Ancient Laws and Institutes of England, Vol. I (Benjamin Thorpe, ed., 1840)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1840 Record Commission edition (https://archive.org/details/ancient-laws-and-institutes-of-england-1-book).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Ancient Laws and Institutes of England


Originally published for the Record Commissioners in 1840, this two-volume work
remains a standard source for scholars of Anglo-Saxon and early Norman legal
history. Benjamin Thorpe (1781?-1870) was a respected and prolific scholar and
translator of Old English, whose publications in the field earned him a civil list
pension in 1835. Trained in Copenhagen under Rasmus Rask, Thorpe advocated

a scientific approach to philology, and this is reflected in the thoroughness of the
notes, commentary, and concordance appended to the sources reprinted here. The
preface to the text places the laws in their historical and geographical context, notes
where there are unavoidable gaps in the evidence, and offers a descriptive analysis
of the original documents. Volume 1 contains the secular laws issued from the reign
of Athelberht to that of Henry I, with a parallel translation of the Anglo-Saxon text,
although the sources in Latin and French remain untranslated.


Cambridge University Press has long been a pioneer in the reissuing of out-of-print
titles from its own backlist, producing digital reprints of books that are still sought
after by scholars and students but could not be reprinted economically using
traditional technology. The Cambridge Library Collection extends this activity to a
wider range of books which are still of importance to researchers and professionals,
either for the source material they contain, or as landmarks in the history of their
academic discipline.


Drawing from the world-renowned collections in the Cambridge University
Library and other partner libraries, and guided by the advice of experts in each
subject area, Cambridge University Press is using state-of-the-art scanning
machines in its own Printing House to capture the content of each book selected
for inclusion. The files are processed to give a consistently clear, crisp image, and
the books finished to the high quality standard for which the Press is recognised
around the world. The latest print-on-demand technology ensures that the books
will remain available indefinitely, and that orders for single or multiple copies can
quickly be supplied.

The Cambridge Library Collection brings back to life books of enduring
scholarly value (including out-of-copyright works originally issued by other
publishers) across a wide range of disciplines in the humanities and social sciences
and in science and technology.


Ancient Laws and
Institutes of England


Comprising Laws Enacted
Under the Anglo-Saxon Kings
from Aethelbirht to Cnut


VOLUME L:
CONTAINING THE SECULAR LAWS


EDITED BY BENJAMIN THORPE


CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS


Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town,
Singapore, Sao Paolo, Delhi, Mexico City


Published in the United States of America by Cambridge University Press, New York


www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781108045148


© in this compilation Cambridge University Press 2012


This edition first published 1840
This digitally printed version 2012


ISBN 978-1-108-04514-8 Paperback


This book reproduces the text of the original edition. The content and language reflect
the beliefs, practices and terminology of their time, and have not been updated.


Cambridge University Press wishes to make clear that the book, unless originally published
by Cambridge, is not being republished by, in association or collaboration with, or
with the endorsement or approval of, the original publisher or its successors in title.


ANCIENT


LAWS AND INSTITUTES


oF


ENGLAND.


ANCIENT
LAWS AND INSTITUTES


OF


ENGLAND;


COMPRISING


Laws enacted under the Anato-Saxon Kines from
AMTHELBIRHT to CnuT,
With an English Translation of the Saxon ;


The Laws called Epwarp THE Conressonr’s;
The Laws or Witi1AM THE Conqueror, and those ascribed
to Henry THE First;


ALSO,


MONUMENTA ECCLESIASTICA
ANGLICANA,


FROM THE SEVENTH TO THE TENTH CENTURY 5


AND THE
Ancient Latin Gersion of the Anglo-Saron Laws.


WITH


A COMPENDIOUS GLOSSARY, &c.


VOLUME THE FIRST 5
CONTAINING THE SECULAR LAWS


PRINTED BY COMMAND


oF
HIS LATE MAJESTY KING WILLIAM IV.
UNDER THE DIRECTION OF


THE COMMISSIONERS ON THE PUBLIC RECORDS
OF THE KINGDOM.


MDCCCXL.


COMMISSIONERS
on
THE PUBLIC RECORDS OF THE KINGDOM,


APPOINTED BY


HIS MAJESTY’S COMMISSION


OF THE


12th of March 1831.


HIS GRACE THE ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY.

THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BROUGHAM anp VAUX.

THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME
DEPARTMENT.

THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONS,

THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE CHANCELLOR OF THE EXCHEQUER,

THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE MASTER OF THE ROLLS.

THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE LORD CLERK REGISTER OF SCOTLAND.

THE RIGHE BYONGARAVLE ELARL SPLNCER, K.G.

THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE EARL OF ABERDEEN, K. T.

THE RIGHT REVEREND THE LORD BISHOP OF LLANDAFF.

THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THOMAS GRENVILLE.

THE RIGHT HONOURABLE CHARLES WATKIN WILLIAMS WYNN, M.P.


THE KICHC MONOURALGLE SIR JAMES MACKINTOSH.
THE RIGHT HONOURABLE HENRY HOBHOUSE.

THE RIEHC HMONOUKAGLE LORD DOVER.
THE RIGHT HONOURABLE MR. BARON PARKE.

THE RIGHT HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE BOSANQUET.

SIR ROBERT HARRY INGLIS, BART., M. P.

LOUIS HAYES PETIT, ESQUIRE.

HENRY BELLENDEN KER, ESQUIRE.

HENRY HALLAM, ESQUIRE.

JOHN ALLEN, ESQUIRE.

EDWARD PROTHEROE, ESQUIRE.

EDWARD VERNON UTTERSON, ESQUIRE.

WILLIAM BROUGHAM, ESQUIRE.


CHARLES PURTON COOPER, ESQUIRE, SECRETARY.


PREFACE.


A Moment more favourable than the present for the
appearance of an enlarged and improved edition of
the Ancient Laws of England could scarcely have
been selected, when new and critical editions of our
early original writers, collections of ancient charters
anterior, and of records subsequent to the Conquest,
not to mention the numerous and able productions of
contemporary historic writers, have of late, in rapid
succession, been issuing from the press. ‘That the
present work is enlarged will be obvious on a com-
parison with preceding editions; whether it be also an
improvement on them must be left to the verdict of
the few whose pursuits have qualified them to sit in
judgment on it.

In adopting the indefinite title of Ancrenr Laws
AND Institutes or Encuanp, I have been influenced
by the consideration, that what we now possess of
Anglo-Saxon Law is but a portion of what once
existed, and, therefore, without claim to the title of
The Anglo-Saxon Laws, which has usually been
bestowed on it. Of the laws and kindred docu-
ments no longer extant, the names of some, together
with fragments worked into other codes, have been
transmitted to us; such as the Mercian Laws of Offa,
from which Alfred, in framing his body of laws, selected
such portions as were suitable to his purpose; the
South Anglian Laws, the Frid-gewritu, &c. <At the

a 4


viii PREFACE.


same time, we ought not, perhaps, to suppose that,
among our Saxon forefathers, any more than among
ourselves, there ever existed a complete Corpus Juris
Anglici, but that their’s was also a Customary or Com-
mon Law ; and that what we still possess, and also the
portion that has perished, were either the records of
decisions to serve as precedents for the future, or
enactments passed in the ‘ Witena-gemots’ for the
repeal, confirmation, amendment, or completion of the
law as it then stood.

A glance at the laws themselves, though more
particularly at those of the Kentish kings, in which
cases are to be found, the occurrence of which no
human foresight could ever have contemplated, must
tend to confirm the former ef these suppositions, and a
support to the latter will be found in the preamble to
many of the others.’

To many the question will here present itself:
whence did the earlier of these institutes originate ?
for, if brought by our forefathers from their German
home, we ought apparently to give them credit for a
degree of civilization beyond that usually ascribed to
them. Their original institutes were, however, but
scanty, consisting, probably, in little beyond that
portion of the laws of Ethelbert which contains the
penalties for wounds and other bodily injuries; and
which, with such modifications as time, place, and
other circumstances may have produced, were common
to all the kindred nations of Northern Germany. It
is, moreover, observable, that the nations nearest of


'The division of the Anglo-Saxon laws suggested by
Mr. Allen into @, customary or common law; ayetnyyya,
statutes; and ddmay, adjudged cases or precedents, is, I believe,
perfectly just, though ignorance or carelessness may occasionally
have caused confusion in the application of the terms.


PREFACE. ix


kin to the Angles and Saxons, in this chapter coincide
with them the most closely.

Besides the portion brought over by the Saxons,
Angles, Jutes, and perhaps Frisians, and the records of
adjudged cases or sentences passed, the Church, from
the earliest period, furnished its full portion to the
codes of our simple forefathers; the first enactment
of the first Christian king being, that for the property
of God and of the church (if stolen’) twelve-fold
compensation be made. If, therefore, from the laws
before us we extract all re-enactments, and all matters
purely ecclesiastical, all cases recorded as precedents
for the future, probably immediately after their decision,
and all exhortatory matter, the remainder will pro-
bably consist of the few primitive institutes by which
the various tribes were ruled before their establishment
in this country.


I wit now proceed to give a slight notice of the
most remarkable documents contained in the present
volume.

The Laws of the Kentish kings are known to us
only from one manuscript,—the Textus Roffensis,
preserved in the library of the Dean and Chapter of
Rochester, compiled under Ernulf, bishop of that see,
from 1115 to 1125. ‘That these laws have descended
to us in their primitive state it would be unreasonable
to suppose; at the same time, I am inclined to the
belief that they approach more nearly to it than is
generally imagined. At all events, their language,
besides exhibiting occasional archaic forms, is not that
of the days of Ernulf. Of these Laws no ancient
Latin version is known to be extant.


1 Bede, lib. ii. c. 5.


x PREFACE.
The succeeding Laws of Alfred, Ine, and their


successors, to those of Cnut, require but little notice
in this place. Those of Ine, which in the manuscripts
are annexed to Alfred’s, and even numbered with
them, so as to form, as it were, a continuation of
Alfred’s code, are, for that reason, placed after them
in the present volume; it being probable, as has
been suggested, that the edition we possess was
designed for the use of the West Saxons, while an-
other (now lost), with the Institutes of Offa in like
manner appended, was destined for the inhabitants of
Mercia.’

Preceding the laws of Edgar is the valuable
document, ‘De Hundredo Tenendo,’ now first printed
from the unique manuscript in the library of Corpus
Christi College, Cambridge. The Latin version or
text will be found in its place at the end of the
volume, freed, by the aid of manuscripts, from most
of the corruptions which so lamentably disfigure it in
the edition given by Bromton.

Among the statutes of Ethelred, the document
entitled ‘ De Institutis Londonie,’? has a great claim
to interest on account of its importance to the com-
mercial and monetary history of England. It is
printed, though very unintelligibly, in Bromton, where
it is made to form an appendage to the Conc. Wane-
tingense, but there are several manuscripts of it in
our libraries, from a collation of which the text now
given has been derived, which it is hoped, though
by no means free from corruption, will be found suf-
ficiently so to obviate all difficulty with regard to
its sense.


1 Palgrave’s Rise and Progress, vol.i. p.47.
2 See p. 800. of this volume.


PREFACE. xi


Immediately following the Laws of Cnut, is the
curious document entitled ‘ Rectitudines Singularum
Personarum, the Saxon original of which exists, I
believe, in one manuscript only, belonging to the
library of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge. This
piece is valuable, as presenting us with an enumeration
of the several classes of persons employed on a domain,
of the services to be rendered by each, and of the
reciprocal duty of the lord to those engaged on his
land. This document presents difficulties to the
modern student, arising from our want of acquaintance
with many of the usages therein mentioned, though an
attempt at the illustration of some will be found in the
Glossary appended to the work; it was, therefore,
deemed advisable to annex to it the Latin version,
from a collation of manuscripts, in place of an English
one, of which it seems hardly susceptible.

The French text of the Conqueror’s Laws is
chiefly from a valuable manuscript at Holkham,
formerly the property of Sir Edward Coke, bearing his
autograph, and still in the possession of the Right
Honourable the Earl of Leicester. The text contained
in this manuscript bears signs of great antiquity, and
(if the laws of William were really composed in
French!) is, from its dialect, much more likely to be


* Anno regni sui quarto, apud Londoii, consilio baronum
suorum, fecit summoniri, per universos Anglie comitatus,
omnes nobiles, sapientes, et sua lege eruditos, ut eorum leges
et consuetudines audiret. Et licet idem rex Willelmus leges
Northfolkie et Southfolkie, Grantebrugie et Deire (ubi quon-
dam maxima pars Danorum et Norwegensium inhabitabant,)
prius magis approbaverat, et eas per totum regnum observari
preceperat, pro eo quod omnes antecessores ejus, et fere omnes
barones Normannie Norwegenses extitissent, et quod de Nor-
wegia olim venissent; sed postea, ad preces communitatis
Anglorum, rex adquievit, qui deprecati sunt, quatenus per-


* 2. quid.


xii PREFACE.


a nearly faithful representation of the original, than
that most corrupt one transmitted to us in the work
bearing the name of Ingulph.


mitteret sibi leges proprias et consuetudines antiquas habere,
in quibus vixerant patres eorum, et ipsi in eis nati et nutriti
sunt, scilicet leges sancti regis Edwardi. Et ex illo die magna
autoritate venerate, et per universum regnum corroborate et
observate sunt, pre ceteris regni legibus, leges regis Edwardi ;
que quidem prius invente et constitute fuerunt tempore regis
Edgari avi sui. Verumptamen post mortem ipsius regis Edgari,
usque ad coronationem sancti regis Edwardi, quod tempus
continet annos Lxvi. predicte leges sopite sunt et penitus
pretermisse ; sed postquam rex Edwardus in regno fuit sub-
limatus, consilio baronum Anglie, legem Lxvil. annis sopitam
excitavit, excitatam reparavit, reparatam decoravit, decoratam
confirmavit, et confirmata vocata est lex sancti regis Edwardi;
non quod ipse prius adinvenisset eam, sed cum pretermissa
fuisset, et oblivioni penitus dedita, a morte avi sui regis Edgari,
qui primus inventor ejus fuisse dicitur, usque ad sua tempora,
videlicet Lxvi1. annis.

Unde per preceptum regis Willelmi, electi sunt de singulis
tocius Anglie comitatibus x1. viri sapientiores, quibus jure-
jurando injunctum fuit, coram rege Willelmo, ut quoad possent,
recto tramite, neque ad dextram neque ad sinistram decli-
nantes, legum suarum et consuetudinum sancita patefacerent,
nil pretermittentes, nil addentes, nil prevaricando mittentes.
Aldredus autem, Eboraé archiepiscopus, qui regem Willelmum
coronaverat, et Hugo, Londofi episcopus, per preceptum regis,
scripserunt, propriis manibus, omnia que predicti jurati dixe-
runt. <A legibus namque sancte matris ecclesie sumentes
exordium, * qui per eam rex et regnum solidum subsistendi
habent fundamentum, leges et libertates et pacem ipsius con-
cionati sunt dicentes, omnis clericus, &c. ut supra. Chron.
Lichf. MS. Cott. Cleop. D. 9.

Ingulphus.— Attuli eadem vice mecum Lundoniis in meum
monasterium leges aquissimi regis Edwardi, quas dominus
meus inclytus rex Willielmus autenticas esse, et perpetuas per
totum regnum Angliz *inviolabiliterque tenendas sub peenis
gravissimis proclamarat, et suis justitiariis commendarat, eodem


* Ita Codex ms. b justitiis in Ms.


PREFACE. xiii


Unfortunately the Holkham text is incomplete,
not reaching further than to the twenty-eighth chapter.
Its deficiency could only be supplied from the printed
text'; though the real loss sustained is greatly dimi-
nished by the superiority of the Latin edition now
given from a Harleian manuscript? over that printed
by Wilkins from the Lichfield Chronicle.*

The Charter (Wil. IV. p. 495. of this volume),
directing the separation of the civil and ecclesiastical
courts, is here given, both on account of its intrinsic
importance, and of reference made to it in the annota-
tions to the Laws of Henry I. Had the design of con-
tinuing this work to a later period not been abandoned,
it would have been reserved for the place to which
it naturally belongs.

The Laws of Henry I. will, it is hoped, be found
to exhibit a few corrections (chiefly from the Red
Book of the Exchequer, which has been carefully
collated for the purpose) whereby some difficulties
have been removed, and the sense restored. Attention
has also been directed to the reformation of the
punctuation, and the subdivision into sections will
necessarily tend greatly to facilitate citation from
this code.‘


idiomate quo edite sunt; ne per ignorantiam contingat nos
vel nostros aliquando, in nostrum grave periculum contraire
et offendere ausu temerario regiam majestatem, ac in ejus
censuras rigidissimas improvidum pedem ferre contentas szepius
in eisdem, hoc modo.,

‘The few conjectural readings in the margin having the
signature M. are by M. Francisque Michel.

® Harl. No. 746.

8 Sir F. Palgrave has the merit of being the first to publish
both the Holkham and Harleian texts. See Origin and Progress,
Voi. 2. p. Ixxxviii.

‘In this subdivision I have been anticipated by Dr. Schmid.


xiv PREFACE.


With respect to their substance, the laws ascribed
to Henry I., but evidently the unauthorized compilation
of an individual, are derived from various sources,
most of which will be found specified in the notes of
Somner and others subjoined to the text; but the
portion chiefly valuable to us is that which has pre-
served many fragments of Anglo-Saxon Law, of which
traces nowhere else are known to exist, either in
original or translation.

Of the ecclesiastical monuments!, the first in
order of time, and perhaps in importance, as the pro-
totype to later productions of the kind, is the Peni-
tential of Theodore, Archbishop of Canterbury, from
the year 668 to 690. This early and valuable monu-
ment of the church is here given for the first time
from a manuscript in the library of Corpus Christi
College, Cambridge; and, though other smaller pieces
have been published under the name of Theodore’,
seems alone to have a just claim to that title, for of
the numerous passages cited as Theodore’s by other
ancient writers, this will be found to contain the larger
portion, and the few not there to be found may reason-
ably be regarded as extracts from such of Theodore’s
works as have perished, or what for us is nearly the’
same, still lie forgotten and unknown among other
relics of by-gone ages, on the shelves of a foreign, if
not of an English library.

Another manuscript of the Penitential in the same


? All ordinances proceeding from the king and ‘ Witena-
gemot,’ whether of a secular or ecclesiastical character, are
considered as Laws, and inserted in their places in the first
part of the work. Those without such sanction, and of a
nature strictly ecclesiastical, are placed among the MonumEnTA
EccEsIASTICa.

* See D’Achery Spicileg. Theodori Pcenitentiale a Jac. Petit.
MS. Cott. Vesp. D. 15.


PREFACE. xv


library, collations from which are given under the
text, terminates with the pathetic, though not very
poetic lines addressed by Theodore to his friend
Hedde!, which, if genuine, as I believe them to be,
leave no pretext for a doubt as to the authenticity of
the document; and even if not genuine, are of an
antiquity to show that, at a very remote period, this
work was regarded by the English church as the pro-
duction of Archbishop Theodore.

The next monument to be considered is the
Penitential, or rather, Confessional and Penitential, of
Ecgberht, Archbishop of York, from 735 to 766.

This venerable document, though in no one of the
manuscripts transmitted to us in its primitive North-
umbrian garb, and bereft of nearly every pretension
to originality by the publication of the Cambridge
copies of Theodore, is, nevertheless, a most valuable
monument, not alone of our old expressive and gram-
matical language, but as containing some passages of
curiosity, chiefly with reference to the popular super-
stitions of the time. The references at the foot of
each page will sufficiently show to whom its compiler
was indebted for the greater part of his composition.
In like manner, the similar references in the ‘ Modus
Imponendi Peenitentiam’ will at a glance enable the
reader to perceive, that the whole is an abridgment of
Ecgberht, the work apparently of a bishop (perhaps
Dunstan) very sensitive with regard to the infal-
libility of his order, if such an inference may be
drawn from the circumstance, that, in laying down
the penalties for crime to be paid by each class
of the clergy, he carefully omits mention of the
bishop, who, in the Penitentials of Theodore and his


} Bishop of Winchester, from 676 to 705. See vol. 11. p. 62.


xvi PREFACE.


translator Ecgberht, is usually placed at the head of
the list."

The remaining Ecclesiastical documents offer little
matter for remark; and of the Versro Antiqua, with
which the volume closes, it remains only to be said,
that it is formed from a collation of very ancient
manuscripts with the text given in Bromton, and is,
generally speaking, a well-executed monument of, it
may be presumed, the twelfth century. The accuracy
with which, with the exception of a few passages, it
generally expresses the sense of the original, forbids
our assigning it to a later period, when pure Anglo-
Saxon was become a dead language to the Normanized
writers of England.


A compenpious Glossary is given at the end of the
work, to which I have for the most part consigned
the little I had to offer in illustration of the text, in
preference to placing it at the foot of the page. And
here I cannot refrain from expressing deep regret,
that the passages in the volume either wholly in-
explicable, or of extremely doubtful import, are yet
so numerous ; but a partial illustration of them at least
may yet be found in the original documents con-
nected with the policy of our forefathers, now in a
course of publication.’


Tue Concordance, and the Indexes which close
the work, will, no doubt, tend materially to facilitate


1 For reasons, which will be manifest on perusal, it was
deemed advisable to give a corrected Latin version of both
these pieces in preference to an English one.

® Codex Diplomaticus AZvi Saxonici, opera Johannis M. Kem-
ble, vols. i. ii. A work reflecting equal honour on its editor
and the English Historical Society, under whose auspices it is
brought forward.


PREFACE. xvii


its use to students, both by affording a synoptical view,
arranged under distinct heads, of: whatever matter of
importance it contains, and also by rendering a collation
of the Anglo-Saxon Laws with those of the Germanic
nations of the continent a matter of comparative ease ;
thereby conducing to the promotion of a branch of
study by no means useless even to the jurist, and
indispensable to the historian of modern Europe.


A sHoRT space must now be devoted to the
memory of a good man and highly accomplished scholar,
my lamented predecessor in this work, the late Ricuarp
Price, Esa., by whose labours my own have been
considerably lightened, and who, had he been longer
spared to his friends and country, would, no doubt,
have raised another monument of his industry and
learning in the work subsequently committed to the
care of a less experienced successor.!

Of the Laws, Mr. Price had committed nineteen
sheets [of the folio edition] to press, extending to the
beginning of those of Athelstan; besides which, four
sheets, comprising the rest of Athelstan’s laws, were
already in type. His papers contained transcripts and
collations from the several manuscripts of the Saxon
Laws to the end of Cnut, with translations, some evi-
dently prepared for the press, others in a less forward
state. Of all these I have availed myself in the course
of the work, and have carefully inserted every note left
by Mr. Price, that tended in the least degree to the
illustration of the text, leaving untouched the whole


1Mr. Price was the editor of an improved edition of Warton’s
History of English Poetry, in four volumes, 8vo; also of a
valuable edition of Blackstone’s Commentaries in four volumes,
London, 1830; and of the Saxon Chronicle to the year 1066,
contained in the first volume of the ‘ Materials for the History
of Great Britain,’ not yet completed.


XViii PREFACE.


of those subjoined to the portion already printed, when
the work devolved on me, with the sole exception of
such as the substitution of a different reading rendered
no longer applicable.

It was originally intended by the late Record
Commission, under whose authority the publication was
undertaken, that the work should be continued from
the point where the printed portion of Mr. Price’s
labours terminated; but it was afterwards resolved,
that the whole should be cancelled, and the work
recommenced from the beginning. By this decision
an uniformity of phraseology was secured in the
translation, which could otherwise have scarcely been
looked for.

From the performance of a melancholy duty, I
turn to one of an opposite description—that of ex-
pressing my grateful acknowledgments to those who
have aided me in the prosecution of my work. Of
these, my first thanks are due to Joun Auten, Esa., by
whose counsel and suggestions I have profited from the
commencement of the undertaking to its close, and to
whose kindness I owe the valuable body of notes
appended to the laws of Henry the First, as well as
many portions of the Glossary, either suggested by
him, or extracted from his works both printed and
in manuscript.'

To Tue Eart or Letcester, my grateful thanks
are due for the loan of his valuable manuscript, con-
taining the French text of the Conqueror’s laws; as


1 Particularly the articles ‘ Bocland’ and ‘ Folcland,’ extracted
from his ‘Inquiry into the Rise and Growth of the Royal
Prerogative in England,’ a small volume, but in which is con-
densed a store of information relative to our Constitutional
History, derived from original sources. The article ‘Money’
likewise owes much to the investigations of Mr. Allen.


PREFACE. xix


well as to Lorp Houzanp, for his kind application to
the noble owner of Holkham on my behalf; also to
the Right Reverend the Bishop of Llandaff, Dean of
St. Paul’s, for access to the ‘ Liber Pilosus’ preserved
in the Chapter House of that Cathedral.

The Very Reverend Dr. Lams, Dean of Bristol
and Master of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, has
also a strong claim on my gratitude, for his readiness,
on all occasions, in affording me every facility, con-
sistent with the existing restrictions, in consulting the
valuable collection of Saxon Manuscripts in the library
of his college.

To Hupson Gurney, Esq., I offer my sincere
acknowledgments for the loan of a valuable manuscript
in his possession, from which the work has derived
considerable benefit ; also to Cuartes Purton Cooper,
Esq., Q.C., for his kindness in allowing me the free use
of such printed works contained in his library as were
needful to the prosecution of the undertaking.

Messrs. Eyre anp Sporriswoope, Her Majesty's
Printers, have also a claim to my thanks, both for the
promptitude with which they have conducted their
portion of the undertaking, and for the obliging dis-
position constantly evinced by them from its beginning
to its termination.


A cottection of the Anglo-Saxon Laws was first
published by William Lambarde, under the title
‘ APXAIONOMIA, sive de priscis Anglorum legibus
libri, &c. Lond. 1568, 4to.’ In this edition the laws of
the Kentish kings, of William the Conqueror, and of
Henry the First, are wanting. With regard to the
manuscripts used by Lambarde, he gives the following
account: ‘ Obtulit mihi superiori anno Laurentius
Noelus priscas Anglorum leges, antiquissima Saxonum

be


xx PREFACE.


lingua et litteris conscriptas, atque a me ut Latinas
facerem, ac pervulgarem vehementer flagitavit.’ He
then goes on to say: ‘Jam vero ne quis domi nostree
has natas esse leges arbitretur, plane suscipio atque
profiteor, magna fide et religione ex vetustissimis (ut
que ante quingentos annos, uti conjectura autumo,
Saxonicis depicta sunt litteris) exemplaribus fuisse de-
sumptas, quorum pleraque in R. in Christo Patris, atque
optime de antiquitate meriti, D. Martuzr, Cantuariens.
Archiepiscopi bibliotheca, alia aliorum in _librariis
visenda supersunt. Now what appears singular in
this account is, that Lambarde’s text exhibits, generally
speaking, a specimen of language bordering on Semi-
Saxon, rather than of pure Anglo-Saxon, and resembling
no manuscript at present’ to be found among those
bequeathed by Parker to the library of Corpus Christi
College ; and with regard to the locality of the other
Manuscripts used by him, he leaves us in a state of
perfect ignorance, not however to be regretted, as their
manifest worthlessness, in comparison with the existing
Manuscripts, reduces every question concerning them
to one of pure curiosity.

A second edition of the Archaionomia was pub-
lished at Cambridge in folio, in the year 1644. The
editor was Abraham Whelock, Professor of Arabic in
that University, who added to it the laws of William
the Conqueror, those of Henry the First, the Canons of
Edgar, and those of Elfric. Of Whelock’s merits as
an editor it is now almost needless to speak ; though,
from its greater comprehensiveness, as well as from his
corrections (not always happy ones) of Lambarde’s
stile, who in his version, or rather paraphrase, most
absurdly affected the phraseology of the Twelve
Tables, his work is by far preferable to that of his
predecessor.


PREFACE. xxi


A more important work, at least in respect of its
contents and improved text, is the edition of Wilkins,
in folio, printed at London in the year 1721, under the
following title: ‘Leges Anglo-Saxonice, Ecclesiastice
et Civiles. Accedunt Leges Edwardi Latin, Gulielmi
Conquestoris Gallo-Normannice, et Henrici I. Latine,
&c. cum Codd. MSS. contulit, notas versionem et
Glossarium adjecit David Wilkins, S.T.P. Canonicus
Cantuariensis, &c. This edition contains the laws of
the-Kentish kings, Ethelbirht, Hlothhere and Eadric,
and Wihtreed.

As a monument of industry, this edition is very
creditable to Dr. Wilkins; at the same time it must,
though reluctantly, be acknowledged by every one
competent to judge, that, as a translator of Anglo-
Saxon, he not unfrequently betrays an ignorance even
of its first principles, that, though.not unparalleled, is
perfectly astounding.

The last edition of the Anglo-Saxon Laws is that
of Dr. Schmid, published at Leipsig in 1832, under the
following title: ‘Die Gesetze der Angelsachsen. In
der Ursprache mit Uebersetzung und Elduterungen
herausgegeben von D* Reinhold Schmid, Professor der
Rechte zu Jena. Erster Theil, den Text nebst
Uebersetzung enthaltend,’ i.e. Zhe Laws of the Anglo-
Saxons, in the original tongue, with a translation and
illustrations, edited by Dr. Reinhold Schmid, Professor
of Law at Jena. First part, containing the text and
translation. The second part has not yet appeared.
This edition, considering that the editor had no access
to manuscripts, is upon the whole a very creditable
publication, decidedly superior to the preceding ones,
the version being freed from the gross errors of
Wilkins, and generally correct. In his conjectural
emendations of the text, Dr. Schmid is not at all times

bs


xxii PREFACE.


fortunate ; and it is much to be regretted that he has
paid so little attention to the Laws of Henry the First,
where, without the help of manuscripts, he might have
contributed to the restoration of the text, particularly
with regard to the punctuation, which had been left
untouched by Wilkins, as he found it in the slovenly
edition of Whelock. Dr. Schmid has, however, divided
the chapters of these laws into sections, whereby all
references to them are greatly facilitated.

The Laws of Cnut, published under the following
title, yet remain to be mentioned: ‘ Legum Regis
Canuti Magni versio antiqua Latina, cum textu Anglo-
Saxonico, cum variis lectionibus atque observationibus
Jan. Laur. Andr. Kolderup Rosenvinger. Haun. 1826.
4°, The Saxon text of this edition is that of Wilkins,
the Latin version, or rather paraphrase, is from a manu-
script formerly in Colbert’s collection. It is accom-
panied by some excellent remarks of the learned editor.


Sucu then, as they appear in the following pages,
were the Laws and Institutes of England, at the outset
of her bright, though sometimes darkened course ;
what they would now have been, had Norman influence
never had footing in the land, is a question difficult to
answer, nor will the modern laws of the other Germanic
nations supply us, by comparison, with the means of
forming a plausible conjecture: the laws of imperial
Rome having among them already in great measure
supplanted their national institutes, at a period when
those of the Anglo-Saxons still retained their Teutonic
character, uninpaired: by the calamities with which
their empire had from time to time been assailed, and
by which it was finally overthrown.'


’ Savigny, ii. p. 167. edit. 1834.


PREFACE. xxiii


In the wish, if not the hope that, like the Vercelli
poetry, there may ere long be brought forth, from
among the hidden stores of Europe, such records of our
laws and history as may shed light on what is dark,
and supply much that is wanting, I will close this brief
introduction to a long-looked-for volume. At the same
time, it must be confessed, that our present sources are
yet far from being exhausted, but I fear that the text
of holy writ is here applicable: Micel pip iy 4 feapa
pyphcena, ‘The harvest is great, but the labourers
few.”!


B. THORPE.


1 Matt. 1x. 87. Lue. x. 2.


List of Manuscrirts and Printep Books, referred to in the


Various Readings and Notes, under the letters of the
alphabet.


The Marks within braces ( ) are those of the Old Catalogue of the Corpus
Christi utss., by which they are referred to in Wanley.


A,


by


ty


2


= S


Harl. 55.


C.C. 383. (19. 2.)


C.C. 265. (K. 2.)


C.C. 201. (S. 18.)
C.C. 173. (S.11.)
Cott. Nero, E. 1.


Cott. Nero, A.1.


Folio. Not earlier than the 12th century;
exhibiting the tongue in its decline;
inferior to the other mss. of Cnut’s
laws.

Octavo. 10th century; well and accu-
rately written.

Small Folio. 10th century; in various
hands; formerly belonging to Wor-
cester Cathedral.

Small Folio. Apparently of the middle of
the 11th century.

Small Folio. Apparently of the early part
of the 10th century.

Folio. The portion containing Saxon laws
of about the end of the 10th century.

Octavo. Formerly belonging to Worces-
ter; written at various times; the
Saxon portion apparently in the
beginning and middle of the 11th
century.


The Textus Roffensis, belonging to the Dean and Chapter of


Cott. Claud. A. 3.


Cott. Claud. D. 2.
In private hands.
Macro Ms.


Cott. Tib. A. 3.


Rochester Cathedral.

Quarto. Of about the period of the Con-
quest (containing the Council of
Enham).

Folio. Of the 14th century.

Folio. Of the 13th century.

Octavo. Belonging to Hudson Gurney,
Esq.; from the collection of Dr. Cox
Macro; well written, apparently about
the end of the 13th century.

Folio. The portions printed in the pre-
sent volume written apparently about
the period of the Conquest.


ra)


R oR


ss


XXVi


C.C. 190. (L. xr.) Small Folio. Said to have been given to


Exeter Cathedral by Bishop Leofric.


Theodori Sanctissimi ac Doctissimi Archiepiscopi Cantuariensis


Cott. Vesp. D. 15.
Reg. 11. B. 2.
Harl. 746.


Cott. Tib. A. 27.


Bodl. Junius, 121.
Bodl. Laud, F. 17.


Cott. Vitell. A. 12.


Peenitentiale, omnibus que reperiri
potuerunt ejusdem Capitulis adauc-
tum, &c. Jacobus Petit primus in
lucem edidit, &c. ‘Lut. Paris. 1679.
4to. 2 tom.

A very ancient ms. in most barbarous
Latin, and extremely incorrect.

Apparently of the latter part of the 12th
century.

Folio. Of about the beginning of the
14th century.

Octavo. Of the 13th century ; containing
perhaps the best text extant of the
old Latin version of the Saxon laws.

Large Octavo. Of the 10th century; a
fine Ms.

A small narrow volume of the 11th cen-
tury.

Of the latter portion of the 11th century.


Bromton in Decem Scriptores.
ms. belonging to the ‘ Bibliothéque des Ducs de Bourgogne,’


at Brussels ; apparently of the latter
part of the 10th or beginning of the
11th century.


Hk. WHolkham ms. Apparently of the 13th century.
Hr.M. Rhabani Mauri Liber Peenitentialis, apud Canisii Lectiones


Reg.


Ry.
Se.
Sp.


Antiquas, tomi II. pars II. Ant-
verpiz, 1725. Folio.


Reginonis de Ecclesiasticis Disciplinis, Libri II. a Steph.


Rymeri Feedera.


Baluzio.


Liber Rubeus Scaccarii.
Spelmanni Glossarium.


TABLE OF CONTENTS.


ANGLO-SAXON LAWS.


Page
The Laws of King ETHELBIRHT - ° : 2, 3
The Laws of Kings Htoruy#reand Eapric_ - = 26, 27
The Laws of King WintrzpD - - - = 36, 37
The Laws of King AtFrep (Scriptural, p. 44-59) - 60, 61
The Laws of King Ine - - - - 102, 103
ALFRED and GuTHRUM’s PEACE - - - - 152, 153
The Laws of King Epwarp - - - + 158, 159
The Laws of Epwarp and GutHRUM - - - 166, 167
Of Wers - - - - - 174, 175
Of Oatus - - - - - - 178, 179
Of Wér-cILps - - - - - 186, 187
Of Mercian Law - - - - - 190, 191
Ranks - - - - - - 190, 191
The Laws of King ErHELSTAN.
J. (Council of Greatanlea) - - = 194, 195
II. (Decretum Cantianum) - - : 216
III. (Decretum Sapientum Angliz) . - 217
IV. - - - - - - 220, 221
Of ForFANnc - - - = 224, 225
Doom concerning Hor Iron and WaTER - 226, 227
V. (Judicia Civitatis Lundoniz) - - 228, 229
The Laws of King Epmunp.
(Ecclesiastical) e - - - 244, 245
(Secular) - - - - - 246, 247
(Concilium Culintonense) - - - 252
(Of betrothing a Woman) - - - 254, 255
The Laws of King Epcar.
(How the Hundred shall be held) - - 258, 259
I. (Ecclesiastical) - - - = 262, 263
II. (Secular) - - - - 266, 267


(Supplement) - - - - 270, 271


XXVill TABLE OF CONTENTS.


The Laws of King ETHELRED.


I. (Council of Woodstock) = - e235
II. (Treaty with Anlaf, Justin, and Guthmund)
III. (Council of Wantage) - - -
IV. (De Institutis Londonie) = - - of
V. (Liber Constitutionum) = - - -
VI. (Council of Enham) = - - -


VII. (Of ‘Grith’ and of ‘Mund’) - -

VIII. (Concilium apud Habam) = - - oe

IX. (Of Church-‘ Grith’) “ - -

ORDINANCE respecting the ‘ Dun-sETAs’ - -
The Laws of King Cnur.


(Ecclesiastical) - - - -
(Secular) - - - - -
(Constitutiones de Foresta) = - - -
RecTiruDINEs SINGULARUM PERSONARUM - -
Leces Regis Epwarpt ConFEssonris - - -
(Libertas Civitatum)  - - -


The Laws of King W1LL1AM THE ConqueERor.


J. + = = - -


II. - - - - -

III. (Carta de quibusdam Statutis) - -

IV. - - - - -

Leces Regis Henric1 Primi + - - :
Notes on the Laws ascribed to King Henry I. -


ADDITIONAL REMARKS.
Tasie of ConcoRDANCE.
InpEx.


Page


280, 281
284, 285
292, 293


304, 305
314, 315
330, 331
336, 337
340, 341
352, 353


358, 359
376, 377
4.26
431
442
462


466, 467
488, 489
490
495
497
609


THE


ANGLO-SAXON LAWS.


THE


ANGLO-SAXON LAWS.


JEDELBIRDTES DOMAS.


I8 SYNDON D&A DOMAS DE *>JEDELBIRHNT LYNING
ASETTE ON ALUSTINUS D/CLE.


1. Loder yeoh- ¥ cipicean ®-x11- gylde. Biycopey feoh -xt-
zylde. Ppeoycey feoh «1x- gylde. Draconey yeoh -vi- gyloe.
Llepocey peoh -1t- gylde. * Lypuc-puid -n- gylde. 40) .....-
pd -11- Zylde:-

ur. Ing cyning hip *leobe to him gehaved- 4 heom mon pep
yrel gedo -11--f bove- y cyninge -L- * peillinga:-


a JETHELBIRHT, king of Kent, fourth in succession after Hengist,
was baptized by Augustine in the year 597, and died, according to
Beda, after a reign of 56 years, on the 24th of February 616. Hist.
Eccles. ii. 5. The laws of /Ethelbirht, as well as those of the other
Kentish kings, are taken from the Textus Roffensis, the only ancient
mS. in which they are found. In this copy, which is of the twelfth
century, each series is written continuously ; the several laws being
distinguished, though not ziways accurately, by a large initial letter.
The numbers prefixed to the different laws are from the edition pub-
lished by Hickes in his Thesaurus, and were probably added by J. a
Laet; for the convenience of reference which they afford, they are
here retained.

b There is no verb in this law to fix the sense; but we learn from
Beda that it is to be understood of the property of the church when
stolen: * Defunctus vero est Rex Aedilberct. .. . qui inter cetera
bona, que genti sue consulendo conferebat, etiam decreta illi judi-
ciorum, juxta exempla Romanorum, cum consilio sapientium con-
stituit; que conscripta Anglorum sermone hactenus habentur et
observantur ab ea: in quibus primitus posuit, qualiter id emendare
deberet, qui aliquid rerum vel Ecclesiz vel Episcopi, vel reliquorum
ordinum furto auferret ; volens scilicet tuitionem eis, quos et quorum
doctrinam susceperat, prestare. Hist. Eccl. ii. 5. [Fopzyloe seems
to be understood, see ¢c.4, where it is expressed.— 7. ]

¢ The Church-frith is what in the later documents is called the
Church-grith, or right of sanctuary and protection given to those


THE


ANGLO-SAXON LAWS.


THE LAWS OF KING ATHELBIRHT.


THESE ARE THE DOOMS WHICH KING * A THEL-
BIRHT ESTABLISHED IN THE DAYS OF AU-
GUSTINE.


1. The property of God and of the church, *twelve-fold; a
bishop’s property, eleven-fold ; a priest’s property, nine-fold; a
deacon’s property, six-fold; a clerk’s property, three-fold;
©¢ church-frith,’ two-fold; 4m... . . frith? two-fold.

2. If the king calls his ** leod’ to him, and any one there do
them evil, [let him compensate with] a two-fold ‘bot,’ and
L. ®shillings to the king.


within its precincts. By the present law, any infraction of this pri-
vilege subjected the offender to a two-fold penalty, or twice the
amount of the fine payable for an invasion of the ordinary frith, or
what in modern times has been termed a breach of the peace.

@ Wilkins reads Mynycepey pid; but in the ms. there is not space
for so long a word: it may however have been contracted.

¢ I have been unable to discover whether this meant a particular
class of persons, such as the Leudes of France: or whether it is used
in the ordinary sense of ‘people.’ In Anglo-Saxon poetry, ‘leob’
frequently occurs for chieftain, prince, &c. [Perhaps people, sub-
jects.— 7.]

{ Wherever the term ‘ bote’ occurs, it is to be understood of the
compensation due to the injured party, as damages for the wrong
sustained. This, as in cc. 4, 5, 10, 11, 12, may be due to the king
in his personal or private capacity, as well as to others. The penalty
due to the crown by way of fine was called the wite (see c.9.). Both
forfeitures are thus spoken of by Tacitus: ‘ Pars mulcte regi vel
civitati, pars ipsi, qui vindicatur, vel propinquis ejus exsolvitur.’
Germ. c. 12.

& The value of the Kentish shilling is altogether a matter of in-
ference. According to cc. 69, 70, 71, of these dooms, compared
with cc. 53, 54, the shilling contained xx. scetts, and from a passage
which will be found in another part of this volume, as a portion of the
Mercian law, we learn that thirty thousand scetts were equal to one
hundred and twenty pounds of silver: ‘Donne bid cyngey anreald


BQ


4 JEDELBIRHTES DOMAS.


im, Ing eyning et manner *ham dpinceed- 4 peep man
> lyypeep hpeet zedo -11--boce zebeve:-

iv. Ing ppigman cyninge stele -1x- zylde opzyloe:-

v. Ing in cyninger ‘cfine man mannan ofylea -Le yeill.
sebete:.

vi. Inf man ypugne mannan ofyleah’d. cyninge -L- yeill. to
* omhvin-beaze:-

vir. Ing cymngey fambiht-ymd- oppe Jaad-pune mannan
ofylehd- fmeduman ® leodgelde ropzelde:.


pen-zeld vi. pezna pep be Mypena laze, pec iy Xxx. purend pceatca,
and pec bid ealler cxx. punda.’ Hence, according to Mercian law,
‘a king’s simple wer-gild is equal to the were of six thanes, that is,
thirty thousand scztts, which make one hundred and twenty pounds.’
By this it would appear that the pound contained 250 scztts, or 124
shillings, which would make the scztt nearly equal to the penny, and
the shilling something less than an ounce of silver.

By Alfred this term is used on one occasion as a translation of
the Latin monasterium: ‘ Lpzed he Beba, me sabe sum appupte
meyye-ppeose y abbud of Peopcanea pam ham... narravit mihi
presbyter et abbas quidam vir veracissimus de monasterio Peortanea.’
Bed. ii. 16. In another passage it is applied in a far more extended
sense; ‘berpih hir hamum oppe tunum mid hip pegnum.. . inter
civitates sive villas suas cum ministris. 26. But here it seems to be
equivalent to the ‘ curtis’ of the Barbaric laws; the ‘hof,’ ‘ huwe,’ of
Upper and Lower Saxony. In Old-Frisic, ‘ham’ meant either the
hof, or house and land conjointly, or the house itself. The terms
hof, huwe, hip, ham, and hite, are clearly synonymous; but it would
be difficult to find any expressions now in use which would convey
the sense of either.

& The same term occurs below (c. 72.), with a slightly-varied
orthography. It is there written ‘lerpey;’ but in Anglo-Saxon @,
éa, , are interchangeable. The meaning must be left to the read-
er's conjecture. The root may be either ‘lear, false,’ and then it
may denote those offences which come under the comprehensive title
of the ‘crimen falsi; or it may be the same word with leso, leyepey,
(lerpey,) which being derived from ‘leran,’ to lease, might be inter-
preted ‘pilfering.’ [gu. lying?—-7.] In the Lex Angliorum et
Werinorum, tit. xii. ‘De minoribus caussis,’ there is a provision of
the same general nature: ‘ Quidquid homo alteri fecerit, quod in-
justum factum dicatur, x. solidis componat, aut cum quinque juret.’
This, though offering one obscurity in illustration of another, may
guide a more fortunate enquirer to the solution of both laws.—
{The cognate adjective occurs in the metrical legend of St. Andrew,
in the following passage: ‘J€pcep pam popbum com. pepod unmee.
lyrpe lap-pmeodar. mio lind-zecpobe. bolgen mote.’ See Appendix B.
to Mr. Cooper's Report, p.77. Somner has lyrpen, from the ‘ Liber
Medicinalis,’ where it is said (in the case of a diseased liver) that,
‘Donne ye spile cobypyc ‘ponne bid yeo muicze lyrpen spilce popmy.
3p he fic-ypnd ponne bp } sap lespe: Quando tumor diruptus
fuerit, tune urina lyrpen erit, sicut pus, vel corruptio; fortasse sani-
-osus, purulentus.’ ms. Reg. 12. pxvir. fol. 74°.— 7.)


THE LAWS OF KING AXTHELBIRHT. 5


3. If the king drink at any one’s * home, and any one there
do any °*¢ lyswe,’ let him make two-fold ‘ bot.’

4, Ifa freeman steal from the king, let him pay nine-fold.

5. Ifa man slay another in the king’s ° ‘tin,’ let him make
‘bot’ with t. shillings.

6. If any one slay a freeman, vu. shillings to the king, as
¢¢ drihtin-beah.’

7. If the king’s *‘ ambiht-smith,’ or ¢ laad-rinc,’ slay a man,
let him pay a ‘ half ® ¢ leod-geld.’


¢ In the Northern parts of this island this term is not altogether
obsolete in its original sense; at least, it is not many years since ‘in
Scotland a single house was called a town;’ in Ireland it is still
called a township. The nature of such a settlement is thus described
by Tacitus: ‘ Vicos locant non in nostrum morem, connexis et co-
herentibus edificiis: suam quisque domum spatio circumdat.’ Germ.
c.16. The economy of a royal vill, in even its minutest particulars,
will be found in the Capitulare de Villis of Charlemagne.

4 Literally as a lord ring. In the later dooms this fine is called
the man-bote (See Edw. Conf. 12.), whether paid to the king or a
subject.

a have translated this law in the only way the present text
admits of translation, though it is difficult to understand why the
king's smith (or carpenter) or his guide should pay a mesne leod-
geld (100s.) for slaying a ceorl, or why, if they chanced to slay an
eorl, the amount of the mulct (300s. Conf. HI. et E. 1.) should be
reduced in a similar proportion. This difficulty would vanish by
reading, Lig [man] cyninzer ambihe-pmid oppe Jaab-pinc-mannan
ofrleahd, &c. If any one slay the king’s official smith or guide, let
him pay a mesne leod-geld. All the Barbaric codes supply us with
instances where the ‘ ministeriales’ of the crown, who were generally
taken from the servile classes, have an increased ‘ wer’ conferred upon
them; but I have sought in vain for an example where the ‘ were’
is fixed, as on the present occasion, for men of all degrees, and in
favour of persons holding particular offices. The wer-geld was the
property of a man’s family. There might be grace in increasing it,
but to lessen its amount in behalf of any class of men would be
little short of giving encouragement to the commission of the very
crime against which the law is directed. Indeed such a principle is
in opposition to the whole body of Germanic jurisprudence, in which
the ‘wer,’ and the duties connected with it, may be said to be the
corner-stone of the fabric. Perhaps an objection may be taken to
laad-rinc-man, on the score of tautology; but ‘rinc’ and ‘man’ are
only synonymous in poetry. The precise meaning of the term iy
perhaps beyond our reach, but ‘guide’ or ‘avant-courier’ are ap-
proximations justified by the component parts. The ambihc-pmid
seems the ‘ prefectus fabrorum.’ Ambaht-hus, ‘ Officina.’ Jun.Gl. D.

f [In the ms. the two first letters and part of the 6 are obliterated

8 The ‘leod-geld,’ or, as it is called, ¢.31, the ‘wer-geld,’ was the
sum paid to the family of a man who had been slain, as a compensa-
tion for the death of their kinsman. In the Latin documents these


> ee


6 JEDELBIRNTES DOMAS.


vit. Lyningey *mund-bypd -L- yeallinga:-
1x. Ing ypigman >ppeum yreld -m- gebete- 4 cyning aze $
Spite 4 ealle pa zhtan:.


x. Ing man pid cyningey ¢mazden-man zelized -i- peillinga
zebete:.

x1. Ing hio gpindende peopa pio -xxv- peillmga gebete. S10
}midde «x peillingay:-

xu. Lyningey °ped-ey] -xx- peillinga popzelde:-

xiu. Ing on eopler cine man mannan ofyleh® -xi- yell.
sebete:.

xiv. Ing pid eopley fbipele man gelized «x1 yell. gebeve :-


xv. Leopley mund-bypd -vi- peillingay:-

xvi. Ing, pid ceoplep bipelan man geliged -vi- peillingum
gebece- et pape odepe peopan -L- ycaecta- xc bape pyiddan
*XXX+ fowtta:-

xvi. Ing man in manney vin epeye ™zeipned -vi- yeullingum
gebece- yefe eeptep ipned -ru- perlingay- prppan gehpyle yel-
ling:

ae Ing man mannan pepnum bebyped peep ‘ceay peopd-
4 man nenig yyel ne zeded -vi- yeillingum gebete:.


terms are usually translated, ‘compositio, solutio, hominis occisi ;
from leod, pep, ‘ homo, vir ;’ and zeld, ‘retributio. See hereafter ‘Be
pep-zyloe.’

a Protection: but the fine here imposed is for an infraction of the
mund-byrd, or what in the later dooms is called ‘mund-bryce.’
Under this head are to be classed the penalties spoken of in ce. 2, 6.

> This can hardly be considered as the dative plural of rpea,
‘dominus,’ or fpeo, ‘mulier,’ because the laws never speak of crimes
as committed by or against multitudes. A very obvious correction
presents itself in ppeum [men.] ‘If a freeman steal from a freeman,
let the bote be three-fold.’ From a passage in Alfred’s version of
the Jewish Jaw it would seem that the adjective frioh, freoh, was
sometimes used absolutely or with a substantive sense: ‘Sepe rpione
(speonne ms. H.) fopycele,’ &c.: ‘Whoever steals a freeman,’ &c.,
e.15. Still, for the reason already given, that can hardly be the
case here. Most of the Barbarie codes afford instances where the
ancient fines are in like manner tripled, quadrupled, &c.

¢ See note, p.3: the ordinary meaning of the word is punish-
ment.

4 It is clear from the context that the person here spoken of was
of the servile classes. The Salic law notices a ‘ regis ancilla’ (tit.
27.), and the Ripuarian law an ‘ancilla regia’ (tit. 58. § 9. 14.),
but without giving us any further knowledge of their duties. From


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELBIRH1. 7


8. The king’s * ‘ mund-byrd,’ L. shillings.

9. If a freeman steal from a freeman, Jet him make three-
fold ‘ bot;’ and let the king have the ‘‘wite’ and all the
chattels.

10. If a man lie with the king’s ¢ maiden, let him pay a ‘ bot’
of 1. shillings.

11. If she be a grinding slave, let him pay a ‘bot’ of xxv.
shillings. The third [class] x1. shillings.

12. Let the king’s *‘ fed-esl’ be paid for with xx. shillings.

13. If a man slay another in an ‘eorl’s’ ¢ tin,’ let make ¢ bot’
with xu. shillings.

14, If a man lie with an ‘ eorl’s’ £ ¢ birele,’ let him make ‘bot’
with x11. shillings.

15. A ‘ceorl’s’ * mund-byrd,’ v1. shillings.

16. If a man lie with a ‘ceorl’s’ ¢ birele,’ let him make ¢ bot’
with vi. shillings; witha slave of the second [class], L. ® ¢ scetts;’
with one of the third, xxx. ¢ scetts.’

17. If any one be the first ®to make an inroad into a man’s
‘tin,’ let him make ¢ bot’ with v1. shillings ; let him who follows,
with 11. shillings; after, each, a shilling.

18. If a man furnish weapons to another where there is
‘strife, though no evil be done, let him make ‘bot’ with v1.
shillings.


ce. 14, 16. it might be inferred that the maegden-man was a cup-
bearer, if such an office in the royal household could be supposed
to have been conferred on a female. In Beowulf the mead is dis-
tributed by females, but then they are royal personages.

e There can be no doubt that this word is derived from féban,
‘nutrire ;’ but whether the woman were the person fed or the feeder,
t.e. a nurse, is not so clear.

f A female cup-bearer; but we ought to read ‘ bipelan.’

8 It has been already stated, on the authority of a passage in the
Mercian law, that there were 250 scetts in a pound of silver. An
examination of those which remain gives an average of from 15 to 18
or 19 grains of silver, though some have been found to contain 20
grains. Ruding’s Annals of the Coinage, vol. i. p. 296.

h The power of ‘ ge’ in composition can only be gathered from the
context in these early specimens of the Anglo-Saxon language; and
though the translation adopts the import of the simple verb, it is
evident that a forcible entry of some kind is here intended.—[It
must, however, be borne in mind, that the only Ms. in which these.
Laws are extant is of the 12'> century.—7Z.]

i Such, and not ceayr, is the reading of the ms. It is the old Frisic
* case :’ ‘ Hwersama gold ieftha ferene clathar urliust anna enre case,
&c. In case a man lose gold or his holiday-clothes in a quarrel.’
Lit. Brocm. § 158.


a |


8 JEDELBIRNTES DOMAS.
xix. Lup *peg-pear pi ged6n -vi- yeillingum gebeve:.
xx. Ing man pone man ofylahé -xx- yeillingum gebete:.


xx. Inp man mannan ofylehd. medume leod-geld -c- yeul-
inga gebete:-

xxu. Tip man mannan orylehd ‘act openum gpefe -xx-
peulinga yopgelde- 4 1n -xx- nihta ealne leod ropgelde:-

xxi. Ing bana of lande zeprced- pa mazar healgne leod
Fonzelden:-

xxiv. Ing man fpigne man gebi ¢. . ed -xx- sell. gebeve:-


xxv. Ing man ceopley ¢hlap-acan ofplehd -vi- peillingum
Zebece:-
xxv. Ing lev fogplah’ pone peleycan -Lxxx- peill. popgelde.
Zip Fane oSepne opylehd -ix- peillingum fopgelde- Fane pyud-
*4. ropzelée. dan -x- yeillingum * ropgelden:-
xxvu. Lip fpiman f%edop-bpecde zed@5 -vi- pallingum ge-
bete::


a This appears to have been a similar offence with the Longobardic
‘ weg-worfe (Ed. Rotharis, c.26.), and perhaps the later ‘ fore-steal,’
when this was attended with robbery. It might be termed a highway
robbery, were it not that this offence has acquired a technical sense
which can hardly have been required to make out a case of weg-reaf.
With this law it is conceived the succeeding one ought to be con-
nected, and that their object is to declare, that for simple weg-reaf
the fine should be 6s., but for weg-reaf attended by homicide, 20s.,
in addition to the ‘ leod-geld,’ &c.

> That is, if one freeman (ingenuus) kill another.

¢ One of the provisions of the Liter Brocmannorum is to this
effect: ‘ Thes data friund schellath then bona makia wr thet epene
gref: The friends of the dead shall denounce the perpetrator over the
open grave. § 178, note. The same practice is also noticed in the
Emsingoer Land-Recht: ‘Ac ieffhia then riuchta bona nawt ne
withat onda boniath hine nawt wr thet epene greff. Also, if they
know not the right slayer, and do not denounce him as the murderer
over the open grave. With one of these customs the law before us
appears to be connected, and it will be almost needless to remark,
that in the turbulent times for which these provisions were enacted,
both must have given occasion for frequent affrays.—[This law has
been otherwise understood by some eminent scholars, with whose
opinion I onee coincided, but I now feel convinced that the above
interpretation of Mr. Price is correct. Asa prospective enactment,
the sense in which it has been taken, viz., ‘If a man slay another, let
him pay 20 shillings at the open grave,’ has certainly an appearance
of plausibility ; but in considering it (as most of these dooms, per-
haps, ought to be considered) to be an adjudged, and not a contem-


THE LAWS OF KING AETHELBIRHT. 9


19, If ** weg-reaf’ be done, let him make ‘bot’ with v1. shil-
lings.

20. If the man be slain, let him make ‘ bot’ with xx. shil-
lings.

21. Ifa man slay another, let him make‘ bot’ with a half
* leod-geld’ of c. shillings.

22. Ifa man slay another “at an open grave, let him pay xx.
shillings, and pay the whole ‘leod’ within xx. days.

28. If the slayer retire from the land, let his kindred pay.a
half ¢ leod.’

24, If any one ¢bind a freeman, let him make ‘ bat’ with xx.
shillings.

25. If any one slay a ‘ceorl’s’ ¢ ‘hlaf-eta,’ let him make ¢ bot’
with vi. shillings.

26. If ‘[any one] slay a ‘leet’ of the highest class, Jet him pay
Lxxx. shillings; if he slay one of the second, let him pay ux.
shillings; of the third, let him pay xt. shillings.

27. Ifa freeman commit 8 ‘ edor’-breach, let him make ¢ bot’
with vi. shillings.


plated, case, all objection to the present version seems removed ; the
verbal order of the Saxon text would moreover hardly admit of the
other interpretation.— 7.]

4 These are the only letters of this word which can now be distin-
guished ; the translation adopts the conjecture of Wilkins,

e Literally the ‘ loaf-eater,’ and consequently a domestic or menial
servant.

* [The word ‘man,’ both here and in the following clause, is un-
derstood from c. 25, of which c. 26. seems to be a continuation.— 7.]

8 Itis clear, from the laws of Alfred, c.36, that edorbryce was
the same offence against a ceorl that burhbryce was against a person
of higher rank. It cannot therefore mean a mere breaking of his
* close,’ but a breaking coupled with a forcible entry into his place of
residence. It is true the old Latin version of Alfred’s laws renders
edor-bryce ‘ sepis-fractio,’ making edor equivalent to the ederzon
and ezzisczun of the Longobardic and Bavarian laws. ‘ Si quis
sepem alienam ruperit, id est ederzon, componat solidos vi. Ed. Ro-
tharis, c.290. < Si illam sepem eruperit quam ezzisezun vocant,'. &c.
‘ Superiorem virgam quam etorgasta vocamus que septs continet fir-
mitatem,’ &c. LL. Bajuvar. tit.ix. c.11. Thus, too, at the present
day, in some provinces of Germany, the eder-zaun is the hedge which
encloses a peasant’s ‘hof.’ (Die eder-zuyne buwich halden ind niet
vergenchlich laissen werden. To keep the fences in repair, and not
suffer them to be in decay. Doc. an. 1359, apud Walraff Alt-
Deutsche Worter-Buch.) The edter-zehend are the tithes of fruits,
vegetables, and indeed of every thing growing within the limits of the
garden hedge or wall; and eddert-bruch, the ebop-bpecde of the text,
is an injury done to the landmark or boundaries of an estate or a


* 7, ham.


10 JEDELBIRNTES DOMAE.


xxvii. Inp man inne feoh genimed- ye man «1 zelde
sebeve?:
xxix. Ing pyu-man ebop >gezanzed -1v- yeillingum gebete:-


xxx. Dp man mannan opylea- Cagene peaetve- y unfacne feo
sehpilce zelde:-

xxx1. Lig ypaman pid pmep manner pip zeliged- ny pep-gelde
abicge- 4 odep pip hy agenum yeette ‘begete- 4 pam odpum
zet * bam gebpenge:-


municipal territory. Still I conceive that ‘ edor,’ like ‘ tun,’ implied
the area inclosed by the fence, as well as the fence itself; and that a
ceorl’s ‘ edor’ comprized not only his] curtilage but also the house
attached to it. This seems confirmed by the expression ‘inne yeoh’
in the succeeding law; and which, judging from the analogy of the
Dutch inboel, the Flemish in-gedoem, and the Frisic ingod, ingoed,
must mean the goods and furniture contained in a dwelling-house.
From the language of c. 30, it may be inferred that cc. 27, 28, 29, 30,
form only one enactment, and are to be thus understood: Ifa free-
man commit ‘ edor-breach,’ and steal ‘inne-feoh,’ or if he forcibly
enter an ‘ edor,’ and slay, in so doing, a man, let him pay for each
offence, according to their nature, with his own money, &c.

[I differ from Mr. Price in the interpretation of this enactment:
he had considered ‘inne feoh’ as a compound expression, and thus ren-
dered it, ‘If a man take away ‘inne-feoh,’ let the man pay a three-
fold bote.’ In the Saxon Gospels we have the following passage in
support of my version, ‘ De roplec pa pa memizeo J com co hi inne:
He then left the multitude and came to his dwelling.’ Matt. xiii. 36.
70}

> The compound ‘ gezan’ is almost invariably used in the sense of
going against with a hostile intent; hence, to subdue, to overcome.
From the succeeding law it is clear that the offence spoken of in the
text was sometimes attended by loss of life on the part of the person
whose property was thus invaded.

© Azene yeecre is a false concord; and a similar objection lies
against unracne and zehpilce. The better reading would be, azene
(for azgenne) seat and unyacn feo gehpile zelbe. By ungacn feo I
understand what in Alfred’s dooms is called cpic-eaht reo z0b. * And
Set pi on cpiceahtum seo zobum and man neenizne man on Set ne
yylle: And let it be paid for in good live stock, in which let there
be no blemish.’ There is a seeming difficulty in the expression
‘ agene yee, his own money,’ occasioned by that precision of ancient
composition which sometimes runs into redundancy and sometimes
amounts to tautology. It is also found in an ancient charter pre-
served at Canterbury, dated 1044, but which has been reduced to the
dialect of the period, (circa 1300,) when it was recorded in the
volume which has made us acquainted with it: ‘Hyer suotelet on
thisen ywrite embe tho vorewerde the Ethelrich wrogte with Edsige
Archebiscop at than londe at Chert the Chelnoth Archebiscop bogte
at Helethen than theyne mid his ogene sheatte and Etheluf King hit
ybokode Ceolnoth archebiscope on eche yrve: In this deed is wit-
nessed the covenant which Ethelric made with Archbishop Edsig,


THE LAWS OF KING AATHELBIRHT. Ir


28. Ifany one take property from a dwelling, let him pay a
three-fold ‘ bot*”

29. Ifa freeman »pass over an ‘edor,’ let him make ‘ bot’
with iv. shillings.

30. If a man slay another, let him pay * with his own money,
and with any sound property whatever.

31. Ifa freeman lie with a freeman’s wife, “let him pay for it
with his ‘ wer-geld,’ and © provide another wife with his own
money, and bring her to the other.


concerning the land at Chert, (and) which Archbishop Chelnoth
bought of Heletha the thane with his own money, and (which) King
Ethelwulf granted (booked) to Archbishop Ceolnoth in fee for ever.’
~—‘Donatio Ethelrici Bigge de manerio de Chert, Stuting et Mele-
tune, Anno Domini millesimo quadragesimo quarto.’ ms. £cel.
Christi Cant. Liber A. f. 153. From the ‘ Evidences,’ at the close of
Thorn’s Chronicle, it would seem that the original grant contained
the same words: ‘Anno Dominice incarnationis pccc.xx1x. Ego
Ceolnothus gratia Dei archiepiscopus Doroberniz comparavi ‘ pro-
pria pecunia,’ terram nomine Cert, a quodam principe dicto Heleth,
consensu Athulfi regis qui eandem terram liberam proclamavit ab
omni seculari servitio et regio tributo, exceptis expeditione, pontis et
arcis constructione. Ap. x. Scriptores, col. 2218, 1.16. A very
similar form of expression is found in the old Swedish Law: ‘ Bota af
sina enskyldu: de proprio multam pendere.’ Upl. L. Jord. B. c. 16.
* Af sins enskyllum penningum: de propria pecunia.’ Suderm. L.
Arfd. B.c.5. Ihre, in voce. In the Capitulare de Villis, c. iv. there
is a phrase in the disjunctive coming very near to our present text :
‘ Et quod pro fraude dederint ad opus nostrum veniat; id est, in
peculio aut in alio precio. [I regret that I cannot concur with my
late respected predecessor, either in his grammatical strictures upon
the text of this law, or in the emendations proposed, or in his inter
pretation, viz. ‘If a man (so doing) kill another, let him pay for
each (offence) with his own money, and in cattle without blemish.’
Unyacn yeoh may probably be synonymous with clene feoh, as in
the Saxon inscription from the Codex Aureus at Stockholm: ‘Pe
begecan pay béc mid uncpe clene fed. f poi. peer mid clene zolte.’
See Rask’s A.S.Gr. p.208.—TZ.]

4 [ have given this term the import it usually bears in Anglo-Saxon
composition ; but as it is clearly the source of the Old-English ‘aby,’
to suffer, such may be its meaning here. The difference however is
so slight, as perhaps to be hardly worth notice.

e The practice here referred to, of purchasing the bride, will be
illustrated below in the notes to the Kentish custumal respecting
marriage forms, usually printed as a part of the laws of Edmund.
It is thus alluded to in Theodoric’s letter to Hermanfrid, king of
Thuringen: ‘ Quapropter salutantes vos gratia competenti, indicamus
nos venientibus legatis vestris impretiabilis quidem rei, sed more
gentium suscepisse pretia destinata, equos argenteo colore vestitos,
quales decuit esse nuptiales.” Bouquet, iv. p.8. Conf. Tacitus, Germ.
c.18. For ‘ct pam’ we should in all probability read ‘zc ham,’ at

home.


12 JEDELBIRMTES DOMAS.


xxx. Ing man *yuht ham-yeyld puphycind- mid peopde
Fongelde:

xxx. Inp >yeax-pang gepeopd -L- pextva to bote:.

xxxiv. Ing baner blice peopded -111- perllmgzum gebere:-


xxxv. Inp baney ‘bive peopd -1v- peilingzum gebete:-


xxxvi. Ing pio uteppe “hion zebpocen peoped -x- yerllingum
sebete:.


® The difficulties in this law do not merely lie in the obscure
term ‘ham-rcylo,’ but in the double doubt whether ‘jihc’ ean pos-
sibly mean ‘ right’ as opposed to ‘left ;’ and again, whether an injury
done to the right ham-rcylo should alone be visited with a fine.
With respect to ham-scylo, (if it be one word, and the present text
be correct,) it is clear from the context that it means something of
changeable value, as any injury it sustained was to be paid for
according to its worth. In Anglo-Saxon, ‘ham’ implied ‘ cutis,
camisia, tegmen,’ in short, any kind of covering [‘ hama’ rather; I
am not aware of ‘ham’ having this signification in A.S.—7.]; and
reylb any kind of defence or protection ; whence ham-reylo would be
a legitimate compound for any sort of garment, as in an old German
glossary we find ‘scapulare’ rendered hals-uueri (Jun. Gl. C.), terms
which, taken separately, are equivalent to the Anglo-Saxon haly and
yeylo. Thus, too, in the Guta-Laga, we have lic-vara (he-rcylo,
Anglo-Saxon,) or body-shield, used as a general name for several
parts of a man’s dress: ‘ Da en torfa ier manni af haufpi haggvin,
pa ir byt at marc silfs. Skamir pa clepi mannz pa byt ifir clept at
oyri, kurtil at tueim ogrum, licvara at atta ertaugum oc giert alt
hailt clepi mannz oc iemgup sum pet fir war. Lievara callar sere
oc scyrtu. Broc oc hatt mannz paun iru all iemdyr huert paira sum
scaimt verpr.’ C. xix. 56, 57. ‘If the skin, with the hair, be hewed
off from the head, the bote is one mark of silver. If thou injure
any man’s clothes, pay for the upper garments one ore, for the coat
two ores, for the licvara (shirt) eight oer-tugs; and make the clothes
whole again and equally good as they were before. The sark (shift)
and shirt, the breeches and hat of a man, are called licvara (and)
they are equally dear (z.e. the bote is equally high) when they are
injured.’ There is a sufficient analogy between the component parts
of ham-ycylé and lic-vara to justify an inference, that in these
kindred dialects both terms may have imported the same thing; but
there is a remarkable passage in the Lex Saxonum which, when
confronted with cc. $2 and 33 of the present text, has induced me
to believe that we must still have recourse to conjectural criticism in
removing our difficulties. 1.6. ‘Si gladio vestem seu scutum alterius
incideret, xxxv1. solidos componat vel tertia manu juret. 7. Si per
capillos alium comprehenderit, cxx. sol. componat vel undecima manu.
juret.’ In the first of these provisions we have the ham [r. hama.
—T.] (vestem) and seylb (scutum) of our present text, ¢. 32, and
it is immediately followed by the feax-ranz of c. 33. Why may
we not read, Lip man [on un]pihe ham [oppe] seylo pupyeind: Si
quis injyste vestem seu scutum perforaverit? A similar disposition


THE LAWS OF KING ATHELBIRHT. 13


32. If any one thrust through the *‘riht ham-scyld,’ let him
adequately compensate.

33. If there be »< feax-fang,’ let there be L. sceatts for ‘ bot,’

84. If there be an exposure of the bone, let ‘bot’ be made
with 11. shillings.

35. If there be an ‘injury of the bone, let ‘bot’ be made
with rv. shillings.

36. If the outer ¢‘hion’ be broken, let * bot’ be made with x.
shillings.


of offences is to be met with in the Bishop of Roskeld’s code for
Copenhagen, An. 1294 :—‘ Item qui alteri dederit alapam vel ¢rawerit
per crines, seu turpiter receperit per nasum, vel aures, vel genas,
vel vestes ejus laniaverit manibus, gladio vel cultello, &c. C. 61.
{Rihc ham-yeylb I imagine to signify the right shoulder-blade, an
injury to which is naturally more serious than one inflicted on the
left. Dam is apparently the M.G. ams, Aumerus, and a blade-bone
(of a hog at least) is, I believe, in some parts of England still called
a shield. Mr. Price’s observation with regard to its varying in value
seems founded upon a misconception of the phrase mid peopse,
which certainly does not signify, as he had rendered it, ‘the worth
of it,’ but is adverbial, (like such phrases as mib yibbe, pacifice, mid
hycum, dolose,) and means digue, worthily, adequately; a vague form
of expression, especially in a legal enactment, but of which repeated
instances occur in the Northumbrian Priests’ Laws.— T.]

> A taking hold by the hair: ‘Si illum per capillos compre-
henderit similiter ter quatuor solidos componat.’ Lex Frisionum,
addit. tit. iii. c. 40.

¢ In the Asega-Buch (P. iii. § 17.) it is enacted, ‘ Benes-biti niugun
skill; bone-bite, 9s... And upon which Mr. Wiarda observes, ‘ Benes-
biti’ is a mere injury of the bone, and is to be distinguished from
* benskredene,’ or an injury producing either exfoliation or a simple
fracture, and ‘ ben-truch-sketen,’ a compound fracture of the bone.

4 The only approximations to this term in the kindred dialects,
which I have been able to discover, are the Suio-Gothic hinna,
meaning any species of membrane; whence ogon-hinna, ‘ membrana
oculi,’ and the Old-Danish hinne, bearing the same import. In the
Guta-Laga the former occurs, in a list of offences, disposed in nearly
the same order as those of the present text: ‘Suerp-sprang bytr at
mare penninga. Schin hiern-schal pa bytir tuar marc penninga.
En ier hiern-schal suigin epa rimnin pa ir marc silfs. Sis a himin
epa hinna pa ir byt at tueim marc silfs.’ C. xix. c.13, 14. ‘If the
skin (of the head) be broken, the bote is a mark. If the brain-pan
be visible, the bote is two marks. If the brain-pan be contused or
broken, then the bote is a mark of silver. If the membrane (the
himin or hinna) of the brain be visible, then the bote is two marks
of silver.’ And thus, in King Eric’s Zealand Law, we have, —
‘ Hwert ben man ma kienne ther wither margh hauer lighet eller
with hinne tha zr thet half mark bot: For every bone which can
be known to have lain by marrow or by membrane,’ &e. 11. ¢. 36.
Mr. Kolderup Rosenvinge renders ‘hinne’ by the modern Danish
hinde, a word meaning any fine membrane, but chiefly the mem-


14 JEDELBIRNTES DOMAS.


xxxvil. Iny butu sien -xx- yellingum Zebete:-

xxxvil. Ing eaxle zelamed peopSed -xxx- yallingum ze-
bece:.

xxxix. *Inp eape of peopd aylagen -xi- yeill. gebeve:.

xt. Ing odep eape napiht geheped -xxv- yeill. gebere:-

xu. Inf eape pipel peopded -11- youll. gebeve:-

xiu. Ing eape yceapd peopded -vi- yeill. gebeve:-

xu. Ing eage of peopd -L- yeillingum gebete:-

xiv. Ing mud oppe eage poh peopded -xu- yeill. gebere:-

xiv. Ing bnayu pypel peopd -1x- pallingum gebete:-

xvi. Ing hic pio an hleope «111+ poll. gebete:-

xivit. ‘Ing bucu pypele yien -vi- reall. gebeve:.

xvi. Ing nayu aleop yeeapd peopd- gehpile -vi- yell. ze-


bete:-
xix. Ing pipel peopd -vi- yell. zebere:.


braneous covering of the bones, and which is obviously from the
same root as the Anglo-Saxon hinnod, viscera. Thus, too, we have
in the Lex Frisionum:—‘ Si os perforatum fuerit duodecim solid.
componat. Si membranam qua cerebrum continetur gladius tetigerit,
xvill. solid. comp. Si ipsa membrana rupta fuerit ita ut cerebrum
exire possit xxiv. solid. comp.’ Tit. xxii. § 6, 7,8. It may be right
to state, that in Alfred’s Dooms, c. 44, a penalty is imposed for
breaking the tablets of the skull; and the outer tablet is expressly
mentioned: ‘Ing pec uteppe ban bid pypel. zerelle .xv. roll. co bote:
If the outer bone (tablet of the skull) be pierced, let 15s. be given
as bote.’ It is, however, always dangerous to seek the aid of con-
jectural criticism, without some better reason than the obscurity of
the term used ; and the integrity of the present text seems to be gua-
ranteed by the use of the feminine article, while, in the quotation from
Alfred, we have the article neuter.

® [have transposed this and the succeeding law, for reasons which
will be obvious to the reader. There is a remarkable coincidence
between the offences here enumerated, and the amount of the fines
prescribed for them, and a similar recital in the Lex Alamannorum,
tit. Ix. c. 1-3. ¢ Si quis alterius aurem absciderit et non exsurdaverit
duodecim solidos componat. Si autem sic absciderit profundo ut
eum exsurdaverit quadraginta solidos componat. Si enim medietatem
auris absciderit quod Alamanni orscardi dicunt, cum sex solidis
componat.’


THE LAWS OF KING ATHELBIRHT. 15


37. If it be both, let ‘ bot’ be made with xx. shillings.
38. If a shoulder be Jamed, let ‘bot’? be made with xxx.


shillings.

89. * If an ear be struck off, let ‘ bot’ be made with xu. shil-
lings,

40. If the other ear hear not, let ‘bot’ be made with xxv.
shillings.

4l. If an ear be pierced, let ‘ bét’ be made with m1, shil-
lings.

42, If an ear be mutilated, let ‘bot’ be made with vr. shily
lings.


43. If an eye be [struck] out, let ‘ bot’ be made with L. shil-
lings.

44, If the mouth or an eye be injured, let ‘ bot’ be made
with x11. shillings.

45. If the » nose be pierced, let ‘bot’ be made with 1x. shil-
lings.

46. If it be one ‘ala,’ let ‘bot’ be made with m1. shillings.

47. If both be pierced, let ‘ bot’ be made with v1. shillings.

48. If the nose be otherwise mutilated, for each let ‘ bot’ be
made with vi. shillings.

49. If it be pierced, let ‘bot’ be made with vi. shillings.


> The Frisian law is equally particular in all the possible injuries
which can affect this feature, and will throw some light on the ob-
scurities of the present text. ‘Thiu nosi thruch-sketen thi ingong
tian enza and achta panninga; thi utgong alsa felo; thera inra mutha
iawelikes bote twilif skill’, thi gristel fiuwer skill’; thera thrira
domma gersfal iahwelikes bote sex and thritich skill’: If the nose be
pierced through, for the entrance, 10 0z. and 8d.; for the exit as
much. The bote of each of the inner mouths (2.e, the prey? is
12s.; the gristle, 4s. The bote for cutting off the three dams (2. ¢.
the sides and the cartilage) is for each 36s.’ Asega-Buch, p. iii. § 5.
And again: ‘ Thiu nosi thruch-sketen: thi forma wach fiarda
thrimine lad, thi other and thi thredda alsa felo: The nose pierced
Pe eed first wall, 32 loths; the second and third, as much.’

- §16,

¢ We ought perhaps to transpose this and the following Jaw, as we
have already had a bote for piercing the nose, c.45. It should
however be mentioned, that in some of the dialects, scarcely any
distinction is found hetween the term implying the nose and that
used for the nostril. ‘ Nezsa in veteribus lingue nostre monumentis
non tam nasum quam narem denotare videatur, unde in plurium
numero occurrit, dum de toto membro sermo est. In Lege Scanica
Orb. m. p.63. ‘ Rister a bodhe nesen: si disciderit utrumque
narem. ex Bire. c.14.1, ‘Warda neser afhogner: si nasus
amputatus fuerit.’ Jhre, in voce.


16 JEDELBIRITES DODAS.


L. Sebe *ein-ban fopylehd. mid -xx- yeillingum yongelde:-


uu. fEc pam yeopen cvodum yypeycum zt zehpylcum -vi-
seillingay+ ye cod ye panne biytanded -1v- yerll. pepe bonne bi
pam ytanded -111- yeill. 4 ponne yippan gehpile peilling:-


tu. Ing yppeec apypd peopd -xi- peillingay. Ing >pido-bane
sebpoced peopded -vi- yerll. zebere:.

tin. Sepe ‘eapm puphycind -vi- yeillingum gebece. Ing
eapm fopbpocen peopd -vi- yeill. zebeve:-


tiv. Ing puman of-ayleehd -xx- yell. Ing puman nzgl of
peopded -1- peill. xebece. Ing man “yeyce-pingep of-aylehd
sviite peill. zebece. Ing man middel-pingep of-ayleehd -1v- yall.
sebece. Inp man ‘gold-pingep of-aplehd -vi- yell. gebete.
tif man pone lyclan pingep of-aylehd -x1- yeill. Zebere:-


tv. Ec pam neglum zehpyleum yeilling:.

Lyi. fEc pam lepeyvan .fplice-pamme -mi- pallingay. 4 ee
pam mapan -vi- peill.:.

vi. Ing man odepne mid fyyte in nayo plehd -m- yeill.:.


a ¢Mentum, chinni beini. Gl. Jun. B. [Perhaps better ‘ jaw-
bone. ‘Ak jabai hwas puk stautai bi taihswon peina kinnu, wandei
imma jah po andara.’ Ulf. Matt. v.39. ‘ Whosoever shall smite thee
on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also.’ ‘Damma stautandin
puk bi kinnu.’ Ib. Luc. vi.29. ‘ And unto him that smiteth thee on
the one cheek. So also Old High-Ger. chinni, O.-Sax. kinni,
O.-Nor. kinn, Mod.-Ger. kinn (maxilla, gena).— 7.]

b There is some difference of opinion as to the particular bone
here alluded to. It is mentioned in the Asega-Buch (iii. ¢.17.):
‘ Thet widuben atwa eider enda en skill’ wicht goldis: The widoben
in two, either end, one shilling of weighed gold’ (7.e. a mark). In
the notes on this passage, Mr. Wiarda quotes the Harling Land-
Recht in illustration of the meaning; where it is said: ‘If the weite-
bein (wide-bone), that is, the shoulder-blade, be broken,’ &c. An
old Low-German gloss, published by Hoffman, ( Observ. J.G. p. 245.)
supports this interpretation: ‘ Dat wyde-ben dat is sculter-blatt.’
But in v. Schwartzenberg’s Charten-Bock, i. p. 98, we have, ‘ Wyde-
ben an den hals: the wide-bone of the neck.’ And the editors of the
Old-Frisic Land-Recht (p. 368.) have translated the word sleutel-been,
or collar-bone, in which I have followed them.—[The foregoing
quotations are from Wiarda’s notes to the Asega-Buch, p. 216.


THE LAWS OF KING AXTHELBIRHT. 17


50. Let him who breaks the *chin-bone pay for it with xx.
shillings.

51. For each of the four front teeth, vr. shillings; for the
tooth which stands next to them 1Vv. shillings; for that which
stands next to that, 111. shillings; and then afterwards, for each
a shilling.

52. If the speech be injured, xu. shillings. If the ®collar-
bone be broken, let ‘ bot’ be made with v1. shillings.

58. Let him who stabs [another] through an Sarm, make
‘bot’ with vi. shillings. If an arm be broken, let him make
‘ bot’ with vi. shillings.

54, If a thumb be struck off, xx. shillings. If a thumb nail
be off, let ‘bot’ be made with m. shillings. If the ‘shooting
(2. e. fore) finger be struck off, let ‘bot’ be made with vim. shil-
lings. Ifthe middle finger be struck off, let ‘ bot’ be made with
1v. shillings. If the ‘gold (ze. ring) finger be struck off, let
‘bot’ be made with vi. shillings. If the little finger be struck
off, Jet ‘bot’ be made with x1. shillings.


55. For every nail, a shilling.


56. For the smallest ‘disfigurement of the face, m1. shillings;
and for the greater, vi. shillings.


57. If any one strike another with his fist on the nose, 111.
shillings.


¢ ¢Si quis alio brachium super cubitum transpunxerit cum sex
solidis componat. Lex Alamana. tit. Ixv. ¢. 3.

4 «Si secundum digitum quo sagittatur, excusserit, m.cccc. den.
qui faciunt sol. xxxv. culpabilis judicetur.” Zex Sal. tit. xxxii. 4.

¢ In a law of the Conqueror it is stated: ‘Del’ lung dei (rendra
xvi.sol.; del’ autre ki porte Janel xvu1. sol.’ (Holkham ms. 142. BS
In the Lex Alamannorum, tit. lxv. c. 21, this finger is called ‘digitus
annularis.’

f « Vulitivam, L. solid. componat.’ Lex Angl. et Werin. tit. v. c. 10.
* Si os fregerit vel vulitivam fecerit, &c. Lex Saxonum, tit.i. c. 5.
* Si ex percussione deformitas faciei illata fuerit, que de duodecim
pedum longitudine possit agnosci, quod wulitivam dicunt, ter Iv. sol.
componat. Lex Fris. Add. Sapientum, iii. c.16. In the Old-
Frisic Land Recht (p. 362), this injury is termed ‘ wlite-wimelsa’
and in the East Frisic Land-Recht (p. 726), vlyta-wlemelsa. ‘ Weir
einer wert gewundet buten den kledern und licklauwen beholt, de
noch kleyd noch haere bedecken und stede anschinnende is dat het
vlyta wlemelsa: If a man be wounded in a part not covered by his
clothes, and a scar ensues, which is neither covered by his clothes
nor his hair, and which is constantly visible, such a scar is called
vlyta-wlemelsa.’


18 JEDELBIRNTES DOMAS.


iyi. * Ing dyn yie- peilling. Ing he heahpe handa dynver
onyehé- yall. ropzelde:.

ux. Ing dyn ypeape pie buton pacdum -xxx- yextta Je-
bete:.

Lx. Ing hie pie binnan pedum- gehpile -xx- peaetta gebete:-


txt. Ing hyp pund peopded -x- yell. gebece. Inp he
puph-pipel peopded -xx- yerll. gebere:.


Lx. Lip man * gexzemed peopded «xxx: yeill. gebeve:-
Lx. Ing man ¢ceap-pund pie «111+ yerll. gebete:-


txiv. Ing man gekynbelice lim apypded- ppym leud-geldum
hine man fopgelde. Ing he puphycind -vi- yeill. gebere.
Ing man in-beyeind -vi- yell. gebere:-


txv. Ing peoh gebpocen peopded -xir- yeillingum gebete.
Ing he healc peopd. peep mocan ypeond yeman:-

Lxvi. Ing ub yopbpocen peopd -111- yell. gebere:.-

txvit. Ing man peoh puphyvingo- price gehpilce -vi- yeil-
lingay. Inge ofep ynee- yollinz- ec tpam yncum cpegen-


ofep pry +t. peall.:-
yxvi. Ing * pele pund peopded -ut- peilingap gebete:-


a {Mr. Price’s translation of this law was as follows: ‘If there be
a bruise, one shilling ; if he catch the blow with his uplifted hand,
let one shilling be paid.’ But surely the participle uplifted cannot
be a correct translation of the adjective ‘heah,’ the cognate expression
to which is in the Scandinavian dialects constantly employed to ex-
press the right (hand); and though an authority for this use of the
word in A.S. be wanting, still the circumstance that the settlers in
Kent were Jutes seems sufficient to account for the occurrence of
this northern idiom in the Laws of /Ethelbirht. Dr. Reinhold
Schmid’s translation accords with Price’s, and both follow Wilkins,
who has ‘elata manu; Palgrave adopts the Northern acceptation, but
renders the law, ‘If the injured party receive a blow on the right
an &e. See Orig. & Prog. of the Engl. Commonw. V. 2. p. ex.

> «Si autem in interiora membra transpunctus fuerit, quod href-
wunt dicunt, cum duodecim solidis componat. Si autem transpunc-
tus fuerit, cum viginti quatuor solidis componat. Lex Alamann.
tit. Ixv. ec. 25, 26.

¢ Wilkins reads zelemed. The ms. agrees with the present text.
I have been unable to discover any thing which will illustrate the
term. In the Lex Angliorum et Werinorum, it is enacted, ‘ Si ipse


THE LAWS OF KING /ETHELBIRHT. 19


58. *If there be a bruise, a shilling; if he receive a right
hand bruise, let him [the striker] pay a shilling.

59. If the bruise be black in a part not covered by the clothes,
let * bot’ be made with xxx. ‘scetts.’

60. If it be covered by the clothes, let ‘bot’ for each be made
with xx. ‘sceetts.’

61. If the »belly be wounded, let ‘bot’ be made with x1.
shillings; if it be pierced through, let ‘bot’ be made with xx.


shillings.

62. If any one be ¢‘ gegemed,’ Jet ‘bot’ be made with xxx.
shillings.

63. If any one be *‘ cear-wund,’ let ‘bot’ be made with 11.
shillings.


64. If any one destroy [another’s] organ of generation, let
him pay him with 1. ‘leud-gelds:’ if he pierce it through, let
him make ‘bot’ with vi. shillings; if it be pierced within, let
him make ¢ bot’ with v1. shillings.

65. If a thigh be broken, let ‘bot’ be made with x11. shil-
lings; if the man become halt, then the friends must arbitrate.

66. Ifa rib be broken, let ‘bot’ be made with m1. shillings.

67. If a thigh be pierced through, for each stab v1. shillings;
if (the wound be) above an inch, a shilling; for two inches, 1.;
above three, 11. shillings.

68. If a *sinew be wounded, let ‘bot’ be made with m1.
‘shillings.


stomachus perforatus fuerit, nec vulnus medicamento claudi potuerit,
pro vulneris apertione totidem sol. componat quot pro ipso vulnere
composuit.’ Tit. vi. c. 13. But though gegyman (zgegeman) means
© to take care of,’ I know of no instance where it is used in the sense
of healing; and if such an interpretation could be supported, we
must still read, Ing man [ne] zezemed, &e.

4 I have been unable to discover the particular nature of this
injury. Wilkins proposes peap-pund as an emendation, in which he
is followed by Lye: peapp, peap, ‘callus, nodus,’ Cotton, 32, 33.
Med. ex Quadr. 7. 2. Ethelb. 62. Belg. ‘weer, wier.’ The accu-
racy of the present text may be supported by the analogous com-
pounds ceap-y13, ‘iter difficile’; ceap-yoph, ‘ solicitudo.’

e ¢ Pro nervo colli, id est walde-waxa, xxxvi. solidi” V. Jus. Fris.
iii. c. 7. In the East-Frisic Land-Recht, it is termed wolt-sene
(sinew). [In a case of so much doubt I have deemed it right to
subjoin the version of this enactment as given by my predecessor,
viz. ‘If the muscle of the neck be wounded, the bote is three shil-
lings.’ My inability to concur in which arises partly from the vast
disproportion between the sum of 3s. here fixed as an indemnity
for an injury which, according to Mr. Price’s own interpretation, is,
by rxxvit. of Alfred, estimated at 100s. I am, moreover, ignorant


* ronzelée.
* rongeloe.


20 JEDELBIRNTES DOMAS.


Lxix. Ing pot of peopded -L- pallingum *popzelden:-

Lxx. Ing yeo mycle ta of peopded -x- yell. *pongelden:.

LxxI. fEt fam odpum caum gehpilcum- heal gelde- ealypa
eet pam yingnum yy cpiden:.

Lxxu. Ing pape mycclan taan neez] of peopded -xxx- pextra
co bote- at pam odpum gehpileum -x- peaccay gebete:-

uxxm. Inp pp-pig ?loc-bope leypey hpat geded -xxx- peill.
sebece:-

Lxxiv. )ezd-boc- yi ppa pyagey manney:-

Lxxv. >CQund pape betyran pidupan eoplcundpe -L- yallinga
gebece. Dape odpe -xx- yeill. pape ppiddan -xu- yell. pape
feopan -vi- perll.:.

uxxvi. Ing man pidupan ‘unagne genimed -11- gelde yeo
mund yy:


of any authority for assuming the A.-S. ‘ pale’ and the O.-Frisic
‘ walde-waxe’ as equivalent terms; nor indeed can they be so, the
latter being used in the plural, a circumstance overlooked by Wiarda,
who translates the words ‘thera walduwaxa bote, &c. by ‘ der
Halssehne Busse,’ &c. See Asega-Buch, pp. 180, 188. My opinion
(upon which my vresion is founded) is, that this enactment is a
continuation of the one immediately preceding it, and, consequently,
that pele is not a ‘ muscle of the neck,’ but a sinew (nervus) of the
thigh— T.]

: If loc-bope be the predicate of rpi-pip, it must imply some degree
or office. It cannot, I conceive, be the puella crinita of the Salic
Law (Pactus 26. tit. 28. c.3.), nor the filia in capillo of the Longo-
bardic (LL. Liutprandi, Lib. 1. c.4.): for in these Dooms, the term
for a virgin is maz. The difficulty would vanish by supposing
‘ypi-pip’ to have been a marginal gloss of ‘loc-bope, which had
found its way into the text. A similar interpolation is met with in
the Salic Law; for where the ‘ Pactus’ reads, ‘Si quis puerum
crinitum (? loc-bopa) sine voluntate parentum totonderit’ (tit. xxvi.
ce. 2.), the Wolfenbiittel ms. has—‘ Si quis vero puerum crinitum
ingenuum (sc, ppizgman) tundere (sc. tondere) presumserit,’ (tit.
XXxiv. ¢. 5.)

> The Longobardic Law is the most copious of all the Barbaric
codes in its provisions respecting marriage; and is particularly so on
the subject of the mund. From that law it appears that the ‘ mun-
dium ’ was a sum paid to the family of the bride, for transferring the
tutelage they possessed over her to the family of the husband. ‘Si
quis pro muliere libera aut puella mundium dederit et ei tradita
fuerit ad uxorem, &c.’ Ed. Rotharis, c. 183. In the case of a
widow, where the relatives of her deceased husband refused to accept
the terms sanctioned by law, it is said: ‘Et mundium ejus prioris
mariti non habeant parentes, pro eo quod denegaverant eidem vo-
luntatem suam. Ideo redeat mundium ejus ad parentes proximos
qui prius eam ad maritum dederint.’ Jé. c.182. And in the form
of process attached to this law, we find: ‘Propter hoc dat Petrus
hanc grosnam ut mittas eam sub mundio cum omnibus rebus mobi-


THE LAWS OF KING ZTHELBIRHT. 21


69. Ifa foot be cut off, let x. shillings be paid.

70. Ifa great toe be cut off, let x. shillings be paid.

71. For each of the other toes, let one half be paid, like as it
is stated for the fingers.

72. Ifthe nail ofa great toe be cut off, xxx. ‘sceetts’ for ‘ bot;’
for each of the others, make ‘ bot’ with x. ‘sczetts.’

73. If a freewoman **‘loc-bore’ commit any ‘leswe,’ let her
make a ‘ bot’ of xxx. shillings.

74. Let ‘maiden-bot’ be as that of a freeman.

75. For the >*‘mund’ of a widow of the best class, of an
“eorl’s’ degree, let the ‘ bot’ be x. shillings; of the second, xx.
shillings; of the third, x11. shillings; of the fourth, vr. shillings.

76. If a man carry off a widow ‘not in his own tutelage, let
the ‘mund’ be twofold.


libus et, immobilibus seu familiis, quee ad eam per legem pertinent:
et mundium et grosnam tradas sibi (sc. tradas ei, for this clause is
directory,) ad proprium.’ There was another case, also, where the
‘mund’ of a widow might be paid, or, to speak more accurately,
where there might be a repurchase of the tutelage on the part of her
family. ‘ Si pater filiam suam aut frater sororem suam alii ad mari-
tum tradiderit, et contigerit casus, ut ille maritus moriatur, et pater
aut frater mundium ejus liberaverit, &c. et illa vidua in domo patris
aut fratris regressa fuerit, &c.’ J6. c.199. In the formula, which
follows this statement, we find one hundred shillings might be paid
for the repurchase of the mundium. ‘Quando Donatus tuus socer et
suus dedit Aldam tuam conjugem ad priorem maritum dedit ei
C. sol. in faderfium ; et fuit mortuus ipse maritus; et dedit ei C. sol.
liberando mundium et ipsa regressa fuit in casa patris.’ In the same
sense in which the term occurs in these dooms, it is also to be met
with in the Alamannic Law (tit. liv. c.2.); it was also common in
Denmark, where a bride was called ‘ mundi-keypt-koni,’ or a mund-
bought woman (Biarko Law, c. 68.); and in Sweden, with some
slight variation, she was called ‘ mund-gipt kona,’ a mund-given
woman. West, G.L. Arfd. B. c.8. apud Ihre.

¢ I have translated this ‘not in his own tutelage,’ as the best so-
lution which presented itself. The expression is met with in the
Longobardic Law: ‘ Nulli sit licentia quamlibet mulierem, etiam
mundium ejus habenti in potestate, post mortem mariti sui ante
anni spatium velare, aut monastico habitu induere. . . Et si alter
quicumque homo, in cujus mundio non est, hoe facere presumserit,
componat widrigild suum in sacro palatio, et ipsa cum rebus suis sit
in potestate Mundoaldi sui.’ Leg. Liutprandi, lib. vi. c. 46. And
again: ‘Si quis puellam aut mulierem liberam que in alterius mun-
dio est,’ &c. Ed. Rotharis, c.198. The term ‘zenimed’ would seem
to imply that the taking here spoken of was a forcible one (nebe),
(though the Barbaric codes have ‘ rapuerit,’ where no force was
used,) or what in the same law, from whence so many illustrations
of this subject have been derived, is called ‘violento nomine:’ ‘ Si
quis violento nomine tulerit uxorem liberam, componat ut supra


al, eft.


22 JEDELBIRNTES DOMAS.


uxxvir. Ing man mezd gebized *¢eap1 geceapod yy- gzip
hic ungacne 1y- gy hic fonne acne 1y- *°ep fap xc ham
gebpenge- 4 him man hiy © yea azere:-


txxvitt. Ing hio epic beapn gebyped- healne yest aze- zy
ceopl zp ypylced:.
txxix. Ing md beapnum bugan pille- healpne peat aze:-


uxxx. Inf ceopl agan pile- *ypa an beapn:-


solidos pcccc. et postea mundium ejus faciat.’ 7b. c. 187. Where no
force was used, but the consent of the kindred had been withheld,
the fine was more lenient: ‘ Si puella libera aut vidua sine volun-
tate parentum ad maritum ambulaverit, liberum tamen, tune maritus,
qui eam acceperit uxorem, componat pro anagrip solidos xx. et
propter faidam alios xx.’ Jb. c. 188. The mundium, however, was
still to be paid. In the case of a maiden who had voluntarily sought
the abode of her lover, the Burgundian Law imposes a triple witte-
mon or mund, ‘Si vero puella sua sponte expetierit virum et ad
domum illius venerit, et ille se cum illa miscuerit, nuptiale pretium
in triplum solvat.’ Tit. xii. ¢. 3. ’

« The meaning of these words will be determined by the punc-
tuation; whether we read, Lig man mezéd zebized ceapi, zeceapod
Ty, or Inp man mezd zebized, ceap1 zeceapod yy. The former is
supported by the natural order of the words, and the following pas-
sage in a poem published by Hickes, i.221, from the Exon. ms.


* Lyning yeeal mid ceape

[pene zebicgan

Bunum and beazum.’
In this case the translation will be as above. The latter may be
inferred partly from the alliteration :

‘ Lip man mezd zebized

Leap: zeceapod sy,”
and partly from the manner in which the same words are connected
in a document published by Hickes, Diss. E. 30: ‘ Dep spucelad on
ptyum zeppice. hu Godme et Bupnan begeac pec land ec Offaham.
pet 3p ponne. pec he yealoe Cabzyuan hip speoycon an mape zoloer
anb XIII pd. and LXxIft pei. on Zeceapodne ceap. cto Zyfanne and co
syllanne. on deze and wzprep deze. pam pe him leoruye sy. per ceap
per zeceapod on Pu ecpopan ealpa yeype: It is here published in
this writing how Godric at Bourne acquired the land at Offaham ;
that is, then, that he gave Eadgiva his sister one mark of gold, and
twelve pounds and sixty-three pence in valued ceap, so that he might
give it or sell it, during his life and after his decease, to whomsoever
he pleased: this ceap was valued at Wye, before the whole shire.’
A similar mode of expression also occurs in the municipal law of
Schleswic: ..... ‘unde de beschermer des gudes de siick der
deuerie entledighen wil de bringhe twe tiighe unde swere silfsdste
dat he dat gud to markede hopliken gekofft hebbe.’ c.26. ‘Reus
autem, defensor bonorum, sese furti crimine purgare volens duos


THE LAWS OF KING ATHELBIRHT. 23


77. If a man buy a maiden *with cattle, let the bargain
stand, if it be without guile; but if there be guile, *let him
bring her home again, and let his “property be restored to
him.

78. If she bear a live child, let her have half the property, if
the husband die first.


79. If she wish to go away with her children, let her have half
the property.

80. If the husband wish to have them, [let her portion be]
¢as one child.


a


testes adducito, juratoque ipsemet sextus, se eas res in foro pretio
justo emisse.’

> The probable reading seems to have been either 2xfcep or eff[c]
pep. Thus, in the Modus Imponendi Penitentiam, ec. 45. we have:
‘Buton he bycze ere ham onzean pec he ucrealbe: Unless he
repurchase home again what he has sold out (of the country).’ [Read
certainly epe pep.— 7.)

¢ That is, as I understand this very obscure law, ‘If the cattle be
diseased or maimed, or the goods otherwise defective, let them be
returned, and let the price of the bride be paid for in hard money.’
Thus on the back of: an ancient charter preserved in the collection at
Stowe, we have: ‘Diy 1p Dypimgdenner boc pe Eabdpold and sCéel-
fled geudsan JElppolde pid lup he-pypdan yeecve: This is the title-
deed of Hyringden, which Eadwold and /Ethelfled conveyed to
/Elfwold, (in return) for his acceptable money.’ It is clear from the
Lex Saxonum, that though the fines were fixed at a certain money
value, the amount was sometimes paid in cattle and other goods.
‘Solidus est duplex, unus habet duos tremisses quod est bos anni-
culus duodecim mensium, vel ovis cum agno. Alter solidus tres
tremisses id est bos xvi. mensium. Westfalaiorum et Angraricrum
‘et Ostfalaiorum solidus est secalis scefhila xxx, ordei xL, avenz Lx.’
Tit. xix. c. 1,2. [My predecessor’s version of this somewhat ob-
scure enactment, upon which his annotations are founded, was as
follows: ‘If a man purchase a maiden with cattle, let the bargain
stand if they be without blemish; if they be faulty, let him bring
them home (to the payer), and Jet him be paid his money.’ It is to
be here observed, that the neuter hic (which cannot strictly refer
either to the feminine mwz%, or the masculine ceap), as well as the
woztls unfacne and facne, apply to the bargain, which the law
declares to be binding, if void of deceit; but permits the man, if he
could prove that he had in any way been imposed upon with regard
to the maiden, to send her back and demand the restitution of his
cattle. Dr. Schmid’s translation agrees essentially with my own.
Dr. Grimm’s apt allusion to the dageciGoas of Homer may be here
adduced, in illustration of the phrase ‘ceape zebicgan.’ See Deutsche
Rechts Alterthiimer, p.421.—T.]

4 A similar disposition under different circumstances occurs in the
Bavarian law ‘De viduis.’ ‘ Vidue si post mortem mariti in viduitate
permaneant, zqualem inter filios suos, id est gualem unus ex filiis,
usufructuariam habeant portionem, usque ad tempus vite suz, usu-
fructuario jure possideant.’ Tit. xiv. c. 6.


24 JEDELBIRNTES DOMAS.


txxxI. Ing hio beapn ne gebyped- feedepung-magar * pioh
agan- 4 >mopgenzyre:-

Lxxxi. Lip man mezd-man nede genimed- fam agende -L-
yeillinga- y ape et pam agenbe- ‘ymmne pillan- xv-gebicgze:-


yxxxul. Ing bio oSpum men in ‘yceat bepyddod yi -xx-
pallinga zebete:.

Lxxxlv. Ing °geengang xepeopSed -xxxv- yell. y cyninge
xv- peillingay:-

yxxxv. Ing man mid erney cpynan geliged be epicum ceople
«Ile Zebete::

Lxxxvi. Inp erne oSepne oyylea unyynmigne- ealne peopde
fongzelde:-

uxxxvit. Ing eyney eage 4 oot of peop%ed aylagen- ealne
peopde hine yonzelde:-

Lxxxvil, Inp man manner eyne gebinded -vi- perl. xebece:-


LxxxIx. Deopey peg-pear ye -11- yeillingay:-
xc. Lp peop yveled -11- gzelde zebere:-


@ This is the ¢ fader-feum’ of the Longobardic Law: ‘tune illa
vidua que in domo patris aut fratris regressa est, habeat sibi [in
ante] morgen-gab, et methium; de ‘ faderfio’ autem, id est de alio
dono; quantum pater, aut frater dederit ei, quando ad maritum am-
bulaverit, mittat in confusum (hotch-pot) cum aliis sororibus, &c.’
Ed. Rotharis, c.199. And again: ‘ Habeat ipsa mulier morgengab
et quod de parentibus suis adduxerit, id est phaderfium.’ Jb. c. 182.

b The morgen-gife, as the name implies, was a gift made to the
bride by her husband on the morrow following the consummation of
the nuptials. ‘ Libellus dotis qui ex Tabular. Casauriensi descriptus
est a Gallandio in Tractatu de Franco alodio, p. 323, prorsus indicat
donum istud matutinale factum mane, post primam noctem nuptialem,
quasi ob pretium virginitatis cujus spolia proxime preterita nocte
retulerat, uti fuere apud Greecos daragSéna.’ Du Cange, in voce.
The abuse of this custom among the Longobards led to a provision
that it should never exceed one fourth of the husband’s property.
‘Tamen ipsum Morgengab volumus, ut non sit amplius, nisi quarta
pars de ejus substantia, qui ipsum Morgengab dedit. Si quidem
minus dare voluerit de rebus quam quarta portio sit, habeat in omni-
bus licentiam dandi quantum voluerit. LZ. Liutprandi, 1.ii. c. 1.


THE LAWS OF KING ASTHELBIRHT. 25


81. If she bear no child, let her paternal kindred have the
**fioh’ and the >‘ morgen-gyfe.’

82. If a man carry off a maiden by force, let him pay L. shil-
lings to the owner, and afterwards buy [the object of] ‘his will
of the owner.

83. If she be betrothed to another man in ‘money, let him
make ‘ bot’ with xx. shillings.

84. If she become °‘ gaengang,’ xxxv. shillings; and xv. shil-
lings to the king.

85. If a man lie with an ‘esne’s’ wife, her husband still
living, let him make twofold ¢ bot.’

86. If one ‘esne’ slay another unoffending, let him pay for
him at his full worth.

87. If an ‘esne’s’ eye and foot be struck out or off, let him
be paid for at his full worth.

88. If any one bind another’s ‘ esne,’ let him make ‘ bot’ with
vi. shillings.

89. Let the ‘ weg-reaf’ of a ‘theow’ be 111. shillings.

90. If a ‘ theow’ steal, let him make twofold ‘bot.’


¢ ¢ Si quis puellam aut viduam alteri sponsatam, illa tamen con-
sentiente, rapuerit, sit culpabilis parentibus mulieris.. .. . et mun-
dium ejus sicut convenerit, faciat. Ed. Rotharis, c. 191.

4 The practice here spoken of may be illustrated by an extract
from a Longobardic formula already cited: ‘ Pro hoc venit M. quod
vult sponsare D. filiam P. Venisti tu propter hoc? Veni. Da va-
diam, quod facies ei quartam portionem de quanto tu habes, aut in
antea adquirere potueris, tam de re mobili, quamque immobili, seu
familiis, et si te subtraxeris componas libras C. Et per istam spatam
et istum vuantonem sponso tibi M. meam filiam, et tu accipe eam
sponsario nomine? et comanda eam nusquam ad terminum talem.
Tu Pater feminz da vadia ei, quod tu des eam ad uxorem, et mittas
eam sub mundio. Et tu da, quod eam accipias: et qualis se sub-
traxerit componat solidos mille.’ Form. ad Ed. Rotharis, c. 182.
(Cane. ii. p. 467.)

¢ [So in Ms., where the final z has originally been omitted, and
afterwards inserted (apparently by the writer of the ms.) in a length-
éned and straightened form, within the narrow space between zenzan
and the following word. Its signification, though quite uncertain, yet.
judging from the context, seems to be ‘ pregnant.’—Z.]


DLODNARES AND CADRILES
DOAS.


DIS SYNDON DA DOMAS DE *HLODHJERE AND
CADRIC CANTPARA LCYNINLAS ASETTON.


Nloshepe 4 Eadpic- Cancpana cyningay- ecton fa &- pa pe
heopa aldopay @p gepophton- pyyyum domum pe hyp
eftepn peezed:.

1. Ing *manney eyne eopleundne mannan ofylehd- pane fe

yio- ppeom hundum seill. gylde ye agend- pone banan agere y do
pep ppo man-pypd co:-


a HLoTHH#RE succeeded his brother Ecgberct in July 673, and,
after reigning eleven years and seven months, died on the 6th of
February 685, of wounds received in battle against his nephew Eadric,
who then obtained the kingdom, and reigned during a year and an
half. Bede Hist. Eccles. iv. 5.26. The rubric would seem to imply
that at some time they had governed jointly.

> There are some obscurities in this and the provisions immediately
following, which can only be removed by a close attention to the
general principles of Germanic law. The most natural solution would
be, taking the language of the text as it stands, without reference to
the subject matter, that the esne was to pay 300s. for his offence,
and his lord three man-wyrths in addition. It would, however, be
an anomaly peculiar to these dooms if any of the servile classes were
made directly responsible, either to the injured party or his family,
for the wrongs they might commit. The maxim of the Lex Angli-
orum et Werinorum, ‘omne damnum quod servus fecerit dominus
emendet,’ tit. xvi. is common to all the codes, and may be found,
either directly or indirectly, asserted throughout the whole Anglo-
Saxon law. It seems impossible, therefore, to believe that the esne,
who was so much a peop as to be subject to the castigation of the
whip ( Wihir. c. 23.), would have been held accountable in the first
instance to the family of the deceased for a wergild, or, as a conse-
quence of this, that he might be sued as a freeman in the public
courts. That he appeared in court by the person of his lord, or the
representative of his lord, the gerefa, is evident from Wihtr. ¢. 22.
There appears good reason, therefore, for believing that the first
penalty of 300s. was paid by the lord. The next difficulty lies in
the meaning of the term man-wyrth. There is certainly a strong
analogy between the expressions leob-zilo, pep-gilo, and man-pyps.


THE LAWS OF
KINGS HLOTHHHRE AND EADRIC.


THESE ARE THE DOOMS WHICH * HLOTHHAHRE
AND EADRIC, KINGS OF THE KENTISH-MEN,
ESTABLISHED.


Hlothhere and Eadric, kings of the Kentish-men, augmented
the laws, which their elders had before made, by these
dooms, which hereafter say.


1. If ¥any one’s ‘ esne’ slay a man of an ‘eorl’s’ degree, who-
ever it be, let the owner pay with three hundred shillings, give
up the slayer, and add three ‘ man-wyrths’ thereto.


But among all the Germanic tribes, the terms ‘ peopde’ and ‘ ceap,’
or whatever may have been their equivalents, appear generally to
relate to things having a market price: and while these are limited
in their application to the servile classes, as a part of the stock of an
estate, the term ‘ zilo,’ or retribution, seems to have been the epithet
by which the free orders chose to dignify the price paid for averting
or soothing their vengeance. Perhaps some objections may be
raised to the exposition here given, from the singular phraseology of
c. 3.: ‘ye azend pone banan azere- 4 odep man-pypd pepo :’ which,
when strictly translated, is —<‘ let the owner give up the slayer, and
a ‘second’ man-wyrth thereto.’ But, in calling this a second man-
wyrth, I conceive the person of the esne is considered as the first;
and this seems confirmed by the language of the succeeding law:
‘If the slayer escape, let him be paid for with two man-wyrths.’
Both the subject and the language of this and the succeeding law
may be illustrated by the provisions of the Lex Frisionum. ‘ Si
servus nobilem, seu liberum, aut litum nesciente domino occiderit,
dominus ejus, cujuscunque conditionis fuerit homo qui occisus est,
juret, hoc se non jussisse, et mulctam ejus pro servo bis simplum
componat.’ The ‘simplum’ here spoken of was what in the Wessex
dooms is called the ‘anzyloe. [Yet by Ethelb. 90. it is ordered,
that even a ‘ theow,’ if he steal, shall pay a double bot; and by
Wihtr. 10, 11, that an ‘ esne’ shall not only pay a bot, but that he
shall pay it to his lord. A remedy is, however, at hand, by which the
present difficulty is at least diminished, and the sense improved ; viz.,
the removal of the point in cc. 1. and 3. from zyloe to azend, a li-
berty which I have not hesitated to take. A collocation of words
precisely similar occurs in Ine 49.—7Z.]


28 WLODIRES AND ECADRILES DOMAS.


i. Ing ye bana * oSbypyte- reopSe man-pypd he vo-zebdo- ¥
hine gecenne mid zodum >epdum- f he pane banan begeten
ne mihte:.

i. Ing manney eyne yyigne mannan ofyleehd- pane fe pie-
hund yeillinga gelde ye agend- pone banan agere- 4 odep man-


pypd peep vo:-

iv. Ing bana odbypyte- tpam man-pypdum hine man fop-"
selde- 4 hine geceenne mm zodum zpdum f he pane banan be-
gecen ne mihte:-

v. Lip pgman mannan fopytele- © zip he eft cuma yeep-
melda yecze an andpeapdne- zeceenne hine zip he mzeze- habbe
“pane fpeona jum zepda-manna- 4 enne mid in ade- zxzghpile


a A similar provision is found in King Eric’s Zealand Law:
‘ Draper noker mans thre frelseman tha a han ut at late threllen
i hins freender wald ok ther til sex mark. En loper bort threl-
Ten foreen han andworther hanum tha skal han seliz tylter eth et
thet weerth hwerken hans rath ok ey hans buth zt han lop bort
ok bote ni mark fore: If any man’s thrall slay a freeman, he ought
to give up the thrall to the power of his (the dead man’s) friends, and
six marks thereto. But if the thrall run away before he deliver him
up, let him then take a tylter oath (an oath with twelve compurga-
tors) that it was neither by his counsel nor by his command that the
thrall ran away; and let him pay a bote of nine marks for it.’ C.32.

> In the Latin documents, the terms ‘ boni, probi, /egales homines,’
are constantly occurring. The ‘pda’ is evidently the last of these,
though throughout these dooms the term appears to be used in the
sense of compurgator. According to Ihre, in Regulus Judic. § 34.
‘ Lagman denotat conjuratorem, compurgatorem.’ The same power
was also given to this term in the Danish law : —‘ og theligeste skall
lade optigne, hwem hands Loughéring og Lougsmendt ere wedt
Naffn. And the same shall be made known by name, who are his
oath-following, and his consacramentales.’ Christian III. Copenhagen
Recess, 1537. As these terms are respectively derived from pe,
‘jus,’ and laze, ‘lex,’ it is clear that the roots must at one time
have borne the same meaning, and that the distinction usually taken
between them must have been the result of convention and later
necessity.

¢ The translation is founded on a conjecture that the true reading
of this passage would be, Ing he eye cume (though the a in cuma
may be the M.G. ai—A.S. a), and pceopmeldan secze, &c. Such a
denunciation is to be found in the Salic Law: ‘Si quis servum
alienum plagiaverit, id est, per circumventionem de servitio domini
sui abstraxerit, et trans mare sive in quamlibet regionem ipsum
duxerit et ibidem a domino suo inventus fuerit, et ipsum a quo in
patria plagiatus est in mallo publico nominaverit; et tres ibidem
testes dominus habere debet. Et iterum, cum servus ipse citra
mare vel de qualibet regione fuerit revocatus, in altero mallo debet
nominare qui eum plagiaverit, et ibidem similiter tres testes debent
adesse. Ad tertium vero mallum similiter fieri debet, ut novem testes
jurent, quod servum ipsum zqualiter semper super plagiatorem dicere


THE LAWS OF HLOTHH/ERE AND EADRIC, 29


2. If the slayer * escape, let him add a fourth ‘ man-wyrth,’
and let him prove, with good >‘ zewdas,’ that he could not obtain
the slayer.

8.. If any one’s ‘esne’ slay a freeman, whoever it be, let the
owner pay with a hundred shillings, give up the slayer, and a
second ‘ man-wyrth’ thereto.

4, If the slayer escape, let the owner pay for him with two
‘man-wyrths; and let him prove, with good ‘ ewdas,’ that he
could not obtain the slayer.

5. Ifa freeman steal a man; ‘if the man return, and de-
nounce him before the ‘ stermelda;’ let him clear himself, if he
be able, and let him have “the number of free ‘zewda’-men,


audissent. Sic postea, qui eum plagiaverit I cccc denariis, qui
faciunt solidos xxxv. culpabilis judicetur, excepto capitali et delatura;
ea tamen ratione ut nomina hominum et villarum, equaliter per totos
tres mallos debeat nominare.’ Z. Sal. Ref. tit. xli. c.2. If, however,
the present text be correct, though it is far too disjointed to admit
readily of such a supposition, we may translate it: Let the Stermelda
declare (the charge) in the presence er the person accused). The
literal version of ‘ Steormelda’ is ‘delator fiscalis,’ and, judging from
the context, he was the same officer with the Bon of the Frisic courts,
whose duty in some degree approached that of our English sheriff,
and who, in the absence of a prosecutor, might sue on the part of the
Province: ‘ Sa hwersa thi Bon ena monne bitegath enere clagi and
ther nen onspreke ne stont, sa mire dwa hwedder sare wili, ia tha
biseka: wilere biseka, sa skil hi thre with-etha swera mith thrium
monnum. Thene forma eth skil thi mon hera, thene otherne tha
liode, thene thredda skil thi frana hera. Sa mire mith thesse thrium
ethon falla thera lioda fretho and thes frana bon.’ Asega-Buch, p.271.
‘In case the Bon accuse a man of an offence (charge), and no pro-
secutor appear, he may do whichever he will, confess or deny (the
charge). If he chuse to deny it, he shall swear three with-oaths with
three men. The first oath shall belong to the man (the Bon), the
second to the people, and the third to the Frone; and thus with these
three oaths may he free himself from the frith due to the people, and
the Ban due to the Frone.’ In Germany, the offices of the Bon and
the Frone seem to have been united, and the Frone, or Fronebote, to
have had a jurisdiction varying in extent and importance according
to the district, or the times of which we speak ; sometimes, as at Soest
(where there were two), exercising the authority and assuming the
functions of the Gorichter (yeipe-gepera), and on other occasions
descending into a mere apparitor of the provincial or municipal
courts.

4 pape is again used for papa, in Wihtred’s Dooms, ¢.10. The
ordinary ‘ pim-ad’ appears to have been made up of men of any de-
gree, each swearing according to his legal estimation. If the present
text be correct, it would seem that on the occasion in question the
compurgators were to be all freemen, without any admixture of ceorls.
The preferable reading would be, hebbe pape ppeopa sum epba
manna: let him have some three, &c.


« J. medle.


# L pio.


30 WLODHYERES AND EADRILES DOMAS.


man at bam tune pe he to-hype- gig he $ ne mege- gelde ypa
he * gono hagze:-

vi. Ing ceopl acpyle be hbbendum pipe 4 beapne- jue iy $
Inc: $ beapn- meddep yolzize- y him man an hip fedeping-
mazum pil yumne bepugean ‘zerelle- hy feoh to healdenne
oppec he -x- pintna sie:

vu. Ing man o}pum meen feoh fonytele+ y ye agend hic ere
wet seteme tocyngey yele- zip he meeze- y pane ev-gzebnengze-
pe him yealde. zip he $ ne meze- late dn+ 4 yo ye agend
v0:


vit. Ing man o&epne yace tihte: 4 he pane mannan ¢ mote
an * ¢medle oppe an pinge- yymble ye man fam odpum byp-
Sean geyelle- y pam yuht apypce pe to hiom Lantpapa deman
seyepipen:-

1x. Ing he ponne bypigan roppepne -xu- yeillingay agyloe
pam cyninge- 4 sio “ye sacy ypa open: ypa hio ep pey:-

x. Ing man odepne tihte pippan he him bypgan gerealdne
hebbe- 4 ponne ymb -111- mht geyecen hiom pemend- buton
pam urop leogpe yio- be pa tihtlan age- yippan pio yace Jeyemed
yio- an yeoran mhtum ye man pam odpum uht gedo- gecpime


zono.

a Inthe ms. these words are thus disposed: haze. Wilkins has
substituted zenoh, which, if it be the true reading, must be received
in the sense of the Old-German ‘ ginoch,’ opulentia. Such a form of
expression is also found in the Bavarian Law: ‘ Cetera vero quecun-
que commiserit peccata, quousque habet substantiam, componat
secundum legem.’ Tit.ii. c.1. § 4

> The Aapenrader Skraa (1335) contains a provision nearly
parallel with the present text: ‘ Unde de gudere der kindere, der ere
vader unde moder gestorven sin, bewaren de negesten vriind mit
edder van buten tho, alse se nogafftighe vorwaringe davore don alse
denne deme Rade rechtuerdich unde reddeliik duncked wesen: Itein
bona puerorum, quorum pater et mater obierant, custodiant cognati
propinquiores nobiscum, vel extranei, dummodo sufficientem faciant
caucionem pro iisdem sicut consulibus justum et racionabile visum
fuerit.’

¢ Such is the reading of the ms., and not zeyelle, as published by
Wilkins. The difference between the A.S. ¢ and y is slight, and the
natural inference would be, in the absence of any authority in sup-
port of zerelle, that the two letters had been confounded. But in
Suio-Gothic, ‘ befalla’ means, to commit, entrust unto; in Old-Ger-
man, ‘ bifelan’ bears the same import; and in Old-Frisic, ‘fella’ is
constantly used as an equivalent for the A.S. ‘yellan.” ‘Sa hwasa
enne mon sle and thes nena iechta ne lade thet hi thritich merk
breke and ther efter enich hus [ieftha] hawe thet hia umbe thet hus
sextich merk felle: In case any one slay a man, and neither confess


THE LAWS OF HLOTHHAERE AND EADRIC. 31!


and one with (himself) in the oath, each at the ‘tiin’ to which
he belongs; if he be unable, let him pay as he ** gono haze.’

6. If a husband die, wife and child yet living, it is right that
the child follow the mother; and let there be » sufficient ¢ borh’
‘given to him from among his paternal kinsmen, to keep his
property till he be x. years of age.

7. If one man steal property from another, and the owner
afterwards lay claim to it; let him vouch to warranty at the
king’s hall, if he can, and let him bring thither the person who
sold it him; if he cannot do that, let him give it up, and let the
owner take possession of it. ;

8. If one man make plaint against another in a suit, and he
“cite the man to a°*methel’ or to a ‘ thing,’ let the man always
give ‘borh’ to the other, and do him such right as the Kentish
judges prescribe to them.

9. But if he refuse to give ‘borh,’ let him pay xu. shillings
to the king, and let the suit be as open as it before was.

10. If one man make plaint against another; after he has
given him ‘borh,’ and then after three days let them seek for
themselves an arbitrator, unless a longer period be desired by
him who carries on the suit: after the suit is settled, let the


nor clear himself of the offence, let him forfeit thirty marks; and if
after that any one house or harbour him, let him pay sixty marks for
the housing.’ Asega-Buch, p.234. Notwithstanding the plausibility,
therefore, of the substitution made by Wilkins, supported as it is by
the reading of c. 8, ‘ bypizean geyelle,’ I have thought it best to leave
the text undisturbed.—[I believe zerelle to be a mere clerical error
for zerelle. The above citations in favour of the reading of the text
seem hardly to the point.—-Z.]

4 In the Old-Danish law, mote (A.S. moran) means, to appear on
summons before a court of justice. ‘En moter hin a forste thing
ther swere skal: And if he who shall answer (z.e. the accused) ap-
pear at the first thing.” Again: ‘Tha skal han entingh sielf mote
eller [hans] forfal: Then shall he either appear in person or by his
proxy.’ Zealand Law, c. 51.

e The distinction between these courts receives no illustration from
any of the later documents; but as ‘mepel’ and ‘ more’ are synony-
mous in their usual acceptation, perhaps the former is the hundred-
gemot of subsequent times, and the ‘ping,’ the court of the tithing.
In the municipal Law of Lund, a similar distinction is made between
the Moot and the Thing: ‘Um byman taka noker adethis man tha
skal han til things fore eller til moot(s] a rat moots-dagh, &c.: If a
citizen take an offender, he shall lead him to the Moot or the Thing,
upon a proper moot-day.’ C.10. In support of the conjecture given
above, it may be stated, that in the Florence Gloss published by
Eccard (Fr. Orient. f.982), the Latin ‘decurio’ is rendered ‘tinc-
man.’


32 WLODH/ERES AND CADRILES DOMAS.


an feo *oppe an ade+ spa hpeBen ypa him leoppe yio- zp he
ponne $ nylle- zelde ponne -c- > buton ade- yippan ane neaht
ofen } zerem hie °:.


xt. Inf man mannan an odpey ‘ylecce man-ypapa hated.
oppe hine mid biymep-popdum yeandhce zpeve- polling agelde
pam pe  flet age 4 -vi- yall. fam pe he $ popd to-gecpzede- 4
eyninge »xu- yeill. ropzelde:.

xu. Ing man oSpum ‘yteop ayetve- peep meen dpincen buton
yeylde- an eald-piht yell. azelde pam pe } flec age y -vi- yell.
pam pe man pone yeap ayet- 4 cynze +x yeill.:-


xu. Ing man pepn abpegde pep meen dpuncen- 4 pep man
nan yfel ne ded- yelling pan pe } plec aze- 4 cynimge -xn-
yeill.:.

xiv, Ing } flec gzeblodzad pypSe- popzylbe fem men hiy
mund-bypd 4 cyninge -L- seill.:.

xv. Inf man cuman feopmed -m- mhc an hip agenum
hame- cepeman oppe oSepne pe yio f ofep meapce cuman+ 4 hine


a That is—he was either to pay the money on the spot, or else to
give security, on the oaths of others, for its payment at some future
period. <‘ Si quis ad eneum mallatus fuerit, et ille qui admallatus est
manum suam redimat et juratores donet,’ &c. Lex Salica, Ref. tit. lv.
el.

b In such case I presume he was to pay the money instantly, with-
out being permitted to give security for it; and this on account of
his contumacy. The value of the fine is not given. One hundred
‘ shillings,’ or twice the amount of the king’s mund-byrd, would seem
an incredible sum.

¢ There will be some difficulty in making this law intelligible, un-
less we assume it to be a provision for a case of ‘ withertihtle,’ or what
is now called a cross-action, and of which more will be said hereafter,
Cn. P. c.24. On such grounds we might perhaps explain it thus:
If the defendant in such a suit as is spoken of in c. 8. should enter a
cross-action, having given the security required by that law, and then
the arbitrators should seek out the parties within three days, which is
the usual course, unless indeed a longer time be desired by the
plaintiff in the original suit; after the award is given, let the one do
justice to the other within seven days, &c.

4 Tt would seem from the dooms of Alfred, c. 35, that ‘flet’ was a
eee given to the habitation of a ceorl, or of persons of an inferior

egree,

¢ The only known meaning of this term is a drinking-cup, or what
in the North of England and in Scotland is called a stoup. On the
authority of the Nopshymbpa Ppeoyca Laza, (c.2.) we might trans-
late ‘zip man oSpum yceop arecre’ ‘if any ore remove a stoup from


THE LAWS OF HLOTHH/ERE AND EADRIC. 33


man do justice to the other within seven days; let him satisfy
him either in money * or with an oath, whichever be desired by
him; but if he will not do this, then let him pay c. > without an
oath: within one day after, let them settle®.

11. If one man call another perjurer, in another’s ¢ ‘ flet,’ or
shamefully bespeak him with abusive words, let him pay a shil-
ling to him who owns the ‘ flet,’ and v1. shillings to him to whom
he said the words, and xu. shillings to the king.

12. If a man ©‘ yveop ayevce’ to another, where men are
drinking unoffendingly; according to ancient usage, let him
pay a shilling to him who owns the flet,’ and vr. shillings to
him to whom he the ‘ ptveap ayet,’ and x11. shillings to the
king.

13. Ifa man draw a weapon where men are drinking, and
no harm be done there; a shilling to him who owns the ‘ flet,’
and xu. shillings to the king.

14. If the < flet’ be stained with blood, let him pay to the man
his ‘ mund-byrd,’ and L. shillings to the king.

15. Ifa man entertain a stranger for three nights at his own
home, a chapman or any other who has come over the march,


another; but on what grounds such an act would constitute an
offence the contemporaneous and later documents afford us no in-
struction. If the meaning of ‘ areccan’ might be extended by impli-
cation, the Frisian laws make mention of an offence which is the only
one I have found recorded bearing any analogy to the present law:
« Hwansoma mith coppe and mith byare under sine aghene werpth so
is thi bote v1. engelles; holth hi thine cop and swength hi meth ta
byare 111. engeles: If any one with a cup and with beer casts (it)
upon another under the eyes, so is the bote six angels; if he hold
the cup and pour the beer upon him, three angels.’ Hemstra Boten
ap. v. Schwartzenberg, i. p.107. And again, in the Emsingoer Land-
Recht, ‘...thi lereste swang hwane sa mith biare iefta mit wathere
suangt ane skell: The smallest (kind of) drenching, (or) when any
one pours beer or water over another, one shilling.’

f This expression occurs again in Wihtrad’s Dooms, ¢.8. * Lup
man hiy mzn an propode fpeolr zepes ye ye sole ypy. fpeols-zera aze
hiy epipe. eende pep-zelb. 7 munbe pane hina. pie opep meapce pap he
pile: Ifany one give his man his freedom at the altar, let him be
folk-free; let the giver have his property and wergild and mund of
his family, let him be over the boundary wherever he may be.’ This
can hardly mean the marches or the boundaries of the kingdom of
Kent, but rather the limits of the estate of the lord who had con-
ferred the freedom. It is thus that at a later period a provision is
made for taking a woman ‘out of the land’ on her marriage, but
which is immediately explained to mean from one thane’s land to that
of another: ‘Ing hy ponne uc of lande lebdan pille on odjer pezener
land, &c.: If, however, they wish to take her off the land to another


34 )LODDYERES AND CADRILES DOODAS.


ponne ny mece fede- 4 he fonne senigum men yrel zedo- ye
man Fane odepne et pihte zebpenze- oppe yuht yone-pypce:.


xvi. Ing Lancpapa emg in *Lunben-pic feoh gebycze-
heebbe him ponne tpegen- oppe ppeo- unyacne ceoplay to Ze-
picneyye- oppe cyningey pic-zeperan. Ing hic man eft av
pam men in Lent ety6- ponne came he to pic to cynzey
yele- to bam men pe him yéalde- zip he pane pive- 4 at pam
veame zebpenzgen mege- zip he } ne meege- gekybe panne in
plopode- mid hiy yepycena anum- oppe md cyningey pic-zejie-
yan- } he } feoh undeopnunga hip cudan ceape in pic zebohte-
4 him man panne hip peopd azere- zip he panne $ ne mege
gecypan- mid puhepe canne- >lete panne an- 4 ye agend
‘c0-f0:-


thane’s land, &c. The following passages, taken indiscriminately
from various charters, seem to leave no doubt as to import of the
term in both laws: ‘ Diy pind pa land-meapca to Bylgerbene: These
are the landmarks (or boundaries) of Byligesdene. ‘ Anbdlanz par
bupnan pec hic cymed cto Ospyder-meance 7 Eabpolber: Along the
brook till it comes to Oswyth’s boundary and Eadwold’s.’ ‘ Andlanz
Lpypn-bupnan pec hic cymd to Mannan-meance: Along Cwyrn-
burne till it comes to Man’s-boundary. ‘Of Mepbupnan earc
mfrep meapce co Sano-gere: From Mer-bourne east along the
boundary to Sand-gate.’ ‘ fEpeyc uc Sand-zace pan pa ppeo mance
vozebene zed: First from Sand-gate where the three boundaries meet
together.’

a Mr. Somner, in his ‘ Ports and Forts,’ p.9, contends that Lun-
den-wic in this passage means Sandwich. The grounds for such an
inference are alleged to be the improbability of a Kentish king mak-
ing a law for purchases made in the Mercian city of London: the
impracticability of carrying any such law into execution ; and above
all, the use of Lunden-wie as a name for Sandwich, in the following
charter of Offa: ‘Ego Offa rex Merciorum, suggerente Maginario
abbate....de terra illa que est in loco illo in portu, viz. qui
nuncupatur Lundenuuic, ubi duo fratres Agonauuala seu Sigrinus
omnem suam possessionem . . . Sancto Dyunisio, in Francia, dede-
runt, ego quoque censum omnem, quod in parte mea jure accipere
debui et ad usus proprios adhuc retinebam, sive in auro, sive in
argento, sive in redditibus aliis, totum abbati Maginario. . . concedo,


THE LAWS OF HLOTHH/ERE AND EADRIC. 35


and then feed him with his own food, and he then do harm to
any man, let the man bring the other to justice, or do justice
for him.

16. If any Kentish-man buy a chattel in ** Lunden-wic,’ let
him then have two or three true men to witness, or the king’s
‘ wic’-reeve. If it be afterwards claimed of the man in Kent,
let him then vouch the man who sold it him to warranty, in the
‘wic’ at the king’s hall, if he know him, and can bring him to
the warranty ; if he cannot do that, let him prove at the altar,
with one of his witnesses or with the king’s ‘ wic’-reeve, that he
bought the chattel openly in the ‘ wic,’ with his own property,
and then let him be paid its worth: but if he cannot prove that
by lawful averment, 'Jet him give it up, and let the owner take
possession of it.


ita ut nec ego, nec posteres mei, redditum aliquem exinde reposcant,
neque recipiant.’ Felibien. Hist. de S. Denis, preuves, \xii. If it
could be proved that at any time Sandwich had borne the name of
Lunden-wic, the question would be settled; but unhappily we have
only Mr. Somner’s interpretation of the document just cited for such
an opinion; a document, as we have seen, granted by a Mercian
king. The difficulties are almost equally great, whether we under-
stand London or Sandwich; but before we accept the latter as the
place intended, some reason should be given why Sandwich is distin-
guished in the text from the rest of Kent, and put as it were in oppo-
sition to it; and again, why we are to reject the evidence of the
Saxon Chronicle, which expressly calls London. Lunden-wic: ¢ pc.1v.
And fCSelbephe zerealbe Mellice bircop-recle on Lunben-pic: And
Ethelberht gave Mellitus the bishoprick of London.’ The knot might
be cut by supposing this law a later addition.

b «Si quis rem furtivam sibi surreptam esse asserat, civibus ad-
hibitus eam concipito usque ad comitium. Deinde, duobus testibus
adductis, ipsemet duodecimus jurato, ea bona sibi furto subtracta
esse, seque illic primum ea offendisse, sibique asseruisse. Reus au-
tem, defensor bonorum, sese furti crimine purgare volens duos testes
adducito, juratoque ipsemet sextus, se eas res in foro pretio justo
emisse, seque nec furem nosse nec furti reum esse. Postremo duo-
decimus ipsemet jurato, quanti eam emerit rem pretioque careto,
Slesvig's nyere Stadsret, c. xxvi.


*/.peolsbom.


PIDTRDES DOWMAS.


DIS SYND *PIHTRJEDES DOMAS LCANTPARA
LYNINGES.


Dam mildeycan cyninge Lantpapa Pihtpede- prxigendum
pe prycan pincpa hiy picey- py mgudan gebanne- yextan
deze > Rugepney- in pepe ycope py hacce Bepghamycybde-
pep pey gepamnad eadizgna ° zepeahtendlic ymcyme. pep
pey Biphtpald Bpevone heah-biycop- y ye epnzembda cy-
ning- eac pan Jpogceaycpe bipceop- ye lea Lybmund
pey haten- andpeapd pey- 4 cpzed zle had ciyucean pape
megde anmodlice mid py hepruman foley. Dep pa
eadigan sundon mid ealna gemedum pay domay- y Lanctpapa
puhcum peapum acton- ypa hic hyp epcep yeged y
cpys::


1. Lipicean * ¢ppeolydome garolas y man fop cyning Ze-
bidde- 4 hine buon neadheee heopa pillum peopdigen:.


i. Lipicean mund-bypd yie -L- peal. ppa cmgey:-


ut. Unptht-heemede men to prhtum hfe mid yynna hpeope
co-fon- ope of cipicean * Semanan aycadene pien:-


2 WIHTRED, according to Bede, Hist. Eccles. v.23, died on the
23d of April 725, having reigned thirty-four years and an half.
This would place his accession towards the close of the year 690.
Brihtwald was elected archbishop of Canterbury on the Ist of July
692, and consecrated on the 29th of June 693. He died on the
13th of January 731. Bede, v. 8.23. Gebmund’s death is mentioned
loosely under the year 693, in the Saxon Chronicle. The Indiction
would agree with 696. The place of meeting may have been Ber-
ham, near Canterbury: Berkhamsted, being in Mercia, seems out of
the question. Several of the ecclesiastical provisions in these dooms
appear to have been founded on the canons of the synod of Hertford,
held in the year 673. Vide Bed. 1v. 5.

> The published menologies take no notice of this month.

¢ The Ms. reads zeheahtentlic, an obvious mistake.

4 The text seems to have been ‘ppeoly Some ¥ zarole,’ or some
similar form conveying the same meaning. Thus we have in a


THE LAWS OF KING WIHTRAD.


THESE ARE THE DOOMS OF ? WIHTR/ED, KING
OF THE KENTISH-MEN.


In the reign of the most clement king of the Kentish-men,
Wihtreed, in the fifth year of his reign, the ninth indic-
tion, the sixth day’ of > Rugern, in the place which is
called Bergham-styde, where was assembled a deliberative
Sconvention of the great men: there was Birhtwald arch-
bishop of Britain, and the fore-named king; also the
bishop of Rochester, the same was called Gybmund, was
present; and every degree of the church of that province
spoke in unison with the obedient people. There the
great men decreed, with the suffrages of all, these dooms,
and added them. to the lawful customs of the Kentish-men,
as it hereafter saith and declareth.


1. To the Church ‘freedom from imposts, and that the king
be prayed for, and that they revere him of their,own will, with-
out command.

2. That the ‘mund-byrd’ of the Church be t. shillings, as
the king’s.

3. That men living in illicit intercourse take to a righteous
life, with repentance of their sins; or that they be separated
from * communion with the Church.


charter contained in the register of Sherborne, f. 29, * pec hye yy
feyclice 3 unapendedlice 4 ecelice zerpeod ealpa cynelicna 3 ealdop-
bomlicna peopboma. ze peorpengcer ze wezhpylcene uneadneysre ealler
popolblicey bpocer buton fypdyocne 4 buphzepeopce 4 bpiegzepeonce :
So that it be firmly and irreversibly and eternally freed from all
royal and ealdormanic services, as well of thief-fang as every kind
of trouble from secular duties, except military service and repairing
of fortresses and repairing of bridges.’ A Latin charter of Ethelwult,
of the year 844, is still more explicit: ‘ Ut sit tuta atque munita ab
omnibus secularibus servitutibus, fiscis regalibus, tributis majoribus
et minoribus sive taxationibus quod nos dicimus Witeraeden, sitque
libera ab omnibus causis regalibus pro remissione animarum et pec-
catorum nostrorum Deo soli ad serviendum sine expeditione et pontis
instructione et arcis munitione.’
e The Ms. reads zenaman.


D3


* U. pulpihre.


38 PIHTRDES DOOAS.


Iv. fElpeoize meen zip hio hiopa hemed juhtan nyllad- of
lande md hiopa ehtum y mid yynnum Zepicen. * Speeye meen
in leodum ciyuchezy yemanan ungeycpodyne poligen :.


v. Ing pep zepeopde-“zeyiScundne mannan. orep piy Jemor-
he unpihc hemed genime- ofep cingey bebod- 4 biycopeyr 4
boca d0m- ye P gebete hip dpyhcne -e- yeill. an eald pehe.
Ing hre ceopliye man pie- zebete -L+ yell. y zehpadep  haemed
mid hpeope fopleete:.


vi. Ing pyoye lepe unpiht hemed- oppe * pulpthSe untpu-
mey fopyicce- oppe co pon dpuncen sie: $ he ne mezge- pio he
youle hy pegnungee- 03 bipcopey d6m:-


vu. Ing beycopen man ‘yteopleay sange “him an Zey'c-hid-
neyye zeye him man eney- 4 f ne zepeopde- buton he lear-
neyye heebbe- $ hine man leng reopmige:-

vit. Ing man hip meen an piofodve ypeoly gere- se sie fole-


EPpy: Fpeoly-gera age hiy eppe- znde pep-geld- 4 munde pape
hina: y1e ofep meapce peep he pille:-


1x. Ing ene oyep dpyhcner heye feop-peope pypee- an
*yunnan eren- eptep hipe yevl-gange- 05 monan eyeney yetl-
sang -Lxxx- yell. ye dpyhtcne gebete:.

x. Ing eyne ded ‘hip pade pay deegey -vi- * ye pid Spyhten
zebeve- oppe sine § hyd:.


a [Mr. Price had rendered speye meen by ‘inland strangers.’ I am
unable to discover any authority for this interpretation, and doubt
its accuracy. Spey is the M.G.swes, and signifies proprius, own.
» The tenth canon of the synod of Hertford is to this effect:
‘Decimum, pro conjugiis: ut nulli liceat nisi legitimum habere con-
nubium. Nullus incestum faciat; nullus conjugem propriam, nisi,
ut sanctum evangelium docet, fornicationis causa relinquat.’ Which
fElfred thus translates: ‘Se ceoda 1p pop zerinhipum. pec nenizum
alyyed y1 bucan zlicne zeyynrcype habban. ne nemz mez-hemed ne
unelene spembde. ne neniz hiy agen pip yoplete nymBe spa per
hale zodypell leaped. rop incvenzan oypnpe foplizeneyye. Bed. iv. 5.

¢ The fifth canon of the synod of Hertford is nearly to the same
effect with this law: ‘ Quintum, ut nullus clericorum relinquens pro-
prium episcopum, passim quolibet discurrat, neque alicubi veniens
absque commendatitiis litteris sui presulis suscipiatur. Quod si semel
susceptus noluerit invitatus redire, et susceptor et is qui susceptus est
excommunicationi subjacebit.’ Bed. 1v. 5.

[I have modified the interpretation of this law, as the one given
by Wilkins, Price, and Schmid supposes an inversion of order in the


THE LAWS OF KING WIHTRAED. 39


4. That foreigners, if they will not correct their fornication,
depart from the land, with their goods and with their sins. Let
* natives among the people forfeit communion with the Church,
without expulsion ».

5. If it happen that a ‘ gesithcund’ man, after this ‘ gemot,’
take to illicit intercourse, contrary to the king’s command, and
the bishop’s and the books’ doom; let him make a ‘bot’ for it
to his lord of c. shillings, according to ancient usage. If it be
a ‘ceorlish’ man, let him make a ‘ bot’ of . shillings; and let
either with penitence desist from his fornication.

6. If a priest allow of illicit intercourse; or neglect the bap-
tism of a sick person, or be drunk to that degree that he cannot
do it; let him abstain from his ministry until the doom of the
bishop.

7. Ifa shorn man go ° wandering about for hospitality, let it
be given him once; and, unless he have leave, let it not be that
any one entertain him longer.

8. Ifany one give freedom to his man at the altar, let him be
folk-free; let the freedom-giver have his heritage, and ‘ wer-
geld, and the ‘mund’ of his family, be he over the march
wherever he may be.

9. If an ‘esne’ do any servile labour, contrary to his lord’s
command, from sunset on ° Sunday-eve till sunset on Monday-
eve, let him make a ‘ bot’ of ixxx. shillings to his lord.

10. Ifan ‘ esne’ so do f of his own accord on that day, let him
make a ‘bot’ of vi. * to his lord, or his § hide.


Saxon hardly admissible in prose composition, viz. ‘If a shorn man
go wandering about, let any one from hospitality supply him once,’
&c. The word ‘him’ in the first line is apparently redundant.—-Z.]

e That is, from sunset on Saturday until sunset on Sunday.

f It would be natural to suppose a connection between this and
the preceding law, such as we find between cc. 14. and 15. below ;
and that ‘hip pate’ was either an equivalent or an error for ‘hiy
rylper pede.’ There was, however, a duty called a ‘pate,’ a riding
on the lord’s errand, which may be the subject alluded to. [Such
cannot be the signification of pad in this place; for how could the
law direct the ‘esne’ to pay a compensation to his lord, for having
ridden on his (the lord’s) errand? The meaning I take to be this:
In c.9, the ‘bot’ is established for the case of an ‘esne’ who shall
work contrary to his Jord’s command; but c. 10. fixes the ‘ bot’ to.
be paid by the ‘esne’ who shall work on Sunday simply of his own
accord, 2.é without any prohibition (as in the preceding law) from
his lord, and the ‘bot’ is less in proportion to the delinquency.
Mr. Price had rendered the law: ‘ If an ‘esne’ do his ‘rade’ on that
day,’ &c.— TZ]

8 In the Barbavic laws also this term is applied to the servile


* scill.?


* Ul. ehva.


40 pINTREDES DOMAS.


x1. Ing yyuman fonne-an pane fopbodenan timan- io he
*healy-yangze yeyldiz- 4 pe man- ye $ apayie- he age healp $
Five: 4 $ peone:-

xu. Iny ceopl bucon piper piydome deoflum Zelde- he pie
ealpa ny * eehtan yeyldiz- 4 healy-pange. Ing butpu deoglum
geldad- yion hio healy-ranze yeyloizo- y ealpa * ahtan:.


x. Ing feup dedplum zelda -vi- yell. gebece- oppe hip
hyo:-

xiv. Ing mon np Pheopum in yepten plese Zepe- Fugne
ze peopne- haly-ranze alyye:-

xv. Inf peop ece hip pylpey pede -vi- peal. oppe hip hyd:.


xvi. Biycopey popd 4 cyningey sie unleegne- buton ade:-
xvi. @ynyepey aldop hine caenne in ppeoyer * canne:-
xvii. Ppeoys hine clenyie- yylpey yode- in hip halgum


hpegle- eecpopan piofode- pup cpedende. * Ueprcatem dico in
Xpo non mentiop.’ Spylce dracon hine cleenyie:-


x1x. Lhipoe- peoppa yum hine claenyie- ny heapod-zemacene-
4yane hip hand on piorode- odpe aev-yptanden “45 abyezan:.


xx. Leyt hine clenpie sylpey ade- on piofode. rpylce cynin-
Sey beng:
xxt. Leophye man hine feoppa yum hiy heafod-gemacene on


classes: ‘Quod si servus in judicio approbatus apparuerit, vel con-
fessus fuerit, quanti res, que ablata fuerit, estimabitur, tantum domi-
nus pro servo componat, et servus vapulet, nisi dominus quatuor
solidis corium ejus redimere voluerit.’ Lex Fris. tit. 111. ¢. 7.

a In the Custumal of Hen. I. this term is defined: ‘Est autem
verbum Anglicum quod Latine sonat apprehensio colli. From the
same chapter we learn that the composition of a thane for his
halsfang was 120s. of ancient or 50s. of current money, and that
of a ceorl one sixth less, or 30s.=12s. 6d. There is a dictum in
the old Latin version of Cnut’s Laws, referred to below, somewhat
at variance with this statement: ‘Qui vero steterit in falso testimonio
et victus fuerit. . .persolvat regi aut domino terre decem solidos
quod Dani vocant halsfang.’ But the term ‘landrica’ in the original
shews this enactment to have been borrowed from some text of the
Dena-Lage; and in the districts where this law obtained 10s, may
have been the amount of a ceorl’s halsfang.

» Thisis the hipan, hizan, hian of the later documents.


THE LAWS OF KING WIHTRAED. Al


11. But ifa freeman [so do] at the forbidden time, let him
be liable in his * ¢ heals-fang ;’ and the man who detects him, let
him have half the ‘ wite,’ and the work.

12. If a husband, without his wife’s knowledge, make an
offering to devils, let him be liable in all his substance and his
‘heals-fang.’ If both make offering to devils, let them be liable
in their ‘heals-fang,’ and all their substance.

18. If a ‘theow’ make an offering to devils, let him make a
‘bot’ of vi. shillings, or his hide. .

14, If a man during a fast give flesh-meat to his » family, let
him redeem, free or bond, with his ‘ hals-fang.’

15. If a *theow’ eat of his own will, v1. shillings, or his
hide.

16. Let the word of a bishop and of the king be, without an
oath, incontrovertible.

17. Let the ‘aldor’ of a ‘ minster’ clear himself with a priest’s
© ¢eanne.’

18. Let a priest clear himself by his own sooth, in his holy
garment before the altar, thus saying: ‘ Veritatem dico in
Christo, non mentior.” In like manner, let a deacon clear him-
self,


19. Let a clerk clear himself with four of his fellows, and he
alone with his hand on the altar, let the others stand by, ‘make
the oath.


20. Let a stranger [clear himself] with his own oath at the
altar: in like manner, a king’s thane.


21. Let a ‘ceorlish’ man clear himself with four of his fel-


© The legal form of defence observed by all defendants, and which
is explained in the laws immediately following.

4 ‘The translation follows the text, but in what sense this ceremony
was to constitute the buying of an oath I have been unable to dis-
cover. If the terms ‘ad abyczgan’ could be understood as referring
to the compurgators, it might be received in the sense of the Old-
English abye; that they were to abye or bear the issue of the oath.
If we might suppose ‘ abyezan’ an error for ‘ alyezan,’ and this a
varied form of ‘aleczan, deponere,’ then our difficulty would be sur-
mounted. [The translation, upon which the preceding note is
founded, was thus, ‘ Let a clerk, &...... and he alone with his
hand on the altar, the others standing by, (thus) purchase his oath.’
I have ventured to modify this interpretation, Ist, because abyezan
refers to odpe, ze. the consacramentals; 2dly, because a$ abyczan
(whatever may be the signification of abyegan taken absolutely) is,
I doubt not, as a phrase, equivalent to our make outh.—T.]


* zobey ?


42 PINTREDES DOMAS.


peorode- y pipya ealpa a8 pie unlegnaz. Danne iy cipican canne
yuhe:.

xxu. Inp man biycopey epne thte oppe cyningey- czenne
une an geperan hand. oppe hine gepera clenpie- oppe yelle to
ypinzganne:.

xxii. Iny man * Trebey-peupne epne in heopa gemange tihte-
hip dpyhten hine hip ane a¥e zeclenyie- zi he huyl-genga yie-
zip he huyl-zenga my- heebbe him im ade od1pme zepdan godne-
oppe gelde- oppe yelle to ppinganne:.


xxiv. Ing folcey-manmy eyne tihte cipican-manney eyne-
oppe cyican-manney eyne tihte folcer-manney epne- hip opyh-
ven hime ane hny ade geclenyize:-

xxv. Ing man *leud ofylea an peorde- lege butan pyp-
Selde:-

xxvi. Inp man yyigne man ec heebbendpe handa gero- panne
pealde ye cyning ppeopa zener. oppe hine man cpelle- oppe ofep
yz yelle- oppe hine hiy pep-zelde alee. Sepe hine zero 4 ze-
ganze: healpne hine age. z1p hine man cpelle- gerelle heom
man -Lxx yeill.:-


xxv. Ing peup yrele 4 ’hi man aleye ° -txx- yell. * ppa
hpeSep ypa cyning pille- gi hme man acpelle- pam agende hi
man healpne agelde:-

xxvii. Ing peoppan-cumen man- oppe ppeemde- buton peze
zange- 4 he bonne napden ne hpyme- ne he hopn ne blape-
yop. peor he bid co pporianne- oppe co yleanne oppe to alyyenne:-


a [A corruption or peculiarity of dialect for leped.— 7.]

b The accusative feminine is used twice in this law for the mas-
culine. [For hi we no doubt ought to read hi, the contraction for
hine.—7Z.]}


THE LAWS OF KING WIHTRAD. 43


lows at the altar; and let the oath of all these be incontrover-
tible: then is the church ‘canne’ right.

22. If any one make plaint against a bishop’s ‘esne’ or the
king’s, let him clear himself by the person of the reeve; either
let the reeve clear him, or give him up to be scourged.

28. If any one make plaint against a priest’s ‘esne’ in their
congregation, let his lord clear him with his sole oath, if he
be acommunicant; if he be not a communicant, Jet him have
with him in the oath another good ‘ ewda;’ or let him pay, or
give him up to be scourged.

24. Ifa layman’s ‘esne’ make plaint against a churchman’s
‘esne,’ or a churchman’s ‘ esne’ make plaint against a layman’s
‘esne;’ let his lord clear him with his sole oath.

25. Ifany one slay a *layman while thieving; let him lie
without ‘ wer-geld.’

26. If a man seize a freeman with stolen goods upon him,
then let the king have power of one of three things: either
that he be slain, or sold beyond sea, or redeemed with his
‘wer-geld.’ Whoever shall seize and secure him, let him have
half of him; if any one slay him, let him be paid uxx. shil-
lings.

27. If a ‘theow’ steal, and *he be redeemed, ° Lxx. shillings
*as the king may choose; if any one slay him, let half his
value be paid to the owner.

28. Ifa man come from afar, or a stranger, go out of the
[high] way, and he then neither shout nor blow a horn; he is
to be accounted a thief, either to be slain, or to be redeemed.


¢ It will be seen by the context that the transcriber has made an
omission here, though there is no hiatus in the ms.


JELFREDES DOMAS.


a KLFREDES DOMAS.


1Dmhten pey pppecende *pay pond cto Aoyye- 4 pur cpaxd.
Ic Seom Dyuhten’ pin Lod. ‘Ic fe Gt’-zeledde og Ezypra
Slonde- ¥ of 7hiopa peopdome:-

1. Ne luga pu odpe rpembde goday orep ®mé:.

i. Ne mmnne ®noman ne cig pu on “idelnerye- foppon pe”
pu ne “bye unyeyloiz pid me- giy pu on idelnesye Peigye
minne noman:.

i. “Lemyne $ pu “zehalgige fone “peyte-dez. ” Dyp-
cead eop “yyx dazar- 4 on “pam “yiopodan peycad eop?.
21Fonpam on “yyx dagum Lmyc gepophte heopenay y eopdan-
Srey 4 ealle zepceapta pe on “*him pynt-’ 4 hine gepeyte on
pone yeorodan dzz. 4 *poppon Dpihven’ hine gehalgobe:.

1v. Apa pinum eden y pinpe **meddep pa be Dpihten yealde-
7% pu *me py” leng libbende on eopSan:-

v. Ne “pleah pu:-

vi. Ne hge pu *deapnenga:-

vit. Ne prala pu:-

vit. Ne *yaeze pu leare *zepicneyye °:-

1x. Ne *Spilna pu piney *nehycan 1epfey’ mod Sunpyhre:.

x. Ne ®pyne *[pu] fe *zylone goday oppe *yeolpnene:-


IDpyhcen H. 2~G. 3”eam Dpyhcen H. “~G. 5-zelede H. 6 lanse
G.H, 7hypa G. heopa H. 8°G. %naman G.H.  }’yoelneyre
yoppam H, “bye G.H. 'zecyzrc H. naman G.H. 14 Gemune
G. Lemun H. 'zehalne G.H. '6pesce-G. percen- A. 17 pypcad
G.H. %v1.G. pone G. yeoposan G.A. 2! Foppan G. 22 v1.


a ALFRED succeeded to the crown of Wessex, on the death of
his brother /Ethered, in the year 871, and died in 901. His laws,
chronologically, should follow those of Ine; but, for the reason al-
ready assigned in the preface, they are here placed as they oceur in
all the mss,

The text is taken from a ms. in the library of Corpus Christi
College, Cambridge, marked in the catalogue 173, and here distin-
guished by the letter Z. The variations are from another ms. in the
same library, numbered 384, B.; the Cottonian ms. Nero A.1, G.;
and the Textus Roffensis, H. The mss. B. and G. are imperfect.


THE LAWS OF KING ALFRED.


* ALFRED’S DOOMS.


The Lord spake these words to Moses, and thus said: I am
the Lord thy God. I led thee out of the land of the Egyptians,
and of their bondage.

1. Love thou not other strange gods above me.

2. Utter thou not my name idly, for thou shalt not be guilt-
less towards me if thou utter my name idly.


8. Remember that thou hallow the rest-day. Work for your-
selves six days, and on the seventh rest>. For in six days
Christ wrought the heavens and the earth, the seas, and all
creatures that are in them, and rested on the seventh day: and
therefore the Lord hallowed it.

4. Honour thy father and thy mother whom the Lord hath
given thee, that thou mayst be the longer living on earth.

5. Slay thou not.

6. Commit thou not adultery.

7. Steal thou not.

8. Say thou not false witness *.

9. Covet thou not thy neighbour’s goods unjustly.

10. Make thou not to thyself golden or silver gods.


G. ye G. and ye H. 24’hym pintdon G. heom-H. % fonpan G.
‘yoppam Dpyhcen H. 26meden G.H. 27 pe add. H. yy pe H.
2%rlea G. 30 deapnunza G. deopnunza H. 3!yeze G. 32 zepicneyyea
G. B8zepiina A. 34mehycan G. /nyhrcan ypper H. % unmhte G.
36 pynce G. 37G.H. 8xylobene G.H. %yylppene G.H.


[Where £. is manifestly corrupt, I have not scrupled to adopt in the
text the more correct readings of the other mss., placing those of E.
among the variations.—7.]

> Lambard here adds: ‘pu 3 pmyunu y pie bohcep 3 pm peope
J pme pylne 3 pin peope-nycen 4 ye cuma pe bid binnan pinan
oupum: thou and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy theow, and
thy female slave, and thy working-neat, and the comer who is
within thy doors.’ His authority for this insertion has not been
discovered.

¢ Lambard adds: ‘pid pum nehycan: against thy neighbour.’


Exodus,
xxi. 1-6.


W-11.


12, 14,


46 JELFREDES DOMAS.


x1. Diy *pyne pa domay pe pu *him yevvan yeeale. Ing hpa
Szebicgge cpiycenne peop: *-vi- geap *peopige he- °py yio-
fodan’ beo he 7pnioh Spceapunga.’ Cid Fypelce hpwgle” he
in eode- mid *ypelce “zanze “he “tic, Ing he *pip “yelp
hebbe-’ ganze “hio fic’ md him. Ing ye hlafopd him
ponne pig yealde- "yie bio” 4 “hine beapn “pay hlaropdey.
20Tnp ye peopa ponne *cpeSe. Nelle 1c *ypom minum hla-
fopde- ne *ypom mmum pire ne *ypom minum beapne- ne
*2rnom minum *1epre- bpenge” hine ponne hiy hlaropd *co
peey’ templey dupa. 4 puph-*pyphze hip éape mid *eele- to
vacne $ he *’ypie zppe *yippan peop:.

xu. Deah hpa ***bebycgze hip dohtop on peopenne-” ne
Strie 2hio ealley pa peopu ypa SoSpu mennenu.’ Nage he
“hie ut” on “elpeotiz role to Sbebycgganne. Ac gzip he
S7hipe ne pecce- yepe *hie bohte- lave *hie *ppeo on *°elpeo-
diz sole. Iny ponne he “alee hip “yuna md to hemanne-
>4366 “hiene zsypta “4 “locige $ “ho hebbe’ “hpegl- y p
peopd “me “hie meezd-hader- $ ry ye “peocuma- *azire
he “hipe pone’ Inp he hipe “pana nan ne do- fonne “pie
Shio puoh:”

xn. Se ®mon yepe’ “hip gepealder “monnan orylea- spelte
ye deade. Sepe @hine ponne “neder ofyloge-’ oppe unpillum
“oppe ungepealdey- “ypelce hine’ Inod ypa yende on “hip
SThonda- 4 he Shine ne °ymbyypede-” pie he 7peoney pypde
4 fole-*pyhtpe boce-” zip he ppid-pcope gerece. 7* Ing hpa
ponne dp *ziepneyye 4 gepealdey Ofplea “hip fone 7 nehycan


1yyndon G. pnt H. 2heom H. 2zebycze G.H. 4yyx H. 5 peopie
H. pi yeorodan G. and on pam-H. “ pneo onceapunze H.
ppeoh~-G. %ypilee H. “zpylee pease A. Y%ypilce G. ypylee A.
za G. UnotinH. 2G. uc HM. BG. My A. /yytp habbe
G. %heo H./~"G. Lye MH. 71 7G. yy heo A. '8hype G.A.
Wpar G. Ly H. 2A cpede. G. 22 ppam G.H. 23/ypre bpynze
G.-bpinge H. 2’ec pay G. co pepe H. %-piphze G. -pyple A.
26 ale G. ane H.add. 27;y H. %yyppan G. %xebieze G.A. 30’co
peopce H. 3!/beo heo aller spa peop spa odep peop pirman ZW.
Zhe G. Boipe Go Mh G. hy uce G. % elpeodiz G.H.
%6 bebyczanne G. yyllanne H. %7hype G.H. 8hy A. 9% yapam


* [For zebyczze of the Mss., I have, with Wilkins, adopted the
correct reading of Lambarde.—7.]

» (Whether the phrase ‘ziyca 06n’ signifies (as I am inclined to
think) ‘ nuptias facere,’ or, as Mr. Price had rendered it, «do [unto
her] marriage-gifts,’ is uncertain. In the singular, zipe (and zifce)
may stand both for gift, dos, and for marriage; but used in the
plural, as in this law, its usual signification is nuptie. In Exod.


THE LAWS OF KING ALFRED. 47


11. These are the dooms which thou shalt set for them. If
any one buy a Christian ‘theow,’ let him serve vi. years; the
seventh he shall be free without purchase. With such raiment
as he went in, with such go he out. If he have a wife of his
own, go she out with him. If, however, the lord have given
him a wife, be she and her child the lord’s. But if the ‘ theow’
should say: ‘I will not from my lord, nor from my wife, nor
from my child, nor from my goods;’ let his lord then bring him
to the door of the Temple, and bore his ear through with an
awl, in token that he ever after shall be a ‘ theow,’


12. Though any one sell his daughter to servitude, let her
not be altogether such a ‘theowu’ as other female slaves are.
He ought not to sell her away among a strange folk. But if he
who bought her reck not of her; let her go free among a
strange folk. If, however, he allow his son to cohabit with her’,
let him marry her: °and let him see that she have raiment, and
that which is the worth of her maid-hood, that is, the dowry ;
let him give her that. If he do unto her none of these things,
then let her be free.

13. Let the man who slayeth another wilfully perish by death.
Let him who slayeth another of necessity or unwillingly or un-
wilfully, as God may have sent him into his hands, and for
whom he has not lain in wait, be worthy of his life, and of law-
ful ‘bot,’ if he seek an asylum. If, however, any one pre-
sumptuously and wilfully slay his neighbour through guile, pluck


G. add. ymze H. “zlpeoiz G.H. “alse G./—hyy HW. #yunea

G. 8°G. “hype zyca G.H. “and add. H. locie G.H. “6 heo
H.’~-habbe G. 47 hpezl G.H. hpegle EB. 8yy A. hype GH.
hip H Sine G. 2picuma G.H. Band H. add. azyre G.
‘4hype G.7-pene H. hype H. pena GH. 57 yy H. 5% heo
yreoh G.H. 5%man pe G.H. “hy H. “man G.H. hyne G.
8 nyder G. “neaber ofylea H. 4 ungepiller A. % ypylce G. /—hyne
H. hy G. 67handa G.H. hyne G. him HZ. /ymbe piepede
G.-yyppobe H. Myy HM. Mh Madd. 7/-pihepe boc G. 7 ppys-
yeopa G. 4 Lyp H. 7xeonnnesye GA. hy H. 77 nyehycan G.
nyhycan HZ.


xxi. 10. the plural zipca is the translation of nuptias, but, 2b. xxii. 17.
(where it is used in the singular) the passage ‘ reddat pecuniam juxta
modum dotis quam virgines accipere consueverunt,’ is rendered ‘ zilbe
be pepe ziycan mepe. In the Scandinavian tongues, married is
constantly expressed by ‘ gift..— 7.]

¢ (I have inserted 3 before locizge from H. as necessary to the
sense.—- 7. ]


Exodus,
xxi, 15.


16, 17.


18, 19.


20, 21.


22, 23.


24.
®hond? *fot?


26, 27.


28-31.


48 JELFREDES DOOAS.


puph 'peappa- alfic? pu *hine ppam Sminum peorode- to pam
pe he deade ppelce:.

xiv. Sepbe ylea hip feeden oppe hir ‘modop- ye yceal deate
5ypelvan:”

xv. Sepe ®rpione fopyvele’ 4 7he ®hine *bebycgge- 4 hic
Thym] onbeyceled "ye. $ he hine “bepeccean ne mez-
ypelce ye deade. Sepe “penze ny pedepn oppe “hip modon-
ypelce ye deade:.

xvi. Iny hpa lea “my pone “nehycan mid yrane oppe md
Fyyce- 4 he peah *fic ®zanzan mege’ bi pcare- bezrce’ him
leece- 4 pypce ny peone pa **hpile pe he *yelp ne meege:-

xvi. Sepe ylea In agenne peopne epne oppe hny **mennen- 4
he ne yy *4idaezey de45- beah he *libbe cpa **mhe oppe ppeo-
ne *’bid he ealley ppa “yeyldiz- *foppon pe’ hic peey hip agen
moh. Lng he ponne “pie 1daezepr dead- ponne yicve ’ pio peyld
on him:-

xvi. %Ing hpa on *ceaye eacmiend’ pip *zepepde- bere”
pone *zepepdlan- ypa “him *domepay zeneccen. “Ing “Ino
dead “yie- yelle yaple pid yaple:.

xix. “Ing hpa’ odpum “ny eage “opdd-. “yelle np agen
rone- vod “pope ced” ©°* honda pid’ Shonda. * pec *yope
yec- bepning fope bepninge- pund pid Spunde- lel’ pid
lele:.

xx. Ing hpa “aylea my “pedpe oppe np “peopenne } eazé
47Gc- y he ponne “hi zedo “an-1gge- Zeoppeoge’ ©“ hie yoppon.
Inr’ he ponne pone tod of-aylea- 6 p “lce:-


xxi. © Ing oxa oghnice pen ope pip $ Shie deade’ “pien-
pie’ he mid yranum “orpoppod y ne “yie ny plaeye Vécen. Se
hlapopd “bid unyeyldig- gp ye oxa hnicol pape tpam dazum
zp oppe ppm 4 yé hlapopd hic 7 nyyce. sp he hic ponne”
piyce 4 7he hine “inne becynan nolde- y he ponne pep oppe
pig opyloze- “pie he md ycanum 7ofpoppod- 4 “pie ye hlapopd


Tryppa G. “yyppunge“H. 2hyne H. 3minan G. 4“ mobep ppelce
ye deate H.  *ypylcan G.  fneonne yonrcele G. — ropyceled H.
7notin G. Shyne H. %bebycze G.H. °G. Uy A. 12 bepeccan
G.H. Wmeze G. |4pynze G. pyme A. not in G. Why A.
Wnyhycan H. Wucc H. 1/zanzen maze G. 20’be yrape. bezyce
G.H. hpyle H. yylp G.H. pipmen H. py sager G.
%lybbe G. %nyhe H. 27byS H. *%reyloyz G. 2% roppan G.
‘soppam H. %reoh G. peop H. 2% by H. 2yeo G.H. 8B Ly G.
34cearce G. ’-eacmiende £. eacmiend H. %zepypbe zebece G.
36 epypdlan H.~G. 37 hym G. %8bemepar H. 39 zerecan G.


THE LAWS OF KING ALFRED. 49


thou him from my altar, to the end that he may perish by
death,

14. He who smiteth his father or his mother, he shall perish
by death,

15. He who stealeth a freeman, and selleth him, and it be
proved against him so that he cannot clear himself; let him
perish by death. He who curseth his father or his mother, let
him perish by death.

16, If any one smite his neighbour with a stone or with his
fist, and he nevertheless can go out with a staff; let him get him
a leech, and work his work the while that himself may not.

17. He who smiteth his own ‘ theow-esne’ or his female slave,
and he die not on the same day; though he live [but] two or
three nights, he is not altogether so guilty, because it was his
own property; but if he die the same day, then let the guilt
rest on him.

18, If any one, in strife, hurt a breeding woman, let him
make ‘bot’ for the hurt, as the judges shall prescribe to him.
If she die, let him give soul for soul.

19. If any one thrust out another’s eye, let him give his own
for it; tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, burning
for burning, wound for wound, stripe for stripe.


20. If any one smite out the eye of his ‘theow’ or of his
‘theowen,’ and he then make them one-eyed; let him free
them on this account. And if he smite out a tooth, let him do
the like.

21. If an ox gore a man or a woman, so that they die, let it
be stoned, and let not its flesh be eaten. The lord shall not be
liable, if the ox were wont to push with its horns for two or
three days before, and the lord knew it not; but if he knew it,
and he would not shut it in, and it then shall have slain a man
or a woman, let it be stoned; and let the lord be slain, or the


zeneccan H. “Typ G. 4theo GH @yy MW. S8yylle GH.
Woy G. Shy GH. “opo H “Vyylle GH. 8 yon H.
9rop H./-c0d G. %handa H.’—yon G. 5thanda G.H. 2 pon
G.H. 53/punt- lele G.  4opylea H. 5 peopan A. 56 peopene H.
37°G. ucc H. hy H. 59 aneaze G.“anezebe. rpeoze H. 6 heo
H. ‘mw foppan. Lyp G. “yylpe G & Ly G. In cease Z.
bead E. St yynd G./yyn- yy H. Sopcopros H. yy H. 67 zeecen
H.-G. ®&bys H. Spnym GAL °G. 7’ not in H. 72 not
in H. not in G. mnan H. “yy G.H. 7 ogpoppen H. 76 yy
H.


nn


Exodus,
xxi, 33, 34.


35, 36.


xxi, 1.


2-4,


10-12.


50 JELFREDES DOMAS.


*Opylegen- oppe *[pe man] ropzolden- ypa P *pican vo juhte
‘yinden. Sunu obpe *dohtop Sxy he 76pytinge- pep Pilcan
domey *yie he pypSe. Inp he ponne “peop oppe “peop-men-
nen’ '6rycinge- zeyelle pam hlaropde “-xxx- yell. yeolppey-
4 ye oxa *ypie mid pranum “orponpod:-

xxi. Ing hpa “abdelpe peecep-pyc- oppe betynedne Yon-
tyne- 4 hine ert ne becyne- *zelde ypelc’” neat **ypele paepon
berealle- y *hzbbe him Ff deade:.

xxi. Ing %dxa oper monner oxan *zepundige y he ponne
dead *yie- “bebyexzen pone *éxan 4 “hebben him’ # peond
gemene 4 eac # yleyc ppa pey deadan. Ing ye hlafopd
fonne piyce ye oxa hnicol peepe- y **hine healdan nolte-
52relle him odepne oxan fope- 4 hebbe him “eall $ pleye:.

xxiv. Ing hpa “ronpcele odper oxan 4 hine ofylea ope
Sbhebyegzze- yelle’ tpezen pid. 4 peopep yceap “pid anum.
8Inp he ®nebbe “hp he *‘yelle- sie” he “yelp beboht pid
pam “pio:-

xxv. Ing peor bpece manner htiy mhtey- 4 he “peopde peep
‘Sorrlegen- ne “sie he “na man-ylegey yeyldiz. “Ing he
“mppan eprep yunnan “tip-zonze pip ded- he bid man-ylegey
yeyldig*- 4 he fonne “yelp ypelce-’ *bucton he *miebd-dxeda
pepe. “Ing mid him cpicum “yie funden p he &p yreel- be
cpyrealdbum *popzielde he’ hic:.

xxvi. Ing hpa *’zepende odper “monney pin-zeand-” oppe
hip “zecpay- oppe np landey “apuht- gebece ypa hic mon
zeeahuze:.”

xxvi. Ing fyp “sie ontended °“*nyhc to ©bapnenne- Ze-
beve pone “&ppepdelyan ye $ “yp “ontenv:.

xxvii. Ing hpa oppeyce hip ®pmend pioh-? zip he “hie
?rely Sycale- ponzylbe be ctpypealbum. “Ing he *nyce hpa
Inc prale-’ “zelatige hine “yelpne $ he pap nan ”yacn


lopplagen G. 2H. 3pycan A. ‘4pindan G. pyndad H. Sbohrep
H. 63yp G. 7ycynze H. Sylean G. S%y He 1 peopan H.
1/ peopne G. peopene H. }2 oppcynze H. zerylle GH. 14 ppyc-
ug H. yy H. 'orpoppad G. oppoppen H. 'belpe G. 18 pice
Hl. Wuncyne H. 2 zylde spyle G. -ppile H. 2 ypyle G. spa pen
Hf. habbe H, %°G. manner G.H. %zepundie H. 26 yy H.
27 bebicgan G. H. 2G. 2%” habbon~G. habben heom H. 2% piyce
G.H, piyye BE. 3the hyne G. yylle GA. Beal H. 34 popyrele
G. 9” bebycze. yylle G. bebicye-H. not in G. 3% pyd HA.
8Lyp G. ®mce HM. Mhpec G. 4lyylle G./-yy A. “yylp GA.


* Lambard adds, ¢ pe him yloge.’


THE LAWS OF KING ALFRED. 51


man be paid for, as the ‘ witan’ decree to be right. If it gore
a son or a daughter, let him be subject to the like judgment.
But if it gore a ‘ theow’ or a ‘theow-mennen,’ let xxx. shillings
of silver be given to the lord, and let the ox be stoned.


22. If any one dig a water-pit, or open one that is shut up,
and close it not again; let him pay for whatever cattle may fall
therein; and let him have the dead [beast].

23. If an ox wound another man’s ox, and it then die, let
them sell the [live] ox, and have the worth in common, and
also the flesh of the dead one. But if the lord knew that the
ox hath used to push, and he would not confine it, let him give
him another ox for it, and have all the flesh for himself.

24. If any one steal another’s ox, and slay or sell it, let him
give two for it; and four sheep for one. If he have not what
he may give, be he himself sold for the cattle.


25. If a thief break into a man’s house by night, and he be
there slain; the slayer shall not be guilty of manslaughter. But
if he do this after sunrise, he shall be guilty of manslaughter;
and then he himself shall die, unless he were an unwilling
agent. If with him living that be found which he had before
stolen, let him pay for it two-fold.

26. If any one injure another man’s vineyard, or his fields,
or aught of his lands; let him make ‘bot’ as it may be valued.


27. If fire be kindled to burn °‘ryht,’ let him who kindled
the fire make ‘ bot’ for the mischief.

28. If any one entrust property to his friend, if he steal it
himself, let him pay for it two-fold. If he know not who hath
stolen it, let him clear himself that he hath therein committed


®Sreo G.H. “pupde H. *opplazen G. “yy G.H. 47 not in G.
8Lyp G. yyppan A. upzanze G. uppzanze H. I ypylp G.
‘ypylcee A. %2buran G.H. B8nyddbeta HM ML G. Mry A.
56 ronzylbe G./— H. 57 zepynde G. apynoe H. 58 manner G./—pyn-
geapo H. hy G. ecepar G.H. Slapihe G. apyhe H. 6 man
G.’-zeehtie H. Syy H. “pyc G. Sbaepnanne G. 6 epypdlan
H.°G. = %°G. not in H. ®oncente G. ontended H. ©” rnynd
yeoh G. ppeond- HH. Mayr G. “hye G. “yyy HM. Bycele G.H.
“Ly G nce H Mhyc G./ hice yrele H. “7 zélanze G.
gelabie H. 7 yylpne H. 7% yacen G.


> [Lambarde reads pyp.—7Z.]}


Exodus,


xxii, 16, 17.


25.


26, 27.


28.


29, 30.


52 JELFREDES DOMAE.


‘ne ®zerpemede. Ing *hre ponne ‘cucu feoh pepe: 4 he
Syeezze P Inc hepe name- oppe * hic’ ’yelp *acpaele- 4 he
Seprenerye hebbe- ne peapy he $ %geldan. Iny’ he ponne ge-
preneyye nebbe- y he him ne zetpiepe- ypeyuge” he ™ponne:.

xxix. Ing hpa remnan beypice unbepeddode-” y “hipe mid
“ylepe- Spopgielde me-” 4 “habbe hi pippan’ him to pire.
In pepe peemnan feeden hie ponne *yellan 7nelle- azipe”
he } *yioh aepcep *Spaem peocuman:.

xxx. Da peemnan fe *zepuniad *onyon *zealdon-cpzeprigan:
+4 yein-leecan: y piccan- ne lec **pu pa hbban:-

xxxi. And yepe hame mid “necene- spelve “he deade:-

xxx. And yepe *z0d-gelbum Snyecge ofep” nod “anne-
ypelce ye deade:-

xxxut. *Uran-cumene 4 %elpeotize ne “zeypenc pu *no-
fopfon’ fe se pepon *z1u “elpeodize Gn “YEzy pra *!londe:-

xxxiv. Da “pudupan 4 “®pa “priop-cild ne “*yceddad Ze-
“ne “ne “napep depiad. Ing ge ponne eller 505 “hie cleo-
pias’ to me 4 1c “zehepe hie-’ ¥ 1¢ eop ponne ylea md
minum ypeopde- 4 1¢ edd $ @eoppu pip Sbeod *pydepan- y
Seopnu beapne *beod * yceop-cild:.

xxxv. Ing pu *pioh cto “bonze “yelle” pinum gerepan pe
mid pe eapdian “piles ne ’mede pu hine spa Smedhing- 4 ne
“zehene pu ®hine md py *edcan:-

xxxvi. Inp “mon nebbe “buton angeald “hpzegl ine md
co ppeonne opfe to pemanne- y he Int to pedde “yelle- ep
yunnan “yevl-zonge yie’ “hie agipen.’ Ing pu ypa ne deyt-
ponne *cleopiad he’ to me- 4 1c “*hine zémepe-’ fponpon Fe
1¢ eom ppide mild-heope:.

xxxvil. Ne cel pu pinne Dpyhten. ne pone hlaropd fer
folcer ne ” penze pu:-

xxxvil. Dine teodan yeeatcay y *pine ppum-pipan- zon-


gender 4 peaxendey- azyp’ pu Lode:.


lonadd. G.H. 2 pemese H. 3 not in G. 4cpicu G. Syecze G.
yeoze A “hye G. 7yylp H 8°G. Szyloan H./’-Lyp G.
10/ gecpype- ypenze G. zetpeope ry. pepe H. ' penne G. ! ber-
pyce H.’-unbepeddude G. hype G. ‘4ylepe G.  popzylbe G.
‘-heo H. \Whabbe G 7G. hy yyppan Z Ly G. Yh G.
heo H. %ryllan G.H. 2” njlle“G. 2yreoh G.H. %pam HH.
24zepunias G. zepunniad EB. zepilmad H. anpon G. 26 zalbon-
cpare G. Zaldepopepeigan Hf. 27yenlacan H. 21 A. 27 G. not
in HA. *mecene G. nycene H. 3tre G.H. % zodzyldum HH.
’—onyecze of G. Benne H. 4°G. % elpeodizge GH. 36 zerpaenc
H, 37 pa G.’pone soppam H. %81u G. not in H. 39 elpeodige


THE LAWS OF KING ALFRED. 53


no fraud. If, however, it were live cattle, and he say, that the
‘here’ hath taken it, or that it perished of itself, and he have
witness; he needeth not to pay for it. But if he have no wit-
ness, and he believe him not, then let him swear.

29. If any one deceive an unbetrothed woman, and sleep
with her; let him pay for her, and have her afterwards to wife.
But if the father of the woman will not give her, let him render
money according to her dowry.

30. The women who are wont to receive enchanters, and
workers of phantasms, and witches, suffer thou not to live,

81. And let him who lieth with cattle perish by death.

32. And let him who sacrificeth to gods, save unto God
alone, perish by death.

33. Vex thou not comers from afar, and strangers; for ye
were formerly strangers in the land of the Egyptians,

84. Injure ye not the widows and the step-children, nor hurt
them anywhere: for if ye do otherwise, they will cry unto me,
and I will hear them, and I will then slay you with my sword ;
and I will so do that your wives shall be widows, and your
children shall be step-children.

385. If thou give money in loan to thy fellow who willeth to
dwell with thee, urge thou him not as a ‘ niedling,’ and oppress
him not with the increase.

36. If a man have only a single garment wherewith to cover
himself, or to wear, and he give it [to thee] in pledge; let it be
returned before sunset. If thou dost not so, then shall he call
unto me, and I will hear him; for I am very merciful.


87. Revile thou not thy Lord God: nor curse thou the Lord
of the people.

388. Thy tithes, and thy first-fruits of moving and growing
things, render thou to God.


G.H. %€zypca G. 4llante G.H. “pyopan G. pybepan H.
43 notin G. yceopcild G. yceopcyls A. # pceadeed G. peyddad H.
466nb add. H. not in G. ‘hy H. ‘8nahpen nene G. 4” hy
chppiad H. zehyne G.’-hy H. 5leop add. H. %eopne G.H.
5316 G. 54pubdepan A. ‘Seoppe G.H. 6 not in H. 57 yceopcilbe
G. yceopcylo H. %8yeoh G.H. 5% zerylle G. yylle H. 6! pylle
H. “nyse H. nyoling H. %zehyne G. gehyn H. hyne G.
66“G. 67 man G.H. buran G.H. Shpegle G. rye G.H.
71 yeclgange G.’-yy H. 7 hye agypen G. 7 clypiad hy Ma
74’ hyne zehype G. hy- H. “yoppam H. eam He 77 pypz G.
pepz H. 7pmne H. 7 zanzender G.H


Exodus,
xxii. 31.


xxii. 1.


2, 3.


%


13.


54 JELFREDES DOMAS.


xxxix. al  *ypleye"P Spildeop leyen-” ne *even ze P+ ac
5yella3 hie hundum:.

xi. Leayey ®monneyr pond ne ’pece pu ®no *peyr to *zehie-
panne. ne hiy domay ne gepaya pu- ne nane Zeprcneyye eeprep
him ne " yaza pu:

x1. Ne pend pu pe ®no on pey polcer “tinned y unpyhe
sep? on Shiona pppece” 4 zeclyyp- opep pin “pyhe- 4
fon] pep unpipeytan lane ne him’ ne zepara:-


xLu. Ing pe *becume odper *monney *z1emeleay pioh’” on
hand- peah “hic *yie pin yeond *zecySe hie 7 him:.

xt. Dem pu ypide “emne- ne dem pu odepne d6m pam
pelezan o8epne pam “eopmen- ne odSepne pam “hogpan 4
odepne pam *JaSpan- ne dem pti:

xLiv. Onycuna ‘pu 4 leapunza:”

xLy. Sobpeycne *man 4 “unyeildigne né” “cpele pu *pone
neppe:-

xivi. Ne %onrpoh pu neerpe “mebd-peeatcum: foppon “hie
ablenbda’’ yul “ope prppa monna gepoht- 4 “hiopa popd “on-
pendad:.

xiv. Dam *elpeotizan 4 “Gcan-cumenan ne let “pi “no
fncushee’ pis “hine- ne mid “nanum © Gnguhtum pu hine ne
dpecce:-

xiv. Ne “ypepizen zé’ neppe undep hedene goday- ne
$n nanum’ pingum ne *cleopien ze co © him:*

XLIx. Diy Syindon pa domay pe ye SElmbhuga Liod “yelp
yPpeecende par to Moyye- y him bebead to *healdenne. 4
Sryppan ye °dn-cenneda  Dpyhcner punu “tine [rod.” $ “ay
“helend Lmyc- on ®middan-zeapd “cpom.’ he cped } he ne


1“G. €all H. 2°G. pilodeop lesan G.H. 4ecan G.H. 5 yyllad
G.H. manner G.H. 7pecce H. 8naG. not in H. 9 not in G.
l0zehypanne G.H. Uyeze G. @xzepends MH. 3°G. na MH 4G.
unpihe gepill G. on—~H. 16 hypa ypece G. i zeclarp G. ze-
cleby 7. '8mhe G. 9G. pu H. 2lbecyme G.H. 22 manner
G. %zymeleay yeoh G.H. hye G. %yy H. %zecys HA.
7hym G. %pihte jG. pyhene b0m 4 H. add. % eapman
G.H. *leoppan G. leoran H. 3ilatan H. %6em H. 3% pa
leopunza H, 34°G,. 25 mann G. 36 unyeyliigne H./-“G. 37 Gie-


@ It will be proper to observe, that the Anglo-Saxon text is not
as a whole a translation of the Vulgate, or of any other known Latin
version. A reference is given in the margin to the corresponding
passages in the book of Exodus; but the reader will frequently find


THE LAWS OF KING ALFRED. 55


39. All the flesh that wild beasts leave, eat ye not that, but
give it to the dogs.

40. 'To the word of a lying man reck thou not to hearken,
nor allow thou of his judgments; nor say thou any witness after
him.

41. Turn thou not thyself to the foolish counsel and unjust
desire of the people, in their speech and cry, against thine own
reason, and according to the teaching of the most unwise; nei-
ther allow thou of them.

42. If the stray cattle of another man come to thy hand,
though it be thy foe, make it known to him.

48. Judge thou very evenly: judge thou not one doom to the
rich, another to the poor; nor one to thy friend, another to
thy foe, judge thou.

44, Shun thou ever leasings,

45. A just and innocent man, him slay thou never.


46. Receive thou never meed-monies; for they blind full oft
the minds of wise men, and pervert their words.


47. To the stranger and comer from afar behave thou not
unkindly, nor oppress thou him with any wrongs.


48. Swear ye never by heathen gods, nor ery ye unto them.
for any cause.*

49. These are the dooms which the Almighty Ged himself
spake unto Moses, and commanded him to keep: and after the
only begotten son of the Lord, our God, that is, our Saviour
Christ, came on earth, he said that he came not to break nor to


pelle G. acpel H. pane G. % onsoh G.H. onzos HB. 40 mec-
yeeaccum A, 417hi~G. hy pe ablentad’ H. “7G. 4hypa G.
heona H. “apendad H. “elpeodegan G. alpeotizan H. 46 uc~
cymenan G.H. 47°G. 8na H./°G. “pone G. 50-G. 51°G.
unpyhcum A. 5% ypenen“G. 5%“ nemzum G. 4elypizen G..
chpien HH. Shym G. heom A. ‘yyndon G. yylp GH.
58healbente G. %pppan H. acenneda H.~G. 6lLober A.
62°G./not in H. Sy G. “helende G.H. ©” populd becom A.
6 com G.


that the Vulgate has been so far departed from, by omissions, ampli-
fications, or substitutions, as to preserve very little resemblance with
the presumed original.


Acts,
xv. 23-29,


Matt. vii, 12.


56 JELFREDES DOMAS.


come 'no pay *bebodu to bpecanne ne to ronbeobanne- ac mid
eallum godum vo ®eacanne. 4 muild-heoptneyye 4 *eadmodneyye
he lepde. Da eycep mp ppopunge- eppam pe ny Apoyvolay
Scorapene pepon geond ealle eopdan to 7Jepanne- 4 pa
Smiec pa °hie xvgebdene papon- monegza heeSena peoda “hie
to Lode *zecepdon. %Da “hi ealle acyomne pepon- ¥hi
yendon zpend-ppecan 7c6 Antocha 4 %c6 Syma-7 Cmycer
6 co lepanne. Da hie pa ongeacon $ him ne ypeop- pa
yendon “hie apend-zepuic v6 “him. Diy “ip ponne’
*4zenend-zeppic pe pa Apoycolay *yendon ealle co Antiochia-
4 co Syma y to Dihecia- pa pind **nii of *hadenum peodum
8x6 Liye *zecipde.

Da Apoycolay 4 pa eldpan bpodon’ helo eop *pyycad. 4
pe eop cydad- $ pe *zearcodon P Stipe zepepan yume mid
upum popdum <6 eop **comon- 4 eop hepizpan *[piyan
budan] co healdanne ponne pe “him budon- 4 eop *”c6 *ypide
%zedpealdon mid “bem manizgyealbum zebodum- ¥ eoppa yapla
“tma “yophpepydon ponne “hie “*zemhcon. Da *zeyomnodon
pe Gy” ymb - 4 “ty eallum *’Zelicode pa. $ pe “yendon
Pauluy y Bapnaban- “men pa pilmia’’ “heona yapla’ *yellan
pop Dpyhteney naman. id Shim pe “yendon Iudam 4 &2-
lam- $ ®[hi] eop $ ice *pecgan. Dam’ Walzan Lrayte per
sepuht y *’Gy- $ pe nane *bypSene on eop yeccan noldon-
open P pe eop “ned-peanr pay’ to *healdenne- } ip ponne
ze “ropbepen $ ge deofol-zyld ne “peopdien- ne blod ne
Sbiegen- ne Sarmoned- 4 “ppom depnum’ gehzepum. y f ze
‘pillen $ odpe men “@op ne don- ne dod ge P Mospum
mannum.

710 piypum’ anum dome “mon mez zepencean- $ he
sezhpelene on mht gedbemed-’ ne peapy he 7*nanpa d0m-boca
7 oSeppa [cepan]. 7*Irepence he $ he nanum men ne deme
~ he nolde $ he him dembe- gi¢ he pone “dom orep hine
®rohce.


ina G.H. pond H. 3icanne G. zeecanne H. 4 ecadmobdneyye G.
5°G. 6coranene G.H. cosyapenne &. 7leppanne G. ‘aye GLH.
Shi G. hy H. Mmamze G. maneza H. Uhy A. |2zecipdon A.
B°G. 4-G. hy H. “hy A. Wenpendpecan G. xpendpacan A.
VG. "Sma G 9°G. hb G. hy H. 2°G. hy H. 2-G.
2737 G. A ependzeppics H. %yendan H. 26~G. 27 e3enum G.
7° G. 2% zecypned G. zecyppetbe AH. %eelopan G. “ ylopan bpodpa
H.  pypcas G. 32 zeahyobon G. xeaxobon H. %“G. %coman
H. ©G.H. %hym G. 37-G. not in H. *®ypySe G. 39 zed-
pelton H. “pam G.H. 41° H. rophpyppton G.H. *heo


THE LAWS OF KING ALFRED. 57


forbid these commandments, but with all good to increase
them: and mercy and humility he taught. Then after his
Passion, before his Apostles were dispersed throughout all the
earth, teaching, and while they were yet together, many hea-
then nations they turned to God. When they were all assem-
bled, they sent messengers to Antioch and to Syria, to teach
the law of Christ. But when they understood that it speeded
them not, then sent they a letter unto them. Now this is the
letter which all the Apostles sent to Antioch, and to Syria, and
to Cilicia, which now from heathen nations are turned to
Christ.


‘ The Apostles and the elder brethren wish you health: and
we make known unto you, that we have heard that some of
our fellows have come to you with our words, and have com-
manded you to observe a heavier rule than we commanded
them, and have too much misled you with manifold commands,
and have subverted more of your souls than they have directed.
Then we assembled ourselves concerning that; and it then
seemed good to us all that we should send Paul and Barnabas,
men who desire to give their souls for the name of the Lord.
With them we have sent Judas and Silas, that they might say
the same to you. It seemed to the Holy Ghost and to us, that
we should set no burthen upon you above that which it was
needful for you to bear: now that is, that ye forbear from wor-
shiping idols, and from tasting blood or things strangled, and
from fornications: and that which ye will that other men do not
unto you, do ye not that to other men.

From this one doom a man may remember that he judge
every one righteously ; he need heed no other doom-book. Let
him remember that he adjudge to no man that which he would
not that he should adjudge to him, if he sought judgment
against him.


HH, “mbcon G. “zeyamnoden H. ’zeramnoton” G. 467 G,
47 pa add. H. “yendan G. 4% pa zepilniad A. 5 pillad G. 51 hina
Hi. ‘hypa yaula G. 52 co yyllanne G.H.  3hym G. 54yenbad G.
35 HT, *8 yeczas. Dam G. 57°G. S58bypdene G.H. bypdenne ZF.
59noloan G. nyopeanp A. “miebpeapp iy G. ‘S!healbene H.
62 ronbepan G.H. ®peopsian G. pupdian H. 4 piczan G.H. % ary-
mopod A. 6 ;nam oypnum G.H. 7 pillan H. 8G. 960 H,
70 Here Gi. closes. 7/ On pyypum &. “man H. 7 xzepencan H.
74 ezhpylene om H. 75/pyhc zebeme H. 7nanpe H. 7 odepa H.
8H, 7 Tepence H. man A. loom H, dome £. ahve ZH.


58 SELFREDES DOMAS.


Sippan } ‘ha gelamp $ *monega peoda Upiycey gelearan
Sonyenzon- ba pupdon *monega yeonoday” zeond ealne middan-
Szeand gexadepode- 4 eac Sypa zeond Angebcyn yippan hie”
L[yuycer geleayan onrenzon- halizpa ’ biycepa y eac odeppa
Zepungenna picena. *Ide pa zeyeccon yon pepe *mild-heoptc-
neyre pe Lpuyc lepde- ec maycpa hpelepe mipdzder $ pa
populd-hlapopoay moy'ton mid "hiopa learan- @buton yynne-
zc pam yopman zylce “bene proh-bote” onron pe “hie pa
geyeccan- *buton et hlaropd-peappe- pam %hie nane mild-
heoptcneyye ne dSopycon ” zecpeSan- roppam pe Irod Elmhtig
pam nane ne gedémbde- pe hine ™[orephogodon- ne Lpyc
Lrodey yunu pam nane ne zedembe pe hyne] *yealde co deade-
4y he bebead pone hlaropd lupian ypa hime [yelpne.] Iie pa
on *monegum yenodSum monegpa’ menniyepa miydzeda bote
gereccon+ 4 on *monega yenod’-béc hy *pprcon hpep *anne
dom hpzep odepne:-

Ic pa JElyped cynimg pay tcogeedepe gegadepode- 4 appucan
hec “monege papa pe upe foregenzan “heoldon- pa’ be me
*licodon- 4 °°manege papa pe me ne “heodon- 1c @peapp mid
minpa pitena zepeahte- 4 on odpe piyan bebead co healdenne-
foppam 3e ne dopyce gedmyclecan papa minpa apuht *yeala
on zeppic yeccan- “poppam me pay uncud hpat per pam
heian polde pe xpcep ur *pepen. Ac pa “pe ic zemetce-
S7appen oppe on Iney daze miner meeger- oppe on Ofrfan
ypcena cyningey- oppe on “jCdelbpyhtey pe «pers yulluhc
onyeng on Angel-cynne- pa pe me *pyhcoyce puhton- ic pa
hép-on gegadepode 4 pa odpe “yopléc:-


Ic pa sElpped *'Peyc-peaxna cyning’ eallum mimum pitum
par geeopde- 4 me pa cpexdon- $ “him # hicode eallum “to
healdenne:.


‘notin H. 2maneza H. 3unbeppenzon H. 4 maneze yynodar H.
Seand H. fypylee on Angeleynne. yyppan bi H. 7bipcopa A.
Shy H. %milbheopenyye H. Mzehplcene A. Uheopa H. 12bu-
can H. 1% papa yeoh-bora H. “hy H. Ubhucan H. hy A.
7 zecpedan H. ‘8muloheopenee H. add. 9H. 2 zerealbe A.
21H, 2py AH. %3/manezum ysynosum manezna H. 4manezpa


THE LAWS OF KING ALFRED. 59


After this, then happened it that many nations received the
faith of Christ; then were many synods assembled throughout
all the earth, and also among the English race, after they had
received the faith of Christ, of holy bishops, and also of other
exalted ‘witan.’ They then ordained, out of that mercy which
Christ had taught, that secular lords, with their leave, might,
without sin, take for almost every misdeed, for the first offence,
the money-‘bot’ which they then ordained; except in cases of
treason against a lord, to which they dared not assign any
mercy, because God Almighty adjudged none to them who
despised him, nor did Christ the son of God adjudge any to
him who sold him to death: and he commanded that a lord
should be loved as one’s self. They then in many synods or-
dained a ‘ bot’ for many human misdeeds; and in many synod-
books they wrote, at one place one doom, at another another.


I, then, Alfred, king, gathered these together, and com-
manded many of those to be written which our forefathers held,
those which to me seemed good; and many of those which
seemed to me not good I rejected them, by the counsel of my
© witan,’ and in other wise commanded them to be holden; for
I durst not venture to set down in writing much of my own,
for it was unknown to me what of it would please those who
should come after us. But those things which I met with,
either of the days of Ine my kinsman, or of Offa king of the
Mercians, or of Aithelbryht, who first among the English race
received baptism, those which seemed to me the rightest, those
I have here gathered together, and rejected the others.

J, then, Alfred, king of the West-Saxons, shewed these to all
my ‘ witan,’ and they then said that it seemed good to them all
to be holden.


yyn0d H. = %pmcon H. ppican FH. % anne H. 27 manize ZH.
28 heolden papa H. lycedan H. 2monmze H. 2!lycobon H.
2mmpe H. %yeola A. %4ponpon H. %pepon A. %pa A,
apap H. %8Cdelbiphcey A. *pihcerc H. “yoplece H. 417 peyc-
yeaxena cyng H. “heom H. “pel add. H.


60 JELFREDES DOMAS.


BE ADUM AND Be peDDUMs


1. JEc epeytan pe lepad $ meeyc peapr ip P 'eghpele mon’
Iny a8 4 ny *ped paeplice healtde. Inp hpa to * hpetpum
pyyya gented sie’ on poh- oppe co hlagopd-reappe- oppe to
4enzum unpyhcum’ fulcume- } 1p ponne pyhcpe to *aleo-
ganne bonne to geleycanne. %[Inp he ponne py peddie pe
hym yuht yy co geleycanne] y } aleoze- ’yelle mid eadmedum
Iny’ pepn 4 ny ehta hip ypeondum vo ®zehealdanne- 4 beo
®reopepis mihta on capcepne “on cynmgey tune ™ ppopize
pep ypa *biycep him yee: 4 ny “megay hine “peden zip
he “yelp mete nabbe. Ing he “mezgay nebbe- opfe fone
mece “nebbe- fede cynmger gepera hine. Ing hine *mon
co-genedan’ yeyle- 4 he eller nylle- zip hine ®mon gebinde-
%bolize ny pepna 4 hip *1epper. Iny hine mon ogylea-
*Shegge he opgilte’” Ing he fic-odpleo ep pam piepyte-” 4
hine man gefo- *ypie he *reopeptiz mica on capcepne ypa he
7€n yceolde. Iny he *[ponne] “loyize- yie he aphemed’ 4
me dmenyumod’ df eallum Lyuycer *eycum. Inp pep
ponne oSep menmye boph “pe: bece fone *bopz-bpyce” ypa
lim “pyhc pipes y pone *ped-bpyce ypa nm inp yempe
popure:-


BE %LIRILENA SOLNUG.
u. Ing hpa papa mynycep-hama “hpelene yop hpelepe
yeyloe gerece” pe “cynmger *feopm to-belimpe- oppe odepne


Vezhple man H. 2peds H.  hpedepum pippa zenyd sy A.
4enizum unhctum H. 5 aleogenne H. 6H. 7 yylle mid eab-
mebum hyp H. 8zehealbenne H. %xr. HM. Mac H. Uppopre A.
Wbircop & mazar AH. Myedan MH. Uyylp H mazar HH.
not in H. 8 man co-zenyoan H. man H. %polie A.


a The language of the original writ in the court of King’s Bench
still agrees with the form of process here mentioned: ‘If N.N. shall
give you security of prosecuting his claim, then put by gage and safe
pledges A.B. &e.’

» According to a well-known rule of law, if the defendant made
default, the borhs or sureties were amerced by the court; and this
fine he is here directed to make good. For the wed or gage he was
bound by an oath, the ropead, prejuramentum, which occurs here-
after, in person; and perjury being a matter of ecclesiastical cog-
nizance, the censure was to be fixed by the church.

¢ The nature of the king’s ‘ feorme’ will be best illustrated by a
passage in a contemporary document, granted under the sanction of


THE LAWS OF KING ALFRED. 61


OF OATHS AND OF ‘WEDS.’


1. At the first we teach, that it is most needful that every
man warily keep his oath and his ‘wed.’ If any one be con-
strained to either of these wrongfully, either to treason against
his lord, or to any unlawful aid; then is it juster to belie than
to fulfil. But if he pledge himself to that which it is lawful to
fulfil, and in that belie himself, let him submissively deliver up
his weapon and his goods to the keeping of his friends, and be
in prison forty days in a king’s ‘tiin:’ let him there suffer
whatever the bishop may prescribe to him; and let his kinsmen
feed him, if he himself have no food. If he have no kinsmen,
or have no food, let the king’s reeve feed him. If he must be
forced to this, and he otherwise will not, if they bind him, let
him forfeit his weapons and his property. If he be slain, let
him lie uncompensated. If he flee thereout before the time,
and he be taken, let him be in prison forty days, as he should
before have been. But if he escape, let him be held a fugitive,
and be excommunicate of all Christ’s churches. If, however,
there be another man’s ‘borh,’ let him make ‘bot’ for the
‘borh-bryce,’> as the law may direct him, and the ‘wed-bryce,’
as his confessor may prescribe to him.


OF CHURCH- SOCNS.’


2. If any one, for whatever crime, seek any of the ‘mynster-
hams’ to which the °king’s ‘feorm’ is incident, or other


2lyprer H. 22man H. 2% leeze opzylbe A. 2” pan fypyce A
Bry HM ext. H. 7-H. 2% H. lorie yy he aplymed ZH.
307 ry he amanyemod H. 2! cypicum H. %yy H. 83 boph-bpice ZA.
4nihc A. %pedbmce H. %cypicena H. 37 pepa H. 38 hpylene
zerece fon hpylcene yeylbe H. 3 peopme HZ.


Alfred: ‘Ice sCdelped eloopman. mbpypdendpe Lovey zere zepelzod
and zeplencedb mid sume dele Mepena pucey. ron sober lugan and
yon alerneyya minpa zylca and yynna. and fop benum abbodey and
pepe heo-peebene wc Bepclea. and eac fop ealpe Mepce. 1c heo
zeppeoze ecelice. pay zaroler pe hio nu get co cyninger hanba
azeogan yceolan. of pam dele pe pep unzeypeod co lare per pepe
cyninz-Feopme. ze on hlucpum alaé. ze on beope. ge on bunige. ze
hpyépum Ze on ypynum. ze on yceapum. .. . and pet i¢ do mid
J€lppeber cyninger leape and zepicnerre: I Athelreed, ealdorman, by
the disposing grace of God endowed and enriched with some portion
of the kingdom of the Mercians, for the love of God, and for the
remission of my offences and sins, and on account of the abbot’s


62 JELFREDES DOMAS.


“plone hneped” pe ap-pypde *yie- age he ppeopa nihta pepe
him to gebeopzanne- *bucon he pingian pille. Inp hine mon
on ®pam fiepyce geyflige md yleze-” ope mid bende- oppe
puph-punde- ®beve pana zeghpele mid pyhte peodycipe-’ ze mid
pepe ge md pice: y bam hipum 7hund-cpelprg pat. Semie-
yyudep co” bove- 4 °*nebbe hiy agne fopronzen:.”


Be 10BORL-BRYLE.

1. Ing hpa cymnger “bopg abpece- zebece pone @cyhe
ypa lnm “pyhe pipes 4 pey bopger-bpyce mid -v- pundum
>meppa “peninga. JEpcebiycepey’ bopgey-bpyce oppe hur
mund-bypd gebece md “ppm pundum- odper *bipceper oppe
Yealoonmonney bopgey-“bpyce opye ®mund-bypd zebece mid
2°cpam pundum::


21BE PLAFORD- S€ARPE/
1v. Ing hpa ymb cymingey feoph “yieppie puph hine- opbe
puph *pneccena yeop-munge- oppe ny manna- “jie he hiy


Vmeonne hyped H. 2yy A. Apyppe HM. 4bucan A = pem
Fypyce geyslie mid sleaze A. © zebece pena ezhpyle mid prhce
peoprerpe H. 7c.xx. H. ® cype- A. % hebbe hir agen soprpanzen
Hf. Wbuph-bpyce G.A. Uboph HM. Veihclan A. Bpihc HM.


prayers and the brotherhood’s at Berkley, and also on account of all
Mercia, I free them for ever of the tribute which they now still ought
to render into the king’s hands, (i.e.) of that part of the king’s
‘ feorme’ which there remained unfreed, as well in pure ale, as in
beer, and in honey, and in oxen, and in swine, and in sheep... .
and that I do with King ilfred’s leave and knowledge.’ Heming,
Charé. p.104. Lambard, and after him Wheloc and Wilkins, reads
‘pe ne cyninger reopme co belimpe, to which the king’s feorme is
not incident ;’ and three of the four mss. of the Latin version agree
with him: ‘ que ad firmam regis non pertineat.’ A < free-hired’
was possibly a monastery of private foundation, but free from the
bishop’s jurisdiction, having the right of electing their own head, the
free disposal of their temporalities, and enjoying the privilege of the
Jus asyli. Conf. Form. Baluziane, No.37. [I prefer the insertion
of ‘ne’ as in Lambarde, conceiving the sense to be as follows, ‘If
any one, &c. seek any of those monastic domiciles which are free
from the king’s ‘feorm’ (or purveyance), or any other free frater-
nity, &c.’ Such ‘ mynster-hams’ and ‘hyreds’ as were burthened
with the king’s ‘feorm,’ having apparently had the privilege of
granting an asylum for a longer space than three days.—7.]

2 There is a threefold difficulty in this clause: first, as to the
reading of the text, whether it should be nebbe, or hebbe, as in


THE LAWS OF KING ALFRED. 63


‘ free-hired’ which is worthy of reverence, let him have a space
of three days to protect himself, unless he be willing to come to
terms. If during this space, any one harm him by blow, or
by bond, or wound him, Jet him make ‘bit’ for each of these
according to regular usage, as well with ‘wér’ as with ‘ wite?
and to the brotherhood one hundred and twenty shillings, as
‘bot’ for the church-‘frith :’ and let him *not have ‘ forfongen’
his own.


OF « BORH-BRYCE,’

3. If any one break the king’s ‘borh,’ let him make ‘ bot’ for
the plaint, as the law shall direct him; and for the ‘ borh-bryce’
with v. pounds of ®¢mzrra’ pence. For an archbishop’s ‘borh-
bryce,’ or his ‘mund-byrd,’ let him make ‘bot’ with three
pounds: for any other bishop’s or an ‘ earldorman’s’ ‘borh~
bryce,’ or ‘ mund-byrd,’ let him make ‘bot’ with two pounds,


OF PLOTTING AGAINST A LORD.


4. If any one plot against the king’s life, of himself, or by
harbouring of exiles, or of his men; let him be liable in his life


17 peninza. Epcebiscoper H. Wu. A. bircoper A. 1 ealdep-
manner H. 18-bmice H. ny Madd. 11. B. 21” Be cynineger
jpictome. B. spice H. superscribed. ™yyppe BH. 4 eapd-
ppecena B. yy BA.


Ms. #.; secondly, as to the party indicated by the personal pro-
noun; and, thirdly, the meaning of ‘ropfonzen.’ In Britton’s chap-
ter ‘des Abjuracions,’ it is said of those who flee to a sanctuary
after the commission of crime, ‘si perdent lour chateux pur lour
fuite: and again: ‘de lour chateux nequedent soient forjuges pur
la fuite.’ On the other hand, the legal import of the old German
‘verfangen’ (the same verb as that used in the text) was ‘ to pre-
judice;’ and if we refer the pronoun to its immediate antecedent,
the clause may be rendered, according as we read nebbe or hebbe,
* let him not (or, let him) have prejudiced his suit by this procedure.’
A passage in the custumal of Henry I. is decidedly in favour of the
latter reading ; though it is by no means impossible that the law may
have been changed since Alfred’s time: ‘ Qui rectum offerentem
occiderit vel afflixerit in aliquo, emendet wytam, vel vulnus, vel
denique sicut egerit, e¢ guicquid adversus eum habebat, forisfaciat.
ce. 83. [In Lambarde’s edition, the words ‘4 neebbe hiy azne yop-
ponzen’ are wanting.—7.]

> The original is left untranslated, as the version given by Lye is
disputed: ‘cum quinque libris purorum denariorum, i.e. bone
monetz.’ There is, however, a passage quoted by Mr. Turner from
some unnamed source, which seems to justify this interpretation:
‘cpa pund mere hpicer yeolgney.” Hist. A. Saxon. 11. p.129. With


64 JELFREDES DOMAS.


yeoney yeyloiz 4 ealley pay 'pe he age. *Ing he hine *yelpne
juopan pille-” d0 $ be cyninger *pep-gelde. Spa pe edic yetcad
be eallum hadum- ze ceople- ge eople. Sefe *ymb hy”
hlaropdey °peoph yieppe- sie” he pid pone hiy feopey peyloiz-
yealley pay pe he age- oppe be Inp hlaropbdey pepe hine 7 ze-
pope:

BE 8LIRLENA FRIDGE’

v. Eac pe yettad °xzhpelcepe cipican’ pe “biycep zehalzode
py ys. gp “ne fah-mon geiepne” *oppe geepne- $ hme
2reoran mhtum nan *mon uv’ ne veo. “Ing hit ponne
hpa do- “ponne “yie he yeyloig cyningey mund-bypde- 4
peepe ®cipican prudey. "mane “zip he peep mape *°Gf-gefo- ZF”
he yon hungpe lbban **méze- **buron he *yelp tc’-peohte.
*Tnp hipan *hiopa cipican’ **manan peapre habben- healde
hine mon on odpum *zepne- 4 $ neebbe *pon ma dupa ponne
m0 cipice’ Lepice pepe *cican ealdop *'p him mon on
ham *piepyce mece ne “elle. Inf’ he “yelp hip **peepno
hiy *” gepan uv-pécan pille-” *zehealden hi hine *-xxx- nihta-
4 “hie hine ny ““megum gebobien’ Cac cipican yd “Lay]-
zip “hpele mon’ *cpican “zeyéce yon “papa gzylca “hpyleum
“bana pe ap geypped “n&pe 4 hine pap on Loder naman
zeandette- “ye hiv’ healp *yopgipen. Sepe pralad *on Sun-
nan nihc- oppe on “Irehhol- oppe on Eaycpon- oppe on pone
Nalgan Dunpey “dez- “[4] on Lrang-dazay- papa zehpele pe
pillad *ye cpy-bove- ypa “on © Lencten-peyten:-


lpec B. 2Lyp B. *yylpne cpeopyian pylle B.—cpeopan - H.
4pepzylee B.H. Symbe B.’-hyy H. © feoph yyppie sy BA
7zecpeoprie B. zecpeppe H. * cypicena fpyse G. cicene B.
Yezhpylcepe A.’ ezhpilcene cipcean B. 'biyceop B. biycop H.
11/ zerah man cypican zeypne B. yahman hy geypne H. !2yeoron
H. %man B./-uee Me My B. OB. not in H. yy
B.H, WepiceanB. Yay B. OM.’ -ay B. AB. 2 bucan
AL yyy Bo’ -—uce- H. 4Lyp B. % heopa A.’ cipcean B.
2%@mane BH. 7 huse B. %ponne H. 2” yeo cypice B. seo
epce H. %cipicean B. I$ BH. pe L. not in B. 8 pypyce


this may be compared the authority quoted by Du Cange: ‘ De
denariis si mero sunt argento et pleniter pensantes.’ Voce Denarii
meri. Lambard, in the margin, reads ‘ mepena.’

a [The words oppe zeepne appear to have been originally a mar-
ginal gloss: they are not in Lambarde’s text.—TZ.]

b [Mane Zip... eee eee uc-feohte. Notwithstanding the con-
currence of mss., [ believe this place to be very corrupt: instead of


THE LAWS OF KING ALFRED. 65


and in all that he has. If he desire to prove himself true, let
him do so according to the king’s ‘wer-gild’” So also we ordain
for all degrees, whether ‘ceorl’ or ‘eorl.’ He who plots against
his lord’s life, let him be liable in his life to him and in all that
he has; or Ict him prove himself true according to his lord’s
‘ wer.’ .

OF CHURCH- FRITH?


5. We also ordain to every church which has been hallowed
by a bishop, this ‘ frith ’ if a ‘fah-man’ flee to* or reach one,
that for seven days no one drag him out. But if any one do
so, then let him be liable in the king’s ‘ mund-byrd’ and the
church-‘ frith ? "more if he there commit more wrong, if,
despite of hunger, he can live; unless he fight his way out.
If the brethren have further need of their church, let them
keep him in another house, and let not that have more doors
than the church. Let the church-‘ealdor’ take care that
during this term no one give him food. If he himself be
willing to deliver up his weapons to his foes, let them keep him
xxx. days, and let them give notice of him to his kinsmen.
It is also church-‘frith’ if any man seek a church for any of
those offences, which had not been before revealed, and there
confess himself in God’s name, be it half forgiven. He who
steals on Sunday, or at Yule, or at Easter, or on Holy Thursday,
and on Rogation days; for each of these we will that the
* bot’ be two-fold, as during Lent-fast.


BH. *yylle H./-Ly B. FP pylp BA. 2% pepna HW. 977 A.
‘—“pylle B. 8zehealban BAL 8% ppicnz B. bh BH 47 ma-
zum zebeoben B.—zebotie A. “cypicean BB. 8B. 4 hpyle
man BH. “cymcean B. In H. the e has ben erased, and so fre-
quently before. %- B. “pepa H. Shpleum #. “papa BH.
50" B. lyy H./-"B. 8 yopzypen B. 83° B. 54 Treol BH;
but in the margin of H.al.Geohhol. “B56 not in BE. and in-
serted in H. *7zehpyle B. wzhpyle H. yy BH. not in A.
60 Lenzczen B.


zip he pep mape of-zero, perhaps we should read zip he pene man
of-zero, ‘if he carry the man off By uc-peohte I am inclined to
understand, not ‘fight his way out,’ but ‘fight without,’ ce. out of
the bounds of his asylum, when it would be lawful to seize him.
In a case, however, of so much uncertainty, I have left Mr. Price’s
version untouched, though very doubtful as to any authority for his
translation of of-zepo.—Z-]


66 JELFREDES DOMAS.


1BE 2LIRLAN STALE’

vi. Ing Shp@ on ‘erpican hpac gepeorize- popzylbe $
Aanzyloe- y p pice ypa to °pam angylde ’bel:mpan pile. 47
ylea mon pa °hond dp pe he hic md “zedyde. “Ing he pa
hand “leyan pille-” him mon  ®Zeparian “pille- ®zelde ppa
co hip pepe belimpe:-


16 BE 17DON DE MON ON YWLYNLES PEALLE 20 FEOPTE,’

vu. Ing *hpd *in cyningey” *Shealle zepeohte- oppe iy
*4yeepn gebpéde-’ 4 hie mon *zer6- *yie P on eyninger
27$6me- ypa dead ypa lip. ppa he him *yonziyan pille. Ing’ he
loyize- y hine “mon ere *zer6- *popzielde he hine *yelra be
lny *pep-gilde- 4 pone gyle *zebéce- ppa “pep ypa pice *ppa
he ®>zepyphtc aze:-


36BE NUNNAN PyseMEDE.’

vi. Ing hpa nunnan o¢ mynycpe * Gc-aléde buran *ky-
mingey lerneyye’ oppe *biyé. zeyelle” hund-cpelpraz” pett. healr
cyninge heal *bipcepe 4” “paepe “cipican hlaropde pe “[pa
nunnan] age. “Ing hed’ leng libbe ponne yepe hie “uv-ledde-
nage “Ino hiy” “iepreyr “opiht. Iny’ °hio beapn **Zeycpiene-
2nebbe $ “per “1epper- =pon mape pe yio modop. Inj”
hipe beapn mon ofyled-’ *zielde cynmge “papa “medpen-
mega’ d&l- adpen-meegum hiopna’ ol “mon “agzife:-


6 BE BEARN-CALNUM PIFe OFSLLENUM.
ix. “Ing “mon” pip md beapne drylea ponne $ beapn in


V Be pam pe yzled on eipice. B. 2cypicena G. eipcean H. 37 B.
4cypicean B. 5° H. Spem H. 7 zelimpan pylle ec odpum ceppe
B. §man H. %hand BH. Moyse A. ycal superscribed. Ly
B.  Walyyan H. ‘yan pylle B Wzeparyan A. Mpylle B.
zylbe BH. 16’ Be pam pe man yeohted on kyningey healle. B.
Wpac G. pam H. ‘man G. Weyninzer G. kyninger A. 20 ze-
feohte GH. 2° B. on kynmnzery B.A. halle B. 24 pepen
Hi.’yepne”B. 3° BE. yy BM. 27" HH. Byopzyzan A.
‘—pylle. Ly B man BH ®° BE. 5 yopzylte B.H.
2yylne BH. Bpepzilbe H. penzyloe B. pepeglobe B. 24- B.
35 zepyphce B. %/ Be pam pe nunnan of mynycpe ut alebad. B.


@ The ‘angylde’ is what in the Frisic and other Barbaric codes
is called the ‘simplum,’ or single value of the property claimed, or
in dispute.


THE LAWS OF KING ALFRED. 67


OF STEALING IN A CHURCH.

6. If any one thieve aught in a church, let him pay the
*Sangylde,’ and the ‘wite,’ such as shall belong to the ‘angylde;’
and let the hand be struck off with which he did it. If he
will redeem the hand, and that be allowed him, let him pay
as may belong to his ‘ wér.’


IN CASE A MAN FIGHT IN THE KING’S HALL.

7. If any one fight in the king’s hall, or draw his weapon,
and he be taken; be it in the king’s doom, either death, or life,
as he may be willing to grant him. If he escape, and be taken
again, let him pay for himself according to his ‘ wer-gild,’ and
make ‘bot’ for the offence, as well ‘wér’ as ‘wite,’ according
as he may have wrought.


OF FORNICATION WITH A NUN.

8. If any one carry off a nun from a minster, without the
king’s or the bishop’s leave, let him pay a hundred and twenty
shillings, half to the king, half to the bishop and to the
church-‘hlaford’ who owns the nun. If she live longer than
he who carried her off, let her not have aught of his property.
If she bear a child, let not that have of the property more than
the mother. If any one slay her child, let him pay to the king
the maternal kindred’s share; to the paternal kindred let their
share be given.


OF SLAYING A CHILD-BEARING WOMAN.
9. If a man kill a woman with her child, while the child is


37° A.” B. 8 eyninzey lease B.H. 2% birceoper zerylle B. biy-
copes —H. “7 hund-cpentiz B. c.xx. H. “!bipcope H. / birceope
B “&not in H Beypice B. “pone munuc A. #/ Lye 7B.
4Suclete B. Vheo H.’-B. 4 yprey BG. “ apube H. ” napibe.
Lyp B. 0° B. heo H. Slzercnyne B. zercpme H. but orig.
zeropiene. 52naze H. per H. 4” ypyer na mane ponne seo
movep. Lip B. Spe MH. man H./-"B. 57zylbe B.-pam H.
58/ pepa medpa maga B. 597 mebopien maza H. mazum ZH.
‘—hedpa B. Silman H. azyre B. Be pam pec man oyylea pir
mid cilbe. B. © yp man B. Shpa ZH.


b [Perhaps, ‘as he may deserve :’ zepyphc seems here to be the
noun substantive meritum, rather than the participle passive, accom-
panied by age as an auxiliary.— 7. ]


68 JELFREDES DOAS.


Thine *yie- pongielde” pone piyman’ rullan *z1elde- 4 $ beapn-
be pey seedpen-cnoyleyr pepe Shealran ®zelde:-


A "ye P Spice -ux-” seit. o3 P anzylde ame to -xxx-
yell. °yippan hie cto “pam agiye- # anzylde- “yippan “pie
pice ™-c.xx- yerlt. Iteo’ peer zold-pedpe* +4 % pc0d-peore
4y beo-beope- y “mamgu picu’ mapan ponne odpu. nu '*yme
Pealle gelice butan’ man-peore *°-c.xx- pertt.:-


21 Be TpeLF-pYNDES 2 MONNES pIFE FORLEGENUM.


x. 8Iip mon heme md *cpelp-hyndey *monney pipe.”
*7hund-cpelpaz’ yeitl *zebece pam pepe. % Syx-hyndum
men *hund-ceontig perl.” zebece. *Liephycum men *yeopep-
wig yeill. gebece?:.


Be 4CIRLISERE FKLMNAN % ONFENLGE.


xt. ®Iny mon’ on *eiphyepe yaemnan bpeoy’c *zeyo- mid
40.v- yell, hipe zebece. Ing he “ne ofeppeoppe 4 mid ne
xeheme- “mid -x-’ yell gebece. “Ing he md geheme-
mid “Lx. peill. “zebete. Inp odep “mon mid hipe “lege
“gn. pie’ be healpum “pem }onne’ “io boc.” Ing “hie
mon’ veo: *zelatie S[hi] be “*yixcezum “hida-” oppe *folize


‘hype H. 2’ py popzylbe B.- fopzilbe H. %heo H. 4zylbe B.A.
Shalran B. Szylbe BA. 779 BA &¥ “pxa Bo 9 pmeag B.
Wyyppan B. Upam BH. yyppan B. yy BA 4 hund-cpelr-
viz. Pplon B. 6" B. 16 -peope B. Wmanezu H./ marniz~ B.
8yynd B. | ealle zelice bucan B.H. eal zelice H. 2° hund-cpelpaz
BH. Be hemed-pingum. B. manner G.H. 27 B. 24man
A. xu. H. manner A.’-" B. 2’ oxx. H. %man BH.
add. not in B. %6ix- B. 31c. H./ hunbd-ceoncizen yeyil. B.


a ¢Deore’ is the ‘diebe’ of the old German codes, the ‘ dieve’ of
Lower Saxony, and means ‘ theft,’ not a thief. In Ine’s dooms we
have ‘ pyfe- (peore) reoh, stolen goods. [Deore is, I doubt not, a
case of peor, and I have rendered it accordingly. The accuracy of
Ine, c. 25. as given in &. (for which H. reads ropycolen reoh) is to
me very questionable, as the same Ms. has ‘ ciepe-mon’ for ‘ ceap-
mon;’ besides, if peore be a nominative, the words bucan man-peose
would form a downright solecism.—Z.]


THE LAWS OF KING ALFRED. 69


in her, let him pay for the woman her full ‘ wer-gild” and pay
for the child half a ‘ wer-gild, according to the ‘ wér’ of the
father’s kin,


Let the ‘wite’ be always ux. shillings, until the ‘angylde’
rise to xxx, shillings. After the ‘angylde’ has risen to that
let the ‘wite’ be cxx. shillings. Formerly there was [a dis-
tinct ‘wite’] for a gold-thief*, and a mare-thief, and a bee-
thief, and many ‘wites,’ greater than others; now are all alike,
except for a man-thief, cxx. shillings.


OF THE ADULTERY OF A TWELVE~‘HYNDE’ MAN’S
WIFE.


10. If a man lie with the wife of a twelve-* hynde’ man, let
him make ‘bot’ to the husband with one hundred and twenty
shillings. To a six-*hynde’ man, let him make ‘bot’ with one
hundred shillings. To a ‘ceorlish’ man, let him make ‘bot’
with forty shillings.®


OF SEIZING HOLD OF A ‘CEORLISH’ WOMAN.


11. If a man seize hold of the breast of a ‘ ceorlish’ woman,
let him make ‘bot’ to her with v. shillings. If he throw her
down and do not lie with her, let him make ‘ bot’ with x. shil-
lings. If he lie with her, let him make ‘bot’ with xx. shil-
lings. If another man had before lain with her, then let the
‘bot’ be half that. If she be charged [therewith], let her clear


32Leophrcum B. Cypliycum A. 8 feopeprizii B. xi. A. 34 eyp-
hycpe G. ciepliyepe A. 3 angenze G. onyeenge H. no rubr. in B.
36’ Ere zyp man B. 37man H. %8ceopliyene B. eyplirepe ZH.
o- BLAH np B. 41g B. ofeppeoppe hy H. 4% cyn B.
Siy Bo 4#pxcn B. Shic Madd. “man BH. 4/zeleze H.
wry BH. 4 not in B. “seo H.’-~ B. boce H. 5!’ man
B. hy-H. zehlatize B. zelasize H. hi B. gehie H. hy H.
54x, A, /pxezum hdum B. » pohe BH.


> Lambard, and after him Wheloc and Wilkins, here adds a pas-
sage which will be found below, ¢c.18. ‘And pec yy on cpic-ehcum
feo Zobum and mon nemyzne mon on perv ne ysylle’ The Latin
translations printed hereafter concur with our Anglo-Saxon mss, in
omitting it; but the copy in Brompton agrees with Lambard.


¢ For an illustration of this subject, see below, Ine, c. 14.
F 3


70 JCLFREDES DOMAS.


be *healppe pepe” bote. Ing ?[edel]-bopenpan pipmen pip
gelimpe- Speaxe “pio boc” be pam pepe:-


Be 5pUDR BJERNETTE.


xu. Ing 7mon oSper pudu bepned oppe heaped ®un-
alieredbne- fopgielde” ele zpeac tpeop mid ®-v- perth. 4 y1ppan
Uechpyle- “yie ypa “pela ypa “hiopa pie” mid -v- ™paenin-
gum: 4 -xxx- yeill/ co pice:


VfB GIF MAN AFYLLED BID ON LEMsENUG PEORTE.]


xu. “Inp mon odepne et zemenan peopce *6rrelle un-
zepealder- *azipe *%mon pam “meezum  tpeop- y hi hic
hebben exp *-xxx- nihta of *”pam lande- *oppe him 76 “ye
to yepe pone pudu aze:-


BE 31} DUMBERA MANNA DJCDUM.
xiv. “Ing mon “yie dumb oppe deap gebonen- p he ne
meze S(np] “yynna *onyeczzan ne *andeccan- bete se
pedep hip miydzeda:-


2 BE DAM “MONNUM DE BEFORAN 4! BISLOPE FEOPTAD.

xv. “Ing “mon beropan “zepcebipcepe sepeohte oppe psepne
“Szebpegde- mid “-L- yeitl y hund-ceontegum gebece, Lr
begopan odpum “biycepe oppe “ealdopmen pip gelampe- mid
hund-“ceontezum pelt. gebete:-


bs0TBE DAG LIF MAN OF MYRAN FOLAN ADRIFD ODDE
LU LeALF.]


xvi. Ing ’mon cu oppe *ycod-mypan ronycele- 4 yolan


V healrepe B. 2B. bopenpan Z. pir becc- H. 3pexe B. 4yeo HA.
‘-° B. 5Spute B.; but B. connects the two laws, and reads b. yp. b.
and zyp man, &c. SLyp B. 7man B.A. * unalypebne yopzylte B.
—popzilte H sp B. MyyppanB. Nele H. yy B.A. 8 yeola
B. momz H. 14/heopa sy B. pep-A. ' penezum B. peningum
HA. ‘ppicng yell. B. halp pund superseribed. 17 E.G.H. incorporate
this in the preceding law, omitting the rubric 8B. WE B.
20 man B.A. 2losealle B.H. @azyye B. man B.A. 24mazon
B. magum H. Shy HS pmcnz BA. 7 pam BH. 8 d0n A.


2 For an illustration of this subject, see below, Ine, c. 14.


THE LAWS OF KING ALFRED. 71


herself with sixty *hides, or forfeit half the ‘bot’ If this befall
a woman more nobly born, let the ‘bot’ increase according
to the ¢ wér.’


OF THE BURNING OF WOODS.

12, If a man burn or hew another’s wood without leave, let
him pay for every great tree with v. shillings, and afterwards
for each, let there be as many of them as may be, with v. pence;
and xxx. shillings as ‘ wite,


IF ONE MAN SLAY ANOTHER AT THEIR COMMON
WORK.

18. If at their common work one man slay another unwil-
fully, let the tree be given to the kindred, and let them have
it off the land within xxx. days; or let him take possession of
it who owns the wood.


OF DUMB MEN’S DEEDS.
14. If a man be born dumb or deaf, so that he cannot
acknowledge or confess his offences, let the father make ‘bot’
for his misdeeds.


OF THOSE MEN WHO FIGHT BEFORE A BISHOP.


15. If a man fight before an archbishop or draw his weapon,
let him make ‘bot’ with one hundred and fifty shillings. If
before another bishop or an ealdorman this happen, let him
make ‘ bot’ with one hundred shillings.


bIN CASE ANY ONE DRIVE OFF A MARE’S FOAL OR
A COW’S CALF.


16. If a man steal a cow or a stud-mare, and drive off the


add. 29" H. not in H. 3oumbpa BH. 2 Lye B. man Z.
ayy BH 8 BH 3%yynne HA. 387 ecyacan B. onpeczan MH.
38zeandeccan H. Be pam pe man beropan, &c. B. “ mannum H.
4lbircope H. biycopum &. “Ty; B. Sman BA. “enceb. B.
aencebirceope H. “zebnebe BA. 4S ppeizum B. 47 birceope
B. bycope H. 8ealtsopm. B. ealbopman #. “ceoncizum B.
50 F.G.H. incorporate this in the preceding law, omitting the rubric.
Ly B. man BH. Bycobmepe B.


b [Read rather, as in the text, Be pam zy man mypan folan of=
apmyd, &e.—-T.]


~~ A


72 JELFREDES DOMAS.


oppe cealr 16p-admure- *popzelde. mid Sreitt. y fa *modep be
Shiona peopde:-


6[BE DON DE ODRUM PIS »UNMALAN ODF JCSTED.]


xvu. Iny 7hpa oSpum hip unmagan odpeeyte- 4 he hine on
pepe peeycinge sopfepie- *zecpiope hine racney ye pe hine fede
°c hine hpa “hpelcey ?ce6:-


Be NUNNENAZ 13 ONFENLE.


xviu. “Ing hpa nunnan mid “hemebd-pinze- oppe “on hine
hpeezl oppe on hipe bpeoyt bucan hipe leare gez6- "pie hic
Becpy-bece- ypa pe “&p be *lepbum men fundon. *Inp be-
peddodu’ reemne “hie yoplicgze-” zip *hio sie ciphye-” md
-Lx-’ peill. gebece bam *bypzean- 4 $ pie on *ecpic-aehcum
byeo-zodum-+ 4 mon neemigne ‘mon’ on # ne “yelle. Inp
Shio ple yyx-hyndu-’ * hund-ceontaz’ yell. Szeyelle pam
Mbynzean. “Ing hio” *pe -xu- ’hyndu -c.xx- yerll. zebece
pam *bypzean:-


lorpabpiped H. 2 ronzylbe B. popzilbe A. 3ypixciz B. add., and
feopeprizgum superseribed B. yallinge H. +mobop B. 5 heopa B.H.
6B. 7° B. ®zecpypze B. zecpeoppe A. %2y7 Bo -B.
Uhpyleer BH. 2" B. Banodzenezum B. angenze AH. 4 Lyp B.
lhemed- BH. hemes &. 6 not in Bo Vyy BA. ‘8 cpboce B.
cpybore H. 197 B. angandlice A. add. %lepedum BH. 21’ Gyr
bepeddo B. bepeddod Zi 2/hi yophezge B. hy-HA. Bayp B.


a One of the Latin versions of Cnut’s Laws, and which has con-
siderable additions taken from various parts of the earlier collections,
includes this law as a doom of the Danish king, and gives the fol-
lowing free translation of it: ‘Si quis commendaverit hominem
alicui homini, non parenti, et commendatus perierit in ipsa com-
mendatione, et aliquis eum calumpniaverit quod dolositate sua peri-
erit, purget se.’ This approaches considerably nearer to the original
than the ‘Si quis alii sui quid imbecille commendet’ of the Latin
version. But ‘unmaga’ is capable of a more specific definition. In
an old German Gloss to Gregory’s Liber Pastoralis, written in the
tenth century, and published in an appendix to the Wiener Jahr-
biicher for January 1827, the Latin parvuli is rendered ‘ unmage.’
Another illustration of its meaning may be drawn from the old
Swedish law, where ‘omagi’ is interpreted pupillus, qui curatore eget,
and its converse ‘moghandi man’—adultus. ‘Then kallas moghandi


THE LAWS OF KING ALFRED. 73


foal or the calf, let him pay with a shilling, and for the mothers
according to their worth.


IN CASE ANY ONE COMMIT A*#MINOR TO ANOTHER’S
KEEPING.


17. If any one commit his infant to another’s keeping, and
he die during such keeping, let him who feeds him prove him-
self innocent of treachery, if any one accuse him of aught.


OF SEIZING HOLD OF A NUN,


18. If any one, with libidinous intent, seize a nun either by
her raiment or by her breast without her leave, let the ‘bot’
be twofold, as we have before ordained concerning a lay-
woman. Ifa betrothed woman commit adultery, if she be of
‘ceorlish’ degree, let ‘bot’ be made to the ‘byrgea’ with Lx.
shillings, and let it be in Plive stock, cattle goods, and in that
let no “human being be given: if she be of six-‘ hynde’ degree,
let him pay one hundred shillings to the ‘ byrgea:’ if she be of
xu. ‘hynde ’ degree, let him make ‘bot’ to the ‘ byrgea’ with
cxx. shillings.


24” heo yy ciephye H.“-ceoplire B. 2” syxciz B. 2 pe hic xe-
bymze [zebype H.] BH. %yy BH. %epyee B. 2% man
neningne man B. —nenmgne- HZ. %yylle BA. 3)” heo sy syx-
hynte H. ~-pix-hynde B. 3% c. H. 8 xezylle B. 34 pe hic co
zebypizge B.-hic gebypie H. 35’ Tiye heo B. yy BH. 37 hynde
B.H, pe hic co zebymze B.— hic zebyme A.


man sum tiugher ara ir.’ Upl. Z. Kong. B.c.10.6. ‘He is called
an adult who is twenty years old.’ The substance of the law is also
given in the custumal of Hen. I., where puerum takes the place of
*‘unmagan.’ ‘Si quis alterius puerum, qui vel ei commissus sit ad
educandum vel docendum occidat vel dormiens opprimat, nihilominus
reddat quam si virum adultum occidisset.’ c. 88.

b [*In good live stock.-——-P. It is to be observed, however, that
zodum is here not an adjective, but a substantive, forming a com-
pound noun with feo: it seems originally to have been a marginal
gloss to cpic-ehcum.— 7.]

¢ As the word ‘mon’ may be understood to mean a theow of
either sex, it has not been translated literally. In the Lex Frisionum
there is a similar classification of the slave with other live stock:
De rebus fugitivis: «Si servus aut ancilla, aut equus, aut bos, aut
quodlibet animal fugiens dominum suum,’ &c. Add. Sup. tit. viii. 1.


74 JELFREDES DOME.


1BE DAM 2MONNUM DE 2PEORA 4+pPyEPNA TO 5MON-
SLYPTE LJENAD.’

xix. ©Ing hpa hip ?peepner odpum fonlene $ he °mon md
dpylea- “hie moton “hie geromnian gi’ “ne pillad’ cto Spam
pepe. “Ing hn hie *geramnian [nellen-] zielbe ye par
pepney Yonlah pey pepeyr “pmddan deel 4 peer picey ppiddan
del. Ing’ he hine ®cyepian pille-’ $ he cto pepe lene
7yacn *ne pices $ he mov. *Inp ypeopd-“hpica odper
*monney pepn’ to feopmunge *ongd- oppe pnud *monney
andpeone: “hie hic *zerund begen **azipan ypa hre hpeden
hiopa &p *ongenge. /bucon *hopa hpxden’ &p pingode $ he
hiv angyloe healdan ne popyce:.


BE DAM BDE MUNELUM PEORA sFEOP 4%*BUTAN LEAFE’
% BEF SESTAD.


xx. %Iny mon odpey ®monney *munuce reoh “odpeeyte-
bucan pey “'munucey “hlaropder “lepnerye-” 4 hre him
“lomize- “pohize Iny yepe hic &p ahte:-


BE PREOSTA LEFEOPTE.
xxi. “Ing ppeoyt o8epne man “dyyled- peoppe “mon to


Vv Be pam pe heone pepna lenaé co manylhce B. 2 mannum G.A.
3hypa G. 4papn G. pepen &. pepna H. Smanyhhce G. man-
jlyhee H. SLyp B. 7pepne B. pepn H. but two letters have been
erased. ®lene B.H. 9man BH. hi B. hy H. 7h zeyamman
syp B. hy-zp Hh Ahi pyllas B. Bpam BA 4 Lyy
heo In ne & Inp i heo H. zerammen £.B.H. add. nellen
Wevlobe B. zlbe H. Wonlente B. per onlan H. '8 pmdda bell.
Ly B. 'cpypan H. “cpyppian pylle B. 2° pene fone and HM. add.


2 A similar law, scarcely the same, is preserved in the custumal of
Hen.I.: ¢ Si quelibet arma politori vel emundatori commissa sint ad
purgandum vel cuilibet ad servandum et de subito arripiantur ad
aliquid male agendum, justum est cui absoluta commissa sunt, ab-
soluta restituat, nisi forte custodiam eorum diffinitis prelocutionibus
abdicaret.’ c.87. The old Latin version gives the close of the law
in similar terms. In both, however, there is an omission of the
original ‘angylde. The translation has been framed on the autho-
rity of the Bavarian law, which made a man responsible for those
things only that were committed to his keeping, on condition of being
paid for the trust: « Si quis caballum aut quodlibet animalium genus
ad custodiendum mercede placita commendaverit, si perierit, ejusdem
meriti ille qui commendata suscepit, exsolvat; si tamen mercedem
fuerit pro custodia consecutus. Quod si etiam nulla placita mercede


THE LAWS OF KING ALFRED. 75


OF THOSE MEN WHO LEND THEIR WEAPONS FOR
MAN-SLAYING.


19. If any one lend his weapon to another that he may kill
some one therewith, they may join together if they will in the
‘wer’ If they will not join together, let him who lent the
weapon pay of the‘ wér’ a third part, and of the ‘ wite’ a third
part. If he be willing to justify himself, that he knew of no
ill-design in the loan; that he may do. If a sword-polisher
receive another man’s weapon to furbish, or a smith a man’s
material, let them both return it* sound as either of them may
have before received it: Punless either of them had before
agreed that he should not hold it ‘ angylde.’


OF THOSE WHO ENTRUST THEIR cCATTLE TO MONKS
WITHOUT LEAVE.


20. If a man entrust cattle to another man’s monk, without
leave of the monk’s Jord, and it escape from him, let him forfeit
it who before owned it.


OF THE FIGHTING OF PRIESTS.
21. If a priest kill another man, let all in his home that he


2Zlyacne B. 2nyce BA By B 4° B. % manner A.
‘—pepen B. %° #.H. undepfo B %manney BA. Bhi B.
hy H. %azyren B. agen H. %heona B.H. 31 unbdenpenze B.
32/ heopa hpedep B.H. *man H. add. “not in B. % bereeyrced
B.G. Ly B. 37man H. %manner H. 2% muneke B. “ be-
peyce B.’—lup hlapopder leage H. 41 muneker B. 4? aloper B.
superscribed. ‘8hleare B. “lone H. *#pohe B. 6 Ly B.
47" B. 48man H.


susceperat et mortuum esse probaverit, nec ille mercedem requirat
nec ab illo aliquid requiratur..... Eadem et de commodatis
forma servetur.’ Tit. xiv. c.1.


» (Mr. Price’s version of this portion of the Jaw is certainly not
borne out by the words of the original: it was as follows, ‘unless
either of them had before agreed that he should not keep it for a
requital.. The words, ‘that he should not hold it ‘ angylde,’ I
understand to mean, that, in case of loss or damage while in his
custody, he should not be liable for its ‘angylde,’ z.e. its price or
value.— TZ]


¢ This specific rendering of ‘eoh’ is founded on the phrase, ‘and
hic him lopize;’ which can be scarcely understood of any thing else
than living and moving things.


76 JELFREDES DOMAS.


thanda+ eall $ he *him *hdmer *bohve- 4 hine *biycep on-
hatige-’ ponne hine 5mon of Spam mynytpe ‘azipe- buvon
ye hlagopd fone pep fopepingian *pille:.


9 BE “ECOFOTES ANDETLAN.
xxu. Ing "mon on folcey zemote cyningey *’zepézan ™ze-
yppe “eofoc-” y hip eft geypican pille- ’zeyr&le on “pyhtpan
hand "zip he “mege. zip he ne ®meze- *polie® hip #an-
syloey- [4 fo co pam pite:-]


1him B. superseribed. 2m B.H. add. *bpohre B.H. 4bircop
H./~-onhabie B. iman H. Spem B. pem A. 7azyre B. ®pyille
B. %Be cyninezey zepesan pyre. B. Be peoger andeccan. HH.


a The mss. B. and H. read ‘hamey bpohce,’ which would be the
more intelligible text, if the verb ‘ bpingan’ could be supported by
other authority in such a regimen. The practice and the reason of
the rule are mentioned: ‘ Res vero si quas ecclesiz obtulerat, eas
sacerdos reddat, ut habeat unde se redimat.’ Wilk. Cone. 1.85. A
similar text with that of ms. £. was before the author of the old
Latin version, ‘et totum unde sibi mansionem emerat;’ and it is
indirectly countenanced by the language of the old Danish law:
“Wil och nogen mana faare i kloster som haffuer tofftt oc hus, tha
skal hana selge by-mendt thett med konningens wilge och skal fére
och giffue med seg rede penninghe till closter: If any man possessing
a toft and a house be desirous of entering a monastery, he shall,
with the king’s permission, sell it to persons in the town, and (then)
go and give the ready penny with himself to the monastery.’ King
Eric's Copenhagen Law, §'70. And unless it be a mere rhetorical
flourish, the historian of Ramsey alludes to the same doctrine in the
following passage: ‘ Decretum est ut si forte eorum quisquam contra
regulam et statuta majorum recalcitrans, turbulentus in congrega-
tione et inquietus inveniretur, tertize juxta regule sanctionem cor-
reptione nil emendatus a communione loci et consortio caterorum
exsors ipse fieret et alienus: nullum postmodum nisi emendationis
vitee commercio reversionis aditum mercaturus. 1.¢.57. [Mr. Price
had rendered the law thus, ‘If a priest, &c...... let him be
delivered up, and all wherewith he bought his residence, and let the
bishop unhood him: then let him be given up from the minster,’ &c.
But the old Latin version, which he followed, is not authorized by
the Saxon text; besides, how is a man to deliver up that which has
been disposed of in the purchase of a residence? The regimen of
bohce is not hamey, but pec in the line preceding. And how was
he first to be delivered up, and afterwards given up? Mr. Price was
apparently misled by the word ‘ano’ in the second line, which, as it
appears only in £. (which reads 3 eall $ he him, &c.) and is sub-
versive of the sense, I have not hesitated to suppress: hamey I take
to be an adverbial genitive, (like dezey, mihcey,) the domi of the
Latins. — Z.]


THE LAWS OF KING ALFRED. 77


had. *bought be delivered up, and let the bishop secularize him:
then let him be given up from the minster, unless the lord will
compound for his ¢ wer.’


OF » CONFESSION OF DEBT.


22. If any one at the folk-mote make declaration of a debt,
and afterwards wish to withdraw it, let him charge it on a
righter person, if he can; if he cannot, ‘let him forfeit his
‘ angylde,’ {and take possession of the ‘ wite.’]


Wiy B. UNman HX 2° BR. Weeeoyor uppe H. 14 peorde B.
5° B, Wmhcpan B.. Vay B. maze A. May B. 2 maze H
2pohze BH. 2anziloer H. 23 BH.


> There is a variation between the rubric and the text, which is
common to all the mss.: a circumstance, probably, arising from the
practice of committing this division of the transcriber’s duty to a
separate class of writers, known by the name of rubricatores. It
may be almost superfluous to remark, that these titles must have been
a work of later date than the first enactment of the laws. Generally
speaking, they are found unconnected with the text; and, when
given in conjunction with it, are almost always in a different hand-
writing. The mss. B. and Z. give ‘peor’ and ‘pyrde’ as equivalents
for ‘eofoc;’ and the Northumbrian Gloss, (Cott. ms. Nero, p. Iv.)
reads ‘eoruc’ (Matt. xviii. 25.) where Marshall’s text has ‘ycyle.’
The import of the term, therefore, may be divined, though it seems a
stranger to the kindred dialects.

¢ The purport of this seems to be, that if the plaintiff declined the
prosecution without charging some other person with the same of-
fence, he was to forfeit a sum equal to the value of the goods he had
lost ; and which sum he had either paid into court, or was pledged
by his borhs to make good, in case judgment was given for the
defendant. The ms. H. adds, that he might receive back again the
money he had deposited to meet the wite, or rather, perhaps, that he
might withhold the wite; for it does not appear that any money was
actually paid, but that pledges were given for the amount. The
object of the forfeiture seems to have been the prevention of secret
compositions between the parties to a suit. The Latin versions
translate ‘and yo to pam pice—et reddat witam preposito,’ which is
not authorized by our text. [Mr. Price had rendered eofoc by
‘theft,’ without, I think, sufficient authority: his translation was as
follows, ‘If a man at the fole-mote reveal a theft to the king’s
reeve, and afterwards he willeth to conceal it, let him fix it on a
righter person, if he can: if he cannot, let him lose his angylde, and
take to the wite. The clause within brackets I believe to be incom-
plete, and that we should read 4 fo se zepefa co pam pite, ‘ and let
the reeve (as the king’s officer) take possession of the wite.’ This
reading will account. for the Latin version, ‘et reddat witam pre-
posito.’— 7]


78 JELFREDES DOMAS.


Be DUNDES SLITE.

xx. ‘Ing hund *mon coyhce oppe Sabice- ac yopman
4mipd&bde “zeyelle -vi- yell. Szip he him mete ‘yelle. xc
Seepcepan *ceppe’ «xu yell. ac pmddan xxx: pal Inp
zt “piyya mipdzeda “hpelcene ye hund loyize- za peor boc
“hpeedene yond. Iny ye hund ma mipdeda zepypce- 4 he hine
hebbe- bete be fullan pepe- ypa %dolz-bove ypa’ he pypce:-


BE VW NIETENA MISDSEDUM.
_ xxiv. *Ing Yneac mon gepundige- peoppe $ neat to
2honda oppe rope pinzie:-


BE 2CEORLES MENNENES 23 NIED-psEMEDE.

xxv. Ing *mon ceopley’ mennen to *5ned-haembe ze-
ppeaved. mid *.v- peitl. zebece pam *’ceople- y *-1x- pelt. co
pice. Ing *peopmon peopne to *neb-hambe senede-’ bete
mid hiy * eopende:-


BE 3 UNLEPINTREDES PIFMANNES’ #4 NED-psEMDE.
xxvi. Ing mon ungepincpedne pipmon’ to *nied-haembe
seppearigze- "jie $ ypa pey Szepinctpedan *monnery bov:-


[BE M/ELLEASUM MONNUM.]

xxvil. “Inp ‘'peedbpen-mega “megleay mon’ gereohte- 4
mon Ofyled- 4 ponne “zy “Lhe] “medpen-mezay’ hebbe-
‘7z1elden pa pep pepey ppiddan del. “[ppiddsan deel pa ze-
gyloan-’ “yon ’pmddan del/ he fleo. Ing he medpen-
5Imeezay nage-’ “zielban pa *zegildan healpne- *yon healpne
he fleo:-


Gy B. 2man BA. 3° BH 4° B. Szerylle BH. Sxyp B.
7yylle BA. pam odpan cyppe B. %eppe H. Weippe A. add.
ULy B. 2pypaB. ihpyleepe BH. Mhyedepe H. 15 solh- A.
’-oppe spa hpet B. MW zepypce BH. Wnycena BH. 8 Lyf B.
19 manney-neat H. %man B. *handa BH. = ciopler H. 23 nyo-
hemete B.H. %4man B.’-ciopley H. % nyb-hemede B.H. 26 pip
B. *Voople HH. %yyhag B. Ly B. %-man BH. 3! nyo-
hemebe gzenyse B.-—zembe A. 2hyse A. Bunzepinepader G.


a [The rubric to this law, which I have supplied from Lambarde,
who undoubtedly found it in his ms., is wanting in all the other mss.


—_—


THE LAWS OF KING ALFRED. 79


OF TEARING BY A DOG.

23. If a dog tear or bite a man, for the first misdeed let
vi. shillings be paid; if he [the owner] give him food; for the
second time, xu. shillings; for the third, xxx. shillings. If,
after any of these misdeeds, the dog escape, let this ¢ bot’ never-
theless take place. If the dog do more misdeeds, and he keep
him; let him make ‘bot’ according to the full ‘ wér, as well
wound.‘ bot’ as for whatever he may do.


OF MISDEEDS BY CATTLE.


24. If a neat wound a man, let the neat be delivered up or
compounded for.


OF THE RAPE OF A ‘CEORL’S’ FEMALE SLAVE.


25. If a man commit a rape upon a ‘ceorl’s’ female slave,
let him make ‘bot’ to the ‘ceorl’ with v. shillings, and let the
‘wite’ be Lx. shillings. If a male ‘theow’ commit a rape upon
a female ‘ theow,’ let him make ‘bot’ with his testicles.


OF THE RAPE OF A WOMAN UNDER AGE.


26. If a man commit a rape upon a woman under age, let the
* bot’ be as that of a full-aged person.


a[OF KINLESS MEN.]

27. If a man, kinless of paternal relatives, fight, and slay a
man, and then if he have maternal relatives, let them pay a
third of the ‘wér;’ his guild-brethren a third part; for a >third
let him flee. If he have no maternal relatives, let his guild-
brethren pay half, for half let him flee.


‘ cynzepincpebey manner H. %4yleze B. ylezer G. nyd-hemebde H,
35/ man unzepintpebne piyman B.H. %snyshemete BA. Wyy BH.
88 zepmcpedey B. 8manner BH “Ly B. Ai peddspen- Z.
47 meizlear man B. 4man B.A. “4zyp B. © B.A. 468 meddpen
H.’-mazay B. “zylben B. given H. 4 BM. 8 H, Te
B. 5mazer H./ mazar nebbe B. 52 zylben B. zilben H. 3 ze-
zylben B. gegilben H. 4and H. add.


b In like manner, the old Danish Jaw banished the offender for
garth-gang, attended by homicide: ‘Ok alt thet hinhorer til
[hanum) ther drepet hauer, uten jorth, thet were innen konungs


80 JELFREDES DOMAS.


1 BE SpA GERADES 2MONNES SLELE/
xxvitt. Ing *mon spa gepadne *mon ofylea+ “zip he ‘mezay
nage °gielbe mon’ 7healpne *cyninge-’ healpne * pam ze-
gubdan:-


2BE TPY-PYNDU® MEN JET > PLOD-' SLYpPTe.


xxix. * Ing %mon tpy-hyndne’ “mon unyynmgne mid hloSe
opylea- *gielde ye’ peer “ylezey andecca “ypie pep y pice. 4
®eexhpele mon’ fe on “[pem] *yiSe pape *zerelle -xxx-’ yertt.
to *hlod-bote:-


BE 38YX-PYNDUM MEN.


xxx. Ing hit “pie yyx-hynde’ >mon- zle mon co hlod-
bore *7-Lx- yell. 4 ye plaza pep 4 pul pice:


BE 30 XII. PYNDUM MEN.

xxxi. ‘Inp he *yie tcpelp-hynde%. ale *hiopa hund-cpelf-
viz pelt. [4] ye ylaga pen y pice. Ing hlod fy gedd- 4 ere
56 oSypemian pille-” *’c10 [man] *hie ealle- 4 ponne ealle “yop-
gielden pone “pep “zemzenum “hondum. ¥ ealle “an pice.”
ypa co bam pepe ** belimpe:.


46Be FOLL-47 LEASUNLE LEpYRPTUM.


xxx. In¢ “mon folc-learunge zepypce- 4 “hio on hine
©50zenerp peopde- mid nanum leohtpan pinge gebece fonne him


lno rubric in B. 2 manner slezge H. 3man BH. 4ayp B. 5 ma-
zay B.H. &zyloe man B. zlsbe-H. *” healre kyninge B. 8 pepe
pem H. add. %pem H. Wzezyloan BH. 'yhhce BAL 12 Gyr
B. Wman H.’-cpyhyntbe Bo Mman BH. zyloe B./ aloe
yepe H. ylezer BD. Vyy BH. ele B./ wzhpyle pepa A.
19 B.H, %Myyse BH. 7 zerylle ppreviz B. 22lod- B.  Bpix- B.
yy H./—-pix- B. %man BH. notin B. man H. 7 yeopepziz


wald, ok han fly sielf frithlés. And all that belongs to him who
struck the mortal blow—except his land—shall be forfeit to the
king, and let him flee frithless.’ Eric's Zealand Law, uu. ¢.3. In the
custumal of Hen. I. this passage is given, ‘pro dimidia fugiat vel
componat. The composition, though not expressed in the A.S. text,
might have been understood.

a In B, and HX, this and cc. 30. 31. follow ec. 24,


THE LAWS OF KING ALFRED. 81


OF SLAYING A MAN THUS CIRCUMSTANCED.


28. If a man kill a man thus circumstanced, if he have no
relatives, let half be paid to the king; half to his guild-
brethren.


aOF >*HLOTH’-SLAYING OF A ‘TWY-HYNDE’ MAN.


29. If any one with a ‘hloth’ slay an unoffending ‘twy-
hynde’ man, let him who acknowledges the death-blow pay
‘wer’ and ‘wite;’ and let every one who was of the party pay
xxx, shillings as ‘ hloth-bot.’


OF A SIX--HYNDE’ MAN.


80. If it be a six-‘hynde’ man, let every man pay Lx. shil-
lings as ‘hloth-bot;’ and the slayer, ‘wér’ and full ¢ wite.’


OF A TWELVE-‘HYNDE’ MAN.


81. If he be a twelve-‘hynde’ man, let each of them pay
one hundred and twenty shillings; and the slayer, ‘ wér’ and
‘wite.” Ifa ‘hloth’ do this, and afterwards will deny it on
oath, let them all be accused, and Jet them then all pay the
‘wér’ in common; and all, one ‘ wite,’ such as shall belong to
the ‘wér,


OF THOSE WHO COMMIT ‘ FOLK-LEASING,


82. If a man commit ‘folk-leasing,’ and it be fixed upon
him, with no lighter thing let him make ‘bot’ than that his


B. pene. B. %yullpice H. 2% epylp-hendum B. 4 Ly B.
2;ry BH. 8man B.add. *heopa B.A. 3 BH. 36 xeeypeman
pylle B. ceo BH. %H. 9hi BH. “yonzyloen B. yopzilben
HH. “ipan H. 42zemene B. *handum BH. 44° H. “8 co- B.
46 no rubr. in B. 47leayunzga G. “man H. “heo BH. zener
B. zepeer HH.


> According to Ine’s laws, c.13., a hloth might consist of any
number of men ‘ from seven to five and thirty.’

¢ The context may be said to have furnished the translation of this
passage. Our vocabularies supply only a few remote analogies in
illustration of zeperp and gepez; but these concur in supporting the
version given.


82 JCLFREDES DOMAS.


?mon aceopre pa tungzan ?6y- $ "me mon na’ undeoppan
*peonBe moye *lépan ponne ®hie mon be 7pam pene ®zeeah-
vige:?


Be GOD- BORLUM.


xxxmi. Ing hpa’ oSepne >z0b-bopger oncunne- 4 “tion
pille-’” } he *hpelene ne gelzycte papa pe he him. gerealde-
azire pone fope-ad on reopen “cipicum. ¥ ye odep- “zip he
hine tpeopian "pille- *in «xm-’ crpicum d0 “he peev:-


BE 20 LIEPE-MANNUM.


xxxiv. Efc 1p *ciepe-monnum gepeht- *pa men pe *Shie
up mo*™him lebden gebpengzen’ befopan “kyningey gepefan
on yole-zemote- 4 °*zenecce hu *7maneza papa pien-” y *hie
nimen pa men *?mid “him pe **hie meegen’ eft to pole-zemocve
4829 pyhte” bpengan. 4 *ponne him’ peaprf “*y1e ma manna’
fp md *hm to “hebbanne Yon *hiopa fope-” gecyde
9rymle-  ypa “him peapp “'y1e- mn’ Zemovey “zepic-

syne Tye OES: FF TF YT $ y Sep
neyye cyningey geperan:-


Iman H. 2° BE. Sheo B. hy”. 4pupte B. 57 B. alyyan
Hi. Sheo H.°B. 7peam HH.” B. 8xzeehuze B. 9-bophzum B.
7 Typ 7B. Uceon A. /-pylle B. 'hpilene B. hpylene H.
Bazye B. Meypicum B. aye B. 'cpeopan MH. 177 pylle innan
cpelr B. Won H. Wnot in H. %cypmannum B. cypemannum
G.H. %eypemannum BH. pac Bi add. 3m B. hy A.


@ In the time of Fleta, this offence was punished with imprison-
ment at the pleasure of the court: ‘Sunt etiam quedam atroces
injuriee que prisonam voluntariam inducunt, sicut de inventoribus
malorum rumorum, unde pux possit exterminari. Lib. 11. ¢. 1.

b This species of pledge seems to be thus spoken of in the Welsh
Laws: ‘If a person pledge his baptismal vow for a debt, let him
either pay or deny it, as the law requires. The church and the
king ought to enforce the baptismal vow; for God is accepted in
lieu of a security. Wotton, p.114. The practice seems not to have
been wholly obsolete in the time of Fleta: ‘Inter quos (sc. merca-
tores) vero habetur talis consuetudo, quod si tallia proferatur contra
talliam, allegando per eam solutionem rei petite, si ex parte adversa
dedicatur, tune considerandum erit quod ille, cujus tallia dedicitur
eam probet hoc modo; quod adeat novem ecclesias, et super novem
altaria juret, quod talis querens talliam dedictam sibi fecit nomine
acquietantiz debiti in ea contenti, sic ipsum Deus adjuvet et hee
sancta. Lib. 11. ¢.63.

A better understanding of the subject matter might, perhaps,


THE LAWS OF KING ALFRED. 83


tongue be cut out; which must not be redeemed at any cheaper
rate than it is estimated at according to his ‘ wer.’*


OF ‘GOD-BORHS.’


83. If any one accuse another on account of a » ¢ god-borh,’
and wish to make plaint that he has not fulfilled any of those
[‘ god-borhs’] which he gave him, let him make his ‘ fore-ath’
in four churches; and if the other will prove himself innocent,
let him do so in xu. churches.


OF CHAPMEN.


34. It is also directed to chapmen, that they bring the men
whom they take up with them before the king’s reeve at the
folk-mote, and let it be stated how many of them there are;
and let them take such men with them as they may be able
afterwards to present for justice at the folk-mote; and when
they have need of more men up with them on their journey,
let them always declare it, as often as their need may be, to the
king’s reeve, in presence of the ‘gemot.’


24/ heom lesan (or lebad) zebpingan B. -lebdan zebpinze H. 25 cy-
monger BH. %zepecca B. 27/monte pepa syn B. monze— A
hn B. hy H. up H. add. %heom B. 3 uz mazon B. hy—
A. 3% not in B. 3 ponon heom B. %4y;y H./-B. *heom B.
36habbanne B.H. %7co H. Sheopa H.’-~B. *yymble BH.
YWnotin B. “yy B./-on H. “@zeprenyysye B.


enable us to translate ‘pac he hpelene ne geleyce papa pe he him
xeyealde,’ thus: that he has not returned him any of those things
which he delivered to him; or, that he has not fulfilled one of those
things on account of which he gave him the god-borh. [The
latter of these interpretations seems to me a closer approximation to
the sense of the original than either the one immediately preceding,
or that which had been given in the text, which I subjoin, that the
reader, amid such a variety, may be enabled to follow his own judg-
ment, viz., ‘If any one accuse another of god-borh, and willeth to
make plaint that he has not delivered to him any of those things
which he had sold him,’ &e. My predecessor had apparently omitted
to notice that hpelene is a masculine singular and the relative to
y06-boph.— 7]

¢ [Supply ‘man’ after xepeece. A precisely similar ellipsis occurs
at c.41.—Z.]

4 bring to right, i.e. produce and present them at the folc-mote,
oF any other court, to answer any charge or suit brought against
them.


84 JELFREDES DOMAS.


Be 'LIERLISLES 7MONNES BYNDELLAN’


xxxv. Ing Smon ‘eiepliyene Smon gebinde Sunyynmigne-
gebeve mid7-x: yertt. ®Iny hine °mon beypinge- mid ?cpentigz
youll. zebece. “Ing he hine on “hengenne alecgze- mid
M.xxx- Syoilt. gebece. “Ing he hine on “biymop to **ho-
molan beyeipe-’ mid -x- peilt. zebece. “Ing he hine to
ppeoycte *bercipe unbundenne- mid -xxx- yeilt. gebeve. Ing
he pone beapd *op-aycipe- mid -xx- pelt. zebece. * Ing he
hine gebinbde- 4 ponne to ppeoyte *beycipe- mid 4 -Lx- yet.
Sebete:-


BE SPERES 25 GFEMELEASNESSE.

xxxvi. *€ac ap gzepunden- gip mon *harad ypepe orep
%eaxle- y hme mon on-aynayed- gielde” pone pep *butan
pice. Ing befopan eagum “apnaye- *zielde pone pep. *Inp
hine *mon ‘tio’ Zepealdey on pepe dade- *zecpiopie hine be
bam pice. y md py $ pice Parelle. °4°[And piy beo] “zr
ye opd #yie “[ppeo fingpe] “*ugop fonne “hindepeapd yeeare.
Szp “he” “yen “bi gelic-” ond 4 hindepeapd yceaye- $ “sie
butan pleo:.


1 ceophycey B. cyphycer G. 2 manner G.7-bindelan B. — byndelan
H. 3man H. 4ceophyene B. 5 man H. Sunyeyltizgne B. 7eyn B.
SLyp B. 9man BA Mxx. HW. ULyp B. Whenzene B. 13 ze-
bpinge B.A. Mppreaz B. yelhnza ZH Ly B. '7 byymep A
18 homelan beycype BH. Lye B. 2 bercype B.A. 2! orarcepe
B. ogaycype H. 2 Ly B. Bbercype BA. 4pixciz B. peopepuy
superscribed. 5 zymelearce B. zymeleayneyye G.H. 26 Lye B.


8 ¢A person with his head shaved,’ of which the disgrace was, that
it formed a part of an ignominious punishment inflicted upon slaves,
and offenders of the worst class. Vid. Du Cange in voce. ‘ Decalvare’
Sees publice virgis czsus et sub inhonesto ludibrio turpiter
Se decalvatus. Pet. Damian. Lib. 1. Epist.10. See also
Haltaus under the word ‘ Harscar:’ ‘Si is qui incusatur se excusare
aut expurgare nequiverit, 111. solidos componat et persolvat; et si
noluerit persolvere, crinibus turpiter abscissis, virgis excorietur.’
dipl. an.1608, A shaved head was also a mark of a madman or a
fool.

> This term is used in a legal sense. Haltaus defines it: ¢ est dis-
quirendo cogitandoque in causa quid verum, justum et zquum cog-
noscere.’ p. 458.

¢ The addition from B. seems necessary to a modern reader, and
that from H. is supported by all the Latin versions: ‘si acutum
lancee sit altius tribus digitis quam cuspis.’ The same law is more


THE LAWS OF KING ALFRED. 85.


OF BINDING A ‘CEORLISH’ MAN.


85. If any one bind an unoffending ‘ceorlish’ man, let him
make * bot’ with x. shillings. If any one scourge him, let him
make ‘bot’ with twenty shillings. If he lay him in prison, let
him make ‘ bot’ with xxx. shillings. If, in insult, he shave his
head like a ?‘homola,’ let him make ‘bot’ with x. shillings.
If, without binding him, he shave him like a priest, let him
make ‘ bot’ with xxx. shillings. If he shave off his beard, let
him make ‘ bot’ with xx. shillings. If he bind him, and then
shave him like a priest, let him make ‘bot’ with ux. shillings.


OF HEEDLESSNESS WITH A SPEAR.


86. It is moreover decreed: if a man have a spear over his
shoulder, and any man stake himself upon it, that he pay the
¢ wer’ without the ‘wite. If he stake himself before his face,
let him pay the ‘wer. If he be accused of wilfulness in the
deed, let him clear himself according to the ‘wite; and with
that let the ‘wite’ abate. ° And let this be if the point be
three fingers higher than the ‘hindmost part of the shaft; if
they be both on a level, the point and the hindmost part of the
shaft, be that without danger.


27man H. hed B. *%eaxlen H. 3 man onyneyed zylbe-B.
—onarnered nlbe A. 3%ibucon B. Bamneye H. notin B. aloe
BH. *4Lyp B. 35/man ceo B.H. %zecpeoppe B. zecpype H.
7paem H. 8pam B. BVarylle BH OB. Agy B. @yy BA.
83H, “upon H “Aca B. “hy Vpn BA 8° AM
‘ bura zelice B. “yy BH.


fully given in the laws of Hen.I. c. 88. ¢ Si quis in arma cujusdam
irruat vel incidat ut inde moriatur, et ejus solius culpa compareat,
ita sit; tamen ille cujus arma erant non indiscrete, ea suscipiat.
Tractandum vero est in agendis hujusmodi de modo portationis vel
positionis armorum, de loco positionis, de eo qui posuit, quid quo-
modo contigerit. Si quis lanceam ferat super humerum, et inde
quis occidatur, reddatur pretio nativitatis ejus sine wyta. Si acu-
men lance ante oculos portitoris sit, weram mortui reddat, et si
impossibilitatis accusetur, in eo pernegare studeat secundum pretium
wyte et ita remaneat. Si vero cuspis et acies lance pari sustenta-
tione respondeant, sine culpa sit.’ The Welsh laws give instructions
for the manner in which the apparitor is to carry his spear: his
spear must be the length of three cubits; two parts of it must
extend behind him, and one before, carrying it on his shoulder.
Wotton, p. 62.

4 [Literally, Aindward shaft; a similar idiom to which occurs in


86 JELFREDES DOOAS.


Be BOLD-LETALE.


xxxvi. 7Iny *mon pille’ of *bold-getale in odep *bold-zereel
hlayond yecan- 406 md Spey Sealdopmonney ’zeprcneyye
pe he ®&p in’ hip yeipe folzode. °Ing he hic bucan hiy
"zeprcneyye d0- ™“zeyelle yepe Shine to men ™reonpmie
5.c.xx- yell. to pice. Dele he “hpadpe $ heal ’cyninge
in Mpa yepe pe he &n *yolzode- healp *41n pa pe he
oncymd. *Inp he hp&c *ypla zedon *haebbe pep he ép
per: bece $ yepe hine **ponne to men *“ongo- 4 cyninge
*8.c.xx- yeitl. to pice:


Be ®DON DE 2MON BEFORAN 31EXLDORMEN ON
32 TEMOTE 3 LEFEOPTE.


xxxvil. Ing ®mon beropan cyningey “ealdopmen on Ze-
mote *zereohte- bece pen 4 pitee ypa hic Spyhe *yre- 4
befopan pam “.c.xx+ yertl pam “‘ealdopmen co pice.’ Ing
he “yole-gemot mid peepney bpyde apeepe- pam “ealdopmen
hund-cpelpag’ yat. “co price’ “Ing “pier hpec beropan
cyningey ““ealbopmonney >zimgpan gelimpe- oppe cyninger
ppeoyve: “xxx. “yeith. to pice:.


BE °LIERLISLES 51 MONNES 52 FLET-GEFEOPTE.
xxxix. Inp Shpa on “ciephycey monney’ flecvce geyeohte-


V Tyr man pylle B. 2man A. 3bologecele B. 4° H. snot in B.
6ealbepmanney H. 7zepicnyyye B. “on A. 9p B. 1 bucon
B. Uzeprenyyye B. 2zerylle BA. Whyne H. Myeopmye A.
15 hhund-cpelpuiz GB. 'Shpedene H pam B.H. add. '8on HH.
pa B. %rolzatey H. 2lon H. 22ponne B.H.add. %Lyz
B. *co yyele B. co yyleH. *heps BH. 2% ponnon B. 27 un-
depro B. ono H. unben superscribed. 8hunbd-cpelpciz B. 79 pam
B.G.H, man G.H. not in B. laltop-m B. ealbepmen A.
2° H, 8yeohte BAL 4Lyy B. man H. Bealbepmen A,


‘The Spell,’ where neopepeand is used for the lower part, and
unnepepd for the inner part. See Rask’s A.-S. Gram. p. 189. and
Analecta A.-Sax. p. 179.—T.]

2 The books give us no instruction as to the meaning of this
obscure term. Elfric (76) in his Glossary renders centurias by
‘hunopebu, vel heapay, vel zevalu;’ and another glossary, quoted by
Lye, makes zecalu equal to éribus. Judging, therefore, from the
import of the words taken singly, we may, perhaps, understand the
law as stating that, If a person who had commended himself, wished
to take his name off the manor-roll of one lord, &c.

> The Latin version of Cnut’s laws, already referred to, also adopts


THE.LAWS OF KING ALFRED. 87


OF A ‘BOLD-GETAL.’


37. If a man from one ‘ bold-getel’ wish to seek a lord in
another * ‘ bold-geteel,’ let him do it with the knowledge of the
‘ealdorman’ whom he before followed in his shire. If he do it
without his knowledge, let him who entertains him as his man
pay cxx. shillings as ‘wite;’ let him, however, deal the half to
the king in the shire where he before followed, half in that into
which he comes. If he has done any wrong where he before
was, let him make ‘bot’ for it who has then received him as his
man ; and to the king cxx. shillings as ‘ wite’


IN CASE A MAN FIGHT BEFORE AN «EALDORMAN’
IN THE ‘«GEMOT,


88. If a man fight before a king’s ‘ealdorman’ in the
‘gemot,’ let him make ‘bot’ with ‘wér’ and ‘wite, as it may
be right; and before this, cxx. shillings to the ‘ ealdorman’ as
‘wite.” If he disturb the folk-mote by drawing his weapon,
one hundred and twenty shillings to the ¢ ealdorman’ as ¢ wite.’
If aught of this happen before a king’s ‘ ealdorman’s’ junior,
or a king’s priest, xxx. shillings as ¢ wite.’


OF FIGHTING IN A ‘CEORLISH’ MAN’S ‘ FLET,
39. If any one fight in a ‘ceorlish’ man’s ‘flet,’ with six


37 reohead B. B8mhe B. Pry BA 40 hunb-cpelperz B. 4 eal-
dopi 4 hund-cpelperz pertt.co pice B. but this repetition of the fine
has been occasioned by the negligence of the scribe, who has omitted the
whole of the following sentence, except these concluding words. ealbep-
men H. “ryolcer- H. /ealbepmen c.xx. H. 4” not in A.
SLyp B. Spyrer B. pyyey ZH 47 ealbepmanner H. 4 ppicxg B.
49 yellmzay H.  cyplircer BG. I manner B.G.H. 5? lecc- BiXd..
53° B. 54 ceopliycey manner B. cioplipces — A.


this law; and renders the passage in the text, ‘si autem quid tale
factum fuerit ante vice-comitem.’ There is some reason for sus-
pecting that the author of this version was not an Englishman; and
in using the term ‘ vice-comitem’ he may have followed the rule of
the French law, where the vice-comes seems to have been the de-
puty of the count. In England, the gerefa was the king’s officer:
and the term ‘zinzpa’ (junior) seems therefore to be applied in its
usual acceptation, and intended of an officer sitting for the ealdor-
man. Thus, too, the king’s priest, it is presumed, sat and officiated
for the bishop.


a4


88 JELFREDES DOMAS.


md *pyx yatt. zgebece pam *ceople. Iny *hé pepne zebpede
y ‘no feohte- Srie be healrum pam. °Inp yyx’-hyndum
7piyya ®hpedep gelimpe- *pmerealdlice “[apire "be pepe
Peienhycan bote. ™-xu--hyndum men- tpyfealdlice] be per
Mpyx-hyndan bote:-


[BE BURD-BRYLE.]


xL. Lyninger “bupg-bpyce bid 7-c.xx- yeilt. /Epcebiy-
cepey- hunt-mgontiz’” yeilt. Odper “bipcepey- y¥ *ealdop-
monney -Lx-’ yertl %Tpelp-hyndey * monney -xxx-’ pitt.
*8yx-hyndeyr *monnep «xv+ yalt.” Leopler *edop-bpyce -v-”
yout. Iny *piyyer hpeec zelimpe * penden rypd uve *yi1e- oppe
in *Lencten-peycen-’ hic pie epy-boce. Ing *mon *in
Lencten’ *hahz “pyhe %in yolce *butan leape *alecgze-
gebere mid ®.c.xx- yeilt. :.


BE %» BOL-LONDUM.


x1. Se “mon yepe boc-land hebbe y him “hip mazay
Jeapden-’ ponne reccon pe $ he hit ne “moyte yellan’ of iy
meg-bupgze- zip pep bid “zeppic oppe “*Zepicner P hic papa
manna “yopbod pepe pe hic on ppuman “Zeycpindon- 4 papa
pe hrc him yealdon- $ he ypa ne move- 4 } fonne- on cy-
mngey “74 on biycoper Zepicneyre ’gepecce- beropan hi


8 meegum :-


Inx Bovi H. 2ea0ple H 3° BRB. tne BH fF yy BA. 6 Typ
px B. 7men B.H. add. *%hpedep B. 9 ppyfealdhice B. pprzeald-
lice H WBA B. Ube B. Meyphycan B. Wepelp B.
Mpix-hyndum B. no rubric in E.G.H. and incorporated in the
foregoing law. \6buph-bpyce B. buph-bpice H. 1 hund-cpelpuz B.
187 enceb. hund-nizonti B. encebircoper H. 'biyceopey B. biycoper
Hf.  ealbopmanney yyxciz B. ealbepmannes pxaz HM. 2 xm. A.
22/ manney ppieag B.H. 26x B. 24 manner H. /— pipcyne yeyit. B.


a All the mss. agree in this reading. Lambatd, and after him
Wheloc and Wilkins, read ‘hahz pyc,’ which is supported by all the
Latin mss. ‘Si quis in Quadragesima sanctum velum in populo
sine recto deponat emendet c. viginti sol.’ This, if the true reading,
would refer to the ‘velum Quadragesimale,’ which during Lent was
hung before the altar while the Liturgy was read. Du Cange,
Velum. It is, however, difficult to resist the united authority of all
the Anglo-Saxon texts, notwithstanding the obscurity which, by


THE LAWS OF KING ALFRED. 89


shillings Jet him make ‘bot’ to the ‘ceorl.’ If he draw his
weapon and fight not, let it be half of that. If, however, either
of these happen to a six-‘hynde’ man, let it increase three-
foldly, according to the ‘ceorlish’ ‘bot:’ to a twelve-‘ hynde’
man, twofoldly, according to the six-‘hynde’s’ ¢ bot.’


OF ‘BURH-BRYCE,’


40. The king’s ‘burh-bryce’ shall be cxx. shillings. An
archbishop’s, ninety shillings. Any other bishop’s, and an
‘ealdorman’s,’ Lx. shillings. A twelve-‘hynde’ man’s, xxx.
shillings. A six-‘hynde’ man’s, xv. shillings. A ‘ceorl’s edor-
bryce,’ v. shillings. If aught of this happen when the ‘ fyrd’ is
out, or in Lent fast, let the ‘bot’ be twofold. If any one in
Lent put down holy law among the people without leave, let
him make ‘ bot’ with cxx. shillings.


OF «BOC-LANDS,


41. The man who has ‘ boc-land,’ and which his kindred left
him, then ordain we that he must not give it from his ‘meg-
burg,’ if there be writing or witness that it ‘was forbidden by
those men who at first acquired it, and by those who gave it
to him, that he should doso; and then let that be declared in
the presence of the king and of the bishop, before his kins-
men.


2 ebonbpice H. “eobepbpyce pp B. pyre A. 27 ponne BH.
8ry BH. 7/ Lenccene B. Lenzcen H. %yy MH. 4) cpiboce B.
22man H. 338 on Lengecen B.—Lengcen H. %4mihe B. 3% on A.
3% bucon B. 3%8alecze BH. 38hunbd-cpelprigum B.H. 39 béclanbe
B.: this rubric stands as the catch-word in B., but the following leaf
is wanting. boclanbum H. man ZZ. 4!/ ponne hip ylépan lepban
H. 4 moc syllan H. Bzeppice H. “zepicneyre H. * podbob A.
46 zeycpi-ndon H. orig.ie. “ze H. 48mazum


acknowledging it, is thus made to attend the subject. The ‘hahz
pyhc” may refer to the canons of the church, which prohibit alk
games, festivals, christenings, marriages, &c. during this sacred sea-
son; and the ‘ putting down of holy law’ may have meant the per-
mission of such ceremonies or pastimes, and any neglect of the rigid
fast enjoined. See Bingham’s Origines, xxt., 1, 22, 23.


> [That is zepecce man; see c. 34.—7Z.]


90 JELFREDES DOMAS.


BE 1 FEPDUM.

XLII. Gac pe beodad- ye *mon pepe hiy Szepan ham-‘yiv-
endne pice- $ he ne feohte appam pe he him pyhtey bidde.
Iny he megney hebbe } he hiy *zeran bepiide-” 4 ®inne be-
yrete- gehealde hine 7-vir- niht mne- 4 *hine Gn ne feohte- Zig
he inne Zefolian puille. 4 ponne °ymb -vu-” niht- gzip he pille
%on hand gan- 4 “[my] @pepenu yellan-’ zehealde “hine
*xxx- nthta gerundne- 4 hine hiy *mazum gebobie’ 4 lnp
yniondum. Ing he ponne “eimcan geiepne- ye” ponne be
pepe “cipican ape-’ ypa pe ep buran cpedon. Inp he ponne
peey “megeney ne hebbe’ } he hine inne beprcce™- pide vo
bam ealdopmen-’ *"[4] bidde hine yulcumey. Inp he him
*rulcumian ne pille-’ ise to cyningze ep he feohte. Cac
8ypelce gp *mon becume’ on hiy **zeran- y he hine *&p
ham-feycne ne pite- zip he pille np peepen *yellan- hine
*8mon gehealde -xxx- mihta- 4 hine hiy ppeondum gecyde- gy
he ne pille ny pzepenu yellan- ponne mot he feohtan on hine.
Ing he pille on *hond gan-’ y ny “peepenu yellan- y *hpa
ofep } on “him feohte- “zrelde ypa pep ypa “punde- ypa Phe
Zepynce: 4 “pice*- 4 hebbe hy maz fyoppophc. Cac pe cpedad
~ mon mote mid hip hlagopde feohtan *onpige’- gzip “mon
on pone hlaropd “piohte. ypa mde ye hlapopd mid “py men
feohcan. JCpcep pepe ilcan piyan “mon mov feohtan md
Iny “zebopene mege- zip “hine mon’ on poh “onfeohtad-
bucon’ pid np hlapopde- $ pe ne “herad. And “mon mort
feohtan oppize- gzip he gemeced odepne “ac hiy axpum pire
“becynedum dupum oppe undep anpe pedn- oppe “av hip
dehtep sepum-bopenpe- oppe “ac Iny ypiycep °Leepum]-bop-
enpe> oppe “zt ny “'meddep pe pape to zpum pire fopgifen
hiy feeden:-


1zereohte G. yehdum A. pehde B. 2man MA. 3° H, 4yiccende
H. “°E.A. Shme H.add. 7yeofranH. Shim HH. % ymbe
yeoyan H. Mond H. A. '2/pepnu ypyllan ZH. Shine HZ. him £.
M47 mazum bebeote H. 'ypeondbum H. | eipicean geypne- sy
17 eymcean~ H. 18 mezner nebbe H. 19 meze H. add. 2” pam
ealbepmen H. 21 H, 2% yulcomian nelle H. 3 ypylee H. 2” man
becyme H. 3° FE.A. ep pam HH. but orig. ham. 77 yyllan H.


a The variation in ms. H, is ‘pice pec he hebbe, &c., and let him
know that he has forfeited his meg-ship.’ This forfeiture probably
operated like the provision in Edmund, c. 8.; and absolved his
kinsmen from their obligations to assist him in paying the legal


THE LAWS OF KING ALFRED. 91


OF FEUDS.


42. We also command: that the man who knows his foe to
be home-sitting fight not before he demand justice of him. If
he have such power that he can beset his foe, and besiege him
within, let him keep him within for vi. days, and attack him
not, if he will remain within. And then, after vit. days, if he
will surrender, and deliver up his weapons, let him be kept safe
for xxx. days, and let notice of him be given to his kinsmen
and his friends. If, however, he flee to a church, then let it
be according to the sanctity of the church ; as we have before
said above. But if he have not sufficient power to besiege him
within, let him ride to the ‘ealdorman,’ and beg aid of him.
If he will not aid him, let him ride to the king ‘before he fights.
In like manner also, if a man come upon his foe, and he did
not before know him to be home-staying; if he be willing to
deliver up his weapons, let him be kept for xxx. days, and let
notice of him be given to his friends ; if he will not deliver up
his weapons, then he may attack him. If he be willing to sur-
render, and to deliver up his weapons, and any one after that
attack him, let him pay as well ‘ wér’ as wound, as he may do,
and *‘wite,’ and let him have forfeited his ‘meg’-ship. We
also declare, that with his lord a man may fight  ‘ orwige,’ if
any one attack the lord: thus may the lord fight for his man.
After the same wise, a man may fight with his born kinsman,
if a man attack him wrongfully, except against his lord; that
we do not allow. And a man may fight ‘orwige,’ if he find
another with his lawful wife, within closed doors, or under one
covering, or with his lawfully-born daughter, or with his law-
fully-born sister, or with his mother, who was given to his
father as his lawful wife.


22man H. 27% hand ~ H. %peapen A. 3 zp H. add. hme H.
3 zyloe H. %4pund-prre H, % pan H. add. pice pac he hebbe
H. 37man @. %onpze H. 3man A. “reohce H. 41 pam H.
2man H. “zebopenum H, 4”%him man H. 4” onfeohted bucan
H. lypas H. 47man H. “md H. “becynebe A. but orig.
bezynebum. 5°, 5! meben A.


penalties he might have incurred on that occasion, or should incur
thereafter.

b «Without committing war.’ The Latin versions read, ‘ sine wita,
sine forisfacto.’


92 JELFREDES DOOAE.


BE M/EssE-1 DALA FREOLSE/


xLut. Callum *ppioum monnum/ par dazay Syren yopgzipene-”
bucan peopum mannum 4 eyne-pyphtum. -xu- dazay on ‘Teh-
hol- 4 pone daz pe Lyuyc pone deorol ofepypidde- 4 Sép Ime-
gopuy semynd-dez- 4 °-vir- bazar to 7Eaycpon y ®-vire ofep-
‘yan deez °c Sée” Pecpey vide 4 "Sée ” Pauley. 4 on “hep-
Feyce pa yullan “pican &p Séca Qapian meyyan- y ae > Eallpa
haligpa peopdungze “anne dxz- 4 7+1111- Podnepdazay on ” «11116
Ymbpen-*pican. Deopum “monnum eallum *°yien yopgifen”
pam pe him **leoroyt pie” vo *yellanne- egzhpat per pe him
Senz “mon fop Loder *noman geyelle-’ obpe *hie on
*7enesum hiopa hpil-yeiccum’ *zeeapmian meegen:.”


BE PEAFOD-pUNDE.


xLiv. Weapod-punde to bove. “zip pa ban beod bucu *pypel
xxx: yeitt. S@zeyelle him mon. “Ing $ “uceppe ban “bid
Sbynel- zeyelle” 57-xv- peitt. co bove:-


3 Be FENX-pUNDE.


xiv. Ing in feaxe bid pund “incey lang: *Zeyelle anne”
youll. co bore. “Ing bepopan feaxe bid pund *incey lang-
“cpegen yeitt. to bote:-


4BE EAR SLELE.


xiv. “Iny him “mon aylea *odep’ eape of- *Zerelle -xxx-”
yell. co bote. Ing ye *hlyyc odpcande’ f he ne ’ maze
8 zehiepan- Zeyelle” *-Lx- yeutt.” to bote:.


V deza ppeoljum H. ?speomannum H. *yyn fopzirenne A.
4LGehhel H. ‘yeopan H. © B. recommences here. 7€aycpum H.
8reoron B. 9c0 H. ’-Sene B. 9° HH. 'NSenc B. 1? Paulus H.
13 henrayce B. heppeyc H. Mpucan BA. MEalpa B.A. an B.
Wreopen B. '8pucan BH. 'mannum BH. %yyn HH. /pind
Fopzyren B. 27 Jeorare yy BA. 2 yyllanne BH. not in B.
“4man B.H. 25/ naman zerylle BH. %heo B.H. 27 enizum
heopa hpilycyccum B.H. 28 zeapmian mazan B. 2 and odpe hhman


* [Oden eane: this expression seems to prove that an enactment
similar to Ethelb. 39. is here wanting; in which case, however, it
must have disappeared before the framing of the laws of Henry I.,


THE LAWS OF KING ALFRED. 93


OF THE CELEBRATION OF MASS-DAYS.


43. To all freemen let these days be given, but not to
* theow ’-men and ‘esne’-workmen: x1. days at Yule, and the
day on which Christ overcame the devil, and the commemora-
tion day of St. Gregory, and vir. days before Easter and
vu. days after, and one day at St. Peter’s tide and St. Paul’s,
and in harvest the whole week before St. Mary-mass, and one
day at the celebration of All-Hallows and the 1v. Wednesdays
in the 1v. Ember weeks. To all ‘theow’-men be given, to
those to whom it may be most desirable to give, whatever any
man shall give them in God’s name, or they at any of their
moments may deserve.


OF HEAD-WOUND.


44. For head-wound, as ‘bot: if the bones be both pierced,
let xxx. shillings be given him. If the outer bone be pierced,
let xv. shillings be given as ‘ bot.’


OF HAIR-WOUND.


45. If within the hair there be a wound an inch long, let
one shilling be given as ‘bot.’ If before the hair there be a
wound an inch long, two shillings as ‘ bot!


OF STRIKING OFF AN EAR.


46. If *his other ear be struck off, let xxx. shillings be given
as ‘bot.’ If the hearing be impaired, so that he cannot hear,
let Lx. shillings be given as ‘ bit.’


B. add. %zyp B. pyle BA. 2zerylle BA Bly B.
34 uccepe B. ucpe H. ®byd H. 36/pypl zeyylle BH. 37 piycyne B.
8 not in B. 9Lyy B. “yncer BH. 4) zerylle H. 7-enne B.
42 Gyp hic B. Bynce BH. 41.H. “not in B. 6-ylazge H.
47Teyp B. “man ofaylea pee odepe B. —ofayclea pec odep A.
9 zeyylle H. -him ppeag B. Ly B. 5 lye ecpcande B.
52 merase B. 5 zehypan zerylle B. zehipan-H. 5” pixar youth.
him B.


where (c. 93.) it simply says, ‘Si auris amputetur alicui,’ &c., giving
no equivalent for odep. Precisely the same words are found also in
Bromton.—7.]


* 7. paninzer.
* Lye ppidda.


94 JELFREDES DOMAS.


BE 1}MONNES EAL-PUNDE AND 27ODERRA MISSENLILRA’
LIMA.


xivit. Ing Smon men ‘eage of-aylea- Szeyrelle him mon
S.uxe poll. 4 7-vie perl. 4 Sevres peningay? 4 ppiddan del
*%pemingay co bote. Ing hic “in "pam heapbe ®yie- 4
he noht geyeon ne mage “mid- ycande * pmddan dal pepe
bote inne:-

xivin. Ing mon odpum } "neb *éz-aylea- gebece “him
mud +Lx- perlt.:.

xix. Inf *mon odpum pone vod *onropan hearbe Gy-aylea-
2zebece $ md *%-vint- yell. zip hie *pie ye” pongz-cod- *>ze-
yelle *®-11- yall. to bore. *Monner tux bid *-xv- yertt.
peops:.

L. *Ing *monney *ceacan *mon yopyhh’’ $ *hie “*beod
fopode-” gebeve Smid -xv-” yeutt.:.

@)onney em-ban-’ zip hic bid coclogen- *zeyelle mon
8 .x11- pelt. to bove:-

uu. “Ing “'monney ppot-bolla “bid “pypel- zgebete “mid
45 .x01- pelt:

ui. “Ing “monney cunge bid of heapde- odper “monner
*deebum- d6n-” $ bid gelic y eazan-bor:.

Lin. ’Ing mon bid on Seaxle *pund p f his-peap tv-plope-
zebere mid .xxx- yeilt.:.

tiv. “Ing ye eapm bid “ponad buran *elmbogan- pep
yeulon ©.xv- yeatt. to bote:-

ty. Ing pa *eapm-yeancan beod begen yopade- “yio boc bid
xxx perll.:.

tyr. “Ing ye” puma bid *op-ayleezen- Spam “yceal -xxx-
yelt. co bore:-

Ing ye neg] bid op-aylegen- “pam yeulon © -v- yertt. co
bote:-


Imanner G.H. 2 odpa mishepa G. ospe miyclicnpa A. 3man A.
4hiy H. add. ‘zerylle BAL Spx Bo 7yyx Bopx MV yyx
penezay B. pix peninzar H. %pemzay B. pemzer HM. Ly B.
Non H. pan B. Bry BA. MOB. ye B.H. add. man B.
mann H. ‘nebb BA. nab G %" AH. Whic B. 2% man B.
21onponen B. 22 zeberaS B. Weahva B. yy pe B.A.  zerylle
B. zebecte md H. %yeopen B. 27 Manner H. 28yyxcyne B.
2 Tn man B. manner BH. 3 ceacer fopylea B. */ man
yopylyhs H. Sheo B. hy H. 3” beon yonebe B.H. 35/ pipcyne B.
36/Manner cinnban A. 37 ayp B. Bzerylle BH. %cpelp BH.


THE LAWS OF KING ALFRED. 95


OF A MAN’S EYE-WOUND AND OF VARIOUS OTHER
LIMBS.


47. If a man strike out another’s eye, let him pay him xx.
shillings, and v1. shillings and vi. pennies and a third part of
a penny, as ‘bot.’ If it remain in the head, and he cannot see
aught therewith, let one third part of the ‘bot’ be retained.


48, If a man strike off another’s nose, let him make ‘ bot’?
with xx. shillings.

49, If a man strike out another’s tooth in the front of his
head, let him make ‘ bot? for it with vi. shillings: if it be the
canine tooth, let 1v. shillings be paid as ‘bot? A man’s grinder
is worth xv. shillings.

50. If a man smite another’s cheeks so that they be broken,
let him make ‘bot’ with xv. shillings.

A man’s chin-bone, if it be cloven, let xu. shillings be paid
as § bot.’

51. If a man’s wind-pipe be pierced, let ‘bot’ be made with
xu. shillings.

52. If a man’s tongue be done out of his head by another
man’s deeds, that shall be like as eye-‘ bot.’

53. If a man be wounded on the shoulder so that the joint-
oil flow out, let ‘bot’ be made with xxx. shillings.

54. If the arm be broken above the elbow, there shall be
xv. shillings as ‘ bot.’

55. If the *arm-shanks be both broken, the ‘bot’ is xxx.
shillings.

56. If the thumb be struck ‘off, for that shall be xxx. shil-
lings as § bot.’

If the nail be struck off, for that shall be v. shillings as
‘bot.’


oLy B. 4imanney BH. “bys H Spypl B. “pec BH. add.
Scpelr BA. 4Lip B. 47manney B.A. 8mannum B. 4/sebum
zedon H. notin H. SFleazon B. 2G B. Bpa HA. add.
‘4zepundeb B.A. Spnivag B. Ly B. 7 sonod H. pam
elbozan B. pam el-bozan A. %yipcryne B. Syeo BH. 8 Typ
pe B. ozaylazen B. Spam B.A. “yeulon B. SLyp B.
66 nezel B. 6 opaslagen B. ofaylezen H. Spam B. © pp B.


® Probably the bones of the fore-arm, the radius and ulna.


96 JELFREDES DOMAS.


Lyi. ‘Ing ye yeyce-pingzep biS ? of-aylezen- yio” bor bid
S.xv- peilt, hip neegley *biB 5-m1- perlt.:-

ty. SIng ye 7midleycva pingep ®pie of-aylegen-’ °pio bos
bil’ exir- perth. 4 np neeglep boo bid -11- yeatt.:.

tix. "Ing ye zold-pmgep “sie of-aplegen-” to Spam yeulon
xvi pelt. co bove-” 4 hip negley -m1- pelt. cto bove:-

ux. ®Ing ye “lycla yingep @bid op-aplegen- pam’ yceal to
bove *°-viri1- perth 4 an yeitt hy negler- "zp ye @yie dp-
aylegen:.”

uxt. Ing mon bid on *hpp pund-” *zeyelle him ®”mon
«xxx: peill. *%co bove. zip” he puph-pund bid. eect * zehpeSepum
mude *cpenrig yeilt.:-

ux. * Ing ’monney peoh bid *pypel- “zeyelle him *mon
38 .xxx- peill, co bote. "zy hic popad *pie- pio” boc eac bid
+xxx- peilt.:.

ux. °Inp ye “pconca bid “*pynel beneodan “cneope- peep
yeulon *“cpelp yertt. “cto bove-” zip he fopad *yie beneodart
4 cn€ope- *’zeyelle nm ®-xxx- yall. co bove:/

txiv. Ing yio micle’ ta bid *ox-aylegen- zeyelle” him
52.xx- yell. co bove. zip Shic pie pio *epceppe ta-’ -xv- peitt.
co bote *zeyelle him mon. gp “pe “midlerce ca “ye of-
aylegen-” peep “yculon evi.” yertl. co bove. @ zip hic bid “yo
feopde @ca- Speen ypeulon *-vi- path co bove. zip *pio lycle
ci Srie S-aylegen- zerelle” him ©-v- yertt.”°:.

txv. Ing ?7!mon ”yie on pa hepdan co “*pam ypide *pund
~ he ne mege beapn “[zeycmienan]- gebece him $ md
7 .Uxxx: 7 yeitt.:-

uxvi. Ing men “ye ye eapm “mid *honda mid ealle of-
Zcoppen’ beropan “elmbogan- gebete $ md * -rxxx- yeitt.:.

85 Ezhpelcepe punde befopan feaxe y befopan “yheran 4
beneodan cneope- *y10 bos hid “cpy-yceatce’ mape:-


1LGyp B. 2 oaylagen peo B. ofaylegen- HH. Ayipcyne B. 4 beod
B 5urn Gv. A Shy B. 7midleyce B. yy ofaylazen B.
bid ofaylezen H. Yeo BH. 1% not in Bo Uy B. IM yy
ofaslazgen B. bid osaylezen H. Bpem B.H. Myeoroncyne B.
Wnot in B. Gy B. Milycde B. yy B. 19 ofaplazen B. 7 of-
aylezen pem H. 2mzon B. 2lazyp B. 2 ry ogaylagen B. bid
oyaylezen H. 23 Gyp B. 24man A. 5 hme H. ’ mye zepunded B.
Bzeyylle BH. 7 man H. 2% ayp B. M%ezspan B. ezspum HM.
xx. AX. 3 Ly B. 2manner A. Bpypl B.  Azepylle BH.
man BH. Spprcaz B. Wazyp B. 38’ yy yeo BH. 39 Lyp B.
“rcanca BH. Upypl B. “cpeope B. Bx. H. “not in B.
Sry Bobs H 8° BR. Vzervlle BH. man H. add. pprewz B.


THE LAWS OF KING ALFRED. 97


57. If the shooting [i.e. fore] finger be struck off, the ‘ bot’
is xv. shillings; for its nail it is 1v. shillings.

58. If the middlemost finger be struck off, the ‘bot’ is
xu. shillings; and its nail’s ‘ bot’ is 1. shillings.

59. If the gold [i.e. ring] finger be struck off, for that shall
be xvur. shillings as ‘bot; and for its nail 1v. shillings as ¢ bot.’

60. If the little finger be struck off, for that shall be as
‘bot’ 1x. shillings; and for its nail one shilling, if that be struck
off.

61. If a man be wounded in the belly, let xxx. shillings be
paid him as ‘bot:’ if it be thorough-wounded, for either orifice
twenty shillings.

62. If a man’s thigh be pierced, let xxx. shillings be paid
him as ‘bot;’ if it be broken, the ‘bot’ is likewise xxx. shil-
lings.

63. If the shank be pierced beneath the knee, there shall be
twelve shillings as ‘bot;’ if it be broken beneath the knee, let
xxx. shillings be paid him as ¢ bot.’

64. If the great toe be struck off, let xx. shillings be paid
him as ‘ bot;’ if it be the second toe, let xv. shillings be paid as
‘bot;’ if the middlemost toe be struck off, there ‘aball be 1x.
shillings as ‘bot ;’ if it be the fourth toe, there shall be vi. shil-
lings as ‘bot;’ if the little toe be struck off, let v. shillings be
paid him.

65. If a man be so severely wounded in the genitals that he
cannot beget a child, let ‘bot’ be made to him for that with
Lxxx. shillings.

66. If a man’s arm, with the hand, be entirely cut off before
the elbow, let ‘bot’ be made for it with Lxxx. shillings.

For every wound before the hair, and before the sleeve, and
beneath the knee, the ‘ bot’ is two parts more.


4 not in B. Typ mycle B. seo micele H. 5!” oraylazen zerylle
B. ofarlezen- HH. 52 man BH. add. ctpenuz B. 5% yeo arcene ca
ry opaylezen H. Starcepe B. SS zeyylle BH. Syeo B.H. 57 mid-
leyce B. pi ofaylagen B. pu Ope ecen H, *yeylon mon B.
60 ZF B. 61 yeo A. 627 63 pan B. 64 yx B. 65 ZYE B.
6 reo BH. 8° H. 8 yy Sisen zeyylle B. bid opaylezen — H.
6 mon B. add. py BH. %co boce Badd. man HH 7? B.
vy HH. ®hepdan B. “pan BH. zepunded B.H. 76 H. be-
sycan B. 7 hunbd-eahranz B. Byeillngum XH My B. Mypy
B.H. 8 osacopuen B. Shanda H. 8el-bozgan H. &hunt-
eahcauz B. © Ezhpileene B. fEzhpyleepe WZ. 86 yleran B. ylypan
Hi. 87y;eo BH. % cpyzzyloe B.


* Lye pyidda.


98 JELFREDES DOMAS.


txvil. Ing *yio lenden-*bpede bid *popylegen- pep yceal
5.ux- yell. to bote. Sxip 7hio bid on-beycungen- ®zerelle -xv-
yell. co bove. °zip *hio bid puph-"pypel- ponne yceal * peep
*xxx-’ pelt. to bote:-

txvi. %Iny “mon bid *in eaxle “pund- gebece mid
™.uxxx: sell. ®zir ye ®mon epic *ypie:.

yxix. *'Ing *?mon odpum pa *hond *uran ronylea- *zerelle
him +xx-+ yell co boce- *zir hine “mon gelacnian meze,
ay bio heal On’-pez fleoge- ponne yeeal 5*-xu- peal. to
bote:-

Lxx. Ing Smon ofpum “yb fopylea binnan *zehalpe
hyde- Szeyelle *7.x- yell. to bote. ®zip pio hyd “ye co-
bpocen- 4 “mon ban’ * 6p-406- “zeyelle “-xv- yeitl 40
bove:.’

txxI. Ing “monney eage him “mon 6f-aylea-” oppe hn
hond oppe hip “poe. pep “zed zelice boc vo eallum- ™.vi-
‘Ipenmgay y vie Syeitt. 4 ux. yall. 4 *ppiddan deel
55 peeningey:->

Lxx. Ing ’monney reonca’ bid *d¢-arlagzen pid $ ®cneou-
peep yoeal © -txxx- yell. to bove:-

yxxu. “Ing ®mon oSpum pa yeuldpu fopylea: Szerelle him
mon -xx: yeult. to bote:-


\Lyp B. 2yeo BH. 3-bpeda B. 4ropylezen BH. Syyxcz B.
Szyp B. 7heoH. “B. SzerylleH. %zy¢ B WheoH.“B.
Npypl Bo /pnicag BB. BLyp B. i4man HH. Yon BH. 16 ze-
pundad B.H. \7hunb-eahraciz B. '8zyp B. man BA. 2% yy
BH, ~Gy B. %manon BH. hand BH. %4ucon B. %ze-
yWlle BA. %zyp B. 7%man BA. Baye B. %he B. heo A.
37 healre “B. lpixeng B. feopeptiz superscribed. 2Lyrp B.
3man H. %4mbb BA. %zehalpe BH. zehalope E. 6 zerylle


2 The injury here spoken of appears to have been a serious one,
from the amount of the bote; and may refer either to 2 maiming of
the lower false ribs, or of the posterior part of the haunch-bones, as
pertaining to the loins, or of the spinous processes of the lumbar
vertebrae.

> In this reading all the mss. agree, and asimilar statement, having
no further difference than a slight change in the order of the monies
enumerated, is found at the beginning of the chapter. Against the
force of such authority it may be difficult to offer any valid ob-
jections. A doubt, however, seems to arise as to the integrity of
the text, from two causes. In the first place, sixty-six shillings and
sixpence and one third of a penny are no aliquot part of any known
penalty ; and in the second, a Wessex shilling of more than five-


THE LAWS OF KING ALFRED. 99


67. If the *Join be maimed, there shall be Lx. shillings as
‘ bot;’ if it be pierced, Jet xv. shillings be paid as ‘bot;’ if it
be pierced through, then shall there be xxx. shillings as ‘bot.’


68. If a man be wounded in the shoulder, let * bot’ be made
with Lxxx. shillings, if the man be alive.

69. If a man maim another’s hand outwardly, let xx. shil-
lings be paid him as ‘bot,’ if he can be healed; if it half fly
off, then shall be xt. shillings as ¢ bot.’


70. If a man break another’s rib within the whole skin, let
x. shillings be paid as ‘bot;’ if the skin be broken, and bone
be taken out, let xv. shillings be paid as ‘ bot.’


71. If a man strike out another’s eye, or his hand or his foot
off, there goeth like ‘bot’ to all; vi. pennies and v1. shillings
and vx. shillings and the third part of a penny.


72. If a man’s shank be struck off near the knee, there shall
be xxx. shillings as ‘bot.’

78. If a man fracture another’s shoulder, let xx. shillings be
paid him as ‘ bot.’


BH. eon B. B8Lyy B. Myeo BH “sy BA. 4 man
“BH. “oradd H. Bzeyylle BA. “4 pypcyne B. 4’ not in B.
46 manner #. ‘mon him oyylea B. 47 man HM. 4yorr B. 49 ze5 B.
50yyx B. stpemgar B. peningay A. 82 yyx B. Byeillmzar A,
S4yyxciz B. Spemzer BH. 6 Iiyp B. 57’ manner yceanca B.
-yeanca A. 58oraylezen H.  %cneop BH. % hund-eahranz B.
Gy B. &man BH. ®zerylle BM.


pence, which here seems implied, does not rest upon any very satis-
factory authority. ‘The numerals 111. and ul., consisting of the same
number of bars or strokes, are frequently given for each other in
the mss.; and notwithstanding B. and H. in the first passage, and
BB. in both, express the sum in question in words, and not in
numerals, it is only by supposing a similar substitution that our
presumed difficulties can be removed. By reading sixty and six
shillings and three pence and one third of a penny, we have a sum
amounting to one third of the were of a ceorl (200s.); and at the
same time we are freed from the necessity of supposing a larger
shilling to have been intended than that commonly known of five-
pence.


H 2


100 JELFREDES DOMAS.


Lxxiv. ‘Ing *hie mon’ 'in-beyléae y *mon ban ‘ory-add-
Szeyelle mon pey to bote 7-xv- pett.:.

uxxv. *Iny %mon pa gpeatan “ympe* yonyléa- giz’ “hie
mon’ gelacnian mege $ Vhne hal *pie- geyelle” '*-x11- peut. co
bore. “Ing ye “mon healt "ye yon pepe ®yinpe punde- 4
hine ®mon gelacnian ne mege- *zeyelle -xxx- yet. to
bote:.

Lxxvi. *7Ing pa ‘ymalan *yinpe> mon *fopyléae *zerelle
him **mon -v1-/ yeith. to bote:-

txxvu. Ing %mon odpum pa *zepeald fopyléa’ uppe on
pam *ypeonan- y *yoppundie to pam ypidse } he nage *pxpa
gepeald- 4 Shpadene “hme ypa *zercended- gerelle’ him
88mon %.c- peitl. co bove- *bucon him pican “pyhtpe 4 mape
Sepeccan®:.


1Lyp B. 2 bine man BH. 3° B. 4man BH. 58° HM. Szerylle
BH. 7ypycyne BA 8 Lyp B. X9man H. 1%” yynepe ~ zyp B.
i/hine man BH. he B. heoH. sy zerylle BA. 4 cpelp
B. 'Gy Bo Wman HM WVyy BA. 'yynepe B. man A
°Vzerjlle BA ALy B. Byynepan B. Bman BH 4° B.


@ Probably the tendo Achillis.

b There are so many subordinate and smaller flexors of the toes,
and extensors of the ancle-joint, which lie beneath the presumed
great sinew, that it is extremely difficult to say which of these can
be here alluded to. It may, however, mean the * plantaris;’ but this
is so slender that it can scarcely be singly and separately injured.

¢ Jf only a single muscle be here intended, it probably refers to
the external one, or trapezius. [Mr. Price’s translation, to which
his note has reference, was: ‘If a man injure another’s muscle up


THE LAWS OF KING ALFRED. 101


74. If it be broken inwardly, and bone be taken out, let
xv. shillings [in addition] be paid as its ‘ bot.’

75. If a man rupture the great * sinew, if it can be healed
so that it be sound, let xu. shillings be paid as ‘bot.’ If the
man be halt on account of the wounded sinew, and he cannot
be cured, let xxx. shillings be paid as ‘bot.’


76. If the small > sinew be ruptured, let vr. shillings be paid
him as ¢ bot.’

77. °If a man rupture the tendons on another’s neck, and
wound them so severely that he has no power of them, and
nevertheless live so maltreated ; let c. shillings be given him as
‘bot,’ unless the ‘ witan” shall decree to him one juster, and
greater ¢.


Bzerylle BA. 26’ man yyx Be-px H 27 Ly B. 8 man BA.
27 zepalb “.B. %ypeone B. 3! yoppundize H. 2 pep B. pepe Z#.
pepa H. peah B.add. *lipize B. libbe H. 5 zercend- zeryille
B. zeyeyndeb- HH. %6notin H. 37hund B. Bbucan A. *9 pihcpe
B


on the neck, and wound it so excessively,’ &c. But it had appa-
rently escaped his notice, that zepeal, (as well as its relative pzpa,)
is, as already observed, (/Ethelb. c.68.), a plural, and cannot there-
fore signify a single muscle. I take the word to be akin to the Old
H.-Ger. waltowahso, and to the Old Frisic walde-waxe, ‘ nervus
(colli). — Z.]

¢ The Latin version H., which will be given hereafter, adds here:
‘hoc est, ut reddantur afflictiones liberorum per plenum, servorum
autem per dimidium.’


Hu 3


102 INES DOQ)AS.


1BE *INE8 DOMUA.

Ie *Ine- md Loder *zipe *Pey-peaxena kyning-’ md ze~-
peahte +4 ®mid lane °Lenpedep miner paeedep- y 7 Deddeyr
mmey *biycepey- 4 °€opcenpolder miner * biycepey-
™mid eallum mmum “ealdopmonnum- 4 “pem 1eld-
ycan’ “picum minpe peode- 4 “ede “micelpe ” seyom-
nunge Loder *peopa- per ymeagende be pepe “hélo
unpa yapla- y be pam yradole uper picey- p ve *pyhe
ep 4 *pyhte cyne-domay puph upe pole zerey'cnode 4
setpymede pepon- $ ce nemz *ealdonmonna ne uy
*®unden-zepeodedpa septep *7 bam pape apendende pay upe
domay ::


BE LGODES DEOPA 28 REGOLE.
1. °fEneyc» pe bebeodad $ re *'Zroder peopay *hopa
**nyhc-pegol on *pyht Shealtan. y€pcep pam- pe **bebeodad
 *"ce ealley yolcey *2ep 4 Somay pur *yien gehealdene:-


47 BE CLILDUM.

u. “Inld binnan “ppicegum nihta’ “pie gerulpad.” “Inp
hie ypa ne “rie. -xxx- perth> “zebéce. Ing’ hie ponne “pie
dead bucan “rulpihce- >zebere “he hic mid eallum pam pe
he °aze:.


1 So E.G.H. in the list of rubrics prefixed to Alfred's and Ine’s laws ;
but in the body of the work H. reads, Iney cyningey ayecnyyye, or
King Ine’s institutes; and B. Iner laze, or Ine’s law. 2? Yne H.
3zyre B. “ Peyyexene cyninz B. Peycyeaxena— HH. 5 not in A.
6Lenpetey H. 7 Pedder H. *bipceoper B. bipcoper H. 9 Encen-
poloer B. Eopcenpalber H. biceoper B. biycoperH UA B.
add. ‘ealbopmannum B. ealbepmannum H. pam yloeycan
BH. Mpcan B 6° EL Wmycelpe B. 'yomnungze B. ze-
yamnunze H. '\8peopena B. hele BH. %upe B. to which H.


@ Ine became king of Wessex on the resignation of Cedwalla, in
the year 688. He abdicated the government, and retired to Rome,
after a reign of thirty-seven years, in 725. Bede H.E. v.'7. Cenred,
Ine’s father, is called « Subregulus’ in the ‘ Regalis Prosapia,’ follow-
ing Florence of Worcester; and would seem, from the manner in
which he is here mentioned, to have survived the period of his son’s
obtaining the West-Saxon crown. Hedde was bishop of Winchester
from the year 676 to 705. [703. Sax. Chron.] Erconwald obtained


THE LAWS OF KING INE. 103


OF THE DOOMS OF *INE.


I, Ine, by God’s grace, king of the West-Saxons, with the
counsel and with the teaching of Cenred my father, and
of Hedde my bishop, and of Eorcenwold my bishop, with
all my ‘ealdormen,’ and the most distinguished ‘ witan ’
of my people, and also with a large assembly of God’s
servants, have been considering of the health of our
souls, and of the stability of our realm; so that just law
and just kingly dooms might be settled and established
throughout our folk; so that none of the ‘ ealdormen,’
nor of our subjects, should hereafter pervert these our
dooms.


OF THE RULE OF GOD'S SERVANTS.


1. First, we command that God’s servants rightly hold their
lawful rule. After that, we command that the law and dooms
of the whole folk be thus held.


OF CHILDREN.

2. Let a child, within thirty days, be baptized. If it be
not so, let “him make ‘ bot’ with xxx. shillings. But if it die
without baptism; let him make ‘bot’ for it with all that he
has.


has been corrected from'uppa. 2ipihe B. 2ape BH. Bmhe B.
%not in B. ealbonpmanna B. ealbepmanna H. 26 undepzepeod-
endpa BH. 7 pem B. %pezgule H. no rubr. in Bo 97 B.
30 not in H. 3Lobay B. %2héopa B. heopa H. 33 mhe-pezol
gyman and on, Se. or, observe and, Sc. B. %4prhc B. % healbon
B. healben H. %beobad B.A. notin B. Ba B. %yyn BA.
no rubr.in B. “Cylb HM &@ xxx. B./-mhcum H. & sy ze-
fullad B. -zerullod H “Ly B. 8yy BH. "Ly B.A yy
BH. *®yulluhce BH. not in H. 597 A.


the see of London in the year 675; but the exact time of his death is
not known.

The laws of Ine are not here chronologically placed for the reason
already given. In all the mss. the numbering of the chapters fol-
lows the order of Alfred’s laws in regular succession; but, for the
convenience of reference to preceding editions, a distinct numbering
has been here adopted.

> [By the pronoun ‘he’ the priest is intended, as is evident from
the other enactments to the same effect —T.]


104 INES DOQ)AS.


BE SUNNAN-D CLES 'pEORLUM.


1. *Ing *peopmon pypce on Sunnan-dez be hy hlayopder
*h@ye- 5yie he ®ppioh- 4 ye hlaropd "zeyelle -xxx- *yeilt. to
pice. °Inp ponne re peopa buctan ny ”zepicneyye pypce- pole
In hyde "{oppe hyd-zyloey]. Ing ponne ye pyugea py
deze pypce “bucan hip hlaropder “h&ye- polie hip ypeover
*Coppe prxag Vyallngay- 4 ppeope ®p: cpy-¥yeiltiz:-]


BE 2 CIRIL-SLEATTUM +.
iv. *Dipie-peeatvay “yin agiyene” be Sée *Mapriney mey-
yan. *Inp hpa p ne gelayce- pe he yeyloiz %-1x- yeilt. 4


be *-xu- pealbum *azipe pone *cipic~*°yceat:-


BE 31 CIRIL-SOLNUM .

v. Ing hpa *yie deadep peyloiz- 4 he *cipican “zeiepne-
heebbe hip feoph- 4 *béce ppa him Spyhe pipe.” Ing 87 hpa
hip hyde yoppypces 4 *®ermican “zerepne- pie? him “pio
“ypingelle “popziyen:-


1pyneum G. 2Lyp B. 3peopman HM. 4° B. Syy BH. Sypeo B.
7zerylle BH. 8yeillmzay B. %Lyp B. M9 zepicnyye B. not
in E:. and only in the margin of H. '2Typ B. 'bucon B. M7 B.
15 polige H. '6not in E. and only in the margin of H. yeitt. H.
Wrot in H. 9-reyln B. 2 cime-peeaccte B. cyme-sceacum G.
“1 Eypiee B. 22° BH. yyn H. ’—azypene B. %Mapcyner B. 4 Lye


a This was originally a certain measure of corn paid to the church:
‘And all hizgen eoban co mimum buje on Peozopna-ceaycne. and me
yaltan heopa hond-recene pyye gepeebneyze. papa noman hen be-
neodan appicen sconbad. and [? pec] heo hic hebben ezhpey co
Freon. bucun [? pec hi] azeren elce zene ppeo miccan hpever co
cipice-yeeacce to Lhipe: And the whole brotherhood went to my
dwelling at Worcester, and gave me their signature to this agree-
ment; (that is) those whose names stand written here beneath; that
they were to have it free of every thing, except that they were to give
yearly to Cliff three measures of wheat as church-scot.’ Charta
Werfrithi Episcopi ap. Smith, Bede, p.'772. It is also mentioned
in Cnut’s letter from Rome: ‘Et in festivitate Sancti Martini
primitiz seminarum ad ecclesiam sub cujus parochia quisque degit,
que Anglice ‘ciric-sceatt’ nominatur. The penalty for neglect of
paying the church-scot seems to have continued unaltered until after
the Conquest; and the quantity of corn exacted so much per hide:
‘De cirisceato de Perscora dicit vicecomitatus, quod illa ecclesia de
Perscora debet habere ispum cirisceattum de omnibus ccc. hidis,


THE LAWS OF KING INE. 105


OF SUNDAY WORKINGS.


8. If a ‘theowman’ work on Sunday by his lord’s command,
let him be free; and let the lord pay xxx. shillings as ‘ wite.’
But if the ‘ theow’ work without his knowledge, let him suffer
in his hide, or in ‘hide-gild.’ But if a freeman work on that
day without his lord’s command, let him forfeit his freedom, or
sixty shillings: and be a priest doubly liable.


OF *CHURCH-SCOTS.


4. Let church-scots be rendered at Martinmas. If any one
do not perform that, let him forfeit Lx. shillings, and render the
church-scot twelve-fold.


OF > CHURCH- SOCNS,’


5. If any one be guilty of death, and he flee to a church, let
him have his life, and make ‘bot’ as the law may direct him.
If any one put his hide in peril, and flee to a church, be the
scourging forgiven him.


B. *yy BH Byeopaz B. Wcpely- B. BazypeB. % cypie- B.
30 -pceacce H, Bleyne- G. 2yy BH. 38 cypicean B. The e has
been expunged from H. %4zeypne B.H. 3° B. 36 mhe pyrze B.
37" B.  8ecypicean B. % zeypne sy B. zeapne—-H. %yeo BH.
41 rpingle B. and so H. originally. 42 ropzypen B.


scilicet de unaquaque hida ubi francus homo manet unam summam
annong, et, si plures habet hidas, sint liber, et si dies fractus
fuerit, in festivitate Sancti Martini, ipse, qui retinuerit det ipsam
summam, et undecies persolvat abbati de Perscora, et reddat foris-
facturam abbati de Westminstre quia sua terra est.’ Heming. 21.
But the definition given by White Kennett seems best suited to the
generality of the A.-S. term: ‘It was sometimes a general word, and
included not only corn, but poultry or any other provision that was
paid in kind to the religious. So in the Inquisition of the Rents of
the Abbey of Glastonbury, An. 1201: ‘In church-scet Lx. gallinas
et semen frumenti ad tres acras. Chartul. de Glaston. ms. f. 38.
The rubric to Edgar's Jaws, P. c.2, not a very safe guide, extends it
to tithes.

b The term ‘rocen’ is chiefly used in the laws to denote some place
enjoying the privilege of the jus asyli. Its root is the same with
yécan, querere. In Icelandic, soknsykn is defined conventus judi-
cialis, districtus ecclesiasticus—a place to which suit (secta) was
owing either for judicial or spiritual purposes.


106 INES DOODAS.


Be 1 GEFEOPTE.

vi. Ing hpa gereohte on cyningey huye-’ ®yie he peyltiz
ealley Iny *ieppey- y Syre on cyningeyr dome Shpeeden he hr
age pe nage. 7Ing hpa’ on mynytpe zereohte- *hund-cpelpag
yall, gebece. °Iny hpd on’ *ealdopmonney huye “zefeohte-
oppe on odper *zepungeney pican-” -Lx- yeilt. gebete hee 4
odep -Lx- Szerelle co pice. Ing “he ponne on garol-zeldan
huye oppe on zebupey zepeohte- -c.xx-* yell. co pive "Ze
yellee y pam ™zebupe -vi-’ yell, And peah hic *yie on
*%middum yelda **zerohten- *hund-cpelpag yatt. co pice pie
agipen. Inf’ ponne on gebeopyerpe “hie gecidens 4 odep
*hiona mid *zepylbe hic’ popbepe- *zeyelle ye odep -xxx-
*8reith. co pice:-


BE STALE.
vi. Ing hpa’ pcahe ypa mp pip “nyce y ny beapn-
2 zeyelle -tx-’ yell. to pice. *Inp he ponne “ptalie on *ze-
prcneyye ealley hiy *hmpeder- *zongen “hie ealle on *peopor.
“°.x- pintpe’-cniht mez “bion piefSe” Zepica:-


Be 2RYPTES BENE.


vin. “Inp> hpa lnm “pyhtey bidde beropan “hpeleum
‘Sycip-men oppe odpum deman- 4 “abiddan ne meege- y him


lzereohtum B.H. 2 Gyr B. ” Lig hpa on cyninger huye zeyeohce H.
3;y BH. 4ypre BA SFyy BAL Shpeden BM “Ly “B.
8cxx.H. Typ “in B. Mealdopmanner B. ealbenpmanner HZ.
Nyeohte B. zepeohte H. but after prcan. 12/ pican gepunzenan ZZ.
Bzerylle he B. notin H. notin BH. 15-zylben B. -zlban H.
16 hund-cpelprizg B. 7 zerylle BA. 1% zebupeys syx Bo py BA
20middan BH. 2) gerpohcan BB. 2% c.xx. A. yy A. ’—azyren.


a All the Mss. agree in this reading, and below the amount is
expressed in words instead of numerals. Lambard has xxx. shillings,
which seems to have been the true reading. A similar substitution
of c.xx. for xxx. occurs in Edgar’s dooms, E. c.8, where the error
is the more remarkable, as it has caused one transcriber to insert 120
pounds, in the text, instead of ‘ healpan punte, half a pound.’

> The brevity of this law seems to have somewhat obscured the
meaning, yet as it was not the deemster’s duty ‘to give the wedd,’
the penalty can hardly be understood as due from him. It rather
appears to be a case where the defendant refused to obey the legal
summons, such as is mentioned in the Lex Sal. Tit. rrv.1.: ¢ Si
quis alteri de rebus suis aliquid prestiterit, et ei reddere noluerit,


THE LAWS OF KING INE. 107


OF FIGHTING.

6. If any one fight in the king’s house, let him be liable in
all his property, and be it in the king’s doom whether he shall
or shall not have life. If any one fight in a minster, let him
make ‘bot’ with one hundred and twenty shillings. If any one
fight in an ‘ealdorman’s’ house, or in any other distinguished
‘ wita’s,’ let him make ‘ bot’ with ux. shillings, and pay a second
Lx. shillings as ‘wite.’ But if he fight in a ‘ gafol-gelda’s’
house, or in a ‘ gebur’s,’ let him pay *cxx. shillings as ¢ wite,’
and to the ‘gebur’ vi. shillings. And though it be fought on
mid-field, let one hundred and twenty shillings be given as
‘wite’ Butif they have altercation at a feast, and one of them
bear it with patience, let the other give xxx. shillings as ‘ wite.’


OF STEALING.


7. If any one steal, so that his wife and his children know it
not, let him pay Lx. shillings as ‘wite.’ But if he steal with the
knowledge of all his household, let them all go into slavery. A
boy of x. years may be privy to a theft.


OF PRAYING FOR JUSTICE.


8. *If any one demand justice before a ‘ scir-man’ or other
judge, and cannot obtain it, and a man [the defendant] will not


Ly B. 4m B. hy H %heopa B.A. 2 zepylsé ~B. 27 zerylle
BH *yellmgay B. 2’ Lyp “B. %ycahze BA Fhe BA.
add. zerylle HH. ’-pxa B. BLyp B. %4ycahge A. % zepic-
nyyye B. 3hypeser A. 37 zanzen B. zan HM. but originally zanzen.
%8heo B. hy H. ®peopec BH. “cyn B. ’x. pinctpa A. 417 beon
pyre BA @mhee BGA By Bo “pihcer B. “hpileum
B. hpyleum H. 46° BH. 47 him phe ZH. add.


sic eum debet mallare. Cum testibus ad domum illius cui res pre-
stavit accedat et sic contestetur ei, &c. Si nec tunc voluerit reddere,
adhuc super vii. noctes similiter contestetur, sicut antea fecit, &c.
Ergo si tunc noluerit reddere, nec fidem facere reddendi, supra de-
bitum, quod ei prestitum est, et super illos novem solidos, qui per
tres admonitiones accreverunt, pc. den. qui faciunt sol. xv. culp. iud.’
For the earlier part of the process, see the same code, Tit. x11.
[Mon, the subject not only of nelle but of the imperative xebo,
evidently refers to the defendant. The Latin has, ‘et si accusatus
vadium recti dare nolit, emendet 30s., et infra vir. noctes faciat eum
recti dignum.’ Macro ms. penes H, Gurney, Esq.—TZ.]


108 INES DOMAS.


tpedd *[mon] Syellan nelle-’ zebeve -xxx- poll. y *binnan -vir-”
Smhron ®zed6 hine ’pyhrey ®piepSne:.


BE DAM PRELENDAN %ER HE pla) RYPTES BIDDE.


1x. Ing hpa *ppace 66 “zppon he him @pyhcey bidde-
he him onmme:- ¥agize>- 4 “ponzielde- 4 !zebecve mid -xxx-
yeult.:.


BE REAF-LATLE.
x. *Ing¢ hpa bmnan pam gemepum upep pucey pear-lic*
4 mebd-neme ¥06- “agire he pone pear-lac- 4 * zerelle -Lx-”
yell. co prce:-


iped B. 2H. 3yyllan H. ’—nylle B. “bimnon yseoren B. 5 mhe
ZB. mhoum MH 6° A.M. 7pihcer B. 8 pypde BH. no rubr.
in B. ep man G. ep hine man. Gy B. Yep A 12 peer


a The language of the Statute of Marlebridge will afford the best
illustration of the offence here alluded to: ‘ Et nullus de cetero
edtiones aut districtiones faciat per voluntatem suam absque con-
sideratione curiz domini regis, si forte dampnum vel injuria sibi fiat
unde emendas habere voluerit de aliquo vicino suo sive majore sive
minore. Upon which my Lord Coke observes: ‘ Ultiones.] That
they (refusing the course of the king’s laws) took upon them to be
their own judges in their own causes, and to take such revenges as
they thought fit, until they had ransom at their pleasure. Distric-
tiones.] That is, taking distresses, not according to law, as for ser-
vices, rents, or for damage fesaunt, or for other lawful cause, but for
revenge, without cause, of his own head and will; that is, to be his
own judge and carver, to satisfy himself without any lawful means or
course of law.’


> The translation assumes that the bote was not a satisfaction for
any special damage sustained by the injured party, but a compensa-
tion for the aggression upon his rights. Thus, too, in ¢.31., we
have, ‘azipe pet reoh and ropzielde and zebece,’ &c. In Cnut, c. 64.,
‘azipe him co puhce, and fopzilbe pam pe hic zgebypize. and glee pam
eminze, &c. The same form of expression occurs in a case of
‘ reaflac’ given at some length in an ancient charter, (Aug. 11. 15.)
‘Da cpedon pa pitan pe pep pepon. pec betepe pepe. pet man
pene ad apez-lece. ponne line man yealoe. foppan pep yyppan nan
Fpeondycype neepe. and man polbe biddan pee nearlacey. pec he hic
yoiolbe azyran. and sonzylban. and pam cynmze luy pep: Then the
witan said who were there, that it were better to leave out the oath
than that it should be given; for after that there would be no friend-


THE LAWS OF KING INE. 109


give him ‘wedd;’ let him make ‘bot’ with xxx. shillings, and
within vir. days do him justice.


OF HIM WHO TAKES REVENGE BEFORE HE DEMANDS
JUSTICE.


9. If any one take *revenge before he demand justice; let
him ’give up what he has taken to himself, and pay [the damage
done], and make ‘ bot’ with xxx. shillings.


OF ‘REAF-LAC,’


10. If any one within the limits of our realm commit ° ‘reaf-
lac’ and ‘nyd-neme;’ let him give up the ‘reaf-lac,’ and pay
Lx. shillings as ‘ wite.’


B. Wazype B. Myopzyloe B. ropzilte H. Mbece B. lM LByp B.
Inf hpa pear-lac and nydneme zedo binnan, Se. H. 17 nybd- B.A.
BBE. Wazye B. 0-B, 2Azerylle BA. /-pxa B.


ship; and that they would ask for the reaflac, so that he should give
it up, and pay the damage done (perhaps here the mesne profits), and
his were to the king.’


¢ In the later documents ‘ peaylac’ is used in a sense equivalent to
the disseisin of our ancient Jaw-books: ‘and heo co pam zenebdde
pec hy bpucan pana lanoa on pearlace: and urged her to that degree
that they should hold the lands in disseisin. Text. Roff. c.80. It
is clearly the rapina of the Latin annalists: ‘ Addidit idem deceptor
malum malo et dolum dolo, Deoque ac Sancto Petro abstulit cum
rapina Burh et Undelas et Kateringes...... judicaverunt etiam
ut Leofsius episcopo totum damnum suum suppleret, et mundam
suam redderet; de rapina vero regi forisfacturam emendaret, dato
pretio genealogie sue. Hist. Eliensis, c. x. p.469. In their origin
the terms in the text are synonymous; and unless we refer pearlac
to the spoil, and nyonzeme to the mode of execution, there will be a
difficulty in shewing that they are not so here, since the pearlac
alone is spoken of as the thing to be restored. By /Elfred, in his
translation of Bede, nyoneme is used in the sense of a violent
taking away: ‘Se ppidoa ip pect ce pa mynycep pa pe Lobe zehal-
zobe yyndon. nenizum biscope alyped y1 in eemzum pinge hi ze-
unycilhan. ne opihc of heopa ehcum puph nydneme on zeneoman :
Tertium, ut quzque monasteria Deo consecrata nulli episcoporum
liceat ea in aliquo inquietare; nec quicquam de eorum rebus vio-
lenter abstrahere. Lib. 1v. ¢.5. In the old German glossaries
we have ‘Notnumft, spolia:’ ‘* Notnumfte, furtum violentum :’
‘ Notname, rapina:’ and at a later period, ‘ Ned numpft, a burglarious
stealing.’


110 INES DOMAS.


1BE 2DAM 27MONNUM DHE 4HIORA *LELONDAN Be-
BYLGLAD’
xi. °Iny hpa np Saxenne 7geleod *bebyczze- peopne ope
®ymigne- peah he yeyltig pies Moren * ye. “ponzielde hine
[be] Inp pepe?®:.


BE 7LEFONGENUM DEOFUM’


xu. *Ing peor “ye geponzen-” *yppelce he dea8e- oppe hiy
hy be hip pepe man *aliere:.


BE 2 DAM DE 4 PIORA LEPITNESSA’ 25 BEFORAN 26 BIS.’
27 ALEOLAD.
xi. *Inp hpa beropan *biycepe hip *zepreneyye 4 hip
51ped aleoge- gebeve mid * «c.xx- Byertt.


Deoray pe hacad 035 *-vie men- *ppom %*-vi-7 hlod- 03
§7.xxxv- Syippan *bid hene:-


Be PLODE.
xiv. Sepe hlode “becygen yie-” *'zerpicne ye hine >be
42.c.xx+ hida-’ oppe spa “bete:.


1 Be land byzene B. léoban superscribed. 2 pan G. %mannum GH.
4 hina zelandan bebicgad G. heona--HA. 4FLyp B.  Sazene B.
7leoban B. leob H. Shebyczge BH. %ymize B. Myy BH. Mand
B. add. notin EH. 2" B. Byende B. add. zeyylle H. add.
M4 ronzylte B. sopgibe H. 15 B.H. 6 and pid Lodd deoplice bere.
B.add. zepanzenum B.H.’-peore G. Ly Bo yy B.
’—zepanzen H, %ypylce BH “not in H. 2alyye B.A.


« There is a variation between the rubric and the text, which may
or may not have been intentional. (See above, p.77, note>.) Per-
haps the rubric defines the class intended to be protected. One of
the St. Galle glosses renders ‘ patriota’ by ‘gilanta; and the pro-
hibition might in practice have been confined to native, and not to
foreign slaves.

> A similar form of expression has already occurred in Alfred’s
dooms (c. 11.) ‘ Ing me mon ceo. gelabie In be pxcezgum hita: If
any one accuse her, let her clear herself with sixty hides.’ In these
dooms it is of more frequent occurrence. Thus, ¢.46: ‘ponne yceal
he be Lx. hyba onyacan pepe piepSe: he shall make denial of the
theft with sixty hides.’ C.52: ‘zerpiene hine be ¢.xx. hida: let him
clear himself with one hundred and twenty hides.’ C. 53: ‘ eye on
pam ade be Lx. hia: let him prove in the oath of sixty hides.’
C: 54: “ponne yseeal bion on pepe hyndenne an kyninz ede be


THE LAWS OF KING INE. 111


OF THOSE MEN WHO SELL THEIR # COUNTRYMEN.


11. If any one sell his own countryman, bond or free, though
he be guilty, over sea, let him pay for him according to his
* wer.’


OF THIEVES SEIZED.


12. If a thief be seized, let him perish by death, or let his
life be redeemed according to his ‘ wér.’


OF THOSE WHO BELIE THEIR TESTIMONIES BEFORE
A BISHOP.


18. If any one before a bishop belie his testimony and his
‘wed,’ let him make ‘ bot’ with cxx. shillings.


Thieves we call as far as vit. men; from vil. to xxxv. a
‘hloth;’ after that it is a ‘here.’


OF ‘HLOTH.’


14. He who is accused of ‘hloth,’ let him clear himself
>with cxx. hides; or make ‘bot’ accordingly.


23pan G. 47 heone zepitneyye B. hypa-—G. heopa-H. 2/ not
inB. *%biycope H. 7 zeleozas B. %Lyp B. % biyceope B.
biycope H. 2 zepicnyre B. 3lpedd A. 32 hunbd-cpelrciz B. 33 yeul-
Iingum H. *4yeozen B. 35’ ppam yeoron mannum H. 36 yeoron B.
37 pip and ppicaiz B. Band yyppan B. %not in B. 4” becozen.
yy BH “lzeclenne B. “/hund-cpelprizum hyba B. 43 zebece


xxx. hiba: then shall there be in the hynden one king-oath of thirty
hides. And in the same law: ¢ Pice-peopne monnan Pyliyene mon
yeeal bedmyan be cpelp hibum ypa peopne co spmzum. Engliyene
be feopep and ppiczig (cpeontiz) hioba: A Wylise wite-theow shall
be followed up (to conviction), like a theow, to the scourging, with
twelve hides. An English (wite-theow) with four-and-twenty hides,’
The expression clearly refers to the oath required in the wager of
law, and in all probability to the pm-ad’. C.52 seems to contain
the rule which regulated the number of hides essential to the com-
pletion of such an oath, making it to consist of a hide for every
shilling of the wite. ‘He who is accused of compounding suits
secretly, let him clear himself thereof with one hundred and twenty
hides, or pay 120s.’ And again, ¢.54: ‘A Wylise wite-theow shall
be followed up (to conviction), like a theow, to the scourging, with
twelve hides.’ According to c.23, the hydgild of a Wealh was


112 INES DOMAS.


Be 1 peRIe.

xv. Sepe *hepe-ceama *becygen yie-’ he hine be hi ‘pep-
gilde aheye-” oppe be hip pepe geypicne’” Se ad yceal Shion
healp’ be huyl-gengum. Deor ’yippan he *bis on cyninger
®*bende- nah he pa “ypicne::-


Be DEOF-SLELE.
xvi. See feor ofylihd- ye moc zecySan md “ade $ he
hine *yynmigne opyloge.’ *naller pa “zexildan:-


Yhenze B.G. hepeze H. 2hepeceame H. 9% berogen yy BZ.
4 venzylbe alyre B. pepezlbe—~ A. 5 hy. pam superscribed. ’ pam
zeclennie B. Sbeon BH. /—halp B. 7yyppan BA. %heod B.


12s. Indeed the same inference may be indirectly drawn from all
the examples cited, since the wites in Ine’s dooms are fixed at 30s.,
60s., and 120s. Perhaps the same rule obtained when the defendant
was to swear ‘be hiy pepe,’ or the amount of his wergild. Nearly
all the continental codes observe this system with respect to the
compurgators. The old Danish law supplies the following scale:
‘If the value of the matter litigated amounted to three marks of
silver, thirty-five compurgators were necessary; if to two marks,
twenty-three; if to one mark, eleven; if to six ores, five; and for
two ores, and below that sum, two.’ Rosenvinge’s Grundriss, §'75.
The number of hides for which the respective classes might swear is
not delivered with equal apparent certainty. In c.19 we are told:
‘ Lyninger geneav zip hiy pep bré cpelp hund peri. he moc spepran fon
yyxciz hida zip he bid huyl-zengea.’ This is rendered in the old
Latin version, ‘Regis geneat, id est colonus fiscalinus, si were sua
sint xu. hund scill., id est duodecies c.sol., potest jurare pro Lx,
hidis, id est pro hominibus v1., si sit huslgenga, id est x11. hyndus
vel husbonde.’ There are some inaccuracies here; but the calecula-
tion, with which alone we are at present concerned, is founded upon
a dictum contained in the Mercian law respecting the wergild:
‘Tpelp hender manner ad fopycenc vr. ceopla ad. roppam zip man
pone x11. hendan ppecan ycoloe. he bid ful-ppecen on yx ceoplan.
ano hip pepgild bid pox ceopla pepzilo: The oath of a twelve-hynde
is equal to the oath of six ceorls, because if any one should avenge
a twelve-hynde man, he is fully avenged in six ceorls, and his wer-
gild is that of six ceorls.’ A confirmation both of the doctrine and
the practice may be collected from a passage in the Dialogus Ec-
berti, An. 734: ‘Si necessitas coegerit, in quantum valet jura-
mentum episcopi, presbyteri, vel diaconi, sive monachi? ... Pres-
byter secundum numerum c.xx. tributariorum; diaconus vero juxta
numerum LX. manentium; monachus vero secundum numerum xxx.
tributariorum: sed hoe in criminali causa. Wilk. Cone. 1. p. 82.
At first sight there appears to be some exaggeration in this state-
ment: for, assuming that the presbyter was considered at that time
as equal to a thane (confer Oaths, ¢.12.), and that the wergild of a
thane was 1200s. (confer Be Wergelde, c.1.), it is certain from


THE LAWS OF KING INE. 113


OF «‘HERGE,

15. He who is accused of ‘hereteam,’ Iet him redeem him-
self with his ‘ wer-gild,’ or clear himself according to his ‘wer’
The oath shall be half of communicants. A thief, after he is
in the king’s custody, shall not have the clearance.


®OF THIEF-SLAYING.


16. He who slays a thief must declare on oath that he slew
him offending; not his gild-brethren.


Sbendum B. Mzerpicne BH. Uhy AH. add. 1% poylonz~ Be
13 naller H. 14 zyloan B,


c. 19, that a king’s geneat, if his ‘were’ were 1200s., could only
swear for sixty hides. But this difficulty may be met by a conjecture
which the reader will find submitted below, (p. 137, note*,) that
the true reading of c. 54. is 120 and not 30 hides, in which case
there will be nothing extraordinary in placing the presbyter or mass-
thane on an equality with a king’s thane. In addition, it may be
right to notice some other allegations which seem to confirm the
doctrine contained in the old Latin version, that the oath of a
ceorl was rated at ten hides or shillings. At c. 46. it is said, ‘tune
debet per Lx. hidas, id est per v1. homines abnegare.’ In another Ms.
of the Latin translation, c. 19. is thus given: ‘ Regis geneat, id est
villanus, si wera sua sint x11. hund sol. potest jurare per Lx. hidas,
id est se sexto, si sit huslgenga.’ After the Conquest, villanus is the
usual term for a ceorl (see the Custumal of Hen. I. throughout);
and such, indeed, is the translation of the word geneat in a docu-
ment to be cited immediately (p.114, note»). It is obvious, there-
fore, that the author of this version considered the law as referable
to the ceorl of his own times, and equally so that the ceorl was
reputed as capable of swearing for ten hides; since whatever may
have been the text before the translator, whether our own or a dif-
ferent one, he has rendered it, ‘per Lx. hidas, id est se sexto.’
Again: a still further confirmation of this doctrine has been thought
to be deducible from the following passage in c. 54: ‘Ing hine
mon zilc. ponne moc he zeyellan on papa hyndenna zehpelcepe, &e. :
If he be found guilty, he may then give each of the hyndens,’ &c.
According to the Jud. Civit. Lundonia, a hynden consisted of ten
men ; and as the plural number is here used, it must have required at
least two hyndens to convict the party charged. Now 10 x 10 x 2
are equal to 200, whether hides or shillings, the were of a ceorl;
30 x 10 x 2 = 600, or the were of a six-hynde man; and 60 x10 x2
==1200, or the were of a twelve-hynde or thane.

a [Mr. Price had thus rendered this obscure enactment: ‘He who
slays a thief may prove with an oath that he slew him offending ;
then is he by no means to make requital.’ His version, though
countenanced by Bromton’s Latin, appears to me wholly inadmissible
as a representation either of the sense or words of the original.


T


114 INES DOQDAS.


Be FORSTOLENUG) FLJESLE.
xvi. Sepe fopycolen pleye pinded 4 Izedypned- 2z1¢ he
deap- he mot mid ade gecySan $ he hic Saze. 48epe Shc
Sorypypad+ he ah } meld-yeoh:-


«Be 7LIRLISLUM DEOFE LEFONLENUM’

xvi. *Lnephiye mon-’ ®ziy he dpe becygzen p&pe- “zi”
he xe *yiSercan Pyie zepongen-” “ylea mon “hond [oy]
oppe ®yor:.

BE I9TYNINGES > GENEATE.


xix. Lyninger geneac- zy hny pep bid 2cpelp hund pert.
he moc “ypemian yop *yyxazg *hida gp he bid huyl-
6 zenzea:


BE FEORRAN 2 LUMENUM MEN *2BUTAN peLe 2 Te-
METTON,’


xx. Ing *yeopcund *mon oppe ypemde butan pegze *zeond


Izebipned H. 2ayp B. 387 B. 4and Hiadd. 5° B. §& opppyped
B.H. 7 ceoplhycum peopum zefanzenum B. cyplycum —- G.
cieplrcum —-—-H. 8%Lyphye B. ’Liophye man A. %zyp B.  be-
cozen BAB. UV’ “aye Be 2 ySmercan MH. 1 ry zeranzen B.
pi-H. 4°B. man BH “han BM VB 7B.


Though much doubt certainly attends the meaning of this law, yet
some of it may, perhaps, disappear on observing that the short intro-
duction immediately preceding c. 14. has reference to ce. 14, 15, 16,
(or, as they ought to stand, cc, 16, 14,15.) The lawgiver begins
by the definition of a Thief, a ‘ Hloth,’ and a ‘ Here,’ and then
proceeds to the three enactments, of ‘ Hloth,’ of ‘Herge,’ and of
‘ Thief-slaying.’ When, therefore, in the last of these, he mentions
pa zegilban, he means apparently, not strictly his ‘ gild-brethren,’ or
those belonging to the same gild or fraternity, but his fellow thieves,
according to the definition, peogar pe hata’ 03 vit.men. ‘The law
then would be simply this, that if a thief be slain while thieving, the
slayer must declare on oath that he slew him in the fact, but then
that slayer must not be an associate (not one of the seven or under
seven), the object being apparently to prevent the recurrence of some
villainous practice that had prevailed, such as murdering an asso-
ciate, for the sake both of plundering him of his booty, and of the
benefit attending the denunciation of him asa slain thief. Dr. Schmid
renders the words ‘nalley pa zezildan’ by ‘nicht die Genossen.’— 7]

« This law will be found in a larger form at c. 37.

> The term ‘zenear,’ like zey:3 and zerepa, means an associate or
companion, and appears to have denoted a person holding land by


THE LAWS OF KING INE. 115


OF STOLEN FLESH.
17. He who finds stolen flesh and keeps it secret, if he can,
he may prove on oath that he owns it. He who traces it out,
he shall have the information money.


aOF A ‘CEORLISH’ THIEF SEIZED.


18. A ‘ceorlish’ man, if he have often been accused, if he at
last be seized, let his hand or foot be cut off.


OF A KING’S >‘GENEAT,’


19, A king’s ‘geneat,’ if his ‘wér’ be twelve hundred shil-
lings, he may swear for sixty hides, if he be a communicant.


OF A MAN COMING FROM AFAR FOUND OUT OF THE
HIGHWAY.


20. If a far-coming man, or a stranger, journey through a


Wenger B. kynmgep ZH %Azyp B. Aeoxx. H. 2 ypepizan A.
3pnxa B. 1x. HX. 4° BE. %beos B. %-zenza B.H. 27 cume-
nan H. 2% not in B. %zemeccan G. zemeccum H. % yeopcuman
B. 3tman BH. 32 ze0n B.


a base tenure: ‘ Geneac-pihe iy miyzlic be pam pe on lanbe scene.
On yumon he yceal lanbd-zarol yyllan. and zepy-spyn on geape. and
piban and auepian and lade leban. pypcan and hlaropd feopmian.
pipan and mapan. deopheze heapan. and seve haloan. byclean and
buph-hezezian. nize fyapan co cune feccan. cypie-eeac yyllan and
eelmey-feoh. hearod-peapoe healdan. and hopy-peapde ependian Fyn
ypa nyp spa hpybep rpa hine man co-cecd. ms. C.C.C.C. 383. Vil-
lani rectum est varium et multiplex secundum quod in terra statutum
est. In quibusdam terris debet dare land-gablum et gers-swyn,
i.e. porcuum herbagium [porcum herbagii], et equitare et avariare
et summagium ducere, [operari] et dominum suum firmare, metere
et faleare, deorhege cedere et stabilitam [stabilitatem] observare,
edificare et cireumsepire, novam faram adducere, cyric-sceatum dare
et elmesfeoh, i.e. pecuniam elemosine, heafodwardum custodire et
horswardum, in nuncium ire longe vel prope quocunque diceret
[dicetur] ei.’ Cot. Titus. A. 27. fol.149. It seems, from the text,
that a twelve-hynde man might be a king’s geneat. In Domesday
frequent mention is made of thanes holding by ignoble services.
{The variations within brackets in the above extract are from the
Macro ms.—TZ.]


~ a


116 INES DOQAS.


pudu 'zonze- 4 ne *hpieme ne honn blape- ron peor he bid to
pporianne- Soppe to yleanne’ oppe to ‘alieyanne:.


BE SpX 5OFSLELENES MONNES’ PERE.
xx1. ®Inp ’mon pey dpylegenan pepe bidde. he mot ze-
cydan $ he hine fon peor opyloge. ®naller pay %orplegenan
segildan’ ne np hlapopd. "Ing he hic ponne “odiepned- 4
2 peopded ’ymb long’ yppe- ponne prymed he “pam deadan to
pam a’e- } hine moton hip “meezay unpyngian:”


BE i6 DON DE 17MONNES 18LENEAT STALIGE’


xxn. Ing pin geneat ypcahe- y “lorie pe- zy pu haebbe
*bypgzean- mana pone pey *anzylder- zz’ he nebbe- *zyld
pu # anzgyloe- 4 ne *jie him *’no py pinzgodpe:”


BE 2ELDEODIES MONNES’ SLELE.


xxi. Ing mon *elfeodigne ofyleas re “cyning ah
Scpaedne del’ pepey- ppuddan deel yunu oppe “mega. Iny”
he ponne meegleay “yie- healp’ “kyninge- ‘healp’ ye geyi5.


lzanze H. 2pyme B. hpyme H. ¥ not in B.  ‘4alyranne BH.
5/ opylazener manner B. opplazener-G.H. 6 Lys B. 7 man ponne
B.H. &naley B. naller H. 9 opplazenan H. 7 opylezenan zylban B.
Ly B. loypned B. oipned A. 12 pupd H.W emb B. 7 ymbe
lange H. ‘Mpem B. ' mazar B./—unrcyloizne zedon H. 16 pan
B.G. pam H. Wmanner B.G.H. 18 zeycalize G. 19 Lys B.


a (Here we meet with the same difficulty as in c.16. With
respect to the gegiléan of a stranger slain in passing through a wood,
&c., the same reason may be assigned for excluding them from the
oath as is given in the note to c.16., but this will not hold equally
good with regard to the hlaropd. Perhaps this, as well as the other
law, was enacted to provide against a repetition of some foul deed,
in which the hlapopd and zeziloan of the murdered man had been
implicated. Mr. Price’s version differs so widely from my own, that,
in a case of so much doubt, I ought not to suppress it: ‘If a man
demand the were of the slain, he must prove that he slew him for a
thief; then he is by no means to pay the were of the slain, nor his
lord. If, then, he conceal it,’ &c. Dr. Schmid accords with me in
his translation of the passage nalley pay opylezenan, &c. viz. ‘nicht
die Genossen des Erschlagenen oder sein Herr.’ Bromton’s Latin
has ‘ et [non] solvatur ipsius occisi congildonibus vel domino suo.’
74

> [Bromton and the Macro ms. read ‘si non habeas,’ which
affords a better sense, though unauthorized by any of the Saxon
texts extant.— 7. ]


THE LAWS OF KING INE. 117


wood out of the highway, and neither shout nor blow his horn,
he is to be held for a thief, either to be slain or redeemed.


2OF A MAN’S ‘WER’ THUS SLAIN.

21. If a man demand the ‘wér’ of the slain, he must de-
clare that he slew him for a thief; not the associates of the
slain, nor his lord: but if he conceal it, and after a time it
become known, then makes he room for an oath on behalf of
the dead man, that his kindred may exculpate him.


IN CASE A MAN’S ‘GENEAT’ STEAL.


22. If thy ‘geneat’ steal, and run away from thee, if thou
have a ‘byrgea,’ admonish him of the ‘angylde? *if he have
it not, pay thou the ‘angylde,’ and be it to him, therefore, not
the more settled.


OF SLAYING A FOREIGNER.
23. If a foreigner be slain, the king has two parts of the
‘wer,’ a third part his son or kinsmen. But if he be kinless,
half the king, ‘half the ‘gesith.’ If, however, it be an abbot


Vycahzge H. Alonze BH. 2 zip B. Bbopzar B. 4 anzyloar
syp B. %zlb M yy BA. 277 na pe zepmzoope B. - —zepinz-
ove H. 2% zxlpeodizer manner BH. Ly B. man AH,
31 elpeobnizne mon B. elpeotigne H. 2 eynz B. 3% cpezen delay
per BA mazar WH. /-Lyp B. yy H. ’—halp B. 36 cyninze
HX, kyninge £. / cyning halp B.


¢ The use of the definite articles proves the full sentence to have
been ‘ye zeri15 per zlpeodizgan manney,’ and not, as it is given in the
Latin versions, ‘dimidiam consocio regis.’ Perhaps the custom may
be illustrated by the following extract from the 5th Hen. IV. c. 9.:
‘In every city, town, and port in England where alien merchants
are or repair, sufficient hosts shall be assigned them by the chief
officers of such cities, &c.; and such merchants shall not remain in
other places, but with their hosts so to be assigned, who shall take
for their trouble as of old time.’ The rule with respect to an abbot
or abbess is thus spoken of in a grant of Ecgbert to the monastery
at Abbandon, An. 835: ‘ Similiter de hereditate peregrinorum, id
est Gallorum et Brittonum et horum similium, ecclesia reddatur,
Pretium quoque sanguinis peregrinorum, id est Wergeld, dimi-
diam partem rex teneat, dimidiam ecclesie antedicte reddant.’
Kyninge has the appearance of a misreading of kyninge, a common
error. [Kyninzec is undoubtedly the true reading, and I have not
scrupled to adopt it in the text; it is moreover supported by ms. B,


118 INES DOQAS.


1Ing hit ponne *abbod pie’ oppe Sabbobderye- dzelen’ on pa ican
piyan pid pone *kyning.

Pealh garol-*zelda °-c.xx- yaitt. ny yunu 7c. Deopne ®-ix-
*Somhpelcne pipcezum.’ Pealey hyd !cpelrum:


BE pITE-DEOpes ' MONNES SLELE.


xxiv. "Ing Pprce-peop- Enzliye-mon- hine fopyralie- “hé
hine *mon- ¥ ne gyloe hip hlaropde, Ing hine ”mon *or-
yléa- ne gylse hine “mon iy *mezum- zi’ “he hine on
cpely-mondum ne “aheyden,

Pealh- *zy he *hayad mp *hybda- he bid pyx hynde:-


BE 27 CIEPE-MONNA 2 FORE 2 UPPE ON 3% LONDE.


xxv. Ing *crepe-mon uppe’ on folce *“ceapie- 06” P be-
popan “zepicnerrum. © Iny piere-pioh mon wt *ciepan bers.”
4 he Inv neebbe befopan zodum *’peocum zgeceapod- gecyde
hit be *pice he “ne “zepica ne geycala nepe- oppe “zielde
co pite yr. 4 -xxx- peith:-


Be FUNDENES LILDES FOSTRE.


xxvi. To sundeney “cilder forcpe py fopman geape “ze-
yelle -vi-” yeilt. “py “eyceppan cpelg-” “py pmnddan “-xxx-
*rippan be hip plice:-


lGyp Bo %abbud sy BH. ¥abbubdyye delon BH. 4cyning
BH. 5-zylba BH. Shunbd-cpelprizg B.  7hundped B. 8 pexaz,
yell. B. ” Somhpylene mod prog BA. 1° mid B.H. add. man-
ne B.G.H. 32 Lyp B. 8 fEngzhye-man HZ. 4" BE. ' man H.
boy Bo Vman a 8° BL. man B. 2 mazgum A. /—zyp B.
hy BA. Zalyoon BH. 8ayp B. Ahad BH. % hida B.
bys H. 7 cypmanna B.G. cypemanna H. *%~ E.G. yape ZA.


@ [The terms ‘ Wealh’ and ‘ Wylisc’ have been left untranslated,
when signifying the British inhabitants of Wessex, &c., in order to
distinguish them from the ‘ Welsh’ of the Principality. Wealh,
O.H.Ger. Walah, (whence the adjectives wylise and walahisc,) i.e.
a ‘foreigner,’ was the term applied by the Teutonic nations to the
inhabitants of Latin Europe in general: even at the present day,
Italy is by the Germans called ‘ Welschland.’—7Z.]

> The following extract from the Formule Marculphiane will
best illustrate the circumstances and the conditions under which a
man became reduced to the state of a wite-theow: ‘Contigit quod
cellarium vel spicarium vestrum infregi, et exinde annonam vel aliam
raupam in solidos tantos furayii Dum et vos et advocatus vester


THE LAWS OF KING INE. 119


or an abbess, let them divide in the same wise with the
king.

A **Wealh gafol-gelda,’ cxx. shillings; his son, c; a
‘ theow,’ Lx.; some with fifty: a ‘ Wealh’s’ hide with twelve.


OF SLAYING A ‘WITE-THEOW,’


24. If a >‘ wite-theow,’ an Englishman, steal himself away,
let him be hanged; and nothing paid to his lord. If any one
slay him, let nothing be paid to his kindred, if they have not
redeemed him within twelve months.

A * Wealh,’ if he have five hides, he shall be as a six-* hynde’


man.


OF THE JOURNEYING OF CHAPMEN UP THE COUNTRY.


25. If a chapman traffic up among the people, let him do it
before witnesses. If stolen property be attached with a chap-
man, and he have not bought it before good witnesses, Jet him
prove, according to the ‘ wite,’ that he was neither privy [to the
theft] nor thief; or pay as ‘ wite’ xxxvu. shillings.


OF FOSTERING A FOUNDLING.


26. Let vi. shillings be paid for the fostering of a foundling
for the first year: xu. shillings the second; xxx. shillings the
third ; afterwards, according to its appearance.


2tp G. upp H. ®*lande B. land G. lanbe-scpyne H. BN Lyyp BV.
32ceapman AH. ’cepeman yppe B ceapze B.’-"H. 347¢-
pienyyye B. zeprcnerre BH. % Ing man fopycolen seoh A. Lyf mon
jp B. 367 cypmen ~ B. ceapmen- AM. Wpcum BH. 38° B.
9nd M O° B. 4laylbe B. zlbe HM. “@yyx BB. Seyloer BH.
“zerylle HZ. /-yyx B. pa B. and py MH. “eycpan B. epcepan
Mi Tyx y F F
geape xul.and A. 47pa B. ®xx. and H. “yyppan B.


exinde ante illum comitem interpellare fecistis, et ego hance causam
nullatenus potui denegare, sic ab ipsis Racimburgiis fuit judicatum,
ut per wadium meum eam contra vos componere atque satisfacere
debeam, hoc est, solidos tantos vel.* Sed dum ipsos solidos minime
habui unde transsolvere debeam, sie mihi aptificavit, ut brachium in
collum posui, et per comam capitis mei coram presentibus hominibus
tradere feci, in ea ratione, ut interim quod ipsos solidos vestros red-
dere potuero, et servitium vestrum et operam qualemcunque vos vel
juniores vestri injunxeritis facere et adimplere debeam; et si exinde
negligens vel jactivus apparuero, spondeo me contra vos ut talem
disciplinam super dorsum meum facere jubeatis quam super reliquos
servos vestros. Canciani, vol. 1. p. 276.


120 INES DOODAS,


BE !DON DE 2MON DEARNENGA’ BEARN 2GESTRIENE,


xxvil. Sefe *deapnengza* beapn *geycpiened y Sgzehiled- nah
ye hiy deaSep 7pép- ac hip hlapopd y ye ®cyming:-


9BE DEOFES ONFENLE CT 1° DIEFDE.


xxvul. Se ™[pe] peor zereh3- “[he] ah ”-x- yell. 4 ye
cyning pone peor: 4 pa maegay him ypepian aday “unfechda.
%Inp he ponne “oviepne 4 “opize> peopdSe- ponne bid he
picey yeyltig. Ing he “onyacan pille-” #°06 he $ be bam
*1r@0 y be pam prce:-


BE 2DON 2 DE 4MON SpEORDES ONLJENE ODRES

¢ DEOpe.

xxix. *Ing *mon ypeopder onlene *oSper *épne- 4 “he
%Jories tzielde he hine pyuddan dzle. Inf’ “mon ypepe
Srelle- healpne™. Ing *he hopyer “onlene- ealne he hine
87 cylde:-


BE 8DON DE ®LIERLISL MAN “FLIEMAN FEORMILE.


xxx. “Ing “mon cieplipene’ “monnan *pheman-peopme”
ceo- be ny “agnum pene “zelatige he hine. “Ing he ne


1pan B.G. pam H. ?/ deapnunze B. man deapnunza G.H. 3 ycyp-
ned B.H. 4oeapnunga B.H. S5zeycpeonad B. zercpyned HH,
6zeheled BH. 7° B. 8cynz B. Be peopey-manner B.H.
Wpypse BH. UB. Ueyn B. mazar B.A. Munzehda and
A, “Lye BR.  odypne H. osepna B. 60 superseribed. 17 opnze
A '85yp B. 1% ecyacan pylle B. 29" H. 2\ pepe H. 22pan G.
pam BH. pe hy B, pa hiy ypeopd alene odpes peopan H.


3 The old Swedish law contains a similar prohibition: ‘ Si tandem
nativus clanculum inscioque domino suo cum nativa contubernium
habuerat, sancitum erat, ut nihil in liberos juris haberet’ Ler
Ostro-G. Erfd. B. c.29. Ihre, in v. Fostre. By Alfred the seventh
commandment is rendered ‘ Ne licze pu deapnunza.’


> This term is not met with elsewhere. From certain analogies
which are found in the Icelandic —Or, Ur, cicatrix; Aur, Ur,
lutum; Aurgr, Urigr, lutulentus—it may be presumed to be only
a varied form of the A.-S. Uz. In this case the passage in the
text would be equivalent to the expression, ‘ and he sul peopde: and
he be convicted.’ Lambarde reads ‘ peynge;’ which, if correct, is
equally obscure.


THE LAWS OF KING INE. 121


IN CASE A MAN BEGET A CHILD CLANDESTINELY.


27. He who *clandestinely begets a child, and conceals it,
shall not have the ‘wer’ for its death; but his lord and the
king.


OF SEIZING A THIEF IN A THEFT.


28. He who seizes a thief shall have x. shillings, and the king
the thief; and let the kindred swear to him oaths of ¢ un-
feehthe’ But if he run away, and become °‘ orige,’ then shall
he be liable in the ‘wite’ If he wilt deny it, let him do so
according to the property, and according to the ‘ wite.’


IN CASE A MAN LEND A SWORD TO ANOTHER’S
es THEOW,


29. If a man lend a sword to another’s ‘esne,’ and he run
away, let him pay a third part of his value. If a man give a
spear, half: if he lend a horse, let him pay his whole value.


IN CASE A ‘CEORLISH’ MAN HARBOUR A FUGITIVE.


30. If a man accuse a ‘ceorlish’ man of harbouring a fugi-
tive, let him clear himself according to his own ‘wer,’ If he


4man BG. Ly B. %man B.A. 3 27odspum B. 27 HH.
Vhic B. X*lonze BH. 3 zilbe H. “be pmiddan dele he hic zyloe.
Ly B. 2man B.A. Byylle BAH. del hme giloe H. add.
mon B. man H. lene H. %7zltbe H. 8 pam BH. pan G.
Veyplyc B.A. “ylyman BGA. 41 Lyp B. “@ man HZ. /— cyphyene
B. mann ylyman feopmize B. man—yeopmie H. “azenon B.
agenum H, “zelatie H. 46 yp B.


¢ For the variation between the rubric and the text, see above,
p-77. noteb. The esne was a theow, but every theow was not an
esne. [From the text as given above, it appears to have been the
*esne’ that was to be paid for, while, according to ms. B., which
reads hic, instead of hine, it was the sword. In the one case, the
payer must have been the lender of the sword, in the other, the
master of the ‘esne.’ The 87th of Henry I, as well as the trans-
lation in Bromton, were apparently made from a Ms. very different
from those extant. The latter has ‘ Qui gladium prestabit ad homi-
cidium, si occidatur homo, reddat tertiam partem compositionis ejus;
qui lanceam preestiterit, dividat weram; qui equum prestiterit, totum
reddat.’ The law of Henry is to the same effect.—7Z.]

4 Lambarde reads, ‘ly man seopmige veo.


122 INES DOMAS.


mezge- Iz1elée hine [be] mp 2agenum pepe. 4 ye *zepidmon
*Teac] ®ypa be hip pepe:-


BE ‘PON DE 7MON PIF SBYLGLE- AND 9DONNE 19810
al GIFT TOSTANDE/


xxxr. 2Ing 8mon pip “zebyezze- 4 “pio zype’ yond ne
cume- “agire } Feoh- 4 ”yopgielde- y Mzebéce “pam bypgean
ypa hip *bopg-bpyce yre:”


BE 2) pILISLEs 22MONNES LOND’-23psEFENE.


xxx. Ing *Pyhye *mon hebbe hite *londey- hip pep
bid °° .c.xx- pertt zip he ponne hebbe “healpe -Lxxx-” yell.
zr he @nenig Shabbe -ix-’ peillinga:-


BE 4CYNINGES PORS-% peALe,
xxx. Cyningey hopy-pealh+ yepe him *mege * gecependian-
pey *pep-zield bid” %.cc- yeitt.:-


BE “© MON-SLIPTE.
xxxiv. Sepe on “pene “ydpe> peepe “pap “mon “monnan
ofyloge- “zectmepe hine per *’yleger- 4 pa” rope gebete be


Izylbe B. zlbe he H. 2azenum B. azenan H. azne £&. 3zepidman
BH. 4B. 5° B. SpanG. pam H. 7man B.G.H. ®bycze
B.H. bicze G. seo ziyc pid-ycanse B. Myeo G.A. Uayye G.
Liy B. Bman HH. Mbycze BH. Uyeo B.’-ayc H. 'aziyye
B.  \ysopzylbe B. sopziloe ZH. 18° B. 'Wpem H. 2 boph- sy
B.H, “pylycer B. pylyycer G. 22/manney land B.G.H. 23 hepene
A. 4Uyp B. *pitye A. 2% man BA. 27 lander BH. 28 hund-


® The Longobardic and old Swedish laws inflict a similar penalty
for breaking a marriage contract: ‘Si quis sponsaverit puellam li-
beram aut mulierem, et post sponsalia facta et fabulam firmatam per
duos annos sponsus neglexerit eam tollere et dilataverit nuptias
exequi; post transactum biennium potestatem habeat pater, aut fra-
ter, vel qui mundium ejus in potestate habet, distringere fidejussorem
quatenus adimpleat metam illam quam in die sponsaliorum promisit:
postea liceat eis ipsam dare marito alii, libero tantum.’ Ed. Rotharis.
e.178. ‘Nu kan thom manni dalla kunu hugher windas, ok willa ai
tha fastning halda; hawi than forgiort forningum ok fastnadha fa:
Si accidat, ut sponsus vel sponsa rumpere velit pacta sponsalia; qui
in causa est, perdat dona sua cum pignore sponsalitio. Upl. LZ. Arfd.
B. c.1. Ihre, in v. Forning. [Mr. Price’s version of this somewhat
obscure law was as follows: ‘In case a man buy a wife, and then
the gift be withheld—_If a man buy a wife, and the gift come not
forth, let him pay the money, and compound and make bote to his


THE LAWS OF KING INE. 123


cannot, let him pay for him according to his own ‘wér? and
the ‘ gesithman’ in like manner according to his ‘ wer.’


IN CASE A MAN BUY A WIFE, AND THEN THE
aMARRIAGE TAKE NOT PLACE.
81. If a man buy a wife, and the marriage take not place;
let him give the money, and compensate and make ‘bot’ to his
‘ byrgea,’ as his ‘ borg-bryce’ may be.


OF A ‘WILISC’-MAN’S LANDED ESTATE.
32. If a * Wylisc’-man have a hide of land, his ¢ wer’ shall
be cxx. shillings; but if he have half a hide, uxxx. shillings ;
if he have none, Lx. shillings.


OF THE KING’S ‘ HORSE-WEALH’’
33. The king’s ‘ horse-wealh,’ who can do his errands, his
‘ wer-gild’ shall be cc. shillings.


OF MAN-SLAYING.
84. He who has been in a >foray where a man has been
slain, let him prove himself innocent of the slaying, and make


cpelpaug B. %2vep B. Whealper L. “healpe eahcacs B 3 yp B.
8/nebbe nan land pixar B. Bnebbe H. 4kyninger H. %-pale
B. 3% mez BH. 87 zeenendian B. ’ zeepndian per pepegilb ay A.
Bpenzyld B. %cpa hund B.A. 4” monnylyhre A. 4! pepe B.
2-H Span B. peck. “man H. “mann B. man LZ. but
orig.mannan. 46zecpypie B. zecppie H. 47 ylaezer oppe B.


borh, according as the borh-bryce may be.’ What idea it is here
intended to convey by the word ‘gift,’ as a translation of zipc, I am
unable to ascertain; but the meaning of the enactment seems to be,
that if a man, after having bargained for a wife, neglect, without
good cause, to complete the marriage, he should pay to the woman’s
relatives, not only the ‘mundium,’ but a -compensation besides, as
well as a bot to his surety. A compensation to the relatives, under
nearly like cireumstances, is also directed by the Lex Bajuv. Tit. vii.
c.15., where it is said, ‘Si quis liber, postquam sponsaverit alicujus
filiam liberam legitime, sicut lex est, et eam dimiserit et contra
legem aliam duxerit, cum xxIv. solidis componat parentibus.’— 7.]

> There is a fullness of meaning in the word ‘y6pu’ which can
hardly be rendered by any single term, since it implies as well the
going to a fray as the being actually engaged in it. The old German
‘fara’ appears to have been used in the same double sense-— seditione,
ungareh odo fara.’


124 INES DOMAS.


pey topplegenan pep-zielte.” *Ing hny Spep-gield sie’ *-cc-
yell. zebece mid 1 pelt. 4 Spa ican 7ht 50 man be pam
deop-bopenpan:.


Be DEOF-*sLIpTe- »D/ET PE MCDT] UMOTE ADE
L€LYDAN.

xxxv. Sepe peop yhhd- he mov *aSe zecySan } he hine
rleondne pop peor yloge 4 “peep deadan ’meezay him ypepian
unceayer ad. ™ Ing he hic ponne ®bdiepne- ¥ pie ert yppe-
ponne *yopzielde he hine.

921Tn¢ mon to *pam men’ reoh *zeréme pe by *&p
6 odypanen hepde y “pc *Sodypeman pille-” *odppemze be
pam pite 4 be per yeor pypde. Iny he *odypeman nylle-
sebece ‘pone meenan ad *cpy-bore:-


Be DEOFES SONFENLE AND PINE #([MAN] % DONNE
FORLJCTE/

xxxvi. Sepe peop “zepehd- oppe him mon *Zeronzenne
Saziy5- 4 he hine ponne “Alzve+ oppe pa *piepbe gediepne-
popzielde” fone peop “[be] ny pepe. **Ing he “ealdopmon
yie-’ “pohe lny perpes “buton him“ “’7kyning apuan pille:.


Be 8LI(EJRLISLES “MONNES SSONTYNESSE SCT DICFDE’

xxxvil. Se *cifejphyca mon” “yepe orc Sbecyzen pepe”
‘“hrepde- y ponne ac yidesran *yynnigne “[man] * zero >in
58ceape oppe eller ac openpe yeylde- lea him ®mon hond”
Gr oppe © Oc:-


V osslezenan pepzyloe 2B. ofylezgnan pepe H. 2LypB. ¥ pepzyld
we. 4cpahund B OppazgB. Spa Be. py B 7mhe B.
pyhce ZB. 8-ylyce H. Spec he more pect mid ade zecydan Z.
pe he EB. peche G. °G.H. UG. mb Badd. 'yleonde Z.
Mper B. Wmaza BH. Vuncearcer XH Ly B. 8 bypne
BH. yy B.H.  yonzylbe B. popziloe H. 2! Ly B. 22 man A.
3pem H.’-menn B. 4° BL, 2 26 ecyponen B. odspopen
He Were H. 8 weypepan pylle B. 2%ypemze B. odspepie A.
20 Ly B. 31 ponne H. add. ecypean B. 32 cpyz-bore B. 3% and-


a Though the mss. give no fresh rubric, this is matter so evidently
distinct from what has gone before, that the two enactments have
been divided.


THE LAWS OF KING INE. 125


‘bot’ for the foray, according to the ‘wer-gild’ of the slain.
If his ‘wer-gild’ be cc. shillings, let him make ‘bot’ with
L. shillings; and let the like justice be done with respect to the
dearer-born.


OF SLAYING A THIEF; THAT HE THAT MUST PROVE
ON OATH.

85. He who slays a thief must prove on oath that he slew
him fleeing for a thief; and the kinsmen of the dead swear to
him an ‘ unceas’-oath. But if he conceal it, and it afterwards
become known, let him pay for him.

4 If any one vouch a man to the warranty of goods who had
‘before denied it on oath, and again is willing to deny it on
oath; let him deny it on oath, according to the ‘wite’ and the
worth of the goods. If he will not deny it on oath, let him
make ‘bot’ for the false oath two-fold.


OF TAKING A THIEF, AND THEN LETTING
HIM GO.

86. Let him who takes a thief, or to whom one taken is
given, and he then lets him go, or conceals the theft, pay for the
thief according to his ‘wér.’ If he be an ‘ealdorman,’ let him
forfeit his shire, unless the king is willing to be merciful to him.


OF ACCUSING A ‘CEORLISH’ MAN OF THEFT.
87. The ‘ceorlish’ man who has been oft accused of theft,
and then at last is taken offending, whether »in the fact or
otherwise in open guilt, let his hand or foot be cut off.


yenze and hine ypa foplete B. 4B.H. XSpenne G. %yehd H.
37 zeyanzgene B.A, 38azyp5 B. 39° EB. 4° pypde zedypne fopzylbe
B. -zebpne sopzilbe H. BA. 2 Lyp B. 47 ealdopman sy B.
ealbepman—H. “pohze H. *bucan A. “ye H.add. 47 cyning
BH. 8eyphycer B.G. creplicer H. manner G.H. 5° bero-
zeneyye B. xt pypde becogemyye H. 51” ceonliyce man B. ciophyca
~H. pe H. 8becozen H. /—penpe B. pyyde B. pisse Z.
55 cyppe B.H. add. yynnmgne B. 6 not in EF. 37° BH. 58 ceace
B.H. 5” man handa B. —hand H. not in.” BE. 7 EB,


> The variation is ‘ceac,’ for which see c. 62. below. The trans-
lation assumes that céap is the root of cépan, captare: and that
ceac is the simple form of y-ceac; whence rceacepe, latro. Schac


126 INE8 DOMAS.


BE 1 DON DE 2RYPT-2LESAMPIPAN BEARN 4pJ/EBBEN-
5AND DONNE SE PER LEPITE’
xxxvu. Ing 7ceopl 4 hy Spip beapn hebben *zemé&ne- 4
rene ye Mceopl fopd- hebbe “yio modop” hipe beapn 4 fede.
Pazire hipe *mon -vi-’ yerth to foycpe- *ci on yumepas oxan
on *pintpa. ™Jealden pa “megay pone *ypum-ycol opper
hic gepincped *pe:.


BE 19 UNALEFEDUM 2 FJERE 21 FROM PIS PLAFORDE.

xxxix. Inp *hp@ pane *unalieped ypam hip “hlaronde- oppe
on odpe yeipe hine beytele- y hine *mon geahyize-” rane pep
he ep pey+ 4 *zeyelle hip *hlapopbde -ix-” yeitt.:-


BE 2CEORLES 29 pEORDILE ».


xu. Leopler *peopdiz yceal beon *pincpey y yumepey be-
cyned. “Ing he bid unvyned- 4 *pecd hip *neah-zebupey*
ceap in on hip agen geac- nah he et “pam ceape “nanpuht.
adpupe “hine ut- y polie *[pone] *eeppepdlan:-


pan G. pam H. 2mhe B.G.H. 3zeramhipon G. 4hebban B.A.
habben G. “notin B. SLyp B. Zeopl MH §"B. Y%pepe
BH. Yoaopl H. “Nyeo B./—movep H. !2 and H. add. axyre B.
man A. /-yyx B. 4° MH. Vypinepan B. '6Pealoan B. '7 mazar
BH. yy BH. 97° G. unalypedum B.G. unazelypebum HH.
rape B. Apam BH 2° B. *Bunalypede B. unalysed H.


(s-ceac) occurs in the Longobardic law in the sense of theft: ‘De
furto aut schacho si ultra vi. solid. fuerit, similiter ut per pugnam
veritas inveniatur precipimus. Canciani, 1. p. 232. Again: ‘ Ex-
cepto homicidio, raptu virginum, roboria seu scacho. Du Cange, in
v. ‘Scach. In Old-Frisic, scac-raf is robbery in general, though
most frequently used to denote a highway robbery: ‘ Hwasa deth
en scac-raf, &c.: Whoever commits a robbery,’ &c. Lit. Brocm.
§ 70.

2 As a specific allowance is named for the maintenance of the
infant, the term ‘ceopl’ can hardly be translated ‘husband’ to meet
the general expression of the rubric. Were it not very unlikely that
a ceorl would be possessed of more than one dwelling-house, the
word ‘spum-ycol’ might be translated, in the language of our law-
books, ‘ the principal mansion or capital messuage.’ Perhaps his
house of residence was thus called, to distinguish it from the out-
buildings on the land.

> The old Latin version reads: ‘id est, rustici curtillum’ In a
grant of Edward the Confessor’s, An. 1061, to abbot Wulfwold, a


THE LAWS OF KING INE. 127


IN CASE LAWFULLY MARRIED PERSONS HAVE A
CHILD, AND THEN THE HUSBAND DIE.


88. If a ‘ceorl’ and his wife have a child between them, and
the ‘ceorl’ die, let the mother have her child and feed it: let
vi. shillings be given her for its fostering; a cow in summer,
an ox in winter. Let the kindred take care of the * ¢ frum-stol’
until it be of age.


OF GOING FROM HIS LORD WITHOUT LEAVE.


39. If any one go from his lord without leave, or steal him-
self away into another shire, and he be discovered, let him go
where he was before, and pay to his lord ux. shillings.


OF A ‘CEORL’S’ >CLOSE.

40. A ‘ceorl’s’ close ought to be fenced winter and summer.
If it be unfenced, and his ‘neighbour’s cattle stray in through
his own gap, he shall have nothing from the cattle: let him
drive it out, and bear the damage.


24laronde B. 25’man zeacyize B. —zeaxie H. 26 zylbe B. zerylle H.
27/ Jaryopde yyxciz B. %ciopler H. %popdize B. peoptize A.
30 peond: B. pupdig H. 3lpyncper H. yp B. Bpeced H.
8tnehhebuper B. Spam B. %snanphe B. Vhe MH 8 B.A,
39 eerpyplan B. efpypolan HZ.


part of the boundaries is thus described: ¢ andlanz ycpeamey efc co
Neceleronda and buran pam cpely eecepay mabe. pe liczad on yud-
healg pezey inco pam ppeom poppizan. ny opre co leye: along the
stream again to Nettleford, and without the twelve acres of meadow,
which lie on the south side of the way, into the three closes, for the
pasture of his cattle.’ In the body of the grant these closes are
called ¢ azell.” When transferred by Wulfwold to St. Peter's at
Bath, the distinction between the meadow-land and the closes is thus
clearly stated: ‘and pa feopep popdiay we fEyepican. and pa ekepay
meede pe papco zebypiad. and on puda and on felda. spa micel spa.
pee ic heapbe ler minan opfe and minpa manna opfe: and the four
closes at Ashwick, and the acres meadow appurtenant thereto, and
by wood and by field, so much as would give me pasture for my
cattle and my men’s cattle. (C.C.C.C. cxi. p. 92.

¢ In the Welsh laws it is said: ‘The owner must make his garden
so strong that beasts cannot break into it; and if it be broken into,
there can be no redress, except for the trespass of poultry and geese.’
Wotton, p. 286.


128 INES DOODAS.


Be BORGES !ONDSATLE.
xi. * Bopzey *mon moc Sobyacan giz’ he pac p he *pyhe
de5:-


5 Be SLEORLES LJERS-TUNE.

xi. Ing ’ceoplay sepy-cun *hebben °zemenne- oppe ddep
Mzedal>-land- to tynanne- y hebben yume gecyned “hiopa
dzl- yume ”nebben- 4 * Seccen “hiona zemeenan “zecepay
oppe zepy- “xan pa ponne pe # zeac “Sazan- 4 '’xebete[n]
Bbam odpum fe “hiona oél *zxerynebne *haebben pone”
* ely Jpepdlan pe pep *zeddn *pie- y *abidden 27 him ac bam
ceape *ypile ®pyhe yppylce”’ hic kyn pie’ %Iny ponne
@hnydena *hpele sie’ be *hézapr bpece- 4 ga mm gehpap- y ye
hic nolde *zehealban ye *hic age- oppe ne maze- mme “ye
hic on hip ecepe mete y *dpylea- 4 nime” ye agen-“pmigzea
hiy “fel 4/ pleye- y “polie pey odper:-


Be “pUDU-BJERNETTE/
xt. Donne “mon beam on puda fopbepne- 4 “peopde
Yppe on pone pe hic dyde- “zielde he “pul pice. “zerelle
-Lx-’ yeilt. poppam pe ¢¥p bid peop. Iny %'mon “arelle on
puda Spel “*monega cpéopa-” y “pypd epc “Sundiepne- fop-
gielde «111-7 “cpeopu ale mid *-xxx- yal Ne peapr he
hiona ma “zeldan- pepe “*hiona ypa “pela ypa “hiopa pepe-

“ronpon “yio zee” bid melda- “nalley peor:-


lantbyece B.G.H. ?2man B.H. 8ecyacan A. /-zyp Bo 4mhe
B.H. 5 Be pan pe ceoplay habbad land zemene and zepycunar B.
Sciopler H. 7cioplar H. Shebban B. habban H. %zemene B.H.;
but originally zemenne in H. 'zarol land H. al. zebal-land super-
scribed. “heopa BAH. Vnabben H. 'heopa BH. '4acepnayr B.
b°E.H. Mazon BH. Waebece £. Wpem B.H. 19 héopa B.A.
20 zeryneb B. becyned H.; orig. becynebne. 2!” habben ponne HA.
2 eppypdlan BAH. 3° A. 4yy B.A not in H. %abiddon B.
7hem BH. 2 ypyle BH. %mhe B. ’-yppyle H. 2% cyn py B.
eynn-H, 3 Typ B. 2hpisepa HZ. = 38/ hpile sy B. xzehpyle -— Z.


4 This is: ‘on moc bopzer onyacan,’ &c. The Welsh laws allow
the same privilege to a person sued as surety: ‘If the surety wish to
deny his bail, the denial is made as follows. The form is then given.
Wotton, p. 147.

> It would seem to have been the custom to make the meadow-
land appurtenant to the arable land, and to have granted it as a
tenancy incommon. Thus in one of the Worcester charters, on de-


THE LAWS OF KING INE. 129


OF DENIAL OF «BORH’
41. A man may make denial of **borh,’ if he know that he
_ does right.


OF A ‘CEORL’S’ MEADOW.

42. If ‘ceorls’ have a common meadow, or other partible
land to fence, and some have fenced their part, some have not,
and * eat up their common corn or grass; let those go who
own the gap, and compensate to the others, who have fenced
their part, the damage which there may be done, and let them
demand such justice on the cattle as it may be right. But if
there be a beast which breaks hedges and goes in everywhere,
and he who owns it will not or cannot restrain it; let him who
finds it in his field take it and slay it, and let the owner take
its skin and flesh, and forfeit the rest.


OF WOOD-BURNING.

43. When any one burns a tree in a wood, and it be found
out against him who did it, let him pay the full ‘ wite? let him
give Lx. shillings, because fire is a thief. If any one fell in a
wood a good many trees, and it be afterwards discovered; let
him pay for m1. trees, each with xxx. shillings. He need not
pay for more of them, were there as many of them as might
be; because the axe is an informer, not a thief.


34° B. 3 zehealben H. %*pe H.add. ye pe B. yepe H. 38 ze-
mece HM. 39°F. 7 B. not in B. “ypza B.H. 2 not in B.A.
8polize H. ‘pudu H. puda EL. ’pube bepnece B. man H.
46 pynte B. pupse H. 47zylbe B. gldbe H. 8 yullprce B.A 4 and
gerylle Z. ‘zerylle yyxuz B. Ly B. Aman H. 2arylle B.
apylled H. Spell B. 4mamze H. “maneza cpeope B. 5 pupd
pec B. 6 undypne fopzylbe pneo B. -fonglbe-H. 977 B.
cneopa BH. 8ppicaz B. 9 heonpa B nan H.add. zylban By
zilban H. !heona BH. ® yeola B. H. Sheopa BH. 4 yoppan
B. &/yeo eax B. -ex H. Snalay B


mising a hide of land for three lives, it is said: ‘ ponne xebinad re
fipea ecep pepe dal-mebue co pepe hite: then belongeth the fifth
acre of the partible-meadow to that hide.’ Heming. Chart. f.'72.

¢ There is here apparently an omission, from the inattention of the
transcriber, and which may be supplied in words to this effect: ‘ and
pecen heopa neahgebupey ceap in: and their neighbour's cattle stray
in and eat,’ &c., as in c. 40. above.


130 INES DOQDAS.


Be pUDA 'ONFENLE BUTAN LEAFE/


xiv. Ing ?mon ponne aceopye an tpeop $ mage: >-xxx-
ypina ‘undep-geycandan- y *pypd Sundiepne- gerelle -Lx-”
yout.:.


2 Trarol-hpicel:-pceal beon et ’hipiyce 7-v1- ®peeninza peond:”
Fol-npivel f° py Pp 5a peop


Be 9 BURL-BRYLE.

xiv.  Bupg-bpyce mon’ yceal becan ™-c.xx+ yeitt. ? ky-
ningey> 4 “bipcepey pap hip yuce bid. ™ Ealdopmonner
xxx. pall” Lyninger “pegney -xx-’ yall. Lreyidcunder
monney land-haebbendey * -xxxv- yeilt. 4 bi pon *anyacan:-


BE 21§8T/CL-TYPTLAN.
xLv1. Donne *mon monnan bectyhd $ he ceap **yonytele-
oppe **ronycolenne *°zereopmie- ponne yeeal he be *-ix- ”hyda
onyacan’ pape *piepSe zip he ad-°pypde bid. %°Ing ponne
Enghye “onyval® ga fopd- *onyace ponne”’ be cpy-fealoum.
8Iny hie ponne bid “Pihye Sonycal- ne bid ye ad na pe”
mana.


lanopenze H. “anpenze B. 2man H. 3ppicaz B. 4 undeprcandan
B. Fpupd B. “undypne zerylle pyxuz BA. 7yyx B. *%& peneza
pupd B. peninza pypd H. 9% buph- B.G.H. -bpece G. 1°” Buph-
-man B.H. 'hunb-cpelpaz B. md cxx. H. Veyninger B.A.
13 biyceoper B. biycoper H. 14 €aloopmanney B. Ealdbepmanner Z.
157 mip hunbd-eahtazg yellingay B. 6 peznay prxes B. 17 manner


= If it could be shown that this passage originally had any con-
nection with the preceding law, it would be natural to infer that the
‘whittle’ here spoken of was a knife, paid in the place of rent, and
perhaps for permission to cut wood in the lord’s forest. But these
supplementary passages are often inserted very arbitrarily. The
term ‘hpicel’ also meant a garment. [In Gen. ix. 23. the passage,
‘and Shem and Japheth took a garment,’ &c., is rendered, ‘......
dydon an hpicel on hina sculdpa.’ In the Latin versions this enact-
ment is omitted.—7Z.] And in the continental documents frequent
mention is made of the ‘ camisiles, sarciles,’ which were made by the
‘ancille’ and wives of the ‘ coloni, tributarii, (zarol-zyloan,) as pres-
tations to the lord. A charter of the monastery at St. Galle
(An. 809,) mentions a rent consisting of thirty-five measures (mut)
of corn, or six sarciles. The price of corn at the period shows the
value of the sarcile to have been sixpence, rather a large sum it is
presumed for a woodman’s knife. The following illustrations are
from the Codex Laurishermensis, tom. iii. * Ancille: ad easdem hur-


THE LAWS OF KING INE. 131


OF TAKING WOOD WITHOUT LEAVE.


44, But if any one cut down a tree under which xxx. swine
may stand, and it be discovered, let him pay ux. shillings.


A ** gafol-hwitel’ from a ° ‘hiwise’ shall be worth v1. pence.


OF ‘BURG-BRYCE,’

45. * Bot’ shall be made for the king’s ‘ burg-bryce,’ and a
bishop’s, where his jurisdiction is, with cxx. shillings; for an
ealdorman’s, with Lxxx. shillings; for a king’s thane’s, with Lx.
shillings; for a ‘gesithcund’ man’s having land, with xxxv. shil-
lings: and according to this make the legal denial.


OF THEFT-CHARGE.

46. When a man charges another that he steals, or harbours
stolen cattle, then shall he deny the theft with Lx. hides, if he
be oath-worthy. If, however, an English ¢‘onstal’ come for-
ward, let him then deny it with twice as many. But if it be a
‘ Wilisc’ ‘ onstal,’ the oath shall not be the greater.


B.H, ‘pp and xxx. B. bid B. by} on H. 2onyacan B.
21 pcal-cihclan B. ycal-crhlan G. yeal-cyhclan H. 22man mon H.;
but orig. monnan. 2 yopycéle B.A. 4 yonrcolene B. 25 zereopmize
MH. *%pxca B. 7hita H. /-ecyacan D, 8 peorde B. pyySe H.
2% anbdpynde B. 8% LypB. 31mon yralad B. 32 ecpace B. 3 Ly
B. Apylye B. 5° H. 36 notin He 37 B. mane B.


bas pertinentes faciunt singule camisile Lx. ulnarum in longo v. in
lato de opera dominica’ (the lord finding the materials), p. 178.;
*camisile unum de opera sua,’ p.197.; ‘ vi1I. pannos ex dominico.
lino et x1. ex proprio,’ p.219. See Anton’s Wirthschaft, i. p. 345.

> The translation of this word must depend upon the context;
«hpire’ meant both a hide of land and a family. {Mr. Price had
rendered this obscure enactment thus: ‘ A gafol-hwitel for a hiwisc,’
&e.; but conceiving that its object is to fix the ‘angilde’ of a
‘gafol-hwitel,’ or the rate at which it may be compounded for as
* gafol,’ I have ventured to translate zc by its more usual significa-
tion, from.— T.]

¢ Judging from the context, this appears to be the root of the verb
onycelan, accusare; but in what an English onycal consisted is no
where laid down. The meaning of the law seems to be this: ‘If a
man were accused in the ordinary way, he might wage his law with
sixty hides; but if the prosecutor were an Englishman, and that par-
ticular form of process called an ‘onyval’ was either adopted or


132 INES DOQAE.


JEle ‘mon mot ?onyacan *spymbe* 4 pep-faehSe mp he
*meeg oppe *déan:-


BE DON DE 7MON FORSTOLENNE 8 LEAP BEFEPD,


xiv. °Ing¢ mon “yonycolenne ceap bepehd- ne mot bine
mon “tieman to ™peopum men:


BE pITE-DEOPUM I6SMANNUM.

xiv. “Ing *hpelc man’ bid "pice-peop mipan zepeopad-
4 hine *mon *becyhd $ he hebbe &p *zepiered ep hine
mon **zepeopode. ponne ah ye ceond ane *ypingellan ac him.
bedpure hine to *ypingum >be hiy ceape:-


2* BE UNALIEFEDES MESTENNES ONFENTE.


xLix. Ing mon on np mey’cene *unahiered ypin semete-
genume bonne *.vz- yeitl. **peopd *ped. Ing “hie ponne
pep *naepen opto ponne zene: “zerelle cenne yelling ye agen-
yyigeas y gecySe P hie peep ofcop “ne “comen’ be per
ceapey “‘peopde. Inp’ hn pep “cupa “papen- gerelle” cpezen
yoult.

“Ing “mon nme “zpeyne® on “ypynum: at pny-pingzpum®
P pmdde- sec cpy-pingpum H feonde- et pymelum #f pipte:-


\man H. ?ecyacan B. *yypmie BH. 4meze B. mezz A.
Soeapn BH. 7 B. Spam H. 7man G.A. 8° H.; no rubric in B.
9Gyp B. man H. Myzopycolene B. 12° B. Bman A. Mcymon
B. cyman H. \peopan B. ’—-menn H. 16mannum B.A. men B:
yp B. hpyle ZH 7-monB. YB. man H. 21 becyh B.
2zepeorad B.H. Bzepeopate BH. *ypingelan B.A. % ypnzlum
BH. Be unalypebum meycenum anbyencze. B. unalypeber mey-


necessarily arose, then the compurgators were to be doubled. Ifa
Welshman were the prosecutor, &c. then sixty hides (which were,
perhaps, twice as many as would be required in a defence against
him in common cases) would be sufficient. In the Frisic law,
* oenbring,’ a term equivalent to onycal in an etymological sense, is
of frequent occurrence. This Mr. Wiarda conceives to be the same
with the delatura of the Salic law, in the usual form of action.
[May not onyval signify ‘an accuser’?—Z.]

@ The former of these is probably the offence which in the later
documents is called slymene-rypmde. On a charge of this kind, and
of pep-fehde—slaying a man in prosecution of the deadly feud—a
man is hereby permitted to wage his law. There seem to have been
some offences, such as sacrilege, &c., where this was not permitted.


THE LAWS OF KING INE. 133


Every man may deny *‘frymth’ and ¢ wer-feehthe,’ if he can
or dare.


IN CASE A MAN ATTACH STOLEN CATTLE.


47. If a man attach stolen cattle, the party may not vouch a
* theowman’ to the warranty of it.


OF ‘WITE-THEOWMEN:,’


48. If any man be a ‘ wite-theow’ newly made a ‘ theow,’ and
he be accused that he had before thieved, ere he was made a
© theow,’ then may the accuser have one scourging at him: let
him follow him to the scourging Paccording to his value.


OF TAKING UNALLOWED MAST.


49. If a man among his mast find unallowed swine, then let
him take a ‘wed’ of vi. shillings value. If, however, they have
not been there oftener than once, let the owner pay a shilling,
and let him prove that they came there not oftener, according
to the value of the beasts. If they have been there twice, let
him pay two shillings.

If ‘pannage be taken for swine, of those three fingers thick
in fat, the third; of those two fingers, the fourth; of those a
thumb thick, the fifth.


ceney. H. 7Lyy B. %man H. *unalyped BH. *%yyx Be
3lpupd B. 2petd HM. BLyp B 4m BA. %nepon BA,
ss zerylle BA Fonz BA” B. 3m Bo hy H. ® nepon A,
“comon B. 4lpypte MH. —-Lip B. “epza H. *” peepon zerylle
BH “yp Bo Sman H 4eberne B.A. 47 ypmum B.A.
48 pie B. add.


> [Though Mr. Price’s version agrees with that in Bromton, who
has ‘secundum captale suum,’ yet I doubt whether hiy’ should not
be rendered by ‘its,’ with reference to the property stolen.— 7.]

¢ This is the pasn-agium of the Latin documents; the obes.
(zf-es-en), fructus, of Upper Germany. With a modification com-
mon to the times approaching the Conquest, it is found in Edward
the Confessor’s grant of Cealchythe to St. Peter’s at Westminster:
‘mid meede and mid lere. mid meyce and mid eveyan... And ic an
heom ere ealrpa pec hy habben peepogep yaca and yocna... and
ealle odpe zepshea on eallum pinzgum pe pap upp ayppinzgad. And eac
ypylce co peoyum lanbe mid fullan rpeobome ie ann pee pmidde tpeop
and pet spin of zeveyan :—with meadow and with pasture, with mast
and with pannage. .. And I grant unto them also, that they have


184 INES DOQAS,


Be LESIDLUNDES MONNES LEDINIE.

L. Ing geyrdcund *mon jpingad pid Scyming- oppe pid
‘kyningey ealdopmannan-” fop hip °inhipan- oppe pid hy hla-
Fopd yop peope oppe rop ypige- nah he pep Snane ” prcepaedenne-
ye geyi- foppon *he him nolde °*&p “yyler geytiepan’ ac
ham:-


BE ' DON DE LESIDLUND MAN 12FYRDE FORSITTE.


ui. 3Ing “zeyidcund %mon land-agende fopyrece ®pypde-
Vzerelle -c.xx-’ yell. 4 “polie hip landey- “unlandagende *°-Lx-
ott Liepliye -xxx-’ yet. to *pend-pite?:-


BE 4 DIERNUM LEDINGE.’
Lu. Sepe *diennum? gepingum’ *becyzen sie- geppicne”
hine be *.c.xx- hida’ *pana *zepingea- oppe %-c.xx- yeilt.
51 Zeyelle:.-


Be FORSTOLENES 2MONNES FOREFONTE!


Liu. *Iny “mon ropytolenne man beso ect odpum- 4 “pie
yio hond” *oScpolen “yo hine yealde bam men pe hine *mon
zecbeyenz- “tieme® ponne pone “mon to “pey deadan


\Lyp B. 2man H. 3cynz B. 4 cynzer ealbonmannum B. hip
ealbepmannum #. ‘4imnnipum A. nan H. 7pite-peddene B.
8pe H.add. 9° B. ' yreley zeycypan BH. pam B.A. pan G.
l2pynd G. fypte B.A. piepoe &. BLyp B. ye pScunte B.
man B. mann H. \yypte BH. prepd &. 7 zerylle A. “— hund-
cpelpazg B. \pohze BH. M9landazgende H ~Mypixai Be 2 yeil-
Inga A. Leoplyc A. ’-pmcug B. yend- B. pypo- ZA.


thereover sac and socn. . . and all other rights in all things which
there upspring. And moreover, with this land in full freedom, I
grant the third tree and the pannage hog.’

« The Latin versions render this ‘forisfactura expeditionis ’—the
fine paid for neglecting to obey the summons to the field.

b These secret compositions are forbidden by nearly every early
code of Europe; for by such a proceeding both the judge and the
crown lost their profits. The Capitulary of 593 puts the receiver of
a secret composition on a level with the thief: ‘Qui furtum vult
celare, et occulte sine judice compositionem acceperit, latroni similis
est.’ At a later period, the maxim in France was, ‘ Celui qui avant
quitte se méfait;’ which M. Lauriere illustrates by the following
extract from the Coutume des Bourbonnois: ‘Si le denonciateur ou


THE LAWS OF KING INE. 135


OF A‘GESITHCUND’ MAN’S COMPOUNDING A SUIT.


50. If a ‘gesithcund’ man compound a suit with the king
or with the king’s ‘ealdorman’ for his household, or with his
lord for bond or for free; he, the ¢ gesith,’ shall not there have
any ‘ witerseden,’ because he would not correct him before of
his evil deeds at home.


IN CASE A ‘GESITHCUND’ MAN NEGLECTS THE
*FYRD,

51. If a ‘gesitheund’ man, owning land, neglect the ‘fyrd,’
let him pay cxx. shillings and forfeit his land; one not owning
land, ux. shillings; a ‘ceorlish’ man, xxx. shillings; as * ¢ fyrd-
wite.’

OF PRIVATE COMPOSITION.


52. Let him who is accused of "secret compositions clear
himself of those compositions with cxx. hides, or pay cxx. shil-
lings.


OF SEIZING A STOLEN MAN.


58. If any one attach a stolen man in another’s possession,
and the hand be dead which sold him to the man in whose pos-
session he is attached; then let him ‘vouch the tomb of the


24oypnum G.H. ‘oypnunge pincde B. % oypnum ZH. /—zepinzsum
B. /becozen yy zeclenne he B. —-gelavie H. 27’ hunbd-cpelr-
czun” B. %pepa HM. %pmza B. zepmza H. 3 hunbd-cpelpcz B.
31 zerylle B.H. 32/manney yoppenze. BH. BLyp B. 34man BH.
37 yy yeo hand B.A. %acpolon B. “pe BH. Bnot in A.
%cyme BH. “man BH. 4” pepe bypgenne per beadan manner


accusateur compose ou appointe, pendant le procés, avec l’accusé, et
rapport proufit d'iceluy appointement, l’accusé est tenu en l'amende
envers le seigneur justicier ; et si l’accusé ne rapporte proufit d’icelui
appointement, ou ne baille aucune chose 4 l’accusant ou dénongant;
le dit accusant ou dénoncant est tenu en l’amende.’ Loisel, liv. 111.
tit. i. §'7. In Friesland, the judge was to be privy to the com-
position: ‘ And hwasa telt opp ane ende sin redieua skal thet wita:
And if any one treat for a composition, his judge shall know it.’
And even now, in our own law, the rule is to obtain the sanction of,
the court for permission ‘to speak with the prosecutor,’ and thus
terminate the suit by compounding the affair in private.

¢ This practice of citing the dead to warranty is common to the
laws of Germany and Scandinavia: ‘Olim si quid a quo vel apud


136 INES DOQAS.


"bypgelye-” ppa oben *yioh ypa *[hpeSen ypa} inc *pie- 4 cyde
on *pam ade be %Lx- hida-” $ p10 deade ®hond hine him
yealde. Donne hed he # pice apylled mid “py ade- 4 Mazipe
pam "azend-"ppio pone “monnan. Inj’ he “ponne pice
Shpa pey deadan “iepre habbe- “cieme ponne co “pam
*ienpe- 4 bidde pa *hond be $ *1epye hara’’ *f he him **zedd.
pone ceap *unbeceayne- oppe gecySe f ye *deada neppe $
*S,enpe ahte:.


BE 27 pER-FJEPDE-22 TYPTLAN.


Liv. Sepe bid *pep-paehde becogen+ 4 he *onyacan pille”
peer “ylezey mid ade- ponne yeeal bion on pepe *hyndenne”
an ‘kymng-* [ede] be *-xxx- hida-” ppa be zeyiScundum men
yp2 be *ciephycum- ypa “hpeeden ypa "hic Spe, Iny’” hine
mon zilc- ponne mot he “Zeyellan on’ *pana hyndenna


1 bypgenne B. 2yeoh BA. 3 BH. 4yy BH. Spem B. pam HM.
6 yeopuz~B. 7yeo BH. Shand BH. 91 B. Wand H.add.
azyye B. Nazen H. 12 ppéo B. poze H. man A. “Lyf B.
l4panne H 4° B. ype BH. Weryme BH. Bpem A.
i inpe BH. Mhand 7B. Aypre B. /’—hared H. pe B.
3° BE.H. 2tunbeyacene BH. *bdease B. %ypre BH. 27 pep-


quem esset actum, hujusque rei testimonium propter mortem ejus
haberi jam non posset; solebant ire ad sepulcrum et cum jurejurando
etiam consacramentalium fidem defuncti contestari. Que dicebatur
contestatio super sepulcrum, s. super fossam mortui, super mortuum,
super os mortui.’ Jus Prov. Alem. ec. vii. §2. ‘ Die schulde, die man
niht en waizz, die sol man ERZIUGEN UF DEN TOTEN MANN Selb
sibender: Ea debita, de quibus non constat, probari debent septima
manu, super mortuum debitorem.’ c. viii. § 3. ‘¢ Ist aber dehain
schulde UF DEN TOTEN MAN ERZIUGET so biizzen auch die erben
niht.’ ec. eclxxxvi. § 3. ‘Ist er aber ir friunt worden und mag man
daz BEHABEN HINTZ DEM TOTEN MANNE mit siben mannen £0 ist er
ledig gen dem erben und gen dem rihter: Si autem defunctus cum
ledente transegerit, aut alio modo amice res composita fuerit, idque
super defunctum probari possit per septem testes, ledens ad nihil
tenetur heredibus aut judici.. Haltaus, in voc. GRAB. In the old
Swedish law it is said: ‘ Han skal biudha bot a grawarbacka: Mulc-
tam occisor offeret super tumulo mortui.’ Upl. Z. Mont. B. c. 7.
Upon which Ihre observes: ‘Mos erat veterum, apud sepulcra jus-
jurandum edere, et istiusmodi actus, qui aliquo modo defunctum
‘illiusve actiones tangebant. Lex Suio-Goth. in voce GRAF.

a In these dooms, offences involving the penalty of the ‘ were’
appear to have this term prefixed to their designation. Thus, in
c. 71, we have ‘ pepzihcla,’ and c. 72, ‘ penzilb peor.’


THE LAWS OF KING INE. 187


dead to warranty of the man, in like manner with other pro-
perty whatsoever it may be; and with the oath of Lx. hides let
him declare that the dead hand sold him to him. Then has he
abated the ‘ wite’ with that oath: and let him give up the man
to the owner. But if he know who has the property of the
dead, let him then vouch the property to warranty, and demand
of the hand which has that property, that he make the chattel
uncontestable to him; or prove that the dead man never owned
that property.


OF CHARGE OF ‘WER-FEHTHE,


54, He who is charged with * ‘ wer-fiehthe,’ and he is willing
to deny the slaying on oath; then shall there be in the
><hynden’ one * king’s oath of xxx. hides, as well for a ‘ gesith-
cund’ man as for a ‘ceorlish’ man, whichsoever it may be.
If he be found guilty, then may he give to any one of the


pebre G. %8cyhlan B. chelanG.H. %/ecyacan pylle B. 30 slezer
B. Xbeon BH. hyntene B. 3 B.H. wde BH. 34 ppicag ~ B.
3 ceophycum B. cyphycum AH. %hpedep Be 397" B. Bry A.
’-Ly B. ®man HM “gle BA. “i geryllan B. /—an A.
42 pena B.A.


> It has been already observed, that the hynden consisted of ten.
persons, and, like hynde, in the words twy-hynde, six-hynde, twelf-
hynde, appears to have been formed from hund, of which the ori-
ginal meaning was ten. The hynden, therefore, will correspond to
the turba of the Civil Law (quia turba decem dicuntur. Lege
Pretor. 4. § Turbam), the tourbe of the French Coutumes: ‘ Coutume
si doit verefier par deux tourbes et chacun d’icelles par dix temoins.’
Loisel, liv.y. tit. 5. e 13.

¢ According to the treaty between Alfred and Guthrum: ‘If any
one accused a thane of less degree than a king’s thane, he was to
clear himself with eleven of his equals, and with one king’s thane.’
c.3. It would be natural to offer such an interpretation of the king-
oath in this law; but by c.19, a king’s geneat, whose were was
1,200s., might swear for sixty hides, and here the oath of the party
is only of thirty hides. If, however, the principle of both laws be
the same, we may venture perhaps, in the present instance, to sub-
stitute c.xx. for xxx., and thus make the whole system of the ‘pim-
ad’ intelligible, by showing an agreement in all the details. We
should then have the oath of a king’s thane equivalent to one hun-
dred and twenty hides, or 120s., the highest wite occurring in these
dooms; the oath of a less thane equal to sixty hides, or 60s., the
next greatest wite’; and the oath of a six-hynde equal to thirty hides,
or 30s., the lowest wite.


138 INES DOMAS.


1zehpelcepe- ?monnan y*bypnan y ypeopd on } Spep-zild- z1y7
he *pypye.

Pice-peopne >monnan *Pyhycne mon’ yceal bedmypan be
cpelp 7hibum- ypa peopne- to *ppingum. Cnghycne be *yeopep.
by pprccig’ @hida:-


BE "Epes 12 peORDE.


Ly. 8€pe bid md hine “ziunze yceape peilt. peopd. oppeer
®[.xmu-] mhv’ oren Eaycpon:-


BE ’GEppeLLes LEAPES 18 ANGELDEs.


tvt. Ing mon hpelene’ ceap zebyzed- 4 he ponne *!on-
yinde him *hpelce unhelo” on *binnan -xxx-/ mhta-+ ponne
peoppe *pone ceap to *honda®. opbe *ppemize f he him nan
*8racn on nyy’ce pa he hine him yealde:.


BE 2 LIERLISLES 3° MONNES 31 STALE.
tv. *Inp Sceopl ceap “yonyceld- 4 “biped into np
Seonne- 4 7 berehd *[hic] pep-inne *mon- bonne bid “ye ny
del “yynmg- butan bam pipe anum- “foppon heo yceal hipe
Sealdone mepan’” “Ing “hio deap mid ade gecydan  heo
per fopycolenan ne onbrce- nme hipe “pmdbdan * pceac:”


48BE OXAN PORNE.


Lyin. Oxan hopn bid *-x- peeninga peopd:-”


1 gehpylepe B. zehpylcepe H. 2monna BE.H. % penzylb H. ’—zyp
B. 4puppe BH. 5 man A; but orig.monnan. © Pilyene man
BH. 7hynoum B. *ypmzlum B.A. = yeopep and xxx. B.
xxxuu. H, Whyoa B. Neope B. eopes G.H. lpypte B.A.
13 €opu B. e superscribed H. 4zeonze B. zeonzan H. xu. B.
feopepryne B. / xu. nyhe H. \Earcpan BH. 7 zehpyleer B.G.
zehpilcer H. '8 pypde B. angilbe G.H. Lye B. 2” man hpylene
Hf. larmte B. 7 on hpylee H. “hpylene unhele B. 23 binnon
Hf. ‘-pmcag B. %he H. add. *%handa B. pam yyllende B.


a This seems a provision similar to that of the Ripuarian law:
‘Si quis wergildum solvere debet .... spatam cum scogilo pro
septem solidis tribuat ..... bruniam pro duodecim solidis tribuat,
&c. Quod si cum argento solvere contigerit pro solido duodecim
denarios sicut antiquitus est constitutum.’ Tit. xxxvi. cc. 11,12. In
like manner it is said in the Conqueror’s laws: ‘ en la were purra il


THE LAWS OF KING INE. 139


* hyndens,’ a *man and a coat of mail and a sword, in the
‘wer-gild,’ if he need.

A *Wylise wite-theowman’ shall be followed up with twelve
hides, like a ‘ theow,’ to the scourging; an English, with ° four
and thirty hides.


OF A EWE'S WORTH.


55. A ewe with her young sheep shall be worth a shilling,
until xiv. days after Easter.


OF THE ¢‘ ANGYLDE’ OF ALL KINDS OF CATTLE.


56. If a man buy any kind of cattle, and he then discover
any unsoundness in it within xxx. days; then let him throw the
cattle on his hands, or let him swear that he knew not of any
unsoundness in it when he sold it to him.


OF A ‘CEORLISH’ MAN’S STEALING.


57. If a ‘ceorl’ steal a chattel, and bear it into his dwelling,
and it be attached therein; then shall he be guilty for his part,
without his wife, for she must obey her lord. If she dare to
declare by oath that she tasted not of the stolen property, let
her take her third part.


OF AN OXES HORN.


58. An oxes horn shall be worth x. pence.


add. ypeme B. *Byacen H. ®%eyphycer B.G. eiphiycer A.
20manner B.G.H. Icale G. 2 Lyp B. Beiopl MH. *#yonycyls B.
fopyceled H. 5 bened B. byps H. 26huye H. I. epne superscribed.
37man B.add. 38 and hic man pep mne bepehd H. ic B. not
in B. “notin B., and erased from H, “\yeylnz A. pnmg B.
yeyloiz superscribed. “yoppan B.H, *’ealope hypan B. hlafopbe
-H. “Ly B. “Sheo BH. 4’ pene ppiddan dal pepe ehca B.
47 zercead H. 48 no rubric in B. 4 seopepcyne penmza pupd B.
ceon — pypse A.


rendre cheval ki ad Ja coille pur xx. sol, e tor pur x. sol, e aver pur
v.solz. c.8. Holkham ms.

b The relative distinctions observed throughout these dooms be-
tween the degrees of a Wealh and an Englishman make it more than
probable that we ought to read reopep and xx.

¢ If the rubric be correct, anzelte, in this place, must mean either
the return of the goods, or the money paid for them.


140 INES DOMAS.


BE 1ZUUS PORNE.
tix. ? Liiu-hopn *bid *tpezea Spemmga’ °[pupd.] Oxan
veg] bid “yeitt. peopd. LCuuy’ bid ®piya °[peneza.] Oxan eaze
bid pry Mp. peopd.” Lup bid * perth. peopd.”
Mon yceal *yimle to bepe-gayole “azipan et anum *pyphtan
rix © pund-pega:”


BE 17pYR-LEOPTE.
ux. Se Sceopl yepe hard” oSper Mzeoht ah¥pod- **zi¢ he
hebbe ealle on yoSpe cto “agipanne- geyceapige mon- *azize
ealle’ *Inp he nebbe- *azipe healp on fodpe- healg on
odpum ceape:-


BE 26 CIRIL-27§LEATTE.


ux. *Diuc-yeeacs mon’ yeeal *azipan- to pam “healme? 4
co pam heopde pe ye mon on bid to *middum pintpa:-


cBE BDON DE 4MON TO 5 LEAPE FORDR CFE.


Lx. Donne “mon bid tyhtlan “becyzen 4 hime mon


let H. no rubricin B. 2 Tt- BH. 3not in B. 4 v. pennga A.
5peniza B. 6B. 7/1111. peoneza pups. Lu-ceg B. 8pp B. ve A
9B. pennza H. 17 peoneza pypd B. penmza~H. 1 Lu-eaze B.
2rellnger B./-H. 3yymle B. Mazyran B. azgypen H.  15/v1.
pund—- H. 16 pund in E. is wanting. 177 E. hype- A. hyp-oxan B.
18ciopl pe hebbe ZH Woxan B. 2%ahyped HB. A xyp B.


a The term ‘pyphtan,’ when used alone, generally means a la-
bourer: ‘ hep sy mycel pip and repa pyphtena:—the harvest truly is
great, but the labourers are few.’ Luc. x.2. (received version.) In
composition it answers to our modern ‘wright.’ ‘Lyy-pyphcan ze-
byped hundpeb cyye. and pec heo of ppinzh-peze. bucepan macize.
co hlaropber beobe. and hebbe hipe pa yypinge ealle. bucan per
hypoer dele.’ C.C.C.C. ms. 885. ‘ Caseum facienti reddere convenit
c. caseos, et ut butirum faciat ad mensam domini sui de siringia, et
habeat sibi totam siringiam preter partem pastoris.’ Cot. ms. Titus,
A. 27. Both the subject-matter and the mode of expressing it seem
to forbid either interpretation on the present occasion. We should
do better perhaps to consider ‘pyphca’ as equivalent to or of the
same family with the ‘ factus’ of the Capitularies, a certain measure
of land: ‘ Ex capitulis Domini Karoli, qualiter ex factis aut mansis,
vel quartis, servitium agatur. Pro nimia reclamatione que ad nos
venit de hominibus ecclesiasticis seu fiscalinis, qui non erant adiur-
nati quando in Ceenomannico pago fuimus, visum est nobis una cum
consultu fidelium nostrorum statuere, ut quicunque de predictis


THE LAWS OF KING INE, 14]


OF A COW’S HORN.


59. A cow’s horn shall be worth two pence; an oxes tail
shall be worth a shilling; a cow’s shall be five pence; an oxes
eye shall be worth five pence; a cow’s shall be worth a shilling.

There shall always be given as barley-rent from one *‘wyrhta’
six pounds.


OF A HIRED YOKE,


60. The ‘ceorl’ who has hired another’s yoke, if he have
to pay wholly in fodder, let that be looked to, let him give it
wholly. If he have not, let him pay half in fodder, and half
in other goods.


OF CHURCH SCOT.


61. Church-scot shall be rendered according to the > ‘healm’
and to the hearth that the man is at at mid-winter.


cIN CASE A MAN COMPEL [ANOTHER] TO GIVE
PLEDGE.


62. When a man is charged with an offence, and is com-


2azvranne BH. azyye B. notin H. Ly B. Aazyre B.
26 eynic- G. 27 -yceaccum G.H. 28’ Lypic- man BH. 29 azypan
BH. ®halme B. 31 man B. %2middan B. mide H. but orig.
midsum. pan B.G. pam H. orig.n. man B.G.H. * ceace
B.G.H. %6man H. 37 bevozen B.A


hominibus quartam facti teneret, cum suis animalibus Seniori suo
pleniter unum diem cum suo aratro in campo dominico araret, et
postea nullum servicium ei manuale in ipsa ebdomada a Seniore suo
requireretur.’ Cap. v. c. 303.

b This word, in its simplest signification, meant a straw; and hence
its secondary meanings, a chimney, and a roof of thatch. The latter
may have been its import here: nor, in this sense, is the word al-
together obsolete in the provinces.

¢ [Although I have dismissed from the text the version of this
law given by Mr. Price, yet, in a case affording very ample scope for
doubt, and as his annotations have reference to that version, I have
not ventured to suppress it; it ran thus: ‘In case a man follow up
another to ceap.—When a man is charged with an offence, and he is
followed up to ‘ ceap,’ not having then himself aught to give before
ceap ; and then goeth another man, gives his goods for him in such
manner as he may bargain, on the condition that he pass into his
service until he can restore him his goods. Then charges him a man
afterwards another time, and followeth him up to ceap; if he whe


142 INES DOODAS.


bedmiyed co *ceape- nah ponne *yely S{nan piht] to *zerellanne
*befopan *ceape. bonne zee odep man: Syeled Inp ceap rope
ypa he ponne Zepingian mege- on pa 7p&denne pe he him Za
co Shonda oppec he ny ceap *him zeimman “m&ze. Donne
becyh3 hine mon ec odpe yide- y “beduzd co ’ceape. zip’
hine ropd *nelle yopycandan yepe him ep ceap rope yealde- 4
he hine ponne fopfehd- “pohze ponne ly ceaper ’yepe he him
zp fone yealde:.


leeace B.H. 2yylp BH. 3nane pihe #. 4 yyllanne B. zeryllanne
H. ‘ceace B.H. ‘yylat B. 7peddeneB.° H. sShanbda BH.


a [The word beronan is used here apparently in the sense of yop,
though I should have hesitated to give it this signification in the
present instance, had it not been sanctioned by a passage in the


before gave his goods for him, will not stand by him again, and he
then convict him, let him then who before gave for him lose his
goods. —7.]

The mss. B.G.H. read, ‘sopdpere co ceace.’ In the correspond-
ing passages of the text, B. and H. (the text is wanting in G.
adopt the same variation: and it has been already noticed, that, in
ce. 37., where the present text reads ‘zero in ceape,’ the same Mss.
have ‘zero in ceace. These repeated substitutions of ‘ ceace’ for
*ceape’ clearly prove that we have not to deal with an error of the
transcriber, but that ‘ceac’ and ‘ceap’ are mere dialectic variations.
This transmutation is not of frequent occurrence; yet the instances
are sufficiently numerous to establish the law:


Waffen, Germ. Weapon, £. Wakn, Suio- Goth.
Haften, — hepta, S.G. Stechten, Platt-D.
Brautlauf, — Bryllaup, Dan. Brutlacht, —
Keeft, S.G. Kiaptur, Jsl. Teac, A.-Sazon.


It would be an easy task to increase the list. The following pas-
sages from the Richt-staig, an old German law-book, written in the
dialect of Austria, exhibit the transmutation in the root of our pre-
sent text: ‘Budet men dii ter antworde om verkochie (verkaufte
Ms. B. zeceaped A.S.): If any one ask a replication of thee respect-
ing (things) bought. Again: ‘ Wer du yet naerre to behalden siids
diins kopes (ceapey A.S.) end diines gekochten (geceapebdan A.S.)
goedes dan hie dii mit synen ede dat toe ontweren sy.’ C. x11.
* Whether thou art nearer (Conf. Aithelred. 11. c.10.) to retain thy
purchase and thy purchased goods, than he to defend it with his
oath.’ The integrity of the mss. is therefore sufficiently supported ;
and there can be as little doubt that the terms ‘ceap’ and ‘ceac’
were used interchangeably to denote the same thing. From a docu-
ment published by Dugdale, it seems that ‘ cippus’ (Confer. Cesar.
B.G. lib. vii. ¢. 73.) was either a place or instrument of punishment;
and apparently, as it is rendered by Cowel, a pair of stocks:
* Habeant necnon cippos et conclusoria in singulis villis ad correc-


THE LAWS OF KING INE. 1438


pelled to give pledge, but has not himself aught to give *for
pledge; then goes another man, [and] gives his pledge for
[him], as he may be able to arrange, on the condition that he
give himself into his hands, until he can make good to him his
pledge. ‘Then again, a second time, he is accused and com-
pelled to give pledge; if he will not continue to stand for him
who before gave pledge for him, and he [the last accuser] then
imprison him; let him then forfeit his pledge, who had before
given it for him.


Snot in H. "BB. Ubedbpiped A. 2 ceace H. /—Lyp he B.
BnylleB. 4polle B. “pe ZH


Vercelli us. (p.74, 1.19,) viz. pe he beropan manna yynnum feyce
+XL» baza J nihta, ze. ‘for the sins of men,’ &c.—7Z.]


tionem delinquentium.’ Mon. Angl. 2 p. fol.349a. By Du Cange
the same word is interpreted ‘ instrumentum quo reorum pedes con-
stringuntur.’ And again, from an old glossary: ‘ Cipus chep a mestre
malfacteurs.’ In this sense our vocabularies contain no record of
* ceap,’ and they are equally silent with respect to ‘ceac. But in
the old German vocabulary known by the name of Vetus Teutonista,
‘ caeck’ is explained ‘a pillory:’ and by Kilian, ‘kaecke’ is defined
—‘ Schavot, suggestus sive structura sublimis rotunda, instar cadi
sive ocrez, in qua malefici ad horas aliquot proponuntur deridendi.
In old Danish, this structure is called a ‘kag,’ the obvious root of
the French and English ‘cage; of which latter Junius has said:
‘ Catasta pegma, in quo ad columnam, collo manibusque adstrictis,
exponebantur vulgo hominum ludibriis.’ The identity then of ‘ceap’
and ‘ ceac,’ as indicative of a place or instrument of punishment,
seems beyond dispute. The next difficulty lies in the phrases of the
rubric and the text, ‘ropopefe co ceape,’ and ‘bedpizad co ceape.’
They are clearly idiomatic forms of expression. The verb bedmyan
is met with in cc. 48. 54., and on both occasions has been rendered
‘to follow up.’ According to Ihre, the S.G. ‘ drifwa’ meant per-
cutere, verberare ; and was equivalent to the A.S. ‘lean,’ ferire, the
German ‘schlagen.’ In Sweden it was said, ‘Slo a annan fe sinu:
in alterius pascua pecus suum immittere:’ in Germany they still
say, ‘die schwein in die eicheln schlagen: to drive the hogs into
the mast:’ and, what is still more to our purpose, ‘ Einen in den
stock legen oder schlagen: to put a man in the stocks. This latter
is an ancient idiom: ‘ Soe wie valsche mate met of wichte weghet
die solt men te stupe slaen. Gloss. March. ad Spec. Sax. Lib. 11,
art.13. ‘ Whoever measures (with) a false measure, or weighs with
a false weight, shall be brought to the whipping-post.’ ‘ Einen an der
schrayat schlagen. Jus Vetus Aug. c.45. ‘An der schraiat slahen.’
Jus Prov. Alem. c.188.: ‘to put a man in the pillory.” A similar
mode of expression occurs in the old Danish law: ‘Er han man tha
skall han aff Rodzens budh slags till kaghen. Waldemar rr. Pri-


*


144 INES DOMAS,


BE LGESIDLUNDES 1}MONNES 2 F JERE.


Lx. *Ing geyiscund man rapes ponne mot he habban hip
seperan mid him. y ln pmid- 4 hip eld-*peypepan:-


BE 4+DAM DE 5 PsECFD -XX- 6PYDA LANDES.’


LxIv. Sepe heyd 7-xx- hidas ye ypeeal ®caecnan -xi- hida’
geyeccey landey Fonne he yapan °pille:.


BE 10 xi upIDUM.
uxv. Sepe herd %-x- Inda™ ye peeal “caecnan -vi-’ hida
Zeyeccey landey:-
Be +I PIDUM/
Lxvi. Sepe hebbe “pneo hida-’ “caecne odpey healyey®:-


Imanney BH. 2yane B. 3 Ly B. 4panG. Shard B. Shida
G.H./-B. 7cpenag B. %cecan cpp“ B. %pylle B. Meyn B.
Uhyoum G. Wen B. lander A. add. '4/cxcan syx B.


2 In a vocabulary cited by Lye, this word is rendered nutrix.
The important station held by such a person in ancient families is
evidenced by this fact, that so late as the time of Edw. I. it was con-
sidered treason against the lord for his tenant to debauch the nurse


vilegium for Lund. c.18. ‘If it be a man, he shall by command of
the council be put in the cage.’ And again: ‘Kan han them icke
uthgive han slaas til kaghen eller oc lose sigh fran foghet, burge-
mestre oc radh som han meth thennum kan ens wordhe.’ Christopher
of Bavaria’s Copenhagen Law, vi. c.29. ‘If he cannot pay that
(the wite), he is to be put in the cage, or compound with the vogt,
burgomaster and council, as he can answer to (satisfy) them.’ With
these illustrations, we may, perhaps, venture to translate the opening
of this law: * When a man is accused of an offence, and the accuser
prosecutes him to punishment, (and) he then has nothing (where-
with) to pay before punishment.’ The substance of this law is to
be found in the Capitularies: ‘Liber qui se loco wadii in alterius
potestatem commiserit, ibique constitutus damnum aliquod cuilibet
fecerit, qui eum in locum wadii suscepit, aut damnum solvat, aut
hominem in mallo productum dimittat, perdens simul debitum prop-
ter quod eum in wadio suscepit. Et qui damnum fecit, dimissus
juxta qualitatem rei cogatur emendare.’ Cap. 11. An. 803. 8. &c.
And the Latin formule in Canciani contain several precedents for
such compacts: the following is from the Formule Mabillonii:
¢Domno mihi proprio illo, ego illi, Et quia conjunxerunt mihi culpas
et meas magis necligentias pro furta quid feci, unde ego in turmentas
Sui, et eologias feci, et morte pericolum ex hoc incurrere debui; set
habuit pietas vestra datis de * ris vestras solidus tantus. Ideo hane


THE LAWS OF KING INE. 145


OF A ‘GESITHCUND' MAN’S GOING AWAY.


63. If a ‘gesithcund’ man go away, then may he have his
reeve with him, and his ‘ smith,’ and his child’s ? fosterer.


OF HIM WHO HAS XX. HIDES OF LAND.


64. He who has xx. hides, shall & show xu. hides of cultivated
land, when he wishes to go away.


OF X. HIDES.


65. He who has x. hides, shall ® show vi. hides of cultivated
land.


OF III. HIDES.
66. He who has three hides, let him ® show one and a half.


157 pned ti. B. 167 pneo~ B. pneona #. 111. hia lander H. 17 cece
B. 'hybser zereccer H. add.


of his children: ‘si come de treason fait a ascun seigniour par le
pargiser de sa femme ou de sa fille ou de la norice de ses enfants.’
Britton, ¢. 22.

b [¢ Deliver up. P. Committere. Brom. Aufweisen. Sch.]


epistolam venditione de integrum statum omni peculiare meo vobis
emittendam curavi, ut quidquid ab hodierna die de memetipso facere
volueritis, sicut et de reliqua mancipia vestra originaria, in omnibus
Deo presole habeas potestatem faciendi,’ &c. Cane. vol. 111. p. 470.
In the old Liibeck law, mention is also made of this permission to
compound for offences punishable by excoriation of the head, and
which was done at the stocks or whipping-post: ‘ So we mit duve
begrepen wirt, unde di duve beter is dann en virdine, den schal man
hangen; is dat di duve beneden eme virdinge is, men schal den dief
scheren, is oc dat he sic uthkopet mit sineme gude, des wert dat
dridde del deme gerichte” Ant. Jus Lubec. art. clxxvi. ‘If a man
be taken with stolen goods upon him, and they are worth more than
a virdine, he shall be hanged: if they are worth less, he shall have
his head excoriated; and if he compound with money for the punish-
ment, the third part of the composition shall be given to the Court.’
It only remains to observe that the old Latin version renders the
rubric, ‘Si quis ad ceace pertrahatur, z.e., contamen vel fauces vel
ancidiam :’ for ‘ancidiam’ another ms. reads ¢ ancillam ;' which would
seem to indicate that the original was ‘maxillam.’ In the body of
the law is read, ‘ad fauces cohortatur—ad captale pertrahatur:’ and
for ‘ beponan ceace, ‘ante certamen,’ by which also the rubric should
be corrected.


146 INES DOMAS.


Be !1GYRDE 2LONDES 2’
txvu. *Ing ¢mon gepmnga8’ sypde lander oppe mepe co
bnede-zapole- y °zeened- zip’ ye hlapond him ’pile } land
apeepan co peonce y to gafole- ne peapr he him ®onron °ziy he
him nan botl ne ”yeld. 4 ™ pole © pana ” zecpa:.”


Be BLESIDLUNDES 4MONNES DR,JCFE’ OF 5 LONDE.


yxvi. Ing mon geyrdcundne “monnan adyige- fopdmure
py bocle- neep pape yecene:.


Be SLEAPES BLONEE 9 MID pls 2 FLIESe’
LxIx. Sceap yceal gongan mid hy #4 here 05 midne yumop-
oppe *zilde p *yheyre mid *cpam *paeninzum::


Be TpY-pYNDUM peRE.

Lxx. Ec ctpy-hyndum pepe mon yeeal *’yellan to *mon-
bote -xxx- perth. 2c %-vie hyndum *.Lxxx: pertt. sec cpelf-
hyndum * «c.xx.

JEc 8.x. hidum to foytpe- %-x- paca *huniey- % «ccc hlapa-
-xu-’ Sambpa *Pihycey ealad-’ %-xxx- hluccper-” “cu eald
hySepu’ oppe *°-x- pedenay. “+x. # zeep. -xx- hennas “-x-
‘Sceyay- ““amben fulne buvepan- “-v- leaxay- “-xx- pund-
peza pooper: 4 hund-ceontiz *éla:-


Vane lander H. 2notin B. 3Lyp B. “man zepinzed A. 5 mane
H. “ened H.; but orig. zeeped. /zeepad zyp B. 7pyleB. 8° £.
9ayp B. Myyld B. phd H. 1 polize Iny ecepa H. Vecena B.
Byrécundey G. 14manner G.H. /—opase B. 1 lanbe B.G. lanbde
HY, \Gyp B. “mann H. '8zanze B.G.H. 1% notin B. 29 zleye
G. lye H. A plyye BH. 2 zylbe B. %yzleor B. plyp A. 2411. A.
2 penegum BH. %man BH. 7 yyllan BA. %man- MH. 945


a The quantity of a yard of land varied considerably in the several
counties. According to the ancient custumal already quoted, it would
seem in some places to have been the measure of a Gebur’s estate:
‘On pam yylpum lanbe. pe peor peben on-ycanc. zebupe zebyped.
pec him man co lanbd-setene ysylle 1. oxan. and 1. cu and VI. ;ceap.
and VII, zcepar zerapene on hip zypoe lanbey.’ C.C.C.C. ms. 383.
‘In ipsa terra ubi hee consuetudo stat, moris est ut ad terram assi-
dendam dentur ei duo boves et una vacca et VI. oves et VII. acre
seminatz in sua virgata terre. Cot. ms. Titus, A. 27.


> Perhaps it would be more correct to consider this the ‘reede-
geld’ ‘ parata pecunia’ of Germany, the ‘reede-penningh’ of the
Danish law.


THE LAWS OF KING INE. 147


OF A *YARD OF LAND.

67. If a man agree for a yard of land, or more, at a * fixed
rent, and plough it; if the lord desire to raise the land to him
to service and to rent, he need not take it upon him, if the lord
do not give him a dwelling: and let him ‘lose the crop.


OF DRIVING A ‘GESITHCUND’ MAN OFF THE LAND.


68. If a ‘gesithcund’ man be driven off, Jet him be driven
from the dwelling, not from the stock.


OF A SHEEP’S GOING WITH ITS FLEECE.
69. A sheep shall go with its fleece until Midsummer, or let
the fleece be paid for with two pence.


OF A ‘TWY-HYNDE’'S WER.’

70. With a ‘twy-hynde’ man’s ‘wér’ shall be given, as
‘man-bot,’ xxx. shillings; with a six-‘ hynde’s,’ Lxxx. shillings ;
with a twelve-‘ hynde’s,’ cxx. shillings.

With x. hides, as ‘foster,’ x. vessels of honey, ccc. loaves,
xu. ‘ambers’ of ‘ Wilisc’ ale, xxx. of clear; two full-yeared
oxen or x. wethers, x. geese, xx. hens, x. cheeses, an ‘amber’
full of butter, v. salmons, xx. pounds of fodder, and a hundred
eels.


B. add. = %yyx BH. Ahunbd-eahvacig B. 32hund-rcpelparz PB.
8cyn B. *hunizer H. 5” pneo hund ~ cpelp B. 3 ambper Z.
37/ Dyliycey ealod B. —eolod A, 28 ppicaiz hlucpey B. 3°” cpa ealoa
pydsepu B. 11. ealoe hpySepu ZH. “cyn B. Aland cyn B. 4276 A.
%cpenei B. “and cyn B. “cypay BH. 4 Biadd. 47 py B.
84 H.add. cpennz B. “peza B. %c. HH. A" B.


¢ The translation assumes that this clause contains a beneficial
provision for the tenant. If the lord make a demand of increased
advantage to himself—that is, of service in addition to the rent
previously agreed upon—he may do so, provided at the same time
he give an equivalent; to wit, a botl; for to this, as a tenement,
service shall be incident. If he do not give the botl, and still chuse
to determine the tenure. by enhancing the terms, let him lose the
crop; that is to say, his proportion of it. It is still a principle of
our law, that if the landlord of a tenant at will determine the tenancy
by ejecting the tenant, the latter shall have the crop without paying
any rent. [I am inclined to prefer the reading of Lambarde and of
fi: «4 ne polize papa (hip) ecpa: and let him (the tenant) not
forfeit the (his) fields. — 7.]


- a


148 INES DOOAS.


BE ! p€R-TYPTLAN.?
LxxI. ? Ing mon °pie pep-cyhtlan’” betogen- 4 he hic ponne
4zeondecte beropan ade- 4 Ponyace “€p- Sbide mon’ md pepe
pite-’ nsedenne oppeet ye pep Zegolden ®yie:-


cBE 9pER-LELD-DEOFES 10 FOREFONKE.
txxu. "Ing mon "pep-gild-peop zerehS- 4 he ®loyize py”
deze pam “monnum pe hine zerod- peah hine ™mon Zero’
ymb nthe. nah him “mon mape et *ponne ful * pice:


¢ Be 2ANRE 21 NIPTES 22 DIEFDE.


txxi. SIng hie bid *nihv-eald *piepd- gebécen” pa pone
syle pe hime gerenzon+ ypa hie zepingian *megen- pid
*eyming 4 my geperan:-


BE 2DON DE 3 DEOP-PEALP 31FRIONE MON’ 82 OFSLEA.


txxiv. Ing peop-pealh Enghycne “*monnan ofyhhis- ponne
yeeal yepe hine ah peoppan hine to “honda hlaropde 4 *mz-
gum: oppe * -x- pert. ®zeyellan prs hiy peope. Ing he ponne
pone ceap nelle rope “!zerellan- ponne mot hine ye hlaropd
“zerneozan. “zielden yippan’ iy “mazar pone pep “zip he
meg-“bupg hebbe ypeo. ‘7 Ing he neebbe- heden np “pa


1pep-cthclan H. -cihlan G. -cyhlan B. 2 Ly B. 3yy Mi
-cyhlan B. ‘4zeantdecre BH. °° BE. Sabise B. /-man A.
7-pedene H.; but orig. -pebenne. %yy BA. %pepgld BGA.
10 roperenze B.G.H. “Lys B. Mypepzylo B. Blope A. “pi B.
Mmannum B man” BA Wnyhe HZ man A '8ponon
B. 9° B. %®annpaG. Ambre B. nhrae G. 2 pyyce B. pypde
G.H, By B. *nyhe H.  pyyps H./-"B. Binz B. hy ZA.


* An accusation involving the penalty of the wergild. See above,
p. 136, note.

A provision, explanatory of this law, occurs in the Privilegia
Civitatis Ripensis, (1269): * Si quis querimoniam de altero moverit
quacunque de causa, et alter negaverié coram advocato et consulibus,
et super hoc juramentum prestare noluerit, sed pocius reddere, quam
jurare maluerit, eo, quod prius negavit, persolvet advocato II. oras
et oe II. oras denariorum.’ C.46. See also Eric’s Zealand Law,
p. 494.

¢ These chapters, though they have separate titles, ought to be
considered as consecutive propositions of the same law. They allude
to a very important distinction occurring in every early Germanic
code: ‘Multum olim intererat, ne accusatio maleficii manifesti


THE LAWS OF KING INE. 149


OF #‘ WER-TYHTLE,’


71. If a man be accused of ‘ wer-tyhtle,’ and he then confess
it before the oath, and had previously *denied it; let the ‘ wite-
reeden’ abide until the ‘ wér’ be paid.


cOF THE CAPTION OF A ‘WER-GILD’ THIEF.
72. If a man seize a ‘ wer-gild’ thief, and he escape that day
from the men who seize him; though he be seized again by
night, they shall have no more from him than full ‘ wite.’


cOF A DAY-OLD THEFT.


73. If it be a theft of a day old, let those make ‘ bot’ for the
offence who seized him, as they can agree with the king and
his reeve.


IN CASE A ‘THEOW-WEALH’ SLAY A FREEMAN.


74, If a ‘theow-wealh’ slay an Englishman, then shall he
who owns him deliver him up to the lord and the kindred, or
give Lx. shillings for his life. But if he will not give that sum
for him, then must the lord enfranchise him ; afterwards let his
kindred pay the ‘wer,’ if he have a free ‘meg-burh:’ if he
have not, let his foes take heed to him. ‘The free need not pay


27 mazon BH. %cyninze B. 2% pan B.G. pam H. % peop-palh B.
peor-pealh G. 3!/pmzne man B.A. ppeonne-G. 27 £. 33 Lyp B.
34mann B. man H. Shanda B.A. %mazum BH. 37 nxcuz B.
8zerjllan BH. My B. Wnylle A. 4lzeryllan BH “2 ze-
Fpeogean H. 8zilbon A. /zylban syppan B. “mazar BH.
HS 2vp B. 46-boph B. -buph HZ 47 Ly B. “ponne H. add.


differetur in crastinum; quippe hoe casu cessabat clamor violentiz
et accusatio criminalis, reusque jam admittebatur ad purgationem
sui per jusjurandum.’ Haltaus, p.1496. Hence, whether the thief
were taken ‘bec-benend, and zt openpe yeyloe,’ or the offence be-
came ‘ ntht-ealo pypde,’ made an important difference to the prose-
cutor: since, in the one instance, there was a certainty of conviction ;
in the other, the thief might be able to produce the legal number of
unexceptionable compurgators, and thus ensure his acquittal. An
escape therefore, by so materially lessening the chance of redress to
the prosecutor, was so far defeating the ends of justice; and, as a
safeguard against collusion, the parties suffering it were to compound
with the crown in the best manner they could.


L3


150 INES DOMAS.


*zepan. Ne peapp ye *pugea mid pam *peopan * mez-
gieldan-” ‘buton he >him “*pille yeehde of-aceapian- ne ye
peopa mid °py yygean:.


Be 7FORSTOLENES LEAPES FOREFONLE.


Lxxv. Ing ®mon ceap berehd *yonyvolenne- 4 yo hond
ciem&’ ponne- “yio hine mon et-bepehd- “co odpum men.
Bar ye “mon hine “ponne onyon “ne pille-” y esd $ he
him neype # ne yealde- ac yealde odep- bonne mot se secydan-
yepe hic ’tiemS co “pepe “handa- $7 he him nan oden ne
yealde burton # ilce:-


11 BE 2DON LIF 2MON ODRES LOD-SUNU SLEA ODDE
pis LOD-FsEDER.

uxxvi. “Ing hpa’ oSper zob-runu *ylea oppe hiy z0d-peeden-
re yo’ ‘mez-bot 4 *y1o man-bot gelic. Peaxe pio bot
be pam pepe: ypa ilce ypa *’y10 man-bot de3 pe pam hlaronde
yeeal. *Inp hic ponne *kynmgey god-punu “yie- bete be
Iny pepe pam “eyninge ypa “ilce ypa pepe magdse. *Inp
he ponne on pone gzeonbypde be hine “ylog- ponne etpealle
Sr10 bot paem Szob-péden ypa Vilce ypa p prce *pam hlayopde
ded. Ing hie “biycep-punu “pie. ie” be healpum pam*:.


1°B. 2rmyzea HH. ppize #. 7 B. % peopan men zyloan B. zyldan
H. 4bucan H. Syyile B. Spam BH. 7poprenze H. roperenze
G. Be fopycolene ceape. B. ®man H. %fopycolene B. 1%” seo
hand rymt BH, Nyeo BA. ype Badd. BLY B. 4Mman AD
not in B. 1 nylle B. nylle per ceaper H. Mcymd B.A.
papa B. Whanda H./’-peB. *%bucanB. 7) Be zobpabepeyr


a That is, to pay a certain proportion of the wergild due for a
homicide committed by a kinsman.

» [The person intended by ‘him’ is doubtful, though the Latin
version in Bromton has, ‘nisi velit eum factione liberare :’ Sehmid’s


THE LAWS OF KING INE. 151


‘ meeg-bot’ with the ‘ theow,’ unless he be desirous to buy oif
>from himself the ‘ feehthe ;’ nor the ‘ theow’ with the free.


OF THE ATTACHMENT OF STOLEN PROPERTY.


75. If a man attach stolen property, and the person with
whom. it is attached then vouch another man to warranty; if
then the man will not accept it, and says that he never sold
him that, but sold him other; then must he prove who vouches
it to that person, that he sold to him none other, but that
same.


IN CASE A MAN SLAY ANOTHER’S GODSON OR HIS
GODFATHER.


76. If any one slay another’s godson or his godfather, let the
¢¢meeg-bot’ and the ‘man-bot’ be alike. Let the ‘bot’ in-
crease according to the ‘ wér,’ in like manner as the ‘man-bot’
does, which is due to the lord. But if it be a king’s godson,
let him make ‘ bot’ to the king according to his ‘weér,’ in like
manner as to the kindred. If, however, he strive against him
who slew him, then let the ‘bot’ to the godfather decrease in
like manner as the ‘ wite’ to the lord does. If it be a bishop’s
son, let it be half of this.


ore socpunuy jlehee. B. pan G. pam H. %man G.H. 4 Typ

“B. yy yeo BH. %yeo BH. Bij B.  % cyninzer
a YB lenge B. Byame BA. BLyp B. 34 yloh BA
35 reo Bit 36“ zobyebene B. %Vyame BH. Bpam HM, Ly
sae 40biyceop B. biycop A. 4 yy. yy BA #yeo bore. A.
add.


German is to the same effect: ‘ausser wenn er ihn von der Fehde
loskaufen will. — 7]

¢ The bote due for the slaughter of a kinsman, here distinct from
the wergild, and perhaps altogether a rule of ecclesiastical law.


L4


152 JELFREDES AND LUDRUGQES FRID.


JELFREDES AND LUDRUMES?* FRID.


Diy ip Pi pyud f JElpped *cymincg- 4 LeySpum cynmng- 4
ealley Angel-cynney pican- 4 eal yeo peod pe on Earye-
Englum beod- ealle zecpeden habbad- 4 md adum ®ze-
feoycnod- ron *hy yylpe 4 yop heopa zmgpan- ze pop
gebopene ze yop ungebopene- pe Lroder miltye pecce
oppe upe:-


1. JEpeys ymb upe land-zemepa. up on Temeye- 4 ponne
up on Ligan- 4 andlang Ligan od hipe x-pylm- ponne on
septhte to Bebdan-popda- ponne up on Uyan 0% Perlinza-


oper :-


51. Dec ip ponne. zip man orylagen peopde- ealle pe lécad


JELFREDES LALA CYNINGES.


Diy ay P Fd  sElgped cyng- 4 Gudpun eing- ¥ ealley
Angel-cynney pitan- 4 eal yéo peod pe on Eayc-Enzlum
beod- cped- 4 seppopen® habbad- ge ron hy rylre ze yop
heona ’orrppyng:


*iIponne. 1 J€peyc ymbe heopa land-zemepa. andlang Temere- *
up on Ligean- andlang Ligean od hipe 2-pylm- panon on ze-
puhca co Bebda-fonda- panon up on on Uyan 0d Pé&chnza-


sopeér:-


ui. And hi cpsedon- syf mon ofylegen pupde- eal pe lecad


TynySe 2eynmz 3zepeaycenod 4hi 5 Be ogylezenan manner
7 zingpan


® Guthrum, king of the invading Danes, after being worsted in
battle by Alfred, was baptized in the year 878; and having evacu-
ated Wessex according to treaty in the following year, he took pos-
session of East-Anglia in 880, which he seems to have governed till
his death in the year 891. See the Saxon Chronicle.

This has been printed by Lambard; apparently from a Ms. which


ALFRED AND GUTHRUM’S PEACE. 153


ALFRED AND GUTHRUM’S? PEACE.


This is the peace that king Alfred, and king Guthrum, and
the ‘ witan’ of all the English nation, and all the people
that are in East-Anglia, have all ordained and with oaths
confirmed, for themselves and for their descendants, as
well for born as for unborn, who reck of God’s mercy
or of our’s.


1. First, concerning our land-boundaries: up on the
Thames, and then up on the Lea, and along the Lea unto its
source, then right to Bedford, then up on the Ouse unto Wat-
ling-street.


2. Then is this: if a man be slain, we estimate all equally


THE LAWS OF KING ELFRED.>


This is the peace that king Zilfred, and king Guthrum, and
the ‘ witan’ of all the English nation, and all the people
that are in East-Anglia ordained, and have sworn to, as
well for themselves as for their offspring.


1. First, concerning their land-boundaries: along the
Thames, then up on the Lea, along the Lea unto its source,
thence right to Bedford, thence upwards on the Ouse unto
Watling-street.


2. And they ordained: if a man should be slain, we estimate


pepe. Rubr. add. Sand md adum zepeyenod B. margin.
B. margin.


has not been found. It is here given from ms. B., collated with
Lambard’s edition.

b This second text is also found in ms. B. As it contains some
material variations, it has been thought advisable to give it entire,
notwithstanding the close agreement between most of the chapters in
both texts.


154 JELFREDES AND GUDRUMES FRID.


epen dypne- Enghyene 4 Demycne- to -vii- healy-'mapcum
ayodeney zoldey- *bucon pam’ ceople pe on garol-lande yic-
4 heopa *hepingum-? pa *yyndan eac efen dype- xzdep co
soc yeult.:.


5311, SAnd gp mon cyningey pezn 7becveo man-ylihtey-/
zip he hine labian dyppe- d0 he $ mid -xi- Scimingey pegnum.
Ing ®man pone man betyhd pe bid leyya “maga pone ye
eyningey pegn- laze he hine mid -x1- hy gelicenas y mod
anum cyningey “pegne. And spa Sezehpilepe yppece pe
mane yy “pone -1m11- mancuyyay. And “zyp he ne *dyppe-
Waylde hic ’ppy-zylde- ppa hic “man gepypde:-


BE LETYMUM.
1v. And *$ zle man pice np zecyman be mannum- y be
hopyum- 4 be oxum:-


v. And ealle pe cpzdon on “bam deze pe mon *pa aday


eren dypne- Enghyene y Demyce- $ 1p to -vi1- healy-mapcum
ayodener zoldey- buton pam ceople fe on zarol-lande prt 4
héopa lyypingon. pa yyndon eac efen dype- wegen cpa hund
yeytt.:.


m1, And zyf man cyngey pegen beceo man-ylihcay- 4 he
hine ladian duppe- d0 he f mid -xu- cyngey pegnay- 4 SYF
mon pone man betyhd pe bid leyya maga- latie Hine -x1- hip
Zelicena 4 anum cymngey pegene:-


1v. And ealle Ing gecpxdon pa man pa adap ypop- pe


Imeapeum %bucan pem 3lypmzgum ‘4yynton 5Be pezgnum pe
bevogene yynd. Rubr. add. ‘omitted. 7/ manylihcer beteo &cy-
mnger %mon ma B Mpezn Umiza pezgne 13 ezehpylene


a (Mr. Price, whose version of this phrase was, ‘seven and a half
marks,’ had evidently regarded it as identical with eahcope healy
mape, where the number expressed by the ordinal is diminished by
a half; an idiom which, however, does not exist when the cardinal
number is used. In /Ethels. I. 24. we have opne healre, ‘one and a
half,’ while in Lambarde’s text (see var. reading) the same measure
is expressed by ppeo head, z.¢. ‘three halves.’ The following pas-


ALFRED AND GUTHRUM’S PEACE, 155


dear, English and Danish, -at *vi11. half-marks of pure gold;
except the ‘ceorl’ who resides on ‘gafol-land,’ and their
» ¢liesings? they also are equally dear, either at cc. shillings.


3. And if a king’s thane be accused of man-slaying, if he
dare to clear himself, let him do that with xu. king’s thanes.
If any one accuse that man who is of less degree than the
king’s thane, let him clear himself with x1. of his equals, and
with one king’s thane. And so in every suit which may be for
more than rv. ‘mancuses.’ And if he dare not, let him pay
for it three-fold, as it may be valued.


OF WARRANTORS.


4, And that every man know his warrantor for men, and
for horses, and for oxen.


5. And we all ordained on that day that the oaths were


all equally dear, English and Danish, that is at *vrr. half,
marks of pure gold; except. the ‘ceorl’ who resides upon
‘ gafol-land,’ and their ‘lysings:’ they also are equally dear,
either at two hundred shillings.


8. And if a man accuse a king’s thane of man-slaying, and
he dare to clear himself, let him do that with xu. king’s
thanes; and if any one accuse that man who is of less degree,
let him clear himself with x1. of his equals, and with one
king’s thane.


4. And they all ordained, when the oaths were sworn, that


Mponne zy Ioypne Wzylo '8ppyzylo 1%mon 2 omitted.
21pem pa B. 22 omitted.


sages, from a version of Cnut’s Laws, (see p. 168, note,) are to the
same effect: ‘decem dimidie marce, hoe est quinque marce;’ and,
“sex dimidie marce, hoc est tres marce. —7.]


b The ceorl occupying gafol-land, and his equal, the Danish lysing
— in Icelandic a freedman is still called a leysingiwere to be valued
in a were of 200s.


* pane?


156 JELFREDES AND LUDRUMES FRID.


ypop- P ne peope ne ypeo ne moton in pone hepe fapan butan
leare- ne heopa nan pe ma to uy. Ing ponne sebyyge *P ror
neode heopa *hpile pid upe bige *habban pille- oppe pe pid
heona- md ype y md ehctum- } ip to parianne on pa piyan-
~ ¢man giylay yylle “pmde ®to pedde- 4/ cto ypuculunze f
7man pice $ ®man *clene’ °bzec heebbe:-


naéop ne pe on pone hépe yapan burton leare- ne heopa nan
pe ma to uy- buton man >tpypan 4 becpynan gyylay yylle
Fpse co pedder 4 co ypucelunze # man mid puhte fape-
SYF P Zeneodize } upe axniz co odpum * rece md ype 4 md
zehtum:-


Ipec peB. 2hpylee %hebban ‘4mon 4ypydse


a The translation adopts the obvious meaning of these words, and
which appear to be used in contradistinction to bec-berend, or the
characteristic of an offender taken in the mainour. The Latin
version reads ‘ clene-bec, id est, mundam carnem.’


ALFRED AND GUTHRUM’S PEACE. 157


sworn, that neither bond nor free might go to the host without
leave, no more than any of them to us. But if it happen,
that from necessity any of them will have traffic with us, or
we with them, with cattle and with goods, that is to be allowed
in this wise; that hostages be given in pledge of peace, and
as evidence whereby it may be known that the party has a
clean back.


neither should we go to the host without leave, no more than
any of them to us, unless >faith and hostages be mutually
given in pledge of peace, and as evidence that the party law-
fully goes, if it so need, that any of us go to the other with
cattle and with goods.


6 omitted. 7 mon 8’ mon clen 9 al. plese marg.


b There can be little doubt that we ought to read: ‘bucon man
betpynan cpyuan and zyylay yylle, &c.: unless sureties and hostages
be mutually given.’


CADPECARDES DOMAS.*


'CADPARDEs LGERS[DINESSE.


Be DOME AND SPR,ELE.

Eadpepd cyning byt pam zeperum eallum. $ ze deman ypa
puhce domay ypa ge phtoyve cunnon- y hic on faepe dom-bec
yeande. Ne ?pandiad yop nanum pingum fpole-pihe vo ®zenez-
ceanney y $ gehpile *pppeec hebbe andagan Shpeenne heo
geleeyc yy $ xe ponne gepeccan:


Be LEAPUNLE.


1. And ie pille $ gehpile man heebbe hip zeveaman- 4 nan
man ne ceapige butan >popte- ac habbe pay popc-zeperan Ze-
pitneyye oppe odepa ungelizenpa ‘manna pe man jzelyfan
meze. And 7g hpa butan pope ceapizes ®ponne sy he
°cyningey ° opephypneyye ypeyldiz- 4 ganze ye team peah yopd
opps man pice hpep he odstande. Eac pe cpxdon- yebe
cyman ycolde $ he hapde ungelizene zepicneyye per p he hic
on yuht tymbe- oppe pone ad funde pe ye gelypan ™muhte pe
onyppece. Spa pe cpadon be “pape azgnunge $ ylce- } he
Seledde ungehigne gZepictnerye pey- oppe fone ad funde- Sz
he mehte ‘ungecopenne- pe ye onypeca ongehealden pepe.
“Tng he “pone ne *mehte- ”ponne namede him man ®px
men on pam ylean *zebuphyctpe pe he on hampey pepe-


1 The rubrics are all from H.; the text is also from H.; the varia-
tions from B. * pandie B. 2zepeccanne B. 4yppec B. yppece H.
Shpenne B. Sman B. 7zyp B. Spone B. %eymyzer B. 19 0d


a Edward, commonly called the Elder, succeeded his father AElfred
in the year 901, and died in 924.


> This term appears to have obtained here the same extended sense
which is given to it in the Roman law. ‘ Portus est conclusus locus
quo importantur merces et inde exportantur. Est et statio conclusa
acmunita’ D.C. Portus.


¢ Equivalent to what is now called a contempt: from ofep-hypan


THE LAWS OF KING EDWARD.*


EDWARD’S ORDINANCES.


OF DOOM AND SUIT.


King Edward commands all the reeves: that ye judge such
just dooms as ye know to be most righteous, and it in the
doom-book stands. Fear not on any account to pronounce
folk-right; and that every suit have a term when it shall be
brought forward, that ye then may pronounce.


OF BUYING.


1. And I will that every man have his warrantor; and that
no man buy out of port, but have the port-reeve’s witness, or
that of other unlying men whom one may believe. And if
any one buy out of port, then let him incur the king’s ¢ ‘ofer-
hyrnes,’ and let the warranty nevertheless go forward, until it
be known where it shall stop. Also we have ordained: that he
who should vouch to warranty should have unlying witness to
the effect that he rightfully vouched it; or should bring for-
ward an oath which he might believe who made the claim,
So we have ordained the same respecting ownership; that he
should adduce unlying witness thereof, or bring forward the
oath, if he could, of persons “unchosen, by which the claimant
should be bound. But if he could not, then should be named


B. Umeze B. Vpepe B. Bay B. MLyy B. pone B.
ponne ZH. ‘'6mexhte B. pone B. '8v1. B. zebupyeipe B.


—literally to over hear; that is, to hear, and neglect or refuse to
obey. According to c. 2. it carried with it a penalty of 120s,

4 This is the first notice of the ‘cype-ad’ which occurs in the
laws, and from the manner in which it is referred to, it seems to
have been a form of process well understood. It is distinctly men-
tioned in the Capitulary for 593: ‘Si‘litus, de quo inculpatur, ad
sortem ambulaverit, mala sorte priserit, medietatem ingenui legem
componat, et juratores sex medios electos dare debet.’


160 ERDPEARDES DOMAS.


4y bezecve pana yyxa anne zc anum hpydepe- oppe xt pam
opfe pe per peopd yy: 4 yyppan pexe be peey ceaper ‘ahve
sy” pep ma co-peyle. €ac pe cpedan. gip *emg yrelpa’
manna pepe pe polde odper ypre co bopge *yectan yop
‘pisep-cihtlan- $ he gecydSe ponne md ade P he hic fon
nanum facne ne dyde- ac mid ‘ful pyhce butan °bpede 4
Shigypices 4 ye dyde ponne ypa pep he dopyce pe hit man
7ev-penze. ypa he hic ®agnobde ypa he hic *cymbe:-


BE DONE DE ODRUM RIPTES PYRND.

11. Gac pe cpadon hper ye pypde pepe pe odSpum pyhtey
pypnde avon oppe on boec-lande oppe on folc-lande- 'y } he
him “zeanddzode of pam fole-lande’ hponne he him juhe
pophce beropan pam gZeperan. ‘Ing he ponne nan juhc
nede ne on boc-lande ne on fole-lande- $ ye pape fe yuhtey
Mpypnde peyldig -xxx- yell. pid pone Pcyning. y ec odpum
cyppe eac ypa. ac puddan cyppe “cyningey ofep-hypneyye-
P ap -cxx- peitl, bucon he ep geypice:-


BE MAN-SpORUM.


11. Eae pe epedon be pam mannum pe *man-ppopan peepan-
zp } zeypurtelod pepe oppe him ad bupyce oppe ofencyded
pepe- $ hy yippan ad-pypde nezpon ac opdaler pypde:-


Be FRYDE.
iv. © Eadpeapd cynng *myngode ny pycan pa hy ec


Veahce zyp B. %hpa zemeappa B. Byeacan B. ‘4yolepihce B.
5bnebe B. Sbiypice B. 7erzence B. 8ahnote B. %cymabe B.
Wmhce Bo 1 not in Bo OH By B. Mpypde B.


® A cross action. This mode of defence is altogether forbidden
by Cnut, c. 24.; and, as one resorted to for purposes of delay and
oppression, it is also declared void: by the Sachsenspiegel: ‘ Von
wiederklage (wither-tihtla) swelk man uppen anderen klaget unde
jene weder up yne, die erst klaget die ne heuet dem anderen nicht
to antwerdene he ne si aller erst von yme ledich. 111. 12.: If any
one bring an action against another, and he (again) sue him, the


THE LAWS OF KING EDWARD. 161


to him six men of the same neighbourhood wherein he was
resiant, and of the six let him get one for one ox, or for that
cattle which may be the worth of this, and afterwards let it
increase, according to the value of the property, if there ought
to be more. Also we have ordained: if there were any evil-
minded man who would put another’s property in ‘ borh’ for
‘ wither-tihtle,’ that he should then declare on oath that he did
it not ‘from any knavery, but with full right, without fraud
and guile,’ and that he then should there do as he durst with
whom it is attached: ‘like as he it owned, so he it vouched to
warranty.’


OF HIM WHO DENIES JUSTICE TO ANOTHER.


2. Also we have ordained of what he were worthy who
denied justice to another, either in ‘ boc-land’ or in ‘ fole-land,
and that he should give him a term respecting the ‘ fole-land ’
when he should do him justice before the reeve. But if he
had no right either to the ‘ boc-land’ or to the ¢ folc-land,’ that
he who denied the right should be liable in xxx. shillings to
the king; and for the second offence, the like: for the third
offence, the king’s ‘ oferhyrnes,’ that is, cxx. shillings, unless
he previously desist.


OF PERJURORS.


3. Also we have ordained concerning those men who were
perjurors; if that were made evident, or an oath failed to
them, or were out-proved, that they afterwards should not be
oath-worthy, but ordeal-worthy,


“4
OF ‘FRITH.’


4, King Edward exhorted his ‘witan’ when they were at


Ueynmz B. not in B. Weymzer B. 18 HH. 19 There is here
a division in B. as for a distinct set of laws. 2 mb B.


first suitor need not answer the other till the latter is entirely free
from him.’ See also Stat. Stadensis, p. 554.

> The old Danish law adopts the same form of expression (bryste
logh, logh juramentum) for failing to produce the legal number of
compurgators, or when one of the persons produced refused to join
in the oath.


* pillen?


162 ECADPEARDES DOQAS.


€xan-ceaytpe pepon- ' hy’ ymeadon ealle hu heopa * pd
becepne beon *mehve ponne’ hic eppam . per. Spoppam Inm
puhte $ hic ’maccop geleyc pape ponne hic yeolte } he
zp beboden heybe. Je azyode hy pa hpa to pepe bore
cyppan polde- y on pepe *zefeppeeddene beon pe he pape 4
# lupian } he lupode- 4 $ apcumian f he aycunode- zegdep ze
on ye ze on lande. p 1p bonne } nan man odpum *pyhtey ne
pypne. zip hic hpa °6- bece ypa hic bepopan apprcen 1.
ec fopman cyppe «xxx: yell, y zc odpan cyppe ealppas 4 a
pmiddan mid -cxx- peitl. 7pam cyninge:-”


Be GEREFAN DE MID RIPT NE AMANILE.


v. And *zir hic ye xepepa ne amanmize mid hte on papa
manna zepitneyye pe him to geprcneyye getealde yyndon- ponne
bete mine orephypneyye °mid -cxx- peith.:.


BE DYFDE BETOLENUM.


vi. Ing hpa “pipde “becdzen yy- bonne niman hine on
boph pa pe hine ”[zep] hlagopde beraeycon- $ he hine per
secpypypige: oppe o8epe ppynd zip he hebbe” don # syle.
“Ing he nyte hpa bine on boph nime- ponne niman pa pe
hic vo-gebyped on hip ehtan *in-boph. Ing he na¥op nebbe
ne ehta ne odepne boph- ponne healde hine man to dome:-


BE DON DE PEORA ALEN SELAN * NYLLON.


vit. Eac 1c *pylle $ ele man hebbe “yymle pa men geapope
on hip lanbde pe "7 lébden pa men fe “heopa *azen yecan *°pillen-
y hy pop nanum *med-pceactum ne pepian- ne “fil napap
yy.bian ne feopmian- pilley ne gepealder:.


V not in B. *%mehzce pone B. 3yoppam B. 4zerepabene B.
5mhcey Bo 6° H. “pam cynge B. Sayp B. not in B.
pyse B. UNA 2B. Bsyphebbe B. MLyp B. 'pille B.


a The peace of the country, which has since been called the king's
peace. It is thus defined by Haltaus, in voce Friede: ‘ Pax publica,
quam dextra fideque jurata singuli olim cum in comitiis tum per
provincias imperii firmabant per certos annos observandam, gravi
pena denuntiata violatoribus.’

> It is believed that this is a combination of letters altogether un-


THE LAWS OF KING EDWARD. 163


Exeter, that they all should search out how their? ‘ frith’ might
be better than it had previously been: for it seemed to him
that it was more indifferently observed than it should be, what
he had formerly commanded. He then asked them, who
would apply to its amendment, and be in that fellowship that
he was, and love that which he loved, and shun that which he
shunned, both on sea and on land? That is, then, that no
man deny justice to another: if any one do so, let him make
© bot’ as it before is written; for the first offence, with xxx.
shillings ; and for the second offence, the like; and for the
third, with cxx. shillings to the king.


OF THE REEVE WHO DOES NOT LAWFULLY EXACT.


5. And if the reeve do not lawfully exact it, with the witness
of those men who are assigned him to bear witness, then let him
make ‘ bot’ my ‘ oferhyrnes,’ with cxx. shillings.


OF THOSE ACCUSED OF THEFT.


6. If any one be accused of theft, then let those take him
in ‘borh’ who before commended him to his lord, that he may
justify himself thereof; or let other friends, if he have any, do
the same. If he know not who will take him in ‘borh,’ then
let those on whom it is incumbent take an °‘ in-borh’ on his
property. If he have neither property nor other ‘borh,’ then
let him be held to judgment.


OF THOSE WHO WILL NOT SEEK THEIR OWN.


7. Also I will that every man have constantly those men
ready on his land, who may lead those men who desire to seek
their own, and for no meed-monies prevent them, nor anywhere
protect or harbour a convicted offender, wilfully nor violently.


yymble B. 7-H. Whenpa B. 9° HH. %pillan B. 2! mebd-
yeeacum B. 2° A,


known to the Anglo-Saxon language. The true reading seems to be
*‘meccop, the comparative of mevce, mediocris, moderatus. [The
correct reading is, I doubt not, ‘mzzzop.’ See J.C. L. ¢.10., where
‘metcpe’ occurs in the sense of ‘inferior, worse. —Z.]

¢ To take his goods in execution. In the Custumal of Hen. I. it
is said: ‘vel de suo aliquid pro inborgo retineatur.’ c. 82.


164 ECADPEARDES DOMAS.


BE DON DE FUL FRIDIAD.

vu. ‘Ing hpa pip opephebbe 4 hy ad 4 Iny *peed bpece pe
Seal peod zereald hepd- bete ypa *d6m-boc cece. Ing he
ponne nelle- polize upe ealpa *ppeondyeipey- y ealley pay pe
he age. °Iny hine hpa yeopmige yyppan- beve ypa yeo dom-
boc 7peeze- 4 ye seyle pe plyman ®peopmge- zip’ hic °yy
hep-inne. zip hic °yy eayv-inne- zip hic yy nopd-mne- bete
be pam pe pa * pid-zepmicu peecgan:”


Be PON DE pls FREOT FORPYRLIE.
rx. "Ing hpa puph yeel-nhclan ppeoe poppypee- 4 hip hand
on hand yylle- y hine np magzay yopletan- y he ?nyce hpa
him fope-becte- ponne “yy he pay }eop-peopcer pypte pe
peep-co zebyjuge- 4 odpealle ye pep pam magum:-


BE DONE DE ODRES MANNES MAN UNDERFEPD BUTAN
LEAFE.


x. Ne “undeppo nan man odper manner man butan per
leare pe he ap “pylizde- 4 “ap he [yy ledleay] pd alee
hand. Ing hic hpa 06- beve mine *orephypneyye:-


BE LEMNOTE-ANDALUM.
x1. Ie *pille $ zle gepepa habbe zemot 4 ymbe feopen
pucans 4 gedon $ ele man yy fole-juhcer pypde. y f ale
ypyeec heebbe ende 4 andagan hpzenne hit fopd cume, * Ing
hic hpa *orephebbe- bete ypa pe sep epaedon::


1Gy B. 2ped B. theal B. 4° H. 5B. ppeonreipes H. SLi
B* Tyecze B. peopmie. zyp B. 9p: B.  1%-zepnicu yeczan B.
-zehppicu HZ. UGB. VnceB Bn Bo MOH. Uypyizbe B.


@ These, perhaps, are the dooms now bearing the name of Al-
fred and Guthrum, and Edward and Guthrum. The ‘rprd-zemal’


THE LAWS OF KING EDWARD. 165


OF THOSE WHO PROTECT A CONVICTED OFFENDER.


8. If any one disregard this, and break his oath and his
‘wed,’ which all the nation has given, let him make ‘bot’ as
the doom-book may teach: but if he will not, let him forfeit
the friendship of us all, and all that he has. If any one har-
bour him after that, let him make ‘bot’ as the doom-book may
say, and as he ought who harbours a fugitive, if it be here
within. If it be in the east-country, if it be in the north-
country, let him make ‘bot’ according as the * ‘ frith-gewritu’
say.

OF HIM WHO FORFEITS HIS FREEDOM.

9. If any one, through a charge of theft, forfeit his freedom,
and deliver himself up, and his kindred forsake him, and he
know not who shall make ‘bot’ for him; let him then be
worthy of the ‘theow’-work which thereto belongs, and let the
‘wer’ abate from the kindred.


OF HIM WHO RECEIVES ANOTHER MAN’S MAN
WITHOUT LEAVE.


10. Let no man receive another man’s man without his
Jeave whom he before followed, and until he be blameless to-
wards every hand. If any one so do, Jet him make ‘bot’ my
* oferhyrnes.’


OF ‘GEMOT’-TERMS.


11. I will that each reeve have a ‘gemot’ always once in
four weeks; and so do that every man be worthy of folk-right :
and that every suit have an end and a term when it shall be
brought forward. If that any one disregard, let him make
‘bot’ as we before ordained.


Wen B. hen H. 7B. yyllad leary H. Gy B. 1 opephypnyyye B.
2Vpylle B. 2ALyp B. 22 opephabbe B.


of Ethelred and Anlaf seems to be another example of the same
kind.


166 CADPEARDES AND GUDRUGMES DOMAS.


1fGFT bis. AND LUDRUGMES. AND
* CADPARDES,]


Diy yyndon pa domay pe JElpped cynez y Ludspum cyncz
gecupan:.


And pip ry peo *zepedmip eac pe fElyped cyng 4 SLuspum
cyngz- 4 eye Cadpapd cynzg 4 %Ludpum cyng- gecupan
‘4y Zecpeedon- pa pa Engle y Dene to ypide y to fpeond-
yeipe yullice penzon. 4 pa prcan eac be yyppan peepon
oye 4 unyeldan # yeolpe gempodon y mid zode *ze-
Inhtan:-


5(Deec ip epee] P hi gecpedon. $ hi enne Isod lupian
poldon- 4 zlene heBendom geopne “7apeoppan. And
Sing geyevcon populdhice *ycedpa eac yon pam pingum-
pe hig piycan $ hig eller ne mbhton manegum fe-
yveonan- ne rela manna nolte to godcundpe bore eller
zebugan ypa hy yeeolde. 4 fa populd-bore nz ™ze-
yeccon zemene Lyiyte 4 cynge- spa “hpap ypa man
nolde godcunde boce gebugan mid jute to biyceopa
dihve:-


1. And $ ip “ponnon epeyc $ big gecpxdon. $ Mcype-
zs binnan pagum 4 cyningey hand-zd ycande efne un-
pemme:.


1B. %zenebnyy B. sLyspum B. 4zehyhcan B. 5B. Dir
Uyeccan B 2 BHM 37 B.


* Guthrum, as has been already stated, p. 152, died in the year
891. Edward succeeded his father Elfred in 901. How, therefore,
they could have been joint parties to this treaty can only be ex-
plained by supposing Edward, when very young, to have been asso-
ciated in some degree with his father. But perhaps the rubric is
erroneous, and some other person should be substituted for Guth-
rum, so far as Edward is concerned. [The party to this treaty with
Edward was apparently a second Guthrum, who, according to Wal-
lingford (pp. 539, 540), was living in Edward’s time, and probably
succeeded Eohric, the immediate successor of Guthrum I. See Sax.
Chron., a° 905; Sim. Dunelm., a° 906; W. Malm. 1.1. ¢.6. The
rubrics to these laws, which are very defective in the mss., have
been partly supplied from Lambarde’s edition. — 7. ]


THE LAWS OF EDWARD AND GUTHRUM. 167


AGAIN HIS, AND GUTHRUM’S, AND
*EDWARD’S.


These are the dooms which king Alfred and king Guthrum
chose.


And this is the ordinance also which king Alfred and king
Guthrum, and afterwards king Edward and king Guth-
rum, chose and ordained, when the English and Danes
fully took to peace and to friendship; and the ‘ witan”
also, who were afterwards, oft and unseldom that same
renewed and increased with good.


This is the first which they ordained: that they would love
one God, and zealously renounce every kind of heathen-
dom. And they established worldly rules also for these
reasons, that they knew that else they might not many
controul, nor would many men else submit to divine
‘bot’ as they should: and the worldly ‘bot’ they estab-
lished in common to Christ and to the king, wheresoever
a man would not lawfully submit to divine ‘ bot,’ by
direction of the bishops.


1. And this is then the first which they ordained: that
>¢church-grith’ within the walls, and the king’s ‘ hand-grith,’
stand equally inviolate.


epos AH. 6° BH. 7apoppnB *mB 9 BH WB.
M4 ponon on B. Veipic- B.


> The distinction between ‘zmid’ and ‘ppd’ must have been
originally slight. In their future application ‘pid’ seems to have
acquired a broader import, and to have been used for the king’s
peace in general, while ‘ zp13’ became limited to the king’s protection
given under the sign manual, or conferred by charter or statutory
enactment. ‘Fpid’ seems to have been a matter of right, the
privilege of all within the pale of the law; ‘zm’ a personal and
territorial franchise incident to men of a certain rank, such as the
king, an archbishop, &c., and particular places, such as a church,
monastery, the king’s palace, or the residence of an ealdorman, &c.
For examples of the king’s hand-grith at a later period, see the
letters of safe-conduct in Rymer’s Feedera passim.


168 CADPEARDES AND LUDRUMES DOMAS.


1. And giz 'hpa Lyycendom pypde- *oppe hedendom
peopdize- ponder oppe peopcer- gsylde pa pep ypa pice. ypa
SJah-ylicce-* be pam pe *pyo dd yy:


mr. And zyp sehadod man %zeychae oppe ®zereohte oppe
Fopypeyuze oppe yoplicze- gebece $ be pam pe seo ’dxbde sy-
ypa be pepe ypa be prce- ypa be ®lah-plicce- 4 pop Lode hupu
bete ypa canon teece- 4 peep boph yinde oppe on capcepne”
gebuge. And “zy meyye-ppeoyt role ™mippyypize et ypeolye
‘4y wt peeycene- zylde -xxx- yall, md Enzlum- y md Denum
>pneo healy-(mape.] Ing ppeoye to juht anbdagan cpipman
ne *recce> oppe yulluhtey foppypne pam pe pep peapy yy-
Bylde “pice mb Englum- y mid Denum lah-ylic- $ 1p cpelp
opan::


BE SIB-LELERUM.

v. And xt ¥pyb-legepum pa pican gepeddan. $ cyng ah
pone “ufepan- y biyceop “pone nydepan- *butan hic man
gebece yop Irode 4 fon populde be pam fe yeo dxde ry:
ypa biyceop gereece. * Ing cpegen gsebpodpa oppon tpezen
*1zenyhe-magay pid an pip foplicgan- beten *ypySe Zeopne ppa
ypa man gedarige- ypa be pice- ypa be “lah-ylicce- be pam pe
yeo *daebde yy:


*©Inp gehadod man hine roppypce mid dead-pcylde- *zepilde
hine man: 4 healde co bipcopey dome:-


v. And zip dead-peylig man yepipt-ppyieece Zypne- ne him
man negpe ne pyyne. And ealle Loder *zepihto *popdize
man zeopne be Iroder mildye- y be pam *pican Je prcan
co-ledan:-


1° B.H. oppon B. Blahylce B. 4yeo B. 5 zercalize B.
6zerehte B. 7dxad.B. Slahyhce Be ” B. Maye Be Umuypypize
B. YB. mape H. Byeece Be UO BH. Wyiblezepum B.


2 One of the Latin versions of Cnut’s law gives the following
account of the ‘lahyhz:’ ‘In lege Danorum erit reus forisfacture,
quam Dani vocant lahslit. In lege eorum liberalis hominis vocant
decem dimidie marce, hoc est quinque marce; hominis alodium ha-
bentes sex dimidie marce, hoe est tres marce; villani lahslit, quem
Angli vocant cherlman, xu. ore.’ The term is also found in the old


THE LAWS OF EDWARD AND GUTHRUM. 169


2. And if any one violate christianity, or reverence heathen-
ism, by word or by work, let him pay as well ‘ wér,’ as ‘ wite’
or * ‘lah-slit,’ according as the deed may be.


8. And if a man in orders steal, or fight, or forswear, or
fornicate, let him make ‘bit’ for it according as the deed may
be, as well by ‘wér,’ as by ‘wite’ or by ‘lah-slit ? and, above
all things, make ‘ bot’ before God as the canon teaches, and
find * borh’ thereof, or yield to prison. And if a mass-priest
misdirect the people about a festival or about a fast, let him
pay xxx. shillings among the English, and among the Danes
>three half-marks. If a priest fetch not the chrism at the
right term, or refuse baptism to him who has need thereof, let
him pay ‘wite’ among the English, and among the Danes
‘lah-slit;’ that is, twelve ‘ ores.’


OF INCESTUOUS PERSONS,


4, And concerning incestuous persons, the ‘ witan’ have
ordained, that the king shall have the upper, and the bishop
the nether, unless ‘bot’ be made before God and before the
world, according as the deed may be; so as the bishop may
teach. If two brothers or two near kinsmen commit fornica-
tion with the same woman, let them make ‘ bot’ very strictly,
in such wise as it may be allowed, as well by ‘ wér,’ as by ‘wite’
or by ‘ lah-slit,’ according as the deed may be.

If a man in orders foredo himself with capital crime, let him
be seized and held to the bishop’s doom.


5. And if a man guilty of death desire confession, let it
never be denied him. And all God’s dues let every one
zealously further, by God’s mercy, and by the ‘ wites’ which the
‘ witan’ have annexed thereto.


yrepan B. WpeneB. buconB. Wed B. WAnd zyp B.
21 zenyomazar B. 2 ypite B.A. lahyhce B. %dxd B. And
Badd. *%zepylbe B. 27 mhre B. Bypypsme B. 9" BAL


Swedish law: ‘ Will thessi nampd hwarti wargé eller fella, tha bote
hwar there lagsliht: Si assessores reum nec condemnare nec ab-
solvere voluerint, quilibet eorum contumaciam luat.’ Hels. L. Kon.
B. c.6.4. Itis derived from ‘laze’—(the final g and h are inter-
changeable) — law, and ‘ylican,’ to slit.

> [See p. 154, note*—7Z.]


170 ECADPEARDES AND LUDRUMES DOMAS.


vi. 1Inp hpa’ teosunge *pophealde- zylde Jah-plhic md De-
num: Spite md Enzlum. *Ing hpa’ °Rém-reoh* fophealde-
syloe Slah-yhe mid Denum- pice md Englum. 7Ing hpa’
Sleoht-zepceoc ne °geleyce- syloe “lah-phe mod Denum-
pice mid Englum. "Ing hpa’ >yulh-elmyyyan ne yylle-
Beryloe lah-phe’ md Denum- “pice mid Englum. “Ing
1hpd emigpa zodcundpa “zemhto yoppypne-’ gzylbe ™lah-
ye md Denum- pite md Enzlum. And “zi he pigie 4
man *°zepundie- beo hny peper yeylig. *Ing he man to
deade xerylle- beo he ponne *ticlah- 4 hip “hence mid heapme
zle papa pe he *pille. And **zir he gepypce $ hine man
arylle puph $ *he ongean’ Irodey pyhc oppe pay cyngey
zeonbypde- zip man } gzerodize- licge “&zylbe:.


Be FREOLS-DJELES PEORLUM.
vir. Sunnan deger cypmgze “zr hpd agynne- polie per
ceapey+ 4 tpelp “opena mid Denum- 4 -xxx- yeitt, md Englum.
S°Tnp ymgman’ ypeoly-deeze pypce- folie hy fpeovey- oppe


1And B. add. ‘zyp" B. 2yopheolbe Be 3° HM. VTi B.
5" BH. Slahylice B. 7 Lyp7 B.  Shleoht- B. 9% zelearce B.
Wlahylice B. U7 AM Gy 7B. 1 zeloe lahylice B. 14° BAL
ULyp B. 1° BA 7 zemhera soppyna B. lahyhiee B. 19 yp


a The Glossarists make Rom-feoh, Rom-yceat, and heopd-peniz
one and the same due, and say that it consisted of a penny paid from
every hearth. The author of the life of St. Alban, cited by Spelman,
makes it a due collected for the support of the English school at
Rome, and that it was paid by those only who had live-stock to the
amount of 30s.

b A due of a penny annually collected from every plough used
in tillage. ‘De qualibet caruca juncta inter Pascham et Pente-
costem, unum denarium, qui dicitur Plow-Almes.’ Monast. Angl. 1.
f. 256.

¢ The Latin version renders this phrase ‘ et persequatur eum cum
clamore,’ &c. In Cnut’s dooms, where this law is republished, it
is given by one Ms. ‘et capiat eum cum clamore;’ by another, ‘ et
cum clamore expellatur; and by a third, ‘et capiat eum cum
damno. With the exception of the last, all these versions adopt
the import of the old German harm, calumnia, (hpeam A.-S.) and
make it amount to the hue and cry of the Statute of Winchester.
In this view of its meaning Mr. Kolderup Rosenvinge has illustrated
the passage by the following extract from the Witherlags ret of
Cnut: ‘At si... terra perfugere maluisset, ad nemus usque pari
militum cura comitandus erat, cunctis tam diu in ejus abitu ex-
pectantibus, quousque procul ipsum ahesse cognoscerent. Ac tum


THE LAWS OF EDWARD AND GUTHRUM. 171


6. If any one withhold tithes, let him pay ‘lah-slit’ among
the Danes, ‘wite’ among the English. If any one withhold
4 ¢ Rom-feoh,’ let him pay ‘lah-slit? among the Danes, ‘wite’
among the English. If any one discharge not ‘light-scot,’ let
him pay ‘lah-slit’ among the Danes, ‘ wite’ among the English.
If any one give not ° plough-alms, let him pay ‘lah-slit’ among
the Danes, ‘wite’ among the English. If any one deny any
divine dues, let him pay ‘lah-slit’ among the Danes, ¢wite’
among the English. And if he fight and wound any one, let
him be liable in his ‘wér.’ If he fell a man to death, let him
then be an outlaw, and let every of those “seize him with
‘hearm’ who desire right. And if he so do that any one kill
him, for that he resisted God’s law or the king’s, if that be
proved true, let him lie uncompensated.


OF WORKINGS ON A FESTIVAL-DAY.


7. If any one engage in Sunday marketing, let him forfeit
the chattel, and twelve ‘ores’ among the Danes, and xxx.
shillings among the English. If a freeman work on a fes-


B. ~%zepundia B. ALyp B. 2° H. uvdlah B. Bpylle B. 24 zy
B. %/hine man zean H. %azyp B. 27° MH.  Bayp B. %ope B.
307 Liye ppiman B,


demum magno cum totius militia fragore ter valide edendus clamor,
cunctaque strepitu miscenda fuerant, ne fugiturus ullo ad eos
errore referri posset.’ Vide Saxo-Gram. (ed. Stephanii), p. 199.
The last version, ‘et capiat eum cum damno,’ gives the literal
meaning of the terms in their ordinary acceptation, and is, perhaps,
the least objectionable of any. The verb ‘hentan’ occurs once
again in Cnut’s dooms, Pol. c.19.: ‘Ing ye ponne bepyce. mme
ponne leare. zzéep ze heonon ze panon. pect he moze henvan eften
uy agenan,’ which is thus given in the Latin translation: ‘quod si
dies statutus fractus fuerit, accepta licentia a comitatu in eundo
et redeundo ut possit accipere mame quousque habeat sua:’ or, ac-
cording to another version of the close: ‘ut abhine et inde suum
audeat perquirere.’ In the Chronicle we have, ‘And namon eall
pet ne gehencan myhcon: and took all that they might lay hands
on. The verb ‘hencan,’ therefore, seems to have been formed
from ‘hand,’ just as ‘;canban’ forms ‘ycenv;’ and the meaning of
the idiom appears to be, that they were to seize the offender by
force, and in case he should make such resistance as to require
extreme violence, the consequential harm was to be at his own
risk. The close of the law provides that in this event he was to
lie irredeemable, or without a claim for his were on behalf of his
kindred.


172 CADPEARDES AND LUDRUMES DOMAS.


zyloe ‘pice oppe lah-phre. Deopman *polie hiy hyde oppe
hyd-zyloep. %Inp hlapopd hip peopan fpeoly-deze nyde co
peopce- zylde lah-plicce inne on *Deone lage- 4 *pice md
€Enzlum:.


Be FSTENUM.


vi. 7Inp yyigman’ he feeycen abpece- zylbe *pice oppe
lah-ylice. °Iny ke peopman zed6- pole ny “hyde ope
hyd-zyloey:-


BE ORDELE AND ADUM.


1x. Ondel 4 adar "yyndan cocpedene fpeoly-bagum y yuh
feyven-dagum. 4 yepe P abpece- zylde lah-phc md Denum. 4
Spice md Englum.

4TInp man pealban meze- ne dyde man nefpe on ysunnan
dezer ypeolye amigne foppyphtne- ac pylbe 4 healbe } ye
ypeoly-dzez agan “ye:.


x. Ing hm-"*[lépeo] lama pe roppopht pepe peonde rop-
leven: 4 he eycep pam ppeo “mbhv alibbe- pippan man mot
hylpan- be biyceopey leaye- yepe pylle beopgan yape 4 yaule:-


BE PILLUM pIGLERUM MAN-SpORUM, &e.
x1. Iny ®picean oppe * piglepay- “man-ppopan oppe” mopd-
pyphcan- oppe fule apylede abaxpe °hop-cpenan ahpap on


1“ B. 2polze B. Ly B. 4ye hlapopd B. add. 5oeze B.
6° A. 7 Typ ppman B. 8° MN Ly B. "BA MU not in B.


@ The Latin versions render this term either ‘ incantatores’ or
‘ incantatrices ;' but it is clear from the compounds ‘ pizbeb-pizlepe,
yuzel-pizlene, zebypbe-pizlepe,’ that it means a diviner in general.

+ This seems to refer to such as occasioned death and injuries by
poison rather than to murder in its legal sense. The offence is spoken
of by Fleta as a secret crime: ‘ Traditores . .. qui alicui occulte
venenum prebuerint unde expiravit, et inde convincantur, detrac-
tentur et suspendantur. Lib. 1. 0.35.

¢ It may be questioned, whether in Anglo-Saxon the word ‘hop’
ever refers to simple fornication or concubinage. The kindred
dialects confine it to adultery, ‘Ni hérinds,’ M.Goth.: «thou shalt
not commit adultery.’ Thus too in the Flensborg Statsret (An.


THE LAWS OF EDWARD AND GUTHRUM. 178


tival-day, let him forfeit his freedom, or pay ‘wite’ or ‘lah-
slit’? Let a ‘theowman’ suffer in his hide or ‘hide-gild,’
If a lord oblige his ‘ theow’ to work on a festival-day, let him
pay ‘lah-slit’ within the Danish law, and ‘wite’ among the
English.


OF FASTS.


8. If a freeman break a lawful fast, let him pay ‘ wite’ or
*lah-slit.”’ If a‘ theowman’ do so, let him suffer in his hide
or ‘ hide-gild.’


OF ORDEAL AND OATHS.


9. Ordeal and oaths are forbidden on festival-days and lawful
fast-days; and he who shall break that, let him pay ‘lah-slit’
among the Danes, and ‘ wite’ among the English.

If it can be so ordered, no one condemned should ever be
executed on the Sunday festival, but be secured and held till
the festival be gone by.


10. If a limb-maimed man who has been condemned be
forsaken, and he after that live three days; after that, any one
who is willing to take care of sore and soul may help him, with
the bishop’s leave.


OF WITCHES, DIVINERS, PERJURERS, &c.


11. If witches or *diviners, perjurers or » ‘morth’-workers,
or foul, defiled, notorious adulteresses, be found anywhere


yyndon B. BH. Ming B. Myy B. 1° B. lapeoH Vnihce
B. 'ypycan B. 1” monypopan oppon B.


1284); «Af byman secther sin leghtheghen kune for domer for
hoor, af hun dyl, gif logh meth tolf gildbréther af hoghest gild ;
worther hun feld zt logh, hete sik horkune. ¢.75: ‘If a burgher
accuse his lawful wife before the doomsmen of whoredom, and she
deny it, let her make oath with twelve gild-brothers (as compurgators)
of the highest gild; if she fail in the oath, let her be called a whore-
quean. ‘The Low-German version also reads, ‘vor ene hore: as a
whore;’ and, ‘so het se eyn hore: let her be called a whore.’ In
the same manner an adulterer is called a hor-carl: ‘Fynder nogher
en hor-karl i senge meth syn echte konx.’ Privilegia Civitatis Ri-
pensis, An. 1269, c. 44. ‘If a man find an adulterer in bed with
his lawful wife.’


174 GCADPEARDES AND LUDRUMES DOMAS.


lande pupdan azycene- ponne yyrre hi man of eapde 4
clenyie pa peode- ‘oppe on eapde foprane hy mid ealle-
buton *hi zeypican 4 pe deoppon gebercan:-


Be GEPADEDUM AND sCLDEODILUM.

xu. *Inp man gehadodne oppe xldecotigzne puph *emiz ping
5ropp&bde et Seed ope 7aet feope- ponne *yceal him °eyng
beon-+ oppon eopl pap on lande 4 bifceop *pepe peode- for
mez 4 oy. mund-bonan- bucon he “eller o’epne heebbe- 4
bete man zeopne be bam ”pe yeo “dade py Lyuyce 4 cyninge-
ypa hire zebyyuge- oppe pa dade ppece ypide deope pe cyning
yy on peode:.


4)U MAN SLEAL GYLDAN TpELF-PYNDES MAN.


Tpelp-hyndep manney pep 1p cpelp-hund reyllinga:.

Tpy-hynbdep manney pep 1p tpa-hund seilt.:.

Imp man ofylegen peopde- syloe hine man ypa he 'ze-
bopen yy. And phe ip } ye ylagae *pppan he pepey be-
peddsod habbe- finde peepco pep-boph be fam pe peepco
zebymgze- $ 1p ac cpely-hyndum pepe gebyjad cpelp men
co pep-bopze- -vili- peedepen-meegde- 4 -11I- medpen-mezie.
Donne  zedon “yy- ponne pape man *cynmzger munde-
ir ~ hy ealle yemzenum handum of ezdepe megde on anum
pepne pam yemente yyllan $ cyningey mund yrande. of pam
deze on -xxI- mhtan gylde man -cxx: *yeult. co healy-panze
at cpelp-hyndum * pene. ealy-pang gebyped beapnum-
bpodpum 4 fedepan. ne gebyped nanum mage } *[feoh]
bute pam pe yy bmnan cneope. of pam deze pe # healy-pang
agolden y+ on -xxi- mhtan gyloe man pa man-bote. pey on
«xxi mhran $ “pyhv-pice. per on -xxre mhtan pey pepe
*ypum-zyld. 4 spa fopds p fulgolden yy on pam fypyce pe


loppn B. 2hy B 3%Ly Bo 4aemg B. 58° BRB. 6" BH.
7ect B. 8yceol B. %emz B. pepe B. Mheller B. 12 peo B.
Bond B. Mno rubr.in H. Sycylt. B. MDyp B.  bopen B.


2 The first instalment of the were, and which for a ceorl appears
to have been 20s. But whether part of this—12s. 6d.—was paid
on the day the were was pledged, as stated in the Custumal of


THE LAWS OF EDWARD AND GUTHRUM. 175


within the land; let them then be driven from the country
and the people cleansed, or let them totally perish within the
country, unless they desist, and the more deeply make bot.’


OF ECCLESIASTICS AND FOREIGNERS.


12. If any one wrong an ecclesiastic or a foreigner, through
any means, as to money or as to life, then shall the king or
the ‘eorl’ there in the land, and the bishop of the people, be
unto him in the place of a kinsman and of a protector, unless
he have another; and let ‘bot’ be strictly made, according as
the deed may be, to Christ and to the king, as it is fitting;
or let him avenge the deed very deeply who is king among
the people.


HOW A ‘TWELVE-HYNDE’ MAN SHALL BE PAID
FOR.


A ‘twelve-hynde’ man’s ¢ wer’ is twelve hundred shillings.

A ‘ twy-hynde’ man’s ‘wér’ is two hundred shillings.

If any one be slain, let him be paid for according to his
birth. And it is right that the slayer, after he has given
‘wed’ for the ‘ wér,’ find, in addition, a ‘ wer-borh’ according
as shall thereto belong; that is, to a ‘twelve-hynde’s’ ‘wer’
twelve men are necessary as ‘wer-borh,’ vii. of the paternal
kin, and tv. of the maternal kin. When that is done, then
let the king’s ‘mund’ be established, that is, that they all of
either kindred, with their hands in common upon one weapon,
engage to the mediator that the king’s ‘mund’ shall stand. In
xxi. days from that day let cxx. shillings be paid as ‘heals-
fang’ at a ‘ twelve-hynde’s’ ‘wer. <‘ Heals-fang’ belongs to
the children, brothers, and paternal uncles; that money be-
longs to no kinsman, except to those who are within the
degrees of blood. In xxi. days from the day that the ‘heals-
fang’ is paid, let the ‘man-bot’ be paid; in xx. days from
this, the fight-‘ wite;? in xx1. days from this, the * ‘ frum-gyld’


1s ryppan B. : 9n B. Meynzer B. 2 ypeyit. B. B@pape B. 3B.
yeod H. 4 yyhco-pice B.


Henry I. c. 76. and the remainder after payment of the fight-wite,
or whether the custom then noticed was only of local observance or a
point of Jatter practice, is nowhere laid down.


176 CADPEARDES AND LUDRUMES DOMAS.


pitan 'zepeeden. *Sippan man moc ?*mid lure organ: zip man
8[pille] yulle *¢peondpeedene habban:-


€al man yceal xt cyphycum pepe be pepe made don fe
him vo-gebyped- ypa pe be tpelg-hynodum tealdan :.


i zepeedoan B. 2Syppan B.


3 The practice here briefly hinted at is thus recited in king Eric’s
Zealand Law: ‘Ok hinew skule thet igen swerim, han forst thet
boteen tok, at thet han hauer ther boter taket fore han wil thet
eeldre hefne hwerken meth rath eller meth dath, hwerken af
borne ok zy uborne ther meth skule the were satte ok legge


THE LAWS OF EDWARD AND GUTHRUM. 177


of the ‘ wér;’ and so forth, till it be fully paid, within the time
that the ‘witan’ have appointed. After this they may depart
* with love, if they desire to have full friendship.

All men shall do with regard to the ‘ wér’ of a ‘ceorl’ that
which belongs to his condition, like as we have said about a
* twelve-hynde’ man.


3B. hpile Z. 4peontpebdene B.


heender samen ok mines. 11. 27.: And he who has taken the
bote shall swear that he never will avenge the deed for which he has
taken the bote, neither by counsel nor by deed, neither upon the
born nor the unborn, (and) therewith shall they be reconciled, and
lay their hands together, and hiss each other.’


* peer pe?


178 OATHS.


OF OATHS.


hU 8€ MAN SLEAL SPERIE.


1DUS MAN SLEAL SpERIGEAN PYLD-ADAS.»


1. On pone Dmthten pe *per *halhizsom iy pope haliz- ic
‘pille beon N. hold 4 *zecpupe- 4 eal lugian $ he lurad. y eal
aycunian } he Saycunad- eycep Trobey puhce 4 apcep popold-
sepyynum: 4 nerpe pilley ne gepealdey- popder ne peopcey-
opiht don * pey him ladpe bi8- pid pam pe he me healde pa
1¢ eapnian pille- 4 7eall $ leypce $ uncep fopmel peer pa ic to
him zebeah 4 hiy pillan zeceay:.


DUS MAN SLEAL SPERIGEAN DONNE MAN HAFD PIs
JEPTE GEBRYID AND BRINLED PI >ON GANLE.


u. On pone Dpuhtcen pe *pey hahzsom ip *fope halig- ypa
1¢ fpece dpire mid srullan fole-pihte- buran bpeede 4 butan
Wbippicee 4 bucan “awghpylcum yacne- ypa me ™peor-ycolen
pey P opr N. } 1c onypece- 4 $ 1c mid N, befangen hzbbe:.


DES ODRES AD DE MON PIS ORF sCT-BRYIDED.


ui. On pone Dyhten ney ic wt pede ne wt deede- ne


1 This and the following rubrics are all from B. * par B. 3 hah-
9rop eh B. lM ypice B.


a These oaths and the pieces immediately following are found
differently arranged in the different mss. Their respective dates must
therefore be left to some future discovery; though it seems not un-
reasonable to suppose, from internal evidence, that they cannot have
had a later origin than the period in which they here stand. Some of
them are probably much earlier.

It is impossible to read the oaths without perceiving at every turn
their rhythmical quantity and alliteration. An ear any way accus-
tomed to Anglo-Saxon poetry will easily detect the disjointed mem-
bers of their poetic formule, and instinctively arrange them in the
order in which they ought to stand. [It is, however, to be observed,


OATHS. 179


OF OATHS.


HOW THE MAN SHALL SWEAR.


THUS SHALL A MAN SWEAR FEALTY OATHS.

1. By the Lord, before whom this relic is holy, I will be to
N. faithful and true, and love all that he loves, and shun all
that he shuns, according to God’s law, and according to the
world’s principles, and never, by will nor by force, by word nor
by work, do aught of what is loathful to him; on condition
that he me keep as I am willing to deserve, and all that fulfil


that our agreement was, when I to him submitted and chose
his will.


THUS SHALL A MAN SWEAR WHEN HE HAS DIS-
COVERED HIS PROPERTY, AND BRINGS IT %IN
PROCESS.

2. By the Lord, before whom this relic is holy, so I my suit
prosecute with full folk-right, without fraud and without deceit,
and without any guile, as was stolen from me the cattle N. that
I claim, and that I have attached with N.


THE OTHER’S OATH WITH WHOM A MAN DISCOVERS
HIS CATTLE.


8. By the Lord, I was not at rede nor at deed, neither


con B. 4pylle B. Szecpype B. Saycunod B. Zeal B. Sper B.
Hezhpleum B. 12 sonpcolen A.


that in these and similar pieces, neither metre nor alliteration is con-
stant, and that the latter, when it does occur, is usually unlike the
common poetic alliteration, having no ‘chief letter’ (hofuéstafr) in
the second line. The use of this kind of alliteration in early laws
and judicial documents, as well as of final rime, was common to all
the Germanic and Scandinavian nations. Those who wish to see
more on the subject may consult Grimm’s ‘ Deutsche Rechts Alther-
thiimer,’ p. 6.—7.]

b [I have thus rendered ‘on zanze,’ on the presumption that zanz
is here equivalent to the German Recht-Gang, ‘processus juris. —


¥ 1, poet:


180 OATHS.


Zepica ne xepyphta- pep man md ‘unguhcte N. opp ecpenede.
Ac ypa 1c opp hebbe ypa ic hice mid phe begear. *1 And.
ypa 1c hic tyme ypa hic me ye yealde pe ic hic nu on hand
yecce. And. *ypd ic Opp hebbe- ypa hic me ye yealde pe hic
to yyllanne Sahte. And. ypa ic opr haebbe- ypa hic of mmum
agnum pingum com: ¥ ypa hit on fole-ht min agen ‘eht 1p
‘4j min in-foytep:


DES AD DE PIs SEPTE BRYIDED DCT PE NE DED NE
FOR beTé Né FOR POLe.


tv. On pone Dmhten ne °teo ic N. ne pop hete ne yop
Shole ne yop unjuhtpe yeoh-zypneyye- ne 1c nan yodpe nav
bute ppa min yecgza me yede- 4 1¢ pylp co yode valizee $ he
muiney opfey peor peee:-


DJES ODRES AD *DE pe IS UNSLYLDIL.


v. On pone Dmhten 1c eom unyeyldig- xgdep ge dede ze
dihtey- acc 7 pepe tihtlan pe N. me ®uhd:.


IS GEFERAN AD DE pilmM MID-STANDAD.
vi. On pone Dpihten ye a¥ ip clene 4 unmene fe N.
popes:


AD GIF MAN AFINDED pis sepTE SYDDAN he PIT
GEBOPTE PAFED UNPAL.
vi. On *fElmhtigey Iroder naman- pu me behete hal y
clene } $ pu me yealdeyc- 4 Mrulle “pepe pid eepvep-pppeece-
on pa *zepicneyye pe unc pa mid pay N.:-


PU pe SLEAL SpERILGEAN DE MID ODRE ON LEpITNEsse
STANDAD.
vin. On 8 Elmghtgeyr Irodey naman- ypa ic hep N. on
yospe ™zeprcneyyre poande- unabeden 4 ungeboht to- ypa ic
mid minum egum ofepyeah 4 mmum eapum ofephypde }
1c him mid yeecze:-


1°, 2°°" Saxe H. 3 4ehc HW. ehre B. Fre B. hele
H. 7pepeB. 8cyh3 B. %almbezey B. sulle H full B.
‘pane B. '2zepircenneyye H. 13€almiheizer B. 4 zeprcnoyye B.


OATHS. 181


counsellor nor doer, where were unlawfully led away N.’s cattle.
But as I cattle have, so did I lawfully obtain it. * And: as I
vouch it to warranty, so did he sell it to me into whose hand
I now set it. And: asI cattle have, so did he sell it to me
who had it to sell. And: as I cattle have, so did it come of
my own property, and so it by folk-right my own possession is,
and my rearing.


THE OATH OF HIM WHO DISCOVERS HIS PROPERTY,
THAT HE DOES IT NOT EITHER FOR HATRED OR
FOR ENVY.

4. By the Lord, I accuse not N. either for hatred or for
envy, or for unlawful lust of gain; nor know I any thing
soother ; but as my informant to me said, and I myself in sooth
believe, that he was the thief of my property.


THE OTHER’S OATH THAT HE IS GUILTLESS.


5. By the Lord, I am guiltless, both in deed and counsel,
of the charge of which N. accuses me.


HIS COMPANION’S OATH WHO STANDS WITH HIM.


6. By the Lord, the oath is clean and unperjured which N.
has sworn.


OATH IF A MAN FINDS HIS PROPERTY UNSOUND
AFTER HE HAS BOUGHT IT.

7. In the name of Almighty God, thou didst engage to me
sound and clean that which thou soldest to me, and full se-
curity against after-claim, on the witness of N., who then was
with us two.


HOW HE SHALL SWEAR WHO STANDS WITH]
ANOTHER IN WITNESS.
8. In the name of Almighty God, as I here for N. in true
witness stand, unbidden and unbought, so I with my eyes over-
saw, and with my ears over-heard, that which I with him


say.


«@ Here the oath is accommodated to the various circumstances
under which the defendant denies the charge.


-


182 OATHS.


AD DJCT HE NYSTE NE FUL NE FALLEN.


1x. On 7y€lmihetizey Loder naman: nyy'ce 1c on pam pingum
pe pu ymbe ypecyt ful ne facn ne *pac ne pom- to pape
2dee1z-cide pe ic hic pe yealde- ac hic wzdep pay ge hal ge
clene *butan zlcon facne:-


x. *On lysender Iroder naman-+ ypa ie feoy bidde- ypa ic
Spanan heebbe pey pe me N. beher pa 1c him min yealde:-


ANDS LIE.
x1. On liprender Lrodey naman- ne peapr ic N. peeacc ne
Sreilling- ne 7paemiz ne ®pemizey peopd- ac eal ic him ze-
leyce $ $ 1c lum yeolde- ypa fopd ypa uncpe popd-zecpyou
Fypmey peepon:-


9BE LEPADODRA MANNA ADE AND PAD-BOTE.


xu. Meyye-ppeoytey a5 4 ™populd-pegenep 1p “on Engla-
laze *zeceald eren-dype-” 4 yop pam yeoron “cipic-hadan pe
ye Smeyye-ppeoys puph Irober gipe “zepedh $ he heyde- “he
bid pezen-yuhtey pypde:”


BE MERLISLAN ADE.
xu. Tpely-hyndey manner ad “popycent -vi- ceopla ad.
roppam zip man pone *tpely-hyndan’ **man ppecan *yceolde-
he bid *full-upecan on pyx ceoplane 4 hip *pep-syld bid pix
ceopla “pep-zyld:.”7


1€almihcizer B. 2bei-c1ibe H. 3bucon H. 4no rubric in B.
5 zy panan H. panan B.; but zy or something like it was originally
inserted, and afterwards erased. *ycylling H. 7pemz H. 8penizer
H. 9 The two succeeding laws are from H. collated with D. and with
Lambard. No rubries in H. poplo-peynep D. Yo A. 1” bid
zelic zebemed Lamb. Boye D. 4 cypichcum anbvebypdnyyyum


a [Wilkins takes pacne for an adjective, and translates pacne pom
‘vilem maculam. Mr. Price adopted the same reading, which he
rendered ‘weakly blemish.” My translation of pac as a noun sub-


OATHS. 183


OATH THAT HE KNEW NOT OF FOULNESS OR
FRAUD.

9. In the name of Almighty God, I knew not, in the things
about which thou suest, foulness or fraud, or infirmity or
blemish, up to that day’s-tide that I sold it to thee; but it was
both sound and clean, without any kind of fraud.


10. In the name of the living God, as I money demand,
so have I lack of that which N. promised me when [ mine to
him sold.

DENIAL.

11. In the name of the living God, I owe not to N. ‘sceatt’
or shilling, or penny or penny’s worth; but I have discharged
to him all that E owed him, so far as our verbal contracts were
at first.


OF THE OATH AND DEGREE-‘ BOT’ OF MEN IN
ORDERS.


12. A mass-priest’s oath, and a secular thane’s, are in Eng-
lish-law reckoned of equal value; and by reason of the seven
church-degrees that the mass-priest, through the grace of God,
has acquired, he is worthy of thane-right.


OF THE MERCIAN OATH.


13. A ‘twelf-hynde’ man’s oath stands for six ‘ceorls’ oaths:
because, if a man should avenge a ‘ twelf-hynde’ man, he will
be fully avenged on six ‘ceorls,’ and his ‘wer-gild’ will be
six ‘ceorls’ ‘ wer-gilds.’


Lamb. “ppeoyc D. 16°" D. 17 not in D. ‘hender D.  19// bid
peops yyx ceophycpa manna avay. foppem pe mon moc cpelf-henden
man zeppecan fullan upece be ysyx ceoplum 4 Imp pepzylb bid syx
ceopla pepzyloa. Lamb. 2% x11, hendan D. 2! notin D. 2 ycolbe
D. *yul- D. 4 penzilo D.


stantive (O.H.G. Weihi, mod. Weiche,) is founded, not only on
the form of the sentence itself, but on the authority of the Macro
MS., which has ‘nec sill nec yacnum n° pac n° pom,’ &c.—T.]


184 OATHS.


1 re becpaed 4 becpzel- yepe hic ahte- mid yullan role-pihte-
ypa ypa hic hip ylépan- mid feo 4 mid feone- pute begeaton-
4 lecan y lepdan- pam to gepealde- pe hy pel udan. And ypa
1¢ hic haebbe- ypa hic ye yealde- pe to yyllanne ahte- un-
bpyde 4 unfopboden. 4 1c Ine agmian *pille- to azenpe ehte-
~ f 1c hebbe. y neppe *pe myncan- ne ploc ne ploh- ne
cupp ne topes ne yuph ne yot-mel- ne land ne *leyye- ne
Fepye ne mepye- ne puh ne pum: pubdey ne reldey- lander ne
yopandey- pealter ne paveper- *bucan  leyce- “pe hpile ®pe
1¢ hbbe- foppam my 7eenrman on hye- pe xppe sehypde-
man cpydde oppon cparode- hine on Shundpede- oppon ahpap
on gemote: on ceap-ycope- oppe on cypic-pape- pa hpile pe he
®hyede. Unyac he pey on lye- beo on legepe- ypa ypa he
mote. Do ypa ic lepe- beo pe be pmum- 4 lec “me be
minum. ne gypne ic piney. ne Jedey ne lander. ne yace ne
yocne- ne pu miney ne ™peany'c- ne mynte 1c pe nan ping:-


1The text is from B. and the variations from H. *pylle H. 3 pec
Shuntpete H. lide H.


@ [Bucan $ lxyce. I offer my version of these words with much
hesitation ; bucan, although our dué be derived from it, occurring
rarely in that acceptation in pure Anglo-Saxon. An authority, how-
ever, for giving it that signification in the present instance is found


OATHS. 185


Bequeathed it, and died, he who it owned, with full folk-
right, so as it his elders, with money and with life, lawfully
got, and let and left, in power of him, whom they well gifted.
And so J it have, as he it gave, who had it to give, without
fraud and unforbidden; and I will possess it, as my own pro-
perty, that that I have; and ne’er for thee design, nor plot
nor ploughland, nor turf nor toft, nor furrow nor foot-mark,
nor land nor leasowe, nor fresh nor marsh, nor rough nor
plain, by wood nor by field, by land nor by strand, by weald
nor by water, * but that will maintain, the while that I live;
for there is no man alive, who ever heard, that any one made
plaint against, or summoned him at the hundred, or anywhere
at ‘ gemdt,’ in market-place, or among church-folk, the while
that he lived. Sackless he was in life, be he in the grave,
so as he may. Doas I teach: be thou with thine, and leave
me with mine: I covet not thine, nor ‘leth’ nor land, nor
‘sac’ nor ‘socn;? nor needest thou mine; nor design I to
thee any thing.


yncan H. ‘lere H. 5de He Spe HH. $B. 7mypecman Z.
Wme AH. pepe A.


in Boethius, 111. 1.: bucon ic paz, ‘but I know.’ Mr. Price’s ver-
sion was, * except that last,’ which, besides being apparently void of
meaning, requires that bucan should govern an accusative case (pet),
instead of its constant dative—7Z.]


186 WER-GILDS.


!1NORD-LEODA LALA.

1. *Nop-leoda cynger gild 1y7 -xxx- puyend ppymya. pir-
cene puyend ppymya *bid pay *pep-zildep- -xv- puyend pey
cyne-dDomey. Se pep gebipad magum- 4 yeo cyne-boc pam
leodum:.


u. SAficey 47 adelingey pep-xyld iy -xv- pupend ppymya:-


1m. °Biycopey 4 7ealdopmanney «vir ®puyend ppymya:-”

iv. Woldey 4 °eyninger Mheah-gepéran -11- ™purend ppym-
yar”

v. ’Qeyye-pegney 4 populd-pegney” -11- ®puyend prymya:”


vi. Leopley pep-gild ap -cc+ 4 -Lxvie ppi. “P bid -m- hund
Brat. be Q)ypena laze:-


vi. And gp Pilyfe] man gepeo f he heebbe hipiye lander
4 Smeege *cyninger “zayol popS-byngan- ponne “bid hip pep-


1 >Deyp cyningey pep-zyld sie md Enzla cynne on folc-
pube- pnycag puyend ppimya- y peepa -xv- M. pen paey peepeys
4 odpa -xv- mM. bey cyne-dDomey. Se pape belympad to pam
meegse pep cyne-cynney- 4 $ cyne-bot to pam land-leod:-


m1. JEpeebiyceoper 4 eopley peep-gild bid -xv- mM. ppimya:-


vi. Leopley pepe-gild biS cc.Lxvir- ppimya be pam Dena-
laga:


vir. And‘Pealiye-monney pep-guld- gzip he beo to pam ge-
pelezod- $ he hyped- 4 eht aze- 4 pam cyng xarol zyltan


1Be pepzylte. H. 2” Lynzer penzild iy mne mid Enzlum on fole-
phe A. 3bys A. 4pepey H. = notin H. © Biyceoper Lamb.
7ealbepmanner H. &%M. L. % notin H. Lamb. Mheh-zeperan H.


a From this and other passages in the dooms of Alfred and Ine,
there seems to have been little difference between the condition of the
Welshman and the Romanus tributarius of the Salic Jaw.

12


WER-GILDS. 187


THE NORTH PEOPLE'S LAW.


1. The North people’s king’s ‘gild’ is xxx. thousand
‘ thrymsas ;’ fifteen thousand ‘thrymsas’ are for the ‘ wer-gild,’
and xv. thousand for the ‘cyne-dom.’ The ‘ wer’ belongs to
the kindred, and the ‘ cyne-bot’ to the people.


2. An archbishop’s and an etheling’s ‘wer-gild’ is xv.
thousand ¢ thrymsas.’


8. A bishop’s and an ‘ ealdorman’s,’ viir. thousand ¢ thrymsas.’


4, A ‘hold’s’ and a king’s high-reeve’s, 1v. thousand
* thrymsas.’

5. A mass-thane’s and a secular thane’s, 1m. thousand
‘ thrymsas.’

6. A ‘ceorl’s’ ‘ wer-gild’ is cc. and Lxv1. ‘ thrymsas, that is
ce. shillings by Mercian law.


7. And if a ‘ Wilisc’-man thrive so that he have a hide of
Jand, and can bring forth the *king’s ‘ gafol,’ then is his ‘ wer-


1. Let the king’s ‘wer-gild’ be with the English race, by
folk-right, thirty thousand ‘ thrimsas,’ and of these, let xv. thou-
sand be for the ‘wer,’ and the other xv.m. for the ‘ cyne-
dom.’ The ‘wer’ belongs to the kindred of the royal family,
and the ‘ cyne-bdt’ to the people of the country.


2. An archbishop’s and an ‘eorl’s’ ‘ wer-gild’ is xv. M.
‘ thrimsas.’


6. A ‘ceorl’s’ ‘wer-gild’ is ccuxvu. ‘ thrymsas’ by the
Danish law.


7. And a ‘ Wylisc’-man’s ‘ wer-gild,’ if he be to that degree
enriched that he have a hide of land and property, and can


hehzepepar Z. 3!” puyenda Z. 1’ Meyre- y peopolb- LZ. 17M.
pmmya LZ. Mpec pes H. ycyllinga ZH. maze H. 1 zarel A.
18 byd HZ.


> The following variations of the text are from Lambarde; the ms.
which he transcribed has not been found. The numerals have been
added for the purpose of reference: n°. 111.-v. are collated.


188 WER-GILDS.


guld }-c.xx- yell, And zip he ne gepeo buton to healne hibe-
ponne *y1 hnp pep -Lxxx- yeilt.:.

vin. And gir he emg land naebbe- 4 peah yneoh *py- rop-
gilde” hine man mid -Lxx- yelt.:-

1x. And zip ceopliye man zepeo $ he hebbe -v- hiba lanbey
co cyngey *ut-pape- y hine man oyyleae *popgilde man hine
mid tpam puyend bpumya:-

x. And peah he gepeo he hebbe helm 4 bypnan 4 zolde
feted ypeopd- zip he # land narad- he bid ceopl ypa peah:-


xt And gip by punu y hip sunu-yunu } gepeod $ hi ypa
micel lander habban- yippan *bid ye ofypppine zepiScunder
cynney be tpam puyendum:.

xu. And zip hi $ nabbad- ne to pam zepeon ne magan-
Szilde man cipliyce:-


mez- hit bid pon -ccoxx- yell. Ac he ne bid butan to
healp hyda sepyyen- ponne pie hip pepe -Lxxx- yeilt.:.


vit. Ing he land nebbe- ac bid gpeoh- syld mon -Lxx-
yout:

1x. Ing ceopl sie gepelegod to bam $ [he] aze -v- hyda
lander 4 mon hine ofylea- zy10 hine mon mid -11- mM. ppmya:-


x. And zip he begycad $ he hebbe bypne y helm 4 ofep-
zyldene ypeopd- peah pe he land naebbe- he bid yiScund:.


x1. And gy hip sunu y pep yun-punu } begzycen fp he ypa
micle lander habbad- yien hiopa apcep-zenzay peey yiScunda[n]
eynney 4 syld bam mon mid -11- M. pyumya:-


1co.xx. A, 2yry A. ¥ ry popzylbe A.


2 Such is the reading of all the mss. It is no substitution for
uc-fane, as supposed by Lye, but the Lantweri of the Germanic
codes: ‘ Et quia in hostem aut propter terram defendendam, aut
propter acquirendam itur, de Lantweri, id est de patric defensione,


WER-GILDS. 189


gild’ cxx. shillings. And if he thrive not except to half a
hide, then let his ‘ wer’ be Lxxx. shillings.

8. And if he have not any land, and yet be ae let him be
paid for with uxx. shillings.

9. And if a ‘ceorlish’ man thrive, so that he have v. hides
of land for the king’s * ‘ ut-ware,’ and any one slay him, let him
be paid for with two thousand ‘ thrymsas.’

10. And though he thrive, so that he have a helm and coat
of mail, and a sword ornamented with gold, if he have not that
land, he is nevertheless a ¢ ceorl.’

11. And if his son and his son’s son so thrive, that they
have so much land; afterwards, the offspring shall be of * ge-
sitheund’ race, at two thousand [¢ thrymsas.”]

12. And if they have not that, nor to that can thrive, let
them be paid for as ¢ ceorlish.’


pay ‘gafol’ to the king, it is then ccxx. shillings. But if he
be only risen to half a hide, then let his ‘wér’ be Lxxx. shil-
lings.

8. If he have no land, but is free, let him be paid for with
Lxx. shillings.

9. If a ‘ceorl’ be enriched to that degree, that he have
v. hides of land, and any one slay him, let him be paid for with
11. M. * thrimsas.’

10. And if he acquire so that he have a coat of mail and a
helmet, and an over-gilded sword, if he have not that land, he
is ‘sithcund.’

11. And if his son and the son’s son that acquire, that they
have so much land, let their successors be of the ‘sithcund’ kin,
and let them be paid for with 11. m. ¢ thrimsas.’


4 ponzylbe H. Sbyd A. 6zyloe HZ.


non aliter nisi secundum istum modum, in lege aut in capitulis
Imperatorum scriptum habemus. Cod. Remensis ap. Du Cange, in
voce.


190 WER-GILDS.


1 BE MIRLNA-LALE.

Leopley *pep-zild Sip on ODypena ‘laze -cc- yailt. °Degney
Spep-gild” iy yx pa micel-’” $7bid -xu- Shund peitl, Donne
®bid cyngey’ anreald pep-zild -vi- pezna “pep” be ODypena
Plaze-/’ P 1p -xxx+ puyend peeatcae By $ bid ealley -c.xx-
punda’” *Spa micel “iy peer pep-zildep on ®yolcey role-phcey
be M@ypena lage.” And pop pam *cyne-ddme "zebipad odep
ypile co bote on cyne-¥zilde. Se pen @zebipad magum- 4 yeo
cyne-bot pam leodum:-’”


RANKS.


BE 2([LEOD-]KEDINGDUM AND LALE.


1 "Sic pep hpilum- *on Engla lazum-” f leod y lagu. rop
be *zepincdum- 4 pa pepon *[peod-]pican-> *peondyerper
6 pynde- ale be ny mede- %eopl 4 ceopl- “pezen 7y
peoden.


nu. And zip ceopl gepeah- $ he heepbde rullice- Sip *hida
ageney landey- “cipican y kycenan-’ *bell-huy 4 buph-geat-
yecl- 4 *yundep-note- on cyngey healle- ponne py he * Ponon-
Fops- pezen-juhtey * peopde.

m1. And *zip pegzen’ gepeah- $ he penode cyngze- 4 Iny
© %nad-ycepne- nad on hip hipede- gzip he ponne hepbde- pegen
pe him pilizde- pe to “cinger “uc-pape- pip Shyda heepde- 4


1no rubric in H. 2pepzylo H. 3biS LZ. Aland Z. 5’ Dezener
penzylo H. /yyxpealb pam ZL. 7bys H. yy L. Shundped A,
% byd cyninger H. 107 pepgylo yyx pegena pepzylo H. //pepzyloan
L. Plaza D. not in MH. not in L. 34/7 bid ye pepzyld. ac pop
per pices cynebot bid co piypum genumon ere spa micle on cyne-
zylo. pam pepe habbad pa mazar 3 pam cynebor ye lanbleobs. LZ.


2 [Spa micel. .. ~~. lage. This passage is extremely corrupt,
poueh the sense may be ascertained by comparison with the reading
of L—T.j

b The books speak of three kinds of witan: peobd-pican, leob-
pican, and yseip-prcan. The first two perhaps were identical, and may
have meant the members of the king’s court, and consequently of


WER-GILDS. 19]


OF MERCIAN LAW.


A ‘ceorl’s’ ‘wer-gild’ is by Mercian law cc. shillings. A
thane’s ‘ wer-gild’ is six times as much, that is, x1. hundred
shillings. Then is a king’s simple ‘wer-gild’ v1. thanes’ ¢ wér’
by Mercian law, that is, xxx. thousand ‘sceatts,’ and that is
altogether cxx. pounds. *So much is the ‘wer-gild’ in the
people's folk-right by Mercian law. And for the ‘cyne-dom’
there is due another such sum as ‘bot’ for ‘cyne-gild” The
‘wér’ belongs to the kindred, and the ‘ cyne-bot’ to the
people.


RANKS.


OF PEOPLE’S RANKS AND LAW.


1. It was whilom, in the laws of the English, that people
and law went by ranks, and then were >the counsellors of the
nation of worship worthy, each according to his condition, ‘eorl’
and ‘ceorl,’ ‘ thegen’ and ‘ theoden,’


2. And if a‘ ceorl’ thrived, so that he had fully five hides of
his own land, church and kitchen, bell-house and ‘ burh’-gate-
seat, and special duty in the king’s hall, then was he thenceforth
of thane-right worthy.


3. And if a thane thrived, so that he served the king, and
on his “summons, rode among his household; if he then had
a thane who him followed, who to the king’s ‘ut-ware,’ five


1 not in H. 6" D. Wxzebypad H. 18-zyloe H. 9 zebypad HH.
20D. leobe- H. 21 not in D. 2 notin D. *%zepmzsum D. 4D.
leob- “H. %pupd- D. %pupte D. %% ze D. add. *%v. D.
29° A. hyta D. 3% mot in D. bellan- D. 3? pundop- D.
33panon- D. *4pypte D. 3%ye peD. %°D. 8 cynzer D.
38 not in D. 99 hidba Dz


the witena-gemote in contradistinction to the scir-witan, or the mem-
bers of the county court. But the distinction was one of office rather
than of rank, since the members of the witena-gemote sate in the
scir-gemote of their respective counties.

¢ A summons or citation carried on horseback.


192 RANKS.


on 'cingey yele- hny hlaropde penode- 4 pypa mid hip 2epende-
Zefope cto %cinge- ye moyte ‘yyppan- mid hip rop-adee ny
hlaropd appelian- °ec miytlican neobdan-’ y ny onypece- ze-
pecan mid juhte- ypa hpep ypa he ®yceolde.

iv. And yepe ypa Zepogenne- yon-pyphtan nepdes ypope yop
7yylpne- aycep hiy pihte- oppe hiy polode.

v. *And gip pexen gepeah- $ he peapd to eople- ponne pxy
he yyppan- *eopl-pihtey peopde.

vi. And gif mayyepe gepeah» $ he yepde pmge- ofep pid
ye be hip agenum *cpepre: ye pay ponne yyppan- begen-
pubtey peopde.

vu. And gif leopnepe *[pepe- $ puph lane zepuge] P he
had heepde- 4 penode [piyte- ye pay ponne pyppan-” meede 4
munbde- ypa micelpe pupSe- ypa “[ponne pam hade- zebipede
mid pihte- zip he hine heolde- ypa ypa he yceolde]- bucon he
yop-pophte- p he pape *had-nove- notian ne morte.


vit. And gip *hic gepupde- $” man gehadedum- oppe el-
peodigum- ahpan “zedenode- popdey oppe peopcer. ponne Ze-
bypede- Pcinge 4 bipceope- $ “hig $ becvan- ypa hig pavoye
muihton:-


leynmnzey D. 2ependan D. ScynzeD. 4pppanD. notin D.
6ponpce D. 7ypilne D. 8ce. 5, 6. not in D. 9D. zepeh puph


* Tt is to this law that the historian of Ely seems to allude in the
following passage, and not to any qualification for a seat in the
witena-gemote, as has been so frequently asserted: ‘ Habuit (sc.
Ulfricus abbas) enim fratrem Gudmundum vocabulo cui filiam pre-
potentis viri in matrimonium conjungi paraverat. Sed quoniam ille
quadraginta hidarum terre dominium minime obtineret licet nobilis
(that is, a thane) esset, inter proceres tunc numerari non potuit,
eum puella repudiavit. Gale, 11. c. 40. If we refer to the dooms
of Cnut, c.69, we shall see that the heriots of an eorl and of a
lesser thane were in the proportion of from one to eight—a rule
which may be supposed to have arisen from a somewhat similar
relation between the quantities of their respective estates; and as the


RANKS. 193


hides had, and in the king’s hall served his lord, and thrice
with his errand went to the king; he might thenceforth, with
his ‘fore-oath,’ his lord represent, at various needs, and his
plaint lawfully conduct, wheresoever he ought.


4. And he who so prosperous a vicegerent had not, swore
for himself according to his right, or it forfeited.


5. And if a thane thrived, so that he became an ? “eorl,’
then was he thenceforth of ¢ eorl’-right worthy.


6. And if a merchant thrived, so that he fared thrice over
the wide sea by his own *means, then was he thenceforth of
thane-right worthy.


7. And if there a scholar were, who through learning
thrived, so that he had holy orders, and served Christ; then
was he thenceforth of rank and power so much worthy, as then
to those orders rightfully belonged, if he himself conducted so
as he should; unless he should misdo, so that he those orders’
ministry might not minister.


8. And if it happened, that any one a man in orders, or a
stranger, anywhere injured, by word or work; then pertained
it to king and to the bishop, that they that should make good,
as they soonest might.


lane H. '/peneyepippan D. "3D. peprozebypebe H. 12° H.
Wnot in D. ‘zebenebe D. Neynze D. Mbircepe D. Whi D.


possession of five hides conferred upon a ceorl the rights of a thane,
the possession of forty (5x 8) in all probability raised a thane to the
dignity of an eorl.

> [It is possible that epafpe may here, as at the present day,
signify ‘a vessel.’ In the beautiful metrical ‘ Legend of St. Andrew’
it occurs in that sense, in the following passage: ‘ peeped yamiz-healy-
suzole zelicoyc- zlibed on xzeofone. 1c Zeopne pac. pet ic eppe ne
zereah- ofen yd-lape- on ya leoban- yylliepan cperc: fareth the
foamy-neck, to a bird most like, glideth on ocean; I well know, that
I never saw, over the smoothened waves, on the sea sailing, a craft
more wonderful.’ See Cooper’s Report, App. B. p.(59.) —TZ.]


JEDELESTANES DOMAS.*


I.
[COUNCIL OF GREATANLEA.]


b>EDELSTANES LYNINGES LERJEDNES.


Ie s€¥elpcan ‘eyninze md gepeahve ?Pulphelmey apceb”
+4 ®minpa foBepa bipcopas SeyS pam geperan vo °hpilcepe
big.” 4 eop bidde on Trodey naman y on 7eallum hip haligpa-
‘4y eac be mmum fneondycipe® $ Ze apeyco of mmum agze-
num °zéde Maziyan pa ceodungza+ azSep ze on cpicum ceape
ze on pey geaney eopd-paycmum: ypa man “yihtoyc mage”
oppe zemetan- oppe getellan- oppe apegan. 4 pa bipcopay ponne
~ Pilce don- on heopa agenum gode- y mme ealdopmen y
mine geperan } ’pilye. And ic pille $ biyceop 4 pa gepefan
hit beobdan eallum pam pe him “hipan yeulon-’ $ hic to pam


‘Ic s€Selpcane cyning md gepeahte Pulphelmer miner
heh-biyceopey- 4 oSpa minpa bipceopa- bebeode eallum mmum
gepearum puph ealle mime juce- on peey Dmhczener nama- 4
ealpa halgena- 4 foyi mime lufu- $ hi xporc miney agener
whtey pam veode geyyllad- ze per hbbendey yprer- ge pay
geaplicer peycmey. y f lee gedO eac pa biyceopay heopa ze-
hpylepas 4 eac mme ealdopmanna 4 gepeara, And ic pille
~ mine biyceopey- 4 gepeaza per demad eallum pe hio Ze-
hypyumian gebypad- y $ uce to pam tide Fulppemad pe pe
hio pevcad- 4 pey pie to pam daz pep beheapdunger Sein


Leynz 2 Pulpelmey apceb G. apcebiycop D. %eac add. 4odeppa
1/7 mheare ~meeze 12 ylce


a JEthelstan, the natural son of Edward the elder, was placed on
the throne upon the death of his father in the year 924. Archbishop
Wulfhelm succeeded to the see of Canterbury in the year 925, and
held it till about 960.


THE LAWS OF KING ATHELSTAN.*


I.
[COUNCIL OF GREATANLEA.]


KING AETHELSTAN’S ORDINANCE.


I, Asthelstan king, with the counsel of Wulfhelm, arch-
bishop, and of my other bishops, make known to the reeves at
each ‘burh,’ and beseech you, in God’s name, and by all his
saints, and also by my friendship, that ye first of my own
goods render the tithes both of live stock and of the year’s
earthly fruits, so as they may most rightly be either meted,
or told, or weighed out; and let the bishops then do the like
from their own goods, and my ‘ealdormen’ and my reeves the
same. And I will, that the bishop and the reeves command
it to all those who ought to obey them, that it be done at


I, Athelstan king, with the counsel of Wulfhelm my arch-
bishop, and of other my bishops, command all my reeves
throughout all my realm, in the Lord’s name, and of all saints,
and for my love, that they first of my own property give the
tithe, both of live stock and of yearly fruit; and the like do
also the bishops from each of theirs, and also my ‘ ealdormen’
and reeves. And I will that my bishops and reeves adjudge
this to all whom it behoveth to obey them, and accomplish
the same by the time which we appoint to them; and let this
be on the day of the beheading of St. John the Baptist.


5cySe © zehpylcepe bypiz 7ealpa S8beobeadd. 97 Mazyran
yylpe 4hypan yeylan. J


b The text is from Ms. D., and the variations are all from
Ms. G.

¢ This second text is taken from Lambarde. The ms. which he
followed has not been found.


o 2


196 JEDELSTANES DOOAS.


yuhran anbdagan gelayc sy. 'Ucon zepencan hu Iacob cped
ye heah-peedep. ‘Decimas et hostias pacificas offeram tibi. 4
hu Moyer cpeed on Troder lage. ‘ Decimas et primitias non
tardabis offerre Domino. Uy iy vo ?zepencanne hu %on-
Fpylic hie on bocum gecpeden iy. *Inp pe fa teodunga Lode
geleycan nellad. $ he uy *benimed papa migon dela ponne
pe ley penad- 4 eac pe habbad fa yynne co-eacan. And ic
pille eac # mine Zeperan zedon $ man Sazire pa ’cipic-peeaccay
4y ba yapl-peeatcap to pam pcopum fe hic nnd prhe vo-*gebi-
yuse- y sulh-eelmeyyan on °zeape on pa zenad. $ pa np
bpucan et pam haligan “ycopum pe heopa “ecipican “began
pullad- 4 co Irode 4 to me *zééapmian pillad. pefe fonne nelle-
pohize *fane ape- opfe eft to yuhte “zecippe. Nu ge "ze-
hipad- cped ye ®cyngc- hpey 1c Trobe ann- 4 hpet ze gZe-
leycvan ®yculan be *mynpe ofephypnyyye. And zedod eac
~ ze me *zeunnon miney ageney f ye me md puhte *zeycpi-
nan mazon/’ Nelle 1c $ ge me md unpihte ahpap *ahc
Zeyepynan. ac ic pille eopper** geunnan eop juhtlice- on fa


Iohanney pey fulhtepey. Uran gefencan pe hpet Jacob ye
hieh-peedep co pam Dyuhren cpxd. Ic pe pille geryllan mine
teodan- 4 mine yib-lac. And Dyhven yeolfe on pam Iobd-
ypel cpzed. Callum pem hebbendum mon yeeal agyyan- 4 hi
genyhcyumias. Pe moton eac per pfencan fe egerhe on
Jyyum bocum ip geppicen. Ing pe upe ceosan geryllan
nyllad- up pa nygon dzelay bid ecbpwdene- 4 ye teoda an uy
bi3 co lap. Se godcunde lape up gemynad- $ pe pa heoron-
hea pinga mid fam eopdlicum- 4 pa ecelic mid fam hpilpend-
lheum geeapniad, Nu ge gehypad hpat Dpihtene uy bebeod-
4y hpeec uy fulppemian gebypad. Ired6 $ ze seopmad- pam
pinga fe ge me yuhthe begycan maz. Ic nylle $ ze me
hpac mid poh begytad. Ing ic eop ealla eoppa pinga zeunne
on pa gepade pe ge me mine Zeopniad- papmad eop- 4 hio pe
eope vo-belimpad- peep Dpihteney eoppey- 4 miney:.


Te Cdelycane cyning- eallum minum gepefum binnon mine
Juce xecySe- mid gepeahte Pulrhelmey miner eepcebipceopey-
‘4j ealpa mina odpa biyceopa- 4 Loder peopas yop mina yinna


1Ucan 2pencanne 3ondpyylic 4Lyp Sbenmmad Sazyre 7 cypie-
8-zebypize %zeaner Mzepad Uycopan Meypean #7 MA" DY,


THE LAWS OF KING “XTHELSTAN. 197


the right term. Let us bear in mind how Jacob the patriarch
spake: ‘ Decimas et hostias pacificas offeram tibi:’? and how
Moses spake in God’s law: ‘ Decimas et primitias non tardabis
offerre Domino.’ It is for us to think how awfully it is de-
clared in the books: If we will not render the tithes to God,
that he will take from us the nine parts when we least expect;
and, moreover, we have the sin in addition thereto. And I
will also that my reeves so do, that there be given the church-
scotts and the soul-scotts at the places to which they rightly
belong: and plough-alms yearly, on this condition; that they
shall enjoy it at the holy places who are willing to serve their
churches, and of God and of me are willing to deserve it:
but let him who will not, forfeit the bounty, or again turn
to right. Now ye hear, saith the king, what I give to God,
and what ye ought to fulfil by my ‘oferhirnes.’ And do ye
also so that ye may give to me my own what ye for me may
justly acquire. I will not that ye unjustly anywhere acquire
aught for me; but I will grant to you your own justly, on this


Let us think on what Jacob the patriarch said to the Lord:
‘I will give thee my tenths and my peace-offering’ And the
Lord himself in the Gospel spake: ‘ To all those having shall
be given, and they shall abound.’ We may, moreover, think
on this, which fearfully in these books is written: ‘ If we will
not give our tenths, the nine parts shall be taken away from
us, and the tenth alone shall be left unto us.’ The divine
doctrine exhorts us, that we should earn the heavenly things
with the earthly, and the everlasting with the transitory. Now
ye hear what the Lord commandeth us, and what it behoveth
us to fulfil, Do so that ye acquire those things which ye for
me rightly may get: I will not that ye get for me any thing
with wrong. If I grant to you all your things on the con-
dition, that ye for me acquire mine, be ye warned, and those
who unto you belong, of God’s ire and mine.


I, Akthelstan king, make known to all my reeves within
my realm, with the counsel of Wulfhelm my archbishop, and
of all my other bishops and God’s servants, for my sin’s


pepe  Izecyppe Wzehypad eynzg '9yceolan 29 minpe
21unnon G. zeannon D. 22/zercpynan mazgan %ohr 24 azeney add...


198 JEDELSTANES DOOAS.


gepad pe ge me 'zeunnan miney- 4 beonzad xgdep ze cop
ze pam pe ge *mingian yeulon-’ pid Loder *ippe 4 prs mine
‘ orephimneyye:-


fopsyreneyye- P 1c pillee $ ge yedad ealle pega dn eapm
Englyemon- gif ze him habba’- oppe oSepne gepindad. Fram
cpam minja feopma agzyre mon hine elce monad ane ambpa
meley- 4 Gn ycone ypicey- oppe dn pam peopde -1111- peningay+
4 yepud fon cpelp monda ele zeap. And P ge alyyad an
pice-feopne. 4 peey ealle pie zeddn top Dyihceney mildheoptc-
neyye: 4 mine luru- undep peer bipceopep gepicneyye- on per
Juce ic sie. And zip ye gZepeara piy ofepheald- zebece -xxx-
yout. y pre P peoh gedzled paem peaprum- pe on pa tun pynd
pe piy ungeppemed punie- on bey bipceopey zepreneyye:-


JEDELSTANES LER /E[DINESSE."


5BE DEOFUM.

1. JEpeyc. *f mon’ ne ypayige 7nenne peop pe xt heb-
bendpe Shanda gepangen yy- ofep %-xm- Mpmtep+ 4 ofep
eahta “peningayp. And “zip hic @hpa 86-” rongzyloe pone peor
be hip pepe: y ne “beo ’pam peore na pe gepingodpe- oppe
hine be “pam !zeladie. Ing he hine ®ponne pemian *pille
oppe *o%pfleo- ponne’ ne “ypapize hine “man. Inp **man
peop on *capcepne gebmnge. $ he beo *-xu- mhta *’on
capeepne- 4 hine mon ponne’ alyye fic md © -c.xx- yeilf.
4 ga yeo *'meezd him on boph he egpe gerpice. And “zip
he ogep $ “ycahize- “yopgildan hy’ hine be hip pepe- oppe
hine “ere paep-“imne gebpingan.’ 4 *’ zip hine hpa ropycande-


Junnan 2 mynzian yeylan 3yppe ‘4orenypnesre 5x0 rubric in H.
“pec man B. ‘7nanneB. Shand BL. %cpelp B. 1° pmczepne
BL. and so H. orig. “penezay B. Vay Bo "WB. Myy
BL. ®’ypem L. pam B. Wzelange L. Ly B. 19 penne B.
70 pylle B. 2 yleon L. ‘yleo- penne B. %ypame B. ep pam


a The text is taken from ms. H. The early variations are from
ms. B.; but unfortunately this ms. wants the greater part of 7thel-
stan’s enactments, though it supplies us with the Anglo-Saxon
original of a set of dooms supposed to have been lost, but which is


THE LAWS OF KING ZTHELSTAN. 199


condition, that ye yield to me mine; and shield both your-
selves, and those whom ye ought to exhort, against God's anger
and against my ‘ oferhirnes.’


forgiveness, that I will that ye entirely feed one poor English-
man, if ye have him, or that ye find another. From two of
my ‘ feorms’ let there be given him every month one ‘amber’
of meal, and one shank of bacon, or one ram worth rv. pence,
and clothing for twelve months every year. And that ye
redeem one ‘wite-theow;’ and let all this be done for the
Lord’s mercy, and my love, under witness of the bishop in
whose jurisdiction it may be. And if the reeve omit this, let
him make ‘bot’ with xxx. shillings, and let that money be
distributed to the needy who are in the ‘tiin’ where this
remains unfulfilled, in the witness of the bishop.


JETHELSTAN’S ORDINANCES.


OF THIEVES.


1. First: that no thief be spared, who may be taken ‘ hand-
hebbende,’ above xu. years, and above eight pence. And if
any one so do, let him pay for the thief according to his ¢ wér,’
and let it not be the more settled for the thief, or that he
clear himself thereby. But if he will defend himself, or flees
away, then Jet him not be spared. If a thief be brought into
prison: that he be xu. days in prison, and then let him be
released thereout with cxx. shillings, and let the kindred enter
into ‘borh’ for him that he evermore desist. And if after
that he steal, let them pay for him according to his ‘ wér,’ or
bring him again therein: and if any one stand up for him,


4 o8ep B. ~pam. OSen LZ. %mon LZ.  *%cpeapcepne B. cpeap-
cepne Z. %yeopepng B.L. 27 pap-mne BZ. 8’ man penne B.
29° H, 3 hunod-cpelpci B. —cpelprigum LZ. 2! maggie L. 2 ayp B.
33 yralie B. 34’ ponne yopzyloan hi B.L. %/ peep epe ingebpingan B.
Sin L. 37 zy B.


known from the Latin version in Bromton, and which will be found
below. The variations from Lambarde have been added as usual.
From the general agreement of both texts, it would seem that Lam-
barde must have used a copy closely resembling ms. B.


200 JEDELSTANES DOOAS.


Trongzilde line be hip pepe- ypa *peem Scymngze- spa *peem
be hic ®mid pyhte’ co-zebypige. + zle man papa pe *pep
mid-ytande- Zeyylle 7paem cyninge -c.xx- pelt, to pite:-


8BE [DJLAFORDLEASUM MANNUM.


1 °Ond pe cpzdon. be “pxem hlaropdleayum mannum pe
“man "nan “pyht’ ect-begycan ne meg- $ man “beode pepe
megdse } hi hine to “role-pyhcte ’zehameccen- 4 him “hla-
Fopd *pinden on fole-zemote- 4 ?zip hi hine *°ponne bexytan
*1nyllen opfe ne magen co pam andazan- ponne beo **hé
ryppan *ylyma- 4 hine lecze yop **peop yepe him to-cume. 4
yepe hine “open $ feopmize- fongzylbe hine be ny pepe- oppe
*7he hine be *pam * Jadize:-


30 BE RYPTES pERNUNKGE.

m1. And se “hlapopd pe *pyhver pypne 4 yop hip yrelan
3man lege’ y man fone cyng “fope-gerece- Sponzilbe $
Sceap-z1ld”. 4 geyylle pam cynge *-cxx- yeitl 4 yepe
bone cyng “zerece ap he “him “pyhtep bidde ypa oft ppa
him “vo-zebyme- gilde” $ “ilce pice $ ye odep yceolde “zip
he him “pyhvey pypnde. And ye “hlapopd pe hip peopan
xe pyySe gepita yy: 4 hic “him on’ open pupde- “polige peey
peopan- 4 beo Iny peper “ypeylig at ppum-cyppe. Inyp he
hic oftop “86- bed “he ealler “ycyloig pep pe he age. 4
eac *ypilce cynger *’hopdepa® opfe upe gepepena “ypyle
Sheena peopa gepica pepe fe yraledon- beo “he be “pam
ican :.


} ropzylbe BL. 2 pam B. 3 eyng L. 4pam B. 57 nat in BL.
Spepe LZ. 7huno-cpelpriz peti. co pice pam cynze. B. — pam
eynze L. 8no rubr.in H. 9And BL. “pam B. |! nan L. add.
127nau mam phe B. ‘pihce LZ. Mbube BL. 15 -mhce BL.
16 zehamecte B.H.L. but originally xehameccen in H. 17 hlaropde
L. 'yundon B. punden LZ. 9 ayp B. 2% penne B. 2! nellon B.L.
2mazon BL. Bpam BL. 4" B.  *peoye L. %orson B.
27not in L. %pem L. *zelanie BL. no rubric in BL.


2 A man who had fled for his offence, and whose flight was equi-
valent to a conviction. The ‘ fugitivus’ of Bracton and Fleta.

b The ‘ captale’ of the Barbaric laws, or the simple value of the
thing stolen.

© In AElfric’s glossary this term is translated Cellerarius. In the
Chronicle it occurs more than once as the title of an officer attached


THE LAWS OF KING AXTHELSTAN. 201


let him pay for him according to his ‘ wér,’ as well to the king
as to him to whom it lawfully belongs: and let every man
of those who there stand by him pay to the king cxx. shillings
as ‘ wite.’


OF LORDLESS MEN.


2. And we have ordained: respecting those lordless men
of whom no law can be got, that the kindred be commanded
that they domicile him to folk-right, and find him a lord in
the folk-mote; and if they then will not or cannot produce
him at the term, then be he thenceforth a ** flyma,’ and let
him slay him for a thief who can come at:him: and whoever
after that shall harbour him, let him pay for him according to
his ‘ wer,’ or by it clear himself.


OF DENIAL OF RIGHT.


8. And the lord who denies justice, and upholds his evil-
doing man, and the king be applied to on that account; let.
him pay the >‘ceap-gild,’ and give to the king cxx. shillings:
and he who applies to the king before he has prayed for jus-
tice, as oft as it shall behove him; let him pay the like ‘wite’
that the other should if he had denied him justice. And the
lord who is privy to his ‘ theow’s’ theft, and it is made mani-
fest against him, let him forfeit the ‘theow,’ and be liable in
his ‘ wer,’ for the first time. If he do so oftener, let him be
liable in all that he has: and, also, such of the king’s * ‘ hor-
deres,’ or of our reeves, as shall be privy to the thieves who
have stolen, let him be subject to the like.


3lhlaropde Z. 32 mhcer B. plhce LZ. 3/men lyeze L. 34 ronerece
B. sopyece L. *yonzyloe BL. %ceapexyl B. ceapesyloe L.
37pem L. 8hund-cpelpczy B. %pene B. “rece BL. 4 hine B.
“mhcer LZ. 4 co-zebypize zylbe BL. 4y¥lee ZL. “ay B.
46mhcey BL. 47hlazopse L. 4% notin L. pole B. yeiltig
L Ly Bo 2° H. 3e0 B. not in BL. yale L.
56ypile B. ypylee LZ. 57 hopbepe B. 8hpyle BL. pe L. add.
pape HX. notin ZL. pem L.


to a monastery. The Chartulary of Glastonbury makes mention
of his dues under the name of Horderes-gild :—* Nos H. abbas de
Niwenham et ejusdem loci conventus remittimus —— abbati Glaston’
et conventui x. sol. de turno vicecom. et iv sol. vit1. den. de
quodam redditu qui vocatur Horderesgeld unde placitavimus pra-
dictum abbatem Glaston. per breve domini regis.’ f. 36, apud Cowel.


202 JEDELSTANES DOMAS.


1Be PLAFORD-2SeEARPUM.


rv. 3Ond pe cpxdon be hlagond-tyeappan. $ he *beo hip
feopey peyloiz “sip he 7hip etyacan ne mihte- obpe °epc on
pam °ppimrealdan opdale fil pepe:


BE LIRIC-BRYLE,
v. And pe cpedon be “ecipic-bpyce. “gir he “pal pepe on
“bam ppyfealdan opdale- bete be *pam “pe yeo %6m-boc
yecgze:”


18 BE PILLE-LRSEFTUM.

vi. Ond pe ®cpxdon be *° pam picce-cpeepcum- y be * lib-
lacum- 4 *be mopS-decdum. ** zip man peep *acpeald peepee ¥
he *hip *scyacan ne *’mihte- $ he beo Inp feoper yeyloig.
Ing he *ponne etpacan pillee y on pam pprmpealdum’ opdale
Fal peopde- $ he beo -c.xx- mhta on capcepne. 4 nimen pa
magap hine “'yippan uc+ 4 geryllan pam “cynge -cxx- peill.
4 ®pongzylban pone pep “hip magum- y zangon him’ on boph
he eeype ypylcer geypice:-


36BE BLJCSERUM.
7Da *blypiepay- 4 pa pe *peor ppecon- beon “pzey “lean
pyhcey” pypde. And yepe peop “ppecan pille- y “nanne man
“tne xepundizge- gerylle “pam cyiunge’ -cxx- perth. “co pice
Fo. pan Peev-hlype:.”


BE ANFEALDUM ORDALE.


vir. And pe cpadon be pam anfealdum opbdale- ac “pam
mannum fe “orc betihtlede” pepon- y “hy rule *pundon-


lno rubric in B. 2-syppum LZ. 3And BL. 4-reappe A. -ryppan
Le. ‘Sypepe BL. 83yp Bo 7h BL. Snot in BL. %ppy-
fealoan BL. no rubricin B. Neyme- BL. Vayp B. 137 B.
Mpam BL. pam B. MnotinL. W/~“yecze B. '8n0 rubric
in B. Wepedon B. pam B. 2 notin BL. 2p B. %mon
ZL. *acpealbe LZ. hic L. 26 Here an hiatus occurs in B. of
several leaves. 27 maze LZ. 8 hie Lamb. add. from whom the varia-


2 Whatever may have been the precise import of this term in
its usual acceptation, whether fascinatio or incantatio, as given
in the book, it is clearly derived from the same root with the


THE LAWS OF KING ATHELSTAN, 208


OF PLOTFINGS AGAINST A LORD.


4. And we have ordained respecting plottings against a lord:
that he should be liable in his life if he could not deny it, or
afterwards at the threefold ordeal should be guilty.


OF CHURCH-BREACH.
5. And we have ordained respecting church-breach: if he
should be guilty at the threefold ordeal, let him make ‘bot’
according as the doom-book may say.


OF WITCH-CRAFTS.

6. And we have ordained respecting witchcrafts, and * ‘ lyb-
lacs,’ and ‘ morth-deeds:’ if any one should be thereby killed,
and he could not deny it, that he be liable in his life. But if
he will deny it, and at the threefold ordeal shall be guilty;
that he be cxx. days in prison: and after that let his kindred
take him out, and give to the king cxx. shillings, and pay the
‘wér’ to his kindred, and enter into ‘borh’ for him, that he
evermore desist from the like.


OF INCENDIARIES.

Let incendiaries, and those who avenge a thief, be worthy
of the like law. And he who will avenge a thief, and wounds
no man, let him give to the king cxx. shillings, as ‘ wite’ for
the " assault.


OF THE SINGLE ORDEAL.


7. And we have ordained respecting the single ordeal, for
those men who have been often accused, and have been found


tions are henceforth taken. 2’ pem ppyrealoum %niman 2! ;yppan
2eynz Bronzylben 34 per manner 3/zanzen hi 36 Be hzepar.
in marg. no rubr. nor fresh section. 37 And add. *8 bliyzepay
39 peorppeecan 49beon add. 41’ ylca 4 pnecan #nenne “not
in L. 4/pemeynz 46 ron pon exhlype. 47 pam 4 peorde ze-
cyhclob “hi 50 pypden


Old German ‘luppi,’ venenum; ‘ luppig,’ venenatus; ‘ luppari,’
veneficus; ‘ lubper,’ maleficus,—hence lybbe— lyb, lyb-lac.

> [Perhaps here, as in J.C. L. I. 5. and Lib. Const. I. 30., we
ought to read w-hlype, ‘transgression of the law.’— 7.]


204 JEDELSTANES DOOAS.


4 hy 'mcon hpa hy on boph mme- gebpinge *man hy’ on
capcepne. 4 man *hy don’ uv ypa*hic hep befopan gecpeden
ye


BE LANDLEASUM MANNUM.


vir. And pe cpedon. zip hpyle landleay man yrolzode on
So$pe yeipe- y ego ny Smazar geyece-’ $ he 7hine on fa
Szenad yeopmize- he hine to fole-“pyhte gelede-” zip he
peep syle sepypce- oppe ropebece:-


BE 1 YRFeES JETFENLE.


1x. "Sebe ype beso. *nemne him’ mon %-y- men hi
Mneah-zebupa- 4 begite papa ®-v- «1-7 $ him mid ypepize
he hie on "pole-pyht him’ vo-ceo. 4 pepe hic him ®zeagnian
piles nemne him man -x- men- 4 *begice papa cpezen-” 4
yylle pone ad- $ hic on ny ehte zebopen peepe- butan **pam
pum-ade- y ycande * per cype-ad opep -xx+ peninga:.


BE 2 PpeARFe.

x. And nan man ne hpypye naner yprey butan pey ze-
peran *zepreneyye- oppe per meyye-ppeoytey- oppe pay land-
hlaropdey+ oppe peer *hopdeper- oppe odper *ungelyzeney
manney. Ing hiv hpa *06- geyylle” -xxx- yeill. 4 *6 ye land-
S*hlaropd to *'pam hpeapre:”


2 BE POPRE LEPITNESSE.
Ing *man ponne “arinde $ heopa emg on *pohpe gepre-
neyye pepe-” } neppe hip “zeprcney eyo naht ne fopytande-
yeac gepylle -xxx: peill. to prce:-


37TBE DON DE SLYLDGUNLE BDE CT OFSLELENUM.]


x1. %Ond pe cpedon. “pepe peyloungza” bebe ac “orylaze-
num peore- } he eode ppeopa pum “'to- cpezen “on yaedepan-


Imcen 2#hmemon %hmebto 4¢nzotinZ. Soden 6 mexar rece
7pe add. Szepabe %-pihce lebe '°ponne pe yp berehde. 11 And
add. %2%namne hine py Mnehbupa '/yipa: anne 6hm
Wrolephce '8azman 1mon 27 bezyce pepa 11. 21 pem 22 per
% ypra zehpynpe. “Dac %zepirnyyye hopdper 27 -ungeligeneyr


THE LAWS OF KING ZTHELSTAN. 205


guilty, and they know not who shall take them in ‘ borh;’ let
them be brought into prison: and let them be delivered out as
it here before is ordained.


OF LANDLESS MEN.


8. And we have ordained: if any landless man should
become a follower in another shire, and again seek his kinsfolk ;
that he may harbour him on this condition, that he present
him to folk-right if he there do any wrong, or make ¢ bot’ for
him.


OF ATTACHING CATTLE.


9. He who attaches cattle, let v. of his neighbours be named
to him; and of the v. let him get one who will swear with him
that he takes it to himself by folk-right: and he who will keep
it to himself, to him let there be named x. men, and let him
get two of them, and give the oath that it was born on his
property, without the ‘rim-ath; and let his’ ‘cyre-ath’ stand
for over Xx. pence.


OF EXCHANGE.


10. And let no man exchange any property without the
witness of the reeve, or of the mass-priest, or of the land-lord,
or of the ‘hordere,’ or of other unlying man. If any one so
do, let him give xxx. shillings, and let the land-lord take
possession of the exchange.


OF WRONGFUL WITNESS.
But if it be found that any of these have given wrongful
witness, that his witness never stand again for aught, and that
he also give xxx. shillings as ‘ wite.’


OF HIM WHO WOULD PRAY OFF A CRIMINAL CHARGE
FROM ONE SLAIN.

11. And we have ordained: that he who would pray off a

criminal charge from a slain thief, should go with three others,


27“ z1be 297 30-hlaronde 3!” pem zehpyppe. 22 not in L.
33mon 4onpinde 3rone xzepienysre sy 28zepienyyye 97 ZL.
38 not in L. 3% be pon pe yeylogunza 4° oplezenum 4! not in L..
42/rebepia mazar


206 JEDELSTANES DOMAS.


meegay’ y pdta on medpen+ 4 fone ad "yyllen $ *hy on
heopa maze nane *pyypde nyycon-’ $ he hip feoper pypde
nepe fon ‘pam gilte” 4 Shy gan *ypippan 7-xu- yume’ 4 ®ze-
ycyltigen hine- pa hic ap *zecpeden per 4 gif peer deadan
Mmezay pidep”’ cuman “noldon to “pam anbdagan- “zilbe ele
pe hic ep pppece -c.xx- yertt.:-


[BE DON DE MON Ne LeEAPIGE BUTAN PORTE.]


xu. ™Ond pe cpedon *$ “man neenne *ceap ne ceapize
butan popte opep -xx+ ™peneza. ac ceapige peep binnan on
pep popc-seperan *°xepicnesye- oppe *odper * unlyzeney
manner. oppe efc on “pana geperena *zeprcneyye on folc-
25 semote:-


Be BURGA LEBETTUNLE.


xu. And pe *cpedad $ ale *buph py gebec *-x1m- mihc
orep Irang-dazay.
Oden. P zle ceaping’ yy binnan popte:-


BE MYNETERUM.

xiv. 3Dpudda. $ Yan mynec yy orep Beall pay cynzger
%onpeald- 4 nan man ne myneteze bucan on pote. And”
zip ye mynetepe fal pupde- plea “man of pa hand pe *he $
Fal mid pophte» 4 yecce uppon pa “mynec-pmiddan. 4” zip
hic ponne cyhcle sy. y he hine latian pille- ponne “za he
to pam hactum iyene- 4 “ladize pa hand mid “pe man’ cyhd
~ he $ “pacen mid’ pophre. “And gzip he “on “pam onbdale
yal pupde- “50 man p “:lce ppa hic zp beronan > epaed:.


On Lantpapa-bypig -vire mynetvepay. -um- “pep cynger-
524 «11e @baey Sbipcopey- «1+ pay abboder:-

To JWpope-ceaycpe [-r11-], 11+ “[peey] cyngey y +1 peer
“°biycopey.

To Lunbden-bypug -viI1.

To © Pinta-ceaycpe «vi.


lyealbe 2hi 9% peorde nycen “pem zylc Shio 6yyppan
7 cpelra sum 8 zercylben %zecpeben 1 mazar pedep 1 nyllan
Zpem Wzylbe MLE. not in L. be pon add. 7 mon
Weeape Mpeninza 2zepicnyyye 2! notin LD. on odper YD. 2? un-
gelizener 3 pepa 24zepicnyspe %5-more 26 notin Z. 27 epeebon
28bupzgh *yeopeptyne 7 Oden. yle ceapunze 3! Pe cpwebdon


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELSTAN. 207


two of the paternal, and the third of the maternal kin, and
give the oath that they knew of no theft by their kinsman,
so that he were not worthy of his life for that crime: and
after that let some x11. go and charge him with the crime, as
it was before ordained; and if the kindred of the dead would
not come thither at the term, Jet every one who had before
tnade suit for it pay cxx. shillings.


THAT A MAN BUY NOT OUT OF PORT.


12, And we have ordained: that no man buy any property
out of port over xx. pence; but let him buy there within, on
the witness of the port-reeve, of of another unlying man: or
further, on the witness of the reeves at the folk-mote.


OF REPAIRING OF «BURHS,’


13. And we ordain: that every ‘burh’ be repaired xiv. days
over Rogation Days.
Secondly: that every marketing be within port.


OF MONEYERS.


14, Thirdly: that there be one money over all the king’s
dominion, and that no man mint except within port. And if
the moneyer be guilty, let the hand be struck off with which
he wrought that offence, and be set up on the money-smithy :
but if it be an accusation, and he is willing to clear himself;
then let him go to the hot-iron, and clear the hand therewith
with which he is charged that fraud to have wrought. And
if at the ordeal he should be guilty, let the like be done as
is here before ordained.

In Canterbury vir. moneyers; tv. the king’s, and um. the
bishop’s, 1. the abbot’s.

At Rochester 111.; 11. the king’s, and 1. the bishop’s.


At London vit.
At Winchester v1.


32 Bealle 4anpealbe 3 3 none. 37mon 8notin L.
39usan on 4% minec-pmidan 417 42latie 4” pam mon 44 racn
notin ZL. “ponneadd. “pam 87 *ylee hep 51 cpyd
Snot in L. 8biyceoper 4andan 5 ZL, Scpexen 57 Z. s8an
59 bisceoper 6° Pinceceayepe


208 JEDELSTANES DOMAS.


To 1Lepe -11.

To Deepcinga-ceaycpe +1.

Oden co ? Lipye-ceaycpe.

To ?am-cune -11.

To *Peep-ham -11.

To 5€xe-ceayme +11.

To Sceapcey-byjuz +1.

Elley co 7pam oSpum bupgum * 1:


9(BE SLYLD-pYRPTUM.]
xv. “Feopde. $ nan yeylo-pyphta ne lecze “nan yceper fell”
on yeyld. 4 zip he hie 06+ gilde” «xxx: yeitt.:.
xvi. 8 Fipce. $ ale man hebbe xc “pepe yyhl %-1- pel
®zehopyede men:-


BE DEM DE LT DEOFE MED-SLEATTE NIMAD.
xvi. Syxce. sip hpa ac peore *mébd-pceacc mime- y odpey
*nyhe apylle- *beo he hip peper peyldig:-


BE PORSUM.


xvi. *4Seorode. P’ nan man ne yylle nan hopy open y&-
bucan he hic * ziran pille:.


[Be DEOPMAN DE FUL pURDE CT ORDALE.]


xix. *Qnd pe cpadon be *peopan-men. zip he ful *pupde
zc bam opdale- } “man gulde’ $ ceap-"zild- 4 “ypinge hine
S!man ppipa-’ oppe p odep “zild yealde” y py P pice be
Shealrum pupSe zt fam peopum:-


% [BE DON De LEMOT FORSITTE.]

xx. Ing hpa gemoc yoppicce pmpa- “zilde per cynzeyr
ofephypneyye’ 4 hic *beo yeofon mihcum geboden xp } se-
mot yy. Inp he ponne “pyhc pypcan nylle- ne pa *orep-
hypneyye yyllan- ponne *yudan pa yloeycan men ealle to pe
co “pene bymz “hipon- y “nimon eall’ $ he age- y “yer-
con hme on boph. Ing hpa ponne “nylle pidan’ md hip


1Lepey 2yyyeceaycpe 3Pamrun 4Pepham 5 Exancearcpe
Scpezen Vpem San %Z. Dpecpedon. 1/7 yeexper relle
we syloe notin L. 4pep Mepezen zehoprate not
in Z. \Wmebyceac mhte be 2 notin L. 2 aypan 23 LD.
Anot in L. %peop- %pypSe 27 pem 8 monzylbe 29-zylbe


THE LAWS OF KING ZTHELSTAN. 209


At Lewes 1.

At Hastings 1.

Another at Chichester ;

At Hampton um.

At Wareham 11.

At Exeter 11.

At Shaftesbury 1.

Else, at the other ‘ burhs’ 1.


OF SHIELD-WRIGHTS.
15. Fourthly: that no shield-wright cover a shield with
sheep’s skin; and if he so do, let him pay xxx. shillings.
16. Fifthly: that every man have to the plough 1. well-
horsed men.


OF THOSE WHO TAKE MEED-MONEY OF A THIEF.


17. Sixthly: if any one take meed-money of a thief, and
suppress another’s right, let him be liable in his ¢ wér.’


OF HORSES.


18. Seventhly: that no man part with a horse over sea,
unless he wish to give it.


OF A ‘THEOWMAN’ WHO IS GUILTY AT THE ORDEAL.


19, And we have ordained respecting a ‘theowman: if he
were guilty at the ordeal, that the ‘ceap-gild’ should be paid;
and that he be scourged thrice, or a second ‘gild’ be given:
and be the ‘ wite’ of half value for ‘ theows.’


OF HIM WHO FAILS TO ATTEND THE ‘GEMOT:


20. If any one [when summoned] fail to attend the ‘ gemot’
thrice; let him pay the king’s ‘ oferhyrnes, and let it be
announced seven days before the ‘ gemot’ is to be. But if he
will not do right, nor pay the ‘oferhyrnes;’ then let all the
chief men belonging to the ‘burh’ ride to him, and take all
that he has, and put him in ‘borh.” But if any one will


9 rpynze 3 pnypa 7 aylbe yylle 937 healran pypde we paem peopan.
34, % zylde cyningey ofephypnyrpe 8%yy 87 pice —- 88 of ep-
hypnyyre = piten “pean 4thypen “/nimen ealle 43 yeccen
4 nelie co-


P


210 JEDELSTANES DOOAS.


Tgepepan- zilde’ cyngey ?orephypneyye. And beode man on
Spam zemore” $4man eall ymdize $ ye cyng pydian pile. y
Fonza SpypSe be hip feone 4 be eallum Spam pe he age.
And yepe be 7prcum geypican nylle- ponne *yudan pa yloeycan
men °to ealle be to pepe bymgz *hypon- 4 ™mmon eall’ $
he aze+ 4 y6 ye cyng to healrum-: to healrum pa men pe on
pepe “pade beon-” 4 “yecton hine on boph. Ing he “nite
hpa Inne “abongie- heecon’ hine. Inp he nylle ’hre ge-
papian- “lecon hine hegan bucan he *erpinde. Ing “hpa
hine *ppecan pilles oppe *heona wmgne ypélece-’ ponne
*beo he yah pid pone cyngz 4 pid ealle ny fpeond. Ing he
Seecpinde- 4 hpa hine feopmge- sy “he hip peper ypeyloig-
buran he hine latian duppe be pey flyman pepe he hine
*5rlyman nyyce:


26 [BE DEM DE FOR ORDALE DINGIAD.]
xxi. Ing hpa pingie fon *opdal- pmgie on “pam ceap-
gilde-” } he meege- 4 nahet’ on “pam pite- butan “hit ye
Sziran pille pe hic to-gebygze:-


3(BE DON DE ODRES MANNES MAN UNDERFEPD.]


xx. “And ne undepfo nan man odpey manner man-
bucan “hip leape pe he xp folgode. Ing hic hpa 06- “azire
pone man- 4 beve *’[peey] cynger “orephypnerye. And nan
man ne “cece np “zethcledan man spam him- ep he
hebbe “pyhc zepophe:”


#2 [BE DON Dé ORDALES pEDDILAD.}


xxi. Ing hpa opdaler peddiges ponne cume he ppm mhcum
zep to paem meyye-ppeoyte pe hit halgian yeyle- 4 pede hine
yylpne mid hlare- 4 “mid peertepe 4 yealce 4 pypcum ep he
co-zan yeyle. 4 geycande “him meyyan pepa ppeona “daza
zlene-’ 4 zeopyyuge toe 4 ga to huyle py deze pe “he co
pam opbdale gan yeyle. 4 “yppepige ponne pane’ ad- $ he yy


Vv zerenum. zylée 2ofephypnyyre % pem zemoc 4mon 5 pyyda
Spem 7pyyum 8piten Y%not in ZL. Whypen 1/nmen ealle
2/nad syn Byeccen Mnye /abopzize. hepcen 16 not in. L.
Wlecan WodSpmde 19 ponne add. appecan 2!” heona emzne
falece Z. hine yélece B. 2 yy %ponne odpinde 4 not in L.


THE LAWS OF KING AXTHELSTAN. 211


not ride with his fellows, let him pay the king’s ‘ oferhyrnes.’
and let it be announced at the ‘gemot,’ that the ‘frith’ be
kept toward all that the king wills to be within the ‘ frith,’
and theft be foregone by his life and by all that he has.
And he who for the ‘wites’ will not desist, then let all the
chief men belonging to the ‘burh’ ride to him, and take all
that he has; and let the king take possession of half, of half
the men who may be in the riding;-and place him in ¢borh.’
If he know not who will be his ‘borh,’ let them imprison him.
If he will not suffer it, let him be killed, unless he escape. If
any one will avenge him, or be at feud with any of them,
then be he foe to the king, and to all his friends. If he
escape, and any one harbour him, let him be liable in his
‘wér;’ unless he shall dare to clear himself by the ‘ flyma’s’
‘wer,’ that he knew not he was a ¢ flyma.’


OF HIM WHO COMPOUNDS FOR AN ORDEAL.


21. If any one compound for an ordeal, let him compound
for the ‘ ceap-gild,’ as he can, and not for the ‘ wite;’ unless he
is willing to grant it to whom it may belong.


OF HIM WHO RECEIVES ANOTHER MAN’S MAN.


22. And let no man receive another man’s man, without
his leave whom he before followed. If any one so do; let
him give up the man, and make ‘ bot’ the king’s ‘ oferhyrnes.’
And let no one dismiss his accused man from him before he
has done what is right.


OF HIM WHO GIVES ‘WED’ FOR AN ORDEAL.


23. If any one gives ‘wed’ for an ordeal, then let him
come three days before to the mass-priest who is to hallow it;
and let him feed himself with bread and with water, and salt,
and herbs, before he shall go to it; and let him attend mass
each of the three days, and make an oblation, and go to
housel on the day that he shall go to the ordeal: and then


2%yrlymene 2% JZ. 2opbdale 28 pem ceapzylbe 2 naphe 30 pam
3lnot in L. 2azypan BL. notin £. per  %azyre he
872. 8orephypnype %zerece “zecyhcledan 4!’mhe zepophte
20, Bnotin L. “hyp “/oaze ylee “She add. 47/;pymze
pone

P2


212 JEDELSTANES DOQAS.


mid fole-'nyhce unyeyloig pepe *tihtlan wp She to *pam
opdale a. And gzip hic py pecep- $ he gedure obpe healre
elne on °Fam pape. gp hit py 7yyen opdal- beon” pneo ’mhz
zp °man pa hand @undd. And orga “ele man np “cihelan
mid pone-ade- ypa pe sep epzedon. 4 beo papa Mele peeycende
on wxzdepa’ hand pe peep mid py- %on Loder bebode y per
Yeencebiycopey. 4 ne beo peep on nadpe healpe na’ ma manna
ponne -xu. Ing “ye getichloba’ man mapan *pepude beo”
ponne *'cpelpa yum fonne *beo $ *onbdal *opad- bucan hy”
him ynpam gan *pillan:-


BE 3 DAM DE YRFE BYLCGLAD.
xxiv. *And yepe ype byceze on *zepicneyye- 4 hit ec
*%cyman yeyle- bonne onfo ye hiy- pe he hic &p ev-bohte.
*beo he’ ypa ypeoh ypa peop ypa” hpedep he yy.


And $ nan *cyping ne sy Sunnan-dazum. gzip hic * bonne
hpa 06. polize pay *ceapey- y “zepylle -xxx- pat. co pice:


BE MAN-SpORUM.

xxv. ®And yebe *man-ad ypepize- y bic him on open
pupde: $ he nerpe Sere ad-pypSe ne yy. ne binnan nanum
gehalzodum lic-cune ne heze- feah he *fopSpape- butan he
heebbe peep “biycopey gepicneyye” fe he on hny *yemipe-yeipe
yy: p he hre ypa “gebecc hebbe- ypa him hiy yepipe yeyure.
And Inp pepuye bic gecySe “fam biycope’ bimnan “-xxx:
mihta+ hpedep he to “pepe bote “cippan polde’ -Inp he
ypa ne 6+ bece “be pam fe” ye bipceop “him ropgziyan”
pille:-


xxvi. Ing minpa geperena “hpyle ponne” Jip don nylle-
5°.) ley ymbe beo’ fonne pe gecpeden habbad- “ponne zilbe


l.mhcte 2cyheelan %peadd. 4pem Sppeo Spem i7en-
syn Smhce 9mon Mondo Uyle Wryhcan Wyopead 14/7 yle
peycende on ezdsepe notin LZ. be Wbirceoper 1% napdpe
healra 197 ponne ye getyhcleba 2” peonpod yy 2x. 2 yy
23’ ontale yopode bucon hi pille %pem not in L. 27 zen
picnyyye 28 mon ceaman 2 ;y 2 peope Slceapmz notin L.


® ¢ Broken’ in a technical and legal sense.


THE LAWS OF KING AETHELSTAN. 213


swear the oath that he is, according to folk-right, guiltless of
the charge, before he goes to the ordeal. And if it be water,
that he dive an ell and a half by the rope; if it be iron
ordeal, let it be three days before the hand be undone. And
let every man begin his charge with a fore-oath, as we before
ordained: and be each of those fasting, on either hand, who
may be there together, by God’s command and the arch-
bishop’s: and let there not be on either side more men than
xu. If the accused man be with a larger company than
some twelve, then be the ordeal * void, unless they will go
from him.


OF HIM WHO BUYS PROPERTY.


24. And he who buys property with witness, and is after
obliged to vouch it to warranty, then let him receive it from
whom he before had bought it, whether he be free or bond,
whichsoever he be.

And that no marketing be on Sundays; but if any one so
do, let him forfeit the goods, and pay xxx. shillings as ¢ wite.’


OF PERJURORS.


25. And he who shall swear a false oath, and it be made
clear against him; that he never after be oath-worthy, nor
let him lie within a hallowed burial-place, though he die,
unless he have the testimony of the bishop in whose shrift-
shire he may be, that he has made such ‘ bot’ as his confessor
prescribed to him. And let his confessor announce to the
bishop, within xxx. days, whether he would turn to the ‘bot.’
If he do not so, let him make ‘bot’ in such wise as the
bishop shall prescribe to him.


26. But if any of my reeves will not do this, and care less
about it than we have commanded; then let him pay my


3 ceapzylo 34yylle notin LZ. %6mzenne- 37 peopde %8 not in
LE. Szerene 4% bipceoper zepicnyyye 4) reype 42 zebere
4/ pen byceop “pmeugum pep 46 pile 477 y;pa 48” hine
fopzyran 4% zehpylce 5 oppe leyye ymb yy 5!” zylbe min osep-
hypnyye


See ad-bypycan, above, note, p. 161.
r3


214 JEDELSTANES DOMAS.


he mine ofephypneyye-” 4 1¢ finde oSenne pe *pile. And se
*biycop amamze pa Sopephypneyye at pam’ geperan pe *hic
on hiy rolzo’e yy. Sepe of *pippa gepedneyye ga- gilbe” ae
ypum—cippe -v- punde, et odpum 7cippe hip pepe.” ac ppid-
dan Seppe polige °ealler pay pe he aze- y upe ealpa yneond-
yolpey.


*[Ealle pip pey geyecced on ham miclan pynod we >Imeat-
anleage. on pam pey ye epcebipceop Pulphelme mid eallum
pem zdelum mannum ¥ piocan pe /CSelpcan cyning gegadpuan


aims eine Sal Oi ' e3.]


1pille 2biyceope  orephypnyyye et pam 4not in ZL. 5 pir
zepebnyyye za. zyloe S-cyppe 7 cyppe hip pep 8 omitted.
9 ealle


THE LAWS OF KING AXTHELSTAN. 215


‘oferhyrnes,’ and I will find another who will. And let the
bishop exact the ‘oferhyrnes’ of the reeve in whose following
it may be. He who goes from this ordinance, let him pay
for the first time v. pounds; for the second time, his ‘ wér;’
for the third time, let him forfeit all that he has, and the
friendship of us all.


* All this was established in the great synod at » ¢ Great-
anlea:’ in which was the archbishop Wulfhelm, with all the
noble men and ‘witan’? whom King Mthelstan.......
gather.°¢


« This passage is given by Lambarde, but it is not found in
our MS.

> Probably Greatley near Andover, Hants.

© [The sentence is here manifestly incomplete.— 7.]


p4


216 JEDELSTANES DOMAS.


IT.


DECRETUM EPISCOPORUM ET ALIORUM SAPI-
ENTUM DE KANCIA DE PACE OBSERVANDA.


* Karissime, Episcopi tui de 'Kancia et omnes Cantescyre
Thaini,’ Comites, et Villani tibi Domino * karissimo suo gratias
agunt, quod nobis de pace nostra preecipere voluisti, et de
commodo nostro *querere et consulere, quia magnum inde
nobis est opus, divitibus et *pauperibus.

Et hoe incepimus quanta diligentia potuimus *auxilio sapi-
entum eorum’ quos ad nos misisti; unde, ®karissime Domine,
primum est de decima nostra, ad 7quam multum’ cupidi sumus
et voluntarii, et tibi Ssuppliciter gratias °reddimus admonitio-
nis tue.


Secundum est de pace nostra, quam omnis populus teneri
desiderat, sicut apud Greateleyam sapientes tui posuerunt, et
sicut etiam nunc dictum est in concilio apud ® Fauresham.


Tertium est quod gratiant omnes misericorditer "te, karis-
simum’ Dominum suum, ’super dono quod forisfactis homi-
nibus concessisti, hoc est quod pardonatur omnibus forisfactura
de quocunque furto quod ante concilium de Fauresham factum
fuit, eo tenore ut semper deinceps ab omni malo quiescant, et
omne latrocinium “suum confiteantur et emendent hinc ad
Augustum.


Quartum, Ne aliquis recipiat alterius hominem sine licencia
Bejus cui “ante folgavit, nec intra “mercam nec extra, Et
etiam ne dominus libero homini *hlafordsoknam interdicat si
eum recte custodierit.


V Kent et omnis Kentescire thayni Br. tayni WM. The variations
without initials are common to Br. and M. dilectissimo 3 per-
guirere 4egenis  consilio horum sapientum 6 charissime Br.
% quod valde ‘®supplices 9%agimus 10Fefresham. !!/ hermerum
de Br. Bquo Mwanting in Br. M. ‘ipsius prius 1 mar-
cam 18 hlasocnam


@ [The text of AEthelst. II. and III. is from a collation of the
Cott. ms. Claud. D. 1. with Bromton and the Macro ms., which
closely resemble each other.— 7.]


THE LAWS OF KING AXTHELSTAN. 217


Quintum, Qui ex hoc discedat sit dignus eorum que in
scripto pacis ‘dicuntur, quod apud Greateleyam institutum est.

Sextum, Si aliquis homo sit adeo dives vel tantz parentelze
?ut castigari non possit, vel °idem cessare nolit, ut ‘facias qua-
liter abstrahatur in aliam aliquam partem regni tui, sicut
dictum est in occiduis partibus, sit alterutrum quod sit, sit
comitum, sit villanorum.

Septimum®, ut omnis homo teneat homines suos in fide-
jussione sua contra omne furtum. Si tune sit aliquis qui tot
homines habeat quod non sufficiat omnes custodire, preeponat
sibi singulis villis praepositum °unum, qui credibilis sit ei, et
qui concredat hominibus. ’(Et si preepositus alicui eorum
hominum concredere non audeat inveniat x11. plegios cogna-
tionis suze qui ei stent in fidejussione.] Et si’[dominus vel]
prepositus vel aliquis homo hoc infringat vel abhinc exeat, sit
dignus eorum que apud Greateleyam dicta sunt, nisi regi
7[magis] placeat alia justitia.

Octavum, Quod omnibus placuit de opere scutorum sicut
dixisti.

Precamur Domine misericordiam tuam, ®si in hoc scripto
alterutrum sit,” vel nimis vel minus, ut hoc °emendari jubeas
secundum velle tuum. Et nos devote parati sumus ad omnia
que nobis precipere velis, quae unquam aliquatenus implere
valeamus.


Il.
DECRETUM SAPIENTUM ANGLIA.


aUBI HAC JUDICIA FUERUNT INSTITUTA.


1. Hee sunt judicia que sapientes  Exoniz consilio *Atpel-
stani regis instituerunt, et iterum apud Fauresham, et tercia
vice apud “Dunresfelde>, ubi ¥totum hoc diffinitum simul et
confirmatum est.


'habentur 2quod Br. cur M. 3illud Br. ‘4efficias 5 est add,
Br. M. Stalem 7 not in Cott. ®& sit in hoc, sit in alterutrum
Semendare 1juxta 'Oxonie Cott. 12 Adelstani Br. Apelstani
M. '3Feuresham Br. Fefresham MZ 14 Thundresfeldium 1} wané-
ing in Br. M.


@ [These rubrics are from Bromton.— Z.]
> Thundersfield, near Horley in Surrey, apparently.


218 JEDELSTANES DOOAS.


DE JUDICIIS OBSERVANDIS QUZ APUD GREATELEYAM


EDITA FUERUNT.
u. Et hoe in primis est, ut observentur omnia judicia que
apud Greateleyam posita fuerunt, practer mercatum civitatis et
diei Dominice.


DE DIVITIBUS VEL GENEROSIS A FURTO VEL LATRONUM
FIRMATIONE NON DESISTENTIBUS.

ut. Et si quis adeo dives sit, vel tantee cognationis, ut a furto
vel defensione latronum vel firmatione revocari non possit, edu-
catur de patria lista cum uxore, et pueris, et omnibus rebus suis,
in eam partem regni hujus quam rex *velit, sit quicunque sit, sit
comitum, sit villanorum; eo tenore quo nunquam in *patriam
*redeat, °et deinceps nunquam obviet alicui in patria ista, sed sit
tanquam fur inter manus habens inventus. Et qui eum firma-
bit, vel suorum %aliquem mittet ad eum, pecunise sua reus sit in
omnibus que habebit. 7 Hoc autem igitur est quia juramenta et
vadia, quee regi et sapientibus suis data fuerunt, semper infracta
sunt et minus observata quam Deo et seculo conveniant./


DE ILLO QUI ALTERIUS HOMINEM RECEPIT.
1v. Et qui alterius hominem ®suscipiet intra ®*mercam vel
extra, quem pro malo suo dimittat et castigare non possit, reddat
regi centum viginti solidos, et redeat intus unde exivit, et
rectum faciat ei cui *servivit antea.”


NE DOMINUS LIBERO HOMINI JUS PROHIBEAT.
v. Et “item, ne dominus libero homini *hlafordsocnam pro-
hibeat, qui ei per omnia rectum fecerit.


DE FURE QUI PERSONAM VEL LOCUM PACIS ADIERIT.


vi. Et ¥sic fur qui furatus est postquam concilium fuit apud
“Dunresfeld, vel *furetur, nullo modo vita dignus “habeatur ;
non per socnam, non per pecuniam, si per verum reveletur in
eo; sit liber, sit servus, sit comitum, sit villanorum, "sit qui-
cunque sit, sit handhabenda, sit non “handhabenda; si pro


lwanting in Br. M. 2voluerit 3patria Br. patriam W. 4revertatur
5’et si nunquam in patria ista obviet alicui, sit tanquam in manus
habens fur Cot. quempiam mittat ad illum ‘not in Br. M.
Srecipiet %marcam ’servierat. Niterum (2hlafordsconam si
144 Thundresfeldium 5 furabitur 'sit 17 sit domina, sit pedissequa
add. Br. M.  habbenda


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELSTAN. 219


certo sciatur, ‘id est si aplata sit,” vel in ordalio reus °sit, vel
per aliud aliquid Sculpabilis innotescat. Si regem vel archi-
episcopum requirat vel sanctam Dei ecclesiam, habeat novem
noctes de termino, et querat quicquid querat, non habeat vitam
diutius, de quo ‘vere palam erit, nisi capi non possit. °Si
autem fugiat persequatur ei cui obviabit ; qui ei pepercerit, vel
eundem firmaverit, indignus sit omnium que habebit et vite
sue, sicut fur, nisi se possit allegiare quod nec furtum cum eo
sciret nec facinus, pro quo vite suze reus esset. Si comitem vel
abbatem vel aldermannum vel thaynum requirat, habeat ter-
minum tres noctes, et querat quicquid querat ut supra.’ Si
libera mulier sit, preecipitetur de clivo vel submergatur. Si
servus homo sit, eant ®sexaginta et viginti servi et lapident eum;
et si colpus alicui fallat ter, verberetur et ipse ter. ? Tunc
quando furatus servus mortuus ®fuerit, reddat unusquisque ser-
yorum illorum tres denarios domino suo. Si serva ancilla sit,
et “ipsa furetur alicubi praeterquam domino “suo et dominz
sua, adeant sexaginta et viginti ancillz, et afferant singule tria
ligna et comburant "eam unam ancillam, et conferant totidem
denarios quot servi deberent; aut verberentur sicut de servis
dictum est.


DE INFRINGENTIBUS ISTA STATUTA ET EORUM PQENA.


viz. Et si quis preepositus hoc “non fecerit,” nec inde curam
“habuerit, det regi centum viginti solidos, si *per verum’ re-
citetur super eum, et etiam ‘indecentiam perferat sicut "dic-
tum est:’ et si thainus sit, qui hoc faciat, vel aliquis alius,
sit hoc idem.”


si verbum non direxerit, ut ailata (aplata M.) sit 2 appareat
3 notin Cott. 4verere Cott. 5 Si episcopum vel comitem vel ab-
batem, vel aldermannum, vel thaynum requirat, habeat de termino
(terminum M7.) 111. noctes, et querat quod querat, non habeat vitam
diutins sed (si MZ.) capiatur. Si aufugiat, persequatur eum omnis
homo super witam suam, et qui ei obviabit, rex vult quod eum occi-
dat (qui velit quod rex et occidat eum cui obviabit, Fc. M.) Qui ei
pepercerit, vel eundem firmabit, sicut fur, suz vite et omnium que
habebit indignus sit, nisi se possit adlegiare, quod nec furtum cum eo
scivit (sciverit Jf.) aut factum pro quo mortis esset.reus. Br. xx.
7Et 8erit 9illa preter |! wanting in Br. M.  '?ipsam
13 disperdat Madhibeat 1’pro vero ‘evidentiam 17 diximus
187 not in Cott.


220 JEDELSTANES DOMAS.


IV.


at Cvelycan cyng cys. $ 1c hebbe ®zeahyod $ upe *ymd
iy pypye” gehealden ponne me lyyce- oppe hic wc *Imear-
anlea gecpeden’ pape- 4 Smine prean peczad ic hie vo Slange
fopbopen hebbe. Nu hebbe 1c 7zerunden mid pem prcum
pe mid me peepon et Cxan-ceay'cpe cto *middan-pintpe- $ fa
ealle *beon zeappe md “lnm pilpum-’ 4 md pipes 4 mid
Neenpes 4 md eallum pingum- to “papenne pidep ic *pille-
bucan “hy open pip geypican pillan- on pa ’zenad $ hy’
nefpe eps on “eand ne cuman.’ And zip “heo man’ eppe
ero on Seande zemece-” $ Mhy yyn ypa peyltiz ypa yepe ac
**habbendpe handa *!zepanzgen yy.’ And yepe ?*hy feop mige-
oppe *hypa manna emigne- oppe *“amigne man to-yeende-”
yy he *ycyloig Iny pylpey 4 ealley pay pe he age. $ 1y fonne-
*ronpan pe fa adar 4 pa ped 4 pa bopgay *yyne ealle
*opepharene 4 abpocene fe “pep gerealde” papon. And pe
Snycan nanum odpum jingum to *!zecpupianne burcan hic
by yy


Be DON 2 DE ODRES BMANNES MAN UNDERFEpPD.


1. And yepe odpey manner man undepro- pe he yop np
Syyrele nm *ppam do- 4 him “zecpupian> ne mege up
57yreley- gylde” hine pam pe he ep folgode- 4 gZerylle “pam
eynge’ -c.xx- yeilt. Ing ye hlapopd ponne pille *pane man’
mid poh yopdon: bepecce hine ponne zip he “mage on yolc-
gemote. y gzip he “Jadleay “beo- yece ypylene hlayopd” on pba
‘Szepicneyye ypylene” he “pile. poppy pe 1c an” } “zele pana’


‘Ie add. 2zeacrod = ypyd ay pypp  Lipeacanleze zecpaden
5mme B. mna HM. ‘long 7punden Smiddum- %yyn 10” bine
Tylpum lypre lypepenne pisep 3 ponne 14h: 1/zenate pe
heo '6eonda ne cumen 1/hi mon 1% pam eopda gemizzve 19 hn
20hebbendpa 2!/zeponzen syn 22h %heopa 74 emz mon nm


@ [I cannot agree with Dr. Schmid in distinguishing the following
enactments by the title of ‘ Council of Exeter,’ because, from the
preamble, it evidently appears that they are not a record of that
council, which is therein mentioned as a past event, but rather a


THE LAWS OF KING ATHELSTAN. 221


IV.


2 Atthelstan king makes known: that I have learned that our
‘ frith ?is worse kept than is pleasing to me, or it at ‘ Great~-
anlea’ was ordained; and my ‘ witan’ say that I have too long
borne with it. Now I have decreed with the ‘ witan’ who were
with me at Exeter at mid-winter; that they [the ‘frith’-
breakers] shall all be ready, in themselves and with wives and
with property and with all things, to go whither I will, (unless
from henceforth they shall desist) on this condition, that they
never come again to the country. And if they shall ever
again be found in the country, that they be as guilty as he
who may be taken ‘hand-habbende.’ And he who shall enter-
tain them or any one of their men, or send any man to them,
be he liable in himself and in all things that he has: now that
is, because that the oaths, and the ‘weds,’ and the ‘ borhs’ are
all disregarded and broken which there were given; and we
know of no other things to trust in except it be this.


OF HIM WHO RECEIVES ANOTHER MAN’S MAN.


1, And he who receives another man’s man, whom he for
his evil conduct turns away from him, and whom he cannot
>clear of his evil, let him pay for him to him whom he before
followed, and give to the king cxx. shillings. But if the lord
will foredo the man wrongfully; then let him clear himself, if
he can, at the folk-mote: and if he be innocent, let him seek
whatever lord he will, in virtue of that testimony; because I


co-yente %yeloiz 26roppem ?7yyn %8orepherene 2% peey ze-
yeald 20nycen 2lzecpeoprzanne omitted. %%monner 44 yrle
rnom %zerceonan 37 ypler. zilbe 38” pam cynz 39” pone mon
40meze 4llablear H. 42/yy- yeece hpylene hlapopde 4°” zepic-
nyyye ypelene 4” ponne pille- roppon ic pille /yle pepa


re-promulgation of certain of the laws passed there and at Thunders-
field.— 7]

b [The reading of ms. B. (gerceopan) ‘restrain, correct,’ is far
preferable to that of the text, and is supported by the Latin, which
has: ‘ et castigare non possit. See p.218.—TZ.]


222 JEDELSTANES DOMAS.


pe ‘ladleay beo- *polgie ypyleum hlaronte *ypyleum he pile.’
And *ypyle genera *ypyle pup “popsymeleayie- y Symbe beon”
nylle- geyylle “pam cinge” hip *orephypmyye- gp hic man
him’ ongepecce mid pode- *[y he hine ungepeccan ne meze.]
And ypyle gsepera “ypyle mebd-pceac’ nime- 4 odpey ’pyhe
puph # alecze- gylde fey “cinger ofephypneyye-” 4 pese
Meac pa ungejuyenu- ypaypa pe zecpeden habbad. And gif
hic yy “pegen pe hic 86- ’y1 $ ®ylee.

And nemne *man on *elcey generan *manunge* ypa
rela manna ypa *man pice $ *ungzelyzne yyn- $ *hy beon
to gepreneyye **zehpylcepe pppace. And *ypien heopa aday
*ungelygenpa manna be peer peor pypde butan cype:-


2[BE DON DE YRFE BESPIRILE.]

1. °And yepe *berpyjuze ype @imnan oBper land. *arpi-
pge hit uc- pepe f land aze- zip he meze. gzip he ne mege-
yrande  ypop fon pone fop-ad- “zip he peep-mne hpzene”
‘ceo:-


m1. And *man singe Sele Fugbeze ac eleum’ mynytpe
ealle pa *’Irobep peopan’ an yiptizg *[yealmay] op pone cynz-
4) Fop ealle *pe pillad $ he pile-” y yon fa “odpe spa hy
“1zeeapmian:->

“(And ylee man pe pille moc geberen ylce zeyvale pid pone
teonde- butan yleum pice od Longz-dazay- 4 beo syppan ypa
hire ep peey:-]®


1v. And pe gecpxdon 2c Dunpey-felda on pem gemote. x17
hpile peop oppe pearepe gerohte pone cing: oppe hpylce
eypucan y pone bircop- $ he hebbe mzon mihta fypyc. And
zip he ealdepman- oppe abbud- oppe pezen yece- habbe ppeopa
nthta rypyc. And zip hime hya lecze binnan pem fypyve-


Jableay H. 2yolzze °%”ypylee he ponne pylle 4ypylece 5 popzy-
meleanize  ymb beo 7” pem cynz 8orephypnyyye % hme mon
10 Z. Wy ypylee mityceaccay 12 pihte 13 eynzer ofephypnyyre
Mec Wzecpeben 'pezn Wey Wyle mon %y¥lcer 2! mo-
nunge 2yeala 23mon 4ungelezene not in LZ. 76 zehpylepe


* The reeve's ‘manung’ seems to have been co-extensive with
and equal to his following (folzos), and to have comprised all re-


THE LAWS OF KING ZTHELSTAN. 228


grant that each of them who is innocent may follow such lord
as he will. And such reeve as shall neglect this, and will not
care about it, let him pay to the king his ‘ oferhyrnes,’ if any
one truly charge it to him, and he cannot exculpate himself.
And such reeve as shall take meed-money, and thereby sup-
press another’s right; let him pay the king’s ‘ oferhyrnes,’ and
also bear the disgrace, so as we have ordained. And if it be
a thane who shall so do, be it the like.

And let there be named, in every reeve’s * ‘ manung,’ as
many men as are known to be unlying, that they may be for
witness in every suit. And be the oaths of these unlying men,
according to the worth of the property, without election.


OF HIM WHO TRACES CATTLE.


2. And he who traces cattle into another’s land; let him
trace it out who owns that land, if he can; if he cannot, let
the tracing stand for the fore-oath, if he accuse any one
therein.


8. And let there be sung every Friday, at every monastery,
by all God’s servants, a fifty [psalms] for the king, and for all
who will what he wills; and for the others, as they may merit.


And every man that will may make ‘bot’ for every theft with
the accuser, without any kind of ¢ wite,’ until Rogation days;
and be it after that as it was before.


4. And we ordained at Thunresfeld in the ‘ gemot? if any
thief or robber should flee to the king, or to any church and
to the bishop; that he have a term of nine days. And if he
flee to an ‘ealdorman,’ or an abbat, or a thane, let him have a
term of three days. And if any one slay him within that


27yyn =Bunzelezenna 292. ®%not in L. Zberpiyze 32 non
Barpymze %“hpone % mon 3/ ylee Fmzoege xc yleum 37 Trob-
Ser peopas 8 LZ. 3% pa pe pillen pec he pille “pa add. 4\ypa
zeeapnizen add. 43 Here Lambarde ends as to Asthelstan, except
the addition of Be Pepum.


siding within his jurisdiction, and owing obedience to his summons
(manunz).
b This should be either ‘zeeapnen’ or ‘zeeapnian mazon.’


224 JEDELSTANES DOQAS.


ponne gebete he pey mund-bypde pe he ap yohre- obpe he
hnine tcpelpa pum ladige } he pa yoene nyyte. And rece rpylce
yoene ypylce he yece- $ he ne yy hip feoper pypSe buran pa
yeola mthcta spa pe hep be-ufan cpadon. 4 yefe hime ofep }
peopmige- yy pay ilcan pypde bey pe ye feor- bucan he hine
latian meege # he him nan facn ne nane pyySe on nyyee:-


v. Dup feop yeeal beon pap cingep gd ppam hiy buph-
geave peep he ip yrtvende on feopep healye ny. f 17+ +111- muila-
4y te puplang- 4 -111- cepa bpsede, 4 -1x- pOca- 4 -IxX+ peapra
mundas 4 -Ix+ bepe-copna:-


1BE BLASERUM AND’ BE MORD-SLIPTUM.

vi. Pe %cpsedon be pam *blayepum y be fam *mops-
ylyhcum- } “man dypce fone ad be ppypealbum- y myclade
p opdal-*yyen $ hie 7zepeze ppy’ pund- 4 eode ye man yylr
co pe man ®tuge- 4 hebbe ye °ceond cype spa petep-opdal spa
yyren-ondal ypa hpedSep “him “leogpe ry. Inp he pone
%a3 yond-bpingan ne mez: 4 he ponne fil yi- pcande on peepa
yloeycta manna dome hpedep he lip age pe nage pe to pape
bymg hypan:.


Be FORFENLE.

Fopyang oyep eall- yy Inc on anpe *yeipe yy hic on ma-
yipcyne peningay. y ec elcon ymalon opye eppe et ycytt.
penig:-

>€mbe fopfang pican habbad gep&dd $ man orep eall
€ngle-land zelicne 50m healde- $ i1y- et men piptene pe-
ningay. 4 act hopye heal ypa- yy hic ofep ane yeipe- ry hic
oyep ma- Se ley Se unmhcig man yeopp fon np agenon


V not in B. which here re-commences. 2cpedon B. 3 bdlaycepum B.
4mop-shheum B. 5mon B. yen pec B. 7 zep&ze ppeo B.
8° B. %yepe cyhd B. MWiyen- B. Uypa B. add. leogpe B.


2 [Though the mss. concur in reading yeipe, the mistake is too
obvious to be perpetuated.— 7.]


THE LAWS OF KING ATHELSTAN. 225


term; then let him make ‘ bot’ the ‘ mund-byrd’ of him-whom
he before had fled to; or let him clear himself with some
twelve that he knew not of the ‘socn” And flee he to such
‘socn’ as he may flee to, that he be not worthy of his life but
as many days as we here above have declared; and he who
after that harbours him, let him be worthy of the same that the
thief may be, unless he can clear himself, that he knew no
guile nor any theft in him.


5. Thus far shall be the king’s ‘grith’ from his ‘ burh’-gate
where he is dwelling, on its four sides; that is, 111. miles, and
ut. furlongs, and 11. acres breadth, and 1x. feet and rx. palms
and rx. barleycorns.


OF INCENDIARIES AND ‘MORTH'-SLAYERS.


6. We have ordained concerning incendiaries, and concerning
‘morth’-slayers; that the oath be augmented by threefold,
and the ordeal-iron be increased so that it weigh three pounds ;
and that the man himself who is accused should go thereto, and
let the accuser have the choice whether of water-ordeal or of
jron-ordeal, whichsoever to him be the more desirable. If he
cannot bring forth the oath, and he then be guilty, let it stand
within the doom of the chief men belonging to the ‘burh,’
whether he shall have or not have his life.


OF FORFANG.


Let ‘ forfang’ everywhere, be it in one shire be it in more,
be fifteen pence, and for every one of small cattle always for
each shilling a penny.

b Concerning ‘ forfang’ the ‘ witan’ have counselled, that like
judgment be held all over England; that is, for a man fifteen
pence, and for a horse as much; whether it be in one shire,
whether it be in more; lest that a powerless man toil far for


leoppa H. '3ponne B. '4 Here B. closes, and in place of the catch-
word is written ‘Hic desunt z cap.’


> [This supplement to the title ‘ Of Forfang,’ which had previously
been known only from Bromton’s Latin, is from B.—T.]


* hic bid.


*), cyhcle.


226 JEDELSTANES DOQAS.


ypince- y eac to feola yylle. *Jpilon prod $ man xe elcon
Seor-yrolenan opye....... 4 be hip yoppange yylle- $ ap
zt elcon yell. pemg- ry Sey cynney opr Se hie yy- syp hic
man ec Seoyer handa ahpev. syp nt Sonne eller on hydelye
Funden yy Sonne mez  Fopfang-feoh leohtpe beon- ropsam
* bid on leyye phhve begycan:.


DOM BE PATAN IseNe ANID] pT.
vir. And of pam Spdale pe bebeodad Loder bebodi- y bey


anceb. 4 ealpa biyceopa. $ nan mann ne cfime innon pepe
cipicean yippan man  y¥p mbypd- pe man  Opdal mid
hé&van yceal- bucon ye mayye-ppeoye: 4 yepe paytco gan yceal.
44 béo p&p zemécen nyzon féc- of pam yracan to pepe
meapce+ be pey manney yOcan pe papcd ged. And gip hic
ponne pacep yy- héce man hit od hit hleope to pylme. 4
yi  dlpatc iyen oppe @pen- leaden oppe lémen. And Tir
hic angeald * cyhle py: dGfe yeo hand &pcep pam yrane od
pa pmyce. y zip Inc ppypeald py- o3 pene élbogan. And
ponne } opdal geapa yy- ponne gan tpezen menn inn oF
zgdpe healpe- 4 beon hig anpébe f hic ypa hac yy ypa pe
zep cpedon. And gan inn emyela manna of xzdpe healre-
4 yrande on cpa healpe pey Opdaley andlang pape cypicean-
4 pa beon ealle feeycende- 4 ppam heopa pipe gehealdene
pepe nyhte- 4 yppeenge ye meyye-ppeoyc hahz-peren ofep
Ing ealle- y heopa xle abymge pey halig-pevepey- y¥ yylle
heom eallum cyyyan béc y LCyiytep pode-cacn. y na béce nan
man } f¥p na lenge ponne man pa halgunge onginne- ac
heze P iyen uppan pam gledan oppet pa xpcemeytan coll.
lecge hic man yyppan uppan pam °yvapelan- 4 ne yy pep
nan odep ypc inne buton $ hig biddan Lod fElmihug zeopne
} he P yodeyte gerpytelie. And za he cO- 4 °m-peghze man
pa hand- 4 “yéce man Ofen pane pmddan o&z ypa hpevden
ypa hed bed ful ypa clene bmnan pam in-fezle. And ysepe


® [Here the Saxon text, which is evidently defective, differs widely
from the Latin in Bromton, viz., ¢ Aliquando fuit quod forfang
dabatur secundum numerum comitatuum ; sed antiquum rectum est,
ut de omni furtivo pecore,’ &c.— T.]
> [Scapela, which may also signify a pile (of wood, &c.), seems, in
this place, to be synonymous with ycaca.—TZ.]
‘ And let his hand be sealed up.—P. [But yegl is the Lat.


THE LAWS OF KING ATHELSTAN. 227


his own, and also pay too much, * Formerly it stood, that for
all stolen cattle....... and on its ‘forfang,’ payment be
made; that is, for every shilling a penny, be the cattle of
whatever kind it may, if it be rescued from the hand of a
thief: but if otherwise it be found in a hiding place, then the
‘ forfang’-money may be less, because it was gotten with less
danger.


DOOM CONCERNING HOT IRON AND WATER.


7. And concerning the ordeal we enjoin by command of
God, and of the archbishop, and of all bishops: that no man
come within the church after the fire is borne in with which
the ordeal shall be heated, except the mass-priest, and him who
shall go thereto: and let there be measured nine feet from
the stake to the mark, by the man’s feet who goes thereto.
But if it be water, let it be heated till it low to boiling. And
be the kettle of iron or of brass, of lead or of clay. And if it
be a single accusation, let the hand dive after the stone up to
‘the wrist; and if it be threefold, up to the elbow. And when
the ordeal is ready, then let two men go in of either side; and
be they agreed that it is so hot as we before have said. And
let go in an equal number of men of either side, and stand on
both sides of the ordeal, along the church; and let these all
be fasting, and abstinent from their wives on that night; and
let the mass-priest sprinkle holy water over them all, and let
each of them taste of the holy water, and give them all the
book and the image of Christ’s rood to kiss: and let no man
mend the fire any longer when the hallowing is begun; but let
the iron lie upon the hot embers till the last collect: after that,
let it be laid upon the °‘stapela;’ and let there be no other
speaking within, except that they earnestly pray to Almighty
God that he make manifest what is soothest. And let him go
thereto; and let his hand be “enveloped, and be it postponed
till after the third day, whether it be foul or clean within the


‘ velum,’ and in-yezl-1an is literally en-vel-ope, in which sense I believe
the word is here to be understood.— 7.


4 The accentuation of this word in the ms., coupled with the
context, makes it probable that the true reading is yéce. If not, we
may perhaps read yevve, and translate it ‘settle. [The alteration to
rece is plausible, but not necessary.—7Z.]


ao


* > he.


* 1, pone.


228 JEDELSTANES DOMAS.


pay lage abpéce- beo $ dpdal on him ronad- 4 gilbe pan cyninge
*c.xx- poll. to pite:-


Pal-peay 1p mdingey d&de: zip hpa ofyacen pille- 50 $ md
eahta 4 peopepig fulbopenpa pegena:.


V.
*JUDICIA CIVITATIS LUNDONIE.


Dir ip yeo sepedmy pe pa biycopay y fa gepepan fe to
Lunten-bymz hypad gecpeden habbad- 4 mid peddum ge-
Feyenod on upum yyd-gegylbum- agdep ge eophyce ge
ceopliyce- to-ecan pam domum pe et Ipedcanled y at Cxan-
ceaytpe zeyecve pepon- 4 et Dunpey-yelda:-


DJCT IS DONNE JEREST.

1. Det man ne ypayuge ‘nanan peore ofep +x peemingay-
‘j ofep -xlI- pntpe mann: pone pe pé on fole-mhe geaxian * $
pul y¥- 4 to nanan andyece ne mage. $ pé hine ofylean- 4
niman eall $ he age. y nman epeyt } ceap-zyld of pam ypre-
4 dale man yyppan pone ofep-efican on -11- enne d&l pam
pipe: zip heo clene yy- 4 pey yacner zepica nepe. 4 P odep
on -11- to healpum y6 ye cyng- to healpum [ye] gerepycrpe.?
Iny hiv boc-land yy oppe biyceopa land. ponne ah ye land-
hlapopd * ponne healgan d&1 pid pone gerepyeipe Zemeene:.

ur, And sepe peor Seapnunga feopmige- 4 pay facney ¥ fey
yuley gepica yy: 50 him man }P ilce:-

m1. And ysepe mid peope prande- y mid feohte- lecze hine
man mid pam peore:-

1v. And yepe pypde ofc p foppophtc peepe openlice- 4 vo
Opdale za- 4 pap fil peonde- # hine man ylea- buton pa mazar
oppe ye hlayopd hine fic-mman pillan be hiy pepe ¥ be rullan
ceap-zilde- y eac hine on boph gehabban yyppan he elcer


‘nanan pe in the text, but peore in


a [The text is from ms. Zi— T.]

b The ms. reads ‘ zepepreipe,’ which, if the true reading, would
support Wachter’s conjecture that zepera (graf) is a mere trans-
position of zerepa (socius). There can, however, be little doubt that


THE LAWS OF KING AETHELSTAN. 229


envelope. And he who shall break this law, be the ordeal with
respect to him void, and let him pay to the king cxx. shillings
as ‘ wite.’

‘ Wal-reaf’ is a ‘nithing’s’ deed: if any one desire to deny
it, let him do so with eight and forty full-born thanes.


V.
*JUDICIA CIVITATIS LUNDONIE.


This is the ordinance which the bishops and the reeves be-
longing to London have ordained, and with ‘ weds’ confirmed,
among our ‘ frith-gegildas,’ as well ‘ eorlish’ as ‘ceorlish,’ in
addition to the dooms which were fixed at ‘ Greatanlea’ and at
Exeter and at ‘ Thunresfeld.’


THIS IS THEN FIRST:


1. That no thief be spared over xn. pence, and no person
over x11. years, whom we learn according to folk-right that he
is guilty, and can make no denial; that we slay him, and take
all that he has; and first, take the ‘ceap-gild’ from the pro-
perty; and after that let the surplus be divided into 1.; one
part to the wife, if she be innocent, and were not privy to the
crime; and the other into 11.; let the king take half, half the
fellowship. If it be ‘boc-land,’ or bishops’ Jand, then has
the land-lord the half part in common with the fellowship.

2. And he who secretly harbours a thief, and is privy to the
crime and to the guilt, to him let the like be done.

8. And he who stands with a thief, and fights with him, let
him be slain with the thief.

4. And he who oft before has been convicted openly of
theft, and shall go to the ordeal, and is there found guilty;
that he be slain, unless the kindred or the lord be willing to
release him by his ‘ wér’ and by the full ‘ceap-gild,’ and also


the margin, though by a later hand.


‘zepéra springs from the same root with peayan (péran), and that it
originally meant ‘spoliator, exactor, the executor of the law. In
the same manner scaccarium, the king’s exchequer, is derived fromm
‘ yeeacene,’ latro, spoliator, exactor. ,


*hi hine?


* ec-hlip ?


230 JEDELSTANES DOOAS.


yreley zeypice. Iny he ero open  yralie- azipan fa mazar
ponne hine spa zepyld ypa * hine zp fic zt pam opdale namon
pam zeperan pe pap-co gebypize- 4 ylea man hine on pa
*beor-ppace. Inp hine ponne hpa fopene fopytanbde- 4 hine
gemmman pile 4. he pape pil 2c pam opdale- } hine man
lecgan ne moyte. he pepe ny reoney reyloiz- bucon he cyng
geyohte- y he him hiy reoph fopziran polde. eall ppa hic ep
zt Imedacanleé y xt Cxan-ceaycpe y ac Dunpey-pelba ge-
cpeden pay:-


v. And yepe peor ppecan pille- 4 *&-hlip gepypce- oppe on
ycpeete co-zelihc- beo -c.xx- pelt. perldiz prxd pone cing. Ing
he fonne man ofylea on pa ppace- beo hé hiy reopey peyloiz-
4 eallep pay pe he aze- bucon ye cing him amuan pulle:.


ODER.

Dec pe cpedon. P upe ele peute -mI- peng to upe ge-
mene feappe binnan -xu- mondum- 4 sopgzyldon $ ypre pe
yyppan genumen pépe pe pe  feoh yeuton- 4 heydon uy
ealle pa &ycean yemé&ne- 4 yeute ele man >hiy ett. pe heepde
~ ypre P pepe -xxx- pamy pypd- bucon eapmpe ptidepan pe
nenne *yon-pyphtan nzpde ne nan land:.


DRIDDAN.
Dec pe vellan 4 -x- menn cogebdene- 4 ye Fldeyca bepiyte
pa nizene to zlcum papa gelayce papa fe pe ealle zecp&don.


@ This is obviously some instrument of punishment—perhaps the
wheel ; literally, ‘the rack.’ [Mr. Price’s version, upon which his
note is founded, was: ‘and let him be slain on the thief ‘wrace.’ It
seems, however, highly improbable, that the words ‘on pa ppiace’
should here mean ‘on the wheel or rack,’ and in the very next enact-
ment (according to Mr. Price’s own translation) should signify ¢ in
revenge. Did ppace mean an instrument of punishment, it is
scarcely probable that the mention of it would occur but once
throughout a long series of criminal laws, from AEthelbirht to Cnut.
If the passage be not corrupt (and the lines immediately preceding
it almost justify a doubt of its integrity), its literal meaning, no
doubt, is, ‘in thief-vengeance.’ The use of the accusative case too
is quite unfavourable to Mr. Price’s interpretation. Dr. Schmid’s
translation agrees with my own, viz. ‘und man tddte ihn zur Strafe
fiir den Diebstahl.’ The Latin has merely, ‘et occidatur’—7.]

> The Latin version reads ‘denarium suum,’ which seems sup-


JUDICIA CIVITATIS LUNDONLE. 231


have him in ‘ borh’ that he thenceforth desist from every kind
of evil. If after that he again steal, then let his kinsmen give
him up to the reeve to whom it may appertain, in such cus-
tody as they before took him out of from the ordeal, and let
him be slain *in retribution of the theft. But if any one
defend him, and will take him, although he was convicted at
the ordeal, so that he might not be slain; that he should be
liable in his life, unless he should flee to the king, and he should
give him his life; all as it was before ordained at ‘ Greatanlea’
and at Exeter and at ‘ Thunresfeld.’

5. And whoever will avenge a thief, and commits an assault,
or makes an attack on the highway; let him be liable in cxx.
shillings to the king. But if he slay any one in his revenge,
let him be liable in his life, and in all that he has, unless the
king is willing to be merciful to him.


SECOND:


That we have ordained: that each of us should contribute
Iv. pence for our common use within x1. months, and pay for
the property which should be taken after we had contributed
the money; and that we all should have the search in common;
and that every man should contribute "his shilling who had
property to the value of xxx. pence, except the poor widow who
has no ° ¢ for-wyrhta’ nor any land.


THIRD:


That we count always x. men together, and the chief should
direct the nine in each of those duties which we have all


ported by the context; for a shilling, or five pence, would be a
heavy contribution where the collective property amounted to 30d.
only. It must be observed, however, that this penny does not
appear to have been contributed for the general purposes of the
society, but for defraying the expences attending the pursuit. (Conf.
c. vil.) It is this passage which is usually cited to prove that the
A.S. shilling in Athelstan’s time was worth only four pence. The
context above would be sufficient to cast a doubt upon the position,
more especially as it chiefly rests upon the uncertain authority of a
sum expressed in numerals (1111. pemz). However, in c. vi. 2,
below, where our present text reads ‘3 yceap co yelt.:’ the Latin
versions have ‘et ovis solido persolvatur —et ovis v. d’ persolvatur.’


c An agent of some kind. Perhaps the superintendant or bailiff
of a widow when she had land. [Perhaps one who hires the land, a
farmer; O.H.G. Vorwere, mod. Vorwerk, a farm.—TZ.]


* une
zemeenan ?


* 1. opp.


*Zupe.


232 JEDELSTANES DOOQDAS.


4, yyppan pa hyndena heopa tézeebepe- 4 enne hynden-man
pe pa -x- mymze to upe ealnpe zeméne peappe. y ng -x1-
healdan peepe hyndene yeoh- y¥ pitan hpaec ng yopSyylan
ponne man gildan yeeole- 4 hpec ng ec niman zip uy Feoh
apiye &c * unum gemé&num yppece. 4 picon eac P ele zelayc
fopdcume papa pe pe ealle gecpeden habba® to upe ealpa peapre
be -xxx- paii- oppe be anum hpydene- f eall selayc ry P pe
on upum Zepzdneyyum gecpeden habbas- 4 on upe soype-ppaece
yoeent:.


FEORDE,

Dec ele man pape odpum gelaycpull- ze ac ypope ze &t
mid-pade- papa pe pa zebodu gehypde- ypa lange ypa fe man
ypop piyce. y syppan. him ypop bupyce- P man funde znne
man peep *mane yole’yiz- ypa of anne teodunge fen leyre role
yy to pade oppe co Zange- buton ma pupre- pidep fonne meeyt
peapy yy 4 hig ealle gecpeedon:-


FIFTE.


Det man ne fopléce nane &ycan- nadvep ne be nopdan
Meapce ne be yudan- &p ele man hebbe ane pade Zeyiiden. pe
hopy habbe. y yepe hopy nabbe- pypce Pam hlagopSe fe him
fope side oppe ganze * opp he ham cfime. buton man €p to
puhte cuman mexge:.


SYXTE.

1. Emban * upne ceap-yild. hopy to healpan punde gzip hic
ypa 50d yy: ¥ sip hic >mecpe yy- gilde be hip phlicey pypde-
‘4ybe pam pe ye man hit peoptige pe hic age- buton he gepit-
neyye habbe hic ppa 36d pepe ypa he yecge- 4 haebbe Foil
oyep-eacan pe pe bap abiddan:.


® The Latin version reads: ‘ qui bannus hoc audiant inveniatur
semper de duabus decimis unus homo ubi magis populus sit sie de
una decima ubi minus sit. This seems to speak for an A.S. text.
something like ‘;pa of cpam ceodunza peep maye role pz spa of anpe
ceodunze pep leyye pole pz. But looking at the reason of the
thing, we might rather expect the text to have been ‘ypa of anpe
ceodunze pep mane fole pz spa of tpam ceodunza pep lerye role
yz [After the words ‘enne man’ the text is apparently defective.


> The translation follows the text, but the Latin version contains
a variation which appears to be the better reading: ‘et si sit betre,


JUDICIA CIVITATIS LUNDONIE. 233


ordained; and [count] afterwards their ‘hyndens’ together, and
one ‘hynden’-man who shall admonish the x. for our common
benefit; and let these x1 hold the money of the ‘hynden,’
and decide what they shall disburse when aught is to pay, and
what they shall receive, if money should arise to us at our
common suit; and let them also know that every contribution
be forthcoming which we have all ordained for our common
benefit, after the rate of xxx. pence or one ox; so that all be
fulfilled which we have ordained in our ordinances, and which
stands in our agreement.


FOURTH:


That every man of them who has heard the orders should be
aidful to others, as well in tracing as in pursuit, so long as
the track is known; and after the track has failed him, that
one man be found where there is a large population, as well
as from one tithing where a less population is, either to ride
or to go (unless there be need of more,) thither when most
need is, and as they all have ordained.


FIFTH:

That no search be abandoned, either to the north of the
march or to the south, before every man who has a horse has
ridden one riding; and that he who has not a horse work for
the lord who rides or goes for him, until he come home; unless
right shall have been previously obtained.


SIXTH:


1. Respecting our ‘ceap-gild:’ a horse at half a pound if it
‘be so good; and if it be inferior, let it be paid for by the
‘worth of its appearance, and* by that which the man values it
at who owns it, unless,he have evidence that it be as good as he
says, and then let [us] have the surplus which we there require.


id est melior.. By adopting this reading, ‘and zi hic betpe iz,’
and substituting ‘neepe’ (was not) for ‘pepe’ in the clause ‘ pec
hic spa z06 pepe, the difficulties of the present text will disappear.
[I suspect that merely a negative is wanting, and that we should read
4 ne be pam pe ye man, &c., ‘ and not by that,’ &c. Indeed, both
the sense and the structure of the sentence seem to require its in-
sertion. And lower down I would propose to read, 3 hebbe pe pone
ofep-eacan, ‘and let us have,’ &c. That the pronoun ‘pe’ is wanting
is rendered probable not only by the Latin of Bromton, ‘ et habeamus
nobis superplus,’ but by the language of the law immediately fol-
lowing, viz., J herdon uy pone ofep-eacan.— 7. ]


* and not?


234 JEDELSTANES DOMAS.


u. And oxan to *mancuyes 4 ci to -xx+ 4 ppyn tO +x ¥
yeeap co pelt.:.

11. And pe cpedon be upum feopum mannum- >pa menn
pa men herdon- zip hine man fopyceele- $ hine man fopgulde
mid ©healpan punde. gif pe ponne °zyld apeepdon- $ him man
yhte uron on “ be hip plicey peopdSe- 4 haegdon uy pone oren-
efcan pe pe pep abzedon. Ing he hine ponne ropyvalede- $
hine man ledde to pepe toppunge- spa hic ép secpeedan pey-
yyeute ele man $ man hepbe ypa pemig ypa healpne be per
serepyeipey meenio- ypa man } peopd fip-apeepan mihce. Ing
he ponne odyeoce- $ hine man yopgulbe be hnp plicey peopde-
‘J pe ealle hine @xodan. Iny pe him ponne t6-cuman moy'ton-
~ nm man dyde f ylee pe man pam Pyliycean peoge dyde-
oppe hine man anhé:.


iv. And  ceap-zild ayfipe @ opep -xxx- peng od healp pund
ryppan pe hie eycad. pupSop- sip pe P ceap-gild apeepad be
fullan angylde- 4 beo yy eyce Fopd- ypa hiv ep Zecpeden py:
f beah heo leyye yy:


SEOFODE.

Dec pe cpedon. dyde dda pepe Oyde  fipe ealpa cednan
ppéce- P pe p&pon ealle ypa on Anum fpeondycype ppa on
anum yeondycype- spa hpxden hic ponne pepe. 4 pepe peor
rylle befopan odpum mannum- # he pepe of fine ealpa feo
*-xIle peeng pe becepa fon pepe dada y pon anginne. 4 yepe
ahte } yppe pe pe yope-gildad- ne fopléce he pa &ycan be
upe opephypneyye- y pa mynegiinge pap-mid- oppeet pe to bam
silde cuman+ 4 pe ponne eac him hny Zeypincey gepancedon
of upum zZemezenum feo be fem fe seo yape pupde p&pe- py
ley yeo mynugung yopl&ze:-


» The value of the mancus was thirty pence.


> [The repetition of pa men is, no doubt, a clerical error, and is
subversive of the sense, and irreconcileable with the rules of grammar.


¢ [That is the ceap-gild.—Z.]
4 [That is, above the ceap-gild—7.]


JUDICIA CIVITATIS LUNDONILE. 2385


2. An ox at a **mancus,’ and a cow at xx., and a swine
at x, and a sheep at a shilling.

8. And we have ordained respecting our ‘ theowmen,’ »>whom
men might have; if any one should steal him, that he should
be paid for with ‘half a pound; but if we should raise the
¢¢gild,’ that it should be increased ‘above that, by the worth
of hig appearance, and that we should have for ourselves the
surplus that we there should require. But if he should have
stolen himself away, that he should be led to the stoning, as it
was formerly ordained; and that every man who had a man,
should contribute either a penny or a halfpenny, according
to the number of the fellowship, so that we might be able
to raise the worth. But if he should make his escape,
that he should be paid for by the worth of his appearance,
and we all should make search for him. If we then should
be able to come at him, that the same should be done to
him that would be done to a ‘ Wylisc’ thief, or that he be
hanged.

4. And let the ‘ceap-gild’ always advance from xxx. pence
to half a pound, after we make search; further, if we raise the
‘ceap-gild’ *to the full ‘angylde;’ and let the search still
continue, as it was before ordained, ‘though it be less.


SEVENTH :


That we have ordained: let do the deed whoever may that
shall avenge the injuries of us all, that we should be all so in
one friendship as in one foeship, whichever it then may be:
and that he who should kill a thief before other men, that he
be xm. pence the better for the deed, and for the enterprize,
from our common money. And he who should own the pro-
perty for which we pay, let him not forsake the search, on peril
of our ‘oferhyrnes,’ and the notice therewith, until we come to
payment; and then also we would reward him for his labour,
out of our common money, according to the worth of the
journey, lest the giving notice should be neglected.


¢ * Let it be paid for in a full angylde.’ P.


f If this be the genuine reading, ‘ heo’ must refer to ‘reo eyce,’
in which case the whole passage appears inexplicable. If, however,
we substitute ‘hic’ for ‘heo,’ and refer it to the ceap-gild, then there
will be little difficulty in understanding the passage.


236 JEDELESTANES DOMAE.


E€APTODE.


=


1. Det pe uy Zegadepian 4 emban &nne monad zip pe
mazon y mtan habban- pa hynden-menn y pa pe pa teoSunze
bepican- ypa mid *byte-pyllinge ypa eller ypa up c6-anhazie-
‘4y pican hpet upe gecpydpaxddene geleyc yy. y habban pa
*x1I- menn heopa metycype cOzeedepe- 4 fedan Ing ypa ypa
Ing yylpe pypSe m&non- y delon ealle pa mete-lape Lroder
pancey:-

1. And gif fonne p zebyjuze P emg megs to ban pepang
yy 4 co pam mycel- innon lander oppe uton landey- -xm-
hynbde ope cpy-hynde- } uy upeyr phcer pypnen- 4 bof peor
fopan yopycande- f pe siidan be eallum cd mid pam geperan pe
hic on hiy monunge yy:-

m1. And eac yendan on cpa healpa to bam generum-e ¥ pil-
man tO heom yulcum be spa manegum mannum ypa uy ponne
cinelic pince ec ypa micelepe yppeecee $ pam foppophcum
mannum beo pe mapa éze yop upe Zeyomnunge- 4 pe pudan
ealle to 4 upne tednan ppécan- 4 fon peor lecgean- 4 pa pe
him mid feohtan 4 ytandan- buton ng him fpam Zan pillan:-


1v. And zy man ypop geypiyyge of yeype on odpe- fon pa
menn tO fe pep nycyt yyndon- 4 dpipan $ ypop od hic man
pam geperan gecyde. yO hé yyppan cO mid hip monunge- 4
adpipe $ ypop uv of hiy yeipe gip he mage. gif he ponne ne
mege- sopgzyloe } ypre angylde. y habban pa gepefyeypay
begen pa yullan ppzece zemeene- y1 ypa hpeep ypa hie sy- ypa
be nopdan meapce ypa be sudan- 4 of yeipe on odpe- ele
seperza fylyce odpum vo upe ealpa pide be cynzey ofep-


hypneyye:-


v. And eac $ ele oSpum fylyce- ppa hie gecpedven ip y mid
peddum Zerfeytnod. y pile mann ypilce hic ofep fa meapce
fopyrcce- beo -xxx- pa yeyldig- oppe aney Oxan- gp he aht
pay opephebbe pe on upum Zeppicum yrent- 4 pe md upum
peddum Zepaeycnod habbas:.

v1. And pe cpeedon eac be elcum |apa manna fe on upum
Sesyldoycripum Iny pédd geyeald hard. gy him yond ze-
byyuge- p ale gegiléa geyylle anne Zeytifelne hlap op pape
yaule- 4 geyinge an piyugz oppe bexice Zepungen binnan -xxx-
nihtan:-


2 The Latin version reads, ‘de bucellorum impletione,’ or, literally,


JUDICIA CIVITATIS LUNDONIZA. 237


EIGHTH:


1. That we gather to us once in every month, if we can
and have leisure, the “‘hynden-men’ and those who direct the
tithings, as well with *‘bytt-fylling’ as else it may concern us,
and know what of our agreement has been executed; and let
these x1. men have their refection together, and feed them-
selves according as they may deem themselves worthy, and deal
the remains of the meat for love of God.

2. And if it then should happen that any kin be so strong
and so great, within Jand or without land, whether xu.-‘hynde
or ‘twy-hynde,’ that they refuse us our right, and stand up in
defence of a thief; that we all of us ride thereto with the reeve
within whose ‘manung” it may be.

8. And also send on both sides to the reeves, and desire
from them aid of so many men as may seem to us adequate
for so great a suit, that there may be the more fear in those cul-
pable men for our assemblage, and that we all ride thereto,
and avenge our wrong, and slay the thief, and those who
fight and stand with him, unless they be willing to depart
from him.

4. And if any one trace a track from one shire to another,
let the men who there are next take to it, and pursue the track
till it be made known to the reeve; let him then with his
‘manung’ take to it, and pursue the track out of his shire if
he can; but if he cannot, let him pay the ‘angylde’ of the
property: and let both reeveships have the full suit in com~
mon, be it wherever it may, as well to the north of the march
as to the south, always from one shire to another; so that every
reeve may assist another, for the common ‘frith’ of us all by
the king’s ‘ oferhyrnes.’

5. And also that every one shall help another, as it is
ordained and by ‘weds’ confirmed; and such man as shall
neglect this beyond the march, let him be liable in xxx. pence,
or an ox, if he aught of this neglect which stands in our
writings, and we with our ‘weds’ have confirmed.

6. And we have also ordained respecting every man who has
given his ‘wed’ in our gildships, if he should die, that each
gild-brother shall give a ‘gesufel’ loaf for his soul, and sing
a fifty, or get it sung within xxx. days.


‘ the filling of butts ;’ but this in no way illustrates the subject.


238 JEDELESTANES DOMAS.


vi. And pe beodad eac upum *hipe-mannum: $ ele man
pice hpeenne he ny ypre heebbe- oppe hpzenne he neebbe- on
hiy nehebupa gepicneyyes ¥ uy ypOp ceece zip he hit pintdan
ne m&z binnon ppim mihton. foppam pe penad p meenigze
gmeleaye menn ne peccean hi heopa ypye rape pop pam ofep-
tpuan on pam ymide:-

vit. Donne beode pe $ binnan -111- mhctum he hiy neche-

*lLyeo. bupan gecyde- zip he pey ceap-zilder biddan pille. y beo *ye
eeyce peah yond. ypa hic &p gecpeten peey- roppan pe nellen
nan zymeleay ypre fopgylban burton hie fopycolen yy.
G)emige men ypecad gemahlice yppece. Lyy he nyte ypop
co teecenne- gecySe mid ade mid hip -m1- nechebupan # hre
binnan -111- mhcum pape fonycolen- 4 bidde yyppan ny ceap-
silbey :-

1x. And ne yy fopypécen ne Fopyyigod: zip upe hlaropd oppe
upe xepeyana emg tip senigne edcan zepencean m&ze to upum
Fod-gildum- P pe peptd luyclice yon- ypa hre up eallum gepiye
‘4y up peapylhie yy. Donne gelyre pe to Trobe. 4 to upum
cyne-hlaropde- gig pe hie eall puy geleycan pillad- $ ealley
yolcer Ping byd pe bécepe ac pam pypdum ponne hic ep pepe.
Ing pe ponne aylaciad pay ypmder y pee pedder pe pe yeald
habbad- 4 ye cyng uy beboden harad- ponne mage pe pénan+
oppe geopne pican- $ pay peoray pillad pixian g¥ca yprdop
ponne hig ap dydon. Ac ficon healdan upe pedd y f yd
ypa hic upum hlaropde lege. uy iy meel peapp pe apedian
he piles 4 zip he up mane h&c 4 ctecd- pe beod eadmodlice


Seapape:-


NIGODE.

Dec pe cpxdon. be piyum peofum pe man on hpebdinge rule
geaxian ne meg- 4 man ey geaxad pe he pil bid 4 yerlnz-
# ye hlayopd hine oppe pa magay on # ilce gepad tic-mman pe
man pa menn fic-nimd pe zt opdale rule peopdad:-


TEODE.
Det pa pican ealle realdan heopa pedd ealle cozeedepe bam
apcebiyceope ac Dunpey-felda- pa JElpeah Stybb 4 Bprhcnod
© be pes? Oddan yunu céman to-geanep pam xemote * pey cingey popde-


* The original has been retained to avoid a paraphrastic
version. It is clear from -e. 11., that the term is a general


JUDICIA CIVITATIS LUNDONIE. 239


7. And we also command our *‘hire-men’ that each man
shall know when he has his cattle, or when he has not, on his
neighbours’ witness, and that he point out to us the track, if
he cannot find it within three days; for we believe that many
heedless men reck not how their cattle go, for over-confidence
in the ¢frith.’

8. Then we command that within m1. days he make it known
to his neighbours, if he will ask for the ‘ceap-gild;’ and let
the search nevertheless go on as it was before ordained, for we
will not pay for any unguarded property, unless it be stolen.
Many men speak fraudulent speech. If he cannot point out to
us the track, let him shew on oath with m1. of his neighbours
that it has been stolen within 111. days, and after that let him
ask for his ‘ceap-gild’

9. And let it not be denied nor concealed, if our lord or any
of our reeves should suggest to us any addition to our ‘ frith-
gilds,’ that we will joyfully accept the same, as it becomes us
all, and may be advantageous to us. But let us trust in God,
and our kingly lord, if we fulfil all things thus, that the affairs
of all folk will be better with respect to theft than they before
were. If, however, we slacken in the ‘frith’ and the ‘wed’
which we have given, and the king has commanded of us, then
may we expect, or well know, that these thieves will prevail
yet more than they did before. But let us keep our ‘weds’
and the ‘frith’ as is pleasing to our lord: it greatly behoves
us that we devise that which he wills; and if he order and
instruct us more, we shall be humbly ready.


NINTH:

That we have ordained: respecting those thieves whom one
cannot immediately discover to be guilty, and one afterwards
learns that they are guilty and liable; that the lord or the
kinsmen should release him in the same manner as those men
are released who are found guilty at the ordeal.


TENTH:


That all the ‘witan’ gave their ‘weds’ all together to the
archbishop at ‘Thunresfeld,’ when /#lfeah Stybb and Briht-
noth Odda’s son came to meet the ‘gemot’ by the king’s com-


appellation for all persons owing obedience to some superior
authority.


240 JEDELSTANES DOMSS.


# axle genera name f pedd on hip agenpe ycipe. $ hi ealle
pus ypa healdan poldan ypa Cdelpcan cyng hic geped herd
4 hip prcan *@peayt ec Ipedcanlea- y epc wc Cxan-ceaytpe-
4 s¥ppam «ec Feerpey-ham- 4 yeopdan yydde ec Dunpey-relda-
beropan pam apcebipcope- 4 eallum pam birceopan- 4 hip
picum- pe ye cyng silp namobde- pe pep-on pepon. $ man pay
domay healban yceoldan fe on piypum gemote geyetve peepon-
buton Jam fe peep ap of-addne pepon. p pay Sunnan-dxzer
cyping- 4 $ man mid fulpe gepreneyye 4 Zecpedppe moyte
ceapian butan popite:.


ENDLYFTE.


Das JC8elycan bedc hiy biyceopum- 4 hip ealdopmannum-
4 hiy geperum eallum orep ealne minne anpeald. $ Ze fone
ms ypa healdan ypa ic hine zep&d0 habbe y mme pican. In
eopep hpile fopzymeleayad- y me hypan nelle. 4 $ pedd wt
tuy hype-mannum niman nelle- 4 he geparad pa dypnan Ze-
pingo- 4 emban pa ycedpan ypa beon nelle ;pa ic beboden
hebbe- 4 on upum Zeppicum stent fonne beo ye Jepefa buton
hip rolgoSe- y bucon minum fneondyeipe- 4 gepylle mes -c.xx-
yell. 4 be healpum pam ele minpa pegna pe gelandod yy y
pa ytedpe ypa healdan nelle ypa 1c beboden habbe:.


TPeLFTe.


1. Det ye cyng cpeed nG epe ac > Piclan-bymz co hip pican-
4y hec cyan pam apceb be °Deodpede biycop- $ him to
hpeophc puhte } man ypa seongne man cpealde- oppe ert fon
ypa lyclan- ypa he geaxod haeyde pe man gehpep dyde. Lpad
pa ~ him puhte- 4 pam pe he hic pid-peedde. } man nenne
zingpan mann ne yloge ponne -xv- pintpe man- buton he hine
peyuan polde oppe yleoge y on hand gan nolde- $ hine man
ponne lede- ypa et mapan ypa we leyyan+ ypa hpedep hic
ponne pepe. And gzip he ponne on hand gan pille- ponne 06
hine man on capcepn- ypa hire wet Lpedcanlea gecpeden pey-
‘4y hine be pam ylean lyyige:.


* [Mr. Price here, following the ms. which reads ep. eayt, had
translated ‘had before counselled it east at Greatanlea.’ That eperc
is the true reading is manifest from the context: besides, the term


JUDICIA CIVITATIS LUNDONLE. 241


mand; that each reeve should take the ‘wed’ in his own shire:
that they would all hold the ‘frith’ as king Atthelstan and his
‘witan’ had counselled it, first at ‘Greatanlea,’ and again at
Exeter, and afterwards at Feversham, and a fourth time at
‘Thunresfeld,’ before the archbishop, and all the bishops, and
his ‘witan,’ whom the king himself named, who were thereat:
that those dooms should be observed which were fixed at this
*gemot,’ except those which were there before done away with;
which was Sunday marketing, and that with full and true
witness any one might buy out of port.


ELEVENTH:


That A&thelstan commands his bishops and his ‘ ealdormen,»
and all his reeves over all my realm, that ye so hold the ‘frith’
as I and my ‘witan’ have ordained. And if any of you neglect
it, and will not obey me, and will not take the ‘wed’ of his
Shiremen,’ and he allow of secret compositions, and will not
attend to these regulations as I have commanded and it stands
in our writs; then be the reeve without his ‘folgoth,’ and
without my friendship, and pay me cxx. shillings; and each of
my thanes who has land, and will not keep the regulations as
I have commanded, [let him pay] half that.


TWELFTH:


1. That the king now again has ordained to his ‘ witan’ at
>¢ Witlanburh,’ and has commanded it to be made known to
the archbishop by bishop ° Theodred, that it seemed to him too
cruel that so young a man should be killed, and besides for so
little, as he has learned has somewhere been done. He then
said, that it seemed to him, and to those who counselled with
him, that no younger person should be slain than xv. years,
except he should make resistance or flee, and would not
surrender himself; that then he should be slain, as well for
more as for less, whichever it might be. But if he be willing
to surrender himself, let him be put into prison, as it was
ordained at ‘Greatanlea,’ and by the same let him be
redeemed,


east cannot be applied to a place lying from London in the direction
of Andover.—7Z.]

b Whittlebury, Northamptonshire ?

¢ [Bishop of London A.D. 900 until about 921.— 7.]


“pa?


242 JEDELSTANES DOMAS.


11. Oppe- z1p he in c&pcepn ne cume- 4 man nan nebbe- f
hi hine niman be hy rullan pepe on boph he zgpe ma elcey
yfeley geypice. Ing yeo megs hmm fc-niman nelle- ne him
on boph zan- ponne ypemgze he ypa him biyceop tece he
leer yrelep zerpycan pille- y prande on pedpete be hip pepe.
Ing he ponne oren # yealie- plea man hine- opfe h6- ypa man
*pa yldpan ep dyde:-


ur. And ye eynz cped eace $ man nenne ne yloge Fon
leyyan ype ponne -xm- pam peopS buton he fleon pille
oppe hine peman. $ man ne pandodve fonne- }eah hic leyye
pepe. Ing pe hit pur zehealdad- ponne gelype ic to Lobe $
une yd bid bevepa ponne hic pop pey:-


JUDICIA CIVITATIS LUNDONIZ. 243


2. Or, if he come not into prison, and they have none, that
they take him in ‘borh’ by his full ¢ wér,’ that he will evermore
desist from every kind of evil. If the kindred will not take
him out, nor enter into ‘borh’ for him, then let him swear as
the bishop may instruct him, that he will desist from every-
kind of evil, and stand in servitude by his ‘wer.’ But if he
after that again steal, let him be slain or hanged, as was before
done to the older ones.

8. And the king has also ordained, that no one should be
slain for less property than x11. pence worth, unless he will flee
or defend himself; and that then no one should hesitate,
though it were for less. If we it thus hold, then trust I in
God that our ‘frith’ will be better than it has before been.


CADMUNDES DOMAS.*


ECCLESIASTICAL.


1EXDMUNDES CYNINGES ASETNYSSE.?


Eadmund scyning zeyomnode’ *micelne ymod to *Lunbden-
Sbymuz- on pa halzan 7€ayveplicon vid.” Sezdep ze sodcundpa
Shada ze © populdcundpa. Deep “per *%Oda ancebiyceop: ¥
Pulgycan apcebiyceop- y Smamze odpe “biyceopay+ ymeagende
%ymbe heona “yapla “aped- 4 “papa pe him undeppeodde
peepon::


Be LEPADED(RJA MANNA LLJENNISSE.


1. Dee 1p epeyc® p pa halgan habday- pe Loder yolc
*lenan peylan’ “hyey *byyne- $ hi heopa clanneyye *heal«
dan be” heopa habe- ypa pep-hadep ypa pip-hadey- ppa *hpaedepn
ypa’ hreyy. *Ing hy’ ppa ne don- ponne pyn *”hy pey pypde
pe on pam canone *cpeed.  ap- $ hi polian *ponold-ehta 4
zehalzodpe lezep-ycope * bucon “hy gebevan:.


Be TEODUNLGUM AND LIRILC-SLEATTUM.


u. Teodunze pe bebeodad elcum cmiycenum men be hip
Zempcenddme- 4 “cypie-pceac- 4 ** Rom-reoh+ y yulh-zl-
meyyan. And zip hic *hpa don nelle- ry he “amanyumobd:.


1no rubrics in B.D. Pep onzmned Eadmunber xzepeedney. D.
¥ eynze zeramnote D. ‘4mycelne H. ‘4Lunbe- B. &-bimz D.
7 Earceplican~ D. Sezden B. 97 D. poplocundpa D. popold-
cuntdpa H. Uhpep He 12° D. 13 maenze B. manezaD. biy-
copay D. 4 ymbon D. zeopne ymbe H. lyaula B. iW aped B.
ped D. pena H. 19h bubson D. add. 2lepon seulon D.


« (Edmund, the brother of /Ethelstan, began to reign in the year
940, and was assassinated in 946. Odo was archbishop of Canter-
bury from the year 934 to 958. Wulfstan was archbishop of York


THE LAWS OF KING EDMUND.*


ECCLESIASTICAL.


KING EDMUND’S INSTITUTES,


King Edmund assembled a great synod at London, during
the holy Easter tide, as well of ecclesiastical as of secular
degree. There was Oda archbishop, and Wulfstan archbishop,
and many other bishops, meditating concerning the condition
of their souls, and of those who were subject to them.


OF THE CHASTITY OF ECCLESIASTICS,


1. This is the first: that those holy orders who have to teach
God’s people by their life’s example, hold their chastity
according to their degree, as well of man’s degree as of woman’s
degree, whichsoever it may be. If they do not so, then are
they worthy of that which in the canon is ordained; that is,
that they forfeit their worldly possessions and a consecrated
burial-place, unless they make ‘bot.’


OF TITHES AND CHURCH-SCOTS.


2. A tithe we enjoin to every Christian man by his Chris-
tendom, and church-scot, and ‘ Rome-feoh,’ and plough-alms.
And if any one will not so do, let him be excommunicated,


Wry H. 2biyne D. Bhy B. %heolbon exprep be B.
257 rpedsen B. hpeten H. 2 And zp D. %hi D. Beped
j pec i D. = 29 ponld D. %buco B. 3th D 27D,
Bemice- D. 3 emie-yceac 3 almey-peoh BH. 3D. %6aman-
yomod B.


from the year 929 to 952, when he was deprived, and in 954 obtained
the see of Dorchester: he died in 956.—The text is from a colla-
tien of mss. B., D., and H.—T.]


R 3


246 EADMUNDES DOMAS.


BE MAN-SLIPTE.


i. 1Ing hpa cyupcener manney blod azeote- *ne cume he
na on Spey *cyningey °neapiyce xp he on dzd-bove sa- ypa
bircop him ceece- 4 hip pepe him °pipige:-


Be NUNNA pjJEMEDE AND FORLIGRE.


1v. Sepe 7md nunnan heeme- gehalgodpe legep-ycope ne sy
he pypde- *bucon he zebeve- pe ma pe °man-rlaza. $ yee
pe “cpedon be zp-" bnyce:-


Be LIRILENA LGEBETUNLE.
v. Eac pe “zecpedon. $ ele “bipcop béce’ Loder hur on
Inp “aznum- y eac pone “cyning “myngige $ ealle Loder
¥®cyncan pyn pel behpopyene- ypa up *°micel peapy *1p:-


BE MAN-SPORUM AND LIBLALUM.
vi. Da pe *man-ypemad 4 *lyblac pypcad- “pyn hi 3”
ypam elcum Lovey dle apoppene- *bucon “hy to juhtpe
dxd-bove **zecyppan*:.


SECULAR.


Eadmund cyning cyp eallum folce- ge yldpum ge singpum-
fe on Inp anpealde “yynd- $ 1c ymeade md minpa picena
gepeahte» ze “hadedpa ge lepedpa. JEpeyc- hu 1c mehte
cyipcendomey *mzyt apeepan. Donne puhte up epeyt mays
peapp $ pe upe gepibpumnerye 4 Zeppepneyye feyclicoyc up
betpeonan healdan gynd ealne minne anpeald. Me Sezled
ypySe- 4 up eallum- fa unpihcthcan 4 memzrealoan gereoht
pe becpux up yylpum “yyndan. ponne cpade pe-


1LGyp B. 2ne cume he na on pes cynizer neapeyce zyp he cyninger
man yy B. 3pary H. ‘4ecynizer B. 5 neapeyce B. ansyne H.
Spypse H 7 pd HW. Shure BH. 9° H. Wilce B. hylee H.
Nepedan B. 12-bmce D. epetbon B. MM bigceop ~ D.
Wazenum D. Weynines D. 17 mynonze B. mmnegze D. 18 cip-
can D. 'behporene B. behpeoprene H. 2 miccel H 7! buy B.


THE LAWS OF KING EDMUND. 247


OF HOMICIDE.


3. If any one shed a Christian man’s blood, let him not
come into the king’s presence, ere he go to penance, as the
bishop may teach him, and his confessor direct him.


OF NUNS’ FORNICATION AND OF ADULTERY.

4. He who commits fornication with a nun, let him not
be worthy of a consecrated burial-place (unless he make ‘bot’),
any more than a man-slayer. We have ordained the same
respecting adultery.


OF THE REPAIRING OF CHURCHES,
5. We have also ordained: that every bishop repair the
houses of God in his own [district], and also remind the king


that all God’s churches be well conditioned as is very needful
for us.


OF PERJURERS AND ‘LYBLACS.,’


6. Those who swear falsely and work ‘lyblac,’ let them be
for ever cast out from all communion with God, unless they
turn to right repentance.


SECULAR.


Edmund king makes known to all people, both old and
young, that are in his dominion, that which I have deliberated
with the council of my ‘witan, both ecclesiastic and secular.
First, how I might most promote Christianity. Then seemed
it to us, first, most needful that we should most firmly pre-
serve our peacefulness and harmony among ourselves, through-
out all my dominion. To me and to us all are exceedingly
offensive the unrighteous and manifold fightings that are
among ourselves: we have therefore ordained :


2° B. Bhbla D *%beon D hy” MH %bure B.
bucen H. 27k D. xecippan pe zeopnop D. %—hen zebspad
nu co Eabganer zepeebner be zehadobpa manna hy-rabunze. D. and
which immediately follows. yn Bo Xzospa Bo 32 myc B.
Beled H. 34 yyndii B.


248 ECADMUNDES DOMAS.


BE MAN-SLIPTE.

1. Ing hpa theonan-fopS enigne man ofyleas } he peze
TYlp pa *yeehSe- bucan he hy mid fpeonda fylyce binnan cpelp
mondum yopgyloe be yullan pepes yy spa bopen ypa he yy.
2 Ing hime ponne seo mez foplete- 4 him fope-zyloan nellen-
ponne pille 1c $ ®eall eo meezd yy Punpah- bucan pam ‘hand-
deedan- zip hy him yyppan ne d08 mete ne munde. Ing ponne
yyppan hpile ny maga hine *yeopmige- ponne beo he yeyloig
ealley peer pe he age pid pone cyning< 4 pege pa yehde pid ba
mzgde- foppam hi hine foprocan ap. “Ing ponne of pepe
odpe meezSe hpa ppace d0 on emgum odpum men butan on
pam yuht hand-deban: 7yy he gerah pid pone eyning- 4 pid
ealle hip ppynd- 4 *polize ealley peey °pe he aze:-


Be DON DE MON ODERNE ON CIRILEAN LESELE ODDE
ON LYNINGES BURP.


u. Ing hpa “cypiecan geyece: oppe mine buph- 4 hine man
pep yece oppe “yphze-'pa pe $ *de5 yyn pep *ylean peyloige
pe hic hen beropan ™ cped:.


Be FYPT-pITE AND MAN-BOTE.
un And ic nelle $ emg fyhce-pite oppe man-bore yop-
aipen Pye
Be ‘BLOD-LEOTE.


iv. Eac 1¢ cype f 1c nelle pocne habban to mnum hipede
[pone pe manney blod-zeace] ep he hebbe zodcunde bote
undeprangen- y “pid ’pa ineegte’ gebec on bote berangen-+ 4


Iheonon- B. 2Lyp B. 3eal B. 4handeban B. 5 reonme B.
6Gyp hpa ponneon B. 7y1 B. Spohe B. %notin H. ' cypcan


@ The Decretio Childeberti, circa an. 595, ¢. 5. contains a similar
decree respecting homicide, and is, moreover, the first legislative
provision on record invading the ancient law of the ‘rahde:’—<* De
homicidiis vero ita jussimus observari, ut quicunque ausu temerario
alium sine causa occiderit, vite periculo feriatur, et nullo pretio
redemptionis se redimat aut componat. Et si forsitan convene-
rit ut ad solutionem quisque descendat, nullus de parentibus aut
de amicis ei quicquam adjuvet; nisi qui presumpserit ei aliquid
adjuvare suum widrigildum omnino componat; quia justum est, ut qui
injuste novit occidere, discat juste moriri.’


THE LAWS OF KING EDMUND. 249


OF HOMICIDE.


1. If any one henceforth slay any man, that he himself bear
the *‘fehthe;’ unless, with the aid of his friends, and within
twelve months, he compensate it with the full ‘wér,’ be he born
as he may be. But if the kindred forsake him, and will not
pay for him, then I will that all the kindred be >¢ unfah,’ except
the perpetrator; if afterwards they do not give him either food
or ‘mund.’ But if afterwards any one of his kindred harbour
him, then be he liable in all that he possesses to the king, and
bear the ‘feehthe’ with the kindred, because they had pre-
viously forsaken him. But if any one of the other kindred
take vengeance upon any other man, except on the real per=-
petrator, let him be foe to the king and to all his friends, and
forfeit all that he owns.


IF A MAN SEEK ANOTHER IN A CHURCH, OR IN A
KING’S «BURH’’


2. If any one take refuge in a church, or my ‘burh,’ and
one there seek him, or do him evil: be those who do that
liable in the same that is heretofore ordained.


OF FIGHT-WITE’ AND ‘MAN-BOT,’


3. And I will not that any fight-‘wite’ or ‘man-bot’ be
forgiven.


OF BLOOD-SHEDDING.


4, Also I make known that I will not have to ‘socn’ in
my household that man who sheds man’s blood, before he has
undertaken ecclesiastical ‘bot,’ and "made ‘bot’ to the kindred,


B. Uyplyge XH Woon B. ByleonB. Meped B. “not in H.
6 zecunde B. 17 pam wzte B. pam exzdep H.


> Literally ‘unfoe,’ or freed from the hostility incidental to them
as kinsmen of the offender. It occurs in the Asega-Buch, vi. § 9,
where Mr. Wiarda has altogether failed in supplying the meaning :-—
‘ Falt ther en mon twene ieftha thre, min ieftha mar, so [hidra] ther
is, s@ skilun hiara alra lif opa thes ena hals stonda, and otheres alle
sine friond unfach beliua.—If a man slay two or three, less or more,
as they may be, the life of them all shall rest upon the neck of this
one, and all the rest of his friends be unfoe.’

¢ The variation in Ms. B. is ‘pid pam wzSe. This seems to indi-
cate that the true reading has been ‘pid pa mezée,’ and perhaps the


250 CADMUNDES DOOAS.


co zleum yuhte gebogen- spa bircop him vace pe hic on hip
yeype yy


DJENLIUNLE DEM DE PID DYFDE FYLSTAD.


v. Eac 1¢ 'paneige Lrobde- 4 eop eallum pe me *pel rylycon-
‘y pey’ ypider pe pe nu habbad wet pam pyrdum. ponne zelyre
1c co eop ge pillan rylypcan vo *piypum ypa *miccle bet ypa up
iy eallum mape *peanr $ Inc gehealden Syy:.


BE MUND-BRYLE AND 2PAQ-SOLNE.


vi. Eac pe cpedon be 7mund-bpice y be ham-yocnum. yepe
hic orep pir %d- f he *polige ealler pay pe he ages 4 yz
on "cyningey dome hpeedep he hip age:


Be FJEpDE.

vi. Pitan ’yeylon fehde yecvan. apeyc. expcep Brole-
puhte ylaga’ yceal Iny >yop-ppecan on hand yyllan- 4 ye
Fop-ppeca magum- # ye ylaga “pille becan prs mezde. ™ponne
yYppan gebyped f man yylle pay ylagan fop-ppecan on hand-
ye ylaga mote mid gmide nyp y syle peepey peddian. Donne
he pep bepeddod hebbe- ponne yinde he peepto “paep-boph.
ponne $ gedon yy- ponne pepe "man cyninger munbde. of
pam deze on -xx1- *niht gylde man healy-pang. pep on -xxr-
mht man-bote. pay on -xx1- @niht per peper $ ppum-zylo:-


1pancie B. % me fylycon per B. 3 pyrrom B. 4micle B. 5 pepy
H. 6p B. 7mund-bpyce B. 8° H. %pohe B. not in H.


whole clause may have been ‘pid pa mezde on boce befanzen yy:
engaged in a bote to the kindred.’ If so, ‘zebec’ may be considered
as a marginal illustration of ‘on boce beranzen,’ and which has now
found its way into the text. The reading of either ms. is quite
unintelligible; the Latin version omits the clause altogether. [I
have not scrupled to admit into the text the reading afforded by B.
‘On boce befanzen’ has possibly been meant as a marginal gloss to
* zeber.’— J. ]

@ This offence is thus defined in the Custumal of Henry I. c. 80:


THE LAWS OF KING EDMUND. 251


* * * * and submitted to every law, as the bishop shall


teach him in whose shire it may be.


THANKS TO THOSE WHO ASSIST AGAINST THEFT.


5. Also I thank God, and you all who have well assisted
me, and for the ‘frith’ which we now have with regard to
theft: then I trust to you that ye will assist in this so much
the better as there is the greater need for us all that it be
observed.


OF ‘MUND-BRICE’ AND +*HAM-SOCN’


6. Also we have ordained, respecting ‘mund-brice’ and
‘ham-socns; that he who shall do it after this forfeit all that
he owns, and be it in the king’s doom whether he shall have
his life.


OF ‘F/EHTHE’’

7. The ‘witan’ shall appease ‘feehthe.’ First, according to
‘folk-right,’ the slayer shall give pledge to his ¢forespeca,’
and the ‘ forespeca’ to the kinsmen, that the slayer will make
‘bot’ to the kin. Then after that it is requisite, that security
be given to the slayer’s ‘forespeca,’ that the slayer may, in
peace, near, and himself give ‘wed’ for the ‘wér.’ When he
has given ‘wed’ for this, then let him find thereto a ‘ wer-
borh:’ when that is done, let the king’s ‘mund’ be levied:
within xxr. days from that day, let the ‘hals-fang’ be paid:
xxi. days from that, the ‘man-bot:’ xxi. days from that, the
‘ frum-geld’ of the ‘ wér.’


Neynizer B. 'yeylan ZH.  18/poleey puheey lazga BA = Mpylle H.
pone B. 16 pepe-boph B. Vmon B. ’Wmk B.


—‘ Hamsoena est (vel Hamfare) si quis preemeditate ad domum eat
ubi suum hostem esse scit, et ibi eum invadat. Si die vel nocte hoc
faciat, et qui aliquem in molendinum vel ovile fugientem prosequitur,
Hamsocna judicatur. Si in curia vel domo seditione orta bellum
etiam subsequatur, et quivis alium fugientem in aliam domum infuget,
si ibi duo tecta sunt, Hamsocna reputetur.’

b The Anglo-Saxon ‘ sopeypeca.’ or ¢ foperppeca’ is the Contour of
the Norman law-books; the Advocatus rather than the Attornatus
(foppyphea) of the Latin documents.


252 EADMUNDES DOMAS.


*CONCILIUM CULINTONENSE.


Hee est institutio quam Edmundus Rex, et Episcopi sui,
cum Sapientibus suis, instituerunt apud Culintonam, de pace
et juramento faciendo.


IDE SACRAMENTO FIDELITATIS REGI EDMUNDO
FACIENDOY


1. In primis ut omnes jurent in nomine Domini, pro quo
sanctum illud sanctum est, fidelitatem Edmundo Regi sicut
homo debet esse fidelis domino suo, sine omni controversia et
2seditione, in manifesto, in occulto, in amando quod amabit,
nolendo quod nolet; *et antequam juramentum hoc dabitur
ut nemo concelet hoc in fratre vel proximo suo plusquam
in extraneo.


5 DE FURIBUS CAPIENDIS,


1. Vult Seciam, ut ubi fur pro certo cognoscetur, twelf-
hindi et twifhindi consocientur, et exuperent eum vivum vel
mortuum, alterutrum quod poterutit; et qui aliquem eorum
infaidiabit qui in ea queestione fuerint, sit inimicus regis et
omnium amicorum eorum; et si quis adire negaverit et coad-
juvare nolit, emendet regi cxx. s. vel secundum hoc perneget
quod nescivit, et 7hundredo xxx. s.


8DE ILLO’ QUI ALTERIUS HOMINEM RECEPERIT, VEL
AD DAMPNUM ALIQUEM MANUTENUERIT.


m1. Et nolo ut aliquis recipiat alterius hominem priusquam
quietus sit erga omnem manum que rectum querat ab eo:
et qui aliquem manutenebit et firmabit ad dampnum faciendum,
custodiat ut repraesentet eum ad emendandum, vel ipse com~-
ponat quod alius componere *debeat.


De juratione que fiebat E.R. 2seductione %etadd. ‘notin
M. */Defure. Set 7hundreto % notin M. 9% debebat.


a [The text is from Bromton; the variations are from the Macro
Ms.— Z.]


THE LAWS OF KING EDMUND. 253


DE SERVO FURE.


1v. Et *de servis *si qui’ furentur, senior ex eis capiatur
et occidatur, vel suspendatur, et aliorum singuli verberentur
ter, et Sextorpentur, et truncetur minimus digitus in signum.


4DE ILLIS QUI EMUNT IGNOTA PECORA SINE TESTI-
MONIO’


v. Et nemo barganniet vel ignotum pecus recipiat, qui non
habeat testimonium summi preepositi, vel sacerdotis, vel ordalii,
vel portireve,


DE ‘PECORE FURATO INVESTIGANDO’


vi. Et dictum est de Sinvestigatione et quesitione pecoris
furati, ut ad villam pervestigetur, et non sit foristeallum ali-
quod illi vel aliqua prohibitio itineris vel quesitionis. Et si
vestigium illud de terra illa non possit educi, queeratur ubi-
cunque suspectum fuerit ac dubium. Et si aliquis illic ac-
cusetur, adlegiet se sicut ad hoc pertinebit, et reddat captale et
regi cxx.s. Et si quis refragaverit et resistat, et rectum facere
nolit, emendet regi cxx. s.


UT QUISQUIS 7HOMINES SUOS FACIAT CREDIBILES,
ET DE INFAMATIS, ET 8HAC PRECEPTA NEGLI-
GENTIBUS’


vit. Et omnis homo credibiles faciat homines suos et omnes
qui in pace et terra sua sunt. Et omnes infamati et accusa-
tionibus ingravati sub plegio redigantur. Et preepositus, vel
thaynus, comes, vel villanus qui hoc facere nolit aut disperdet,
emendet cxx. s. et sit dignus eorum que supra dicta sunt.


'dictum est add. quisi %extoppentur “ Ignotum pecus non
emendii sine testimonio. 5” investigando pecore furato. © vestiga-
tione 7notin M. * de eis qui hec precepta negligunt.


254 EADMUNDES DOOMAS.


1BE pIFMANNES BEpEeDDUNLE!’


1. Ing man meedan oppe pip peddian pille- y luce spa bine
‘J FPeondan gelicize- Fonne ip phe p ye bpyd-guma- epcen
*Troder pihte y zprep populd-gepyynum: epeye behate 4 on
pedde yylle pam men pe hipe *fop-rppecan pynd-” $ he on pa
piyan hipe geopmge- *$ he hy epcen Loder yuhte healdan
pille ppa peep hip pir yeeal. 4 abopgian hip ppynd P:-


u. fEfpcep pam ip “to pictanne hpam # »yoyvep-lean ge-
bypige. peddige ye bpyd-guma ec pey- 4 hic abopgian hip
Fpynd:.

ur. Donne yyppan cype ye Sbpyd-yuma hpaey he hine
Szeunne pid pam ‘pet heo hiy pillan ‘gzeceore- y hpzy he hine
Sseunne zip heo leng yy ponne he:-

iv. ¢Ingp hire ypa gepoppopd bid- ponne iy phe # heo yy
healer °ypper pypSe- 4 ealler zip hy cild gemane hebban-
bute heo "ere paep ceore:-

v. Tpymme he eal mid pedde $ $ he behate- y abongian
Fnynd p=

vi. Ing hy ponne elcer Pinger sammele beon- ponne fon
magay to- y peddian heopa mazan to pipes 4 co jhe lipe-
pam pe hipe *zipnde- 4 “fo to pam bopge yebe pay peddey
paldend yy:-


1’ Pu man meben pebddian yeeal 3 hpylee fopepapbe pep azhon co
beonne. B. % yon-ypecan syn B. spe B. 4notin HM. Sbmid-


2 This doctrine is also inculcated in the Capitularies :—‘ Placuit
ut fideles sciant conjugium a Deo esse constitutum, et quod non
sit causa luxurie, sed causa potius filiorum adpetendum.’ Lib. vi.
c. 230.

> This appears to be another name for the ‘mund’ of Ethelbirht’s
dooms, or the money pledged to the family of the wife at her be-
trothal. In Lower Saxony this sum was called the Brud-kip, or
purchase money of the bride; here, the remuneration for her nur-
ture. The ‘ yoycep-lean’ was due to that relation in whose ‘mund’
the woman was at the time of her betrothal. Hence also it is stated
in the Salic law:—‘ Hoe discernendum videtur cui reippus (foycep-
lean) debeatur.’ tit. 46. c.2. And in the Capitularies :—* Non fit
conjugium, nisi ab his qui super ipsam feminam dominationem habere
videntur, et a quibus custoditur, uxor petatur.’ vir. c. 463.

¢ This is borrowed from the oath of fealty. In all the Barbaric


THE LAWS OF KING EDMUND. 255


OF BETROTHING A. WOMAN.


1. If a man desire to betroth a maiden or a woman, and it
so be agreeable to her and her friends, then is it right that the
bridegroom, according to the *law of God, and according to
the customs of the world, first promise, and give a ‘wed’ to
those who are her ‘ foresprecas,’ that he desire her in such wise
that he will keep her, according to God’s law, as a husband
shall his wife: and let his friends guarantee that.


2. After that, it is to be known to whom the »¢ foster-lean’
belongs: let the bridegroom again give a ‘wed’ for this; and
let his friends guarantee it.


8. Then, after that, let the bridegroom declare what he will
grant her, in case she ‘choose his will, and what he will grant
her, if she live longer than he.


4. “If it be so agreed, then is it right that she be entitled
to half the property, and to all, if they have children in
common, except she again choose a husband.


5. Let him confirm all that which he has promised with a
‘wed;’ and Jet his friends guarantee that.


6. If they then are agreed in every thing, then let the kins-
men take it in hand, and betroth their kinswoman to wife, and
to a righteous life, to him who desired her, and let him ‘take
possession of the ‘borh’ who has control of the ‘wed.’


guma B. Szeunze H. 7pe B. 8zeunze H. Y%oppep B. Maye
B. Mpedbian B. 2 zypnde B.


codes the marital authority is represented as co-extensive with that
of the lord over his vassal.

4 The language of this law seems to indicate that the legal endow-
ment of a woman was one third of the chattels, as in Ine, c. 57.
By contract, however, before marriage the husband might increase
this to one half, and if she had a child, and continued a widow, to
the whole of his personal property. Where there was neither child
nor endowment before marriage, the law was as it still is, the next of
kin of the husband succeeded to two thirds of the deceased's personal
estate.

e Perhaps the meaning of this passage is, that the person to whom
the ‘wed’ was plighted by the husband, and who had both the dis-
posal of it when made good, and the right of claiming it if with-
held, was also to enter into a counter-engagement to the husband, to
undertake the ‘ borh’ on behalf of his kinswoman, the wife.


256 ECADMUNDES DOMAS.


vir. "Ing hy man ponne ut of lande lebdan pille on odpey
*pegney Jand- ponne bid hipe peed $ ppynd pa roppopd habban
 hipe man nan poh to ne 0. 4 gi¢ heo gyle zepypce- $
hy moton beon *bote nyhyc+ zip heo nefS of hpam heo
bete:.

vir. JEc pam gipcan yceal meyye-ppeoyt beon mid pubte.
ye yceal mid Loder blecpunge heopa geromnunge gebdepian an
ealpe zeyundyulneyye:.

1x. Pel 1p eac to Spapmianne $ man pice } hy puph *mez-
ybbe >to gelzenge ne beon- pe ley pe man ere tpame $ man
zp. apoh toromne zedydon:-


1Lyp B. 2 pezener B.


a In accordance with this doctrine it is laid down in the Custumal
of Hen. I. c.70:—‘ Si mulier homicidium faciat, in eam vel in pro-
geniem vel parentes ejus vindicetur, vel inde componat; non in virum
suum seu clientelam innocentem.’


THE LAWS OF KING EDMUND. 257


7. But if a man desire to lead her out of the land, into
another thane’s land, then it will be advisable for her that
her friends have an agreement that no wrong shall be done
to her; and if she commit a fault, that they may be * nearest
in the ‘ bot,’ if she have not whereof she can make ‘bot.’


8. At the nuptials, there shall be a mass-priest by law;
who shall with God’s blessing bind their union to all pros-
perity.

9. Well is it also to be looked to, that it be known, that
they, through kinship, *be not too nearly allied; lest that be
afterwards divided, which before was wrongly joined.


3 pepianne B. 4maizpibbe B.


> The canons of the time had fixed this in the seventh degree :—
‘ Christiani ex propinquitate sui sanguinis usque ad septimum gradum
connubia non ducunt; neque sine benedictione sacerdotis, qui ante
innupti erant nubere audeant.’ Capit. L. vi. c. 130.


CADLARES DOWMAS.*


>’DIS IS SEO LERJEDNYESS HU MON DJET WUN-
DRED WALDAN SLEAL.


J€peyet $ hi heo gegadepian 4 ymb feopep pucan. 4 pypce
zele man oSpum puhe:-


u. Dec man fapan Con. pyd epcep Seoran:-

Lyf neobd on hanbda ytande- cySe hic man Sam hundpedey-
men: 4 he yyddan Sam ceoding-mannum- y fapan ealle popd
Seep him Isod piyize hi cto-cuman movon. 60 Sam Seore hip
puhc ypa hic ep 4€admundey cprdbe pay. 4 yylle mon }
ceap-zyld- Sam Se $ yppe age. y d0€le man H odep on Tpa-
healp Sam hundpede- healp Sam hlapopde- butan mannum. 4
ro ye hlapopd cto 8am mannum:.


mr And ye man Se Sip foppicces y Sep hundpeder d6m
fopyaces °4y him mon ere # ilce gepecce-’ zerylle man Sam.
hundpede -xxx- peninga- 4 et Sam eytepan cyppe pyxtiz
penega. halp Sam hundpede- halp Sam hlapopde. yy [he]
hic Spiddan pide 96- yylle healp pund. at Sam feopdan cyppe-
Solie ealley Sey Se he age-y beo fitlah- bucon him ye cyng
eapd alyfe:-


1v. And pe cpedon be uncudum ypre- $ nan man neybe
buton he hebbe Sy hundpeder manna gepicnyyya- odSe Say


a [Edgar, son of Edmund, succeeded his brother Edwi in the
year 959, and died in 975.—7.]

> [This document, which had hitherto been known only in Brom-
ton’s Latin, is from &., and is undoubtedly the ‘set of dooms’
alluded to at p. 198, note °.—TZ.]

¢ [This word is partly illegible in the ms.--7Z’.]

¢ [The Macro ms., concurring with the Saxon text, reads ‘ Ead-
mundi: Bromton has ‘ Edwardi; though there is no law of Edward
extant to which the reference is applicable; while the enactment


THE LAWS OF KING EDGAR.


b‘THIS IS THE ORDINANCE HOW THE HUNDRED
SHALL BE HELD.


First, that they meet always within four weeks: and that
every man do justice to another.


2. That a thief shall be pursued .........

If there be present need, Jet it be made known to the hun-
dred-man, and Jet him [make it known] to the tithing-men;
and let all go forth to where God may direct them to go: let
them do justice on the thief, as it was formerly the enactment
of 4Edmund. And let the ‘ceap-gild’ be paid to him who
owns the cattle, and the rest be divided into two; half to the
hundred, half to the lord, excepting men; and let the lord
take possession of the men.


8. And the man who neglects this, and denies the doom of
the hundred, ‘and the same be afterwards proved against him ;”
let him pay to the hundred xxx. pence, and for the second
time sixty pence; half to the hundred, half to the lord. If
he do so a third time, let him pay half a pound: for the fourth
time, let him forfeit all that he owns, and be an outlaw, unless
the king allow him to remain in the country.


4. And we have ordained concerning unknown cattle; that
no one should possess it without the testimonies of the men of


referred to is very probably that of Edmund, Conc. Culin. 1. The
above document would, in that case, be posterior to Edmund’s time,
and that it is not later than his successor appears plainly from a
reference to it in one of his laws (Edg. v. p. 269.) The foregoing
considerations, as well as its place in the Ms., at the beginning of
Edgar’s Laws, have induced me to include it under the general
rubric, though without disturbing the old numerical order of those
Laws.—TZ.]


e [¢Ut in eum denique recitetur.” Br—TZ.]
s 2


260 ECADLARES DOOAS.


ceoding-manney: 4 ye yy pel gecp¥pe. 4 bucron he Sapa odep
hebbe- nele him mon nzenne team zeSapian:.


v. Gace pe epxdon. zyf him hundped bedpiye cpod on odep
hundped- P mon cySe Sam hundpeder men- 4 he Sonne Sep
mid-rape. Lryp he hiv fopyrece- geyylle Sam cynge Suey
yall. :-


vi. Lryp hp& mht fopbuge- 4 fic-hleape- yopgyloe p an-
gyloe yede hine to 8am heapme geheold. And zyp hine man
ced $ he hme fiv-peedve- zeladige hme ypa hie on lanbe
yrande:.


vir. On hundpede ypa on odep gemove- pe pyllad. $ mon
fole-yuhc getaece ac xlcepe yp&ce- y andagie hpanne man
gelayte. y yede Sone andazan bpece- bucon hiv yy Suph hla-
fopder geban- gebete mid -xxx- yell. 4 to geyeccton deze
geleyce P he ep peeolde:.


vi. Wpysepey belles y hunder hoppe- 4 bley-hopn. Sipya
Speona ele bid aner peilt. peopd- 4 ele 1p *melda Zereald:.


1x. Det iyen Se bid cto Spmpealdbum opdale } peze -m-
pund- 4 co anraléum an pund:.


* [A dog’s hoop or collar was perhaps regarded as a ‘ mela’ or
informer, in consequence of its having a bell attached to it. In


THE LAWS OF KING EDGAR. 261


the hundred, or of the tithing-man; and that he be a well
trusty man: and, unless he have either of these, let no vouching
to warranty be allowed him.


5. We have also ordained: if the hundred pursue a track
into another hundred, that notice be given to the hundred-
man, and that he then go with them. If he neglect this, let
him pay thirty shillings to the king.


6. If any one flinch from justice and escape, let him who
held him to answer for the offence pay the ‘angylde.’ And if
any one accuse him of having sent him away, let him clear
himself, as it is established in the country.


7. In the hundred, as in any other ‘gemot,’ we ordain: that
folk-right be pronounced in every suit, and that a term be
fixed when it shall be fulfilled. And he who shall break that
term, unless it be by his lord’s decree, let him make ‘bot’ with
xxx. shillings, and, on the day fixed, fulfil that which he ought
to have done before,


8. An oxes bell, and a dog’s collar, and a blast-horn; either
of these three shall be worth a shilling, and each is reckoned
an informer.


9. Let the iron that is for the threefold ordeal weigh
111. pounds; and for the single, one pound.


like manner, an axe is declared to be a ‘mela,’ because of the noise
made by it in felling a tree. See Ine, c. 43.—7.]


262 ECADLARES DOGAS.


I.
aI NER I6 CADLARES LYNINCLES LER/EDNES.


*Diy yp yeo *zepedner pe Cadzan *cyng- md hip picena
sepeahte- zepadde- Lode to lore. 4 him ®yylpum to
Seynererpe- 4 7eallum Iny leodycipe” vo peapye:-


1. Det Syyndon ponne epeye. P Loder Peypican yyn Meelcer
puhcep pypde- 4 man “Yazire elce “ceodunge to pam ealdan
13 4s Mhy chy *, 7 ee

mynycpe pe seo “hypner vo-hypd- 4 $ sy ponne ypa ?ge
leyc- xzgdep xe of pesney m-lande ze of “zeneac-lande- ’yppa
ypa hye seo sulh geganze:.”


Be CIRIL-SLEATTUM.


u. Ing hpa ponne *pezena y¥ pe on Inp ™boc-lande
*eypicean heebbe pe legep-pcop on ysy- Zeyylle “he “pone
pmddan dzel hiy *%azenpe ceoSunge’ into ny *cyypicean. Lig
hpa “cyyucean *hebbe pe legep-yrop on *ne *yy- *ponne
2°96 he of pam mzgon delum’ np ppeoyte $ $ he pille- 4
ga ele *cypic-peeat into pam ealtan mynycpe be “elcum
Srmizan heopde. “4 geleyce man ysulh-elmeyyan ponne -xv-
nthe beon on ufan Cayctpan:”


Be TEOQDUNLUM.


mu. And*y¥ Selcene seogude *cteodung gseleyc be Pente-
coyven- 4 papa eopd-peycma be emn-nihtes y ele *eypic-
yeeac® be Mapcinuy-meyyan» be “pam fullan pice pe yeo
*$6m-boc cecd. “y giz “hpa ponne pa veodunze geleycan
nelle» ypa pe gecpeden habbad- “pane per “cyngey genera
“vo- 4 pay “bipceopey y per mynytpey meyye-ppeoyt: 4


Ino rubric in G. 2DyyD. 3zepebnyp G. 4eynze D. Fypilpum
D. Scynreype AD. 7 eallum hry leobyeipe not in D. — —le0b-
yeype A. 8yyne A. pynd D. = %eimrcanD. Mnot in A. 7G.
2ceodunza D. Wmynrepum D. Mhepney G. 'xeleayc G.
16 neac-lante D.G. 17 y;pa spa hip yulh zeza G. 18 pegna G.
19“ G. %eincan D. 2 notin D. 22 pane G. %/ azenpa teopunza
D. *ecimcan D. *%habbe G. not inD. %he G. 8 not
in D 8° A, WW nizodan bale G. epics D. 2 zleom D.


THE LAWS OF KING EDGAR. 263


I.
*HERE IS THE ORDINANCE OF KING EDGAR.


This is the ordinance that king Edgar, with the counsel of
his ‘ witan,’ ordained, in praise of God, and in honour
to himself, and for the behoof of all his people.


1. These then are first: that God’s churches be entitled to
every right; and that every tithe be rendered to the old min-
ster to which the district belongs; and that be then so paid,
both from a thane’s ‘in-land,’ and from ‘ geneat-land,’ so as the
plough traverses it.


OF CHURCH-SCOTS.


2. But if there be any thane who on his ‘boc-land’ has a
church, at which there is a burial-place; let him give the third
part of his own tithe to his church. If any one have a church
at which there is not a burial-place, then, of the nine parts,
let him give to his priest what he will; and let every church-
scot go to the old minster, according to every free hearth:
and let plough-alms be paid, when it shall be fifteen days over
Easter.


OF TITHES.


8. And let a tithe of every young be paid by Pentecost ;
and of the fruits of the earth by the equinox; and every
church-scot by Martinmass, on peril of the full ‘wite’ which
the doom-book specifies: and if any one will not then pay
the tithe, as we have ordained, let the king’s reeve go thereto,
and the bishop’s, and the mass-priest of the minster, and take


BypizeandA. 34/notin G. yy A.~G. Beleepe D. 37 ceo-
sunze D. *Beipice- D. yy zeleyc add. G. “pan A. pem G.
4°A, @notinD. 8notin A. “ponne sane D. “cinger A.
cyningep D. “8° G. 47 bigcoper D.


a [The text is from a collation of the mss. A., D., and G.—TZ.J


264 EADLARES DOQAS.


niman ‘finpancey pone’ teodan dzl to pam mynytpe pe hic
*co-zebypuge- 4 Scaecan him to pam ‘mgo¥an dele- 4 codzxle
man pa eahta delay on cpa 4 °-d ye land-hlaropd vo
Shealpum- to Shealpum ye "birceop. yy’ hic &cyngey man-
°ry hic pegney:-


BE DON PEORD-PENINEE.

iv. And “yy ele heopS-"pemg azipen’ be Pecpey meyye-
Roeze. y Syehe hine to” pam anbdagan gZeleyc nabbe- lade
hine to Rome- 4 “peep to-eacan -xxx- “peenegza- y bpinge
bonne “fonon ypurelunze } he pep ypa micel becehr
hebbe. And fonne he ham *cume- “zylbe pam *cynze
hund-cpelpag *yellinga. 4 “zip he hme ere *yyllan *nelle-
lede hine eye co” Rome- ¥ odpe *ypylce boce- y ponne he
ham cume- *zylde pam cynge cpa hund “yall sec pam
pmddan *pide- giz’ he ponne *zic nelle- pohge ealley pay pe
he *aze:.


BE FREOLS-DALUM AND FsESTENUM.


v. And healbe “man elcer Sunnan-dezey * ppeolyunga
Fpam *non-cide bey Seecvepney-deeger “op peer Monan-dezeyr
hhtinge- be pam pice pe *peo dom-boc *recd- 4 elene
odepne meyye-deez ypa he beboden “beo. 4 man “ele “be-
boden feeyten healde mid “zeleepe geopnpulneyye- “y elcer
Fynge-deegep feyten- bucon hic rpeolp yy.” 4 *zeleeypce man
“yapl-yceat at zelcan cyycenan men to pam mynytpe pe hit
co-’ zebyuge- 4 “pcande ele “eiqic-zud pa ypa hic becye
yood:.77


Vv“ pene A. 2co-bypze A. co-zebimge D. 3ctecenD. 4nyzo¥an
A, mzedan G. 5° G. Shealpan G. 7 biycop- yi: D. 8 cymngzey D.
9n D. yA, /-peninyz azypen A. -pemg-G. 12 -bez A.G-
13’yepe ponne to G. Mpan D. 5 f.D. penne A. 17 panon G.
18rpicelunze D. spycolinza G. pan D. %come A. 2! zilbe D.
2eynnzge D. Byatt G. %zyp AG. ypllanD. *nylle G.


THE LAWS OF KING EDGAR. 265


by force a tenth part for the minster to which it is due; and
assign to him the ninth part; and let the eight parts be divided
into two, and let the land-lord take possession of half, half the
bishop; be it a king’s man, be it a thane’s.


OF THE HEARTH-PENNY.


4. And let every hearth-penny be rendered by St. Peter’s
mass-day : and he who shall not have paid it by that term, let
him be led to Rome, and in addition thereto [pay] xxx. pence,
and bring then a certificate thence, that he has there ren-
dered so much; and when he comes home, pay to the king a
hundred and twenty shillings: And if again he will not pay
it, let him be led again to Rome, and with another such ‘bot?
and when he comes home, pay to the king two hundred
shillings. At the third time, if he then yet will not, let him
forfeit all that he owns.


OF FESTIVALS AND FASTS.


5. And let the festivals of every Sunday be kept, from
noontide of the Saturday, till the dawn of Monday, on peril
of the ‘wite’ which the doom-book specifies; and every other
mass-day, as it may be commanded: and let every ordained
fast be kept with every earnestness; and every Friday’s fast,
unless it be a festival: and let soul-scot be paid for every
Christian man to the minster to which it is due; and let every
church-‘ grith’ stand as it has best stood.


27 G. «=ypileeD. W%zilbe D. %yeyllnza A. 3 pyde- zyp A.
eyppe-G. 2a Aw 3° G. %mon A. %ppeolp G 37 G,
37 not in A. 8not in G. B8cece D. “yy D. 41 not in G.
42bebobon D. Balepe G. 4” notin D. “notinG. *leyce A.
Syaul- A. 47-zebipize D. 48ycand A. “cypie- A.


266 ECADLARES DOMAS.


II.


1 peORULD-LER JEDNES.


1. Diy 1p ponne yeo *peonuldcunde gepedney pe ic pille
~ man healde. $ 1p ponne ®epeys 1c pille. $ zle man sy
fole-hcey *pypde- “ze eapm *ze eadiz. 4 Shim man puihte
domar.7déme- 4 sy on ®pepe bore *ypile popgzipner “ypilce
hic fon Trobe #zebeophhe yy y pop *peopulde abependlic:-


Be DON DE MON LYNG LEseLe. AND BE DCM
peRre.
mu. And “ne zerece nan man “pone “eyng Fop nanpe
yppeece- ®buton he et ham puhtey @pypde beon ne mote-
oppe yuh abiddan ne meze. Ing $ phe to hepig py- **yece
yppan pa *hheinge to pam cynge- y ect nanum bov-pypsum
Szylce ne roppypce man mane **ponne hiy pep::


BE UNRIPTUM DOME.
m1. And *ye dema pe odpum poh *deme- gerylle’ bam
eynze hund-“cpelpuz *ycitt. to botes bucan he md ade
S!zecypan duppe $ he hic na mhton ne cude. 4 polige 2
Inp “pegenyciper- “bucan he Shine ac pam cynge *zebicze
ypa *ypa he Im geparian pille. y *dmamze pepe’ “ycipe
“biyceop pa bove to per “cynger hanba:-


BE DON DE MON ODERNE FORSELLAD.
1v. And yepe odepne md “poze “yonyeczan pillee $ he
“taSon oppe feo oppe “ypeme pe pypya “y¥- zy’ ponne ye
oven “$ Zeunyodian meze $ him man onyecgan polde- “yy
he hip tungan “yeyldig- “bucon he hine mid hip pepe pop-
gilde:-


1€abzaner cynineger zeneebner. D. 2 popoldecunde A. peopldcunte
D. +notinG. ‘+pupseD. 5" D. Sheom D. 77 G. Spane D.
Sypyle G. 1 ponzypner A. MUypylee G. 12 zebeopzhie G. 33 ponuloe
A. peoplbe D. 14na A. pene A. 'cynze D. 'ypece A.
Wburan G. Wnot in D. Ly G. %AyecanD. 22 lyheinge A.
3zlce D. “pane G. %ye dema ysepe odpum on poh zedeme G.
267 serille D. 27 enze A. 78-cpelpei G.  yeillmga 4. 2 bucon


THE LAWS OF KING EDGAR. 267


Il.


SECULAR ORDINANCE.


1. Now this is the secular ordinance which [ will that it be
held. This then is first what I will: that every man be worthy
of ‘ folk-right,’ as well poor as rich: and that righteous dooms
be judged to him; and let there be such remission in the
‘bot,’ as may be becoming before God and tolerable before
the world.


IN CASE ANY ONE APPLY TO THE KING: AND OF
THE ‘WER.’

2. And let no man apply to the king, in any suit, unless he
at home may not be worthy of law, or cannot obtain law.
If the law be too heavy, let him seek a mitigation of it from
the king: and, for any ‘bot’-worthy crime, let no man forfeit
more than his ‘ wér.’


OF UNRIGHTEOUS JUDGMENT.


8. And let the judge who judges wrong to another pay to
the king one hundred and twenty shillings as ‘bot; unless he
dare to prove on oath, that he knew it not more rightly: and
let him forfeit for ever his thaneship; unless he will buy it of
the king, so as he is willing to allow him: and let the bishop
of the shire exact the ‘bot’ into the king’s hands.


IN CASE ANY ONE ACCUSE ANOTHER.


4. And he who shall accuse another wrongfully, so that he,
either in money or prosperity, be the worse; if then the other
can disprove that which any one would charge to him; be he
liable in his tongue; unless he make him compensation with
his ¢ wer.’


D. %cypan D. 2 not in G. a 83 pezenycypey - 34 bucon
D. lind eps G. 36 ebigge “a 37 not in G. 7G. ot OF-
manize D. 2%yceype A. seyp G. “biscopD. 4! foe A. 4276
A. and unpihs in the margin. G. “3 ropreccan D. Fopreggan G.
44a3en A. 4 yeope AG. ypeme D. 46 “zyp Ge 47 not in G.
Brn G *yciltiz D. Obucan G. 5! ropzilbe D.


268 ECADLARES DOMAS.


BE LEMOTUM.
v. And yece man *hundped-zemoc- ypa hic &p geyec pey-
4 *habbe man ppipa on geape *buph-zemoéc- y cupa *ypeip-
gemoc- 4 “pep beo on *pane yeme 7 bipceop y ye *ealdopman-
4y “peep eegdep ceecan "ze Lroder phe ze ’populd-prhe:-


BE BORLUM.

vi. And yinde him ele man } he boph “hebbe- 4 ye boph
hine “ponne to *zelcon yuhte zel&de 4 gzehealde- 4 “zip hpa
ponne poh “pypce 4 utc-oSbenyce- abene ye boph } he
Wabenan yeolde. ®Inp hic **ponne peoy’ beo- 4 *z1¢ he
*hine bmnan tpelp mondum gelangian mege- “azire hine to
puhre- 4 him man *azire $ he *&p zeald:.”


BE * TIPT-BYSILUM.

vir. And yebe *nhe-bynz yy-” y folce “ungecpype- y pay
gemov sopbuge *pnypa- ponne *yceapize man of pam gemore
pa pe him *xo-pidan- 4 pide him ponne *'zyc boph “zip he
meege. zip he ponne ne mexzge- *zepyloe *man hine “ypadop
man meze- ypa *cucenne ypa deadne- y “miman eal f he
age- y 8zylbe man pam “ceonde ny “ceap-zyld *angyloey-
4 fo ye “hlayond “eller to “healpan- to “healpan $ hundped-
4 “zip *’aSep oppe “m&z oppe ypembde pa pade fopyace “zilde
pam cynze “hund-cpelptiz “yeillinga. 4 Szeyéce ye *aebepa
peor # P he geyece- oppe yepe on hlaropd-yeappe yemet yy
p In neppe feoph “ne “zerecen- “buton ye cyninge mm
yeoph-genepey unne:’


BE MYNETUM AND LEMETUM.
vi. And *zanzge “dn mynec ofep ealne per cynzey


1hundpevey- D. 2habbe G. 3bupuh- D. ‘4yeyp- A. Span D.
Spane D. 7biycop D. 8ealbepman A. % pap D. cacen A.
Ngoben D. 'poplo- D. Bhabbe D. ManotinD. Yeleum G.
iS azyp A.G. pince D. 18 ec-bepyce A. uc-abeprce D.  !9 bepan
D. Gy AG. not in A. /pypd G. 2 zyp G. 2% hine ponne
A. *azyre AG. %/&p yealbe G. *Scihe-bipyy D. / cyhe-
byng~ G. 27 unzecpipe G. %notin A.G. %yeyce D. seeapie G.
X%co-pdoon A. Siac D. zyp AG. Bzepilbe D. 34mon A.
35 ppadep A. spa hpatep ypa D. 36 cucunne D. cpicne G. 37 mme
G. %8zlbe D. %ccondan D. +cep-zylo A. 4! angilbey D. an-


THE LAWS OF KING EDGAR. 269


OF ‘GEMOTS,’


5. And let the hundred-‘ gemot’ be attended as it was before
fixed ; and thrice in the year let a ‘burh-gemot’ be held; and
twice, a shire-‘ gemot;’ and let there be present the bishop of
the shire and the ‘ealdorman,’ and there both expound as well
the law of God as the secular law.


OF «BORHS.’


6. And let every man so order that he have a ‘borh;? and
let the ‘borh ’ then bring and hold him to every justice; and
if any one then do wrong and run away, let the ‘ borh’ bear
that which he ought to bear. But if it be a thief, and if he
can get hold of him within twelve months; let him deliver him
up to justice, and let be rendered to him what he before had
paid.

OF ** TIHT-BYSIG’ PERSONS.

7. And he who is ‘ tyht-bysig,’ and is untrue to the people,
and has shunned these ‘gemidts’ thrice; then let there be
chosen from the ‘ gemdt’ those who shall ride to him, and then
let him yet find a ‘borh’ if he can: but if he cannot, let them
seize him as they can, whether alive or dead; and take all that
he owns; and let the accuser be paid an ‘angylde’ for his
‘ceap-gild :’ and let the lord moreover take half, half the
hundred; and if either.a kinsman or a stranger refuse the
riding, let him pay to the king a hundred and twenty shillings :
and let a notorious thief seek whatever he may seek, or he
who is found in plotting against his lord, so that they never
seek life; unless the king will grant them salvation of life.


OF MONEY AND MEASURES.
8. And let one money pass throughout the king’s dominion ;


zelbey G. 421and-hlarond G. “notin G. ‘4healran G. 4 healpan
AG. zy G Zadop G 8° G. 8xylbe G. 5 cyningze D.
Slexx. D. yet G 8° G. S4ebepa G. na A. 56 zerecan
D. 7D, 87a G 97D. emzer A. cyninger D.


a The original has been retained in the translation, though there
can be little doubt that it means a person who had forfeited his civil
rights by a legal conviction of crime.


270 ECADLARES DOOAS.


anpeald. 14 pone nan man ne fopyace. 4 ganze 2an zemer
in gepihte- *ypilce *man on Lunben-*bygz y on *Pintan-
ceaytpe healde- 4 ga yeo page pulle *to -cxx- f. y nan man
"hig *na undeopop ne *yylle- 4 zip hpa In ponne undeopop
®rylle- oppe eapungza oppe deapnunga- Mzilde azSen pam cynze
"xx. peillinga-” ge epe *hi ypylle xe pepe hi bycze:-


SUPPLEMENT TO EDGAR’S LAWS.


1. Wep ip Zerpucelod on pisum gepmice hu Cadzan “cynge
pey ymeazende hpeet co boce mihte at pem fep-cpealme pe
hip “leodycipe ypySe dpehcte 4 panode pide zynd hip anpeald.
Det 1y ponne epee. } him puhte y hiy prcum $ pur gepad
ungelimp md yynnum 4 mid ofephypnyyye Loder beboda
geeapinod pape- 4 spydoye mid pam optmge pey nead-zaroley
pe cmycene men Isobe Zeleycan ycoldon on heopa ”teobing-
yeeaccum. Je bepohte y aymeade  godcunde be populd-
zepunan. Inp geneat-manna hpile yopgymeleayad ny hla-
ropdey zarol y hrc him to fem phe andagan ne geleyt- pen
ip Zp ye hlayopd mild-heope bid P he pa gsymeleayte to *pop-
zyfeneyye lace 4 to hiy garole buvon prcnunge 6. *Iny
he ponne gelomlice puph lnp bybdelay ny *zZaroley myngad
4 he ponne aheapdad 4 hic pencd to:etycpengenne- pen ip
pey hlapopder zpama co pam yspySe” peaxe $ he him ne
unne nadep ne *&hta ne lipey. Spa iy *pén $ upe Dypuhten
*496 puph pa gedupyognyyye pe yolcey men prd-haecon pepe
zelomlican *mynegunge fe upe *lapeopay dydon ymbe
nead-garol upey Dyuhcner- $ pyn upe teodungza 4 cyme-
yceaccay. Donne beode ic 4 ye *ancebiyceop $ ze Lod ne
*znemian ne nadep ne geeapman ne pone “yéplican dead
piper andpeapdan hiyer ne hupu pone to-peapdan *écepe helle
mid “zenigum ofcige Loder gepthta. ac agdep se eapm ze


1) pane nan man ne foprace- J zemev ypylce man on Pincan-cercpe
healbe- 4 ga yeo pez pulle co ealpan punbdey- 4 Ine nan man na
Seonon ne yylle. G. and here it closes. 2“ D. 3ypylee D. 4mon A.
5-bipiz D. 6Pinea-ceaycpe D. 7hy A. 8notin D. pile D.
Wgylbe A. Lx, peylinga 4. hy A. Byplle D. Mhy A.


@ The variation in ms. G. is ‘co [h]ealfan punbe,’ which makes it
more than probable that we should here read ‘xxx. yeillinga.’ [There


THE LAWS OF KING EDGAR. 271


and that let no man refuse: and let one measure and one
weight pass; such as is observed at London and at Winchester ;
and let the wey of wool go for *cxx. p.; and let no man sell
it cheaper; and if any one sell it cheaper, either publicly or
privately, let each pay xt. shillings to the king, both him who
sells it, and him who buys it.


SUPPLEMENT TO EDGAR’S LAWS.


1. Here is manifested in this writing how Edgar the king
was deliberating what might be for ‘bot’ in the pestilence,
which much afflicted and decreased his people, widely through-
out his dominion.— That then is first: that it seemed to him
and his ‘witan’ that a misfortune of such kind had been
merited by sins, and by contempt of God’s commandments, and
most of all by the diminution of the need-~‘ gafol,’ that Christian
men ought to render to God in their tithing-scots. He thought
on and considered the divine according to worldly usage. If
any ‘ geneat-man’ neglect his Jord’s tribute, and do not render
it to him at the right term, it may be expected, if the lord be
merciful, that he will grant forgiveness of the neglect, and
accept his tribute without a penalty. But if he, by his mes-
sengers, frequently remind him of his tribute, and he then be
obdurate and think to resist it, it is to be expected that the
lord’s anger will so greatly increase, that he will neither grant
him property nor life. Thus it is to be expected that our
Lord will do, through the audacity with which people have
resisted the frequent admonition that our teachers have made,
respecting the need~-‘ gafol’ of our Lord; that is, our tithes and
church-scots. Then I and the archbishop command, that ye
anger not God, nor merit either the sudden death of this pre-
sent life, nor, still more, the future one of eternal hell, by


Beynmze F.  leosyeype C. 17 ceodinge- F. 8 yopzypnyyye F.
9“ OF, Ly C.  2%Azapole F. 2 pan ypide FL 237 F,
24° C.F, %mynzgunze FP. 2%" F. 27 epcebyceop &. 28 znymman
FF. 92°F, 8° CF. 3lenezum &


is no substantial difference between the mss., ‘cxx §. being a con-
traction for ‘cxx. penmnza,’ or, as G. expresses it, ‘half a pound. —Z.]


272 CADLARES DOMAS.


eadig pe nize 'teolunga habbe gelayce Lode ny teodungza
mid ealne bhyye y mid eallum unnan ypa yeo gepxbdnyy teece
pe mine pivan ect Anderenan gepeddon 4 nu epe ec Pihe-
bopdeyycane mid pedde Zefeytnodén. Donne beode 1¢ minum
seperan be mimum *gpeondycipe y be eallum pam pe *n
‘axon p hi prypan ezleum papa pe piy ne geleyre y mina
picena ped abpecan mid emizum °pacreipe pille ypa ypa him
yeo fopeyzede 7zepzedner cece. 4 on Fepe yreope ne sy nan
Sronzipney. °Ing he ypa eapm bid he “atop ded ope pa
Trodey panad Inp “yapla co foppypde oppe paccop mid moder
gpaman hy behpypyd ponne he him to agenum teled- ponne
Inm micele agenpe 1y $ him efpe on “écnezye geleye @ zip
he hit md unnan 4 fulpe bhyye don polde. Donne pille ic
~ “par Loder gemthca yrandan egzhpep zelice on mmum
anpealde 4 pa Isodey peopay fe pa yceaccar undeprod pe pe
Love yyllad libban clenan hye $ “hy puph pa clennyyye
Gy co Lode pingian meegen 4 1c 4 mine pegnay pyloan upe
ppeoycar to pan pe upe yaula hypbay uy tacad $ pyndon
upe bipceopar pe pe nxype miyphypan ne “ycylon on nan
papa pinga pe hi uy fop Trobe vaecad pe pe puph fa hypyum-
nyyye pe pe heom yon Lode “hypyromiad } ece lip seeapnian
fe hy uy to-peniad mid lape 4 md byyene ®zodpa peonca:.


ur. Populd-zepthca ic pille } ycandan on zlcum ™leodycipe
ypa gode ypa “hy mon *on betyte apedian meeze Lode to
*zecpemnyyye y me to fullum *cyneycipe y eapmum 4
*%Seamzum to peapre y to Fpude. y to alcepe bypiz y alcepe
reine hebbe 1c miner *cyneyeipey Jemhta ypa min fedep
haepde 4 mine pegnay heebben heopa ypeipe on minum tman
ypa “hy hepdon on minep feedep, And 1c pille $ populd-
gemhta mid Denum yrandan be ypa godum lagum ypa hy
betyc xeceoren megen. Scande ponne md *Anzlum # 1c
4) mine pitan to minpa yldpena domum geyhton eallum
leodyeipe to peappe. Sy peah hpaepe pep peed zemzene


Icylunge F. 2yneontyeype C. Shy F. 4° CF. Senezum F.
6 pacreype C. 7 zenabner F. Sponzypner C. 9 Lye C. Watep C.
Uyaula F. POR, Bay Co MOF. bh FF. 167 CR. 'yceolon


THE LAWS OF KING EDGAR. 273


any diminution of God’s dues: but that both rich and poor,
who have any tilth, render to God his tithes with all joyfulness
and without all grudge, as the ordinance teaches that my
‘witan’ ordained at Andover, and now again confirmed with
their ‘weds’ at ‘ Wihtbordesstan.” Then I command my
reeves, by my friendship, and by all which they possess, that
they punish every of those who will not render this, and shall
break the ‘wed’ of my ‘witan’ by any remissness, according as
the aforesaid ordinance teaches: and of the punishment be
there no forgiveness. If he be so poor that he do the one or
the other; either that he diminish the things of God, to the
perdition of his soul, or with anger of mind more remissly
treat them, than that which he counteth to himself as his own;
then is that much more his own which ever lasts him to eter-
nity, if he would do it without grudge and with perfect glad-
ness. Then will I, that these God’s dues stand everywhere
alike in my dominion, and that the servants of God, who re-
ceive the moneys which we give to God, live a pure life; that,
through their purity, they may intercede for us with God; and
that I and my thanes direct our priests to that which the
pastors of our souls teach us, that is our bishops, whom we
ought never to disobey in any of those things which they teach
us on the part of God, so that, through the obedience with
which we obey them on account of God, we may merit that
eternal life to which they fit us by doctrine, and with example
of good works.


2. I will that secular rights stand among every people as
good as they can be best devised, to the pleasure of God, and
to my perfect royalty, and to the need and peace of rich and
poor: and in every ‘burh,’ and in every shire, that I may
have my rights of royalty as my father had; and that my
thanes have their dignity, in my time, as they had in my
father’s. And I will, that secular rights stand among the
Danes with as good Jaws as they best may choose. But with
the English, let that stand which I and my ‘ witan’ have added
to the dooms of my forefathers, for the behoof of all the
people. Let this ordinance, nevertheless, be common to all


Cc. ‘'8hyprumiats C. zobtpa F. *leobreype Ce 2th CL
2not in F. Bzecpemmyse C. %cynercype C. %eabezum C.
2% yeyne C. 27 cynercypesC. %hr C. %Englum C. *leobyeype C.


274 EADLARES DOMAS.


eallum leodperpe xgdep ge *Anglum xe Denum Ze Bnyecum
on zlcum ende miner anpealder to py $ eapm y eadiz mote
*azan $ Shy mid puhve gepctpynad y peop nyve hpap he *pypSe
befeyce peah he hpet ptele y him ypa gebopgen yy heona
unpilley $ heopa to *yela ne *loyien:.


mi. 7D 1p ponne’ f 1¢ pille. $ ele mann yy undep bonge
ge binnan bupgum ge *buton bupgum-e y *zepicner “y¥ seyret
vo elcene bypig y to elcum hundpode:.


1v. To zlcepe bymg -xxxi- yn “zecopene to gepicneyye:-


v. To ymalum bupgum y vo zleum hundpobte -xu1- buton ge
2ma ®pillan:-


vi. And ale mon md heopa “Zepienyyye bigeze 4 yylle
zle “pana ceapa pe he bigege odep pylle aden oppe bupge oppe
on peepen-xereece. y heopa zle ponne hine man epey to
Wezeprenyyye Zecyys sylle “pone ad $ he nazgpe ne yop feo ne
yop luge ne yop ege ne zetyace naney papa pinga pe he to
Wzeprenyyye pey 4 nan odep pinge on *!zepicnyyye ne cype
bucan $ “an $ he gereah oppe gehypbe. 4 ppa *zexdedpa
manna **y§n on zlcum ceape tpegen oppe ppy to seprenyyye:-


vil. And yepe eyptep *enezum ceape pide cype hy neah-
gebupum ymbe hpxt he jude 4 ponne he ham cume cype eac
on hpey gepitnyyye he pone ceap gebohte:.


vin. *Inp he fonne unmyndlunge ceap *apebdige ut on
hpylcepe fape burton he hic ’&p cydde fa he *tic-pad cype
hic ponne he *ham cyme 4 gp hic cuce opp bid mod hi
cunyelpey Zepitnyyye on gemenpe leye gebpinge. Ing he
ypa ne de5 *ép *'yip mhcum cypan hic pey tuner men pam
hundpedey ealdpe y beon burton pite zzden ze hy yylpe ge
heopa hypday 4 pohge pey oprey pe hic Jadep bpohte ron *py
fe he hic ny “neah-zebupum cyfan nolde ¥ fo re land-pica to
healyan 4 vo healyan } hundped:.


1€nglum C. 27 F. 3hi C. 4peopce C. Syeola C. Slopizen £&.
7” Der ponne hy C. Sbucan C. %zeprnar C. "FF, MN ze-
copone C. 2° CF, Bpyllan C. Meepicnessa C. | peopa C.
16 notin C. Wpyenesse C. '8pene F.  'zepyenyppe CL 2


THE LAWS OF KING EDGAR. 275


the people, whether English, Danes, or Britons, on every side
of my dominion; to the end that poor and rich may possess
what they lawfully acquire, and a thief not know where he
shall deposit his theft, though he steal anything; and that, in
their despite, they be so guarded against, that too many of
them escape not.


8. This then is what I will: that every man be under
‘borh,’ both within the ‘burhs,’ and without the ‘burhs;’ and
let witness be appointed to every ‘burh’ and to every hundred.


4, To every ‘burh,’ let there be chosen xxx11. as witness.


5. To small ‘ burhs,’ and in every hundred, x11.; unless ye
desire more.


6. And let every man, with their witness, buy and sell every
of the chattels that he may buy or sell, either in a ‘burh’ or in
a wapentake ; and let every of them, when he is first chosen as
witness, give the oath that he never, neither for money, nor
for love, nor for fear, will deny any of those things of which he
was witness, nor declare any other thing in witness, save that
alone which he saw or heard: and of such sworn men, let there
be at every bargain two or three as witness.


7. And he who rides in quest of any cattle, let him declare
to his neighbours about what he rides; and when he comes
home, Jet him also declare with whose witness he bought the
cattle.


8. But if he, being out on any journey, unintentionally
make a bargain, without having declared it when he rode out,
let him declare it when he comes home; and if it be live
stock, let him, with witness of his township, bring it to the
common pasture. If he do not so before five days, let the
townsmen declare it to the ‘ealdor of the hundred; and let
them be exempt from ‘wite,’ both themselves and their herds-
men, and let him forfeit the cattle who brought it thither;
because he would not declare it to his neighbours; and let the
‘land-rica’ take possession of half, and half the hundred.


2lzepycnerpe C. 22° C.F. Bzendsepa FF. 4- F. %azenum C.
eri. 2K BO" OF. 8° F MG IF.
2p. C, %3neah-bupum F.


* picena ?
* unpicepa P


276 ECADLARES DOOAS.


1x. Ing hic ponne ofep -v- mht ungecyd on gemenpe leye
punad polige pay opper ypa pe zp cpzedon 4 papa hypda ele
pohize pape hyde. y ber ne.yy 7nan *yongipney- *zeyecen P hi
Szerecen. 4 he peah-hpedepe cybe on hpey gepicnyyye he
opp bohte:.


x. Iny he ponne cend $ he hic mid gepienyyye bohte papa
manna pe to gepicnyype zsenamode yynt aden oppe on bymz
oppe on hundpode y ye *hundpoder ealdop $ geacrod P hic yod
iy polige peah peep oppey. ron py pe he hic hip neah-zebupum
cypan nolde ne np hundpodey ealdpe 4 neebbe ip na mapan
heapm:.


x1. °Inp he ponne 7czenne } he hic mid ®zeprenyyye bohte
4 lear bid yy he peor 4 polize heapder y ealley pay fe he
°aze. 4 healde ye land-hlapopd p ropyrolene opp y pay oprer
ceap-syld oppec ye agen-ppigea $ Zeacpige y mid gZepitneyye
him opp geahnize:-

xu. Donne pille ic $ prande md Denum ypa Zobde laza ypa
Uhy betyte zeceoren 4 1c heom "4 gefapode y zepayian pille
ypa lange ypa me hr geleyc fop eoppum hyldum pe ze me
yymble cyddon- 4 per pilmge f per “dn %d6m on ypylcene
ymeagungze yy “tip eallon gemzne co gebeopge 4 to fpide
eallum ” leodpeipe:-


xm. And 1c pille $ tuney-men 4 heopa hypbday habban peey
®ylean ymeagunge on minum cucum ope ¥ on minpa pegena
eal ypa hy habbad on heopa “agenum. Inp lnc ponne min
Zepeza oppe zeemg odep man * piccpe opfe * unpiccpe onpeunad
4 ungepyyena gebyt adep opfe cuney-mannum oppe heopa
hypdon- ceore Dene be lagum hpylce yceope hy be pan healdan
pillad:.


xiv. (id Englum ic haebbe Zecopen y mine pican hpet yeo
yeeop beon mege gif emg man **anbypdnyyye bezind oppe
mid ealle ofylyhd cenigne papa fe ymbe fay pmeagunze bid-
‘4 p Oypne opp ameldad. oppe papa zemgne pe on yodpe gepiv-
neyye bid 4 md hip pode pene *unycyldigan ahpec y peene


1°PF. — 2yonzymmer C. 3xzerecan F. ‘4hundpeber Fo Fp C.
SLyp C. 7cynne F. Szeprenesre F. 97°F. @yoprcolone F.


THE LAWS OF KING EDGAR. 277


9. But if it remain above v. days undeclared in the common
pasture, let him forfeit the cattle, as we before ordained, and
let every of the herdsmen suffér in his hide: and of this let
there be no forgiveness, let them seek what they may seek:
and, nevertheless, let him declare in whose witness he bought
the cattle.


10. If he then declare, that be bought it with the witness of
those men who are named as witness, either in ‘burh’ or in
hundred; and the-‘ealdor’ of the hundred is informed that it
is true, let him nevertheless forfeit the cattle; because he
would not declare it to his neighbours, nor to the ‘ealdor’ of
his hundred, and let him have no greater harm from it.


11. But if he declare, that he bought it with witness, and
that be false; be he the thief, and forfeit his head, and all that
he owns: and let the land-lord hold the stolen cattle, and the
‘ceap-gild’ of the cattle, till that the proprietor is informed of
it, and with witness claims the cattle for his own.


12. Then will I, that, with the Danes, such good laws stand
as they may best choose, and as I have ever permitted to them,
and will permit, so long as life shall last me, for your fidelity
which ye have ever shewn me; and this I desire, that this one
doom, concerning such inquiry, be common to us all, for
security and peace to all the people.


18. And I will, that townsmen ,and their herdsmen have the
same inquiry concerning my live cattle, and that of my thanes,
as they have concerning their own. But if my reeve, or any
other man, more or less powerful, shun this, and command
things unseemly, either to townsmen or their herdsmen, let the
Danes chuse, according to their laws, what punishment they
will adopt respecting him.


14. With the English, I and my ‘witan’ have chosen what
the punishment shall be, if any man make resistance, or out-
right slay any one of those who are engaged in this inquiry,
and give notice of secreted cattle; or any of those who bear
true witness, and with his sooth save the guiltless, and lawfully


hy FB 2A OF. Bpa Co MOOR BF 6" C.F,
7 leoppeype C. ileanC. °F. 2° CR. Aunyeyloizean F


T3


278 CADLARES DOOAS.


Ireyloigan puhtlice yopded. Donne pille ic $ yymble mid eop
gehealden yy pe ge to fpiser-bote gecopen haepdon md
?micelum pipbome y me ypyde gecpemlice. And per eaca sy
up eallum zemene pe on piypum ‘izlandum pumiad:.


xv. Donne rypSmze *Oylae eopl 4 eal hepe fe on py
ealdopdome punad $ fry yrande Lode to lore 4 upe ealpa
yapla co peapre 4 eallum folce to yude. And pre man
manega seppica be pipyum y yende ezd5ep ze co /Elrepe eal-
dopmen ge to 7 fCpelpine ealdopmen 4 hy °zehpidep $ per
ped cud py egdep Ze eapmum Ze eadszum:-


xvi. Ie beo eop ypyde hold hlaropd pa Mhpile pe me hy
geleyc 4 eop eallum ypyde bhde eom fon “pF be ze ypa
seopne ymbe ymid pyndon:-


Vycyltizean F. 2miclum F. Spar C. 4° CF. Seal Co Shi F.


THE LAWS OF KING EDGAR. 279


foredo the guilty. Then will J, that ever be observed among
you what you had chosen as ‘ frith-bot,’ with great wisdom, and
very agreeably to me. And be this supplement common to us
all, who dwelt in these islands.,


15. Then let Oslac ‘eorl, and all the army dwelling in this
*ealdordom,’ further this, that it stand to the glory of God, and
to the benefit of the souls of us all; and to the ‘frith’ of all
the people. And let many writings be written concerning these
things, and sent both to A£lfere ‘ealdorman,’ and to Aithelwine
*ealdorman,’ and Jet them [send] in every direction; that this
ordinance be known both to poor and rich.


16. I will be to you a very kind lord, the while that my life
lasts, and I am exceedingly well disposed towards you all,
because ye are so earnest about the ‘frith.’


7zelpne C. Shy F. %zehpyoep C. Mhpyle CC. Up CB.


JEDELREDES DOMAS.*


I.
bTEDELREDES LYNINGES GERJEDNISSE.


Diy iy *yeo gepxdnyy’ pe sCSelped Scymngz y hiy pican
Zepzxddon eallon yolce to ymser-bote wt Pudercoce on
Mypcena lande eptep Engla laze:-


Be BORLUM.


1. Dec is *p exle ypeoman gecpeopne boph hebbe f ye
boph hine to zlcon puhte gehealde Szip he becyhtlad pupse.
SIng he ponne tyhe-byyiz py ganze co 7 fam ®ppypealdan on-
dale. °Ing ye hlapopd yecge } him naSop ne ™bupyte ne
ad ne opdal yyppan p gemoc pey wc Bnomdune mime ye hla-
popd him cpegen *zetpeope pegenay imnan pam hundpede 4
ypeyian $ him neegpe ad ne bupyte ne he peop-zyld ne zulde-
%bucan he pone geperan hebbe pe pay pypde sy pe f don
meze. “Ing ye ad ponne yopd-cume ceoye ye man ponne pe
pep ®becyhrlad yy ppa hpedep ypa he pylle ypa anfeald opdal
ypa pundey pupdne ad innan pam ppim hundpedan ofep °pprevig
%peninza. “Ing hy’ pone ad ryllan ne duppon ganze to pam
%pnyrealban opdale. “Ing he ponne ful pupdSe- ac pam
Fopman cyppe bete pam ceonde ctpy-zylde y pam hlayopde hip
pepe 4 yecce zetpeope bopzay he zlcey * yreley ert geypice.


\no rubrics in B. “ pazepebnyyye B. FemnzB. 4° BB. Fayre
B. Shy B. 7pam B. Sppeogealoan B. %Lyp B. Mnasen
Hf. \bypyce B zecpeopa B. bucon B MByp B.


a [Ethelred, son of Edgar, succeeded to the throne, on the murder
of his brother Edward, in the year 978, and died in 1016.—7Z.]


> [The text is from a collation of mss. B. and H.—T7.]


¢ The election allowed the offender seems to have been between
the oath of a pound and the ordeal, and not the choosing his own
compurgators from the three adjacent hundreds. The phrase ‘ above
thirty pence’ indicates, apparently, the amount of the property at


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELRED.*


I.
>KING ETHELRED’S ORDINANCE.


This is the ordinance which King Ethelred and his ¢ witan’
ordained as ‘ frith-bét’ for the whole nation, at Wood-
stock, in the land of the Mercians, according to the law
of the English.


OF «BORHS,’


1. That is, that every freeman have a true ‘borh,’ that the
‘borh’ may present him to every justice, if he should be ac-
cused. But if he be ‘ tyht-bysig,’ let him go to the threefold
ordeal. If his lord say that he has failed neither in oath nor
ordeal since the ‘gemot’ was at ‘ Bromdun;’ let the lord take
with him two true thanes within the hundred, and swear that
never had oath failed him, nor had he paid ‘theof-gyld;? un-
less he have the reeve who is competent to do that. If then
the oath succeed, let the man then who is there accused choose
whichever he will; either single ordeal, or a pound-worth oath,
within the three hundreds, for above ‘thirty pence. If they
dare not take the oath, let him go to the triple ordeal. If he
then be guilty; at the first time, let him make ‘bot’ to the
accuser twofold; and to the lord, his ‘wér;’ and iet him give
true ‘borhs’ that he will hereafter abstain from every evil.


hbecyhtlec AH. 'peneza B. '/Lyp hi B. 18 ppryealdan B.
WLyp B. 2%ypel B.


suit, for in Edward, ce. 1., we have a form prescribed for the ‘ cype-ad’
in a suit of the value of an ox or thirty pence, and in Alfred and
Guthrum a rule to be observed, where the suit was above three
mancuses. By the old Danish Law, in all cases where the ‘nefnd”
or ‘cype-a5’ was allowed, the accused had a similar election granted
to him; for if he doubted whether the persons chosen would swear
him free of the charge, or if any of them refused to swear with him,
he might reject their interference, and go to the ordeal.


282 JEDELREDES DOMAE.


And ect pam odpan cyppe ne sy pep nan odep bor 'butan $
*hearod. *Inp he ponne ut-hleape 4 $ opdal ropbuze zilbe
ye boph pam teonde hiy ceap-zyld 4 pam hlaropde Imp pepe pe
hiy prcer pypSe yu. And gsyf mon fone hlaropd teo # he be
Inp *peede Suc-hleope 4 zp unphe pophte mme him pif
pegsnay to ¥ beo him yylp yyxta 4 ladie hine pey. And 7zip
yeo *lad yond-cume beo he *pep peper *pypSe. And “zp
“hed fond ne cume fo se “cyning co pam pepe y beo ye peor
utlah pid ¥eall fole. And habbe ele hlapopd Imp hiped-men
on lnp agenon bopge. “Ing he ponne *beryhclad pupde 4
he ut-odhleape gylbe ye hlaropd per manner pepe pam
®eyninge. And zip mon pone hlafopd ceo } he be hip pede
Bur-hleope ladie hine md pp pegnum 4 beo him yylp prxva.
Tn him yeo lad bypyte gilde pam cynge hiy pepe y *yy ye
man ?' @lah:.


And beo ye cynz *elcey *pepa pica pypSe pe pa men
*zepyncen pe boc-land *hebben. y ne bete nan man fop
nanpe **cyhtlan buton hic yy pey cynger geperan *’gepic-
neyye:


BE DEOPMEN DE FUL pYRDE.


u. %And “zip peopman * yal *pypse ae pam ondale meancie
man hine zt pam fopman cyppe y zt pam odpan cyppe ne sy
peep nan *odep bot buton # hearod:.


Be DON DE MON NE LEAPILGE BUTON LEpITNESSeE.


11. And $ nan man ne 06 navop ne ne “bycge ne ne
*Shpypre bucon he boph heebbe y *zepreneyye. *7 zip hie ponne
hpa’ d0 fo ye Jand-hlaropd to y healde $ “Opp oppeet mon pite
hpa hie *aze mid pbte:-


BE DEM MEN DE EALLUM FOLLE UNLETRYPE SI.
tv. And zip hpyle man yy pe eallon yolce ungetpype sy
Fape pay cyngey gepepa co 4 Zebpunge hine undep bopgze $


1buron B. 7hiasond H. 2Lyp B. 4hpete B. 5S urchleope H.
6yyxca Bo 7 ayp Bo Sper B. Y%pupte H. May Bo UAB.
Renz Bo Beal B. Mbyp B. becyhcled H. i cynze B.
Wayp Bo Wur-leopeB. VL B MB ATH Bele H.
pana B. *zepypcean B. %habban H. %Schclan B. 27 zepic-
nye B. notin Bo Maye B. 29° HL. Bpupte BH. 32 not


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELRED. 283


And at the second time, let there be no other ‘bot’ than the
head. But if he run away, and avoid the ordeal; let the
‘borh’ pay to the accuser his ‘ceap-gild,’ and to the lord his
“wér,’ who is entitled to his ‘wite. And if any one accuse the
lord, that he ran away by his counsel, and had previously acted
unlawfully; let him take to him five thanes, and be himself
the sixth, and clear himself thereof. And if the *purgation
succeed, Jet him be entitled to the ‘wér.” And if it do not
succeed, let the king take the ‘wér,’ and Jet the thief be an
outlaw to all people. And let every lord have his household in
his own ‘borh.’ If then any one of them should be accused
and run away, let the lord pay the man’s ‘ wér’ to the king.
And if any one accuse the lord, that he ran away by his
counsel; let him clear himself with five thanes, and be himself
the sixth. If the purgation fail him, let him pay to the king
his ‘ wér ;’ and Jet the man be an outlaw.

And let the king be entitled to every of the ‘wites’ that
those men incur who have ‘ boc-land:’ and let no man make
‘bot’ for any accusation, except it be with the witness of the
king’s reeve.


OF A ‘THEOWMAN’ WHO IS GUILTY.


2. And if a ‘theowman’ be guilty at the ordeal, let him be
branded the first time; and the second time, let there be no
‘bot’ except the head.


IN CASE ANY ONE TRAFFIC WITHOUT WITNESS.

3. And let no man either buy or exchange, unless he have
‘borh’ and witness: but if any one so do, let the land-lord
take possession of, and hold the property, till that it be known
who rightfully owns it.


OF THE MAN WHO IS UNTRUE TO ALL THE PEOPLE,


4, And if there be any man who is untrue to all the people,
let the king’s reeve go and bring him under ‘borh;’ that he


inB. 38° BH. Hbyzze B. Shpppe A. Szepienyye B. 37/74
xyp lic hpa B. 8° BB. Maye B.


@ The legal purgation. In A.S.‘hlaban’ had a twofold and very
opposite import, ‘ onerare—haurire;’ hence, ‘1a,’ onus, purgatio.


284 JEDELREDES DOMAS.


hine man 'to puhte *zel@de pam pe him Sonyppecon. ‘Ing
he ponne boph nebbe ylea *mon hine °y on’ *yul lecge. And
7p hpa’ hine ®ronenne ropycande beon *hy begen aney yhtey
pypse. And yebe “pip ponyrece” y hie zeropdian nylle ypa upe
ealpa cpide ip pylle pam cynge ™-cxx- reilt.:.


I.


>Dip synd pa pmd-mal 4 pa foppopd pe sEdelped cyng ¥
ealle hip prcan pS pone hepe gedon habbad pe ° Anlap 4
Juyctin 4 Trudmund Scegzican yunu mid peepon:.


1. Det pore. $ popold-pmiS ycande becpeox Js€Selpede
cynge 4 eallum hip leodycipe 4 eallum pam hepe pe ye cyng
 yeoh yealbe- eeypcep pam fopmalan pe Sigzepic apcebipcop ¥
CSelpeapd ealdopman y /Elypic ecaldopman pophton- pa hy
abedon et pam cynge $ hy moytan pam leppan fd ge-
bicgean pe hy undep cyngcer hand ofepherdon. And gir
zmig yelp-hepe on Engla-lande hepgie $ pe habban heopa
ealpa yulcum 4 pe him yeulon mete yindan pa hpile pe hy md
up beod. And ele pepa landa pe amgne yutige pepa pe
J€ngla-land hepzie beo hre utlah pid up 4 pid ealne hepe:.


Be LEAP-SLYPUM.


u. And ele ceap-yeip yd hebbe pe binnan mudan cuman
peh hic ungpid peyp py- syp hic undpizen bid. And peh hic


1’, 2° 2B. 3onspecon B. 4Lyp B Sman B. 64 hine
Nl hunbd-


* The reading of this passage, as republished by Cnut, is ‘on yulan
lecze,’ which is rendered in the old Latin version, ‘ et in loco latronum
sepeliatur.’ This transition from one form of declension to the other,
‘ ytila— pil,’ is common in A.S.

Th text is from ms. B. The rubrics are from Lambarde.
© [The Anlaf (Aulaf) or Unlaf, with whom the above articles were
concluded, was the celebrated Norwegian king Olaf Tryggvason, con-
cerning whose expedition to England and subsequent baptism, see the
Saxon Chron. and Florence of Worcester, a° 993. In his Saga also


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELRED. 285


may be led to justice, to those who accused him. But if he
have no ‘borh,’ let him he slain, and *be laid in the ‘ful’
And if any one stand up for him, let them both be worthy of
one law. And whoever neglects this, and will not further it,
as is the decree of us all, let him pay to the king cxx. shillings.


iL,


> These are the articles of peace and the agreements, which
king Ethelred and all his ‘witan’ have made with the
army that °Anlaf, and Justin, and Guthmund, Stegita’s
son, were with.


l. That first: that secular ‘frith’ stand between king
Ethelred and all his people, and all the army to which the king
gave the money, according to the treaty which Sigeric arch-
bishop, and Aithelweard ‘ ealdorman,’ and Aélfric ‘ealdorman,’
made; when they obtained of the king that they might buy
‘frith’ for those districts which they, under the king’s hand,
ruled over. And if any naval armament commit ravages in
England, that we shall have the aid of them all; and that we
shall find meat for them, while they shall be with us. And
that every of those lands which keep the ‘frith’ towards any
one of those who ravage England, be outlaw to us and to the
whole army.


OF MERCHANT-SHIPS.


2. And let every merchant-ship have ‘frith, that comes
within port, though it be a hostile ship, if it be not driven.


on B. Yay" B. Syopne B. 8hi B. 1 py foprycece A.
vpelpciz B.


it is said—‘ pba var Olafr Tryggvason half pritogr er hann -var
skirdr. p@ voro lidin fra holdgan vars herra Jesti Krists 993 ar.—
Olaf Tryggvason was twenty-five years when he was baptised: there
were then elapsed from the incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ 993
years. Justin (Jésteinn) was apparently the maternal unele of Olaf.
See ‘Saga Olafs Kontings Tryggvasonar,’ vol. 1. p. 147-8 and p. 186.
See also his Saga in Snorre, and the metrical fragment on the battle
of Malden in the ‘Analecta Anglo-Saxonica’ (Pref. p. vii. and
p- 121.), first published by Hearne at the end of Joh. Glaston. Chron.,
from a Cottonian manuscript no longer in existence.—7.]


286 JEDELREDES DOMAS.


Zedpiuen beo y hie erzleo to hpilene fud-bypiz 4 pa menn
up-etbepycan into pepe byyg- ponne habban pa men ypud 4
$ hy him mid-bpingaéd:.


Be DCS LYNINGES FRYD-MANNUM.


ur And zle agenpa ymd-manna fms hebbe- ge on lande
se on petepe- ge binnan muvan ge buran. Lyr sCdelpeder
cyngey yps-man cume on unymid land 4 ye hepe fep-co cume
heebbe yd hip perp y ealle np ehca. Lyp he ny rerp uppe
zecogen hebbe- oppon hule zepophtne- oppon geteld geylagen.
p he pap fd hebbe y ealle mp ahca. Ityp he hip ehta
bene zeman papa unpmd-manna ehva into huye pole hy
zhta 4 heebbe syle pmd 4 peoph zip he hine cyfe. Lyf ye
yy15-man fleo oppon feohte 4 nelle hine cypan gp hine man
orylea liege ungylde:-


Be DON DE MON ON SLIPE BEREAFOD SY.


iv. Iryp man beo et ny ehvan bepeapod y he pite of
hpilcum ypeipe- agyfe yceopey-man pa zhta oppon ganze feoppa
yum co 4 odyace 4 beo him yylp pipcas P he hic amhc name
ypa hic zp xeponpopd peer :-


BE MAN-SLELE.

v. Ing fEnghye man Demyene ofylea- pmzman fyugne- zylde
hme mid -xxx+ pundum obfon mon pone hand-dedan azyre-
4 50 ye Demiyea pone Enghycan eal ypa gzip [he] hine ofylea.
Lyy Enghyce man Denipene ppeel ofylea zylde hine mid punde
4 ye Demyca Enghycne eal ypa gip he hine ofylea. Lyp
eahta men beon ofylagene ponne ip } yd-bpec- binnan bypig
oppon buton. Binnan eahta mannum bete man f yullum


pepe:


Be FRID-BRELE BINNAN BYRIL.

vi. Lyf ne bmnan bymg gedon bid yeo yd-bpec sane
yeo bupuhpapu yylp vo 4 bezyce pa banan ‘cuce obpe deade”
heona nyhycan magay hearod pid heayde. Tryp hy nellan yape
ye ealdopman to. zip he nelle pape ye cyning to. zip he nelle
hege ye ealdopdom on ungpide:-


Veucne oppe


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELRED. 287


And though it be driven, and it flee to any ‘frith-burh,’ and the
men escape into the ‘ burh,’ then let the men, and what they
bring with them, have ‘ frith.’


OF THE KING'S ‘FRITH’-MEN.


8. And let every of our own ‘frith’-men have ‘ frith,’ both
by land and by water, both within port and without. If king
Ethelred’s ¢ frith’-man come into ‘ unfrith’ land, and the army
come thereto; let his ship and all his property have ‘frith’” I¢
he have drawn up his ship, or made a hut, or pitched a tent;
let him and all his property have ‘frith.’ If he bear his pro-
perty into a house, in common with the property of ¢ unfrith’~
men, let him forfeit his property, but himself have ‘ frith’ and
life, if he make himself known. If the ‘frith’-man flee or fight,
and will not make himself known; if he be slain, let him lie
uncompensated.


IN CASE ANY ONE BE ROBBED IN A SHIP.


4. If any man be robbed of his property, and he knows by
what ship, let the steersman give up the property; or let him
go, with four others, and be the fifth himself, and make denial,
and [declare] that he took it lawfully, as it was before agreed.


OF HOMICIDE.

5. If an Englishman slay a Dane, a freeman a freeman, let
him pay for him with xxx. pounds, or let the perpetrator be
delivered up; and let the Dane do the same by an Englishman,
if he slay him. If an Englishman slay a Danish thrall, let
him pay for him with a pound; and so a Dane, in like man-
ner, by an Englishman, if he slay him. If eight men be slain,
that then is ‘frith’-breach, within a * burh’ or without. Under
eight men, let ‘bot’ be made with the full ‘ wer.’


OF ‘ FRITH’-BREACH WITHIN A‘ BURH’

6. If the ‘frith’-breach be committed within a ‘ burh,’ let
the inhabitants of the ‘burh’ themselves go, and get the mur-
derers, living or dead, [or] their nearest kindred, head for
head. If they will not, let the ‘ealdorman’ go; if he will not,
let the king go; if he will not, let the ‘ealdordom’ lie in
‘unfrith.’


deabne Ms.


288 JEDELREDES DOMAE.


J€z eallum slyhe 4 ee ealpe pape henzunge 4 et eallum
pam heapmum pe zp pam gedon pepe xp p pid geyet pepe
man eall onpeig leave y nan man $ ne ppece ne bote ne bidde.
And f nadop ne hy ne pe ne undepron odpeyr Pealh ne odper
peor ne odpey gefan:-


BE LANDES-MANNES TYPTe.


vu. And gif man yecge on landey-mann # he opf ysrele
oppon man yloge y hit yecge an yeeié-man y an landey-man
ponne ne beo he naney anbdyecey pypde. And zip heopa menn
lean upe ehta ponne beod hy uclaze ze pid hy ge pid up y
ne beo nanpe bote peopde. Tpa 4 cpentizg puyend punda
golder 4 yeolpper mon geyealde pam hepe of /Engla-lande pid
Fyse:-


Be DON DE MAN LEFO DE plM LOSOD p,és.


vit. Lyf hpa ber6 $ him loyod pay cenne yepe he hic
*1-bero hpanon hic him come: yylle on hand y yecce boph
he binge np geceaman in peep hic berppecen bid. Ing he
lhuiendpe handa team gecenne 4 sy on odpe yeipe yepe he
vo-cymS heebbe ypa langne rypyc ypa peep-co zebypize. Serre
on pa hand fe hit lim yealde y bidde $ he clenpie zp he
meze. Ing he >*to-rehd bonne clenynod he pene pe hit ap
eet-berangen py. Lenne he yyppan hpanon nc him come.
Ing he cenne ofep -1- yeipa heebbe -1- pucena rypyc. gip he
cenne ofep -II- yeipa heebbe -11- pucena fypyc. syp he cenne
ofep -11- yeipa heebbe -111- pucena fypye. Ofop eallypa rela
yoipa ypa he cenne- hebbe ypa fela pycena rypyc. And cume
man zune peep hit zpoyt befangen beo:-


Be TEAMUM.
1x. pron prod $ man yeeolde ppypa tyman pep hic epeyc


befangen pepe 4 syppan fylgean cteame ypa hpep ypa man


lep- ms.


« The ms, reads ‘zp bero;’ an obvious mistake.
> The Ms. reads ‘to-zeoht.’ The present reading has been adopted


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELRED. 289


Let every slaying, and every harrying, and every injury,
that was committed before the ‘frith’ was established, be dis-
regarded; and let no man avenge them or ask for ‘bot.’ And
that neither they nor we harbour the other’s ‘ Wealh,’ nor the
other’s thief, nor the other’s foe.


OF ACCUSING A LANDSMAN.


7. And if it be said of a landsman that he has stolen cattle,
or slain a man; and one shipman and one landsman say it;
then let him not be entitled to any denial. And if their men
slay our property, then shall they be outlaws, both to them and
to us; and let them not be entitled to make any ‘bot.’ Twenty-
two thousand pounds of gold and silver were given to the army
in England for the ‘ frith.’


IN CASE ANY ONE ATTACH THAT WHICH HE HAD
LOST.


8. If any one attach that which he had lost, let him with
whom he attaches it declare whence it came to him; Jet him
deliver it back, and appoint a ‘borh’ that he will produce his
warrantor at the place where it is claimed. If he vouch to
warranty a living person, and he whom he vouches be in
another shire; let him have as long a term as is requisite
thereto. Let him deliver it up to the party who sold it to him,
and desire that he clear, if he can. If he accept, he then clears
him with whom it was first attached. Let him afterwards de-
clare whence it came to him. If he declare over 1. shire, let
him have a term of 1. week: if he declare over 11. shires, let
him have a term of 11. weeks: if he declare over 11. shires,
let him have a term of 111. weeks. Over as many shires as he
declares, let him have a term of as many weeks. And let the
parties always come to the place where it was first attached.


OF VOUCHINGS TO WARRANTY.
9. Formerly it stood, that everybody should vouch to war-


ranty thrice where it was first attached, and afterwards should


2 co-peohs ms.


at the suggestion of a learned friend. [Dr.Schmid has also adopted
*co-pehd.’— Z.]


* pa pind ?


290 JEDELREDES DOMAS.


co-cende, Da gepaeddan pican p hic betepe pape $ man
zeupe cymbde pep hic epee berangen peepe- spa lonze $ man
piyce hpep hic zvycandan polte. Dy lay pe mon unmbhtgne
man to fFeon 4 to lange yop hip azenan ypencte. Spunce
mape yebe unjuht gzeycpeon on hip hanbda ycobe 4 leyye sepe
pep ayhc onyppece. Papige eac hine yepe hiy agen berod
[P] he to zxlcan teame habbe gecpypne boph y beopgze $
he apoh ne beyo- py ley pe hine mon ypence ypa he odepne
man pohte. Lryp hpa to deadan tyme- buton he ypue-noman
hebbe pe hic cleenyie- zerputelie mb geprcnyyye zp he mxze
he puht cenne yepe Inc tyme 4 clenymge hine yylpne md
pam. Donne bid ye deadsa bermicen buton he ypind hebbe
pe hine mid juhte cleenymian ypa he yylp yeolde gp he mehte
oppe huey pepe. Ing he fonne * pepe pneonda’ herd pe P
don duppon fonne bepyt ye team ypa pel ypa he huey pepe y
yylp andyeee pophte- ycent ponne peor-peyltiz yepe hic on
handa herd. soppam a bid tandpaec ypiSepe ponne onyazu.
€ac becpeox teame gif hpa vo-pehd 4 na pupdop team ne cend
ac agnian piles ne meeg mon pey pypnan gir Zecpype Zepicner
him to agenunge pymd foppam agnung bid nep fam pe heerd
fonne pam pe eptep-pppecd:.


lanbyet Ms.


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELRED. 291


follow the warranty wherever it might be vouched. The
*witan’ then decreed, that it were better the warranty should
always be made where it was first attached, until it could be
known where it would stop; lest any one should cause a man
of feeble means to toil too far and too long for his own. Let
him toil the more, in whose hands lay the unjust gain, and less
him who lawfully claims it. Let him also be cautious who
attaches his own, that, at every avowry, he have a true ‘borh,’
and let him take care that he attach not wrongfully; lest any
one annoy him as he thought to annoy another man. If any
one vouch his warranty to a dead man, (unless he have heirs
who will clear it;) let him who vouches it show by witness, if
he can, that he justly makes declaration; and thereby let him
clear himself. Then will the dead be stigmatized, unless he
have friends who will legally clear him, as he himself should, if
he might, or were alive. If then he have those friends, who
dare do so, then will the warranty fail, as well as if he were
alive, and made legal denial himself. Then will he be held
guilty of theft, who had it in his possession; for denial is al-
ways stronger than affirmation. Likewise during the vouching
to warranty; if any one accept, and make no further avowry,
but will possess it, this may not be refused, if true witness make
way for him to possession ; because possession is always nearer
to him who has than to him who claims.


292 JEDELREDES DOOMAS.


III.


*Diy pyndon pa laza fe JCdelped cyng y Inp prcan gensedd
habbad ac Panevingc co ppidey-bore:.


1. Dec iy. $ np zd prande ppa fond ppa hic rypmere
ycrod on Inp ylopena dazum. $ $ py bor-leay $ he md hip
agenpe hand yyld. y $ spd f ye ealdopmann y kingey gepéra
on *yip buphga ‘zepincde yylle bece man $ mid %-x1- hund.
4 Pp sud P man yylled on *buph-gzepincde bece man $ md
-vi- hundji. y > man yylle on p&pencake bete man } mid
hundji. zip hic man bpecd. y $ man yylle on “eala-huye beve
man $ et deadum menn mid -vi- healp-mapice- y et cpicon
mid -x1I+ Gpan:-


mu. And $ $ man cyde mid Zepicneyye P nan man P ne
apende at cpicon fe ma pe et defdon, And gZange zle man
peey co gepicneyye be he duppe on bam halizdéme, ypeman pe
him man on hand yyls:.


m1. And *lind-cép y fhlapopdey gipu- pe he on phe aze


1zepmneda ws. 2 buphga


a (The text is from H.—T7.]

b The usual import of ‘zepinz5’ or ‘zepincd’ is ‘dignity’ or
‘honour,’ and if the term were confined to the five-burgs, we might
perhaps translate it ‘the honour of the five-burgs.’ But taken in
conjunction with what follows, and the persons who bestow the ‘zm,’
the better inference seems to be, that it means the court of the five-
burgs, and that it is used in the sense of the old German ‘ Gedinge:’
—‘In publico placito quod Gedinge vocatur, curiam in Lautemberg
Sah eteye resignaverunt.’ Dip. 1. an. 1253. ‘ Dat men in den boeme
voor dat Steenhuys houden sal drie Gadinghe os iaers: That three
Gadinghe shall be held during the year at the tree before the stone-
house. Hali., voc. Gedinge.

© The laws ascribed to the Confessor give the following illustration
of this wite and its application: —‘ Pax data manu Regis, et octo
dierum quibus primum coronatus est, et pax predictorum festorum,
et pax per breve Regis, unum habent modum emendationis, et hoc
judicio quod majus habetur in scyra ubi pax fracta fuerit; verbi
gratia in Danelaga per xvi11. hundreda, qui numerus complet septies
viginti libras et quatuor, quoniam forisfacturam hundredi Dani,
Norwegienses vit. lib. habebant. Multiplicatis igitur octo per octo-
decem, faciunt centum et quadraginta quatuor. Et hoc non sine


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELRED. 293


IIL.


*'These are the laws which king Ethelred and his ¢ witan’
have decreed at Wantage, as ‘ frith-bot.’


1, That is: that his ‘ grith’ stand henceforth as it originally
stood in the days of his forefathers: that that be ‘bot’-less which
he shall give with his own hand; and for the ‘grith’ which the
‘ealdorman’ and king’s reeve, in the assembly of the ° five-burgs,
give, let ‘bot’ be made with °x11. hundred; and for the ¢ grith’
which is given in a ‘burh’-assembly, let ‘bot’ be made with
vi. hundred; and for that which is given in a wapentake, let
‘bot’ be made with a hundred, if it be broken; and for that
which is given in an @alehouse, let ‘bot’ be made, for a dead
man, with vi. half marks, and for a living one with x11. ores.


2. And that that which is declared with witness, no man
pervert, either respecting the living or the dead. And let every
one go to the witness of that which he dare swear, on the relic
that is given into his hand.


8. And that ¢‘land-cop,’ and £ ‘hlaford’s gifu,’ which he has
pinde ms. 3 peep Ms.


causa: De istis enim octo libris Rex habebat centum solidos, et
consul comitatus quinquaginta, qui tertium habebat denarium de
forisfacturis. Decanus autem episcopi in cujus decanatu pax fracta
fuerat reliquos decem.’

« Wilkins, in his notes to the Custumal of Hen. I., cites the fol-
lowing authorities in illustration of this custom :—‘ Diem noctemque
continuare potando nulli probrum. Crebre ut inter vinolentos rixe,
raro convitiis sepius cede et vulneribus transiguntur. Sed et de
reconciliandis invicem inimicis et jungendis affinitatibus, et adscis-
cendis principibus, de pace denique et bello plerumque in conviviis
consultant, tanquam nullo magis tempore aut ad simplices cogita-
tiones pateat animus aut ad magnas incalescat.’ Zac. de Mor. Ger-
manorum. ‘The Germans still use to conclude of bargains, and
ratify friendship between parties, by drinking together, as appears by
that phrase they have,—den Frieden trincken—pacem bibere.’ A
Discourse concerning the Lord’s Supper, by R.C.

e Jt may seem superfluous to remark, that among all the Ger-
manic tribes every transfer of real property was made in a court of
justice.

: € What in later times has been called ‘infeudation.’ ‘And re man
pe erfleo ppam hiy hl@ponde. . . . poze ealley pay pe he age and


294 JEDELREDES DOODDAS.


to Zipanne- 4 *lah-cOp 4 “pic-popd 4 gepicney- $ f prande p
Iie nan man ne apénde. 4 $ man habbe zemoc on exlcum
pepentake- 4 gan fc pa yloeycan -x1- Pegnay 4 se Zepepa md
‘J ypeptan on pam hahgdome fe heom man on hand yylle- $
Ing nellan nenne yacleapan man ‘yopyecgean ne nenne yacne
pophélan. 4 niman ponne pa wtiht-bypian men- fe md pam
Zeperan [pace] habbad- 4 heopa zle pylle -vr- healy-mane pedd-
healp land-pfican 4 healp pepentake. y exle bicge him lage
mb -xit- Opan+ healp land-pican healy peepenvake. y ale taht-
bymz man ganze to ppyrealdan opdale oppe gilde yeopep-
silde:.


1v. Ing ye hlaopd fonne hine Jabian pylle md tpam zodum
fezenum- } he neegpe Feor-z11d ne gulde pippan p semoc per
on Bpémbdune ne he bevih{cJlod nepe- ganze to anfealbum
opdale opfe gilde -111--zylde. Ing he fonne ful beo- ylea man
hine $ Inm fopbepyte ye spedpa- y gi he } opdal yopbuge
gilde anzylde pam agenan yyian- ¥ land-piican -xx- Opan- 4 Ja
eps to fam Gpdale. And gzip ye Azgena-fyiigea nelle  opbdal
gzeyecean zilde -xx- onan 4 yy hip ppeece yoplépen- 4 he feah
gange fam land-jican to opdale opfe azipe tpy-gilde:.


hip dzener yeoper and 76 ye hlapopd co pam &htan anb co hip lanbe
pe he him &p yealte.’ Cnut, c.75. ‘And the man who shall flee
from his lord... . let him lose all he possesses, and his own life;
and let the lord seize his possessions and his land which he previously
gave him.’


4 The books interpret this term, ‘redemptio privilegiorum que
per utlagationem fuerint amissa.’ This exposition seems confirmed
by the circumstance of tiht-bysig men and moneyers being the only
persons spoken of as buying their law. In the old Danish Law it is
said:—‘ Item hwilcken man som uthfar aff stadhen meth huozfrue
och gotz, oc commer ey in i stadhen igen innen dagh oc aar at boo,
han miste bylagh oc byret oc bor at kdbe sigh thet igen a ny.’
Christopher of Bavaria's Copenhagen Law, v. § 33. ‘Whoever goes
away from the town with his wife and goods, and does not return
to dwell therein within a year and a day, has forfeited his town law
and town-right, and must buy it to himself again.’ In the old
Sleswic Law the term itself is found :—‘ Sciendum est autem quod
rex habet quoddam speciale debitum in Sleswick quod dicitur
Leghkép, quo redimitur ibi hereditas morientium, non tamen om-
nium sed quorundam, quia nulli viri (on) uxorati emunt illam im-
munitatem, et tantummodo cives uxorati et omnes hospites de ducatu
Saxonie, de Frysia, de Hyslandia, de Burgundcholm, et aliunde.
Hujusmodi hospites nisi redemerint hereditatem suam predicto precio


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELRED. 295


rightfully to give, and *‘lah-cop,’ and >< wit-word,’ and witness,
stand so that no man pervert them: and that a ‘gemot’ be
held in every wapentake; and the xu. senior thanes go out,
and the reeve with them, and swear on the relic that is given
to them in hand, that they will accuse no innocent man, nor
conceal any guilty one: and let them then take the ‘tiht-bysig’
men who have to do with the reeve, and let each of them give
a ‘wed’ of vi. half marks, half to the ‘land-rica,’ and half to
the wapentake; and let every one buy himself law with x1.
ores, half to the ‘land-rica,’ half to the wapentake; and let
every ‘ tiht-bysig’ man go to the threefold ordeal, or pay four-
fold.


4. But if the lord be willing to clear him with two good
thanes, that he had never paid ‘ theof-gild’ since the ‘ gemot’
was at ‘ Bromdun,’ nor had he been accused; let him go to
the single ordeal, or pay threefold. If he then be foul, let
him be smitten, so that his neck break; and if he avoid the
ordeal, let him pay an ‘angylde’ to the proprietor, and to the
‘land-rica’ xx. ores, and go afterwards to the ordeal. And if
the proprietor will not attend the ordeal, let him pay xx. ores,
and let his suit be lost; and let him, nevertheless, go to the
ordeal, before the ‘land-rica,’ or pay twofold.


vel debito, quod est Lagh-kép, dum libram viri tenere possunt,
regem habebunt heredem. Nullius defuncti substantia ponenda est
sub fidejussione per annum et diem, nisi illius tantum qui emerat
lagh, et quamvis possessor in vita sua emerat lagh, tamen non in-
ventis heredibus infra diem et annum, portio ejus erit regis.’ c.29.

> In the old Swedish Law the term ‘wits ord’ had a twofold
meaning: 1. ‘ Facultas probandi (ga wits ord)—fidem et jus pro-
bandi habere.’ ‘Dela twe um ett marke, hawa bade ett mzrke ok
anner hawer bolsmerke, gifs tha thém wald ok witsordh, sit at
werja, sum bolsmerke hawer. Wesm. Z.B.B. c.64. ‘Si de sig-
nolis orta fuerit, eodemque signo bini usi fuerint, sed alter eorum
signo fundo adherente; melior hujus conditio sit isque jus habeat
rem suam vindicandi. Jhre, in voce Bomaerke. 2. ‘ Notat tesseram
que data fidem faciet.’ * Jéns Westgothe hade i sina hosor ett stycke
pergament, som honom witnesbyrd och witsord wara skulle. ‘Jo-
annes Westrogotus in femoralibus habuit particulam charte pergar
meng, quze ipsi pro tessera esset.’ Zhre, in voce. The ‘ witnesbyrd
och witsord’ of this last extract correspond, in ah etymological sense,
to the ‘ pic-pond” and ‘ zepicney’ of the text; but as there were cases
where the testimony of witnesses was sufficient to establish the fact
in dispute, we ought perhaps to take ‘ pic-popd’ in its ordinary legal
sense, and consider it as equivalent to the wager of law.

¢ This term occurs in the old Danish Law in the same sense: —


296 JEDELREDES DOMAS.


v. And zip hpa bophleay Opp habbe y Janbd-yiican Inv beyon-
agipe Opp y gilde -xx- 6pan:-


vi. And zxle viond age gepeald pa hpawden he pille ypa
pete ppa iyen. ¥ ele ceam y ele Opdal beo on pay kyningey
bymg. 4 Zip he $ opdal roprleo gilde ye boph hine be hy
pepie:-


vir. And zip hpa peor clenyian pylle lecze an -c- to pedde-
healf land-pican y healp eingey Zeperan binnan popt- y ganze
co pyrmfealdan opdale. Ing he clene beo «xt pam opbdale
nime fipp hy még. gig he ponne yil beo liege pap he l@z 4
gilde an -cs:-


vit. And ele mynetepe pe man cwhd Pf raly feoh ploge
yyppan hic sopboden py ganze to ppimrealdan opdale- zip he
yal beo ylea hine man. And nan man ne age nwenne myne-
vepe buton cyng. And ele mynetene pe betihclad yi biegze
him Jah md -xir- Opan:.


1x. And nan man hpydep ne sled buton he habbe tpézpa
cpyppa manna gepictneyye y he healde -111- mht hyde 4 hearod.
4 yeeapey eallppa. And zip he ba hyde @p pam apeg sylle
gubde -xx- Opan:.-


x. And ele rlyma beo flyma on zlcum lande pe on anum
yy

x1, And nan man nage nane yocne ofep cyngzey pezen buton
eyng yylp


xu. And xt cyngzer pp&ce lecge man -vi- healy-mape pedd.
4 xv eopler 4 bipceopey -xi- Span pedd. y xt xleum pezene
“Vie Opan pedd:


xut And gi man hpilene man ved $ he pone man fede pe
upey hlapopdey x15 cobpocen habbe- ladize hine mid *pminna


‘ Tha skal then Mand ther forsagen er werge sig mid neis loug som
gamle sedwaane er. Eric's Copenhagen Low, c. 89. ‘ Then shall
the man who is accused defend himself with an oath of denial, as the
old custom is.’

a This term does not appear to have been current in the South of


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELRED. 297


5. And if any one have cattle for which no ‘borh’ has been
given, and the ‘land-ricas’ attach its let him surrender the
cattle, and pay xx. ores.


6. And let every accuser have power of whichever he will,
whether water or iron; and let every vouching to warranty, and
every ordeal, be in the king’s ‘ burh;? and if he flee from the
ordeal, let the ‘ borb’ pay for him according to his ¢ wer.’


7. And if any one will clear a thief, let him deposit one c. as
‘wed,’ half to the ‘land-rica,’ and half to the king’s reeve
within port; and let him go to the threefold ordeal. If he be
clean at the ordeal, let him take up his kinsman; but if he be
foul, let him lie where he lay, and pay one c.


8. And let every moneyer, who is accused of striking false
money since it was forbidden, go to the threefold ordeal; and
if he be foul, let him be slain. And let no man have a moneyer,
except the king. And let every moneyer who is accused buy
him law with x11. ores.


9. And let no one slay an ox, except he have the witness of
two true men, and that he keep for three nights the hide and
the head; and the same with a sheep. And if he dispose of
the hide before that, let him pay xx. ores.


10. And let every ‘flyma’ be a ‘flyma’ in every land, who
is so in one.


11. And let no man have any ‘socn’ over a king’s thane,
except the king himself.


12. And in a king’s suit, let every man deposit a ‘wed’ of
vi. half marks; and in an ‘eorl’s,’ and a bishop’s, a ‘wed’ of
XII. ores; and in every thane’s, a ‘wed’ of vi. ores.


18. And if any man be accused of feeding the man who has
broken our lord’s ‘grith,’ let him clear himself with *thrice


England. It is of frequent occurrence in the old Danish Law :—
‘Nefnd skal ey i Lund ganga: for nefnd skal ganga threnne tylter.’
Town Law of Lund. ‘ The nefnd shall not be in use in Lund: three
tylter oaths (oaths of x11.) shall be used instead of it.’


298 JEDELREDES DOOAS.


*XIIe y ye Zepepa namige pa lade. And zip hine man md him
*berane bedn hig begen aney pihtey peopde. y P d6m ytande
pap pegenay yamméle beon. zip hig yacan ptande P hig -vi-
yeczad. And pa pe pep ofepdyipene beod zilbe heopa elec
-vi+ healy-mape. And pan pegen dze tpezen coytay “lure oppe
lage 4 he ponne lupe Zeceore- ycande } ypa peeye ypa ye oom.
And yepe ofepn P lade gebarie oppe yepe hy yylle gude «vr.
healg-manpe:.


xiv. And yepe sieve fincpydd 4 uncparod on ny ape on hre-
nan man on hiy ypye-numan ne ypece eptep hiy daeze:-


xv. And sepe peayaS man leohtan déze y he Ine kyfe to
“pnpim cfinan- } he ne beo naney ppySer peopde:-


xvi. And pa mynetepay fe mne puda pypced ofpe elley-
hpeep- $ fa bion heopa yeopey yeyloiz buton ye cyning heom
aman pulle:.


a If the text be correct, there seems no other mode of interpreting
this passage than by referring ‘ him’ to the thief, and taking the verb
in the sense of the old Frisic ‘ bifare:’—*‘ Sa hwersama enne menotere
bifari mith falske tha mith fade: Wherever a moneyer is detected
having forged or base coin,’ &c.

> The same rule prevailed in the old Danish Law :—< Sed si illi
XII. in unum convenire non poterint, major pars przvalebit, et quic-
quid juramento suo decreverit. Priv. Civ. Ripensis, an. 1296.

¢ The laws of nearly every Germanic tribe recognize this prin-
ciple. In the laws of Soest it is said :—‘ Causa que coram advocato
vel sculteto juste vel amicabiliter decisa fuerit rata esse debet et
firma.’ c.16. And in Sweden :—‘ Epter thet kennas skal i retta eller
minne: Quoniam res examinari debet jure aut amice transigi.’ Ihre,
in voce. The day appointed for the amicable settlement of differences
was called a love-day,—dies amoris,—-freundlicher Tag. Germ.

* And now is religion a ridere, a romere by streetis,

A ledar of lovedayes, and a loud begere.—P. Plowman, fol. 1. a.


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELRED. 299


x11; and let the reeve name the ‘lad.’ And if any man *take
him about with him, Jet them both be worthy of one justice.
And Jet doom stand where thanes are of one voice: if they
disagree, let that stand which vu. of them say. And let those
who are there out-voted pay, each of them, vr. half marks.
And where a thane has the choice of two things, ‘love or law,
and he then choose love, let that stand as firmly as the doom.
And whoever after that permits a ‘lad,’ or whoever gives it, let
him pay vu. half marks,


14. And he who sits, without contest or claim on his pro-
perty, during life; that no one have an action against his heir
after his day.


15. And he who robs a man by light day, and he declare it
in ‘three ‘tiins;’ that he be not entitled to any ‘ frith.’


16. And the moneyers who work within a wood, or else-
where; that they be liable in their lives, unless the king will
be merciful to them.


4 This must mean either the three towns nearest to the place where
the robbery was committed, which is the more probable solution, or
to the residence of the party robbed. In the Sachsenspiegel it is
said :—‘ Begiebt sich aber eine handhaftiger That von Dieberey oder
von Raub da ein Mann mit begriffen wirt, da mag man wol umb
kiesen einen Gograffen zu den minsten von dreien Dorfern, die da zu
Gericht gehen; und die sollen die That richten, ob man des belehnten
Richters nicht haben mag.’ Jus Provin. Saxon., lib.t.¢.55. ‘If a
theft be committed which is hand-habend, or a robbery in which the
offender is taken, a go-graf may be chosen from at least chree villages,
and they shall form a court and judge the case, provided the official
judge (he who has the office in fee) cannot be had.’


300 JEDELREDES DOME.


IV.
DE INSTITUTIS 'LUNDONIE,’


2ET PRIMUM,’


3QUZ PORTE ‘OBSERVABANTUR.


1. Ealdredesgate et *Cripelesgate, i.e.’ portas illas, 7obser-
vabant custodes.


DE TELONIO DANDO AD BYLYNGESGATE.


11. Ad Billingesgate, si advenisset una navicula, unus obolus

thelonei dabatur: si major et haberet ®siglas, unus denarius.

Si adveniat ceol vel hulcus, et ibi jaceat, quatuor d. ad telofi.?

De navi plena lignorum, unum lignum ad teloii."° In ebdo-

mada ™paii telofi '?111. diebus: die Dominica, et die Martis, et

die Jovis. Qui ad pontem “venisset cum uno bato, ubi piscis
inesset, ipse mango unum ob dabat in teloii: et de una majori

nave, unum d. Homines de Rotomago, qui veniebant cum

vino vel craspice, dabant rectitudinem sex sot de magna navi,

et vicesimum frustum de ipso craspice.’ Flandrenses, et Pon-
teienses, et Normannia, et Francia, monstrabant res suas et
Yextolneabant. Hogge, et Leodium, et Nivella, “qui “per

terras ibant,’ ostensionem dabant et teloii. Et homines Impe-
ratoris, qui veniebant *°in navibus suis, bonarum legum digni
*disso- tenebantur, sicut et nos. Prater discarcatam Janam, et * dis-
lutum ?* sutum unctum et tres porcos vivos licebat eis emere in naves
suas; et non licebat eis aliquod forceapum facere burhmannis,

et dare telonium suum; et in sancto Natali Domini duos


1London Br. primo Br. %quod Br. 4observabuntur. Br.
5Ciryclegate Br. Cirpilegate Hk. add. M. 7observabunt Af
Sgulas R. 7. 9dentur.add.Br. Wdetur.add. Br. )!J pannum
Hk. ‘2detur add. Br. '3add. Br. ‘veniat Br. ‘Sdabatur Br.
16/ not in Br. M. Hk. 17 extoneabant. WM. Hk. 18g@ Hk. que R.
19 pertransibant A. 2%cum Br. M. Hk.


2(The text is from 7. collated with R. and M.; the rubrics are
chiefly from JZ—T.]


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELRED. 301


4grisengos pannos, et unum brunum, et decem libras piperis,
et cirotecas quinque hominum, et duos caballinos ?tonellos
aceto plenos, et totidem in Pascha; de dosseris cum gallinis
1. gallina telof, et Sde uno dossero cum ovis v. ova telonei, si
veniant ad mercatum. *Smeremangestre, °que mangonant in
caseo et butiro, x11. diebus ante Natale Domini, unum den,
et septem diebus °post Natale’, unum alium®,


DE TELONIO RETENTO.


nt. Si portireva vel tungravio °compellet aliquem, vel alius
preepositus, quod telonium supertenuerit, et homo respondeat,
quod nullum tolneum concelaverit, quod juste dare debuisset,
juret hoc se vii°, et sit quietus. Si appellet quod teloneum
dedit, inveniat cui “dedit, et sit quietus. Si tune hominem
invenire non possit cui “dederit, reddat ipsum tolneum, et
persolvat quinque libras regi. Si cacepollum advocet, quod
ei tolneum dedit, et ille neget, perneget ad Dei judicium, et
in nulla alia lada.


DE HAMSOCNA, VEL IN PORTU VEL IN VIA
REGIA.


1v. Et diximus, homo qui hamsocnam faciet intra portum
sine licentia, et summam infracturam agat de placito “unge-
bendro, vel qui aliquem innocentem “afiliget in via regia, *si
jaceat,’ jaceat in ungildan “kere. Si pugnet antequam sibi
rectum postulet ac vivat, emendet regis burhbrece quinque
libras. Si “curet amicitiam “ipsius porti, reddat nobis tri-
ginta sot emendationis, si rex hoe concedat nobis.


DE FALSARIIS ET EIS CONSENTIENTIBUS, ET DE
CUM FALSA MONETA DEPREHENSIS, ET DE
MONETARIIS.


v. Etiam dixerunt, quod nichil eis interesse videbatur inter
falsarios et mercatores, qui bonam pecuniam portant ad


Igisengos Hk. ?tolennos M. colennos Br. Hk. not in Hh.
4mongestre sinere Br. sinem. Hk. M. ‘qui Br. Spost Br.
M. Hk. ante T.R. 7Domini add. Br. M. Hk. 8 denarium ad the-
loneum add. Br.  %compellat Br. Wdebuit Br MNded Hh.
ded Hk. dedit Br. Jagat Br. ‘'ungebendeo R. 'affligat
Br. 16 notin Br. Wakere Br. ekere R. ‘'8curat M. Hh.
19ipsi Br.


nm 7 >


802 JEDELREDES DOMAS.


falsarios, et ab ipsis emunt, ut inpurum et minus appendens
Operentur, et inde mangonant et barganniant, et eos etiam qui
conos faciunt in occultis, et vendunt falsariis pro pecunia,
et incidunt alterius 7monetarii nomen in eo,’ et non *ipsius
inmundi.” Unde visum est sapientibus omnibus, quod isti tres
homines unius rectitudinis essent digni. Et si aliquis eorum
accusetur, sit Anglicus sit transmarinus, ladiet se pleno ordalio.
Et constituerunt, monetarii Scur manum perdant, et ponatur
super ipsius monete fabricam. Et monetarii qui in nemoribus
‘operantur, vel *alicubi similibus fabricant, vite: suze culpabiles
sint, nisi rex velit eorum misereri.


SDE SONANTIBUS PECUNIAM PURAM.


vi. Et praecipimus, ne quis pecuniam puram et recte appen-
dentem sonet, monetetur 7in quocunque portu monetetur,’ in
regno meo, super overhyrnessam meam.


DE MERCATORIBUS QUI FALSUM ET *LACCUM
AFFERUNT AD PORTUM.


vi. Et diximus de mercatoribus, qui falsum et *lacum
afferunt ad portum, ut advocent, si possint; 7si non possint,”
were suz °culpa sit,” vel vitee suse, sicut rex 'volet; vel
eadem lada se innoxient quam prediximus, quod in ipsa
pecunia nil inmundum sciebant, unde suam_negotiationem
exercuerunt; et habeat postea dampnum illud ex incuria sua,
ut cambiat ab institutis monetariis purum et recte appendens.
Et portireve, qui falsi hujus consentanei fuerint, ejusdem
censure digni sint cum falsis monetariis, nisi rex indulgeat eis,
vel se possint adlegiare eodem 'cyra%, vel ordalio preedicto.


DE SUASIONE REGIS CONTRA FALSUM OPERANTES.


vil. Et rex suadet et mandat episcopis suis, et comitibus,
et aldremannis, et preepositis omnibus, ut curam adhibeant de
illis qui tale falsum operantur et portant per patriam, sicut
preemissum est utrobique cum Danis et Anglis.


’ monetam mundam Br. monetarii unde in eo Hk. 2% ipsam im-
mundam Br. %quod Br. 4notin Br. Salibi BrT. 6 This
and the following rubrics not in M. 7! in the other mss., but not in R.
Sjactum Br.  culpabiles sint Br. M. velit Br. Msirath Br.
syrad Hk.


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELRED. 303


DE MONETARIIS ET UBI ERUNT.


1x. Et ut monetarii pauciores sint quam antea fuerint; in
omni summo portu 1, et in omni alio portu sit unus
Tmonetarius; et illi habeant suboperarios suos in suo crimine ;
quod purum “*faciant, et recti ponderis, per eandem witam
quam prediximus. Et ipsi qui Sportus custodiunt, efficiant,
‘per overhirnessam meam, ut omne pondus ‘sit marcatum ad
pondus’ quo pecunia mea recipitur, et eorum singulum sig-
netur, ita °quod xv. ore libram faciant. Et custodiant omnes
monetam, sicut vos docere precipio, et omnes elegimus.


ladd. M. 2faciunt M. porto M. porcos R. ‘super M. Hh.
57 marcatii ad pondus sit M.Hk. ‘cur MR.


304 JEDELREDES DOMAS.


V.


IN NOMINE DOMINI,
ANNO DOMINICZE INCARNATIONIS M.VIIL


*Diy ay peo Zep&dney pe Engla 'eyngz- 4 egdep Ze ZehAdode
ge leepede pican *zecupan  °zepzeddan:-


1 Dec ip ponne &peyet. $ pe ealle &nne Lod IGpian y
‘peopdians 4 anne cpipcendém geopne healdan- 4 *ealcne
heBenddm mid ealle °dpeoppan. 4 $ pe habbad ealle ezSep ze
mid popde ze md peddse Zepreeypctnod- # pe undep Gnum cyne-
d6me &nne cyuycendom healdan pillad. And per hlapopdey
zepédney y hip prcena 1y- f man puhte lage up-anépe- y elce
unlage gzeopne apyllee y $ man léte beon ezhpylene man
puhtey 7pypde- 4 & man ymd y fpeondyeipe pihtlice healde-
®*innan piyan eapde- op Lrobde 4 sop popolde:.”


u. And Gpey hlapopdey gep&dney y hip picena iy- $ man
cyjuycene menn 4 unfoppophte of eapde ne yylle- ne hupu on
heedene ledde. ac beopze man geopne $ man pa yapla ne fop-
rape pe Cpyc mid hy agenum life gebohte:.


11. And finer hlapopdey Zep#dnep y hip pitena 1p. p man
cjuycene men fon ealley to lyclum vo dedde ne “pondéme. ac
eller gep&de man fmdlice yreopa yolce tO peapre. y ne fop-
ypille fop lyclum Lobe hand-zepeone- y hiy agenne ceap pe
he de6ne gebohte:-


1v. And Gper hlapopder Zep¥Hdner y hy prcena iy- f elcer
hader men geopne gebugan+ fon Lsode y ron "populde- ele vo
pam mhve- pe him vo-zebymge. y hupu-pinga Loder pedpay-
biycopay 4 abbuday- munecay 4 mynecena- pypeoytay y nunnan-
v6 pihte gebugan- 4 pegollice hbban- 4 fop eall cpiycen folc
pingian Zeopne:-


leyninge ?zecupon ‘zepebdon ‘4pupdian ‘alene 6 apuppan
7pupse Snot in D. “notin D. yopsembe | poplte


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELRED. 305


V.


IN NOMINE DOMINI,
ANNO DOMINIC INCARNATIONIS M.VIII.


*This is the ordinance that the king of the English, and
both the ecclesiastical and lay ‘ witan,’ have chosen and
advised :


1. This then is first: that we all love and worship one God,
and zealously hold one Christianity, and every heathenship
totally cast out: and this we all have, both with word and with
‘ wed,’ confirmed ; that, under one kingship, we will observe
one Christianity. And the ordinance of our lord and of his
‘witan’ is; that just law be set up, and every unlawfulness
carefully abolished; and that every man be regarded as entitled
to right; and that peace and friendship be lawfully observed,
within this land, before God and before the world.


2. And the ordinance of our lord and of his ‘witan’ is;
that Christian men, and uncondemned, be not sold out of the
country, especially into a heathen nation: and be it zealously
guarded against, that those souls perish not that Christ bought
with his own life.


3. And the ordinance of our lord and of his ‘ witan’ is;
that Christian men, for all too little, be not condemned to
death: but in general let mild punishments be decreed, for the
people’s need; and Jet not for a little God’s handywork and
his own purchase be destroyed, which he dearly bought.


4. And the ordinance of our lord and of his ‘witan’ is;
that men of every order readily submit, before God and before
the world, each to that law which is appropriate to him: and
above all, let the servants of God, bishops and abbots, monks
and mynchens, priests and nuns, submit to the law, and live
according to their rule, and fervently intercede for all Christian


people.


* (The text is from G.; the variations are from D.—T-.]


306 JEDELREDES DOMAS.


v. And per hlapopder gepHdney y Iny prcena 21y- $ muneca
gehpyle pe Gce y¥ of mynyctpe 4 pezoley ne z¥me- 96 ypa
him peapy iy. gebuge geopne incO mynyepe md eallum edd-
méccum: 4 mipd&ba Zeppice- y béve ypide zeopne f he dbpocen
hebbe. zepence popd y pedd pe he Lode becéhre:-


vi. And ye munuc fe mynytep nabbe- cume %O peipe-
biycope- 4 'tp¥pme hine yylpne pid Lod 4 pid men- * he
hupw pned ping panan-yopd ‘healdan pille. $ y+ np clénmiyye-
‘4jmunuclice yepfidpane- 4 pedpian ny Dpihene- ypa pel ypa he
becyc mage. 4 zp he $ zel&yce- ponne bid he pypde p hine
man pe bet healde- punige pap he punige:-


vir. And candnicay- pep yed ap yI P hi beddd-epn y ylep-
epn habban magan- healdan heoyia mynytep md yuhte 4 mid
clénneyye- ypa heopa pegol caece. Soppon yuh 1p $ he polize
pene ape- yepe } nelle:.


vi. And ealle mayye-ppeoycay pe biddad 4 lepad- p hi
beopgan heom yylpum pid Lrodep yppe:-


1x. Ful geopne hi pican $ hi na@gan md mhte puph Shemed-
ping piper gemanan. y yepe pey geypican pille y clénneyye
healdan- heebbe he Lobdey 7milcye- 4 paep-c6-eacan- c6 *popold-
*peopdycipes $ he s¥ pegen-pepey 4 pexen-mhter ” pypde-
ge on lige ge on legene. ¥ yepe P nelle “P Iny habe sebymze-’
pamze hy ’peopd-yeipe- ze ron [rode ze ron * popolde:-


x. And eghpyle cmycen man edc unpht haemed geopne
Fopbuge- 4 godcunde laza puhtlice healde. y y¥ ele cipice on
Loder gide 4 on pay cynger 4 on ealley cpiyteney folcey.
4 “mg man heonan-fopd eipican ne pedpige- ne cipic-man-
gunge mid unjiht ne macie- ne cipic-pén ne fege- buton
biycopey zepehte:-


x1. And gelépte man Lrober zeqhta seopne zeghpylcee geape.
P ip- pulh-zelmeyyan -xv- miht on ufan *€aytpan- 4 Vzedgode


1 cpyprize 24 G4. 3 pinze 4 behealban 5 odde
§ -pinge 7 miloye 8 poplo 9 pupdyeipe 10 punde


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELRED. 807


5. And the ordinance of our lord and of his ‘ witan’ is;
that every monk who is out of minster, and heeds no rule, do
as it behoves him: let him willingly retire into a minster, with
all humility, and abstain from misdeeds, and make ‘bot’ very
strictly for that which he may have broken: let him be mindful
of the word and ‘wed’ which he gave to God.


6. And let the monk who has no minster come to the bishop
of the diocese, and engage himself to God and to men, that
he three things especially thenceforth will observe; that is, his
chastity, and monkish raiment, and to serve his Lord, as well as
he best can: and if he that perform, then is he worthy of being
the better respected, let him dwell where he may.


7. And let canons, where their benefice is, so that they may
have a refectory and a dormitory, keep their minster rightly,
and with purity, as their rule may teach: or it is right that he
forfeit the benefice who will not do so.


8. And we pray and instruct all mass-priests, that they secure
themselves against the ire of God.


9. Full well they know, that they have not rightfully, through
concubinage, intercourse with woman: and let him who will
abstain from this, and preserve his chastity, have God’s mercy ;
and, in addition thereto, for worldly honour, that he be worthy
of thane-‘ wer’ and thane-right, both in life and in the grave:
and he who will not that which is befitting his order, let his
honour wane before God and before the world.


10. And also let every Christian man carefully eschew un-
lawful concubinage, and rightly observe the divine laws. And
let every church be in the ‘ grith’ of God, and of the king, and
of all Christian people: and let no man henceforth reduce a
church to servitude; nor unlawfully make church-mongering ;
nor turn out a church minister, without the bishop’s counsel.


11. And let God’s dues be willingly paid every year: that
is, plough-alms, xv. days after Easter, and a tithe of young by


UMnot in D. Zpupsyespe _ ponte l4eni 15 macyze
16 Eaytpon 7 zeozude


308 JEDELREDES DOMAS.


veodungze be Pentecoyten- y eopd-peycma be Calpa Jd4lzena
meyyan- y Rom-reoh be Petper meyyan- y ledht-geycot pupa


on Zeape:-


xu. And 'yaul-pceac 1p puhtayc $ man symle gel&ycte xc
openum gpefe 4 Zp man €mz lic of yuht pepure-peipe elley-
hpap lecge- geléyve man 'yaul-yceav ypa ?}éh incé pam myny-
cpe pe hiv cé-h¥pde- 4 ealle rodey ®zequhva *pypdmze man
zeomne- eal ppa hic pean iy- 4 ppedlya 4 peycena healde man
puhelice:-


xu. Sunnan-dezey fpedly healdbe man geopne ypa Speep-co
zebymze. 4 cypimza 4 fole-xemOca on pam halgan deze
seypice man seopne:.


xiv. And *8ce. Maman fpedly-cida ealle 7 peopdie man geopne-
&peye mid peeptene 4 pippan mid ypedlye. y tO aghpilcey apoy-
coler hedh-vide payte man 4 fpedlyize- *buton co Philippuy
4 Jacobuy ypedlye ne bedbde pe nan feycen *yon pam Caycop-
lican fpedlye:-”


xv. Elley ope ppedlya 4 paycena healde man Zeomne- spa
ypa pa heoldan pa pe bety heoldan:.


xvi. And Sce. “Eadpeapder meepye-deez pican habbad ze-
copen } man fpedlpian yceal ofep eal Engla-land on -xv- kal.


Appiliy:-
xvi. And feey'can zlce Fyge-deeg- bucan hic yneoly y¥:-


xvii. And opdal 4 adap pindon cocpeden fpedly-bagum- 4
nthc Ymbpen-dagum- 4 spam Advencum Domim “od oc-
vabay Eprphame-’ y spam Septuageymmam 0d .xv- mht ofep
6 Caycpan:-


xix. And beo pam halgum cidan- eal ypa hic mht ip-
eallum cpiptenum mannum ypib 4 yom geméne- 4 ele yacu
secpaemed:-


xx. And zip hpa odpum "ycyle boph oppon béoce ac *ponold-


lean pingan- zeléyce hit zeonne- €p oppon eptep:-


Vyapl- 2peah 3mhra 4gpidige Spap- 6Sea 7 peopsian
Sbucan “notin D. “heoldon !!€abpapber notin D. '3 ab


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELRED. 309


Pentecost, and of earth-fruits by Allhallows’ mass, and Rome-
‘feoh’ by St. Peter’s mass, and light-scot thrice in the year.


12. And it is most proper that soul-scot be always paid at
the open grave: and if any corpse be laid out of its proper
shrift-district elsewhere, let soul-scot be, nevertheless, paid to
the minster to which it belonged; and let all God's dues be
diligently furthered, as is needful, and let festivals and fasts be
rightly held.


13. Let Sunday’s festival be rightly kept, as is thereto
becoming: and let marketings and folk-motes be carefully
abstained from on that holy day.


14, And let all St. Mary’s feast-tides be strictly honoured ;
first with fasting, and afterwards with feasting: and at the cele-
bration of every apostle, Jet there be fasting and feasting;
except that on the festival of St. Philip and St. James we enjoin
no fast, on account of the Easter festival.


15. Else, let other festivals and fasts be strictly observed, so
as those observed them who best observed them.


16. And the ‘witan’ have chosen, that St. Edward’s mass-
day shall be celebrated over all England on the xv. kal. April.


17, And to fast every Friday, unless it be a festival.


18. And ordeals and oaths are forbidden on festival-days, and
on the regular Ember-days, and from Adventum Domini till
the octaves of the Epiphany; and from Septuagesima till
xv. days after Easter.


19. And at those holy tides, let there be, as is right, to all
Christian men general peace and concord; and let everv strife
be appeased.


20. And if any one owe another ‘borh’ or ‘bot,’ on account
of secular matters, let him fulfil it willingly, before or after.


14/7 x1111. mhe ofep midse-pintper cio xr. = 6 Earrpon = 17 cule
18 poplolican =!9 od8e


310 JEDELREDES DOMAE.


xx. And yi zle 'pydepe- pe hi yylpe md pihte *zehealde-
on Lrobder zmide 4 on pay cyngey. y piece ele -xit- monad
pepleay- cedye yyppan } hed pyle pille:.


xxu. And ezghpyle cpipten man 06 ypa him peapr 1p: s¥me
hip cytendomey Zeopne- y gepumze gelomlice tO *yemuyce-
4 ungoppandodhice hip pynna zec¥pe- 4 Zzeopnlice béce ypa ypa
him man véce- 4 geappize ec c6 huyl-gange- oft 4 zeléme-
gehpa hine yylpne y popd y peope fadize mid puhte- y 45 4 ped
péplice healde:.


xxut. And eghpyle unpihc apeoppe man Zeonne of *pyyan
eapde- pay pe man °zed6n meege:-


xxiv. And ypicollice d&da 4 ladhce unlaga apeumze man
ypyde. $ iy- palye gepihta- 4 poze geméva- y ledye gepicneyya-
®4 ¢pacodlice prcunza:”


xxv. And ezeylice man-ppapa 4 deorlice d&da- on mopd-
peopean y on man-yhhtan- on yralan ¥ on 7 ycpudungan- on
gicyungan 4 on Zipepneyyan- on ofep-méccan 4 on orep-
yyllan- on ypic-cpzepcan 4 on myclican ®lah-bpycan- on had-
bpycan 4 on €p-bpycan- 4 on memgey cynney miyd&dan:.


xxvi. Ac Itipize man Loder mht heonan-fopd geopne- ponder
4y d&de- fonne pypd pyyye pedde yona Lod milde. And bed
man Zeopne °ymbe fpidey-bove 4 ymbe fedy-boce ezhpap on
eapde- 4 ymbe buph-béte on “xzghpylcan ende- "y ymbe
bpic-bote-” 4 ymbe fypdunga eac- be pam pe man Zepede 44
ponne ned j1:.


xxvil. And ymbe yeip-FypdSpunga- ppa man Zeopnoyt meze-
 xzghpyle zeyec yy yona ofep *Caytpan- eghpylee geape:-


xxvin. And zip hpa *bucan ledge of fypde “zepende- pe
ye cyming yylp on y¥- phhce hmm yylpum *y ealpe hip dpe.
4 sepe elley of pypde Zepende- beo ye -cxx- pall. eyloiz.


Ipudupe 7healbe %Epyre ‘4pyum 566n 6 not in D.
7yepucungan = flaz- %ymban Mezhpylcum 1’ not in G.


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELRED. 811


21. And let every widow, who conducts herself lawfully, be
in God’s ‘ grith’ and the king’s: and let every one continue
x1. months husbandless: afterwards let her choose what she
herself will.


22. And let every Christian man do as is needful to him;
let him strictly keep his Christianity, and accustom himself
frequently to shrift; and fearlessly declare his sins, and earnestly
pray as he may be instructed; and let every one prepare him-
self to go to housel oft and frequently: let every one direct
himself and his words and works justly, and carefully keep his
oath and ¢ wed.’


23. And let every injustice be carefully cast out from this
country, as far as it can be done.


24, And let fraudulent deeds, and hateful illegalities, be
earnestly shunned ; that is, false weights, and wrongful measures,
and lying witnesses, and shameful fightings.


25. And horrid perjuries and diabolic deeds, in ‘ morth’-
works and in homicides, in thefts and in plunderings, in avarice
and covetousness, in gluttony and drunkenness, in arts of fraud
and in various breaches of law, and in breaches of holy orders,
and in adulteries, and misdeeds of many kinds.


26. But let God’s law be henceforth zealously loved, by word
and deed; then will God soon be merciful to this nation. And
let ‘frithes-bot’ and ‘feos-bot,’ every-where in the country, and
‘burh-bot’ on every side, and ‘bric-bot,’ and the armaments
also, be diligently attended to; according to what is always
prescribed, when there is need.


27. And with respect to naval armaments, as may be most
diligently; so that every one be stationed immediately after
Easter, every year.


28. And if any one without leave return from the ‘ fyrd’ in
which the king himself is, let it be at peril of himself and
all his estate; and he who else returns from ‘ fyrd,’ let him be
liable in cxx. shillings.


2Earcpon bucon Mzepente 5 D. adds oppe pep-zilbe, but
omits the rest.


312 JEDELREDES DOMAS.


xxix. And zip &mz amanrumad man- butan hit ypid-bena
y¥- on pep tcyngzer *neapeyte ahpap gepunize- &p fam fe he
hebbe zodcunde boce geopne gebogene- ponne phhre *him
yylpum ¥ eallan hip zehvan:”


xxx. And gig hpd ymbe ‘cyninger feoph yyppe-” *s¥ She
hiy feopep yeyloiz- 74 zip he latian pille- 86 $ be fey cyngey
pep-gilde- oppe md pp¥fealdan Sopdale on Engla lage:-”


xxx. And gir hpd sopyceal oppon openne pidep-cpyde on-
gean lah-phc Cyyter oppe cyningey ahpap gepypce- gilde
ypa pep ypa pice ppa lah-plive- a4 be pam pe sed dd yY. ¥ SIF
he ongean *mht puph &-hlyp zeonbypde 4 ypa sepypce P hine
man 4pylle-’ liege agyloe *eallan hiy ppeondan:.


xxxu. And apne alicgan heonan-fopd pa unlaga» pe &p
payan pépan v6 gepunelice pide:


xxx. And zzghpylce unlaga dlecge man seopne- foppam
puph } hic yceal on eapde gotian c6 adhte- be man unpihe
alecge- 4 yuhcprpnesye ltipie- pon Lode 4 pop popolde:.


xxxiv. Ealle pe “ycylan &@nne Lod lipan 4 “peoptian-
84 enne cpycendom geopne healdan.’” y zlene hedendom mid
ealle &peoppan:.

xxxv. And tican &nne cyne-hlafopd holdlice healdan- 4 lif
4y land yamod ealle pean ypa pel ypa pe beryc “magan. 4
Lod  €almihtigne *inpepdpe heoptan rulcumey biddan.


leynineger =? neapiyte co him ypilpum oppe co hy ehran
4/cynine srypepe Sbeo Snotin D. 7 bucon he him laze be pam
deopeycan pe pican zepeban pihe zeonbypde oppe ehhp zepipce


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELRED. 313


29. And if any excommunicated man, unless it be a ‘ frith’-
suppliant, dwell anywhere in the king’s proximity, before he
has earnestly submitted to divine ‘bot;’ then be it at peril of
himself, and of all his property.


80. And if any one plot against the king’s-life, let him be
liable in his life; and if he desire to clear himself, let him do so
according to the king’s ‘ wer-gild,’ or with threefold ordeal, by
the law of the English.


81. And if any one anywhere commit ‘forsteal,’ or open
opposition to the law of Christ or of the king; let him pay
either ‘wér,’ or ‘ wite,’ or ‘lah-slit,’ always according as the deed
may be: and if he resist against right, by any violation of the
law, and so act that he be slain, let him lie uncompensated to all
his friends.


82. And ever henceforth, let the illegalities be suppressed,
which before this were commonly too wide-spread.


83. And let every illegality be carefully abolished; because
through that it shall turn to some good in the country, that
injustice be abolished, and righteousness loved, before God and
before the world.


34, It is the duty of us all to love and worship one God,
and strictly hold one Christianity, and totally cast out every
kind of heathenism.


85. And let us faithfully support one royal lord, and all
defend life and land together, as well as we best may; and to
God Almighty pray for aid with inward heart.


3j hine man ponne puph f apille %eallum 1! fnpeondbum = "yculon
pupdian not in G. Mapuppan Muron 'mazon 17).
mihtizgne 18 npeapbpe


314 JEDELREDES DOMAS.


VI.
COUNCIL OF *ENHAM.
*BE PITENA LERJEDNESSAN.


1. Diy ?yindon pa gepednerya pe Enzla ped-ziyan zecupan
‘4y Zecp&dan- 4 geopnlice lépdan- $ man ycolde healdan. And
xy ponne &peyc p&pa biycopa ppum-p&d. f pe ealle spam
yynnum geonne gec¥ppan pey pe pe d0n *magan. 4 tipe miy-
d&da Sondeccan zeopne 4 geopnlice bécan- y énne Lod juhr-
hee lfyian 4 peopSian- 4 €nne cycenddm anp&dlice healdan-
4; lene heBenddm geopne ysopbugan- y gebedpHdene ap&pan
zeopne uy becpeonan- y yibbe 4 yéme lGpian geopne- y anum
cyne-hlafopde holdhce h¥pan- y geopne hine healdan- md
puhtan gecpYpdan:-


1. And pitena gep&dney 1y- $ abbodar 4 abbodiyyan heopa
agen lip puhthce radians ¥ eae heopa heopda piylice healdan-
4  elcey hader men Jeopne gebugan- fon Lobe y fon
popolde- ale t6 pam pihce pe him v6-gebyyuge. y hupu-pinga
Gover peopay- biycopay y abboday- munecay 4 mynecena-
canonicay 4 nunnan- v6 juhte gec¥ppan- ¥ pegollice hbban- 4
fon eall cmyzen fole pingian geopne:-


m1. And picena gep&dney iy P muneca gehpyle pe fire of
mynycpe y1- 4 pegoley ne s¥me- 60 ypa him peapr ip. gebuze
yeopne inctO mynycpe- mid eallum ea}-méccum- y mydexda
zeypices 4 béce ypyde geopne- } he abpocen hebbe. gepence
popd 4 pedd pe he Lode beteehte. And ye munuc pe myny-
cep neebbe- cume 6 yeipe-bipcop- 4 wp¥prige hine yylpne pid
Lod y pid men- $ he hupu ppeo ping panon-ropd healdan pille-
p ay- Inp cl&énneyye- 4 munuclice pepidpape- 4 pedpian hi
Dpthene- ypa pel spa he betyc meege. y zip he $ gel&yre-
ponne bid he peopde  hine man pe bet healde- punige peep he
punize:-


1 yyndan 2 meezan


2 (Ensham or Eynesham, near Oxford.-— 7.]


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELRED. 315


VI.
COUNCIL OF *ENHAM.
‘OF THE ORDINANCES OF THE ‘WITAN,’


1. These are the ordinances which the councillors of the
English selected and decreed, and strictly enjoined that they
should be observed. And this then is first,—The primary
ordinance of the bishops— that we all diligently turn from sins,
as far as we can do so, and diligently confess our misdeeds, and
strictly make ‘bot,’ and rightly love and worship one God,
and unanimously hold one Christianity, and diligently eschew
every heathenism, and diligently promote prayer among us,
and diligently love peace and concord, and faithfully obey one
royal lord, and diligently support him, with right fidelity.


2. And it is the ordinance of the ‘witan,’ that abbots and
abbesses rightly order their own life, and also wisely keep their
flocks ; and that men of every order willingly submit, before God
and before the world, each to that law that is appropriate to
him: and especially, that God’s servants, bishops and abbots,
monks and mynchens, canons and nuns, turn to right, and live ac-
cording to rule, and intercede fervently for all Christian people.


3. And it is the ordinance of the ‘ witan,’ that every monk
who is out of minster, and heeds no rule, do as it behoves him;
let him willingly retire into a minster, with all humility, and
abstain from misdeeds, and make ‘bot’ very strictly for that
which he may have committed: and let him be mindful of the
word and ‘wed’ which he gave to God. And let the monk
who has no minster come to the bishop of the diocese, and engage
himself to God and to men, that he three things especially
thenceforth will observe; that is, his chastity, and monkish
raiment, and to serve his Lord, as well as he best can: and if
he that perform, then is he worthy of being the better respected,
let him dwell where he may.


3 anderran


> [The text is from D.; the variations are from K.—TZ.]


316 JEDELREDES DOMAS.


1v. And canonicay- pep yed ap yi P hi *beod-epn y plép-
epn habban mazan- healdan heopa mynyctep md clé&nneyye-
ypa heopa pegol cvéce oppon prhv iy. *4 polige peepe dpe yebe
p nelle:.


v. And ealle Loder pedpar» 4 hupu-pinga yacepday- pe
biddad 4 lépad p hi Trobe h¥pan ¥ cl&énnerye lian 4 beoph-
gan him yylrum pid Loder yppe. Ful zeopne hi pican $ hi
naézon mid yuhve- buph @mz h&mebd-ping- piper semanan. ae
hit ip be *pypye pe yume habbad cpa oppe ma. 4 yum péh he
fopléce fa he €ép heeyde- he be liprendpe pepe eft *odepe
nimd- ypa *&nigan cpiypcenan’ men ne zedarenad tO donne.
4 yebe pay geypican pille 4 clénneyye healdan- hebbe he
Loder miltye- 4 pap-c6-edcan vd popold-peopdycipe- P he yt
pegen-pépey- 4 pegen-juhter pypde- ze on life ze on legepe.
4 yepe P nelle $ ny hade gebypize- panize hip peopdycipe-
eezden Ze pop Lode ze fon popolde:-


vi. And la gyc pe pillad biddan ypeonda gehpylene- y eal
fole eae lépan geopne- f hi inpepdpe heoptan &nne Lod
IGpian- 4 zlene hedendom gZeopne aycunian:.


vu. And Zip piccan oppe piglepay- yein-cpeprizan oppe
hép-cpénan- mopd-pyphtan oppe man-ypopan- ahpap on eapde
pupdan agitene- ¢yye hi man geopne tic of pyyan eapde- 4
clényize pay Fedde. oppe on eapde fopfape hi mod ealle- butan
hi geypican y pe dedppop gebéran:-


vin. And picena gepédney 1y+ $ man pihte laga up-an&pe
fop Lobe 4 op popolde- y zghpylce unlaga geopne apylle- 4
~ man heonon-fopd lace manna gehpylene- ge eapmne ge
eadigne- yole-mhter pypde. y $ man ymd y Fpeondyeipe prhe-
lice healde- innan piyan eapde- fon Lode y sop popolde:.


1x. And pivena Zepedney 1y- f man cpiycene men y unfop-
pophte or eapd ne yylle- ne hupu on heedene pedde. ac beonze
man Zeopne } man pa yapla ne roppape- pe Lmyc mod hip
agenum life zebohte:.


1 heopdepn 2p 3 pire 4 odeys


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELRED. 317


4, And that canons, where their benefice is, so that they may
have a refectory and a dormitory, keep their minster with purity,
as their rule may teach, or as is right: and let him who will
not so do forfeit the benefice.


5. And all God’s servants, and priests above all, we beseech
and enjoin, that they obey God, and love chastity, and secure
themselves against God’s ire. Full well they know, that they
have not rightfully, through any concubinage, intercourse with
woman: but it is the worse, that some have two or more; and
one, though he had forsaken her whom he had previously,
he, she being living, often takes another, as is not allowable
for any Christian man to do: and let him who will refrain from
this, and preserve his chastity, have God’s mercy; and, in
addition thereto, for worldly honour, that he be worthy of
thane-‘wer,’ and thane-right, both in life and in the grave: and
he who will not that which is fitting to his order, let his honour
wane both before God and before the world.


6. And moreover we will beseech every friend, and all people
also diligently teach, that they, with inward heart, love one
God, and carefully shun every heathenism.


7. And if witches or soothsayers, magicians or whores,
‘morth’-workers or perjurors, be anywhere found in the country,
let them diligently be driven out of this country, and this people
be purified: or let them totally perish in the country, unless
they desist, and the more deeply make ‘ bit.’


8. And it is the ordinance of the ‘witan,’ that just laws he
established before God and before the world, and every illegality
carefully abolished, and that every man henceforth, whether
poor or rich, be considered worthy of ‘folk-right;’ and that
peace and friendship be duly held, within this country, before
God and before the world.


9. And it is the ordinance of the ‘witan,’ that Christian
men, and uncondemned persons, be not sold out of the country,
at least not into a heathen nation; but let it be carefully guarded
against, that those souls be not made to perish that Christ has
bought with his own blood.


/ enizam epiycenam 6 he


318 JEDELREDES DOMAE.


x. And pitena gep&dney 1y- $ man cpipcene men fop ealley
v6 lyclan 6 deade ne foppede- ac eller gep&de man ypmdlice
ycedpa- folce tO peanre. y ne fopypille sop lyctlum Lnobdey agen
hand-zepeonc- 4 hip 'azenne ceap- pe he dedpe gebohve- ac
2ethpilce d&de cOpcade man peplicee 4 d6m eptep d&de
medemigze be mzvde- ypa fon Lode yt Zebeophlic 4 ron popolde
abependlic. And gepence ypySe zeopne yepe odpum déme-
hpey he yyle sypne- bonne he puy Scpede- Ec dimicte nobir
debica noytpa- ev peliq:-


x1. And pe lépad ypySe gseopnlice- $ eeghpile epycen man
unpiht hémebd geopne ropbuze- 4 ‘emycene lage puhtlice
healde:-


xu. And zppe ne gepeopde- f cpipcen man fepipige in
vie manna yib-feece- on hip 42genum cynne- $y binnan pam
feopSan cnedpe. ne on pay lape pe ypa neah pepe on popold-
cundpe ysibbe. ne on pey piper nyd-magan pe he ép herve.
Ne on gehalzodpe nigpe nunnan- ne on hip gepedepan- ne
on &-levan mz cmyten man ne °gepipize apne. ne na ma
pira ponne an hebbe- ac beo be pepe anpe pa hpile fe heo
libbe. yepe pille Loder lage g¥man mid prhte- y pid helle
bpyne beopgan hip yaple:-


xu. And yi ele cipice on Loder gmide- y on pep eyngey- 4
on ealley cmyceney folcey:-


xiv. And y1 ele cipic-zud binnan pagum. y cyningey hand-
gms. epen unpemme::


xv. And €&niz man heonan-fopd cipican ne pedpize- ne
cipic-mangunge mid unpiht ne macige- ne cipic-pén ne tivige-


butan biycopey gzepehte:-


xvi. And geléyte man Loder gehta- ezhpilce zeape puhe-
lice Zeopne. $ 1p pulh-zelmeyyan hupu -xv- mhv ofep Eaycpon:-


xvi. And gedgode ceodunze be Pentecoyten- 4 eopd-
peycma be Calpa Dalgena meeyyan:-


lazene ? ezhpyle 3 cprede


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELRED. 319


10. And it is the ordinance of the ‘ witan,’ that Christian men
be not, for altogether too little cause, condemned to death;
but in general let mild punishments be decreed, for the people’s
need; and let not for a little God’s own handywork, and his
own purchase, be destroyed, which he dearly bought: but let
every deed be heedfully distinguished, and doom, according to
the deed, be moderated in degree; so that before God it be
fitting, and before the world bearable. And let him who judges
others bear in mind very seriously what he himself desires, when
he thus speaks: ‘ Et dimitte nobis debita nostra,’ et reliq.


1]. And we direct very earnestly, that every Christian man
carefully avoid unlawful concubinage, and rightly observe
Christian law.


12. And let it never be, that a Christian man marry within
the relationship of vi. persons, in his own kin, that is within
the fourth degree; nor with the relict of him who was so near
in worldly relationship; nor with the wife’s relation, whom he
before had had. Nor with any hallowed nun, nor with his god-
mother, nor with one divorced, let any Christian man ever
marry; nor have more wives than one, but be with that one,
as long as she may live; whoever will rightly observe God’s
law, and secure his soul from the burning of hell.


13. And let every church be in God’s ‘grith,’ and in the
king’s, and in all Christian people’s.


14, And let every church-‘ grith’ within walls, and the king’s
*hand-grith,’ be equally inviolate.


15. And let no man henceforth reduce a church to servitude,
nor unlawfully make church-mongering, nor turn out a church
minister, without the bishop’s counsel.


16. And let God’s dues be lawfully and willingly paid every
year; that is, plough-alms, at least, xv. days after Easter.


17. And a tithe of young by Pentecost, and of earth-fruits
by Allhallows’ mass.


4 eniyclice 5 pipize


320 JEDELREDES DOMAS.


xvi. And Rom-pedh be Pecper meyyan- 4 c1pe-peeat 6
QMapcinup meeyyan:-


xix. And ledhv-zepcot pyiipa on xeape:-


xx. And ‘yaul-pceac ip phcayc P man yymble gel&yve 44
et openum Zpere:-


xx. And zip man €miz lic of mht yeipe elley-hpap lecge-
geleyte man ponne 'ydul-rpceac ypa péh into fam minytpe
pe hic c6-h¥pbde. 4 ealle Isodey zepihca pypSmze man Zeopne-
ealppa hrc peapr ip:


xxi. And ppedlpa y feeycena healde man prhtlice. €unnan-
deze fpedly healbe man geopne- ypa pep-co gebypige. 4
c¥pinga+ 4 folc-zemoca- 4 huntad-rapa- 4 popoldlicna peomca-
on pam hialzan deze gerpice man geopne. 4 Sca. Mayan heah-
Fpedly-cida ealle peopdige man geopne- &peyc mid feeyene ¥
y1ppan mid ppedlye. y c6 aghpilcey apoytoley heah-cide yeeyce
man zeopne- butan t6 Phihppuy y Jacobuy ypedlye ne bedde
pe nan feeyten foppam Cayvephican fpedlye- bucan hpa pile.
elley oSpe ypedlya 4 feeytena healde man geopne- ypa ypa pa
heoldan pa fe becyt heoldan:-


xxi. And ymbpen 4 faeycena- spa ypa Scy. Lpegopuy
Angel-cynne yylp hie gedihve:.


xxiv. And yayce man elce Fpige-dege- bucan hic ypedly
yir


xxv. And dpoal y abay y pipunzga ape yindan vdcpedene
heah-ppedly-bagum y yuh ymbpenum- 4 rpam Advencum Do-
mini 08 octabay Epiphamge- 4 ppam Sepcuageruma od -xv-
niht ofep Eaycpan. And bed pam halgan vidan- eal ypa hic
phe iy- eallum cpiptenum mannum- pibb 4 yém zemé&ne- 4
zle yacu tocpemed. 4 gif hpa odpum yeyle boph oppe bore
zt popoldlican pingan- geléyte hic him geopne- &p oppon
? eptem::


1 yapl-


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELRED. 821


18. And Rome-‘feoh’ by St. Peter’s mass, and church-scot
by Martinmass.


19. And light-scot thrice in the year.


20. And it is most proper that soul-scot be always paid at the
open grave.


21. And if any corpse be laid out of its proper district else-
where, then let the soul-scot be, nevertheless, paid to the
minster to which it belonged: and let all God’s dues be willingly
furthered, as is needful.


22. And let festivals and fasts be rightly kept. Let Sunday’s
festival be rightly kept, as is thereto becoming: and let mar-
ketings, and folk-motes, and huntings, and worldly works,
be strictly abstained from on that holy day. And let all
St. Mary’s solemn feast-tides be strictly honoured, first with
fasting, and afterwards with festival: and at the celebration of
every apostle let strict fast be held, except that on the festival
of St. Philip and St. James we enjoin no fast, on account of the
Easter festival, unless any one will: else let other festivals and
fasts be strictly observed, so as those observed them who best
observed them.


23. And ember-days and fasts, so as St. Gregory himself
prescribed to the English nation.


24, And let fast be kept every Friday, unless it be a fes-
tival.


25. And ordeals, and oaths, and marriages, are always for-
bidden on high festival days and on the regular ember-days;
and from Adventum Domini till the octaves of the Epiphany ;
and from Septuagesima till xv. days after Easter. And at those
holy tides, let there be, as it is right, to all Christian men,
general peace and concord, and let every strife be appeased :
and if any one owe another ‘borh’ or ‘bot’ on account of
secular matters, let him willingly fulfil it to him, before or
after.


2 were


322 JEDELREDES DOMAS.


xxv, And yi ele pydepe- pe hi pyle md yuhte gehealde-
on Iroder zpide 4 on pey cyngep- y piece ele -xu- monad
pepleady. cedye yippan } heo yyle pulle:.


xxv. And eghpile epiycen man 00 ypa him peapy iy.
zyme hip cprycendémey geopne- 4 gepunize zeldmlice 6 "ny.
yoppre- 4 unfoppandodlice hiy pynna gec¥pe- 4 zeopnlice béce-
ypa ypa him man t&ce. y Zeappizge 'hine efc vO *hurel-zange-
hupu ppipa on geane- gehpa hine yrylpne pe hip a@zene peapre
pile undenycandan- ypa ypa him peapr ip:


xxvii. And pond y peone Fpeonda zehpile ratize mid puhte-
‘4, 85 4 pedd p&plice healde. y aghpile unmhe *apuppe man
seopne of *piyan eapde- pey pe man d6n meze. And spicol-
hice deda 4 la8hce unlaga apcunige man ypidse. f iy- Falre
gepthta 4 poze seméca y ledye gepitneyya y ppacodlice ficunga
4 File pophgzna 4 egeylice man-ypapa y deoylice d&da- on
mopd-peopcum 4 on man-plihtan- on ycalan 4 on yepudungan-
on Zitrungan 4 on Zipepneyyan- on ofep-méccan 4 on ofep-
Fyllan- on ypic-cpeepcan- 4 on miyclican lah-bpican- on &p-
bpican ¥ on héd-bpucan- on Fpedly-bpicon 4 on feycen-bpicon:
on cypic-pénan- 4 on meenigey cynney miydédan:.


xxix. And la undepycande man geopne- f eal ypile iy v6
leanne 4 neype c6 lipanne:.


xxx. °Ac lige man Loder yuh heonan-fopd geopne- popder
4 Speoncey+ ponne pypd piyye pedde yona Tod milde:-


xxxI. Putan e&c ealle ymbe ypidey-bore 4 ymbe fedy-bire
Fmeazean ypide Zeopne::-


xxxir. Spa ymbe ypidey-bore- ppa pam bondan yi yeloye 4
pam pedpan yi laSoyc. And pa ymbe redy-bice- } an mynev
gange orep ealle par pedde bucan zlcon yalye. And zeméra
‘y Septhta puhte man Zeopne- y zlcey unmhtey heonan-fopd
Zeypice. And buph-bora 4 bpuc-boca aginne man Zeopne on


Pd


zghpileon ende- 4 fypdunga e&c- 4 yeip-pypdunga ealypa- 4


I not in K. 2 huyl- 3 apeonpe


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELRED. 328


26. And let every widow, who conducts herself lawfully, be
in God’s ‘grith,’ and the king’s, and let every one continue
xu. months husbandless; afterwards let her choose what she
herself will.


27. And let every Christian man do as is needful to him;
let him strictly keep his Christianity, and accustom himself fre-
quently to sbrift, and fearlessly declare his sins, and earnestly
pray, as he may be instructed; and let every one who will
understand his own need also prepare himself to go to housel,
at least thrice in the year, so as it is requisite for him.


28. And let every friend direct his words and works aright,
and heedfully keep his oath and ‘wed;’ and let every injustice
be carefully cast out from this country, as far as it can be done.
And let fraudulent deeds, and hateful illegalities, be earnestly
shunned; that is, false weights, and wrongful measures, and
lying witnesses, and shameful fightings, and foul fornications,
and horrid perjuries, and diabolic deeds, in ‘ morth’-works and
in homicides, in thefts and in plunderings, in cravings and in
rapaciousness, in gluttony and in drunkenness, in arts of fraud
and in various breaches of Jaw, in adulteries and in breaches of
holy orders, in breaches of festivals and in breaches of fasts, in
sacrileges, and in misdeeds of many kinds.


29. And let it be well understood, that all such are to be
censured, and never to be loved.


80. But let God’s law be henceforth zealously loved, by
word and deed; then will God soon be merciful to this nation.


81. Let us also all very earnestly deliberate concerning
‘ frithes-bot,’ and concerning ‘ feos-bot.’


82. So concerning ‘frithes-bot,’ as may be best to the pro-
prietor and most hostile to the thief. And so concerning ‘feos-
bot,’ that one money go over all the nation, without any
counterfeit. And let weights and measures be carefully rectified;
and every illegality be henceforth avoided. And let ‘burh-bots’
and ‘bric-bots’ be commenced on every side, and the arma-


4 pyyyan 5 And D. 6 beba


324 JEDELREDES DOMAS.


ponne ‘peapr yi- ypa ypa man geyide yop zeménelicpe
nedde:-


xxx. And p&ple bis $ man exzghpilce Jeane yona exycep
Eaycpon rypd-yeipa Zeappige:-


xxxiv. And gzip hpa rolcey fypd-perp apypde- gebéce f
Zeopne- y cyninge ba munte. y gp hic man amyppe # hic
nove peopde- fopgiulde hic fullices 4 cyninze pone munbd-
bpice:-


xxxv. And zip hpa of fypde butan leape zepende- be cyning
rylp on y1- phhre ny ape:.


xxxvi. And zip mopd-pyphtan oppe man-ypopan oppe ebepe
man-flagan tO pam geppiycian- hi on per cyningey neapeyte
gepumian- ép pam pe hi habban béce dgunnen- yop Lode 4
Fop popolde- ponne plihte hi heopa dpe y eallon heopa éhton-
butan hic ppid-bénan pindan:-


xxxvu. And zip hpé ymbe cyningey geoph yyppe- x7 he
hip feoper yeyloiz 4 ealley pay pe he adze- gp hie him on-
Seyodod peopde. 4 Zip he hme ladian pille 4 mage- 60 be pam
deOpeytan ade oppe mid pynfealdan Gpdale- on Engla lage- 4 on
Dena laze be pam pe heopa lagu yi:-


xxxvul. And gzip hpa fopyteal ongean lah-mht Cypuycer oppe
cyningey ahpap gepypce- gilde pep oppe pice be pam pe yed
d#d yi. y gp he geonbypode y pylp sepypce f hine man 4rylle-
heze &z1lbe:.-


xxxix. And gzip hpa nunnan gepemme oppe pydepan nYo-
n&éme- gebéce } dedpe- fon Lode y op popolde:-


xi. And ymeage man yymle- on ?elce pipane hi man
Fypmeyc meegze p€d Apedian- fedde co peanre- 4 puhctne cpiy'cen-
d6m ypiSoye ap&pan- y Seezhpilce unlaga zeopnoye apylian.
Foppam puph p hic yceal on eapde zodian tO ahte- pe man
unjuht alecge- 4 yuhtpiyneyye lipige- pop Irode y pop popolde:-


1 neob 2 echpilee


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELRED. 325


ments also, and naval armaments, in like manner, always when
there may be necessity; so that the common need be provided
for.


83. And it will be prudent, that, every year, immediately
after Easter, ships of war be made ready.


34, And if any one of the people injure a ship of war, let
him strictly make ¢ bot’ for it, and to the king the ‘mund? and
if any one so injure it that it be useless, let him pay for it
fully, and to the king the ‘ mund-bryce.’


35. And if any one return from the ‘ fyrd,’ in which the king
himself is, without leave, let him peril his estate.


86. And if ‘morth’-workers, or perjurers, or notorious
homicides, are so daring, that they dwell in the king’s proximity,
before they shall have undertaken ‘ bot,’ before God and before
the world, then let them peril their estate and all their pos-
sessions; unless they are ‘ frith’-suppliants.


87. And if any one plot against the king’s life, let him be
liable in his life, and in all that he owns, if it be proved against
him: and if he desire to clear himself, and may, let him do so
with the most solemn oath, or with threefold ordeal, by the
law of the English; and by the law of the Danes, according as
their law may be.


88. And if any one, against the law of Christ or of the king,
commit ‘forsteal’ anywhere, let him pay ‘ wér’ or ‘wite,’ as the
deed may be: and if he resist, and himself so do that any one
slay him, let him lie uncompensated.


89. And if any one defile a nun, or force a widow, Jet him
make ‘bot’ for that deeply, before God and before the world.


40. And let it ever be considered, in every way, how methods
may chiefly be devised for the behoof of the nation, and true
Christianity best exalted, and every illegality most effectually
suppressed: because through that it shall turn fo some good in
the country, that injustice be abolished, and righteousness loved,
before God and before the world.

et a


3 ezhpile


826 JEDELREDES DOMAS.


xu. Ni pille pe ede lépan Irobder pedpay geopne- P hi
hupu bi yylpe p&phce bepencan- 4 puph Tobey rulcum clén-
neyye liyian- 4 zeopne heopa bocum y gebédum fylgean- 4
deezey 4 nthtey- ofc 4 zelOme- cl¥pian co Lpuyce- 4 op eal
cpiycen ole pingian zeopne:-


xLu. 7And gic pe’ pillad’ mynzian geopne fpeonda Ze-
hpilene- eal pa uy ne6d ip sel6me v6 d6nne- *4 } gehpa hine
yylpne geopne bepence- 4 $ he ypam pynnan zeopne zec¥ppe-
4y oSpum mannum unpihtey ype¥pe- *4 $ he opep ealle odpe
pinge lumze hry Dmhcen-” 4 $ he opt 4 geléme hebbe on
gemynde } mannum iy m&y’c peapy ofcay v6 *zemunenne.
y+ $ hi puhtne geledpan anp&dlice habban on pone yodan
Trod- fe ip pealdand 4 pyphca ealpa zeyceayta. 4 $ hi pubcne
cpiycend6m yuhtlice healtan- 4 $ hi *zodcundum lapeopan
geopnlice h¥pan- y Iroder lapum y lagum Smhthice piligan.”
4p hi Loder cayican eghpap geopne spidian y ppdian- y mid
ledhte y lacum hi geléme gegpécan- 4 hig yylpe pep geopne
<6 Dpiyce gebiddan:-


xt. And $ hi Tobey sequhta- eghpilce zeape- md multe
gel&pcan- y ppedlya y peeptena yuhtlice healdan:-


xtiv. And p hi Sunnan-deger c¥pmga y foleiyepa Zemoca
Zeopne Zeypican:-


xiv. And $ hi Irodey pedpar pymle pepian 4 peopdian:.
xivi. And hi Lrobep peapran ppeypian 4 pédan:.


xiv. And p hi ’pidupan 4 yceop-cild c6 ofc ne ahpaenan-
ac seopne hi gladian:.


xivin. And $ hi elfeotige men 4 feoppan cumene ne tyman
ne ne tynan:.


xix. And $ hi odpum mannum unyuhc ne beddan ealler
vo ypide. ac manna zehpile odpum bedde phe # he pille p
man him bedde- be pam pe *hic med y7.2 4 $ ap ppySe mabe
lagu:-


V Gac pe zye 2 not in K. ¥ not in K.
4 zemunene 5 zodcundan 6 zeopnlice yylzean
7 pybepan


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELRED. 827


Al. Now we will also earnestly instruct God’s ministers, that
at least they carefully consider themselves, and, with the succour
of God, love chastity, and strictly attend to their books and
prayers, and daily and nightly, oft and frequently, call to Christ,
and earnestly pray for all Christian people.


42. We will also yet earnestly admonish every friend, as it is
our duty frequently to do, that every one earnestly consider
himself, and that he earnestly turn from sins, and that he cor-
rect other men for injustice, and that above all other things he
love his Lord, and that he oft and frequently have in mind that
of which it is most needful oftenest to remind men; that is, that
they unanimously have orthodox belief in the true God, who is
ruler and maker of all creatures; and that they rightly hold
orthodox Christianity, and that they willingly obey the divine
instructors, and willingly follow God’s doctrines and laws; and
that they everywhere willingly maintain the ‘ grith’ and ¢frith’
of God’s churches, and frequently greet them with light and
with offerings, and that they there earnestly pray to Christ.


43. And that they lawfully render God’s dues every year,
and rightly hold festivals and fasts.


44, And that they strictly abstain from Sunday marketings
and popular meetings.


45. And that they always defend and honour God’s ministers.
46. And that they comfort and feed God’s poor.


47. And that they do not too often oppress widows and step-
children, but willingly gladden them.


48. And that they do not vex or provoke foreigners or comers
from afar.


49. And that they do not altogether too much command
injustice to other men; but that every man enjoin to others
that justice which he desires shall be enjoined to him, according
as it is reasonable; and that is very just law.


a [Here probably, as at p.336. c. xx1x., we should read, ‘ be pam
pe ny med yi’—T7.]
> Here ms. D. closes.


328 JEDELREDES DOOMAS.


L. And yede ahpap heonan-rops yuhte laga pypde- Loder
oppon manna+ zebéce hic geopme-: ypa hpetop ypa hit ze-
byyuge- spa mid zodcundpe bore ypa mid popoldcundpe ycedpe:-


ur. And gig fop god-bécan yedh-béc dyyed- ppa ypa pire
popold-pican tO yceépe gereccan- $ zebyped pubchice- be biy-
copa dihte- t6 gebed-bigene- 4 tO peappena hydde- 4 tO cypic-
boce- 4 tO lapdome- 4 tO pede. 4 tO pice fam pe Lobe
peopian- 4 tO bocan- y tO bellan- 4 c6 cypic-peedan- ¥ neefpe
%6 popoldlican idelan glengan- ac yop popold-predpan to god-
cundan neddan- hyilum be pice- hpilum be pép-zilde- hpilum
be haly-pangze- hpilum be lah-plice- hpilum be ape- hpilum be
éhte- 4 hpilum be mapan- hpilum be leyyan:-


Lu. And @ ypa man bid mihtizna hep ni fop populde-
opfon puph gepingda heappa on hade- ypa ceal he dedppop
Jynna gebécan- y alce mypdébda dedpap agyloan. foppam pe
ye maga 4 ye unmaza ne beod na gelice- ne ne magon na
gelice bypSene ahebban- ne ye unhala pe ma fam halum
gelice. 4 p¥ man yceal medmian- 4 Zepeddlice corcddan- Ze on
godcundan yepupcan ge on popoldcundan yredpan- yloe 4 zed-
zove- pelan 4 pedle- héle 4 unhé&le- y hada zehpilene. And
zy hic gepeopded. } man unpilley oppe ungepealdey &miz
ping mupded- na bid p na gelic pam pe piller 4 zepealdey yyly-
pilley miydéd. 4 e&e ye pe nyo-pyphta bid fey fe he miydéd-
ye bid gebeophgeyr 4 }¥ becepan d6mer yymle pypde- Fe he
nyo-py pha pay peey pe he pophte:-


Lin. JElce d&de core’de man péplicee y a d6m be d&de
fadize md puhtee y medemige be meede- fon Lode y for
popolde. 4 milcyize man yop Lobey ege- 4 hdige man zeomne-
4) beopge be d&le- fam pe pay peapp sy. foppam ealle pe
bepupyan pe uy tipe Dmhten oft 4 geloéme hiy milcyce geunne.


Amen::-


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELRED. 829


50. And he who anywhere henceforth shail corrupt just laws,
either of God or of men, let him strictly make ‘bot’ for it,
in whatever manner is fitting, as well with divine ‘ bot’ as with
secular correction.


51. And if for a ‘god-bot’a pecuniary ‘bdt’ shall arise, so
as wise secular ‘witan’ may have established as a penalty, that
belongs lawfully, by the direction of the bishops, to the buying
of prayers, to the behoof of the poor, and to the reparation of
churches, and to the instruction and to the clothing and to the
feeding of those who minister to God, and for books, and for
bells, and for church-garments; and never for worldly idle
pomp, but as a secular correction for divine purposes, some-
times as ‘wite,’ sometimes as ‘ wer-gyld, sometimes as ‘hals-
fang,’ sometimes as “lah-slit;’ sometimes in estate, sometimes in
goods; and sometimes in more, sometimes in less.


52. And ever, as any one shall be more powerful here in the
eyes of the world, or, through dignities, higher in degree, so
shall he the more deeply make ‘bot’ for sins, and pay for every
misdeed the more dearly; because the strong and the weak
are not alike, and cannot raise a like burthen; no more than
the unhale is like to the hale: moderation is therefore to be
used; and discreetly are to be distinguished, both in divine
shrifts and in secular corrections, age and youth, rich and poor,
hale and unhale, and every order. And if it be, that any one
unwillingly or unintentionally do anything amiss, he shall
not be like to him who misdoes intentionally and of his own
will: and also he who is an involuntary doer of that which he
misdoes, he is ever worthy of protection and of the better
doom, because he was an involuntary doer of that which he
did.


58. Let every deed be carefully distinguished, and doom
ever be guided justly, according to the deed, and be modified
according to its degree, before God and before the world; and
let mercy be shown, for dread of God, and kindness be willingly
shown, and those be somewhat protected who need it; because
we all need, that our Lord oft and frequently grant his mercy
to us. Amen.


*1 4.


* 7. bepupfon.


330 JEDELREDES DOMAS.


VIL.


*Be GRIDE AND Be MUNDE.


1. Iroder gud ip ealpa gyda ypelayc vO Zeeapmianne- 4
seopnoyt t6 healdanne- 4 peep néhyt pep eyngey:-


ut. Donne 1p puhelic- *4 Lrodep cxpuc-zyud binnan pagum: 4
cuyteney cyningey hand-zyud- pcande eren unpemme:-


ur. And hpilum p&épan hearobd-prebday 4 headlice haday micelpe
meede 4 munde pypde- 4 gpidian mihton pa pe pey * bepopr-
‘y peeptO yohtan-. a4 be pepe made pe paepcd zebypede. 4 pur
hic yc6d on bam dagum inne md Enzlum-


iv. Det zip peoph-peyloig man cyning zeyohte- apcebiycop
oppon z%eling- ponne ahte he mgon mhta gud- feope vo
gebeongze- butan him ye cyng piimpan fypycep seunnan
polde:-

v. And gzip he geyéhte ledd-biycop- oppe ealdopman- oppon
healicne heafod-ycede- ponne ahte he «vie mhta zud- bucan
man leng geunnan polde:-

vi. And on Lantpapa laze. cyning 4 apcebiycop azan Zelicne
4 efen S¥pne mund-bpyce:.

vu. And on pam lazum- iy apcebiycopey fedh endlizan zilde-
‘4y cynzey ip nigon zilde:.

vir. And Cyaycey cxpican mund-bypd 1p egne ypa cyngzey::


1x. And on Sud-Engla lage. gb-lagu pur yrene. P zip hpa
gefeohted on eipican- oppon on cyngey hfiye- ponne yi rop-
pophe eal pe he age- 4 yi on cynger d6me hpesdep he lip age
pe naze:-

x. And gp hpa gereohted on mynycpe buran cipcean- ge-
béce eall umd fulpe boce $ paep-cd zebymge- be mynyeper
meve:-

x1, And gig hp cyngzer mund-bpice eller zepypce- gebéce
md -v- pundum on Engla laze. apcebipcopey y acdelingey


8 [The text is from G., collated with D.


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELRED. 331


vil.


OF ‘GRITH’ AND OF ‘MUND,’


1. God’s ‘grith’ is of all ‘griths’ the most excellent to
deserve, and most earnestly to be preserved; and next thereto,
the king’s.


2. Then it is right that God’s church-‘ grith,’ within walls,
and a Christian king’s hand-‘ grith,’ stand equally inviolate.


8. And formerly the chief places and exalted degrees were
entitled to great dignity and ‘mund,’ and could give ¢ grith’ to
those who needed it, and sought it, always according to the
dignity which appertained thereto: and thus it stood in those
days among the English,


4, That if a man who had forfeited his life sought the king,
the archbishop, or the ‘ztheling; then had he nine days
‘ grith,’ for the saving of his life; unless the king would grant
him a longer period.


5. And if he sought a suffragan bishop, or an ‘ealdorman,’
or an exalted chief place ; then had he vir. days  grith;’ unless
a longer should be granted him.

6. And in the law of the Kentish people, the king and the
archbishop possess a like and equally dear ‘mund-bryce.’

7. And in those laws, the archbishop’s property is to be com-
pensated elevenfold, and the king’s, ninefold.

8. And the ‘mund-byrd’ of Christ’s church is the same as
the king’s.

9. And in the South-Angles’ law, ‘ grith’-law stands thus:
that if any one fight in a church, or in the king’s house; then
let all he possesses be condemned, and let it be in the king’s
power whether he have life or not.

10. And if any one fight in a minster without a church, let
him make ‘bot’ for all, with full ‘ bot,’ which thereto appertains,
according to the rank of the minster.


11. And if any one, in any other way, commit the king’s
‘mund-bryce,’ let him make ‘bot’ for it with v. pounds, by the


These ss. closely agree together.— 7.]


* epicne ?


332 JEDELREDES DODAS.


mund-bpyce mid pyiim pundum- odpeyr biycopey y ealdop-
manney mid -i1- pundum::-


xu. And zip man befopan edelinze oppe apcebircope Ze-
feoht dzmned- mid -cu- peillinga zebéce. zip beropan odpan
bipcope oppe ealdopmen pip xelimpe- mid -c yeillinga ge-
béce:.

xu. And on Nopd-Engla lage ycent- $ yepe ogylehd man
binnan cipic-pagum- he bid reoph-peyling. 4 yepe zepundad ye
bi hand-yeyloiz. 4 pepe man orylehd binnan cipic-depum- syle
pepe cipucan -cxx- yell. be Nopd-Engla lage:-


xiv. And pmgman yepe *cpicna on pepe mund-bypde ge-
yrelize pylle «xxx: yerlt.:.


xv. And sepe m cynzer bymz- oppon on hip neapeyte-
feohted oppe yceled- he bid reoph-pcylgz. mmpe him ye
cyning 4lfyan pille $ man pep-gilbe al¥pan méte:-


xvi. And gzip foppophc man fpis-pcol geyéce- y puph $
yeoph zeypne- ponne yi ppedpa dn yop hip feope- bute man
bec geamian pile. pep-zild- ece pedpec- hengen-picnung:-


xvi. And bed peepa ppedpa ypyle hic bed- zilde he- pedpize
he- 4 polige he- pinde boph zip he mage. 4 gp he ne megze-
ponne ypepie he # he eeppe ne yrele- ne feoh ne zcbepe- ne
picnunge ne ppece:-


xvi. And zip he piyya &mz aledge- nahpap he ere ny
feoph gefape- ne zeypne:-

xix. De€lney-zmd y had-gu5 healbe man md mhte- exype
ypise zeopne- 4 Loder lagum fylge- 4 lapeopum hlyyte- ypa
pep-co gebyyge. Biycopay yindon bydelay- y Loder laze
lapeopay- 4 hi yeylan geopne- oft y gelome- cl¥pian <6 Lynyte-
‘44 Fop eal cmiycen pole pingian geopnlice. 4 hi yeylan bedian
‘44 byynian Zeopne Zodcunde peapye cpiytenpe pedde:-


xx. Sepe opephogie $ he heom hlyyte- hebbe him zeméne
P pid Lod ypylpne:-

xx1, Ac yume men yindan fe yop heopa ppytan- 4 ede sop
gebypoan- yophogiad $ bi h¥pan godcundan ealdpan- ypa ypa


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELRED. 333


law of the English ; an archbishop’s and an ‘zetheling’s’ ‘ mund-
bryce,’ with three pounds; another bishop’s and an ‘ealdor-
man’s,’ with 1. pounds.


12. And if any one engage ina fight in the presence of an
‘ etheling’ or an archbishop, let him make ‘bot’ with ct. shil-
lings: if in presence of another bishop or an ‘ealdorman’ this
happen, let him make ‘bot’ with c. shillings.


18, And in the North-Angles’ law it stands, that he who slays
any one within church walls shall be liable in his life; and he
who wounds shall be liable in his hand; and let him who slays
any one within church doors give to the church cxx. shillings,
according to the North-Angles’ law.


14, And let a freeman who harms a living person in his
‘mund-byrd’ pay xxx. shillings.


15. And he who fights or steals in the king’s ‘burh,’ or in
his proximity, shall be liable in his life; unless the king will
allow him to be redeemed by his ‘ wergild.’


16. And if a man who has forfeited his life seek a sanctuary,
and thereby gain refuge for his life; let there then be one of
three for his life, unless he obtain remission more favourably ;
‘ wer-gild,’ perpetual thraldom, imprisonment.


17. And be it of these three whichever it may; whether he
pay, whether he serve, or whether he suffer; let him find
‘borh,’ if he can; and if he cannot, then let him swear, that
he will never, neither steal, nor bear away cattle, nor avenge
his punishment.


18. And if he belie any of these, let him proceed nowhere
again for his life, nor gain refuge.


19. Let ‘helnes-grith’ and ‘had-grith’ be lawfully observed,
always very strictly; and God’s laws followed, and teachers
listened to, as is becoming thereto. Bishops are heralds, and
teachers of God’s law; and they shall fervently, oft and fre-
quently, call to Christ, and mediate diligently for all Christian
people; and they shall preach and diligently set example, for
the religious behoof of a Christian nation.


20. For him who scorns to listen to them, let that be only
between him and God himself.


21. But there are some men who on account of their pride,
and also on account of birth, scorn to obey divine superiors,


334 JEDELREDES DOOAS.


hi yeeoldan- zip bi yuh poldan. 4. dzinnad ofc hyppan - hi
yeoldan heman- 4 caliad pe pypyan: rop heanan zebypdan- pa
pe heona ylopan on popolde ne pupdan pelige ne plance- puph
popold-zleenze- ne on lénan Iif-peece- pance ne jiice. ac pa ne
beod na pire ne rullice geycade- pe Irode nellad h¥pan- ne bet
undepycandan hi ofc he of lyclan ap&pde to muiclan- pa fe
him h¥pdan- 4 md prhte gecp&don. Pe pictan } puph Loder
syFe ppeel peand co pegene- 4 ceopl peapd td eople- yangepe
<6 yacepde- 4 bécepe to bircope:-


xxu. And hpilum peapS zepopden- ypa ppa Irod polde- peeap-
hypde co cynge- 4 ye peapd ypide m&pe. ede peand zepopden-
rpa ypa Irod polde- yiycepe cd bipcope- 4 ye pay ypise O¥pe 4
Lyuyte zecpeme:-

xxi. Spilce yindan Loder sypa- pe eife mez of lyclan
ap&pan co miclan- eall $ he yylr pile- eal ypa ye realm-peop
yodlice y&de- pa pa he puy yang. Quy picuc Dominur Deus
noycep- Yc. pupercany a teppa mopem- 4 de stepcope epgeny
paupepem- uv collocec eum cum ppunciprbuy- cum ppinerpibuy
populi yu. ypyle unbdepyrandad pa pe Troder ege habbad- 4
pipoomey s¥mad:-

xxiv. And pire eae p&pon on geap-dagum popold-pican- pe
&peyc Zepectan to godcundan puhc-lagan popld-laga- bircopan
4 gehalgedan hedpan- 4 hahgzdom 4 haday- fon Loder luran-
peopSedan- 4 Lrobdey htiy y Loder pedpay dedphice gmdedan:.


xxv. And on hpam meg hupu xype &mz man on popolde
ypSop Irod puptian ponne on cipcan y on hélneyyan- y eye on
sehalzedan healican hadan:-


xxv. And la hpilean gepance meg &n1g man xype hupu-
pinga } d6n- } he hine on eypican geopne gebidde- y v6 Loder
peoredan zeopnlice gebuge- y &p oppon zeftep- ine ope fice
cipican bepype- 4 pypde opbe panige } v6 cipcan gebypige:-


xxvii. Oppon hpilean gepance mez &niz man efpe Zepencan
on hip modde- $ he td yacepdan hearod ahylde- y blecpunze
sypne- 4 heopa mayyan on cipcan geycande- y av hlay-zanze
heopa hand cyyye- 4 yona paep-zepcep hi hpzbdlice sippan peypde
oppe yeynde- mid popde oppe peopce:-


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELRED. 335


as they ought to do, if they desired right; and often apply
themselves to blame what they ought to praise, and account the
worse, for their humble birth, those whose forefathers were not
in the world either wealthy or proud, through worldly splendour,
nor, in this transient space of life, flourishing or powerful:
but these are neither wise nor wholly discreet, who will not
obey God, nor better understand, how often he has from little
raised to great, those who obeyed him and justly spake. We
know that through God’s grace a thrall has become a thane,
and a ‘ceorl’ has become an ‘eorl,’ a singer a priest, and a
scribe a bishop.


22. And formerly, so as God decreed, a shepherd became a
king, and he was very great: also, so as God decreed, a fisher
became a bishop, and he was very dear and acceptable to
Christ.


28. Such are the gifts of God, who can easily from little raise
to great, all that he himself will, so as the psalmist truly said,
when he thus sang: Quis sicut Dominus Deus noster, &c.
suscitans a terra inopem, et de stercore erigens pauperem, ut
collocet eum cum principibus, cum principibus populi sui:
he understands those that have fear of God, and heed wisdom.


24. And wise were also in former days those secular ‘ witan’
who first added secular laws to the just divine laws, for bishops
and consecrated bodies; and reverenced, for love of God,
sanctity, and the sacred orders; and God’s houses and God’s
servants firmly protected.


25. And in what, indeed, can ever any man in the world
worship God more zealously than in churches and in sanc-
tuaries, and besides, in the sacred high orders.


26. And, oh! with what thought can any man, indeed, so
do, that he fervently pray in church, and zealously bow to
God’s altars, and before or after, within or without, plunder
the church, and corrupt or impair that which to the church
belongs.


27. Or with what thought can any man ever think in his
mind, that he inclines his head to the priests, and desires
blessing, and attends their masses in church, and kisses their
hand at the passing of the bread, and then straightway there-
after should injure or revile them by word or deed.


* J. Epiycer.


336 JEDELREDES DOMAS.


xxvii. Ae héhizd6m 4 habay 4 gehalzode Lodey hiiy- 4 man
yceal yon Lroder ege peop%ian geopne- 4 inpepdpe heoptan
eeppe Irod lépian:-


xxix. And ede iy micel n¥d-peapp manna gehpyleum- } he
odpum bedde $ whe $ he pille $ man him beode- be ham pe
hip meed y1:-


xxx. Ealle pe habbad &nne heogonlicne pabdep- 4 ane zayc-
hee modbdop- yed 1p Eccleyia genamod- p ip Loder cipuce- ¥ py
pe yin gebpodpa:-


xxx. And fonne ip puhthe edc- $ tipe exle odepne healde
mid puhtee y $ ele cipice yi exppe on Loder Calmihetigey
gpide- 4 on ealley emyceney rolcey. fop-pam ele empie-zyud 1p
* Duyceney agen spud. y ele cyuycen man 4h muicle peapre }
he on pam gmde micle made pice:-


VIII.


*1HAC INSTITUERUNT *EDELREDUS *REX ET
SAPIENTES EJUS APUD HABAM.


DE DENARIO SANCTZ ECCLESIZ DANDO ET
DECIMATIONE THAYNORUM.


1. Inprimis, ut unus Deus super omnia diligatur et honore-
tur, et ut omnes regi suo pareant, sicut antecessores sui melius
fecerunt, et cum eo pariter defendant regnum suum. Et
constituerunt inprimis Dei misericordiam et auxilium invocare
jejuniis, eleemosinis, confessione, et abstinentia, *et malefactis
et injustitia °abstinere. © Et ut detur de omni caruca denarius
vel ?denarium valens, et omnis qui familiam habet, efficiat, ut

omnis


1 Hoe M. Hk. 2 Ethelredus Br. %add. M.Hk. 402M. HR. 5 not
in M. Hk. Hoc est M.Hk. 7denarii M. Hh.


2 [The text is Bromton’s, collated with the Macro and Holkham
mss. The rubrics, which are wanting in both Mss., are from Bromton.


a7


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELRED. 337


28. But sanctity and sacred orders, and the hallowed houses
of God, shall always be zealously venerated, for dread of God,
and God, with inward heart, be ever loved.


29, And it is also much needful to every man, that he enjoin
to others that justice which he desires shall be enjoined to him,
according as his condition may be.


830. We have all one heavenly father, and one spiritual
mother, which is called ‘ Ecclesia; that is God’s church; and,
therefore, are we brothers.


81. And then it is also just, that each of us observe justice
towards another; and that every church be always in the
‘grith’ of God Almighty, and of all Christian people; because
every church-‘ grith’ is Christ’s own ‘grith,’ and every Christian
has great need that he hold in great respect that ¢ grith.’


omnis 'hirmannus suus det unum denarium; *quod si non
habeat, det dominus ejus pro eo; et omnis thaynus decimet
totum quicquid habet.


DE JEJUNIO ET FERIATIONE TRIUM DIERUM ANTE
FESTUM SANCTI MICHAELIS.


i. Et instituimus, ut omnis Christianus qui atatem habet,
jejunet tribus diebus in pane et aqua, et bis crudis, ®ante
festum Sancti Michaelis.’ Et omnis homo ad confessionem
vadat et nudis pedibus ad ecclesiam, et peccatis omnibus ab-
renunciet emendando, cessando. Et eat omnis presbyter cum
populo suo ad processionem tribus diebus nudis pedibus; et
super hoc cantet omnis presbyter xxx. missas, et omnis dia-
conus et clericus xxx. psalmos, et apparetur tribus dicbus
corredium uniuscujusque sine carne in cibo et potu, sicut idem
comedere deberet, et dividatur hoc totum pauperibus. Et
sit omnis servus liber ab opere illis tribus diebus, quo melius
jejunare possit, et operetur sibimet quod vult. Hi sunt illi
tres dies, dies Lune, dies Martis, et dies Mercurii proximi


'hyremannus MM. Hk. 2qui Hk. ¥ not in M, Hk.


338 JEDELREDES DOMAS.


ante festum Sancti Michaelis. Si quis jejunium suum in-
fringat, servus corio suo componat, reddat liber pauper xxx. d.,
et regis *thaynus cxx. sol. et dividatur haec pecunia pauperibus.
Et sciat omnis presbiter, et tungravius, et decimales homines, ut
*heee eleemosina’ et jejunium perveniat sicut in Sanctis jurare
poterunt.


QUID REGI ET POPULO OMNI DIE SIT CANTANDUM.


mm. Et preecipimus, ut in omni congregatione cantetur cotidie
communiter pro rege et omni populo suo una missa ad matu-
tinalem missam, quse inscripta est contra paganos. Et ad sin-
gulas horas decantet totus conventus extensis membris in terra
psalmum, ‘Domine °qui multiplicati sunt,’ et collectam contra
paganos; et hoc fiat quamdiu necessitas ista nobis est in manibus.
Et in omni ccenobio vel conventu monachorum, celebret omnis
presbyter singillatim xxx. missas pro rege et omni populo; et
omnis monachus ‘dicat xxx. psalteria.


DE CONSUETUDINIBUS SANCTZ DEI ECCLESLZE
REDDENDIS.


1v. Et preecipimus, ut omnis homo, super dilectionem Dei et
omnium sanctorum, det cyricsceattum et rectam decimam suam,
sicut in diebus antecessorum nostrorum °stetit, quando melius
5stetit; hoc est, sicut aratrum peragrabit decimam acram. Et
omnis consuetudo reddatur super amicitiam Dei ad matrem
®nostram ecclesiam cui adjacet. Et nemo auferat Deo quod ad
Deum pertinet, et ’praecessores nostri concesserunt.*®


NE QUIS VENDATUR EXTRA PATRIAM.


v. Et prohibemus ne quis extra °patriam vendatur. Si quis
hoc preesumat, sit preeter benedictionem Dei et omnium sanc-
torum, et preter omnem christianitatem, nisi poeniteat et
emendet, sicut episcopus suus edocebit.


DE ROBARIA.


vi. Et prohibemus omnem robariam omni homini; et sit
omnis homo dignus jure publico, pauper et dives; et reddatur


Itainus VM. Hk. he eleemosine Br. th elemosina Hk. 3 quid
MM. Hk. ‘not in M.Hk. ‘5stetit U. Hk. fecit Br. add. Br.
7 preedecessores M. Hk. %ei add. M. Hk. not in M. Hh.


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELRED. 339


omnis robaria, si quis aliquam fecerit, *et emendet, sicut prius
et postea *stetit; et si quis prapositus eam fecerit, dupliciter
emendet quod alii judicaretur.


DE ELEEMOSINIS ET RECTITUDINIBUS ECCLESIZ.


vir. Et reddatur pecunia eleemosine *hine ad festum Sancti
Michaelis, si alicubi retro sit, per plenam witam; et omnibus
annis deinceps reddantur Dei rectitudines in omnibus rebus que
supradictee sunt, per amicitiam Dei et sanctorum omnium, ut
Deus Omnipotens misericordiam nobis faciat, et de hostibus
triumphum nobis et pacem indulgeat; quem sedulo deprecemur,
ut misericordiam ejus consequamur hic ‘et gratiam,’ et in futuro,
requiem sine fine. *Amen.


ladd. M. Hh. 2stet M. fecit Br. 3hic Br. hic Hh.
4add. M. Hh.


340 JEDELREDES DOMAS.


TX.


*ANNO M.XITI. AB INCARNATIONE DOMINI
NOSTRI JESU CHRISTI.


Be CIRIL-GRIDE.


1 Dip iy 4n papa zepednerpa pe Engzla ‘cymngz gebdihte
mid hiy prcena gepeahte. $ 1p peyc- f he pile $ ealle Loder
eipcean beon fulley zydep pupde. 4 zip xeppe &niz man heonan-
pops Trodey erpic-zud ypa abpece $ he binnon cipic-pazum
man-ylaga peopde- ponne yi  bocledy. y ehte hiy ele papa
pe Loder fpeond yi- bucon $ zepupse # he panon zcbepyrce-
‘y spa dedpe pyud-yocne geyéce $ ye cyninge him puph } reoper
seunne- pid rulpe bove- ge pid Irod ze pid men:-


u. And ip ponne &peyc- $ he hip d@genne pep zepylle pam
cyninge 4 Uyuyces y mid pam hine yylpne mlazize 6 bite.
Foppam epiyven cyning ry Upper gerpelia geceald on cpuy-
cenpe pedde- 4 he yceal Lyuycep abilgSe ppecan ypidse geopne:-


m. And gzip hic ponne tO bote geza- 4 ye cyngze P ze-
papige- ponne béce man  capuc-zd invd *pape cipcan- be
pey cyningey fullan mund-bpyce. 4 pa mynyvep-cl&ényunge
begice- ypa panto gebypige. 4 pid rod hupu pingian geopne:-


1v. And gig *elley be cpicum mannum cipe-zpd abpocen
beo- bécan man geopne be pam pe yed d&d yi. yt bre puph
feoht-lac- yi hic puph peag-lac- yf hic puph unpihc hémed-
yi puph  P hre yi. béce man ape &peye fone zmd-bpyce
into pape cipcan- be pam pe yed deed yi- 4 be fam pe pape
eipcan meed y7:-

v. Ne yin ealle crpcan na gelicpe mede popldlice pypde-


peah hi godcundhice habban halzunge gelice. Jeapod-myny-
they gpid-bpyce- ac boc-pupdan pingan- béce man be cy-


} eynmze 2 pape 3 add.


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELRED. 341


IX.


*ANNO M.XIIII. AB INCARNATIONE DOMINI
NOSTRI JESU CHRISTI.


OF CHURCH-‘GRITH.’


1. This is one of the ordinances which the king of the
English composed with the counsel of his ‘witan.’ That is first :
that he will that all God’s churches be entitled to full ‘ grith;
and if ever any man henceforth so violate God’s church-‘grith,’
that he be a homicide within church walls, then be that ¢ botless ;’
and let every one of those who are friends to God pursue him ;
unless it happen that he escape thence, and seek so awful a
sanctuary, that the king through that grant him life, against
full ¢ bot,’ both to God and to men.


2. And that then is first, that he pay his own ‘wér’ to the
king and to Christ, and thereby inlaw himself to ‘bot:’ because
a Christian king is accounted Christ’s vicegerent among
Christian people, and his duty it is to avenge offence to Christ
very severely.


8. And if it then come to ‘bat, and the king allow it, then
let ‘bot’ be made for the church-‘grith’ to that church, accord-
ing to the king’s full ‘ mund-bryce ;’ and let purification of the
minster be gotten, as is thereto befitting; and especially let
intercession be fervently made with God.


4, And if else, no man being slain, church-‘grith’ be broken,
let ‘bot’ be strictly made, as the deed may be: be it through
fighting, be it through robbery, be it through fornication, be it
through what it may; first, let ‘bot’ be made for the ‘grith-
bryce’ to the church, as the deed may be, and as the rank of
the church may be.


5. All churches are not secularly entitled to equal rank,
although divinely they have like consecration. For the ‘grith-
bryce’ of a chief minster, in cases entitled to ‘bot,’ let ‘oot’ be


® [The text is from G.; the various readings are from D.—7.]


342 JEDELREDES DOMAS.


ninzey munde- } 1p- mid -v- pundum on Engla Jaze. y medem-
pan mynycpey- md hund-cpelpagan yell. $ iy- be cyninger
pice. 4 ponne gic leypan mid prxcigan yoillinga. y xe feld-
cipcan mid -xxx- yertl, A yceal mid phte d6m eyptep d&de-
‘4j medemung be meede:.


vi. And be veoSunge- ye cyng y hip pican habbad zecopen
4y secpeden- ealypa hit piht iy- $ ppiddan del pane ceotunze
pe v6 cipean gebypige 34 tO cipic-bote- y oep deel pam Loder
pe6pum. pmdde Loder peappum y eapman peopeciingan:-


vi. And pice cpiytenpa manna Zehpile- he ny Dprhtene
Iny teodungze- 4 ypa yed yulh pone teoSan eecep seza- yuhrlice
geléyce- be Loder miltye- 4 be pam yullan pice- pe Cadgap
cyninge gelagode. } 17+

vit. Ing hpa teodunge mtlice gel&épcan nelle- fonne yape
vO fey cyningey gepepas 4 pey mynyceper meyye-ppeoyt-
opfe pey land-pican- 4 py bipcopey zepépa- 4 miman unbancey
fone veodan d#1 to fam mynytpe pe hic vo-zebymige. 4
veecan him t6 fam migodan dé&le. 4 cédéle man fa eahta
oélay on cpa: 4 fo ye land-hlapopd co healpum- c6 healpum
ye biycop. yt hic cyningey man y7 hic pegney:-


ix. And si wle geogude teodung gel&pc be Pentecoyven-
be pice. y eopd-peycrma be emmbhte- oppe hupu be Ealpa
Jdalgena meeyyan:.


x. And Rom-feth gel&yce man exzhpilce zeape be Pecper
meyyan. y yefe P nelle gel&ycan yylle pap-c6-edcan -xxx-
peninga- y gilbe pam cyninge -cxx- yertl.:.


x1. And erpie-peeav gel&y'te man be Maptinuy-meyyan. 4
yepe P ne gel&yte fongilde hine mid cpelppealban- y pam
eyninge -cxx: yeull.:.


xu. Sulh-zlmeyyan gebyped $ man gel&yce be pice ezhpilce
Zeape- bonne -xv- niht beod aan ofen Eaytep-cid. y leoht-
seycor gel&yce man to Landel-maeyyan. 06 oytop yepe pille:.


xu And yapl-pceac iy puhtay'cs $ man yymle gelé&yce & xe
openum Zpefe:-


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELRED. 348


made according to the king’s ‘mund,’ that is, with v. pounds
by English law; and of a minster of the middle class, with a
hundred and twenty shillings, that is, according to the king’s
‘wite:’ but of a yet less, with sixty shillings; and for a field
church, with xxx. shillings. Judgment shall ever be with
justice, according to the deed, and mitigation according to its
degree.


6. And respecting tithe; the king and his ‘witan’ have chosen
and decreed, as is just, that one third part of the tithe which
belongs to the church go to the reparation of the church, and a
second part to the servants of God; the third to God’s poor,
and to needy ones in thraldom.


_ 7, And be it known to every Christian man, that he pay to
his Lord his tithe justly, always as the plough traverses the
tenth field, on peril of God’s mercy, and of the full ‘wite,’
which king Edgar decreed; that is:


8. If any one will not justly pay the tithe, then let the king’s
reeve go, and the mass-priest of the minster, or of the ‘land-
rica,’ and the bishop’s reeve, and take forcibly the tenth part
for the minster to which it is due, and assign to him the ninth
part; and let the eight parts be divided into two, and let the
land-lord take possession of half, half the bishop; be it a king’s
man, be it a thane’s,


9. And let every tithe of young be paid by Pentecost, on
pain of the ‘wite;’ and of earth-fruits by the equinox, or, at
all events, by Allhallows’ mass.


10. And Jet Rome-‘feoh’ be paid every year by St. Peter’s
mass; and let him who will not pay it give in addition xxx.
pence, and to the king pay cxx. shillings.


11. And let church-scot be paid by Martinmass; and let him
who does not pay it indemnify it with twelvefold, and cxx. shil-
lings to the king.


12. Plough-alms, it is fitting that they be paid, on pain of
the ‘wite,’ every year, when xv. days are passed after Easter-
tide; and let light-scat be paid at Candlemass; let him do it
oftener who will.


13. And it is most proper that soul-scot be always paid at
the open grave.


344 JEDELREDES DOMAS,


xiv. And ealle Lrobey gzepuhca rypdmge man Zeopne- eal
ypa hic peapr ip:-

xy. And zip hpa } nelle- gepilbe man hime tO yuhte mid
popldliepe yredpe. y $ yt Zemeene Lynyte 4 cyninge- eal ypa
hic iu peey:


xvi. And fpedlya 4 peycena be pice healde man juhtlice:.


xvu. And ‘Sunnan-baza cypinza sopbedde man geopne- be
pullan popld-pice:.


xvi. And peorod-pena mae medemize man yop Loder
ege:-


xix. Ing man meyye-ppeope cahclige- pe pegollice lbbe
*Gnrealdpe yppéce- meyyize zip he duppe- 4 latige hine on
pam huyle- pylp hme yylpne. y ac *ppimrealdpe yppéce-
latize zip he duppe- efc on pam huyle- md ctpam hip gehadan:.


xx. Ing man biacon tihtlize- pe pegollice lbbe- dnrealope
yppéce- nime cpegen Iny gehddan y ladige hine md pam. 4
sip man hme cmhclige ppypealdpe ypp&ce- mme yrx ny ze-
hadan- 4 ladige mid pam- 4 beo he ryle yeoroda:-


xxI. Ing man yoleiyene meyye-ppeoyc mid cihtlan belecze-
pe pegol-lip nzebbe- latige hine spa ypa diacon pe pegol-‘lip
hbbe:-


xxi. Ing man fpeondledyne peorod-pén mid tihtlan belecze-
pe a6-rulcum neebbe- 34 to copyn&de- 4 pap ponne et zerape
} # Lod pille- buton he on huyle ladian m6te:-


xxi. And gp man gehadodne mid peehde belecze- 4 pecze
he p&pe d&b-bana oppe p&d-bana- latize mid lip magan pe
yehSe mocon mid-benan- oppe yope-bécan:-


xxiv. And gig he yi megledy- latige mid gerépan- oppe
Feyte co copynéde- 4 bape zerane $ P Irod p&bde:.


1§unnon- 2 and-


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELRED. 845


14. And let all God’s dues be furthered diligently, as is
needful.


15. And if any one refuse that, let him be compelled to
what is right by secular correction; and Jet that be in common
to Christ, and to the king, as it formerly was.


16. And let festivals and fasts be rightly held, on peril of
the ‘ wite.’


17, And let Sunday marketings be strictly forbidden, on peril
of full secular ‘wite.’


18, And let the rank of the servants of the altar be respected
for fear of God.


19. If a mass-priest, living according to rule, be accused in a
simple suit, let him celebrate mass, if he dare, and clear himself
on the housel, himself alone: and in a triple suit, let him clear
himself, if he dare, likewise on the housel, with two of his fellow
ecclesiastics.


20. If a deacon, living according to rule, be accused in a
simple suit, let him take two of his fellow ecclesiastics, and clear
himself with them: and if he be accused ina triple suit, let
him take six of his fellow ecclesiastics, and clear himself with
them, and be himself the seventh.


21. And if a secular mass-priest be charged with an accusa-
tion, who follows no life of rule, let him clear himself so as a
deacon, who lives a life of rule.


22. If a friendless servant of the altar be charged with an
accusation, who has no supporters to his oath; let him go to
the ‘corsneed,’ and then thereat fare as God will, unless he may
clear himself on the housel.


28. And if any one charge one in holy orders with ‘fechthe,’
and say that he was a perpetrator or adviser of homicide, let
him clear himself with his kinsmen, who must bear the ‘ feehthe’
with him, or make ‘bot’ for it.


24. And if he be kinless, let him clear himself with his
associates, or fast for ‘corsneed; and thereat fare as God may
ordain.


3 ppige- 4-hre


346 JEDELREDES DOMAS.


xxv. And ne peany nig mynycep-munue ahpap mid pbte
faeh3-boce biddan- ne pahd-boce bécan. he ged of hip maz-
laze ponne he zebyhé v6 pnegol-laze:-


xxvi. Ing meyye-ppeoy't man-ylaga pupde- oppe elley man-
peope v6 ypidse gepupce- ponne polize he egpey- ge habdey ze
eapdey> 4 ppaecmgze ypa pide ypa papa him peylipe- 4 deed-béce
Zeopne:.


xxv. Ing meyye-ppeoy' ahpap yrande on leaype gepit-
neyye- opfe on m&nan d¥e- oppe fedpa zepica y zepeophta beo-
ponne yi he dpoppen of gehddodpa gemanan- y¥ polhgze axzdep
se Zerepyeipey se ppeondyeipey ze zeghpilcey pupSycipey- bucon
he p13 Lod 4 pid men pe dedphicop zebéce- fullice ypa biycop
him véce+ 4 him boph pinde- $ he panan-fopd exppe yspilcer
Zeypice. y zip he Jatian pille- gelatige be d&de mede- ypa
mid pyredldpe *[ypa mid angealdpe] lade- be pam pe ed d&d
yi:


xxvii. Inp peorod-pén- be boca v&cinze- Imp agen lif
yuhthce yadige- ponne yi he fuller pegn-pépey 4 peopdyciper
pupde- ze on lige ze on legene:-


xxix. And gip he hiy lip miyfadigze- pamge hip peopdyeipe-
be pam pe ye6 5&0 x1:


xxx. Puce zip he pille ne gebypad him nan pinge ne v6 pire
ne to popld-pge- gp he Lode pile uhthce h¥pan 4 Loder
laza healdan- ypa ypa np hade gedarenad mid pubte:.


xxxl Ac pe lépad geopne 4 ltilice biddad- $ elcey hadeyr
man pam lire hbban fe heom t6-zebypige. 4 heonan-ropS pe
pulad- $ abboday 4 munecay pegollicon hbban ponne hi ni
&p piyan on gepunan hepdon:.


xxx, And ye cyngc bedded eallum hip zepépan on ewzhpil-
cepe ycope- $ ge pam abbodan et eallum popld-neddum
beopgan ypa ze betyt magon. y be pam pe Ze pillan Loder oppe
minne fpeondyerpe habban- pilycan heopa picnepan &ghpap v6


@ [Supplied from


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELRED. 347


25. And no minster-monk may anywhere lawfully demand
‘feehthe-bot,’ nor pay ‘feechthe-bot:’ he forsakes his law of kin
when he submits to monastic law.


26. If a mass-priest become a homicide, or otherwise
flagrantly commit crime, let him then forfeit both his order and
his country, and be an exile as far as the pope may prescribe
to him, and strictly do penance.


27. If a mass-priest stand anywhere in false witness, or in
perjury; or be cognizant and perpetrator of thefts; let him
then be cast out from the community of ecclesiastics, and for-
feit both their society and friendship and every dignity; unless
he the more deeply make ‘bot’ to God and men, entirely as the
bishop may direct him; and find himself ‘borh,’ that thence-
forth he will ever abstain from the like: and if he desire to
clear himself, let him clear himself according to the degree of
the deed, either with a threefold or with a simple ‘lad,’ accord-
ing as the deed may be.


28. If a servant of the altar, by the instruction of books,
his own life rightly order, then let him be entitled to the
full ‘wér’ and dignity of a thane, both in life and in the
grave.


29. And if he misorder his life, let his honour wane, accord-
ing as the deed may be.


30. Let him know, if he will, that it befits him not to have
any concern either with woman or with temporal war; if he
desire uprightly to obey God, and observe God’s laws, as is
properly becoming to his order.


31. And we earnestly instruct, and affectionately beseech,
that men of every order live that life which is becoming to
them: and we will that henceforth abbots and monks live more
according to rule than before this they had in custom.


82. And the king commands all his reeves, in every place,
that ye protect the abbots on all secular occasions, as ye best
may ; and as ye desire to have God’s or my friendship, that ye
aid their stewards everywhere to right; that they themselves


Cnut, Eccl. 5.—T.)]


* pees ?


348 JEDELREDES DOMAS.


puhte. $ hed yylpe magan pe ofpcop on mynycpum feyce
sepumian 4 pegollice lhbban:-


xxx. And gif man gehadodne oppe exlpeddigne man buph
gmz ‘pingc fopp&de- ac ped oppe act feope- oppe hine
beende- 2oppe hine beate-” oppe zebiymyge on &nige piyan-
ponne yceal him cynge beon yop meez- 4 yop munbd-bopan-
buton he elley odepne hebbe:.


xxxiv. And béce man ewgdep ze him ze pam cynge- ypa
ypa Inc gebypige- be pam pe yed d&d yi- oppe he pa d&de
ppece ypide de6pe:-


xxxv. Cyiycenum mannum *zebyped ypise puhtee p he
Trodep abilgde ppece ypide geopne:.


xxxvi. And pire p&pan popld-prcan pe tO zodcundan piht-
lagan popold-laga yectan: rolce tO ycedpe. y Lyyte 4 *cyninge
Zepuhtan pa bores *pap man ypa yeolde manega yop nedde
gepildan +6 prhce:-


xxxvi. Ac on pam gemdcan- peih p&dlice pupSan on
nameudan ycopan- zpcen Cadgapey lip-ddgum- Cayce laze
panobdan. y cyningey laze lyclebdon:.


xxxvi. And ba man gecpemde } &p pay seméne Cpiyce


‘4y eynimege on popldlicpe yredpe. y @ hic peopd pe pypye fop
Lobe 4 sop poplde. cume ni v6 biéve- gip hic Lod pille:.


xxxix. And gic meg pedih boc cuman: pille hrc man Zeopne
on eopnoyt aginnan:-


xi. And gig man eapd pille prhclice cl&ényian- ponne moc
man ymeagan 4 Zeopnlice ypyjuan hpap pa manrullan pununge
habban pe nellad geypican- ne fon Isode bécan. ac ypa hpap
ypa hi man pinbe- gepilte hi co pihte- pancey oppe unpancey-
oppe hi apippize mid ealle of eapde- bucon hi gebugan y c
pubte °xzependan:-


xr. Ing munuc oppe meyye-ppeoyt pisepraca pupSe md
ealle- he yi Amanyumod eefpe- buton he pe pebdlicop gebtize
co hiy peapre:-


} pine 7 add. 3 zebipad


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELRED. 349


may the more uninterruptedly dwell closely in their minsters,
and live according to rule.


83. And if any one wrong an ecclesiastic or a foreigner,
through any means, as to money or as to life; or bind, or beat,
or insult him in any way; then shall the king be unto him in
the place of a kinsman and of a protector, unless he else have
another.


34, And let ‘bot’ be made both to him and to the king, as
is fitting, according as the deed may be; or let him avenge the
deed very deeply.


35. It is very justly incumbent on Christian men, that they
very diligently avenge any offence against God.


86. And wise were those secular ‘witan’ who to the divine
laws of right added secular laws, for the people’s government;
and directed the ‘bot’ to Christ and the king, that many should
thus of necessity be compelled to right.


37. But in those ‘ gemots,’ though deliberately held in places
of note, after Edgar’s lifetime, the laws of Christ waned, and
the king’s laws were impaired.


88. And then was separated what was before in common to
Christ and the king in secular government; and it has ever
been the worse before God and before the world: let it now
come to an amendment, if God will it.


39. And an amendment, however, may yet come, if it be
diligently and earnestly undertaken.


40. And if any one will properly cleanse the land, then must
he inquire and diligently trace where the criminals have their
dwelling, who will not desist, nor make ‘bot’ before God; but
wherever they may be found, let them be compelled to right,
willingly or unwillingly ; or let them altogether withdraw from
the country, unless they submit and turn to right.


41. If a monk or a mass-priest become altogether an apostate,
let him be for ever excommunicated, unless he the more readily
submit to his duty.


4 cynmexze 5 zepeendan


850 JEDELREDES DOMAS.


xLu. And yepe Loder tic-lagan- open pone andazan pe ye
eyngc yecte- hebbe on zepealde- plihte v6 him yylrum ¥ ealpe
Iny ape- pid Lpnycer geypelian- pe cpipcendom 4 cyneddm
healdad 4 pealdad pa hpile pe peer Irod zeann:-


xii, Ac ucon o0n ypa uy peapg p+ uton niman uy to
byynan } &ppan popld-prcan v6 p&de sepxddon- /Cbdelytan- 4
Eadmund- 4 Eadzap pe myc pey. hi hi Irod peopdodon- 4
Loder laze heolton- 4 Irodeyr zarel léycan- pa hpile pe hi
leopodon. And fican Inod Itjan mmnepepdpe heopan- y Lrober
laza s¥man- ypa pel ypa pe becyt mazon:-


xiv. And ficon yuhtne cyuycenddm zeopnlice peopdian- 4
zlene hedenddm mid ealle opephogian. y uton &nne cyne-
higpopd holdlice healdan- 4 fpeonda gehpile mid mbtan Ze-
cpypdan oSepne lupige 4 healde mid pihte:.


THE LAWS OF KING ETHELRED. 351


42, And he who holds an outlaw of God in his power over
the term that the king may have appointed, he acts, at peril of
himself and all his property, against Christ’s vicegerent, who
preserves and sways over Christianity and kingdom as long as
God grants it.


48. But let us do as is needful to us; let us take to us for an
example that which former secular ‘witan’ deliberately insti-
tuted; /Mthelstan, and Edmund, and Edgar who was last: how
they worshipped God, and observed God’s law, and rendered
God’s tribute, the while that they lived. And let us love God
with inward heart, and heed God’s laws, as well as we best
can.


44, And let us zealously venerate right Christianity, and
totally despise every heathenism; and Jet us faithfully cherish
one royal lord, and let every friend love his fellow with right
fidelity, and cherish him with justice.


* and?


352


ORDINANCE
RESPECTING THE ‘DUN-SETAS.’


“Diy 1p peo gepeedney pe Angel-cynnep pican y Pealh-
peode peed-bopan becpeox > Dun-yetan gereccon- Ff 17:


Be TRODE LESTOLENES YRFES.

1. Ing mon tpode bedpizd yopycolener yprer of pra e on
odep+ ponne befeyce mon } spon landey-mannum: * oppe mid
meayice gecype $ man juht dmire. Fo ye yyppan co pe $
land age 4 heebbe him pa eycan- 4 pey on -1x- mhton zylve
~ yppe- oppe co pam deze undep-ped lecze. $ sy peey oprey
odep healp peopd. y pey on «1x mhton f ped undo mid
puhcan gylbe. Ing mon yecge $ man $ cpod apoh dpize-
ponne moc yepe } yppe Sahtpodad co yrade ladan- 4 peep
yyxa yum ungzecopenjia pe secpype yyn pone ad yyllan } he
mid folc-puhte on } land yppece- ypa hip opp feep-up eode:.


Be RIPTES PEORLE BETPEOX- peALUM AND
ENGLUM.
nu. JEppe ymb -1x- mht gebyped- betpeox pam yredum-
# mon odpum phe pypce- ze wet lade ge xc elepe yppeece fe


* [The text is from B. The rubrics are from Lambarde.—TZ.]

b [Lambarde here has Deun-yevay, though at the end of the
document, in his edition, we find Dun-recum, Dun-yecan, Dun-
yeece: whence it seems evident that the first reading is either a
clerical or a typographical error. It has, nevertheless, given occa-
sion to the supposition (see Palgrave’s Rise and Progress, vol. 2.
p- cexxxili.) that ‘this is a treaty between the British and English
inhabitants of Devon, which establishes the very important fact, that
the Britons still existed as a people unmingled with their conquerors.’
Had the mss. concurred in the above reading, this supposition would
have had some probability in its favour, but unluckily—though the
author has omitted the observation —it is solitary, unsupported either
by the C.C. ms. or by the Latin versions in the Macro, Holkham,
and Royal mss., all of which concur in reading Dun-setas, 7. e.
Mountain dwellers. Malmesbury (De Gestis Reg. Angl. 11. 6.)


353


ORDINANCE
RESPECTING THE ‘DUN-SETAS.’


This is the ordinance which the ‘witan’ of the English race
and the counsellors of the ‘Wealh’ nation established,
among the >‘Dun-setas;’ that is:


OF THE TRACING OF STOLEN CATTLE.


1. If any one pursue the track of stolen cattle from one
‘steeth’ to another, then Jet him commit the tracing to the men
of the country, *or show by some mark that it is rightfully
pursued. Let him then take to it who owns the land, and
have the inquiry to himself, and 1x. days afterwards compensate
for the cattle, or deposit an ‘ under-wed’ on that day, which
shall be worth half as much again as the cattle; and in rx. days
from that time let him redeem the ‘wed’ by lawful payment.
If it be said that the track is wrongfully pursued, then must he
who ‘traces the cattle lead to the ‘staeth,’ and there himself one
of six unchosen men, who are true, make oath that he accord-
ing to folk-right makes lawful claim on the land, as his cattle
went thereup.


OF DOING JUSTICE BETWEEN ‘WEALHS’ AND
ENGLISH.


2. It is meet always after 1x. days, between the ‘stzths,’ that
one man do justice to another, both with respect to ‘lad’ and in


informs us that AEthelstan established the Wye as a boundary be-
tween the English and British on that side: may not that be the
river alluded to in the document? It flows, at least in some parts
of its course, in a direction by no means unfavourable to the con-
jecture. Besides, if the people of Devonshire be here meant, how
are the words ‘Dpilon Penc-pere hypbon mcto Dun-yeran,’ &c. to be
understood ?—T.

¢ [This is the reading both of B. and of Lambarde, but the pas-
sage is apparently corrupt. The Latin version in the Macro and
Royal mss. evidently follows the reading of the Saxon, viz. « Si
dicatur quod vestigium illud injuste minetur, tune debet homo qui
per vestigium sequitur ad locum ducere, et ibi se sexto, &c. The
reading given in the Holkham ms. is defective, and affords no sense,
viz. ‘Si dicatur quod vestigium sequitur ad locum ducere, et ibi,’
&e.—T.)


*and ?


354 ORDINANCE RESPECTING


him betpeox bid. Ne ycent nan oden 14 ac tihclan bute
opdal becpeox Pealan y Englan- bute man payian pille. Of
zgdpan yozde on odep man mot babdian- bute man eller juht
begycan meese:-


Be BADUM.


1. Ing bad genumen yy on monner opre fop odper monner
pmgum- ponne begzyce pa bade ham yepe heo fope-genumen
yy: opbe of ny agenum pone gehealde pe $ opp age. Sceal
yppan nede yuht pypcean yepe ep nolde. +xi- lahmen yeylon
puhe ceecean Pealan y JEnglan- -vi- Engliyene 4 «vie Pyliyce.
Dolien ealley pay hy agon zip hi poh taecen- oppe seladian hi
~ hi bet ne cudon:.


Be DONE DE LAD TEORIE.


iv. Deah xt yral-vyhclan 14 ceome /Engliycan oppe
Pihycan- zylde angyloey he mud-beled pey. Day obdpey
syloer nan ping ne pey pricey pe ma:-


BE MAN-SLIPTE.


v. Iryp Pealh Cnghy[e]ne man ofylea- ne pean he hine
hiven-ofep buon be healpan pene gyldan- ne sEnghye Py-
hi{y]ene geon-ofep pe ma yy he pegen-bopen yy he ceopl-
bopen. heal pep peep 2ec-yeals:.


BE DON DE ENGLISLE ON PYLISL-LAND FARE.


vi. Nah nadep to yapenne- ne Pyhiye-man on JEngliyc-land
ne fEnghye on Pyhye pe ma- butan geyeccan land-men- ye
hine yceal xv yrade undepron- 4 epc pap butan yacne ze-
byngan. Lyf ye Jand-man zmigey yacney zepica yy- ponne
ry he prcey yeyloig- buton he hme pepe geprcneyye Zelabdie.
Spa eac ale pe gepica oppe Zepyphta yi- pep uclendiye man
inlendipcan depie- geladie pepe mid-pry'ce be per oppey peopde.
4B ry cype-ad. 4 yepe hine belecze o¢zga hip yppeece mod
fop-ade. Ing peor ad ceopie zylbe cpy-zylde- 4 hlaropde hir
pive:.


THE ‘DUN-SETAS, 355


every suit that may be between them. There stands no other
‘]2d’ in an accusation, save the ordeal, between ‘ Wealas’ and
Englishmen, unless it be allowed. From either ‘steeth’ to the
other a pledge must be given, unless justice may be got in any
other way.


OF PLEDGES.


3. If a pledge be taken on a man’s cattle for another man’s
account, then let him for whose account it is taken get the
pledge home, or let him satisfy from his own property him who
owns the cattle. Then he must needs do right who before
would not. xu. ‘lahmen’ shall explain the Jaw to the ‘ Wealas’
and English, vi. English and vi. ‘Wealas.’ Let them forfeit all
they possess, if they explain it wrongly; or clear themselves
that they knew no better.


OF HIM WHO FAILS IN A ‘LAD,’


4, Though, in an accusation of theft, a ‘lad’ fail to an
Englishman or to a ‘Wealh,’ Ict him pay the ‘ angylde’ [only]
of that with which he was charged. Of the other ‘gild’ nothing,
no more than of the ‘wite,’


OF HOMICIDE.


5. If a ‘Wealh’ slay an Englishmap, he need not pay for
him on this side except with half his ‘wer;? no more than an
Englishman for a ‘Wealh’ on that side; be he thane-born, be
he ‘ceorl’-born: one half of the ‘wér’ in that case falls away.


IN CASE AN ENGLISHMAN JOURNEY INTO ‘WYLISC’
LAND.


6. Neither is to travel, neither a ‘Wealh’ in the English land
any more than an Englishman in the ‘ Wylise,’ without the
appointed man of the country, who shall receive him at the
‘steth,’ and bring him thither again without guile. Ifthe man
of the country be cognizant of any guile, then let him be liable
in the ‘ wite,’ unless he clear himself of that cognizance. So
also Jet every one who is cognizant or perpetrator, where an
outlandish man injures an inlandish one, clear himself of that
privity, according to the value of the property; and let that
be a ‘cyre-ath:’ and he who charges him, let him begin his
suit with a ‘for-ath.’ Ifthe ‘lad’ fail, let him pay twofold, and
to the lord his ‘ wite.’


356 ORDINANCE RESPECTING


Be sCLLES NYTENES PEORDE LIF PI LOSIAD.


vi. Wop mon yeeal gyldan mid -xxx- yeili. oppe be pam
lavian. mypan mid -xx- yell. oppe be pam. y pintep-yteal
ealypa. *pilde-peopp mid -xir- yeitt. oppe be pam. 4 oxan mid
xxx+ p. cu md -xXxIIII- p. ppyn mid -vi- p. man mid punde.
yceap mid yell. zac mid -1-p. Odpe >ungerapene ping mon
mot mid ade Zepypban- 4 yyppan be pam zyloan:-


BE ORF OFER STREAM BEFANGENUM.


vit. Ing mon opp bepo- y man open ypepeam hic tyman
pylle- ponne yecce mon in-boph oppe undep-ped lecze- } yeo
yppec ende heebbe. See hic him to-ceo pylle yrxa yum pone
46 } he hic him ypa to-ceo ypa hic him peor-ycolen pepe. 4
yepe hic tyme yylle ana pone a5- } he hic to pape hanbda
cyme pe him yealde, Inp hie man begeondan yepeame agnian
pylle- ponne yceal $ beon mid opdale. Lrelice pam sEnghye.
yeeal Pyhycan juhte pypcean:.


BE pENT-SETUM AND DUN-8CTUM.


1x. }pilon Pent-peece hypdon into Dun-yetan- ac hit ze-
byped puhcop into Peyt-yexan. pydep hy yeylan garol 4
gylay yyllan. Cac Dun-yeete bepyprpan- zip heom ye cyning
an- $ man hupu ypis-ziylay to heom lete:.


a This seems to be either a wild unbroken colt or a colt foaled in
the forest or uninclosed pasture. The German ‘ werfen,’ when de-
noting to bring forth, is confined to animals.


THE *‘DUN-SETAS’ 357


OF THE WORTH OF ALL CATTLE, IF IT BE LOST.


7. A horse shall be paid for with xxx. shillings, or an ex-
purgation after that rate; a mare with xx. shillings, or after
that rate; and a ‘winter-steal’ the same: a * ‘wilde-weorf’
with xu. shillings, or after that rate; and an ox with xxx.
pence; a cow with xxv. pence; a swine with vil. pence; a
man with a pound; a sheep with 1. shilling; a goat with 1.
pence. Other unseen things may be estimated on oath, and
then paid for accordingly.


OF CATTLE ATTACHED OVER THE STREAM.


8. If cattle be attached, and the party will vouch to warranty
over the stream; then let him place an ‘in-borh’ or deposit an
‘under-wed,’ that the suit may have an end. Let him who
claims it make an oath, himself one of six, that as he claims it
so it was stolen from him; and let him who vouches to warranty
make an oath alone, that he vouches to warranty the person who
sold it to him. If one beyond the stream will lay claim to it,
then must that be with ordeal. Like to that shall an English-
man do justice to a * Wealh.’


OF ‘WENT-SZTAS’ AND «DUN-SATAS,’


9. Formerly the ‘ Went-setas’ belonged to the ‘ Dun-setas,’
but more properly they belong to the West Saxons: there they
shall give tribute and hostages, ‘The ‘ Dun-setas’ also need,
if the king grant it to them, that at least ‘frith’-hostages be
allowed them.


b [The Latin version in WM. and Hk. reads: ‘Cetere res ungese-
wene, 7.¢. non vise. £. has even ‘ungesawene, z.e. non vise. Unseen
things are undoubtedly equivalent to things not forthcoming, which
can therefore only be valued on oath.—7Z.]


LCNUTES DOCAS.*


ECCLESIASTICAL.


Diy 1p ped tzepdnyy pe Inuc *cyningce ealley Cngla-lander
cyningc 4 Dena *cyminge *4 Nopdjugena cyninge-7 mod
hip picena gepeahte- zepaddse Trobe +6 lope y him
yylpum <6 cyneyeipe 4 tO peapre- 4 P pay on pape
halzan °mid-pincpey vide on 7 Pintan-ceaytpe:-


DE DEO, RELIGIONE, ET REGE DEBITE COLENDIS.


1. Dec iy ponne &peyc- $ hio ofep ealle Soppe pinge &nne
God eppe poldan lipan 4 pupdian- 4 &nne cmycendém anped-
lice healdan- y Inuv cinge IGpian mid puhtan secp¥pdan:-


DE PACE DEI, REGIS, ET ECCLESIARUM.


nu. °And Loder cipican zyban 4 pprdian y gelomlice
récean- “yaplum to héle- 4” ur yylpum co peapre. Ele
cipice 1p mid puhce on Dyer “azenan gpide- y ale cyten
man &h micele peappe $ he on pam gue micele made pice.
yoppam Irodey zyud ay ealpa gyda “yeloyc vO geeapmianne
zeopnoyt to healdenne- y “peep nehyc-’ Mcyninger. Donne
ip yprse puhthe $ Loder cipic-gmS binnan pagum y emycener
Seyningcey hand-zud ycande een “unpemme. 4 sepe adop
pulbpece polize lander 4 Hipeyr- bucon "him ye cyninge geapian
pylle. And gzip xppe “mg mann heonon-fopd Loder cipie-
zyjud ypa abpece- } he binnon cyic-pagum mann-ylaga peopde-
ponne “siz P bocleady. y ehte hip ele papa pe Loder fpeond
J15- butan  gepeopde $ he panon zcbepyce 4 spa dedpe Fus-
yocne zeyéce- $ ye cyninge him puph # feopep geunne pid


1gepedney A. 2eynnz A. Seyninz G. Vnot in G. 5yole L.
add. ®mibe- G. 7Ppinceaycpe G. Snot in A. 9” And ucon Loder
cypican zelomlice zmupran J ppipian A. Myecan D. not in A.
Wwazanan A. Wyelayc A. pap mhye D. Weynger D. 1 un-
pemme D. “not inG, Wamz A.


THE LAWS OF KING CNUT.*


ECCLESIASTICAL.


This is the ordinance that king Cnut, king of all England,
and king of the Danes and Norwegians, decreed, with
counsel of his ‘ witan,’ to the praise of God, and to the
honour and behoof of himself: and that was at the holy
tide of Mid-winter, at Winchester.


1. That then is first, that, above all other things, they should
ever love and worship one God, and unanimously observe one
Christianity, and love king Cnut with strict fidelity.


2. And to hold in ‘grith’ and in ‘frith, and frequently to
seek God’s churches, for the salvation of souls and the behoof
of ourselves. Every church is by right in Christ’s own ‘ grith,’
and every Christian man has great need that he show great
reverence for that ‘grith; because God’s ‘grith’ is of all
‘griths’ the most excellent to merit, and the best to preserve,
and next thereto, the king’s. Then is it very right, that God’s
church-‘ grith’ within walls, and a Christian king’s hand-‘ grith’
stand equally inviolate ; and let him who infringes either forfeit
land and life, unless the king will be merciful to him. And
if ever any man henceforth so break God’s church-‘ grith, that
he be a homicide within church-walls, then be that ‘botless;’
and let every one of them who is a friend to God pursue him;
unless it happen that he escape thence, and seek so awful a


a [Cnut, king of Denmark, became monarch of all England on the
death of Edmund Ironside, A.D. 1017, and died A.D. 1035. The
text is from G.— Z.]


AAA


360 INUTES DOMAS.


Fulpe béce- ze pid Ind ge pid menn. And } 1p ponne Kpeyc.
® he hny @genne "pen Lyte 4 pam cymngce zerylle- y md
pam hine yylgne inlagie co béce. 4 zip hic ponne v6 béve zeza-
4 ye cyninge P gepapige- ponne béce man f cipic-zmd inco
pape cipican be cynincger fullan *mund-bpyce- y pa myn-
yeep-clenyunge begice ypa *pep-co gebyjuge. 4 *egdep ge
meg-bote xe man-bote fullice gebece- 4 pid Trod hupu pingie
Zeopne:-


DE MULCTA PRO DIGNITATE ECCLESLE
CONFERENDA.


m1. And gzip eller be cpicum mannum cijue-zud abpocen
yy: becte man zeopne be pam pe yeo d&d y¥. y¥ hic puph
feohvlac- yy nc puph pearlace y¥ puph $ pe Inc yf. Béce
man °€pey'c pone gypud-bpyce vo Speepe c1yucan- be pam pe
yeo 70&> yy- 4 be pam pe pepe cipcan med yy. Ne yd
ealle cypicean na Zelicne made peopuldlice *pupdycipey pypde-
peah biz godcundhice *halgunge habban gelice. Wedpod-
mynycpep syud-bpyce ip ac boc-pypdum pingum be cyningey
munbte- $ y+ mid -v- pundum on Engla laze- 4 on Lenv-
lande at pam mund-bpyce -v- pund pam cingce 4 pped pam
apcebipcope.’ 4 medempan mynyctpep mid ™-cxx- yell.” f ay-
be cyningey pice. y fonne gyc leyyan- pep lycel pedpdom pF
4 lexep-pcop peah y¥- md ” -ix- yeilt. y peld-capce peep legzep-
ycop ne ®yiz- mid pprecigum peill.:.


DE REVERENTIA SACERDOTIBUS PRASTANDA.


1v. Callum cmycenum mannum gebypad ypidse pihte P hiz
hahzoom- y haday- 4 gehalgode Loder htiy xppe ypide geopne
gpidian y Fdian. 4 p hi hada gehpylene peoptian be meade.
yopsam undepycante pepe pille oppe cunne- micel 1y 4 m&pe
yacepd dh to d6nne- fFolce c6 peapre- yp he ny Dmhtne
gecpemed mid pihte. Gicel ap yed halpung y mé&pe ip yeo
halgungz pe deorla arypyad 4 on fleame zebpinged- ypa orc
ypa man rullaS oppe huyel halgad. 4 “hahze englay pap-
“abucan hpeappiad- y pa d&da *bepedpdiad- 4 puph Loder


1pep A. 2munbd-bpece A. 3 pap-co A. 4 exten A. 5 epoye A.
Spanpe A. 7ombe A. Snot in A. *halpunge G. 1% not wn A.


THE LAWS OF KING CNUT. 361


sanctuary, that the king through that grant him life against
full * bot,’ both to God and to men. And that is then first:
that he pay his own ‘wér’ to Christ and to the king, and
thereby inlaw himself to ‘ bot :’ and if it then come to ¢ bot,’ and
the king allow it, then let ‘bot’ be made for the church-‘ grith’
to that church, according to the king’s full ‘ mund-bryce,’ and
the purification of the minster be gotten, as is thereto be-
fitting; and let ‘bot’ be fully made, both with ‘meg-béot,’ and
man-‘bét,’ and especially let intercession be fervently made
with God.


3. And if else, no man being slain, church-‘grith’ be
broken, let ‘ bot’ be strictly made, according as the deed may
be: be it through fighting, be it through robbery, be it through
what it may be. First, let ‘bot’ be made for the ¢ grith-bryce’”
to the church, according as the deed may be, and as the rank
of the church may be. All churches are not secularly entitled
to a like degree of reverence, although divinely they have like
consecration. The ‘grith-bryce’ of a chief minster, in cases
entitled to ‘bot,’ is according to the king’s ‘ mund,’ that is,
v. pounds by English law; and in Kent, for the ‘ mund-bryce,’
v. pounds to the king, and three to the archbishop: and of a
minster of the middle class, cxx. shillings, that is, according to
the king’s ‘ wite:’? and of one yet less, where there is little
service, provided there be a burial place, Lx. shillings: and of
a field church, where there is no burial place, thirty shillings.


4, It is very justly incumbent on all Christian men, that
they very strictly observe ‘grith’ and ‘frith’ towards holy
things, and holy orders, and the hallowed houses of God; and
that they reverence every holy order, according to its rank:
because (understand who is willing or able) much and great
is that which the priest has to do, for the behoof of the people,
if he justly please his Lord. Much is the supplication, and
great is the hallowing which sendeth away devils and putteth
them to flight, as often as baptism is performed or housel


17 4n hundped +y cpenvigum yeillingum A. pxcnzgum A. yy A.
M4 not in Ae bependiad A.


362 LNUTES DOMAS.


mihta pam *yacepdan rylycad- ypa ope ypa Ing Cpyce peniad
mid yuhte. 4 ypa hi 065 yymle- yppa ofc ypa hig geopnlice
inpeapdpe heopcan cl¥piad cd Ipiyce. 4 fon folcey nedde
pingiaS zeopne. 4 pi man yeeal pop Loder Exe made on hade
gecnapan mid geyceade:-


DE PURGATIONE ORDINATORUM.


v. And zyp hic gepeopSe- $ man mid *cyhclan 4 mid
uncpepoum yacepd belecgze pe pegollice hbbe- 4 he hme yylrne
pice pey clénne. meyyize gzip he duppe 4 latige on pam
huyle- yylp hime yylpne- ac angealdpe ppp&ce. y xc ppy-
fealdpe yppé&ce latige *he gyp he duppe ec on pam huyle-
mid cpam hip gehadan. Inp man diacon ‘cihtlize pe pezol-
hee lbbe- dnpealdpe ®ypéce- mime cpegen ny zehadan 4
latize bine ®imd pam. 4 gif man hine cihthze pp¥pealdpe
7ypéce- mime -vi- hiy gehadan- 4 ladige hime mid pam-
beo he yylp yeopeda. Ing man folcipcne meyye-ppeoyc mid
tihtlan beleege- pe pegol-lip nebbe- latizge hine ypa diacon
pe pegol-lize hbbe. y gyf man fpeondleayne peorod-péen mid
cihtlan belecge pe a-pulcum nebbe- 34 tO copyn&de- 4
peep ponne xv gefape $ P Thode pyllee buton he on huyle
seladian move. y gif man gehadobne man mid fehde be-
lecge- y yecge $ he p&pe o&bd-bana oppe pé#d-bana- ladige
mid hiy magum pe fehde mocon mid-bepan- oppe fope-bécan.
4y sip he ip meegleay- latige *hine md gerépan- oppe on
feycen yo» gp he  pupye: 4 ga tO conpn&de- y pep-ac
zerape ypa ypa Lod pede. y “ne peapy nig myny'cep-munuc
Wahpap mid yuhte faehd-borve biddan- ne feehd-boce béran.
We zed of hy megd-lage ponne he ge-byhd to pegol-laze.
And zip meyye-ppeoyc xppe ahpxp yrande on ledype ge-
picneyye- oppe on mé&nan e+ oppe pedpa gepita oppe ze-
pyphta beo- ponne y¥ he apoppen of gehadodpa gemanan-
4y pohgze eezgdep ge “xepepyeiper ge Fpeondycipey ge eeghpyleeyr
peopdyeipey- butan he pid Tod 4 pid menn pe dedplicon
gebéce- ypa bipceop him cé&ce- 4 him boph pinde- $ he
panon-fop exype ypyleer seypice. And gyp he “hine ladian


1 yacepdon A, 2 crhlan A. Snot in A.
4 cihlize A. 5ypnece A.D. Snot in A.


THE LAWS OF KING CNUT. 363


hallowed: and holy angels hover there around and protect the
deeds, and, through God’s powers, support the priests, as often
as they rightly minister to Christ; and so they always do, as
often as they earnestly, with inward heart, call to Christ, and
fervently intercede for behoof of the people; and therefore,
for fear of God, rank is discreetly to be acknowledged in holy
orders.


5. And if it happen that a priest who lives according to
rule be charged with an accusation and with evil practices,
and he know himself innocent thereof; let him celebrate mass
if he dare, and himself clear himself on the housel, in a simple
suit: and in a threefold suit, let him also, if he dare, clear
himself on the housel with two of his fellow ecclesiastics. If a
deacon, living according to rule, be accused in a simple suit,
let him take two of his fellow ecclesiastics, and with them clear
himself: and if he be accused in a threefold suit, let him take
vi. of his fellow ecclesiastics, and with them clear himself, and
be himself the seventh. If a secular mass-priest be charged
with an accusation, who has no regular life, let him clear
himself as a deacon who lives a life of rule: and if a friendless
servant of the altar be charged with an accusation, who has
no support to his oath, let him go to the ‘corsned, and then
thereat fare as God will, unless he may clear himself on the
housel. And if a man in orders be charged with ‘ feehthe,’ and
it be said, that he was perpetrator or adviser of homicide, let
him clear himself with his kinsmen, who must bear the
‘ feehthe’ with him, or make ‘bot’ for it: and if he be kin-
less, let him clear himself with his associates, or betake him-
self to fasting, if that be necessary, and go to the ‘corsneed,’
and thereat fare so as God may ordain: and no minster-monk
may lawfully anywhere demand ‘feehth-bot,’ nor pay ‘ feehth-
bot” He forsakes his law of kin when he submits to monastic
law. And if ever a mass-priest stand anywhere in false wit-
ness or in perjury, or be cognizant and perpetrator of thefts,
then let him be cast from the community of ecclesiastics, and
forfeit both their society and friendship and every dignity ;


7 ppece A.D. Snot in G. 9na G.
1 ahpen A. 1 yenrerper A. 12 not in G.


364 LNUTES DOMAS.


pylle- gelatige ponne be 75@de meede-” *ppa mid pp¥pealdpe
Sypa mid anrealdpe’ lade- be pam pe yed d&6 y1:.


EXHORTATIO AD ECCLESIASTICOS, UT SANCTE
VIVANT.


v1. And pe pillad  elcey hddey menn zeopne gebugan ele
to pam juhte pe him to-zebymze. y hupu-pinga Lroder
peopay: biyceopay 4 abboday- munecay 47 mynecena- canonicay
4j nunnan- to quhte xebuzan- 4 pezgollice hbban- y *dzeger
4 nthvey- oye 4 geléme- cl¥pian v6 Cyiyce- 4 op eall emycen
yole pingian zeopne. And ealle Tnoder pedpay pe biddad 4
lépad- 4 hupu-pinga yacepday- f hi Irode hY¥pan- y *clénneyye
lG@pian- 4 beopgian Sheom yylpum pid Lobe yppe- 4 pid pone
peallendan bp¥ne pe peallad on helle. Ful geopne hig pican
p hig *naézon mid yubte puph hemed-pinge piper gemanan. 4
yebe pay geypican pille- 4 clénneyye ®healban- “hebbe he
Lrobdey multye- 4 tO “populd-pupdyeipe- yi he pegen-*laze
pypse. And eghpyle cpycen mann “ede pop my Dmbhtner
ege unpuhc hémed seonne fopbuge- 4 zodcunde “laze yuhtlice
healde:-


DE CONJUGIIS PROHIBITIS.


vu. And pe lépad 4 biddad 4 on Loder naman beddad-
énizg cpiycen mann binnan -vi- manna yib-pece- on hip
azyenan cynne efpe ne Zepipie. ne on hy megey laze pe
ypa neath yib p&pe- ne on pey piper “néd-mazan pe he yylr
&p hepde- ne on np *zep&depan- ne on gehalgodpe nunnan-
ne on &lécen nig cmyten mann epye ne Zepipige- ne émze
fophgpu ahpap ne begange- “ne na ma pia ponne an hebbe.
‘4; P beo hip bepeddode pif.” *°ac beo be *4pepe anpe pa hpile
pe hed hbbe- yepe pille Inoder lage z¥man mid puhte- y pid
helle bpyne beophgan hip yaple:.


V sabe mae A. 2 not in G. ¥ not in A. 4 deerzes A.
5 clenneyya A. Shim D. 7 pe D. ®nazan D.
$healoen A. 10 habbe A. Npupulo- A. 1? -laza D.


THE LAWS OF KING CNUT. 365


unless he the more deeply make ‘bot’ to God and men, as the
bishop may direct him, and find himself ‘borh,’ that thence-
forth he will ever abstain from the like. And if he desire to
clear himself, then let him clear himself according to the
degree of the deed, either with a threefold or with a simple
‘Jad,’ according as the deed may be.


6. And we will, that men of every order readily submit, each
to that law which is becoming to him; and above all, let the
servants of God, bishops and abbots, monks and mynchens,
canons and nuns, submit to law, and live according to rule,
and by day and by night, oft and frequently, call to Christ,
and fervently intercede for all Christian people. And we be-
seech and instruct all God’s servants, and especially priests,
that they obey God and love chastity, and secure themselves
against God’s ire, and against the fierce burning which rageth
in hell. Full well they know, that they have not lawfully
through concubinage intercourse with woman; and let him
who will abstain from this, and preserve his chastity, have God’s
mercy, and, for worldly honour, be he worthy of thane-law.
And let every Christian man also, for dread of his Lord,
strictly eschew unlawful concubinage, and rightly observe the
divine law.


7. And we instruct and beseech and, in God’s name, com-
mand, that no Christian man ever marry in his own family
within the relationship of vi. persons: nor with the relict of
his kinsman who was so near of kin; nor with the relative of
the wife whom he had previously had; nor with his godmother,
nor with a hallowed nun, nor with one divorced, let any
Christian man ever marry, nor any fornication anywhere com-
mit; nor have more wives than one, and let that be his wedded
wife; but let him be with her alone, as long as she may live,
whoever will rightly keep God’s law, and secure his soul against
the burning of hell.


not in AG. ‘4 laza D. Ss healben A. pe D. add.
17 nyb- D. 18 zerebepan A. 1% not in A, 205 G.
21 pane D.


366 LINUTES DOOAS.


DE DECIMIS REDDENDIS.


vi. And zel&yc man Lrodeyr geuhta xeghpylee geape puhr-
lice zeopne. $ iy yulh-‘elmeyye hupu fipcene mht ofep
*€ayrcpan- 4 zeogude ceodungze be Pentecoycen: y eopd-
peycma be Calpa ]algena meyyan. y syp hpa ponne pa teo-
Sunge gel&ycan nelle- ypa pe zecpeden habbad- } iy ye teoda
aecep eal ypa yeo ysulh hic *zeza- ponne rape pey *emngcer
Sepera co y Spy biyceopey” 4 pey land-pican 4 pey mynycper
meyye-ppeoyt- 4 Snime unpancey pone teodan d&1 to pam
mynycpe pe hic to-zebymze- 4 7t&can him tO pam Snizodan
déle. y codé@le mann pa eahta ddlay on cpa- 4 yO ye land-
hlapopd 6 healrum- °c6 healpum ye biyceop- s¥ hie cmingcer
mann yy hic pegney:-


DE NUMMO ROMANO.
1x. And Rom-fedh be ”Pecpey meeyyan. 4 sepe oyep ™paene
deez hc healde- gype pam biyceope @paene penig- ¥ pap-co
8.xxx- “penega- 4 pam cingce ™-cxx- yertl.:-


DE PRIMITIIS SEMINUM.


x. And cypie-pceat to Mapctinep meyyan. 4 yepe hine
ofep ‘pane deez healde- dgype hine pam biyceope- ¥ popzylde
hine ”-x1- prSan- 4 pam *cingce ®-cxx: peitt.:-


DE DECIMIS AD ECCLESIAM THANI PERTINENTIBUS.

xi. Tryp hpa ponne pegna “pig. pe on ny béc-lande
*1eypican heebbe- pe legep-ycop on “y1z- geyylle pone ppid-
dan él hip *azenpe ceodunge into Inp *cypican. *And
sypF bpd cyycean heebbe pe legep-ycop on ne *y1z- 06 he of
pam mgon *délum hip ppeoyce } f he pille. And za ele
cypuc-peeatt into pam ealtban mynycpe- be “zeleon pmgan’
heopSe:-


DE PECUNIA PRO LUCERNIS.


xu. And ledht-zerceot pyiipa on °zeane. perc on Caytep-
zeren healy-*'penig-pupd pexey act zlcepe hide. 4 epc “on


l-elmeyyan D. 2€aycpon D. 3zeza5 A. 4eynmzer A.D. 5 par
biyceopay 4. Sniman D. 7tceacan A. Snizodum D. 94 D. add.
10Pecepey Ad. Uponne A. pane A. ' ppicciz dA. 14 penmez A.
cpa hundped J cpentiz pelt. A. Iponne A. 1 enbdlizan ZL.


THE LAWS OF KING CNUT. 367


8. And let God’s dues be lawfully and willingly paid every
year: that is, plough-alms at least by fifteen days after Easter,
and a tithe of young by Pentecost, and of earth-fruits by All-
hallows’ mass: and if then any one will not pay the tithe as we
have decreed; that is the tenth acre, so as the plough tra-
verses it; then let the king’s reeve go, and the bishop’s, and
the ‘ land-rica’s,” and the mass-priest of the minster, and take
forcibly the tenth part for the minster to which it is due, and
assign to him the ninth part; and let the eight parts be divided
into two, and let the land-lord take possession of half, half the
bishop, be it a king’s man, be it a thane’s.


9. And Rome-‘feoh’ by St. Peter’s mass; and whoever with-
holds it over that day, let him pay the penny to the bishop, and
xxx. pence thereto, and to the king cxx. shillings.


10. And church-scot at Martinmas; and whoever withholds
it over that day, let him pay it to the bishop, and indemnify
him x1. fold, and to the king cxx. shillings.


11. But if there be any thane who has a church on his
*boc-land, at which there is a burial-place, let him give the
third part of his own tithe to his church. And if any one
have a church at which there is no burial-place, let him do for
his priest what he will from the nine parts. And let every
church-scot go to the old minster, according to every free
hearth.


12. And light-scot thrice in the year: first, on Easter-eve,
a half-penny worth of wax for every hide; and again on


1eyningce A. 1ccxx. L %yry A. Aecypicean LZ. 2 zy A,
ponne A. *azene A. %eypicean L. 8G. add. 27 yy A,
%oalum A. lean ypizean LZ. %zeana A. 3 -peninz L.
3% not in A. Bro L.


368 LINUTES DOQAS.


Ealpa Jalzena meyyan eall ypa’ mycel- y epce ‘to bem
Sanctan Mayam clényunge eal ypa:.


DE PECUNIA QUZ DICITUR SYMBOLUM ANIM, ET
DE SEPULTURA.


xi. And yapl-peeac ip yuhtayc $ man *yymle *zelé&yce 4
etc topenum gpere. 4 xyp man &mg lic og *pihet pepyfe-peipe
elley-Shpep 7lecze- zel&y'ce man pone yapl-yceat ypa peah inco
pam mynycpe pe Inc v6-h¥pde:.


DE DEI JURIBUS, FESTIS, ET JEJUNIIS CONSERVANDIS.


xiv. And ealle Loder geyhca *yypSmze man zeopne- eal
ypa hic peapp iy. And fpedlpa 4 peeytena healbe mon puht-
lice. 4 healde mon elcey Sunnan-deezeyr fpedlpunze- yppam
Sevepney-deezey nOne od Ménan-dezer hhtingce- y ezlene
odepne *meyye-"dez- ypa he beboden beo:.


DE DIE DOMINICO.


xv. And Sunnan-“dxzey c¥pmyce pe fopbeddad eae eop-
noytlice- y ele fole-zemdc- bucon Inc fron mycelpe ™nedd
peapre yi. 4 huntad-papa- 4 ealpa populd-licpa peonea- on fam
halzgan deeze- geypice man seomne:.


2DE JEJUNIIS.


xvi. And $ man ele beboden yeycen healde- yi Inc
Ymbpen-peycen- yi Inc “Lengeten-peycen- yi hic “eller
odep Feycen- mid ealpe geopnyulneyye. y to Stam “Mauam
meyyan zlcepe- 4 to zxlcey apoytoley mayyan “yeyte man-
*®bucan “co Philpp: 4 Jacobi *meyyan pe ne beddad nan
Feycen- yon *pam *Eayceplican fpedlye. 4 alcey Fruge-dezer
*Sreycen- buton hic ppeoly y¥. And ne peapp man *na
Feycen ypam Caycpan o3 Pentecoycen+ buton hpa zereyiifen
J13° oppe he elley peeycen pylle. *And of middan-pincpe od
occabay Epiphame- *°} ip yeoren mht orep cpelpctan meyye-
deege:-/


‘notin G. 2notin D. 33elerce A. 4pam D.add. * pepe D.
6-hpan D. 7lezce A. ‘Spmpize LZ. %-baeze B. 10 -beza G.
Nnyo- B. 12 new rubric, Be Feycene B. 'ilenccen- B. 1 elley
A, YealpaB. 'Maman B. Vyeycan B. 8 bucon B. not


THE LAWS OF KING CNUT. 369


Allhallows’ mass, as much, and again on the purification of
St. Mary, the like.


18. And it is most proper that soul-scot be always paid at
the open grave: and if any corpse be laid out of its proper
shrift-district elsewhere, let soul-scot be, nevertheless, paid to
the minster to which it belonged.


14. And let all God’s dues be diligently furthered, as it is
needful. And let festivals and fasts be rightly held; and let
every Sunday’s festival be held from the noon of Saturday
till the dawn of Monday, and every other mass-day as it is
commanded.


15. And Sunday marketing we also strictly forbid, and
every folk-mote, unless it be for great necessity: and let
huntings and all other worldly works be strictly abstained from
on that holy day.


16. And let every appointed fast be held, be it Ember fast,
be it Lent fast, be it any other fast, with all earnestness; and
on every St. Mary’s mass, and on every apostle’s mass, let fast
be kept, except that on St. Philip and St. James’s mass we
enjoin no fast, because of the Easter festival: and every
Friday’s fast, unless it be a festival. And no one has need
to fast from Easter to Pentecost, unless it be prescribed to any
one, or he otherwise will. And from mid-winter to the oc-
taves of the Epiphany, that is seven days after the twelfth
mass-day.


in B. notin AB. pan B. %€aycophican B. *raeycon B.
24notin A. %€al pa A. 26 not in A.B.


2 (ms. B. begins here.—Z.]


370 LINUTES DOMAS.


DE TEMPORIBUS JUSTITIZ.

xvi. ‘And pe yopbeddad opdal y aSay ppedly-bagum- y
ymbpen-bagum- y *lengccen-dagum- *y pubht peycen dazum-”
44ypam Abdvencum Domini 0d ye eahtoda dxz Azan “yg ofen
Sepelptan meeyye-deeze.’ 4 ppam Septuageyima 06 ®-xv- mhton
oyep 7Eaytpon. And S&e S€adpeander meyye-dzez pican
habbaS gecopen } man fpedlyian yceal ofep eall Cnzla-land
on -xv- kl. Apml. And Sée Dinycaner mexyye-dez on -xum-
kl. Junn. And beo pam *halgum vidum- eal ypa Ine puhe
1y- eallum cmycenum mannum ypib 4 yom gemé&ne- 4 ele
yacu ctocpemed, And zyp hpa odpum yceole boph oppe bore-
ec populdlicum pingum- “zeleyce hic him geopme- ep ope
eeptcep::


PIA EXHORTATIO AD CONFESSIONEM ET
PCENITENTIAM.


xvi. "And pe biddad ron Lrobey lupan- } ele eycen mann
undepytande geopne hiy agene peapye. foppam ealle pe
2rceollon &nne ctiman gebidan- “ponne uy pé&pe ledppe ponne
eall $ on middan-eapde ip- P pe Apophtan pa hpile pe pe
mihton zeopne Iroder pillan. ac ponne pe yceolan habban
dnpeald lean py pe pe on lipe &p Zepophcan: pa pam “ponne
pe €p geeapnode helle pice. “Ac ficon ypise zeopne ppam
yynnum gecyppan- 4 tipe ele ny mypdaeda fipum pepipcum
Seopnlice andevcan- y apne Zeypican- y Jeopnlice béran. 4
Gne ele odpum bedde # pe pillon } man uy bedde. Pay pubthic
d6m 4 Lobe ypide gecpéme- y ye byd ypide “zerehz pe Bpone
d6m zehylc. roppam Lod yElmihng uy ealle zepophte- 4 exc
dedpum ceape gebohte- P iy- mod hiy agenum “lige pe he ron
uy eallum *°yealde:.


AD EUCHARISTIAM ET PROBITATEM.

xix. Ac *zeghpile emycten man 86 ypa him peapy 1p- 3¥me
Iny cyypcendémey *zeopne- y geappige line eae v6 hurel-
zanze hupu pyipa on geape- gehpa hine yylene: “pe hip azene
peapre pylle undepycandan- ypa ypa “him peanr “yz. And.


lnot in B. 2lencren BB. * notin B. 4yy AB. Acpelpca AB.
Srpcyne B. 7E€aycpan A. 8€abdpepder A. Eadpander B. 9% halzan
A, zeleyce B. 1 pe pillad B.add. \yeulon A. BH B. “not


THE LAWS OF KING CNUT. 371


17. And we forbid ordeals and oaths on festival-days, and
ember-days, and lenten-days, and regular fast-days, and from
Adventum Domini until the eighth day be passed after the
twelfth mass-day; and from Septuagesima till xv. days after
Easter. And St. Edward’s mass-day, the ‘witan’ have chosen
that it shall be celebrated over all England on the xv. kl.
April. And St. Dunstan’s mass-day on the xiv. kl. Junii.
And, at those holy tides, let there be, as it is right, to all
Christian men, general peace and concord, and let every
dispute be settled. And if any one owe to another ‘borh’ or
‘bot’ for secular matters, let him willingly fulfil it to him,
before or after.


18. And we beseech, for God’s love, every Christian man,
that he well understand his own need: because we all have to
await a time, when it will be better for us than all that is on
middle earth, that we had always earnestly performed God’s
will, while it was in our power: but when we shal] have the
simple reward of that which we had before done in life, woe
then to those who had before merited hell torment. But let
us very earnestly turn from sins, and every one of us wil-
lingly confess his misdeeds to our confessors, and ever abstain,
and willingly make ‘bot: and let every one of us enjoin to
others that which we desire should be enjoined to us: that
is just doom, and very acceptable to God, and he shall be very
happy who keeps that doom; for God Almighty made us all,
and afterwards bought us at a high price, that is, with his own
life, which he gave for us all.


19. And let every Christian man do as is needful to him;
let him strictly keep his Christianity, and also prepare himself
to go to housel at least thrice in the year; every one himself,
who will understand his own need, so as is needful to him.


in A. new rubric, Be Scpryce B. 'yempran A. 7 zerah B.
ponne A. 'blod B. Wazeac B. not in B. 2 Lehpyle B.
4 A.add. *%pepeB. *heomB. yy A


an a


372 LNUTES DOQAS.


pond 4 peone rpeonda zehpyle fadige mid mhte- 4 45 4 pedd
péplice healde. y zezhpyle unpiht adpedppe man zeopne or
pyyum eapbe- per pe man d6n Imager y*lémze Sman Loder
yuhc heonon-popS zeopne- popder 4 *O%da+ ponne pupde up
eallum Lrodey milty pe geapuppe:-


AD FIDELITATEM ERGA DOMINUM.


xx. Ucon 86n eac zeopne spa pe zyc lépan pyllad. ficon
beon 4 tipum hlafonpde holde 4 *xecp¥pe- °y eyppe eallum
mihcum hy pupdyerpe p&pan-” 4 hip pillan ?zepypean. foppam
eall $ pe aype yop yuho hlépopd—*helde 65- eall pe hic 065 up
yylrum c6 mycelpe pedpye- poppam pam byd *prcodlice Lod
hold pe bid hip “hldpopde “pihchee hold. 4 eae ah hlaropda
zehpyle peey pop-mycle peapre- $ he np men puhrlice *healbe:.


AD DEUM EX INTIMIS COLENDUM, ET FIDEM.


xxi. And ealle cpiycene men pe lépad ypise geopne-
hig *inpeapdope heoptan erpe Lod Iiyian- 4 prhtne cpy'cend6m
geopnhice healdan- 4 zodcundan “lapepan gzeopmlice h¥pan- ¥
Trodey lapa 4 laga ymeagan 4 ypyjan- ofc 4 zeléme- “him
yylpum ‘to peanre:.


UT ORATIONEM DOMINICAM ET SYMBOLUM
CALLEANT.

xxu. *And pe lépad- $ ale cmycen man zeleopmzge- } he
hupu cunne pihtne geledpan "amhc undepycandan- y Pacep
noycep 4 Cpedan geleopman. roppam mid pam odpum ®yceal
ele cmycen man hine to Trobe gebiddan- y md pam odpum’
Seyptvelian pihcne geleapan. Lys ’yylp yang Pacep norcep
epeyc: 4 $ *zebéd Iny leopninge-cmhtum **c&hte- y on pam
godcundan gebede pyn -vil- gebedu. Cid pam yebe hic in-
peapdlice gerinzd- he *zeapendad co Lobe yylrum ymbe
zype élee nedde Je man bepeapp- adop oppe fon pyyum life
oppe yop pam té-peapdan. Ac hu meg ponne xppe mg
mann hine inpeapdlice t6 Lobe zebiddan- buvan he on Lod
hebbe mpeapbdlice yodSe lure 4 puhtne geledzan. roppam he
nah eften sops-pSe mid cpiycenpa manna gsemadnan- *ne
on gehalzedan lic-cfine 6 pepcene- oppe hep on lize hiyler


Imaze A. lupe B. 3notin G. 4be0a A. Fzecpeope B. spa
ypa heom pupdyeiper pepan B. 7zepeopcan A. 8%-hylbe B. 9 not
in A. Wlaronte B. not in A. Jheolbe A. 13 mpeapbdlice A.


THE LAWS OF KING CNUT. 378


And let every friend guide his words and works aright, and
carefully keep oath and ‘wed;’ and let every injustice be
strictly cast out of this country, as far as it can be done; and
let God’s Jaw be henceforth earnestly loved by word and by
work; then will God’s mercy be the more ready for us all.


20. Let us.also earnestly do, as we will yet teach, let us all
be always faithful and true to our lord, and ever exalt his
dignity with all our powers, and execute his will; because all
that we ever do as just fidelity to our lord, we do it all to our
own great behoof; because God verily is faithful to him who is
rightly faithful to his lord: and also, every lord has very great
need that he treat his men justly.


21. And we very earnestly instruct all Christian men, that
they ever love God with inward heart, and diligently hold
orthodox Christianity, and diligently obey the divine teachers,
and meditate on and inquire into God’s doctrines and laws, oft
and frequently, for their own behoof.


22. And we instruct, that every Christian man learn so that
he may at least be able to understand aright orthodox faith,
and to learn the Paternoster and Creed: because with the one
every Christian man shall pray to God, and with the other,
manifest orthodox faith. Christ himself first sang Paternoster,
and taught that prayer to his disciples; and in that divine
prayer there are vu. prayers. herewith, who inwardly sings
it, he ever sends to God himself a message regarding every
need a man may have, either for this life or for that to come.
But how then can any man ever inwardly pray to God, unless
he have inward true love for, and right belief in God: for
after his departure hence, he may not, in community with
Christian men, rest in a hallowed burial-place, or here in
life be worthy of housel. Nor is he well a Christian who will


MJaneopan B. “heom B. notin B. Vamhe G. 18not in B.
Wyeolp A. 20zebebd A. 2lteahte B. 2 zeepndad A.G. 23 not in
G. not in B.


374 INUTES DOQAS.


beon 'pypde. *Ne he ne bid pel %cmycen pe  geleopman
‘nele- ne he nah md puhte odper manner to onponne et
fulluhte ne et birceoper handa pe ma- &p he hit geleopnize
# he hic pel cunne:.


5UT EXITIALIA FUGIANT/


xxi, And pe lépad- $ man prd hedlice *pynna y¥ pd deor-
hice d&ba ycylde ypySe zeopne on wzhpylene timan- 4 béte
ypyse gzeonne- be hiy pepipcer gzepeahte- yepe puph deorler
yoyfe on Syynna berealle:.


ET INTER H/C STUPRUM.


xxiv. And pe lépad- $ man pid poilne zalpeipe- 4 prd unprhe
h&med- y pid ’ezhpylene &p-bpyce- papmige yymle:-


UT CAVEANT SIBI DE TREMENDO JUDICIO.


xxv. And pe lépad e&c geopne manna zehpylene- # he
Trobder ege heebbe *yymle on hiy yemynbde- 4 dager 4 mhter
fophtige sop yynnum- %6m-deez ondpéde- y yop helle azyiiye-
4y eppe him gehénde “ende dager péne:-


UT EPISCOPI ET SACERDOTES FIDE OBEANT
OFFICIA.

xxvi. Bipceopay pindan bydelay 4 Loder lage Iapeopay+ 4 hi
yeeolan bodian 4 byynian geopne godcunde peappe- Z¥me yepe
pylle. poppam pac bid ye hypde runden to heopbe- be nele pa
heopde pe he healdan yceal mid hpeame bepeyuan- butan he
eller m&ze- zyp pap hpyle pedd-pceada yceatian onginned.
Niy nan ypa ypel pceada ypa 1p deofol yylp- he byd @ ymbe
} an- ha he on manna yaulum méyc geyceadian meze. Donne
mécon pa hypbay beon ypidse pacope- ¥ gzeopnlice cl¥pizende-
pe pS pone pedd-pceadsan folce yceolon ycylban- $ yyndon
biyceopay 4 meype-ppeoycay- fe godcunde heopda bepapian 4
bepepian yeeolan mid piylican lapan- } ye pod-ppéca peye-pulf
v6 ppyde ne ylice- ne to “yela ?ne abice of godcundpe heopde.
4 yepe orephdzie $ he Loder bodan hlyyte-+ habbe him Ze-
méne } prd Lod yylpne. A yi Loder nama écelice geblectyod-


1 peopde A. 2De A. %epycene A. 4nolte A. nyle B.
“rubric, Lobe Lap B. 6yynne B. 7 ezhpylce B.


THE LAWS OF KING CNUT. 375


not learn it; nor may he lawfully receive another man at
baptism, nor at the bishop’s hand, before he so learns it that
he well knows it.


23. And we instruct, that every one shield himself very
carefully against deep sins and diabolical deeds at every time;
and that he very carefully make ‘bot,’ by counsel of his con-
fessor, who, through impulse of the devil, has fallen into sins.


24, And we instruct, that every one ever guard himself
against foul lasciviousness, and against fornication, and against
every kind of adultery.


25. And we also earnestly instruct every man, that he con-
stantly have the dread of God in his mind, and, by day and
by night, that he fear for sins, dread dooms-day, and shudder
for hell, and ever suppose the end of his day near to him.


26. Bishops are heralds, and teachers of God’s laws, and it
is for them earnestly to preach and set example for spiritual
behoof; heed it who will: because weak is the shepherd found
for the flock who will not defend with his cry the flock that
he has to feed, (unless he can do otherwise,) if there any
spoiler begins to spoil. There is none so evil a spoiler as is
the devil himself; he is ever busy about that alone, how he
can most injure the souls of men. Therefore must the shep-
herds be very watchful and diligently crying out, who have to
shield the people against the spoiler; such are bishops and
mass-priests, who are to preserve and defend their spiritual
flocks with wise instructions, that the madly audacious were-
wolf do not too widely devastate, nor bite too many of the
spiritual flock: and he who scorns to listen to God’s preachers,


8 yymble B. 9 domer baz B. 1 ender B. N yeola B.
12 not in B. 1 not in A.


376 INUTES DOMAS.


4 lop him y puldopn 4 pupdmine yymble egpe co populte.
Amen:


SECULAR.


Diy 1p *ponne yeo *populdcunde *zepeedney pe ic ‘pille md
minan pitenan pede } man healde ofep eall Engla-land:.


DE JUSTITIA EFFERENDA.

1. Dee iy ponne Seepeyt $ 1c pyllee $ man’ prhte ’laza
uppanépe 4 Szhpilce unlaza geopne “Marylle ?y $ man
Bgpeddize y “apypcpalize Seghpyle unpiht ppa man Zeopnoyc
’meze of “piyyum Peapde. And “an&pe up Lover rhe. y
*©hednan-fopd *léce manna ** zehpylene- ze eapmne ze
eadigne- folc-phcer “*pypde- 4 him man pihte ‘Sdomay
deme:”


DE MISERICORDIA EXHIBENDA IN JUDICIO.

u. *And pe lepad $’ peah hpa *azylce ¥ hine *yylpne
deope foppypce- fonne “zeradige man “fa “yceope ypa hic
pop Lode “yy gebeophlic 4 fon “populde abependlic. And
gepence *ypide geopne yefe domey Zepeald Saxe “hpey he
yylp *sypne ponne he pur *cpede- Ec dimicce nobip debica
noytpa picut et noy dimiccimuy.*? § 47And pe #beodad man’
cpycene *men fon ealley to “lyclum hupu vo deade ne
‘Sronpéde. ac eller “gep&de man ymdhice ypreopa rolce to
‘Sheanpe 4 ne “yonypille yon “lyclum Lodey hand-zepeope 4
Iny “azenne ceap pe he *deone gebohte:-


DE CHRISTIANO NON VENDENDO EXTRA REGNUM.


ur. And pe *beodad $ man’ cmytene “men ealley to


1not in G. 2popldcunde A.D. %zepedner A. zepeonyyre B. xe-
peony G. 4pylle G. 5” And picena zepedner sp P man D.
Sepore A. epye B. 7laze BB. 8° BD. Y%ezhpylee G. Wun-
laze B. “aplle D. Wnotin B. 3° G. "7 BD. ‘4apypcpalie B.
eghple B.D. maze A. 7 pyan D. pyrpum G. |8heapoe A.
Wanape A.” B. 2° B, heonan- B.G. 217 B. % zehpilene D.
Beanze A. %4peopSe B. pupde beon D. %/ not in D. 26 omer
A. 77 Rnd picena zepeoney iy H man D. %azilce D. 2 yilyne D.


THE LAWS OF KING CNUT. 377


let that be between him and God himself. Ever be the name
of God eternally blessed, and to him praise and glory and
honour for ever and ever. Amen.


SECULAR.


This then is the secular ordinance which, by the counsel of
my ‘ witan,’ I will that it be observed over all England.


1. That is then the first that I will; that, just laws be estab-
lished, and every unjust law carefully suppressed, and that
every injustice be weeded out and rooted up, with all pos-
sible diligence, from this country. And let God’s justice be
exalted; and henceforth let every man, both poor and rich,
be esteemed worthy of folk-right, and let just dooms be doomed
to him.


2. And we instruct, that though any one sin and deeply
foredo himself, let the correction be regulated so that it be
becoming before God and tolerable before the world. And let
him who has power of judgment very earnestly bear in mind
what he himself desires, when he thus says: ‘ Et dimitte nobis
debita nostra, sicut et nos dimittimus.’? And we command that
Christian men be not, on any account, for altogether too little,
condemned to death: but rather let gentle punishments be
decreed, for the benefit of the people ; and let not be destroyed
for little God’s handy-work, and his own purchase which he
dearly bought.


8. And we command, that Christian men be not too readily


30 zerabie B. medemze D. 3lnot in G. yceope A. 3m 4.G.
34pepulte A. poplbe D. %*ypySeA.G. %° BD.G. hyper D.
88zeopne A, %cped A.D. 4-H ip on Enghre 3 yopgyr ur Dpihcen
une zylcay spa pe fopzyrad pam. pe pid up azylcad. G.. 41” And picena
zepedney ip Pp man D. 4 fonbeodad B. Smenn A. “liclum D,
4° B, pepe A. 47 popppille man B. 8hrlum AD. 4 azene
B. %beope A. * 5!” And picena zepedney ip fF man D. 52 yopbeodad
AG. %3menn A,


378 LINUTES DOAS.


1ypide of Zeapde ne *pylle ne on *hadendome Shupu ne ®ze~
binge. ac 7beopze man geopne’ } man pa *yapla ne *foprape
pe Cpe md hip agenum lige zebohte:-


DE SAGIS, SORTILEGIS, &c. EJICIENDIS.


1v. And pe beodad $” man eapd geome clenyian “azinne
on Pezghpylean Sénde- 4 “mangulpa deda Meeghpan 'zerpice.
y zp “piccan oppe *pizlepay ®mopd-pyphcan oppe *hop-
cpenan *ahpap on lande “pupSan *agytene “pyre “ht man
Zeopne uc of *piypan eapde. “oppe on eapde *yonyane hi
mid ealle- * bucon *'hn *zeypican 4 pe deoppop * zebéren.

And pe beodad’ } pidepyacan y “ficlagan Loder 4 manna
of Veapde “zepican- ®buton Ing *zebtizan y pe “'zeopnop
“zebécan. 4 “peopay 4 peod-yceadan to “ctiman “yoppupsan
buton Ing geypican:-


46BE pJEDENSLIPE.—DE GENTILIUM SUPERSTITIONIBUS
ABOLENDIS.


v. *7‘And pe yopbeodads eopnoyrlice elene “hedenycipe.
‘“hedenreipe bid $” man “idola peopdize- $ ry $ man
peopdize Sheedene goday 4 sunnan “oppe monan- ryp “opbe
plod. *pécep-pyllay oppe pranay- oppe seniger cynney “ptidu-
cpeopas *oppe *picce-cnaps “luyize- “oppe mopd-peone ze-
fpemme- on enige “piyan- “oppe *on blote “oppe » on
Fyphce’ oppe on ypylepa’ “zedprmépa amz ping dpeoze:-


lypyde A. 2eapdan B. SyilleD. ‘4hebdenedome A. not in A.
6 bpinge B. sebpynze D. 7 beopzan B. Syaule G 97 B. 1° And
pivena geneeenes yp D. Nazynne A. onzinne D. 12 eeghpilcon D.
B- B. BD.G. Yezhpep A.G. zerpyce A. 7B. 17 pie-
cean G. ‘ts pizlener B. 19 mopd-pycan A. mopd-pypheran D. 207
D.G. hopepeonan B. 2! ahpep A.G. ™pupton B. 2 agzicene D.
4ryne A. pre D. hz G. %pyyan A. piysan B. pypum G.
27 oppon G. 8 onpepe A. poppanan G. %hiz4.G. %buran G.
3hizD.G. zerpycan d. %deopop A. deoppan G. 34 zeberen


2 The variation ‘on hloce’ is only found in the least accurate of
our Mss., though it appears to have occurred in the text used by the
author of the old Latin version, ‘aut in sorte. There is no other
record of its existence, and ‘on bloce’ is supported by the reading
of the N.P.L.


THE LAWS OF KING CNUT. 379


sold out of the land; and especially be not brought into
heathendom; but let it be carefully guarded against, that those
souls be not made to perish which Christ bought with his
own life.


4, And we command, that ye undertake diligently to cleanse
the country on every side, and every where to desist from evil
deeds: and if witches or diviners, ‘morth’-workers or adul-
teresses, be any where found in the land, let them be diligently
driven out of this country; or let them totally perish in the
country, except they desist and the more thoroughly amend.


And we command, that adversaries and outlaws of God and
men retire from the country, unless they submit and the more
earnestly amend: and let thieves and public robbers forthwith
perish, unless they desist.


OF HEATHENISM.


5. And we earnestly forbid every heathenism: heathenism
is, that men worship idols; that is, that they worship heathen
gods, and the sun or the moon, fire or rivers, water-wells or
stones, or forest trees of any kind; or love witchcraft, or pro-
mote ‘morth’-work in any wise; or * by ‘blot,’ or >by ‘fyrht;’
or perform any thing pertaining to such illusions.


A,“ B. 3/ Rnb picena zepebner ir $ D. 2° B. 37 eapde G.
38° B. %bucan G. 49° B. zebuzon D. 4lzeopnan A. 4? becan
A.“ B. ®peoyanD. ““B.G. 4“ yoppypsan A. foppeopsan G.
46 This law not in D. 47/not in B. #hedenycype A. 4% haden-
yeype 4. “H bd $ B. MbyS D.G.  lidol B. deofol-zylo G.
52mann A. 53ha’ene.A. 54oppon G. 7 B. 56 peoba-cpeopa A.
“G@. 57 oppon G. 58piccan- A. lupe B. oppon G. 6! pyran
A, ®oppon G. Sonhloce A. 6 oppe syphee A. oppon ryphce
G. 6 oppon ypylena G. 6 zebpymepa 4. ~ B. 97 pinez G.


> The only translation which could be offered of this word is
‘ affright;’ but introduced as it is in conjunction with ‘on bloce,’
the connexion seems too remote and the term too general to warrant
such an interpretation.


880 LINUTES DOMAS.


DE HOMICIDIS, PEJERANTIBUS, ET MCQECHANTIBUS.
vi. Man-plagan 4 *man-ppopan- *had-bpecan 4 Seep-bpecan
Zebugan 4 *gebécan- oppe of *cySde mid pynnan °zepiran:-


DE COHIBENDIS ASSENTATORIBUS.

vi. 7Licecepap y leogepay- ®pypepay 4 %pearepay- Loder
gpaman “habban “buton “hig “zerpican “y pe “deoppon
gebecan.’ 4 yepe 'pylle eapd yuhelice clenman y unpihe
Walecgan y “mhcpynespe lupian- ponne mot he geopne
Mpylhcer °ycypan 4 *pylle apcuman:.


Be FEOS-BOTE.—-DE PACE TUENDA ET MONETA
CORRIGENDA.


vir. *Ucan eac ealle *ymbe fpisey’-bote y *pedy-bote
®%rmeazan ypise zeopne- spa **ymbe *’pmidey-bocve ypa pam
bondan’ “yy yeloyc 4 pam peoran yr “ladoye. 4 ypa *ymbe
S2redy-bote P an mynec ganze ofep ealle pay feode *bucan
zlcon falye y } nan “man ne “ropyace. 4 yepe ogep py paly
Spyynce * polige Bpeepa handa pe he  yaly md pophte 4 he
‘ht md “*nanum pingum/ ne “zebicze- ne mid golde ne mid
yeolppe. y “zip man ponne **fone. generan’ “ced he be hip
‘Sleare } yaly pophve- “latize hine mid ppyrealdpe “lade. 4
cir yeo lad ponne “benyce- “habbe pone “ilcan *d6m


She yepe P palp pophte:.


DE JUSTO PONDERE.
1x. 7 And ®zeméva 4 °gepihca @pihce man zeopne- 4 aleey
unjuhtey ®'heonon-fopd “zerpice:-


DE INSTAURATIONE OPPIDORUM ET PONTIUM.
x. And *buph-bora 4 “bpicg-bota 4 “ypeip-popSungza


1° A.G, manrpopan A. 2° B.G. habdbpican D. 3 exp-bpican D:
4" G. 5eyse A. cydtan B. 8° G. 7Siecopay A. Liccecepay G.
Spnepepay A. pupepar D. %hpeapanpary B. 'habban eppe A.G.
Ubucan G. 2h D. xzerpycan A. not in D. ‘5 beoppan G.
lle A. W7Glezan A. '8pihcpyrne A. prhtpipnyyre B. 9 pillicer
BG. %yceopan B. 2Apillic AD. 2 Ucon B. %3 embe fpyder-
A. 4° A. %ymeagianB. %%embe A.G. 27 ppyder- A.  28/ pan
bundan A. yi G. ®lasayc A. Slembe A. 22° A. ~B. 3 buron
A. %mann A. 37 B. %ppce A. 387 polie B. %8papa B.
%mite A. “Ing A.~ B.  4!/nanon pingon G. -pinza A. 42 bycze
B. ®zip BG. “pene G. /pone pean B. ©" B. +hieage B.


THE LAWS OF KING CNUT. 381


6. Let manslayers and perjurers, violators of holy orders and
adulterers, submit and make ‘bot;’ or with their sins retire
from the country.


7. Let cheats and liars, robbers and reavers, have God’s
anger, unless they desist, and the more thoroughly amend:
and whoever will lawfully cleanse the country, and suppress
injustice, and love righteousness, then must he diligently
correct such things, and shun the like.


OF ‘ FEOS-BOT,’


8. Let all of us likewise very earnestly take into consideration
‘frith-bot’ and ‘feos-bot:’ so concerning ‘frith-bdt,’ as may
be best for the proprietor, and most hostile to the thieves: and
so concerning ‘feos-bot,’ that one money pass over all the
nation, without any counterfeit, and let no man that refuse;
and he who after this shall make false, let him forfeit the hands
with which he wrought that false, and not redeem them with
any thing, neither with gold nor with silver: and if any one
accuse the reeve, that he wrought that false by his leave,
let him clear himself with a threefold ‘lad: and if the ‘lad’
then fail, let him have the same doom as he who wrought the
false.


9. And let weights and measures be carefully rectified, and
every species of injustice henceforth abstained from.


10. And let **burh-bots,’ and ‘bricg-bots,’ and ‘scip-for-


47 labile B. Blab A. Oayp BG. 5°” B. sl bynrce B. =2hebbe
G. %ponne A. 54ylean G. 3° B. 56notin A. 57 not in B.
58 zemécca A.“ B.G. %zepyhca A. mihcta dA. 6! heonon- A,
notin B. zerpice A. ~ B. 3D. closes here, and continues with
Cn. Eccl. 6. ©4bupz-boca A. 6 bmicez-boce A. bpycz-boca heonan-
fons. .B. 6 yerp-pypdungza B.


a ¢Buph-hoce,’ the repairing of fortresses; bpucz-bote,’ the re-
pairing of bridges; and ‘ rypbunza’ (below called rypd-pape) military
service, are the three public duties mentioned in the Latin docu-


382 LINUTES DOOAS.


aginne man Zeopne- y rypdungza eac "spa 24 bonne feanr yy
For *zemzenelicpe neobe:-


DE CONSILUS AD UTILITATEM REIPUBLICE PERTI-
NENTIBUS.


x1. And *ymeagze man *yymle on eghpylce ’pipan hu man
Fypmeye °meze *pxd “anédian peode co peanre y juhtne
cuycendom ™ypydoyc *apépan- 4 “wzhpilce unlaga zeopnoys
¥aryllan. roppam puph hit yceal on eapde “zdd1an co ahte
man unuht alecge y “mhepipnerye *lupize- pop Lode 4 fon
populde. Amen:.


DE AUCTORITATE REGIS IN VIOLATIONE PACIS, &c.

xu. Dip *ypyndon pa *!zemhta pe se *cyning ah oren ealle
men *ton *Pey-pexan. $ 1y **munb-bpyce 4 ham-rocne-
7ronycal y ylymena-pypmde 4 fypd-pice- buton he *hp&ne
%rundopn “semeedman pylle- 4 he him pep peopSyciper
zeunne:”


UTLALA.


xu. * And sepe *ticlager peone gepypce pealde ye “cyninge
peer Fpdey. And gyp he “béc-land “hebbe yy $ foppophe
pam “cyningce to *handa- “py fey manner man pe he
“yy. And “oc “hpa pone “ylyman “yéde oppe “peopmie
“zyloe pip pund pam “cyningce- “burton he hine gelatize $
he hine “ylema nyyte:-


1° B. 2° BG. 37. G. 4zemenehicpe A. menelhicpe B. 5 pmeaza
A. Szeopne B. 77 B. Smeze A. 7B. 9" Bo 1 - AL UM ypidare
B. 2° A." B. Bezghpylee G. Munlaze B. unlaza G. aryllen
B. "A, Wyhepynyye B lupe B. notin A. 2% pm-
ton B. 2zemhce A. 2 ecinge A. cynmgec . %menn A. not
in A. % Peyc-yeaxan A. 26 munbd-bpice A. 27 ronyceal G. yopyzal


ments under the name of ‘ trinoda necessitas.’ The constant language
of the royal grants is: ‘ Libere ab omni servitio, exceptis pontis et
arcis constructione et expeditione contra hostem.’ <‘Serp-fopdunza,’
or the furnishing an equipment for the fleet, is first mentioned in the
laws of Ethelred.

@ The Latin version gives the following gloss of these terms:
‘ munbd-bpyce,’ infractionem pacis, the king being the mundbora or
protector of all his subjects; ‘ham-rocn,’ invasio in propria domo aut
infra curiam causa alicujus mali; ‘foperceal,’ quod nos possumus dare


THE LAWS OF KING CNUT. 383


thungs,’ be diligently set about; and ‘fyrdungs’ also, when-
ever it is requisite, for our common need.


1]. And be it constantly inquired, in every wise, how
counsel may most especially be devised for the benefit of the
nation; and orthodox Christianity most exalted, and unjust
laws most diligently abolished: because through that it shall
turn to some good in the country, that injustice be put down,
and justice loved, before God and before the world. Amen.


12. These are the rights which the king enjoys over all men
in Wessex: that is, **mund-bryce’ and ‘ham-socn,’ ‘ forstal,’
and ‘flymena-fyrmth,’ and ‘fyrd-wite,’ unless he will more
amply honour any one, *and concede to him this worship.”


OUTLAWRIES.


18. And whoever does a deed of outlawry, let the king have
power of the ‘frith” And if he have ‘boc-land,’ let that be
forfeited into the king’s hand; be he man of whatever man he
may. And take notice, whoever may feed or harbour the
‘ flyma’ shall pay five pounds to the king, except he shall clear
himself that he knew not of his being a. ‘ flyma.’


J Fypdizce bucon, Fe. A. fopycal y fypdpice bucon, Fe. B. 8" B.
29 pe pupsop G. 3° madpian A. gemedian B. 31’ Giadd. 32 not
in Bo 83° AB. 34eynz B. ange G. 3° B. Khabbe B.
37eynze B. cinzce G. 33° B. handbe BG. 89 G. “ng G.
41° B. @ylemanB. 8° B. “4peopmize B. *ziloe G. 46 c¥nze
B. anzce G. 47bucan G. 48yleame A.G.


contrastacionem causa mali. In the statutes of Speier ham-socen is
thus defined: ‘ Das heisset Heimsuche, da man freveliche Imannes
Thur, Porte, Want, oder Fenster uffstiesse, oder drin huwe, oder in
iemans Hoff oder Huss gienge, und Jemand dinne verserte, der git
zehend Pfund Spirscher.’ Haltaus, in voce. ‘It is called ham-socen,
that is to say, whoever with a strong hand breaks open any man’s
door, gate, wall, or window, or attempts to force them, or goes into
any man’s curtilage or house, and injures any one therein, let him
pay ten pounds Speierish.’


384 LNUTES DOQAS.


xiv. And on Gypcean he ah teal ypa hep-beyopan *zeppiten
iy orep Sealle men:-


REX MULCTAS PACIS VIOLATA IN REGIONIBUS
DACORUM ACCIPIAT.

xv. And on *Dena-lage °hé ah °pyhve-pica 4 7pypd-pica 4
Sxmid-bpyce y ham-rocne- buton he *hp&éne pupdop "ze-
medpian *pylle. 4 zip hpa “peene ypid-leayan man healde
oppe peopmige bece } ypa hic “an lagu ’pep. And yee
unlage pape oppe 7und0om gedeme ®hednon-fopd- yon ledde
oppe “yon *yeoh-panze- beo ye pid *!pone *cyninge *Shund-
cpelprig perth” yeyliz on Engla-*laze- *butan he **mid ade
cypan duppe } he *hic na yuhtop ne *cfiSe. 4 *polige aa
hny pegen-*'ycipep butan he “hine ext “pam *cyningze *ze-
byeze *4 ypa “he ®him gepapian’ *pylle. And on *Dena-
laga lah-pheey peyloig **bucon he “hine gelamize $ he na bec
ne cude. And yepe puhte lage 4 “phtne d0m’ ropyace beo
he yeyloiz pid “pone pe nc *aze. ppa pid “eyninge *7-cxx-
Srerit. 4 ppa pid eopl *-Lx- peitl ypa pid hundped -xxx-
youll. ypa pid ele *peepa zip’ hic ypa gepeopSed on Engla-
laze. 4 yepe on *Dena-lage puhte lage pypde *zylde he
5 Jah-plice:.-


DE PENA CONVITIATORUM.

xvi. And sepe odepne md “pd yop-reczan *"pille- P he
Sasen oppe feo oppe “ypeme pa pypre “yy- “zip ponne ye
®oen $ seunyodian mage Shim man onfecgan polte. “py
he Inp tungan yeyliiz- “bucon he “hine “mid np “pepe
Srongilde:-


NEMO REGI DE ALTERIUS INJURUS QUERATUR.


xvu. And ne 7zeyéce nan man pone cymnge “burton
he ne mote beon naney yuhtey “pypde innan hip hundpede


leall G. 2zeppycan A. appicen G. 3eall G. 4Dena- G. 5“ B,
6yyhe-pice A. pihe-prce B. 7 pypd-pice A. 8znys-G. 97 B.
be pupdup G. Nzemedpian A. lpille dA. Bay BG. Mponne
A.B. “yeopme G. notin B. 7" B. Whetnan- B. 19 not
in A. yeoh-sanzce A. peoh- G. 2! ponne A. 22 cynz B. cing G.
23 cxx. G. “hip peonep A. 247 B. %buron B. %7 B. 27 nan A.
B-G. pole B. 3” B. 31-yeypep AW 27 BL Bpam B.
34 eynz B. cincze G. % zebieze A. ert zebicze G. 36 not in A.B.
7B. 3 hym papian A. pile G. 4° Dena-lage B. 4! bucan G.


THE LAWS OF KING CNUT. 385


14, And in Mercia he enjoys all as is here before written,
over all men.


15. And by Danish law he enjoys ‘fight-wites,’ and ‘fyrd-
wites,’ and ‘grith-bryce,’ and ‘ham-socn,’ unless he will honour
any one more amply: and if any one keep or harbour a
‘frithless’ man, let him make ‘bot’ for it, as the law formerly
was. And he who shall henceforth set up unjust law, or doom
unjust doom, for hatred or bribery, let him be liable to the
king in a hundred and twenty shillings, by English law, unless
he dare to prove on oath that he knew-not aught more just;
and let him ever forfeit his thaneship, unless he repurchase it
of the king, and as he will allow him. And by Danish law,
let him be guilty of ‘lah-slit,’ unless he clear himself, that he
knew no better. And he who denies just law and just doom,
let him be liable unto him who is entitled to it: either to the
king in cxx. shillings, or to an ‘eorl’ in ux. shillings, or to the
hundred in xxx.shillings; so with every of them, if it so
happen, by English law: and he who by Danish law shall
corrupt just law, Jet him pay ‘lah-slit’


16. And he who shall accuse another wrongfully, so that he
be the worse either in substance or advancement, if then the
other can show to be false that which one would charge upon
him; let him be liable in his tongue, unless he redeem himself
with his ‘ wér.’


17. And let no one apply to the king, unless he may not be
entitled to any justice within his hundred; and let the hun-


2° B. notin G. *mhc dom B. “ponne dA. © GL eynz
B. Whund-cpelpriz B.  Byeytt. A. not in B. pys A,
51 pyxaz B. 52 pana zyp B. %Dane-laza A. “4zilbe A. 7 By
lahylic G. 58 poh A. “ B.G. 7 pylle G. 58atop A. 59 peonme A.
yreoma B. On BG. Sayp BG. Sodson A. 8° BB. bn G.
6 bucan G. ShimB. notin A. 8° B. Sronzylbe B. 70 not
in B. 1° B. ponne BG. eynz B. cyncz G. 74 bucan G.
75 pipde A. puside B.


386 LINUTES DOAS.


ty yece man hundpeder *zembc be *pice- Seal ypa hic ‘phe ap
co Syecanne:.


DE COMITIIS MUNICIPALIBUS.

xvi. And Shabbe 7man *pmpa %on geape’ buph-zemor-
4 cpa yeip-zemoc- be pice eal ypa hic phe ip bucon hic
ofcop neod y1. And pep beo on “pepe yeipe’ biyceop y ye
ealdopman- 4 pep ezdep @cecan ze Loder yuhe ze *ponpuld-
yuhe:.


Be 4NAAME.— NE ALIUM INTRA SATRAPEM
COERCEAT.


xix. And ne “nime *nan man “nane name- ne *mnan
Pree ne uv of yciper cep man *habbe *>pmpa on **hun-
dpede ny’ puhcer *zebeden. %Ing he ec pam pmiddan *cyppe
nan juht *nzbbe ponne rape he *peondan pide” to “ycip-
gemote- 4 yeo yep him yette “pone feopdan andagan.’ * Iny
ye ponne bepyte’ mme *ponne leare’ “ze heonon ge *panon
# he mote “henvan epcep “hip agenan:-”


DT SLE MON BEO ON TEODUNLE.— NEMO LIBER IN
CENTURIAM SE CONJICIAT.


xx. ®And pe pyllad $ zle ppeoman beo on hundpede 4 on
ceodunge gebpoht pe lade pypde beon “pylle *°oppe pepey
pypse- syp hine “thpa arylle” “open -xu- pintpe-’” “oppe he
ne beo “yyppan emgey fpeo-pihtey pypde- “yy he *heops-
feyc “yy he polgene. And f ele “py on hundpede 4 on
‘Sbonge gebpoht. y gehealde ye boph “hine y “zelede co


lnot in B. 2° B. 3eall G. 4not in G. ‘yeacan A. yecanne G.
Shebbe B. 7mann G. 8ppeopa B. "on zeana A. not in B.
1cupa G. ‘pape ycype A. |2ceacean A. 'peopulb A. 4" B.
linet in B. 1° G. Wnot in A. '8inne B.  'yeypan A.
®reype A. 2!mann G habbe A. 3 pnypa A. /not in B.
24hundpobe A. %zebeban A. 2% Lyp B. %cype A. 28 nabbe A.
2/ ex pam feopdam syse A. S3°yeyp- A. 3!/ panne feoddan pon


® The Latin version reads: ‘Et de hiis qui non (habent) terram
sed serviunt aliis, quos Angli vocant husfest et folgeres.’ If there be
any accuracy in this definition, we may suppose the distinction to
have consisted in those free ministeriales who resided under the
lord’s roof, and those who either had a house assigned them or had
a house of their own. On the other hand, without this dictum it
would be more natural to interpret the law thus: Ad freemen are to


THE LAWS OF KING CNUT. 387


dred-‘gemot’ be applied to, under penalty of the ‘ wite,’ so as
it right is to apply to it.


18. And thrice a year let there be a ‘burh-gemdt,’ and
twice, a shire-‘gemot,’ under penalty of the ‘wite,’ as is right;
unless there be need oftener. And Jet there be present the
vishop of the shire and the ‘ealdorman;’ and there let both
expound as well the law of God as the secular law.


OF DISTRESS.


19. And let no man take any distress, either in the shire or
out of the shire, before he has thrice demanded his right in
the hundred. If at the third time he have no justice, then
let him go at the fourth time to the shire-‘gemot;’ and let the
shire appoint him a fourth term. If that then fail, let him
take leave, either from hence or thence, that he may seize
his own.


THAT EVERY MAN SHALL BE IN A TITHING.


20. And we will, that every freeman be brought into a
hundred, and into a tithing, who wishes to be entitled to ‘lad’
or to ‘wer,’ in case any one shall slay him after he is x11.
years of age; or let him not afterwards be entitled to any free
rights, be he ** heorth-fest,’ be he follower. And that every
one be brought into a hundred and in ‘borh; and let the


andazan A. 32 Gyp A.G. “And zip ye anddsazan ponne bypyce B.
3 panne ze leaye A. %4ezSep ze G. 35 peonon B. 3 hemcen A.
hévan B. 37 azan B. not in B. %pille A. 4 oppon G.
4\7hpa fylle A. “hpa apylle open cpelp pncpe B. “orep f he
bid G. SopponG. “notin B. “nm G. “boph B. 47° B.
48 lade A.


be brought to the hundred and the tithing — all, whether they are
heorth-fast (7. e. living independent and having a house of their own)
or followers (z.e. those who have commended themselves to some
lord). The old German ‘herdfest’ is explained by Haltaus: ‘ man-
sionarius, fundum et domum familiarem propriam possidens.’ More-
over, by ¢. 28. the lord was to answer for his hired-men, or those who,
strictly speaking, were of his family.


388 INUTES DOQAS.


Telean puhte.’ Gamz *ycpecman pyle *gip he mez 4 moc
pemman hip man ypa hpeSen him ‘pincd he hine %ead apepian
Sméze- *ypa fon yyigne *ypa fon peopne. Ac pe ’nellad
sepapian  unpuhc:.


Be DEOFAN.
xxI. SAnd pe pyllad } zle man orep °cpelp pincpe yylle pone
ad he *nelle peor beon ne peorey gepita:.


DE FIDELIBUS ET INFIDIS IN JUREJURANDO.

xx. And "py ale @zecpypa man pe “cihv-bymg “n&pe
4, ®naSon ne bupyte ne ad ne opdal “innan hundpede” an-
realdpe lade pypSe. And “ungecpypan men ceoye man an-
fealdne ad on *ppim *hundpedum: y *pnyyealdne ad ypa
pide ypa hic co “pepe *bymgz hype. *oppe *ga co *”pam
opdale 4 *orra man »*anpealde lade % mid *anpealdan
fop-ade 4 *Sppypealde lade’ md “pnypealoan fop-ade. And
Szip pegen hebbe “zetpypne man to fop-ade Fop hine-  ypa
57py, Inp he nebbe orga syle up ppaece. 4 ne beo *zeppe
emg fop-ad pongzipen:-


DE ADVOCATIS.


xxi. “And ne beo en1z man enigzey teamey pypde “buon
he ‘zectpype *zeprenyyye “habbe “hpanan him come } him
man etv-bepehd- 4 “zecype “yeo zeprcnyyye’ Pp on’” Loder
helde 4 “on hlazopdey-  heo him on yodpe “zepicenyyye “yy:
ypa heo “hic eagum ofepyeah 4 eapum “opephypbe $ he hic
mid puhte begeate:-


Velce pihte A. elcon zemhre B. 2yep&ceman B. 3ayp BG.
4pmzs G. Snot in A. ySB. 8° B. Tnyllad B. Snot in B.
Ac G. 9xu.G Wnele BG. "pp A.G. Wzecpipa A. zecpeopa
B.  Beyhe-bypiz A. cahe-by B. 4nape 4.7 B.  Wnasen B.
16’ hip hundpede B. 7 anpealbe B. 8unzecpepe A. unzecpeopan
B. Wanrealone A. %ppeo B. 2 hundpebe A. hundpedan B.
22 pneorealbne B. 33° B. %pape A. %oppon G. 26 not in A.


2 From a document published by Gale (Hida quorundam Burgo-
rum), it appears that there were many burhs having a jurisdiction
more extensive than any three hundreds, and equal to that of many
of the shires.

> The Latin version thus illustrates this form of process: ‘ Qui
autem conquirere debet simplicem purgationem, simplici sacramento


THE LAWS OF KING CNOT. 389


‘borh’ hold and lead him to every plea, Many a powerful
man will, if he can and may, defend his man in whatever way
it seems to him that he may the more easily defend him;
whether as a freeman or a ‘theow.’ But we will not allow
that injustice.


OF THIEVES.


21. And we will, that every man above twelve years make
oath that he will neither be a thief nor cognizant of theft.


22. And let every true man who has not been ‘tiht-bysig’
and has failed neither in oath nor ordeal within his hundred,
be entitled to a single ‘lad’ And for an untrue man, let a
single oath be chosen in three hundreds, and a threefold oath
as far as it belongs to the ** burh ? or let him go to the ordeal,
and let a single ‘lad’ be preceded by a single ‘for-ath,’ and
a threefold ‘lad’ by a triple ‘for-ath” And if a thane have a
true man to take the ‘for-ath’ for him, be it so. If he have
not, let him begin his suit himself: and let no ‘for-ath’ ever
be remitted.


23. And let no man be entitled to any vouching to warranty,
unless he have ‘true witness whence that came to him which is
attached with him; and let the witness declare, by the favour
of God and his lord, that he is a true witness for him, as
he saw with his eyes and heard with his ears that he rightfully
obtained it.


27not in B. %°B.G. anrealone A. 9° B. 31’ not in A.
32 anrealone B. %%ppipealbe B. 34 ppypealbe A. Bzyy B.G. 36 ze-
cpeopne B. Fz G, B8Ly BG. *%notin B. “yonzypen B.G.
4‘inot in B. @bucan G. #piccenesye A. 4+habbe A. 4 hpanon
B. 46/75 xecype seo zepicnesye hpanon him come } on B. 47/re
zepicnerre A. 4%on by B. “xepicnepe B. Mp Bo 517 RB,
52 orephypdon B.


hoc faciat, hoc est accipiat duos et sit ipse tertius, et sic jurando
conquirat. Triplex vero juramentum sic conquiratur: accipiat quin-
que et ipse sit sextus, et sic jurando acquirat triplex judicium aut
triplex juramentum.’

© The Latin version explains this by saying: ‘Nisi habeat duos
idoneos testes qui fuerint videntes et audientes unde sibi venit.’


390 INUTES DOGAS.


DE REBUS NON EMENDIS SINE TESTIMONIO.

xxiv. And nan man nan ‘ping ne *bycge ofep feopep Spe-
ninga peop’ ne hbbende ne licgende *bucon *man %hebbe
7Zetpeope *zepitneyye feopep manna- *yy hiv binnan bymg
yy Inc “upp on lande. And "zip hic ®man fonne ™bero 4
he *pylhce *zepitnyyye *nabbe- ne beo pap nan team. ac
Vagiye man pam agen-"pmzean hip agen- 4 P*epcep-zyld 4
® pice pam pe hic daze. And “zip he “zeprcnyyye “habbe
ypa **pe hep-beropan cpedon-” ponne tyme hic man *ppypa.
zc pam *’reopdan *cyppe “aznize hic oppe azyre pam pe
hic age. And up ne “pincd nan pho $ emg man “agman
Srceole peep “zeprenyyye *biS 4 man zecnapan *can f pap
bnegde bis. *$ nan man hic nah co *zeahmanne pavdoyec-
pinga ap “ryx mondum “eepcep pam’ pe hic “yonycolen
pey:

DE INFIDIS ACCUSATIS.

xxv. And yepe “cyhe-byyig “yy 4 polce “ungetpype 4
“pay gemov “popbuge ppypas ponne “yceapie man of pam
“reondan semote pa pe him to-pidan- 4 inde “ponne zy
boph *zip he *mege. zip he ponne ne *meze zepylbe man
hine ypa hpeden pa man “mege ypa “cucne ypa deadne 4
Smman eall $ he “age. And “zilbe man pam teonde hiy
ceap-"zyld- 4 @¢o ye hlapopd elley to healpum to Shealpum
p hundped, And “zip adon oppe mez oppe ™pnembde fa “pade
ropyace ®zyloe pam “cyningce “hund-cpelpriz portt.:”


BE DEOFAN.
xxv1, And geyece ye “abepa peop $7? he *zerece- oppe


1 pinez A. pnge G. 2bizce G. 3 pemz A. “pem pupd G. 4 bucan
G. 5mon B. Shabbe B. 7zecpype G. Szepienyyre B. %yeo G.
up A. May BG. mon B. zero B. Mpillice A. 1 ze-
piccnyyre A. zepicneyre G.  'habbe A. Wazyre B. azype G.
18-pizan G. Wpa A, 20° G. 2Zsyp BG. 22zepiccnesye A. ze-
picneyre G. *habbe B. 74’ cpedon ty A. pe ep cpedon B.
%rcyma B. %Spmpa A. 7 yeoptam B. %ceppe A. 2% azme A.
ahnze B. pings G. %InaG. 2ahman B. %ycule B.  34e-
preneyye G. SbyS AG. 36° B. cann G. 37 bpezben A. bpyzbe LB.


@ One of the Latin versions reads, ‘Reddatur calumpnianti quod
suum est aut valor et ixsuper iterum tantum valens. The zfter-
gyld was therefore paid in addition to the ceap-gyld, where the
thing stolen could not be obtained, and hence the name; ‘efter’


THE LAWS OF KING CNUT. 891


24. And let no one buy any thing above the value of four
pence, either living or lying, unless he have the true witness of
four men, be it within a ‘burh,’ be it up in the country. For
if it then be attached, and he have no such witness, let there
be no vouching to warranty; but let his own be rendered to
the proprietor; and the **zfter-gild,’ and the ‘wite,’ to him
who is entitled thereto. And if he have witness, as we have
here before ordained, then let it be thrice vouched to warranty:
at the fourth time, let him keep possession of it, or render it to
him who owns it. And it seems right to us, that no man
should hold possession where there is witness, and it can be
known that it had been abstracted: [and] that no man ought to
claim possession, at the earliest, before six months after it had
been stolen.


25. And he who is ‘tiht-bysig,’ and untrue to the people,
and avoids the ‘gemot’ thrice; then let there be selected, from
the fourth ‘gemot,’ those who shall ride to him; and let him
still find a ‘borh,’ if he can: but if he cannot, let them seize
him as they can, whether alive or dead, and take all that he
owns. And let the accuser be paid his ‘ceap-gild;’ and let the
lord take possession of half, half the hundred. And if one or
other, either a kinsman or a stranger, refuse the riding; let
him pay to the king one hundred and twenty shillings.


OF THIEVES.
26. And let the notorious thief seek whatever he may seek,


385 $ A. %zeagmianne A. “pix A. 4 not in B. “ycolen A.
Bche-byyz A. 44nz G. Sungecpeape B. “par B. 47 ronbuza
G. *ycepize A. %yeoptam A. pone A.B. Alayp B. 52 maze
A. 8ay7 B. 54maze A. not in A.B. maze A. 57 epicne
G.  8mmen A. %ah B. ahteG. 2yltbe B. Szlb G.
2” B, Shalran A. S4zyp 4.B. SS ppamde man B. 67 B.
67" BG. S8zilbe A. Scynze B. cingce G.  cxx. G. / hund-
cpencz yeillinge A. 7labene A. ebépa B. ~G. not in B.
2 yece B.


being used in the sense of again or once more. This shows it to
have been used synonymously with the much disputed ‘ wider-widri-
gild,’ and with which, etymologically speaking, it is identical.


892 INUTES DOMAS.


yebe 7on hlaropd-yeappe gemec *yy- $ ®n nape feoph ‘ne
Szeyecean. 4 yepe ofen pir *pcalige- zeyece” $ he ’zeyece- $ he
negpe  feoph’’ ne *zeyéce at Sopenne pyre:


DE CALUMNIATORIBUS.


xxvu, And yepe on gemorve mid pidep-cihtlan hine yylpne
oppe hip man "pemge- ?habbe $ Seall ropypecen. 4 “zeand-
pypde pam *odpum ypa *hundpede juhe ™ pence:-


QUOD NEMO PLUS TRIDUO ACCIPIATUR HOSPITIO.


xxvii. And $ nan man ¥’nenne man ne undepfo na
*lenx ponne ppeo niht- buton *hine ye bereyce pe’ he ep
polzgade. y nan man ny men “ppam him ne *c&ce ep “he
*cléne yy *zlcene **yp&ce pe he ep “beclyped pey:-


DE LATRONIBUS PER INCURIAM DIMISSIS.
xxix. And *ziy “hpa peop zemece 4 hine ny pancey “apex
S1éce “bucon “hnedme- gebecte he pay peorey “pépe opfe
hine md *rullan ade *zelatige } he him nan facn mid
nyyce. And Sxy Mhpa “hpeam gehype 4 hine fopycce-
sylde py “cymneger “opephypnyyye- oppe hine be rullan
geladige:-


DE INFIDIS APUD CENTURIATOS.


xxx. And syp hpyle man “yy spa “ungecpype pam hun-
dpede 4 ppa “uhe-byyig- y hine “ponne “ppeo men “ev-
geedene teon- fonne ne beo pep nan oden buton } he ganze
co “bam °pnyrealdan opdale. °'Inp ye hlapond fonne yecze
% him nadop ne ad ne opdal ne bupyte yyppan $ zemoc per
on Pim-ceaycpe- ’nime ye hlayopd him tpegen gecpype men
co Sinnan fam hunopede y spepan $ him “n&ype ad ne
bupyte ne opdal ne “he *pede-zyld ne gulde- “bucon he
bone sepecan hebbe pe per “pypSe yp pe $ don maze.
“Tnr re ad ponne fond cume ceoye ye man pe pep @betihtled


Inotin A. 2nzg G. 3g G. “notin A. Szerecan B. %ycahe-
yece B. 7yece B. 8yéce B. Yopenepe A. mann B. 1! peme
B. “habbe A. Beal A. Mzeandpepde G. odpan A. 'Shun-
oped A. iWpynce B. 'nenne A. not in B. 2% lenze G.
217 he hine bepayce sepe A. 22ypom G. raced.“ Bo 4B.
2 lene A. xc wleepe B. 267 B. rppece G. 27 beclypad B.
beclypod G. ayp B. 7B. Manpez A. 31° B. 2 bucan G.


THE LAWS OF KING CNUT. 393


or he that is discovered in treason against his lord, so that
they never seek life; and he who after this steals, let him seek
what he may, so that he never seek life in [case of] open
theft.


27. And let him who in the ‘gemot’ shall defend himself or
his man by ‘wither-tihtle’ have wholly sued in vain; and
answer to the other as shall seem right to the hundred.


2& And that no one receive any man longer than three
nights, unless he shall recommend him whom he before followed:
and let no one dismiss his man before he be clear of every suit
to which he had been previously cited.


29. And if any one find a thief, and voluntarily let him
escape, without hue and cry; let him make ‘bot’ with the
thief’s ‘wer,’ or clear himself with a full oath, that he knew of
no guile in him. And if any one hear the hue and cry, and
disregard it, let him pay the king’s ‘ofer-hyrnes, or fully
clear himself.


30. And if any man be so untrue to the hundred, and so
‘ tiht-bysig,’ and three men together then accuse him; let there
be no other (course) but that he go to the threefold ordeal.
But if the lord say that neither oath nor ordeal had failed him
since the ‘gemdt’ was at Winchester; let the lord take to him
two true men within the hundred, and swear that never oath
or ordeal had failed him, nor had he paid ‘theof-gyld;’ unless
he have the reeve who is competent to do that. If then the
oath succeed, let the man who is accused choose whichever he
will; either a single ordeal, or a pound-worth oath, within the


3pedme B. 347 B. Xyullum A. 36 ze f A. 37 mise A. 8ayp
G. X®%hed. “peam B. 4lcynzer B. cingces G. 4 opephyp-
nese G. yr G. 44unepype GS cyhe-bynzg A. not in B.
47pny D. ‘ec-zedepe A. “pan A. 59 pprpealoan A. 41 Gyr
BG 8° B. B8innon G 4° B. notin Bo OB.
‘7buran G. 8ponne A.B. %pupse B. Ong G. 6 Ly BG.
62 becihtlab A. beryhrlob B.


394 INUTES DOMAS.


ry ypa °hpedep ypa he’ *pylle ypa anpeald opdal ypa punder
*peondne ad innan pam *ppim Shundpedan ofep 7+xxx- pe-
minga’ And zip *hi pone ad yyllan ne “duppen ganze he
co pam “pnyfealdan opdale. 4 “orga man $ ®ppyrealde ondal
puy. nime fife y beo “him ysylpa “yyxca- 4 “zip he ’ponne
Bral peopde- ac pam ropman *“cyppe bece pam teonde cpy-
sylde 4 pam *hlayopde Inp **pen pe hip picey pypde “py.”
4 yecce *zecpype bopzar P he alcey *yrpeley * ep *zeypice.
And ec pam *odpum “cyppe ne “py pep nan oden “boc
Scr he ful pupdse *buton $ man ceopre him pa handa *orp-
oppe pa fec- oppe ezdep- be pam pe yeo “dad Vyy. And
zip he ponne *zic mane *peone “!zepopht heebbe- “bonne
do man ut np eagan y ceopran of np “nore 4 “eapan “y
urepan “hppan- “oppe hine *®heruan. “yppa “hpile piyya”
ypa man fonne gepede’” pa pe pepo “pexdan “yceolan: ypa
man meg yrypan y eac “pene “yaple zebeopzan.” *Iny
She ponne “ut-hleape 4 $ opdal *ponbuge- “zylde ye boph
pam teonde hiy ceap-“zylo 4 bam “cyninze ny pep oppe pam
pe In @prcer Spunde yx. And zip “man “pone “hlarond teo
~ he be np pede “ur-hleope y ep ®unpihe pophte- °nime
him pig ?zectpype” men #6 4 beo him yylp ?yixva y labdize
hine pey. Ing reo ’*lad fond cume beo he peey peper pypde-
4; zip “heo fond’ ne ”cume yo ye cynincg to pam ” pene
4 beo re *pede utlah pid *eall yolc:-


BE PIRED-MONNU@. — DE HERO PROPRLE FAMILLE
FIDEJUSSORE.
xxx And “hebbe ele” *hlaropd mp *hiped-men on hiy
Sazenum *bonge y zip hine man eenrgey finger ced Mand—
ypame innan pam “hundpede pap he on “beclypod bed ypa


Ing G. %pedep he A. ypetep he G. 3pille G. 4 peopne A.
pupwne B. oppym A. Shundpese B. 7 ppicci penezga A. shiz
A. heo G. %ponne A.B. Mouppan B. ouppean G. 1! pnypeadan
A. ppiyealdan B. 127 G. ppiyealbe A. Mhe G. ' pixca A.
lay B. Wnotin A. 3G. Mpupse B. %cenpe A. 2! hlagond
Bo. 2° B. pe per pypte sy A. Anz G. 2% zecpeope B.
2G yrley G. 2% not in B. *Bzerpyce A. %odpan B. %cepne A.
In AG 2°G. Bbucon zp B. %4buran G. not in BG.
3% oede A. Wrz G. Bray B. V®zyc A. “pune A.G. 4! zepoph
A. zepeophe B. pone A. 4 naye A. nosu G. 447 B. hy
eapan G. © 3 paG. 4lippen A. 47 oppon G ‘4heczian A.
49/7 spyle piypa spa man pyle oppe ponne zep&be B. 5” hpyle piyya G.
5tneden A. %ycealyceonan B. pape A. 54” yaule beopzan B.
ss Gyp B. Syeo peoy G. 57 uc-leape A. uc-xt-leape B. 58 ron-


THE LAWS OF KING CNUT, 395


three hundreds, for above xxx.pence. And if they dare not
take the oath, let him go to the triple ordeal; and let the triple
ordeal be commenced thus: Jet him take five, and be himself
the sixth; and if he then be foul, at the first time, Jet him
make ‘bot’ to the accuser twofold; and to the lord who is
entitled to his ‘wite,’ with his ‘wér;’ and let him appoint true
‘borhs,’ that he will hereafter abstain from every evil. And
at the second time, let there be no other ‘bit,’ if he be foul,
than that his hands be cut off, or his feet, or both, according
as the deed may be. And if he then have wrought yet greater
wrong; then let his eyes be put out, and his nose and his ears,
and the upper lip be cut off; or let him be ? scalped: whatever
of these then, those shall counsel whose duty it is to counsel
thereupon; so that punishment be inflicted, and also the soul
preserved. But if he run away, and avoid the ordeal, let the
‘borh’ pay to the accuser his ‘ceap-gyld,’ and to the king his
‘wér;’? or to him who is entitled to his ‘wite.’ And if any
one accuse the lord, that he ran away by his counsel, and had
previously acted unlawfully; let him take to him five true men,
and be himself the sixth, and clear himself thereof. If the
purgation succeed, let him be entitled to the ‘wér:’ and if it do
not succeed, let the king take the ‘wér,’ and let the thief be an
outlaw to all people.


OF ‘ HIRED-MEN,’


81. And let every lord have his household in his own
‘borh;’ and if any one accuse his man of any thing, let him
answer within the hundred wherein he is cited, as just law is.


buzan A. %zlbe G -z1b A. Sleynze B. cingce G. 6 pener
B. &pypte B. “mon B. “ponne dA. Slapond B. 7 use
leope B. ~ G.  8unpihcer A. ©” nyme him fire zetprpe A. 7 ze~
cpeope B. notin G 2° B. ryxscaG. 4" Bo Meyme A.
‘notin B. ®%heA. “7cyme G. eynz Benge G. 77 B.
%yeo A, 81° B. Sealle A. 8% habbe ‘ele A. 8 laropd B.
Shind-men A. %6azanum A. ®7bopghe B. 8zyp Bo 8" B.
%Manbdspemze A. %hundpe A. 9% beclepad Ad. 83° B.


@ The Latin version explains this: ‘ Aut corium capitis cum
capillis quod Angli vocant beheettie. Another translation reads, ‘ vel
decapilletur. This punishment in Germany was called ‘ harschat.’


396 LINUTES DOMAS.


hic 4yuhe "lagu Spy. And *zip he Sbetihclod peopde 4 he
Suc-odhleape 7zylbe ye hlapopd peer manney *pepe pam *cy-
minge. 4 gif man “pone “hlarond Sceo $ he be hip “*p&de
urc-hleope- labige hine mid "yip peynum 4 beo him syle
Wyyxca. “Ing him yeo lad “benyce *zylde pam *cyminge
Inp pepe y “py ye man *urlah:.


DE SERVO ORDALII QUESTIONE EXAMINATO.
xxx. And zip *peopman xt pam opdale “tl peopde”
*Smeancie man hine’ wt fam fopman “cyppe. y xt pam
odpan *ceyppe ne? yy peep nan Soden bor *buton  hearod:-


BE UNLETREOPUM MANNUM®.—INFIDUS VADEM
REGIUM EXIGAT.

xxx. ©And Szir hpyle man “py pe eallum yolce un-
secpype “yy- Fane per “cyningey “zepéra to 4 “gebjunge
“hine undep bopge- $ “bine man to mite “lade pam pe
him “onyppecan. “Ing he ponne boph nebbe ylea hine man
4j on fulan leczee y “zip “Hine “hpa yopene ropycande
beon Shiz begen aney puhteyr pypde. And yebe piy fonyrcce
4 hic geropdian “nylle ypa upe *ealpa “epide iy” pylle pam
57eyninge ®hund-vpelpug yerlt.:-


DE MUNICIPIIS PURGANDIS.
xxxiv. And prande *becpux bupgum an “lagu av ladunze:-


Be FREONDLEASAN.— DE ADVENIS ET PEREGRINIS
CUSTODIENDIS.


xxxv. *And “zip ypeondleay man oppe feoppan cuman ypa
Szerpenced “peonde puph “yneondleayce $ he boph nebbe
zt Srnum-cyhtlan. “bonne “zebuge he “hengenne 4 pep
70zebide opps he 434 co Loder opdale 4 *zerape pep p he
megze. Prcodlice yepe fpeondleayan 4 yfeoppan cumenan


lnotin B. 2laza A. 38ye0 Bog G. 4297 B.G. Sbecihled A.
becyhclob B. 6uc-hleape A. uc-et-leape B. 7zilbe G. 8 pép B.
%cynze B. cynzce G. hi B. | ponne A. 1 lapond B. 3 ceon
B. pete 4.7 B. uar-hleape A. uc-leope B. 16° B. v. G.
Wyxcad, WL BG. Mbypyce B. %zilbe A. 2 cynze B.
cingce G. 2pep B. Bbeo B. “4uclaze A. *zyp B.G. 26 peor-
man A.B. %~ G. ‘pul pup peopde A. 28 meapcyge A. ’meapcie
hine ponne B. %ceppean A. %od5pum 4. 3! ceppe A. eyppan B.
2G. Bnotin B. 3tbucan G. Bnotin B. aye B. 37 hpile


THE LAWS OF KING CNUT. 397


And if he be accused, and he run away, let the lord pay the
man’s ‘ wér’ to the king. And if any one accuse the lord, that
he ran away by his counsel, let him clear himself with five
thanes, and be himself the sixth. If the purgation fail him,
let him pay to the king his ‘wer,’ and let the man be an
outlaw.


82. And if a ‘theowman’ be foul at the ordeal, let him be
branded the first time; and at the second time, let there be no
other ‘bot’ except the head.


OF UNTRUE MEN.


83. And if there be any man who is untrue to all the people,
let the king’s reeve go, and bring him under ‘borh,’ that he
may be led to justice to those who accuse him. But if he have
no ‘borh,’ let him be slain, and be laid in the ‘ful. And if
any one stand up for him, Jet them both be worthy of one law.
And whoever neglects this, and will not further it, as is the
decree of us all, let him pay to the king one hundred and
twenty shillings.


34. And at a ‘ladung,’ let one law stand between ‘ burhs.’


OF FRIENDLESS MEN.


85. And if a friendless man or a comer from afar be so
distressed, through want of friends, that he has no ‘borh’ at
the ‘frum-tihtle;’ let him then submit to prison, and there
abide, until he go to God’s ordeal, and there let him fare as
he may. Verily he who dooms a worse doom to the friend-


A. 3871 G Sallum 4. “not in G. 4l eynzer B. cingcer G.
42° B. 4S zebpinze B..zebpingon G. “hyne A. 5° B. 46 labe
A. ‘onypecan B. onsppecanG. 8Ly B. Oz B. 0° B,
51 yona A. not in B. 2beo AB. Bhi G. nelle G. 55 not
in B. ‘epyoe G. “cpide fy A. 57 cynze B. cingce G. 58 xx. G.
59 becpyx B. ClazaB. Snotin B. “aye B. notin G. ze.
ypencad B. “4punte B. % ppeond-leyco B. “ypumerhlan A.
ynymeyhelan G. 67 pone G. zebuzga A. © henezen A. henzene
B. Mabbe A 1° B.G. 2° B. Bmaze A.


398 LNUTES DOMAS.


pypyan 106m demed ponne hip gefepan he *deped Shim
yylpum:.


BE MJENAN ADE. —DE PEJERANTIUM PENA.


xxxvi. ‘And zip hpa meene-ad on halizgdome ®rpepize 4 he
7openyc&led peopde- *polige °pepa handa’ oppe healer peper-
yp “yy gemene hlaronde 4 “birceope. And ™ne beo he
panon-fopd ader pypde. “buton he fon Isobe pe “bdeoppopn
zebete 4 him boph yinde $ he eppe eye ypylcer zeypice::


Be LEASRE LEpITNEsse.— DE FALSI TESTIMONIO
ACCUSATO.


xxxvi. And zip hpa on learpe ®zepreneyye openlice ytande
4 he ofenyvaeled *peopde ne *ycande Inp *!zeprcneyye **yyppan
fon Sahc- ac *zylde bam *>cyminge *oppe landpican be *” healy-
fange:-”


PECCATUM TURPIUS EST IN DIEBUS ET LOCIS SACRIS,
ET MAJORES MAGIS SUNT PLECTENDI.


xxxvilt, Nip on anigne timan unpthe “alyped- 4 peah man
yeeal ppeolp-vidan *°y peeyten-cidan’ y on *ppeoly-pcopan zeopn-
heoyt *beopgan. And “a ypa man *bid Smihtigna oppe
mapan “hdder ypa “yceal *hé deoppon fon Tose 4 fon
S7populde unmiht gebecan. And godcunde bore *yece man
Zeopne 4 pymble be’ boc-vale.’” “4 “!ponuldcunde bove’ yece
“man be populd-laze:-


DE MINISTRUM ALTARIS OCCIDENTE.


xxxix. “Inp hpa peofod-“pen arylle ry he “uclah pid
Irod 4 pid men- “buton he puph *pnec-pi8 pe dSseoppop
aebece y eac pid pa “megde- oppe *zelatize hine mid


17 B. 26enad B. Shym A. 4notin B. 5ayp BG. Sypepie B.
7ofepycaled A.“ B. Spohe B. papa handa B. 1 not in A.
un G. 12 bircope A. Bna G. Mburan G. Gob B.
1% beopon A. Mayr BG. Wzepcnyye A. Mpunte B. 2 not
in G. “\zeprcnyype B. 2 pippan A. *%hahe A. nahe B. %2zilde
A. %cynze B. cinzce G. 26” oppe landpican pe hip yoene ah G.


a The Latin version reads, ‘ Injustitia est festis diebus et sanctifi-
catis locis propensius interdicta.’ But, judging from the ordinary
acceptation of * sneoly,’ and the analogy of its other compounds, the


THE LAWS OF KING CNUT. 399


less and the comer from afar than to his fellow, injures
himself.


OF A FALSE OATH.


36. And if any one swear a false oath on a relic, and he be
convicted, let him forfeit his hands, or half his ‘ wér;’ and let
that be common to lord and bishop. And let him not be
thenceforth oath-worthy; unless he the more thoroughly before
God make ‘bot,’ and find him ‘borh’ that he will ever after
abstain from the like.


OF FALSE WITNESS.


87. And if any one stand openly in false witness, and he be
convicted; let not his witness afterwards stand for aught, but
let him pay to the king, or to the ‘landrica,’ according to his
‘ heals-fang.’


38. At no time is injustice allowed; and yet at festival-tides,
and fast-tides, and in festival-places, one ought most earnestly
to take care. And always as a man is mightier or of greater
degree, so ought he the more thoroughly to make ‘bot’ for
injustice, before God and before the world. And let divine
‘bot’ be earnestly and constantly sought, according as the
books prescribe; and let secular ‘bot’ be sought according to
secular law.


39. If any one kill a servant of the altar, let him be an
outlaw to God and to men, unless he the more thoroughly
make ‘bot’ through exile, and also to the kindred, or clear


27 halr-sangzce A. haly-panze B. 8aleped A. alypad B. 29 not in B.
Mzebypzan B. 7G. bys AG. Bmhepa dA 7G.
35 yrcel G. 36° B. 37 peopulbe A. 38yece man yymle zeonne be A.
39/7mann yymble bé boc-cecinge G. 495 fon A. 4!” populb-boce B.
“mann B. #Andzyp G. 44 pezen B. Hurclaga B. 46 bucan G.
47 pnec-y15 A. ppecd-16 G. 8mezta B. 4 latize B.


definition given by Lye seems the preferable interpretation: * Locus
in quo festivitas consecrate diei celebrari solebat.’


400 LNUTES DOMAS.


pep-lade y 1binnan *pmiccigum *mhta aginne *bote- agzdep
ze pid *Irod ze pid Smen- be “eallum pam pe he aze:-


UT REX SIT ORDINATIS [ET] ALIENIGENIS PATRONUS.


x. *Ing man gehadodne °man oppe ezlpeotigne puph “amg
Upinge foppedes xt feo oppe ac “reope- ponne yeeal him
Beyninge beon fop maz y fom mundbopan- “buon he eller
odvepne “hlaropd habbe. And *bece man pam’ ”cynincze
ypa hiv gebypize- oppe he pa dzde ppece *ypyde deope.
?%Cmycenum *cyningce sebypad *ypySe mhte ?2 he Loder’
SeabylSe ppece **ppySe deope- be pam pe seo *ded *yy:.


BE GEPADEDUM MANNUM.— DE MINISTRO ALTARIS
HOMICIDA, &e.

xu. Ing peorod-%pezen man-ylaza **pypde oppe Peller

co *ypidse *man-peope zepypce- ponne *pohize he agdep ge

hader ze “edeler 4 ppeecmge ypa pide spa “papa him yepuye

+y ®deed-beve zeopne. And "zy he ladian pylle *latize *hine

mid ppyyealdan- 4 “bucon he “binnan *-xxx- mthta’ bote
‘Sazinne pid Irod y pid men ponne “yy he “utlah:.


DPJCT MAN LEPADODNE MAN [NE] BENDE NE BEATE. —
DE ORDINATUM VINCIENTE AUT VERBERANTE.
xi. ‘Ing hpa “zehadodne man “bende “oppe beate obfe
50 ppyde Izebypmmze- bece pis hine spa “ypa hic prhe yy
‘4 ®biyceope peofod-bove be “haber mzde- y *hlaropde *opbe
eynincze’ be yullan mund-bpyce- oppe geladige “hine mid
rulpe lade:-


DE ORDINATO CAPITIS REO.
xiiu. ©Inp “zehadod man hine roppypce mid dead-ycylde-


Ibinnan A, 2xxx.B. S3mhconG. ‘4paboce B. Todd A.
6menn A.G. 7Zallum A. *Lyp BG. %notinG. Wamgz A.
NpmzA. yope A. Bkinge B. emge G. Mbucan G. ' not
in B. 6 becon pam B. Wkynmzge B. einzce G. 18 ypide G.
19Epiycenan G. 2 kyninze B. kyningce G. 2 ppite A. 2?” pe
Lobes A. 2ebylzde G. %ypte A. Modatad. 7B. %ypi G.
7iyy BG. %-pen G. peopse G. *%heller A. 3! ypyde G.
2°G."B. S8pohe Bo %edlep G ye papa B. 3boxv- A.
Vay BG. Blane B. 2not in G. “bucan G. 4! binnon B.


THE LAWS OF KING CNUT. 401


himself by a *‘wer-lad;’ and within thirty days let him set
about the ‘bot,’ both to God and to men, on peril of all he
possesses.


40. And if any one wrong a man in holy orders, or a
foreigner, through any means, as to money or as to life, then
shall the king be unto him in the place of a kinsman and of a
protector, unless he have another lord besides. And let ‘bot’
be made to the king as it may be fitting; or let him avenge the
deed very deeply. It belongs very rightly to a Christian king
that he avenge God’s anger very deeply, according as the deed
may be.


OF MEN IN HOLY ORDERS.


Al. If a servant of the altar be a homicide, or else work
iniquity very enormously; let him then forfeit both degree and
country, and go in exile as far as the pope shall prescribe to
him, and earnestly do penance. And if he will clear himself,
let him clear himself with a three-fold [*lid’]; and unless he
begin the ‘bot’ within xxx. days, to God and to men, let him
be an outlaw.


THAT NO ONE BIND OR BEAT A MAN IN HOLY
ORDERS.


42. If any one bind or beat or grossly insult a man in holy
orders, let him make ‘bot’ to him as it may be right, and
to the bishop, with an altar-‘bot,’ according to the degree of
his order; and to the lord or the king, according to the full
*mund-bryce;’ or clear himself with a full ‘lad’


48. If 2 man in holy orders defile himself with a crime


42/ pniccigum mhron A. 4 anzmne A. azynne B. “41 G. 4 ure
lazga B. “Lyp G. 47 habne dA. “binde A. “ oppen B. oppon
G. pide A. Sl zebypmepze B. 2not in B. Bpam b. B.
54 per haber B. 55 pam lapopte B. 5674 pam cyningce B.
47 mund-bpice A. Shine sylpne B. S9%yulle A. Ly BG.
6! habod A.


® A ‘lad’ equivalent to the wer-gild of the party.


402 LINUTES DOQAS,


zepylde man ine 4 healde co *bipceopey dome- be *pam pe
yeo dad Spy:.”


DE REO CONFESSARIUM PETENTE.
xuiv. Ing dead-peyldiz man yepype-*pppeece Szypne ne
7pypne him ®man eppe’ ¥ °zip him “hpa "pypne gebete” $
pid ®pone *ceyninge mid *hund-cpentigum yeitl.” oppe gelatize
Shine. mime ’mp 4 7 beo him pylp” Byixca::


BE PALI-DCILES FREOLSE. — DE DIE DOMINICA ET
FESTIS OBSERVANDIS.


xiv. Ing man pealdan *magze ne o¥de man efpe on
Sunnan-“dezey ppeolye aenigne *yoppyphtne man *bucon he
leo oppe feohte. ac *pylbe 4 healde” $ ye ppeoly-daez agan
ry, %Inp *ypeoman fpeoly-daze pypce ponne *zebere
~ mid hip healy-pange y hupu pid *Lod bece nce geopne
ypa ypa him man tece. Deop-man gip “he “pynce *}Fohze
hny hyde “oppon hyd-zyldey- be fam “pe yeo ded yy.
7Iny Shlayopd np peopan fpeoly-“daeze nyde co peopce
bolige pay peopan 4 beo he “yyppan yole-pmgz- y “zylde
lah-yhic re “hlaropd mid Denum “pice mid Englum- “be pam
pe peo deed “py obpe Shine “zeladige:-


Be FesTEN€.— DE JEJUNIUM VIOLANTE.


xiv. ° Dip yyug-man’ uhe peeyten abpece *'zylde Jah-yhic
mid Denum pice mid Englum- be pam “pe seo dad py. Yyel
3biS $ man “ihe peepcen-cide xp mele eves y zyc Spynye
~ man md fleyc-mete hine yylpne “apyle. In hic peop-
man zed6 polige Iny hyde Poppe hyd-gilbey” be Fam pe yeo
Vond py:


UT QUADRAGESIMA ET FESTA NON TEMERENTUR.
xtvin. Ing hpa “openlice Slengecen-bpyce gepypce- puph
feoht-lac- opfe puph pir-lac- “oppe puph pear-lac-” oppe Fuph


\byeoper A. perb. B. 2 pamyyooete A. 3G. 4Lyp BG.
5-rppace A. -ypece G. Szeopne A. 7pipne de © nan man
neppe B. 277 B. man B. MW peopne bece A. 1}? not in A.
BWkyninze B. enz G. Mcxx, G. “hund-cpennig yeillinga B. 15 not
inG. Mpymen B. v. G. 1 beosylp AG. 8ypyxca G. 19 Gyr
B.G. maze A. 27 G. 22-bazer 4. *3soppophtne B. 24 bucan
G. %»ylbemanhine B. %n A. 2 Ly BG. 8 yprgman B.
2%-taze A. %zebecehe B. 3! Gots d. not in G. 33 peonce


THE LAWS OF KING CNUT. 408


worthy of death, let him be seized, and held to the bishop’s
doom, according as the deed may be.


44. If 4 man who has committed a crime worthy of death
desire confession, let it never be denied him: and if any one
deny it him, let him make ‘bot’ for that to the king with a
hundred and twenty shillings, or clear himself; let him take
five, and be the sixth himself.


OF THE HOLY DAY FESTIVAL.


45. If it can be helped, no condemned man should ever be
put to death on a Sunday festival, unless he flee or fight: but
let him be secured, and held till the festival-day be past. Ifa
freeman work on a festival-day, then let him make ‘bot’ with
his ‘ heals-fang,’ and, above all, earnestly make ‘ bot’ to God, so
as he may be instructed. If a ‘theowman’ work, let him pay
with his hide, or ‘hide-gild,’ according as the deed may be.
If a lord compel his ‘theow’ to work upon a festival-day, let
him forfeit the ‘theow,’ and be he afterwards folk-free; and let
the lord pay ‘lah-slit? among the Danes, and ‘wite’ among
the English, as the deed may be; or clear himself.


OF FASTING.


47. If a freeman break a lawful fast, let him pay ‘lah-slit’
among the Danes, and ‘wite’ among the English, as the deed
may be. It is sinful, that any one, at a lawful fast-tide, eat
before the time, and yet worse that any one defile himself with
flesh-meat. If a ‘theowman’ do so, let him pay with his hide,
or ‘ hide-gild,’ as the deed may be.


48. If any one openly commit lent-breach, through fighting,
or through fornication, or through robbery, or through any


A. *polie B. Boppe A. %not in AG. 37 Ly BG. Blarond
B. %-daze A. “pole B. “A\pippan B. @zilbe A. #8 lapond B.
“4 ypreB. bi B. 4oxesed. V7nzG. Bnot in A. 4 ze-
lahie B. 5 Gyr ppiman B. i zylbe B. 2 not in A. 33/ bid
hic B. byS BG. 4not in AB. 5° B. Shic byd pypre B.
S7zeryle B. 86 58 Ly B. 539" BG. = not in A. Sl bebe AL
Sopendlice B. Slenczten- B. ©" not in G.


404 LNUTES DOQAS,


enize healice 'mipdaeda- py $ ?cpy-bece- *ypa on heah rpeolye-
be pam pe yeo ‘dmb 5yy- y zip man aetyace- latizge 7hine md
ppyrealope lade:.


GIF ppX FORPYRNE GODLUNDE LERIDTA.— DE
ECCLESIZ DEBITA VI DETINENTE.

xix. Ing hpa md pige zodcundpa *zemhea roppypne °zylde
Jah-ylic mid Denum "rull-prce mid Englum oppe geladige hine-
nime ™.x1- 4 beo Shim “yylp cpelpca. Ing he man *ze-
pundize zebete $ 4 Vzylde “rull-prce pam hlapopde 4 Var
biyceope pa *handa *alyre *oppe Ing aleve.” **Inp he
*4man arylle beo he *urlah 4 np *hente mid heapme elec
“hepa ~ phe pylle. *Inp he zepypce $ man hine arylle
puph pe he ongean phe *zeanbypde- zip man } *zepodige
hege * zezilbe:-


DE SACRUM ORDINEM VIOLANTE.
L. Ing hpa *had-bpyce “zepynce gzebece $ “be haber
meses spa be pepe ypa be “pice ppa be lah-plice ypa be
ealpe ape:


BE JCp-BRYLE.— DE ADULTERIO.
ux. Ing hpa ep-bpyce “zepypce zebece $ be pam pe yeo
dad yy” Yel xep-bpyce *bid p Paep-peye “man mid
“emtize foplicge y “mycele pypye “pS odpep wpe oppe pid
“¢zehadode:-


BE SIB-LEGERE. — DE INCESTUOSIS.
tu. “Ing hpa pib-legep “zepypce gebece P be sibbe
mzde- ypa be pepe ypa be pice ypa be “ealpe ahve.” Ne
bid na gelic $ man “pid ypuytop “zecheme ty hic pepe
®reon Syibb:”


Imybete 4.B. 2cpi-boce B. 3ypaeac B. ‘bebe A. 571 G.
Seyp B. 7not in AG. 8%phra B.  %xlbe A. Myulpice B.
Nenbhran A. lnotin A. Wanot in AG. Myeolp B. 15 Ly B.
puntize B. Vazlte A. 'yulpice G. War pam B. 2hande A.
2lalyra A. 2% oppon Ing yoplece G. 3 Lyp B. 2%4mann G.
%urlaze B. hence B. %papaB. Bpille A. Lyf BG.
30 zeond-bypde G. 3! zerodian meze B. azilbe A. ezylbe B.
B3zeppce A. %4be par B. 7A. %6zeppce dA. 377 debe pi A.
8 bys G. Xeap-paycte B. eap-payc G. 4 mann A. men B. 4 em-


THE LAWS OF KING CNUT. 405


heinous misdeeds ; let the ‘bot’ be twofold, as on a high festival,
as the deed may be; and if any one deny it, let him clear
himself with a threefold ‘lad.’


IF ANY ONE REFUSE DIVINE DUES.


49, If any one with violence refuse divine dues, let him pay
‘lah-slit? among the Danes, and full ‘wite’ among the English,
or let him clear himself: let him take x1., and be himself the
twelfth. If he wound any one, let him make ‘bot’ for it, and
pay full ‘ wite’ to the lord, and redeem his hand of the bishop,
or lose it. If he kill any one, let him be an outlaw, and let
every of those pursue him with hue and cry who desire right.
If he act so that he be killed through striving against right,
if that can be proved, let him lie uncompensated.


50. If any one commit *‘had-bryce,’ let him make “bot”
according to the degree of the order, as well with ‘wér, as with
‘wite,’ and with ‘lah-slit,’ and with all his possession.


OF ADULTERY.


51. If any one commit adultery, Jet him make ‘bot’ for it
as the deed may be. It is a wicked adultery when a married
man lies with a single woman, and much worse, with another’s
wife, or with one in holy orders.


OF INCEST.


52. If any one commit incest, let him make ‘bot’ for it
according to the degree of kin; as well with ‘wer,’ as with
‘wite,’ and with all his possessions. It is by no means alike
whether a man lie with a sister, or if it were a distant relative.


cize G. 42 micele A. “pyd A. “4 xzehabedd. SH Lyp B. 6 ze-
pynce A. 47 ealpaehte B. 48by5 BG. not in A. 9 zehame
A, 51/4 per pe hic bid yeop pibbe. B. 2zeon G. 8b A.


a The Latin version defines this offence: ¢ Scilicet, aut monachum,
aut presbiterum, aut aliquem ordinatum verberaverit, aut aliquid
ejusmodi fecerit.’


406 INUTES DOMAS.


[Be] PYDEPAN (3) MDEN.—DE VIDUAM VIOLANTE.
Lut. Ing hpa ‘pydepan nyd-neme gebete $*be pepe. *Inp
hpa meeden nyd-neme gebete  *be pepe:-


DT NAN PIF PEO NE FORLICLE.— DE UXORIS
ADULTERZE PENA GRAVI.

tiv. *Ing be Sepicum ceople pip 7hiz be oSpum pepe
Srophege 4 hic open *peaopde- zepeopSe heo vo “populd-~
“yceame “yyppan hipe yylppe 4 heebbe ye yuht pep eall $
heo “ahte- y “heo ponne polize” “naye 4 eapena-” 4 “gir
hit “cihtcle ®yi” y lad *yopbenyce- *4bipceap ponne pealde’ 4
yuidlice deme::


DE UXORATO FORNICANTE AUT CONCUBINAM
HABENTE,

Lv, *Inp pig-peeyt pep hine foplicge be np agenpe pylne
*Spohige pepe 4 bece rop hine yylpne pid *Ir0d 4 pid men. ¥
yepe *hzebbe puht pip 4 eac *ayeye ne d0 him nan ppeoys
nan “pana geyhta’ pe man emyctenum *men don *Yyceal-
zen he geypice y ypa deope gebeve *ypa bipceop him’ tece 4
zgpe “ypylcep gerpice:-


UT ALIENIGENZ LIBIDINOSI EJICIANTUR.


Lv1. fElpeotize *men- gi ng heopa heemed mhcan “nellan-
Sop Jande mid heopa zehtum 4 yynnan gepican:”


UT HOMICIDA IN PURGATIONE CADENS EPISCOPO
TRADATOUR.


tvu. %Ing *open mond peopde $ man py Bamypodped
Sazire man magum “pone banan-’ y zip hice tihtle “py 4 2
“Jade miytide deme ye biyceop:-


lyudupan Bo 2be by B. 3Ly Be 4behy B. Fy B.

6epycum A, 7hi G. foplizce A. Y%pupse B. ' zepypde B.
Nypenulo- A. 12-pcame A. 'ypippan A. Maze B.  15/heo ponne
pohe B. nara G. ’ezdep ze nosu ze pa eapan B. 17 xy B.
chela boo B. "pz G. 2%yonbeprca B. 21” ponne pealte ye
biceop B. 2 Iyp B. Bpolle B. %Lodvsd AB. %habbe B.
26 cearere A. cerere B. 27 pena G. “pepe plea B. 2%menn A.
29;ceall A. en pam G. 3!” ypa hm fe bipceop B. 32 spilcer B.
3menn A. 4nyllan A. nellas B. %5”opiue ht man oy Jande mid


THE LAWS OF KING CNUT. 407


OF WIDOWS AND MAIDS.


53. If any one ravish a widow, let him make ‘bot’ for it
with his ‘wer.’ If any one ravish a maid, let him make ‘bit’
for it with his ‘wer,’


THAT NO WOMAN COMMIT ADULTERY.


54. If, during her husband’s life, a woman lie with another
man, and it become public, let her afterwards be for a worldly
shame as regards herself, and let her lawful husband have all
that she possessed; and let her then forfeit both nose and ears:
and if it be a prosecution, and the ‘Jad’ fail, let the bishop use
his power, and doom severely.


55. If a married man lie with his own maid-servant, let him
forfeit her, and make ‘bot’ for himself to God and to men: and
he who has a lawful wife, and also a concubine, let no priest
administer to him any of those rites which ought to be adminis-
tered to a Christian man; ere he desist, and so deeply make
‘bot’ as the bishop may teach him; and let him ever desist
from the like.


56. If foreigners will not correct their fornications, let them
retire from the land, with their possessions and sins.


57. If there be *open ‘morth,’ so that a man be murdered,
let the slayer be- delivered up to the kinsmen; and if there be
a prosecution, and he fail at the ‘lad,’ let the bishop doom.


heopa ehvan y on synnan gepican. Be Gy Bo Fn AB,
38 malas B.G. ®*azyue B. agye G. 4 not in AG. 4nz G.
4 lebde A.


a As ‘mopd’ implies death by secret means, we must not refer this
term to the crime at the time of its perpetration. It rather means
‘mond’ which has been subsequently discovered.


408 INUTES DOOAS.


Be PLAFORDES SYRPUNLE. — DE INSIDIIS ADVERSUS
REGEM ET DOMINUM.
ty. ‘Ing hpa *embe ®cyninez oppe *hlaropd *yyppie ry
he hnyp feopey yeyltiz 4 ealley peer pe he aze-’buton he za
co ®ppyyealdan opbale:-°


Be BORD-BRYLE.— DE VIOLATIONE FIDEJUSSIONIS.

tix. Ing hpa “eynimgceyr boph abpece “zebete P md ve
%pundum. Ing hpa apcebiyceoper boph oppe “adehngeyr
Sabnece gebete $ md *pnym pundan. “Ing hpa leod-
biyceopey oppe ealdopmanney *boph abpece zebece ™P mid
20cpam pundan:-


BE DAM DE ON LYNINCILES PIRDE FEOPTED. — DE
DIMICATIONE IN REGIA.
ux. *Iny hpa on *eynincgey *hipede gereohve” “polize
pey *liper- buton ye **cymincg him geayuan pylle:.


Be DAM DE MAN ODERNE BEPEPNAD.— DE EO QUI
ALIUM ARMIS INJUSTE SPOLIARIT.


txt Ing man et unlagum man *be-pepnize *ponzilde
hine be hiy healy-pange- 4 zip hine man gebinde *°yongilde
be healpan *"pepe:.


LRID-BRYLE.—DE MILITUM RAPINIS.
ux. Ing hpa on pypde Szpid-bpyce yulpypce polize
“hirer oppe pape-gildey” “Ing he yam-pypce bece be pam
pe yeo dzed yy:


PAM-SOLIN.— DE EO QUI DOMUM ALTERIUS
INVASERIT.

Lx. *Ing hpa ham-pocne gepypce zgebece $ mid pir
Spundan pam “cyningce on Engla-lage- 4 “10n Dena-laze
ypa hic ap yood- y “zip hine man pep “4pylle liege
“ezylde:


1Lyy B. 2emb A. ymb B. 2kynincz B. cimnez G. 4 hlaropde
A. ymbe lup- B. 5yyppie B. 6p: G. 7bucan G.  & pmpealoan A.
97 pep clene pyps. Badd. Mkymnczer B. crmnzcer G. |! ze
be A. yy A. pundan G. Meidelinzeer G.  bpece B.
ppm G Wy B. bung A. Vanotin B. 11.G. Ly B.
2kynineger B. cimingeer G. 237 hipbe seohte A. - 24 pohe L.


THE LAWS OF KING CNUT. 409


OF PLOTTING AGAINST A LORD.


58. If any one plot against the king, or his lord; let him be
liable in his life, and in all that he owns, except he go to
the threefold ordeal.


OF ‘BORH-BRYCE,’

59. If any one break the king’s ‘ borh,’ let him make ‘bot’
for it with v. pounds. If any one break an archbishop’s or an
atheling’s ‘borh,’ let him make ‘bot’ for it with three pounds.
If any one break .a suffragan bishop’s or an ‘ealdorman’s’
‘borh,’ let him make ‘bot’ for it with two pounds.


OF HIM WHO FIGHTS IN THE KING’S HOUSEHOLD.


60. If any one fight in the king’s household, let him forfeit
his life, unless the king will be merciful to him.


IN CASE ANY ONE DISARM ANOTHER.


61. If any one unlawfully disarm a man, let him compensate
with his ‘heals-fang;? and if he bind him, let him compensate
with half his ‘wér’


‘ GRITH-BRYCE,’
62. If any one in the ‘fyrd’ commit ‘grith-bryce,’ let him
forfeit his life, or his ‘wer-gild.’ If he co-operate, let him make
‘bot’ according as the deed may be.


‘HAM-SOCEN.’


68. If any one commit ‘ham-socen,’ let him make ‘bot’ for
it with five pounds to the king by English law, and by Danish
law as it formerly stood; and if he there be killed, let him lie
uncompensated.


huey B. %kynincz B. ange G. 7Lyp B. %bepepme B.
2%ronzylbe B. ropzilbe hine A. fopzilbop B. 3! prepeA. 32 Lyf
B. Bznid-bpice A. zspyd-bpyce G. 3 liuer oppon pepe-zylter B.
Shy B. Boered. Ly B. Bpundan B. *kynineze B.
cinzce G. 494 on Cent ec pam socne -v- pam cinze 4j ppeo pam ances
biyceope G.add. ‘inotinG. @zy Bo 8 B. Haziloe G.


410 LNUTES DOMAS.


REAF-LAL. — DE RAPINA.
ixiv. ‘Ing hpa peay-lac gepypce *azipe y fonzylte 4 beo
hip pepey yeyliiz pid Spone *cymingc®:-


pUS-BRYLE. —QUZ SUNT SCELERA JNEXPIABILIA.
txv. Duy-*bpyce 4 bepnec y open pyrd 4 *7aebepe mopd 4
hlayopd-*ypice eypcep populd-laze ip bocleary:-


BUR)-BOTE. —DE VHS PUBLICIS REFICIENDIS.
uxvi. °Ing hpa “buph-bote oppe ™bpicgz-bocte oppe rypd-
Fane foppicce gebece mid “hund-cpelpagum yeilt. pam
Beyningce on “€ngla-laze- y on Dena-lage ypa hic ap yrod-
oppe gelaize “hine- *namize man him ™-xun- 4 ®bezyce
«xi > To cipie-bote yeeal eall role ylpcan mid puhte:-


Be cLODES-FLYMAN.— DE EO QUI EXCOMMUNICATUM
VEL UTLAGATUM CUSTODIERIT.


yxvi. Ing hpa Gobdey-ylyman hebbe on unphe *azire
hine to mhte” y “ponzyloe pam pe hic gebymze- y zylde
pam *cyningce be *hiy *pene-gilde. *” Ing *2hpd %amanyodne
opfe “uclahne *hebbe 4 healte phhce him yylpum 4 ealpe
hip ape:-


DE MISERICORDIA EXHIBENDA.
Lxvit. * And © zip hpa *pille geopne ypam unmhte xecyppan
Sere to puhve- Smiltyige “man yop Loder ege ypa man *beye
®megze pam “ypyde “zeonne:-


1Lyp B. 2aziue B. agyre G. 3ponne A. 4kymnze B. ange G.
Soppe pid pone pe hir yocne age G. add. 6-bpec A. 7abene A.
ebépe G. S-ppyce G. Gyr B. Mbupuh- B "1 bpyzce- B
bpyez- G. 12 hund-cpenzigum B. Bkynzce B. emzce G. 14 Enzle-
B. WnotinG. %name G. 17 x11. 4 bezyce pepco x1. B.
Whezce A Gy B. %-phman 4. Zlazype BG. 227 mid


® There would seem to be a distinction between ‘open-mopd’ and
* ebepe-mons,’ since the one was the subject of civil and the other of
ecclesiastical jurisdiction; the one was boteless and not to be com-
muted, and the other was to be punished according to the discretion
of the bishop.


THE LAWS OF KING CNUT. All


‘ REAF-LAC,


64. If any one commit ‘reaf-lac,’ let him give it up, and
compensate, and be liable in his ‘ wér’ to the king.


HOUSE-BREAKING.


65. House-breaking, and arson, and open theft, and “open
*morth, and treason against a lord, are, by the secular law,
* botless.’


‘BURH-BOT.’

66. If any one neglect ‘burh-bot,’ or ‘ bricg-bot,’ or ¢ fyrd-
fare;’ let him make ‘ bot’ with one hundred and twenty shil-
lings to the king by English law, and by Danish law as it
formerly stood; or let him clear himself: let x1v. be named to
him, and let him choose x1. » To church-‘bot’ all men must
lawfully give assistance.


OF A¢cGOD-‘ FLYMA.’


67. If any one unlawfully have a God-‘ flyma,’ let him give
him up to justice, and compensate to him to whom it is due,
and pay to the king according to his ‘wer-gild.”’ If any one
have and hold an excommunicated person or an outlaw, let him
peril himself and all his property.


68. And if any one will earnestly turn from wrong again to
right, let him have mercy shown him, or fear of God, as best
may be, very earnestly.


pihce B. yopzilbe G. %4kynineze B. cinzce G. % notin A.
26 pep-zylbe B. 27 Lys B. °° B. %amanrumobne B. amanyobne
man G., uclazene B %habbe A. notin B. Bayp B.
34 pylle G. notin B. 3% milbpze B. 37man him B. bere G.
399 maze A. “ypide A. 4) not in G.


b [In Lambarde this is a new rubric: ‘De fano reficiendo.’

© Apparently a fugitive from a monastery, since in Wihtred’s
dooms a ‘ Lobey-peop’ is clearly a ‘peop’ the properly of a monas-
tery.


* pam pe he?


412 INUTES DOQAS.


PII REGIS MISERICORDIA ET JUSTITIA.


Lxix. And 'uton don ypa up peapp iy. helpan ?aa pam
padoyc pe helper *becyt *behorad- Sponne ®nime pe pee lean
peep uy leopayc bid. Foppam 74 man yeeal pam unycpanzan
%men yop Loder “lure 4 “éze hdehcop deman y “yepipan
ponne pam ycpangan- “ronpam pe ne meg ye unmaza pam
magan- pe piton yull zeopne- Zelice’ bypdene ahebban’’ ne
ye unhala pam halan gelice- 4 *py pe “ypeylon “medmian 4
®zerceadlice tobelan ylbe 4 zeozode- ”pelan 4 padle- ppeos
‘4y peopec-’” hale 4 “unhele. And azdep man yeeal ze on
godcundan. yepipcan ge on populdcundan *4d0man “pay **pinge
**corceadan. €ac on *meemgpe dede ponne man *bid nyd-
pyphra- ponne bid ye zebeongzer pe bec pypde pe he ron
neodve dyde $ f he dyde. 4 zip hpa *“hpec ungepealder
geded- ne bid $ *eallunga na gelic *pe Inv’ gepealder
S2zeded:-


DE VICTU EX REGIS PRAEDUS.


yxx. Diy 1p ponne “yeo hheinge “pe 1¢ pylle” eallon folce
gebeongan pe hig ep “pyyon mid-zedpehte pzpon ealler to
Srpyde, Det 1p ponne Szepoye. $ 1¢ bebeode eallum minan
sepepan $ °hi on’ minan agenan “pibtlice cilian y me mid
pam feopmian- y } him “nan man ne peapr to feopm-fulcume
nan pinge yyllan “buctan he yylp “pille. And “zip “hp
zpcen “pam pice “cparizge “beo he hiy’ pepey yeyltiz pid
5°bone “cyninge:-


BE PER-LEATE. — DE INTESTATO MORTUIS.

Lxx1. And zip “hpa cpydeleay of “pyyyum hye *zepice-
Spy hic puph hy “zymeleayce- yy Phe puph “peplicne
deaS- ponne ne teo se “hlarond “na mape on hny “ehte
butan np “puhtan “hepe-zeace. Ac beo be hiy dihte yeo


lucan G. 2eppe B. bese A. not in B. 4be ofad A. be-
hood B. “not in B. Slee A. 77 G. Smenn A. Yuan B.
ron lus exe B. 7G. Nyeyson A. yepipon G. }2’poppam ne mez
pe pican sul zeopne se unmaze pam mazan zelice A. ““ronpam pe pe
magon pican ful zeopne } ye unmaza J ye maze ne mez Zelice
mycele bypdene abepan B. pi B. Myculon B. ysceolon G.
Wmedeman B. '8zercabelice A.B. 1% pelize y padle pmze J
peopa B. ‘hale B. Wunhale B ~®axdep B. 2oome B.
22 per A. BpnzB. %corcadan A. %zemeanpe B. 26 byd AG.


THE LAWS OF KING CNUT. 418


69. And let us do as is requisite for us: Jet us ever help
those the speediest who stand most in need of help; then shall
we obtain the reward of it, where it will be most agreeable to
us. For we ought always, for love and fear of God, to doom
and prescribe more lightly to the feeble man than to the
strong; because we know full well that the powerless cannot
raise a like burthen with the powerful, nor the unhale a like
with the hale; and therefore we ought to moderate, and dis-
creetly distinguish between age and youth, wealth and poverty,
freedom and slavery, hale and unhale. And both in religious
shrifts and secular dooms these things ought to be discrimi-
nated. Moreover, in many a deed, when any one is an in-
voluntary agent, then is he the better deserving of protection,
because he did what he did from necessity: and if any one
do a thing unwillingly, it is not at all like that which he does
wilfully.


70. This then is the alleviation which it is my will to secure
to all the people of that which they before this were too much
oppressed with. That then is first: that I command all my
reeves that they justly provide on my own, and maintain me
therewith; and that no man need give them any thing as
‘feorm-fultum,’ unless he himself be willing. And if any one
after that demand a ‘wite,’ let him be liable in his ‘ wér’ to
the king.


OF THE HERIOT.


71. And if any one depart this life intestate, be it through
his neglect, be it through sudden death; then let not the
lord draw more from his property than his lawful heriot.
And, according to his direction, let the property be distributed


277e man B. Bxyp A. Bnot in A. bys BG. Feallum A.
‘ eallunza zelic pam pe B. 326e3 B. %8not in A. 2 pe pille A.
35 pyyron A. 26pepan G. %Zypite A. Bepee G. hz B. / not
ir A. %mimon B. 4!not in A. me pirhelice G “na G.
4bucon A. “pylleB. “Say B. 6° B. Vnotin A. 4 cpauan
B. beby A. %ponne A. Slenzge G. notin B. mann
B. 4pyyum A. 8° BG. nn G. shyc A. 8 xymelyyce B.
9n G Shy B. Syeaplicne 4. “laropd B nan B.
Siehra G. pihte A. 6 hepezeaca G.


¥* 7, mb.


414 LNUTES DOOAS.


whe zereype ‘ypySe yuhte pipe 4 *aldan 4 %neh~mazon-
‘eelcum be pape made pe him to-zebypize:-


DE HEREOTIS.


txxi1. And beon pa Shepe-zeata ppa hic meblic *yy. Eopley
ypa pep-to 7zebyjuze- P *yyndon Seahta hopy- ?peopep ™ze-
yadelode 4 ? reopen Sungeyadelode- y “peopep helmay 4 “peopep
bypnan 4 ehta ppepa 4 “eall ypa “yeala ypeyloa 4 “ypeopep
rpupd y tpa hund *mancuy goldep. And pyppan *cyningeyr
*bezener *pe him *nyhyce *yyndon- “reopen hopy- *Stpa
*7zeradelode y cpa “ungeyadelode- 4 cpa *ypupd y-*feopen
ypepa 4 “Sypa feala’ yeylta y helm *y “bypnan 4 *pyng
Smancur golder. And “medempa *pegna. hony y ny *ze-
pedlan y ly “peepn- oppe “hip “healy-pang on * Peyc-yexan-
y on “@)ypean “cpa pund- 4 on Eayt-Engzlan “cpa pund,
And “cymngey pegney hepe-geaca imne md Denum pe hy
yocne “hzebbe “reopen pund. And zp he to pam “cyminge
Srundop cydde habbe- “cpa hopy- an geradelod 4 odep *un-
geyadelod- y “an “ppupd 4 Bcpa ppepa 4 “cpa peylday 4
mpag “mancuy Zolder: 4 “yepe laeypye Smaza “py” cpa
pund:-


CONJUX INCOLAT EANDEM SEDEM QUAM MARITUS.


txxu. And pep ye “bonda yaett “uncpyd y unbecparod
yroce ® pip y¥ fa cild Son fam ylean’ unbeyacen. And “xp
ye 7bonda ap he dead pepe “beclypod pzepe- ponne


Iypise A. 2cilbum G. %neahmazum B. nehmazgum G. 4zlcon B.
5henezeace A. hepizeata spa fundene B. 671 G. 7 byme B.
8yindon A. 9vi1. G. M111 B.G. 'geradolobe A. 12 1111. BG.
13 unzeradolebe B. unyabelobe Ge Muu BG. vin. BG.
eal A. notin B. Wyeala G. i111. BG. ypypo B. 20 man-
cor A. mancer G. 2! kynezer B. cnzcer G. 22 peezner hepezeate
B. pegnar G. pe mhyce A. nyxyce B. 24 pmdon A. pyndan G
21 BG. *u. BG. 7 zeradolobe A. 811. G. 29 unge-
yadolobe A. unyabelote G. 211. BG. ypypd B. 32 1101. BG.
3eal ypa yeola. B. %4bipnan A. 31. G. %mancor A. mancer G.


a This transition from the singular noun to the plural verb is not
unusual in A.S. composition. We might avoid the false concord by
reading, ‘pe him nyhyce [yy],’ but, for the reason already given, it
seems unnecessary. ‘The subject appears to be referred to again
below —‘zip he to pam cyninge rupdon cyé8e hebbe;’ and which can
hardly imply any relation arising from the ties of blood, but from


THE LAWS OF KING CNUT. 415


very justly to the wife, and children, and relations; to every
one, according to the degree that belongs to him.


72, And let the heriots be as it is fitting to the degree.
An ‘eorl’s’ such as thereto belongs, that is: eight horses,
four saddled and four unsaddled, and four helmets, and four
coats of mail, and eight spears, and as many shields, and four
swords, and two hundred mancuses of gold. And after that,
a king’s thane’s, *of those who are nearest to him: four horses,
two saddled and two unsaddled, and two swords, and four
spears, and as many shields, and a helmet, and a coat of mail,
and fifty mancuses of gold. And of the medial thanes: a horse
and his trappings, and his arms; or his ‘ heals-fang’ in Wessex ;
and in Mercia, two pounds; and in East-Anglia, two pounds.
And the heriot of a king’s thane among the Danes, who has
his ‘socen,’ four pounds. And if he have further relation to
the king: two horses, one saddled and the other unsaddled,
and one sword, and two spears, and two shields, and fifty man-
cuses of gold: and he who is of less means, two pounds,


78. And where the husband dwelt without claim or contest,
let the wife and the children dwell in the same, unassailed by
litigation. And if the husband, before he was dead, had been


37mebmena A. 38 pezen B. %89zenedban A. zepeda G. 4 pepna B.
4l not in A. 4 haly-panze A. 4 Peyc-pexan B. Peyyexan G.
“4Myncen B. 411. BG. %-EnleB. “1. B. @kyncgeyr B.
eingecey G.  %habbe A. 1m BG. Alayp B. 2kyneze B.
cingce G. S8yopdop A. 5411. B.G. 5 unzeradolod B. unyabdelod
G. Snot in G. ‘7ypypd B. 81. BG. 9% cpezen B. m1. G.
601. G. 6 mancor A. mancer G. ©’ yepe leyre hebbe 7 leyye
mazayy B. Smeze A. maze G. 4 G. %11.B.G. “bunda
B. Suncpysd G. not in B. zy B. Mbunda B. 7 be~
clypod G.


the official relation in which the ministeriales of the crown stood to
the king, and which, as it carried with it a higher wer-gild, seems also
to have involved the payment of a larger heriot. Perhaps both
passages may be illustrated by a term occurring in the History of
Ramsey: ‘Qui festinus iter arripiens Londoniam venit et a regiis
collatoribus ofticiose exceptus,’ &c. c. 86.


416 INUTES DOMAS.


Tandpypdan pa *yppe-numan ypa he yylp yeeolde peah he hy
Sheepde:-


BE PUDEPAN. DET NEO SITTE -XII- MONDAS CEORL{L],€s.
— VIDUZ NON NUBANT NISI POST BIS SENOS
MENSES.


txxiv. And ypicce wle pudupe pepleay tpelp-monas. *ceore
5yyppan  Sheo yyly’ 7pille- 4 ®zip ®heo binnan geapey” rece
pep. gZeceore ponne ™polize “heo #pepe mopgen-"zyre 4
Mealna pepa ahta’ pe heo puph “eppan “pep Mhepde- y
yon pa *nehycan “ppynd to pam *lande y to *!pam *eehtan
pe heo *&p hepde’” And “py he hip peper yeylig pid
bone *cyning oppe pid *’pone pe he *hic *zeunnen heebbe.
And peah heo *nyd-numen ™peopSe “polize “papa aha.”
*bucon heo rpam “pam ceople “pile epc ham ongean ¥
neppe eft heo hiy ne *peopde. And *ne hadige man *zeppe
4°pudepan to hpzdlice. And *'zeleyce zle “pudupe pa “hepe-
zeaca binnan “cpelp-mondum- “buton “hine zp vo “7onhazize
‘8 hiceleay:-


NEMO NUBAT FQ@MINAM INVITAM.


ixxv. And “ne “nyde man *'naSep ne pip ne meden to
pam pe *hype yylppe Smiyhecige- ne pid yeeacte *ne yylle-
bucon he hpet ageney pancer gyyan *pille:-


lanbdpipoan A. andpypbe B. Zeprenumen A. ypynumen B. Zharbe
A. 43 ceoye B. Spppan dA. “hi yylp A. 7pylle G. 8zyp B.
¥ heo ponne binnan pey zeaper B. Mpohe B. MUhyo A. 12/pane
mopzan-zyre A. '-zeaue B. 14 pane ehca A. ealpe pape ehtan
B. “eppan A. 'pene B. Whearde B. '8nrhrcan A. nyxycan B.
19;pind A. 2%landanG. 2panG. 2ehcre G. 23/ €p harbe A.
21n BG. %ponne A. %kyning B. cnzge G. 27ponne A. 28 hip


a It is usual to consider this as a prohibition of the sale of the
female ward, and as an evidence that the muntagium of the Norman
times was an innovation upon the ancient law. A change of this
important nature was not likely to be announced in a short clause
such as the present text; and the sale of the female ward was at
the time permitted by every code of Europe. The better opinion,
therefore, seems to be, that the purport of this law was to prevent
the guardian from forcing his ward into an unwilling union, and
demanding more than the mund established by law, unless indeed
the future husband might choose to give more. Similar forms of
expression are found in the statutes of Friburg and Soest: ‘ Judex


THE LAWS OF KING CNUT. 417


cited; then let the heirs answer, as himself should have done
if he had lived.


OF A WIDOW: THAT SHE CONTINUE XII. MONTHS
HUSBANDLESS.


74, And let every widow continue husbandless a twelve-
month: let her then choose what she herself will; and if she,
within the space of a year, choose a husband, then let her
forfeit her ‘morgen-gyfu,’ and all the possessions which she
had through the first husband; and let the nearest kinsmen
take the land and the possessions that she had before. And let
him [the husband] be liable in his ‘wér’ to the king, or to
him to whom he may have granted it. And though she be
taken forcibly, let her forfeit the possessions, unless she be
willing to go home. again from the man, and never again
be his. And let not a widow take the veil too precipitately.
And let every widow pay the heriots, ‘wite-less,’ within twelve
months; except it be convenient to her earlier.


75. And let no one compel either woman or maiden to him
whom she herself mislikes, nor for money *sell her; unless he
is willing to give any thing voluntarily.


yocne G. 29zeunnan A. 3neabnuman B. 3! pypde B. 32 polie B.
33/ pana ehca A. %4bucan G. % not in A. %6pylle G. 97 punde A.
pynte B. na G. 2%neppe B. “pudupan A. 4) zelayca A.
42pubupa A. ‘hepezeacu G “xu. G. “bucan G. 46hype
B.G. 47 anhazye A. onhage B. 8° G. ®naG. nme A.
5lneppe nadop B. 2hype AG. 8muylice AG. 4bucan G.
55 pylle A.


nullus a nobis constitutus presumat steuram, taleamque seu preca-
rium in predictos cives facere.... Nisi quod et quantum dare
voluerint de spontanea voluntate.’ Jnst. Friburg. Pr. ‘ Dieseluen
twene vorlehnden Vronen siillen beiden binnen der Stadt all unsen
Borgern, so wen sy wollet to Gerichte laden, sunder ene iet to
geven, et ne sy dat en we wat geve mit guden Willen: The same
two enfeoffed frones shall both within the city cite all our burghers
before the court, whenever they will, without giving aught to any
one, unless we give something with good will.’ Jus Susat. art. xii.
ap. Westphalen Mon. ined. tom. iv. col. 3075.


418 INUTES DOQAS.


BE DAM DET MAN PIs SPERE TO ODRES MANNES DURE
Se€TTE.—DE EO QUI RELIQUERIT TELUM PRO
FORIBUS.

txxv1. ‘And 1c lete put peah *hpa” hip Sagen ypepe secre
co odpeyr manner hurey “dupa 4 he prdep-°inn aepende Sheebbe-
7oppon *zip °man *oSep pepn gedpeohlice YMlecze pap @hiz
pelle *mbhcton beon *zip hi moycon- 4 “hpile man ponne
~ Spepn “zgeleecce y *“hpylene heapm pep-**mid zepypce-
ponne *iy  puht $ yepe “pone heapm gepophte P ye *pone
heapm *eac gebete. And yee } *pepn *aze* hine geladige-
mp he duppe- $ hic neppe ney nadep ne hy *zepile- ne
hny gepeald- ne Iny paed- ne hip gepreney. ponne ™1y $ Loder
puhc $ She beo clene- 4 pice ye *oden pe  peope *zepophte
® he hit bete ypa ypa lagu teece:.


BE FORSTOLENE sCDTA.— CONJUX, QUA FURATA
RECIPIT, FURTI NON TENETOR.


txxvi. And gzip hpile man fopycolen’ pinge ham to hip
Vcoran bpinge 4 he “anayod *pupde- mh iy $ he “hebbe
he zytep-eode. And “buton hic undep “per piper “cxez-
locan gebpoht pepe “py heo clene- ac “papa “cezean heo
yeeal peapdian- iy “hipe Yhopd-epn 4 “hine cyyce 4 “hipe
5Sveze.’ Inp hic undep “@pyyya amgum gebpohe byd
Shonne “bid *heo yeyltiz. And ne mez nan pip “hine
%bondan fopbeodan } he ne mote into ny “coran “zelozian
p P he “pille. Dic per ap “pyyon $ $ cild pe leg on


V Rnd 1c pylle peah pe hya A. And 1c nelle peah hyd B. 2° B.
3not in A. 4oupuA.B. 5-n B. Shabbe A. 7oppe A. 8zyp B.
9mon B. 1pépn B. pepne H. Nileczce G. hi B. Mycylle A.
Mmihran Ge  zyp B. Ing A. Whpyle G. I8pepn B. 19 ze-
lecce A. % yhe B. 2 hpilene A. %-mbe A. hy B. %4ponne
A.B. *ponne A. not in G. 27 pepn B. °° G. 2 not in A.
Hay B. zepyle A. my A. Bheo B. %oton A. %ze-
peophre B. 56” Ine hpa sopycolen B. 37 cocon B, 8 apepned B.


a The translation assumes the true reading to have been ‘odpu


ne

+ The Latin version reads: ‘Sed suum hordern quod dicere pos-
sumus dispensam, et cistam suam, et teage, id est scrinium suum,
debet ipsa custodire.’ A similar provision is found in the old Scot-
tish law: ‘Tamen uxor in certis casibus respondere tenebitur;
videlicet, .si furtum inveniatur sub clavibus suis quas ipsa habet sub


custodia et cura sua, utpote spense, arcee suze vel scrinii sui. Et si
t


THE LAWS OF KING CNOT. 419


IN CASE A MAN SET HIS SPEAR AT ANOTHER
MAN’S DOOR.


76. And I hold it right, though any one set his own spear
at the door of another man’s house, and he have an errand
therein; or if any one quietly lay any *other weapon, where
they would be still if they might; and any man then seize the
weapon, and do any harm therewith; then it is right that he
who wrought that harm, also make ‘bot’ for the harm. And
he who owns the weapon, let him clear himself, if he dare, that
it never was either by his will, or in his control, or by his
counsel, or with his cognizance: then is it God’s law, that he
be innocent; and let the other, who wrought the deed, see that
he make ‘ bot’ as the law may teach.


OF STOLEN PROPERTY.


77. And if any man bring a stolen thing home to his cot,
and he be detected [by the owner]; it is just that he [the
owner] have what he went after. And unless it has been
brought under his wife’s key-lockers, let her be clear; for it is
her duty to keep the keys of them; namely, her > ¢ hord-ern,’
and her chest, and her ‘tege.’ If it be brought under any of
these, then is she guilty. And no wife may forbid her hus-
band that he may not put into his cot what he will. It was
ere this, that the child which lay in the cradle, though it had


9% punte B. “habbe A. 4ibucan G. “per A. 8 cxez-locum A.
“Mryo A. G. pape A. pepe G. “Scazen A. cagan B.
47hype G. ; hipe hebddenner ceeze 3 hype erie ceze 3 hipe cezan B.
4shype G. “hype AG. %ceze A. Lye B. *pyye A.
53pone B. 4bys G. SShyo A. ‘6hype A.G. 7 bundan B.
2 cocon G. 59 zelaSyan A. 80 pile B. pjlle G. 6 pyran A. pyyyon


aliquod furtum sub clavibus suis inveniatur, uxor cum viro suo
tamquam ei consentaneus erit culpabilis et punietur.’ Quon. Attachi.
xu. ¢. 7. There is a republication of the same law in the Stat.
Willielmi Regis, with this variation: ‘Spensa et arca robarum et
jocalium suorum et de scrinio seu coffero.’ x1x. c.3. We may there-
fore, perhaps, render the terms in the text, ‘her store-room, her chest,
and her cupboard.’


EE 2


420 LINUTES DOQAS.


Yenadele- peah hic neeppe meter ne abice- fa ®zycyepar
SJecon *epen peyloig’ y hie geprevizg Spepe. Ac ie-hie fop-
beode heonon-fopd eopnoyclice *y eac ypyde maneza pincg pe
Lode yyndon ypyde lade:.”


Be DAM DE FLIPD FRAM PIs (PILAFORDE. — DE SERVO
DESERENTE DOMINUM.


Lxxviil. And 7ye man pe *etpleo ppam hy hlaropde oppe
ypam hny °zerepan sop ny yphde- ry hic on “yeyp-pypde
ry hic on land-pypde- “polige ealley peer pe he age 4 hip
agener feoper- 4 fo ye hlaropd to pam “ehtan y vo hi
Jande pe he him ep yealde. 4 *zip-he boc-land hebbe- za $
pam “cyninge to hanbda:-


BE DAM DE TO-FORAN pIs [PILAFORDE FEALLED.


txxix. And ye man pe on *pam fypdunge etronan ny
hlagopde fealle- *yy Inc ®innan lande yy hie “ut of lanbde-
beon pa hepe-zeata yongypene- y fon ba *ypre-numan to lanbe
4y to *ehvan 4 *yeypean hic **ypise pute:


QUI TERRAM LITE TUTAM PRASTITERIT, EANDEM
POSSIDETOR.
Lxxx. And yepe land gepepod “hebbe *be pepe “ze-
picneyye*? *habbe he “unbeyacen- on deze 4 eeptvep dege-
vo Syyllenne *y to *’zienne-’ pam pe him *leogays py:


Be PUNTNADE.— DE FERIS ABIGENDIS.


LxxxI. And 1c “pylle $ ale man “yy hip huncnodey pypde
on puda y on “yelda on ny *“azgenan. And “pongza “zele man
minne “huntnod- “loc “hpaep 1c hit gerpdod “pille habban™
be yullan pive:-


lenadole B. 2gicpepar G. Slecon A. lecan G. “yeyliize A.
eal pa yeyloizne B. Spape A. 64 ypylee maneza [managa A.]
pe Lobe yyndon ppyde lade [pyndan lade A.] AG. 7pe B. ®yleo
B. %zereapan A. nn G Uyap-G. 1271 BG.’ 13+pepde A.
Mpohe he B. Wehcan A. ehcon B. lazy B. Wkyncze B.
cingce G. notin B. YG. %mnonB. 2p G. 22 not
in G. %enyenuman G. %ehce B. %yeypcen B. % ypyde B.
27habbe A. on G. %ycype G. %zepicnyyse B. 3!-on seyp-
Fypde 3 on lano-pypde B. -— 3 ye nolbe oppe ne mihte pe hic ep


THE LAWS OF KING CNUT. 421


never tasted meat, was held by the covetous to be equally
guilty as if it had discretion. But henceforth I most strenu-
ously forbid it, and also very many things that are very hateful
to God.


OF HIM WHO FLEES FROM HIS LORD.


78. And the man who shall flee from his lord, or from his
comrade, by reason of his cowardice, be it in the ship-‘fyrd,’
be it in the land-fyrd; let him forfeit all that he owns, and
his own life, and let the lord seize his possessions, and his
land, which he previously gave him: and if he have boc-land,
let that go into the king’s hands.


OF HIM WHO FALLS BEFORE HIS LORD.


79. And if a man fall before his lord in the ‘ fyrdung,’ be it
within the land, be it without the land, let the heriots be
forgiven ; and let the heirs succeed to the land and the pro-
perty, and divide it very justly.


80. And he who has * defended land, with the witness of the
shire; let him have it undisputed, during his day and after his
day, to sell and to give to him who is dearest to him.


OF HUNTING.


81. And I will that every man be entitled to his hunting,
in wood and in field, on his own possession. And let every
one forego my hunting: take notice where I will have it un-
trespassed on, under penalty of the full ‘ wite’


whre G.add. habbe d. notin G. *“unbesaken B. 5 yyll-
anne B. 36’ not in A. Wayane B. Bleopoe G Bp Gi
pile A. 41pp G 42yealba A. ‘azanan Aw 34” ALBLGL
Selec A. ‘4hunctad A. ‘“loce G. Shpan B  pylle G.
50habben A, 5!~on mimon agenan B.


a [That is, against all claims.— 7.]


rra


422 INUTES DOQAS.


DE OFFICIIS DOMINO DEBITIS.


Lxxxu. And *7opince-lean 4 hlapopder phe *gyu prande
zype Sunapend:-


DE EO QUI AD COMITIA PROFICISCATUR.


Lxxxu. And ic ‘pille $ ele man ‘yy zmdey pypSe to ze-
mote 4 ypam gemote- *buton he 7y1 Seb&pe peor:-


DE HARUM LEGUM VIOLATORE.

Lxxxiv. °And yepe par Mlaza pypde pe ye Vcyninge heed
nuda Yeallum mannon “yopgypen: ’y1 he Demye oppe pr
“he Enghye-’ beo he hip peper peyliiz pid “pone ™cyning.
4 zip he Inc epce pypde gylde *cupa hip pepe. 4 “zip he


lonynce-lean B. 2-zypu B. Sunapented B. ‘pylle G. Sbeo B.
p.G. Sbucan G. 7heoB. *%exbenpe B.~ G. %notin B. laze
A, “Neinzge G. eallon G. mannii G. Myopziren A. 'yeo


a ‘This term is nowhere found except in the laws, and here it stands
unconnected with any thing in the context which can materially assist
us in defining its meaning; the reader must therefore make his elec-
tion between those analogous expressions which are found in other
European codes, all of which, however, resolve themselves into the
same import with ‘drinc-lean’ in an etymological sense, but which
are applied to things in their nature essentially different. First: in
the Lit. Brocmannorum (p.62.) we find the term ‘ berielda,’ or beer-
gild, as a due claimed by the judge of the Frisic courts: ‘ Hwersama
sziuath umbe londcap, sa wite thi redieua hweder cap wesen hebbe
sa naut; and thi redieua skelt wita ther sin berielda sprecht thetter
cap den se: Whenever there is a difference respecting the purchase
of land, let the judge prove whether there has been a purchase or
not, and that judge shall prove it whose beer-geld declares (whose
beer-geld is the proof) that a purchase has been made.’ In the
Hunsingoer Land-Recht (1252) it is said: ‘ Thetter neen rediegeua
sinne beerielda urherich ne kethe: That no judge shall demand his
beer-geld unjustly.’ And in the Frisic ordinance of 1464: ‘Item
soe sullen die grietmans nemen ene kanne wyns van des landes segell
van elcker brief to besegelen: The greetmen shall have a kan of
wine for every writ to which they affix the seal of the land.’ In
Germany similar dues were known under the name of ‘ Wein-gelt.’
Haltaus, 2057. Secondly: there is a custom frequently referred to
in the early law-books of the continent, known by the names of
lige-kioff, ley-kauf, lid-kop, wein-kauf, and a variety of other appel-
lations, (in Latin called mercipotus,) which, like the drinc-lean of
the text, was by some codes held to be irreversible, and concluded
the bargain in respect of which it was given. Thus in King Chris-
topher’s Copenhagen Law it is said: ‘Item hwilken Man som koper
noghre Thing, then som han hauer forre seet, oc drycker ther Ledh-


THE LAWS OF KING CNUT. 423


82. And let *‘drinc-lean’ and a lord’s ‘riht gifu’ ever
stand unchanged.


83. And I will that every man be entitled to ‘grith,’ to
the ‘ gemot’ and from the ‘ gemot;’ except he be a notorious
thief.


84, And he who violates these laws, which the king has now
given to all men, be he Danish or be he English, let him
be liable in his ‘wér’ to the king: and if he again violate
them, let him pay twice his ‘wér:’ and if he be then so


B. yt G. “yy he Deniye sy he Enghye A. 161 G. not in B.
Wponne A. 9kyninge B. cinge G. 2% zyp B. A cpuza A. cypa B.
?ayr B.


kop uppa, tha schal holde Kopit, oc betale thet som han hauer
kopt: If any one buy a thing which he has before seen, and drink
the ‘ledhkop,’ he shall hold to the bargain, and pay for that which
he has bought. ‘Si quis aliquid emit et dat mercipotum, nec
emptor nec venditor possunt revocare. Grupen. Antig. Hanover,
p- 234. Thirdly: Wein-kauff, Lett-kauf, Lid-kop was a species of
relief paid to the lord in socage tenure, or, as it is defined by Haltaus,
‘ Pecunia vinaria et potabilis quam colonus heres pro relevio solvit
domino.’ p.2059. Lastly: there was a service known by the name
of ‘Lid-lon’ and ‘Lit-lon:’ ‘Wo Yemanndt ainen beclagt umb
gearnneten Lon, das Lid-lon ist, so sol der Richter oder Fronpot,
nach der Clag, dem beclagten gepieten, das er den Clager seines
Lid-lons, wo er des bekennt, in viertzehen Tagen, enntricht. Art. 10.
Was der Man verdiennt mit seinem Pflug, mit seinem Vieh, do der
Man selb, oder sein gedingter Eehallt bey ist, oder ain gedingter
Eehallt, bey seiner Herrschafft verdiennt, das haisst alles gearnnter
Lon. Bayr. Land-Recht, an. 1518, ap. Haltaus. ‘If any one sue
another for gearnnter lon (reward or wages earned) which is lid-lon,
the judge or the fronpot after the charge shall command the de-
fendant, if he acknowledge the debt, to pay the prosecutor his lid-lon
in fourteen days. What a man earns with his plough, with his
cattle, with which the man himself or his hired servant is present,
or what a hired servant hires of his master, that is also called
gearnnter lon.’ ‘The earlier German glossographers render this term
merces artuum, deriving it from ‘lid,’ membrum ; but the analogy of
ber-ielda, wein-kauf, lit, lid-kop seems to speak for ‘118, A.-S., “lid,”
S.-Goth., potus inebrians, which would make it nearly identical with
the modern German Trinkgeld, and still more so with the drinc-lean
of the text.


EE4


424 INUTES DOMAS.


ponne ypa dypnyug tyy P he *hic *pmddan *ypide Spypde folize
ealley pay pe he °aze:.


yxxxy. Nu bidde 1c geopne 4 on Lrodey naman beode manna
Zehpylcene $ he 7inpeapdpe heoptan *zebuge to ny °Dpihene-
4y ofc y gelome ymeage “ypide geopne’ hpec him “yy to
donné 4 to fopganne. Callum uy “ir “mycel peane P pe
¥4JGod lupan 4 Loder “laze “pylgean 4 gsodcundan ™ laneopan
*®zeopnlice hypan-” roppam hi yceolan up ledan fopd wc bam
dome ponne *Irod demed manna *zehpileum be eppan *ze-
pyphtan. And *zerehz “bid re hypde pe ponne pa heopde
into Trodey pice 4 to heoronlicpe *myph8e blise mot ledan
fon *zppan gepyphcan. And pel pape heopde pe gZerolzad
pam hypde pe ng deorlum * ztpened 4 Lode *hi *zeytpyned.
8°Ucan ponne ealle anmodpe heoptan zeopne upum * Dphene
cpeman mid puhte y heonon-fopd yymle yeyloan uy Zeopne
pid pone hacan bpyne pe pealled on helle. And “don nu
eac laneopay 4 godcunde bydelay ypa ypa Inc puhe 1p y ealpa
manna peapr iy bodiam gelome godcunde peappe. y ale “H
Szeycad pice Shlyyce him geopne 4 zodcunde “lane gehpa on
zepance healde *yppySe ypeyce him yylpum to peappe. 4 a
manna zehpyle co “peopdungze mp “Dmhtne d0 to “zéde
“bey pe he meze “ponder 4 dade “zledhice’ zype- ponne
“bid uy eallum “Loder “miley pe geappup.” “Aa yy Loder
nama ecelice geblecyod- 4 lop him 4 puldop 4 pupdmynt
“rymble ape co “populde.™ Irod sElmhag up eallum
zemuilcyize ypa ny *pilla yy-’ 4 gehealde uy appe on ecneyye.
$1 hic ypa. Amen:-


ing G. 2notin A. 3 ppydde A. pmidse B. 4yyS5e B.G. 5 abpece
B. & G. 7inpearbdlice A. Szebuza B. 9Dmhcene B. 1 ppyde
G. ‘not in Bo YnzG. Why A. Wmichel 4. “LGodd A.
laza A. ‘ypylgian LB. Ilapepan A. 184 zeopnlice B. 9-Y
Trobe laze fylgean sop hy up yeeolan hypan A.B, 20 Gobd A.
21 zehpjloum G. 22zehpyphcan B. 3 zeyaliz A. zereliz G. 24 byd
B *mypse B. Shy eppan B. 7 wcpenad B. Bz B
29 zeycpeonad B. %Ucon B. 5! Dpihtene B. @ponne A. 30


THE LAWS OF KING CNUT. 425


daring that he violate them a third time, let him forfeit all that
he possesses.


85. Now I earnestly beseech and in God’s name command
every man, that he with inward heart bow to his Lord, and
many times and oft meditate very earnestly what is for him to
do and what to forego. It is very needful to us all, that we
love God, and follow God’s law, and diligently attend to our
divine teachers; because they shall lead us forth at the doom,
when God will deem to every man according to his former
works. And happy will be the pastor who then can joyfully
lead his flock into God’s kingdom, and to heavenly bliss, for
their former deeds. And well for that flock which followeth
the pastor, who weaneth them from devils and gaineth them
to God. Let us all then, with unity of heart, diligently please
our Lord, as is right, and ever henceforth diligently shield our-
selves against the hot burning which seetheth in hell. And let
our instructors and divine preachers now also do as it is right
and needful for all men, by announcing frequently the divine
benefits; and let every one who has discretion diligently listen
to them; and let every one hold the divine doctrine very fast
in his thought, for his own advantage: and let every man, in
honour of his Lord, ever gladly do what good he may, both by
word and deed; then shall God’s mercy be the readier to us.
Ever let God’s name be eternally blessed, and praise be to him,
and glory and honour for ever and ever. May God Almighty
have mercy on us all, as his will may be, and preserve us ever
to all eternity. So be it. Amen.


B. %not in A. peG. %zercens B. 8hhyce A. 37 lapa A;
8rpite A. %pypdunze A. peopdunga B. 49 Dpihrene B. 417 G.
42pe A. not in G. 4” peondeyr' peopcer 4 debe 3 zlebhice B.
44zlebhice A. “byS B.G. 4° z0d pe zeappenpa B. 4” milzya A.
#24 A. AcB. “not in B. peopulte A. 51-Amen B. 52 ze-
muilcyyze A. zemiltpie B. 3 muloa pilla G. “pille sy. Amen. B.
which closes here.


426 INUTES DOQAS.


§CONSTITUTIONES DE FORESTA.


He sunt Sanctiones de Foresta, quas ego Canutus Rex cum
consilio primariorum hominum meorum condo et facio,
ut cunctis regni nostri Angliee ecclesiis et pax et justitia
fiat, et ut omnis delinquens secundum modum delicti et
delinquentis fortunam patiatur.


1. Sunt jam deinceps quatuor ex liberalioribus hominibus,
qui habent salvas suas debitas consuetudines, quos Angli
1 ¢begenes’ appellant, in qualibet regni mei provincia constituti,
ad justitiam distribuendam, una cum poena merita et materiis
forestee cuncto populo meo, tam Anglis quam Danis, per totum
regnum meum Anglia, quos quatuor primarios forestee appel-
landos censemus,


u. Sint sub quolibet horum, quatuor ex mediocribus homi-
nibus, quos Angli ?‘lespegenes’ nuncupant, Dani vero ‘yoong-
men’ vocant, locati, qui curam et onus tum viridis tum veneris
suscipiant.


m1. In administranda autem justitia nullatenus volo ut tales
se intromittant: mediocresque tales post ferarum curam sus-
ceptam, pro liberalibus semper habeantur, quos Dani ‘ ealder-
men’ appellant.


iv. Sub horum iterum quolibet sint duo minutorum homi-
num, quos § Tineman’ Angli dicunt; hi nocturnam curam et
veneris et viridis tum servilia opera subibunt.


v. Si talis minutus servus fuerit, tam cito quam in foresta
nostra locabitur, liber esto ; omnesque hos ex sumptibus nostris
manutenebimus.


vi. Habeat etiam quilibet primariorum quolibet anno de
nostra warda, quam ‘michni’ Angli appellant, duos equos,
unum cum sella, alterum sine sella, unum gladium, quinque


1 pegened Sp. 2 lespegend Sp.


2 [The text is from Spelman’s Glossarium Archzologicum.— 7.]


THE LAWS OF KING CNUT. 427


lanceas, unum cuspidem, unum scutum, et ducentos solidos
argenti.


vir. Mediocrium quilibet, unum equum, unam lanceam, unum
scutum, et Lx. solidos argenti.


vu. Minutorum quilibet, unam Janceam, unam arcubalistam,
et xv. solidos argenti.


1x. Sint omnes, tam primarii quam mediocres et minuti,
immunes, liberi, et quieti ab omnibus provincialibus summo-
nitionibus et popularibus placitis, quee ‘hundred laghe’ Angli
dicunt, et ab omnibus armorum oneribus, quod ‘ warscot’ Angli
dicunt, et forinsecis querelis.


x. Sint mediocrium et minutorum cause, et earum correc-
tiones, tam criminalium quam civilium, per providam sapientiam
et rationem primariorum judicatee et decisze: primariorum vero
enormia si que fuerint (ne scelus aliquod remaneat inultum),
nosmet in ira nostra regali puniemus.


x1. Habeant hi quatuor unam regalem potestatem, (salva
semper nobis nostra presentia,) quaterque in anno generales
forestee demonstrationes, et viridis et veneris forisfactiones, quas
‘muchehunt’ dicunt, ubi teneant omnes calumniam de materia
aliqua tangente forestam, eantque ad triplex judicium, quod
Angli ‘ofgangfordell’ dicunt. Ita autem acquiratur illud
triplex judicium. Accipiat secum quinque, et sit ipse sextus,
et sic jurando acquirat triplex judicium, aut triplex jura-
mentum. Sed purgatio ignis nullatenus admittatur, nisi ubi
nuda veritas nequit aliter investigari.


xu1, Liberalis autem homo, i. '‘ pegen,’ modo crimen suum
non sit inter majora, habeat fidelem hominem, qui possit pro
eo jurare juramentum, i. ‘forathe:’ si autem non habet, ipsemet
juret, nec perdonetur ei aliquod juramentum.


xi. Si advena vel peregrinus qui de longinquo venerit sit
calumniatus de foresta, et talis est sua inopia, ut non possit
habere plegium ad primam calumniam, qualem nullus Anglus
judicare potest; tunc subeat captionem regis, et ibi expectet
quousque vadat ad judicium ferri et aque: attamen si quis


1 pegen Sp.


428 LNUTES DOMAE.


extraneo aut peregrino de longe venienti* sibi ipsi nocet, si
aliquod judicium judicaverint.


xIv. Quicunque coram primarios homines meos foreste in
falso testimonio steterit et victus fuerit, non sit dignus im-
posterum stare aut portare testimonium, quia legalitatem suam
perdidit, et pro culpa solvat regi decem solidos, quos Dani
vocant '* halseang’ alias ? ‘ halsefang.’


xv. Si quis vim aliquam primariis forestee mez intulerit, si
liberalis sit, amittat libertatem et omnia sua; si villanus,
abscindatur dextra.


xvi. Si alteruter iterum peccaverit, reus sit mortis.


xvi. Si quis autem contra primarium pugnaverit, in plito
emendet secundum pretium sui ipsius, quod Angli °‘pere’ et
‘pite’ dicunt, et solvat primario quadraginta solidis.


xvi. Si pacem quis fregerit ante mediocres forestz, quod
dicunt 4‘ grithbrech,’ emendet regi decem solidos..


xix. Si quis mediocrium aliquem cum ira percusserit, emen-
detur prout interfectio ferae regalis mihi emendari solet.


xx. Si quis delinquens in foresta nostra capietur, poenas luet
secundum modum et genus delicti.


xxi. Poena et forisfactio non una eademque erit liberalis,
quem Dani ‘ealderman’ vocant, et illiberalis; domini et servi,
noti et ignoti; nec una eademque erit causarum tum civilium
tum criminalium, ferarum foreste et ferarum regalium: viridis
et veneris tractatio: nam crimen veneris ab antiquo inter ma-
jora et non immerito numerabatur; viridis vero (fractione
chaceze nostre regalis excepta) ita pusillum et exiguum est,
quod vix ea respicit nostra constitutio: qui in hoc tamen
deliquerit, sit criminis forests reus.


xxu. Si liber aliquis feram forestee ad cursum impulerit,
sive casu, sive preehabita voluntate, ita ut cursu celeri cogatur


thalfehang Sp. 2halsehang Sp. 3 pere et pite Sp,
4gethbrech Sp.


a (Here some words are wanting, cf.Cn. Sec. 36, and the ancient
Latin version.—Z.]


THE LAWS OF KING CNUT. 429


fera anhelare, decem solidis regi emendet; si illiberalis, dupli-
citer emendet; si servus, careat corio.


xx. Si vero harum aliquot interfecerit, solvat dupliciter et
persolvat, sitque pretii sui reus contra regem.


xxiv. Sed si regalem feram, quam Angli ‘staggon’ appellant,
alteruter coegerit anhelare, alter per unum annum, alter per
duos, careat libertate naturali; si vero servus, pro utlegato
habeatur, quem Angli ‘frendlesman’ vocant.


xxv. Si vero occiderit, amittat liber scutum libertatis; si sit
illiberalis, careat libertate; si servus, vita.


xxvi. Episcopi, abbates et barones mei non calumniabuntur
pro venatione, si non regales feras occiderint; et si regales,
restabunt rei regi pro libito suo, sine certa emendatione.


xxv. Sunt aliee (preeter feras forestee) bestia, quee dum
inter septa et sepes forestee continentur, emendationi subjacent :
quales sunt capreoli, lepores et cuniculi. Sunt et alia quam-
plurima animalia, que quanquam infra septa forestee vivunt,
et oneri et cure mediocrium subjacent, forestee tamen nequa-
quam censeri possunt, qualia sunt bubali, vacce et similia.
Vulpes et lupi nec forest nec veneris habentur, et proinde
eorum interfectio nulli emendationi subjacet. Si tamen infra
limites occiduntur, fractio sit regalis chaceze, eo mitius emen-
detur. Aper vero quanquam forest sit, nullatenus tamen
animal veneris haberi est assuetus.


xxvi1I. Bosco nec subbosco nostro, sine licentia primariorum
forestae, nemo manum apponat; quod si quis fecerit, reus sit
fractionis regalis chacee.


xxix. Si quis vero ilicem aut arborem aliquam, que victum
feris suppeditat, sciderit, preter fractionem regalis chacex,
emendet regi viginti solidis.


xxx. Volo ut omnis liber homo pro libito suo habeat ve-
nerem sive viridem in planis suis super terras suas, sine
chacea tamen; et devitent omnes meam, ubicunque eam habere
voluere.


xxxt. Nullus mediocris habebit nec custodiet canes, quos
Angli ‘greihounds’ appellant. Liberali vero, dum genuiscissio
eorum facta fuerit coram primario forests, licebit; aut sine


430 LNUTES DOMAS.


genuiscissione, dum remoti sunt a limitibus forestae per decem
milliaria: quando vero propius venerint, emendet quodlibet
milliare uno solido. Si vero infra septa forestee reperiatur,
dominus canis forisfaciet *et decem solidos regi.


xxx. Velteres vero, quos ‘langeran’ appellant, quia mani-
feste constat in iis nihil esse periculi, cuilibet licebit sine
genuiscissione eos custodire. Idem de canibus quos ‘ram-
hundt’ vocant.


xxx. Quod si casu inauspicato hujusmodi canes rabidi
fiant et ubique vagantur, negligentia dominorum, redduntur
illiciti, et emendetur regi pro illicitis, ete. Quod si intra septa
forestee reperiantur, talis exquiratur herus, et emendet secun-
dum pretium hominis mediocris, quod secundum legem > Weri-
norum, i.? Thuringorum, est ducentorum solidorum.


xxxiv. Si canis rabidus momorderit feram, tune emendet
secundum pretium hominis liberalis, quod est duodecies solidis
centum. Si vero fera regalis morsa fuerit, reus sit maximi
criminis,


1 Churingorum Sp.


= [Apparently a repetition of the preceding syllable-—7Z.]
> [ ‘Qui liberum occiderit, cc. sol. componat.’ Lex Angl. et Werin.
tit. 1. § 2—TZ.]


( 481 )


RECTITUDINES
SINGULARUM PERSONARUM.


aRECTITUDINES
SINGULARUM PERSONARUM.


DELENES LAGU.

Degeney lagu iy $ he yy Imp boc-mheey pypde- 4 $ he
Speo Sine of hiy lande do- rypd-peepeld- y buph-bote 4 bpyc-
Sepeope. Cac of manegum landbum mape land-mhe amyc to
cynizer zebanne- ypilce iy deop-hege to cynigey hame- 4
ycopp cto ymd-peipe- 4 yee-peand- 4 hearod-peapd- 4 yypd-
peapd- elmey-peoh- 4 cyjuc-peeats y menize odepe muyclice
Singe:-


LENEATES RIPT.


Geneav-phe 1p mipthe be 8am Se on lande yrent. On
yumon he yeeal land-zarol yyllan 4 geepy-ypyn on geape 4
yudan 4 auepian 4 lade lebdan- pypcan 4 hlapopd feopmian-
+j pan 4 mapan- deop-hege heapan-+ 4 yece haldan- byclian-
4 buph hegezian nize fapan to tune feccan- cypic-yceat
yyllan 4 almey-peoh- heapod-peapde healban 4 hopy-peapde-
zpendian+ fyp ypa nyp- ypa hpydep ypa him mon to-ceecd:-


KOT-SETLAN RIPT.


Kove-yeclan puht- be Sam Se on lanbe ycenc. On yumon
he yeeal zlce Mon-deze ofen xeaper fypyc hp lapfopde
pypcan- 085 -11- dazay zlepe pucan on hepreyc- ne Seapr
he land-zarol yyllan. Jom gebymad [-v-] zecepay to hab-
banne» mane gyp hic on lande Seap yy- 4 vo lycel Inc bid
beo hic a leyye- ropdan Iny peope yceal beon ofc-peede-
yylle hip heop&-pemz on halgan Dunpey-dez- eal ypa alcan
Fyigean men gebyped- 4 pemgze Inp hlaropder land. giz him
man beobe- xt ya-peapbe y xt cynizey deop-hegee y xt


1 This superseription is from Hh.; R. has the less appropriate one,
‘De dignitate hominum.’ 2brugbotam RR. 3 capiatis
4et M.Hk. ‘et de alia annona dimidiam acram 7. add. si


2 [The Saxon text is from B.—T.]


“‘RECTITUDINES
SINGULARUM PERSONARUM.


Taint lex est, ut sit dignus rectitudine testamenti sui, et ut
ita faciat pro terra sua, scilicet, expeditionem, burhbotam, et
*brigbotam. Et de multis terris majus landirectum exurgit ad
bannum regis, sicut est deorhege ad mansionem regiam, et
sceorpum in hosticum, et custodiam maris, et ®capitis, et pacis,
et elmesfeoh, id est, pecunia elemosine, et ciricsceatum, et alie
res multimode.


VILLANI rectum est varium et multiplex, secundum quod
in terra statutum est. In quibusdam terris debet dare land-
gablum et gersspin, id est, porcum herbagii, et equitare, ‘vel
averiare, et summagium ducere, operari, et dominum suum
firmare, metere et falcare, deorhege cedere, et stabilitatem ob-
servare, edificare et circumsepire, novam faram adducere, ciric-
sceatum dare et almesfeoh, id est, pecuniam elemosine, heafod-
wardam custodire et horswardam, in nuncium ire, longe vel
prope, quocunque dicetur ei.


CoTsETLE rectum est juxta quod in terra constitutum est.
Apud quosdam debet omni die Lune, per anni spatium, operari
domino suo, et tribus diebus unaquaque septimana in Augusto.
Apud quosdam, operatur per totum Augustum, omni die, et
unam acram avene metit pro diurnale opere. Et habeat
garbam suam °quam prepositus vel minister domini dabit ei.
Non dabit landgablum. Debet habere quinque acras ad per-
habendum, plus °si consuetudo sit ibi, et parum nimis est si
minus sit quod deservit, quia sepius est operi illius.’ Det super


consuetudo opus est operis illius #2. si consuetudo sit ibi, et opus est
operis illius A.


a [The Latin text is from 2. collated with M. Hk. and T.—T.j
FF


* enize P


484 RECTITUDINES


ypilcan Smzan pile np med yy. y yylle np cypie-peeat to
Qapcmup meyyan:


LEBURES LERIPTE.

Gebup-gepihta pyn miylice- zehpap hy ryn hepige- gehpap
eac medeme- on yumen lande iy } he yceal pypcan ‘co pic-
peopice -11- dazay- ypile peope ypile him man teecd ofep geaper
Fypyc: azlepe pucan- ¥ on heppeyc -11+ dagay co pic-peopice- 4
of Landelmeyye 03 Eaytpan -1- gr he apepad ne deapf he
pypean Sa hpile Se ny hopy ure bid. We yeeal yyllan on
G)ichaeley meyye-dzeiz -x- garol-p. y on Mapcinuy meyye-
deg -XXIN+ pyyepa bepey- 4 -11- hen-fugelay» on Caycpan an
geong yeeap- ode «+p. y he yeeal legan of Mapcinuy
meyyan od Eaycpan ac hlapopder yalde- ppa oft ypa him to-
begad- y of Sam timan Se man epey eped o3 Mapcmur
meyyan he yceal eelepe pucan epian «I+ aecep- 4 peedan pylp $
yzd on hlaropdey bepne- to-eacan Sam -111- eecepay to bene 4
“le to Zepy-ypse- zyp he mapan gepyer bedyppe Sonne
*eanmge Sey ypa him man Saige. Jp Zauol-ypde -m--
zeceplay ejuze 4 yape of hip aganum bepne- y yylle hip heopd-
peng. tpegen 4 tpegen yedan eenne headop-hund- y ele gebup
yylle -v1- hlapay Sam in-ppane donne he hip heopde to may-
cene dpe. On Sam syleum lande Se Seoy paden on-prant
gebupe gebyped him man cto land-yetene yylle -11- oxan ¥
“Is Cus 4 +VIe poeap> 4 +vII- secepay Zeyapene on hiy gypde
landey- ropdize ofep } geap ealle gemhtu Se him co-zebypi-
gean+ 4 yylle him man col to hip peopce 4 andlaman vo hip
huye. Donne him fopsd-y15 gebyyige syme Iny hlaropd Sey
he lege:-

Deoy Jand-lagu yreent on yuman lande- gehpap hie ip ppa ic
zp cped hepigne zehpap eac leohcpe- yopdam ealle land-pida
ne yyn Zelice. On yumen lande zebup yeeal pyllan humz-
zayol- on suman meve-zarol- on suman ealu-zarol. Jdede yede
yeipe healde } he pite 4 hpet eald land-peden yy y hpat
Seode Seap:-


Be DAM DE BEON BEPITAD.
Beo-ceople zebypeS zy: he garol-heopde healc $ he yylle


lyot in M. Hk.T.


SINGULARUM PERSONARUM. 435


heordpenig in sancto die Jovis, sicut omnis liber facere debet,
et adquietet inland domini sui, ‘si submonitio fiat de sewarde,
id est, de custodia maris, vel de regis deorhege, et ceteris
rebus que sue mensure sunt: et det suum cyricsceatum in festo,
Séi Martini.


Gesurt consuetudines inveniuntur ?multimode, et ubi sunt
Sonerose et ubi sunt’ leviores aut medie. In quibusdam terris
operatur opus septimane, 11. dies, sic opus sicut ei dicetur per
anni spatium, omni septimana; et in Augusto m1. dies pro
septimanali operatione, et a festo Candelarum ad usque Pascha
ui. Si averiat, non cogitur operari quamdiu equus ejus foris
moratur. Dare debet in festo Séi Michaelis x. d. de gablo,
et Sci Martini die xxi, et sestarium ordei, et um. gallinas.
Ad Pascha 1. ovem juvenem, vel 11. ad. Et jacebit a festo Séi
Martini usque ad Pascha ad faldam domini sui, quotiens ei
pertinebit. Et a termino quo primitus arabitur usque ad
festum Sti Martini arabit unaquaque septimana 1. acram, et
jpse parabit semen domini sui in horreo. Ad hee m1. acras
precum, et duas de herbagio. Si plus indigeat herbagio, arabit
proinde sicut ei permittatur. De aratura gabli sui arabit
1II. acras, et seminabit de horreo suo, et dabit suum heor®’-
penig; et duo et duo pascant unum molossum. Et omnis
geburus det vi. panes porcario curie quando gregem suum
minabit in pastinagium. In ipsa terra ubi hec consuetudo
stat, moris est ut ad terram assidendam dentur ei 11. boves,
et I. vacca, et vr. oves, et vII. acre seminate, in sua virgata
terra. Post illum annum faciat omnes rectitudines que ad
eum attinent ; et committantur ei tela ad opus suum, et sup-
pellex ad domum suam. Si mortem obeat, rehabeat dominus
suus omnia.

Hee consuetudo stat in quibusdam locis, et alicubi est,
sicut prediximus, gravior, et alicubi levior; quia omnium ter-
rarum instituta non sunt equalia. In quibusdam locis gebur
dabit hunigablum, *in quibusdam metegablum,’ in quibusdam
ealagablum. Videat qui scyram tenet, ut semper sciat que sit
antiqua terrarum institutio, vel populi consuetudo.


BocuEro, id est, apum custodi, pertinet, si gavelheorde, id


2 multitudine JZ Hk. ¥ not in R.


436 RECTITUDINES


Sonne lande zepeed beo. Ghd uy ip gepeed f he yylle -v-
yuycpay huniger to gapole- on suman landum gebyped mape
zarol-peeden. Cac he yceal hpil-cioum geapa beon on mane-
gum peoncum to hlaropdey pillan- to-eacan ben-ypde y *ben-
Jupe 4 meed-mepecte- 4 zyp he pel gelend bid he yceal beon
zehoprad $ he maze co hlaropdey yeame  yyllan odde yyly
ledan- ypeedep him man vece- 4 fela Singa ypa gepad man
yceal don- eal ic nu atellan ne maiz. Donne him fopd-pd
gebypize hede ye hlapond Sep he lepe buce hpet fgey sy:


Be LAFOL-SpANE.


Tragol-ppane zébypedS $ he yylle mp ylyhc be Sam Se on
lande ycenct. On manezum landum ycenct he yylle zlce
seaple -xv- ypyn vo ypticungze -x- ealde- 4 -v- Zynze- hebbe
rylp P he ofep $ apape. On manegum landum gebyped
deoppe ypan-jihc. Iryme eac ypan he zptep ypricunge hiy
ylyhe-ppyn pel behpeopfe- yeencge- Sonne bid he ful pel
sepypeey pypde- eac he yeeal beon- ypa ic ap be beocepe
cpzed- ofc-peede to gehpilcon peopce- y sehopyad co hlaropder
neode. Deop-ypan y Seop-beocepe wxften fopd-pse be anpe
laze pypbe:-


BE sCPTE-SpANe.
J/€hce-ypane Se in hepode heale gebyped yri-peaph- y lnp
sepipce Sonne he ypic behponyen heefd- 4 eller Sa gemhtu de
Seopan men to-gebypuad:.-


BE MANNA METSUNTE.

Anan ene zebyped to metyunge -xm- pund Zoder copney-
4 +lI+ perp-zetepaye y -Ie Zod mete-cu- pudu-paden be land-
yroe:-

Be PIFMONNA METSUNEE.

Deopan piymen -vil- pund copney to mete «I yceap odde
*llls p. to pinvep-puple -1- pyycep beana to leengcen-fufle-
hpzig on ysumepa odde «I+ p.:-

Eallum ehte-mannum zebyped ()id-pintpey feopm: 4 Eay-


1 ws. beb- 2 et sarticare 1. Hk. esarticare FR,


SINGULARUM PERSONARUM. 437


est, gregem ad censum teneat, ut inde reddat sicut ibi moris
erit. In quibusdam locis est institutum, reddi v1. sestaria
mellis ad censum. In quibusdam locis plus gabli redditur ;
et aliquotiens etiam debet esse paratus ad multas operationes
voluntatis domini sui, et ad benyrde, id est, araturam precum,
et benripe, id est, ad preces metere, et pratum falcare. Et si
bonam terram habeat, equum habeat quem ad summagium do-
mini sui prestare possit, vel ipse minare quocunque dicatur ei.
Et hujusmodi plurima facienda sunt ei que modo nequeunt
enarrari. Cum finis eum demediabit, habeat dominus quod.
relinquetur, nisi forte liberum aliquid intersit.


GarotspanE, id est, ad censum porcario, pertinet, ut suam:
occisionem det secundum quod in patria statutum est. In
multis Iocis stat, ut det singulis annis xv. porcos ad occisionem,
X, veteres, et v. juvenes; ipse autem habeat superaugmentum.
In multis locis est servilius rectum porcarii. Viderit etiam
porcarius, ut post occisam ipsam, porcos occisos bene corrediet
et suspendat, et tunc habeatur dignus opera sua. Etiam erit,
sicut de custode apum diximus, multis operibus frequentatus.
Et equum habeat in opus domini sui. Servus porcarius, et
servus custos apum, post obitum suum, sint unius legis digni.


JEHTESpANE, id est, servo porcario, qui dominicum gregem
curie custodit, pertinet habere stiferh, id est, porcellum de sude,
et suum gewirce, quando bacones suos bene corrediaverit, et
amplius, eas rectitudines que servo jure pertinent.


Un HEsno, id est, inopi, contingunt ad victum x1. pondia
bone annone, et duo scepeteras, id est, ovium corpora, et I.
bona. convictualis vacca, et °sarticare juxta situm terre.


Uni ANCILLE vil. pondia annone ad victum, 1. %ovis vel
1.4, ad ‘hiemale companagium, 1. sester fabe ad quadragesi-
malem convictum. In estate suum hpeig, vel 1.4.


Omnibus ehtemannis jure competit Natalis firma, et Paschalis


3 ovis M.Hk. ovem R. ‘4Ahiemalis WZ. Hk. hiemalem R. hiemale 7.


* 1, dingan.


438 RECTITUDINES


cop-feopm yulh-scep- 4 haepyeyc-handpul- co-eacan heopa
nyd-puhte:-
Be FOLLERAN.

Folgepe zebyped $ he on cpelp mondum -1- zcepay ze-
eapniges odepine geyapene y odepne unyapene- yseedige yyly
Seene- 4 hip mete- 4 ycoung- 4 Zlofunz him gebyped. syp he
mape geeapnian meig him bid yylpum ypemu:.


Be SCDERE,

Sexdene gebyped $ he hebbe elcey yeed-cynney zenne leap-
sulne- Sonne he ele pad pel geyapen heebbe open geapey
Fypye:

BE OXAN-PYRDE.

Oxan-hypde mot leypian -11- oxan od3e ma mod hlaropdey
heopde on gemenpe lee be hy ealbopmanney gepicneyye.
Eapman mid Sam yeor ¥ Zlofa him yylpum- 4 hip metve-cu
mot gan mid hlapopdey oxan:-


Be KU-PYRDE.

Lu-hypse zebyped $ he heebbe ealépe cu meole -vire mht

yySsan heo mize cealpod hed. 4 ppymetlinge byycinge -xum-
niht- 4 ga hip meve-cu mid hlaropdey cu:-


BE SLEAP-PYRDAN.

Sceap-hypdey puhc ip $ he heebbe cpelp mhta * Singan to
Q)iddan-pinctpas 4 «1+ lamb of geapeyr geogede- y -1- bel-plyy-
4y np heopde meole -vi1- mht zyptep emnihtey deege- 4 blede
sulle hpegey od8e pypinge ealne yumop:.


Be GAT-pYRDE.
Tiae-hypde gebyped hiy heopde meole oyep Mapcinuy meyye-
dxiz- 4 ayt Sam hip del hpeegey- 4 +1+ ticcen of Zeapey Zeo-
zovde- zip he hip heopde pel begymed:.


Be LYS-pYRPTE.
Lyy-pyphean gebyped hundped cyye- y f heo of ppungh-
pege butepan macige to hlapopdey beode- 4 heebbe hipe da
yypinge ealle bucan Sey hypdep dzle:.


SINGULARUM PERSONARUM. 439


sulheecer, id est, carruce acra, et manipulus Augusti in augmen-
tum jure debiti recti.


Fot@ario competit, ut in duodecim mensibus, 1. acras
habeat, unam seminatam, aliam non; sed idem seminet eam,
et victum suum, et calciamenta debet habere, et cirotecas. Si
plus deservit ipsi commodum erit.


SzpERE, id est, seminatori, pertinet, ut habeat unoquoque
sementis tempore I. leap-fulne, quando semen omne bene semi-
naverit in anni spatio.


Busutco licet adherbare duos boves, et alicubi plus, cumr
grege domini, in communibus pascuis, per testimonium tamen
aldremanni sui. Deserviat per id calceos et cirotecas sibi; et
ejus mete cu, id est, victus sui vaccam, licet ire cum bobus
domini.


Vaccarir rectum est, ut habeat lac vacce veteris vir. noc-
tibus, postquam enixa erit, et primitivarum bistinguium ximL
noctibus ; et eat ejus vacca cum vaccis domini.


Pastoris ovium rectum est, ut habeat dingiam x11. noctium
in Natali Domini, et 1. agnum de juventute hornotina, et 1. bel-
flis, id est, timpani vellus, et lac gregis sui, vi1. noctibus ante
equinoctium, et blede, id est, cuppam plenam mesguii de
siringia, tota estate.


Caprario convenit lac gregis sui post festum Sti Martini,
et antea pars sua mesguii, et 'capricum anniculum, si bene
custodiat gregem suum.


CasEUM FACIENTI reddere convenit centum caseos, et ut
butirum faciat ad mensam domini sui, de siringie: et habeat
sibi totam siringiam preeter partem pastoris.


lcapritum A.


440 RECTITUDINES


Be BERE-BRYTTE.
Bene-bpyccan zebyped copn-gebpot on heepyeeye set bepney
dupe- zip him hiy ealdopman ann 4 he Inc mid getpypdan
Zeeapnod:-


Be BYDELE.
Bydele zebypad $ he yon np pycan py peopcey rpigpa Sonne
oSep man- fopdan he yceal beon opt-pade- eac him gebyped
yum land-ycyece ron hip zeypince:-


BE PUDU-pexRDE.
Pudu-peapde zebyped zle pind-fylled cpeop:-


[Be p/€lG-peARDE.]

Ieez-pepde sebyped man Inp gerpincey lean gecnape on
Sam endum %e to eten-leye licgan- popdam he meg penan-
3yp he p ep ropzymd- $ him man hpulcey land-priccey Zeann-
P yceal beon mid yole-mhte nyhyt even-leye- ropdam zyp he
pop ylepde np hlaponder yopzyms- ne bid hip agnum pel ge
bopgen- gig hic bid Sup punden- gig he Sonne eal pel zepmdad
he healdan yceal- Sonne bid he godey leaner ful pel peopde:-


Lant-laga syn muiytlice ypa 1c xp befopan yeede- ne yette
pe na Say gepihcu ofep ealle Seoda- Se pe wp befopan ymbe-
Jppecon- ac pe cydad hpac Seap ip Sep Seep uy cud ryp- Zyp
pe yelpe geleopmiad } pe pillad geopne lupan ¥ healdan- be
Sepe 1Seode Seape Se pe Senne on-puniad- ropdam laga yeeal
on leode luplice leopmian- log yede on lande yylf nele leoyan-
feola yyndan fole-zemhtu- on yumepe Seode gzebyped pintep-
feopm- Caycep-peopm- *ben-fopym fon pupe- gyt-feopm yon
ypde- meed-med hyeac-mete- at pudu-lade pen-cpeop- xt
copn-lade hpeac-copp- y yela Singa Se 1c getellan ne mag.
Diy ip Seah myngung manna bipiyce 4 eal $ 1c ep beropan
ymbe-nehte:.


1 us. Sede ms. bend-


SINGULARUM PERSONARUM. 441


Berepreto, i.e. horreareo, pertinet habere 'crodinum ad
ostium horrei in Augusto, si aldremannus suus ei concedat, et
idem fideliter deserviat.


BEDELLO pertinet, ut pro servitio suo liberior sit ab opera-
tione quam alii homines, quia sepius est impeditus: etiam ei
convenit, ut aliquam terre portiunculam habeat pro labore suo.


PuveparD, id est, custodi nemoris vel forestario, jure cecidit
lignum omne vento dejectum.


Herwarpo pertinet, ut merces laboris ejus compensetur in
eam partem segetis que pascuis adjacet; quia scire debet si
minus hoe servabit, dampnum segetis imputabitur illi, Et si
aliqua terre portiuncula permittatur ei, secundum jus publicum,
debet esse vicina compascuis, ut si per desidiam ejus seges in-
festabitur, a suo primitus expectetur.


Leges et consuetudines terrarum sunt multiplices et varie,
sicut prelibavimus, nec sancitum hoc super omnes dicimus
generale. Notificamus tamen quid in quibusdam locis sit
observare; si melius innotescat, gaudenter amplectimur, et cus-
todiri volumus ?juxta mores populi cum quo tunc habitabimus.
Leges debet in populis libenter addiscere, qui non vult in
patria solus amittere. In quibusdam locis datur firma Natalis
Domini, et firma Paschalis, et firma precum ad congregandas
segetes, et gutfirma ad arandum, et firma pratorum fenando-
rum, et hreaccroppum, id‘est, macoli summitas, et firma ad
macholum faciendum. In terra nemorosa, lignum plaustri; in
terra uberi, caput macholi: et alia plurima fuerint a pluribus,
quorum hoc viaticum sit, et quod supra diximus.


1 @dinti: HA. 2vitas Hk. vitam M.


LEGES
REGIS *EDWARDI CONFESSORIS.


1INCIPIT LEX GLORIOSI ANGLORUM
REGIS EDWARDI.


Post quartum annum adquisicionis regis Wiltmi istius terre,
®scilicet Anglie,” consilio baronum suorum fecit sum-
moniri per universos Spatrie comitatus,’ Anglos nobiles,
‘sapientes, et °in lege sua eruditos, ut eorum consue-
tudines ab ipsis audiret. Electis igitur de singulis tocius
patrie comitatibus xu. jurejurando in primis sanxerunt,
Sut quoad possent, recto tramite incedentes, legum
suarum ac consuetudinum sancita edicerent, ’nil preter-
mittentes, ’nil addentes, nil prevaricando mutantes.


DE PACE ET LIBERTATE SCE ECCLESIE.


1. 8A sancta itaque ecclesia exordium sumentes, per quam
rex et regnum solide subsistere *haberent, pacem “illius et
libertatem concionati sunt dicentes. * Omnis clerus’ et ’sco-
lares et omnes eorum possessiones, ubicumque fuerint, pacem
Dei et sancte ecclesie habeant.


lin Hk. rubrica desunt. in Hk. deest. % Anglie Hk. ’ Anglie
consulatus Z. ‘4et Hk.add. 5in Hk. deest. 6coram eo Hk. add.
7nichil Hk.  & A legibus itaque sancte matris ecclesie sumentes
exordium, quoniam per eam rex et regnum solidum subsistendi ha-
bent fundamentum, leges libertatis et pacis ipsius concionati, Se. L.
9valerent Hk. ‘Met libertatem Hh. add. !/ Omnes clerici Hk.
12 omnes Hk. add.


a [Ex Chron. Saxon. et Flor. Wigorn. liquet Edwardum an. 1043,
111. non. Aprilis, Wintoniz, in regem unctum fuisse, et an. 1066,
Indict. 1v., Epiphanie Domini vigilia, feria quinta, Lundoniz mortem
obiisse. Textus est ex ms. Si—TZ.]


LEGES REGIS EDWARDI CONFESSORIS. 4438


QUIBUS TEMPORIBUS PAX SERVANDA EST.


1. Ab adventu Domini usque ad octavas Epiphanie *pax
Dei et sancte ecclesie per omne regnum. Similiter a Septua-
gesima usque ad octavas Pasche. Item ab Ascensione Domini
usque ad octavas Pentecostes. Item omnibus diebus m1. tem-
porum. Item *omnibus Sabatis’ totius anni, ab hora nona,
et totum diem sequentem. Item ‘vigilia Sancte Marie, Sancti
Michaelis, Sancti Johannis Baptiste, *sanctorum omnium Apos-
tolorum, et Sanctorum illorum quorum festivitates a sacerdoti-
bus in ecclesia diebus Dominicis Sannunciabuntur, et Omnium
Sanctorum kalendis Novembris, semper ab hora nona vigiliarnm
Set totum diem sequentem. Item in festivitatum celebracio-
nibus Sanctorum quicumque fuerint in parochiis ubi sunt ec-
clesie eorum. Et si est qui pro pietate ad celebracionem
Sancti adveniat, cum pace moretur et ’abscedat. Item omni-
bus ®Christicolis ad ecclesiam Dei causa oracionis pergentibus,
pax sit in eundo et redeundo: item ad dedicaciones euntibus,
et ad sinodos, et ad capitula, sive summoniti sint, sive per
se ibi quid agendum habeant. Et si aliquis excommunicatus
ad emendacionem ad episcopum venerit, absolutus eundo et
redeundo pacem Dei et sancte ecclesie habeat. Quod si
aliquis "ei forisfecerit, episcopus faciat suam justiciam. Et si
pro justicia episcopi emendare noluerit, ostendat regi, et rex
constringat forisfactorem ut emendet “cui forisfecit,’ et epis-
copo et sibi. Et sic juste gladius gladium juvabit.


DE JUSTICIA SANCTE ECCLESIE.
ui. Ubicumque justicia regis vel “alia quelibet justicia,
cujuscumque ‘sit, tenuerit placita vel justiciam, si minister
episcopi fuerit, et ostenderit causam ™“sancte ecclesie, ipsa
prius “ad finem’ deducatur, ad quem finem poterit racionabilius


lpax Hk. pacem S. 2% dies Sabbatorum Hk. vigiliis Hk. 4in
Hk. deest. *annunciantur Z. et subsequentium solempnitatum.
Item in parochiis ecclesiarum ubi propria festivitas sancti cele-
bretur. Similiter et in parochiis in quibus dedicationis dies obser-
vatur. Et si quis piam devote ad celebracionem sancti adveniat,
pacem habeat eundo, et subsistendo, et redeundo. 7 discedat Hh.
8 christianis Z. %pro Z. et si aliquis excommunicatus ad emen-
dacionem venerit, absolutus eundo et redeundo, pacem Dei et sancte
ecclesie habeat. Hk. add. '\ sibi S. ei LZ. et editt. 12/ de forisfacto
Hk, = ‘aliqua Hk. “in Hk. deest. \°in Hk. deest.


444 LEGES REGIS EDWARDI CONFESSORIS.


leo die. Justum est etiam ut Dominus ?ubique per servos
suos honoretur.


DE LIBERTATE EORUM QUI DE FEODIS ECCLESIE
TENUERINT.


Iv. Quicumque de ecclesia tenuerit, vel in Sfeudo ecclesie
manserit, alicubi extra ‘curiam ecclesiasticam’ non placitabit,
si in aliquo forisfactum habuerit, donec, quod absit, Sin curia
S ecclesiastica de recto defecerit.


DE HIS QUI AD ECCLESIAM PRO PRESIDIO
FUGERINT.


v. Quicumque reus vel noxius ad ecclesiam pro presidio
confugerit, ex quo atrium ingressus fuerit securus sit, et a
nemine insequente 7ullo modo apprehendatur, nisi per ponti-
ficem loci illius, vel ministros ejus. Et si in fugiendo ad
domum sacerdotis vel ad curiam ejus diverterit, eandem se-
curitatem et libertatem Sibidem inveniat quam apud ecclesiam ;
dum tamen °sacerdotis domus et curia in feodo’ ecclesie con-
sistant. Si latro est vel raptor, quod male cepit quod ad
manum est reddat. Et si illud extirpaverit, et de suo proprio
quod reddat habuerit integrum, ei a quo furatum est "resti-
tuat. Si autem hoc sepius egerit, et forte fortuitu sic “sepius
confugerit, ablacione reddita provinciam forisjuret, nec redeat.
Et si redierit, quisquam eum recipere non praesumat, nisi per
consensum ™justiciariorum domini regis.’


DE HIS QUI PACEM ECCLESIE FREGERINT.


vi. Si quis sancte ecclesie pacem fregerit, episcoporum tum
est justicia. Et si *eorum sentenciam defugiendo vel superbe
contempnendo parvipenderit, ad regem de eo clamor deferetur
post dies XL., et justicia regis mittet eum per “vadimonium
et per plegios, si habere ”poterit, usque dum Deo primitus et
regi postea satisfaciat. Et si infra xxx. et unum diem, per
amicos suos seu per justiciam regis reperiri non poterit, ore


lipsa Hk, 2in Hk. deest. 3feodo Hk. fundo Z. 4’ecclesie curiam
Hk. 5in Hh. deest. fecclesie Hk. ‘7nullo Hk. %in Hh. deest.
%/domus enim sacerdotis in feodo Hk. '%si Hk. \reddat HA.
12ad ecclesiam Hk. add. ‘%sepe Hk. 14’ justicie regis Hk. ' quis
Hk. add. ‘vadium Hk. 7 potuerit Hk. 8in Hh. deest.


LEGES REGIS EDWARDI CONFESSORIS. 445


suo utlagabit eum rex. Et si postea repertus fuerit et teneri
possit, vivus regi reddatur, vel caput ipsius si se defenderit;
lupinum enim caput geret a die utlagacionis sue, quod ab
Anglis wluesheued nominatur. Et hec sententia communis
est de omnibus utlagis.


DE DECIMIS.


vit. De omni annona decima garba sancte ecclesie reddenda
est. Si quis gregem equarum habuerit, pullum decimum
reddat; qui unam solam vel duas, de singulis pullis singulos
denarios. Qui vaccas plures habuerit, vitulum decimum; gui
unam vel duas, de ‘singulis obolos singulos. Et si de eis
caseum fecerit, caseum decimum, *vel Jac decima die.


ITEM DE DECIMIS.


vi, Agnum decimum, vellus decimum, *caseum decimum,’
butirum decimum, porcellum decimum. *De apibus’ secun-
dum quod ‘sibi per annum inde’ profecerit. Quinetiam de
boscis et pratis, aquis, molendinis, parcis, vivariis, piscariis,
virgultis, ortis, negociacionibus, et de omnibus similiter rebus
Squas dederit Dominus,’ decima reddenda est; et qui eam
detinuerit, per justiciam sancte ecclesie et regis, si necesse
fuerit, ad reddicionem cogatur. Hec predicavit Sanctus Au-
gustinus, et hec concessa sunt a rege, et confirmata a baro-
nibus et populis: sed postea instigante diabolo ea plures
detinuerunt, et sacerdotes qui divites erant non multum curiosi
erant ad. perquirendas eas, quia in multis locis sunt modo
1111. ®vel 11.’ ecclesie, ubi tune temporis non erat nisi una; et
sic inceperunt minui.


DE ILLIS QUI JUDICIUM FACIUNT AQUE VEL FERRI
CALIDI.


1x. Assit ad judicium minister episcopi cum clericis suis,
et justicia regis cum legalibus hominibus provincie illius, ut
videant et audiant quod omnia eque fiant, et quos salvaverit
Dominus per misericordiam suam et justicia eorum, quieti sint
et liberi abscedant; et quos iniquitas et injusticia sua ’con-
dempnaverit, justicia regis de ipsis fieri faciat justiciam.


l yitulis Hk. add. 2sinon fecerit Hk. in Hk. deest. 4/ Hh. add.
5/ per tempus anni HR. in Hk. deest. 7 dampnaverit Hk.


446 LEGES REGIS EDWARDI CONFESSORIS.


Barones autem qui curias suas habent de hominibus suis,
videant ut ita agant de eis, quatenus erga 'Dominum reatum
non incurrant, et regem non offendant.

Et si placitum de hominibus aliorum baronum oritur in
curiis suis, assit ad placitum justicia regis, quoniam absque eo
fieri non debet. Et si barones sint qui judicia non habeant, in
hundredo ubi placitum habitum fuerit, ad propinquiorem ec-
clesiam ubi judicium regis erit, determinandum est, salvis recti-
tudinibus baronum ipsorum.


DE DENARIO SANCTI PETRI QUI ANGLICE DICITUR
ROMESCOT.


x. Omnis qui habuerit xxx. denariatas vive pecunie *de suo
proprio’ in domo sua, lege Anglorum dabit denarium Sancti
Petri; et lege Danorum, dimidiam marcam. Iste vero sum-
moniri debet in festivitate sanctorum Apostolorum Petri et
Pauli, et ultra festum Sancti Petri ad Vincula non detineatur.
Si quis vero eum detinuerit, ad justiciam regis clamor defe-
ratur, quoniam ille denarius elemosina regis est, et justicia regis
reddere faciat denarium et forisfacturam regis et episcopi. Et
si quis plures domos habuerit, de illa ubi residens fuerit, *festo
apostolorum Petri et Pauli, reddat denarium.


DE DENEGELDO.


xt. Denegeldi reddicio propter piratas primitus statuta est.
Patriam enim infestantes, vastacioni ejus pro posse *suo insiste-
bant; sed ad eorum insolenciam reprimendam, statutum est
Denegeldum annuatim *reddendum: i. duodecim denarios de
unaquaque hida tocius patrie, ad conducendos eos qui pira-
tarum irruptioni resistendo obviarent. De hoc quoque Dene-
geldo quieta erat et libera omnis terra que de ecclesiis propria
et dominica erat, eciam de ecclesiis parochiarum ad idem
pertinentibus, et nichil in Sejus redemptione’ persolvebant, quia
majorem fiduciam in oracionibus sancte ecclesie habebant quam
in defensionibus armorum. Et hance libertatem habuit sancta
ecclesia usque ad tempus ? Willielmi junioris, qui de baronibus


1 Deum Hk. % in Hh. deest. %vigiliaZ. ‘add. Hk. LZ. 5 reddi
Hk. £. * redditione ejus Hk. “regis Willielmi minoris, qui Ruffus
vocabatur; donec eodem a baronibus Anglie auxilium requirente,
ad Normanniam retinendam, de Roberto, fratre suo, cognomine
Curthose, Sc. Z.


LEGES REGIS EDWARDI CONFESSORIS. 447


tocius patrie auxilium petiit ad Normanniam retinendam de.
fratre suo Roberto’ eunte Ierusalem. Ipsi autem concesserunt
ei 1111. sot de unaquaque hida, sanctam ecclesiam non excipi-
entes: quorum dum fieret collectio, clamabat ecclesia, liber-
tatem suam reposcens, sed nichil sibi profuit.


DE MULTIPLICI PACE REGIA ET IIII. CHIMINORUM
SIVE VIARUM REGALIUM, ET FLUVIORUM NO-
MINATORUM, QUORUM NAVIGIO DE DIVERSIS
LOCIS VICTUALIA CIVITATIBUS SIVE BURGIS DE-
FERUNTOR.


xu. Pax regis multiplex est. Alia data manu sua, quam
Anglici vocant kinges hand-sealde grid. Alia die qua primum
coronatus est; ipsa habet vu. dies. In Natali Domini, vin.
dies; et vii. dies Pasche; et vir. dies Pentecostes. Alia per
breve suum data. Alia quam habent mu. chimini: scilicet
Watlingestrete, Fosse, Hikenildestrete, Ermingestrete, quorum
duo in longitudinem regni, alii'vero in latitudinem? disten-
duntur. Alia quam habent aque quarum navigio de diversis
partibus deferuntur victualia civitatibus et burgis. Illa autem
pax manus sue, dierum coronationis sue, et brevis, sub judicio
unius forisfacture est. Similiter m1. chiminorum, et majorum
aquarum de assaltu. De opere *vero si fiat” opus destruetur,
et medietas emendacionis dabitur. Qui scienter fregerit eam
4x, et vii.’ hundreda in Denelage, et corpus suum in miseri-
cordia regis; lege Anglorum, suum were, i. precium suum, et
manbote de occisis erga dominos quorum homines interfecti
erant. Manbote in Danelaga, de vilano et de socheman, xn.
oras; de liberis hominibus 111. marcas. Manbote in lege
Anglorum, regi et archiepiscopo, 111. maré de hominibus suis ;7
episcopo comitatus, comiti comitatus, et dapifero regis, xx. sot;
baronibus ceteris, x. solid. Emendacionem faciat parentibus,
aut ®guerram paciatur, unde Angli proverbium habebant:
Bicge spere of side oSer bere, quod est dicere, lanceam eme
de latere aut ’fer eam.’ Pax autem 1111. chiminorum et ma-
jorum aquarum predictarum sub majori judicio, quod superius
diximus, continetur, scil. de assaltu. Et si molendina, piscaria,
vel alia quelibet opera ad disturbacionem eorum preparentur,


duo Hk. ?regni Hk.add. *% L. add. in 8. deest. “x11. et viti.
5/ Hk. add.  ®weram S. guerram Hk. guerra L.  feras Hk.
fer Z. et de ceteris forisfactis. Hk. add.


448 LEGES REGIS EDWARDI CONFESSORIS.


ipsa opera destruantur, chimini et aque reparentur, et foris-
factura regis non obliviscatur. Ceteri chimini de ‘civitatibus
ad civitates, de burgis ad burgos, per quos homines vadunt ad
mercata vel alia negocia sua, sub lege comitatus sunt. Et si
quid operis ad disturbacionem eorum erigitur, solo tenus de-
ponatur et chimini reparentur, et secundum legem comitatus,
erga’ comitem ?et vicecomitem emendetur. Similiter de aquis
minoribus naves ferentibus, cum eis que necessaria sunt civi-
tatibus et burgis, videlicet ligna et cetera, cum lege minorum
chiminorum sit et emendacio earum.


DIVISIONES SCIRARUM ET HUNDREDORUM.


xiu. Divisiones scirarum regis proprie cum judicio 111. chi-
minorum regalium sunt.

Divisiones hundredorum et wapentagiorum, comitibus et
vicecomitibus, cum judicio comitatus.


DE THESAURIS.


xiv. Thesauri de terra regis sunt, nisi in ecclesia aut in
cimiterio inveniantur. Et si ibi inveniuntur, aurum est regis;
et si argentum, dimidium est regis, et dimidium ecclesie ubi
inventum fuerit, quecumque sit, dives vel pauper.


DE MURDRO.


xv. Quando aliquis alicubi murdritus reperiebatur, quere-
batur apud villam, *nisi inveniebatur interfector illius; et si
inveniri poterat, justicie regis infra vi. dies interfectionis
tradebatur. Si vero inveniri non poterat, mensem et diem
unum ad eum perquirendum in ‘respectum habebant. Et si
non inveniebatur, colligebantur in villa xivi. marce. ‘5Et si
ad tante pecunie solucionem non sufficiebat, per hundredum
colligebatur quod in villa non poterat. Sed quia villa omnino
confundebatur, ®providerunt barones quod per hundredum col-
ligerentur, et sigillarentur sigillo alicujus baronis comitatus, et
deportarentur ad ’thesaurarium regis, quas ille servaret per
annum integrum. Quod si infra annum posset murdritor in-
veniri, fieret de eo justicia, et ipsi rehaberent marcas suas.


1 civitatibus Hk. civitate S. 2vel Hk. 3ubi HAL. 4terminum
L. *Quod Z. providerunt Hk.Z. viderunt S. 7 thesaurum
Hk.


LEGES REGIS EDWARDI CONFESSORIS. 449


Si autem infra annum non posset inveniri, parentes murdriti
haberent vi. marcas. Si parentes non haberet, dominus ejus
aut felagus, si haberet, scilicet fide ligatus cum eo. Si autem
neutrum istorum haberet, rex regni, sub cujus dominio et pace
degunt omnes Albani, haberet vi. marcas cum suis XL.


DE INVENCIONE MURDRI.


xvi. Murdra quidem inventa fuerunt tempore Cnuti regis,
qui, post adquisitam terram et *secum pacificatam, remisit
?domum exercitum suum precatu baronum de terra; et ipsi
fuerunt fidejussores erga regem, quod illi quos retineret in
terra firmam pacem haberent. Ita quod si quis de Anglis
aliquem ipsorum interficeret, si non posset defendere se judicio
Dei, ferro vel aqua, fieret justicia de eo. Si autem aufugeret,
solveretur ut supra dictum est.


DE MULTIPLICI POTESTATE REGIA.


xvi. Rex autem, *qui vicarius Summi Regis est, ad hoc
constitutus est, ut regnum et populum Domini, et super omnia,
sanctam ecclesiam, regat et defendat ab injuriosis; maleficos
autem destruat et evellat. *Sin autem, nomen regis perdit,
testante Johanne papa, cui Pepinus et Karolus filius ejus
necdum reges sed principes, sub rege Francorum stulto, scrip-
serunt, querentes: Si ita deberent manere reges Francorum,
Ssolo regio nomine contenti? A quo responsum est: Illos
‘vocari decet reges qui vigilanter defendunt et regunt eccle-
siam Dei et populum ejus, imitati regem psalmigraphum di-
centem: ‘Non habitabit in medio domus mee qui facit
superbiam,’ ete.


QUID DEBEANT FACERE QUOS REX VOLUERIT DE
MORTE LIBERARE.


xvi. Tamen si aliquis forisfactus requisierit misericordiam
ejus, timore mortis vel membrorum, pro forisfacto suo, potest
ei condonare, si placet, lege sue dignitatis. Et ipse cui fecerit
injuriam faciat rectum, cui prius forisfecerat, in quantum poterit
complere, et inveniat fidejussores de pace et legalitate tenenda.


Ycum illo Zk. 2Daciam LZ. quia HAL. ” Quod nisi fecerit,
nec regis nomen in eo constabit, verum, Z. ‘solo Hk.L. sub S.
6in S. deest.


450 LEGES REGIS EDWARDI CONFESSORIS.


Quod si non poterit, exulabit a patria. Habet etiam rex
aliam potestatem misericordie super captivos: quod ubicumque
venerit in civitatem, vel burgum, vel villam, vel etiam in viam,
si captivus ibi fuerit, potest eum solvere a capcione: ipse tamen
liberatus faciat rectum cui forisfecerit, pro omni posse suo.
Murdritor autem vel traditor, si rex condonaverit eis vitam
vel membra, servata lege, nullo modo remanebunt in patria,
sed jurabunt se ituros ad mare, ad terminum quem justicia
constituerit, et se transituros quam cicius poterunt habere
navem et ventum. Quod si perjuri remanserint in terra,
quicumque eos invenire poterit, faciat de eis justicia. Et si
aliquis scienter eos detinuerit pro una nocte, majori lege
Anglorum vel Danorum emendabit: pro secunda duplicius:
pro tercia nocte socius est et compar malefactorum.


DE UXORIBUS REORUM.


xix. Si ipsi rei uxores habuerint, et remanserint in terra, et
dixerit aliquis parentum 'murdriti, quod ipsis qui’ murdrierunt
vel tradiderunt, eas consiliatrices vel adjutrices fuisse, expurgent
se, si poterunt, judicio Dei; et si misericordia Dei et rectum
suum eas salvaverit, remaneant legales cum maritagiis suis et
dotibus. Et infantes qui ante malefactum generati fuerint, non
habebuntur exleges, pro malefacto quod patres eorum fecerunt
post generacionem, nec perdent hereditatem.


DE FRIDBORGIS, ET QUOD SOLI EBORACENSES VO-
CANT FRIDBORCH TENMENNE TALE, i.e. SERMO
DECEM HOMINUM.


xx. Alia pax maxima est, per quam omnes firmiori statu
sustentantur: scilicet fidejussionis stabilitate, quam Angli vocant
fridborgas, preter Eboracenses, qui vocant eam tenmanne tale,
hoc est, numerum x. hominum. Et hoc est, quod de omnibus
villis tocius regni sub decennali fidejussione debeant omnes
esse, ita quod si unus ex decem forisfecerit, novem eum
haberent ad rectum. Quod si aufugeret, et dicerent quod non
possent eum habere ad rectum, daretur eis ad minus a justicia
regis spacium xxx. dierum et unius diel. Et si possent eum
invenire, adducerent eum ad justiciam. Ipse quidem de suo
restauret dampnum quod fecerat, et de corpore suo fiat justicia,


Vmurdriti Z. illorum, quod ipsi S.


LEGES REGIS EDWARDI CONFESSORIS. 451


si ad hoc forisfecerit. Si autem infra supradictum terminum
inveniri non poterit, quia in omni fridborge unus erat capitalis
quem ipsi vocabant fridborgheued, ipse capitalis acciperet duos
de melioribus in suo fridborge, et de tribus fridborgis propin-
quioribus vicinis suis accipiat de unoquoque capitalem, et
similiter duos de melioribus, si poterit eos habere, et se duo-
decimo expurget se et fridborgum suum, si facere poterit, de
forisfacto et fuga supradicti malefactoris. Quod si facere non
poterit, restauraret dampnum quod ipse fecerat de proprio
forisfactoris quantum duraverit, et de suo’; et erga justiciam
emendent, secundum quod legaliter judicatum fuerit eis.
*Et tamen sacramentum quod non potuerunt complere per
vicinos, per se ipsos novem jurent se esse immunes. Et si
*aliquem potuerint recuperare, adducent eum ad justiciam, si
potuerint, aut dicent justicie ubi sit.


aDESCRIPCIO LIBERTATUM DIVERSARUM.


xxi. ‘ Archiepiscopi, episcopi, comites,” barones et milites
suos, et proprios servientes suos, scilicet dapiferos, pincernas,
camerarios, cocos, pistores, sub suo fridborgo habebant: et ipsi
suos armigeros vel alios servientes suos sub suo fridborgo; quod
si ipsi forisfacerent, et clamor vicinorum insurgeret de eis, ipsi
haberent eos ad rectum in curia sua, si Shaberent sacham et
socham, tol et theam, et infangenethef.


QUID SIT SOCHE, ET SACHE, ET TOL, ET THEAM, ET
INFANGENTHEF.


xxu. Soche est, quod si aliquis querit aliquid in terra sua,
etiam ‘furtum, sua est justicia si inventum fuerit an non.
Sacha, quod si aliquis aliquem nominatim de aliquo calump-
niatus fuerit, et ipse negaverit, forisfactura probacionis vel
negacionis, si evenerit, sua erit. Tol, quod nos vocamus
theloneum, scilicet libertatem 7emendi et’ vendendi in terra


let frithborgi sui Z. add. 27Tandem vero Z. Et tamen Hh.
3quandoeum Z. “in Hk. S.deest. * has libertates habent, scilicet
Hk. add. & furta vel aliqua hujusmodi Hk. add. 7in L. deest.


4 In marg. ms. S. litt. rub. Quod omnes qui habent sacham et
socham, et tol et theam, et infangthef, pro omnibus servientibus frid-
borgas dare debent.


452 LEGES REGIS EDWARDI CONFESSORIS.


sua. Theam, quod si ‘aliquis. aliquid’ interciebatur super
aliquem, et ipse non poterat warantum suum habere, erit
forisfactura, °et justicia similiter de calumpniatore, si deficiebat,
sua erit. De infangenepef—* Justicia cognoscentis latronis sua
est’ de homine suo, si captus fuerit super terram suam. Et
illi qui non habent consuetudines quas supradiximus, ante
justiciam regis faciant rectum eciam in hundredo, vel in
wapentagiis, vel in schiris.


DE HOSPITIBUS.

xx. *Si aliquis hospitatur aliquem cognitum vel incog-
nitum duabus noctibus, poterit eum habere’ tanquam hospitem.
Quod si ipse forisfecerit, non incurret dampnum pro eo. Sed
si ipse cui ipse forisfecerat fecerit clamorem ad justiciam de eo,
quod consilio ejus factum sit forisfactum, expurgabit se sacra-
mento cum duobus legalibus vicinis suis, si poterit, de consilio
et facto. Sin autem, emendet dampnum et forisfacturam.
Quod si tercia nocte hospitatus fuerit, et ipse forisfecerit alicui,
habeat eum ad rectum, tanquam de propria familia; quod.
Angli dicunt *‘tuua nicte geste fe pirdde nicte agen hine.”
Et si non poterit eum habere ad rectum, habebit terminum
mensis et unius diei. Etsi poterit eum invenire, ipse malefactor
restauret dampnum quod fecerat, Set emendacionem si poterit,
et de corpore, si ad hoc fuerit forisfactum. Et si malefactor
non poterit restaurare dampnum quod fecerat, ’restaurabit
hospes qui eum hospitatus fuerat, et forisfacturam. Et si
justicia habet eum suspectum, expurgabit se judicio hundredi
vel schire.


DE INVENCIONIBUS.


xxiv. Si aliquis adduxerit aliquid in villam, vel apportaverit
animal vel pecuniam aliquam, et dixerit se invenisse; ante-
quam introducat illud in domum suam vel alterius, ante eccle-
siam ducat, Set faciat venire sacerdotem de ecclesia, et prefectum


V aliquid Hk. 2 et similiter justicia de calumpniatore, si deficiebat,
sua erit Hk, 3 omnis enim qui habet sacha et tol et them et in-
fangenpef, predictas viz. consuetudines, justicia sua est, Sc. Z. 4” Si
quis hospitatur privatum, vel alienum, qui Anglice cup other uncup
dicuntur, poterit eum habere noctibus duabus Hk. 5 tuo niht gest,
pe pridde oyen hine. Hk. in Hk. deest. 7si non, restaurabit Hk.
et coram sacerdote ecclesie, et preposito ville, et melioribus homi-
nibus totum ostendat inventum, quicquid sit. Prefectus ville mox
mittat ad quatuor villas propinquiores pro sacerdotibus et prepositis


LEGES REGIS EDWARDI CONFESSORIS. 453


de villa, et de melioribus hominibus de villa, quotquot habere
poterit, per summonicionem prefecti. Ipsis congregatis, ostendat
eis totum inventum quicquid sit.’ Et prefectus de villa mittat
ad quatuor villas propinquiores, vel proprios sacerdotes et
prepositos de villis, et ipsi prefecti adducant secum quisque
tres vel quatuor de melioribus de villis, et ipsis ostendant totum
inventum. Et post testimonium ipsorum, prefectus de cujus
dominio inventor est, custodiat inventum usque in crastinim
diem, et in crastino die cum aliquibus vicinis suis qui inventum
videant, eant ad prefectum hundredi in quo sua villa est, et
ostendat illi totum. 'Et si dominus in cujus terra inventum
est non habet consuetudines suas, scilicet, socham et sacham,
omnia liberabit prefecto hundredi, si habere voluerit, cum bonis
testibus. Et si dominus ejus habet suas consuetudines in curia
domini sui, teneat rectum.”


DE JUDEIS.


xxv. Sciendum est quod omnes Judei, *ubicumque regno
sint, sub tutela et defensione regis ligie debent esse. Neque
aliquis eorum potest subdere se alicui diviti sine licencia regis;
quia ipsi Judei et omnia sua regis sunt. Quod si aliquis
detinuerit eos vel pecuniam eorum, rex requirat tanquam suum
proprium, si vult et potest.


DE PACE REGIS, ET QUOMODO SE CONTINERE DE-
BENT QUI PACEM PER MANUM SUAM, VEL PER
BREVE REGIS HABENT.


xxvi. 8De illis’ qui pacem regis habent, vel manu vel brevi
regis, ‘fiat; °quia summum necesse est eis ut eam servent
contra omnes legales, non propter eam pacem retineant ®ser-
vicium dominorum suorum, nec rectitudines, si quas debent
vicinis suis; quia non est dignus habere pacem qui non diligit
observare pacem. Quod si confidens in pace quam habert,


villarum, qui adducant secum de unaquaque villa tres vel quatuor de
melioribus hominibus, quibus congregatis ostendatur totum inventum
quicquid sit. Z. 1 Et si homo alicujus domini sit in cujus terra
inventum est hoc, et dominus ejus habeat consuetudines suas, scil.
sacham et socham, in curia domini sui teneat rectum: sin autem,
liberabit prefecto hundredi, si habere voluerit, cum bonis testibus.
Hk. 2 ubicumque Hz. Z. quocumque S&S. % Hi L. et editt. 4in
Hk, deest. ei fideles exsistant L. et editt. S5ideoque Hk L. &ser-
vicia Hk. L.


454 LEGES REGIS EDWARDI CONFESSORIS.


per superbiam forisfecerit alicui, restauret dampnum et iterum
tantundem, quod Angli vocant ‘astrikibthet forisfacturam.


ITEM QUOMODO VEL QUID EMENDARE SOLEBANT,
QUID REGI, QUID DECANO DABUNT, QUI PACEM
REGIS INFRINGEBANT.


xxv. Pax data manu regis, et vil. diebus quibus primum
coronatus est, et pax dictorum festorum, et pax per breve
regis, unam mensuram habent emendacionis, et hoc judicio,
quod majus habetur in scira, ubi pax fuerit fracta; verbi
gracia, in Danelaga per xvi. hundreda, qui numerus complet
septies xx. libras et 1111.3; forisfacturam enim hundredi Dani et
Norwicenses vocabant viu. libras.3 Nec hoe sine causa: de
istis enim habet rex centum solid, *et comes comitatus L., qui
tertium denarium habet de forisfacturis. Decanus autem®
reliquos xX., preter pacem regis, scilicet de pace data manu
regis, et de primo coronatu, et de supradictis festis: Natali,
Pascha, Pentecoste.


QUARE FRIDBORGI CONSTITUTI SUNT.


xxvii. Cum autem viderunt quod aliqui stulti libenter
forisfaciebant erga vicinos suos, sapienciores ceperunt consilium
inter se, quomodo eos reprimerent, et sic imposuerunt justicia-
rios super quosque x. fridborgos, quos decanos possumus di-
cere, Anglice autem °tyenpe heued vocati sunt, hoc est caput x.
Isti autem inter villas, imter vicinos tractabant causas, et
secundum quod forisfacture erant, emendaciones et 7ordinaciones
faciebant, videlicet, de pascuis, de pratis, de messibus, de
Scertacionibus inter vicinos, et de multis hujusmodi que fre-
quenter insurgunt.


ITEM.


xxix. Cum autem majores cause insurgebant, referebant
eas ad alios majores °justiciarios, quos sapientes supradicti
super eos constituerant, scilicet, super x. decanos, quos pos-


1 atrihilthet Hk. astrihilthet Z. 2diit Hk. add. 3 multiplicatis igitur
VIII. per xvit. faciunt c. et xz1ui. LZ. add. ‘4in L. deest. 5 epis-
copi, in cujus decanatu pax fracta fuerit Z. add. 6 tentefe S.
tyenpe heued Hk. /7concordaciones Hk. ZL. 8 certacionibus HA.
litigacionibus Z. 8 justiciarios HR.L. interciarios S. }%super
Ak. L. per 8.


LEGES REGIS EDWARDI CONFESSORIS. 455


sumus vocare centenarios, quia super centum fridborgos judi-
cabant,


DE HUNDREDIS ET WAPENTAGIIS, ET QUARE
WAPENTAC VOCATUR.


xxx. Everwichescire, Nicholescire, Notingehamscire, Leices-
trescire, Norhamtunescire, et usque ad Watlingestrete, et vil.
milliaria ultra Watlingestrete, sub lege Anglorum. Et quod
‘alii vocant hundredum, supradicti comitatus vocant wapenta-
gium, et hoc non sine causa: ?cum enim aliquis accipiebat
prefecturam wapentagii, die constituto, conveniebant omnes
majores contra eum in loco ubi soliti erant congregari, et,
descendente eo de equo suo, omnes assurgebant contra eum,
et ipse erigebat lanceam suam in altum, et omnes de lanceis
suis tangebant hastam ejus, et sic confirmabant se sibi. Et
de armis, quia arma vocant wappa, et taccare, quod est con-
firmare.”


DE TREINGIS ET WAPENTAGIIS ET HUNDREDIS.


xxxI. Erant et alie potestates super wapentagiis quas tre-
hingas vocabant, scilicet, terciam partem provincie, et qui super
ipsam dominabantur, trehingref, ad quos deferebantur cause
quando non poterant diffiniri in wapentagiis. Et quod Angli
vocabant hundredum, isti vocant wapentagium. Et quod illi
vocabant tria hundreda, vel 1111. vel plura, isti vocabant tre-
hing. Et quod trehinge non poterat diffiniri, in scira
‘servabatur.


1 Angli HAL. alii S. 2’cum quis accipiebat prefecturam wapentagii,
die statuto in loco ubi consueverant congregari, omnes majores natu
contra eum conveniebant, et, descendente eo de equo suo, omnes
assurgebant ei. Ipse vero erecta lancea sua, ab omnibus, secundum
morem, foedus accipiebat: omnes enim quotquot venissent cum
Janceis suis ipsius hastam tangebant, et ita se confirmabant per
contactum armorum, pace palam concessa. Anglice vero arma
vocantur wapen, et taccare confirmare, quasi armorum confirmacio,
vel ut magis expresse, secundum linguam Anglicam, dicamus wa-
pentac, i.e. armorum tactus: wapen enim arma sonat; tac tactus est.
Quamobrem potest cognosci quod hac de causa totus ille conventus
dicitur wapentac, eo quod per tactum armorum suorum ad invicem
confeederate sunt. Z. In quibusdam vero provinciis Anglice vo-
cabatur led, quod isti dicunt tithinge. Z.add. 4ferebatur Z.


456 LEGES REGIS EDWARDI CONFESSORIS.


QUID SIT PREPOSITUS ET PREFECTURA, ET QUID
ALDERMAN, QUI LATINE SENIOR POPULI SONAT,
ET QUAM MULTIPLICITER VOCABULUM PREPO-
SITI DISTENDITUR.


xxx. Greve autem nomen est potestatis; apud nos autem
nichil melius videtur esse quam prefectura. Est enim multi-
plex nomen; greve enim dicitur de scira, de wapentagiis, de
hundredo, de burgis, de villis; et videtur nobis compositum esse
e grid Anglice, quod est pax Latine, et ve Latine, videlicet
quod debet facere grid, i.e. pacem, ex illis qui inferunt in
terram ve, i.e. miseriam vel dolorem, summa auctoritate Do-
mini nostri Jesu Christi dicentis, ‘Ve tibi Bethsaida, ve tibi
Corozaim.’ Frisones et Flandrenses comites suos meregrave
vocant, quasi majores vel bonos pacificos; et sicut modo vo-
cantur greves, qui habent prefecturas super alios, ita tune
temporis vocabantur eldereman, non propter senectutem, sed
propter sapienciam.*


LEGES DANORUM.


xxx. Erat eciam lex Danorum, Northfolc, Suthfole, Cante-
brugescire, "que habebat in emendacionem forisfacture ubi


1 scire oportet quid Hk.


@ [Capitulum sequens, textui Lambardiano interpolatum, ne forte
ab aliquo desideraretur, visum est hic subjungere.


“DE HERETOCHIIS, ete.


«“ Erant et alie potestates et dignitates per provincias et patrias
universas, et per singulos comitatus tocius regni predicti constitute,
qui heretoches apud Anglos vocabantur; scil. barones, nobiles, et
insignes sapientes, et fideles, et animosi: Latine vero dicebantur
ductores exercitus, apud Gallos capitales constabularii vel mares-
challi exercitus. Illi vero ordinabant acies densissimas in preliis,
et alas constituebant prout decuit, et prout melius eis visum fuit, ad
honorem corone et ad utilitatem regni. Isti vero viri eligebantur
per commune consilium pro communi utilitate regni, per provincias
et patrias universas, et per singulos comitatus in pleno folemote, sicut
et vicecomites provinciarum et comitatum eligi debent: ita quod in
quolibet comitatu semper fuit unus heretoch per eleccionem electus,
ad conducendum exercitum comitatus sui, juxta preceptum domini
regis, ad honorem et utilitatem corone regni predicti, semper cum
opus adfuerit in regno. Item qui fugielt a domino vel socio suo, pro
timiditate belli vel mortis, in conduccione heretochii sui in expedi-


LEGES REGIS EDWARDI CONFESSORIS. 457


supradicti comitatus habebant xvi. hundreda, isti x. et di-
midium. Et hoc affinitate Saxonum, quia tunc temporis major
emendacio forisfacture Saxonum erat quater 'xx. lib et mu.
In omnibus aliis causis et forisfacturis eandem legem habebant
cum supradictis Norwensibus.


lxtiv. Lamb.


cione navali vel terrestri, perdat omne quod suum est, et suam ipsius
vitam, et manus mittat dominus ad terram quam ei antea dederat.
Et si terram hereditariam habeat, ipsa in manus regis transeat. Et
qui in bello ante dominum suum ceciderit, sit hoc in terra, sit alibi,
sint ei relevaciones condonate, et habeant heredes ejus pecuniam et
terram ejus sine aliqua diminucione, et recte dividant inter se. Et
qui terram acquietatam habet comitatus testimonio, habeat sine que-
rela in die, et post diem ad dandum ei quem plus amavit. Et omnis
sit venacione sua dignus in nemore, in campo, in dominio suo: et
abstineat omnis homo a venariis regis, ubicumque pacem eis habere
voluerit, super plenam witam, i.e. forisfacturam. Et omnis homo
pacem habeat eundo ad gemotum, vel rediens de gemoto, nisi pro-
batus fur fuerit. Et qui leges apostabit, si fuerit Anglicus, vel Dacus,
vel Waliscus, vel Albanicus, vel insulicola, were sue reus sit apud
regem, et si secundo id faciat, reddat bis weram suam; et si quid
addat tercio, reus sit omnium que habebit. Item aliud folkmote esse
debet in quolibet comitatu, per provincias et patrias tocius regni
predicti universas, scil. in capite kal. Octob. ad providendum ibi quis
erit vicecomes, et qui erunt eorum heretochii, et ad audiendum ibi
justa eorum precepta, consilio et assensu procerum, et judicio folkes-
mote. Et ut warde juste et rite observentur, et ut caute deinceps
incendiis sibi illic provideant, cum ad propria redibunt. Ita vero bis
folkemote singulis annis semper celebrari debet per annum per uni-
versos comitatus, et provincias, et patrias universas tocius regni pre-
dicti, pro pace, et stabilitate, et confirmacione regni, ut predictum
est, super plenam witam.’ Debet autem scyremotum bis, hundreda et
wapentachia duodecies in anno :congregari, et septem diebus antea
submoniri, nisi publicum commodum vel dominica regis necessitas
terminum preveniat. Debet eciam in Londofi, que caput est regni
et legum, semper curia domini regis singulis septimanis die Lune
hustingis sedere et teneri, Fundata enim erat olim et edificata ad
instar, et ad modum, et in memoriam veteris magne Troie, et usque
in hodiernum diem, leges, et jura, et dignitates, libertates, regiasque
consuetudines antique magne Troie in se continet. In ea itaque
supersunt ardua compota, et ambigua placita corone, et curie domini
regis tocius regni predicti, que hucusque et consuetudines suas una
semper inviolabilitate conservat, ubicunque ipse rex fuerit, sive in
expedicione, sive alibi, propter fatigacionem gencium et populoram
regni, juxta veteres consuetudines bonorum patrum, et predecessorum,
et omnium principum, et procerum, et sapientum seniorum tocius
regni predicti.”


In ms. Z£. textus a titulo xxx11°. usque ad xxxvi™, deest.— Z.]


458 LEGES REGIS EDWARDI CONFESSORIS.


QUOD A REGE ANGLORUM WILLELMO AUCTORIZATA
EST LEX REGIS EDWARDI.


XxxIVv. Quam cum ipse Willelmus rex audivit et alias leges
de regno, maxime appreciatus est eam, et voluit ut ipsa obser-
varetur per totum regnum; quia dicebat, quod antecessores sui
et 'omnium de Normannia’ de Norweia venerunt, et legem
eorum, cum honesta erat, bene deberent sequi, cum profundior
et honestior sit omnibus aliis, scilicet, Britonum, Anglorum,
Pictorum. Sed omnes compatriote qui leges narraverunt
summopere precati sunt eum, ut permitteret eis leges et con-
suetudines habere cum quibus vixerant antecessores eorum, et
ipsi nati sunt, quia durum erat eis suscipere leges, et judicare
de eis quas nesciebant. Et hoc eciam precati sunt eum, pro
anima regis ASdwardi, qui sibi concesserat regnum, et cujus
erant leges, nec aliorum exterorum. Tandem consilio et pre-
catu baronum adquievit, et sic auctorizate sunt leges regis
Edwardi, que prius adinvente et constitute fuerunt tempore
regis Addgari, avi sui; sed post mortem ejus dimisse sunt
annis ?Lx, et vin.’

idwardus, filius ejus, natus de uxore, regnavit quatuor
annis, xvi. ebdomatibus minus. Quo occiso innocente, dolo
noverce sue, propter innocentem vitam suam castam et elemo-
sinis plenam, interfeccionem ejus pro martirio reputaverunt, ei
et vocaverunt Sanctum. Post Aéldredus, frater ejus, regnum
suscepit, regnavitque in multis periculis xxx. et vil. annis.
Post *ldredum filius ejus A&dmundus, cui cognomen erat
Hirenside, i. latus ferreum, rx. fere mensibus regnavit, in
quibus viriliter quinquies contra Danorum regem Chnutum
dimicavit. Pacto vero ultimo bello concordiam inter se
fecerunt. Regnum quoque Anglie diviserunt ; dimidium
Chnuto, et dimidium Aidmundo, ea ‘condicione, ut si quis
eorum superviveret, alius eorum totum possideret, nec interim
aliquis eorum coronaretur. Sed hac convencione, cunctis
primatibus Anglie consencientibus, firmata, post primum men-
sem, /Edmundus ex hac luce, proh dolor, subtrahitur. Chnutus
vero totum suscepit Anglie regnum, regnavitque fere x. et
vill. annis. Quo mortuo, Haraldus, falso pene ab omnibus
*filius ejus’ putatus, successit, et v. annis regnavit. Post quem


V et fere omnium baronum Normannie Hk, 2 xivit. Hh
3 JEdelredum Hh. 4divisione Hk, add. ex Hh.


LEGES REGIS EDWARDI CONFESSORIS. 459


Hardechnutus, filius Chnuti ex Alfueua Imme, sorore * Roberti
comitis Normannie, et matre Edwardi regis, 11. annis, x11. eb-
domatibus minus regnavit: et sic completi sunt ‘Lx. et vim.
anni’ dimissis legibus. Sed postquam AZdwardus rex venit
ad regnum, consilio baronum regni, legem omissam, quia
honesta videbatur eis, et quia avus ejus eam constituerat; fecit
eam reparare et confirmare, et sic vocata est Jex regis Acdwardi,
que prius dimissa erat a morte Aidgari avi sui usque ad tempus
suum.


DE ADVENTU SCE MARGARETE, MATRIS REGIS SCO-
CIE, ET ADGARI ADELING, FRATRIS EJUS, IN
ANGLIAM, DE QUO SCS EDWARDUS REX HERE-
DEM SUUM FACERE NOLUIT, ET POSTEA WILLEL-
MUM DUCEM HEREDEM SUUM FECIT, EO QUOD
DE ZDGARO FACERE NEQUIVIT.


xxxv. Iste supradictus Edmundus habuit filium quendam qui
vocatus est Aidwardus; qui mortuo patre timore* aufugit de
ista terra usque ad terram Rugorum, quam nos vocamus
Russeiam, quem rex ipsius terre, Malesclodus nomine, ut
audivit, et intellexit quis esset et unde esset, honeste eum
retinuit. Et ipse Edwardus accepit ibi uxorem nobili genere,
de qua ortus est ei Aidgarus Epeling, et Margareta regina
Scocie, et °Christiana soror ejus; cui *Christiane rex Edwardus
dedit terram quam habuit postea Radulfus de Limeseia, propter
quem misit Rex Edwardus, avunculus ejus, et fecit eum ad se
venire. Ipse autem et uxor ejus non multo tempore vixerunt
post adventum eorum. Edgarum filium eorum secum retinuit
et nutrivit pro filio. Quia vero heredem putabat eum facere,
nominavit eum AMpeling, quod nos dicimus domicellum ; sed nos
de pluribus, quia filios baronum vocamus domicellos; Angli
autem nullum preter filios regum vocant. Quod si expressius
volumus dicere, dicemus, quod in quadam parte Saxonie ling
imago dicebatur, ANdela Anglice nobilis, quod conjunctum
Epeling, i. nobilis imago; unde eciam occidentales Saxonici,
scilicet Execestre, habent in proverbio summi despectus, quod
summa ira commotus, unus vocat alterum hinderling, i. ab
omni honestate dejectum.


xvi. anni et fereduo menses Hk.  ? regis Canuti add, Hk.
3Cristina Hk.  4Cristine Hh.


* I, Ricardi.


460 LEGES REGIS EDWARDI CONFESSORIS.


Rex autem Edwardus, quia cognovit nequiciam gentis sue,
et maxime filiorum Goduuini, scilicet, Haraldi, Tosti, Gurthi,
Leofwini, comperiit quod non posset esse stabile vel firmum de
/Edgaro, et adoptavit Willelmum ducem Normannorum, filium
? Roberti, avunculi sui, qui postea, auxiliante Deo, conquisivit
rectum suum bello contra supradictum Haraldum.


DE LATRONIBUS INTERFECTIS PRO LATROCINIO.


xxxvi. Si post justiciam factam fecerit aliquis clamorem ad
justiciarium, quod injuste interfectus sit, et quod injuste jacet
inter latrones; et si dixerit, quod velit hoc diracionare, det
vadimonium et plegios. Et detur ei terminus unius mensis,
ut habeat parentes interfecti ex utraque parte generis sui, sci-
licet, ex parte patris x11, et ex parte matris vi. Kt si isti
x. et vill. vellent diracionare cum illo qui prius fecerat cla-
morem, et dederat vadimonium, det quisque eorum vadimo-
nium cum gladio, et inveniat plegios tales qui possint reddere
forisfacturam, i. ?waram suam: si non possunt diracionare.
Et tunc interfector det vadimonium suum, et inveniat. plegios,
quod juste interfectus est, et juste jacet inter latrones secun-
dum legem, sicut latro. Et tune primum dicat quo latrocinio
et qua racione interfectus sit. Et si cognoverit quod fuit
captus vivus, nominet justiciarium et judices et testes de vici-
nis legales. Et si ipsi °warantizabunt eum quod juste sit facta
justicia de eo pro suo latrocinio, quietus erit interfector, et
ipsi qui fecerant clamorem emendent sua vadimonia. Quod
si sibi defecerint judices et testes, et diracionatum fuerit quod
injuste interfectus sit, interfector dabit vadimonium justicie
episcopi, et fidejussores ‘invenient rectum persequendi.” Et
postea justicia episcopi faciat venire processionem cum sacer-
dote induto alba ‘et manipulo’ et stola et clericis in suppelliciis,
cum aqua benedicta et cruce et candelabris et thuribulo cum
igne et incenso; et sic extrahant mortuum a terra ponentes
in feretrum, et deportent eum ad ecclesiam. Cantata missa
et sancto servicio, interrent eum sicut Christianum. Et ab
ipso die in °xv1. diebus reddat Sinterfector episcopo forisfacturas
tres; unam, quia legalem injuste pro latrone interfecit; alteram,
quia fratrem suum pro latrone interravit, quod Angli dicunt


'Ricardi Hk. 2gucram Hk. %guarentizent Hk. 4’ L. add.
5v1. 8 6 L. add.


LEGES REGIS EDWARDI CONFESSORIS. 461


his emcristen; terciam, quia vadimonium ad diracionandum se
dedit, et non potuit.


DE USURARIIS.


xxxvil. Usurarios eciam defendit Edwardus, ne esset aliquis
in regno suo. Et si aliquis inde probatus esset, omnes posses-
siones suas perderet, et pro exlege haberetur. Hoc autem
dicebat, sepe se audisse in curia Regis Francorum, dum ibi
moratus. esset, nec immerito, usura enim summa radix viciorum
interpretatur.


DE ANIMALIBUS VIVIS ET PANNIS VETERIBUS
EMENDIS.


xxxvu. Defensum erat eciam in lege, ne aliquis emat vivum
animal vel pannum usatum sine plegiis et bonis testibus. Et
si fuerit aliquod opus aureum vel argenteum, unde ‘emptor
debeat dubitare, non ematur preter aurifabros et monetarios.
Et si ipsi viderint quod sit de ecclesia vel de thesauris, non
ematur sine plegiis, Et si venditor non potest habere plegios,
retineatur cum *pecunia donec veniat dominus ejus, aut quilibet
alius, qui juste possit eum warantizare. Quod si aliter aliquis
emerit, quod stulte emit perdat et forisfacturam, et postea
inquirat justicia per lagemannos, et per meliores homines de
burgo vel hundredo vel villa, ubi emptor ipse manserit, de
quali vita ipse esset, et si antea audierint eum calumpniari de
exlegalitate. Quod si testati fuerint eum de exlegalitate,
expurget se judicio comitatus, quod venditorem nesciebat
reum de hac vendicione, nec de alia aliqua exlegalitate. Et
si sciat venditorem, quis sit et ubi sit, dicat, et justicia
querat eum ad faciendam justiciam; et si inveniri non poterit
utlagetur.


DE OCCISIONIBUS ANIMALIUM CONTRA NATALE.


XxxIx. Cum autem dictum est, quod non emerent animalia
preter plegios, clamaverunt macecrarii, quos Angli vocant
fleismangeres, de civitatibus et burgis, quod quaque die
oportebat eos emere animalia, occidere et vendere.2 Clamabant


lemptor Z. et editt. venditor S. 2censu Z. nam in occisione
animalium erat vita eorum LZ. add.


462 LEGES REGIS EDWARDI CONFESSORIS.


eciam cives et burgenses pro consuetudinibus suis, quod circa
festum Sancti Martini *emebant animalia’ sine plegiis, ad
faciendas suas occisiones contra Natale Domini, quas consue-
tudines justas et sapienter ductas non auferimus eis, tamen in
mercatis emptis cum testibus et cognicione venditorum.*


*Expliciunt leges Sancti Edwardi, primo adinvente per
Edgarum, avum suum, et per Willelmum, Conquestorem Anglie,
confirmate, et prius tempore Cnutonis Regis approbate.’


LIBERTAS CIVITATUM.


1. Sciendum est enim quod infra trium miliarium spacium,
ex omni parte extra civitatem, non debet homo alterum re-
tinere vel impedire, nec eciam cum eo mercatum agere, si
in pace civitatis ad eam venire voluerit. Sed cum in civitatem
pervenerit, tunc sit ei mercatum commune tam pauperi quam
diviti.


DE LIBERTATE CIVIUM LUNDONIENSIUM.


11 Sciendum item est, quod homo qui de curia sit regis vel
baronum in domo alicujus civis Londonie 111. vel liberacione
vel consuetudine, nisi gratis hospitis hospitari non debet. Si
enim vim hospitandi ei in domo sua intulerit, ibique ab hospite
occisus fuerit, eligat hospes vi. de parentibus suis, et juret
septimus, quia hac de causa predicta eum occiderit. Sicque a
nece defuncti versus regem et parentes dominosque defuncti
quietus remanebit.


ITEM DE LONDONIA.


1. Sciendum est itaque quia civis Londoniensis extra civi-
tatis muros, versus regem nec versus alium placitare debet.


Y consueverant animalia in foro mercari Z. 2” L. add.


a [Hic desinunt codd. Hk. et Z. Que proxime sequuntur capitula
sunt ex Ms. S., ubi legibus Confessoris nullo intervallo annectuntur.


—T)


LEGES REGIS EDWARDI CONFESSORIS. 463


Si enim forisfacturam fecerit, que pecunia placari posset, ad
magis quam ad suum werre judicari non debet, scil. c. solid.


ITEM DE LONDONIA.


tv. Vicecomites civitatis pecuniam alicujus detinere non pre-
sumant, nec habeant aliquem in socha manentem ad regis
placita invitare, vel justiciam de eo facere, donec custos illius
soche in qua manserit de recto tenendo vicecomiti defecerit,
nisi eum in regis socha aperte et patenter forisfacientem
invenerit.


ITEM DE LONDONIA.


v. Civis iterum ad folkemoth, vel ad husteng, si sine invita-
cione placitandi venerit, non habet ibi alicui de qualibus
querela respondere nisi voluerit.


ITEM.


vi. Civis iterum de Londonia si pro inopia terram suam
venumdare voluerit, nec filius nec parentes ejus vetare poterunt,
nisi eam ad concessum ipsius mercari voluerint.


UNDE SUPRA.


vit. Item si civis Londonie terram aliquam per annum et
diem sine calumpnia tenuerit, alicui in civitate manenti re-
spondere non debet, nisi qui terram illam post calumpniatus
fuerit, talis etatis tune fuerit quod calumpniari eam nescierit,
vel nisi langor impediat, aut in patria hac non fuerit.


ITEM DE LONDONIA.


vit. Mercator itaque foranus, postquam civitatem introierit,
quocumque placuerit ei hospitetur. Sed videat ne ad in-
cisionem merces suas vendat, ut si fulco tinctos attulerit, non
minus duodena simul vendat. Et si piper vel cuminum vel
gingiber vel alumen vel brasit vel laco vel thus attulerit, non
minus quam xxv. libras simul vendat. Si vero zonas attulerit,
non minus vendat simul quam unum mille. Et si pannos de
seia vel lana vel lino attulerit, videat ne incidat, sed integros
vendat. Si vero ceram attulerit, non minus vendat quam
unum quartanum.


464 LEGES REGIS EDWARDI CONFESSORIS.


Mercator itaque foranus nequit pannum madidum emere
vel tincturam in urbe facere, vel operam aliquam qui ad cive
operari pertineat.


ITEM.


1x. Nequit iterum mercator foranus cum socio suo infra
civitatem mercatum aliquem facere ad revendendum illud in
civitate, nec aliquem mercatum faciendum nequit civi perve-
nire, nec magis in urbe prehendinare poterit.


THE LAWS


OF


KING WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR.


« U, baillie ?


#1. XL.
#le1L.souz


THE LAWS


OF


KING WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR:


I.


>Cez sunt les leis e les custumes que li reis Witt grantad al
pople de Engleterre, apres le cunquest de Ja terre: iceles
meimes que li reis Edward, sun cusin, tint deuant lui.


1. Ceo est a sauer: Pais a seinte iglise. De quel forfeit que
hom fet oust, e il poust uenir a seinte iglise, oust pais de uie e
de menbre. E si aucuns meist main en celui ki la mere iglise
requereit, si ceo fust u euesque, u abeie, u iglise de religiun,
rendist ceo quil aureit pris, e cent souz le forfeit; e de mere
iglise de parosse, xx. souz; e de chapele, x. souz.


1. E ki tenfreint [la] pais le rei, en Merchene Jahe, cent
souz les amendes. Autresi de hemfare et de agwait purpense.
Icel plait afert a la curune le rei. E si aucuns uescunte u
prouost mesfait as humes de sa *ende, e de ceo seit ateint
deuant iustise, le forfeit est a duble de ceo que auter fust forfeit.
Et ki en Dene lahe enfreint la pais le rei, set uint liures e quatre
les amendes; et les forfez le rei ki aferent al uescunte, *L. souz
en Merchene lahe, *xu. souz e” en Westsexene lahe. E cil
francs hom ki ad e sache e soche, e toll e tem, e infangentheof,
se il est enplaide, e il seit mis en forfeit el cunte, afert al os


1 ys. enfreit


* [William duke of Normandy ascended the throne of England, on
the death of Harold, in the year 1066, and died in 1087.—7.]


THE LAWS


OF


KING WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR.*


1,


> Iste sunt leges et consuetudines, quas Willielmus rex, post
adquisicionem Anglie, omni populo Anglorum concessit
tenendas; eedem videlicet, quas predecessor suus et cog-
natus, Edwardus rex, servavit in Anglorum regno.


DE PACE ET IMMUNITATE ECCLESIE.


1. Pacem et immunitatem ecclesie sancte concessimus.
Cujuscumque criminis reus, si ad ecclesiam confugerit, pacem
habeat vite et membrorum. Quod si quis in eum manus inje-
cerit violentas, et ecclesie immunitatem fregerit, in primis
restituat plenarie ablata, et insuper de forisfacto; si cathedralis
fuerit ecclesia, vel cenobium, vel quecumque religiosorum
ecclesia, centum solid; si matrix ecclesia parochialis, xx. solid ;
si capella, x. solid.


DE PACE REGIA.


ut. Qui pacem regiam infregerit, secundum Merchenalahe,
c. solid pene succumbet. Similis de hamfare et insidiis preco-
gitatis pena delinquentem manet. Secundum Denelahe pena
infracte pacis regie cxLut1. libi, et forisfactum regis, quod ad
vicecomitem pertinet, scilicet xu. solid in Merchenelahe, et L.
solit in Westsaxenelahe. Quod si vicecomes vel * prepositus
convictus fuerit” coram justitia? regis erga homines sue ballie
deliquisse, duplo forisfactum majus reportabit quam alii in pari
delicto. Si quis eorum, qui habent soche et sache et tol et
them et infangenetheof, implacitetur in comitatu, et in forisfac-


2” us. prepositi convicti fuerint


> [The French text is from Hk.; the Latin from S. The defi-
ciencies of #2., within brackets, are supplied from Ingulph and the
other printed copies.—7Z.]


fo ee ee


*q,un.


468 THE LAWS OF KING


le uescunte en Dene lahe xu. ores: e de cel hume ki ceste fran-
chise nen ad, xxx. ores. De cez xxxii., auerad le uescunte
al os le rei, x. ores, e cil ki le plait auerad deredne uers lui,
x11. ores; e le seinur en ki fiu il meindra, les x. ores. Ceo est
en Dene lahe.


111. La custume en Merchene lahe est: si aucuns est apele de
larrecin u de roberie, e il seit pleui a uenir deuant iustise, e il
sen fuie dedenz sun plege, il auerad terme un meis e un iur de
querre Je; e sil le pot truuer dedenz le terme, sil merra a Ja
justice: e sil nel pot truuer, si iurra sei duzime main, que al
hure quil le pleui, Jarrun nel sout, ne par lui sen est fuid, ne
auer nel pot. Dunc rendrad le chatel dunt il est retez, e xx.
souz pur la teste, e 1111. defi [al] ceper, e une maille pur la
besche, e x. sot al rei. EE en Westsexene lahe, c. sol; xx. sot
al clamif pur la teste, e u111. lib al rei. En Dene lahe, vu. lib
le forfeit, les xx. sot pur la teste, les vir. lib al rei. E sil pot
dedenz un an e un iur truuer le larrun, e amener a iustise, si
lui rendra cil les xx. sof, kis auerad oud, sin ert feite la iustise
del larrun.


1v. Cil ki prendra larrun senz siwte e senz cri que cil enlest
a ki il auera le damage fait, e il uienge apres, si est resun quil
duinse x. sot de hengwite, e si face la iustise a la primere
deuise. E sil passe la deuise senz le cunged a la iustise, si est
forfeit de x. sol.


v. Cil ki aueir rescut, u cheuals, u bos, u uaches, u berbiz,
u pors, que est forfeng apele en Engleis, cil kis claimed durrad
[al prouost] pur la rescussiun vitt. defi; ia tant ni ait, mes quil
i oust cent al maille, ne durrad que vu. defi; e pur *111. pors,
1. deli; e pur 1. berbiz, 1. defi, e issi tresque a vir. pur chas-
cune, I. dei; ne ia tant ni auerad, ne durrad que vi. dei. E
durrad guuage, e truuerad plege, que si autre uienge a prof


WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR. 469


tum cadat, erit ejus forisfactum ad opus vicecomitis x1. ores in
Danelahe: aliorum autem, qui non habent hance libertatem,
erit forisfactum in simili casu xxx11. ores; de quibus vicecomes
ad opus regium x. ores accipiet, et ei qui in eam optinet xu.
ores restituentur: residuum autem, i.e. x. ores, ad dominum
in cujus feudo manet, deveniet, secundum Danelahe.


DE PLEGIATIS FUGIENTIBUS.


mm. Si quis appellatus de Jatrocinio vel roberia plegiatur ad
habendum ad justiciam, et interim fugerit, in Merchenelahe
dabitur plegio respectus unius mensis et unius diei, querendi
fugitivum, quem si infra terminum prescriptum invenerit, jus-
ticie offerat; si minus, jurabit x11*. manu quod, hora qua eum
plegiavit, nescivit quod latro esset, quod consilio aut ope sua
non fugerit, et quod eum habere non potest ad justiciam.
Deinde catallum reddet pro quo fuit attachiatus, et xx. sot pro
capite fugitivi, et 111. dei cippi custodi, et ob pro fossorio, et
insuper regi xt. sot. Juxta Westsaxenelahe, in tali casu dabit
c. solif pro capite, illi qui clamium prosecutus est, et regi 1111.
libras. At vero in Denelahe, in tali casu, forisfactum est vi.
librarum, quarum vil. regis erunt, octava autem pro capite
calumpniati dabitur. Quod si infra annum et diem poterit
latronem repertum justicie offerre, reddetur ei libra, quam pro
capite calumpnians accepit, et de latrone justicia fiet.


DE LATRONE CAPTO SINE UTHESIO.


1y. Si quis latronem sive furem, sine clamore et insecucione
ejus cui dampnum factum est, ceperit, et captum ultra duxerit,
dabit x. solid de henwite, et ad primam divisam faciet de eo
justiciam. Quod si eum ultra primam divisam sine justiciarii
licencia duxerit, erit in forisfacto x. sot.


DE AVERIIS QUOS PREPOSITUS HUNDREDI RESTARE
FECERIT.


v. Si preepositus hundredi equos, aut boves, aut oves, aut
porcos, vel cujuscumque generis averia vagancia restare fecerit ;
is qui veniens sua clamaverit, dabit preposito pro ove de-
narium, pro porco 11. denaf, pro bove vel equo i. ad Ita
tamen ut ultra vit. denai non tribuat, quotquot averia sibi
restitui petierit. Dabit insuper wagium, et plegios inveniet,
quod si quis alius infra annum et diem veniens, illa averia


* 1. heals-
fange.


* Ll, lecfeoh
or lecefeoh.


470 THE LAWS OF KING


dedenz Jan e le iur pur laueir demander, quil ait a dreit en la
curt celui kil aueit rescus.


vi. Autersi de aueir adire, e autersi de truueure, seit mustred
de treis parz del uisned, quil ait testimonie de la truueure.
E si aucuns uienged auant pur clamer la chose, duinst guuage
e truist plege, que si auter le cleimt dedenz Jan e un iur, quil
lait a dreit en la curt celui kil auera truued.


vit. Si hom ocist auter, e il seit cunuissant, e il deiue faire
les amendes, durrad de sa manbote al seinur, pur le franch
hume x. sol, e pur le serf xx. sol.


vi. La were del thein xx. lié in Merchene lahe; xxv. li6 in
Westsexene lahe. 11a were del uilain c. sot, en Merchene lahe,
e ensement en Westsexene.


1x. De la were, primereinement rendrad lom del *hamsochne
a la uedue e as orfenins x. sot, e le surplus Jes parenz e les
orfenins partent entre eus. En la were purra il rendre cheual
kiad la coille pur xx. sol, e tor pur x. sot, e uer pur v. sol.


x. Si hom fait plaie en auter e il deiue faire les amendes,
primereinement lui rende *sun *lecheof: e li plaez iurra sur
seinz, que pur meins nel pot feire, ne pur haur si cher nel fist.
De sarbote, ceo est de la dulur—Si la plaie lui uient el uis en
descuuert, al pouz tuteueies vi. deh; u en la teste u en auter
liu u ele seit cuuerte, al pouz tuteueies m1. den. Et de tanz
os cum lom trait de la plaie, al os tuteueies mu. def. Puis al
acordement, si lui metera auant honurs, e iurra que sil Iui oust
fai ceo quil lui ad fet, e sun quor lui purportast e sun cunseil
lui dunast, prendreit de lui ceo que offert ad a lui.


1 ys, En Ia 2ms. sein


WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR. 471


tanquam sua quesierit, habebit ea ad justiciam ubi habere
debet.


DE AVERIO ERRANTE VEL RE INVENTA.


vi. Si quis averium errans recollegerit, vel rem quamcumque
invenerit, denunciet illud per tres partes visneti, villis proximis,
ut sint in testimonium inventi. Quod si quis venerit, rem ut
suam clamans, det vadium et plegios, quod eam judicio sistet, si
quis infra annum et diem eandem requisierit, et suum recipiat.


DE HOMICIDHS.


vir. Si quis convictus vel confessus fuerit in jure, alium occi-
disse, dat were suum, et insuper domino occisi, manbote,
scilicet, pro homine libero x. sot, pro servo xx. solid.


DE WERE DIVERSORUM.


vir. Est autem were theni in Merchenalahe xx. libf; in
Westsaxenelahe, xxv. lib?: rustici autem, c. solid in Merchene-
lahe, et similiter in Westsaxenelahe.


QUID FIAT DE WERE.


1x. De were ergo pro occiso soluto, primo vidue x. soft
dentur, et residuum liberi et consanguinei inter se dividant.
1Poterit autem quis, in were solvendo, equum masculum non
castratum pro xx. sot dare, et taurum pro x. sol, et verrem
pro v. sol’


DE VULNERANTE ALIUM.


x. Si vulneraverit quis alium, et satisfacere debeat, in primis
reddat ei lichfe, quantum scilicet in curam vulneris impendit.
Jurabit tamen vulneratus, quod non potuit pro minori illud
curasse, nec quod in odium illius magis justo persolvit.
Deinde si plaga in discooperto faciei fuerit, semper ad unciam
* * * * * ri @ persolvet. Et si ossa abstracta
?fuerint, quot ossa, totiens 111. @ dabit. Demum ad con-
cordiam plenam, honores illi exhibebit, jurabitque quod sibi,
si id intulisset quod ipse illi intulit, id in satisfactionem ab eo
susciperet quod ei offert, si hoc in animo sibi sederet et amici
consulerent.


V not in H. 2not in H.


472 THE LAWS OF KING


x1. Si ceo auient que aucuns coupe le puing al auter, u le
pie, si lui rendrad demi were sulune ceo quil est nez. Del
poucer, lui rendra la meite de la main. Del dei apres le
poucer, xv. sol, de sot Engleis que est apele quaer denier. Del
lung dei, xvi. sot. Del autre ki porte lanel, xv1. sot. Del
petit dei, v. sot. Del ungle, sil le couped de la charn, v. sot de
souz Engleis. Al ungle del petit dei, m1. dei.


xu. Cil ki autrui femme purgist, si forfeit sun were vers sun
seinur.


xt. Autersi ki faus iugement fait, pert sa were, sil ne pot
iurer sur seinz, que mieuz nel sout iuger.


xiv. Si hom apeled auter de larrecin, et il seit franchs hom,
e puissed auer testimonie de lealted, se escundirad par plein
serment. E ki blasme unt este, se escundirunt par serment
nume: ceo est a sauer par x11. humes Jeals par num, sil les
pot auer; si sen escundira sei duzime main. E si il auer nes
pot, si sen defende par iuise: e li apelur inrra sur lui par vil.
humes numez, sei siste main, que pur haur nel fait, ne pur
auter chose, se pur sun dreit nun purchacer.


xy. E si aucuns est apéled de mustier fruissir, u de chambre,
e il nait este en ariere blasme, sen escundisse par x1111. humes
Jeals numez, set duzime main. E sil ait auter fiede este
blasme, sen escundisse a treis duble, ceo est a saueir par
xu. leals humes numez, sei trente siste main. £ sil auer
nes pot, auta la iuise a treis duble, si cum il deust a treis
duble serment. E sil ad larrecin ca en ‘ariere amende, aut
al ewe.


1 ws. nariere


WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR. 473


DE MEMBRORUM MUTILACIONE.


x1. Si quis alteri vel manum vel pedem abscidit, dimidium
were illi reddat, juxta statum conditionis sue. Si pollicem,
reddat dimidium illius quod pro manu redderet. Si indicem,
xv. sot Anglicos (solidum Anglicum quatuor denarii consti-
tuunt). Si medium, xvi. sof. Si annularem, xvi. sot. Si
auricularem, v. sof. Si unguem pollicis, vel ancus digiti ma-
joris, v. sof. Si unguem auricularis, 1111. deii.


SI VIOLAT QUIS UXOREM PROXIMI.


xu. Si quis uxorem alterius legitimam violat, weram suam
domino suo reddat.


DE JUDICIO FALSO.


x11. Qui judicium falsum fecerit, were suum domino solvat,
nisi probare possit quod melius judicare nescivit.


DE APPELLATIS EX FURTO.


xiv. Si quis appellatur de furto, et sit liber homo, si bone
fame hucusque fuerit, et testimonium bonum habuerit, purgabit
se per juramentum suum. Quod si ante culpatus fuit, purgabit
se duodecima manu, et eligentur x1. legales homines ex
nomine, qui juramentum hoc faciant. Quod si defecerit, et
jurare cum eo noluerint, defendet se per judicium aque vel
ignis: et appellator per vit. legales homines ex nomine jurabit,
quod nec ex odio nec alia aliqua causa hoc ei imponit, nisi tamen
ut jus suum adipiscatur.


SI APPELLATUR QUIS DE VIOLATIONE ECCLESIE
VEL CAMERE.


xv. Si quis appellatur quod aut ecclesie immunitatem, aut
alicujus cameram infregerit, si hactenus de tali crimine immunis
fuerit et inculpabilis, purget se juramento, per x1. legales
homines nominatos manu duodecima. Quod si alias culpatus
fuerit, purget se juramento triplicato, id est per xivi. legales
homines nominatos, manu xxxvi*. Si eos habere non potest,
eat ad judicium triplex, si juramentum debuit exhiberi triplex.
Si furtum alii calumpniatus emendavit, eat ad judicium aque.


474 THE LAWS OF KING


xvi. Li erceuesque auerad de forfeiture x. sot en Merchene
lahe; e li eueske, xx. sot; e li*quens xx. sof; e li barun, x.
sot; e li socheman, xt. dei.


xvi. Cil ki ad aueir champestre xxx. den vaillant deit
duner le def Sein Piere. [Le seignur pur i111. defi que il
dourad, si erunt quites ses bordiers; e ses bovers e ses serianz.
Li burgeist, qui ad en soun propre chatel demi marc uailant,
deit doner le den Seint Pere.] Kien Dene lahe franch hume
est, sil ad demi marc uaillant daueir champestre, si duinst le
defi Sein Piere; e par le defi que li sire durrad, si erent quite
cil ki meindrunt en sun demeine. [Ki retient li dener Seint
Pere, le dener rendra per la iustice de seinte eglise, e xxx. dei
forfait. E siilen est plaide de la iustise Je rei, le forfait al
euesque xxx. defi, e al rei xx. solz.]


xvur. Cil ki purgist femme a force, forfeit ad les menbres.
Ki abat femme a terre pur fere lui force, la munte al seinur
x. sol.


xix. [Si alquns crieue loil al altre par auenture, quel ge seit,
si amendrad Lxx. sot de solz Engleis. E si la purnele y est
remis, si ne rendra lui que la meite.]


xx. De relief a cunte ki al rei afert—vin. cheuals enfrenez
e enseelez [les 1111], e 111. haubercs, e 1111. haumes, e m1.
escuz, e 1111. lances, e 11. espees. Les autres, 1. chaceurs e
i. palefreis a freins e a cheuestres.


De relief a barun—nu. cheuals, Jes 11. enfrenez e enseelez,
e 11. hauberes, e 11. haumes, e 11. escuz, e 11. espees, e 11. lances.
E les autres, 11. cheuals, un chaceur e un palefrei a freins e a
cheuestres,


Ms. queds


WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR. A475


DE FORISFACTURIS.


xvi. Archiepiscopus habebit de forisfactura in Merchenelahe,
XL. sol; episcopus, xx. sol; comes, xx. sof; baro, x. sot; vil-
Janus, xL. denaf.


DE DENARIIS SANCTI PETRI.


xvu1. Liber homo, qui habet possessionem campestrem ad
valenciam xxx. denaf, dabit denarium Sancti Petri. Dominus
autem pro uno denario adquietabit bordarios suos, et bubulcos,
et servientes. Burgensis, si habet de proprio catallo ad valen-
ciam dimidie marce, dabit dena Sancti Petri. In Denelahe,
homo liber qui habuerit catallum campestre ad valenciam
dimidie marce, dabit denat Sancti Petri; et per denarium
domini adquietabuntur omnes qui in dominico illius manent.
Qui vero denarium Sancti Petri detinet, cogetur censura eccle-
siastica illum solvere, et insuper xxx. d. pro forisfacto. Quod
si ante justicias regis placitum venerit, habebit rex xi. sot pro
forisfactura, et episcopus xxx. a.


DE VI OPPRIMENTIBUS.


xvut. Si quis mulierem vi oppresserit et violaverit, membro-
rum dampno punietur. Si vi ad terram prostraverit ut violaret,
domino x. sot reddat.


DE OCULO ERUTO.


xix. Si quis alicui oculum quocumque modo eruit, dabit illi
uxx. sol Anglicos. Quod si pupilla forte remanserit, dabit
dimidium tanti.


DE RELEVIIS.


xx. Relevium comitis, quod ad regem pertinet, vii. equi, ex
quibus 1111. erunt sellati et frenati, et cum eis 111. lorice, m1.
galee, 111. lancee, m1. scuta, et 1m. gladii. Alii mix. equi
erunt palefridi et chascuri, cum freinis et camis.


Relevium baronis 1111. equi, ex quibus duo sellati erunt et
frenati, et cum eis lorice due, scuta 11, galee 11, lancee due,
gladii nu. Reliquorum duorum equorum, alter erit palefridus,
alter chascur, cum frenis et 'camis.


lys, chamis


476 THE LAWS OF KING


De relief a uauassur a sun lige seinur—Deit estre quite par
le cheual sun pere, tel cum il out Je iur de sa mort, e par sun
haume, e par sun escu, e par sun haubere, e par sa lance, e par
sespee. E sil fust desaparaille quil noust cheual ne armes,
fuste quite par c. sot.


Del relief al uilain—Le meillur aueir quil auerad, u cheual,
u bof, u uache durrad a sun seinur: *e puis seient tuz les
uilains en franc plege.


[Cil qui tenent lur terre a cense, soit lur dreit relief a tant
cum la cense est’de un an.]


xxi. De entercement de uif aueir, kil uoldra clamer pur
embled, e uoldrad duner guuage e truuer plege a parsuire sun
apel; dunc estuuera celui kil auera entre mains, numer sun
guarant, sil lad; e sil nel ad, dunc numerad il sun heimelborch
[e ses testimonies], e ait les a iur e a terme, sil les ad; e li
enterceur Je mettrad en guage, sei siste main, e li auter le met-
trad en la main sun guarant, u a sun heimelborch le quel
quil auerad. Et sil nad guarant, ne haimelborch, e il ait les
testimonies quil le achatad al marche le rei, e quil ne set
sun guarant, ne sun plege, uif ne mort, ceo iurrad od ses testi-
monies od plein serment; si perdera sun chatel, sil testimonient
quil heimelborch enprist. E sil ne pot guarant ne testimonie
aueir, si perderad e parsoudrad, e pert sun aueir uers sun
seinur. Ceo est en Merchene lahe e en Dene lahge. En West-
sexene laghe ne uocherad il mie sun guarant deuant iceo quil
seit mis en guage. En Dene laghe mettrad lom laueir en uele
main, de ici quil seit derehdned: e sil pot prouer que ceo seit
de sa nureture, par de treis parz de sun uisned, sil auerad
derehdne; kar puis que le serment lui est iuged, nel en pot
lom puis leuer par le iugement de Engleterre.


xxi. Ki Franceis ocist, e les humes del hundred nel pren-
gent e meinent a Ja iustise dedenz les vii. iurs, pur mustrer
kil ait fet; si renderunt Je murdre ?xLvi1. mars.


* [For the Latin text of this clause see cap. xxv.— T.]


WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR. 477


Relevium vavassoris, quod ad ligium dominum suum pertinet,
equus patris sui qualem die obitus habuit; et lorica, galea,
scutum, lancea, et gladius. Quod si forte hee non haberet,
poterit se solucione centum solidorum adquietare.


Relevium villani melius averium; sive bos fuerit, sive equus,
sui domini erit.


Qui terram ad censum annuum tenet, sit ejus relevium
quantum unius anni census.


DE WARRANTO PRODUCENDO.


xxi. Si clamaverit quis vivum averium quasi furto sibi sur-
reptum, et dederit vadium, et invenerit plegios de clamio pro-
sequendo; oportet eum qui rem in manu habet, warantum
suum producere: quod si non potest, hemoldborh et testes pro-
ducat. Si vero warantum producere non potest, nec hemold-
borh, sed testes habet, quod in mercato regis emerit, et
hemoldborh, sed nec warantum nec plegium, sit vivum vel
mortuum, perdet rem illam que calumpniatur; et simplici
juramento suo et testium suorum se purgabit. Quod si nec
warantum, nec plegium, nec testes invenerit, tunc, preter
causam clamantis, were domino suo solvet. Hoc generale est in
Merchenalahe, et Danelahe, et Westsaxenelahe. Nemo autem
cogetur warantum vocare antequam calumpniator producat en
gaige, manu sexta. In Danelahe ponetur res in manu equali,
donec diracionetur. Si autem probare poterit per tres partes
visneti sui, quod sit de nutritura sua, disrationabit; quia ex
quo per juramentum adjudicatum est, non potest abjudicari
per judicium Anglie.


DE MURDRE.


xxl. Si quis Francum hominem occiderit, et non capiant
homines de visneto occisorem infra ebdomadam, et offerant jus-
ticiariis ad ostendendum quamobrem hoc ille fecerit; reddent
pro murdre XLVII. m.


1 ys. XLVI.


478 THE LAWS OF KING


xx. Si hom uolt derehdner cuuenant de terre uers sun
seinur, par ses pers de la tenure meimes quil apelerad a testi-
monie, lui estuuerad derehdner; kar par estrange nel purrad
pas derehdner.


xxiv. De hume ki plaided en curt, en ki curt que ceo
seit, fors la u le cors le rei seit, e hom lui met sure kil ad
dit chose kil ne uoille conuistre; sil pot derehdner par un
entendable hume del plait, oant e ueant, quil nel auerad dit,
recouread sa parole.


XXV.


xxvi. De quatre chemins, ceo est a saueir, Watlinge strete,
Erminge strete, Fosse, Hykenild: ki en aucun de ces quatre
chemins ocist aucun ki seit errant par le pais, u asaut, si en-
freint la pais le rei.


xxv. Si larrecin est truued, en ki terre que ceo seit, e le
larrun ouoc, li seinur de la terre e Ja femme auerunt Ja meite
del aueir al larrun, e les chaleniurs lur chatel, sil le trouent;
e lautre meited, sil est troue dedenz sache e soche, si perderad
Ja femme, e Je seinur lauerad.


DE VIARUM CUSTODIBUS.


xxv. De chascuns x. hides del hundred, un hume dedenz
la feste Seint Michel e Ja Seint Martin. E si li guardireue
auerad xxx. hides, quite serrad pur sun trauail. E si aueir
trespasse par iloc u il deiuent guaiter, e il ne puissent mustrer,
ne cri ne force que lur fust feite, si rendissent laueir.*


a [Here Hk. ends: what follows is from Ingulph, collated with the
other printed copies.—7.]


WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR. 479


SI QUIS CONTRA DOMINUM SUUM TERRAM PETAT.


xxi. Si voluerit quis convencionem terre tenende, adversus
dominum suum disracionare; per pares suos de eodem tene-
mento, quos in testimonium vocaverit, disracionabit ; quia per
extraneos id facere non poterit.


SI QUIS NEGAT IN CURIA SE DIXISSE QUOD EI
IMPONITUR.


xxiv. In omni curia, praeterquam in presencia regis, si cui
imponitur, quod in placito dixerit aliquid, quod ipse negat se
dixisse; nisi possit per duos intelligibiles homines de [visu et]
auditu convincere, recuperabit ad loquelam suam.


DE FRANCPLEGIO.


xxv. Omnis qui sibi vult justiciam exhiberi, vel se pro legali
et justiciabili haberi, sit in francplegio.*


DE TRIBUS STRATIS REGIS.


xxvi. In tribus stratis regiis, id est Watelingestrete, Erminge-
strete, et Fosse, qui hominem per patriam transeuntem occi-
derit, vel assultum fecerit, pacem regis infringit.


SI FURTUM CUM FURE REPERITUR.


xxv. In cujuscumque terra fur cum furto invenitur, domi-
nus terre et uxor furis habebunt medietatem omnium bonorum
furis; calumpniator autem rem sibi furatam, si invenit; et
alteram medietatem, nisi inveniatur in terra ejus qui habet soch
et sac, etc.; quia tunc uxor perdet, et dominus habebit.


DE STRETWARDE.


xxviu. De qualibet hida in hundredo 1111. homines ad stret-
warde invenientur a festo Sti Michaelis, usque ad festum Séi
Martini. Et gwardereve, id est prepositus custodum, habebit
xxx. hidas quietas pro labore suo. Quod si averia per locum
custodie sue transducta fuerint, et non possint monstrare nec
clamorem suum nec vim sibi illatam, reddent illa.


a [For the French text of this law see cap. xx.—-7.]


* departent


.


480 THE LAWS OF KING


xxix. Cil qui custiuent la terre ne deit lum trauailer se de
lour droite cense; noun le leist a seignurage de partir les
cultiuurs de lur terre, pur tant cum il pussent le dreit servise
faire.


xxx. Les naifs ki departet de sa terre, ne deiuent cartre
faut naiuirie quere, que il ne facent lur dreit servise, que apend
a lour terre. Li naifs qui departet de sa terre dunt il est
nez, e uent a autri terre, nuls nel retenget ne li ne se chatels,
enz le facet uenir arere a faire soun servise, tel cum a li
apend.


xxx1. Si les seignurages ne facent altri gainurs uenir a lour
terre, la justise le facet.


xxx. Nullui ne toille a soun seinour sun dreit servise, pur
nul relais que il li ait fait en arere.


xxx. Si femme est jugee a mort u a defaciun des mem-
bres, ki seit enceintee, ne faced lum justice, des quele seit
deliuere.


xxxiv. Si home mort senz deuise, si * depertent les enfans
lerite entre sei per uwel.


xxxv. Si le pere truuet sa file en auulterie en sa maisoun,
u en la maisoun soun gendre, ben li laist ocire Ja auultere.


xxxvi. Si home enpuissuned altre, seit occis u permanable-
ment eissilled.


WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR. 481


DE COLONIS TERRE.


xxix. Coloni et terrarum exercitores non vexentur ultra
debitum et statutum; nec licet dominis removere colonos a
terris, dummodo debita servicia persolvant.


DE NATIVIS.


xxx. Nativi non recedant a terris suis, nec querant ingenium
unde dominum suum debito servicio suo defraudent. Si
autem aliquis discesserit, nullus eum receptet, vel catalla sua,
nec retineat, sed faciat ad dominum proprium, cum omnibus
suis, redire.


DE TERRA COLENDA.


xxx. Si domini terrarum non procurent idoneos cultores ad
terras suas colendas, justiciarii hoc faciant.


NE QUIS JUSTUM SERVICIUM DOMINO SUBTRAHAT.


xxx, Nullus pro quacumque remissione ei a domino gratuito
facta, debitum subtrahat servicium.


NE FEMINA PREGNANS JUDICIUM MORTIS SUBEAT.


xxx. Si femina pregnans adjudicata sit morti, vel mem-
brorum mutilacioni, differatur execucio sententie usque quando
pariat.


DE SINE TESTAMENTO MORIENTIBUS.


xxxiv. Si quis paterfamilias casu aliquo sine testamento
obierit, pueri inter se hereditatem paternam equaliter dividant.


SI PATER FILIAM ADULTERANTEM REPERIT, VEL
FILIUS UXOREM PATRIS.
xxxy. Si pater filiam maritatam in adulterio deprehendit in
domo propria, sive in domo generi sui, licet ei adulterium occi-
dere. Similiter, si filius matrem in adulterio deprehendit,
patre vivente, licet adulterium occidere.


DE VENEFICIO.


xxxvi. Si quis alterum veneno occiderit, aut occidatur, aut
in exilium perpetuum agatur.


* mespurierai


M.


482 THE LAWS OF KING


xxxvil. Io iettal uoz choses de la nef, pur pour de mort, e
de co ne me poez enplaider, kar leist a faire damage a altre pur
pour de mort, quant perele ne pot eschaper. E si de co me
uiescez, que pur pour de mort nel feisse, de co *mespriorai; e
les choses que sunt remises en la nef, seient depertiz en comune
sulun les chatels; e si aleun iethed les chatels fors de la nef
senz busun, sil rendet.


xxxvit. Dous sunt perceners de un erithet,e est lun en-
plaide senz laltre, et par sa folie si pert; ne deit pur co laltre
estre perdant qui present ne fud; kar chose iuge entre eus, ne
forsiuge pas les altres, qui ne sunt a present.


xxx1x. Ententivement se purpensent cil qui les iugementz
unt a faire, que si iugent, cum si desirent, quant il dient:
‘Dimitte nobis debita nostra.’ Ki tort esleuera u faus iuge-
ment fra, pur curruz ne pur hange u pur aueir, seit en la for-
faiture le rei de xL. solz, sil ne pot aleier, que plus dreit faire
nel sout; si perde sa franchise, si al rei nel pot reachater a
soun pleisir. E sil est en Dene lae, seit forfait de sa laxlite,
sil aleier ne se pot, que il melz faire ne sout.


XL. + & * ¥


xu. E nous defendun que lun Christien fors de la terre ne
uende, nensurchetut en paisnime. Wart lun que lun laume ne
perde que Deu rechatat de sa uie.


WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR. 483


DE JACTURA METU MORTIS FACTA.


xxxvil. Si quis in periculo maris ad navem exonerandam,
metu mortis, alterius res in mare projecerit, si suspectum eum
habuerit, juramento se absolvet, quod nulla alia causa nisi metu
mortis hoe fecerit. Res autem que remanent ex equo inter
omnes dividentur, secundum catalla singulorum. Quod si
aliter actum fuerit, reddet dampnum qui intulit.


NE QUIS EX JUDICIO ALTERIUS PREJUDICIUM
PACIATUR.


xxxvim. Si duo aut plures hereditatem parciantur, et unus,
sine altero vel aliis, in jus vocatus, ex insipiencia vel alio casu
amiserit, non debent parciarii inde dampnum sentire; quia res
inter alios judicata aliis non prejudicat; praesertim si presentes
non fuerunt.


DE JUDICIS ET JUDICIBUS.


xxx1x. Diligentissime attendant judices, ut ita judicent prox-
imum, sicut se a Deo paciscuntur judicandos, cum dicunt:
‘ Dimitte nobis debita nostra, sicut et nos dimittimus debitori-
bus nostris.’ Qui vero falsum judicium fecerit, vel injusticiam
foverit, odio, vel amore, vel pecunia, sit in regis forisfacto de
xL. solid, nisi purgare se possit, quod melius judicare nescivit,
et insuper libertatem, si habuit, amittat illam, nisi a rege eam
redemerit. In Danelahe erit in forisfactura de suo laslite.


NE QUIS PRO PARVO DELICTO MORTI ADJUDICETUR.


xi. Prohibemus ne pro parvo forisfacto adjudicetur aliquis
homo morti. Sed ad plebis castigationem, alta pena, secundum
qualitatem et quantitatem delicti, plectatur. Non enim debet
pro re parva deleri factura, quam ad ymaginem suam Deus con-
didit, et sanguinis sui pretio redemit.*


NE CHRISTIANI EXTRA TERRAM VEL PAGANIS VEN-
DANTUOR.
xt. Inhibemus etiam ne quis Christianum in alienam patriam
vendat, et maxime infidelibus. Cavendum enim valde est, ne
anime in dampnacionem vendantur, pro quibus Christus vitam
impendit.


2 [To this chapter there is no corresponding French text.—7.]


* xxx?


* si?


484 THE LAWS OF KING


xu. E qui dreite lei e dreite iugement refuserad, seit forfait
envers celi, qui dreit co est aaueir. Si co est enuers li rei,
vi. liuers; si co est enuers cunte, xu. solz; si co est en hun-
dred, xxx. solz; e enuers touz icous-ki curt unt en Engleterre,
co est *en solz Engleis. Een Dene lae, qui dreit iugement
refuserad, seit en la mercie de sa laxlite.


xuitt. E ne face lun pleinte a rei dici que lun li seit defaili
el hundred ou el conte.


xLiv. Ne prenge hum nam nul en conte ne defors dici, quil
eit tres foiz demande dreit el hundred uel conte. E sila la
terce fiee ne pot dreit aueir, alt a conte, e le conte Jen asete le
quart iurn, e se cil idefait de ki il se claime, dunt prenge
conge que il pusse nam prendre pur le son *luin e pres.


xiv. Ne nul achat le uailiant de 11m. def, ne mort ne uif,
sanz testimoine ad 1111. hommes u de burg u de uile: e *le hom
le chalange, e il nen ait testemoine, si nad nul warant, rende
lun al hum soun chatel, e le forfait eit, qui aver Je deit. E si
testimonie ad, si cum nous einz desimes, uoest les treis feiz, e
ala quart feiz le dereinet u il Je rende.


xvi. Nus ne semble pas raisoun que lun face pruuance sur
testimonie, ki conussent co que enterce est; e que nul ne prust
deuant le terme de vi. meis apres ico que laueir fu emble.


xiv. E cil qui est redte e testemoniet de deleaute, e le plait
treis foiz eschuit, e al quart mustrent li sumenour de se treis
defautes; uncore le mande lun, que il plege ®truue e uienge a


a [The editions read ‘lum epref’— 7.]


WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR. 485


DE HIIS QUI JUSTUM JUDICIUM REPELLUNT.


XL. Qui legem equam et justum judicium subire renuit,
forisfacturam reddat ei cujus erit juris illam accipere. Si ad-
versus regem, vi. lib?; si adversus comitem, xL. sot; si in hun-
dredo vel in cujuscumque curia, qui eam ex libertate habere
debet, xxx. sot Anglicos. In Danelahe, qui rectum judicium
subire contempserit, erit in forisfactura de suo laslite.


NE QUIS REGI CONQUERATUR, NISI EI HUNDREDUS
VEL COMITATUS DEFECERIT.
xt. Nemo querelam ad regem deferat, nisi ei jus defecerit
in hundredo vel in comitatu.


NE QUIS TEMERE NAMIUM CAPIAT.


xuiv. Nullus namium capiat in comitatu vel extra, nisi
rectum in hundredo vel comitatu tercio postulaverit. Quod si
nec ad terciam postulacionem responsum acceperit, eat ad comi
tatum, et comitatus ponat ei quartum diem. Quod si nec tune
ei satisfactum fuerit, accipiat licenciam namium capiendi pro
suo, et prope et longe.


NE QUIS ALIQUID SINE TESTIBUS EMAT.


xLv. Nemo emat vel vivum vel mortuum, ad valenciam m1.
denaf, sine 111. testibus, aut de burgo aut de villa campestri.
Quod si aliquis rem postmodum calumpniatus fuerit, et nec
testes habuerit nec warantum, et rem reddat et forisfacturam,
cui de jure competit. Si vero testes habet, videant rem tercio;
et, quarta vice, aut rem disracionet aut amittet.


NE PROBACIO FIAT SUPER TESTES.


xivi. Absonum videtur et juri contrarium, ut probacio fiat
super testes qui rem calumpniatam cognoscunt; nec admittatur
probacio ante terminum statutum, scilicet vl. mensem ex quo
furatum fuit quod calumpniatur.


DE RECTATO QUI VOCATUS NON COMPARET.


xvi. Si quis malam habens famam et de infidelitate rectatus,
tercio vocatus non comparet, quarto die ostendant summoni-
tores tres defaltas, et adhuc summonicionem habeat, ut plegios


> [The editions read ‘ truse.’— Z.]


* il ert?


486 THE LAWS OF KING


dreit. E sil ne uolt, sil ne uist lun uifu mort, si prenge lun
quanque il ad, e si rende lun al chalangeur sun chatel, e li sire
ait la meite del remenant, e Je hundred Ja meite. E si nul
parent nami ceste iustise deforcent, seient forfeit envers li rei
de vi. lié e quergent le larun; nen en ki poeste il seit troue,
neit warrant de sa uie, ne per defense de plait nait mes
recouerer.


xiviu. Nuls ne receit home ultre 111. nuis, si cil ne li com-
mand od qui il fust ainz: ne nuls ne lait sun hum de li partir,
pus que il est rete.


xitrx. Eki larun encontre, e sanz eri a acient li leit aler, si
lamend a la uailaunce de larun, u sen espurge per plener lei,
que il Jaroun nel sout.


u. Eki le cri orat e sursera, la sursise [enuers] ]i rei amend,
u sen espurget.


ui. Si est alquons qui blamet seit dedenz le hundred, e m1.
humes le retent, si x11. main sespurget.


Lu. E chascun seniour eit soun seriant*en sun plege; que
si *nele rete, que ait a dreit el hundred; e si il sen fuist dedenz
la chalange, li sire rende sun were. E si lun chalange le
seignour, que per li sen seit ale, si sescundie sei vi. main, e sil
ne pot, enuers li rei lament, e cil soit utlage.


2 [The editions read wv, for which Schmid substitutes ex ; Palgrave
has a.—T.]


WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR. 487


inveniat et juri pareat. Quod si nec sic copiam sui fecerit,
judicetur sive vivus sive mortuus, capiaturque quicquid habet,
et redditis calumpniatoribus catallis, residuum dividant inter se
ex equo, dominus et hundred. Quod si amicorum aliquis hane
justiciam difforciat, sit in forisfactura v1. librarum versus regem.
Queraturque fur, nec habeat quisquam potestatem eum tenendi,
vel vitam ei warantizandi, nec ad placitum ultra recuperare
potest.


NE QUIS HOSPITEM ULTRA TRES NOCTES NON
RETINEAT.
xtviit. Nullus hospitem ultra terciam noctem recipiat, nisi
ille cum quo prius fuit hoc ei mandaverit. Nec permittat quis
hominem [suum], postquam rectatus est, a se recedere.


NE QUIS FUREM FUGERE PERMITTAT.
xLIx. Si quis latroni obvians, sine clamore eum transire per-
mittit, in forisfactura sit ad valenciam latronis; nisi juramento
probaverit quod eum latronem esse nescivit.


DE NON INSEQUENTIBUS CLAMOREM.


L. Qui, clamore audito, insequi supersederit, de sursisa erga
regem emendet; nisi se juramento purgare potuerit.


DE CULPATO IN HUNDREDO.


i. Si quis in hundredo inculpatus fuerit, et a 111. hominibus
rectatus, purget se manu xII.


UT DOMINUS IN FRANCPLEGIO HABEAT SUOS.


Li. Omnes qui servientes habent, eorum sint francplegii;
quod si rectati fuerint, ad rectum in hundredo eos habebunt.
Quod si infra rectacionem aliquis fugerit, dominus solvat were.
Et si calumpnietur quod per eum fugerit, aut purget se manu
vi, aut erga regem emendet; et is qui fugerit, uthlagetur.


A88 THE LAWS OF KING


II.


4ICARTA EJUSDEM BR W. DE APPELLATIS PRO
ALIQUO MALEFICIO, FRANCO VEL ANGLICO.’


Wilts Dei gratia Rex Anglorum omnibus ad quos scriptum hoc
perveniat salutem et amicitiam. Mando et precipio per
totam Angliz nationem custodiri:


1. Si Anglicus homo compellat aliquem Francigenam per
bellum, de furto, vel homicidio, vel aliqua re pro qua bellum
fieri debeat, vel judicium inter duos homines, habeat plenam
licenciam hoc faciendi. Et si Anglicus bellum nolit, Franci-
gena compellatus adlegiet se jurejurando contra eum, per testes
suos, secundum legem Normanniz.


ur. Item; si Francigena compellet Anglicum per bellum de
eisdem rebus, Anglicus plena licencia defendat se per bellum,
vel per judicium, si magis ei placeat. Et si untpum sit, i. in-
validus, et nolit bellum, vel non possit, querat sibi legalem
defensorem. Si Francigena victus fuerit, persolvat regi Lx. sol.
Et si Anglicus nolit se defendere per bellum, vel per testimo-
nium, adlegiet se per Dei judicium.


11. De omnibus utlarie rebus rex instituit, ut Anglicus se
purget ad judicium. Et si Anglicus appellet Francigenam de
utlagaria, et hoc super eum inveritare velit, defendat se Franci-
gena per bellum. Et si Anglicus non audeat eum probare per
bellum, defendat se Francigena pleno juramento, non in ver-
borum observanciis.


V Hk. hune habet titulum: Institutio Witti Regis. Si Anglicus
Francigenam, vel conversio, homicidii, vel furti, vel utlagariz accu-
saverit. 2’ tota Anglie natione HA.


WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR. 489


II.


*PILLELMES LCYNINGES ASETNYSS8E.


Pilhelm cynz zpet ealla pa pe pyy zeppit to-cymd oren eall
Engla-land yneondhice- 4 beot 4 eac cyd eallum mannum
orep eall Angel-cynn to healdenne. f 1y-


1. Ing Enghyeman beclypad snigne Fpeencipene mann to
opmeyte fop peorces oppe fop man-ylihcte- oppe fop zmzan
pingan pe gebypize opneyt fope vo beonne- oppe 6m be-
tpeox tpam mannum- hebbe he fulle leare ypa to donne-
And gzip ye Enghyca fopyecd f opneyc- pe Fpencigca pe se
Engliyca beclypad latize hine mid ade onzean lune md hi
Sepicneyye- zepcep Nopdmanbdiycepe laze:-


u. Epc. Iny Fpencipeman beclypad Enghycne man to
opineyce fon pam ylean pingan- ye Englirca be fulpe leare hine
pepige md onneyce, oppe mid ipene- zip him } gecpempe bys.
And giz he uncpum byd 4 nelle $ opneyt oppe ne mage-
begyce Im lahhene ypalan. And gip ye Fhenaiyca byd
ofepcuman: he gzyfe pam cynge -11- pund. And gir ye
Enghyca nele hine pepian mid opneste oppe mid seprcneyye-
he latige hine mid ipene:-


mu J€c eallan utlaga pingan ye cyng gerecte $ ye
Enghiyca latige hine mid pene. And zip re Enghiyca beclypad
Fpenciyene mid utlagan pingan y pille hic fonne on him
zeyopian- ye Fpenciyca bepepie hine mid opneyte. And gir
ye Enghyca ne duppe hine to opneyte beclypian- pepize hine
ye Fpeenciyca mid unfopedan ape:-


2 [The Latin text is from Se., collated with Hk. The Saxon is
from H.—T.]


490 THE LAWS OF KING


Il.


*CARTA REGIS WILLELMI CONQUISITORIS DE
QUIBUSDAM STATUTIS, etc.


Willelmus rex Anglorum, dux Normannorum, omnibus homi-
nibus suis, Francis et Anglis, salutem.


DE RELIGIONE ET PACE PUBLICA.


1. Statuimus imprimis super omnia, unum Deum per totum
regnum nostrum venerari, unam fidem Christi semper inviola-
tam custodiri, pacem, et securitatem, et concordiam, judicium,
et justiciam inter Anglos et Normannos, Francos et Britones
Wallie et Cornubie, Pictos et Scotos Albanie, similiter inter
Francos et insulanos, provincias et patrias, que pertinent ad
coronam et dignitatem, defensionem et observacionem, et hono-
rem regni nostri, et inter omnes nobis subjectos per universam
monarchiam regni Britannie firmiter et inviolabiliter observari;
ita quod nullus alii forisfaciat in ullo, super forisfacturam
nostram plenam.


DE FIDE ET OBSEQUIO ERGA REGEM.


1. Statuimus eciam, ut omnes liberi homines federe et sacra~
mento affirment, quod intra et extra universum regnum Anglie
(quod olim vocabatur regnum Britannie) Willelmo regi, domino
suo, fideles esse volunt, terras et honores illius omni fidelitate
ubique servare cum eo, et contra inimicos et alienigenas
defendere.


DE NORMANNI SEU FRANCIGENZ CEDE.


ut. Volumus autem et firmiter precipimus, ut omnes homines,
quos nobiscum adduximus, aut post nos venerint, sint sub pro-
teccione et in pace nostra, per universum regnum predictum.
Et si quis de illis occisus fuerit, dominus ejus habeat intra quin-
que dies homicidam ejus, si poterit, sin autem, incipiat persol-


a [The text is from Se. The division into chapters and the rubrics
we owe to Selden.— 7]


WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR. 49]


vere nobis XLVI. marcas argenti, quamdiu substancia domini
illius perduraverit. Ubi vero substancia domini defecerit, totus
hundredus in quo occisio facta est communiter solvat quod
remanet,


DE JURE NORMANNORUM QUI ANTE ADVENTUM
GUILIELMI CIVES FUERANT ANGLICANI.


1v. Et omnis Francigena qui tempore Eadwardi propinqui
nostri fuit in Anglia particeps consuetudinum Anglorum, quod
ipsi dicunt an hlote et an scote, persolvat secundum legem
Anglorum.


DE CLIENTELARI SEU FEUDORUM JURE, ET
INGENUORUM IMMUNITATE.


v. Volumus eciam, ac firmiter precipimus et concedimus, ut
omnes liberi homines tocius monarchie regni nostri predicti
habeant et teneant terras suas et possessiones suas bene et in
pace, libere ab omni exaccione injusta, et ab omni tallagio, ita
quod nichil ab eis exigatur vel capiatur, nisi servicium suum
liberum, quod de jure nobis facere debent, et facere tenentur ;
et prout statutum est eis, et illis a nobis datum et concessum
jure hereditario in perpetuum, per commune consilium tocius
regni nostri predicti.


DE NOCTURNIS CUSTODIIS.


vi. Statuimus eciam et firmiter precipimus, ut omnes civi-
tates, et burgi, et castella, et hundreda, et wapentachia tocius
regni nostri predicti singulis noctibus vigilentur et custodiantur
in girum, pro maleficis et inimicis, prout vicecomites, et aldere
manni, et prepositi, et ceteri ballivi, et ministri nostri melius
per commune consilium ad utilitatem regni providebunt.


DE MENSURIS ET PONDERIBUS.


vit. Et quod habeant per universum regnum mensuras fide~
lissimas et signatas, et pondera fidelissima et signata, sicut-boni
predecessores statuerunt.


DE CLIENTUM SEU VASSALORUM PRESTATIONIBUS.


vil. Statuimus eciam et firmiter precipimus, ut omnes
comites, et barones, et milites, et servientes, et universi liberi


* J. aliqua res
vetita.


t quis add. ?


492 THE LAWS OF KING


homines tocius regni nostri predicti habeant et teneant se
semper bene in armis et in equis, ut decet et oportet, et quod
sint semper prompti et bene parati ad servicium suum integrum
nobis explendum et peragendum, cum semper opus adfuerit,
secundum quod nobis debent de feodis et tenementis suis de
jure facere, et sicut illis statuimus per commune consilium
tocius regni nostri predicti, et illis dedimus et concessimus in
feodo jure hereditario. Hoc preceptum non sit violatum ullo
modo, super forisfacturam nostram plenam.


UT JURA REGIA ILLESA SERVARE PRO VIRIBUS
CONENTUR SUBDITI.


1x. Statuimus eciam et firmiter precipimus, ut omnes liberi
homines tocius regni nostri predicti sint fratres conjurati ad
monarchiam nostram, et ad regnum nostrum, pro viribus
suis et facultatibus, contra inimicos pro posse suo defenden-
dum et viriliter servandum, et pacem, et dignitatem corone
nostre integram observandam, et ad judicium rectum, et jus-
ticiam constanter omnibus modis pro posse suo, sine dolo
et sine dilacione faciendam. Hoe decretum sancitum est in
civitate Londoii.


NE VENDITIO ET EMPTIO FIAT, NISI CORAM TESTI-
BUS, ET IN CIVITATIBUS.


x. Interdicimus eciam ut nulla viva pecunia vendatur aut
ematur, nisi intra civitates, et hoc ante tres fideles testes;
nec *aliquam rem vetitam, sine fidejussore et waranto.
Quod si faliter fecerit, solvat, et persolvat, et postea foris-
facturam.


DE EMPORIS, ET JURE URBIUM PAGORUMQUE NOTE
MELIORIS.


x1. Item nullum mercatum vel forum sit, nec fieri permit-
tatur, nisi in civitatibus regni nostri, et in burgis [clausis] et
muro vallatis, et in castellis, et in locis tutissimis, ubi consuetu-
dines regni nostri, et jus nostrum commune, et dignitates corone
nostre, que constitute sunt a bonis predecessoribus nostris de-
perire non possint, nec defraudari, nec violari, sed omnia rite,
et in aperto, et per judicium et justiciam fieri debent. Et ideo
castella, et burgi, et civitates site sunt, et fundate, et edificate,


WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR. 493


scilicet, ad tuicionem gencium et populorum regni, et ad defen-
sionem regni, et idcirco observari debent cum omni libertate,
et integritate, et racione.


DE PURGATIONE FORENSI IN JUDICIIS PUBLICIS.


xu. Decretum est eciam ibi, ut si Francigena appellaverit
Anglum de perjurio aut murdro, furto aut homicidio, ran, quod
dicunt apertam rapinam, que negari non potest; Anglus se
defendat per quod melius voluerit, aut judicio ferri, aut duello.
Si autem Anglus infirmus fuerit, inveniat alium qui pro eo
faciat. Si quis eorum victus fuerit, emendet regi x. solidos.
Si autem Anglus Francigenam appellaverit, et probare voluerit,
judicio aut duello, volo tunc Francigenam purgare se sacra-
mento non fracto.


FIRMANTUR LEGES EADWARDI REGIS.


x11. Hoe quoque precipimus, ut omnes habeant et teneant
leges Eadwardi regis in omnibus rebus, adauctis hiis quas con-
stituimus ad utilitatem Anglorum.


DE JUSTITIZ PUBLICE FIDEJUSSORIBUS.


xiv. Omnis homo qui voluerit se teneri pro libero sit in
plegio, ut plegius eum habeat ad justiciam si quid offenderit.
Et quisquam evaserit talium, videant plegii ut solvant quod
calumpniatum est, et purgent se, quia in evaso nullam fraudem
noverint. Requiratur hundredus et comitatus (sicut anteces-
sores statuerunt); et qui juste venire debent et noluerint, sum-
moneantur semel; et si secundo non venerint, accipiatur unus
bos; et si tercio, alius bos; et si quarto, reddatur de rebus
hujus hominis quod calumpniatum est, quod dicitur ceapzeld,
et insuper regis forisfactura.


DE SERVIS, ET EORUM MANUMISSIONE.


xv. Et prohibemus ut nullus vendat hominem extra patriam.
Si qui vero velit servum suum liberum facere, tradat eum
vicecomiti per manum dextram ‘in pleno comitatu, quietum
illum clamare debet a jugo servitutis sue per manumissi-
onem, et ostendat ei liberas vias, et portas, et tradat illi
libera arma, scilicet, lanceam, et gladium; deinde liber homo
efficitur.


* del?


494 THE LAWS OF KING


2DE SERVIS.


xvi. Item si servi permanserint sine calumpnia per annum
et diem in civitatibus nostris, vel in burgis * vel muro vallatis,
vel in castris nostris, a die illa liberi efficiantur, et liberi a
jugo servitutis sue sint in perpetuum.


DE SUPPLICIORUM MODO.


xvi. Interdicimus eciam ne quis occidatur vel suspendatur
pro aliqua culpa, sed ‘enerventur oculi, et abscindantur pedes,
vel testiculi, vel manus, ita quod truncus remaneat vivus, in
signum prodicionis et nequicie sue: secundum enim quanti-
tatem delicti debet pena maleficis infligi. Ista precepta non
sint violata super forisfacturam nostram plenam. Testibus,
ete.


1 eruantur Hov. et exempl. alt.


* Capitulum hoe et in Hov. et in altero hujus charte exemplari
deest.


WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR. 495


IV.
*CARTA WILLELMI.


TW. gracia Dei Rex Anglorum R. Bainardo et G. de
Magnavilla, et P. de Valoines, ceterisque meis fidelibus de
Essex et de Hertfordschire et de Middelsex, salutem. Sciatis
vos omnes, et ceteri mei fideles qui in Anglia manent, quod
episcopales leges, que non bene, nec secundum sanctorum
canonum precepta, usque ad mea tempora in regno Anglorum
fuerunt, communi concilio et consilio archiepiscoporum ?et
episcoporum et abbatum, et omnium principum regni mei,
emendandas judicavi. Propterea mando, et regia auctoritate
precipio, ut nullus episcopus vel archidiaconus de legibus
episcopalibus amplius in hundret placita teneant, nec causam
que ad regimen animarum pertinet ad judicium secularium
hominum adducant; sed quicunque, secundum episcopales
leges, de quacumque causa vel culpa interpellatus fuerit, ad
locum quem ad hoc episcopus elegerit vel nominaverit veniat,
ibique de causa vel culpa sua respondeat, et non secundum
hundret, sed secundum canones et episcopales leges, rectum
Deo et episcopo suo faciat. Si vero aliquis per superbiam
elatus ad justiciam episcopalem venire contempserit vel nolu-
erit, vocetur semel, secundo, et tercio; quod si nec sic ad
emendacionem venerit, excommunicetur; et si opus fuerit ad
hoc vindicandum, fortitudo et justicia regis vel vicecomitis
adhibeatur. Ile autem qui vocatus ad justiciam episcopi
venire noluerit, pro unaquaque vocacione legem episcopalem


7 W. gracia Dei Rex Anglie comitibus, vicecomitibus, et omnibus
Francigenis et Anglis, qui in episcopatu Remegii episcopi terras
habent, salutem. 2/meorum et ceterorum episcoporum


a Textus est ex ‘Libro piloso’ ut vocatur, penes Dec. et Capit.
Eccl. Cath. S. Pauli London. Lectt. var. sunt ex altero ejusdem
charte exemplari in registro Lincoln. (Remig. fol. 9.) adservato.


496 LAWS OF WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR.


emendabit. Hoc eciam defendo et mea auctoritate interdico,
ne ullus vicecomes aut prepositus seu minister regis, nec ali-
quis laicus homo, de legibus que ad episcopum pertinent se
intromittat, nec aliquis laicus homo alium hominem sine jus-
ticia episcopi ad judicium adducat. Judicium vero in nullo
loco portetur, nisi in episcopali sede, aut in illo loco quem ad
hoc episcopus constituerit.


LEGES
REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


DE LIBERTATE ECCLESIE ET TOCIUS ANGLIE
OBSERVANDA.


LEGES HENRICI PRIMI, FILIT CONQUESTORIS.


Hec sunt denique beata pacis ac libertatis exoptate gaudia,
quibus toti regno suo gloriosus Cesar Henricus in divinis
legibus et secularibus institutis, scriptis et bonorum ope-
rum exhibicionibus, irradiat moderatus, justus, fortis, pru-
dens, quem Deus felicibus auspiciis et salutari quavis
corporis et anime prosperitate, cum conjuge sua inclita
Matilde Secunda et eorum Jiberis, longis seculorum seculis,
et eterna pace gentis nostre, faciat imperare.


«I. EPISTOLA EJUSDEM OMNIBUS FIDELIBUS SUIS.
>Henricus °Dei gracia Rex Anglorum, omnibus baronibus


® Charta hee Henrici Primi in pluribus extat exemplaribus, quo-
rum omnium est antiquissimum, quod in textu, ut vocatur, Roffensi
invenitur, ubi illa sic orditur, ‘Anno Incarnacionis Dominice, mc.
Henricus, filius Willelmi regis, post obitum fratris sui Willelmi, Dei
gracia Rex Anglorum, omnibus fidelibus salutem:’ et ita desinit,
‘ Testibus M. Lundonie episcopo, et Gundulfo episcopo, et Willelmo
electo episcopo, et Henrico comite, et Siii comite, et Waltero Gif-
fardo, et Rodberto de Monfort, et Rogero Bigoto, et Henrico de
Portu; apud Londoniam, quando fui coronatus.’ Quod tamen factum
narrant historici anno mc. quinto die mensis Augusti. Vide Florent.
Wigorn. et Roger. Hoveden.

b Nota lector, quod in Codice Rubro Scaccharii, duo reperiuntur
hujus chartee exemplaria, quorum alterum his legibus preefixum est
(quod tibi hic fideliter exhibemus), alterum alio ejusdem libri loco
relatum cum hac inscriptione, ‘ Henricus rex Anglorum Samsoni epis-
copo, et Ursoni de Abetot, et omnibus baronibus et fidelibus suis, tam
Francigenis quam Angligenis de Wirecestrescira salutem. Sciatis,’
&c. Discrepantes posterioris lectiones textui nostro subjecimus:
quicquid autem hujuscemodi signis [ ] inclusum reperies, id omne
noveris in illo exemplari deesse: hee etiam charta habetur apud
Mattheum Paris, annis Mc. et MCCXIIL.

¢ Omisit nonnunquam titulo suo voces hasce ‘ Dei gracia,’ et sim-
pliciter tantum scripsit ‘ Henricus Rex Anglorum,’ aut ‘Rex Angliz,’


KK


498 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


et fidelibus suis, *Francis et Anglis, salutem.  §1. Sciatis
me Dei misericordia et communi consilio >[et assensu] baronum
lreoni Anglie ejusdem regni regem coronatum esse, et quia
regnum oppressum erat injustis exaccionibus, ego Dei respectu
et amore quem erga” vos [omnes] habeo, “sanctam Dei eccle-
siam, inprimis, liberam facio, ita quod nec vendam, nec ad
firmam ponam, nec, mortuo archiepiscopo, ’sive episcopo, ‘vel
abbate, aliquid accipiam de *dominio ecclesie, vel hominibus
ejus, donec successor in eam ingrediatur. Et omnes malas


\tocius H. add. illos et K. add. 3seu Se. 4sive A. Se.2
5 dominico A.


ut et idipsum ab Henrico Secundo factum observat Ed. Cocius
Instit. par. 1. fol.’7. Weruntamen neque in sigillo, neque chartis
Henrici Secundi illud mihi adhuc videre licuit. Ampliorem, recte,
ni fallor, primus omnium reddidit titulum, additis hisce voculis ‘ Dux
Normanniz et Aquitaniz.’ Czeterum notatio illa ‘Dei gracia’ non
erat regibus tantum peculiaris, sed communis etiam tum archiepis-
copis, episcopis, ducibus, comitibus, abbatibus et aliis, qua de re
videatur erudit. Spelman. Glossar. verbis ‘ Dei gratia.’ Clar. Seld.
Tit. Honor. par. 1. cap. 7. § 2., Roverii Illustrat. Histor. Monaster.
S. Joh. Reomaénsis, pag. Ixviii. num. elxviti.

@ Primi post subactam Angliam reges nostri, sive quod ex Gallia
oriundi essent, sive quod amplarum illic possessionum existerent
domini, quamvis magnam vite suze partem in Anglia transigerent,
Francis tamen magis studuerunt placere, forsan ne si aliter fecissent,
proniores eos ad res novandas reddidissent; unde et hoc manabat,
quod seipsos non solum Gallorum patronos profitebantur, sed et in
omnibus eos Anglis preferebant, uti videre est in sigillo et in legibus
Willielmi Primi 1. 2. et harum, filii ejus, legum, cap. 92. de quo
vide Eadmer. Histor. Novor. pag. 94. et Ingulfi Histor. Croyland.
fol. 512 b. Et recte non observavi unquam, ducem aliquem aut
inferioris potentia virum adeptum fuisse ullibi principatum majorem,
quin simultates inde inter nationes fuerint suborte, que non nisi
lapsu temporis, ac ipsorum principum prudentia, rursus fuerunt
extinct. Qua autem ratione huic malo a Ferdinando exquisiti
judicii principe (‘re di-eccellentissimo consiglio,’ Guicciard. 1. 12.)
et Isabella potentioris territorii regina, obviam itum sit, preposito
Isabella uxori in instrumentis omnibus regis nomine, ut maritalis
ei honor conservaretur, atque interim ut Castella dignitas non
minueretur, hujus regni insignia Arragonie preefigendo, narrat, si
bene memini, Marian. Histor. edit. Madrid. Hisp. anno 1612. Plura
hae de re observata vide apud Clement. Reyner. Apostolat. Bene-
dictin. in Anglia, in append. par. ii.. pag. Ixii. ubi iste loquendi
modus occurrit, et Rob. Holkat. a clar. Seldeno citat. Notis ad
Fortescut. de Laud. Legg. Angli, cap. 48.

> Inter lineas insertum est, et deest in secundo exemplari, uti apud
Matth. Paris. tam anno 1100 quam 1213.


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 499


consuetudines, quibus regnum Anglie 'opprimebatur, *inde
aufero, quas malas consuetudines ex parte ®suppono,

§ 2. *Si quis baronum meorum, comitum, sive aliorum qui
de me tenent, mortuus fuerit, heres suus non redimet terram
suam sicut faciebat tempore *fratris mei, sed “legitima et
justa relevacione relevabit eam. Similiter et homines baronum
meorum legitima et ®justa relevacione relevabunt terras suas
de dominis suis. 7§8, ™ Et si quis ®baronum vel hominum
meorum/ filiam suam °nubitum tradere voluerit, sive sororem,
sive neptem, sive cognatam, mecum inde loquatur. Sed neque
ego aliquid de suo pro hac licencia accipiam, neque ei de-
fendam quin eam det, excepto si eam jungere vellet inimico
meo. Et si, mortuo barone vel alio homine meo, filia heres
remanserit, illam dabo consilio baronum meorum cum terra
sua. ‘Et si, mortuo marito, uxor ejus remanserit, et sine
liberis fuerit, dotem™ et *maritacionem suam habebit™, et eam
non dabo marito, nisi secundum velle suum. 18§ 4, Si vero
uxor cum liberis remanserit, dotem quidem et maritacionem
suam habebit, dum™ corpus suum legitime ™servabit, et eam
non dabo, nisi secundum velle suum; “et terre et liberorum
custos erit sive uxor sive alius “propinquorum, qui justus esse
debebit: et precipio, ut barones mei similiter se contineant
erga filios vel filias vel uxores hominum suorum. _§ 5. Mone-
tagium commune, quod capiebatur per civitates et per comi-
tatus, quod non fuit tempore Edwardi regis, hoc ne amodo fiat
omnino °defendo. Si quis captus fuerit, sive monetarius sive


linjuste Sc.2. add. 2? Se.2.add. hic pono Sc.2. hic suppono K.
4(rubr.) De releviis dandis. Sc.2. 5 fratris MP. Scerta Se. 2.
7 abr) De mulieribus maritandis. Sc.2. 8” baronum meorum vel
aliorum hominum H. Se.2. %nuptum 7. Se.2. 'viro H. |suam
Hf. ‘dum corpus suum legitime servabit M. P. add. 38 (rubr.) De
custode terre et heredis mortuo tenente R. Se.2. i4uxor Se. add.
15 servaverit H. Se.2. 6 propinquarius HZ.


» Alias ‘maritagium:’ sic supra ‘relevacio’ pro quo jam ‘relevium.’
Vide clar. Seld. Jan. Anglorum. pag. lxxx. § xxi.

> «Defendo;’ z.e. prohibeo, ad modum Gallici idiomatis. Order.
Vital. Histor. Eccles. 1. vi. p.629. ‘ quapropter huc ad vos ex regis
imperio missus interdico, ne illum in vestro collegio audeatis susci-
pere. Nos autem audita regis defensione timentes,’ &c., id est,
‘audito regis interdicto.” Sic Leg. Edo. Confess. cap. xxxvii. pag.461.
‘Usurarios eciam defendit Edwardus,’ id est ‘ prohibet; hee autem
prohibitio facta videtur ad imitationem legum Willielmi (.


500 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


alius, cum falsa *moneta, justicia recta inde fiat. §6. Omnia
placita, et omnia debita, que fratri meo debebantur, condono,
exceptis rectis firmis meis, et exceptis illis que pacta erant
pro aliorum hereditatibus’, vel pro eis rebus que justius aliis
contingebant. Et si quis aliquid pro hereditate sua *pepigerat,
illud condono, et omnes relevaciones que pro rectis *heredita~
tibus pacte erant. §7. Et si quis baronum vel hominum
meorum infirmabitur, sicut ipse dabit, vel dare disponet pe-
cuniam suam, ita datam esse concedo. Quod si ipse preventus,
vel armis vel infirmitate, pecuniam suam non dederit nec dare
disposuerit, uxor sua, sive liberi, aut parentes, aut legitimi
homines ejus, “eam pro anima ejus dividant, sicut eis melius
5visum fuerit. § 8. Si quis ‘baronum vel hominum meorum
fovisfecerit, non dabit vadium in ‘" misericordia [tocius] pe-
cunie sue, sicut faciebat ‘tempore patris mei ®[et fratris mei];
sed, secundum modum forisfacti, ita 4emendabit sicut emen-
dasset retro a tempore patris mei et fratris mei, in tempore
aliorum antecessorum meorum. Quod si perfidie vel sceleris
convictus fuerit, sicut justum erit, sic emendet.


Il. DE CONFIRMACIONE LEGUM EDWARDI REGIS.


§ 1. “™ Murdra eciam, retro ab illa die quo in regem corona-
tus fui, omnia condono; et ea que amodo facta fuerint juste


let heredibus K.add. aliquid H.add. hereditacionibus Sc. 2,
4Sce.2.add. ‘eis Se.2.add. %vel Se.2.


® De legislatoris nostri in monete adulteratores gravi animad-
versione videantur Seld. Jan. Angl. 1. ii, pag. Ixxxili. § xxxi. et
Eadmer. 1. iv. p. xciv.

> Hic iterum fas sit lectorem remittere ad comment. clar. Seld.
Jan. Angl. 1.2. p. 80. § 24; sequitur linea, tertia et quarta sequ.
‘ sicut eis melius visum fuerit. Quomodo autem et quatenus pos-
terior zetas ab hoc recesserit instituto, vide (preter ab eodem authore
ubi supra tradita, et Tit. Honor. edit.2. par. 2. cap. 1. § 21. pag. 714.)
Tractatum clar. Somneri de Gavelkind. c. 3.

¢ ¢Baronum vel hominum meorum’ desunt in textu Roffensi per
Ernulphum illius evi episcopum descripto, querendum tamen annon
male.

4 Magna Charta cap. 14. ‘amercietur secundum modum et magni-
tudinem delicti.” Quzenam autem sit differentia inter ‘amerciamentum’
et ‘redemptionem’ illam, de qua agit statutum de Marlebridge anno
52 Henr. III. cap. 1, 3, 4, jurisperitis discutiendum relinquo. Vide
Glanvill. 1.9. ¢. 11. Spelm. Glossar. verbo ‘Contenementum. Cowelli
Interpret. verbo ‘Countenance;’ et Dom. Edw. Coci Instit. part 1.
sect. CXCclv.


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 501


emendentur, secundum lagam regis*Edwardi.  § 2. Forestas
communi consensu baronum meorum in manu mea ’sic re-
tinui” sicut pater meus eas habuit. §3. '"* Militibus, qui
per loricas terras suas >*deserviunt, terras dominicarum caru-
carum [suarum] quietas ab omnibus gildis et ab omni opere
[proprio] dono meo concedo, [Sut sicut benignitas mea pro-
pensior est in eis, ita michi fideles sint;’] et sicut tam magno
gravamine allevati sunt, ita equis et arma se bene instruant,
ut apti et parati sint ad °servicium meum, et ad defensionem
regni mei. §4. ™4Lagam Edwardi regis vobis reddo cum
illis emendacionibus quibus eam emendavit pater meus, ¢con-
silio baronum suorum.’ § 5. Si quis aliquid de meo, vel
de rebus alicujus, post obitum Willelmi fratris mei ceperit,
totum cito ‘reddat absque emendacione’ Et si quis inde


Vita tenui Se.2. 2defendunt Het MP. % in H. quogue desunt.
4’ Pacem firmam in toto regno meo pono, et teneri amodo precipio—
pater meus eam emendavit cum consilio Sc.2.e¢ K. / sine emen-
dacione reddatur H. Se. 2. et K.


a Leges, ni fallor, Edwardi Confessoris 15 et 16,‘ De murdro’ et
‘De invencione murdri’ inscriptas intelligit legislator, quas vide.
‘Murdrum’ autem hic intelligitur, opinor, uti etiam Legg. Edw.
91, 92. peena homicidio imposita, non ipsum homicidium. Czterum
quid sit murdrum Dialogus de Scaccario, 1. 1. c. 10. explicat his
verbis ; ‘Murdrum proprie dicitur, mors alicujus occulta, cujus inter-
fector ignoratur; murdrum enim idem est quod absconditum vel
occultum. Vide infra, c. 92.

> Pro ‘deserviunt’ ‘ defendunt’ Text. Roffens. et Matth. Paris. ac
forte magis congrue. Loricz siquidem servitii genus est hujusmodi
militum, quo dominis suis in militiam proficiscentibus deserviunt,
cujus quidem servitii praestatione terras suas erga cosdem dominos
defendunt, et sibimet salvas et securas reddunt. Nihil tamen hic
statuo, preesertiin cum ‘per plena arma feudum suum deservire’
forma sit loquendi in veteri Normanniz Custumario usurpata cap. 85..
qua servitium intelligo, sive conditionem, sub qua ejuscemodi vas~
sallus terram suam possidet, domino scil. deserviendi lorica.

¢ Simile ut videtur obtinuit in Normannia, dum corone regis.
Anglie annexa: in ejus enim loci Custumario Latino cap. 5. (quod.
in Gallico desideratur) haud procul a fine sic legimus: ‘Ex pra-.
dictis patet, quod non immerito Anglorum temporibus solet in Nor-
mannia usitari, quod omnes feudum lorice possidentes, equum et:
arma habere tenebantur, et cum ad etatem 30 annorum devenissent,.
tenebantur in militibus promoveri, ut prompti et apparati ad man-.
datum principis et hominum suorum invenirentur.’

4 In concilio forte Wintoniz celebrato anno Domini 1070, regni
vero ipsius quarto, de quo vide clar. Seld. Titul. Honor. edit. 2.
par. 2. cap. 5. § 20. in prince. et Florileg. in eodem anno. Item
Order. Vital. Histor. Eccles. 1.4. p. 516, ubi concilium istud cele-
bratum refert Windesoris.


502 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


aliquid retinuerit, ille super quem inventum fuerit michi
graviter emendabit. *Testibus archiepiscopis, episcopis, baro-
nibus, comitibus, vicecomitibus, et optimatibus tocius regni
Anglie ; apud Westm, quando coronatus fui.


x% CARTA CIVIBUS LONDON.


> Henricus Dei gracia Rex Anglie, archiepiscopo Cantuarie,
et episcopis, et abbatibus, et comitibus, et baronibus, et justi-
ciarlis, et vicecomitibus, et omnibus fidelibus suis, Francis et
Anglicis, tocius Anglie, salutem. Sciatis me concessisse civibus
meis Londofi tenend Middlesex ad firmam pro ccc. libi, ad
compotum ipsis et heredibus suis, de me et heredibus meis, ita
quod ipsi cives ponent vicecomitem qualem voluerint de se-
ipsis, }et justiciarium qualem voluerint de seipsis,’ ad custo-
diendum placita corone mee et eadem placitanda; et nullus
alius erit justiciarius super ipsos homines Londofi. Et cives
non placitabunt extra muros civitatis pro ullo placito; et sint
quieti de schot et ?de loth,’ de danegildo, et de murdre, et
nullus eorum faciat bellum. Et si quis civium de placitis
corone implacitatus fuerit, per sacramentum, quod judicatum
fuerit in civitate, se disracionet homo Londof. Et infra muros
civitatis nullus hospitetur, neque de mea familia neque de alia,
Snisi alicui hospicium liberetur. Et omnes homines Londo
sint quieti et liberi, et omnes res eorum, et per totam Angliam
et per portus maris, de theolonio, et passagio, et lestagio, et
omnibus aliis consuetudinibus. Et ecclesie, et barones, et
cives, teneant et habeant bene et in pace socnas suas cum
omnibus consuetudinibus, ita quod hospites, qui in soccis suis
hospitantur, ‘nulli dent consuetudines suas, nisi illi cujus
socea fuerit, vel ministro suo quem ibi posuerit. Et homo


in ms. Lond. desunt. 2! Ry.add. ms. Lond. vi H. 4neque Se.
nulli Ry.


2 Posterior charta Scaccarii (Se. 2.) sic concluditur: ‘ Teste Mau-
ricio Lond. episcopo, et Willelmo electo Wintofi episcopo, et Gerardo
Hereford episcopo, et Henrico comite, et Simone comite, et Waltero
Gifardo, [et Abbe Crispino K.] et Roberto de Munford, et Rogero
Bigodo, et Eudone Dapifero, et Roberto fit Hamonis, et Roberto
Malet, apud Westmonasterium quando coronatus fui. Valete.’

» In tertio Ms. hujus carte exemplari, quod videtur fuisse archi-
episcopi aut monachorum Cantuar., hoc adjectum inveni, fol. 2. a. b.
‘Deest in mss. Scaccar. usque ad cap. 3, sed habetur in Ms. in archivis
Londo apud Guildhall.


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 503


Londoniarum non judicetur in misericordia pecunie, nisi in sa’
were, scilicet, ad c. solid: dico de placito quod ad pecuniam
pertineat. Et amplius non sit miskenninga in hustenge, neque
in folkesmote, neque in aliis placitis infra civitatem. Et
husting sedeat semel in ebdomada, videlicet, die Lune. Et
terras suas, et *wardemotum, et debita civibus meis, habere
faciam infra civitatem et extra. Et de terris, de quibus ad
me clamaverint, rectum eis tenebo lege civitatis. Et si quis
thelonium vel consuetudinem a civibus Londoii ceperit, cives
Londo capiant de burgo vel de villa, ubi thelonium vel
consuetudo capta fuit, quantum homo Londofi pro thelonio
dedit, et proinde de dampno ceperit. Et omnes debitores,
qui civibus debita debent, eis reddant®, vel in London se
disracionent quod non debent. Quod si reddere noluerint,
neque‘ ad disracionandum venire, tunc cives quibus debita
sua debent capiant *in civitatem namia. sua, *vel de comitatu
in quo manet qui debitum debet. Et cives habeant fugaciones
suas ad fugandum, sicut melius et plenius habuerunt ante-
cessores eorum, scilicet, >®Siltre et Middlesex et Sureie.
Testibus episcopo Wintof, Rob fit Richer. et Hug Bigot, et
7 Alii de Toneis,’ et Witto *Albini, et Huberto Regis Cameraf,
et Wilto de Montfichet, et °Hagulfo de Tani, et Joh’ Belet, ev
Rob. fil. Siwa. Dat’ apud Westin.


Va sa ms. Lond. ad suam Ry. ?vadimonia Ry. %in Londonia,
Ry. add. 4quod non debent Ry. add. 5de burgo vel villa Ry. add.
Sin Chiltre Ry. 7’Alnero de Toteneis Ry. %de Alba Spina Ry:
9 Haugulfo Ry. 1° Siwardi Ry.


a ¢Intra civitatem’ lego, juxta chartam Henrici regis III. dat.
16 Martii, anno regni sui 11, eisdem civibus factam. Vid. Dom. Ed.
Coci Institut. par. 4. pag. 252. ‘ Et si aliquis’ (inquit rex) ‘in
aliqua terrarum nostrarum, citra mare vel ultra, thelonium, vel ali-
quam aliam consuetudinem, ab hominibus Londofi ceperit, postquam
ipse a recto defecerit, vic. Londofi namium inde apud London ca-
piant.” Consimilem ostendunt chartam cives Cantuarize ab Henrico II.
iis factam, et a nepote ipsius Henrico III. confirmatam, totidem fere
yerbis conceptam. Namium autem quid sit, docebitur in Glossario
ad finem operis. Hee interim ‘ withernamium’ sapiunt, quod exteris
‘repressalia,’ de qua voce pluribus clar. Vossius de Vitiis Sermon.
Vide etiam Smithi nostri Tractat.¢de Republ. Anglic. a Buddeno
Latine redditum, lib. 3. c. 10.

b Pro ‘ Siltre’ lege ‘ Ciltre,’ regiuncula nomen non procul a
S. Albano, de qua videsig D, Watsii Glossar. Matth. Paris. additum
in voce.


kra


* quoquo ?


504 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


Ill. *-DE CAUSARUM PERTRACCIONE ET DISTINC-
CIONE !VEL DESCRIPCIONE/


Omnes cause vera *consilii racione discuciende” sunt a
judicibus, et, sine personarum acceptacione, cum equalitate
discernende, vel, si facultas admiserit, pocius pace honestande:
et licet sanum ubique consilium in sue majestatis luce viguerit,
pro modo tamen concertancium informari lepida moralitate
non nocuit; et consilium forsitan dici poterit, quicquid honestum
et utile propositum *quoque modo promoverit.


IV. ?DE CAUSARUM LIBERACIONE.


Genera causarum tria sunt: deliberativum, de factendo et
non faciendo: demonstrativum, de laude et vituperio; judiciale,
de pena vel merito. *% Ut racionales et legales, partes quatuor:
exordium provocans; narratio explicans ; argumentum asserens ;
conclusio compellens. Species v.: honestum, commendatorium
vel persuasorium; admirabile, alienatum; humile, neglectum;
anceps, dubium vel promiscuum; obscurum, difficile vel tardum
in lege scripta, in moribus vel communi usu pro lege suscepto.
Omne autem jus aut naturale cognatorum est, aut morale
extraneorum, aut legale civium. Set sive lex agenda precipiat,
levia permittat, hortatur maxima, vitanda prohibeat, debet esse
manifesta, justa, honesta, possibilis; in omni condicione, pro-
fessione et ordine, in omni genere et statu causarum, in omni
controversia simplici vel composita, in omni jure naturali vel
consuetudinis, in omni contingenti vel remoto loco, *tempori
proprio conveniens, nullo privato commodo precipue deserviens,
veritatis et justicie, non miserum pecunie *querens Paugmentum.


Vin ms. Lond. deest. 2’consimili raciqne discernende ms. Lond.
3/ Status causarum duo sunt, racionabilis et legalis ws. Lond. et K.
4 persone us. Lond. et K. *querentis K.


a Titulum in impressis codicibus (‘ De carcerali liberatione’) cum
sit a capituli contentis omnino alienus, rejiciendum censeo; dubito
autem an pro eo legi possit ‘De generali causarum ratione ? hie
enim agitur de causarum generibus, et in cap. sequenti ‘De, causarum
proprietatibus.’ His ita conjectura scriptis, aliud tandem vidi harum
legum exemplar (ms. Lond.), in quo titulus huic capiti preefixus sic
se habet: ‘De generibus causarum.’ Sensus autem capituli difficilius
intelligitur, ob vitiosam in nonnullis locis distinctionem.

+ «Augmentum’ pro ‘argumentum’ in impressis. ms. Lond. legit
‘augmentum.’


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 505


Purum vero sit, et perspicua brevitate decorum perorantis
*eloquium, invencione, disposicione, elocucione, memoria, pro-
nunciacione, persuasione naturali, ingenio, doctrina sciencie,
et assiduo usu peritum in omni ?dicendi genere, qui magna
salutari gravitate peroret, * parva subtili lenitate deducat, media
temperata moderacione delectet; nec longioribus yperbatis
sensum confundat, nec verbis inanibus ambages interserat, qui
directa locucione fatigatur, congrua *schematum junctura re-
ficiat. Et si quid in dicendis aptum est et validum, finis
senciat, et principium; reliquum, °si dissimulari vel preteriri
nequeat, breviter sit, et transcursim medietatibus interjectum.


V. «DE CAUSARUM PROPRIETATIBUS.


§1. In causis omnibus, ecclesiasticis et secularibus, legaliter
et ordine pertractandis, alii sunt accusatores, alii defensores,
alii testes, alii judices, in omni discussione probitatis ydonei;
nullaque ‘sunt exaccione permixti. Demum causarum qualitas
sincera perscrutacione pensanda, et accusancium intencio, tes-
tium modus, et “judicum. eleccio.  § 2. Ne ‘peregrina sint
judicia, vel a non suo judice vel loco vel tempore celebrata;
nec in re dubia, vel absente accusato, dicta sit sentencia.
§ 3. Notandum quod per omnia, si accusatus inducias compe-
tentes, et respondendi vel defendendi licenciam habuit legi-
timam, ne disseisiatus, vel inplegiatus, vel illegiatus, vel sur-
repcione aliqua circumventus, aut fraude, judicetur: si in
testibus et judicibus et °personis satisfactum sit ei, ‘si judicibus


1 prava ms. Lond. 2cematium Se. 4 ms. Lond. add. 4 simul
us. Lond. et K. 4 prepositis ms. Lond. et K.


a Impressi codd. ‘ elogium.’

b Impressi male legunt ‘discendi.. Caput autem hoc congestunt
videtur ex diversis locis Isidori Hispal. Orig. Eccles. |.2. vide cap. 4,
5, 7, 8, 10, 19, 20, 21. Item Quintil. Instit. Orator. 1. 1. c. 4. et
14. e1.

¢ Totum hoc fere caput desumptum est ex diversis patrum senten-
tiis, canonibus ecclesiasticis insertis, uti videre est apud Burchardum,
Ivonem et Gratianum, et post Henrici Primi obitum, ni fallor, hisce
legibue adjectum.

4 Vide Burchard. lib. 16. c.13. ex epist. Zepherini Pape Sicilien-
sibus, vide cap. 14.

¢ Hee sumuntur ex epistolis Zepherini et Adriani Pontificum
Romanor. Vide Burchard. lib. 16. cap. 13, 14, 31, 29.

f Infra cap. 31. § 6. sic legimus: ‘ Si quis judices suspectos habeat,
advocet aut contradicat.’ An presens locus sit ex illo corrigendus,


* pares ?


506 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


consenciat, aut vocet aut contradicat. $4. ® Non ita penitus
est in ecclesiasticis negociis sicut in secularibus. In seculari-
bus, postquam aliquis. vocatus venerit, et in foro placitari
ceperit, non licet ante peractam causam, etsi in justiciam
convenerint, recedere: in ecclesiasticis vero, dicta causa, licet,
1si necesse fuerit, si judicem suspectum habuit, vel se senciat
pergravari. § 5. Judices sane non debent esse, nisi quos
impetitus elegerit; nec prius audiatur vel judicetur quam ipsi
eligantur: et qui electis consentire distulerit, nullus ei com-


municet, donec obtemperet. § 6. *"* Quod si in judicio
‘inter * partes oriatur dissensio, de quibus certamen emerserit,
vincat sentencia plurimorum. § 7. ‘Sancitum est in causa


fidei, vel ecclesiastici alicujus ordinis, eum judicare debere,
qui nec munere impar sit, nec jure dissimilis; et nichil fiat
absque accusatore; nam Deus et Dominus noster Jesus Christus
Judam furem esse sciebat, set quia non est accusatus, ideo non
est *abjectus; et quicquid inter Apostolos egit, pro dignitate


sed necesse fuit st judicem ms. Lond. et K.


aliis, quibus animus, inquirendum relinquo. De judicii vero eontra-
dictione vide Scotor. Leges, tit. Quoniam Attachiamenta, cap. 13.
et 35. Statuta etiam Williélmi regis ibid. cap. 10. Vide Spelm.
Concil. p. 273. c.140, 141. Burchard. Decret. lib. 1. cap. 222.

@ Locus hic spinosus desumitur ex Decretis Felicis Pape, uti
refert Burchardus, lib. 1. cap. 222, ubi sic legimus: ‘ Non in eccle-
siasticis agendum est negotiis, sicut in secularibus. Priusquam legi-
bus vocatus venerit, ut quum in foro decertare cceperit, non licet ante
peractam causam recedere, in ecclesiasticis vero causa dicta recedere
licet, si necesse fuerit, aut si se pregravari viderit’ Vide Spelm.
Concil. pag. 273. cap. 140. Nescio tamen, an et hic locus non sit
corruptus, quem tamen ex ipsius pape epistolis restituere frustra
conatus sum.

> Locus totidem verbis postea repetitus cap. se. 33. § 5., uterque
desumptus ex epistolis Fabiani Papz ad Hilarium Episcopum cap. 16.
Vide Burchard. 1. 1. ¢. 147. et Concil. Spelm. pag. 278. cap. 141.
‘ Judicibus’ heic assessores intelligo, vel ut infra ¢. 29. § 4. appel-
lantur senatores (exterorum rachimburgiis et sagi-baronibus non
dissimiles) non autem juratores, duodecim viri sc. qui in reatu dis-
quirendo, de facto, ut dicitur, apud nos judicant et cognoscunt, quod
equiti illi doctissimo (hunc locum in Glossario suo citanti in verbo
* Judex’) quam recte non video, placitum.

¢ Rectius ‘inter pares. Vide cap.31. §6. et Latin. Norman.
Custumar. c. 9.

4 Vide Ambros. Epist. 82.

¢ Pro‘ abrectus’ Sc. mss. Seld. et Lond. legunt ‘abjectus ;’ attamen
Burchard. lib. 16. c.'70, ubi locum hunc desumptum notat ex cap. 3.
Decret. Eleutherii Papze episcopis Gallia, ‘ejectus’ exhibet.


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 507


officii ratum mansit. § & Sicut autem nec clerici laicos, ita
nec laici clericos, in suis accusacionibus vel infamacionibus,
debent recipere. § 9. ?Accusatores clericorum et testes
legitimi sint et presentes, absque ulla infamia, vel suspicione,
vel manifesta macula sint; »quia recte sacerdotes accusare non
possunt qui sacerdotes esse non possunt, nec sui sunt ordinis;
nec oportet quemquam judicari vel dampnari, priusquam le-
gitimos accusatores habeat presentes, locumque defendendi
accipiat ad abluenda crimina. = § 10. Placuit eciam, quociens
clericis ab accusatoribus multa crimina objiciuntur, et unum
ex "hiis de quo prius egerint probare non valuerint, ad cetera
non admittantur. § §11. ¢Et non dampnetur presul nisi in
Lxxu. testibus; neque presul summus a quoquam judicetur.
Presbiter cardinalis nisi in xuuu. testibus non dampnabitur;
diaconus cardinalis nisi in xxvi.; subdiaconus et infra nisi
in vue; “nec major in minorum impeticione dispereat.


leis ms. Lond.


a Hee constitutio desumitur ex Decretis Calixti et Damasi Papa-
rum. Vide Burchard. lib. 1. cap. 171. et 172. et Concil. Spelm.
pag. 273. cap. 142, 143.

> Desumptum hoe videtur ex Capitular. Kar. et Ludov. Impp.
1.17. c. 130. et id quod sequitur ‘Placuit etiam’ ex eisd. Capitular.
eod. lib. c. 77.

¢ Vide pag. sequ. Eadmer. p. 113. 47. 115. 31. Vide Gratian.
caus. 2. q. 5. cap. 2. et 8. Ante concilium Lateranense sub Alex-
andro Tertio episcopi longe preferebantur cardinalibus. Vide ejusd.
concil. cap. 4. et habetur in Decretalium libro, tit. de Censibus,
cap. Cum Apostolus. Certe post constitutionem Nicolai Secundi
anno 1059, ut habetur Distinct. 23. et Ceelestini II. electionem a car-
dinalibus solummodo factam, ut deinceps stabilitum ab Alexandro III:
decretum anno 1179, ut is esset Romanz pontifex ecclesie, qui a
duabus partibus cardinalium electus foret, dignitas hec mirifice
crevit, adeo ut ab eo tempore etiam regibus comparanda censeatur.
Et licet de moderando eorum numero tum in conciliis Constantiensi
sess. 40. et Basileens. sess. 23. actum sit, et a Germanis et Gallis
in ultimo Tridentino expetitum, nihil tamen profectum fuit, donec,
anno 1586, tertio non. Decembr., Sixtus Quintus bulla quadam de-
claravit, ut essent tantum cujuscunque ordinis lxx. cardinales; vid.
vi. episcopi, 1. presbyteri et xiv. diaconi. De cardinalibus autem
justum habemus tractatum apud doct. equ. Spelm. in voce, et Duaren.
de Sacris Eccles. Ministr. ac Benefic. lib. 1. c. 13.

4 Idem inculcatur infra cap. 32. § 1. aliis verbis, cui respondet
illud apud Gratianum cap. 2. q. 5. ‘Majorum quisquam minorum
accusationibus non impetatur.’ Vide caus. 3.96. Can.1. ex Epist. 3.
Fabiani Pape Decret. Julii 1. tom. 1. Concil. cap. 16. fol. 185. b.
p. 195. 33.


508 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


§ 12. *Et ibi semper causa agatur ubi crimen admittitur.
§ 183. Pulsatus ante suum judicem, si voluerit, causam ?suam
dicat; et non ante suum judicem pulsatus, si voluerit, taceat :
et ut pulsatis, quociens petierint, inducie dentur. § 14. Et
omnis qui crimen objicit ®scribat se probaturum, et si ante
conversus “prosequi noluerit, *convicium est, non crimen, ha-
bendum. ‘Quod si decertare contendat, si non probaverit
quod objecit, penam quam intulit ipse paciatur. §15. Apos-
tolus inquit, adversus presbiterum inscripcionem non recipi-
endam absque duobus vel tribus idoneis testibus ; quanto magis
de episcopis, si hec de presbiteris vel ceteris fidelibus sunt
observanda ? § 16. Si quis aliquem clericorum in accusa-
cione fornicacionis appetit, secundum Apostoli Pauli preceptum,
duo vel tria testimonia requirantur ab eo: quod si non potuerit
datis testimoniis approbare quod dixit, excommunicacionem
accusati accusator accipiat. Et nemini de se: confesso super
alienum crimen credatur: confessio vero per metum vel per
fraudem %exorta non valet. § 17. Caveat sacerdos ne de
hiis qui ei confitentur peccata sua alicui recitet quod ei con-
fessus est, non propinquis non extraneis: quod si fecerit,
deponatur, et omnibus diebus vite sue ignominiosus peregri-
nando peniteat. Et si quando episcopus ‘dicit aliquem’ sibi®
fuisse confessum proprium crimen, et ille neget, non putet


lin ms. Lond. deest. 2 convictum mss. Seld. et Sc. habent. 3 extorta
uss. Seld. Sc. Lond. et K. legunt.  “ aliquem dicat as. Lond. et K.
5 soli K. add.


a Idem habetur infra cap. 57.§2. Item cap. 62. §3. Pariter jus
et civile et pontificium. Vide Burchard. lib: 16. ¢. 9. ex concilio
Arausican. cap.4. caus. 2 quest. 8. cap.4. Matth. Stephan. de Offic.
Jud. 1. ¢. 8. n.50. Skenzum de Verb. Signific. verbo ‘ Infang-
thefe.’ Atque apud nostrates quoque illud receptum innuit Bractonus
1.3. tract.2. cap. 35. it. 1.5. tract.5. 2. n.3.

> Forte, ‘sciat se probaturum.’ Vide Burchard. lib. 16. ¢. 3. nisi
inscriptio sit intelligenda, qua quis crimen quod objecerit non probans,
legi sive poene talionis jure civili fit obnoxius.

¢ Ita ms. Lond. etiam legit; impress. olim, ‘ persequi noluerit ;
conjunctum est.’ Vide stat. 37 Edw. III. ¢.18. stat. 38 Edw. III.
cap. 9, infra, cap. 34.

“ Lex plane talionis cui assentitur non solum jus civile 1. penult.
ce. De accusat. item 1.2. § fin. Pandect. De adult. inscriptionum
pagina I. 3. c. Qui accus. poss. sed et jus pontificium, Burchard. 1. 16.
c. 3. Cum autem apud nos idem in ordinum comitiis sancitum esset
anno 37 Edw. IIl. ¢. 18. deinceps illud tanquam aliquanto severius
fuit rursus mitigatum anno 38 Edw. III. c. 9.


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 509


episcopus ad injuriam suam non pertinere, quod gibi soli non
creditur, etsi scrupulo consciencie sue dicat se ei nolle com~
municare.  § 18. Plerumque boni tacent et sufferunt mala
que noverunt, ‘quia documentis deseruntur, et judicibus pro-
bare non possunt; quamvis enim vera sint, non tamen judici
sunt credenda, nisi certis *indiciis probentur. %Nos vero a
communione nequaquam prohibere possumus, (quamvis het
prohibicio non sit mortalis, set medicinalis,) nisi vel sponte
confessum, vel judicio convictum: hinc enim talis est *nomina-
bilis, ut ait Apostolus, qui confitetur, vel ordine judiciario
convincitur. Quod si per judicium auferri non potest, tole-
retur pocius, ne quis perverse malos *vitando ab ecclesia,
discedens precedat illos ad gehennam. Communio malorum
non maculat aliquem percepcione sacramentorum, set confessio
factorum. Quisquis in ecclesia bene vixerit, nil ei prejudicant
aliena peccata. § 19. De habitu et vestitu nichil legimus
imperatum divinitus; que ad pompam sunt prohibentur: et si
regeris, potes in superbo cultu Shabere cor humile, ut Hester.
§ 20. >Peccatores non solum Deus iratus, set eciam miseratus,
evertit: evertuntur autem duobus °modis: aut sicut Sodomite,
ut pro peccatis suis ipsi homines puniantur; aut sicut Ninivite,
ut ipsa hominum peccata puniantur et destruantur. Omnes
eque diligendi sunt, set cum omnibus prodesse non poteris,
hiis pocius consulendum est, qui pro locorum et temporum et
quarumlibet rerum opportunitatibus constriccius junguntur tibi.
§ 21. Uterque reus est, et qui veritatem occultat, et qui men-
dacium dicit; quia ille prodesse non vult, et iste nocere desi-
derat. Non ita caveatur arrogancia, ut veritas relinquatur.
§ 22. Qui sacerdotem, ante familiarem commonicionem, apud
suos judices aliquando, vel apud seculares unquam, accusaverit,
anathema sit.©  § 23. Si episcopus a fide deviaverit, et a
subditis secrete commonitus incorrigibilis apparuerit, tunc ad
4summos pontifices vel sedem apostolicam accusetur: pro aliis


Iquea AK. judiciis Sc.  3non AK. ‘4invitando K. 5 in ms.
Lond. deest. 6 us. Lond. add.


a Nonne rectius ‘ abominabilis ?”

b Vide August. epist. 29.

¢ Vide supra, et cap. 66. § 3. et 73. § 6.

4 Adde Capitular. Kar. et Lud. Impp. 1. 7. cap. 68.113. et 234.
Videtur autem hoc caput ad exemplum canonis noni Concilii Chalce-
donensis confectum. Vide Eadmer. Histor. l. 5. pag. 107. 33. ubi


* si fuerit
add.?


510 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


actibus suis magis est tolerandus, quam corrigendus. § 24. *Si
quis episcopus super certis criminibus accusetur, ab omnibus
qui sunt in provincia episcopis audiatur, nec dampnetur vel
judicetur, priusquam legitimos accusatores presentes habeat, et
conprovinciales non alienigenas, et a se electos judices non
refutet, nisi sit appellatum: quod eciam liceat destinatis in
supplicium. Appellantem autem et viciatam causam appella-
cionis remedio sublevantem non debet affliccio vel detencionis
injuriari custodia. §25. Quidam ad ‘repellenda imperitorum
machinamenta, et suas raciones preparandas, et testes con-
firmandos, et 'consilia querenda, annum et sex menses concedi
mandaverunt; quidam annum, in quo plurimi concordant,
minus vero quam seX. menses non reperi. § 26. Quod si
episcopi vel clerici, vi vel timore ejecti, vel suis rebus expoliati,
fuerint, prius eis omnia sua legaliter reddantur, et tantum
temporis spacium habeant quanto dissaisiati ?fuisse videbuntur,
antequam ad judicium canonice vocentur. § 27. Gregorius
in *Decretis: Presbiter vel diaconus, vel quilibet clericus*, a


1 consimilia mus. Lond. 2 esse ms. Lond.


Anselmum archiepiscopum Anglorum summum pontificem vocat, quo
nomine, ut videtur, eo evo, provinciarum primates, patriarche,
‘metropolitani sunt generatim comprehensi. Porro satis hinc, me
judice, constat, leges hasce fuisse demum recognitas post annum
1172, ante enim id tempus de appellationibus ad sedem Romanam
prohibitis satis edocemur a diversis, Eadmer. Hist. p. 39. 1. 35.
Matth. Paris. anno 1164, uti et de frequentibus paparum eo nomine
institutis querelis. Id. Eadmer. p. 113. 2, 3. p. 115.31. Nec un-
quam. eas legibus permissas deprehendimus ante absolutionem Hen-
rici II. anno 1172, quando inter cetera condebatur: ‘ Appellationes
nec a rege impediendas, nec impediri permittendas, quin libere
fierent in ecclesiasticis causis ad Romanum pontificem.’ Rog. Hoved.
fol. 303. ‘7. quam tamen concessionem Henrici II. posteri deinde
reges multis modis enervarunt, et tandem penitus abrogarunt.

« Ipsissima verba sunt Capitular. Kar. et Lud. Impp. lib. 7. cap. 79.
Videatur etiam ejusdem libri cap. 230.

b Legendum forte: ‘ Appellans autem, et. vitiatam causam appella-
tionis remedio sublevans, non debet afflictionis vel detentionis injuriari
custodia:’ nisi malit quis pluraliter, ‘ Appellantes autem,’ &c.

¢ Impress. olim legit ‘ replenda.’ Vide Burchard. ].1. ¢. 180. ex
epistolis Felicis pape 2. fratribus Agypti, c. 15.

4 Hine apparet leges hasce recognitas atque, uti jam extant, post
Henrici Primi mortem (que incidit in annum 1135) in archiva re-
latas. Siquidem Decreta non ante annum 1151 a Gratiano, monacho
Benedictino, in monasterio S. Felicis Bononiensis compilata fuere.
Baron. To. 12. n.6.. Mat. West. Vide Epist. D. Edwardi Coci ad
Relationum suarum partem nonam. Quod autem ex Gregorio et


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 511


populo accusatus, si certi non fuerint testes illati criminis qui
approbent veritatem, jusjurandum sit in medio, et illum
proferant testem de innocencie sue puritate cui nuda et aperta
sunt omnia. Hoc eciam beatus Sixtus papa se fecisse com-
memorat a quodam Basso culpatus, licet cum magna examina-
cione satis possit evadere suspicionem et emulacionem fugiens,
non eis qui noluerint aut sponte hoc elegerint faciendi formam
dans Ieronymus super Jeremiam libro .primo. § 28. Jura-
mentum debet habere comites veritatem, ‘justiciam et judicium ;
si ista defuerint, non juramentum set perjurium erit; nam si
quis per coaccionem abjurare cogatur quod per multos annos
quiete tenuerit, non in jurante set cogente perjurium erit.
Reum non facit nisi mens rea. Nemo se circumveniat aut
seducat. § 29. *Qui per *"*lapidem falsum jurat, perjurus
est. Quacunque arte verborum juret aliquis, Deus ita accipit
sicut ille cui juratur intelligit. Set sine dubitacione malum
minus est per deum falsum jurare veraciter, quam per Deum
verum jurare fallaciter; quanto enim id per quod juratur magis
est sanctum, tanto magis est penale'perjurium. = § 80. Qui
exigit juracionem, multum interest si scit illum falsum jura-
turum vel nescit: si nescit et dicit, jura michi, jura michi, ut
fides stet, non audeo dicere non esse peccatum, tamen humana
temptacio est: "si novit fecisse et cogit jurare, homicida est.
§ 31. Si ab alio provocatus fueris, ab illius malo est quod


1 judicium ms. Lond. et K.


Sixto Tertio hic citatur habetur in Decretis caus. 2. q. 5. cap. Pres-
byter et Mandastis; ze. cap. 5. et 10. Idem supra observari potest
cap. de Danegeldo, ubi Willielmi Secundi fit mentio. Quod a
Ranulpho Glanvil. an 1180 forte adjectum, cujus sapientia condite
sunt leges subscripte, quas Anglicanas vocamus. Hoveden. fol. 342.
b. 34. Vide tamen Lanfranci epist. 23. § Pospositis, p. 313, col. 1.;
in Decretis sic legitur.

« Verius, ni fallor, legitur: ‘Qui per lapidem falsum jurat, per-
jurus est. Quacunque arte verborum juret aliquis.’ Melius tamen
ut intelligas, lector, quid sit per lapidem jurare et pejerare, ad-
monendus es, Romanos, ut Festus docet, olim jurasse lapidem tenentes
et projicientes in his verbis: ‘ Si sciens fallo, me Diespiter salva urbe
arceque bonis ejiciat, ut hunc ego lapidem.’ De hoc autem juramento
vide, preter Livium et Macrobium, Erasmum in Chil. 2. cent. 6.
ada, 33. ‘Jovem lapidem jurare.’ Videantur etiam Cujac. Observat.
li. i. ca.21. Dempster de Juram. li.1. ce. 8. et Turneb. Adversar.
1. 30. c. 24.

> Concord. cap. Ille qui hominem, 22. q. 5.


512 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


juras, non a tuo. § 32. Si quis jurat falsum, te sciente, si
te non audierit, utrum sit 'prodendus, si proditus et peri-
culum mortis incurrat? Difficillima questio est, cui plus noceat,
illi cui juratur, an sacerdoti? michi videtur quod ille cui magis
prodest vel obest veritatem jurare. § 33. Jurare, necessitate
cogente, non est peccatum. § 84. Non est servandum
sacramentum cum malum incaute *promittitur. § 35. Jura-
mentum filii et filie, nesciente patre, et vota monachi, nesciente
abbate, et juramenta pueri, irrita sunt.


VI. DE TRIPARTICIONE REGNI ANGLIE IN DIVERSI-
TATE LEGUM, COMITATUUM, VEL PROVINCIARUM.


§ 1. Regnum Anglie trifariam dividitur in regno Britannie,
in Westsexiam, et Mircenos, et Danorum provinciam. Habet
archiepiscopatus duos, *episcopatus *xv. comitatus xxx. Ipsi
vero comitatus in centurias et ?sipessocna distinguuntur.
Centurie vel hundreta in decanias vel decimas, et dominorum
plegios. §2. Legis eciam Anglice trina est particio, ad
superiorem modum; alia enim Westsexie, alia Mircena, alia
Denelaga est; ‘preter tremendum regie majestatis ‘titislamus


1 Impress. legit procedendus, rectius prodendus ms. Lond. et Sc. 2 pro-
nunciatur Sc. rectius promittitur us. Lond. et K. 3multos ms. Lond.
et K. 4titulamus muss. Seld. Twysd. Lond. et K.


a Hine apparet leges hasce conditas post erectionem episcopatus
Eliensis circa ann. 1108, et Carleolensis cirea ann. 1133 aut 1134.
Hoved. Henr. Huntind. fol. 171. a. lin. 2. fol. 220. b. ii.

» Nisi hic, nusquam occurrit mihi istud vocabulum ‘ sipessoena,’
Erratum puto pro Saxon. yipeyyocna scriptoris forte vel incuria vel
imperitia Romanum p pro Saxonico p accipientis. Vox est, ni fallor,
composita, ducenda 4 Sax. zep13, contracte pid, et socna ‘sodalitium,’
scil. coetus, fraternitas, societas quorundam hominum (quod id
signat) privilegiis, libertatibus, franchesiis (ut a Normannis dictis)
preditorum, quod yocna notat. Nec voce hac hoc sensu ulla apud
nos hodieque vulgarior vel tritior, e.g. cum dicimus, ‘ What a sith of
men,’ &c. interrogando sc. vel admirando, i.e. ‘Quantus hominum
cetus.’ Ejusmodi sodalitium ‘gildam’ vulgo vocant, alias ‘ fribor-
gam,’ quarum vocum utriusque prostat expositio in doct. Spelm.
Glossario, quod velim consulas. Sicut autem in decennz sive de-
curiz sodalitio reliquis preerat dignior unus, quem ceodungmon
nuneuparunt, hodie ‘tithingman,’ sic etiam isthoc sodalitium suum
habuit prefectum, quem zeripcundmon quandoque sipcundmon no-
minarunt; z.e. Lambardo interprete, ‘ custos paganus.’

© Locus plane mendosus diu me torsit, et frustra, quid enim sen-
tiendum sit de voce illa ‘ titislamus’ penitus ignoro, nec aliquid
lucis accendit varia illa leetio < titulamus,’ nisi legamus, ‘ Preter


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 5138


imperium, quod preesse jugiter legimus ac salubriter *cele-
bramus, adyertendum. In multis autem differunt, set in multis
conveniunt. Ipsorum eciam jura comitatuum per provincias
plerumque dissensiunt, sicut, videlicet, cupiditas et maligna
professorum detestanda studia graviora nocendi genera legalibus
Sstatutibus adjecerunt: tanta quippe rerum perversitas et
malorum affluencia est, ut definita legis veritas vel stabilis
medicine providencia raro possit inveniri; set, ad majorem
omnium confusionem, novus inplacitacionis modus exquiritur,
nova nocendi fraus invenitur, tanquam parum noceat quicquid
ante fuerit, et pluris esse judicetur, qui pluribus plus nocuerit.
Illis tamen reverenciam et amorem stigia simulacione _polli-
cemur, quibus carere non possumus :.quicquid nostre crudelitati
pari congressione non respondet nobis natum ‘reputamus.
5Induimus animos tyrannorum, et hanc rabiem nobis induxere
divitie. Nemo quantum potest, set ultra modis omnibus appetit
insanire. Tot denique sunt et tantis occupata solicitudinibus,
tot circumduccionibus involuta sunt infortunia seculorum, ut
vitande pocius videantur exacciones, et incerta penitus alea
placitorum.


VII. DE GENERALIBUS PLACITIS COMITATUUM,
QUOMODO VEL QUANDO FIERI DEBEANT.


§ 1. Sicut antiqua fuerat institucione formatum, salutari
regis imperio, vera nuper est recordacione firmatum, generalia
comitatuum placita certis locis et ®vicibus, et diffinito tempore,
per singulas Anglie *'-provincias, convenire debere, nec ullis
ultra fatigacionibus agitari, nisi propria regis necessitas, vel
commune regni commodum sepius adjiciat. § 2. * Inter-


Megimus K. legibus Se. 2frequentamus us. Lond. et K. 3 statibus
us. Seld. et K. 4nd, punctulis subjectis, Sc. add. indicimus K.
6 judicibus ms. Lond. et A.


tremendum, quod titulamus regiz majestatis imperium ;’ utcunque sit,
idem videtur esse loci sensus cum eo, de quo versus finem cap. 9,
ubi post regni et legis Anglie velut hic partitionem, statim additur :
« Supersunt regis placita curie, que usus et consuetudines suas una
semper immobilitate servat ubique.’

a Vid. cap. 29. His in exhibitione loci addit doctiss. Spelmannus
plures alios; ‘ heretochios,’ sc. ‘trithingrevios, leidgrevios,’ omnes
locum suum post vicecomites capessentes; de hoc iterum postea,
cap. 31. § 3.


514 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


sint autem episcopi, 'comites, vicedomini, vicarii, centenarii,
aldermanni, prefecti, prepositi, barones, vavasores, tungrevii,
et ceteri terrarum domini, diligenter intendentes ne malorum
impunitas, aut *graviorum pravitas, vel judicum subversio solita
miseros laceracione conficiant. § 3. *” Agantur itaque primo
debita vere Christianitatis jura; secundo regis placita*; pos-
tremo cause singulorum dignis satisfaccionibus expleantur; et
quoscunque ¥scyresmot discordantes inveniet, vel amore con-
greget, vel sequestret judicio. § 4. **Debet autem
scyresmot et burgemot bis, hundreta vel wapentagia duodecies
in anno congregari, et ‘sex diebus antea *submoniri, nisi
publicum commodum vel® regis dominica necessitas terminum
preveniat. § 5. Et si aliquid in hundretis agendorum
penuria judicum, vel casu aliquo, transferendum sit in duas,
vel tres, vel amplius hundretas, respectetur justo fine clau-
dendum. § 6. Et si quisquam, violenta recti destitucione
vel detencione, in hundretis vel congruis agendorum _locis,
causam suam ita turbaverit, ut ad comitatus audienciam.per-
trahatur, perdat eam, et de cetero componat, sicut rectum sit.
§7. Si quis baronum regis vel aliorum comitatui, secundum
legem, interfuerit, totam terram, quam illic in ®dominio suo
habet, acquietare poterit. Eodem modo est, ¢si dapifer ejus
legitime fuerit. Si uterque necessario desit, prepositus et
sacerdos et quatuor de melioribus ville assint pro omnibus qui
nominatim non erunt ad placitum submoniti. §8. Idem in
hundreto decrevimus observandum, de locis, et vicibus, et
judicum observanciis, de causis singulorum justis examina-


1’ comites et vic. herehohei treingrevei, leidegrevei, vicarii ms. Lond.
et K. 2gravionum K. 3septem A. 4submonitionem Se. 5 effi-
ciente Sc. add. dominico KK


@ Quo confusum constat forum sacrum cum civili, contra sancitum
illud Guilielmi Primi, (hujus edit. p. 495.) de quo plura scholiis ad
cap. 31. § 3.

> Verior recte hec lectio quam illa doct. Spelm. in Glossar. in
verbo ‘Chirgemot.’ Vide quosque ‘ Chirgemot discordantes inveniet,’
&c. unde vocem trahit ac significandum forum ecclesiasticum.

© Impress. legit ‘Scyresmot et burgimotis—et sex diebus antea
submotum—-vel efficiente regis dominica, &c. Deprompta hac
videntur e legibus Edo. Confess. ‘De Heretochiis,’ (hujus edit.
p- £56, .) unde erronee istius loci lectionis correctio in promptu est.
Vide Leges AEthelst. I. c. 20.

4 Similiter locum exhibet doct. Spelman. in Gloss. verbo ¢ Dapifer.’
Malim autem ‘legitime interfuerit.’


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 515


cionibus audiendis, de domini et dapiferi, vel sacerdotis et
prepositi et meliorum hominum presencia.


VIII. *““DE HUNDRETIS TENENDIS.


§1. Speciali tamen plenitudine, si opus est, bis in anno
conveniant in hundretum suum quicunque liberi, tam *7hudefest
quam folgarii, ad dinoscendum, scilicet, inter cetera, si decanie
plene sint, vel qui, quomodo, qua racione, recesserint, vel
super-accreverint. Presit autem singulis hominum novenis
decimus, et toti simul hundreto unus de melioribus, et vocetur
aldremannus, qui Dei leges et hominum jura vigilanti studeat
observancia promovere.2 § 2. *"""Communis quippe com-
modi provida dispensacione statutum est®, ut, a duodecimo
etatis sue anno, et in hundreto sit et decima, vel plegio liberali,
quisquis were, vel wite, vel jure liberi, dignus curat estimari.
Conducticii, vel solidarii, vel stipendiarii, *duorum plegio
teneantur. §3. ** Et omnis dominus secum tales habeat
qui ei justiciabiles sint, tanquam eos, si peccaverint, ad rectum
habiturus, vel pro eis forsitan racionem redditurus. § 4. “Dic-
tum est de illis qui terram non habent, si in alio comitatu


1 hurderefest us. Lond. et K. .?4*™ Quia nil a nullo exigi vel capi
debet, nisi de jure et racione, per legem terre et justiciam, et per
judicium curie, sine dolo, prout statutum est maxima consideracione
procerum et bonorum predecessorum tocius regni, et multa aggre-
gacione servorum Dei et bonorum patrum et sapientum tocius
monarchie approbatum. ms. Lond. et K. add.


® Loco ‘hudefest’ habetur ‘hirderefest’ in doct. Spelm. Glossar.
verbo ‘ Folgarii;’ vitiose tamen sic scribi pro hurdesfest alibi opinatur
eques ille doct. verbo sc. ‘ hurderefest.’ Neutrum autem mihi placet ;
scribendum reor ¢ heorthfest,’ nec aliter in LL. Cnuti regis, Sec. c. 20.
Vocis autem et loci pleniorem intellectum quere in Glossar. ad finem
operis, verb. ‘ Heordfest.’

b Que sequuntur ad ista ‘rationem redditurus’ e legibus 2thel-
redi, I. c.1, et Cnuti, Sec. c. 19. et 28. excerpta videntur. Huc etiam
spectat lex illa Guil. Primi, III. cap. 14, nec non ejusdem regis leges
in Ingulpho 49. et 50. Vide cap. 28. LL. Cnuti, Sec.

¢ Hee et sequentia usque ad ‘emendet,’ ipsissima verba sunt
legum /Ethelstani, I. c.8, quod cum lemmate prefixo sic se habet
in Jorvalensi, cap.14. ¢ De illis qui terram non habent, et in alio
comitatu famulantur.’ ‘Item ediximus, si quis non habens terram
serviat in alio comitatu, et ad cognatas suos quandoque redeat, qui
eum in ipsa visitatione firmabit, eum ad jus publicum presentet, si
forisfaciat ibi, vel emendet pro eo.’

4 Harum legum exemplar, quod, ut videtur, secutus est doct.
Spelm. verbo ‘ Aldermannus,’ eandem habuit additionem cujus partem


* [, domino-
rum.


* esse eum ?


516 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


serviant, et cognacionem suam visitent, qui eos inter agendum
firmabit, eos ad publicum rectum ducat, si ibi forisfaciant; vel
propter eos emendet. §5. *Nemo ignotum, vel vagantem,
ultra triduum, absque securitate detineat, vel alterius hominem,
sine commendante vel plegiante, recipiat, vel suum a se
dimittat, sine prelati sui licencia et vicinorum testimonio,
quietum *eciam in omnibus in quibus fuerit accusatus.
§6. Set de hiis omnibus pleniorem suggerent ventura noticiam,
sicut Edwardi beatissimi principis extitisse temporibus certis
indiciis et fida relacione cognovimus. Et si quid professioni
nostre congruum precedencium vel sequencium capitula
docuerint, sive jure naturali, vel legali, vel morali, gaudeant
instituto, et hoc licet multa 4compositorum varietate minus
plene peregerim, bonam saltem voluntatem ubique pretendo.


IX. ***DE QUALITATE CAUSARUM.


§1. Qualitas causarum multa est: emendabilium, et non
emendabilium, et que solum pertinent ad jus regium. Omnes
vero cause simplices sunt aut conjuncte, et in manifestacione
consistunt, vel in baccusacione. In contemplacione peccato-
rum, alie per visum fiunt et auditum, alie per relacionem,
alie per estimacionem, que magis ad violentam usurpacionem
improbis prelatorum conjecturis inversantur, que a legitimis?
causis omnibus, et maxime ecclesiasticis, submoventur. § 2. Et
sive unus unum accuset aut plures, vel plures unum, vel plures
sint compellantes, et compellati aliquem statim in inculpa-


1 circumpositorum mss. Seld. Twysd. et Lond. 2 legum ms. Lond.


exhibet ibidem. Hac autem de re vide statutum editum ann.
34 Edw. 1. ‘De tallagio non concedendo,’ cap. 1, et LL. Will. Primi,
III. c. 5.

* Deprompta hee videntur cum sequentibus ad ista: ‘quibus
fuerit accusatus’ e LL. Cnuti, Sec. c. 28, et antecessoris ejus AEthel-
stani, I. c.22. Recensuit Guiliel. Primi, I. c. 48. legum suarum.
Concordat Bracton. 1.3. tract.2. cap.10. num.1. ‘ Nec debet,’ in-
quit, ‘quis repellere servientem suum antequam purgatus sit de
omni calumpnia, unde prius fuit calumpniatus.’ Plura huc spectantia
vide in doct. Spelm. Glossar. verbo ‘ Homehyne.’

> Id est ex notorietate facti, (ut cum forensibus loquar) nulla sunt
tergiversatione celande, ut id furti manifesti quod vocant ‘hond-
habend, bacberend,’ cui respondet Saxonum et openpe yeylte, de
quo in LL. Ine, cap. 37, aut non ita notorie, ut que probationis
indigent manifestatione, quo etiam tendit id quod sequitur infra,
* si quid in actu vel in sola tihla,’ z.e. accusatione, ‘ consistat,’ &c.


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 517


cionibus responderi oportet, aliquando competenti termino,
aliquando nullo. § 8. Et omnes habeant congruos per-
tractacionum modos, locis temporibus et personis assignatos.
§4. Et omnis causa terminetur vel hundreto, vel comitatu, vel
halimoto socam habencium, vel dominorum curiis, vel divisis
parium, vel certis agendorum locis Jadjacentibus, ne cuilibet
irrogatam injuriam *fomenta dilata vel amota multiplicent, ne
causarum habitudine, vel aliqua recti destitucione, jura per-
transeant. Transeunt autem multis modis, alia intrinsecis, alia
extrinsecis accidenciis, secundum industriam vel insciciam:
Sconcertancium, secundum socam ‘placitorum, quam quidam
habent in suo de suis, quidam de suis et extraneis, sive in
omnibus sive in quibusdam causis.* §5. Multa siquidem
causarum differencia est: Capite plectendarum, vel pecunia
redimendarum, transeuncium, manencium, vel utrumque spec-
tancium, et que solum pertinent ad jus regium.  §6. Differt
eciam an aliquis cum suo vel alterius homine causam agat, et
si quid in actu vel in sola tihla consistat, et si quid bello vel
lege sacramentali, plena vel frangenti, vel eciam judiciali
repetatur. Aliud vero est si par parem accuset, vel major
minorem, vel minor majorem. § 7. Permutantur eciam
causarum acciones in locorum contingenciis, in tempore, ex
personis. §8. In accusacionum modis, personarum dis-
tinctio est in condicione, in sexu, secundum professionem et
ordinem, secundum observatam legalitatem, que in agendis
omnibus pensanda sunt judicibus. §9. -Nemo enim stultus
aut improbus debet esse judex, set optimates quique, secundum


ladjacens K. 2formata ms. Lond. 3 causancium ms. Lond. et K.
4 prelatorum K.


@ Quod traditum heic pluries in his legibus occurrit, et in cap. 20
§ 2, 27, et 59 § 17 et sq. atque semper intelligendum est de privi-
legiis maneriorum dominis, principis beneficio, competentibus, foren-
sium nostratium lingua ‘infangthefe’ et * outfangthefe’ dictis, quorum
prius significat potestatem judicandi furem quemcunque infra ma-
nerium vel dominium tuum comprehensum, posterius autem similem
jurisdictionem in latronem extra limites manerii vel dominii tui
delinquentem, dummodo intra ejusdem fines deprehendatur. Vide
Bracton. 1. 3. tract. 2. cap. 35. et Spelman. Glossar. in voce ‘ Infang-
thefe.’

> Hac de re vide plura cap. 29. §1. et LL. thelredi (VIII.)
apud ‘Habam’” (vide Spelm. Concil. pag. 532. (Wilk. Cone. t.1.
p- 295.) ubi ‘ Habam’ corrigend. forte ‘Badam,’ quomodo in vet.
cod. Ms. olim §. August. Cant., modo penes D. Simonesium D’Ewes


518 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


modum suum, qui non personam sed opera dijudicent, per
legem provincie; regnum enim Anglie tripartitum est in
Westsaxones, et Myrcenos, et Dacorum provinciam; legis
eciam Anglice trina est particio; et ad eandem distanciam
supersunt regis placita curie, *que usus et consuetudines suas
una semper immobilitate servat ubique. Soca vero placitorum
alia proprie pertinet ad fiscum regium, et singulariter, alia
participacione; alia pertinet vicecomitibus et ministris regiis
in firma sua; alia pertinet baronibus socham et sacham
habentibus.


X. **-DE JURE REGIS.


§1. >Hee sunt jura que rex Anglie solus et super omnes
homines habet in terra sua, commoda pacis et securitatis
institucione retenta: infraccio pacis regie per manum vel breve
date; denegildum; placitum brevium vel preceptorum ejus
contemptorum; de famulis suis ubicunque occisis vel injuriatis ;
infidelitas et prodicio; quicunque despectus vel maliloquium
de eo; ‘castellacio trium scannorum; utlagaria; **""*furtum


equ. aurat. et baronet.) cap. ‘De Officio Judicis,’ ubi, inter alia, hae
ad rem nostram signantur facientia: ‘ Et nullus dominus stultos aut
improbos judices constituat, quia stultus per ignorantiam, improbus
per cupiditatem vitat quam didicit veritatem.’

a His similia predicantur de tribunali quod curiam de hustingis
olim nuncuparunt, que, ut loquuntur leges Edo. Confess. (De Here-
tochiis, p. 457, 2.) consuetudines suas una semper inviolabilitate
conservat.

> Que se. in hoc et seq. capitibus (presertim 13.) recensentur,
usque ad cap. 19. inclusive, concordant LL. Cnuti, See. cap. 12.
et 15, Glanvill. lib. 1. cap. 2, Bracton. 1.3. tract. 2, per totum Vetus
Custumar. Norman. cap. 10, 12, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. Regalia hae
recte dicenda, quorum quedam enumerantur in usibus Feudorum,
cap. ‘Que sunt regalia,’ quod vide, et Hotomanni comment. ibid., et
si plura cupias, adi Regneri Sixtini tractatum, quem inscripsit ‘De
Regaliis.’

¢ Spelman. in Glossario suo, vocem ‘Castellacium’ expositurus,
adducit locum una cum alio non dissimili in cap. 13. § 1. (14. Spel-
manno) obscura et corrupta indigitans, nec immerito obscuriora
tamen ob defectum distinctionum et interpunctionum recte adhibita-
rum. Sic autem distinguendum et legendum puto: ‘ Castellatio
trium stannorum utlagaria furtum morte puniendum;’ ‘ puniendum’
dico, capitulum 13. sequutus, ubi est: ‘furtum probatum et morte
dignum.’ Si quis tamen ‘impunitum’ maluerit, non contendero,
presertim cum moris olim fuerit, latronem in furto manifesto vel
crimine flagranti deprehensum, sc. rem furtivam in manu habentem,
quod ‘hondhabend’ (Germano-Saxonibus ‘handhafte that,’ i.e. fac-
tum manuale. Vide Gryphiand. de Weichbild. Saxon. cap. 57.
num. 4.) aut a tergo deferentem, quod ‘bacberend’ nuncupabant ;


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 519


morte impunitum; murdrum; falsaria monete sue; incendium ;
hamsocna; forestel; *!fyrdinga; flemenfyrme; premeditatus
assultus; robaria; ?stretbreche; >presumpcio terre vel pecunie
regis; thesaurus inventus; *naufragium; ‘maris algarum;
éviolentus concubitus; raptus; *“' foreste; relevaciones baro-
num suorum; °qui in domo vel familia regis pugnabit; qui
in hostico pacem fregerit; qui burgbotam, vel brigbotam, vel
firdfare supersederit; qui excommunicatum vel utlagum habet
et tenet; borchbreche; qui in bello campali vel navali *fugerit
injustum judicium ; defectus justicie; prevaricacio legis regie.
§ 2. fOmnes herestrete omnino regis sunt, et omnia *qual-
stowa, i. occidendorum loca, totaliter regis sunt, in soca sua.


1 fynderinga K. 2sterbreche us. Lond. et K. in us. Lond. deest.
4defuerit us. Lond. 5 gwalstowa ms. Lond.


modo is annos (ut primo) decem ut postea duodecim natus esset,
et quod octo denariis carius estimaretur clepserit (etatem in 15
annos et valorem in 12 denarios mutavit postea /Ethelstanus rex in
Concil. apud Witlambyrig. Vide Judic. Civit. London. c. x11.) causa
coram loci domino rei cognitionem habente, alioquin coram coro-
natore festinantius accersito summarie cognita morti adjudicare, cujus
illa Hallifaxiz nostratibus satis nota lex videtur esse vestigium ;
quinimo si quis furi mortem obtulerit, jurejurando fidem adstringat,
se tanquam criminis reum occidisse, atque hoc pacto omni solutione
liberator, lex est expressa regis Inez, cap. 16. cui similis illa in cap. 35.
Vide etiam LL. Edo. Confess. cap. 36. et Vetus Norman. Custumar.
c. 23.

« Pro ‘fyrderinga’ Spelmannus locum hune exhibens in Glossario
suo habet ‘ Fynderinga,’ quem sequitur D. Edw. Cocus Institut. par. 3.
pag. 132, et ‘thesaurum inventum’ vertunt. Cum vero thesaurus
Inventus nominatim hic subsequatur, nisi conjectura mea me fallit,
bona sonat adventitia, forensibus nostris ‘waywium et estrayeria,’
veteribus ‘cumelings’ a Saxon. cuma, ‘advena, que regi acquiruntur,.
aut saltem domino feudi hanc libertatem sibi a rege indultam habenti.
Vide Bracton. lib.1. cap.12. num. 10. et Vetus Nornian. Custumar.
c.19. Queri tamen potest, utrum ‘fyrderinga’ hic non sit scriben-
dum ‘fyrderunga,’ quod Glossarium ‘ apparatum expeditionis ’ vertit.

b¢Presumpcio terre,’ forte ‘zris. Vide tamen LL. Burgund.
tit. 54. pro ‘terrarum presumptoribus.’

¢ Id est ‘alga maris ;’ de qua vide infra in Glossar.

4 Vide infra cap. 13. §6.

© Vide cap.12. § 3. et cap. 80. §1, 7. Leges Inez, c.6. lfredi,
c.7. Cnuti, Sec. c.60.

f Vias publicas regias scil. alias militares intelligit, regales forte
vias, quibus itur de civitate in civitatem, de quibus in placito exhibito
apud Pinendenam per cl. Selden. notis ad Eadmer. p.197, et Wilk.
Conc. t.1. p.324; preesertim vero quatuor, quos, a Gallico chemin,
vocant ‘chiminos’ nostratibus bene notos, de quibus vide plura in
Spelm. Glossar. verbis ‘ Ikenild-streat’ et ‘Irminsul.’


520 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


§3. **”4 Et omnibus ordinatis, et alienigenis, et pauperibus,
et abjectis, debet esse rex pro cognato et advocato, si penitus
alium non habent. Hec sunt dominica placita regis, nec per-
tinent vicecomitibus, vel apparitoribus, vel ministris ejus, sine
diffinitis prelocucionibus, in firma sua.


XE **-DE PLACITIS ECCLESIE PERTINENTIBUS AD
REGEM.


§3. Sunt alia quedam placita Christianitatis, in quibus
rex partem habet hoc modo. Si rex paciatur ut qui in ecclesia
fecerit homicidium ad emendacionem veniat, primo ‘episcopo
et regi precium nativitatis sue reddat, et ita se inlegiat;
> deinde componat de pace ecclesie v. libras, et reconciliacionem
ecclesie querat, sicut ad eam pertinebit; et cognacionis ° et
donacionis emendacionem plene restituat. §2. *Si quis
rectam decimam superteneat, vadat prepositus regis, et epis-
copi, et terre domini, cum presbitero, et ingratis auferant, et
ecclesie cui pertinebit reddant, et nonam partem relinquant
ei qui decimam dare noluit; reliquum in duas partes dividant,
dimidium habeat dominus, dimidium habeat episcopus, sit
homo regis vel alterius. § 3. **" eRomfech in festo
Sancti Petri ad Vincula debet reddi: qui supratenebit, red-
dat episcopo denarium illum, et xxx. defi addat; et regi L. sol.
§4. **"""2 Qui cyricsceattum tenebit ultra festum Sancti Mar-
tini, reddat eum episcopo, et undecies persolvat, et regi L. sol.”
§ 5. *™f Qui uxoratus faciet adulterium, habeat rex® ejus


1 Christo ws. Lond. et K. 2/in us. Lond. et K. deest. 3vel dominus
Se. add.


@ Petitum hoc videtur e cap. 12. Feeder. Eadw. et Guth. regum,
inter leges Saxonicas, cui simile capitulum illud 33. Legum Eccle-
siast. ab ZEthelredo, ‘De Pace Ecclesiz,’ (hujus edit. p.348.) latarum.
Rem renovavit postea Cnutus rex, legum suarum Sec. cap. 40.

>Vide cap. 79. §6, et sensum inde pete.

¢ Legendum forsan ‘et dominacionis emendacionem,’ id est, manbor,
ut Saxonibus olim dicta compensatio sive muleta pecuniaria (de qua
vide Glossar. in voce Emenda) domino pendi solita ab hominem
sublatum. Vide Burchard. lib. 3. c. 132.

4 Vide Leges Edgar. I. c. 3, 4. Cnuti, E. ¢. 8, 9.

¢Tanta inter hee et LL. Edgari, I. c.3, 4, uti et Cnuti, E. ¢. 8,
9, 10, videtur symphonia, ut quicquid hic habetur illinc suppeditatum
esse cuivis liquere possit.

f Vide hac de re plura apud Spelman. in -Glossar. voce ‘ Adul-
terium.’


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 521


superiorem, episcopus inferiorem. § 6. * Qui perjurium
super sancta commiserit, perdat manum suam, vel dimidiam
weram suam, et hoc commune sit domino ejus, et episcopo.
§7. Qui falsum testimonium dicet, non admittatur deinceps in
testimonium, set reddat regi vel terre domino helsfang.
§ 8. »Qui ordinatum occiderit vel malignaverit, emendet ei
sicut rectum sit, et episcopo emendacionem altaris, secundum
ordinis dignitatem; regi vel domino plenam infraccionem pacis;
vel plena lada neget. §9. *** Si quis mortis reus confes-
sionem desideret, nunquam negetur ei; quod si quis faciat,
emendet regi cxx. sof, aut cum v.juret, quod hoc non fecisset.
§10. Si liber festis diebus operetur, emendet suum helsfang,
et saltem erga ‘dominum sedulo componat. §11. ¢Si quis
Dei rectitudines per vim teneat, solvat *Jahslite cum Dacis,
plenam witam cum Anglicis, aut neget cum *xr. Si aliquem
illue vulneret, hoc emendet, et reddat plenam witam, et ab
episcopo manum suam redimat, vel perdat eam. Si aliquem
occidat, sit utlaga, et prosequatur eum cum clamore omnis qui
rectum vult. Si efficiat ut occidatur, per hoc quod rectum
contra resistat, si hoc inveritetur, inultus jaceat. §12. Qui
ordinis infracturam faciet, emendet hoc, secundum ordinis dig-
nitatem, wera, wita, lahslita, et omni misericordia. §13. Sit


1Deum K. ?lahstung Se. 3x11. uss. Seld. Twysd. Lond. et K.


® Hac et sequentia ad ista usque ‘terre domino helsfang’ e legibus
Cnuti, Sec. c. 36 et 37. hausta videntur. Huc etiam spectat lex Edw.
Senioris, cap. 3. et AEthelstani, I. c.25. Hine illud Bractoni, 1.4.
tract.1. c.19. n.2. ‘ Repellitur autem’ (inquit) ‘a sacramento
infamis, scil. qui alias convictus fuerit de perjurio, qui legem amittit,
et ideo dicitur, quod non est ulterius dignus lege; quod Anglice, he
ne es othes worthe that es enes gylty os oth broken.’ Quo tendunt
etiam tradita per eum postea lib. 4. tract. 5. cap.5. num.1. Advertit
locum cl. Selden. notis ad Fortescutum, cap. 26. quas vide.

b Sic habetur cum postea, cap.66. §1. tum in legibus Cnuti regis
secularibus, cap.42, unde utrumque locum petitum credimus, cujus
veterem apud Jorvalens. versionem videas, si placet, apud Spelm.
Concil. to. 1. p- 567.

¢ Petita hac et sequentia ad ista, ‘hoc non fecisset,’ e Jegibus
Cnuti Sec. cap. 44, plane idem totidem verbis ordinantis, prout etiam
id quod immediate subsequitur, sc. ‘Si liber festis diebus operetur,’
usque ‘sedulo componat,’ e lege ejusdem Cnuti proxime sequenti
mutuatum censeo.

4 Hausta hee videntur cum sequentibus, ad ista ‘inultus jaceat,’
e cap. 6. Foederis Edw. et Guthr. regum, et e cap. 49. legum Cnuti
Sec. sicut que sequuntur ex cap. 50. legum ejusdem Cnuti.


522 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


omnis vidua sine marito x1I.mensibus; eligat postea quem
velit; et si infra unius anni spacium capiat maritum, perdat
morgangifam suam, et omnem pecuniam suam, quam ex ‘primo
marito habebat, et sit maritus ejus were sue reus apud regem;
vel cui rex concesserit. §14. Si quis Dei fugitivam habeat
injuste, reddat eum ad rectum, et persolvat ei cujus erit, et
regi emendet, secundum **weregildum. Si quis excommuni-
catum habeat, vel utlagam, et teneat, dispereat ipse et omnis
venia ejus. Et omnis emendacio communiter emendetur
Christo et regi. § 15. ***" Ubicunque recusabitur lex Dei
juste servari, secundum ‘diccionem episcopi, cogi oportebit per
mundanam potestatem: necessaria siquidem justicia et dis-
triccio secularis in divinis plerumque legibus et secularibus
institutis, quia plures aliter a suis pravitatibus revocari
nequeunt, plures ad Dei cultum ac legalitatis observanciam
inclinari nolunt; unde pro multa malorum infestacione, com-
moda pacis dispensacione provisum est, ut graviora placita
magisque punienda soli justicie vel misericordie principis
‘addicantur, ut venia petentibus et pena peccantibus abun-
dancius habeatur. »In causis autem emendabilibus, Sanctorum
miseracione permissum est, ut terreni domini audeant, ex eorum
licencia, pecunialem emendacionem capere, secundum legem
patrie,


XII. ***1- QUE PLACITA >EMENDARI DEBEANT.


§ 1. Ex hiis placitis quedam emendantur c. sot; quedam
wera; quedam wita; ***"" quedam non possunt emendari, que
sunt husbreche, et bernet, et openthifthe, et eberemorp, et
*lafordiswike, et infraccio pacis ecclesie vel manus regis, per


1 priori Se. 2legergildum K. distinccionem AK. 4adjudicantur
ms. Lond. et K. Semendari mss. Seld. Twysd. et Lond. com-
mendari Se.


a Impress. et Se. legunt ‘legergildum,’ rectius ‘weregildum,’ et
pariter corrige citata hine per doct. Spelman. in Glossar. verb. ‘Lair-
wite’ et ‘Legergild,’ et per Spelmannum sequutum cl. Vossium De
Vitiis Sermonis, p. 234, verbo ‘Legergeldum, sic etenim (weregild
scil.) habet lex illa, unde locum hune petitum credimus, cap. sc. 67.
legum Cnuti Sec. cui quidem in ceteris verbatim respondet.

> Vide Praefat. ad leges Elfredi.

¢ Rectius <hlafordswice,’ sic enim scribitur in lege unde hec
deprompta videntur cap.65. LL. Cnuti Sec. Hujus autem et cate-
rarum vocum expositionem vide in Glossar. sub finem operis, ‘laford-


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 523


homicidium. §2. ***'”" Hec emendantur c. sot: gripebreche,
stretbreche, forestel, burchbreche, hamsokna, flymonfirma.
§ 8. Hec emendantur wera, si ad emendacionem veniat: qui
in ecclesia fecerit homicidium; persolucio furti vel robarie ;
qui furem plegiatum amiserit; qui ei obviaverit, et gratis sine
vociferacione dimiserit; qui ei consenciet in aliquo; homi-
cidium wera solvatur, vel weralada negetur; si uxoratus homo
fornicatur; qui viduam duxerit ante unum annum; * qui in
1hostico, vel familia regis, pacem fregerit, si ad emendandum
venire poterit; si prepositus pro firme adjutorio witam exigat.
§4. >Qui legem apostabit, were sue sit reus, prima vice; si
secundo fecerit, reddat bis weram suam; qui tercio presumet,
perdat quicquid habet.


XIII. ***-QUE PLACITA MITTUNT HOMINES IN MISE-
RICORDIA REGIS.

§1. Hee mittunt hominem in misericordia regis: ‘infraccio

pacis quam per manum suam dabit alicui; ‘contemptus bre-

vium suorum, et quicquid ad propriam ejus personam vel


lhostio A.


fithe’ (quod ms. Lond. habet), idem forte quod ‘letherwite,’ species
quedam fornicationis. Vide Coci Institut.2. p.488. Vide cap. 23.
Legerwite cap. 81. § 3. sed hic est domini proditio.

a Vide leges Ine, cap.6. Aélfred. c.7. c.40. Cnuti, Sec. c.60.

> Simile habetur institutum in legibus Edw. Confess. (ef. p. 457, 2.)
‘De Heretochiis’: ‘Et qui leges apostabit’ (ipsissima legis verba
sunt) ‘si fuerit Anglicus, vel Dacus, vel Waliscus, vel Albanicus, vel
insulicola, were sue reus sit apud regem, et si secundo id faciat,
reddat bis weram suam, et si quid addat tercio, reus sit omnium que
habebit. Idem iterum hic, c.34. § 8.

© Hane pacis speciem ‘cyninger hanbd-zpip’ et ‘cyninzer hanb-
yealo-zpip’ Anglo-Saxones nuncuparunt, de qua vide Foedus Eadw.
et Guthr. regum, cap.1, item leges Cnuti, E. c.2, leges Edwar.
Confess. cap. 12, Seldeni Tit. Honor. par. 2. cap. 5. §3, quibus adde
chartam Guilielmi Primi abbati Rames’, de qua apud Spelm. in
Glossar. verbo ‘Honor.’ Huic autem, ni fallor, respondet Germano-
Saxonum ‘handfried,’ cujus meminit Gryphiander Tractat. de
Weichbild. Saxon. cap. 66, uti etiam Latino-Barbarorum ‘munde-
burdium,’ de quo Hotoman. De Verb. Feudal. in voce ‘ Mamburgus,’
et Vossius, De Vitiis Sermonis, verbo ‘Mundium.’ Hine forte pro-
tectionum apud nos origo, de quibus D. Cowellus in interprete verbo
‘ Protection.’

4 Hee ‘vel mandatorum suorum’ precedentia verba ‘contemptus
brevium suorum’ immediate forte sequerentur, quomodo consimilia
verba disposita videmus, cap. 10, §1. ubi ‘placitum brevium et pre-


524 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


mandatorum suorum contumeliatur injuriam; de famulis suis
in civitate, vel in castello, vel ubicunque occisis; infidelitas et
prodicio; despectus de eo; castellacio sine licencia; utlagaria;
et qui eam faciet in jure regio sit, et si bocland habeat, in
manum regis veniat; furtum probatum, et morte dignum.
§2. Murdrum xtvi. marcis reddatur, nisi malefactor infra
vit. dies habeatur. §3. Falsarii pugnum perdant, et nullo
modo redimant. §4. *Qui injuste judicabit, cxx.sol reus
sit, et dignitatem judicandi 'perdat, nisi se redimat erga
regem. §5. Dominica *captalia regis celata pro furto
habeantur. § 6. Violencia virgini vel vidue facta. §7. °Qui
in domo regis pugnabit vite sue culpa sit. §8. *Qui in
hostico pacem fregerit, vitam perdat, vel weregildo componat.
§9. Qui burchbotam, vel brigbotam, vel firdfare supersederit,
cxx. sot forisfecerit, aut nominentur ei xin, et perquirat ex
eis x1.ad negandum. §10. Qui excommunicatum habet et
manutenet, vel utlagam. § 11. Qui Dei recta contratenendo
fecerit homicidium. § 12. ¢Qui in bello campali vel navali
pro timiditate fugiet a domino vel a socio suo, perdat omne
quod habet, et ‘vitam suam, et manus mittat dominus ad
pecuniam suam et terram quam ei dedit, et si bocland habet,’
in jus regium cadat.


lamittat us. Lond. 2 capitalia uss. Seld. Twysd. et Lond. 3x11. Sc.
xin A. =” in ms. Lond. et K. desunt.


ceptorum ejus. Czterorum sensus idem est cum eo quod in eodem
10 capite legimus, ‘Quicunque’ sc. ‘despectus vel maliloquium
de eo.’

a Excerpta hee videntur e legibus Edgari, 11. c. 3, et Cnuti, Sec.
e 15.

> Huc tendunt leges Ine, c.6. lfred. c. 7. et Cnuti, Sec. c. 60.
Vide Burchard. lib. 6. ¢. 2.

¢ Petita reor hc et sequentia e legibus Cnuti, Sec. c. 62. et 66.

4 Heec et que sequuntur, ad finem usque capituli, deprompta credo
e legibus Cnuti regis, Sec. ¢.78, quam quidem sanctionem repetitam
habes in legibus Edo. Conf. (p.456, 2.) ‘De Heretochiis,’ verbis
paululum mutatis, que hac: ‘Qui fugiet a domino vel socio suo, pro
timiditate belli vel mortis, in conduccione heretochii sui in expedi-
cione navali vel terrestri, perdat omne quod suum est, et suam ipsius
vitam, et manus mittat dominus ad terram quam ei antea dederat.
Et si terram hereditariam habeat, ipsa in manus regis transeat.’
Eisdem fere verbis utitur Jorvalensis, ejusdem regis Cnuti Jegem
memoratam Latine exprimens.


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 525


XIV. ***vlaDE RELEVACIONIBUS.


§1. Sint relevaciones singulorum sicut modus sit: comitis
VIII. equi, 1111. sellati, et mut. sine sella, et galee 111., et lorice
ill, cum vu. lanceis, et totidem scutis, et gladii m1, et
c. mance auri. §2. Postea, thaini regis qui ei proximus sit,
IIl1. equi, duo sellati, et 1. non sellati, et duo gladii, et
1111. lancee, et totidem scuta, et galea cum lorica, et L.mance
auri. §§8 Et mediocris thaini, equus cum apparatu suo,
et arma ejus, et suum halsfanga, in Westsexa; in Myrcenis
due libre. §4. ?Et thaini regis °relevacio cum Dacis, qui
socam suam habeat, 11. lib; et si apud regem promociorem
justiciam habeat,’ duo equi, unus cum sella, alius sine sella,


V Sic ordine turbato ap. Sc. Et thayni justiciam habeat duo equi,
unus cum sella, alius regis relevacio cum Dacis qui socam suam
habeat 111. lib, verbdts et si apud regem promotiorem omissis.


@ Hoc 14. capitulum ‘De Relevacionibus’ inscriptum videtur
integre petitum e legibus Cnuti, Sec. ¢.71, 73, et posteriori part.
c. 74.

> Spelman. in Glossario suo vocem ‘Hereotum’ expositurus hoc
Cnuti regis institutum advertit, Latina legum illarum versione pro-
pria, ut videtur, adhibita. Si antiquam apud Jorvalensem versionem
lector desideret, dom. Edw. Cocum adeat Instit. par.2. pag. 8, ubi
secundum Magne Charte libertatum Anglie capitulum illustraturus,
vetus quoddam ms. in bibliotheca quondam reverendis. Matthzi
Cantuar’ Archiepiscopi, de harum relevationum modo, laudat, quod
utique Guil. I. legibus a clar. Seldeno olim in lucem editis cap. 22,
23, 24, et 29. concordat (hujus edit. p.476). Relevationem autem
inibi exhibitam injustitie injuste, me judice, arguit reverendus ille,
olim per universam Angliam judiciis privatis prases, cum vix aut
ne vix quidem discrepet ab illa legislatoris nostri in prasenti cap.
contenta, multo minus ab illa in patris ejus Guiliel. I. memoratis
legibus instituta relevatione. Quod autem hic (in exemplari sc.
Seldeno usurpato) ‘hammes’ illic ‘hawmes’ legitur, posterior lectio
verior: vox autem ‘galeas’ signat nobis, vulgo ‘helmets,’ a Sax.
‘helm,’ ejusdem sensus; quod (secundo) hie ‘per le cheval son
piepe,’ cap.sc. 24. illic ‘per le cheval son pere’ legitur et rectius.
Vide clar. Seld. Tit. Honor. p.625. Verba sic Latine reddo, ‘per
equum patris sui;’ quod (tertio) hic cap. 29. (cf. p. 476.) ‘et puis se
serait tuz les vilains en franepledge,’ illic, ‘et pus sont touts les
villains in frankpledge’ legitur. Posterior lectio magis placet, et sic
Latine verto, ‘et postea sint omnes villani in franco plegio.’ Vice-
versa hine in veteri illius manuscripti capitulo, ‘De Villanorum
Relevio,’ ‘11. chevals, 11. boefs, 11. vaches,’ melius leguntur in altero
‘u cheval, u buf, u vache,’ z.e. sive equus sit, sive bos, sive vacca,
‘n’ idem hic valente quod Gallis modernis ‘ou.’ De numero autem
sunt equorum octc in cap. 22. (hujus edit. p. 475.) LL. Guil. I.,


526 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


et unus gladius, et due lancee, et totidem scuta, et L. mance
auri: et qui minus potest, det duas libras. §5. Et ubi
bunda manserit sine calumpnia, sint uxor et pueri in eodem
sine querela. Et si accusatus fuerat, dum vixerit, in aliquo,
respondeant heredes ejus, sicut ille faceret, si viveret. §6. Et
persolvat omnis vidua relevacionem suam intra xt. menses,
sine forisfactura, si non possit antea.


XV. DE DENEGILDO.


Denagildum, quod aliquando *pingemannis dabatur, i. x11. defi
de unaquaque hyda per annum, si ad terminos non reddatur,
wita emendetur.


XVI. ***vI- DE PACE CURIE REGIS.


>Tam longe debet esse pax regis a porta sua, ubi residens
erit, a quatuor partibus loci illius, hoc est: ‘tria miliaria, et
III. quarentene, et 1x. acre latitudine, et 1x. pedes, et rx. palme,
et 1x. grana ordei. Multus sane respectus esse debet, ac multa
diligencia, ne quis pacem regis infringat, maxime in ejus
vicinia.


'tria in Sc. aperte scribitur in linea, neque deletur, et tamen 1111.
superinducitur. quatuor K.


quatuor autem in 23. (hujus edit. 20.) capitulo, relevii nomine impo-
sitorum, quorum dimidium cum bello forte inservituri sint ephippiis,
dimidium autem aucupio forsan aut venationi, sine apparatu bellico,
frenis sc. et capistris ornanda; horum autem aque ac illorum in
bello _usus.

a Juxta sensum loci legendum potius ‘Danigenis dabatur,’ nisi
malis ‘ringemannis dabatur’; perinde ac si Dani olim sic dicti (quod
non reperio) ex eadem causa qua Danorum literaturam Runicam
indigitant, de quo vide Wormii Tract. de litter. Runica. Potius
Wicingemannis vel Wiccingis, quo quidem nomine pirate Danici
majoribus nostris noti. Vide Henr. Huntind. fol. 201 a. et Cambd.
Britan. de Danis. Conjecture favent verba legis regis Edo. Con-
fessor. cap. De Danegeldo: ‘Danegeldi reddicio’ (ita se lex habet)
ropes piratas primitus statuta est,’ &c. Vide Worm. Monum. Dan.
-4, p. 269.

be Tam longe’ pro impress. ‘nam longe.’ Sic etenim habetur in
legibus regis Aethelredi apud Venetingum, cap. 20, (hujus edit. p. 453.)
unde hoc mutuatum censeo, quod apud Jorvalensem sic Latine
legitur, ‘Tam longe debet esse pax regis a portu suo, ubi residens
erit, a quatuor partibus, hoc est, tribus miliaribus et tribus quaren-
tenis et tribus acris in latum et 9 ped. 9 granis ordei.’


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 527


XVII. ***¥12 DE PLACITO FORESTARUM.


*Placitum quoque forestarum multiplici satis est incommo-
ditate vallatum: De essartis; de cesione; de combustione; de
venacione; de gestacione arcus et jaculorum in foresta; >de
misera canum expeditacione; si quis ad ‘'stabilitam non
venit; si quis *pecuram suam reclusam dimisit; *de edificiis
in foresta; de summonicionibus supersessis; de obviacione
alicujus in foresta cum canibus; de corio vel carne inventa.


XVIII. DE LADA.


Francigena compellatus juret se sexto. Anglicus liber
triplici lada plane, vel simplici *frangenti, vel judicio, neget.


XIX. DE JUSTICIA REGIS.


4Hec sunt que ad justiciam vel indulgenciam regis et fiscum
censentur, cum appendiciis suis, nec, sine diffinitis prelocu-
cionibus, pertinent vicecomitibus, vel prepositis ejus, in firma
sua, ubicunque, a quocunque, in quemcunque fiant, sive terra
dominica regis et socna sit, sive sit alterius. Omnium terrarum
quas rex in dominio suo habet, socnam pariter habet; quarun-
dam vero terrarum maneria dedit, set socnam sibi retinuit
5singularem et communem; nec sequitur socna regis data
maneria, set magis ex personis.


1 stabilitatem K. 2 placitis mss. Seld. et Twysd. ‘ms. Lond. et K.
omittunt.  4franget us. Lond. et K. exigenti Wilk. unde nescio.
5/ ys. Lond. et K. add.


a Manwoodus noster, prefatione ad suum de legibus foreste trac-
tatum, locum hunc, correctis corrigendis, sic exhibet: ‘Placita
quoque forestarum satis sunt incommoditat. vallat. sicut de assartis.’

> En hic canum expeditationem etate Henrici regis Primi inva-
luisse. Fallitur igitur Manwoodus noster commentum hoc loco
genuiscissionis prius usitate, et vulgo a poplite ‘hambling’ dicte,
excogitasse primo Henricum Secundum et vocabulo initium dedisse,
praetendens in suo, de quo supra tractatu, cap. 16. § 12, quem eo fine
laudat Spelm. in voce.

¢ Idem forte stabilitas heic quod junioribus forestariis (vox enim
est forestica) ‘stableia,’ de qua voce D. Ed.Cocus Instit. par. 4. p. 306.
verbo ‘ Bucstall’ et verbo ‘Tristis. Plura, si placet, videas in clar.
Cowelli Interpr. in voce ‘ Stablestand.’

4 Ad causas et negotia hic respicit legislator que in cap. 10. et seq.
hucusque enumerantur.


528 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


XX. ***™1DE SOCNA ET THOL ET THEAM/


§1. Participancium quoque causarum partim in socna, i. in
questione sua, rex habet, partim concedit aliis. Omnis autem
socna simplex est habentibus aut conjuncta. In custodia vero
trina principaliter distincta: sub prepositis maneriorum, in
2causis adjacentibus hallemotis; sub prelatis hundretorum et
burgorum; sub vicecomitibus.  §2. Archiepiscopi, episcopi,
Scomites, et alie potestates, in terris proprie ‘potestatis sue,
sacam et socnam habent, tol et theam et infongentheaf; in
ceteris vero, per empcionem, vel cambicionem, vel quoquo
modo perquisitis, socam et sacam habent, in causis *omnibus
et hallemotis pertinentibus, super suos et in suo, et aliquando
super alterius homines; *presertim si in forisfaciendo retenti
vel gravati fuerint, et illie competentem emendacionem habeant.
§3. Singulorum ®baronum, senatorum, et clericorum, laicorum,
ubicunque habeant terram, sive socna regis sit vel non, in
capitalibus questionibus socna regis est, ’sicut a >Cnuti, vel
Edwardi legibus, per successiones posteras, hereditaria dignitas
successit; nisi vel ®propinquitate, vel aliqua dignitate meri-
torum, regis indulgencia quemcunque respexerit, cujus amanda
bonitas promovet pocius, non evertit libertatem.


Vin Se. deest, ms. Seld. tantum habet De socna. ?muS Se. causis
os. Lond. et K. in ms. Lond. et K. deest. ‘potentatus Se. 5 com-
munibus ws. Lond. §denique ms. Lond. et K. add. 7 Edmundi A.
add. *propinquitate mss. Seld. Twysd. et Lond. propinquante Se,


a Simile habemus postea cap. 27. a clar. Seld. Tit. Honor. par. 2.
c.5. p.626. de vavasoribus verba faciente, integre citato. Quod
autem seriptum occurrit hic ‘gravati’ scribendum reor ‘cravati,’ et
similiter alibi in his legibus non semel scriptum reperitur. Verbum
autem quid significet, et unde dictum sit, quere in Glossario sub
finem operis. Quod ad ‘retencionem’ attinet, pluries in his legibus
obviam, vide Leges Burg. apud Scotos, cap. 80.

b Vide leges Cnuti, Sec. cap. 12, 13, 14, 15. quo, ni fallor, respicit
legislator noster in sequentibus, ‘nisi vel propinquitate vel aliqua
meritorum dignitate regis indulgentia quemcunque respexerit :’ quo
tendunt hec in cap.12. et 15. memoratis ‘bucan he hpzne suppop
xemadpian pille’ Hue pertinet illud Bractoni, 1. 3. tract. 2. c. 8. n. 3.
‘nisi sit, inquit, ‘aliquis in regno qui regalem habeat potestatem in
omnibus, sicut sunt comites paleys (ita locum legit cl. Seld. Tit.
Honor. par.2. ¢.5. p.639.) salvo dominio domino regi sicut prin-
cipi, vel si sit aliquis qui de concessione regis talem habeat liber-
tatem,’ &c.


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 529


XXI. *« DE GENERIBUS CAUSARUM.


Sunt eciam, ! ut diximus,” quedam genera causarum permissa
singularitate licencius expedita, in quarum emendacionibus rex
particulariter communicat, ubicunque fiant, in divinis vel
secularibus, super regios, et ecclesiasticos, et baronum homines,
et acefalos, et pauperes; sive socnam totaliter habeat vel
particulariter; ex quibus sunt adulterium; homicidium in
ecclesia factum; infraccio pacis, vel ordinis, vel Christianitatis,
vel legalitatis; si cogi oporteat per mundanam potestatem ut
rectum fiat.


XXIL. *4#2DE GRITHBRECHE ET HAMSOCNA/


@Sepe eciam ex justicia placitancium cause transeunt in jus
aliorum, ex ®aggeracione rerum: ut qui*mominant et ‘per-
mittunt grithbreche, vel hamsocnam, vel eorum aliquid quod
socnam et sacam eorum excedit; ipsa ®nocendi cupiditate
prepositi, dum ad witam castigacius posset inflecti; difforcia-
cione recti; miscravacione; presumptis accusacionibus; tardi-
tate, ut qui in prefectura vel qualibet potestate constitutus,
sepe differt exigere dum licet, quod sepe cum labore frustraque
prosequitur destitutus: transeunt autem in mislocucione, mis-
kenninge, que magis inhorruit in Londonia.


XXIII. DE FORISFACTIS.


§ 1. Siquis blodwitam, fightwitam, legerwitam, et hujusmodi
forisfaciat, et inde veniat, »sine ®dividiacione vel calumpnia,
placitum domini sui est. § 2. Nemo eciam de cesione


V in ms. Lond, et K. deest. 2/ De grindebreche. ms. Lond. 3aggre-
gacione mss. Seld. Twysd. et Lond. ‘promittunt Sc. permittunt
mss. Seld. Twysd. Lond. et K. 5 noscendi Se. nocendi K. dijudi-
cacione ms. Lond. dividicacione K.


® Hac de re vide cap. 9. § 4.

> Doct. Spelm. in Glossar. verbo ‘ Lairwite’ habet hee ‘sine
dijudicatione vel calumpnia; hereo. Dividiatione (divisionem in-
telligo) magis placet, presertim cum post causarum participantium
in pracedentibus catalogum, res, causas, et crimina, in quibus cujus-
que propriis (manerii sc.) Dominus solummodo absque participe
seipsum immiscet, et mulctas inde reportat, legislator hic recenseat :
nisi malis, ‘ sine divadiacione,’ 4.e. sine vadio dato sistendi se alibi
coram judice nimirum loci, ubi deliquit, et damnum, si reus foret,


530 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


*nemoris inoperati jure cogitur respondere per withertihlam,
nisi domino suo, vel captus in eo. § 3. 1Idem dicimus de
commissis monacho, monache, sponse, pueris, servo, ancille,
sine legitima prelatorum suorum licencia. § 4. De monacho,
quem obedienciarium ? fecerit, respondeat abbas ejus per omnia,
sicut rectum sit. §5. **" Eorum eciam est consecucio et
reduccio furum sine calumpnia. § 6. Recepcio quoque fugi-
tivi, secundum legem quesiti, quicquid referat preter furtum.


XXIV. 3DE JUDICIS FISCALIS JURE’


Super barones socnam suam habentes habet judex _fiscalis
justicie legis observanciam, et ‘quicquid peccabitur in eorum
personam; nemo enim forisfacturam sui ipsius habuit, sed
fortasse dominus ejus. Et qui furem ei promisit, vel robariam,
vel pacis fraccionem, vel deinceps similia, accusatum convincat,
vel inde componat. Et si forisfaciant, emendent sicut alii;
nullus enim socnam habet impune peccandi. Si prepositus
regius, in terra socnam habencium, forisfactum prior sciat, non
tamen habeat, nisi socnam illam excedat.


XXV. **"' DE PRIVILEGIIS PROCERUM ANGLIE.


Si exurgat placitum inter homines alicujus baronum socnam
habencium, tractetur placitum in curia domini sui, de causa
communi.’ Si est inter homines duorum dominorum socnam
habencium, "respondeat accusatus in curia domini sui, de causa
communi.


1Deinde K. “fecerint K. 2% Sc. duo habet lemmata hujus capitis,
De judiciis fiscalibus. De judicis fiscalis jure. 4siquid ms. Lond.
et K. 5Sed ms. Lond. et K. in mus. Lond. et K. desunt.


refarciendi. Adstipulantur tradita in cap. 41. §1. 52.§1. 57. §2.
62. § 3, et placito apud Pinendenam in clar. Seld. Notis ad Eadm.
p. 199, et Wilk. Conc. t.1. p. 323.

a Per nemus inopertum intelligo nemus sepibus aliisque sepimentis
predatorum invasionem obstare valentibus carens, ideoque ingressui
publico omniumque predis et rapinis obnoxium. [Codd. Sc. et K.
‘inoperati’ legunt.—T.]

+ Institutum sane juri tam civili quam pontificio concordat, que
actorem volunt sequi forum rei. Vide Matth. Steph. De Offic. Jud.
1.1. c.8. n.10. ¢ Procerum’ hic in titulo capitis appellatione qui
habendi, vide apud Spelm. verbo ‘ Baro.’


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 5381


XXVI. DE FURTI PLACITO.


Defensor aut dominus de furto pulsatorum, si semel aut
amplius respectaverit erga vicinum diem, vicinaliter et absque
justicie majoris auctoritate condictum, curiam suam perdet;
pulsator autem quos pulsaverit ad majorem audienciam pro-
trahendi potestatem accipiet. Porro qui accusantur, presertim
pro capitalibus, si diem sic condictum subterfugiant respec-
tatum, partem suam, etsi non mortuam, faciunt tamen egri-
orem. Planum est denique pro tali causa *condictum diém,
2nec semel’ quidem, salva curia vavassoris, licere respectari,
nec accionem hujusmodi sine regie potestatis ministerio debere
finiri; que magis vitanda sunt, si quis de furto seisiatus sit.
Si lex inde jam judicata ‘sit, *coram regis *ministerio causa
fuerit.


XXVII. DE LIBERTATE VAVASORUM.


Habeant autem vavasores, qui liberas terras tenent, placita
que ad witam vel weram pertinent super suos homines, et in
suo; et super aliorum homines, si in forisfaciendo retenti vel
gravati fuerint.


XXVIII. DE EQUO JUDICIO FACIENDO.


>In omnibus agendis, inoffensus esse debet 5judicum affectus,
non suspectus; ‘gravius enim lacerantur pauperes a pravis
judicibus quam a cruentis hostibus; et diligencia testium et
personarum omnium digna Dei auribus perscrutacione pen-
sanda est, ut ydonea sit, et cui ab adversario jure contradici
non possit: et ipsi coagentes frequenter interrogandi sunt, an


1eondictum mss, Seld. Twysd. et Lond. conductum Se. % vel A.
3sit bis Sc. 4ministro ms. Lond. 5 judicium ms. Lond. et K.


® Quod ad presentiam ministri regis attinet, vide leges /Ethelredi,
I. c. 1. leges etiam Edo. Confess. cap. 9. et Glanvill. 1.14. c.1.
fol. 113 b.

b Excerptum hoc videtur e libello ‘De Officio Judicis,’ a doctiss.
Spelman. in Concil. tom. 1. p. 532. in lucem edito, ubi verba hee
habentur ipsissima. Quo quidem in capitulo hee corrigenda, sc.
lin. 6. pro ‘rectori’ lege ‘ recitari,’ lin. 8. pro ‘excitant’ lege ‘ excee-
cant,’ lin. 18. pro ‘ pravos judices ’ lege ‘pravos inimicos,’ lin. 29. pro
“accedere’ lege ‘attendere.’

© Vide cap. 33, 34. Ex dictis Isidori Burchard. Decret. lib. 16.
c. 26. Vide ‘De Officio Judicis.’ Concil. Spelm. tom. 1. p. 582.


582 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


amplius! dicere velint, an inde judicari? quia multa per sub-
repcionem eveniunt. Tanto enim majus est periculum judi-
cantis quam ejus qui judicatur, quanto, ex verbis Domini,
judicium super alios habitum nobis scimus reservari; et licet
infinita delinquencium multitudo modum miseracionis incom-
modet, uno verbo 2concludimur: ‘quod tibi non vis fieri, alii
ne feceris.’


XXIX. *“"-QUI DEBENT ESSE JUDICES REGIS.


§ 1. Regis judices sunt *barones comitatus, qui liberas in
eis terras habent, °per quos debent cause singulorum alterna
prosecucione tractari; villani vero, vel cotseti, vel ferdingi, vel
qui sunt viles vel inopes persone, non sunt inter legum judices
numerandi; unde nec in hundreto vel comitatu pecuniam suam


laliquid K.add. 2concluduntur mss. Seld. Twysd. et K.


® Quomodo iste locus (cui consimilis antea, cap. 9. § 8.) sit in-
telligendus vide Spelm. Glossar. verbo ‘Barones comitatus.’ Brac-
tonus, lib. 3. tract. 2. ¢.1. n.1. qualiter procedere debeant justitiarii
in itinere suo, et quo ordine verba faciens, de majoribus loquitur
de comitatu, ‘qui (inquit) dicuntur busones comitatus:’ qua verba
(qui dicuntur busones comitatus) desiderantur (inquit Spelm.) in
codice nostro ms. Expresse ratum habet verbum ‘ busones’ D. Edw.
Cocus Instit. par. 4. p. 185. etymologia ibidem adhibita, violenta
licet. Certe variam loci lectionem in libri initio interim minime
advertebat, ubi plane quod hic ‘busones’ ‘barones’ legitur, et sic
legendum censeo. Milites comitatuum vocat hos Charta Libertatum
regis Johannis apud Matth. Parisium, p.257. Huie autem par est
institutum illud in Veteri Norman. Custumario, cap. 9. et 123. edit.
Lat. ubi locorum citatorum priore hee: ‘Judiciarii autem sunt dis-
crete persone et auctentice, qui judicium proferunt in curia de
auditis, ut archiepiscopi et episcopi, et ecclesiarum cathedralium
canonici, et alize persone in ecclesiis dignitatem obtinentes, abbates
et priores conventuales, et rectores ecclesiarum, quos fama discre-
tionis ac honestatis fide dignos efficit ac commendat. Baillivi siqui-
dem atque milites omnes et servientes spade principales et seneschalli
baronum, quos honestas atque discretio fecerit fide dignos.’ Altero
autem loco sic: ‘Recordatores autem dicuntur omnes persone in
curia assistentes, per quos curie recordatio valeat celebrari: ut prin-
ceps Normanniz, archiepiscopi, et omnes persone dignitatem seu
personatum habentes in ecclesia cathedrali, abbates et etiam priores
conventuales, comites, barones et omnes milites, et omnes principes,
justiciarii, vicecomites, et etiam spade servientes, et magne fame
ee quos vite meritum et prudentiz honestas fecerit fide

ignos.’

> Ecclesiastic. xxxviii. 25, 33. supra, cap. 9. Burchard. lib. 16,
cap. 26. ‘ Judices quales debent esse.’ Exod. xviii.21. Deut. i.13.


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 533


vel dominorum suorum forisfaciunt, si justiciam sine judicio
dimittant; sed, submonitis terrarum dominis, inforcietur pla-
citum ‘termino competenti, si fuerint vel non fuerint antea
submoniti, cum *secuti jus estimatis. § 2. Qui ad hundre-
tum submonitus, sine aliqua et vera necessitatis causa, venire
noluerit, capiatur de suo triginta defi valens, prima et secunda
vice, et in hundreto namium sit*; per plegium vero dimittatur
ad diem disracionandi vel emendandi, et seisiatus placitet, et
sit pro capitali suo, et non ducatur hoc namium extra hun-
dretum. § 3. Qui ad comitatum, secundum legem sub-
monitus, venire noluerit, xx. maré culpa sit, in Westsexa: et
si de nominatis placitis inplacitatus non erat, termino congruo,
cause sue prosequende facultatem habeat. Si de nominatis
placitis terminum non susceperat, nisi competens Ssoinus eum
detineat, si non venerit, omnium reus sit, de quibus placitum
nominatum suscepit. § 4. *Si opus est, licet in placitis
judicibus, qui aderunt, respectare placitum ex *abundanti,
donec senatores absentes interesse possint, vel ipsi judicium
inquisierint, nec jure cogendi sunt ad *jurandum, quod
nesciant judicium inde.


XXX. DE LIBERTATE PROCERUM IN PLACITO COMI-
TATUUM.


Si quis baro comitatus contra vicecomitem placitet, potest
retinere suos homines a judicio, maxime tamen si de eo teneant;
nisi de furto vel de illis sit *qui simul abjuravimus.


XXXI. DE CAPITALIBUS PLACITIS.


§ 1. In summis et capitalibus placitis unus hundretus vel co-
mitatus judicetur a duobus, non unus duos judicet. § 2. **'Si
inter judices studia diversa sint, ut alii sic, alii aliter fuisse
contendant, vincat sentencia meliorum, et cui justicia magis


ltestimonio ms. Lond. et Sc. 2securius estimasset ms. Seld. et K.
3essoinus uss. Seld. Twysd. Lond. et K. +Sed Sc. Si K. 5 com-
petenti mss. Seld. Twysd. Lond. et K.


4 Quod sequitur, opinor, additur, ne ‘ vetitum (ut vocant) namium’
contraheretur, de quo vide Bracton. De Corona, cap. 37.

b Unde pignus vel rem eo nomine prehensam aut captam extra
hundredum, ze. centuriam, ut vocant, abigere, inter juris nostri
municipalis corruptelas, ab Horno in suo Justiciariorum Speculo,
cap, 5. sect. 1. enumeratas locum obtinet, num. 78.


* judican-
dum?


* que ?


534 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


acquieverit.  § 3, **” *Interesse comitatui debent episcopi,
comites, et 1cetere potestates, >que Dei leges et seculi negocia
justa consideracione diffiniant. § 4, **" © Recordacionem
curie regis nulli negare licet; **""" alias licebit per intelli-
gibiles homines placiti. § 5.***°Et nemo de capitalibus
placitis testimonio convincatur. § 6. Si quis judices sus-
pectos habeat, advocet aut contradicat. § 7. ** Unusquisque
per pares suos judicandus est, et ejusdem provincie: ‘ peregrina


Jecclesie ms. Lond. et K.


* Sumptum est hoc ut videtur e legibus Edgari, II. c. 5. et Cnuti,
Sec. c.18. Hac autem de re plura, si placet, videas clar. Somner. in
Antiq. urbis Cantuar. cap. 350. et hic retro, cap. 7. § 2.

> Filium hie habes contra patrem, adversantur enim hoc sancito
illi Guiliel. I. patris legislatoris nostri, quo sacrum a civili discrimi-
navit forum. Etenim florente Saxonum imperio, una agebantur qux
ad forum pertinent ecclesiasticum et que ad seculare, donec Guil-
ielmus Conquestor divisis jurisdictionibus hane ab illa separavit.
(Cf. p- 495.) De quo vide clar. Seldeni ad Eadmerum notas, pag. 166,
et Spelman. Glossar. in voce ‘ Hundredus,’ ut plures alios mittam.

¢ Simile habes postea, cap. 49. §4. Vide etiam Glanvill. li. 8
ce. 9. et Vetus Norman. Custumar. c. 121. in Gallico, in Latino
autem, cap. 123. quibus adde hee e relatione judicii a baronibus in
Thomam archiep. Cantuar. lati, e Stephanide excerpta, et per clar.
Seldenum Tit. Honor. par. 2. ca. 5. p. 706. exhibita. ‘ Archiepisco-
pus autem quia sententiz vel recordationi curie regis Anglie non
licet contradicere sustinuit.’ Vide etiam leges Guiliel. Primi, I. ¢.21.
extrem. De verbis autem hic postremis ‘alias licebit,’ vide eund.
Glanvill. 1. 12. ¢. 7. et D. Edw. Cocum Instit. par. 1. fol. 117 b. et
fol. 168 b.

4 Sensum loci petas e cap. 48. § 4. ubi hee: ‘ Nec liceat domino,
(sie lege, non ‘domini’) vel justicie testibus aliquem sine contra-
diccione vincere. Id est, nemo condemnandus, licet testibus con-
vineatur, nisi data prius venia seipsum, si valeat, defendendi, et pro-
bationes vel testimonia in ipsum allata improbandi, juxta illud in
capitul. Kar. et Lud. Impp. 1. 70. c. 130. ‘ Nemo debet judicari aut
damnari priusquam accusator presens habeatur, et spatium non mo-
dicum defendendi accipiat accusatus ad abluenda crimina.’ Simile
habes retro, cap. 5. § 8. ‘Nec oportet quemquam judicari.’ Vid.
Magnam Chartam, c. 29.

e Notanda hine antiquitas judicii apud nos per pares. Longe
tamen altius peti potest, a legum sc. Inw, cap. 55. et alibi. Hac
autem de re vide D. Edw. Cocum, Institut. par. 2. pag. 28, 48, 49,
50, et feudistas de paribus curiae, imprimis Lindenbrog. Glossar. in
voce ¢ Pares,’

‘ Inculcatur hic quod prius institutum cap. 5. § 2. concordat
capitul. Kar. et Ludov. Impp. 1.7. c. 230. ‘ Peregrina,’ inquiunt,
‘ judicia generali sanctione prohibemus,’ &c. Que sequuntur ibi e
synodo Nicena petuntur, ut in doct. Spelm. Coneil. to. 1. p. 273.
ca. 141. videre est.


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 535


vero judicia modis omnibus submovemus ; et quicquid adversus
absentes, in omni loco vel negocio, vel a non suis judicibus,
lagitur, penitus evacuetur.  § 8. In *quibusdam locis utrum-
que eligitur judicium, medietas ab eis quorum est negocium,
“Let ibi testes nominati et electi sunt habendi, nisi odium vel
aliquid competens in nominacione proponatur, cur haberi non
possint. *™™In Westsexa duo modi testium sunt, nominati et
electi, *electi ™™ et non nominati judices constituti advocati.


XXXII. NE ALIQUIS JUDICET DOMINUM SUUM.


§ 1. Nemo solus presumat, vel ab aliquo cogatur, judicium
celebrare, nec summorum quispiam minorum judicacione dis-
pereat. § 2. ?Nemo dominum suum judicet, vel judicium
proferat super eum cujus ligius sit, si eclam de principis causa
sit. § 3. Si dominus placitet contra suum hominem, potest
in consilio suo judices habitos inforciare, si opus sit.


XXXII. DE PLACITO TRACTANDO.


§ 1. Si quis in curia sua, vel in quibuslibet agendorum
locis, placitum tractandum habeat, convocet pares et vicinos
suos, ut, inforciato judicio, gratuitam, et cui contradici non
possit, justiciam exhibeat. ¢Defectus quippe justicie, et vio-
lenta recti eorum destitucio est qui causas protrahant in jus
regium, vel *jurisdictiones dominorum. § 2. Injusto quo-
que judicio contradici poterit wemminge majori et sapienciori,
presertim si in reddicione fuerit advocatum. Si vero sine
calumpnia *reperiatur, et deinceps causam illam quis informare
cupiat, non procedet in ®sceleribus, ut opus sit judicibus nar-
raciones repetere judicii, maxime si dominus querimonie inter-
fuerit, vel dapifer, vel minister ejus, vel congruum inde ter-
minum tune “habuit. § 3. Si dominus placitet contra
hominem suum, ®respectare potest et differre, dum velit; quia
non frangit, nisi major justicia intersit. Erga parem, vel


lagitur ms. Lond. et K. agunt Se. 2quibus Sc. quibusdam K.
3in ms. Lond. deest. ‘+dicionem mus. Lond. et K. *recipiatur A.
6 celeribus Sc. sceleribus K. 7habuerit K. 8 representare us. Lond.


a Magna Charta regis Johannis apud Matth. Paris. anno 1215. de
persona regis, regine, et liberorum expressa cautio habetur.

b Vide cap. 28.

© Vide cap. 59. § 19.


536 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


vicinum suum, vel alterius hominem agens, viderit ne pro recti
penuria sine judicio dimittat eum tercio; quia curiam suam
inde perderet et placitum, et emendaret. § 4. ? De libro
Theodosiane legis, injuste victus infra 111. menses reparet
causam!; quod si neglexerit, sentencia collata, perseveret.
§ 5. *Judices sane non debent esse nisi quos impetitus elegerit.
§ 6. Augustino juris forensis est, qui in impeticionibus mentitus
est, non ei prosit quod impetravit; Jeronimo, equum judicium
est, ubi non persona set opera considerantur.


XXXIV. 2DE PLACITO TRACTANDO IN JUSTO
JUDICIO.’


§ 1. Si quis ira, vel odio, vel timore, vel amore, vel cupi-
ditate, vel quoquo respectu, injustum judicet, vel unlagam
constituat, cxx. sot culpa sit, et Segenscypes et omni judiciaria
dignitate privatur; “'Y nisi se erga regem redimat, sicut in
ejus misericordia erit: in Denelaga ‘lahslite, nisi super sancta
jurare poterit, quod melius et reccius nescivit: sive in comitatu,
vel quovis placito regis fiat, de sua vel alterius causa, vel inter
compares in curiis, vel divisis, vel locis suis, vel inter dominum
et hominem suum, *ubique sit interdictum. Pensandum est
eciam, si de pecunialibus, vel capite plectendis ®accionibus, et
an scienter vel inscienter hoc acciderit; sepe enim culpa malum
ageravat, et were, vel wite, vel lahslite discrimen infatuat.
§ 2. Si quis injustum judicet et affligat, wera componat.
§ 3. Qui justum judicium ordinabiliter habitum, et legitime


1suam ms. Lond. et K. add. % De forisfacto judicio injusto. as.
Lond. %honore K.  4lahsliites Sc. lahslite K. ‘5 utrique Se.
ubique K. 6 occasionibus A.


2 Habe hic integram legem e codice meo Theodosiano edit. Basil.
an. Dom. 1528, lib. 2. tit. 9. De reparationibus appellationum Imp.
Valent. et Valens AA. ad Modestum P.F.P. < Reparatis intra men-
sem tertium ex priore lege temporibus in notitiam hoc ipsum ad-
versarii per denuntiationem ex more celebrandam jubemus sine
dilatione perferri, scilicet ut interjectorum spatiorum dinumeratione
servata ad debitum partibus judicium revertantur. Quod si is, cui
reparata sunt tempora, ultra dinumerationem crediderit differendum,
lata adversus eum sententia roboretur, atque in executionem semel
judicata judicantur. Dat.’ &e.

> Vide supra, cap. 5. § 4. et Spelm. p. 273. cap. 141.

¢ Non multum recedunt hee a sancitis in ante memorati Cnuti
lege Sec. c. 15, versus finem apud Jorvalens. sic Latine reddita,
cap. 35. ‘Et qui recte legi vel justo judicio refragabit, reus


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 537


redditum, improbaverit, si regis accio sit, overseunesse judi-
cetur, i. "“L. sot in Westsexa; si erga comitem, xL. sot; erga
hundretum, xxx. sot Jex v. @, *qui faciunt v. mané, ut sof
?deh x11.’ computetur, et deinceps in aliis estimetur, sicut
eorum overseunessa erit. § 4, >Vadium affirmandi vel con-
tradicendi judicium in reddicione debet dari. § 5. °Si quis
in placito per 5justiciam posito sui vel suorum causam injustis
conterminacionibus vel contraposicionibus difforciet, hance per-
dat, et de cetero rectum faciat, sicut hundreto vel judicibus
videbitur ydoneum. § 6. “Et nemo apud regem proclama-
cionem faciat de aliquo, qui ei, secundum legem, rectum offerat


let K. 2/xx. duo defi ms. Lond. et K. 3in Sc. judicium linea
seribitur, et justiciam superinseritur, nec deletur judicium ; vide tale
supra notatum, cap. 16.


habeatur erga eum, cui pertinebit ; erga regem sit 120 solid. sit erga
comitem 60 solid. sit erga hundredum 30 solid. sit erga singulum
eorum, si sic accidat in Anglorum laga, in Danelaga lahslihte.’ Vide
Leges Guil. Primi, I. 39.

a Vide cap. 35. § 1. et Glossar. infra in *‘ Manca.’

b Sensus si queratur loci, ni fallor, idem est quod Bractono ‘ va-
dium defendendi per appellatum,’ et ‘vadium disrationandi per ap-
pellatorem datum.’ De quo vide eum lib. 3. De Corona, c. 20.
num. }.

¢ Innovatur hic lex illa Cnuti regis, Sec. c. 27. quam his verbis
exhibet Jorvalensis: ‘ Et qui in placito seipsum vel hominem suum
distortis compellationibus defendere praesumpserit, habeat totum hoc
forspecen, et continget de reliquo sicut hundredo rectum videbitur.’
‘ Conterminatio’ et ‘contrapositio’ hic recriminationem signant, de
quibus plura infra in Glossario. Quod autem hic ‘ conterminationi-
bus’ in ms. Lond. scribitur ‘ concriminationibus.’

4 Idem omnino instituit in legibus suis Edgarus, II. ¢.2. et
Cnutus, Sec. cap. 17. unde forte hoc desumptum. Simile etiam
habetur in legibus Guilielmi Primi, I. 43, ubi hac: * Nemo querelam
ad regem deferat, nisi ei jus defecerat in hundredo vel in comitatu.’
Sic versio legis illius Latina, verbatim ad fidem earundem legum
exemplaris Normanno-Gallici ibidem e regione exhibiti. Deesse
autem videtur ‘ne’ inter ‘li’ et ‘seit’ in Gallico, uti inter ‘ei’ et
‘defecerit’ in Latino ‘non,’ quo (uti sensus vult) rite addito exacte
respondet institutum illud prioribus, unde, ut verisimile est, traduc-
tum est legibus. De verbis satis, de re nunc aliquid. Claret hic
prisci seculi ratio in justitia queerenda: ‘Litium enim vis precipua
(nobilis Spelmanni verba sunt Glossar. verbo ‘ Comitatus;’ vide etiam
harum legum nobilis editor. prefat. pag. 1.) tune rure agebatur,
nimirum aut in villis coram domino ville seu manerii, aut in hun-
dredo coram domino hundredi, aut in comitatu coram comite, seu
vicario ejus, quem Saxones zepera et yeip-zepera vocabant, Nor-
manni vicecomitem. Ab his ad curiam regis provocare non licuit,
nisi deficiente justitia. Hodie spretis curiis omnibus rusticanis cyriam


538 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


in hundreto suo. §7. Qui aliquem *erga justiciam accusabit,
et presertim in quibus convictus, vite jacturam, vel honoris
detrimentum pateretur, et mendacium denique pernoscatur,
linguam perdat, vel wera sua redimat. Cum autem hoc ubi-
que notandum sit, in domino et magistro maxime detestandum
erit. § 8. °Qui prevaricator vel eversor conscripte legis
extiterit, were sue culpa sit, prima vice, Dacus, Anglicus, qui-
cunque sit; secunda vice, dupliciter; qui tertia vice presump-
serit, quicquid habet perdat.


XXXV. DE OVERSEUNESSE REGIS.


§ 1. ©Overseunesse regis est, in causis communibus, xx.
mané, que faciant L. sol. In Westsexa, regine xx. mané,
episcopi x. man¢, comitis x., 'thaini vel'baronis v.’m. §2. In
causis regiis, grithbreche c. sot, strethbreche c. sof, forestel
c. sot, hamsocne c. sol, borhbreche c. sot; et deinceps, ‘sicut
prediximus, emendabitur wita, wera, juxta culpam pocius quam
personam.


XXXVI. QUI PERDUNT OVERSEUNESSAM.


§ 1. De illis qui nominatam overseunessam non habent’,
set in quibusdam causis eam perdunt, honorabilius est, ut, si
quid in eos vel in suos peccabitur, armis hoe et honoribus,
pro modo singulorum, emendetur; nemo enim overseunessam
sui ipsius habet, sed fortasse dominus ejus: amicicie tamen est,
non necessitatis, ut in quibus causis overseunessam suam quis
amittit, dignis satisfaccionibus honoretur. Si talis est qui


Vin ms. Lond. et K. desunt. 2vel habent us. Lond. et K. add.


regis imprimis advolant, imo levissima sepe jurgia tota peragrata
Anglia Londinum appetunt, rusticanis curiis animam interea exha-
lantibus.’

a ¢ Erga justiciam,’ id est, ‘justiciarium.’ Quod autem hic statui-
tur nihil aliud est quam quod antiquiores in legibus sec. scil. Edgari
regis, II. c.4. quam quidem legem recensuit Cnutus rex in legum
suarum Sec. c.16. Vide supra, cap. 5. § 12.

> Simile habes in legibus Cnuti, Sec. c. 84. In hoe tamen dis-
crepant, quod hee presens sanctio generalis, illa particularis, leges
ejusdem regis solummodo respiciens. Vide leges /Ethelstani, I.
cap. 26; huic etiam simile reperitur antea, cap. 12. § 4.

© Vide cap. 34. § 3.

@ Se refert legislator ad caput proxime precedens, ubi hec: ‘ Sepe
enim culpa malum aggravat,’ &c.


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 539


peccaverit, ut non sit opus vel honor aliquid de suo accipere,
laudabilius est, ut totum dimittatur ei, vel, si ita procedat, ut
in eum vindicetur. Quod si juramentum pacacionis exigitur,
juret, sicut presens causa dictabit, in circumstanciis, vel pau-
pertatis, vel qui aderunt obtentibus; quod si ille sic esset pro
hujusmodi forisfacto, hoc reciperet, vel hoc modo dimitteret.
Quod autem in pacacionem hoc modo datur, aliquando com-
petenter retineri potest, ‘aliquando non potest.” — § 2. Si quis
alii malefactum suum emendaverit, vel dampnum suum resti-
tuerit, et postmodum, ex ejus amicicia consequenda, aliquid ei
cum juramento pacis offerat, ad laudem est ei cui offertur, °si
totum reddat, et non contumelie sue suggestionem retineat;
satis enim esse debet, si ex judicio forisfactum emendavit, et
pro habenda dilacione seipsum ei quodammodo exposuit, ut et
metuendus ostendatur cui rectum fieri expediat, et ejus esse
meriti cujus et amor prosit, et odium officiat. Si vero con-
tigerit, ut pro emendacione et satisfaccione auferatur aliquid,
recipi debet, et retineri potest, ex toto vel ex parte, sicut causa
dictaverit.


XXXVII. 3DE CESIONE NEMORIS,’


*Mundbreche, et blodwita, et wudehewet, preter parcum et
forestam, communi emendacione componuntur regi et thainis,
i, v. mané. Si wudehewet, i. nemoris cesio, in parco regis vel
foreste fiat, *xx. mané emendetur; nisi *prohibicio propensior
amplius exigat.


XXXVITI. DE SCHELDWITE.

Si scyldwyta extra burgum et curiam fiat, *xxx. d. emendetur
regi et thainis; nisi de aliquo nominatim prohibitum sit, in
quo overseunessa forisfactum accrevit.

XXXIX. DE FORISFACTURA SANGUINIS.


In quibusdam locis, qui blodwitam, i. forisfacturam sanguinis,


1” in ms. Lond. et K. desunt. 2 quod ms. Lond. et K. % in Se. desunt.
4xxx. ms. Lond. et K. ‘5 propositis ms. Lond. proposicio K.


@ Firmante cap. 40. ubi parci infractura alibi quam in curia regis
quinque mancis mulctatur. Quinque vero mance et triginta solidi
in diebus illis sese mutuo exequabant, ut plenius docebitur in
Glossar. verbo ‘Manca.’ Vide etiam cap. 37. [mss. vero xxx. d
legunt.—Z.]


* Pund-
breche ?


540 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


fecit, solummodo reus est: *in quibusdam eciam, qui patitur
ut nec agens impunitate superbiat, nec contumeliatus fedis
emendacionibus assuescat.


XL. >1DE INFRACTURA PARCI’


Si pundbreche, i. infractura parci, fiat 'Y*in curia regis,
plena wita sit; alibi v. mané@. Pundbreche fit pluribus modis:
emissione, evocacione, recepcione, excussione; que tamen omnia,
secundum prelationem et subjeccionem causancium, multimode
variantur; in omnibus enim causis distancia est loci, temporis,
persone, eventus.


XLI. *Y* QUOD UNUSQUISQUE OVERSEUNESSAM
DEBEAT HABERE.


§ 1. Unusquisque dominus plenam overseunessam suam
habeat, secundum locum et modum culpe, de homine suo, et
qui sunt ejus super terram suam. Quod si diversos feodos
quis teneat, overseunessam que ad feodum attinet, et inde te-
nentibus, et inibi forisfacientibus, *habet: super alterius vero
homines, tantum unusquisque baro vel thainus recipiat quantum
redderet ei. Si quis autem, ubi forisfecerit, retentus aut
divadiatus sit, plene componat. § 2. Qui residens est ad
domum suam submoniri debet de quolibet placito cum testibus ;
et si domi est, eidem dicatur, vel dapifero, vel denique familie
sue libere denuncietur. Si in eodem comitatu sit, inde ad
vu. dies terminum habeat; si in alia scira sit, xv. dierum
terminus ponatur; si in tercio comitatu sit®, 111. ebdomade;
si in quarto, 1111. ebdomade; et ultra non procedit, ubicunque
fuerit in Anglia, nisi competens detineat. eum ‘soinus. Si
ultra mare est, v1. ebdomadas habeat, et unam diem, ad ac-
cessum et recessum maris, nisi vel occupacio servicii regis, vel


De infractura partici. ws. Lond. De fractura joncis. Sc. K. ut in
textu. 2faciat Se. habet K. terminus mss. Seld. e¢ Twysd. add.
+sonius mss. Seld. et Twysd.


@ Ineuleatur hoc iterum postea, cap. 84.

b Sic se habet capitis lemma (in Sc. scil.), obscurum quidem: si
divinandum est, ego potius divinarem aut ‘ pacis’ aut ‘ parci,’ quarum
vocum prior scriptioni proprior (‘ pz’ priori syllaba ex tribus literis
prioribus facile formata) posterior autem sensui: sed neutrum valde
placet: prestat aliis relinquere.


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 541


ipsius egritudo, vel tempestas, vel aliquid competens, amplius
respectet.  § 3. Si quis plures mansiones de diversis dominis
habeat, et ab aliquo eorum inplacitetur, submoniri debet ad
feodum, vel ad id quod de eo tenet, ubicunque sit, non ad
alterum. §§ 4. Si de uno domino aliquis plures mansiones
teneat, ad *‘quod dominus maluerit submoniri eum compe-
tenter faciat. § 5. Qui plures mansiones habet in comitatu,
submoniri debet a vicecomite ad quam earum residens erit
cum familia sua; si sit eciam agendum de alia. § 6. Si de
familia sit qui inplacitatur, ad rectum eum habeat in cujus
familia est, quando et ubi justum erit, si a domino, vel rege,
vel prelato, secundum legem, sit monitus, sive per breve, sive
per nuncium. *Lex enim est, ut omnis dominus secum tales
habeat qui ei justiciabiles sint, et teneat familiam suam in
plegio suo, et si accusetur in aliquo, respondeat in hundreto
ubi compellabitur, sicut recta lex sit. Si accusetur, et aufugiat,
reddat dominus ejus regi weram illius hominis. Et si domi-
nus accusetur, quod ejus consilio fugerit, allegiet se cum
v. thainis, et idem sit sextus. Si juramentum frangat ei,
reddat weram suam regi, et qui fugit utlaga sit. °Si accusetur
itaque quamdiu cum eo est, non dimittat illum dominus, donec
satisfaciat, *’"'Si jam recesserat, juret, si opus sit, “quod
nichil inde audierat, nec ejus velle nec posse fuerit, nec ob


1 quos ms. Lond.


= Ex quadam parte hee eadem habentur, cum antea cap. 8. § 3.
tum postea, cap. 59. § 6. Lex autem hic laudata triplex est: altera
/Ethelredi, I. cap. 1. altera Cnuti, Sec. cap. 32. tertia autem Guiliel.
Primi, I. c. 52. de qua vide plura scholiis ad cap. 8. et Bracton. 1.3.
tract. 2. cap. 10. num. 1. item leges Edw. Confess. cap. 21.

b Sumptum forte hoc e legibus /Ethelstani, I. c. 22. et Cnuti,
Sec. c. 28, quibus concordant leges Guiliel. Primi, I. c. 48 et 52.
Institutum hoe Bractoni e2vo nondum antiquatum. Vide eum ubi
supra.

¢ Id est forte servi vel familiaris sui culpz non consentiit, nec
cum eo de eadem celanda ex parte convenit. In re furti, pars
damnum passa, que emendam vel compensationem ceperit sine con-
sideratione curiz domini regis, id est, extrajudicialiter, et curia in-
consulta ‘ theft-bati,’ ut vocant, reus est. Vide Coci Institut. par. 3.
pag. 134, quo tendit lex thelstani. Huic autem multum affine
ilud in legibus Edw. Confess. cap. 27: ‘ purgabit se sacramento de
consilio et de facto; nec multum distat lex illa Guilielmi Primi:
‘purgunt se quia in evaso nullam fraudem noverint.’ Hec autem
vera, si ‘curvatus’ hic non sit rectius scribendum ‘crayatus,’ de quo
vide Glossarium infra.


* 7, quam.


* iterum ?


«2, homini.
* ratum ?


542 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


hoc eum dimiserit, nec cum eo ‘cravatus sit, *set legitimo testi-
monio dimisit eum; nam’ justum est, ut inde pacem habeat
erga omnem manum, et qui peccavit luat. Quod si inplacitatus
in aliquo refragaverit, retineat ipsum dominus vel de suo quan-
tum ad satisfaciendum sit. Justum siquidem est, ut eum habeat
ad emendandum cum quo fuit ad peccandum, et *eciam si
forisfecit’” alibi, rectum faciat ibi.


XLII. DE SUMMONICIONIBUS.


§ 1. Qui summonicionem regis vel communis domini, domino
vel cuilibet perferendam susceperit, et dimiserit, vel ex indus-
tria vel ex inscicia, emendet per judicium, sicut erit, dampnum
vel overseunessam, si ad id deducatur, et quietus inde sit qui
submonebatur, et *item ad rectum submoneatur. § 2. Si
quis vero dapiferum, vel quemlibet ministrum, ita rebus suis
prefecerit, et hoc, ubi et sicut justum est, notificaverit, et
*domino suo committet, ut quodammodo locum ejus habeat,
et quod fecerit * factum sit, et a rege, vel justicia ejus, vel a
communi utrorumque domino, de proprio ipsorum placito per
eum submoneatur, et idem coram testibus suscepit, ut negari
non possit, submonitus judicetur, ®sive dictum sit ab homine
suo, sive non; et si non venerit ad placitum rectum, inde
judicetur ;’ unde si dampnum ei evenerit, loquatur inde cum


‘in ms. Lond. desunt. 2 etiam forisfecerit us. Lond. % in ms. Lond.
et Kx. desunt.


2 De modo servos dimittendi adinittendique, consulas velim leges
fEthelstani, I. cap.1. De recessu autem extranei in burgo vel villa
hospitio excepti, vide Assisas apud Clarendon. in clar. Seld. Jan.
Angl. p.116. § 68. ‘ Nulli liceat neque in burgo neque in villa
hospitari aliquem extraneum ultra unam noctem in domo sua, quem
ad rectum habere noluerit, nisi hospitatus ille essonium rationabile
habuerit, quod hospes domus monstret vicinis suis, et cum recesserit,
coram vicinis recedat et per diem.’ Huc pertinet illud Bractoni,
qualiter procedere debeant justitiarii in itinere suo, et quo ordine
verba facientis scil. lib. 3. tract. 2. c.1. n.1. ubi hee: ‘ Jurabunt
etiam (omnes scil. tam milites quam alii, qui sunt quindecim anno-
rum et amplius, ut pag. habetur pracedenti) quod nullum de nocte
recipient in domum suam ad hospitandum, nisi bene notus sit, et si
forte ignotum aliquem hospitaverint, quod non permittent eum in
crastino recedere ante clarum diem, et hoc sub testimonio trium.vel
quatuor proximorum vicinorum. Tanta adeo fuit priscorum in servis
imo et hospitibus admittendis et dimittendis providentia, celebratione
non indigna. Quod autem ad hospites attinet, vide plura, si placet,
in legibus Edo. Confess. cap. 27. et eund. Bracton. libro et tract.
memoratis, c. 10.


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 543


homine suo. Si eciam venire non possit, et mittat nuncium
ad dominum suum, mittat qui diligenter et fideliter renunciet
preceptum illius.


XLIII. **NE QUIS !INPLACITATUS A REGE ALICUI
RESPONDEAT.


§ 1. * Nemo a rege inplacitatus cogitur per legem alicui
respondere, donec ei qui dominus omnium est satisfecerit : *sic
potest ei *warantus esse qui in servicio suo est. ™' Si pre-
positus aut debitor domini sui est, quod debet reddat, aut inde
componat; neque enim justum est, ut hominis sui forisfactum
dominus luat, nec expectari convenit, ut quis eum in suis
preveniat; pensandum tamen est, ut racione et consideracione
hoc fiat, ne fraudacionis pocius quam juste repeticionis accio
judicetur. § § 2. Si quis a domino suo sine licencia discedat,
utleipa Semendetur et redire cogatur, ut rectum per omnia
faciat. § 8. Qui sibi facit advocatum contra dominum suum,
per superbiam, perdat quod de eo tenet. § 4. Si quis
hominem habeat, qui ei nolit **"" esse ad rectum, si quid de eo
tenet, post legitimam submonicionem, saisiri faciat. § 5. Si
quis diversos diversorum feodos teneat, de eo, quod ad eorum
feudum pertinet, cum singulis componat, et de rebus alterius
alteri non intendat. § 6. Quotcunque dominos aliquis
habeat, vel quantumcunque de aliis teneat, ei magis obnoxius
est, et ejus residens esse debet, cujus legius est. Si multis
homagium fecerit, et ab aliquo eorum captus et inplacitatus sit,
ille, cujus residens et legius est, erga quoslibet alios jure
potest eum plegiare, nec debet ei denegari, qui manbotam inde
haberet, et cui ipse magis acquieverit. §7. ‘*"* Qui furtum
fecerit, qui proditor domini sui fuerit, quicunque ab eo in
obviacione hostili, vel bello campali, fugerit, vel victus erit,
vel feloniam fecerit, terram suam forisfecerit. § 8. Si domi-
nus terram vel feodum suum auferat homini suo, unde est homo
suus, vel si eum in mortali necessitate deserat, supervacue
‘forisfacere potest dominus suus’ erga eum; sustinere tamen


1 placitatus ws. Zond. 2 warrantatus mss. Seld. Twysd.et K. ?enim
detur us. Zond. 4% forisfaciat dominum suum K.


a Videatur hac de re Glanvilla, 1.1. c.27. et Term. Juris, in voce
* Protection.’


544 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


debet homo dominum suum, si faciat ei contumeliam vel in.
juriam ejusmodi, in werra xxx. dies, in pace unum annum et
unum diem; et interim private, per compares, per vicinos, et
per domesticos, et extraneos, per leges, 'requireret eum de
recto.


XLIV. “DE PLEGIIS DOMINORUM SUORUM.


*Si quis a domino suo missus sit in plegium, et ostendere
possit quod *ei %ex sponsione” vel fidejussione illa dampnum
venit, non cogitur ex lege de quavis pecuniali inplacitacione
respondere ej, donec totum restituat quod amiserit pro eo.
De contumelia vero domini semper est homini suo responden-
dum, prima vice eciam sine alio compellante; deinde qui
sacramentum vel legem abnegandi vult habere, querat accu-
santem,


XLV. DE INCULPACIONIBUS.


§ 1. Multe sunt et multorum inculpaciones in quibus non
necesse est, secundum legem, responderi, ut quavis compella-
cione simplici promptum est inveniri: simplex enim et vacua
compellacio est, ubi ex neutra parte, compellantis scilicet aut
compellati, testis est; nec causa *hujusmodi que bello, vel
judicio, vel lege sacramentali, vel timore, vel amore, mereatur
® promoveri. § 2. ¢Et si quis monacho vel monache, servo
vel ancille, sine prelatorum suorum licencia, aliquid committat,
ut negaverit, nil recipiat. § 3. Item, si quis sponse, vel


Trequireret mss. Seld. Twysd. Lond. et K. require Sc. in us. Lond.
deest. % exponcione Se. et K. 4hujusmodi mss. Seld. Twysd. Lond.
et K. hujus Se. 5 promoveri ut aperte promereri us. Lond.


« Simile habes in Magno sive Veteri, ut vocant, Norman. Cus-
tumar. c. 60. fol. 75 a. quod in Latina ejusdem editione sive versione
sic se habet: ‘Residentes vero homines per vicecomitem et in assisiis
comitatus dominium suum’ (vel ‘dominum’ juxta Gallicum) ‘ple-
giare tenentur, ad expensas tamen ejus et ipse eos indempnes super
hoc reddere tenebitur. Et si eos’ (deest ‘damnum’ juxta Gallicum
exemplar) ‘incurrere de plegiatione permiserit, non tenebuntur ipsum
ulterius nec amplius plegiare, quousque super illa plegiatione et damnis
et perditis satisfactum fuerit evidenter.’

> De quo vide plura infra, cap. 59. § 16.

¢ Ex quadam parte derivatum hoc videtur ex legibus 7lfredi, c. 20.
Quod statim legitur ‘ ut negaverit,’ legendum puto ‘et negaverit,’ nisi
malis ‘et amiserit,’ juxta citate legis verba: 3 hic him lopige, te.
(Jorvalensi interprete) ‘et amittatur.’ Lectioni favet lex quedam


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIML 545


puero, vel puelle, sine permissu domini sui, quamcunque com-
mendacionem, vel aliquam commutacionem, vel tradicionem,
fecerit, non opus est eos, vel eorum dominos, respondere
super hiis, si complaceat abnegare quamdiu sub virga sunt.
§ 4. *Et de nemore inoperato, per thihlam nemo respondeat,
nisi sit ibi captus, vel sit homo ejus cujus est nemus.
§ 5. Et si quis delegiatus ‘legalem hominem accuset, funestam
dicimus vocem ejus.


XLVI. DE INPLACITATIS 2A DOMINIS/


§ 1. **"" Si quis a domino suo, vel justicia, per suam vel
alterius suggestionem, inplacitetur, submoneatur ad vir. dies in
eodem comitatu, de nominatis vel innominatis placitis ; et si lex
domino vadietur, differat cetera placita, donec lex deducatur
per burgi legem; ‘nisi de furto vel capitalibus sit, in quibus
statim oportet responderi. § 2. De quibuscumque inplacitetur
aliquis, furst et fondung habeat, et nominentur ei placita, et
inde ad vir. dies respondeat quod velit. %Si autem hoc vel alio
modo ventum erit ad placitum, sive contra dominum, sive
contra alium, tacite se inplacitari paciatur in omnibus‘ placitis
super eum.  § 3. Et si quis de felonia compellitur, remaneat
de cetero, donec inde finiatur. ‘*’" In aliis querat accusatus
consilium, et habeat, ab amicis et a parentibus suis, quod nulli
jure debet defendi, maxime eorum quos secum adduxerit, vel
ad placitum suum rogaverit; et °si in consilio suo fiducialiter


lin ms. Lond. deest. 2/dominorum ms. Lond. 3Cum ms. Lond.
et K. 4 vel quodlibet Se. add. perperam. ‘in ms. Lond. deest.


hac de re per 4Elfredum lata, et inter instit. ejus (Cf. pp. 74, 75.) re-
perta, que talis: ‘ Et si quis commendaverit alterius monacho pecu-
niam, aut aliquid tale ad custodiendum, sine licentia prelati sui, et
monachus illud perdiderit, sit illi perditum, qui sine licentia preelati
ejus monacho commendavit.’

* Repetitionem sapiunt hee superius decretorum, cap. 23. § 2.
Vide scholia ibid.

> Locum hunce advertit nobilis Spelman. in Glossar. verbo ‘ Dili-
giatus,’ unde sensum petas, inserto ibidem quod deest ‘legalem’ inter
‘diligiatos’ et ‘hominem,

¢ Locum exhibet Spelm. in Glossar. sub vocibus ‘ Furst’ et ‘ Fan-
dung’ nulla omnino expositione adhibita. Defectus distinctionum, ut
opinor, preecipue in causa fuit. Voces, fateor, ‘furst’ et ‘fandung’
nisi hic nusquam, quod sciam, simul occurrunt: restituta autem
modo quo supra vera loci lectione sensum eorum facilius exploremus,
quem vide in Glossario huic operi addito.


546 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


rerum veritatem fateatur, ut de placito vel de pace salubrius
videatur. Bonum autem est, ut cum alicujus ‘consilium in
placito redditur, cum emendacione dicendum predicatur, ut si
forte perorator vel superadjecerit aliquid, vel, omiserit, emendare
liceat ei. Sepe enim fit, ut in sua causa quis minus videat
quam in alterius, et in ore alterius plerumque poterit emendari,
quod in suo non liceret.


XLVI DE CAUSIS CRIMINALIBUS, VEL CAPITALIBUS.


Txvill. aDe furto, et murdro, et prodicione domini, et robaria,


et utlagaria, ?et husbreche, et bernet, et falsaria,’ et causis
criminalibus, vel capitalibus, nemo querat consilium, quin inpla-
citatus statim perneget, sine omni peticione consilii, cujuscum-
que nacionis vel condicionis sit; vel ejus affirmacionem vel
negacionem defensor, aut dominus, prosequatur, competenti
termino comprobandam.


XLVIII. QUOMODO POSSUNT UTI CONSILIO.


§ 1. >In aliis omnibus potest et debet quilibet uti consilio in
consulendo, eciam consulte agere consilium est. Si quis enim
a justicia regis inplacitatus ad consilium exierit, et ad inculpa-
cionem non responderit, xx. marce, vel overseunesse regis, culpa
sit. Quum itaque aliquid habeatur in inplacitacionibus preten-
dendum, in inculpacionibus ostendatur: et ad consilium de
inplacitacione non exeat, qui placitare non deliberat; judicium
enim est, qui, sine contradiccione vel preoccupacione, super
inplacitacionem exit ad consilium, intrat in placitum, et de
quibus non responderit, concesserit. § 2. Si totus comitatus
vel vil. hundreta super aliquibus inplacitentur, et ad aliquem
specialiter vel singulariter inculpacio dirigatur, petat ut ei
comitatum suum, qui ejusdem esse dicitur, habere liceat, et
cum eo respondeat, ut, sicut omnium una est inculpacio, una


lus. Lond. et K. add. Y in us. Lond. desunt.


@ Vide supra cap. 10. § 1. et infra cap. 61. §17. Horum autem
criminum capitalium nonnulla tractantur per Glanvill. 1.14. per
totum, et fusius per Bractonum, |. 3. tract.2. De Corona.

b Vide Vetus Normannie Custumar. cap. 84. unde colligo consi-
lium petenti in causa ex simplici querela personali orta apud Nor-
mannos non esse denegandum.


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 547


Temundacio vel emendacio sit.’ Si eis alternatim verum de se
testantibus, quia Francorum et Anglorum plenum est testimo-
nium, ita sit; si secus est, eligantur de melioribus juraturi,
secundum ?rerum meritum’ et cause modum. § 3. Nec
aliquis baro solus de hundreto vel de eo placitet quod ad plures
pertinet. § 4. *Nec liceat domino vel justicie testibus
aliquem sine contradiccione vincere.  § 5. >Si quis Sin comi-
tatu, vel in quovis placito, per justiciam dictum factum ne
negetur, per homines qui interfuerint, et per alterius domini
testes agatur. §6. °Et de omni causa ubi plures fuisse
dicuntur, unum ad minus intelligibilem de placito rectum haberi
erit. §7. Et qui contra dominum partem confitetur, ceterum
probabit. Qui nichil inculpacionis recognoscit, totum, si velit,


Vin ms. Lond. et K. desunt. %regum ms. Lond. et K. 3quid
ms. Lond. add.


a Vide scholia ad cap. 31.

> Vide Glanvill. lib. 12. cap. 7.

¢ Hine forte ortus apud nos recordatorum, ut vocantur, usus.
Vide Vetus Norman. Custumar. cap. 123. leges Edo. Senior. cap. 5.
et /Ethelstani, par. 2. c.1. in Jorvalensi (huj. edit. IV.1.): ‘Et
nominentur in manunga singulorum prepositorum tot homines, quot
pernoscuntur esse credibiles qui sint in testimonio (forte testimo-
nium) singularum causarum, et sint eorum juramenta credibilium
hominum butan sire (Z. cype) i.e. sine electione.’ Quz sequuntur in
presenti capite pleraque sunt obscura; hc autem ‘et de cremento
feodi debet habere testes ejusdem dominii, vel ex sua vel ex parte
domini eciam invocatus’ non multum discrepant a legum Guiliel.
Primi, I. c.23. quod Latine exhibitum sic se habet: ‘ Si voluerit quis
convencionem terre tenende, adversus dominum disracionare; per
pares suos de eodem tenemento, quos in testimonio vocaverit, disra-
cionabit; quia per extraneos id facere non poterit.’ Idem igitur
locus ‘de cremento feodi’ forsan hic intelligendus: ‘ Et de conven-
tione feodi (hic ‘cremento’ dicta, forte a vernaculo nostro ‘ gree-
ment’ et ‘agreement’) debet habere testes ejusdem dominii, vel ex
parte sua vel ex parte domini invocatos.’ Fortasse tamen putent
aliqui ‘cremento’ hic ‘incrementum’ intelligi, perinde ac si eodem
sensu hoc in loco usurpatum esset quo in Feudor. lib. 1. tit. 4. § ‘Si
quis de manso.’ Ego non renitor. In quorum gratiam integrum
illum paragraphum representandum duxi: ‘ Si quis de manso uno
feudi nomine investituram acceperit, et dixerit, quod omne incremen-
tum pertineat ad eum per investituram: si dominus reservaverit sibi
aliquid in ipsa curte, tune oportebit fidelem incrementi investituram
per pares curtis vel per breve testatum probare. Sed si dominus in
ipsa curte nil sibi retinuit, tunc omne incrementum jure feudi fidelis
obtinebit. Si vero fidelis in possessione incrementi fuerit, non opor-
tebit eum investituram probare sed jurare.’ Vox ‘crementum’ eodem
forte sensu in libro Angliee censuali usurpatur, ut apud Cambdenum
Britann., de Sarisburia urbe agentem, videre est.


548 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


abnegabit; nec testes audientes vel videntes habendi sunt de eo
quod ‘non fuit,’” set quod accusatus fuisse intendit. Et de cre-


mento feudi debet habere testes ejusdem dominii, vel ex sua,
vel ex parte domini eciam invocatos. De primo feudo habean-


tur ?quicunque liberi;’ si non possint, alii: et in diraciona-
cione feudi *producere debet” feudatus testem suum ad bellum,
vel aliam legem.


XLIX. 4QUIBUS CAUSIS STATIM RESPONDERI DEBEAT,
QUIBUS NON’


§ 1. Quedam cause sunt de quibus statim respondere, sicut
dictum est, set non statim placitare, necesse est; quedam, de
quibus, sine competenti summonicione, non cogitur aliquis vel
placitare vel respondere, sine consilio, vel in omni loco; que-
dam, de quibus respondere et placitare oportet; quedam, in
quibus non respondere oportet, tam in causis quam in ‘causa-
toribus. § § 2. Pro statu vero causarum, et esse temporum, et
modo inplacitatorum vel inplacitancium, unusquisque deliberet,
tam ex presentibus quam preteritis, an ei inpresenciarum sit,
vel non sit, placitandum. Melius autem aliquando erit, secun-
dum amicorum vel inimicorum presenciam vel absenciam, dif-
ferre placitum, et aliquem, cum placitare possit, dilatari.
§ 3. Si quis vero per legem de pluribus causis inplacitatus non
respondet de omnibus, omnium quas pretermiserit reus esse
judicetur, si de omnibus antea submonitus fuit, aut de omnibus
ipsa die respondere et rectum facere promisit. In quibus vero
expedit, debet ei, si petierit, consilium dari, et, cum respon-
derit, queratur, an amplius dicere velit? ne quis occasione
pocius quam racione placitare videatur: si ita ammonitus ali-
quid pretermiserit, sibimet deputet, si dampnum ei evenerit.
Et qui testes habet nominandos, ante nominet; raro enim
prodest quicquid dicatur postquam judicium exit, vel magis
redditum est; dum in respectacione erit pocius addatur, si
Sante judicium opus est.” § 4. Et omnem recordacionem
dominice regis curie non potest homo contradicere. Fre-
quenter autem in divinis legibus interrogandum est, ne aliquid
pretermissum forte remaneat, quod annecti conveniat; inducie


non fuit us. Lond. et K. si fuerit Sc. °v. libre ms. Lond. et K.
¥debet procedere (precedere K.) feudi ms. Lond. ‘in ms. Lond.
desunt. *accusacionibus HK. § opus fuerit ante judicium ms.
Lond.


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 549


enim 'modice ad querendum dande sunt, ne quid agi propere
a quacunque parte videatur, quia multa per surrepcionem
eveniunt. § 5. Si plures alicujus homines simul implaciten-
tur, secundum quod cause fuerint vel pactum inter eos, de
omnibus una die simul, vel de singulis sigillatim, rectum faciat ;
*pactum enim legem vincit, et amor judicium. § 6. In
causis vero communibus, tractande simul et finiende sunt que-
rele de pluribus, que lege sacramentali vel judicio promoventur;
in quibus vero bellum est singulariter fiant.  § 7. Et si pla-
citum sit furti, vel exaccionis hujusmodi, et unus inculpatorum
adducatur ad reddendum quod exigitur, non reddent alii; quia
ex una culpa non debent in hunc modum plures emendaciones
haberi. Debet autem de convictis justicia fieri.


L. 2DE SUPERSESSIS PLACITIS.’


Si quis a domino vel prelato suo de nominatis placitis, secun-
dum legem, inplacitatus, ad diem condictum non venerit,
omnium placitorum, de quibus nominatim inplacitabatur,
incurrit emendaciones, nisi competens ‘aliquid respectaverit.
Aliud enim est, si quis a domino suo sic submoneatur, ut illa
vel illa die sit ad eum, et placitum ei nominetur, ‘et aliter, si
ita expresse sit mannitus, ut ei placitum non nominetur. Si
{sint] nominata placita, et non venerit, overseunessa,’ juxta loci
consuetudinem, sit, et alius dies ponatur ei; et tunc explacitet
se, vel emendet, nisi competens soinus intercedat.


LI. DE SUMMONICIONE HUNDRETI.


§ 1. Qui ad hundretum secundum Jegem submonitus non
venerit, prima et secunda vice, xxx. dei culpa sit erga ipsum
hundretum, nisi soinus legalis eum detineat; tercia vice, plena
wita sit. §2. Debent autem, ‘ut dictum est, ad singulos


1 dominice ms. Lond. et K. in ms. Lond. deest; reperitur tamen
in capitulo sequenti. 3aliquis K. 4 si non sunt ei nominata placita,
et non venit overseunessa ms. Lond. et K.


= Concordat Glanvilla, 1.10. c. 14. *Generaliter (inquit) verum est
quod conventio legem vincit,’ Ciceronem, ut videtur, sequutus, De
Invent. ‘ Pacta (inquit) prestant legibus.’ Item ad Herenn. ‘ Pac-
tum prestat juri.

> Hac de re vide plura, cap. 29. § 2. et schol. ibid.

© Cap. sce. 7. § 4. Vide etiam leges Ede. Senior. cap. ult.


550 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


menses, i. per annum duodecies, congregari hundreta, comi-
tatus bis, si non sit opus amplius; et omnis homo rectum faciat
alteri ad rectum terminum, et omnis causa finem habeat, et
submoneatur comitatus vu. dies antea. §3. *™ Et nulli,
sine judicio vel licencia, namiare liceat alium in suo vel alterius.
§4. Si vicecomes injuste aliquem namiet, convictus noxa
causam suam perdat, et dupliciter emendet, et regi, sicut fac-
tum sit. § 5. Nemo justicie vel domino suo namium excu-
tere presumat, si juste vel injuste capiatur, set juste repetet,
plegium offerat, et terminum  satisfaciendi. § 6. Si vice-
comes namium capiat, ad propinquiorem regis curiam dimittat,
nec vendat ipsa die. § 7. Qui namium excussit, reddat, et
overseunessa sit. Si plus peccet, plus ’emendet. Si alicujus
homines super hiis accusentur, ad rectum eos habeat dominus
suus. Et si alicujus precepto namium excusserint, qui in eos
potestatem haberent, omnes simul unam forisfacturam reddant :
sicut acciderint, sigillatim componant. § 8. Excutere
namium est, si quis viam tollat, et avertat retro namium
ipsum.


LI. 4** DE PROPRIO PLACITO REGIS.

§ 1. Si quis de placito proprio regis inplacitetur a justicia
ejus, cujuscunque homo sit, non debet *justicie vadium ?recti
denegare. Si non fuerat antea submonitus, nec ad hoc veniat,
debet per judicium *recti vadium justicie dare, et plegios eciam,
si opus sit, invenire. Si fuerat inde submonitus legaliter, et
dies *emendacionis positus, vel emundacionis, ipsa die oportebit
eum, si justicia cogat, respondere vel perdere, si dominum
suum habeat, sive non habeat. Si quis vadium recti justicie
denegaverit, tercio interrogatus, overseunesse culpa sit, et ex


‘det us. Lond. regis K. Sregi ad ms. Lond. regi K.


a Justitiz hic ut et alibi, cum supra tum infra, crebre (quod etiam
in Glossario nostro infra monitum) cum J capitali scribendum est;
siquidem non ‘ justitia,’ virtus scil. illa moralis, sed minister potius vel
administrator justitie, nimirum justitiarius, ut vocant juniores, eo
nomine intelligitur.

> Juxta illud tam antea, cap. 48. §2, ‘ut, sicut omnium una est
inculpacio, una emundacio vel emendacio sit :’ quam postea, cap. 57.
§ 3. © et ibi purgetur vel ibi sordidetur,’ quod iterum etiam repetitum
habes, cap. 62. § 3. ‘et si quis malefactum inter manus habens alicubi
retinetur, ibi purgetur vel sordidetur.’ Similis autem correctio desi-
deratur postea, cap. 59. § 4.


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 551


judicio licet retineri eum, donec plegios inveniat, vel satisfaciat ;
maxime si judicatum sit de vadio, si de capitalibus agatur in eo.
§ 2. Clericus per consilium prelati sui vadium dare debet, cum
dederit in accusacione. § 3. Et omnis homo pacem habeat
quam rex ei dabit.


LIIl. DE SUPERSESSIONE COMITATUS.


§1. '**" Qui secundum legem submonitus a justicia regis,
ad comitatum venire supersederit, overseunesse regis, i. xx. M,
reus sit in Westsexa; *et si de nominatis et susceptis placitis
pulsabatur, nisi competens aliquid intervenerit, reus omnium
judicetur ; si *secus, tantum’ inde xx. m emendet, et rectum
faciat. Quod si overseunessam dare et rectum facere renueret,
mittantur qui de suo capiant, et eum, si opus est, per plegium
ponant. Si neque sic satisfecerit, totum quod habet amiserit,
et idem capiatur, nisi plegios inveniat. Si repugnet et cogatur,
occidatur. Si evaserit et aufugerit, pro utlaga reputetur. Qui
eum interim susceperit, consilio foverit, juverit, were sue reus
sit, vel, secundum inculpati natalicium, perneget. §2. Si
quis inplacitetur de eo unde per plegium corporis et tocius
pecunie responsurus sit, remaneat de omnibus aliis causis, donec
prime finis sit; quia est quodam tenus in capcione regis.
§ 3. Nullus a domino suo inplegiatus, vel inlegiatus, vel injuste
dissaisiatus, ab eodem inplacitetur, ante legitimam restitucio-
nem. § 4. >Si dominus de felonia, vel fide mentita, com-
pellat hominem suum, non respondeat quibuslibet inplacita-
cionibus ejus, donec quietus sit. § 5. °Et nemo dissaisiatus
placitet, nisi *circa ipsam dissaisiacionem’ agatur. *Et post-
quam aliquis dissaisiatus legem vel rectum domino suo vadia~
verit,’ et plegios, si opus est, addiderit, saisiatus esse debet.


V yeus erat K. / in ipsa dissaisiacione us. Lond. et K. 3’ Et nemo
dissaisiatus legem vel rectum domino suo vadiaverit mss. Seld. Twysd.
Lond. et K.


8 Dimidium istius capitis, prius sc.. ex majori parte desumptum
reor e legibus Ethelstani, I. c.20. ut collatori non incurioso facile
constat. Hoc autem, ‘etsi de nominatis et susceptis placitis pulsa-
batur, nisi competens aliquid intervenerit, reus omnium judicetur,’
repetitionem sapiunt quorundam prius traditorum, cap. 50.

> Simile habes supra, cap. 46. § 3.

¢Convenit hoc, ne quis dissaisiatus placitet, tum prius traditis,
cap. 5. § 2. tum etiam posterius, c.6]. § 20. qua de re vide Magnum
Norman. Custumar. c. 5. n. 8. et glossam Latinam ibid.


552 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


LIV. '**"| DE !DISCESSIONE SOCIORUM UNIUS
PECUNIE.


§ 1. Si aliqui fuerint ita socii ut pecuniam suam posuerint in
communi, et a societate et communitate illa discedere voluerint,
afferant coram testibus quicquid habent in commune dividen-
dum, ut, si opus est, super sancta jurent, quod amplius non
habeant; et adquisicionem et adquisitum, sicut rectum est et
pactum fecerunt, dividant inter se. § 2. Si quis cum socio
vel compari suo causam habuit, et inter eos super hiis ex amore
et testimonio convenerit; si deinceps utrumque vel alterum
peniteat, non possunt tamen per judicium ad placiti principium
remeare, maxime si justicia interfuit. Ubi vero aliquis eorum
optionem habet per justiciam, amicicie vel lage, et amiciciam
eligit, stet hoc ita firmum ut ipsum judicium. Item, si justo
judicio inter eos actum sit, nullatenus fieri debet, ut quod
judicio finitum est, velut infectum, repetatur. In quibusdam
vero causis nemo tenere cogatur, quod sine justicia placitavit.


LV. ***3" DE PRIVILEGIO DOMINI SUPER HOMINEM
SUUM.


§ 1. Omni domino licet submonire hominem suum, ut ei sit
ad rectum in curia sua; et si residens est ad remotius mane-
rium ejusdem honoris unde tenet, ibit ad placitum, si dominus
suus submoneat eum. Si dominus ejus diversos feodos teneat,
non cogitur per legem homo unius honoris in alium ire pla-
citum, nisi de alterius causa sit, ad quem dominus suus sub-
monuerit eum. § 2. Si homo de pluribus dominis et hono-
ribus teneat, quantumcunque de aliis habeat, ei plus debet, et
ejus residens per judicium erit, cujus homo ligius erit.
§ 3. Omnis homo fidem debet domino suo de vita et membris
suis, et terreno honore, et observacione consilii sui, per hones-
tum et utile, fide Dei et terre principis salva. Furtum vero, et
prodicio, et murdrum, et que contra ?Dominum sunt et fidem
catholicam, nulli precipienda vel peragenda sunt; set fides
habeatur dominis omnibus, salva fide precedencium, et magis ei
cujus ligius est; et ejus licencia sit, si quis hominum ejus*®
alium sibi dominum faciat.


'dissensu mss. Seld. et Twysd. Deum as. Seld.et K.  aliquem
us. Lond, et K. add.


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 553


LVI. '**'. DE FIRMA TENENDA.


$1. Si inter aliquem et firmarium suum, qui non eciam sit
homo suus, de hiis que ad firmam pertinent controversia
oriatur, sive de taleis agatur, sive de ’supplecione in ipso ma-
nerio, sit de cetero sicut in ceteris. § 2. Si quis vero firmam
in feodo teneat, et homagium inde fecerit, sive in ea manens
sit, *vel non sit, et eam diligit, satisfaciat domino suo in curia
sua, vel in’ curia domini de quo ipsum feodum est. § 3. Que-
rendum est autem, in reddicione manerii, a pastoribus, de
animalibus, de numero, de modo; a ceteris servientibus, de
officio suo, si plena singula habeantur, et ejusdem valencie; de
supplecionibus, in hominibus, in pecunia; si deterioratum sit
manerium in dominio, vel hominibus, in pascuis, in nemoribus;
si quis gablum auxerit, si quis tulerit; quid sit in horreis, quid
seminatum sit. Si quis de preposito conqueratur, quod ei per
injuriam aliquid abstulerit, in ipso manerio vel in ¢uria domini
sui audiatur, et tanquam prepositus respondeat subditis suis.
Si preposituram dimisit, et alterius dominii sit, qui postea
loquitur in his super eum, veniat in hundretum suum. °%Si et
ipse quicquam repetat in ante subjectis, sicut erga alium fieret
causa sit, si in prepositura non ‘cravavit. Unicuique vero licet,
secundum legem, preposituram non’ suscipere, custodiam non
licet.


LVII. DE QUERELA VICINORUM.


§ 1. '**" Si inter compares vicinos utrinque sint querele,
*conveniant ad divisas terrarum suarum, et qui prior querimo-
niam fecerit, prior rectum habeat; et si alias ire oporteat, in
curiam domini sui eant, si unum dominum habeant, et soca sit
ejus; et illic eos amicicia congreget, aut sequestret Judicium;
si secus est, in hundretum suum, si opus est, eant. §2. Si


1 supplicione ms. Lond. et K. in curia ejus vel ms. Lond. et K.
3Sed ms. Lond. 4/cravavit unicunque non ms. Lond.


a Simile habes tam supra, cap.9. §4. quam hic infra, cap. 57.
§ 8. et postea iterum, cap.91. §4. quo etiam tendit illud in legibus
Edo. Conf. cap.32. ‘Isti (friborgi decanos indigitat) inter villas
inter vicinos tractabant causag, et secundum quod forisfacture erant,
emendaciones et ordinaciones faciebant, videlicet, de pascuis, de
pratis, de messibus, de certacionibus inter vicinos.’ De hoc autem
et loci istius pleniore intellectu vide plura in Glossario nostro, verbo
* Divisa’ et ‘ Erthmiotum.’


* ne?


554 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


inter eorum homines disceptetur, in curiis super accusacionibus
alternatim sibi rectum faciant in causis suis, nisi quis retentus
vel dividiatus sit, vel plegiatus pro culpa sua, sit alibi, secun-
dum legem. § 3. Et ibi semper causa agatur ubi crimen
admittitur, si presertim qui forisfecerit retineatur ibi. § 4. *Si
cum Jaliquo inventum sit unde *culpatus sit,’ ibi necesse est
causam tractari, et ibi purgetur, vel ibi sordidetur. §5. Si
quis in curia sua rectum de hominibus suis facturus sit, nomi-
nentur ei qui inplacitantur, et competenti Stermino satisfacci-
onem habeant, nec perdat curiam nec socnam suam, quamdiu
non difforciaverit rectum. § 6. Inter homines aliorum comi-
tatuum observetur, ut de thihla pariter veniant in curias, vel
hundreta, vel congrua causarum loca; tantum, si opus est,
datis plegiis rectum faciendi, si craventur ibi. § 7. ’Quod
si de manifestis et confessis agatur, ubi quis peccavit, ibi rec-
tum faciat, vel ‘de suo ad valens’ forisfacti pro inborgo reti-
neatur ; considerate, scilicet, et coram testibus, et racione hoc,
non furore, fiat, *nec °*rieflacum reputetur, et justicia repe-
tentis in injusticiam convertatur; sepe enim fit, ut ad compen-
dia preceps et dispendia dilabatur; sepe eciam contingit, ut
hoc modo depositum pro furto %et rieflaco, et”? quoquo modo
defraudato, postea fuerit interciatum, et ad hoc denique com-
probatum. §8. Pensandum autem erit omni domino, sive
socam sive sacam habeat, sive non habeat, ut ita suum homi-
nem ubique manuteneat, ne dampnum pro defensione, vel pro
demissione dedecus, incurrat, juxta causarum modum, et locum
diffnitum, aliquando in divisis vel in 7erthmiotis, aliquando
super ipsam terram vicine, aliquando in curia domini, ali-
quando in hundreto vel hundretis, aliquando in comitatu, vel


alio ws. Lond. et K.  inculpatur ms. Lond. et K. 3 testi-
monio Se. termino K. 4in ms. Lond. et K. desunt. ‘nefflatum
us. Lond. et K. vel nefflato vel K. 7 herimotis A.


2 Crimen heic intelligit legislator manifestum et hujusmodi, scil.
ubi aliquis (Bractoni verbis utor) deprehensus est seisitus de aliquo
latrocinio, scil. ‘ hondhabend’ aut ‘bacberend.’ Vide supra, cap. 9.
§4. et infra, cap. 62. §3. et Gryphiandr. in tractatu de Weichbild
Saxonum, cap. 57. num. 3 et 4.

> Hue tendit quod habetur versus finem, cap. 41. ‘Quod si impla-
citatus in aliquo refragaverit, retineat ipsum dominus vel de suo
quantum ad satisfaciendum sit.’ De ‘inborgo’ autem hic, quid signi-
ficet, videas velim in Glossar. extremo opere.

© Vocabuli significatum quere in Glossario.


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 555


burgmoto, vel hallimoto: longum est enarrare singula, set
planum est inveniri, Omnes enim cause suos habent per-
tractacionum modos, sive in statu quo cepere permaneant, sive
de eo in alium transeant. § 9. Cum clerico, qui uxorem
habeat, et firmam teneat laicorum, et rebus extrinsecis secu-
lariter deditus sit, seculariter est disceptandum. *De illis qui
ad sacros ordines pertinent, et eis qui sacris ordinibus pro-
moti sunt, coram prelatis suis est agendum de omnibus incul-
pacionibus, maximis vel minoribus.


LVIIIl. DE HOMINE VAGANTI.


Aliter de vaganti si dominum habeat, aliter si non habeat;
quod si fuerit, et alicubi forisfaciat, ostendatur justicie que
preerit, et consilio ejus agatur.


LIX. “%**¥- DE CONTRAMANDACIONE PLACITI.


§ 1. Si dies placiti sit contramandatus 'ubi residens est cum
quo agitur, ipsi vel familie ejus *libere, sive suscipiant sive
non, nichil refert, quoniam contramandatus judicetur,’ nisi
causa sit, que contramandari non debeat, vel pactum interces-
serit quod legem contramandacionis ‘vicerit; causa vero contra-
mandacionis’ vicinaliter debet addi, et alius dies competens
poni cum testibus. Si non sit contramandatus, nisi erga eos
qui ‘non frangunt causam suam, reus erit qui remanserit, nisi
repentine infirmitatis, aut domini necessitatis, aut exercitus,
vel suorum causa hostium, vel justicie regis, competens de-
tencio liberaverit. § 2. De quocunque placito emendabili
deceptetur, si contramandacione vel respectacione opus est, hoc
modo celebretur: Pridie, ante solis occasum, ad domum suam,
si residens est cum quo agitur, et per bonum testimonium
vicinorum et Saliquorum, quos secum habeat qui placitum con-
tramandat, ipsi respectetur, si domi est; uxori, dapifero, vel
preposito, et familie ejus, dicatur intelligibiliter, si idem ab-


in ms. Lond. desunt. 2in K. deest. in ms. Lond. desunt.
4non K. in Sc. deest. ‘aliorum ms. Lond. et K.


a Notanda hee pro antiquitate tam fori ecclesiastici quam cleri et
sacris initiatorum a foro et gladio seculari in criminalibus olim apud
nos immunitatis, de quibus nihil habeo quod addam prius dictis, et a
longe doctioribus, quos vel nominare superfluum erit, et a clar.
Somnero in Antiquit. urbis Cantuar. p. 485.


* qui?


556 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


fuerit; et hoc titerum et tercio licet, continue sive interrupte.
Si ejusdem comitatus sit qui placitum induciat, pridie, ante
solis occasum, ad vii. dies terminum ponat, sicut premisimus,
Si alterius comitatus sit, duobus diebus ante placitum respecte-
tur 2ad xv. dies. Si de tercio comitatu sit, triduo respecte-
tur’ ad ur. ebdas. Si de um. comitatu, 111. diebus ante
prenunciet ad 11. ebdom, et ultra non procedit, si sit in Anglia,
Hee secundum legem diximus; qui pactum fecit aliter habeat;
*que ad *indefinitum utrimque’ se habent, diffinitis prelocu:
cionibus egent. §3. Omne placitum, inter quoslibet habi-
tum, et ab eisdem, sine justicie majoris auctoritate, si opus est,
respectari potest, exceptis capitalibus: ut si quis furtum inter
manus habeat, vel murdrum, vel prodicionem domini, vel
deinceps hujusmodi que, salvis coagentibus, tanto libencius
quanto festinancius optanda sunt pertractari. § 4. De pecu-
nia *eciam, que pro pace vel inimicicia vadiata est, ‘testes
prothelari non debent, nec placitum de morte inimicorum ; nisi
exercitus, [vel] regia necessitas inpediat, vel infirmitatis vel
ydonee veritatis aliquid occurrat, et tune inter eos firma pax
et diffinita plenaque consistat. In aliis eciam omnibus causis
et hominibus, et in emendacione omni, vel emundacione, re
spectari licet, generaliter et simpliciter, omne placitum ab eis
quorum est placitum, si sit ab eis sine justicia positum; nisi
forte sit sine contramandacione susceptum, vel sepius, aut
aliter quam lex velit, contramandatum. § 5. Et ubi residens
est cum quo agitur, nisi sit alibi constitutum, secundum quod
prediximus, respectetur omne placitum, et per Francigenam et
Anglicum: sive autem per amicos sive per inimicos placitum
cuilibet respectetur, si legitime agatur, respectatum judicatur.
§ 6. >Et omnis dominus teneat familiam suam in plegio suo, et
si accusetur, respondeat in hundreto ubi compellabitur, sicut
rectum sit. § 7. Qui, sine legali racione, contramandacio-
nem renuit, licet ad locum placiti veniat, licet illic adusque
expectet dum hora placitandi pretereat, et hujus expectacionis
testes circumquaque convocet, et ita adversarii sui placitum


1 utrimque Sc. et K. perperam. 7 in us. Lond. et K. desunt. ¥ jus
diffinitum utrumque ms. Lond. et K. ‘4autem ms. Lond. et K. 5 ter-
minus ms. Lond. e¢ K,


® Vide scholia ad cap. 12.
> Vide scholia ad cap. 41.


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 557


esse fractum contendant; non procedit quin diem qui positus
est expectari oporteat; et si eum, ‘secundum legem, contraman-
datum esse constet,’ de capite placiti disceptetur.? Si vero pla-
citum sine contramandacione sit, vel adeo processerit, ut sepius
aut aliter quam rectum est contramandetur et non recipitur,
qui non venerit amiserit. | § 8. Videndum autem *summo-
pere est, ut ibi et ei cui dici debet contramandacio dicatur;
dicenda vero est, sicut prediximus, ei cum quo agitur, si ita
provectus est in etatem‘ ut pro se loqui possit, et sui juris
habeatur. § 9. *Pueri autem ante xv. annos plenos, nec
causam prosequantur, nec in judicio resideant. De rebus here-
ditatis sue interpellatus, post xv. annos defensorem habeat, vel
idem respondeat, et calumpniam mittat in rebus suis, ut nullus
eas teneat uno anno et uno die, sine contradiccione, dum sanus
sit, et patrie pax. De minoribus vero causis, respondeant in-
terim tutores Seorum, si forisfaciant aliis, vel ®alii forisfaciant
ipsiss  § 10. Et cui per justiciam placitum sit positum, eidem
respectetur; qui autem respectabit, respectabit utrimque, accu-
sato, scilicet, et 7justicie. §11. Nullius contramandacionem
necesse est recipi, si dominus placitat contra suum hominem de
proprio placito suo, ‘nisi forte domini, si unum dominum inde
habeant, vel justicie °regis, si placitum aliquo modo pertineat
ei. § 12. *Et omni domino jure licet hominibus suis defen-
dere, ne sibi faciant injuriam de omnibus pertinenciis ad
feodum suum et eciam alterius. Et si gwerram sibi faciant, et
de "aliis dominis alios quoque feodos teneant, prohibeat, si
velit, ne homines feodi sui vexentur ad defensionem "“alterius
feodi, maxime contra hominem suum. § 13. © Qui dominum
suum erga regem, vel quoslibet repetentes, in capitalibus et
criminalibus falso accusaverit, de lingua sua componat.
§ 14. Qui de judicata et vadiata domino pecunia apud justiciam


1/ omnes contramandant secundum Jegem constant Se. K. ut in textu.
2si vero placitum contra mandacionem mandatum esse constet, de
capite placiti disceptetur. mss. Seld. Twysd. et K. add. si in opere
K.  4vel evectus in libertatem ms. Lond. et K.add. tin ms. Lond.
et K. deest. Saliqui ms. Lond. et K. 7 judici ms. Lond. et K.
8 ubi us. Lond. et K. %leg Se. regis K. '°in us. Lond. et K. deest.
NK, add.


a Inculcatur idem postea, cap. 70. § 18.
b Vide scholia ad cap. 1.
¢ Vide cap. 61. § 6. et cap. 34. § 7.


558 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


falso conqueritur, et contradicit, et molitur; secundum quod
natus est, culpa sit erga justiciam cui mentitus est; pro falso
clamore, xx. maré culpa sit. § 15. * Qui bellum vadiaverit,
et per judicium defecerit, Lx. sot emendet. § 16. Omne
autem bellum per emendacionem et respectum capi debet;
addi vero poterit, non eciam demi, aliquid eorum in quibus
bellum consistet; et non fiat bellum sine capitali, ad minus x.
sol, nisi de furto vel hujusmodi nequicia compellacio sit, vel de
pace regis infracta, vel in illis in quibus est capitale mortis 'vel
diffraccionis.’ § 17. Et omnis tihla vel compellacio sit ejus
qui socam et sacam *suam plene’ habet, et de suis hominibus
et in suo. § 18. Et si quis furem in eis que mortis sunt
probatum, sine justicia dimittat, sit placitum ejus cujus socna
erit. § 19. °Defectus justicie, ac violenta recti detencio,
primo, secundo, et tercio, secundum legem requisiti, commune
regis placitum est super omnes, sive socnam suam habeant,
sive non habeant. § 20. ¢Singulos convenit, ut veram per
omnia justiciam teneant, ‘et sic in malefacientibus misericor-
diam senciant, ne forisbannitum, aut furem handhabbendum,
Francigenam vel Anglicum, ultra duodecimum etatis annum,
et vii. dei valens, impunitum transeant. Intra hunc etatis
terminum, et hoc furti precium, poterit ei aliquociens, Sper
legis’ beneficium, prima vice subveniri, condicione, sexu, par-
ticipacione, eventu, furti qualitate. § 21. Omne autem
furtum, mobile vel immobile, simplex aut multiplex, redimen-
dum non est. Redimendorum alia membris, alia pecunia.


Vv}. Se. diffraccionis K. in ms. Lond. et K. desunt. 3” plegii
us. Lond.


a Simile habes in legibus Guilielmi Primi, III. 12. cui concordat
Glanvilla, lib. 2. ¢.3.

>’ Monendum hic lectorem duxi de veterum distinctione latrocinii
vel furti in capitale et non capitale, quod forenses nostri juniores
majus et minus, alias magnum et parvum, nuncupant; quibus majus
sive magnum est cum res furto ablata x11. valet denariis; minus autem
vel parvum, cum non tanti zstimaretur; et hoc flagro vel carcere,
illud patibulo castigatur. Qua de re fusius Spelman. in Glossar.
verbo ‘Laricinium,’ et D. Cowell. Instit. Jur. Angl. lib. 4. tit. 16.
sect. 28.

¢ Vide scholia ad cap. 22. et cap. 23. Adde Glanvill. lib. 12. ¢. 7.

4 Vide Spelman. Concil. tom. 1. pag. 522. cap. Concilii Enhamen-
sis 28. (hujus edit. pp. 314, 315.) et leges Cnuti, Sec. cap. 11. unde
hec, ut videtur, desumpta.

e¢ Vide scholia ad cap. 10.


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 559


§ 22. In omnibus vero furtis, aut solus compellans est aut
plures, servi vel liberi, divisim vel permixtim, fugitivi vel non
fugitivi, unum dominum habentes vel non. _—§ 23. Si servus,
in redimendis immobilibus intra virr. denaf estimatis furetur,
reddat dominus ejus repetenti capitale suum semel, et verbe-
retur et signetur ab eodem repetente, prima vice. Si in mor-
tificantibus handhabbenda sit, sicut liber moriatur. § 24. Si
liber cum servo furetur, liber solus paciatur. Quicquid
evenerit dampnacionis vel redempcionis, *servus domino suo
reddatur, jure castigandus. § 25. Si plures servi furentur,
unus pro omnibus paciatur, et is sit quem sors obtulerit. Si
furtum redimendum sit, capitale repetentis simul conjectent.
Si plures furentur unam ovem, aut porcum, aut deinceps aliquid
majus, aut morte puniendum, simul omnes paciantur, sive
furtum simplex sit aut multiplex.  § 26. De fugitivis vero,
conducticiis vel residentibus, servis vel liberis, secundum
legem perquisitis institutum, prima vice, furatos reducendos et
signandos esse.  § 27. >Si quis ex proclamacione, quam apud
justiciam fecerit, placitum suscipiat, quod de furto, vel robaria’,
forestel, et grithbreche, et hamsocna, et similibus, apud justi-
ciam de aliquo clamorem faciat, aut inde eum convincat, aut
emendet.


LX. DE CONTRAMANDACIONE PLACITI PER JUSTI-
CIAM SUAM.


§ 1. Si quis positum per justiciam placitum contramandare
velit, contramandet utrimque, accusato scilicet et justicie. Si
accusato contramandet, et justiciam pretermittat, overseunesse
culpa sit. Si soli justicie contramandet, causam suam perdet.
§ 2. Si quis, die placitandi suscepto, in servicium domini sui


'vel hujusmodi sit nullam inde sine licencia justicie latentem vel
patentem reconciliacionem faciat. Qui enim de furto et robaria, &c.
mss. Seld. Twysd. et Lond. add.


a Ac si vite et necis servorum, ut olim jure gentium, domini
adhuc potestatem retinerent.

> Hue, ni fallor, plus minus pertinet lex illa regis fElfredi, cap.22:
‘Ing mon on yolcer zemor,’ quam sic Latine versam habes apud
Jorvalensem: ‘Si quis in conventu publico preposito regis proclama-
tionem ostendat, vel ostensionem denuntiet, et postea cessare velit,
pertrahat ad rectam manum si possit; si non possit, perdat suum
angildum, et reddat witam preposito.’ Nec huic videtur alienum
quod habetur hie supra non procul a fine cap. 24.


560 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


iturus ait, hoc faciat. Si coagentes sint homines unius domini,
respectet, si velit, inter eos terminum, donec alius de servicio
suo redeat. Si vicinus et compar sit ejus cum quo agitur, et
alterius dominii, contramandet placitum ad numerum comita-
tuum, secundum legem, et iterum et tercio, si opus sit tanto;
ut sit respectus in omnibus secundum causam respectandam,
secundum quod coagentes homines vel tenentes ejus erunt, si
placitum aliquo modo pertineat ad eum; item juxta quod
processerit, vel pactum fuerit, sive in eodem comitatu maneat
vel non; diffinito autem inter aliquos longiori termino, si con-
tramandans remaneat, vel cicius redeat. § 3. Si vicecomes,
vel prepositus aliquis, de proprio placito suo, diem ponat alicui
baronum, et ad terminum condictum! non veniat, ®convictus
est cum quo agebat, nisi competens eum necessitas detineat, si
de placitis capitalibus et de propriis placitis regis sit.


LXI. 3DE PLACITO ALICUJUS DOMINI CUM PREPO-
SITO SUO ET SIBI SUBJECTIS.


§ 1. Si dominus inter prepositum et sibi subditos placitum
condicat, qui sine legitima racione remanserit nichilominus,
causam suam perdat, et overseunessam domini emendet.
§ 2. Si dominus ministro suo precipiat ut causam suam agat, et
idem minister ad diem non veniat, nec eum ydoneum quid de-
tineat, quietum jure dicimus super quem causa erat, et minister
domino ‘suo suppleat, si per eum quid amittat. § 3. Nullus
dominus de propria causa sua frangat placitum erga “hominem
suum, nisi, secundum quod prediximus, major justicia, exorta
queremonia, presit eis.  § 4. Si quis sit serviens regis, vel
cujuslibet potestatis ministrator, et alium tamen dominum
habeat, cum singulis juste componat de hiis que ad eos per-
tinent. § 5. Si dominus conqueratur de homine suo in eis
que pertinent ad potestatem regiam, et dies inde placitandi
ponatur, si non veniat dominus, quietus est homo ejus.
§ 6. Si quis forte causam habeat contra dominum suum, rema-
nere potest infirmitatis, vel Slegis inoperacionis, vel [regis]


let diem mus. Lond. add. ?quietus ms. Lond. et K. in Se. deest
rubrica. ‘4in ms. Lond. deest. 5 hominem ms. Lond. dominum Se.
6 regis K.


_* Vide paulo infra, § 7., et supra, cap. 59. § 1., utrumque sit foren-
sium nostrorum essonium, ut vocant, ‘de malo lecti,’ de quo Glan-


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 561


inplacitacionis excessibus: et si communis eorum dominus
detineat eum, salvare potest diem ejus; set sive antea sive post-
modum inplacitet alius aliquis eum, et eundem vel alium diem
ponat, ‘ei jure semper preerit’ dominus cujus ligius est.
§ 7. De omnibus et quibuscunque *sciendum, quod cause quas
prediximus ad excusacionem sufficiunt, et quaslibet inpugna-
cionum decertaciones evertunt: hoc est vel infirmitatis, vel
domini necessitatis, vel contramandacionis, vel regis inplacita-
cionis, vel inoperacionis causa. § 8. Et omnis justicia potest
respectare placitum sibi subditorum quod posuit, donec eidem
per competens. interesse possit. Si vero non contradixit, et
paratum tamen sit ut coram eo debeat agi, qui non venerit,
amiserit, et overseunesse culpa sit, nisi soinus intercedat.
§ 9. Et unicuique domino licet *induciare placitum hominum
suorum, si in eo est, sive posuit vel non posuit ‘diem. De furto
autem, vel de hiis que sunt mortis, faciat secundum quod soca
et saca ejus erit. | §10. Si quis dapifer, vel prepositus, vel
minister, placitum domini sui contramandet, ita sit, quicquid
dominus ejus dicat, si redierit, et placitum adversarii sui frac-
tum esse velit. § 11. Si quis ‘inter homines suos, per eorum
querimoniam, placitum ipse posuit, et idem promiserit inter-
esse, nulli eorum quorum causa est, sine prelocucione vel ejus
licencia, respectare vel inde finire possit. § 12. Et nemo
jure possit irrecuperabiliter perdere vel forisfacere placitum
domini sui: viderit itaque cum quo agetur, si contracausator non
veniat quem pro se mittat. §13. Multi vero possunt emen-
dare placitum domini sui pocius quam amittere, unde, si quis
eciam de propria causa tractaret que ad feodum suum disracio-
nandum pertineret, et eam aliquo placitandi casu perderet, hoc
sibi ‘non domino suo perdiderit. Quod si domino ejus videatur
ut injuste quid actum sit, potest ad placiti principium refor-
mare, sive ’suus homo suscepé¢rit vel non susceperit inde judi-
cium: *nemo enim potest de feodo domini sui placitare sine


Vei unus unde forte preerit ei ms. Zond. ?senciendum K. 3 judi-
care Se. induciare K. 4in Se. et K. deest. ‘per Sc. inter K.
6 non ms. Lond. et K.add. 7servus ms. Twysd.


villa, lib. 1. cap. 18. et alii, (quod nihil aliud est quam partis se a
judicio absentantis ex infirmitate excusatio) perantiqua ipsius vestigia
hic aperit.

a Sensum loci: a paucis lineis precedentibus, ubi hec: ‘ Nemo
jure possit irrecuperabiliter perdere vel forisfacere placitum domini


562 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


eo, nec cogi debet rectum ejus forspeken nec forspillen.
§ 14. De omnibus et quibuscunque causis communibus vel
emendabilibus inplacitetur aliquis, si petierit, debet habere ter-
minum requirendi et habendi dominum suum, ubicunque sit,


ex competenti; modus enim in omnibus. § 15. Si quis
Romam, vel Ierusalem, vel in regiones longinquas, ierit, habeat
eum cui rerum suarum curam commiserit. § 16. Si sine


domino aut termino placitare cogatur aliquis, injustum est, et
per judicium poterunt recapitulare placitum ejus et emendare.
§ 17. Quando autem aliquis inplacitatur sine domino suo, nisi
de illis sit in quibus statim oporteat responderi, ut de furto, de
incendio, de murdro, de hamsocna, et capitalibus, terminum
querat ac respectum, donec dominum suum habeat, secundum
rectum; et iterum, si opus est, vadium det, et plegios mittat.
§ 18. Capitales enim et criminales cause suam ubique retinent
malicie prerogativam. Et si ibi confitebitur, vel ordine judi-
ciario convincitur, jam condempnatus est. Negetur itaque
statim quod nunquam sane fateri licet, et sit inde judicium an
in presenti finiendum, an ad terminum ‘differendum sit, juxta
legalitatem accusancium et cause statum. Differt enim de
infami, et saisiato, et de societate compellato. § 19. Nulli,
vel aliquando vel alicubi, necesse sit, de causis exaccionalibus,
secundum quod prediximus, improvise respondere, sed habeant
optimi quique legalem placitandi terminum et locum, quamdiu
rectum non difforciaverint.  § 20. *Et si quis inplacitetur de
quibus submonitus non fuerit, nec ad hoc venerit, terminum
habeat legitimum. § 21. Et nemo placitet dissaisiatus.


LXII. DE OBSERVACIONE TEMPORIS LEGES FACIENDI.


§ 1. »Ab Adventu Domini usque ad Epiphanie octabas, et a
LXx. usque ad xv. dies post Pascha, et festis diebus, et quatuor


| differendi Se.


sui, &c. et hine advocatio illa orta, quam exteri authores laudatio-
nem, nos autem warantiam vocamus, de qua passim in forensium
nostratium libris.

a Vide scholia ad cap. 53.

b Major pars istius capitis (ad hee nempe ‘ voluptatibus instituti’
inclusive) peti videtur e canonibus regis Edgari & leg. Cnuti, Eccl.
c.17. Vide cap. Decret. 22. qu. 5. et Wormii Monum. Danica, 1.1.
¢. 11. p.83. Concordant Foedus Edo. et Guthr. regum ce. 9, et Vetus
Custumar. Norman. cap. in Gallico exemplari 81, in Latino vero 80,


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 563


temporum, et diebus Quadragesimalibus, et aliis legitimis
jejuniis, et in diebus Veneris, et vigiliis ’sanctorum Apostolo-
rum, non est tempus leges faciendi, *i, vel jusjurandum pro
fidelitate domini,’ vel concordiam, vel bellum, vel ferri, vet
aque, vel ®alias legis examinaciones tractari; set sit in omnibus
vera pax, beata caritas, ad honorem Omnipotentis Dei, cujus
sapiencia conditi sumus, nativitate provecti, a morte redempti,
consolacione securi.  § 2. Et qui debitor est, ante persolvat
vel induciet, donec dies isti transeant, gaudiis et honestis volup-
tatibus instituti. § 3. *Et si quis malefactum inter manus
habens alicubi retinetur, ibi purgetur vel sordidetur. >Si
solum inculpacio sit, plegiis, si opus est, datis, ubi justum fuerit
terminanda, revertatur.


LXUI. DE IMPLACITACIONE JUDICIS FISCALIS.


In causis ubi judex fiscalis aliquem inplacitet de socna sua,
sine alio accusatore, sive *sagemanno, *sive investitura, si quis
se tercio vicinorum suorum purget, satis est propter justicie


1 singulorum A. 2’idem vel jusjurandum nisi primo fidelitate
domini ms. Lond. et K. 3in us. Lond. et K.deest. 4sakemanno K.
5sine A.


cujus hee sunt verba: ‘ Notandum autem est quod quedam sint
tempora in quibus leges non debent fieri, nec simplices nec apertz,
videlicet omnia tempora in quibus matrimonia non possunt celebrari.
Ecclesia autem legibus apparentibus omnes dies festivos prohibet ac
defendit, viz. ab hora nona die Jovis (Sabbati potius) usque ad
ortum die Solis in die Lune sequente, et omnes dies solemnes novem
lectionum, et solemnium jejuniorum, et quatuor temporum, et dedi-
cationis ecclesiz, in qua duellum (nonne deest ‘non’?) est deducen-
dum. Hine facultas illa archiepiscopalis justitiariis itinerantibus
impertita de juramentis tempore Quadragesime reis deferendis, de
qua in Antiqu. Britann. p.209. Monendum hic quod quatuor anni
tempora litigiis apud nos dicata, que ‘terminos’ hodie vocamus,
zvum istud non agnovit, nec horum alicubi ulla mentio ante
Henr. II. tempora; eorum primus, quod sciam, meminit author
Dialogi, ut vocatur, Scaccharii, qui tamen terminos tantum Pasche
et S. Michaelis commemorat. Lapsus interim Polydor. Vergilius,
terminorum nostrorum originem Guilielmo Primo attribuens; sed
bene potuit in Anglia errare Italus, ut clar. Selden. de eo in simili.

4 De quo plura scholiis ad c.9. Affirmatur enim heic juris illud
civilis axioma reum sortiri forum delicti.

bId est, si sine seisina (ut cum Bractono loquar, lib. 3. tract. 2.
c. 32.) vel sine investitura, ut hic cap. prox. sequ., suspectus scil.
tantum et accusatus de aliquo crimine, non autem possessionis
arguendus aut in facto, hoc est, in flagranti crimine deprehensus.


* prepostere?


564 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


reverenciam. In aliis, *preter dominum, nemo sine testibus,
sive competentibus’ et cogentibus circumstanciis, in ceteris
accusacionibus allegiandus est. Multe enim sunt et multorum
inculpaciones, que jure publico non procedunt, sicut supra
monuimus; set dum favorem et graciam dominorum catervatim
sequimur, maliciosa semper cupiditate, *prepostera candida
nigris, nigra candidis commutamus; unde consequenter et sane
competenter evenit, ut continuis miseriarum passionibus, ac
variis infortuniorum casibus, nosmetipsos evertamus.


LXIV. '*xvl-b2 DE CHRISTIANA CONSUETUDINE LOCU-
CIONUM SECUNDUM QUOD SUNT’


§ 1. Omnis tihla tractetur Santejuramento, plano vel obser-
vato,’ sepius aut semel, sicut loci consuetudo erit*; omnia
enim locorum consuetudine, causarum accione, modo causan-
cium, multipharie variantur. In quibusdam locis, juramenti
vel antejuramenti multa est distancia, sicut in delatura et plu-
ribus aliis. In *Hamtescira, ‘qui verborum jurat observanciis,
semel juret, et in eo Japsus vel elapsus judicetur. In quibus-


sine competenti termino ms. Lond. et K. % ms. Lond. hoc lemma
habet: De tractatione locutionum, secundum quod sunt. /jura-
mentum quod observando ms. Lond. et K. 4vel compellans pre-
cesserit, juxta rei meritum et cause modum mss. Seld. Twysd. Lond.
et K. add.


De genere et numero est causarum que in accusatione non manifes-
tatione dicuntur consistere, de quo vide supra c.9. §1. et schol.
ibidem.

a Simile quid apud Bracton. lib. 3. tract.2.¢.32. num.2. ‘ Sed si
seisitus (inquit) non inveniatur de aliquo Jatrocinio, non habet quis
potestatem inquirendi, nec procedendi contra ipsum ad inquisitiones,
nisi ipse dominus rex in curia sua.’ Vide Glanvilla, lib. 14. ¢.2. et
harum legum, ¢.45; item Magnam, ut vocant, Chartam, e. 28.

» Titulus plane corruptus et obscurus; quomodo autem restituendus
ignorare me fateor; locutio autem heic quid significet docebitur in
Glossario extremo opere. ms. Lond. habet hoc lemma: ‘ De tracta-
tione locutionum, secundum quod sunt.’

¢ Comitatum intellige Hantoniensem, Hampshire vulgo, ut doctiss.
Spelm. observatum, verbo ‘ Hantesia.’

4 Juramentum, ni fallor, signant hee tam stricte prestandum, ut
ne vel in minimo liceat prestanti a verborum formula qua defertur
recedere, ne causa cadat. Adstipulatur Vetus Normann. Custumar.
Latin. c.85. ubi hee: ‘ Notandum etiam est, quod si deraisnator
verba dimiserit vel mutaverit, et juraverit que ei in deraisnatione
fuerint escariata, ejus deraisnatio reprobatur, et similiter si quis
coadjutor defuerit, vel verba escariata dimiserit, vel mutaverit, vel


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 565


dam locis, quociens velit juramentum repetat, donec efficiat vel
deficiat. Continget eciam antejuramentum non dari non
frangi per alterum fieri a re ipsa, a persona, prelacione, nacione,
merito. Malorum autem 'infestacionibus, et ? perjurancium
conspiracione, *depositum est frangens juramentum, ut magis
4Dei judicium ab accusatis eligatur; et unde accusatus cum


linfestinacionibus K. 2juramentum ms. Zond. jurancium K. 3 dis-
positum Sc. depositum ms. Lond. et K. 4ei K.


etiam ad deraisnam oporteat evocari, vel compelli, vel attrahi.’ Idem
autem rigoris requiri videtur in duello, vel in causa duello terminanda,
Glanvilla teste. (lib. 14. c.1, quem vide lib.2. c.3.) ‘ Sciendum,’
inquit, * quod ex quo fuerit duellum in hujusmodi placitis vadiatum,
non potest alterutra partium verbis in ipsius vadii datione propositis
aliquid adjicere, vel diminuere, vel aliquatenus a proposito declinare,
vel resilire, quin pro victo habeatur, et lege victi censeatur.’ Lo-
quendi hee occurrit formula in legibus Guilielmi Primi IT. ce 3:
‘Et si Anglicus non audeat eum probare per bellum, defendat se
Francigena plano’ (quomodo habetur in ms. regio, haud <pleno,’ ut
ibi per errorem) ‘juramento, non in verborum observantiis,’ Locus
cui parem habes in cap. earundem legum III. c. 12, preesertim in fine.
Porro juramentum in verborum observantiis preestitum, idem esse
reor, quod in his legibus juramentum vel (quod idem sonat) sacra-
mentum non fractum pluries dictum adverto, et juramento, quod
vocatur planum, contrarium. Sic enim juramenta distinguunt in
planum scil. et observatum, ut in hujus capitis initio. Hine est quod
ubi in fine preecitate legis Guiliel. Primi, III. c.12. legislator vult
Francigenam purgare se ‘sacramento non fracto’ (apud Hoveden
habetur ‘sacramento non ferro,’ perperam; ad fidem exemplaris
Saxon. in Textu Roffensi ‘ mid unfopeban ade,’ ‘cum sacramento non
fracto’) in lege postea II. c.3. perinde ac si clavem hic adhibeat
prioris aperiendi gratia, instituit, ut defendat se Francigena ‘ plano’
(sic enim legendum est, ut dixi, non pleno) ‘ juramento, non in ver-
borum observantiis,’ quod quasi repetitum habes paulo post in capite
hoc: ‘ Francigene quoque et alienigene in verborum observanciis non
frangunt ;’ i.e. plano, non autem quod in verborum observantiis con-
sistit, juramento utuntur. Mitto alia in hoe capitulo his similia.
Quid autem sit planum, quid observatum juramentum, ediscas licet ex
jurandi formulis a Petro Greg. Tholosano traditis in Syntagm. Juris
Universi, lib.50. ¢.8. num.1. et 3: ‘Quoddam (inquit) solemne
juramentum, quoddam non solemne dicitur. Solemne dicitur quod
habet certas solemnitates prascriptas et dictatas, vel a partibus defe-
rentibus, vel a judice, vel a lege, cum certa verborum conceptione’
(idem forte quod Matth. Paris. Histor. p.321. lin. 33. literatorium
dictum) ‘a qua varietate juranti nec recedere liceat, vel si recedatur
ratum non erit, 1.3. et non erit ratum 5. c. jusjurandum, et ad
pecunias, 34. § Qui jusjurandum de jurejur. Juramentum non solemne
est, quod summarie et de plano prestatur, sine delectu verborum aut
locorum,’ &c. Plura, si placet, vide apud Annazum Robertum Rer.
Judicatar. c. 11. et Dempster. de Juram. lib. 1. ¢.8.


* /, tripon-
dum.


566 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


una decima se purgaret per eleccionem et sortem, si ad judi-
cium ferri calidi vadat. In quibus vero causis triplicem
1wereladam haberet, ferat judicium **tripodum, i. Lx. sot.
§ 2. ***""l Jn furto, et murdro, et prodicione, et incendio, et
domus infraccione, et eis que ad disfaccionem pertinent, omnes
fracto sacramento jurent Sin Westsexa, exceptis thainis, et pres-
biteris, et eis qui legalitatem suam in nullo diminuerunt. Hii
de quacunque compellacione, capitali vel communi, plane jura-
bunt, congruo numero *consacramentalium, et qualitate parium
suorum retenta; quia *thaini jusjurandum contravalet jus-
jurandum sex villanorum, et si occideretur, plene vindicaretur
in sex villanis, et si emendaretur, ejus weregyldum est v1. vil-
lanorum weregyldum. § 8. Misse presbiteri et secularis
thaini jusjurandum, in Anglorum lege, computatur eque carum;
Francigene quoque °et alienigene in verborum observanciis
non frangunt. § 4. '**™ Si quis de homicidio accusetur,
et idem se purgare velit, secundum natale suum perneget,
quod est werelada, ut qui ex parte patris erunt fracto jura-
mento, qui ex materna cognacione erunt plane se sacramento
juraturos advertant. § 5. ™* bItem, si quis sine judicio
occidatur, et parentes ejus innoxiare velint, quod innocens et
sine merito sit occisus, predicto modo faciant. § 6. Si qui-
libet rem in communi propriare velint sibi, et utrimque sint
testes et furtiva dicatur, qui melius testimonium habebit, pro-


1vero se ladam HK. ?tripodis K. 3ut ms. Zond. 4sacramentalium
us. Lond. et K. = 5 vel Se.


a Id est, thaini jusjurandum equivalet (sic verto ‘ contravalet,’
unde nostrum ‘countervaile’ eodem sensu,) jusjurandum sex villa-
norum. Hec autem que sequuntur ad ista ‘computatur zque carum’
translata sunt e legibus /Ethelstani (ef. pp. 182, 183. c.13.); ubi qui
thainus hic ‘ twelfhinde-man’ appellatur.

b Vide c. 74. §1,2. et LL. Athelstani, I. c.11. Hee autem et
sequentia ad ista, ‘ postquam furabitur’ hausta sunt pleraque e legi-
bus Cnuti, Sec. c.24. Hue etiam tendunt legum illarum, Guil. Primi,
I. ¢.45. et 46. quorum intellectus adhuc in aliquibus obscurus citate
legis ope perquam facile innotescat. Huc etiam ex quadam parte
pertinet posterior pars LL. thelredi, II. 9. ubi id ipsum quod hic,
veluti juris communis regula allatum: ‘ sop pam aznung bid nep pam
pe hess ponne pam pe erceprppecd;’ i.e. Jorvalensi interprete,
‘quia purgatio (1. propriatio. v. Hottoman. Disput. de Feud. ec. 43.)
propinquior est semper possidenti quam repetenti.’ ‘ Weninga’ sive
‘weminga’ hic, ut obiter notem, scribendum forte ‘cenninga.’ Sig-
nificatum queeras in Glossar. in voce * Advocatio.’


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 567


bacioni propior sit, et solus fracto Juramento suam esse com-
probet, et testes ejus plane confirment. Si secus sit, semper
erit possidens propior quam repetens et habeat, aut ille, si
potest, '***" lwerminga resistat, que ultra terciam vicem non
procedit. Et nobis non videtur rectum, secundum legem, ut
aliquis, si propriare velit, compellatur, ubi cognosci potest
quod et testis interest, saltem ante VI. menses postquam fura-
bitur. § 7. Quando quis jurare debeat solus, quando cum
pluribus, in causa semper est et persona, juxta legalitatem et
modum concausancium in omni ordine, et juxta precium capi-
talis et wite. | § 8. *Sacerdos qui regularem vitam ducat, in
simplici accusacione solus, in triplici cum duobus ordinis sui
juret. Diaconus in simplici compellacione cum duobus, in
triplici cum v1. diaconibus se allegiet. Plebeius sacerdos purget
se sicut regularis diaconus. Presbiter, ab episcopo vel archi-
diacono suo accusatus, se sexto juret sacerdotum legitimorum,
sicut ad missam paratorum. § 9. Et sit omnis homo credi-
bilis, qui non fuit accusacionibus infamatus, et *neutrum ei fre-
gerit, vel juramentum vel ordalium in hundreto, simplici lada
dignus. Incredibili eligatur simplex lada in tribus hundretis,
et *triplex lada, tam’ late sicut ad ipsam curiam obeditur, vel
eat ad ordalium, et inducatur simplex ‘Jada simplici prejura-
mento, et triplex lada’ triplici prejuracione. Et nullum unquam
antejuramentum condonetur.


LXV. DE DIMISSIONE FURIS.


§ 1. ¢Si quis furem gratis dimittat, emendet secundum
weram ipsius furis, aut plena lada perneget, quod cum eo falsum


lweminga ms. Lond. wemunga K. 2venturum ms.Zond. *simplex
Jada cum Se. K.ut in textu. in ms. Lond. et K. desunt.


@ Hee et que sequuntur ad ista, ‘sicut regularis diaconus,’
prompta sunt e legibus Cnuti, E.c. 5. ubi idipsum quod hic ver-
batim fere statutum est. Veterem autem legis illius versionem queras,
si placet, in Spelm. Concil. tom.i. p. 562.

> Hee et que sequuntur in finem capitis sumpta sunt e legibus
Cnuti, Sec. c.22. unde errata et hic et in exhibitione per Spelman.
in Glossario suo, verbo ‘ Lada simplex,’ facile cernenda, corrigenda.

©¢§i quis furem gratis dimittat:’ concordat LL. Ine, c¢. 36. et
Cnuti, Sec. c. 29. e quibus, presertim posteriori, hec et que se-
quuntur ad ista ‘se ladiet,’ c.3. sumpta sunt. Posterior autem illa
(Cnuti) lex apud Jorvalensem sic se habet: ‘Si quis furi obviaverit,
et sine vociferatione eum dimiserit, emendet secundum weram ipsius


nna


568 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


nescivit. § 2. Si quis audito clamore non exierit, reddat
overseunessam regis, aut plane se ladiet. § 3. *Si quis adeo
sit incredibilis hundreto, et a tribus simul incusetur, tunc
nichil aliud interveniat quin ad triplex ordalium eat; et eligat
accusatus alterutrum quod velit, sive simplex ordalium, sive
jusjurandum unius libre in tribus hundredis super xxx. deh.
Et si jurare non audeant cum eo, eat ad triplex ordalium; et
inducatur triplex ordalium hoc modo, sumat v. et ipse sit
sextus. § 4. Si dominus compelletur, quod suorum aliquis
1prelatorum consilio suo fugerit, et antea malum fecerit, as-
sumat secum v. credibiles thainos, et idem sit sextus, et
inde se purget. § 5. Si quis amicis destitutus, vel alieni-
gena, ad tantum laborem veniat, ut amicum non habeat, in
prima accusacione ponatur in hengen, et ibi sustineat, donec ad
Dei judicium vadat.


1 compellatorum ms. Lond. et K.


furis, vel plena lada se adlegiet, quod cum eo falsum nescivit.” Hac
de re vide plura per D. Edw. Cocum, Institut. par. 2. p. 126, ex Brac-
tono, et aliis allata. Guilielmum I. legem illam suam (I. ¢.49.) hinc
mutuatum esse quis non videt? a lege sc. illa Cnuti 29. Invicem
enim collate eadem apparent, ac sese mutuo exponunt.


a Hee et sequentia ad ista ‘et inde se purget’ plane desumpta
sunt e legibus Ethelredi, I. c.1. et Cnuti, Sec. c. 30, 31. Notan-
dum insuper, quod inter hee ‘eat ad triplex ordalium’ et que
proxime sequuntur, plura in legibus illis AEthelredi et Cnuti, unde hee
deprompta sunt, plane interveniant; nimirum hec, ut habentur apud
Jorvalensem: ‘si dominus ejus dicat tunc, quod ei neutrum, vel
juramentum vel ordalium, fregerit, &c. assumat idem dominus secum
duos homines credibiles in ipso hundredo, et jurent, quod illi nun-
quam juramentum vel ordalium fregerit, vel furigeldum reddidit, nisi
talem prepositum habeat, qui eo dignus sit ut hoc facere possit, si
juramentum procedat.’


b Hee et sequentia ad finem usque capitis deducta peto e Jegibus
Cnuti, Sec. c.35. Vide Spelman. Glossarium in vocibus ‘ Carcan-
num’ et ‘Henghen. Hinc illud Bractoni, lib. 1. tract. 2. c. 8. num. 1:
‘ Et si advena fuerit et ignotus de longinquo veniens peregrinus, vel
si pro penuria amicorum plegios invenire non possit, ejus sit plegius
gaola, que ad custodiendum deputatur, et non ad puniendum.’
Locus re vera paulo altius petitur, viz. e legibus Edo. Sen. cap. 6.
* Si quis accusetur de furto (ita Jorvalensis) capiant eum in plegio
qui domino suo commendaverunt illum, quod de hoc se adlegiet; vel
alii amici, si hahct, faciant hoc. Si nesciat quis eum capiat in ple-
gium, accipiant quibus hoc pertinet de pecunia sua inborghum: si
neutrum habeat, nec pecuniam suam nec plegium, tune servetur ad
judicandum.’


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 569


LXVI. DE OCCISIONE MINISTRI ALTARIS.


§ 1. Si quis ministrum altaris occidat, utlaga sit erga Deum
et homines, nisi digna satisfaccione peniteat, et parentibus
illius juste componat, ‘vel werelada perneget;’ et hoc infra
Xxx. noctes incipiat apud Deum et homines, super omne
quod _habet. §2. *Si quis minister altaris hominem oc-
cidat, vel malis actibus supra modum differatur, ordine simul
et dignitate privetur, et peregrinetur, sicut ei papa? injunget,
et opus emendet’, et si se purgare velit, tripliciter hoc faciat;
et nisi infra xxx. noctes hoc incipiat, erga Deum et homines
utlaga sit. § 3. Si quis ordinatorum ‘aliquem verberibus,
5vel vinculis, vel aliquatenus affligat, emendet ei sicut rectum
sit, et episcopo emendacionem altaris, secundum dignitatem
ordinis; regi vel domino plenam mundbreche, vel plena ®lada
perneget. § 4. Si quis morti dampnatus confiteri desi-
deret, nunquam negetur ei; quod si quis ei deneget, emendet
regi cxx. sol, vel cum vi. juret, quod hoc non fecisset. §5. Si
quis Dei rectitudines per vim deforciet, emendet lahslit cum
Dacis, plenam witam cum Anglicis, vel ita neget, assumat
x1, et idem sit xu".  § 6. Si quis burcbotam vel brig-
botam, vel ’fierdfare supersederit, emendet hoc erga regem
cxx. sot in Anglorum laga; in Denelaga, sicut stetit antea,
vel ita se allegiet, nominentur ei x1. et acquirat ex eis
x1. ™***Yn hiis vero, secundum legem, nominati consacra-
mentales vicini habendi sunt, quia solus non potuit tantis effi-


cienciis invisibilis affuisse. § 7. Si manupastus alicujus
accusetur de furto, solus paterfamilias emendare potest, si velit,
fracta lege sine prejurante. § 8. Si quis furti vel hujusmodi


periculosa capitalium compellacione pulsetur, secundum legem
Wessexe, antejuramentum a compellante habeatur, et *aliter


in K. deest. 2suus ms. Lond. et K. add. 3sedulo ms. Lond. et
K.add. 4in ms. Lond. deest. Saut ms. Lond. ‘plaga ms. Lond.
7 fudfare ms. Lond.


a Hee cum sequentibus ad ista ‘ et acquirat ex eis undecim’ integre
hauriuntur e legibus Cnuti, Sec. c.39, 41, 42, 44, 49, 66. Simile
ex quadam parte Foedus exhibet Edo. et Guthr. reges, c.5. Vide
Concil. Enham. c.32. Vide Jorvalens. c.62. p.927. Vide supra,
c. 57. § 8.

b Legerem ‘ diffamatur’ aut ‘deferatur:’ vide supra, c. 5. § 8 et
seqq. et infra, c. 73. § 2.


* alter?


* juramen-
tum?


570 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


se *sexto 'decime sue’ purgetur; sicut accusator precesserit,
secundum meritum concausancium, et cause modum. § 9. Si
quis a vicecomite vel justicia regis legitime inplacitetur de furto,
de incendio, de robaria, vel similibus, ad triplicem ladam jure
sit applicandus; tune oportet, ut die congruo xxx. consacra-
mentales habeat, quorum nullus in aliquo reculpandus sit, et
cum xv. ex eis, quos justicia selegerit, sextusdecimus juret,
sicut causa dictabit.  § 10. '***"* In Myrcenis habendi sunt
in triplici lada xxxv. consacramentales; in Denelaga, xiv.
electi, et sorte pocius quam eleccione juraturi.


LXVII. DE HOMINE INFAMATO.


§ 1. Sit omnis homo, qui non fuerit accusacionibus infama-
tus, ?simplici Jada Sdignus, sicut prediximus. Incredibili
eligatur simplex lada,’ in tribus hundretis: ‘***!: triplex *lada
tam late sicut ad ipsam curiam obeditur. ****% Et de omnibus
causis unde accusatus juraret se sexto, sit judicium xx. sot.
In triplici lada ferrum judiciale triplex sit, i. Lx. sol.
§ 2, ™**"" bIn causis que cotidie non cessant, par contra parem
solus juret, inferior contra superiorem se altero vel tercio,
‘contra dominum se tercio” ®vel sexto;’ in weminga duo sunt
contra unum, et ejusdem dignitatis.


LXVIH. DE SOLUCIONE LIBERI AUT SERVI OCCISI.


§ 1. Si quis liber aut servus occidatur, natalis sui precio
legitime componatur, nisi satisfaccionis judicium dampnis cor-
poralibus amplietur; continget enim, qui aliquem occiderit vel


Vin ms. Lond. et K. desunt. triplici ms. Lond. % in K. deest.
4’ ws. Lond. et K. omittunt. in ms. Lond. desunt.


a Forte ‘sexta manu decime sue’ uti Glossar. Lindenbrogi in verb.
¢ Sibi alterum.’

> Institutum hoe aliquid habet affinitatis cum Magno Norman.
Custumar. c. 85: ubi hec: ‘ Notandum etiam est, quod secundum
diversas personas plures vel pauciores in deraisnis exiguntur adjutores.
Inter pares enim vel vicinos potest quilibet se tertia manu facere
deraisnam ; versus autem dominum, sexta manu in curia domini sui.
Si autem in curia domini superioris placitaverit, se tertia manu
deraisnabit versus dominum suum, et simili modo dominus versus
hominem suum. In curia enim domini superioris placitando sunt
quasi pares, versus autem domini regis servientem quinta manu debet
fieri deraisna.’ Id ipsum reperies repetitum postea, ¢. 125. in Latino
exemplari, in Gallico autem c. 122.


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 571


plagiaverit, sue vite periculum vel membrorum detrimenta sus-
tinebit. § 2. Alternantur enim omnia: loco, ut si in ecclesia,
vel domo regis, vel in expedicione, vel familia, vel civitate, vel
hujusmodi perpetua pacis habitacione, proveniat: *tempore, si
dies festus sit, si rex in hostico vel in ipso sit comitatu: per-
sona, si serviens regis sit, vel alterius domini prepositus aut
minister, vel quoquo modo securam pacis tranquillitatem pre-
ferat, sive per breve, sive per aliud. § 8. MX*XVIL DD Et licet
omnis presbiter, undecumque oriundus, si canonicam vel regu-
larem vitam ducat, in seculari dignitate, thaini legem habeat;
si tamen occidatur, et hoc ad emendacionem pertrahi liceat,
secundum natale suum reddatur. Si de thainis natus est,
thaini wera reddatur; si de villainis, similiter conjectetur; et
tam in clericis quam in laicis observandum, ut ad patrem non ad
matrem generacio dirigatur. § 4. Et nemo ‘sub servitute”
natus, ante legitimam libertatem, sacris ordinibus admittatur.
§ 5. Si ordinatus aliquis occidatur, super rectam weram, primus
gradus emendetur una libra cum digna penitencia; in secundo
gradu, reddantur due libre, pro infractura ordinis, super rec-
tam weram, cum digna penitencia; in tercio gradu, 11. libre;
in quarto gradu, uu. libre; in quinto gradu, v. libre; in sexto
gradu, vi. libre; in septimo gradu, vil. libre emendentur, super
rectam weram, cum digna penitencia. Et ad ordinis infractu-
ram de pace componatur juste, secundum factum. Et ordinis
emendacionis una pars sit episcopi, alia altaris, tercia societatis.
§ 6. Qui occiderit episcopum, sit in arbitrio principis et episco-
porum. § 7. °Qui monachum vel clericum occiderit, arma


in ms. Lond. et K. desunt.


® Quemadmodum enim tempus culpam aggravat et peenam ampliat,
sic hee tempora exempli gratia specificantur; inde descenditur ad
personam.

> Sic etiam statuit olim rex Ethelstanus, ut in legibus suis apud
Greatanleiam, c. ult. ‘ De Weris,’ videre est (hujus edit. p.182, c.12.);
quod quidem caput, in codice regio ms. a Spelman. Concil. tom. 1.
p- 406 laudato, sic Latine exprimitur: ‘ Miss presbyteri et secularis
taini jusjurandum in Anglorum lege eque carum, et pro septem ordi-
nibus ecclesiz, quibus sacerdos per Dei donum ascendit, ut haberet
taini rectitudinem dignus est.’

¢ Vide Capitul. Car. et Lud. Impp. lib. 6. tit.90. et 97. Hoe etiam
et sequentium quamplurima peti videntur e canonibus quibus titulus
‘Excerptum Egberti Archiep, c.3. apud Spelm. t.1. Concil. p. 283.
Wilk. t. 1. p. 101.


572 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


relinquat, et Deo serviat; et si casu perpetravit et 'nolens, vir.
annis peniteat; si volens fecit, usque ad exitum vite peniteat.?
§ 8. Si diaconus vel presbiter homicidium fecerit, deponatur,
et peniteat, secundum episcopi sui judicium. §9. Qui
patrem aut matrem casu occiderit, xv. annis peniteat; si volun-
tate, usque ad exitum vite. § 10. Qui ad homicidium
consenserit, vII. annis peniteat, uno anno in pane et aqua.
§ 11. Si servus jussu domini sui hominem occidat, xi. dies
peniteat in pane et aqua, et tribus Quadragesimis cum legitimis
feriis a carne et potu se abstineat: dominus ejus peniteat 5xv.
annis. § 12. Qui hominem occiderit in publico bello, vel in
defensione domini sui, tantundem peniteat.


LXIX. DE OCCISIONE ANGLICI.


Si quis Anglicus sine merito suo occidatur, secundum pre-
cium natalis sui et loci consuetudinem, de wera parentibus com-
ponatur, et wita et manbota dominis, sicut justum est, ad
modum ipsius were. De twyhindi hominis wera, debent reddi,
secundum legem, xxx. sot ad manbotam, ‘i. hodie v. mance;
de ‘twelfhindo, i. thaino, cxx. sol, que faciant xx. °mancas.


LXX, *X*Xvl CONSUETUDO WESTSEXE.


§ 1. ****™ In Westsexa, que caput regni est et legum,
7twyhindi, i. villani wera est m1. lib; ®twelfhindi, i. thaini
xxv. lib. § 2. *** Si servus servum occidat, domino reddan-
tur Xx. sot pro manbota, parentibus interfecti servi, xi. dei.
§ 3. Si dominus occisoris nec pro eo reddit, nec servus habet
unde reddat, dimittere potest eum dominus, ut *sibi caveat, nisi
forte °cravetur dum secum est; quod si eveniat, eum ™ repeten-
tibus reddat, vel inde componat. §4. Si liber servum occidat,
similiter reddat parentibus x1. defi, et duas ’mufflas, et unum
8pullum mutilatum;’ domino servi xx. sot pro manbota; blod-


Ynoluit ms. Lond.  2mss. Seld. Twysd. et Lond. hee inserunt: Qui
ad homicidium consenserit, poeniteat septem annis, uno anno in pane
et aqua. Hee in Sc. et K. lin. tertia sequ. invenies. 3 decem
as. Lond. et K. 4idemve ms. Lond. ‘theshindo ms. Zond. &mar-
cas ms. Lond. 7tehindi ms. Lond. ®%thelhindi ms. Lond. 9%si Se.
10 gravetur K. cavetur Sc. 1! parentibus ms. Zond. 2 musflas Se.
mufflas mss. Seld. Twysd. et K.  1%pullum mulilatum K. billum
mutilatum Se.


4 Vide Lindenbrog. Glossar. verb. ‘ Servus 15 sol. valens.’


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 573


witam, vel ‘fihtwitam sicut acciderit. § 5. Si servus Walis-
cus Anglicum hominem occidat, debet ille cujus servus est
reddere eum domino et parentibus, vel dare xx. sot pro vita
sua. Si hoc capitale nolit dare pro eo, dimittat eum liberum,
solvant postea parentes ejus weram illam, si cognacionem
habeat liberam: si non habeat, observent eum inimici. *Non
cogitur liber cum servo meggildare, nisi velit ei *satisfaccionem
facere, nec servus cum libero. §6. Si Anglicus homo
Dacum occidat, liber liberum, persolvat eum xxv. ‘lib, vel ipse
malefactor reddatur, et tantundem reddat Dacus de Anglico,
si eum occidat. § 8 Si Anglicus Dacum servum occidat,
reddat eum xx. sol, et Dacus similiter Anglicum, si eum occi-
dat: *°* attamen persolvantur plena wera. § 9. *° Si se
invicem occidant liberi, vel nativitate vel casu servi, unus pro
alio jaceat. Si superhabundat aliquis eorum in genitura, que-
rant parentes ejus were vel vindicte superplus. Si Sunius dig-
nitatis et paritatis sint, in eo consistat. § 10. *°"" Si quis
de servo liber °factus occidatur, omne malum occisoris pro
nichilo reputatur, si homicidium fecerit contra legem, quia
scilicet rectum quod inde habiturus erat sibi abstulit; reddat
vero quem occiderit, tanquam ab eo nichil passus sit.
§ 11. *°” Qui pacem facit cum aliquo de vulnere vel malo quod
inflixerit, 7 distincte cum testibus et gratuita parentum ejus
unanimitate finiat, ut ei scilicet sic non requiratur a genitis vel
Sgignendis, quicquid postea contingat. Sepe etenim fatigacio
secuta est desuper natura, que sanitatem intempestam doloribus
obduxerit. § 12. Similiter, *° si mulier homicidium faciat,
in eam vel in progeniem vel parentes ejus vindicetur, vel inde
componat; non in virum suum, °seu clientelam innocentem.
Sive autem sponte aut non sponte fiant hec, nichilominus tamen
emendetur ; que enim per inscienciam peccamus, per industriam
corrigamus : amicicie tamen et venie propius vel remocius erit,
sicut meritum ejus qui occisus est interfuit, et sicut acciderit.
§ 13. Si mulier occidatur, sicut weregildum ejus est reddatur,
ex parte patris, sicut observamus in aliis. § 14. Si pregnans
occidatur, et puer in ea vivat, uterque plena wera reddatur.
Si nondum vivus sit, dimidia wera solvatur parentibus ex parte


\fightwytam mus. Lond. 2Ne ms. Lond. 3faccionem Se. 4maré
ms. Lond. et K. ‘minus mus. Lond: in ms. Lond. et K. deest.
7 districte K. ‘ingenitis mss. Seld. Twysd. Lond. et K. 9% vel
ms. Lond. et K. im ms. Lond. et K, deest.


574 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


patris. De manbota vero utriusque vel alterius, domino jure
conveniat. § 15. Si infans occidat vel occidatur, sive nomen
habeat sive non habeat, plena wera 'commutetur. §16. Mu-
lieres que fornicantur, et partus suos extinguunt, et eas qui
secum agunt, ut utero conceptum excutiant, *antiqua *diffinicio,
usque ad exitum vite, removet ab ecclesia, nunc clemencius
diffinitur, x. afi peniteant. Mulier si partum suum ante xL. dies
sponte perdiderit, ‘1111. annis peniteat ; si postquam animatus
est, quia homicida, vi. afi peniteat. | § 17. Mulier si duobus
fratribus nupserit, abjiciatur usque in die mortis; in extremis
tamen, propter humanitatem, reconcilietur. §.18. *°%* 2Si
quis pater mortuus fuerit, et filium vel filiam hereditandam
reliquerit, usque ad xv. etatis annos, nec causam prosequantur
nec judicium subeant, set, sub tutoribus et actoribus, sint in
parentum legitima custodia saisiti, sicut pater eorum fuit in die
mortis et vite sue. § 19. >Et nullus heredipete suo pro-
pinquo, vel extranei periculose sane custodie, committatur.
§ 20. *°Y" ¢ Si quis sine liberis decesserit, pater aut mater ejus
in hereditatem succedant; vel frater aut soror, si pater ‘aut
mater ®desint; si nec hos habeat, soror patris vel matris; et
deinceps, in quintum geniculum, quicunque propinquiores in


1 sic Wilk. cOmercetur K. conjectetur Sc. 2antiquam Se. 3 dif-
funceio Sc. 4tribus Sc. Saut Ket Se. Sdesinunt K,


4 Vide Glanvill. lib. 13. ¢. 15. fol. 105 a.

> Hinc illud, forte, Glanville et aliorum posterioris evi juristarum
nostrorum municipalium axioma sive juris nostri communis regula:
‘ Numquam enim (ita Glanvill. lib.’7. c.11.) custodia alicujus de jure
alicui remaneat de quo habeatur suspicio, quod possit vel velit aliquod
jus in ipsa hereditate clamare.’

¢ Vide testamentum Regis /Elfredi, sub finem vite sue per Asse-
rium. Hinc, forte, forensium nostratium placitum, de quo in statuto
‘Regis prerogativa’ inseripto cap. finali: ‘ Foemine non participa-
bunt cum masculis.’ Videantur etiam Glanvill, 1.7. c. 3. et Bracton.
lib.2. ¢. 30. num. 3. ubi id ipsum velut juris regula affertur. Utrum
autem hoc et que utrinque adhzrent a lin. se. 18. ‘si quis sine liberis’
ad ista ‘non hereditetur,’ lin.2, pag. seq., juris sint Anglicani primi-
genii, seu potius integre petita e lege Ripuariorum, dubitandum censeo.
Audi enim quid in ea ipsa lege, tit. 56, de Alodibus statutum exhibet
Codex LL. Antiquarum, p.460: ‘Si quis absque liberis defunctus
fuerit, si pater materque superstites fuerint, in hzreditatem succe-
dant; si pater materque non fuerint, frater et soror succedant. Si
autem nec eos habuerit, tunc frater et soror matris patrisque succe-
dant, et deinceps, usque ad quintum genuculum, qui proximus fuerit
in hereditatem succedat: sed dum virilis sexus extiterit, foemina in
hereditatem aviaticam non succedat.’


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 575


parentela fuerint, hereditario jure succedant; et dum virilis
seXus extiterit, et hereditas ab inde sit, femina non hereditetur.
§ 21. *Primo patris feodum primogenitus filius habeat; Pemp-
ciones vero, vel deinceps acquisiciones suas det cui magis
velit. Si bocland habeat quam ei parentes dederint, non mittat
eum extra cognacionem suam, ‘sicut prediximus. § 22. *Si
sponsa virum suum supervixerit, dotem et maritacionem suam,


* Capitale, ni fallor, signat messuagium, ut forensibus nostris
dictum, de quo Glanvilla nostras, de hereditate inter filios partiunda
verba faciens: ‘salvo tamen (inquit) capitali messuagio primogenito
filio, pro dignitate esinecie sue. Hune sequutus est Bractonus,
lib. 2. c.34. Concordat Magnum Normann. Custumar. c. (in exempl.
Gallico) 26: ‘le chief de Vheritage remaindra a laisne,’ &c., id est,
juxta Latin. exemplar, ‘ capitale herbergagium primogenito remane-
bit, sicut edificia in eo constructa continebunt. Clausum autem sive
gardinum vel ortum eidem remanebit, dum tamen fratribus legitimam
fecerit excambiationem super hoc ad valorem;’ vide Glossar. Latin.
ibidem. Mihi idem hoc videtur quod in legibus Ine, c. 38. ¢ fpum-
ycol’ dictum occurrit, i.e. prima vel primaria sedes vel mansio, qui-
busdam hodie vulgo ‘the homestall.’

> Heic videatur Bractonus, fol. 273 a. 407 b. et 409 b. Exemplum,
ni fallor, valde appositum suppeditat charta in archivis eccl. Cant.
cujusdam Normanni dicti le Wautier, de tota terra sua in Suthwerke
ecclesiz Cantuar. donata, anno Gratiz 1204: ‘Et quia (inquit) pre-
dicta terra de libero catallo et proprio perquisito meo fuit, et non de
aliqua hereditate parentum meorum, ideo Deum inde et S. Thomam
Martyrem et Sanctos Cantuariensis ecclesie, et conventum monacho-
rum ejusdem, heredem meum legitimum inscribo, et hac mea charta
in perpetuum constituo.’ Glanvilla autem nostras, lib. 7. c.1, paulo
aliter, et cum quadam adhibita limitatione: ‘ Si vero (inquit) questum
tantum habuerit is qui partem terre sue donare voluerit, tunc quidem
hoe ei licet, sed non totum questum, quia non potest filium suum
heredem exheredare; veruntamen, si nullum heredem filium vel
filiam ex corpore suo procreaverit, poterit quidem ex questu suo
cuicunque voluerit quandam partem donare, sive totum questum
hereditabiliter.’

¢ Nusquam, quod sciam, sic preedixit legislator: in sequentibus,
fateor, sic instituit, c.88. §14. Id ipsum autem vult /Elfredus Rex
in legum suarum ;c.41, cui conforme testamentum ejusdem regis,
sub finem vite suze per Asserium, quoad terras suas quas vocat
liberas (quo nomine, opinor, boclands indigitat, voce illa in LL.
£lfredi, c.41. oceurrente sic versa apud Jorvalensem), limitatione
tamen in lege memorata adhibita; ‘si,’ nimirum, ‘scriptum intersit,
et testes, quod eorum prohibitio fuerit, qui hane inprimis acquisi-
erint, et ipsorum qui dederint ei, ne hoe possit;’ alioqui enim ‘ boc-
land,’ cum sit terra sua natura libera, ad libitum possidentis licite
posse alienari, et, ut cum forensibus nostris loquar, forisfamiliari
existimo. Vide tractat. clar. Somn. de Gavelkynd, c.4. et Glossar.
in voce ‘ Bocland.’

4 Hic iterum ingerit se Ripuariorum lex, tit. 37. ‘De dotibus
mulierum,’ quam hic locus usque ad ‘nihil inde recipiat’ totus spirat,


576 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


cartarum instrumentis vel testium exhibicionibus ei traditam,
perpetualiter habeat, et 'morgangivam suam et terciam partem
de omni collaboracione sua, preter vestes et lectum suum: et si
quid ex eis in elemosinis vel communi necessitate consumpserit,
nichil inde recipiat. § 23. Si mulier absque liberis moriatur,
parentes ejus cum marito suo partem suam dividant.


LXXI. DE HOMICIDIO 2VEL ALIIS MALEFICIIS.’


§ 1. *Si quis veneno, vel sortilegio, vel *invultuacione, seu
maleficio aliquo, faciat homicidium, sive illi paratum sit sive
alii, nichil refert, quin factum mortiferum, et nullo modo redi-
mendum sit. *Reddatur utique qui fuerit reus hujusmodi
parentibus ‘et amicis’ interfecti, ut eorum misericordiam ° aut
judicium senciat, quibus ipse non pepercit. Si res in com-
pellacione sit, et emundacione °miseveniat, episcopi judicio
reservetur. Et si beneficio legis ad misericordiam vel con-
cordiam pertrahatur, de wera mortui plene satisfaciat; et
witam, et manbotam, et, omnibus rite pacatis, “plegios legali-
tatis deinceps inveniat: triplex vero lada vel 7emundacio in


1 morhangifam ms. Lond. % in mss. Seld. Twysd. et Lond. desunt.
3in vultu accione Se. invultuacione ms. Lond. ef K. in ms. Lond.
et K. desunt: Set Se. aut K. 6 misse veniat ms. Lond. et: K.
7/emendacio sit in agendis hujusmodi ms. Lond. et K.


unde erratorum hic corrigendorum facultas. ‘Si quis mulierem
desponsaverit, (lex loquitur,) quicquid ei per tabularum seu charta-
rum instrumenta conscripserit, perpetualiter inconvulsum permaneat.
Si autem per seriem scripturarum ei nihil contulerit, si virum super-
vixerit, L. sol. in dotem recipiat, et tertiam partem de omni re quam
simul conlaboraverint sibi studeat evindicare, vel quicquid ei in
morgangeba traditum fuerat, similiter faciat. Quod si ex his que
conscripta vel tradita sunt simul consumpserint aliquid, nihil (inde)
requirat.’

a Prima, secunda, et tertia hujus capitis linea corrupte videntur ;
sensum autem loci talem existimo: homicidium veneno, sortilegio,
vulneratione, seu maleficio aliquo ejusmodi illatum scelus, esse inex-
piabile et nullo modo redimendum. Simile habes in LL. Athelstani,
I. ¢.6.

b Vid. ce. 92. Traductum hoc videtur e LL. Cnuti, Sec. c. 57.
quod vide.

© Cetera lingua vernacula sic exprimo: ‘ Let him find sureties
for his good abearing in time to come,’ quod juris est consultum
nobis adhuc in usu, et quam antiquum hine collige; vid. LL. Edo.
Confess. c.18. Rem autem altius petendam censeo a supra memorato,
scil. LL. thelstani, I. ¢.6. ubi hoc modo cautum est: ‘4 zanzgon
him on boph # he zgpe ypylcey zeypice.’


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 577


Tagendis *hujusmodi sit’  § 2. ?Si autem insorticatus non
fuerit mortuus, set cutis variacionem vel probabilem corporis
contrahat egritudinem,’ emendetur, sapientum antiquis diffini-
cionibus, sicut acciderit.


LXXII. DIFFINICIO HOMICIDII.


§ 1. Homicidium fit multis modis, multaque distancia in eo
est, in causa, et in personis. Aliquando *autem fit per cupidi-
tatem, vel contencionem temporalium, fit eciam per ebrietatem,
fit per jussionem alicujus, fit eciam pro defensione et justicia,
de quibus ita meminit beatus Augustinus de sermone Domini
in monte: ‘Si homicidium ‘est hominem’ occidere, potest
aliquando accidere sine peccato; nam miles hostem, et judex
nocentem, et cui forte invito vel imprudenti telum manu fugit,
non michi videntur peccare, cum hominem occidunt.’ »Beatus
Jeronymus: ‘ Homicidas et sacrilegos punire non [est] effusio
sanguinis, set ministerium legum;’ et ipsa lex dicit: ¢ Si dimi-
seris virum dignum morte, anima tua erit pro anima ejus.’
§ 2. Fit eciam homicidium casu, consilio. Aliter eciam est, si
clericus vel laicus cum propinquis vel extraneis agant hoc vel
paciantur; et alii plures modi sunt, qui maxime ad penitentes
pertinebunt, quibus aptanda quidem est et amica participacione
providenda medicina, secundum etatem, et possibilitatem, et
virtutem, et confessionem singulorum, in oracionibus, in vigiliis,
in jejuniis, in elemosinis, et beneficencie modis.” § 3. Qui
non potest jejunando peccata curare, potest elemosina redimere;
elemosina sufficit sine jejunio, °jejunium non sufficit sine ele-
mosina.’ Jejunium cum elemosina duplex bonum est, sine
elemosina nullum bonum est. Unusquisque donum suum a
Deo habet, nec querit penitencie spacium, set modum.


1Sc. omittit. 2 Si vero insorciatus non fuerit modo vivus, sed cutis
variacionem vel probacionem corporis contrahat ms. Lond. et K.
3in ms. Lond. deest. 4 hominem reddit us. Zond. */ beneficie modis
ms. Lond. §in us. Lond. desunt.


2 Sec. criminum hujusmodi diluendorum gratia, juxta dicti Regis
ZEthelstani memorate legis tenorem. Re vera capitulum hoe quasi
integre inde haustum videtur, et e lege illa Cnuti, Sec. 57. quibus-
cum, ex quadam parte, presertim posteriori, concordat lex Ripua-
riorum, tit. 83.

b Vide Excerptiones Ecgberti Archiep. ¢, 80. in Spelm. Concil.
to. 1. p. 266; Wilk. Cone. t.1. p.106. ¢. 82.


578 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


LXXITI. @DE ORDINATIS HOMICIDIIS.


§ 1. Si episcopus homicidium faciat, deponatur et peniteat
XII. anil, vil. in pane et aqua, et v. jejunet m1. diebus in ebdo-
mada, et aliis communi cibo utatur. § 2. Si presbiter
hominem occidat, vel monachus, ordinem perdat, et peniteat x.
anil, ‘vr. in pane et aqua, et 1111. jejunet in ebdomada “111. dies,’
ceteris utatur cibo suo. Si presbiter hominem vulneret, c. dies
jejunet. § 3. Si diaconus hominem occidat, exordinetur, et
vil. annis peniteat, 11. in pane et aqua, et 11. jejunet 11.
diebus in ebdomada, in ceteris communi cibo utatur. § 4, Si
clericus hominem occidat, *v1. annis peniteat, *1111. in pane et
aqua, et duos jejunet tribus diebus in ebdomada. § 5. °Si
Jaicus hominem occidat, v. ani peniteat, 11. in pane et aqua,
et 1. annis tribus diebus jejunet in ebdomada.” § 6. Si quis
ordinatum occidat vel proximum suum, exeat de patria sua, et
Romam adeat, et papam et consilium ejus scire® faciat. De
adulterio, vel fornicacione, vel nunne concubitu, similiter
peniteat.


LXXIV. *°Y¥" DE PURGACIONE OCCISORUM.


§ 1. >Si parentes eorum purgare velint eos qui injuste vel
sine judicio fuerint occisi, liceat eis, secundum legem pristinam,
werelada pernegare. *°* Si ad um. libras natus sit, cum
*xvir. ex’ patre sint, ex matre uu. ° Si ad xmu. lib, cum
xvi. Si bene juraverint, *atrium ei” querat qui occidit, et
emendet ei per omnia, sicut lex et consuetudo loci sit, et wera
parentibus, et manbota domino. § 2. Et qui culpam exigit
de fure occiso, eat se tercio, ut duo sint de cognacione patris,
tercius de cognacione matris, et jurent, quod in cognato suo
nullum factum erat pro quo de vita forisfactus esset; et eant


Iseptem us. Lond. et K. 2 tribus diebus ms. Lond. 3 quinque A.
4tres K. 5/ in ms. Lond. et K. desunt. &scire ms. Lond. et K. add.
7octo de us. Lond. *atri ut ei K.


@ Istud caput integre petitur, ni fallor, e Canonibus Regis Edgari,
sub tit. ‘Modus imponendi peenitentiam,’ quem consule.

b De his et seqq. ad ista ‘manbota domino’ consulas velim harum
LL. ¢.64, § 5. et leges Edo. Confess. c. 36. Hee autem ‘atrium
ei quzrat qui occidit,’ sic intelligenda puto: ‘sanctuarium sibi
petat.’


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 579


alii cum xIL, et superjurent ei in mundiciam que ante dicetur.
Quod si parentes mortui nolint illuc venire, constituto termino,
emendet unusquisque cxx. sol, qui super hoc loquebatur.
§ 3. Si Jaliquis homo ex contencione aliqua vel rebus repentinis
occidatur, requirat eum dominus suus per plegium, et pro mor-
tuo plenam et eam rectitudinem offerat, quam pro vivo faceret,
de quo rectum non difforciaverit: si ei denegetur, et interim
amittatur, vel a bestiis aut avibus devoretur, vel si ab occisori-
bus inhumetur, vel circumsepiatur, hoc preter weram judicio
componatur.


LXXV. DE OCCISORIBUS DOMINORUM SUORUM.


§ 1. Si quis dominum suum occidat, si capiatur, nullo modo
se redimat, set de comacione vel *excoriacione, severa gencium
animadversione, dampnetur, ut diris tormentorum cruciatibus
et male mortis infortuniis infelicem prius animam exhalasse,
quam finem doloribus excepisse videatur; et, si posset fieri,
remissionis amplius apud inferos invenisse, quam in terra reli-
quisse protestetur ; in omnibus enim humane pravitatis excessi-
bus, medicine salutaris fomenta prolata sunt, preter tradicionem
Domini, et blasphemiam Spiritus Sancti, i. habere cor impe-
nitens, quod, juxta verbum Domini, non remittetur alicui, vel
in hoe seculo vel in futuro.  § 2. Quisquis itaque de morte
domini sui, per se vel per susceptam vel per suspectam perso-
nam, aliqua rerum accione, vel subintroduccione, tractabit, vite
sue culpa sit, et omnium que habebit; et si placitum in accu-
sacione sit, werelada, sicut ipse *dominus natus est, abnegabit.
§ 3. Si quis hominem suum sine culpa mortis occidat, parenti-
bus ejus, sicut natus est, nichilominus eum reddat; quia vide-
licet ad serviendum, non ad occidendum, °"‘servus erat; et si
dominus in capite est, manbota remaneat. § 4. %™ *Qui
servum suum occiderit, suum peccatum est et dampnum. Si
ipso die quo vulneratus est, vel alio modo afflictus, tanquam in
manibus domini sui, moriatur, crudelius est et gravius, sicut
in lege Moysy scriptum est.  § 5. Qui aliquem de parentibus


lalicujus us. Lond. accusacione vel ita postremo ms. Lond. ejus
cacione Se. excoriacione K. 3in K. deest. 4suus ms. Lond. et K.


a Hue forte pertinet sanctio illa inter Canones Regis Edgari, tit.
‘Modus imponendi peenitentiam.’


* habeat ?


* eam?


580 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


suis occidit, dignis apud Deum penitencie fructibus emendet;
et in modo penitencie sit, si sponte vel casu perpetravit; et
excidat emendacio patrini sicut manbota domini; si ‘non per-
tineat ei utrumque, et aliorum inportunitate, quorum consan-
guineus “est, cogatur eum reddere, sapientum hoc judicio,
secundum genus, componatur. § 6. *Si Francigena qui
parentes non habeat in murdro perimatur, habeat ®precium
natalis ejus ‘qui murdrum “abarnaverit; rex de hundreto
7ubi invenietur xL. maré argenti; nisi intra vi. dies redda-
tur malefactor justicie regis, et talis de quo possit justicia
fieri; vel qui occisum comprobet Anglicum, * habeatur judi-
cium ferri calidi, vel sicut rerum circumstanciis fuerit appro-
batum. §7. *Ad patrem vero, non ad matrem, genera-
cionis consideracio dirigatur; ‘omnibus %enim Francigenis et
alienigenis debet esse rex pro cognacione et advocato, si
penitus alium *non habeat. = § 8. Si ex parte patris parentes
non habeat qui occiditur, et ex parte matris habeat, quan-
tum ad *eum attinet, i. tercia pars weregildi sui reddatur.
Si quis hujusmodi faciat homicidium, parentes ejus tantum
were reddant, quantum pro ea reciperent, si occideretur.
§ 9. Si ex parte patris parentes habeat, et ex parte matris
non habeat, et hominem occiderit, reddant °pertinentes ei’
quantum de ejus interfeccione reciperent, i. duas partes were-
gildi sui. § 10. Si quis autem paterna cognacione carens
male pugnet ut hominem occidat, si tune cognacionem ma-
ternam habeat, reddat ipsa terciam partem were, terciam
congildones, pro tercia fugiat. Si nec maternam cognacionem
habeat, reddant congildones dimidiam weram, pro dimidia
fugiat vel componat. Si quis occidatur ejusmodi, secundum
legem pristinam, si parentela careat, reddatur dimidium regi,
dimidium congildonibus. § 11. Si quis moriens debitor tes-
tamenta. tradicionis vel vendicionis aliqua fecerit, et filios vel
filias non habuerit, quicunque de parentibus suis in heredi-


1K. omittit. 2non K. 3spacium ms. Lond. et K. 4 Sc. omittit.
5 peroraverit mss. Seld. Twysd. Lond. et KK. 6K. add. 7nisi
ms. Lond. et K. 8in ms. Lond. et K.deest. parentes mss. Seld.
Twysd. Lond. et K.


@ Plura de hoc vide infra c. 91, §1. 92, §6. et schol. ibid.

> Sic etiam antea consultum est c. 68. §3. et postea, c.77. § 1.

© Exemplum forte duxit legislator ex foedere Edo. et Guthr.
Regum, ec. 12.


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 581


tatem successerit, ‘omne debitum ejus juste restituat, et omne
factum ydoneare studeat, vel culpam incurrat.


LXXVI. DE PRECIO CUJUSLIBET.


§ 1. Si homo occidatur, sicut natus erit persolvatur. Et
rectum est ut homicida, postquam weregildum vadiaverit, in-
veniat wereplegios, sicut ad eam pertinebit, i. de thaino debent
dari x11. wereplegii, viz. de parte patris, et 1111. de cognacione
matris; et cum hoe factum erit, elevetur inter eos pax regis in
omni weregildo, et debet halsfang primo reddi, sicut were
modus erit. § 2. Omnis autem wera liberorum est aut ser-
vorum. § 3. Servi alii natura, alii facto, et alii empcione, et
alii redempcione, alii sua vel alterius dacione servi, et si que
sunt alie species hujusmodi; quas tamen omnes volumus sub
uno servitutis membro constitui, quem casum ponimus appellari,
ut ita dictum sit, servi alii casu, alii genitura; liberi alii thwy-
hindi, alii syxhindi, alii twelfhindi. § 4. Thwihindus homo
dicitur cujus wera est cc. sol, qui faciunt im. libr. Twelf-
hindus est homo plene nobilis, i. thainus, cujus wera est duo-
decies c. sot, qui faciunt libras *xxv., cujus halsfang sunt *cxx.
sol, qui faciunt hodie sot x. Et non pertinet alii cognacioni
pecunia ista, nisi illis qui sunt intra genu. § 5. >A die illa
qua wera vadiata est in vicesimum unum diem *debet halsfang
reddi;’ ‘inde in xx. unam noctem reddatur manbota; inde in
xx. unam noctem, fythtwyte; inde in viginti unam noctem,
ipsius were primum gildum; et sic omnibus parentibus domi-
nisque emendacionibus iniciatis persolvantur reliquum were,
intra terminum quem sapientes instituunt; deinde liceat per
amorem procedere, si perfectam velint amicorum intrandi et
exeundi licenciam habere. § 6. Eodem modo per omnia de


}1vel cui weregildum ejus, si occisus esset, pertinebat mss. Seld.
Twysd. et Lond. add. 2v. Se. xxv. K 3/in ms. Lond. desunt.
habet hoc halsfangum reddi Sc. K. ut in textu. “4 in K. desunt.


a Hinc est forte, quod ipsum crimen in LL. Cnuti, Sec. «15,
cxx. sol. mulctatum, harum legum c. 34. § 3. x. solid. tantum plec-
tatur. Unde autem hoc vide in Glossar. in voce ‘Manca.’

> Hic ingerit se legum illarum Regis Edmundi, Sec. c. 7..pars
posterior: ‘of pam bzze on -xxi- nihtum, &c. Verba autem hee
‘intra genu’ quid significent in obscuro est, nisi de cognatis zsti-
mate persone consanguinitate, non autem affinitate junctis, accipienda.
sunt.


582 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI


leyrlisci vel villani wera fieri debet, secundum modum suum,
sicut de duodecies centeno diximus. Age enim de aliquo,
secundum legem, qui natus sit ad 1111. lié, et quando vel quibus
reddi debeat, vel quomodo distribui: halsfange ejus sunt v.
maré, que faciunt ?x11. sot et Sv. defi; est autem verbum
Anglicum, quod Latine sonat ‘ apprehensio colli’ § 7. Si
quis ad i. lib persolvendus occidatur, et ad id res veniat, ut
precio natalis ejus componendus sit, primo debent reddi x11. sot
et vi. defi, et in wera numerari: reddantur vero patri, vel filio,
vel fratri, vel qui propinquior est de patre, si predictos parentes
non habeat: si omnes istos habeat, et ipsi dividant inter se.
*A die qua wera vadiata est in xxt. ‘diem, sine omni excusa-
cione et dilacione, debet halsfang reddi, sicut premisimus, et
hoe indivisum habeant a ceteris; inde ad xx1. diem, reddatur
ipsius manbota; tune ad xxi. diem, fuytwhita; inde ad xx.
diem, reddatur ipsius were frumgildum, i. vii. sot et vi. dei ad
explecionem xx. sot; inde componat, qui weram solvit, termi-
num de xx. sot; inde ponat terminum suum parentes mortui
de xi. ovibus, que pro xx. °sot computantur ; sint autem oves
videntes et cornute, nulla parte corporis diminute; ultimo ter-
mino reddatur equus, qui pro xx. sot numerandus est. Hoc
secundum legem et nostram consuetudinem diximus: diffe-
rencia tamen weregildi multa est in >Cancia villanorum et
baronum.


LXXVII. DE SOLUCIONE LIBERI VEL SERVI.


§ 1. °™ © Si quis de servo patre natus sit et matre libera, pro
servo reddatur occisus in ea parte, “quia semper a patre non a
matre generacionis ordo texitur. § 2. Si pater sit liber et


-


leylisci Se. sirlisci as. Zond. ?xxu. Se. xu. K. 3x. A 4in
us. Lond. deest. ‘solid ms. Lond. occisi ms. Lond. add.


@ Hic repetitio eorum que paulo ante dixerat legislator.

> Utrum autem Cantium nostrum (comitatus sic dictus) villanos,
forensium hujus temporis sensu, servos scil. et nativos, ut alias
vocant, Saxonibus ‘ peop, ppel, pealh,” tunc temporis anteave aut citra
agnovit necne, vide tract. clar. Somneri de Gavelkind. c.3; utrumque
Cantium in re weregildi pre ceteris locis esse notabile ex premissis
patet.

© Contra jus civile Romanorum, ubi partus sequitur ventrem.
Vide Fortescut. de Laud. LL. Angliz, c. 42. et cl. Seldeni notas
ibid.

4 Vid. schol. ad ¢.75.


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 583


mater ancilla, pro libero reddatur occisus, si sit Anglicus vel
non sit, ‘et nichil interveniat cur remaneat; aliquando autem
erit sicut dominus ejus voluerit; *vitulus autem matris est
cujuscunque taurus alluserit. § 3. Si quis servus, natus vel
factus, in libertatem transeat, habeat dominus suus manbotam
liberi.


LXXVIII. DE LIBERACIONE SERVI.


§ 1. °™ Qui servum suum liberat, in ecclesia, vel mercato,
vel comitatu, vel hundreto, coram testibus et palam faciat,
et liberas ei vias et portas conscribat apertas, et lanceam
et gladium, vel que liberorum arma sunt, in manibus ei
ponat. § 2. Si quis in servum transeat, sicut possessor
est, in halimoto vel hundreto vel vicinio, coram testibus,
agatur, cum excoluerit, ut nec ille deinceps abneget, °” et
de singulis discrete sciatur cujus condicionis estimandi sunt,
libere scilicet an servilis; *quia multi potentes volunt, si
possunt, defendere homines suos, modo pro servo modo pro
libero, sicut interim factu facilius sit; ‘set legibus hoc in-
terdictum est; in signum vero transicionis hujus, 4 billum
vel *strublum, vel deinceps ad hunc modum servitutis
arma suscipiat, et manus in manus domini mittat, et caput.
§ 3. Si quis de servitute redeat in liberum, in testem manu-
missionis, cum testibus reddicionis, domino suo °xxx. deii


‘sed ms. Lond. 2stumblum ms. Lond. et K.


@ Hine forte illud apud nos vulgare: ‘The mother’s is the surer
side,’ ze. ‘Laterum certius esse maternum;’ hinc etiam aliud quo
utimur in mentem venit proverbium: viz. ‘Maritum teneri vitulum
nutrire, quicunque rem habuerit cum vacca. Anglice autem sic:
‘ Whosoever bulls the cow, the good man must keep the calf;’ juxta.
illud ‘filius est’ (pater etiam) quem ‘nuptiz demonstrant.’ De quo
vide Glanvill. nostr. 1.7. c.12, item Bracton. 1.1. c. 9. et 1.2. ¢.29,
Bartolum etiam in L. filium, 6. ff. de his qui sunt sui vel alieni juris,
1, 5. ff. de in jus vocand.

b Quod autem sequitur ad ista, ‘factu facilius sit,’ e legibus Cnuti,
Sec. c. 20. ductum arbitror, ubi eadem verba: ‘Mantz yscpecman

vle,’ &e.
ee Sc. lege Regis Cnuti, Sec. c.xx., ubi hee: ‘Ac pe nellad zepapian
‘ unpihc, &c.: Sed nolumus hanc injustitiam pati.’

4 Forte ‘ billum vel stimulum,’ que arma, ut videtur, servo propria,
ut e contrario lancea et gladius libero. Vide’ supra initium capitis
hujus 78.

e Non tamen proprios, audiatur enim Glanvilla, lib. &. ¢. 5. ¢ No-
tandum est (inquit) quod non potest aliquis in villenagio positus.


584 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


reddat, scilicet, *precium corii sui, in signum quod eo dignus
sit in eternum. § 4. Si quis in occulto filium vel filiam
genuerit et celaverit, si forte occidantur, non est ei de wera
respondendum post mortem, quorum pater non comparuit in
vita.  § 5. °" De inventis et pauperibus et abjectis posi-
tum est, si quis eos occidat, eque si parentes repetentes, wera,
wita, manbota, sicut justum accidencia fecerit, persolvantur, vel
in thaschis vel hujus suggerendis, sicut de *bledstodiis est in-
stitutum, quos parentes sui divites ac domini multa ?sinunt in
progenies egestate mendicos; si pecuniam habebunt, sit domino
cui prebendarii erant, si super terram ejus sit; que omnia for-
ciora erunt, si sine distribucione, vel divisione, vel commissione,
et prelocucione erant ibi. § 6. Si quis a nativitate surdus
et mutus sit, ut sua vel alterius nequeat interrogata confiteri,
emendet pater ejus forisfacta sua. § 7. Insanos et ejusmodi,
maleficos debent parentes sui misericorditer custodire.


’ LXXIX. DE LIBERACIONE FILIOLI 3VEL PATRINI’


§ 1. Qui alterius filiolum vel patrinum occiderit, erga eum
et parentes mortui ‘communiter reus sit, et crescat emendacio


1 beldstotis A. 2sint A. 3 in ms. Lond. et K. desunt.
4in ms. Lond. deest.


libertatem suam propriis denariis suis querere; posset enim tunc a
domino suo, secundum jus et consuetudinem regni, ad villenagium
revocari, quia omnia catalla cujuslibet nativi ita intelliguntur esse in
potestate domini sui, quod propriis denariis suis versus dominum
suum a villenagio se redimere non poterit. Si vero quis extraneus
eum ad liberandum emeret suis nummis, posset quidem perpetuo
versus dominum suum, qui eum vendiderat, se in statu libertatis
tueri.’ Vide tamen Lindenbrog. Glossar. in voce ‘ Redemtionale,’ ubi
redemptionem servi propria pecunia exterarum nationum jurispru-
dentia, saltem veteri, permissum esse reperies.

@ Quod alias ‘hidegild’ antiquitus vocatum. Vide eccles. legum
Cnuti, ¢. 42. et Concil. Berghamsted., (huj. edit. pp. 38, 39.) Concil.
tom. 1. ap. Spelm. p.196. num. 11, 14, 16, (Wilk. tom. 1. p. 61.)
ubi hoc ad 6 sol. estimatur. Summa autem, licet in utroque loco
videatur varia, revera tamen veterum estimatione eadem est, ut in
Glossar. ad fin. operis, in voce ‘ Manca’ plenius docebitur. Lapsus
interim, ni fallor, idem doctiss. eques in Glossar. suo, hidagium et
hidegild veluti synonyma confundens: ‘ Hidagium (inquit) tributum
quod ex singulis hidis colligitur, alias hidegild; vide Geldum.’ Hide-
gild autem illo sensu, quod sciam, nusquam occurrit, quod hic
‘pretium corii’ dictum. Lex Salica, 42. § 2. habet ‘solidos pro dorso
suo reddere,’ quod Lindenbrogio ‘corium et dorsum redimere,’ ne
vapulet, puta.


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 585


secundum weram, sicut manbota secundum dominum. Si
filiolus regis sit, per weram emendetur regi sicut cognacioni.
Si occisor ejusdem parentele sit, remaneat emendacio patrini
sicut et wita domini. § 2. Si quis in nuncium regis eat et
breve ejus deferat, qui eum innocentem occiderit in *miseri-
cordia regis erit; et si commodum aliquod facere promiserat,
hoc camponat. § 8. Qui pacem regis fregerit, quam idem
manu sua dabit alicui, si capiatur, de membris culpa sit.
§ 4, °Y Si quis a vicecomite vel *ita ministro pacem regis
habeat, si infringatur in eo, 'gridbreche sit, et c. sot emendetur,
si ad emendandum venire liceat. § 5. Si quis in ecclesia
faciat homicidium, hoc emendare non possit, sed persequatur
eum omnis qui Deum diligit, nisi forsan eveniat, ut, per aliquod
pacis confugium, rex ei vitam indulgeat, dignis satisfaccionibus
apud ?Deum et homines, sua prius induccione, ut emendare
liceat; postea wera parentibus, manbota domino, wita cui pro-
veniet. Et emendetur infraccio pacis ecclesie, et reconciliacio
perquiratur, secundum dignitatem singulorum. § 6. °Y"" Ma-
tris et capitalis ecclesie *gridbreche est ad minus ‘sicut infrac~
cio pacis regie,’ i. v. lib in Anglorum lege; medie 1. sot, que
est. wita regis; et adhuc minoris, ubi parva parochia est, et
atrium cum sit,’ xxv. sot; et campestris capelle, ubi non sit
atrium, x11. sot et vi. def.


LXXX. DE HOMICIDIO IN CURIA REGIS, EXERCITU,
BURGO, VEL CASTELLO.


§ 1. In domo, vel in curia, vel in burgo, vel castello, vel
exercitu, vel hostico regis, faciat aliquis homicidium, sit in


1 grindebreche ms. Lond. e¢ K. 2Dominum ms. Twysd. 3 grind-
breche ms. Lond. ‘ in ms. Lond. et K. desunt. 5 transit ms. Lond.
et K.


@ Misericordia regis multiplex, gravior autem et levior, pro culpe
qualitate et aliis cireumstanciis. Misericordiam autem regis hoc in
loco intellectam explicatam habe Glanville verbis, lib. 14. ¢.1, ubi,
de capitalis criminis convicto verba faciens, ‘Ex regie (inquit) dis-
pensationis beneficio tam vite quam membrorum suorum ejus pendet
judicium,’ quod Anglo-Saxonibus sic expressum: ‘And yy on cy-
ninger Some hpeden he liye age Se nage: Et sit in arbitrio regis
utrum vitam habeat vel non.’ Misericordia hoc sensu accepta foren-
sibus nostris amerciamentum signat; sic autem dicta, quia cum nulla
certa peena in ea parte jure definita sit, persona censenda judicis re-
linquitur misericordiz, qui majorem vel minorem, pro suo arbitrig,


* alio?


586 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


misericordia regis de pecunia vel membris. § 2. Si in via
regia fiat assultus super aliquem, *forestel est, et c. sot emen-
detur regi,’ si ibi calumpniam habeat, *ut divadietur vel reti-
neatur ibi malefactor, vel si est in socna regis. § 3. Tanta
vero debet esse via ut inibi duo carri sibi possint °ad invicem
obviari, et bubulci de longo stimuli sui possint’ assimulare, et
xvi. milites possint equitare de latere armati. >Et via regia
dicitur que semper aperta est, quam nemo concludere potest
vel avertere cum ‘minis suis, que ducit in civitatem, vel bur-
gum, vel castrum, vel portum °regium. Et unaqueque civitas
tot magistras vias quot magistras portas habet, ad theloneum et
consuetudines insignitas. § 4. Forestel est, si quis ex trans-
verso incurrat, vel in via expectet et assalliat inimicum suum;
set si post eum expectet, vel evocet, ut ille revertatur in eum,
non est forestel, si se defendat. § 5. ¢®Stredbreche c. sot
emendetur. °Stredbreche est, si quis viam frangat concludendo,
vel avertendo, vel fodiendo. § 6. In cujuscunque terra fiat
homicidium, qui socam et sacam suam habeat, si homicida
divadietur ibi vel cravetur, fihtwytam recipiat; si plures inter-
fuerunt cum domino, vel preposito, vel adhuc modo aliquo, qui
jus habeat in eos, si occisus et locus unius domini sint, qui
socnam suam habeat, manbotam et fihtwytam. § 7. °™ Si
quis in domo vel in curia regis fecerit homicidium vel homini-
plagium, de membris componat. Et domum regis vel ’curiam
hoc loco dicimus ubicunque in regione sua sit, cujuscumque
feodum vel mansio sit. Si quis tamen *legitimos coaccionis


1maxime ms. Lond. et K.add. aut K. °K. omittit. 4 pannis
ms. Lond. ruinis ms. Seld. ramis ms. Twysd. et K.  5in ms. Lond.
deest. &Sterbreche K. 7locum Se. curiam K. legitimacionis
vel ms. Lond.


animadversionem in eum exercet. Reus enim in hoc casu Gallice
(unde verba hac) dicitur ‘ amercié,’ z.e. in forensi Latinitate ‘ in
misericordia.’

4 Vide supra c. 12. § 2. ubi, ut et heic, forestal inter placita enu-
meratur emendabilia, scil. c. sol. Quid autem sit forestal, praeter
species ejus heic exhibitas, vide Glossar. ad finem operis.

b Vide LL. Edo. Confess, ¢. 12. et placitum apud Pinendenam apud
clar. Seld. notis ad Eadmer. p. 197. Wilk. Concil. t.1. p. 324.

¢ Recurre ad c.12. § 2. ubi hoc reperies inter placita enumerari
emendabilia, uti et heic, c.sol. Stretbreche autem, quid significet
et unde ductum sit, verba heic immediate sequentia sat plane de-
monstrant.


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 587


testes habeat, vel Dei judicium offerat, quod *se defendendo
fecerit, Dei rectum est ut emendare liceat. § 8. Item qui in
domibus archiepiscoporum, episcoporum, vel comitum, fecerit
homicidium vel hominicedium, sicut causa fuerit, membrorum
1vel pecunialis’ emendacionis reus sit. § 9. Emendacio
autem vel redempcio est juxta culpe meritum et loci consuetu-
dinem; cum enim in omnibus grave sit, gravius tamen est de
>parente domini occiso, de ministro suo, et ante eum: gravius
est hoc effectum, et overseunessa vel multa constituta disfac-
cione plectendum. De thainis vel et baronibus et qui sunt
ejusmodi in overseunessa consistat, nisi amplius interveniat ut
addatur, per pacis fraccionem, per hamsocnam, et similia, vel
si sit homo ejus cujus est domus qui fuerit interfectus, vel per-
cussus, vel quoquo modo afflictus. | § 10. Hamsocna, *quod
domus invasionem Latine sonat, fit pluribus modis, extrinsecus
vel et intrinsecus accidenciis. § 11. Hamsocna’ est, si quis
Salium in sua vel alterius domo cum charaido assaliaverit vel
persequatur, ut portam vel domum sagittet vel lapidet, vel col-
pum ostensibilem undecunque faciat. Hamsocna est, vel ham-
fare, si quis premeditate ad domum eat, ubi suum hostem esse
scit, et ibi eum invadat, si die vel nocte hoc faciat; et qui ali-
quem in molinum vel ovile fugientem prosequitur, hamsocna
judicatur. Si in curia vel domo, sedicione orta, bellum eciam
subsequatur, et quivis alium fugientem in aliam domum infuget,
si ibi duo tecta sint, hamsocna reputetur. § 12. Infitht vel
insocna est quod ab ipsis qui in domo sunt contubernales
agitur; hoc eciam, sicut premisimus, wita emendabitur patri-
familias, 4si questionem habeat querentem vel quesitam.


 pecunia vel us. Zond.  /in ms. Lond. desunt. %in ms. Lond.
deest.


a Vide D. Cowelli Interpretem, verb. ‘Se defendendo.’ Simile
habes postea, c. 87. §6. et de eod. vide etiam c. 83. § 1. et Exodi
C. xxii. ver. 2.

b Parentis vox et hic et alibi harum legum sepius obvia. Quod
stricte aut proprie, ut apud veteres Romanos, accipienda sit haud
sentio ; verum plane (ut verbis utar viri undiquaque doctiss. Isaa.
scil. Casauboni, Comm. in Capitol. p. 134.), quomodo in idiotismo
Gallico, Hispanico etiam et Italico, pro. quibuscunque sanguine vel
affinitate junctis usurpatur ; potest addi, et in feudorum libris, de quo
vide Hotoman. De Verb. Feudal. et Lindenbrog. in voce.

¢ Sensum pete ex ‘Hariraida’ et ‘Herireita’ apud doct. Spelm.
Glossar.

4 i.e. si socnam habeat.’ Vide c. 20. § 1. ubi hee: ‘in socna,’


588 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


LXXXI. °-aDE PACE REGIS DANDA IN !POTACIONE.


§ 1. *In omni potacione, dacioni, vel empcioni, vel gilde,
vel ad quidlibet in hunc modum *preparata, primo pax Dei et
domini inter eos qui convenerint, publica prenunciacione
ponenda est; et rogandum, ut si quis alium ibi quacunque
devitet occasione, si placet, palam faciat, et rectum ei vadietur
competenti termino peragendum, sicut et ibi justum erit. Si
presentem concordiam non admittunt, vel exeat vel recedat.
cujus culpa claruerit ad odium. § 2. 4Si, postquam pax ita.
posita sit,” a combibentibus in domo quid agatur, overseunessa


1 preliis mss. Lond. et Sc. add. 2Non ms. Lond. add.  reparata
os. Lond. et Kk. Si postquam posita sit ita ms. Lond. et K. Si
priusquam pax ita posita sit Se.


id est, ‘in questione.’ Jurisdictionem, ni fallor, signat ‘in querentem
vel queesitum,’ id est, in contuburnalium alterum infith vel insocne
reum.

@ Et titulum et priorem partem capituli tam corrupta et obscura
reperio, ut sensum alterutrius vix assequi possim, nisi LL. Ine, c.6.
respiciant, ubi de rixa inter convivas (‘ decertacio in potacione,’ Jor-
valensi,) et ejus pcena inter alia agitur. De pace, ni fallor, cavetur
hic in domo publici convivii servanda; talem Saxones eala-htir
appellabant, unde nostrum ‘alehouse:’ ‘et pax que dabitur in
ealahus emendetur de homine occiso vi. dimidiis marcis, de vivo
xu. oris;’ ita LL. thelredi, III. apud Venetingum, c.1. Ad ple-
niorem autem hujus capitis intelligentiam quedam de veterum Ger-
manorum (a quibus tum Normanni tum Saxones oriundi) moribus
paulo altius petenda sunt. Audiamus igitur, que de illis ut luculen-
tissime scripsit, Cornelium Tacitum, insignem illum historicum, in
peculiari tractatu de moribus Germanorum: ‘ Diem,’ inquit, ‘noc-
temque continuare potando nulli probrum. Crebre, ut inter vino-
lentos, rixee raro convitiis, seepius caede et vulneribus transiguntur ;
sed et de reconciliandis invicem inimicis et jungendis affinitatibus, et
adsciscendis principibus, de pace denique et bello plerumque in
conviviis consultant, tanquam nullo magis tempore aut ad simplices
cogitationes pateat animus, aut ad magnas incalescat.’ Hoe in parte
et de aliis nationibus tradit Quintil. in Declam. his verbis: ‘ Ut
severa nobis antiquitas tradidit infestos animos placavere mense, et
homines, qui inter se armis atque exercitibus conflixerant, tuti tamen
jacuere media ccene fide.’ Id hodieque durare inter Germanos tes-
tatur vir doctus in libro Anglico (¢ A Discourse concerning the Lord’s
Supper, by R.C.), cujus hee sunt verba: ‘The Germans still use
to conclude of bargains, and ratify friendship between parties, by
drinking together, as appears by that phrase they have— den Frieden
trincken — pacem bibere.’ Potationum hujusmodi queedam, ni fallor,
umbra adhue manet in ‘alis,’ ut vocantur in partibus Angliz occi-
dentalibus et aquilone, nondum exoletis, ubi qaemadmodum etiam in
vigiliis (vulgo ‘ wakes’) convenitur, non solum convivii causa, sed et


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 589


est emendandum domino domus, vel cui proveniet, si *cravatus
et retentus sit ibi, et sit alterius dominii. § 3. ?Quidam,
villani qui sunt, ejusmodi leierwitam, et blodwitam, et hujus-
modi minora *forisfacta, emerunt a dominis suis, vel quoquo-
modo meruerunt 5de suis’ et in suos, quorum fletgefoth vel
overseunessa est xxx. defi; cothseti xv. def; servi ‘v1. dei.
§ 4. Si quis ad arma prosiliat et domum °exfrediet, nec tamen
aliquem percuciat, dimidio forisfacto culpa consistat.


LXXXII. DE ALIQUIBUS INIMICIS AD INVICEM.


§ 1. >In omni causa, si quis inimicum residentem habeat,
non ante inpugnet eum quam °ipsum ter et per bonos testes de
recto requirat, et ei cujus homo est, et, si opus est, justicie que
preerit, ostendat, sive de Anglico sive de Franco causa con-
sistat. § 2. Sivagans homo sit qui forisfecerit, requiratur
tamen de recto ubi eum esse constabit; et consilio ac licencia
7ejus in cujus terra ac socna invenietur, fide, vel sacramento,
vel fidejussoribus astrictus, juste satisfaccioni preparetur. Quod
si per omnia *refragaverit, et id cause, vel temporis vel loco-
rum vel accidencium, sit ut de suo aliquid pro inborgo °reti-
neatur, racione hoc et legitimis testibus fiat, ne deterius inde
aliquid sequatur ; que diligencius advertenda sunt, sicut accu-
satus credibilis erit, et accusacionibus vel detencionibus ad-
quieverit, et sicut ejus esse vel non ejus esse, quod ita retine-
bitur, innotuerit. Et hiis omnibus habundantiori ”formidine
refectum est, an de parentum vel amicorum interfeccione, vel
dampnis corporalibus vel pecunialibus, actitetur. Et si eciam
is in cujus terra fuerit inventus rectum per omnia difforciabit,
non tamen in eos inconsulte quid agatur, set in manu ipsius


1Quid ms. Lond. in ms. Lond. deest. in ms. Lond. desunt.
4v. ms. Lond. diffrodiet ms. Lond. ct K. ‘ipse Se. 7in ms.
Lond. et K. deest. ®refragatus fuerit us. Lond. et K. 9%. sine plegio
ms. Lond, et K.add. in us. Lond. et K. deest.


ut jurgia, lites, et controversie inter vicinos ort# audiantur et com-
ponantur. Vide Carzi notitiam Cornubie, p.68, et Chauceri inter-
pretem, in voce ¢ Vigils.’

8 Vide scholia ad c.20.

> Hoc capitulum, ut videtur, fundatur in LL. Alfredi Regis ce. 49,
quod sic se habet: ‘eac pe beobad,’ &c., 7.e. (ut habetur apud Jor-
valensem) ‘etiam instituimus, ut homo qui inimicum suum residentem
scit non autem [ante] impugnet eum quam sibi rectum postulet.’


* concubi-
tum ?


590 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


cravetur, et principi vel ministro suo demonstretur. § 3. Et
unicuique licet domino suo sine wita subvenire, si quis assaliet
eum, et in omnibus legitimis obedire, preterquam in prodicione,
7furto, murdro, et deinceps similibus, que nullo prorsus ingenio
fieri concessa sunt, et legibus infamantur. § 4. Ad eundem
modum dominus consilio pariter et auxilio debet, et modis
omnibus potest, sine forisfacto, homini suo, *in suis opportu-
nitatibus,’ subvenire. § 5. Et quotcunque dominos quis
habeat, vel Squantumeunque de aliis teneat, ei plus debet’” cui
ligius est, in omni honesto, utili, et necessario, ad facultatem,
ad sanitatem, ad °animam, et’ ejus residens esse debet, et in
bello secum esse, et ejus manbota est, si occidatur. § 6. Et
in quibusdam potest dominus homini suo warantus esse, si pre-
cepto suo verberaverit, vel alio modo ‘contristaverit aliquem,
qui pertineat *vel non pertineat” ad eum. In quibusdam vero
non poterit. § 7. Similiter conceditur, ut homo cum ger-
mano suo cognato communicet in omni necessario, = § 8. Si-
militer pugnare potest homo contra eum quem cum desponsata
Ssibi uxore, post secundam et terciam prohibicionem, clausis
hostiis, et sub una coopertura inveniet; sive cum filia sua quam
de sponsata genuerit, sive cum sorore sua que de sponsata
sit, sive cum matre sua, que patri suo fuerit desponsata.
§ 9. Pecunialis autem emendacio legibus inventa est, si despon-
sata femina fornicetur, et cyrlisca, vel syxhinda, vel twelfhinda
sit, et corporalis disfaccio persistentibus instituta. Pensandum
autem est per visum accusantibus, visum *concubitus propen-
sius advertendum, ut scilicet ipsas coeuncium naturas viderint
commisceri.


LXXXIII. 7QUOD UNICUIQUE LICET SE DEFENDERE
IN QUOLIBET NEGOCIO, PRETERQUAM CONTRA
DOMINUM SUUM/


§ 1. Unicuique licet se defendere, si quis eum assaliat, in
omni loco vel negocio, *excepto contra dominum, quem tole-


lin ms. Lond. et K. deest.  oportunibus ms. Lond. et K. Yin
us. Lond. desunt. 4constrictaverit Sc. contristaverit mss. Seld. Lond.
Twysd. et K. 5/in us. Lond. desunt. ‘sua ms. Lond. et K. 7/Quod
unicuique liceat in negotio se defendere contra dominum suum.
ms. Lond.


4 Videantur omnino c. 43. § 8. et ¢.'75. §1.; secus Glanvilla, lib. 9. c.1.


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 591


randum, non occidendum, jugiter ac salubriter frequentamus
advertendum. Si quis, juxta quod prediximus, in hostem suum
incidat vel ‘vagipalantem, vel alium qui juste requisitus rectum
per omnia denegaverit, si tamen se reddiderit, et pacem ac
misericordiam vel invitus quesierit, non occidatur, set ad satis-
faccionem a reperiente custodiatur xxx. noctes, et parentibus et
amicis suis sepius interim offeratur. § 2. Si pax in terra sit,
consilio principis et ministrorum ejus agatur in quibuscumque
causis rectum difforciabitur legitime perquisitum. §3. Qui
rectum offerentem occiderit, vel afflixerit in aliquo, emendet
witam, vel vulnus, vel denique sicut egerit, et quicquid adversus
eum habebat forisfaciat. § 4. Et qui aliquem quocunque
modo perimit, videat ne weilref faciat. Weilref dicimus, si quis
mortuum refabit armis, ?aut vestibus,’ aut prorsus aliquibus,
aut tumulatum aut tumulandum. § 5. Et si quis corpus in
terra, vel noffo, vel petra, sub pyramide vel structura qualibet
positum, sceleratus infamacionibus effodere vel exspoliare pre-
sumpserit, wargus habeatur. § 6. Si quis in vindictam vel
in se defendendo occidat aliquem, nichil sibi de mortui rebus
aliquis usurpet, non equum, non galeam, vel gladium, vel pecu-
niam prorsus aliquam; set ipsum corpus solito defunctorum
more componat, caput ad Soccidens, pedes ad oriens versum,
super clipeum si habeat; et lanceam suam figat, et arma circum-
mittat, et equum ‘adregniet; et Sadeat proximam villam, ®et
cui prius obviaverit denunciet, et eciam socnam habenti, quod
probari denique vel defendi possit contra parentes vel consocios
ejus. § 7. Si inter aliquos de rebus repentinis, verborum
dicacitate vel eventus aliqua procacitate, dissensio consurgat, ex
quo aliquis eorum gladium ’scogilatum evaginat, non est expec-
tandum eciam ut percuciat.


LXXXIV.. DE VERBERACIONE.


°*! In quibusdam locis, sicut diximus, reus est qui verberat
et qui verberatur, ut nec malefaciens inpunitate superbiat, nec
contumeliatus fedis emendacionibus insolescat. Ubi unus non
vult duo non certant; et omnis unlaga frater est alterius; et qui
respondet stulto juxta stulticiam suam similis est ejus.


1 vapalentem ms. Lond. % in ms. Lond. et K. desunt. 3K. et hic et
loco prope sequenti oriens legit. 4arreniet ms. Lond.et K. Sad K.
Svel K. 7sconigatum ms. Lond. et K.


592 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


LXXXV. QUOD QUIVIS LIBERARET EUM QUEM IN
MALIS DUXERIT.


§ 1. Qui ad ?7dampnum vel malum aliquem duxerit, liberet
eum advocacione, vel emendacione, vel participacione.
§ 2. Non omnes cause omnibus suo possunt interventu suffra-
gari; que vero possunt vel non possunt, promptum est inveniri
a causa, a persona: capitales enim et criminales cause ita pre-
latis, et subditis, et modis omnibus, *interdicte sunt,’ ut non
solum auctor ipse sceleris puniendus sit, set quicunque dando,
recipiendo, defendendo, vel casu, conscius fuerit, aut consilio
vel consentaneus in aliquo, simili pene subjaceat; et nemo
possit super hiis alterius inde warantus esse. § 3. Qui ad
occidendum aliquem innoxium redbana vel dedbana fuerit, con-
victus noxe componat inde, solus vel cum aliis. § 4. Si
servus cum liberis homicidium faciat, totum liberis imputetur ;
et item solus furatur, ®qui cum servo furatur;’ si negetur,
werelada fiat.


LXXXVI. “" NE QUIS VINDICETUR DE SUO HOMINE
SINE LEGE.


§ 1. Omni domino liceat conqueri hominibus suis et amicis,
si quis ei malefaciat, set non percipere sine lege vindictam.
§ 2. Nec debet requiri a domino, si homo suus *misfaciat, sine
posse vel velle suo, maxime si nunquam deinceps ad eum
redeat, et hoc in verum mittere possit. § 3. Et ubi forte
plures fuerint, et eorum quidam forisfaciant, non est eis impu-
tandum, qui tenuerint viam suam et recedent ab illis, si per
omnia se allegient, quod nec consilium eorum vel auxilium sit
in forcia ipsa.


LXXXVII. DE DELICTO EX ARMIS ACCOMMODATIS.


§ 1. %*"™ Qui ad occidendum aliquem arma sua prestiterit,
cum occisore de occisi persolucione conferre debebit, et de sua


lin us. Lond. et K. deest. 2/in ms. Lond. et K. desunt. 3 satisfaciat
ms. Lond.


* Td est, ut conjicio, cum vocabitur ab eo quem ad malum duxerit
in warantum, ut forensibus dicitur. Vide Spelm. Glossar. in voce
‘ Advocatio,’ et hic statim: ‘ Et non possit super his alterius inde
warantus esse.’


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 593


parte weregildi conveniat ei. Qui gladium prestiterit, terciam
partem weregildi reddat; qui lanceam prestiterit, dimidiam ;
qui commodaverit equum, totum reddat: inveritare tamen liceat
arma sua commodanti, quod nulla mali suspicione vel inten-
cione commodaverit, si possit et velit. § 2. %' Si quis ad
hostium alicujus lanceam suam ponat, dum ad colloquendum vel
ad quod velit agendum introeat, vel quevis arma ‘reclinet ubi
quiete jacerent, si permitterentur, et arreptis armis hujusmodi
dampnum ingeratur, justum est qui dampnum inde fecerit
dampnum illud emendet ; et cujus arma fuerant, si ita proce-
dat, emundet se, quod nec velle, nec posse, nec consilio, nec
testimonio ejus extiterit; et Dei rectum est, ut pacem habeat;
et videat qui misfecit, ut per omnia, secundum legem, emendet.
Observet autem ille cujus arma erant, ut ea non recipiat ante-
quam in omni calumpnia munda sint. § 3. °*" Si quelibet
arma politori vel emundatori commissa sint ad purgandum, vel
cuilibet ad servandum, et de subito-arripiantur ad aliquid male
agendum, justum est, cui absoluta commissa sunt absoluta resti-
tuat, nisi forte custodiam eorum diffinitis prelocucionibus
abdicarat. Si et ipse super hiis accusetur consciencie vel
possibilitatis in aliquo, perneget sicut rectum sit. § 4. °“*Y" Si
quis occidatur *in hlope,’ reddat interfector weram parentibus
et manbotam domino, et omnes qui interfuerunt *hlopbotam,
sicut emendent *‘*twihindeman xxx. sol, sixhinde Lx. sol,
twelfhinde cxx. sol. Manbota, secundum legem; a persona
interfecti, secundum weram,’ pocius accipiebatur, quam per
overseunessam domini vel personam. § 5. > Overseunessa
regis est, ut diximus, xx. man@, episcopi et comitis x. mang,
baronis vel thaini v. mance, in Westsexa, que caput regni est
et legum, ad quam recurrendum est in omni dissidencia con-


1 redimet mus. Lond. et K. 2% cum lope ms. Lond. et K. 3blodbotam
ms. Lond. et K. 4twifhindeman xxx. soutz, sexhindeman xt. sot,
twelfhindeman ct. sot, manbota secundum legem interfecti, aut per-
sonz, secundum weram, Sc. ms. Lond. et K.


2 Locus in hance forte sententiam supplendus: ‘ sicut qui occiditur
natus est,’ (vel ‘sicuti fuerit perempti corporis est estimatio’) ‘emen-
dent.’ Vide LL. Ina, c. 34.

b Videlicet, c. 35. § 1. et 53. §1.; adde c. 34. § 2. ubi 10 sot
corrige 60 sol, que quidem summa. respondet 10 mancis hic et ¢. 35,
comiti overseunesse assignatis, ut in Glossario plenius docebitur, in
voce ‘Manca.’


594 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


tingencium. § 6. Si quis autem judicio ferri calidi, vel bello,
vel testibus legitimis vel consacramentalibus adhibitis, vel
ydoneo legis examine, monstrare possit, quod assalliatus fuerit,
quod coactus et se defendente fecerit homicidium, dignis satis-
faccionibus hoc monstrare liceat, et rectum inde sit; quia, sicut
prediximus, multis modis potest homo weram suam forisfacere,
ut per hamsocnam, "per homicidium’ in ecclesia, per Dei rec-
tum difforciatum, per furtum, per murdrum, per injustum
assultum, ?vel homicidium, et deinceps similium, de quibus
wera parentibus, manbota domino, et wita *justiciis remanet.
§ 7. Si cohors aliquem occidat, et non sciatur quis nominatim
hoc fecerit, accusentur quotquot ibi esse constiterit, et com-
muniter weram occisi conjectent, et witam et manbotam qualis
were pertinebit.  § 8. Qui in collegio vel societate fuerit ubi
aliquis occidatur, acquietet se quod eum non percussit, et ita
quartam partem composicionis ejus solvat, sive plures sive
pauciores plagas, vel quotcunque vel qualescunque habeat, vite
retractacione vel mortis simplicitate discretas. § 9. Si quis
in conventiculo aliquo convivii, vel potacionis, vel hujusmodi,
fuerit occisus, defendant se vel emendent quibus fuerit inputa-
tum. § 10. *Secundum legem Saligam, si in convivio ubi
mu. vel y. fuerint homines unus ex ipsis fuerit interfectus, illi
qui remanent aut unum convictum reddant, aut omnes mortis
illius composicionem conjectent; que lex usque ad vir. ‘qui
fuerint in convivio illo *convenit observari.” Si ®vero in con-
vivio illo plus quam vu. fuerint, non omnes teneantur obnoxii,
set quibus fuerit inputatum illi secundum legem componant.
§ 11. Si quis foris casam, ’sive iter agens sive in agro positus,
a contubernio fuerit occisus, et 111. vel amplius habuerit plagas,
ur. de eodem contubernio, qui convicti fuerint, sigillatim mortis
illius composicionem componant, et 111. alii de ipso contubernio
xxx. sol; unusquisque illorum culpabilis judicetur; et tres
adhuc alii de ipso contubernio singuli xv. sot culpa judicetur.


Vin ms. Lond. et K.desunt. per ms. Lond. et HK. 3justius Se.
justiciis K.  4si us. Lond. et K. “in ms. Lond. et K. desunt.
Sin ms. Lond. et K. deest. 7 si ms. Lond. et K.


* De lege Salica generatim accepta vide Spelm. Synopsin Legum
Antiquarum in Glossar., verbo ‘Lex.’ Hee autem legem Salicam
specialiter contingentia, scil. ab his verbis, ‘si in convivio,’ ad finem
usque capitis expresse leguntur et extant in lege Salica, tit. 45. § 1,
2, 3.


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 595


LXXXVIII DE COMMISSIONE ARMORUM QUIBUS
ALIQUIS OCCIDITUR.


§ 1. Si quis in arma cujusquam irruat vel incidat, ut inde
moriatur, et ejus solius culpa compareat, ita sit; tamen ille
cujus arma erant non indiscrete ea suscipiat.  § 2. Tractan-
dum vero est, in agendis hujusmodi, de modo portacionis vel
posicionis 7armorum, de loco posicionis,’ de eo qui posuit, quid
quomodo contigerit. § 3. Si quis lanceam ferat super hume-
rum, et inde quis occidatur, reddatur precio nativitatis ejus
sine wita. Si acumen *lancee ante oculos portitoris sit, weram
mortui reddat; et si possibilitatis accusetur in eo, pernegare
studeat, secundum precium wite, et ita remaneat. Si vero
cuspis et acies lancee pari sustentacione respondeant, sine culpa
sit  §4. Si quis, in defensione sua, lanceam, vel gladium,
vel arma quelibet, contra hostem suum extendat, et ille, dira
nocendi cupiditate cecatus, irruat, sibi imputet quicquid habeat.
§ 5. Si quis alium fugiens, ut ira decertancium vel causa per-
sequencium sepius impetravit, *precipicio vel “casu prosequen-
cium’ aliquo, moriatur, reddat eum qui injuste profugabat,
nec sibi mortem intulisse nec egilde jacuisse videatur. § 6. Si
quis in ludo sagittandi vel alicujus exercicii, jaculo vel hujus-
modi casu aliquem occidat, reddat eum; legis enim est, qui
inscienter peccat scienter emendet, Misericordie tamen et
amori tanto propior erga parentes esse debet, quanto genus
humanum fortune sevientis asperitatibus, ]ugubri miseroque
omnium fletu, novimus egrotare. § 7. Si quis alterius
puerum, qui vel ei commissus sit ad educandum vel docendum,
Soccidat, vel dormiens opprimat, nichilominus reddat quam si
virum adultum occidisset. § 8. Nemo suum ipsius infantem
reddere cogatur quem voluntarie non occidit, nec emendacione
pecuniali nec diffaccione corporali. § 9. Qui aliquem roga-
verit ut secum in opus suum eat, et interim occidatur a suis
Svel ejus’ inimicis, reddat eum cujus hortatu et gracia in locum
mortis venerit, et consciencie vel consensus in aliquo se ac-
quietet, si fuerit accusatus, et hoc werelada. Si autem inveri-
tare possit, quod non rogatus cum eo venerit, si qui inimici sui
perimant eum, qui nec ei consanguinitate vel affinitate 7junctus


V in Ms. Lond. et K. desunt. in ms. Lond. et K. deest. 3 precipio
Se. precipicio K. “” K. add. in us. Lond. et KE. deest. % in
us. Lond. et K.desunt. 7 vinctus K.


nan oO


* semper ?


* 2, unfah.


596 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


sit, justum est, ut sicut peccaverint luant, et in eos vindicetur
a parentibus et dominis, aut inde comportant; quia non est
*super ‘vindicandum in hominibus vel servientibus alicujus.
§ 10. Et unicuique licet domino suo sine wita succurrere, si
quis assalliet eum, sicut prediximus; respectus tamen habeatur
in omnibus. § 11. Si quis cum inimico suo restitit contra
legem, si alicui mortem vel vulnus inflixit, vel aliquid excitavit,
ut exigentibus meritis mors secuta videatur, non est eciam in
quibuscumque parentibus, vel paternis vel maternis, occiden-
tibus vel occisis, indiscrete judicandum; quia, in omni compo-
sicione homicidii, due partes referuntur ad paternam cognacio-
nem, tercia ad maternam; et alia est wera vel vindicta thaini,
alia villani, sicut prediximus: qui secus fecerint, querant
parentes mortui were vel vindicte superplus, tam in generositate
quam in propinquiori pertinencia. § 12. Scriptum est in
legibus regis Edmundi: ‘ Michi valde displicent et nobis omni-
bus injuste et multiplices pugne que inter nos ipsos fuerint,
unde diximus: Si quis post hee hominem occidat, ipse sibi
portet homicidii *faidiam, nisi amicorum auxilio intra xu.
menses persolvat pleno weregildo, sit natus sicut sit, Si eum
tune cognacio sua deserat, et pro eo gildare nolit, tune volo, ut
omnis illa cognacio sit **hundfah, preter solum malefactorem,
si ei deinceps nec -victum det nec pacem. Si quis cognacionis
ejus postea firmet eum, reus sit omnium que ‘habebit erga
regem, et portet faccionem erga cognacionem; quia eum antea
reprobavit. Si ex alia cognacione quis vindictam *faciat in
alium aliquem, preter in ipsum malefactorem, sit inimicus regis
et omnium amicorum ejus.’ § 138. %""" Si quis, Spropter
faidiam’ vel causam aliquam, de parentela se velit tollere, et
eam forisjuraverit, et de societate, et hereditate, et tota illius
se racione separet; si postea aliquis de parentibus suis abjuratis
moriatur vel occidatur, nichil ad eum de hereditate vel compo-
sicione pertineat; si autem ipse moriatur vel occidatur, here-
ditas vel composicio filiis suis vel dominis’ juste proveniat.
§ 14. Et nemo forisfaciat feudum suum legitimis heredibus suis,
nisi propter feloniam vel reddicionem spontaneam. “™ Et
nulli liceat forismittere hereditatem suam de parentela sua,


Vhiis judicandum ms. ond. ?fauliam ms. Lond. et K. 3 infrangh
Se. hundfah ms. Lond. et K. ‘4habeat ms. Lond. et K. * capiat
ms. Lond. et K. % per faldiam ms. Lond. et K. 7suis ms. Lond. et
K. add.


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 597


dacione vel vendicione, sicut diximus; maxime si parentela
eontradicat, et pecuniam suam velit in ea mittere. § 15. Et
si quis, in necessitate mortali, vel infirmitate, vel egestate,
supervacue deserat patrem vel 'parentem suum,’ et aliquis
propinquus vel extraneus in tanto vite necessario succurret ei,
et hereditet eum in fine, cum testibus, et filium sibi constituat,
de feodo vel alio conquisito, sapientum hoc inter *heredipetas
judicio terminetur, sicut acciderit.  § 16. Si quis de vulnere
quod alicui fecerit componere velit, ita componat ut precium
vulneris in precio were numeretur, si homo mortuus sit.
§ 17. “* Et in omni weregildo melius est ut parentes homicide
pacem simul *faciant quam singillatim. § 18. Et si plures
aliqui faciant homicidium quorum crocca ‘towallet, si velint,
5simul componant; si nolint,” reddat unusquisque pro se
secundam vel terciam vel quartam partem; vel, secundum
Squotquot fuerint were et wite partes, restituant cui proveniet,
prelacione, recessione, retencione, vel cravacione. § 19. De
coacto ad homicidium wita juste remanebit: de eo pariter qui
se vindicabit.  § 20. De contribulibus et parentibus rema-
neat emendacio ’patrini, sicut manbota domini: et rectum
necesse est fieri parentibus interfecti per justiciam, sive possit
vel non possit eorum wera, tolerari.


LXXXIX. QUI ALIQUEM DE PROPINQUIS OCCIDERIT.


§ 1. * Si quis de libertate sua interpellatus fuerit, et, timens
ne in servicium cadat, aliquem de propinquis suis, per quem
in servicium cadere timet, occiderit, scilicet, patrem aut


V parentelem suam K. Zheredipedum ms. Lond. %habeant ms.
Lond. et K. 4cowellet Sc. towallet K. in ms. Lond. desunt.
6 quod Se. quotquot mss. Lond. Seld. Twysd. et K. 7paterni ms.
Lond.


@ Locum hunc indigitat doct. Spelm. in Synopsi LL. Antiqu. in
Glossar. Loci autem situm vel judicia legis Salicze qu remittit
legislator noster aliis, ut videtur, inquirenda reliquit; occurrit, ni
fallor, inter legis Salice capitula per Carolum Magnum addita, de
quibus in Legum Antiquarum codice per Lindenbrog. p. 351, (Pertz,
Legg. to. 1. p.113) ubi (scil. § 5, 7, 8.) totum hoc capitulum fere
verbatim extat. In majorem fidem depromere non pigebit: ‘§V. Si
quis de libertate sua fuerit interpellatus, et timens ne in servitium
cadat, aliquem de propinquis suis, per quem se in servitium casurum
timens occiderit, id est, patrem, matrem, patruelem, avunculum, vel
quamlibet hujusmodi propinquitatis personam, ipse qui hoc perpe-


598 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


niatrem, patruelem vel avunculum, vel quamlibet hujus propin-
quitatis personam, ipse qui hoc fecerit, secundum legem Sali-
gam, moriatur, et agnacio ejus et consanguinitas in servicium
cadat; et si neget quod eum occiderit, ad 1x. vomeres ignitos
examinandus accedat. § 2. Si quis, per cartam ingenuitatis
a domino suo, Jegitimam est libertatem consecutus, liber per-
maneat. Si vero aliquis eum injuste cogat inservire, et ille,
per cartam ingenuitatis sue, ostendat et convincat adversarium ;
ipse, qui hoc attemptavit, 1multam que in carta scripta est sol-
vere cogatur. Si vero non compareat carta, set ab illo qui
inservire vult disfacta sit, weregildus ejus componat, duas
partes illi quem inservire voluerit, terciam regi, et iterum, per
preceptum regis, libertatem ipsam componat. § 3. Liber
qui se vadii loco in alterius potestate commiserit, et ibi consti-
tutus *dampnum aliquod cuilibet fecerit, qui eum in locum
vadii suscepit aut’ dampnum solvat, aut hominem in mallo
productum dimittat, perdens ‘simul debitum, propter quod
eum in vadio suscepit; et qui dampnum fecit, dimissus, juxta
qualitatem culpe, cogatur emendare. Si vero *liberam femi-
nam habuit, et filios interim dum in pignore est procreavit,
liberi permaneant.


lin secta us. Lond. et K. 2” uss. Seld. Lond. Twysd. et K. add.
3suum ms. Lond.et K. 4libera Se.


traverit moriatur, agnatio vero et consanguinitas ejus in servitium
cadat. Et si negaverit se illum occidisse, ad novem vomeres ignitos
judicio Dek examinandus, accedat. § VII. Si quis per cartam in-
genuitatis a domino suo legitime libertatem est consecutus, liber
permaneat. Si vero aliquis eum injuste inservire tentaverit, et ille
cartam ingenuitatis suz ostenderit, et adversarium se inservire velle
comprobaverit, ille qui hoc tentavit multam, que in carta descripta
est, solvere cogatur. Si vero carta non paruerit, sed jam ab illo
qui eum inservire voluerit disfacta est, weregildum ejus componat,
duas partes illi quem inservire voluerit, tertiam regi; et ille iterum
per preeceptum regis libertatem suam conquirat. § VIII. Liber qui
se loco wadii in alterius potestate commiserit, ibique constitutus
damnum aliquod cuilibet fecerit, qui eum in loco wadii suscepit,
aut damnum solvat, aut hominem in mallo productum dimittat,
perdens simul debitum propter quod eum in wadio suscepit; et qui
damnum fecit, dimissus juxta qualitatem regi cogatur emendare. Si
vero liberam fominam habuerit, usque dum in pignus extiterit, et
filios habuerint, liberi permaneant.’ Vide LL. Longobard. 1. 2. tit. 35.
c.10, ubi que heic secundo locorum (scil. § 7.) proferuntur, totidem
verbis occurrunt. Quid autem sit ‘ad novem vomeres ignitos ex-
aminatio’ docetur Glossar. et Lindenbrog. et Spelin. verb. ‘ Judicium
Dei.’


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 599


XC. 1 SI QUIS VOLENS ALIQUOS INTER SE DIMICANTES
DIVIDAT/


§ 1. ?Si quis, dum inter se dimicantes dividere satagit, ex
industria vel incuria decertancium, occidatur innocens, reddat
eum qui occidit, quamvis rixam non incepit. § 2. Si quis
arcu vel balista de subitanti, vel pedico ad lupos vel ad aliud
2eapiendum posito, dampnum vel malum aliquod recipiat, solvat
qui posuit: inde pensandum de eo cui hoe licuit, an qui lesus
est herbagium vel lignagium, vel causam aliquam in nemus
habeat, unde jure debeat premoneri. § 3. °Si quis puteum
vel cisternam fodiat, vel factam disclaudat, et aliquid incidat ut
mortem vel debilitatem incurrat, eque bonum restituat, mor-
tuum *vero vel debile ad se recipiat. § 4. Quod si in sepem
animal inpalaverit, et ipsa sepes mentonalis *non fuerit, domi-
nus sepis interfeccionis seu debilitatis reus judicetur. Si autem
virga deforis sepem incaute missa sit, et aliquid interfecerit,
secundum ‘“legem Ribuariorum, solvatur; si autem de intus
sepem in virga se inpalaverit, non est solvendum. § 5. Si


in ms. Lond. desunt. 2in ms. Lond. et K. deest. 3si_ A


® Simile habetur in LL. Wisigoth. 1. 6. tit. 5. c.5. his verbis:
‘ Si, exorta cade, ad faciendam pacem quicunque ingenuus advenerit,
et eum percussione litis mori contigerit, atque ille qui percussit, aut
suo sacramento aut testibus, numero et dignitate idoneis, approbare
potuerit, quod hoc ut fieret voluntatis ejus non fuit, quia percussor
nec percutere nec occidere voluit, libram tantum auri parentibus
persolvat occisi. Similiter et qualecunque vulnus tali casu fieri
provenerit, tertiam partem compositionis qui percussit exsolvat ; quia
mors ejus inulta esse non debet, qui pacis premium ut conferret:
advenit.’

b Omnino convenit LL. Wisigoth. 1. 8. tit. 4. c. 23, sed et LL. Bur-
gund, tit, 46.

¢ Simile habetur in Capitular. Car. et Lud. Impp. 1.6. c. 16, his
verbis: ‘ Si quis aperuerit cisternam et foderit et non operuerit eam,
cecideritque bos vel asinus in eam, dominus cisterne reddat pretium
jumentorum; quod autem mortuum est ipsius erit.’

4 De qua lege Ripuariorum vide Spelm. Synops. LL. Antiqu. in
Glossar. Quz autem hic tradita, cum immediate preecedentibus et
subsequentibus, extant in LL. Ripuar. tit. 70. § 2, 3,4, 5. Locum
integrum exhibere non indignum censui, quo errata heic facilius
valeant emendari: ‘§ II. Si quis autem fossam vel puteum fecerit,
seu pedicam vel balistam incaute posuerit, et ibidem hominem vel
pecus debilitaverit vel interfecerit, omni composicione, sicut lex con-
tinet Ripuaria, culpabilis judicetur; aut si negaverit, cum legitimo
numero juret. § III, Quod si in sepem animal impalaverit, et ipsa


600 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


quis in sepem vel in quodlibet periculum res alienas invitus
minaverit, et ibidem interfecte vel debilitate fuerint, similes
restituat, aut cum vi. juret quod hoc non fecisset. § 6. Si
lignum in communi opere aliquem occidat, reddatur lignum
parentibus interfecti, ut infra xxx. noctes de terra educatur,
vel habeat cujus est nemus. Idem de quolibet manufictili
dicimus. Si homo taliter sit interfectus, non solvatur, nisi forte
quis auctorem interfeccionis in usus proprios assumpserit, et
tunc absque fredo culpa judicetur. Distancia vero sit, si quis
eum ad opus suum rogaverit, et si sponte advenerit; et item,
si ad precium vel graciam operetur; et si quis casu decidat,
vel ab aliquo dejiciatur; differt eciam si commune sit opus
eorum domini, vel commune operancium, vel alicujus proprium.
§ 7. ?Si homo cadat ab arbore 'vel quolibet mechanico super
aliquem,’ ut inde moriatur vel debilitetur; si certificare valeat,
quod amplius non potuit, *antiquis institucionibus habeatur
innoxius; vel si quis, obstinata mente, contra omnium estima-
cionem, vindicare vel *weram exigere, presumpserit, si placet,
ascendat, et illum similiter obruat. § 8. Si alicujus manus
aberraverit, ut alium occidere volens alium perimat, nichilomi-
nus eum solvat. § 9. *** Qui aliquem exarmaverit injuste,
halsfangium ejus emendet; si ligaverit, dimidiam weram.
§ 10. Si quis injuste exarmatus ab aliquo mortem vel malum
interim incurrat, componat hoc qui eum exarmavit. §11. Sunt
eciam infortuniorum genera quamplurima casu magis quam
consilio contingencia, et misericordie pocius quam judicio com-
mittenda; legis enim est, qui inscienter peccat scienter emen-
det, et qui bpecht ungepaldey bece gepalder. Et in quibus
non potest homo legitime jurare, quod per eum non fuerit
aliquis vite remotior morti propinquior, digne componat, sicut
factum sit; ex quibus sunt: Si quis alii missione in missatico


1’ in ms. Lond. et K. desunt. aliquis ms. Lond. et K. 3in ms. Lond.
et K. deest.


sepes mentonalis non fuerit, dominus sepis interfeetionis seu debili-
tatis reus judicetur; aut, si negaverit, cum legitimo numero juret.
§ IV. Si autem virga de foris sepe incaute missa fuerit, et aliquid
interfecerit, solvatur ; si autem de intus sepem se in virgam impala-
verit, non est solvendum. § V. Quod si quis in sepem vel in quo-
cunque libet periculo res alienas invitas minaverit, et ibidem inter-
fecte vel debilitate fuerint, similes restituat, aut cum vi. juret, quod
hoc non fecisset. Vide etiam LL. Saxonum, c. 11, 12.
@ Vide Constit. Sicul. in Cod. LL. Antiqu. lib. 3. tit. 56.


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 601


causa mortis sit; si quis pro quolibet mittat, et in veniendo
occidatur; si quis mortem 'incidat ab aliquo vocatus; *si
alicujus arma perimant aliquem, ibidem posita ab eo cujus
erant; si quis ea dejecerit, sive occisus sive alius, et noceant;
si quis vocatus,’ in alicujus alicubi reposita arma transfigatur ;
?si quis aliquem terreat vel impellat ut, equo vel aliunde cadens,
malum habeat; si quis ad spectaculum fere vel Sinsani ductus,
aliquid ‘paciatur ab eis; si quis equum vel aliud cuiquam
commendat, et inde malum ei veniat; si alicujus Sequus, ab
aliquo stimulatus vel Ysubcaudatus, quemlibet percuciat. In
hiis et similibus, °ubi homo aliud intendit et aliud evenit, ubi
opus accusatur non voluntas, venialem pocius 7emendacionem
et honorificenciam judices statuant, sicut acciderit.


XCI. “*'-DE SOLUCIONE 8 FRANCIGENE.


§1. °Si quis Francigena, vel Normannus, vel denique
transmarinus, occidatur, et tantis res calamitatibus involuta
sit, ut ad murdrum pertrahatur, et interfector ignoretur, vel
denique fugiat, ut infra vi.dies justicie regis non reddatur,
ad quod justum fuerit perferendum, ‘xtvi. maré argenti per-
solvantur; et sint xL. marce regis, v1. parentum interfecti. Si
parentes secundum legem repetentes vel probantes non habeat,
sint illius qui murdrum abarnaverit: ubi autem inventum
fuerit, illic per legem requirendum est, et ejus persolucionem
vadiare debet aldremannus hundreti, et in cujus terra jacebit;


linscidat Se. incidat K. 2/in ms. Lond. et K. desunt. 3visum
as. Lond. et K. 4prestatur ms. Lond. et K. ‘5in ms. Lond. et K.
deest. nisi ms. Lond. et K. 7n. dacionem Sc. 8 murdri Se.
Francigena ms. Lond.


@ Huic simile videtur Longobardorum ‘merworphin,’ de quo in
eorum lege, tit. 36. 1.4. ductum (inquit Lindenbrogius) a ‘mer’ equa
et ‘ werphen’ dejicere.

> Per ‘subcaudatus’ heic intelligo equum ex quovis molesto caudze
ipsius supposito ad calcitrandum irritatum.

¢ Huc tendit LL. Guiliel. Primi, I. c.22., de quo supra ‘ Qui
Franceis ocist,’ sed et LL. ejusd. regis, II.1. Hac autem de re vide
et plura supra c. 13. §2, 75. § 6, et infra c. prox. sequ. § 6, 9. et seq.
et schol. ibidem,

4 Similiter harum legum c. 13. § 2. legum etiam Edo. Confess.
ce. 15. et LL. Guiliel. 11. c. 1. Aliter tamen Bracton. vide, Lxvi.
maré; forte autem sic literis 1 et x transpositis,


602 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


discrete tamen in omnibus, juxta quod acciderit. §2. 4Si
murdrum in domo, vel in curia, vel ‘claustura inveniatur,
tum, ad premissam xL. et vil. marcarum reddicionem, per-
venietur primo quicquid in ipso manerio est, in annona viridi
et sicca, in animalibus, et in omnibus omnino. Primo vendatur
usque ad olera; et si ad xL. et v1. maré habundat, ?nichil
aliunde exigitur; si quid vero defuerit, in hundreto com-
muniter suppleatur.’ § 3. Si eciam manerium in quo
murdrum °invenietur de dominio et firma regis sit, et rex ita
preceperit, per totum hundretum inde componendum erit.
§4. Si murdrum/ in campis patentibus et passim accessibilibus,
inveniatur, a toto hundreto communiter, non solum ab eo
cujus terra est, suppleatur; si in divisis accidat, utrunque
pertranseat; si in via regia sit, inde componat cui terra
adjacebit.


XCII. DE SOLUCIONE MURDRI.


§-1. Si quis vulneratus in alium hundretum eat et ibi


moriatur, et ad murdrum veniat, illic persolvatur. §2. Si
murdrum ab eo loco ubi fuerit inventum alias deportetur,
referri cogatur cum overseunessa, et ibi solvatur. §3. Qui


murdrum fecerit, si capiatur, debet reddi justicie regis, et
talis de quo justicia fieri possit, ‘non videlicet occisus aut
Sdisfactus, >°nisi fugiat aut repugnet, et aliter nequeat retineri;
et hoc intra 7vi1. dies, a die qua prius inventum est. Si
mortuus sit interim naturali morte sua, ostendant, et advocent
ad tumulum ejus, si parentes vel amantes non habeat, qui
Seum innoxiare °velint; et emendetur de pecunia illius et hun-
dreti, sicut fieret in vivente’ non habito. Si a parentibus
murdriti sit ante reddicionem interfectus, ut justiciabilis reddi
nequeat, vel si post vit. dies habeatur, nichil ad solucionem
conferat. §4. Si sciatur quis murdrum fecerit, et fugerit,
habeat hundretum pecuniam ejus; et si quis consociorum ejus


lin claustra ass. Lond. et K. 2/ K. add. % in ms. Lond. et K. desunt.
4vel Sc. non ms. Lond. ‘districtus ms. Lond. et K. Subi K.
7 sex ms. Lond. et K. 8in ms. Lond. et K. deest. nolit Se. velint
ms. Lond. et K. }% inumete ms. Lond. et K.


2 Hee provisio facta videtur ad imitationem c.15. LL. Edo.
Confess.

» Concordat LL. Scotorum. Vide Regiam Majestatem, 1.4. c. 23.
ubi plura his et sequentibus similia.


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 603


capiatur, justicie presentetur. §5. *Murdritus homo dice»
batur antiquitus cujus interfector nesciebatur, ubicumque vel
quomodocunque esset inventus; nunc adjectum est, licet
sciatur quis murdrum fecerit, si non habeatur intra vu. dies.
§ 6. >Non procedit, nec solvatur pro murdro Anglicus, set
Francigena ; ex quo vero deest ‘qui interfectum hominem
eomprobet Anglicum esse, Francigena reputatur. §7. Et
licet malefactor regem requirat, ut vitam et membra recipiat,
nichilominus murdrum solvatur, sicut diximus. §8. Si mur-
drum inveniatur alicubi, conveniat *ibi hundretum cum pre-
posito et vicinis, et, sive cognoscatur sive non, custodiatur
vit. diebus, super Scletam unam elevatus, lignis nocte circum
accensis ; et cireumquaque nuncietur, multa promissione mune-
rum et dacione eum fore cumulandum, si quis eos adjuvaret.
§9. Si intra terminum malefactor capi possit et justicie reddi,
quietum sit hundretum; si non possit, et desit qui probet eum
ex parte patris Anglicum, sit ad predictum modum; murdrum


lsi us. Lond. et K. illue ms. Lond. et K. 3decam ms. Lond.
et K.


a Vide Dialog. de Seace. 1.1. ¢.10.

> Concordat Bracton. 1.3. c.15. num. 7..fol. 135 b: ‘Pro Anglico
vero (inquit), et de quo constari possit, quod Anglicus sit, non dabitur
murdrum.’ Idem etiam Fleta, 1.1]. ¢. 30.

¢ Locus tum supra c. 75. § 6.(* vel qui occisum comprobet Angli-
cum’) prius positus, tum infra, quasi iteratus concordat Bracton. ;
Fleta etiam ubi supra: ‘Si autem (inquit Bractonus) Englescheria
nulla sit, vel minus rite faeta, licet interfectus Anglicus fuerit, pro
Francigena reputabitur ;’ que repetitionem sapiunt prius dictorum
circa capitis initium, viz. ‘sive interfectus cognitus fuerit sive ignotus
——dicitur Francigena, nisi Englescheria, 7. quod Anglicus sit,
probetur per parentes et coram justiciariis presentetur.’ Hic ingerit
se prisca illa Englescheria, ut vocant, innovata lex a Cnuto nostro
primo, ut ferunt, (vid. LL. Edo. Confess. c. 16.) excogitata. Et vocis
etymologiam, et rei ortum, vigorem et interitum, fuse exhibet Glossar.
Spelm. in voce; de qua vide plara in LL. Edo. Confess. c. 15, 16,
et adde schol. ad c. prox. preced. Quod autem hic seribunt
‘Englescheriam’ et similiter scribendum reor ‘ Englisceriam,’ vulgo
‘Englishry,’ voce ducta ab ‘ Englise,’ i.e, Anglicus, et ‘ry,’ termina-
tione pari apud nos significatus cum ‘ hood,’ ¢ ship,’ ‘ness,’ ‘dome,’ et
similia, que omnia statum, conditionem, qualitatem, &c. signant ;
unde ‘aldermanry’ pro statu, &c. senatoris; ‘gentry’ pro statu, &c.
generositatis; ‘ yeomanry’ pro statu, &e. vulgi vel plebis (precipue
ruricolas vulgo notat); ‘husbandry’ pro statu, &c. patrisfamilias (ad
agriculturam vox vulgo extenditur); ‘huswifery’ pro statu, &c. matris-
familias; ‘infantry’ pro statu, &c. peditatus. ‘ Engliseeria’ itaque
‘ Anglietas’ est, sive persone alicujus qualitas vel conditio Anglica.


* del.?


604 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


enim habetur 'si alienigena occidatur, et quis hoc fecerit
ignoretur, vel ad diem non reddatur. Si quis neget accusatus,
triplici Jada vel judicio *Lx. sot applicetur. § 10. Si quis
Francigenam fugientem, vel more suo resistentem, solus vel
cum aliis, pro furto perimat, statim *palam faciat; et si ’certum
hoc innotuerit, pacem suam habeat. §11. Si hundretum de
aliquo ®probare velit quod Francigena murdrum *quod non
fuerit x1. melioribus hominibus hundreti ipsius jurantibus hoc
credatur. § 12. Si quis murdritus intra vir. dies inhumetur,
et parentes ejus suspecti videre velint eum, non diffodiatur
sine licencia justicie. Si [quis] infodit eum ante terminum,
componat inde secundum rectum. § 18. Si alicui jure non
creditur, quod ei pertineat judicio probet. §14. Homicidium
werelada pernegetur; ad purgandum vero vel *respondendum
super hiis sufficit compellacio parentum bello vel antejura-
mento, vel per legalem personam vel per publicam fuerit, vel
5terminum simul habuerint, vel aliquid hujusmodi; *"" et
quando et ubi simul fuerint, vel eciam recesserint; et si ire,
vel odium, vel mine intercesserint. §15. °De confesso
autem vel convicto faciendum est, ut reddatur parentibus
interfecti, misercoridiam Seorum subiturus quibus nullam
exhibuit; si parentes non habeat, faciat inde rex justiciam’
suam. § §16. Si hundretum compellet aliquem, quod mur-
drum fecerit, et ille neget, expectetur de reddicione murdri,
donec inde finis sit. §17. Et si quis baronum terram suam
velit tollere de hundreto ubi murdrum vadiaverit, vel prepo-
situs suus, prius reddatur quod sine calumpnia vadiatum est,
et postea transeat inde, si velit et possit; que omnia forciora
erunt, si unquam antea murdrum inibi conjectaverit vel con-
suetudines alias hundreti fecerit. §18. Et eat submonicio
regis ad dapiferum vel ministrum manerii, si dominus desit


lin Se. 2x. ms. Lond. et K. 3in ms. Lond. et K. deest. 4per-
negandum ms. Lond.et K. ‘enim unum Se. terminum AK. “in
ous. Lond. desunt.


a Sic etiam supra c. 81.§1. ‘Si placet, palam faciat,’ ¢.e. notum
faciat vel proclamet. Originem hoc traxisse videtur e LL. Ine Regis,
c. 20, 34. occultationem prohibentibus cesionis cujusvis malefactoris
in flagranti crimine perempti. Vide c. 83. § 6.

> Hue etiam tenuit illud Bractoni, fol. 135b: ‘Si autem (inquit)
dubium fuerit, utrum Anglicus fuerit vel non, et utrum producti

arentes fuerint vel non, hoc per patriam declarabitur.’

¢ Vide scholia ad c. 71, ubi hae eadem habentur.


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 605


vel nequeat 7ei nunciari. §19. “*'’Qui murdrum aperte
fecerit, sive combusserit, vel decapitaverit, vel excoriaverit,
aliterve defecerit, ne cognosci valeat, ut dictum est, reddatur
parentibus interfecti; et si compellacio sit, et in emundacione
*miseveniat, judicet episcopus.


XCIII. *DE EMENDACIONE VULNERIS.


§1. Si vulnus eveniat alicui, sive membri truncacione, vel
debilitacione, vel ®disfaccione, in nudo et manifesto, ut ante
capillos, ante manicam, sub genibus, dupliciter emendandum
est, supra id quod in capite sub capillis, vel in membris sub
vestibus, in occulto fieret. §2. Capitis vulnus emendetur,
si utrunque os perforatum sit, xxx. sol; si exterius os *per-
cussum sit, xv. sot.  §3. Si in capillis sit vulnus longitudine
unius uncie, v. def, i. uno sol, componatur. Si ante cesariem
sit vulnus unciam habens longitudinis, duobus sol, i. x. defi,
emendetur. §4. Si auris amputetur alicui, xxx. sot emen-
detur ei; si auditum inde perdat, Lx. sot emendetur. §5. Si
quis alii crepet oculum, solvat ei Lxvr. sot et vi. defi et trientem
unius defi. Si oculus in capite remaneat, ut tamen homo
nichil inde videat, tercia pars in eo emendacionis consistat.
§6. Dentes alii precisores, alii canini, alii molares: precisores
dicuntur primi dentes hominis, quia omne quod accipit ipsi
prius incidunt ; sequentes canini dicuntur, quorum duo in
dextra maxilla, duo sunt in sinistra, et dicuntur canini quia
ad similitudinem caninorum dencium existunt, et canis ex
ipsis ossa frangit sicut homo, et quod priores prescindere non
possunt illis tradunt, ut confringant; ultimi sunt molares, qui
concisa a prioribus vel confracta a sequentibus *molunt, et
inde massant.’ Viri plures, femine pauciores habent dentes.


\sibi ws. Lond. 2misveniat Sc. misevias ms. Lond. misevenias K.
3defraccione ms. Lond. ‘4perforatum ms. Lond.et K.  5/moluntur
et inmassuntur ms. Lond. et K.


@ Hoc capitulum ut plurimum depromptum reperio e LL. Elfredi,
c. 44, et seqq., unde lumen accensum et cognitioni et correctioni quo-
rundam heic erratorum. Pauca igitur sunt que de hoc capite anno-
tabo. Desunt tamen in lege lfredi a linea hac: ‘ Dentes alii pre-
cisores,’ usque ad ‘ femine pauciores habent dentes,’ ut e contrario
quod in eadem Elfredi lege immediate id sequitur, quo hee linea
terminatur (vid. ‘Ing mon odpum  neb of-aylea: zebece him mid
LX. yell.’ i.e, ‘qui alteri nasum preciderit, dato ei Lx. sof,’) in hoc
capitulo omnino deest.


606 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


§7. Qui primos vel precisores dentes excusserit alicui, vim. sot
emendet. Qui caninos vel *wongtod excusserit, 1111. sot culpa
sit; molares excussi xv. sot constent. § 8. Gingive
‘eonfracte xv. sot emendentur. §9. Mentum x1. sol.
§ 10. *Gurgullio vel protebolla xu. sot’ §11. De lingua
sicut de oculo componatur. §12. Si quis in humero pla-
gietur ut glutinum compagum effluat, xxx. sot emendetur.
§ 18. Brachium fractum supra cubitum xv. sot emendetur.
§14. Si utrumque os brachii fractum sit, emendetur xxx. sol.
§15. Pollex manus amputatus xxx.sof Semendetur; unguis
v.sot, § §16, Index xv.sot; unguis m1. sot. §17. Medius
vel *inpudicus xu. sot; unguis 1. sot. | §18. Annularis vel
medicinalis xvi. sot; unguis 1111. sol. §. 19. <Auricularis
1x. sot constet; unguis uno sol, i. v. defi. §20. Si quis in
ilibus plagietur, habeat xxx.sot ad emendacionem. Si trans-
punctus sit, ad utrumque os emendetur xx. sol. §21. Coxa
transforata vel fracta xxx.sol emendetur. § 22. Crus per-
foratum alicui sub genu x11. sot emendetur; fractum xxx. sot.
§ 28. Si major pedis articulus amputetur, xx. sot constet;
secundus xv. sol; tercius 1x. sof; quartus vi. sot; quintus
v.sot. §24. Si quis in genitalibus plagietur, ut procreandi
perdat officium, Lxxx. sot multa judicetur.  § 25. Si homini
sit brachium cum manu penitus amputatum sub cubito, Lxxx.
sol emendetur. § 26. Omne vulnus ante capillos, et ante
manicam, et sub genu, dupliciter emendetur. § 27. Lumbi
truncati Lx. sof constent; intus puncti xv. sof; transpuncti
Xxx. sol. § 28. Si quis in humero plagietur, emendetur
Lxxx. sol, si homo vivat. § 29. Si quis alteri manum extra
plagiaverit, xx. sot emendet; si dimidia manus ®avolaverit,
reddantur inde Lx. sol. § 30. Si quis alteri costam fregerit,
x. sot emendet, si cutis integra sit; si cutis aperta sit, et os
extrahatur, xv. sol comparetur. § 81. Si quis oculum, vel
manum, vel pedem excuciat alicui, parem emendacionem faciat


lficte in ms. Lond. et K.desunt. 3in us. Lond. et K. deest.
4in impudicus Sc. 45 xv. ms. Lond. ef K.  Samolaverit s15. Seld.
violaverit mss. Lond. e¢ Twysd. molaverit K.


® [Pessime mss. Sc. et K. pongood et pongtod, ex inscitia scribe
Normannici vel Franco-Gallici, legunt; est enim locus versio illius
/Elfredi: ‘gi; hic py ye pongcod zerelle 1111. yorlt co béce,’ quam
lectionem in textum recipere non dubitavi.—Z.]


LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI. 607


de singulis, i. txv1. sot et 'v1. deii et terciam partem unius defi,


que est triens. § 32. *Et si crus alicui excussum sit sub
genu, Lxxx. sol culpa judicetur. § 83. Si quis alii scapulam
truncaverit, xx. sot mulctetur.  § 84. Si quis intus plagietur


ut os extrahatur, Ssint ad emendacionem xv. sot.’ § 85. Qui
grossos tibiarum nervos truncaverit alicui, si medicamentum
sanitatis admittant, x11. sot emendabit. Si homo claudicet pro
vulneribus nervorum, et sanari non possit, xxx. sot emendetur.
§ 36. Si graciles nervi truncentur, ‘v1. sot emendetur.
§ 87. Qui aliquem in collo plagiaverit, ut incurvacionem, vel
inflexibilitatem, vel inde perpetuam contrahat egritudinem, et
tamen vivat *ita contumeliatus, c. sot emendetur, et quicquid
in medicatura fuerit erogatum; nisi sapientum estimacio
amplius judicaverit.


XCIV. DE VERBERACIONE ABSQUE SANGUINIS
EFFUSIONE.


§ 1. Qui aliquem ita 5verberaverit ut sanguinem ejus non
effundat, quotlibet ictus ei det, tres solummodo ictus per legem
emendet, singulum v. deii, quod est in summa xv. defi. Do-
mino ipsius verberati' overseunessam suam emendet, si sint
homines unius hominis, vel si sit ibi retentus, vel divadiatus et
cravatus; et fihtwitam cui proveniet; set non simul habenda
est blodwita et fihtwita, *due scilicet emende de una culpa. Si
quis partim confiteatur et partim neget, emendet quantum
recognoscit, et juret de reliquo solus vel amplius, sieut factum
sit. § 2. Qui vulnus alicui faciet ac sanguinem, emendet hoc
per uncias, ad singulas v. deii in cooperto; in nudo, pro sin-
gulis unciis, x. defi; et remaneat de ®cecis ictibus et ’blind-
intis; et wita domini decidat, si sanguis exeat, et sine crava-
cione sit. Differt autem in pluribus: Si homines unius baronis
pugnent cum sanguinem faciente vel non faciente, sive in pre-
senti sive postea, quanquam craventur, non remanet wita
domini. Si sint duorum dominorum, et alius alium verberet


lyur. Se. vi. us. Lond. et K. 2in us. Lond. deest. %/xv. sot emen-
detur. us. Lond. et K. 4in ms. Lond. et K. deest. 5 vulneraverit Se.
verberaverit mss. Seld. Lond. Twysd. et K. ceteris K. 7 beli-
dentibus ms. Lond. et K.


® Simile prius c.49.§ 6. Regula juris inde firmatur: ‘ Neminem
(se.) esse bis puniendum.’


608 LEGES REGIS HENRICI PRIMI.


cecis ictibus et non cruentis, sive cravatus Jibi sit” vel non,
convictus noxe witam emendabit domino cujus hominem ver-
beravit. Sisanguinem ei faciat et recedat, sine cravacione vel
divadiacione, witam domini retulit; et non habebit eam domi-
nus cujus hominem vulneraverit; si autem retineatur, vel diva-
dietur, vel implegietur, ibi blodwita et fihtwita poterit aggre-
gari. § 3. Si plures unum aliquem vulnerent precepto
domini sui, et velit in quibus poterit warantus esse, solus
emendet pro omnibus, sicut malum fecerint, et unam witam cui
rectum erit. Si eorum crocca *towallet, id est, si eorum olla
non simul bulliat, et misfaciant, singuli *sigillatim componant.
§ 4. Si quis aliquem per capillos arripiat, tantum emendet
quantum de uno colpo faceret, i. v. defi de hergripa. § 5. Si
vulnus fiat alicui, et accusatus neget, se sexto juret sine pre-
juramento, * quia sanguis et vulnus ipsum forade prevenerunt.


sive ms. Lond. 2towellet Sc. towallet us. Lond. et K. 3 singillatim
as. Lond. et K. “4heregripa us. Lond. et K.


@ Bene autem dicit ‘quia sanguis et vulnus ipsum fonade pre-
venerunt,’ cum inde notorie constet de maleficio commisso (facit
Form. 119. apud Marculf., ubi hec: ‘ unde livores vel capulature
atque colaphi manifeste apparent,’) quod accusatorem a prajuramento
(prestando alioquin si de cecis ictibus, ‘dry blowes, contenderint)
excusat. Quod autem constaret de maleficio, priusquam ad examen
procedatur, in quibusdam casibus me docet Hotoman. Disput. de Jure
Feud. c. ult., de quo vide plura in Glossar. verbo ‘ Antejuramentum.’
Vide etiam LL: thelstani, IV. c. 2, et Senatuscons. de Montic.
Wallie, c.6. (Cf. p. 576.) Juramento huic, ni fallor, respondet
Danorum ‘aasvoren eed,’ de quo apud doct. Wormium, in Monum.
Danie. 1.1. c. 2. p. 82, 84.


( 609 )


NOTES ON THE LAWS


ASCRIBED TO


KING HENRY Ll.


Cap. I. * The exaction of services from the church, or of
unlawful gains from the church, are prohibited in
general terms by N.P.L. 20., Ethelr. V. 10. and
VI. 15; and at a still earlier period, in 785,
Cone. Chalch. x1v., and complained of as a crying
grievance of the Anglican Church by Boniface, in
145.

™ What is here termed ‘legitima et justa relevacione’


— to be the relief prescribed in Gul. Pr.
. 20.


"" Liberty of marriage, recognized by Cn. Sec. 74., is
here abridged; but it is forbidden to demand


money for the licence required, as by the law of
Cnut.


Liberty of marriage to widows is recognized in
Ethelr. VI. 26. and V. 21., and confirmed by Cn.
Sec.'74, but only after a twelvemonth’s widowhood.
The latter restriction is here omitted, but the ab-
solute liberty of marriage is reduced to a security
from being married against their will.


’ By Inge 38. the custody of orphans was given to their
mother, and the care of the ‘ppum-yrol’ to the
nearest of kin.


*“ ¢ In misericordia = be ealpe ape,’ Cf. Cn. Sec. 50.,
rendered by Bromton ‘omni misericordia.’


Cap. II. Y This reference to the ‘Leges Regis Edwardi,’
for the penalty for murder, would seem to indi-
cate that the laws of the Confessor, (15, 16,) or
some analogous laws were known and in force at
the time this charter was granted.


“1 Borrowed from Gul. Pr. IIT. 5, 8, which it explains,
and limits to the demesne lands of the military
tenants. Does it not follow that what are called
in Gul. III. 5. ‘terras suas et possessiones suas’
meant nothing more than the lands in demesne,

RR


610 NOTES ON THE LAWS


i.e, exclusive of lands held in seignory, but occu-
pied by vassals, ¢ villani, bordarii, cotarii, cotseti,’
and other base tenants ?


™ ¢ Lagam Edwardi,’ &c. This is a confirmation of the
recitals, pp. 442, 491, that the changes made by
the Conqueror in the laws of the Confessor were
‘consilio baronum suoram.’


* Charter to the city of London. See also Feedera,
to.1. 11. from an Inspeximus 2 Edw. IV.


This important charter has no date, and though there are ten
attesting witnesses, I find no name, except that of Hugh Bigod,
that gives the least assistance towards ascertaining the date of
the instrument. Hugh Bigod succeeded his brother William,
who was drowned in 1120. He was ‘dapifer regis,’ though not
so stiled in this charter. He survived to the time of Stephen.

The privileges granted to the citizens of London are the fol-
lowing : —

1. To hold Middlesex for ever in farm for £300 a year;
to appoint whom they please to be sheriff and jus-
ticiary ‘ad custodienda placita corone mee et eadem
placitanda;’ and that there should be no other jus-
ticiary ‘ super ipsos homines Londonie.’

2. The citizens ‘non placitabunt’ without the walls of' the
city, ‘pro nullo placito,’ and shall be ‘quicti’ from
eschot and lof, and from danegeld and murdrum; and
none of them ‘faciet bellum.’ And if any citizen is
impleaded ‘de placitis corone, per sacramentum quod
judicatum fuerit in civitate, se disracionet homo
Londo.’

8. No one to be quartered within the walls of the city, and
no quarters assigned by compulsion to any one ‘de
mea familia, neque de alia,’

4, The men of London and their goods to be ‘quieti et
liberi’ over all England, and in all sea-ports, from toll,
passage (transit duty), and lastage; and from all other
customs.

5. The churches, barons, and citizens to hold and enjoy,
well and in peace, their sokes, with all their customs;
so that the indwellers in their sokes shall render cus-
tom to none but to the owner of the soke, or to his
officer.

6. In pleas relating to money, a man of London shall not
be sentenced ‘in misericordia, nisi ad suum were, scil.
ad centum solidos.’

%. There shall be no longer miskenninge in the hustings,
nor in the folkmote, nor in any pleas within the city ;
and the husting shall sit every Monday.


ASCRIBED TO KING HENRY I. 611


8. * Et terras, et wardemotum (vadimonia, Fed.) et debita
civibus meis habere faciam, infra civitatem et extra; et
de terris de quibus ad me clamaverint, rectum eis
tenebo lege civitatis.’

9. If any one takes toll or custom from the citizens of
London, the citizens may take as much from the
burg or vill whence the exaction took place, besides
damages.

10. And all persons indebted to citizens of London shall
pay their debts in the city, or show there that the
demand is unfounded. And if they refuse, the citi-
zens of London, to whom they are indebted, may
take, by distress within the city, ‘de burgo, vel villa,
vel de comitatu, in quo manet qui debitum debet.’

11. And the citizens of London shall have their hunting
grounds for hunting, as was best and most fully en-
joyed by their predecessors; that is, in Chiltern, in
Middlesex, and in Surrey.


Cap. II1. ** This collection of laws and usages is manifestly
a compilation of ancient Saxon laws by some pri-
vate person, and not a publication by authority of
the state; we are, indeed, almost told this in
cap. 5. § 25., where the compiler uses the first
person singular, and in cap. 8., where, after giving
some account of frankpledge, he expresses himself
thus: ‘set de hiis omnibus pleniorem suggerunt
ventura noticiam, sicut Edwardi beatissimi princi-
pis extitisse temporibus, certis indiciis et fida rela-
cione cognovimus? ‘Et si quid professioni nostre
congruum precedencium vel sequencium capitula
docuerint, sive jure naturali, vel legali, vel morali,
gaudeant instituto, et hoc licet multa composito-
rum varietate minus plene peregerim, bonam saltem
voluntatem ubique pretendo.

It appears from this: Ist, that the author speaks
as a private compiler, and not as an authorized
agent of the government: 2dly, that he wrote for
the benefit of his own profession: 3dly, that he
was apprehensive his work might be imperfect, on
account of the number and variety of materials
from which it was to be collected: 4thly, that he
was sensible of the defects of the system he had
undertaken to collect and arrange: 5thly, that
the object of his work was to make a collection of
the laws and customs that prevailed in England
under the Confessor.


The general clamor in England for the Saxon laws of the
Confessor, under the three Norman kings, makes it probable that


wan O


612 NOTES ON THE LAWS


this compilation was made by some private person at the time
when the restoration of these laws was called for by, and re-
peatedly promised to the nation.

At the same time, it appears from ¢. 5. that this compilation
was at least interpolated after the death of Henry L, but, at
whatever time it was made, it is clear, from the above passage,
that the purpose of it was to collect the laws and legal usages
of England as they existed under the Confessor. From a re-
ference to the Decretals in c. 5. §27., the date of that part of
the compilation must be postponed till 1151, when Gratian col-
lected the Decretals. Another passage (c. 6. § 1.) must have
been written after 1108, when the bishopric of Ely was insti-
tuted, and even subsequently to 1133, when Carlisle became a
bishopric.*

Stephen promised in his charter to restore the good laws and
customs which his subjects had enjoyed in the time of King
Edward. Henry I. had done the same. After the capture of
Stephen, the citizens of London petitioned the empress Maud
for the restoration of the laws of the Confessor.

Ralph, appointed bishop of Durham in 1099, is said in the
Peterborough Chronicle, published by Sparke (p. 57.), to have
written a book ¢ De Legibus Angliz’ He was disgraced and
imprisoned by Henry on his accession, escaped to Normandy,
and died in the year 1128.

The fact that this compilation is not a collection of laws pro-
mulgated by Henry I., but a digest of Anglo-Saxon laws and
usages made by some private individual, shows how mistaken
those eminent lawyers have heen, who have inferred from cap. vii.
that Henry I. reunited the civil and ecclesiastical courts, which
his father had disjoined.


Cap. V. *™ © Quod si in judicio,’&c. This rule agrees with
the one laid down in Ethelr. III. 13. A some-
what different rule is laid down in H. 31. § 2.
¢ Si inter judices studia diversa sint, ut alii sic, alii
aliter fuisse contendant, vincat sententia meliorum,
et cui justicia magis acquieverit.’?, Who is meant
here by the ‘justicia’? the natural president of the
court, or the justiciary sent by the king? Are we
to understand by ‘meliores’ the men of the highest
rank? Itis plain, at all events, that unanimity in
the judges was-not required in the Anglo-Saxon
courts.


*™. ¢ Qui per lapidem falsum jurat.’ (see Gloss. voce
* Lapis.’)


® Two of the mss., however, instead of xv., read multos.’


ASCRIBED TO KING HENRY I. 613


Cap. VII. **- « Per singulas Anglie provincias,’ &c. Does
this expression refer to the threefold division of
England, or to the division of shires into hun-
dreds, or to county courts held at different places
alternately ?


*Y- When the ¢placitum’ is held, ‘ agantur primo debita
vere Christianitatis jura,’ &c. This, with some
additional explanations, is taken from Edg. II. 5.
and Cn. Sec. 18, but is completely at variance with
the law of the Conqueror, [V. removing from the
civil courts of the hundred the cases pertaining
to the bishop. The same is repeated in Hen. 31.
§ 3., and affords another of the many proofs that
what are called * Leges Henrici Primi’ are a com-
pilation by some private person, without any legal
authority from the state.


xt ¢ Debet autem scyresmot’, &c. The scyresmot to
he held twice a year, and the hundreds or wapen-
takes twelve times a year, and seven days notice
to be given beforehand, ‘nisi publicum commodum
vel dominica regis necessitas terminum preveniat.’
This is taken literally from Conf.* and the num-
ber of meetings from Edg. II. 5, and Cn. Sec. 18,
i.e. expressly as to shiremotes and burghmotes,
and, by implication, as to hundredmotes.


2 The passage of the Laws of the Confessor, which forms a con-
tinuation of Cap. xxx11., is the following; but being manifestly an
interpolation, and not contained in the best manuscripts, is excluded
from the present text: —‘ Et similiter olim apud Britones temporibus
Romanorum in regno isto Britanniz vocabantur senatores, qui postea
temporibus Saxonum, ut preedictum est, vocabantur aldermanni, non
propter setatem, sed propter sapientiam et dignitatem, cum quidem
adolescentes essent, jurisperiti tamen, et super hoc experti. Et ut
verum fatear, habent etiam aldermanni in civitatibus regni hujus, in
ballivis suis, et in burgis clausis, et muro vallatis, et in castellis
eandem dignitatem, et potestatem, et modum, qualem habent prepo-
siti hundredorum et wapentachiorum in ballivis suis sub vicecomite
regis per universum regnum. Debent enim et leges, et libertates, et
jura, et pacem regis, et justas consuetudines regni et antiquas a bonis
predecessoribus approbatas inviolabiliter, et sine dolo, et sine dila-
tione, modis omnibus pro posse suo servare. Cum aliquid vero in-
opinatum, vel dubium, vel malum, contra regnum, vel contra coronam
domini regis, forte in ballivis suis subito emerserit, debent statim
pulsatis campanis quod Anglice vocant ‘ mocbel’ convocare omnes,
et universos, quod Anglice dicunt ‘rolemoce,’ i.e. vocatio et con-
gregatio populorum, et gentium omnium, quia ibi omnes convenire
debent,! et universi qui sub protectione et pace domini regis degunt,


a ED


1 Vid. LL. Alvredi, cap. 22. et Athelstani in Preefat.


614 NOTES ON THE LAWS


Cap. VIII. *”" This chapter, like the preceding, contains a
variety of distinct provisions, the greater part of
which are literally translated from the Saxon
laws.

The first of these provisions, viz. ‘That a full
meeting of every hundred should be held twice a
year, at which all freemen (liberi) tam hudefest’
(heopdpeyc, Cn. Sec. 20.) ‘quam folgarii (fol-
zepe, 76.) should be present ad dinoscendum,’ &c.
is not to be found in any of the Saxon laws
extant.


et consistunt in regno predicto, et ibi providere debent indemnitati-
bus corone regni hujus per commune consilium, et ibi providendum
est ad insolentiam malefactorum reprimendam ad utilitatem regni.
Statutum est enim quod ibi debent populi omnes, et gentes universe
singulis annis, semel in anno scilicet convenire, scilicet in capite kal.
Maiti, et se fide et sacramento non fracto ibi in unam et simul con-
foederare, et consolidare sicut conjurati fratres ad defendendum reg-
num contra alienigenas, et contra inimicos, una cum domino suo
rege, et terras, et honores illius omni fidelitate cum eo servare, et
quod illi ut domino suo regi intra et extra regnum universum Brit-
annie fideles esse volunt. Ita debent facere omnes principes, et
comites, et simul jurare coram episcopis regni in folemote, et similiter
omnes proceres regni, et milites, et liberi homines universi totius
regni Britannie facere debent in pleno folemote fidelitatem domino
regi, ut pradictum est, coram episcopis regni. Hanc legem invenit
Arthurus, qui quondam fuit inclytissimus rex Brytonum, et ita con-
solidavit, et confcederavit regnum Britannia universum semper in
unum. Hujus legis authoritate expulit Arthurus predictus Saracenos,
et inimicos a regno. Lex enim ista diu sopita fuit, et sepulta, donee
Edgarus rex Anglorum qui fuit avus Edwardi regis propinqui vestri
illam excitavit, et erexit in lucem, et illam per totum regnum firmiter
observari preecepit. Debent etiam universi liberi homines totius regni
juxta facultates suas, et possessiones, et juxta catalla sua, et secun-
dum feodum suum, et secundum tenementa sua, arma habere, et illa
semper prompta conservare ad tuitionem regni, et servitium domino-
rum suorum, juxta preceptum domini regis explendum et peragen-
dum. Non debent illa Jinvadiare, nec extra regnum vendere, sed
heredibus suis in extremis legare ad servitium tenementorum suorum
dominis suis explendum cum opus adfuerit. Quod si qui eorum
heredes vel parentes non habuerint, dominus suus illa recipiet: et si
dominum non haberent, felagus suus (i.e. fide cum eo ligatus), si
haberet, illa reciperet: si vero nihil istorum haberet, tune regni sub
cujus protectione et pace degunt universi rex illa resumet. Universi
vero predicti singulis annis in crastino Purificationis Beate Marie
debent omni excusatione remota arma sua per universum regnum
ostendere, scilicet in civitatibus regni, et in burgis, et in castellis, et
hundredis, et wapentachiis regni, secundum eis quod statutum est,
et adjudicatum, et juxta quod debent, et idcirco hoc fieri debet uno
eodem die per universum regnum, ut predictum est, ne aliqui possint


' Invadiare; i.e. pignori ponere.


ASCRIBED TO KING HENRY I. 615


These meetings of the hundred twice a year
were afterwards called the sheriff's tourn, or view
of frankpledge. Feta, lib. 2. c.52. It seems, at
least, from the nature of the business first trans-
acted at the sheriff’s tourn, that it is the same with
the full meetings of the hundreds here described,
though held under the sheriff instead of the ‘ hun-
dredarius.’ Lord Coke is evidently mistaken in
supposing the sheriff’s tourn to be the same with
the scyresmot, in Hen. '7. § 4. Inst. ch. 53.


xvul ¢Communis quippe,’ &c. taken from Cn. Sec. 20.
‘On ceopunge’ is rendered ‘decima vel plegio
liberali’ ¢ Labde pypde: wite dignus” ‘Sy he
heondpeyc yy he rolzepe: conductitii, vel solidarii,
vel stipendiarii duorum (2. dominorum) plegio te-
neantur.’


xm (See various readings.) ‘Quia nichil a nullo exigi
vel capi debet,’ &c. The law that corresponds the
nearest to this general provision is Gul. Pr. III. 5.,
but the latter applies only to liberi homines, and
Cn. Sec. 70. is merely a protection against pur-
veyance.


**¢ Et omnis dominus,’ &c. taken in substance from
Cn. Sec. 31, &Xc. but the last clause inexact, ‘ pro
eis forsitan racionem redditurus.’ The hlaford was
not answerable for his servants, unless they fled
from justice.


¢ Ad publicum rectum.= To folepthte.’
‘Si ibi forisfaciant.=Inp he pep gyle ze-
pypce.’


Cap. IX. *** This is a very miscellaneous chapter, contain-
ing a number of general remarks, difficult to analyse, and not
always very clear in their meaning and application.


arma sua familiaribus suis et notis aecommodare, nec ipsi illa mutuo
accipere, ac justitiam domini regis defraudare, et dominum regem et
regnum offendere. Si qui eorum infirmi fuerint, vel aliis de causis
in regno occupati, vel urgentissimis negotiis extra regnum vel in
regno detenti, inveniant alios pro semetipsis qui sufficienter hoc fa-
ciant: quod nisi fecerint, vicecomites, et aldermanni, et prepositi
hundredorum et wapentachiorum, et ceteri ballivi domini regis illud
domino regi graviter emendare debent. Hujus legis autoritate Ethel-
redus rex subito uno eodemque die per universum regnum Danos
occidit. Barones vero qui suas consuetudines habent, et qui suam
habent curiam, de suis hominibus videant, ut sic de eis agant, et
omnia rite faciant, quatenus erga dominum regem reatum non incur-
rant, nec coronam regni preedicti offendant.’


616 NOTES ON THE LAWS


Cap. X. **" This and the following chapter contain a sum-
mary of the rights of the crown, as they were
understood by lawyers at the time when this com-
pilation was made.


xxl ¢ Furtum morte impunitum.’ Somner here seems to
understand a thief taken with the stolen goods
upon him, but not put to death at the moment, as
might be done by In. 16.; to which he might have
added Wih. 25, 26. and In. 21., besides the laws
to which he refers of Ath. 1. pp. 198, 199. and
J.C. L. xu. 1; but he rather prefers to read puni-
endum, instead of impunitum, as agreeing better
with Hen. 13. § 1., where the expression is ‘ furtum
probatum, et morte dignum.’


xxiv. ¢ Foreste.? The earliest allusion to the forest laws is
in Cn. Sec. 81. See also Cnut’s ‘ Constitutiones de
Foresta,’ p. 426. By Carta Hen. p. 503. the free
use of their hunting grounds was conferred on
the citizens of London.


xxv. ¢ Et omnibus ordinatis et alienigenis,’ &c.


Ing mon gehabodne oppe zlpeotigne puph emg
ping fopp&de- ev fed oppe wt feope- ponne
yeeal him cyng beon- oppe eopl peep on lande. 4
biceop peepe peode. on meeg 4 Fon mund-bonan.
bucon he elley opepne hebbe.—E. & G. 12.

And zip hic gsepupse $ man gehadedum- ofbe zl-
peodigum- ahpan zedenode- popdey ope peopcer.
ponne gebypede- cinge 4 bipceope- } hig  bev-
van- ypa hig papoyt mhton.—See p. 192. viir.

And zip man gehadobdne ope zlpeddigne man puph
&miz pinge foppade- xc fed oppe at yeope- oppe
hine bzende- oppe hine beate- oppe gebipmpige
on énige piyan- ponne yceal him cynzc beon fon
mez 4j om mund-bonan. buton he eller opepne
hebbe.—Ethelr. IX. 33.

lng man gehadodbne man oppe elpeotigne puph
enig pingc yfoppade- xt feo oppe at feope-
ponne yceal him cyninge beon fop meg y sop
mund-bopan. bucon he eller opepne hlaropd
haebbe.— Cn. Sec. 40.

The progress of this law is here set down, because every
stage of it illustrates the progressive advancement of the royal
authority.


Cap. XI. **"* This chapter, like the former, is a summary
from the Saxon laws, with such additions as had
been made since the Conquest, of fines or penalties
due to the king for offences against the church.


ASCRIBED TO KING HENRY I. 617


xxvil. ¢ Rom-pech in festo Séi Petri’ The penalty to the
king is here declared to be 50 shillings, which
(supposing them to be Norman shillings) make
120 Saxon shillings, as in Ethelr. IX. 5.


xxvil. ¢ Qui cyrisceattum,’ &c. The preceding remark is
also applicable here.


xx ¢ Qui uxoratus,’ &c. This is evidently taken from
E. & G. 4., though with the insertion of dominus,
and the substitution of adultery for incest, most
probably from some blunder of the copyist.


Xxx: ¢ Si quis mortis reus.’ The Saxon shillings are not
converted into Norman in this place.


XXXL ¢ Ubicunque recusabitur,’ &c. The general reflections
that here follow seem to be collected from a
variety of Saxon laws and maxims, but not taken
literally, as the others, from any one law in par-
ticular. The passages from which they seem
chiefly drawn are, E. & G. Preamble, Ethelr. V.
31. and IX. 34. The last sentence of all seems
to refer to the epilogue attached to Alfred’s col-
lections from the Scriptures, pp. 58,59, and the
one immediately before it gives a reason, though a
very bad one, for referring so much of the admi-
nistration of justice to the discretion of the king:
‘ provisum est, ut graviora placita,’ &c.


Cap. XII. ***" This chapter is a very imperfect enumeration
from the Saxon laws of the compensations that
might be received in different placita.


xxxIL ¢ Quedam non possunt emendari,’ &c. This is taken,
with no other change than some bad spelling, from
Cn. Sec. 65., with the following addition from
Cn. E. 2. ‘et infraccio pacis ecclesie, vel manus
regis per homicidium,’ It is true that in Cn.
Eccl. 2. it is homicide within church walls only
that is declared to be ‘bdtleay,’ but the king’s
‘handgmd’ is declared to be the same, and ever
‘unpemmed,’ and in Ethelr. III. 1. the king’s
‘hand-gy3’ is expressly said to be ¢ bocleay.’


XXXIV. me . eyy°
XIV. ¢ Hec emendantur c. solidis,’ ¢.e. Norman shillings.


Cap. XIII. ***” This chapter, like the three last, is a slo-
venly compilation from the whole body of the Saxon laws,
being a collection of such offences as were held, at the time
when the author wrote, to place the culprit in ‘ misericordia
regis” As many of these offences are very heinous, and many
of the penalties very severe, it may be doubted whether to be in


618 NOTES ON THE LAWS


‘ misericordia’ was at that time so light a matter as it appears
to have been in the days of Glanvile. See Gloss. sub voce.


Cap. XIV. ****" Taken literally from Cn. Sec. 72. & 73,
and the last sentence of 74., with the substitution of 100 man-
cuses of gold, instead of 200, in the heriot of an earl, and the
omission of the East-Angles after mention made of the Mercians,


Cap. XVI. **"™ From Ath. pp. 224, 225. with the substi-
tution of four miles for three, and of nine-acre breadths for
three.


Cap. XVII. ***""" These pleas, which the compiler justly
states to be highly vexatious, cannot be traced beyond the time
of Cnut, whose 81st secular law, while it confirms to every man
the right of hunting in his own woods and fields, directs all
persons to forego the king’s hunva%, which he is pleased to have
Seppupod, under the penalty of full ¢ wite.’


For the ‘ Constitutiones de Foresta,’ ascribed to Cnut, see
p. 426,


Cap. XX. ***™ All capital questions, whether occurring in
the king’s soke or not, are of the king’s soke, unless granted
away by his special favour: ‘buton he hpeene ruppop zemedpuan
pule- 4 he him pey peopSyeiper geunne.’ Cn. Sec. 12.15. See
also Cn. Sec. 64., where one guilty of ‘peaplac’ is declared
‘pepey yeyldiz’ to the king, or to him who has his ‘yocen.’
Also Cn. Sec. 74., in the case of one marrying a widow within
the time prohibited by Jaw.


Cap. XXI. ** This chapter contains cases in which the king
has part of the penalty, whoever be the guilty persons, or whe-
ther he has the whole soke, or only in part: such as adultery,
homicide in church, breach of the peace, ‘had-bryce,’ ‘ infraccio
christianitatis vel legalitatis,’ if the secular arm is required to
bring the offender to justice.


Cap. XXII. *“ The title of this chapter, as of many others
in the collection, seems to have been given at random, without
any attention to the subject matter, which relates to the grounds
for evocating a cause from one court to another.


Cap. XXIII. *** To whom does the word ‘ eorum’ refer ?


Cap. XXV. *“"" Spelman justly remarks, that the word ‘ pro-
ceres’ here means lords of manors.


Cap. XXIX. *"" By ‘barones comitatus’ Spelman under-
stands the freeholders of the county.


ASCRIBED TO KING HENRY L 619


The only Saxon law which imposes a penalty on those who
refuse to attend the ‘ gem6c’ when legally cited is Ath. I. 20.,
but the provisions and penalties are different.


Cap. XXXI. **¥ ¢Si inter judices,’ &c., partly taken from
Ethelr. III. 18., but with the substitution of ¢ meli-
orem’ for two thirds, and the addition of ‘et cui
justicia magis acquieverit.’ Does ¢ justicia’ here
mean the king’s justiciary ?


xLVI. ¢ Interesse comitatui,’ &c. from Edg. II. 5. and Cn.
Sec. 18., with the insertion of ‘et alie potestates.’
This and H. 7. § 2. show that the compiler had
not adverted to the Conqueror’s separation of the
ecclesiastical from the secular courts.


xLvilL ¢ Recordacionem,’ &c. Somner refers to H. 49. § 4,
for a confirmation of this principle. See also


Glanv. L. 8. § 8


XLVIIL ¢ Alias licebit,’ &c., that is, in other courts. Glanv.
L.8. § 8. and L, 12.§ 7.


xLIx. ¢ Bt nemo de capitalibus,’ &c., that is, without allow-
ing him the means of defence. See H. 48. § 4.


* ¢Unusquisque per pares suos,’ &c. For the anti-
quity of this fundamental principle of English
jurisprudence Somner refers to In. 55. (54.), but
I think erroneously, He might have found ex-
amples of it in Wih. 17,18, 19. A. & G. 3.
N. P. L. 51, 52, & 53. Ethelr. V. 19, 20. Cn.
Eccl. 5. and Cn. Sec. 31.3; some of which are
repeated in H. 64, 65.


™ ¢ Et ibi testes,’ &c. This clause, as well as the pre-
ceding, must relate to compurgators, who were to
swear to their belief of the facts charged against
the accused. It is evident from this passage, that
the testes or compurgators, named by the compe-
tent authorities, might be challenged, like modern
jurymen, for cause shown.


MI ¢ In Westsexa,’ &c. There is no allusion elsewhere
to the peculiarity here referred to.


‘ule Et non nominati judices,’ &c. Compurgators
named by the defendant were called advocati.
There are many allusions in the Saxon laws to
the nomination of compurgators, but it is nowhere
said by whom they are to be named except in
Ethelr. III. 13., where they are directed to be
named by the ‘ xenera.’


620 NOTES ON THE LAWS


Cap. XXXIV. ™: « Nisi se erga regem: butan he ere et
pem cynge zebicze ypa he him geparian pille’—
Edg. I]. 3. *Si al rei nel pot reachater a soun
pleisir’—Gul. Pr. I. 39.


Y. ¢y, sol. in Westsexa,’ &c. Here the penalty to the
king is converted from 120 Saxon to 50 Norman
shillings. To the earl it is put down at 40, instead
of 60 sh. as in Cn. Sec. 15; to the hundred at
30 sh. of 5 pence each, which, it is said, are equal
to 5 mancuses, in order that they may be reduced
to shillings of 12 pence each.


Cap. XL. '" «In curia regis’ must here mean within the
precinct described in H.16.


Cap. XLI. *"* Under this head we find a number of rules
and distinctions, with respect to overseunessa, sum-
monses, and borh, partly taken from the Saxon
laws still extant, and partly from laws no longer
in existence, and from the inventions of Norman
lawyers.


“vill. ¢ Si jam recesserat........ . dimisit eum,
This oath agrees in part with that exacted from
the ¢ plegii’ in Gul. Pr. III. 14., from the ¢ hospi-
tator’ in Conf. 23., and from the ¢ hlapopd’ in
Cn. Sec. 21. 30., and Ethelr. I. 1.


Cap. XLIII. *™ Besides the subject referred to in the title,
this chapter contains a number of provisions re~
specting the relation of lord and follower, partly
Saxon, and partly not to be found in the Saxon
laws.


** «Nemo a rege inplacitatus,’ &c. Hence, also, em-
ployment in the king’s service was a valid essoin.


Xl ¢ Si prepositus aut debitor,’ &c. This seems to be
an equitable exception from the preceding preroga-
tive. Was it made part of the common law with
the prerogative itself?


xi. ¢ Esse ad rectum,’ is an answer in his lord’s court to
any charge or suit against him.


‘xl ¢ Qui furtum,’ &c. From Cn. Sec. '78., with the
addition of theft, felony, and being overcome in
duel. Land is forfeited for theft also by J.C. L.
) ae


Cap. XLIV. ‘*! One who is surety for his lord, and sustains
any loss by his suretyship, is entitled to be reimbursed before


ASCRIBED TO KING HENRY I. 621


he is bound to answer any pecuniary demand of his lord. ‘The
remainder of this chapter is extremely obscure.


Cap. XLVI. **” This, with many of the following chapters,
contains minute details of the proceedings in
courts of law, very difficult to comprehend, and of
no great use when understood.


“xvi ¢ Si quis a domino suo,’ &c. Hence it appears that
seven days were allowed between the summons of
the defendant and his appearance in court. See
also H. 7. §4.”.°. and 51. §2.


uxvil ¢In aliis querat,’ &c. It appears that in misde-
meanors, but not in capital charges, the defendant
had time given him to make his answer, and leave
to consult with his friends and relations.


Cap. XLVII. **¥" «De furto,’ &c. In certain heinous and
capital offences enumerated the person accused was obliged to
answer without delay.


Cap. LI. *** «Et nulli” &c. The laws that follow relate
to distresses, of which the only mention in Saxon times is in
Cn. Sec. 19.


Cap. LII. *** The text of this chapter is very corrupt, but
its meaning, as far as sense can be made of it, seems to be as
follows :


1. Whoever is impleaded, at the suit of the king, by one
of his judges, must give vadium recti, i.e. security that
he will answer the charge, and make good the damage
that may be awarded against him.

2. If he were not summoned to appear, and came not on
that account, he must give the above-mentioned
security, and find bail, if required.

8. But if he were legally summoned, and the day of trial
fixed, he must answer without delay, if required by
the judge, or lose his cause.

4. If he refuse to give the security required, after it has
been three times demanded, he is guilty of overseunessa,
and may be detained in custody till he finds bail or
gives satisfaction: ‘maxime si judicatum sit de vadio,
si de capitalibus agatur in eo.’


Cap. LIII. ***" « Qui secundum legem,’ &c. One legally
summoned to the county court by the king’s justice, if he neglect
to attend, is guilty of overseunessa regis, that is 20 mares (it
should be mancuses) in Wessex; and if he had notice of the


622 NOTES ON THE LAWS


causes for which he was cited, and has no sufficient excuse, he
shall be adjudged to have lost them all.


Cap. LIV. '**™ Settlement of copartnery accounts: adjust-
ment of differences among partners. No part Saxon, except
the clause ‘ ubi vero aliquis eorum ..... . judicium.’


Cap. LV. ***"" Various points settled of the relation of lord
and tenant. First mention of the word honor; and in the oath
of fealty a salvo introduced of fidelity to the king, which shows
that this chapter was compiled long after the time of Henry I.


1. Every lord may summon his homager to be ad rectum
in his court, and though he reside in a remote manor,
pertaining to the honor of which he holds, he must
attend the ¢ placitum,’ when summoned by his lord.

2. But the tenant of one honor is not bound to attend a
‘placitum’ held in another, ‘nisi de alterius causa sit’
for which he is summoned.

3. If a man holds of different lords and different honors,
‘ei plus debet, et ejus residens erit, cujus ligius est.’

4, Obligations of an homager to his lord, salva side Dei
et terre principis, and with a reserve of theft, treason,
and murder, and what is contrary to God and the
Catholic faith.

5. No one, without leave of his liege lord could become
homager of another. This accords with numerous
regulations in the Saxon laws, as Edw. 10. Ath. I. 22.
Cn. Sec. 28.


Cap. LVI. ***!. How differences are to be settled between
landlords and their farmers, whether homagers or not. How
complaints against stewards are to be tried, whether in the
manorial court or in the hundred.


Cap. LVI. ***" * Si inter compares, &c. Neighbours to
meet and settle their differences at the boundaries of their land,
and, if necessary, to go to their lord’s court, and if they belong
to different lords, to the hundred.

2. The quarrels of their men to be settled in the same
manner, unless they have come under a legal engage-
ment to appear elsewhere; for every one should be
tried where he has committed the offence, especially if
he was seized and detained.

3. Where a man is seized with the proofs of his guilt in
his possession, there he must be tried.

4, When men are impleaded in their lord’s court, he must
name a competent term for trying them, and not lose
his court or soke, ¢ quamdiu non difforciaverit rectum.’


ASCRIBED TO KING HENRY I. 623


5. ‘Inter homines,’ &c. This regulation is not clear.


6. * De illis’ &c. Exemption of the clergy from secular
jurisdiction, ‘in culpationibus maximis vel minoribus.’


Cap. LIX. ™*"" Besides the subject of which it professedly
treats, this chapter, like most of the others, touches on a variety
of other questions, especially on the relation of lord and vassal,
and of master and slave, on theft, battle, and jurisdiction of
courts.


Cap. LXIV. '**"" Rubric corrupt and unintelligible.


Uxxvil¢ In furto et murdro,’ &c. It appears from this
passage, that to be permitted ‘plane jurare’ was
an honourable distinction, and that ‘fracto jura-
mento jurare’ implied a doubt of the veracity or
good faith of the person who was required to
swear in that manner; and for this reason, pro-
bably, ‘ Francigene et alienigene in verborum ob-
servanciis non frangunt. There is no mention of
the juramentum fractum, frangens, in verborum
observanciis, or planum, before the time of the
Conqueror.


1xxIX. ¢ Si quis de homicidio,’ &c. Hence it would seem
that the paternal relations were considered less
worthy of credit than the maternal. There is no
mention in the Saxon laws extant of any general
purgation for homicide. The purgation, in a
particular case, in Cn. Sec. 39. is the same as here;
the purgation in In. 54. is quite different.


4XX% ¢Ttem si quis sine judicio,’ &c. This mode is more
fully detailed in H. 74. § 1, 2. What is here
alluded to is probably the nature of the oath to be
taken from the relations, See also Ath. 11.


“XXX. ¢ Werminga’ is supposed by Somner (note) to be a
mistake for cenninga. ‘The whole passage is ob-
scure and unintelligible.


Cap. LXVI. ****!" «In hiis vero,’ &c. This sentence appears
to have a reference to the clause immediately pre-
ceding, but it is neither of easy construction, nor
is the reason given for the rule easy to be under-
stood. ‘The rule seems to be, that the parties
named as con-sacramentals should be taken from
among the neighbours of the accused.


XXXL ¢ In Myrcenis,’ &c. By this last clause it would
seem that the number (say fifteen) required out of
the forty-eight to take the oath should be selected
by lot, and not by election.


624 NOTES ON THE LAWS


Cap. LXVIL. '***!¥. ¢ Triplex lada (juramentum) tam late,’
&c. This would seem to mean that the compurga-
tors required for the compurgation must be taken
from among the persons who belong to the court
where the cause is tried.


1xxxv. ¢ Et de omnibus causis,’ &c. The meaning of this
passage is: Whenever the accused might purge
himself by oath se sexto, if he preferred the ordeal
(judicium), he was to use the ¢ ferrum judiciale’
that weighed 20 sol. or 1 lib. Where the three-
fold purgation was required, he was to use the
‘ferrum judiciale’ that weighed 60 sol. or 3 lib.
In confirmation of this it may be observed, that in
Cn. Sec. 30. the simple ordeal appears to be re-
garded as equivalent to the pound-worth oath in
three hundreds. In the triple dada the iron was
triple and weighed three pounds; in the simple
ordeal it was, therefore, one pound. But in Cn.
Sec. 30. the simple ordeal is said to be equivalent
to the one-pound oath, and here in H. 67. it is
the same as ‘jurare se sexto.’ ‘Jurare se sexto’
was therefore the simple purgation by oath, in
such cases as there described in the law.


YXXXVL ¢ In causis que cotidie non cessant,’ &c. What
these causes were is nowhere mentioned in the
laws.


Cap. LXVIII. ***"" ¢ Et licet omnis presbiter,’ &c. From
the time of Athelstan (see pp. 182, 183.) there is a number
of laws declaring a mass-priest to be worthy of ‘ thane-right’;
and in many of them his ‘wer’ is said to be equal to that of a
secular thane, as in Ath. pp. 186, 187. Ethelr. V. 9. and VI. 5.,
&c. This is the first time where it is said that the ‘wer’ to be
paid for him shall be regulated, not by his rank in the church,
but by his birth; and is so far completely at variance with the
whole tenour of the Saxon laws.


Cap. LXX. '***""" This chapter consists chiefly of excerpts
from Saxon laws, put together without method,
and, though principally relating to compositions
for homicide, diverging, towards the end, to other
subjects.


LXXXIX. ¢ Tn Westsexa,’ &c. Wessex being here declared the
head of the kingdom, would seem to indicate that
this was a fragment of some Saxon law.


Xe. ¢ Si servus servum occidat,’ &c. The exact proto-
type of this law seems uncertain. In Gul. Pr. I.7.
the manbot for the slaughter of a serf is declared


ASCRIBED TO KING HENRY I. 625


to be 20 shillings, but it does not appear what
sort of shillings were intended; and there is -no
mention of any sort of compensation to the kin-
dred. 40 pennies=8 Saxon=10 Mercian shillings.
In Ethelr. II. 5. the payment for killing a thral
is declared to be 1 pound=20 Norman shillings,
which makes it probable that the shillings in
Gul. Pr. I. 8. are meant to be Norman shillings.
In In. 74. the payment for killing an Englishman
by a British ‘theow,’ is 60 shillings by his master,
or the theow to be given up: but though 60
Mercian shillings=20 Norman shillings, 60 Saxon
shillings == 25. In In. 23. it seems to be de-
clared, that for slaying certain theows, the com-
pensation was 60 shillings, and for others 50; but
50 Saxon shillings were nearly equal to 20 Norman
shillings.


xc. ¢ Attamen persolvantur,’ &c. The connexion of this
clause either with what precedes or with what
follows, is not apparent.


xel. ¢ Si se invicem occidant liberi,’&c. This Jaw, though
its origin is not apparent, is undoubtedly Saxon ;
for it explains an obscure passage (see ‘ Oaths,’
pp- 182, 183, and ‘ Mercian Law,’ pp. 190, 191.)
repeated in H. 64, §2. It appears from this law,
that after an affray an account was taken of the
slaughter on each side; that if the account were
even, neither side was entitled to compensation
for its losses, nor could lawfully take vengeance
for the slaughter; but if there were any difference
in the loss, estimated by the ‘ wers’ and numbers
of persons slain, that the side which had sus-
tained the greater loss was entitled to the over-
plus, or to exact vengeance to the amount of the
overplus.


xeul. ¢ Si quis de servo,’ &c. This law is far from clear;
it probably means that if a freedman is slain, the
slayer must pay for him, without any account being
taken of the provocation or injury he had received
from the person slain.


xelv. ¢ Qui pacem facit,’ &c. One who makes compen-
sation for wounds or other injuries ought to
take care that the accord is final, and have wit-
nesses.


*ev. ¢ Si mulier homicidium faciat,’ &c. It appears that
the husband and husband’s family were not liable
ss


626 NOTES ON THE LAWS


to make satisfaction for homicides committed by
the wife; but that she, her children, and relations,
were liable. Edm. 7. (pp. 256, 257.)


xeVl. ¢ Si quis Pine mortuus fuerit,’ &c. Both these rules
are laid down in Glanvile, lib. 13. c.15. and lib. 7
c.1l. The first is taken in part from Cn. Sec. 73.
Ethelr. III. 14. and the principle of the second is
to be found in H. & E. 6. and in In. 38.


xevIt. ¢ Si quis sine liberis,’ &c. Taken literally from the
Leg. Ripuar. 56.


Cap. LX XIV. *°'"* This chapter contains a number of regu-
lations concerning persons slain on suspicion of
having committed some capital offence, but without
a legal trial.


xeix. ¢ Si ad uu. libras,’ &c. This passage is manifestly
corrupt, nor does any obvious correction present
itself. One ‘qui ad 1111. libras natus sit’ was a
villein, H.70. § 1. In Conf. 36. the compurga-
tors required in a trial of this sort are eighteen,
of whom twelve are to be paternal relations, and
six maternal; but here, if the text is allowed to
stand, they are to be eighteen paternal and four
maternal, a number quite disproportionate. In
E. & G. pp. 174, 175. the sureties required for
‘wer-borh’ are twelve, of whom eight are to be
kinsmen on the father’s side, and four on the
mother’s.


®
o


Si ad xrv. libras,’ &c. One ‘qui ad xv. libras
natus sit’ is nearer being a ‘six-hynde’ man than
any other description of persons, x1v. libras= 672
Saxon shillings. Can xiv. be a mistake for xxv.,
which is the ‘ wer’ of a thane?


Cap. LX XV. % ¢Servus erat,’ &c. Is not the word servus
here used for a free retainer? Is not this implied
by the phrase ‘dominus in capite,’ and by the
payment to the relations ?


ct. ¢ Qui servum suum,’ &c. There appear to be no
civil penalties in the Saxon Jaws for the death of
a slave by his master. The ecclesiastical penances
in Edg. M.I. P. 11, 12, are taken from Ecgbert’s
Penitential, IJ. 3, 4.


Cap. LX XVII. °*Si quis de servo patre,’ &c. The only
provision on this subject in the Saxon laws is a general decla-


ASCRIBED TO KING HENRY I. 627


ration, that children born in ‘ peopet’ are ‘ peopay,’ and children
born in freedom are free. Ecg. P. c. 25. Th. P. xvr. 33. 21.
If a woman was condemned to slavery while in a state of
pregnancy, the child was born free. ‘Th. P. xvz. 33.2.1. On
the other hand, if a female slave was manumitted after she
became pregnant, her child was born a slave. Ecg. Conf. c. 25.
See upon this subject Glanv. lib. 5. c.6; Bracton, lib. 1. c. 6,
§4, 5; Fleta, lib. 1. c. 3,43; Britton, c. 31. p. 156; Mirror, c. 2.
§ 28; Littleton, § 187,188; and Fortescue, § 42, who says, ‘ Lex
Anglize nunquam matris, sed semper patris conditionem imitari
partum judicat.’

It appears that the general maxim above quoted is as old at
least as this compilation; and that, as a consequence flowing
from it, children born of a serf and a free woman in marriage
have been always reputed serfs; but that children born of free
women unmarried, though begotten by serfs, have always been
reputed free; though this exception is not mentioned here. It
does not appear, however, that bastards, as such, were necessarily
free in the time of Bracton: among those born servi he enume-
rates children ‘ex nativa soluta, quamvis ex patre libero.’ Lib. 1.
c.6. §4. Fleta also classes among those born servi the children
‘ex soluta nativa, quia sequitur conditionem matris, a quocunque
fuerit genitus, libero vel nativo.’

It appears that Britton held the same doctrine on this point
with Bracton and Fleta, but the contrary is held to be the com-
mon law by Lord Coke, in his commentary on the above-cited
passage from Littleton. It appears also that the principle laid
down by Bracton and Fleta, of deciding on the status of the
child from the status of the mother at the time of its conception,
is as old as the Penitentials of Theodore and Ecgbert. This
principle is indeed carried further by Bracton than by the Saxon
bishops, and by Fleta still further.

‘ Si pater sit liber et mater ancilla” &c. ‘The general rule at
the beginning of this clause is at variance with the doctrine laid
down by many subsequent authorities. Glanvile enumerates
among the persons who are nativi by birth one born ‘ex patre
Jibero et matre nativa,’ and adds, ‘si quis liber homo duxerit
nativam in uxorem ad aliquid villenagium, quamdiu fuerit ita
obligatus villenagio eo ipso legem terree tanquam nativus
amittet.’

Bracton also Jays it down, that one is born ‘servus,’ ‘ qui de
libero genitus, qui se copulavit villane in villenagio constitute,
sive copula maritalis intervenerit, sive non.’ Lib. 4. c.6. § 4.
But he adds, that he is born free ¢ qui ex matre ancilla et patre
libero genitus, dum tamen extra villenagium et in libero thoro,
dum tamen ex matrimonio.’

Fleta, on the contrary, maintains that if the parents were
copulate, and ‘genitus fuerit partus a libero, licet a nativa,
partus erit liber” Lib. 1. ¢.3. § 2.


ss2


628 NOTES ON THE LAWS


The Mirror makes the marriage of the parents an essential
condition to the liberty of the offspring. ‘ Those are villaines
who are begotten of a freeman and a neife, and born out of
matrimony.’ Ch. 2. § 28. Britton also appears to consider the
same condition essential. Ch. 31. p. 156. And Fortescue
(chap. 42.) asserts the same doctrine as is here laid down,
Littleton makes the offspring of a neife who marries a free-
man free: ‘si niefe prend frank home a sa baron, Jour issues
serra frank,’ Sec. 187. On which Lord Coke notes, that the
neife marrying a freeman is enfranchised during the coverture,
and therefore, by the common law of England, the issue is free.
123 a.

Bastards, in the time of Littleton, were born free, whatever
was the condition of the mother.

It appears on the whole, that the construction of the law
became gradually more favourable to personal liberty after the
time of Glanvile.


Cap. LX XVIII. “ «Qui servum suum liberat,’ &c. This
form of manumission agrees with Gul. Pr. III.
15., but it appears that, besides the county court,
manumissions might take place in the church, in
the market place, and in the hundred.


°v. «Et de singulis discrete sciatur,’ &c. A register to
be kept of slaves to prevent the abuse here com-
plained of. The passage seems to be a note thrust
into the text.


vt ¢ De inventis et pauperibus,’ &c. Text corrupt and
unintelligible.


Cap. LXXIX. © “Si quis a vicecomite’ &c. The same
penalty for ‘zmdbpyce’ as in H. 12. §2., H.35.
§2., and the passages referred to in H.12. The
shillings are Norman. The peculiarity here is,
that the king’s peace might be granted by the
sheriff or other minister.


cvul. ¢ Matris et capitalis ecclesie zpi5bpeche,’ &c. Taken
literally from Ethelr. IX. 5., and Cn. Eccl. 3.,
except that 120 shillings are translated 50 shillings,
60 sh. 25, and 30 sh. 12sh. 6d.


Cap. LX XX. © ¢Si quis in domo vel in curia regis,’ &c.
The distance to which the king’s peace extends from his
‘ bupg-geat’ is laid down in Ath. pp. 224, 225. and Hen. 16.;


ASCRIBED TO KING HENRY I. 629


but this is the only place where a definition is given of what is
to be considered as his domus. The limits were probably the
same as what is termed in Edm. E, 3., Ethelr. VII. 15. and
VI. 36., his ‘ neapeye.’


Cap. LXXXI. ™ This is a very curious chapter, and not
only shows us with what care precautions were taken to prevent
and punish drinking quarrels, but it marks the relative im-
portance of the villani, cotseti, and servi. ‘The text is corrupt,
but not to such a degree as to make the sense obscure.


Cap. LXXXIV. “%" «In quibusdam locis,’ &c. This very
singular regulation, so strongly illustrative of a rude but warlike
people, is nearly the same with H. 39.


Cap. LXXXVI. %™ The title of this chapter is incorrect.


Cap. LXXXVII. “" ¢ Qui ad occidendum,’ &c. ~ The first
sentence is from Alf. 19., but instead of going
on with that Jaw, the three sentences that fol-
low are from In. 29., omitting the words ‘ obpey
eyne- y he lorige’ The compiler then reverts
to Alf. 19., and takes from it the remainder of
the clause.


cxtv. ¢ Si quis ad hostium,’ &c. From Cn. Sec. 76.,
with the addition ‘ observet autem ... munda
sint,’


exV. ¢ Si quelibet arma politori,’ &c. from the latter part
of Alfr. 19., and explains what is there very diffi-
cult to understand. The words e¢ de subito
arripiantur ad aliquid male agendum, which are
necessary to make out the sense, are wanting in
the Saxon text, as well as in the Latin version.
‘ reyund’ is rendered ‘ absoluta,’ and ‘angyloe,’
by a periphrasis, ‘custodiam.” ‘The passage, as it
here stands, may be thus translated: Jf arms are
entrusted to a cutler to clean, or to any one to keep,
and they are carried off to do mischief with, it is
Sair that the person to whose care they were com-
mitted free from guilt should give them back in
the same state, unless he made an express bargain
that he should not be bound to keep them from being
used for an unlawful purpose. But if he is ac-
cused of being privy or auxiliary to the use that
was made of them, he must clear himself according
to law. The last sentence is not in Alf. 19.


ss 3


630 NOTES ON THE LAWS


°x¥t. ¢ Si quis occidatur in hlope,’ &c. taken from Alf. 29.,
and in part from In. 34, but the sums different,
and ‘ manbota’ substituted for wite.


Cap. LX XXVIII. “¥" A very miscellaneous chapter; chance
medley; homicides from carelessness, from misfor-
tune, deadly feuds; right and obligations of kin-
dred.


cxvill. ¢ Si quis propter faidiam,’ &c. By the Salic law
(Tit. 63. Ref.), if one who had abjured his kin-
dred died or was slain, his inheritance or com-
position went, not to his heirs, but to the jise, or
grantees of the isc.


cxix.¢ Et nulli liceat forismittere.’ There is nothing
analogous to this in any Saxon law extant, except
the particular case in Alf. 41.


xX. ¢ Et in omni weregildo,’ &c. This regulation im-
plies that the law of Edm. Sec. 1. had been with-
out effect, and that the relations of the homicide
were still liable to the feud for his offence, until
satisfaction was given.


Cap. XC. °**" * Qui aliquem exarmaverit injuste,’ &c. taken
from Cn. Sec. 61., with this addition, that if the person deprived
unjustly of his arms is in the meantime slain or hurt by any
one, the person who disarmed him must make compensation.


Cap. XCI. °**"" The following are the variations between
this law and former ones on the same subject: Time.— By
Conf. 15. a month and day allowed to search for the criminal
before the penalty is exacted, and then to be kept under the
king’s seal for a year andaday. By Gul. Pr. IIL 3. the time
is reduced to five days; in H. 13. § 2.75, §6. it is the same
as here. Amount of penalty.—In Gul. Pr. I. 22. it is said to
be 47 marks, but probably by some blunder. In H. 75. the
clause on murder is manifestly corrupt. Zo whom due,— By
Conf. 15. on failure of relations, their portion to the lord or
‘ felagus’ (zey15?), and on failure of all, to the king.


Cap. XCII, °*"" «Et quando et ubi,’ &c. What follows
seems corrupt, and to want something to complete
the sense. It alludes, apparently, to the inquiries
to be made as to any former quarrels or differences
between the person murdered and the person sus-
pected of having murdered him.


ASCRIBED TO KING HENRY I. 631


cxxIv. ¢ Qui murdrum aperte fecerit,’ &c. How can mur-
der be committed ‘aperte’? The punishment is
from Cn. Sec. 55., where the words ¢ open mop’
are used, and here improperly applied to the
perpetrator, instead of the deed,


ADDITIONAL REMARKS.


Ethb. 8. note (*). Mr. Cooper’s Report, referred to here and
at page 1938. note (*), has not been published. From
a copy of Appendix (B.), which reached Germany,
the two principal poems have been reprinted, with
illustrations, under the following title: ‘ Andreas
und Elene, herausgegeben von Jacob Grimm. Cassel,
1840.’


Ine, 62. The interpretation, which I have ventured to give of
this obscure law, is founded on the supposition, that
the word ‘ceap’ is used in the same sense throughout.
To the objection, that my translation of it by pledge
is unsupported, it may be answered, that pledge, or
security, is the only term which seemed to express the
meaning of ‘ceap’ in every place where it occurs, and
that it is, to a certain degree, authorized by the law
of H.& E. 10., where it is said: ‘Ing man odepne
tihte yippan he him bymizan gerealdne hebbe,’ Jf
any one should accuse another after he has given him a
security (pledge).


Ine, 64-66. The object of these enactments was apparently to
prevent persons from letting their land lie waste, by
enacting that no landholder should leave his land
who could not show that the half at least was in a
proper state of cultivation.


Ine, 67, 68. These two laws, though their precise import is not
clear, seem to have the same object with the three
immediately preceding; viz. the promotion of agri-
culture.


Edw. & Guth. 4. What is meant by pone ufepan and pone
nypepan is a point of uncertainty, which the Latin of
H. x1. 5., where the Saxon is rendered by superiorem
and infériorem, leaves undecided. If the condition in
life of the parties is to be understood, it would seem,
from the use of the masculine article only, that the
man alone was subject to punishment. If sex be
referred to, the text is faulty, and for the second
‘pone’ we should read ‘pa.’ This interpretation is


ADDITIONAL REMARKS.


supported by the following passages from Domesday
Book: fol. 1., ‘De adulterio vero, per totum Chent,
habet rex hominem, et archiepiscopus mulierem, ex-
cepta terra S. Trinitatis, et S. Augustini, et S. Mar-
tini, de quibus rex nichil habet;? and again, fol. 26.,
‘ Adulterium vel raptum faciens, vir. sol. et 1111. den.
emendat homo, et femina tantundem. Rex habet
hominem adulterum, archiepiscopus feminam.’


Ath. I. 16. By the plough, the plough or carrucata of land is
meant, not the implement of agriculture.


Edm. C. 3. The word ‘ordalii’ is undoubtedly either a bar-
barism or a clerical error for ‘ordarii,’ or ‘ hordarii,’
from the A.S. ‘hordere.’


Edg, H. 4. For ‘manna’ we ought certainly to read ‘manney,’
and translate—of the hundred-man, ‘The Latin trans-
lator had evidently this reading before him; he ren-
ders it ‘hominis hundreti.’


Edw. Conf. 30. 1.38. The mss. read Anglorum, but it should
manifestly be Danorum.


Page 30.


ERRATA.


line 5. for pil pumne read pilpumne.


. line 8. for cocynzey read co cynzey.
. cap. Iv. line 2. for yeop-munze read feopmunze.
. cap. 3. line 5. for ‘earldorman’s’ read ‘ealdorman’s.’


note (°). line penult. for c. 10. read c. 6.

line 9. for pacepey read pacener.

line 8. for zecichloba read zethclobda.

cap. 111. line 3. for eaS-méccum read e@Sméccum.


. note (*). for The text is from G. read The text is


from ZH.
cap. vill. line 1. for zeleyc read zeleyce.


. cap. 1. line 1. for sunt read sint.

. cap. xxx. line 4. for veluere read voluero.
. note (*). for 57. § 2. read 57. § 3.

. note (>). for 453. read 224, 225.


ABBREVIATIONS EXPLAINED.


A.&G. Alfred and Guthrum’s Peace, p. 152, 153.
Alf. Laws of King Alfred, p. 44, 45.
Ath.I, Laws of King Athelstan, I. (Council of Greatanlea),
p. 194, 195.
Ath JI. - - - - II. (Decretum Cantianum),
p- 216.
Ath. WI. - - - - III. (Decretum Sapientum An-
glie), p. 217.
Ath IV. - - - - IV. p. 220, 221.
Ath. V. - - - - V. (Judicia Civitatis Lun-
doniz), p. 228, 229.
C. E. Laws of King Cnut (Ecclesiastical), p. 358, 359.
C.F. - - - (Constitutiones de Foresta), p. 426.
C.S. - - - (Secular), p. $76, 377.
Ed. Laws of King Edward, p. 158, 159.
E.&G. Laws of Edward and Guthrum, p. 166, 167.
Ed.C. Laws of King Edward the Confessor, p. 442.
Ea.c.L. - - - - - (Libertas Civita-
tum), p.462.
Edg. H. Laws of King Edgar (How the Hundred shall be held),
p. 258, 259.
Edg.I. - - - I. (Ecclesiastical), p. 262, 263.
Edg.IL - - - II. (Secular), p. 266, 267.
Edg.S. - - - (Supplement), p. 270, 271.
Edm. B. Laws of King Edmund (Of betrothing a Woman),
p. 254, 255.
Edm. C. - - - - (Concilium Culintonense),
p. 252.
Edm. E. - - - - (Ecclesiastical), p. 244, 245.
Edm. S. - - - - (Secular), p. 246, 247.


ABBREVIATIONS EXPLAINED.


Eth.I. Laws of King Ethelred, I. (Council of Woodstock),
p. 280, 281.

Eth.II. - - - Ji. (Treaty with Anlaf, Justin,
and Guthmund), p. 284,
285.

Eth. II. - - - III. (Council of Wantage), p.292,
293.

EthIV. - - - IV. (De Institutis Londoniz),
p- 300.

Eth. V. - - - Vz. (Liber Constitutionum),
p. 304, 305.

Eth. VI. - - - VI. (Council of Enham), p. 314,
315.

Eth. VII. - - - VII. (Be Grid and be Munde),
p- 330, 331.

Eth. VIII. - - - VIII. (Conc. apud Habam), p. 336.

Eth. IX. - - - IX. (Be Ciric-Grise), p.340, 341.

Ethb. Laws of King #thelbirht, p. 2, 3.

Ff, Of Forfang, p. 224, 225.

H. Laws of King Henry I. p. 497.

H.&E. Laws of Hlothhere and Eadric, p. 26, 27.

In. Laws of King Ine, p. 102, 103.

M.L. Mercian Law, p. 190, 191.

O. Oaths, p. 178, 179.

O.D. Ordinance respecting the ‘ Diin-setas,’ p. 352, 353.

R. Ranks, p. 190, 191.

R.S. Rectitudines Singularum Personarum, p. 432, 433.

Ws. Wergilds, p. 186, 187.

Wih. Laws of King Wihtred (Council of Berghamstede),

p» 36, 37.

Wil. Laws of King William the Conqueror, I. p. 465.

Wil. TI. - - : - - II. p. 488, 489.

Wil. III. - - - - - III. p. 490.

Wil.IV. - - - - - IV. p. 495.


TABLE OF CONCORDANCE.


N. B.—It is to be observed, that whenever a law, which in one
code stands alone as a separate chapter or title, appears
in another place as a clause only of a chapter or title, the
references to such clauses are in the Table of Concordance
distinguished from each other by a short line (—).


/ETHELBIRHT.


Cap. 1. Eth. VII. 7.
5. H. xir.1. LxXxx. 1.7.
6. H. uxviir. 1.
8. Wih.2.; Eth. VII. 8.
15. Alf.39.; In. 6.; H. uxxxt. 3.
18. Alf.19.; H. uxxxvit. 1.
19. Eth. 89.
923. H.& E. 2.4.
24. Ethb.ss.; Alf.35.; C.S.42.61.; H. xc. 9.


on } Alf. 40.3 In. 45.3 EtheIV.4.; H. x12, xxxv. 2


31. C.S. 54.
33. H. xciv,. 4.
36. }

37 yp Alt 44.; H. xetrr 2.
38. Alf. 68.; H. xcrrr. 28.


40 Ale 46.; H. xciti. 4.


43. Alf. 47.; Wil. I. 19.; H. xcrrr. 5.
44, Alf. 47.

50. <AJf. 50.; H. xcrr1.9.

51. Alf. 49.; H. xcrri. 7.

53. Alf. 54.55.; H. xcrir. 13. 14.


rep Ale 56-60.; Wil. I. 11.; H. xc11I. 15-19.


oo} Wil J. 10.; H. xcrit. 1.


61. Alf. 61.; H. xcrrr. 20.
64. Alf.65.; H. xcrri. 24.
65. Alf. 62.; H. xcr11. 21.
66. Alf. 70.; H. xcrz. 30.
67. Alf. 62.; H. xcrir. 21.
68. Alf. 77.; H. xcr11.37.
69. Alf. 71.; Wil. I.11.; H. xem. 31.


TABLE OF CONCORDANCE.


ZETHELBIRHT — continued.


ne Alf. 64.; H. xcrr1. 23.
82. Alf. 11. 18. 25. 26.; In.10.; Eth. VI.39.; C.S. 53.;
Wil. I. 12. 18.; H. x. 1. x11. 6.


86. H. vxx. 2. 3.

88. Ethb. 24.; Alf.35.; C.S.42.61.; H. cx. 9.
89. Ethb. 19.

90. Wih. 27.; Ath. III. 6.; Edm. C. 4.


HLOTHHERE AND EADRIC.


Cap. ra Ethb. 23.


6. In. 38.; H. vxx. 18.
7 H.& E. 16.; In. 25.


a } In. 8. 62.


12 Yn. 6.; H, LxXxxI. 1. LXXXVII. 9. 10.


15. C.S. 28.; Ed. C. 23.; Wil. I. 48.; H. vim. 5.
16. H.& E.7.; In. 25.


WIHTRAD.


Cap. 1. Ath. IV.3.; Eth. VIIL 3.
Ethb. s.; Eth. VII. s.

C. S. 6. 56.

In. 2.; E.& G. 3.

H. Lxxvil.3. LXXVIIL 1.


POMP


10. Mn 3.; E.&G.7.; C.S. 45.; H. x1. 10,
11.


14. : .
. 5p E&G. g.; Eth. VIII. 2.; C.S.47.


et Eth. IX. 19. 20. 21.3; C.E. 5.; H. ixtv. 8.


20. A.& G. 3.

25.y In. 12.; Ath. I. 1. TI. 6.; Wil. I. 27.; H. xvi. 4, nx. 20.
%6. 23.

27. Ethb. 90.; Ath. III. 6.; Edm. C.4.

28. In. 20.


ALFRED.


Cap. 1. C.E. 19.

Alf. 5.42.; In.5.; Ath. III. 6. 1V.4.; Edm.S.9.; Eth.
VIL 5.; Ed. C.5.; Wil 1.1.

C.S. 59.; Eth. VII. 11.

Ath. I.4.; Edg. II.7.; Eth. V. 30. VI. 37.; C.S. 26. 58.
65.; H. xi. 1. XLUL 7. XLVIL


Poo pO


TABLE OF CONCORDANCE.


ALFRED — continued.


Cap. 5. Alfio. 42.; In.5.; Ath. III. 6. IV.4.; Edm. S.2.; Eth.


VII. 5.; Ed.C.5.; Wil. 1.1.

7. In.6.; Eth. VII. 9. 15.; C.S. 60.; H. x. 1. XIII. 7. LXXX. 1.

8. Alf.18.; Edm. E. 4.; Eth. VI. 39.; H. uxxi11. 6.

9. H. Luxx. 14. 165.

11. Ethb. sa-s4.; Alf. 18. 25. 26.; In. 10.; Eth. VI. 39.; C.S.
53.3; Wil. I. 12. 18.; H. x. 1. XIII. 6.

12. In. 48. 44.; C. F. 28, 29,; H. xx11I. 2. XXXVII. XLV. 4.

13. H.xe.6.

14. H. uxxvill. 6.

15. Alf. 38.; In.6.; Eth. VII. 12.; H. uxxx. 8.

17. H. uxxxviit. 7. 8.

18. Ethb. so-84.; Alf. 11. 25. 26.; In. 10.; Eth. VI. s9.; C.S.
53.; Wil. I. 12.18.; H. x. 1. xu. 6.— Alf. 8.; Edm. E.
4.; Eth. VI. 39.; H. uxxiir. 6. — H. uxxxil. 9.

19. Ethb. 18.; H. pxxxvii. 1.— H. ixxxvil. 3.

20. H. xxrir. 3. XLV. 2

21. Eth. IX. 26.; C.S. 41.; H. xxvii. 2. wxvitl. & LXXIII. 2
3. 4.

25.) Ethb. s2-84.; Alf. 11. 18.; In. 10.; Eth. VI. 39.; C.S. 53.;

26. Wil. I. 12. 18.; H.x. 1. x11 6.


Hh }in 23.; H. Lxxv. 6.10.


29.

20 bn, 13. 14.; H. uxxxvil. 4. 7.

31.

32. Edg. II. 4.; C.S. 16.; H. xxxrv. 7.
34, In. 25.


35. Ethb. 24. 88.; C.S. 42. 61.; H. xc. 9.

36. H. Lxxxvill. 1. 2. 3.

37. In. 39.; Ed. 10.; Ath. I. 22. II. 4. III. 4. IV.1.; Edm.C.
3.; C.S. 28.; Wil. I. 30. 48.; H. xxi. 2.

38. Alf.15.; In. 6.; Eth. VII. 12.; H. uxxx. 8.

39. Ethb. 15.; In. 6.; H. uxxxr. 3.

40. Ethb. 27. 29.; In. 45.; Eth. IV. 4.; H. x11. 2. xxxv. 2,—
C.E.16.; C.S.48.; H. vx. 1.

41. H. uxx. 21. LXxxvIill. 14.

42. Alf.2.5.; In.5.; Ath. JII.6. [V.4.; Edm. S.2.; Eth.
VII. 5.; Ed. C. 5.; Wil. I. 1.— Eth. IV. 4.; H. uxxxi1. 1.
LXXXIII. 1. 3. —— H. LXxxil. 3. 4. LXXXVIII. 10. — H.
LXXXII. 8 — Wil. I. 35.

43. Edg. I. 5.; C.E. 14.— Eth. V. 14. VI. 22; C.E. 16.—
Eth. VI. 23.; C.E.16.; H. xx. 1.

44, Ethb. 36. 37.; H. xciii. 2.

45. H. xcirt. 3.

46. Ethb. 39. 40.; H. xciir. 4.

47, Ethb. 43. 44.; Wil. I. 19.; H. xc. 5.

49. Ethb. 51.; H. xcuz. 7.

50. Ethb. 50.; H. xcii1. 9.

51. H. xcrrr. 10.

52. H. xcri. 11.

53. H. xciii. 12.


is } Ethb. 53.; H. xcri. 13. 14.


TABLE OF CONCORDANCE.


ALFRED ~—continued.
Cap. 56.
57.
58. >Ethb. 54. 55.; Wil. I. 11.; H. xcrir. 15-19.
59.
60.


61. Ethb. 61.; H. xciri. 20.

62. Ethb. 65. 67.; H. xcitt. 21.
63. H. xciri. 22.

64. Ethb. 70. 71.; H. xcri1. 23.
65. Ethb. 64.; H. xcrir. 24.
66. H. xcrir. 25. 26.

67. H. xcrit.-27.

68. Ethb. 38.; H. xcir. 28.
69. H. xcrri. 29.

70. Ethb. 66.; H. xci11. 30.
71. Ethb.69.; Wil. I. 11.; H. xcrrt. 32.
72. H. xciit. 32.

73. H. xciit. 33.

74, H. xcrit. 34.

75. H. xciit. 35.

76. H. xciii. 36.

77. Ethb.68.; H. xci11. 37.


INE.


Cap. 2. Wih.6.; E.& G. 3.
3. Wih.9.10.11.; E.& G.7.; C.S.45.; H. x1. 10.
4. In.61.; Ath. I. proem.; Edm. E.2.; Edg. I. 2.3.; Eth.
aE 18. VIII. 4. [X.11.; C. E.10.11.; R.S. p. 434, 435.;
. XI. 4.
5. Eth. VII. 4.5.; H. xc. 7.— Alf. 2. 5. 42.; Ath. HI. 6.
IV. 4.; Edm. S. 2.; Eth. VII. 5.; Ed.C.5.; Wil. I. 1.
6. Ethb. 15.; Alf. 39.; H. yxxxr.3.-—-H. & E. 13. 14.; H.
LXXXI. 1, LXXXviI. 9. 10.— Alf. 7.; Eth. VII. 9. 15.;
C.S.60.; H.x.1. x11.7. Lxxx. 1. — Alf. 15.38.; Eth.
VII. 12.; H. uxxx. 8.
7. In.57.; C.S. 77.
8 H.& E.8.10.; In. 62.
10. Ethb. s2-84.; Alf. 11. 18. 25. 26.; Eth. VI. 39.; C.S. 53.;
Wil. I. 12.18.; H. x. 1. xu. 6. — Eth. TX. 4.; C.E.3.;
C.S. 48. 64.
ll. Eth. V. 2. VI.9, VIII.5.; C.S.3.; Wil. I. 42. III. 15.
12. Wih. 25. 296.; Ath. I. 1. III. 6.; Wil. I. 27.; H. nvr. 4.
LIX, 20. 23,


13.
14. } Alf. 29-31.; H. uxxxvit. 4. 7.


16. In.35.; Ath. IV. 4. V. vir.

18. In. 37.

20. Wih. 28.

2). Ath. I. 11.; Eth. III. 7.; Ed. C. 36.; H. uxiv. 5. LXxIv. 2
23. Alf. 27. 98.; H. uxxv. 6. 10.

24. In. 32.; Wg. 7.8.

25. H.& E.7. 16.; Alf. 34.

27. HH. uxxvin. 4.


Cap.28.


TABLE OF CONCORDANCE.


INE — continued.


In. 36. 72.; C.S.29.; Wil. I. 3. 49.; H. x11. 3. LIX. 18.
26. LXV. 1. 2.

Ed. 7. 8.; Ath. I. 8. 20. II. 6. IV. 4. V.1.2.; Eth. TIL
13.; C.S. 13. 15. 67.; Ed.C.5.; H. vis. 4. X.1. XI. 14.
XII. 10.

Edm. B. 1. 5.

In. 24.; Wg. 7. 8.

H. Lxxxvil. 8.

In.16.; Ath. IV.4. V. vir.

In. 28. 72.; C.S.29.; Wil I. 3. 49.; H. xr. 3. Lrx. 18.
26. LXV. 1. 2.

In. 18.

H.& E.6.; H. xx. 18.

Alf. 37.; Ed.10.; Ath. I. 22, II. 4. IlI.4. IV. 1.; Edm.C.
3.; C.S. 28.3; Wil. I. 30.48.; H. xn. 2. — Wil. I. 32.;
H. xxii. 2.


7 } Alf.i2.; C.F. 28. 29.; H. xxl. 2. XXXVII. XLV. 4.


Eth. 27. 29.; Alf.40.; Eth. [V.4.; H. x11. 2. xxxv. 2.
In. 54.

Ath. I, 24.

C.S.66.; H. x111.9. LXvI. 6.

Ath. V. x1.


In. 4.; Ath. I. proem.; Edm.E. 2.; Edg. I. 2.3.; Eth.
VIL is. VIII. 4. 1X. 11.; C. E. 10. 11.; R.S. p. 434, 435. ;
H. x1. 4.

H.& E. 8. 10.; In. 8.

Ed. C.12.; Wil. I. 7.; H. tx1x. “xx. 2.4. LXXXVII. 4.—
E. & G.13.; O.13.; Wg. 6.9-12.; M.L.; Wil. I. 8.;
H. xiv. 2. LXX. 1. LXXVI. 4.

In. 28. 36.; C.S. 29.; Wil. I. 3.49.; H. x11. 3. Lrx. 18
26. LXV. 1. 2.

H. ixx. 5.

H. vxxrx. 1.


ALFRED AND GUTHRUM'S PEACE.


Eth. Il. 5.; Ed. C. 16.; H. uxx. 6. 8.
Wih. 20.
Ed. 1.


EDWARD.


Ed.11.; Edg. H.7. I. 1.; Eth. V.1. VI. 8. VIIL 6.; C.S.
1.—+ Ed. 11.; O.D.8.; H.1x.4. ut 2.

A. & G. 4. — Ath. J. 10. 12. 13. III. 2. V. x.; Edm. C. 3.;
Edg. S.6.; Eth. I. 3.; C.S.24.; Ed. C.38.; Wil. I. 45.
III. 10. 11. C. S. 27.; H. xxii. 2


TABLE OF CONCORDANCE.


EDWARD — continued.


Cap. 2. Ed.4.; C.S.15.; H. xr. 4.
3. Ath. I. 25.; C.S. 36. 37.
4. Ed.2.; C.S.15.; H. xu. 4.
5. Ath. IV. 1.; Edg. 8. 3. 4. 5.
7.UIn.30.; Ath. I. 8. 20. III. 6. IV. 4. V.1.2.; Eth. III. 13.;
8. C.S. 13. 15. 67.; Ed. C.5.; H. viri. 4. x.1. XI. 14, XI
10. -— Ath. I. 17.
10. Alf.37.; In. 39.; Ath. I. 22. I. 4. III. 4. 1V.1.; Edm. C.
3.; C.S. 28.; Wil. I. 30. 48.; H. xurt. 2.
ll. Ed. proem.; Edg. H.7. Il. 1.; Eth. V. 1. VI. 8. VIIL 6.;
C.S. 1.— Edg. H. 1. IL. 5.; C.S.18.; H. vir4. on 2
— Ed. proem.; Edg. H.7.; O. D.8.; H. 1x. 4. Lr. 2


EDWARD AND GUTHRUM.


Proem, Eth. V.1. VI. 1. IX. 44.; C.S. 5.
Cap. 1. Edg.I.5.; Eth. I.1. VI. 14. VII. 2.; C. E. 2.; Ed.C. 12.
96. 27.3; Wil. I.1.2.; H.x. 1. xl. 1. LXXIX. 3.
2. Eth. V. 1. 22. VI. 1. 27. 34, 42, 1X. 44.; C.E. 1.11.19. 21.
3. Wih.6.; In. 2,— Edm. E.1.; Edg.S.1.; Eth. V. 4.6.9.
VI. 41. IX. 27.; C. E. 5.; H. v. 16.
4, C.S.52.; H. x1.5.— C.S. 43.
5 C.S, 44.; H. xt. 9. txvi. 4.— E.& G.6.; Eth. V.11.
VI. 16. 43. VIIL. 4.; C.E. 8. 14.
6. Ath.I. proem.; Edm. E.2.; Edg. I. 3.; Eth. 1X.8.; C.E.
g.; Ed.C.7.8.; H.x1.2.—C.S8. 49.; H. xr. 12. x11.
Lxvi. 5. — E.& G.5.; Eth. V.11. VI. 16. 43. VIII. 4.;
C.E. 8, 14.— Edm. E. 2.; Edg. I. 4.; Eth. V. 11. VI. 18.
IX. 10.; C.E.9.; Ed.C.10.; Wil. 1.17.; H. xr. 3.
7. Wib.9-11.; In.3.; C.S.45.; H. xr. 10.— Ath. I. 24, IIL.
2. V.x.; Eth. V. 13. VI. 22. 44. [X.17.; C.E. 15,
8. Wih. 14.15.; Eth. VIII. 2.; C.S. 47.
9. Eth. V. 18. VI. 25.; C.E.17.; H. uxi.1.—C.S. 45.
ll. Eth. VI.7.; C.S. 4.
12. R.s.; Eth. VI. 48. IX. 33.; C.S. 40.; H. x. 3. Lxxv. 7.


13.) In. 70.; O.13.; Wg. 6. 9-12.; M.L.; Wil. I. 8.; H. xiv.
p: 74} 2. LXX. 1. LXXVI. 4.— Edm. S. 7.; Wil. I. 7-9.; H.
175. LXVIII. 1, LXXVI. 1. 5-7.


OATHS.


Cap. 3. Ath. T. 9.
7. In. 56.; 0.9.
8. Edg. S. 6.; C.S. 23.


12, Eth. V. 9. VI. 5. IX. 98.; C.E.6.; H. vxiv. 2.3. LXvII.
3.
13. In. 70.; E.& G.13.; Wg. 6. 9-12.; M.L.; Wil. I.8.;


H. Lxiv. 2. LXX.1. LXXVI. 4,
14. Eth. III. 14.;.C. 8. 73.; H. xrv. 5.


TABLE OF CONCORDANCE.
WER-GILDS.


§ 6. In.70.; E.& G.13.; O. 18.; Wg. 9-12.; M.L.; Wil. I. 8.;


H. vxiv. 2. Lxx. 1. LXXVI. 4.


lin, 24, 32.


ve
12.


§ 1.


§ 8.


Procm.


13.


14,


15.
17.


H, LXIv. 2. LXX. 1. LXXvI. 4.


9.
a 70.; E.& G.13.; O.13.; Wg.6.; M.L.; Wil. I. 8.;


MERCIAN LAW.


In. 70.; E.& G.13.; O.13.; We. 6. 9-12; Wil. I. 8.;
H. vxiv.2. Lxx. 1. LXXVI. 4.


RANKS.


E.& G. 12.; Eth. VI. 48. IX. 33.; C.S. 40.; H.x.3.
LXXxV. 7.


ATHELSTAN. I.


In. 4.61.; Edm. E. 2.; Edg. I. 2.3.; Eth. VI. 18. VIII. 4.
IX. 11.; C.E. 10. 11.3; R.S. p. 432, 433.; H. xr. 4.—
E. & G.6.; Edm. E.2.; Edg.I.3.; Eth. [X.8.; C.E.
8.; H. x1. 2.

Wih. 25. 26.; In. 12.; Ath. III. 6.; Wil. I.27.; H. ivir
4, LIX. 20. 28. — Ath. V. 1.1. xu. 3.3; H. Lix. 20.

Edg. II. 2.; C.S.17.; Wil. I. 43.; H. xxxiv. 6.

Alf. 4.; Edg. II. 7.; Eth. V. 30. VI. 37.; C.S, 26. 58. 65. ;
H. xn. 1. XLII. 7. XLVI.

Ed. C. 6.; Wil. I. 15.

Ath. IV. 6; C.S.65.; H. x... xin 1. XLVIL1. XLVIE
LXvi. 9. — Ath. V. 1. 5. ~- Edm. E. 6.; H. yxx. 1.

Eth. I. 1.; C.S. 30.

In. 30.; Ed.7.8.; Ath. I. 20. III. 6. I[V.4. V.1.2.; Eth.
III. 13.; C.S. 13. 15. 67.; Ed.C.5.; H. viii. 4. x. 1.
XI. 14. XIII. 10.


O. 3.
Ed.1.; Ath. I. 12.13, III. 2. V.x.; Edm.C. s.; Edg. S.
6.; Eth. I.3.; C.S.24.; Ed.C.38.; Wil. I. 45. ITI. 10.


11.

In. 21.; Eth. III. 7.; Ed. C. 36.; H. ixtv. 5. Lxxiv. 2,

Ed.1.; Ath. I. 10.13, III. 2. V.x.; Edm.C.5.; Edg. S.
6.; Eth.I.3.; C. 8. 24.; Ed.C.38.; Wil. I. 45. III. 10.
1k.

Ed. 1.; Ath. I. 10. 12. II. 2. V.x.; Edm.C. 5.; Edg.S.
6.; C.S.24.; Wil. I. 45. III. 10. 11.— Eth. V. 26. VI. 32.;
C.S. 10. 66.; R.S. p.432, 433.; H. x.1. XIII. 9. LXVI. 6.

Edg. II. 8.; Eth. VI. 32.; C.S. 8. — Eth. III. 8. IV. 5.;
H. xu. 3.

Ath. II. s.

Ed. 7.


Cap.19.
20.


22.


23.
24.


25.
26.


Cap. 4.


Cap. 2.


Pr SS


Cap. 1.


PS


TABLE OF CONCORDANCE.


ATHELSTAN. I.—continued.


Eth. I. 2.; C.S. 32,

Edg. II.7.; C.S.25.; Wil. III. 14.; H. xxrx. 2.3. bt. 1.
Liu. 1.—In. 30.; Ed. 7. 8.3; Ath. I. s. III.6. IV. 4.
V. 1.2.3; Eth. If. 13.; C.S. 13. 15. 67.; Ed. C. 5.;
H. vir. 4. X. 1. XI. 14. XIII. 10.

Alf. 37.; In.39.; Ed.10.; Ath. II. 4. III.4. [V.1.; Edm.C.
3.; C.S.28.; Wil. I. 30.48.; H. xxi. 2.

Ath. IV. 7.

In. 47. — E.& G.7.; Ath. III. 2. V.x.; Eth. V. 13. VI. 22.
44, 1X.17.; C. E, 15. — Wil. I. 45.

Ed. 3.; C.S. 36. 37.

Edg. II. 3. — C. S. 84.; Ed.C. p. 456, 457.2.; HH. x11. 4.
XXXIV. 8.


ATHELSTAN. II.


Alf. 37.; In.39.; Ed.10.; Ath. I. 22. III. 4.1V.1.; Edm.C.
3.3; C.S.28.; Wil. I.30.48.; H. xii. 2. — Ath. IID. 5.

Ath. III. 3. V. vir. 2.

Edm.C. 7.; Eth. I. 1.; C.S. 31.; Ed. C. 21.; Wil. I.
52.; H. vir. 3. XLI. 6. LIX. 6.

Ath. I. 15.


ATHELSTAN. III.


Ed. I.; Ath. I. 12.13. V.x.; Wil. III. 10. 11. — E. & G.
7.; Ath. J. 24. V.x.; Eth. V. 13. VI. 22. 44. IX. 17.;
C.E. 15.

Ath. II. 6. V. vit. 2.

Alf. 37.; In. 39.; Ed.10.; Ath. I. 22. II. 4. IV.1.; Edm. C.
3.; C.S. 28.; Wil. I. 30. 48.; H. xviit. 2.

Ath. IT. 4.

Ethb. 90.; Wih. 27.; Edm.C. 4. — Wih. 25. 26.; Ath. I.
1.; Wil. I. 27.; H. nvit. 4. Lrx. 20. 23. — Alf. 2. 5. 42.;
In. 5.; Ath. IV.4.; Edm.S.2.; Eth. VIL 5.; Ed. C.
5.3; Wil. I. 1. — Eth. I. 1. II. 7.—In. 30.; Ed. 7. 8.;
Ath. I. 8. 20. IV. 4. V.1.2.; Eth. III. 13.; C.S. 13. 15.
67.; Ed.U.5.; H. vit. 4. x. 1. XI. 14. XIII. 10.


ATHELSTAN. IV.


Alf. 37.; In.39.; Ed.10.; Ath. I.22. II.4. IfI.4.; Edm.C.
8.; C.S. 28.; Wil. I. 30. 48.; H. xxi. 2.— Ed. 5.;
Edg. S. 3. 4. 5.

Wih. 1.; Eth. VIII. 3.

In. 16. 35.; Ath. V. vir. -—— Alf. 2. 5. 42.; In. 5.; Ath. III.
6.; Edm. S. 2.; Eth. VII. 5.; Ed. C. 5.; Wil. I. 1.—
In. 30.; Ed. 7. 8; Ath. I. 8. 20. TII.6. V.1.2.; Eth.
III. 13.; C.S, 13. 15.67.; Ed.C. 5.; H. vir 4. x1.
XI. 14. XIII. 10.

H. xvi.


TABLE OF CONCORDANCE.


ATHELSTAN. IV.— continued.


Cap. 6. Ath. I.6.; C.S. 65.; H. x. 1. xu. 1. XLVI. 1. XLVU.
Lxvi. 9. — Edg. H. 9.; H. uxvis. 1. — Eth, III. 6.
7. Ath. I. 23. — H. cxxxii. 4. 5. 6.


FORFANG.
Wil. I. 5.


ATHELSTAN. V.


Cap. 1.
§ 1. Wil. I, 27.— Ath. 1.1. V. x1. 3.; H. 11x. 20. -- In. 30. —
Ed. 7.8.; Ath. I. 8. 20. III. 6. IV. 4. V.1.2.; Eth. II.
13; C.S.13.15.67.; Ed.C.5.; H. virr.4. x.1. x1. 14.
XIII. 10.
g. In.30.; Ed. 7.8.; Ath. I. 8. 20. III.6. IV.4. V.1.1.; Eth.
III. 13.; C.S. 13.15. 67.; Ed.C. 5.; H. vii. 4. x. 1.
XI. 14. XIII. 10.


3.
. } Eth. I. 4.
5. Ath. 1.6.


Cap. vir.
In. 16. 35.; Ath. IV. 4.
Cap. vit.
§ 2. Ath. If. 6. III. 3.
4. Edg. H. 5.
Cap. x.


Ed. 1.; Ath. I. 12. 13. III. 2.; Wil. ITI. 10. 11.— E. & G.
7.;| Ath. I. o4. II].2.; Eth. V. 13. VI. 22, 44. IX. 17.;
C. E. 15.


Cap. x1.
In. 52.


Cap. x11.
§ 3. Ath. I. 1. V. 1.1.3; H. 11x. 20.


EDMUND. EccrestAsTIcAL.


Cap. 1. E.& G. 3.; Edg.S. 1.; Eth. V. 4. 6.9. VI. 41. IX. 97.;
C.E.5.; H. v. 16.

2. In. 4. 61.; Ath. I. proem.; Edg. I. 2. 3.; Eth. VI. 18.
VII. 4. IX.11.; C.E. 10.11.; R.S. p.434, 435.; H. xr.
4,—E.&G.6.; Ath. I. proem.; Edg. I.3.; Eth. IX,
8.; C.E.8.; Ed.C.7.8; H.x1.2,—E.& G.6.; Edg.
I.4.; Eth. V.11. VI. 18. [X.10.; C.E.9.; Ed.C. 10.;
Wil. I.17.; H. x1. 3.

4. Alf.s.18.; Eth. VI. 39.; H. uxxi1. 6. —Eth. V. Jo. 25.
VIL 11. 28.; C.E. 7. 24.; C.S.51.; H. xu. 3.

6. Eth. V. 25. VI. 28.; C.S. 36. 37.—Ath. I. 6.; H. uxxr.
1


Cap. 1.
2.


6.


Cap. 1.
5.
9.


Cap. 1.
4.
5.
6.
7.
9.


Cap. 1.
2.


TABLE OF CONCORDANCE.


EDMUND. Sescurar.


H. Lxxxvill. 12.

Alf. 2,5.42.; In. 5.; Ath. III.6. IV. 4.; Eth. VII. s.;
Ed. C. 5.; Wil. I. 1.

Eth. IV. 4.; C.S.63.; Wil. I. 2. 15.

E. & G. 18. (p. 174, 175.); Wil. I. 7-9.;  H. uxvir. 1.
LXXVI. 1. 5-7.


EDMUND. Conc. Cut.


Alf. 37.; In. 39.; Ed.10.; Ath. I. 22. II. 4. IL.4. IV.1.;
C.S. 28.; Wil. I. 30. 48.; H. xxi. 2.

Ethb. 90.; Wih. 27.; Ath. IIT. 6.

Ed.1.; Ath. I. 10. 12.13.; Edg.S.6.; Eth. I.3.; C.S.
24.; Ed.C.38.; Wil. I. 45. III. 10. 11. — Edg. H. 4.

Ath. Il. 7.; Eth. I. 1.; C.S. 31.; Ed. C. 21.; Wil. I
52.; H. vit. 3. XL1. 6. LIx. 6. — Edg. II. 6.; Edg. S. 3.;
Eth. I. 1.3; C. S. 20.; Wil. I. 25. II. 14.; H. vii. 2.


EDMUND. BEtTRoTHING.


}In. a1.


Eth. VI. 12.; C. E. 7.


EDGAR. Huwnprep.


Ed. 11.; Edg. II. 5.; C.S.18.; H. vir. 4. 11. 2
dm. C. 5.

Ath. V. vir. 4.

Wil. I. 42.

Ed. prowm.; Ed.11.; Edg.II.1.; Eth. V. 1. VI. 8. VIIL.6.;
O.D.8.; C.S.1.; H. 1x. 4. 11.2.

Ath. IV.6.; H. vxvit. 1.


EDGAR. I.


Eth. VIII. 4. 1X.7.; C.E. 8.

In. 4. 61.; Ath. I, proem.; Edm. E. 2; Edg. I. 3.;
Eth. VI. 18. VIII. 4. IX.11.; C.E.10.11.; R.S. p. 434,
435.; H.xr1.4.— Eth. VII. 4.; C. E. 11. — Eth. V. 11.
VIL 16. IX. 12,; C. E. 8.

In. 4. 61.; Ath. I. proem.; Edm. E. 2.; Edg.I.2.; Eth.
VI. 18. VIII. 4. IX.11.; C.E.10. 11.3; R.S. p. 434, 435. ;
H. x1. 4.— E. & G.6.; Ath. I. proem.; Edm. E. 2. ;
Eth. IX. 8.; C. E. 8.; Ed. C. 7. 8,; H. x1. 2. — Eth.
V.11. VI. 17. IX. 9.; C. E. 8.

E. & G. 6.; Edm. E. 2.; Eth. V.11. VI. 18. IX.10.; C.E.9.3
Ed. C. 10.; Wil. I. 17.; H. xr. 3.

Alf. 43.; C.E. 14.—-E. & G.1.; Eth. IID. 1. VIL 14.
VII. 2.; C.E.2.; Ed. C. 12. 26. 27.3; Wil. I. 1. 2;
H. x. 1. xn. 1. Lxxix. 3. — Eth. V. 17. VI.24.; C.E.
16.; H. yxii. 1.


TABLE OF CONCORDANCE.


EDGAR. II.


Cap. 1. Ed. proem.; Ed. 11.; Edg.H.7.; Eth. V. 1. VI. 8.
Vill. 6.; C.S.1.
2. Ath. I.3.; C.S.17.; Wil. I.43.; H. xxxrv. 6.
3. Ath. I. 26.—C.S.15.; Wil. I. 13. 39.; H. x1t.4. xxxiv.
1. 2. 3.
4. Alf.32.; C.S.16.; H. xxxiv. 7.
5. Ed.11.; Edg.H.1.; C.S. 18.; H. vir.4. 11. 2.—C.S. 18.;
H. vit. 2. XxxI. 3.
6. Edm.C.7.; Edg. S. 3.; Eth. I.1.; C.S.20.; Wil. I. 25.
III. 14.; H. vii. 2.
7. Alf.4.; Ath. I.4.; Eth. V. 30. VI. 37.; C.S. 26. 58. 65.;
H. xin. x“11.7. xitvit.— Ath. I. 20.; C.S. 25.3; Wil.
JIT. 14.; H. xxix. 2. 3. “1.1. Li. 1. —C. S. 25. 30.;
Wil. I. 47.; H. uxv. 3.
8 Ath. I. 14.; Eth. VI. 32.; C.S. 8.— Eth. V. 24. VI. 28.
32.; C.S.9.; Wil. III. 7.


EDGAR. SvuprLEMENt.


Cap. 1. E.& G.3.; Edm. E. 1.4; Eth. V. 4.6.9. VI. 41. IX. 97.;
C.E.5.; H. v. 16.
3. Ed.5.; Ath. IV.1.; Edg.S. 4. 5.— Edm. C. 7.; Edg. II.
6.; Eth. I. 1.; C.S. 20.; Wil. I. 95. III. 14.; H. vir.
2.


ep Ed.s.; Ath. IV. 1.; Edg. S. 3.


6. O.8.; C.S. 23.— Ed. 1.; Ath. I. 10.12; Edm. C, 5.;
Eth. I.3.; C.S. 24.; Ed.C.38.; Wil. 1.45. III.10, 11.


ETHELRED. I.


Cap. 1. Ath. I.7.; C.S. 30.— Ath. JI. 7.; Edm.C.7.; C.S. 31.;
Ed.C. 21.; Wil. I. 52.; H. vit. 3. xii. 6. LIx. 6.—
Edm. C.7.; Edg. Il. 6.; Edg.S.3.; C.S.20.; Wil. I.
25. II. 14.; H. viii. 2. — Eth. III. 3.4.; C.S. 22. 30.;
H. vxiv. 9. Lxv. 3. “xvi. 1.— Ath. I. 6.; Eth. III.
7.—C.S, 30. 31.; Wil. I. 52.; H. xv1. 6. Lxv. 4.

Ath. TL. 19.; C.S. 32.

Ed. 1.; Ath. I. 10. 12.; Edm. €. 5.; Edg.S. 6.; C.S. 24.5
Ed. C. 38.; Wil. I. 45. III. 10.

4. Ath. V.1. 3. 4,.—C.S. 30. 33.; Wil. I. 47.; H. ixv. 3


gre


ETHELRED. II.


Cap. 5. A. & G.2.; Ed. C. 16.; H. uxx. 6. 8
8. Wil. I. 21.
9. In. 53.


Cap. 4.


Cap. 1.


Pep


ON Ma


10.


li.


12.


TABLE OF CONCORDANCE.


ETHELRED. III.


E.&G.1.; Edg. I. 5.; Eth. VI. 14. VIE2.; C.E.2;
Ed.C. 12. 26.27.; Wil. J. 1.2.; H. x. 1. XIII. 1. LXXIx, 3


Eth. J.1. III. 4.; C. S. 22.30.; H. vxiv. 9. LXV. 3. LXVII. 1.
—C.S. 82.

Eth. I. 1. II. 3.; C. 8.22. 30.; H. rxiv. 9. Lxv. 8 LXVII. 1.

Ath. IV. 6.

In. 21.; Ath. I.11.; Ed.C. 36.; H. ixrv. 5. Lxxiv. 2,
— Ath. III. 6.; Eth. I. 1.

Ath. I. 14.; Eth. IV. 5.; H. xr11. 3.

H. v. 6. xxxi. 2. — In. 30.; Ed. 7. 8.3; Ath. I. 8. 20. III. 6.
IV.4. V.1.2.; C.S. 13. 15.67.; Ed.C.5.; H. vir. 4.
X. 1. XI. 14. XIII. 10.

O. 14.; C.S. 73.; H. xiv. 5.

Eth. IV. 5.


ETHELRED. IV.


Ethb. 27. 29.; Alf.40.; In. 45.; H. xt. 2. xxxv. 2.—
Alf. 42.; H. wxxxir. 1. “xxx. 1. 3. — Edm. S, 6.;
C.S. 63.; Wil. I. 2.15. — Ed. C. 12.3; Wil. I. 26.

Ath. I. 14.; Eth. II. 8.; H. xr. 3. — Eth. III. 16.


ETHELRED. V.-


Eth. V. 34. VI.1. 6. VIIJ.1.; C.E.1.; Wil. IIL. 1.— Ed,
proem.; Ed.11.; Edg. H.7. II.1.; Eth. VI. 8. VIII.
6.; C.S.1.—E.&G. 2.; Eth. V. 22, VI. 1. 27. 34. 42.
1X. 44.; C.E. 1. 11.19. 21.-—-E.& G. proem.; Eth. VI.
1. 1X.44.; C18. 5.

In.11.; Eth. VI. 9. VIII. 5.; C.S.3.; Wil. I. 41. III. 15.

Eth. VI. 10.; C.S.2.; Wil. I. 40.

E.& G.3.; Edm. E.1.; Edg.S.1.; Eth. V.6.9. VI. 41.
IX. 27.; C.E.5.; H. v. 16.— Eth. VI. 2, [X.31.; C.E.


6.

Eth. V. 6. VI. 3.

E.& G.3.; Edm. E.1.; Edg.S.1.; Eth. V. 4.9. VI. 41.
IX. 27.; C.E.5.; H.v.16.— Eth. V. 5. VI. 3.

Eth. VI. 4.

E. & G.3.; Edm. E.1.; Edg.S.1.; Eth. V. 4.6. VI. 41.
IX.27.; C.E.5.; H.v.16.—O. 12.; Eth. VI. 5. IX.
gs.; C.E.6.; H. yxiv.2. 3 wixvii. 38.— Eth. VI. 5.
IX. 30.; C. E. 6.

Edm. E. 4.; Eth. V. 25. VI. 11. 28; C.E,7. 24.; C.S.
51.; H. xu. 3, — Eth. VI. 18. VII. 31. IX.1.; C.E. 2.3
Ed. C. 1. —- Eth. VIL 15.

Edg. I. 3.; Eth. VI. 17. IX. 9.; C. E. 8,— Edg. I. 2.;
Eth. VI. 16. IX. 12.; C.E. 8. —E.&G. 5.6.; Eth.
VI. 16. 43. VIJI.4.; C.E. 8. 14.— Eth. VI. 19. IX. 12.;
C.E. 12.—E.&G.6.; Edm. E.2.; Edg. 1.4. VI. 18.
IX.10.; C.E.9.; Ed. C. 10.; Wil. I. 17.; H. x13.


Eth. VI. 20. IX. 13.; C.E. 13. — Eth. VI. 21.; C.E. 13.


31.
34.


Cap. 1.


IP po


.


= SO £NM


—


12.
13.


14,
15.


TABLE OF CONCORDANCE.


ETHELRED. V.— continued.


E. & G. 7.; Ath. J. 24, III. 2, V. x.; Eth. VI. 22. 44.
IX. 17.; C.E. 15. — Eth. VI. 22.; C. E. 14.

Alf. 43.; Eth. VI. 22.; C. E. 16.

C.E. 17.

Edg. I. 5.; Eth. VI. 24.; C. E. 16.; H. ux. 1.

E. & G. 9.; Eth. VI. 25.; C. E.17.; H. vx. 1. — Eth.
VI. 25.; C.E.17.

Eth. VI. 25.; C.E.17.; H. wx. 2.

Eth. VI. 26.; C.S.74.; H. xr. 13.

Eth. VI. 27.; C.E.19.— E. & G.2.; Eth. V. 1. VI. 1. 27.
34,42, IX. 44.; C.E.1. 11. 19. 21.

Eth. VI. 28.; C.8.37.; C.F. 14.; H. x1. 7.— Edg. II.
8.; Eth. VI. 28. 32.; C.S.9.; Wil. III. 7.

Edm. E. 6.; Eth. VI. 28.; C. S. 36. 37. — Edm. E.4.; Eth.
V. 10. VI. 11. 28.; C.E. 7. 24.; C.S.51.; H. xm.3.

Ath. I.13.; Eth. VI. 32.; C.S. 10. 66.; R.S. p. 434,
435.; H.x.1. xu. 9. Lxvi. 6. — Eth. VI. 31. 32.; C.S.


8.

Eth. VI. 33.

Eth. VI. 35,

Eth. VI. 36.

Alf. 4.; Ath. I. 4.; Edg. I. 7.; Eth. VI. 37.; C.S. 26.
58. 65.; H. x1t.1. XLII. 7. XLVII.

Eth. VI. 38.

Eth. V.1. VI.1.6. VIII.1.; C.E.1.; Wil. III. 1.


ETHELRED. VI.


Eth. V. 1. 34. VI. 6. VIII.1.; C. E. 1.; Wil. III. 1.—
E.& G.2.; Eth. V. 1. 22, VI. 27. 34. 42, IX. 44.; C.E.
1, 11. 19. 21.-—— E. & G. proem.; Eth. V. 1. IX. 44.;
C.S. 5.

Eth. V. 4. IX. 31.; C.E.6.

Eth. V. 5.6.

Eth. V. 7.

O. 12.; Eth. V. 9. IX. 28.; C.E.6.; H. uxiv.2.3. LXVIII.
3. — Eth. V. 9. IX. 30.; C. E. 6.

Eth. V. 1.34. VI.1. VIII. 1.; C.E.1.; Wil. IIT. 1.

E.&G.11.; C.S. 4.

Ed. procem. ; Ed. 11.; Edg. H. 7. II.1.; Eth. V.1. VIII. 6.;
C.S8.1


In. 11.; Eth. V. 2. VIII. 5.; C.S.3.; Wil. I. 41. III. 15.


Eth. V. 3.; C.S.2.; Wil. I. "40.

Edm. E. 4.; Eth. V. 10. 25. VI. 28.; C. E. 7. 24.; C.S. 51.;
H. x11. 3.

Edm. B.9.; C. E. 7.

Eth. V. 10. VII. 31. IX.1.; C.E.2.; Ed.C. 1.

E. & G.1.; Edg. I. 5.; Eth. III. 3. VII. 2.; C. E.2.; Ed.C.
12, 26. 27.; Wil. I.1. 2.; H. x. 1. xtII. 1. LXXIX. 3.

Eth. V. 10.


TABLE OF CONCORDANCE.


ETHELRED. VI.— continued.


Edg. I. 2.; Eth. V. 11. IX.12.; C.E.8.—E. & G. 5. 6.;
Eth. V. 11. VI. 43. VIII.4.; C. E. 8. 14.


Edg. I.3.; Eth. V.11. IX.9.; C.E. 8.


In. 4. 61.; Ath. I. proem.; Edm.E. 2.; Edg.I. 2. 3.; Eth.
VIII. 4. IX.11.; C. E.10.11.; R.S. p. 434, 435.; H.
xi. 4.—E. & G. 6.; Edm. E.2.; Edg.I.4.; Eth. V. 11.
IX. 10.; C.E.9.; Ed.C.10.; Wil. I. 17.; H. xr 3.


Eth. V. 11. IX.12.; C. E. 12.

Eth. V. 12. IX.13.; C. E. 13.

Eth. V. 12.; C. E. 13.

E.&G.7.; Ath. I.o4. II.2. V.x.; Eth. V. 13. VIL. 44.
IX.17.; C. E.15.—Eth.V.13.; C. E. 14.— Alf. 43.;
Eth. V. 14.; C. E. 16. — C. E. 15.

Alf. 43.; C. E.16.; H. xin. 1.

Edg. I. 5.; Eth. V.17.; C. E. 16.; H. uxt. 1.

E.& G.9.; Eth. V.18.; C.E.17.; H. xi. 1.—Eth. V.
20.; C.E.17.; H. vx. 2.— Eth.V. 18.; C. E. 17.

Eth. V. 21.; C.S.74.; H. x1. 13.

E. & G.2.; Eth. V. 1. 22. VI. 1. 34. 42. IX. 44.; C.E.1
11. 19. 21.

Edm. E. 6.; Eth. V. 25.; C.S.36.37.— Edm. E.4.; Eth. V.
10. 25. VI.11.; C.E.7.24.; C.S. 51.; H. xu.3.—
Eth. V. 24.; C.S. 37.; C.F.14.; H. x1. 7.—C.S. 50.;
H. x1. 12. — Edg. II. 8.; Eth. V. 24. VI. 32.; C.S.9.;
Wil. III. 7.

Eth. V. 26. VI. 32.; C.S. 8.

Ath. I. 13.; Eth. V. 26.; C.S. 10. 66.; R.S. p. 432,
433.; H.x.1. x11. 9. LxvI.6.— Ath. I, 14.; Edg. Il.
8.; C.S.8.— Eth. V. 26. VI. 31.; C.S. 8. — Edg. Il.
8.; Eth. V. 24. VI. 28.; C.S.9.; Wil. III. 7.

Eth. V. 27.

E. & G.2.; Eth. V. 1.92. VI. 1. 27. 42, IX.44.; C.E.1.
11.19, 21.

Eth. V. 28.

Eth. V. 29.

Alf. 4.; Ath. I. 4.; Edg. II. 7.; Eth. V. 30.; C.S. 26.
58. 65.3 H. xl. 1. XLII. 7. XLVII.

Eth. V. 31.

Ethb. s2-s4.; Alf. 11. 18. 25. 26.; In.10.; C.S.53.; Wil.
I. 12.18.; H.x.1. xu. 6.— Alf. s.18.; Edm. E. 4.;
H. yxxiu. 6,

E. & G. 3.; Edm. E. 1.; Edg. S. 1.; Eth.V. 4. 6. 9. IX. 27.;
C.E. 5.; H. v. 16.

E.& G. 2.; Eth. V. 1.22. VI. 1. 27. 34. IX. 44.; C.E.1.
11. 19, 21,

E. & G.5.6.; Eth. V. 11. VI. 16. VIII. 4.; C. E.s. 14.


E.& G. 7.; Ath. I. o4. III. 2. V.x.; Eth. V. 13. VIL. 22.
E. & G. 12.; R.8.; Eth. IX. 33.; C.S. 40.; H.x.3.


TABLE OF CONCORDANCE.


ETHELRED. VII.


Cap. 2. E.& G.1.; Edg.J.5.; Eth. III. 1. VI. 14.; CE. 2.;
Ed. C. 12. 26. 27.3; Wil. I.1.2.; H. x. 1. xi1f. 1. LXXIx.
3
4, In.5.; H.xcii. 7.
5. Alf. 2.5. 42.; In. 5.; Ath. III. 6. 1V.4.; Edm. S. 2.;
Ed. C. 5.; Wil. J. 1. —In. 5.; H. xcrt. 7.
6. CE. 3.
7. Ethb. 1.
8. Ethb. s.; Wih. 2.
9. Alf.7.; In.6.; Eth. VII. 15.; C.S.60.; H.x.1. xm. 7.
LXXX. 1.
11. Alf. 3.
12. Alf.15.38.; In.6.; H. uxxx. 8.
18. Eth. 1X. 1-4.; C.E.2.; H. xr. 1. xt. 8. LXVIII. 2. LXXIX.
5. LXXXVII. 6
15, Alf. 7.; In.6.; Eth. VII.9.; C.S.60.; H. x... xin 7.
LXXxX. 1.
31. Eth. V.10. VI. 13. IX.1.; C.E.2.; Ed.C. 1.


ETHELRED. VIII.


Cap. 1. Eth V.1. 34. VI. 1.6.; C.E. 1.; Wil. III. 1.

2. Wih. 14. 15.; E. & G. 83 C.S. 47.

3. Wih.L; Ath. IV. 3.

4. Edg.I.1.; Eth. [X.7.; C.E.8.—E. & G. 5. 6.; Eth. V.
11. VI. 16. 43.; C. E. 8, 14. — In. 4. 61.; Ath. I. proem. ;
Edm. E. 2.; Edg. I. 2. 3.; Eth. VI. 18. IX.11.; C.E.
10.11.; R.S. p.434, 435.; H. x1.4.— Edg. I.2.; C.E.
11.

5. In. 11.; Eth. V. 2. VI.9.; C.S.3.; Wil. I. 41. III. 15.

6. Ed. proem.; Ed.11.; Edg.H. 7. II.1.; Eth.V.1. VI. 8.;
C.S. 1.


ETHELRED. IX.


Cap. 1. Eth.V.10. VI.13. VII. 31.; C.E.9.; Ed. C. 1.— Eth.
VII. 13. IX. 2-4.; C.E.2.; H. xr. 1. x1. 3. LXVIII. 2,

LXXIX. 5. LXXXVII. 6.
2.) Eth. VIL 13. IX. 1.4.; C.E.2.; H. x1.1. xii.3. LXVIII. 2.

3. LXXIX. 5. LXXXVII. 6.
4, In. 10.3; C.E.3.; C.S. 48. 64. — Eth. VII. 13. IX. 1.
2.3.; C.E.2.; H.xi. x11.8. LXVIHI. 2. LXXIX. 5


LXXXVII. 6.


5. C.E.3.; H. vxxrx. 6.
7. Edg.I.1.; Eth. VIII. 4.; C.E. 8.
8 E.& G.6.; Ath. I. proem.; Edm. E.2.; Edg.I.3.; C.E.
8.; Ed. C. 7. 8.; H. x1. 2.
9. Edg. I. 3.; Eth. V. 11. VI. 17.; C. E. 8.
10. E.&G.6.; Edm. E.2.; Edg.1.4.; Eth. V. 11. VI. 18.;


C.E. 9.; Ed. C. 10.; Wil. I. 17.; H. xr. 3.

ll. In. 4.61.; Ath. I. proem.; Edm. E. 2.; Edg.I. 2. 3.; Eth.
VI. 18. VII. 4.; C.E.10.11.; R.S. p. 434, 435.; H.
XI. 4.


TABLE OF CONCORDANCE.


ETHELRED. IX.— continued.


Cap.12. Edg. I. 2.; Eth. V. 11. VI. 16.; C. E. 8. —- Eth. V.11. VI.


13.


19.; C.E. 12.
Eth. V. 12. VI. 20.; C. E. 13.


17. E.&G.7.; Ath. I. 24. IID.2, V.x.; Eth. V. 13. VI. 22,


44.; C.E. 15.


19.
20. bi 17. 18; C. E.5.; H. yxiv. 8.
21.


22.

23.

2 the E. 5.

25.

96. Alf. 21.; C.S.41.; H. uxvi. 2. LXVIII. 8 LXXIII. 2. 3. 4.

27. E.&G.3.; Edm. E.1.; Edg.§.1.; Eth. V. 4.6.9. VI.
41.3; C.E.5.; H. v. 16.

28. O.12.; Eth. V.9. VI. 5.; C. E.6.; H. vxiv. 2. 3. LXVIII. 3.

30. Eth. V.9. VI. 5.; C.E. 6.

31. Eth. V.4. VI.2.; C.E. 6.

33. E. & G.12.; R.8.; Eth. VI. 48.; C.S. 40.; H.x. 3.
LXXV. 7.

42. C.S. 15. 67.; H.x.1. xI.14. XIII. 10.

44. E.&G.2.; Eth. V. 1. 22. VI. 1. 27. 34. 42.; C. E. 1.11.19.


21.— E.& G. proem.; Eth. V.1. VI.1.; C.S. 5.


ORDINANCE RESPECTING THE DUN-SETAS.


Cap. 8.


Cap. 1.


ad


Ed. procem.; Ed. 11.; Edg. H. 7.; H. 1x. 4. x1. 2.


CNUT. EccrestasticaL.


Eth. V. 1. 34. VI. 1. 6. VIII.1.; Wil. III. 1.—E. & G.2.;
Eth. V. 1. 22. VI. 1. 27. 34. 42. IX. 44.; C.E. 11. 19.


21.

E.&G.1.; Edg. 1. 5.; Eth. IIf.1. VI. 14. VI.2.; Ed.c.
12, 26.27.; Wil. I. 1.2.; H.x.1. xt. 1. LXxIX. 3. —
Eth. V. 10. VI.13. VII. 31. IX.1.; Ed. C. 1. — Eth. VII.
is. IX, 1-4.; H. xn 2. x13. LXVIII. 2. LXXIX. 5.
LXXXVII. 6.

In. 10.; Eth. IX.4.; C.S. 48. 64. Eth. VII. 6. — Eth. IX.
5.3; H. Lxxix. 6.

Wih. 17. 18; Eth. IX. 19. 20. 21. 22.; H. Lxiv. 8.—
E. & G.3.; Edm. E. 1.; Edg. S. 1.; Eth. V. 4.6.9. VI.
41. IX. 27.; H. v. 16. — Eth, IX. 23. 24. — Eth. IX. 25.

O. 12.; Eth. V. 9. VI. 5. IX. 98.; H. vxiv. 2.3. pxvui. 3.
— Eth. V. 4. VI. 2, IX. 31. — Eth. V.9. VI. 5. IX. 30.

Edm. E. 4.; Eth. V. 10. 25. VI. 11. 28.; C. E. 24.; C.S. 51.3
H. xu. 3. — Edm. B.9.; Eth. VI. 12.

E.& G. 6; Ath. I. proem.; Edm. E. 2.; Edg. I. 3.;
Eth. IX. 8.; Ed. C. 7. 8.; H. x1. 2, — Edg. I. 3.; Eth. V.
11. VI.17. IX. 9. — Edg. I.2.; Eth. V. 11. VI. 16. IX.
12.—E.& G. 5.6.; Eth. V.11. VI. 16. 43. VIIL 4.;
C. E. 14. — Edg. J. 3.; Eth. VIL 4. IX. 7.


Cap. 9.


16.


TABLE OF CONCORDANCE.


CNUT. Ecc estasticaL — continued.


E. & G. 6.; Edm. E.2.; Edg.1.4.; Eth.V.11. VI. 18.
IX. 10.; Ed. C. 10.; Wil. I.17.; H. xn 3.

In. 4.61.; Ath. I. proem.; Edm. E.2.; Edg.I. 2.3.;
Eth. VI. 18. VIII. 4. IX.11.; C.E.1n; R.S. p.434,
435.; H. x1. 4.

In. 4.61.; Ath. I, proem.; Edm. E. 2.; Edg. I. 2. 3.;
Eth. VI. 18, VIII. 4. IX.11.; C.E.10.; R.S. p. 434,
435.; H. x1. 4.— Edg. I. 2.; Eth.VIIL 4.— E. & G. 2.;
Eth. V. 1. 22. VIL 1. 27. 34.42. IX. 44.; C. E. 1. 19. 21.

Eth. V. 11. VI. 19. IX. 12.

Eth. V. 12. VI. 20, IX. 18. — Eth. V. 12. VI. 21.

Alf, 43.; Edg. I. 5.— Eth. V. 13. VI. 22.—E. & G. 5. 6;
Eth. V. 11. VI. 16. 43. VIII. 4.; C.E. 8.

E.& G.7.; Ath. I. 24. JII.2. V.x.; Eth. V.13. VI. 22.
44, IX. 17. — Eth. VI. 22. 44,

Alf. 43.; Eth. V. 14. VI. 22. — Edg. I. 5.; Eth. V. 17. VI.
24.; H. vxu.1.— Alf. 43.; Eth. VI. 23.; H. vxir.2.
— Alf. 40.; C.S. 48.; H. uxir. 1.

E. & G.9.; Eth. V. 18. VI. 25.; H. ux. 1.— Eth. V. 16.
— Eth. V. 20. VI. 25.; H. rx. 2.

Alf. 1. — E. & G.2.; Eth. V. 1.22. VI. 1. 27. 34.42. IX.
44.; C.E. 1.11. 21.

E.& G.2.; Eth. V. 1. 22. VI. 1. 27. 34, 42. [X.44.; C.E.1.
11. 19.

Edm. E. 4.; Eth. V. 10. 25. VI. 11. 28.; C.E. 7.; C.S. 51.;
H. x11. 3.


CNUT. Securar.


Ed. procem.; Ed. 13.; Edg. H. 7. II. 1.; Eth. V.1. VI. 8.
VIII. 6.

Eth. V. 3. VI. 10.; Wil. I. 40.

In. 11.; Eth. V. 2. VI. 9. VIII. 5.; Wil. I. 41. ITI. 15.

E.& G.11.; Eth. VI. 7.

E. & G. procem.; Eth. V.1. VI. 1. IX. 44.

Wih. 4.

Ath.I.14.; Edg. II.s.; Eth. VI. 32.— Eth. V. 26. VI. 31.
32,

Edg. Il. 8.; Eth. V. 24. VI. 28. 32.; Wil. IIL. 7.

Ath. I.13.; Eth. V. 26. VI. 32.; C.S. 66; R.S. p. 432,
433.; H. x.1. XIII. 9. LXVI. 6.

C.S. 14.15.; H. x. 1.

In. 30.; Ed. 7. 8; Ath. I. 8.20. III. 6. IV. 4. V.1.2.;
Eth. III. 13.; C.S.15.67.; Ed.C.5.; H. vii. 4. x. 2.
XI. 14. XIII. 10.

C. S. 12. 15.; H. x. 1.

In. 30.; Ed. 7. 8; Ath. I. 8.20. III. 6. IV. 4. V.1.2.;


Eth. III. 13.; C.S.18.67.; Ed.C.5.; H. v1.4. x. 1.
xI. 14, xr. 10.— Edg. II. 3.; Wil. I. 13. 39.; H. xu11.
4. XXXIV. 1.2. 8.— Eth. IX. 42.; C.S.67.; H. x. 1. xr
14, xu. 10. — C.S. 12.14.; H. x. 1.— Ed.2.4.; H.
XIII. 4

Alf. 32.; Edg. II. 4.; H. xxxiv. 7.


Cap. 17.
18.


TABLE OF CONCORDANCE.


CNUT. Securar ~ continued.


Ath. I. 3.; Edg. IL. 2.; Wil. I. 43.; H. xxxiv.6.

Ed. 11.; Edg. H. 1. II. 6.; H. vir. 4. Lr. 2,— Edg. IL. 5.;
H. vil. 2. XXXI. 3.

Wil. I. 44.

Edm. C. 7.; Edg. II. 6.; Edg. S.3.; Eth. I. 1.; Wil. I. 25,
Ill. 14.; H. vir. 2. — H. uxxvitt. 2.

Eth. I.1. IIL 3. 4.; C.S. 30.; H. vxiv. 9. Lxv.3. LXVII 1.
— C.F. 12.— H. yxiv. 9.

O. 8.; Edg. S. 6.

Ed. 1.; Ath. I. 12. 13. IIT. 2 V. x. ~— Ed.1.; Ath. I.
10. 12.; Edm. C. 5.; Edg.S. 6.; Eth. I.3.; Ed. C. 38.;
Wil. I. 45. ITI. 10. 12.

Ath. I. 20.; Edg. II. 7.; Wil. III. 14.; H. xx1x. 2.3. xr. 1.
Lit. 1. —~ Edg. I. 7.; C.S. 30.; Wil. I. 47.; Hs ixv. 3.
Alf. 4.; Ath. I. 4.; Edg. Il. 7.; Eth. V. 30. VI. 37.;

C.S. 58. 65.; H. xi. 1. XLIII.7. XLVI.

Ed. 1.; H. xxrir. 2.

H.& E.15.; Ed. C. 23.; Wil. I. 48.; H. viir. 5.~ Alf. 37.;
In. 39.; Ed. 10.; Ath. I. 22. II. 4. II. 4. IV. 1.; Edm. C.
3.3; Wil. I. 30.48.: H. xxii. 2.

In. 28. 36. 72.; Wil. J. 3.49.; H. xir. 3. LIx. 18.26. LXV.
1.2.— Wil. I. 49. 50.

Ath. I. 7.; Eth. I. 1.—Edg. IL 7.; C.S.25.; Wil. I.
47.; H. uxv. 3. — Eth. I. 1. III. 3.4.; C. 8.22; H.
LXIV. 9, LXV. 8 LXvII. 1.— Eth. I. 1.; C.S. 31.3 Wil. I.
52.3; H.xxi.6. Ltxv. 4.— Eth. 1.4.; C.S.33.; Wil. 1
47.; H. uxv. 3.

Ath. II. 7.; Edm.C.7.; Eth. I.1.; Ed.C.21.; Wil. I.
52.; H. viii. 3. xLi. 6 LIX. 6.— Eth. I. 1.; C.S. 30.;
Wil. I. 52.; H. x1. 6. Lxv. 4.

Ath. I. 19.; Eth. IL 2.

Eth. I. 4.; C.S. 30.; Wil. I. 47.; H. uxv. 3.

C.F. 13.; H. yxv. 5. :

Ed. 3.; Ath. I.25.; C.S. 37.— Edm. E.6.; Eth. V. 25.
VI. 28.; C.S. 37.— H. x1. 6.

Ed.3.; Ath. I. 25.; C.S.36.—Edm. E.6.; Eth. V. 25.
VI. 28.; C.S. 36, —- Eth, V. 24. VI.28.; C.F. 14.; H.
XI. 7.

H. x1. 8 LXVI. 1. LXVIIL. 5.7% LXXIII. 6.

E. & G. 12.; R.8.; Eth. VI. 48. [X. 33.; H. x. 3. Lxxv. 7.

Alf. 21.; Eth. IX. 26.; H. Lxvi. 2. LxvIll. 8. EXXIII.
2. 3. 4.

Ethb. 24. 88.; Alf. 35.; C.S.61.; H. xc. 9.— H. ixvi. 3.

E. & G. 4.

E. & G. 5.; H. xt. 9. Lxvi. 4.

E. & G. 9. — Wih. 9-11. ; In. 3.; E.& G. 7.; H. x1. 10.

Wih. 14. 15.; E. & G. 8.; Eth. VIII. 2.

In. 10.; Eth. [X.4.; C. E. 3.; C.S. 64. — Alf. 40.; C.E. 16.;
H. vx. 1.

E. & G.6.; H. xt.11. XIt. 11. LXVI. 5.

Eth. VI. 28.; H. xi. 12.

Edm. E.4.; Eth. V. 10.95. VI. 11. 28.; C. E. 7. 24.; H.
XII. 3.

E. & G.4.; H. x1. 5.


TABLE OF CONCORDANCE.


CNUT. Srcurar— continued.


Cap.53. Ethb. s2-s4.; Alf. 11. 18. 25. 26.; In. 10.; Eth. VI. 39.;

Wil. I. 12. 18.; H. x.1. x11. 6.

54. Ethb. 31.

56. Wih. 4.

58. Alf.4.; Ath. I. 4.; Edg. II. 7; Eth. V. 30. VI. 37.;
C.S. 26. 65.; H. x1i.1. XLII. 7. XLVI.

59. Alf. 3.

60. Alf. 7.; In. 6.; Eth. VII. 9. 15.; H. x. 1. XIII. 7% LXXX. 1.

61. Ethb. 24.; Alf.35.; H. xc. 9.

62. H.x.1. x1. 3. x11. 8.

63. Edm.S.6.; Eth. 1V.4.; Wil. I. 2. 15.

64. In. 10.; Eth. IX. 4.; C.E.3.; C.S. 48.

65. Alf. 4.; Ath. I. 4.;  Edg. II. 7.; Eth. V. 30. VI. 37.;
C.S. 26. 58.; H. xi1.1. xbi1.7. xivit.— Ath. I. 6. IV.
6; H.x.1. XII.1. XLVI. 1. XLVII. LXVI.9.— Wil. I.
15.; H. x1. 1. XLVII.

66. In. 51.; H. x11. 9. Lxvi. 6. — Ath. J. 13.; Eth. V. 26. VI.
32.; C.S.10.; R.S. p. 432, 433.; H. x.1. x11. 9. LXVI.


6.

67. Eth. IX. 42.; C.S.15.; H.x.1. xr. 14. x11. 10.— H. x1.
14,.—In. 30.; Ed. 7. 8.; Ath. I. 8. 20. III. 6. IV. 4. V.1.
2.; Eth. Ill. 13.; C.S.18.15.; Ed. C.5.; H. vir. 4.
X.1. XI. 14. XIII. 10.

69. Eth. VI. 52.

71. Wil. I. 34.

72. Wil. I. 20.; H. xiv. 1-4.

73. O.14.; Eth. III. 14.; H. xiv. 5.

74. Eth. V. 21. VI. 26.; H. x1. 13. —H. xiv. 6.

76. H. Lxxxvil. 2.

77. In.7. 57.

78. p.456,457.2.; H. X.1. X11. 12. XLII. 2 7.

81. C.F. 30.

82. Eth. III. 3.

84. Ath. I. 26.; Ed.C. p.456, 457.2.; H. x11. 4. XXXIV. 8.


CNUT. Constirutiones DE ForeEsTA.


Cap.12. C.S, 22; H. xiv. 9.
13. C.S.35.; H. rxv. 5.
14. Eth. V. 24. VI. 28.; C.S.37.; H. x1. 7.
a pale. 12.; In, 43, 44.3; H. xxiii. 2. XXXVII. XLV. 4.


30. C.S. 81.


RECTITUDINES SING. PERSONARUM.


p. 434, ) In. 4. 61.; Ath. I. proem.; Edm. E. 2.; Edg. I. 2. 3.; Eth.
435.5 VI.18. VIII. 4. 1X. 11.; C. E. 10. 11.; H. x1.4.—Ath. I.
13.; Eth. V. 26. VI. 32.; C.§.10.66.; H.x.1. x11. 9.

LXVI. 6.


TABLE OF CONCORDANCE.


EDWARD THE CONFESSOR.


Cap. 1. Eth. V. 10. VI. 13. VII. 31. IX.1.; C.E. 2
5. Alf.2.5.42.; In.5.; Ath. III. 6. [V.4.; Edm. S.2.; Eth.
VIL. 5.; Wil. I. 1.—In. 30.; Ed. 7.8.; Ath. I. 8. 20.
Ill. 6. IV.4. V.1.2; Eth. IIL 13.; C.S. 18. 15. 67.;
H. viii. 4. X. 1. XI. 14. XIII. 10.
6. Ath. I.5.; Wil. I. 15.
7.1 E. & G.6.; Edm. E. 2.; Edg. I. 3.; Eth. IX. 8.; C.E.3.;
8. H. x1. 2.
10. E.& G.6.; Edm. E.2.; Edg.I.4.; Eth. V.11. VI. 18.
IX. 10.; C.E.9.; Wil. I. 17.; H. x1. 3.
ll. H. xv.
12. In. 70.; Wil. I. 7.; H. xix. vxx. 2.4. LXXXVII.4. —E.& G.
1.; Edg.I. 5.; Eth. Iff.1. WI. 14. VII.2.; C.E.2.;
Ed. C. 26. 27.; Wil. I. 1.2.; H. x. 1. XIII. 1. LXXIX. 3. —
Eth. IV. 4.; Wil. I. 26.
14. Ed.C. 24.; Wil. I.6.; H. x. 1.
16. A.& G.2.; Eth. II. 5.; H. vxx. 6. 8.
920. Ed.C. 28. — Wil. I. 3.
21. Ath. II.7.; Edm. C. 7.; Eth. I. 1.; C.S. 31.; Wil. I.
52.; H. vill. 3. XLl. 6. LIX. 6.
23. H. & E.15.; C.S.28.; Wil. I. 48.; H. vir. 5.
24, Ed.C. 14.; Wil. I.6.; H. x. 1.
26.) E. & G.1.; Edg. I. 5.; Eth. III.1. VI. 14. VII. 2.; C.E. 2.3
27. Ed. C. 12.; Wil. I.1.2.; H. x. 1. xml. 1. LXXIX. 3.
28. Ed. C. 20.
36. In. 21.; Ath. I.11.; Eth. IIL 7.; H. vxiv. 5. uxxiv. 2.
38. Ed.1.; Ath. I. 10. 12; Edm. C. 5.; Edg. S.6.; Eth. I. 3.;
C.S. 24.; Wil. I. 45. III. 10. 11.


WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR. I.


Cap. 1.) Eth. VII. 7.— Alf. 2.5.42.; In. 5.; Ath. III.6 IV. 4.;
2.5 Edm.S.2.; Eth. VIL 5.; Ed. C. 5.—E. & G.1.; Edg. I.

5.; Eth. III. 1. VI. 14.; Eth. VIL. 2.; C.E.2.; Ed. C. 12.
26.27.; H. x. 1. xuir. 1. Lxxrx. 3. — Edm. S. 6.; Eth.
IV. 4.; C.S. 63.; Wil, I. 15.

Tn. 28. 36. 72.; C.S.29.; Wil. I.49.; H. xu. 3. LIx. 18.
26. LXV. 1. 2.; Ed.C. 20.

Ff.

Ed. C. 14. 24.; H. x1.


In. 70.; Ed. C. 12.; H. uxix. LxXx. 2. 4. LXXXVII. 4.~E. & G.
13. (p.174, 175.); Edm. S.7.; H. xviii. 1. LXXvI. 1.
5-7.

8 In.70.; E.& G.13.; 0.13.; Wg. 6.9-12.; M.L.; H. uxrv.
2. LXX. 1. LXXVI. 4.
9. E.& G. 13. (p. 174, 175.); Edm. S. 7.; H. vxviit. 1. LXXvI.
5-7.
10. Ethb. 59.; H. xcrir.1.
ll. Ethb. 54. 55. 69.; Alf. 56-60. 71.; H. xciir. 15~19. 31.


TAM


TABLE OF CONCORDANCE.


WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR. I.— continued.


Cap. 12.
13.
15.


Ethb. s2-84,; Alf. 11. 18.25. 26.; In.10.; Eth. VI. 39.;
C.S. 53.; Wil. I, 18.; H.x.1. xz. 6.
Edg. I. 3.; C.S.15.; Wil. I. 39.; H. xu. 4. xxxiv.


1. 2. 3

Ath. I. s.; Ed. C. 6. — Edm. S. 6.; Eth. IV. 4.; C.S. 63.;
Wil. I. 2.—C.S. 65.; H. xu. 1. xnvin

E. & G.6.; Edm. E. 2; Edg.I.4.; Eth.V.11. VI. 18.
IX. 10.; C.E.9.; Ed.C. 10.3 H. x1. 3.

Ethb. 82-84.; Alf. 11. 18. 25. 26.; In.10.; Eth. VI. 39.;
C.S. 53.; Wil. I. 12.; H. x. 1. xurr. 6.

Ethb. 43.; Alf. 47.; H. xcriz. 5.

C.S. 72.; H. xv. 1-4.

Eth. II. 8.

H. xci. 1.

Edm. C.7.; Edg. II. 6.; Edg. S.3.; Eth. I. 1.; C.S. 20.;
Wil. III. 14.; H. virr. 2.

Eth. IV. 4.; Ed. C. 12,

Wih. 25. 26.; In. 12.; Ath. I. 1. Ill. 6.; H.xuvirn4. wrx.
20. 23. — Ath. V. 1. 1.


Alf. 37.; In. 39.; Ed.10.; Ath. I. 22. II. 4. WI.4. IV. 1.;
Edm. C. 3.; C.S. 28.; Wil. I. 48.; H. xxi. 2.

In. 39.; H. xxii. 2.
~S. 71.

Alf. 42,

H. exxi. 1.

Edg. II. 3.; C.S.15.; Wil. I. 13.; H. xt. 4. xxxtv. 1.
2. 3.

Eth. V. 3. VI. 10.; C.S. 2.

In.11.; Eth. V. 2. VI. 9. "IIL. 5.; C.S.3.; Wil. IIL. 15.

Edg. H. 6

Ath. I. 3.5 Edg. II. 2.; C.S.17.; H. xxxiv. 6.

C. S. 19.

Ed.1.; Ath. I. 10. 12. 18.; Edm.C. 5.; Edg.S.6.; Eth.
I.3.; C.S.24.; Ed.C.38.; Wil. II. 10. 11, — Ath. I.


24,

Edg. II. 7.; C.S. 25. 30.; H. uxv. 3.— Eth. I. 4.; C.S. 30.
33.; H. ixv. 3.

Alf. 37.; In. 39.; Ed.10.; Ath. I. 22, II. 4. IIIf. 4. IV. 1.;
Edm. C. 3.; C. S. 28.; Wil. I. 30.; H. xuu41 2.—
H.& E.15.; C.S. 28.; Ed.C.23.; H. vir. 5.

In. 28. 36. 72.; C.S.29.; Wil. I.3.; H. x1. 3. Lx. 18.
26. Lxv. 1. 2.—C.S. 29.; Wil. I. 50.

C.S, 29.; Wil. I. 49.

Ath. IL. 7.; Edm. C. 7.; EthI.3.; C.S.31.; Ed. C
21.; H. vii. 3. xxi. 6 Lix. 6. — Eth. I.1.; C.S. 30.
31.; H. xu. 6. Lxv. 4.


WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR. II.


Cap. 1} wil IIL. 12.


3.


H. xvii.


|


TABLE OF CONCORDANCE.


WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR. III.


Cap. 1. Eth. V. 1.34. VI. 1.6. VJII.1.; C. E. 1.
7. Edg. II. 8.; Eth. V. 24. VI. 28. 32.; C.S. 9.

10.7 Ed. 1.; Ath. I. 10. 12. 13. III. 2 V.x.; Edm. C. 5.;

11S Edg.S.6.; Eth. 1. 3.; C.S.24.; Ed.C. 38.; Wil. I. 45,

12, Wil. IL. 1. 2.

14. Ath. I.20.;  Edg.II.7.; C.S.05.; H. xxrx.9.3. un 1.
Lut. 1.— Edm.C. 7.; Edg. II. 6.; Edg.S.3.; Eth. 1. 1.;
C. S. 20.3; Wil. I. 95.; H. virr. 2.

15. In.11.; Eth. V. 2. VI. 9. VIII. 5.; C.S.3.; Wil. L 41..—
H. vxxvill. 1. 3.


HENRY I.


Cap. v.
§ 5. H. xxx. 5.
Eth. III. 13.; H. xxxr. 2.
H. yvit. 3.
E.&G.3.; Edm. E.1.; Edg.S.1.; Eth.V. 4.6.9. VI. 41.
IX. 27.; C.E. 5.


ae
Mom


Cap. vir.


§ 2. Edg. II. 5.; C.S. 18.; H. xxxr 3.
4, Ed.11.; Edg. H.1. IL. s.; C.S.18.; H. 11 2.


Cap. viir.


§ 2. Edm.C.7.; Edg. Il. 6.; Edg.S.3.; Eth. I.1.; C.S. 20.;
Wil. I. 25. IIT. 14.
3. Ath. II.7.; Edm.C.7.; Eth.I.1.; C.S.31.; Ed.C.
21.; Wil. I. 52.; H. xt. 6. LIx. 6.
4. In. 30.; Ed. 7. 8.; Ath. I. 8.20. III. 6. IV. 4. V. 1. 2.3
Eth. III. 13.; C.S. 13. 15.67.; Ed. C. 5.; H. x... xr.14.


XII. 10.
5. H.& E.15.; C.S8.28.; Ed.C. 23.; Wil. I. 48.
Cap. 1x.
§ 4. Ed. proem.; Ed.11.; Edg.H.7.; O.D.8.; H. 11. 2
Cap. x.


§ 1. C.S. 12 14. 15.
3. E.& G.12.; R.8.; Eth. VI. 48. IX. 33.; C.S.40.; H.
LXXV. 7.


Cap. x1.


§ 1, Eth. VIL 13. IX. 1-4.; C.E. 2; H. xi. 3. LXvitt. 2.
LXXIX. 5. LXXXVII. 6.

E. & G.6.; Ath. I. proem.; Edm. E. 2; Edg. I. 3.;
Eth. IX. 8.; C. E. 8.; Ed. C. 7. 8.

E.& G.6.; Edm. E.2.; Edg.I.4.; Eth. V.11. VI. 18.
IX.10.; C.E.9.; Ed. C.10.; Wil. I. 17.

In. 4. 61.; Ath. I. prooem.; Edm. E. 2.; Edg. I. 2. 3.; Eth.
VI. 18. VIII. 4. IX. 11.; C.E. 10. 11; RS, p. 434,


PrP YS


An
2
i?)

*)

=)


§ 1.


3.


PE WD Bye


TABLE OF CONCORDANCE.


HENRY I.— continued.


Cap. x1.— continued.


Eth. V. 24. VI. 28.; C.S.37.; C.F. 14.

C.S. 39.; H. pxvi. 1. LXVIII. 5. 7. LXXIII. 6

E. & G. 5.3 ; C.S. 44.; H. LXVI. 4.,

Wih. 9-11.; In. 3. ; E. & G. 73 CS. 45.

E. & G. 6.; C.S. 49.5 H. xiir.11. LXVI. 5.

Eth. VI. 28. ; C.S. 50.

Eth. V. 21. VI. 26.; C.S. 74.

Eth. IX. 42.; C. S.15.67.; H. x. 1. xu. 10. — In. 30. ;
Ed. 7.8.; Ath. I. 8.20. III. 6. IV. 4. V.1.2.; Eth. III.
13.; C.S. 13. 15.67.; Ed. C.5.; H. vit. 4. X.1. XII
10.


Cap. xt.


Alf. 4.; Ath. I. 4.; Edg. IL. 7.; Eth. V. 30. VI. 37.;
C. S. 26. 58. 65.; H. xii. 7. xtvir.— Ath. I. 6. IV. 6.;
C. 8. 65.; H. x.1. x3vi. 1. xLVII. Lxvi. 9. — C. S. 65.;
Wil. I. 15. ; H. xznvi.

ore 27. 29. ; Alf. 40.; In. 45.; Eth. IV. 4.; H. xxxv.


In. ‘28. 86.72; C.S.29.; Wil. 1.3.49.;  H. tix. 18. 26.
Lxv. 1. 2.— Edm. E. 4.; Eth. V. 10. 25. VI. 11. 28.;
C.E. 7. 24.; C. S,51.— Eth. VIL 13. IX. 1-4.; C.E.
2.; H. XI... LXVIII. 2. LXXIX. 5. LXXXvII. 6.-——C. S.
62.; H. x. 1. x1. 8.

Ath. I. 26.; C.S.84.; Ed. C. p. 456, 457. ”.; H. xxxtv. 8.


Cap. x11.


Ethb. 5.; H. vxxx.1.7.—E.& G.1.; Edg.I.5.; Eth.
TII.1. VI. 14. VII.2.; C.E.2.; Ed. C. 12. 26. 27.; Wil.
J.1.2.; H.x.1. Lxxrx. 3,

Ath. I. 14.; Eth. III. s. IV. 5.

Edg. II. 3.; C.S.15.; Wil. I. 13. 39.; H. xxxrv. 1. 2. 3,
— Ed. 2. 4.; C.S. 15.

Ethb. s2-84.; Alf. 11. 18. 25. 26.; In.10.; Eth. VI. 39.;
C.S. 53. ; Wil. I. 12. 18.; H. x. 1.

Alf. 7.; In. 6.; Eth. VII. 9. 15.; C.S.60.; H.x.1. Lxxx.


1.

C.S. 62.; H. x... x1. 3.

In. 51.; C.S.66.; H.uxvi.6.— Ath. I. 13.; Eth. V. 26.
VI. 32.; C.S. 10. 66; R.S. p. 434, 435.; H. x. 1.
LXVI. 6.

Eth. 1X. 42.; C.S.15.67.; H. x.1. x1. 14.—JIn. 30.;
Ed. 7.8.; Ath. I. 8.20. III. 6, IV. 4. V.1.2.; Eth. III.
13.; C.S. 13. 15.67.; Ed. C.5.; H. vii. 4. x. 1. XI. 14.

E. & G.6.; C.S8.49.; H. xt. 11. Lxvi. 5.

C.S. 78.; p.456,457.2.; H. x. 1. XLII. 2. 7.


Cap. xiv.


C. S. 72.3; Wil. I. 20.


O.14.; Eth. III. 14.; C.S. 73.
C. S. 74.


$1.


§ 2.
3.


§ 2.
3.


§ 2.
3.
4


§ 3.
5.


§


§ 6.


§ 2.


zt


TABLE OF CONCORDANCE.


HENRY I.— continued.


Cap. xv.
Ed. C. 11.
Cap. xvi.
Ath. IV. 5.
Cap. xvitr.
Wil. II. 3.


Cap. xxuI.
Alf. 12.; In. 43. 44.; C.F. 28. 99.; H. xxxvil. XLv. 4.—
Ed. 1.; C.S. 27.
Alf. 20.; H. xiv. 2.
Cap. xxIx.


Ath. I. 20.; Edg. II. 7.; C. S.25.; Wil. III. 14.; H. xr 1.
LUI 1.


Cap. xxxI.


Eth. III. 13.; H. v. 6.
Edg. II. 5.; C.S.18.; H. vu. 2.
Hi. xyrx. 4.


Cap. XXxIII.
H. xivi. 1. LY. 4. LIX. 11.
H. v.5.
Cap. xxxIv.
Edg. If. 3.; C.S. 15.; Wil. I. 13. 39.; H. xr. 4.
Ath. I. 3.; Edg. II. 2.; C.S.17.; Wil. I. 43.


Alf. 32.; Edg. II. 4.; C.S. 16.
Ath. I, 26.; C.S.84.; Ed. C. p.456,457.2.; H. x11 4.


Cap. xxxv.
Ethb. 27. 29.; Alf. 40.; In. 45.; Eth. 1V.4.; H. x11.


Cap. xxxvit.


Alf. 12.; In. 43. 44.; C.F. 98. 09.; H. xxiin. 2. xzv. 4.
— H. xn.
Cap. xxxIx.
H. Lxxxiv.
Cap. xL.
H. xxxvit.
Cap. x1.


Ath. II. 7.; Edm. C.7.; Eth. I.1.; C.8.31.; Ed. C.21.;
Wil. I. 52.; H. vin. 3. tix. 6.— Eth. I. 1.; C.S. 30. 31.3
Wil. I. 52.; H. txv. 4.


Cap, XL.


Alf. 37,; In. 39.; Ed.10.; Ath. I. 22. II. 4. III. 4. IV.1.;
Edm. C. 3.; C. S. 28.3; Wil. I. 30. 48. —C. S. 78.;
p- 456, 457. 2.3; H. x.1. x11.12. xLi1.7.— In. 39.; Wil.
I. 32.


§ 7.


§ 1.


§ 4.


$1.


TABLE OF CONCORDANCE.


HENRY I. — continued.


Cap. xLIll. — continued,


Alf. 4.; Ath. I. 4.; Edg. II. 7.; Eth, V. 30. VI. 37.;
C.S. 26. 58. 65.; H. xi. 1. xnvir.—C. 8. 78.; p. 456,
457.n.3; H. x... XIII. 12. XLII. 2.


Cap. xiv.
Alf. 20.; H. xxi. 3.
Alf. 12.; In. 43. 44.; C. F. 28. 29.; H. xxi. 2. XXXVII.


Cap. xLvi.


Ath. I. 6. IV.6.; C.S.65.; H.x.1. xii. xnvu.— H.
XXXII. 3. LIM. 4 LIX. 11.


Cap. xLVvir.


Alf. 4.; Ath. I. 4.;  Edg. I. 7.; Eth. V. 30. VI. 37.;
C. S. 26. 58. 65.; H. x1. 1. xLiir. 7.— Ath. I. 6. IV. 6.;
C.S. 65.; H. x2. xm. 1.—C.S. 65.; Wil. I.15.; H.
XI. 1.


Cap. xLix.
H. xxxi. 4.
Cap. LI.
Ath. I. 20.; Edg. II. 7.; C.S.25.; Wil. III. 14.; H. xxrx.
2. 3. LIM. 1.


Ed.11.; Edg.H.1. II. 5.; C.8.18.; H. vir. 4. — Ed.
proem.; Ed. 11.; Edg. H.7.; O. D. 8.; H. 1x. 4.


Cap. L111.
Ath. I. 20.; Edg. II. 7.; C.S.25.; Wil. I[I.14.; H. xxix.
2.3. LI. 1.
H. xxxiil. 3. XLVI. 1. LIX. 11.


Cap. LVII.
H. v. 12.
Wih. 26.; In. 12.; Ath. 1.1. III.6.; Wil. I. 27.; H. u1x.
20, 23.
H. wrx. 12.
Cap. LIx.
Ath. II. 7.; Edm.C. 7.; Eth. I. 1.; C.S. 31.; Ed. C.
21.; Wil. I. 52.; H. viii. 3. xl. 6.
H. xx. 18.
H. xxx. 8. XLVI. 1. LI. 4.
H. bvit. 8.
In. 28. 36. 72.; C.S.29.; Wil. I. 3. 49.; H. xir. 3. Lrx. 26,
LXV. 1. 2
Wih. 26.; In. 12.; Ath. I. 1. TI. 6.: Wil. I. 27.; H. rvir
4, Lix. 23.— Ath. I. 1. Vit. x11 3.
Wih. 26.; In.12.; Ath. I. 1. TI. 6.; Wil. I. 27.; H. rvir.
4, LIX. 20.
In. 28. 36. 722; C.S.29.; Wil. I. 3. 49.; H. xir.3. 11x. 18.
LXV. 1. 2.


TABLE OF CONCORDANCE.


HENRY JI.— continued.


Cap. Lx.


§ 1. E.& G.9.; Eth. V. 18. VI. 25.; C. E. 17. — Edg. I. 5.;
Eth. V. 17. VI. 24.; C.E.16.— Alf. 43.; Eth. VI. 23.;
C. E. 16. — Alf. 40.; C. E.16.; C.S. 48.
2. Eth. V. 20. VI. 25.; C. E. 17.


Cap. Lxrv.


§ 2 In. 70; E.& G. 13; O. 13.3; Wg. 6 9-12.; M.L.;
Wil. I.s.; H. uxx. 1. txxvi. 4.—O. 12.; Eth. V. 9.
VI. 5. IX. 28.; C.E.6.; H. yxiv.3, txvii. 3.


3. O.12.; Eth. V.9. VI. 5. IX.28.; C.E.6.; H. uxiv. 2
LXVIIL. 3


5. In.21.; Ath. I. 11.; Eth. III. 7.; Ed. C.36.; H. xxiv.


2.
8. Wih. 17. 18.; Eth. IX. 19. 20. 21.; C. E. 5.


9. Eth. I1. HI. 3. 4.; C.S. 22. 30.; H. txv. 3. Lxvii. 1
— C.S. 22,—C. F. 12.


Cap. Lxv.
§ 1.) In. 28. 36. 72.; C.S.29.; Wil. I.3. 49.; H. xu. 3. irx. 18.
2. 26.


8 Edg. II. 7.; Wil. I. 47.; C.S. 25. 30. — Eth. I. 1. III. 3.
4.; C.S. 22. 30.; H.xuxiv.9. Lxvit. 1.— Eth. L. 4;
C.S. 30. 338.; Wil. I. 47.


4. Eth. I. 1; C. S. 80. 31.; Wil. I. 52.; H. xu. 6
§ C.S8.385.; C.F. 13.


Cap. LxvI.


§ 1. C.S8.39.; H. x1. 8. Lxvitl. 5. 7 LXXIII. 6.
2. Alf. 21.; Eth. IX. 26.; C.S.41.; H. exvirr. 8 LXxxiIt. 2
3. 4.
3. C.S. 42.
4. E.& G.5.; C.S. 44.; H. xn 9.
5. E.& G.6.; C.S.49.; H. xn.11. xu. 11.
6. In. 51.; C.S. 66.; H. xi.9.— Ath. J.13.; Eth. V- 26.


VI. 32.; C.S. 10. 66.; R.S. p. 434, 435.; H. x.1. xu1.9.
9. Ath. I. 6.1V.6.; C.S.65.; H. x. 1. x1.1. XLVI. 1. XLVIL


Cap. Lxvit.


§ 1. Ath. IV. 6.; Edg. H. 9.— Eth. 1. Ill. 3. 4; C.S. 22.
30.; H. Lxv.3. LxIv. 9.


Cap. Lxvitl.
§ 1. Ethb. 6.—E. & G. 13. (p. 174, 175.); Edm. S.7.; Wil. I.
7-9.; H. LXxvI. 1. 5-7.


2. Eth. VII. 13, IX. 1-4.; C. E.2.; H. x01. xt. 3. LXXIX. 5.
LXXXVII. 6.


3. E.& G.13.; H. pxxvi. 1.—O. 12.; Eth. V.9. VI. 5. IX.
28.; C.E.6.; H. xiv. 2. 3.


he. S. 39.; H. xt. 8 LXVI. 1. LXXIIL. 6.


TABLE OF CONCORDANCE.


HENRY I.— continued.


Cap. Lxv111.— continued.


§ 8 Alf. 21.; Eth. IX. 26; C.S. 41.; H. uxvi. 2. LXxxrii. 2.
3. 4.
9, H. Lxxxrx. 1.


Cap. Lxix.
§ 1. In. 70.; Ed. C. 12.; Wil. I. 7.; H. uxx. 2. 4. UXXXVIL 4.


Cap. Lxx.


§ l. In.70.; E.&G.13.; O.13.; Wg. 6.9-12.; M.L.; Wil I.
8.; H. Lxiv. 2. LXxvI. 4.


2. Ethb. 86.— In. 70.; Ed. C. 12.; Wil. I. 7.; H. vxix. vxx.
4. LXXXVII. 4.


3. Ethb. se.


4. In.70.; Ed. C. 12,; Wil. I. 7.; H. uxrx. Lxx. 2. LXXXVII. 4.
5. In. 74.


aha. & G.2.; Eth. IL 5.; Ed.C. 16.


14.
re } Alf. 9.
18. H.& E.6.; In. 38,— H. iix. 9.
2). Alf.41.; H. uxxxvull. 14.
Cap. Lxx1.
§ 1. Ath. I.6.; Edm. E. 6.— Wil. I. 36.


Cap. LXxIII.
pi a1.; Eth. IX.06; C.S. 41.; H. uxvr. 2. exvur
° 8.


4.
6. Alf.s.18; Edm. E. 4.; Eth. VI. 39.—C.S. 39.; H. x1 8.
LXVI. 1. LXVIIL, 5. 7.
Cap. LXxIv.


§ 2 In. o1.; Ath. I. 11.; Eth. TII. 7.; Ed. C. 36; H. vxiv.
5.
Cap. Lxxv.
§ 6. Alf. 27. 28.; In. 23.; H. uxxv. 10.
7 E.& G.12.; R.8.; Eth.VI. 48. [X.33.; C.S. 40.; H. x. 3
10. Alf. 27. 28.; In. 23.; H. uxxv. 6.


Cap. LxxvI.


§ 1. E.&G.13.; Edm.S. 7.; Wil. I.7-9.; H. pxvii.1. LXXVI
5-7.
4, In.70.; E.& G.13.; 0.13.3; Wg.6.9-12.; M.L.; Wil I.
8.; H. LxIv. 2. Lxx. 1.


cb & G.13.; Edm. §.7.; Wil. I. 7-9.; H. uxviti.1. LXXvh
1.


Cap. LxxviI.
§ 3. Wih.s.; H. pxxvur 1.


1
2.
3.
4.
6


TABLE OF CONCORDANCE.


HENRY I.— continued.


Cap. Lxxvitl.


Wih. 8.; H. vxxvir. 3. — Wil. TE. 15.
C.S. 20.

Wil. III. 15.

In, 27.

Alf. 14.


Cap. LXxIx.
In. 76.


E. & G.1.; Edg. .5.; Eth. WI.1. VI.14. VII.2.; C.E.2.;
Ed. C. 12. 26. 27.; Wil. I.1.2.; H. x.4. xr. 1.


Eth. VII. 13. [X.1-4.; C.E.2; H. x2. x13. Lxvinn
2. LXXXVII. 6.


Eth, IX. 5.; C. E. 3.


Cap. Lxxx.


Ethb. 5.; H. xi. 1. Lxxx. 7. — Alf. 7.; In. 6.; Eth. VII.
9.15.; C.S.60.; H. x.1. xu. 7.

Ethb. 5.; H. xu. 1. Lxxx. 1.

Alf. 15. 38.; In. 6.; Eth. VII. 12.


Cap. Uxxxr.
H. & E. 13. 14.; In. 6.; H. uxxxvit. 9. 10.
Ethb. 15.; Alf. 39.; In. 6.


Cap. LxxxtI.
Alf. 42.; Eth. IV. 4.; H. rxxxrr. 1. 3.


4. a} Ale 42.; H. uxxxvill. 10.


8.
9.


:
ef


1.


8.


Alf, 42.
Alf. 18.


Cap. Lxxx111.
Alf, 42.; Eth. IV. 4,; H. uxxxir. 1.


Ath. IV. 7.


Cap. LXxxIv.
H. xxxix.


Cap. LXxxvi.


Ethb. 18.; Alf. 19.

C.S. 76.

Alf, 19.

Alf. 29. 30. 31.; In. 13. 14. — In, 70.; Ed.C.12.; Wil.
7.; H. uxrx. LXx. 2. 4.

Eth. VII. 13. IX. 1-4.; C.E.2; H. xii. xt1.3. xxvill.
2. LXXIx. 5,

Alf. 29. 30. 31.; In, 13.14.

In, 34,


io yu & E. 13. 14.; In. 6.; H. uxxxn1.


3.


TABLE OF CONCORDANCE.


HENRY I.— continued.


Cap. LXxxvii1.


§1.
2) alr 36.


sf } alt. a7.


10.


Alf. 42.; H. pxxxin, 3. 4.
Edm. S. 1.
Alf. 41.; H. txx. 21.


Cap. Lxxx1x.
H. xvii. 9.


Cap. xc.
Alf, 13.
Ethb. 24.; Alf. 35.; C.S. 61.


Cap. xcr.
Wil. I. 22.


Cap. xcr1.
In. 5.; Eth. VII. 4. 5.


Cap. xci1.


Ethb. 59. 60.; Wil. I. 10.

Ethb. 36. 37.; Alf, 44.

Alf. 45.

Ethb. 39. 40.; Alf. 46.

Ethb. 43. 44.; Alf. 47.; Wil. I. 19.
Ethb. 51.; Alf. 49.

Ethb. 50.; Alf. 50.

Alf. 51.

Alf. 52.

Alf. 53.


13, .
14. } Ethb. 53.; Alf. 54, 55.


15.


16.
17. SEthb. 54. 55.; Alf. 56-60.; Wil. I. 11.


18.
19.


Ethb. 61.; Alf. 61.
Ethb. 65. 67.; Alf. 62.
Alf. 63.

Ethb. 70. 71.; Alf. 64.
Ethb. 64.; Alf. 66.


25.
on } Alf. 66.


Alf. 67.
Ethb. 38.; Alf. 68.


Alfixes.


Ethb. 66.; Alf. 70.


Ethb. 69.; Alf. 71.; Wil. I. 11.


Alf. 72.
Alf. 73.


TABLE OF CONCORDANCE.


HENRY I.— continued.


Cap. xc1I1.— continued.
§ 34. Alf. 74.


35. Alf. 75.
36. Alf. 76.
37. Ethb.6s.; Alf. 77.


Cap. xcIv.
§ 4. Ethb. 33.


No notice is here taken of the ecclesiastical documents,
references to them being rendered perfectly accessible by
means of the Index to the Monumenta Ecclesiastica.


Of the three Penitentials, viz. Theodore’s, Ecgbert’s, and
the ‘Modus Imponendi Peenitentiam,’ the third has foot re-
ferences to the second, and the second to the first.


INDEX.


N.B.— Words having the prefix Ge are placed under the initial
letter of their roots.


A.


Abarnare, H. rxxv. 6. xcI.1.


Abbess.
Her share of the ‘wér’ of a kinsman slain, In. 23.
That abbesses observe a righteous life, Eth.VI. 2.
Abbot.
His share of the ‘wér’ of a kinsman slain, In. 23.
If a thief seek him, Ath. III.6. IV. 4.
a ti observe a righteous life, Eth. V.4. VI. 2. IX. 31.;
ie Ie 6.
Not to be accused for hunting, C. F. 26.


Abicgan, Ethb. 31.


Accusation (Scyldung — Tyhtle — Stzl-tihtle — Wér-tihtle — Wiser-

tibtle).

If any ue bring an action against another, H.& E. 8.9.10.

If one accuse another after he has given him security, Ib. 10.

If any one accuse an ‘esne,’ Wih. 22. 93. 24.

If any one accuse another on account of a ‘god-borh,’ Alf. 33.

If a ‘ceorlise’ man be accused of theft, In. 18, 37.

if of flyman-fyrms, Ib. 30.; Ed.8.; C.S. 13, 15.

If any one be accused of stealing cattle, In. 46.

If any one be accused of secret composition, Ib. 52.; Ath.V. x1.

If any one be accused and driven to ‘ ceap,’ In. 62.

If any one be accused of ‘ wér-tihtle,’ Ib. 71.

If a king’s thane, or one of inferior rank, be accused of homicide,
A.& G. 3.

of ‘wiper-tihtle, Ed.1.; C.S.27.; H. xx. 2.

If any one be accused of theft, Ed.6.; Wil.1. 3. 14.

If any one through a charge of theft forfeit his freedom, Ed. 9.

If any one wish to clear a slain thief from accusation, Ath. I. 11.;
Eth. III. 7.; Ed.C. 36.; H. 1x1v.5. Lxxiv. 2.

If any one accuse a moneyer, Ath.J.14.15.; Eth. III. 8. IV. 5.;
H. xii. 3. XLVIL 1.

That no one take another's accused man from him, Ath. I. 22.
IV.1,.


INDEX.


Accusation — continued.
Of an ‘4nfeald tihtle,’— a ‘ pryfeald tihtle,’ Ath. IV.7.; Eth. 1X.
19. 20.; C. E. 5 dis.; H. uxiv. 8.
That all ‘infamati et accusationibus gravati’ be held in pledge,
Edm. C. 7.
If any one accuse another wrongfully, Edg.II.4.; C.S. 16.;
H. xXXxxIv. 7.
That no one make ‘bot’ for an accusation but with testimony of
the king’s reeve, Eth. I. 1.
If a ‘hired-man’ be accused and escape, Ib. 1.; C.S. 31.
If any one be accused of feeding a breaker of the king’s ‘ grié,’
Eth. IIL. 13.
If any one accuse a priest living according to his rule, Eth. IX.
19.; C.E.5.; H. yxrv. 8.
If any one accuse a deacon, Eth. IX. 20.; C.E.5.; H. uxiv.
8.
If any one accuse a secular (folcisc) mass-priest, Eth. IX. 21.;
C. E. 5.; H. txiv. 8.
If any one accuse a friendless servant of the altar, Eth. IX. 22.;
C.E. 5.
If any one accuse a man in orders of ‘ fehd,’ Eth. IX. 23. 24.;
C.E. 5.
If the ‘lad’ fail in a charge of theft (stel-tihtle), O.D. 4.6.
If three men accuse a ‘tyht-bysig’ man, C.S. 30.; H. txv.3.
If a freeman be accused of theft, Wil. I. 14.
If any one be accused in the hundred, Ib. 51.
Judges to be chosen by the accused, H. v. 5. XXXIII. 6.
That neither ecclesiastics admit laymen, nor laymen ecclesiastics
in accusations, H. v. 8.
If any one accuse a priest before admonition, Ib. 22.
If those accused of capital offences avoid the day of trial,
H, xxvi.
If any one be accused of felony, H.x1111.7. XLVI. 3. LIII. 4.
If a man accuse his lord falsely to the king or justiciary,
H. 11x. 13. 14.
That every accusation (tihle) be commenced with a fore-oath
(ante-juramentum), H. xiv. 1.
If any one accused of homicide wish to clear himself, Ib. 4.
If a priest be accused by a bishop or an archdeacon, Ib. 8.
If any one be accused of arson, H. yxv1.9.


Accuser (Tionde).
That every accuser have the choice of iron or water ordeal, Ath.
IV.6.; Eth. II. 6.
That the accuser of a ‘tyht-bisig’ man have his ‘ ceap-gild,’
C.S, 25.
Acephalos, H. xxi.
Acquietare, H. v1.7.
Adultery, Fornication, &c. (/Ew-bryce — Cifes — Forliger — Hémed-
ping — Hor-cwene — Unriht hémed).
If any one lie with the king’s maiden (megden-man), Ethb. 10.
with his grinding servant, Ib. 11.
with his ‘ fed-esl,’ Ib. 12.
with an ‘eorl’s’ ‘birele,’ Ib.14.
with a ‘ceorl’s,’ Ib. 16.


INDEX,


Adultery, Fornication, &e. — continued.


If a freeman lie with a freeman’s wife, Ethb. 31.; Wil. I. 12.

If a man lie with an ‘esne’s,’ Ethb. 85.

That fornicators turn to a virtuous life, or be separated from
the church, Wih. 3.

If strangers will not refrain from fornication, Ib. 4.; C. S. 56.

If natives (swese men) will not refrain, Wih. 4.

If a ‘gesidcund’ man commit fornication, Ib. 5.

If a ‘ceorl,’ Ib. 5.

If a priest allow fornication, Ib. 6.

If a man lie with a nun, Alf. s.18.; Edm.E.4.; Eth. VI. 39.;
H. Lxxiir. 6.

If a man lie with a ‘twelf-hinde’ man’s wife —with a ‘six-hinde’
man’s — with a ‘ ceorl’s,’ Alf. 10.

If with a ‘ceorlise’ woman, Ib. 11.

If a betrothed woman fornicate, Ib.18.; H. Lxxxir. 9.

If a father finds his son, or a son his father or mother, in adul-
tery, Alf.42.; Wil. I. 35.

If an ecclesiastic commit fornication, E. & G.3.; H. v. 16.

If two brothers or near relations lie with the same woman,
E.& G. 4.

If harlots be anywhere found, Ib.11.; Eth. VI.7.; C.S. 4.

If a man commit adultery, Edm. E.4.; C.S.51.; H. xr. 3.

That a priest have no intercourse with women, Eth.V.9. VI. 5.
IX. 30.; C.E. 6.

That every christian man avoid fornication, Eth.V. 10. VI.11.;
C.E. 7. 24.

That every one shun adultery, Eth.V.25. VI. 28.; C.E. 24.

If any one force a widow, Eth.VI.39.; C.S.53.; Wil. I. 12.17.

If church-‘ grid’ be violated by fornication, Eth. IX. 4.

That adulterers repent, or depart the land, C.S. 6.

If any one violate Lent through fornication, Ib. 48.

If a married woman commit adultery, Ib. 54.

If a married man commit adultery with his female slave (wyln),
Ib. 55.

If a man have a lawful wife and also a concubine (cifes), Ib. 55.

If a man violate another’s wife, Wil. I. 12.

If a married man commit adultery, that the king have the
superior, the bishop the inferior (see Incest), H. x1. 5.

Of the king’s soke in cases of adultery, H. xx1

If a woman fornicate, and destroy her offspring, H. uxx. 16.


Advocatio, H. uxxxv. 1.
fZEcer, see Field.
/Efesn (Pannage — Pasnagium).
Of ‘efesn’ for swine, In. 49.
/Efter-gild, C.S. 24.
/Efter-spréc, O. 7.
Efwyrdla, In. 40. 42.
Egylde (Ungylde — Orgylde).
If any one be slain in resisting God and the king’s law, that he
lie ‘egylde,’ E.& G.6.; C.S.49.; H. x111.
If any one be slain committing ‘ hamsocn,’ Edm. S. 6.; Eth. IV.
4.; C.S. 63.


INDEX.


JEgylde— continued.


If any one slay a frithman fleeing or fighting, Eth. II. 3.

If any one be slain in violating the law through ‘&-hlip,’ Eth.V.31.

If any one be slain in committing ‘fore-steal,’ Eth.V. 31. VI. 38.

If any one be slain flying from his enemy, that he lie not
‘epylde,’ H. LxxxvIIl. 5.


/E-hiip.
Of ‘ @-hlip’ in avenging a thief, Ath.V.1.5.
If a man be killed in committing ‘ &-hlip,’ Eth.V. 31.
ZEht, see Deow.
ZEhte-swan (Servus porcarius), R.S. p.436, 437.
f£) (Eel), In. 70.
#lfet, Ath. IV. 7.
/Elmes-feoh, R.S. p. 432, 435 bis.
ZElpeodige, see Strangers and Foreigners.
ZEsce, Ath.V. v. vie4. viE. vit. 8.; O.D.1.
ZEtfon, see Attachment.
ZEt-hlyp, Ath. I. 6.
ZEw, see Woman.
fEw-bryce, see Adultery.
vdeman, yH&E ; Wih. 23
ZEwda-man, ° 2 2.4. 5.5 ih. 23.
Epeling.
His ‘ wer-gild’ by the North people’s law, Wg. 2.
If a death-guilty man sought him, Eth.VII. 4.
If any one commit his ‘mund-bryce,’ Ib. 11.
If any one fight in his presence, Ib. 12.
If any one violate his ‘borh,’ C.S. 59.


Afyllan, see Slaying.

Agwait purpense (Insidiz preecogitate), Wil. I. 2.
Albani, Ed. C. 15.

Alderman, see Ealdorman.

Aldersgate, Eth. IV. 1.

Ale, Welsh (Wilisc Ealu), In. 70.


Alehouse (Eala-hiis).
Of ‘grid’ given in an alehouse, Eth. III. 1.


Algarum maris.
One of the king’s rights, H. x. 1.


All Hallows, Alf. 43.

Altaris emendatio, see Weofod-bét.
Alum, Ed.C.L. 8.

Amfnian, see Exacting.
Amansumian, see Excommunication.
Amber, In. 70. Ath. I. procem.


Ambiht-smith.
If the king's slay any one, Ethb. 7.


INDEX.


Amends, see Bit.
Amyrdrian, see Slaying.
Ancilla, see Deow.


Andeg,


G F } (Terminus).
eandagian,
That every suit have its term (andeg), Ed. proem.; Ed. 11.;
O.D.8.; H. 1x. 4. LI. 2.
If a man ‘ geandagie’ another regarding folkland, Ed. 2.
If any one break the ‘andeg,’ Edg. H. 7.
Of the shire appointing a fourth ‘andeg,’ in case of distress
(nem), C.S. 19.


Andszee, see Denial.


Angylde.
That a church robber pay the ‘angylde, Alf. 6.
Of the ‘dngylde,’ if any one slay a pregnant woman, Ib.9.
Its proportion to the ‘ wite,’ Ib. 9.
Of the ‘angylde’ in a declaration of debt, Ib. 22,
That the ‘angylde’ be demanded of the surety (byrgea), In. 22,
*‘ Angylde’ of a ewe, Ib. 55.
Of the ‘dngylde,’ if a man buy a chattel (ceap) and it prove
unsound, Ib. 56.
‘ Angylde’ of cattle, Ib. 56.
an ox’s horn, Ib. 58.
eye and tail, Ib. 59.
a cow's, Ib. 59.
If ‘ceap-gild’ be raised to the full ‘angylde,’ Ath.V. vr. 4.
If the reeve cannot trace property, that he pay the ‘dngylde,’
Ath.V, vit. 4.
That the surety of one who avoids justice and escapes pay the
‘Angylde,’ Edg. H. 6.
Angylde of an ox’s bell, a dog’s collar, and a ‘ bles-horn,’ Ib. 8.
Of paying the ‘angylde’ to him who accuses a ‘tyht-bysig’ man,
Edg. II.7.; Eth. III. 4.
Of paying the ‘angylde’ in a charge of theft, O. D. 4.


Antejuramentum, see Oath.
Aper (Boar), C.F. 27.
Aplata, Ailata, Awlata, Ath. III. 6.


Apostate ( Witersaca).
If a priest or monk become an apostate, Eth. IX. 41.
That apostates depart the land, C.S. 4.
Apostle.
That there be a fast or festival on every apostle’s commemora-
tion (heah-tid), Eth.V.14. VI. 22.; C. E. 16.


Apprehensio Colli, see Healsfang.


Ar.
That canons keep to their minster where their ‘ar’ is, Eth. V. 7.


If any one quit the ‘fyrd,’ where the king is, that he perils his
‘ar, Eth.V. a8. VI. 35.

That ‘mord-wyrhtas’ and perjurors forfeit their ‘ar,’ Eth.VI. 36.

Of ‘god-bits’ arising from ‘ar,’ Ib. 51.


INDEX.


Aratura Precum (Bén-yrd), R.S. p. 436, 437.


Archbishop.

If any one violate his ‘borh,’ or ‘mundbyrd,’ Alf. 3.; Eth.VII.6,
1; C.E. 3.; C.S. 59.

If any one fight in his presence, Alf. 15.; Eth. VII. 12.

His ‘burg-bryce,’ Alf. 40.

His ‘wer-gild’ (by the North people’s law), Weg. 2.

If a thief seek him, Ath. III. 6.

If a death-guilty man sought him, Eth.VII. 4.

His ‘feoh’ in ‘ Kent-lagu,’ Ib. 7.

‘Manbot’ to him, Ed. C. 12.

That he have his family and servants under his ‘ frid-borg,’ Ib. 21.

His forfeiture (forisfactura) in Mercian law, Wil. I. 16.

Has sac, soke, &e. in his own lands, H. xx. 2.

If any one commit homicide, or hominicedium, in his house,
H. Lxxx. 8.


Army, see Fyrd.


Arson (Bernet — Bleseras —Incendium), Ath.I.6. I1V.6.; C.S.65.;
+Xel. XU 1.
Incendium one of the king’s rights, H. x. 1.
In a charge of arson that no one seek counsel, but answer imme-
diately, H. xnvi.1. xivu.
If any one be accused of arson by the vicecomes or king’s jus-
ticiary, H. rxv1. 9.
Aspelian (Represent).
Who may represent his lord, R. 3.


Assultus.


Premeditatus assultus, one of the king’s rights, H. x. 1.
‘Wer’ forfeited by injustus assultus, H. pxxxvit. 6,


Astrikibthet, Ed. C. 26.
Asylum (Frié-stél — Frid-socn).

If a ‘forworht’ man seek a ‘ frid-stél,’ Eth. VIL. 16.

If a man-slayer seek a very sacred ‘frid-socn,’ Eth. IX.1.
Attachment (Befon — #tfon).


If a man attach stolen or lost property (ceap), In. 25. 47.75.;
Ath.I.9.; Eth. II. 8. party: Cceay);


If any one attach a stolen man, and the party who sold him be
dead, In. 53.


If the person with whom property is attached vouch another
person to warranty, Ib. 75.

Of attaching beyond stream, O. D.8.
Augustine (St.), Ed. C. 8.
Aveir,
Averium,
Averiare, R.S. p.434, 435.
A%, see Oath.
Aé-fultum, Eth. IX. 22,


see Property.


INDEX.


B.

Bacon (Spic).

A shank to be given to a poor Englishman, Ath.I. procem.
Bad, see Security.
Bernet, see Arson.
Bana, see Murderer.
Ban-bite, Ethb. 35.
Banes-blice, Ethb. 34.


Baptism (Fulluht — Fulwiht).
If a priest neglect or refuse baptism, Wih.6.; E.& G. 3.
That every child be baptized within thirty days, In. 2.
If a child die without baptism, Ib. 2.


Bargannire, Edm. C. 5.; Eth. IV. 5.


Baron (Barun — Baro).
A baron not to be accused for hunting, C.F. 26.


If a plea relating to another baron’s men arise in his court,


Ed. C. 9.
¢Man-bdét’ to be paid to him, Ib. 12.
That barons have their household in their ‘ fridborg,’ Ib. 21.
His forfeiture (forisfactura) in Mercian law, Wil. 1.16.
His heriot, Ib. 20.


That all barons hold themselves well in arms-and horses, Wil.


II. 8.


I
If a baron holding of the king die, of redeeming his land, H.1. 2.
If he wish to give his daughter or sister or relative in marriage,


Ib. 3.
If a baron die leaving a daughter or wife, Ib. 3.


That he have the free disposal of his property; and if he die


without disposing of it, Ib.7.
Si forisfecerit, Ib. 8.
That barons have their sokes and customs in peace, p. 502.
Barons to attend the placita comitatuum, H. vit. 2.


If a baron attend the placita comitatuum in person, or by his


dapifer, Ib. 7.


That the judex fiscalis has legal power over barons having soke,


H. xxiv.


If a plea arise between the men of barons having soke, H. xxv


Barons to be judges in the king’s court, H. xx1x.1.
If a baron of the county plead against the vicecomes, H. xxx,
His ‘ overseunes,’ H. xxxv. 1. LXXXVII. 5.


That no baron plead singly in that which concerns the hundred,


or many, H. XLvItl. 3.
If men of one or two barons fight, H. xcrv. 2.


Barter (Hwearf), see Traffic.


Beard.
If any one shave off a ‘ceorlish’ man’s beard, Alf. 35.


Bearn, see Child.
Beast, see Nyten.
Bebycgan, see Traffic.


INDEX.


Gebed-bigen, Eth.VI. 51.
Bedellus (Bydel), Eth. VII. 19.; C. E.26.; R.S. p.440, 441.
Bedford, A. & G. 1.
Bees, Ed. C. 8.
Beestings (Bysting), R.S. p. 438, 439:
Befén, see Attachment.
Bel-flys, R.S. p. 438, 439.
Bell, Eth.VI. 51.
‘ Angylde’ of an ox’s, Edg. H. 8.
Bell-his, R. 2.
Bén.
Aceras to béne, i.e. precum, R.S. p. 434, 435.
Bén-feorm (Firma Precum), R.S. p. 440, 441.
Bén-rip, R.S. p. 436, 437.
Bén-yrd (Aratura precum), R.S. p. 436, 437.
et } Gocherus), R.S. p.434, 435.
Beo-peof, Alf. 9.


Gebeorscipe ;
Geburscipe (Potatio).


Tf persons quarrel or be slain in a ‘gebeorscipe,’ In. 6.;
H. Lxxxvit. 9. 10.
Six men to be named from, Ed. 1.
Regulations for preserving peace in compotations, H. rxxxt.1.
Bere-brytta (Horrearius), R.S. p. 440, 441.
Bere-gafol, see Gafol.
Berigea, see Security.
Besche (Fossorium), Wil. I. 3.
Bescéren man, see Priest.
Bespyrian, see Track.
Beweepnian, see Disarming.
Billingsgate, Eth.IV. 2.
Billum, H. uxxviit. 2.
Binding (Bindele — Bindung).
If any one bind a nec, Ethb. 24.; C.S. 61.; H. xc. 9.
If any one bind a man’s ‘esne,’ Ethb. ss.
If any one bind an innocent man of ceorlish degree, Alf. 35.
If any one bind a ‘ceorl,’ Ib. 35.
If any one bind a priest, C.S. 42.
Birele.
An ‘eorl’s,”’ Ethb. 14.
A ‘ceorl’s,’ Ib. 16.
Bishop.
His ‘ feoh,’ Ethb. 1.
His word, Wih. 16.
If any one accuse his ‘esne,’ Ib. 22.
If any one violate his ‘borh’ or ‘mund-byrd,’ Alf.3,; C.S. 59.


INDEX.


Bishop — continued.

If any one fight in his presence, Alf.15.; Eth. VII. 12.

His ‘burg-bryce,’ Alf. 40.

If any one belie his testimony before him, In. 13.

What ‘ bot’ is to be made for his ‘ burg-bryce,’ Ib. 45.

If his god-son be slain, Ib. 76.

In case of incest (adultery) that he have the ‘inferiorem,’
E.&G.4.; H. x15.

That he is ‘meg’ and ‘mundbora’ to ecclesiastics and strangers,
E.&G.12.; R.s.

His ‘ wergild’ by the North people's law, Weg. 3.

That he see that the tithes be rendered at the right time,
Ath. I. procem.

That he exact the king’s ‘oferhyrnes’ (bot) from an unjust
judge, Ath. I. 26.; Edg. II. 3.

If a thief seek him, Ath. IV. 4.

That he repair the churches in his diocese, and remind the king
concerning them, Edm. E. 5.

His share of a man’s property who refuses to pay tithe, Edg. I. 3.;
Eth. IX.8.; C.E.8.; H. xr.2.

That he be present at the ‘gemdt,’ &c., Edg.II.5.; C.S.18.;
H. vit. 2. XXXI. 3.

Of the ‘wed’ to be deposited in his suit, Eth. ITI. 12.

That bishops turn to righteousness, and live according to their
rule, Eth.V.4. VI.2.; C.E. 6.

If a death-guilty man sought him, Eth.VIL. 5.

If any one be guilty of his ‘mund-bryce,’ Ib. 11.

That he is a proclaimer (bydel) and teacher of God's law, Ib.
19.; C.E. 26.

“Weofod-biét’ to be paid to him, C.S.42,; H. x1. 8. Lxvi. 3.
LXVIIL, 5.

Of a man redeeming his hand from the bishop, C. S. 49.

Not to be accused for hunting, C.F. 26.

That he is judge in cases of ciric-bryce,’ Ed. C. 6.

‘Manbot’ to him, Ib. 12.

That he have his family and household in his ‘frisborg,’ Ib. 21.

His forfeiture (forisfactura) by Mercian law, Wil. I. 16.

If a bishop deviate from the faith, and heed not admonition, &c.,
Hi, v. 23. 24.

If he be expelled or despoiled, Ib. 26.

That a homicide within a church pay to him the pretium nativi-
tatis, H. x1. 1.

Has ‘sac,’ ‘socn,’ &c. in lands subject to him, H. xx. 2.

His ‘overseunes,’ H. xxxv.1. LXXXVII. 5.

If any one slay a bishop, H. txviit. 6.

If he slay any one, H, Lxxr11.1.

If homicide or hominicedium be committed in his house, H.
LXxx. 8


Bleseras, see Arson.


Bles-horn, je dg. H. 8.
Blau-horn,


Bledstodiis (De), H. uxxv1it. 5.
Blod-geote, see Slaying.


INDEX.


Blédwita (Forisfactura sanguinis), H. xxii. 1. XXXVI. XXXIX. LXX,
4, LXXXI.8, XCIV. 1. 2.


Blot, C.S. 5. See Superstitions.
Boar (wild), C.F. 27.
Bocherus (Beo-ceorl —Beocere), R.S. p. 434, 435.
Béc-land (Hereditas).
That a man may not dispose of his ‘béc-land’ out of his family
(meg-burg), Alf.41.; H. Luxx. 21, LxxxvIil. 14.
If a man refuse right with regard to ‘béc-land,’ Ed. 2.
Of ‘béc-land’ belonging to a slain thief, Ath.V.1.1.
If a man have a church with (or without) a burying ground on
his ‘ béc-land,’ Edg.I.2.; C.E. 11.
That the king is entitled to the ‘wites’ of those having ‘ boc-
land,’ Eth. 1.1.
If a man doa deed of outlawry, that he forfeit his ‘bdc-land’
to the king, C.S.18.; H. xr. 1.
If a man who forsakes his lord have ‘ béc-land,’ C.S. 78.; p. 456,
457. m.; H. X11I.12. XLII. 7.
Bée-riht (Testamenti rectum), R.S. p. 432, 433.
Bold-getzl (Mansio), Alf.37.
Bonda, Eth.VI.32.; C.S.8.73.; H. xv. 5.
Books.
‘God-bot’ to be employed in buying books, Eth. VI. 51.
Bordatius (Bordier), Wil. I.17.
Borh,
Borh-bryce, |
Boscus, see Wood.
Botl, In. 67. 68.
Bover (Bubuleus), Wil. I. 17.
Branding, see Punishments.
Brasii, Ed. C. L. 8.
Bread, see Hiaf.
Breve.
Contempt of the king’s writ, H. x1. 1.
Bribery (Méd-sceat — Feoh-fang).
That no one by bribery prevent another from seeking his own,
Ed. 7.
If any one receive a bribe from a thief, Ath. I.17.


If a reeve, or a thane take a bribe, Ath. 1V.1.
If any one do injustice for bribery, C.S. 15.
Bricg-bot, Eth.V. 26. VI.s2.; C.S.10.66.; R.S. p.432, 433; H.
X.1. XIII. 9. LXVI. 6.
Bridegroom (Br¥d-guma).
That a bridegroom give his ‘ wed,’ Edm. B. 1. 2.
That he declare what he will give his wife, Ib. 3.
That a bridegroom confirm by ‘wed’ all that he promised, Ib. 5.
If he desire to lead his wife out of the land, Ib. 7.
Bromdtn, Eth.I. 1.


+ see Security.


INDEX.


Bubalus, C.F. 27.
Bubulcus (Bover), Wil.I.17.
Buccellorum impletio (Bytt-fylling), Ath.V. vi11.1.
Gebir.

If any one fight in his house, In.6.

His ‘ gerihta,’ R.S. p. 434, 435.
Burg-geat-setl, R. 2.


Burg-gebétung, ) Ath. I.13.; Eth.V.26. VI. 32.; C.S. 10. 66.; B.S.
Burg-bot, Sf ?-482,433.; H. x.1. x11.9, LXVEG.


Burg-gemot, see Gemdot.
Burglary (Hiis-bryce), C.S.65.; Wil..15.; H.x11.1, xnvii.
Geburscipe, see Gebeorscipe,


Burh.

That every ‘burh’ be repaired fourteen days after rogation days,
Ath. I. 13.

If any one fly to a king’s ‘burh,’ Edm. S. 2,

That witness be appointed to every ‘burh,’ Edg. S. 3.4. 5.

That every vouching and every ordeal be in the king’s burg,
Eth. III. 6.

If any one fight or steal in a king’s ‘ burh,’ Eth.VII. 15.


Burh-bryce.

The king’s, archbishop’s, bishop’s, ‘ealdorman’s,’ ¢ twelf-hinde’
man’s, ‘six-hinde’ man’s ‘burg-bryce,’ Alf. 40.

How ‘bot’ is to be made for the king’s, archbishop’s, &c. ‘ burg-
bryce,’ In. 45.

If any one fight before he demands justice, that he pay the king’s
‘burg-bryce,’ Eth. IV. 4,

To be compensated with 100 sol, Ib. 4.; H.x11.2. xxxv. 2.

One of the king’s rights, H. x. 1.


Burh-waru, Eth. II. 6.
Burying Place (Leger-stow — Lic-tiin).
Of vouching to warranty the sepulchre of the dead, In. 53.;


Eth. II. 9.

That a perjuror lie not in a consecrated burying place, Ath.
I. 25,

Of ecclesiastics not worthy a consecrated burying place,
Edm. E. 1.


That he who lies with a nun, or is a homicide, or an adulterer,
be unworthy a consecrated burying place, Ib. 4.

If a thane have, on his ‘ béc-land,’ a church with (or without)
a consecrated burying place, Edg.I.2.; C.E. 11.

If any one be buried out of his shrift-district, Eth. V. 12.; C.E.
13,


Butter, In. 70.
Buying, see Traffic.
Bydel (Bedellus), Eth.VIL19.; C.E.26.; R.S. p.440, 441.


Byrigea, see Security:


INDEX.


Byrne (Corslet, Hauberk, Coat of Mail).
A ‘byrne’ to be given in payment of ‘ wergild,’ In. 54.
If a ‘ceorl’ have a ‘byrne,’ &c., Wg. 10.

Bysting (Beestings), R.S. p. 438, 439.

Bytt-fylling (Buccellorum impletio), Ath.V. viii. 1.


C.


Cacepollus, Eth. IV. 3.

Ceg-locan, C.S. 77.

Gecennan (Clensian), H. & E. 2. 4.5.16.; Wih. 17. 18-21. 22.
Cesio, H. xvi.

Calf, Alf. 16.

Camerarius, Ed. C. 21.

Candlemas, Eth. IX. 12.

Cann, Wih.17.21. See Lad.
Canon (Canonicus), see Priest.
Capreolus (Roebuck), C.F. 27.
Captale, see Ceap-gild.

Captalia Dominica Regis, H. x111. 5.


ti :
Captio, \ see Prison.
Carcern,


Caruca, see Plough.
Castellacio, H. x.1. x1II. 1.


Cattle (Orf, Pecus). See also Property.
Of the ‘angylde’ of cattle, In. 56.
If any one follow the track of stolen cattle (orf), Edm.C. 6.;
O.D.1.
If any one have ‘borhleas orf,’ and the ‘land-rica’ seize it,
Eth. IIL. 5.
That no one receive strange (ignotum) cattle, Edm.C.5.;
Edg. H. 4.
If undeclared cattle be five nights in the common meadow,
Edg. S. 9.
If any one will vouch cattle to warranty over the stream,
D.8.


Cause. See also Suit.
That causes be tried where the crime was committed, H. v. 12.
LVII. 3.
Of the kinds of causes, H. viii. 1-8. 21.
Of cause participantes, H. xx. 1.
Of capital causes, H. XLVI.1. XLVII.
In what causes it is (or is not) necessary to answer directly,
HL xuix. 1.
Various rules respecting causes, H. xL1x. 1-7. LVII. 1-9.
Ceap, In. 87. 40. 46. 47. 49. 53. 56. 57. 60.62, 74.75.; E.& G.7.; (ewic)
Ath. I. prowm.; Ath.I.12.24.; Edg.S. 6.7.83; Eth. V. 2.
VI.10.; C.E.is.; C.S.2. See Aveir.


INDEX.


Ceap- sy (Captale), Ath.I. 3.19.91. V. 1.1.2.4. VI-1.2. VIL 8$
Edm. C. 6.; Edg. H. 2.; Edg. II. 7.; Edg.S,11.; Eth. 1.1.;
C.S. 25.30.; O.D.7.; Wil Hil. 14.
Ceapian,
Ceapman, S Chapman and Traffic.


Ceap-scip, see Ship.

Ceap-stow, p. 184, 185.

Cear-wund, Ethb. 63.

Cennan, see Vouching to Warranty.
Centenarius, Ed. C. 29.; H. vit. 2.
Ceoll, Eth. IV. 2.


Ceorl (Ceorlise man —Twy-hinde man — Illiberalis — Rusticus —
Villanus —Vilain — Socheman).
His ‘mund-byrd,’ Ethb. 15.
If a man lie with his ‘birele,’ Ib. 16.
if any one slay his «hlaf-eta,’ Ib. 25.
If a ‘ceorl’ die, leaving a wife and child, H. & E. 6.; In. 38.;
H. uxx. 18.
If he commit fornication, Wih. 5.
If he sacrifice to devils, Ib. 12.
How a ‘ceorl’ shall clear himself, Ib. 21.
If a man lie with his wife, Alf. 10.
If a man lie with a ‘ceorlise’ female, Ib. 11.
If a ‘ceorlisc’ female betrothed fornicate, Ib.18.; H. Lxxx11. 9.
If any one violate a ‘ceorl’s mennen,’ Alf. 25.
Tf any one slay him innocent with a ‘hlod, Ib. 29.; H.
LXXXVII. 4.
If any one bind, or scourge; or imprison a ‘ceorlisc’ man, or
shave him ‘to homolan,’ Alf. 35.
If any one fight in his ‘ flet,’ Ib. 39.
His sedon bry ees Ib. 40.
If a ‘ceorlisc’ man be often accused of theft and taken in the
fact, In. 18. 37.
If a‘ ceorl’ be accused of ¢ flyman-fyrmé,’ Ib. 30.; Ed.8.; C.S.
13. 15.
That a ‘ceorl’s weordig’ be inclosed, In. 40.
If ‘ceorls’ have a common meadow to fence, Ib. 42.
If a ‘ceorlisc’ man neglect (forsitte) the ‘fyrd,’ Ib. 51.
If a ‘ceorl’ steal cattle (ceap), Ib. 57.
If he hire another’s yoke, Ib. 60.
Of his ‘wér,’ Ib.70.; p.176, 177.; O.13.; We. 6.9-12.; M.L.;
Wil. I. s.; H. uxtv. 2, LXIX. LXX.1. LXXVI. 4-
If a ‘ceorl’ living on ‘gafol’-land be slain, A. & G. 2.
His oath, O.18.; H. txiv. 2.
If a ‘ceorl’ have five hides of land, Wg. 9.
If he have helm, corslet, and sword ornamented with gold, Ib.
10.
If his son and grandson have (or have not) land, Ib. 11.19.
If he have five hides of land, a church, &ec., R. 2.
If a * ceorl’ drive a beast of ‘the forest, C.F. 22,
if eae (villanus) neglect to have the ‘infamati in plegio,’
Edm, C. 7.


INDEX.


Ceorl, &e. — continued.
His. forfeiture (forisfactura) in Merc. lagu, Wil. I. 16.
His heriot, Ib. 20.
Villani not to be judges, H. xxrx.1.
His ‘man-bot,’ H. rx1x.
His ‘wér’ in Wessex, Wil. I.8.; H. 1xx.1.
His ‘ overseunessa, H. ixxxI. 3.
Ceper (Cippus), Wil. I. 3.
Chapman (Ceapman). ;
That they bring the men that they take with them before the
king’s reeve, Alf. 34.
If a chapman traffic up the country, or if stolen property be
attached with him, In. 25.


Cheese (Cyse), In.70.
Cheesewright (Cyse-wyrhta), R.S. p.438, 439.
Chichester, Ath. I. 14.


Child (Bearn — Cild — Cniht).

If the father die, H. & E.6.; In. 38.

If a child be deaf and dumb, Alf. 14.

If any one entrust his child to another’s keeping and it be killed,
Ib. 17.; H. rxxxviii. 7. 8.

That a child be baptized within thirty days, In. 2.

If it die without baptism, Ib. 2.

That a child of ten years may be cognizant of a theft, Ib.7.

Of the rearing of a foundling, Ib. 26.

Of the ‘wér,’ if any one clandestinely beget a child, Ib. 97.;
H. wxxviit. 4.

A cow to be given for its fostering, In. 38. 70.

A child in the cradle formerly accounted equally guilty with its
parents, C.S.77.

Of children born after crime committed by the parent, Ed. C.19.

Of property committed to a child, H. xxi. 3. x1v. 2.

Children under fifteen not to carry on a suit, H. 11x. 9. Lxx. 18.

If a child be slain, H. txx.15.16.

That no heir be entrusted to a relation or a stranger, Ib. 19.

If any one die childless, succession to his property, Ib. 20.

That the eldest son have the father’s fief, Ib. 21.


Chiltre, H. p. 218.
Chiminus, see Highway.
Chirothecze (Gloves), Eth. IV. 2.; R.S. p.438, 439,


Chrism.
If a priest do not fetch chrism at the right time, E.& G. 3.


Christian (Cristen man).

If any one shed a christian man’s blood, Edm. E. 3.

That christians be not sold out of their country (earde) nor car-
ried into heathendom, In.11.; Eth.V.2. VI. 9. VIII. 5.; C.S.
3.; Wil. 1.41. III. 15.

That christians be not condemned to death for too little cause,
Eth.V.3. VI.10.; C.S.2.; Wil. I. 40.

That every christian shun fornication, Eth.V.10. VI. 11.

Restrictions regarding marriage, Eth. VI. 12.


INDEX.


Christian — continued.
That every adult christian fast three days before the feast of
St. Michael, Eth. VIII. 2.
That every christian know his Paternoster and creed, C. E. 22.


Christianity (Cristendom).
If any one corrupt (wyrde) christianity, E.& G. 2.
That every one strictly hold to one christianity, Eth.V.1. VI.1.
34, [X.44.; C.E.1.
That every one be observant of his christianity, Eth.V.22. VI.
27.; C.E.19, 21.
That every one promote true christianity, Eth.VI.42.; C.S.11.


Christmas (Midwinter — Gehhol).
If any one steal at Yule, Alf. 5.
Twelve days festival (freols) at, Ib. 43.
‘ Freols’ from Christmas to the octave of the Epiphany, C.E. 16,


Church (Cirice —Godes-htis — Ciric-bryce — Ciric-ren — Ciric-socn

—- Ciric-weecce — Ciric-weed).

Its ‘feoh, Ethb.1.; Eth.VII.7.

That it be exempt from tax (gafol), Wih. 1.

Tts ‘mund-byrd,’ Ib. 2.; Eth. VIL 8.

That adulterers be excluded from, Wih. 3.

Of church-‘soens,’ if any one seek a ‘mynster-ham,’ Alf. 2,

If any one steal in a church, Alf.6.

Tf any one flee to a church, Ib. 5.42.; In.5.; Ath. III. 6. IV.4,;
Edm. S.2.; Eth.VII.5.; Ed.C.5.; Wil.I.1.

Of church-‘bryce,’ Ath. I.5.; Ed.C.6.; Wil. I. 15.

That the bishop repair the churches within his diocese, Edm. E. 5.

That God’s church be entitled to (wyrée) all dues, Edg. I, 1.

That a thane pay a third of his tithe to his church, Ib.2.;
C.E. 11.

If a thane have a church with (or without) a burying ground
on his ‘ bée-land,’ Edg.I.2.; C.E. 11.

That all churches be in God’s and the king’s ‘grith,’ Eth.V. 10.
VI.13. VII.31. IX.1.; C.E.2.; Ed.C.1.

If any one traffic with a church, Eth.V.10. VI. 15.

If any one reduce a church to servitude, Eth.V.10. VI. 15.

If any one turn a priest out of his church, Eth.V.10. VI. 15.

That church robbery (ren) be abstained from, Eth.VI. 2s.

That every one strictly ‘grid’ and * frié’ God’s church, Ib. 42.;
Ed. C. 1.2.

That money-(feoh-)‘ bots’ arising from ‘god-béts’ be employed
for church vestments, &c. Eth.VI. 51.

If any one fight in a church (Sud-engla lagu), Eth.VII. 9.

If any one slay or wound another within church walls (or doors),
Eth.VII. 13. [X.1-4.; C.E.2.3.; H. x11. X11.3. XXI. LXVIIE
2. LXXIX. 5. LXXXVII. 6.

That all churches be entitled to full ‘grid,’ Eth. IX. 1,

Are not all of equal rank, Ib. 5.; C.E. 3.

Of ‘grith-bryce’ of a ‘heafod-mynster’ and a ‘medemre myn-
ster,’ Eth. [X.5.; C.E.3.; H. uxx1x. 6.

That every one must aid in the reparation of churches, C. S. 66.

That any one holding a fief of the church plead not in another
court, Ed.C. 4.

If any one violate its ‘grid,’ Ib. 6.


INDEX.


Church — continued.

Its share of treasure trove, Ed. C. 14.

Its law amended, and its jurisdiction separated from that of the
civil courts, Wil. IV.

Immunities granted, H.1.1.

That churches have their sokens and consuetudines in peace,
H. p. 502.

Of the king’s soke in case of homicide in a church, H. xxr.

Forfeiture of ‘wér’ through homicide in a church, H. txxxvit. 6.


Church Frid, see Frid.
Church-Mongering (Ciricemangung), Eth.V.10. VI. 15.


Church-Scot (Ciric-sceat).

That it be paid by Martinmas, In. 4.; Edg.I.3.; Eth.VI. 18.
IX.11.; C.E.10.; R.S. p.434, 435.; H. x1. 4.

If any one withhold church-scot, In.4.; Eth. IX.11.; C.E.10.;
H. x1. 4.

Church-scot to be rendered to ‘pam healme and to pam heorve,’
In. 61.

That church-scot be rendered, Ath.I. proem.; Edm. E. 2.;
R.S. p. 432, 433.

That church-scot be rendered to the mother (eald) mynster,
Edg.I.2.; Eth. VII. 4.; C. E.11.

That a thane, a ‘geneat,’ and a ‘cotsetla’ pay church-scot,
R.S. p. 432, 433.


Cifes, see Adultery.

Cild, see Child.

Cild-festre, In. 63.

Ciltre, H. p. 503.

Cippus (Ceper), Wil. I. 3.

Ciric-bot, see Reparation of Churches.
Ciric-bryce, see Church.

Ciric-frid, see Frié and Church.
Ciric-grid, see Grid.

Ciricemangung, see Church-mongering.
Ciric-ren, see Church.

Ciric-sceat, see Church-scot.
Ciric-socn, see Church.

Ciric-stalu, see Theft.

Ciric-weeece, } soe Ohne
Ciric-weed,

Ciric-pegn, see Priest.

Cist, C.S,77.

City.
Of the liberty of cities, Ed. C.L.1.


That every city (civitas) have as many high roads (magistre vie)
as it has principal gates (magistre porte), H. xxx. 3.


Clensian, see Geceennan.
Clensung (Purification), C. E. 2.


INDEX.


Clamor (Cri), see Hream.
Cleric and Clericus, see Priest.
Clothing (Serid).
For a year, to be given to a poor Englishman, Ath.I. proem,
Cniht, see Child.
Coat of mail, see Byrne.
Cocus, Ed. C. 21.
Cohors, see Hod.
Coining, see Money and Moneyers,
Collar (Hoppe).
‘Angylde’ of a dog’s, Edg. H.8.
Collificium (Homola), Alf. 35.
Colonus, see Cultivur.
Comatio (Hettian), see Punishments,
Combustio, H. xvi.
Comes, see Eorl.
Comitatus, see Gemot.
Communicant, see Husl-genga.
a ea (Sufel—Gesufel hlaf), Ath.V. vin.6.; R.S. p. 436,


Compellatio, H. xnv.1. Lxiv. 2. LXVI. 8.
Compounding (Geping — Dyrne Geping).
If a ‘gesidcund’ man compound with the king or ‘ ealdorman,’
In. 50.
If any one be accused of secretly compounding, Ib. 52. ;
Ath. V. x1.
Of compounding in the case of driving to ‘ceap,’ Ib. 62.
If any one wish to compound for wounding, H. Lxxxviil. 16.
Compurgation.
Process of, trial by, Eth. I. 1.
Concubine (Cyfes), see Adultery.
Condemned (Forwyrht).
That no condemned person be put to death on a Sunday,
E. & G.9.; C.S, 45.
If a criminal live three days after mutilation, E. & G. 10.
Of ‘forworht’ men, Ath.V. virr. 3.
If a ‘forworht’ man seek an asylum (frid-stl), Eth.VIL. 16,
If a condemned criminal desire confession, see Confession.
Condueticii, H. vit. 2.
Confession and Confessor (Scrift — Scrift-spréc).
If a death-guilty man desire shrift, E.&G.5.; C.S,44.; H.x1.9.
LXVI. 4.
Frequent shrift enjoined, Eth.V. 22, VI. 97.
That every one three days before St. Michael’s go barefoot to
confession, Eth.VIII. 2.
If a priest refuse shrift, C.S.44.; H. x1.9.
Congildo, sce Gegilda.


Conterminatio, H. xxxIv. 5.


INDEX.


Contramandatio, H. 11x. passim. Lx. 1.2
Contrapositio, H. xxxiv. 5.
Contumelia, H. xi1I. 8. XLIv.
Conus, Eth. IV. 5.
Conviction (Oferstélan), C.S. 36.37.
Corpse (Lic).
If S Supe be buried out of its district (scir), Eth.V.12. VI. 21.;


Correction (Steore), Ath.V. x1.

Corredium, Eth.VIIL 2.

Corslet, see Byrne.

Corsneed, Eth. IX. 22. 24.; C. E. 5 bis.

Cotsetus and Cotsetla, R.S. p.432, 433.; H. xx1x.1. LXXXI. 3.


Counsel (Consilium).
That, in a capital charge, no one seek counsel, but answer
directly, H. xivi.1. XLVI.
If any one impleaded by the justiciary go to counsel, and do not
answer immediately, H. xLv1ii.1.
County Court, see Gemot.
Court. See also Gemot and Placitum.
f any one holding of the church plead in another court,
Ed. C. 4.
That no one may deny ‘recordationem curie regis,’ H. xxxt. 4.
If any one has a cause for trial in the king’s court, H. xxx111.1.
Cow (Ci).
If any one steal a cow, Alf. 16.
A cow to be given for fostering a child, In. 3s,
‘ Angylde’ of its eye; its horn; its tail, Ib. 59.
Its ‘ceap-gild,’ Ath.V. v1.2.; O.D.7.
Of the ox-herd’s ‘mete-cii,’ R.S. p.438, 439.


Cowherd, R.S. p.438, 439.
Craspice, Eth. IV. 2.

Creda, C.E. 22.

Cri (Clamor), see Hream.
Cripplegate, Eth. IV. 1.
Cristendém, see Christianity.
Cristen man, see Christian.
Crocea, H. pxxxvIII.18. xcIv. 3.
Ci, see Cow.


Cultivur (Colonus).
Cultivators not to be aggrieved, nor removed from the land,
Wil. I. 29.
If a lord do not provide proper cultivators, Ib. 31.


Cuma, see Strangers.
Cumin, Ed.C. 1. 8,
Cuniculus, C.F. 97.
Curia, see Court.


INDEX.


Curtillum (Weoréig), In. 40.
Cwene, see Woman.
Cwide, see Testament,
Cyfes, see Adultery.
Cyne-bot.
Of the North king’s, Wg.1.
Of ‘cyne-bot’ by Mercian law, M. L.
Cynedém, M.L.
Cyne-gild.
By Merena lage, M.L.
Cyning, see King.
Cyning-a8, see Oath.
Cyninges Geréfa, see Reeve.
Cyninges Gerihta, see Secular Dues.
Cyninges Degn, see Thane.
Cyre-a3, see Oaths.
Cyse’ (Cheese), In. 70.
Cyse-wyrhta (Cheesewright), R.S. p.438, 439.
Cyéan, see Declaring.


D.


Ded-bana, Eth. IX. 23. H. uxxxv. 3.
Gedal-land, In. 42.
Dane.
If a Dane slay, or be slain by, an Englishman, A.& G. 2.;
Eth. I. 5.; Ed.C.16.; H. 1xx. 6. 8.
That neither English nor Dane receive a thief or ‘Wealh’ of the
other, Eth. IT. 6.
If a Dane slay our property, Ib. 7.
Danegeld, see Denegeldum.
Danish Law (Dena Lagu).
Of the king’s rights (gerihta) in Danish law, C.S. 15.
That one judging unjustly be guilty of ‘lah-slit,’ Ib. 15.;
H. xxxiv. 1.
Of ‘ham-soen,’ C.S. 63,
If any one neglect ‘ burg-bot,’ &c., Ib. 66.
Of a thane’s heriot, Ib. 72.
Of ‘Rom-feoh,’ Ed. C.10.; Wil. I. 17.
Of the emendatio forisfacture, Ib. 33.
If any one violate the king’s peace, Wil. I. 2.; H. xi11.1.
If any one having ‘tol’ and ‘team,’ &c. be impleaded in the
county, Wil. I. 2.
If any one accused of robbery flee from his surety, Ib. 3.
Of claiming stolen property, Ib. 21.
If a judge judgé wrongfully, Ib. 39.
Forfeiture, if justice be shunned, Ib, 42.
Of a triple ‘lad,’ H. txvi. 9.10.


INDEX.


Dapifer, Ed. C. 12. 91.; H. vil. 7. XLI.2. XLI. 2. LXI.10,
Deacon. See also Priest.
His ‘feoh,’ Ethb. 1.
How he is to clear himself, Wih. 18.
If he be accused in a single or triple suit, Eth. IX. 20.
If he be charged with an offence, C. E. 5.


Dead.
If any one vouch the dead to warranty, In. 53.; Eth. II.9.


Deaf, see Dumb.
Death, see Slaying.
Death-guilty (Feorh-scyldig — Dead-scyldig — Dead-scyld.)
If a death-guilty man sought a church, the king, archbishop,
‘etheling,’ &c., In. 5.; Eth. VII. 4.5.; H. xcu.7.
If an ecclesiastic foredo himself with deadly sin, E.&G.4.;
C.S. 43.
If a death-guilty man desire confession, E.& G. 5.; C.S,44.;
H. x1. 9. LXvi. 4.
That a homicide within church walls is death-guilty, Eth.VII. 13.
That he who fights or steals in the king’s burg or presence is
death-guilty, Ib. 15.
Debt (Eofut), Alf. 22.
Decania, see Tithing.
Decanus (Tyenpe heued), Ed. C, 27. 28.
Declaring (Cyéan).
That every bargain (ceap) be declared, Edg. S. 5-9.
If any one do not declare a bargain, Ib. 7-9.
Defensor, H. xxvi.
Dei Rectitudines, see Divine Dues.
Delegiatus, H. xiv. 5.
Déma, see Judge.
Dena lagu, see Danish Law.
Denarium S. Petri, see Rom-feoh.
Denegeldum (Danegeld).
What is to be paid, Ed. C.11.; H. xv.
Church lands exempted therefrom, Ed.C. 11.
Citizens of London exempted from, H. p. 502.
One of the king’s rights, H. x. 1.


Denial (Andszc).
If a man make denial of ‘borh,’ In. 41.
That a man may deny harbouring (frym%), In. 46.
How a man shall make denial of a debt, O. 11.
That the ‘steores-man’ make denial, if any one be robbed in a
ship, Eth. II. 4.
That denial is stronger than accusation, Ib. 9.
If any one deny words charged to him, Wil. I. 24.


Denier Sein Piere, see Rom-feoh.


Deofol, :
Deofol-gild, } Wih. 12.13. See Superstitions.


Deor-hege, R.S. p.432, 433 bis, 484, 435.


INDEX.


Derehdner, see Dirationare.
Devisa (Devise), see Divisa.
Difforciatio Recti, H. xx.
Dirationare, ) (Derehdner), Ed. C. 36.; Wil. I. 23. 45.; H. p. 502,
Disracionare, § 503 passim. xLv111.
Disarming (Bewepnian).
If a man unlawfully disarm another, C.S.61.; H. xc. 9.
If any one unjustly disarmed be slain, H. xc. 10.
Dissaisiatus.
That no one dissaisiatus plead, H. Liu1. 5. LXI. 21.


Distress, see Nam.
Dividiacio, H. xx111. 1.


Divine Dues (Godcunde Gerihta — Dei Rectitudines, vel Recta).

That all God’s dues be strictly paid, E.& G. 5.6.; Eth.V.11.
VI. 16.43. VIII. 4.; C.E. 8.14.

If homicide be committed in resisting them, E.& G.6.; C.S.
49.; H. x1.11. XIE 11.

If any one refuse to pay them, E.& G.6.; C.S.49.; H. x11.
LXVI. 5.

That ‘man fripige georne’ all God’s dues, Eth. 1X. 14.; C.E. 14.

Forfeiture of ‘wér’ through Dei rectum difforciatum, H.
LXXXVII. 6.


Divisa (Devise), Wil.I.4.; H.1x.4. LVIr. 1. 8


Dog (Hund).
If a dog tear or bite any one, Alf. 23.
“Angylde’ of a dog’s collar, Edg. H. 8.
Of a‘muchehunt,’ C.F. 11.
That no mediocris have greyhounds, Ib. 31.
Of hamstringing (genuiscissio), Ib. 31. 32.
If a dog go mad, Ib. 33. 34.
De canum expeditatione, H. xv.


Dolg-bot, Alf. 23.


Dom (Judgment). See Justice.


If any one pronounce unjust judgment, Edg.II.3.; C.S. 15.;
Wil. I. 13.

That ‘dém’ stand where thanes are unanimous, Eth. III. 13.;
H. v.6. XXxxI. 2.

If any one deny just judgment, C.S.15.


Dém-bic, Ed. proem. Ib.8.; Ath.I.5.; Edg.I.3. 5.
Dominus, see Hlaford.

Domus Invasio, see Hém-socn.

Dormitory, see Slep-ern.

Dos, H. Lxx. 22.

Dowry (Gyft), In. 31,

Drihtin-beag, Ethb. 6.

Drince-lean, C.S. 82.


INDEX.


Drinking.
If the king drink at a man’s ‘ham,’ Ethb. 3.
If any one set a ‘steop,’ or draw a weapon, where men are
drinking, H. & E. 12.18.


Dumb or Deaf, Alf.i4.; H. uxxviit. 6.
Din-sete, O.D.9.
Dunstan (St.), C. E. 17.


E.


Eala-hiis (Alehouse), Eth. III. 1.


Ealdorman, (Alderman).

If any one break his ‘borh’ or ‘mund-byrd,’ Alf.3.; C.S. 59.;
Eth. VIL 11.

If any one fight in his presence, Alf.15.38.; Eth.VII. 12.

His ‘burg-bryce,’ Alf. 40.; In. 36.

If any one fight in his house, In. 6,

If he let a thief escape, Ib. 36.

If a ‘gesidcund’ man compound with him for his household,
Ib. 50.

His ‘ wer-gild,’ by the North people’s law, Ws. 3.

If a thief seek him, Ath.III.6. IV. 4.

If he neglect to have pledge for the infamati, Edm. C. 7.

That he attend the shiremote, &c., Edg.II.5.; C.S.18.; H.
VII, 2, XXXI.3.

That he go and seize the murderer, in case of ‘frid-brece,’ or
lie in ‘ unfrié,’ Eth. IL. 6.

His ¢ griges-bot,’ Eth. III. 1.

If a death-guilty man sought him, Eth.VII. 5.

Danish definition of ‘ealdorman,’ C.F. 3.

Poona. et forisfactio of, Ib. 21.

That every hundred be under an alderman, H. viit.1. xcI.1.


Ealu, Wilise (Welsh Ale), In. 70.
Eard, see Land.
East-Anglia.
A thane’s heriot in, C.S.72.
Easter.
If any one steal at Easter, Alf. 5.
Seven days before and seven days after to be kept, Ib. 43.
That a halfpenny worth of wax be rendered at Easter for
‘leoht-gescot,’ C. E. 12.
Easter-feorm (Firma Paschalis), R.S. p.436, 437.


Edor,
Edor-brecé, }
Edor-bryce,
If a freeman commit ‘edor-brecé,’ Ethb. 27.
If he pass over (geganged) an ‘edor,’ Ib. 29.
Of a ‘ceorl’s’ ‘edor-bryce, Alf. 40.
Edward the Confessor.
His laws to be observed, Wil. III. 13.


INDEX.


Edward (Saint), Eth.V.16.; C.E. 17.
Eel (4£)), In. 70.
Efesian (Shaving), Alf. 35.


Ember-days (Ymbren-dagas).
To be observed, Alf. 43.
Ordeals and oaths forbidden on ‘riht ymbren-dagas,’ Eth.V. 18.
VI. 25.; C.E.17.; H. yxur. 1.
That they be held as directed by St.Gregory, Eth.VI. 23.;
C.E. 16.
Emissio, H. xr.


Enemy, see Gefa and Fehd.


Engla lagu.
Of a ‘heafod-mynster’s’ ‘ grid-bryce’ in Engla lagu, Eth. IX. 5.
Of the king’s ‘mund-bryce,’ C. E. 3.
England.
Tripartite division of, H. v1.1. vi11.9.
Englishman.
If an Englishman slay or be slain by a Dane, A. & G.2.; Eth.
IL. 5.; Ed.C.16.; H. uxx. 6. 8.
One poor Englishman to be fed, Ath. I. procem.
That neither English nor Dane receive a thief or ‘Wealh’ of
the other, Eth. IT. 6.
ae English and ‘Wealh’ there is no lad but ordeal,
~D. 2
If an Englishman slay a ‘ Wealh,’ and vice versa, Ib. 5.
That no Englishman travel on ‘Wylise land,’ and vice versa,
without the regular ‘land-men,’ Ib. 6.
If an Englishman challenge a Frenchman on account of theft,
homicide, &c., and vice versa, Wil. II.1. 2. IIT. 12.; H. u1x.15.
Of an Englishman’s ‘lad,’ in a case of outlawry, Wil. II. 3.;
H. xvii.
If an Englishman be slain, H. vxrx.
An Englishman, if murdered, not to be paid for, H. xc11. 6.
Eofut (Debt), Alf. 22.
Eorl,
Eorleund nan, } (Comes — Quens).
Eorl-riht,
If one man slay another in ‘an eorl’s ‘tin,’ Ethb. 13,
If a man lie with his ‘birele,’ Ib. 14.
If an ‘esne’ slay an ‘eorleund’ man, H. & E. 1. 2.
That an ‘eorl’ be ‘meg’ and ‘mund-bora’ to ecclesiastics and
strangers, E. & G. 12.
His ‘wergild,’ Wg. 2.
Of a thane being worthy of ‘eorl-riht,’ R. 5.
If a thief seek him, Ath. III. 6.
If he neglect to have pledge for the infamati, Edm.C. 7.
Of the ‘wed’ to be given in his suit, Eth. III. 12.
His heriot, C.S.72.; Wil. I.20.; H. xiv.1.
‘Manbot’ to be paid to the comes, Ed. C. 12.
That comites have their family and servants under their ¢ frid-
borg,’ Ib. 21.


INDEX.


Eorl, &c. — continued.
His forfeiture (forisfactura) in Mercian law, Wil. I. 16.
Forfeiture to him in case any one will not submit to justice,
Ib. 42.
That all comites be well furnished with arms and _ horses,
Wil. III. s.
If a comes holding of the king die, of redeeming his land,
H. 1. 2.
That the comes attend the county court, H. vii. 2.
Has ‘sac and soc,’ ‘tol and team,’ in lands subject to him,
H. xx. 2.
His ‘ overseunes,’ H. xxxv.1. LXXXVII. 5.
If any one commit homicide or hominicedium in his house,
H. Lxxx. 8.
Eowende (Genitalia), Alf. 25.
Erminge strete, Ed.C.12.; Wil. I. 26.
Erthmiotum, H. ivi. 8.
Escape (Ut-hleapan — Utleipa).
f a thief escape, Jn. 28.36.72.; C.S.29.; Wil.I. 3. 49. 50.;
H. xii. 3. LIX.18. LXV. 1.2.
If any one escape from his lord, or shun the ordeal, Eth.I.1.
J.4.; C.S.30.31.; Wil. I. 52.; H. xi1.6. Lxv. 4.
If any one run away from his lord, H. xx111. 2.
Esne.
If a man lie with an ‘esne’s’ wife (ewyne), Ethb. 85.
If he slay another, innocent, Ib. 86.; H. txx. 2.3.
If his eye be struck out or his foot off, Ethb. 87.
If any one bind a man’s ‘esne,’ Ib. 88.
If he slay an ‘eorlcund’ man, H. & E. 1. 2.
If he slay a freeman, Ib. 3. 4.
If an ‘esne,’ against his lord’s command, do servile work on a
Sunday, Wih. 9.
If he work on Sunday of his own accord (rade), Ib. 10.
If any one accuse a bishop’s or a king’s ‘esne,’ Ib. 22.
If any one accuse a priest's ‘esne,’ Ib. 23.
If a layman’s ‘esne’ accuse a churchman’s, or a churchman’s a
layman’s, Ib. 24.
If any one lend a sword, or give a spear, or lend a horse to
an ‘esne,’ In. 29,


Essartum, H. xvi.
Essoign, see Soinus.
Eucharist, see Husel.
Evocatio, H. xr.
Ewe, In. 55.
Exacting (Amianian).
If the reeve do not exact rightly, Ed. 5.
The bishop to exact the king’s ‘ oferhyrnes’ of the reeve, Ath. I.


26.

That the shire bishop exact ‘bot’ from an unjust judge, Ib. 26.;
Edg. IT. 3.

That every freeman be free from exactions, Wil. III. 5.


Excess in eating and drinking (Oferfylle), Eth.V.25. VI. 28.


INDEX.


Excommunication (Amansumian).

For refusing to pay church scot, Edm. E. 2. ; nee

If an excommunicated person aot a suppliant) dwell in the king’s
neighbourhood, Eth.V. 29. VI. 36. ;

If a monk or mass-priest apostatize, that he be excommunicated,
Eth. IX. 41.

If any one harbour an excommunicated person, C.S. 67.; H. x.
1, XI. 14, XIII. 10.


Excussio, H. xu.
Exeter, Ed. 4.; Ath.I. 14.
Exile (Wrece — Weallian).
If a minister of the altar be a homicide, that he be banished,
C.S. 41.
Expeditatio, H. xvi.
Expeditio, see Fyrd.
Extorpere (Torfian), Edm. C. 4.


F.


sbi } Geht-bot— Feud —Foe—Enemy). See also Wer-fehi.
tJ
That no one fight with his ‘ham-sittende gefa,’ before de-
manding justice of him, Alf. 42.; Eth.IV.4.; H. vxxxu.1.
LXXXIII. 1.3. ;
Of buying off ‘fahe,’ In. 74.
That a homicide bear the ‘ feh%e,’ Edm. S.1.; H. uxxxvirt. 12.
That the ‘ witan’ settle ‘ fahdes,’ Edm. S. 7.
That neither English nor Danish receive the other’s foe (gefa),
Eth. II. 6.
If any one charge an ecclesiastic with ‘fehte,’ Eth. IX. 93, 24.;
.E. 5.
That no monk demand or give ‘fehd-bot,’ Eth. IX. 25.; C.E. 5.
If any one, on account of ‘fehde,’ wish to withdraw from his
kin, H. pxxxvill. 13.


Félecan, Ath. I. 20.
Femne, see Woman.


Festen, } see Fast.
Festen-bryce,


Fahmon, Alf. 5.
Falsarii, see Money and Moneyers.


Farmer, H. ivi. 1-3.
Fast (Festen — Festen-bryce — Unfeestende).
If any one give flesh to his household in fast time, Wih.14.;
C. 8. 47.
If a ‘peow’ eat flesh in fast time, Wih.14.15.; E.& G.8.;
C.S. 47.
If a priest misdirect about a fast, E.& G.3.
If a freeman or ‘peow’ break a lawful fast, Ib.8.; C.S.47.
Ordeals, oaths, and marriages forbidden on fasts and festivals,
E.& G.9.; Eth.V.18. VI.95.; C.E.17.; H. rxi.1.


INDEX.


Fast — continued.

That fast-tides are to be most strictly observed, Edg. I. 5.; Eth.
V.14.15, VI. 22.43. IX.16.; C.E.14.16.; C.S. 38.

That every one fast on a Friday, Edg.I.5.; Eth.V.17. VI. 24.;
C.E.16.; H.uxm.1. ©

That fasts be observed, as St. Gregory appointed, Eth.VI. 23.

That ‘feesten-bryce’ be carefully avoided, Ib. 28.

That every adult christian fast three days before the feast of
St. Michael, Eth. VIII. 2.


Father.
Responsible for his deaf and dumb child, Alf. 14.
If any one desert his father or relative in their necessity, and
a relation succeed to their property, H. Lxxxviil. 15.


Fealty, Wil. III. 2.
Feax-fang (Hergripa), Ethb.33.; H. xcrv. 4.


Gefedere.
That . man may not marry with his ‘ gefedere,’ Eth. VI. 12,;
C.E.7.


Fed-esl, Ethb. 12.

Felagus, Ed.C.15. See Gesid.

Feld-cirice (Field-church), Eth. IX. 5.; C.E. 3.
Felonia, H. xLitr.7. XLVI. 3. LIL. 4.

Feodum, see Fief-


Feoh, see Money.

Of God and the church’s ‘feoh;’ a bishop’s, a priest’s, a dea-
con’s, a clerk’s, Ethb. 1.

If any one take ‘feoh’ from a dwelling (inn), Ib. 28.

Of the feeder-feoh, Ib. 81.

If any one entrust ‘feoh’ to another’s monk, Alf. 20.; H. xxrrr. 3.
XLV. 2.

The king’s and archbishop’s ‘feoh’ in Kentish law, Eth. VII. 7.


Feoh-fang, see Bribery.

Feohtan, see Fighting.

Feohtlac, Eth. IX. 4.; C.E.3.; C.S.48. See Fighting.
Feorh-scyldig, see Death-guilty.

hima ee s } (Purveyance), Alf. 2.; Ath.I. procem.; C.S. 70.
Feormian, see Harbouring.

Feorran-cumene men, see Strangers.

Feos-bot, see Money.

Ferdingi, H. xxrx.1.

Ferht, see Fyrht.

Ferse, p. 184, 185.

Geferscipe, Ath.V. 1.


INDEX.


Festival (Freols-deg — Freols-tid — Freols-bryce).

Of the celebration of mass-days, Alf. 43.; Edg.I.5.; C.E.14.

That St. Mary’s, and every apostle’s, and St. Edward's festival,
and every Friday be observed, Alf.43.; Eth.V. 14.15. 16.17.
VI. 22.; C.E. 16.17.

If a priest misdirect about a festival, E. & G. 3.

If a freeman or a ‘peow’ work on a festival, Ib.7.; C.S.45.;
H. x1. 10.

Ordeals, oaths, &c. forbidden on festivals, E.& G.9.; Eth.V.18.
VI. 25.; C.E.17.; H. uxi1.1.

That a criminal (forwyrht) be secured and. held till a festival be
over, E.& G.9.; C.S. 45.

That Sunday and Friday be kept, Edg.I. 5.

That festivals be strictly observed, Eth.V. 13-15. VIL. 22, 43.
IX.16.; C.E.14.; C.S.38.

That ‘freols-bryce’ be carefully avoided, Eth.VI. 28.


Festre, see Foster.


Feud, see Gefa and Fief.
Fidejussio, see Security.
Fief (Feodum).
If any one hold of the church, Ed. C. 4.
If a lord take his fief from his man, H. xiii. 8.
De cremento feudi, H. xnvirt.7.
That the eldest son have the fief, H. Lxx. 21.
Causes of forfeiture, H. uxxxvuir. 14.
Field (AEcer).
If cattle eat on the common fields (zceras) of ‘ceorls,’ In. 42.


That every man pay his tithe as the plough traverses the tenth

field, Eth. VII. 4. IX.7.; C.E.8.
Field-church (Feld-cirice), Eth. IX. 5.; C.E. 3.
Fighting (Feohtan —Wigian — Feohtlac — Orneste).

If any one fight in the king’s hall or house, Alf. 7.; In. 6.;
Eth.VII.9.; C.S.60.; H.x.1. x11t.7. LXxx. 1.

If any one fight in the presence of an archbishop, ‘zbpeling,’
bishop, or ‘ealdorman, Alf.15.38.; In. 6.; Eth.VII. 12.;
H. xxx. 8.

If a kinless man fight and slay a man, Alf. 27.28.; In, 23, ;
H. Lxxv. 6-11. ;

If any one fight or draw his weapon in the folkmote, Alf. 3s.

If any one fight in a ‘cierlisc’ man’s dwelling —a ‘six-hinde
man’s — a ‘twelf-hinde’ man’s, Ib. 39.; In. 6.; H. Lxxx1. 3,
That no one fight before he demands justice, Alfi42.; Eth. IV.

4.; H. LxxxIl. 1. LXXXHI. 1. 3.

That a man may fight for his lord, ‘orwige,’ and vice versa,
Alf. 42.; H. LxxxIl. 3.4, LXXXVIII. 10,

That a man may fight for his kinsman, though not against his
lord, Alf.42.; H. uxxxu11.1.

That he may fight ‘orwige’ if he find another with his wife,
daughter, &c., Alf.42.; H. Lxxxl. 8.

If any one fight in a minster, in the house of an ‘ealdorman,’
a ‘gafol-gilda,’ or a ‘gebir,’ or in a ‘ gebeorscipe,’ In. 6.

If an ecelesiastic fight, E. & G.3.; Eth. IX. 27.; C.E. 5.

If any one fight with, and wound or slay another, E. & G. 6.


INDEX.


Fighting, &c. — continued.

If any one fight in defence of a thief, Ath.V.1.3.; Eth. I. 4.

That sinful fightings be avoided, Eth.V. 24. VI. 28.

If any one fight in a church, (South Anglian law), Eth.VII. 9.

If any one fight in a mynster without a church, Ib. 10.

If any one fight in the king’s ‘burh’ or proximity, Ib. 15.

If ‘church-grid’ be broken through ‘feohtlac,’ Eth. IX. 4.;
C.E. 3.

If any one violate Lent through ‘feohtlac,’ C.S. 48.

If an Englishman challenge a Frenchman, and vice versa, Wil. II.
1.2.3. IIT, 12.

If any one give pledge for a battle, H. urx. 15.

Various rules regarding battle, Ib. 16.

That the striker and stricken are both culpable, H. uxxxrv.

If a man be slain in separating combatants, H. xc. 1.

If the men of one or two lords fight, H. xciv. 2.


Fightwita, see Fyht-wite.
Finding, see Treasure Trove.
Fire, C.S. 5. See Superstitions.
Firma.
Laws between lords and their farmers, H. ivi. 1-3.
Firma Paschalis (Easter-Feorm), R.S. p. 436, 437.
Firma Precum (Bén-feorm), R.S. p. 440, 441.
Firma Regis, H. x1x.
Five Burgs, Eth. III. 1.
Flese, see Flesh.
Flandrenses, Eth. IV. 2.
Fleece, In. 69.
Fleismangere (Macecrarius), Ed. C. 39.
Flesh (Flesc).
If ha ou give flesh to his household in fast time, Wih.14.;
Flesh not to be eaten on fast days, Wih. 14.; C.S. 47.


If a ‘peow’ eat flesh of his own accord in fast time, Wih.15.
If any one find stolen flesh, In. 17.
Filet.
If one call another a perjuror, or otherwise insult him in
another's ‘ flet,’ H.& E.11.
If a man ‘steop asette’ in a ‘flet,’ Ib. 12.
If a man draw his weapon in a ‘flet,’ Ib. 13.14.
If any one fight in a ‘ceorl’s flet,’ Alf. 39.


Flet-gefoth, i.e. Overseunessa, H. rxxxt. 3.

Flyma,

Flyman-feorm or -fyrm,
If any one accuse a ‘ceorl’ of ‘flyman-fyrmé,’ In. 30.
Of harbouring a ‘flyma’ (flymena-fyrmd), Ed.s.; C.S. 13.15.
That a lordless man be slain for a ‘flyma,’ Ath. I. 2.


That every ‘flyma’ be a ‘flyma’ in every land, Eth. III. 10.
‘Flymena-fyrm6’ one of the king’s rights, C.S.12.; H. x.1.


} (Fugitive). See Harbouring.


INDEX.


Flyma, &c.— continued.

If any one unlawfully detain God’s ‘flyma,’ C.S. 67.; H. x1.14.
‘Flymon firma’ to be atoned for with 100 sol, H. x11. 2.
Receptio fugitivi, H. xxt11. 6.

Foal (Fol), Alf. 16.

Foe, see Gefa.

Fole-fry, Wik. 8.; C.S. 45.

Fole-gemot, see Gemot.

Fole-land, Ed. 2.

Fole-leasung, see Slander.

Fole-riht, Ed. procem. Ib. 11.; O. 2,3. 4.; Ath. I. 2.8.9. 23. V. 1.1.3
Edm.S.7.; Edg.H.7.; Edg.II.1.; Eth.V.1. VI.s. VIII. 6.3;
C.S.1.

Folgere (Folgarius).

Correlative to ‘heordfest,’ C.S. 20.; H. viii. 1.
His ‘gerihta,’ R.S. 438, 439.
Folgod (Prepositura), see Manung.
Folkmote.
If any one declare a debt at the folkmote, Alf. 22.
If any one fight in, or disturb the folkmote, by drawing his
weapon, Ib. 38.
Of finding a ‘hlaford’ for a man in the folkmote, Ath. I. 2.
OF buying and selling with the reeve’s testimony in the folkmote,
b. 12.
That no folkmote be held on Sundays, &., Eth.V.13. VI. 22.
44.; C.E. 15.
If a citizen of London attend the folkmote, Ed. C. L. 5.

For (Foray), In. 34.; H. uxxxvil. 8.

Forad, Ath. I. 23. II. 6.

Forceap, Eth. IV. 2.

Fore-a3, see Oath.

Foreigners, see Strangers.

Fore-sp&c, Ath.V.3. See For-spéca.

Forest.

If any one commit violence on an officer of the forest, C.F.
15.19.
If ‘grid-bryce’ be committed ante mediocres forest, Ib, 18,
If a delinquent be taken in a forest, Ib. 20.
Of beasts of the forest and fer regales, Ib. 21.
If a freeman, a ‘ceorl,’ or a ‘peow’ drive or kill a beast of the
forest, Ib. 22. 23. 24.
Forests held in the hands of the king, H. 11. 2.
Forestz one of the king’s rights, H. x.1.
Of the placita forestarum, H. xvi.
Forfang, In, 53.72.75.; Ff.; Wil.I. 5,
Forfeiture (Forisfactura).
Of the emendatio forisfacturz in D.L., Ed. C. 33.
Of forfeiture in ‘Mere. lagu,’ Wil. I. 16.
That a judge judging wrongfully be in la forfaiture le rei de
XL. solz, Ib. 39.


INDEX.


Forfeiture — continued.
Rates of forfeiture, if any one will not submit to justice, Wil. I,
42,
Forisfactura if any one difforce a judgment, Ib. 47.
If any one fail to attend when summoned, Wil. III. 14.
Causes of forfeiture, H. uxxxviil. 14.


Forfongen, Alf. 2.

Forisfactura, see Forfeiture.

Forisfactura Sanguinis, see Blédwita.

Forliger, see Adultery.

Formel, O. 1.

Formyroérian, see Slaying.

Fornication, see Adultery.

Forsecgan, Edg. IT. 4.; C.S8.16.

Forspéca,

Forspréea,
That the ‘forspéca’ engage that a homicide make ‘bot’ to the


family of the slain, Edm. S. 7.
Of a bride’s ‘forsprécan,’ Edm. B. 1.


Forsteal.
That there be no ‘forsteal’ in tracing cattle, Edm. C. 6.
If any one commit ‘forsteal,’ Eth.V.31. VI. 38.
One of the king’s rights in Wessex, C.S.12.; H. x1.
To be compensated with 100 sot, H. x11. 2. xxxv. 2.
Definition of, Ib. xxx. 2, 4.

Forstélan, see Theft.

Forswerian, see Perjurors.

Forword, Edm. B. 7.

Forwyrht, see Condemned.

Forwyrhta, R.4.; Ath.V. 11.

Fosse, Ed. C. 12.; Wil. I. 26.

Fossorium (Besche), Wil. I. 3.


Haster (Festre); In. 26. 38. 68.70.; Edm. B. 2.
Foster-lean,


Fother, In. 60. 70.
Fot-mal, p. 184, 185.
Foundling, In. 26.; H. xxvint. 5.
Fox, C.F. 27.
Francplegium, see Frid-borg.
Freedom (Freols — Freot.)
If a man give freedom to his man at the altar, Wih.8.;
H. xxvii. 8.
If a man forfeit his freedom through a charge of theft (stel-
tihtle), Ed. 9.
Ifa arm work on a festival that he forfeit his freedom,
E.& G.7.


} (Prolocutor — Paranymphus.)


INDEX.


Freeman (Liber).
If a freeman steal from the king, Ethb. 4.
If any one slay a freeman, Ib.6.; H. pxvui1.1.
If a freeman steal from a freeman, Ethb. 9.
If a freeman bind another, Ib. 24.
If he commit ‘edor-brecé,’ Ib. 27.
If he pass over an ‘edor,’ Ib. 29,
If he lie with a freeman’s wife, Ib.31.; Wil. I. 12.
If an ‘esne’ slay a freeman, H.& E. 3.
If a freeman steal a man, Ib. 5.
If a freeman work on Sunday and at forbidden times, Wih. 11.;
In. 3.; E.& G.7.; C.S. 46.
If a freeman be taken ‘ et hebbendre handa,’ Wih. 26.; Ath. I.
1.3; H. uvit4.
That a freeman may not ‘meg-gieldan’ with a ‘peow,’ In. 74.;
H. vxx. 6.
If a freeman work on a festival, E.& G. 7.; C.S.45.; H. x1.10.
If he break a lawful fast, E.& G. 8.; C.S. 47.
That every freeman have true ‘borh,’ Eth.I.1.; C.S.90.; H. vim1.2.
If he be ‘tyht-bysig,’ Eth. I. 1.
If he injure any person by ‘mund-bryce,’ Eth.VII. 14.
If a poor freeman break the feast of St. Michael, Eth. VIII. 2.
That every freeman be brought into a hundred and tithing,
C.S. 20.; H. viz. 2.
That every freeman have his hunt, C.S. 81.
If a freeman drive or kill a beast of the forest, C.F. 22. 23. 24,
That every freeman have the vert and venison on his own
lands, Ib. 30.
If a freeman be accused of theft, Wil. I. 14.
That every freeman swear fealty to King William, Wil. III. 2.
That he be exempt from exactions and tallage, Ib. 5.
That he hold himself well armed, Ib. 8.
That all freemen be sworn brothers for the defence of the
monarchy, Ib. 9.
Form of making a freeman, Ib. 15.; H. Lxxviit. 1. 3.
If a freeman steal with a ‘peow,’ H. L1x. 24.
If he slay a ‘peow,’ H. uxx. 4. Lxxv. 3. 4.
If one freeman slay another, H. yxx. 9.
If any one made free be slain, Ib. 10.
If a freeman surrender himself to any one as a pledge, and then
do injury to any one, H. Lxxx1x. 3.
Fremde, see Strangers.
Frenchman and Norman.
Toll to be paid by them, Eth. IV. 2.
If any one slay a Frenchman, Wil. I. 22.; H. xc1.1.
If an Englishman challenge a Frenchman, Wil. II. 2.
If a Frenchman challenge an Englishman, Ib.1. 2. IIL 12.;
H. wrx. 15.
Of a Frenchman’s ‘lad,’ Wil. IJ. 3.; H. xvirt.
If any follower of K. William be slain, Wil. IIL. 3.
Of Frenchmen settled in England in the time of Edward the
Confessor, Ib. 4.
Of the oaths of Frenchmen, H. xvill. LxIv. 3.
If a Frenchman without relatives be slain, H. yxxv.6. xcl. 1.
If a Frenchman be slain for theft, H. xcr1. 10.


INDEX.


Frendlesman, see Outlaw and Strangers.
Freoh-riht, C.S. 20.


Freole, } see Freedom.
Freot,


Freols-bryce,
Freols-deg, } see Festival.
Freols-tid,

Freols-gefa, Wih. 8.

Freols-stow, C.S. 38.

Freondlease Men, see Outlaw and Strangers.
Friday.


That every Friday be accounted a fast, Edg.I. 5.; Eth.V. 17.
VI. 24.; C.E.16.; H. uxit. 2.

Frio-hyred, Alf. 2.

Fri-wif, Eth. 73.

Frié (Church-fris — Mynster-fris —Woruld-fris — Frit-gewritu—
Frid-man — Frit-brece — Frié-gysel — Frides-bot — Frid-burh
— Pax — Pax Regis.)

Of ew fris’ and mynster-‘frid,’ Ethb. 1.; Alf. 5.; E.& G.
1.3; C. be 2

If a criminal or ‘fahmon’ flee to a church, Alf. 2. 5.42.; In. 5.;
Edm.S.2.; Wil. I. 1.

That the ‘frié’ had been more indifferently (mzctor) observed
than formerly, Ed. 4.; Ath. IV. prooem.

That no one grant ‘frid’ to a criminal (fal), Ed. 7.

That ‘bot’ be made according to the ‘frid-gewritu,’ Ib. 8.

That all bishops and ‘ealdormen’ hold the ‘ fri,’ Ath.V. 11.

Of over-confidence in the ‘ frid,’ Ath. V. vir. 7.

Of ‘weds’ given to hold the ‘frié,’ Ib. 9.

The king’s thanks to those who aided him in preserving the ‘frit,’
Edm. S. 5.

That secular (woruld-) ‘ frié’ be observed, Eth. II. 1.

Of the country that grants ‘frié’ to plunderers, Ib. 1.

That every merchant ship have ‘ frid,’ Ib. 2.

If a merchant ship take refuge in a ‘ frié-burg,’ Ib. 2.

That every ‘frit-man’ have ‘ fri,’ Ib. 3.

That each prince have ‘frié’ for his own ‘ frid-men,’ Ib. 3.

If Ethelred’s ¢ frid-man’ come on ‘unfrid’ land, Ib. 3.

If Ethelred’s ‘ fris-man’ draw his ship up on ‘unfrid’ land, Ib. 3.

If he convey his property in common with an ‘ unfrid-man’s’
property, Ib. 3.

If he fly or fight and will not make himself known, Ib. 3,

If eight men be slain it is ‘frid-brece,’ Ib. 5.

If <frid-brece’ be committed within a town (burh), Ib.6.

22,000Ibs. of gold paid for the ‘frié,’ Ib. 7.

That he who robs in open day be worthy of no ‘ fri,’ Eth. II.
15


That ‘ frides-bot’ be attended to, and so ordered as is best for
ce and worst for the thief, Eth. V. 26. VI. 32.;
-». 8


INDEX.


Frit — continued.
If any one detain or harbour a ‘ friéless’ man, C.S. 15.; H, x111.


10.

Of ‘ frid’-hostages to the ‘ Diin-setas,’ O.D. 9.

That every one grant ‘frid’ to God’s church, C. E. 2.

That all king William’s followers are in his peace and protec-
tion, Wil. III. 3.


Frid-béna, Eth.V. 29. VI. 36.


Frid-borg (Tenmanne Tale — Francplegium.)

That all vills throughout the realm be under a decenary
guarantee, Ed. C. 20.

Process in case of crime committed, Ib. 20.

That archbishops, bishops, comites, &c. have their family and
servants under their ‘ frid-borg,’ Ib. 21.; Wil. I, 52.

‘Fridborgs’ how constituted, Ed.C. 28.

That every man, who wishes to be accounted lawful and true,
be in frankpledge, Wil. I. 25. III. 14.


Frid-breca,
Frid-brece,
Frid-burh,
Frides-bit,
Frid-gegilda, h
Frib-gild, } Ath. V. procem.
That each contribute four pence for the common use, Ath. V. 11.
Ten men to be chosen, Ath, V. 111.


Frid-gewritu,
Frid-gysel, be Frid.


Frid-man,


see Frid.


Frid-socen,

Fri8-stél, } see Asylum.

Frum-gild, p. 174, 175.; Edm. S.7.; H. 2xxvi. 5.7.
Frum-stél, In. 38.

Frum-tyhtle, C.S.35.; C. F.13.; H. uxv. 5.

Frymé, see Harbouring.

Fugacio, see Hunting.

Fugitive, see Flyma.

Fil, see Guilty.


Fal.
That an ‘ungetrywe’ man be slain and laid in the ‘fil,’ Eth. I. 4.;
C.S. 33.


Fulco (Fullo?), Ed. C. L. 8.
Full-wite, C.S. 49 dis.

Fulluht,
Fulwiht,
Furh, p. 184, 185.


see Baptism.


INDEX.


Furst and Fondung, H. xivi. 2.
Furtum, see Theft.


Fyht-wite, p.174, 175.; C.S.15.; H. xxi. 1.3; LXx.4. LXXVI, 5.7.
LXXX. 6. XCIV. 1. 2.

That no ‘fyht-wite’ be forgiven, Edm. S. 3.

Fyrd (Army — Fyrd-wite — Fyrdung — Fyréing — Scip-fyrdrung
— Fyrd-scip —Fyrd-faru — Fyrd-feereld — Fyrd-weard — Ex-
peditio).

Of ‘ fyrd-wite,’ In. 51.

one of the king’s dues in Wessex and Danish lagu, C.S.
12.15.; H.x.1.

If a ‘ gesiécund’ or ‘ceorlisc’ man neglect the ‘ fyrd,’ In. 51.

That the (scip) ‘fyrdung’ be zealously attended to, Eth.V. 26. 97.
VI. 32. 33.; C.S.10.

If any one leave the ‘fyrd’ where the king is without permission,
Eth. V. 28. VI. 35.

That ‘ fyrd’-ships be equipped every year, Eth.V. 27. VI. 33.

If any injure, obstruct, or render useless a ‘fyrd’-ship, Eth.VI. 34.

If any one in the ‘fyrd’ commit ‘grid-brece,’ C. S. 62.; H. x. 1.
XII 3. XIII. 8.

If any one neglect it, C.S.66.; H.x.1. x1Il. 9. LXVI. 6.

Ifa man flee from his lord in the ‘fyrd,’ C.S. 78.; p, 456. 2;
H. x. 1. XIN. 12. XLII. 2. 7.

If he fall before his lord, C.S. 79.

Of <‘ fyrd-fereld,’ R.S. p. 432, 433.

Of ‘ fyrd-weard,’ Ib. p. 432, 433.

If any one be slain in expeditione, H. Lxvu1. 2.


Fyrd-wite, see Fyrd.

Fyrht, C.S.5. See Superstitions.
Fyrms, see Harbouring.
Fyrthinga, H. x.1. See Fyrd.


Gengang, Eth. 84.
Gers-swyn, R.S. p. 432, 433.
Gers-ttin, see Tin.


Gafol (Rede-gafol — Bere-gafol — Nyd-gafol).
Freedom from impost to the church, Wih. 1.
What is to be paid for each ‘ wyrhta’ for ‘ bere-gafol,’ In. 59.
If land be hired for ‘rede-gafol,’ Ib. 67.
Of the king’s ‘ gafol,’ Wg. 7.
Of ‘nyd-gafol,’ Edg. S. 1.
If a ‘geneat-man’ neglect his lord’s ‘gafol,’ Ib. 2.
of Rae with regard to the ‘ Went-seetas’ and ‘ Din-satas,’
0. D. 9.
‘Land-gafol,’ R.S. p.432, 433.
‘Hunig-gafol,’ Ib. p. 434, 435.
* Ealu-gafol,’ Ib. p. 434, 435.
‘Mete-gafol,’ Ib. p. 434, 435.


INDEX.


Gafol-gilda, In. 6. 23.
Gafol-heord, R.S. p.434, 435.
Gafol-hwitel, In. 44.

Gafol-land, see Land.
Gafol-swan, R.S. p.436, 437.
Gafol-yrd, R.S. p. 434, 435.
Gang-days, see Rogation Days.
Garments (church), Eth. VI. 51.
Gat (Goat), O.D. 7.

Gehhol, see Christmas.

Gegemed, Ethb. 62.

Genitalia, see Eowende.
Genuiscissio (Hamstringing), C.F. 31. 32.
Geoht, see Yoke.

Gest, see Strangers.

Gift, see Dowry.

Gifta, see Wedding.


Gegilda. (Congildo), Alf. 27. 98.; In.16.21.; Ath.V.vim.6.; H.
LXxXv. 10.


Gild.
Rules for preserving peace in gilds, H. uxxxi.1.


Gildscipe, Ath. V. vit. 6.

Ginger, Ed. C. L. 8.

Gingra (the ealdorman’s), Alf. 38.

Gisel (Hostage), A.& G. 4.; O.D. 9.

Gloves (Cirotece), Eth. IV. 2.; R.S. p. 438, 439.
Goat (Gat), O. D. 7.

Goat-herd, R. S. p. 438, 439,


God.

His ‘feoh,’ Ethb. 1.

That every man love one God, Eth. V. 1.34. VI.1.6, VIII. 1.;
C. E.1.; Wil. IM. 1.


God-borh, Alf. 33.

God-bot, Eth. VI. 51.

Godcunde Gerihta, see Divine Dues.

Godes His, see Church.

Godes Riht, see Justice.

Godes Deow, see Priest.

Godfather, In. 76.; H. Lxxtx, 1. LXXXVIII. 20.
Godmother (Gefeedere), Eth.VI.12.; C. E. 7.
Godson, In. 76,; H. Lxxix. 1.


INDEX.


Gold and Silver,
Goldsmith, } Ed. C. 38.


Gold-peof, Alf. 9.
Goose, In. 70.


Grave.
If any one slay another at an open grave, Ethb. 22.
That soul-scot be paid at the open grave, Eth. V.12. VI. 20.
IX. 13.; C.E, 18.


Gregory, St.
His commemoration, Alf, 43.
Ember days and fasts to be kept as he prescribed, Eth. VI. 93.;
C.E. 16. .


Greve.
Definition of the word, Ed. C. 32.


Greyhound.
That no mediocris homo keep a greyhound, C.F. 31.
Grindende Deowa, Ethb.11.
Grid (Hand-grit — Grit-bryce — Helnes-grié — Had-grit — Ciric-
grid — Pax Regis).

That the king’s and the church’s ‘hand-grid’ stand inviolate,
E.&G.1.; Edg.I.s6.; Eth.VI.14. VI.2.; C.E.2.; Ed.C.
12. 26.27.; Wil. J. 1.9.; H. x. 1. xi. 1. LXxIx. 3.

Extent of the king’s ‘ grid,’ Ath. IV. 5.; H. xvi.

The king’s ‘ hand-grid’ ¢ botless,’ Eth. IIT. 1.; H. xm. 1.

‘Bot’ for an ‘ ealdorman’s grid, Eth. III. 1.

‘Bot’ of a reeve’s, in the assembly of the five burgs, Ib. 1.

How ‘bit’ is to be made for ‘grid’ given in the assembly of the
five burgs,— in a wapentake,— in an alehouse, Ib. 1.

If any one be accused of feeding one who has broken the king’s
* grid,’ Ib. 13.

If any one ‘ befare’ with him who has broken the king’s ‘ gri8,’
Ib. 22,

That every church be in God’s ‘grid,’ and the king’s, and all
christian people’s, Eth.V.10. VI.13. VII.31. IX.1.; C. E. 2.;
Ed. C. 1.

That widows be in God’s and the king’s ¢ grid,’ Eth.V. 21. VI. 26.

That every one give ‘ grid’ to God's church, Eth. VI. 42.; C.E.
2.; Ed.C. 1.2.

Of God’s * grid,’ Eth. VIL.1.; C. E. 2.

Of ‘ grid’ to a death-guilty man, Eth. VII. 4. 5.

Of ¢ grid’ in ‘ Suth-Engla lagu,’ Ib. 9.

If any one violate church-‘ gris’ by being a manslayer within
the walls, Ib. 13. IX.1-4.; C. E. 2.3; H.x1.1. x11,3. LXVIII.
2. LXXIX.5. LXXXVIL 6.

That ‘helnes-grid’ and ‘ had-grid’ be strictly held, Eth. VII. 19.

If church-‘ grid’ be violated by fighting (feohtlac), robbery
(reaflac), or fornication, Eth. IX. 4.; C. E. 3.

Of ‘grid-bryce’ of churches of various ranks, Eth. IX. 5.; C.E.
3.; H. uxxix. 6.

‘ Grid-bryce’ one of the king’s rights in Dena lagu, C.S. 15.

If any one commit ‘grid-bryce’ in the ‘fyrd’ or king’s family,
Ib. 62.; H.x. 1, x11. 8. XIII. 8,


INDEX.


Grit — continued.
That every man be entitled to,‘ grid’ to and from the ‘ gemit,’
C.S. 83.


If any one commit ¢ grid-bryce ’ ante mediocres forestz, C. F.18,

If any one violate church-‘grid,’ Ed. C. 6.

Of ‘grid’ given by the king’s hand and ‘per breve,’ and on the
eight days when he is first crowned, and its ‘bot,’ Ib. 12. 26.
27.; H. x11. 1. XIII. 1.

ae infraction of church-‘ grid’ through homicide is ‘ botless,’

+ XII. 1.
© Grid-bryce’ to be compensated with 100 sot, Ib. 2.
with the ‘wér,’ Ib. 3.

De iis qui nominant et permittunt ‘ gri’-bryce, H. xxu.

Of ‘ grié-bryce’ in royal causes, H. xxxv. 2.

Of ‘grid’ given by the vicecomes, &c., H. xxix. 4.


Grid-bryce, see Grid.
Guardireve, Wil. I. 28.
Guest (Cuma -—- Gest), see Strangers.
Guilty (Fal).
ar ae eae afford ‘ grid’ to, or harbour a guilty (fil) person,


Gut-firma (Gyt-feorm), R.S. p. 440, 441.
Gyft, see Dowry.

Gildscipe,
Gegyldscipe, hath Vz. vurt. 6.

Gyrd of land, In. 67.

Gyt-feorm (Gut-firma), R.S. p.440, 441.


H.


Gehada, Eth. IX. 19. 20.; C.E. 4.

Had-bot (Ordinis emendatio), H. rxvult. 5.
Had-breca, C. S. 6.

Had-bryce, see Infractio ordinis.

Had-grid, see Grid.

Gehadod-man, see Priest.


Hebbende Handa (Handhabende), Wih. 25. 26.; Ath. I.1. III. 6.;
Wil. I. 27.; H. xt. 1, Lvit.4. LIX. 20. 23.


Heeig-weard (Hayward), R.S. p.440, 441.

Helnes Grid, see Grid.

Hémed-ding, Unriht Hémed, see Adultery, &c.
Herfest-handful (Manipulus Augusti), R.S. p. 438, 439.
Heettian (Comatio), see Punishments.

Hedendém, see Heathenism.

Hedenscipe, see Superstitions.

Haligdém, O.1.2.; Eth. III. 3. 6.; C.S. 36.


INDEX.


Hialige Hadas, see Priest.
Halige-tida, see Holy Seasons.


Hall (the king’s), (Healle, Sele).
Of vouching to warranty to the king’s ¢ sele,’ H.& E. 7. 16,
If any one fight or ‘draw his weapon in the king’s hall, Alf. 7.


Halle-mot, H. xx.1.2. LVII. 8. LXXVIII. 2.


am.
If the king drink at a man’s ‘ham,’ Ethb. 3.
Ham-fest, Alf.42.; Ed.i.; H..xxxir. 2.
Ham-fare, Hemfare, see Ham-socn.
Hampton, Ath. I. 14.
Ham-scyld, Ethb. 32.
Ham-sittende, Alf. 42.; Eth. IV. 4.; H. uxxxu. 1.
Ham-soen (Ham-fare — Domus invasio).
If any one commit ‘ ham-socn,’ Edm.S.6.; Eth. IV. 4.; C.S.
63.; Wil. I. 2.
One of the king’s rights in Wessex, C.S.12.; H. x1.
in Dena lagu, C.S. 15.
Si aucuns est apeled de chambre fruissir, Wil. I. 15.
To be compensated with 100 sot, H. x11. 2. xxxv. 2.
Of those who nominant and permit ‘ham-soen,’ H. xxu.
Definition of, H. uxxx. 10.11.
Forfeiture of ‘ wér’ through, H. txxxvii. 6.


Hamstringing, see Genuiscissio.
Hand-grid, see Grid.

Handhabbend, see Hebbende Handa.
Hand-scyldig, Eth. VII. 13.
Haraidum, H. Lxxx. 11.


Harbouring (Feormian — Flieman-feormian — Fyrmé — Frym3 —
Underfon). See Flyma.
If any one harbour a stranger longer than three (two) days,
H. & E.15.; C.S. 28.; Ed. C. 23.3; Wil. I. 48.; H. vii. 5.
That no one harbour a shaveling (besc6ren-man) longer than
one night, Wih. 7.

If any one harbour a plotter against the king’s life, Alf. 4.

If a ‘ceorl’ or a ‘gesiécund man’ be accused of harbouring,
In. 30. ; C.S. 18. 15,

That every man may deny harbouring (frym%), In, 46.

That no one harbour or grant ‘frid’ to a guilty (fil) person,
Ed. 7. 8.

That no one harbour another’s man, Ib.10.; Ath.I. 22. II.4, III.
4. 1V.1.; Edm. C. 3.; C.S. 28.; Wil. I. 30. 48.; H. x11. 2.

Of harbouring a landless man, Ath. I. 8.; H. vu. 4.

If any one feed or harbour a ‘flyma,’ Ath. I. 20.; C.S. 13.

If any one harbour a thief, Ath. IIT. 6. IV. 4. V. 1.2.; Ed. C.5.

That neither English nor Dane harbour the other's ‘ Wealh,’
Eth. II. 6.

If any one be accused of feeding him who has broken the king’s
‘grid,’ Eth. II. 13.

If any one harbour a fridless or excommunicated man or outlaw,
Ed. 8.; Eth. IX. 42.; C.S. 15.67.; H.x.1. x1. 14. XIII. 10.


INDEX.


Hare, C.F. 97.

Harvest-tide, Alf. 43.

Hastings, Ath. I, 14.

Hayward (Heig-weard), R.S. p. 440, 441.
Heador-hund (Molossus), R.S. p. 434, 435.
Heafod-cirie (Mother Church), C.E. 3.
Heafod-mynster, Eth. IX. 5.
Heafod-stedas, Eth. VII. 3. 5.
Heafod-weard, R.S. p. 432, 433. bis.
Heah-geréfa, We. 4.

Healice Hadas, see Priest.

Healm, In. 61.

Hearm, E. & G. 6.


Heals-fang (Apprehensio colli), Wih.11.12.14.; p. 174, 175.; Edm.S.
7.; Eth. VI. 51.; C.S. 37.45. 61.; C.F.14.; Wil. I. 9.; H.
XI. 7.10. XIV. 3, LXXVI. 1.4. 5. 6. 7. XC. %
Heathenism (Hatendém).
That every species of heathenism be totally extirpated, E. & G.
procm.; Eth. V.1. VI. 1. [X. 44.; C.S8. 5.
If any one revere heathenism, E. & G. 2.
That no christian be carried into ‘hetendém,’ Eth.V. 2. VI. 9.;
C.S. 3.
Hedge (Sepes).
If an ox break hedges, In. 42.
If an animal stake itself on a hedge (sepes mentonalis), H. xc. 4.
If an animal be driven into a hedge, and injured or slain, Ib. 5.


Heimelborch,
Hemoldborh,


Helmet.
If a ‘ceorl’ have a helmet, &c., Wg. 10.


Hen, In. 70.
Hengen, see Prison and Punishments.
Hengen-witnung, see Punishments.


Hengwite, Wit I. 4. See Punishments.
Henwite,


Hentan, C.S. 19. 49.


Heoré.
Church-scot to be paid at the ‘heord,’ In. 61.


Heord-fest (Hudefest), C.S. 20.; H.v111. 1.

Heord-penig, Edg. I. 4.; R.S. p. 432,434, 435. See Rom-feoh.
Herbagium, H. xc. 2.

Her


} Wil. I. 21.


e.
Definition of, In. 13.
Hereditas, see Boc-land.


INDEX.


Heregeatu,
Hergeatu,
Here-str#t, see Highway.
Here-team, In. 15.
Here-toga, Ed. C. 32. note.
Hergripa, see Feax-fang.
Heriot (Hergeatu —Heregeatu — Relief — Relevium — Relevacio.)
Of the heriot, if any one die intestate, C.S.71.; Wil. I. 20.
The heriots to be paid according to the several ranks, C.S. 72,;
Wil. I. 20.; H.xrv. 1-4.
That a widow pay the heriot within twelve months, C.S.74.;
H. xiv. 6.
That the heriot be remitted, if a man be slain for his lord,
C.S. 79.
If a baron, count, &e. die, H.1. 2.
«Relevationes pro rectis hereditatibus’ remitted, Ib. 6.
One of the king’s rights (jura), H. x. 1.


} see Heriot.


Highway (Here-strét—Via Regia —Chiminus.)
If any one injure another on the king’s highway, Eth. IV. 4.
De pace quatuor chiminorum, Ed. C. 12.
If one be slain on any of the four highways, Wil. I. 26.
All highways belong to the king, H. x. 2.
Width and definition of, H. uxxx. 3.


Hikenilde Strete, Ed. C. 12.; Wil. I. 26.
Hine, see Deow.
Hion, Ethb. 36. 37.
Hired, Alf, 2.

If any one fight in the king’s, C. S. 60.
Hire-man,
ee


That every ‘hlaford’ have his ‘hyred-man’ in his own ‘borh,’
Ath. JI. 7.; Edm.C.7.; Eth.I.1.; C.S. 31.; Ed. C. 21.;
WiLI. 52.; H. vir. 8. xu. 6. Lx. 6.

That every ‘hire-man’ know when he has his property, Ath. V.
VIII. 7.

If any one will not take the ‘ wed’ of his ‘hire-men,’ Ath.V. x1.

If any one accuse a ‘hired-man,’ and if he abscond, Eth, I.1.;
C.S. 31.

That every ‘hire-man’ pay a penny, Eth.VIII. 1.


Hiwise, In. 44.; Weg. 7.

Hlaf (Gesufel-hlaf — Companagium), In.70.; Ath. V. vIII. 6.
Hlaf-zta, Ethb. 25.

Hlaford (Dominus).


If a lord give freedom to his nian, Wih.s.; H. Lxxvil. 3.

If a man wish to go from one Jord to another, Alf. 37.

That a man may fight for his lord ‘ orwige,’ and vice versa,
Ib. 42.; H. Lxxxil. 8. 4. LXXXVIII. 10.

That a man may not fight against his lord, Alf.42.; H. Lxxx1Il.
1.


INDEX.


Hlaford —- continued.

That the lord may fight for his man, Alf. 42.; H. 11x. 12. Lxxxu.
3.4.

That he and the king have the ‘wér’ of children clandestinely
begotten, In. 97.; H. uxxviit. 4.

If any one flee from his lord, In. 39.; C.S. 78.; p.456. 2;
H. x. 1. XII. 12. XLII. 2.7.

That no one withdraw his service from the lord, In. 39.; Wil.I.
32.; H. x iii. 2.

if = ‘gesidcund’ man compound with his lord for his household,

hn. 50.

If a lord compel a ‘peow’ to work on a festival, E. & G. 7.;
C.S. 45.

If a lord deny justice, Ath. I. 3.

If a lord be privy to the theft of his ‘peow,’ Ib. 3.

That no lord deny a freeman ‘hlaford-soen,’ Ath. II. 4. III. 5.

That every lord have his ‘hyred-men’ in his own ‘borh,’ Ath. II.
7.; Edm. C. 7.; Eth. 1. 1.; C.S. 31.; Ed. C.21.; Wil. I. 52.;
H. vit. 3. XLI.6. LIX. 6.

If a lord have more men than he can see to, Ath. II. 7.

If a lord will unjustly injure his man, Ath. [V.1.

That every one who is ‘ ladleas’ follow what lord he will, Ib. 1.

If a lord will take the ‘ wed’ of his ‘hired-men,’ Ath. V. x1.

That the lord take half his ‘tyht-bysig’ man’s property, Edg. H.
2.; Edg.II. 7.; C.S. 25.; Wil. I. 47.

If alord declare that his man’s oath has not failed, Eth. I. 1.;
C.S. 30. 31; H. yxtv.9. LXVvIt. 1.

If a man be foul at the ordeal, that he pay his ‘wer’ to the
lord, Eth. J. 1.

If a lord be accused that his man escaped through his counsel,
Ib. 1. bis ; C. S. 30. 31.; Wil. I. 52.; H. xxi. 6. Lxv. 4.

If a lord has to swear, that he take five thanes, Eth. I. 1.;
H. xu. 6.

If his ‘ hyred-man’ be accused, and escape, Eth.,I.1.; C.S. 32,

If a oe wish to clear his ‘tyht-bysig’ man, Eth.I.1. Il. 4.;
C.S. a0.

That no one dismiss his man before he is clear of every suit,
C.S. 29.

Of a priest’s ‘ mund-bryce’ paid to the lord, Ib. 42.; H. Lxvi. 3.

If a man fall before his lord, Ib. 79.

That a ‘cot-setla’ work every Monday for his lord, R.S. p. 432,
433.

That the lord of a murdered man have six marks, Ed. C.15.

His share of a thief’s property, Wil. I. 27.

That a lord remove not a husbandman without cause, Ib. 29.

If a lord do not provide proper cultivators for the land, Ib. 31.

If one of king William’s followers be slain, that the lord find the
slayer within five days, Wil. III. 3.

Of the dominus de furto pulsatorum, H. xxv.

That no man judge his lord, H. xxx11. 2.

If a lord implead his man, H. xxxu.3. XLVI. 1. LUI. 4. LIX. 11.

That every lord have the ‘ overseunes’ of his man, H. xut. 1.

That he answer to the hundred for his accused man, Ib. 6.

If he entrust his affairs to his dapifer, H. xu11. 2.

If any one act as advocate against his Jord, H. xxii. 3.

ane”


INDEX.


Hlaford — continued.
If the lord has a man ‘qui ei nolit esse ad rectum,’ H. xx. 4.
Of various relations between lord and man, Ib. 5. 6. LxI. 1-17.
LXXXIIL. 5. 6.
If he take his land or fief from, or desert his man, H. xxi. 8.
If a man be given as surety for his lord, H. xitv.
That a lord may not convict any one by witnesses, without con-
tradiction, H. xiviit. 4.
Of the rights of a lord over his man, H. iv. 1. 2.
Of differences between lords and their farmers, H. ivi.1-3.
That every lord so defend his man that he incur no detriment,
H. yvil. 8 LIX. 12.
If a man accuse his lord falsely to the king, H. rx. 13.
If any one ‘de judicata et vadiata domino pecunia apud justitiam
falso conqueritur,’ Ib. 14.
Every lord may ‘induciare placitum hominum suorum,’ H. 1x1. 9.
If a man be impleaded without his lord, Ib. 16. 17.
If he command his servus to slay any one, H. Lxvui. 1.
If a man slay his lord, H. rxxv.1. 2.
If a lord slay his man without cause, Ib. 3.
Of slaying a relative, or a servant of the lord, H. uxxx. 9.
That a man owes most to the lord whose liege and resident he is,
H. Lxxxi. 5.
That, in certain cases, the lord be guarantee for his man, Ib. 6.
That no lord punish his man without law, H. yxxxvi. 1.
If the men of one lord (or two) fight, H. xciv. 2.
Hlafordes gifu, Eth. III. 3.; C.S. 82.
Hlafordlease men, Ath. I. 2.
Hlaford-searu, ie 7
Hlaford-awics, } (Proditio Domini).
If aman plot against the king or his lord, Alf.4.; Ath. I. 4.;
Eth. VI. 37.; C.S. 58.
That he who is guilty of ‘hlaford-searu’ never hope for life,
Edg. II. 7.; C.S. 26.65.; H. x11.1. XLiil. 7.
That in a charge of proditio domini no one seek counsel, but
answer directly, H. xLvi. 1, XLVIL.
Hlaford-soen, see Socn.
Hlot and Scot, Wil. III. 4.; H. p. 502.
Hlod (Cohors).
If any one slay an innocent man with a ‘hlod,’ Alf. 29.30, 31.;
H. Lxxxvit. 4. 7.
Of the number of men to form a ‘hlod,’ In. 13,
If any one be accused of ¢hlod,’ Ib. 14.


Hlod-bot, Alf. 29. 30.; H. uxxxvil. 4.
Hogge, Eth. IV. 2.
Hold.
His *‘ wergild,’ by the North people’s law, Wg.4.
Holy Seasons, Eth. V. 18.
Holy Thursday, Alf. 5.
Homagium, H. xxiii. 6.
Homicide, see Slaying.
Hominicedium, H. rxxx. 8.


INDEX.


Homola (Collificium), Alf. 35.
Hondhabbend, see Hebbende Hand.
Honey, In. 70.
Hoppe (Collar), Edg. H. s.
Hér-ewene, see Adultery.
Hordere (Treasurer).
If the king’s ‘hordere’ be privy to the theft of a ‘peow,’ Ath. I. 3.
That no one barter without his testimony, Ib.10.; Edm.C. 5.
Hord-ern, C.S. 77.
Horn.
If a stranger, going out of the road, blow not. his horn, Wih. 28. ;
In. 20.
‘ Angylde’ of an ox’s horn, In. 58.
of a cow’s, Ib. 59.
of a bles-(blau-)horn, Edg. H. 8.
Horrearius (Bere-brytta), R.S. p. 440, 441.
Horse.
If any one lend a horse to another's ‘esne,’ and he run away,
In. 29.
That no one sell a horse beyond sea, Ath. I. 18.
Its ‘ forfang,’ Ff.
Its ‘ ceap-gild,’ Ath. V. vi. 1.
Rate of payment for, O. D.7.; Wil.I. 5.
A stallion may be given in payment of the ‘wér,’ Wil. I. 9.
Of a man slain, how to be disposed of, H. rxxx111. 6.
Hors-wealh, In. 33.
Hors-weard, R.S. p. 432, 433.
Hostage (Gisel), A.& G. 5.
Housel, see Husel.
Hreac-copp, R. S. p. 440, 441.
Hreac-mete, R. S. p. 440, 441.
Hream (Uthesium — Cri — Clamor).
If any one let a thief escape without hue and cry, or neglect it,
C.S.29.; Wil. I. 49. 50.
Hryser, see Ox.
Hudefest, see Heordfest.
Hulcus, Eth. IV. 2.
Hund, see Dog.
Hundred (Visnetum).
To meet every four weeks, Edg. H.1.
Share of ‘ ceap-gild’ to be paid to the hundred, Ib. 2.
If any one deny the doom of the hundred, Ib. 3.
If one hundred pursue a track into another, Ib. 5.
That folkright be pronounced in the hundred, Ib. 7.
That the hundred take half a ‘tyht-bysig’ man’s property, Ib.
2.; Edg. II. 7.; C.S. 25.; Wil. I. 47.
That witnesses be appointed to every hundred, Edg. S. 3. 4.
That the hundred take the half of property bought without
declaration, Ib. 8.


INDEX.


Hundred — continued.

If a man cannot obtain justice in his hundred, C. S. 19.

That no one levy a distress (nam) before he has thrice demanded
his right in the hundred, Ib.19.; Wil. I. 44.

That every man be included in a hundred and tithing, C.S. 20.;
H.vut. 2.

Division of comitibus et vicecomitibus, Ed. C. 13.

Hundred synonymous with wapentake, Ib. 30. & 7.2.

If a Frenchman be slain, and the men of the hundred do not find
the slayer within a week, Wil. I. 22.

Forfeiture in case of denial of justice, Ib. 42.

If any one be accused in the hundred, Ib. 51.

What the hundred is to pay in case of homicide, Wil. III. 3.

If any one fail to attend the hundred when summoned, Ib. 14.;
H. xxix. 2. Li. 1.

Of holding the hundred court, H. vir. 1-8.

That an ‘ealdorman’ preside over each hundred, H. vu. 2.
XCI. 1.

In great and capital causes, that one hundred be judged by two,
H. xxx. 1. :

That a lord answer in the hundred for his accused man, H. xt1.


6.
If seven hundreds be impleaded, H. xivuit. 2.


Hundredes ‘ ealdor,’ }
Hundredes man, .

That a theft be announced to him, Edg. H. 2.

That no one have strange cattle without his knowledge, Ib. 4.;

Edg. S. 8. 10.

Hundred-gemit, see Gemot.
Huntas,
Huntad-fér,


Hunting (Fugacio).

That it be abstained from on Sundays, Eth. VI. 22.; C. E. 15.

That every one may hunt on his own property, but must forego
the king’s hunt, C.S. 81.; C.F. 30.

Of bishops, abbots, and barons hunting, C.F. 26.

That the citizens of London have their hunt (fugaciones), H.
p. 503.

Venatio, a plea of the forest, H. xvii.


} see Hunting.


Husbandman, see Cultivur.
His-bryce, see Burglary.


Husel (Housel—Eucharist).
To be taken before an ordeal, Ath. I. 23.
That every christian often prepare himself for ‘husel,’ Eth. V.
22,
That every christian prepare himself thrice a year for ‘husel,’
Eth. VI. 27.; C. E. 19.


Husl-genga (Communicant), Wih. 23.; In, 15. 19.
Husting, Ed. C.L. 5.; H. p. 503.
Hwearf, see Barter.


INDEX.


Hyde.
Of an ‘esne’s’ hyde, Wih. 10.
Of a ‘Wealh's’ hyde, In. 23.
That the keepers of undeclared cattle suffer in their hyde,
Edg. S. 9.
That an ox’s or a sheep’s hyde be kept for three nights, Eth. III. 9.


Hyd-gild, E.& G. 7.8.; C.S. 45. 47.
Hyld-a8, see Oath.

Hynden, In. 54.; Ath. V. m1.
Hynden-man, Ath.V. 10. viii. 1.
Hfr-geoht, see Yoke.

Hyrnes, Edg.I. 1.

Hyd, Eth.VI. 51.


I.


Idols, C.S.5. See Superstitions.
Ikenilde Strete, Ed. C. 12.; Wil. I. 26.
Tlex, C.F. 29.
Illiberalis, see Ceorl.
Impleading, see Placitum.
In-borh, Ed.6.; O.D.8.; H. uxxxm. 2.
Incendiaries,
Incendium,
Incest (Sib-leger).

That the king have ‘ pone uferan’ (superiorem), and the bishop

‘pone nyperan’ (inferiorem), E.& G. 4.; H. x1. 5.
If two brothers lie with the same woman, E. & G. 4.


If any one commit incest, C. S. 52.
If a woman marry two brothers, H. ixx. 17.


Induciare, H. Lxt. 9.


see Arson.


Infangenthef.
Of those having it, Ed. C. 21.
Definition of, Ib. 22.
If any one having ‘tol, team, and infangenpef’ be impleaded in
the county, Wil. I. 2.
That archbishops, bishops, comites, &c. have ‘infangenthef’ on
land subject to them, H. xx. 2.
Infiht, or Insocna, H. uxxx. 12.
Inforciare, H. xx1x. 1. XXXII. 3. XXXIII. 1.
Infoster, O. 3.


Infractio or Infractura Ordinis (Had-bryce).
Whoever commits infractura ordinis, pacis, christianitatis, legali-
tatis, Eth. VI. 28.; C.S.50.; H. xr 12.
Of the king’s soke in cases of, H. xx.


-- 4


INDEX.


Infractura Parci (Pundbreche), H. xxxvit. Xt.
Inheritance, H. xx. 18-23.

Inlagian,
Inlegiare,
Inland, Edg.I.1.; R.S. p. 432, 433.
Inn, Ethb. 28.

Geinnian, In. 62.

Inroad (Geirnan).


ee E.2.; H. x11. Lit. 3.


If any one make an inroad into another's ¢ tin,’ or ‘edor,’ Ethb.


17. 29.
Insane, H. xxviii. 7.
Insegl and Inseglian, Ath. 1V. 7.
Insidie preecogitate (Agwait purpense), Wil. I. 2.
Insocna, see Infiht.
Insorticatus, H. Lxxt. 2.
In-swan (Porcarius), R. S. p. 434, 435.
Interciare, H. tv. 7.
Intestate, see Testament.
Invasio Domus, see Ham-soen.
Invultuacio, H.xxx1.1. See Superstitions.
Geirnan, see Inroad.


J.


Jews.
All jews under the king’s protection, Ed. C. 25.


John the Baptist, Ath. I. procem.
Judge (Déma — Justicia).


If a judge judge unjustly, Edg.II.3.; C.S.15.; Wil. I. 39.3


H. xii. 4. XXXIV. 1. 2. 3.


That the king’s justiciary, with the ‘homines legales,’ sit in the


court, Ed. C. 9.
That judges judge as they would be judged, Wil. I. 39.
If any one difforce a judgment, Ib. 47.
Judges to be chosen by the accused, H. v. 5. xxxuII. 5.
If judges differ in opinion, H.v. 6. xxxI. 2.


That no idiot (stultus) or bad man (improbus) be a judge,


H. vill. 9.
Of the authority of the judex fiscalis, H. xxiv. bxiu.
Who are to be the king’s judges, H. xxix. 1.
If any one have suspected judges, H. xxx1. 6.


Tf any one be impleaded by the justiciary (justicia), H. xiv1.1.


LXVI. 9.


That no justice may convict by witnesses without reply (con-


tradictio), H. xiviti. 4.


Every justiciary may postpone a plea (respectare placitum),


H. vx. 8.


INDEX.


Judgment, see Dém and Justice.
Juramentum plenum (planum), see Oath.


Justice (Riht — Godes Riht).

If any one demand justice and cannot obtain it, In. 8.

If any one take revenge before he demands justice, Ib. 9.

Of what he is worthy who denies justice, Ed. 2. 4.3. C.S.15.;
HI. Xx1it. 4. LIX. 19.

Of ‘bét’ for denial of justice, Ed. 4.

If a lord or any one deny justice, Ath. I. 3.

That no one apply to the king before he has demanded justice
elsewhere, Ath. I. 3.; Edg. II. 2.; C.S.17.; Wil. I. 43.;
H. xxxiv. 6.

If any one decline justice and escape, Edg. H.6.; Wil. I. 42.

That God’s ‘riht’ be established, C. S. 1.

If any one do injustice for bribery, Ib. 15.

If a man cannot obtain justice in his hundred, Ib. 19.; Wil. I. 42.

Peregrina judicia abolished, H. v. 2. xxx1.7.

Unjust judgment, or default of justice, one of the king’s dues,
H.x.1. LIx. 19.

That in summis et capitalibus causis one county be judged by
two, H. xxx1. 1.

That every man be judged by his peers and of the same county
(provincia), Ib. 7.

Various precepts concerning judgments, H. xxx. 7. 8. XXXIII.
1-4.

That no one alone presume to pronounce judgment, H. xxx11. 1.

That no one judge his lord, Ib. 2.

That a justice may not convict any one by witnesses, without
contradiction, H. xiviit. 4.

Defectus justicie a plea of the king, H. x.1. 11x. 19.


Justicia, sée Judge.


K.


Kentish Law.
The king’s ‘mund-byrd,’ Ethb. 8.
Of the king’s and archbishop’s ‘mund-bryce in Kentish law,
Eth.VII 6.; C. E. 3.
Of their ‘feoh’ in Kentish law, Eth. VII. 7.
Of church-breach in Kentish law, C.E. 3.
Great difference of ‘ wer-gilds’ in Kent, H. uxxvi. 7.
Kin, see Megi.
King (Cyning).
If any one do injury to his ‘leods,’ Ethb. 2.
If he drink at a man’s ‘ham,’ Ib. 3.
If a freeman steal from him, Ib. 4.
If one man slay another in his ‘ttn,’ Ib. 5.
If his ‘ ambiht-smid’ or ‘laad-rine’ slay a man, Ib. 7.
His ‘mund’ ane thee Ib. 8.; Wih.2.; Alf.5.; p. 174,
175.; Edm. S.7.; Eth.VI. 34. VII. 6. 8.
If a man lie with his ‘ megden-man,’ Ethb. 10.
with his ‘grindende peowa,’ Ib. 11.
with his ‘ fed-esl,’ Ib. 12.


INDEX.


King — continued.

Of vouching to warranty to his hall, H. & E. 7. 16.

That he be prayed for, Wih. 1.

His word, Ib. 16.

If any one accuse his ‘esne,’ Ib. 22.

If any one violate his *borh,’ Alf. 3.; C.S. 59.

If any one plot against his life, Alf. 4.; Eth.V. 30. VI. 37.; C.S.
58.

If any one fight or draw a weapon in his hall or house, Alf. 7.;
In. 6.; Eth. VII. 9. 15.; C.S.60.; H. x.1. x1. 7. LXXXI. 1.

His ‘ burg-bryce,’ Alf. 40.; In. 45.

If a foreigner be slain, that part of the ‘wér’ belongs to the
king, In. 23.

That he and the ‘ hlaford’ have the ‘wer’ of surreptitious chil-
dren, Ib. 27.; H. uxxviit. 4.

That he have a thief, if taken, In. 28.

‘ Wer-gild’ of his ‘ hors-wealh,’ Ib. 33.

If a *gesiScund’ man compound with him for his household,
Ib. 50.

If his godson be slain, Ib. 76.; H. Lxx1x. 1.

His ‘ oferhyrnes,’ Ed.1. 2. 4.5.10.; Ath. I. 20. 22, 26. IV.1.
V. vit. vit. 4.3 Eth. IV. 6.; C.S. 29.; Wil. I. 16. 39. 42, 47.

His ‘hand-grid,’ E.& G.1.; Eth. III.1. VI.14. VII.2.; C.E.2.;
Ed.C, 12. 26.27.; Wil.I.2.; H.x.1. X11. 1. LXXIX. 3.

In case of incest (adultery) that he have the ‘ superiorem,’
E.& G.4.; H. xu. 5.

He is ‘mag’ and ‘mund-bora’ to ecclesiastics and strangers,
E. & G.12.; R.8.; Eth. VI. 48. IX. 33.; C.S.40.; H.x.3.
LXXV. 7.

The North king’s ‘ wér-gild,’ and ‘ cyne-bat,’ Weg. 1.

His ‘ gafol,’ and ‘ ut-ware,’ Ib. 7. 9.

His ‘anfeald wér-gild’ and ‘cyne-bot,’ in Mercian law, M. L.

120 sol ‘ wite’ to be paid to him, Ath. 1.1. 3.

That no man have recourse to him before he has demanded
justice elsewhere, Ib. 3.; Edg. II. 2.; C.S.17.; Wil. I. 43.;
H. xxxiv. 6.

If a thief seek him, Ath. III. 6. IV. 4.; Ed.C. 5.

That a fifty (quinquagenarium) be sung for him every Friday,
Ath. IV. 3.; Eth. VII. 3.

Extent of his ‘grid,’ Ath. IV. 5.; H. xvr.

His share of a thief’s property, Ath. V. 1.1.

That he ride and quell a thief, Ath. V. vitt. 3.

If ‘moré-wyrhtan,’ perjurors, or manslayers dwell in his neigh-
bourhood, Edm. E. 3.; Eth. VI. 36.

If any one flee to his ‘ burh,’ Edm. S. 2.

That he will not have a homicide in his ‘socen,’ Ib. 4.

Entitled to the ‘wites’ incurred by those possessing ‘ béc-land,’
Eth. I.1.

That he get the murderer, if ‘frié-bryce’ be committed, Eth. IT.


6.

His ‘hand-grid’ ¢ botless,’ Eth. III.1.; H.xu.1.

That every vouching and every ordeal be in his ‘burg,’ Eth. III.
6


That no one but the king have a moneyer, Ib. 8.
That only he have ‘socn’ over a king’s thane, Ib. 11.
‘Wed’ to be deposited in his suit, Ib. 12.


INDEX.


King — continued.

That all churches be in his ‘grid,’ Eth.V. 10. VI. 13.

That all widows be in his ‘grid,’ Eth.V. 21. VI. 26.

If any one, without leave, forsake the ‘ fyrd,’ where he is present,
Eth. V. 28. VI. 35.

If any excommunicated person dwell in his neighbourhood
(neawest), Eth. V. 29. VI. 36.

His ‘ wér-gild,’ Eth. V. 30.

That all adhere to one ‘cyne-hlaford,’ Eth.V. 34. VI.1. IX. 44.

If any one injure (awyrde) a ‘fyrd’ship, that he pay the full
‘mund-bryce’ to the king, Eth. VI. 34.

If a death-guilty man sought him, Eth. VII. 4.; H. xcu. 7.

His 2 mund-bryce’ in Kentish and English law, Eth. VII. 6.;
C.E.s.

His ‘feoh’ in Kentish law, Eth.VII. 7.

If any one commit his ‘mund-bryce,’ Ib. 11.

If any one fight in his ‘ burg’ or presence, or steal, Ib.15.

What is to be daily sung for him, Eth. VIII. 3.

That a homicide in a church pay his ‘ wer’ to the king, Eth. IX.
2.; C.E.2.; H. x11.

That he is Christ’s vicegerent (gespelia), Eth. IX. 2. 42.

That he shall avenge Christ’s anger, Ib. 2.

His ‘ wite’ in case of church-breach, Ib. 5.

That all men love and be faithful to the king, C. E. 1. 20.

His rights in Wessex, Mercia, and Dena lagu, C.S. 12-15.;


eXe1.

That the ‘ béc-land’ of an outlaw be forfeited to him, C. S. 13.;
H. x1. 1.

Of ‘ wér-gild’ to be paid to him, C.S. 30. 64.

If a man escape, that the ‘borh’ pay his ‘wér’ to the king,
Ib. 30. 31.

Of ‘ heals-fang’ to be paid to him, Ib. 37.; C. F. 14.

Of‘ mund-bryce’ to be paid to him, if any one maltreat a priest,
C.S. 42.; H. vxvi. 3.

That he be maintained from his own possessions, C. S, 70.

That he seize the ‘béc-land’ of him who flees from his lord,
Ib. 78.; p. 457. 2.3 H. xu. 12.

That every one forego his hunt, C.S.81.; C.F. 31.

Of ¢ grid-bryce’ accruing to him, C.F. 18.

Of ‘manbot’ to him, Ed. C. 12.

His share of treasure trove, Ib.14.

Payment to him if a man be murdered, Ib. 15.

If any one sue for his misericordia, Ib. 18.

Has power of misericordia over captives, Ib. 18.

If he grant life or limbs to a murderer or traitor, Ib. 18.

All jews under his protection, Ib. 25.

Forfeiture to him, in case of denial of justice, Wil. I. 42.

Forfeiture to him, if any one difforce a judgment, Ib. 47.

All highways and ‘ qualstowa’ are the king’s, H.x. 2.

What ecclesiastical pleas belong to him, H. x1. 1.

If any one commit ‘ grié-bryce’ in his household, H. x11. 3.

Enumeration of crimes placing persons in his misericordia,
H. xr. 1.

That he has the soke of all lands in his dominion, H. xx.

Of his soke (socn), H. xx. 1.

Who are to be his iusticiaries. H. xxix. 1.


INDEX.


King — continued.

His ‘overseunes,’ H. xxxiv. 8. xXxXv. 1. XLVI. 1. LUI. 1.
LXXXVII. 5.

Of ‘grid-brece’ in his causes, H. xxxv. 2.

If any one be impleaded by him, H. xiii. 1. Lu. 1.

If any one be slain in his house, court, burg, army, &e.,
H. ,xviit. 2. Lxxx. 1.7.

If his messenger be slain, H. uxx1x.-2.

His house and court defined, H. 1xxx. 7.


Kinless man.
If a man without paternal kin fight and slay any one, Alf. 27.
If a homicide have (have not) maternal kin, Ib. 27.
If any one slay a kinless man, Ib. 28.


Kitchen (Kycene), R. 2.
Kote-setla, R.S. p. 432, 433.


Laad-rine, Ethb. 7.
Laco, Ed.C. L. 8.
Lad (Summagium), R.S. p.432, 433.


Lad, :
Li et (Wer-lad — Cann).
Of a ‘mynster-aldor’s’ ‘cann,’ Wih. 17.
How a priest and deacon shall clear themselves, Ib.1is.
a clerk, Ib. 19.
a guest, Ib. 20.
a king’s thane, Ib. 20.
a ‘ceorl,’ Ib. 21.
a bishop’s ‘esne,’ Ib. 22.
a priest’s ‘esne,’ Ib. 23.
a layman’s ‘esne,’ Ib. 24.
Of a ‘tyht bysig’ man’s ‘lad,’ Eth. I. 1. bis; C. S. 22. 30.;
H. vxiv. 9. Lxvit. 1.
Of ‘lad’ after thanes are unanimous in judgment, Eth, III. 13.
Of single and threefold ‘lad,’ Eth. IX. 27.; C.E.5.; C.S8. 22,
23. 48.; Wil. I. 15.; H. Lxvi. 9. 10.
Between ‘ Wealh’ and English there is no other ‘Jad’ than ordeal,
O.D. 2.
If ‘lahmen’ prescribe injustice, that they clear themselves by
showing that they knew no better, Ib. 3.
If a ‘lad’ fail to a ‘Wealh’ or an Englishman, Ib. 4. 6.;
C.S. 31.
Of a reeve’s ‘lad,’ if accused of having allowed the coining of
base money, C.S. 8.
That every true man be worthy of single ‘lad,’ Ib. 22.; H. ux1v.
9. LXVII. 1. .
That one law stand between ‘ burgs’ at ‘ladungs,’ C. S. 34.
Of ‘wer-lad, Ib. 39. H. x11.3. LxIV.1.4. LXVI. 1. LXxIV. 1.
LXXV. 2. LXXxv. 4, XCII. 14.
If a minister of the altar wish to clear (ladian) himself of homi-
cide, C.S. 41.


INDEX.


Lad, Ladung — continued.
If a ‘lad’ for ‘ mord’ fail, C.S. 57.
Of a Frenchman’s and an Englishman’s ‘ Jad,’ Wil. Il. 3.;
H. xviii.
Of a triple ‘lad’ in Mercian Law, H. txvi. 10.
Lesu (Leasow), p. 184,185.; Edg. S. 8.
Let, Ethb. 26.
Léwede (Leud — Laicus).
If a layman (leud) be slain in the act of stealing, Wih. 25.
layman not to be witness against a cleric, and vice versa,
H. v. 8.
If a layman slay a man, H. uxxitr. 5.
Led, p. 184, 185.; Ed. C. 31. 2. 3.
Laford, see Hlaford.
Lagemannus, Ed. C.38. See Lahman.
Lagu (Law).
That just laws be established, Eth. V. 1. VI.8.; C.S. 1.16.
If any one violate the law, Eth. V. 24. VI. 98.; p.457.2; H.
XII. 4.
If any one pervert the law, C.S. 84.; p. 457. .; H. xu. 4.
XXXIV. 8.


Lah-ceap, }
Lah-cép, Eth. IIT. 3. 8.


Lahman. See Lagemannus.
That twelve ‘lahmen’ are to explain the law to the English
and ‘Wealhs,’ O.D. 3.
If they wrongly explain, that they clear themselves as they best
can, Ib. 3.


Lah-slit, E. & G. 2. 3. 4.6. 7. 8.9.; Eth.V.31. VI. 51.; C.S. 15.
45. 47.49.50.; Wil. I. 39. 42.; H.xI.11. 12. xxXIV. 1. LXVI.5.


Laicus, see Léwede.


Land (Eard — Gafol-land).
If a ‘Wealh’ have a ‘hiwisc’ (hide) of Jand, In. 32.; Wg.7.
Of him who has twenty hides, In. 64.
_ ten hides, Ib. 65.
—_ three hides, Ib. 66.
If any one bargain for a yard of land, Ib. 67.
If any one drive a ‘ gesidcund’ man from the land, Ib. 6s.
Ifa ‘ceorl’ dwelling on ‘ gafol-land’ be slain, A. & G.2.
If a ‘ceorl’ have five hides, (a church, &c.), Wg. 9.; R. 2.
If his son and grandson have land or not, Wg. 11. 12.
Of bishops’ land belonging to a slain thief, Ath.V. 1.1.
If a man has defended land with the testimony of the shire,
C.S. 80.
Si quis voluerit conventionem terre tenendz adversus dominum
suum disracionare, Wil. I. 23.
If a lord take his land from his man, H. x11. 8.


Land-dgende, see Land-owner.


Land-ceap,
. HI. 3.
Land-cép, } per?


INDEX.


Landes-man, Eth. II. s.
Land-fyrd, C.S. 78.
Land-gafol, R. S. 432, 433.
Land-hlaford, }


Land-rica,
That no one barter without his testimony, Ath. I. 10.
He share of a man’s property who refuses to pay tithe, Edg. I.
; Eth. IX. 8.; C.E.8.; H. xr. 2

That the ‘land- hlaford” have half the property of a ‘ “tyht-bysig’
man, Edg. H. 2.; Edg.II.7.; (C.S.25.; Wil. I. 4

If a man do not declare a bargain, that the ‘and-riea’ seize
on half, Edg. S. 8.

That the ‘land-rica’ take half the ‘wed’ of a ‘tyht-bysig’ man
Eth. IIL. 3.

If the ‘land-rica’ attach ‘ borhless orf,’ Ib. 5.

If any one refuse his tithe, that the ‘land-rica’ or ‘hlaford’
go to him, Eth. IX. 8.; C. E.s8.; H. xn 2.

Of ‘heals-fang’ to be paid to him, C. S. 37.


Landless man, Ath. I. 8. ; H. vir. 4.


Landman.
That he conduct a traveller without guile to the ‘sted,’ O. D. 6.
If he be guilty of fraud, Ib. 6.


Land-owner (Land-agende), In. 64. 65. 66.
Land-rica, see Land-hlaford.

Land-riht, R.S. p. 432, 433,

Langeran, C. F. 32.


Lapis.
Of swearing per lapidem, H. v. 29.
Law, see Lagu.
Layman, see Léwede.
Lea, A&G. 1
Leasow (Lesu), p. 184, 185.; Edg. S. 8.
Leax (Salmon), In. 70.
Lece-feoh (Lichfe — Lecheof), Wil. I. 10.
Leger-stow, see Burying place.
Leger-wita,
Leier-wita,
Lent.
‘Burh-bryce’ in Lent to be doubly atoned for, Alf. 40.
If any one ‘alecge’ holy law (ryht) in Lent, Ib. 40.


That Lent be observed, C. E.16.; H. ux11. 1.
If any one publicly violate Lent, C.S. 48.


Leod, Ethb. 2.

Geleod, In. 11.

Leod-geld, Ethb.7. 21. 22, 23. 64,
Leodium, Eth. IV. 2
Leoht-gescot, see Light-scot.


} H. xxuiz.1. LXxx. 3.


INDEX.


Leornere (Scholar), R. 7.
Lepus, C. F, 27.
Lestagium, H. p. 502.
Lespegen, C.F. 2.
Leud, see Léwede.
Lewes, Ath. I. 14.
Lex Ripuaria, H. xc. 4.
Lex Saliga, H. yxxxvir. 10. LXxxIx. 1.
Liberalis, see Thane.
Lib-lac, Ath. 1. 6.; Edm. E.6. See Superstitions.
Lie, see Corpse.
Licetere, C.S. 7.
Lichfe (Lece-feoh), Wil. I. 10.
Lic-tiin, see Burying place.
Liesing, A.& G2
Lysing, }
Light-scot (Leoht-gescot).
If any one refuse to pay it, E.& G. 6.
That it be paid thrice a year, Eth. V.11. VI.19.; C. E.12,
That it be paid at Candlemas, or oftener, Eth. IX. 12.
Lignagium, H. xe. 2.
Lim-lepeo lama, E. & G.10.
Linen Cloth, Ed. C.L. 8.
Loaf, In.70. See Hlaf.
Loc-bore, Ethb. 73.
Gelonda, In.11.
London (Lunden-burh — Lunden-wic).
If a Kentish man buy a chattel in, H. & E. 16.
Moneyers in, Ath. I. 14.
¢ Frid’-laws, &c. framed at, Ath. V. procem.
Its franchises, Ed. C. L. 1-9.; H. p. 502, 503.
Of entertaining strangers in, Ed. C.L. 2.
Citizens not to plead without the walls, Ib. 3.
Decree passed at, Wil. III. 9.
Middlesex granted in farm to the citizens, and divers privileges,
H. p. 503.
Of ‘ miskenning’ in, H. p.503.; Ib. xxi1.
Lordless men, Ath.IJ. 2.; H. ivi.
Lorica.


That tenants ‘terras suas per loricas deservientes’ be free from
all imposts and work, H. 11. 3.


Loth, H. p. 502.
Lunden-burh, } see London.
Lunden-wic,

Lupinum caput, Ed. C.6.
Lupus, C.F. 97.

Lyswe, Ethb. 3. 73.


INDEX.


M.


Macecrarius (Fleismangere), Ed. C. 39.
Macholum, R. S. p.440, 441.

Meector, Ed. 4.

‘Meeden, see Maiden.


Mag-bot, } Ethb. 74.; In.74.76.; C. E.2.
Megs-bot,
Meg-burg, In. 74.; Alf. 42.
Meg-gieldan, In. 74.; H. xx. 6.
Megd (Kin).
If any ‘megd’ deny the king his due and protect a thief,
Ath. V. vir. 2.
If the ‘magé’ abandon a homicide, Edm. S.1.
If any of the ‘mzgé’ harbour a homicide, Ib. 1.
If a ‘meg’ take vengeance, Ib. 1.
Megé,
Meegden-man, } see Maiden.
Meg%-man,
Megs-bot, Ethb. 74.
Mere pening, Alf. 3.


Maeesse-preost, } a
Meesse-pegn, see Priest.


Maeesten, see Mast.

Metre, Ath.V. vi.

Me, see Rank.

Mad-méd, R. S, p. 440, 441.

Maiden (Maden —Megi — Megden-man— Megé-man).
If: a man lie with the king’s ‘ magden-man,’ Ethb. 10. 11.
Of ‘megé-bot,’ Ib. 74.
If a man buy a maiden, Ib.77.
If she bear a living child, Ib.78.
If she wish to go away with her children, Ib. 79.
If the ‘ceorl’ wish to have the children, Ib. 80.
If she have no children, Ib. 81.
If a man force a maiden, Ib. 82.; Alf. 26.; C.S. 53. 75.
If she become ‘gengang,’ Ethb. 84.


Maille, Wil. I. 3. 6.
Maiming, see Wounds.
Malam habens famam, see Tyht-bysig.
Man.
That no one harbour another’s man, Ed.10.; Ath.I. 22. II.4.
Ilf.4. IV.1.; Edm. C.3.; Wil. I. 30.
Of lordless men, Ath. I. 2.
That no one send his accused man away before he be clear of
every suit, Ib. 22.; C.S. 28.
That every man not criminal may follow whatever lord he may
choose, Ath. IV.1.
How a man is to be paid for, O. D.7.


INDEX.


Man-bit, In. 70. 76.; p.174, 175.; Edm. 8. 3.7.; C.E.2.; Ed. C.12.;
Wil. I. 7 ; HL LXIX, LXX. 24.14, LXXIV. 1. EXXV. 8.5, LXXVI-
S.7. LXXVIT. 8. LXXVIII. 5. LXXIX. 1. LXXX. 6. LXXXIT. 5.
LXXXVII. 4. 6.7. LXXXVIII. 20.
Manerium, H. xrx. xx. 1. XcI. 4.
Manipulus Augusti (Herfest-handful), R. S. p.438, 439.
Mansio (Bold-getel), Alf. 37.
Man-slaga, see Slaying.
Man-swara, see Perjury.
Manumission, Wil. III.15.; H. uxxvur 1.3.
Manung (Ménung — Folgod).
That in every reeve’s ‘marung’ there be nominated veracious
men as witnesses, Ath. IV. 1.
Case when the reeve shall be without his ‘ folgod,’ Ath. V. 11.
If a thief be in the reeve’s ‘manung,’ Ath. V. vitt. 2.
Manupastus, H. ixvi. 7.
Man-wyré, H. & E. 1. 2. 3. 4.
Man-peof, Alf. 9.
Mare, O. D. 7.
Maritacio, H. 1. 3. 4. Lxx. 22.
Maritagium, Ed. C.19.
Market, Wil. IIT. 11.
Marriage (Gifta — Gewifian).
If 2 man buy a wife, and the marriage do not take place, In. 31.
Of the ‘ wed,’ Edm. B.1. 2. 5.
That the priest should be present, Ib. 8.
Of the prohibited degrees, and that no one have more than
one wife, Ib. 9.; Eth. VI. 12.; C. E. 7.
That no one marry a nun or divorced woman, Eth. VI. 12.;
C. E. 7.
Forbidden on high festivals, &c., Eth. VI. 25.
If a married (wiffeest) man lie with his female slave, C.S. 55.
If a baron of the king wish to give his daughter, sister, &c. in
marriage, H. 1. 3
If a woman marry two brothers, H. Lxx, 17.
Martinmas, In. 4.; Wil. I. 28.
Mary, St., Alf. 43.; Eth. V.14. VI. 22.; C.E. 16.


Mass,


} (Missa).
Mass-day,
Of the celebration of mass-day, Alf. 43.; Edg.I.5.; C.E.14.


Missa contra paganos, when to be sung, Eth. VIIL 3.
Massere, see Merchant.
Mast (Mesten).

If a man find unallowed swine among his mast, In. 49.
Meadow.

If ‘ ceorls’ have a common meadow to fence, In. 42.


Meare, H.& E.15; Wih.8.; Ath. IV. Viv. vui.4. 5.


INDEX.


Measures, see Weights and Measures.
Méd-sceat, see Bribery.
Meld-feoh, In.17.


Mercator, } (Massere).
Merchant,
If a ‘massere’ has made three voyages, R. 6.
De merecatoribus qui falsum et laceum afferunt ad portum,
Eth. IV. 7.
Regulations relative to foreign merchants, Ed. C.L. 8. 9.
Mercia (Mercena Lagu).
The king’s rights (gerihta) in Mercia, C.S. 15.
A thane’s heriot in Mercia, Ib. 72.
If any one violate the king’s peace in Mercena lagu, Wil. I. 2.
If any one accused of theft in Mercena lagu flee from his surety,
Ib. 3.


A thane’s ‘ wér’ in Mercena lagu, Ib. 8.
a ‘ceorl’s,’ Ib. 8.
Of various forfeitures (forisfacture) in Mercena lagu, Ib. 16.
Of claiming stolen property in Mercena lagu, Ib. 21.
Of a triple ‘lad’ in Mercena lagu, H. rxvi. 10.
Merse, p. 184, 185.
Medel, H. & E. 8.
Michael, St., Eth. VIL. 2. 7.; Wil. I. 28.
Michni, C. F. 6.
Middlesex, H. p. 503.
Midwinter, see Christmas.
Minister episcopi.
That the ‘ minister episcopi’ with his clergy sit in court, Ed. C.
9.
Miscravatio, H. xxt1.
Misericordia Regis, Ed. C.12. 18.; H. x1it. 1-12. LXXxIx. 2. LXXX. 1.
Miskenning, H. p.503.; Ib. xxur.
Missa, see Mass.
Molossus (Heador-hund), R.S. p. 434, 435.
Monasterium, see Mynster.


Money, (Mynet — Mynetere — Monetagium — Monetarius —
Moneyers, Falsarii).
That there be one money over all the realm, Ath. I.14.; Edg. II.
3.; Eth. VI.32.; C.S. 8.
That no moneyer coin, except in port, Ath. I. 14.
Places where moneyers are established, Ib. 14.
If any one accuse a moneyer, and he be guilty, Ib.14.; Eth. III.
8. IV.5.; H. xu. 3.
That no one except the king have a moneyer, Eth. III. 8.
That moneyers who work in a wood be punishable with death,
Ib. 16. IV. 5.
No difference between debasers of money and merchants who sell
good money to them for debasement, Eth. IV. 5.
Ne quis pecuniam puram sonet, Ib. 6.


INDEX.


Money, &c. — continued.

Of merchants who bring ‘ falsum et laccum ad portum,’ Eth. IV.
7.

If any one accuse the reeve of permitting the coining or in-
troduction of base money, Ib. 7.; C.S. 8.

Of the number of moneyers in the ports, Eth. IV. 9.

That every one deliberate concerning ‘feos-bot,’ Eth. V. 26.
VI. 31. 32.; C.S. 8,

If any one make base money, C.S. 8.

Monetagium quod non fuit temp. Ed. R. prohibitum, H. 1. 5.

If any one be taken with base money, Ib. 5.

‘ Falsaria monete regis,’ one of the king’s rights (jura),


+X, 1.
In a charge of falsaria, that every one answer immediately,
H. xivit. 1.


Monk (Munuc).

If any one entrust property (feoh) to another man’s monk,
Alf. 20. H. xxi. 3. XLV. 2.

That monks live according to their rule, Eth. V. 4. VI. 2. IX. 31.;
C. E.6.

If a monk be out of mynster, and observe no rule, Eth. V. 5. 6.
VI. 3.

That a monk preserve his chastity, and monkish habit, and
serve his lord, Eth. VI. 3.

That every monk say thirty psalters for king and people
Eth. VIII. 3. ,

That no mynster monk either ask or give ‘fehd-bot,’ Eth. IX.
25.; C.E.5.

If a monk be an apostate, Eth. IX. 41.

If any one slay a monk, H. xviii. 7.

If a monk slay any one, H. Lxx1ut. 2.


Mon-sliht, see Slaying.

Ménung, see Manung.

Moon, C.S. 5. See Superstitions.

Morgen-gifu, Ethb. 81.; C.S.74.; H. xt. 13, Uxx. 22.


Mord,
Mord-ded,
Moré-sliht,
Mord-weorc,
Mord-wyrhta,
If ‘mord-wyrhtas’ be anywhere found, E.& G.11.; E th. VI.7.
C.S8. 4.
If any one be killed through ‘mordded,’ Ath. I. 6.
Of ‘ moré-slihtas,’ Ath. IV. 6.
That ‘mord-weore’ be carefully abstained from, Eth. V. 25.
VI. 28.; C.S. 5.
If ‘mord-wyrhtas’ dwell in the king’s neighbourhood, Eth. VI.
36.
If a person be slain in open ‘moré,’ C.S. 57.
That ‘bere mord’ is ‘ botless,’ Ib. 65.; H. xit.1.


ao. an


INDEX.


Gemot (Fole-gemdt — Scir-gemidt — Hundred-gemét — Burg-gemot

— Wardemotum — Comitatus — Curia).

Burg, hundred, and shire-‘ mét,’ when to be held, Ed.11.; Edg. H.
1.; Edg. IL. 5.; C.S.18.; H. vir. 4. vir. 1. 11. 2.

Of those who avoid the ‘gemot,’ Ath. I.20.; Edg. II. 7.; C.S.
25.; Wil. III. 14.; H. xxix. 3. LI. 1. LIL 1.

That the bishop and ‘ ealdorman’ attend the ‘gemdt,’ Edg. II. 5. ;
C.S.18.; H. vir. 2. xxxr. 3.

That a ‘gemdt’ be held in every wapentake, Eth. III. 3.

That the ‘gemét’ be not held on a Sunday, &c., Eth.V. 13,
VI. 29. 44. IX. 71.; C. BE. 15.

That the hundred-‘ gemot’ be applied to before having recourse
to the king, C.S. 17.

Of appeal from the hundred to the shire-‘gemdt,’ in case of
‘nam,’ Ib. 19.

That every man have ‘ grid’ to and from the ‘gemot,’ Ib. 83.

That the minister episcopi with his clergy sit in court, Ed. C. 9.

That there be no ‘ miskenninga’ in the folkmote, H. p. 503.

Of the wardmote, Ib.

What persons are to attend the placita comitatuum, H. vii. 2.
XXXI. 3.

Folkmote, description of, p. 613. 7.?.


Gemot-andeg, Ed. 11.; H. ir. 2.
Motbel, p.613. 7.3.

Mother Church (Heafod-ciric), C. E. 2.
Muchehunt, C. F. 11.

Moaffla, H. vxx. 4.


Mund,
Mund-bryce, \
Mund-byrd,
Of the king’s ‘mund,’ Ethb. 8.; Wih. 2.; Alf. 5.; p- 174, 175.3
Edm. S.7.; Eth. VI. 34, VII. 6. 8.
a ‘ceorl’s,’ Ethb. 15.
Of the ‘mund’ of widows, Ethb. 75. 76.
That his ‘mund-byrd’ be paid to the owner of a ‘flet,’ where
blood has been shed, H.& E. 14.
The church’s ‘ mund-byrd,’ Wih. 2.; Eth. VII. 8.
That the manumitter have the ‘mund’ of the manumitted,
Wih. 8.
If any one commit the king’s, archbishop’s, ‘ eSeling’s,’ &c.
‘mund-bryce, Alf.3.; Eth. VII. 11.
If a thief be slain, the ‘mund-byrd’ of him to be paid with
whom he sought refuge, Ath. IV. 4.
If any one commit ‘mund-bryce,’ Edm. 8S. 6.; H. xxxvi.
If any one injure a ‘fyrd-scip,’ that he pay ‘mund-bryce’ to
the king, Eth.VI. 24,
Of the king’s and archbishop’s ‘mund-bryce’ in Kent and
Anglian law, Eth. VII. 6.; C. E. 3.
If any one injure any living person with regard to his ¢ mund-
byrd,’ Eth. VII. 14.
That the ‘ grid-bryce’ of a mother church is according to the
king’s ‘mund,’ Eth. IX. 3. 5.; C. E.3.


INDEX.


Mund, &c. — continued.
If any one commit ‘cyrie-bryce,’ by homicide in a church, that
‘bot’ be made according to the king’s ‘mund-bryce,’ Eth. IX.
1-3.; C.E. 2 3.
‘Mund-bryce’ one of the king’s dues in Wessex, C.S. 12.
That he who binds or beats a priest, make ‘bot’ to the king or
‘hlaford’ in the full ‘mund-bryce,’ Ib. 42.; H. uxv. 3.


Munuc, see Monk.


Murdrum. See also Slaying.

If any one be found murdered, Ed. C. 15.

If a murderer cannot be found within a year, Ib. 15.

Murdra inventa tempore Cnuti, Ib. 16.

If the king grant life or limbs to a murderer, Ib. 18.

If a Frenchman challenge an Englishman on account of mur-
drum, Wil. ITI. 12.

Murdra forgiven, H. 1.1.

Citizens of London quieti de murdre, H. p. 502.

Murdrum one of the king’s rights (jura), H. x. 1.

To be compensated with 46 marks to the king and dominus,
H. xu. 2.

In a charge of murdrum, that every one answer directly,
H. xivi. 1, XLVvIt.

Forfeiture of ‘wér’ through murdrum, H. Lxxxvit. 6.

Of murdrum in the case of a Frenchman or Norman, H. xct. 1.

If murdrum be discovered in a house, court, &c., Ib. 2. 3.

in the open fields, Ib. 4.

Various enactments concerning, and definition of murdrum,

H. xcrr, 1-19.


Mynecene, see Nun.
Mynet,
Mynetere,


Mynster (Monasterium).
Of tithes to the mother church (eald mynster), Edg. J. 1. ;
Eth. VIII. 4.
If any one fight in a mynster, In. 6.; Eth.VII. 10.
Of ‘ mynster-clensung,’ Eth. IX. 3.
Of a mynster’s ‘ grid-bryce,’ C.E. 3.
Mynster-frid, see Frid.
Mynster-ham, Alf. 2.


Mynstres Aldor, Wih. 17.


} see Money and Moneyers.


N.


Naif (Nativus).
Naifs not to leave their land, Wil. I. 30.
Nam, 7 van
Nainiunia f (Distress).
That no man levy ‘nam’ before he has thrice demanded his
right, C.S.19.; Wil. I. 44.
That ‘nam’ be levied if any one fail to attend the hundred,
H. xx1x. 2.


INDEX.


Nam, &c. — continued.


That no one levy ‘nam’ without judgment or permission, H. 11. 3.
If the vicecomes levy ‘nam’ unjustly, Ib. 4.

That no one dare excutere namium, Ib. 5. 7.

Excutere namium, definition of, Ib. 8.


Nativus, see Naif.
Naufragium, see Shipwreck.
Nead-gafol, Edg.S. procem.
Neat, see Ox.


Geneat,
Geneat-man, f
If the ‘ wér’ of the king’s ‘ geneat’ be 1,200 shillings, In. 19.
If a man’s ‘ geneat’ steal, Ib. 22.
If a ‘geneat-man’ neglect his lord’s ‘ gafol,’ Edg. S. 1.
A ‘geneat’s’ right, R.S. p. 432, 433.
Geneat-land, Edg. I. 1.


Neighbours.
If they quarrel, H. ivir. 1-3.


Nemoris Cesio, } ae Woda:
Nemus inoperatum,


Nied-name, see Rape.

Nivella, Eth. IV. 2.

Noffus, H. pxxxu. 5.

Norman, see Frenchman.

Nord-engla Lagu, Wg. 1-5.; Eth. VII. 13,


Nun (Nunne — Mynecene).

If any one carry off a nun, and she have a child, Alf. 8.

If any one lie with a nun, Ib. 8.; Edm. E.4.; Eth. VI. 39.;
H. “xxi. 6.

If any one seize a nun to lie with her, Alf.18.

That nuns and mynchens turn to right, and live according to
their rule, Eth.V. 4. Vl. 2.; C.E.6.

That no one marry anun, Eth.VI.12.; C. E. 7.

Of property committed to a nun, H. xxiii. 3. xv. 2.


Nuncius.

If any one going on the king’s errand be slain, H. rxx1x. 2.
Nyd-gafol, Edg. S. 1.
Ny at see Rape.
Nyd-neme,
Nyten (Beast).


Of the value of various beasts, O. D.7.
If a beast stake itself on a hedge, H. xc. 4. 5.


INDEX.


O.


Oath (Ad — Cyning-a3 — Cyre-a5 — Fore-46 —Hyld-45 — Rim-45 —
Unceases 45 — Unfeehte 45 —Unfored 45 — Ungecéren 45 —
Antejuramentum — Juramentum (plenum) planum).

If a man belie a lawful oath, Alf. 1.

Of a ‘ fore’-oath to be taken in four (or twelve) churches, Ib. 38.

Of an ‘unfeh%de’ oath, In. 28.

*unceases’ oath, Ib. 35.
a ‘cyning ’-oath, Ib. 54.

If a man, before oath, confess ¢ wer-tyhtle,’ which he had pre-
viously denied, Ib. 71.

Of an ‘ungecdren’ oath, Ed. 1.

If an oath fail, or be outproved, Ib.3.; Eth. I. 1.

Oaths forbidden on fasts and festivals, E.& G.9.; Eth. V.18.
VI. 25.; C.E.17.; H. uxt.

Of a ‘hyld’-oath, O.1.

Various forms of oaths, Ib. 2-11.

A mass-priest’s oath equal to a thane’s, Ib. 12.; H. uxiv. 2. 3.

A ‘twelf-hinde’ man’s, and ‘ceorl’s’ oath, O. 13.; H. uxiv. 2.

A ‘rim-48,’ Ath. I. 9.

Of a ‘cyre’-oath, Ib. 9.; Eth. IV. 7.; O. D. 6.

In case of ordeal, that every one begin his accusation with a
‘fore’-oath, Ath. I. 23.

Of a ‘ fore’-oath in tracing cattle, &c., Ath. IV.2.; O.D.6.

That for incendiaries the oath be increased, Ath. IV. 6.

Of a pound worth oath, Eth.I.1.; C.S. 30.; H. rxv.3.

If a lord declare that his man’s oath has never failed, Eth. I. 1.;
C.S. 30.31.; H. vxiv.9. LXvi1.

lf a lord has to swear, Eth. I. 1.; H. xx1. 6.

If the compurgators refuse to swear, Eth. I. 1.; C.S. 30.

That the deepest oath be taken by him, who is accused of plot-
ting against the king’s life, Eth. VI. 37.

That every one above twelve years make oath, that he will neither
be a thief, nor cognizant of thieves, C.S. 21.

Of an ‘ungetrywe’ man’s oath, Ib. 22.

That ‘untrywe men choose a simple (anfeald) oath in three
hundreds, and of a triple oath, Ib. 22.

Of a simple and triple ‘fore’-oath, Ib. 22.; Wil. I. 15.

If a thane have (or have not) a true man to make ‘ fore’-oath
for him, C.S. 22.; C.F. 12.

That no ‘fore’-oath ever be forgiven, C.S. 22.; C.F.12.; H.
LXIV. 9.

Of fourteen true men’s oath in a charge of theft, Wil. I. 14.

Of an ‘unfored’ oath (juramentum planum (plenum) vel non
observatum), Wil. II.3.; H. uxtv. 1. 2.

Of a sacramentum non fractum, Wil. III. 12.

Various concerning oaths, H. v. 28-35. LxIV. 1.2.7.

Of swearing per lapidem, H. v. 29.

Of a Frenchman’s and strangers’ oaths, H. xviIl. LXIv. 3.

Of a frangens juramentum, H. xvii. LXxIv. 1.

Form of oath in Hampshire, H. uxiv. 1.

Of cases requiring a Juramentum fractum, Ib. 2. 4.6.

Of an ante-juramentum, in a charge of theft, &c., H. uxvi. 8.


INDEX.


Obedienciarius, H. xxtrt. 4.
Occidendorum Locus (Qual-stow), H. x. 2.
Oferfyile, see Excess.


Oferhyrnes, Ed.1.2.4.5.10.; Ath. I. 20, 22.96. IV.1. V. vit. vist
4.; Edg.II.3.; Eth. IV.6.; C.S.29.; Wil. I. 16, 39. 42, 47.
See Overseunessa.


Oferstélan (Conviction), C. S. 37. 38.
Ofgangfordell, C.F. 11.
Ofslean, see Slaying.


Onspeca, r
Onsprecan, J Ed. 1.


Onstal, In. 46.


Ordalii, manifestly an error for ‘Ordarii’ (Hordarius, A.S. Hordere),
Edm. C. 5.


Ordeal.

Perjurors worthy of, Ed. 5.

Forbidden on festivals and fasts, E.& G.9.; Eth.V.18. VI. 95.;
C.E.17.; H. uxit, 1.

Of threefold ordeal, Ath.I. 4. 5.6.; Eth.I.1. III. 7.8. V. 29.
VI. 37.; C.S8. 30. 58.

Of single ordeal, Ath. I.7.; Eth.I.1.; C.S. 30.

That one charged with making base money go to the hot iron,
Ath. I.14.; Eth. III. s. IV. 5.

If a ‘peow’ be foul at the ordeal, Ath.I.19.; Eth.I.2.; C.S.32.

If any one compound for an ordeal, Ath. I. 21.

If any one give ‘wed’ for an ordeal, and process of, Ib. 23.


V.7.

If a thief be foul at the ordeal, Ath. III.6.; Eth.I.1. III.7.

That every accuser have the choice of water or iron ordeal,
Ath. 1V.6.; Eth. IIL. 6.

That the ordeal be increased in the case of incendiaries and
‘mord’-slayers, Ath. 1V. 6.

Of the weight of the iron, Ib.6.; Edg. H.9.; H. uxvit.1.

‘That he who has often been guilty of theft go to the ordeal,
Ath. V. 1.4.

That every ‘ tyht-bysig’ man go to the threefold ordeal, Eth.I.1.
IIL.3.; C.8.30.; H. vxv.3. Lxvil. 1.

If a ‘tyht-bysig’ man decline the ordeal, Eth. I.1. III. 4.; C.S.
30.

Of the ordeal in case a lord wish to clear his man, Eth. I. 1.
III. 3.; C.S. 30.

If the proprietor of stolen property will not attend the ordeal,
Eth. III. 4.

That every ordeal be in the king’s burg, Ib. 6.

That a port-reeve, who is privy to the introduction of base money,
clear himself by ordeal, Eth. IV- 7.

That between English and ‘ Wealth’ there is no ‘Jad’ but ordeal,

-D. 2.

If cattle be claimed beyond the stream, it must be by ordeal, Ib. 8.

That * ungetrywe,’ &c. men go to the ordeal, C.S. 22. 30.

That a friendless man go to prison until he go to the ordeal,
Ib. 35.; C. 3.13.3; H. uxv.s.


INDEX.


Ordeal -~ continued.
Who are to attend an ordeal, Ed. C. 9.
Of the ordeal in a charge of theft, Wil. I. 14.
Of the ordeal between French and English, Wil. II. 2. 3. HI. 12.
Of ordeal in the case of a Frenchman being slain, H. Lxxv. 6.
Ordinis Emendatio, see Had-bat.
Orf, see Cattle.
Orgylde, see /Egylde.
Orige, In. 28.
Orneste, see Fighting.
Orwige (sine wita).
That a man may fight for his lord, and vice versa, ‘ orwige,’
Alf. 42.; H. uxxxi1. 3.4. LXxxvIII. 10.
That a man may fight ‘ orwige,’ if he find another with his wife,
daughter, &c., Alf.42,; H. uxxxtr. 8
Ostensio, Eth. IV. 2.
Ouse (Use), A.& G.1.
Outlaw (Utlah — Frendlesman — Utlagaria).
That he who strikes another dead be an outlaw, E.& G. 6.
If any one refuse divine dues, and slay any one, that he be an
outlaw, Ib.6.; C.S.49.; H. x1.11. xu. 11.
Case when a thief or ‘hyred-man’ shall be an outlaw, Eth. I.1.;
C.S. 30. 31.
That the country that gives ‘ frid’ to enemies be ‘utlah,’ Eth.II.1.
If a Dane destroy our property, that he be ‘utlah,’ Ib. 7.
If any one detain God’s ‘utlah,’ Eth. IX. 42.
That outlaws depart the country, C. S. 4.
If any one do a deed of outlawry, Ib. 13.; H. x11. 1.
If any one hold and harbour an outlaw, C.S. 15. 67.; H. x.1.
XI. 14, XIIE. 10.
Outlaw equivalent to ‘frendlesman,’ C. F. 24.
If any one slay a minister of the altar, that he be an outlaw,
C.S. 39.; H. rxvi.1.
If a minister of the altar commit homicide, that he be an
outlaw, C.S. 41.; H. rxvr1.
Outlawry in case of church-breach, Ed. C. 6.
Of an Englishman’s and a Frenchman’s ‘lad’ in cases of out-
lawry, Wil. II. 3.
One of the king’s rights (jura), H. x.1.
In a case of outlawry, that no one seek counsel, but answer
directly, H. xivu.


Overseunessa. See also Oferhyrnes.

The king’s, H. xxxiv.3. xxxv.1. XLVIM- 1. LIM. 1. LXXXVII. 5.

The queen’s (in Wessex), H. xxxv. 1.

A bishop’s, count’s, thane’s, baron’s, &e., H. xxxv. 1. LXXxI. 3.
LXXXVII. 5.

Of those who have no ‘nominatam overseunessam,’ or lose it,
H. xxxvi. 1.

‘Overseunes’ in case of ‘scyldwita,’ H. xxxvi1i.

That every dominus should have the ‘overseunes’ of his man,
H. xu. 1.


INDEX.


Overseunessa — continued.

If any one do not answer directly to a capital charge, that he
pay the king’s ‘overseunes,’ H. xiviil.1.

If any one namium excusserit, it is ‘overseunes,’ H. 1.7.

If any one refuse to give vadium recti, it is ‘overseunes,’ H. vit. 1.

If any one fail to attend the comitatus, the king’s ‘ overseunes’ in
Wessex is twenty marks, H. rrr. 1.

‘Overseunes’ if any one without alarm let a thief escape,
H. Lv. 2.

‘ Overseunes’ incurred in compotations, gilds, &c., H. Lxxx1. 2.

Ox (Neat -- Hryser — Tor— Taurus).

If a neat wound a man, Alf. 24.

To be given for a child’s ‘foster,’ In. 38. 70.

If an ox (hryéer) break hedges, Ib. 42.

Value (angylde) of an ox’s horn, Ib. 58.

Value anevada} of its eye and tail, Ib. 59.

Six men to be got, as witnesses, for the value of one ox, Ed. [.

Its ‘ceap-gild,’ Ath.V. 111. v1. 2.; O.D.7.

If any one neglect the tracing, that he is liable in the value of
an ox, or xxx.d., Ath.V. vir. 5.

« Angylde’ of its bell, Edg. H. 8.

That an ox be not slain without witness, and that the hyde and
head be kept, Eth. III. 9.

If the prapositus rescue an ox, Wil. I. 5.

That a bull may be given in payment of the ‘ wér,’ Ib. 9.

If any one fail to attend when summoned, to pay an ox, Wil. III.14,


Oxan-hyrde, R.S. p. 438, 439 bis.


P.


Pannage, } see /Efesn.
Pasnagium,


Pannus grisengus, Eth. IV. 2.
Pannus de seia, lana, &c., Ed. C. L. 8.
Pannus madidus, Ed. C.L. 8.
Pannus usatus, Ed. C. 38.
Parricide, H. Lxv1ll.9. LXxxIx. 1.
Participans, H. xx.1.
Participatio, H. Lxxxv. 1.
Partnership, H. rv. 1. 2.
Passagium, H. p. 502.
Pater noster, C. E. 22.
Pax,
Pax Regis, } see Frid. and Grié.
Pecunia Eleemosyne.
To be rendered at Michaelmas, Eth.VIII. 7.
Pecura, H. xvit.
Pecus, sce Cattle.


INDEX.


Pentecost, Edg.I.3.; Eth.V.11. VI.17. IX.9.; C.E. 8.
Pepper, Eth. 1V. 2.; Ed. C.L. 8.


Perjury and Perjurors (Man-swara— Forswerian). See Witness.
If any one call another a perjuror in another's ‘flet,’ H. & E. 11.
That perjurors be never oath-worthy, Ed.3.; Ath. I. 25.
Perjurors worthy of ordeal, Ed. 3.
If perjurors be discovered, Ib.3.; E.& G.11.; Eth.VI. 7.
If an ecclesiastic forswear himself, E.&G.3.; Eth. IX. 27.;
C.E. 5.
That a perjuror lie not in a consecrated burying place, Ath. I. 25.
If any one commit perjury, Edm. E.6.; C.S. 36. 37.
That perjury be carefully abstained from, Eth.V. 25. VI. 28.
Jf perjurors live in the king’s neighbourhood, Eth.VI. 36.
If any one commit perjury super sancta, C.S. 36.; H. x1. 6.
That perjurors submit and make ‘bét,’ or leave the country,
C.S. 36.
If perjurors remain in the country, Ed.C. 18.
If a Frenchman challenge an Englishman, on account of perjury,
Wil. III. 12.
Peter Pence, see Rém-feoh.
Peter’s, St., day, Edg. I. 4.
Peter, St.. nd St. Paul, Alf. 43.
Philip, St., and St. James, Eth.V.14. VI. 22.; C. E.16.
Pincerna, Ed. C. 21.
Pistor, Ed. C. 21.
Placitum. See also Suit.
That no one holding a fief of the church plead in any other
court, Ed. C. 4.
If any one having ‘tol,’ ‘team,’ &c. be impleaded in the county,
Wil. I. 2.
Of holding the placita comitatuum, H. vir.1.
What persons are to attend the placita comitatuum, H. vit. 2.
XXXL 3.
Of ecclesiastical pleas belonging to the king, H. x1.1.
Of placita admitting, or not admitting compensation, H. x11.
Of the placita forestarum, H. xv1.
Various rules respecting pleas, H. xxv. XXVI. XXXI.1. XXXIV. 8.
XLI.2. XLIII1. XLVI.1-3. XLVIL. 1-7. LIL. 1-5. LIX. LX. 1-3.
LXI. 1-21.
Of placitum ex abundanti, H. xxix. 4.
If a lord implead his man, H. xxx111. 3. XLVI. 1. LILI. 4. LIX. 11.
If any one be impleaded by his lord, H. xxxu. 3. XLVI. 1.
by the king, H. x.ii.1. 11.1.
De nominatis et innominatis placitis, H. xiv1. 1.
If a whole county, or seven hundreds be impleaded, H. xvi. 2.
If any one impleaded by the lord or a justiciary fail to attend,
H. 1


If the day of pleading be countermanded, H. irx.1.2. 4.7. 8.11.
Every plea may be deferred except capital ones, Ib. 3.

If any one illegally refuse to countermand a plea, Ib. 7.

Of the king’s pleas, Ib. 19.

Si quis ex proclamatione placitum suscipiat, &c., Ib, 27.

If any one desire to countermand a plea, H. Lx. 1.


INDEX.


Placitum — continued.
Causes of essoign, H. ux1.7.
Every justice may respectare placitum, Ib. 8.
Every lord may induciare placitum hominum suorum, Ib. 9.
No one may perdere vel forisfacere placitum domini sui, Ib.
12, 13,
If any one be impleaded without his lord, Ib. 16.17.
If any one be impleaded by the vicecomes or justiciary, H. Lxv1.9.


Plegium, see Security.

Ploh, p. 184, 185.

Plot, p. 184, 185.

Plough (Syhl — Caruca).
That two men well mounted be to every plough of land, Ath.I. 16.
That tithes be rendered as the plough traverses the tenth field,


Edg.I.1.; Eth.VIII. 4. [X.7.; C.E. 8.
That a penny be rendered for every caruca, Eth.VIII. 1.


Plough-alms (Sulh-elmessan).
If any one refuse to pay them, E. & G. 6.
That they are to be rendered, Ath. J. procem.; Edm. E. 2.
That they be paid fifteen days after Easter, Edg.1.2.; Eth.V.11.
VI.16. [X.12.; C.E. 8,


Poison, Wil. I. 36.; H. uxxr. 1.
Pondus (Pound), Eth. IV. 9.
Ponteienses, Eth. IV. 2.


Poor (Dearfan).
That all God’s servants comfort and feed the poor, Eth.VI. 46.
That they have a share of god-‘ bots,’ Ib. 51.
That a third of the tithe go to the poor, Eth. IX. 6.
That the king is to them pro cognato et advocato, H. x.3.


Porcarius (In-swan), R.S. p.434, 435.


Port.
That no one buy out of port, Ed.1. Ath. I. 12.13, III. 2.;
Wil. OI. 10.
That no one coin out of port, Ath.J.14.
That a man may buy out of port with full witness, Ath. III. 2.
V.x.


Port-geréfa. See also Reeve.
That no one buy without his testimony, Ed.1.; Ath. I. 12.;
Edm. C. 5.
If any one will clear a thief, that he give c. as ‘wed’ to the
portreeve, Eth. III. 7.
If he charge any one with refusing toll, Eth. IV. 3.
If he be privy to the introduction of false coin, Ib. 7.


Potatio, see Gebeorscipe.

Potens (Strecman), C.S. 20.; H. uxxviir 2.
Pound (Pondus), Eth. IV. 9.

Prefectus, H. vir. 2.

Prelatus Hundredi, H. xx. 1.


INDEX.


Prepositus (Provost).
That a ‘hlaford’ have a prepositus, Ath. II. 7.
That no one buy without his testimony, Edm. C. 5.
If he be negligent, Ib. 7.
If he commit robaria, Eth. VIII. 6.
If the prepositus be convicted of wrong, Wil. I. 2.
If the prepositus of the hundred rescue cattle, Ib. 5.
Prepositi to attend the placita comitatuum, H. vit. 2.
Si prepositus regius, in terra socnam habentium, forisfacturam
prior sciat, H. xxrv.
If he be indebted to his lord, H. xtut.1.
If any one complain of the prepositus, H. ivi. 3.
If any prepositus countermand his lord’s placitum, H. Lx1. 10.


Presumptio Terre vel Pecunie Regis.
One of the king’s rights, H. x. 1.


Prevaricatio Legis regiz.
One of the king’s rights, H. x. 1.


Prevaricator, H. xxxrv. 8.
Pretium Nativitatis, see Wér.


Priest (Preost — Gehadod-man— Bescéren-man— Ciric-pegn —Weo-
fod-pegn — Messe-preost — Maesse-pegn — Godes-peow —
Halige-hadas — Sacerd — Canon — Clericus).

His ‘feoh,’ Ethb. 1.

If he allow fornication, or neglect to baptize, Wih.6.; E. & G.3.

If a ‘bescéren’ man wander about, Wih. 7.

How a priest, deacon, &c. is to clear himself, Ib. 18. 19.

If a priest slay a man, Alf. 21.; Eth. IX. 26.; C.S.41.; H.
LXVI. 2. LXVIII. 8. LXXIII. 2.3.4.

If any one shave a ‘ceorl’ like a priest, Alf. 35.

If any one disturb the folkmote before the king’s priest, Ib. 38.

That God’s servants observe their rule, In.1.; Eth. V.4. VI. 2.;
C.E. 6.

Tf a priest steal, or fight, or forswear, or fornicate, E. & G. 3.;
Eth. 1X. 27.; C. E. 5.; H. v.16.

If a mass-priest misdirect (miswyssige) the people about a fes-
tival or fast, E.& G.3.

If at proper time he do not fetch chrism, or refuse to baptize,
Ib. 3


If he foredo himself with deadly sin, Ib.4.; C.S. 43.
If any one injure an ecclesiastic, E.& G.12.; R.8.; Eth. IX. 33. ;
.S.40.; H. x.3, LXVI. 3,

A mass-priest’s oath equal to a thane’s, O.12.; H. Lxiv. 2.3.

That a mass-priest be worthy of thane-right and ‘ wér,’ O. 12.;
Eth.V.9. VI. 5. IX. 98.; C.E.6.; H. xvii. 3.

A mass-‘ pegn’s’ ‘ wer-gild’ by the North people’s law, Wg. 5.

That no one barter without the mass-priest’s testimony, Ath. I.
10.; Edm. C. 5.

That ecclesiastics preserve their chastity, Edm. E.1.; Edg. S, 1.;
Eth.V. 4.6.9. VI. 41.

That a mass-priest should be at all weddings, Edm. B. 8.

That the mass-priest go to him who refuses to pay tithe, Edg. I.
3.; Eth. IX. 8.; C. E.8.; H. x1. 2.

That a canon keep to his minster where his benefice (Gr) is,
Eth.V.7. VI. 4.


INDEX.


Priest — continued.


That a mass-priest have no criminal intercourse with woman, or
engage in warfare, but act so as to be worthy of thane-right,
Eth.V.9. VI. 5. IX.30.; C.E.6.

If any one unlawfully expel a priest from his church, Eth.V. 10.
VI.15.

That some priests have two or more wives, Eth.VI. 5.

That all should defend and revere God’s servants, Ib. 45.

That the ‘healice hadas’ might formerly give ‘grid,’ Eth.VII. 3.

That every priest go in procession with his congregation, and
celebrate thirty masses for king and people three days before
the feast of St. Michael, Eth. VIII. 2,

That one third of the tithe belongs to the priest, Eth. IX. 6.

ee a minister of the altar be esteemed according to his rank,

b. 18.

If any one accuse a mass-priest or deacon, living according to
rule, Ib. 19.; C. E. 5.; H. Lxtv. 8.

If any one accuse a secular (folcisc) priest, Eth. IX. 21.; C.E.
5.; H. vxrv. 8.

If any one accuse a friendless minister of the altar, who has no
consacramentals (48-fultum), Eth. IX. 22.; C.E. 5.

If any one accuse an ecclesiastic of ‘fehd,’ &c., Eth. IX. 23. 24.;
C.E. 5.

If a priest be cognizant of thieves, Eth. IX. 27.; C. E. 5.

If a minister of the altar misconduct himself, Eth. IX. 29,

If any one bind or beat an ecclesiastic, Ib. 33.; C.S.42.;
H. Lxv1. 8.

If a mass-priest become an apostate (wipersaca), Eth. IX. 41.

If any one slay (afylle) a minister of the altar, C.S.s9.; H. x1.
8. LXVI.1. LXVIIL, 5.7. LXXII. 6,

If a priest wish to clear himself of homicide, C.S. 41.

If a priest refuse shrift, C.S.44.; H. x1.9.

A is not to be witness against a layman, and vice versa,

- V.8

Number of witnesses requisite for the condemnation of a priest,
Tb, 11.

If a priest be charged with fornication, Ib. 16.

If any one accuse a priest before-admonition, Ib. 22.

If a priest have a wife, and be addicted to secular affairs,
H., uvii.9.

Exemption of priests from secular jurisdiction, Ib. 9.

If a priest be accused by a bishop or archdeacon, H. uxv. 8.

If a priest be slain, that he be paid for according to his birth,
H. LXxviil. 3.

That no one born in servitude be admitted to holy orders
before manumission, Ib. 4.

If a priest wound a man, H. Lxxii. 2.

Principal (Gewyrhta), O.D.6.
Prison (Carcern — Hengen — Captio).

If any one imprison an unoffending ‘ceorl,’ Alf. 35.

Of putting a person of fifteen years into prison, Ath. V. x1f.

That a condemned man who has sought a sanctuary suffer
‘hengen-witnung,’ Eth.VII. 16.

That a friendless man who has no ‘borh’ go to prison (hengen),
C.8.35.; C.F. 13.; H. rxv. 5.


INDEX.


Proditio Domini, see Hlaford-searu.


Property (Yrfe — Aveir — Averium).

If any one entrust property to another’s monk, Alf. 20.;
H. xxii. 3. XLV. 2.

How property is to be attached, In. 25. 47. 53.75.; Ath I. 9, 24.;
Eth. II. 8.; O. D.8,

Of bartering property, Ath. I. 10,

How it is to be traced, Ath. IV. 2.

That compensation be made for stolen property, Ath. V. 11.

That the ‘ gegildan’ will not indemnify for unguarded property,
Ath.V. viii. 6.

Distribution of property if a father die intestate, C.S.71.;
Wil. I. 34.

If the prepositus rescue property, Wil. I. 5.

If any one find property (aueir), that he publicly announce it,
Ib. 6.

If any one claim the same, Ib. 6.

If any one claim live property, Ib. 21.

If two or more inherit property and one lose it in a suit, Ib. 38.


Provost, see Prapositus.


Psalm.
That a fifty (quinquagenarium) be sung every Friday for the
king, Ath. 1V. 3.
That a fifty be sung for a deceased gild-brother, Ath.V. vii. 6.


Pullus, H. 1xx. 4.
Pulsator, H. xxvr.
Pund-breche (Infractura parci), H. xxxvit. xL.


Punishments.

Scourging, Wih. 22. 23.; Alf. 35.; In. 5.48. 54.; Ath.I.19. III.
6.; Edm.C.4.; H. xiv. 3.

Cutting off the hand, Alf.6.; In. 18.37.; Ath.I.14.; Eth. IV. 5.
VII.13.; C.S. 8.30. 36.49.; C.F.15.; Wil. T1.17,; H. x1. 6
XII. 3.

Castration, Alf. 25.; Wil. III. 17.

Cutting out the tongue, Alf. s2.; Edg.II.4.; C.S.16.; H.
XXXIV.7. LIX. 13.

Cutting off the feet, In. 18.37.; C.S.30.; Wil. III.17.

Hanging, In. 24.; Ath. V. v1.3.; Edm. C. 4.; Wil. III.17.; H.
XII. 2

Casting from a height, Ath. III. 6,

Drowning, Ib. 6.

Stoning, Ath. III.6. V. v1.3.; Edm. C. 4.

Burning, Ath. III. 6.

Death, Edm. C.4.; C.S. 62.; Wil. I. 33.

Mutilation, In. 18.37.; Edm.C.4.; Wil. I.18.33.; H. vxxvir. 8.
LXXIX, 8, LXXX. 7. 8.

Decapitation, Edg.S.11.; Eth.I.1.2.; C.S. 32,

Branding, Eth.I.2,; C.S.32.; H. rx. 26.

Breaking the neck, Eth. III. 4.


Hengen ; : :
Hengen-witnung, $ Eth.VII.16.; C.S.35.; C.F.18. 24.


Heng-wite, :
Hen-wite, } Wil Tet:


INDEX.


Punishments — continued.
Outlawry, Eth. 1X. 42.; C.S. 30. 41.; C.F. 24.; Ed.C.6.; Wil.
I. 52.; H. pu. 1. Lxvi.1.
Putting out the eyes, C.S.30.; Wil. III. 17.
Cutting off the nose, ears, and upper lip, C.S. 30. 54.
Scalping, C.S.30.; H. yxxv. 1.
Exile, C.S. 39. 41.; Wil. I. 36.
Flaying (excoriatio), H. rxxv. 1.
Purification (Clensung), C. E. 2.
Purveyance, see Feorm.


Puteus, see Well.


Q.


Qual-stow (Occidendorum locus).
Belongs to the king, H. x. 2.


Queen.
Her ‘overseunes’ in Wessex, H. xxxv. 1.
Quens, see Eorl.


Quinquagenarium, Ath. IV. 3.


R.


Rabbit, C.F. 27.
Rad, Ath.V.v.; Edg.II.7.; C.S. 25.
Ré&d-bana, Eth. 1X. 23.; H. uxxxv. 3.
Ré&d-bora, O. D. procem.
Rede-gafol, see Gafol.
Geref, Alf. 32.
Ram, Ath. I. procem.
Ramhundt, C. F. 32.
Rank ae
Of various persons, R. 1-8.
Churches of various ranks, Eth. IX.1.; C.E.3.
Rape (Nyd-héme — Nyd-neme).
If any one force a widow, wife, or maiden, Ethb. 82. 83.; Alf.
11. 26.; Eth.VI. 39.; C.S.53.75.; Wil. I. 12. 18,
If a man seize a nun, for the purpose of fornication, Alf. 18.
If a man force a ‘ceorl's’ female slave (mennen) to lie with him,
Ib. 25.
If a ‘peow’ force a female ‘peow,’ Ib. 25.
If any one commit ‘nyd-neme,’ In. 10.
Violentus concubitus et raptus one of the king’s rights (jura),
eX. Le
Violence to a maid or widow places the criminal in misericordia
regis, H. x11r. 6.


Reafere,
Reatian, } see Theft.


INDEX.


Reaflac, In. 10.; Eth. IX. 4.; C.E.3.; C.S.48.64.; H.xvir.7. See
Theft.
Receptio, H. xt.
Recordatio Curie Regis, H. xxx1.4. xL1x 4.
Rectitudines Dei, see Divine Dues.
Reeve (Geréfa — Cyninges Geréfa —Wic-geréfa—-Tungrevius). See
also Port-geréfa.
Of the wic-geréfa, H. & E.16.
If any one declare a debt (eofut) to the king’s reeve, Alf. 22.
That chapmen bring their men before the king’s reeve, Ib. 34.
Of a ‘gesiécund’ man’s reeve, In. 63.
That no one barter without his testimony, Ed.1.; Ath. I. 12.
If the reeve do not lawfully exact (amanige), Ed. 5.
‘That each reeve have a *gemét’ every four weeks, Ib. 11.
‘Wergild’ of the king’s ‘heah-geréfa’ by the North law, Wg. 4.
That the reeve see that tithes be rendered at the right time, &c.,
Ath. I. procem.
If a reeve be cognizant of a ‘peow’s’ theft, Ath I.3.
If he be negligent, Ib. 26. III.7. 1V.1.
If the reeve take a bribe (méd-sceat), Ath. IV. 1.
That witnesses be appointed in his ‘manung,’ Ib.1.
That he ride against a thief in his ‘manung,’ Ath.V. vii. 2.
That the track of lost cattle be pointed out to the reeve, and if
he cannot trace it, Ib. 4.
That every reeve aid another in tracing, Ib. 4. 5.
That every reeve take the ‘wed’ in his own shire, Ath.V. x.
Case when the reeve shall be without his ‘ folgod,’ Ath.V. x1.
If any one refuse to pay tithe, that the king’s reeve, the bishop's,
and the ‘land-rica’s’ go, &c., Edg.1.3.; Eth. IX.8.; C.E. 8;
H. x1. 2.
If the reeve command any thing unseemly, Edg. S. 13,
If a lord have the reeve to swear for him, Eth.I.1.
That no ‘bot’ be made without his testimony, Ib. 1.
That the reeve go and seize every man who ts ‘ ungetrywe’ to all
people, Ib. 4.; C.S. 33.
The king’s reeve’s * grides-bot,’ Eth. III. 1.
That the reeve and twelve of the chief thanes go and swear,
that they will accuse (forseegan) no innocent (sacleas) person,
or conceal any guilty one, Ib. 3.
If any one accuse a reeve that base money was coined by his
leave, Eth. 1V.7.; C.S.8.
If a ‘tyht-bysig’ man have the reeve to swear for him, C.S. 30.


Relevatio, 1
Relevium, see Heriot.
Relief, J
Reparation of Churches (Ciric-bot).
That every bishop repair God's house within his diocese,


Edm. E. 5.

That ‘god-béts’ be applied to the reparation of churches,
Eth.VI. 51.

That a third of the tithe go to the reparation of churches,
Eth. IX. 6.


That every one aid in the reparation of churches, C. S. 66.


INDEX.


Represent, see Aspelian.
Geresp, Alf. 32.
Riht, see Justice.
Gerihta (Cyninges), see Secular Rights.
Gerihta (Godcunde), see Divine Dues.
Rim-46, see Oath.
Ripuaria (Lex), H. xc. 4.
Rivers, C.S.5.; Ed.C. 12.
Robaria, see Theft.
Rochester, Ath. I. 14
Roebuck (Capreolus), C. I’. 27.
Rogation Days (Gang-dagas).
If any one steal in, Alf. 5.


That every burg be repaired fourteen days after rogation days,


Ath. I. 18.


Theft may be compensated for till rogation days, Ath. IV. 3.
Rom-feoh (Heord-penig — Denier Sein Piere — Denarium Sancti


Petri).


If any one refuse to pay ‘Rom-feoh,’ E.& G.6.; Edg. I. 4.;
Eth. IX.10.; C.E.9.; Ed. C.10.; Wil. I. 17.
That ‘Rom-feoh’ be paid by all christian men, Edm. E. 2.
That ‘Rom-feoh’ be paid by Saint Peter’s day, Edg. I. 4.;
Eth.V.11. VI.18. [X.10.; C.E.9.; Ed.C.10.; H. x1. 3.
What is to be paid lege Anglicana and lege Danica, Ed. C. 10.
and by whom, and if any one withhold it, Wil. 1.17.


Rotomagum (Rouen), Eth. IV. 2.
Rugern (the month), Wih. procem.
Ruh, p. 184, 185.

Rusticus, see Ceorl.

Ryft, Alf. 41.


S.


Sac and Socn (Sache and Soche), p. 184, 185.
Of those having sac and soke, Ed. C, 21.


Definition of, Ib. 22.


See also Socn.


If a lord, on whose land any thing is found, have (have not)


*sac and soen,’ Ib. 24.


If any one having ‘sac and socn’ be impleaded in the county,


Wil. I. 2.


If a thief with stolen property be found on the land of one


having ‘sac and socn,’ Ib. 27.


That churches, barons, and citizens have their ‘socns’ in peace,


H. p. 502.


Soca placitorum, to whom appertaining, H. 1x. 9.


That the king has the ‘socn’ of all lands in dominio suo, H. xrx.

That archbishops, bishops, comites, &c. have ‘sac and socn’ in
lands under them, H. xx. 2.

That in capital cases, the ‘socn’ of the lands of barons, senators,
&c. is the king's, Ib. 3.


INDEX.


Sae and Socn — continued.
Of the king's ‘socen,’ H. xxt.


Of barons having soke, and if a plea arise between the men of


any baron having soke, H. xxv.


That omnis ‘tihla’ vel compellatio sit ejus qui ‘sacam et socam’


habet de suis hominibus, et in suo, H. 11x. 17.
If a homicide be committed on the land of one having
socn, H. Lxxx. 6.


Sacerd, see Priest.

Sacu, see Suit.

Sédere (Seminator), R.S. p. 438, 439.
Geseman,

Seemend, ha & E. 10.3 p.174, 175.
S&-weard, R.S. p.432, 433 bis.
Sagemannus, H. vx.

Saliga (Lex), H. Lxxxvil. 10. LxxxIx. 1.
Salmon (Leax), In. 70.

Sar-bot, Wil. I. 10.

Sawl-sceat, see Soul-scot.

Scannorum (Castellacio trium), H. x. 1.
SceidSman, Eth. II. 7.

Scheldwite,
Scyldwita,
Scholar (Leornere), R. 7.

Schot and Loth, Wil. III. 4.; H. p. 502.

Scin-creft, E.& G. 11.; Eth.VI. 7. See Superstitions.
Scip,

Scip-fordung,

Scip-fyrd, see Ship and Fyrd,

Scip-fyrdrung,

Scip-here,

Scip-etere, R.S. p. 436, 437.

Scir-gemét, see Gemot.

Scir-man, In. 8.

Scorp, R.S. p. 432, 433.

Scourging (Swingele), see Punishments.

Scrift, see Confession.


Scrift-scir (Shrift-district).
If any one be buried out of his ‘scrift-scir,’ Eth.V. 12
C. E. 13.


Scrift-spréec, see Confession.
Scriid, see Clothing.
Scutorum opus, Ath. II. s.
Scutum Libertatis, C. F. 25.
Scyldung, see Accusation.


} H. xxxvili.


‘sac and


. VIL 21;


INDEX.


Scyld-wyrhta, Ath. I. 15.

Seam (Summagium), R.S. p.436, 437.

Searu, see Hiaford-searu.

Secular Rights (Woruld-gerihta — Cyninges-gerihta).
That secular rights stand with English and Danes, Edg. S. 2.
Of the king’s rights, C.S. 12.14. 15.; H. x. 1.


Security, Surety (Berigea — Borh —Borh-bryce — In-borh — Bad —

Plegium — Fidejussio).

Of the surety, in the case of a child whose father is dead,
H. & E. 6.

In the case of one man accusing another, Ib. 8.

If a man accused refuse to give a surety, Ib. 9.

If a man accuse another after he has given him surety, Ib. 10.

Of making ‘bot’ for ‘borh-bryce,’ in the case of oaths and * weds,’
Alf. 1.

If any one break the king’s, archbishop’s, ‘ peling’s,’ a bishop's,
or an ‘ ealdorman’s borh,’ Ib. 3.; C.S. 59.

That the ‘angilde’ be demanded of, and paid by the surety, In. 22.;
Edg. H. 6.

Of making ‘bat’ for ‘borh-bryce,’ in the case of a marriage not
taking place, In. 31.

In what case a man may deny ‘bork,’ Ib. 41.

If a2 man would put another’s property in ‘borh’ for ‘wider-
tihtle, Ed. 1.

Of taking a thief in ‘borh,’ Ib. 6.

Of taking an ‘in-borh’ on the goods of a thief, Ib. 6.

That every ‘hlaford’ have his ‘hyred-men’ in his own ‘borh,’
Ath. II. 7.; Edm. C.7.; Eth.I.1.; C.S.31.; Ed.C.21.; Wil.
I, 52.; H. v1.3. Xui.6. LIX. 6.

If the kin (mzgé) of a thief will not enter into ‘borh’ for him,
Ath. V. x11. 2.

That no one buy or sell without ‘borh,’ Edm.C. 5.; Edg. S. 6.;
Eth.I.3.; C.S.24.; Ed.C.38.; Wil.I.45. III. 10.11.

That every man have ‘borh,’ Edm. C.7.; Edg.II.6.; Edg.S. 3.;
Eth. I.1.; C.S.20.; Wil. II].14.; H. vurr. 2.

If any one run away from his ‘ borh,’ Edg.II.6.; Wil. I. 3.

That the ‘borh’ pay the ‘ceap-gild,’ if a man escape, Eth. I. 1.;
C.S. 30.

That the reeve bring all ‘ ungetrywe’ men under ‘borh,’ Eth.I. 4.

If an ‘ungetrywe’ man have no ‘borh,’ Ib.4.; C.S. 33.

That every one give ‘borh’ that he will bring his vouchers to
warranty, Eth. II. 8.

That every one have true ‘borh’ in vouching to warranty, Ib. 9.

If a man have ‘borhleas orf,’ Eth. III. 5.

If one man owe ‘borh’ to another, Eth.V. 20. VI. 25.; C.E.17.;
H. vxit. 2.

If ‘bad’ be taken on a man’s property, for another man’s account,

.D.3.

Of an ‘in-borh,’ when cattle is to be vouched over the river
(stream), Ib. 8.

That the ‘borh’ have charge of every freeman, and present him
to every judicial process, C.S. 20.

If a stranger or foreigner have no ‘borh,’ Ib. 35.; C.F. 13.;
H. vxv. 5.


INDEX.


Security, &c. — continued.
If any one be given as surety for his lord, H. xtrv.
Of an ‘in-borh’ taking the defendant’s goods, H. iv. 7.
Of taking an ‘in-borh’ of a vagrant, H. Lxxxtt. 2.
If a freeman surrender as a pledge, and then injure any one,
H. Lxxx1x. 3.
Sele (cyninges), see Hall.
Selling (Bebycgan), see Traffic.
Seman and Semende, H.& E.10. p.174, 175.
Seminator (Sédere), R.S. p. 438, 439.
Sepes, see Hedge.
Serviens,


Servus, } see Deow.


Servus Porcarius (/Ehte-swan), R.S. p. 436, 437.
Setene, In. 68.
Shaftesbury, Ath. I. 14,
Shaving (Efesian), Alf. 35.
Sheep.
Its fleece, In. 69.
At what rate it is to be paid for, Ath.V. v1. 2.; O.D.7.; Wil I. 5.
That no one kill a sheep without witness, and that he keep the
hide and head, Eth. III. 9.
Rate at which to be given in payment of the slain, H. nxxv1. 7.
Shepherd, R.S. p. 438, 439.
Shield,
Shield-wright, f Ath-I- 15. IL 8.


Ship (Scip-here — Ceap-scip — Scip-fyrd—Scip-fyrérung). See also
Fyrd.


If any ‘scip-here’ commit ravages in England, Eth. II. 1.
That every merchant (ceap) ship have ‘frid,’ Ib. 2.
If a merchant-ship take refuge in a ‘frid-burg,’ Ib. 2.
If a man has been plundered, and know by what ship, Ib. 4.
If any one injure a ship of war, Eth.VI. 34.
If goods be thrown overboard, to lighten a ship, Wil. I. 37.
Shipwreck (Naufragium).
One of the king’s rights (jura), H. x. 1.
Shire.
Divisiones scirarum regis proprie sunt, Ed. C. 13.
Shireman, In. 8.
Shoe, R.S. p. 438, 439.
Sib-leger, see Incest.
Silk, Ed. C.L. 8.
Siltre, H. p. 503.
Six-hynde man.
If a man lie with his wife, Alf. 10.
If a betrothed ‘ six-hinde’ woman fornicate, Ib.18.; H. uxxx11.9.
If any one slay him with a ‘hlod,’ Alf. 30.; H. uxxxvit. 4,
If any one fight in his house, Alf. 39.
His ‘burg-bryce,’ Ib. 40.
That a ‘Wealh’ with five hydes is ‘six-hynde,’ In. 24.
Of ‘man-bét’ with a ‘six-hynde’ man's ‘wér,’ Ib. 70.


INDEX.


Gesid (Felagus), }
Gesid-mon,
His share of the ‘wer,’ if a foreigner be slain, In. 23. 30. 50.;
Ed. C. 15.


Gesidcund-cyn, }
Gesidcund-man,

If he commit fornication, Wih. 5.

What ‘bot’ to be made for his ‘burg-bryce,’ Alf. 40.; In. 45.

If he compound with the king, or his ‘ealdorman,’ In. 50.

If he neglect the ‘fyrd,’ Ib. 51.

If he go away, he may have with him his reeve, smith, &e., Ib 63.

If he be driven off the land, Ib. 68.

Case when the offspring of ‘ceorls’ are to be regarded of ‘ gesid-

cund’ race, Wg. 11.


Sipessocn, H. v. 1.
Slep-ern, see Dormitory.
Slander (Folc-leasung), Alf. 32.; Edg. Il. 4.; C.S. 16.; H. xxxiv.7.


Slaying (Ofslein — Slege — Mon-sliht — Afyllan — Sleén — Man-

slaga — Bléd-geote —- Dead — Amyrdrian — Formyréian).

If a man slay another in a king’s ‘ttin,’ Ethb. 5.

If a man slay a freeman, Ib.6.; H. Lxvuil. 1.

If the king’s ‘ambiht-smi®,’ or ‘laad-rine’ slay a man, Ethb. 7.

Of the ‘leod-geld,’ if one man slay another, Ib. 7. 21-23.

If a man slay another in an ‘eorl’s tin,’ Ib. 13.

If a man slay another at an open grave, Ib. 22.

If a murderer escape from the country, Ib. 23.; H. & E. 2.

If a man slay a ‘ceorl’s hlaf-zta,’ Ib. 25.

If a man slay a ‘let,’ Ib. 26.

If a man slay another, that he pay ‘agene sceatte, and unfacne
feo gehwylce,’ Ib. 30.

If an ‘esne’ slay another, Ib. 86.

If a man’s ‘esne’ slay an ‘eorleund’ man, H. & E.1. 2.

If a man’s ‘esne’ slay a freeman, Ib. 3. 4.

If a ‘leud’ be slain in the act of stealing, Wih. 25.

If a stranger go out of the highway without blowing his horn,
that he be slain, Ib. ¢8.; In. 20.

If any one slay a woman with child, Alf.9.; H. uxx. 14. 15.

If a man slay another at their common work, Alf.13.; H. xc. 6.

If a man slay a child entrusted to him, Alf.17.; H. Lxxxvill.7. 8.

If a man lend weapons to another, that he may slay, Alf. 19.;
H. Lxxxvil. 1.

If a priest slay any one, Alf.21.; Eth. IX. 26.; C. S.41.;
H. Lxvi. 2. LXVIII. 5. 8. LXXIL. 2.3.4.

Tf a kinless man slay another, Alf.27.; H. yxxv. 6-10.

If any one slay a kinless man, Alf.28.; H. xxv. 6-10.

If a man slay a ‘twy’-, ‘six’-, or ‘twelf-hinde’ man with a
thlod,’ Alf. 29. 30.31.; H. uxxxvil. 4.7.

If a man have a spear on his shoulder, and another stake himself
thereon, Alf. 36.; H. uxxxvill. 1. 2.3.

If any one slay another offering right, Alf. 42.; H. xxx111. 3.

If any one be slain in a compotation, In.6.: H. Lxxxvit. 9.10.

If any one slay a thief, In. 16.35.; Ath. 1V.4. V. vin.


INDEX.


Slaying — continued.

If a man demand the ‘wér’ of one slain in passing through a
wood without blowing his horn, In. 21.

If a foreigner, a ‘Wealh gafol-gilda,’ or a ‘peow,’ be slain,
Ib. 23.; H. uxvitl. 1.

If a ‘wite peow’ be slain, In. 24.

If any one have been in a ‘for’ where a man was slain, Ib. 34.;
H. Lxxxvit. 8.

If a ‘Wealh-peow’ slay an Englishman, In.74.; H. ixx. 5.

If any one slay another’s godson, or godfather, In. 76.; H.
LXXIX. 1.

If a Dane slay or be slain, A.& G. 2.; Eth. II. 5.; Ed.C. 16.;
H. uxx. 6. 8

If a man slay another, or be slain, in resisting divine dues,
E.& G.6.; C.S.49.; H. xr... xu. 12. “Xvi. 5.

If any one wound or strike another dead, E. & G. 6.

That compensation for the slain be made according to his birth,
p. 174, 175.; H. uxviit.3. LXXxvt. 1.

That a homicide find ‘wer-borh,’ p. 174, 175.; Edm. S.7.; Wil.
1.7.; H. uxxvi. 1.

Compensations for homicide specified, p. 174, 175.; Edm. S. 7.;
H. Lxxvi. 5-7.

That no one be slain on account of property under the value
of twelve pence, Ath. I.1. V.1.1.; H. i1x. 20.

That a lordless man be slain for a ‘flyma,’ Ath. I. 2.

If any one be slain by witchcraft, ‘liblac,’ &c., Ib. 6.

That no thief be slain under fifteen years and for less than twelve
pence, Ib. 1.3.

Of hanging a thief, Ath.V. x11. 2.

If any one shed a christian man’s blood, Edm. E. 3.

That a homicide be not worthy of a hallowed resting place, Ib. 4.

If a man slay another, that he bear the ‘ feehd’ himself, Edm. 8.1.

If the ‘mzgd’ abandon, or harbour a homicide, Ib. 1.

That the king will not have in his ‘socn’ him who sheds blood,
Ib. 4.

That a homicide surrender himself to his ‘forspéca,’ Ib. 7.

If a man slay another while engaged in the ‘smeagung,’ Edg. S.
12.

If any one be ‘ungetrywe and have no ‘borh,’ that he be slain
and laid in the ‘fil,’ Eth.I.4.; C.S. 33.

If a ‘frid-man’ flee, or fight and be slain, Eth. II. 3.

If eight men be slain, Ib. 5.

In case of ‘frid-brece,’ that the townsmen, ‘ealdorman,’ or king
go and seize the murderer (bana), Ib. 6.

If a slave (zht) be slain by the Danes, Ib.7.; H. Lxx. 8

If a man of the country be accused of slaying, Eth. II.7.

If a moneyer prove foul, &c. that he be slain, Eth. III. 8. 16.
IV. 5.


That a christian be not condemned to death for too trivial an
offence, Eth.V.2. VI.10.; C.S.2.; Wil. I. 40.

If a man be slain in committing ‘&-hlip,’ Eth.V. 31.

If any one slay or wound another within the walls or doors of a
church (N.E. law), Eth.VII. 13. IX.1-4.; C.E. 2; H. x11.
XII. 3, LXVIIL. 2, LXXIX. 5. LXXXVII.6.

If a homicide seek a ‘ frid-socn,’ Eth. 1X, 1.


3BA4


INDEX.


Slaying — continued.

That a homicide within a church pay his ‘wér’ to Christ and the
king, Eth. IX.2.; C.E.2.; H. xn.

That a homicide pay church-‘ grid’ to the church, Eth. IX. 3. 5.;
C.E. 2.

If a mass-priest or monk be slain, C.S.39.; H. x1. 8 Lxvi. 1.6.
LXVIM. 5.7. LXXIII. 6.

If a ‘Wealh’ slay an Englishman, or vice versa, O. D. 5.

That a homicide submit and make ‘bot,’ or leave the land, C.S. 6.

If there be open ‘mor%,’ and one murdered, that the slayer be
delivered up to the kin, Ib. 57.

If any one be convicted of, or confess homicide, Wil. I. 7.

If a Frenchman be slain, and the hundred do not find the slayer,
Ib. 22.

If a man be slain on one of the highways, Ib. 26.

If one destroy another by poison, &c., 1b. 36.; H. vxx. 1.

If an Englishman challenge a Frenchman, on account of homi-
cide, and vice versa, Wil. II. 1.2. III. 12.

If any follower of king William be slain, Wil. III. 3.

What the hundred has to pay, in case of homicide, Ib. 3.

That no one be slain for any crime, Ib. 17.

Homicide to be compensated with the ‘wér,’ or denied by a
*weralada,’ H. xu.3. LXIv.4. LXVI.1. LXXXV.4. XCII. 14.

If the king’s servants be slain, H. x11. 1.

Of the king’s soke in case of homicide in a church, H. xxi.

If any one accused of homicide desire to clear himself, H. ux1v. 4.

If homicide be committed in the king’s court, burg, army, &c.,
H. vxvill. 2. Lxxx, 1.7.

If any one slay a bishop, H. txvii.6.

If any one slay a monk, Ib. 7.

If any one consent to a homicide, Ib. 10.

If a ‘peow,’ by his lord’s command, slay any one, Ib. 11.

If one slay another in warfare, or in defence of his lord, Ib. 12.

If an Englishman be slain, H. ux1x. xc11. 6.

If a ‘peow’ slay a ‘peow,’ H, Lxx. 2.3.

If a freeman slay a ‘peow,’ Ib. 4.

If men slay one another, Ib. 9.

If one made free be slain, Ib. 10.

If a woman connnit homicide, or be slain, Ib. 12.13.

If an infant be slain, Ib. 15. 16.

Of various homicides, H. Lxx1. 1.

If a bishop slay any one, H. Lxx11. 1.

If a monk slay any one, Ib. 2.

If a man be slain in a contest, H. yxxtv. 3.

If a man slay his lord, H. yxxv.1. 2.

If a lord slay his man without cause, Ib. 3.

If a man slay his ‘peow,’ Ib. 3. 4.

If a man slay his relative, Ib. 5.

If a Frenchman without relatives be slain, Ib. 6. xcr.1.

If the slain or slayer have maternal, or paternal relatives only,
H. Lxxv. 8.9.

If any one without paternal relatives slay a man, Ib. 10.

If any one of four lib be slain, H. pxxvi. 7.

If any one of aservile father and free mother, and vice versa,
be slain, H. pxxvil. 1.2.


INDEX.


Slaying — continued.

If any one going on the king’s errand be slain, H. rxxrx. 2.

If homicide be committed on the land of one having sac and
soke, H. Lxxx. 6.

If homicide or hominicedium be committed in the house of an
archbishop, bishop, or comes, Ib. 8.

If a relative or servant of the lord be slain, Ib. 9.

If any one slay another in revenge or self-defence, H. LxxxI1l. 6.
LXXXVII. 6. LXXXVIII. 19.

If a servus commit homicide with freemen, H. txxxv. 4.

‘ Wer’ forfeited through homicide in a church, &c., H. LXxxvIl. 6.

If any one be slain by his comrade, foris casam, or iter agens,
&e., Ib. 11.

If any one rush on the weapon of his enemy and be slain,
H. Lxxxviil. 4.

If any one be slain accidentally flying from his enemy, Ib. 5.

If any one slay another at any exercise of shooting, &., Ib. 6.

If any one desire another to accompany him to his work, &c.,
and he be slain, Ib. 9.

Relatives of a homicide recommended to compound jointly, Ib. 17.

If several ‘quorum crocca towallet’ commit homicide, Ib, 18.

If any one be forced to homicide, Ib. 19.

If any one fearing for his liberty slay a relative, H. Lxxx1x. 1.

If any one be slain in parting combatants, H. xc. 1.

If any one be slain by accident, as specified, Ib. 2. 3.

If a man be slain by falling from a tree, Ib. 7.

If a man aiming at one slay another, Ib. 8.

If a Frenchman or Norman be slain, H. xci.1. xcii. 10,


Slean,
Slege } see Slaying.
>
Smeagung, Edg. S. 12.
Smere-mangestra, Eth. IV. 2.
Smid.
The king’s ‘ ambiht-smié,’ Ethb. 7.
A ‘gesidcund-man’s smi6,’ In. 63.
Socheman, see Ceorl.
Soen. See also Sac and Socn.
That no lord deny a freeman ‘ hlaford-socn,’ Ath. II. 4. IIL. 5.
That the king will not have in ‘socn’ him who has shed blood
Edm. S. 4.
That no one, save the king, have ‘socn’ over a king’s thane,
Eth. IIT. 11.
If a church ‘ grid-breca’ seek a solemn ‘frid-socn,’ Eth. IX. 1.
Soinus (Essoign), H. xx1x.3. XLI.2. LII. 1. LXI. 7. 8
Solidarii, H. vurr. 2.
Sortilegium, H. uxx1.1. See Superstitions.
Soul-scot (Sawl-sceat).
That it is to be rendered, Ath. I. procem.; Edg. I. 6.
That it is to be paid at the open grave, Eth. V.12. VI. 20.
IX. 13.; C.E. 13.
That it is to be paid, if a corpse be buried out of its parish
(serift-scir), Eth.V.12, VI. 21.; C. Es 13.


INDEX.


South Anglian Law.
If any one fight in a church, Eth.VII..9.


Gespelia, see Vicegerent.
Spere, see Weapons,

Spic, see Bacon.

Spor, see Track.

Spré&c and Sp&c, see Suit.
Stabilita, H. xvi.

Staca, Ath. IV. 7.
Stel-tihtle. See Accusation.
Stes, O.D. 1 bis. 2 bis. 6.
Stag, C.F. 24.

Stalu, see Theft.

Stapela, Ath. IV.7.

Steap,
Steop,
Steore (Correction), Ath.V. x1.
Steores-man, Eth. II. 4.
Step-children, Eth.VI. 47.
Stermelda, H. & E. 5.

Stipendiarii, H. vu. 2.

Stéd-myre, Alf. 16.

Stdd-peof, Alf. 9.

Stones, C.S.5. See Superstitions.


‘ H. & E. 12, 13.


Stoning (Torfung). See Punishments.


Strangers and Foreigners (Fremde— Feorran-cumene men— Freond-
lease men — E|peodige— Gest — Cuma).

If any one entertain a stranger (cuma) longer than three (two)
days, H.& E.15.; C.S. 28.; Ed.C. 23.; Wil. I.48.; H. vir. s5.

If strangers will not refrain from fornication, Wih. 4.; C.S. 56.

How a guest shall clear himself, Wih. 20.

If a man coming from afar, or a stranger go out of the high
road, Ib. 28.; In. 20.

Of the ‘wér’ of a foreigner, if slain, In. 23.

If any one wrong a foreigner, &c., that the king, ‘eorl,’ and
bishop are as ‘meg and mund-bora,’ E.& G.12.; R.8.; Eth.
VI.48. 1X.33.; C.S. 40.; H. x.3. Lxxv. 7.

If a man from afar, or a friendless man, have no ‘borh’ at
‘frum-tihtle,” C.S. 35.; C.F. 18.; H. uxv. 5.

If any one adjudge worse judgment to a friendless man, or one
from afar, C.S. 36.

Si advena vel peregrinus sit calumniatus de foresta, C. F.13.

Of entertaining strangers in London, Ed.C. L. 2.

Of strangers’ oaths, H. Lx1v. 3.


Strecman (Potens), C.S. 20.; H. xxvii. 2.


INDEX.


Stretbreche.
One of the king’s rights (jura), H. x.1.
To be compensated with 100 sol, H. xi. 2. XXxv. 2. Lxxx. 5.
Definition of, H. rxxx. 5,


Streteward.
That four men be chosen from every hide (x. hides) as ‘ strete-
ward,’ Wil. I. 28.


Strublum, H. txxviil. 2.
Strudung, Eth. V. 24. VI. 29.
Subboscus, see Wood.


Submonitio.

Of the process of summoning, H. xui1. 1. 2.

If any one summoned to the hundred fail to attend, H. 11.1.
Sufel (Companagium — Convictus), ) Ath. V. vir. 6.; R.S. p. 436,
Gesufel hlaf (Companagium), } 437.

Suit (Sacu — Spré&c — Spéc).

If one make plaint against another in a suit, H. & E. 8.9.10.

That every suit have an end and term, Ed. procem.; Ib. 11.;
O.D.8.; H. 1x.4. 11.2.

‘ Spé&ce drifan,’ O. 2.

That no one send away his man ere he be clear of every suit,
Ath. I. 22.; C.S. 28.

Of the witnesses to be named, Ath. IV. 1.

Of the ‘wed’ to be deposited in a king’s, ‘eorl’s,’ or bishop’s
suit, Eth. III. 12.

If any one be‘ uncwydd and uncrafod’ during life, that no one
enter into a suit against his heirs, p. 184, 185.; Eth. III. 14.;


C.S. 73.
Of single and threefold suit, Ath. IV.7.; Eth. IX. 19. 20.; C.E.
5 bis.; H. Lxiv. 8.
That every suit be settled by the holy tides, C. E. 17.
Children under fifteen not to carry on a suit, H. Lix. 9. Lxx. 18.
Sulh-zlmessan, see Plough-alms.
Summagium (Lad — Seam), R.S. p. 432, 433. 436, 437.
Summonitio, see Submonitio.
Summonitor (Sumenour), Wil. I. 47.
Sun, C.S.5. See Superstitions.
Sunday.
If a serving man (esne, peow) do ‘peow’-work on Sunday,
Wih. 9.10.; In. 3.; E.& G.7.; C.S. 46.
If a freeman work on Sunday, Wih.11.; In.3.; E.& G.7.;
C.S. 46.
If any one steal on Sunday night, Alf. 6.
Of traffic on Sunday, E.& G.7.; Ath. I. 24. II. 2. V.x.; Eth.
V.13. VI. 22.44, [X.17.; C.E.15.
That no condemned person be executed on Sunday, E.& G.9.;
C.S. 45,
How the Sunday festival is to be observed, Edg. I. 5.
That the Sunday festival be solemnly held, Eth. V. 13. VI. 22.;
.E. 14,
That there be no hunting, Eth. VI. 22.; C. E. 15.


INDEX.


Superstitions (Deofol — Deofol-gild — Wiglere — Wicce — Wicce-
craft — Hepenscipe — Liblac — Blot — Ferht— Scin-craeft—
Sortilegium — Invultuacio).

If a ‘ceorl’ sacrifice to devils, Wih. 12.

If a ‘ peow’ sacrifice to devils, Ib. 18.

If witches (wiccan), diviners (wigleras), and magicians (scin-
creftige) be anywhere found, E.& G.11.; Eth.VI.7.; C.S.4.

If any one be killed by witchcrafts, ‘liblacs,’ invultuatione, &e.,
Ath.I.6.; H. 1xxt.1.

If any one be guilty of ‘liblac,’ Edm. E. 6.

That heathen gods, the sun, moon, fire, running water, wells,
stones, forest trees, be not worshipped, C.S. 5.

That no one love witchcraft, or perpetrate ‘ mord-weore,’ either
by ‘blot’ or ‘ferht,’ Ib. 5.

Surrey, H. p. 503.

Sursise, Wil. I. 50.

Sweese Men, Wibh. 4.

Sweord, see Weapons.

Sweord-hwita.

If he receive a weapon to furbish, Alf. 19.; H. Lxxxvil. 3.

Geswicnan, In. 15.

Swine (Ver — Verres).

If a man find unallowed swine in his mast, In. 49.

Rate of pannage (zfesn) to be taken for swine, Ib. 49.

How a swine is to be paid for, Ath.V. v1.2.; O.D.7.; Wil. I. 5.
A ‘gers’ swine to be rendered by a ‘geneat,’ R.S. p. 432, 433.
That a swine may be given in payment of the ‘wér,’ Wil. I.9.

Swingele, see Scourging.

Syb and Som, C.E.17.; Ed.C. 2.

Syb-leger, see Incest.

Syhl, see Plough.


Syringia (Wringh-weg),. R.S. p. 438, 439 bis.


if ie


Teecnan, In. 64. 65. 66.

Tallagium, Wil. III. 5.

Taurus, see Ox.

Team, see Toll.

Team,

Geteama, >} see Vouching to Warranty.
Getéman, J

Tege, C.S. 77.
Telonium,
Thelonium,
Tenmanne Tale, see Frid-borg.
Teolung (Tillage), Edg.S. 1.


see Toll.


INDEX.


Teodung (Tithing), Ath.V. rv. vitt. 1.
Teodung, see Tithe.
Terminus, see Andeg.


Testament (Cwyde — Boc-riht — Testamenti Rectum — Intestate).
If any one die intestate, C.S. 71.; Wil. I. 34.
That a thane be worthy of ‘boc-riht’ (testamenti rectum), R.S.
p. 432, 433.
If a debtor die childless, leaving a will, H. yxxv. 11.


Testimony, see Witness.
Thames, A. & G. procem.; Ib. 1.


Thane (Degn — Cyninges Degn — Liberalis —Twelf-hinde man (H.
Lxx.1.) See also Degen-riht).
How a king’s thane shall clear himself, Wih. 20.; A. & G.3.
Of the ‘bot’ for a king’s thane’s ‘burg-bryce,’ In. 45.
If a king’s thane, or one of inferior degree, be accused of
homicide, A. & G. 3.
A secular thane’s oath equal to a mass-priest’s, O.12.; H. yxrv.


2. 3.

Of his ‘ wer-gild,” Wg. 5.; Wil. I. 8.; H. uxx.1. LxxvL4. |

That a thane who has served the king, &c. may represent his lord
with his fore-oath, R. 3.

If a thatie so thrive as to become an ‘eorl,’ Ib. 5.

If a thief seek a thane, Ath. III.6. IV. 4.

If a thane take a bribe, Ath. IV. 1.

If a thane neglect to have all infamati in plegio, Edm. C. 7.

i oo be paid from a thane’s ‘in-land’ and ‘geneat-land,’

dg. I. 1.

If a thane have a church with (without) a burying ground on
his ‘ béc-land, Ib.2.; C. E. 11.

That a thane pay a third of his tithe to his church, Edg. I. 2.;
C.E.11


Of twelve thanes and the reeve, Eth. III. 3.

That no one but the king have ‘socn’ over a king’s thane, Ib. 11.

Of the ‘wed’ to be given in his suit, Ib. 12.

That judgment (dém) stand, where thanes are unanimous, and
vice versa, Ib.13.; H.v.6. xxx1. 2.

If a thane’s sentence is outvoted (oferdrifen),. and if he have
choice of love or law, Eth. III.13.; H. iv. 2.

Ut omnis thaynus decimet quicquid habet, Eth. VIII. 1.

If a king’s thane break the fast of St. Michael, Ib. 2.

If a thane have a man to make ‘fore-oath’ for him, C. S. 22.;
C.F. 12.

A thane’s heriot, C.S.72.; Wil. I. 20.; H. xiv. 2.3.4.

That four thanes are appointed in each province, for the adminis-
tration of justice, and four less thanes under each of them,
C.F. 1.

Peena et forisfactio of a thane different from a person’s of low
degree, Ib. 21.

Of thane’s law, R.S. p. 432, 433.

A thane’s ‘overseunes, H. xxxv.1. LXXXVII. 5.

Number of ‘ wereplegii,’ if a thane be slain, H. xxv1.1.


Thaschis (De), H. xxvii. 5.


INDEX.


Theam.
Definition of, Ed.C. 21.22. See Vouching to Warranty.


Theft (Stalu — Ciric-stalu— Reaflac — Robaria — Reafere — Reafian
— Deof — Forstélan — Furtum).
If a freeman steal from the king, Ethb. 4.
If a freeman steal from a freeman, Ib. 9.
If any one take money from a dwelling Gan Ib. 28.
If a ‘peow’ steal, Ib. 90.; Wih. 27.; Ath. III. 6.; Edm.C. 4.
If a freeman steal a man, H.& E. 5.
If a man steal money (feoh) from another, Ib. 7.
If a man slay a layman (leud) while thieving, Wih. 25.
If a freeman be taken with stolen goods upon him (zt heb-
bendre handa), Wih. 26.; Ath.I.1. II].6.; H.uvur.4.
That a stranger travelling through a wood, if he blow not his
horn, be accounted a thief, Wih. 28.; In. 20, 21.
If any one steal on Sunday night pouanancen or at Christmas,
Easter, or in rogation days, Alf. 5.
If any one steal in a church, Ib. 6.
Of a gold-thief, a ‘stéd’-thief, a bee thief, a man thief, Ib. 9.
If any one steal a cow, or stud mare, and drive off the foal or
calf, Ib. 16.
If any one steal without (or with) the knowledge of his wife and
children, In. 7.57. ; C.S.77.
A child of ten years may be cognizant of theft, In. 7.
If any one commit ‘ reaflac,’ Ib. 10.
If a thief be taken, Ib. 12.
The word thief defined, Ib. 13.
Of a thief, after he is in the king’s custody, Ib. 15.
If any one slay a thief, Ib. 16.35.; Ath. 1V.4. V. vir.
If a ‘ceorlish’ thief, who has often been accused, be taken,
In. 18. 37.
If a ‘geneat’ steal, Ib. 22.
If any one attach stolen property, Ib. 25. 47.75.
If any one seize a thief, or if he escape, Ib. 28. 36.72.; C.S. 29.;
Wil. I.3.49.; H. x11. 3. LIx. 18.26. LXV. 1.2.
That the king have a thief if taken, In. 28.
If any one accuse another of cattle (ceap) stealing, Ib. 46.
If a ‘wite-peow’ be accused of having committed theft, Ib. 48.
If any one attach a stolen man, Ib. 53.
If a ‘ceorl’ steal cattle (ceap), Ib. 57.
If a theft be a day old, Ib.73.
If any one be accused, that those take him in ‘borh,’ who had
previously commended him to a lord, Ed. 6.
If any one, through a charge of theft, forfeit his liberty, Ib. 9.
If an ecclesiastic steal, or be cognizant of theft, E.& G.3.; Eth.
IX. 27.; C.E. 5.
That no thief above twelve years, and for more than twelve
eight) pence, be spared, Ath. I.1. V.1.1. x11.3.; H. 1x. 20.
If a thief will defend himself, or run away, or be put in prison,
Ath.I.1. III. 6.
If a ‘hlaford’ or ‘hordere’ be privy to the theft of his ‘peow,’
Ath. I. 3.
If any one avenge a thief, Ib. 6. V. 1. 5.
If any one wish to clear from accusation a slain thief, Ath. I. 11.;
Eth. II.7.; Ed.C.36.; H. vxiv.5. ixxiv. 2.


INDEX.


Theft — continued.
If any one take a bribe from a thief, Ath. I. 17.
f any one commit theft, after the Council at Thundersfield,
Ath. III. 6.
If a thief seek the king, the archbishop, a bishop, church, ¢eorl,’
abbot, ‘ealdorman,’ or thane, Ath. III. 6. IV. 4.; Ed.C. 5.
If a free woman commit theft, Ath. III. 6.
That compensation for theft may be made till the rogation
(gong) days, Ath. IV. 3.
If a thief be foul at the ordeal, Ib. 6.; Eth. I. 1.
Of a thief’s wife’s and the king’s share in his property, Ath.V.
Il.
If La ae secretly harbour a thief, Ath.V. 111.6. Iv.4. v.1.2.3
d.C. 5.
If any one defend a thief, Ath.V.1.3.4.; Eth. I. 4.
If any one has often been condemned for theft, Ath.V. 1. 4.
If any one steal a ‘peow,’ or if a‘peow’ steal himself, Ath.
. VI 3.
Of a ‘Wylisc’ thief, Ib. 3.
If any one slay a thief before other men, Ath.V. vir.
If the kindred (mzg®) defend a thief, Ath.V. virt. 2.
That the king ride and quell a thief, Ib. 3.
Of thieves who cannot be immediately proved guilty, Ath.V. 1x.
No thief under fifteen, and for less than twelve pence, to be
slain, Ath. V. x11. 1.3.
If the kindred will neither release, nor enter into ‘borh’ for a
thief, Ib. 2.
That ‘twelf-hindi’ and ‘twi-hindi’ associate to take a thief,
Edm. C. 2.
If a robber flee to a church, Ib. 5.
That a thief be ridden after, Edg. H. 2.
That a theft be announced to the ‘hundredes man,’ Ib. 2.
If any one neglect to pursue a thief, Ib. 3.
If a thief run away from his ‘borh,’ Edg.II.6.; Wil.I. 3.
That a manifest (bere) thief hope not for life, Edg. II. 7. ;
C.S. 26.65.; H. x11. 1.
That a thief may know not where to place his theft, Edg.S. 2.
If a man make a false declaration with regard to stolen property,
Ib. 11.
That a thief forfeit his head, Ib. 11.
Of thief-gild, Eth. I.1. III. 4.; C.S. 30.
That a thief be declared an outlaw, Eth.J.1.; C.S. 30.
Of a thief’s ‘wer’ and ‘ ceap-gild,’ if he escape, Eth.I.1.
If a man be robbed, and he know by what ship, Eth. IT. 4.
That neither English nor Dane receive a thief of the other, Ib.6.
If a man of the country (landesman) steal cattle, Ib. 7.
Of the ‘ peof-scyldig,’ in vouching to warranty, Ib. 9.
If he who will clear a thief be clean or foul at the ordeal, Eth.
Ill. 7.
If any one be robbed in open day, and make it known in three
‘tins,’ Ib. 15.
That ‘frises-bot’ and ‘feos-bot’ be so ordered as may be most
prejudicial to the thief, Eth.V. 26. VI. 32.; C.S. 8.
If any one steal in the king’s burg or neighbourhood (neawist),
Eth.VIL. 15.


INDEX.


Theft — continued.


Robaria prohibited, Eth. VIII. 6.

If ‘church-grid’ be violated by ‘reaflac,’ Eth. IX. 4.; C.E. 3.

If any one follow the track of stolen cattle, O. D. 1.

Of the ‘angylde’ in a charge of theft, Ib. 4.

If any one claim (to-teo) stolen cattle, Ib. 8.

That every one above twelve years make oath that he will neither
be a thief nor privy to theft, C. S. 21.

If the ‘1ad’ fail, that the thief be an outlaw, Ib. 31.

If any one break Lent through ‘ reaflac,’ Ib. 48.

If any one commit ‘ reaflac,’ Ib. 64.

If any one bring stolen property to his cot, or into his wife’s
lockers (ceglocan), Ib. 77.

That an open thief be not worthy of ‘griS’ to and from the
‘gemot,’ Ib. 83.

If any one accused of robbery flee from his pledge, Wil. I. 3.

If any one take a thief without ‘siwte’ (insecutio), and ‘cri’
(clamor) of the person robbed, Ib. 4.

{f a freeman be accused of theft, Ib. 14.

[f a thief with stolen property be found on any one’s land,


b. 27.

If an Englishman challenge a Frenchman on account of theft,
&c., and vice versa, Wil. II. 1.2. III. 12.

Robaria one of the king’s rights (jura), H. x.1.

Persolutio furti to be compensated by the ‘ wér,’ H. x11. 3.

Qui furem plegiatum amiserit, to compensate with the ‘wér,’
Ib. 3.

If any one be cognizant of thieves, Ib. 3.

Furtum probatum et morte dignum, H. x11. 1.

Of the dominus et defensor de furto pulsatorum, H. xxvi.

If any one commit theft, H. xii. 7.

That in case of robaria and capital crimes, no one seek counsel,
but answer directly, H. xLvi.1. XLVIL.

How thefts are to be atoned for, H. 11x. 21.

Various enactments concerning thefts, Ib. 22-27.

If a freeman steal with a ‘peow,’ Ib. 24.

If thieves, servile or free, escape, Ib. 26.

If a ‘manupastus’ be accused of theft, H. yxvi.7.

Law of Wessex in an accusation of theft, &c., Ib. 8.

If any one be accused of theft by the vicecomes, or king’s jus-
ticiary, Ib. 9.

If a servus steal with freemen, H. Lxxxv. 4.

Forfeiture of ‘wér’ by theft, H. pxxxvit. 6.

If a Frenchman be slain for theft, H. xc11. 10.


Thundersfield, Ath. III.6. IV. 4. V. 10.
Thursday (Holy), Alf. 5.

Thus, Ed.C.L. 8.

Tihtan, H.& E. 8,

Tihtle, see Accusation.

Tillage (Teolung), Edg. S. 1.
Tineman, C.F. 4.

Tionde, see Accuser.


INDEX.


Tithe (Teodung).

If any one withhold tithe, E.& G.6.; Edg.I.3.; Eth. IX. 8.;
C.E.8.; Ed.C.7.8.; H. x1.2.

That tithe is to be rendered, and by whom, Ath. I. prowem.

That the bishops see that tithes be rendered, Ib. procem.

The peop &e. very desirous (multum cupidi) of their tithe,
Ath. II. 1.

Tithe commanded to all Christian men, Edm. E.2.; Ed.C.7.8.

To be paid to the mother church, (eald mynster), Edg. I. 1.;
Eth. VIII. 4.

That every one pay his tithe as the plough traverses the tenth
field, Edg.I.1.; Eth. VII. 4. [X.7.; E.C.8.

That a thane pay a third of his tithe to his own church, if it
have a burying place: and if it have no burying place, Edg.
I.2.; C.E.11.

That every tithe of young be paid by Pentecost, Edg. I. 3.;
Eth.V.11. VI.17. IX.9.; C.E. 8.

Of earth fruits by the equinox, Edg.I.3.; Eth. IX. 9.

by All-hallows, Eth.V.11. VI.17. [X.9.; C.E. 8.

Of ‘teodung-sceatts,’ Edg. S. 1.

That he who has tillage pay to God his tithe, Ib. 1.

Ut omnis thaynus decimet quicquid habet, Eth. VIII. 1.

Tripartite division of tithes, Eth. IX. 6.

That the tenth sheaf, the tenth foal, the tenth calf, &c. be ren-
dered, Ed.C. 7. 8.

Tithe enjoined by Saint Augustine, Ib. 8.


Tithing (Decania), }
Tithing-man,
That a man for tracing be furnished by the tithing, Ath.V. iv.
Of assembling those who direct the tithings, Ath.V. vi11.1.
Of the tithing-man, Edg. H. 2.; H. vit. 1.
That no one have cattle without the tithing-man’s witness,
Edg. H. 4.
That every freeman be included in a hundred or tithing, C. 8S.
20.; H. vin. 2.


Toft, p. 184, 185.


Toll and Team (Telonium — Thelonium).

Of toll payable at Billingsgate, Eth. IV. 2.

If the port-reeve or town-reeve charge any one with withholding
toll, Ib. 3.

Of those having ‘toll & team,’ Ed. C. 21.

Definition of toll, Ib. 22.

If any one having toll and team be impleaded in the county,
WiL TI. 2.

The citizens of London exempted from toll, H. p. 502.

That archbishops, bishops, comites, &c. have toll and team on
lands subject to them, H. xx. 2.


Tonellus caballinus, Eth. IV. 2.

Tor, see Ox.

Torfung (Stoning), see Punishments.
80


INDEX.


Track (Spér — Troéd — Bespyrian).

If any one trace cattle into another’s land, Ath. IV. 2.; O. D. 6.

That everyone aid in tracing, Ed.7.; Ath.V. rv.

If the track of lost cattle be followed from one shire to another,
Ath.V- vill. 4.

That it be made known to the reeve, and if he cannot trace it,
Ib. 4.

If any one neglect the tracing, Ib. 5.

If a man cannot show the track, Ib. 8.

That there be no forestal in tracing, Edm. C. 6.

If the hundred pursue a track into another hundred, Edg. H. 5.

That the track (spér) of stolen cattle be committed to the men
of the country, and the process of tracing, O. D.1.


Traditor (Traitor), Ed.C. 18.


Traffic (Barter — Hwearf — Bebycgan — Ceapian).

If a Kentish man buy a chattel in London, H. & E. 16.

If any one sell his own countryman (geleoda), In. 11.

If a chapman traffic up the country, Ib. 25.

If stolen property be attached with him, Ib. 25.

If any one buy an unsound chattel (ceap), Ib. 56.

That no man buy or barter without witness and surety (borh),
Ed.1.; Ath.I.10.12.; Edm. C.5.; Edg.S.6.; Eth.I.3.; C.S.
24.; Ed.C.38.; Wil. I. 45. III. 10. 11.

Of trafficking within port, Ed. 1.; Ath.I.12.13. III.2. V.x.;
Wil. III. 10.

Of Sunday trading, E.& G.7.; Ath.I. 24. HI.2, V.x.; Eth.V.
13, VI. 22.44. 1X.17.; C.E. 15.

That no one sell a horse beyond sea, Ath. I. 18.

If any one buy a chattel, and have afterwards to vouch it to
warranty, Ib.24.; Wil. I. 45.

Of buying cattle and not declaring it, Edg.S. 8.9. 10.11.

That no christian and uncondemned person be sold out of the
country, Eth.V.2. VI.9. VIII.5.; C.S.3.; Wil. I. 41. I[I.15,

If any one traffic with a church, Eth.V. 10. VI. 15.

That no one buy above the value of four pence without witness,
C.S. 24.; Wil. I. 45.

That no one buy any animal, or pannus usatus, without pledge
and witness, Ed. C. 38.

Regulations regarding the purchase of gold and silver, Ib. 38.


Treasure Trove.
Appropriation of, Ed. C. 14.
If any one bring anything to the town, which, he says, he has
found, Ib. 24.
If any one find property, that he publicly announce it, Wil.I. 6.
One of the king’s rights (jura), H.x.1.


Treasurer, see Hordere.


Tree.
If any one cut down or burn a tree or trees in a wood, Alf. 12.;
In. 43, 44.; C.F. 98. 29.; H. xxtil. 2. xXXVII. XLV. 4,
If a man slay another at their common work (felling trees), Alf.
13.; H. xc. 6.
Worship of trees forbidden, C.S. 5.


INDEX.


Tree — continued.
That every tree blown down belongs to the woodward, R.S.
p. 440, 441.
If a man fall from a tree and be slain, H. xc. 7.


Trehing,
Treping, } Ed. C. 31.
Trehingref.
His functions, Ed. C. 32.
Tréd, see Track.
Tiin (Gers-tiin).
If one slay another in a king's ‘tiin,’ Ethb. 5.
in an ‘eorl’s,’ Ib. 13.
If any one overrun (geirnan) a man’s ‘tiin,’ Ib. 17. 29.
If *ceorls’ have a common ‘ gers-tiin’ to fence, In. 42.


Tungrevius, Eth. IV. 3. VIII.2.; H. vit.2. See Reeve.


Twelf-hynde man.
If any one lie with his wife, Alf. 10.
If a ‘twelf-hinde’ betrothed female fornicate, Ib.18.; H. uxxx1t.


9.

If he be slain with a ‘hlo3,’ Alf. 31.

If any one fight in his house, Ib. 39.

His ‘burh-bryce,’ Ib. 40.

Of ‘man-bét’ to be given with his ‘wér,’ In. 70,

His ‘wer,’ E.& G.13.; p.174,175.; O.13.; Wg.6.9.; Wil.
I.8.; H. vxix. uxx. 1. LXXxIV. 2. LXXVI. 4.

If he be slain, p.174, 175.

His oath, O.13.; H. uxrv. 2.
Twy-hynde man, see Ceorl.
Tyenpe-heued, see Decanus.
Tyht-bysig (Ungetrywe — Malam habens famam — Incredibilis).
That all infamati et accusationibus gravati be in pledge, Edm.C. 7.
That a ‘tyht-bysig’ man, who shuns the ‘gem6dt,’ be ridden to,
Edg. II. 7.; C.S. 25.

Of paying his ‘angylde,’ Edg. II. 7.

That he go to the threefold ordeal, Eth. I.1. III. 3.4.; C.S. 30.;
H. Lxv. 3. LxvIl. 1.

Of his ‘lad,’ Eth. I. 1.; C.S. 22.30.; H. uxiv.9. uxvitr. 1.

If his oath has never failed, nor he paid, ‘ peof-gild,’ Eth.I.1.;
C.S. 30.31.; H. rx1v.9. LXvII. 1.

If a lord be willing to clear his ‘tyht-bysig’ man, Eth. I. 1.
IIL. 4.; C.S. 30.

If he be foul (fal) at the ordeal, Eth.I. 1.

If any one be ‘ungetrywe’ to all people, and have no ‘borh,’
Ib. 4.; C.S. 30.33.; Wil.I.47.; H. ixv. 3.

Of a ‘tyht-bysig’ man’s ‘wed,’ Eth. III. 3.

Of an ‘ungetrywe’ man’s oath, &., C. S. 22.

That the accuser of a ‘tyht-bysig’ man have his « ceap-gild,’
Ib. 25.

If three men together accuse him, Ib. 30.; H. txv. 3.

If he have the reeve to swear, C.S.30.

If he run away, Ib. 30.

If he be cited thrice, and appear not, Wil. I. 47.

Of his ‘man-bét,’ H. uxrx.


INDEX.


Tyhtle, see Accusation.
Get¥ma,


Getfman, \ see Vouching to Warranty.


Uz


Uneeases 45, see Oath.
Unerafod,

Unewyd, be. 184, 185.; Eth. III. 14.; C.S.73.
Underfén, see Harbouring.

Under-wed, O. 1.8.

Unfehde a3, see Oath.

Unfeestende, see Fast.

Unfored 46, see Oath.

Ungebendro ¢Placitum de), Eth. IV. 4.
Ungesawene ping, O. D. 7.

Ungetrywe, see Tyht-bysig.

Ungildan Ecere, Eth. IV. 4.

Ungylde, see igylde.

ees } see Weak and Helpless.
Use (Ouse), A. & G.1.

Usurer and Usury, Ed. C. 37.
Uthesium, Wil. I. 4.

Ut-hleapan, see Escape.

Ut-laga,

Ut-lagaria, } see Outlaw.

Ut-lah,

Utleipa, see Escape.

Ut-ware, Wg.9.; R. 3.


Vacea, C. F. 97.
Vadium, see Wed.
Vagrants.


If a vagrant have (have not) a lord, H. ivi.
If a vagrant commit an offence, H. Lxxxir. 2.


Vavassur (Vavassor).
His heriot, Wil. I. 20.
Vavassores to attend the placita comitatuum, H. vit. 2.
Of the vavassour’s court, H. xxvi.
That they have pleas (placita) affecting ‘wite,’ and ‘wer,’ H. xxvit.


Velteres, C. F. 32.


INDEX.


Venatio, see Hunting.


Vengeance (Wrece).
If any one take vengeance before he has demanded justice, In. 9.
If any one will avenge a thief, Ath. I.6. V.1.5.
Of taking vengeance by slaying the thief, Ath.V. vit1. 3.
That a man swear that he will not take vengeanee for a punish-
ment, Eth.VII. 17.
If any one slay another in revenge, H. Lxxx111. 6.


Ver, Swi
wine.
Verres, 1 e


Vert and Venison, C.F. 2. 4. 21.30.
Vescunte, see Vicecomes.

Via Regia, see Highway.

Vicarius, H. vit. 2.


Vicecomes (Vescunte).
That the vicecomes of London detain not any one’s money, &c.,
Ed. C. L. 4.
If any vicecomes be convicted of injustice, Wil.I. 2.
Of forisfactura to the vicecomes, Ib. 2.
The king’s ‘soen’ in custodia vicecomitum, H. xx. 1.
If a baro comitatus plead against the vicecomes, H. xxx.
The vicecomes the summoning officer, H. x11. 5.
If he unjustly levy a distress, H. 11. 4.
That he may not sell the property seized by distress on the same
day, Ib. 6.
If a vicecomes de placito suo fix a day, and do not attend,
H. ix. 3.
If anyone be impleaded of theft, &c. by the vicecomes, H. LXvI. 9.
Of ‘grid’ given by him, H. txx1x. 4.
Vicedominus, H. vit. 2.
Vicegerent (Gespelia), Ath. IX. 2. 42.
Vicini, see Neighbours.
Vilain,
Villanus,
Virga.
Of denial sub virga, H. xiv. 3.


} see Ceorl.


Visnetum, see Hundred.


Vouching to Warranty (Cennan— Team—Teama—Getéman).

Of vouching stolen goods to warranty at the king’s hall, H.& E.
7.16.

If any one vouch property to warranty to him who had previously
denied it, In, 35,

That no one vouch to warranty stolen ‘ceap’ to a ‘peow,’ Ib. 47.

Of vouching to the sepulchre of the dead, Ib. 53.; Eth. IT. 9.

If stolen property be attached, and the party vouch it to another
party, In. 75.

That every man know his warrantor (getyma), A.& G. 4.

That every man have his warrantor, Ed. 1.

That he who vouches have unlying witness, Ib. 1.

A man’s oath who finds his property in another's possession, O. 3.


INDEX.


Vouching to Warranty — continued.

If any one buy a chattel and have afterwards to vouch it ta
warranty, Ath.I.24.; Wil. I. 45.

If any one vouch to warranty in another shire, Eth. IT. s.

That he with whom lost property is found declare whence he
had it, Ib. 8.; Wil. I. 21.

That in every ‘team’ a man have good ‘borh,’ Eth. II. 8. 9.

That it was formerly thought necessary, in the first instance,
to vouch thrice to warranty, Ib. 9.

If any one take possession, and will declare no further ‘team,’
Tb. 9.

That every vouching be in the king’s burg, Eth. III. 6.

If ae one will vouch cattle to warranty beyond the stream,

8.

That no one be entitled to vouch, unless he have witness whence
the property came, C.S. 23.

If any one vouch to warranty that which he bought without
witness, Ib. 24.; Wil. I. 21. 45.

If there be true witness, that property be vouched thrice, C. S. 24.


Vulpes, C. F. 27.


Ww.


Weg of wool, Edg. II. 8.
Walreaf, Ath. IV.7.; H. uxxxiit. 4. 5. 6.


Wapentake (Weepen-getec).
That no one buy or sell in a wapentake without witness, Edg. S. 6.
Of ‘grid’ given in a wapentake, Eth. III.1.
That a * gemdt’ be held in every wapentake, Ib. 3.
Division of comitibus et vicecomitibus, Ed. C. 13,
The same as hundred, and definition of the name, Ib. 30. & 2.2
When to assemble, H. vit. 4.


Wardemotum, H. p. 503.
Wareham, Ath.I. 14.
‘Wargus, H. pxxxut. 5.
Warscot, C.F. 9.


Watching.
That all cities, burgs, castles, hundreds, and wapentakes be
nightly watched, Wil. III. 6.


Water-wells, C.S.5. See Superstitions.
Watlinga Stret, A.& G.1.; Ed.C.12. 30.; Wil. I. 26.
Wax, Ed.C.L. 8.


Weak and Helpless (Unmaga — Unhal).
If any one entrust an ‘unmaga’ to another, and he die, Alf.17.;
H. Lxxxvill. 7. 8.
That the strong and the weak, the healthy and the unhealthy,
are not to bear a like burthen, Eth.VI. 52.; C.S. 69.


INDEX.


Wealh, }


Wyliscmon,

If a ‘ Wealh gafol-gilda’ be slain, In. 23.

Of a ‘Wealh’s hyde,’ Ib. 23.

If a ‘Wealh’ have five hides of land, Ib. 24.

If a ‘ Wealh’ have a hide, or half a hide of land, or none, Ib. 32.;
Wg. 7.8.

Of the king’s ‘hors-wealh’s wér-gild,’ In. 33.

Of a ‘Wylise onstal,’ Ib. 46.

Of forcing a ‘Wealh wite-peow’ to the scourging, Ib. 54.

If a‘ peow Wealh’ slay an Englishman, Ib.74.; H. uxx. 5.

Of a ‘Wylisc’ thief, Ath.V. vi. 3.

That neither English nor Dane receive the other's ‘Wealh,
Eth. IT. 6.

That between ‘Wealh’ and English there be no other ‘Jad’ but
ordeal, O. D. 2.

If a ‘Wealh’ slay an Englishman, and vice versa, Ib. 5.

That a ‘Wealh’ may not travel on English land, nor vice versa,
without the appointed landmen, Ib. 6.

That the English do justice to the ‘Wylisc,’ Ib. 8.


Weallian, see Exile.
Weapons (Sweord — Spere — Byrne — Helm.)
If any one furnish weapons to another, where there is strife,


Ethb. 18.
If any one draw a weapon, where others are drinking, H. & E.


18, 14.

If any one lend his weapon to another, and a man be slain, Alf.
19.3; H. Lxxxvil. 1.

If a sword-‘hwita’ receive another’s weapon to furbish, Alf.
19.; H. uxxxvil. 3.

If any one have a spear on his shoulder, and another stake
himself thereon, &c., Alf.36.; H. pxxxviil. 1. 2. 3.

If any one lend a sword or give a spear to another's ‘esne,’
In. 29.

A coat of mail’ (byrne) and sword to be given in payment of
‘wér-gild,’ Ib. 54.

If a ‘ceorl’ have a helm and hauberk, and a sword ornamented
with gold, Wg. 10.

If any one place his spear at another's door, or lay weapons in
another's way, and harm be done, C.S.76.; H. uxxxvit. 2.

Of arms to be supplied to the forest officers, C.F. 6. 7. 8.

Proverb —‘ Bicge spere of side odde bere,’ Ed. C. 12.

That all comites, barones, milites, &c. be well equipped with
arms, Wil. III. 8.

Arcus et jaculorum gestatio, a plea of the forest, H. xvir.

Of arms given to the manumitted, H. Lxxvi11. 1.

Weapons of the slain, how to be disposed of, H. LxxxIilII. 6.

If a man rush on the spear of his enemy and be slain, H.
LXXXVIIL. 4.

Wed (Vadium).

That every man carefully keep his oath and ‘wed,’ Alf.1.;
C.E.19.

That the surety make * bot’ for ‘wed-bryce, Alf. 1,

If a man belie his ‘ wed’ before his bishop, In..13.


INDEX.


Wed — continued.
Of ‘weds’ given to hold the ‘frid,’ Ath.V. viu1. 9.
Of a ‘tyht-bysig’ man’s ‘ wed,’ Eth. IIT. 3.
Of the ‘ wed’ to be given in various suits, Ib. 12.
Of laying an ‘ under-wed,’ O. D. 8.
That a baron or king’s man need not give vadium in misericordia
tocius pecunie, H.1. 8.
Qui bellum vadiaverit et defecerit, H. i1x. 15.


Wedding (Gifta— Gewifian). See Marriage.
Weg-reaf, Ethb. 19. 89.


Weights and Measures.

That there be one measure and one weight, as at London and
Winchester, Edg. II. 8.

That every one shun false weights and measures, Eth.V. 24.
VI. 28.

That weights and measures be strictly corrected, Eth.VI. 32.;
C.S. 9.

That there be just weights and measures duly stampt, Wil. III.7.


Well (Puteus).
If any one open a well or reservoir (cisterna), and anything fall
therein, H. xc. 3.
Wemming, H. xxxill. 2. LXVII. 2.
Went-sete, O.D.9.
Weofod-bit (Altaris emendatio), C.S.42.; H.x1.8. LXVI.3,. LXVIIL 5.
Weofod-pegn, see Priest.
Weordig (Curtillum), In. 40.
Wer (Pretium Nativitatis), i
Wér-borh, J
Wer-gild,
That a freeman who lies with another’s wife compensate (abicge)
with his ‘ wér-gild,’ Ethb. 31.
That the manumittor have the ‘ wér-gild’ of the ‘hine,’ Wih. s.
That a thief, if taken, be released by his ‘wér,’ In. 12.
Of the king’s ‘ geneat’s wér-gild,’ 1b. 19.
If the ‘wér’ of one slain for a thief be demanded, Ib. 21.
A foreigner’s ‘wer,’ if slain—a ‘peow’s’—a Wealh ‘gafol-
gilda’s,’ Ib. 23.; H. uxvu. 1.
That the king and lord have the ‘wér’ of a child clandestinely
begotten, In. 97.
Of a‘ Wylisc’ man’s ‘wér,’ Ib. 32.; We. 7. 8.
The king’s ‘ hors-wealh’s wér-gild,’ In. 33.
That a man accused of ‘ wer-feehd’ give a corslet and sword in
payment of ‘wér-gild,’ Ib. 54.
Of a ‘twy-, six-, twelf-hinde’ man’s ‘ wér-gild,’ Ib. 70.; p. 174,
175.; 0.13. ; ; We. 6.9-12.; Wil.I.3.; H. uxiv.2. LXIX. LXX.
1. LXXVI. 4.
If a man take a ‘ wér-gild’ thief, and he escape, In. 72.
That a man wounding another in resisting divine dues be liable
in his ‘wer,’ E.& G.6.; C.S.49.; H. xr.11.
If a man be slain, that he be paid ‘for according to his birth,
p. 174, 175.; H. uxviit1.


INDEX.


Wér, &c. — continued.

That a homicide find ‘wér-borh,’ p, 147, 175.; Edm. S. 7.;
WiLI.7.

Of a king’s, archbishop’s, bishop’s, &c. ‘ wér-gild’ by Northern
law, Wg. 1. 2. 3.

a ‘hold’s,’ the king’s ‘ heah-gerefa’s,’ a mass-thane’s, and a
secular thane’s, Ib. 4. 5.
a ‘ceorl’s’ and ‘ Wylisc’ man’s, Ib. 6-12.

Of a ‘ceorl’s,’ a thane’s, a king’s ‘wér-gild’ by Mercian law,
M.L.; Wil.I.8. _

That no one be condemned in more than his ‘ wér,’ Edg. II. 2.

That a man, if foul at the ordeal, pay his ‘wér’ to his lord, or
the king, Eth.I.1.; C.S. 30.

Of the king’s ‘wér-gild,’ Eth. V. 30.

Of releasing a man by his ‘ wér-gild’ who fights in the king’s
burg, &c., Eth.VIL. 15.

Of releasing a man who seeks a sanctuary (frid-stol) by his
‘wér-gild,’ Ib. 16.

That a ‘ciric-fridbreca’ pay his ‘wér’ to the king and Christ,
Eth. IX. 2.

A married man’s ‘ wér,’ C.S. 55.

Of animals to be given in payment of ‘wér,’ Wil. I. 9.

If a one pronounce false judgment, that he forfeit his ‘ wer,’

b. 13.

Of ‘wérs’ in Wessex, Wil.I.8.; H. vxx. 1.

Great difference in ‘wér-gilds’ in Kent, H. rxxvi. 7.

Cases of forfeiture of ‘wér,’ H. uxxxvil. 6.


Weralada, see Lad.
Wereplegius, H. uxxvi.1. See Werborh.
Werewulf, C.E. 26.


Wer-fehd.
That a man may deny ‘ wer-fehs,’ In. 46.
If a man be accused of ‘ wer-feh%,’ and make denial, Ib. 54.
That a man accused of ‘ wer-feehd’ may give a corslet and sword

in payment of ‘ wér-gild,’ Ib. 54.

Wer-lad, see Lad.

Werminga, H. Lxiv.6.

Wer-tyhtle, see Accusation.


Wessex.

Of the king’s rights (gerihta) in Wessex, C.S.12.

A thane’s heriot in Wessex, Ib. 72.

If any one break the king’s peace in West Saxena lagu, Wil. I. 2.

If any one accused of theft flee from his pledge, Ib. 3.

Of a thane’s, a ‘ceorl’s,’ &c. ‘wér’ in Wessex, Ib. 8.; H. txx.1.

Of claiming stolen property in Wessex, Wil. I. 21.

Two kinds of witnesses in Wessex, nominati et electi, H. xxx1. 8.

The king’s and queen’s ‘overseunes’ in Wessex, H. xxxiv. 3,
XXXV. 1.

Of an antejuramentum in a charge of theft, &c. in Wessex,
H. vxvi.8.


Wether, In. 70.
Wey of Wool, Edg. II. 8.


INDEX.


Wiccan,
Wicce,
Wicce-creft,


VE.&G.11; AthL6; EthVL7.; C.S.4.5. See
‘ Superstitions.


Wic-geréfa, see Reeve.
Wicnere, Eth. IX. 32.
Wic-weore, R.S. p. 434, 435.


Widow (Wuduwe).

Of the ‘mund’ of widows, Ethb. 75. 76.

Excused from contributing to the ‘frid-gild,’ Ath.V. 11.

That every widow is in God’s and the king’s ‘grid,’ Eth.V. 21.
VI. 26.

That every widow remain single for twelve months, Eth.V. 21.
VI. 26.; C.S.74.; H. x1. 18.

That a man may not marry the widow of a kinsman, Eth.VI.12.

If a man force a widow, Ib. 39.; C.S. 53.

Widows not to be oppressed, Eth.VI. 47.

That widows be not compelled to take orders prematurely, C.S.74.

That every widow pay the heriots within twelve months, Ib. 74.;
H. xiv. 6.

A widow’s portion of the ‘wér’ of the slain, Wil. I.9.

If any one marry a widow within a year, H. x1, 13. xit. 3.


Wif,
Wifman,
Gewifian, see Marriage.

Wiflac, C.S.48. See Woman.

Wigian, see Fighting.

Wiglere, E.& G. 11.; Eth.VI.7.; C.S.4. See Superstitions.
Wilde Weorf, O.D. 7.

Winchester, Ath.I.14.; Edg. I.8.; C.E.1.; €.8. 30,
Wine, Eth. IV. 2.

Winter-feorm, R.S. p. 440, 441.

Winter-steal, O. D. 7.


Witan.
That they settle ‘fahés,’ Edm. S. 1.
ite.
That the king is entitled to the ‘wites’ of those having ‘béc-land,’
Eth. I. 1.
Its proportion to the ‘angylde,’ Alf.9.; Eth.IX.5.; C.E.3.


Wite-reeden, In, 50. 71.


Wite-peow.
If a ‘wite-peow’ abscond, or be slain, In. 24.
If a ‘wite-peow’ have been accused of theft before he became
a ‘wite-peow,’ Ib. 48.
Of pursuing a ‘ wite-peow’ to the scourging, Ib. 54.
That a ‘ wite-peow’ be released from prison, Ath, I. procem.


} see Woman.


INDEX.


Witness and Testimony. See also Perjury.

If any one belie his testimony before a bishop, In. 13.

That no property be bought or sold without witness, Ed. 1.;
Ath.I.10.; Edm.C.5.; Edg.S.6.; Eth.I.3.; C.S.24.; Ed.C.
38.; Wil.1. 45. III. 10. 11.

That purchases be made with the portreeve’s or reeve’s testimony,
Ed. 1.; Ath.I.12.

oe ae priest stand as a false witness, E.& G.3.; Eth. IX, 27.;

. E. 5.

If any one buy property with witness, and have to vouch it to
warranty, Ath, I.24.; Wil.I.45.

That in the manung of every reeve unlying men be nominated
as witnesses, Ath. IV.1.

How witnesses are to be chosen, Ib. 1.

That witnesses are to be appointed in every ‘burh’ and in every
hundred, and various regulations respecting witnesses, and
purchasing cattle, Edg. S. 3-10.

If it be discovered that any one has falsely declared that he
bought with witness, Ib. 11.

If any one pervert (awende) that which is declared before
witness, Eth. III. 2.

That every one go to the witnessing of that to which he dare
swear on the ‘haligdém,’ Ib. 2.

That false witness be avoided, Eth.V. 24. VI. 28.

ar no one be entitled to ‘team’ without witness of purchase,

 S. 23.

That the witness declare, that he is a true witness, Ib. 23,

That no one buy above the value of four-pence without witness,
Ib. 24.; Wil. I. 45.

If any one stand as a false witness, C.S.37.; C.F.14.; H. x1. 7.

That no one buy a live animal or ‘pannus usatus’ without
witness, Ed. C. 38.

Number of witnesses required for the condemnation of a priest,
H. v.11.

That no lord or justice may convict by witnesses without con-
tradiction, H. xviii. 4.


Witnung, Eth. VII. 17.
Wit-word, Eth. III. 3.
Wiser-cwide, Eth. V. 31.
Wider-saca, see Apostate.
Wiser-tihtle, see Accusation.
Wluesheued, E. C.6.

Wolf, C.F. 27.


Woman (Wif—Wifman — Femne— Ew — Cwene—Wiflac).

If a freeman lie with a freeman’s wife, Ethb. 31.

If any one force a woman, Ib. 82.; Alf. 26.; Eth. VI. 39.; C.S.
53.75.; Wil.I. 12. 18.

If a man lie with an ‘esne’s cwyne,’ Ethb. 85.

If a ‘ceorl’ die leaving a wife and child, H.& E.6.; In. 38,

If any one slay a pregnant woman, Alf. 9.; H. Lxx. 14. 15.

If a man lie with a ‘twelf-hynde,’ a ‘six-hynde,’ or a ‘ceorl’s”
wife, Alf. 10.


INDEX.


Woman — continued.

If a man seize on the breast of a female, or throw her down,
or lie with her, Alf.11.; Wil. I. 18.

If a betrothed female fornicate, Alf.18.; H. Lxxxit. 9.

Case where a ‘ceorl’ steals, and the wife is not culpable, In. 7.57.

If a man buy a wife, and the marriage do not take place, Ib. 31.

If a ‘ceorl’ die leaving his wife pregnant, Ib. 38.

Case where a thief’s wife is to have a share of the surplus of his
property, Ib.57.; Ath. V.1.1.; Wil. I. 27.

If two brothers or near relations cohabit with one woman,
E. & G. 4.

If a free woman commit theft, Ath. III. 6.

If a woman survive her husband, her portion, Edm. B. 3, 4.

Of a married woman’s share in the property, Ib. 4.

If a man wish to take his wife into the land of another thane,
Ib. 7.

If a married woman do wrong, Ib. 7.

That no one have more than one wife, C. E. 7.

That a man may not marry his ‘god-sib,’ Ib. 7.

That a man may not marry a divorced woman, Ib. 7.

If any one profane Lent by ‘wif-lac,’ C. 8. 48.

If a woman commit adultery, while her husband is living, Ib. 54.

That the wife continue in the dwelling after her husband's death,
Ib. 73.

That no woman or maiden be forced to marry one whom she
dislikes, Ib. 75. ;

If stolen property be placed in the wife’s custody, Ib. 77.

A woman may not prevent her husband from bringing what he
will to his cot, Ib. 77.

If the wives of murderers remain in the country, Ed. C.19.

If a pregnant woman be sentenced to death or mutilation,
Wil. I. 33,

If any baron of the king wish to give his daughter, &c. in mar-
riage, H. 1.3.

If a baron die leaving a daughter, Ib. 3.

If a wife be left without children, Ib. 3.

If a wife be left with children, Ib. 4.

Of property committed to a wife, H. xx11l. 3. XLv. 2.

If a woman commit homicide, or be slain, H. yxx. 12. 13.

If a woman fornicate, and destroy her offspring, Ib. 16.

If a woman marry two brothers, Ib. 17.

If a woman survive her husband, Ib. 22.

If a wife die childless, Ib. 23.


Wood (Wudu — Wudu-bernet — Wudu-hewet — Nemoris cesio -—
Nemus inoperatum — Boscus — Subboscus).


If any one burn or cut down a wood, Alf.12.; In. 43. 44.; C.F.
28. 29.; H. xxilI.2. XXXVII. XLV. 4.


Woodward (Wudu-weard), R.S. p.440, 441.
Wool, Edg. II. 8.

Woollen cloth, Ed. C. L. 8.

Woruld-frid, see Frié.


Woruld-gerihta, see Secular Dues.


INDEX.


Wounds, Wounding and Maiming.

Penalties for wounds, Ethb. 32-72. 87.; Alf. 44-77.; Wil. I.10.
11.{9.; H.xcri1.1-87. xcIv. 1-5.

If a dog bite or tear any one, Alf. 23.

If a neat wound a man, Ib. 24.

If a man stake himself on a spear, Ib. 36.; H. LXxxvill. 1. 2. 3.

If any one wound another in resisting divine dues, E.& G.6.;
C.S. 49.; H. xr. 11. ;

If any one wound another within the walls of a church (N.E.
Law), Eth.VII. 13.

If any one make peace with another, on account of a wound,
Hi. 1xx. 11.

If a priest wound any one, H. Lxx111. 2.

If any one wish to compound for a wound, H. Lxxxviii. 16.


Wrece, see Exile.
Wrece, see Vengeance.
Wringh-weg (Siringia), R.S. p.438, 439.


Writ.
Contempt of the king’s, H. x111. 1.


Wudu,
Wudu-bernet, } see Wood.
Wudu-hewet,

Wuduwe, see Widow.

Wudu-weard (Woodward), R.S. p. 440, 441.
Wylisc, see Wealh.

Wyln, see Deow.

Wyrhta, In. 59.

Gewyrhta, see Principal.


¥,


Ymbren-dagas, see Ember days.
Yoke (Hfr-geoht), In. 60.
Yoongmen, C.F. 2.

Yrfe, see Property and Cattle.


Yule, see Christmas.


Zona, Ed. C. L. 8.


INDEX.


D.


Dearfan, see Poor.


Degen,
Degen-riht, |
Degen-scipe, see also Thane.
Degen-weordscipe, {
Degen-wér,
That a mass-priest is worthy of thane-right, O.12.; H. Lxrv. 2. 3.
That priests so conduct themselves as to be worthy of thane-
neh and thane-‘wer,’ O. 12.; Eth.V.9. VI. 5. IX: 28.; C.E.
; H. uxvirt. 3.
That a ‘ceorl,’ if he have five hides, &c, is worthy of thane-right,
R. 2.
Of a merchant becoming worthy of thane-right, Ib. 6.
That he who promotes unlawfulness, or pronounces unjust judg-
ment, forfeit his thaneship, Edg. II. 3.; C.S.15.; Wil. 1. 39.;
H. xii. 4, XXXIV. 1.
Deod-wita, R. 1.
Deof, see Theft.
Deof-gyld, Eth. I. 1. III. 4.; C.S. 30.
Deof-wracu, Ath.V. 1. 4. 5.
Deow (Hine —Man—Wyln — ht — Serviens — Servus — Ancilla).
If a servus slay a servus, Ethb. 86.; H. Lxx. 2. 3.
A ‘peow’s weg-reaf,’ Ethb. 89.
If a *peow’ steal, Ib. 90.; Wih. 27.; Ath. III. 6.; Edm. C. 4.
If any one give freedom to his man on the altar, Wih. 8.
If a ‘peow’ work on a Sunday, Ib. 9. 10.; In.3.; E.& G.7.
C.S. 46.
If he sacrifice to devils, Wih. 13.
If he eat flesh in fast time, Ib. 14. 15.
If a He sl or any one force a ‘peowen,’ Alf. 25.
His ‘ wer’ if slain, Ib. 23.; H, vxvitl. 1.
That ‘peow-men’ may not be vouched to the warranty of stolen
goods, In. 47.; Ath. I. 24.
Ifa ‘peow-wealh’ slay an Englishman, Ib.74.; H. Lxx. 5.
That a ‘peow’ may not ‘meg-gildan’ with a "freeman, In. 74.;
H. ixx. 6.
If a ‘peow’ work on a festival, E.&G.7.; C.S. 45.; H. x1. 10.
If a ee compel his ‘peow’ to work on a festival, E. & G.7.;
C.S8.4
Ifa jean! break a lawful fast, E.& G. 8.; C.S. 47.
If a lord or the ‘hordere’ be privy to a theft by his ‘peow,’
Ath. I. 3.
If he prove foul at the ordeal, Ib.19.; Eth. J. 2.; C.S. 39.
If any one steal a ‘ peow,’ or he steal himself, Ath.V. v1. 3.
If our ‘zhts’ be slain by the Danes, and vice versa, Eth. IL. 7.;
H. ixx. 8.
Of perpetual servitude (peowet), Eth.VII. 16.
That every slave be free from work three days before the feast
of Saint Michael, Eth. VIII. 2.


INDEX.


Deow — continued.


If a slave break the feast of Saint Michael, Eth. VIII. 2.
If a married man lie with his female slave, C.S. 55.
If a ‘peow’ drive a beast of the forest, C. F. 22-94.
That servientes hold themselves well armed, Wil. III, 8.
Form of manumission, Ib.15.; H. uxxvi11.1. 3.
If a servus remain a year and a day in a city, &c., Wil. IIL. 16.
Of property committed to a servus or ancilla, H. xx111.3. xiv. 2.
If a servus steal under the value of 8 den., H. u1x. 23.
If a freeman steal with a ‘peow,’ Ib. 24.
If many servi steal, Ib. 25.
That no one born in servitude be admitted to holy orders,
before manumission, H. uxvitt. 4.
If a servus slay any one by his lord’s command, Ib. 11.
If a freeman slay a servus, H. Lxx. 4. Lxxv. 3. 4.
Various sources of servitude, H. Lxxv1. 3.
If one born of a servile father and free mother, or vice versa,
be slain, H. xxvii. 1. 2.
Of ‘man-bot,’ if a servus obtain liberty, Ib. 3.
Form, if any one become a servus, H. Lxxvill. 2.
His ‘overseunessa,’ H. txxxt. 3.
If a servus commit homicide, or steal with freemen, H. Lxxxv. 4.
If any one has (has not) a charta libertatis from his lord,
H. Lxxxix. 2.
Ding,
Dingd,
If one cite another to the ‘ping,’ H.& E. 8.
Of ‘grid-bot’ given in the ‘ping’ of the five burgs, Eth. III. 1.
in the ‘burg-ping,’ Ib. 1.
Geping,
Dingian,
Dingeman, H. xv.
Drel, Eth. II. 5.


Dundersfield, Ath. IV.4. V.x.


} see Compounding.


a A FIC IO A


Lonpon: Printed by Grorcz E. Eyre and Anpaew Sporriswoops,
Printers to the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty. 1840.
