Northern Mythology, Vol. II (Benjamin Thorpe, 1851; public domain)
===============================================================================
Vol. II of Thorpe's great collection of Northern popular traditions — Scandinavian merman and mermaid lore including 'The Merman and Mermaid'; completes the live Vol. I. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/northern-mythology-vol-2-b-thorpe).

Northern Mythology


BERSERKER


BOOKS


CONTENTS.


SCANDINAVIAN POPULAR TRADITIONS.


Tutuls and Mountain-Giants
The Jutal on Hestmande

The Jutul’s Bridge
The Girl at the Seter
Gurri Knnnan
The Bridal Crown,
The Bishop's Cattle
‘The Midwife
‘The Oiestad Horn ...


iv CONTENTS.


The Rore-Trotd
‘The Brunmtgi
‘The Qreernknurre
‘The Finngalkn
Gertrud’s Bird... 5
Aasgaardsreia (Wild Hunt) ib,
‘The Merman (Murmennill) and Mermaid (Margyge) ..esecenee 97
‘The Sea-Snake .. 8
Dragons. al
‘The Severed Hand 2
OF St, Olaf. au
Of St. Olaf and the first Church in Norway... 39
St. Olaf at Vasler ... - 40
St. Olaf at Ringerige - 42
Axel Thordsen and Fair Valdborg. 43
‘The Signe-Kjerring, or Witch 47
Il. SWEDISH TRADITIONS.
Christmas or Yule Pastimes 49
‘Modern Traditions of Odin 50
‘Modern Traditions of Thor .. 51
Of Rocking Stones and Thundering Stones ba
‘Superstitious Usage in Case of Theft . ib,
Finnish Superstition ey 55
Of Giants and Dwarfs 56
King Eric's Dream . 58
Of Bidmn the Swede, Ulf Jarl, and Cnut the Great. 59
Christinn-Heathen Traditions of Trolls, ete. 61
Or Eves 62
Of the Mount-Folk.. 63
Elfin Gardens 67
Of Bergtagning (Mount-taking) ib.
The Flying Elves. 68
Lafjerskor .. a
‘The Skogerii—The Siti. 73


conrENTs. v


Or Waren Exvas.
I. The Mermaid

IL Fountain Maidens
IIL, The Neck and the Strémkarl.
The Wild Hunt
Mystic Animals
‘The Mountain Troll I,


m1.
Iv.
‘The Trolls celebrate Christmas,
Origin of the Noble Name of Trolle..
‘The Giant’s Path.
‘The Tomte or Swedish
Ravens.—Pyslingar and Mylingar —Skrat
‘The Werwolf
Jack o? Lantern


‘The Ram in the Getaberg .. ib,
‘The Dragon, or White Serpent 98
‘The Uninvited Wedding Guest 100
(Of Lund Cathedral... - 101
The Church-grim and the Church-lamb -. 102
Helige Thor's Killa (Well) 103


Of the Virgin Mary
Yule-Seraw

‘The Biiiraan, or Bare
Midsummer Eve


Christmas
The Cuckoo eine By
Swedish Popular Belief 108


Ul. DANISH TRADITIONS.

Barrow- on Mount-Fouk, Euy-Foux, ano
Dwanri

Origin of Trolls


Tuous


ns


vi CONTENTS.


Page
ELf-Polk .. 16
‘The Klint-King on the Isle of Méen 124
‘The Underground Folk in Bornholm 195
The Mount-Polk borrow Beer 136
‘The Elf-Folk under the Hearth. a7
Fru Mette ib.
‘The Underground Folk fetch » Midwife 128
Trolls at Uglerup 130
‘The Midwife of Fuur 131
Skotte 132


King Pippe is
The Troll at Mehred
‘The Man in the Oxnebierg
‘The Unbidden Gnests.
Ellevilde, ot Elf-erazed
‘The Brudehii, or Bride Mount


“Hana Pamtleder 137
‘The Aged Bride 138
Bondevette . i.
‘The Giant’s Daughter and the Ploughman 140
Srend Felling sw. 11
Altar-Cups 44


‘The Troll’s Glove M9
‘The Troll outwitted ib,
Raginal 150
Gillikop 151


‘The Trolls desire to be saved
‘The Trolls’ Fear of the Cross
‘The Trolls’ Fear of Thunder
‘The Trolls’ Hatred of Bells

The Trolls forsuke: Vendsyssel
‘The Elf-folk forsake ri ...
‘The Trolls cast Stones at Churches
‘The Ninse or Nias


CONTENTS. vii


‘The Kirkegrim (Church-grim) .
‘The Kirkegrim and the Strand-vareel
Hyldemoer.—Elder..
The Werwolf
The Mars...
Mermen and Merwives.
Changelings
‘How to distinguish a Changeling ..
Tae Devin.
Friar Raus
‘The Devil at Cards .
A Scholar assigns himself to the Devil
The Devil’s Footstep ..
Jens Plovguard =
‘How the Devil allowed himself to be outwitted
‘The Lady of Risthygaard
A Feast with the Devil...
‘The Book of Cyprianns ..
Of Witches ..
‘The Shipmaster of Aarhuns and the Finlap ..
Of Frit Skud
‘Traprrions ov Spacraes.
‘The Flying Huntsman
Grin-Jette


Tons Seger seve
King Abel’s Hunt
King Valdemar's Hunt ..
Pamishment for removing Land-marks
A'Sumday’s Child.
Spectres in St, Knud’s Church at Odense
Hans Neb .
A Sagacious Woman ..
‘Master Mads and Herr Anders ..


viii CONTENTS.


Of Dragons ..
‘The Dam-Honee ..
‘The Hel-Horse.
‘The Church-Lamb
The Grave-Sow .
The Night-Raven ..
The Jack o* Lantern
‘The Basilisk...
The Jerusalem Shoemaker, or Wandering Jew, in Jutland...... ib.
Or Laxus, Borromuses Pons, nrc.
Tis Lake ..
‘The Sunken Mansion ..
Trapivions or Warts.
‘Helen's Well
St. Knnd’s Well «
Snogakilde (Snake's Well.
‘The Sand-Hills at Nestved.....
Or Trees
The Lonely Thom «
Of the Pestilence in Jutland .
‘The Rat-hunter ..
Historica.
Habor snd Signelil
Feggeklit ..
Jellinge Barrows ..
Holger the Dane under Kronborg
Bishop William's Foot-mark
Bishop William’s Death and Burial
The Punishment of Tnlumanity
Svend Grathe’s Military Chest
‘The Two Church Towers ..
Archbishop Absalon’s Death
Dannebrog «.
Dannebrog Ships.
St, Niols (Nicholas), the Patron of Asrhuut «1.


CONTENTS, ix


Little Karsten’s (Christine’s) Grave .
Marsk Stig
‘King Valdemar and Queen Helvig
‘Queen Helvig and Falk Lohman...
Queen Margaret when Child
Prophecy of King Frederie the First’
Spectacles Ducats .
Or Hustonicat Pensows, Famtty TRapirions, Etc.
‘The Arms of the Bille Family...
Herr Eske Brok 1...
‘The Half-full Bottle ..
Herr Erland Limbek ..
‘The Family of Monrad ..
‘The Name and Arms of the Rosenkrandses ..
‘The Arms of the Trolle Family .
‘Major General Sranwedel ..
‘Traprtions oF Towns AND orien PLACES,
‘The Ramparts of Copenhagen .
‘The Image of St. Olu?
Secret Passages under Aalborg ..
Or Cuurcies ann Convenrs.
Of Churches...
The Tower of St. Mary's in Copenhagen ..
‘The Chimes in the Tower of St. Nicholas
‘The Ses-Troll in the Issefiord
Roeskilde Cathedral
Veiby Chureb ..
Kalundborg Church ..
Rachlév Church
The Altar-pieee in Sord Chureh
Blood Spots on the Wall of Karise Church ...
‘The Church at Falster...
‘Maribo Church
‘Aarhus Cathedral
Ribe Cathedral


x CONTENTS,


‘The Chureh at Erte
The Altar-piece in Sleswig Cathedral
‘TRADITIONS RELATING TO MANSION!
Herlufshoim
Vaargaard
‘Traprrions or Parests ano Wise Man.
St. Andrew of Slagelse
Master Laurids
‘The Priest of Nérre-Vilstrap
St. Kield of Viborg
Treasures ann Tarasune-Dicoxns.
‘The Treasure in Hyirvel Bakke
‘The Treasure in Daugbierg-Daus


SBE ER End


or Roppaxs.
‘Thyre Bolixe and her Sons
Sterk Olger
Voldborg’s Day ..
Friar Rous
Danish Popular Belief


NTRODUCTION:.


Aatap the lofty Hjelds® of Norway the gigantic Jutul has
fixed his home, of whose fingere and feet traces may be
seen in the hard stone, and whom fragments of rock and
ponderous grave-stones serve for weapons; in the lower
ridges the wily Troll and the beautiful Huldra have their
welling ; in mounds and by lofty trees the countless
swarms of Elves have their haunt, while beneath the
earth the small but long-armed and skilful dwarfs excreise
their handicrafts. In the evening twilight Thusser and
‘Vesttir still wander about, and the merry, wanton Nisser
frisk and dance by moonlight. In the rivers and lakes
lnrks the fell Nuk, and through the air flies the Aasgaards-
reia’s frantic crew®, announcing bloodshed and war, while
a guardian, warning Pélgie attends each mortal on his
earthly career. ‘Thus speaks tradition, and that this be-
lief is of long standing in the North may be concluded


* From Faye's Nore Folke-Sogo, Christiania, 1844.

+ T have preserved the native orthography of this word (signifying x far
‘outstretched stony mountain), to prevent confusion with the English word
felé. Te is our north of Bogland felt # See p. 25.


xii INTRODUCTION.


from the testimony of Procopius :—“The Thulites worship
many gods and spirits, in heaven, in air, on earth, in the
‘sea, and some even that ure said to inhabit the waters of
springs and rivers. They constantly make to them all
Kinds of offerings 2”

‘The question that naturally first presents itself to us, on
hearing these wondrous stories, is: What ean have given
birth to, and indslibly imprinted and quickened in the
imagination of the peoplea superstition, which is the more
remarkable, as similar opinions are found among the
majority of the people in the north of Europe?

It is probable that unaequaintance with nature and her
powers, combined with the innate desire of finding a reason
for and explaining the various natural phenomena, that
must daily and hourly attract the attention of mankind,
hhas Jed them to see the eauses of these phenomena in the
power of the beings who, as they supposed, had produced
them, and afterwards frequented and busied themselves
with and in their own productions. These phenomena
were too numerous and various to allow the ascribing of
them to a single being, and therefore a number of super-
natural beings were imagined, whose dangerous influence
and pernicious wrath it was sought to avert by sacrifices
and other means,

The hollow thundering that is at times heard among
the mountains, the smoke and fire that ascend from some
of them, the destruction often caused by a sudden earth-slip
orearthquake, all of which in our times are easily explained
from natural causes, might to the rugged peasant, wholly
unacquainted with nature and her hidden powers, appear


» Geijer, Sven Rikes Hafer, p. 87.


INTRODUCTION. xin


‘as supernatural, and as the operations of Jutuls, Giants,
and similar mighty, evil beings, that were supposed to
dwell in the mountains, and of whose huge feet and fingers
a lively imagination easily found marks in the hard rocks.
Fear and superstition gradually invested these imaginary
beings with all sorts of terrific forms ', and people fancied
they saw these direst foes of man transformed into stone
all over the country.

Crystals and other natural productions were found,
which could not have been made by human hands; a
voice, asound, was sometimes heard where least expected,
either an echo, or arising from other natural causes, and
which could now be easily accounted for; footsteps of men
were seen where no one had ever chanced to meet a human
being ; among many comely children there was a deformed
one, which either by its ugliness or its excessive stupidity
was distinguished from the others, All these things, it
was said, must have a cause, and from ignorance of nature,
joined to superstition and a lively imagination, the idea
suggested itself of conjuring up beings, to whom all these
phenomena might be ascribed, and who, according to the
places of sojourn assigned them, were called Forest-trolls,
Huldres, Mountain-trolls, Vattir, Elves, Dwarfs, Nisser,
Mares, ete.

The sea’s smooth surface, its hidden, unfathomable
depth, the raging of the storm, and the foamy billows of
the troubled ocean, make a deep and often a wonderful
impression on the human mind. ‘This state of feeling,

1 In Orvarodd’s Saga, o.15, a giant is thus described: He was quite
Diack except his eyes and teeth, which were white his nose was large


and hooked; hishair, which hung down over all his breast, was as coarse
‘as fah’s gill, and his eyes were like two pools of water.


xiv INTRODUCTION,


together with the extraordinary creatures of the ocean that
are sometimes caught, and the terrific marine monsters that
are sometimes seen, must supply the ignorant fisherman,
in his sequestered home, with sueh abundant food for his
invention or fancy, that it is almost a wonder there are not
even more stories of mermen, mermaids, and other crea~
tions of the deep.

The monotonous roar of the waterfalls, the squalls and
whirlpools that render our fiords and rivers so dangerous,
and in which many persons annually perish, together with
the circumstance, that in several fresh waters, when a thaw
is at hand, the ice splits through the middle with a fearful
crash, leaving an open strip, haye given occasion to super-
stition to imagine the depths of the water inhabited by
malignant sprites, that yearly at least require a human
being for a sacrifice, and which, under the names of Néks,
Grims and Quernknurrer, are sufficiently known.

‘When it suggested itself to the imagination to peo-
ple the mountains, the earth and the water with super-
natural beings, it could not be long before it must also
give inhabitants to the boundless space above our heads,
Tn the countless stars, in the extraordinary figures often
assumed by the clouds and the mist, in the balls of fire
and the blazing northern lights, in the pealing thunder
and the wind howling through the narrow mountain-val-
leys, the uninstructed might easily see and hear the pass
ing of the gods, the Ansgeardreis’s wild course, the Troll-
wives’ ride, and thence draw omens of impending misfor-
tune. The lightning oftenest strikes downward among
the high mountains, what then can be more reasonable
than the belief that the god who reveals himself in thunder


INTHODUCTION. wv


and lightning, the mighty Thor, is chastising the demons
of earth, who dwell in the places that have been struck by
the lightning ?

‘Wicked, and injurious to man were the greater number
of these supernatural beings, who may strictly be regarded
as personified powers of nature, and as there hangs a de-
gree of obscurity over their whole being, the night was
supposed to be the season of their activity, when imagina-
tion and fear are most disposed to create all kinds of
terrific images.

Although personified powers of nature are to be regarded.
as the primary elements of mythic tradition, it would, ne-
ertheless, be a great error to suppose that every individual
myth or tradition of supernatural beings can be explained
on that principle. ‘The explanation would in such case
often be not only far-fetched but false ; for, in the first
place, many myth, or some particular part of it, is mere
poetic embellishment, and, secondly, it often contains an
obscure tradition of the country’s earliest history, An
almost inscrutable blending of various traditions is a pe-
culiar characteristic of a myth. In the representations of
the gods and other beings, their wars and other relations,
lies the oldest history of a people in the guise of a myth.
‘That it must be dark and fabulous is a consequence both
of its antiquity and the rudeness in which most nations
live in their earliest infancy, when it never occurs to them,
nor in fact have they the means, to transmit to after-ages
sccounts of their transactions, Consequently the earliest
history of every people consists of traditions, which in the
course of time may have been subjected to various changes,
Through the mist that envelops the primitive history of


wi INTRODUCTION.


the North, the historic inquirer thinks that he discerns a
straggle between the primitive inhabitants and a more
civilized invading people; and in our popular traditions
of Jutuls, Trolls, Elves and Dwarfs, are sought traces of
these elder and more rugged people, the conquest and
expulsion of whom, as dark monuments of times long
gone by, is alluded to and eternized in the old skaldic
gongs and sagas !,

‘That these primitive inhabitants consisted of one and
the same people it is not necessary to assume. On the
contrary, the great difference found in the sagas between
the huge Jutul, who plays with fragments of rock, and the
little wily dwarfs, who conceal themselves in the earth and
its caverns, seems to indicate that they were as different as
could well be, although in particular places they may have
lived together, and combined in opposition to and as com-
mon enemics of the invading Goths, In some places it
would seem as if the intruding conquerors had mingled
with the older inhabitants, settled among them and formed
intermarriages with them. “In ancient times,” a Thelle-
mark saga relates, “the Thusser were so numerous that
Christians could not inhabit Norway, nor Norway be co-
lonined, before they formed intermarriages.” And in our
old sagas mention frequently occurs of historic personages,
who, on the father’s or mother’s side, descended from
giants, or were ‘half-trolls?

In other places it would appear that it was only after

1 ‘Thor himself is made to relate that Norway in ancient times was
inhabited by giants, who all perished suddenly except two women} but
that after the people from the east countries began to inhabit the country,


these women were a great sonoyance, until Thor slew them. See the
story in vol. ip. 178.


INTRODUCTION. xvii


an obstinate struggle that the original inhabitants were
driven from the plains and valleys to the wooded and
mountainous regions, where caves were their dwelling-
places, the chase afforded them sustenance, and the skins
of beasts covering. ‘That they continued to stand in a
hostile relation to their conquerors, and that, whenever an
opportunity presented itself, they attacked, plundered and
murdered the intruders, in the tracts nearest to their
hiding-places, and then disappeared with their booty, is in
the highest degree probable, Their sudden attacks and
disappearance, the bloody traces they left behind them,
their vast strength, savage aspect and garb, together with
‘the darkness, under cover of which they chose to visit their
enemies’ stores or to attack them, must give to these
people a terrific, demonlike colouring in the eyes of the
peaceful inhabitants of the valley. The less often they
showed themselves the more wonderful were the stories
told of them ; and so formidable did they at length appear,
dressed out in all the terrors of imagination and super-
stition, that, according to the general opinion, it required
powers greater than human to contend with them. It
was, therefore, a fitting task for the Thunder-god himself,
who sometimes crushed them with his bolt, or for his
earthly representative, who in the old skaldic poem is de-
scribed as the overthrower of the altars of the Forniotish
gods, the mountain foll’s, the fjeld-wolves’, the sons of the
rock’s and the giants’ terror and destroyer !,

In the Norse Sagas we rend not only of the mighty
Jutuls, Giants (Riser) and Mountain-trolls, but also, and


Comp. Thorsdraps, pp. 16-22, and Thiodolf hin Hvinerske’s poem
Héstlanga, also Geijer’s Svea Rikes Hifder, p. 276.


xviii INTRODUCTION.


even more frequently, of Thusser and Dwarfs. ‘The tra-
dition of a former dwarf-race may probably in part be
ascribed to an obscure reminiscence that the Lapps once,
during Norway's savage state, inhabited tracts whence
they have been driven away. If the diminutive Lappa
were not formidable to the invading Goths in battle, they
might, nevertheless, through their acquaintance with the
secrets of nature, their cunning and their dexterity, be
dangerous neighbours, who could drive off the cattle,
change children (whence probably the numerous stories
about changelings), steal houachold utensils and provisions,
give persons stupefying drinks, entice them into their
caves with songs, presents, etc, traits which supply us with
the key to many a tradition of the subterraneans,

‘These views are confirmed by the testimony of history.
Adam of Bremen, who lived in the eleventh century, re-
Istes from oral information given him by the Danish king
Svend Estritheon, that in Sweden “there was a people
who were in the habit of suddenly descending from the
mountains in sledges, laying all around waste, unless most
vigorously opposed, and then retiring.” “In Norway,”
he says in another place, “I have heard there are wild
women and men, who dwell in the forests, end seldom
make their appearance; they use the skins of wild beasts
for clothing, and their speech is more like the growling of
animals than the talk of human beings, so that they are
hardly intelligible to their neighbours.”

At the first glance it must appear wonderful, that after
Christianity has been established in the North for eight
hundred years, there should still be so many remains of
heathen superstitions there. On closer consideration,


INTRODUCTION. xix


however, the enigma may be solved. The first Christian
teachers, finding the old ideas too deep-rooted, and, as it
were, too fast interwoven with the physical condition of
the country, its ancient history and poetry, to be imme-
diately eradiested, strove to render the heathen supersti-
tion less offensive by giving it a Christian colouring. The
heathen festivals, which had formerly been held in honour of
the gods of Valhall,were now transferred to Christian saints,
and in St, Olaf the Norse clergy were so fortunate as to
get a saint of such high repute for his wonderful strength,
that they could well place to his account the marvellous
deeds that had been previously ascribed to the mighty
Thor and the gods of Valhall. These latter, who were
sometimes regarded by the Christians as mere human
beings, and at others as evil spirits, were at length almost
totally forgotten by the people, aa it was but seldom that
any visible sign appeared before them which could tend to
retain them in remembrance; while belief in the other
supernatural beings, that were attached to the surround-
ing nature, could not be so easily eradicated. As giants
and other beings of that class had never been objects of
adoration, but of hatred and aversion, they were allowed
to retain their old denominations and character, and even
served to confirm the Christian doctrine of the devil and
his angels, among whom the giants and other supernatural
beings were reckoned.

‘The Lutheran reformation, instead of checking this
superstition as it had done many other errors, let it re-
main unheeded; the belief in the devil and his angels
(the common name for the supernatural beings), together
with their influence, both on mankind and all nature,


xx INTRODUCTION.


seems rather to have acquired new life. Persecutions for
witcheraft, and assignments to the fiend belonged to the
order of the day.

Tt was, it is true, considered an impiety to have any
concern with the subterrancans and other such “petty
devils; but to the untutored and superstitious people it
‘was a necessity to have some beings of whom they could
ask counsel; and as the reformed clergy had made an end
of the Catholic saints and relies, superstition was driven
to betake itself secretly to its old heathen friends, the sub-
terraneans, the Nisser, and the like, whose favour it was
sought to gain, or whose enmity it was hoped to avert
by offerings at hollow trees, in woods, or under vast,
venerable stones, on a Thursday evening, or the eve of a
holyday.

‘The more expanded ideas which began to prevail to-
wards the end of the last century, and the increase of
Knowledge, which hes manifested itself in so many ways
in these latter times, have greatly contributed to diminish
the belief in these supernatural beings. In many parts
such traditions are already sunk into oblivion, in some
they are regarded as pleasant stories, or are related merely
to frighten children ; while in other places, among the
Jess enlightened and more superstitious peasantry, many
are still to be found who are convinced of the existence of
these mythic beings, who played so important a part in
the imagination of their fathers, They themselves or,
more usually, an aunt, a father or mother, have seen the
underground folk and their dogs and cattle, heard their
sweet music, known persons that have been taken into the
fjelds, or had their infants changed for those of the subter-


INTRODUCTION. xi


raneans!, The places where such beings were supposed
to have their resort are in some parts atill looked upon


2-We ought not in fact greatly to wonder that the belief in the subter-
‘ranean people still finds followers among the uninstructed peasantry, when
wwe read, that it is seareely a hundred years since learned men disputed
‘whether the subterraneans were created by God, whether they were pre-
adamites, whether they can hold intorcourse with mankind, ete. Herman
‘age, clergyman of Slidre in 1754, in his Rational Thooghts on various
curious matters’ was of opinion "chat the subterraneans formed, as it
‘were, the boundary between brutes and human beings!" The said clergy~
man, Ruge, who has dedicated a whole chapter of his book to the subject
of changelings, informs us (as an ancient method to be applied with regard
to such children), that if « mother has been so unfortunate as to have her
child changed, she must take the changeling on thres successive Thursday
evenings and whip it unmercifoly with rods on a heap of sweepings 5 for
thea the subterranean mother, taking pity on her infant, will come and
restore the genuine child and take back her own. The belief in change-
linge is universal also out of Norway. As many persons will, no doubt,
bbe gatifed to know what the great German reformer, Martin Luther,
‘thought and said with regard to changeliugs, we will give an extract or
to from his Table Talk: “Changelings (Wechselbilge) and Kielkropfa
‘Satan lays in the place of the genuine children, that people may be tor-
‘mented with them. He often carries off young maidens into the water,
hha intercourse with them, and keeps them with him until they have been
delivered then lays such children in eradies, takes the genuine children
out, and carries them away. But such changelings, itis said, do not live
sore than eighteen or twenty years.”

“In the year 1541 Dr. Luther mentioned thi
that he had told the Prince of Anbalt that such changelings should be
drowned. On being asked why be had «9 advised? he answered, that it
was his firm belief that auch changelings were only a lump of flesh, a
‘masea carnis, aa there was no soul in them, for such the devil eould easily
‘make, at well as he ean destroy men, who have body, reason and soul,
when he potsestes them bodily, to that they neither bear nor see nor feel
anything; he makes them dumb, deaf and blind ; the devil is therefore in
ssuch changelingy as their soul.”

“Bight years ago there was a changeling in Dessau, which 1, Dr. Martin
‘Lather, have both seen and touched; it was twelve years old and hed all
ita senter, vo that people thought it was a proper ehild; but that mattered
tle; for it only ate, and that as much as any four ploughmen or thrashers,
and when any one touched it it sereamed; when things in the house went
‘wrong, 0 that any damage took place it laughed and was merry; but if
things went well, it ered. Thereupon I said to the Prince of Anbalt :


subject at table, adding,


xxii INTRODUCTION.


5 sacred. No superstitious peasant, who has a regard
for his health and property, dares venture to meddle with
a Vettir-mound, a Butree or Thunbede, which is fre-
quented by the invisible folk; but, on the contrary, that
they may not, in their anger, pass their dwelling and
take the luck of the house with them, the people wait
upon them on holydey eves with cakes, sweet porridge
and other offerings,

‘An example or two will serve to show how deeply im-
printed is the belief in the subterrancans, in many places,
even at the present day. “At Luré in the Northlands,”
the Rev. G. Faye writes to me, “an incredible degree of
superstition prevails, particularly with regard to the sub-
terraneans, who have their sojourn in certain places, how
‘they take in persons and make away with them; they are
even suid to have a church somewhere here in the parish,
of which one of my parishioners, a great ghost-seer, is, as
Tam told, the priest, It is, moreover, said that in the
neighbourhood of the parsonage there dwelt a subterranean,


“If 1 wre prince or ruler here, I would have this child thrown into the
water, into the Moldan that fows by Dessau, and would run the risk of
Ding ® homicide.’ But the Blector of Sexony, who was then at Dessau,
and the Prince of Anhalt would not follow tay advice. I then said:
“They ought to eause a Pater noster to be said in the chuech, that God
‘would take the devil away from them.’ That was done daily at Dessau,
and the said changeling died two years after.” See Dobeneck, ip. 168.

‘Then follows a story almost identical with ‘The Kielkropp’ in vo. fi
p46.

fn Moland, in the Upper Thellemark,” writes Pastor Buch,“ they
paid adoration to the Thusser, under the name of Fetir, by offering to
them some oftheir best meat and dri, upon up-raised mounds, pertieu-
larly buttermilk, or wort when they brewed. Such a libation was called
4 roup, ie. w sup or gulp. Those who had not auch Vetir-mounds poured
outa litle cup of drink on the hearth. The friendship of theso beings
‘was very useful tothe peasant both for his cattle and general welfare.”


INTRODUCTION. xxiii


who had a pleasure-boat, whom people that were eynsk
often saw sailing on the Inke. I have repeatedly endea-
voured to talk them out of this superstition; but before
me they will never confess that they entertain such belief
becanse, as I afterwards learned, they think it is to the
priest’s advantage to suppress all belief in the subterra-
neans: ‘For,’ eay they, ‘he is as sensible of it as we are;
he has read it in the sixth book of Moses, which does not,
it is true, stand in the Bible, but which the priests keep
to themselves’ ” That the Sinderfjeld Norwegians stand
on about the same level with regard to belief in the sub-
terrancans will appear from the following traditions, but
to which I will add a passage from my college days.

In company with some University friends, I undertook,
in the summer of 1824, a foot-journey to the Riukanfoss
and Gaustafjeld. As a guide on the Gansta, we took an
active peasant from Vestfiorddsl, a man singularly well-
informed for his station, but who was, nevertheless,
thoroughly convinced of the existence of the subterraneans.
“T once myself,” said he, “saw in the fjeld a man who
suddenly sank down in the earth before my eyes, and it
well known,” added he, “that one of the subterraneans,
who in outward appearance perfectly resembled one of us,
courted a girl who rejected him, although he promised her
a house, chattels and as much silver plate as she desired.”
On our objecting that either his imagination must have
played him a trick, and the courtship have been a mere
idle invention on the part of the girl; or that some per-
son for a joke had imposed upon her, by giving him-
self out for a subterranean, he continued: “But it is
Known for certain, that a man, who one day went into the


xxiv INTRODUCTION.


forest, came suddenly upon a mansion with its appurte-
nanees, the inmates of which, on his coming, instantly
abandoned it, ‘The man, who from fear of troll-craft did
not venture to take up his abode in the mansion, an-
nounced the incident to the authorities, who took posses+
sion of the place in the king’s name, which to this day,
in remembrance of the event, bears the name of Findland.”
‘As we still continued incredulous, and suggested that the
persons mentioned might have been culprits, who on the
‘man’s coming betook themselves to flight, through fear of
being discovered, our guide came forth with his last and
weighticat argument: “But it stands in the Bible, that
every knee, both of those who are in heaven and on earth,
and under the earth, shall bow before the Lord. And who
then are those under the earth, if they are not the sub-
térraneans ?” Thus may even passages in the Bible itself,
when misunderstood, serve to confirm superstition !
Having thus endeavoured to explain how the belief in
these supernatural beings originated, and by some exam-
ples shown that in certain parts of the couintry it is still
the popular belief, it only remains to lay before the reader
a slight sketch of the similar ideas and kindred supersti-
tions existing in the other Northern countries. In this
sketch we shall confine ourselves chiefly to the subter-
raueans, who, according to both the old mythology and
the popular traditions, are divided into several classes, as
‘Thusser, Veettir, Dwarfs, Elves, ete. In the old mythology
the dwarfs—under which denomination seem to be com-
prised several of the species which now constitute the sub-
terraneans—play an important part. They came forth, as
we have already seen, as maggots in the rotten carcase of


INTRODUCTION. xv


the giant Ymir, and at the behest of the gods received
human form and understanding, and had habitations
assigned them in the earth and in stones'.

‘From these we may consider the subterraneans in all
the Northern countries to derive their origin. We will
first direct our attention to Iceland. As in Norway, the
subterraneans here also dwell in hills and mounds, they
are neat and cleanly, comely and flighty, readily hold eon-
verse with Christians, by whom they formerly had chil-
dren. These they strove to exchange for the children of
Christians before they were baptized, that their own might
enjoy the benefit of baptism. Such substituted children
were called Umskiptingar, and are usually stupid and
weakly, ‘The subterraneans have beautiful cattle, which,
like themselves, are invisible, though they sometimes let
themselves be in the bright sunshine, which they
ack in their dwellings, and in which they therefore from
time to time recreate themselves. On New Year’s night
they sometimes change their habitations, at which time it
was formerly a custom in Iceland to leave well-provided
tables standing, and the doors open, in order to gain the
good will both of the comers and goers. According to
old traditions, the subterraneans of Iceland were governed
by two chieftains, who are changeable every second year,
when, accompanied by some of their subjects, they sailed
to Norway, to appear before the king of the whole race,
who had his residence there, to renew their oath of fealty,


1 See voli. p.9. According to one tradition, the sabterrancans de-
scend from Adam's children by hin fit wife Lileth. Goethe alludes to
har in Pauet.


xvi INTRODUCTION.


and render an account of their administration, which, if
found good and just, was continued to them; but in the
contrary ease they were instantly deposed; justice and
equity being in high estimation among these elves!

In the Ford isles the subterraneans are, as in some
parts of Norway, called Huldefolk, and resemble the Norse
Vacttir, being described as full-grown, clad in grey, with
Dlack hats. ‘Their large, fat cattle graze, though invisible,
among those of the inhabitants ; a sight of them is, how-
ever, sometimes obtained, as also of their dogs. ‘They are
fond of Christian females and of their children, which they
exchange for their own,

In Sweden the people have nearly the same ideas with
regard to the subterraneans. Of their origin they have a
singular tradition, viz. that they are fallen angels, and that
‘when God cast down from heaven the adherents of Imeifer,
they did not all fall into hell, but that some fell on the
earth, others into the sea. Those that fell in the woods
and forests beeame Wood-trolls (Skovtroll, Skogsnufvor) ;
‘those that fell in the green fields and groves, Veltir or
Lysgubbar ; those that were cast into the sea or waters
became Néicher; those that fell among houses, Tomte-
gubbar, und those in trees, Elfoar.

In Denmark we meet with the same ideas as in the rest
of Scandinavia, though, in consequence of the nature
of the country, somewhat modified. ‘The subterraneana
there dwell in mounds, in which they often have merry-
makings; they brew, bake, steal beer from the peasants,


+ Pinni Jobanneei Hist. Eccles. Islandis, ii. p. 368; Pref. to Hint. Hrott
Krakii; F. Magausen ; Bddalere, ii. p. 308,


mitaopverion, xvii
if they neglect to mark the casks with e cross, punish
tattlers with blindness, cannot endure the sound of bells,
thunder, drums or water, are jealous, and can transform
themselves into cats. Steel, as needles, keys, scissors
and the like, cither laid in the eradle or crosswise over
the door, will, as in Sweden, prevent them from ex-
changing children; but if such an exchange is accom.
plished, there is no other remedy than to ill-treat the
changeling.

‘The subterraneans or dwarfs of Germany resemble their
Scandinavian brethren, and are officious, good-humoured
and patient; they wear a mist-mantle or eap (Nebelkappe),
which renders them invisible. They also exchange chil-
dren; and if the changeling is ill-treated, its mother
brings back the stolen child. The black dwarfs of Rigen
bear a near resemblance to the Norwegian dwarfs; they
are ugly of aspect, but are able smiths, particularly in steel,
fare unsocial, seldom leave their bills and mounds, and are

- no lovers of music, The white dwarfs, on the contrary,
who in summer sport among the trees and dance on the
grass, resemble the Danish, Swedish and Norwegian elves,
With the brown dwarfs of Rigen, who are eighteen inches
high, wear glass shoes, have delicate hands and feet, are
skilful smiths, but roguish, there are none to be compared.

In Pomerania there was formerly a number of earth-
sprites or dwarfs, who eagerly exchanged their own ugly
offspring for comely, human children. ‘They also fell in
love with handsome girle and courted them. By day they
crawled about in the form of touds and other reptiles, but
at night they appeared in their own form, and danced


xxviii INTRODUCTION.


merrily by moonlight. ‘The people called them Uellerkens.
Like the Nisser, they often lived in cellars. ‘The German
subterraneans differ from those of Scandinavia, in having
adopted the true faith, and in sometimes wandering
abroad.


SCANDINAVIAN POPULAR TRADITIONS.


L
NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS.


‘THURSER, VATTER, DWARPS, ETC.


IN Norway the subterranean people—under which deno-
mination are comprised Thurser (Thusser), Vietter and
Dwarfs, and sometimes Huldres, Nisser and Elves—are
exceedingly numerous. The Thusser or Trolls, who are
as large as men, inhabit the mountain-ridges and hills.
In former days they were in such multitudes thet no
Christians could dwell in Norway, until they formed mar-
risges with them, Like ourselves, they have houses,
churches, chattels, and beautiful cattle, which graze in the
night, and are watched by female keepers and black dogs.
‘The Thusser are well formed, but of a pale or blue eolou

When the sun is set and the twilight (Thus-mérk) begins,
they are in full activity; then it is dangerous for persons,
more particularly young females, for whom they have an
especial liking, to pase by the places where they resort,
where most delightful music is to be heard; and many are
the instances, particularly in former days, of young maidens

B


2 NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS.


having been conveyed by them into the mountains and
hills. ‘They are also partial to little children, and formerly
would often exchange them for their own, which were
neither so handsome nor so thriving. But a cross made
‘on the child, or steel in any shape laid in its cradle, is an
effectual preventive of all such exchanges !.

With respect to these supernatural beings, the belief
eurrent in the North is, that when our Lord cast down the
fallen angels, some fell to hell, while those who had not
sinned so deeply were dispersed in the air, and under the
earth, and in the waters ®,

A similar belief with regard to fairies prevails in Ireland. Keightley,
P.M. p. 363,

HULDRA OR HULLA,


Over the whole of Norway the tradition is current of a
supernatural being that dwells in the forests and moun-
tains, called Huldra or Hulla. She appears like a beautiful
woman, and is usually clad in a blue petticoat and a white
snood; but unfortunately has a long tail, like 8 cow's,
which she anxiously strives to conceal, when she is among
people. She is fond of cattle, particularly brindled®, of
which she possesses a beautiful and thriving stock. They
are without horns. She was once at a merry-making,
where every one was desirous of dancing with the hand-
some, strange damsel ; but in the midst of the mirth, a
young msn, who had just begun a dance with her, hap-
pened to cast his eye on her tail. Immediately guessing
whom he had got for a partner, he was not a little
terrified ; but collecting himself, and unwilling to be-
tray her, he merely said to her, when the dance was over,
“Fair maid, you will lose your garter.” She instantly
vanished, but afterwards rewarded the silent and consi-

 Asbjirnsen, Huldreeventyr, i. 29.
rancede, the meaning of which is doubtful.


NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS. 8


derate youth with beautiful presents and a good breed of
cattle",

‘The idea entertained of this being is not everywhere the
same, but varies considerably in different parts of Norway.
In some places she is described as a handsome female,
when seen in front, but is hollow behind, or else blue*;
while in others she is known by the name of Skogsnerte,
and is said to be blue, but clad in a green petticoat, and
probably corresponds tothe Swedish Skogenufvor’. Her song
—a sound often heard among the mountains—is said to be
hollow and mournful §, differing therein from the music of
the subterranean beings, which is described by ear-witnesses
as cheerfol and fascinating. But she is not everywhere
regarded as a solitary wood-nymph : Huldre-men and
Huldre-folk are aleo spoken of, who live together in the
mountains, and are almost identical with the subterra-
nean people. In Hardanger the Huldre-people are always
clad in green, but their cattle are blue, and may be taken
when a grown-up person casts his belt over them. They
give abundance of milk. The Huldres take possession of
the forsaken pasture-spots in the mountains, and invite
people into their mounds, where delightful music is to be
heard®,

‘The belief in Huldra is very ancient. We read that as far back as the
year 1205, the queen of Magnus Lagabeter, when detained by an ad-
Yorme wind at Bergen, haviag heard that the Ieelander Sturli Thordsen
‘was an excellent story-teller, desired him to relate to her the Saga of the
inntew Huldra. Her name appears to be derived from the Old Nonk
holt, des, propia ®,


2 Faye, p.39. __ # Haller, Norsk Ordsamling, p. 48, voce Huldre,

2 Linmei Gotlindske Ress, p. 312.

4 ¢Hfuldre dwells in the mountains and in the valley ; hers are all the
riches, splendour and beauty of the North; but hers in also itn deep mo
lancholy ; to this ber music and her song bear witness, which cannot be
heard without a feeling of sadness and ears.” Norske Huldreeventyr, i.


piv.
Faye, p42, * Sep 96, finn Dp 26
B


4 NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS.


JUTULS AND MOUNTAIN-GIANTS.

The Jutul is large and strong, and has his dwelling in
the highest mountains, where riches and costly treasures
are to be found in abundance. He is of evil disposition,
hates churches and the sound of bells, and is greedy after
Christian blood. When a storm is at hand, or a whirlwind
howls among the rocks, he shakes himself in the moun-
tain, so that the pots and kettles resound, in which his
wife Gyvri or Gidgra prepares their food. All over the
country traditions and traces of these monstrous beings
are to be found. Marks of their footsteps are often to be
teen in the mountains.

Of all the supernatural beings of the North, none bear
so evident a mark of high antiquity as the gigantic Jutuls.
The traditions concerning them rise always to the mon-
strous, and harmonize with the cloud-eapt mountains
among which they dwell.

On comparing the traditions of the vulgar with the old
mythology, we find a great accordance between them, and
at once recognise in the Jutuls and Réser (giants) the
‘Jétuns and Risar, the foes of gods and men, who in Thor,
the mighty god of thunder, found a dangerous enemy.
‘The Jétuns in the Norther mythology are considered as
chaotic beings, ruling over the dark and eold regions of
the earth, shunning the light of day, and by the sun’s rays
(as we have already seen)! becoming changed to stone*.

Tn Old Norse a giantess was called gyfr or gygr, a word
to be recognised in the Gyvri and Gidgra of the vulgar.

Besides Jutuls or Jétuns, we meet with Riser and Bierg-
riser (giants and mountain-giants), who dwelt in moun-
tain-caves, and are supposed to be the carliest inhabi-
tants of the North. In the Sagas they are often called
‘Trolls, which may be considered a common denomination
for all noxious, supernatural beings.

1 See voli. ps8, note’, 2 Page, ps7.


NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS. 5


‘THE JUTUL ON HESTMANDOE!.

On Hestmandée in the Nordlands there is a mountain,
which st » distance resembles a horseman with a large
cloak over him. This mountain was once a Jutul, who
dwelt on the spot. Twelve miles to the south, on Lekie
in Nummedal, there lived at the same time a maiden to
whom he made love; but the haughty damsel, who was
skilled in all kinds of magic, not only rejected him, but
turned all his messengers to stone, who are still to be seen.
as rocks round the northern part of the isle. Exasperated
at such conduct, the Jutul bent his bow, to take instan-
taneous vengeance. The mighty arrow flew and passed
clean through the lofty mountain called Torgehat, where is
still to be scen the large hole made by the errow through
the hard rock®, “That straw stands in the way,” ex-
claimed the Jutul, Being somewhat checked in its flight,
by forcing its way through the Torgehat, the arrow did
not quite reach its destination, but fell at the feet of the
maiden on the north side of Lekie, where it yet lies in
the form of a huge, long stone. By their mutual magie
they were both changed to stone, and shall so remain,
looking on each other until doomsday.

Even at the present time a Nordlander seldom sails by
without taking his hat off to the maid of Lekie’,


‘THE JUTUL'S BRIDGE.


In Spirillen, at low water, a sort of stone bridge is to
be seen, about the eighth of a mile in length. It owes its
origin to a Jutul that dwelt on the Elerudkolle. This
Jutul courted a Huldra on the Engerkolle, which lies on
the opposite side of the water. That he might visit her

4 Florseman’siale

1 That the size of the bole is considerable, may be inferred from ite
‘height, which is estimated at 600 fect, 3 Faye, ps 13.


6 NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS.


without getting wet, which sorely grieved his beloved, he
resolved to construct a bridge, but burst in pieces, when
the sun rose and surprised him at his work '.


‘THE GIRL AT THE SATER*


A land proprietor in Norway was betrothed to a very
pretty young woman, who, although a farmer’s daughter,
went out with the eattle to their summer pasture, where
she employed herself in weaving a piece of drill. Being,
however, unable to finish her work by the time when the
cattle should return home, the resolved to stay behind till
she had accomplished her task: but no sooner had her
lover received intelligence of her design, than he set out
for the pasture, justly thinking it hazardous to leave the
damsel alone exposed to the attempts of Huldres and other
subterranean beings. He reached the spot in the nick of
time, for he found the cattle-house surrounded by black
homes ready saddled. Suapecting, therefore, that there
‘was something wrong in the wind, he stole into the ps
ture, and peeping through a little window in the hut, saw
his intended sitting in a bridal dress with a golden crown
on her head, and by her side an old red-eyed Huldreman.
‘Seizing his pistol, which he had wisely loaded with a silver
bullet’, he fired over the head of the girl, before the
witchery could be dissolved, rushed into the hut, seized her,
placed her behind him on his horse, and rode off, followed
by the whole company of Trolls, One of these held out to
him a welleilled golden horn, to retard his light : he took


2 Faye, ps 15, nd vol i. p. 8, note®,
2 The Setere are grassy spots among the mountains of Norway, to
which the cattle are sent for summer pasture, They are frequently a
considerable distance from the dwelling.
2 Great in the good days of yore was the efficacy of a silver bullet, oF a
silver button, when fired at a witch, or wizard, or the like. See Anecdotes
and Traditions, by Thoms (Cama. Publ.) pp. 111, 112, and the note,


NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS. a


the hom, but east the liquor it contained behind his horse,
and galloped off with both horn and girl. At length he
reached a steep mountain near his dwelling, in which some
subterranean folk had their abode, who were on terms of
hostility with his pursuers, and who cried to him, “Ride
on the rongh, and not on the smooth.” He followed their
advice, and rode through a rye-field, where the Trolls
were unable to follow him, but in their exasperation cried
after him, “The red cock shall crow over thy dwelling !.”
‘And behold | his house stood in a blaze ®,


GURRI KUNNAN?.

At Osterraad there dwelt formerly a rich and powerful
man, who had a daughter named Aslaug, the fairest dam-
sel far and near. She had, as may be easily imagined,
many a gallant suitor, but she preferred to every other a
young man who had been fostered with her in her father’s
mansion, notwithstanding that he was of low extraction.
‘As they could not hope thet the proud father would
consent to their union, they fied secretly, and sought con-
cealment and shelter in a deep cave, which is to be seen
at this day not far from Osterraad. By chance the en-
raged father, in the following spring, got intelligence of
the place where his daughter was concealed, and instantly
proceeded thither, for the purpose of punishing the auda-
cious seducer; but just as he reached the cave there fell
down such a quantity of stones and rubbish, that the
entrance was completely closed, so that the fugitives were


1 The aymbol of a red cock for fire is of remote antiquity (See Valuspé,
34, 35). ‘Twill set a red cock on your roof” is the incendiary’ threat


Hauff’s Marchenalmanach for 1827, The simpler form, in which it here
‘appears, I take to be the older.


8 NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS.


not to be taken. When the first danger was over, the
loving pair succeeded, though with difficulty, in working
their way out from amid the fallen stones, They then
took a boat, that was lying near the shore, and through
many perils succeeded in reaching the uninhabited group
of islands called Tarven, which at that time served as a
retreat for Trolls. The chief among these, the Huldre,
Gurri Kunnan, received them kindly, and allowed them
to stay in her habitation, though on condition that they
should never make the sign of the cross, which she could
not endure. One Yule-eve, when Gurri, with a countless
number of Trolls, were assembled at a festivity, the wonder-
struck Aslaug forgot her promise and crossed herself, at
the same time pronouncing the name of Jesus, On a
sudden all the witchery vanished, and of the whole parade
a huge copper kettle alone remained, which for time out
of mind has since been kept in the largest isle of the
group, the now inhabited Hunsie!.

‘This Gurri was the daughter of giant, who dwelt on
the isle of Kunnan off Helgeland. Being very beautiful,
she had many suitors, who fought for the possession of the
fair giantess, and round about Kunnan® is to be seen a
cluster of rocks formed of the stones they hurled at each
other. All were, however, forced to cede to the giant
Anfind, who married the beautiful Gurri, and lived hap-
pily with her, until her father was slain, together with the
powerful ‘Sout,’ by the mighty ‘Gout, who came from
the east, when the whole family was driven from Kunnan,
and Anfind with his wife sought shelter with Fréi, who
gave them Tarven for a residence. Here they lived in


1 The other isles are used merely for the grazing of eatle in conse-
quence of the superstition that no one ean inbabit them, on account of
the Trolls and other devilish beings. The copper kettle, as I have been
assured, i atl preserved by the inhabitants of the ile

+ Kuanen in & promontory on the north side of Helgeland,


NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS. 9


peace until St. Olaf came to the island, who, with the
sign of the cross and the name of Jesus, not only quelled
the storm that the giant had raised, but tumed the giant
himself into a hard block of stone!,

‘The abore isthe story on which the beautiful poem of Gursi Kunnan’
isfounded. Its author, Professor Steenblock, kindly communicated the
tradition to me, as he had heard it in hia youth. A prose paraphrase of
the poem is given in the ‘ Mythologie der Feen und Elfen,’ by Prot. Wolf
‘L234, This in many respects interesting story seems to point to a re-
‘mote antiquity, when the original inhabitants of the North were forced to
retire before the invading Gotbs (the ‘Gout’ of the tradition), who, by
means of their greater civilization and superior skill, destroyed or expelled
their advermris’,


‘THE BRIDAL CROWN.
Fa

In Nummedal there once lived @ young girl so beauti-
ful that a Thus fell in love with her ; but notwithstanding
that he promised her a sumptuous mansion, abundance of
cattle, and in short whatever she could desire, if she would
betroth herself to him, she continued faithful to her old
lover. When the Thuss found that nothing was to be
done by gentle means, he carried her off. Accompanied
by a numerous body of Thusser, he was already on his
road with his prey to the subterranean people’s chureh,
there to be married to her, when her lover was 0 fortu-
nate as to get traces of their route. Having overtaken the
bridal party, he shot with steel over his betrothed’s head,
when the whole witchery vanished, and he not alone re-
covered the maiden, but got a splendid silver crown, which
the Thuss had placed on her head. The crown still exists
im the ‘dal,’ and as it is supposed to bring good luck to
every bride that wears it, itis let out at almost every wed-
ding of the better class.

2 See vol i. p. 8, note %

* Faye, p- 10. Henceforth when no authority is given, the traditions
are generally from Faye. :

B


10 NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS.


11.

It is not long beyond the memory of man since a young
man in Nummodal, when passing by a forsaken seeter-hut,
saw in it @ gay Huldre-wedding party. Through o win-
dow he was witness to all that passed among the moun-
tain-folk; but his attention was chiefly directed to the
bride, by her beauty and elegant attire, especially by
massive, glittering silver crown that she wore. ‘The young
man continued gazing on her till he contracted a violent
passion for her, and soon resolved on depriving the wed-
ding party of their mirth, and the bridegroom of his rich
and lovely bride. Quickly he drew forth his knife, and as
quickly flew the shining steel through the window and
over the head of the bride, ‘The company vanished in the
twinkling of an eye, the maiden alone remaining spell-
bound by the steel The pair came soon to an under-
standing; the Huldre bride accompanied him to the vil:
lage and then to the altar, after having been baptized.
But her magnificent bridal attire was insufficient to with-
draw attention from an ugly cow’s tail, which, however,
after a time, gradually disappeared. They lived long and
happy together, and of her rich wedding ornaments, the
fame of which is yet preserved, there is still to be seen at
‘Meerabru the costly silver crown.


‘THE BISHOP'S CATTLE.

One summer, « long time ago, the bishop of Drontheim
sent his cattle to the mountains to graze. ‘They were the
finest eattle in all Norway; and the bishop, when he sent
them away, strietly enjoined those who were to watch
them, not, on any account, to suffer them, for one mo-
ment, to be out of sight, as the mountains thereabouts
swarmed with subterranean people, who, however, had no
power over any animal, as long as it was under a human
eye. The cattle were then sent up to the mountains, One


NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS. n


day, while the animals were grazing, and the keepers sit-
ting in various places with their eyes directed towards
them, there appeared suddenly, on the highest point of
the mountain, an elk of an extraordinary size. At this
apparition, the eyes of the three keepers were drawn off
from the cattle, and for an instant fixed on the elk; but
when they again looked down into the valley, they saw
their beautiful large cattle transformed to a set of dimi-
nutive mice, ranning along the mountain’s side, and be-
fore the keepers could approach them, they all vanished
through a crevice in the earth, Thus did the bishop of
Drontheim get rid of his three hundred head of cattle.

Conway, in bis ‘ Journey through Norway,’ p. 240, relates this story,
and adds: “This tradition ia universally credited in the mountainous
parts.” A woman, who wax watching cattle on a hill, was more fortunate
ahe say her eaitle suddculy vanish, but while she was bewailing ber lors,
the heard a voice from the mountain, desiring her to hasten home, and
Jo! there she found not only ler own cows, but also a new one, which,
although it never calved, yet had a greater abandance of milk than the
others. =

‘THE MIDWIFE.

‘There was once a man and his wife that had an only
daughter. Suddenly she disappeared, and notwithstand-
ing that her parents—who took the loss of their dear
child sorely to heart—sought for her in every direction,
they could not discover the faintest trace of her. A con-
siderable time had elapsed, when late one evening there
came a stranger to the house and asked the woman, who
was at home alone, whether she would visit her dsughter,
who abode in the neighbourhood, and was in labour, and
required her aid. The mother, who was both glad and
grieved at this unexpected intelligence, instantly made
herself ready, and by means of a thread, which the stranger
gave her, was in one moment with her daughter, who gave
birth to a lively, well-formed child, Before it was dressed,
the man gave her a liquid, desiring her to rub it over the


12 NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS.


infant’s body, at the same time cnutioning her not to let
any of it come in contact with herself. But her eye be-
ginning to itch, she inadvertently rubbed it, and thus got
some of the liquid in her eye. When her help was no
longer required, the man—who was her daughter’s hus-
band and a Troll—told her she might depart, when by
means of the thread she found herself in a few seconds
again at home, The following day, while at work with
her husband in the field, she on a sudden saw her daugh-
ter with her subterranean spouse walking close at her
side. On her addressing them, her son-in-law asked her
with astonishment, whether she really could sce them?
“Yes, surely, I ean see you with my right eye,” said the
woman ; but at the eame instant the Troll touched her eye,
and from that time she saw no more with it.


‘The superstition of anointing the eyes, and being thereby enabled to
‘ee what would else be invisible, appears to have been generally current
‘among the inhabitants of western Europe, both Keltic and Germanie.
Instances of its prevalence in Denmark we shall see hereafter of its ex-
istence in other countries, cur own included, we give the following proofs.

Mrs. Bray (Letters to Southey) relates a story of the soge femme of
Tavistock, who was one night summoned to & falry labour, and who, on
receiving an ointment to rub the child's eyes with (thinking, no doubt, thas
‘what was good for the baby must be equally 0 for herself), applied « little
of it to one of her own eyes, when Io! all things around her suddenly ap-
‘eared in their true form, all delusion was dissipated. On the next market
day she saw the old fellow who had conveyed her, pifering from the stalla
in the market, and accosted him, What," exclaimed he, do you soe
me tonday?” See you! to be sure I do, and I see you are busy too.”
“And pray with which eye do you see all this?” “With my right.”

‘Take thet for meddling with what did not belong to you: you shall see
‘me no more.” He then struck her eye, and from that hour till the day of
her death she was blind of that eye?.

‘A similar story is related of a cottager and his wife at Nether Whitton.

‘The author of *Round about our Coal fire’ (quoted by Brand, Pop.
Anti ‘The moment any one sew them (the fairies), and took mo-
‘tice of them, they were struck blind of an eye.”

Ritson (Fairy Tales) relates that a woman who had been in their (the


2 Keightley, F. M. p. 301. 2 Tb, p. 298,


NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS. 18


fairies’) society, challenged one of the guests, whom she eapied in the
‘market selling fairy-butter, This freedom was deeply resented, and cost
Ibex the eye she first saw him with!,

Tn Scottth tradition it in related that a fairy left a child to be suckled
‘with a young woman of Nithsdale, and rubbed her eyes with a wonderful
salve, by virtue of which she could diseera the atherwite invisible fairy
folk. Some of the salve she contrived to secure. Happening one day to

she attempted to shake hands with ber. “What ee
‘whispered she. “Wi them baith,” said the woman,
‘The fairy breathed on her eyes, and the salve lost its effeacy

Mr. Keightley relates (F. M. p. 417), from « communication made to
hhim by a indy in North Wales, of a gipsy, that desired the narrator, who
‘wished to see fairies, to meet her by moonlight on the top of Craig y Dit
‘She there washed his eyes with the contents of a phial which she had,
‘and he instantly sow thousands of fairies, all in white, dancing to the
‘sound of numerous harps.

Gervase of Tilbury, who lived in the 12th century (I quote from Dobe-
neck, i. 48), speaks of certain water-sprites in the south of Prance called
Drates. ‘These astuine a human form and appear in the public market.
‘They are said to inhabit the caverns of rivers, and to allure women and
children while bathing, under the form of gold rings and cups, striving to
‘obtain which they are suddenly dragged down to the bottom. This cftenest
‘happens to women giving suck, whom the Drakes seize to suckle their
‘own unblest offypring. These, after seven years thus past, sometimes
‘eta rewarded to our hemisphere. They relate that with the Drakes and
their wives they dwelt in spacious palaces in the caverns and banks of the
rivers. ‘On men thn seized the Drakes are snid to feed. One day
‘a Drake having given a woman in his service some eel-pasty, he happened
‘to draw her fingers, greasy with the fat, over one eye and one side of her
face, and thereby acquired a most clear end sharp power of vision under
‘water, Having completed the third year of her servitude, and being re-
‘turned home, she one morning early met the Drake in the market-place
of Beaucaire, whom she accosted, and inquired after her mistress and
numling. “With which eye did you recognise me?" asked the Drake.
She pointed to the eye she had greased with the fat of the pasty. Having
sscertained this, the Drake thrust his Gnger into that eye, and thus eou-
tinued thenceforth unseen and unknown by all.

‘A.story somewhat similar is told of a Countess Ranzav,


1 Keightley, F. M. p, 309.
+ Cromek’s Remains of Nithsdale and Galloway Song, quoted by Keight-
dey, p. 353.


14 NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS.


THE O1GSTAD HORN.


‘Near the river Nid in Nedenes there is mansion called
‘Neersteen, in which there once dwelt a man named Siur,
who was both powerful and rich ; for besides Neersteen he
owned six other mansions, and a» considerable salmon
fishery in the Nid; but what was more than all these, he
had a daughter, who was the fairest maid of all the sur-
rounding neighbourhood. She was courted by a Westland
man named Ring, but the wealthy Siur rejected him for a
son-in-law, although his daughter was fondly attached to
him. The lover, however, was not disheartened, so while
the father one St. John’s day was at matins in Oiestad
church, Ring came to the mansion and found his lass,
although her father had taken the precaution of locking
her up in one of the presses—which, according to the cus-
tom of the time, were made at the foot of the bed—a
‘corner of her apron having protruded and betrayed her.
‘They now fied, and Siur, the instant he was apprized of
their elopement, mounted his horse and went in pursuit
of them. On the way he was stopped by a Troll, who
came out of a mount, and bade him welcome, at the same
time presenting to him a full drinking-horn. Instead of
emptying it, he cast its contents behind him, but some
drops that fell on the horse’s loins instantly singed the
hair off. Siur, who had from the first suspected mischief,
put spurs to his horse, and galloped away with the horn
in his hand and the Troll whining after him. He was
now in a most serious dilemma, from which he was uncx-
pectedly rescued by another Troll, who was on terms of
hostility with the former one, who called to him when he
had just reached a large field: “ Ride through the rye and
not through the wheat.” Following this counsel he got
the start of his pursuer, who could not. proceed so rapidly
through the tall rye. ‘The danger was not, however, com-


NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS. 16


pletely over until he came near the mansion of Bringsver,
when the cock erew and the Troll vanished. Siur now
continued his pursuit without further delays, and overtook
the fugitives on a hill where they had stopt to take a few
moments rest. When the men got tight of each other,
they immediately drew their knives, and a contest ensued,
the result of which was, that Siur stabbed Ring in the
belly, who instantly gave up the ghost.

In expiation of this homicide, Siur was compelled to
make heavy compensation. The hom, which he kept, was
preserved in the family down to our times, Of the
daughter's fate tradition makes no mention.


The (or rather 4) horn, which had long been an heitloom in Sinr’s
family, has lately been presented by Shipmaster Berge tothe public library
fand museum of Arendal school, where it now is, It is very handsome,
‘and has on its three silver gilt rings the following inscription, in monkish
characters: potum servorum benedic deus ale [tuorum religoar wus
beneile le wn}? carpar, melehior, baltazar.

‘A similar occurrence to the above took place many years ago near
Hahanger in allingdal, where one Christmas eve @ subterranean woman
presented drink in a horn to a man named Gudbrand Goelberg, which be
threw over hhis ahoulder and rode off with the horn; but down to the
ninth generation, bis posterity, as a penalty, were alflcted with some
bodily blemish or defect, ax the Troll bad threatened, This horn, which

Halsteenagaard in Aal, contained nearly three quarts,
‘strong gilt copper ring about three inches broad,
‘on which, in monki ood melehior,baltazar, caspar, Tn the
middle was a small, gilt copper plate, in which an oval erystal was act.


HULDRE MARRIAGE.

It is related that an active young fellow in Nordland,
by laying the barrel of his rifle over a Huldre in a forest,
got her into his power and made her his wife. They lived
happily together and had a child; but on a sudden, as
the child was one evening playing by the fireplace, where
the Huldre was sitting and spinning, while the man was
at his work, something of her savage nature came over
her, during which she said to her husband, alluding to


16 NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS.


the child, that it would make 2 capital roast for supper.
The man was horrified, and the woman, who was conscious
that she had grievously committed herself, changed her
tone, and begged her words might be forgotten. But they
were not: the man bore them in remembrance; the horrid
sounds rung incessantly in his ears; he perceived in them
a proof of his now no longer blooming wife’s real nature,
and their domestic peace was at an end. From boing a
good man he became morose, frequently upbraided his
wife with her diabolical proposal, cursed the hour when
he resolved on marrying her, beat and ill-used her. Thus
it continued for a season. ‘The woman suffered and re-
pented. One day she went to the smithy, to sce with a
friendly eye her husband at his work; but he began as
before, and on its coming to blows, she, by way of proving
her superior strength, eeized an iron bar and twisted it
round her husband as if it had been a wire. ‘The husband
was now forced to submission and to promise domestic


peace.
‘THE NISSE OR NISS.


‘This is a supernatural being, nearly resembling our
Goblin, the Scottish Brownie, the German Kobold, and
the Kaboutermanneken of the Netherlands. In the good
old times they were infinitely more numerous than they
are in our days. They are not larger than small children,
are clothed in grey, and wear a red, pointed cap. Their
habitation is usually in barns and stables, where they help
to tend the cattle and horses, for which they show the
same partiality as for men. There are many instances of
the Nisse having drawn the hay from the eribs of the other
horses to that of the one for which he entertains a predi-
lection. He is fond of pranks, will sometimes let all the
cows loose in the cowhouse, plague the milkmaids, either
by blowing out the light, or by holding the hay so fast


NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS. 7


that the poor girls cannot draw out « particle; then, while
they are tugging with all their might, he will suddenly let
go his hold, so that they fall at full length on the ground.
This delights the Nisse exceedingly, and causes him to set
up a horse-laugh. If he feels attached to the master of
the house, he will do all he can for his benefit. Instances,
indeed, are not wanting of his having endeavoured to
abstract hay and other things from his neighbours, for the
use of his master; whence contention and conflicts some-
times take place between the Nisser of the two houses, so
that the hay and straw may be seen flying about in all
directions. ‘As they are obliging to those they favour, but
spiteful and vindictive when any one slights or makes
game of them, it is not surprising that their good will is
deemed worth the gaining. On Christmas eve, therefore,
and on Thursday evenings, in many places, they set sweet
porridge, cakes, beer, ete. for the Nisse, which he gladly
consumes, provided they are to his taste; for he is some-
times dainty. Ridicule and contempt he cannot endure,
and as he is strong, notwithstanding his diminutive size,
his opponent often comes off second best. A peasant, who
one winter evening met a Nise on the road, and in an
authoritative tone ordered him to get out of the way, found
himself, before he knew a word of the matter, pitched over
the hedge into a field of snow. With a girl also, who
‘one Christmas eve brought him food accompanied with
mockery, he danced such » dance, that she was found, on
the following morning, lying dead in the barn.

They love the moonlight, and in winter may sometimes
be seen amusing themselves in little sledges, or in leaping
over the fences. Although they are lively, yet they do
not at all times like noise and bustle, particularly on
Christmas eve; or a Thursday evening. In general the
Nisee is Liked, and is, therefore, in many places called
‘good fellow.


18 NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS.


Of all the beings that live in the imagination of the
Norwegian peasantry, the Nisse is that of whose existence
they are the most thoroughly convinced. Though belong-
ing to the dwarf-race, he nevertheless differs from the
dwarfs by his sprightliness and well-proportioned figure,
as well as by his sojourn in houses and barns, for which
his predilection is so strong, that he cannot endure a re-
moval; for he will then forsake the family, and take their
good luck with him. It is this partiality to old tofts that
has obtained for him the names of Toft-vette, Tomte-
veette!, and Gardbo.

Neither in the Eddas nor the Sages is there any men-
tion of the Nisse. Akin to him are, the Niigriusar of the
Ferde isles, who are described as diminutive, with red
caps, and bringers of luck ; also the Swedish Tomtegubbe.

‘They frequently dwell in the high trees that are planted
round the house, on which account eare should be taken
not to fell them, particularly the more ancient ones, Many
a one has paid for his disregard herein by an incurable
disease*,


THE WERWOLP.

That there were persons who could assume the form of
a wolf or n bear (Huse-bjém), and again resume their
own, is « belief as wide-spread as it is ancient. This pro-
erty is cither imparted by Trollmen, or those possessing
it are themselves Trolls. In the Volsunga Saga we have
very early traces of this superstition’.


THE MARA (QVALDRYTTERINDE).

‘The Mara (Bug. mare, in nightmare) belongs to the same
family with the Vardégl, Drang’, ete. In appearance she
resembles a most beautiful woman, but in acts the most

1 Toft and tomt are synonymous, and signify the space on which


menage has stood.
2 Arndt, ii, 15. See vol.i.p.93,andmote®, Tb. p. 113.


NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS. 19


malignant Troll. She passes through locked doors, assails
persons sleeping by setting herself across them, and tor-
menting them 9o that it is horrible. ‘The person afflicted
by such a nightly visit is said to be Mare-ridden, and is
often nearly suffocated. She is not satiafied with torment-
ing persons, but will ride both sheep and horses. In the
‘Thellemark she is called Muro, and there, asin other places,
they have many methods of getting rid of her; one of the
most effectual is to wrap « knife in a cloth, and, in a
manner prescribed, let it turn three times round the body,
while uttering certain rimes.

Like other rmpermataral being, the Mara can enter by the small hole,
bat, like them, she must also make her exit by the way through which she
entered, even though every door and window should be open (Thiele,
{iL 282). Hence Mephistopheles, in answor to Paust’s inguiry why he did
ot depart through the window? say1—

‘sist cin Gesetz der Teufel und Gespenster,
‘wo sic hereingeschliipf, da miissen sic hinaus.
See also Holberg’s Uden Hoved og Hale,’ Act I. Se. 4.

‘The Yoglingasaga, cxvi. has a story of King Vanl: in Upsala, who
was trodden to death by a Mara. When his men held his head, she trod
on and almost crushed his legs; aud when they held his feet, she so
prevsed hin head aa to cause his death,


Guosts.


‘The belief that the souls of the departed find pleasure
in revisiting the places where they have experienced joy
or sorrow and pain, is universal among almost every peo-
ple. Hence the current opinion, that the soul of a mur-
dered person willingly hovers around the spot where his
body is buried, and makes its appearanee, for the purpose
of calling forth vengeance on the murderer. The eye of
superstition sees them sometimes as white spectres in the
churchyard, where they stop horses, terrify people, and
make a disturbance; sometimes as executed erimin
who in the moonlight wander round the place of execu-
tion, with their head under their arm. Sometimes they


20 NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS.


pinch people while asleep both black and blue, and such
marks are called ghost-spots (Dédningepletter), or ghost
pinches (Dédningeknib). Such spectres cannot find peace
in the grave, in consequence of the erimes either of them-
selves or of others, before they are asked what it is they
‘want ; after which they do not appear again. Bullets, gun-
powder, and weapons are wasted on them ; but at the sight
of across and from exorcisms they must retire. Under this
hoad may be included the so-called Udburrer or Udbore,
‘who in some districts ery like children in the woods, and
entice people to them, and in other places, have their
abode in steep mountains, and retired spota near the sea,
and are supposed to derive their origin from murdered
children.

‘The Danish word for ghost is Gjenganger, or Gjenfterd, answering exactly
to the Freuch reomans The belief in ghotts was deeply imprested on the
sind of the heathen Northmen a belief elosely connected with their ideas
of the state after death. The soul, they believed, returned to the place
‘whence it sprang, while the body and the grosser life bound to it pemed
to the abode of Hel or Death. Hlerewith wan naturally combined the
Deliof that the soul of the departed might, from its heavenly home, revisit
the earth, thereat night-time to unite itself in the graveemound with the
‘corporeal shadow released from Hel. Thus the dead could show them-
cies in the opened grave-mounds in the aame form which they hed in
life. See Volaungaky. I. Str, 97, 9 in Edda Sem.

In the Eyrbyggiasoge is a story of an ejectment of a whole troop of
ghosts from a house by judicial process.

THE NOK.

‘The Norwegian Nék (0. Nor. Nikr, Sw. Neck) gene-
rally has its abode in rivers and lakes, sometimes also in
friths (Fiorde), It requires a human sacrifice every year}
for which reason one person at least is annually missing
in the vicinity of every river or water that is inhabited by
a Nék. When any person is drowned the Nok is often
heard to cry in a hollow, unearthly voice: “Sst over 1”
(Cross over). The Nok can transform himself into all
kinds of things. Sometimes he will appear like balf a


NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS. 21


boat in the water, at others like » half horse on the bank,
sometimes like gold and other valuables. If a person
touches any of these things, the Nok instantly gets power
over him. He is particularly greedy after little children,
He is, however, dangerous only after sunset. On ap-
proaching any water, it is not amiss to say: “Nyk! Nyk!
Neal i Vatn! Jomfru Maria kastet Staal i Vatn! Du sek,
sek fiyt!” (“Nyk! Nyk! needle in water! The Virgin
Mary cast steel into water! Thou sink, I flost!”) This
formula requires some explanstion, which will be found
hereafter in what is related of the Swedish Neck.

‘The Nok is known in many places under the name of
the Sdetrold (water-sprite), which is said to abide always
in the water, and to have many heads. If persons are in
danger of shipwreck, they must promise him a son or @
daughter for their deliverance ; for which he, on the other
hand, bestows on them riches and good fortune as much
as they desire. He frequently changes his form, and takes
his name from the place where he has his abode. In one
place in Norway, whenever it is stormy, or a tempest is
gathering, he appears in the form of a large horse, plashing
with his monstrous hoofs in the water, which he causes
almost constantly to be in violent motion. In the same
water, another being, called the Vigtrold, has its habita-
tion, which shouts terrifically when any danger is at hand.

Althongh the Nok is a dangerous being, he neverthe-
Jess sometimes meet with his master. In the waterfall
of Sund, as the story goes, there dwelt for a long time a
Nok, who caused the loss of many persons, when they
rowed up or down the fall. The priest, who apprehended
danger from this Nok, took with him on his passage four
stout men, whom he ordered to row with all their might
up the fall. They made the attempt twice, but at each
time glided back. In making the third attempt, it was
observed thet, at the upper part of the fall, the priest,


22 NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS.


dashing his hand into the water, drew up a black creature
resembling a little dog. He then ordered the men to row
farther up, at the same time placing the animal firmly
between his feet, and keeping a constant silence. Having
now reached the stone-mound at Tvet, he conjured the
Nok into it. From that time no one has perished in the
fall.


In Iceland, where the Nak ia called Hnitwr, he appears like a handsome
ity hore, though with his hoofs turned backwards, and etrives to tempt
people to mount him, when be will gallop off with them into the water,
Some efforts to tame him have been partially successful, and he bas beca
made to work, though for « shart time only.

In the Faroe islands the Nikor hus his abode in fresh waters or lakes,
‘where he will drag poople down and drown them,

In Scotland the Nok is sometimes represented by Shellycoat, who is
covered with ses-weed and muscle-shells; sometimes by the Kelpie who,
at least in the Highlands, appears in a horse's shape. In the Orkneys be
fappears either as alittle horse, or as man under the name of Tangie™.
In Shetland he is called Shoopiltee, and appears as a handsome litte horse,
tempting perions to mount him, when he runs with his rider into the sea.
In the Scottish islands they make him an offering, in the shape of a cup
of good beer.

Grimm (D. M.p. 479) interprets the name of Shellycoat by the German
‘Schellenrock (Bell-coat), supposing him so named from his cost being
‘hung with bells; and cites the instance of a Puck, who for thirty years
served in the kitchen and stable of a Meklenburg monastery. He appeared
always well-dsposed, and only stipulated for funicam de divereiscoloribur
of tintinnadulia plenam.

‘The Norwegian Nok and the Kelpie of Scotland are identical beings.
‘When one of the Grabama of Morphie was building the old castle, he
secured the assistance of the water-kelpie or river-hocse, by the accredited
‘means of throwing a pair of branks (a sort of yoke) over his head. When
released from his labour, and about to return to the water, he anid :—

 Sair back and exir banes,
Drivin the Laird o” Morphie’s stanes !
‘The Laird ot Morphie Nl never thrive
‘As lang 's the Kelpie in alive?!”


* In Ben's Deseript. of Orkney (1599) be is thus described : “Tndutus
‘st algis marinis toto corpore, similis est pullo equino convoluto pilis,
membrum habet simile equino, et texticulos magnos.” Hibbert, 504.

¥ Soe Hibbert, 5. 26, ® Chambers’ Pop. Rh. p. 85.


NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS, 28


THE GRIM, OR FOSSEGRIM.

Closely allied to the Nék is the musical Grim or Fosse-
grim of Norway, being whose sojourn is by waterfalls
and mill-works, He generally plays in still and dark
evenings, to entice persons to him, and teach those to play
on the violin or other stringed instrument, who, on a
Thursday evening, offer to him, with averted face, a white
kd, which is to be east into a waterfall running north-
wards. If the offering is lean, the learner’s progress will
extend only to the tuning of the violin ; but if it is fat,
the Fossegrim will grasp the player's right hand, and move
it backwards and forwards until the blood springs out
at the end of every finger. ‘The pupil is then fully in-
structed, and can play s0 incomparably that the very trees
will dance and the waterfalls stop their course,


‘THE RORE-TROLD.

In the Rorevand in Nedens, a lake enclosed within
steep mountains, and mueh exposed to squalls of wind, a
Troll, called the Rore-trold, has his abode, He appears
‘under various forms, sometimes as a horse, sometimes as
a load of hay, sometimes as a huge serpent, and sometimes
as a number of persons, In the winter, and when the
ive is thickest, there may be seen, on one night, a long,
broad chasm, with fragments of ice lying in it, all which
is the work of the Rore-trold.


‘Tae BRUNMict.

Another somewhat noxious Troll is the Brunmigi, who
is supposed to dwell near and infest springs. His name
(from Brunn, fons, and miga, mingere) sufficiently indicates
his nature.

‘THE QVARNKNURRE.

This being seems in many respects identical with the

Fossegrim. In Gicrrestad it was formerly the custom to


24 NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS,


place a soft loaf, a cup of beer, or something of the kind,
by the millstone, that the Qvernknurre might increase
the flour in the sacks. For some time he took up his
abode in Sandager waterfall, where a man had a mill, As
often as the man began to grind corn the mill stopt.
Knowing that it was the Qvernknurre that caused this
annoyance, he took with him one evening, when he was
about to grind, some piteh in a pot, under which he made
a fire. As soon as he had set the mill in motion it stopt
as usual. He then thrust downwards with a pole, in the
hope of driving away the Qvernknurre, but in vain, At
Inst he opened the door to see, when lo! there stood the
Qvernknurre with extended jaws, and of such magnitude
that while its lower lip rested on the threshold, its upper
one touched the top of the doorway. It said to the man:
“Hast thou ever seen such great gaping?” Instantly
seising the boiling pitch-pot, the man dashed it into his
mouth, with the words: “Hast thou ever tasted such hot
boiling?” With a howl the Qvernknurre vanished, and
was never again seen.

‘A being nearly rerembling the Qvaemknurre isthe Uriak of the Scottish
Highlands, which is described as a rough hairy sprite that sets mills ut
‘work in the night, when there i nothing to grind. He is sent howling
away by a panful of hot ashes thrown into his lap while he is sleeping",


‘THE FINNGALEN.

‘This monster is often named, though not accurately
described in the later romantic Sagas. According to these
it has « human head with enormous teeth, 2 beast’s body
and 2 large heavy tail, terrific claws and a sword in every
claw *.


+ Keightley, F. Mp. 396, from the Quarterly Review, 1825,
+ Keyser, p. 163. See Snorra-Kdda, edit Rask, p. 342.


NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS. 25


GERTRUD'S BIRD.

In Norway the red-erested, black woodpecker is known
under the name of Gertrud’s Bird. Its origin is as fol-
lows: “When our Lord, accompanied by St. Peter, was
wandering on earth, they eame to a woman who was occu-
piedin baking; her name was Gertrud, and on her head
she wore axed hood. Weary and hungry from their long
journeying, our Lord begged fora cake. She took a little
dough and ect it on to bake, and it grew so large that it
filled the whole pan. ‘Thinking it too much for alma, she
took a smaller quantity of dough, and again began to bake,
but this cake also swelled up to the same size as the first ;
she then took still less dough, and when the cake had be-
come as large as the preceding ones, Gertrud said: ‘You
must go without alms, for all my bakings are too large for
you’ Then was our Lord wroth, and said : “Because thou
givest me nothing, thou shalt for a punishment become a
little bird, shalt seek thy dry food between the wood and
the bark, and drink only when it rains’ Hardly were
these words spoken, when the woman was transformed to
the Gertrufs bird, and flew through the kitchen
chimney; and at this day she is seen with a red hood and
black body, because she was bluckened by the soot of the
chimney. She constantly pecks the bark of trees for
sustenance, and whistles against rain; for she always
thirats and hopes to drink !.”


AASGAARDSRETA (WILD HUNT).

‘This band consists of spirits who have not done so
much good as to deserve heaven, nor a0 much evil as to
be sent to hell. It consists of drunkards, brawlers, sing-
ers of slanderous songs, orafty deceivers, and those t
for the sake of lucre have perjured themselves. ‘Their


4 Aabjéimsen og Mée, No. 2. Grimm, D. M. p. 639.
ce


26 NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS.


punishment is to ride about till the end of the world. At
the head of the troop rides Guro-Rysse or Reisa-Rova
with her long tail, by which she is distinguished from the
rest. After her follows a multitude of both sexes. If
seen in front, they appear tall and comely, both riders
and horses; but behind, nothing is to be seen but Guro’s
long tail. ‘The horses, which are coal-black, and have
eyes that glow in the dark like fire, are guided with red
hot rods and iron reins, which, together with the scream-
ing of the riders, eause such a terrific noise that it may
be heard at a vast distance, They ride as easily over water
as over land, their horses’ hoofa scarcely touching the sur-
face of the water. Wherever they cast a saddle on a roof,
there a person must soon die; and where they understand
there will be fighting and murder in a drinking bout,
there they enter, and set themselves on the ledge above
the door. They conduct themselves quietly as long os
nothing is going forwards, but set up a horse-laugh and
make a loud rattling with their iron rods, when the fighting
is begun and murder committed. The troop rides about
chiefly at Christmas, when the great drinking bouts are
held. When a person hears the troop coming, he should
get out of the way or fall down on his face, and appear to
be asleep; for there are instances of men having been
caught up by them, and either carried back to the place
whence they were taken, or found half stupified at a di-
stance from it. A good man who takes this precaution
has nothing more to apprehend than that each of the
troop will spit on him. When all are passed by, he must
spit in his turn ; otherwise he would receive injury there-
from.

‘This remarkable tradition, the title even of which points to hestheniam,
is known, ut leat by name, over the grenter part of the diocese of Chris.
tiantand, bot iit found most complete in the Upper Thellemark, where
Tel have heard it; where itis called the Aaake-Rei or Asanerford,


NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS. 27


which cannot be seen but only heard. It devours the Fladbréd (thin
cakes), batter, et. that have beeo prepared for Christmas, unless they be
crossed previously to being put away. In one district of Norway, if any
fone, on hearing the troop, does not throw himself down, his soul must
accompany it, while hia body remains lying. When the soul returns to
the body, the latter in quite enfeebled, and remains 20 ever after. In some
places this noisy troop is called Aaskereia, in others Hoskelreia. Some-
‘des they ride with a rushing noise through the sir; sometimes they are
to be met by night, on the roads, riding on black horses with glowing eyes.
On Christmas eve, and the three nights of Christmous, they are the mont
riotous, and the countryman who has neglected the precaution of placing
1 bar before his horses, or a cross over his door, may be certain of finding
them the next morning dripping wet and almost broken-winded ; for the
HRoskelrein wil have used them, and they are not the people to treat them


gently,
‘THE MERMAN (MARMENNILL) AND MERMAID (MARGYGR).


Sailors and fishermen, when the weather is calm, some-
times sce Mermen and Mermaids rise from the bosom of
the tranquil deep. ‘The Mermen are of a dusky hue,
with a long beard, black hair, and from the waist upwards
resemble a man, but downwards are like a fish. ‘The Mer-
maids are beautiful upwards, but downwards, like the
Mermen, have a fish’s form. ‘Their children are called
Marnucler. These are sometimes caught by fishermen,
who take them home, that they may gain from them a
knowledge of future events; for both they, as well ss
the Mermen and Mermaids, can see into futurity, It
is now rare to hear a Mermaid speak or sing. Mariners
are not pleased at the sight of them, as they forbode a
storm.

It is dangerous to hurt them, A sailor once enticed a
Mermaid so near, that she laid her hand on the gunwale
of the vessel, which he struck off. For his barbarity he
was overtaken by a storm, in which he nearly perished.
St. Olaf, on one of his piratical expeditions, fell in with »
‘Mermaid, who by her sweet song was wont to Iull ma-
riners to sleep, and then drag them down. If, in diving
c2


28 NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS.


under water, they turn towards a ship, it betokens mis-
fortune; if they turn from the ship, it is a good sign!.
Belief in Mermen and Mermaids is as old as it ia general. According
to Gervate of Tilbury, we bad Mermaids in our ves, and they are men-
tioned inthe Icelandic Segas, Ses Dobenecy i, pp. 38 agg lao for an
runt of the German Water-nix. In Ireland they are called Merrose,
tod legends are tld of them similar to thoee of other countries,


‘THE SEA.SNAKE.

In fresh waters and rivers, as well as along the coasts
of Norway, enormous snakes are said to exist, but varying
with regard both to their appearance and magnitude. Ac.
cording to the general belief, they are brought forth on
the land, and have their first abode in forests and mounds
of stone, whence, when they grow large, they betake them-
selves to the great lakes or inland seas, or to the ocean,
where they grow to a tremendous size. They seldom make
their appearance, and when they do, are regarded as fore-
runners of important events. In most of the lakes and
rivers of any considerable magnitude, these monsters have,
in former times, on one or other extraordinary occasion,
‘been seen to rise from the water’s depth. In the fresh
waters none have been seen within the memory of man,
but they sometimes, when there is a dead calm, appear in
the fiords or firths. Some time after the Black Death*
there came, according to tradition, two large snakes from
the Foksde, by the town down to the ‘loug’ (bath),
where one, it is said, is still to be found; but the other
attempted, about two hundred years since, to go down to
the river's mouth, where it perished in the fall and was
driven across in the vicinity of Drontheim, where it be-
came putrid, and emitted such a stench that no one could
approach the place.

2 Keyser, p. 162.


2 A.D. 1350, ‘Twosthirds of the people of Norway are said to have
perished. It visited England two years earlier.


NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS. 29


In the Irundevand, on Lister, there is a Sea-Snake that
appears only before a king’s death or some great revolu-
tion. Some assert that they have seen it.

In Bollamvatn also, in Bahuus' there was formerly a
Sea-Snake, whose body was as thick as a calf’s of a year
old, and whose tail was about six ells in length. It de-
stroyed the fish, and had its abode in a little isle called
Svanviksde, It never showed itself, except when some
calamity was at hand. But of all the snakes inhabiting
the waters of the North, none are s0 celebrated as those
that wore and are to be found in Mis. In an old writing ®,
we are told of a tremendous snake, that seemed to approach
from the island, and to go from thence to the ‘ King’s
land,’ but instantly vanished. In like manner, many
large snakes appeared day after day in Mids, which twisted
themselves into a variety of curves, and cast the water to
a considerable height. At length the first-mentioned enor-
mous snake made its appearance a second time, and darted
with rapidity up on a rock, Its eyes were as lange as the
bottom of a barrel, and it had a long mane that hung far
down its neck. As it could not get off the rock, but lay
and beat its head against it, one of the bishop’s servants,
who was a daring fellow, took a steel bow, and shot so
many arrows into its eye, that the water round about was
coloured green from the outflowing humour, This snake,
which displayed variety of colours, was appalling to look
upon. It died of the wounds it had received, and sent
forth such a stench, that the people thereabouts, by the
bishop’s order, united for the purpose of burning it, which
was done. Its skeleton lay for many years on the shore,
A grown-up youth could hardly earry the smallest portion
of its backbone. It is also said that there is a Sea-Snake,

* Thin tradition belongs stricily to chote of Sweden, but is left here,
in order not to divide the several ecounte of the Sea-Snake.

+ Beakrvelse over Hammer.


30 NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS.


which winds itself round the grest bell from Hammer,
which was eunk during the seven years’ war in the Akers-
vig, and when the water is clear may still be discerned.
All attempts to raise it have been in vain, though it was
once lifted to the water’s surface.

That this Mids snake was not a thing to be played with,
will appear from an account of the year 1656, given in
Pontoppidan’s Natural History of Norway, 2, 65. Such
a water-snake made a land trip from Mids to Spirillen, and
is probably the same with the one that was wont to appear
in that lake against evil and perilous times. It was in
appearance like huge mast, whatever stood in its way it
overthrew, even trees and huts. With its loud hissing
and horrid roaring it terrified all the people round about.”

‘That in calm weather such enormous Sea-Suakes some-
times appear on the coast of Norway, ean hardly be denied,
as credible persons, even in our own time, declare that
they have seen them!; to whose testimony may be added
that of Hibbert, who says: “The existence of the Sea-
Snake, a monster fifty-five feet long, is placed beyond a
doubt by the animal, that was thrown on shore in Orkney,
the vertebre of which are to be seen in the Edinburgh
Museum.”

‘The writer, who among us has most amply treated of
the Sea-Snake, is Erie Pontoppidan, in his Natural Hi-
story of Norway, in which two representations of Sea-
Snakes are given. According to his testimony, founded
on the accounts of Bergen and Nordland mariners, as well
as of other eye-witnesses, these monsters live in the depthe
of the ocean, exeept in July and Angust, when in calm
weather they come up to the surface ; but sink again the

* Compare the Vestlandske Tidende No. 22, and Sorenskriver Blom’s,
aso Bishop Neomann's paa troverdige Folks Beretninger grundede Vid-


nesbyrd, Budstikken 6te Aargang 189 and 578,
2 Description of Shetland, p. 565,


NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS. 31


moment the wind begins to ruffle the watery mirror. Ac-
cording to the testimony of Commander de Ferrys in
1746, given before a court, “the Sea-Snake seen by him
in the vicinity of Molda, had a head resembling in shape
that of a horse, which it held about an ell above the water,
of a greyish hue, the snout quite black, very large black
eyes, and a long white mane, which hung from its neck
into the sea, Seven or eight coils of its body, which was
very thick, were also seen: according to conjecture, there
was a fathom between the coils!” According to the tes-
timony of the priest Tuchsen of Here, end of some neigh-
bouring priests, these Sea-Snakes were as thick as a double
hogshesd (Oxehoved), had large nostrils and blue eyes,
which st a distance resembled a couple of bright pewter
plates. On the neck there was a mane, which from afar
appeared like sea-weed.


‘DRAGONS.


‘Traditions of Dragons that fy through the air by night
and spit forth fire, are very general, and holes in the earth
and the mountains are yet shown over all the country,
whence they have been seen issuing like a glowing fire,
when war or other public calamity was at hand. When
they return to their habitations,—where they brood over
vast treasures and precious things, which, according to
some traditions, they have collected in the bottom of the
sea—the sound may be heard of the great iron doors, which
close after them. As they are fierce and spit pernicious
fire, it is dangerous to contend with them. Under Agers
church, which stands on four golden pillars, a dragon
broods over immense riches. It has been seen, even within
the memory of persons living, or a short time before the
last war, issuing from a hole near the church. From the


+ Pontoppidan, 2, 821.


82 NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS.


Dragon’s Hole on Storée in Aadal, from the Dragon’s
Hill on Rasvog, and numerous other places, firedrakes
with long tails were to be scen issuing in former times,
and sometimes even in our days. ‘That they are not in-
vincible appears from an old tradition, which tells of a
Priest, named Anders Madaen, who is said to have lived
about 1681, that shot a dragon which brooded over silver
in the so-called Dragon Mount near the Tvedevand.
Theimportant part played by dragons, Gredrakes andthe like inthe old
songs legends and romances, where the biling of dragon forms one of «
hero's earliest proofs of valour, has probebly given birth to the inna


rable traditions concerning these monsters; an accidental electric fire, a
fire-ball or the like, being enough to keep the belief alive.


THE SEVERED HAND?


‘There was a miller whose mill was burnt down on two
successive Whitsun-eves. In the third year, just before
‘Whitsuntide, he had a tailor in his house to make holyday
clothes.

“T wonder how it will go with the mill this time;
whether it will be burnt again to-night,” said the miller.

“You need not fear that,” said the tailor, “give me
the key, and I will keep wateh in it.”

This seemed to the miller both good and highly ac-
ceptable; and when it drew towards evening the tailor
got the key and went to the mill, which was still empty,
having but just been rebuilt. So placing himself in the
middle of the floor, he chalked round him a large circle,
on the outside of which he wrote the Paternoster; and
thus fortified, would not have feared if the arch-enemy
himself had made his appearance. In the dead of the
night the door suddenly flew open, and there came in such
a multitude of black cats, that the place literally swarmed.
But a short time had elapsed when they set a large earthen


2 Asbjdrnsen, Noruke Huldreeventyr, i. pp. 11-14.


NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS. 33


pot in the chimney, and lighted a fire under it, so that it
began frying and hissing in the pot as if it were full of
boiling pitch and tar.

“Oho,” thought the tailor, “is that what you are
after?” And scareely had he given utterance to the
thought when one of the eats put its paw behind the pot
and tried to upset it.

“Whisht cat, you ‘ll burn yourself! ” cried the tailor.

“Whisht cat, you’ll burn yourself! the tailor says,”
said the cat to the other cats, and all ran from the chimney,
and began hopping and dancing round the circle ; but in
the meanwhile the cat again sneaked to the chimney and
endeavoured to upset the pot.

“Whisht cat, you'll burn yourself!” eried the tailor,
and drove it from the chimney.

“Whisht cat, you'll burn yourself, the tailor says,”
said the cat to the other eats, and all began dancing and
hopping again, but in a moment the same cat was away
trying a third time to overturn the pot.

“Whisht eat, youll burn yourself!” cried the tailor
in a rage, and so terrified them that they tumbled one
over another, and then began to jump and dance as before.

‘They then formed a cirele without the tailor’s cirele,
and began dancing round it with an ever-increasing velo-
city, till at length it seemed to the tailor that everything
was whirling round before him. All this while the cats
were staring at him with their large, fierce eyes, as if they
would swallow him.

‘While they were in the thick of it, the cat that had tried
to upset the pot, put her paw within the circle, as if she
felt inclined to seize hold of the tailor, but who seeing her
design, drew out his knife and stood on his guard. After
afew moments the cat again put her paw within the ring,
when the tailor in one instant chopped it off ; and all the
cata took to their heels, screaming and howling, as speedily

°5


34 NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS.


as they could, and left the tailor in quict posseasion of the
field.

The tailor then lay down in the circle till long after the
sun had been shining in upon him. He then rose, locked
the mill-door and proceeded to the miller’s house.

‘When he entered the room the miller and his wife were
sill in bed, it being Whit-sunday.

Good morning,” said the tailor, giving the miller his
hand. “Good morning,” said the miller in return, and
was both glad and surprised to sce the tailor again.

“Good morning, mother,” said he, holding out
to the miller’s wife.

“Good morning,” said she, but appeared pale and sor-
rowfal, and kept her hand under the bed-clothes, but at
last offered him her left hand. The tailor now saw how
matters stood; but what afterwards took place is not said.

‘The North-German story, Die Katzenmible, closely resembles the
above, but is much simpler. The Norwegian one is probably embellished
by the author, from whore work it is extracted.


is hand


‘OF ST. OLAP,

St. Olaf was the Norwegian people’s hero, and yet lives
in their remembrance, while few only and imperfect tradi-
tions are occasionally to be met with of his equally valiant
predecessors and successors. Let us, therefore, consider
this man, in order more easily to comprehend the causes
of his great cclebrity.

Olaf was born in 995 ; his father, Harald Greenske, was of
the race of Harald Hiérfager, and his mother, Asta, the
daughter of Gudbrand, from the Uplands. In his third
year he was baptized, King Olaf Tryggvason standing god-
father to him. In his youth he eailed on piratioal expedi-
tions, in which he acquired great experience and fitness for
warfare. Supported by powerful relations and friends, as
well as by his own sagacity and military skill, he gained


NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS. 35


possession of his paternal kingdom, over which he reigned
for fifteen years with great vigour and reputation, His
exertions were chiefly directed to the complete establish-
ment of the Christian faith in Norway, which, after the
death of Olaf Tryggvason, had greatly declined ; but the
violence with which he proceeded, together with his ambi-
tion and severity, rendered him so hateful, that he found
it advisable to flee from the country to Gardarike', from
his diseontented subjects, who were, moreover, instigated
and supported by the ambitious Dano-English king, Cnut
the Great. Olaf, who in the school of adversity had begun
to act the saint, was on the eve of starting for Jerusalem,
when Olaf Tryggvason, in a dream, bade him return to
Norway. He obeyed the behest and marched with an
army into the country, where, in an obstinate battle at
Stiklastad in Veerdal, he was defeated and slain by his re-
volted subjects, on the 29th July 1080.

Shortly after the death of Olaf, the fame of his sanctity
and the miracles said to have attended his corpse formed
1a topic of conversation among the people, who found them
the more credible, as they were highly dissatisfied with what
they had got in exchange for him. Olaf’s body, which had
been buried in a sand-bank at Stiklastad, was taken up, and
being found, after the expiration of a year, unchanged, with
the hair and nails grown, Grimkell, Olaf’s court-bishop, de-
clared him a holy person, and the commonalty thereupon
determined that Olaf was a true saint. His body was by
his son, King Magnus the Good, laid in a costly shrine,
and placed by the high altar in the church of St. Clement
at Nidaros (Drontheim), where, as well as afterwards in
the mognificent Christeburch (the present cathedral), it is
said to have wrought numerous miracles. St. Olaf’s festi-
val, the 29th July, was by law commanded to be celebrated
throughout the country as the chief solemnity, and churches

» Russia, in its then restricted signification,


36 NORWEGIAN TRADITIO’


to his honour were erected not only in Norway, but in
Denmark, Sweden, Russia, England, and even by his
countrymen at Constantinople. Pilgrims journeyed in
crowds to St, Olaf’s shrine, and legends of cripples who
had there recovered the use of their limbs, and of other
‘miracles soon became numberless.

St. Olaf’s shrine of silver, inlaid with gold and precious
stones, a single one of which cost Archbishop Walkendorf
twenty lasts of butter!, was on solemn occasions, such a8
the Saint’s yearly festival, or the election of a king, borne
in procession by sixty men, and was an abundant source
of revenue to the clergy and the cathedral. The last arch-
bishop, Olaf Engelbretson, carried it with him to his strong
castle of Steinviksholm, where, after his fight, it fell into
the hands of the Danish commander, Christopher Hyit-
feld, who sent St. Olai’s shrine of silver gilt, weighing
about 3200 ounces, together with another silver shrine, in
which the Saint’s shirts were preserved, and many other
valuables, to the Danish treasury.

‘When the Swedes in 1564 had taken possession of
Drontheim, they found nothing remaining of St. Olaf’s
treasures, except his helmet, spurs, and the wooden chest
that had contained his body*, The helmet and spurs
they took with them to Sweden, where they are still pre-
served in the church of St. Nicholas at Stockholm ; but
the ehest they left behind in a church, after having drawn
out the silver nails, which had been left by the Danes.
After the expulsion of the Swedes, St. Olaf’s body and
chest were, with great solemnity, carried back to the eathe-
ral, where, a contemporary bears witness, that the body
‘was found entire in a grave of masonry in 1667, and “hia


1 Equal to sbout forty toms.

F This was, without doubt, one of the eases in which his silver shrine
‘as preserved. What became of his armour, battle.axe, spear, and the
‘banner given him by an angel, while he slept on the place where he wa?
martyred, is not kaown,


NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS. 37


blood is seen to this day in a barn, and ean never be
washed out by water or human hands.” In the following
year St. Olaf’a body was by a royal ordinance covered with
earth.

St. Olafs sanctity is no more thought of, even his last
resting-place is forgotten, but his name still lives, as is
proved by the numerous traditions still fresh in the me-
mory of the Norwegian people. Throughout the land are to
be found traces of St. Olaf’s deeds and miraculous power.
Fountains sprang forth when he thirsted, and acquired
salutary virtue when he drank; rocks were rent at his
bidding, and sounds (sunde) were formed at his nod;
churches were raised, and Trolls found in St. Olaf a foe as
formidable as they had formerly had in the mighty Thor,
whose red beard even was inherited by St. Olaf, In many
places ‘Trolls are still shown, who at St. Olaf’s command
were turned into stone.

Ont of Norway also St. Olaf lived long in popular tra-
dition, In Denmark and in Sweden are many places
where traditions are yet current of St. Olaf and the Trolls
he turned into atone: ‘Thus, as he was one day riding by
Dalby church in Virmeland, he was addressed by a Troll-
wife in these words :—

“Kong Olaf med dit pipugaSkiigg!! King Olaf with thy pointed beard!
‘Du segiar for niir min Badstugu- Thou sailest too near my bath-
vig.” room wall.
To which he answered -—
“Du Tréll med din Réck och Thou Troll-wife with thy rock


Ten snd wheel

Skal bli i Sten, Shall turn to stone,

Och aldrig mer gira Skeppare And never more do shipman
Men.” harm,


In the Shetland isles, we learn from Hibbert, the in-


1 The same probably as Sw. Pipskiigg (Grimm, D.M. p.517), the little
pointed beard on the under lip.


38 NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS.


habitants, as Inte as the eighteenth century, maintained
that they had their ancient, but now lost, law-book from
“St. Olla,’ of whom they relate wonderful things in their
songs, which they call ‘Viesacks.’ A arte tradition
ascribes it to St. Olaf, that they have now no woods on
the islands. St. Olaf having inquired of some of the in-
habitants whether they had any woods at home, they sis-
pecting that he made the inquiry with the view to taxing
them, answered in the negative. “Be it so,” said the
king, and st the same time the Farée woods sank into
the earth.

If it be asked what can be the origin of many of these
wondrous traditions, we answer, that it must be sought
for in the same ignorance of nature and its effects, together
with the desire of finding a reason for everything that
uncommon, which has given birth to 0 many tra-
ditions of supernatural beings. What heathenism attri-
buted to the gods of Valhall and to the mighty Thor, the
cunning Catholic ecclesiastics, with their earliest converts,
no doubt transferred to the powerful suppresser of the
Asw-fuith, St. Olaf, whose axe supplanted Thor's Midlnir,
and whose steed, renowned in tradition, the goats of
the Thunder-god!. Olaf’s own renown, the tales of pious
pilgrims and monkish legends have gradually combined to


1 The numerous representations, which in the days of Cathoticism were
no doubt to be found in many of the churches dedicated to St. Olaf, are
now for the most part destroyed; but from the notices which we have of
‘them, the hero was generally represented with a battle.axe in his hand,
and treading on x Troll or a dragon. In Ladvig church there is a re-
markable processional Lanner, on which is the figure of St. Olaf, in com-
plete armour, treading on a dragon. In St. Marys chorch at Litbeck T
have seen an old, but very good painting, the principal Ggure iu which is
St Olaf completely armed, with his Uattlesxe in his hand and a royal
rmantle over his shoulders. With one foot he in treading on 1 dragon,
‘but which has a human heed. In the Kollmann chapel, in the same
‘church, there is likewise an ancient picture of “St. Olaus.’ Even in Lon-
don there are two or three churches dedicated to St. Olave.


NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS. 39


make of St. Olaf a hero, whom the superstitious and igno-
rant multitude believed capable of performing the most
impossible things.


OF ST, OLAF AND THE FIRST CHURCH IN NORWAY.


In Norrland there is the following tradition respecting
the first church erected in Norway! :-—

As St. Olaf was one day wandering among the woods
and mountains, deeply meditating how, without laying
heavy burthens on his people, he could accomplish the
construction of a church he had planned in his mind, of
such magnitude that its like should hardly be found, he
met a man of gigantic size, who asked him what he was
pondering over. “I may well be pondering,” answered
the king, “having made a vow to build a church for mag-
nitude and magnificence without its like in the whole
world.” ‘The Troll thereupon undertook by a certain
fixed time to complete such a structure, but only on con-
dition that, if the work should be finished at the time
appointed, St. Olaf would engage to give him, in remu-
neration for his labour, the sun and moon, or St. Olaf
himself. ‘The king agreed to the condition, but fancied
he could form such a vast plan for the edifice, that the
giant would find it impossible to finish the work by the
time agreed on, ‘The church was to be so spacious that
seven priests might preach in it at the same time without
hearing or disturbing one another. ‘The pillars and orna-
ments, both within and without, were to be of the hardest
flint; besides which many other and equally dificult con-
ditions were included in the bargain. But within a much
shorter time than the period agreed on, St. Olaf saw the
church finished, with the exception of the spire, which
was still to be erected. Seeing this the Saint went out


4 For other versions of thit story, see Danish Traditions and Swedish
‘Traditions.


40 NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS.


again among the woods and monntains, in deep tribula-
tion, thinking of his unfortunate engagement; when sud-
denly he heard a child crying in the mountain, and a
giantess comforting it with the following song :—


“'Vys! vyss! sonen min! Hush! bush! my son!
I morgon kommer Vind och To-morrow comes Wind and
Viider, fader din, ‘Tempest, thy father,


Och bar med sig Sol och Mine, And has with him sun and moon,
Eller sjelfver Sanct Olof.” Or St. Olaf himself.

Now the king was overjoyed, becanse Trolls, as we are
told, always lose their power when a Christian man calls
them by their name, On his return he saw the giant
standing on the top of the tower, in the act of placing the
spire, and called to him :—

“Vind och Viider, ‘Wind and Tempest,
‘Du har satt spiran sneder !” ‘Thou hast set the spire awry!

From the summit of the church the Troll now fell with
4 terrific smash, and was shivered in fragments, all which
were mere flints, According to another version the giant’s
name was Slitt, and St. Olaf cried out :—
© Slate! siitt spiran ratt !”” Shite! act the spire straight!

According to another, he is called Blister, and St. Olaf
calls to him :
“Blister! sitt spiran yiister!” Blaster! sct the spire westward !

The same tradition is also current in Norway itself,
where the giant is called Skalle, and the magnificent cathe-
dral of Nidaros (Drontheim) is the church erected by him!
A similar tradition respecting the name of the Troll is
found also in Germany®,


ST, OLAF AT VAALER,
When travelling over the country, for the purpose of
introducing the Christian faith, St. Olaf came to a place


2 Afeelius, il, 97, 98; Grimm, D. M. pp. 515, 516.
* Grimm, K. and H. M. No. $5.


NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS. 41


on the east bank of the Glommen, which, together with
its church and the whole parish, uoquired the name of
Vaaler in the following manner:—In the above-named
place, St. Olaf held an assize, at which, after some hesi-
tation, it was decided that the God whom the king wor-
shiped should also be worshiped by the people, and that
Odin’s religion should give place to that of Christ, It
was further decided, on the king’s proposal, that a church
should be erected there, as at other places, where the new
faith had been adopted. With respect, however, to the
spot where it should be built, a great difference of opinion
arose; whereupon, as the tradition informs us, St. Olaf
bent his bow, sent forth an arrow, and declared that on
the spot where it fell the church should stand. The king
was standing at the time by the fountain that still bears
the name of St, Olaf’s, and the arrow fell in a Vaal',
where a wooden church was afterwards built, which, to-
gether with the house and parish, was by St, Olaf named
Vaaler. This church, at which the sick and dying were
wont to make offerings, existed till the year 1805, when a
mew one was erected, in the vestment-chest of which there
is an elaborate iron wire clasp, called St. Olaf’s clasp,
which, according to tradition, was placed in the old church
by the king himself, and is said to have belonged to the
halter of his horse. This horse the king was accustomed
to water in the crystal spring, which is never dry in sum-
mer nor frozen in winter, and also bears St. Olaf’s name.
Miraculous powers were formerly ascribed to it. The sick
placed money or anything of silver in it, for the recovery
of their health; and great misfortune was supposed to
await the person who should make free with these sacred
deposits. Only a few years ago it was customary for the
people, on the first day of every celebration, to strive who


1 A Vaal is a quantity of trunks and roots of trees, piled in & heap for


42 NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS.


should first arrive at the fountain, and it was regarded as
something to boast of by him who was the first to water
his horse at St. Olaf’s well.


ST. OLAF AT RINGERIGE.


‘When St. Olaf was journeying from place to place, for
the purpose of introducing the Christian faith and erecting
churches in the place of the heathen temples, he found
much opposition and hindrance not only from his refrae-
tory pagan subjects, but also from the numerons Trolls,
Jutuls and Giantesses inhabiting the mountains round
about, The Trolls could not endure St, Olaf, partly be-
cause, by using the sign of the cross, he did them much
harm, and partly because he founded so many churches,
the sound of whose bells disturbed their quiet. But not-
withstanding their frequent efforts, they could effect nothing
against the holy king, who, on the other hand, turned
them at once to stone, Such petrified Trolls are still to
be seen in all parts of the country. Thus, when St. Olaf
was on one of his progresses, a fierce giantess suddenly
sprang from a steep rock, crying aloud :—
“St. Olaf med det brede skjeg! St. Olaf with the broad beard!
‘Du rider sas ner min Kjelder- Thou ridest so near my cellar-
veg!” wall!
St. Olaf instantly answered :-—
“ Stat du der i Stok og Steen, Stand thou there in stock and


stone,
TT jeg kommer her tilbars Till I come hither back again.
igjen.”

‘The petrified giantess is yet to be acen there.

‘When St. Olaf came to Steen, where hia mother at that
time dwelt, he resolved on building a church there. With
this resolution a giantess (gyvri) that lived in the moun.
tain (which istwo thousand fect high, and after her was
called Gyrihauge) was highly displeased; and, although


NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS. 43


she might, from the above-mentioned example, have known
that St. Olaf was not a person to be trifled with, she de-
termined to try her strength, and challenged him to a
competition, “Before thou art ready with thy church,”
said she, “T shall have laid a stone bridge across Steen’s
fiord.” Olaf accepted the challenge, and before she was
half ready with her bridge, the sweet tones of the bella
were heard from St. Olaf’s already finished church. In
her rage the Troll hurled the stones, which she had des-
tined for the completion of the bridge, from Gyrihauge,
straight across the fiord, at the church ; but as none of
them hit the mark, she was s0 exasperated that she tore
off one of her legs and cast it at the church-tower. Some
say that it carried the tower along with it, others that she
aimed too high. But be that as it may, the leg sank
down in a swamp behind the church, where it causes a
foul stench even to this day. The swamp is still called
by the country folk Gidgraput, and the stones which she
cast at the church were not long since to be seen in the
neighbouring fields. ‘The bridge begun by the giantess
is now completed, and at Steen are still to be seen the
ruins of St. Olas church, which deserve to be preserved
more carefully than they now are. Formerly service was
performed on every St. John’s day, but about a hundred
and fifty years ago the building was struck by lightning.


AXEL THORDSEN AND FATR VALDBORG.

In the land of Norway there lived in former days a
maiden so fair, that she was universally denominated the
Fair Valdborg. Her father, Sir Immer, died in her tender
infancy, and her mother, the Lady Juli, rested also in the
dark earth before her daughter was grown up. Being of
noble race she had powerful relatives all over the country,
but the choicest of them all was Axel Thordsen, who chose
her for his bride, while she was yet child, and was be-


44 NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS.


trothed to her, previous to his departure from the country
to visit foreign courts, among which he took service under
the emperor Henry.

His young bride was, in the meanwhile, placed in
cloister, that she might learn to sew, and there she re-
mained for eleven years, when Queen Malfred received the
fair maiden into her court, where she was held in high
honour ; for Malfred and the Lady Julli had been intimate
acquaintances and often played at tables together. Axel
was, in the mean time, beginning to feel a longing after
his betrothed, and having been informed by a pilgrim of
‘Valdborg’s race, that she was the most beauteous maiden in
the whole land, and that her powerful kindred had destined
her for the king’s son, Hagen, he obtained leave of absence
from the emperor, and hastened back to his native country.
‘Thirty attendants followed him, but when he reached his
mother’s mansion, he rode alone. At the gate he was
met by his fair sister, the Lady Helfred, who advised him
to disguise himself as o messenger, at the same time giving
him a letter to Valdborg, whom he found, attending the
queen, just coming from yespers. In the letter, which
was filled with expressions of love, lay five gold rings, on
which roses and lilies were embossed. On reading the
letter, she plighted to him her faith anew, and adhered to
her oath, although eleven knights made love to her, be-
sides Hagen, the king’s son, who was the twelfth. The
young prince was sunk in despair and weary in spirit, when
fair Valdborg would not be moved, and his mother, Queen
Malfred, answered his complaint with: “ By force thou
canst not gain her.” He nevertheless recovered hope,
when he by chanee met his confessor, the black friar Knud,
who gave him the unexpected consolation, that Axel could
not be united to Valdborg, because they were cousins
german, and one woman had held them both over the
font.


NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS. 45


Hagen now addressed himself to Valdborg’s three ma-
ternal uncles, who were jurls of high degree, and of them
demanded her in marriage. Joyfully they gave their con-
sent, but Valdborg said: “Axel is my dearest friend, I
will never deceive him.” Hagen then caused letters to
be written and the archbishop summoned, together with
seventy eoclesinstios, and declared that the two lovers
should be cited before the archbishop.

With beating hearts the loving pair attended before the
archbishop in St, Mary’s church, where the black friar
Kannd stept forth, and with the pedigree in hand, showed
that they could not be joined in wedlock, as they were
cousins on the mother’s side, and were besides godehildren
of the same sponsor. They then went up to the altar,
where » handkerchief was delivered to them, which was
then eut in two between them, and a part retained by each.
‘Thus were they parted for ever. ‘The gold ring was then
taken off Valdborg’s finger and the bracelet from her arm,
both of which were returned to Axel, who easting them on
the altar, made a present of them to St. Olaf, at the same
time swearing, that for the remainder of his life he would
be the friend of Valdborg.

At this oath Hagen waxed wroth, and stepping forth
swore, that Axcl should on the following day make oath
on aword and holy writ, that Valdborg was a virgin for
him, Not only did the two lovers swear on the mass-
book, but eleven jarls of the same rece, with gilded swords
and yellow locks, attended to awear with the fair maiden,
with whom Hagen offered to share his throne whenever
he beeame king; but she declared to the sorrowful Axel
that she would never forget him, but would pass her days
in solitude.

Thus stood matters for @ considerable time. Axel and
his beloved never entered into any amusements and never
were seen to laugh, At length a war broke out, and


6 NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS.


Hagen, who had now become king, summoned all his men
to the field. He made Axel his general, and the bold
knight, in whose shield of white and azure stood two red
hearts, was ever at hand wherever his country’s honour or
his own required him. ‘The conflict was obstinate. Axel
slew King Amund’s sons and many of the nobles of Up-
land. But King Hagen fell, mortally wounded, from his
horse, requesting, at his last moments, Axel to avenge his
death, to receive the kingdom of Norway, and take to wife
the beloved of them both. Axel now again rushed into
the thickest of the fight, slanghtering the enemy until his
sword brake, and he had received seven mortal wounds,
His last words were of his betrothed.

Valdborg divided alll she possessed of value among her
relations, and retired to the convent of St. Mary, where
she was consecrated a nun by Archbishop Aage.


otice of the story of Axel and Valdborg is abridged from


‘hich we know neither the name ofits author nor the time ofits compo-
sition, It is printed in the Udvalgte Danske Vier (Ba. ii. pp. 257 aye),
‘and a German translation by W. C. Grimm is given in his ¢ Altdinische
Heldealieder? pp. 387 «99. Tt has been dramatized by Ochlenschlwger,
1f the ballad has any historic worth beyond the circumstance that it
affords an accurate pictare of Norwegian costume in the middle age, and


‘that in it may be seen, an in a mirror, the spirit and manners of the time,
it seem most probable thet its scene was in Romsdal and the neighbour
{ng Séndmér. At the mansion of Houe in Séndnir, tradition tela of «
battle fought there, in which both Axel Thordsen and the king's son,
Hagen, were slain; and on the little isle of Gidske, by the church, there
is a marble slab, shaped like a coffin lid, about six feet long and in the
‘widest part scarcely an ell broad, on which are some illegible runic cha-
acters, which has always been known as Fair Valdborg’s grave. On the
other side of the quire, tradition further says, Axel Thordsen lies buried,
but without a memoria, By each grave an ash was planted, both of
which grew to an equal height, and when they had risen above the roof
of the church, they inclined towards each other, and entwined thetr boughs
together. Axe’s tree yet stands flourishing, but Valdborg’s is dead,


NORWEGIAN TRADITIONS. 47


THE SIGNE-KJRRING, OR WITCH.


To ascertain under what disease a sickly child was
labouring, recourse was—and, perhaps, is—hnd to a signe.
Herring}, who employed for that purpose the process of
melting or casting. This was done by melting lead taken
from church windows after sunset, into water drawn from
a stream running from the north. Over the vessel con-
taining the water there was Inid a barley cake, having in
it a hole made with a damning needle, through which the
molten lead was slowly poured into the water. This ope-
ration was usually performed in the ease of rickets, in
order to discover under which of the nine species of that
diaease—for such was the number of its varieties—the
child was suffering. According to the form assumed by
the lead in the water, the species was determined ; if, for
instance, it resembled @ man with two large horns, it was
the troldsvek (troll-rickets) ; if a mermaid, the vassvek
(water-rickets
‘While pouring the lead the sorceress muttered the fol-
lowing spell :-—
I charm for guile, and I charm for rickets;
I charm it hence, and I charm it away;
charm it out, and I charm it in;
1 charm in weather, and I charm in wind;
I charm in the south, and I charm in the east ;
T charm in the north, and I charm in the we
‘T charm in the earth, and I charm in water ;
I charm in the mountain, I charm in the sand;
‘I charm it down in an alder-root ;
I charm it into a colt’s foot ;
‘I charm it into the fire of hell ;
I charm it into a north-running stream 5
‘There shall it eat, and there shall consume,
‘Till harm for the babe there shall be none’.
1 Prom at signe Le, fo exoreiee, and Kjerring (Nor. for Kjetling) an
ld erone; nn undoubted descendant ofthe Vala of the herthen times.
3 Asbjérnsen, Huldreeventyr, ii. pp. 158 agg.


SCANDINAVIAN POPULAR TRADITIONS.


IL.


SWEDISH TRADITIONS'.


CHRISTMAS OR YULE PASTIMES.


Many Christmas customs and pastimes derive their origin
from the sacrifices, which, in the days of heathenism, were
appointed, in order to render the gods propitious. The
sacrifices consecrated to Odin, which sometimes consisted
of human beings, were celebrated with games and dancing.
In Gothland, where most memorials of Odin are to be met
with, a game still exists in some places, which represents
such a sacrificial dance. It is performed, amid many
nimble springs and changes of motion, by young men dis-
guised, with their faces blackened or coloured. One of these
represents the victim, everything required for the sacri-
fice is brought forth, which is apparently carried into effect
to the sound of music or of song. Sometimes the person
selected as the victim sits clad in skin on a stool, holding
wisp of straw in his mouth, which, eut sharp at the ends
and standing out: from his ears, is intended to resemble


1 From Afsalius, Srenska Polkets Sogo-Hifder, unless otherwise expressed.
D


50 SWEDISH TRADITIONS.


swine’s bristles ; he is thus supposed to represent the es-
crifice made at Yule to Frey, and which consisted of a hog.
In many places a loaf or eake is baked, which is called the
Yule-bog (Julgalt), and is kept till the spring, when it is
given to the cattle with which the labours of spring are to
be executed; all in commemoration of the pagan sacrifices
at midwinter or Yule for « good year. Even the name of
Yule (O. Nor. Jol, Dan. Sw. Jul) is derived from the cir-
calar motion of the sun; the first half-year till Yule
with decreasing days, the second from Yule with increas-
ing days; whence the time when both these halves meet
is called the ‘Jula-mOt’ This was the ancient new year :
it began with the longest night of winter, which was called
the Modernatt (Mother night). The new year’s wish of
old was, ‘a good Jula-mét’

The hog of propitistion (sdnargolt) offered to Prey was a solemn sae
crifice in the North, and in Sweden, down to modern times, the custom
thas beon preserved of baking, on every Christmas ev, a loaf or cakein the
form of ahog. Vereliu, in hia remarks on the Hervararaage (p. 159) ro-
lates that the Swedish peasants dry the baked Yule-hog, and preserve it
Ail the spring; then having pounded a part of it inthe vemel out of which
the seed is to be scattered, they give it mixed with barley to the plough-
horses, leaving the other part to be eaten by the servants that hold the
plough, in the hope of having a plentiful harvest,

MODERN TRADITIONS OF ODIN.

In Gothland, and particularly in Smiland, many tra-
ditions and stories of Odin the Old still live in the mouths
of the people. In Bleking it was formerly the custom to
leave a sheaf on the field for Odin’s horses. In Kraktorps
gird in Smilend, a barrow was opened about a century
ago, in which Odin was said to have been buried, and
which, after the introduction of Christianity, was called
Helvetesbacke (Hells mount). In it was found a vault,
from which when opened there burst forth @ wondrous

* From 0. Nor. bjol,Dan. Sw-hjol (wheel). See Grimm, D. ML p. 664.

2 1b pp. 45, 1188,


SWEDISH TRADITIONS. 51


fire, like » flash of lightning. A coffin of flints also and a
lamp were found at the same time. Of a priest, named
Peter Dagson, who dwelt near Troienborg, it is related,
that when the rye he had sown there sprang up, Odin came
riding from the hills every evening, of stature so lofty that
he towered above the buildings in the farm-yard, and with
spear in hand, Stopping before the entrance, he hindered
every one, during the whole night, from going in or out.
And this took place every night until the rye was cut.

A story is also current of a goldtn ship, which is said
to be sunk in Runemad, near the Nyckelberg, in which,
according to the tradition, Odin fetched the slain from the
battle of Brivalla to Valhall. Kettils-As, it is said, derives
its name from one Kettil Runske, who stole Odin’s runic
staves (runekaflar), with which he bound his dogs and
ball, and at Jength even the mermaid herself, who came
to Odin’s help. Many such traditions haye been and may
still be found in those parts ; all of which, it may well be
conceived, are not regarded as articles of faith ; it is, ne-
vertheless, a pleasure for the countryman, when, walking
over his fiolds, he comes to a mount, a water, a pile of
stones, to know what old traditions were current concern-
ing them, and have given names to villages and dwellings.

Tt is worthy of remark that one of our (Swedish) hand-
somest birds of passage, the black heron (Ardea nigra,
Linn.) was in ancient times called Odin’s swallow.


MODERN TRADITIONS OF THOR.

‘Thor, as well as Odin the Old, came to the North with
some immigration, which in remote times took place from
Asia and Asgard. Here he had to contend with the land’s
earliest inhabitants, who from their dwelling in mountain
caverns and dens, as well as from their gigantic stature
and ferocity, were called Jattar (Giants), Trolls and Bergs-
Doar (mountain-dwellers). Hence have all the traditions

v2


32 SWEDISH TRADITIONS.


about giants and the like their origin, Those smooth,
wedge-shaped stones, which are sometimes found in the
earth, are called Thorwiggar, i.e. Thor’s wedges: these,
it is said, have been hurled by Thor at some Troll. In
many places where the meadows border on the mountains,
stories were once rife of the terror felt by the Trolls when
it thundered, and how they then, in various shapes, though
most frequently as large balls or clews, would come rolling
down the mountain, seeking shelter among the mowers
who, well aware of tReir danger, always held them back
with their sithes ; on which occasions it hus often hap-
pened that the thunder has struck and shivered the sithe,
when the Troll with  piteous piping sound would again
return to the mountain.

‘Aérolites are found in many places and are memorials
of Thor. Although not always of great magnitude, they
are, nevertheless, so heavy that there is now scarcely any
man who ean lift them. These, it is said, Thor handled
like playthings. Of the aérolite at Linneryd in Smfiland
it is related, that Thor, as he was once passing by with his
attendant, met a giant, whom he asked to what place he
was going. “To Valball,” answered he, “to fight with
‘Thor, who with his lightning has burnt my cattle-house.”
“Tt is hardly advisable for thee to measure strength with
him,” answered Thor, “for I canmot imagine that thou
art the man to lift this little stone up on the large one
here,” At this the giant waxed wroth, and grasped the
stone with all his might, but was unable to raise it from
the earth, so wonderfully had Thor charmed it. Thor’s
follower then made the attempt, and lifted the stone as
though it had been a glove. The giant now aimed a blow
at Thor which brought him on his knees ; but Thor with
his hammer struck the giant dead. He lies buried under
the great stone heap hard by.

‘Thor was worshiped in Gothland above and more than


SWEDISH TRADITIONS. 53


the other gods, The Thorbagge (scarabeeus stercorarins)
was sacred to him. Relative to this beetle a superstition
still exists, which has been transmitted from father to son,
that if any one in his path finds a Thorbagge lying help-
less on its back, and turns it on its feet, he expiates seven
sins ; because Thor in the time of heathenism was regarded
as a mediator with a higher power, or All-father. On the
introduction of Christianity, the priests strove to terrify the
people from the worship of their old divinities, pronoun-
“cing both them and their adherents to be evil spirits and
belonging to hell. On the poor Thorbagge the name was
now bestowed of Thordjefrul or Thordyfvel (Thor-devil), by
which it is still known in Sweden Proper. No one now
thinks of Thor, when he finds the helpless creature lying


passes it without setting it on its feet, and thinking of his
sins’ atonement.

That the remembrance of and veneration for Thor were
long retained in Norway and in Bobuslin, appears from
many traditions, Of some sailors from Bobualin, about
a hundred years since, it is related, that while out in a
Dutch ship from Amsterdam, on the whale fishery near
Greenland, being driven out of their known course, they
observed for many nights the light of a fire from an island
or shore, at which some of the sailors, and among them
one of the men from Bohusliin, were seized with a desire
to visit the place and see what people were there. They
therefore took the ship’s boat and rowed to the spot.
Having landed and approached the fire, they found sitting
by it an old man warming himself, who immediately asked
them whence they came. “From Holland,” answered the
man from Bohuslin. “But from what place art thou thy-
self?” inquired the old man. “ From Séfve on Hisingen,”
answered the sailor. “ Art thou acquainted with Thorsby?”
“Yes, well.” “Dost thou know where the Ulfveberg


a


54 SWEDISH TRADITIONS.


in?” “Yes, I have often passed it, becanse there is a
direct way from Gothenborg to Marstrand across Hisingen
through Thorsby.” “Do the great stones and the earth-
mounds still stand in their places?” “Yes, all but one
stone which is ready to fall.” “Tell me farther,” said
the old heathen, “dost thou know where Glosshed’s altar
is, and whether it is atill safe and sound?” On the sailor
answering that it was not, the old man said: “ Wilt thou
desire the people in Thorsby and Thores-bracka not to
destroy the stones and mounds under the Ulfveberg, and
above all things to keep the altar at Glosshed safe and
whole, so shalt thou have a good wind to the place for
which thou art bound.” All this the sailor promised to
perform on his return home. On asking the old man his
name, and why he s0 anxiously inquired about such ob-
jects, he answered the sailor : “ My name is Thorer Brack,
and my habitation is there; but Iam now a fugitive. In
the great mound by the Ulfvesberg my whole race lies
buried, and at Glosshed’s altar we performed our worship
to the gods.” ‘They then parted from the old man and
had a fair wind home.


OF ROCKING STONES AND THUNDERING STONES.


With Rocking Stones, like those in England and else-
where, and with Thundering Stones, or such as when
passed over give forth a dull, hollow sound, much soreery
is practived, because they are regarded as a resort for
Elves and Trolls.


SUPERSTITIOUS USAGE IN CASE OP THEFT.
The following barbarous superstition is still practised
in an enlightened Christian age.
If a person is robbed, he goes to a so-called cunning
man, who engages to strike out the eye of thethief. The


SWEDISH TRADITIONS. 55


following is the process. The Trollman ents a human
figure on a young tree, mutters certain dire spells to ob-
tain the devil’s aid, and then drives some sharp instrument
into the eye of the figure. It was aleo a practice to shoot
with an arrow or bullet at one of the members of the
figure, by which pain and sore are, it is believed, inflicted
on the corresponding member of the living person.


FINNISH SUPERSTITION.


With the foregoing may be classed the Finnish super-
stition of producing the image of an absent person in a
vessel of water and aiming a shot at it, and thereby wound-
ing or slaying » hated enemy at many hundred miles
distance. Even on a neighbour’s cattle this degrading
superstition has been practised. Apoplery and other
sudden diseases have hence acquired the name of shots,
‘Troll-shots.

‘A young Swede had, during his wanderings in Finland,
engaged himself toa handsome Finnish girl, but after his
return home, had quite forgotten both his love and his
promise to return to his betrothed. A Lapp skilled in th


magic of his country coming one day to him, it occurred ~~


to the young man to inquire of him how it fared with his
betrothed in Finland. “That you shall sce yourself,”
answered the Lapp, who having, while muttering divers
spells, filled a bucket with water, bade him come and look
into it. ‘There, we are told, the young man saw the well-
known country round the eottage of his betrothed, and
his heart best violently on perceiving her pale and in tears
stepping out at the door, followed by her father, with an
angry countenance and holding gun in his band. The old
‘Fin now approached a pail filled with water, looked in the
direction whence the young man had been expected, shook
his head, and cocked the gun, while the daughter stood


tee


56 SWEDISH TRADITIONS.


wringing her hands. “Now,” said the Lapp, “he will
shoot you, if you do not prevent it by shooting him. Make
haste and take aim with your gun.” ‘The Fin, having
levelled his piece, went to the pail. “Shoot now,” said
the Lapp, “or you are a dead man.” He fired accord-
ingly, and the Fin fell lifeless on the earth. Conscience
some time after prompted the young Swede to revisit the
scone of his perfidy, where he learned that the old man
had died of apoplexy on the very day that the Lapp bad
displayed his magical skill,


OF GIANTS AND DWARFS.

According to the testimony of several Sagas and other
writings, there dwelt in Sweden, in remote times, a gi-
gantic, wild, cruel race called Jotens (Jotnar), and the
country they inhabited, about the Gulf of Finland and
thence northwards, was named Jotuualand, or Jittehem.
But when a more enlightened people from Asia, who knew
the God of the whole universe, and worshiped him under
the name of All-father, entered Sweden across its eastern
boundary, there arose between them and the Jotnar or
Tiitte-folk a war which Insted for many centuries, And

_-4 Dari slew the presumptuous giant Goliah, so did the
new Asiatie settlers in the North, through skill and supe-
rior understanding, overcome the earlier, savage inhabitants
© the country, who withdrew more and more into the
deepest forests, and took up their abode in mountain-
caves and dens. From these times are derived all our
popular traditions of Mountain-trolls, Gisnts, and Moun-
tain-dwellers. They are described as possessing vast stores
of gold and other valuables, as bad, but credulous. ‘Their
women are described as ugly.

‘A distinet species of Berg- or Mountain-troll were the


4 For more on this curious subject, see Grimm, D. M. p, 1045 ag. and
note,


SWEDISH TRADITIONS. 57


Dwarfs. ‘These were good mechanics and cunning, their
wives and daughters are spoken of as very beautiful. This
Dwarf-race seema to spring from a people that migrated
from the eastern countries at a later period, as they were
acquainted with runes, which they used in sorcery, ac-
companied by the harp, as we read in the old ballad of
Sir Tynne —
“That was Ulfvy, the little dwarf's daughter,
To her maiden thus she spoke :
‘Thou shalt fetch my harp of gold ;
Sir Tynne will I cause to love me.
‘Ye manage well the runes.”
Sa whe


A similar art of enchanting and bewitching the Lepp-
landers are supposed to possess even at the present day,
and with some probability it may be conjectured that the
Asiatic people, who in the Sages arc mentioned under the
name of Dwarfs, was no other than an immigration of
oriental Lapps, and the origin of the race among us which
still bears that name: also that the Fins descend from the
giants, and are thus the oldest of the races that now in-
habit Sweden. ‘These peoples had no unanimity, no general
government and laws, and were therefore so easily con-
quered by the combined Msir-race, who led by their drotts
or kings, in two separate invasions (the Swedes and Goths)
arrived in the North.

At a period when self-defence. as the first duty of man
and victory his greatest happiness, and even Gimle itself,
or heaven, was to be gained by valour and a good sword,
‘it was natural that well-tempered, efficient weapons should
be regarded as one of the most precious possessions, A


1 The old Danish ballad of « Herr Ténne,’ or‘ Runernes Magt,’ is only
1 variety of the Swedish one. It is printed in the Danske Vier, i. 281.
vs


58 SWEDISH TRADITIONS.


good armourer was said to be instructed by the Elves or
Dwarfs. A woll-hardened, good and elastic sword was
usually regarded es of Dwarf workmanship. Other pre-
cious things also, particularly armlets of gold, set with
jewels or of beautifal colours, were called sometimes Elfin-!
‘and sometimes Dwarf-ornaments, In the amith’s art the
Giants and the Mountain-dwellers were considered as emi-
nently skilful, and among the mountains are sometimes
found smaller rocks detached from the larger ones, which
by the common people are called Giants? anvils, on which
it is supposed the Giants executed their works.


KING ERIC’S DREAM.
_/ le was long believed by the people that King Eric was
& great magician (Trolliarl) and conversant in hidden
Knowledge, also that he gained from Odin information
concerning things that were hidden from other men. After
his victory at Fyriswall, he had no more enemies to con-
tend with him the tranquil possession of his dominions.
He saw Christianity spread itself more and more in every
direction, and felt conscious that he was the last heathen
king in the North. He therefore made a sacrifice to Odin,
that he might learn from him how many Christian kings
after him should sit on the throne of Sweden. In a dream
he received for answer, that he must burst King Sverker’s
rock, in which he would find a tablet that would elucidate
all that he wished to know concerning his successors.
This instruction he followed; but who this Sverker was
and where his rock was, our chronicles tell us not, When
the rock in question was split, there was found in it a
stone tablet set round with golden plates and precious
stones. On the one side was represented an oblong,
quadrangular table, around which were thrice nine crowns
distinguished by the names of kings; on the other side


1 In the Vélundarkyipa Valund is called ford of fe, companion of alft.


SWEDISH TRADITIONS. 59


was a triangular table or plate with thrice seven crowns.
All these crowns were distinguished by colours, to indicate
the race of the several princes, as blue for the Swedes,
green for the Norse, red for the Danes, and yellow for the
Germans. This tablet, we are told, was long preserved
among the treasures of the kingdom in the state trea
sury, until Archbishop Gustaf Trolle in the war time car-
ried it with him to Denmark, and, after the precious stones
were taken out, left it in the custody of a priest in Roes-
kilde, This priest took it with him to Séfde in Scania,
and had it entered in the inventory of the church there.
Here it was found by Nils Hvide, bishop of Lund, who
stole it, A priest in Scania, named Master Jacob, com-
posed a Iampoon ‘in verse, charging the bishop with the
theft, but was unable to prove the charge, and was there-
fore condemned and executed at Copenhagen. His last
words at the place of execution, and which stand on his
grave-stone, are ssid to have been :—


“Skall nu Mister Jacob miste Though now Master Jacob shall
site lif, Tose his life,


‘For stenen han stal.” For he stole the stone.
In « book belonging to Frésunda church in Roslagen,


this story of King Eric’s dream is to be found, also a
representation of the tablet in Sverker’s rock.


OF BIORN THE SWEDE, ULF JARL, AND CNUT THE GREAT.

‘There dwelt once in Sweden a rich man, who had a
young danghter of exquisite beauty. Near the town where
they dwelt there was a green and pleasant place, to which
the youth of both sexes were wont to resort for amuse-
ment. It befell one day that when the damsel above-
mentioned was out playing with her companions, a bear
‘came out of the forest, rushed in the midst of the terrified


60 SWEDISH TRADITIONS.


children, and seizing her with his fore paws, hastened with
her to his den in the forest. He showed her the greatest
affection, every day procured for her both game and fruits,
and let her want for nothing. But the bear having killed
much cattle for his own subsistence, the people assembled
in a general hunt and destroyed him. ‘The damsel was
now found again, and soon after was delivered of @ con
who was called Biérn (Bear). He grew up, became
stronger than other men, and possessed great understand-
ing. In this he seems to have taken after his forefathers,
according to the old saying: “A bear has twelve men’s
understanding and six men’s strength.” A grandson of
this Bidrn was Ulf Jarl in Scania; who, against her bro-
ther’s will, married Estrid, the sister of Cnut the Great.
It was this Ulf who aided King Cnut, when his fleet was
on the point of falling into the hands of the enemy at the
isle of Helge. Yet, notwithstanding this aid, Ulf could
never gain the king’s friendship, and was ill rewarded in
the end, as we shall presently see.

King Onut and Ulf Jarl were sitting one day after the
battle of Helge playing st chess in Roeskilde. Cnut
moved « pawn, but wished to put it back; at this Ulf was
so irritated that he overthrew the board and was rushing
from the apartment, when the king in anger called to him :
“Art thou running away, cowardly Ulf?” Ulf answered:
“Thou wouldst have run farther in the fight at Helge, had
I not come: I was not called cowardly Ulf when the
Swedes were beating you like dogs, till 1 came to your
relief” It soon appeared how unwise it is for an inferior
person to speak too freely to a superior. On the morrow
the king was informed that the jarl had taken refuge in
the church of St. Lucias, and thereupon sent a man who
slew him before the high altar. After the extinction of
the house of Cnut in the male line, Svend, the son of Ulf
Jarl and Estrid, ascended the Danish throne, the last of


° SWEDISH TRADITIONS. 61


whose descendants was the celebrated Queen Margaret,
ob. A.D, 1412.


(CHRISTIAN-HEATHEN TRADITIONS OF TROLLS, ETC.
The first light of Christianity was insufficient to dispel
all the darkness of heathenism. There still remained on
the public ways and in fields small oratories built over
some pagan idol, for the accommodation both of travellers
and of those employed in the fields. From these oratories
or ‘scurds,’ as they were called, the heathen images were
indeed removed, but those of saints were set up in their
plsce, and many a neophyte prayed sometimes to the
‘Virgin Mary, St. Peter'and other saints, and at others to
Thor and Freyia. The Christians, therefore, strove now
with all their might to suppress among the people all faith
in these heathen deities, condemning them as spirits of
hell that sought the ruin of mankind. The spectres of
heathenism, Trolls and Elves, together with those, in their
mounds or barrows, who had died in the time of idolatry,
were represented as bugbears to Christian men, so that
they were always held in fear, and trembled on their way,
particularly by night, for the ‘evil meeting,’ that is, the
meeting with Trolls or Elves, whence, it was said, many
diseases and troubles were caused to mortals; nor was
self-interest behindhand in finding remedies for all such
calamities. The simple people paid dearly to monks, troll-
wives and exoreising women for these remedies, consisting
in superstitious mammery with incense and spells, per-
formed in crossways, churches, and at Elf-stones. At such
places strange prayers were said, mingled with the invo-
cation and misuse of the names of Jesus and the saints,
‘These prayers, which were for the most part composed in
the monasteries, were sometimes in rime. We could ad-
duce some that have been in use even in our time; but,
as offensive to Christian ears, they had better be forgotten.


62 SWEDISH TRADITIONS.


What still remains of these superstitions of Elves, Trolls
and the like, either in traditions or popular belief, shall be
here briefly related.


OF ELVES,


Both in the heathen and the Christian supernatural
world, Elves occupy the most conspicuous place. What we
have already communicated concerning the pagan belief in
Elves has been propagated by traditions, from age to age,
‘until our times, with the addition of much Christian fable.
‘There are still to be found elf-altars, where offerings are
made for the sick. The so-called wise women—the Horga-
brudar of our days—anoint with swine’s fat, which was
used in the pagan offerings, and read prayers, which they
say are mystic; after which something metallic, that has
been worn or borne by the sick person—a small coin or
even a pin is sufficient—and lastly a cross (as a token that
the Saviour’s power is also here superstitiously invoked),
are Isid upon the elf-mill (ilf-qvarn) or, as it is also
called, elf-pot (ilf-gryta). These conjuring women (sig-
nerekor), when they are called to the sick, usually begin
with pouring melted lead into water, and from the forms
whieh the finid metal assumes, they usually pretend to
judge that the disease has been caused by Elves; when
having secured payment, they commence a new juggle,
which they call ‘striking down, or ‘anointing for the
Elves,’ at sunset on the following Thursday, Some country
people will anoint the elf-mill without applying to @ cun-
ning woman ; these read no prayers, but instead only sigh
out: “Lord, help me!”

‘Among the oldest popular traditions concerning Elves,
is that which is to be read on the runic stone at Lagné,
on Aspé, in Sédermanland, Within a serpentine line of
runes, there sits, cut out of the rock, an Elf with out-


2 See pp. 47 ag. for a spell repeated on such an occasion.


‘SWEDISH TRADITIO! 63


stretched legs, seising with his hands the heads of two
serpents, The runes inform us, that “ Gislég caused those
characters to be exeeuted after (in memory of) Thord ; and
Slodi caused true witness to be taken concerning the Elves
that he saw, and something clse——what was that?”
‘These seem to have been cut with the object of bearing
testimony to the Elves and other Trolls that Slodi had
seen about the rock.

The traditions concerning Elves current among the peo-
ple divide them ito three classes: those belonging to the
earth, the air and the water.


OF THE MOUNT-FOLK.

Among the Elves belonging to the earth, or, perhaps
more correctly, the subterranean Elves, the Mount- or
Berg-folk occupy the most prominent place. It seems
probable that Christian compassion for those that died in
the time of heathenism, without participation in the bless-
‘ings promised in the Gospel, but in heathen wise have been
placed in unhallowed earth, is the foundation for the cheer-
leas notion, that, awaiting in their green mounds the great
day of universal redemption in fear and trembling, they
are tormented by sensual desires, as formerly in life; that
they long for the love and society of Uhristians, yet, when
they come in contact with them, cause them injury, and
if speedy rescue come not, even death itself. In stature
the Elves are said to be equal to the generality of the
human race, but are more slim and delicate. Their young
females are described as extremely beautiful, slender as
lilies, white as snow, and with aweet, enticing voices. Their
time for playing and dancing is from sunset till cock-
crowing; but when the cock has crowed they have no
longer permission to stay above ground. Of all the spectre
world it is said, that if they do not go to rest when the
cock has crowed thrice, they become “ dagstfnd,” that ia,


64 SWEDISH TRADITIONS.


stationary on the spot where the third cock-crowing reached
their ears', It is said to be dangerous for a person to
come in contact with such an invisible ‘ dagstnd’ on his
way, and many are believed to have contracted pain and
sickness from thet cause. If the wanderer in a summer’s
evening lays himself to rest by an elf-mount, he soon hears
the tones of a harp with sweet singing. If he then pro-
mises them redemption, he will hear the most joyful notes
resound from numerous stringed instruments; but if he
says, “Ye have no Redeemer,” then with eries and loud
Jament they will dash their harps in pieces; after which
all is silent in the mount. In the green woods and val-
leys, in the meadows and on the hills, the Elves perform
their nightly ‘stimm,’ that is, play and dance, from which
cause the grasa grows luxuriant and of a darker green
circles; these by the people are called elf-dances, and must
not be trampled on,

In nearly all the most distinguished families of Sweden
are to be found jewels or ornaments connected with tra-
ditions of Trolls and Elves. Thus it is related of the State-
councillor Harald Stake’s wife, how late one summer's
evening an elf-woman came to her, who desired to borrow
her bridal dress to wear at an elfin wedding. After some
consideration the Indy resolved on lending it to her. In
a few days it was returned, but set with gold and pearls
on every seam, and hed hanging from it a finger-ring of
the finest gold set with the most costly stones, which after-
wards, together with the tradition, passed for several cen-
turies as an heirloom in the Stake family.

‘Among the simple country folks, even at the present
day, a bridegroom stands in dread of the envy of the Elves,
to counteract which it hes long been a custom to lay in
the clothes on the wedding day certain strong-smelling


1 See voli. p. 8, note.


SWEDISH TRADITIONS. 65


plants, as garlic or valerian. Near gates and in crosaways
there is supposed to be the greatest danger. If any one
asks a bridegroom the reason of these precautions, he will
answer: “On account of envy.” And there is no one
so miserable whose bride will not think herself envied
on her wedding day, if by no others, at least by the Elves.
Hence the tenour of most of the elfin traditions is nearly
as follows
‘The bride sits ready in her bridal bower, in anxious ex-
pectation and surrounded by her bridesmaids. ‘The bride-
groom saddles his grey steed, and clad in knightly attire,
with his hawk perched proudly on his shoulder, he rides
forth from his mother’s hall, to fetch home his bride. But
in the wood where he is wont to hunt with hawk and
hound, an elfin maiden has noticed the comely youth, and
ia now on the wateh for an opportunity, though for ever
so short a time, to clasp him to her breast in the flowery
grove; or, at least, to the sweet tones of their stringed
instruments, lightly to float along with him, hand in hand,
on the verdant field. As he draws near to the lf-mount,
or is about to ride through the gateway of the castle, his
eare are ravished with most wondrous music, and from
among the fairest maidens that he there sees dancing in a
ring, the Elf-king’s daughter herself steps forth fairer
than them all, as it is said in the lay -—
‘The damsel held forth her snow-white bs
Come join in the merry dance with me.”
If the knight allows himself to be charmed, and touches
tho fascinating hand, he is conducted to Elfland, where in
halls indescribably beautiful, and gardens such as he had
never beheld, he wanders about, on his Elt-bride’s arm,
amid lilies and roses. If at length the remembrance of
his mourning betrothed enters his mind, and the Elves,
who do not deliberately desire evil to mankind, are moved


66 SWEDISH TRADITIONS.


to lead him out on his way, he sees, it is trae, his former
home again, but he has been absent about forty years,
though to him it seemed an hour only, On his return no
one knows him, he is a stranger on whom all look with
wonder. The old people remember a young knight who
disappeared ubout forty years before, when he rode forth
to fetch his bride :—and his bride? she has died of grief.

According to another turnof the story, the knightanswers
the elfin damsel’s invitation to dance with her thus :—

“T may not trend the dance with thee 5
My bride in her bower is awaiting me.”

‘The elves ace then compelled to leave him, but pale and
sick to death he returns to his mother, who anxiously
addresses him :—

“But tell me now, my dearest son,
‘Why are thy cheeks so dendly pale? ”
“Oh well may my cheeks be deadly pale
For youder I?ve been at the elfin dance.”—
“And what shall T answer, oh tell to me,
“When thy fair young bride asks after thee?” —
“Oh say I have ridden to the gay green wood,
‘To chase the deer with hawk and hound.”
But he will return,
‘While the leaves of the forest are green.
‘The young bride waited two long long days,
‘Thea rode with her maids to the bridegroom's hall,
But he will return, ete.
‘And there they pour’d mead and there they pour’ wine :
“ But where is my bridegroom, thy dear young son? ”—
But he will return, ete.
‘Thy bridegroom's gone to the gay green wood,
To chase the deer with hawk and hound.”
But he will return, ete.


But the bride had a presentiment that he would never
return, and going to his bed, and drawing the sheet aside,


SWEDISH TRADITIONS. 67


there saw him lying cold and pale. At the sight her
heart brake, and when morning came, three corpses were
bore from the bridal hall; for his mother had also died
of grief,

In the old Danish balled (Elveskud) the elfin lady, on Oluf's refuael to
dance with er, aay

“Tf then thon wilt not dance with me,
Sickness and death hal fellow thee.”

She then strikes him violently between the shoulders its him on his
‘borve, and desires him to ride home to his betrothed, etc.

‘The Swedes have similar balla, and the Breton ballad of * Lord
NNann and the Korrigan' beart a striking resemblance to the Seandine-
via


ELFIN GARDENS,
Tn most country places traditions are current of magic
gardens. The spot where such are said to exist, is pointed
out by the country people, and some person is always
named who has been conducted into them, has wandered
about under trees of a finer verdure than any to be seen
elsewhere, has tasted fruit the like of which is not to
be found in any other place ; seen flowers of extraordinary
beauty, but afterwards, when all this has been sought
for on the same spot, not a trace was to be found: all was
either wild wood or plain open fields.


OP BERGTAGRING (MOUNT-TAKING).

In old writings many stories are told of persons that
have been ‘mount-taken, that is, carried off by the
Elves into their mounts, Examinations before magistrates
and the clergy have taken place even in our time into
cases of individuals, who have imagined themselves to
have been so carried off, and who in the delirium of fever
have believed that they saw elves and wood-demons, which


1 See a translation of it in Keightley, F. M. p. 433, and the original in
‘Villemarqué, Chants Populaires.


68 SWEDISH TRADITIONS.


distempered state of body has not seldom been followed
by death itself.

Elfin halls or elfin rooms are grots or subterranean
houses in mountains and hills, into which sometimes the
wanderer enters and reposes; but when he again seeks
for the place, he finds it no more. At Estorp on Mésse
berg there dwelt an intelligent man, who related as truth,
how in returning home one beautiful summer evening
from Fahlképing, he took a wrong path, and among the
rocks unexpectedly found one of these elf-halls, which he
entered and seated himself on a mossy bench in a delight-
ful coolness. On leaving it, he particularly noticed the
spot, in order that he might again find so remarkable a
place, but could never discover it afterwards.

‘Three sisters (thus relates the survivor of them) went
out one beautiful summer’s day to 2 meadow near the
mansion of Boda in Bohuslin. Near the meadow there
is mountain, about which they had often played, and
knew the place well. To their great astonishment, however,
they found themselves at the entrance of a most beautiful
grotto. It was an elf-ball, of a triangular form, with
moss-covered seats around it. In the middle there stood
little fir-tree, as an ornament, on the floor. They én-
tered, reposed themselves in the refreshing cool, took aceu-
rate notice of the place, but could never find it again,


‘THE FLYING ELVES.


‘Mention of these occurs but rarely. They are described
as extremely beautiful, with small wings on their snow-
white shoulders ; but whether these wings are a borrowed
plumage, or belong to the body of these tender beings,
has not been decided ; though the first opinion seems most
in accordance with the Sagas, seeing that mortal men have
taken such elfin maidens to wife. Transformed to swans,


SWEDISH TRADITIONS. 69


in full plumage, the people say they have often seen them
coming through the air, and descending into some water
to bathe; but as soon us they enter the water, they assume
the fairest human forma.

‘A young hunter once saw three such swans descend on
the sea-shore, With astonishment he observed that they
Inid their plumages aside, which bore a resemblance to
linen, and that, instead of ewans, three damsels of daz-
sling whiteness were swimming in the water. He soon
saw them leave the water, draw on their linen coverings,
which then became changed to swans’ plumage, and fly
away. One of them, the youngest and fairest, had so
captivated the heart of the young man, that he could rest
neither by night nor day, for thinking of her lovely form.
His foster-mother soon perceived that neither the chase
nor the other pastimes, in which he formerly found de-
light, afforded him any more pleasure, and therefore re-
solved to discover the cause of his sorrow. From himself
she soon leaned the wondrous sight he had witnessed,
and that he must either win the fair maiden or never again
enjoy happiness. His foster-mother assured him: “T ean
advise a remedy for thy affliction, Go next Thureday at
sunset to the spot where thou last sawest her. The three
swans will not fail to come. Observe where thy chosen
damadl lays her linen ; take it, and hasten with it from the
shore. Soon thou wilt hear two of the swans fly away
with a great noise, but the third, in search of her plumage,
will in her distress come to thee ; but although she be-
seech thee on her knees, do not give back the linen, if
thou wilt have the maiden in thy power.” The young
man was not backward in following this counsel. Long
seemed the days till the coming of Thursday, but longer
still seemed to him the hours of that day. At length the
sun sank, and ere long a rustling was heard in the sir,
and the three swans descended on the shore. They were


70 SWEDISH TRADITIONS.


instantly changed to three moat beauteous dameels, and
having laid their linen on the grass, they hastened to the
white sands, and were soon covered with the waves. From
his hiding-place the young hunter had closely watched his
beloved, and where she had laid her plumage, which was
now fine snow-white linen. He then stole forth, carried
it off and concealed it among the folinge. Shortly after
he heard two of the swans flying away with a great rust
ling; but the third, as his foster-mother bad said, came
and fell before him on her snowy knees, praying him to
restore her plumage, But the hunter refused, and taking
her in his arms, wrapped his cloak round the tender damsel,
lifted her on his good steed, and bore her to his home.
His foster-mother soon made all things ready for their
marriage, and they both lived happily together. Of their
children it was said, that fairer never played together, But
when seven years had passed, the hunter, one Thursday
night, when they were going to bed, related to his wife
how he had obtained possession of her; and at her request
showed her the white linen, which he had till then con-
cealed ; but no sooner had she got it in her hand, than she
became changed to a swan, and vanished like lightning
through an open window. The husband, it is said, did
not live long after that Iuckless day ',


‘The grass which, in luxuriant circles, called, as we have
seen, elf-dances, is here and there to be observed in the
fields, is said so to flourish from the dancing of the elves,
and is thence called iilfexing (cynosurus emruleus). The
miliary fever is said by the country people to be caused
by the elf-mote, or meeting with elves, as a remedy for

2 ‘The origin of this and other kindred tales must, no doubt, be sought


for in the East. ‘The ‘ Peri-wife, from the Bahar Danuah, is almost iden-
tical with the above. See Keightley, F. M. p, 20,


SWEDISH TRADITIONS. n


which the lichen called ilfniifver (lichen aphosus, or li-
chen eaninus) is to be sought for. In old topographical
works there is no lack of accounts of families, which, on
the mother’s side, are supposed to descend from much
beings. In Smiland a tradition has been credited of a
well-known family, whose ancestress, a young, beautiful
elfin girl, is exid to have flown with the sunbeams through
a knot-hole in the wall, and by the heir of the family to
have been taken to wife. After having given her husband
seven sons, she vanished by the way she came,


LOFJERSKOR.

The ‘Lifjerskor’ named in the old Swedish catechism
seem identical with the Grove-damscls (Lundjungfrur), a
species of Elves which is also called the Grove-folk (Lund-
folk). The sacred. groves of the heathens which, by the
ecclesiastical law, it was forbidden to approach with super-
atitious worship, were believed, in the time of paganism,
‘to be protected by invisible deities. If a lime or other
tree, either in a forest or solitary, grew more vigorously
than the other trees, it was called a Aabitation-tree (bo-
tréd), and was thought to be inhabited by an Elf (R8,
Rédande), who, though invisible, dwelt in its shade, re-
warded with health and prosperity the individual that took
are of the tree, and punished those who injured it.

‘Thus did our heathen forefathers hold in reverence and
awe such groves and trees, because they regarded them as
given by the Almighty as ornaments to his noble creation,
aa well as to afford protection to the husbandman and
cattle against the scorching heat of the midday sun. In
this and in many other instances, simple Antiquity may
serve ua 8 a lesson not wantonly to destroy the life even
of a shoot, which may one day become a useful, umbra-
geous tree, or to injure and profane a grove, into which
no reflecting Christian can entor, for the purpose of en-


72 SWEDISH TRADITIONS.


joying ita refreshing shade, without thinking of the Crea-
tor’s goodness, and calling to mind how the Saviour of
the world had a grove, a garden, to which he oftentimes
went, with his disciples, when he would discourse with
them on heavenly things and on the immortality of their
souls. It was under the shade of a tree that he prayed,
and there the comforting angel eppeared and strengthened
him. Let a Christian meditate on this, and let him have
a care of all planting for the omament and benefit of the
earth; and if, when out on his way, he feels tempted to
break off a growing shoot, thus let him think: “I will
not destroy a growing life, I will not spoil the embellish-
ment of my mother-earth ; it is my neighbour's property,
to injure it is unjust, and all injustice is sin.”

The sanctity of the heathen groves und trees originated,
it would seem, from the custom of hanging there the limbs
of the human and other victims, after they had been for
a time immersed in the sacred fountain. But rational
Christians have had snother reason for retaining the super-
ition, namely on account of its aid in withholding mis-
chievous persons from violence to the woods and trees.
‘Even at the present day the people in many places point
out such groves and trees as no one may approach with
an axe. These noted tren often stand alone, and have
singular aspect. Stories are in some places not wanting
among the common people of persons, who by cutting a
chip or branch from a ‘habitation tree,’ has in consequence
been struck with death, Such a famed pine was the
“Klinta tall’ in Westmanland. Old and decayed it ap-
peared to the traveller standing on the bare rock, until a
few years ago it fell down from age. A mermaid, who
ruled in the neighbouring creek of the Miilar lake, was
said to inhabit the mountain under the pine, and to have
been that tree’s “RE” The country people had frequently
seen snow-white cattle driven up from the lake to the


SWEDISH TRADITIONS. 73


meadow beneath it. The trank and branches of the tree
still lie untouched on the rock. In an old writing there
is a story of a man, who was about to cut down a juniper
bush ina wood, when a voice was heard from the earth,
saying, “Friend, hew me not!” But he gave another
stroke, when blood flowed from the root. Terrified and
sick he hastened home!. In ballads and traditions sto
occur of young maidens that have been transformed to
trees and bushes through sorcery, but of the ‘ Léfjerskor*
there are not many tales ; nor is it easy to arrive at the
origin of the name. But the ‘ Horgabradar’ in the groves
of the heathen divinities were much consulted by the peo-
ple in cases of doubt and difficulty, whence may probably
be derived the superstition, in later times, of seeking help
of the ‘Ras’ that inhabit trees, and are called Lafjerskor,
in cases of sickness and trouble, against which there stands
a prohibition in our ancient catechism. Loki’s mother
was named Léfja (Laufey) ; it seems, therefore, not im-
probable that evil Troll-wives and Léf-maids derive their
name from her. ‘The heathen, in all countries, have ce-
Iebrated their idolatrous rites in groves and under trees.
In the Lives of the Saints it i reluted of St. Martin, how
among a heathen people, who were willing to adopt
Christianity, he demolished a temple, and met with no
opposition ; but on his proceeding to cut down a fir that
stood close by, the people rushed forward, and would on
no account allow the tree to be destroyed.


THE SkOGSRA—THE SIORA#

Of the same race with the Elves already mentioned, the
Skogs- or Forest-elves seem to have been originally, and
have undoubtedly belonged to the time of heathenism. As

4 Maniestly from the story of Polydorus in the inet i. 21, app. et
alibi. iy
2 Compounds of ekog, wood, forent; sj, aca, lake; and ré, fairy, goblin.
2


74 SWEDISH TRADITIONS.


the merwife for fishermen, so is the Skogeré for hunters
regarded among the unlucky objects to mect with. Ac-
cording to old hunting traditions, the Skogs-elf announces
her approach by a peculiar, sharp, rushing whirlwind, thet
shakes the trunks of the trees so that they seem ready
to snap asunder. If then the hunter spits and strikes
fire, there is no danger, because it is mere noise, there
being no power in such winds. The Skogera, according
to the popular belief, is only of the female sex; whence
comes the superstition, that it presages badly for the
hunter’s luck, if, on leaving home, the first person he meets
isa female. He then spits and calls it kéringméte (lit.
crone-mote). In the Sagas these forest-wives are repre-
sented as evil, wanton and forebodera of misfortune;
though stories are, nevertheless, told by hunters of their
having seen these beings come very friendly to their fires,
who, when they have been suffered to remain in peace,
have said at their departure: “There will be excellent
sport to-day.” On which occasions they have invariably
killed an abundance of game. When the hunters are re-
posing in the forest at midnight, they will come to warm
themselves by their fires, taking care to show their front
side only, and always moving so that their backs may not
be exposed to view. ‘Those who have tales to tell of these
beings, usually conclude by saying something like the
following: “Just as she was standing before the fire, quite
proud and showing her beautiful person, I took a brand
from the fire and struck her, saying : ‘Go to the woods,
thou odious Troll!’ She then hurried away with a whining
cry, and a strong wind rose, so that the very trees and
stones seemed as if they would be torn up. When she
turned her back she appeared as hollow as a hollow tree
or a baker's trough.” Ifa Christian man has intercourse
with a forest-woman, there will be born a pernicious
being, to the sorrow and misfortune of others.


SWEDISH TRADITIONS, 75


‘The Skogsra is further described as a female spirit of the
woods, and as a young person in elegant attire, of friendly
demeanour and small figure, but—with claws instead of
nails! An eye-witness of ber existence relates, that once
when out grouse-shooting, having just kindled a fire, and
while taking his repast, she appeared before him, and
kindly greeted him. To his invitation to warm herself
she responded by a friendly nod. He then offered her a
share of his fare, holding it, however, at the end of his
axe, as he felt somewhat diffident at the sight of her talons ;
but she declined his offer, smiled and vanished. He now
shot five grouse. If he had not offered a part of his fare
to the Skogsrg, he would not have killed a single bird.

He, with seven others, was once sitting watehing grouse,
when a Skogsr& darted past them from s tree. Never
before had they scen the birds so numerous, but they
missed every one. For fourteen days their shooting seemed
bewitched, until at length he was so fortunate as to see
another R& come rustling by from a tree, and to throw
his knife over her, whereby the spell was broken. These
little goblins milk the cows and deprive the horses of their
strength, but anything of steel cast over them hinders
them from doing harm. The narrator of the above!
secured his horses with garlic and asafcetida, which must
be placed concealed somewhere about the head.

‘The same individual relates, that being with several of
his neighbours on a fishing expedition, they began to joke
about the Sidri and beings of a similar kind, treating
them as ridiculous fictions, when on a sudden a Sidré
peared before them, and with # loud plash plunged into
the lake. They saw fish in abundance, but could not
catch one.


+ He was Amdt's postltion during « part of his journey.


Be


76 SWEDISH TRADITIONS.


OF WATER ELVES.
4
‘THE MERMAID.

Learned men, who have given attention to the wonders
of the creation, have described a water to be found in cer-
tain lakes, called spectre-water (spékvatten). It has the
property, when warmed by the sun, of sending up a thick,
snow-white mist, resembling at one time a human form,
‘at another that of an animal, changing its appearance and
course as it ia driven by the wind. The simple people,
that dwell by such lakes, bewildered by this phenomenon,
relate as a fact that they have seen, innumerable times, a
Mermaid sitting by the lake, combing her long locks with
a golden comb, or standing on the islets, spreading out her
snowy linen on the bushes, or driving before her her
snow-white cattle. The Mermaid is thought to be false
and deceitful, and is spoken of by the fishermen as the
Skogsr& is by the hunters. They all have something to
say about her, and anticipate a bad capture, storm and
tempest, when she makes her appearance. It is said to
be good and advisable, when the fisher sees one of these
beings, not to speak of it even to his comrades, but to
take his flint and steel and strike fire. From the time
that Thor hurled his thunder at the Trolls, they lost, it is
said, both power and courage. Hence it is, that in our
country places, in every house where there is a new-born
child, either fire on the hearth, or a light, must bum by
day and night, until the child is christened ; else it is to
be feared that the Trolls may come and carry off the child,
and leave one of their own in its stead. Of the Mermaids
it is said that they dwell at the bottom of the ocean or of
an inland sea, have castles and mansions, also domestic
animals and cattle, which are called ‘ brand’-cattle, the sig-
nification of which is far from evident!,


* Qu, Angl drindied.


SWEDISH TRADITIONS. 7


In West Gothland, in the distriet of Bitirke, there is a
lake with beautifully wooded shores, called Anten, On
an isle in this lake there was formerly an ancient castle,
revtuins of which are still to be seen, called Loholm, in
which dwelt Sir Gunnar, a renowned knight, and ancestor
of the famous family of Leionhufvud, or Lewenhaupt.
Once, when out on the lake he had fallen into danger, a
‘Mer-wife came to his aid, but exacted from him the pro-
mise, that on a certain day he should meet her again at
the same place. One Thureday evening she sat expecting
the knight ; but he forgot his promise, She then caused
the water of the lake to ewell up over Loholm, until Sir
Gunnar was forced to take refuge in a higher apartment ;
but the water reached even that. He then sought safety
in the drawbridge tower; but there the billows again
overtook him. He next committed himself to a boat,
which sank near a large stone, called to this day Gunnar’s
stone; from which time Sir Gunnar, it is said, lives cou-
stantly with the Mer-wife. When fishermen or the coun-
try people row by the stone, they usually lift their hats,
as a salutation to Sir Gunnar, in the belief that if they
neglected to do so, they would have no success. From
that time no one dwelt at Loholm, of the materials of
which was built the noble castle of Griifsniis, on a penin-
sula in the same lake, with towers, ditches, and draw-
bridges, remains of which are still visible. From this Sir
Gunnar descended Erik Abrahamsson, father-in-law of
Gustavus the First.


mm


YOUNTAIN MAIDENS,


Mention has been already made of the priestesses of
the heathen gods, or Horgabrudar, who watched by the
sacred fountains, in which the members of the victims


78 SWEDISH TRADITIONS.


‘were washed, and received gifts from the people for advice
in cases of sickness, as well as on other occasions. After
the country became Christian, the monks and priests took
the fountains under their care, placed by them images of
saints or a cross, and caused the people to make offerihgs
to, and seek health from, the saint that was supposed to
have the well under his protection. Thus did Christian
superstition step into the place of pagan, and continues
even to the present day. But the heathen Horgabrudar,
who died without baptism or sacrament, were still in the
remembrance of the people, and had become Elves, who
await salvation, dwelling till doomsday under their foun
tains’ silvery roof. In song and in story the beauty of the
Fountain-maids is praised, when they have been seen by
mortal man and displayed their fair forms either in the
depth of a fountain, or reposing by its side on a bed of
flowers. To the person who cleanses a fountain, or plants
over it an umbrageous tree, the Fountain-maid will be
kind and propitious ; while he who profanes or sullies the
fountain’s salubrious stream will be followed by sickness
and misfortune.


mL
‘THE NECK AND THE STROMKARL.


‘The Neck appears sometimes in the form of a grown
man, and is particularly dangerous to haughty and pert
damscls ; sometimes in that of a comely youth, with his
lower extremities like those of @ horse ; sometimes like an
old man with along beard; and occasionally os a hand-
some youth, with yellow locks flowing over his shoulders
and a ted cap, sitting in a summer evening on the surface
of the water with a golden harp in his hand. If any one
wishes to learn music of him, the most welcome remune-
ration that can be offered to him is a black lamb, espe-
cially if the hope of his salvation—which the Neck has


SWEDISH TRADITIONS. 79


greatly at heart—be at the same time expressed to him.
Hence when two boys once said to a Neck, ‘“ What good
do you gain by sitting here and playing ? you will never
enjoy eternal happiness,” he began to weep bitterly ',

Tf one of the common people has a disease, for which
they cannot otherwise account, they imagine that it is
caused by the spirit of the place where the disease was
contracted, or was supposed to be contracted ; whence the
expression, which is often to be heard, “He has met with
something bad in the air, in the water, inthe field.” In
such case the Neck must be propitiated, which is done
in the following manner: They pour a drink into a eup,
and mix with it the scrapings from the wedding ring, from
silver, brass, or any other metal possessed by inheritance,
but 20 that the odd number, particularly three, be observed.
‘With this mixture they repair to the place where they sup-
pose the disease was contracted, and pour it out over the left
shoulder. On the way they must neither tum about nor
utter a sound, If there be any uncertainty as to the
place, the pouring is made on the door-post, or on an
ant-hill *.

A Neck at Bohuus, in West Gothland, had transformed
himeelf into a horse and gone on the bank to eat; but a
eunning man, whose suspicions were roused, threw such
‘a curiously contrived halter over him, that he could not
get loose again, ‘The man now kept the Neck with him
all the spring, and tormented him most thoroughly, by
making him plough all his fields. At length the halter
accidentally slipping off, the Neck sprang like lightning
into the water, dragging the harrow after him.

A Neck who takes up his abode under a bridge or in a
stream, is commonly called a Strémkarl. He always plays
‘on the viol; and when any musician plays with extraordi-

2 aye, p. 54. Srenske Folk-Visor, ii, 127,
2 Arndt. li 15, » Faye, p. 53.


80 SWEDISH TRADITIONS.


nary boldnese and skill, he is said to play with the Strém-
Karl’s touch. Near Homborgabro, in West Gothland, a
Striimkarl was once heard singing, to a pleasant melody,
these words thrice repeated :—“I know,—and I know,—
and I know—that my Redeemer liveth.” As seen by
tailors, the Neck is described as an old man, sitting on
rock, wringing the water out of his large, green beard.
Their appearance is said to forebode storm and tempest.
‘Under this form they may be more correctly called Mer-
men. He is sometimes seen on the shore under the form
of a handsome horse, but with his hoofs reversed.

A priest riding one evening over a bridge, heard the
most delightful tones of a stringed instrument, and, on
looking round, saw a young man, naked to the waist, sit-
ting on the surface of the water, with a red cap and yellow
locks, as already described. He saw that it was the
Neck, and in his zeal addressed him thus:—“ Why dost
thou so joyously strike thy harp? Sooner shall this dried
cane that I hold in my hand grow green and flower, than
thou shalt obtain salvation.” Thereupon the unhappy
musician cast down his harp, and sat bitterly weeping on
the water. The priest then turned his horse, and con-
tinued his course. But lo! before he had ridden far, he
observed that green shoots and leaves, mingled with most
beautiful flowers, had sprung from his old staff. This
seemed to him a sign from heaven, directing him to preach
the consoling doctrine of redemption after another fashion.
He therefore hastened back to the mournful Neck, showed
him the green, flowery staff, and said: “Behold! now my
old staff is grown green and flowery like a young branch
in a rose garden; s0 likewise may hope bloom in the
‘hearts of all created beings; for their Redeemer liveth [?”
Comforted by these words, the Neck again took his harp,
the joyous tones of which resounded along the shore the
whole livelong night.


SWEDISH TRADITIONS. 8


The Strdmkarl’s melody (Strimkarlslag) has cleven varie
ties, ten only of which may be danced, the eleventh belongs
to the night-spirit and his troop ; for if any one were to
cause it to be played, tables and benches, pots and cups,
old men and grandmothers, blind and lame, even babes in
the cradle, would begin to dance,

Those who are desirous of learning the Strémkarl’s ten
variations, must place their violin for three Thuraday nights
under a bridge, where there is « constantly running stream,
On the third night, the Neck, or Strémkarl, will come and
strike the strings of his instrument, when the learner must
tune his fiddle and accompany him. If the eleventh me-
lody is played, inanimate things, as trees and stones, will
dance.

‘An equally wonderful composition is the Elf-king’s tune,
which no musician will venture to play; for having once
begun it, he cannot cease from playing, unless he can
play it backwards, or some one behind him ents the strings
of the violin ®,

‘The anme anxiety as to their state hereafter prevails amoug the Dacine
‘Shi of the Scott Highlands, one of whom, Ising from a lake, quet-
tions clergyman onthe euhject. Like the Neck, they also have melo-
ious music’,

Of the earths which gather among the foam in the still
creeks, and of river waters, there is formed a loose, white,
porous kind of stone, resembling picked or pulled bread :
this is called ‘Necke-brod;’ the masses or cakes of
which are called marlekor (marekor), because the mare
(Gtill water) cements them together. ‘The beautiful white
or yellow flowers, that grow on the banks of lakes and
rivers, and are called ‘ Neck-roses,’ are well-known me-
morials of the popular idea of the Neck. The poisonous


iv. 241,
166, ag. edit, 1820.
rare, Superstitions of the Highlands, quoted by Keightley, F. M.


55


82 SWEDISH TRADITIONS,


root of the water hemlock (cicuta virosa) formerly bore the
name of the Necke-root.

In Beowulf frequent mention oceurs of the Nicor (pl. Niceras), Con-
nected with the mame is that of Odin, Hnikarr, in his charatter of a
sea-god?.

‘The following extract may serve as a commentary on
what is related both of the Swedish Neck and Danish Nik.
“ Husby is very pleasantly situated, and its church is said
to be one of the oldest in Sweden. Here is shown St.
Siegfried’s well, with the water of which the holy man Sig-
fridus, according to the tradition, baptised king Olov
Skitkonung. The well is still famous, and is said on
many occasions to be used nightly by the country people.
Fifty years ago” (the author travelled in 1803) “ many su-
perstitions and ceremonies were practised at wells, Almost
every province had some that at certain periods of the
summer were visited, and into which a piece of money,
iron or any metal was east as an offering. But this illu-
sion is now almost extinct, Still it is, nevertheless, worth
inuiring, what power, and why a power is everywhere
ascribed to metal of counteracting the influence of witch-
craft and of evil spirits?’ For no other reason than to
propitiate the Neck of the well, did people throw into it
anything metallic. Connected with the above is the popular
belief, that, when bathing in the sea, a person should east
into it, close by him, a fire-steel, a knife, or the like, to
prevent any monster from hurting him. The steel, or
whatever it may be, may be taken out again. Formerly
a fire-steel, or a pair of scissors, was laid on the cradle of
1 child, until it was christened. Even to the present day
the custom exists of pouring melted silver or other metal
on the spot where it is believed that a person is suffering
from the work of the evil one, With such a pouring the
injury is also poured out.”

2 Ver. 838, 1144, 2854,

# Bdda-Sem, 46, 91, 184, Bada-Snorra, 3, 24, 922,


SWEDISH TRADITIONS. 83


Having thus propitiated, or rather neutralized the per-
nicious propensities of, the Neck, it was not unususl while
bathing to address him scoffingly in the following words:
“Neck, Neck, Naleputa, du tir p& lan, men jag ar i van”
(Neck, Neck, needle-thief, thou art on lend, but I am in
the water). On quitting the water, the person took the
steel again, saying: ‘Neck, Neck, needle-thief, I am on
Jand, and thou art in the water!”


THE WILD HUNT,

In Scania the sounds like voices, that are at times heard
in the air in November and December, are by the common
people called Odin’s hunt®, Grimm also connects the
‘Wild Hunt (Wiitendes Heer) with Odin (Ohg. Wuotan),
the tradition of which is eurrent over almost all Germany.
Tn the course of time, after the introduction of Chris
anity, the pagan deity degenerated into a wild hunter,
regarding whom almost every place where he is said to
ride has its tradition.

MYSTIC ANIMALS.

According to the Swedish popular belief, there are eer-
tain animals which should not at any time be spoken of
by their proper names, but always with euphemisms, and
kind allusions to their character. If any one speaks
slightingly to a cat, or beats her, her name must not be
uttered; for she belongs to the hellish crew, and is inti-
mate with the Bergtroll in the mountains, where she often
visits, In speaking of the cuckoo, the owl, and the mag-
pie, great caution is necessary, lest one should be ensnared,
as they are birds of sorcery. Such birds, also snakes, one
ought not to kill withont cause, as their associates might
avenge them, It is particularly sinfal to tread toads to

» mat 250, ape Si 17, a7.

2 These sounds are by Nilsson (Skandiv. Fauna, ii. 106) ascribed to
certain water-fowls on their way to the South.


84 SWEDISH TRADITIONS.


death, as they are often enchanted princesses. Many a
one has become lame without fall or fracture, but as a
penalty for such wantonuess. In speaking of the Troll-
psck or Witch-crew, one must name fire and water, and
the name of the church to which one belongs; then no
injury can arise. The weasel must not be so called, but
the aduine; the fox, blue-foot, or he that goes in the forest ;
and the bear, the old one (Gubbe, Gammeln), grandfather
(Storfar), Naskus; rats, the long-bodied; mice, the small
grey; the weal, brother Lars; the wolf, gold-foot or grey-
foot, grey-tosse, not varg, because it is said that formerly,
when the now dumb animals could speak, the wolf made
this announcement :—


Kallar du mig Varg, sf blir jag dig arg,
‘Men kallar du mig af Guld, si blir jag dig huld.
If thou callest me Varg, I will be wroth with thee,
But if thou callest me of gold, I will be kind to thee.

Even inanimate things are not at all times to be called
by their usual names: fire, for instanes, is on some ocea-
sions not to be called eld or elt but hetta (heat) ; water
used for brewing, not vatn, but lag or lou, else the beer
would not be 80 good’.

‘The magpie—like others of the raven or crow family—
is also a mystic bird, a downright witches? bird, belonging
to the devil and the other hidden powers of night. When
the witches, on Walpurgis night, ride to the Blikulle, they
turn themselves into magpies. When they are moulting
in summer, and become bald about the neck, the country
people say they have been to the Blakulle, and helped the
evil one to get his hay in, and that the yoke has rubbed
their feathers off.


‘The above superstition of the wolf is very ancient and wide-spread, an


1 Arndt, i. 495 ii, 18, 19, ‘Thiele, ii. 122, edit. 1820. Finn Magnu-
ven, Den Aldre Bada, i. 9.


SWEDISH TRADITIONS. 85


evident trace of it existing in Anglo-Saxon and Old Norse: “gryre soeal
for greggum "(terror sball there be for the grey one)}.


‘THE MOUNTAIN-TROLL.


1

‘The extraordinary tales of Mountain-trolls and their
kidnappings that are told by eredible persons, and con-
firmed by very singular circumstances, might afford ground
for the supposition that the primitive inhabitants of Sweden,
the wild mountaineers, had not altogether died out, but that
in the recesses of the great mountain-forests some in recent
times might have still resided. Memorials of the hostility
entertained by these people against the light of Christi-
anity are preserved in the traditions concerning the several
stones or masses of rock called giant-casts. These are
shown by the people in all country places, and are usually
in auch situations aa to give birth to the tradition of their
having been hurled from @ mountain towards some church.
“The Giant,” as the story goes, “could not endure the
noise of the bells from the holy edifice, and therefore cast
this rock, in the hope of knocking it down, but being too
strong, he hurled it far beyond the church.” Or it is said:
“The stone was too heavy, and the church too far away,
0 that it fell short of the mark.” In some of these stones,
as in the one near Enkiping, are to be scen marks as if
made by the five fingers of « gigantic hand. Near the
celebrated church of Warnhem lies the Himmelsberg, in
which, as we are tuld, a giant dwelt, until the convent
ells ringing for prayers drove him away. It is related
that, on leaving the mountain, he inquired of a lad, that
worked in the neighbourhood, in which direction Alleberg
lay? for thither he intended to take his course. The lad
having directed him, he went off as in a whirlwind, and
the lad now discovered, to his no small astonishment, that
his forefinger, with which he had pointed out the way,


) Cod. Bron. p. 342, Kraka Mél, p. 54, edit. Rafa.


86 SWEDISH TRADITIONS.


had followed slong with the giant, In the Description of
Uppland there is a story of a mountain near Lagga church,
and how a giant with his family quitted it on account of
the bells, “the sound of which he was not inclined to
hear.” “When wilt thou come again?” asked a man
standing by, and witnessing their departure; whereupon
the man of the mountain answered: “ When Lagga fiord
is field, and Ost-tuna lake meadow.” The fiord and the
lake are now like to become field and meadow; but the
‘Troll’s return seems by no means ¢0 certain,


m
STEN OF FOGELKARR.


In an old Description of Bohuslin the following event
is related.—Sten of Fogelkiirr was sn excellent marksma
One day when out hunting, he came to a mountain, where
he saw a young, beautiful gir] sitting on a stone; and as
he instantly formed the design of obtaining her, he cast
his fire-steel between her and the mountain, for that pur-
pore. He then heard a loud laugh within the mountain.
Tt was the damsel’s father, who at the same moment opened

is door and said: “Wilt thou have my daughter?” Sten
wered: “ Yes,” and as she was stark naked, he wrapped
her in his cloak, and so took her home with him, and had
her christened. Before, however, he left the mountain,
the damsel’s father gave him this injunction: “When
thou celebratest thy marriage with my daughter, thou
shalt send to the mountain in which I dwell twelve barrels
of beer, together with bread, and the meat of four oxen ;
and when the bridal gifts are to be given, mine shall not
be wanting.” Nobly did the man of the mountain keep
his promise; for while the company was sitting at the
nuptial board, and the guests, according to ancient custom,
were bestowing the bridal presents, the roof was suddenly
raised, and a large purse of money thrown down ; at the
same time was heard the old man’s voice: “Here is my


SWEDISH TRADITIONS. 87


bridal gift, and when thou wilt have thy dower, drive to
the mountain with four horses and take thy share.” Sten
did so, and got copper kettles of various sizes, besides
“brand’-cattle!, descendants from which good stock were
long to be found in those parts, Sten became a rich and
influential man, and had many comely children by his
wife; even now families exist in the neighbourhood, that
profess to derive their descent from Sten of Fogelkirr
and the damsel of the mountain’,


mm.

A peasant, ina village named Fyrunga, had in like
manner married a giant’s daughter, with whom he had
received considerable wealth ; but he lived unhappily with
her, beat and misused her, although she was of a meck
and compliant disposition, When the giant was apprized
of this, he withdrew from his son-in-law, so that he be-
came poor. This peasant being one day about to shoe his
horse, in the absence of other aid, ordered his wife to hold
‘up the horse’s feet. With astonishment he saw that she
not only lifted up the horse’s fect with the utmost ease,
but that when a shoe did not fit, she bent it as if it bad
been wax instead of cold iron. Not without signs of fear
the man said to her: “As thou art so strong, why dost
thou allow me to strike thee?” ‘I bear in mind,” said
she, “what the black man said who united us, that I shall
be obedient to thee, and I will hold to my engagement,
although thou hast often broken thine; else I could have
chopped thee up like cabbage.” From that moment the
san became so changed through his wife’s good sense and
forbearance, that he ever after treated her with affection.
‘When spprized of this change, the giant again bestowed


1M. p- 436) gives the story with some variations from Od.
‘The attle are there distinguished as white-headed (hiel-
meta), O.Nor hjelétr, ertice albus alae diecolor ; de pecudiu dictur.


88 SWEDISH TRADITIONS.


on them all sorts of good, 0 that they became rich and
prosperous.
Iv.

In the district of Nis in Wiirmland there is an immense
stone, having in it a eavity like a room, in which the pea-
sant children sit and play while they are out with the
cattle. By some it is called Stygges stone, by others
Halvar’s room. In this hollow, so says the tradition, there
dwelt, in the time of heathenism, a giant, who lived on
the best terms possible with a farmer in the nearest grange.
‘One day as the farmer and another man came out of the
forest from their labour, they found the giant sitting out-
side of the stone. “Can I barter with thee?” said the
giant; “‘six’she-goats and the he-goat seven I will give
thee for a cow.” The farmer expressed his willingness.
On the following morning when the farmer’s wife entered
the cowhouse, she saw to her surprise that the cow was
gone and that there were seven goats in its place. The
bargain proved a good one, for they were lucky with the
goats. Once when they were out raking in the field they
saw before them a great frog big with young. The far-
mer’s wife had pity on the heavy creature and wound a
woollen band round its body. In the evening the giant
came to the farm requesting the wife fo come and loose
that which she had bound. The woman followed him to
the stone, where she found that the frog was no other than
the giant’s wife, who had assumed that form. She loosed
the band and delivered her. In reward for this service,
they desired her to come with a bag, into which the giant
poured as much silver money as she could carry. It is
farther related that one evening, when the people were at
work in the field, there came from the giant’s habitation
such a quantity of cattle and goats that they were forced
to leave the field. One Easter eve, the farmer was passing
by, when the giant, who was sitting on his stone seat, said


a


SWEDISH TRADITIONS. 89


to him: “Wilt thou come in and eat milk porridge with
me?” “No,” answered the other; “if thou hast more
than thou canst eat, keep it till to-morrow.” “Thanks,”
said the giant; “had I known that before, I should now
be rich.” The giant was never seen afterwards.

‘When the Trolls and Giants were driven away by the
Christians, they took refuge out at sea, on uninhabited
rocks and on desert strands, where, according to general tra-
dition, they have in Inter times been seen by mariners.
Some sailors belonging to Bohusliin, when once driven on
a desert shore by a storm, found a giant sitting on a stone
by afire. He was old and blind, and rejoiced at hearing
the Northmen, because he was himself from their country.
He requested one of them to approach and give him his
hand, “that I may know,” ssid he, “whether there is yet
strength in the hands of the Northmen.” The old man
being blind, was not sensible that they took a great boat-
hook, which they heated in the fire and held out to him. He
squeezed the hook as if it bad been wax, shook his head
and said, “I find the Northmen now have but little
strength in their hands compared with those of old.”


‘THE TROLLS CELEBRATE CHRISTMAS.


Of the manner in which the Trolls celebrate Christmas
eve there are traditions throughout the whole North. At
that time it is not advisable for Christian men to be out.
On the heaths Witches and little Trolls ride, one on a wolf,
another on a broom ora shovel, to their assemblies, where
they dance under their stones. These stones are then
raised on pillars, under which the Trolls dance and drink.
In the mount are then to be heard mirth and music, dan-
cing and drinking. On Christmas morn, during the time
between cock-crowing and daybreak, itis highly dangerous
to be abroad.

One Christmas night in the year 1490, as Fru Cissela


90 SWEDISH TRADITIONS.


‘Ulftand was sitting in her mansion at Liungby in Sca
fa grest noise was heard proceeding from the Trolls
sembled at the Magle stone, when one of the lady’s bol
servants rode out to see what was going on. He for
the stone raised, and the Trolls in a noisy whirl danci:
under it. A beautiful female stept forth, and present.
to the guest a drinking hom and a pipe, requesting hit
to drink the Troll-king’s health and to blow in the pipe.
Hetook the horn and pipe, but at the same instant clapped
spurs to his horse, and galloped straight, over rough and
smooth, to the mansion, ‘The Trolls followed him in a
body with a wild cry of threats and prayers, but the man
kept the start, and delivered both horn and pipe into the
hands of his mistress. The Trolls promised prosperity
and riches to Fru Cissela’s race, if she would restore their
pipe and horn; but she persisted in keeping them, and
they are still preserved at Liungby, as memorials of the
wonderful event. The horn is said to be of an unknown
amixture of metals with brass ornaments, and the pipe of a
horse’s leg-bone. The man who stole them from the Trolls
i after, and the horse on the second day.
ion has been twice burnt, and the Ulftand
family never prospered afterwards. ‘This tradition teaches
that Christians should act justly even towards Trolls.

It is also related of some priests, who were riding before
daybreak by a mount on a Christmas morning, while the
‘Trolls were at their sports, how a Berg- or Mount-woman
came out and offered them drink in metal bowls ; and how
they east the drink behind them, but that some drops
chanced to fall on the horses’ loins and burned the hair off.
‘The bowls they carried away with them, and such are still
to be found in several churches, where, it is said, they were
formerly used as chalices ',

‘This drink, which the Trolls were in the habit of offer-

2 For more on this subject see ‘Danish Traditions.”


SWEDISH TRADITIONS. 91


ing s0 liberally, was believed to have the property of ob-
literating from the memory all the past, and of rendering
the guest who partook of it contented with all he met with
in the mount.


ORIGIN OF THE NOBLE NAME OF TROLLE.


On the wall of Voxtorp church in Smiland there is «
painting representing a knight named Herve Ulf, when
one Christmes morning he received adrinking horn from a
‘Troll-wife with one hand, while with his eword he struck off
her head with the other, kept the horn and rode to church.
In remembrance of this deed, the king commanded him
to call himself ‘Trolle, and to take a Troll without » head
for his armorial bearing. Such is the origin of the noble
name of Trolle. ‘This wonderful horn was of three hun-
dred colours, and was first preserved in the cathedral of
Werit; but when the Danes in 1570 burned Werid, the
horn was carried to Denmark.

It is said that the Trolls are very prolific, but that their
offepring for the most part dies when it thunders; whence
the saying : “ Were it not for thunder, the Trolls would
destroy the world.”

‘THE GIANT'S PATH.

In a large cleft in the mountain of Billingen in West
Gothland, called the Jattestig (Giant’s Path), itis said there
was formerly a way leading far into the mountain, into
which a peasant once penetrated, and found a man lying
asleep on a large stone, How he came there no one could
tell, but every time the bell tolla for prayers in Yglunda
church, he turns round and sighs. So he will continue
till doomsday.


THE TOMTE, OR SWEDISH NISS.
Two husbandmen dwelt in a village; they had like


92 SWEDISH TRADITIONS.


arable land, like meadow, like wood and pasture, but the
one grew richer and the other poorer from year to year.
‘The one had a house painted red, well tarred, with boarded
walls and a sound turf roof ; the other’s habitation was
moss-clad, with bare, rotten walls and a leaky roof, Whence
all this difference? Many a one will answer : “The rich
man had a Tomte in his house.” He appears before the
master, and, if she is kind to him, before the mistress also,
“But what are they like, these propitious little beings ?”
In magnitude like a child of  twelvemonth old, but with
fan ancient and asgacious looking face under a little red
cap; with a gray, coarse woollen jacket, short breeches,
and shoes like those worn by peasant children. He ap-
pears at noontide, in summer and autumn, and has gene-
rally a straw or an ear of corn, which he drags slowly
along, panting at every step, like one under the heaviest
burthen. On such an occasion the poor peasant had once
Inughed at a Tomte, and said: “ What difference is there
whether thou bringest me that or nothing?” This vexed
the little, weary collector, and he transferred himself to
the other peasant’s abode, who was at that time a poor
new beginner. From that day prosperity withdrew itself
from him who had despised the diminutive being. But the
other man, who esteemed the industrious little Tomte, and
took care of the smallest straw or ear, became rich, and
cleanliness, order and abundanee reigned in his dwelling.


Tf a stable-man takes care of his horses, speaks kindly
to them, feeds them at ten o’clock at night, and again at
four in the morning, he has no eause to stand in fear of
the Tomte. But the careless one, who maltreats the cattle,
curacs and swears when he enters the stable, forgets their
nightly food, and sleeps till day, must take good care of
himself, lest when be steps into the stable he get a buffet


SWEDISH TRADITIONS. 93


on the ear from the unseen but hard fist of the Tomte,
that brings him to a stand on his nose.

Tt has been believed that the souls of those who in
heathen times were slaves, and while the master and his
sons were engaged in piracy, had charge of the land and
buildings, and were employed in agriculture, are repre-
sented in these small, gray beings, as pursuing their former
earthly labours until doomsday. There are still many
Christians who believe in these Tomt-spirits, and annually
make them a kind of offering, or, as they now term it,
“ give them a reward.” This takes place on the day when
joy was proclaimed to all the world, and salvation even to
the Tomtar—Christmas morning ; and consists in some
‘small pieces of coarse, gray woollen cloth, a little tobacco,
and a shovelful of earth.

Tomtar are also called Nissar. ‘For the good Niss,”
the country folks in Blekinge and other places are wont to
say, when out at work in the fields and sitting at their re-
past, they lay a piece of bread, cheese, etc. under a green
turf, whereby they hope to gain his good will.

A peasant in Scania was in the habit of placing food on
the stove daily for the Tomtar or Nissar. This came to
the knowledge of the priest, who thereupon searched the
house, for the sake of convincing its inmates that no Nissar
were to be found. “How then does the food disappear
every night ?” asked the peasant. “That I ean tell you,”
said the priest. “Satan takes it all and collects it in a
Kettle in hell, in which kettle he hopes to boil your souls
to all eternity.” From that time no more food was set
out for the Nissar.

‘Where building and carpenters’ work are going forward,
it is said that the Tomtar, while the workmen are at
their dinner, may be seen going about and working with
‘small axes. When a tree is felled in the forest, it is said:
“The woodman holds the axe, but the Tomte fells the


vy SWEDISH TRADITIONS.

tree.” When the horses in a stable are well tended and
in fine condition, it is said: “The groom lays the food in
the crib, but it is the Tomte who makes the horse fat.”


A housewife when she sifted meal had long remarked
that there was an uncommon weight in the tub, and that
although she had frequently taken considerable quanti
from it, the weight exceeded all belief. But once, when
going to the storeroom, she chanced to look through the
Keyhole, or through a chink in the door, and beheld a
little Tomte in tattered gray clothes sitting and busily
sifting in the meal-tub, ‘The woman withdrew softly, and
made s new, handsome kirtle for the industrious little
fellow, and hung it on the edge of the tub, at the same
time placing herself so that she might see what he thought
of his new garment. When he came he immediately put
it on and began to sift most sedulously; but sceing that
the meal dusted and damaged his new kirtle, he exclaimed,
casting the sieve from him :

“The young spark is fine;
He dusts himself;
Never more will he sift.”


RAVENS.—PYSLINGAR AND MYLINGAR—SERAT.


Ravens seream by night in the forest-swamps and wild
moors, They are said to be the ghosts of murdered per-
cons, who have been concealed there by their undetected
murderers, and not hed Christian buris

In forests and wildernesses the spirits of little children
that have been murdered are said to wander about wailing,
within an assigned space, as long as their lives would have
lasted on earth, if they had been permitted to live. As a
terror for unnatural mothers that destroy their offspring,
their ead cry is said to be: “Mamma! Mamma!” When


SWEDISH TRADITIONS. 95


travellers by night pass such places, these beings will hang
on the vehicle, when the liveliest horses will toil as if they
were dragging millstones, will sweat, and at length be un-
able to proceed a step further. The peasant then knows
‘that a ghost or Pysling has attached itself to his vehicle.
If he goes to the horses’ heads, lifts the headstall, and
looks through it towards the carriage, he will see the little
pitiable being, but will get a smart blow on the ear, or
fall sick, This is called ghost-pressed (gastkramad)..

‘The Myling, as well as the Tomte and Skogsrf, are ex-
‘posed to persecution from the wolves, Some hunters, who
had one evening taken up their quarters in a barn in the
forest, were waked in the middle of the night by the howl-
ing of wolves and an extraordinary noise; and on secking
the cause, they saw a Skogsril fleeing before a number of
wolves that were pursuing her. On reaching the barn
she jumped up to the little window that stood open,
whence she jeered the wolves standing beneath, showing
them first one foot then the other, and saying: “Paw this
foot! Paw that foot! If you get both, take them” One
of the hunters, tired of her proximity, gave her a push in
the back, so that she fell down among the wolves, saying :
“Take her altogether!” She was instantly devoured by
the wolves, Similar stories are related of Mylingar end
Tomtar.

Of the Myling it is related that it can assume the form
of persons both living and dead, thereby deluding the
nightly traveller; also that it can imitate the speech,
Iaugh and singing of persons,

The Skrat! is a species of Myling that with a horse-
laugh makes game of persons that are out at night in the
forests or fields. A peasant in Westmanland had while
digging found a ring that shone like gold, and would, as
he said, have certainly become possessor of it, had not the

+ See Grimm, D. M. p. 447.


96 SWEDISH TRADITIONS.


Skrat, before he had well got hold of it, laughed it away.
So it in said frequently to happen to treasure-diggers. He
comes at midnight, chiefly in winter, out of the forests, to
the public roads, and hangs on the hinder part of a sledge
or other vehicle, when on a sudden it becomes #o heavy,
that the horses, however good they may be, become jaded,
sweat, and at length stop ; then the Skrat generally runs
off with a malicious laugh, and vanishes.


‘THE WERWOLF.


In a hamlet within a forest there dwelt a cottager, named
Lasse, and his wife. One day he went out in the forest
to fell a tree, but had forgotten to cross himself and say
his Paternoster, a0 that some ‘Troll or Witch (Vargamor)?
got power over him and transformed him into a wolf. His
wife mourned for him for several years; but one Christmas
eve there came a beggar woman, who appeared very poor
and ragged: the good housewife gave her « kind recep-
tion, as is customary among Christians at that joyous sea-
son. At her departure the beggar woman said that the
wife might very probably see her husband again, as he
was not dead, but was wandering in the forest as a wolf.
‘Towards evening the wife went to her pantry, to place in
it a piece of meat for the morrow, when on turning to go
out, she perceived a wolf standing, which raising itself
with its paws on the pantry steps, regarded the woman
with sorrowful and hungry looks. Seeing this she said:
“If I knew that thou wert my Lasse, I would give thee
a bone of meat.” At that instant the wolf-skin fell off,
and her husband stood before her in the clothes he had
on when he went out on that unlucky morning.


» Old women dwelling in the forests, who not unfrequently give them-
selves out as sorceresses, have got the name of Vargamor (Wolf-crones),
‘and are believed to have the wolves of the forest under thelr protection
and control.


SWEDISH TRADITIONS. 97


‘The heathen sorcery of transforming a person to the likeness of a wolf,
fs still believed by many to be tranemitted to some wicked individeals,
‘even to onr days, Fins, Lapps and Russians are held in particular aver-
sion on this account; and when, during the last year of the war with
Rossin, Calmar was unusually overrun with wolves, it was generally said
that the Russians had transformed the Swedish prisoners to wolves, and
sent them home to infest the country.


JACK 0” LANTERN.


A flaming light moves backwards and forwards on the
hearth, not unlike a lantem borne by one in search of
something. It is ‘Jack with the lantern,’ who, as many a
simple person, after old traditions, will tell us, was a
mover of landmarks, and is thus doomed to wander with
a light in his band.

According to the old popular belief, a man, who during
life has rendered himself guilty of such a crime, is
doomed to have no rest in his grave after death, but to
rise every midnight, and with a lantern in his hand to
proceed to the spot where the landmark had stood which
he had fraudulently removed. On reaching the place, he
is seized with the same desire which instigated him in hia
lifetime, when he went forth to remove his neighbour's
Inndmark, and be says as he goes, in a harsh, hoarse voice :
“Te is right! it is right! it is right!” But on bis re-
‘turn, qualms of conscience and anguish seize him, and he
then exclaims: “Tt is wrong! it is wrong! it is wrong !””


‘THE RAM IN THE GETABERG.

‘Near Ingelsiad, in the district of Oxie, in Seania, there
is a mount called the Getaberg, where before misfortunes
and public calamities, a ram, terrible to look upon, makes
its appearance. The neighbouring peasantry can tell, both
with year and day, of calamities that have been so fore-
boded. One evening boy passed over the mount singing
a. song about the ram, that was current in the neighbour-

r


98 ‘SWEDISH TRADITIONS.


hood, and by hie ill-timed mirth waked the ram, which
soon stuck him on his horn, and would have killed him,
had not # handsome young damsel come and saved him 5
for whgn young girls come to him the ram becomes as
gentle as a lamb.


‘THE DRAGON, OR WHITE SERPENT.

Among the fabulous beings of former days must be
reckoned the Dragon, concerning which many traditions
ind songs are extant. In the heathen Sagas no mention
is made of its colour; but in later writings we find it
usually designated the White Serpent. This must not be
confounded with the white Tomt-serpent (Tomtorm), which
in the southern parte is numbered among good domestic
sprites, and is gladly fed by the inmates of the house in
which it vouchsafes to take up its abode under the flooring.
‘The White Serpent now to be spoken of is very rarely
seen, some suppose only every bundred years, and in desert
places. Soreeresses were in the habit of secking for it,
and boiling it in their magical eompounds, for the attain-
ment of profound knowledge in the secrets of nature; for
by insinuating itself, in the innermost parts of the earth,
around the roots of rocks and mountains, among the lowest
fibres of the trees and plants, it is believed to have imbibed
their occult virtues, and to communicate them to the indi-
vidual by whom it allows itself to be found. If any one
finds a White Serpent, he should instantly grasp it by the
middle of its body, when it will leave its skin. Only to
lick this is thought to strengthen the inward powers of
‘man, 80 that, without previous instruction, he will know
the virtues of plants, earths and stones, how to heal wounds
and cure all kinds of diseases. This is called “To become
cunning’
‘A poor little peasant boy, who had wandered out of his

° Att blifra Klok.


SWEDISH TRADITIONS. 99


‘path, came to a small hut in the forest, in which one of
‘these so-called cunning women and serpent-boilers dwelt.
‘When the boy entered she was not at home; but a large
kettle was standing on the fire, in which a white sgrpent
‘was boiling. The boy was hungry, and seeing bread on
a table, and a thick, fat seum in the kettle, which he
supposed to arise from boiling meat, he dipped a piece of
bread in the kettle and ate it. The old beldam, who now
came in, was instantly aware of what had taken place ;
‘but feeling convinced that the boy, however he might
excel others in wisdom, would not surpass her, and that
he could not do any harm to her, suffered him to depart,
and secompanied him until he was again in his right path,
instructing him on the way how he should apply the
wondrous gift he was possessed of.

Of Sven in Bragnum in West Gothland, who was so
famous that he was visited by Linnwus, the story goes,
that he found a White Serpent, the skin of which he
licked, whereby he became cunning (klok), so that he knew
the virtues of all kinds of creeping things and plants, which
he sedulously collected about Mésseberg and the meadows
of Boulom, for the cure of diseases. It is remarkable that
he knew beforehand that he should lose his knowledge as
soon as he married ; so that from the day of his marriage
he never would receive a visit from a patient.

‘The Swedish people ascribe the virtue of certain medicinal springs to
White Serpe, Tn 1809 thousands flocked from Halland and West
Gothland to the wonder-working Helj6 (a mall Inke near Rampegida).
1s was said that some children on its banks tending cattle had in that year
often seen a beautiful young female sitting on its shore, holding in her
Ihand a white serpent, which she showed them. This water-nymph with
the serpent appears only every hondred years, Bexell's Halland, quoted
bby Grimm (D. M. p. 554). See Danish traditions. According to a Ger
mam story, by eating of a white serpent, a person acquires a knowledge
of the language of all animals


> Grimm, K, and H. Mf. No. 17.
F2


100 SWEDISH TRADITIONS.


‘THE UNINVITED WEDDING GUESTS.


A farmer in Bahuus was celebrating his daughter’s
marrigge, but scarcely was the table covered and the
viands brought in, before all—even before the guests had
scated themselves—was eaten up. When the master came
in and saw this, he said: “Now Hile has been here and
eaten up all the meat.” He then ordered other viands to
be brought in, of which the company began immediately
to partake; but whatever the guests might cat, it was
evident that more vanished than was consumed by them.
Near the door stood an old cavalry soldier, who knew more
than the others, and who, on hearing what was being talked
of at table, mounted his horse and rode to a neighbouring
mount, where he knocked, On the mountain being
opened, the soldier said to its inhabitant: “Lend me thy
hat; thou shalt have mine in the mean time.” Such @
hhat was called an uddehat, and made the person that wore
it invisible. The old man of the mount answered : “Thou
shalt have it; but thou must promise me to roturn it be-
fore sunset.” No sooner said than done. The old soldier
now hastened back to the wedding party, where he saw
that by the side of every guest there sat two Trolls, who
helped themselves from the dishes with both hands and
ate to their hearts’ content. Grasping his whip, he lashed
the spunging intruders so smartly over the fingers, that
they lost all inclination to make further havoc among the
dishes, and tumed them head over heels out of the apart-
ment. Then taking off the borrowed hat, whieh had till
then made him invisible to the company, he said: “Till
this moment the fiend has been feasting with you; but
now set more meat on the table, and I will bear you com-
pany.” They did so, ate in peace, and had a quantity
over. When evening approached, the old man remounted
his horse and rode to the mount, where he cast down his


SWEDISH TRADITIONS. 101


borrowed hat and hastened away with all possible speed ;
and had scarcely turned his horse, before » multitude of
Trolls came running, and even got hold of the horse’s tail,
as he rode over a bridge: but the horse was strong and
active, so that the rider escaped, and the Trolls returned
to whence they came !.


OF LUND CATHEDRAL’.


The cathedral of Lund was regarded as a miracle of
Gothic architecture, with respect both to its magnitude
and decorations, which monuments of an early age are for
the most part still preserved. The giant Finn is said to
have built it, and his effigy with those of his wife and
child are yet to be seen in the undereroft, concerning whom
there in the following legend. The holy St. Lawrence (or
Lars), when walking among the mountains and forests, and
thinking how he could raise a spacious temple worthy of
the Lord, was met by a huge giant from a mountain, who
engaged to accomplish his wish, but on condition of re-
ceiving as a remuneration the sun and moon and both St.
Lawrence’s eyes. The time, however, fixed for the com-
pletion of the work was co short, that the undertaking
seemed impracticable. But the holy man soon saw the
building drawing too near its completion, and the day ap-
proaching when the Troll should come and demand his re-
ward. He now again went wandering about sad and
sorrowful in the mountains and forests, when he one day


1 Faye, p- 30. The old soldier's horse was more fortunate than Tam
o'Shanter"s Maggie, which at
“Ae pring brought off her master hale,
But left behind her ain grey tail.”

+ Lund, a famous city and university in Skania (Skine), with a uoble
old cathodral. It in called the Canterbury of the North, nnd before the
‘cession of the province by Denmark to Sweden in 1658 was the metro-
politan see of the former kingdom. It lies nearly opposite to Copen-
hagen.


102 SWEDISH TRADITIONS.


suddenly heard a child erying in the mountain, and the
mother, a giantess, singing to appease it :
“ Hush, my babe, hush !
‘Thy father, Finn, comes home to-morrow ;


Then shalt thou play with sun and moon,
And with St. Lars’ two eyes.”


St. Lawrence now knew the giant's name, and so had
power over him, When the Trolls were aware of this, they
both came down into the undercroft, where each seized a
pillar, with the intention of throwing down the whole edi-
fice; but St. Lawrence, making the sign of the cross,
ried out: “Stand there in stone till doomsday |” ‘They
instantly became stone as they are yet to be seen; the
giant embracing one pillar, and his wife, with » child on
her arm, another !.


THE CHURCH.GRIM AND THR CHURCH-LAMB.
Heathen superstition did not fail to show itself in the
construction of Christian churches, In laying the founds-
tion, the people would retain something of their former re-
ligion, and sacrificed to their old deities, whom they could
not forget, some animal, which they buried alive, cither
‘under the foundation or without the wall. The spectre of
this animal is said to wander about the churchyard by
night, and is called the Kyrkogrim, or Church-grim.

‘A tradition has also been preserved, that under the altar
in the first Christian churches a lamb was usually buried,
which imparted security and duration to the edifice. ‘This
is an emblem of the genuine Church-lamb, the Saviour of
the world, who is the sacred comer-stone of his church
and congregation. When any one entera a church at a


2 See the story of King Olaf, p. 39, and of Esbern Snare and Kallund-
‘borg church in Danish Traditions. The original is manifestly the Eddsic
story of the builder that engaged to fortify Asgard.


SWEDISH TRADITIONS. 103


time when there is no service, he may chance to see a little
Jamb spring across the quire and vanish. That is the
Church-lamb. When it appears to a person in the church-
yard, particularly to.the gravediggers, it is ssid to fore-
bode the desth of a child that shall be next laid in the
earth.

HELIGE THOR’S KALLA (WELL).


From the time of heatheniam there is a well in Smaland,
in the parish of Skateléf, which is remarkable for a de-
plorable event. On the spot where the well now is, a

young. damsel, it is said, met her Jover, and from some
suspicion of his infidelity, murdered him. ‘The god Thor
caused the well to spring up from his blood. In conse-
quence of the change that the heathen religion underwent
in the minds of the people, the name of the god Thor
became altered to ‘ Helige Thor? (Saint Thor), the festival
of our Saviour’s Ascension was called ‘Helig Thor’s-dag?
(Holy Thursday), and Skateléfa Kalla was named ‘Helige
‘Thor’s Kalle’ From ancient documents it appears that
fa particular song was formerly sung in the neighbourhood
of this well, when the country folks, every Holy Thureday
eve, assembled there to play and make offerings.


OF THE VIRGIN MARY.


All that is most beautiful and glorious in the creation
was dedicated to the Virgin Mary, memorials of which
exist even at the present day. One of the earliest and
fairest flowers of spring was, and in many places atill is,
called Our Lady's bunch of keys (primula veria; common
cowslip); the galium verum luteum is Our Lady's bed-
straw} ; a very green grass, with flowers of a more beau-

2 N. Poussin has painted this plant, instead of stravt, under the infant


Jevus in the manger, with its bright yellow flowers gilded, as it were, by
‘the rays emanating from the child.


104 SWEDIGH TRADITIONS.


tiful blue than those of the common flax, is Our Lady’s
flax; in low, wild places a flower called Our Lady's hand
lifts its rose-coloured spike: it has two roots like hands,
one white the other black, and when both are laid in
water, the black one will sink—this is called Satan’s hand;
but the white one—called Mary’s hand—will float. This
plant the peasant shows to his children, and tells of the
holy mother and of Him who overeame the powers of hell.
The pretty, small green secd-vessels of the shepherd’s
purse (thlaspi bursa pastoris) are called Our Lady’e pin-
cushion; and the dew-flower (alchemilla vulgaris) with its
plaited leaves, Our Lady’s mantle,

‘As the Thorbagge!, in the time of heathenism, was
sacred to Thor, so was the Lady-bird (coccinella septem-
punetata) dedicated to the Virgin Mary, and is to this day
called Our Lady's key-maid (nyckelpiga). It is thought
lucky when a young girl in the country sces this little
creature in the spring; she then lets it ereep about her
hand, and says: “She measures me for wedding gloves.”
And when it spreads its little wings and flies away, she
particularly notices the direction it takes, for thence her
sweetheart shall one day come. This little messenger from
the Virgin Mary is believed to foretell to the husbandman
whether the year shall be a plentiful one or the contrary :
if its spots exceed seven, bread-corn will be dear; if they
are fewer than seven, there will be an abundant harvest
and low prices,

YULE-STRAW.


It was a custom in many placea to carry Yule-straw
(Julhalm) into the fields, in the belief that it would be of
avail in bringing forth an abundant harvest, for the sake
of the Child, through whom come all grace and blessings.
Tt is in remembrance of the Virgin Mary, who laid the


1 Seo page 83.


SWEDISH TRADITIONS. 105


Saviour of the world on hay and straw ; therefore all little
children may well play and rejoice in the Yule-straw, the
infant Jesus having celebrated Yule on a bed of straw.

It is also said, that of the Yule-straw (as of the Yule-
hog, or loaf)! a part should be preserved and given to the
draught horses and other cattle in the spring, to preserve
them against sickness and mishaps, and to keep them
together, so that they shall not be dispersed, although
they should go to graze on large heaths or in forests.

In some places it is the custom to make a so-called fra-
ternal bed (syster-siing) on the floor, in which the children
and domestics sleep together on Yule-straw. On this
night all the shoes must be put in one place close together,
in order that all may live in harmony throughout the
coming year. Great is the virtue of Yule-straw. To the
nesta of the fowls and geese, in whieh it is laid, no martens
nor any witcheraft dare approach ; strewn on the earth
it promotes the growth of fruits and corn. If given
to the cows before they are driven to their summer pasture,
it secures them against distempers, and prevents them
from separating.


THE BJARAAN, OR BARE.


‘This was a milk-pail composed of nine kinds of stolen
weaver’s knots. Three drops of blood from the little finger
were to be dropt into it, and the following formula uttered :


PA jorden skal tu for mig springa, On earth shalt thou before me
spring,
T Blatculla skal jg férthig brinna! In Blikulle shall I for thee burn !


Blskulla (the Blué mountain) is the Swedish Blocksberg,
a rock between Smiland and Oland*,


2 See p. 80. A part of this wan given to the homachold, that they
aight live together in harmony.
2 Grimm, D. M. pp. 1004, 1044.
v5


108 SWEDISH TRADITIONS.


‘As many times as he repeats his note so many years will
‘the person live, or pass in single blessedness. But the
maidens are wary and provident withal. That he may
not afflict them by declaring too many years of maiden-
hood, they have established the rule that ten is the highest
number he may lawfully ery. If he cries oftener than
ten times, they say he sits on a bewitched bough (pi galen
qvist), and give no heed to his prediction.

Much depends on the quarter whence the note of the
cuckoo is first heard. If heard from the north, the year
will be one of sorrow; if from the west or east, one of
prosperity; if from the south, it will be a good butter
year; or a year of death, according to another account’,


SWEDISH POPULAR BELIEP?.

1. Be eareful not to mect with sweepings in the door-
way, if you wish to be married in the same year.

2. Ifa maiden and a youth eat of one and the same
beet-root, they will fall in love with each other.

8. If on midsummer night nine kinds of flowers are
Inid under the head, a youth or maiden will dream of his
or her sweetheart.

4. A youth'may not give a knife or pins to a girl, be-
cause they sever love.

5. A girl must not look in a looking-glass after dark,
nor by candle-light, lest the lose the good will of the
other sex.

6. A bride must endeavour to see her bridegroom before
he sees her; she will then have the mastery.

7. She must, for the same reason, during the marriage
ceremony, place her foot before his.

8. For the same reason, she must take care to sit down
first in the bridal chair.

2 Thiele i, 108 ag. edit. 1820. Grimm, D. M. pp. 640 4g.
2 Grimm, D. M. Anhang, p. evi. edi. 1835.


SWEDISH TRADITIONS. 109


9. For the same reason, ahe must, as if by accident, let
her shoe slip off, or her handkerchief, or anything else
fall on the floor, which the bridegroom from politeness
will stoop to pick up. It will then be his lot to submit
(lit. to bend his back) during the whole continuance of
their marriage.

10. The bride nmust stand near to the bridegroom, that
no one thenceforward may press between them,

11. In the church let them hold a riband or napkin
Detween them, that they may live solely for each other.

18. The bride shall touch with so many fingers on her
naked body, while sitting in the bridal chair, as she de-
sires to have children.

14, That she may have an abundance of milk, let her
mother meet her, when she comes home from church, with
a glass of milk to drink.

15. As food in her first confinement, let her provide
herself with a cake and a cheese, which she should have
lying by her in the bridal bed.

16. When children are newly born, a book is to be
placed under their head, that they may be quick at read-
ing.

‘17. When they are bathed for the first time, let money
‘be put into the water, that they may become rich. A purse
with money in it should also be sewed round their neck.

18, A part of the father’s clothes should be laid on a
female child, and the mother’s petticoat on a male child ;
to find favour with the opposite sex.

19. The mother should meet the child at the door,
when it is carried out to be christened; but when it is
carried home after it is baptized, it should be met at the
door with a loaf, that it may never want bread.

20. As long as a child remains unnamed, the fire must
not be extinguished.


110 SWEDINH TRADITIONS,


21. No one may pass between the fire and a sucking
babe.

22, Water may not be brought in late where there is a
sucking child, without throwing fire into it.

28. No one that enters a house may take a child in his
hands, without previously having touched fire.

24. When a child geta teeth early, other children may
be expected soon after.

25, An empty cradle must not be rocked, the child will
else be given to erying and noisy.

26. Ifa first-born child, that is born with teeth, bites
a whitlow, it will be cured.

27. A child may not read and cat at the same time,
else it will get dull memory.

28. A child should first touch a dog, but not a cat.

29. If » child plays with fire, it will with difficulty
retain its water.

80, A child may not ereep through a window, nor may
any one step over a child, or walk round a child that is
sitting on the floor or is in a carriage; for then, it is be-
lieved, it will never grow bigger than it is.

B1. Ifa sick person gets strange food, he becomes well.

82, If thanks are given for a remedy (medicine), it
will have no effect.

83. If a person walks over graves with an open sore, it
will heal either very slowly or never.

84, One must not mention before morning whether one
has seen a spectre, lest one be pressed and spit blood.

85. After dark one must not go by water, for fear of
getting a whitlow.

86. For the same reason, or alao that one may not be
pressed, one should spit thrice in crossing the water after
dark,


1 Qu. by the nightmare ?


SWEDISH TRADITIONS, nl


87. For the sick one ought to cause prayers to be said
in three churches, one of which should be sn offering-
church, if there be one near. It will then epecdily be
decided whether the sick is to recover or die,

88. The teeth of large fish should be burnt, in order to
be lucky in fishing.

89. One ought to tell no one when one goes out to
fish, and not mention whether one has caught many or
few.

40. Nor should any stranger see how many fish one
has taken.

41. When one rows out from land to fish, one must
not turn the boat against the sun.

42. Pins found in a church and made into fish-hooke
catch the beat.

43, If a women passes over the rod, no fish will bite.

44, Stolen fishing tackle is lucky, but the person robbed
loses his luck.

45. A light must not be held under the table, lest the
guests should fall out.

46. One should not turn round when going on any
business, that it may not turn out ill.

47. One must not return thanks for pins.

48, There must be no spinning on a Thursday evening,
or in Passion week ; for else there will be spinning in the
night.

49, If a stranger comes in where a pudding (ssusage)
is being boiled, it will split asunder.

50. If you turn your slippers or shoes with the toes to-
wards the bed, the mara will come in the night,

51. On Easter-eve a cross should be made over the
door of the cattle-house, against harm from witches.

52. When you sleep for the first time in a house, you
should count the beams; then what you dream will come
to pass.


12 SWEDISH TRADITIONS.


58. If a person forgets something when setting out on
‘a journey, there is good hope of his safe return ; but to look
‘behind is not a good sign.

54. When cats wash themselves, or magpies chatter
near the house, they expect strangers. If a slothful house-
wife, or a careless servant, has not already swept the
floor, it ought forthwith to be done.

55. The person that comes first home from church on
Christmas day, will be the first to die.

56. If a person walks thrice round a bed of cabbages,
after having planted them, they will continue free from
worms,

57. An empty sack must never be carried untied. If
a pregnant woman follows it, her child will never be
satisfied with food.

58. When you bathe, be careful to put steel in the
water to bind the Neck, and cry, “Neck, Neck, steel
in atrand, thy father was a steel-thief, thy mother was a
needle-thief ; so far shalt thou be hence as this cry is
heard.” Then let all cry as loud as they can, “ho haglal.””

59. On Easter-saturday, a long horn (lux) is to be
blown through the window of the eattle-house: 8o far as
the sound is heard, so far away will beasts of prey con-
tinue during that year.

60. If a person seeking cattle in the forest meets with
‘a titmouse on his right hand, the cattle sought for will be
found.

61. If swine are let out on St. Lucins’ day, they get
vermin.

62. If the cattle, on Michaelmas eve, are driven in with-
out noise, they will be quiet in the cattle-house the whole


year.
63. All labour when completed is to be signed with
the cross.
1 Seo p. 82.


SWEDISH TRADITIONS. ns


64. If a grain of cornis found under the table in sweep-
ing on a new year’s morn, there will be an abundant crop
that year.

65. If suspicious female enters the yard, to counteract
the effects of witchcraft, you must either strike her ao that
the blood runs, or cast a firebrand after her.

66. When 8 bride comes from church, she must her-
self unharness or unseddle the horse, that she may easily
have children.

67. If a bride dances with money in her shoes, no
witchery can affect her.

68. In Sweden, as well as in Norway and Finland, the
belief ia general that when wolves appear in great multi-
tudes it forebodes war. The same superstition prevails
also with regard to squirrels?


+ Ate


1172,


SCANDINAVIAN POPULAR TRADITIONS.


Im.
DANISH TRADITIONS '.


‘TROLLS.


BARNOW- OR MOUNT-FOLK, ELP-YOLK AND DWARFS.
ORIGIN OF TROLLS.


ra
‘Tax people in Jutland relate, that when our Lord cast the
fallen angels out of heaven, some of them fell down on the
mounds or barrows and became Barrow-folk, or, as they
are also called, Mount-folk, Hill-folk; others fell into the
elf-moors, who were the progenitors of the EUf-folk; while
others fell into dwellings, from whom descend the do-
mestie sprites or Nisser.
n.

While Eve was one day washing her children by »
spring, our Lord unexpectedly appeared before her, whereat
she was terrified, and concealed those of her children that


» From Danmark’s Folkesagn samlede af J, M. Thiele, 2 Bd. Kidben-
hava, 1843,


116 DANISH TRADITIONS,


were not yet washed. Our Lord asked her if all her
children were there; she answered ‘yes, to avoid his
anger, if he should see that they were not all washed. Then
said our Lord, that what she had coneealed from him
should thenceforth be concealed from mankind; and at
the same moment the unclean children disappeared and
were concealed in the hills, ‘From these descend all the
underground folk.

{tn arabbinie tration i in said, that after Adam had exten of the tree
of knowledge he was accursed for a hundred and thirty years. During all


‘these years, as we are informed by Rabbi Jeremias ben Elieser, he pro-
created only achedimy, i, e. demons und the like.


RLE-FOLK,


‘The Elf-folk dwell in the Elf-moors. The male ap-
pears as an old man with a broad-brimmed hut ; the female
Elf is young and seducing in appearance, but behind she
is aa hollow as a dough-trough. Young men should be
particularly on their guard against her, for it is difficult
to withstand her, and she has besides a stringed instru-
ment, when she touches which she infatuates every heart.
‘The male is often to be seen by the Elf-moors basking in
the sunbeams; but if any one approach him too near, he
will stretch his jaws and blow on them, which causes sick-
ness and pestilence. ‘The females are most frequently to be
seen in the moonlight, when they dance their circling dance
inthe high grass with such lightness and grace, that they
seldom get a refusal, when they offer @ young man their
hand. Good eare must be taken to prevent cattle from
grazing where the Elf-folk have been ; for if an animal
come on a place where they have either spat or done worse,
it will be seized with grievous complaints, which can be
remedied only by giving them to eat a handful of St.


1 That the blast of the elves is dangerous, is also popular belief in
Scotland.


DANISH TRADITIONS. uz


John’s wort, gathered on St. John’s night at twelve
o’clock. Tt may also happen that they receive injury by
mingling with the Elf-folk’s cattle, which are particularly
large and of blue colour. Such are sometimes to be
seen in the fields licking the dew from the grass, for it is
on that they live. The peasant may, however, provide
against the evils above-mentioned, if, before he lets his
cattle loose, he goes to the Elf-barrow and says: “ Thou
little Troll! may I graze my cows on thy mount?” If
he gets no refusal, he may feel easy.

‘Between Terslése and Sobierg lies Sobierg-Banke, which
is the richest barrow in all Seeland ; it is in fact impos-
sible to tell the precious things to be found there. In this
hill there dwells a Troll-wife, to whom there was once a
grand procession from Steenlille field, when the Troll in
Galtebierg took her to wife.

Tt often happens, in fine weather, that the passer-by
‘sees the most beautiful copper utensils and choicest bed-
dings lying on the mound to be aired ; and on approach-
ing still nearer, he may see the young Elfings labouring
to get them all in with the utmost speed.


In Ilerup field near Kallondborg there is a mount called
Fibierg-Bakke, in which there is « vast number of Trolls,
who have much property and gold there. It may be
plainly seen that they have a hole in the mount through
which they drag those on whom they seize. At Yule one
may see how they bring out their silver and gold to sun
it, at which time it is dangerous to go on the mount. But
on St. John’s night the entire mount is set on red pillars,
and then dancing and merry-making may be seen there.
‘At this time any one may approach, and may also see how
they drag great chests full of money backwards and for-
wards.


1s DANISH TRADITIONS.


In Taanchdi on Hiré the Troll-folk may frequently be
heard slamming their coffer-lids. Some harvest-people
once sitting on the mount at their repast, heard, by placing
their ear to the earth, that they were grinding com in it.


‘That Mount-folk formerly dwelt in Gallebéi on Ars
there can hardly be entertained a doubt; for not only
have people heard them slam their coffer-lids, but the
smith in Lille-Rise, who in the war time kept watch there,
heard every morning a clock strike five in the mount.


‘Near Gatrel, between Aalborg and Thisted, there is a
mount, in which there dwells an elfin smith. At night
one may plainly hear that smith’s work is going on there ;
and in the side of the mount there is a hole, by which in
the morning elag and flakes of iron may be found.


In the neighbourhood of Sundby, on the isle of Mors,
there is a mount inhabited by a Troll who is a smith.
At night one may hear when he is at work, Opposite to
this mount there is » sand-hill, where the same smith has
another workshop, whence may be heard the strokes of
ponderous hammers. At midnight he often rides through
the air from one workshop to the other, on a horse with-
cout a head, with hammer in hand, followed by all his
apprentices and journeymen.


In the parish of Buur there are three large mounts, In
one of them dwells a Troll who is a smith and has his
workshop there. At night fire may frequently be seen
issuing from the top of the mount, and, singular enough,


DANISH TRADITIONS. 119


entering again at the side; but it is by that means he
Keeps his iron hot. If any one is desirous of having a
piece of iron forged, he needs only to lay it on the mount,
together with a silver skilling, at the same time saying
what he wishes done, and the next morning the skilling
will have disappeared, and the piece of work desired will
lie ready and well exeented?.

Once some of the country people of Buur determined
to dig up thie Troll’s treasure; for which purpose they
one night assembled with spades and pickaxes. After all
had been informed that they must beware of uttering even
single word, however strongly they might be tempted, they
set to work. But scarcely had they put a spade in the
ground before all sorts of frightful sights came out of the
mount. Still they dug on uneoncerned in the most per-
fect silence, until they arrived at a spacious stone apart-
ment. There lay the treasure before them, to wit, a lange
copper kettle full of gold money, close by which was an
enormous black dog asleep. One of the men then taking
off his coat, laid the dog gently upon it, for the purpose
of carrying him away. At this moment came a great
load of hay out of the mount, drawn by two eocks, which
drew their load thrice round the mount; still no one
uttered a syllable, until one of the cocks kicked out be-
hind with such foree that he broke the thick pole of the
‘wagon, at which one of the men exclaimed: “That was a
dence of a kick for a cock!” But scarcely had he said
the words when all the men, many as they were, were
projected to a considerable distance out of the mount,
which was instantly closed again. On msking a second
experiment, it seemed to them that the whole Oster-
Buur was in flames, at which sight, casting away their


4 The Wayland smith of Kenilworth.


120 DANISH TRADITIONS.


spades, they ran to their several homes; but on reaching
the village they found all safe and quiet.

In these goblin smiths may evidently be recognised the descendants of
the dwarfs of the Bde mythology.


At Gamtofte, not far from Assens, there is a mound in
a ficld in which a Troll is said to have taken up his abode,
Of this Troll it is related that he is very obliging when
persons wish to borrow anything; on which occasion it is
simply necessary to go to the mount and knock thrice on
the north side, at the same time naming the things re-
quired, whether pots, pans or other domestic utensils,
when they instantly get what they need, but may be reckon-
ed as dead, if they do not return them at the time fixed.


On the isle of Méen! there is a mount called Osted-
Hai. Once when Margaret Skelvigs was passing it on
her way to Elnelund castle, an old woman met her and
asked: “ Whither art thou going, my child?”
answered that she was on her way to Elmelund castle, to
borrow a gown of Peter Munk’s wife, to be married in,
Then said the old woman: “If thou wilt be here on
Saturday, I will lend thee a bridal dress.” On the Satur-
day following Margaret went accordingly to Osted-Hii,
and the woman brought her beautiful clothes of gold em-
broidery, ordering her to bring them back in a week; if
then no one appeared to receive them, she might consider
them her own property. Thus did Margaret Skelvigs
appear as a bride in clothes of gold embroidery ; and when
she took them back at the time appointed, no one was


+ One of the Danish islands, lying close to the most southern point of
Seeland.


DANISH TRADITIONS. 121


there to receive them, so she rightfully kept them as her
own,


In Thyholm there is a series of lofty mounts which
were formerly inhabited by the Mount-folk. A peasant
‘once passing them on his way to Vestervig market, hap-
pened at the moment to utter complaints that he was
mounted on such a sorry jade. On his way back, he saw
lying precisely on the spot where he had sent forth his
Inmentations, four horseshoes, which he took home and
shod his horse with them. But from that time no other
horse in the neighbourhood could go with such speed as
his.

Another time, some peasants, who were passing by the
mounts, by way of joke prayed the Mount-folk to give
them some good beer, At the moment a little Troll
came out of the mount with a large silver can, which he
held out to the men, one of whom hed no sooner got it in
his grasp, than he set spurs to his horse, with the inten-
tion of keeping it. But the little man of the mount being
quicker than he, soon overtook him and compelled him to
give hack the ean.

At length these Mount-folk grew weary of their abode
in Thyland, and one day departed in a body to the ferry,
for the purpose of crossing the fiord. When the ferry-
man was to be paid, they threw something into his hat
which burned through it and sank under the floor, and
which must have been gold; for otherwise it would be
impossible to account for the comfort which afterwards
prevailed in the ferry-honse.


A little Elf-girl once came to aman in Dunkier on the

isle of Hiré with a peel, the handle of which was loose,

begging him to fasten it, which he refused to do. Where-
°


122 DANIGH TRADITIONS.


upon a led, who was standing by, undertook to assist her,
and in reward for his service found lying by his plate at
dinner-time a dainty slice of fine bread with butter on it.
The man, who well knew whence the present came, ad-
vised him not to eat it, saying it would cause his death ;
but the lad ate it without fear, and was well and cheerful
when he rose the following morning; but the man lay
stone-dead in his bed.


In the neighbourhood of Lynge, near Soré, there is a
mount called Bodedys, not far from which dwelt an aged
peasant that had an only son, who made long voyages.
For a considerable time the father had received no tidings
of his son, and thinking that he had perished, mourned
for his loss, One evening as he was passing by Bodedys
with a fall load, the mount opened and the Troll came out,
who desired hum to drive in. At this the man felt some-
what disconcerted, but knowing that it would not turn to
his profit if he refused compliance with the will of the
Troll, he turned his horses and drove ‘into the mount.
There the Troll began to deal with him, and paid him
liberally for all his wares. When he had unloaded his
wagon and was about to drive out, the Troll said: “If
thou canst keep thy mouth shut with regard to what has
taken place, I shall look to thy advantage hereafter ; and
if thou wilt come again to-morrow, thou shalt find thy
son here.” At the first moment the man knew not what
to answer, but believing that the ‘Troll was able to keep
promise, he felt extremely glad, and at the time fixed
returned to Bodedy ‘There he sat waiting for a consi-
derable time, and at length fell asleep. When he awoke
his son was lying by his side, and both father and son
found it no easy matter to say how all this had come to
pass, The son now related how he had been in prison and


DANISH TRADITIONS. 123


there suffered great hardships; but that one night he had
dreamed that a man came to him and said: “Dost thou
still hold thy father dear ?” and on his answering “ Yes,”
it was ae if all chains and walls were broken. During
this narrative happening to raise his hand to his neck, he
found that a piece of the iron chain still remained there.
At this they were struck dumb with amazement, and went
to Lynge, where they hung the piece of chain up in the
church as a memorial.


Not far from Soré is the village of Pedersborg, a little
beyond which is another called Lynge. Between these
two places there is « mount called Bréndhii, which is said
to be inhabited by Troll-folk. Among these there was an
old jealous Troll, on whom the others had bestowed the
name of Knurremnrre; because through him there was
often dissension and ill-feeling in the mount. It once
reached the ears of this old Knurremurre that there was too
close an intimacy between his young wife anda young Troll,
which the old Troll took #0 much amiss that he threatened
the life of the other, who consequently deemed it advisable
to flee from the mount, and betake himself, transformed
into a yellow cat, to the village of Lynge, under which
form he ingratiated himself with a poor housekeeper named.
Platt. With him he lived a considerable time, got milk
and porridge every day, and lay from morning till night
in the eaay-chair behind the stove, One evening Platt
came home just as puss in his usual place was lapping
some porridge and licking the pot. “Well, mother,”
said the man, “I will now tell thee what happened to me
on my way home. As I was passing by Bréndhii, u Troll
came out and called to me, saying: “Holla you, Platt!
tell your cat that Knurremurre is dead” At these words
the cat rose on his hind legs, let the pot roll and said,

o2


124 DANISH TRADITIONS.


while stealing out at the door: “What? is Knurremurre
dead? I must then hasten home.”


‘THE KLINT-KING ON THE ISLE OF MOEN.


There in a Klint-king who rules over the klints (cliffs)
of Méen, Stevn? and Rigen. He has a curious chariot,
drawn by four black horses, in which he rides from one
‘dint to another, over the sea, which then becomes agi-
tated. On these occasions the neighing of the horses may
bbe distinctly heard.

By the ‘Queen’s chair’ on Miéen’s Klint, there are
some caverns high up in the rock, where in former times
dwelt the Jéde* of Upsala. A foolhardy person, it is said,
once undertook to visit him in his abode, ond suffered
himself to be let down by a rope, but he never appeared


again.

Sometimes the said Jéde of Upsala may be seen driving
over the sea with his black horses ; and in the last Swedish
war he passed with his green hunters over the rocks, for
the purpose of defending the land, which he has promised
to do once more. It in said that he has now betaken him-
self to Steyn’s Klint.

Not far from the Queen's chair there is a falling in the
cliff, which is called the Orchard fall, There he had e
beautiful orchard. ‘To this Jéde, or Giant, of Upsala the
peasants of Méen were, until a few years since, in the
habit of giving the last sheaf, when they had housed
their corn.

In Méen’s Klint there are said to be two caverns, in one
of which dwells “Jon Opsal’ himself, in the other his dog
and white horse.


‘A remarkable clif on the east side of Seeland,
2 Tide, i.e. Jew, doubt a corruption for Jota, giant. The white
hhorse and his denomination of Uprala manifestly identify him with Odin.


DANISH TRADITIONS. 125


‘Twice already he has ridden the ‘king’s ride,’ and saved
the land from danger, and he will now soon ride a third
time, He will then transform all the stones on the beach
to cavalry, and with them overeome the foes of the country.
Sometimes he rides to Stevn’s Klint, and visits the king
there.

It is not long since that he came riding through Busse-
rup, and stopt before the house of an old woman, of whom
he begged a drink of water for himself and his white horse.
The old woman told him she had only a siove to give him
the water in, “It’s no matter,” said he, “only fill it.”
‘And the sieve held the water, so that both he and his
horse could drink from it,


‘THE UNDERGROUND FOLK IN BORNHOLM’.

In Bornholm, particularly in foggy weather, the Under-
ground folk are sometimes to be seen on the sides of the
heaths practising the use of arms, They have a captain
who ia called the Ellestinger, and who, as well as all the
other chieftains in this army, rides on a horse that has
only three legs. ‘These troops, as far as it is possible to
discern, are clad in light blue or steel-gray uniforms, and
have red caps, though sometimes three-cornered hats. The
sound of their drums is often to be heard, and small,
round stones are sometimes found, which are said to be
their bullets. Whenever any hostile power has threatened
Bornholm, these subterraneans have always made their
appearance, fully prepared to defend the country ; so that
the enemy, at such a formidable spectacle, has frequently
retired with all possible speed.

Thus it happened on the 6th Feb. in the year 1645,
when two Swedish ships of war appeared off the ‘Ham-
mer,’ with the intention of effecting a landing, that they


A small island, belonging to Denmark, in the Baltic, to the north.
east of Rigen.


126 DANISH TRADITIONS.


saw the whole mountain covered with troops swarming
forth from every side, and although there were but two
companies of soldiers on the island, the enemy was led to
believe that the place was so strongly defended, that it
would be vain to attempt a landing, and withdrew ac-
cordingly.


In the parish of Ulvsborg there iss high mount, in
which dwells a Troll, whom many persons have seen, when
in the night he has all his bright copper utensils out in
the moonlight. This Troll once came to a woman and
requested her to lend him a loaf, promising to bring her
another in two days; but the woman made him a present
of the loaf. ‘Then said the Troll: “Thon shalt not have
given me this for nothing; from this day forwards all
shall go well with thee; and thy race shall share the
benefit until the fourth generation.” And ro it proved.”


THE MOUNT FOLK BORROW BEER.


At Holmby near Aarhuus, as © woman was standing at
her door, there came to her a little Troll with a peaked
hump, who said: “To-day Store-Bierg is to he married
to Lille-Bierg: if mother will be 80 good as lend us a cask
of beer for a few days, she shall have it back equally
strong and good.” Hereupon the woman followed the
‘Troll to the brewhouse, and desired him to take which-
ever cask he liked best; but as there was a cross marked
on all of them, the ‘Troll was unable to take one, but only
pointed and said: “Cross off!” ‘The woman now under-
stood that she must first remove the cross; and when she
had so done, the little Troll took the largest cask upon
his hump and walked off with it. On the third day he
came again, bringing with him a cask of beer equally
good with that which he had borrowed. From that time
prosperity prevailed in the house.


DANISH TRADITIONS. 127


‘THE ELE-POLK UNDER THE HEARTH,

In a mansion in Lille-Rise, on the isle of Aird, the
Elf-folk dwell under the stove. A little Elf-girl once
came to the mistress of the house, begging the loan of a
pair of scissors, to cut out her bridal dress with. When
the woman heard that there was to be a wedding, she felt
a wish to be present, and promised to lend her the scissors,
provided she would let her see what took place at the wed-
ding. The girl directed the woman to peep through a
crack in the hearth, but at the same time cautioned her
against laughing; for if she laughed the whole spectacle
would vanish before her eyes.

‘When the wedding-day arrived the woman went to the
‘crack and peeped in, and there saw the entire festivity,
how the Elf-folk sat at table in their best clothes and
enjoyed the beer and eatables. At this moment it hap-
pened that a quarrel arose between two of the guests,
which proceeded so far that they both sprang on the table.
‘There they pulled cach other’s hair, and at length fell into
the soup-bowl, out of which they crept quite crest-fallen.
‘As the whole company laughed at the two heroes in the
soup-bowl, the woman could uot refrain from doing the
like ; when at the same moment the whole vanished.

‘These same Elf-folk were at one time so offended with
two girls that served in the house, that they took them
out of their bed and carried them to a remote apartment,
where after much search they were found in a deep sleep,
though it was long past noon.


FRU METTE.
On the isle of Mors in Jutland there is a mansion
called Overgsard, in which there once dwelt a lady named
» Females of the higher classes are styled Frue (Ger. Frau), while those


of an inferior grade, ex merchante! and tradesmen’s wives, are called
Madame.


128 DANISH TRADITIONS,


Fru Mette. To this lady a little Troll one day came,
saying: “Fra Mette of Overgaard! wilt thou lend thy
silken skirt to Fra Mette of Undergaard, to be married
in?” Having lent the skirt and waited a long time in
vain for its return, she went one day to the mount, and
cried: “Give me back my skirt.” At this the Troll came
out and gave her the skirt quite covered with drippings
of wax, and said: “As you have demanded it, take it;
but if you had waited a few days, there should have been
8 diamond in the place of every drop of wax.””


THE UNDERGROUND FOLK FETCH A MIDWIFE.


One Christmas eve, as a woman was preparing meat for
the family, an Elf-man came to her, begging her to ac-
company him and help his wife who was in labour, The
woman haying eonsented to accompany him, he took her -
‘on his back and descended with her into the earth through
a fountain. Here the woman learned that the Elf-wife
could not be delivered without the aid of a Christian
woman, she being herself a Christian, but had been carried
off by the Elf-man,

‘When the child was born, the Elf-man took it in his
arms and went away with it, which, as the mother told
the woman, he did for the reason, that if he could find
two newly married persons, in the bridal bed, before they
had repeated their Paternoster, he could, by laying the
child between them, procure for it all the good fortune
that was designed for the newly married pair. The wife
‘then instructed her helper as to what she had to do when
the Elf-man returned: “First,” said she, “you must eat
nothing, if he asks you; for I ate, and therefore never
returned. Next, if he will make you a present, and
gives you the choice between something that looks like
silver and something that looks like potsherds, do you


This compilation © Phoenix E-Books UK


DANISH TRADITIONS. 129


choose the latter, And when he again beara you hence,
seize, if you can, on a gooseberry bush, and say: Now,
in the name of God, now I am on my own!”

In an hour the man returned with the child, quite angry
that he had not found what he had been seeking after.
He then offered the stranger woman some refection, and
on her refusal to take any, said: “They did not strike
thee on the mouth who taught thee thet.” He then
offered her a present, but she accepted only some black
potsherds; and when she again found herself on the face
of the earth, she did as she hed been directed. With the
potsherds in her apron, she now proceeded to her dwelling,
but before she entered she cast them into the ash-hole,
and refused to tell her husband where she had been. But
when the maid-servant came running into the room, say-
jing that something shone like silver in the ash-hole, and

* when she herself saw that it was pure silver, she told her
husband where she had been, and they came into good
circumstances through that Christmas eve.


One night a Troll came to a midwife in Bingsbierg and
requested her to accompany him down through a mound
to help his wife. She followed him into the earth, without
suffering any injury; but having afterwards divulged what
she had seen in the mound, she lost her sight.


An Elf-wife who was in labour sent a message to a mid-
wife, requesting her aid. Having received the child, the
Bif-folk gave her an ointment to rub over ita eyes; but
in doing which some adhered to her fingers, so that she
inadvertently anointed her own eyes with it, On her way
home she remarked that something had heppened to her
ight; for as she passed by a rye-ficld she saw that it

05


180 DANISH TRADITIONS.


swarmed with small Elf-folk, who went sbout clipping off
the care. “What are ye doing thore ?”” cried the woman,
on seeing them steal the corn from the field; and got for
answer: “If thou canst see us, thus thou shalt be served.”
‘They then thronged about her and put out her eyes.


TROLLS AT UGLERUP.


In Uglerup there once dwelt a man well to do in the
world, named Niels Hansen. The wealth he possessed,
it was anid, he acquired through the Trolls, One day, to
wit, as his wife was raking hay together in the field, she
caught a large fat tond between the teeth of her rake,
which she gently released, saying: “Poor thing! I see
that thon needest help: I will help thee.” Some time
after, a Troll came to her by night, desiring her to secom-
pany him into the mount where he dwelt. When, in
compliance with the Troll’s request, she had entered into
the mount, she there found a Troll-wife lying in bed, and
at the same time remarked a hideous serpent hanging
down just above her head, Thereupon said the Troll-wife
to her: “As you are now frightened at the serpent that
hangs over your head, so frightened was Iwhen I stuck in
your rake. But as you were kind to me, I will give you
good advice. When you go from this place, my husband
will offer you a quantity of gold; but, unless you cast this
knife behind you when you go out, it will be nothing but
coal when you reach home. And when he causes yon to
mount and rides away with you, be mindfal to glide down
from the horse, when you come over a slough ; else you
will never see your home again.”

While Niela Hansen’s wife was thus in the mount, she
went into the Troll’s kitchen, where she saw her own
scrving-man and maid standing and grinding malt. As
they did not know her, she went up to them and cut a


‘DANISH TRADITIONS. 131


piece out of the linen of each, which she kept. At length,
the Troll made her a costly present of gold, and she did
as the Troll-wife directed; and when she was riding home
with him, she slipt from him, according to the instruc-
tiona she had received, and before morning reached her
house with all her treasure.

‘The next day, when the man and maid appeared before
her, they both complained of pain in the arms, as if from
excessive fatigue, She then told them that they should
recite a prayer and make the sign of the cross before going
to bed, seeing that, unknown to themselves, they had
been in the mount during the night, and had there ground
malt for the Trolls. At thie they Inughed and thought
she was joking; but when she showed them the pieces
of linen, they could no longer withhold their belief, see-
ing that the pieces corresponded with the holes, She then
related to them the adventure of the night.


~ THE MIDWIFE OF FUUR.


Many years ago there was a midwife on the isle of
uur, who was one night waked by a violent knocking st
her door. On opening it she saw a diminutive creature
who begged of her to follow him to attend an Elf-wife.
She yielded to his entreaties, and was missing for a long
time after, At length her husband happening one night
to pass by the Elf-mount, saw that it was illuminated, that
there was great parade and merry-making within, and, on
taking a more accurate survey, that among the gayest of
the company was his own wife. He beckoned to her, and
they conversed together fora while; and when, in spite of
her caution, he called her by name, she was compelled to
accompany him ; but from that time he never had the
least good of her : she sat constantly by the kitchen table,
and was dumb ever after.


182 DANISH TRADITIONS.


skorts, :

At Gudmandstrup there is a mount called Hiulehdi.
‘The Troll-folk that inhabit this mount are well known in
the neighbouring villages, and if any person forgets to
make a cross on his beer cask, the Trolls will sneak out
of Hiulehdi and steal his beer. One evening late a pea-
sant passing by the mount, saw that it was standing on red
pillars, and that beneath were music, dancing anda grand
festivity, While he stood viewing the joyous spectacle,
the music and dancing ceased ona sudden, and amid much
lamentation he heard a Troll cry out: “Skotte has fallen
into the fire! Come and help him out!” The mount
then sank and all the merry-making was at an end.

In the mean time the peasant’s wife was at home alone,
and while she was sitting spinning her flax, che was not
aware that a Troll had crept in at the window of the adjoin-
ing room and was standing by the cask drawing beer into
his copper kettle. At this moment the peasant entered the
apartment quite bewildered at what he had seen and heard.
“Now, mother,” said he, “now I will tell you what has
just happened to me”—The Troll was all attention—
“As I passed by Hinlehii, there was a great merry-
making; but when it was at the highest, there was an
outery in the mount that Skotte had fallen into the fire.”
On hearing this, the Troll, who was still standing by the
beer cask, was so startled that he let the beer run, the
kettle fall, and hurried away as quickly as possible through
the window. By the noise the people were soon led to
discover what had been going on at the beer cask ; but as
they found the copper kettle, they took it as an equivalent
for the spilt beer.


KING PIPPE 18 DEAD!
Between Nordborg and Sénderborg, on the isle of Als,
there is a mount called Stakkelhdi, which in former days


DANISH TRADITIONS, 183


‘was inhabited by a multitude of the subterranean folk,
who were noted for their diligent researches in the neigh-
bouring pantries, One evening late, as a man was pasting
over Stakkelhii to Hagenbierg, he heard some one in the
mount exclaim: “Now King Pippe is dead!” ‘These
words he retained in his memory. At the same time, one
of the mount-people of Stakkelhii was paying a visit at a
peasant’s in Hagenbierg, for the purpose of letting some
of his beer flow into a silver jug that he had brought with
him. The Troll was just sitting cheek by jowl with the
ask, when the aforesaid man entered the house and told
the peasant how, as he was passing over Stakkelhii, he
heard a voice in the mount saying: “Now King Pippe is
dead!” At this the Troll in a fright exclaimed: “Is
King Pippe dead ?”” and rushed out of the house with such
haste that he forgot to take his silver jug with him.


THE TROLL AT M&MRED.


At Mechred near Prasté, as e smith was one day ham-
mering at his forge, he heard a great moaning and sobbing
outside. Looking out at his door he saw a Troll driving
a pregnant woman before him and crying withont inter-
mission: “A little further yet! a little further yet !”
At this spectacle the smith sprang forwards with a red hot
iron, which he held behind the woman, so that the Troll
was forced to abandon his prey and take to flight. He
then took the woman under his protection, who was
shortly after delivered of two sons. Thereupon he went
to her husband, in the supposition of finding him incon-
solable for her loss; but on stepping into the apartment,
he perceived a woman, exactly resembling the man’s wife,
lying in bed. He at once saw how the matter stood,
seized an axe, and with it struck the witch on the head as
she lay. While the man was bewailing the death of his


184 DANISH TRADITIONS.


supposed wife, the smith brought him the genuine one
together with the two new-born babes.


‘THE MAN IN THE OXNEBIERG.

At Rolfsted there is a mount called the Gxnebierg, by
which there runs a rivulet, but between the mount and
the rivulet there is to be seen a pathway trodden down in
the corn, and which, according to the testimony of three
men, who lay one night on the mount, is known to be #0
trodden by ‘the Man in the Oxnebierg,’ who rides out
every night on his dapple-gray horse, which he waters in
the rivulet.

‘There was a similar path from the mount down to a
spring in a garden at Brekstrup. It passed through a break
in the hedge, which, how often soever it might be filled
up, was always found open again on the following day. In
the dwelling to which the spring belonged the mistress
was hardly ever in good health; but her husband, in
consequence of advice given him, having filled up the well
and dug another in another place, the woman from that
time recovered her health, and the hole in the hedge was
no more opened.

THE UNBIDDEN- GUESTS.

In a house in the neighbourhood of Ostrel, between
Aalborg and Thisted, the master and mistress remarked
that the ment at dinner always disappeared very speedily,
however large the quantity might be. ‘They consulted
with their serving-man, who was a knowing fellow, as to
the cause, who being aware that @ neighbouring mount
was inhabited by a swarm of little Trolls, hit upon the
idea that some of these probably partook of the fare, and
therefore resolved to keep watch. On the following day,
when the dinner was nearly ready, he went to the mount,
where, applying his ear, he heard a great bustle and con-


DANISH TRADITIONS. 185


fasion beneath, and one saying to another: “Give me my
hat, dinner is ready.” Hearing this, the man also cried
out: “Give me my hat,” and was answered: “Here’s
none but old dad’s.” “That will do,” said the man, and
instantly a hat was flung to him out of the mount.
Having put it on his head, he saw the Trolls coming out
of the mount in swarms, and running towards his master’s
house, He speedily followed them, and on entering the
apartment saw them already seated at the table, and busily
regaling themselves with a pancake, which the mistress
had just served up. The man also sat down and ate with
them ; but in a few seconds the pancake vanished. Angry
that there was no more, one of the little Trolls leaped on
the table and untrussed his points over the empty dish.
On seeing this, the man took up his knife and gave the
shameless little wretch a slash, who uttered a loud scream
and all ran away. The man now took off his hat, called
his mistress and the people of the household, and asked
them whether they had seen anything. They answered,
that they had heard the door bang, also « scream, but
seen nothing.

In the evening, when the man was going to bed, he
heard the bucket in the well drawn up and down. Where-
upon he put on the hat, went into the yard and saw the
‘Trolls watering their little horses. He asked them whe-
ther they wished for a repetition of what they had expe-
rienced at dinner? but they besought him cameatly to
allow them to water their horses at the well, as there was
no water in the mount. This the man allowed them to
do, on condition that they should never more steal the
dinner.

On the following morning the man found two gold
pieces hanging to the well; and from that day the good
housewife has kept her dinner secure from uninvited
guests.


186 DANISH TRADITIONS.


ELLEVILDE, OR ELP.CRAZED.


Not far from Ebeltoft, as a boy was watching cattle,
there came to him a beautiful damsel, who asked him
whether he was hungry or thirsty. But he, observing that
she was particularly careful not to let him see her back,
felt convinced that she was an Elf, the Elves being hollow
behind. He would therefore hold no converse with her,
but endeavoured to avoid her. When she remarked this,
she presented her breast that he might suck her, in which
there was so much fascination, that he had no more power
to resist. After he had done as she bade him he was no
longer master of himself, so that she found it no difficult
matter to induce him to go with her. For three days he
was absent. In the mean time his parents were at home
bewailing his loss ; for they felt certain that he had been
decoyed away. But on the fourth day the father saw him
coming at a distance, and desired his wife to set a pan on
the fire with bacon as speedily as possible. Immediately
after the son entered and sat down without uttering a
syllable. Nor did the old man speak a word, but acted as

- if everything was us it should be. The mother then set
the meat before her son, and the father desired him to
eat; but he let the food stand untouched, saying that he
mew where he could get better fare. The man now grew
angry, and taking up heavy stick, again ordered him to
take his food. The lad was then compelled to eat, and
when he had once tasted the bacon, he devoured it greedily,
and then fell into a profound sleep. He slept as many
days as the fascination lasted, but never from Lana time
recovered the use of his understanding.


THE BRUDEHOT, OR BRIDE MOUNT.
Near Borbierg church, in the diocese of Ribe, there is
a mount called Brndehii, or The Bride's Mount, which


DANISH TRADITIONS. 187


name it is said to have derived from the following
event.

When King Cant the Great was engaged in building
Borbierg church, there dwelt in the above-mentioned
mount a vicious Troll, who every night demolished what
hhnd been erected during the day, so that the work could
not proceed. ‘Thereupon the king made an agreement
with the Troll, promising him the first girl that should
come to the church as a bride, ‘The building now went
on prosperously end was soon completed. ‘There then
sat the Troll, waiting in his mount till « bridal company
should pass, On the firat opportunity he seized the bride
and dragged her into the mount. From that time the
place has been held in such dread, that all bridal couples,
on their way to Borbierg church, rather go a mile or more
about than pass by the mount,


In Reicren's Description of St, Beat’s church at Ringsted, i is sad of
‘that structure: “There are two entrances to the chareh, viz. a lange gate
in the north chapel, through which the people usually puss into the
‘church ; anda smaller ne on the same ide towardathe ond of the edifice,
‘through which al children that have been christened and all corpses are
Drought; also all bridal pairs pass that have been united in the church 5
‘nor world it be posible to get any ofthese to be conveyed or passthrough
‘he large door, though from what cause no one can tell” In Seania there
in also a Bride-mount, where a Troll named Gyllebert carried off « bride,
fn which aesount no bride ever passes by it


HANS PUNTLADER.

In the field of Bubbelgeard in Fyen there are three
mounts, which from the following event are known by the
name of the ‘Dandse-hdie,” At Bubbelgaard there was a
serving-led named Hans, who one evening passing through
the field above-mentioned, saw that one of the mounts
was raised up on red pillars), and that there were dancing


1 Ina Sleewig tradition the pillars are said to be golden. Milllenhoff,
No, CDIL 2.


188 DANISH TRADITIONS.


and merriment beneath, Struck with the beauty of the
spectacle which he witnessed, he felt singularly attracted.
nearer and nearer, until the fairest of all the fair Insses
approached him and gave him a kiss. From that moment
he was no more master of himself, and became so un-
manageable that he tore all his clothes to tatters, until at
length it was found necessary to make him a garment of
sole leather (puntlmder), which he was unable to tear
asunder ; for which reason he ever after went by the name
of Hans Puntleder.


THE AGED BRIDE.

Ata marriage at Nérre-Broby near Odense, the bride
during a dance left the apartment and walked without re-
flection towards « mount in the adjacent field, where at the
same time there were dancing and merriment among the
Elf-folk. On reaching the mount, she saw that it was
standing on red pillars, and st the same moment an Elf
came and presented to her a cup of wine. She took the
cup, and having emptied it, suffered herself to join in a
dance, When the dance was ended she bethought her-
self of her husband and hastened home. Here it appeared
to her that everything in and about the place was changed,
and on entering the village, she recognised neither house
nor farm, and heard nothing of the noisy mirth of the
wedding. At length she found herself standing before
her husband’s dwelling, but on entering saw no one whom
she knew, and no one who knew her. One old woman
only, on hearing the bride’s lamentation, exclaimed : “Is
it then you, who a hundred years ago disappeared at my
grandfather's brother’s wedding?” At these words the
aged bride fell down and instantly expired.


BONDEVETTE,
In Bornholm there was once a peasant named Bonde-


DANISH TRADITIONS. 139


vette, who, it was said, was born of a Mer-wife. His fa-
ther, as it is related, going once down to the sea-shore, saw
8 Mer-wife there, with whom he had intercourse. At their
parting she said to him: “In a year thon shalt return,
when thou shalt find a son here, who shall drive away the
Mountain-imps and Trolls.” It befell as she had said ;
for the man, on returning exactly a year after, found a
little male child lying on the shore, which he took with
him, fostered it, and called it Bondevette, because ite
father was a bonde' and its mother @ vette*. As the child
grew up he became large and strong, and also synsk, 80
that he could see what was invisible to others, When
his father died, Bondevette succeeded to the farm and took
to himeelf a wife.

Not far from his dwelling there was a mount called
Korshéi. As he was one day passing by, he heard the
Trolls within, who were busied in carving a piece of wood,
utter the words, “Cut it, Suef! that’s almost like Bon-
devette’s wife.” His wife was just at that time lying in,
and the Trolls had made a wooden image of her, which
they intended to lay in her place, when they had carried
her off, And this they accomplished ; for while she was
Iying in bed, and the women were sitting around her, the
‘Trolls brought their wooden figure into the room, took the
‘woman out of bed, and laid the image in her place, as if
it were the woman herself. Their next object was to
convey her through the window to some other Trolls, who
stood without to receive her; but Bondevette, who had
had an eye upon their proceedings, placed himaelf by the
window, took his wife and concealed her in the house, un-
known to the other women. He then caused the oven
to be heated very hot, took the image that lay in the bed,
and thrust it into the oven, where it blazed and crackled
prodigiously, while the women who were sitting in the

1 A countryman, peasant of free condition, —_* See vol i. p. 116.


140 DANISH TRADITIONS.


room and saw what he had done, made a woful outery,
thinking that he had burnt his wife. But he afterwards
set their minds at ease, by showing them where he had
laid his own wife.

‘Another time, ss he was passing by Korshi, he heard
the Trolls within say: “To-morrow Bondevette’s wife
brews, 80 we will away and steal her beer.” Whereupon
he went home and ordered the brewing kettle to be filled
with water, and the water to be heated to boiling. He
then said to his men; “ Wherever I cast water do you
strike with stout cudgels.” So when the Trolls came with
their bucket and a strong iron rod to fetch the beer, Bon-
devette cast the boiling water over them and scalded them,
while the men beat about with their cudgels, but without
seeing that they were belabouring the Trolls. In this
manner he drove them off with such speed that they had
no time to take with them either bucket or iron rod. The
latter Bondevette afterwards gave to the church ; and it is
the same on which the church door yet hangs.

Once, as he was passing the same mount by night, he
saw how the Trolls were dancing around it. When they
saw him they would drink to him, and handed him a cup ;
but he cast the liquor over his shoulder, some of which
falling on his horse, burnt both its hide and hair. Bonde-
vette hastened away with the cup, which he afterwards
gave to the church, and which was subsequently made into
achalice and paten. It is furthermore said of him, that
he continued in the same course towards the Trolls, until
they at last grew tired of inhabiting Korshéi.


THE GIANT'S DAUGHTER AND THE PLOUGHMAN,
In Tréstrap Mark there is a barrow, in which a giant
lies buried, of whom it is related that he had a daughter


of gigantic form and power. As she was one day crossing
a field, she found a man ploughing, and thinking it was


DANISH TRADITIONS. 141


some sort of plaything, she took him with his team and
plongh up in her pinafore, and carried them to her father,
saying: “See what I have found in the ficlds, while T was
raking in the ground.” But her father answered : “Let
them go: they will drive us away!”


SVEND PALLING,

Svend Felling was s doughty champion, born at Pell-
ing in Jutland. For a considerable length of time he
served on the farm of Askier near Aarhus, and as the
roads were not secure, on account of Trolls and other sub-
terranean beings, who bear enmity towards all Christian
folk, he undertook the office of letter-carrier. As he was
‘once passing along, there came to him the Troll from
Jelshii, requesting his aid in a battle with the Troll of
Borum-Eshéi, Svend Feeling expressed his willingness,
thinking himself sufficiently strong and daring. To try
his atrength, however, the ‘Troll held out to him a thick
iron bar, but which, strong as he was, he was unable to
lift. The Troll then handed him a horn, desiring him to
drink from it, and when he had drunk a little, he could
lift the bar; and when he had again drunk, it was still
lighter to him ; but when he had emptied the horn, he
was able to brandish the bar, and learned from the Troll
that he had the strength of twelve men. He then made
ready to proceed against the Troll of Borum-Eshéi, and
was told that he would meet a black and red bull
on the way, and that he should attack the black one, and
drive him with all his might from the red bull. This he
did, and afterwards learned that the black bull was the
‘Troll from Borum-Eshii, and the red one the Troll from
Jelshdi, from whom, in recompense, he received, as a
permanent gift, the strength of twelve men, though with
the condition that if he ever divulged to any one how he

+ See more on this rubject in Grimm, D. M. pp. 505, w.


142 DANISH TRADITIONS.


hed sequired such power, be should, as « punishment, re-
ceive also the appetite of twelve.

From that time the report of Syend Felling’s strength
became wide-spread throughout the country, seeing that
he was constantly displaying it in divers manners. It is
related of him that being once offended at « milk-maid, he
so threw her that she found herself sitting across the gable
of a house. When this feat was reported to the proprietor
of Aakier, he ordered Svend Felling to be called before
him, and commanded him to relate how he had acquired
such vast bodily strength. But as Svend well remem-
bered the Troll’s warning, he refused until he got his
‘master’s promise that he should have as much to eat as
he desired. From that day he ate and drank the portion
of twelve men. At Aakiar there is still shown a flesh-
pot which he emptied daily, and which is called Svend
Feelling’s flosh-pot. At the same place there is also said
to be a huge two-handed sword three ells long, which
once belonged to him ; also an ancient beech with a large
ring in it, to which he was accustomed to tie his horse.


According to other accounts, Svend Falling served as
a boy at the farm of Sicllevakov, and it once happened,
when he had ridden on 2 message to Ristrup, that it was
evening before he reached home. As he passed by the
mount called Borum-Eshéi, he observed the Elf-girls,
who kept incessantly dancing round his horse. One of
these approaching him, presented to him a costly drink-
ing horn and invited him to drink. Svend took the horn,
but having no great faith in what it contained, he threw
it out behind him, so that it fell on his horse’s back and
singed the hair off. ‘The horn he held fast, and clapping
spurs to his horse, rode away with all possible speed, fol-
lowed by the Eli-damsel, until he reached Trigebrand’s


DANISH TRADITIONS, 143


mill, where he rode over the running water, across which
the Elves cannot follow. ‘Thereupon the Elf-damsel ear-
nestly implored him to give her the hora back, promising
him in recompense the strength of twelve men ; on which
assurance he returned the hom to her, and got what she
promised him. But he thereby frequently found him-
self in difficulty, secing that he had at the same time
acquired the appetite of twelve. When he returned home
in the evening of that day, the people were just having
their Christmas beers and fecling disposed to be merry
at his expense, they sent him to fetch beer, saying:
“S8vend! do thon go and fetch us our beer, then we will
drink no more this Christmas.” Svend said nothing and
went, but came back with a eask in each hand and one
under each arm,

Near the village of Steenstrup there is a mount called
Havbierg, on which the doughty Svend Falling was wont
to sit while washing his hands and feet in Stnderstrand,
which is distant about an cighth of a mile, In Holmstrap
the peasants cooked meat for him, which they brought
him in huge brewing vessels, When he was dead, he
was buried at Dalhéi, between Loms and Holmstrup.

In the old Danish ballad of ‘vend Pelding’s Kamp med Risen,’ Srend
4a described as going on a pilgrimage to Rome, and on his way arriving
aka city called HBvdingab, the princess of which Snforms im that the
lund is being made desolate by a giant who feeds only on women and
maidens, Svend undertakes to encounter this monster, and « number of
hhomes ar le forth, that he may select one qualified to bear him in the
casuing combat. Thete proving either too shy or t00 weak, he wishes
for a Jutland horse, when a miller passes by, who informs him that he
bas a Jutland horve that can carry fifteen skippund. This horse in ao
powerful and violent that he barat every aadile-gicth that ix applied to
‘him, until fifteen maidens knit a girth of silk and gold, seven ells long, a
quater of an ell thick and five spans broad, which fully answers ite por-
ove Srend fnally ills the giant.


1 Dahske Viser fra Middelalderen, j. 150.


144 DANISH TRADITIONS.


In Borberg church, in the diocere of Ribe, there in a remarkable git
aitarpiece with figures of alabaster, representing the history of Svend
Felding, wo celeurated in the Danish chronicles, ax well as that of the
giant, who would have only women and maidens; alsa the Daniah bore
‘that could cerry fifteen skippund of cora, which the miller gave to Svend
Felding to bear him in the combat; the giant's head, which Svend Fad.
{ng cut off; the damsls who wove the thick saddle-girth ; the priest who
absolved Svend Felding of his sins before be went to the encounter


ALTAR.CUPS.

In Holbek amt, in Secland, between Marup and Aage-
up, there was once s large castle, the ruins of which may
still be seen on the shore, At this place, tradition tells
us, there are vast riches, and that a dragon under the
earth broods over three kings’ ransoms, The underground
folk are often to be seen here, particularly on solemn oc-
casions, when they have dancing and merry-making on
the shore.

‘One Christmas eve a man in Angerup asked his master
to let him ride down to see the Trolls’ merry-making.
‘The master allowed him to take the best horse in the
stable. On reaching the spot, he sat a while on his horse
witnessing the festivity, and while wondering to sce the
mount-folk dance, a little Troll came to him, who invited
him to dismount and partake of their mirth, Another then
came springing, who took his horse’s rein and held it while
the man dismounted end danced with them the whole night.
‘When the morning drew nigh, he thanked them for their
hospitality and mounted his horse, when they invited him
to come again on the following new year’s night, when
there would be another merry-making. A damsel then
brought him a gold cup, bidding him take a parting
draught; but feeling some mistrust, he, while feigning
to put the cup to his lips, east the liquor over his shoulder,
so that it fell on the horse’s back, the hairs of which it


4 J, Hofman, Pundgr. iv. 613.


DANISH TRADITIONS. 145


singed. Applying then the spurs to his horse’s sides, he
rode away cup in hand over a ploughed ficld, followed by
all the Trolls, who finding it very difficult to traverse the
deep furrows, cried incessantly; “Ride on the smooth
and not on the rough!” But it was not until he ap-
proached the village that he found it necessary to ride on
the level road, whereby he was exposed to great peril, as
the Trolls came nearer and nearer at every moment. In
his extremity he put up o prayer, and for his safety pro-
- mised to give the cup to the church. Having now reached
the churchyard, he threw the cup over the wall, that that
might at all events be secure. He then quickened his
pace and entered the village, and just as the Trolls were
about to seize the horse, it darted through the gateway of
the house, and the man slammed the gate after him. He
was now safe, but the Trolls were so exasperated that they
fetched an enormously large stone, which they hurled with
such force against the gate that four of the planks flew
out, Of the house not a vestige remains, but the stone
yet lies in Aagerup village. The cup waa given to the
church, and the man got as a reward the best farm on the
estate of Ericsholm,

in well worthy of remark, that Wiliam of Newbridge, who lived as early
as the twelfth century, relates astory of « manin Yorkshire, who returning
‘home one night, saw a mound open, in which a number of persons were
feasting, one of whom offered him a cup, the contents of which he poured
out, and rode off with the cup. The cup was presented to Henry 1,
from whose hands it passed into those of David, king of Scotland, and
‘was finally given by William the Lion to King Henry I. The province
of Deir, the scene of this tradition, it must be recollected was chiefly th
Ihabited by the descendants of the Northmen '.

In Scotland “it in efll currently believed, that he who has courage to
‘rash upon a fairy festival, and snatch from them their drinking cup or
hhorn, shall ind it prove to him a cornucopiwe of good fortune, if he can
Dear it im nafety acrous a running stream. A goblet is still carefully pre-
served in Edenball, Cumberland, which is supposed to have been seized


* Keightley, F. M. p. 283,


146 DANISH TRADITIONS.


at a banquet of the elves, by one of the ancient family of Muygrave; er
as others say, by one of their domestics, in the manner abore described
The fair train vanished, crying aloud,

If thin gaan do break or fall

Farewell the luck of Edenball!!"


Between North and South Kongersley are two mounts,
one of which is called Ornehii, the other Kizerlinghii ; both
are inhabited by Troll-folk, who are at enmity with each
other.

‘One Christmas eve, a farmer in South Kongersley was
sitting at table talking with his man : “Christian,” said
he, “what may the Mount-folk in Kirlingbierg be about?”
“What are they about?’ answered the man, “ what can
that concern us?” ‘The farmer then said that it would
be amusing to see the mount standing on four pillars and
all the merriment beneath. To which the man replied,
that if he might take the one-coloured horse that stood in
the stable, he would go and bring him back the informa-
tion he wished, and also a token that he had been there.
‘The farmer allowed him to take the horse, and when he
reached the spot he found the mount standing on four
pillars, and great feasting and mirth beneath. For a
while he sat quiet on the horse and looked on, but when
just about to return, he began erying out: “hou! vildt!
hou! vildt!” which people are wont to ery when they
have lost their way. As soon as the Mount-folk saw him,
a little boy, with a red cap on his head, came out and
offered him drink from a gold enp. He took the oup,
but cast out the liquor and hastened away at full speed.
Being followed by all the Trolls, he was nearly overtaken by
them just as he passed by Ornebierg; but the Trolls there,
sceing him pursued by those of Kizerlingbierg, eried out :

2 Scott's Minstreliy, i. p. 130,


DANISH TRADITIONS. 147


“Rido off the hard, up on the fallow, and you will escape
them!” This the man understood quite well, quitted
the road, rode up into the ploughed field, and so escaped,
the little Trolls of the mount being unable to follow him
over the furrows, On reaching the farm, he made a cross
at the gate, a cross on the horse, a cross on the door, and
a cross on the cup, which he still held in his hand,

‘Now he must tell his master all he had seen and heard:
first, that all the Trolls in Kisrlinghiii are called either
Vidrik or Didrik, eo that during their feast it was to be
heard on every side: “Your health, Vidrik!” “Thank
you, Didrik!” “Your health, Videik’s wife!” “Thank
you, Didrik’s sweetheart !” and the like. He further told
him that they could not say a merry feast. At length, in
proof of the truth of his story, he drew forth the costly
cup that he had taken from the Trolls, which precious ac-
quisition was highly valued in the house, and brought
forth only on extraordinary occasions.

On the following Christmas eve a little man in tatters
came to the house and begged a night’s lodging of the
mistress. “Yes, certainly,” said the woman, “come into
the room and get something to live on.” She then cut
him an exeellent luncheon of fine bread with butter and
other good things upon it, but the miserable fellow would
not touch it. In the evening, when supper was brought
in, the mistress invited him to sit down and partake of
their meal, but still he would touch nothing. “ What if I
were to offer him a drink of good beer in our beautiful
cup,” thought the woman within herself; and did so ac-
cordingly ; but no sooner had the beggar received it, than
both he and the cup vanished from her sight, although
the door continued closed,


ae


148 DANISH TRADITIONS,


TROLLS IN THE RED STONE.

‘As a man on horseback, accompanied by his dog, wa
passing one evening late by the Red-stone, a projecting
crag on the isle of Faur in the Liimfiord, he saw by the
moonlight the Trolls carrying their gold and silver trea
sures out to the little knolls thereabout, for the purpose of
exposing them to the air. ‘The man happened to have his
gun with him, and having heard that, if any one ean shoot
three times over them, the Trolls must go into the mound
and leave their treasure behind them, he shot accordingly ;
but being unable to restrain his cupidity until daybreak,
when he could convey the treasure home at his ease with-
out hindrance, he put the whole into a bag and hurried
away. As he was riding along between two banks, he
heard something puffing and panting behind him, and on
Jooking round, saw a little man with a long beard, on a
horse not larger than a cat, but without a head, and with
a diminutive black dog by his side. He casily guessed
that it was the Troll of the Red-stone. “Wilt thou let
thy horse fight with mine?” said the little man. “No,
God forbid!” answered the man. “Or thy dog with
mine?” “No, God forbid!” “Or wilt thou thyself
engage with me, little as I am?” ‘No, God forbid !”
At the same time the man whipped his horse and rode
away a8 fast as he could. When he got home and was
within his own doors, there seemed to be a storming and
hissing without, and the whole house appeared to be in a
blaze, Being well aware what sorcery was going forward,
he took up the bag with the treasure and flung it out.
‘The sorcery thereupon ceased, and a voice without cried :
“Thou hast still enough!” Next morning he found a
heavy silver cup that had fallen behind a chest of drawers.


DANISH TRADITIONS. 149


‘THE TROLL'S GLOVE.


Near Hvidovre in Secland there is a large mount in
which a Troll dwelt, who went every night from the mount,
through » neighbouring farm-yard, down to the rivulet,
to fetch water : his foot-marks might easily be traced in
the grass. One morning, as the farmer was going to his
turf-field, he found on this path a glove so large that the
thumb could hold a barrel of rye. When he bronght it
home, all were amused with it, and were unanimous that
it must belong to the Troll. The following midnight, ax
the man lay asleep, he was awaked by a loud knocking at
the window, followed by the words :—

“Vante, Ven! ‘The glove, friend!

Giv mig min Vante igien; . Give me my glove aguin;

Eilers ligge to af dine Heeste, Else shall lie two of thy horses,

De atiirste og de bedste, ‘The lnrgest and the best,

‘Déde imorgen paa Mosen!”” Dead to-morrow on the moor.

‘Thereupon the farmer took the glove, went out of the
house, and hung it on a beam-end over the window, and
having made a cross on the door, again went in. In the
morning the glove was away and the beam-end was found
snapped off level with the wall. From that time nothing
more was ever heard of the Troll; his path became grown
over and was no longer to be traced.


‘The idea of the gigantic glove is evidently derived from that of Skry-
rir, in the story of Thor and Udgarde-Loki.?


THE TROLL OUTWITTED.

A husbandman, who had a little mount on his field, re-
solved not to let it lie waste, and began to plough it up.
At this the Troll, who dwelt in the mount, came out and
demanded who it was that dared to plough on his roof.
‘The husbandman said that he did not know it was his
roof, and at the same time represented to him that it

2 Voli. p. 56.


150 DANISH TRADITIONS.


was disadvantageous for both to let euch a piece of land
lie uncultivated ; that he was willing to plough, sow and
reap every year, and that the Troll should alternately have
that which in one year grew on the earth, and the man
that which grew beneath, and the next year the reverse.
‘To this the Troll agreed, and the man in the first year
sowed carrots, and in the year following, corn, and gave
the Troll the tops of the carrots and the roots of the com. ,
From that time there was a good understanding between
them.
RAGINAL.


A farmer fell into poverty because he could not keep
any cows in his stalls, the necks of all having been broken
one after another. He therefore left the dwelling, which
was sold to another. When the new proprietor came into
the cowhouse one evening and saw that everything was
in tolerable condition, he exclaimed : “Good evening,
Raginal!” whereupon a voice anawered: “What! dost
thou know me?” “Yes, I have known thee for many a
year!” “If,” said the Troll, who dwelt beneath, “ thou
wilt move thy cowhouse to some other place, thon shalt
then become an opulent man. I have my habitation under
the cows, and their dirt falls down on may table every day,
so that I have been obliged to break their necks.” The
man removed the cowhouse, and thrived from that time.

‘That a similar superstition was known in Scotland, will appear from the
following : The Scottish fairies, in ike manner, sometimes reside in sub
terranean abodes, in the vicinity of human habitations, or, according to
the popular phrase, under the ‘ door-stane,’ or threshold; in which situa-
tion they sometimes eatablish an intereourse with men, by borrowing and
ending, and other kindly offices, In this capacity they are termed ‘the
‘good neighbours,’ from supplying privately the wants of their friends, and
Ateisting them in all their trnnactions, while their favours are concealed.
Of this the trditionary story of Sir Godirey Macculoch forms a curious
example.

is tha Govidian geateman wis taking the son horebec, nar
his own house, he was suddenly accosted by litle old man, arayed in


DANISH TRADITIONS. 151


green, and counted upon a white palfrey. After mutual salutation, the
‘ld man gave Sir Godfrey to understand, that he resided under his habita-
tion, and that be had grest reason to complain of the direction of a drain,
‘or common sewer, which emptied itself directly into his chamber of dais.
Sir Goddrey was # good deal startled by this extraordinary complaint ; but,
(guessing the nature of the being he had to deal with, he assured the old
‘man, with great courtesy, that the direction of the drain should be al-
tered; and caused it to be done accordingly. Many years afterwards,
Sir Godfrey had the misfortune to Killin a fray, gentleman of the neigh-
dourhood. He was apprehended, tried, and condemned. The scaffold,
‘upon which his head was to be struck off, was erected on the Castle-bill of
Béinbargh ; but hardly had he reached the fatal spot, when the old man
upon bis white palirey, pressed through the crowd, with the rapidity of
lightning. Sir Godfrey, at his command, sprung on behind him the good
neighbour sparred his horse down the steep bank, and neither he nor the
‘eriminal were ever again seen.”

A woman was returning Inte one night from a gossiping. A pretty
ttle boy came up to her and seid: “Coupe yere dish-water farther frae
yere door.step it pits out our fie


GILLIKoP.

Some Jutlanders having got a little Troll into their
power, thought they could not do better than make him
Christian, and therefore set him in a eart for the purpose
of driving him to church and having him baptized. As
he there sat peeping ont, the men heard a voice in the road
calling aloud : “ Where now, Gillikop ?” to which the little
‘Troll in the cart responded: “A long way, Slangerop! I
am going to a little water yonder, where I hope to be-
come a better man.”


THE TROLLS DESIRE TO BE SAVED.

One night as a priest was going from Hiorlunde to
Rolakilde, he passed by a mount in which there were music,
dancing and other merriment. At this moment some
‘Dwarfa sprang forth from the mount, stopped the priest’s


1 Scot's Minstresy, i pp. 169, 4
+ Gromek, Nithadale and Galloway Song, quoted by Keightey, F. M.
p. 383.


152 DANISH TRADITIONS,


vehicle, and said: “Whither art thou going?” “To |
Landemode,” answered the priest. They then asked him
whether he thought they could be saved; to which he re-
plied that he could not then inform them. ‘They then
appointed him to meet them with an answer in a year.
Tn the mean time it went ill with the coachman, who the
next time he passed by the mount was overturned and
killed on the spot. When the priest came again at the
end of a year, they again asked him the same question,
to which he answered: “No! you are all damned!”
Scarcely had he uttered the words before the whole mount
was ina blaze.

A similar story i told of the Nok, see p. 80. In the Irish story named
“ The Priest’s Supper,’ # fisherman, at the request of the fairies, asks»
priest who had stopt at his house, whether they would be saved or not at
thelaat day. Te priest desired him to tell them to come themselves and


ut the question (o him, but this they declined doing, and the question
remained unanswered ?.


THE TROLLS' FEAR OF THE GROSS.

‘Near Aathuus there dwelt a smith, who one day, on his
way to church, observed a Troll sitting by the road-side
on a heap of coals and busied with two straws that were
accidentally lying across each other on the heap; but in
spite of all his labour, being unable to get them to lie
otherwise, he besought the smith, who stood looking at
him, to take the straws sway. But the smith, who well
knew the real state of the case, took the whole heap toge-
ther with the cross, paying little attention to the outery
made by the Troll. It was found afterwards, when he
reached home, that what appeared like coals was a grest
treasure over which the Troll had no longer power.


THE TROLLS’ FEAR OP THUNDER.
The Mount-folk are exceedingly terrified at thunder,
* Keightley, P. M. p. 365.


DANISH TRADITIONS. 163


and therefore hasten to get into their mounts when they
see a storm drawing up to windward. In consequence of
this terror they cannot endure the beating of drums, which
is, in their opinion, a species of thunder, A good me-
thod, therefore, to get rid of them is, to dram vigorously
every day in the neighbourhood of their mounts; for
then they will at length pack up, and wander to 2 more
peaceful spot.

‘A countryman once lived in good fellowship with »
Troll, who had his mount in the countryman’s field.
‘When his wife was once lying-in, he was a little embar-
assed because he could not well avoid inviting the Troll to
the birthday feast, which would give hima bad reputation
both with the priest and with the other townsfolk. In this
state of perplexity, from which he knew not how to extrieate
himself, he sought counsel of his swineherd, who was a
shrewd fellow, and had often helped him on other occa-
sions. The swineherd undertook to settle the matter with
the Troll, so that, without being offended, he should not
only stay away, but should give a handsome present. In
pursuance of his plan, taking » bag with him, he went to
the mount, knocked, and was admitted. He then in the
name of his master invited the Troll to honour them with
his presence at the lying-in festival. The Troll thanked
him and said: “So, I shall then have to give you a gossip-
gift;”” at the same time opening his money chest and
causing the man to hold the bag up, while he poured
money into it. ‘Is there enough now ?”—* Many
give more, few give less,” answered the swineherd. ‘There-
upon the Troll began again to pour into the bag, and
again asked, “Is there enough now?” The swineherd
lifted the bag a little as a trial whether he could carry
more, and answered, “ Most people give as much.” The


' Thor, the god of thunder, was the deadly foe of the Trolls. See


vol i. p36.
pay


154 DANISH TRADITIONS.


Troll thereupon emptied the whole chest into the beg,
and asked : “Is there now enough?” The man finding
that he had now ax much as he could carry, answered:
“None give more, most people give less.” Well,”
said the Troll, “let us now hear who is to be there
besides.” “Ah,” said the man, “we shall have grest
personages: first three priests and a bishop.” “ Umph!”
growled the Troll; “though such high dons generally
look only after what’s to eat and drink; they are not
likely to notice me. Now, who else?” “Then there’s
the Virgin Mary.” “Umph! umph! Still there will
be a retired place for me behind the stove. Now, who
next?” ‘Then our Lord is to be there.” “Umph!
umph! umph! Still such exalted guest come late and
make a short stay; but what music are you to have!”
“Drums,” answered the swincherd. “ Drums,” repeated
the Troll, startled, “no thank you; I remain at home.
Greet thy master from me, and thank him for his invita-
tion ; but I shall not come; for once, when I went out
for a little walk, the folks began to drum, and when I was
hastening away and had just reached my own door, they
threw a drumatick after me and broke one of my thighs.
From that time I have been lame, and shall beware of
such music!” With these words he helped to lift the
bag on the man’s shoulders, and again desired him to
greet his master.

‘The dread entertained by the Trolls for thunder dates from the time of


paganinm, Thor, the god of thunder, being the deadly foe of their race.
‘THB TROLLS’ HATRED OF BELLS.


In Egens Mark a multitude of the dwarf race once made
their appearance. They were all clad in gray jerkins and
wore red caps. With respect to their persons, they were
hump-backed, and had long hooked noses. Whitherso-


2 See vol i. p. 36.


DANISH TRADITIONS. 155


ever they came they made sad havoc among the pantries,
and people found it no easy task to get rid of them, until
a pious and experienced man advised that a bell should be
hung in the tower of Bbeltoft church. When this was
done, people saw no more of the Trolls.

‘The Korrigan of Brittany have a similar abhorrens of bells


In Dishdi a Troll bad lived undisturbed for many years,
Decause at that time there was no church in the neigh-
bourhood. But when at length a church was built hard
by, and the bells for the first time rung in the tower, the
Troll in great tribulation came riding on a gold-shod
horse to peasant his neighbour, and delivered to him the
keys of his treasure, as he himself must take his departure,
‘The next day the peasant went to the mount to get the
treasure: he found the door, but in his joy exclaimed :
“Now I have it!” At the same instant both door and
key vanished.


A peasant once observed a Troll in deep affliction sitting
on a stone between Mullernp and Dalby. At first he
imagined him to be a proper Christian man, and asked
him to what place he was going. “Iam going out of the
country,” answered the Troll, “for no one can now stay
in it for sheer ringing and tolling.”


‘THE TROLLS FORSAKE VENDSYSSEL.

It happened one evening that a stranger eame to Sundby
ferry and agreed with all the ferrymen, that during the
whole night they should ferry over from Vendayssel, with-
out knowing what lading they were to have. ‘They were
told that half a mile east of Sundby they were to take in
their freight. At the time appointed the stranger was on
the spot, when the ferrymen, although they saw nothing,
yet remarked that their boat sank more and more, whence


166 DANISH TRADITIONS.


they concluded that they had received an exceedingly
heavy lading on board. In this manner the ferry bosts,
during the whole night, passed backwards and forwards
across the water ; and although they at each time took a
new freight, the same stranger was always present, thet
all might be done according to his orders. At the ap-
proach of morning the ferrymen received the stipulated
payment, and on inquiring whet it was they had con-
veyed across, could get no information. Among the ferry-
men there was, however, a shrewd fellow, who knew much
more about such matters than the others. He sprang on
shore, took the earth from under his right foot and put it
into his cap, and having set it upon his head, he perceived
‘that all the sand-hills east of Aalborg were entirely o-
vyered with small Trolls, having red, peaked caps on their
heads. From that time no dwarfs of that description have
‘been seen in Vendsyseel,


‘THE ELP-FOLK FORSAKE ARO.


‘After that the miller in Dunkisr had repeatedly dis-
turbed the subterranean folk in Elleshdi, and at length
even ploughed over their mount in every direction, which
they could not possibly endure, they prepared to quit the
country and migrate to Norway.

‘There came one day a little old man to a poor skipper,
who had no employment, and asked him whether he would
like to have charge of a vessel. ‘The man answered that
he would gladly; but when the little man led him down
to the shore at Gravendal, and showed him an old wreck,
the skipper objected, telling him that such a wreck could
not possibly keep the sea, The little man answered, that
he might make himself quite easy on that score, might
hire a sailor, and meet him again in three days, when the
vessel should be ready to sail. The skipper in the mean-


DANISH TRADITIONS. 157


while found it difficult to hire a sailor, for all that he ap-
plied to turned their backs on him and laughed, as soon
‘as they heard that he was going to sail in the old wreck at
Gravendal, At length he met with a poor Ind who, in
the hope of getting something to eat, allowed himself to
be hired.

On the third day the skipper and his helpmate were at
Gravendal, where they found the bark lying at anchor
and, instead of sails, hung with rags. ‘The wind being fair
they departed instantly. When on their way, the skipper
being curious to sce what sort of cargo he had on board,
peeped down the hatchway, where he perceived the whole
place swarming as with innumerable rats and mice. And
now the little man taking off his hat, placed it on the
head of the skipper, who thereby became so clear-sighted
that he could see a multitude of small elves in travelling
dresses, and withal a vast quantity of gold and silver,
which they were taking with them.

On their srrival in Norway, the old man said: “Do
thou go on shore: I will unload the vessel.” ‘The skipper
did 20, and when be came back the bark was empty, and
on their return the little man desired him within three
days to expect another freight. ‘The skipper having ful-
filled his engagement, the old man desired him to follow
him and take with him two sacks. “Now thou shalt be
paid for thy labour,” said he, at the same time filling one
ofthe sacks with shavings and the other with coals. “Give
the lad his share,” added he, and took his departure. With
such payment the skipper was not over-satisfied. “ Yes !”
he muttered to himself, “we have, sure enough, got our
pockets full” When they hed been sailing about an
hour, the skipper said, “Go, lad, and make us a drop of
tea.” Yes, master,” answered the lad, “but [ have no
fuel.” — Take a handfal of shavings out of the sack.””—
“Master, they shine !” cried the lad. “ What shines”


158 DANISH TRADITIONS.


asked the skipper; “take from the other sack.”"—“ Master,
they shine!” eried the led a second time. ‘The ekipper
himself now looked at the sacks, and found that one was
full of gold coin and the other of silver. On their return
they divided their treasure and became wealthy people.

‘The North German traditions of the departure of the “ little people"
resemble the foregoing in every essential particular, excepting that the
water they have to cross isthe Hider, the Weser, or the Ale, in place af
thane above-mentioned


THE TROLLS CAST STONES AT CHURCHES.


Before the Trolls had forsaken the country, in conse-
quence of the constant din of the church-bells, the erec-
tion of a new church was an intolerable vexation to them.
Hence the numerous traditions, how during the night
they destroyed the work, particularly when a church was
to be raised near their habitations. Equally numerous,
too, are the traditions all over the country, which tell how
the Trolls hurled huge stones against the churches already
built; a circumstance which affords a most satisfactory ex-
planation of the manner in which the vast stones, which
are acattered about, came into places where no human hand
could have deposited them,


‘THE NISSE OR NISS.


In a house in Jutland a Nisse had long been accustomed,
after the servant was gone to bed, to fetch his porridge
from the kitchen, where it was set for him in a little
wooden bowl. But one evening, on taking his porridge,
he saw-that the gir] had forgotten to put butter in it, and
in his anger at the omission went to the cowhouse and
wrung the neck of the best cow. Afterwards fecling


+ See Mallesbo, No. CDXXIX. Kuli and Schwartz, No. 270. Grimm,
D.M. 428,47. See eto ‘The Departure of the Pairiea? in Keightley,
¥. M, p. 356, from Cromek's Nithadale end Galloway Song.


DANISH TRADITIONS. 159


hungry, he meaked back, deeming it advisable to put up
with the despised porridge, when after he had eaten a
little, he discovered that there was butter in it, but that
it had sunk to the bottom. For having thus wronged the
servant he was sorely grieved, and to repair the injury he
had done to the good folks, he went again to the cowhonse
and placed a chest full of money by the side of the dead
cow.

‘A similar tale in carrent in Holstein, with the difference only, thet in-


sion ie fl fs, thn We peoure cw slr spyes-
ance to the one killed by him


At a farm in Secland, there was a Nisse who was active
and cheerful at all kinds of work, provided only thet he
got butter in his porridge every night; for any reward
‘beyond that he did not require. One morning, as the men
were going to plough, he went to the farmer and requested
him to let him drive the plough. The men thought that he
‘waa too little to drive four horses, but he answered: “I
can very well sit up in the ear of one of the horses® and
drive with four: I have done it before now.” ‘The man
then let him have his way, and afterwards could not help
confessing that he had never before had so excellent a
driver. It was, moreover, highly amusing when any one
passed and could not ace the driver, who sat in the horse's
ear, but only heard him erying out: “Hyp so! Hop so!
Will ye go, ye old jades! Yell get your hides curried !
that ye may swear to!” When the farmer died the
Nisse would no longer remain there, but transferred him-
self to the manor-house, where he continued for some time
in concealment. Some days after, the proprietor got a
new man, who was to thrash the winter corn. The first


2 See Miillenboff, No. CDXXXVII.
2 See the story of ‘ Daumesdick,’ in K, and H, M, No, 87.


160 DANISH TRADITIONS.


day, when the man came into the barn, he did nothing,
‘but merely looked at the corn; the second day he did no
more than the first, until Nis towards evening said to him:
“Hear! I will come and help thee.’ To this the man
had nothing to object, so it was settled that Nis should
every night have for his supper porridge with butter in it.
On the following morning, when the man came into the
barn, Nis hed already thrashed a heap of corn, containing
about twenty-five loads. “Thou canst now cut up the
straw by noon,” said Nis, and as he helped him, so it was
done. Then said the man: “But how shall we get the
chaff separated from the barley?” That I will soon
show thee,” said Nis, “ Just go up outside on the top of
the barn, and make a large hole in the roof, we shall then
easily separate the chaff” When the man had so done,
the Nisse opened every door in the barn, then went up to
the hole, laid himself on his face, thrust his head through
the hole, and sent forth a loud scream, so that all the
chaff flew about over the whole yard. This brought the
proprietor out, who on seeing what had been done was
highly incensed : “I believe thou art mad, fellow!” said
he. “Dost thou let the chaff, that we should have for
the cattle in the winter, fy away in that manner?” “QO!
is that all, master?” said the man: “if you want the
chaff in again, that you ean soon have.” The Nisse now
helped the man to gather up the chaff and carry it in
again, all which was accomplished in half an hour. “Go
‘now into your master,” said the Nisse, “and tell him that
the corn is thrashed, and the chaif gathered in a heap, if
he will now come out and measure, that we may know
how many bushels there are. But tell him, at the same
time, that we must be paid for every bushel of chaff as
well as for every bushel of corn; and that if he refuses,
we will throw down the whole barn.” When the man
had delivered this message, the master answered laugh-


DANISH TRADITIONS, 161


ing: “Yes, do so, if you ean; but I am not so ailly as to
pay the same for chaff as for corn.” ‘When the Nisse re-
ceived this answer, he merely said si Well! if he will not,
then come ; we shall soon overthrow it.” Both then weut
and placed their backs against one of the side walls, when
it instantly began to totter. Seeing this, the proprietor
ran out into the yard and yielded to the demand. So the
man got well paid for his trouble, and did not forget to
give his due recompense to the Nisse.


Ibis difficult to get rid of a Nisse, A man dwelt ino
house where a Nisse carried his jokes so far, that he re-
‘solved to quit it, and leave the Nisse by himself. Just as
Ihe was about to send off the last load of his chattels, con-
sisting chiefly of empty tubs and the like, and had taken
1 last farewell of the house and, as he thought, of the
Nisse also, he went by chance to the back part of the
cart, where to his unutterable dismay and astonishment,
he espied the Nisse seated in a tub, and ready to accom-
pany him. The man was of course excessively vexed at
finding all his Inbour in vain, but the Nisse burst into a
hearty laugh, and popping up his head from the tub, ssid,
“So! we are moving to-day.”

‘A being in many respects similar to the Niss is the Yorkshire Boggart,
by whore praska an honent farmer was nearly driven from his habitation,
‘When his chattels were already in the cart, a voice from a deep upright
churn cried out, “ Aye, aye, Georgey, we're flitting ye see.”

Sach, to, is the Irish Charicewn. To get rd of one, the houscholder
had revolved on removing, andthe ist ear, led with empty bares, ete,
vras just moving of, when from the bung-bole of one of them Wildbean
Ted ont, Here, master! here we gall together”) What; said the
‘master, "dost thon go alo?”” "Yes, to be sare, master; here we go all
togesher "1"


+ Keightley, P. M. pp. 308, 369,


162 DANISH TRADITIONS.


In the parish of Alstrup there once lived a man who
had a beautiful white mare, which for many years had de-
scended from father to son, and was the cause that a Nise
and, consequently, good luck were attached to the farm.
This Nisse had such an affection for the mare that he could
not endure to sce her used for labour, and every night fed
her in the best manner ; and as he was accustomed to bring
‘® superabundance of corn, both thrashed and unthrashed,
from a neighbour's barn, all the other cattle had. benefit
thereof. But the farm at length got a new proprietor,
who would not believe what was told him about the mare,
and sold her to # poor neighbour. When five days had
elapsed, the poor peasant, who had bought the mare,
began to find his condition manifestly improving, while
the other’s circumstances became every day narrower, 20
that et length he could scarcely make shift to subsist. Hed
now the man that bought the mare only known how to
profit by the good fortune that was come to him, his
children’s children would have been in affluence to this
day; but seeing the great quantity of corn that was every
night brought in, he felt a strong desire to see the Nisee
also, and therefore concealed himself one night in the
stable. At midnight he perceived the Niase coming from
his neighbour's barn, and bringing with him a sack full
of grain; but the Nisse, having discovered that he was
watched, was grievously vexed, ond after having fed the
mare tended her for the last time; then turning towards
the place where the man lay watching, he bade him fare-
well. From that time the condition of both neighbours
continued alike, seeing that each enjoyed the fruits of his
‘own labour.


Of the predilection entertained by the Nisser for horses there are alo
‘many Swedish traditions,


DANISH TRADITIONS. 163


Tutland once literally swarmed with Nisser. At Vos-
borg they found such good cheer that their abode there
was characterized by their great diligence and care for the
welfare of the proprietor. Every evening they got in their
sweet porridge a large lump of butter, for all which they
once gave a strong proof of zeal and gratitude. In a very
severe winter, a remote cowhouse, in which were six calves,
was so overwhelmed with snow, that for fourteen days no
human being could get access to it. When the snow dis-
appeared, it was naturally thought that the calves would
bbe found starved to death,—but quite the contrary ; they
were all found strong and well, the stalls were swept, and
the eribs full of excellent corn. It may easily be guessed
who had taken care of them.

But the Nisse is, at the same time, sure to have revenge
for any injury done him. One day, when a Nisse had
run up into the loft over the cowhouae, a plank gave way,
so that one of his legs went through. The farmer's boy,
who happened just at the moment when this happened to
be in the place beneath, on secing the Nisse’s leg hanging
down, snatched up a dung-fork and gave it a violent blow.
‘At dinner, when the people were all sitting at table in the
servants’ hall, the boy was constantly laughing to himself,
and on being questioned by the overseer, he answered:
“Tye had such a bout with Nis this morning, and given
him an infernal bang with my fork, as he poked his leg
down through the floor of the loft.” “Nay,” eried Nis
from outside the window, “thou didst not give one,
thou gavest me three; for the fork had three prongs ;
but it shall be paid thee back.” On the following night,
while the boy lay asleep, eame Nis, seized him, and threw
him over the house, but was 60 instantaneously on the
other side that he caught him and again cast him back.
This game was continued until the boy had been eight
times over the house ; the ninth time he let him fall into a


164 DANISH TRADITIONS.


large pool of water, and then set up « horse-laugh, 00
that all who were in the dwelling were waked by it.


In a farm-house in Jutland there was a Nisse, who
every evening got his porridge in proper time, and there-
fore helped both man and maid, and saw to the master’s
interest in every way possible, But there once entered
into the farmer’s service a mischievous lad, who took every
opportunity of annoying the Nisse, and one night, when
all were gone to rest, and the Nisee had taken his little
wooden bowl, and was about to enjoy his evening meal, he
discovered that the boy had concealed the butter at the
bottom, in order to make him first eat the porridge and
then find the butter when the porridge was consumed.
Hereupon he resolved on giving the boy like for like.
Going then up into the loft where the boy and the man-
servant lay sleeping in the same bed, he took the eoverlid
of, when seeing the short lad by the side of the long carle,
he said: “ Short and long unequal,” and so saying pulled
the legs of the boy down, to make them even with those
of the man. He then went to the head of the bed, and
dragged the boy up again, uttering the same words. But
as this process, in whichever way applied, did not succeed
in making the boy as long as the man, he continued
dragging the boy up and down until brosd daylight;
when feeling himself tired, he crept up and seated himself
in the window-sill. At the sight of him, all the dogs in
the yard—dogs bearing a great aversion to Nisser—began
to bark, at which the Nisse, who was beyond their reach,
was highly amused, and thrusting forth first one diminutive
leg then the other, continued to tease them, saying:
«Look at this little trotter! Look at that little trotter 1”?
In the meanwhile the boy waked, and sneaking behind
the Nisse, who was going on with his “Look at this and


DANISH TRADITIONS. 165


look at that little trotter,” pushed him down among the
dogs, crying out: “There! now look at him from top to
toe!”


‘The North Germans bave a story nearly identical with the foregoing.

‘The Scandinavian Niss is identical with the Seottish Brownie, who is
described aa “ of a somewhat grotesque figure, dwarfish in statare, but
endowed with great personal strength.....lt was customary for the mis-
treas of the house to leave out work for him..,..To have offered him
‘wages, or even to present him with an ocetsional boon, would have ensured
hhia anger, and perhaps caused him to abandon the establishment altoge-
ther. The goodman of a farm-house in the parish of Glendevon leaving.
‘out some clothes one night for the brownie, he was heard during the
night to depart, eaying, ina highly offended tone,

“Gis brownie coat, gie brownie sark,
‘Ye'se get nec mair o? brownie’s wark !"””

‘Numerous other instances might be quoted.

Our own Robin Goodfellow was equally sensitive om this point, See a
passage from ‘The Mad Pranks and Merry Jests of Robin Goodfellow

Hilton Hall, in the vale of the Wear, was in former times the resort of
‘Brownie or Hoose-spirt, called the Cauld Lad. For the parpote of
getting rid of him, the servants left a green cloak and hood for him by
the kitchen fire and remained on the watch. They sew him come in,
‘guze at the new clothes, try them on, and, apparently in great delight, go
jumping and frisking about the kitchen; but at the first crow of the cock
be vanished, erying—

Here's a cloak and here’s a hood!
‘The Cavld Lad of Hilton will do no more good;

and he never again returned to the kitchen‘,

‘A similar story is told by Mrs. Bray (Letters to Southey) of the Devon-
shire Pixies, one of whom, on receiving new elothes, exclaims

Piry fine, Pisy gay,
Pixy now will run away.


‘A being clotely resembling the Brownie is the Phynnodderie of the Is
of Man.


2 Millenhoff, No. CDXLVI. See alo p. 95.
+ Seo p. 94, and Chambers, Pop. Rh. p. 38.
2 Keightley, F. M. pp. 287,
4 Keightley, P.M. p. 296, from Richardson, Local Historian's Table-
ook.


166 DANISH TRADITIONS.


‘THE KIRKEGRIM (CHURCH-GRIM).


In churches also there are Nisser, one in each, called
Kirkegrim, who dwells either in the tower or wherever he
can find s place of concealment, He keeps order in the
church, and punishes when any scandal is perpetrated.

In Soré church there is a large, round hole in the roof,
in which dwells that church’s Nisse. Of this hole it it
also said, that in former times the evil one was accustomed
to fly out through it, when the priest in baptizing said:
“Go out, thou unclean spirit !”


‘THE KIRKEGRIM AND THE STRAND-VARSEL.


At the time “when the sea-shores were not yet conse-
crated,” it was dangerous to pass by night on the ways
which lay along the coast, on account of the Strand-varsler
by which they were infested. These were the spectres of
those corpses that were driven on shore and etill lay un-
buried, One night as a peasant was going along the
strand towards Taarbek, a Strand-varsel sprang suddenly
on his back and there clung fast, crying: “Carry me
to the church!” The man having no alternative, car-
ried him the shortest way to Gientofte. On their reach-
ing that village, and when close under the churchyard
wall, the Varsel sprang quickly over it, when instantly the
Kirkegrim approached, and an obstinate battle ensued be-
tween them, After having fought for a while, they both
sat down to rest, when the Varsel said to the peasant:
“Did I stand up well?” The peasant answered; “ No,”
‘The battle then commenced anew, and when they again
sat down to rest the Varsel again asked: “Did I stand
up well now?” and the peasant a second time answered ;
“No2’ The fight then recommenced, and the Varsel for
the third time said: “ Now! have I stood up well ?” aud
on the peasant answering: “Yes,” “It is well for thee,”


DANISH TRADITIONS. 167


said the Varsel, “that thou hast answered so, for other-
wise I would surely have broken thy neck.”


At Niverdd as a woman was goiug to milk her cows,
she saw a corpse that had been washed up on the sand,
and noticed that a large money-bag was bound round its
body ; and no one being near, she was tempted to take
the money, to which she had as good a claim as any one
else, But the next night the Strand-varsel came to the
village and made a great noise before her window, de-
siring her to come out and follow him. Supposing that
she had no alternative, she bade her children farewell and
accompanied the Varsel, When they were outside of the
village, the Varsel said to her: “Take me by the leg and
draw me to the church.” But the nearest church lay
three-quarters of a mile distant. When the church sp-
peared in sight, the Varsel said: “Let me go now; then
go to the house by the church gate, and desire the people
to sit up until thou comest again. When thou hast helped
me over the churchyard wall, run as fast as thou canst,
lest the Kirkegrim should seize thee.” She did accord-
ingly, and scarcely had the corpse been placed over the
wall, when the Kirkegrim came out after the woman and
seized her by the petticoat, which being old gave way, and
so she slipt into the house in safety. From that time all
went well with the woman, who lived contented with her
children on the money she found on the Straud-vareel.


HYLDEMOERELDER.
There dwells in the elder-tree a being called Hylde-
moer (Elder-mother) or Hyldeqvinde (Elder-wife). She
avenges all injuries done to the tree. Of an elder stand-
ing in a smell court in the Nyboder’, it is related, that
1A quarter of Copenhagen, built for and inhabited by persons belong
ing to the nary.


168 DANISH TRADITIONS.


at dusk it often moves up and down the court, and some-
times peeps through the window at the children, when
they are alone. It is not advisable to have moveables of
elder. A child having been laid in a cradle made of elder
‘wood, the Hyldemoer came and pulled it by the legs, nor
would she let it have any rest until it was taken out of
the cradle. A peasant once heard his children crying in
the night, and on inquiring the cause, was told that some
one had been there and sucked them ; and their breasts
were found to be swollen. The cause of the annoyance
was, it in said, that the room was boarded with elder.

‘This wonderful medicinal tree derives its name, it is
supposed, from a healing deity named Hildi, who toge- |
ther with her spirits or subordinate deities, has her abode
under its roots. From early times the Danes have loved
and honoured the elder, and planted it by walls and
fences.

The elder may not be cut without permission previously
asked in these words: “ Hyldemoer, Hyldemoer, allow me
to cut thy branches.” The peasants, when about to cut
the tree, spit thrice, in order to drive away the Vetts and
other evil beings.


THE WERWOL?.


A man, who from his childhood had been a Werwolf,
when returning one night with his wife from a merry-
making, observed that the hour was at hand when the
evil usually came upon him; giving therefore the rein to
his wife, he descended from the vehicle, saying to her:
“Tf any one comes to thee, only strike at it with thy
apron.” He then withdrew, but immediately after, the
woman, as she was sitting in the vchicle, was attacked by
a Werwolf. She did as the man had enjoined her, and
struck it with her apron, from which it bit a picce and ran
off with it. After some time the man returned, holding in


DANISH TRADITIONS. 169


his mouth the tom fragment of his wife’s apron, on seeing
which she cried out in terror: “Good Lord, man! why
thou art a werwolf!” “Thank thee, mother!” said he,


“but now I am free!” and from that time the evil never
returned.


If a female at midnight stretches between four sticks
the membrane that envelops the foal when it is brought
forth, and creeps through it naked, she will bring forth
children without pain; but all the boys will be Werwolves,
and all the girls Maras. By day the Werwolf has the
human form, though he may be known by the meeting
of his eyebrows above the nose. At a certain time of the
night he has the form of a dog on three legs. It is only
when another person tells him that he is a Werwolf, or
reproaches him with being such, that a man can be freed
from the affliction.

Not only the belief in, but the name also of the Werwolf, has been
‘transplanted to Normandy, where itis ealled le Warou or Warwou.

‘THE MARA.

A peasant had a sweetheart, who, without being herself
conscious of it, was a Mara, and came every night to the
man, so that he soon saw how the case was. He therefore
kept watch, and having discovered that she crept in to him
through a little hole in the door-post, he made a peg which
fitted the hole, and when she came on the following night,
he drove in the peg, so that she was compelled to remain
within. She then assumed a human form, the man took
her to wife, and they had many children. When many
years had passed, and they were both advanced in life, it
chanced one evening that the man cast his eye on the peg,
which still remained in the hole, and asked his wife in
joke whether she knew how she had entered the house?
‘On her confessing her ignorance, he informed her, made
himself right merry at the story, and even drew the peg

1


170 DANISH TRADITIONS,


ont, tht she might sce in what manner she had entered.
The woman then peeped through the hole, but as che
peeped she beeame on a sudden quite small, passed out
through it, and from that time was never more seen,


There was once in Jutland a queen who was a grest
lover of horses; she had one in particular to which she
was most attached, and which occupied her thoughts both
waking and dreaming. It frequently happened, when the
groom entered the stable at night, that he found this
horse out of order, and thence concluded that it had been
ridden by the Mara, Taking therefore a bucket of cold
water, he cast it over the horse, and at the same moment
saw that the queen was sitting on its back.


MERMEN AND MERWIVES.

In the neighbourhood of Assens in Fyen there once
appeared an ineredible number of Mermen and Merwomen
on the strand. Aged fishermen relate how they often
and often have seen the Merwives sitting there on large
stones out in the water, with children at the breast, which
they quickly cast on their backs when, terrified at the
approsch of man, they darted down into the water. It is
further related, that in those places sea-cows and sea-bulls
have been seen to land in the fields, seeking intercourse
with other cattle.

In the year 1619 King Christian IV. sent two of his
councillors, Oluf Rosenspar and Christian Holek, to Nor-
way, there to hold a dict. On their return they captured
a Merman. In form this Merman resembled a man. For
a long time he rolled himself backwards and forwards, but
at length lay as if he were dead. On one of the bystanders
saying to him: “It must, indeed, be a wonderful God
that has such human ereatures also in the water,” he
answered: “Yes! if thou knewest that as well as I, then


‘DANISH TRADITIONS, i7l


mightest thon say so, But if ye do not instantly restore
me to the water, neither the ship nor yourselves shall ever
reach land.” After this he would not utter a word, but
was placed in the boat, and thence sprang into the water.


Out in Nordstrand there dwells a Merwife, who once
rove her cattle up on the sea-shore, and let them graze
the whole day on Tibirke Mark. This did not at all
please the peasantry thereabouts, who for ages have been
notorious for their covetousness ; they therefore took mea-
sures for intercepting the cattle, whereby they succeeded
in driving the Merwife with all her herd into an inelosure
near the town, from which they would not allow her to
escape until she had paid them for pasturage on their
lands. Having assured them that she had no money to
give, they required her to give them the girdle she wore
round her body, which appeared very costly and shone as
with precious stones. There being no alternative, she
redeemed herself and cattle by giving them the girdle.
But as she was driving her cattle down to the shore, she
said to her large bull: “Rake up now!” Whereupon the
animal began to throw up the earth with his horns and
to cast up the sand along the sea-coast ; and as the wind
now blew from the north-west, the sand was drifted in
over the country towards the village of Tibirke, so that
the church was nearly buried under it, Of the costly
girdle, too, they had but a short-lived gratification, for on
returning home and examining it more closely, it was
found to consist of worthless rushes.


Tn the diocese of Aarhuus there once dwelt two poor
people who had an only daughter named Margaret, or
Grethe. One day when she had been sent down to the
sea-side to fetch sand, and was scooping it into her apron,

12


172 DANISH TRADITIONS,


a Merman rose from the water. His beard was gresner
than the salt sea, he was of comely aspect, and spoke in
friendly words to the girl, saying, “Follow me, Grethe!
I will give thee as much silver as thy heart can desire.”
“That would not be amiss,” answered she, “for we have
not mueh of that article at home.” So she suffered her-
self to be enticed, and he took her by the hand, and con-
ducted her to the bottom of the ocean, where she became
mother of five children.

After a long lapse of time, and when she had nearly
forgotten her Christian belief, as she was sitting one holy-
day morning, rocking her youngest child in her lap, ehe
heard the church bells ringing above her, and was scized
with a strong fit of melancholy and longing after church;
and as she sat and sighed with the tears rolling down her
cheeks, the Merman, observing her sorrow, inquired the
cause of it. She then besought him earnestly, with many
expressions of affection, to allow her once more to go to
church. The Merman could not withstand her affliction,
but conducted her up to land, repeatedly exhorting her
to return quickly to her children. In the middle of the
sermon the Merman came outside of the church and cried
“Grethe! Grethe!” She heard him plainly enough, but
resolved within herself that she would stay and hear the
sermon out. When the sermon was ended the Merman
came a second time to the church, crying “Grethe ! Grethe !
art thou soon coming?” But she did not obey him. He
came a third time, erying “Grethe! Grethe! art thou
soon coming? Thy children are longing after thee.” On
finding that she did not come, he began to weep bitterly,
and again descended to the bottom of the sea. But from
that time Grethe continued with her parents, and let the
Merman himself take care of the poor little children, His
wail and lamentation are often to be heard from the deep.

‘The foregoing forms the subject of the old Danish ballad ‘ Aguete og


DANISH TRADITIONS, 173


Haymanden? (Danske Viser, i
sgeten and Ocblenschleger,

In the Pari islands the superstition in current that the seal cast off
skin every ninth night, assumes a human form, and dances and amuses
ivelf ike m human being, until it resumes its akin, and again becomes a
seal. It once happened that a man passing during one of these transfor.
‘mations, and seeing the skin, took possession of it, when the seal, which
‘wana female, not finding ber skin to creep into, was obliged to continue
in a human form, and being a comely person, the man made her his wife,
‘had several children by her, and they lived happlly together, until, after
‘elapse of several years, she chanced to find her hidden skin, which she
could not refrain from creeping into, and so became a seal again.

According to the old Danish ballad, a Mermaid foretold the desth of
Queen Dagmar, the wife of Valdemar IL, surnamed Seier, or the Victo-
rious, And in the Chronicle of Frederick Jl. of Denmark we read the
following story : “In the year 1576 there came late in the autumn asimple
‘old peasant from Samsé to the court, then being held at Kallundborg,
‘who related that  benutifil female bad more than once come to him
while working in his feld by the sea-shore, whose figure from the waist,
downwariaresembled that of afish, and who had solemnly and strictly en-
joined him to go over and announce to the king, that as God had blessed
hhin queen a0 that she was pregnant of a son (afterwards Christian IV.),
‘who should be numbered among the greatest princes of the North, and
seeing that all sorts of sine were gaining ground in his kingdom, he, in
hhonour of and in gratitode to God who had so blessed him, should with
all earnestness and diligence wholly extirpate such sins, lest God should
hereafter visit him with his anger and punishment.”

‘Tales of Mermaids are most complete in the Shetland isles. ‘There, it
in said, that they dwell among the fishes, in the depth of the ocean, in
Ibabitations of pearl and coral; that they resemble human beings, but
greatly excel them in beauty. When they wish to visit the upper world,
they put on the Aam or garb of some fh, but woe to those who lose
‘their ham, for then are all hopes of return annihilated, and they must
stay where they are. Ve-Skeries (the sacred rocks) are a very favourite
place with the fair children of the sea, who, undixturbed by men, here
lay aside their Aan, inspire the air of earth, and revel in the clear moon-
gi. As com's poe-bied bri ae moral they ar oon
‘their excursions, exposed to dangers; examples, indeed, are not wanting of
their having been taken and Killed by superstitious fabermen. It has
‘io happened that earthly men have married Mermaids, having taken
‘potsession of their hain, and thus got them into their power!” A case


813), also of two beautiful poems by Bag-


* Hibbert's Shetland quoted by Faye, pp. 60, 61. Thiele il. p, 51,
edit. 1820.


174 DANISH TRADITIONS.


somewhat similar ia that of Vélund and his brothers and the three Val
deyrinr.
CHANGBLINGS,

A man and his wife were sorely troubled with a change-
ling that had been left with them by the subterranean
folk, who had carried off their genuine child, that had not
been baptized in time. ‘This changeling conducted him-
self in a most extraordinary way. When no one was pre-
sent he was quite obstreperous, would run along the wall,
sit in the cockloft, and shout and scream. But if any one
was in the room with him, he would sit drowsy at the
end of the table. He would eat as much as any four, and
cared very little about what was set before him, yet was
never satisfied. After having long thought how they
should get rid of him, a shrewd female engaged to drive
him from the house. One day, when he was out in the
fields, she killed a pig, and made a pudding (sausage) of
it, together with the akin and hair, which, on his return,
she placed before him. As was his custom, he began
slashing away at it, but as he ate he gradually became
thoughtful, and at last sat quite still with the knife in his
hand and eyeing the pudding : he then exclaimed, “ Pud-
ding with hide, and pudding with hair, pudding with eyes
and pudding with bones in it, I have now seen thrice
‘a young wood spring up on Tiis lake, but never before
did I see such a pudding! The fiend will atay here no
longer!” Saying these words he ran off and never re-
turned.


‘There dwelt in Christiansé a man and his wife who
neglected to have their child christened in proper time, in
consequence of which a subterranean woman exchanged
it for her own babe, which was #0 miserable a being thet
it could neither cat nor drink, and must inevitably have


DANISH TRADITIONS. 175


perished, if the mother had not come every night to suckle
it. Being greatly troubled and perplexed on account of
this changeling, the woman at length hit on the following
plan for getting rid of it. Having instructed her servant
maid what she should ask and say, she heated the oven
very hot, whereupon the girl, in a voice loud enough to
be heard by the Troll-folk, said, “Why do you heat the
oven so hot, Mistress?” ‘To which the woman answered,
“I am going to bum my child.” When the girl had
asked this question three times, and received the same
answer, she took the changeling and laid it on the peel,
aa if about to thrust it into the oven. At this moment
the subterranean woman rushed in, took her child from
the peel, and returned the woman her own, with these
words: “There is your child! I have done by it better
than you have by mine.” And, in fact, the child was, as
she said, both thriving and strong.


HOW 10 DISTINGUISH A CHANGELING.


‘When a child is born, the lights in the lying-in chamber
must not be extinguished; for otherwise the infant may
easily be exchanged by the underground folk, At a place
in North Jutland, it happened many years ago in a lying-
in room that the mother could get no sleep while the
lights were burning. So the husband resolved to take
the child in his arm, in order to keep strict watch over it
ad long as it was dark in the room. But unfortunately
he fell asleep without having noticed in which arm he
held his child, and on being waked by a shake of the arm,
he saw a tall woman standing by the bed, and found that
he had an infant in each arm, The woman instantly
vanished, but there he lay, without knowing which of the
two children was his own. In this difficulty he went to
the priest, who advised him to get a wild stallion colt,
which would enable him to discover the right one. They


176 DANISH TRADITIONS,


accordingly procured such a wild colt, which was so un-
manageable that three men could hardly lead it; then
laid both infants wrapped up on the ground, and led the
colt to smell to them. And it was curious to see how the
colt each time that it smelt to the one, would lick it and
was quite quiet, while every time that it smelt to the other
it was restive and strove to kick the infant. By this me-
thod it was ascertained infallibly which was the changeling.
While they were standing, there eame suddenly a tall
woman running, who snatched up the changeling and
disappeared with it,

The Scotch (oo had their changelings, though they appear to have been
of afar more social character than thote of Seandinavin at leat if we may
jndge from the jovial little fellow described in Chambers (Pop. Rh. p.55).
‘A gudewife, named Tibbie Dickson, having occasion to go to the town of
Danse, left her babe (a changeling) in the care of her neighbour, Wallie
Grieve, the tailor. So Wallie sits doon at the fire, and awa’ wi’ ber
yarn gues the wife; but searee had ahe ateckit the dacr, an’ wan half-way
‘down the clots, whan the baira cocks up on its doup in the cradle, and
rounds in Wallic’s log, * Wullic Tyler, an ye winna tell my mither whan
she comes back, I'se play ye a bonnie spring on the bagpipes.”
So he rounds again in the buim's lug,‘ Play up, my doo (dov
‘tell nachody.’ Wi’ that, the fairy ripes amang the cradle atrae,
‘oot a pair o' pipes, sic an tyler Wallie ne'er bad seen in a’
rmuntit wi' ivory, an’ gold, an’ silver, an’ dymonts, an’ what not...
‘Wollic had nae great goo o’ his performance ; so he site thinkin to hitmacl
"This maun be a deil’s get; an’ I ken weel boo to treat them ; an’
while the time awa, Auld Waughorn himsel may come to rock his son's
cradle, an’ play me some fon! prank;’ so he catches the bairn by the cuff
6? the neck, and whupt him into the fre, bagpipes and a’! Surely this
litle fellow did not deserve so cruel fate’.

Of another changeling it i related that, on seeing a huge fire kindled,
with an eggshell boiling ou it, having one end of measuring rod set in
it, be crept out of the cradle on his hancs, while his legs stil remained.
in the cradle and thus, stretehing himself out longer and longer, he at
length reached quite across the floor up the chimney, when he exclaimed:
‘Well! seven times have I seen the wood fall in Lessé forest, but never
until now have seen so big a ladle in such # litle pot?"


2 For other accounts see Keightley, F. M, p. 355.
¥ Ashjérnsen, Huldreeventyr, ii 165,


DANISH TRADITION!


177


‘Methods nearly similar of getting rid of a changeling ate, with some
modifications, amazingly wide-spread throughout almost the whole of
Europe. In the Irish tradition, the boy, on seeing the egg-shells
‘laime: “FiNeen hundred years have I been in the world, yet have never
seen that before.” Walter Scott (Minstrelsy, i-p. 173), quoting “A Plea-
sant Treatise on Witchcraft,” relates of e woman who, to ascertain whether
hher child were a changeling, was advised to break a dozen eggs, and place
the twenty-four half shells before it, then to go out aud listen at the
door; for if the child spoke, it was a changeling. She did accordingly,
and heard it say: ("Seven years old was I when I eame to the marse, and
four years have I lived since, and never sew so many milk-pans before.”
Sce also Wal le of Man, and Grimm, D.M. p. 438, for other a
counts. Similar stories are told of Highland-Scotch and French change-


‘Various monstrous charms were resorted to in Scotland, for procuring
‘the restoration of a child that had been so stolen; the most eficacions of
‘which was suppoted to be the roasting of the supposititious child upon the
live embers, when, it was believed, it would vanith, and the trae infant
‘appear in the place whence it had been originally abstracted’,


THE DEVIL.
PRIAR RUUS.

It is related that the devil once seeing how piously and
virtuously the monks lived in the convent of Esrom °, as-
sumed a human form, and knocked at the gate of the con-
vent for admission, saying his name was Runs. He gave
himeelf out for a scullion, and was received by the abbot
as such, Being one day alone with the head cook, he re-
sisted his authority, for which he received chastisement.
‘At this he was sorely exasperated, and having just then a
kettle of boiling water on the fire, he seized the head cook
with all his might and set him on his head in the kettle ;
then ran out erying and lamenting the ealamity that had
befallen his master. ‘Thus by his falschood he deceived
all the brethren in the convent, so that they regarded him
as free from all suspicion and appointed him their head

+ Scott's Minstrelsy, ii. 172.
2 Pormerigncelebrated monastery in the north of Seeland, not far from
Fredenaborg.


15


178 DANISH TRADITIONS,


cook. Now this was precisely what Ruus had been aim-
ing at, in order that he might corrupt the whole of the
monks together. He now prepared viands go rich and
delicate, that the monk forgot both prayer and fasting and
resigned himself to luxury. It is even said that he intro-
duced women into the convent, and thereby gained great
favour with the abbot, who at length prevailed on him to
enter the fraternity, as he wished to have such a cook
constantly at hand. From that hour strife and wickedness
80 gained the upper hand in the convent that it would in-
evitably have fallen into the power of the evil one, if the
brethren had not repented in time. For one day Brother
Raus being in the forest, saw there a beautiful fat cow,
which he slaughtered aud took a quarter of it to the con-
vent; the remainder he hung up in a tree, When the
owner of the cow missed it, and discovered three quarters
of it hanging in the tree, he determined to keep watch in
another tree, for the purpose of detecting the thief, when
he came to fetch the rest. By this means he discovered
how the devils played their pranks in the forest, and heard
at the same time much talk about Friar Ruus, how he
would invite the abbot and monks to a banquet in hell.
The peasant being naturally exceedingly terrified at all
this, went on the following day to the abbot, to whom he
related all he had heard and seen in the forest. On hear-
ing this the abbot summoned all the monks to meet him
in the chureh, where they began to read and sing, so that
Ruus, who could not endure either, endeavoured to sneak
away; but the abbot seized him by the cowl and conjured
him into a red horse, committing him to the power of hell.
For many years after this event, Friar Ruus’s iron pot and
gridiron were shown in the convent of Esrom.


Before the conventval church was turned into a dwelling, the efigies
of Friar Rous and his epitaph, half Latin and half Danish, were to be
seen there, His epitaph ran thus:


DANISH TRADITIONS, 179


Hie jacet John Preest, (John priest)

Qui dedit suum gran Hest (gray horse)

[Nec now de sligne tue Lacs, (two lasts)
Semper comedebat det Brest, (the best)
Requieweit im pulvere sud west. (south-west).

‘To the foregoing, Molbech, in his Ungdomevandringer, adds that “the
abbot afterwards constrained him to proceed to England, and without in-
terminsion to return, bringing with him, through the air, ax much lead as
amounted to $20,000 pounds weight, for the roof of the convent.”


‘THE DEVIL AT CARDS.


Once on a Christmas eve a set of profane gamesters
were sitting in Lemvig playing at cards for large sums,
and as they became more and more excited by loss and
gain, they became at the same time more and more unre-
strained in their abominable eursing and swearing. When
the night was somewhat advanced a knocking at the door
was heard, and a well-dressed man entered, who begged
permission to join the party, Having seated himself, he
took the cards and began by losing a considerable sum.
While they were thus sitting and playing, a card fell on
the floor, and when one of the party, having taken a light,
crept under the table to pick it up, he saw that claws pro-
truded from the stranger’s boots, whence it was evident
that he was no other than the foul fiend, of whom it
is well known that he can conceal everything except his
claws. At this discovery a messenger was instantly des-
patched to fetch the priest, who came and found the
stranger still at the table, where he sat counting his
money. The priest, who was a sagacious man, knew him
instantly, and commanded him to depart; but the fiend
answered, that the men by their gambling and swearing
had called him, and that he would not go before he had.
tasted warm blood. The priest thereupon took a little
dog, that was running about the room, and threw it to
him, which he eagerly tore in pieces and devoured, except-


180 DANISH TRADITIONS.


ing three heirs, which he wae obliged to leave behind. The
priest having thus satisfied him, bored a hole with an awl
in the lead of one of the windows, and commanded him
to make himself little and pass through it; because if he
passed out by the door, he could quickly enter again by
the same way. ‘This cost the priest much trouble; but
he pressed him so hard with reading and exorcisms, that
he was at length compelled to obey, though he howled so
loud that it was heard over the whole town.


A SCHOLAR ASSIGNS HIMSELF TO THE DEVIL.


‘There was once a scholar in the school of Herlufsholm',
who through the devil’s craft was seduced to give himself
up to his power and will. He therefore wrote a contract
on astrip of paper with his own blood, and stuck it in @
hole in the church wall. But for the salvation of his sin-
fal soul, which the fiend would else have seized, it hap-
pened that another scholar of the school found the paper
and took it to the rector. Now nothing was to be done
but to have recourse to many prayers, whercby the devils
cunning was turned to naught ; but it was long impossible
to close up the hole in the wall so effectually that it was
not immediately found open again.


‘THE DEVIL’s FOOTSTEP.


In a field near Sonneréd there is a row of stones,
among which one has on it the mark of a footatep. Of
this it is related, that the devil once rested his foot on it
when he had carried a bride away from her bridegroom, and
was obliged to wander far and wide with her before he
could find a man, who for a hatful of money would take
the bridal wreath from her head; for as long as she had


+ Of Herlufsholm school see hereafter.


DANISH TRADITIONS. 181


that on he had no power over her, the bridemaids having
placed it on her head in the name of Jesus,


JENS PLOVGAARD.


In Séndre-Niseum, near Ringkidbing , there dwelt »
man named Jens Plovgaard, who was in league with the
devil, and could therefore raise the dead and perform other
feats of the kind, whereby he gained a considerable sum of
money. But for this he was, on the other hand, after «
certain number of years, to belong to the evil one. One day
when he was absent from home, a fisherman from Thy came
to ascertain what had become of a swine, but not meeting
with Jens Plovgaard, and it being late, he slipt into the
barn to sleep till the following morning, when he could
accomplish his errand. In the middle of the night Jens
returned home, who, on hearing that aman from Thy hed
been there to make inquiry of him concerning a lost swine,
vould immediately consult ‘Brie,’ and for that purpose
went into the bam to raise him. ‘The man, who was still
awake, heard plainly how the devil was forced to obey.
Jens asked him sbout the swine, but Erie would not
utter a syllable, for he had observed thet they were not
alone; while Jens, on the other hand, ascribed his silence
to sheer obstinacy, and therefore took his iron whip, with
which he belaboured the fiend until he told him that the
swine lay under an earth-slip, and described the place
most accurately. When the fisherman heard this, he
spared Jens Plovgaard all further trouble, and on his re-
turn dug in the slip, and found his swine.

‘The time at length arrived when the fiend, according to
their compact, was to fetch Jens Plovgaard, who caused
himself to be placed in a large cask together with an

2 A small town on the west const of Jutland.


2 The devil, like our ‘ old Harry,’ whieh is probably a corruption of the
Danish term.


182 DANISH TRADITIONS.


ample provision of meat and drink. This eask he caused
to be buried in a field which was afterwards ploughed and
sown. When the devil now came he could get no power
over him, but ran backwards and forwards on the field
every night for three weeks, and at last howled so terri-
fically that he might have been heard on the other side of
the fiord as far as Ulfborg church, At the expiration of
the three weeks Jens Plovgaard was free, and eaused him-
self to be dug up; and from that time there was no man
in the whole parish so pious as he; but his great cunning
be possessed no longer.


HOW THE DEVIL ALLOWED HIMSEL¥ TO BE OUTWITTED.


In Jutland there was once a priest who knew more than
his Paternoster. One evening there came a message to him
from the manor-house, requiring his attendance there with
the least delay possible, his aid being quite indispensable.
‘The fact was that the proprietor, in order to attain to his
vast riches, had sold himself to the devil, who was already
there to fetch him, his time being expired. The priest,
who arrived at the house just at the moment when the
fiend was about to depart with the master, endeavoured to
prevail on him to grant a further delay, firet a year, then
a month,—a week,—a day, but not even an hour would
the fiend grant him. There stood on the table a little
stump of wax candle nearly burnt out, pointing to which
the priest said: “Thou wilt surely let him live as long as
that stump lasts?” To this the fiend assented, but at
the seme moment the priest seizing the light, blew it out
and put it into his pocket ; so that for the present the fiend
‘was obliged to leave the proprietor in peace, but who from
that hour so amended his life that the devil got him not,

‘Asimilar artes with a wax candle occurs in Norma Gest’s Saga, whereby


Norua Gest attains to an age of many hundred years, In the Popular
‘Traditions und Tales of Poland, we find the devil allowing himself to be


DANISH TRADITIONS. 183


tricked in the ssme manner, See also ‘The Devil outwitted’ in Nether-
landish Popular Traditions.


‘THE LADY OP KIGLBYGAARD.


_ On the road from Aalborg! to Thisted, through
Ostrel, there lies in a valley on the left 1 mansion called
‘Kidlbygaard, in which there once dwelt a very rich lady,
‘but who was as wicked as she was rich, and was, moreover,
devoted to soreery. One of her greatest delights was to
hear that there were earousings and gaming at the inn on
Sundays. Among the servants of the mansion there was
‘one that stood high above others in her favour, to whom
she frequently showed a large chest containing silver
money, telling him that he might take as much of it as
he would, but he was never able to raise a single piece
from the chest. When he sometimes said that he wished
he bad so much money, because life must then be 80 joy-
ous and pleasant, she always answered with asigh: “ Yes,
true! were there no horrid death !””

One night one of her tenants came to the mansion to
pay his rent, but found all in darkness, the family being
in bed. He walked about the place until he came to a
‘mall apartment, in which he saw alight. On the middle
of the floor he perceived a half-bushel measure, and im-
mediately a dog of ferocious aspect entered the room,
approached the measure and barked into it, and every time
he barked there fell from his mouth several pieces of silver
money into the measure, nor did he leave the place before
it was quite full. A great desire now eame over the man
to take some of these silver coins, and he accordingly
helped himself to thirty new pieces and put them into his
purse. In the morning he went to the lady to pay his
rent ; but when she saw the new money, she declared that
it had been taken from her. The man then told her what


4 A considerable town in Jutland,


184 DANISH TRADITIONS.


he hed seen in the night, whereupon she was so terrified
that she bestowed on him the farm which he had held on
lease, in order to secure his silence aa to what he had wit-
nessed as long as he lived.

When this lady had for many years been leading so un-
righteous a life, she one evening ordered her eoachman to
put the horses to, as she wished to take a drive. The
man objected that it was so dark that he could not find
the way, but she answered that the horses knew it well
enough, She then for more than two hours rode over
stock and stone, until the horses stopt before an illuminated
mansion which the man had never observed before. They
drove in, the Indy alighted and went into the saloon whieh
was illuminated. In the mean while the man waited with
the carriage. After a considerable time had elapsed he
stole up to the window and peeped in, and saw his mistress
sitting on the middle of the floor undressed; by her side
apile was burning, and a man stood combing her hair.
Immediately after the man received orders to drive home,
but from that hour no one ever saw the lady more, and
the couchman’s belief was that she was on that night con-
veyed to hell. Her family, it is true, gave out that she
returned home, and immediately after sickened and died ;
while others asserted that at her pompous funeral the cofin
contained only a whisp of straw.


A FEAST WITH THE DEVIL.


In Ostrel there once dwelt a man who entertained the


suspicion that his wife was a witch, and one St. John’s eve
resolved to remove his doubts by watching whether che
went to the devil’s banquet, At night therefore he kept
‘an eye on her movements, and eaw her take froma drawer
a small phial of ointment which she rubbed over peel,
then setting herself astride on the peel, she said: “Now
in the devil’s name!” and immediately at full speed flew


DANISH TRADITIONS. 185


up through the chimney. Hereupon the man did as he
had seen his wife do, and flew after her on another peel,
and at length descended in a mansion, it! which there was
room brilliantly illuminated and full of people. On his
entrance he saw the devil going round and the witches

itting at table, at the head of which set his own wife.
‘The devil then came to him and inquired his business, to
which he anawered that he had followed his wife. ‘Old
Eric’ then handed him a book that he might inseribe his
name in it, which he did, but adding the words “in the
name of God.” When the fiend saw what he had written
he uttered a howl, and the whole mansion fell down. On
the following morning the man found himself in a hole
out in the fields, among a heap of human bones; but his
wife he never saw again,


A girl once by chance saw her mistress take pot from
the cupboard in which there was an ointment, with which
she had no sooner anointed a broomstick, than with the
broomstick between her legs she flew away up the chimney.
‘The girl, full of wonder at what she had seen, took the same
pot out of the cupboard to see what it contained, and rubbed
a little of the ointment on a brewing vat, when instanta-
neously she with the vat also flew up through the chimney
atraightways to the Blocksberg, where there was a nume-
rous assemblage of old women with base-viols and fiddles

_ before them. ‘The devil himeclf, whom they called Old
Eric, whien he had danced out a polonaise and paid the mu-
sicians, came to the girl with a book, in which he desired
her to write her name; but she, instead of her name, first
wrote the words with which it is uaual to try the pen:

“Den, som mig foder, ete. ; the devil, consequently, was
unable to take the book back, and would not dance again
the whole evening, although he had previously been never


186 DANISH TRADITIONS.


off the floor. Early on the following morning, which was
St. John’s day, all the old dames rode back on their
broomsticks, and the girl in her brewing vat, until they
came to a brook, across which the old women sprang very
nimbls ; but the girl hesitated and thought within her-
self: “Tt surely won't do to make such a jump with «
brewing vat.” But at last she said: “I can at any rate
try” So giving the vat a kick, it sprang as lightly os
the broomsticks themselves ; at which the girl langhing,
exclaimed: ‘That was a devil of a jamp for a brewing
vat!” But scarcely had she uttered the deviPs name
when the vat stopt, the book was away, and the good Insx
had to find her way back to Thisted on foot.


THE BOOK OF CYPRIANUS.

Cyprianns was a student, and by nature a gentle and
orderly person, but he had passed through the Black
School in Norway, and was therefore engaged to the devil
to apply his learning and extraordinary faculties to the
perpetration of evil. ‘This grieved him in his latter yeare,
his heart being good and pious ; 90 to make the evil good
again, he wrote a book, wherein he first ehowa how evil is
to be done, and then how it may be remedied. ‘The book
begins by explaining what soreery is, and with a warning
serinat it, It is divided into three heads, vis. Cyprianua,
stus, and Jacob Ramel. The last two parts are
ae in characters which are said to be Persian or
Arabic, and also in ordinary characters. In this book are
taught exorcising, laying and raising of spirita, and all that
of which mention is made in the 5th book of Moses,
xviii. 10, 11, 12. Whether this book hes been printed is
uncertain, but manuscript copies of it are concealed here
and there among the common people, who regard it as
something sacred. Those who possess the book of Cy-
prianus need never want money, they can read the devil


DANISH TRADITIONS. 187


to them and from them, and no one can harm them, not
even the devil himself, But whoever possesses the book
cannot get rid of it for whether he sells, burns or buries
it, it will come back; and if person cannot dispose of it
before his death, it will go badly with him. The only
method is, to write his name in it in his own blood, and
lay it in a secret place in the church, together with four
shillings clerk’s fee.


The following is the German tradition of Cyprianus

In ancient times there lived in one of the Danish isles
2 man named Cyprianus, who was worse than the devil ;
consequently, after he was dead and gone to hell, he was
again cast forth by the devil and replaced on his isle.
There he wrote nine books, in the old Danish tongue, on
Witcheraft and magical spells. Whosoever has read all
these nine books through becomes the property of the
devil. From the original work three (or nine) copies are
said to have been made bya monk, and mutilated copies of
these to have been dispersed all over the world. A count,
who resided in the castle of Ploen?, is said to have pos-
sessed a perfeet copy, which he caused to be fastened with
chains and buried under the castle; because in reading
through eight books he was so troubled and terrified that
he resolved on concealing it from the sight of the world.
One of these books still exists in Flensborg®, Some
spells from the nine books are still known among aged
people. Whoever wishes to be initiated therein must first
renounce his Christianity.

1 The count here allnded to was, no doubt, Duke Hane Ado of Hol
steln-Ploen, who was & great magician, and was finally earied off by the
devil, through a window, though the matter wax hushed up. He lived in


‘the 17¢h centary.
2 A considerable town in Sleswig.


188 DANISH TRADITIONS.


‘Two miles from Horsens' there dwelt a miller, who was
a master in the black art and possessed the book of Cy-
prianus. A pessant having once stolen an axe"from him,
‘was obliged to bring it back at midnight, and was, more-
over, borne so high in the air that his feet rattled among
the tops of the trees in Bierre forest. This miller im fact
performed so many wonderful things thet all his neigh-
bours were astonished at his feats. Impelled by curiosity,
a journeyman miller once slipt into his master’s private
room, where having found an ola quaint-looking volume,
he began to read in it, when the horrible Satan appeared
before him and asked his commands. The man, who was
not aware that it was necessary to give the fiend some stiff
job to execute, fell down in terror deprived of specch, and
it would, no doubt, have been all over with him, had not
hhis master entered at the moment and seen how matters
stood. Snatching up the book, the miller instantly began
to read in another place, in order, if possible, to drive the
fiend away ; but things had already gone too far, and
nothing remained to be done but to give him something to
do, 80 taking sieve, he commanded him to bale water
with it from the mill-pond ; but being unable to do so, he
was obliged to take his departure through the air, and left
behind him a most loathsome stench,

Cypriaa's book i alao Known in Normandy, where a similar story i
told under the title of Le Grimoire du Curé, Calderon has made Cyprian
fhe hero of one of his dramas, in which he appears ana native of Antioch.


OF WITCHES.


On St. John’s eve the witches, as it is generally known,
have a meeting with ‘ Old Eric,’ though it rarely happens
that others aro witnesses of the spectacle.


4 A considerable town in Jutland,


DANISH TRADITIONS. 189


In Gidrding near Ribe! there was once a serving-man,
who on that night placed a green turf on his head, that he
might be invisible to the witches, and 10 slipt into the
churchyard, While standing quite secure and looking at
the wonderful witch-dance round Old Eric, who sat in the
middle, it happened that one of the women came quite
close to him, when, in springing aside, the turf fell from his
head. In an instant he beeame visible to all the witches,
who started off in pursuit of him, and had not the priest
happened to be standing just without his gate, he would
hardly have escaped falling into their clutches.


In a certain, house everything went perversely ; for
which reason the inhabitants sent to a well-known wise
woman, She came and went about the’ house both within
and without, At last she stood still before a large stone,
which lay just without the dwelling. “This,” said she,
“should be rolled away.” But all that they could do
with levers and other means was to no purpose: the stone
would not move, At length the wise women herself
hobbled up to the stone, and scarcely had she touched it
before it moved from its old station. Beneath was found
asilken purse filled with the claws of cocks and eagles,
human hair and nails. “ Put it into the fire together
with a good bundle of pea-straw, that it may catch
quickly,” said the old woman; and no sooner was thi
said than done. But the moment the fire began to take
effect it began to howl and hiss us if the very house were
ready to fall, and people who stood out in the fields hard
by plainly saw a witch sally forth on her broomstick from


1 A city on the west side of Jutland, with s fine old cathedral, said to
be the first church in Denmark, ‘The early kings frequently kept their
court at Ribe.


190 DANISH TRADITIONS.


the mouth of the oven. At the same moment the oli
woman died, who, it was supposed, had bewitched the
hhouse, and all the sorcery was at an end.


In the neighbourhood of Ostrel a man served at a
farm, the mistress of which unknown to him was a witch,
Although she gave him good and wholesome food, he
never thrived, but became thinner every day. At this
being much troubled, he went to 8 wise man, to whom
he communicated his case, From this man he learned
that his mistress was a witch, and that st night, while he
slept, she transformed him into a horse, and rode upon
him to Troms church in Norway; eo that it was not to be
wondered at that his strength decreased. ‘The wise man
at the same time gave him an ointment with which to rub
his head at night ; then when he fell asleep he would have
a violent itching on his head, when he would wake and see
that he was standing outside of Troms church, The man
did as he had been directed, and on waking the following
night, he was standing by Troms church holding a bridle
in his hand, which he had torn off in scratching his head ;
and behind him he saw many horees bound together by
each other's tail. “When he had for some time stood thus
without the church door, his mistress came out and cast
afriendly look at him; but he nodded for her to come
nearer, and when she came he cast the bridle over her
head, when instantly she was transformed into a handsome
mare. He then mounted the mare and rode homewards.
On his way he called at a farrier’s and caused him to put
four new shoes on the mare, On reaching home, he told
his master that he had been out to buy a capital mare,
which would go well with the one he already had. The
master bought her of him for a good round sum ; but
when he took the bridle off, the mare disappeared and the


DANISH TRADITIONS. 191


mistress stood in her place with new horseahoes on her
hands and feet. Then the man related all that had taken
place ; the wife was in consequence turned out of doors,
and never got the horseshoes off her hands and feet.


‘The North Germans have & story (The Witeh with the bridle) very
nearly resembling the foregoing. Millenhotl, No. 310,


In Ostrel there was st one time a vast number of
witehes. A huntsman, who was in the habit of passing
by the farm of Baller, always observed in the neighbour-
hood cither a hare or a wild duck; yet, notwithstanding,
that he shot (and was a sure shot), he never could hit
either the one or the other. He once sew a duck lying
in the water close by the farm, at which he shot many
times, but the duck remained quite still and seemed not
to notice the firing, As now neither shot nor slug would
hit it, he eut a silver button from his jacket, said three
Aves over it and put it into his piece. Now he hit the
duck, which, however, flew out of the water into the farm,
and hid iteelf in the poultry-house, ‘The huntsman fol-
lowed and told the people, who were sitting at supper,
what he had done, and demanded the duck he had shot.
‘The master told him he might go into the kitchen and
speak to the servant maid, who would see to get him his
duck. When he entered the kitchen there sat an ugly old
beldam by the chimney, with only one shoe on, while the
‘blood was running down her leg. She said she had fallen
down and cut herself, but the huntsman knew instantly
that it was the witeh that he hed shot, and hurried ont of
the place with all possible speed.


At Bréndated Mark, in the diocese of Ribe, there is
shown a spot near the forest, where in former days a castle
in asid to have stood. In this castle dwelt @ lady who


192 DANISH TRADITIONS,


‘was a witch, and one day when all the men of Briindsted
were at the chase, she, in the form of a hare, it is ssid,
kept constantly teasing and tantalising them, until a
old peasant, wiser than the others, took a silver button,
loaded his piece with it, and shot the bare in the leg. The
following day it was rumoured that the lady was sick.
She never appeared again.


‘Two men from Svendstrup near Aalborg went out one
night to shoot hares in the churchyard. For this purpose
they stationed themselves in the church tower, expecting
that game of some sort would appear, but in vain. At
midnight, however, a swarm of hares burst forth from all
the graves; but although the men at first ventured to
shoot at them, not a single one fell, end their number so
increased that the whole churchyard was completely hidden
under their countless multitude. The men were then
seized with a sudden terror, and with difficulty escaped
unscathed.


‘On Bornholm itis related that the witches make a kind of hare of old
legs of stockings, with three harrow-prongs inatead of legs, ‘These bares,
which they call ‘smérbarrer,’ are sent by the witches to fetch milk from
their neighbours’ cattle. Hares used by the witches to mille cattle are
‘also known in Sweden.


In the parish of Vissenberg in Fyen there was once
woman who was generally regarded aa a witch. When st
the point of death she could not divest herself of life; but
another cunning woman, who was present, advised thst
straw should be placed under the chair in which the dying
woman sat ; for if she were a witch, she must die imme-
diately afterwards, this means having never been known
to fail. This advice was followed and the woman died
shortly after.


DANISH TRADITIONS, 193


‘THE SHIP-MASTER OF AARHUUS! AND THE FINLAP.


‘A shipmaster from Aarhuus was once lying at Dront-
heim, where he formed an acquaintance with a Finlap,
who often came on board to visit him, This Finlap, who
could perform many sorceries, offered, among other things,
to teach the shipmaster how to procure a wind. This,
thought the skipper, might be very convenient, and the
next day the Finlap brought a bag with him, which he
placed outside of the cabin, saying, that he needed only
to take that with him, and he could make any wind. But
the ehipmaster on reflection would have no concern with
it, suspecting thst it came from the devil, ‘The Finlap
then asked him whether he wished to know how his wife
and children were. On the skipper answering in the
affirmative, the Finlap immediately fell down on the deck
an if dead. After somo time he rose, saying: “I have
been to Aarhus, ‘Thy wife was sitting drinking coffee ;
the others were also in good health, though one of the
children had been ill. That thou mayest believe my words,
—dost thou know this?” at the same time handing him
asilver spoon. “This,” said the other, “thou hast taken
from my house in Aarhus.” And so saying took the
spoon and kept it.

After they had been lying some time at Drontheim, the
Finlap one morning said: ‘To-morrow we shall be under
sail, und shall both have a good wind, although you are
going southward and I northward. And I will further
tell you that you will not go to Christiania fiord, to pur-
chase a lading, as you think ; but will get a better freight
than you expect.” On the following morning both were
under sail, and the wind changed so that the Jutlander
had a fair wind for twelve hours, and afterwards the Fin
for twelve hours. When off the isles of Oster-Riis the


2 A city on the east coast of Jutland, with a spacious old cathedral.
K


194 DANISH TRADITIONS.


wind for the Jutlander was directly adverse, 20 that after
having beaten about for nights and days, he was at last
obliged to seek a port in the Oster-Riis islands. There
one merchant outbid another in their offers of freight, but
being eastward bound for a cargo, he declined their pro-
posals, until a merchant at length offered him » freight to
the Issefiord which almost equalled the value of a whole
lading. ‘This he could not withstand, but wrote to hia
owners, that for weighty considerations he had not fol-
lowed their orders, an announcement which among the
parties interested in Aarhuus excited the suspicion that
he had lost his wits. On his arrival home after this trip,
and when just stepping on shore, being questioned about
his freight, he answered: “I have it in my fob.” This
proved highly satisfactory. On coming home to his wife,
he inquired: “How are all here ?”—“ Well,” was the
answer.—“Has any one been ill?”—“Yes, the young
one.’— Have you lost anything ?—“ No—yes—no.”
Think sgain.”—* Yes, a silver spoon.” — There it
'—said the skipper, laying it on the table,


OF FRIT SKUD.

To acquire ‘Frit Skud, that is, always to hit the mark
aimed at, some lay certain prayers or secret words under
the chamber of the piece. Others effect the same by let-
ting the wind on a Thursday morning blow into the barrel.
Such certain shooters are in league either with the evil
one or with the wild huntsman, and whether they shoot
to the east or to the west, their shot always brings them
game of some kind,

On the manor of Thiele in Jutland there was once an
old keeper, who often when out sporting, especially when
he was rather drunk, would turn the piece backwards and
fire it off; and he never did so without bringing down


game,


DANISH TRADITIONS, 195


‘TRADITIONS OF SPECTRES.
‘THE PLYING HUNTSMAN,


All over the country a terrific apparition makes its ap-
pearance, of which every one who has either seen or heard
itspeake with shuddering. It occurs at various times that
a rushing and buzzing, a shouting and uproar, a eracking
and rattling are heard in the air, precisely as if a hunting
party, with echoing horns, dogs with outstretched necks,
and wild huntamen, were galloping through the fields and
forests. It is THE PLYING HUNTSMAN, says the peasant,
laying himself on his face on the earth, or hiding himself
behind a tree, until the hellish band has passed.


onoN-yErTE,


On the west side of Mien there in a forest called Grén-
veld, in which Grin-Jette (Green-giant !) hunts every
night on horseback, with bis head under his left arm, a
spear in his hand, and many hounds around him. At
harvest time the peasants leave a bundle of oats for his
horse, that it may not trample down their grain in the
night. Grénsund is named from him, as Phanefiérd i
called after Phane, his betrothed. Near Frendrup a large
stone is to be seen, which is ssid to have heen Grin-Jette’s
sleeping place; and in the perish of Aastrup on Falster®
are several mounds, in which those whom Grén-Jette has
slain with his spear lie buried. But Grin-Jette and Phane
lie buried on Harbille Mark, in Stege parish, where a
giant-grave is shown, a hundred and seventy ells long.


2 The first component of this name Grimm (D. M. p. 896) considera to
be the O. Nor. Grom (beard), and the entire name x identical with the
©, Nor. Granidtunn, the deerded giant, without any allusion to the colour
of his clothing.
+ One of the small Daniah islands near Moen,
K2


196 DANISH TRADITIONS.


‘One night when Grén-Jette was hunting in Borre-Skor,
he stopped his horse before Henrik Fyenboe’s door,
knocked, and ordered him to hold his dogs, He then
rode away, Henrik Fyenboe standing in the mean while
at his door holding the dogs for two hours, At length
Grdn-Jette returned with a mermaid lying acrose his hore,
which he had shot, and said to the peasant: “After her
I have been hunting these seven years; but now I got
her down by Falster.” He then asked for something to
drink, having got which, he handed a gold coin to Henrik
Fyenboe, which burnt a hole through his hand and dis-
appeared on the earth. The huntsman then laughing
said: “Now thou canst sey that Grén-Jette has held out
his hand to thee. But that thou mayest not say that I
have drunk at thy cost, take the band with which thou
hast held the dogs.” He thereupon rode away, and Hen-
rik took the band, which he long held under lock and
key, and from that time increased in affluence; but at
length, when he thought little of it, he became poorer
than he had ever been, and died in great misery.

In former times it was a superstition in Men to leave a sheaf standing
‘of the lant stack that was hoosed ; but at « later period, thatthe last sheaf
‘of oats that was bound up should be thrown into the field with these
‘words: “This is for the Jéide of Upeala?; this he shall have for his horse
‘on Christmas eve." They believed that if they neglected thin, their cattle


would die. In Norway the custom prevailed of setting a sheaf on a pole
for the birds, on Christmas eve,


PALNE-JAGBR, OR PALNE THE HUNTER,


Like as King Valdemar hunts by night in Secland does
Palne the Hunter* hunt in Fyen ; and it is related that a
man, who, about a hundred years since, dwelt near Odense,
once fell in with him. For when this man was one night
gone with his people to bind barley, there came to him a


1 See page 124. 4 Palnatoli, the founder of Jomaborg.


DANISH TRADITIONS. 197


tall and comely female, who asked: “Have ye seen sny-
thing of Palne-Jeger?” And on their answering that
they had not seen him, she hastened through the wood.
But an hour had scarcely elapsed when Palne-Jeeger came
to the same people, with helmet and waving plume on his
head, a bow on his left and a quiver on his right shoulder,
and sandals on his fect. He inquired: “Have ye seen
anything of Langpatte?” And when they had given
him the best intelligence they could, he hastened after
her. He did not, however, eatch her that night, as the
same happened to the harvest people on the night fol-
lowing.

Bvery new year’s night Palne-Jeger fetches three horse-
shoes from one or other smithy in Fyen, and the smiths
forget not to lay them ready for him on the anvil, as he
always leaves three golden horse-shoes in their stead.
But if he eomes to any amithy and does not find shoes,
he removes the anvil, aa it once happened to a smith in
Korup, whoee huge anvil Palne-Jeger moved up into the
tower of Seden church, whence the smith had great dif-
ficulty in getting it down again.


HORNS JEGER.

In the neighbourhood of Aarhuus Horns Jeger hunts
by night, to extirpate all the Elfwives. Early one momn-
ing a man from Lyngen, who was out in the field to
remove his horses, heard with terror a rustling in the air,
and immediately saw a man on horseback coming towards
him. It was Horns Jeger, and he had with him three
hounds bound with a silken cord. “Hold my dogs,”
ried he to the terrified peasant, and then again rode off ;
but returned shortly after, having two Elf-wives hanging
across the horse’s neck, who were bound together by their
Jong hair, “Give me my dogs now,” cried he to the


198 DANISH TRADITIONS.


peasant, “and hold forth thy hand for drink-money.”
‘The man did so, but the huntsman only put the end of
three fingers into his hand, and having thus burt him,
rode away with the two howling Blf-wives.


JONS JROER.

In the neighbourhood of Aalborg Jons Jeger often rides
through the air, followed by a number of hounds that run
on the earth, Whoever meets him must lie down fist,
else he would be sick afterwards. Sometimes this hunts-
man may be heard calling his dogs with a horrid scream.
If he happens to pass over a house in which two doors
opposite each other stand open, his dogs pass through
them; and if, at the same time, brewing or baking is
going on in the house, it will all be spoiled.


‘KING ABEL’s BUNT.

In Sleswig it is the Danish king Abel, the fratricide,
that leads the Wild-hunt, who in an expedition against
the Frieslanders (a. 1252) sank into a deep morass as he
‘was fording the Byder, where, being encumbered with the
weight of his armour, he was slain. His body was buried
in the cathedral, but his spirit found no rest. The canons
dug up the corpse, and buried it in a morass near Gottorp,
“but in the place where he is buried and the neighbour.
hood, even within our own memory, horrid sounds and
shrieks are heard, by which travellers by night are often
terrified and rendered almost lifeless. Many persons
worthy of credit relate and affirm that they have heard
sounds so resembling a huntsman’s horn, that any one
would say that a hunter was hunting there, and which
the usual night.watch at Gottorp have frequently heard,
It is, indeed, the general ramour that Abel hus appeared
to many in our time, black of aspect, riding on a small


DANISH TRADITIONS. 199


horse, and accompanied by three hounds, which appear to
be burning like fire!.””

King Abel was buried in St. Peter’s church at Sleswig,
but on account of his eruel frutrivide he eould find no rest
in the grave. By night he haunted the church and dis-
turbed the monks at their prayers, 20 that at length it wos
found necessary to take up his body and sink it in a mo-
rase near Gottorp. To keep him in the grave, a sharp
stake was driven down in the earth through him. The
place is still known by the name of the king’s grave. He
nevertheless rides every night on a black horse, aceom-
panied by a leash of dogs. ‘Then is to be heard « slam-
ming of gates, besides a terrific shouting and screaming,
0 that all who hear it are struck with fear.

Some ropemakers in Sinderborg once undertook to
stop him, by stretching a rope across the street; but when
he came, everything gave way before him.

Tn Sweden, when a noise, like that of feria horses, is heard by
night, the people say: “Odin in pasting by


KING VALDEMAR’s HUNT.


In Secland it is King Valdemar® who rides, of whom
a story is told similar to one related of Charlemagne.
King Valdemar loved a lady from Riigen named Tovelille’,
at whose death his sorrow was so great that he could not
quit her corpse, but had it carried with him whithersoever
he went. This being found inconvenient to those about


» J, Cyprai Ann, Episcopor. Sle. p. 267, quoted by Thiele, i. p. 187,
edit, 1820.

# Goljer, Sv. Rikes Hild. ip. 268.

4 Valdemar IV. of Denmark, surnamed Atterdeg he reigned from 1334
to 1375, and was the last male descendant of King Svend Kstrithson, the
nephew of Cnut the Grest, by his ister Estrith, married to UI Jarl.

4 Tovelille, i e the little dove. Tn like manner, Christian the Second’s
ceclebrated mistress was called Dyveke, signifying the same in Low Ger-
aman... She was of Dutch extraction,


200 DANISH TRADITIONS,


the king, one of the courtiers scized a favourable moment
to ascertain what it was that so attracted him to the dead
body. He found on her finger an enchanted ring, which
had been placed there by her mother, that even after death
she might retain the love of Valdemar. The courtier took
the ring from her finger, and the king’s affection was
instantly transferred from the dead Indy to himself, who
had retained the ring in his possession ; so that whatever
was to be done was to be done by or through him. This
at length becoming exceedingly irksome to him, and a8
he knew that it was to the ring he was indebted for the
king’s favour, he threw it into s march as he was one day
riding through Gurre wood, From that moment the king
began to find more pleasure in the wood than in any other
place. He caused the castle of Gurre to be built, and
hunted in the wood day and night; at the same time it
became @ habit with him to utter the words which after-
wards proved his curse: that God was weleome to keep
heaven, if he might only hunt in Gurre,

He now rides every night from Burre to Gurre, and is
known over all the country as the flying huntsman. In
some places he is called the flying Marcolfus. When he
approaches, great shouting and uproar and cracking of
whips are heard in the air; the people then step aside and
place themselves behind the trees. First come his coel-
black hounds, which ran on all sides snuffing the ground,
with long red-hot tongues hanging out of their mouths.
Then comes ‘ Wolmar’ on his white horse, sometimes hold-
ing his own head under the left arm. When he meets
any one, especially an old person, he commands him to
hold a couple of his hounds, and makes him either stand
with them for several hours, or loose them immediately
after a shot, on hearing which they break from all bonds
and chains. When he is thus riding onwards, he is heard
to slam the gates after him; and in many plneea where


DANISH TRADITIONS. 201


there is a passage through a farm, he rides in at one gate
and out at the other, and no locks or bolts are so strong
‘as not to fly open at his approach. In some places he
takes his course even over the house-tops, and in the
neighbourhood of Herlufsholm there is said to be a house,
the roof of which is considerably sunk in the middle,
because he so often passes over it. In the north of Sec~
land he has another Gurre, where there are ruins, which
are still called Valdemar’s castle, It is a custom here for
the old women, at St. John’s tide, to go out at night on
the road, and open the gates for him. About two miles
from Gurre is Valdemar’s mount, surrounded by water.
Here, according to the tradition, six priests in black walk
every midnight, muttering over the islet. Between Sél-
leréd and Nerum, be hunts with black dogs and horses,
on the road called Wolmar’s way.

Haying thus roamed about, he rests alternately at many
places in the country, It is particularly related that he
stops at Vallé castle, where he has a bedchamber, in which
there stood two ready-made beds. Here he passes. the
night in the form of a black dog. In the same room stand
two large chests, which, on being once opened, were
found full of small round pieces of leather ; “ for better
money they had not in King Wolmar’s time.” A sub-
terraneous passage is said to connect Vulld castle with
Tollésegaard, in the district (amt) of Holbek. Here he is
also said to have had a chamber, and formerly even a maid-
servant was kept to wait on him. Sometimes he rests at
Vordingborg, in ‘ Valdemar’s Tower,’ or among the ruins
of ‘Valdemar’s Castle,’ where young females and persons
from his time are often seen to go and make beds. A
peasant, who would not believe that the king thus came
to his tower in the night, ventured once to pass the night
there ; but at midnight, in walked King Valdemar to him,
greeted him in a friendly manner, and said, “Thou hast

K5


202 DANISH TRADITIONS.


my thanks for taking care of my tower,” at the same time
holding out to him a gold coin, but which, when the pea
sant took it, burnt a round hole through his hand, and
fell like a coal tothe ground, From this dreadful money,
‘an idea may be formed of what his sufferings must be. It
sometimes happens, when an old man or woman has faith-
fully held his dogs for many hours, that he throws them
something that appears like coal, and is, therefore, disre-
garded, but when examined, is found to be pure gold.


PUNISHMENT FOR REMOVING LAND-MARKS,

Before the permanent allotment of lands, to every pear
sant, in sowing time, so much of the field or mark was
assigned as was just and appropriate, and boundary-posts
were driven between his and his neighbour's allotment.
‘Whoever removed such marks, though he might escape
punishment in this world, could find no rest in the grave,
but by way of penalty must plough every night on the
spot where his sin lay hidden. Of such ploughmen it ia
said, that when any person came near, they compelled
him to drive their horses; and if any one were so forced
into their service, there was no other way to get free again
than to take notice of the place where he began, and after
the first turn to cast away the reins, He might then
pursue his way unscathed.


Near Skive lies the manor of Krabbesholm, where there
once dwelt a lady who wished to appropriate to herself an
adjacent field, and therefore caused her overseer to put
earth from the garden at Krabbesholm into his wooden
shoes, with which he went to the ficld in dispute, and swore
that he stood on the soil of Krabbesholm, The field was
adjudged to the lady, but afterwards the overseer could
not die before she had given it back ; yet he, nevertheless,


DANISH TRADITIONS. 203


every night still goes round the field with earth in his
wooden shoes.


Three men belonging to Spandet, in North Sleswig,
swore away the beautiful meadow of Elljer from the vil-
lage of Fjersted ; in lieu of which the villagers got the in-
ferior one of Sepkjeer. ‘They had also put earth in their
shoes. After their death they were long to be seen wan-
dering about the meadow, wringing their hands and
crying:

Med Ret og Skjel, By law and right,

‘Det ved vi vel, ‘That low we well,

Elkjeer ligger til Fjersted By,  Elkjeer belongs to Fjersted town,
Sepkjeer ligger til Spandet. __Sepkjeer belongs to Spandet,


‘Near Ebeltoft dwelt » peasant who possessed land and
cattle in superabundance, paid taxes both to church and
state, brought his tithes at the right time, gave to the
poor, and went every Sunday to church; yet, notwith-
standing all this, there was not an individual in the whole
neighbourhood that placed any real confidence in him.
He died and was buried, but after having lain in the earth
until harvest time, he was heard at night crying piteously
over the field: “Boundary here! boundary there |” Now
people discovered how in his lifetime he had acquired hie
wealth.

A SUNDAY’S CHILD,


In Fyen there was a woman who was born on a Sunday,
and, like other Sunday’s children, had the faculty of sec
ing much that was hidden from others. But because, in
consequence of this property, she could not pass by the
church at night without seeing either s hearse or a spectre,
the gift became a perfect burthen to her. She therefore


204 DANISH TRADITIONS.


took the advice of a man skilled in such matters, who di
rected her, whenever she saw a spectre, to say : Go to
heaven,” but when she met a hearse, “Hang on.” Hap
pening some time after to meet a hearse, she, throngh
lapse of memory, eried out: “Go to heaven!” and ,
straightway the hearse rose up in the air and vanished.
Afterwards meeting a spectre, she snid to it: “ Hang on!”
when the spectre clung round her neck, hung on her back,
and drove her down into the carth before it. For three
days her shricks were heard, before the spectre could put
an end to her wretched life.


SPECTRES IN 87, ENUD’S CHURCH AT ODENSE?,


A man in Odense was once desirous of knowing what
took place in the church in the night-time, and therefore
one evening went into St. Knud’s, where he remained.
‘At midnight he saw a spectre come forth from one of the
graves holding a long wax taper, with which it went about
and lighted all the candles in the church. Shortly after
there came one spectre after another walking slowly from
their graves, and placed themselves in the seats, among
whom the man lying in concealment recognised many a
good old friend. At length came a spectre in priestly
attire, ascended the pulpit, and preached @ sermon in an
unknown tongue, until day began to dawn.


TANS NED.
In the village of Qverndrup in Fyen there was once a
horrible spectre, which caused great fear and disquietude
throughout the whole parish; as every one that saw it
dicd immediately after. Thia spectre had assumed the like-
ness of adead man called Hans Neb, and when it appeared
to any one, it was always with the ery: “Look at Hans
2 Tue chief town ofthe island of Fyen. :


DANISH TRADITIONS. 205


Neb!” All the men in the place and then the women
were already dead, and the turn now came to the young
ones. In this impending danger a young fellow offered
to encounter the apparition and endeavour to drive it
away. For this purpose he went at midnight to the church
path, through which the spectre was in the habit of pass-
ing, having previously provided himself with steel in
various shapes, When the apparition approached, he
fearlessly threw steel before its feet, so that it was obliged
instantly to turn back, and appeared no more in the pa-
ish, But the young man being satisfied that it really
was Hans Newb, it was resolved to open his grave, to see
if anything were amiss, when it was found that he was
lying on his face in the coffin, whence it was evident to
all that with his ery of “Look at Hans Nab” he had only
wished to cause them to lay him on his back, it being well
known that a corpse cannot have peace in the grave when
it lies otherwise.
A SAGACIOUS Woman.

Near Lille Verldse in Secland there once dwelt a
farmer who associated with thieves and robbers, never
went to church, and was in bad repute among all for his
impiety. When he was dead and buried, and the fancral
procession had returned from the chureh to drink ‘ grave
beer? at the house of the deceased, they saw him sitting
on the roof staring down on all who ventured to look up
at him, eo that acareely one remained behind, all leaving
the place as.quickly as possible. At length came the
priest, who began reading, and exorcised him down into
Kalsmose hard by Farum lake; and that he might con-
tinue there till the world’s end, a sharp stake was driven
into the earth ao that it just met his head. While all this
was being done, an old crone chanced to be present who
understood these matters better than the priest himeelf,


206 DANI8H TRADITIONS.


and who taking a darning needle without an eye, stuck it
into the stake. At this the spectre cried out from be-
neath: “Thou shouldst not have done that, thou old
witch ! I should else have been at home before thee !” But
now he is obliged to remain beneath, yet he flies about
every night, and is « night-raven until cock-crowing.


MASTER MADS AND HERR ANDERS.


Master Mads, the priest of Lumby, was full of shrewd-
ness and cunning. He once said that the dead were
liable to thirst, and caused a cask of beer to be brought
to the funerals within the church, and when, some days
after, the beer was looked after, it was all drunk out.
Many persons now conecived all sorts of opinions con-
cerning him, and certain it is, that when Master Mads
was dead he re-sppeared. His successor, Herr Anders,
who was no less shrewd than Master Mads, undertook to
exorcise his spirit, wheresoever it might chance to be. One
night, therefore, he went out into the field which is now
called the Pilelykke, taking with him three large books.
There sure enough he met with Master Mads, with whom
he hed « hard struggle, and was hardly able to answer all
the questions put to him by the learned sprite, So at
length he had recourse to reading out of one of his books,
which Master Mads, however, knocked out of his hand.
Tn all haste Herr Anders then drew forth the second book,
and again began to read; but the spectre struck this also
out of his hand, saying: “When thon wast a lad thou
didst once steal a wheaten loaf in Elsinore.” But Herr
Anders lost no time in throwing two skillings to him, an-
swering, that with that it would be paid. At the same
time he took forth the third book, from which he read so
impressively that Master Mads found himself under the
necessity of creeping into the earth at the spot where he was
standing, and where a sharp stake of oak was driven to


DANISH TRADITIONS. 207


hold him down. Old folks say that they have seen the
stake in its place, adding that on shaking it to and fro, a
voice was always heard from beneath, crying: “Pull it
up! Pull it up!”

OF DRAGONS.

About 2 mile and a quarter from Sor! stands Alsted
church, in which there is still to be seen a picture repre-
senting a fight between a bull and « dragon, in comme-
moration, as people say, of an event which took place in
the churchyard. According to the tradition, a dragon had
taken up his abode near the church gate, and done great
injury to the people, 80 that no one could enter the church,
when an ancient wise man gave his advice, that a bull-calf
should be reared with pure sweet milk, and after a certain
time be set to fight with the serpent. At the end of the first
year, the young bull was so strong, that every one thought
it might stand the encounter; but on seeing the serpent,
it was 00 terrified, that it was found necessary to feed it
in the same manner for another year. It was then less
timid, but would not engage in combat until the end of
the third year, when it proved 80 bold and vigorous that
it instantly engaged in the conflict and killed the dragon.
But the bull was so envenomed that it was found neces-
sary to kill it also, and bury it together with the dragon.

‘There is a tradition nearly similar of a dragon in the churchyard of
Lyngby, a village near Copenhagen.


‘Two miles from Aalborg are two mounts ealled Ostbierg
Bakker. Here many years since « dragon had his abode,
and caused great affiction in the neighbourhood. At
length there came @ man skilled in the knowledge of ser-
pents, who engaged to destroy the dragon. He caused a


1 A town in the west of Seeland, famed for ita academy.


208 DANISH TRADITIONS,


pile to be raised, and when it was kindled, mounted «
courageous horse and rode up to the monster, which fol-
lowed him whithersoever he rode, and thus came at length
to the pile. The man then rode over the pile and the
dragon crept after him through the midst of the fire.
He then sprang a second time over the pile, ‘and the ser-
pent crept after him a second time. When he had thus
ridden unscathed seven times over the fire, and the dragon
had crept seven times through it, it was completely con-
sumed.
THE DAM-HORSB.

Once when some peasant children from Hirschholm *
were playing by Agersé there sprang suddenly up from
the water a large white ‘dam-horse? and galloped about
the field. ‘The boys ran to look at it, and one of them
ventured to set himself on its back; but in the same mo-
ment the horse darted off and was about to plunge into
the lake, when the boy luckily exclaimed :—

“Tord Jesus? eross!
I never saw a larger horse!”


and it instantly vanished from under him.


To the north of Thisted* lies the village of Brund.
From this village as three drunken peasants were crossing
a field called Kronens Mark, one of them expressed a wish
for a horse on which they could all ride home together,
when suddenly an immensely large black horee stood
before them, on whose back they thought they might all
very well find room ; but when two of them were mounted,
the third in wonder cried out :


+ A village about eight miles north of Copenhagen.
2 A little town on the Limifiord in the north of Jutland.


DANISH TRADITIONS. 209


“Lord Jesus’ cross!
Never saw I such « horse!”

At the same moment the horse vanished, and there lay

the three sprawling on the ground.

In France the dam-horse ls known hy the name of the Lutia, and in
the Shetland isles it ia called the Shoopiltee. In both places itis anid to
appear as a little horse, which, when any one has set himeelf on its back,
‘rushes with him into the water.


‘THE HEL-HORSE.

In every churchyard in former days, before any human
body was buried in it, a living horse was interred. This
horse re-appears and is known by the name of the ‘Hel-
horse.’ It has only three legs, and if any one meets it,
it forebodes death. Hence is derived the saying when any
one hes survived a dangerous illness: “He gave death a
peck of oats,” (as an offering or bribe).

In the cathedral yard at Aarhuus there is a Hel-horse,
which sometimes makes ita appearance. A man, whose
windows looked into the cathedral yard, exclaimed one
evening as he sat in his apartment: “ What horse is that
outside?” “Tt is perhaps the Hel-horse,” answered one
sitting by him. “Then I will see it!” ssid the man,
While looking out of the window he grew as pale as a
corpse; but he never mentioned afterwards what he had
seen, Shortly after he fell sick and died.

Heli identical with Death, and in times of petilence rides about on &
‘three-legged horse, and strangles people; whence when a sickness rages
itis anid that Hel in going about; or when in the night the dogs bark
tnd how, “Hel is among the dogs” when the sickness begins in a
place, “Hel is come ;” or when it ceases, “Hel is driven away.” Hel
‘an be driven from one place to mother; instances of this are related and
persons named who have driven Hel from this or that town or village.
‘When any one to death, it is “He has his Helsot”
(mortal sickness) ; if he recovers it is said: “ He has settled matters with


Hol” “When any one says out {00 long on an ertand, people to this
day say: “Yon are 8 good one to send after Hel.”


 Matlenhott, p. 244,


210 DANIBH TRADITIONS,


THE CHURCH-LAMB?,


When any one enters a church alone and when there
ia no service, it often happens that he aces the Church-
lamb running about ; for the church is built over a lamb,
that it may not sink, Formerly, when a church was being
built, it was customary to bury a living lamb under the
altar, that the building might stand immoveable.. This
lamb’s apparition is known by the name of the Church-
lamb ; and if a little child is to die, the Church-lamb is
seen to dance on the threshold of the house.

In all Fyen there is only one church that has its Church-lamb, while
cach of te others has ita Church-tow. The custom of burying living


animal, that church or a house may stand fim, extends itself to other
‘animals besides a lamb, of which a swine and poultry are oftenest mes-
tioned ?,


THE GRAVE-SOW.

In the streets of Hréskiobing® there is often seen 8
Grave-sow, or, as it is also called, a Gray sow. This is
said to be the apparition of a sow formerly buried alive,
and when it appears, to forebode death and calamity.


THE NIGHT-RAVEN.

Every exorcised spirit becomes, according to tradition,
a Night-raven, At the spot where a spirit has been ex-
orcised, a sharp stake is driven into the earth, which passes
through the left wing of the raven, causing a hole in it.
It is only through the most frightful swamps and morasses
that the Night-raven ascends. It first begins under the
earth with the ery of “Rok! rok!” then “Rok op! rok


2 See page 102.

2 In building the new bridge at Halle, which was completed only in
1843, the people thought it would be requisite to immure a child in the
foundation! Grimm, D. M, p. 1095.

® Atown on the north side of Ard, a small island on the south of
Fyen,


DANISH TRADITIONS, 211


op!” and when it has thus come forth, it flies away
screaming “ Hei! hei! he !—i!” When it has flown up
it resembles a cross, and at first hops on the ground like
a magpie, and cries “Bav! Bay! Bav!” Tt afterwards
fics towards the east, to approach the holy sepulchre, be-
cause if it can come thither, it will get rest. When it
flies over head, care must be taken not to look up; for if
any one sees through the hole in its left wing, he him-
self becomes a night-raven, and the night-raven is re=
leased. In general the night-raven is harmless, and
strives only to go farther and farther towards the east.


‘THE JACK 0’ LANTERN.


Jack 0” lanterns are the spirits of unrighteous men},
which by a false glimmer seck to mislead the traveller, and
to decoy him into bogs and moors. The best safeguard
against them, when they appear, is to turn one’s cap in-
side out. When any one sees a Jack o? lantern, let him
take care not to point at him, for he will come if pointed
at. It is also said that if any one calls him, he will come
and light him who called; but then let him be very
cautious.


Near Skovby on the isle of Felster® there are many
Jack o' lanterns. The peasants say they are the souls of
Innd-measurers who in their lifetime bad perpetrated in-
justice in their measurements, and therefore run up
Skovby bakke at midnight, which they measure with red
hot iron rods, crying, “Here is the clear and right boun-
dary ! from here to there 1”

4 According to the Belgian tradition, they are the souls of unbaptized


children.
+ Lying near the south coast of Seeland,


214 DANISH TRADITIONS.


piety of the people and the more frequent ringing of bell.

He crossed over to Fyen, where he lived for some time.
It happened once that a man who had recently fixed hix
habitation in Kundby, eame to Fyen and met this Troll on
the road. “Where hast thou thy home?” asked the
Troll. There was nothing about the Troll unlike an or-
dinary person, therefore the man answered him truly:

“Tam from Kundby.” “From Kundby ?” repeated the
Troll, “I don’t know thee; though I think I know every
man besides in Kundby. Wilt thou take a letter for me to
Kundby?” ‘The man expressed his willingness, and the
Troll put the letter into the man’s pocket, with the injunc-
tion not to take it thenee until he eame to Kundby church,
where he would need merely to east it over the wall of the
churchyard, and the person would get it for whom it was
intended. They then separated and the man thonght no
more of the letter; but when he had again crossed over
to Sceland, and was sitting in the meadow where Tiis lake
now is, the Trolls letter euddenly entered his thoughts.
Taking it from his pocket, he sat a while with it in his
hand, when on » sudden water began to bubble out from
the seal, the letter expanded itself, and it was with diffi-
culty that the man saved his life; for the Troll had en-
closed a whole lake in the letter, intending by such a de-
struction to revenge himself on Kundby church. But
God averted it, and the lake poured itself into the great
hollow where it now is,


THe SUNKEN MANSION.

In the neighbourhood of Lindenborg, near Aarhuus,
there is a Jake which no one has hitherto been able tofathom.
Of this lake the following story is current in the neigh-
bourhood. Many years ago there stood in the place where
the lake now is, a proud, ancient castle or mansion, of
which the only trace remaining is a road that led to the gate,


DANISH TRADITIONS. 215


but which is now lost under the waters of the lake, On one
holyday-eve, when the family were from home, the servants
of the place indulged in great revel and merriment, which
at length proceeded so far, that in their state of dranken-
ness they wrapped a swine up in bed-linen, placed 2 cap on
its head, and laid it in the master’s bed. They then sent
8 measoge to the priest, summoning him to come without
2 moment’s delay to administer to their master, who lay
at the point of death. The priest was instantly there,
and, observing no deception, read to the swine and did
everything required by his vocation; but when he was
‘about to administer the sacrament, all present burst into
fit of laughter, and the swine snapped the bread out of his
hand. In terror he hurried from the place, but forgot to
take his book with him. Just as he was hastening through
the outer gate, the castle clock struck twelve, when a
cracking and erashing began in every side and corner of
the building, When he turned round the mansion had
sunk and the lake rushed forth from the abyss, As he
stood gating, through fear and wonder unable to proceed,
there came & little stool floating on the water to the border
of the lake, on which lay the book that he had left in
the mansion,


‘TRADITIONS OF WELLS.


HELEN'S WELL.

In Tisvilde Mark in Seeland, close on the coast, there is
a spring, which beyond all others has acquired a celebrity
on account of its miraculous virtues. On St. John’s day,
pilgrimages are made to it by the sick and crippled, even
from the most southern parts of the island; and many
have there recovered their health down to the present day.
‘This spring is called Helen’s Well, and various are the
traditions current respecting it.


216 DANISH TRADITIONS.


1,


There dwelt in Sweden a holy woman named Helen ;
she lived in a forest apart from human converse, and led
a pure godly life, In her solitude she was assailed by
some wicked men, who slew her and cast her body into
the sea, There a'large stone received her lifeless corpse
and floated with it over to Seeland, where it was found
under a high acclivity in Tibirke pai But as, in con-
sequence of the steepness, it was not practicable to bring
it ashore, a miracle caused by her sanctity took place, the
precipice burat asunder so that the body was borne through
it into the plain. The cleft is still to be seen. At the
spot where the body was first laid, « spring gushed forth,
which ia the celebrated well that still bears her name,
‘When her body had been placed in a coffin, it was con-
vyeyed to Tisvilde church, When on its way, the bearers
having used some indecent language, the bier became 80
heavy, that they could not move it from the spot, but it
sank deep into the earth at the place which is atill called
Helen’s grave. The stone on which she flosted to See-
land yet lies on the strand, and bears evident traces of
her body.


m.


Helen was a Scanian princess and much famed for her
beauty. A king fell in love with her, and as he could not
win her affection, he resolved on violence, In her distress
Helen fled from place to place pursued by the king. When
on reaching the sea-shore and the king was about to
seize her, she plunged into the deep. But she did not
perish. A large atone rosd from the bottom of the ocean
and received her, on which she floated over to Seeland,
‘At the spot where she first set her foot on land there
sprang forth a fountain which still bears her name, and


DANISH TRADITIONS. 217


she lived long in that neighbourhood, and was venerated
and visited as a holy woman.


nr.

Three pious sisters being on a voyage together, all
perished, and the waves dispersed their bodies in three
several directions. ‘The first of these was named Helen.
Her body came to Tisvilde, where a fountain sprang from
her grave. The name of the second was Karen, Her
body came to land at the spot in Odd’s district, where St.
Karen’s well is still shown. The third sister was in like
manner cast on shore, and a well likewise sprang from her
grave.


On a cif in Odds district there is a spring called Thore’s well, which
‘may possibly have been so named from the third sister,


sr, KNUD’s WELL.


Near Harrested in Secland, on the spot where Duke
Kaud Layard was treacherously murdered by the king’s
son Magnus (4.p. 1129), a spring gushed forth, which
in visited by persons suffering from bodily ailments. It
bears the name of St. Knud, and around it the grass is
green both summer and winter.


SNOGSKILDE (8NARE’S-WELL).

Whoever is 20 fortunate os to catch a snake with a
crown on its head, or, as it is also called, a royal snake,
and eats # piece of its flesh, becomes ‘ fremsynet ’ (i. e.
able to'ee into hidden things), understands the speech of
animale, and can read any book whatsoever.

From such an event Snogekilde in Fyen derives its
name and origin. As a man was going down the bills in
Guldbierg parish he saw a royal snake putting its head
forth from the earth, which he quickly seized and ran off

1


218 DANISH TRADITIONS.


with it, followed by # multitude of snakes, all bent on
rescuing their king ; but the man, casting off his wooden
shoes, reached his little hut in safety, instantly ate # part
of the snake, and thus acquired a vast insight into the
seerets of this world. From the hole, through which the
crowned snake had crept forth, there sprang a fountain,
which for many years after was fenced in and visited, on
account of the wonderful virtue of its water in the cure of
all diseases. It has now fallen into neglect!

On the isle of Mors? there are ssid to be white vipers, though they
are found but seldom, Whoever eats one acquires an extraordinary de-


‘gree of understanding, together with the faculty of seeing things invisible
to others.


‘THE SAND-HILLS AT NESTVED.
At Fladsé there dwelt a Troll who bore a grudge against
the inhabitants of Nestved®. He therefore one day took
his leather bag, went to the beach, and filled it with sand,
It was now his intention to do the people of Nestved a
great injury, by burying their houses under the sand ; but
as he was on his way to the town, with the sack on his
shoulders, the sand ran out through a hole, and caused
the row of sand-hills that lie between Fladsé and Nestved ;
nor until he reached the spot where the castle of Husvold
formerly stood, was he aware that he had lost the greater
part of the sand, at which he was so angry that he cast
the remainder against Nestved, where it is still to be seen,
a solitary sand-hill.


OP TREES.
In Rugaard Forest there is a tree which has no leaves,


of which it is related, that although it has the appearance
of other trees, it is, nevertheless, an elf, who by night


1 Sea pp. 98, 99.
* A small island in the Liimfiord, in the north of Jutland.
+ A town in the soath of Secland.


DANISH TRADITIONS. 219


goes about the forest. To injure this tree would be dan-
gerous, and would surely call forth vengeance.


‘THE LONELY THORN,

One often aces in a field a solitary thorn, which never
grows larger. Such are always bewitched, and care
should be taken not to approach them too near in the
night time, as there comes a fiery wheel forth from the
bush, which, if» person cannot run away from it, will
destroy him.

OF THE PESTILENCE IN JUTLAND.

On the east side of the churchyard of Fur no one is
buried, because when the Black Death raged in the coun-
try, a living child was buried there, in order to stay the
contagion.

Other instances are given ofthis method of staying the pestilence.


THE RAT-HUNTER,

On the Alhede the people were grievously annoyed with
rats, mice and other vermin, when there came sn itinerant
rat-hunter who undertook to drive them all away. He
first, however, inquired whether they bad ever seen a
dragon thereabouts, and on their answering in the nega-
tive, caused a pile to be raised on the middle of the heath,
having kindled which he sat by it on chair. While the
fire was burning he took forth e book, out of which he
read much, and while he read, rats and mice, serpents and
various reptiles were seen to go into the fire. But at last
there eame a dragon, at the sight of which the man com-
plained that he was betrayed and must now perish him-
self. The serpent then wound his tail round both the
man and his chair, and thus entered the fire, where they
both perished together.


12


220 DANISH TRADITIONS.


HISTORICAL.


HABOR AND SIGNELIL.

Near Ringsted? lies Sigersted, so called from King
Sigar, who resided there. His daughter, Signelil, loved a
noble warrior named Hebor, and to this day ia shown, near
Alsted, the place where they usually met. It still bears
the name of Signelil’s walk,

One day, when chasing a hart, and pursning it across
the rivulet of Vrangstrup, her horse fell under her, #0 that
he was exposed to much danger. At this instant Habor
appeared, sprang into the stream and rescued her. Their
love at length became so ardent, that Habor, disguised as
a waiting-maid, secretly gained admission to Signelil,
which Gunvare, Signelil’s nurse, treacherously betrayed to
King Sigar. ‘The whole affair being now divulged, and
Habor being seized by the king’s men, the two lovers
formed the resolution of dying together. Habor was con-
Aueted to Stanghti, there to be hanged; but feeling de-
sirous in his last moments of proving the fidelity of Sig.”
nelil, he requested that, before he was hanged, his cloak
might be suspended on the gibbet, that he might thence
form an idea how he himself should hang. Signelil, in
the mean while, cast all her jewels into a deep pit, which
is etill ealled Signelil’s well ; whence the saying derives its
origin, that Sigersted has more gold and silver than it
Knows of. She then shut herself in her bower, anxiously
watching the gibbet on which Habor was to suffer. On
pereeiving the cloak, she act fire to the bower, in the be-
lief that Habor was already dead. When the bower to-
gether with Signelil was consumed, and Habor was con-

1 Once a considerable, but now a small, town in Seeland. Tit charch


(St. Ben's), formerly helonging to the Benedictine convent, are deposited
‘the remains of several of the early kings and royal personages.


DANISH TRADITIONS. 221


vinoed of her love, he resigned himself to his fate, and was
buried in Hagehdi. But the accursed nurse had no great
joy of her treachery, being afterwards cast into a well,
which still bears the name of the Nurse’s Well.


‘This in one of the most ancient and celebrated of all the Scandivavian
traditions. In Saxo the narrative at length is admirably given. See also
‘W. Grimm, Altdinieche Heldenlieder, p. 509, also Udvalgte Danske Viser,
Sik. pp. 403, ag., where the several places in Denmark, Sweden and Norway
are specified which claim to be the seene of the tragedy.


FECGEKLIT.

‘There was once, in days of yore, a king in Mors named
Fegge or Fengo. His castle was on the hill which after
him is still called Feggeklit, from whence he could order
his ships out to sea, He and his brother, Horvendil,
ruled alternately on land and on sea, so that one, during
three years, should be engaged in piratical expeditions
abroad, while the other directed the government at home.
But Fegge, growing jealous of Horvendil’s good fortune
and inereasing power, slew him and married his widow,
which murder was afterwards avenged by Horvendil’s son,
Amlet, who slew Fegge, whose grave is still to be seen on
Feggeklit.

JELLINGE BARROWS.

About two miles to the north-west of Veile, near the
village of Jellinge, lie King Gorm the Old and his queen,
‘Thyra, each in a barrow by the side of the churchyard,
On Thyra’s barrow, it is said, there was formerly a fair
fountain, which, as some relate, was conducted in copper
pipes under the earth, from a hill near the village of Rug-
dalle ; while others sey that it was derived from s spring
thet risea in Finnet field; others assure us that Thyra
was suspected of infidelity towards her husband, but that
three days after her interment, a fountain sprang from
the earth in token of her innocence. A peasant once


222 DANISH TRADITIONS.


washed his horse in the water to cure it of the ecab, in
‘consequence of which profanation the well was dried up.

Near these barrows, just without the door of the church,
stand two remarkable monuments of antiquity, namely,
two very large stones with runie inscriptions, which tell
of King Gorm and his queen Thyra, This writing can,
however, be no longer read by any one, unless he stands
‘on his head and has been to the Black School. A cun-
ning priest once read the writing, and thereby learned the
existence of treasure lying sunk in a field on e large stone;
but where it is now to be found, nobody knows.


HOLGER THE DANE UNDER KRONBORG *.


Under the castle of Kronborg a clashing of arms was
frequently to be heard, for which no one could assign a
cause, and in the whole country not one could be found
daring enough to descend into its nethermost passages. °
To a slave, who had forfeited his life, his pardon and free-
dom were promised, if, by descending as far us the passage
admitted, he could bring information of what he there
met with. He came at length to a large iron door, which,
on his knocking, opened of itself, and he found: himself
ina deep vault. From the middle of the roof bung a
lamp nearly burnt out, and beneath it was an immense
stone table, around which sat steel-clad warriors bending
down, and resting their heads on their crossed arms. He
who sat at the end of the table then arose ; it was Holger
the Dane ; but in lifting his head from his arm, the stone
table burst asunder, for his beard had grown into it,
“Reach me thy hand!” said he to the slave; but the
latter, not venturing to give his hand, held out an iron
bar instead, which Holger so squeezed that the marks re-
mained visible. At length letting it go, he exclaimed :
“Tt gladdens me that there are still men in Denmark!”


1 The castle at Elsinore, which guards the passage of the Sound.


DANISH TRADITIONS. 223


BISHOP WILLIAM'S FOOT-MARK.

At the door on the south side of Rocskilde * cathedral,
there is still to be seen on the threshold the place where
Bishop William in his anger set his foot, when he pre-
vented King Svend Estrithsen from entering the ehurch,
and excommunicated him, for having profaned the holy
edifice with unjust bloodshed.


BISHOP WILLIAM'S DEATH AND BURIAL.
When the tidings reached Bishop William of Roeskilde
that his king and master, Svend, surnamed Estrithsen,
was dead, at an advanced age, in Jutland, he prepared to
go and meet the king’s body. Before he set out he went
into the church of the Holy Trinity, called the grave-
diggers to him, ordered them first to dig a grave for the
- king and then one for himself; as he felt certain that he
should immediately follow his beloved master. He then
entered a carriage and proceeded to meet the royal corpse.
On reaching Topshége forest he observed two remarkably
high trees, which he ordered his attendants to fell and to
form a coffin of them. Supposing that the bishop intended
the coffin for the king’s body, they executed his order and
placed the coffin on a vehicle to be conveyed after them.
But on emerging from the forest, Bishop William seeing
the king’s body drawing nigh, ordered the driver to stop ;
he then descended from the carriage, spread his cloak on
the ground, fell on his knees, and prayed to God for peace
and a happy departure. When the attendants, who were
standing by, had long wondered that the bishop still con-
tinued prostrate, they raised his head and saw that he
was no more. They then laid his body in the coffin and
conveyed it back to Roeskilde, ‘Thus was his corpse borne


"Formerly the capital of Denmark and the residence of the Danish
‘monarchs, whose burial-place isin its venerable cathedral.


224 DANISH TRADITIONS,


after the king’s, and buried in the quire, in the place
that he had himself selected.

Afterwards, when Bishop Svend Norbagge' was re-
building the church of hewn stone, and all was
as far as the quire, it being found that Bishop William’s
burial-place occupied too much room, he ordered it to be
removed. In the night there came a man clad in priestly
attire to the precentor, who lay asleep, and ordered him
to greet Bishop Svend and say to him, that he onght to
have been satisfied with the honour of completing the re-
construction of the church, and not to have separated his
body from the king’s ; adding, that if Bishop Svend had led
a less godly life, he would have taken revenge on himeelf,
but now he would be revenged on the building only that
he had raised. With these words he thrust at the wall
with his staff so that a whole column came falling down
in fragments. The precentor, on awaking from his dream,
saw that the column was thrown down, and found himself
lying amid the rubbish, but without having suffered any
injury. When informed of this occurrence, Bishop Svend
answered, that it was not to be wondered at thet Bishop
‘William was so hasty and unyielding after his death, sce-
ing that he had been so during his whole life,

For a long time the grave remained untouched, until
the death of Bishop Asker, when it was thought that the
most honourable place for him was by the side of Bishop

1 Of this prelate, a Norwegian by birth, Saxo (pp. 569, 0.) relaten a
story worth repeating:—When raised to the episcopal digaity, Svend,
‘though well vend in his own native literature, was miserably deficient in
Latin. ‘The preference shown hian by the king excited the eavy of many,
and by way of rendering him ridiculous, it was contrived, when he had t0
celebrate mass, to lay before him s book in which the frst two letters of
amubom, in the prayer for the king, were erased ; so that in his ignorance
‘he prayed God to protect his majesty, rmulam suum. On inspecting the
‘book, the king at once perceived the rick, and caused the bishop (whom


hie loved for his virwues) to apply himself to the study of the liberal arts,
in which he afterwards excelled.


DANISH TRADITIONS. 225


William, of which opinion were the precentor Herman,
‘the schoolmaster Arnfast, and the provost Isaac. These
three opened the grave, and found, on examining it,
Bishop William’s cope, which spread around so sweet and
pleasant an odour, that they thence concluded he must be
blessed in heaven. The odour was at the same time so
powerful, thet for three days those who had touched the
cope could not wash it off their fingers. But when they
threw his bones aside with no respect, each received his
punishment. Herman the precentor got the St. Anthony’s
fire in his nose, of which within three days he died. The
schoolmaster, who, by way of remedy for an increasing
debility of the limbs, took to.drinking, beeame such a
sufferer that he vomited up his liver, and confessed to
Bishop Absalon, who visited him, that he suffered all be-
cause of that sin: he entered a cloister and died three
months after, Provost Isaac, who saw how the other two
‘were punished, sold all that he owned and founded the
convent of St. Mary in Roeskilde, but nevertheless died
of a wasting sickness.


‘THE PUNISHMENT OF INHUMANITY.


‘When King Cnut the Saint was pursued to the church
of St. Alban in Odense, he knelt down before the high
altar, prayed to God for forgiveness of his sins, and pre-
pared himself for death. While there kneeling he suffered
severely from thirst, and therefore besonght a Jutlander,
who peered in at a window, to be so compassionate as to
give him a little drink of water. ‘The man thereupon ran
to a brook and brought some water in a jug; but when
in the act of reaching it in to the king, another Jutlander,
who was standing by, struck the vessel with his spear, so
that all the water was spilt on the church floor. Then said
the king to him who had broken the jug: “Dost thou
deny me a little drink of water?” And having said this,

us


226 DANISH TRADITIONS.


he was slain by a stone that was cast at him (4.p. 1086),
But the pitiless Jute met with his reward. He became
mad and suffered from burning thirst, and one day having
laid himself down by a spring to draw up water, he slipt
half way down into the well and remained hanging by the
legs, with his head close to the water, though without
touching it, and so perished.


SVEND GRATHE'S MILITARY CHEST.


In Jutland, near the village of Kragelund, there is a
Inrge morass called Graa-Mose. It was formerly called
Grathe Mose, it having been there that Svend Grathe was
slain by King Valdemar. (a.p. 1157). Connected with
this place is the following tradition. When Svend Grathe
saw that the battle was lost, he caused his large military
chest to be cast into the slough (for such at that time it
was), from which cause there is seen, as in every place
where treasure is concealed, lights burning by night.
Hitherto it has been sought for in vain; and a school-
teacher, who had one night stuck pegs where he saw the
lights, found them all pulled up on the following morning,


‘THE TWO CHURCH TOWERS.


Herr Asser Ryg resolved on building a church at Fien-
nesléviille; but before the same was finished, he was
obliged to go to the wars with his kinsmen. When on the
eve of departure, he desired his wife, who was at the time
pregnant, that if she brought him a son, to place a tower
on the church, but if daughter, then to omit that oma-
ment. When he returned some time after, lo, there stood
the church with two towers! His wife had brought him
two sons, and these were Absalon and Esbern Snare.

‘The words of Saxo (see Dablmann, Gesch. v. Diinnem. i. 279, note)
render this tradition rather doubtful: quanquam (Heshernus) natu pre-
Stet” Absalon was the celebrated archbishop of Lund and still more


DANISH TRADITIONS, 227


‘celebrated stateaman and warrior under Valdemar I, surnamed the Great.
His brother, Esbern (Asbidra), was also distinguished statesman and
warrior.


ARCHBISHOP ABSALON’S DEATH.


Absalon had wronged peasant, who, when on his death-
bea, cited the archbishop before the judgement-seat of
God; and at the moment when the peasant died, Absalon
was also called to his account. It befell at the same time in
the monastery of Soré, that the brethren, who had received.
no tidings of the archbishop’s death, heard, on the eve-
ning of the same day, a mournful voice near the altar,
saying: “Sora! Sora! pro me supplex ora!”


DANNEBROG.


While King Valdemar the Vietorious was fighting
against the heathen Livonians, with the view of converting
them to the Christian faith, Archbishop Andrew of Lund
stood, like the Moses of his time, on a high hill, offering
up prayers to God for the success of the Danish arms,
And it is said, that as long as he was able to hold his
arms aloft, the Danes were successful; but the instant he
let them sink, through the weakness of age, the heathens
gained the advantage. On which account, the other
Priests, who were present, supported his arma as long as
the conflict Insted. It was in this battle the miracle took
place, that, when the Danish principal banner was lost in
the heat of the contest, there fell from heaven a banner
bearing a white cross on a red field, and to this the Danes
owed the victory. This precious banner was preserved
for a long time after, and it was the general belief, that
wherever it was, there was vietory certain. They named
it the Dannebrog. On the spot where this battle was
fought, the town of Wolmar was afterwards built, and so
named after King Valdemar.


228 DANISH TRADITIONS.


DANNEBROG SHIPS.


On Gienner Mark, about a mile from Apenrade!, there
are still the remains of an ancient monument called the
Dannebrog sl It is said to have originally consisted
of twenty greater or smaller stones, shaped into the figure
of ships, and set up on a level spot in the form of an oval,
so that the end of one stone is parted from the next only
dy another stone standing up between them.

Of these stones it is related, that when King Valdemar
II. had conquered the heathen Livonians, through the aid
of the miracle of the Dannebrog, he, on his way back to
Denmark, caused these stones to be set up near the bay
formed by the Baltic on the east of the rural village of
Gienner, as a lasting monument of his victory, on which
account they were called the Dannebrog ships.

In the course of time some of these stones have been
broken and placed in the fences of the peasants; there is,
nevertheless, still a remnant of them left standing, and
ancient people, who have seen more of them, declare that ,
they had the form of ships.


ST. NIELS (NICHOLAS), THE PATRON OF AARHUS.


‘When King Cout the Sixth was on his way from North-
to South-Jutland, and was in Haderslev®, where he in-
tended to pass the night, there came a soothsayer to him,
who had knowledge of the stars. This man declared he
had read in the heavens that on the next night a child
would be conceived, who in the course of time should
acquire great renown and be in favour both with God and
man, On hearing this, the king was instantly seized with

+ A town on the east coast of Sleswig.

2 On, Ger. Hadersleben, a town of Sleswig. South Jutland i another


same for the duchy of Sleswig, which it bore till the close of the 14th
century.


DANISH TRADITIONS, 229


a strong desire to be the father of so fortunate a babe, and
forthwith gave orders that a noble young lady should be
secretly conducted to him on the following night and shere
his bed. ‘This took place as he had commanded, and the
said young Indy, at the expiration of nine months, brought
a boy into the world, who cost his mother her life. ‘This
prince, who at his baptism received the name of Nicls,
was delivered to the king's sister, to be reared by her
until he was sufficiently grown up to be conducted to the
court, there to be instructed in martial exercises and
knightly demeanour. When Prince Niels hed been some
time at court, it came to his knowledge that his existence
had cost his mother her life, which circumstance had such
an effect on his mind, that from that moment he entirely
altered his course of life; so that it was said of him, that
from that time he never laughed. ‘The dissipations of the
court were 40 distasteful to him, that he sought solitude,
and devoted himself to praying and fasting to that degree,
that every Friday he partook only of bread and water,
renounced the use of linen, clothed himeelf ine garment
of hair, and passed the nights in devout prayer on his
bare knees. At last he resolved wholly to forsake the
turmoil of the world, and withdrew to Anrhuus, there to
pass the remainder of his life. In that eity he founded a
monastery with a church, which was afterwards called by
his name, ‘To this cloister he retired, and chose a monic
named Hugo to live with him, besides whom he associated
with no one.

‘A short time before his death, which happened in the
year 1180, a revelation took place. The before-mentioned
Hugo, who slept in the same apartment with the prince,
saw in the night a procession of young clergymen enter
the chamber, clad in their robes of ceremony, with purple
copes, and bearing lighted wax tapers in their hands. At
the brilliancy of the light Hugo awoke, rose from his bed,


230 DANISH TRADITIONS,


fell on his knees before his young master, and related to
him the vision he had seen, asking what it betokened?
‘The prince answered that it was » message from heaven,
to announce that he should die on the night following.
The next day he summoned to him his friends in the city
and all the monks of the convent, gave them kind ex-
hortations, and bade them farewell. He then distributed
liberal alms among the poor, and departed hence, as he
had predicted, on the following night, after having di-
rected to be buried in the church of St. Oluf by the sea,
which church he had, during his life, enriched with royal
donations. After his death, it seemed to Bishop Svend
of Asrhuus that the spot chosen by the prince was too
mean for so exalted a personage; he would, therefore,
have had his body borne to the conventual church of St.
Nicholas; but it happened that a star was seen to fall
from heaven on the eastern side of St. Oluf’s church,
which was interpreted to signify that the prince by that
miracle repeated his wish and command; so that the
bishop was forced to comply. After his burial in that
church, divers miracles took place there from time to time.
By the grave a wooden cross was erected, which in the
course of time having become decayed, these words were
heard thrice repeated: “Make a new cross of oak from
Skeibye forest, and sct it on the mound where St. Niels
is buried!” ‘This was done as ordered, and the trunk
that was brought from the forest was so large and heavy,
that five yoke of oxen could hardly draw it into Aarhuns.

Near to the grave there stood a large apple-tree, A.
person having once climbed up this tree for the purpose
of stealing the fruit, became palsied both head and foot,
so that he could neither descend nor even move, before he
had prayed to the saint for forgiveness, and made a vow
that he would never again be tempted to rob him of his
apples,


DANISH TRADITIONS. 231


There was a box placed by the grave, which day and
night stood open to receive the pious gifts of every one
who had, through the intercession of the saint, recovered
from blindness, deafness, or other corporal infirmity. From
this box a thief was once tempted to carry off a pair of
curiously wrought eyes of silver, which a man, who had
been restored to sight at St. Niels’ grave, had placed in
it, This thief eame from Horsens, and desiring to hasten
back with his booty, ran the whole night on the way, as
he thought, to that town; but at day-break met a priest
just entering o churchyard, from whom he learned that
he was still in St. Olu?’s churchyard, and that, notwith-
standing all his running, he had not stirred from the spot.
He then confessed his enormous sin, and having given
back the silver eyes, without difficulty found the way back
to Horsena.

A cow belonging to a poor woman having died, St.
Nicls restored it to life. He did in like manner with a
flock of sheep in Randlev; and a hawk, which had died
on King Valdemar’s hand, became again living on calling
on St. Niels.

He was once standing near some workmen, who were
cutting timber in Viby forest for a church that was to be
built. Hearing them complain of thirst, he forthwith
caused a spring to gush out for their refreshment, which
still bears his name, and is visited by the sick.

After St. Niels had performed many such miracles, and
his shrine been richly gifted, there arose in the time of
King Erie Menved an apprehension, that the sweet and
powerful odour, which issued from his grave, would tempt
Marek Stig and his band of robbers over from the iale of
Hielm, not far from Aarhus. In consequenee of this
apprehension, both St. Niels and his shrine were removed
to St. Clement's church in Aarhus; but from that time
he performed no more miracles, and the pleasant odour


282 DANISH TRADITIONS.


from his bones entirely ceased and returned not egain—
not even after he had been made a saint by the pope.


LITTLE KIRSTEN'S (CHRISTINE'S) GRAVE.
Just without the north door of Vestervig! church there
is @ remarkably long grave-stone, with a cross engraved
on it, and an illegible inscription, Beneath it Lies Little
Kirsten, the sister of King Valdemar the First. During
the absence of the king she entered into un illicit connec-
tion with Buris, prince of the Wends, and brother to the
queen, by whom she became pregnant. When the king
on his return observed what had taken place, he called,
as it is said, Little Kirsten out to dance, and danced her
to death, Prince Buris he ordered to be blinded and cast
into prison. After » time, when the king’s anger was
somewhat mitigated, he allowed the unhappy prince to
choose another prison, and he chose the monastery of
Vestervig, where he was kept confined until his death in
‘a tower, which stood where the churchyard now is; and
it is related that he had a chain round his body so long
that he could go from his tower to Kirsten’s grave, which
he daily visited. The queen, his sister, on the other hand,
who had always hated Little Kirsten, eame one day riding
that way, and to show her contempt, galloped over the
grave; but the stone proved less hard than her heart, and
reeeived the dints of the horse’s hoofs.


‘MARSK STIG.


After the death of Marsk Stig at Hiclm’, his corpse
was conveyed by night to the church of Hinteeholm, and


1 A town on the Liimfiord, om the westside of Jutland.
2 Stig Andersen was Marck (i.e. Marshal) of the kingdom. He was
one of the assamins of King Erik Glipping, who, it ie said, bad die-
honoured his wife. Under the reign of Erik Menved, son of the murdered
king, the Marsk being outlawed, fortified himself on'Hielm, « litle island
‘off the coast of Jutland in the Cattegat See Danske Viser, il 115-162.


DANISH TRADITIONS. 233


there secretly buried by his followers, who would not have
it known where he rested, lest his remains should suffer
insult. But at the time they brought the body to the
ehureh, it happened that a servant girl saw a light in the
building and men carrying in a corpse. This she told to
the priest, and the grave was afterwards searched. But
the priest not knowing who it was that had been so buried,
‘made no mention of the circumstance, but took the velvet
‘that was over the coffin, a part of which he gave to the
girl. A considerable time after this event, the same girl
‘became the wife of one of Marsk Stig’s followers, who one
day noticing the velvet on s cushion, inquired of her
whence she got it? She thereupon recounted what had
taken place; but as he was fearful that his master’s rest-
ing-place might thereby be one day discovered, he killed
her, although he entertained much affection for her.


KING VALDEMAR AND QUEEN HELVIG.
y

Once when king Valdemar was in the act of mounting
his horse, and had already set one foot. in the stirrup, he
fell into deep thought, and so continued standing, to the
great astonishment of those present. At length one of
his attendants ventured to ask him why he thus continued
standing? The king answered, that if he could not inform
him, nor procure him information whether that over which
he was pondering would happen or not, he must never
again appear before him. With this answer the man went
away full of sorrow ; he wandered about in the forest, and
Anew not to which side he should turn, At length he
observed a woman in the forest sitting by a fire, who on
his approach asked him why he appeared so sorrowful,
and on his informing her, laughed at him, saying : “ Greet
thy master and tell him, that Sweden can easily fall to


234 DANISH TRADITIONS.


Denmark, if he will receive Queen Helvig, into favour!”
Queen Helvig was in disgrace, and had been repudistel
by the king; for which reason, on hearing the man’s an-
swer, he was very angry, and said that such should never
be the case,

It happened, however, as through 2 miracle, that as the
king was once hunting in the forest near the castle of
Réborg, where Queen Helvig was at the time residing,
he saw a damsel, with whose beauty he was so smitten
that he ordered his attendants to conduct her to him at
midnight. But when the servants came to employ force
against this young person, announcing to her at the same
time the king’s will, Queen Helvig, who had received in-
formation of the whole affair, resolved on putting on the
young gitl’s clothes, and letting heraelf be conducted by
the attendants to the king her consort. She became preg-
nant, and gave birth to a daughter, afterwards the cele-
brated Queen Margaret, who united Sweden with Denmark
and Norway.

This and the three following traditions refer to King Valdemar IV.
surnamed Atterdag (Grom stter, again, and dag, day) in consequence, it
in supported of hi frequent use of the expression “ Morgen er atter en
Dag" (To-morrow is again a day). His queen, Helvig, was confined in


{he castle of Sdborg wall her death, on account of the affair with Folker
Lovmandsen. See p. 236.


nm


Once when king Volmar was about to mount on horse-
back, he continued standing with his left foot in the
stirrup, and appeared lost in thought. At this moment a
man was led by whom the king had condemned to death,
who falling on his knees, prayed for his life. The king
starting said: “If thon eanst enable me to know what
the thought was that has just passed from my mind, and
whether it will be accomplished, thou shalt be free.”


DANISH TRADITIONS. 285


Hereupon the man got permission to travel over the eoun-
try to all those skilled in secret knowledge; but no one
could answer his inquiry. One evening he came toBorbierg,
a steep cliff lying out in the sea. Here he struck thrice
with the white staff he had in his hand, and the dwarf of
the cliff came out. He could, however, afford no infor-
mation : “but I have,” said he, “a great-grandfather in
Dagbierg Dans, who is an old and very sagacious man:
try your luck with him.” ‘The man took staff in hand
and hied away to Dagbierg, but fared not a whit better
there; the dwarf knew nothing whatever : “But I have
a great-great-grandfather in the Rédateen (Red-stone) on
Fuur; if he can’t inform you, no one can.” ‘The man then
dragged on to the isle of Faur, and it happened to be just
midnight when he stood by the cave and knocked three
times, A very little old man came tottering forth. “Yes,
Tean help thee, sure enough ; but first thou shalt tell me
three truths.” ‘The man bethought himself a moment,
and said: “Much have I travelled and far have I been',
yet never have seen so firm a house as thine.” —“Yes, that I
can well believe, for it is a eave of one stone ;—now again !””
—*Much have I travelled and far have I been, yet never
have seen so much gold and silver in one spot.”—“ Yes,
that is very possible; but now another.”—“ Much have I
travelled and far have I been, yet never have seen so little
aman with so long a beard.” For it was so long that
the little man almost trod on it. “Yes,” said the men-
nikin, “and now I will tell thee what the king was think-
ing about, and that is, whether he could get Denmark,
Norway and Sweden hammered together; but that will
only take place under his daughter.” The man was
heartily rejoiced, appeared with his answer before the
king, and got remission of his sentence according to
promise.
¥ Almost the words of Odin in the Eddie poem, Vafthrudair’s Mil


236 DANISH TRADITIONS.


QUEEN HELVIG AND FALK LOHMAN.

‘When King Valdemar Atterdag discovered that Queen
Helvig was unfaithful to him, and held illicit intercourse
with Falk Lohman, he cansed the latter to be hanged
without the Strand-gate at Nyborg', and adjudged the
queen to witness the execution from the ramparts. ‘The
prison in which he was confined was in the esstle, and til
within a few years was shown, under the name of Falk
Lohman’s chamber. But the queen yet appears mourn-
ing on the ramparts, and, it is said, sometimes speaks to
the sentinels, one of whom so won her favour, that she
promised him he should, every morning, in a certain place
and under a particular stone find a dollar. For some time
the soldier regularly found his dollar, but having fallen
sick and sending one of his comrades to fetch it, there
was no dollar there, nor has one been found under the
stone from that time.


QUEEN MARGARET WHEN A CHILD.


Queen Helvig had forfeited the favour of the king her
husband, and for several years been confined in Gurre
castle, because she had caused Tovelille, the king’s mis-
tress, to be killed in a bath, It happened that the king,
when once riding over the ‘Copper-bridge,’ noticed a
pretty little girl, in a peasant’s dress, standing at the castle
gate. Being much pleased with the child, he placed her
before him on his horse. “Now,” said the little one,
“we will ride to court.” “What wilt thon do there?”
asked the king. “Beg forgiveness for my mother, Queen
Helvig,” answered the child. This so softened the king’s
anger, that he took hie queen again into favour. The


1 A fortified town on the island of Fyen, whence is the regular passage
over to Seeland.


DANISH TRADITIONS, 237


little girl was named Margaret ; she grew up and became
queen of the three northern realms.


PROPHECY OF KING FREDERIC THE FIRST'S ACCESSION TO
THE THRONE,

In the year 1515, when King Christian II. was cele-
brating his marriage in the palace at Copenhagen, and
the assembled nobles were sitting amid joy and fest
Duke Frederic, the king’s paternal uncle, entered the hall,
Among the nobles present was Ditlef Rewentlow, who was
reported to be well skilled in astronomy and the black art.
‘When he saw the duke entering, he hastily rose, saying
to those around him: “Stand up, ye Danish nobles ! and
advance to meet your future king!” Which prophecy,
after a lapse of eight years, was fulfilled, and Ditlet Re-
wentlow, on the accession of Frederic I., became his chan-
cellor and privy counsellor.


SPECTACLES DUCATS.


In the reign of King Christian IV. a gold mine was
discovered in Norway, from which the king caused some
half-dueats to be coined. But some foreign traders having
denied that it was Norwegian gold, it being quite unheard
of to find gold in Norway, the king was indignant ; and
therefore, when more gold was afterwards found there, he
ordered half- and quarter-ducats to be coined, bearing for
device a pair of spectacles, thereby signifying that those
who were still doubtful, might put on their spectacles to
see the better.


238 DANISH TRADITIONS.
ie


OF HISTORICAL PERSONS, FAMILY TRADI. |*
TIONS, ETC. a


‘THE ARMS OF THE BILLE FAMILY.


In the arms of the noble family of Bille there is
dwarf or little wild man, concerning whom there is the |'
following tradition, 1

Many hundred years ago there was a great drought in
the country, #0 that all the water-mills were stopt, and the
people could get no com ground. During this calomity
a land-proprietor of the above-mentioned family was walk-
ing in his court-yard, much perplexed and dejected, when
a little dwarf eame to him, whose body was all shaggy,
and in his hand carrying a tree that had been torn up by
the roots. Standing before the proprietor, he asked him
why he was so sad? To which the other answered,
“What can it avail if I tell thee, for thou canst not help
me.” The dwarf replied, “Thon art sad because thou
canst not get thy corn ground, and hast many children
and people that require bread. But I will show thee
place on thy own grounds where thou eanst build seven
tills that shall never lack water.” And having pointed
out to him the spot, Herr Bille built there the seven mills
still existing by Ellebro Dam, which are never at a stand
for want of water, winter or summer.

It is further related that the same dwarf gave him a
little white horn, which, as long aa it remained in his
family, should preserve them in prosperity. This horn, it
is said, was long preserved at Sdholm in Seeland.


HERR ESKE BROK,


Herr Bske Brok, who dwelt at Vemmeltoft, going one day
into the fields, amused himself with striking the air with
his stick, when suddenly a hat fell at his feet, which he


DANISH TRADITIONS. 239


ordered his servant to take up, and placed it on his own
head ; but had no sooner done 0 than he became invisi-
ble. He then tried it on his servant with the same result;
‘80 that whoever had the hat on became invisible to others.
Greatly delighted with his prize, he took it home with
him. Shortly after a bareheaded boy came to the gate,
requesting to speak with Herr Eske Brok. When the
latter appeared, the boy requested to have his hat back,
which Herr Eske had struck from his head with a stick,
offering a hundred ducats for it, and afterwards more, if
he would let him have it. But all that the boy could say
‘was to no purpose, for Herr Eske had taken a particular
fancy to the hat. At length the boy promised him, that
if he would give it back, bis posterity should never come to
want anything, and by this means got the hat from the
<junker, who thought that with such a promise it was well
paid. But the boy, when going out at the door, said:
“Thou shalt leave no sons behind thee, but daughters
only!” And so it proved in the sequel, for Herr Eske’s
wife brought forth several sons all dead-born, and he him-
self died the lust of his race.


THE HAL-PULL BOTTLE.

When the Swedes above a hundred years since invaded
Holstein, it happened that after battle in which the
Danes were vietorions, a soldier, who had his post on the
field, hed with great difficulty obtained a bottle of beer to
allay his burning thirst. When about to drink he heard
a Swede, who had lost both his legs, calling to him in a
faint voice, and begging a refreshing draught. ‘The soldier
thereupon went to him, and seeing his deplorable condi-
tion, bent forwards to reach him the bottle; but at the
same moment the treacherous enemy fired his pistol at
him, hoping even in death to have his revenge. But the ball
missed, for our Lord held his hand over the compassionate


0 baMtan raapisions |


soldier. Rising up he drank half the contents of the
bottle, and then held it out to the traitor saying : “Scoun-
drel! now thou shalt have only the half.”

‘When this reached the ears of the king, he ordered the
soldier to be called before him, and gave him a cost of
arms, in which was a half-filled bottle; and this bearing
has continued in his family, which yet lives in Flensborg.


HERR BRLAND LIMBEK.

The Limbeks were an eminent race in Denmark, but are
now extinct ; from, it is said, the following cause.

While Herr Erland Limbek was residing at Graven-
gaard in Jutland, there one day came a dwarf to him as
he was walking in his fields, complaining that he was en-
gaged in hostilities with another dwarf, and feared that he
was hardly strong enough to withstand him, unless Her
Erland would come to his aid on a certain day. He at
the same time promised the knight that if he would do so,
his race should be powerful and prosperous as long as the
world lasted. Herr Erland promised to assist the dwarf,
and fixed both time and place ; but being one night un-
able to sleep, and tossing himself about in the bed, his wife
asked him why he was so restless? He then imparted to
her the promise he had made to the dwarf, whereupon she
exclaimed: “God forbid, my dear husband! that you
should have intercourse with such demons!” and per-
suaded him to break his word. Some time after, on s
Christmas eve, as Herr Erland was sitting merry with his
family and friends, the door of the room was opened, and
a little dwarf in » habit of gold embroidery entered, saying
to the knight: “Had you kept your word, I would have
kept mine; but now your race shall from day to day de-
generate and be despised, and at last be extinguished, and
the last of your family shall be mad!” Hereupon Herr
Erland became angry, and said: “ Dost thou threaten


DANISH TRADITIONS, 241


me?” and attempted to strike him, but the dwarf retired
vw the door. ‘The knight then ordered a servant to seize
im, but the dwarf slipt away in haste, yet was, neverthe-
leas, jammed in the doorway, so that he lost one of his
shoes, which proved to be of pure gold. From this event
the knight acquired the name of Herr Erland Guldsko.


THE FAMILY OF MONRAD.


‘The family of Monrad is said to descend from a miller
in Hungary, who in a war with the Turks raised a body
of men and destroyed a large Turkish force, whereby he
relieved a corps of Imperialista. As a reward for so im-
portant a service, the emperor made him a general and
raised him to the rank of noble, giving him shield and
helmet, and commanding him to bear in his shield a half-
moon, in remembrance of the Turks, and a mill-wheel,
that he might remember his former condition; whence
he and his posterity acquired the name of Mondrad',


THE NAME AND ARMS OP THE ROSENKRANDSES,
1b

‘The first of the Rosenkrands family was Herr Bric, In
company with Stie Hvide he made a journey to Rome,
where the pope gave him a wreath (krands) of roses, which,
as a remembrance, he caused to be represented on his
helmet, whence his family acquired its name. ‘This Herr
Rosenkrands lies buried in Hidrringholms Mark.


n.

In the year 668 the young Herr Styge, a son of the
king of Denmark, made a journey to King Ekuin in Eng-
land, for the purpose of helping him in war, There, on
account of his valour, he became a great favourite, parti-


1 Prom Ger. Mond, moon, and Rad, wheel,
u


242 DANISH TRADITIONS,


eularly of the ladies ; but the one that loved him most
was the daughter of Reduval, the prince royal, and he, on
his part, also loved her. He therefore continued at court
throughout the winter; but when summer came the prin-
cess was pregnant. After his departure from England, the
princess was delivered of a son, which she laid in a golden
coffer, with a consecrated candle and salt, because he had not
been baptized, and placed the coffer out on the sea-strand.
One day her father, the prince royal, Reduval, happening to
ride by, found the infant, and concluding from the golden
coffer that he was of high parentage, he had him reared
and gave him the name of Carl. After the king’s death,
the prince royal, Reduval, ascended the throne of England,
of which he was the first Christian king. Carl in the
meanwhile grew up and became distinguished for bravery,
so that the king thought he could not do better than
marry him to his daughter. When the wedding was just
about to take place, the prineess disclosed to the bride-
groom that he was her own son by Prince Styge of Den-
mark, At this intelligence the king was so exasperated,
that he declared at first she should perish on the pile;
but the young Carl interceded for her end effected a mar-
riage with her and Prince Styge, who had been separated
from her for nineteen years.

In remembrance of these events Prince Carl divided his
shield into four parts by @ white cross, whereby he beto-
kened that he was a Christian; he next painted it trans
versely red and blue, thereby betokening that he was both
a Danish and an English prince. In the first quarter he
placed a white lion crowned, to denote Denmark; in the
fourth another white lion for England. In the second and
third quarters he placed a black and white chess-board,
thereby signifying the separation that had so long existed
between his father and mother. And these are the arms
of Rosenkrands.


DANISH TRADITIONS, 243


‘THE ARMS OF THE TROLLE FAMILY.


The Trolles were in their time, particularly in the
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, one of the first families
in Denmark. In allusion to their name, they bore in
their coat a Troll or demon, and wherever monuments of
the family are to be seen, this demon is to be seen also.
‘Even in the cathedral of Roeskilde, he ia represented on
the iron lattice which encloses the sepulchral chapel of the
family. He there appears larger than life with a long tail
and claws in a half-flying attitude, the effect of which,
when viewed ona sudden, is somewhat startling. The
Trolle family is now extinct. One of its most illustrious
members was Admiral Herluf Trolle, the founder of the
school of Herlufsholm in the seventeenth century, the Eton
or Winchester of Denmark '.


MAJOR.GENERAL SVANWEDEL,


About two hundred years ago there dwelt at Nérre-Vos-
borg in Jutland a proprietor named Svanwedel. He hnd
been a major-general in the Swedish war, and was, more-
over, skilled in the black art. On one oceasion, during
the war in Scania, he was surrounded by the enemy, and
had with him only a small body of troops. But he ma-
naged to help himself; for in the night he transformed #
quantity of rushes, thst were growing in the field, into sol-
diers, with whose aid he attacked and beat the enemy.
Next morning these soldiers were all rushes again standing
on the field as before.

When he died at Vosborg, his body was, according to
usage, deposited in the castle chapel before being conveyed
tothe church. One evening, as his daughter entered the
chapel, he rose up in his coffin and directed her to send
for Magister Nicls, the priest of Huusby. Although this


+ Kohl's Reiven in Diuemark, i. p. 283, See also p. 91,
ud


24h DANISH TRADITIONS.


Magister Niels, during the general's life-time, had been
constantly quarreling with him, he nevertheless eame with-
out delay, having with him a sharp axe. He then shat
himself in the chapel with the corpse, but what passed be-
tween them no one knows; only such a noise was heard
within that the whole mansion shook with it. At length
all was again silent, and Master Niels came out with his
axe, looking deadly pale. From that time the genenl
remained quiet in his coffin, and was buried with great
pomp in Ulvborg chureh.


‘TRADITIONS OF TOWNS AND OTHER PLACES.
‘THE RAMPARTS OF COPENHAGEN,


Many years ago, when the ramparts were being raised
round Copenhagen, the earth always sank, so that it was
not possible to get it to stand firm. They therefore took
a little innocent girl, placed her on a chair by a table, and
gave her playthings and sweetmeats. While ahe thus sat
enjoying herself, twelve masons built an arch over her,
which when completed they covered over with earth, to
the sound of music with drums and trumpets. By this
process they are, it is said, rendered immoveable.

It isa universal tradition that every kind of building is strengthened
shen any living being in buried beneath it, or auch sacrifices, a lamb,
‘wine, or poultry, are generally chosen. Heinrich Heine (Die roman
tische Schule, 270), says on this rubject “Tn the middle age the opinion
prevailed, that when any building was to be erected, something living
‘must be killed, on the blood of which the foundation must be laid, by
whieh process the building would continue frm and immoveable.

‘And in ballads and traditions the remembrance is lil preserved how


children or animals were slaughtered, for the purpose of strengthening
large buildings with their blood.”


THE IMAGE OF ST. OLUF.


St. Oluf had a chapel at Taasinge, in which his image
was preserved. This it was the custom of the peasants to


DANISH TRADITIONS. 25


carry about their fields, after they had put their seed in
the ground, that they might have a plentiful harvest. It
‘once happened that a countryman, who had been carry-
ing the image about his fields, and ought to have restored
it to its place in the chapel, thought it advisable to wait
till the following day, but having no better place where-
in to deposit it, he laid it in the oven. Next morning the
servant maid having to bake, and not knowing that St.
Oluf was there, put fire in the oven, and so the image
was burnt. From that time it is said that the village has
no good luck to expect.


SECRET PASSAGES UNDER AALBORG.


‘Under the town of Aalborg there are many seoret pas-
sages, which are relics of the monkish times. The largest
of these is said to lead from the old convent, used at pre-
sent partly as an hospital and partly as a school, and is
supposed to extend, under the fiord, as far as Sundby,
where there was formerly @ convent of nuns. The descent
to this passage was well secured; for first it was closed
with a brazen door, on which many beautiful figures were
sculptured, and next with four doors of iron, one within
another, One side passage led from this chief one to the
church of St. Mary, under the mansion in which King
Hans died. ‘The ascent into the church was through a
tomb. -Another branch led from the chief passage to St,
Budolf’s church, and thence to the ‘Murede Port's’
bridge. A third branch led, in an opposite direction,
from St. Mary’s church, or from the convent, to the old
castle of Aslborghuus,

‘A student once undertook to explore these passages,
which he entered with a cord bound fast round his body.
In one hand he had a sword, in the other a light. At the
outside of the entrance he had placed people, who at a


246 DANISH TRADITIONS.


given sign should draw him back by means of the cord.
But after he had been in two hours without making any
sign, they drew the cord, the end of which was burnt off
‘The student was never again heard of,


OF CHURCHES AND CONVENTS.


oF CHURCHES.

‘When King Cnut, surnamed the Saint, was building
the first churches in the country, he wished them to be s0
strong that they might last until the end of the world.
He therefore prayed to God for direction how he might
build strong and masterly. He then went to the sea-
shore, where there Iay much froth (skum). This he or-
dered the masons to take and to build with it. Through
his sanctity this froth became as hard as stone, and the
churches that have such walls will never decay as long as
the world endures.


OF the so-called froth-walls many instances occur among the old
couutry churches of Denmark. ‘They consist of a poroas mass which
‘the peasants call fra (froth), the production of which the master-masons
Aeclare it to them a perfect riddle. Notwithstanding its porosity itis
extremely durable. From the description it would seem to be of the na-
ture of travertin or peperia, of which the ancient builders made use, and
‘which is fil much used in the South, As long as it lies in its natural
bed it is oo soft that it may be cut out with a spade, but by the infuence
cof the atmosphere it increases in hardness from yeat to year.


THE TOWER OF ST. MARY'S IN COPENHAGEN.

In the year 1514, when a spire was being placed on the
tower of St. Mary’s cathedral in Copenhagen, a carpenter's
man had an altercation with his master, and in his anger
boasted that he was as able a workman as himself. To
make an end of the dispute, the master laid a beam out
from the top of the tower, took an axe in his hand, went
out on the beam, and struck the axe fast in the end of it.
Having done this, and being safely returned, he ordered


DANISH TRADITIONS. 247


hig man to go and fetch him the axe. The man went
without hesitation, but while standing on the end of the
beam, and in the act of seizing the axe, it seemed to him
that there were two, and he asked: “Master! which is it
tobe?” ‘The master then knew how it was with him,
and answered only: “God be merciful to thy poor soul !”
‘At the same instant the man reeled from the beam.

‘A story nearly the same is related of the tower of 8, Couts church in
‘Odense, but in which the man, when on the end of the beam, looked over
the town and in hia repidation cried :** Master] Bilbo incoming nearer!”
Balbo isa azall place near Odemte


THE CHIMES IN THE TOWER OP ST. NICHOLAS.

During the great fire at Copenhagen, and while the
church of St, Nicholas was enveloped in flames, the tower
long stood reeling from one side to another. People, too,
relate who heard it, that the chimes in the meanwhile
played of themselves the psalm: “God knows how near
me is mine end.”


‘THE SEA-TROLL IN THE ISSEFIORD.


In former days there dwelt in the Issefiord' a Troll,
who was uecustomed to stop every vessel that entered the
fiord and demand a man from each. This calamity had
been long endured, when it became known that the power
of the Troll would last until the head of Pope Lucius
should be shown him, who had been beheaded in Rome
many centuries before. Some monks were accordingly
forthwith sent to Rome to fetch the head. When the ship
returned and was about to run into the fiord, the Troll
made his appearance; but as soon as they held forth the
head and the Troll got a sight of it, he with » horrid howl

1 The Iaseiord or firth ruvs from the Cattogat in vazious directions into


Seelgnd. The city of Rocskilde ia built on the south end of one of ita
arms called the Roeskilde ford.


248 DANIMH TRADITIONS.


transformed himself into a rock. In Roeskilde cathedral
many representations are to be seen which may be ex-
plained by this tradition.


ROESKILDE CATHEDRAL.


In the year 1084 Roeakilde cathedral was dedicated to
Pope Imeins, who in the year 253 had suffered martyrdom,
he having offered to be the patron saint of the church.
For before the church was built, Bishop Svend Norbagge!
despatched two canons to Rome to fetch some relic of a
saint to whom the church might be dedicated. ‘The im-
mense number of relics of all sorts which they found there
caused them no small embarrassment, but in order to
choose a fitting one, they sought to strengthen their judge-
ment by prayer. While thus engaged in dovotion, one
of the canons fell asleep, when Pope Lucius appeared
before him, proffered his patronage, and gave such an
exact description of his skull, that they easily found it
among all the others. This skull was accordingly chosen
and conveyed to Denmark, where, set in gold, it was long
preserved as the most precious possession of Roeskilde
cathedral,
VEIBY CHURCH.

In Veiby church in Seeland there was formerly kept a
man’s dried-up hand. Of this it is related that it had
belonged to a man, who many years before was burnt for
haying murdered his father, and therefore could not be
consumed by the fire.


KALLUNDBORG CHURCH.
When Exbern Snare® was building Kallundborg® church,


* See page 224. 7 Sec page 226.

2 Artown on the west coast of Secland. Esbern Snare's church stil
exists, the Give towers of which render it a conspicuous object for miles
around, In the castle, not a vestige of which remains, Christian II, died


DANISH TRADITIONS. 249


the work at first did not succeed, but there came a Troll
to him offering his service, and with him Esbern Snare
made an agreement, that when the church was finished,
he should either sy what the Troll’s name was, or should
give him his heart and his eyes. The work now went on
well, and was supported by stone pillars. But when it
was nearly complete, one half-pillar only being wanting,
Eabern Snare began to feel alarmed, because he was still
ignorant how the Troll was called. He went wandering
about the fields sorrowing, and one day, being weary and
sad, he lay down on Ulshoi Banke to rest. He there heard
a Troll-wife within the mound saying: “Be still, my
child, to-morrow Fin thy father will come and give thee
Exbern Snare’s eyes and heart to play with.” On hearing
these words, Eabern became himself again and returned
to the church. At this moment the Troll entered, bring-
ing the half-pillar that was wanting, when Esbern, on
seeing him, saluted him by his name of Fin. Hearing
this, the Troll was so angry, that he flew off through the
air with the half-pillar; and therefore the church has only
three pillars and a half.

Kalundborg church has five spires, built by Esbem
Snare. ‘The highest, which stands in the middle, is for
his mother, and the four standing about it for his four
daughters, one of whom was lame, and therefore one of
the spires is less than the others,


RACHLOV CHURCH.


To the north-east of Kallundborg lies the village of
Rachlév; but the church is a considerable distance from
it in the open field. This circumstance is thus accounted


(1580), after a confinement of twenty-ieven yetry, viz. seventeen at Son-
derborg and ten at Kallundborg. King Albert of Sweden was also im.
prisoned in the castle of Kallondborg by Queen Margaret.
4 See pp. $2, 101,
a5


250 ‘DANISH TRADITIONS.


for. While the village church was building, it wae found
that what had been built up during the day was constantly
thrown down in the night. It was therefore determined,
by the advice of some sagecious persons, to place two
red bulls on the spot, for the purpose of driving awsy
the evil spirits ; and this was done accordingly. But on
the following morning, one of the bulls was found killed
outright, near to the town; the other was discovered
standing out in the field on an eminence, wounded and
minused. Hence the folks clearly enough saw that the
evil spirits had no power in this place, and therefore re-
solved there to crect their church.


‘THE ALTAR-PIECE IN 8ORG CHURCH.


The altar-piece in Soré church represents the Last
Supper. It was at first determined that the twelve
apostles should be painted after the twelve professors of
Sord Academy, but as they could not agree who should be
Judas, twelve peasants were fetched from the village of
Haverup, after whom the twelve apostles were painted.
Of these, Andrew the shoemaker offered himself for Judas,
but afterwards sank into all kinds of depravity, and things
went extremely ill with him,


BLOOD SPOTS ON THE WALL OF KARISE CHURCH.


A hunter in Stevnsherred was desirous of being an un-
erring shot. He therefore took the sacrament, but held
the bread in his mouth until he came out of church. He
then loaded his piece, put the bread into it, and fired it
against the chureh wall. On the place where he struck
the wall there is « hole, out of which blood ows, and
which may still be seen.

Of another huntsman it is said that he stuck the wafer
on the church wall and shot at it.


DANISH TRADITIONS. 251


THE CHURCH AT FALSTER.

‘There once dwelt on the island of Falster a Indy of rank,
who was extremely rich, but had neither son nor daughter
to inherit her wealth. She therefore resolved to make a
pious use of it, and eaused a church to be built that was
both spacious end magnificent. When the church was
finished, she caused altar-candles to be lighted, and going
through the quire to the altar, she cast herself on her
Imees and prayed to God that, in reward for her pious
gift, he would add as many years to her life as the church
should stand. Then from time to time her relations and
servants died; but she who had preferred so foolish a
prayer, continued to live. At length she had no longer
a friend or relation to converse with, and saw children
grow up, become aged and die, and their children again
grow old, while she herself was wasting through extreme
age, so that she gradually lost the use of all her senses.
Sometimes, however, she recovered her voice, though for
one hour only at midnight every Christmas, On one of these
nights she desired to be laid in an oaken coffin and placed
in the church, that she might there die; but that the
priest should attend her every Christmas night to receive
her commands. From that time her coffin has stood in
the church, but she has not yet been permitted to die.
Every Christmas night the priest comes to her, lifts the
lid of the coffin, and as he gradually raises it, she rises,
slowly up. When sitting up, she aske: “Is my church
yet standing?” Aud when the priest answers “ Yes,” she
sighs and says :—

* Alet give Gud, at min Kirke var breendt ;
‘Thi da er first al min Jammer fuldendt!”


Ah! God grant that my church were burat
For then only would my affliction be ended.


She then sinks back again into the coffin, the priest lets


252 DANISH TRADITIONS.


the lid fall, and doce not come again until the next
Christmas night.


MARIBO CHURCH.


In Maribo church, by one of the pillars, there ia set up
the image of a monk pointing to another pillar, in which,
the tradition tells us, a treasure was bidden by the monks
when they were compelled to leave the place!.


AARHUUS CATHEDRAL.


Aarhuus cathedral was, in the time of Catholicism,
dedicated to St. Clement; becatise that saint, after his
martyrdom, was cast ashore, bound to an anchor, near
Aarhuns, after having been tossed about on the ocean for
eleven hundred years, He was there buried, and in
memory of him his figure with the anchor is to be seen
on the altar-piece.

Before the Reformation, it was a custom in the same
cathedral, during the solemn service of Good Friday eve,
to send forth a tremendous voice, through a hole in the
vaulting of the church, saying : “Ever accursed be Judas!”
On this occasion a large hunting horn was used, which
till our time was preserved in the church. During the
malediction a hollow, trembling voice was sent forth from
the upper gallery of the north transept, uttering the
words of Judas: “TI have sinned in that I have betrayed
the innocent blood.”


RIDE CATHEDRAL.
In Ribe cathedral there is a door called Cat’s-head door
(Kathéved Dér), in memory of an old tradition, to wit,
1 The learned ntiquary Amat in reported to have declared that be


found in the Vaticen library a memorandum stating that a treasure of
‘manuscripts and documents was concealed in a pillar of Maribo church,


DANISH TRADITIONS. 253


that once on a time a poor skipper belonging to Ribe
came to an island where the inhabitants were plagued
with an overwhelming number of mice. Luckily he had
@ cat on board, which he took on shore with him, and so
destroyed or drove off a vast number of them. His cat
he sold to the inhabitants, for which having received a
considerable sum, he sailed home and returned to the
island with a whole cargo of cats, by which traffic he
‘became so rich, that he had whereon to live for the rest
of his life. When the hour of death drew nigh, he re-
solved to employ his wealth in building a church in Ribe,
as a memorial of which benefit there is, we are told, a
representation in the said church of a cat and four mice.


‘The above-mentioned skipper may be atyled the Danish Whittington,
‘There was also an Italian Whittington, of whom it ia related, in a letter
from Lorenzo Magulotti to Ottavio Fulconieri (Idelers Hand. der ital.
Lit. i. 385), that he, Ansaldo degli Ormanni by name, having arrived at
one of the Canary islands, was invited by the king to dinner. During the
repast he observed that all the attendants went about with long sticks,
for the purpose of driving away the rats, which made constant attacks on,
the viands, Seeing this, he hastened to his ship and returned with two
‘eats, which in an incredibly short time made an appalling slaughter among.
the enemy. He made a present of these cats to the king, who in retum
bestowed on him immense riches. On bis return to his native country
hae related how he had acquired his wealth ; whereupon a certain Giocondo
de Fisant! resolved on trying his luck there, Having sold hie house, be
‘embarked with a quantity of pearls and other precious things, in the belie?
that the king would no doubt prize such gifts moch more highly than two
eats, On his arrival he accordingly presented bis gifts to the king, who
valued them much, bat heving nothing which he considered more pre-
cious than the two cats, he gave one of them to Giocondo, who by his
specalation was reduced to a state of poverty.


‘THE CHURCH AT ERRITSO.

‘Many years ago there lived at Erritsé, near Fredericia,
avery poor man, who one day aaid: “If I had a large
sam of money, I would build a church for the parish.”
The following night he dreamed that if he went to the


254 DANISH TRADITIONS.


south bridge at Veile, he would make his fortune. He
followed the intimation, and strolled backwards and for-
wards on the bridge, until it grew late, but without seeing
any sign of his good fortune. When just on the point of
returning, he was accosted by an officer, who asked him
why he had spent the whole day so on the bridge. He
told him his dream, on hearing which the officer related to
him in return, that he also, on the preceding night, had
dreamed, that in a barn at Erritsd, belonging to a man
whose name he mentioned, « treasure lay buried. But
the name he mentioned was the man’s own, who prdently
kept his own counsel, hastened home, and found the trea-
sure in his barn. The man was faithful to his word and
built the church.

There is « story nearly similar to the above related of a treasure at
‘Tanulet on the isle of Alsen. ‘The reader will, no doubt, be agreeahiy
surprised at meeting with a tradition of near kin to the foregoing, respect-
{ng the reputed founder of Dundonald castle, in Ayrahire :

‘Donald Dio, or Din Donald, was originally « poor man, but bad the
faculty of dreaming locky dreams, Upon one occasion he dreasmed, thrice
in one night, that if he were to go to London Bridge, he would become a
‘wealthy man. He went accordingly, saw a man looking over the parapet
of the bridge, whom he accosted courteously, and, after little convera-
tion, intrusted with the secret of the occasion of his visiting London
Bridge. The stranger told him that he bad made a very foolish errand,
for be himself had once had asimilar vision, which directed him to go tos
‘certain spot in Ayrshire, in Scotland, where he would fund a vast treasure ;
and, for bis part, he bad never once thought of obeying the injunctios.
From his description of the spot, the sly Scoteman at once perceived that
‘he treasure in question must be concealed in no other place than his own
hhumble Aaityerd at home, to which he immediately repaired, in full
expectation of finding it. Nor was he disappointed ; for, after destroying
many good and promising cabbages, and completely cracking credit with,
1s wife, who esteemed him mad, he found a large potful of gold coin,
With the proceeds of which he built a stout castle for himself, and be-
came the founder of « flourishing family »


* Chambers, Pop. Rh, p. 12.


DANIGH TRADITIONS. 255


THR ALTAR-PIECE IN SLESWIG CATHEDRAL.
Master Hans Briiggemann, born in Husum, was a
skilfal artizan and able man, It was he who made the
beautiful altar-piece for the monks of Bordesholm, which,
in the year 1666, was removed to the cathedral of Sleswig,
on which, it is said, he and his men laboured for seven
years, and of which every figure was steeped in oil, to pre-
vent injury from worms. When the work was finished,
King Christian II. and his queen Elizabeth came to see
it; on which occasion, Briiggemann, availing himself of
the opportunity, carved likenesses of them both in wood,
which he placed on two pillars on each side of the altar.

When the Liibeckere saw this work, they wished Hans
Briiggemann to exeente an altarpiece for them equally
beautiful. ‘This he not only engaged to do, but also to
make one still more beautiful. Hereat the monks of Bor-
desholm were stung by jealousy, and gave him something
which caused a fluxion and weakness of his eyes, so that
he could no longer work. He died in the town of Bider-
stidt, near Bordesholm.

Of the altarpiece of the church of Nérre-Broby in Pyen it is also said,
‘that when the artist had completed it, he was asked whether he could
execute another better or equilly good, and on his anrwering inthe ar-
mative, ‘they’ put out his eyes. See a similar story of a clock at Cam-
‘ray in Wolt, Nieder. Sages, p. 444.


‘TRADITIONS RELATING TO MANSIONS.
HERLUPSHOLM.

‘When Fru Birgitte Gide was dead and the council of
the realm had the direction of the school of Herlufsholm,
it reached the ears of some of the family that the deed of
gift was lost, a circumstance from which they hoped to de-
rive advantage. ‘The rector and the clergyman of the place
were consequently summoned to Copenhagen, and found
themselves in no trifling embarrassment by their inability


256 DANISH TRADITIONS.


to find the document. But when the priest, full of
anxiety, had Iain down on his bed, the night previous to
his departure for Copenhagen, Fru Birgitte Gide appeared
before him ; for she was unwilling that after her death the
school should come to nothing, through the avarice of her
family. The priest saw her go to an old table, and strike
several blows on one of its legs. At this he was greatly
surprised, and the following morning, on examining the
table, he found, in a secret drawer, the lost document,
which, accompanied by the rector, he produced in Copen-
hhagen, and thus saved the school of Herlafsholm,


VAARGAARD,


‘Many years ago there dwelt at Vaargeard a lady named
Fru Ingeborg, the widow of one of the family of Scheel,
‘a great oppressor of the peasantry, whom he deprived of
a meadow called Agersted Enge. But if the lord had been
‘unjust and cruel to his tenants, his widow was still more
so. Once on the anniversary of her husband’s death,
being on her way to church, she said to her coachman,
“T would fain know how things go with my poor hus-
band.” ‘To which the coachman, whose name was Claus,
and who was a sly knave, answered : “ Ay, gracious lady !
but that is not easy to say, though he will certainly not be
suffering from cold ; for it is no doubt warm enough where
he is.” At this the lady was highly exasperated and
threatened to take his life, if on the third Sunday following
he did not bring her intelligence how it fared with her late
husband. Claus, who well knew that his lady mistress
never failed to kcep her word when she promised any evil,
resolved in the first instance to consult with the priest at
Albek, who was as stiff in his book as any bishop, and un-
derstood equally well both how to keep people in their
graves and to call them forth. But this priest, on consult-
ing with a relation, was apprehensive that the task would


DANISH TRADITIONS. 257


prove too hard for him. Fortunately, however, the coach-
man had a brother who was a priest in Norway; of him
therefore it would be safest to seek counsel, seeing that
the Norwegian priests are more cunning in such matters
than any others. Claus consequently made a trip to
Norway, and found his brother, who instantly addressed
him with: “Welcome, Claus! things must, indeed, be
desperate with you, since you come all the way to me!”
From these words the coachman saw plainly that his
brother was perfectly aware how matters stood. On the
following day Claus asked him for advice and help. After
some consideration, he answered : “I can, it is trae, com-
pel your dead master to re-appear; but it will prove a
dangerous business if you are afraid of him, for you must
yourself tell him your message.” It was now resolved that.
on the following night at twelve o'clock they would go to
fa cross road in a large forest, and summon him forth. At
the hour and. place appointed the priest began to read s0
that the coachman’s hair stood on end At once a dread-
fal uproar was heard, and a red-hot chariot, with horses
spouting fire on every side, came dashing through the
forest, and stopt at the place where they were standing.
Claus instantly know his master again, although he was
red-hot. “ Who will speak with me?” roared the master
from the chariot. Claus took off his bat and said: “I
have to greet my gracious master from my gracious mis-
tress, and to inquire how he fares since his death.” “Tell
her,” answered his master, that I am in hell, where there
is a seat making for her, which only wants the last step ;
when that is laid down she will be fetched, if she does not
restore Agersted Enge! But as a proof that thou hast
spoken with me, I will give thee my wedding ring, which
thou canst show her.” The priest then whispered to the
coachman that he should hold out his hat, and in the
same moment the ring fell into the hat, through which it


258 DANISH TRADITIONS.


bumed a hole and fell on the ground, from which Claus
took it up. In the next moment, both chariot and horses
were away.

On the third Sunday Claus was standing outside of
Vaar churchyard when Fru Ingeborg was driven by. On
seeing him the gracious lady instantly inquired what mes-
sage he had brought, when the coachman related to her
all that he had. seen and heard, and gave her the ring,
which she instantly recognised. “It is well,” said she,
“thou hast saved thy life. If I am to be with my bus-
band when I am dead, be it 20, but Agersted Enge I will
never give back !””

Shortly after there was a pompous spectacle in Vasr
church. It was the gracious Indy’s funeral. But she
soon re-appeared by night, and committed so much mis-
chief in the castle yard, that the miller and the mill-folka
ran to the priest at Albek, who read over her, conjured
her out of the yard, and laid her in a pond hard by ealled
Pulsen. Beyond this he had no power over her, but is
obliged to allow her every year to approach a cock’s step
nearer to Vaargaard ; and it is, moreover, said that when-
ever in this manner she reaches the spot from whence she
was driven by the priest, Vaargaard will sink in ruin.
On the place where she was conjured into Pulsen not a
blade of grass ever grows, and by the scorched-up streaks
in the field it may be seen how many cock’s steps the has
already gone.


‘TRADITIONS OF PRIESTS AND WISE MEN.
ST, ANDREW OP SLAGELSE,

In the year 1205 there lived in Slagelse a priest of St.
Peter’s church who was known by the name of Holy
Anders. Of this holy man it is related, that with eleven
others he sailed to the Holy Land ; but that when on the


DANISH TRADITIONS. 259


eve of returning, and the wind being fair, he would not
proceed on the voyage until he had heard mass at Joppa.
‘When the mass was ended and his companions were al-
ready on their way back, he found himself in much tribu-
Istion on the sea-shore viewing the distant vessel, when a
man rode up to him and desired him to mount before
him. Anders did so; but as they rode along he fell
asleep in the stranger’s arms. On waking he looked
about him with astonishment, for he found himself on a
mound just outside of Slagelee, and had, nevertheless,
been to St. James of Compostella in Portugal, to St.
Olaf’s in Drontheim, and many other holy places. But
a long time elapsed before his companions, who had left
him at Joppa, returned to Denmark, whereat all people
greatly marvelled.

He was so holy a man thet when he performed his de-
votions in the open air, he was wont to hang his cap and
gloves on the sun-beams ®, and thereby acquired an extra~
ordinary reputation, and at length became the patron saint
of Slagelse. It once happened that when he wonld thus
hang his gloves on a sun-beam, they fell to the ground, at
which he was deeply afflicted and asked our Lord, in what
respect he had sinued, seeing that the miracle no longer
succeeded, and was then given to understand that one of
the inmates of the monastery had stolen a hedge-stake,
and so defiled the sacred community. The mound on
which St. Anders was awakened, acquired from that event
the name of the Hvilehéi (mound of rest), which it retains
until this day.

St. Anders interested himself also in the welfare of the
people of Slagelee, by going with their petition to King

1 Te monks of Adevert abo ung thi cape ad covt on the une
‘beams. See Wolf, Niederl. 8. p. 411.


260 DANISH TRADITIONS.


‘Valdemar, in consequence of which the king promised to
add to the land belonging to Slegelse as much as St.
Anders could ride round on a colt a day old, during the
time the king was in the bath, He took the king at his
word, and rode with such speed that the courtiers were
obliged, from time to time, to run to the king in the bath,
saying that if he did not make haste, St. Anders would
ride round the whole country. To this act the town of
Slagelse is indebted for its extensive town fields.

On the Hvilebdi there stands a cross with the inscrip-
tion: “In memoriam divi Andres, quiescentis Joppm et
heie loci expergefacti.” When this cross was once suffered
to fall into decay, a general murrain among the cattle
ensued, but which ceased the instant a new cross was set


up.


MASTER LAURIDS.


In Hadsherred in Jutland there was once a priest by
name Master Laurids. He could lay the dead and call
them from their graves, and, consequently, it hardly need
be said, had many contests with the devil, in all which,
however, his Satanic Majesty invariably came off second
best.

It once happened to Master Laurids, when returning
from a short journey, that on passing Skandrup church,
his horses stopt, and were unable to draw the carriage
from the spot ; but Master Laurids, who well understood
how matters were, shook his head and ordered his man to
take off the right hind-wheel and lay it in the basket
behind ; for he knew that it was the devil who had placed
himself on it for the purpose of making the carriage heavy.
‘This was more than the devil had bargained for, for he
had now to get down, take his station under the carriage,
and hold it up. In this fashion Master Laurids made
him follow during the whole night. When at length he


‘DANISH TRADITIONS. 261


set him at liberty, the fiend cast the axletree from his
shoulder with auch force that it was broken by the fall,
at which Master Laurids smiling, said: “ See! he can do
that yet 1”

That the devil on such oceanlons must go unde the carriage Instead
ofthe fourth wheel wat a universal popular belie pot only ia Denmark,
bout in other countries. A Cuthoic legend relates a similar miracle of
St. Benedict, which bas anpplie the subject of a well-known composition
by the painter Dit Lindaa at Rome,


‘THE PRIEST OF NORRE-VILSTRUP.

At the close of the last century there lived in the village
of Nérre-Vilstrup, near Veile!, a priest who knew more
than his Paternoster, and who employed the extraordinary
power, which he had acquired in the Black School ®, for
the profit and happiness of his parishioners; on which ac-
count he was much beloved and respected. For the sake
of this power, he had, it was said, sworn to wear only one
garter; and it was well known to all that he never did
‘wear two.

To the parsonage there was attached a little thicket,
which lay at a short distance from the village, from which
the priest’s kindling wood and fire-wood were sometimes
stolen, He one day asked his servants whether they had
no fire-wood to fetch from thence? To which they
answered that for some time past there was none. “You
may at all events,” said he, “take a wagon and drive
out.” They did so, and there found a man from the vile
lage who had piled up a large quantity of brushwood,
which he was about to carry off, but which the ie
men took away and carted home.


‘The provost Petrus Agidii at Bréna was a magician, A youth, who
‘wanted to go to Ribe, took the provost’s horse from the meadow ; but the


1 A mall (own on the east side of Jutland.
2 See more about the Black School in North German Popular Tradi-
tions.


262 DANISH TRADITIONS.


animal would not go forwards, and the Ind could not get off his baal,
even when a couple of millers’ men endeavoured to assist him. He was
‘therefore obliged to ride to the priest.“ Art thou there?” said the good
‘min; “go and take the home back to the field, and play me mo more soch
pranks)”

st. KIRLD oF vinono®,


He was a very holy man, performed many miracles, was
‘on that account made bishop of Viborg, and after his
death canonized by the pope.

Before his sanctity was known, he was once expelled by
the monks from the convent, and driven away ; but meet-
ing one of the conventual servants, who had been sent
out to fetch water, he besought him to let him drink out
of his pitcher. He did so, when Kield turned the water
to wine, which he ordered the servant to take to the con-
vent with his greeting to the brothers, and the request
that they would drink that wine to his health. He was
then speedily recalled and received with great joy.

One morning carly, when reading mass at the altar, the
lights were suddenly extinguished, so that it was quite
dark; but he, nevertheless, continued reading the mass.

After his death, the report of his sanctity reached the
pope at Rome, who caused his name to be enrolled in the
catalogue of saints. His body was laid in a costly shrine,
and suspended by golden chains from the vaulted roof of
the chapel. His richly gilded coffin, called St. Kield’s
ark, was held in great veneration until the Reformation,
when it was taken down and placed bebind the altar in
the cathedral, where it perished in the great fire.


* Rhode, Haderalev-Amt, quoted by Mllenbof, p. 600,

2 The oldest and most remarkable town in Jutland. Prom the remotest
times the Danish monarchs on their accession received homage at Viborg,
and here were held the assemblies of the States of the kingdom. Ite
venerable cathedral perished by fire in 1726. Tn ite erypt manses were
sung for the soul of the murdered king, Eric Glipping (4.n. 1287), which
were continued till long after the Reformation.


DANISH TRADITIONS. 263


z ‘TREASURES AND TREASURE-DIGGERS.
THE TREASURE IN HVIRVEL BAKKE.
* Hvirvel Bakke is said to be quite full of gold, whence
Ait is that on every Christmas eve it appears to be on fire.
If any one would only venture to shoot over the bakke!,
The might no doubt take the whole of it, but now-a-days
no one dares do such a thing.


THE TREASURE IN DAUGBIERG-DAUS.


At Dangstrup, not far from Viborg, there is a barrow
called Daugbierg-Daus, Of this barrow it is said that it
is always enveloped in a blue mist, and that under it lies
a large copper kettle full of money. One night two pea-
sants went to dig for this treasure, and had already pro-
ceeded to far as to get hold of the two handles of the
kettle; when all sorts of wonderful things took place, for
the purpose of diverting them from their undertaking.
At one moment they saw a large black dog with a red-hot
tongue, then eame a cock drawing # load of hay
came a chariot with four black horses ; but in spite of all
this the men did not allow themselves to speak, and went
on with their digging, At length a clown passing by,
stopt before them and said: “See! Dangbierg is on fire !”
and when they looked in that direction, it was precisely
as if the whole village stood in a blaze®. At this moment

* Bakke in a small hill or rising ground. * See p. 119.

2 Ak similar superstition prevailed in Scotland. About a centory ago, we
are told, that the laird of Craufurdland and his domestics, when on the
point of drawing up a pot of gold from the bottom ofa pool, heard noi
Overhead, which extsed them to let go their prize and look upward
‘They perceived a terre Sgure standing on the top of the bil, using
violent gesticulations, and crying,

‘Tip tow!

‘Cranfurdland 's a’ ir t
‘Whereupon the laird, believing that the evil one bad st fire to his house,
in order to divert him from his researches, lft the scene, followed by his


264 DANISH TRADITIONS.


one of the men forgot to keep silence, and at the instant

he began to ery out the treasure sank, and although they

have often since endeavoured to raise it, the Trolls have

always prevented them by their soreery.

In digging up a treasure the strictest silence is necestary ; hence Ochlen-

schieger in bin poem ‘Skattegrareren’ (The Treanuredigger) says:
Men bviset Ord da taler, Buti word thou utter,
Foravinder den igien. Tevanishes agin,


THE TREASURE ON FUUR.

The little isle of Fuur in the Liimfiord rests on a vast
atone, in the middle of which dwells a Troll. When the
shepherds in the field place their ear to the ground, they
sometimes hear him locking and unlocking his great
money chests; and a peasant, who for three Christmas
nights went thither at midnight, saw at the third time,
the Troll sitting on the hillock displaying all his treasures.
If any one shoots over such things, he can freely take of
them as much as he will, and so did this peasant. But
when he was on his return home and very near his dwell-
ing, it seemed to him to be in flames. In his alarm he
cast from him all he had taken, and when he reached
home all was safe, but the treasure was gone.

On the north side of the isle a small part of the stone
may be clearly seen among high, heath-grown hills, and
many names are there inscribed of persons who have
visited the spot. On a level with the carth is a hole
through which a person can enter the stone, but it is not
known how far any one can go, as the greater number do
not venture beyond five steps.


THE TREASURE IN LODAL.
In Sallingherred there is a valley called Lodal, where
formerly a light was seen burning every night. But it


tervants, and ran home to save what he could. Of course there was no
fire whatever at the house.—Chambers, Popular Rhymes, ete. p. 13,


DANISH TRADITIONS. 265


happened that a Holsteiner came to the place, who desired
to be shown the way to Lodal, it having been revealed to
him in a dream, that on the spot where a light was to be
seen burning he should dig and find a treasure. He dug
accordingly and found in the earth a capacious copper kettle
fall of gold, but upon the gold there lay a large black
poodle! with a ring round its neck. This he carefully
lifted from the kettle, laid it on his great coat, and so got
possession of the treasure, of which he distributed a por-
tion to the peasants who had assisted him, and then de-
parted. From that time the light ceased to burn; but
sometimes the dog may be seen running about in Lodal.


TRADITIONS OF ROBBERS.
THYRE BOLOXE AND HER SONS.


Close along an arm of the Issefiord in Seeland, the road
passes through Borreveile forest, where is yet to be seen
the so-called Thyre’s cave.

This Thyre, surnamed Boléxe, with her twelve sons were
notorious robbers, but being at length captured, were all
executed at Roeskilde®, The following tradition concern-
ing them is still current among the peasantry thereabouts.

Tt often happens, when any one drives past the cave by
night, that the horses suddenly begin to sweat violently,
and are scarcely able to drag the carriage. A countryman,
who on such an occasion descended from his vehicle and
peoped through the left side of the headstall, saw that he
had Thyre Boléxe and her twelve sons sitting behind. His
only resource was to take off the hind wheel and lay it in
the vehicle’; for by 80 doing all such spectres are com-
pelled to run under the carriage, for the purpose of hold-
ing up the axle-tree.


1 See pages 119, 263. In the year 1716.» See page 260,
"


266 DANISH TRADITIONS.


sTRK OLoER.

In Ugilt krat (thicket), between Hidring and Flad-
strand, when the country thereabouts had much forest
land, there was a robber who called himself Staerk (Strong)
Olger or Ole. He robbed and murdered whenever he had
an opportunity, but he was particularly notorious for mur-
dering pregnant women. At length the men having armed
themselves, surrounded the entire wood and captured him,
when he thus confessed : “Tt is well that you have caught
sme this time; for henceforth no bond would have bound
or hand held me; for I had already eaten the hearts of
six unborn children! Could I but have got the seventh !”


‘VOLDBORG’S DAY.

On Voldborg’s day, that is the day preceding Whit-
sunday, there was in former times great merry-making
throughout the country, or, as it was called, the riding in
of summer. The youth of both sexes prepared themselves
for the festival, and decorated themselves with their best
for the procession. The young men’s procession, in which
all were on horseback, was headed by two stewards, who
rode forward to announce their approach. These were
followed by two old men, each holding in his hand a long
pole decorated with ribands, garlands, silk handkerchiefs,
and whatever else might appear showy. After them came
the Count of May (Maigreve) with his two attendants,
and lastly the whole procession, two and two, all clad in
blue or red frocks, with white napkins from the shoulder
down under the opposite arm, and ribands fluttering in
their hats. The May-count had two garlands, one over
each shoulder, while every other hud one only. In the
middle of the procession rode the musicians, playing on
violins, drums and fifes. When they eame to a boundary,
a garland was laid on the place of entrance ; and when in
the villages or at the mansions they met any young females,


DANISH TRADITIONS. 267


they threw garlands to them, which was an invitation to
their guild or feast. When they entered a town or village,
both stewards went to a house and begged that the proces-
sion might enter ; and when permission was granted, they
rode thrice round the court, and on passing the windows
saluted the inmates. They then dismounted, and the
leading singers began to sing, the rest, at the end of every
verse, falling in with “med Glede” (with joy). On
coming to a particular verse, two of the party went to the
church, where they knelt on the threshold, and while in
that position the others sang the rest of the song. ‘They
afterwards danced a while, and were regaled with beer and
brandy, and sometimes received money also. ‘They then
remounted their horses, rode again round the court, and
proceeded further in the same order.

‘When the girls ran summer in, they assembled where
the festival or guild was to be, clad in green with white
napkins, and garlands on their heads and over their
shoulders. Thence they proceeded to the fields and
formed themselves in a cirele, when the steward tried a
garland on each, until he found one that it fitted: she
was then Countess of May (Maigrevinde). The procession
then went its round. Whoever would receive them raised
‘a pole adorned with flowers and garlands, as a sign. Ac-
cording to other accounts, the Count of May, on their re-
turn, cast a garland on the girl he chose for Countess.


FRIAR RUUS!, (Continued from p. 179.)
In consequence of his skill in the culinary art, and of


From ‘Dic Deutschen Volksbiicher von Karl Simrock,’ 6 Bd. As a
amore detailed narrative of the doings of Friar Runs, after he became head
‘cook, may not be uninteresting to the reader, Ladd the sequel of his story,
bridged from the metrical aceount of him in the above-named work,
which I had not at hand when translating the portion of his history already
given. In the German story he is called Rausch, which is the same es the
Danish Ruas, and signifies drunkenness, debauchery.

n2


268 DANISH TRADITIONS.


certain secret services rendered by him to the abbot and
monks of Nsrom, Rous was, by universal suffrage, elected |
a member of the brotherhood, in which character he s0-
journed among them during a period of seven years,
Having much leisure on his hands, he was in the habit
of sitting at the convent gate and amusing himself with
cutting oaken cudgels. On being asked for what purpose
he designed the endgels, he answered, that it was well to
be prepared in case of thieves coming by night. Shortly
after, a dispute ensues among the brethren about a female,
one party being headed by the abbot, the other by the
prior. Both parties apply to Runs for cudgels, and both
eeeive a supply. A battle then takes place between them
in the church, where they are assembled at matins, during
which Ruus extinguishes the lights, and in the heat of the
mélée hurls a heavy bench in the midst of the combatants.
After the limbs of many are broken, and others more or
less maimed, Ruus, with a sanctified countenance, appears
among them with a light, reproves them for their un-
seemly conduct, and exhorts them to peace and concord,
Some time after this event, Ruus goes out to amuse
himself, and forgets to prepare supper for the convent,
‘As he is hurrying home he sees a cow grazing, which he
kills, taking with him a hind quarter. In the preceding
part we have seen that the owner of the cow lies in wait for
the thief and, while concealed in a hollow tree, sees Lucifer
with a company of devils assemble on its summit. These
recount to their prince their several exploits, Ruus among
the rest, who promises to bring with him all the brother-
hood, but that they should previously murder each other.
‘When the devils had taken flight, the peasant hastened to
the convent, where he related to the abbot all he had
heard while in the tree. At his recital the holy man was
not a little terrified, and, having assembled the fraternity,
related to them all that the man had told him. There-


DANISH TRADITIONS. 269


upon they betake themselves to prayer, and ring for
mass, when the abbot, taking Ruus with him, orders him
to remain, without stirring from the spot during the
whole mass, Upon Ruus saying he could no longer stay,
during the administration of the sacrament, the abbot
conjures him into the form of a horse. On promising to do
no more harm, he is set free and passes over to England.

In England he enters the king’s fair daughter, where-
‘upon her father sends for all the wise and learned men
from Paris and elsewhere ; but not one of them is power-
ful enough to cast forth the evil spirit from the body of
the princess. At length the demon himself exclaim
“TI am Brother Ruus. No one can expel me from this
fair vessel, save the abbot of Esrom, to whom I have sworn
obedience.” This dignitary had, it seems, in the mean
while, become as holy again as ever. The abbot is, conse-
quently, sent for, who casts out the evil spirit, commanding
him to stand before him in a horse’s form ; when, to the
great astonishment of the king and all present, the abbot
binds him with a heavy chain.

Sceing a quantity of lead lying close by, the abbot re-
quested, as his sole reward, to have as much of it, for the
roof of his convent, as Ruus could carry on his back.
Ruus carries accordingly the enormous weight of three
hundred thousand pounds. The king and the abbot then
sit down to dinner, but before they have finished their
repast, Runs appears before them, telling them he has
carried the lead and waits for further orders, asking, at the
same time, whether he should take the palace and set it
by the side of the convent. The abbot desires him to let
the palace stand, and merely conduct him safely back to
Esrom. Then taking leave of the king, after giving him
his blessing, the holy man gives his hand to the devil?


} According to the Danish metrical version, Ruus takes the sbbot on
his back. Thiele, i. p. 148, Int edit


270 DANISH TRADITIONS.


who forthwith sete him down safe and sound at his own
gate. ‘The fiend then aske where his future residence ia
to be, when the abbot assigns him a neighbouring hill, in
which he is to sojourn till doomaday.


DANISH POPULAR BELIRF?.


1, If a girl wishes to know what sort of a husband she
is to have, she must on New Year’s eve pour some melted
lead into a glass of water, and the following morning
observe what form it has assumed. If it resembles a pair
of scissors, she will inevitably get a tailor; if a hammer,
he will be @ smith, ete. Another method, equally effica-
cious, is to break an egg into a glass of water, and judge
from the figure it takes.

2. If girls are desirous of seeing their future husbands,
let them on the eve of the Epiphany, before going to bed,
repeat the following verses :—

Ye three holy kings, to you I pray,
‘That ye to-night will let me see


8. Another formula, probably to be repeated on the
anniversary of St. Luey (Dec. 18), is the following —
Luey the gentle
Shall give me to know
‘Whose cloth I shall spread,
Whose bed I shall make,
‘Whose child I shall bear,
‘Whose beloved I shall be,
In whose arm I shall sleep.


4. It is custom among the girls on St. John’s day to
gather St. John’s-wort (hypericum) and place it between


2 Thiele, ii, p. 95, agg, edit. 1820.


DANISH TRADITIONS. 271


the beams under the roof, in order to form from ita judge-
ment as to the future. The usual mode is, to place one
plant for themselves and another for their sweetheart : if
these grow together, it is a presage of a wedding. Or
they set the plants between the beams, that they may
know from them which of their relations shall have « long
life, and which a short one. If the plant grows up to-
wards the roof, it is a good sign; but if downwards, it
betokens sickness and death !,

5. When lads and lasses wish to know who shall re-
move from, and who shall stay in, the house, they cast
shoe over their head towards the door. If it fall so that
the heel is turned towards the door, the party will remain ;
if the toe lies towards the door, they will remove.

6. Ifa person sees the cuckoo for the first time in the
year while he is yet fasting, it is aid, “The enckoo befools
us.” If it is amale person, he shall not find any cattle
or anything else he may seck after. If it is a girl, she
must be on her guard against young men, lest she be be-
fooled by them, If it is old folks, they have good reason
to fear sickness,

7. If servants sce the stork, for the first time in the


1 The heathen festival of the Summer Solstice, or Desth of Baldur,
‘was, it seems, by the Christian missionaries made to coincide with the
anniversary of the Nativity of St. John the Baptist. Instead of Baldur's
‘brow (see voli. p. 22, mote’), the plant appropriated to the Christian
hholyday was the hypericum (ot androserour), which in England also wax
‘once “ considered as powerful for the expulsion of witches, and for the
prognostication of the fates of young men and maidens. In Lower Saxony
Birks gather sprigs of it, and fasten them to the walls of their chamber.
Ifthe sprig, the next morning, remains fresh, a suitor may be expected;
if it droops or withers, the maiden in destined to an early grave. Hyp.
perforntam was the species used in this country.” Walker's Flora of
Oxfordshire, p. 217. Finn Maguusen, ‘Den Aldre Bdda|'i.p.17. The
name endrosemum (dSpde aia) is probably an allation to the decol-
lation of the Baptist; the plant containing a reddish uid.


272 DANISH TRADITIONS.


year, flying, it betokens that they will change their place
during that year. If they see it standing, they will con-
tinue in their situation.

8. To discover a thief, particularly among the servants,
it was formerly the custom to “make the sieve move.”
For this purpose, the master placed a sieve in equilibrium
on the point of a pair of scissors, and then repeated the
names of all the servants, at the same time watching the
sieve, which would infallibly begin to move, when the
thief was named.

9. When anything is stolen, recourse should be had to
the “cunning folks,” who have the faculty of forcing the
thief to bring back the stolen property.

10. From Christmas day till New Year’s day nothing
that runs round may be set in motion ; there must, con-
sequently, be neither spinning nor winding !.

11. On Christmas night at midnight the cattle rise in
their stalls.

12. If, when sitting at table on Christmas eve, you
wish to know whether any of those present will die before
the next Christmas, go out silently and peep through one
of the window panes: the person who appears sitting at
table without a head, will die in the following year,

18. Ata party it is not good for thirteen to sit down
to table; for then one of them must die before a year is
over.

14, To cut one’s nails on a Friday brings luck.

15. When your nails or hair have been cut, the cuttings
should cither be burnt or buried; for if evil-disposed per-


1 See p, 111, No. 48.

* In Anspach, when on Christmas or New Year's eve the candles of
4 Christmas tree are lighted, a person has only to observe the shadows of
thove present, to discover who will die in the coming year inthe shadow
they will appear withont heads.


DANISH TRADITIONS. 273


sons get possession of them, they may bewitch the person
who had borne them!,

16. Ifa person finds a broken needle on the ground,
before he has said his morning prayer, he will get either
blows or bad words*,

17, If the eyes of a corpee stand. open, it betokens that
one of the same family will die shortly after.

18. Clothes and linen that have belonged to one dead,
soon decay and fall in pieces, even as the corpse rots in
the grave.

19. A corpse must not be buried in the clothes of a
living person ; because as the clothes rot in the grave, so
will the person to whom the clothes had belonged con-
sume and waste,

20. When the tallow round a burning candle curls
itself like a shaving, it forebodes the death of some one,
most commonly of the person towards whom it points’,

21. One must not weep over the dying, still less let
‘tears fall on them ; for then they cannot rest in the grave*,

22, If in the morning blue spots appear on the body,
they are the pinches of spectre, and betoken the death
of a relative or dear friend,

23. It was the custom formerly, when a person died, to
cause the bells to toll immediately, while the departed
soul was passing to heaven®,

24. When dogs how] they forebode death.


1 In Swabia the superstition is universal, that cuttings of hair must be
burt, or cast into running water; for ifa bird should get them and cary
‘them avray, either the person's hair will fall off or the witches may harm
‘kim, Journal yon und fir Dentachl. 1788, p. 441.

2 Holberg’s Uden Hoved og Hale, Act 1. So. 2,

4 In England too, on the same ocession, we say, ‘See! there is a
‘winding-sheet in the candle.” * See vol. i. p. 292.

* Our passing bel, still in use, though the belief in which it originated
‘has long ceased to prevail.


nB


274 DANISH TRADITIONS.


25. When a magpie perches on house, it is a sign
that strangers are coming.

26. If swallows or storks build their nests on the house,
they must not be disturbed: they bring good luck!

27. If you find a four-lobed clover, or a twin nut, or a
akilling; you must keep it, as either of them brings luck.

28. On going out in the morning you should take
notice whom you meet ; it not being good to meet an old
woman; nor is it a good sign if a hare runs across the
way?

20, If a person wishen to sce the devil or have any
communication with him, he must walk round the church
thrice, and at the third time stop at the church door, and
either cry “Come out,” or whistle through the key-hole.

80. If any one wishes to know whether a deceased per-
son has had intercourse with the devil during his life, let
him peep through the harness of the horses that draw the
hearse; when, if such has been the case, he will see a
black dog sitting behind the carriage.

81. Whoever possesses the book of Cyprian’, ean by
reading out of it perform’ all sorts of conjurations; but
when in possession of the book, a person cannot easily
get rid of it; for whether he sells, or burns, or buries it,
it always returns to its owner.

82. If any one has the book of Cyprian, he can read


Olaf Tryggvason, although a Christian, observed whether the crow
stood on ita right oF left foot, and predicted good or evil accordingly;
whence his enemies nicknamed him Ardéadein (crow-leg)..

3 The coal-miners in the north of England account it specially un-
Iucky to cross 8 woman on their way to the pit, and many 8 miner, if he
catches a glimpse, or fancies he does so, of the Mutter of a female dress,
‘will turn on his heel and go back to bed again."—Morning Chronicle,
Dec. 20th, 1849. This superstition was no doubt brought over by the
Scandinavian settlers in the north of England,

2 See pp. 186-188.


DANISH TRADITIONS. 278


the devil to him; but he must be prepared to give him
such work to do as will cause him annoyance. But it is
a bed affair, if a person does not also know how to read
him away again.

83. Only those children that are born on a Sunday or
a holyday can sce spirits’.

84, If any one is afraid of spectres, let him strew flax-
seed before his door; then no spirit can cross the thresh-
old. A preventive equally efficacious is, to place one’s
slippers by the bed-side with the heels towards the bed*.
Spectres may also be driven away by smoking the room
with the snuff of a tallow candle; while wax lights attract
them: hence it partly arises that churches are always
haunted. Another preventive is, to place steel at the
door.

85. If you nail a horseshoe fast to the step of the door,
no spirit ean enter,

86. When the peasant women have prepared their
dough, they are accustomed to make a cross either on the
dough or on the bread made from it; that the trolls may
not injure it.

87. If a person enters the church too early in the morn-
ing, he may happen to see the dead, how they sit in the

WS,

38. Trolls dare not pronounce the word cross, but call
it merely “here and there.”

39. When out fishing, men must be careful not to
quarrel about the draught; nor must one envy another;
as the fich will then instantly disappear from the spot.

40. If a person dies who, it is feared, will re-appear,
‘as a preventive, let a basinful of water be thrown after the
corpse, when it is carried out.

41. It is absurd to shoot at a spectre, as the bullet will


1 Seep. 203. Holberg’s Uden Hoved og Hale, Acti. Se. 2.
* A superstition equally common in England.


276 DANISH TRADITIONS.


return on him who shot it. But if the piece be loaded
with a silver button, that will infullibly take offect!,

42, The third night after burial the dead are wont to
walk.

43. A pregnant woman must not walk over a place
where a knife has been ground; as it causes a difficult
deli But if she spits thrice on the spot, there is no


danger.

44, If a child is weighed immediately after it is born,
it will not thrive afterwards.

45. If a child be lifted out of one window and taken in
through another, it will never grow bigger.

46, If a lying-in woman dies before delivery, she will
give birth forty weeks after in the grave. For which rea-
son, # needle, thread, scissors, &c. should be buried with
her, that she may sew the baby-linen.

47. By the breast-bone of a Martinmas goose it may
‘be known how the winter will be. The white in it is a
sign of snow; but the brown forebodes very severe cold.
It is also to be observed that the foremost part by the
neck foretells of winter before Christmas; but the hinder
part of winter after Christmas.

48, As the weather is on the day of the Seven Sleepers
(uly 27), so it will continue for seven weeks.

49. It often happens that mariners in the wide ocean
sce a ship—in all respects resembling a real one—sailing
by, and at the same instant vanishing from their sight.
It is the spectre-ship, and forebodes that a vessel will
‘soon go to the bottom on that spot.

50. Every seventh year the cock lays an egg. When
it is hatched, a basilisk comes forth, which kills people
merely by looking at them. It is also said, that this
animal can be killed only by holding a mirror before it,
it being s0 ugly that it cannot survive the sight of itself*,

1 See pp. 6, 191, 192, note», 4 Seep. 212.


DANISH TRADITIONS. 277


51. If you desire to know your future fortune at New
Year's tide, take a loaf, a knife and a skilling, with which
go out and look at the moon, when the new moon shines.
If then you open a psalm-book, you will be able from
what the place contains to judge of the most important
things.

52. On the eve of Maundy Thursday the country folks
cast axes and iron wedges on the sown fields, and fasten
steel on all their doors, that the witches may not injure
them.

53. A ringing in the left ear betokens that somebody
peaking ill of you; but good, if the ringing be in the
right ear.

54. If any one goes to church on Maundy Thursday,
and has, without knowing it, a pullet’s egg (i.e. the first
egg « hen lays) with him, he will see all the women that
are witches with sieves or milk-pails on their heads.

55. The following is recommended as a remedy for the
tooth-ache—Take an elder-twig, first put it into your
mouth, then stick it in the wall, saying, “Depart, thou
evil spirit”

56, Asa cure for the ague, it is good to stick a twig
of elder in the ground, but without uttering a word while
so doing, The disease will then pass into the twig, and
attach itself to the first person that unfortunately ap-
proaches the spot,

57. In Norway it is thought unlucky to meet a hare,
but lucky to meet a bear or a wolf.


INDEX.


A


ORG, secret passages under,
Cathedral, anecdotes of, 252.


ups,
re forthe, 277.
(St) of Slagels, legend of,


Mystic, 83,
ara or din’ swallow, 51.
7), 224.

an and Fair Valdborg,
ie

orted ‘Trolls and
205. =


sunt of the, 212, 276,
277.

opular), Swedish, 108-113 5
+270.


'r Bare, account of the, 105.
m4


Bille family, origin oftheir arma, 298.
Bien, the Swede, 39.

Bidkuite, 64, 108:

Blookaberg, witches ride to, 185.
Bondevette, sory of, 139,


Brok (Evke), anecdote of, 238,
Brora deed 106
liggemann (Hans carves
Piece of Sleswig cathedral, 255.

Bruni, account of the, 23.
am ‘silver, virtue of, 6, 191, 192,
Baris (Prinee), his amour with Kir-
ten, 233.
Butter, witches’, 106,
Button (Silver). See Bullet.


c


Cats, witches in the form of, 32.
Cattie transformed to mice, 11.

Changelings, ancedotes of, 174, 175.
oe peas ‘concerning,


Christmas celebrated by the Trolls, 89.
Christmas, superstitions of, 272.


280 INDEX.


Churches, objecta of abhorrence to
‘the Trolls, 89; one at Flennealoy-
ile, 226 ; built of froth, 2465 tra-
ditions of, 246-258.

Church-griti, account of the, 102,
166, 167.

Church-lamb, account of, 102, 210.

Church-sow, 210,

Glenent(St), patron of Anrhaus, 252,

Glorer, fouriobed, 274.

aut the Great, 89.

Gaut the Sunt (King), of bin death,


Cut Se Roud.

Gock (ied) a sybel of fre 75 8
‘Fuardian of treasure, 119,

Copeahagen, story of’ the ramparts
‘of, 244; of St. Mary's church, 246;
St. Nicholay

Cuckoo, superstitions connected with
‘the, 83, 107, 271,

Oupe (Altar) sien fom Tro, 90,

144, 146, 148.

nus, account of, and of his

3k, 186-188, 274,


D.


Dagwar (Queen), her desth foretold
by ® mermaid, 176,

Darm-horee, acooant ofthe, 208 bis,

‘Dannebrog, origin of the, 327.

Dannebrog’ Ships, neount of, 228.

Danine Shi, 81,

Death, superstitions connected with,
278, 275, 276.

Devil plays at cards, 179), bow ex-
pelled, i; a scholar aatigns him-
Sel to the, 180 bia footstep, i;
his contract with Jens Plovgaard,
181} outwitted, 182, transactions
‘withthe lady of Kidtbygeard, 183;
feast with him, 184, 189; super:
sitions concerning the, 274.

Dogg, guardians of treasure, 119, 263,
265 howling of, 273.

Dragons (Fiery) in Norway, 31; oF

hite Serpent, 98,99; at Alsted,
207; at Outbierg Bakker,

Drakes in the south of France, 13.

Drontheim (Bp. of), story of his
rattle, 10,

Dwarfs, belief concerning, 1, 86;
‘heir aki, 875 origin off 115,


ing in the, 277.
Bdenhall, cop at, 145.
Ekuin, a king of England, 24


Bilder,’ superstitions concerning the,
1687277.
Eifalters, 62,


if-king, of his tune, 8
Elves, account of, 62 ; held in dread,
G4; of fying elves, 68; elf-dances,
water-elves, 76; origin and
orien of, 115, agg. 121; live
under the hearth, 137; an
wedding, ®.; send for a midwife,
and deprive her of sight, 128, 1293
Gecoy 8 boy, 1965 decoy w ‘bride,


Chare, foundation of, 253.

there Saar, tosete scating te
birth, 226] anecdote of him and
Kallindborg church, 248,


Fr


Palater Church, ancedote of, 251,

Peggellt, account of, 221.

Fetal Church, 226,

Finlap, story of a 193.

Finn, the giant, builds Land cathe-
dal, 104} turned to stone, 102

Fiangalkn described, 2.

Floats superatit

Fishing superstitions concerning, 112,
25

Fossogrim, account ofthe, 23.

Fountain Maidens, 77.


Freer. prophecy concerning, 237.
FoeSkua [sory of one, 194,


Gardbo, 18.
Gortrud’s bird, account of, 25.

Ghosts, 19, See Spectres,

Giants: one to stone, 95 im


INDEX. 281


Sweden, 86; one builds and a-
iiss toh
antec, mvages of, with mea,
86, 87; one carries off » ploug
ram, 140,
ibe (birgie), 255,
Goose, of ts breastbone, 276,
Grave'sow, account ofthe, 210.
Gti, accdantof te, 25." See Church-


Gron-Fette, account of the, 195.
poe
eee)
ere


i


Habitation-Tree, 71.

Habor and Siguelil, story of, 220,

Hair-cotting, 272.

Hans Adolf duke of Hoitein-Ploeo,

Hare, unlucky to meet a, 277.

Helen's Well, 215-217.

Hel-horse, account of the, 209,

Helvig (queen), aneedotes of, 233-
23


Herlufsbolm, by whom founded, 243;
ianeedote of, 235,
Holger the Dane’ under Kronborg
‘este, 222.
Horgabradar, 62, 73, 78,
iestad), 14, 15; one at
Livny, 90,

Jeger, account of, 197.
Hares, serio concerning
Hooskereia, 27.

Hiuldea or Hulia, account of, 1, 2,35
roartied, 10, 18.

Huldreman, 6

‘antsman, the fying, 195.

Hyldemoer, account ofthe, 167.


Jack o' Lanterns, traditions concern-
‘ing, 97, 211 8

Jellinge Burrows, account of, 221.

‘Jens Plovgaurd, his contract with the
devil, 181.

John’s (St.) eve, See Midsummer eve.

‘ous Jeger, account of, 198.

‘Fede of Upsala, story of the, 124, 196,


Jotuns, 4, 56,
ssefiord, of the Troll in the, 247.
Jula-mét, 50,

Sanpete, ete
janie tion conn
reh he, 73.

Sut account of them, 4,5,


K


Kaantiong Church, amcle of
Karise Church, blood spots at, 250,
Kill (8) of Vitor, ogend of, 262,
ell (St) of Vibra, egend of
Kistbggued (Lady 6 er rdnas
vein ede
opi i,
Kinsey (Ltt) er grave 232,
Klint-king of Moen, story of the, 124.
fr (aa Sie aes
‘
Koud Lavard (3t.), his well, 217,
Keursemurve, sob of 133.
Kronborg Castle, 222,


L.


Lady-bird, dedicated to V. My 104.
Lagn®, runic inscription ai, 62.
Takes, ee, traditions of, 203.
Land-marks, ponishment for removal
‘of, 97, 202 bie, 203 bis, 211,
Tappiandery ther agile, 6,
193.
TLanrids (Master), anecdote of, 260.
Lawrence or Lar legend of, 101.
Limbek (Erland), anecdote of, 240,
Lafjerskor described, 71, 73
Lucius (St), patron of Roeskilde,
Lacy (St) day, eupertion on 20
y's (St.} day, superstition on, 270.
Lund Cathedral, legend of, 101.


M.


Magpie, 83, 84, 274.

Mansion (the tunes) near Asrhous,
2.

Mara or Queliryiterinde, account of
the, 18, 169 i, 170.

Margret (Qsses), ante of 29,

Manibo Churehancedote of, 25


282 INDEX,


Marea. sane
oy ta named afer
te, (088 Ladd ir, 108
use Taursday, cosiom on, 277.
Mapes diem, 26527.
or Cuting, a
Witcher, 47
Accounts of, 27, 76, 77,
170, 171 bi.


Midsummer day and eve, supersti-
tions eonnected with, 106, 270.

Midwife, ancedote of , 11,

Modemat, 50.

Monmad (Farily of their origin, 241.

Mount raised on (red) pillars by the
‘ray, 85, 107, 159, Ey t38; 146,

Mouni-Folk, See Trolls and Bi
‘rolls, zi


churches, 85; anecdotes of, 86-
89; celebrate Christmas, 89. See
Troll.

Muro, See Mare,

Moylingar, 95.

‘Mystic animals, 83.


nN


Nails, cutting of, 272,
‘Neck, description of the Swedish, 78,
‘80; superstitions connected with
the, 82, 83,
‘Necke-bréd (Neck-bread), 81.
‘Needles, supertition concerning, 273.
New Year's eve and day, supersti-
‘ions connected with, 270, 277.
Niels (St.), legend of, 228.
Night-raven, account of the, 210,
‘account. of the, 16;
‘origin of, 115; porridge set for
em, 158, 159; drive 1 plough,


Begone of 16
162; not to be watched,
gratitude, 163 ; their revenge, 163,
Toa.

Nak, account of the, 20,

Norbagge (Bp. Svend), 224

Narre-Uiroby, altar-piece at, 255,

‘Norre-Vilstrup, anecdote of the priest


Ointment, for the eyes, virtue of, 11,
owas! Sears
5 4 eth
84 incor ot
ia ate drecn 30
substitute for Thor, 37% turaa
‘Trolls into stone, tet of the first
choreh erected by him and the
Techreh at Yar 1; pees
a churel 403 2
Eiantess, 42; hin wager with a
cies ory af ia gs,


Qlger (Str), nooount of, 266,


Om,
P,


Palne-Jwger, account of, 196,

Pestilence in Jutland, 219,

Phane, Gron-Jette's wife, 195.

Phymnodderie, 165.

Plants, AMfexing (cmoturus cxza-
leu), 705 alfnafrer (lichen apho-
sus),'71; juniper, 73; neck-rosey,
81; 'neck-root (cicuta virost), 82
Ont Lady’s bunch of Ke


fie Coyper-

tum) io 270; aiden, 1217;

lover, 274,

Plovgaard (Jens), 181.

Pregnant. women, superstitions con-
exrning, 276.

Puck, 22

Pyalingar, 94,


a
Quooldrytterinde. See Mara.
Qverakaurre, account of the, 28.

R


Ri, a Swedish elf, 73.
Rachlov Church, anecdote of, 249.
Ram in the Getaberg, 97.

Rata, 84.


INDEX. 283


ster, aceount of one, 219.


\thedtral, anecdote of, 252,
‘spell or charm for, 47.


5, traditions of, 265, 266,
Stones, 84
ie Cathedral rebuilt
a Norbagge, 226 ; of St.
stron, 248
1d; account ofthe, 23.
‘ands, arm and fail of, 241,
Friar), account of, 177, 267.


8
ills at Nestved, their origin,
(Pra Ingeborg), story of, 256.
4


te, account of, 28,
Spore) 276.

ther (Jerusalem), 212,
Nee, 22

tl (St), of his wel, 82.
superstition with a 272.
jerring | pretends to cue dine
da, } Pensa, 47, 62.
# Seetin oe78
terte, of Skoganufvor, 3.
‘Eevee the, 3, ag.


14 (Seven), 276.
Cathedral, altarpiece in,


5,83.
silde, 217.

ld, 21.

oltr, 50.

hare, altarpiece there, 250,
tclet Ducats, 237.

ves in St. Knud's charch at
nse, 2045 of Hans Neb, ib;
Lille Verlise, 205; of Master
4s, 206; how to drive them
7275, Ls


ions connected


Minas
(Hereid), ancedote of his wife,


‘Marsk), his funeral, 292.
superstition connected with
1271, 274,


Strand-varsl, account of, 166, 167.

Strimkarl, sscount of tho, 79, 8
‘ia melody, 81,

‘Sunday's Child, 203, 278.

Sranwedel (Major-General), 243,

Sveud Felling, story of, 14-

Svend Grathe (King), hit military
chest, 226,

Srend Norbge (3p) rebuilds oes.

cathedral, 224; ancodote of,


Swallows, 274,


‘Thorer Brack, story of, 83,
‘Thor's (Helige) well, 103.


32.
Thurlelay Stove, 54


‘Thurter or Thusser, belief concern-
ing, 1,2; one carries of a gil, 9.
Tyre Boléxe, account of, 265.
‘iis Lake, its origin, 213.
Toads, 83.
Toft-vatte, 18.
Tomte, secount of the, 18, 91-94.
Tomte-gubbe, 18.
‘Toothache, remedy for the, 277.
‘Treasure-diggery, anecdotes of, 11
Trewin Hire Bakke, 265
augbierg Dans, i. ; on Fur, 264
in'Lodal, 3.
‘Tres acred, 72; Dewitched, 218,
‘Trolle (Gustaf), 95 of the
Inf Trolle founds Herltsholm, 2.
‘Trolls, one builds Drontheim cathe-
ral, 39 ; their fear of thunder, 52
Cheatin dons ot
1185
tothe horseshoes and beer £20,
121; depart from Thyland,’ 121;
fone in Bodedys restores a son t0
hie father, 122; story of Kourre-
murre, 123 ; account of, at Bor
‘holm, 125,126; borrow beer, 12


284 INDEX,


‘ight, 129 bir; steal beer, 132, 193,
140; one falls into the fre, 132;
steal a woman, 133; partake of
their neighbour's dinner, 134 ; pre-
vent the building of Brobierg
church, 137 ; decoy a lad, #5 do-


mes, 147, 151
love, 149; a
their dwell-
ings under the cows or hearth, 150;
‘one baptized, 151; their desire to
bbe saved, 8.5 fear of the cross,
152; fear of thunder, i.; hatred
of bells, 154, 155; their ‘persons
deseribed, 154; depart from Vend-
ayisel, 155; how to render them
sl, 1965, deprt fom x,t
ing ad oe reo by chem
fare oh geld, 151; 200 wage at
churches, 198; one attempts to
inundate Kundby,213 ; one in the
lesen, 247; cannot pronoance
rats, 275,
Troms Church, witebes acenble es,


v.


Uaburrer or Uabore, 20.
‘Udde-hat described, 100,

UME Jarl, 59.

‘Underground Fotk, See Trolls,


v.


Vater, belief concerning, 1, 2.
‘Valahorg (Pair). See Axel.


‘Valdemar (King), account of his haat,
199 ; anecdotes of, 233-236.

Vargamor, 96

Veiby Church, anecdote of, 248.

Vind and Vader, « Troll, 39,

‘Voldborg's day deseribed, 266,


W.


Wells—St. Sicgfried's, 82; Helge

‘Werwolf, account of the, 18, 96, 168,
aq; how recognised, 169; how to

Wilt Heat 2,27,83.

So an
ees

Se

Sra
aries
‘to, 189; bow expelled, #.; tram-
See
ey
i eatieath es
_may be seen, 277.

vee

TEE a mayo pain

al aetare cere


Y


‘Yale Hog, 80.

‘Valo Pastimes. See Christmas or
‘Yale Pasties,

‘Yule-Straw, 104; its virtues, 105,


LONDON:
PRINTED BY RICHARD TAYLOM,
RED LION COURT, FLMEr STREET.


BERSERKER


BOOKS
