Northern Mythology, Vol. III (Benjamin Thorpe, 1851; public domain)
===============================================================================
Vol. III of Thorpe's great collection of Northern popular traditions; completes the live Vol. I. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/northernmytholog03thor).

^ 


^^ 


S!^^ 


^jt  t\it  ifewlojjtai  jr 


%/: 


PRINCETON,  N.  J. 


** 


'^ 


i 


.    TBI 


M.3 


«f 


o<^, 


NORTHERN   MYTHOLOGY, 


COMPRISING    THE  PRINCIPAL 


POPULAR  TRADITIONS   AND   SUPERSTITIONS 

OF 

SCANDINAVIA,  NORTH  GERMANY. 

AND 

THE  NETHERLANDS. 

COMPILED  FROM  ORIGINAL  AND  OTHER  SOURCES, 

BENJAMIN  THORPE, 

MEMBER    OF    THE    ROYAL    ACADEMY    OF    SCIENCES    AT    3IUN1CH. 


IN  THREE  VOLUxMES. 

VOL.  III. 

NORTH   GERMAN  AND  NETHERLANDISH 
POPULAR  TRADITIONS   AND   SUPERSTITIONS. 


LONDON : 
EDWARD    LUMLEY, 

SOUTHAMPTON  STREET,  BLOOMSBURY  SQUARE. 
MDCCCLII. 


PRINTED   BY    RICHARD   TAYLOR, 
RED  MOX  COURT,  FLEET  STREET. 


FLAMMAM. 


CONTENTS. 


SCHLESWIG,  HOLSTEIN,  LAUENBURG. 

Page 

The  Creation  of  Adam    1 

The  Ehrengang  (Walk  of  Honour)    ib. 

The  Lime-Tree  in  Nortorf - 

Our  Lady  on  Horseback     ib. 

The  Dancer ^ 

The  Devil  and  the  Card-players     ^ 

The  Beacon-burning    5 

No  Spinning  on  Saturday  Evening    (> 

Nor  in  the  twelve  days  of  Christmas     7 

New  Year's  Eve  ib- 

Divine  Service  of  the  Dead    8 

The  Spectre  at  Gramm  '^ 

The  Congers    10 

The  Staven-Wiifke 11 

The  Land-divider    ib. 

The  Black  School    V2 

Fast-reading     14 

Fast-wTiting  ib. 

Turning  the  Sieve    15 

A  Mm-derer  cited 17 

The  Magic  Kettle    ib. 

a2 


IV  CONTENTS. 

Page 

The  Devil's  Cat   1^ 

Monoloke ^  ^ 

Witches  in  Friesland  '^"• 

Witches  21 

The  Witches'  Present 23 

Wind-Knots     **• 

The  St.  John's  Blood 24 

The  Waxen  Image ^^• 

The  Witches  stuff  in  Dissension    ^*- 

Witches  take  Batter    25 

The  Severed  Hand  '^^ 

A  Witch  as  a  Hare *^- 

Werwolves    ^ ' 

The  Long  Horse     *'^- 

The  Mannigfual  or  Giant  Ship  28 

The  Basilisk     29 

The  Nightmare    ^^' 

The  Hel-Horse    30 

Flames  in  the  Water  «^- 

Of  the  Underground  Folk  ih. 

The  Onnerbankissen  in  Fogedshoog 32 

The  Subterranean  Potters  33 

The  Underground  Smith  ib. 

Kettles  borrowed     «^- 

The  Dragedukke 34 

The  Gossips. ^b. 

Drum-Music    35 

The  Mill-Stone  suspended  by  a  Silken  Thread    ib. 

Pingcl  is  dead!     37 

The  Builder  Zi 38 

Father  Finn 39 

The  House  with  Ninety-nine  Windows     ^b. 

Ekke  Nekkepenn     -iO 

The  Carved  Image  -11 

A  Subterranean  Child  caught     42 


CONTENTS.  V 

Page  , 

Changelings 43 

The  Kielkropp 46 

The  Underground  Folk  emigrate  47 

The  Wolterkens — Niss-Puk — B  Llsemann — Niske    48 

The  Subterraneans  lick  up  Milk    49 

The  Klabautermann    ih. 

Of  the  Ranzaus    50 

Josias  Ranzau's  Magic  Sword    54 

We  are  removing  !   bb 

The  Snake-King 56 

Thunder 67 

The  Stars ! ib. 

The  Man  in  the  Moon    ib. 

Hans  Diimkt    58 

The  Wandering  Jew    59 

The  Wode    ib. 

The  Man  without  a  Shadow  62 

Devil  against  Devil 64 

Witches  take  away  Butter  68 

Calves  bewitched 69 

Foreseeing    ib. 

The  Communion-Cup  at  Viol    70 

White  Women 71 

MEKLENBURG,  THE  MARK,  SAXONY,  THURINGIA, 
BRUNSWICK,  HANOVER,  OLDENBURG,  WEST- 
PHALIA. 

FruGode 73 

The  Klabautersmanneken  or  Pukse  'J5 

The  Horse-Mare ib. 

A  Woman  Werwolf 'Jd 

The  Ileckethaler ib. 

Milk  abstracted  ']'] 

Witches  discovered "^S 

Hiinensteine  (Giant-Stones)  79 


VI  CONTENTS. 

Page 

A  Horse  comes  out  of  the  Water  80 

OklFrick ib. 

The  Witches'  Ride  81 

Kobolds,  or  Goblins    83 

Jack  o'  Lanterns  with  Long  Legs 85 

Jack  o'  Lanterns  driven  away  by  cursing ib. 

A  Jack  o'  Lantera  caught '••  ib. 

Frau  Harke 87 

The  Nickelmann,  or  Nick  ib. 

The  Princess  Use     88 

Hans  von  Hackelnberg  91 

Witches  in  Gittekle ; 95 

The  Monk  of  the  Mines 96 

The  Demons  of  the  Mine  97 

The  Night-Raven,  or  Eternal  Wagoner ib. 

Frau  Hulle  (Holda,  Hulde) 98 

Traditions  of  the  Kyffhauser 101 

The  Smith  of  Juterbogk     103 

The  Wundcrblume  (Miracle  Flower) 1 06 

The  Werwolf's  Girdle 107 

Traditions  of  Dwarfs  ib. 

Tra(htions  of  the  Hiibichenstein  : 

I.  The  Dwarf  King 109 

II.  The  Ascent  of  the  Hiibichenstein 110 

III.  The  Silver  Fu--cone     115 

The  Bell-Pond     118 

The  Bell  at  Coenhauseu ib. 

The  Children  of  Hameln    119 

The  White  Ghosts  in  the  Liiningsberg 120 

The  Rose  of  Ilildesheim 122 

The  Smith  in  the  Iluggel   123 

The  Deer-stcaler 126 

The  Freischutz 127 

The  Oldenburg  Horn 128 

The  Cuckoo.— The  Pleiades  131 


CONTENTS.  Vll 

NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS. 

Page 

Shrovetide     * 1  ^'^ 

Candlemas    1 34 

Easter   ^b. 

The  Fh-st  of  April    136 

May-day   i^- 

Whitsuntide 138 

St.  John's,  or  Midsummer,  Day     139 

Harvest  Customs 1'^  1 

St.  Michael's  Day    142 

St.  Martin's  Day ib. 

St.  Andrew's  Eve    ib- 

Christmas 1^5 

The  New  Year 149 

Twelfthtide 151 

Supernatural  Beings  of  Twelfthtide  1 53 

The  Mart— Marte— Marten— Nachtmart  (The  Nightmare)    ...  154 

Drak— Kobold— Fire-di-ake    155 

Dwarfs  157 

Jack  o'  Lanterns  158 

The  Nix ib. 

The  Wild  Huntsman  ib. 

The  Devil   159 

Marriage  ib. 

Birth  and  Baptism  160 

Death  and  Burial 161 

Wounds,  Diseases,  etc 162 

House,  Field,  etc 174 

Birds,  etc 180 

The  Elder 182 

The  Elements  and  Natural  Phenomena    183 

Miscellaneous  184 

NETHERLANDISH  POPULAR  TRADITIONS. 

Kaboutermannekens    187 


Vlll  CONTENTS. 

Page 

Kludde 193 

Osschaert 195 

The  Necker 198 

The  Three  Nixen  of  Jupille    199 

Flerus  200 

The  Werwolf  201 

The  Maere   202 

Dwarf- Smithies   205 

Lodder      ib. 

Witchery 208 

The  Long  Wapper  of  Antwerp  209 

The  Wikl  Hunt  218 

The  Wihl  Huntsman's  Present  219 

The  Eternal  Huntsman  of  Wjnandael ib. 

Jack  o'  Lanterns  baptized 220 

Malegy 's  Palfrey ib. 

The  Fiddlestick    228 

The  Fiddler  tricked     230 

The  Fiddler  in  the  Gallows-Field  at  Antwerp  231 

The  Wedding-Feast  at  Carron-St.-Martin    232 

Riding  on  Calves     235 

The  Woman  transformed  to  a  Horse     ib. 

The  Cats  of  Stockhem 236 

A  Witch  bm-nt     238 

The  Red  Cloth    239 

The  Tormented  Witch    240 

The  Ace  of  Hearts  pierced ib. 

The  Lost  Chain   241 

The  Landmark  removed 242 

The  Bold  Soldier  of  Antwerp 243 

Mariken  of  Nymwegcn    247 

The  Devil  of  Ncdcrbrackel 256 

The  Devil  outwitted    258 

The  Freischutz     , 259 

The  Baru  of  Montecouvez 261 


CONTENTS.  IX 

Page 

The  Devil's  Barn  at  Gallemaerde  263 

How  to  become  Invisible    264 

The  Travelling  Mother    ib. 

The  Lying-in  Woman ih, 

WanneThekla 265 

The  Everlasting  Jew  ih. 

Elves     ib. 

Flabbaert 266 

Why  the  Jews  do  not  eat  Swine's  Flesh  ib. 

The  Spectres'  Mass 26/ 

Alvina  268 

Roodselken  ib. 

The  Burning  Land-measurer ib. 

Cowls  hung  on  Sunbeams  269 

\^liite  Maidens  and  White  Women  in  Friesland ib. 

The  Three  Sisters    270 

St.  Gertrud's  Minne    ib. 

The  Lily  271 

The  Feather  Heart  ib. 

Love-Magic 2/2 

Thief's  Foot— Thief  s  Hand— Thief's  Finger   274 

The  Magic  Sword    275 

Witches'  Ointment 276 

Milk-taking— Milk  beaten ib. 

Corn-stealing   277 

A  Sorceress  caught 278 

Witchery  expelled   ....,- 279 

The  Gravedigger 280 

The  Coffin    281 

Zevenbergen    • '^^'^ 

How  Count  Baldwin  of  Flanders  married  a  Devil    283 

The  Poacher  of  Wetteren-Overbeke 289 

The  Bloody  Coach  at  Antwerp  290 

The  Sand-Gate  at  Mechhn ib. 

Chess  with  the  Devil 291 


X  CONTENTS. 

Page 

Falkenberg  ^^^ 

The  Monk  of  Afflighem 297 

St.  Julian  the  Ferryman *^- 

Lohengrin  and  Elsa.— Lohengrin  and  Belaye  302 

The  Knight  and  the  Swan W 

Godfrey  of  Bouillon  and  the  Swan    309 

The  Knight  with  the  Swan «6. 

Netherlandish  Popular  Belief 328 


ORTH  GERMAN  POPULAR  TRADITIONS. 


I. 

SCHLESWIG,  HOLSTEIN,  LAUENBURG^ 

THE  CREATION  OF  ADAM. 

From  the  Old  Frisic. 

God  created  the  first  man,  which  was  Adam,  from  eight 
things ;  the  bones  from  stone,  the  flesh  from  earth,  the 
blood  from  water,  the  heart  from  wind,  the  thoughts  from 
clouds,  the  sweat  from  dew,  the  hair  from  grass,  the  eyes 
from  the  sun,  and  then  blew  in  the  holy  spirit ;  and  then 
from  his  rib  he  created  Eve,  Adam's  companion. 

See  Wodana,  p.  xix.  (from  Richtliofen,  p.  211),  and  remarks  of  Grimm 
from  Haupt's  Zeitschrift.  Compare  also  the  account  of  man's  creation  in 
the  "  Dialogue  between  Saturn  and  Solomon."  Analecta  Anglo-Saxonica, 
p.  110,  and  "Anglo-Saxon  Dialogues"  (.Elfric  Soc.  edit,  by  Kemble), 
p.  178. 

THE  EHRENGANG  (WALK  OF  HONOUR). 

In  many  places  in  the  north  of  Germany,  chiefly  on 

^  From  Miillenhoff,  Sagen,  Miirchen  und  Lieder  der  Herzogtliiiiner 
Schleswig,  Holstein  und  Lauenburg.  Kiel  1845,  unless  otherwise  expressed. 

B 


cini 

1 


xNOKTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

lUMiccs  or  elevated  plains,  tlierc  is  found  a  species  of 
iuonument,  consisting  of  a  large  number  of  granite  stones, 
])laccd  in  an  oblong  square.  Four  stones  stand  near  to 
cacli  other,  one  of  which  is  always  much  larger  than  the 
rest.  Such  monuments  are  now  known  by  the  name  of 
'  Ehrengang,'  or  //  \ilk  of  honour,  because,  in  ancient  times, 
princes  and  chieftains,  after  a  victory,  here,  it  is  said,  made 
their  solemn  processions,  accompanied  with  many  cere- 
monies. Near  Nehmten,  between  Bornhoved  and  Stock- 
see,  and  on  the  Kremsfeld  near  Segeberg,  these  monu- 
ments are  in  the  best  preservation. 

Near  Raulnerg,  in  the  ])ailiwick  of  Apenrade,  there  is  a  spot  set  round 
with  stones,  called  Kongens  Heststald  (the  King's  stable),  where  there  was 
once  a  great  hattle. 

THE  LIME-TREE  IN  NORTORF. 

On  the  south-west  side  of  the  churchyard  in  Nortorf  ^ 
there  stands  a  venerable  three-branched  lime-tree,  beneath 
whose  boughs  courts  of  justice,  festivals,  marriages,  con- 
tracts, etc.  were  anciently  held  and  made.  All  contracts 
were  there  made  orally,  and  w^ere  sealed,  as  it  w^as  called, 
with  a  'doppen.'  This  doppen  consisted  in  simply 
pressing  the  thumb  against  the  trunk  of  the  tree. 

Between  Blunienthal  and  Sprenge,  to  the  south  of  Kiel,  there  stood 
formerly  the  sacred  Schwerk-  or  Dreieiche  (triple  oak).  In  its  vicinity  lay 
an  enormously  huge  stone,  of  which  a  portion  of  from  30  to  40  feet  long 
and  20  feet  wide  was  to  he  seen  in  the  last  centur}-.  A  hill  hard  hy  is 
called  the  Ilciligenberg  (Sacred  hill).  West])hal.  Moninn.  Ined.  iv.  pref.  216, 
and  the  representation  No.  21.    Schroder  Toi)ographie  \on  Ilolstein,  i.  60. 

OUR  LADY  ON  HORSEBACK. 
\\\w\\  the  church  of  Delve  in  North  Ditinarschen  was 
to  be  built,  the  ])eople,  being  unable  to  decide  on  a  site 
for  it,  caused  an  image  of  the  A'irgin  to  be  tied  on  a  pied 

J  A  town  not  far  from  Rendsburg. 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  6 

mare,  which  they  let  run  whithersoever  it  wouldj  and  wherc- 
cver  it  was  found  on  the  following*  morning,  there  should 
their  church  be  erected.  Next  morning  the  mare  was 
found  in  a  marshy  spot  thickly  overgrown  with  thorns  and 
underwood.  After  having  cut  down  and  cleared  all  this, 
they  transferred  their  village  thither,  and  named  the 
church  '  Unse  leve  Fru  up  dem  Perde,'  or,  Our  Lady  on 
horseback. 

THE  DANCER, 

At  a  splendid  wedding  in  the  old  noble  mansion  of 
Hoierswort  in  Eiderstedt  ^,  there  was  among  the  company 
a  young  girl  who  was  the  most  enthusiastic  dancer  far 
and  near ;  she  was,  in  fact,  during  the  evening  constantly 
engaged  in  dancing.  When  her  mother  warned  her  against 
it,  she  said  petulantly  :  ^'  If  the  devil  himself  were  to  call 
me  out,  I  would  not  refuse  him  ! "  At  the  same  instant 
a  stranger  entered  and  invited  her  to  dance.  It  was  the 
devil,  to  whom  she  had  given  her  word.  He  whirled  her 
about  so  long  that  the  blood  at  length  issued  from  her 
mouth,  and  she  fell  down  dead.  The  traces  are  still 
visible  in  the  saloon,  and  are  indelible.  But  the  girl  her- 
self has  no  rest.  Every  night  as  the  clock  strikes  twelve 
she  must  rise  from  her  grave  and  enter  the  saloon,  an  in- 
fernal music  then  strikes  up,  and  the  w^hole  mansion  is  in 
an  uproar.  Every  person,  who  may  happen  to  pass  a 
night  in  the  saloon,  she  calls  up  to  dance ;  but  hitherto  no 
one  has  ventured  to  dance  with  her.  Yet  if  any  Christian 
man  would  venture,  she  would  be  released.  She  once  so 
terrified  a  young  dissipated  fellow,  that  he  lost  all  inclina- 
tion for  merry-making,  and  whenever  he  heard  a  violin, 
fancied  that  the  spectre  had  again  broken  loose. 


^  A  bailiwick  on  the  west  coast  of  Sleswig. 

b2 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 


Two  yoiiiig  damsels  went  together  to  take  the  sacra- 
ment, having  partaken  of  which,  and  while  still  by  the  altar, 
one  said  to  the  otiier :  "  Do  you  go  to  the  wedding  this 
evening  ?  ''  "  Don't  speak  of  it/'  said  her  companion  ; 
l)ut  she  continued  :  ''  I  shall  go,  and  dance  till  I  am  tired  : 
I  could  dance  myself  dead  to-day/'  In  the  evening,  while 
at  the  wedding-party  and  in  the  height  of  the  dancing,  a 
tall,  comely  young  gentleman  entered,  whom  no  one  knew, 
who  invited  her  to  dance.  At  first  they  danced  quite 
soberly,  but  by  degrees  more  and  more  madly,  and  even 
when  the  musicians  made  a  pause  they  continued  without 
intermission.  To  the  rest  of  the  company  this  seemed 
mysterious,  and  they  caused  a  song  to  be  struck  up,  in  the 
hope  of  bringing  them  to  a  stand.  But  the  stranger 
danced  with  the  damsel  out  at  the  door  and  vanished. 
The  girl  was  found  in  a  dung-pit,  into  which  she  sank  in 
the  sight  of  all.  It  was  believed  that  her  mother  had, 
while  she  was  a  child,  sold  her  to  the  devil. 

THE  DEVIL  AND  THE  CARD-PLAYERS. 
In  the  village  of  Hellewadt,  close  on  the  high  road  lead- 
ing from  Apenrade  to  Liigumkloster,  there  is  an  inn  called 
the  Kloveres  (Ace  of  clubs),  which  name  it  derives  from 
the  following  incident.  At  this  house,  which  did  not  stand 
in  the  best  repute,  there  was  formerly  much  card- playing. 
One  winter  evening  a  company  was  assembled  there,  among 
whom  there  was  no  lack  of  cursing  and  swearing  and  un- 
seemly conversation ;  the  devil  of  course  being  repeatedly 
invoked ;  when  quite  unexpected  and  observed  by  no  one, 
a  journeyman  mechanic  entered  the  room  and  seated  him- 
self among  the  i)layers.  In  a  short  time  all  the  luck 
lurned  to  the  side  of  the  stranger,  whereby  the  others 
found  themselves  not  in  the  best  possible  humour.  A 
card  fell  under  the  table,  it  was  the  ace  of  clubs,  and  when 
one  of  the  party  stooped  to  pick  it  up,  he  observed  that 


NORTH   GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  5 

the  stranger  had  a  horse^s  foot.  On  this^  laying  down  his 
cards^  he  left  the  room  without  uttering  a  syllable.  Ilis 
conduct  attracted  the  notice  of  the  others,  and  a  second 
person  now  designedly  let  a  card  fall  on  the  floor,  when, 
stooping  to  pick  it  up,  he  saw  what  the  other  had  seen, 
and  like  him  silently  left  the  place.  Their  example  was 
followed  by  the  rest  of  the  company,  so  that  at  length  tlic 
devil  was  left  sitting  by  himself.  The  host  was  in  the 
greatest  embarrassment ;  in  his  perplexity  he  sent  for  the 
clergyman  to  exorcise  the  evil  one.  The  holy  man  came 
with  three  books  under  his  arm,  two  of  which  the  devil 
immediately  kicked  out  of  his  hand,  but  the  third  he 
luckily  held  fast.  The  clergyman  then  requested  the  people 
of  the  house  to  give  him  a  needle,  with  w  hich  he  made  a 
hole  in  the  lead  of  the  casement,  through  which,  by  dint 
of  reading  out  of  his  book,  he  forced  the  fiend  to  pass  and 
seek  the  boundless  space. 

According  to  one  version  of  the  story,  the  priest,  in- 
stead of  a  needle,  used  a  stick. 

THE  BEACON-BURNING. 

On  the  day  of  St.  Peter  in  Cathedra  (Feb.  22)  a  great 
festival  was  formerly  held  in  North  Friesland.  It  was  a 
spring  festival ;  for  then  the  mariners  left  the  shore  and 
put  out  to  sea.  On  the  eve  of  the  above-mentioned  day 
great  fires  (biiken)  were  lighted  on  certain  hills,  and  all 
then,  with  their  wives  and  sweethearts,  danced  round  the 
flames,  every  dancer  holding  in  his  hand  a  wisp  of  burn- 
ing straw,  which  he  swung  about,  crying  all  the  time  : 
"  Wedke  teare  ! ''  or  ''  Vike  tare  !  "  (Wedke,  i.  e.  Woden, 
consume  !)  ^ 

As  late  as  the  preceding  century  this  festival  was  uni- 
versally celebrated  in  North  Friesland ;  on  the  second  day 

1  That  is,  consume  (accept)  the  offerings,  as  in  the  days  of  heathenism. 


O  NORTH   GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

there  were  great  feastings.  The  clergy  had  long  declaimed 
against  it^  though  without  effect ;  but  one  nighty  before 
St.  Peter's  day,  the  people  of  Kantum,  having  according 
to  custom  called  on  '  Wede/  the  fires  being  extinguished, 
and  all  gone  to  rest,  were  awakened  at  midnight,  and  to 
their  astonishment  saw  an  immense  fire  again  burning  on 
the  Biikenberg.  On  hurrying  towards  it  for  the  purpose 
of  quenching  it,  they  perceived  a  black  monster  resembling 
a  large  poodle  slinking  down  the  hill.  The  dread  was 
now  general  that  they  would  for  ever  have  to  harbour  the 
devil,  or  that  at  least  he  would  be  a  frequent  visitor  anions: 
them ;  they  consequently  made  a  vow  from  that  day  never 
to  repeat  the  beacon-burning.  Nevertheless  on  Wester- 
landfohr  and  Osterlandsilt  the  children  still  kindle  bon- 
fires on  the  22nd  February. 

On  the  island  of  Silt  the  Spring-  or  Petrithing  (court)  ^as  anciently  held 
on  the  Thing-hill  on  the  22nd  Fe])ruary.  The  Summer-  or  Petri-Paulithing 
took  ])lace  on  the  29th  June,  and  the  Autumn-thing  on  the  26th  October. 
In  Ditmarschen,  on  Walpurgis  eve  (April  30th)  they  kindle  great  fires  on 
the  hills  aud  crossways,  wliich  they  call  *  liaken  '  (Ijeacons).  The  boys  and 
young  people  bring  straw  and  dry  boughs  from  all  parts,  and  the  night  is 
])assed  amid  rejoicing  and  dancing  about  the  flames.  Some  of  the  larger 
youths  take  bundles  of  burning  straw  on  a  fork,  and  run  about  swinging 
them  imtil  they  are  burnt  out.  On  the  island  of  Femern  (which  was 
])eo])led  from  Ditmarschen)  they  in  like  manner  celebrate  the  30th  April 
with  the  lighting  of  beacons  (bakenbrennen).  In  the  ^Vilstermarsch  the 
boys  and  youths,  on  Easter  eve,  carry  large  bundles  of  lighted  straw  about 
the  fields  ;  and  in  East  Ilolstein,  both  on  Easter  eve  and  St.  John's  eve, 
they  light  fires  on  the  hills  and  roads. 

NO  SPINNING  ON  SATURDAY  EVENING. 

That  there  should  be  no  spinning  on  a  Saturday  eveninii; 
is  a  wide-spread  belief,  as  it  brings  only  detriment  and 
punishment.  There  were  two  old  women,  good  friends, 
and  the  most  indefatigable  spinners  in  the  village ;  so 
that  in  fact  their  wheels,  even  on  a  Saturday  eveninir, 
never  stood  still.    At  length  one  of  them  died  ;  but  on  the 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  7 

Saturday  evening  following  she  appeared  to  the  other,  who 
as  usual  was  busy  at  her  wheel,  and  showed  her  her  burn- 
ing hand,  saying : — 

Sieh,  was  ich  in  der  Holle  gevvann.  See  what  I  in  hell  have  won, 

Weil    ich    am     Sonnabendabend         Because  on   Saturday  eve    I 
spann !  spun ! 

NOR  IN  THE  TWELVE  DAYS  OF  CHRISTMAS. 

In  these  twelve  days  there  should  be  no  spinning,  nor 
any  llax  left  on  the  distaff,  else  '  Wode  '  will  galloj) 
through  it. 

A  woman,  nevertheless,  resolved  on  making  the  experi- 
ment, and  sat  down  and  spun,  but  immediately  sank  into 
a  profound  sleep,  from  which  she  woke  only  by  some  one 
opening  the  door  and  entering.  The  intruder  demanded 
the  spinning- w^heel  to  be  given  him,  and  began  to  spin. 
The  woman  could  do  nothing  but  continually  keep  throw- 
ing to  him  what  flax  she  had,  but  which  was  all  immediately 
spun,  wound  and  rolled  up.  The  devil  then  demanded 
more,  and  the  woman  brought  him  all  the  tow  she  had  in 
the  house,  and  then  all  her  wool ;  but  he  still  called  for 
more,  and  it  was  yet  only  four  o^clock  in  the  morning  and 
the  day  far  distant.  In  her  tribulation  the  woman  ran  to 
a  neighbour,  a  cunning  old  crone,  who  was  already  aware 
of  what  was  going  forward  in  the  house ;  for  she  came  out 
to  meet  her,  and  fortunately  soon  relieved  her  from  her 
troublesome  visitor.  Had  the  devil  spun  up  all,  and  the 
woman  been  unable  to  supply  him  till  daybreak,  it  would 
have  cost  her  her  life. 

NEW  YEAR'S  EVE. 

On  New  Yearns  eve  the  cows  and  horses  speak  with  one 

another.     A  peasant  who  was  sceptical  on  this  point  laid 

himself  in  the  rack  and  listened.     At  midnight  he  heard 

one  horse  say  to  another  :  "  This  year  we  shall  get  rid  of 


8  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

our  master."  This  so  terrified  him  that  he  fell  sick  and 
soon  after  died.  The  same  horses  drew  him  to  the  church - 
yard.  

On  the  same  ni^ht^  or  on  the  eve  of  some  other  festival, 
at  twelve  o^clock  all  water  is  turned  into  wine.  A  woman 
was  so  foolhardy  as  to  go  one  night  to  a  well.  While 
bending  over  it  for  the  purpose  of  drawing  from  it,  there 
came  one  and  said, 

All  Water  is  Wyn,  All  water  is  wiue, 

unn  dyn  beiden  Ogen  siiut  myn  ;      and  thy  two  eyes  are  mine ; 

at  the  same  time  depriving  her  of  both  her  eyes.  Others 
relate  of  another  woman  that  it  was  said  to  her, 

All  Water  is  Wyn,  All  water  is  wine, 

unn  wat  dar  by  is  myn,  and  what  thereby  is  mine, 

and  instantly  the  woman  disappeared. 

DIVINE  SERVICE  OF  THE  DEAD. 

One  night  an  old  woman  in  Kiel  awoke  and  thought  it 
was  time  to  go  to  morning  service ;  for  it  seemed  to  ber 
that  she  heard  the  bells  and  the  organ.  She  rose  accord- 
ingly, took  cloak  and  lantern — for  it  was  winter — and 
went  to  the  church  of  St.  Nicholas.  But  when  there  she 
could  not  find  the  psalms,  as  the  whole  congregation  sang 
quite  diff*erently  from  what  stood  in  her  psalm-book  ;  the 
people  also  appeared  unknown  to  her,  but  among  them 
she  perceived  one  woman  who  exactly  resembled  a  neighbour 
that  had  been  dead  for  many  years.  A  woman  then  ap- 
proached her,  who  had  also  been  long  in  her  grave  ;  it  was 
her  gossip.  This  woman  told  her  that  she  must  go  out ; 
for  the  church  at  that  time  was  not  for  her ;  but  that  she 
must  not  look  round,  else  evil  might  befall  her.  The 
woman  went  out  as  quickly  as  she  could,  and  as  the  church - 
door  was  sla]nmcd  after  her,  her  cloak  was  caught.  At  tliis 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  V 

moment  the  clock  struck  twelve.  She  unclasped  her  cloak 
from  her  shoulders,  with  the  intention  of  fetching  it  away 
in  the  morning  ;  but  when  she  returned  for  that  purpose, 
she  found  it  torn  into  little  fragments,  the  dead  having 
tripped  over  it. 

THE  SPECTRE  AT  GRAMM. 
The  countess  Anna  Sophia  Schack  became  a  widow  at 
an  early  age.  At  Gramm  she  passed  a  life  of  dissipation 
and  licentiousness,  and  finally  sold  her  soul  to  the  devil. 
After  a  certain  number  of  years  the  fiend  was  to  fetch 
her  away  on  an  appointed  evening,  as  soon  as  the  wax 
light  on  the  table  should  be  burnt  out.  At  Gramm  things 
now  went  on  more  madly  than  ever.  The  appointed 
evening  at  length  came,  and  the  wax  light  w^as  standing 
before  the  countess,  who  was  now  seized  with  unutterable 
anguish.  She  sent  for  the  clergyman  and  to  him  commu- 
nicated her  secret.  He  advised  her  to  extinguish  the 
light  and  cause  the  little  piece  remaining  to  be  enclosed 
within  the  east  wall  of  the  church.  This  was  done,  and 
the  evil  one  had  no  power  over  her.  Shortly  after  a  fire 
broke  out  in  the  church.  It  was  early  in  the  morning, 
and  the  countess  w^as  still  in  bed  when  the  intelligence 
reached  her.  On  hearing  it  she  instantly  sprang  up,  and 
in  her  light  morning  attire  and  without  shoes  hurried  to 
the  church,  which  stood  about  a  mile  and  a  quarter  distant 
from  her  dwelling.  By  her  earnest  entreaties  and  pro- 
mises she  encouraged  the  people  to  extinguish  the  fire,  so 
that  at  least  the  east  wall  might  be  preserved.  From  that 
time  the  countess  became  an  altered  person ;  her  cheer- 
fulness and  good  humour  had  fied  and  given  place  to  a 
gnawing  sorrow  which  brought  her  to  the  grave.  But  at 
midnisht  a  beautifnl  female  form  in  snow-white  attire  is 
seen  in  the  castle,  wringing  her  hands,  with  downcast, 
anxious  countenance,  pacing  incessantly  from  one  apart- 

B  5 


10  NORTH  GERMAN   TRADITIONS. 

ment  to  another,  and  at  last  stopping  in  the  upper  saloon 
of  the  centre  building,  where,  standing  for  some  minutes 
before  the  firc-})lace,  she  gazes  motionless  on  some  blood- 
spots,  and  then  vanishes. 

A  young  countess,  who  in  later  times  was  on  a  visit  to 
Gramm,  was,  while  sitting  at  the  harpsichord,  so  terriiied 
by  the  apparition  that  she  shortly  after  died.  No  one 
enters  the  old  mansion  without  shuddering. 

THE  CONGERS. 

In  Keitum  on  the  island  of  Silt  a  woman  died  before 
her  delivery,  and  appeared  several  times  to  the  servant  of 
the  clergyman,  and  had  no  rest  in  the  grave,  until  her 
scissors,  needle  and  thread  were  placed  by  her  side.  This 
is  a  common  usage  in  North  Fricsland. 

There  are  many  apparitions  there,  or  ^  Gougers  ^ ;  for 
whoever  is  unjustly  slain,  or  has  removed  land-marks,  or 
fraudulently  ploughed  off  land,  finds  no  rest  in  the  grave. 
Blasphemers,  and  those  that  have  cursed  themselves,  and 
suicides  must  in  like  manner  appear  again.  To  such  a 
Gonger  let  no  one  hold  out  his  hand  ;  it  will  be  burnt, 
become  black,  and  fall  off. 

When  any  one  is  drowned  at  sea,  he  announces  it  to  his 
relations.  Though  the  Gonger  does  not  announce  himself 
to  his  nearest  of  kin,  but  to  those  in  the  third  or  fourth 
degree.  In  the  evening  twilight  or  at  night  he  appears  in 
the  clothes  in  which  he  was  drowned.  He  then  looks  in  at 
the  house  door,  and  leans  with  his  arm  against  it,  or  else 
wanders  about  the  house,  but  soon  disappears  and  returns 
on  the  following  evening  at  the  same  hour.  By  night — 
usually  in  heavy,  drawn-up  boots  that  are  filled  with  water 
— he  will  open  the  chamber  door,  extinguish  the  light, 
and  lie  down  on  the  coverlet  by  the  side  of  the  sleeper. 
In  the  morning  there  is  a  stream  of  sea-water  in  the  room, 
that  has  trickled  from  his  clothes.      If  the  relations  are 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITION! 


11 


not  convinced  by  these  signs,  the  Gonger  will  continue  to 
appear  until  they  believe  that  he  has  perished.  He  also 
gives  other  notices  :  it  is  related  that 

A  mariner  with  his  two  sons  once  sailed  from  Amrum 
with  seed  bound  for  Holland.  The  younger  son  had  no 
inclination  for  the  voyage,  and  implored  his  mother  to  let 
him  remain  at  home ;  but  she  told  him  it  was  his  father^s 
will,  and  that  go  he  must.  When  on  their  way  to  the 
harbour  at  Bosk,  in  passing  over  the  dam,  he  said  to  his 
mother  and  the  others  with  him  :  "  Think  of  me  when  you 
pass  over  these  stones."  In  the  same  night  they  perished. 
The  mariner^s  sister  dwelt  in  the  same  house  with  him  ; 
at  night  she  had  laid  her  white  neck -kerchief  by  her  bed, 
and  in  the  morning  found  on  it  three  drops  of  blood.  She 
then  knew  that  her  relations  had  perished  and  had  been 
with  her  during  the  night. 

THE  STAVE iN-WtJFK El. 

This  is  a  spectre  resembling  a  mourning  woman,  who 
appears  on  old  pasture  grounds,  hills  and  void  places, 
where  houses  once  had  stood,  but  which  now,  naked  and 
desolate,  are  either  washed  by  the  sea  or  surrounded  by 
the  sand  of  the  downs.  Sometimes  she  wanders  about 
these  melancholy  places,  and  sometimes  is  seen  sitting 
and  weeping  on  the  spot  where  once  had  been  the  domestic 
hearth^. 

THE  LAND-DIVIDER. 

At  the  time  of  the  partition  and  fencing  of  the  land, 
there  arose  between  the  villages  of  Alversdorf  and  Host,  in 
South  Ditmarschen,  great  disputes  about  their  boundaries. 
The  partition   could  not  be  determined  until  a  man  of 

1  From  Staven,  the  place  on  which  a  house  stands  or  has  once  stood,  arid 
Wiifke,  lit.  ivifekin,  Ger.  Weibchen.  She  is  likcAvise  called  the  Stadcin- 
Wiiflve. 

2  Kohl,  Marschen  und  Inseln,  ii.  289. 


1.2  NORTH   GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

Alversdorf  declared  that  he  knew  it  accurately  and  would 
settle  it  on  oath.  For  this  purpose  he  went  to  the  boun- 
daiy  of  the  Alversdorf  land,  by  the  ford  at  Tensbiittcl, 
where  it  passes  through  the  Gieselau,  filled  his  shoes  with 
sand,  then  appeared  near  Rost,  and  made  oath  that  he  was 
standing  on  Alversdorf  ground.  By  this  fraud  he  believed 
he  had  avoided  perjury.  But  after  death  he  was  doomed 
to  wander  on  the  boundary-line  as  a  fire-sprite.  A  flame, 
the  height  of  a  man,  was  there  long  to  be  seen  dancing 
about,  until  the  moor  was  dried  up.  Whenever  it  flared 
up  higher  than  usual,  the  people  would  cry  out :  "  Dat  is 
de  Scheelvacgt !  "  (That  is  the  land-divider  !)  At  the  spot 
where  he  put  the  sand  into  his  shoes,  every  one,  who 
passes  at  night  and  has  not  a  pure  conscience,  must  for 
a  considerable  distance  bear  the  devil  on  his  back  like  a 
burthen  of  a  hundred  pounds  weight. 

Between  the  lordship  of  Roest  and  the  village  of  Raben- 
kirchen  in  Angeln  there  was  once  a  dispute  about  a  wood. 
The  lord  one  morning  filled  his  shoes  with  earth  from  his 
garden,  stuck  twigs  from  the  trees  in  his  court-yard  in  his 
hat,  and  made  oath  in  the  wood,  which  lawfully  belonged 
to  the  village  of  Rabenkirchen,  that  he  was  standing  on 
his  own  ground,  and  that  the  boughs  above  his  head 
were  his. 

THE  BLACK  SCHOOL. 
Of  the  Black  School  there  is  much  to  tell  both  in  North 
Friesland  and  in  the  Danish  territories.  The  devil  in 
person  is  the  teacher,  and  ])reachers  just  entering  on  their 
career  are  there  instructed.  Almost  every  pastor  knows 
something  of  the  black  art,  while  others  are  perfect  adepts 
in  it ;  but  have  therefore  assigned  their  souls  to  the  devil, 
though  under  certain  conditions.  One,  for  instance,  must 
during  his  whole  life  wear  one  and  the  same  woollen  under- 
waistcoat;  another  may  shave  himself  only  on  Saturdays; 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  13 

a  third  may  wear  only  one  garter;  a  fourth  has  bound 
himself  never  to  enter  a  churchy  or  never  to  stay  in  one 
longer  than  an  hour  or  half  an  hour.  If  from  inadver- 
tence they  once  only  transgress  the  condition^  their  soul 
is  for  ever  lost.  Eveiy  one  who  has  been  in  the  Black 
School  has  power  over  spirits,  and  is  specially  skilled  in 
exorcising  the  ghosts  of  the  departed  and  other  spectres. 
With  one  word  they  can  wish  themselves  from  one  place 
to  another,  and  know  all  that  passes  at  home  in  their 
absence. 

A  certain  Pastor  Fabricius  in  Medelbye  was  particularly 
skilful.  Once,  while  at  a  christening  in  Holt,  he  com- 
pelled a  youngster,  who  was  in  the  act  of  robbing  an 
apple-tree  in  the  parsonage  garden,  to  sit  in  it  till  he  re- 
turned home  and  released  him.  At  another  time,  while 
in  the  middle  of  a  sermon,  he  struck  the  cushion  of  the 
pulpit  and  cried  :  "  Stop  ! ''  and  as  the  people  were  leaving 
the  church,  there  stood  a  man,  as  fixed  as  a  statue,  with  a 
sack  full  of  fresh-cut  grass  that  he  had  stolen  from  the 
churchvard  during  the  service.  He  had  many  magical 
books.  One  day  during  church-time  his  maid-servant  was 
cleaning  his  study,  and  through  curiosity  began  to  read  in 
a  little  book  she  found  there.  On  a  sudden  all  seemed 
alive  in  the  room,  and  a  multitude  of  the  most  hideous  forms 
and  spectres  made  their  appearance,  approaching  nearer 
and  nearer  to  the  girl,  who  was  almost  dead  with  fright. 
The  priest,  who  in  the  church  was  instantly  aware  of  what 
was  going  on  at  home,  suddenly  in  the  middle  of  his  ser- 
mon said  ^'^Amen,^^  hurried  to  his  house,  and  laid  the 
spirits,  who  would  else  have  destroyed  the  girl. 

But  the  devil  is  always  laying  traps  for  those  that  have 
made  a  contract  with  him,  and  if  the  above-mentioned 
Pastor  Fabricius  had  put  on  more  than  one  garter,  the 
fiend  would  have  carried  him  off.  But  the  devil  was  no 
match  for  Pastor  Fabricius,  who  was  always  on  his  guard, 


14  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

when  in  the  morninr^  he  saw  two  garters  lying  by  his  bed. 
The  devil  would  also  frequently^  in  the  shape  of  a  flea, 
torment  the  maid-servant  while  knitting  stockings  for  her 
master,  and  canse  her  to  err  in  the  number  of  stitches. 
The  stocking  would  then  generally  be  too  wide  and  hang 
loose  about  the  parson^s  heels,  though  he  cared  but  little 
for  that.  In  fact,  the  devil  could  never  get  an  advantage 
over  him. 

Pastor  Zieglcr,  the  author  of  a  Holstein  Idiotikon,  never  wore  more 
than  one  garter.  People  said  that  he  had  entered  into  a  contract  with 
the  devil,  and  that  when  it  was  expired  the  devil  came  to  fetch  him.  The 
pastor  would  first  dress  himself  decently  and  was  very  dilatory,  put  on  his 
stockings  inside  out,  etc.  When  tying  liis  second  garter,  the  devil,  burst- 
ing with  vexation,  said  to  him  that  he  would  wait  only  till  he  had  finished 
tying  his  garter.  "  In  that  case  then,"  said  Ziegler,  "  I  will  never  tie  it 
as  long  as  I  live;"  and  again  laid  himself  down  to  sleep.  The  devil  was 
obliged  to  depart. 

FAST-READING. 
A  man  went  one  day  into  one  of  the  churches  of  Ham- 
burg, and  found  at  the  back  of  the  altar  a  book,  in  which 
he  began  to  read,  and  went  on  reading  and  reading,  till 
he  at  length  read  himself  fast.  He  strove  to  release  him- 
self and  to  give  his  thoughts  another  direction,  but  in 
vain ;  he  was  obliged  to  stand  reading  on  and  on,  while  a 
cold  sweat  stood  on  his  forehead  and  he  trembled  in  every 
limb ;  he  would  have  died,  had  he  not  been  observed  by 
an  old  man,  who,  it  is  said,  was  a  Catholic  priest,  who 
guessing  what  had  befallen  him,  advised  him  to  read  the 
whole  backwards;  for  that  only  by  so  doing  he  could 
release  himself.  The  man  did  so  and  escaped  without 
further  inconvenience. 

FAST-WRITING. 
In  Wilster  many  persons  are  masters  of  what  is  termed 
fast-jrrifiiif/.     Two  thieves  having  one   night  broken  into 
the  house  of  a  rich  mau,  and  violently  demanded  his  keys, 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  15 

he  intimated  to  them  that  if  they  would  only  abstain  from 
violence^  he  would  deliver  to  them  everything,  which  they 
might  peaceably  divide  between  them ;  he  wished  merely 
that  all  might  be  done  quietly  and  regularly.  When 
the  thieves  had  got  possession  of  the  money,  they  sat 
down  at  the  table  and  began  to  divide  it ;  but  when  they 
had  finished  their  work  and  were  about  to  rise,  they  could 
neither  move  their  hands  from  the  money  nor  the  money 
from  the  table.  In  the  mean  while  the  household  was 
assembled.  "  Oho/^  said  the  master,  "  we  may  now  go 
quietly  to  bed  again,  they  can  very  comfortably  remain 
sitting.^"  On  the  following  morning,  having  sent  for  the 
police,  he  loosed  the  thieves. 

Another,  whose  cabbages  were  constantly  stolen  from 
his  garden,  wrote  the  thief  fast  from  Saturday  night  till 
Sunday,  when  he  was  just  in  the  act  of  passing  over  the 
fence  with  a  full  load  on  his  back.  There  he  was  com- 
pelled to  sit  riding  on  the  fence  while  all  the  people  were 
going  to  and  returning  from  church,  so  that  all  might  see 
him.     He  was  then  released  and  allowed  to  depart. 

TURNING  THE  SIEVE. 

During  a  time  of  war  a  butcher  of  Amrum,  having  more 
business  than  he  could  well  manage  alone,  took  the  son  of 
a  neighbour  to  assist  him.  In  this  youth  he  placed  so 
much  confidence  that  he  even  showed  him  the  place  in 
which  he  had  laid  by  a  few  hundred  dollars.  This  the 
son  communicated  to  his  mother,  and  both  were  seized 
with  an  irresistible  desire  to  get  possession  of  the  money ; 
so  that  on  the  following  morning,  when  the  mother  came 
for  a  pound  or  two  of  meat,  the  son  contrived  to  place  the 
bag  containing  the  money  in  the  bottom  of  her  basket. 
When  the  butcher  some  days  after  discovered  his  loss,  his 
suspicion  immediately  fell  on  his  assistant ;  but  the  other 
protested  his  innocence,  swearing  by  all  that  is  holy. 


16  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

There  was  at  this  time  in  Morsum  on  Silt  a  celebrated 
sorcerer,  who  could  discover  thieves  and  compel  them  to 
restore  the  stolen  property.  The  butcher  sent  his  wife 
thither,  and  the  sorcerer  immediately  took  his  measures. 
He  ordered  a  flour-sieve  to  be  brought,  placed  in  it  a  key 
and  a  pair  of  scissors,  and  set  it  on  a  large  vessel  filled 
with  water.  He  then  uttered  some  magical  sentences,  and 
the  woman  pronounced  several  times  the  names  of  all  sus- 
pected persons.  As  often  as  she  mentioned  the  name  of 
her  neighbour,  the  key  and  scissors  danced  about;  and 
when  the  sorcerer  desired  her  to  look  into  the  water,  she 
plainly  saw  her  husband's  assistant  in  the  act  of  handing 
the  money  to  his  mother.  But  the  sorcerer  informed  her 
that  it  would  not  be  possible  to  recover  the  money,  be- 
cause the  thieves  had  already  crossed  the  water  with  it. 

Ill  Ditmarschcn,  for  this  process  with  the  sieve,  they  use  a  family  hible 
and  family  key.  The  latter  is  laid  for  a  few  minutes  in  the  former,  for 
the  sake  of  sanctifying  it ;  the  cunning  man  then  takes  the  key,  causes  the 
sieve  to  turn  round  upon  it,  pronouncing  at  the  same  time  the  several 
names,  when  that  person  is  the  thief  at  the  mention  of  whose  name  the 
sieve  falls. 

In  Meklenburg  the  process  is  somewhat  different.  They  there  take  a 
sieve,  that  has  been  inherited  from  relations,  lay  it  on  the  rim,  open  a  i)air 
of  inherited  scissors,  and  stick  the  points  so  deep  hito  the  rim  of  the  sieve 
that  it  may  be  supported  by  them.  Two  then,  of  opposite  sexes,  go  with 
the  sieve  into  a  perfectly  dark  place,  hold  the  middle  finger  of  the  right 
hand  under  the  ring  of  the  scissors,  and  so  raise  up  the  sieve.  It  is  very 
clear  that  the  ring  will  slide  from  the  finger  on  the  slightest  motion,  and 
the  sieve  fall  down,  it  being  hardly  possible  to  hold  it  level  in  the  dark. 
One  then  asks  the  other:  "  In  the  name,  etc.  I  ask  of  thee ;  tell  me  truly 
and  lie  not :  who  has  stolen  this  or  that  ?  Has  Hans,  Fritz,  Peter,  done 
it  ? "  On  naming  the  guilty  one,  the  rimj  sUdcs  off,  the  sieve  falls  to  the 
ground,  and  the  thief  is  detected. 

According  to  other  accounts  the  operation  is  peiformed  in  the  light,  and 
the  sieve  does  not  fall,  but  turns.     Grimm,  D.  M.  p.  10G2. 

In  England,  "  the  vulgar,  in  many  parts,  have  an  abominable  practice  of 
using  a  riddle  and  a  pair  of  scissors  in  divination.  If  they  have  had  any 
thing  stolen  from  them,  tlie  riddle  and  shears  are  sure  to  be  resorted  to. 
A  similar  mode  of  discovering  thieves  or  others  susjjccted  of  any  crime 
prevailed  among  the  Greeks."    Vide  Potter's  Gr.  Antiq.  i.  p.  3J2,  Brocket, 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  17 

voce  Riddle.    Grimm,  D.  M.  p.  1062,  also  vol.  ii.  p.  269,  No.  8.    Kuhn  und 
Schwartz,  Norddeutsche  Sagen,  p.  523. 

A  MURDERER  CITED. 
In  a  public-house  in  Tondern  some  profane  persons  were 
sitting  at  cards  during  divine  service.  The  game  became 
more  and  more  exciting^  and  in  the  dispute  which  followed, 
one  stabbed  the  other  with  his  knife.  The  murderer  fled. 
Allien  the  dead  was  to  be  buried,  the  coffin  was  borne  to 
the  market-place  and  there  set  down ;  it  was  then  struck 
on  the  lid  with  a  hammer,  and  the  murderer  was  cited. 
He  was  at  the  time  in  Riga,  and  afterwards  discovered 
himself  to  a  friend  who  came  thither,  to  whom  he  told  the 
hour  in  which  those  hammer  strokes  struck  into  his  heart. 

THE  MAGIC  KETTLE. 

There  was  once  in  Oppendorp  a  young  serving-man, 
who  was  a  very  strong,  useful  fellow.  This  was  at  the 
time  when  all  the  talk  was  about  giving  the  serfs  their 
freedom.  The  young  fellows  were  overjoyed  at  the  pro- 
spect, but  could  not  await  the  day  of  their  emancipation. 
Among  the  rest,  to  our  serving-man  also  the  time  seemed 
too  long,  so  one  morning,  when  he  ought  to  have  been  at 
the  plough,  he  was  far  away  over  the  hills.  His  master 
was  vexed  at  thus  losing  his  best  man,  and  did  all  he 
could  to  get  him  back,  but  not  a  trace  of  him  could  be 
obtained. 

After  some  time  there  came  a  Jew  up  to  the  farm,  to 
whom  they  related  the  story.  The  Jew  said:  "We  can 
very  well  get  him  again. ^^  This  the  people  told  to  their 
master,  who  let  the  Jew  come  to  him  and  asked  him  if 
what  he  had  said  were  true  ?  The  Jew  said,  "  Yes,^^  pro- 
vided he  had  what  was  requisite  for  the  purpose  and  also 
good  payment.  The  payment  was  soon  agreed  on,  and 
the  Jew  undertook  to  get  the  man  back,  if  he  had  a  piece 
of  any  stuff  that  he  had  worn  for  a  year.     The  master 


18  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

ordered  search  to  be  made,  and  an  old  under-jacket  was 
found.  The  Jew  then  ordered  a  black  cock  and  a  black 
he-cat  to  be  caught ;  these  he  killed,  and  then  took  some 
other  thmgs,  but  which  he  kept  quite  secret.  At  night 
he  set  a  large  kettle  on  the  fire,  into  which,  at  midnight, 
he  put  the  jacket,  the  black  cat,  the  black  cock,  and  the 
other  things,  and  began  boiling  them.  And  he  boiled  and 
boiled  all  night  and  the  following  day,  so  that  he  boiled 
twice  twenty-four  hours.  When  it  was  evening  there 
came  a  man  running  up  the  yard,  covered  with  mud  from 
head  to  foot  and  breathless,  who  on  reaching  the  house- 
door  fell  down  senseless  from  exhaustion.  It  was  the 
runaway  servant.  On  coming  to  himself,  his  first  words 
w^ere:  "Heaven  be  praised  that  I  am  again  in  Oppendorp!" 
He  said  that  he  had  been  in  Amsterdam,  that  he  woke 
one  night  and  was  so  excited  as  he  had  never  been  in  his 
life.  He  felt  obliged  to  dress  himself,  he  knew  not  why ; 
and  then  he  was  forced  to  run  without  cessation  both  by 
night  and  by  day.  How  he  crossed  the  water  he  knew 
not ;  tired  and  hungry  as  he  was  it  mattered  not,  he  was 
forced  to  run  on  and  on,  being  unable  to  stand  for  a 
moment  still. 

THE  DEVIL'S  CAT. 
A  peasant  had  three  beautiful,  large  cats.  A  neighbour 
begged  to  have  one  of  them,  and  obtained  it.  To  accus- 
tom it  to  the  place,  he  shut  it  up  in  the  loft.  At  night 
the  cat,  popping  its  head  through  the  window,  said  : 
"What  shall  I  bring  to-night?"  "Thou  shalt  bring 
mice,"  answered  the  man.  The  cat  then  set  to  work,  and 
cast  all  it  caught  on  the  floor.  Next  morning  the  place 
was  so  full  of  dead  mice  that  it  was  hardly  possible  to  open 
the  door,  and  the  man  was  employed  the  whole  day  in 
throwing  them  away  by  bushels.  At  night  the  cat  again 
put   its  head  through  the  aperture  and  asked:    "  AVliat 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  19 

shall  I  bring  to-night  ?"  "Thou  shalt  bring  rye/^  an- 
swered the  peasant.  The  cat  was  now  busily  employed  in 
shooting  down  rye^  so  that  in  the  morning  the  door  could 
not  be  opened.  The  man  then  saw  that  the  cat  was  a 
witch,  and  carried  it  back  to  his  neighbour,  in  which  he 
acted  prudently ;  for  had  he  given  it  work  a  third  time, 
he  could  never  have  got  rid  of  it.  In  one  respect,  how- 
ever, he  did  not  act  prudently,  to  wit,  in  not  saying  the 
second  time:  ^^  Thou  shalt  bring  gold/^  for  then  he 
would  have  got  as  much  gold  as  he  did  rye. 

MONOLOKE. 
There  was  in  former  times  a  spirit  known  among  the 
people  under  the  name  of  Monoloke ;  so  that  when  any 
one  became  unexpectedly  rich,  it  was  said  of  him :  "  The 
Monoloke  peeps  out  of  his  pocket."  The  Monoloke  was 
a  puppet  made  in  the  deviPs  name  of  white  wax,  and  was 
clad  in  a  petticoat  of  blue  taffety,  with  a  vest  of  black  vel- 
vet ;  the  legs  and  feet  were  bare.  Those  who  would  derive 
aid  from  it  must  preserve  it  carefully  and  keep  it  clean. 

WITCHES  IN  FRIESLAND. 

Tlie  people  of  Donsum,  in  the  island  of  Fohr,  are  ac- 
counted sorcerers ;  the  women  in  particular  are  all  said  to 
be  witches.  On  this  account  no  one  cares  to  hold  any 
intercourse  with  them,  and  no  one  marries  out  of  the  vil- 
lage. On  a  Friday  no  woman  is  to  be  found  at  home; 
because  on  that  day  they  hold  their  meetings  and  have 
dances  on  a  barren  heath.  In  the  evening  they  ride  thither 
on  horses,  though  usually  they  have  wings  on  their 
shoulders  and  fly.  In  their  flight  they  are  often  unable 
to  stop  at  the  right  time,  so  that  if  a  church  stecj)le  is  in 
their  way,  they  fly  against  it.  From  hurts  received  in  their 
fall,  on  the  following  day  they  lie  sick.  Where  their 
dances  have  been  held,  there  may  be  found  on  the  next 


^0  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITION'S. 

(lay  rags  and  tatters  of  all  kinds  and  colours,  pieces  of 
riband,  needles  with  which  in  bewitched  wax  they  have 
pierced  many  a  one^s  heart,  blood  and  matter.  They  can 
transform  themselves  into  cats  and  horses,  swans  and 
eagles.  A  young  man  once  went  to  visit  his  betrothed ; 
when  about  to  enter  the  house,  there  lay  a  white  horse  in 
the  door-way.  This  was  just  on  a  Friday  evening.  A 
man,  who  had  been  much  annoyed  by  witches,  going  once 
out  a  shooting,  saw  a  bird  with  a  plumage  of  surprising 
beauty.  He  aimed  at  and  shot  it,  when  the  bird  became 
a  woman.  As  a  bridal  pair  were  passing  by  a  lake  near 
Donsum,  there  were  some  swans  sailing  on  the  water, 
seeing  which  the  bride  said :  "  I  will  just  go  to  the  swans 
for  a  moment.^'  She  went,  and  the  swans  proved  to  be 
her  sisters.  She  also  became  a  swan,  and  they  all  fluttered 
and  beat  with  their  wings.  The  bridegroom  had  to  go 
home  alone.  The  witches  often  change  themselves  into 
seals,  and  follow  the  mariners  and  fishermen.  They  fre- 
quently enter  houses  in  the  shape  of  toads.  Children  are 
to  be  carefully  protected  from  their  look.  If  a  riband  or 
a  small  cord  with  a  knot  in  it  is  found  lying  in  the  way, 
let  no  one  touch  it,  for  the  witches  have  placed  it  there. 
No  one  may  lend  to  the  witches  any  sharp  instrument,  as 
scissors,  a  knife,  and,  least  of  all,  needles.  A  man^s  cow 
died :  he  set  the  heart  with  the  other  entrails  on  the  fire 
and  boiled  them,  when  the  witch  (who  had  killed  the  cow) 
was  obliged  to  come.  When  no  butter  will  come,  it  is 
usual  to  stick  knives  round  the  cover  of  the  churn ;  the 
first  woman  that  then  enters  is  the  witch.  Houses  and 
stables  may  be  protected  from  witches  by  nailing  a  horse^s 
foot  over  the  door,  or  burying  a  lizard  alive  under  the 
threshold.  Asa-foetida  is  also  used  for  the  same  pur])ose'. 
The  foregoing  holds  good  not  only  of  the  women  in  Donsum,  but  also  of 

'  See  vol.  ii.  p.  75. 


NORTH   GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  21 

those  of  Silt,  Amrnm,  and  the  other  islands.  On  the  1st  May  they  all  ride 
to  the  Blocksherg. 

WITCHES. 

A^lioever  desires  to  become  a  witch  yields  lierself  to  the 
devil  and  abjures  God  in  these  words : 

Hier  trete  ich  in  dieses  Nest,      Here  enter  I  in  this  one's  nest, 
Und  verlasse  unsern   Herrn      And   forsake    our    Lord   Jesus 
Jesu  Christ !  Christ ! 

Then  will  the  sorcery  succeed^  in  which  they  instruct  one 
another,  and  which  they  learn  from  the  devil,  who  comes 
to  them.  On  St.  John's  eve  and  on  the  1st  May  they 
have  their  meetings  and  dances.  From  these  assemblies 
they  return  home  sick  almost  to  death.  Of  all  witches  it 
is  related,  that  on  Wolber's  (Walburg's)  eve  they  ride  to 
the  Blocksherg.  On  that  evening  no  one  may  hinder 
them,  and  whoever  makes  a  cross  over  the  door  through 
which  they  must  pass,  will  afterwards  feel  their  vengeance, 
and  get  a  severe  beating.  They  pass  through  chimneys 
and  holes,  and  ride  on  brooms,  he-goats,  cats,  cocks,  old 
sows,  asses  and  spotted  dogs,  which  the  devil  frequently 
sends  them. 

Of  their  merry-making  on  the  Rugenberg  it  is  related, 
that  as  soon  as  the  witches,  each  in  her  own  fashion,  are 
all  arrived,  they  prepare  a  repast,  either  of  geese  or  fresh 
(i.  e.  unsalted,  unsmoked)  beef  sprinkled  with  mustard, 
with  which  they  eat  bread  baked  in  an  iron  pot,  and  drink 
beer  out  of  wooden  or  tin  cups.  The  devil  brings  the 
kettle  with  him  from  Liitjenbrode.  Then  the  dancing 
begins,  when  each  witch  dances  with  a  devil,  while  an  old 
woman  sings  and  two  kettles  are  beaten.  On  the  sur- 
rounding mountains  fires  shine  forth.  Whoever  approaches 
is  drawn  into  the  circle  and  whirled  about  till  he  sinks 
down  breathless.  When  day  dawns  they  all  vanish.  On 
the  following  morning  are  to  be  seen  on  the  mountain 


22  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

traces  of  fowls  and  of  horses^  and  goats^  feet,  and  in  the 
middle  lies  a  heap  of  ashes. 


If  an  old  woman  is  suspected  of  being  a  witch,  it  is  the 
custom  to  throw^  a  handful  of  salt  after  her,  when,  if  she 
really  is  a  witch,  she  will  look  round.  When  any  one  who 
is  thought  to  be  a  witch  will  enter  a  house,  it  is  merely 
necessary  to  place  a  broom  inverted  in  the  door-way :  if 
she  is  a  witch,  she  cannot  enter.  Some  young  men  once 
adopted  the  following  plan.  On  St.  John^s  eve  they  went 
to  a  meadow,  where  they  rolled  themselves  naked  in  the 
dew.  On  the  Sunday  following  they  went  to  the  church, 
and  saw  that  every  woman  who  was  a  witch  carried  a  milk- 
pail  on  her  head  ^ ;  and  the  number  of  these  was  very  great, 
both  women  and  girls. 

A  couple  of  young  peasants  once  resolved  to  watch  the 
witches  on  St.  John^s  eve,  and  for  this  purpose  put  the 
horses  to  a  pair  of  patrimonial  harrows,  with  which  they 
drove  out  on  one  side  of  the  village,  one  going  to  the  right, 
the  other  to  the  left.  They  went  round  the  village  till 
they  met  on  the  opposite  side.  The  circle  which  they 
thus  drew  round  the  place  the  witches  could  not  trans- 
gress. They  left  one  small  opening  where  they  awaited 
the  witches,  and  placed  the  two  harrows  aslant  against 
each  other,  beneath  which  they  laid  themselves.  At  mid- 
night all  the  witches  flew  out  from  their  several  chimneys 
on  pitchforks  and  broomsticks.  They  all  had  to  pass  bv 
the  two,  and  among  them  one  of  them  recognised  his  own 
wife.  "  Are  you  there  too,  my  old  woman  V  cried  he, 
and  thus  betrayed  himself;  and  the  witches  all  rushing 
upon  him,  drove  the  sharp  spikes  of  the  harrow  into  his 
body;  for  he  had  been  so  thoughtless  as  to  turn  them 
inwards.     He  did  not  escape  with  life. 

»  See  vol.  ii.  p.  275,  No.  54. 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  23 

A^Tioever  desires  to  see  the  witches  dance,  must  take  an 
old  plank  from  a  coffin  lid,  from  which  a  knot  has  heen 
thrust,  and  peep  through  the  hole. 

THE  AYITCHES'  PRESENT. 
Late  one  night  as  a  musician  was  on  the  road  from 
Todendorf  to  Puttgarden,  he  was  met  by  a  number  of 
witches,  w^ho  immediately  surrounded  him,  and  said : 
"  Play  us  some  tune.^^  Fright  prevented  him  from  speak- 
ing, but  at  length  he  contrived  to  tell  them  that  he  had 
no  violin.  '^'^That  makes  no  difference,"  answered  the 
witches,  "  for  we  have  one."  When  he  began  playing, 
they  danced  wildly  around  him,  springing  as  high  as  a 
house.  At  last  they  were  tired,  and  gave  the  man  for 
reward  an  apronful  of  ^krobels^  (a  sort  of  apple-cake). 
On  reaching  home,  he  laid  the  violin  and  the  krobels  on 
a  shelf  and  went  to  bed.  On  the  following  morning,  when 
he  went  to  look  at  his  presents,  the  violin  proved  to  be  an 
old  cat,  the  bow  a  cat's  tail,  and  the  krobels  nothing  but 
horse-dung. 

WIND-KNOTS. 
At  Siseby  on  the  Slei  there  dwelt  a  woman  who  was  a 
sorceress  and  could  change  the  wind.  The  Sleswig  herring- 
fishers  used  frequently  to  land  there.  Once  when  they 
w^ould  return  to  Sleswig,  the  wind  being  west,  they  re- 
quested the  woman  to  change  it.  She  agreed  to  do  so 
for  a  dish  of  fish.  She  then  gave  them  a  cloth  with  three 
knots,  telling  them  they  might  undo  the  first  and  the 
second,  but  not  the  third  until  they  had  reached  land. 
The  men  spread  their  sails,  although  the  wind  was  west ; 
but  no  sooner  had  the  oldest  of  the  party  undone  the  first 
knot,  than  there  came  a  beautiful  fair  wind  from  the  east. 
On  undoing  the  second  knot  they  had  storm,  and  arrived 
at  the  city  with  the  utmost  speed.  They  were  now  curious 
to  know  what  would  follow  if  they  undid  the  third  knot ; 


24  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

but  no  sooner  had  they  done  so  than  a  violent  hurri- 
cane assailed  them  from  the  west,  so  that  they  were  obliged 
to  leap  into  the  water,  in  order  to  draw  their  vessel  on 
shore. 

THE  ST.  JOIIN'S-BLOOD. 
At  Klostersand  near  Elmshorn  there  was  formerly,  be- 
tween the  Pilgerberg  and  the  Kuppelberg,  the  so-called 
Ilexenkuhle.  Here  on  certain  days,  particularly  on  St. 
John^s  day,  between  twelve  and  one  o^ clock,  old  women 
may  be  seen  wandering  about  in  search  of  a  plant  which 
grows  only  on  the  Pilgerberg.  This  plant  has  in  its  root 
grains  containing  a  purple-red  juice,  which  they  call  St. 
John's  blood.  This  the  old  women  collect  in  tin  boxes 
and  carefully  preserve  it.  But  it  is  only  when  gathered 
at  noon  that  it  can  perform  miracles^ ;  when  the  clock 
strikes  one,  its  virtue  is  passed. 

THE  WAXEN  IMAGE. 
A  man  in  Amrum  lay  for  a  long  time  sick,  and  nothing 
afforded  him  relief.  While  he  so  lay,  a  miller  observed 
from  his  mill  that  a  woman  was  in  the  daily  habit  of  going 
to  the  'Donk'am.-'  He  one  day  followed  her  footsteps, 
dug,  and  found  in  the  sand  a  little  waxen  image  of  a  man 
with  a  pin  stuck  through  the  heart.  He  drew  the  pin 
out,  took  the  image  home,  and  burnt  it.  From  that  hour 
the  man  became  well. 

THE  WITCHES  STUFF  IN  DISSENSION. 
When  a  bridal  bed  is  to  be  stuffed,  great  caution  is 
necessary ;  for  the  witches  can  stuff  into  it  either  harmony 
or  dissension,  according  as  they  may  be  affected  to  the 
bridal  pair.  For  a  young  couple,  who  fondly  loved  each 
other,  but  against  whom  certain  old  women  bore  a  grudge, 
they  stuffed  in  dissension.  Both  bride  and  bridegroom 
1  "  These  flowers  were  cuU'd  at  noon." — Moore. 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  25 

had  passed  a  happy  wedding-day,  but  scarcely  were  they 
in  bed  when  they  began  to  quarrel,  till  at  length  they 
came  to  blows.  The  parents  of  the  bridegroom,  who  lay 
ni  a  bed  near,  heard  the  noise,  but  could  not  restore  peace 
between  them.  They  then  advised  the  young  couple  to 
transfer  themselves  to  their  bed,  which  they  did  and  passed 
the  night  amicably.  But  no  sooner  had  the  old  folks  laid 
themselves  in  the  other  bed  than  they  began  quarreling, 
though  they  had  never  before  had  a  difference  between 
them;  and  this  lasted  till  morning.  They  then  examined 
the  bed,  when,  on  taking  out  the  feathers,  they  found 
them  all  twisted  together  in  wreaths  and  rings  with  silken 
threads  of  all  colours.  Now  it  was  manifest  that  the  old 
women  who  had  stuffed  the  bed  were  witches,  and  had 
twisted  dissension  into  it. 

In  Amrum  a  man  lay  sick  and  bewitched  to  death.  While  placing  him 
in  the  coffin  one  of  his  legs  feU  off.  On  opening  his  pillow,  a  be^^^tched 
wreath  of  feathers  of  all  sorts  and  colours  was  found  in  it. 

WITCHES  TAKE  BUTTER. 
There  was  a  time  when  the  witches  were  particularly 
mischievous.  It  was  then  indispensable  for  every  house- 
wife to  have  a  handle  made  of  the  wood  of  the  service 
(quicken)  tree  to  her  churn ;  else  she  could  never  be  sure 
of  getting  butter.  A  man  one  morning  early,  on  his  way 
from  Jagerup  to  Hadersleben,  heard,  as  he  passed  by 
Woiensgaard,  that  they  were  churning  in  the  yard;  but 
at  the  same  time  he  obsei-ved  that  a  woman  whom  he  knew 
was  standing  by  the  side  of  a  running  brook  and  churning 
with  a  stick  in  the  water.  On  that  same  day  he  again 
saw  her  selling  a  large  lump  of  butter  in  Hadersleben.  In 
the  evening  as  he  again  passed  by  Woiens,  they  were  still 
churning;  whereupon  he  went  to  the  house  and  assured 
them  that  their  labour  was  all  in  vain,  for  the  butter  was 
already  sold  at  Hadersleben. 


26  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

THE  SEVERED  HAND  i. 
In  Eiderstedt  there  was  a  miller  who  had  the  misfortune 
to  have  his  mill  burnt  every  Christmas  eve.    He  had,  how- 
ever, a  courageous  servant  who  undertook  to  keep  watch 
in  the  mill  on  that  portentous  night.    He  kindled  a  blazing 
fire  and  made  himself  a  good  kettleful  of  porridge,  which 
he  stirred  about  with  a  large  ladle.     He  had  an  old  sabre 
lying  by  him.     Ere  long  there  came  a  whole  regiment  of 
cats  into  the  mill,  and  he  heard  one  say  in  a  low  tone  to 
another:   ^^Mousekin!  go  and  sit  by  Hanskin  ! ''   and  a 
beautiful  milk-white  cat  came  creeping  softly  to  him  and 
would  place  herself  by  his  side.    At  this,  taking  a  ladleful 
of  the  scalding  porridge,  he  dashed  it  in  her  face,  then 
seizing  the  sabre,  he  cut  off  one  of  her  paws.     The  cats 
now  all  disappeared.     On  looking  at  the  paw  more  atten- 
tively, he  found,  instead  of  a  paw,  that  it  was  a  woman^s 
delicate  hand,  with  a  gold  ring  on  one  of  the  fingers, 
whereon    was  his  master^s  cypher.      Next   morning   the 
miller's  wife  lay  in  bed  and  would  not  rise.     ''Give  me 
thy  hand,  wife!"  said  the  miller.     At  first  she  refused, 
but  was  obliged  at  length  to  hold  out  her  mutilated  limb. 
When  the  authorities  got  intelligence  of  this  event,  the 
woman  was  burnt  for  a  witch. 

A  WITCH  AS  A  HARE. 
In  Bodelsdorf  there  dwelt,  and  perhaps  still  dwells,  a 
very  old  woman,  in  whose  service  no  one  would  e^  cr  con- 
tinue ;  for  when  the  servants  were  employed  in  the  fields 
she  always  knew  exactly  what  they  had  done  and  said,  as 
she  was  ever  present  among  them.  Sometimes  she  would 
be  a  duck  and  swim  on  the  water ;  then,  if  the  men  and 
girls  pelted  her  with  stones,  she  would  merely  dive  down 
and  rise  immediately  afterwards.  At  other  times  she 
would  be  a  hare  and  run  through  the  corn  when  it  was 
1  See  vol.  ii.  p.  32. 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 


cut,  and  never  received  a  hurt,  however  often  the  men 
shot  at  her.  But  once,  when  they  were  going  out  to  mow, 
one  of  the  men  provided  himself  with  a  silver  button,  with 
which  he  loaded  his  piece  and  shot  the  hare.  On  his  re- 
turn in  the  evening  he  found  the  old  woman  with  a  wound 
in  her  arm  which  would  never  heal.  With  inherited  silver 
a  person  may  hit  whatever  has  been  rendered  invulnerable 
by  sorcery.  Both  muskets  and  rifles  can  be  bewitched, 
and  there  are  persons  who  can  cause  bullets  to  glide  off 
from  them  in  another  direction.  When  a  gun  is  bewitched, 
the  best  remedy  is  to  put  a  living  snake  into  the  barrel  and 
shoot  it  off;  then  will  the  sorcery  be  neutralized.  In- 
herited silver  is,  moreover,  useful  in  numerous  other  cases. 
If  a  little  be  scraped  off  and  given  to  a  sick  person,  the 
paroxysms  will  abate.  If  any  one  has  an  inherited  ear=ring, 
and  wears  it,  it  will  relieve  the  most  violent  tooth-ache. 

When  a  witch  is  wounded  with  such  a  silver  button  or 
bullet,  she  must  resume  her  natural  form. 

WERWOLVES. 

On  a  hot  harvest  day  some  reapers  lay  down  in  the  field 
to  take  their  noontide  sleep,  when  one  who  could  not  sleep 
observed  that  the  one  next  to  him  rose  softly  and  girded 
himself  with  a  strap,  whereupon  he  became  a  wolf. 

By  addressing  a  werwolf  thrice  by  his  baptismal  name, 
he  resumes  his  human  form. 


A  young  man  belonging  to  Jagerup  returning  late  one 
night  from  Billund,  was  attacked,  when  near  Jagerup,  by 
three  werwolves,  and  would  probably  have  been  torn  to 
pieces,  had  he  not  saved  himself  by  leaping  into  a  rye-field ; 
for  then  they  had  no  more  power  over  him. 

THE  LONG  HORSE. 
Some  young  persons  belonging  to  Kassoe,  a  village  near 

c2 


28  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

Apenrade,  being  one  Sunday  evening  on  their  way  to  a 
dance  at  Hiidewad,  when  they  came  to  a  brook  that  runs 
between  the  two  villages,  found  themselves  unable  to  cross 
it,  in  consequence  of  the  recent  rains  that  had  greatly 
swelled  it.  While  looking  about  them,  they  perceived  an 
old  horse  standing  close  by,  and  resolved  on  mounting 
him  and  riding  through  the  rivulet.  But  when  one  pair 
had  mounted,  they  saw  there  was  still  room  for  another; 
and  when  another  mounted,  there  was  place  for  a  fourth ; 
till  that  at  length  the  whole  party  seated  themselves  on 
his  back.  When  in  the  middle  of  the  rivulet,  one  who 
sat  foremost  happening  to  look  round,  and  seeing  so  many 
persons  sitting  on  the  horse's  back,  cried  out  in  astonish- 
ment :  "  Cross  of  Jesus,  what  a  long  jade  \"  But  scarcely 
had  he  uttered  the  words,  when  the  goblin  horse's  back 
snapped  asunder,  the  riders  all  fell  into  the  water,  and  the 
horse  vanished  with  an  appalling  howl. 

THE  MANNIGFUAL  OR  GIANT  SHIP. 

The  North  Frisic  mariners  tell  of  a  gigantic  ship,  the 
'  Mannigfual.'  This  ship  is  so  vast  that  the  captain  always 
rides  about  the  deck  on  horseback,  for  the  purpose  of 
giving  his  orders.  The  sailors,  who  chmb  up  the  rigging 
when  young,  come  down  again  stricken  in  years  with  grey 
beards  and  hair.  ^Yh\\e  so  employed  they  keep  themselves 
alive  by  frequent  visits  to  the  blocks  of  the  cordage,  which 
contain  rooms  for  refection. 

This  monstrous  vessel  once  steered  its  course  from  the 
Atlantic  ocean  into  the  British  channel ;  but  being  unable, 
on  account  of  the  narrowness  of  the  strait,  to  pass  between 
Dover  and  Calais,  the  captain  had  the  lucky  thought  of 
having  the  whole  larboard  side  smeared  over  with  white 
soap.  This  operation  proved  effectual;  the  Mannigfual 
passed  through  safely  and  entered  the  North  sea.  From 
that  tune  the  cliffs  of  Dover  got  their  white,  soapy  appear- 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  29 

ance,  from  the  soap  that  was  rubbed  off,  and  the  foam 
raised  by  the  motion  of  the  vessel. 

Once  the  giant  ship  (we  are  not  told  how)  found  itself 
in  the  Baltic ;  but  the  crew  soon  discovered  that  the  water 
was  too  shallow.  To  get  afloat  again,  they  found  it  neces- 
sary to  throw  the  ballast  together  with  the  dirt  and  ashes 
of  the  galley  overboard.  From  the  ballast  the  isle  of  Born- 
holm  derives  its  origin,  and  from  the  rubbish  the  little 
neighbouring  isle  of  Christianso. 

THE  BASILISK. 
When  a  cock  is  seven  (according  to  others  twenty)  years 
old,  it  lays  an  egg,  out  of  which  comes  an  animal,  which 
is  the  basilisk.  All  living  things,  on  which  it  directs  its 
look,  must  instantly  die,  and  even  stones  burst  asunder. 
There  have  been  people  who  have  kept  such  an  animal  for 
many  years  in  a  dark  cellar ;  but  durst  not  open  the  cellar, 
lest  the  light  should  enter.  If  a  mirror  be  held  before  a 
basilisk,  and  it  thus  gets  a  sight  of  itself,  it  must  die  like 
another  being'. 

THE  NIGHTMARE. 

When  seven  boys  or  seven  girls  are  born  in  succession, 
one  among  them  is  a  nightmare,  that  visits  those  sleeping, 
sets  itself  on  their  breast,  oppresses  and  torments  them. 

A  man  had  got  such  a  nightmare  for  his  wife  without 
knowing  it ;  but  he  was  soon  sensible  that  many  nights 
she  had  disappeared  from  his  bed.  One  night,  therefore, 
he  kept  himself  awake  in  order  to  watch  her,  and  saw  how 
she  rose  from  the  bed  and,  as  the  door  was  fast  bolted, 
slipt  through  the  hole  for  the  strap  by  which  the  latch  was 
lifted  up.  After  some  time  she  returned  by  the  way  she 
went.  Next  morning  the  man  stopt  up  the  opening  in 
the  door,   and  now  always  found  his  wife  by  his  side. 

1  See  vol.  ii.  p.  212. 


30  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

When  a  considerable  time  had  passed^  the  man  thinking 
she  had  cast  off  and  forgotten  her  bad  habit,  drew  out  the 
peg,  in  order  to  use  the  latch  again ;  but  in  the  following 
night,  the  woman  was  missing  and  never  came  back^; 
though  every  Sunday  morning  the  man  found  clean  linen 
laid  out  for  him. 

Tlie  mistletoe  is  recommended  as  a  remedy  for  the  nightmare ;  it  is, 
therefore,  sometimes  called  marentakken  (mare-hranches),  or  alfranken 
(elf-tendrils).     Thunder-stones  are  likewise  considered  a  remedy. 

THE  HEL-HORSE. 
At  Jordkirch,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Apenrade,  this 
creature  frequented  a  lonely  way  called  Langfort,  making 
a  noise  like  that  of  a  horse,  well  shod  on  all  its  four  hoofs, 
on  a  stone  pavement^.  He  is  said  to  be  headless.  In 
Tondern  an  old,  three-legged,  grey  (or  white),  blind  horse 
goes  clattering  through  the  streets  every  night.  In  every 
house  before  which  he  stands,  or  into  which  he  looks, 
somebody  must  die.  Old  people  have  often  witnessed 
this,  and  thus  been  enabled  to  foretell  a  death.  This  horse 
is  called  Hel,  and  is  said  to  have  no  master,  though  some 
assert  that  an  old  woman  in  black  rides  on  him. 

FLAMES  IN  THE  WATER. 
Fishermen  relate  that  by  a  bridge  in  Rendsburg  a  whim- 
pering is  often  heard  in  the  water  like  that  of  a  young 
child;  sometimes,  too,  small  flames  dart  up,  which  are 
always  a  sign  that  some  one  will  perish.  The  Eyder  is, 
generally  speaking,  a  bad  river ;  every  year  it  requires  a 
sacrifice.  The  same  may  be  said  of  the  bay  of  Kiel  and 
the  lake  of  Ploen. 

OF  THE  UNDERGROUND  FOLK. 
When  our  Lord  was  on  earth,  he  came  one  day  to  the 
house  of  a  woman  who  had  five  comely  and  five  ugly  chil- 

1  See  vol.  ii.  p.  1G9. 

"  The  Danish  Hcl-horse  has  only  three  legs.    Sec  vol.  ii.  p.  209. 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  31 

dren.  On  bis  entering  the  house  she  concealed  the  five 
ugly  children  in  the  cellar.  The  Lord  then  desired  the 
children  to  be  brought  before  him,  and  when  he  saw  the 
five  comely  ones,  he  inquired  of  the  woman  where  her 
other  children  were.  She  answered :  "  I  have  no  other 
children/^  The  Lord  then  blessed  the  five  comely  chil- 
dren and  cursed  the  ugly  ones,  saying  :  ''  What  is  beneath 
shall  remain  beneath,  and  what  is  above  shall  remain 
above.^^  When  the  woman  went  again  into  the  cellar,  the 
five  children  had  disappeared.  From  them  spring  the 
Underground  Folk^ 


Under  the  earth,  particularly  in  barrows  of  the  dead, 
there  dwell  little  people  called  by  the  Holsteiners  Dwarge 
(Dwarfs)  or  Unnererske  (Subterraneans). 

They  have  been  in  the  country  from  time  immemorial. 
At  Heinkenborstel,  in  the  bailiwick  of  Rendsburg,  there 
once  dwelt  such  people.  These  asserted  that  they  had 
lived  there  before  the  invention  of  beer-brewing^. 

It  is  quite  certain  that  there  are  such  underground 
people.  An  old  woman  in  Angeln  had  been  told  by  her 
grandfather,  that  once  when  ploughing  in  his  field,  in 
which  there  was  a  giant's  mount  (Riesenberg),  he  saw  a 
little  underground  woman  in  a  white  sark  come  out  of  it, 
but  who,  on  seeing  him,  instantly  fled. 

In  the  district  of  Pinneberg,  whenever  there  is  a  wed- 
ding feast,  it  may  be  observed  that  the  undergound  people 
sit  among  the  guests  at  table  and  help  to  eat  the  dinner ; 
for  on  the  side  of  the  table  at  which  they  sit,  double  the 
quantity  vanishes  of  what  is  consumed  on  the  opposite 
side  ^. 

1  See  vol.  ii.  p.  115. 

2  This  is  very  characteristic.  What  an  idea  such  people  must  entertain 
of  remote  antiquity  !  '  See  vol.  ii.  p.  134. 


32  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

They  are  said  to  wear  many  golden  chains,  and  to  have 
many  golden  vessels,  which  they  hang  out  on  the  bushes, 
on  which  they  also  spread  their  linen  to  dry. 

They  can  be  very  mischievous.  From  a  man  in  Siider- 
stapel  they  took  a  horse,  and  only  returned  it  when  it 
became  lame. 

When  a  child  falls  and  cries,  it  is  told  that  it  could  not 
help  it;  that  the  underground  folk  had  caught  it  by  the 
leji-. 


A  man  and  his  wife  passing  one  night  by  a  mount  near 
Krumesse  in  Lauenburg,  saw  a  long  procession  of  under- 
ground folk,  none  of  them  higher  than  the  leg  of  a  chair. 
One  who  rode  foremost  on  a  little  horse,  wore  an  enor- 
mously high  peaked  cap.  At  this  sight  both  cried  out : 
'^  All  good  spirits  praise  God  the  Lord  ^/'  when  instantly 
the  foremost  rider  began  to  grow  higher  and  higher,  and 
at  last  became  a  giant.  The  whole  procession  then  turned 
about  and  entered  the  mount. 

THE  ONNERBANKISSEN  IN  FOGEDSHOOG. 

The  Onnerbankissen  (Subterraneans)  in  Amrum  live 
chiefly  in  the  Fogedshoog  by  the  Downs  (Diinen).  They 
have  been  seen  at  night  dancing  round  it  in  the  moon- 
light, and  spreading  their  linen  out  on  it  by  day.  In  the 
winter  they  have  been  known  to  skate  on  the  water  of 
Merum.  A  wanton  fellow  once  resolved  on  destroying 
their  habitation.  He  dug  far  into  the  hill,  and  fancied  he 
had  found  the  dwellings  of  the  Onnerbankissen,  when  to 
his  astonishment  and  horror  he  saw  his  own  dwelling 
standing  in  a  blaze  ^.  Throwing  aside  his  spade  and 
mattock,  he  ran  with  all  speed  to  the  village,  on  reaching 

'  Alle  guten  Geister  loben  Gott  den  Herrn. 
2  See  vol.  ii.  pp.  119,  152,  et  passim. 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  66 

which  he  found  the  fire  was  a  delusion.  The  fright^  how- 
ever, taught  him  a  lesson,  and  from  that  time  no  one  has 
disturbed  the  Onnerbankissen  in  Fogedshoog. 

THE  SUBTERRANEAN  POTTERS. 

On  the  Morsumkliff  in  Silt  are  found  a  great  quantity 
of  all  kinds  of  smith's  and  potter's  ware,  in  the  shape  of 
pipes,  boxes,  balls,  pots,  etc.  On  Silt  they  call  them 
Onnererskpottjiig  (subterranean  crockery  ware),  on  Am- 
rum,  Traaldaasker  (Troll-boxes),  because  they  are  made 
by  the  Underground  folk. 

In  Holstein  it  is  believed  that  the  corn  found  in  the 
urns  from  the  old  graves,  thrives,  when  sown  in  the  fields 
and  gardens,  better  than  any  other.  Milk  also  becomes 
richer  and  yields  more  butter  when  it  has  stood  in  such 
pots.  If  the  poultry  drink  out  of  them,  they  will  not  be- 
come ill. 

THE  UNDERGROUND  SMITH. 

A  man  riding  one  morning  past  the  Dreiberge,  on  the 
road  between  Apenrade  and  Jordkirch,  heard  smiths  there 
at  work,  and  cried  out  that  he  wished  they  would  make 
him  a  chafF-knife.  In  the  evening,  when  he  was  return- 
ing, he  actually  found  lying  on  the  hill  a  spick-span  new 
knife.  He  laid  down  as  much  money  as  was  equivalent 
to  the  usual  cost  of  such  a  knife,  and  took  it  with  him.  It 
proved  to  be  of  excellent  temper  and  keenness ;  but 
wounds  caused  by  it  were  incurable. 

KETTLES  BORROWED. 

Close  to  Geltorf  near  Sleswig  there  is  a  hill  called  the 
Hochberg,  and  hard  by  is  another,  the  Brehochberg. 
These  were  inhabited  by  underground  people.  In  former 
times  the  country  folks  were  on  quite  friendly  terms  with 

c5 


34  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

the  subterraneans.  When  there  was  to  be  a  wedding  in 
the  viHage,  and  kettles,  pans,  pots  and  the  Uke  were 
wanted,  they  woukl  go  to  the  door  and  knock.  '^  A\Tiat 
do  you  want  ?  ^'  the  underground  people  would  then  ask. 
"  We  want  to  borrow  a  kettle  of  you;  for  Hans  andTrina 
are  to  be  married  to-morrow.^'  "  How  big  must  the 
kettle  be  ?  '^  And  the  peasants  could  then  get  a  kettle 
and  pottery  ware  of  just  the  size  they  required,  which 
they  must  fetch  away  on  the  following  morning  before 
sunrise.  In  return  for  this  accommodation,  they  needed 
only  to  give  the  fragments  remaining  of  the  viands  that 
had  been  cooked  in  the  vessels,  which  they  left  before  the 
hill. 

THE  DRAGEDUKKE. 

As  a  man  was  once  ploughing,  he  observed  a  broken 
bread-peel  and  a  broken  oven-rake  lying  on  the  ground. 
He  took  them  home,  mended  them,  and  again  laid  them 
in  the  same  place.  For  this  service  he  w^as  rewarded  with 
a  '  Dragedukke,^  which  is  a  box,  in  which  there  is  always 
only  a  little  money,  but  out  of  which  a  person  may  take 
as  much  as  he  will. 


THE  GOSSIPS. 

A  man  went  to  a  mount  and  called  to  the  dwarf  that 
dwelt  in  it,  praying  him  to  give  him  a  son,  and  then  he 
would  invite  him  to  stand  godfather.  The  dwarf  pro- 
mised to  grant  his  request,  if  he  would  keep  his  word. 
But  when  the  man's  wife  had  given  birth  to  a  son,  he  was 
loth  to  invite  the  dwarf,  yet  was,  nevertheless,  obliged  to 
go  to  him  for  that  purpose.  The  dwarf  considered  himself 
highly  honoured  and  promised  to  come ;  but  as  the  man 
was  going  out,  he  called  after  him  :  "  Vfh'A.i  company  are 
you  to  have  besides  ? ''  "  Our  Lord,  Mary  and  St.  Peter 
are  the  other  gossips,"  answered  the  man.     '^  You  must 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  35 

excuse  me  then/'  said  the  dwarf,  "if  I  don't  come."     He 
gave,  however,  a  handsome  christening  present. 

lu  the  Jutish  version  of  the  story  (Molbech,  Eventyr,  p.  359),  instead 
of  Christ,  etc.  Tordenveir  (Thunder-storm)  is  named  ;  and  in  the  Swedish, 
Thor  himself. 

DRUM-MUSIC. 

In  the  field  of  Mellerup,  on  the  high  road  to  Apenrade, 
there  is  a  barrow.  As  a  man,  who  was  to  give  a  wedding 
entertainment  on  the  following  day,  and  had  been  to  the 
town  to  buy  all  things  necessary,  was  passing  by,  a  little 
man  sprang  from  the  mount  and  invited  himself  to  the 
wedding,  promising  to  bring  with  him,  for  a  present,  a 
lump  of  gold  as  large  as  a  man's  head.  "  Then  you  shall 
come,"  said  the  man.  The  little  man  then  asked  what 
music  they  were  to  have?  "Drums  and  kettle-drums," 
answered  the  man.  The  dwarf  thereupon  begged  leave 
to  recall  his  words,  as  he  could  not  endure  drum-music  ^. 

THE  MILL-STONE  SUSPENDED  BY  A  SILKEN  THREAD. 

One  hot  summer's  day  a  lad  and  a  lass  were  at  work  in 
a  hay-field  near  the  Stellerberg.  They  were  betrothed  to 
each  other,  and  would  have  been  married,  but  were 
wretchedly  poor.  While  thus  employed,  they  saw  a  large 
toad  stealing  by  them.  The  young  man  was  on  the  point 
of  killing  the  ugly  animal  with  his  hay-fork,  but  the  girl 
seizing  his  arm  prayed  him  to  spare  the  poor  creature's 
life.  The  young  man,  however,  enjoyed  his  sport  for  a 
while,  by  appearing  as  if  bent  on  killing  the  toad,  until 
it  had  disappeared.  On  their  return  home  in  the  evening, 
their  employer  told  them  they  were  invited  to  be  gossips 
at  a  christening  on  the  following  day,  a  voice  to  that  efi'ect 
having  been  heard,  though  no  person  was  visible  at  the 

1  See  vol.  ii.  p,  152. 


36  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

time.     The  pair  knew  not  what  to  think  of  the  matter, 
but  early  on   the    following  morning,  when    rising,   the 
young  man  found  grits  or  sawdust  strewed  by  his  bed- 
side ;  at  the  entrance,  too,  and  before  the  house  he  also 
found  grains  of  com,  and,  proceeding  in  their  track,  he 
came  at  last  to  the  Stellcrbcrg.     There  he  heard  a  voice 
from  the  hill,  desiring  him  to  come  again  at  noon  and 
bring  his  betrothed   with    him ;    for  they    should   stand 
gossips.     The  young  man  having  given  his  lass  due  notice, 
they  made  themselves  ready,  and  at  twelve  o'clock  went 
together  to  the  hill.     They  found  it  standing  open,  and 
were  received  by  a  little  man  in  a  grey  coat,  who  conducted 
them  in  through  a  long  passage.     Within  all  was  magni- 
ficent and  costly :  the  walls,   flooring  and  roof  glittered 
with  gold  and  precious  stones  ;  a  sumptuous  table,  with 
gold  and  silver  plate  and  the  most  delicious  viands,  stood 
in  the  centre;    but  the  whole  apartment   swarmed   with 
little  grim-looking  beings,  all  pressing  round  the  bed  of 
the  lying-in  woman.     WTien  the  young  man  and  his  be- 
trothed entered,  they  brought  to  the  former  the  child  he 
should  hold  at  the  font,  and  conducted  him  to  the  spot 
where  the  sacred  ceremony  was  to  take  place.     During 
the  performance  of  the  holy  rite,  happening  to  cast  a  look 
upwards,  he  saw  exactly  over  him  a  mill-stone  suspended 
from  the  roof  by  a  silken  thread.   He  endeavoured  to  move 
from  the  spot,  but  could  not  stir  a  step.  In  agony  he  awaited 
the  end  of  the  ceremony,  and  then  drew  back  in  haste.    The 
little  man  in   grey  then  approached  and  thanked  him. 
With  respect  to  the  mill-stone,  he  told  him  that  he  might 
now  perfectly  well  imagine  what  his  wife  must  have  suf- 
fered in  mind,  when  on  the  preceding  day  he  was  about 
to  stab  her  with  his  fork  ;  for  she  was  the  toad.     The  pair 
were  then  well  entertained  by  the  little  folks,  and  after 
they  had  eaten,  the  grey  mannikin  conducted  them  out  of 
the  hill,  but  previously    gave   the    gu-1    an    apronful    of 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  37 

shavings.  These  she  was  inclined  to  throw  away  instantly, 
but  her  sweetheart  desired  her  to  keep  them,  as  they  would 
serve  to  light  the  fire.  On  their  way  home  the  burthen 
became  so  heavy  that  she  threw  away  the  half  of  it,  and 
when  they  reached  the  house  the  remainder  proved  to  be 
all  bright  ducats.  Thereupon  the  young  man  ran  back 
for  the  purpose  of  gathering  up  all  that  had  been  thrown 
away,  but  it  had  disappeared.  They,  however,  got  enough 
to  enable  them  to  build  a  farm-house  and  be  married,  and 
lived  happily  together  for  many  years  K 

PINGEL  IS  DEAD  ! 

In  Jagel,  near  Sleswig,  there  was  once  a  host  who  ob- 
served with  vexation  that  his  beer  always  ran  out  too 
fast,  without  his  knowing  how.  But  one  day,  when  on 
his  way  from  the  city,  where  he  had  been  to  fetch  a  fresh 
supply,  he  heard,  on  passing  the  Jagelberg,  where  there 
is  a  giant-grave,  a  voice  crying  in  a  tone  of  lamentation  : 
''  Pingel  is  dead  !  Pingel  is  dead  !  "  On  his  return  home 
he  related  what  he  had  heard  to  his  wife,  and  had  scarcely 
uttered  the  words  when  a  little  underground  man  came 
rushing  out  of  the  cellar,  and  crying  : — 

Ach,  is  Pingel  tot,  is  Pingel  Ah,  if  Pingel 's  dead,  if  Pingel 's 

tot,  dead. 

So  hab  ich  liier  Bier  genug  Then  have  I  fetched  beer  enough, 

geholt, 

and  then  ran  ofi".  A  jug  was  afterwards  found  in  the 
cellar  standing  by  the  beer-cask,  which  the  little  man  had 
left  behind;  for  it  was  for  the  sick  Pingel  that  he  had 
stolen  the  beer. 

One  version  of  the  story  has  the  name  of  Pippe  instead  of  Pingel ;  ac- 


1  The  above  version  of  the  story  is  given  in  preference  to  one  from 
Swinemunde  (Kuhn  and  Schwartz,  p.  321),  the  latter  containing  some  de- 
tails more  characteristic  of  the  good  old  times  than  delicate  and  edifying. 
See  also  vol  u.  p.  132. 


38  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

cording  to  another  the  jug  is  of  silver,  and  the  dwarf  runs  away  crying, 
"Is  King  Pippe  dead?  Is  King  Pippe  dead?"  Another  has  :  "As 
Pilatje  duad?" 


THE  BUILDER  ZI. 

A  man  had  undertaken  to  build  the  church  at  Eckwadt 
by  a  certain  day,  but  was  soon  sensible  that  it  was  not  in 
his  power  to  fulfil  his  contract.     One  night,  while  w^an- 
dering  about  out  of  humour  and   pondering  as  to  the 
course  he  should  pursue,  a  little  hill-man  accosted  him, 
and  oiFered  him  his  services.    The  builder  at  first  hstened 
contemptuously  to  the  little  man's  magniloquent  speech, 
but  at  length  it  was  settled  between  them,  that  the  dwarf 
should  erect  the  church  wdthin  the  given  space,  and  that 
the  builder  should  by  that  time  ascertain  his  name ;  if  he 
failed  in  so  doing,  he  should,  body  and  soul,  belong  to  the 
little  man.  Rejoiced  at  heart  the  builder  went  home ;  for  he 
thought :   "  If  he  himself  will  not  tell  me  his  name,  I  can, 
at  all  events,  extract  it  from  his  w^ork-people."    But  it  fell 
out  quite  contrary  to  his  expectations  ;  for  the  little  man 
used  neither  w^orkmen  nor  labourers,  but  finished  every- 
thing himself  with  incredible  rapidity ;  so  that  the  builder 
clearly  saw  that  all  would  be  complete  by  the  time  agreed 
on.     Sadder  than  the  first  time,  he  was  again  wandering 
about  the  fields,  when,  in  passing  by  a  mount,  he  heard  a 
crying  within  it,  and  on  listening  more  attentively,  distin- 
guished the  following  words  : — 

Vys !  va3r  still  Baen  mint.  Hush  !  be  still,  my  child, 

Maaeu  kommer  Faer  Zi  To-morrow  comes  thy  father  Zi 

Mfc  Christen  Bloi  te  dae.  With  Christian  blood  for  thee. 

Now  was  the  builder  overjoyed,  for  he  well  knew^  to  whom 
the  words  alluded,  and  hastened  home.  It  was  just  the 
morn  hi  g  of  the  day  on  which  the  church  should  be  ready, 
and  the  dwarf  was  busied  on  placing  the  last  stone, — for 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  39 

he  worked  only  during  the  night — when  the  builder  called 
to  him  from  a  distance  : 

God  Maaen,  Zi !  God  Maaen,       Good  morning,  Zi !  Good  morn- 

Zi !  ing,  Zi ! 

Ssetter    du    nu  den     sidste       Are   you   now   placing  the   last 

Steen  i  ?  stone  ? 

When  the  goblin  heard  himself  addressed  by  name  he  was 
furious_,  and  hurling  away  the  stone  that  he  was  in  the 
act  of  placing,  retired  within  his  cave.  The  hole  which 
was  thus  left  could  never  be  filled  up.  In  the  night 
everything  was  cast  out.  A  mason,  that  once  endeavoured 
to  build  it  up,  was  attacked  by  a  wasting  malady.  At  a 
later  period,  a  window  was  placed  there,  which  the  goblin 
suffered  to  remain  ^. 

The  church  at  Munkbrarup,  in  Angeln,  was  built  in  like  manner.  The 
miserable  builder  hears  a  child  crying  under  the  earth,  and  the  mother 
saying  to  it :  "  Hush,  thou  little  creature  !  This  evening  thy  father  Sipp 
will  come,  and  give  thee  Christian  blood  to  drink." 


FATHER  FINN. 

In  very  old  times  the  dwarfs  had  long  wars  with  men, 
and  also  with  one  another.  When  they  were  absent  in  the 
wars,  their  wives  at  home  sang  by  the  cradle  a  particular 
kind  of  song.  North  of  Braderup,  on  the  heath,  there  is 
a  giant-mount,  from  which  was  once  heard  the  following  : 

Heia,  hei,  dit  Jungen  es  min.        Heigh  ho,  the  child  is  mine. 
Mearen  kumt  din  Vaader  Finn      To-morrow  comes  thy  father  Finn 
Me  di  Man  sin  Hand.  With  a  man's  head. 

THE   HOUSE  WITH  NINETY-NINE  WINDOWS. 

The  house  of  a  peasant  in  Eiderstedt  was  burnt  to  the 

ground.     The  man  sorely  afflicted  was  walking  about  his 

field,  when  he  was  accosted  by  a  little  man  in  a  grey  coat 

and  with  a  horse^s  foot,  who  inquired  the  cause  of  his 

1  See  vol.  h.  pp.  39,  101,  248. 


40  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

sadness.  The  man  told  him  of  his  misfortune  and  that  he 
was  without  the  means  of  rebuilding  his  house  ;  where- 
upon the  little  man  promised  to  build  him  one  with  a 
hundred  windows,  and  to  have  it  ready  in  one  night, 
before  the  first  cock-crowing,  if  the  man  would  promise 
him  his  soul.  The  peasant  agreed  to  the  condition,  and 
in  the  night  the  devil  began  to  build.  The  house  was 
soon  all  but  finished,  the  windows  alone  remaining  to  be 
put  in.  A^Tiile  the  devil  was  busy  about  the  last  window, 
the  man  began  to  crow  and  clap  with  his  hands,  at  which 
the  devil  laughed.  But  the  cock  in  the  stable  had  heard 
the  crowing,  and  answered  it  just  as  the  devil  was  fitting 
in  the  last  pane.  Finding  himself  thus  outwitted,  the 
arch-fiend  took  his  departure,  though  not  till  he  had 
m-ung  the  neck  of  the  cock.  No  one  has  ever  been  able 
to  put  in  the  pane,  nor  will  any  furniture  remain  in  the 
apartment  where  it  is  wanting ;  all  flies  out.  The  room 
requires  no  cleaning,  being  always  as  neat  as  broom  could 
make  it. 


EKKE  NEKKEPENN. 

The  dwarfs  are  particularly  fond  of  human  females. 
One  was  once  in  love  with  a  young  girl  of  Rantum,  and 
was  even  betrothed  to  her.  After  some  time,  however, 
she  changed  her  mind  and  would  break  ofi"  the  engage- 
ment. The  dwarf  said  to  her  :  "  I  will  teach  you  to  keep 
your  word ;  and  only  if  you  can  tell  me  how  I  am  called, 
shall  you  be  free.''  The  girl  now  made  inquiries  in  all 
quarters  after  the  name  of  the  dwarf ;  but  no  one  could 
inform  her.  Vexed  and  sad  she  wandered  about  and 
sought  the  loneliest  places,  the  nearer  the  thne  drew  nigh 
when  the  dwarf  should  fetch  her  away.  But  as  she  one 
day  was  passing  by  a  mount,  she  heard  within  it  the  fol- 
lowing lines  sung  : — 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  41 

Delling  skell  ik  bmw.  To-day  I  shall  brew, 

Mearen  skell  ik  baak,  To-morrow  I  shall  bake, 

Aurmearn  skell  ik  Brollep  haa :  After  to-morrow  I  shall  be  married : 

Ik  jit  Ekke  Nekkepenn,  I  am  called  Ekke  Nekkepenn, 

Min  Brid  es  Inge  fan  Raantem  ;  My  bride  is  Inge  of  Rantum ; 

En  dit  weet  nemmen  us  ik  alliin-  And  this    no  one    know  s   but    I 

ing.  alone. 

When  tlie  dwarf  came  on  the  third  day  to  fetch  her  and 
said  :  ''  What  am  I  called  ?  '^  she  answered  :  "  You  are 
called  Ekke  Nekkepenn/^  He  then  disappeared^  and  never 
returned. 

So,  in  the  story  of  the  Dwarf  in  the  Schweckhauserberge(nearGottingen), 
he  is  overheard  repeating  the  hnes  : 

Hier  sitz  ich,  Gold  schnitz  ich,  Here  I  sit,  gold  I  carve, 

Ich  heisse  Holzriihrlein,  Bonnefiihr-  I    am    call'd    Holzriihrlein,   Bonne- 

lein.  fiihrlein. 

Wenn  das  die  Mutter  wiisst,  If  the  mother  knew  that, 

So  behielt'  sie  ihr  Magdlein.  She  would  retain  her  daughter  '. 

Of  the  same  class  with  the  foregoing  are  the  stories  of  Rumpelstilzchen 
(Grimm,  K.  and  H.  M.  55)  and  Fru  Rumpentrumpen  (Miillenhoff,  p.  409). 

THE  CARVED  IMAGE. 

A  peasant,  who  a  hundred  years  since  dwelt  on  a  plot  of 
land  at  the  foot  of  the  Biigberg,  near  Felsted,  on  his  way 
to  the  mill,  while  his  wife  was  lying  in  child-bed,  heard, 
when  not  far  from  the  mill,  a  voice  from  the  hill,  saying  : 
"  Carve  Liese  with  her  long  nose."  He  thought :  "  That 
can  be  no  other  than  my  wife ;  but  their  project  shall  not 
succeed."  So  as  soon  as  he  returned  home,  he  placed 
two  women  to  watch  by  his  wife,  and  went  to  bed,  being 
extremely  drowsy,  yet,  nevertheless,  was  by  anxiety  pre- 
vented from  sleeping.  At  midnight  the  women,  who 
ought  to  have  watched,  had  fallen  asleep ;  but  the  man 
heard  a  noise,  and  saw  how  the  underground  people  came 
in  at  the  window,  lifted  wife  and  child  out  of  bed  and  laid 

'  From  Harrys,  Sagen,  Marchen  u.  Legenden  Niedersachsens,  i.  p.  16. 


42  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

a  wooden  figure  in  their  place.  He  instantly  started  up, 
was  just  in  time  to  catch  his  wife  by  the  leg,  and  cried : 
"  Stop  !  leave  me  mine  and  take  your  own  !  '^  The  sub- 
terraneans were  then  obliged  to  retreat  with  their  wooden 
Liese,  and  the  man  retained  his  own. 

A  SUBTERRANEAN  CHILD  CAUGHT. 

Some  young  peasants  once  resolved  on  catching  one  of 
the  subterraneans.  These  people  never  appear  by  day, 
and  but  seldom  by  night ;  to  catch  one  was,  therefore,  no 
easy  task.  They  waited  till  St.  John^s  eve,  and  then 
some  of  the  boldest  lay  in  wait,  for  the  purpose  of  kid- 
napping one.  But  these  creatures  are  nimble  and  their 
places  of  retreat  small.  They  would  all  have  escaped  had 
not  the  most  active  of  the  young  men  caught  a  young  girl 
by  the  apron.  Full  of  joy  he  conveyed  the  little  damsel 
home  with  him  to  his  wife,  who  placed  her  in  her  lap, 
caressed  her,  gave  her  sugar  and  all  sorts  of  nice  things, 
asked  her  her  name,  age  and  so  on.  But  the  little  creature 
neither  cried  nor  laughed,  nor  ate  nor  drank.  And  thus 
she  continued  from  day  to  day ;  neither  by  promises  nor 
threats  could  a  sound  be  extracted  from  her  lips.  At  length 
there  came  an  old  woman  who  advised  them  to  set  about 
everything  wrong;  for  that  the  underground  folk  could 
not  endure,  and  she  would  immediately  begin  to  speak. 
Thereupon  the  young  woman  took  the  little  one  with  her 
into  the  kitchen  and  desired  her  to  wash  the  turf  nicely 
for  soup,  while  she  cut  up  the  meat  to  light  the  tire.  The 
little  one  did  not  move.  The  woman  then  took  the  turf 
herself  and  washed  it  three  times.  The  little  one  stared, 
but  did  not  move.  But  when  the  woman  had  cut  up  the 
meat,  and  appeared  as  if  about  to  make  a  fire  with  it,  she 
said :  "  Woman,  you  surely  will  not  sin  against  God  ? " 
"  No,^^  said  the  woman,  "  if  thou  wilt  speak,  I  will  do 
right ;  but  else,  wrong."     From  that  time  the  little  one 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  43 

spoke ;  but  shortly  after  found  means  to  escape.  Some 
time  after,  wlien  the  woman  had  given  birth  to  a  daughter,, 
there  lay  one  morning  a  changeling  in  the  cradle. 

CHANGELINGS. 

Before  the  custom  was  introduced  of  having  new-born 
children  immediately  blessed  by  the  midwife,  the  dwarfs 
were  in  the  constant  practice  of  changing  them  for  their 
own,  in  doing  which  they  showed  much  cunning.  When 
a  child  was  born  they  would  pinch  the  ear  of  a  cow  that 
was  near,  and  when  the  people,  hearing  the  animaPs  bel- 
lowing, ran  out  to  learn  the  cause  of  it,  the  dwarf  would 
slip  in  and  change  the  child.  It  happened  once  that  a 
father  saw  how  his  infant  was  being  dragged  out  of  the 
apartment.  He  grasped  it  just  at  the  right  moment  and 
drew  it  to  him.  He,  moreover,  kept  possession  of  the 
changeling,  which  was  found  in  the  bed  by  the  side  of  the 
lying-in  woman,  in  spite  of  all  the  attempts  of  the  subter- 
raneans at  least  to  recover  their  own  child.  By  placing 
on  his  head  the  hat  of  the  subterranean  infant,  he  could 
see  the  dwarfs  sitting  round  the  table  among  the  women, 
and  regaling  themselves  with  coffee. 

The  dwarf  child  continued  long  in  the  house,  but  would 
never  speak.  But  some  one  having  advised  the  foster- 
parents  to  make  a  brewing  in  a  hen's  egg,  and  then  pour 
the  beer  into  a  goose's  egg,  the  dwarf,  after  making  all 
sorts  of  manifestations  of  astonishment,  at  length  cried 
out: 

Ik  biin  so  oelt  I  am  as  old 

As  de  Belimer  Woelt,  As  the  Behmer  wold, 

Unn  heff  in  mjTi  Laebn  And  have  in  my  hfe 

So'n  Bro  nich  seen.  Such  a  brewinj^  not  seen. 


The   '  Wichtelmanner '   had  stolen   a  child  out  of  its 


44  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

cradle,  and  left  a  changeling,  with  a  huge  head  and  staring 
eyes,  in  its  stead,  which  ate  and  drank  voraciously.  In 
her  distress  the  mother  applied  to  a  neighbour,  who  ad- 
vised her  to  carry  the  changeling  into  the  kitchen,  set  it 
on  the  hearth,  kindle  a  fire,  and  boil  water  in  two  egg- 
shells :  that  would  cause  the  changeling  to  laugh,  and  as 
soon  as  he  laughed  it  would  be  all  over  with  him.  The 
woman  did  as  her  neighbour  advised.  As  she  was  placing 
the  egg-shells  on  the  fire,  the  clodpate  exclaimed  :  "  I  now 
am  as  old  as  the  Westerwald,  and  have  never  till  this 
moment  seen  anything  boiled  in  an  egg-shell  !  ^^  and  then 
began  to  laugh.  While  he  was  laughing  there  came  in 
a  multitude  of  Wichtelmannikins,  bringing  with  them  the 
woman^s  own  child,  which  they  placed  on  the  hearth,  and 
took  the  changeling  away  with  them  ^ 


A  person  once  saw  a  female  dwarf  going  across  a  field 
with  a  stolen  child.  The  sight  was  a  singular  one ;  for 
she  could  not  hold  the  babe  sufficiently  high,  on  account 
of  its  length,  and  therefore  kept  constantly  calling  to  it :  — 

Baer  op  dyn  Gewant,  Hold  up  thy  robe, 

Dat  du  nidi  haekst  That  thou  be  not  hook'd 

In  den  gakni  Grant.  In  the  bitter  orant. 

Grant  or  dorant  (antirrhinum  or  marrubium)  scares  away  Dwarfs 
(Wichtel)  and  Nikkers.     See  Grimm,  D.  :M.  p.  11G4. 


In  Eiderstedt  a  woman  one  night  kindled  a  huge  fire 
in  the  middle  of  the  barn,  and  placed  upon  it  an  exceed- 
ingly diminutive  pot.  When  a  Kielkropf  (changeling) 
that  she  had  was  fetched,  it  clapped  its  hands  in  full 
astonishment,  and  cried  in   a  shrill  voice :    "  I  am  now 

1  Grimm,  K.  and  H.  Marchen,  No.  39.  Wichtel  (Wichtelmann)  is  the 
Prankish  name  for  elf. 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  45 

fifty  years  old,  and  have  never  seen  the  Hke  !  "  The 
woman  would  have  thrown  the  kielkropf  into  the  fire,  but 
it  was  snatched  from  her,  and  her  own  genuine  child  stood 
there  before  her. 

Similar  stories  are  almost  innumerable  in  Germany,  but  the  foregoing, 
together  with  the  two  following,  will  amply  suffice  to  show  the  resemblance 
between  the  German  traditions  of  changelings  and  those  of  Scandinavia. 


Before  going  to  bed,  a  pair  of  open  scissors  must  be 
laid  in  the  cradle  of  a  new-born  child,  until  it  is  baptized. 
If  it  sleeps  by  its  mother,  at  the  last  swathing  a  cross 
must  be  made  on  its  breast  and  forehead ;  else  the  sub- 
terraneans will  change  it. 

There  was  once  in  Amrum  a  woman  whose  youngest 
son  was  stolen  by  these  beings ;  but  the  child  they  left 
in  place  of  the  stolen  one  so  closely  resembled  it,  that  the 
mother  at  first  was  not  aware  of  the  deception.  But  after- 
wards their  own  child  came  back,  and  the  parents  were 
wholly  unable  to  determine  which  was  theirs,  until  an 
accident  settled  the  difficulty.  It  was  in  the  haiTcst,  and 
the  woman  going  one  day  to  the  thrashing-floor,  took  up 
a  shovel  and  began  casting  aside  the  thrashed-out  corn; 
both  boys  being  present.  One  of  them  fell  a  laughing, 
and  in  answer  to  the  woman^s  question,  why  he  laughed  ? 
said  :  "  My  father  just  came  in  and  fetched  half  a  ton  of 
rye,  and  in  going  out  fell  and  broke  his  leg.^^  Thereupon 
said  the  woman  :  '^  Thou  art  the  one  ;  go  therefore  to  the 
place  thou  camest  from.^'  She  then  seized  the  boy  and 
flung  him  through  the  window  of  the  thrashing-house, 
and  never  again  set  eyes  on  him. 

It  is  to  be  observed  that  a  thrashing-floor  should  always 
be  swept  with  the  sun,  and  never  in  the  opposite  direction ; 
otherwise  the  subterraneans  will  steal  the  corn.  The 
woman,  it  evidently  appeared,  had  taken  this  precaution. 


46  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

THE  KIELKROPP. 

Not  far  from  the  town  of  Laucnburg  there  is  a  village 
called  Buken,  in  which,  many  hundred  years  ago,  there 
stood  a  chapel,  where  there  was  an  image  of  the  holy 
mother,  made  of  wood.  This  image  was  at  that  time  held 
in  the  highest  veneration ;  for  if  any  persons  were  sick, 
the  people  would  carry  them  to  the  image  and  let  them  lie 
before  it  for  some  time,  when  they  would  be  cured. 

Not  far  from  the  above-mentioned  village  there  lived  a 
peasant,  who,  although  he  had  been  married  for  many 
years,  was  childless.  This  afflicted  him  sorely  :  he  stormed 
and  raved,  maltreated  and  maledicted  his  wife  the  whole 
livelong  day,  until  she  at  length  unexpectedly  said  to  him  : 
"  You  may  cease  your  ill-usage,  you  will  soon  have  your 
wish ;  for  I  feel  that  I  shall  be  a  mother.''  At  this  intelli- 
gence the  peasant  was  overjoyed,  and  thenceforward  treated 
his  wife  more  kindly.  But  that  which  gave  him  so  much 
delight  was  to  be  his  greatest  affliction.  When  the  child 
was  born  it  was  all  right  and  proper  as  to  its  body  and 
limbs,  but  its  head  was  larger  than  that  of  the  largest 
man.  Such  children  the  people  at  that  time  called  KieU 
kropps,  and  believed  that  the  devil  himself,  or  one  of  his 
associates,  was  their  father,  and  that  they  brought  only 
misfortune  into  a  house.  But  be  all  that  as  it  may,  our 
peasant  had  got  his  Kielkropp  and  must  keep  it.  During 
a  space  of  three  years  the  child's  head  grew  larger  and 
larger,  and  looked  like  a  great  basket,  while  its  other 
members  continued  as  diminutive  as  they  had  been  from 
the  first,  so  that  it  could  neither  go  nor  stand ;  nor  could 
it  utter  a  word,  but  only  moaned  and  screamed  both  by 
day  and  night. 

One  evening  as  the  woman  was  sitting  with  the  Kiel- 
kropp on  her  lap,  and  was  lamenting  over  it,  she  said  to 
her  husband  :    "  A  thought  just  strikes  me  which  may 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  47 

probably  be  of  good  to  us.  To-morrow  is  Sunday :  put 
then  the  child  into  a  basket  and  take  it  to  the  holy  mother 
Mary  of  Boken,  lay  the  basket  before  her^  and  rock  the 
child  in  it  for  some  time  :  that  will^  perhaps_,  be  of  ser- 
vice.^^  The  peasant  willingly  followed  her  advice,  on  the 
following  morning  put  his  basket  in  order_,  laid  fresh  hay 
in  it  together  with  some  bedding,  placed  his  Kielkropp  in 
it,  and  went  his  way.  When  on  the  bridge  that  crosses  a 
water  near  Boken,  he  heard,  just  as  he  reached  the  middle, 
a  voice  behind  him,  crying  :  '^  Where  now,  Kielkropp  ?  ^' 
which  the  child  in  the  panier  answered  by  :  ^^  I  ^m  going 
to  be  rocked,  that  I  may  thrive  ^^^  On  hearing  the  child 
begin  to  speak  the  man  was  greatly  terrified,  but  instantly 
recovering  himself,  he  dashed  the  basket,  Kielkropp  and 
all,  into  the  water,  saying  :  "  If  thou  canst  speak,  thou 
monster,  then  go  to  where  thou  hast  learned.^^  At  once  a 
loud  cry  was  heard  from  under  the  bridge,  as  when  many 
people  call  out  together,  at  which  the  mau  was  not  a  little 
frightened,  and  made  all  possible  haste  home,  without 
once  looking  behind  him,  where  he  told  his  wife  in  what 
manner  he  had  got  rid  of  the  Kielkropp. 

THE  UNDERGROUND  FOLK  EMIGRATE. 

The  grandfather  of  a  watchmaker  still  living  in  Hohn, 
was  when  a  boy  one  day  tending  cows  in  a  neighbouring 
field,  and  to  protect  himself  from  the  rain,  had  thrown  his 
father's  large  coat  over  his  shoulders.  While  standing 
under  a  tree,  he  found  himself  on  a  sudden  surrounded 
by  a  multitude  of  imderground  folk,  holding  each  other's 
hand,  and  thus  forming  a  circle  about  him.  They  told 
him  they  were  about  leaving  the  neighbourhood,  and  that 
he  should  go  with  them.  To  his  question  :  Why  they 
were  going  ?  they  answered,  that  they  could  not  endure 
the  ringing  of  the  bells  in  the  village  ^.  But  the  young 
^  See  vol.  ii.  p.  151.  2  gee  vol.  ii.  pp.  154,  155. 


48  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

man  not  liking  to  be  detained  by  them,  broke  through  the 
circle,  leaving  the  coat  behind,  which  they  stript  from 
his  shoulders.  On  the  following  day,  however,  he  found 
it  in  the  same  place  hanging  on  a  bush. 

THE  WOLTERKENS NISS-PUK — BUSEMANN — NISKE. 

The  Wolterkens  appear  to  be  identical  with  the  Scan- 
dinavian Nisser.  In  Meldorf  the  school-children  have  a 
festival,  when  the  girls  decorate  the  school-room  with 
flowers.  In  the  afternoon  and  evening  they  dance,  and 
then  say  :  "  We  have  Nesskuk,"  or  "  We  celebrate  Ness- 
kuk.^^ 

The  Nisken  always  frequent  dark,  concealed  places  in 
the  house  or  stable,  and  even  in  the  pile  of  wood.  They 
disappear  before  every  one  that  approaches  them.  At 
night  the  people  of  the  house  must  clear  the  hearth,  and 
place  a  kettle  of  pure  water  for  the  use  of  the  little  offi- 
cious people.  The  Niss-Puk,  moreover,  always  requires  a 
mess  of  sweet  porridge  with  butter  to  be  set  for  him  in  a 
certain  place. 

Persons  from  the  district  of  Stapelholm,  who  have  seen 
the  Niss-Puk,  describe  him  as  not  larger  than  an  infant  of 
a  year  or  a  year  and  a  half  old.  Others  say  that  he  is  as 
large  as  one  of  three  years.  He  has  a  large  head  and 
long  arms,  and  small  but  bright,  cunning  eyes  K  He  wears 
red  stockings  and  a  long  grey  or  green  tick  coat,  on  the 
head  a  red,  peaked  cap.  He  delights  in  a  pair  of  soft, 
easy  slippers,  and  when  he  gets  such  he  may  be  heard  at 
night  slipping  about  the  floor  in  them. 

These  beings  sometimes  a])pear  in  a  hideous  form,  to 
the  great  terror  of  the  inmates,  at  which  they  testify  their 
delight  by  a  loud  laugh. 

1  The  people  of  Silt  say  he  has  ver>'  large  eyes  ;  ^Yhence  of  inquisitive 
persons  it  is  said  :  "  He  stares  like  a  Puk." 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  49 

People  frighten  children  with  the  Biisemann,  who 
dwells  in  the  stable ;  in  Fohr  they  are  kept  in  awe  by  the 
blind  Jug;  in  Ditmarschen  by  Pulterklaes.  And  who 
knows  not  the  formidable  Roppert  (Ruprecht)  ?  The 
domestic  goblin  was  formerly  known  under  the  name  of 
Chimken. 

In  some  respects  the  Niss-Puk  resembles  the  Galgenmannlein  or  Alraun 
of  South  Germany,  who  is  enclosed  in  a  bottle,  can  be  sold  by  his  owner, 
but  always  for  a  price  less  than  the  sum  he  paid  for  him.  The  soul  of 
the  last  owner  belongs  to  the  Galgenmannlein.  See  the  tale  of  '  Das 
Galgenmannlein '  in  Binder's  Schwabische  Volkssagen. 

THE  SUBTERRANEANS  LICK  UP  MILK. 

About  seventy  years  ago  little  underground  beings  were 
seen  in  many  farms  in  the  Wilstermarsch^  who  did  little 
more  than  accompany  the  maids  and  men  home  in  the 
morning  after  they  had  been  milking,  and  sedulously  lick 
up  the  drops  of  milk  that  had  been  spilt.  But  when  in 
measuring  out  nothing  was  spilt,  they  would  overturn  all 
the  vessels  and  run  away.  These  people  were  about  a  foot 
and  a  half  high,  wore  black  clothes  and  a  peaked,  red  cap. 
Wherever  they  came,  people  thought  they  brought  a  special 
blessing  on  the  house. 

In  the  Frisic  islands  the  housewives  have  frequently 
observed,  when  brewing,  that  the  little  people  usually 
came  in  the  shape  of  toads,  and  licked  from  off  the  floor 
the  new  beer  that  had  been  spilt.  No  one  does  them  any 
harm,  and  the  beer  so  spilt  must  be  left  for  them,  as  well 
as  the  crumbs  of  bread  that  fall  from  the  table. 

THE  KLABAUTERMANN. 

The  Klabautermann  sits  under  the  ship^s  capstan,  and 

is  a  little  fellow  with  yellow  breeches,  horseman^s  boots,  a 

large,  fiery-red  head,  green  teeth,  and  a  steeple-crowned 

hat.     If  a  ship  is  doomed  to  perish,  the  Klabautermann 


50  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

may  be  heard  running  up  and  down  the  shrouds  in  a  state 
of  disquietude^  and  making  a  noise  among  the  rigging 
and  in  the  hold ;  so  that  the  crew  leave  the  ship,  and  the 
sooner  the  better  ^ 

When  such  a  goblin  is  on  board  of  a  ship,  and  on 
friendly  terms  with  the  crew,  the  vessel  will  not  sink  and 
every  voyage  will  be  prosperous ;  if  he  abandons  it,  things 
will  go  ill.  Every  thing  that  is  broken  during  the  day  in 
the  ship  he  sets  to  rights  in  the  night,  and  is  therefore 
often  called  the  Kliitermann  (joiner)^.  He  also  prepares 
many  things  for  the  sailors,  and  even  performs  them.  If 
he  is  in  a  bad  humour,  he  makes  an  awful  noise,  throws 
about  the  fire-wood,  spars,  and  other  things,  knocks  on 
the  ship^s  sides,  destroys  many  things,  hinders  those  at 
work,  and  unseen  gives  the  sailors  violent  cuffs  on  the 
head.  From  all  this  uproar  it  is  supposed  that  he  derives 
his  name^. 

OF  THE  RANZAUS. 


Of  the  very  old  and  ducal-Sleswig  family  of  Ranzau  it 
is  recorded,  that  to  an  ancestress  of  their  house  there  came 
one  night,  as  she  lay  in  bed  by  her  husband's  side,  a  little 
man  bearing  a  lantern,  who  having  waked  her,  prayed  her 
to  follow  him.  She  did  so  (every  door  and  gate  opening 
spontaneously  as  they  passed)  and  arrived  at  length  in  a 
hollow  mount,  in  which  there  lay  a  little  woman  in  the 
pains  of  labour.  When  the  said  noble  dame  Von  Ranzau, 
at  the  earnest  entreaty  of  the  little  woman,  had  laid  her 
hand  upon  her  head,  she  was  instantly  delivered.  The 
lady,  who  had  been  standing  in  great  fear,  now  hastened 

1  Kuhn  and  Schwartz,  p.  423. 

2  From  kliitern,  to  make  or  mend  small  delicate  works,  j)artmdarly  of 
wood. 

3  From  klappen,  to  make  a  noise,  clahauder  {clahauderie)  ? 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  51 

back,  and  was  attended  home  by  her  said  diminutive  com- 
panion. At  parting  she  received  from  the  Httle  man,  in 
recompense  for  her  service,  a  large  piece  of  gold,  of  which, 
at  his  suggestion,  she  caused  to  be  made  fifty  counters,  a 
herring,  and  two  spindles  for  her  daughter.  At  the  same 
time  he  gave  her  also  this  notice  :  That  her  posterity  must 
carefully  preserve  those  articles,  if,  from  being  affluent, 
they  would  not  in  time  become  needy  persons ;  for  that  as 
long  as  none  of  them  were  lost,  they  would  increase  in 
honour  and  repute,  I  think  that  the  person  who  related 
to  me  this  remarkable  anecdote,  at  the  same  time  informed 
me,  that  either  the  herring  or  one  of  the  golden  counters 
had  disappeared  from  among  these  treasures. 

According  to  an  oral  tradition  in  Thiele  (i.  134),  the  little  man  con- 
ducts the  countess  into  the  cellar  of  the  castle  of  Breitenl)urg.  She  re- 
ceives from  him  a  golden  spinning-wheel  for  her  daughter  and  a  golden 
sabre  for  her  son,  together  with  the  prediction,  that  as  long  as  those 
things  were  preserved  in  the  family,  it  should  flourish  in  wealth  and  con- 
sideration.    Both  presents  are,  it  is  said,  still  preserved  in  the  mansion. 

Accorchng  to  another  account,  the  gifts  consisted  in  a  table-cloth,  a 
spool,  and  gold,  of  which  a  chain  was  made,  and  some  coined  into  money. 
Dame  Sophia  Ranzau  of  Seeholm  related  this  of  her  grandfather  Henry 
Ranzau's  wife. 

The  trathtion  of  a  Frau  von  Hahn,  who  was  fetched  by  a  water-nix, 
agrees  (as  I  have  heard  it  related)  vnih  the  Ranzau  tradition.  The  coun- 
tess  is  conducted  into  a  cellar,  receives  a  present  of  shavings,  which  turn 
to  gold,  a  large  beaker  made  from  which  is  still  shown  at  Neuhaus,  Other 
things  made  from  the  same  are  lost. 

II. 

The  newly  married  countess,  who  was  of  a  Danish  family, 
was  sleeping  by  her  husband's  side,  when  a  noise  was 
heard,  the  bed-curtains  were  drawn  aside,  and  she  saw  a 
little  woman  of  extraordinary  beauty,  not  more  than  a 
cubit  high,  standing  before  her  holding  a  light.  ^^  Fear 
not,"  she  said,  "  I  will  do  you  no  harm,  but  bring  you 
good  luck,  if  you  afford  the  assistance  which  I  require. 
Rise  up  and  follow  me ;  but  take  heed  to  eat  nothing  that 

d2 


52  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

may  be  offered  you,  nor  accept  any  other  gift  than  what 
I  shall  present  to  you,  and  which  you  may  safely  receive/' 
The  countess  accompanied  her,  and  the  way  led  under 
the  earth.  They  came  into  an  apartment  that  was  re- 
splendent with  gold  and  precious  stones,  and  full  of  little 
men  and  women.  Before  long  their  king  appeared,  and 
conducted  the  countess  to  a  bed,  in  which  lay  the  queen 
in  the  pains  of  child-birth,  beseeching  her  to  give  her 
assistance.  The  countess  did  her  best,  and  the  queen  was 
safely  delivered  of  a  son.  At  this  there  was  great  rejoicing 
among  the  guests ;  the  countess  was  led  to  a  table  covered 
with  the  choicest  viands,  and  pressed  to  partake  of  them ; 
but  she  touched  nothing,  neither  would  she  accept  any  of 
the  precious  stones,  which  lay  in  golden  dishes.  At  length 
she  was  led  forth  by  her  first  conductress,  and  brought 
back  to  her  bed. 

The  little  woman  then  said  :  "  You  have  rendered  a 
great  service  to  our  realm,  for  which  you  shall  be  re- 
warded. Here  are  three  wooden  staves;  lay  them  under 
your  pillow,  and  to-morrow  morning  they  will  be  changed 
to  gold.  From  the  first  of  these  let  there  be  made  a 
herring;  from  the  second,  counters;  from  the  third,  a 
spindle  ;  and  reveal  this  whole  affair  to  no  one  in  the 
world,  except  your  husband.  You  will  have  three  chil- 
dren, who  will  form  the  three  branches  of  a  house.  The 
one  that  gets  the  herring  will  be  very  successful  in  war, 
both  himself  and  his  posterity ;  the  one  that  gets  the 
counters  will,  together  with  his  children,  fill  high  offices 
of  state  ;  the  one  that  gets  the  spindle  will  be  blessed  with 
a  numerous  offspring.^' 

After  these  words  the  little  hill-woman  departed,  and 
the  countess  fell  asleep.  When  she  woke  she  related  to 
her  husband  the  events  of  the  night.  The  count  laughed 
at  her,  regarding  the  whole  as  a  dream ;  but  when  she 
put  her  hand  under  the  pillow,  there  lay  three  gold  bars. 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  53 

Both  were  astonished,  and  employed  them  precisely  in 
the  manner  prescribed. 

The  prediction  was  accurately  fulfilled :  those  branches 
of  the  house  which  carefully  preserved  the  treasures,  still 
exist,  while  others,  who  were  less  careful,  are  extinct.  Of 
the  branch  that  got  the  coined  money  it  is  related,  that  a 
king  of  Denmark  once  desired  to  have  one  of  the  pieces  ; 
but  at  the  moment  the  king  received  it,  the  individual 
who  gave  it  to  him  was  seized  with  a  violent  stomach- 
ache. 

In  'L'Amant  oisif,'  Bruxelles,  1711,  405-411,  the  foregoing  tradition 
is  told  under  the  title  of  *  La  Comtesse  de  Falinsperk.' 

III. 
A  benevolent  countess  (Ranzau)  at  Breitenburg,  who 
was  frequently  herself  the  bearer  of  her  household  medi- 
cines to  the  sick,  was  one  stormy  evening  called  to  the 
house  of  an  old  woman,  who  dwelt  at  the  other  extremity 
of  the  village.  She  was  in  the  act  of  going,  but  was  pre- 
vented by  her  husband.  While  sitting  alone  in  the  twi- 
light, she  heard  a  noise,  and  before  her  stood  the  house- 
goblin  with  herbs  and  potions,  who  bade  her  take  them 
and  carry  them  to  the  sick,  and  rather  to  obey  the  voice 
of  her  own  heart  than  the  prohibition  of  her  husband. 
The  countess  followed  the  goblin's  bidding,  and  through 
her  care  and  the  medicaments  the  sick  woman  speedily  re- 
covered. On  the  following  evening,  as  the  countess  was 
again  sitting  alone  in  the  twilight,  she  saw  the  goblin 
standing  by  the  hearth  and  stirring  the  fire.  When  the 
fire  had  blazed  up,  he  threw  into  it  an  apronful  of  shavings, 
and  said  to  the  countess  :  "  When  the  fire  is  burnt  out, 
look  among  the  ashes,  and  what  you  find  there  preserve 
carefully.  As  long  as  those  things  continue  in  your 
family,  so  long  will  fortune  favour  the  counts  of  Ranzau. '^ 
When  the  fire  was  out  the  countess  made  a  search,  and 


54  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

found  a  golden  spindle,  a  golden  beaker,  and  something 
besides.  The  last-mentioned  fell  to  a  younger  branch, 
who  lost  it,  and  is  now  without  property;  but  the  spindle 
is  still  at  Breitenbui'g,  and  the  beaker  at  Kastorf. 

At  Breitenljurg  fifty  golden  pennings  are  carefully  preserved  in  a  silver 
box,  on  which  are  the  arms  of  John  Ranzau  and  Dame  Anna  Walstorf,lus 
wife.  The  inscription  on  these  pennings  is  engraved  and  fiUed  ni  with 
l)lack. 

JOSIAS  RANZAU'S  MAGIC  SWORD. 

As   Anna   Walstorf  was   one   night    in   pious   prayer 
making  mention  of  her  absent  husband,  she  was  humbly 
besought  by  a  subterranean  mount-man  to   give  aid  to 
his  wife  who  was  in  the  pains  of  child-birth.     She  fol- 
lowed the  little  man  through  many  cellars  and  vaults  of 
her  castle  of  Breitenburg  that  were  quite  unknown  to  her, 
until  she  came  to  a  bright  crystal  rock.     On  a  touch  from 
her  companion  it  flew  open,  and  in  a  spacious  hall  she 
saw  an  innumerable  multitude  of  similarly  little  men  col- 
lected round  an  elevated  spot.     She  advanced  and  found 
the  queen  in  the  pangs  of  labour  and  at  the  point  of  death. 
Dame  Anna,  who  was  well  skilled  in  the  preparation  of  me- 
dicines, mixed  a  potion  for  the  patient,  through  the  virtue 
of  which  she  was  soon  delivered  of  a  son.     Their  joy  was 
beyond  expression,  and  the  grateful  husband  presented  then- 
benefactress  with  some  gold,  which  appeared  like  shavings, 
enjoining  her  to  preserve  it  as  the  greatest  treasure;  that 
the  fortunes  of  her  house  depended  on  it.     At  a  subse- 
quent  period  she  caused  to  be  made  from  it  three  things, 
viz.  some  small  pieces  of  money,  a  distaff  and  a  herring, 
which  were  afterwards  divided  among  the  several  branches 

of  the  family. 

The  herring  at  a  later  period  fell  to  the  share  ot  Josias 
llanzau,  who,  full  of  militaiy  ardour,  caused  it  to  be  made 
into  a  sword-hilt.  He  entered  the  French  service,  in 
which  he  shared  in  many  battles,  and  at  length  attained 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  55 

to  the  rank  of  field-marshal.  He  was  one  of  the  most 
desperate  duellists,  and  even  when  he  had  arrived  at  an 
advanced  age,  and  was  possessed  of  the  highest  dignity, 
he  would  go  disguised  among  the  soldiers  and  pick  quar- 
rels with  them.  He  once  fought  with  an  esteemed  friend, 
because  he  had  written  his  name  incorrectly.  But  so  long 
as  he  carried  his  magic  sword,  he  was  never,  in  any  battle, 
either  struck  by  a  bullet  or  v>^ounded  by  a  stroke.  No 
one  had  for  a  long  time  placed  any  confidence  in  him,  it 
being  evident  to  every  one  that  there  was  some  sorcery 
in  the  matter,  so  that  when  Caspar  von  Bockwold,  a  Hol- 
stein  nobleman,  had  divulged  the  story  of  the  goblin,  in 
a  company  at  Strasburg,  many  persons  denied  him  the 
praise  of  valour,  and  ascribed  all  his  feats  to  the  herring. 
At  this,  maddened  with  rage,  Josias,  in  the  presence  of 
all,  cast  his  sword  into  the  Rhine.  Still  victory  did  not 
forsake  him,  though  he  had  to  pay  dear  for  it ;  so  that  at 
last,  of  all  those  members  of  which  a  man  has  two,  he  had 
lost  one,  and  had  besides  sixty  severe  wounds  on  his  body. 

WE  ARE  REMOVING! 
Cases  have  been  known  of  houses  in  which  whole  fami- 
lies and  swarms  of  Puks  or  Nisser  have  taken  their  abode, 
and  have  thereby  been  rendered  uninhabitable.  In  Husum 
there  once  lived  two  families  of  these  beings,  one  at  a 
baker's,  the  other  at  a  brewer's.  At  night  they  turned 
everything  topsy-turvy,  made  the  most  horrible  noises, 
ran  up  and  down  the  stairs  ;  sometimes  they  were  in  the 
cellar,  sometimes  in  the  chambers ;  from  the  baker  they 
stole  his  flour,  from  the  brewer  his  beer.  They  were  so 
little,  that  when  pursued,  like  spiders  and  worms,  they 
would  creep  into  the  smallest  crevices,  where  they  would 
make  an  incessant  outcry.  The  people  at  length  could 
endure  them  no  longer,  and  resolved  to  remove.  Their 
moveables  had  all  been  carried  out,  and  the  maid-servants 


56  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

from  both  houses  came  the  last,  carrying  the  brooms  on 
their  shoulders.  They  met  together,  when  Ann  inquired 
of  Susan  where  they  were  going  ?  But  before  she  could 
answer,  many  little  voices  cried  from  one  of  the  brooms : 
"  We  are  removing  ! ''  The  girls  at  first  were  frightened, 
but  soon  recovered  their  presence  of  mind.  There  was  a 
pond  close  at  hand ;  into  this  both  plunged  their  brooms, 
and  left  them  in  the  water.  They  then  betook  themselves 
to  their  new  habitations,  and  were  no  more  annoyed  by 
these  noxious  beings.  But  it  was  soon  remarked  that  all 
the  fish  in  the  pond  grew  sick,  and  by  degrees  died ;  and 
women,  who  late  in  the  evening  fetched  water  from  the 
pond,  declared  by  all  that  was  holy  that  they  had  re- 
peatedly heard  small  voices  in  the  water  crying  out :  ''  We 
have  removed  !  We  have  gone  away  !  '^ 


In  Neumiinster  a  man  had  offended  a  Niss,  because  he 
had  put  no  butter  in  his  porridge.  In  revenge  the  Niss 
played  such  pranks  and  caused  so  much  annoyance  that 
the  people  were  obhged  to  remove.  When  the  last  person 
with  the  broom  was  crossing  the  threshold,  the  Niss,  who 
was  sitting  in  the  broom,  called  out :  "  I  too  am  here/^ 
and  removed  with  them. 


At  a  place  also  in  Angeln,  some  people  left  their  house, 
on  account  of  a  Niss.  When  the  last  cartload  was  just 
ready  to  go,  he  was  sitting  behind,  and  laughing  said  : 
''We  move  to-day." 

The  reader  will  have  already  seen  in  the  Danish  Popnlar  Traditions 
stories  nearly  identical  with  the  three  foregoing,  which  are  here  selected 
from  many  others  as  striking  examples  of  the  close  resemblance  existing 
between  the  superstitions  of  North  Germany  and  those  of  Scandinavia. 

THE  SNAKE-KING. 
A  girl  working  in  the  field  once  found  a  bunch  of  four- 


NORTH   GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  57 

teen  or  fifteen  snakes,  all  hissing  together ;  one  of  which 
had  a  golden  crown.  The  girl  untied  her  white  apron 
and  laid  it  on  the  ground  near  the  group,  when  the  largest 
of  the  snakes,  the  one  that  had  the  crown,  came  and  laid 
his  crown  on  the  apron.  It  was  of  pure  gold  and  set  with 
many  precious  stones  of  a  green  colour.  The  girl  in- 
stantly sprang  forwards  and  snatched  it  up  ;  seeing  which 
the  snake-king  cried  so  horribly  that  the  girl  was  deafened 
by  the  noise.  She  afterwards  sold  the  crown  for  a  con- 
siderable sum'. 

In  the  ruins  of  the  old  Duborg,  near  Flensborg,  there 
lives  a  bluish  snake  that  wears  on  its  head  a  small  crown 
of  the  finest  gold.  It  appears  but  once  a  day,  at  the  hour 
of  noon,  and  then  for  a  moment  only.  Whoever  can 
catch  it,  or  get  its  crown,  is  fortunate.  The  king  would 
instantly  give  twenty  thousand  dollars  current  for  the 
crown ;  for  whoever  wears  it  is  immortal. 

THUNDER. 
In  Silt,  if  any  one  finds  a  thunderstone,  he  carefully 
preserves  it ;  because  thunder  will  never  cause  any  injury 
in  a  house  where  there  is  such  a  stone  ^. 

THE  STARS. 
Old  maids  and  bachelors,  according  to  the  North  Fri- 
sians, are  curiously  employed  after  death.  As  soon  as  the 
sun  is  sunk  below  the  horizon,  the  old  maids  must  cut  stars 
out  of  it,  which  the  old  bachelors,  during  the  night,  must 
blow  up  in  the  east,  going  all  the  time  up  or  down  a 

ladder. 

THE  MAN  IN  THE  MOON. 

At  the  time  when  wishing  was  of  avail,  a  man,  one 
Christmas  eve,  stole  cabbages  from  his  neighbour's  garden. 

1  See  vol.  ii.  p.  217.  "  See  vol.  i.  p.  54,  note. 

D  5 


58  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITlOXSv 

When  just  in  the  act  of  walking  off  with  his  load,  he  was 
perceived  by  the  people^  who  conjured  (wished)  him  up  in 
the  moon.  There  he  stands  in  the  full  moon  to  be  seen 
by  everybody,  bearing  his  load  of  cabbages  to  all  eternity. 
Every  Christmas  eve  he  is  said  to  turn  round  once.  Others 
say  that  he  stole  willow  boughs,  which  he  must  bear  for 
ever. 

In  Silt  the  story  goes  that  he  was  a  sheep-stealer,  that 
enticed  sheep  to  him  with  a  bundle  of  cabbages,  until,  as 
an  everlasting  w^arning  to  others,  he  was  placed  in  the 
moon,  where  he  constantly  holds  in  his  hand  a  bundle  of 
cabbages. 

The  people  of  Rantum  say  that  he  is  a  giant,  who  at 
the  time  of  the  flow  stands  in  a  stooping  posture,  because 
he  is  then  taking  up  water,  which  he  pours  out  on  the 
earth,  and  thereby  causes  the  flow ;  but  at  the  time  of 
the  ebb  he  stands  erect  and  rests  from  his  labour,  when 
the  water  can  subside  again. 

HANS  DiJMKT. 
Of  Charleses  Wain,  or,  as  it  is  more  usually  called,  the 
Great  Bear,  it  is  said,  that  it  is  the  wagon,  in  which  Elias, 
our  Lord,  and  other  saints  journeyed  to  heaven.  But  the 
very  small  star  above  the  centre  one  in  the  pole  is  the 
wagoner,  Hans  Diimkt.  He  was  in  the  service  of  our 
Lord,  and  had  a  very  comfortable  place ;  but  by  degrees 
he  did  his  w^ork  more  and  more  negligently.  Our  Lord 
often  warned  and  chided  him  ;  but  Hans  cared  very  little 
for  that.  He  was  particularly  careless  in  cutting  chaff; 
none  that  he  cut  could  be  used,  being  cut  much  too  long. 
At  this  our  Lord  was  at  last  so  angry  that  he  set  him  on 
the  pole  of  the  celestial  wain,  where  he  may  be  seen  every 
evening,  as  a  warning  to  all  serving-men  that  cut  chaff 
too  long. 
According  to  one  tradition,  Hans  Dlimken  (or  Diimkt)  was  a  carrier, 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  59 

who  conveyed  our  Lord,  who  in  remuneration  promised  him  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  ;  but  the  man  said  he  would  rather  drive  to  all  eternity,  from 
sunset  to  sunrise.     Grimm,  D.  M.  p.  688. 

THE  WANDERING  JEW. 

For  many  years  the  Wandering  Jew  has  been  a  wan- 
derer from  city  to  city.  He  is  never  hungry  nor  thirsty, 
and  never  grows  old.  He  takes  rest  always  out  of  doors, 
and  may  not  sleep  under  a  roof.  It  is  said  that  he  was 
some  years  ago  in  Liineburg,  where  he  slept  on  a  stone 
just  without  the  city. 

A  few  years  since  he  was  seen  in  Sundewith,  not  far 
from  Beuschau.  He  carried  a  basket,  out  of  which  there 
grew  moss.  He  rests  only  on  Christmas  eve,  when  he  finds 
a  plough  in  the  field ;  for  on  that  alone  may  he  sit. 

THE  WODE. 

Many  persons  have,  in  the  twelve  nights  of  Christmas 
and  particularly  on  Christmas  eve,  seen  the  Wode  on  his 
progress.  He  rides  a  large  white  horse,  a  hmitsmau  on 
foot  and  four-and-twenty  fierce  dogs  follow  him.  In  every 
place  through  which  he  passes,  the  hedges  fall  v/ith  a 
crash,  and  a  road  opens  itself  before  him  ;  but  tov.ards 
morning  they  are  all  erect  again.  Some  assert  that  his 
horse  has  only  three  legs.  He  always  rides  on  certain 
ways,  past  the  doors  of  the  houses,  and  with  such  speed 
that  his  dogs  are  not  always  able  to  keep  pace  with  him  : 
they  may  be  heard  panting  and  howling,  and  sometimes 
one  has  been  left  on  the  road.  One  of  them  was  once 
found  in  a  house  at  Wulfsdorf,  another  at  Fuhlenhagen, 
lying  on  the  hearth,  incessantly  howling  and  panting,  until 
the  next  Christmas  eve,  when  the  Wode  again  took  it  with 
him.  At  Christmas  eve  no  linen  ought  to  be  left  out,  as 
the  dogs  tear  it  to  tatters.  There  should  also  be  no 
baking,  as  it  would  cause  a  Wild-hunt.     Everything  in 


60  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

the  house  must  be  quiet.  If  the  door  is  left  open^  the 
Wode  and  his  dogs  will  pass  through  and  consume  all 
that  is  in  the  house,  but  particularly  the  dough,  if  baking 
be  going  forwards  ^ 

The  Wode  once  entered  the  house  of  a  poor  peasant, 
and  his  dogs  devoured  everything.  The  poor  man  made 
great  lamentation,  and  asked  the  Wode  what  compensa- 
tion he  was  to  have  for  the  damage  he  had  sustained.  The 
Wode  told  him  that  he  should  be  paid.  Shortly  after  he 
came  dragging  along  a  dead  dog,  which  he  told  the  peasant 
to  throw  into  his  chimney;  when  he  had  done  so,  the  skin 
burst,  and  there  fell  from  it  many  bright  gold  pieces. 

The  Wode  has  a  certain  road,  through  which  he  rides 
every  night  during  the  twelve  days  of  Christmas.  At  his 
approach  the  subterraneans  must  flee  before  him,  as  he  is 
bent  on  extirpating  them  from  the  earth.  An  old  peasant 
one  night  late  saw  the  subterraneans  running  along :  they 
did  not  appear  terrified  and  cried  out :  "  He  can  't  catch 
us  to-day,  he  must  let  us  go,  he  has  not  washed  himself 
this  morning.^^  On  proceeding  a  little  further,  he  met 
the  Wode,  who  asked  him  what  they  had  been  saying. 
''  They  said,"  answered  the  old  man,  ''  that  you  have  not 
washed  yourself  this  morning,  and  must  therefore  let 
them  go."  When  the  Wode  heard  this  he  stopped  his 
horse,  let  it  stale,  dismounted  and  washed  himself  there- 
with ;  then  remounted  and  continued  his  chase  after  the 
subterraneans.  After  a  little  while  the  peasant  saw  him 
returning,  having  with  him  many  bound  together  by  their 
yellow  hair  ^,  besides  a  number  hanging  down  on  each  side 

^  Woden  here  appears  as  sadly  fallen  from  his  former  high  estate.  This 
and  the  following  story  might  not  inajjtly,  in  a  twofold  sense,  be  also 
titled  *  The  Descent  of  Odin.' 

-  The  subterranean  folk  have  not  yellow  hair.  Those  alluded  to  above 
must  be  the  moss-folk  and  tvood-tvives,  who  resemble  children  of  three 
years,  and  are  friendly  to  mankind.     See  Grimm,  D.  M.  p.  881  note. 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  61 

of  his  horse.  Thus  did  he  pursue  the  subterraneans  until 
they  all  have  disappeared  :  he  therefore  hunts  no  longer  on 
the  earth,  but  only  in  the  air  above.  The  Wode  is  known 
throughout  Lauenburg,  and  people  everywhere  close  their 
doors  against  him  at  Christmas  time. 


A  Meklenburg  tradition  places  the  connection  between 
Odin  and  the  Wild  Hunt  beyond  a  doubt. 

When,  as  it  often  happens,  the  dogs  bark  on  the  heaths, 
in  the  woods  and  cross-ways,  the  countryman  knows  it  to 
be  PFod  that  is  leading  them,  and  pities  the  wanderer  that 
has  not  reached  his  home. 

A  drunken  peasant  passing  one  night  throu^-h  a  forest 
on  his  way  from  the  town,  heard  the  Wild  Hunt,  and  the 
noise  of  the  dogs  and  the  cry  of  the  huntsmen  in  the  air. 
''  In  the  middle  of  the  road  !  In  the  middle  of  the  road' ! '' 
cried  a  voice,  but  to  w^hich  he  gave  no  heed.  On  a  sudden 
a  tall  man  on  a  white  horse  precipitated  himself  from  the 
clouds  before  him.  "  Art  thou  strong  ? ''  said  he.  "  Let 
us  try  which  can  pull  the  strongest.  Here  take  hold  of 
this  chain.''  The  countryman  took  hold  of  the  heavy 
chain,  and  the  wild  hunter  soared  aloft.  The  countryman 
wound  the  chain  round  an  oak,  and  the  huntsman  tu^-o-ed 
in  vain.  "Thou  hast  surely  wound  the  chain  round  the 
oak,''  said  Wod,  descending  from  the  clouds.  "  No  " 
said  the  countryman,  who  had  hastily  loosed  it,  "  see  I 
am  holding  it  in  my  hands."  "  Then  thou  shalt  be  mine 
up  in  the  clouds,"  cried  the  huntsman,  again  mountin"-. 
The   countryman  now  quickly  fastened  the  chain  again 

1  The  reason  of  this  warning  appears  from  the  same  superstition  as 
current  in  the  isle  of  Usedom.  When  the  Wild  Hunt  passes  by,  the  cry 
is  frequently  heard  of 

Ho  ho  !  bliw  innen  Middelwech,        Hallo  hallo  !  keep  in  the  middle  way, 
Denn  biten  di  de  Hunne  nich.  Then  will  the  dogs  not  bite  thee. 

Kuhn  und  Schwartz,  p.  427. 


62  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

round  the  oak,  and  Wod  was  as  unsuccessful  as  before. 
"But  hast  thou  not  fastened  the  chain  round  the  oak?" 
said  Wod,  again  descending.  "  No,"  said  the  country- 
man,  "see  I  am  holding  it  in  my  hands."  ''  If  thou  wert 
heavier  than  lead,  thou  must  up  with  me  in  the  clouds, 
notwithstanding."  Saying  this  he  darted  up  like  light- 
ning, but  the  countryman  had  recourse  to  his  old  process. 
The  dogs  barked,  the  carriages  rolled,  the  horses  neighed 
up  aloft,  the  oak  cracked  at  its  roots  and  seemed  to  turn  ; 
the  countryman  felt  far  from  easy,  but  the  tree  stood  its 
ground.  "Thou  hast  pulled  capitally,"  said  the  hunts- 
man j  "  many  men  have  I  made  mine  :  thou  art  the  first 
that  has  withstood  me.  I  will  reward  thee."  Now  loud 
was  the  uproar  of  the  hunt,  "  hallo,  holla  !  wol,  wol  !  "  ^ 
The  countryman  sneaked  away  towards  home,  when  from 
an  unseen  height,  a  deer  fell  dying  before  him,  and  there 
stood  Wod,  who,  springing  from  his  white  horse,  cut  up 
the  game.  ''  The  blood  shalt  thou  have  and  a  haunch 
besides,"  said  Wod.  "  Sir,"  said  the  countryman,  "thy 
servant  has  neither  pail  nor  pitcher."  "  Take  thy  boot  off," 
cried  Wod.  He  did  so.  "  Now  march  home  with  blood 
and  flesh  to  wife  and  brat."  Fear  at  first  caused  his  bur- 
then to  seem  light,  but  by  degrees  it  grew  hea\'ier  and 
heavier,  so  that  he  could  scarcely  walk  under  it.  Bent 
almost  double,  and  dripping  with  sweat,  he  at  length 
reached  his  hut,  and  behold  !  the  boot  was  full  of  gold, 
and  the  haunch  turned  out  to  be  a  leather  bag  filled  with 
silver  ^ 

THE  MAN  WITHOUT  A  SHADOW. 
Many  preachers  and  sacristans  in  former  times  visited 
(and  still  visit)  the  Black  School,  and  are  there  instructed 
by  the  devil  in  the  black  art,  by  means  of  which  they  can 
exorcise  spectres,  spirits  of  the  dead,  and  even  the  devil 
himself.     The    devil    gives   the   instruction,    though    not 

1  Lisch,  Meklenl).  Jahrb.,  quoted  by  Grimm,  D.  M.  pp.  876,  877. 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  63 

gratis.  The  condition  is,  that  whosoever,  at  the  termina- 
tion of  the  lecture,  when  the  course  is  ended,  of  all  the 
pupils  that  frequent  the  school,  goes  last  out  by  the  door, 
shall  belong  to  him.  By  many,  who  proved  more  cunning 
than  their  master,  he  has  been  outwitted,  among  others, 
by  the  sacristan  of  Brons,  in  the  west  part  of  the  bailiwick 
of  Hadersleben.  He  was  the  last  of  all  that  left  the 
school,  but  he  knew  how  to  help  himself,  when  the  devil 
would  lay  hold  on  him.  The  school-door  was  to  the  south, 
and  it  happened  that  the  lecture  was  finished  in  bright 
sunshine,  exactly  at  noon  ;  so  the  sacristan  veiy  justly  said, 
that  not  he,  but  his  shadow  was  the  last  to  go  out ;  that, 
if  he  liked,  the  devil  was  welcome  to  keep.  The  devil  could 
object  nothing  to  this  reasoning,  and  let  the  man  go,  but 
detained  his  shadow.  From  that  time  the  sacristan  has 
been  shadowless ;  and  many  who  have  seen  and  known 
him  can  testify,  that  even  in  the  brightest  sunshine  not 
the  faintest  appearance  of  a  shadow  accompanies  him. 

It  hardly  need  he  mentioned  that  Chamisso's  *  Peter  Schlemihl '  is 
founded  on  a  similar  tradition.  According  to  a  Spanish  tradition,  there 
was  a  cave  at  Salamanca  in  which  the  devil  always  maintained  seven 
pupils,  under  the  condition  that  when  they  were  fully  instructed,  the 
last  must  pay  the  reckoning.  One  day  when  he  was  dismissing  his 
scholars,  and  had  ordered  the  last  to  remain,  the  scholar  pointed  to  his 
shadow,  sajdng:  "That  is  the  last."  The  devil  was  obliged  to  be  con- 
tent with  the  shadow,  and  the  pupil  continued  for  the  rest  of  his  life 
shadowless. 

Jamieson,  speaking  of  the  Scottish  superstition,  says  :  "  Losing  one's 
shadow  arrives  to  such  as  are  studjdng  the  art  of  necromancy.  When  a 
class  of  students  have  made  a  certain  progress  in  their  mystic  studies,  they 
are  obhged  to  run  tlirough  a  subterraneous  hall,  where  the  devil  literally 
catches  the  hindmost  in  the  race,  unless  he  crosses  the  hall  so  speedily, 
that  the  arch-enemy  can  only  apprehend  his  shadow.  In  the  latter  case 
the  person  of  the  sage  never  after  throws  any  shade,  and  those  who 
have  thus  lost  their  shadow  always  prove  the  1)est  magicians."  See  Grimm, 
D.  M.  p.  976.  Most  readers  will  recollect  Walter  Scott's  lines,  in  the 
Lay  of  the  Last  Minstrel,  when  speaking  of  the  lady  of  Buccleuch's  father, 
who  had  studied  in  "  Padua,  far  beyond  the  sea"  : — 


64  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

For  when  in  studious  mood  he  paced 

St.  Andrew's  cloister'd  hall, 
Ills  form  no  darkening  shadow  traced 

Upon  the  sunny  wall. 

DEVIL  AGAINST  DEVIL. 
A  cross  painted  on  the  principal  door  of  the  house  is  a 
safeguard  against  witches ;  it  is  also  good  to  have  in  the 
house  a  wafer  that  has  been  purloined  at  the  communion. 
If  cattle  is  bewitched  and  no  butter  can  be  produced,  the 
cows,  churns  and  pails  must  in  the  evening  be  silently- 
smoked.  The  witch  will  then  usually  come  and  ask  ad- 
mission, but  no  one  may  be  let  in,  how^ever  hard  they 
may  knock  at  the  door. 


At  a  house  in  Wilster  a  child  was  sick.  A  cunning 
woman  said  there  was  some  sorcery  in  the  case,  and  that 
the  child  must  be  smoked  at  twelve  o^clock  at  night, 
every  door  being  closed.  The  person  that  had  bewitched 
it  w^ould  then  come,  when  blood  must  be  draw^n  from  him 
or  her  on  a  cloth,  and  the  cloth  bui-nt.  At  the  hour  spe- 
cified every  door  w^as  carefully  closed ;  before  the  window  s, 
and  reaching  almost  to  the  top,  sheets  w^ere  hung,  all 
precisely  as  the  cunning  w  oman  had  directed.  But  the 
house  had  wdndow- shutters  after  the  old  fashion,  made  to 
turn  up,  so  that  under  eveiy  window  they  hung  like  a  sort 
of  flap,  on  which,  when  not  turned  up,  a  person  might 
contrive  to  stand  and  look  through  the  window\  And  so 
it  was  here ;  for  wMe  they  were  smoking  the  child,  and 
before  it  had  struck  twelve,  the  witch  suddenly  peeped 
over  the  sheet  into  the  room.  On  seeing  her,  the  man 
rushed  out,  struck  her  in  the  face,  and  received  the  blood 
on  a  cloth,  which  being  burnt,  the  child  recovered. 


In  the  neighbourhood  of  Biisum  there  dwelt  a  wealthy 
peasant,   who  had  an  only  daughter  whom   he  tenderly 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  65 

loved.  But  his  old  motlier-in-law  was  a  witch.  People 
knew  that  she  had  on  several  occasions  transformed  herself 
to  a  cat  or  other  animal ;  in  companies^  too,  she  has  caused 
the  whole  room  to  be  filled  with  ravens,  so  that  the  guests 
were  forced  to  withdraw.  She  did  harm  to  both  man  and 
beast.  If  any  one  passed  a  night  in  her  house,  and  his 
slippers  stood  the  wrong  way,  she  would,  when  she  thought 
that  every  one  was  asleep,  enter  the  chamber  and  turn  the 
slippers ^  This  is  a  certain  proof  that  she  was  a  witch; 
for  so  they  constantly  do ;  otherwise  they  would  have  no 
power  over  the  sleeper.  But  witches  must  always  have 
one  person  in  their  family  on  whom  to  exercise  their  malice. 
The  old  mother-in-law  grudged  the  peasant  his  good  for- 
tune, and  at  length  bewitched  his  daughter  most  wickedly. 
She  presented  the  young  maiden  with  a  beautiful  new  dress, 
which  she,  suspecting  no  guile,  put  on  on  the  following 
Sunday,  intending  to  appear  in  it  at  church.  But  it  was 
hardly  on  her  back  before  her  hair  stood  on  end,  her  eyes 
rolled  wildly,  and  for  internal  burning  she  could  not  con- 
tain herself.  She  dashed  herself  against  the  windows  and 
doors  like  a  savage  cat,  raved  and  raged  at  everybody,  but 
without  knowing  any  one,  and  it  was  not  without  much 
difficulty  that  she  could  be  undressed  and  placed  in  bed. 
The  raving  fit  then  passed,  but  was  succeeded  by  the 
greatest  debility  and  exhaustion.  And  thus  she  lay  for  a 
length  of  time,  and  was  daily  dwindling  away.  No  phy- 
sician could  afford  her  relief,  for  they  all  confessed  that 
they  were  ignorant  of  her  malady.  Her  parents  were  in- 
consolable. Some  sagacious  persons,  to  whom  they  had 
recourse,  told  them  at  last  that  an  old  woman  had  be- 
witched their  daughter,  but  that  they  were  powerless 
against  her.  Only  in  Hamburg  there  lived  a  man  who 
could  probably  relieve  her ;  if  he  failed,  all  attempts  would 

1  See  in  vol.  ii.  Sw.  Pop.  Belief,  p.  ill.  No.  50,  and  Dan.  Pop.  Belief, 
p.  272.  No.  34. 


G6  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

be  vain.  Her  father^  resolved  on  leaving  nothing  untried, 
instantly  set  out  for  Hamburg,  and  spoke  with  the  man, 
who,  after  he  had  heard  a  full  state  of  the  case,  opened  a 
large  book,  written  in  characters  which  nobody  but  him- 
self understood.  At  the  expiration  of  a  quarter  of  an  hour, 
the  man  told  the  peasant  that  his  daughter  was  certainly 
under  the  influence  of  witchcraft,  but  that  he  would  give 
him  a  pot  of  medicine,  that  would  most  probably  afford 
her  relief,  if  only  he  could  carry  it  home  whole ;  as  the 
evil  spirit  would  use  every  endeavour  to  break  it.  On  the 
following  day  the  peasant  received  the  pot  from  the  doctor, 
and  soon  arrived  without  impediment  at  Biisum.  But 
now  all  must  go  wrong.  The  ship^s  boy  was  ordered  to 
carry  the  basket  containing  the  pot  on  shore  and  to  the 
house  of  the  peasant ;  but  hardly  had  he  set  foot  on  dry 
land,  when  the  sand  rose  like  a  water-spout,  threw  the 
youngster  down,  and  dashed  the  basket  out  of  his  hand, 
so  that  the  pot  was  broken  in  a  thousand  fragments.  Thus 
was  the  journey  in  vain.  After  a  very  short  delay,  the 
man  was  again  on  his  way  to  the  wonderful  doctor,  when, 
having  related  his  mishap,  he  w^as  informed  by  the  sage 
that  the  task  was  now  much  more  difficult,  but  that  he  must 
come  again  in  two  days.  The  doctor  had  in  the  interim 
made  everything  ready,  and  packed  up  the  pot,  and  now 
enjoined  the  ])easant  to  keep  the  strictest  watch  over  it ; 
adding  that  there  was  still  one  other  method  of  saving  his 
daughter,  but  one  that  he  should  very  reluctantly  have 
recourse  to,  even  if  her  father  would  consent.  This  time 
the  peasant  returned  home  by  land,  having  the  basket  with 
the  pot  under  the  seat  of  his  vehicle,  and  arrived  within 
sight  of  his  house  in  safety,  and  was  even  on  his  o^^^l 
ground,  when,  on  the  level  earth,  the  vehicle  was  suddenly 
upset,  and  although  the  })easant  himself  sustained  no  in- 
juiy,  the  pot  was  broken  in  pieces.  The  man,  who  had 
his  daughter's  recovery  much  at  heart,  allowed  himself  no 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  67 

rest,  althougli  his  wife,  and  more  especially  his  mother-in- 
law,  would  retain  him,  telling  him  he  ought  to  take  some 
repose  after  his  great  toil ;  but  all  was  to  no  purpose ;  he 
mounted  his  horse,  and  in  twelve  hours  was  again  in  Ham- 
burg. The  doctor  now  informed  him  that  one  course 
alone  remained,  which  was  to  boil  the  old  witch  in  oil ; 
but  before  commencing  this  process,  he  would  show  him 
the  person  who  had  bewitched  his  daughter.  He  then 
went  into  an  adjacent  apartment,  muttered,  with  all  kinds 
of  hocus-pocus,  some  unintelligible  spells,  and  in  a  quarter 
of  an  hour  came  back  with  a  large  mirror  under  his  arm. 
This  he  placed  on  the  table,  and  desired  the  peasant  to 
look  into  it.  The  man  did  so,  and  instantly  recognised 
in  it  his  old  mother-in-law.  He  was  deeply  grieved  at  the 
sight,  yet  on  calhng  to  mind  what  his  daughter  had  suf- 
fered, and  that  if  her  malady  continued,  it  must  soon 
terminate  her  existence,  he  formed  his  resolution,  and  said 
to  the  doctor  that  he  might  do  what  he  thought  proper, 
let  whatever  might  come  afterwards.  The  doctor  appointed 
him  to  come  again  at  noon  on  the  following  day.  At  the 
time  fixed  the  peasant  was  in  attendance,  when  the  doctor 
led  him  into  a  detached  apartment,  and  then  withdrew. 
At  the  expiration  of  an  hour  he  called  him  into  the  kitchen, 
where  he  had  a  large  kettle  on  the  fire,  into  which  he 
poured  oil  and  other  things,  under  all  sorts  of  spells  and 
ceremonies,  and  then  shut  it  close  with  a  heavy  lid.  What 
was  in  the  kettle  now  began  to  work  and  boil,  the  noise 
in  it  grew  louder  and  louder,  and  the  peasant  thought  he 
could  distinguish  the  moans  of  a  human  being.  Whatever 
it  was,  it  seemed  resolved  to  remain  no  longer,  but  to  get 
air,  and  strove  with  all  its  might  to  raise  the  lid.  "  Now 
is  the  time,'^  said  the  doctor,  springing  forwards  and  hold- 
ing down  the  lid  with  all  his  strength ;  and  shortly  after 
called  to  the  peasant  for  his  assistance ;  and  only  with  the 
utmost  difficulty  could  they  succeed  in  preventing  it  from 


68  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

running  over.     When  the  boilmg  ceased,   all   gradually 
grew  more  quiet,  and  was  at  length  quite  still.     "  Now/' 
said  the  doctor,  "your   daughter  is  saved,   and  the  old 
woman  is  no  more.''     The  peasant  felt  ill  at  ease,   and 
although  pleased  at  the  intelligence,  the  doctor  appeared 
to  him  as  something  unearthly.     He  instantly  paid  him 
his  due,  hastened  back  to  his  inn,  and  on  the  following 
day,  as  early  as  possible,  mounted  his  horse  and  rode  home. 
On  entering  his  dwelling,  his  daughter,  quite  healthy  and 
cheerful,  came  to  meet  him,  and  related  to  him  that  her 
old  grandmother  had  died  a  horrible  death  on  the  pre- 
vious  day.     At  noon   she  was  attacked   by  an  internal 
burning,  which  from  one  minute  to  another  became  more 
intense.     In  bed  she  could  not  remain,  had  torn  open  the 
doors  and  windows,   thrown  off  her  clothes,  rolled  and 
writhed  about  the  floor,  crying  and  moaning  the  whole 
time  so  that  she  might  be  heard  at  a  considerable  distance. 
Not  till  the  day  was  far  advanced  did  she  become  gra- 
dually more   calm,  and  at  length   uttered  not  a  sound. 
Until  then  no  one  could  remain  with  her,  but  now  on 
entering,  they  found  on  the  spot  where  she  had  lain  a 
small  heap  of  ashes  and  some  burnt  bones.     From  that 
hour  the  daughter  recovered  her  health,  and  lived  several 
years  after. 

WITCHES  TAKE  AWAY  BUTTER. 
When  the  dew  falls  on  May  morning  it  will  be  a  good 
butter  year.  On  such  a  morning  a  witch,  before  sunrise, 
went  into  her  neighbours'  fields,  took  up  the  dew  with 
large  linen  cloths,  then  wrung  them  out,  and  so  collected 
the  dew  in  a  vessel.  Of  this,  every  time  she  mshcd  to 
make  butter,  she  took  a  spoonful,  and  poured  it  into  the 
churn,  saying  at  the  same  time :  "  From  every  house  a 
spoonfuP."  By  this  process  she  took  every  time  so  much 
J  Uet  elk  hues  en  Lapel  vull. 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  69 

butter  from  those  neighbours  to  whom  the  fields  belonged. 
On  one  occasion  her  man  had  to  churn,  but,  not  rightly 
understanding  the  matter,  said  when  taking  the  dew: 
^^From  every  house  a  bushelfuP.'^  He  then  began  to 
churn,  when  there  came  so  much  butter,  that  it  ran  over 
the  whole  house,  and  the  people  were  at  a  loss  what  to  do 
with  it. 

The  appellation  of  Daustriker  (Thaustreicher),  dew-striker  or  scraper, 
for  a  witch,  is  no  douht  derived  from  the  above  superstition.  See  more  on 
the  subject  in  Grimm,  D.M.  p.  1026. 

CALVES  BEWITCHED. 
A  farmer  could  never  rear  a  calf;  as  often  as  he  at- 
tempted it,  the  animal  fell  sick,  and  seemed  unable  either 
to  live  or  to  die,  so  that  he  was  obhged  to  kill  it.  In  his 
trouble  he  had  recourse  to  a  cunning  man,  who  advised 
him,  when  the  like  happened  again,  to  take  the  sick 
animal  into  his  yard  and  shoot  at  it.  "  You  will  not  be 
able  to  kill  it,^'  added  he,  "  but  continue  to  load  and  fire ; 
somebody  will  then  soon  come,  and  the  matter  will  be 
settled."  After  a  time  another  calf  fell  ill,  when  he  did 
as  the  man  had  recommended.  After  he  had  fired  several 
shots  without  killing  the  calf,  a  female  neighbour  came  in 
running  and  crying  out,  "  Stop  your  shooting ;  you  will 
shoot  all  my  oxen  dead  in  the  meadow."  Every  shot  had 
killed  an  ox.  The  man  ceased  from  shooting,  and  from 
that  day  could  rear  his  calves. 

FORESEEING. 
In  Owschlag,  near  Sleswig,  there  were  formerly  some 
remarkable  men.  Among  them  there  was  one  who  could 
foresee  and  foretell  funerals,  weddings,  etc.  He  must, 
when  anything  passed  by  his  house  in  the  night,  rise  from 
his  bed  and  look  at  it ;  and  if  he  lay  too  long  and  the 
^  Uet  elk  hues  en  Schapel  vuU. 


70  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

thing  was  passed,  he  must  run  after  it  until  he  got  sight 
of  it.  The  cause  of  this  was,  that  he  had  once  trodden  on 
the  tail  of  a  howHng  dog  and  looked  between  his  ears. 
At  first  this  wonderful  faculty  afforded  him  much  amuse- 
ment, and  to  many  persons  he  foretold  a  variety  of  inci- 
dents most  accurately ;  though  as  he  grew  old  it  became 
burthensome  to  him.  But  he  could  not  get  rid  of  it  or 
sleep  in  quiet,  until  he  had  worn  his  shirt  turned  for  a 
whole  year. 

THE  COMMUNION-CUP  AT  VIOL. 
As  an  inhabitant  of  Viol  was  one  night  riding  from 
riensborg,  he  passed  by  a  grave-mound  where  the  under- 
ground folk  were  celebrating  a  great  festival,  and  just  in 
the  act  of  sending  round  a  large  golden  beaker,  in  which 
was  a  beverage  in  appearance  resembhng  buttermilk.  The 
peasant  drew  up  his  horse  and  knavishly  entreated  them 
to  let  him  have  a  draught  from  the  beaker.  In  the  most 
cordial  manner  they  handed  it  to  him ;  but  he,  having  got 
possession  of  it,  cast  the  liquor  behind  him  and  galloped 
away.  He  soon  heard  a  subterranean  cry :  ''  Dreibein 
(Three-legs)  come  out  \"  and  on  looking  back,  saw  a  mon^ 
ster  close  behind  him;  but  his  horse  was  swifter  than 
Dreibein.  He  then  heard  many  voices  at  once  crying : 
"  Zweibein  (Two-legs)  come  out ! ''  and  saw  another  mon- 
ster much  more  frightful  and  much  swifter  than  Dreibein ; 
yet  was  unable  to  overtake  him.  Then  he  heard  them 
with  one  voice  crying :  "  Einbein  (One-leg)  come  out !  " 
On  turning  again,  he  saw  a  third  monster  far  far  more 
hideous  and  larger  than  the  preceding  one,  which  came 
after  him  with  gigantic  springs,  head  over  heels ;  and  would 
have  caught  him,  had  not  the  door  of  his  house  luckily 
stood  open ;  for  scarcely  had  he  slammed  it  to,  when  there 
stood  Einbein  banging  against  it ;  but  was,  nevertheless, 
forced  to  remain  outside.     On  the  following  morning  the 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  71 

peasant  found  that  the  drink  had  singed  off  half  of  his 
horse^s  tail.  The  beaker  he  presented  to  the  church,  in 
fulfilment  of  a  vow  he  made  in  his  fright  on  seeing  Ein- 
bein^ 

WHITE  WOMEN. 
Beneath  the  village  of  Sahrensdorf,  in  Femern,  there 
dwelt  in  former  times  White-women,  who  gladly  stole 
unbaptized  children.  As  a  protection  against  them,  a 
light  was  burnt  immediately  after  the  birth  of  a  child, 
which  must  constantly  burn  in  the  chamber  until  the  child 
was  christened. 

1  See  vol,  ii,  pp,  140,  144,  aqq. 


NORTH  GERMAN  POPULAR  TRADITIONS. 


11. 

MEKLENBURG,  THE  MARK,  SAXONY, 

THURINGIA,    BRUNSWICK,    HANOVER, 

OLDENBURG,  WESTPHALIA^ 

FRU  GODE. 

In  the  twelve  days  of  Christmas  Fru  Gode  makes  her 
tour,  and  has  been  met  by  many  a  one.  As  a  man  was 
once  busy  with  his  horses  in  the  stable,  Fru  Gode  came, 
and  handing  him  a  stake,  requested  him  to  make  a  point 
to  it.  At  first  he  refused,  but,  on  her  promising  him  a 
good  reward,  did  what  she  required.  When  it  was  finished, 
she  told  him  to  gather  up  the  chips  that  had  fallen,  which 
he  did,  and  found  them  all  pure  gold. 


Formerly  much  was  related  of  Fru  Gode,  how  she  rode 
through  the  air  with  her  dogs.  When  she  had  one  day 
passed  over  a  farm-yard,  the  farmer  happening  to  go  out, 

^  From  Kuhn  and  Schwartz,  Norddeutsche  Sagen,  Marchen  u.  Gebrjiuche. 
Leipsig,  1848,  unless  otherwise  expressed. 

E 


74  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

found  a  little  dog  lying  before  his  door.  He  took  it  in, 
and  together  with  his  wife  fed  and  cherished  it.  But  in 
the  following  year,  and  exactly  at  the  same  time,  the  dog 
suddenly  disappeared,  and  in  his  bed  there  lay  a  large 
lump  of  gold.  That  must  have  been  intended  by  Fru  Gode 
for  the  farmer,  who  until  then  was  a  poor  man,  but  now 
at  once  became  rich. 

The  name  of  Fru  Gode,  though  applied  in  the  middle  age  to  a  female 
being,  Grimm  (D.  M.  p.  231)  considers  a  corruption  from  Fro  Woden 
(Dominus  Woden).  In  her  annual  tour  and  transformation  of  the  shavings 
into  gold,  she  resembles  Berhta.  Fru  Gauden  was,  as  we  are  told  (D.  M. 
p.  877),  a  lady  of  consideration  and  wealth,  who  was  so  enthusiastically 
fond  of  the  chase  that  she  uttered  the  sinful  words :  "  If  I  might  always 
hunt,  I  would  never  wish  to  enter  heaven."  She  had  twenty -four  daughters, 
all  as  mad  as  herself.  One  day,  when  mother  and  daughters  were  dashing 
in  full  gallop  through  field  and  forest,  and  in  their  vn\d  joy  uttered  the 
profane  words :  "  The  chase  is  better  than  heaven!"  behold!  before  the 
eyes  of  the  mother  the  daughters'  clothes  are  turned  to  hair,  their  arms 
to  legs,  and  four-and-twenty  hounds  bark  round  the  hunting  car  of  the 
mother ;  four  of  which  take  the  duty  of  the  horses,  the  rest  accompany 
the  carriage,  and  away  goes  the  wild  group  up  into  the  clouds,  there,  be- 
tween heaven  and  earth,  to  hunt,  as  they  had  wished,  without  cessation, 
from  day  to  day,  from  year  to  year.  Long  have  they  been  weary  of  their 
wild  amusement,  and  deplore  the  sinful  wish  ;  but  they  must  bear  the 
consequences  of  their  crime,  until  the  hour  comes  for  their  release.  Come 
it  one  day  will,  but  when?  no  one  can  say.  In  the  twelve  days  of 
Christmas' (for  at  other  times  we  mortals  are  not  aware  of  her  presence), 
Fru  Gauden  directs  her  course  to  the  habitations  of  men ;  on  Christmas 
night,  or  the  last  night  of  the  year,  she  likes  to  traverse  the  streets  of  the 
village,  and  where  she  finds  a  house-door  open,  she  sends  in  a  little  dog. 
In  the  morning  a  little  dog  comes  wagging  its  tail  to  the  inhabitant ;  it  does 
no  harm  beyond  disturbing  the  nocturnal  quiet  by  its  whining.  It  will 
be  neither  appeased  nor  driven  away.  If  any  one  kills  it,  it  wUl  by  day 
be  changed  into  a  stone,  which,  if  thrown  away,  will  return  to  the  house 
and  again  become  a  dog.  This  dog  will  whine  and  moan  during  the  whole 
year,  bring  disease  and  death  to  man  and  beast,  and  peril  of  fire  on  the 
house ;  and  not  till  the  return  of  the  twelve  days  will  the  house  regain  its 
quiet. '  Hence  every  one  takes  especial  care,  both  morning  and  evening, 
to  keep  the  house-door  well-closed.  Some  people  were  once  foohsh 
enough  to  kill  the  dog,  but  from  that  day  they  never  prospered,  and  at 
length  their  house  was  burnt  to  the  ground.  More  fortunate  are  they 
who  render  a  service  to  Fru  Gauden,  who,  in  the  darkness  of  the  night, 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  75 

sometimes  misses  her  road,  and  finds  herself  in  a  crossway.  Now  a  cross- 
way  is  a  stumbling-block  to  the  good  lady,  and  whenever  she  finds  herself 
in  one,  she  contrives  to  break  some  part  of  her  chariot  which  she  is  unable 
to  repair.  On  such  an  occasion  she  once  came,  clad  like  a  stately  dame, 
to  the  bedside  of  a  serving-man,  waked  hira  and  implored  his  aid.  The 
man  complied  with  her  desire,  followed  her  to  the  crossway,  and  found 
that  one  of  the  wheels  of  her  vehicle  had  flown  off.  Having  set  her  con- 
veyance to  rights,  she  desired  him,  by  way  of  remuneration,  to  put  into 
his  pocket  what  appeared  like  ordure.  The  iftan  was  indignant  at  such  a 
proposal,  but  allowed  himself  to  be  somewhat  pacified  on  her  assuring 
him  that  worthless  as  the  present  appeared,  it  would  not  prove  so.  On 
the  strength  of  this  assurance  he  was  induced  to  take  some  with  him, 
when  lo !  to  his  no  small  astonishment,  by  daybreak  it  began  to  glitter 
like  burnished  gold,  and  was  in  fact  the  purest  gold ! 

THE  KLABAUTERSMANNEKEN  OR  PUKSE. 
These  beings  take  up  their  abode  in  houses^  but  par- 
ticularly in  mills  and  ships,  where  they  live  on  the  milk 
that  is  placed  for  them,  in  return  for  which  they  render 
all  kinds  of  services  :  they  milk  the  cows,  curry  the  horses, 
work  in  the  kitchen,  wash  the  ship,  help  to  weigh  the 
anchor,  and  do  a  variety  of  other  jobs.  There  is  nothing 
to  be  more  feared  than  the  Klabautersmanneken  leaving 
the  ship.  On  which  account  great  care  must  be  taken 
not  to  leave  a  coat  for  them,  or  a  pair  of  shoes,  for  then 
they  would  instantly  leave  the  vessel.  They  wear  a  short 
red  jacket,  not  in  the  best  condition,  and  not  always  quite 
covering  their  nakedness,  so  that  the  heart  sometimes  melts 
at  the  sight  of  them.  In  houses  they  hke  to  live  in  the 
timber-work,  on  which  account,  when  pulling  down  a 
house,  the  beams  ought  not  to  be  thrown  away,  but  em- 
ployed, as  far  as  possible,  in  building  the  new  house. 

THE  HORSE-MARE. 
In  Usedom  there  once  lived  a  man,  who  had  a  horse 
that  had  always  been  vigorous  and  in  good  condition,  but 
at  once  became  meagre  and  lost  strength;  and  notwith- 
standing that  it  was  well  fed,  never  could  recover.     This 

E  2 


76  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

appeared  very  singular  to  the  owner,  and  be  thought  the 
matter  over  and  over,  but  could  not  satisfy  himself.  At 
length  be  sent  for  a  cunning  man,  who,  on  seeing  the 
horse,  said  that  he  would  soon  find  a  remedy.  He  re- 
mained there  that  night,  and  at  midnight  went  to  the 
stable,  stopt  a  knot-bole  in  the  door,  then  fetched  the 
owner  of  the  horse,  and  they  both  entered  the  stable.  To 
bis  great  astonishment  be  there  saw  a  w^oman  of  bis  ac- 
quaintance sitting  on  the  horse,  and,  although  she  strove 
with  all  her  might,  unable  to  descend  from  it.  It  was  the 
Horse-mare  that  w^as  so  caught.  She  besought  them  most 
earnestly  to  set  her  free,  which  they  did,  but  only  after 
she  bad  promised  never  to  repeat  her  visits  ^ 

A  WOMAN-WERWOLF. 

At  Caseburg,  on  the  isle  of  Usedom,  a  man  and  his  wife 
w^ere  busy  in  the  field  making  bay,  when  after  some  time 
the  w^oman  said  to  the  man  that  she  bad  no  more  peace, 
she  could  no  longer  stay,  and  went  away.  But  she  had 
previously  desired  her  husband  to  promise,  that  if  perchance 
a  wdld  beast  should  come,  be  w^ould  throw^  bis  bat  at  it 
and  then  run  away,  that  it  might  not  hurt  him.  She  bad 
been  gone  only  a  little  while,  when  a  w^olf  came  swimming 
across  the  Swine,  and  ran  directly  towards  the  haymakers. 
The  man  threw  his  hat  at  it,  w^hich  the  animal  instantly 
tore  to  rags.  But  in  the  mean  time  a  boy  bad  run  up 
with  a  pitchfork,  and  stabbed  the  wolf  from  behind,  which 
in  the  same  moment  became  changed ;  and  all  were  not  a 
little  astonished,  when  they  saw  that  it  was  the  man's 
wife,  whom  the  boy  had  killed. 

THE  HECKETHALER2. 
In  Swinemiinde  there  lived  many  years  ago  a  man  who 
1  See  vol.  ii.  p.  170.  -  Fromhecken,  to  produce,  hatch. 


NORTH  GERMAN   TRADITIONS.  7/ 

liad  a  '  Hecketlialer/  which  he  obtained  in  the  following 
manner.  On  New  Yearns  night  he  went  to  the  church 
door,  having  with  him  in  a  bag  an  entirely  black  he-cat^ 
without  even  a  single  white  hair.  Taking  the  cat  on  his 
back,  he  walked  backwards  from  the  church  door  round  the 
church,  and  his  round  being  completed,  knocked  thrice. 
A  man  then  came  forth  and  inquired  whether  he  would 
sell  the  cat?— ^^  Yes  "  —  "For  how  much?"— '^  For  a 
dollar  " — "  That  ^s  too  much  ;  I  ■'11  give  eight  groschen  " 
— "  He  is  not  to  be  had  for  that."  Thereupon  he  went  a 
second  time  in  the  same  manner  round  the  church,  knocked 
again,  the  same  man  stept  out,  he  repeated  his  question, 
and  the  man  now  offered  sixteen  groschen — "  He  is  not 
to  be  had  for  that." — And  now  he  went  a  third  time 
backwards  round  the  church,  knocked  again,  the  man 
again  came  forth  ]  he  demanded,  and  now  received  his 
dollar.  Then  throwing  the  bag  with  the  cat  in  it  on  the 
ground,  he  ran  as  fast  as  he  could  back  to  his  house. 
From  that  time  let  him  pay  out  the  dollar  as  often  as  he 
might,  the  moment  the  last  groschen  was  spent,  he  had 
the  entire  dollar  again  in  his  pocket. 

According  to  another  account  from  Cottbus,  we  are  informed  that,  if 
any  one  desires  to  have  a  Heckethaler,  he  must  in  the  longest  night  put 
a  black  he-cat  into  a  bag,  which  must  be  bound  fast  with  ninety-nine 
knots.  He  must  then  go  thrice  round  the  church,  and  every  time  he 
comes  to  the  door,  call  to  the  sacristan  through  the  keyhole.  At  the 
third  time  the  sacristan  (and  he  is  the  devil)  comes,  when  the  man  asks 
him  whether  he  will  buy  a  hare  ?  and  for  the  cat  in  the  bag  receives  a 
dollar.  He  must  then  hasten  to  get  into  a  house  ;  for  if  the  devil  looses 
the  knots  and  overtakes  the  seller,  he  is  a  lost  man.  The  dollar  so  ob- 
tained is  the  Heckethaler,  and  is  to  be  got  rid  of  only  by  placing  it  in  salt. 
From  this  superstition  is  evidently  derived  the  proverb  to  buy  a  cat  in  a 
bag.  The  act  of  walking  thrice  round  the  church,  in  religious  and  super- 
stitious ceremonies,  is  of  remote  antiquity. 

MILK  ABSTRACTED. 
In  Caseburg  there  was  once  a  peasant  whose  cows  would 


78  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

yield  no  milk,  however  well  he  might  feed  them,  so  that 
he  at  last  saw  that  they  must  be  bewitched,  and  sent  for 
a  cunning  man  to  aid  him.  The  man  came,  went  into  the 
cowhouse,  looked  at  the  animals,  and  saw  at  once  how 
matters  stood — they  were  bewitched.  He  then  took  a 
walk  about  the  village,  in  order  to  discover  the  witch,  and 
in  a  neighbour's  cowhouse,  saw  his  wife  standing  close  by 
the  wall,  which  joined  the  aforesaid  peasant's  outhouses. 
Into  the  wall  she  had  driven  a  broomstick,  on  which  a 
pail  was  hung,  and  was  milking  the  broomstick,  which 
yielded  milk  like  a  natural  udder.  Thus  was  the  witch 
discovered.  He  threatened  to  have  her  punished;  and 
from  that  day  the  peasant's  cows  yielded  milk. 

Notwithstanding  the  burlesque  character  of  the  above,  a  superstition 
very  near  akin  to  it  was  known  in  Scotland,  where  witches  were  sup- 
posed to  have  it  in  their  power  to  supply  themselves  with  milk,  by  pulUng 
at  a  hair-rope,  as  dairy-maids  tug  the  teats  of  cattle,  and  using  the  fol- 
lowing conjuration : — 

"  Mear's  milk,  and  deer's  milk. 
And  every  beast  that  bears  milk, 
Atween  St.  Johnston  and  Dundee, 
Come  a'  to  me,  come  a'  to  me^" 

WITCHES  DISCOVERED. 

At  Neppermin,  in  Usedom,  there  lived  two  peasants, 
one  of  whom  had  been  sick  for  three  years  and  unable  to 
rise  from  his  bed ;  for  on  placing  his  foot  on  the  ground, 
he  suffered  the  most  excruciating  pain.  The  servants  of 
the  two  peasants  had  strong  suspicions  that  the  wives  of 
their  masters  were  witches.  To  ascertain  the  point,  they 
hid  themselves  on  Walburgis  night  in  the  stove  of  the 
woman  w^hose  husband  was  sick.  They  had  not  been  long 
there  when  six  witches  came,  one  as  a  swine,  another  as  a 
cat,  another  as  a  hare  with  three  legs,  and  the  others 
under  various  forms  ;  among  whom  were  the  two  peasants' 
1  Chambers's  Pop.  Rh.  p.  34. 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  79 

wives.  Wlien  they  were  all  assembled^  one  said  :  "  I  am 
so  hungry  to-day,  and  know  not  how  to  satisfy  my  cra- 
ving." Whereupon  another  answered :  "  Our  neighbour 
opposite  Ues  in  childbed,  let  us  fetch  her  infant  and  kill 
it ;  "  and  at  the  instant  one  hurried  away,  and  soon  re- 
turned with  the  babe.  But  now  a  knife  was  wanting. 
The  sick  man^s  wife  then  said :  "  For  these  three  years 
past  I  have  had  a  knife  inserted  in  my  husband^s  thigh, 
which  I  draw  out  every  Walburgis  night :  I  '11  fetch  that. 
If  he  but  knew  it,  he  could  rise  up.''  She  then  went  into 
an  adjoining  room,  and  immediately  returned  with  a  knife 
not  much  less  than  a  foot  long.  This  they  were  just  in 
the  act  of  applying  to  the  breast  of  the  infant,  when  one 
of  the  men  in  the  stove  exclaimed  "  Lord  Jesus  !  "  at 
which  the  witches  were  scattered  in  all  directions  ;  but  the 
man  hastened  to  his  master  and  related  to  him  all  that  had 
passed.  At  first  he  was  incredulous,  but  on  rising  he 
found  he  could  walk  without  pain.  On  entering  the  room, 
they  there  found  both  the  child  and  the  knife,  which  the 
witches  had  left  behind.  The  man  then  went  and  de- 
nounced his  own  wife,  who  confessed  who  the  other  witches 
were,  and  they  were  all  condemned  to  the  flames. 

HiJNENSTEINE  (GIANT-STONES). 
All  over  the  Ukermark  are  these  gigantic  stones  to  be 
found  j  but  the  neighbourhood  of  Prenzlau  more  particu- 
larly abounds  in  them ;  for  it  is  there  that  the  first  church 
(the  Marienkirche)  was  built  in  the  country,  for  w^hich 
reason  the  Hiinen  ^  hurled  immense  blocks  of  stone  in  that 
direction.  Such  a  block  lies  in  the  vicinity  of  Sternhagen 
and  Buchholz,  on  the  heath,  in  which  there  is  the  impres- 
sion of  the  five  fingers  of  a  giant,  who  would  cast  it  from 

1  In  these  traditions  a  Hiine  is  identical  with  a  Riese,  Dan.  Jaette,  all 
signifying  giant.  The  tradition  of  giants  casting  stones  at  churches  is 
universal  over  all  the  North.     See  vol.  ii.  p.  158. 


80  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

the  Rhine  to  the  above-named  church.  Many  other  similar 
stones  lie  about  the  fields  of  Wichmannsdorf  and  Berk- 
holz,  all  of  which  are  fragments  of  a  huge  block  that  had 
been  hurled  at  Prenzlau  by  a  giant,  but  burst  in  shivers 
on  its  passage. 

A  HORSE  COMES  OUT  OF  THE  WATER. 
In  the  neighbourhood  of  Jagow,  as  a  peasant  was 
])loughing  late  one  Saturday,  when  the  sun  Avas  already 
gone  down,  there  came  suddenly,  out  of  a  lake  that  lay 
close  by  his  field,  a  horse  with  traces  complete,  which 
harnessed  himself  to  the  other  horses,  and  then  trotted 
ofi"  at  such  a  rapid  pace  that  one  furrow  after  another  was 
cut  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye.  The  peasant  followed 
breathless,  the  sweat  running  from  his  hair  and  face,  and 
his  horses  were  white  with  foam.  In  this  way  the  horse 
continued  for  a  full  half  hour,  without  a  moment's  rest, 
until  he  vanished  by  the  same  way  that  he  came.  The 
peasant  then  hastened  home,  and  never  again  ploughed 
on  a  Saturday. 

The  above-mentioned  being  is  evidently  a  German  Nok.     See  vol.  ii. 
pp.  20-22. 

OLD  FRICK. 

Old  Frick,  or  Fuik,  is  the  deviPs  grandmother,  and  has 
frequently  been  heard  making  a  great  noise  in  the  night. 
Many  also  have  seen,  and  at  once  recognised  her  by  the 
large  dogs,  which  she  always  has  with  her ;  for  when  they 
barked,  pure  fire  has  issued  from  their  mouths  and 
nostrils. 

In  former  times,  when  the  jNIill-laws^  were  in  force,  the 
people  of  Naugarten  were  obliged  to  send  their  corn  to  be 
ground  to  the  mill  at  Boitzenburg.     A  peasant  had  once 

1  The  thirlage  of  the  Scottish  law,  by  whicli  every  tenant  was  forced  to 
take  his  grain  to  be  ground  at  the  lord's  mill. 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRxVDITIONS. 


81 


driven  his  corn  thither,  but  having  staid  till  it  was  rather 
late,  did  not  reach  home  with  his  wagon-load  of  flour 
before  dark.  On  his  way  he  heard  on  a  sudden  a  tre- 
mendous uproar,  and  immediately  after.  Old  Frick  with 
her  dogs  came  thundering  along.  In  his  fright,  the  only 
way  to  save  himself  that  occurred  to  him  was  to  pour  out 
the  contents  of  his  flour-sacks  to  the  dogs,  which  in- 
stantly set  to  work,  and  in  a  twinkling  most  ravenously 
devoured  every  atom  of  flour.  Had  he  not  so  done,  it 
would  have  gone  hard  with  him.  Frightened  and  sad  he 
hastened  home,  with  his  empty  sacks,  and  said  to  his  wife  : 
"  Mother,  it  has  gone  ill  with  me ;  I  have  met  with  Old 
Frick,  and  as  quickly  as  I  could  have  thrown  out  all  the 
flour  to  her  dogs,  in  order  to  get  clear  of  them.^^  "  As 
the  sacks  are  empty,^'  said  the  wife,  "  they  may  be  thrown 
aside.^^  The  man  did  accordingly,  but  what  was  his  sur- 
prise, when,  on  coming  to  the  same  place  on  the  following 
morning,  there  stood  his  sacks  well-filled,  just  as  when, 
on  the  preceding  evening,  he  brought  them  from  Boitzen- 
burg  ! 

THE  WITCHES'  RIDE. 

There  was  once  a  peasant  that  had  an  old  wife,  who  had 
a  great  partiality  for  her  man  Hans.  One  night,  when  the 
peasant  was  gone  to  bed,  but  the  wife  was  alone  in  the 
kitchen,  in  came  Hans,  as  usual,  and  saw  how  she  was 
anointing  first  her  grey  he-cat  and  then  her  own  feet  with 
some  ointment  or  salve.  "  What  art  thou  doing  there  ?  ^' 
said  he  (for  in  his  master^s  absence  he  always  thoued  her). 
"  I  am  going  to  the  Blocksberg,^^  answered  she,  "  and  if 
thou  canst  keep  from  babbling,  thou  mayest  go  with  me,  and 
be  my  servant.^'  Thereupon  she  desired  him  to  fetch  the 
black  cock,  and  when  both  animals  had  been  smeared  with 
the  ointment  J  there  in  one  instant  stood  before  them  u 

E  5 


83  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

grey  horse  and  a  black  stallion.  The  woman  then  seating 
herself  on  the  grey,  said : 

"  Up  unci  davon.  Up  and  away, 

nirgends  an  !  "  nowhere  run  foul ! 

and  away  it  went  with  her  through  the  chimney.  Hans 
now  mounted  his  steed,  and  as  she  had  told  him  he  must 
do  exactly  as  she  did,  he  would  also  repeat  her  words,  but 
had  not  well  remembered  them,  and  said  : 

"  Up  und  davon.  Up  and  away, 

alle  weg  an  !  '*  all  the  way  run  foul ! 

then  away  went  he  also  through  the  chimney,  but  during 
the  journey  bounced  now  against  a  tree,  then  against  a 
rock,  till  he  was  bruised  and  excoriated  from  head  to  foot ; 
but  at  length  arrived  at  the  Blocksberg.  On  their  arrival 
the  woman  dismounted,  and  ordered  Hans  to  hold  the 
horses  and  remain  with  the  other  servants,  of  whom  there 
was  a  considerable  number.  Hans  did  as  he  had  been 
ordered,  and  after  some  time,  was  with  all  the  others  ad- 
mitted to  the  feast,  where  he  ate  and  drank  to  his  heart's 
content ;  but  when  their  orgies  were  about  to  commence, 
he  and  the  rest  were  obliged  to  quit  the  place.  At  last, 
when  all  was  over,  Hans  and  his  mistress  again  mounted 
their  horses  and  returned  home. 

Some  time  after,  Hans  quarreled  with  his  mistress  and 
went  to  live  with  another  master.  Whtn  the  time  came 
round  again  for  visiting  the  Blocksberg,  he  thought  he 
would  play  the  old  woman  a  trick,  and  said  to  his  com- 
panions :  "  If  you  would  like  to  see  how  my  old  dame 
rides  to  the  Blocksberg  with  the  old  alehouse-keeper, 
come  with  me.''  And  saying  this  he  led  them  to  a  cross- 
way,  where  a  couple  of  harrows  were  standing,  which  they 
placed  aslant   against  each   other,   and    sat   down   under 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  83 

them^  They  had  not  been  there  long  when  a  tramp  of 
horses  approached  them.  '^  See,  see  !  '^  cried  Hans,  "  that  ^s 
the  old  woman  on  the  grey,  and  the  one  behmd  on  the 
black  horse  is  the  old  alehouse-man.''^  All  now  saw  her, 
as  they  sat  under  the  harrows,  and  at  the  same  time  re- 
marked that  she  rode  at  first  directly  to  the  crossway,  but 
then  took  a  direction  along  one  of  the  ways,  as  she  could 
not  pass  across  them.  On  the  following  day  Hans  was  in 
the  field,  and  on  a  sudden  remarked  that  the  old  woman 
was  on  the  point  of  making  an  attack  upon  him.  In  vain 
did  he  look  around  for  a  place  of  refuge,  but  there  was  no 
escape  for  him.  Just  in  time,  however,  a  way  occurred  to 
him  :  he  took  a  cord,  which  he  had  at  hand,  wound  it 
round  his  body,  drew  it  between  his  legs  and  up  over  his 
back  and  shoulders  to  his  front,  and  then  tied  both  ends 
in  a  strong  cross-knot ;  so  that,  both  before  and  behind, 
he  was  cross-bound,  and  the  old  woman  could  do  him  no 
harm.  When  she  drew  near,  and  saw  how  he  was 
secured,  she  gave  him  fair  words :  That  he  might  again 
enter  her  service,  and  all  should  be  forgotten.  Hans, 
however,  manifested  no  desire  to  return ;  and  then  she 
begged  him  at  least  to  tell  his  companions  that  she  did 
not  ride  on  the  grey  horse  the  preceding  night,  and  if 
he  promised  to  do  so,  he  should  have  twenty  dollars.  To 
this  Hans  consented,  and  received  his  money,  and  at  night, 
while  sitting  with  his  companions  over  a  jug  of  beer,  he 
said  :  "  Hear  !  I  told  you  yesterday  that  the  old  woman 
rode  on  a  grey  horse  ;  but  that  ^s  not  true  ;  she  rode  only 
on  her  grey  cat.'^ 

KOBOLDS,  OR  GOBLINS. 

The  Krampenbude,  a  fisher-house,  about  a  German  mile 
from  Kopenick,  on  the  Wendish  Spree,  is  also  called  the 

1  See  p.  22. 


84  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

Kobold's  house,  because  a  Kobold  formerly  played  his 
pranks  there.  His  chief  amusement  was,  when  the  fisher- 
men at  night  were  lying  asleep,  to  lay  them  even.  For 
this  purpose,  he  would  first  draw  them  up  till  their  heads 
all  lay  in  a  straight  line ;  but  then  their  legs  would  be 
out  of  the  line,  and  he  had  to  go  to  their  feet,  and  pull 
them  till  the  tips  of  their  toes  were  all  in  a  row.  This 
game  he  would  continue  till  broad  daylight  ^ 


In  the  neighbourhood  of  Kopenick  a  man  had  a 
Kobold  that  had  become  troublesome  to  him.  To  get  rid 
of  him,  he  had  resolved  on  changing  his  abode  and  leaving 
his  unwelcome  guest  behind.  On  the  evening  previous 
to  his  removal,  in  passing  along  by  the  gutter,  he  saw  the 
Kobold  sitting  by  it,  and  asked  him  what  he  was  doing  ? 
"  Why,'^  answered  the  Kobold,  "  I  am  washing  out  my 
rags,  as  we  move  to-morrow. ^^  The  man  then  seeing  that 
he  must  still  keep  the  Kobold,  took  him  along  with  him. 


Of  the  Kobolds  it  is  related  that  they  take  their^abode 
in  the  unfrequented  parts  of  a  building,  or  in  wood-houses. 
Their  method  of  communicating  to  the  master  of  the 
house  their  wish  to  live  in  his  family,  and  to  serve  him,  is 
somewhat  remarkable.  At  night  they  bring  shavings  into 
the  house,  and  put  dung  of  every  kind  of  cattle  into  the 
vessels  filled  with  milk.  If,  on  seeing  all  this,  the  master 
of  the  house  neither  sweeps  away  the  shavings  nor  casts 
the  dung  out  of  the  milk-vessels,  but,  together  with  his 
family,  partakes  of  the  foul  milk,  then  will  the  Kobolds 
appear  to  him  and  abide  with  him.  The  grateful,  modest, 
well-fed  Kobolds  bring  to  those  that   feed  and  harbour 

'  See  vol.  ii.  p.  164. 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  85 

them,  corn,  which  they   steal  from  the  barns   of  then- 
neighbours  ^ 

JACK  0'  LANTERNS  WITH  LONG  LEGS. 
As  a  peasant  of  Hermsdorf  was  returning  home  one 
evening  late,  he  saw  a  Jack  o'  lantern,  and  being  of  a 
courageous  nature  went  up  to  it.  The  Jack  o^  lantern, 
without  much  deliberation,  took  to  his  heels  with  the 
peasant  close  after  him,  who  observed  that  he  had  most 
wonderfully  long  legs,  and  from  top  to  toe  consisted  of 
glowing  fire;  but  in  the  same  instant  he  vanished,  and 
the  man  could  hardly  find  his  path  again  in  the  thick 
darkness. 

JACK  0'  LANTERNS  DRIVEN  AWAY  BY  CURSING. 
In  the  neighbourhood  of  Storkow,  as  a  clergyman  with 
his  servant  was  driving  home  one  night  late,  they  saw,  on 
reaching  a  certain  spot,  a  Jack  o^  lantern  coming  towards 
them,  which  merrily  danced  along  before  the  horses. 
Sometimes  there  were  several  of  them,  and  at  last  there 
came  so  many,  that  the  horses  became  quite  shy  and  fear- 
ful, and  would  not  stir  from  the  spot.  The  clergyman 
also  felt  uneasy,  and  began  to  pray  aloud ;  but  the  more 
he  prayed  the  more  Jack  o^  lanterns  came,  so  that  the 
servant  at  length  said  :  "  Just  leave  that  off ;  so  they  will 
never  go ;  but  I  ^11  send  them  packing ;  ^^  at  the  same  time 
roaring  out :  ''  Will  ye  be  off  in  the  deviFs  name  !  "  In  a 
moment  not  a  Jack  o^  lantern  was  to  be  seen. 

V 

A  JACK  0'  LANTERN  CAUGHT. 

A  cowherd  near  Rathenow,  who  had  been  all  day  on 
the  heath  with  his  cattle,  on  his  return  home  at  dark  was 
not  aware  that  one  of  his  cows  was  missing.     On  dis- 

^  Dobeneck,  vol.  i.  pp.  125  sqq. 


86  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

covering  his  loss,  he  immediately  went  in  search  of  her ; 
but  after  seeking  her  here  and  there  and  all  over  the  forest, 
without  finding  her,  he  sat  down,  overcome  with  fatigue, 
on  the  stump  of  an  old  tree,  and  prepared  to  smoke  his 
pipe.  While  he  was  thus  sitting  there  came  all  at  once  a 
countless  multitude  of  Jack  o^  lanterns  dancing  wildly 
around  him,  so  that  he  would  have  been  not  a  little  terri- 
fied, had  he  not  been  a  courageous  fellow.  He  remained, 
however,  sitting  quietly  and  filling  his  pipe,  but  just  as  he 
was  about  to  light  it,  they  began  to  fly  about  his  head,  so 
that  he  expected  every  moment  they  would  singe  his  hair. 
He  therefore  seized  his  stick  and  began  to  strike  about 
him ;  but  the  more  he  struck  the  more  Jack  o'  lanterns 
came.  At  last  he  made  a  grasp  at  one  of  them,  and  found 
that  he  held  in  his  hand  a  bone.  This  seemed  to  have 
scared  the  others,  as  they  instantly  disappeared ;  but  the 
man  put  the  bone  into  his  pocket,  lighted  his  pipe,  and 
returned  home.  On  the  following  morning  he  again  drove 
out  his  herd,  and  also  found  the  missing  cow ;  but  on  his 
return  in  the  evening,  when  it  was  already  dark,  he  saw  a 
couple  of  lights  before  his  window,  and  supposing  that  a 
neighbour  with  a  lantern  was  come  to  consult  him  about 
a  sick  cow,  he  opened  the  window  and  saw  the  entire 
village  street  full  of  Jack  o'  lanterns,  which  came  in  large 
bodies  dancing  and  whirling  about,  and  crying  :  "  If  you 
don^t  give  us  our  comrade,  we  will  burn  your  house  ! '' 
He  now  first  recollected  the  bone,  and  said  :  "  Don^t  make 
such  a  stupid  hubbub ;  surely  the  bone  cannot  be  your 
comrade.^'  But  they  cried  yet  more  loudly  :  "  If  you 
don't  give  us  our  comrade,  we  will  burn  your  house  !  " 
Thinking  then  the  matter  serious,  he  took  the  bone,  laid  it 
on  the  palm  of  his  hand,  and  held  it  out  of  the  window, 
when  it  instantly  became  a  bright,  flickering  Jack  o'  lantern, 
and  danced  away,  all  the  others  surrounding  it  as  in  joy, 
and  then  merrily  hopping  and  springing  out  of  the  village. 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIOiNS.  87 

FRAU  HARKE. 

In  former  times  Frau  Harke  had  her  abode  on  one  of 
the  highest  of  the  Camern  hills,  which  after  her  bears  the 
name  of  the  Frau  Harkenberg,  from  whence  she  often 
descended,  through  the  Frau  Harkengrund  (also  named 
after  her),  to  the  lake  of  Schonfeld,  for  the  purpose  of 
fetching  water.  She  was  of  immense  stature  and  strength, 
and  once  took  a  ploughman,  who  was  ploughing  in  a  field 
near  the  mountain,  together  with  his  oxen  and  plough,  up 
in  her  apron,  to  play  with  them.  But  when  she  showed 
them  to  her  father,  he  ordered  her  to  carry  them  all  back 
to  the  place  where  she  found  them :  "  Because,^^  said  he, 
"  if  the  little  ones  below  yonder  do  not  plough,  the  big 
ones  up  here  cannot  bake." 

Once  when  carrying  an  apronful  of  earth,  her  apron- 
string  gave  way,  and  the  earth  fell  on  the  ground,  and 
that  is  now  the  Collenberg,  the  highest  mountain  in  the 
neighbourhood,  on  which  lay  the  huge  block  of  granite, 
which  she  hurled  at  the  church  of  Havelberg. 

When  the  old  oaks  disappeared  from  the  mountains,  Frau  Harke  mi- 
grated to  Thuringia.     She  is  known  also  in  Lower  Saxony. 

THE  NICKELMANN,  OR  NICK. 
Children  should  not  go  too  near  the  water,  because 
under  its  surface  the  black  Nickelmann  sits,  who  snaps  at 
them.  Above  he  is  formed  like  a  man,  but  below  like  a 
fish,  and  has  very  sharp  teeth.  His  usual  food  is  fishes, 
though  he  not  unfrequently  drags  down  human  beings. 
In  Thale  they  were  formerly  obliged  annually  to  throw  a 
black  cock  into  the  Bode ;  for  if  they  omitted  to  do  so, 
some  one  would  certainly  die  within  the  year.  The  little 
black  figures,  in  wooden  boxes,  which  spring  up  when  the 
box  is  opened,  are  in  Ilseburg  called  Nickelmannlein 
(Nickelmannikins) . 


88  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

As  the  midwife  in  AYesterhausen  was  sitting  one  eve- 
ning in  her  room,  some  one  tapped  at  her  window,  and 
requested  her  to  come  out.  She  went  out,  and  there 
stood  a  Nick,  who  desired  her  to  follow  him.  They  both 
proceeded  to  the  rivulet,  where  the  Nick  taking  a  rod, 
beat  on  the  water,  which  immediately  separated  into  two 
parts,  and  they  went  down  dry-footed.  Here  she  assisted 
the  Nickel- wife  in  her  hour  of  difficulty,  who  in  gratitude 
told  her,  that  if  the  Nick  should  ask  her  what  remunera- 
tion she  washed,  she  must  not  ask  for  money,  but  for 
some  of  the  sweepings.  She  then  went  and  took  the 
infant  to  the  bath,  and  heard  the  Nickelmann's  childi-en, 
five  of  w^hom  were  running  about,  ask  their  father  :  "  Shall 
we  break  her  neck^  ?"  but  their  father  forbade  them. 
When  the  midwife  had  finished,  the  Nick  asked  her  what 
remuneration  she  required,  when  she  requested,  as  the 
w4fe  had  enjoined  her,  a  little  of  the  sweepings  behind  the 
door.  "  God  has  counselled  thee  to  speak  thus,^'  said  the 
Nickelmann,  and  gave  her  what  she  asked.  He  then  con- 
ducted her  home.  When  in  her  own  house,  she  looked 
at  the  sweepings,  and  they  had  all  become  pure  gold^. 

THE  PRINCESS  ILSE. 
On  the  Hsenstein  there  lived  in  ancient  times  a  knight, 
who  had  a  daughter  of  surpassing  beauty  named  Hse. 
She  loved  the  knight  that  dwelt  in  the  castle  on  the 
Westerberg  opposite  to  them ;  but  at  that  time  the  two 
mountains  were  not  sejDarated  from  each  other  by  the 
present  intervening  valley.  The  father  of  tlie  princess 
Ilse  would  not  consent  to  her  union  w4th  the  knight,  and 
as  they  saw  each  other  daily,  in  spite  of  his  prohibition, 
lie,  who  was  a  mighty  giant,  struck  the  rock  through  the 
middle,  and  thereby  caused  the  valley.  In  her  despair 
Hse  cast  herself  down  into  the  raging  fiood  beneath,  and 
1  See  Grimm,  D.  M.  p.  463.  -  See  vol.  ii.  pp.  128,  130. 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  89 

gave  it  its  name,  and  from  that  time  she  often  appears  in 
a  long  white  robe,  with  a  broad  black  hat,  and  is  usually 
now  known  by  the  simple  appellation  of  '  the  Jungfer/ 
Formerly  she  was  to  be  seen  daily  descending  to  a  stone 
by  the  second  Use-bridge,  in  which  there  was  a  deep  hol- 
low containing  water,  even  in  the  driest  seasons,  in  which 
she  bathed.  But  the  stone  is  no  longer  there,  and  she 
appears  no  more  in  the  valley.  Her  last  appearance  is 
said  to  have  been  three  hundred  years  ago,  on  Ascension 
day,  in  commemoration  of  which  a  festival  was  long  held 
there  on  that  day,  to  which  people  from  all  the  neighbour- 
hood flocked  together,  when  a  great  fair  was  also  held. 
There  were  also  two  bands  of  music,  one  on  the  Ilsenstein, 
the  other  on  the  Westerberg,  in  which  the  enchanted 
prince  is  confined ;  but  the  festival  has  fallen  more  and 
more  into  desuetude,  and  there  is  now  only  a  little  music 
on  that  day  in  the  hostel  ycleped  *^The  Trouts^  (Zu  den 
Forellen).  But  the  general  belief  is,  that  the  princess 
will  mount  to  heaven  on  an  Ascension  day,  and  it  is  only 
a  few  years  since  that  the  peasants  awaited  the  event  from 
hour  to  hour.  In  Ilseburg  Ascension  day  is  held  so  sacred, 
that  it  is  thought  whoever  sews  or  mends  on  it  will  be 
struck  by  lightning. 


As  a  shepherd  was  once  driving  his  flock  over  the  Ilsen- 
stein, and  had  stopt  to  rest  for  a  while  by  a  spring,  leaning 
on  his  staff",  the  mountain  suddenly  opened — for  in  his 
staff",  though  without  his  knowledge,  there  was  a  Spring- 
wurzel, — and  the  princess  stood  before  him.  She  com- 
manded him  to  follow  her,  and  when  he  was  within,  said 
to  him  that  he  might  take  as  much  gold  as  he  desired. 
The  shepherd  crammed  his  pockets  full,  and  when  he  had 
taken  enough,  was  about  to  depart,  when  the  princess 
called  to  him  :  "Do  not  forget  the  best !"    But  he,  think- 


90  NORTH  GEllMAN  TRADITIONS. 

ing  she  meant  that  he  had  not  taken  gold  enough,  filled 
his  hat,  while  she  alluded  to  his  stafi"  with  the  Spring- 
wurzel,  which  on  entering  he  had  placed  against  the  wall. 
So  that  when  he  was  going  out,  the  rock  suddenly  closing, 
severed  him  in  two. 


A  horse-boy  lost  a  couple  of  his  horses,  and  while  he 
was  out  seeking  them,  and  was  sitting  on  the  Ilsenstein 
crying,  because  he  could  not  find  them,  the  mountain 
suddenly  opened,  and  before  him  stood  the  princess,  who 
asked  him  why  he  was  crying.  He  told  her  of  his  loss, 
and  she  ordered  him  to  follow  her.  They  then  entered 
the  mountain,  and  came  into  a  vast  stable,  containing 
many  horses,  among  others  his  own  two.  He  was  over- 
joyed at  seeing  them,  and  was  leading  them  out,  but  the 
princess  told  him  that  he  could  not  have  them  again, 
though  she  would  give  him  for  them  gold  enough  to  buy 
a  hundred  others.  Saying  this  she  filled  his  wallet,  at  the 
same  time  enjoining  him  not  to  open  it  before  he  had 
passed  over  the  third  Hse-bridge.  But  being  an  inquisi- 
tive fellow,  he  was  impatient  to  see  how  much  she  had 
given  him,  and  on  reaching  the  second  bridge,  could  no 
longer  withstand  the  temptation,   opened  the  knapsack 

and found  in  it  nothing  but  horsedung.     ^^AVhat," 

thought  he,  "canst  thou  do  with  that  ?"  at  the  same  time 
throwing  it  into  the  Use ;  but  hearing  it  go  kling  kling 
as  it  fell,  he  quickly  looked  into  his  knapsack,  to  see  if 
any  remained  behind,  and  found  some  genuine  pistoles. 

Goethe,  in  Faust,  makes  one  of  the  witches,  on  her  way  to  the  Blocks- 
berg,  pass  over  the  Ilsenstein : 

1st  W.  Welchen  Weg  kommst  du  her? 
2nd  W.  Uebern  Ilsenstein  ! 

Da  gnckt'  ich  dor  Eule  ins  Nest  hinein. 
Die  macht'  ein  Paar  Augen  ! 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  91 

Which  way  coraest  thou  hither  ? 

Over  the  Ilsenstein ! 
There  I  peep'd  into  the  owl's  nest. 
She  made  a  pair  of  eyes  ! 

"  Tlie  Springwurzel  is  a  plant,  that  may  be  procured  in  the  following 
manner :  The  nest  of  a  green  or  black  woodpecker,  when  it  has  young, 
must  be  stopt  with  a  wooden  plug.  The  bird  on  seeing  it  flies  away, 
knowing  w^here  to  find  a  wonderful  root,  which  men  would  seek  for  in 
vain.  This  the  bird  bears  in  its  bill,  and  holds  it  against  the  plug,  which, 
as  if  driven  by  the  most  violent  blow,  instantly  springs  out.  If  the  party 
has  concealed  himself,  and  at  the  bird's  approach  makes  a  great  noise,  it 
will  be  frightened  and  let  the  root  fall.  Some  spread  a  white  or  red  cloth 
under  the  nest,  on  which  the  bird  will  cast  the  root,  after  having  made 
use  of  it."     This  superstition  was  known  to  Pliny. — See  H.  N.  x.  18 ^ 


HANS  VON  HACKELNBERG. 

Hans  von  Hackelnberg  was  chief  huntsman  in  Bruns- 
wickj  and  loved  the  chase  above  all  other  worldly  things. 
He  rode  a  grey  horse,  the  wildest  animal  that  was  any- 
where to  be  found.  From  the  Harz  he  went  to  the  Hakel_, 
and  while  there  dreamt  that  he  would  come  to  his  death 
through  a  wild  boar.  On  the  following  day  there  was  to 
be  a  great  hunt,  when  he  related  his  dream  to  his  compa- 
nions, adding  scornfully,  that  it  would,  indeed,  be  some- 
thing strange,  if  he  were  to  perish  through  a  wild  boar. 
He  then  proceeded  to  the  hunt  and  found  a  boar  exactly 
resembling  the  one  he  had  seen  in  his  dream.  He  eagerly 
pursued  it,  and  at  length  slew  it,  and  shortly  after  re- 
turned home.  While  the  boar  was  being  cut  up,  Hack- 
elnberg held  the  head  aloft  to  contemplate  that  which 
was  to  occasion  his  death;  but  the  head  slipped  out  of 
his  hand,  and  one  of  the  tusks  wounded  him  so  severely 
in  the  leg  that  it  eventually  cost  him  his  life.  From  that 
time  he  hunts,  with  the  cry  of  "  hallo,"  and  followed  by 
his  associates,  up  and  down  the  Hakel. 

1  Grimm,  D.  U.  p.  925. 


92  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

According  to  another  version  of  the  story,  the  hunt  was  in  the  Ilarz, 
and  Hackehiberg,  yiehhng  to  the  persuasions  of  his  friends,  stayed  ai 
home.  On  receiving  the  wound,  Hackelnberg  is  made  to  say :  "  If  I  am 
to  die  from  such  a  scratch,  I  would  rather  hunt  for  ever."  But  the  wound 
became  worse  and  worse,  and  he  hastened  back  to  Brunswick,  but  came 
only  as  far  as  the  inn  called  the  KUpperkrug,  near  Wiilperode,  where  he 
laid  himself  down  and  died,  llis  steel  cap  and  the  iron  headpiece  of  his 
mule  are  still  to  be  seen  there.  In  the  garden  of  the  inn,  which  was 
formerly  a  churchyard,  Ues  his  gravestone,  having  on  it  the  representation 
of  a  knight  on  a  mule,  with  a  short  flowing  mantle  and  high  ruff,  holding 
a  riding-whip  in  his  hand ;  near  him  two  little  dogs  appear  in  the  act  of 
running.     On  the  edge  of  the  long-quadrangular  stone  is  an  inscription 

only  partially  legible,  viz. Domini  1581  den  13  Martii .   From  that 

time  Hackelnberg  hunts,  followed  by  a  number  of  little  dogs,  up  and  down 
the  Harz.  Some  say  he  is  seen  with  two  large  bloodhounds  galloping 
away ;  and  it  is  further  related  that  his  love  of  the  chase  was  so  great, 
that  he  prayed  that  his  portion  of  bliss  might  consist  in  being  permitted 
to  hunt  for  ever. 


A  man  once  mocked  Hackelnberg,  as  lie  heard  him  riding 
through  the  air  with  his  "  hoho  !"  and  was  pursued  by  him 
to  his  own  door,  which  he  entered,  and  went  ratthng  after 
him  even  into  the  hayloft,  to  which  he  had  fled  for  security. 
There  Hackelnberg  threw  a  horse's  leg  to  him.  On  the 
following  morning  the  man  died. 

Another  time  some  horse-boys,  watching  on  the  com- 
mon by  night,  called  after  him  as  he  came  rushing  by 
with  his  dogs ;  when  rending  a  horse  in  pieces,  he  took 
one  piece  for  himself,  threw  another  to  his  dogs,  and  also 
gave  a  part  to  each  of  the  horse-boys,  saying : 

Hast  du  helfen  jagen,  If  thou  hast  help'd  to  hunt, 

soUst  auch  helfen  knagen !       thou  shalt  also  holp  to  gnaw ! 

and  then  rode  away.     The  boys  who  ate  of  the  roast  con- 
tinued alive,  but  those  who  did  not  died  shortly  after. 

Some  others  lying  by  a  fire  in  the  field  one  night  as 
Hackelnberg  passed  by,  called  to  him  :  "  Half  a  horse  !" 
whereat  he  threw  a  horse's  leg  down  into  the  fire.     They 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  93 

then  called  to  him  to  bring  them  some  salt,  which  he  was 
unable  to  do,  and  the  horse/s  leg  vanished. 

At  Rocklum,  not  far  from  Wolfenbiittel,  there  are  several 
earth-mounds  on  an  eminence,  of  one  of  which  it  is  related, 
that  Hackelnberg  with  the  Wild  Hunt  once  passing  by, 
felt  a  grain  of  sand  in  his  shoe,  which  he  shook  out,  and 
thus  formed  the  hillock.  According  to  one  tradition, 
Hackelnberg  returns  every  seventh  year,  and  makes  his 
tour. 


The  following  are  the  Westphalian  traditions  of  Hack- 
elnberg^ : 

Hackelbarend  (as  he  is  called)  was  a  huntsman  who 
hunted  on  Sundays,  on  account  of  which  profanation  he 
was,  after  his  death,  banished  to  the  air,  where,  with  his 
dogs,  he  must  hunt  both  by  day  and  night  without  any  rest. 
According  to  some,  he  hunts  only  in  the  twelve  nights  of 
Christmas ;  according  to  others,  always  when  the  storm- 
wind  howls ;  for  which  reason  some  call  him  the  Joljdger 
(from  jolen,  to  howl,  or  Yuletide?).  On  one  of  his  pro- 
gresses, Hackelnberg  left  one  of  his  dogs  behind  in  a  barn 
at  Isenstadt  (bishopric  of  Minden).  There  the  animal  lay 
a  whole  year,  every  attempt  to  remove  him  proving  fruit- 
less ;  but  when,  in  the  following  year,  Hackelnberg  with 
his  Wild  Hunt  again  passed  by,  the  dog  suddenly  sprang 
up,  and  ran  barking  and  yelling  after  the  troop. 

Two  young  fellows  going  one  night  from  Bergkirchen, 
through  the  forest,  to  visit  their  sweethearts,  heard  in  the 
air  above  them  a  wild  noise  of  dogs  and  a  voice  at  inter- 
vals crying  "  hoto,  hoto  ! "  This  was  Hackelblock,  the 
wild  huntsman,  with  his  company.  One  of  the  young 
men  was  so  rash  as  to  call  out,  mocking  him,  "hoto, 
hoto  ! "  at  which  Hackelblock  approached,  and  with  his 

1  Grimm,  D.  M.  p.  873,  from  Wedcligens  Westfal.  Mag.,  Redckers 
Westfiil.  Sagen,  etc. 


94  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

whole  pack  rode  over  him.     Of  the  unfortunate  young 
man  not  a  trace  could  be  found. 

Hackelnbcrg  rides  in  rain  and  storm  through  the  Thu- 
ringian  forest,  but  in  preference  through  the  Hackel  (a 
forest  between  Halberstadt,  Groningen  and  Derenburg). 
On  his  deathbed  he  would  hear  nothing  about  heaven,  and 
to  the  priest's  exhortation  said,  that  our  Lord  God  might 
keep  his  heaven,  provided  only  that  he  might  continue  to 
hunt.  At  which  the  priest  exclaimed :  "  Then  hunt  until 
the  last  day  ! "  A  malediction  now  in  the  course  of  fuL 
iilment.  A  faint  barking  or  yelping  in  the  air  announces 
his  approach ;  a  screechowl  flies  before  him,  called  by  the 
people  the  tutosel.  Wanderers,  who  fall  in  his  way,  throw 
themselves  on  their  faces,  and  let  him  ride  over  them. 
Tutosel,  it  is  said,  was  a  nun,  who  after  her  death  associ- 
ated herself  with  Hackelnberg,  and  mingled  her  "  uhu  ! '' 
with  his  ^^huhu!" 

Hackelnberg  (according  to  another  tradition)  hunted  on 
Sundays,  and  compelled  all  the  peasants  dependent  on 
him  to  accompany  him.  One  day  there  came  two  horse- 
men galloping  up  beside  him,  who  commanded  him  to  go 
with  them.  One  of  them,  on  his  right,  was  fierce  and 
wild  of  aspect,  and  from  his  horse's  mouth  and  nostrils 
there  sprang  forth  fire ;  while  the  rider  on  his  left  was  of 
gentler  and  milder  mien ;  but  Hackelnberg  turned  to  the 
wild  one,  who  galloped  off"  with  him,  and  in  whose  com- 
pany he  must  hunt  until  the  last  day.  Others  say  that 
Hackelnberg  lived  in  Soiling,  not  far  from  Uslar ;  that  he 
led  a  pious  life,  but  was  so  devoted  to  the  chase,  that  on 
his  deathbed  he  prayed  to  God  that  he  would  allow  him, 
for  his  share  of  heaven,  to  hunt  in  Soiling  till  the  day  of 
judgement.  His  prayer  was  granted,  and  often  in  the 
forest  is  to  be  heard  at  night  the  baying  of  dogs  and  an 
appalling  blast  of  horns.  His  grave  is  in  Soiling ;  near 
him  lie  two  black  dogs. 


NORTH   GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  95 

The  inconsistent  diversity  of  place  evidently  shows  that  Hackelnberg  is 
a  mythic  being ;  a  name  occurring  in  so  many  parts  must  be  more  than 
historic.  The  Westphahan  form  of  the  name,  Hackelberend,  I  consider 
the  oldest  and  most  genuine.  Hakolberand  is  unquestionably  an  Old 
Saxon  denomination  of  Wodan,  vrhich  has  been  gradually  corrupted  into 
Hakkelberg,  Hakkenberg,  Hakkelblok,  etc.  The  Meklenburg  tradition  of 
"  Wod"  (see  p.  61)  places  this  connection  of  the  Wild  Huntsman  with 
Woden  beyond  a  doubts 

WITCHES  IN  GITTELDE. 

In  Gittelde  there  were  formerly  many  witches_,  and  the 
houses  which  they  inhabited  might  be  known  by  fire  often 
to  be  seen  over  the  chimneys ;  for  then  Urian  was  sitting 
above,  and  brought  them  whatever  they  required. 

There  was  once  a  witch  there,  who  had  a  serving-man 
named  Hans,  who  was  always  driving  in  great  loads  of 
wood,  but  yet  never  observed  that  any  was  ever  burnt,  and 
that,  nevertheless,  eatables  were  always  at  hand.  He  re- 
solved on  knowing  how  this  came  to  pass ;  so  while  the 
others  were  gone  to  church,  he  feigned  to  go  with  them, 
but  returned  and  entered  the  house  by  a  back-door,  and 
then  hid  himself  under  a  tub  in  the  kitchen.  He  had  not 
been  there  long,  when  one  came,  and  called :  "  Hei  kucket, 
hei  kucket."  "  They  are  all  at  church,"  said  the  mistress ; 
but  the  call  was  repeated :  ''  Hei  kucket,  hei  kucket, 
shall  I  WTing  his  neck  ?"  '^^Ah,  what  is  it  you  want?" 
said  the  woman,  "  I  tell  you  they  are  all  in  church."  The 
voice  now  asked  :  ''  What  will  you  eat  ?"  "  Baked  pears," 
answered  the  woman,  and  instantly  they  were  hissing  in 
the  dish  which  she  held  out.  She  next  requested  to  have 
dumplings,  then  sauerkraut,  both  of  which  were  imme- 
diately given  to  her.  Hans  was  a  witness  of  all  this,  but 
kept  quite  still,  and  at  length  stole  out.  When  they  were 
all  at  table  he  said :  ^'  I  am  so  unwell,  I  am  so  unwell," 
and  would  eat  nothing,  but  was  afterwards  forced  to  take 
something.  When  they  had  eaten,  the  woman  drew  him 
1  Grimm,  D.  M.  p.  875. 


96 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 


aside  and  asked  him  why  he  had  refused  to  eat,  when  he 
told  her  he  had  witnessed  all  that  had  passed,  and  would 
go  and  inform  against  her.  But  she  prayed  him  not  to 
do  so,  promised  to  give  him  a  good  sum  of  money,  and 
also  to  instruct  him  in  witchcraft.  Hans  accepted  the 
money,  and  yielded  to  her  persuasions.  The  woman  then 
ordered  him  to  go  and  buy  a  new  pot.  He  did  so,  and 
on  his  return  she  told  him  to  sit  on  it  and  say  :  ^'  I  believe 
in  this  pot,-*^  etc.  But  Hans,  placing  himself  upon  it,  said  : 
"  I  believe  in  God,^^  etc.  At  which  the  pot  burst  into 
shivers  and  a  large  frog  appeared  sitting  beneath  it.  Hans 
thereupon  went  instantly  and  informed  against  the  woman. 
An  immense  pile  was  then  raised,  whereon  to  burn  the 
old  witch,  who,  when  placed  upon  it,  cried  out  to  Hans : 
"  Thou  hast  eaten  mice  instead  of  baked  pears,  thou  hast 
eaten  spiders  instead  of  dumplings,  thou  hast  eaten  worms 
instead  of  sauerkraut !  ^^    The  flames  then  closed  upon  her. 

THE  MONK  OF  THE  MINES. 
In  the  mines  about  Clausthal  and  Andreasberg  a  spectre 
was  formerly  seen,  who  was  denominated  the  Bergmonch. 
He  was  clad  as  a  monk,  but  was  of  gigantic  stature,  and 
always  carried  in  his  hand  a  large  tallow  candle,  which 
never  went  out.  When  the  miners  entered  in  the  morn- 
ing, he  would  stand  at  the  aperture  with  his  light,  letting 
them  pass  under  it ;  in  the  shafts,  too,  they  often  met  him. 

The  Bergmonch  was  formerly  a  bergmaster  or  director,  who  took  such 
dehght  in  mining,  that,  when  at  the  point  of  death,  he  prayed  that,  in- 
stead of  happy  rest  in  heaven,  he  might  wander  about  till  the  last  day, 
over  hill  and  dale,  in  pits  and  shafts,  and  superintend  the  mining.  He 
a])pears  to  the  men  in  the  dress  of  a  bergmaster,  with  a  silver  mining 
lamp.  To  those  towards  whom  he  is  w^ell-disposed  he  renders  many  kind 
services,  and  appears  to  them  in  a  human  form  and  of  ordinary  stature ; 
while  to  others  he  appears  in  his  true  form.  His  eyes  sprout  forth  flames, 
and  are  like  coach-wheels;  his  legs  are  like  spiders'  webs'. 

'  Harrys,  ii.  No.  2. 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  97 

THE  DEMONS  OF  THE  MINE. 
As  a  miner  was  one  day  working  in  a  shaft,  there  came 
to  him  a  Uttle  man  clad  in  white,  with  a  Hght  in  his  hand, 
who  beckoned  to  him  to  follow  him.  He  did  so,  and  they 
came  into  a  spacious  hall,  where  a  number  of  persons  were 
sitting,  all  attired  like  the  little  man,  and  eating  and 
drinking.  A  cup  of  wine  was  also  handed  to  the  miner, 
to  whom,  when  he  had  been  hospitably  treated,  the  little 
man  gave  a  gold  pin,  telling  him,  that  if  any  one  should 
take  it  from  him,  he  had  only  to  let  him  know,  and  he 
would  wring  the  neck  of  him  who  had  taken  it,  and  get 
the  pin  for  him  again.  He  then  conducted  him  out  of 
the  mountain  and  vanished.  When  the  miner  returned 
home,  all  appeared  strange  to  him,  he  knew  no  one  that 
he  met,  and  no  one  knew  him;  he  then  went  to  the 
clergyman,  who  looked  through  the  church  book,  when  it 
proved  that  he  had  been  three  ages  of  man  down  in  the 
bowels  of  the  earth  with  the  spirits,  though  to  him  it 
seemed  but  a  few  hours.  But  the  chief  officer  of  the  mines, 
when  he  heard  the  man^s  narrative,  was  seized  with  a 
longing  after  the  gold  pin,  and  when  the  man  refused  to 
give  it  him,  had  it  taken  from  him  by  force.  The  miner 
then  returned  to  the  mine  and  made  his  complaint  to  the 
little  white  man,  who  went  immediately,  wrung  the  officer^s 
neck,  and  restored  to  the  man  his  pin,  by  which  he  be- 
came so  wealthy,  that  he  had  enough  for  his  whole  life. 

THE  NIGHT-RAVEN,  OR  ETERNAL  WAGONER. 

In  the  night  the  '  hor,  hor,^  or  ^  hrok,  hrok '  of  the 
night-raven  is  frequently  to  be  heard.  This  bird  is  much 
larger  than  the  common  raven,  and  almost  as  large  as  a 
full-grown  hen.  By  some  he  is  called  the  Eternal  Wagoner, 
who  also  say  that  he  wished,  for  his  share  of  heaven,  to 
drive  to  all  eternity ;  and  he  accordingly  drives  without 
cessation,  sitting  on  the  middle  horse  of  the  celestial  wain, 

F 


98  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

of  which  the  four  large  stars  behind  are  the  four  wheels, 
but  the  three  foremost  stars,  which  stand  in  a  crooked 
line,  the  three  horses ;  and  the  little  star  over  the  middle- 
most is  the  eternal  wagoner.  He  guides  the  horses,  and 
as  the  wagon  always  goes  in  a  circle,  they  do  not  stand  in 
a  right  line  with  one  another,  but  in  a  curve,  being  always 
on  the  turn.  Before  midnight  the  wagon  is  said  to  be 
going  out,  when  the  pole  inclines  upwards;  and  after 
midnight  it  goes  home,  and  then  the  pole  inclines  down- 
wards ^ 

FRAU  HULLE  (HOLDA,  HULDE). 
In  the  popular  traditions  of  Germany,  Holda  (Hulda, 
HoUe)  appears  as  a  superior  beiug,  favourably  disposed 
towards  mankind,  and  angry  only  when  she  perceives  any 
disorder  or  neglect  in  housewifery.  The  German  tradi- 
tions relative  to  Holda  are  current  chiefly  in  Hesse  and 
Thuringia.  She  is  believed  to  influence  the  atmospheric 
phenomena.  A'VTien  the  sun  shines,  Holda  is  said  to  be 
combing  her  hair ;  when  it  snows,  she  is  making  her  bed^. 
She  likes  to  dwell  in  lakes  and  fountains.  At  noon  she 
is  to  be  seen  as  a  beautiful,  fair  woman,  bathing  in  the 
stream  and  then  vanishing.  Mortals  arrive  at  her  dwell- 
ing through  a  fountain.  She  rides  in  a  chariot,  which 
she  once  caused  a  countryman  to  repair  for  her,  the  chips 
from  which,  when  collected,  proved  to  be  solid  gold.  Her 
annual  visit,  which  takes  place  during  the  twelve  days  of 
Christmas,  when  spirits  are  said  to  wander,  and  animals, 
such  as  the  wolf,  are  not  to  be  mentioned  by  name^,  brings 
fruitfulness  to  the  land.  Like  Woden,  Holda  also  tra- 
verses the  air,  and,  like  him,  belongs  to  the  Wild  Hunt. 
Hence  the  notion  that  the  witches  ride  in  company  with 
Holda.  According  to  the  popular  belief,  the  souls  of 
unbaptizcd  children    are   received   into  the  Wild  Hunt, 

1  See  p.  58.        2  Kinder  und  Ilausmarchen,  24.        ^  See  vol.  ii.  p.  83. 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  99 

and  fall  to  the  share  of  the  heathen  deities,  Woden  or 
Holda. 

To  this  idea  of  Holda  it  is,  no  doubt,  to  be  attributed, 
that,  instead  of  a  divine  form,  she  is  made  to  assume  that 
of  an  ugly,  long-nosed,  long-toothed  crone,  with  matted, 
shaggy  hair.  ^^  He  has  been  riding  with  Holle  '^  is  said 
of  a  person  whose  hair  is  uncombed  and  bristling. 

Holda  is  also  described  as  an  encourager  of  spinning. 
To  industrious  lasses  she  gives  spindles,  and  in  the  night 
spins  their  spool  full;  while  she  burns  or  dirties  the 
wheels  of  idle  spinners.  An  industrious,  good  girl,  whose 
spool  fell  into  her  fountain,  she  rewarded  with  a  shower 
of  gold.  When  she  goes  her  round  at  Christmas  all  the 
spinning-wheels  are  plentifully  furnished,  and  left  stand- 
ing for  her ;  but  by  Shrove-tide,  when  she  returns  home, 
all  must  be  spun  off:  at  which  season  the  spinning-wheels 
are  put  out  of  sight;  because  flax  spun  at  Shrove-tide 
turns  out  ill,  it  being  a  holy  time  of  rest.  If  she  finds 
everything  as  it  should  be,  she  gives  her  blessing :  ^'  So 
many  hairs  so  many  good  years  ;^^  in  the  opposite  case, 
her  malediction  :  "  So  many  hairs  so  many  bad  years." 

According  to  another  German  tradition,  no  flax  should 
remain  on  the  distaff  during  the  twelve  days  of  Christmas, 
lest  Frau  Holla  should  come.  This  is  akin  to  the  Danish 
superstition,  that,  from  Yule-day  to  New  year's  day,  no- 
thing that  runs  round  may  be  put  in  motion,  consequently 
neither  reel  nor  spindled 

Out  of  her  fountain  children  come,  and  women  who  go 
down  into  it  become  healthy  and  fruitful.  She  appro- 
priates to  herself  those  that  are  drowned. 

On  account  of  these  multifarious  attributes,  Holda  was 
generally  considered  a  divinity  of  much  importance.  Burc- 
hard,  bishop  of  Worms,  mentions  it  as  the  popular  belief 

1  See  vol.  ii.  p.  270,  No.  10. 

r2 


100  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

that  on  certain  nights  women  rode  with  her  on  all  kinds 
of  animals,  and  were  supposed  to  belong  to  her  train  ^ 


As  a  woman  was  once  going  up  the  Kyffhauser,  in 
Thurmgia,  for  the  purpose  of  gathering  brushwood,  she 
saw,  although  it  was  only  April,  an  old  woman  sitting  and 
collecting  cotton  capsules,  of  which  she  had  a  large  heap 
lyin"-  by  her.  But  it  being  usual  to  collect  these  only  in 
the  height  of  summer,  the  woman  was  surprised,  and 
asked  the  crone  what  she  intended  to  do  with  them,  as 
they  were  not  yet  fit  for  use.  The  old  woman  told  her 
she  mi"-ht  take  with  her  as  many  as  she  wished,  and  that 
she  would  soon  find  a  use  for  them ;  but  the  other  would 
not  believe  her.  She  then  gave  the  woman  a  whole  apron - 
ful,  and  also  put  some  into  her  basket.  The  woman  then 
went  to  gather  hazel-twigs,  but  on  opening  her  apron, 
found  she  had  pure  gold  pieces  in  it,  as  well  as  in  the 
basket.  Thereupon  she  ran  back  to  the  spot  where  the 
old  woman  had  been  sitting,  but  both  she  and  the  heap 
of  capsules  had  disappeared. 

As  a  man  was  going  over  a  mountain  late  in  the  eve- 
ning, he  saw  Frau  Hulle  sitting,  busily  occupied  in  strip- 
ping off  flax  capsules,  of  which  she  had  a  large  heap  lying 
before  her.  The  man  wished  her  a  good  evening ;  she 
thanked  him  courteously  and  said,  he  might  put  some  of 
the  capsules  into  his  pocket  and  take  them  home.  The 
man  thanked  her  for  her  good  will,  but  said  he  had  plenty 
already,  and  therefore  would  not  encumber  himself.  He 
had  proceeded  only  a  little  way  further,  when  something 
ni  his  shoe  began  to  give  him  pain,  and  on  examination, 
he  found  in  it  some  large  particles  of  gold.  These  were 
the  capsules,  a  few  of  which  had  fallen  into  his  shoe. 
1  Grimm,  D.  M.  p.  245.     Miiller,  Gesch.  der  Altd.  ReUg.  p.  122. 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  101 

TRADITIONS  OF  THE  KYFFHAUSER. 
In  the  Kyffhaiiser  tlie  emperor  Frederic  Barbarossa 
exists  in  a  state  of  enchantment.  There  he  sits,  with  all 
his  knights  and  squires,  at  a  large  table,  through  which  his 
beard  has  grown.  Beneath  the  mountain  all  is  splendid  and 
radiant  with  gold  and  precious  stones ;  and  although  it  is 
a  subterranean  cavern,  it  is  as  light  as  in  the  sunniest  day. 
There  are  the  most  magnificent  trees  and  shrubs,  and 
through  the  middle  of  this  paradise  there  flows  a  brook, 
from  which  if  a  handful  of  mud  be  taken,  it  will  instantly 
become  pure  gold.  Here  a  horseman  constantly  rides  up 
and  down ;  but  others  say  he  sits  on  a  cock,  and  is  very 
probably  the  evil  one  himself,  who  has  effected  all  this 
enchantment.  A  shepherd  one  St.  John's  day  entered  the 
mountain  when  it  was  standing  open,  and  beheld  all  its 
splendour  with  amazement.  The  horseman  before-men- 
tioned then  made  a  sign  to  him  to  take  some  of  the  horse- 
meal,  which  he  did,  and  which  proved  to  be  all  gold. 


Some  musicians  returning  from  a  wedding,  had  to  pass 
over  the  Kyffhauser,  when  one  among  them,  a  mad-brained 
fellow,  said :  "  Listen,  friends — as  we  have  played  so  much, 
we  will  play  up  something  to  the  old  emperor  Frederic.^' 
The  others  at  first  refused,  saying  they  were  tired,  but  he 
talked  them  over  so  humorously,  that  they  at  length  all 
struck  up.  When  they  ceased  a  young  damsel  stept  out 
from  the  Erfurt  gate,  who  brought  them  the  old  emperor's 
thanks,  and  gave  to  each,  as  a  remembrance,  a  horse's 
head.  All  stared  with  astonishment  as  the  young  damsel 
disappeared,  and  began  to  reproach  their  mad  companion 
for  having  stopt  them  for  the  sake  of  such  a  paltry  reward, 
and  threw  their  horses'  heads  far  away  from  them.  But 
their  companion  was  as  merry  as  ever,  and  kept  his  head, 
saying :  "  If  it 's  good  for  nothing  else,  it  will  serve  as  a 


102  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

joke  with  my  old  dame."  They  then  went  home,  and  the 
merry  one  clandestinely  laid  the  head  under  the  bolster. 
On  waking  in  the  morning  he  said  to  his  wife:  ''Just 
look  what  a  handsome  present  I  have  brought  you  from 
old  Redbeard.''  She  raised  the  bolster,  and  the  man 
thought,  now  she  will  be  finely  frightened,  but  to  his 
unutterable  astonishment  she  drew  forth  a  lump  of  gold, 
so  heavy  that  she  could  hardly  lift  it. 

Some  say  that  the  emperor  Otto  sits  in  the  Kyffhauser, 
and  that  a  musician  having  one  day  met  him  near  the 
mountain,  the  emperor  ordered  him  to  strike  up  a  march, 
and  gave  him,  when  he  had  played  it,  three  bones  as  a 
reward,  which  he  was  not  to  look  at  before  he  reached 
home,  and  then  he  found  them  turned  to  pure  gold. 


In  the  Kifhauser,  in  Thuringia,  sleeps  Frederic  Red- 
beard.  He  sits  at  a  round  stone  table,  supporting  his 
head  on  his  hand  and  nodding.  His  beard  grows  round 
the  table,  and  has  already  made  the  circuit  twice ;  when 
it  shall  have  grown  round  a  third  time,  the  king  will 
wake.  On  issuing  from  the  mountain  he  will  hang  his 
shield  on  a  withered  tree,  which  will  then  become  green, 
and  a  better  time  will  ensue.  Some  have,  however,  seen 
him  awake.  Of  a  shepherd,  who  had  played  him  a  pleasing 
tune,  he  inquired :  "  Do  the  ravens  still  fly  round  the 
mountain?"  and  on  the  shepherd  answering  in  the  affir- 
mative, he  said:  "Then  must  I  sleep  a  hundred  years 
longer."  This  shepherd  was  taken  into  the  king's  armouiy, 
and  was  presented  with  the  foot  of  a  hand-basin  of  pure 
gokU. 

'  Grimm,  D.  M.  p.  907.  Tlie  original  sleeper  both  here  and  in  the 
C)(lenl)crg  was,  no  rlouht,  Odin  (Wuotan),  as  appears  from  the  inquiry 
about  the  ravens,  which  could  hardly  he  ol)jects  of  interest  to  the  em- 
peror Frederic  Barbarossa.— lb.  Von-ede,  p.  xvi. 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  103 


THE  SMITH  OF  JUTERBOGK  ^ 


In  the  little  towD  of  Jiiterbogk  there  once  dwelt  a  smith, 
of  whom  both  young  and  old  relate  a  wonderful  story. 
This  smith  when  a  youth  had  a  very  strict  father  and 
faithfully  observed  God's  commandments.  He  had  tra- 
velled much  and  passed  through  many  adventures,  and 
was,  moreover,  skilful  and  active  in  his  art  beyond  all 
belief.  He  possessed  a  chalybeate  tincture  that  made  every 
harness  or  mail  coat  impenetrable  that  was  washed  with  it. 
He  had  been  with  the  army  of  the  emperor  Frederic  II., 
in  which  he  had  borne  the  office  of  imperial  armourer,  and 
had  made  the  campaign  of  Milan  and  Apulia.  There  he 
had  captured  the  standard  of  the  city;  and,  after  the 
death  of  the  emperor,  had  returned  home  with  a  consider- 
able treasure.  He  had  seen  good  days,  and  afterwards 
evil  ones,  and  was  more  than  a  hundred  years  old.  Once, 
w^hen  sitting  in  his  garden  under  an  old  pear-tree,  there 
came  a  little  grey  man  riding  on  an  ass,  who  had  pre- 
viously often  proved  himself  the  smith's  guardian  spirit. 
The  little  man  took  up  his  quarters  with  the  smith, 
and  had  his  ass  shod,  which  the  smith  wilHngly  did  with- 
out i:equiring  any  remuneration.  The  little  man  then 
said  to  Peter  (for  so  the  smith  was  named)  that  he  should 
wish  three  w^ishes,  but  in  so  doing  not  forget  the  best.  So 
— because  his  pears  had  often  been  stolen  by  thieves — he 
wished  that  whoever  climbed  up  into  his  pear-tree  might 
not  be  able  to  come  down  without  his  permission ;  and — 
because  thefts  had  often  been  perpetrated  in  his  apart- 
ment— he  wished  that  no  one  might  enter  it  without  his 
permission,  unless  it  were  through  the  keyhole.  At  each 
of  these  foolish  wishes,  the  little  man  reminded  him  not 
to  forget  the  best ;  whereupon  the  smith  uttered  his  third 

^  From  Bechstein's  Deutsches  Marchenbuch.    Leipzig,  1848,'p.  44,  and 
his  Kiffhausersagen. 


lOi  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

wish,  saying :  "  The  best  is  a  good  schnapps  (dram),  and 
therefore  I  will  wish  that  this  flask  may  never  be  empty." 
"  Thy  wishes  are  granted/'  said  the  old  man,  then  drew 
his  hand  over  some  bars  of  iron  that  were  lying  in  the 
smithy,  mounted  his  ass  and  rode  away.  The  iron  was 
found  changed  to  bright  silver.  The  smith,  who  had  been 
so  poor,  was  now  rich  again,  and  lived  on  and  on  in  con- 
siderable comfort ;  for  the  never-failing  cordial  drops  in 
the  flask  were,  unknown  to  the  smith,  an  elixir  of  life. 
At  length,  however.  Death,  who  seemed  to  have  forgotten 
him,  knocked  at  his  door.  The  smith,  according  to  all 
appearance,  was  perfectly  ready  to  go  with  him,  and 
begged  him  to  allow  him  a  little  refreshment,  and  to  have 
the  goodness  to  get  him  a  few  pears  from  the  tree,  which 
he  could  no  longer  climb  on  account  of  the  weakness  of 
age.  Death  then  mounted  the  tree,  but  no  sooner  was  he 
up  than  the  smith  cried  out :  "  There  stay  !  "  for  he  felt 
a  wish  to  live  a  little  longer.  Death  now  devoured  every 
pear  on  the  tree,  and  then  began  his  fasts,  until  from 
hunger  he  consumed  himself,  even  to  his  skin  and  hair, 
whence  it  is  that  he  is  now  such  a  horrible  dry  skeleton. 
In  the  world  no  more  beings  died,  neither  men  nor  beasts, 
whereby  no  slight  inconvenience  was  occasioned.  But  at 
length  the  smith  went  to  Death,  who  was  rattling  in  the 
tree,  and  agreed  with  him  for  a  further  respite.  He  then 
let  Death  loose.  Urged  by  all  the  furies.  Death  now  flew 
away  and  began  to  make  a  clearance  in  the  world.  Being 
unable  to  wreak  his  vengeance  on  the  smith,  he  set  the 
devil  upon  him,  that  he  might  fetch  him.  The  fiend  in- 
stantly commenced  his  journey,  but  the  cunning  smith 
smelt  the  brimstone  at  a  distance,  closed  his  door,  held 
with  his  workmen  a  leather  bag  to  the  keyhole,  and  as 
Master  Urian  passed  through — for  by  no  other  way  could 
he  enter  the  smithy— tied  up  the  mouth  of  the  bag,  laid 
it  on  the  anvil,  and  then  with  the  heaviest  hammers  began 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  105 

beating  so  unmercifully  on  the  poor  devil  that  he  lost  all 
sense  of  hearing  and  seeing,  was  become  quite  tender,  and 
swore  never  to  come  again. 

The  smith  now  lived  long  in  peace,  until,  when  all  his 
friends  and  acquaintance  were  dead,  he  became  weary  of 
living  on  earth.  He  therefore  set  out  on  his  journey  and 
proceeded  to  heaven,  where  he  humbly  knocked  at  the 
gate.  St.  Peter  looked  out,  in  whom  Peter  the  smith  re- 
cognised his  patron  and  guardian  spirit,  who  had  often 
visibly  rescued  him  from  danger  and  difficulty,  and  had 
lastly  granted  him  the  three  wishes.  But  now^  said  St. 
Peter  :  "  Take  thyself  hence ;  to  thee  is  heaven  closed  :  thou 
didst  forget  to  wish  for  the  best — for  eternal  happiness  !  ^' 
At  this  answer  Peter  turned  away  and  resolved  on  trying 
his  luck  in  the  opposite  realm,  and  returning  downwards, 
soon  found  himself  on  the  straight,  broad  and  well-fre- 
quented road.  But  when  the  devil  was  informed  that  the 
smith  of  Jiiterbogk  was  approaching,  he  slammed  the  door 
in  his  face,  and  placed  his  kingdom  in  a  state  of  defence. 
So  when  the  smith  of  Jiiterbogk  could  not  find  an  asylum 
either  in  heaven  or  hell,  and  had  no  inclination  to  return 
to  the  world,  he  went  down  into  the  Kiffhaiiser,  to  his 
old  master,  the  emperor  Frederic.  The  old  kaiser  was  de- 
lighted at  seeing  his  armourer  Peter,  and  immediately 
asked  him  whether  the  ravens  still  continued  to  fly  about 
the  tower  of  the  ruined  castle  of  Kiffhaiisen  ?  And  when 
Peter  answered  in  the  affirmative,  old  Redbeard  heaved  a 
sigh.  But  the  smith  remained  in  the  mountain,  and  shoes 
the  emperor^s  palfrey,  and  those  of  the  noble  damsels  of 
his  court,  until  the  hour  of  the  emperor^s  deliverance 
strikes,  which  will  also  be  that  of  his  own.  And  that  will 
happen — the  tradition  tells  us — when  the  ravens  no  longer 
fly  round  the  mountain,  and  on  the  lliithsfeld,  near  the 
Kiff'hauser,  an  old  withered  worn-out  pear-tree  again 
sends  out  shoots,  bears  foliage  and  blossoms.     Then  will 

F  5 


106  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

the  emperor  come  forth  with  all  his  armed  followers^  will 
fight  the  great  fight  of  deliverance,  and  hang  his  shield 
on  the  renovated  tree;  after  which  he  will  go  with  his 
companions  into  everlasting  rest. 

THE  WUNDERBLUME  (MIRACLE-FLOWER). 

In  the  old  castle  of  Questenberg  there  are  still  inesti- 
mable treasures,  and  many  a  one  has  thereby  become  rich. 
In  Sangerhausen  there  was  once  a  man,  who,  as  he  was 
passing  across  a  field  on  his  way  to  Questenberg,  saw  a 
beautiful  flower,  which  he  plucked,  and  proceeded  on  his 
way.  When  arrived  in  the  village,  he  thought  to  himself : 
"  So  often  as  I  have  been  in  Questenberg,  I  have  never  yet 
been  up  to  the  old  castle  :  I  ^11  go  now/^  He  did  so,  and 
when  he  reached  it  he  observed  a  large  iron  door,  on 
stepping  towards  which,  it  flew  open,  and  he  entered  into 
a  spacious  vault.  There  he  saw  gold  and  silver  lying  in 
vast  heaps,  of  which  he  first  crammed  his  pockets  full, 
and  when  they  would  hold  no  more,  filled  his  hat.  At  this 
moment  a  voice  was  heard,  saying  :  "  Forget  not  the  best !  ^' 
But  he  went  out,  and  as  he  w^as  passing  through  the  en- 
trance, the  door  slammed  to  and  crushed  his  heel,  so  that 
he  was  lame  ever  after.  He  had  left  the  Wunderblume 
in  the  vault  ^ 

Another,  who  had  also  found  the  Wunderblume  and 
likewise  the  iron  door,  fetched  every  day  a  silver  coin  of 
a  quadrangular  form,  which  he  took  to  Nordhausen,  and 
there  disposed  of  for  five  dollars.  But  he  soon  thought : 
Wliy  should  I  go  so  often  ?  and  then  took  two,  and  shortly 
after,  three  pieces,  till  at  length  he  came  with  a  wagon, 
but  found  no  more. 

In  another  account  it  is  said,  that  the  Wunderhlume  grows  in  the  Johan- 
nisthal  in  Clausthal.     Whoever  is  perfectly  innocent,  and  to  whom  it  is, 

'  See  p.  S9. 


NORTH   GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  107 

moreover,  granted  to  find  it  by  accident — for  those  that  seek  for  it  never 
find  it — acquires  the  faculty,  as  long  as  he  carries  it  about  him,  of  making 
himself  invisible,  and  of  understanding  the  speech  of  animals. 

A  story,  in  most  of  its  essential  parts  agreeing  with  the  above,  is  related 
of  King  Abel's  palace  in  Sleswig.  See  *  Die  gelbe  Blume  '  in  Miillenhoff, 
No.  468.     See  also  Grimm,  D.  M.  p.  923. 

THE  WERWOLF'S  GIRDLE. 
Formerly  there  were  persons  who,  by  putting  on  a 
certain  girdle,  could  change  themselves  into  werwolves.  A 
man  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Steina,  who  had  such  a 
girdle,  forgot  once,  when  he  was  going  out,  to  lock  it  up, 
as  it  was  his  custom  to  do.  In  his  absence  his  little  son 
chanced  to  find  it,  and  buckled  it  round  him,  and  was  in 
an  instant  turned  into  such  an  animal,  which  to  outward 
appearance  resembled  a  bundle  of  pea-straw,  and  went 
rolling  out  like  an  unwieldy  bear.  When  those  who  were 
in  the  room  perceived  this,  they  hurried  forth  and  fetched 
the  father,  who  came  just  in  time  to  unbuckle  the  belt, 
before  the  child  had  done  any  mischief.  The  boy  after- 
wards said,  that  when  he  had  put  on  the  girdle,  he  was 
seized  with  such  a  raging  hunger,  that  he  was  ready  to 
tear  in  pieces  and  devour  all  that  came  in  his  way. 

TRADITIONS  OF  DWARFS. 
Once  upon  a  time,  at  a  marriage  feast,  there  was  an 
abundance  of  all  sorts  of  viands,  but  no  sooner  were  they 
served  up  than  they  disappeared,  so  that  the  bride  and 
bridegroom  looked  on  each  other  in  amazement,  and  laid 
their  heads  together,  but  finally  resolved  to  go  on  serving 
the  guests  as  long  as  anything  remained  to  serve,  and  not 
let  them  depart  with  hungry  stomachs.  But  when  the 
company  came  to  offer  their  presents,  the  dwarfs — for  it 
was  they  who  had  helped  to  eat  the  dinner — took  off  their 
hats,  when  it  appeared  very  evidently  how  the  eatables 
had  vanished  with  such    rapidity  ;    for  the  whole   room 


108  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

swarmed  with  those  beings  ^  But  if  they  had  helped  to 
eat,  they  helped  also  in  besto\Ndng  presents,  eveiy  one 
placing  a  piece  of  gold  in  the  basket,  which  proved 
scarcely  large  enough  to  hold  them  all. 


A  farmer  had  a  beautiful  field  of  peas,  but  when  he 
came  to  gather  them,  the  pods  were  almost  all  empty,  and 
when  he  set  himself  to  watch,  he  heard  a  rustling,  but 
saw  no  one.  So  one  day  he  and  his  man  went  to  the  field 
together,  ha\dng  with  them  a  rope,  of  which  each  taking 
an  end,  they  ran  up  and  down  the  field,  and  thus  swept 
off  their  mist-caps  (nebelkappen)  from  the  heads  of  the 
dw^arfs.  Being  thus  captured,  they  had  to  pay  the  farmer 
dearly  for  his  peas,  before  they  could  get  their  caps  back ; 
but  no  sooner  had  they  got  them  than  they  were  off  with 
a  '  hui ! ' 


A  dwarf  came  one  day  to  a  farmer  and  requested  him 
to  cut  for  him  an  ear  of  barley  every  day,  telling  him  it 
should  not  be  to  his  detriment.  The  farmer  did  so,  going 
himself  daily  to  cut  the  ear ;  and  the  dwarf  came  as  re- 
gularly, took  the  ear  on  his  back,  and  went  away  panting 
under  his  burthen.  In  the  mean  while  the  farmer's  cattle 
became  larger  and  fatter  from  day  to  day,  though  he  gave 
them  hardly  any  fodder.  But  one  day  the  farmer  having 
no  time  to  spare,  sent  his  man  to  cut  the  ear,  who  seeing 
the  dwarf  go  panting  away  under  it,  laughed  at  him,  and 
said  that  it  was  but  an  ear  of  barley,  and  that  he  had  no 
occasion  to  pant  so.  This  the  dwarf  took  amiss,  and  never 
returned,  while  the  farmer's  cattle  visibly  grew  leaner  and 
leaner,  and  all  the  food  that  was  given  them  was  of  no 
avail ;  the  number  of  their  ribs  might  have  been  counted. 


See  vol.  ii,  p.  134. 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  109 

A  dwarf  came  one  day  to  a  girl  and  gave  her  a  distaff 
full  of  flax,  on  which  there  was  enough  for  her  whole  life, 
provided  she  never  spun  it  quite  off.  She  spun  from  one 
year  to  another,  and  yet  the  distaff  was  always  full,  and 
she  got  so  much  yarn  that  she  was  constantly  adding  one 
piece  of  fine  linen  to  another.  At  last  she  thought  she 
might  as  well  know  what  was  beneath  the  flax,  and  why 
she  might  never  spin  it  all  off;  and  so  she  spun  quicker 
and  quicker,  and  had  at  length  the  end  of  it  between  her 
fingers.  But  under  the  flax  there  was  nothing  on  the 
distaff,  and  the  everlasting  supply  was  irrecoverably  gone. 

TRADITIONS  OF  THE  HUBICHENSTEIN  K 


THE  DWARF  KING. 

In  days  of  yore  the  Giibich  was  in  the  habit  of  making 
his  appearance  in  the  neighbourhood  about  the  Hiibichen- 
stein,  near  Grund^ ;  for  deep  under  the  Hiibichenstein  the 
dwarfs  had  their  dwelling,  and  the  Giibich  was  their  king. 
He  had  shaggy  hair  like  a  bear,  and  a  very  ancient  visage. 
So  he  formerly  appeared  to  the  people.  On  those  to  whom 
he  was  well-disposed  he  bestowed  great  riches;  but  to 
those  who  offended  him,  or  otherwise  excited  his  wrath, 
he  caused  much  annoyance.  He  knew  all  the  salutary 
plants  in  the  Harz,  and  thereby  restored  many  a  one  to 
health ;  but  he  never  would  allow  any  one  to  ascend  the 
Hiibichenstein^. 

The  Giibich  was  of  short  stature,  but  could  stretch  him- 

1  This  and  the  following  traditions  are  from  Harry's  '  Sagen,  Marchen 
iind  Legenden  Niedersachsens.'    Celle,  1840. 

-  A  small  town  at  the  western  extremity  of  the  Harz,  remarkal)le  for 
its  vast  suhterranean  works  for  the  draining  of  the  mines. 

3  Those  that  went  up  were  unable  to  descend ;  for  having  reached  the 
summit,  they  were  unable  to  move  a  foot,  and  on  the  following  morning 
were  found  dashed  to  pieces  beneath. 


1  10  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

self  out  to  a  considerable  length.  Formerly  he  might  ap- 
pear in  the  upper  world  once  in  every  hundred  years ;  but 
now  he  may  no  longer  do  so. 

Some  say  the  Hiibichenstein  floated  to  its  present  site  at  the  time  of  the 
Deluge ;  others  that  a  giant  found  it  in  his  shoe  and  shook  it  out  there. 

II. 
THE  ASCENT  OF  THE  HUBICHENSTEIN. 

In  the  forest-house  at  Grund  there  dwelt  in  former  times 
a  forester,  who  lost  his  wife  at  a  very  early  period,  and  had 
only  one  son.  The  youth  was  said  to  be  both  good  and 
clever,  only  somewhat  too  inquisitive,  as  youths  now-a- 
days  are  wont  to  be.  This  lad  one  day  went  out  with 
some  of  his  companions  to  take  a  walk  in  the  wood,  and 
on  reaching  the  Hiibichenstein  their  discourse  turned  upon 
its  height,  when  one  of  them  said,  that  could  easily  be 
ascertained  by  any  one  who  would  ascend  it.  Whereupon 
the  forester^s  son  remarked,  that  to  ascend  it  was  a  trifling 
matter,  and  he  would  undertake  the  adventure,  although 
the  others  strongly  endeavoured  to  dissuade  him;  for 
whenever  any  one  has  ascended  it,  he  has  not  been  able 
to  come  down  again,  and  on  the  following  morning  has 
been  found  lying  at  the  foot  dashed  to  atoms.  To  this 
story  the  forester's  son  gave  no  credit,  but,  laughing,  said 
that  he  would  be  the  first  to  do  the  deed,  and  would  not 
allow  himself  to  be  held  back.  His  task  must  have  been 
hard  enough,  for  what  is  now  called  the  Little  Hiibichen- 
stein  was  formerly  much  higher  than  that  which  is  now 
called  the  Great  Hiibichenstein,  and  was  therefore  then 
named  the  Great  Hiibichenstein. 

When  standing  on  the  summit  he  laughed  at  and  jeered 
his  friends,  saying  they  appeared  as  diminutive  as  dwarfs. 
When  he  had  stood  thus  for  some  time  the  wind  began  to 
blow  and  he  thought  it  advisable  to  descend,  but  could 
not,  being  unable  to  move  a  foot ;  while  those  below  were 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  Ill 

unable  to  afford  him  the  slightest  aid.  At  length  he 
besought  his  friends  to  grant  him  a  last  favour  and  shoot 
him  down,  that  he  might  not  fall  alive.  But  this  no  one 
would  do.  Intelligence  of  the  incident  had  now  reached 
his  father^  who  going  to  the  spot  saw  with  his  own  eyes 
his  son  standing  on  the  Great  Hiibichenstein  and  without 
the  means  of  helping  him.  He  wept,  tore  his  hair,  and 
was  almost  frantic  with  grief,  but  all  this  availed  nothing. 
When  evening  came  on  the  sky  was  cloudy,  the  wdnd  began 
to  rage,  and  the  rain  fell  in  such  torrents  that  no  one 
could  stand  against  it,  and  the  people  bore  the  old  forester 
back  to  his  house  by  force.  A¥hen  again  at  home  he 
thought :  ^'  Thou  wilt  only  do  a  benefit  to  thy  child,  and 
the  merciful  God  will  forgive  thee."  He  then  took  his 
best  rifle  and  again  went  forth  to  the  Hiibichenstein. 
Allien  he  was  out  of  Grund  the  rain  suddenly  ceased,  while 
over  Grund  it  fell  in  torrents,  all  around  being  clear  and 
the  moon  bright.  On  his  way  to  the  Hiibichenstein  he 
began  to  weep  and  to  pray,  and  was  quite  overcome  by 
anguish  of  heart  and  sorrow ;  when  on  a  sudden  a  little 
man  appeared  close  by  him  with  a  snow-white  beard  and 
leaning  on  a  fir-branch.  "  Good  luck  to  you,"  said  the 
little  man,  and  at  the  same  time  asked  him  why  he  was 
going  so  late  into  the  wood.  The  forester  felt  somewhat 
terrified,  but  had  no  inclination  to  say  whither  he  was 
going  or  for  what  purpose.  The  little  man  then  asked 
him  why  he  sighed  so  repeatedly,  and  what  afflicted  him 
so  that  the  tears  were  constantly  running  down  his  cheeks ; 
adding  that  he  should  impart  the  cause  of  his  sorrow,  and 
that  all  might  yet  be  w^ell.  The  forester  was  now  more 
communicative,  and  informed  him,  if  perchance  he  did  not 
know  it  already,  that  he  was  the  man  whose  son  was 
standing  fixed  on  the  Hiibichenstein ;  that  the  devil  had 
tempted  him  to  make  the  ascent ;  that  the  young  man  had 
implored  every  one  for  God^s  sake  to  shoot  him  down ;  but 


112  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

that  no  one  had  been  so  compassionate ;  so  that  the  task 
devolved  on  him ;  for  he  trusted  that  God  would  not  re- 
gard it  as  a  sin.  For  how  could  he  wait  until  his  own 
child  should  fall  down  alive  and  perish  so  miserably  ?  He 
then  began  again  to  lament,  and  said  that  he  had  not 
merited  such  a  calamity  on  his  son,  whom  he  had  reared 
up  with  all  care,  kept  him  strictly  to  church  and  to  school ; 
that  he  was,  moreover,  so  pious,  and  would  not  have  vexed 
a  child  or  trodden  on  a  worm.  He  would  rather  have 
died  with  his  beloved  wife  than  lived  to  experience  such 
an  affliction,  and  be  thus  forsaken  and  have  no  child  to 
close  his  eyes.  This  lament  went  to  the  old  man's  heart ; 
but  while  the  forester  was  yet  speaking  the  little  man 
suddenly  vanished.  The  father  now  looked  up  to  the  peak 
of  the  Hiibichenstein,  placed  himself  at  its  foot  and  levelled 
his  piece  at  his  son,  who  called  to  him,  beseeching  him 
only  to  fire,  and  saying  he  feared  not  to  leave  the  world 
at  that  moment.  The  forester  was  about  to  fire,  when 
in  one  instant  thousands  of  little  men  came  springing 
forth  from  all  the  hedges  and  bushes.  They  hurried  to- 
wards him,  pelted  him  with  fir-cones,  made  all  sorts  of 
faces  at  him,  and  beat  him  about  the  legs  with  thorns  and 
briars.  The  more  he  strove  to  defend  himself  the  worse 
it  w^as,  and  they  were  so  nimble  that  he  could  not  catch  a 
single  one.  In  the  midst  of  them  stood  the  little  man 
with  the  snow-white  beard,  egging  the  others  on.  At 
length  the  forester,  seeing  that  he  could  do  nothing,  re- 
turned to  his  dwelling. 

No  sooner  was  he  gone  than  all  was  uproar  on  the  Hii- 
bichenstein, little  men  without  number  coming  from  all 
directions  up  the  rock,  all  on  iron  ladders,  that  reached 
from  the  foot  to  the  summit,  and  every  one  holding  a 
brazen  mining  lamp  in  his  hand;  of  these  some  were 
young,  others  old  and  with  shaggy  heads  like  a  bear.  The 
first  that   ascended  was  an  old  man  with  a  snow-white 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  113 

beard  which  reached  to  his  breast^  and  holding  a  silver 
mining  lamp  that  shone  like  the  bright  sun ;  on  his  head 
was  a  golden  crown.  He  commanded  the  others  and  was 
their  king. — This  was  the  Giibich. 

When  on  the  summit,  he  said  to  the  forester^s  son  : 
''  Who  has  ordered  thee  to  ascend  my  stone  ?  In  strict- 
ness I  ought  to  have  thee  thrown  to  the  bottom,  and 
never  shall  another  so  escape ;  but  I  have  compassion  on 
thy  father,  because  he  is  a  most  worthy  man/^ 

The  Giibich  thereupon  released  him,  and  desired  him 
to  descend  on  one  of  the  ladders ;  but  his  knees  seemed 
almost  broken.  The  Giibich  then  called  one  of  his  little 
men  to  him,  who  placing  the  youth  on  his  shoulders,  car- 
ried him  down  with  the  utmost  ease.  When  they  were 
descended,  and  the  dwarf  had  set  down  his  burthen,  the 
Giibich,  taking  the  young  man^s  hand,  conducted  him  into 
his  palace  under  the  Hiibichenstein.  They  entered  an 
apartment,  the  walls  of  which  glittered  with  galena  ^ ;  the 
roof  consisted  of  a  single  piece  of  heavy  spar,  as  white  as 
snow,  from  which  there  hung  a  great  crown  light,  com- 
posed wholly  of  crystal  and  precious  stones  of  great  mag- 
nitude ;  the  floor  was  strewed  with  green  fir-branches,  and 
the  pannels  were  resplendent  with  gold  and  gems.  In  the 
middle  of  the  apartment  stood  a  table  of  brown  hsematite  ^, 
before  which  was  a  silver  chair,  sitting  down  on  which  the 
dwarf  king  desired  the  forester^s  son  also  to  seat  himself. 
With  a  silver  hammer  he  then  struck  on  the  table,  which 
gave  forth  so  sweet  a  sound  that  the  like  was  never  heard 
on  earth.  In  an  instant  a  thousand  little  females  entered, 
bearing  in  strawberries  and  raspberries,  of  which  the  Gii- 
bich invited  the  forester^s  son  to  partake.  They  then 
conversed  together,  while  the  little  men  and  women  per- 

*  Sulphuret  of  lead. 

2  Fibrous  brown  iron  ore,  '  brauner  Glaskopf.' 


114  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

formed  some  music.  When  the  repast  was  over,  the  Giibich 
again  struck  the  table  with  the  silver  hammer,  and  before 
the  sweet  tones  had  died  away,  the  little  women  brought 
in  vessels  of  solid  silver;  and  the  Giibich  invited  the  young 
man  to  drink.  He  did  so,  but  anything  so  excellent  he 
had  never  before  drunk. 

When  the  forester's  son  was  thus  refreshed,  the  Giibich 
conducted  him  into  another  apartment,  in  which  stood  a 
large  brewing  copper  full  of  guilders,  as  bright  as  if  just 
issued  from  the  mint. 

The  Giibich  informed  him  that  that  was  his  treasure, 
which  his  subjects  had  to  provide  for  him ;  that  from  it 
he  had  assisted  many  a  poor  person,  and  was  not  the 
enemy  of  man ;  but  that  people  must  leave  him  in  peace. 
'^  If  now  thou  wilt  render  me  a  service,^'  added  he,  "  thou 
shalt  not  repent  it.  Know  that  so  long  as  the  Great 
Hiibichenstein  continues  to  be  the  Great,  I  have  authority 
on  it,  and  may  go  about  on  the  earth ;  but  when  the  Great 
Hiibichenstein  becomes  the  Little,  it  will  cost  me  my 
crown,  and  then  I  may  rule  only  under  the  earth.  Now 
the  people  are  always  shooting  at  hawks  and  buzzards  up 
on  the  Hiibichenstein,  and  that  I  cannot  suffer;  for  if 
they  strike  the  stone,  a  part  crumbles  off.  If  therefore 
thou  wilt  take  care  that  no  one  injures  the  stone,  thou 
shalt  become  a  rich  man,  and  mayest  take  from  the  brew- 
ing copper  as  much  as  thou  wilt."  The  forester's  son 
promised  accordingly,  and  gave  him  his  hand ;  then  taking 
from  the  copper  as  much  as  he  would,  filled  his  pockets 
and  his  cap.  Tlie  Giibich  then  conducted  him  into  an- 
other apartment,  in  which  there  was  a  bed  of  moss  pre- 
pared with  the  greatest  care.  The  Giibich  told  him  that 
he  would  wake  him  early  in  the  morning,  and  wished  him 
good  night.  He  had  not  slept  long  when  he  awoke,  and, 
on  opening  his  eyes,  saw  that  the  morning  was  already 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  115 

grey.  On  looking  about  him,  he  found  he  was  lying 
at  the  foot  of  the  Hiibichenstein,  with  his  cap  full  of 
guilders  by  his  side,  and  his  pockets  also  full  of  guilders. 

His  adventure  he  related  to  the  authorities,  and  be- 
stowed a  portion  of  his  riches  on  the  poor,  and  built  a 
church  in  Grund,  where  there  had  not  previously  been  one. 
And  the  authorities  made  a  law  that  no  one  should  ascend 
the  Hiibichenstein,  and  no  one  there  shoot  at  hawks  or 
buzzards  or  ravens.  And  as  long  as  the  Great  Hiibichen- 
stein  continued  unimpaired  the  Giibich  resided  there,  and 
did  much  good  and  punished  evil,  and  was  seen  by  many. 

But  in  the  Thirty  years^  war,  the  imperialists,  through 
wantonness,  battered  down  the  peak  of  the  Great  Hiibi- 
chenstein with  their  artillery,  from  which  time  no  one  has 
ever  seen  the  Giibich. 

III. 

THE  SILVER  FIR-CONE. 

Very  very  long  ago  there  dwelt  in  Grund  a  miner,  who 
in  the  cupboard  of  his  room  had  a  fir-cone  of  pure  silver, 
as  natural  as  if  it  had  grown  on  a  tree.  Now  any  one  may 
well  ask  how  a  miner  could  get  such  a  treasure  ?  His 
story,  as  he  has  told  it  to  many,  was  as  follows  :  — 

His  great-grandfather,  who  was  also  a  miner,  was  once 
sick  for  many  weeks  together,  and  it  was  a  time  of  dearth, 
and  the  miners  in  those  days  had  no  allowance  during 
sickness  as  at  present ;  that  custom  having  been  intro- 
duced at  a  later  period.  He  had  seven  childi-en  living, 
so  that  it  may  easily  be  imagined  there  was  no  super- 
abundance of  bread  for  them,  or,  indeed,  of  anything  else. 
The  miner  and  his  wife  were  now  quite  disheartened.  The 
wife,  as  she  was  one  day  standing  before  the  door,  thinking 
on  what  was  to  be  done,  resolved  on  going  to  the  forest  and 
gathering  a  basketful  of  fir-cones,  in  the  hope  of  selling 
them,  as  they  would  at  all  events  fetch  something.     She 


116  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

set  out  accordingly,  and  when  on  her  way  to  the  forest, 
thinking  of  her  sad  fate,  tears  came  into  her  eyes,  and  she 
sat  down  and  wept,  holding  her  hands  before  her  face. 
Having  thus  sitten  a  while,  on  looking  up  she  saw  stand- 
ing before  her  a  little  old  man  with  a  snow-white  beard 
and  clad  in  a  singular  garb,  who  had  apparently  been  long 
gazing  on  her.  He  inquired  the  cause  of  her  sorrow  ;  she 
answered  that  he  could  not  help  her.  But  the  little  man, 
in  a  friendly  tone,  said,  people  were  wont  not  to  give 
credit  to  others  for  what  they  can  do,  and  that  she  might 
confidently  tell  him  the  cause  of  her  grief.  Being  thus 
encouraged,  she  related  to  him  how  her  husband  had  been 
long  sick,  that  they  had  seven  children,  and  not  a  morsel 
of  bread  in  the  house,  that  they  had  pledged  or  sold 
everything,  and  that  the  owner  would  no  longer  suffer 
them  to  remain  in  the  house ;  that  she  was  then  come  out 
for  the  purpose  of  gathering  a  load  of  fir-cones,  to  enable 
them  to  buy  some  bread.  The  little  man  then  strove  to 
console  her,  bidding  her  be  of  good  cheer,  and  saying  that 
all  would  yet  go  well,  and  that  if  she  wished  for  good  fir- 
cones, she  had  only  to  go  to  the  Hiibichenstein,  and  not 
be  afraid.  He  then  bade  her  good  morning  and  went  into 
the  thicket. 

But  the  woman  went  to  the  Hiibichenstein,  where, 
having  placed  her  basket  on  the  ground,  she  began  look- 
ing for  fir-cones.  No  sooner  had  she  begun  her  search 
than  fir-cones  fell  about  her  on  every  side,  and  in  such 
abundance  that  she  at  first  thought  that  boys  had  con- 
cealed themselves  in  the  Hiibichenstein  and  were  making 
sport  with  her,  at  the  instigation  of  the  little  man.  She 
therefore  snatched  up  her  basket  and  hurried  away,  not 
feeling  desirous  of  having  her  eyes  beaten  out  of  her  head. 
Though  her  fear  was  quite  groundless ;  for  all  the  cones 
had  fallen  into  the  basket ;  but  persons  in  such  affliction 
are  heedless  of  what  passes  around  them ;  so  she  left  the 


NORTH   GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  117 

Hiibichenstein  and  went  to  another  spot,  where  she  filled 
her  basket,  though  she  had  no  need  to  gather  many  more. 
On  her  way  home,  the  basket,  at  every  instant,  grew  heavier 
and  heavier,  so  that  she  was  obliged  to  rest  many  times 
before  she  reached  her  dwelling.  Though  this  seemed  to 
her  very  extraordinary,  she  entertained  no  suspicions,  and, 
on  reaching  her  home,  went  to  empty  her  basket  in  the 
shed,  with  the  intention  of  returning  to  the  forest  for  more 
cones.  But,  to  her  unutterable  astonishment,  cones  of  pure 
silver  fell  from  her  basket.  She  resolved  at  once  not  to 
keep  them,  thinking  they  came  there  by  no  righteous 
means;  "and  who  knows,^^  thought  she,  "whether  the 
little  fellow  is  not  Satan  himself?^''  She  then  related  to 
her  husband  all  that  had  taken  place,  describing  the  little 
man,  and  asked  him  whether  it  could  all  be  by  fair  means, 
and  whether  she  might  keep  the  cones  ?  Her  husband 
answered  that  she  might  keep  them  all,  and  that  the  little 
man  was  no  doubt  the  Giibich,  who  had  helped  many  a 
poor  person. 

On  the  following  morning  he  would  allow  her  no  rest ; 
she  must  go  again  to  the  forest ;  perhaps  she  might  again 
meet  with  the  Giibich,  and  have  an  opportunity  of  thanking 
him.  And  so  it  happened,  for  no  sooner  had  she  reached  the 
spot  than  she  saw  the  little  man  with  the  snow-white  beard, 
who  asked  her  whether  on  the  preceding  day  she  had  not 
found  beautiful  fir-cones  ?  When  she  began  to  thank  him, 
and  to  tell  him  how  she  was  now  free  from  all  her  difficul- 
ties, the  Giibich  laughed  and  gave  her  a  bunch  of  plants, 
of  which  she  should  make  her  husband  a  drink,  by  the 
virtue  of  which  he  would  soon  be  well  again.  He  then 
went  again  into  the  thicket.  But  the  woman  returned 
home,  prepared  the  drink,  and  from  that  hour  her  husband 
became  well,  and  they  lived  long  and  happy  together.  The 
silver  they  took  to  the  mint  and  became  immensely  rich, 


118  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

and  did  much  good  to  many  poor  people.  One  of  the 
cones  they  preserved  as  a  remembrance,  and  that  is  the 
one  which  the  miner  had  standing  in  his  cupboard. 

THE  BELL-POND. 

In  the  village  of  Moringen,  near  Gottingen,  there  is  a 
garden,  in  which  is  a  pond  called  the  Opferteich.  In 
ancient  times  public  meetings  were  held  in  its  vicinity, 
under  a  large  oak,  from  the  sacrifices  at  which  the  pond 
is  said  to  have  derived  its  name  of  the  Opferteich,  or  sa- 
crificial pond.  It  is  very  deep,  has  no  visible  afflux,  but 
plentiful  subterranean  springs. 

It  is  related  that  every  year  at  Christmas,  from  the  hour 
of  twelve  till  one,  a  bell  is  heard  tolling  from  its  depth. 

The  knights  of  the  Temple,  who  formerly  had  a  house 
there,  once  had  a  new  bell  cast  and  hung  in  the  church 
tower  still  in  existence ;  but  they  forgot,  before  using  it, 
to  have  it  consecrated  to  divine  service,  and  baptized  ac- 
cording to  ancient  custom.  It  was  their  intention  to  use 
the  bell,  for  the  first  time,  for  mass  on  Christmas  eve ; 
but  hardly  had  it  struck  the  first  stroke,  when  it  was  torn 
away  by  a  miraculous  power,  and  projected,  through  the 
sound-hole  of  the  tower,  into  the  Opferteich.  There  it 
lies  to  this  day ;  but  every  Christmas  eve  it  rises  to  the 
surface,  tolls,  and  sinks  again.  No  fish  can  live  in  that 
water. 

THE  BELL  AT  COENHAUSEN. 

In  the  church  of  Cocnhausen,  in  the  county  of  Dassel, 
there  is  a  bell,  on  which  is  the  following  inscription  :  "  I 
call  the  living,  bewail  the  dead,  and  drive  away  tliunder.^^ 
The  people  of  the  place  have,  from  time  immemorial,  placed 
great  confidence  in  this  bell,  and  believe  that  in  a  storm, 
as  soon  as  the  bell  sounds,  the  thunder  must  cease. 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  1  19 

THE  CHILDREN  OF  HAMELN. 

In  the  year  1284  the  town  of  Hameln  was  mtolerably 
infested  with  rats.  One  day  there  came  a  man  to  the 
town^  most  singularly  clad^  and  no  one  knew  from  whence, 
who  gave  himself  out  for  a  rat-catcher,  and  offered,  for  a 
certain  sum  of  money,  to  rid  them  of  those  noxious  animals. 
The  townsmen  agreed  to  his  proposal,  and  promised  him 
the  remuneration  required.  Thereupon  the  man  drew 
forth  a  pipe,  and  piped,  and  in  an  instant  the  rats  came 
hurrying  forth  from  every  house,  cellar  and  corner,  and 
in  such  numbers  that  the  streets  were  over  and  over 
covered  with  them.  The  man  then  proceeded  to  the  gate 
leading  to  Lachem  and  Aerzen,  and,  on  reaching  the 
Weser,  tucked  up  his  dress  and  walked  into  the  river; 
and  the  rats,  following  his  example,  plunged  into  the 
water  and  were  drowned.  But  no  sooner  were  the  towns- 
men relieved  from  their  torment,  than  they  repented  of 
their  promise,  and  on  the  plea  that  the  man  was  a  sorcerer, 
refused  to  pay  him  the  stipulated  remuneration.  At  this 
he  was  furious,  and  vowed  vengeance. 

On  the  26th  June,  the  day  of  St.  John  and  St.  Paul, 
when  almost  every  Christian  soul  was  in  church,  the 
sorcerer  again  entered  the  town,  but  this  time  in  a  dif- 
ferent guise.  He  was  clad  as  a  huntsman,  with  a  fire- 
red  hat,  and  had  a  most  terrific  countenance.  He  struck 
up  a  tune,  at  which  all  the  children  were  so  fascinated, 
that  they  must  needs  follow  him  at  every  step.  Slowly 
he  marched  up  the  narrow  street  leading  to  the  east  gate, 
with  the  children  in  great  number  after  him ;  then,  passing 
through  the  gate,  proceeded  to  a  mountain  called  the 
Koppelberg,  in  which  they  all  disappearedo 

This  was  witnessed  by  a  nursery-maid,  who  related  that 
the  mountain  opened,  and  as  soon  as  the  man  with  the 
children  (to  the  number  of  a  hundred   and  thirty)  had 


120  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

entered,  closed  again.  Two  little  boys,  it  is  said,  re- 
mained behind,  one  of  whom  was  blind,  and  could,  there- 
fore, only  recount  what  he  had  heard,  and  the  other  dumb, 
who  could  only  point  out  the  spot  where  the  calamity 
had  taken  place.  Fathers  and  mothers  now  rushed  out 
at  the  east  gate,  but  when  they  came  to  the  mountain, 
nothing  was  there  observable  but  a  small  hollow,  where 
the  sorcerer  had  entered. 

The  street  through  which  the  sorcerer  led  the  children 
is  called  the  Bungenstrasse,  because  no  music,  no  drum 
(Bunge)  may  be  played  in  it.  If  a  bridal  procession 
passes  through  it,  the  music  must  cease  until  it  is  out  of 
it.  It  is  not  many  years  since,  that  on  the  Koppelberg — 
now  overgrown  with  thorns — two  stone  crosses  were  to  be 
seen,  which,  it  is  said,  were  in  remembrance  of  this  event ; 
the  history  of  it  is  also  sculptured  on  the  wall  of  a  house 
in  the  Bungengasse,  as  well  as  in  many  other  places  in  the 
town,  both  in  wood  and  stone.  For  a  long  time  the  town 
dated  its  public  documents  from  this  calamity. 

Many  are  the  relations  of  this  event.     See  Grimm,  D.  S.  i.  p.  330. 

THE  WHITE  GHOSTS  IN  THE  LUiNINGSBERG. 

Many  years  ago  the  White  Ghosts  in  the  Liiningsberg, 
near  Aerzen,  where  the  beautiful,  level  grass-plot  lies  amid 
verdant  copses,  were  in  the  habit  of  playing  by  night  at 
skittles,  with  golden  skittles  and  golden  bowls.  It  must 
have  been  a  wondrous  sight,  when  in  the  nocturnal  dark- 
ness the  glittering  bowls  were  rolling  swift  as  an  arrow 
along  the  smooth,  green  turf,  and  the  skittles  fell  with  a 
clear,  musical  sound.  It  must  have  been  a  beauteous 
spectacle,  when  the  moon,  bright  and  full,  stood  over  the 
forest,  in  the  blue  heaven,  and  illumined  the  oaks,  beeches 
and  firs,  which  encircled  the  mysterious  skittle-ground. 
When  the  sounding  skittles  fell,  the  little  party-coloured 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  121 

birds  in  the  trees  have  oftentimes  been  waked,  and  looked 
with  inquisitive  eyes  from  the  branches ;  hares,  roes,  foxes 
and  badgers  have  approached  to  look  on,  and  all  con- 
ducted themselves  becomingly.  The  ghosts  in  the  Lii- 
ningsberg  had  for  a  long  time  carried  on  their  play,  in 
which  no  one  was  willing  to  disturb  them.  The  people 
in  Aerzen  had  much  to  tell  about  the  golden  bowls  and 
skittles;  but  no  living  soul  had  ever  ventured  into  the 
forest  by  night ;  the  terror  was  too  great. 

But  there  was  a  journeyman  weaver,  who  had  travelled 
and  wandered  much  in  foreign  lands.  On  his  return  home, 
the  miller^s  fair  daughter,  Anna,  gave  greater  delight  to 
his  heart  than  all  that  he  had  seen  in  the  world  besides. 
Both  were,  however,  wretchedly  poor,  and,  therefore,  un- 
able to  marry;  but  Henry,  for  such  was  his  name,  who 
was  a  daring  young  fellow,  soon  hit  upon  a  project.  ''  I 
will  go  to  the  Liiningsberg,^^  said  he,  "  when  the  ghosts 
are  bowling  at  their  golden  skittles,  and  get  hold  of  one 
of  them.^^  So  one  fine,  mild  night,  he  stole  timidly  and 
softly  through  the  shrubs  and  fields,  but  on  reaching  the 
forest  his  heart  beat  violently.  He  approached  the  grass- 
plot,  and  now  witnessed  all  that  had  been  related  to  him. 
He  saw  how  the  little  white  spectres  hurled  with  an  arrow^s 
speed  their  bright  bowls  along  the  verdant  turf,  which 
instantly  came  rolling  back  to  them  spontaneously ;  how 
the  golden  skittles  fell  with  a  tuneful  clang.  The  fox 
also,  and  the  badger,  and  the  roe,  and  the  hare,  he  saw 
sitting  peaceably  together,  and  the  little  birds  merrily 
hopping  to  the  sound  among  the  branches.  He  crouched 
down  as  low  as  possible  among  the  underwood  on  the 
heath,  fearful  of  being  discovered  by  the  ghosts ;  but  at 
the  same  time  creeping  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  glittering 
skittles,  till  at  length  he  could  almost  reach  one  with  his 
hand.  At  this  moment  a  vigorous  bowl  sent  one  of  the 
skittles  into  the  underwood  in  which  Henry  was  concealed ; 

G 


122  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

he  seized  it,  crying  ''  Anna  !  Anna  !  ''  and,  with  the  pre- 
cious booty,  hurried  breathless  to  the  outlet  of  the  forest. 
But  the  ghosts  had  heard  his  exclamation,  their  skittle  is 
stolen,  they  lament  its  loss  for  a  moment,  and  then,  urged 
on  by  rage,  pursue  the  audacious  mortal,  to  inflict  on  him 
some  terrible  chastisement.  Henry  had,  however,  reached 
the  meadow  which  lies  beneath  the  Liiningsberg,  and 
hastened  towards  the  old,  brittle  trunk,  which  is  laid  across 
the  Humme  by  way  of  bridge.  The  ghosts  were  close 
behind  him,  he  could  hear  them  breathe,  an  icy  chill  ran 
through  his  whole  frame;  he  missed  the  narrow  path, 
yet  not  dismayed,  sprang  into  the  Humme — to  his  salva- 
tion !  "  Lucky  art  thou,''  cried  the  ghosts,  "  in  water  we 
have  no  power ;  we  could  have  seized  thee  on  the  tree- 
trunk,  and  would  have  wrung  thy  neck." 

Breathless  he  reached  the  opposite  bank,  from  which  he 
saw  the  ghosts,  like  forms  of  mist,  flitting  to  and  fro ;  but 
they  could  find  no  crossing. 

Henry  and  Anna  soon  had  a  merry  wedding.  Henry 
bought  an  old  house,  demolished  it  and  built  a  new  one 
on  its  site.  The  ghosts  on  the  Liiningsberg  from  that 
time  disappeared.  At  the  present  day  the  spot  on  the 
mountain  is  show^n,  where  they  played  with  golden  skittles ; 
and  when  the  boys  and  girls  of  the  place  pass  by  the 
house  on  the  Miihlbach,  before  which  stands  the  large 
lime-tree,  they  whisper  to  each  other  :  "  That  is  the  house 
that  was  built  from  the  golden  skittle  of  the  ghosts  in  the 
Liiningsberg." 

THE  ROSE  OF  HILDESHEIM. 
As  the  emperor  Lewis  the  Pious  ^  was  one  day  hunting, 
he  lost  a  cross  that  was  filled  with  relics.    On  discovering 
his  loss,  he  sent  his  attendants  in  all  directions  to  search 

'  Or  '  le  Dcbonnaire,'  as  he  is  called  by  the  French  chroniclers. 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  123 

for  the  holy  treasure,  and  at  the  same  time  made  a  vow  to 
build  a  church  on  the  spot  where  it  should  be  found.  The 
men  followed  the  trace  of  the  hunt,  and  found,  far  in  the 
forest,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  snow,  the  cross  hanging  on 
a  blooming  wild  rose-bush.  They  reported  the  miracle 
to  the  emperor,  who  immediately  commanded  a  chapel  to 
be  erected  there,  with  the  altar  on  the  spot  where  the  cross 
was  found  on  the  bush.  The  rose  flourished  admirably 
on  the  sacred  spot,  and  now,  with  its  leafy  shoots  and 
branches,  like  a  vine,  covers  the  arches  of  the  cathedral 
up  to  its  very  roof. 

THE  SMITH  IN  THE  HUGGEL. 
Not  far  from  Osnabriick  is  the  Hiiggel,  which  is  said 
to  have  formerly  abounded  in  gold  and  silver.     The  in- 
habitants of  the  neighbourhood  tell  of  many  wonders  con- 
nected with  the  spacious  cave  contained  in  the  mountain. 
Where,  on  the  rugged  declivity  of  the  hill,  the  road 
leads  through  the  defile  to  the  village  of  Hagen,  there 
lived,  in  days  of  yore,  a  smith,  who  was  not  like  other 
men,  but  nevertheless  supplied  his    employers  with  the 
best  workmanship.     He  was  a  faithful  husband,  a  provi- 
dent father  to  his   children  and  servants,  beneficent   to 
strangers,   and  never  sufi'ered  a  poor  wanderer  to  pass 
his  door  without  rehef.     But  one  Sunday,  as  his  wife  was 
just  coming  from  church,  she  was  struck  dead  by  light- 
ning.    At  this  the  smith  fell  into    despair,    murmured 
against  God,  would  not  hear  of  comfort,  nor  even  see  his 
children  again.     At  the  expiration  of  a  year  he  was  at- 
tacked by  a  fatal  malady,  and  when  in  his  last  moments, 
there  came  a  stranger  to  him  of  venerable  aspect,  with  a 
long,  white  beard,  who  conveyed  him  into  the  hollow  cleft 
of  the  Hiiggel,  where,  in  atonement  for  his  crime,  and  for 
the  purifying  of  his  soul,  he  should  wander,  and  be  the 
Metal-king,  until  the  mountain  yielded  no  more  produce  : 

g2 


124  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

he  should,  moreover,  rest  by  day,  and  by  night  continue 
to  do  good  to  his  earthly  brethren. 

In  the  cool  mine  his  kindly,  beneficent  disposition  re- 
sumed its  activity.  Gold  and  silver,  he  well  knew,  did 
not  contribute  to  make  men  happy,  and  he  therefore  toiled 
to  extract  from  the  poorest  veins  the  more  useful  iron,  and 
is  said,  in  his  earlier  time,  to  have  made  many  implements 
both  domestic  and  agricultural.  At  a  later  period  he 
limited  his  labour  to  the  shoeing  of  horses.  Before  the 
cave  a  post  was  fixed,  to  which  the  country  people  tied 
their  horses  to  be  shod;  not  omitting,  however,  at  the 
same  time,  to  leave  the  regular  price  on  a  large  stone  that 
lay  close  by.  But  the  smith  was  never  seen,  and  remained 
undisturbed  in  his  cave^ 

A  rash  young  fellow,  instigated  by  avarice,  once  ven- 
tured to  enter  into  the  cavern.  He  lighted  his  mining- 
lamp,  took  a  bundle  of  twigs  under  his  arm,  and  pro- 
ceeded along  under  the  cavern^s  lofty,  blackened  roof. 
He  had  now  to  choose  between  two  ways,  one  right,  the 
other  left,  and  fortunately  chose  the  right-hand  one ;  but 
his  provision  of  twigs,  which  he  had  taken  to  mark  his 
way,  was  now  exhausted ;  yet  return  and  procure  a  new 
one  he  would  not.  At  the  end  of  the  passage  he  came  to 
an  iron  door,  which,  however,  gave  him  but  little  trouble ; 
for  at  a  couple  of  vigorous  strokes  with  his  hammer  it 
flew  open ;  but  the  current  that  rushed  forth  extinguished 
his  lamp.  "Come  in,^^  cried  a  shrill,  clear  voice,  that 
])ierced  his  very  soul.  Half  stupified,  he  stept  forwards. 
From  the  arching  of  the  roof  and  the  side  walls  there 
shone  a  wondrous  light ;  on  the  massive  pillars  and  smooth 
walls  there  flitted  curiously  quivering  figures  backwards 
and  forwards.  The  Metal-king,  among  a  number  of  mis- 
shapen spirits  of  the  mine,  with  attendants  on  each  side, 

1  The  reader  of  '  Kenihvorth '  will  be  here  again  reminded  of  "Wayland 
Smith.     See  vol.  ii.  p.  119. 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  125 

sat  on  a  long  block  of  pure  silver^,  with  a  considerable 
heap  of  shining  gold  before  them.  "  Come  in,  friend/' 
exclaimed  the  same  shrill  voice ;  "  sit  down  by  side  of  me.'' 
There  was  a  vacant  seat  there,  but  which  did  not  seem  to 
please  the  intruder.  "  But  why  so  timid  ?  Be  bold,  no 
harm  shall  befall  thee ;  as  thou  hast  come,  so  will  we  send 
thee  back,  and  will,  moreover,  give  thee  a  good  lesson 
with  thee  on  the  way;  if  thou  canst  act  according  to 
which,  thou  mayest  save  something;  if  otherwise,  all  may 
be  lost.  Step  up  to  this  table.''  Pale  as  a  corpse  and 
with  tottering  steps  he  advanced  to  the  table.  "  Discon- 
tent at  the  loss  of  thy  goods  and  chattels,"  continued  the 
Metal-king,  '^las  misled  thee  to  become  dissolute,  to 
neglect  thy  work,  and  to  seek  after  forbidden  treasures. 
Change  thy  stubborn  disposition,  and  thou  wilt  turn  stones 
into  gold;  cease  from  arrogance,  and  thou  wilt  have  in 
thy  coffers  gold  and  silver  in  abundance.  Thou  desirest 
to  have  immense  treasures  at  once,  without  any  co-opera- 
tion of  thine ;  think  only  how  perilous  that  is,  and  how 
often  it  is  fruitless.  Dig  well  thy  field  and  garden,  culti- 
vate thy  meadow^s  and  hills,  and  thou  wdlt  gain  to  thyself 
mines  of  gold  and  silver." 

When  the  Metal-king  had  thus  spoken,  there  was  heard 
a  screaming  as  of  ravens,  and  a  hissing  and  crying  as  of 
night-owls,  and  a  storm-wind  came  rushing  against  the 
man,  and  drove  him  forcibly  and  irresistibly  forth,  through 
the  dark,  damp  passages.  When  he  again  found  himself 
in  the  open  air,  he  vowed  to  follow  the  old  Hiiggelman's 
counsel,  but  never  again  to  visit  him  in  his  cave. 

Some  say  that  the  Hiiggelman's  evil  inclinations  again 
returned,  that  he  was  no  longer  kindly  disposed  to  the 
country  people,  but  often  threw  up  in  the  air  red-hot 
ploughshares,  thereby  wantonly  causing  great  terror  among 
the  peasantry ;  whence  they  concluded  that  the  silver-mine 
was  nearly  exhausted. 


126  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

THE  DEER-STEALER. 
In  the  Harz  there  was  once  an  incorrigible  deer-stealer. 
Whenever  he  knew  that  a  head  of  game  was  anywhere  to 
be  had,  it  was  no  longer  safe.  He  had  heard  that  in 
Little  Clausthalj  at  the  hour  of  midnight,  on  Good  Friday, 
a  roe  with  her  fawn  appeared,  which  no  one  dared  to  shoot ; 
but  he  only  laughed  at  the  superstitious  tale;  and  one 
day,  just  before  Easter,  being  in  a  jovial  company,  and 
the  conversation  turning  on  the  roe  of  Little  Clausthal, 
he  declared  his  disbelief  of  the  whole  story,  and  turned  it 
into  ridicule,  saying  :  "  Who  will  wager  that  I  don^t  shoot 
both  the  roe  and  her  fawn,  and  have  them  for  dinner  on 
the  first  Easter-holiday  ?  '^  The  company  strove  to  dissuade 
him  from  the  attempt,  but  in  vain ;  so  on  the  Good  Friday 
night  he  took  his  way  to  Little  Clausthal.  On  reaching 
the  pond  he  observed  a  thick  mist  hanging  over  it,  which 
reached  to  the  sky,  and  completely  concealed  the  pond. 
In  the  mist  he  heard  sounds  like  the  voices  of  many  per- 
sons whispering  together,  and  strange  forms  seemed,  from 
time  to  time,  to  issue  from  it.  Along  the  road  also  many 
forms  glided  like  unsubstantial  shadows,  all  of  which 
vanished  in  the  mist  that  hovered  over  the  pond ;  but  he 
augured  no  evil.  He  crossed  over  and  stationed  himself 
at  the  end  of  the  valley,  behind  a  bush.  Exactly  at  the 
time  there  came  the  roe  with  her  fawn,  and  he  shot  the 
fawn.  On  seeing  it  fall,  he  sprang  foi-wards,  bound  its 
feet  together,  slung  it  across  his  shoulder,  and  returned. 
AVhen  he  reached  the  spot  where  the  pond  now  is  again, 
there  stood,  where  the  pond  had  been,  a  church,  brilliantly 
lighted;  a  loud  singing  was  heard  from  within,  with  the 
organ  pealing  forth  at  intervals.  "This,*^  thought  he, 
'•^is  most  extraordinary;  I  will,  however,  just  step  in." 
On  entering,  he  found  the  church  full  of  people,  but  all 
of  whom  appeared  as  if  they  had  been  lying  in  the  grave 
for  ages ;  their  garb,  too,  was  of  a  fashion  he  had  never 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIOXS.  127 

seen.  He  greeted  the  congregation,  but  no  one  thanked 
him,  though  some  nodded,  while  others  shook  their  heads, 
made  signs  to  each  other,  and  pointed  with  their  fingers 
at  him.  The  hghts  at  the  altar  and  in  the  chandeliers 
burned  with  a  blue  flame,  and  from  the  chalice  on  the 
altar  a  blue  light  trembled  forth.  The  priest  then  ap- 
peared before  the  altar,  but  his  speech  was  not  that  of 
earthly  men;  it  was  as  if  wind  and  thunder  filled  the 
whole  edifice  :  from  his  mouth  likewise  there  issued  a  blue 
flame.  At  once  a  crash  was  heard  in  the  church,  as  if  the 
very  earth  had  split  into  shivers.  The  priest  then  pointed 
at  him  and  cried  :  "  Accursed  Sabbath -breaker  ! ''  and  the 
sprites  placing  themselves  before  him,  howled  forth  the 
same  words.  He  rushed  headlong  out  of  the  church, 
stupified  with  fear  and  horror ;  and  as  he  hurried  forth, 
the  door  was  slammed  after  him,  so  that  his  heels  were 
stricken  off.  He  reached  the  road,  and  there  continued 
lying  till  morning.  When  he  came  to  himself,  there  was 
the  pond  as  it  had  ever  been,  but  the  fawn  was  away.  He 
was  sick  to  death,  and  could  hardly  drag  himself  home. 
After  lying  nine  days  he  was  just  able  to  relate  his  adven- 
ture, and  then  died, 

THE  FREISCHUTZ. 
In  former  times  there  lived  in  Zellerfeld  a  gamekeeper, 
who  was  a  Freischiitz.  During  his  apprenticeship  he 
never  had  any  luck  in  shooting,  and  on  that  account  was 
very  sad  and  disheartened.  One  day  as  he  was  walking 
quite  inconsolable  about  his  district,  and  almost  resolved 
to  throw  up  his  calling,  he  met  a  man  clad  in  green,  who 
asked  him  why  he  appeared  so  disconsolate  ?  When  the 
young  man  had  told  him,  he  replied:  ^^If  that^s  all,  it 
may  easily  be  remedied,  it  only  requires  a  little  courage. 
I  will  put  you  in  the  way,  comrade.  Go  to  the  communion, 
and  keep  the  real  body  in  your  mouth,  and  when  you 
come  out  of  church,  take  your  piece,  go  into  the  wood, 


128  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

nail  the  real  body  to  a  tree,  and  fire  at  it  thrice  in  the 
name  of  the  devil.  When  you  have  so  done,  you  may  fire 
away  into  the  blue  sky,  and  bring  down  whatever  you 
will  *."  The  young  man  allowed  himself  to  be  seduced, 
and  in  this  manner  became  a  Freischutz.  In  his  character 
of  gamekeeper  he  w  ould  frequently  show  his  dexterity  by 
w^ay  of  sport,  and  sometimes  when  in  the  long  winter 
evenings  he  had  company  with  him,  he  would  ask  them 
what  they  would  eat  ?  a  roasted  hare,  or  fawn,  or  a 
partridge  ?  he  w^ould  then  take  his  gun,  shoot  out  of  the 
window  and  say :  "  Go  into  the  garden,^^  or,  "  go  into  the 
yard,^^  or,  "the  street;  there  it  lies.^^  And  when  they 
went  where  he  had  said,  there  they  found  it.  Not  unfre- 
quently,  too,  he  would  ask  :  "  Where  shall  it  lie  ?  '^  and 
every  time  it  would  be  found  lying  where  they  had  said. 

A  person  once  requested  him  to  teach  him  the  art ;  but 
he  W'Ould  not  until  the  other  had  sworn  never  to  teach 
any  one  besides,  or  to  reveal  how  he  himself  had  become 
a  Freischiitz.  He  continued  his  course  for  many  years. 
At  last,  w^hen  lying  on  his  death-bed,  he  started  suddenly 
up,  rushed  through  the  chamber  like  a  maniac,  crying  : 
"  No,  devil !  not  yet !  thou  shalt  not  have  me  yet !  "  But 
to  what  purpose  ?  In  the  midst  of  his  crying  he  fell  dowTi 
dead ;  and  on  examination  it  appeared  that  his  neck  had 
been  wrung,  and  around  it  there  was  a  blue  stripe  like  a 
blue  string.  It  was  now^  that  the  man  above-mentioned 
related  what  had  taken  place  betw^een  him  and  the  game- 
keeper. 

THE  OLDENBURG  HORN  2. 

In  the  year  990  after  the  birth  of  Christ,  Count  Otto^ 

1  See  vol.  ii.  p.  194. 

2  Dobeneck's  Volksglauben,  i.  83,  from  Hamelmann's  Oldenburger 
Chronik,  1599,  folio,  where  an  engraving  of  the  horn  is  given.  See  also 
Grimm,  D.  S.  541. 

3  In  Kuhn  and  Schwartz  (p.  280)  the  story  is  told  of  Count  Anthony 
Giinthcr. 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  129 

ruled  over  the  county  of  Oldenburg.  Having,  as  a  good 
sportsman,  a  great  love  for  the  chase,  he  set  out,  on  the 
20th  July  of  the  above-mentioned  year,  with  many  of  his 
nobles  and  servants,  on  a  hunting  party,  and  would,  in 
the  first  instance,  seek  for  game  in  the  forest  of  Bernefeuer. 
The  count  himself  being  in  chase  of  a  roe,  and  following 
it  alone  from  the  wood  of  Bernefeuer  to  the  Osenberg,  lost 
both  sight  and  hearing  of  his  attendants.  On  his  white 
horse  he  stopt  on  the  middle  of  the  hill,  and  looked  around 
him  for  his  greyhounds,  but  could  neither  see  nor  hear  a 
single  one.  He  now  said  to  himself  (for  the  weather  was 
excessively  hot),  ^'  Oh  God  !  if  some  one  had  but  a  draught 
of  cool  water  to  give  me  !  "  Scarcely  had  the  count  ut- 
tered the  words  when  the  Osenberg  opened,  and  out  of 
the  cleft  there  came  a  beautiful  damsel,  well  adorned, 
attired  in  goodly  clothing,  with  fine  tresses  parted  on  her 
shoulders,  a  wreath  of  flowers  on  her  head,  and  holding 
in  her  hand  a  costly  silver-gilt  vessel  in  the  form  of  a 
hunting  horn,  of  beautiful  and  cunning  workmanship, 
granulated  and  exquisitely  finished,  and  soldered  together, 
and  ornamented  with  many  armorial  bearings,  that  are 
now  but  little  known,  and  with  strange,  unintelligible 
writing  in  the  manner  of  the  old  antiques,  and  was  alto- 
gether beautifully  and  curiously  wrought.  This,  which 
was  filled  with  some  liquor,  she  presented  to  the  count, 
praying  him  to  drink  from  it  to  refresh  himself. 

The  count  having  received  the  silver-gilded  horn  from 
the  damsel,  raised  the  cover  and  looked  into  it,  but,  on 
shaking  it,  was  not  pleased  with  the  beverage,  or  whatever 
it  might  be,  contained  in  it,  and  therefore  declined  the 
damseFs  proffered  drink.  Whereupon  she  said  :  "  My 
dear  lord,  drink  only  on  my  faith ;  for  it  will  do  you  no 
harm,  but  will  tend  to  your  benefit ; "  assuring  him,  more- 
over, that  if  he  would  drink  of  it,  it  would  go  well  with 
him  and  his,  and  thenceforth  with  the  whole  house  of 

G  5 


130  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

Oldenburg,  and  the  whole  country  would  thrive  and 
prosper.  But,  if  the  count  would  not  believe  her  and 
would  not  drink  out  of  it,  that  there  would  in  future  be 
no  unity  in  the  succeeding  Oldenburg  family.  But  as  the 
count  placed  no  faith  in  her  words,  and,  not  without  good 
reason,  had  a  great  objection  to  di-ink,  he  swung  the 
horn,  which  he  was  holding  in  his  hand,  behind  him  and 
poured  out  its  contents,  whereof  a  portion  was  splashed 
over  the  white  horse,  the  hair  of  which,  where  it  was 
sprinkled  and  wetted,  fell  off.  On  seeing  this  the  maiden 
desired  to  have  back  her  horn,  but  the  count,  still  holding 
it  in  his  hand,  hastened  down  the  hill,  and  on  looking 
round,  observed  that  the  damsel  had  again  entered  the 
cleft ;  then  feeling  a  terror  from  what  had  befallen  him, 
he  clapt  spurs  to  his  horse  and  galloped  at  full  speed  to 
his  followers,  to  whom  he  related  his  adventure,  showing 
them  the  horn,  which  he  took  with  him  to  Oldenburg. 
And  this  horn,  because  it  was  obtained  in  so  wonderful  a 
manner,  was  regarded  as  a  precious  jewel  both  by  him  and 
all  succeeding  princes  of  the  house  of  Oldenburg,  and  is 
even  at  this  day  preserved  at  Oldenburg,  where  I  myself 
have  often  seen  it.  By  many  it  is  praised  on  account  both 
of  its  workmanship  and  antiquity.  So  far  the  Oldenburg 
Chronicler. 

In  "  Notes  and  Queries,"  No.  61,  there  is  the  follo'^ing  communication 
from  Sir  Walter  C.  Trevelyan  respecting  this  celebrated  horn  : — 

"  The  Oldenburg  Horn  is  preserved  among  the  antiquities  in  the  gallen." 
of  the  king  of  Denmark  at  Copenhagen.  It  is  of  silver  gilt,  and  orna- 
mented in  ])aste  with  enamel.  It  is  considered  by  the  Danish  antiquaries 
to  be  of  the  time  of  Christian  I.,  in  the  latter  half  of  the  fifteenth  centur}-. 
There  are  engraved  on  it  coats  of  arms  and  inscriptions,  which  show  that 
it  was  made  for  King  Christian  I.,  in  honour  of  the  three  kings,  or  wise 
men,  on  whose  festival  he  used  it  at  Cologne." 

An  inscription  containing  the  names  of  the  three  *  kings  of  Cologne ' 
seems  not  to  have  been  unusual  on  horns  of  this  description.  (See  vol.  ii. 
p.  15.)  The  so-called  01denl)urg  Horn  is  now,  as  No.  1,  preserved,  among 
other  objects  of  interest  at  Copenhagen,  in  the  Uttle  palace  of  Rosenborg, 
a  structiure  of  Christian  IV.,  after  the  designs  of  Inigo  Jones. 


NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS.  131 

THE  CUCKOO— THE  PLEIADES. 

According  to  an  old  tradition,  the  cuckoo  was  once  a 
baker^s  man,  and  therefore  bears  a  dun-coloured  plumage, 
appearing  as  if  sprinkled  with  flour.  In  a  time  of  dearth, 
he  had  stolen  from  the  dough  brought  by  the  poor  people 
to  bake,  and  on  drawing  it  thus  diminished  from  the  oven, 
was  wont  to  cry  out:  ^^  Gukuk  ! '^  (see,  see!).  For  this 
our  Lord,  as  a  punishment,  transformed  him  into  a  bird 
that  ever  repeats  that  cry.     Hence  the  rimes, 

Kukuk,  beckenknecht^  Cuckoo,  bakerman, 

sag  mil-  recht  tell  me  right 

wie  viel  jahr  ich  leben  soil  ?       how  many  years  I  shall  live?* 

In  Ditmarschen  the  question  how  long  shall  I  live  ?  is 
asked  of  the  cuckoo  in  the  following  terms, 

Kukuk  in  Hawen,  Cuckoo  in  heaven, 

Wo  lang'  schal  ik  lawen  ?  How  long  shall  I  live  ? 

Sett  dy  in  de  grone  Grastyt  Set  thee  in  the  green  grass-tide, 

Un  tell  myn  Jaerstyt.  And  tell  my  years'  tide. 

In  Lauenburg, 

Kukuk,  Cuckoo, 

Spekbuk,  Fat-paunch, 

Ik  bir  dy  :  I  pray  thee  : 

Seg  my  doch,  Tell  me  now. 

Wo  vael  Joer  How  many  years 

Law'iknoch?  I  vet  shall  live  ?  ^ 


Of  the  origin  of  the  Pleiades  the  following  is  related. 
Jesus  one  day  passing  by  a  baker^s  shop,  whence  the  fumes 
of  new  bread  issued,  sent  one  of  his  disciples  in  to  beg  a  loaf. 
The  baker  himself  refused  ;  but  his  wife,  who  with  her  six 
daughters  was  standing  at  a  little   distance,  gave  him  a 

1  Beckerknecht  ?  -  Grimm,  D.  M.  p.  641. 

3  Mullenhofr,  p.  509.    See  also  vol.  ii.  pp.  83,  107,  269. 


132  NORTH  GERMAN  TRADITIONS. 

loaf  secretly ;  for  which  good  deed  they  were  placed  in 
heaven  as  seven  stars  ;  but  the  baker  was  transformed  to 
a  cuckoo,  which  proclaims  the  spring  from  St.  Tiburtius 
(April  14th)  till  St.  John  (June  24th),  that  is,  as  long  as 
the  seven  stars  are  visible  ^  Traditions  of  the  cuckoo  are 
numerous  throughout  Europe. 

1  Grimm,  D.  M.  p.  691. 


NORTH  GERMAN 
CUSTOMS   AND   SUPERSTITIONS'. 


SHROVETIDE. 


In  the  neighbourhood  of  MelUn^  in  the  Altmark,  they 
flog  each  other  out  of  bed  with  rods.  The  party  flogged 
must  treat  the  flogger ;  hence  every  one  rises  as  early  as 
possible  ^. 

At  Ilseburg  in  the  Harz,  on  New  Year's  eve  and  Shrove- 
tide, the  youths  go  about  the  streets  disguised  and  making 
a  noise.  Cakes  are  also  baked  there,  on  the  eve  of  Ash 
Wednesday,  of  a  triangular  form.  In  some  parts  of 
Thuringia,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Wallhausen,  these 
cakes  are  square,  and  are  called  kroppels.  Throughout 
the  whole  Mark  pancakes  are  baked  at  Shrovetide. 

About  Altenburg  and  some  places  in  the  Harz,  there  is 
no  spinning  on  the  eve  of  Ash  Wednesday,  lest  Frau  HoUe 
should  come.  Some  also  say,  lest  they  should  have  crooked 
cattle.     In  some  places  they  say  that   if  they  spin  on 

^  From  Kuhn  and  Schwartz,  unless  otherwise  expressed. 

2  This  custom  prevails  over  all  Denmark,  where  the  children  use  a 
particular  kind  of  rod  ornamented  with  gilt  paper  and  rihands,  and  called 
a  Fastelavnsriis  (Shrovetide  rod). 


134       NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS. 

Shrove  Tuesday  night,  between  twelve  and  one  o'clock, 
Frau  Hollc  will  come  and  sit  on  the  hatchel.  On  the 
distaff  of  those  that  will  spin,  they  set  a  little  doll. 

In  some  places  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Kyff  hauser, 
they  make  —  particularly  the  thrashers  —  a  little  figure, 
carrying  a  flail,  a  rake,  a  bushel  measure  and  a  half-peck 
measure.  This  they  place  on  a  table,  and  collect  gifts  for 
it.  The  custom  is  now  on  the  decline,  the  gens  d' amies  ! 
ha\ing  pronounced  it  idolatry. 

At  Shrovetide  sauerkraut  and  smoked  sausage  (Knack- 
wurst)  are  to  be  eaten.     Stendal. 

At  Basum,  near  Osnabriick,  there  is  throwing  at  cocks 
at  Shrovetide. 

CANDLEMAS. 

When  the  sun  shines  on  the  altar  on  Candlemas  day, 
there  will  be  a  second  winter. 

Many  think  it  not  right  to  spin  at  Candlemas.  Altmark. 

EASTER  \ 

Almost  everywhere  in  the  north  of  Germany  there  is 
ball-play  at  Easter.  At  Landsberg  on  the  Wartha,  the 
'  Osterball '  is  celebrated.  The  holyday  begins  with  lead- 
ing an  ass,  dressed  out  for  the  occasion,  about  the  town, 
with  great  rejoicings,  having  a  rider  on  his  back ;  all  then 
proceed  to  the  meadow,  where  the  play  takes  place. 
Dancing  and  other  amusements  conclude  the  holyday. 

At  Camern  on  the  Elbe  the  young  men  alone  and  the 
'nrls  alone  go  the  two  Sundays  preceding  Easter,  before  the 

»  So  called  from  the  goddess  Eastre,  according  to  the  testimony  of  Beda 
De  Temp.  Rat.  c.  xiii.),  who  says  :  "  apud  eos  (Anglorura  populos)  Aprilis 
Esturmonath,  qui  nunc  paschalis  mensis  interpretatur,  quondam  a  dea 
iUorum,  quffi  Eostra  vocal)atur,  et  cui  in  illo  festa  celebratur,  nomen 
habuit ;  a  cujus  nomine  nunc  ])aschale  tcnipus  cognominant,  consueto  an- 
tiques observationis  vocabulo  gaudia  novaj  solemiitatis  vocantes." 


NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS.       135 

houses  of  those  who  were  married  during  the  foregoing  year, 
the  former  demanding  the  '  Kliese/  a  wooden  ball,  and  the 
latter  the  '  Brautball/  or  Bride-ball,  which  is  of  considerable 
size  and  made  of  leather.  On  the  second  day  of  Easter 
they  appear  again  before  the  door  to  receive  the  balls,  and 
repeat  some  doggrel  verses.  The  ball-play  is  played  with 
the  ^  Kliese,^  at  which  each  one  endeavours  to  drive  the 
ball  from  his  hole.  The  bride-ball  is  struck  backwards 
and  forwards  until  it  is  beaten  to  pieces. 

At  Warthe  in  the  Ukermark  the  boys  go  about  flogging 
the  girls  on  the  first  day  of  Easter,  in  return  for  which 
they  must  give  them  fish  and  potatoes  on  the  second  feast- 
day  ;  the  boys  providing  the  music  for  a  dance. 

In  many  places  coloured  Easter-eggs  are  given  away, 
particularly  by  their  sponsors  to  the  children.  In  some 
places  they  are  rolled  down  a  declivity,  when  there  is  a 
race  after  them. 

Easter-fires  are  lighted  in  many  places,  particularly  in 
the  North  Harz  (and  sometimes  in  the  South  Harz),  in 
the  Altmark,  Brunswick,  Hanover  and  Westphalia.  They 
are  usually  kindled  on  certain  eminences  and  hills,  which 
thence  bear  the  name  of  '  Osterberge.^  The  manner  of 
proceeding  varies  according  to  circumstances  :  where  there 
are  declivities,  burning  tar-barrels  are  rolled  down.  In 
the  mining  towns  of  the  Harz  the  fire  is  usually  kindled 
on  Easter-eve,  when  a  tree  is  commonly  set  up,  surrounded 
with  brushwood  and  burnt.  In  Grund  they  run  about 
with  torches. 

If  Easter-water  is  to  be  fetched,  it  must  be  only  from  a 
running  stream,  and  against  the  current,  and  between  mid- 
night and  sunrise.  In  Swinemvinde  they  take  it  with  the 
stream,  repeating  certain  lines.  In  the  neighbourhood  of 
Woldegk  in  Meklenburg  the  maid- servants  fetch  Easter- 
water  on  Easter-morning,  or  on  the  preceding  evening 
spread  out  linen  cloths  in  the  garden,  and  in  the  morn- 


136       NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS. 

ing  wash  themselves  with  the  dew,  rain,  or  snow  that 
has  fallen  on  them.  This  preserves  them  from  illness  for 
the  whole  year.  In  Sachsenburg  on  the  Unstrut  they 
ride  the  horses  into  the  water ;  then  they  will  not  be  ill 
during  all  the  year.  The  Easter-water  has  virtue  only 
when,  while  drawing  it,  the  wind  is  due  east. 

If  it  rains  on  Good  Friday,  the  turf  will  be  parched  up 
three  times  during  the  year. 

On  Good  Friday,  after  sunset,  wreaths  of  elder  should 
be  twined  and  hung  up  in  the  houses  :  they  will  then  not 
be  struck  by  lightning.     Neukirchen  near  Chemnitz. 

On  Good  Friday  one  should  not  go  into  the  garden,  lest 
it  cause  caterpillars.     Stendal. 

On  Maundy  Thursday  green  kale  should  be  eaten. 

In  the  neighbourhood  of  Cammin  the  village  boys  hunt 
squirrels  at  Easter.  They  go  into  the  forest,  and  when 
they  have  found  one,  they  drive  it  with  sticks  and  stones 
from  tree  to  tree,  until  it  falls  down  dead. 

THE  FIRST  OF  APRIL. 
Among  children  it  is  everywhere  the  custom  to  make 
April-fools.     In  Berlin  the  little  ones  are  sent  to  the 
apothecary's  to  fetch   crabs'  blood  or  gnats'  fat.     This 
custom  is  prolonged  to  the  end  of  the  month. 

MAY-DAY. 

As  soon  as  the  first  heralds  of  spring  appear,  the  youth 
of  Berlin  issue  from  the  gates  to  fetch  may-flies  and  butter- 
cups, both  of  which  they  exchange  for  pins.  The  may- 
flics  they  let  fly  again,  singing, 

Maikaferchen  fliege,  May-chaferkin  fly, 

Dein  Vater  ist  im  Kriege,  Thy  father  's  in  the  war, 

Deine  Mutter  ist  in  Pommcrland,  Tliy  mother 's  in  Poinerania, 

Pommerhmd  ist  abgebrannt !  Pomerania  is  all  burnt ! 

Maikaferchen  fliege.  May-chaferkin  fly. 


NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS.       137 

In  the  North  Harz  they  say  that  the  witches  must 
dance  away  the  snow  on  the  Blocksberg  on  the  1st  May. 
Also,  that  on  ^  Wolpern  ^-eve  the  great  giant  dances  on  the 
Blocksberg  with  the  little  dwarfs,  that  is,  the  devil  with 
the  witches.  In  many  places  it  is  a  saying,  that  the 
witches  return  in  the  twelve  days,  then  must  the  snow  be 
away. 

When  the  girls  on  the  1st  May  have  not  yet  turned  up 
their  land,  they  get  'Walburgs^;  that  is,  they  make  for 
them  a  scarecrow  with  a  spade  in  its  hand,  and  set  it  in 
the  garden.      Ukermark  and  Mittelmark. 

If  a  man  desires  to  know  what  sort  of  a  wife  he  shall 
have,  he  must  ride  on  Walpurg^s  night  on  a  broomstick 
to  the  stable,  and  knock  thrice,  then  go  to  the  pigstye  and 
hear  what  pig  grunts,  whether  an  old  or  a  young  one. 
His  wife  will  be  old  or  young  accordingly.     Hassleben. 

On  Christmas  night.  New  Year's  night,  and  Walpurg's 
night,  no  persons  should  go  to  bed,  lest  the  witches  should 
come  and  bewitch  them.     Rauen. 

On  Walpurg's  eve  no  cat  may  be  teazed  nor  admitted 
into  a  house  :  it  may  be  a  witch  ^. 

If  a  woman  puts  her  petticoat  on  the  hind  part  before, 
she  will  be  secure  against  witchcraft. 

If  any  one  goes  out  unwashed  on  a  Friday,  the  witches 
have  power  over  him. 

If  any  one  wishes  to  see  the  witches,  he  must  take  an 
e^^  with  him  that  was  laid  on  Maundy  Thursday  and 
place  himself  in  a  crossway.  Or  he  must  go  into  the 
church  on  a  Good  Friday,  but  hasten  out  before  the  bless- 
ing. In  Bergkirchen  a  man  did  so  once,  and  saw  three 
witches,  one  with  a  water-pot,  one  with  a  spinning-wheel, 
and  the  third  with  a  corn- sieve,  who  all  carried  on  their 
work  during  the  sermon^. 

1  Harrys,  ii.  p.  viii.  -  See  vol.  ii.  p.  275.  No.  54. 


138       NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS. 

At  Christmas^  New  Year  and  Michaelmas,  a  sithe  or 
something  sharp  should  be  laid  in  the  fodder ;  the  witches 
can  then  do  no  harm  to  the  cattle.     Mellin. 

In  the  night  of  the  1st  May  and  on  Michaelmas  day 
the  witches  ride  to  the  Blocksberg,  and  on  the  two  fol- 
lowing Sundays  they  go  to  church,  where  any  one  may 
see  them,  if  he  has  with  him  rye  from  three  fields  ;  he  will 
then  see  some  with  butter-tubs,  some  with  milk-pails  on 
their  heads.  But  he  must  hasten  out  of  the  church  before 
the  blessing,  else  they  will  bewitch  him  in  one  way  or 
other.     Gussefeld  in  the  Altmark. 

On  the  night  before  the  1st  May  the  witches  ride  on 
the  tails  of  magpies  to  the  Blocksberg ;  for  which  reason 
no  magpies  are  seen  on  the  1st  May,  as  they  are  not  yet 
returned.      Gussefeld. 

If  any  one  wishes  to  see  the  witches,  he  must  place  him- 
self in  a  crossway  on  May-night,  cut  a  piece  of  turf,  and 
lay  it  on  his  head;  they  can  then  do  him  no  harm^ 
Scharzfeld. 

When  lumps  of  feathers  are  found  in  the  bed,  it  is  said 
that  the  witches  are  sitting  in  it.  They  come  on  May- 
day before  sunrise,  and  have  often  been  seen  in  the  Her- 
ring-market at  Em  den.  When  a  witch  issues  forth,  her 
body  lies  in  bed  as  stiff  as  a  flint-stone.  Moorhausen 
near  Aurich. 

In  Saterland  a  certain  fungus  is  called  witches'  butter  ^^. 

WHITSUNTIDE. 
In  Sannen  thcy  cut  down  willow -branches  a  fortnight 
before  Easter,  and  then  a  wrestling-match  takes  place; 
the  victor  is  proclaimed  king,  and  receives  from  the  little 
ones,  that  are  unable  to  mount  a  horse  without  help, 
bridle  money  and  mounting  money. 

1  See  vol.  ii.  p.  189.  -  See  vol.  ii.  p.  106. 


NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS.       139 

In  Stapel  the  Wliitsuntide-willow  is  to  be  cut  on  the 
thh'd  Easter-day.  At  Whitsuntide  there  is  a  foot-race; 
the  conqueror  is  declared  king ;  the  last  in  the  race  must 
carry  the  tarred  rags  with  which  the  whips  are  smeared. 
Afterwards  there  is  a  horse-race^  at  which  the  king  in  the 
foot-race  is  first  in  the  row,  as  the  place  of  honour.  Who- 
ever falls  from  his  horse  must  carry  the  tarred  rags. 

In  Blumenhagen,  near  Vierraden,  the  stable-boys  smack 
their  whips  in  cadence  on  Whitsun-eve.  On  the  first 
festival-day  the  so-called  "  Kantenreiten  "  takes  place.  A 
little  loaf  (Week)  of  white  bread  is  set  on  a  pole,  and  the 
one  who  first  reaches  it  is  king.  The  last  must  carry  the 
tarred  rags.  The  smacking  of  whips  on  Whitsun-eve  is 
usual  in  many  other  places.  In  some  villages  the  race  is 
for  a  hat,  handkerchief,  etc. 

In  Saterland  shooting  at  a  bird  is  practised.  He  who 
shoots  down  the  last  is  declared  king,  and  receives  a  deco- 
rated hat,  which  he  wears  at  the  dance  in  the  evening,  and 
preserves  till  the  next  year.  A  similar  shooting  takes 
place  in  many  other  parts.  In  Hanover  and  Brunswick 
they  shoot  at  a  target ;  the  best  shooter  is  king,  and  nails 
the  target  to  the  gable  of  his  roof. 

In  the  villages  of  Brunswick  everything  at  Whitsuntide 
is  decorated  with  may  (birch) ;  sometimes  also  a  May- 
bride  adorned  with  flowers  is  to  be  seen,  and  in  some 
places  they  make  a  May -king,  who  is  completely  concealed 
in  sprigs  of  May.  What  they  have  collected  they  take  to 
the  Whitsuntide-field  and  there  eat  it.  A  May-king  is 
usual  in  many  other  places. 

ST.  JOHN'S,  OR  MIDSUMMER,  DAY. 

In  the  South  Harz  and  in  Thuringia  the  so-called  St. 

John^s  fires  are  common.     In  Edersleben,  near  Sanger- 

hausen,  the  proceeding  is  as  follows :  A  high  pole  is  set 

up,  on  which  a  tar-barrel  is  placed,  having  a  chain  drawn 


140       NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS. 

through  it  that  reaches  to  the  ground.  When  it  is  on 
fire  they  swing  the  barrel  round  the  pole  amid  great  re- 
joicing. In  the  neighbourhood  of  Bai-uth^  down  to  recent 
times,  St.  John's  fires  were  lighted,  as  well  as  in  the 
Catholic  parts  of  Westphalia. 

In  Gandersheim  a  tall  fir  is  set  up,  which  is  completely 
stript  to  its  summit;  on  this  they  hang  handkerchiefs 
and  the  like,  to  be  climbed  for. 

In  Sachsenburg,  on  St.  John^s  day,  the  children  make 
a  ^  Rosenstock.'  At  night  they  barricade  the  street  with 
a  rope,  on  which  they  hang  wreaths  of  birch  and  flowers. 
They  also  set  birch-branches  before  the  house  and  raise  a 
large  tree,  round  which  they  dance.  Whoever  will  pass 
through  the  street  must  pay  something,  out  of  which  the 
music  and  the  birch  are  paid  for.  In  the  parts  south  of 
the  Fiirstenwald,  there  is,  about  the  same  time,  a  shooting 
for  a  hat,  or  a  'Rosenbaum.'  A  pole  is  raised,  on  which 
are  streamers,  a  wreath  and  a  crown,  also  handkerchiefs 
and  the  like,  to  be  climbed  for.  The  best  climber  up  the 
'  Rosenbaum'  is  rewarded  with  a  bouquet  in  his  hat. 

In  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Kyff'hauser  the  girls  throw 
at  cocks. 

In  the  'Jantjenacht'  (St.  John's  eve)  the  witches  hold 
their  meeting,  at  which  they  eat  the  berries  of  the  moun- 
tain-ash. Moorhausen  and  Nordmoor  in  E.  Friesland. 

Treasures  burn  especially  on  St.  John's  night,  and  those 
who  know  how  can  raise  them.      Ukermark. 

On  St.  John's  day  there  should  be  fetched  nothing  green, 
it  will  cause  cancer.  Vegetables  should  be  gathered  the 
evening  before.     Mellin  in  the  Altmark. 

On  St.  John's  day,  between  twelve  and  one  o'clock, 
there  grows  in  many  places  a  hand  out  of  the  ground, 
which  they  call  St.  John's  hand.  Whoever  possesses  such 
a  hand  is  lucky,  as  its  stroke  is  good  against  all  kinds  of 
fluxions  and  other  maladies.     It  is  not  to  be  confounded 


NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS.       141 

with  the  so-called  beards-foot,  a  plant  which  also  grows  on 
St.  John's  day,  and  the  roots  of  which  have  likewise  the 
form  of  a  hand.     Bi^odewin  in  the  Ukermark. 

The  Divining  rod  (Wiinschelruthe)  must  be  cut  from  a 
hazel  backwards  on  St.  John's  day,  and  must  then  be  bound 
on  a  child  that  has  been  baptized,  and  so  receive  the  name 
of  John.      Gramzow  in  the  Ukermark. 

On  St.  John's  day,  between  eleven  and  twelve  o'clock, 
the  beech-nuts  open.  If  it  then  rains  in  them,  the  mast 
will  fail;  if  the  weather  is  fine,  the  mast  will  be  good. 
The  nuts  then  close  up  again.  Neighbourhood  of  Hessen- 
Oldendorf. 

If  any  one  wishes  to  have  a  goblin  (Kobold),  he  must 
go,  on  St.  John's  day,  between  twelve  and  one  at  noon, 
into  the  forest,  to  an  ant-hill,  on  which  he  will  find  a  bird 
sitting,  to  which  he  must  speak  certain  words,  when  it  will 
transform  itself  into  a  little  fellow  and  jump  into  a  bag 
held  ready  for  the  purpose,  and  in  which  he  must  carry 
him  home,  where  he  will  perform  all  the  work  committed 
to  him,  with  the  utmost  speed.     Perleberg. 

On  St.  John's  day  children  should  be  weaned;  then 
they  will  have  good  luck.     Stendal. 

On  St.  John's  day,  between  eleven  and  twelve  at  noon, 
a  burdock  root  should  be  dug  up.  Under  it  will  be  found 
a  coal,  which  is  good  for  many  things.     Stendal. 

HARVEST  CUSTOMS. 

Formerly  it  was  the  custom  at  harvest  to  leave  a  bunch 
standing  on  the  field,  round  which  the  reapers  danced, 
throwing  up  their  caps  and  crying  :  "  Waul,  Waul,  Waul," 
or  "W61,  W61,  W61."  Hageburg  and  environs  of  the 
Steinhudersee^ . 

Throughout  the  whole  Ukermark,  and  in  many  of  the 

parts  adjacent,  the  custom  prevails  at  the  end  of  the  rye- 

^  See  Grimm,  D.  M.  pp.  142,  143.  \V6l  is  no  doubt  a  corruption  of 
W6d  (Woden). 


142       NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS. 

harvest,  and,  in  some  places,  at  the  carrying  in  of  every 
kind  of  grain,  to  make  a  puppet  out  of  the  last  sheaf,  and 
either  to  carry  it  home  rejoicing  with  the  last  load,  or  let 
it  be  borne  to  the  village  by  the  girl  who  is  the  last  ready 
with  her  binding.  In  accordance  with  the  one  or  the 
other  of  these  usages,  the  custom  is  called  bringing  the  old 
man  (den  ollen  brengen),  or  it  is  said  of  the  girl,  she  has 
the  old  man  (dei  het  den  ollen).  Customs  nearly  akin  to 
the  above-mentioned  prevail  in  several  other  places  ^ 

At  Grochwitz,  near  Torgau,  it  is  a  saying  at  Bartholo- 
mew tide:  "Now  Herke  is  abroad,  now  we  must  get  in 
our  v/inter  corn,  else  it  will  be  spoiled.^^ 

At  Heteborn,  when  the  flax  was  not  housed  at  Bar< 
tholomew  tide,  it  was  formerly  the  saying :  "  Frau  Harke 
will  come.'^ 

About  Halberstadt  they  say  that  in  the  dog-days  the 
crows  do  not  drink. 

When  the  rye  is  housed  the  storks  depart,  and  all 
assemble  on  the  Blocksberg,  where  they  bite  one  of  their 
number  to  death.     Brill  near  Aiirich. 

ST.  MICHAEL'S  DAY. 
On  St.  Michael's  day  no  work  is  done  in  the  field.  Rauen. 
Nor  is  there  any  spinning.    Altmark. 

ST.  MARTIN'S  DAY. 
In  many  places  a  roasted  goose  is  the  orthodox  fare  on 
St.  Martin's  day. 

ST.  ANDREW'S  EVE 2. 
On  St.  Andrew's  eve  the  girls  can  cause  their  future 
sweethearts  or  husbands  to  appear  to  them  in  a  dream. 

1  For  old  harvest  customs  in  England,  see  Brockett's  Gloss,  of  N.  Country 
Words,  voce  Melldoll,  and  HallhveU's  Archaic  Diet,  voce  Mare. 

2  This  title  is  from  Harrys,  ii.  p.  25.  The  matter  is  from  the  Upper 
Harz,  and  oral. 


NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS.   143 


going  to  sleep^  they  repeat  the 


St.  Andrew's  eve  is  to-day, 
Sleep  all  people, 
Sleep  all  chikh'en  of  men. 
Who  are  between  heaven  and 

earth, 
Except  this  only  man, 
Who  may  be  mine  in  marriasre. 


For  this  purpose,  before 
following  rimes : 

Andreas-Abend  ist  heute, 
Schlafen  alle  Leiite, 
Schlafen  alle  Menschenkind, 
Die  zwischen  Himmel  und  Erde 

sind. 
Bis  auf  diesen  einzigen  Mann, 
Der  mir  zur  Ehe  werden  kann. 

If  a  girl  desires  to  know  in  what  neighbourhood  the 
man  dwells,  who  is  one  day  to  be  her  husband,  she  must  go, 
between  eleven  and  twelve  o'clock  at  night,  in  perfect  silence, 
into  the  garden,  shake  the  hedge,  and  repeat  these  words  : 

Erbzaun  ich  schiittel  Dich,.  Old  hedge,  I  shake  thee, 

Ich  riittel  Dich.  I  jog  thee. 

Wo  mein  fein  Liebchen  wohnt.     Where  my  gentle  lover  dwells, 

da  regti  sichs. 
Kann  er  sich  nicht  selber  melden. 
So  lass  nur  ein  Hiindchen  bellen. 


there  let  there  be  stirring. 
If  he  cannot  announce  himself. 
Then  only  let  a  Httle  dog  bark. 


Then  will  a  dog  be  heard  to  bark  in  the  neighbourhood 
where  the  future  lover  dwells. 

The  future  husband  may  be  also  made  to  appear  on  St. 
Andrew's  eve  by  the  following  process.  At  nightfall  let 
a  girl  shut  herself  up  naked  in  her  sleeping  room,  take 
two  beakers,  and  into  one  pour  clear  water,  into  the  other 
wine.  These  let  her  place  on  the  table,  which  is  to  be 
covered  with  white,  and  repeat  the  following  words, 
Dresmes 

My  dear  Saint  Andi-ew  ! 

Let  now  appear  before  me 

My  heart's  most  dearly  beloved. 

If  he  shall  be  rich, 

He  mil  pour  a  cup  of  wine  ; 

If  he  is  to  be  poor. 

Let  him  pour  a  cup  of  water. 


Mein  lieber  Sankt  Andi-es  ! 
Lass  doch  vor  mir  erscheinen 
Den  Herzallerliebsten  meinen. 
Soil  er  mir  werden  reich, 
Schenkt  er  mir  eine  Kanne  Wein ; 
Soil  er  mir  werden  arm. 
So  schenke  mir  eine  Kanne  Wasser. 


rege? 


144       NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS. 

or, 

Bettspond,  ich  trete  Dich,  Bedstead,  I  tread  thee, 

Sankt  Andres,  ich  bitt  Dich  :  Saint  Andrew,  I  pray  thee  : 

Lass  doch  erscheinen  Let  now  appear 

Den  HerzallerUebsten  meinen.  My  heart's  most  dearly  beloved. 

Soil  ich  mit  ihm  werden  reich,  If  I  shall  be  rich  with  him, 

Kommt  er  mit  dem  grlinen  Zweig ;  He   will   come  with   a   green 

bough ; 

Soil  ich  mit  ihm  werden  arm.  If  I  shall  be  poor  with  him, 

Kommt  er  mit  dem  Knaust  Brod  He  will  come  with  a  crust  of 
im  Arm.  bread  in  his  arm. 

When  that  is  done,  the  form  of  the  future  husband  will 
enter  at  the  door  and  drink  out  of  one  of  the  cups.  If  he 
is  poor,  he  will  drink  of  the  water ;  if  rich,  he  will  take 
the  wine. 

An  over-curious  girl  once  summoned  her  future  husband 
in  the  above  manner.  Precisely  as  the  clock  struck  twelve 
he  appeared,  drank  of  the  wine,  laid  a  three-edged  dagger 
on  the  table  and  vanished.  The  girl  put  the  dagger  into 
her  trunk.  Some  years  after  there  came  a  man  from  a 
distant  part  to  the  town  where  the  girl  dw^elt,  bought  pro- 
perty there,  and  married  her.  He  was  in  fact  the  iden- 
tical person  whose  form  had  already  appeared  to  her. 
Some  time  after  their  marriage,  the  husband  chanced  to 
open  the  trunk,  and  there  found  the  dagger,  at  the  sight 
of  w^hich  he  became  furious.  "  Thou  art  then  the  girl," 
cried  he^  ^^  w^ho  years  ago  forced  me  to  come  hither  from 
afar  in  the  night ;  and  it  was  no  dream.  Die  therefore  !  " 
and  with  these  words  he  thrust  the  dagger  into  her 
heart. 

Hence  if  the  future  husband,  when  he  appears,  lays 
such  a  thing  on  the  table,  it  must  be  destroyed ;  for  if  he 
again  sees  what  he  then  brought  with  him,  he  will  at 
least  bear  a  grudge  towards  his  wife,  for  having  by  her 
spell  caused  him  so  much  anxiety  and  pain. 


NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS.        14-5 

If  any  one  wishes  to  know  whether  he  (or  she)  will  die 
in  the  following  year,  let  him  (or  her)  on  St.  Andrew's 
eve,  before  going  to  bed,  make  on  the  table  a  little  pointed 
heap  of  flour.  If  on  the  following  morning  the  heap  has 
fallen  asunder,  the  party  will  die. 

On  St.  Andrew's  eve  it  may  also  be  learned  which  of 
the  persons  present  love  one  another,  or  will  one  day  be 
united.  For  this  purpose  a  vessel  with  pure  water  is 
placed  on  a  table,  and  on  the  water  are  laid  little  cups  of 
silver  foil  inscribed  with  the  names  of  the  persons  whose 
future  is  to  be  ascertained.  These  little  cups  are  called 
'  nappelpfang '  (cup-pennies) .  If  a  young  man's  cup  comes 
so  near  to  that  of  a  girl,  that  they  both  seem  to  cleave  to- 
gether, they  will  make  a  match.  By  the  nappelpfiings  it 
may  also  be  seen,  whether  a  loving  pair  will  one  day  be 
legally  united ;  in  which  experiment  one  of  the  cups  re- 
presents the  bride,  one  the  bridegroom,  and  a  third  the 
priest.  If  the  three  come  together  so  that  the  priest  stands 
before  the  other  two,  the  lovers  may  cherish  the  hope  of 
being  wedded. 

On  St.  Andl'ew's  eve  young  girls  may  ascertain  what 
coloured  hair  their  future  husbands  have.  For  this  object 
there  formerly  prevailed,  and  probably  still  prevails,  the 
so-called  hair -snatching.  If  a  girl  wishes  to  know  the 
colour  of  her  future  husband's  hair,  she  must  take  hold  of 
the  latch  of  the  door  and  thrice  call  out :  ''  Gentle  love,  if 
thou  lovest  me,  show  thyself."  She  must  then  quickly 
open  the  door  a  little  way,  and  make  a  rapid  grasp  out  in 
the  dark,  and  she  will  find  in  her  hand  a  lock  of  her  future 
mate's  hair.  But  she  must  be  quite  alone  in  the  house, 
and  make  the  trial  at  night  between  the  hours  of  eleven 
and  twelve,  and  unknown  to  any  one. 

CHRISTMAS. 
The  custom  is  wide-spread  among  the  country  people 


146     .  NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS. 

throughout  the  whole  north  of  Germany  of  having  a  man 
on  Christmas  eve  to  enter  the  apartment,  disguised  with  a 
long  beard,  and  enveloped  either  in  fur  or  in  pea-straw, 
who  asks  the  children  whether  they  can  pray,  and,  if  they 
stand  the  trial,  rewards  them  with  apples,  nuts  and  ginger- 
bread (pepper-cakes)  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  punishes 
those  that  have  learned  nothing.  In  the  Middle  Mark  the 
name  most  generally  given  to  this  personage  is  De  hele 
Christ  (the  Holy  Christ),  or  Knecht  Ruprecht.  In  other 
parts  he  is  called  Hans  Huprecht,  which  is  sometimes  cor- 
rupted into  Rumpknecht ;  in  Meklenburg  he  is  known  as 
M  Clas  (Rough  Nicholas)  ;  in  the  Altmark  and  as  far  as 
East  Friesland,  as  Bur  and  Bullerclas.  He  sometimes 
carries  a  long  staff  and  a  bag  of  ashes,  and  has  little  bells 
on  his  clothes.  With  the  bag  he  beats  those  children  who 
have  not  learned  to  pray,  and  is  for  that  reason  called  also 
Aschenclas.  Sometimes  he  rides  about  on  a  white  horse, 
and  not  unfrequcntly  has  with  him  a  sort  of  Jack  Pudding, 
as  an  attendant.  Accompanied  by  fairies,  as  they  call 
them,  or  men  dressed  as  old  women,  with  blackened  faces, 
he  appears  in  some  places,  and  is  occasionally  attended  by 
one  enveloped  in  pea-straw,  who  is  called  the  bear,  and 
led  by  a  long  chain.     In  many  places  the  '  Holy  Christ,' 

usually  a  young  girl  clad  in  white—who  causes  the 

youngsters  to  pray,  and  the  rider  on  the  white  horse,  ap- 
pear as  distinct  persons.  In  some  townis  in  Westphaha 
the  white  horse  makes  its  appearance  at  Christmas  or 
New  Year's  day.     In  Osnabriick  it  is  called  the  Spanish 

horse.  . 

On  the  isle  of  Usedom  Ruprecht  goes  about  at  Christ- 
mas, making  the  children  pray;  but  under  this  denomi- 
nation three  persons  are  comprised,  one  of  whom  bears  a 
rod  and  a  bag  of  ashes,  another  bears  the  '  Klapperbock,' 
which  is  a  pole  on  which  a  goatskin  is  hung,  surmounted 
by  a  goat's  head  of  wood,  to  the  under-jaw  of  which  a  line 


NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS.       147 

is  fastened,  whicli  passing  through  the  upper  one  runs 
through  the  throat,  so  that  when  pulled  by  the  bearer,  the 
two  jaws  make  a  rattling  together.  With  this  Klapper- 
bock  those  children  that  do  not  know  how  to  pray  are 
beaten.  Last  of  all  the  third  person  appears  riding  on  a 
white  horse.  In  all  these  places  Christmas  presents,  wrapt 
in  almost  countless  coverings,  are  thrown  at  the  door  of 
the  party  to  be  gifted,  the  giver  crying  out :   ^  Julklapp.^ 

In  the  neighbourhood  of  Boitzenburg  in  the  Ukermark, 
Winter  and  Summer  formerly  went  about  at  Christmas, 
contending  with  each  other  for  precedence.  It  was  usually 
two  old  women  by  whom  the  contest  was  represented. 
Summer  carried  a  sithe  and  a  rake.  Winter  a  flail,  with 
which  each  indicated  the  labours  to  be  performed  in  those 
two  seasons.  A  peasant  of  Hardenbeck  still  retained  in 
his  memory  the  following  fragment  of  their  respective 
speeches  : 

Winter. 

Ich  bin  der  Winter  stolz,  I  am  the  winter  proud, 

Ich  baue  Briicken  ohne  Holz.        I  build  bridges  without  wood. 

Summer. 
Ich  bin  der  Summer  fein,  I  am  the  summer  fine, 

Ich  mahe  mein  Korn,  I  mow  my  corn, 

Und  harke  es  wohl  auf.  And  rake  it  well  together, 

Und  fahr  es  in  die  Scheun.  And  carry  it  into  the  barn. 

Winter. 
Ich  di'esche  das  Korn  und  fahr     I  thrash  the  corn  and  caiTy  it  to 

es  zur  Stadt,  the  city, 

Dass  jeder  seine  Nahrung  davon     That  every  one  may  have  his  sus- 

hat.  tenance  therefrom. 

Whoever  is  desirous  of  knowing  how  the  weather  will 
be  in  the  coming  year,  must  on  Christmas  eve  take  an 
onion,  cut  it  through,  and  out  of  it  make  twelve  cups,  put 
salt  into  every  one,  and  then  place  them  in  a  row.  The 
months  corresponding  to  those  cups  in  wdiich  the  salt  on 

h2 


148       NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS. 

the  following  morning  is  found  wet,  will  be  wet,  and  the 
contrary.     Querfurt. 

If  a  girl  desires  to  know  of  what  condition  her  future 
lover  will  be,  she  must  on  Christmas  night  listen  at  the 
large  kettle  walled  into  the  stove  (Ofenblase).  If  the  water 
in  it  makes  a  roaring  noise,  he  will  be  a  smith  ;  and  so, 
according  to  the  various  tones  of  the  water,  the  several 
trades  may  be  determined.     Edersleben  near  Sangerhausen. 

If  straw  be  drawn  at  Christmas  from  the  roof  of  an  in- 
herited dwelling,  and  taken  to  the  barn  and  thrashed,  and 
grains  of  corn  be  found  in  it,  it  betokens  good  luck  for 
the  coming  year.     lb. 

At  Elliehausen,  near  Gottingen,  they  lay  the  fodder  for 
the  cattle  at  Christmas  out  in  the  open  air :  then  will  the 
cattle  thrive  well. 

In  the  whole  country  between  Adelepsen  and  Minden  it 
is  believed  that  the  hop  becomes  green  on  Christmas 
night,  and  comes  forth  even  from  under  the  deepest  snow, 
but  that  afterwards  nothing  more  of  it  is  to  be  seen.  The 
same  behef  prevails  in  other  places. 

In  the  territory  of  Miinster  ^  the  custom  of  icindoiving 
still  exists.  At  Christmas  the  young  men  enter  through 
the  window  to  their  sweethearts,  and  continue  with  them 
all  night.  The  parents  do  not  disturb  them,  knowing  it 
will  be  a  match.  If  the  girl  is  averse  to  the  suitor,  she 
drives  him  out  of  the  window  with  a  broom.  From  Del- 
inenhurst. 

In  Berlin  the  boys  go  about  on  the  '  Weinachtsmarkt ' 
selling  what  they  call  Waldteufel.  These  are  cylinders 
of  paScboard  open  beneath,  but  above  fastened  with  horse- 
hair to  a  wooden  handle,  which  when  swung  round,  send 
forth  a  humming  sound.  Wooden  rattles  and  paper  flags 
are  sokl  at  the  same  time. 

•  Also  in  Ilolslcin  and  Danish  Fricsland,  tUougli  not  limited  to  any  par- 
ticular season  of  the  vcar. 


NORTH  GER3IAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS.       149 

At  Christmas  green  kale  should  be  fetched  from  the 
garden  of  the  neighbour  three  doors  ofF^  and  some  of  it 
given  to  every  beast  in  the  stalls.  It  protects  them  against 
witchcraft.      Camern. 

If  at  the  Christmas  festival  a  woman  boils  green  kale, 
takes  the  ladle  with  which  it  was  stirred^  and  goes  with 
it^  concealed  under  her  apron,  to  the  church-door,  just  as 
the  priest  is  saying  the  Pater  noster,  she  will  discover  who 
are  the  witches  of  the  place,  and  that  by  their  extraordi- 
nary, but  otherwise  invisible,  head-gear.  But  she  must 
stay  for  a  moment  only,  else  she  runs  the  risk  of  being 
threatened  and  persecuted  by  the  evil  one.      Camern, 

All  domestic  utensils  must  at  this  time  be  kept  in  safe 
custody  :  not  one  of  them  should  be  lent  out,  though  they 
are  occasionally  asked  for  by  those  who  would  injure  the 
owner ' .      Camern. 

If  any  one,  with  moderate  fodder,  will  have  sound  and 
fat  horses,  let  him  take  a  bundle  of  hay,  go  with  it  on 
Christmas  night  at  midnight  thrice  round  the  church,  and 
give  it  to  the  horses.     Camern. 

THE  NEW  YEAR. 

In  many  places,  particularly  in  the  Harz,  and  westward 
as  far  as  the  Wescr,  it  is  the  custom  on  New  Yearns  eve  to 
fire  guns,  which  they  call  shooting  the  new  year  ^. 

In  some  parts  of  East  Friesland  they  bake  at  the  new 
year  Niijarskaukjes,  a  sort  of  thin  cakes  pressed  into  a 
mould  of  iron,  in  which  the  figures  of  a  horse  and  other 
animals  are  represented. 

In  the  Saterland  it  is  the  custom  for  the  young  men  to 
bring  into  the  house  of  the  girls  they  wish  to  court,  and 
also  for  neighbours  to  each  other^s  houses,  a  ^  Wepelrot ' 
(called  also  a  ^  Tunsker  ')  with  these  words  : 

1  By  witchcraft  ?  2  jhis  custom  is  universal  also  in  Denmark. 


150       NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS. 

Hier  brang  wi  jo  ene  wepelrot ;     Here  bring  we  you  a  wepebot ; 
woi  jii  mi  wet  reke,  if  you  will  give  me  something, 

so  moije  jo  nit  lang  bedonkje.        you  must  not  long  eonsider. 

Saying  these  words  they  usually  fire  off  a  pistol,  and 
throw  the  Wepelrot  into  the  house,  and  then  run  off  with 
all  speed.  The  people  of  the  house  then  run  after  the 
thro\yer  and  endeavour  to  catch  him.  If  they  overtake 
him,  he  is  brought  back,  and  must  either  ride  on  the 
kettle-hook  or  drink  water  mixed  with  soot  (rotwasser). 
Afterwards  they  entertain  him.  The  Wepelrot  is  made  of 
a  willow  staff,  on  the  top  of  which  a  garland  in  the  form 
of  a  wheel  is  fastened,  the  spokes  of  which  protmde 
through  the  circumference,  and  on  their  points  have  apples 
stuck.  In  the  middle  of  the  wheel  there  is  a  broad  orna- 
ment of  gold  foil,  from  which  issue  over  the  whole  garland 
thick,  white,  ray-like  bunches  of  willow  shavings. 

In  the  neighbourhood  of  Gorlitz  and  in  the  Ukermark, 
on  New  Yearns  eve,  they  lay  straw-bands  at  meal-time  under 
the  table,  on  which  they  place  their  feet.  When  the  meal 
is  over,  one  of  the  party  creeps  on  all-fours  under  the  table^ 
and  another  sits  upon  him  and  draws  forth  the  straw-bands. 
These  he  takes  into  the  garden  and  binds  them  round  the 
trees  :  they  will  then  bear  well. 

On  New  Yearns  eve  quite  fresh  flax  must  be  put  on  the 
distaff,  and  on  New  Year's  morning  a  brand-new  shirt  of 
newly-spun  linen  should  be  put  on.  On  New  Yearns  eve 
also  there  must  be  no  winding,  else  the  reel  would  turn 
incessantly  the  whole  year  through.  Kirchhoitzen  near 
Hudemuhlen. 

On  New  Year's  day  one  must  cat  millet  or  herring ; 
then  one  will  have  money  throughout  the  year.  Others 
eat  of  nine  (or  seven)  different  dishes,  but  among  which 
there  must  be  '  MohnstriczeP.'     Stemlal. 

1  A  food  made  of  pounded  poppy-seeds  mixed  with  white  bread  and 
milk. 


NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS.       151 

Whoever  sees  his  shadow  without  a  head  on  the  eve  of 
St.  Silvester,  will  die  in  the  next  year. 


TWELFTHTIDE. 

In  many  places  it  is  said  there  may  be  no  spinning  at 
this  season,  but  that  feathers  must  be  plucked.  At  Pech- 
iile,  near  Luckenwalde,  they  say  the  tubes  of  the  plucked 
feathers  should  be  preserved,  as  they  are  good  against 
moths,  bugs  and  other  vermin. 

In  the  country  between  Hameln  and  Minden,  and  in 
other  places,  it  is  said  that  no  dung  should  be  carried  out 
during  the  twelve  days  of  Christmas  (or  Twelfths) ;  else 
the  cattle  will  be  sick  in  the  following  year,  or  wolves  will 
be  drawn  to  the  stall. 

In  some  parts  of  Oldenburg  it  was  formerly  said  that 
no  wheel  should  turn  during  the  twelve  days;  conse- 
quently there  was  neither  spinning  nor  any  carting  out  of 
dung.  In  some  few  houses  all  this  is  observed  even  at 
the  present  day.  In  such  houses  no  sewing  goes  forward ; 
but  if  it  is  indispensable,  they  go  to  a  neighbour's. 

In  some  places  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Weser  they  say, 
that  whoever  spins  or  winds  on  Twelfth-day  eve,  or  during 
the  Twelfths,  will  get,  instead  of  yarn,  black-puddings  or 
sausages.  In  other  places  they  say,  that  those  who  spin 
during  the  Twelfths  spin  toads  into  the  house. 

Brooms  bound  during  the  Twelfths  protect  against 
witchcraft.  When  the  cattle  are  first  driven  out  in  spring, 
such  a  broom  should  be  laid  on  the  threshold  over  which 
they  have  to  pass;  then  nothing  evil  can  harm  them 
throughout  the  year.  If  a  weasel  has  caused  the  udder 
of  a  cow  to  swell,  it  must  be  stroked  thrice  crosswise  with 
such  a  broom,  which  must  then  in  silence  be  laid  under 
the  crib ;  and  so  the  cow  will  get  well.     Prignitz. 

In  the  Twelfths  thread  should  be  spun,    and   broken 


152       NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS. 

arms  or  legs  be  bound  five  or  six  times  round  with  it, 
then  they  will  speedily  become  sound.     Grochwitz. 

In  the  Twelfths  a  piece  of  yarn  should  be  spun  and 
wound  the  contrary  w^ay,  through  which  if  a  child  that  is 
unquiet  be  put  thrice  it  will  be  quiet.  Or  it  may  be  put 
as  many  times  through  the  steps  of  a  ladder,  or  through 
its  mother^s  wedding-dress.      Useclom. 

Into  yarn  spun  during  the  Twelfths  no  moths  will 
come.     Liepe  near  Rathenoiv. 

In  the  Twelfths  neither  baking  utensils  nor  wood  may 
lie  before  the  oven.      Wi^edenhagen  in  Meklenburg. 

In  the  Twelfths  no  peas  should  be  eaten.  Ukermark, 
Meklenburg,  Thuringia. 

In  the  Twelfths,  but  especially  on  Christmas- day,  green 
kale,  pig^s  head  and  pudding  (sausage)  of  lights  should 
be  eaten.      Ukermark. 

At  Quatzow  in  Meklenburg  the  prohibitions  during  the 
Twelfths  are  still  rigidly  observed.  Many  animals  may 
not  be  called  by  their  right  name,  and,  instead  oi  fox,  one 
must  say  long-tail;  instead  of  mouse,  floor-runner  (Bon- 
loper),  etc.^  Whoever  neglects  so  to  do  pays  a  line,  which 
is  afterwards  spent  in  drinking. 

In  the  Havelland  it  is  a  saying,  that  in  the  Twelfths 
they  have  a  calendar  for  the  whole  year;  i.  e.  as  the  wea- 
ther is  during  the  twelve  days,  so  it  will  be  the  whole  year. 

Those  who  w^ar  linen  made  from  yarn  spun  during  the 
Twelfths  will  be  devoured  by  the  wolf.     Usedom  and  TJ^ollin. 

Whatever  is  dreamed  during  the  Twelfths  will  come  to 
pass  in  the  twelve  months  of  tlic  year.     Arnstadt. 

If  hens  are  fattened  with  peas  during  the  Twelfths,  they 
will  lay  many  eggs.     Camern. 

Animals,  unless  known  to  you,  are  not  to  be  trusted 
during  the  Twelfths,  as  the  witches  often  assume  their 
forms,  particularly  those  of  cats,  dogs,  three-legged  hares, 
1  See  vol.  ii.  p.  83. 


NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS.       153 

etc.^  in  order  to  steal  unobserved  into  houses  and  seek  out 
their  booty.  If  a  person  makes  three  crosses  with  his 
hand  against  them,  he  is  safe  from  them.      Camern. 

To  protect  cattle  against  harm  in  the  Twelfths,  some- 
thing of  steel  should  be  concealed  in  their  provender,  a 
sithe  or  the  like;  they  should  also  be  fed  with  stolen 
kale.     Grabow  in  Meklenburg. 

In  the  Twelfths  magpies  should  be  shot  and  burnt  to  a 
powder,  which  is  good  for  the  ague.     Lausitz. 

SUPERNATURAL  BEINGS  OF  TWELFTHTIDE. 
In  the  greater  part  of  the  north  of  Germany  the  belief 
is  not  yet  wholly  defunct,  particularly  among  the  pea- 
santry, of  the  wandering  of  certain  supernatural  beings 
during  the  tvv  elve  days  of  Christmas ;  although,  in  place 
of  the  old  heathenish  idea  with  regard  to  such  beings,  we 
have  now  usually  the  harmless  threat  only  of  certain 
punishments  for  those  who,  by  working,  especially  by 
spinning,  violate  the  injunction  to  keep  this  time  holily. 
The  name,  however,  of  these  beings  is,  although  often  in 
mere  joke,  still  combined  with  the  threatened  punishment, 
but  the  belief  in  them  is  now  almost  everywhere  regarded 
as  superstition ;  and  not  unfrequently,  instead  of  the  old 
prohibitory  formula,  a  facetious  one  is  used,  like  the  fol- 
lowing :  "  Those  who  do  not  spin  in  the  Twelfth  may  not 
wind  on  the  thirteenth. ^^ 

In  Usedom  and  Wollin  they  say,  "  the  Waud  will  come," 
when  all  is  not  spun  off. 

In  the  Twelfths  Fru  Gode  makes  her  tour  and  befouls 
the  distaffs  of  those  who  have  not  spun  all  off  on  Twelfth- 
day.  Neighbourhood  of  Neu-Strelitz  as  far  as  Robel.  In 
the  territory  of  Schwerin  the  same  is  said  of  Frii  AYod ; 
in  Thymen  and  Godendorf,  of  Fru  Was,  or  Fru  Wiisen^ 
In  the  Twelfths  Fru  Gaue  makes  her  tour  at  the  head 
^  See  pp.  74,  75,  and  vol.  ii.  p.  Ill,  No.  48,  and  p.  270,  No»  10. 

H  5 


154       NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS. 

of  the  Wild  Hunt ;  on  which  account  people  keep  their 
doors  shut,  and  avoid  going  out  at  night,  from  the  fear  of 
meeting  her^      Grabow  in  Meklenhurg. 

Fru  Wagcn  (in  some  places  Fru  Goden,  Goed,  Goik, 
Godke,  Godsche)  comes  in  the  night  and  befouls  the  flax, 
if  it  be  left  on  the  distaff  at  night  during  the  Twelfths. 
Mechoiv,  on  the  frontier  of  Meklenburg,  etc. 

In  some  parts  she  is  called  the  Fuik,  the  Fui,  or  the 
Fricke,  in  others,  Fru  Herken. 

In  some  villages  on  the  Huy  they  say  that  when  be- 
tween the  old  and  the  new  year  anything  is  left  on  the 
distaff,  the  ^  Martche  ^  or  ^  Martchen  ^  will  come. 

THE  MART— MARTE— MARTEN— NACHTMART  (THE  NIGHT- 
MARE). 

Under  all  these  denominations  is  designated  that  spec- 
tral being  which  places  itself  on  the  breast  of  the  sleeping, 
depriving  them  of  the  powers  of  motion  and  utterance. 
Its  approach  is  heard  like  the  gnawing  of  a  mouse,  or  the 
soft  tread  of  a  cat.  If  any  one  puts  on  inherited  gloves 
and  seizes  it,  he  can  hold  it  fast ;  or  if  every  aperture  in 
the  room  be  stopt,  as  soon  as  the  sighing  and  groaning  of 
the  sleeper  begin,  the  Mart  will  be  caught. 

A  powerful  remedy  against  the  pressui-e  of  the  night- 
mare is  to  cross  the  arms  and  legs  before  going  to  sleep. 

In  the  pines  branches  are  often  found  quite  curled 
together,  having  almost  the  appearance  of  nests.  AVhen 
it  rains,  persons  should  be  careful  not  to  pass  under  such 
branches ;  for  whoever  is  touched  with  a  rain-drop  from 
one  of  these  nests  will  in  the  night  be  oppressed  with  the 
^Murraue^/ 

Of  persons  whose  eyebrows  grow  together  they  say  he 
(or  she)  is  a  ^lurraue^. 

^  See  p.  74.  -  The  Wendish  name  for  the  nightmare. 

3  See  vol.  ii.  p.  169. 


NORTH  GEHMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUrERSTlTIONS.       155 

Murraues  are  both  male  and  female,  and  are  always 
Sunday^s  children  ^  If  a  Murraue  presses  any  one,  he 
must  say  he  will  give  it  something ;  it  will  then  come  on 
the  following  day  and  fetch  the  present.  Braunsdorf  near 
Filrstenwald. 

The  Murraue  creeps  up  the  body  of  the  sleeper.  Its 
weight  is  first  felt  on  the  feet,  then  on  the  belly,  and  lastly 
on  the  breast,  when  the  sufferer  can  no  longer  move  a 
limb.  If  the  patient  by  chance  surmises  who  it  is,  he 
must  instantly  address  it  by  name ;  it  must  then  make  its 
retreat.     Teupitz. 

If  the  sufferer  supposes  it  to  be  an  acquaintance,  lie 
needs  only  to  call  it  by  name,  and  it  will  appear  bodily. 

It  is  good  against  the  nightmare,  when  going  to  bed, 
to  turn  one^s  shoes  with  the  toes  outward  from  the  bed^. 

When  there  are  seven  boys  or  seven  girls  in  a  family, 
one  is  a  nightmare,  unknown  to  him-  (or  her-)  self  ^. 

DRAK—KOBOLD— FIRE-DRAKE. 

The  Drak  appears  as  a  fiery  stripe  passing  through  the 
air,  as  large  as  the  pole  that  is  placed  across  a  cartload  of 
hay.  If  a  person  on  seeing  him  does  not  get  under  shelter, 
he  will  be  befouled  by  him,  and  not  get  rid  of  the  stench 
till  long  after.  Swinem'tlnde.  He  brings  those  persons 
something  that  have  made  a  compact  with  him.  Bar  sing- 
haiisen  on  the  Deister. 

The  Drake  (Trach)  is  as  large  as  a  cauldron,  and  a  per- 
son can  very  well  sit  in  him,  and  fly  with  him  to  any 
desired  spot.     Bockswiesen  near  Grund. 

The  Kobold  appears  also  as  a  fiery  stripe  with  a  broad 
head,  which  he  usually  shakes  from  one  side  to  the  other. 
If  he  enters  a  house  and  the  serving-man  takes  a  wheel 
off  the  wagon,  he  must  burn  himself  out  of  the  house. 

1  See  vol.  ii.  pp.  203,  272,  No.  33. 

2  See  vol.  ii.  p.  272,  No.  34.  ^  See  p.  29. 


15G       NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS. 

On  tlic  earth  the  Kobold  appears  like  a  black  cat.     Alt- 
mark. 

The  Drake  carnes  treasures  through  the  air.  If  a  per- 
son sees  him,  he  must  cry:  '^  Halb  part  \"  he  will  then 
bring  him  something.  But  he  must  take  care  to  stand 
under  a  roof,  or  the  Drake  will  cover  him  with  filth,  which 
he  will  not  again  get  rid  of.     Hassleben  near  Prenzlau. 

The  Drake  or  Kobold  traverses  the  air  as  a  blue  stripe, 
and  brings  corn.  If  a  knife  or  a  fire-steel  be  cast  at  him, 
he  will  burst,  and  must  let  fall  that  which  he  is  carrying. 
Pechille  near  Luckenwald. 

The  Drake  has  a  head  as  large  as  a  milk-pail,  and  a 
long  tail.     Murow. 

The  Drake  carries  treasures  through  the  air  like  a  bu'd ; 
whoever  possesses  him,  he  will  lie  with  them  in  a  cask  like 
a  calf.  But  the  Kobold  curries  the  horses,  helps  to  draw 
when  the  cart  is  heavy,  and  takes  care  in  general  of  every- 
thing belonging  to  the  stable  and  carts.    W.  Buchholz. 

The  Kobold  brings  luck  to  those  that  possess  him.  The 
Drake  brings  all  kinds  of  things,  as  cream,  cheese,  etc.  A 
person  must  consign  himself  to  him  with  his  own  blood. 
Sachsenburg  near  Oldislehen. 

The  Puks,  Kobold,  or  Drake  is  a  little  fellow  with  red 
jacket  and  cap,  who  may  be  seen  passing  through  the  an- 
as  a  fiery  stripe.      Westliche  Ukermark. 

The  Furdrak  (Fire-drake)  or  Lutche  Ole  is  the  evil  one. 
The  Stepke,  Furdrak  or  Mertche  are  one.  Dalle  on  the 
Liinebury  Heath. 

If  you  desire  to  secure  the  Drake  and  compel  him  to 
yield  up  a  part  of  that  which  he  is  carrying  with  him,  two 
persons  must  place  their  legs  across  each  other's,  in  silence, 
or  draw  oiF  the  fourth  wheel  of  a  wagon,  and  then  hasten 
to  get  under  a  roof,  else  it  will  go  badly. 

In  the  Saterland  they  call  the  Kobold  Alrun  \  a  deno- 
1  See  Grimm,  D.  M.  p.  1153. 


NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS.        157 

minatioii  which  occurs  also  in  East  Friesland.  According 
to  the  account  of  a  woman  in  Nordmohr,  he  is  a  little 
fellow  scarcely  a  foot  high,  whom  they  enclose  in  a 
^  spind  ^ '  and  feed  with  biscuit  and  milk,  whereby  he  be- 
comes so  strong  that  he  can  carry  a  whole  load  of  rye  in 
his  mouth  to  his  master.  In  Neustadt-Godens  it  is  a 
saying,  when  one  has  luck  at  play,  that  he  has  an  Alrun 
in  his  pocket. 

The  Bier-esel  inhabits  the  cellar.  He  gets  the  beer 
into  the  house,  rinses  the  bottles  and  glasses,  washes  down 
the  tables  and  the  like ;  for  all  which  a  can  of  beer  must 
be  set  for  him  at  night ;  else  he  would  be  angry  and  break 
everything.      Grochwitz  near  Torgau. 

DWARFS. 

The  most  usual  name  for  these  in  the  north  of  Germany 
is  '  Unnererdschke  ^  (Subterraneans).  In  the  Harz  they 
call  them  '^Querje,^  'Querxe  ^  (Dwarfs).  In  Scharrel,  in 
the  Saterland,  they  are  called  ^  Olkers,^  and  are  said  to  be 
buried  in  the  old  grave-mounds,  for  which  reason  the  ves- 
sels found  in  these  are  called  Olkerspott  (Olker's  pottery). 
They  are  also  called  ^  Bargmankes '  (Hill-mannikins),  or 
'  Erdmankes  ^  (Earth-mannikins) . 

When  the  dwarfs  have  stolen  a  child  and  left  a  change- 
ling in  its  stead,  this  must  npt  be  touched  with  the  hands, 
but  the  cradle  must  be  overturned,  so  that  it  fall  out,  then 
with  an  old  broom  it  should  be  swept  out  at  the  door, 
when  the  dwarfs  will  come  and  bring  back  the  stolen 
child.  Changelings  are  not  more  than  twenty  years  okP. 
Gorlitz. 

In  Bergkirchen  the  matting  of  the  horses^  manes  is 
ascribed  to  the  Subterraneans. 

1  A  measure  in  Liineburg  equal  to  an  eighth  of  a  schefFel  or  bushel. 

2  Quite  at  variance  with  the  preceding  accounts.  See  pp.  43-15,  and 
vol.  ii.  pp.  174,  175. 


158       NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS. 

JACK  0'  LANTERNS. 

In  the  south  Altmark  they  call  the  Jack  o'  lanterns 
'Dickepoten.'  If  a  person  prays  as  soon  as  he  sees  one, 
he  draws  it  to  him;  if  he  curses,  it  retires  ^  In  some 
parts  they  are  called  Huckepoten,  and  Tuckbolde,  and  are 
said  to  have  been  persons  that  removed  land-marks  -.  In 
the  neighbourhood  of  Magdeburg  they  call  them  Liichte- 
mannekens.  To  cause  them  to  appear,  it  is  sufficient  to 
call  out  "  Ninove,  Ninove/^ 

Jack  o^  lanterns  mislead  persons,  though  they  are  some- 
times serviceable.  In  many  places  they  call  them  land- 
measurers  ^,  and  are  seen  like  figures  of  fire,  or  running 
to  and  fro  with  a  red-hot  measuring-rod.  These  are 
persons  who  have  falsely  sworn  away  land,  or  fraudulently 
measured  it,  or  removed  land- marks.  They  are  frequently 
said  to  be  the  souls  of  unbaptized  children,  that  have  no 
rest  in  the  grave,  and  must  hover  between  heaven  and 
earth  '*.    They  are  also  called  running  fires,  and  wild  fires. 

THE  NIX. 

The  Nickelmann  or  Hakelmann  sits  in  the  water  with 
a  long  well-hook,  with  which  he  drags  children  down, 
when  they  approach  too  near  the  water^s  edge.     Thale. 

When  the  water-fowl  is  heard  to  pipe  in  the  Bode,  some 
one  must  be  drowned ;  the  millers  in  Thale,  therefore,  as 
soon  as  they  hear  it,  throw  in  a  black  hen. 

When  the  tranquillity  of  the  water  is  disturbed,  either 
by  angling  or  with  nets,  the  Nix  may  frequently  be  heard 
to  laugh  and  clap  his  hands  ;  for  somebody  will  be 
drowned.      Teupitz,  Gorlitz. 

THE  \VILD  HUNTSMAN. 

Many  assert  that  the  Wild  Huntsman  and  his  train 
consist  of  the  ghosts  of  deceased  huntsmen. 

^  See  p.  85.  2  See  vol.  ii.  p.  97. 

3  See  p.  11,  and  vol.  ii.  p.  211.  *  See  vol.  ii.  p.  211,  note  '. 


NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS.       159 

The  nocturnal  huntsman  carries  his  head  under  his  arm, 
has  many  dogs  with  him^  and  as  he  goes  takes  the  people 
along  with  him.  If  any  one  calls  to  him  to  bring  him  a 
piece  of  meat,  he  will  find  it  at  his  door  in  the  morning ; 
but  he  can  never  rid  himself  of  it  again,  unless  by  desiring 
the  huntsman  to  bring  salt  ^,  when  the  meat  will  disappear, 
and  the  hunter  himself  will  not  return.     Gbrlitz. 

In  the  Twelfths  the  Helljager  hunts  on  the  earth,  at 
other  times  he  rides  through  the  air.  All  doors  should 
therefore  be  shut  early,  else  three  dogs  will  run  into 
the  house  and  stay  in  it  till  the  next  Twelfths  ^.     Moor- 

hausmoor. 

THE  DEVIL. 

Never  to  miss  one's  aim  in  shooting,  one  must  repeat  : 

Komm  teufel  und  halte  mir  das       Come,  devil,  and  hold  for  me  the 

thier,  game, 

Ich  gebe  dir  meiiie  seele  dafiir.       I'll  give  thee  my  soul  in  return. 

Or  the  communion-bread  should  be   taken  out  of  the 
mouth,  and  a  gun  loaded  with  it  ^.     Swinemunde. 

^^  The  devil  has  thrashed  peas  upon  him,^^  is  said  of  one 
whose  face  is  pock-marked. 

MARRIAGE. 

When  a  bridal  pair  is  going  to  church,  it  is  the  custom, 
before  they  leave  the  house,  to  throw  a  firebrand  on  the 
threshold  over  which  they  must  pass.  The  mother  of  the 
bride  strews  dill  in  her  shoes,  saying : 

Dille  lass  nicht  Wille,  Dill  cease  not  from  will, 

Salz  lass  nicht  nach.  Salt  relax  not. 

The  bride  and  bridegroom  also  strew  dill  and  salt  in  their 
shoes,  as  a  protection  against  witchcraft.     When  before 

1  Seep.  93.  ^  See  pp.  59,  «y. 

3  See  p.  127. 


160        NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS. 

the  altar,  they  must  stand  as  near  together  as  possible,  so 
that  no  one  can  see  between  them>.     Rauen, 

Marriages  should  take  place  in  the  full  of  the  moon ; 
then  everything  afterwards  will  be  in  full.  Tuesdays  and 
Fridays  are  particularly  dedicated  to  marriages.     Stendal. 

At  Marthe,  near  Templin,  on  a  weddmg-day,  it  was  for- 
merly the  custom  for  three  men,  disguised  as  women,  but 
with  blackened  faces,  to  come  at  midnight  and  play  all 
sorts  of  pranks,  and  at  last  make  the  bride  dance  with 
them.     A   nearly   similar   custom    existed  also  in  other 

places. 

On  the  wedding-night  all  the  old  pottery  is  to  be  thrown 
out  before  the  door  of  the  bride  :  the  more  shards  the 
more  luck.     Rauen. 

In  the  Saterland  it  was  formerly  a  custom  to  put  a  ladle 
into  the  hands  of  a  bride,  as  soon  as  she  entered  her  hus- 
band's house,  and  to  lead  her  thrice  round  the  fire. 

BIRTH  AND  BAPTISM. 

When  there  is  a  new-born  child  in  the  house,  nothing 
ought  to  be  lent  out;  else  the  child  will  have  nothing 
hereafter.     Mellin. 

In  some  towns  it  is  a  common  practice  on  the  birthday 
of  a  child  to  give  it  a  cake  with  a  life's  light  placed  on  it, 
which  must  not  be  extinguished,  but  allowed  to  burn  to 

the  end. 

In  the  cradle  of  a  new-born  child  there  should  be  laid 
orant^ ,  blue  marjoram,  black  cumin,  a  right  shirt-sleeve 
and  a  left  stocking ;  the  '  Nickert '  then  cannot  harm  it. 
Pechiile. 

If  a  child  is  born  with  a  mole,  it  must  be  stroked  with 

1  See  vol.  ii.  p.  109,  No.  10. 

2  Antirrhinum  (snapdi'agon),  or,  according  to  others,  niarrubium  (horc- 
hound). 


NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS.       161 

the  hand  of  a  dead  person  of  the  other  sex :  as  the  dead 
decays,  so  will  the  mole  pass  away.  Or  go  in  the  moon^s 
increase  to  a  crossway,  look  at  the  moon,  at  the  same  time 
stroking  the  mole  with  the  hand,  and  say, 

Alles  was  ich  sehe  nimmt  zu.  All  that  I  see  increases, 

alles  was  ich  streiche  nimmt  ab.         aU  that  I  stroke  decreases. 

Sioinemunde. 

One  ought  not  to  go  with  an  unbaptized  child  to  any 
one  :  it  brink's  misfortune  to  the  house.     Steyidal. 

o 


DEATH  AND  BURIAL. 

If  the  master  of  the  house  dies,  one  must  go  into  the 
garden  and  shake  the  trees,  saying :  '^  The  master  is  dead, 
the  master  is  dead,"  else  they  will  decay.  In  like  manner 
a  person  must  go  to  the  beehive,  knock,  and  repeat  the 
same  words,  else  the  bees  will  fly  away.     Rauen. 

When  a  person  dies,  the  window  must  be  opened,  that 
the  soul  may  fly  out.  If  it  is  a  man,  a  comb,  a  razor,  and 
soap  should  be  laid  in  the  coffin.     Rauen. 

If  a  person  dies  in  a  house,  there  should  be  no  baking 
in  it  on  that  day.     Rauen. 

If  new-baked  bread  has  a  crack,  one  of  the  family  will 
die  soon.     Rauen. 

If  a  person  is  sick,  it  should  be  noticed,  after  supper, 
what  direction  the  smoke  of  the  candle,  when  blown  out, 
takes  :  if  towards  the  church,  the  person  will  die.  Swine- 
milnde. 

The  soul  of  a  person  that  dies  on  shipboard  passes  into 
a  bird:  when  it  appears,  it  is  to  predict  the  death  of 
another. 

If  it  be  wished  to  know  whether  an  absent  person  is 
alive  or  dead,  lay  a  piece  of  bread  and  a  coal  on  the  table, 
and  exactly  between  both  hold  a  darning  needle  suspended 
by  a  thread.     If  it  moves  more  towards  the  bread,  the 


162        NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS. 

person  is  well;  if  towards  the  coal,  he  is  dead.  In  a 
similar  manner  it  may  be  ascertained  whether  a  sick  person 
■will  recover  or  die.     Rohrberg  in  the  Altmark. 

WOUNDS,  DISEASES,  ETC. 

If  a  person  has  wounded  himself,  let  him  cut  in  an  up- 
ward direction  a  piece  off  from  a  branch  of  a  fruit-tree, 
and  apply  it  to  the  recent  wound,  so  that  the  blood  may 
adhere  to  it,  and  then  lay  it  in  some  part  of  the  house 
where  it  is  quite  dark,  when  the  bleeding  will  cease. 
Mellin. 

A  charm  against  pain  from  a  wound  {Swinemiinde) . 

Christus  lag  unci  schlief,  Christ  lay  and  slept, 

seine  Wunden  waren  tief,  his  wounds  were  deep, 

sie  kellten  nicht,  they  pained  not, 

sie  schwellten  nicht,  they  swelled  not, 

also  sollen  diese  Wunden  auch  so  shall  these  wounds  also  be. 
sein. 

I,  N,  G.  d.  V.  u.  s.  w.  In  the  name,  etc. 

Another : 

Heil  sind  die  Wunden,  Whole  are  the  wounds, 

heil  sind  die  Stunden,  whole  are  the  hours, 

heihg  ist  der  Tag,  holy  is  the  day, 

da  Wunden  und  W^ehtag  schach.  when  the  wounds  and  illness  befell. 
I,  N,  G.  u.  s.  w.  In  the  name,  etc. 

When  a  limb  has  been  amputated,  the  charmer  takes  a 
twig  from  a  broom,  presses  the  wound  together  with  it, 
wraps  it  in  the  bloody  linen,  and  lays  it  in  a  dry  place, 
saying  : 

Unserm  Herm  Christus  seine  The  wounds  of  our  Lord  Christ, 

Wunden, 

die  werden  nicht  verbvmden,  they  are  not  bound, 

aber  diese  W^mden,  die  werden  but  these  wounds,  they  are  bound, 
verbunden. 

I.  N.  G.  u.  s.  w.  In  the  name,  etc. 

Swmemilnde. 


NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS. 


163 


If  any  one  has  a  cut-wound,  let  it  be  bound  with  adhe- 
sive plaster,  cooled  with  vinegar  and  water,  and  the  follow- 
ing words  be  uttered  : 

Du  Blut  des  Lebens  halte  an,  Thou  blood  of  life,  stop  ! 

wie  Christus  stand  am  Kreuzes-  as  Christ   stood  at  the  cross's 

stamm,  stem, 

halt  an  du  Blut  die  Ader  dein,  stop,  thou  blood,  thy  vein, 

weil  Christus  stand  am  Kreuzes-  because    Christ    stood    at    the 
stamm.  cross's  stem. 

I.  N.  G.  u.  s.  w.  In  the  name,  etc. 

Swinemunde. 

To  stanch  blood  [Swinemunde). 

Ich    ging    iiber    eine    Briicke,  I  went  over  a  bridge  under  which 

worunter  drei  Strome  hefen,  three  streams  ran, 

der  erste  hiess  Gut,  the  first  was  called  Gut, 

der  zweite  hiess  Blut,  the  second  was  called  Blut  (blood), 

der  dritte  hiess  Eipipperjahn  ;  the  third  was   called   '  Eipipper- 

jahn ' ; 

Blut  du  sollst  stille  stahn.  blood,  thou  shalt  stand  still. 

I.  N.  G.  u.  s.  w.  (Dreimal.)  In  the  name,  etc.  {thrice.) 

Another  [Mellin)  : 

Es    gingen   di-ei   Jungfern  'en  There  went  three  maidens  the 

hohlen  Weg,  hollow  way, 

die  erste  nahm  das  runde,  the  first  took  the  round, 

die  zweite  nahm  das  trull,  the  second  took  the  '  trull,' 

the  dritte  chiickt  es  nieder,  the  third  pressed  it  dovm, 

dass  es  nicht  komme  wieder.  that  it  may  not  come  again. 

I.  N.  G.  u.  s.  w.  In  the  name,  etc. 

A  Latin  spell  for  bad  eyes,  quoted  by  Griram  (p.  1196),  closely  resembles 
this  and  also  some  of  the  following  ones :  "  Juvat  siihnectere  incanta- 
tiouis  formulam,  qua  in  Marchia  Brandenburgensi  atque  adjacentibus  re- 
gionibus  in  ophthalmia  curanda  uti  solent  anus  decrepitai,  insanos  ritus 
deperientes,  quam  quidem  factis  variis  gesticulationibus  ac  digitis  ante 
dolentes  oculos  ter  decussatim  motis,  rauco  susnrr amine  scmel  atque  iterum 
emutire  consuescunt,  ita  autem  habent :  *  Ibant  aUquando  tres  puella  in 
via  virente,  prima  noverat  reniedium  aliquod  contra  suffusioneni  oculorum, 
altera  noverat  aliquid  contra  albuginem,  et  tertia  profecto  contra  inflam- 
mationera,  eneque  sanabant  una  ratione  omnia.'  "     In  nomine  Patris,  etc. 

A¥hcn  a  person  has  an  ague,  he  must  go  to  the  church- 


164       NORTH  GERMAN   CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS. 

yard,  and  there  take  a  bone  from  a  grave.  This,  between 
eleven  and  twelve  o^ clock  at  night,  when  all  is  quiet,  he 
must  burn  in  silence,  and  drink  the  coal  in  water:  he 
will  then  get  rid  of  the  fever.     Nahmitz. 

When  a  person  has  an  ague,  he  must  go  into  the  forest, 
walk  round  an  oak,  and  say  : 

Goden  abend  du  gode  olle,  Good  evening,  thou  good  one  old, 

Ick  brenge  di  dat  warme  un  dat     I  bring  thee  the    warm  and  the 
kolle.  cohl. 

The  fever  will  then  depart.     Mittelmark. 

Or  he  may  go  to  a  river,  dip  the  right  foot  in,  and  say : 

In  dies  Wasser  tret  ich,  In  this  water  step  I, 

Christi  Bhit  anbet  ich,  Christ's  blood  adore  I, 

dies  Wasser  und  Christi  Blut  this  water  and  Christ's  blood 

ist  f iir  das  sieben  und  sieben-  is  for  the  seventj-seventh  fever  ^ 
zigsterlei  Fieber  gut.  ^  good. 

This  must  be  spoken  thrice  in  the  name  of  God,  and 
water  at  the  same  time  taken  from  the  river  and  drunk  : 
the  fever  will  then  go  away.     Swinemwide. 

To  write  away  an  ague.    Write  the  following  on  a  leaf : 

Der  Fuchs  ohne  Lungen,  The  fox  without  lungs, 

der  Storch  ohne  Zungen,  the  stork  without  tongue, 

die  Taube  ohne  Gall  the  dove  without  gall 

hilft  fiir  das  sieben  und  sieben-  help  for  the  seven  and  seventieth 
zigsterlei  Fieber  all.  fever  all. 

If  this  leaf  be  worn  round  the  neck,  the  fever  will  keep 
away. 

For  the  ^Zahnrose^  (Erysipelas  in  the  teeth).    (Rauen). 

Es  kam  eine  Jungfer  aus  En-  There  came  a  maiden  from  En- 

gelland  ^,  gcUand, 

eine    Rose    trug    sie    in    ihrer  a  rose  she  carried  in  her  hand, 

Hand, 

])is  die  Sonne  untergang,  when  the  sun  went  down, 

die    sieben    und     siebsigsterlei  the  seven  and  seventieth  zalmrose 

Zahnrosc  versclnvaud.  disap})carcd. 

^  A  fever  probably  that  was  to  be  allowed  to  continue  for  seventy-seven 
days  before  it  was  cliecked  by  the  spell.  -  Angeln  ? 


NORTH  fiERMAN  CUSTOMS    AND  SUPERSTITIONS.       165 

For  the  '  Ililge  ^  (eruption)  and  the  Rose  (erysipelas)  it 
is  good  to  stroke  them  downwards,  blow  thrice  on  the 
cross,  and  say : 
Es   gingen   drei    Jungfern   aiif    There  went  three  maidens  on  the 

grlinen  Wegen,  green  ways, 

die  eine  pfliickt  die  Bknnen  ah,  the  first  gathered  flowers, 
die  zweite  pfluckt  die  Liljen  ab,  the  second  gathered  hlies, 
die  dritte  trieb  das  Hilge  unde     the  third  drove  away  the  '  hilge ' 

die  Rose  ab.  and  the  rose. 

Swinemunde. 

To  cure  the  Rose.  Silently,  and  as  well  if  after  sunset, 
the  wise  man  enters  and  examines  the  Rose,  w^hether  it  is 
a  running,  '  brand  ^^  or  white  Rose,  and  says  accordingly  : 
Brand  (laufende,  weisse)  Rose     '  Brand '  (running,  white),  Rose,  I 

ick  bote "  di,  expel  thee, 

Ira  namen  Gottes  verstrikst  du     in  God's  name  betake  thee  hence. 

di. 

I.  N.  G.  u.  s.  w.  In  the  name,  etc. 

At  the  same  time  making  the  sign  of  the  cross  three  times 

over  the  diseased  part.  This  he  must  repeat  on  three  several 

days.  It  is  particularly  good  to  do  it  on  Fridays.   Camern. 

To  allay  the  ^Hilg'  (MS.  from  Swinemunde), 
Es  gingen    (bei    Jungfern    an     There  went   three   maidens  to   a 

einen  Berg,  hill, 

Der   eine   hat   es   schmal,    der     the  one  had  it  narrow,  the  other 

andre  hat  es  platt.  had  it  flat. 

I.  N.  G.  u.  s.  w.  In  the  name,  etc. 

To  allay  the  tooth-ache  (MS.  from  Sivinemilnde) . 
Du  sollst  nicht  weh  thun,  Thou  shalt  not  ache, 

du  sollst  nicht  schellen,  thou  shalt  not  break  (scale,  shell 

off"), 
du  sollst  nicht  schwellen,  thou  shalt  not  swell, 

du  sollst  nicht  ritten,  thou  shalt  not  torture  (tear,  rend), 

du  sollst  nicht  splitten,  thou  shalt  not  si)lit, 

du  sollst  nicht  weh  thun.  thou  shalt  not  ache. 

I.  N.  G.  u.  s.  w.  In  the  name,  etc. 

1  Inflammatory.  -  Mhg.  buersen  =  wegschaffen,  stillen. 


166       NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS. 


When  a  person  has  tooth-ache,  let  him  go  and  complain 
to  a  tree^  by  preference  to  a  peartree.  This  is  to  be  done 
by  taking  hold  of  the  tree,  going  thrice  round  it,  and 
saying  : 

Peartree,  I  complain  to  thee, 
three  worms  sting  me  ; 
the  one  is  grey, 
the  second  is  blue, 
the  third  is  red, 

I  would  wish  they  were  all  three 
dead. 

In  the  name,  etc. 

For  the  ringworm  or  tetter  {Paretz) .  Go  to  a  yellow 
willow,  stroke  the  tetter  thrice  with  one  of  its  branches^ 
and  say : 

The  tetter  and  the  willow, 
they  would  both  contend, 
the  willow,  it  won, 
the  tetter  it  vanish'd. 

In  the  name,  etc. 


Birnbaum,  ich  klage  dir, 
drei  Wiirmer  die  stechen  mir ; 
der  einer  ist  grau, 
der  andre  ist  blaue, 
der  dritte  ist  roth, 
ich  wollte  wiinschen  sie  waren 
alle  di-ei  todt. 

I.  N.  G.  u.  s.  w. 


Die  Zeter  und  die  Weide, 
die  wollten  beide  streiten, 
die  Weide,  die  gewann, 
die  Zeter,  die  verschwand 
I.  N.  G.  u 


Or  [Swinemiinde) , 

Die  Flechte  und  die  Weide 
gingen  beid'  im  Streite, 
die  Weide,  die  verging, 
die  Flechte,  die  yerschwindt^ 


The  ringworm  and  the  willow 
both  enter'd  into  strife, 
the  willow  it  decay'd, 
the  tetter  disappear'd. 


Or, 

Der  Mond  und  die  Flecht 
die  liegen  beid'  im  Recht, 
die  Flechte  und  der  Mond 
fingen  beide  an  zu  gehn, 
der  Mond,  der  gewann, 
die  Flechte,  die  verschwand 


The  moon  and  the  ringwonn, 

they  were  both  at  strife, 

the  ringworm  and  the  moon 

began  both  to  go, 

the  moon  he  2  won, 

the  ringworm  (hsaj)pcar'd. 

For  a  fire  (MS.  from  Swinemunde). 
Es  gingen  drei  Ileihgen  wohl     There  went  three  holy  men  over 
iiber  das  Land,  the  land. 


>  verschwand 


2  See  vol.  i.  p.  5,  note  -. 


NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS.        167 


(la  begegnet  ilinen  der  hoUische 

Feueibrand. 
Er  sprach  :  Du  sollst  weichen, 
und  der  Schaden  soil  sclileiclien. 
I.  N.  G.  u.  s.  w.  (Dreimal.) 


there    they  met   with    a    hellish 

fire. 
He  said.  Thou  shalt  withdraw, 
and  the  harm  shall  slink  away. 

In  the  name,  etc.  (thrice.) 


To  allay  the  pain  of  a  burn  (MS.  from  Swinemunde) . 

There  went  three  holy  men  *  * 


Es  gingen  drei  heiligen  Wehtag^ 

auf  einen  schmalen  Weg, 

der  eine  pfliickt  das  Laub  vom 

Baum, 
der  andi-e  pfliickt  das  Gras  vom 

Weg, 
der  di-itte  nahm  die  Wehtag  weg. 
I.  N.  G.  u.  s.  w. 


upon  a  narrow  way, 

the  one  pluck'd  the  leaves  from 

the  tree,  \ 

the  second  pluck'd  the  grass  from 

the  way, 
the  third  took  the  malady  away. 
In  the  name,  etc. 


When  a  person  has  burnt  himself^  he  must  stroke  the 
part  upwards  thrice^  and  say :  [Swinemunde.) 


Wie  hoch  ist  der  Haben, 
wie  roth  ist  der  Krebs, 
wie  kalt  is  die  Todtenhand, 
damit  stille  ich  den  Brand. 

I.  N.  G.  u.  s.w. 


As  the  heaven  is  high, 
as  the  crayfish  is  red, 
as  the  dead  hand  is  cold, 
therewith  still  I  the  burn. 

In  the  name,  etc. 


For  the  Stot  (disorder  of  the  eye,  sty  ?).  Take  in 
silence  a  little  stone  from  the  field,  press  it  on  the  eye,  and 
lay  it  afterwards  in  the  place  whence  it  was  taken.  Du- 
ring the  operation  say  thrice  : 

Es   gingen   drei   Jungfern  auf  There  went  three  maidens  on  the 

griinen  Wegen,  green  ways, 

die  eine  hob  die  Steine  aus  den  one  hfted  the  stones  out  of  the 

Wegen,  ways, 

die  zweite  hob  das  Laub  vom  the   second    gather'd  the    leaves 

Baura,  from  the  tree, 

die  diitte  hob  das  Stot  aus  dem  the  third  removed  the  '  stot '  from 

Auge.  the  eye. 

I.  N.  G.  u.  s.  w.  In  the  name,  etc. 

Swinemunde. 


Wehtag  is,  no  doubt,  an  error  of  the  scribe  or  press. 


168       NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS. 


To  charm  away  the  gout.     Let  the  patient  completely 
strip  himself  before  sunrise  or  after  sunset,  and  say : 


Die'  reissende,  laufende  Giclit, 

ich  besclnvbre  (hch  bei  dem  hbch- 

sten  Gericht, 
ich  beschwore  dich  bei  dem  hoch- 

sten  Mann, 
der  dir  die  reissende,   laufende 

Gicht  stillen  kann. 


Thou  tearing,  running  (flying) 
gout, 

I  conjure  thee  by  the  highest  tri- 
bunal, 

1  conjure  thee  by  the  highest 
man, 

who  the  tearing,  nmning  gout 
can  allay. 


For  dizziness  (MS.  from  Swinemunde). 


Der  Himmel  ist  hoch,  t 
die  Wolken  sind  hell,  t 
so  vde  sich   der  Himmel  t  zer- 

theilt,  t 
zertheilt  sich  der  Schwindel  im 

augenblick  und  schnell.  t 
I.  N.  G.  u.  s.  w. 

To  stanch  blood^. 

Auf  unserm   Herrn   Gott    sein 

Haupt, 
da  bliihen  drei  Rosen, 
die  erste  ist  seine  Tugend, 
die  zweite  ist  seine  Jugend, 
die  dritte  ist  sein  Will. 
Blut,  steh  du  in  der  Wunde  still, 

dass  du  Aveder  Geschwiire 
noch  Eiterbeulen  gebest. 

I.  N.  G.  u.  s.  vv. 

Or, 

Bloet  sta  still ! 

na  uns  Ilerr  Christus  syn  Will. 

Im  namen  Gottes  des  Vaters  und 

Sohn : 
nu  steit  dat  Bloet  schon. 


The  heaven  is  high, 
the  clouds  are  clear, 
so  as  the  heaven  dissolves, 

shall  the  dizziness  dissolve  in  a 
moment  and  quickly. 

In  the  name,  etc. 


On  the  head  of  our  Lord  God 

there  bloom  three  roses, 

the  first  is  his  virtue, 

the  second  is  his  youth, 

the  third  is  his  will. 

Blood,  stand  thou  in  the  wound 

still, 
so  that  thou  neither  sore 
nor  abscess  givest. 

In  the  name,  etc. 


Blood,  stand  still ! 

after  our  Lord  Christ's  will. 

In  the  name  of  God  the  Father 

and  Son : 
now  the  blood  aheady  stops. 


Du? 


The  following  rimes  are  from  Miillenhoff,  pp.  511,  sqq. 


NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS. 


169 


Or, 

Ich  sage  dir,  Blut,  stehe  still, 
es  ist  Maria  ihr  Will, 
es  ist  Maria  ihr  Begehr, 
steh  du  mir  nun  und  immermehr. 
I.  N.  G.  u.  s.  w. 

For  (Mord)  apoplexy. 

Mord,  du  liest  aer  daelschlaen  : 

unse  Herr  Christus  segt, 
du  scliast  wedder  upstaen. 

Or, 

Uns  Herr  Christus  un  de  Moert, 
de  giingen  tosamen  deer  en  enge 
Poert. 

Uns  Herr  Christus  de  ge- 

wann, 
de   Schlag  und    de    Moert 
verschwand. 


I  say  to  thee,  blood,  stand  still, 
it  is  Mary's  ^ill, 
it  is  Mary's  desire, 
stand  thou  now  and  evermore. 
In  the  name,  etc. 


Apoplexy,  thou  hast  struck  her 

down  : 
our  Lord  Christ  sayeth, 
thou  again  shalt  rise. 


Our  Lord  Christ  and  the  apoplexy 
went  together  through  a  narrow 
gate. 

Oui*  Lord  Christ  won, 

the    stroke  ^   and  apoplexy 
disappear'd. 


For  the  gout.     Take  hold  of  an  oak,  or  a  young  shoot 
of  one  already  felled  (Ekenhessen),  and  say : 

Oak-shoot,  I  to  thee  complain, 

all  the  torturing  gout  plagues  me. 

I  cannot  for  it  go, 

thou  canst  stand  it. 

The  first  bird  that  flies   above 

thee, 
to  him  give  it  in  his  flight, 
let  him  take  it  with  him  in  the  air. 
In  the  name,  etc. 


Ekenhessen,  ik  klag  dy, 

all  de  ryten  Gicht  de  plagt  my. 

Ik  kaun  dar  nich  faer  gaen, 

du  kannst  damit  bestaen. 

Den  eersten  Vagel,  de  sewer  dy 

fliigt, 
den  gif  dat  mit  in  de  Flucht, 
de  naem  dat  mit  in  de  Lucht. 
I.  N.  G.  u.  s.  w. 

For  the  rickets. 

Engelsche  Krankheit  verswinn, 
wie  de  Dau  an  de  Siinn, 
wde  de  Kukuk  vor  den  Sa;ven- 
stern. 


English  malady  disappear, 
like  the  dew  in  the  sun, 
like  the  cuckoo  before  the  seven 
stars''. 


Paralytic. 


2  The  ursa  major,  or  Charles's  wain. 

I 


170       NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS, 


For  tetters. 

De  Hecliel  un  de  Flechel,  The  hatchel  and  the  ringworm, 

de  gingenallbeidacwer  enStecheP.  they  both  went  over  a  stile. 
De  Ileehel  de  gewunn,  The  hatchel  won, 

and  the  ringworm  disappear'd. 


un  de  Flechel  verswunn. 


I.  N.  G.  u. 


In  the  name,  etc. 


For  the  tinea  or  scald  head  (Barmgrund).  Fetch  water 
in  silence^  wash  the  head  with  it  lukewarm,  saying, 

So  standen  drei  Madchen  wohl 
vor  dem  Brunn, 

de  ene  de  wusch,  de  ander  de 
wrung'. 

Darin  ist  verdi'unken  en  Katt  un 
en  Hunt, 

damit  verdiTw  ik  dy  den  Barm- 
grunt. 

Or,  more  intelligibly.  To  eradicate  this  eruption,  let 
a  person  wash  himself  in  a  puddle,  in  which  it  is  usual  to 
drown  dogs  and  cats,  and  repeat  the  formula :  "  In  this 
water,  in  which  many  a  cat  and  dog  has  been  drowned,  do 
I  mitigate  the  '  barmgrund^/  '' 

For  the  erysipelas  (Helldink). 


So  stood  three  maidens  before 

the  well, 
the  one,  she  wash'd,  the  second, 

she  wrung. 
Therein  were  di'own'd  a  cat  and 

a  dog, 
therewith  I  drive  away  thee,  the 

barmurund. 


Ik  segg :  Helldink,  Helldink, 
du  schast  ni  st'aken, 
du  schast  ni  briiken. 

Helldink,  Helldink, 
du  schast  ni  kellen, 
du  schast  ni  schwellen. 
Dat  schast  du  ny  doen, 
Dat  schast  du  ny  doen. 

Or, 

Peter  unPaul  gingen  sewertMoer. 
Wat  begegen  iier  daer? 

Ilelldmk,  Helldink— 
"  Helldink,  wo  wuUt  du  bin?" 

"  Na'n  Dorp." 

1  A.-Sax.  stigel. 


I  say  :  Helldink,  Helldink, 
thou  shalt  not  prick, 
thou  shalt  not  break. 

Helldink,  Helldink, 
thou  shalt  not  torment, 
thou  shalt  not  swell. 
That  shalt  thou  never  do. 
That  shalt^iou  never  do. 


Peter  and  Paul  went  over  a  moor. 
"What  met  them  there  ? 

Helldink,  Helldink. 
"  Helldink,  whither  wilt  thou?" 

"  To  the  village." 

2  Grimm,  D.  M.  p.  cxlv.  1st  edit. 


NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS.       171 


"Watwulltdudaer?" 

"  Kellen  im  schwellen  uii  wee 
doen." 
*'Dat  schast  dii  ny  doen. 
"Dat   befiiel    ik    dy   in   Gottes 

Namen." 
Or, 

Hildink,  ik  ra'  dy. 
Ra'  ik  dy  nicli  seer, 
so  jag'  ik  dv  nocli  vael  meer. 
I.  N.  G.  u.  s.  w. 


"What  wilt  thou  there?" 

"  Torment  and  swell  and  cause 
pain." 
"  That  thou  slialt  not  do. 
"  That  I  command  thee  in  God's 
name." 

Helldink,  I  counsel  thee. 
If  I  counsel  thee  not  much, 
yet  I  di'ive  thee  away  much  more. 
In  the  name,  etc. 


This  is  to  be  said  thrice,  after  a  pause  thrice  again,  and 

after  a  second  pause  thrice  again.  At  each  time  the  diseased 

part  is  to  be  blown  on  crosswise. 

Or: 

instead  of  blowing  crosswise,  fire  may  be  struck  with  flint 

and  steel  in  a  cross  direction  : 


Hier  schrief  ik  enen  Rink 

mit  en  stalern  Messer. 
De  Rink  is  sunt, 
dat  Hildink  verschwiind. 

Or, 

Rode  Ros'  un  witte  Ros', 
dunkle  Ros'  un  helle  Ros', 

verswinn, 
wie  de  Dau  vor  de  Siinn. 

For  the  ^Bellrose/ 

Petrus  und  Paulus 

gingen  net  Kruet  te  soken ; 

daer  wollen  se  de  Ros'  mit  ver- 

teenS 
de  Kelleros',  de  Schwelleros', 

de  Stakeros',  de  Brakeros', 


deBlatteros'; 


Here  mark  I  a  ring 
with  a  steel  knife. 

The  ring  is  whole, 

the  heldink  has  disappear'd. 

Red  rose  and  white  rose, 
dark  rose  and  light  rose, 

vanish, 
like  the  dew  before  the  sun. 


Peter  and  Paul 

went  out  plants  to  seek ; 

there  they  would  take  the  rose 
away  with  them, 

the  paining-rose,  the  swelling- 
rose, 

the  pricking-rose,  the  breaking- 
rose, 

the  leafy  rose  i 


For  verzieheu  ? 


I  2 


172       NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS. 

awer  aliens  woUen  se  damit  ver-     but   they  would   take   away  all 
teen.  with  them. 

I.  N.  G.  u.  s.  w.  In  the  name,  etc. 

For  an  excrescence.  Lay  the  finger  on  it  but  without 
looking  at  it,  and  say : 

Was  ich  seh,  das  wachst,  What  I  see,  that  waxes, 

was  ich  [nicht]  seh,  das  vergeht.     what  I  see  not,  that  decays. 
I.  N.  G.  u.  s.  w.  In  the  name,  etc. 

For  warts  there  is  but  one  remedy ;  they  are  to  be  got 
rid  of  only  in  moonshine.  During  the  moon's  increase 
go  into  the  open  air,  look  steadfastly  at  the  moon,  and 
stroke  with  the  hand  over  the  warts,  saying  these  words : 

Was  ich  ansehe,  nimmt  zu,  What  I  look  on  increases, 

was  ich  iiberstreiche,  nimmt  ab.      what  I  stroke  over  decreases. 

For  a  whitlow.  Not  to  be  uttered  too  rapidly,  and  only 
once  each  time. 

De  Adel  un  de  Stoel,  The  whitlow  and  the  stool  ^ 

de  gungen  beid  an  enen  Poel.  they  went  both  to  a  pool. 

De  Adel  de  verswunn.  The  whitlow  it  disappear'd, 

de  Stoel  de  gewunn.  the  stool  it  won. 

I.  N.  G.  u.  s.  w.  In  the  name,  etc. 

For  a  pain  in  the  finger. 

Ik  rad'  en  Baten  I  ad^-ise  a  cure 

mit  Ileisterknaken,  with  magpies'  bones, 

mit  Kreieufciten,  with  feet  of  crows, 

schal  dy  de  Weedag'  uten  Finger  that  shall  drive  the  pain  out  of 
staken.  thy  finger. 

For  a  sprained  foot. 

Ik  hoi'  myn  Foet  in'n  Katten-     I  hold  my  foot  in  the  cat's  way, 

gang' 2, 
so  stil  ik  wol  den  Gnirrband  ^.         and  so  I  still  the  spram. 

1  Purgatio  alvi  ?  "  Through  which  the  cats  can  leap. 

3  Correctly  Knirrhand. 


NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS.       173 

For  a  speck  on  the  eye. 

Daer  seten  dre  Jiingfern  an  den  There  sat  three  maidens  in  the 

Weg,  way, 

de  een  de  puest  dat  Sant  uten  Weg,  one  blew  the  sand  out  of  the  way, 

de  ander  de  puest  dat  Lov  van-  the  second  blew  the  leaves  from 

nen  Boem,  the  tree, 

de  driirr  de  puest  dat  Mael  von  the  third  blew  the  speck   from 

Oeg.  the  eye. 

I.  N.  G.  u.  s.  w.  In  the  name,  etc. 

For  a  sprained  wrist.  At  sunrise  lay  the  arm,  from  the 
elbow  to  the  point  of  the  finger,  flat  on  the  threshold,  and 
remain  within  the  house.  Let  the  charmer  then  take  an 
axe,  and  place  himself  before  the  door,  saying  :  "  I  chop, 
I  chop,  I  chop  ! "  The  patient  is  then  to  ask :  '^  What 
dost  thou  chop  ?  "  The  operator  will  answer  :  "  The 
sprain."  Let  the  patient  then  take  the  axe,  and  stroke 
the  arm  with  it  crosswise  thrice,  in  the  name  of  God.  The 
axe  is  then  to  be  restored  to  its  place  in  silence,  and  the 
affliction  will  subside.     Swinetnunde, 

At  Rauen,  near  Fiirstenwalde,  it  is  said,  when  a  person 
has  a  violent  headache,  he  has  the  perverse,  or  black,  elves. 
The  remedy  is,  to  bind  a  cloth  round  his  head  at  night, 
with  which  he  is  to  sleep,  and  on  the  following  morning 
to  go  with  it  to  a  wise  man,  who  will  charm  the  cloth ; 
the  elves  will  then  depart.  Besides  the  black  elves,  which 
are  the  worst,  there  are  also  red  elves  and  white  elves  ;  but 
whatever  their  colour  may  be,  the  malady  shows  itself 
chiefly  in  causing  a  loss  of  memory. 

If  a  child  by  much  crying  has  got  a  rupture,  take  it  to 
a  young  oak,  which  split  in  two  lengthwise,  and  draw  the 
child  through  the  split.  Then  bind  the  parts  thus  rent 
asunder  together,  and  plaster  the  rent  over  with  loam.  If 
the  oak  continues  growing  and  the  wound  heals  up,  the 
rupture  will  also  be  healed.     Rauen.     Delmenhorst. 

This  method  of  curing  a  ruptured  child  was  also  known  in  England. 
White,  in  his  History  of  Selhorne,  informs  us  that,  "  in  a  farm-yard,  near 
the  middle  of  the  village,  stands  at  this  day  (an.  1789)  a  row  of  pollard 


174       NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS. 

ashes,  which,  by  the  seams  and  long  cicatrices  down  their  sides,  manifestly 
show  that,  in  former  times,  they  have  been  cleft  asunder.  These  trees, 
when  young  and  flexible,  were  severed  and  held  open  by  wedges,  while 
i-uptured  children,  stripped  naked,  were  puahed  through  the  apertures, 
under  a  persuasion  that,  by  such  a  process,  the  poor  bal)es  would  be  cured 
of  their  infirmity.  As  soon  as  the  operation  was  over,  the  tree,  in  the 
suffering  part,  was  plastered  with  loam,  and  carefully  swathed  up.  If 
the  part  coalesced  and  soldered  together,  as  usually  fell  out,  where  the 
feat  was  performed  with  any  adroitness  at  all,  the  party  was  cured ;  but 
where  the  cleft  continued  to  gajie,  the  operation,  it  was  supposed,  would 
prove  ineffectual.  We  have  several  persons  now  living  in  the  village,  who, 
in  their  childhood,  were  supposed  to  be  healed  by  this  superstitious  cere- 
mony, derived  down,  perhaps,  from  our  Saxon  ancestors,  wuio  practised  it 
before  their  conversion  to  Christianity." 

Tetters  and  warts  disappear  if  touched  with  the  hand 
of  a  corpse.     Stendal. 

When  you  have  eaten  eggs  the  shells  are  to  be  broken^ 
else  you  will  get  the  ague.     Mark. 

This  is  also  done  in  England,  and  for  the  sound  reason,  that  the  witches 
may  not  use  them  as  boats.  The  same  injunction  is  current  likewise  in 
Belgium,  but  whether  from  the  same  prudential  motive  is  not  stated. 

HOUSE,  FIELD,  ETC. 

On  entering  a  new  dwelling  the  first  thing  to  be  pro- 
vided is  bread;  you  will  then  always  have  your  bread 
there. 

If  you  bring  corn-flowers  with  you  into  the  house,  the 
bread  will  grow  mouldy.     Mellin. 

What  a  person  dreams  the  first  night  in  a  house  will 
come  to  pass. 

On  Saturday  night  there  should  be  no  spinning  after 
sunset.  Altmark  and  Meklenburg.  Else  the  mice  will 
nestle  in  it.     Near  Wolfenbuttel. 

On  Thursday  evening  there  should  be  no  spinning,  nor 
any  dung  carried  out  on  that  day.     Altmark. 

In  planting  trees  the  planter  should  grasp  them  with 
both  lutnds,  and  somebody  should  stand  by  :  they  will 
then  bear  well.     Stendal. 


NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS.        175 

The  first  fruit  of  a  tree  should  be  gathered  into  a  large 
sack,  and  some  left  on  the  tree ;  then  it  will  always  heur 
well.     Stendal. 

Peas  should  be  sown  only  on  Wednesdays  and  Satur- 
days ;  else  the  birds  will  carry  them  off.     Stendal. 

Millet  sown  after  sunset  will  not  be  eaten  by  the  birds. 
Camern. 

When  the  cattle  go  for  the  first  time  to  the  pasture^ 
a  piece  of  turf  should  be  laid  before  the  door ;  they  will 
then  not  get  the  grass  distemper.     Mellin. 

That  the  witches  may  have  no  power  over  a  newly 
bought  beast,  it  must  be  dragged  into  the  stall  backwards  ; 
and  in  order  that  it  may  thrive,  the  first  time  it  goes  to 
pasture,  earth  should  be  put  into  its  mouth,  which  it 
should  be  made  to  swallow.     Mellin, 

When  unruly  beasts  will  not  be  driven  to  market  or 
elsewhere,  pluck  at  three  several  times  some  hairs  from 
their  eye-lashes  and  put  them  in  your  pocket ;  they  will 
then  go  tamely.      Camern, 

When  beasts  are  driven  to  pasture  for  the  first  time, 
strew  sand  or  straw  before  the  stall-door,  so  that  the 
animals  must  tread  on  it.  The  traces  made  by  them,  if 
thrown  back  into  the  stall,  will  cause  them  to  find  yard 
and  stall  again  without  help.  An  axe  and  a  broom  laid 
crosswise  on  the  threshold  of  the  yard-gate  will  have  the 
same  effect,  and  moreover  protect  them  against  witchcraft. 
Camern. 

A  person,  on  entering  into  service,  should  immediately 
get  a  piece  of  wood  in  the  new  abode,  wrap  it  in  a  rag  or 
morsel  of  paper,  and  wear  it  for  three  days  under  the  arm  : 
the  party  will  then  have  a  kind  master  and  mistress 
throughout  the  year.      Camern. 

If  anything  is  stolen  from  a  person,  to  discover  the 
thief,  take  a  family  psalm-book,  open  it  and  place  on  it  a 
family  key,  saying :  '^N.  N.  has  stolen  it  ^^  (naming  the 
thing)  ;  the  other  (N.  N.?)  will  answer  :  "  No,  he  has  nor 


176       NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS. 

stolen  it/'  If  such  is  the  case,  the  key  will  remain  mo- 
tionless j  but  if  he  has  really  stolen  it,  the  key  will  move 
from  its  place.     Rauen. 

If  anything  is  stolen  from  a  person,  he  must  take  an 
inherited  book,  and  in  it  bind  an  inherited  key,  then  hold 
it  on  two  fingers  and  say :  "  Inherited  book  (Erwbok)  I 
ask  thee,  has  A.  B.  stolen  my  linen  (or  whatever  else  it  may 
be  )  ?  or  C.  D.  ?  '^  At  whichever  person's  name  the  book 
turns,  that  is  the  thief.     Havelland. 

To  fix  a  thief  (MS.  from  Swinemunde) . 
Unser  Heiland  Christus  Jesus,     Our  Saviour  Christ  Jesus,  lie  went 

der  ging  in  den  Garten,  into  the  garden, 

derheiligeuEngelundderJung-     to  await  the  holy  angels  and  the 

frau  Maria  zu  warten  ;  Vu-gin  ]\Iary  ; 

da  kamen  die  Diebe  und  wollten     there  came  the  thieves  and  would 

das  Kindlein  stehlen,  steal  the  little  child, 

das  konnten  vier  und  zwanzig     whom  four  and  twenty  legions  of 

Legionen    Engel   nicht   ver-         angels  could  not  conceal. 

hehlen. 

"  Binde,  Petrus,  binde,  "  Bind,  Peter,  bmd, 

eilend  und  geschwinde,  hastily  and  quick, 

dass  der  Dieb  uns  stehe  stille  that  the  thief  may  stand  still 

wie  ein  Stock,  a^  a  stock, 

und  schreie  ^^'ie  ein  Bock.  and  cry  like  a  goat. 

Binde,  Petrus,  binde.  Bind,  Peter,  bmd, 

dass  der  Dieb  uns  stehe  stille  that  the  thief  may  stand  still 

und  alle  Sterne  zahle,  and  count  all  the  stars, 

die  an  dem  Ilimmel  stehen.  that  stand  in  heaven. 

Binde,  Petrus,  binde.  Bind,  Peter,  bind, 

dass  der  Dieb  uns  stehe  stille,  that  the  thief  may  stand  still, 

dass    meine   leiblichen    Augen  that  my  botUly  eyes  may  see  him, 

ihn  sehen, 
und  meine  leibhche  Zunge  ihn     and  my  boddy  tongue  speak  to 

spreche.  ^"°^- 

Das    gebiet'  ich   dir   Dieb    im     That  I  command  for  thee,  thief,  in 

'Namen  des  heiligen  Bartus,  the  name  of  St.  Bart, 

Der  aller  Kornlein  Meister  ist."    who  is  of  eveiy  gram  the  master. 

This  spell  is  to  be  uttered  after  sunset,  the  utterer,  at 
the  same  time,  going  three  times  round  the  place  to  which 
he  supposes  the  thief  will  come.    WhUe  so  doing  he  must 


NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS. 


1 


not  look  about,  and  must  stop  exactly  at  the  point  from 
which  he  started,  and  then  say  thrice  :  "  In  the  name  of," 
etc.  On  the  following;  morning  the  thief  will  be  found 
fast  bound  to  the  spot.  He  must  then  loose  him  with 
these  words  :  "  Hear,  thief,  I  hereby  release  thee.  In  the 
name  of,"  etc.  But  this  must  be  done  before  sunrise, 
else  the  thief  will  turn  black,  and  die  within  a  year. 
To  fix  a  thief  (oral  from  Swinemunde), 


Unsre  Mutter  Gottes,  die  ging 

wohl  iiber  Land, 
sie  nahm  ihr  liebes  Kind   bei 

der  Hand  ; 
da  kamen  drei,  drei,  drei  Diebe, 

die  wollten  ihr  das  Kind  stehlen, 

sie  schrie  : 
"  Sanct  Peter  bind',  Sanct  Peter 

bind',  Sanct  Peter  binde." 
*'  leh  habe  gebunden  mit  Gottes 

Hand, 
mit  meinen  eignen  Handen, 
mit  Todeslianden, 
mit  eisernen  Banden, 
dass   Dieb   und    Diebin   sollen 

stehn, 
imd  nicht  von  der  Stelle  gehn. 
Sie  sollen  stehen  w^e  ein  Stock, 
und  sehen  wie  ein  Bock, 
zahlen  alle  Sterne,  die  am  Him- 

mel  stehn, 
und  alle   Tropfen,   die   in   das 

frunde  Meer  gehn." 


Om'  mother  of  God  was  going  over 

the  land, 
she  took  her  dear  child  by   the 

hand; 
then    came   three,   three,    three 

thieves, 
who  would  steal   the  child  from 

her,  she  cried  : 
"  Saint  Peter   bind.  Saint    Peter 

bind.  Saint  Peter  bind." 
"  I  have  bound  with  God's  hand. 

with  my  own  hands, 

with  death's  hands, 

with  iron  bands, 

that  male  and  female  thief  shall 

stand, 
and  not  go  from  the  place. 
They  shall  stand  as  a  stock, 
and  look  like  a  goat, 
count  all  the  stars  that  stand  in 

heaven, 
and  all  the  drops  which  go  into 

the  deep  sea." 


The  release  is  in  the  following  words 


Stehst  du  hier  in  Teufelsband, 

so  gehe  hin  in  Gottes  Hand ; 
ich   stosse   dich  von    mir    mit 
meiner  linken  Hand. 

I.  N.G.u.  s.w. 


As  thou  standest  here  in  the  devirs 

band, 
so  go  hence  into  the  hand  of  God  ; 
I  thrust  thee  from  me  with  my 
left  hand. 

In  the  name,  etc, 
i5 


178        NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS. 


Another  form  ^  : 

Mutter  Maria  reiste  wolil  iiber 

das  Land, 
sie  hat  ihr  liebes  Kind  bei  der 

Hand. 
Da  kameu  die  Diebe  und  woll- 
ten  stehlen. 

Da  sprach  sie  zu  St.  Peter  : 
"  Binde  ! " 
St.   Peter  sprach :    "  Ich  habe 

gebunden 
mit  eisernen  Banden,  mit  Gottes 
Han  den. 

Du,  Dieb  (und  Diebin),  sollst^ 
gebunden  sein. 
Wiederum  soUst  du  stille  stehen 

und  nirgends  hingehen. 

Du  soUt^  stehen  als  ein  Stock 

und  Starr  sehen  als  ein  Bock, 

und  ziihlen  all  das  Gras,  das 

auf  der  Erde  wachst. 

Wiederum  sollt  du  stille  stehen 

und  nirgends  hingehen, 
sollt  stehen  als  ein  Stock  und 
Starr  sehen  als  ein  Bock, 
und  zahlen  die  Sterne,  die  am 
Himmel  stehen. 
Wiederum  sollt  du  stille  stehen 

und  nirgends  hingehen ; 
du  sollt  stehen  als  ein  Stock  imd 
Starr  sehen  als  ein  Bock, 
und    zahlen    den  Sand,  der 
iiegt  am  Meeresgrund. 
Wiederum  sollt  du  stille  stehen 

und  nirgends  hingehen  ; 
du  sollt  stehen  als  ein  Stock  und 
Starr  sehen  als  ein  Bock, 
bis  ich  dir  mit  meiner  Zunge 
Urlaub  gcbe. 


Mother  Maiy  was  journeying  over 

the  land, 
she  had  her  beloved  child  by  the 

hand. 
Then  came  the  thieves  and  would 

steal. 

Then  spake  she  to  St.  Peter  : 
"  Bind  !  " 
St.  Peter  said  :  "  I  have  bound 

with    iron     bands,    with     God's 
hands. 

Thou,  thief  (and  thiefess),  shalt 
be  bound. 
Again  thou  shalt  stand  still  and 

nowhere  go  hence. 
Thou  shalt  stand  as  a  stock,  and 
look  staring  as  a  goat, 
and  count    all   the   grass   that 
grows  on  the  earth. 
Again  thou  shalt  stand  still  and 

nowhere  go  hence, 
shalt  stand  as  a  stock,  and  look 
staring  as  a  goat, 
and  count  the  stars  which  stand 
in  heaven. 
Again  thou  shalt  stand  still  and 

nowhere  go  hence ; 
thou  shalt  stand  as  a  stock,  and 
look  staring  as  a  goat, 
and  count  the  sand  that  lies  on 
the  sea's  ground. 
Again  thou  shalt  stand  still  and 

nowhere  go  hence ; 
Thou  shalt  stand  as  a  stock,  and 
look  staring  as  a  goat, 
until  I    with    my  tongue    give 
thee  leave. 


From  Miillenhofl",  p.  517. 


2  Sic. 


NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS.        179 

Den  Himmel  gebe  icli   dir  zu  The  heaven  I  give   thee  for  thy 

deiner  Hiitte,  hut, 

und  die  Erde  zu  Schuhen  deiner  and  the  earth   for   shoes   to  tl)y 

Fiisse.  feet. 

Amen!  indesTeufelsNamen."       Amen  !  in  the  devil's  name." 


Against  firc^ : 

Brant,  Brant, 
du  geist  aewer  Moor  un  Lant. 
Mit  myn  gesegnete  Hant 
rade  ik  dlissen  Brant. 

I.  N.  G.  u.  s.  w. 

Or: 

Petrus  und  Johannes 
giengen  beide  wandehi. 


die 


Petrus  nahm  den  Stab 

Hand, 
damit  still  ik  dy  den  Brand. 

Or: 

Hoch  is  de  Hawen, 

roet  is  de  Krawen, 
koelt  is  de  Dodenhant, 
damit  still  ik  diissen  Brant. 

I.  N.  G.  u.  s.  w. 


Fire,  fire, 
thou  goest  over  moor  and  land. 
With  my  hallowed  hand 
I  control  this  fire. 

In  the  name,  etc. 


Peter  and  John 

went  both  w^andering. 

Peter  took  the  staff  in  his  hand. 

therewith  quench  I  thee,  the  firt 


High  is  the  heaven, 

red  is  the  crayfish, 
cold  is  the  dead-hand, 
wherewith  I  quench  this  fire. 

In  the  name,  etc. 


Or: 

Gott  vmd  Petrus  gehen  iibersLand, 
sie  sehen  brennen  einen  Brand. 
"  Brand,  du  sollst  nicht  brennen. 
Brand,  du  sollst  nicht  sengen. 
Brand,  du  sollst  nicht  hitzen. 
Brand,  du  sollst  nicht  schwitzen, 

bis  die  liebe  Mutter  Gottes 
ihren   andern   Sohn   soUte  ge- 
baren." 

I.  N.  G.  u.  s.  w. 


God  and  Peter  go  over  the  land, 
they  see  a  fire  burning. 
"  Fire,  thou  shalt  not  bum. 
Fire,  thou  shalt  not  singe. 
Fire,  thou  shalt  not  heat. 
Fire,  thou  shalt  not  cause  to 

sweat, 
until  the  dear  mother  of  Go<l 
shall   have   borne    her    second 

son." 

In  the  name,  etc. 


The  following  rimes  are  from  Miillenhoff,  pp.  516  sqq. 


180       NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS. 


Against  rain. 

Ragen,  Ragen,  rusch' ! 
de  Koiiig  faert  to  Busch. 
Laet  den  Ragen  ajwergacn, 
laet  de  Siinn  wedderkamen. 
Lewe  Siinn,  kam'  wedder 
mit  dyn  goklen  Fedder ; 
mit  dyn  goklen  Stralen 
beschyn  nns  akomalen. 
(Besckyn  dat  ganze  Engelland, 
da  hangt  de  Klocken  an  de  Wand, 
wo  Maria  baven  sitt 
rait  dat  liitje  Kind  in  Schoet. 
Haelt  en  Stutenbotterbrot% 
my  Avat,  dy  wat, 
unse  liitje  Mneschkatt  wat ; 
denn  hewt  vry  altomael  wat,) 


Rain,  rain,  patter ! 
the  king  is  going  to  the  bush. 
Let  the  rain  pass  over, 
let  the  sun  come  again. 
Dear  sun,  come  again 
with  thy  golden  plumage ; 
\Aith  thy  golden  beams 
illumine  us  altogether. 
(Illumine  the  whole  Engelland  ', 
where  the  bells  hang  on  the  wall, 
where  Mary  sits  above 
with  the  little  chdd  in  her  lap. 
Go  get  a  *  stutenbotterbrot,' 
a  bit  for  me,  a  bit  for  thee, 
a  bit  for  our  little  mouse-cat ; 
then  have  we  all  of  us  a  bit.) 


BIRDS,  ETC. 

If  a  girl  hears  the  stork  chattering  on  its  first  coming, 
she  will  break  something ;  if  she  sees  one  flying,  she  will 
ride  in  a  bridal  carriage ;  if  she  sees  one  standing,  she  will 
be  asked  to  stand  gossip.     Mellin. 

If  storks  fly  in  a  circle  above  a  company  of  people,  one 
of  those  persons  will  soon  die.     Stendal. 

If  ravens  fly  over  a  house  making  a  great  croaking,  a 
person  will  soon  die  in  it.     Rauen. 

If  a  dog  howls  before  a  house,  it  forebodes  death  or  fire 
in  it. 

Magpies  may  not  be  shot,  it  is  unlucky.  Neighbourhood 
of  Crossen. 

If  the  klewdtt  (a  species  of  owl)  screams  at  night,  some 
one  will  soon  die.     Steina  in  the  Harz. 

>  Qu.  Angeln  ? 

•^  Stutenbrod  is  a  kind  of  pastry  or  cake  in  the  form  of  a  lozenge,  com- 
mon in  Hamburg- 


NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS. 


181 


Verses  to  the  snail : 

Schneckhus,  Peckhus, 
stak  du  din  ver  Horner  rut, 
sust  schmit  ick  di  in'n  Graven, 

da  freten  di  de  Raven. 

Steyidal. 
Taekeltuet, 
kruep  net  dyn  Hues, 
dyn  Hues  dat  brennt, 
dyn  Kinder  de  flennt', 
dyn  Fru  de  ligt  in  Waken  : 
kann'k  dy  nich  mael  spraken? 
Taekeltuet,  u.  s.  w\ 

Or, 

Snaek,  Snaek,  komm  heruet, 
sunst  tobrak  ik  dy  dyn  Hues. 

Or, 

Slingemues, 

kruep  uet  dyn  Hues, 

stick  all  dyn  veer  (fief)  Hoem  uet. 

Wullt  du's  nech  uetstaken, 

mil  ik  dyn  Hues  tobraken. 

Slingemues,  u.  s.  w." 


Schneckhus,  Peckhus, 

stick  thou  thy  four  horns  out, 

else  I  v^'ill  smite  thee   into   the 

ditch, 
there  the  ravens  will  devour  thee. 

Taekeltuet, 

creep  out  of  thy  house, 

thy  house  is  on  fire, 

thy  children,  they  cry, 

thy  wife,  she  lies  in  childbed  : 

can  I  not  once  speak  with  thee  ? 

Taekeltuet,  etc. 


Snail,  snail,  come  out, 
else  I  will  break  thy  house  to 
pieces. 

Slingemues, 

creep  out  of  thy  house, 

stick  all  thy  four  (five)  horns  out. 

If  thou  wilt  not  stick  them  out, 

I  '11  break  thy  house  to  pieces. 

Slingemues,  etc. 


"  In  England  the  snail  scoops  out  hollows,  little  rotund  chambers,  in 

limestone,  for  its  residence The  following  is  a  boy's  invocation  to 

the  snail  to  come  out  of  such  holes,  and  other  places  of  retreat  resorted 
to  by  it — 

Snail,  snail,  come  out  of  your  hole, 

Or  else  I  will  beat  you  as  black  as  a  coal." 

In  Scotland  they  say  : 

"  Snail,  snail,  shoot  out  your  horn, 
And  tell  us  if  it  will  be  a  bonnie  day  the  morn 3." 


^  Fleunen,  to  cry  or  laugh  with  a  distorted  mouth. 

2  This  and  the  two  preceding  addresses  to  the  snail  are  from  Miillen- 


hoff,  p.  509. 

3  Chambers,  Pop.  Rh.  p.  43. 


182       NORTH   GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS. 

In  the  South  of  Italy  the  snail  is  thus  addressed : 
**  Snail,  snail,  put  out  your  horn, 
Your  mother  is  laughing  you  to  scorn, 
For  she  has  a  little  son  just  born^" 

To  the  ladybird  (from  the  marsh  of  tlie  Elbe)  : 

Maikatt,  May-cat, 

Hugg  weg,  fly  away, 

stuff  weg,  hasten  away, 

bring'  my  morgen  goet  Wedder  bring  me  good  weather  with  you 
med.  to-morrow. 

From  Ploen  : 

Marspaert  (Mai-kpaert),  fleeg  in  Marspaert,  fly  to  heaven  ! 

Himmel ! 

Bring'  my'  n  Sack  voU  Kringeln,  Bring  me  a  sack  full  of  biscuits, 

my  een,  dy  een,  one  for  me,  one  for  thee, 

alle  liitten  Engeln  een.  for  all  the  little  angels  one^. 

THE  ELDER. 
An  undoubted  relic  of  old  times_,  connected  with  this 
tree,  existed  till  a  comparatively  recent  period  among  the 
peasants  of  Lower  Saxony^  who,  when  about  to  lop  an 
elder^  were  accustomed  to  utter  this  prayer : 

Frau  Ellhorn,  Lady  Elder, 

gib  mir  was  von  deinem  Holz ;  give  me  some  of  thy  wood ; 

dann  will   ich    dir  von  meinem  then  ^ill  I  also  give  thee  some 

audi  was  geben,  of  mine, 

wann  es  wachst  im  Walde.  when  it  grows  in  the  forest. 

This  they  repeated  three  times,  with  bended  knees  and 
folded  hands^. 

Puschkait,  the  ancient  Prussian  god  of  the  earth,  is  said  to  dwell  under 
the  elder. 

In  England,  magical  practices  with  elders  were  forbidden  at  a  very  early 

1  Taylor's  transl.  of  Basile's  Pentamerone,  p.  183. 

2  This  and  the  prece(Ung  are  from  MiillcnhofF,  pp.  508,  509.     See  also 
p.  104,  Grimm,  D.M.  p.  658,  and  Chambers,  Poj).  Rh.  p.  43. 

3  Arnkiel,  cited  by  Grimm,  D.M.  p.  618;  Miillenhoff,  p.  510;  Thiolc, 
i.  p.  196,  edit.  1820. 


NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS.        183 

period.  In  the  '  Canones  editi  sub  Eadgaro  Rege  '  it  is  enacted  \>xi  preosta 
gehwilc  forbeode  >a  gemearr,  "5e  man  drifS  onellenum,  andeac  on  o'Srum 
mislicum  treowuin — that  is,  that  every  j^riest  forbid  the  vain  jrracticcs, 
that  are  carried  on  tvith  elders,  and  also  with  various  other  trees^, 

THE  ELEMENTS  AND  NATURAL  PHENOMENA. 

When  there  is  a  calm,  scratch  with  an  old  nail  on  the 
foremast ;  then  wind  will  rise.     Hamburg. 

When  the  wind  has  been  long  contrary,  and  yon  meet 
with  another  ship,  throw  an  old  broom  before  it ;  the  wind 
will  then  change,  you  will  get  a  fair,  the  other  ship  a  con- 
trary wind.     Hambwg. 

When  a  storm  rises,  a  fire  should  be  kindled ;  it  will  not 
then  strike  the  house.     Bergkirchen. 

When  it  thunders,  they  say  in  the  Mark :  "  Peter  is 
playing  at  bowls,^^  or,  "  The  angels  are  playing  at  bowls.^-' 

The  lightning  does  not  strike  a  house  in  which  there  is 
a  thunderbolt  ^,  or  fire  burning  on  the  hearth,  or  a  bird  has 
built  its  nest.     Lautenthal. 

After  sunset  there  is  frequently  formed  what  is  called  a 
iveather  tree  (Wetterbaum),  a  form  of  cloud  resembling  a 
tree,  according  to  which  the  weather  will  be  regulated ;  to 
whatever  quarter  the  points  are  directed  the  wind  will 
blow.  Tilleda.  Bart  elf elde  in  the  Harz.  In  the  Ukermark, 
they  say  in  some  places :  ''  Abraham's  tree  is  flowering,  it 
will  rain.^^  In  other  places  :  "  If  Abraham's  tree  flowers 
in  the  afternoon,  the  weather  will  be  fair ;  if  after  mid- 
night, there  will  be  rain.^^ 

According  as  the  breastbone  of  a  goose  is  white  or  red, 
the  winter  will  be  cold  or  mild  ^.     Mark. 

When  it  snows,  they  say  in  Nordalbingia  and  in  the 
Harz:  '^ Peter  is  shaking  his  bed;'^  in  the  Ukermark: 
"  Peter  rules,"  or :  "  The  angels  are  plucking  feathers  and 
down."     In  the  autumn  mornings,  when  the  fine  white 

*  Anc.  Laws  and  Inst,  of  England,  p.  396,  fol.  edit. 

2  See  vol.  i.  p.  54,  note.  3  ggg  vol.  ii.  p.  2/4,  No.  47. 


184       NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS. 

threads  are  hanging  on  the  shrubs  and  bushes,  they  say : 
"The  Metten  (Fates) ^  have  been  spinnmg."  In  summer, 
if  the  weather  has  been  long  di-y  :  ''  It 's  God's  hay-days/' 
If  it  rains  while  the  sun  shines  :  "  The  old  witch  is  frying 
pancakes;"  "They  have  a  holiday  in  hell;"  "The  devil 
is  bleaching  his  grandmother;"  or,  "A  tailor  is  gone  to 
heaven  ^." 

Whatever  is  undertaken  during  the  moon's  increase 
succeeds,  and  the  full  moon  brings  all  things  to  fullness, 
while  that  which  is  begun  during  the  wane  fails.  But  for 
maladies  all  potions  and  the  like  should  be  taken  during 
the  wane,  for  then  the  malady  will  also  wane.     StendaL 

No  one  should  remove  on  a  IMonday,  because  then  the 
house  affairs  will  not  thrive.  If  a  servant  enters  a  new 
service  on  a  Monday,  he  will  not  long  continue  in  it. 
StendaL 

When  the  stars  shoot,  the  weather  is  about  to  change. 

Every  person  has  his  light  in  heaven,  which  when  he 
dies  goes  out ;  and  in  its  place  a  new  one  makes  its  ap- 
pearance, as  men  are  constantly  being  born  ^.     Brodeivin. 

Names  of  constellations.  Heaven's  chariot  (the  Great 
Bear),  St.  Peter's  staff  (Orion),  the  Silver  Stars  (Pleiades)^. 
Brodewin.  Another  constellation  is  called  the  Plough  and 
Harrow,  another  the  Crooked  Rake.     Baltrum, 

MISCELLANEOUS. 

1.  Whoever  carries  about  him  a  four-lobed  clover  leaf, 
cannot  be  fascinated,  i.  e.  he  can  see  through  all  magical 
delusions  ^.    Mellin. 

2.  On  St.  Lucy's  day  (Dec.  13)^  nothing  should  be 
lent.     Rauen. 

3.  White  spots  on  the  nails  denote  luck.     Berlin. 

1  A.-S.  metten,  joarca.  ^  MiiHenhoff,  p.  583. 

3  See  Grimm,  K.  and  H.  M.  No.  44.  ^  See  Grimm,  D.  M.  p.  690  sq. 

5  See  vol  ii.  p.  271,  No.  27.  "  See  Grimm,  D.  M.  pp.  250,  1212. 


NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS.        185 

4.  Yarn  spun  by  a  child  of  seven  years  makes  a  person 
bullet-proof.     Liepe. 

5 .  To  obtain  what  you  wish  from  another,  lay  a  swallow^s 
tongue  under  your  own,  and  then  kiss  the  party.  MS. 
from  Swiiiemunde. 

6.  To  obtain  the  love  of  women,  carry  about  you  a  bat^s 
blood,  or  a  swallow^s  heart.     MS.  Sw. 

7.  To  cause  a  person  to  reveal  a  secret,  lay  a  daw^s  heart 
under  his  left  side,  and  he  will  impart  whatever  you  desire 
to  know.     MS.  Sw. 

8.  A  malefactor^s  arm-bone  carried  in  the  pocket  is  a 
security  against  vermin.  If  a  thief  carries  such  a  bone 
about  him,  the  party  whom  he  designs  to  rob  cannot  wake^ 
Stendal. 

9.  A  found  horseshoe,  if  nailed  on  the  threshold  with 
the  points  turned  outwards,  brings  luck ;  but  if  they  are 
turned  inwards,  it  brings  misfortune.  Berlin  and  other 
places. 

10.  To  be  beloved  by  eveiy  body  carry  about  you  the 
heart  either  of  a  pewet  or  a  green  frog.  The  eyes  of  a 
pewet,  if  carried  about  a  person,  make  him  witty  and 
agreeable ;  and  if  w^orn  on  the  breast,  when  before  a  judge, 
the  party  will  be  acquitted ;  and  whoever  carries  with  him 
in  a  bag  the  heart  of  a  pewet,  cannot  be  defrauded  by 
traders ;  and  if  the  heart  be  dried  and  reduced  to  powder, 
and  laid  under  the  head  at  night,  the  party  will  dream 
where  there  is  treasure  hidden.     Stendal. 

11.  Unlucky  days.  In  January:  1,  3,  6,  17,  18.  In 
February:  8,  16,  17.  In  March:  1,  12,  13,  15.  In 
April :  3,  15,  17,  18.  In  May  :  8,  10,  17,  30.  In  June  : 
1,  7.  In  July :  1,  5,  6.  In  August :  1,  3,  18,  20.  In 
September:  15,  18,  30.  In  October:  15,  17.  In  No- 
vember: 11,  17.  In  December:  1,  7,  11.  A  child  born 
on  any  of  these  days  will  seldom  be  long-lived ;   or  if  it 

1  See  ill  Netherl.  Tradit.  the  "  Thief's  Foot,"  etc. 


186       NORTH  GERMAN  CUSTOxMS  AND  SUPERSTITIONS. 

lives,  will  be  poor  and  miserable.  On  any  of  these  days 
no  marriage  is  desirable,  and  whoever  travels  on  one  of 
them,  is  sure  to  come  home  out  of  health.  The  most  un- 
lucky of  them,  on  which  no  one  should  travel,^are  :  March 
13,  August  18,  September  1,  3,  30.  But  there  are  three 
days  which  are  unlucky  above  all  others,  and  whoever  is 
bled  on  one  of  them  will  surely  die  in  seven  or  eight  days 
after,  viz.  April  1,  on  which  the  traitor  Judas  was  born ; 
Au2:ust  1,  on  which  the  devil  was  cast  down  from  heaven; 
December  1,  on  which  Sodom  and  Gomorrha  were  de- 
stroyed by  fire  from  heaven.     Stendal. 

12.  If  a  child  be  lifted  out  through  a  window,  it  must 
be  taken  in  by  the  same,  else  it  will  grow  no  more  \     lb. 

13.  If  a  person  who  has  a  wen  lets  it  be  struck  with  a 
pea-ladle,  or  a  pregnant  woman  tread  on  it,  it  will  dis- 
appear,    lb. 

14.  If  a  person  takes  water  from  his  neighbour's  well 
after  sunset,  he  takes  with  him  his  neighbour's  luck  and 
prosperity.     lb. 

15.  If  a  hare  runs  across  one's  path,  it  is  unlucky.    lb. 

16.  If  your  nose  itches,  you  will  hear  news.     lb. 

17.  If  you  dream  of  losing  a  cheek-tooth,  one  of  the 
family  will  soon  die.     lb. 

18.  To  dream  of  fish  betokens  money;  of  a  bright- 
burning  fire,  luck ;  of  falling  into  water,  illness. 

19.  To  carry  a  purse  of  moleskin  is  lucky.    Mark. 

1  See  vol.  ii.  p.  110,  No.  30. 


NETHERLANDISH  POPULAR  TRADITIONS 


KABOUTERM  ANNE  KENS. 

The  inhabitants  of  tlie  village  of  Herselt  relate  that,  on 
the  occasion  of  a  war,  a  great  multitude  of  Kaboutermanne- 
kens  came  into  their  neighbourhood.  They  took  up  their 
abode  near  to  the  village,  in  the  middle  of  a  large  forest^ 
in  which  there  were  several  caverns.  They  frequently 
came  to  the  village,  to  fetch  one  thing  or  other,  but  with- 
out  doing  harm  to  any  one.  When  their  women  grew 
old  they  caused  them  to  descend  into  a  pit,  with  a  milk- 
loaf  in  their  hand,  and  then  carefully  closed  up  the  pit's 
mouth.  The  peasants  say  that  the  women  were  very  con- 
tented with  this  kind  of  death,  and  were  by  no  means 
forced  to  it. 

In  the  village  of  Gelrode  there  is  a  small  hill  called  the 
Kabouterberg,  in  which  there  are  many  caverns  dug,  which 
in  former  days  were  the  habitations  of  the  Kaboutermanne- 
kens.  If  the  miller  of  the  place's  millstone  was  worn,  he 
had  only  to  lay  it  before  his  mill,  together  with  a  slice  of 
bread  and  butter  and  a  glass  of  beer,  and  he  was  sure  of 
1  From  Wolf,  Niederlaudische  Sagen,  Leipsig,  1843. 


188  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

finding  it  the  next  moniing  beautifully  sharpened.    He  did 
in  like  manner  when  he  wanted  his  linen  washed. 


The  Redcaps  or  Klabbers,  called  also  Kaboutermanne- 
kenSj  often  increase  the  wood.  In  the  night,  when  the 
moon  does  not  shine,  they  enter  a  house  through  the 
chimney,  make  themselves  a  fire  on  the  hearth,  and  set 
themselves  quietly  before  it.  But  no  one  sees  the  fire 
except  the  Redcaps,  though  it  warms  more  than  an  ordi- 
nary fire.  In  the  morning  the  housewife  often  finds  of  a 
large  bundle  of  brushw^ood  only  a  few  little  twigs  lying  on 
the  dogs ;  but  these  she  readily  kindles,  because  she  knows 
that  they  burn  as  long  as  a  great  bundle,  and  give  double 
the  warmth.  If  while  the  wood  is  burning  the  housewife 
should  curse  the  Redcap  or  cross  herself,  the  twigs  would 
flare  out  in  an  instant. 


A  poor  peasant,  whose  wife  was  suddenly  taken  ill,  rose 
in  the  night  to  churn.  He  had  already  in  the  evening 
placed  everything  in  readiness,  and  set  the  milk  in  large 
pots  near  the  fire,  that  the  work  might  proceed  the  more 
speedily.  On  entering  the  place  he  saw  to  his  great 
astonishment  that  the  fire  was  still  burning,  and  that  a 
little  man  half  asleep  was  sitting  before  it.  The  noise  of 
the  man's  wooden  shoes  waked  the  mannikin,  who  started 
up,  looked  hard  at  the  man,  but  without  uttering  a  word. 
The  peasant  was  equally  silent,  but  cast  a  stolen  side-glance 
at  the  intruder,  and  saw  that  he  was  clad  in  red  from  head 
to  foot,  and  had  a  green  face  and  green  hands.  Then 
looking  straight  before  him,  he  took  from  a  corner  a  bundle 
of  fire-wood,  cast  it  do^vn  by  the  hearth,  and  went  quietly 
to  sleep.  Next  morning  the  butter  was  all  set  and  ready, 
so  that  he  had  only  to  take  it  to  market ;  there  was,  more- 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  189 

over,  a  larger  quantity  than  he  had  ever  got  from  the  milk. 
His  wife  soon  recovered,  Redcap  continued  to  churn  for 
them,  and  the  man  gradually  became  so  rich  that  he  kept 
many  cows,  and  could  lay  by  a  whole  stockingful  of  shining 
dollars.  And  no  wonder,  for  by  degrees  Redcap  did  all 
the  work ;  he  ploughed  the  fields,  took  care  of  the  cattle, 
and  in  short  performed  more  than  the  work  of  three  men. 

But  prosperity  corrupted  the  peasant.  He  now  went 
every  evening  to  the  pot-house,  played  away  his  money, 
and  regularly  returned  home  drunk.  This  did  not  please 
Redcap,  and  he  reproached  him  accordingly.  At  first  he 
gave  ear  to  him,  but  soon  disregarded  him,  and  at  length 
went  so  far,  that,  returning  home  one  night  late  and  drunk, 
he  grossly  abused  Redcap,  and  threw  the  bundle  of  fire- 
wood into  the  well,  which  his  wife  had  carefully  made 
ready. 

In  the  same  moment  Redcap  disappeared.  On  the  fol- 
lowing morning  the  wife  was  sick,  the  stocking,  instead 
of  dollars,  was  filled  with  coals,  the  cows  died,  the  house 
and  stalls  fell  to  ruin,  and  the  fields  lay  waste.  The  pea- 
sant then  came  to  his  senses,  but  it  was  too  late,  and  let 
him  pray  and  wail  as  he  might  that  Redcaj)  would  restore 
him  to  prosperity,  it  was  of  no  avail ;  on  the  contraiy,  the 
following  night  Redcap  was  heard  laughing  round  the 
house  and  jeering  him. 

Shortly  after,  the  man  died  poor  and  miserable. 


Near  Turnhout  a  young  man  was  deeply  in  love  with  a 
maiden.  The  courtship  had  long  continued  without  any 
suspicion  of  its  existence  on  the  part  of  their  respective 
parents.  The  youth  at  length  growing  impatient,  went 
one  day  to  the  damscPs  father,  and  requested  his  consent 
to  their  union.  But  the  old  man  being  proud  and  over- 
bearing, considered  the  young  man  too  poor,  and  said  to 


190  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

him,  "  I  cannot  imagine  how  you  can  think  of  demanding 
the  hand  of  my  daughter  :  if  you  cannot  lay  down  a  thou- 
sand guilders,  you  need  not  let  such  a  thing  enter  your 
mind/^ 

This  was  a  heavy  blow  to  the  young  man,  and  he  slunk 
home  full  of  trouble,  not  knowing  what  he  should  do.  At 
home  he  found  no  comfort ;  for  the  counting  of  his  little 
stock  of  money  ^vas  no  longer  a  pleasure  to  him,  as  it  fell 
far  short  of  a  thousand  guilders;  but  which  he  must, 
nevertheless,  obtain.  He  then  went  into  the  fields,  and 
meditated  self-destruction;  for  life  had  no  longer  any 
pleasure  for  him.  As  he  was  now  going  he  knew  not 
whither,  on  a  sudden  a  Kaboutermanneken  stood  at  his 
side,  who  asked  him  the  cause  of  his  affliction.  With 
tearful  eyes  the  young  man  recounted  to  him  what  had 
taken  place.  When  he  had  finished  his  story  the  Kabouter- 
manneken laughed  and  said  :  "  So,  only  a  thousand  guil- 
ders ;  that  ^s  not  worth  letting  a  single  hair  grow  grey  for.^' 
"  True,"  said  the  youth,  "  but  if  one  has  it  not  ?"  "  Well,'' 
replied  the  Kaboutermanneken,  "  one  can  then  always  get 
it.  Thou  hast  ever  been  a  brave  youth,  and  therefore  the 
matter  may  easily  be  managed.  Just  go  home  and  count 
thy  monc}^,  and  come  back  and  let  me  know  how  much  it 
falls  short.''  "How  much  it  falls  short?"  sighed  the 
young  man,  "  that  I  know  but  too  well, — eight  hundred 
guilders."  "  Thou  hast  not  well  counted  it,"  said  the  Ka- 
boutermanneken, laughing,  "  go  and  count  it  once  again." 

Full  of  joy  the  young  man  now  ran  back  to  the  house 
and  again  counted  his  money,  when  lo  !  there  were  a  thou- 
sand gold  guilders.  Instantly  he  returned,  considering  it 
his  first  duty  to  thank  his  benefactor,  but  he  was  not  to 
be  seen,  and  often  as  he  cried  "  Kaboutermanneken  !  Ka- 
boutermanneken ! "  he  came  no  more.  He  then  ran  home 
again,  packed  up  the  money,  put  on  his  Sunday  clothes, 
and  went  to  the  father  of  the  damsel,  to  whom  he  counted 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  191 

out  a  thousand  guilders.     Within  a  week  the  marriage 
took  place,  and  they  both  lived  long  in  peace  and  content. 


Between  Turnhout  and  Casterle  there  is  a  hill,  which 
is  to  this  day  called  the  Kaboutermannekensberg.  The 
Kaboutermannekens  that  once  dwelt  in  it  were  very  nu- 
merous, but  withal  of  a  very  evil  nature,  their  greatest 
delight  being  to  inflict  all  possible  injury  on  the  inhabit- 
ants of  the  neighbourhood.  When  night  had  begun,  no 
one  was  longer  secure.  They  then  went  round  and  carried 
off  with  them  everything  they  fancied,  fowls,  ducks,  geese, 
oxen,  cows  and  calves,  money,  in  short  everything,  even 
household  utensils.  This  lasted  a  considerable  length  of 
time,  but  now  we  hear  no  more  of  it. 


A  miller  in  Kempnerland  found  often  in  the  morning 
his  work  in  the  mill  performed,  let  it  have  been  ever  so 
much  j  though  only  when  he  left  some  bread  and  butter, 
which  on  these  occasions  disappeared.  This  surprised  the 
man;  so  one  evening  he  concealed  himself  behind  some 
flour-sacks,  and  saw  a  naked  Kaboutermanneken  come,  eat 
the  bread  and  butter,  and  begin  to  work  in  the  mill.  The 
miller  being  grieved  to  see  the  little  fellow  naked,  went  to 
a  tailor  and  ordered  a  pair  of  breeches  and  a  jacket  to  be 
made  for  him,  which  on  the  following  evening  he  laid 
along  with  the  bread  and  butter.  The  Kaboutermanneken 
came  and  danced  for  joy,  on  seeing  the  handsome  garments, 
quickly  ate  up  the  bread  and  butter,  put  on  the  clothes, 
proudly  strutted  about,  and  disappeared  without  the  miller 
seeing  which  way  he  went.     He  never  returned. 

Now  thought  the  miller  :  "  Wait  a  little,  I  ^11  soon  catch 
thee;"  and  with  that  intention  went  and  sat  on  a  little 
bridge  that  was  over  a  brook,  which  the  Kaboutermanne- 


192  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

kens  were  in  the  habit  of  crossing  every  evening.  He  did 
not  wait  long  before  they  appeared.  When  the  first  stept 
on  the  bridge,  he  said  to  the  miller:  ^^A\lio  art  thou, 
man  ?"  but  the  miller  made  no  answer;  for  he  was  look- 
ing out  for  the  Kaboutermanneken  with  the  clothes  on, 
and  those  that  he  saw  were  naked.  The  second  also  said : 
"Who  art  thou,  man?^^  but  he  still  kept  silence;  and  so 
it  went  on  till  the  last  came,  and  he  had  on  the  clothes 
that  the  miller  had  placed  in  the  mill.  "  Haha,^^  cried 
the  miller,  "have  I  got  thee  ?  "  and  was  about  to  seize  the 
manneken,  when  suddenly  a  voice,  like  that  of  his  wife, 
was  heard  from  the  rivulet,  crying  for  help,  when  the 
miller  turning  round  in  a  hurry,  plumped  into  the  water ; 
but  the  Kaboutermannekens  were  all  away. 


An  old  man  from  the  hamlet  of  Landorp,  which  lies  not 
far  from  Aerschot  on  the  little  river  Demer,  has  often  re- 
lated the  following : 

A  certain  Heer  Percy,  who  dwelt  on  the  opposite  side 
of  the  Demer,  was  in  the  habit  of  being  ferried  over  every 
evening,  for  the  purpose  of  visiting  the  inn  at  Landoi-p. 
He  usually  stayed  till  it  was  very  late,  and  when  he  wished 
to  return,  the  ferryman  was  gone  to  bed.  But  Heer  Percy 
cared  little  for  that,  for  he  was  on  good  terms  with  the 
Kaboutermannekens,  who,  as  soon  as  the  ferryman  was 
asleep,  hastened  to  the  bank,  and  when  Heer  Percy  came 
out  of  the  inn,  called  aloud :  "  Heer  Percy  !  Heer  Percy  ! 
come  quickly;  we  will  ferry  you  over.  Come,  Heer 
Percy!"  Then  would  Heer  Percy  proceed  to  the  bank, 
and  the  mannekcns  convey  him  across,  when  he  gave  them 
a  large  jug  of  beer  for  their  trouble. 

He  usually  also  engaged  them  for  the  next  day,  to  make 
coffee  early  in  the  morning,  milk  the  cows,  clean  the  house, 
etc.;  and  all  this  they  did  most  punctually;  nor  did  they 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  193 

drink  a  drop  of  the  coffee  or  milk^  but  left  it  untouched 
until  Heer  Percy  gave  them  some.  Thus  they  acted,  and 
were  so  faithful  because  he  was  so  kind  to  them.  On  the 
other  hand,  however,  the  neighbours  had  to  suffer  a  thou- 
sand annoyances  from  them.  They  drank  the  milk  of 
their  cows,  spoiled  their  butter,  and  played  pranks  innu- 
merable; for  all  which  the  neighbours  were  highly  in- 
censed against  Heer  Percy;  but  they  could  do  him  no 
harm,  for  the  Kaboutermannekens  protected  and  watched 
over  him  that  no  injury  might  befall  him. 

KLUDDE. 

Kludde  or  Kleure  is  the  name  of  an  evil  spirit  which 
plays  its  pranks  in  a  great  part  of  Brabant  and  Flanders. 
With  respect  to  its  form  it  is  a  perfect  Proteus ;  for  which 
reason  the  peasants  are  so  fearful  of  him,  that  they  will 
not  for  any  consideration  venture  into  a  forest,  a  field,  or 
a  road,  which,  according  to  common  report,  is  haunted  by 
Kludde. 

This  spirit  often  transforms  himself  into  a  tree,  which 
at  first  appears  quite  small  and  delicate,  but  soon  raises 
itself  to  an  immeasurable  height,  and  is  lost  in  the  clouds, 
while  everything  around  it  on  earth  is  thrown  into  con- 
fusion. Another  time  he  will  clothe  himself  with  the  skin 
of  a  great  black  dog,  and  so  run  on  his  hind  legs,  at  the 
same  time  rattling  a  chain  that  is  round  his  neck,  and 
will  spring  suddenly  on  the  neck  of  the  first  person  he 
meets ;  and  when  he  has  thrown  him  on  the  ground,  en- 
tirely vanish.  But  Kludde  oftenest  appears  as  an  old, 
half-starved  horse,  and  as  such  is  a  bugbear  to  all  grooms 
and  horse-boys,  who  relate  that  when  they  leave  their 
horses  in  the  field  at  night,  it  frequently  happens  that, 
instead  of  their  well-known  horse  or  mare,  they  set  them- 
selves on  Kludde,  who  instantly  runs  off  with  them  at  full 
speed,  until  he  comes  to  some  water,  into  which  he  pitches 

K 


194  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

his  terrified  rider.  While  the  poor  fellow  is  struggling  to 
save  himself,  Kludde  lays  himself  with  his  belly  flat  on 
the  ground  and  sets  up  a  fiendish  laugh,  until  his  victim, 
sullen  and  angry,  shall  have  worked  himself  out  of  his 
bath. 

Occasionally  Kludde  assumes  the  form  of  a  cat,  a  frog, 
a  bat,  or  any  other  animal.  His  approach  may  be  known 
by  two  little  blue  flames,  which  fluttering  and  dancing  go 
before  him.  These  flames  are,  as  far  as  can  be  ascertained, 
the  eyes  of  the  spectre.  It  is  difficult  to  escape  from 
Kludde,  even  by  running  from  him  at  the  utmost  speed 
m  a  zigzag ;  for,  like  a  snake,  he  will  wind  in  all  direc- 
tions with  equal  rapidity. 

When  this  spectre  takes  his  flight,  he  cries  :  "  Kludde, 
Kludde  \''  w^hence  comes  his  name. 

In  the  neighbourhood  of  Ostend  Kludde  is  kno\\Ti  as  a 
Water-necker  (Water-nix),  and  in  the  flat  country  about 
that  town  as  a  Werwolf. 


As  two  young  men  and  a  girl  were  going  along  in  the 
country,  one  of  them,  who  was  the  lover  of  the  girl,  said 
to  his  comrade:  "Stop  for  a  moment,  I  see  something 
yonder."  "What  dost  thou  see?"  asked  the  other. 
"  Kludde,"  was  the  answer.  "  See,  now  he  is  a  dog — 
now  he  is  growing  up  high — now  he  is  little  again — a 

sheep— no,  a  cat "  and  thus  he  went  on  talking,  while 

neither  his  companion  nor  the  girl  could  perceive  anything. 
His  friend  at  length  said :  "  If  thou  seest  Kludde  again, 
let  me  know,  and  I  will  go  up  to  him."  "  Then  go  now," 
eaid  the  other,  "he  is  just  running  before  me."  His  friend 
went  accordingly,  but  could  see  nothing  of  Kludde. 

So  it  lasted  until  they  came  to  the  house  of  the  young 
man  who  had  all  along  seen  the  spectre  running  before 
him.   Before  the  house  there  lay  a  flat  stone,  under  which 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  195 

the  young  man^s  father  was  in  the  habit  of  placing  the 
key  of  the  house,  that  he  might  not  be  under  the  necessity 
of  rising  from  his  bed,  when  his  son  happened  to  stay  late 
at  the  public  house.  ^'^Don^t  you  now  see  him?^^  cried 
the  young  man,  "  he  is  sitting  on  the  stone,  to  prevent 
me  from  getting  the  key."  Saying  these  words,  he  took 
his  lass  by  the  arm,  adding:  "Come,  Mieken,  we  will 
accompany  you  home,  for  you  are  frightened."  On  his 
return  he  still  saw  Kludde  sitting  on  the  stone.  The  other 
then  took  courage  and  went  to  the  stone,  when  Kludde 
sprang  aside,  so  that  he  could  take  the  key,  with  which 
he  opened  the  door  for  his  comrade,  who  hurried  in,  lest 
Kludde  should  be  at  his  heels,  while  the  other  quietly 
went  his  way,  without  having  seen  a  trace  of  the  spectre. 

OSSCHAERT. 

Formerly  the  town  of  Hamme,  near  Dendermonde,  was 
infested  by  an  evil  spirit  named  Osschaert,  of  whom  it  can 
hardly  be  said  that  he  was  altogether  a  scourge  to  the 
peaceable  inhabitants  of  the  neighbourhood,  for  to  the 
good  Christians  of  the  middle  age  he  was  at  the  same  time 
very  beneficial,  in  being  a  terror  to  the  wicked,  and  in 
having  forced  many  a  one  to  turn  into  the  path  of  righte- 
ousness. 

His  usual  abode  was  the  spot  where  the  chapel  of  Twee 
Bruggen  now  stands,  and  the  immediate  neighbourhood 
the  scene  of  his  exploits.  If  any  one  towards  midnight 
Were  foolhardy  enough  to  cry  out,  or  even  to  mutter  the 
rimes, 

Grypke,  grypke  grauw,  Grypke,  gr^qike  grey. 

Wilt  gy  my  grypen.  If  thou  Avilt  gripe  me, 

Grjpt  my  nou.  Gripe  me  now. 

then  would  Osschaert  leap  on  his  back,  with  outspread 
claws  clamber  up  to  his  shoulders,  and  force  him  groaning 
and  panting  to  carry  him,  until  good  fortune  brings  him 

k2 


196  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

to  a  crossway,  over  which  the  evil  spirit  being  unable  to 
pass,  casts  away  his  half-dead  bearer. 

It  would  seem  that  Osschaert  had  been  repeatedly  irri- 
tated by  the  above  rimes,  for  the  longer  he  infested  the 
place  the  worse  he  grew,  until  at  length  it  was  not  only 
the  drunken  and  the  foolhardy  who  teazed  him  that  were 
the  objects  of  his  malice,  but  every  one  that  he  found 
abroad  at  unseasonable  hours  of  the  night.  The  husband- 
man consequently  left  the  field  with  hasty  steps  before 
sunset,  the  benighted  traveller  anxiously  sought  a  shelter 
before  nightfall,  and  not  a  few  of  the  country  people 
trembled  even  at  their  firesides,  sending  up  fervent  prayers 
that  the  spectre  might  have  no  power  over  them. 

But  most  painful  was  Osschaert's  riding  to  those  who 
had  some  heavy  burthen  on  their  conscience.  On  such  he 
pressed  with  an  intolerable  weight,  struck  his  claws  deep 
into  their  flesh,  burned  their  necks  wdth  his  hellish  fiery 
breath,  and  thereby  infected  with  a  most  insufferable 
stench  every  respiration  of  the  sinner.  Even  when  any 
one  thus  tormented  sank  down  from  pain  and  weariness, 
he  got  no  respite ;  he  must  rise  again  and  continue  his 
course  until  he  reached  either  a  crossway  or  an  image  of 
the  Virgin  in  the  vicinity  of  one. 

But  at  Hamme  there  lived  a  pious  priest,  who,  deeply 
affected  by  the  misery  inflicted  on  his  flock  by  Osschaert, 
resolved  to  drive  him  away,  and  by  exorcisms  banished 
him,  for  ninety-nine  years,  to  the  sea-shore,  where  he  still 
wanders. 


An  old  man  from  the  neighbourhood  of  Doel  related 
many  of  Osschacrt^s  tricks,  among  which  was  the  fol- 
lowing. 

His  grandfather,  when  a  young  man,  had  gone  one 
evening  on  a  courting  expedition.     On  his  return  he  had 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  197 

to  cross  a  field,  when  on  a  sudden  an  enormous  monster 
of  a  horse  stood  before  him.  Then  thought  my  grand- 
father :  "  Halt,  this  is  Osschaert ;  thou  must  get  out  of 
the  way ;  ^'  and  so  he  did,  with  the  intention  of  passing 
through  the  churchyard ;  but  he  had  hardly  got  again 
into  the  main  road,  when  a  huge  dog  as  big  as  a  horse 
met  him  ;  whereupon  he  turned  his  back,  crossed  himself, 
and  struck  into  another  path  leading  to  the  churchyard ; 
but  scarcely  had  he  reached  it  before  a  rabbit  sprang 
backwards  and  forwards  before  him.  "  Osschaert  has 
some  design  upon  me  this  evening,^^  said  he  to  himself, 
and  turned  for  the  purpose  of  going  round  the  church- 
yard, when,  at  the  corner  of  the  gate,  there  stands  a 
gigantic  ass,  with  fiery  eyes  as  large  as  plates  ! 

This  perplexed  him  so  prodigiously,  that  although  he 
was  not  the  most  timid  of  mortals,  he  sprang  over  the 
wall  and  ran  home  with  all  speed,  where  he  arrived 
bathed  in  sweat. 


There  was  once  a  fisherman  named  Blommaert,  who 
dwelt  at  Kieldrecht  and  had  no  wife,  but  only  a  little  boat, 
a  net  and  a  hut.  When  he  brought  his  fish  home  in  the 
evening,  he  was  in  the  habit  of  throwing  them  into  a  tub 
of  water,  which  stood  by  the  window  near  the  hearth. 

On  rising  in  the  morning  he  always  remarked  that  some 
fish  were  missing,  and  that  somebody  had  been,  scattering 
the  ashes  on  the  hearth,  no  doubt  for  the  purpose  of  broil- 
ing the  fish  on  the  still  glowing  embers.  The  fisher  exa- 
mined his  hut,  but  finding  no  opening,  felt  fully  convinced 
that  it  was  Osschaert  who  had  played  him  the  trick.  He 
soon  forgot  the  affair,  but  to  his  no  small  vexation  found 
on  the  following  morning  that  his  fish  had  again  been 
taken  and  broiled  on  the  embers.  "  Now,-*^  thought  he, 
"I  will  cure  Master  Osschaert   of  that  trick,^^   and   so 


198  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

covered  the  whole  hecarth  with  horse-dung,  over  which  he 
scattered  a  few  ashes. 

Osschaert  came  as  usual  to  get  and  roast  his  fish,  saying 
as  he  entered :  "  Blommeken,  vischkens  braeyen  ;  "  but 
when  he  came  to  the  hearth  he  spoiled  the  beautiful  trout 
with  the  horse-dung,  and  went  away  doubling  and  shaking 
his  fists ;  while  the  fisherman,  who  was  awake,  burst  into 
a  loud  laugh.  So  far  so  good  ;  but  Osschaert  knew  how  to 
be  revenged.  On  the  following  morning,  to  \^'it,  the  fisher- 
man went  out  and  cast  his  net,  and  soon  after  attempted 
to  haul  it  up,  but  found  it  inconceivably  heavy.  At  length, 
when  after  much  toil  and  trouble  he  had  pulled  it  to  the 
surface  of  the  water,  he  saw  that  there  were  no  fish  in  it, 
but  only  an  immense  heap  of  horse-dung.  Osschaert  now 
gave  a  hearty  laugh,  and  the  fisherman  full  of  vexation 
returned  home^ 

THE  NECKER. 

In  the  rivers  and  springs  spirits  have  often  been  seen, 
which  the  German  Belgians  call  Neckers.  These  spirits 
sometimes  sang  most  beautiful  melodies  in  chorus ;  some- 
times, like  women,  they  were  seen  arranging  theii'  hair  in 
the  river.  They  have  also  been  known  to  converse  with 
men,  and  to  play  all  sorts  of  games. 


Near  Ghent  a  little  old  man  has  often  been  seen  on  the 
water  of  the  Scheldt.  He  was  a  Necker  (Nix),  and  was 
constantly  sighing  and  moaning.    Two  children  once,  who 

1  Osschaert  and  the  Yorkshire  Barguest  seem  nearly  identical.  There 
was  a  Barguest  named  the  Picktrce  Brag,  whose  usual  form  was  that  of  a 
little  galloway,  "  in  which  shape  a  farmer,  still  or  lately  living  thereabouts, 
reported  that  it  had  come  to  him  one  night  as  he  was  going  home  ;  that 
he  got  upon  it  and  rode  very  quietly  till  it  came  to  a  great  pond,  to  which 
it  ran  and  threw  him  in,  and  went  laughing  away:'  Keightley,  F.  M.  p.  310. 
Scott's  Minstrelsy,  i.  p.  ex. 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  199 

were  playing  on  the  river^s  bank^  saw  him  coming  towards 
them,  and  ran  away,  at  which  the  Necker  cried  piteously. 
He  did  harm  to  no  one.  If  any  person  asked  him  the 
cause  of  his  sorrow,  he  would  fetch  a  deep  sigh  and  dis- 
appear. 

Throughout  Brabant  the  tradition  is  current  that  the 
Necker  sucks  the  blood  of  the  drowned.  From  rivulets 
the  mournful  cry  of  a  child  is  often  heard ;  but  to  this  no 
great  attention  need  be  paid,  as  it  is  often  only  a  deception 
of  the  Necker. 

Those  drowned  of  the  name  of  Jan  have  the  singular 
property  of  remaining  upright  in  the  w^ater,  and  under  no 
circumstances  are  they  ever  found  lying  on  the  side. 

THE  THREE  NIXEN  OF  JUPILLE. 

One  autumn  evening  as  the  joyful  inhabitants  of  Jupille, 
at  the  end  of  the  vintage,  were  springing  about  and 
dancing  on  the  verdant  turf,  three  damsels  suddenly  ap- 
proached them  from  the  banks  of  the  Meuse,  and  joined 
the  mirthful  assemblage.  They  were  attired  in  garments 
of  dazzling  whiteness,  and  on  their  fair  locks  wore  garlands 
of  fresh-blown  water-liUes.  Whether  they  walked  or  only 
glided  on  the  earth  no  one  could  say.  The  young  lads  of 
Jupille  had  never  met  with  such  light  dancers. 

When  the  dancing  was  over,  all  sat  down  in  a  circle, 
and  the  three  damsels  began  to  sing,  and  that  with  such 
sweet  voices  that  the  eyes  of  all  were  fixed  on  them,  and 
no  one  thought  how  far  the  night  was  already  advanced. 
To  their  surprise  the  clock  struck  the  hour  of  midnight, 
when  the  damsels,  after  whispering  a  few  words  together, 
greeted  the  company  round,  and  soon  disappeared. 

On  the  following  evening,  just  as  the  moon  was  risen, 


-00  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

they  returned^  when  the  young  men  instantly  hastened  up 
to  them,  requestmg  them  to  dance.  As  the  night  was 
sultry,  one  of  them  drew  off  her  gloves,  which  her  partner 
took  charge  of.  This  time  the  clock  struck  twelve  while 
they  were  still  engaged  in  the  dance.  Terrified  at  the  sound 
the  damsels  started  and  were  hastening  away,  when  one 
exclaimed  :  "  Where  are  my  gloves  V  But  the  youth 
would  not  restore  them,  retaining  them  as  a  pledge  of  love ; 
and  the  damsel,  with  her  companions,  hurried  away  with- 
out them.  Her  partner  followed  with  equal  speed  ;  being 
but  too  desirous  of  discovering  where  the  beauteous 
maiden  dwelt.  They  proceeded  on  and  on,  when,  on 
reaching  the  Meuse,  the  damsels  sprang  into  the  water 
and  vanished. 

When  on  the  following  morning  the  love-sick  youth  re- 
visited the  spot,  the  water  there  was  blood-red.  The 
maidens  never  appeared  again  ^ 

FLERUS. 
In  a  farm-house  near  Ostend  everything  went  on  satis- 
factorily and  prosperously,  so  that  in  a  short  time  the 
owner  became  one  of  the  wealthiest  persons  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood. This  was  ascribed  to  a  domestic  sprite  named 
Flerus,  who  had  his  abode  there,  and  appeared  sometimes 
under  a  human  form,  sometimes  in  that  of  an  animal.  If 
a  horse  was  sick,  Flerus  was  called,  who  appeared  at  the 
instant  as  a  strong  and  lively  horse,  willingly  suffered  him- 
self to  be  harnessed,  and  performed  thrice  the  quantity 
of  work  of  any  other  horse.  He  never  flinched  from  a 
service  :  even  if  the  maid-servants  foresaw  that  they  would 
not  have  time  to  sweep  the  house  thoroughly,  Flerus  would 
come  at  their  call,  would  draw  water  and  carry  it  to  them. 

1  In  connection  with  the  foregoing  tradition,  see  the  epitome  of  German 
Mythology  in  vol.  i. 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  201 

The  only  remuneration  he  looked  for  was  a  little  fresh 
milk  with  sugar. 

But  once  a  couple  of  young  and  thoughtless  servant- 
girls,  who  had  been  made  rather  wanton  by  the  good  na- 
ture of  Flerus,  resolved  on  playing  him  a  trick.  They 
called  him  and  he  instantly  came ;  but  when  he  had  per- 
formed the  work  required  of  him,  they  set  before  him, 
instead  of  his  usual  meal,  fresh  milk  with  garlic.  Scarcely, 
however,  had  he  tasted  it  when  he  vanished,  saying : 

Melk  en  look  !  Milk  and  garlic  ! 

Flerus  verhuist,  Flerus  decamps, 

En't  geluk  ook.  And  good  luck  eke. 

From  that  hour  no  more  was  heard  or  seen  of  Flerus  in 
the  place,  and  everything  went  crab-fashion.  From  him 
the  place  acquired  the  name  of  Flerushof. 

THE  WERWOLF. 

A  man  had  once  gone  out  with  his  bow  to  attend  a 
shooting  match  at  Ronsse,  but  when  about  half  way  to  the 
place,  he  saw  on  a  sudden  a  large  wolf  spring  from  a 
thicket  and  rush  towards  a  young  girl,  that  was  sitting  in 
a  meadow  by  the  road  side  watching  cows.  The  man  did 
not  long  hesitate,  but  quickly  drawing  forth  an  arrow, 
took  aim,  and  luckily  hit  the  wolf  in  the  right  side,  so  that 
the  arrow  remained  sticking  in  the  wound,  and  the  animal 
ran  back  howling  into  the  wood. 

On  the  following  day  he  heard  that  a  serving-man  of 
the  burgomaster^s  lay  at  the  point  of  death,  in  conse- 
quence of  having  been  shot  in  the  right  side  on  the  pre- 
ceding day.  This  so  excited  the  man^s  curiosity,  that  he 
went  to  the  wounded  man  and  requested  to  see  the  arrow, 
which  he  instantly  recognised  as  one  of  his  own.  Then 
having  desired  all  those  present  to  withdraw,  when  he  was 
alone  with  the  man,  he  persuaded  him  to  confess  how  he 

k5 


202  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

had  received  the  wound^  when  he  acknowledged  that  he 
was  the  Werwolf.     He  died  on  the  following  day. 

THE  MAERE. 

In  the  village  of  Alveringen  a  cunning  man  was  once 
called  to  see  a  woman  who  was  mare-ridden.  He  took  a 
handful  of  dry  sand,  uttered  certain  words,  and  cast  the 
sand  in  the  air,  and  all  about,  under  the  tables,  chairs  and 
cupboards,  in  short,  in  every  corner.  Hardly  had  he  done 
this,  when  at  once  there  stood  a  woman  in  the  chamber, 
of  whom  no  one  knew  whence  she  came,  and  whom  no 
one  had  ever  before  seen.  She  did  not  long  deliberate, 
but  quickly  opened  the  door  and  escaped.  "  There  was 
your  Mare,'^  said  the  man,  "  she  will  not  return  in  a 
hurry,  for  she  is  now  marked."  On  the  persons  present 
inquiring  how  or  with  what  she  was  marked,  he  answered  : 
"  Simply  with  a  grain  of  sand ;  but  her  power  is  now  at 
an  end." 


As  some  reapers  were  one  day  at  work  in  a  field  near 
Vilvorde,  they  found  a  naked  woman  lying  apparently 
asleep ;  yet  it  was  no  natural  sleep,  for  it  did  not  appear 
to  the  men  that  she  breathed.  Curious  to  know  what 
might  be  the  matter  w4th  the  woman,  they  went  and  called 
a  shepherd,  who  had  the  reputation  of  being  skilled  in 
hidden  things.  On  seeing  the  woman,  he  at  once  said : 
"  She  is  not  asleep,  but  is  a  Mare,  who  has  just  stript 
herself  for  the  purpose  of  riding  some  one."  The  reapers 
laughed  at  this,  and  said  the  shepherd  was  befooling  them ; 
but  he  said :  "  Wait  only  an  instant,  and  you  shall  see 
something  extraordinary."  He  then  bent  down  to  the 
woman  and  whispered  a  word  or  two  in  her  ear,  when  they 
immediately  saw  a  little  animal,  the  length  of  a  finger  and 
of  singular  form,  come  running  and  creep  into  the  woman's 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  203 

mouth.  The  shepherd  then  gave  her  a  smart  push  so  that 
she  rolled  over  thrice,  and  which  caused  her  to  wake, 
when  after  looking  about  her  with  astonishment,  she  got 
up  and  fled  with  all  possible  speed,  to  the  great  surprise 
of  the  reapers,  who  enjoyed  the  thing  amazingly. 


Two  young  men  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Vilvorde  loved 
the  same  damsel ;  but  one  of  them,  the  comeher  of  the  two, 
had  an  affliction,  for  which  he  had  tried  a  number  of  re- 
medies, yet  all  to  no  purpose — he  suffered  every  night 
from  the  Mare.  Complaining  one  day  to  his  rival  how  he 
was  tormented  the  instant  he  got  into  bed,  and  how  every 
remedy  had  proved  vain,  the  other  laughed  at  him,  and 
said  :  "  0,  there  is  nothing  more  easy ;  I  will  give  thee 
advice,  which,  if  thou  wilt  follow  it,  will  secure  thee  from 
all  such  visitations  in  future.  Hold  a  sharp  and  well- 
pointed  knife  with  the  point  towards  thy  breast,  when  thou 
liest  down  in  bed,  and  do  not  go  to  sleep ;  then  will  the 
Mare  have  visited  thee  for  the  last  time.^^ 

The  poor  lad,  overjoyed  at  the  thought  of  getting  rid 
of  the  spectre  on  such  easy  terms,  forgot  in  his  delight 
half  of  the  counsel,  and  held  the  knife  with  the  handle  to- 
wards his  breast,  so  that  the  point  stood  upright;  and 
lucky  was  it  that  he  did  so ;  for  when  the  Mare  came  as 
usual,  she  wounded  herself  on  the  point  of  the  knife,  and 
returned  no  more.  In  the  other  case  she  would  have 
driven  the  knife  into  his  breast. 


In  Liege  there  was  at  one  time  a  number  of  persons 
who  by  wishing  could  afflict  any  one  with  the  Mare;  to 
be  again  free  from  which  people  gave  them  money,  and  in 
return  received  from  them  a  bottle.     Into  this  they  had  to 


204  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

void  their  urine,  which  they  placed  a  while  in  the  sun,  and 
then  brought  it  to  the  person  to  whom  they  had  given  the 
money.  This  person  then  led  the  patient  to  some  water, 
by  which  he  stood  with  his  back  towards  it,  and  then 
threw  the  bottle  over  his  head  into  it. 


A  nobleman  dwelling  at  his  castle  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  Sittard,  was  every  night  plagued  with  a  Mare.  He  sent 
for  his  physician,  and  at  length  for  the  clergyman,  but 
neither  could  supply  him  with  a  remedy  for  the  evil. 
This  reached  the  ears  of  a  shepherd,  who  came  to  the 
nobleman  and  told  him  that  he  had  a  certain  remedy  for 
the  Mare.  On  the  nobleman  asking  him  in  what  it  con- 
sisted, he  said  :  "  If  the  Mare  comes  again,  let  her  remain 
quiet ;  but  when  she  is  gone,  make  water,  put  it  in  a 
bottle,  and  keep  it  carefully ;  you  will  then  see  something 
wonderful."  The  nobleman  did  so,  and  shut  the  bottle 
up  in  his  cupboard,  keeping  the  key  in  his  pocket. 

Next  day  about  noon  there  came  an  old  woman  to  the 
gate,  asking  whether  they  had  any  old  broken  glass  to 
sell.  The  maid-servant  gave  her  all  the  broken  glass,  but 
she  again  inquired  whether  they  had  no  entire  bottles,  and 
requested  her  to  ask  her  master  whether  he  had  any.  The 
master,  who  instantly  knew  what  she  was  driving  at,  an- 
swered that  he  had  none.  She  then  asked  whether  she 
could  not  speak  with  the  master  herself.  On  seeing  him 
she  besought  him  to  give  her  the  bottle  that  he  had  in  his 
cupboard,  and  at  his  refusal,  fell  at  his  feet  and  wept 
bitterly,  promising  that  she  would  do  him  no  further  injury. 
He  thereupon  took  the  bottle,  and  broke  it  ^,  and  drove 

^  The  original  adds  :  "  und  zur  Stunde  lief  das  Wasser  also  von  deni 
alten  Weibe  weg,  dass  das  ganze  Zinnner  vol)  ^Yurde." 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  205 

the  old  woman  with  blows  from  the  door.     He  was  thus 
relieved  from  the  Mare,  who  never  again  returned. 


My  aunf  s  grandmother,  says  Mynh.  Van  Swygenhoven, 
had  once  a  horse  that  was  mare-ridden.  This  coming  to 
the  knowledge  of  a  neighbour,  he  brought  two  bricks, 
which  he  laid  crosswise,  bound  them  fast  with  a  cord,  and 
hung  them  on  the  horse.  The  animal  instantly  ceased 
from  sweating  and  feeling  uneasiness,  and  the  Mare  no 
more  tormented  it. 

DWARF-SMITHIES. 

In  the  Walloon  provinces  there  is  not  a  village  nor  a 
hamlet  that  has  not  its  dwarf-cave  or  dwarf-hole.  In  the 
forests  the  vestiges  of  former  smithies  are  often  met  with, 
which  the  people  call  dwarf-smithies.  Whole  pigs  of  iron 
or  lead  are  also  frequently  found,  which  date  from  the 
time  of  the  goblins. 

To  those  that  are  kind  to  them  these  dwarfs  are  very 
serviceable;  only  care  must  be  taken  to  place  food  for 
them  every  night. 

LODDER. 

One  warm  summer  night  three  reapers  went  to  the  field 
for  the  purpose  of  completing  their  labour,  which,  in  con- 
sequence of  the  great  heat,  they  had  been  obliged  to  in- 
termit. The  moon  not  having  yet  risen,  they  could 
scarcely  see,  and  therefore  resolved,  after  laying  aside  their 
clothes,  to  sit  down  for  a  short  time,  until  it  grew  lighter. 
Scarcely,  however,  had  they  deposited  their  garments, 
when  they  heard  a  distant  rattling  as  of  chains,  but  which 
constantly  came  nearer  and  nearer,  and  at  length  reached 
the  spot  where  the  clothes  were  lying.  One  of  the  men 
then  stood  up  to  look  after  their  clothes,  but  there  they 


206  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

lay  undisturbed_,  and  he  saw  nothings  though  the  rattUng 
still  continued. 

In  the  mean  while  it  gradually  became  darker,  and 
thunder  was  heard  at  a  distance,  so  the  reapers  resolved 
to  return  home ;  for  they  saw  that  it  would  be  impossible 
for  them  to  work.  They  had  but  just  put  on  their  clothes 
when  the  rattling  suddenly  and  quickly  came  quite  close 
to  them,  and  something  passed  between  the  legs  of  one 
of  them  which  carried  him  off  wdth  it.  He  cried  as 
loud  as  he  could :  "  Lodder  !  Lodder  !  strike  !  strike  !  I 
am  sitting  on  him/^  But  the  others  laughed  at  him,  for 
although  they  saw  him  riding  away,  they  could  not  see 
Lodder,  for  he  had  made  himself  invisible.  So  the  more 
they  laughed,  the  more  vexed  was  the  man,  and  the  more 
lustily  he  cried  out ;  for  he  well  knew  on  whose  back  he 
was  sitting.  In  short,  he  was  carried  on  and  on  till  he 
came  to  a  large  pond,  into  which  Lodder  threw  himself 
and  left  the  terrified  reaper  lying  half  dead  on  the  grass. 

When  the  others  came  up,  they  saw  plainly  that  it  was 
earnest,  and  from  that  time  have  never  laughed  when  any- 
thing extraordinary  happened  to  them  in  the  night. 


A  wdld  young  fellow  coming  home  late  one  night,  heard, 
while  he  was  putting  the  key  into  the  lock,  something  on 
the  ground  that  continually  went  ticktack,  ticktack,  tick- 
tack.  Stooping  down  he  found  it  was  a  silver  watch,  which 
he  joyfully  placed  in  his  pocket.  On  entering  his  room 
he  drew  it  out,  for  the  purpose  of  seeing  at  what  hour  it 
stood.  At  that  moment  the  church  clock  struck  twelve, 
and  the  watch  became  cold  ajid  icy  in  his  hand,  and  on 
looking  at  it,  it  was  a  large,  fat  toad.  In  his  fright  he 
dashed  it  on  the  ground,  when  suddenly  there  stood  a 
huge  dog  before  him,  with  eyes  like  lanterns,  which  after 
having  stared  at  him  till  he  fell  on  his  bed  in  a  fright. 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  207 

darted  through  the  window,  which  at  that  moment  sprang 
open,  when  from  without  hahaha  !  long  resounded  in  his 
ears.     He  then  knew  that  it  was  Lodder. 


On  a  Saturday  evening  the  country  lads  usually  go  to 
the  window  of  their  sweethearts  and  settle  w4th  them 
where  they  shall  meet  on  the  Sunday.  A  young  fellow  from 
Tissel,  who  was  on  the  same  errand,  had,  in  order  to  reach 
the  house  in  which  his  sweetheart  dwelt,  to  cross  over  a 
brook ;  but  when  he  came  to  the  spot  where  the  bridge 
should  be,  it  was  no  longer  there,  but  there  was  Lodder 
sitting  in  the  grass.  "  What  dost  thou  want  ? "  said 
Lodder.  "  I  want  to  go  to  my  sweetheart,"  answered  the 
young  man,  "  but  I  don^t  see  the  bridge."  "  Then  I  can 
help  thee,"  said  Lodder,  at  the  same  time  stretching  him- 
self at  full  length  across  the  water,  so  that  his  paws 
reached  the  opposite  bank  ;  and  the  youth  taking  courage, 
passed  over  Lodder^s  back  and  neck  and  arms,  and  when 
he  found  himself  on  the  opposite  bank  he  courteously 
thanked  Lodder.  After  having  conversed  a  while  with  his 
lass,  he  took  his  way  home.  In  passing  through  a  corn- 
field he  heard  an  infant  piteously  crying,  and  on  proceed- 
ing to  the  spot  whence  the  voice  seemed  to  come,  he  found 
a  boy  of  about  eight  years  old,  whom  he  took  on  his  back 
and  continued  his  w^ay  to  the  brook,  where  Lodder  was 
still  sitting.  "  What  hast  thou  there  ?  "  asked  Lodder. 
"  A  poor  child,"  answered  the  young  man,  "  whom  I  will 
keep  with  me  till  to-morrow,  when  he  will  perhaps  find 
his  parents."  "^Tis  well,"  said  Lodder,  stretching  out 
his  paws,  and  again  placing  himself  across  the  brook.  But 
as  he  was  passing  over  Lodder^s  legs,  the  boy  on  his 
shoulders  grew  uncommonly  heavy,  so  that  Lodder  cried 
out,  ^'  Thou  art  getting  too  heavy  for  me,  I  shall  let  thee 
fall."     "Just  stay  a  little  while,  dear  Lodder,"  said  the 


208  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

young  maiij  '^  I  shall  be  over  in  a  second."  But  the  boy 
grew  heavier  and  heavier,  and  when  they  were  on  Loddcr's 
back,  he  blew  hot  into  the  young  man^s  neck,  and  struck 
his  long  nails  into  his  shoulders  :  at  the  same  moment 
Lodder  vanished,  and  the  young  man  fell  into  the  water, 
where  he  instantly  crossed  himself,  and  so  released  him- 
self from  the  boy.  He  then  scrambled  out  of  the  brook 
and  ran  home  as  fast  as  he  could,  while  behind  him  re- 
sounded Hahaha ! 

WITCHERY. 

In  the  village  of  Oostbrouck,  near  Utrecht,  there  lived 
a  ^^'idow,  who  kept  a  man-servant,  that  performed  both 
domestic  and  field  labour.  This  servant,  such  persons 
being  generally  curious,  had  through  his  window  fre- 
quently remarked  that  his  mistress,  when  she  thought 
that  all  were  asleep,  went  to  a  particular  place  in  the 
stable,  and  there  took  hay  from  the  crib.  This  surprised 
him,  and  he  wondered  within  himself  why  his  mistress  did 
so,  and  resolved  to  try  what  would  be  the  eflfect,  if  he  did 
the  same.  So  once,  after  she  had  been  in  the  stable,  he 
went  in,  looked  carefully  around,  and  took  some  hay. 
But  scarcely  had  he  taken  it  in  his  hand  before  he  was 
hurried  through  the  air,  and  borne  away  to  the  little  town 
of  Wyck,  and  into  a  large  underground  cellar,  where  he 
found  a  numerous  assemblage  of  men  and  women.  AYhen 
his  mistress  and  the  others  perceived  him,  they  were  at 
first  frightened,  and  asked  him  how  he  came  among  them, 
and  he  then  related  to  them  the  whole  affair.  His  mis- 
tress on  hearing  it  fell  into  a  violent  rage,  and  began  to 
deliberate  with  her  associates  on  the  steps  it  were  most 
advisable  to  take;  but  all  were  of  opinion  that  the  best 
course  would  be  to  receive  the  man  amicably,  and  engage 
him  not  to  blab.  Now  came  the  hour  of  parting,  and  it 
was  again  a  subject  of  discussion,  whether  they  should 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  209 

kill  him  or  let  him  go  free^  but  they  resolved  on  the  latter 
course ;  and  after  he  had  promised  not  to  divulge  what 
he  had  witnessed^  his  mistress  took  him  on  her  shoulders, 
and  they  both  Hew  off  through  the  air.  But  when  they 
came  to  a  lake  the  woman  thought  within  herself  it  were 
better  to  throw  him  into  the  water,  for  then  there  would 
be  an  end  to  all  tattling,  and  she  did  accordingly,  giving 
him  a  smart  shake,  so  that  the  poor  fellow  fell  into  the 
lake. 

But  his  guardian  angel  would  not  allow  him  so  to  die, 
and  he  escaped  with  his  life,  yet  lay  in  great  pain  among 
the  rushes,  groaning  and  wailing  most  piteously.  Some 
persons,  who  were  passing  by,  hearing  him,  dragged  him 
out,  and  inquired  how  he  came  there,  when  he  related  to 
them  all  that  had  befallen  him.  They  then  laid  him  on 
a  wagon  and  conveyed  him  to  Utrecht,  where  he  related 
his  story  to  the  burgomaster,  John  Culemburg,  at  which 
that  magistrate  greatly  marvelled.  The  widow  being 
afterwards  seized,  made  a  full  confession  and  received  the 
punishment  she  merited. 

THE  LONG  WAPPER  OF  ANTWERP  K 

My  late  father,  says  the  veracious  narrator,  as  well  as 
my  ancient  aunt  and  all  my  acquaintances,  have  in  my 
younger  days  talked  to  me  a  thousand  times  about  the 
Long  Wapper,  and  of  the  numerous  tricks  which  that  ex- 
traordinary being  played  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  good 
city  of  Antwerp. 

His  tricks  were  not  always  malicious,  but  consisted  fre- 
quently in  rogueries  and  the  like ;  yet  something  always 
lay  at  the  bottom  of  them  that  was  not  altogether  right, 
and  regarding  which  one  might  entertain  unfavourable 
thoughts.     It  is,  too,  a  well-known  fact  that  he  has  car- 

^  Partly  from  *  Wodana,'  p.  11. 


210  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

ried  many  a  one  off  with  him,  but  whither  the  Lord  alone 
knows.  It  would  seem  that  people  were  afraid  to  speak 
ill  of  him,  for  who  could  say  that  he  was  not  listening  ? 
Who  or  what  he  was  I  cannot  say,  for  no  one  knew  any- 
thing of  the  matter.  As  long  as  he  abode  in  the  city,  his 
name  was  scarcely  ever  pronounced ;  and  it  was  only  when 
all  traces  of  him  had  disappeared,  that  persons  ventured 
to  communicate  to  each  other  their  thoughts  concerning 
him.  My  schoolmistress,  who  was  veiy  religious,  often 
spoke  of  him,  and  told  us  he  was  a  spirit  from  the  other 
world ;  but  I  for  my  part  believe  that  he  was  a  rich  man 
belonging  to  the  city,  who  had  made  a  compact  with  the 
devil.  Indeed,  at  a  later  period  I  heard  that  several  noble 
and  high  city  families  were  in  league  with  him,  and  were 
by  family  connected  with  him,  and  therefore  had  good 
reason  to  keep  the  truth  secret. 

In  former  days  the  Wappersrui,  which  is  now  arched 
over,  lay  quite  open,  and  the  place  now  called  the  Wappers- 
briicke  was  a  real,  true  bridge.  There  it  was  that  the 
Long  Wapper  chiefly  made  his  haunt,  and  from  him  both 
the  above  names  are  derived.  He  usually  made  his  first 
appearance  from  under  the  bridge,  strode  \^'ith  his  long 
legs  out  of  the  water  to  the  rampart,  there  in  an  instant 
shrank  to  a  diminutive  size,  and  then  appeared  as  one  of 
the  street  boys.  He  would  then  mingle  with  the  other 
boys,  and  no  one  ever  recognised  him,  for  he  always  as- 
sumed the  form  of  one  of  them  that  did  not  happen  to 
be  present.  This  took  place  usually  in  the  hours  be- 
tween light  and  dark,  for  then  the  boys  came  from  school 
or  from  their  meals,  and  began  their  play.  One  of  their 
favourite  games  was  '  shove-hat,'  at  which  one  of  them, 
on  whom  it  fell  by  lot,  gave  his  hat,  which  the  others 
shoved  with  their  feet  backwards  and  forwards,  until  he  to 
whom  it  belonged  was  fortunate  enough  to  overtake  and 
seize  it.    All  went  on  well  till  it  fell  to  the  lot  of  the  Long 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  211 

Wapper  to  give  his  hat ;  but  then  wo  to  him  who  gave 
the  first  push  to  the  hat !  He  broke  his  wooden  shoes 
in  pie(;es  and  fractured  his  toes  ;  for  the  supposed  hat  was 
a  heavy  iron  pot.  Then  was  to  be  heard  the  loud  Hahaha  ! 
of  the  jeering  sprite^,  whom  all  now  sought  after,  but  no 
one  found. 

At  night,  when  he  could  find  no  more  boys  to  plague 
and  irritate  in  their  games,  there  was  not  a  single  street 
in  the  whole  city  that  was  wholly  secure  from  his  pranks. 
Not  an  old  woman  nor  a  young  girl  could  be  out  at  a  late 
hour,  without  experiencing  his  artifice.  In  the  neighbour- 
hood of  the  Flesh-market  in  particular  he  perpetrated  a 
number  of  shameful  acts;  though  what  they  exactly 
were  I  no  longer  remember.  Two  cases  are,  however,  still 
fresh  in  my  recollection,  and  that  just  because  they  hap- 
pened to  a  person  of  my  acquaintance.  This  person  was 
returning  home  from  her  work  about  eleven  o^ clock  one 
night,  when  she  heard  the  cry  of  a  little  infant  proceeding 
from  the  Flesh -market.  On  approaching  the  spot,  she 
found  there,  on  a  stone  bench,  a  poor  Uttle  creature  that 
appeared  not  many  hours  old,  in  neat,  white  swaddling 
clothes.  She  took  up  the  little  being  and  pressed  it  to 
her  bosom,  thinking  it  was  a  forsaken  babe  that  had  been 
exposed  by  its  parents,  in  the  expectation  that  some  one 
would  keep  and  nourish  the  poor  foundling.  As  it  con- 
tinued crying  and  would  not  be  pacified,  the  good  woman 
resolved  to  give  it  the  breast,  for  she  had  at  the  time  a 
suckling  at  home.  Having  so  done  she  proceeded  on  her 
way,  but  with  every  step  she  took  the  child  grew  larger 
and  larger,  and  heavier  and  heavier,  so  that  when  she  was 
within  a  few  steps  of  her  own  door  she  could  no  longer 
carry  her  burthen,  but  was  obliged  to  let  go  the  wonderful 
suckling,  which  did  not,  however,  fall  on  the  ground,  but 
glided  away  under  her  arm,  and  at  the  same  moment 
Hahaha  !  resounded  behind  her.     On  her  turning  round. 


212  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

a  voice  addressed  her  with  :  "  Thanks,  good  woman, 
thanks  !  I  have  nicely  quenched  my  thirst/^  Wondering 
hereat,  she  looked  to  see  who  spoke,  and  there  stood  the 
Long  Wapper  close  to  her,  with  his  head  towering  far 
above  the  houses. 

From  that  time  she  was  very  cautious,  and  whenever, 
on  returning  home  late  at  night,  she  met  with  anything 
that  appeared  in  the  least  degree  suspicious,  she  instantly 
either  crossed  herself,  or  called  for  aid  to  the  mother  of 
God,  or  one  of  the  saints  or  holy  angels,  and  then  natu- 
rally all  went  right ;  and  by  following  this  course  she  con- 
tinued free  from  all  annoyance  for  a  considerable  time. 
Once,  however,  as  she  was  on  her  way  home  about  mid- 
night, she  all  at  once  observed  a  white  handkerchief  or 
napkin  lying  on  the  ground  before  her.  Thinking  she 
was  in  luck^s  way,  she  was  carrying  it  off,  when  it  stretched 
itself  out  more  and  more,  slipt  away  from  her,  and  at 
length  became  so  long  that  she  saw  it  was  the  Long 
Wapper  again,  who  now  leisurely  strode  over  the  houses, 
at  the  same  time  laughing  aloud.  Of  such  pranks  I  could 
have  told  you  God  knows  how  many ;  for  every  night 
something  new  occurred,  and  that  not  in  one  place  only, 
but  in  many  at  the  same  time ;  so  that  it  was  evident  he 
could  multiply  himself. 

And  then  if  I  were  to  speak  of  the  various  forms  under 
which  he  appeared  !  Sometimes  he  was  a  cat,  sometimes 
a  dog,  sometimes  a  clergyman,  sometimes  a  richly  clad 
personage,  who  with  sweetmeats  and  the  like  enticed  chil- 
dren to  go  with  him,  the  Lord  alone  knows  whither. 
Often  would  he  stand  of  an  incredible  height  at  the  lofty 
church  windows,  and  disturb  the  late  devotions  with 
cursing  and  blasphemy.  At  another  time  he  would  knock 
at  the  windows  of  the  second  and  even  the  third  stories  of 
the  houses,  striking  the  greatest  terror  into  the  inhabit- 
ants.    If  he  saw  any  lace-makers  or  other  women  or  men 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  213 

working  late  at  night,  he  would  cry  out  to  them  :  "  The 
night  is  for  rae,  the  day  for  you^ !"  In  wealthy  houses 
he  would  appear  in  the  form  of  an  acquaintance  and  sit 
with  the  family  at  table;  and  when  all  were  enjoying 
themselves  in  peace  and  contentment,  would  suddenly 
vanish,  laughing  at  his  host.  He  would  frequently  mingle 
with  card-players,  lose  much  money,  and  refuse  to  pay. 
If  then  a  quarrel  ensued,  he  would  call  his  fellow-game- 
sters out,  to  settle  the  dispute  out  of  doors,  when  gene- 
rally one  would  lose  his  life. 

What  chiefly  made  my  late  father  believe  that  the  de- 
struction of  souls  was  one  of  the  Long  Wapper's  principal 
objects,  was  the  following  occurrence  :  A  man,  whose  wife 
was  in  labour,  going  out  late  one  night  to  fetch  a  midwife, 
encountered  so  many  difficulties  in  his  way  that  it  would 
be  no  easy  task  to  recount  them.  In  the  mean  time  the 
poor  woman  was  left  alone  in  her  sufferings,  and  the  child 
would  inevitably  have  diedf  without  baptism,  had  the  man 
— who  was  my  own  uncle — not  extricated  himself  by 
timely  recourse  to  prayer. 

But  the  best  preservative  against  the  Long  Wapper  was 
an  image  of  the  Virgin,  for  that  he  could  never  pass.  Since 
that  time  such  images  have  been  set  up  at  the  corners  of 
all  the  streets,  which  is  the  principal  reason  why  he  left 
Antwerp.     He  now  haunts  the  sea-coast. 


In  the  foregoing  account  of  the  Long  Wapper  we  have 
mentioned  that  no  one  ever  ventured  to  speak  ill  of  him, 
or  even  to  whisper  the  most  innocent  suppositions  con- 
cerning him ;  for  no  one  could  be  certain  that  he  was  not 
speaking  with  him  himself.  In  general  it  did  not  turn 
out  well  for  those  who  said  anything  about  him ;  for  when 
they  went  out  at  night  they  might  be  sure  of  being,  in 

*  The  cry  of  the  Wild  Huntsman. 


214  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

one  place  or  other,  obliged  to  pass  between  his  legs ;  for 
he  would  place  himself  across  the  street,  with  his  feet 
against  the  opposite  sides,  and  make  himself  so  tall  that 
his  whole  body  rose  above  the  houses,  and  thus  break  the 
neck  of  many  a  one  that  passed  under  him. 

When  playing  with  children  he  often  allowed  them  to 
\Wn  a  great  deal,  particularly  at  marbles ;  but  when  the 
poor  things  returned  home,  and  full  of  joy  would  exhibit 
their  winnings,  the  marbles  were  changed  to  filthy  horse- 
dung. 

He  one  day  played  at  thieves  against  the  church  of  the 
Friars  Preachers,  and  the  lot  fell  on  him  to  be  the  hang- 
man, an  office  he  willingly  undertook.  When  it  came  to 
the  hanging,  he  really  hanged  him  who  played  the  thief, 
so  that  the  poor  boy  died ;  and  then  at  one  bounce  avray 
he  sprang  into  the  water,  leaving  the  others  with  the  dead 
body,  and  laughing  at  them  into  the  bargain. 

A  few  days  after  this  villanous  act,  a  cooper  in  St.  Pie- 
tersvliet  took  a  journeyman  into  his  service,  who  at  first 
w^as  very  handy  and  attentive  to  his  business.  But  one 
day  the  master  ordered  him  to  throw  a  handful  of  shavings 
into  a  cask  and  set  them  on  fire,  as  coopers  are  in  the 
habit  of  doing ;  but  before  the  master  was  aware  of  it,  the 
jom'neyman  had  kindled  the  fire  in  the  w^orkshop,  and 
chopt  all  the  hoops  in  pieces.  Allien  the  cooper  saw  this 
he  was  exasperated,  and  w^as  about  seizing  his  rascally  man 
by  the  hair,  to  revenge  himself  for  the  damage ;  but  he 
fled,  pursued  by  his  angry  master,  and  sprang,  bursting 
into  his  usual  scoffing  laugh,  into  the  water.  The  cooper 
now  saw  pretty  clearly  with  whom  he  had  had  to  do,  and 
instantly  hastened  back  to  his  workshop,  where  he  found 
everything  in  flames,  and  not  till  after  much  exertion, 
with  the  help  of  his  neighbours,  could  the  fire  be  extin- 
guished. 

Shortly  after  this  he  hired  himself  to  a  brewer.     After 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  215 

having  been  a  whole  day  industrious  and  attentive,  he  was 
ordered  in  the  evening  to  roll  away  a  full  tun  of  beer. 
This  he  contrived  to  roll  over  one  of  his  fellow-journey- 
men, and  the  poor  man  was  killed.  Wapper  was  pursued 
by  all  the  brewer^s  men,  who  would  avenge  their  mate, 
but  he  leaped  in  the  Brouwersvliet  and  vanished.  Some 
who  did  not  know  him  sprang  after  him  to  catch  him,  but 
they  were  piteously  drowned. 

Another  time  he  appeared  in  broad  day  selling  muscles, 
and  passing  by  a  house  where  four  women  were  sitting 
before  the  door  at  work,  he  strongly  recommended  his 
muscles  to  them,  at  the  same  time  opening  one,  which  he 
very  courteously  offered  to  one  of  the  women.  She  took 
it,  but  when  in  her  mouth  it  was  nothing  but  dirt.  He 
apologized  and  opened  a  second.  This  time  all  four  saw 
that  it  was  a  fine,  sound  muscle.  Another  of  the  women 
was  about  to  swallow  it,  but  felt  something  crawling  about 
in  her  mouth,  which  on  spitting  it  out  proved  to  be  a  large, 
black  spider.  The  women  fell  upon  him,  but  he  defended 
himself,  left  two  of  them  for  dead  and  vanished. 

Equally  atrocious  was  his  conduct  towards  three  youths. 
They  were  sitting  together  in  the  Ridder-straet,  wishing 
to  play  at  cards,  but  wanted  a  fourth.  The  Long  Wapper 
comes  by,  offers  to  play  with  them,  and  the  game  begins. 
Shortly  after  a  quarrel  arises,  and  from  words  they  soon 
proceed  to  fighting ;  the  Long  Wapper  strikes  them  dead, 
one  after  another,  and  then  was  away  no  one  knew  how 
or  whither.  Often,  too,  when  he  mingled  with  card- 
players,  which  frequently  happened,  he  would  suffer  him- 
self to  be  pursued  by  his  fellow-gamesters,  and  so  entice 
them  into  the  water,  and  there  cause  them  to  perish.  He 
once  went  into  an  inn,  the  sign  of  the  Horn,  and  there 
made  such  a  disturbance  that  the  night-watch  were  on  the 
point  of  seizing  him,  but  he  escaped  from  them  and  sprang 
into  the  water.     Those  who  leaped  in  after  him,  with  the 


216  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

intention  of  capturing  liim,  paid  for  their  temerity  with 
their  lives. 

Sometimes  he  appeared  as  a  Uttle  child.  Once  in  the 
Beddenstraet  some  persons  found  a  new-born  child  lying 
in  the  middle  of  the  road  on  a  dunghill.  They  instantly 
took  the  little  creature  into  a  house^  warmed  and  fed  it 
with  pap,  and  for  ten  days  took  all  possible  care  of  it. 
Then  all  at  once  it  grew  large,  ran  out  of  the  house,  and 
laughed  at  the  good  folks  who  had  been  so  kind  to  it. 
The  same  happened  to  a  washerwoman,  who  returning 
from  church  found  a  child  in  the  street,  which  she  took 
home  and  fed,  and  which,  when  it  was  warm  and  satisfied, 
said,  laughing  aloud  :  "  Thanks,  mammy ;  I  was  very  cold 
and  hungry;"  with  which  words  it  disappeared  up  the 
chimney.  Something  similar  also  befell  three  lads.  They 
had  gone  out  to  cut  osiers ;  and  on  the  esplanade  of  the 
citadel  found  a  child  lying  in  the  path.  After  considering 
what  to  do  with  it,  they  agreed  that  one  of  them  should 
take  it  with  him  and  give  it  to  his  mother.  The  lad  then 
taking  it  in  his  arms,  proceeded  with  it  homewards,  fol- 
lowed by  the  others.  He  had  not,  however,  gone  far  be- 
fore he  began  to  complain  of  fatigue,  and  begged  one  of 
his  companions  to  carry  the  child.  In  his  arms,  too,  it 
grew  so  heavy,  that  he  fell  down  with  it,  and  then  they 
resolved  that  two  together  should  carry  it.  This  lasted 
for  a  while,  when  it  became  too  heavy  for  them,  and  the 
third  was  obliged  to  aid  them.  When  they  had  proceeded 
a  few  steps  further,  the  three  being  unable  longer  to  bear 
their  burthen,  laid  it  on  the  grass  and  sat  down  by  the 
side  of  it.  Then  all  of  a  sudden  the  child  began  to  in- 
crease, and  became  larger  and  larger,  and  they  saw  clearly 
that  it  was  the  Long  Wappcr. 

One  poor  man  he  struck  with  deadly  terror.  This  man 
was  so  poor  that  he  had  not  even  a  handful  of  straw  for  his 
children  to  sleep  on ;   when  one  evening  returning  from 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  217 

his  work  he  found  a  large  bundle  of  straw  lying  in  the 
street.  This  he  gladly  took  home  with  him^  saying  to 
himself:  "Now  my  poor  children  can  for  once  have  a  soft 
bed."  But  hardly  had  he  thrown  down  the  straw  in  his 
hut,  before  it  moved  and  stood  erect.  The  wife  seeing 
this,  instantly  ran  to  get  holy  water,  with  which  having 
sprinkled  it,  it  instantly  flew  out  through  the  chimney. 

But  ten  times  w^orse  is  that  which  befell  a  rich  woman 
in  Antwerp.  This  woman  led  a  very  licentious  life,  and 
had  four  lovers,  all  of  whom  visited  her  in  the  evenings, 
but  at  different  hours,  so  that  no  one  knew  anything  of  the 
others.  The  Long  Wapper  one  night  assumed  the  form  of 
this  lady.  At  ten  o^clock  came  the  first  lover,  and  the  Long 
Wapper  said  to  him  :  "  What  dost  thou  desire  V  "I  desire 
you  for  a  wife,"  said  the  spark.  "  Thou  shalt  have  me," 
replied  Wapper,  "  if  thou  wilt  go  instantly  to  the  church- 
yard of  our  Lady,  and  there  sit  for  two  hours  on  the 
transverse  of  the  great  cross."  "  Good,"  said  he,  "  that 
shall  be  done;"  and  he  went  and  did  accordingly. 

At  half-past  ten  came  the  second.  "  Wliat  dost  thou 
desire  ? "  asked  the  Long  Wapper.  "  I  wish  to  marry 
you,"  answered  the  suitor.  "Thou  shalt  have  me,"  re- 
plied Wapper,  "  if  thou  wilt  go  previously  to  the  church- 
yard of  our  Lady,  there  take  a  coffin,  drag  it  to  the  foot 
of  the  great  cross,  and  lay  thyself  in  it  till  midnight." 
"  Good,"  said  the  lover,  "  that  shall  be  done  at  once ; " 
and  he  went  and  did  so. 

About  eleven  o'clock  came  the  third.  Him  the  Long 
Wapper  commissioned  to  go  to  the  coffin  at  the  foot  of  the 
cross  in  our  Lady's  churchyard,  to  knock  thrice  on  the  lid, 
and  to  wait  there  till  midnight. 

At  half-past  eleven  came  the  fourth,  and  Wapper  asked 
him  what  his  wishes  were.  "  To  wed  you,"  answered  he. 
"  Thou  shalt  do  so,"  replied  Wapper,  "  if  thou  wilt  take 
the  iron  chain  in  the  kitchen,  and  dragging  it  after  thee, 

L 


218  NETHERLANDISH  TllxVDITIONS. 

run  three  times  round  the  cross  in  the  churchyard  of  our 
Lady/^     ''  Good,"  said  the  spark,  "  that  I  will  do." 

The  first  had  set  himself  on  the  cross,  but  had  fallen 
dead  with  fright  to  the  earth,  on  seeing  the  second  place 
the  coffin  at  his  feet.  The  second  died  with  fright  when 
the  third  struck  thrice  on  the  coffin ;  the  third  fell  down 
dead  when  the  fourth  came  rattling  his  chain,  and  the 
fourth  knew  not  what  to  think,  when  he  found  his  three 
rivals  lying  stiff  and  cold  around  the  cross.  With  all 
speed  he  ran  from  the  churchyard  to  the  lady,  to  tell  her 
what  had  happened,  and  to  hold  her  to  her  word.  But 
she  of  course  knew  nothing  of  the  matter  j  when,  however, 
on  the  following  day,  she  was  informed  of  the  miserable 
death  of  her  three  lovers,  she  put  an  end  to  her  own  life. 

THE  WILD  HUNT. 

The  concubine  of  an  ecclesiastic  having  died,  the  night 
after  her  decease,  as  a  soldier  and  his  comrades  were  riding 
through  a  forest,  they  were  surprised  at  hearing  a  woman^s 
voice  crying  for  help.  Shortly  after  they  saw  the  woman 
running  towards  them.  One  of  the  soldiers  then  de- 
scending from  his  horse,  made  a  circle  round  himself  on 
the  earth  with  his  sword,  into  which  he  drew  the  woman. 
Immediately  after  they  heard  a  fearful  noise  in  the  air, 
like  that  of  many  huntsmen  and  dogs,  at  which  the  woman 
trembled  violently.  But  the  soldier,  giving  his  horse  to 
one  of  his  comrades,  took  hold  of  the  woman^s  long  tresses 
and  wound  them  round  his  left  arm,  while  in  his  right 
hand  he  held  his  sword  stretched  out  before  him. 

When  the  Wild  Hunt  di-ew  nigh,  the  woman  whispered 
to  the  soldier :  "  Ride  without  me,  ride  without  me,  there 
he  comes."  The  soldier,  however,  continued  holding  her 
fast  by  the  hair,  but  she  tore  herself  away  and  fled, 
leaving  her  long  tresses  in  his  hand.  But  the  huntsman 
soon  caught  her  and  threw  her  across  his  saddle,  so  that 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  219 

her  head  and  arms  hung  down  on  one  side,  and  her  legs 
on  the  other. 

Next  morning,  when  he  entered  the  town,  the  soldier 
related  his  adventure  and  showed  the  hair  on  his  arm. 
The  people  at  first  would  not  believe  him,  but  went  and 
opened  the  coffin,  and  there  found  the  body  lying  without 
hair. 

THE  WILD  HUNTSMAN'S  PRESENT. 

As  two  countrymen  were  coming  late  one  night  through 
the  Sonienbusch,  one  of  them  quite  drunk,  the  other  being 
a  pious,  sober  man,  they  suddenly  heard  at  a  distance  a 
cracking  of  whips,  barking  of  dogs,  and  tramp  of  horses. 
" God  preserve  us,  here's  the  Wild  Huntsman  \^'  said  the 
sober  countryman ;  but  the  drunkard  laughed  and  said : 
^^I  would  fain  know  what  the  foul  fiend  catches,"  and 
then  in  a  loud  voice  cried :  "  Holla  Sir  Hunter,  pray  give 
me  part  of  your  game.''  At  this  the  other  crossed  him- 
self, and  they  pursued  their  way  home.  On  the  following 
morning,  when  the  drunkard's  wife  would  go  out  to  fetch 
water,  she  found,  on  opening  the  door,  the  hind  quarter  of 
an  ox  that  had  died  in  the  village  about  a  month  before, 
and  had  been  thrown  on  the  common  laystall,  and  which 
stank  horribly,  and  was  full  of  worms  and  maggots. 

THE  ETERNAL  HUNTSMAN  OF  WYNENDAEL. 

In  the  neighbourhood  of  the  castle  of  Wynendael,  the 
former  palace  of  the  Counts  of  Flanders,  there  dwelt  a 
long  time  ago  an  aged  peasant,  who  had  a  son  that  was 
entirely  devoted  to  the  chase,  and  instead  of  ploughing 
and  cultivating  the  fields,  was  always  roaming  about  the 
woods  and  forests.  His  father  had  often  reproached  him 
for  this  propensity,  but  he  continued  in  his  old  course. 

When  the  old  peasant  at  length  lay  on  his  death-bed, 
he  had  his  son  called  to  him,  for  the  purpose  of  giving 
him   a  last  Christian  exhortation.      He  came  not,  but 

T    9 


220  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

whistling  to  his  dogs,  went  out  into  the  thicket.  At  this 
the  old  man  was  struck  with  terrific  despair,  and  he  cursed 
his  son  with  the  appalling  words  :  "  Hunt  then  for  ever  ! 
aye  for  ever  ! ''     He  then  turned  his  head  and  expired. 

From  that  time  the  unhappy  son  has  wandered  restless 
about  the  woods.  At  night  he  is  frequently  heard  crying 
Jacko  !  Jacko  !  Jacko  !  and  then  the  whole  neighbour^ 
hood  re-echoes  with  the  noise  of  the  huntsman  and  the 
baying  of  dogs. 

Others  say  that  the  huntsman  was,  by  his  father's  male- 
diction, transformed  to  a  bird  of  prey,  and  flies  about  in 
that  form,  following  and  attacking  both  men  and  beasts, 
and  constantly  crying  Jacko  !  Jacko  !  Jacko  ! 

In  these  latter  years  the  old  woods  about  Wynendael 
have  been  grubbed  up,  since  which  time  the  huntsman 
has  gone  further  up. 

JACK  0'  LANTERNS  BAPTIZED. 

Jack  0^  Lanterns  are,  as  tradition  tells  us,  the  souls  of 
unbaptized  children.  Because  these  souls  cannot  enter 
heaven,  they  take  their  abode  in  forests,  and  in  dark  and 
desert  places,  where  they  mourn  over  their  hard  lot.  If 
at  night  they  get  sight  of  any  person,  they  run  up  to  him, 
and  then  hasten  on  before  him,  to  show  him  the  way  to 
.^ome  water,  that  he  may  baptize  them  therewith.  And 
that  no  one  should  neglect  to  do,  because  the  poor  beings 
must  remain  without  the  gates  of  paradise  until  some  one 
takes  pity  on  them. 

MALEGY'S  PALFREY. 

On  the  Monday  following  the  little  Tuindag  (or  fair), 
m  the  year  1521,  three  young  damsels,  Magdalena  Ghy- 
selin,  Lucia  Larmeson  and  ^laxima  Vanden  Driessche,  who 
dwelt  near  each  other  in  the  street  of  the  RecoUets  at 


XETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  221 

Ypres,  tempted  by  tlie  coolness  of  the  evenings  were  walk- 
ing slowly  through  the  city,  when,  in  the  Temple  street, 
they  were  surprised  by  the  sight  of  a  little  horse,  which 
seemed  to  be  wandering  about  \\dthout  a  master.  The 
animal  was  of  such  extraordinary  beauty,  that  the  three 
maidens  stood  still  to  admire  it.  Its  skin  was  white, 
without  hair,  and  exceedingly  smooth;  on  each  haunch 
there  appeared,  as  if  embroidered,  a  green  parrot,  and 
round  its  body  hung  many  garlands  of  flowers ;  its  legs 
were  as  round  as  turned  pillars,  its  mane  was  of  gold 
fringe,  and  its  tail  composed  of  many-coloured  ribands ; 
on  its  back  was  a  saddle  of  rose-coloured  damask. 

While  the  three  maidens  were  thus  standing  lost  in 
wonder  at  the  uncommon  beauty  of  the  horse,  a  man  came 
running,  who  appeared  to  be  the  master  of  the  strayed 
animal,  who  turning  to  the  delighted  females,  asked  them 
if  they  had  ever  seen  so  handsome  a  palfrey?  '^^o/' 
answered  they  in  ecstasy.  "  That  I  can  easily  believe,^^ 
continued  he  in  a  courteous  tone,  "  for  this  horse  comes 
from  Japan.  I  have  only  to-day  arrived  in  Ypres :  its 
qualities  render  it  even  more  worthy  of  admiration  than 
its  beautiful  form.  It  will  not  suffer  any  male  to  ride  it, 
and  instantly  throws  any  one  that  ventures  to  make  the 
experiment ;  but  it  is  particularly  adapted  to  carry  young 
damsels,  as  you  may  perceive  by  its  splendid  saddle. 
"V^Tienever  such  wish  to  mount  it,  it  instantly  sinks  down 
on  its  knees,  to  receive  them  on  its  back.  And  if  you  are 
inclined,  ladies,  to  make  a  little  tour  with  it,  let  all  three 
mount,  and  say  where  you  live,  or  whither  you  would  like 
to  go ;  it  will  convey  you  thither  with  all  comfort,  as  if  it 
felt  itself  flattered  at  being  employed  in  the  service  of  the 
fair.^^ 

"  What  say  you  V  said  Magdalena,  who  was  the  boldest 
of  the  three,  to  her  two  friends ;  "  I  have  already  been  on 
horseback  once,  and  if  you  will  venture,  I  will  sit  fore- 


222  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

most  and  hold  the  rein ;  you  can  sit  behind  and  take  fast 
hold  of  me/^  "We  are  willing/^  said  the  two  others. 
"  So_,  courage,  nag/^  said  the  man,  at  the  same  time  pat- 
ting the  animal ;  "  bend  your  knees  before  the  young 
ladies,  that  they  ma}^  mount. ^^  In  an  instant  the  horse 
fell  on  its  knees,  and  the  damsels  mounted.  "  Now,^'  said 
Magdalena  Vanden  Driessche  to  the  man,  "  you  must  not 
let  the  horse  run  or  leap,  for  I  am  afraid  of  falling  off.^^ 
"Fear  not,'^  answered  the  man,  "it  shall  not  leap;  say 
only  where  you  wish  to  go.^^  "Home,'^  answered  the 
three  at  once,  "we  live  near  each  other  in  the  street  of 
the  Eecollets.^^  "  So,  my  nag,  you  have  heard :  be  gentle 
and  ride  on  with  the  young  ladies,^^  said  the  man  to  the 
wonderful  animal. 

Magdalena  held  fast  by  the  rein,  which  was  a  plaited 
silken  cord,  to  guide  the  horse,  and  the  proud  animal  stept 
on  so  gently  that  its  tread  could  scarcely  be  heard ;  but 
by  degrees  its  pace  became  quicker  and  quicker,  till  at 
length  it  seemed  to  fly  along  the  road  like  an  arrow.  It 
was  already  without  the  city  gate  before  the  three  maidens 
Vv^ere  aware  that  they  w^ere  deceived. 

It  was  now  night,  and  it  would  not  be  possible  to  con- 
jecture the  distance  that  the  horse  had  travelled;  but  all 
at  once  it  stopt  before  a  magnificent  palace  of  vast  dimen- 
sions, the  innumerable  windows  of  which  appeared  like  so 
many  furnaces,  so  intense  was  the  light  within  the  place. 
The  melodious  tones  of  a  thousand  musical  instruments 
charmed  the  ears  of  the  listening  damsels ;  it  seemed  also 
that  they  were  dancing  merrily  within. 

At  once  the  gate  flew  open,  the  palfrey  bearing  the 
three  maidens  entered,  followed  by  its  master,  and  the 
gate  closed  of  itself  after  them.  A  moment  after  a  side- 
door  opened,  and  a  numerous  and  richly-clad  party  of 
ladies  presented  themselves  to  the  eyes  of  the  young  dam- 
sels from  Ypres.     In  the  middle  of  the  apartment  stood  a 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  223 

well-furnished  table,  at  the  head  of  which  sat  a  stately 
personage,  who  seemed  to  be  the  master  of  the  mansion. 

Some  of  the  young  damsels  then  stood  up,  approached 
the  three  maidens,  and  assisted  them  to  dismount  from 
Malegy's  palfrey,  which  again  bent  its  knees  ;  after  Avhich 
they  invited  them  to  enter.  But  the  three  maidens,  who 
had  not  recovered  from  their  surprise,  craved  pardon  for 
their  unseasonable  appearance  at  the  palace,  and  were 
about  to  begin  the  recital  of  what  had  befallen  them.  But 
their  excuses  found  no  hearers,  and  they  were  obliged  to 
yield  to  the  request  of  the  young  ladies.  They  entered 
accordingly.  Scarcely  had  they  sufficiently  feasted  their 
eyes  on  the  splendid  attire  of  the  ladies,  when  their  atten- 
tion was  attracted  to  the  lord  of  the  mansion.  His  dress 
consisted  of  an  ample  robe  of  damask,  which  covered  his 
whole  person ;  on  his  head  he  had  a  kind  of  turban,  in 
the  front  of  which  projected  a  small  mirror,  and  on  both 
sides  of  which  w^ere  attached  diamonds  and  other  precious 
stones.  This  personage  was  not  less  courteous  than  the 
young  ladies,  and  by  his  flattering  discourse  so  seduced 
them,  that  from  sheer  politeness  they  sat  down  to  table 
and  partook  of  the  good  cheer. 

The  three  maidens  had  waited  till  the  supper  was  over 
to  give  an  explanation  of  their  adventure ;  but  when  they 
began  to  inquire  for  a  guide  to  conduct  them  back  to  their 
parents,  who  would  be  distressed  on  account  of  their  long 
absence,  the  master  of  the  palace  arose  from  his  seat  and 
said :  "  Dear  friends  !  now  that  Malegy's  palfrey  has  pro- 
cured us  the  pleasure  of  receiving  in  our  mansion  these 
noble  damsels  from  Ypres,  we  must  not  neglect  anything 
that  may  contribute  to  their  passing  the  evening  cheer- 
fully and  pleasantly. — Let  us  play  at  forfeits.'' 

And  as  if  all  the  ladies  had  divined  the  thought  of  their 
lord,  they  had  already  ranged  themselves  in  a  circle  when 
he  uttered  the  last  words,  leaving  places  vacant  for  the 


224  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

damsels  from  Ypres,  whom  they  pressed  to  join  the  party. 
But  IMagdalcna  Ghyselin  said :  "  I  cannot  play  with  you^ 
for  my  parents  will  be  alarmed  if  I  stay  longer.^^  "  Nor 
can  1"  said  Lucia  Larmeson.  "  I  must  positively  be  at 
home  to-night/^  said  Maxima  A'anden  Dricssche,  who  was 
the  youngest,  and  feared  being  chidden.  At  this  refusal 
the  eyes  of  the  master  assumed  such  a  diabolic  expression, 
and  his  countenance  was  overspread  with  such  an  angry 
gloom,  that  they  quickly  sat  down  in  the  circle,  to  with- 
draw themselves  from  the  terrific  fascination  of  that  visage. 
They  immediately  thought  that  their  refusal  was  an  in- 
civility, and  charged  themselves  with  causing  the  unfa- 
vourable change  which  they  remarked  in  the  manner  of 
the  lord  of  the  mansion.     They  then  played  at  forfeits. 

When  it  came  to  the  turn  of  the  three  maidens  to  repeat 
after  the  master  the  words  he  had  spoken,  their  usual 
quickness  at  forfeits  deserted  them,  for  they  were  so  dis- 
concerted by  his  looks,  that  they  lost  every  time,  and  had 
to  forfeit.  This  course  of  bad  luck  lasted  so  long  that 
all  the  three  were  obliged  to  give  everything  they  had, 
so  that  at  last  they  parted  with  all  their  ornaments,  as 
earrings,  chains,  rings  and  bracelets,  and  even  their 
clothes.  With  beating  hearts  they  awaited  the  end  of 
the  game. 

"  Now,^^  said  the  great  man,  "  before  we  proceed  to  the 
redeeming  of  the  forfeits,  let  us  drink  to  the  health  of 
Malegy^s  palfrey,  which  has  so  wondrously  brought  the 
young  ladies  to  our  dwelling.^'  At  these  words  the  eyes 
of  the  ladies  of  the  palace  grew  brighter  and  shot  forth 
little  flames,  which  almost  blinded  our  three  maidens.  The 
master  of  the  palfrey  then  entered,  filled  the  glasses,  and 
the  salver  went  formally  round.  It  seemed  that  the  lips 
of  the  great  man  muttered  some  mysterious  words,  and 
any  one  who  could  have  been  an  indifferent  spectator  of 
what  was  passing,  would  have  seen  that  his  turban  stood 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  225 

higher  than  before,  as  if  something  were  growing  on  his 
head  that  lifted  it  u]). 

They  raised  their  glasses  to  their  mouths,  but  no  sooner 
had  the  first  drop  of  liquid  passed  over  the  lips  of  the 
three  maidens,  than  they  seemed  at  once  to  wake  from  a 
dream,  and  found  themselves  under  the  blue  sky,  in  the 
dewy  grass  that  grew  in  the  bottom  of  a  great  hollow.  The 
sorcery  was  at  an  end.  The  three  maidens  were  sitting 
in  a  deep  cavity  on  the  Kemmelberg,  two  hours  distant 
from  the  city,  yet  totally  ignorant  of  the  place  they  were 
in.  It  may  easily  be  imagined  with  what  dejection  they 
looked  on  one  another,  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  half- 
naked,  and  in  an  unknown  place  thrown  into  a  pit,  from 
which  nothing  could  be  seen  but  the  stars  glittering  in 
the  heavens.  Mute  astonishment  soon,  however,  gave 
place  to  a  general  lamentation  over  their  miserable  plight. 
At  length,  having  found  means  to  escape  from  the  pit, 
they  wandered  bareheaded  and  barefooted  for  some  time 
round  the  mountain,  till  at  length  they  perceived  a  pea- 
sant's cottage,  towards  which  they  directed  their  steps. 

They  knocked  at  the  door :  the  cottager  rose  and  asked 
what  they  wanted.  They  told  him  their  adventure,  and 
inquired  the  name  of  the  place  where  they  were.  "  On 
the  Kemmelberg,'^  was  the  answer ;  "  and  as  I  hear,  you 
have  been  in  the  clutches  of  the  sorceresses,  who  on  the 
mountain  here  make  such  a  hideous  noise  every  night. 
Only  an  hour  ago  I  got  up  and  put  my  head  out  of  the 
window,  yet  saw  nothing  but  a  great  light,  although  I 
heard  playing,  singing  and  dancing  without  cessation. 

The  three  girls  begged  for  the  loan  of  clothes,  and  for 
assistance,  but  the  cottager's  wife,  who  in  her  bed  had 
heard  all  that  passed,  cried  out :  ''  No,  Klaes,  give  them 
no  assistance  :  persons  who  dare  to  appear  so  naked  at  our 
door  can  be  no  other  than  sorceresses,  that  come  to  deceive 
us  and  to  bewitch  our  child,  for  I  hear  it  crying  already : 

L  5 


226  NETHERLAXDISH  TRADITIONS. 

let  US  rather  seize  and  burn  them/'  '^  I  behcve  thou  art 
right,  wife,"  said  the  man,  "  for  it  is  impossible  that  three 
young  damsels  from  Ypres,  daughters  of  respectable  per- 
sons, should  come  to  the  Kemmelberg  at  such  an  improper 
hour,  and  without  clothes."  Saying  this  he  seized  Mag- 
dalena,  who  stood  nearest  to  him,  by  her  blue  under- 
petticoat.  Lucia  and  Maxima  ran  down  the  mountain 
and  escaped.  Magdalena  screamed  and  struggled,  but 
with  little  chance  of  effecting  her  escape,  when  luckily  the 
hook  of  her  petticoat  brake,  by  which  accident  she  was 
enabled  to  run  off,  leaving  her  garment  in  the  hands  of 
the  peasant. 

After  having  wandered  through  many  unknown  ways, 
our  scantily-clad  damsels,  with  tearful  eyes,  cheeks  red 
with  shame,  and  beating  hearts,  came  at  length  to  a  hostel, 
at  the  door  of  which  they  knocked.  They  did  not  venture 
to  tell  the  master,  who  instantly  rose,  how  they  had  fallen 
into  so  miserable  a  plight,  lest  they  should  receive  no 
better  treatment  than  they  had  already  experienced,  and 
therefore  devised  a  falsehood,  making  the  host  believe  that 
they  had  been  attacked  and  stript  by  robbers.  Their  story 
inspired  pity,  they  were  taken  in  and  provided  with 
clothes. 

"But  who  are  you?"  inquired  the  host.  "I,"  said 
Magdalena,  "  am  the  daughter  of  Baldwin  Ghyselin,  and 
these  are  my  near  neighbours."  "What,  the  daughter 
of  my  friend  Ghyselin  in  the  street  of  the  BecoUets  at 
Ypres  !"  exclaimed  the  host;  "that  being  the  case  1  will 
instantly  put  the  horses  to  my  wagon,  in  which  I  last 
week  carried  a  load  of  wood  to  his  house,  and  will  this 
night  conduct  you  home."  "  Oh  do  so,  do  so,  good  man," 
cried  the  three  at  once;  "our  parents  will  handsomely 
reward  you  for  the  trouble."  In  less  than  half  an  hour 
the  wagon  with  two  horses  stood  ready  before  the  door  of 
the  inn,  and  the  three  maidens,  dressed  in  the  hostess's 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  227 

clothes,  sprang  into  it,  and  the  party  drove  off.  When 
they  had  ridden  about  an  hour,  it  appeared  to  the  host 
that  he  had  deviated  from  the  right  road.  ^^  That  is  ad- 
mirable/' said  he;  ''^l  know  the  way  from  Kemniel  to 
Ypres  as  well  as  my  Pater  nostcr,  and  yet  I  have  taken  a 
wrong  road/'  The  anxiety  of  the  damsels  may  be  easily 
conceived,  when  they  thought  of  Malegy's  palfrey,  that 
had  carried  them  so  supernaturally  over  hedge  and  ditch. 
^^  It  is  wonderful,''  said  the  host  again,  '^  I  cannot  govern 
my  horses.  Here  we  are  now  in  the  middle  of  a  field; 
and  I  cannot  imagine  how  the  horses  could  possibly  have 
dragged  the  wagon  into  it."  And  the  wagon  went  on 
more  and  more  rapidly,  and  was  dragged  with  violence 
across  dikes,  through  thickets,  over  ploughed  land,  and 
through  rivulets.  A  shadow  floated  constantly  before  the 
horses.  "  It 's  the  shadow  of  Malegy's  horse,"  whispered 
the  three  girls  with  alarm.  They  at  length  entered  a 
broad  road,  and  the  wagon  stopt ;  the  horses  reeked  with 
the  sweat  that  ran  from  them ;  the  shadow  had  vanished, 
and  day  was  beginning  to  dawn.  "  The  witches  of  the 
Kemmelberg  have  misled  us,"  said  the  host,  looking  as 
pale  as  a  corpse ;  "  but  their  influence  is  at  an  end ;  for 
the  dawn  already  appears  yonder  in  the  east."  At  this 
moment  a  countryman  passed  by  on  his  way  to  the  field. 
"Friend,  what  road  is  this  we  are  in?"  asked  the  host, 
"What  road?"  repeated  the  man.  "Yes,  I  must  inquire, 
though  it  seems  laughable ;  for  I  ought  to  drive  the  way 
from  Kemmel  to  Ypres  blindfold,  so  well  do  I  know  it ; 
and  yet  I  don't  exactly  see  whereabouts  I  am  at  this  mo- 
ment." The  countryman  smiled.  "  I  believe  you,  friend," 
said  he ;  "  you  talk  about  Ypres,  and  you  are  more  than 
ten  hours  distant  from  it ;  for  you  are  now  on  the  road 
from  Steenvoorde  to  Cassel.  Don't  you  see  the  town  in 
the  distance  yonder  ?"  "  Oh  heavens,"  cried  the  damsels 
with  a  sigh,  "  how  could  we  be  so  silly  as  to  ride  on  Ma- 


228  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

legy^s  horse  V  Who  knows  where  their  wandering  would 
have  ended,  if  ^lalegy^s  palfrey  had  not  been  surprised  by 
the  daylight  ? 

It  was  with  great  difficulty  that  they  reached  the  city 
of  Ypres  on  that  day.  What  passed  in  their  parental 
home  on  their  return  may  easily  be  imagined ;  there  sad- 
ness and  anxiety  gave  place  to  joy  and  astonishment  at 
the  relation  of  what  they  had  undergone. 

Three  years  after,  Magdalena  Ghyselin  was  married,  and 
the  marvellous  adventure  of  herself  and  two  friends  was 
represented  on  the  wall  of  the  best  apartment,  together 
with  the  date.  Magdalena  explained  the  subject  of  the 
pictures  to  her  children,  which  they,  at  a  later  period, 
interpreted  to  their  oflfspring ;  and  thus  the  story  has  been 
handed  down  to  us,  with  the  conviction  that  in  days  of 
yore  envious  witches  held  their  meetings  on  the  Kemmel- 
berg,  around  a  pit,  which  in  perpetual  remembrance  of 
this  event,  has  ever  since  been  named  the  Kinderput,  or 
Children's  pit. 

THE  FIDDLESTICK. 

An  old  fiddler  on  his  way  came  one  night  to  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Hesdin,  during  a  raging  storm.  He  had  to  pass 
through  the  forest,  but  in  the  darkness  missed  his  path, 
and  wandered  about  for  a  long  time  without  being  able  to 
find  it.  Angry  hereat,  he  struck  his  stick  violently  on  the 
ground  and  let  such  an  impious  malediction  escape  from 
him  as  had  never  before  passed  his  lips.  At  the  same  in- 
stant he  descried  a  bright  light  at  a  distance,  the  sight  of 
which  inspiring  him  with  new  courage,  he  hastened 
through  thick  and  thin  towards  it.  On  arriving  close  to 
it,  he  saw  that  it  issued  from  the  windows  of  a  splendid 
palace,  which  he  never  before  had  seen,  and  of  which  he 
had  never  heard  a  syllable  spoken.  Overjoyed,  however, 
at  the  thought  of  finding  a  shelter,  he  passed  through  the 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  229 

gate^  hastened  across  the  fore-court_,  and  soon  found  him- 
self standing  before  the  open  door  of  a  brilHantly  lighted 
saloon_,  in  which  were  many  persons  of  both  sexes.  Some 
were  sitting  at  long  tables  around  a  sumptuous  banquet, 
others  were  engaged  in  play  at  smaller  tables ;  but  the 
greater  number  were,  amid  shouts  of  revelry_,  whirling 
about  in  a  merry  dance.  After  the  old  man  had  looked 
on  for  some  time,  he  approached  one  who  seemed  to  be 
the  master  of  the  palace,  and  begged  he  might  be  allowed 
to  pass  the  night  in  a  corner  of  the  mansion.  A  benignant 
smile  and  friendly  nod  were  the  sole  answer;  but  a  ser- 
vant richly  clad  came  and  relieved  him  of  his  violin,  which 
he  hung  on  a  golden  nail.  The  old  man  could  now  go 
about  the  saloon  to  his  heart's  content ;  but  his  first  steps 
were  to  the  stage  on  which  the  musicians  were  placed, 
where  to  his  great  delight  he  perceived  a  violoncello  more 
beautiful  than  any  he  had  ever  seen,  and  immediately 
thought  he  would  try  the  tone  of  it.  But  while  he  was 
casting  his  eyes  around,  for  the  purpose  of  discovering  the 
steps  that  led  up  to  the  stage — for  he  considered  himself 
fully  capable  of  performing  with  the  best  of  the  players — 
he  observed  there  a  face  quite  familiar  to  him ;  it  was  that 
of  his  teacher  in  the  art,  who  had  been  dead  above  thirty 
years.  "  Holy  mother,  what  do  I  see  !  "  exclaimed  the 
old  man  astounded.  At  the  same  instant  the  whole  com- 
pany, with  servants,  tables,  musicians  and  palace,  all 
vanished. 

On  the  following  morning  some  persons  from  Auffin 
found  the  old  fiddler  lying  senseless  at  the  foot  of  the 
gallows.  In  his  hand  was  a  white  fiddlestick;  but  his 
own  violin  and  bow  were  hanging  on  the  toe  of  one  of  the 
malefactors  there  suspended,  round  whose  shoulders  the 
artist's  cloak  was  carefully  wrapt. 

When  recovered  from  his  swoon,  the  old  man  hastened 
home,  where  on  more  closely  examining  the  white  fiddle- 


230  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

stick,  he  saw  that  it  was  a  human  Idoiic,  and  that  on  it, 
inlaid  in  silver,  was  the  name  of  a  person  in  Hcsdin,  who 
bore  a  very  indifferent  character  among  his  neighbours. 

When  the  artist  took  the  bow  to  him,  the  man  turned 
pale,  and  offered  him  a  purse  that  should  never  be  empty, 
but  always  contain  six  pounds  Parisian,  provided  he  would 
keep  the  affair  secret.  This  the  other  readily  promised, 
took  the  purse^  and  soon  became  a  rich  man. 

THE  FIDDLER  TRICKED. 
An  old  fiddler,  who  had  been  playing  at  the  fair  at 
Opbrakel,  and  was  returning  with  well-filled  pockets  and 
contented  mind  to  his  home,  had,  in  order  to  arrive  at 
Nederbraekel,  to  pass  through  a  wood.  It  was  already 
midnight,  and  Kartof  (such  was  the  name  of  the  old  man) 
w^as  proceeding  through  the  wood,  when  by  chance  putting 
his  hand  in  his  pocket,  he  felt  his  pipe.  "  Ah,"  said  he 
to  himself,  "  if  I  had  only  a  spark  of  fire,  how  comfortably 
I  could  smoke  my  pipe  !  ''  Scarcely  were  the  words  out  of 
his  mouth,  when  in  the  middle  of  the  wood,  at  about  a 
hundred  paces  distant,  he  perceived  a  light.  On  pro- 
ceeding towards  it,  he  saw  as  he  drew  near  that  there  was 
a  large  wood  fire,  around  which  a  number  of  men  and 
women  hand  in  hand  were  dancing  and  meny-making. 
"  Good  ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  wish  you  a  pleasant  even- 
in"","  said  Kartof.  "  Will  you  kindly  allow  me  to  take  a 
spark  of  your  fire  ?  "  "  Readily,  readily,"  answered  the 
dancers,  every  one  at  the  same  time  springing  forward  to 
give  him  a  Hght;  so  that  he  soon  blew  forth  clouds  of 
l)almy  smoke.  Perceiving  Kartof  s  fiddle,  the  dancers 
asked  whether  he  would  not  strike  up  a  quadrille.  "  Ah, 
why  not  ?  "  answered  the  old  man  simpering  ;  and  in  an 
instant  all  left  the  spot  and  conducted  him  to  a  spacious 
saloon  in  a  large  palace.  Here  the  fiddler  tuned  his  in- 
strument, a  glass  of  costly  wine  was  presented  to  him,  and 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  231 

now  the  dancing  began  riglit  merrily.  To  rouse  tlie  player, 
every  time  that  his  fiddlestick  flagged,  the  dancers  dropt  a 
piece  of  gold  into  his  instrument,  which  the  old  man  saw 
with  devouring  eyes.  His  glass  also  was  filled  the  moment 
it  was  empty.  But  the  two  operations  were  so  often  re- 
peated, that  both  the  fiddle  and  the  eyes  of  the  player  be- 
came all  the  duller,  and  the  latter  at  length  closed  through 
drunkenness ;  so  that  Kartof  fell  asleep  and  the  dancing 
ceased. 

The  sun  had  risen  high  when  Kartof  woke,  who  just 
raised  his  heavy  head  to  see  where  he  had  been  so  long 
sleeping,  and  gradually  to  collect  his  thoughts  a  little  to- 
gether. He  lay  in  the  middle  of  the  wood  by  a  heap  of 
ashes,  among  w^hich  some  charcoal  was  still  glimmering. 
He  then  stood  up  and  felt  for  his  fiddle  ;  for  drunk  as  he 
had  been,  he  had  not  forgotten  the  events  of  the  night. 
He  turned  his  instrument  about,  for  the  purpose  of  shaking 
out  the  gold  pieces  that  had  appeared  so  attractive  to 
him,  but,  0  horrible  deception !  they  proved  to  be  only 
beech  leaves  that  fell  on  the  ground.  On  further  consi- 
deration he  w^as  convinced  that  the  trick  had  been  played 
him  by  phantoms ;  for  in  the  w^hole  neighbourhood  he 
had  never  seen  any  palace,  save  that  which  the  sprites  had 
that  night  caused  to  appear  and  vanish. 


THE  FIDDLER  IN  THE  GALLOWS-FIELD  AT  ANTWERP. 

Near  Antwerp  there  is  a  large  field  where  formerly  the 
gallows  stood,  whence  its  name  of  the  Gallows-field.  Be- 
yond this  field  there  dwelt  many  years  ago  a  fiddler,  a 
pleasant,  jovial  man,  who  was  a  sort  of  necessary  ap- 
pendage at  every  wedding  and  christening  in  the  city ;  for 
he  was  everywhere  a  welcome  guest. 

Beturning  late  one  night  from  the  city,  where  he  had 
been  engaged  at  a  wedding  party,  he  took  his  way  across 


232  NETHERLAXDISH  TRADITIONS. 

the  Gallows-field.  Here  to  his  no  small  surprise  he  found 
a  large  assembly  of  women  dancing  and  making  merry ; 
and  a  little  further  he  lighted  on  another  company  of  many 
hundreds  sitting  and  feasting  at  sumptuously  covered 
tables.  He  rubbed  his  eyes,  not  knowing  whether  he 
were  awake  or  dreaming,  and  stood  lost  for  a  while  in 
wonder.  One  of  the  women  stepping  up  to  him,  said  : 
"  Pray,  good  musician,  oblige  us  with  a  tune.^'  He  re- 
quired no  second  asking,  but  sat  down,  adjusted  his  in- 
strument, and  struck  up  a  merry  tune,  at  which  the 
feasters  rose  from  table,  took  each  other^s  hand  and 
danced.  When  the  dance  was  ended,  one  of  the  women 
came  and  presented  to  him  a  silver  cup  filled  with  wine, 
which  he  took  with  thanks,  saying  :  "  Now,  my  honoured 
ladies,  to  your  health  !  May  God  bless  you ! ''  But  scarcely 
had  the  last  words  passed  his  lips,  before  all  had  vanished, 
and  he  found  himself  alone,  with  the  cup  and  his  fiddle, 
sitting— on  the  gallows  !  from  which,  not  without  difficulty 
and  danger,  he  contrived  to  descend  only  on  the  following 
dawn.  The  cup  he  of  course  retained,  and  long  preserved, 
and  showed  it  to  many  persons,  to  whom  he  related  the 
adventure. 

THE  WEDDING-FEAST  AT  CARRON-SAINT-MARTIN. 
The  bridegroom  was  the  wealthiest  man,  the  bride  the 
fairest  maid  in  all  the  country  about.  The  wedding  was 
splendid,and  all  went  on  merrily  till  the  hour  for  dancing 
drew  nigh.  It  was  then  suddenly  announced  to  the 
young  bridegroom  that  a  little  man,  a  stranger,  was  at  the 
door  craving  admission,  and  ere  he  could  answer,  the 
extraordinary  guest  was  already  standing  in  the  saloon. 
Scarcely  had  the  bridegroom  cast  eyes  on  him  when  his 
cheeks  grew  deadly  pale,  and  he  but  coldly  returned  the 
stranger's  greeting.  This,  however,  gave  the  latter  not 
the  slightest  concern,  but  seating  himself  at  the  table,  he 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  233 

emptied  the  most  capacious  beer  jug  at  one  draughty  and 
devoured  the  largest  ham  clean  to  the  bone^  so  that  all 
the  guests  were  seized  with  a  cold  shuddering ;  for  they 
could  not  imagine  that  any  man  in  the  world  could  eat 
and  drink  such  a  quantity. 

When  the  table  was  cleared  the  stranger  said  to  the 
bridegroom,  who  sat  still  as  pale  as  a  corpse :  ''  Now  this 
I  call  a  gay  wedding,  at  which  there  is  not  a  solitary 
fiddle.^'  AMiereupon  one  of  the  company  told  him,  that  the 
musician  was  prevented  from  coming  by  the  bad  weather. 
"  Oh,  if  that  ^s  all,"  replied  the  new-comer,  "  I  ^11  soon  set 
the  matter  right :  I  have  my  violin  standing  just  by  the 
door."  Having  said  this,  he  stept  out  and  instantly  re- 
turned with  his  instrument,  seated  himself  in  a  chair 
placed  on  the  table,  and  began  playing  the  merriest  tunes 
imaginable. 

All  now  arranged  themselves  for  dancing  with  the  ex- 
ception of  the  bridegroom,  who  stood  in  a  corner  buried 
in  thought.  No  sooner,  however,  did  the  stranger  get  a 
glimpse  of  him  than,  springing  from  the  table,  he  has- 
tened towards  him,  saying  :  "  How  now,  Hans  ?  this  is  the 
happiest  day  of  your  life,  and  you  stand  there  as  if  you 
could  not  count  three."  But  the  bridegroom  continued 
as  it  were  in  a  dream.  The  stranger  then  laid  his  hand 
familiarly  on  his  shoulder,  and  at  the  same  instant  the 
stings  of  hell  seemed  to  penetrate  him ;  he  rushed  for- 
ward in  the  most  frantic  joy,  danced,  leapt,  cried,  raved 
and  laughed  so  horribly  that  he  might  have  been  pro- 
nounced a  maniac  rather  than  a  rational  being,  who  was 
looking  forward  to  the  realization,  within  a  short  time,  of 
his  long-cherished  wishes.  The  other  guests  were  seized 
with  a  similar  drunken  frenzy,  and  persisted  in  their  wild 
mirth  until  the  clock  announced  the  hour  of  midnight.  The 
stranger  then  putting  the  violin  into  his  pocket,  descended 


234  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

from  the  table,  approached  the  bridegroom  and  in  a  cold, 
calm  tone  said :  "  It 's  now  time  I  think  ?  " 

"  One  night,  only  one  night  longer/^  said  the  person 
addressed,  trembling  as  with  the  most  desperate  ague. 

"  No  !  '^  was  the  answer. 

"  Then  give  me  yet  one  hour,  one  short  hour.^^ 

"  No  !  "  was  repeated  in  an  inexorable  tone. 

"  A  quarter  of  an  hour  then,^^  said  the  bridegroom  im- 
ploringly. 

''  No  ! " 

"Yet  will  I  have  compassion  on  thee,^^  continued  the 
stranger,  after  having  for  a  moment  enjoyed  the  despair 
of  the  poor  wretch ;  "  if  thy  wife  will  undersign  this,  I 
will  grant  thee  eight  days  more.^^ 

The  bridecrroom  snatched  from  the  hand  of  the  stranger 
a  sheet  of  vellum  with  characters  wTitten  in  gold,  cast  on 
it  a  protracted  look,  and  then  with  horror  dashed  it  on  the 
ground. 

"Then  I  must  take  leave  of  the  company,''  said  the 
stranger,  "  and  you  will  perhaps  accompany  me  a  step  or 
two?" 

With  these  words  the  little  man  politely  greeted  all  pre- 
sent, threw  his  arm  familiarly  round  the  neck  of  the  bride- 
groom, and  with  him  quitted  the  apartment,  after  having 
whispered  to  the  bride :  "  xVdieu,  child ;  don't  be  angry 
with  me  for  taking  away  your  husband ;  you  shall  soon 
see  him  again." 

The  poor  bride  did  indeed  see  him  again,  but  not  until 
the  following  day,  and  then  as  a  blackened  half-consumed 
corpse.  AYhen  he  was  conveyed  to  the  church  all  the  con- 
secrated lights  went  out,  and  the  grave,  in  which  the 
coffin  was  deposited,  was  on  the  following  morning  found 
empty. 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  235 

RIDING  ON  CALVES. 

In  the  village  of  Capelle,  three  hours  distant  from  Ant- 
werp^ there  lived  a  respectable  farmer,  whose  wife  was  a 
witch  and  attended  every  sabbath. 

One  night  she  asked  her  husband  whether  he  would 
not  accompany  her,  to  which,  being  of  a  curious  disposi- 
tion, he  consented.  The  woman  then  fetched  two  calves, 
on  which  they  mounted:  she  also  enjoined  him  not  to 
utter  a  syllable,  and  then  said, 

Over  haeg  en  over  heg,  Over  hedge  and  over  haw. 

Tot  Keuleu  in  den  ^^^'nkelder,       To  Cologne  in  the  wine-cellar, 

and  away  they  went  through  the  air  on  and  on,  till  they 
came  to  a  great  water.  There  the  calves  making  a  spring, 
were  instantly  on  the  opposite  side.  At  this  the  man  was 
so  surprised  that  he  cried  aloud :  "  God  bless  us  all,  what 
a  jump  for  a  calf  *  !  '^  But  in  the  same  moment  the  calf 
vanished,  and  the  farmer  stood  alone  and  in  a  strange 
country.  Next  morning,  on  inquiring  of  a  passer-by  in 
what  direction  the  village  of  Capelle  lay,  the  man  had 
never  heard  of  such  a  place ;  but  on  asking  how  far  distant 
the  famous  city  of  Antwerp  was,  he  was  answered :  "  Ah, 
you  must  travel  a  long  way  before  you  reach  that,  for  it  is 
sixty  hours  distant  from  this  place.^^ 

THE  WOMAN  TRANSFORMED  TO  A  HORSE, 
At  a  large  farm  at  Bollebeck  there  dwelt  a  serving- 
man,  w^ho  although  he  always  got  nutritious  food  from  the 
farmer^s  wife,  yet  daily  grew  thinner  and  thinner.  His 
fellow-servants  frequently  asked  him  the  cause  of  this,  but 
he  constantly  answered  that  he  knew  not,  until  at  length 
the  shepherd,  who  was  his  most  intimate  friend,  fished  the 
matter  out  of  him.     To  him  he  confessed  that  every  night 

1  See  vol.  11.  p.  186. 


236  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

the  farmcr^s  wife  came  to  his  bedside  and  threw  a  bridle 
over  his  head,  by  virtue  of  which  he  became  instantly 
turned  to  a  horse ;  she  would  then  set  herself  upon  him, 
and  ride  on  him  throughout  the  night.  "  That  seems  to 
me  incredible,^^  said  the  shepherd,  "  but  let  me  lie  in  thy 
bed  to-night ;  I  should  like  to  try  the  thing  for  once." 
The  man  agreed,  and  the  shepherd  laid  himself  in  his  bed. 
About  ten  o^ clock  the  farmer's  wife  came  in  softly,  and 
was  about  to  cast  the  bridle  over  him,  but  he  was  too 
quick  for  her,  snatched  it  out  of  her  hand  and  cast  it  over 
her  owa  head,  when  in  one  second  there  she  stood  before 
him  as  a  horse  !  He  rode  her  about  the  fields  the  whole 
night,  and  when  the  day  began  to  dawn  he  took  her  back 
and  led  her  to  the  farmer,  saying :  "  blaster,  there  is  a 
horsedealer  in  the  village,  who  wishes  to  dispose  of  this 
mare,  for  which  he  asks  five  hundred  francs.'^  "  She  is 
sold,'^  said  the  farmer,  ''  come  in  and  I  will  give  thee  the 
money."  "  But  it 's  without  the  bridle,"  said  the  shep- 
herd, "  which  he  requires  to  have  back."  The  farmer 
laughing  said  :  "  Be  it  so,  the  bargain  stands,"  at  the 
same  time  counting  out  the  money,  which  the  shepherd 
speedily  pocketed,  and  took  the  bridle  off  the  mare,  when 
lo,  there  stood  the  wife  bodily  before  them !  Shedding 
bitter  tears  she  fell  at  her  husband's  feet,  promising  never 
again  to  do  the  like.  The  shepherd  kept  the  money,  but 
made  a  promise  never  to  divulge  what  had  taken  place, 
which  he  kept  till  his  dying  day  ^ 

THE  CATS  OF  STOCKHEM. 

There  was  a  man  in  Stockhem,  whose  wife  was  in 
childbed,  and  who,  when  the  child  was  safely  brought  into 
the  world,  put  on  his  Sunday  clothes  and  hastened  to  ac- 
quaint his  mother-in-law  with  the  auspicious  event.   '^  0," 

>  See  vol.  ii.  p.  190. 


XETHERLANDISII  TRADITIONS.  237 

said  the  motlier-in-law,  "  I  know  that  ah-cady ;  I  have  just 
been  tokl  it/^  At  this  the  man  was  greatly  surprised^  for 
no  one  in  Stockhem  knew  anything  of  the  matter,  and 
the  wife^s  mother  lived  a  good  half-hour  from  the  village. 

"Wlien  the  man  was  returning  and  quietly  going  along 
by  the  brook  that  runs  by  the  road-side,  a  cat  suddenly 
darted  after  him,  and  passed  between  his  legs  :  a  second 
followed,  a  third,  a  fourth,  and  so  on  to  the  number  at 
least  of  thirty.  All  these  surrounded  the  man  and  so 
annoyed  him  that  he  struck  into  the  midst  of  them  with 
his  stick.  But  his  striking  was  to  little  purpose,  they 
evaded  his  blows,  and  in  reward  for  his  good  intention, 
cast  him  into  the  brook,  after  having  torn  from  him  his 
silver  shoe-buckles. 

Wet  and  fatigued  the  poor  man  reached  his  home,  and 
instantly  sent  for  the  priest,  to  whom  he  related  the  ad- 
venture. "  Ah,"  said  the  priest,  "  I  see  what  ^s  in  the 
wind,  and  all  that  I  can  say  and  advise  is  this :  Give  no- 
thing to  anybody  that  begs  of  you  at  the  door,  if  you 
desire  your  wife  and  child  to  continue  well."  The  man 
promised  to  follow  the  advice,  and  observed  it  faithfully, 
at  least  for  a  while. 

On  the  following  morning  there  came  a  poor  old  wo- 
man to  the  door,  begging  for  a  morsel  of  bread ;  but  the 
man  said :  "  Go  your  way,  I  give  nothing."  In  the 
afternoon  there  came  two  very  aged  women,  one  leading 
the  other :  they  were  dismissed  in  a  similar  manner. 
Greybeards,  cripples,  children  came  begging,  but  no  one 
got  anything,  and  this  went  on  for  more  than  three  weeks. 

The  woman  liad  in  the  mean  time  become  quite  well 
again,  and  the  child  grew  every  day  stronger  and  stronger. 
One  forenoon,  when  she  was  sitting  at  home  with  the 
babe  on  her  lap,  an  old  woman  came,  who  begged  in  a 
most  piteous  tone,  imploring  with  tears  that  a  morsel  of 
bread  might  be  given  her ;  for  that  for  two  days  she  had 


238  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

not  tasted  food.  The  man  was  prudent  and  said  :  "  No, 
go  away,  I  ^U  give  you  nothing/^  But  the  wife,  who  had 
a  tender  heart,  entreated  her  husband  so  long,  that  at  last 
he  gave  the  crone  a  piece  of  bread. 

Scarcely  had  the  wife  with  her  child  re-entered  the 
apartment,  when  the  infant  was  snatched  from  her  by  in- 
visible hands,  and  dashed  against  the  ceiling.  On  falling 
to  the  ground,  no  one  thought  it  had  escaped  with  its 
life.  The  woman  at  the  same  instant  received  a  shock, 
which  threw  her  into  a  corner.  All  cried  and  screamed. 
The  man  ran  to  the  priest,  beseeching  him  to  aid  them 
speedily.  The  good  pastor  came  instantly,  but  pronounced 
both  mother  and  child  beyond  all  help ;  and  so  it  proved^ 
as  both  died  within  a  week. 

A  WITCH  BURNT. 

The  castle  of  Erendegen  was  so  awfully  haunted,  that 
it  would  not  have  been  possible,  with  all  the  gold  in  the 
world,  to  prevail  on  any  one  of  the  peasants  of  the  village 
to  pass  a  single  night  in  it.  At  last,  however,  a  man  came 
to  the  place  who  was  known  by  the  name  of  bold  Jan, 
who  offered  to  go  to  the  castle,  and  stay  any  length  of 
time,  requiring  only  to  be  furnished  with  everything  ne- 
cessary for  the  frying  of  pancakes.  This  was  promised, 
and  Jan  in  the  evening  proceeded  to  the  castle. 

In  one  of  the  best  rooms  he  made  a  fire  and  began 
busily  to  fry,  when  the  door  opened,  and  in  walked  a  black 
cat,  and  sat  down  before  the  fire,  as  if  for  the  purpose  of 
warming  herself.  She  then  asked  Jan  what  he  was  doing. 
"  I  am  frying  pancakes,  my  little  friend,^^  said  Jan,  and 
the  words  were  hardly  out  of  his  mouth,  when  seven  cats 
entered  at  the  same  time,  one  of  which  appeared  to  be  the 
superior.  These  likewise  asked  Jan  what  he  was  doing, 
and  Jan  again  answered  :  '^  I  am  frying  pancakes."  The 
cats  then  taking  each  othcr^s  paw  began  to  dance  round 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  239 

and  round.  Jan  now  filled  tlie  pan  with  butter,  which 
when  melted  and  scalding  hot,  he  threw  over  the  cats,  and 
in  one  instant  they  all  vanished. 

On  the  following-  day  it  was  said  in  the  village,  that 
the  shoemaker^s  wife  was  burnt  over  her  whole  body,  of 
which  the  soldier  knew  something,  and  assured  the  inha- 
bitants that  thenceforth  the  castle  would  be  no  more 
haunted.  And  so  it  proved,  for  the  cats  never  ventured 
to  return  ^ 

THE  RED  CLOTH. 

In  former  times  peasant-women  were  often  observed  to 
bring  butter  to  the  market  of  Turnhout  in  such  quantities 
as  to  excite  every  one^s  astonishment,  it  being  known  that 
they  did  not  own  a  cow,  or,  at  the  most,  had  only  a  single 
one.  The  general  belief  was  that  this  butter  came  from 
the  Kaboutermannekens,  and  by  the  aid  of  a  red  cloth. 

One  of  these  women,  who  was  suspected  of  having  such 
a  red  cloth,  often  brought  butter  to  a  certain  house,  which 
]3 utter  was  as  sweet  as  a  nut  and  as  yellow  as  gold.  When 
she  came,  a  cup  of  cofiee  was  usually  given  to  her,  and  some- 
times a  slice  of  bread  and  butter ;  for  she  was  a  pleasant, 
lively  woman.  The  master  of  the  house,  however,  not  feel- 
ing quite  satisfied  respecting  her,  went  to  a  priest,  to 
whom  he  communicated  his  doubts.  The  priest  gave  him 
a  little  box,  directing  him  to  hang  it  under  the  chair  in 
which  the  woman  might  be  sitting. 

On  the  next  market-day  the  woman  as  usual  brought 
her  butter,  and  having  received  payment  for  it,  a  cup  of 
coffee  was  given  to  her.  While  she  was  sitting,  the  man 
came  clandestinely  and  hung  the  box  on  her  chair,  then 
seated  himself  opposite  to  her,  to  observe  what  she  would 
do.  She  appeared  in  nowise  disconcerted,  but  sat  un- 
usually long,  talking  incessantly  till    the   clock   struck 

1  See  vol.  ii.  p,  32, 


240  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

twelve.  Then  said  the  man  :  "  Good  woman,  we  are  now 
going  to  dine,  and  you  are  probabl}^  going  to  do  the  same ; 
it  is  therefore  time  for  you  to  go  home.''^  The  w^oman  an- 
swered :  "  Yes,  you  are  right/^  and  would  rise  from  her 
seat,  but  could  not,  for  the  chair  clung  to  her.  On  seeing 
this,  the  man  full  of  rage  exclaimed :  "  Stand  up  and  pack 
yourself  ofF.^^  The  woman  was  terrified,  and  said  trem- 
bling :  "  I  will  readily  do  so,  but  you  must  first  take  away 
the  thing  that  you  have  hung  to  the  chair ;  for  it  holds 
me  fast.^'  The  man  then  removed  the  box,  struck  the 
woman,  and  thrust  her  out  of  doors. 

THE  TORMENTED  WITCH. 

The  children  of  two  pious  persons  in  Amsterdam  being 
bewitched,  a  neighbour  advised  them  to  boil  oak  chips  in 
water  which  had  been  drawn  from  below  a  cross-bridge ; 
then  would  the  deviFs  journeywoman  make  her  appear- 
ance, and  the  children  be  well  again.  At  first  the  parents 
gave  no  heed  to  this  advice,  but  afterwards,  from  compas- 
sion to  the  children,  adopted  it,  though  with  closed  doors, 
and  without  the  knowledge  of  any  one.  At  the  first 
boiling  of  the  water,  a  female  neighbour  came  in  running 
and  crying  out :  "  Ye  devil-casters  !  ye  devil-casters  !  " 
and  continued  thus  crying  and  running  about  the  house 
as  long  as  the  pot  was  on  the  fire ;  whence  it  evidently 
appeared  whom  the  poor  infants  had  to  thank  for  their 
sufi'erings. 

THE  ACE  OF  HEARTS  PIERCED. 

An  officer  in  Antwerp  had  seduced  a  maiden  and  de- 
serted her.  In  her  resentment  she  consulted  a  sorceress, 
who  gave  her  an  ace  of  hearts  with  the  following  direc- 
tions :  The  next  night,  when  the  clock  struck  twelve,  to 
take  a  full  glass  of  white  wine,  lay  the  card  upon  it,  and 
pierce  the  heart  exactly  through  the  middle  with  a  needle. 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  241 

She  would  then  be  revenged.     She  did  so^  but  when  she 
pierced  the  card,  three  drops  of  blood  fell  into  the  glass. 

On  that  evening  the  officer  was  sitting  with  his  comrades 
in  a  tavern.  Just  as  the  clock  struck  twelve,  while  he 
was  in  the  act  of  raising  his  glass,  he  suddenly  grew  pale 
and  fell  down  dead.  The  others,  not  aware  that  he  was 
no  more,  carried  him  out  and  laid  him  on  a  bed,  when  on 
examination  it  was  found  that  he  had  a  deep  wound  in 
the  region  of  the  heart. 

THE  LOST  CHAIN. 

A  citizen^s  daughter  in  Antwerp  had  received  a  gold 
chain  from  her  mother  as  a  present.  It  was  on  a  Sunday 
that  it  was  given  to  her,  she  wore  it  the  whole  day,  and 
at  night  placed  it,  carefully  wrapped  in  cotton,  in  her 
drawer.  Next  morning  wishing  to  feast  her  eyes  on  it, 
she  found,  on  opening  the  drawer,  that  it  had  disappeared. 
She  now  went  to  a  sorceress,  in  the  hope  of  discovering 
who  had  stolen  the  chain.  The  woman  told  her  that  the 
chain  was  already  in  third  hands,  but  that  she  would  re- 
cover it,  if  she  conducted  herself  discreetly.  She  then 
fetched  a  crucifix,  a  wax  candle,  a  candlestick,  and  a  paper 
of  needles.  The  cross  she  placed  before  her  with  the  back 
of  the  image  towards  her,  the  candle  she  set  in  the  candle- 
stick, and  then  stuck  every  needle  into  it.  ^^This  is  a 
cruel  process,^^  said  she,  "  for  every  one  of  these  needles 
will  wound  the  thief."  "  That  matters  little,"  answered 
the  girl,  ^^  provided  only  I  get  my  chain  again."  The 
sorceress  assvired  her  she  would  recover  it,  and  that  she 
might  return  home  quite  easy. 

On  the  evening  of  the  same  day,  as  the  girl  was  sitting 
by  the  fire  with  her  mother,  talking  over  the  loss  of  the 
chain,  her  eldest  brother,  breathless  and  pale,  rushed  into 
the  apartment.  In  answer  to  the  questions  put  to  him, 
he  could  only  answer  :  '*  The  dog,  the  dog  with  the  fiery 

M 


242  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

eyes  lias  gone  up  stairs,  oh  the  dog  !  '^  "  ^^liat  means 
all  this  ?  '^  said  the  mother,  opening  the  door,  when  a  large 
dog  darted  down  the  stairs,  passed  by  her  and  sprang  out 
of  the  house.  ^'  Lord  preserve  us,  the  devil !  ''  cried  the 
woman ;  but  the  girl  exclaimed  with  delight  :  *^  He  has 
brought  me  my  chain  back  !  "  All  crossed  themselves, 
and  went  upstairs,  and  searched,  but  found  nothing  \ 
every  chest,  every  closet,  even  the  beds  were  rummaged, 
but  no  chain  appeared.  At  length  said  the  woman  : 
'^  Stop  :  in  the  garret  there  are  the  sacks  of  apples,  which 
we  had  carried  up  yesterday  from  the  garden ;  it  may  be 
in  one  of  them.^^  "  You  are  certainly  very  silly,"  said  the 
daughter  laughing;  but  the  mother  replied:  ^^Who  can 
know  ?  Nothing  is  lost  by  seeking."  And  the  woman 
was  right ;  for  at  the  bottom  of  one  of  the  sacks  the  chain 
was  found  folded  up  in  paper. 

THE  LANDMARK  REMOVED. 

Near  the  village  of  Vierzel  there  dwelt  in  former  times 
a  peasant,  who  was  so  impelled  by  the  desire  of  increasing 
his  land  that  he  removed  the  boundary-posts  that  sepa- 
rated his  fields  from  those  of  his  neighbour,  and  thereby 
stole  a  considerable  piece  of  land.  The  neighbour  was  a 
heartily  good  man,  who  suspected  no  one  of  evil,  and 
therefore  never  w^as  sensible  of  the  other^s  dishonesty. 
Thus  the  peasant  enjoyed  the  fruits  of  his  robbery  as  long 
as  he  lived.  But  now  came  his  hour  of  death,  and  so  un- 
expectedly that  he  had  no  opportunity  to  confess  his  sins. 
After  his  decease,  the  peasants  of  the  neighbourhood  saw 
him  every  night,  between  the  hours  of  twelve  and  one, 
running  through  the  field,  bearing  a  heavy  stake  on  his 
back,  and  crying  incessantly  :  "  Where  shall  I  set  it  ? 
Where  shall  I  leave  it  ?  " 

He  had  long  been  running  about  in  this  manner,  when 
it    chanced   that   a    drunken   peasant,   who  was  passing 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  243 

through  the  field,  finding  hnnself  unable  to  proceed  fur- 
ther,  laid  himself  down  and  fell  asleep.  On  the  stroke  of 
twelve  the  ghost  appeared  wdth  the  landmark,  and  cried 
as  usual :  "  Where  shall  I  set  it  ?  Where  shall  I  leave 
it  ?  ^^  The  drunkard  w^aked  by  the  cry,  raised  his  head, 
and  looking  on  the  ghost,  said :  "  Thou  ragamuffin,  set 
it  again  where  thou  stolest  it  from,  thou  blockhead  !  '' 
"  The  Lord  be  thanked  !  Now  I  am  released  ! ''  cried  the 
ghost  joyfully,  and  went  and  set  the  stake  again  in  its  old 
place  ;  and  from  that  time  never  returned. 

A  precisely  similar  story  is  told  of  a  spectre  near  Toiidern,  in  Sleswig. 
See  MUllenhoff,  p.  189.     The  superstition  is  one  of  the  most  wide-spread. 

THE  BOLD  SOLDIER  OF  ANTWERP  \ 

There  w^as  in  former  days  a  house  in  the  Little  Market 
at  xintwerp  that  had  four  stories,  and  was  as  beautiful  as 
a  royal  palace  ;  but  no  one  would  live  in  it  because  it  was 
haunted.  At  the  stroke  of  twelve  there  came  a  spectre, 
that  ran  up  and  down  the  stairs ;  and  when  it  struck  one, 
it  would  place  itself  behind  the  street-door,  and  begin  to 
howl  so  horribly  that  every  one  felt  pity  for  it.  But  no 
one  had  courage  enough  to  enter  the  house,  which  thus 
continued  empty,  although  the  ghost  every  night  cried  : 
"  Release  my  soul !    Release  my  soul  !  '' 

This  had  continued  a  long  while,  when  an  old  soldier 
from  the  wars  came  to  the  city,  who,  on  hearing  people 
speak  of  the  house,  said  he  would  sleep  a  night  in  it,  if  a 
hundred  guilders  were  given  him  beforehand.  The  land- 
lord wondered  at  this,  but  the  soldier  said  he  feared  nei- 
ther devil  nor  goblin ;  for  what  God  protects  is  well  pro- 
tected. The  landlord  then  said  :  ''  Give  me  thy  hand  as 
a  pledge,  and  tell  me  with  what  I  must  provide  thee.^' 
"  Give  me,"  said  the  soldier,  "  a  good  supply  of  wood  cut 

1  See  Grimm,  K.  and  H.  M.  No.  4. 

M  2 


244  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

small,  a  dozen  bottles  of  wine,  a  bottle  of  brandy,  and  a 
pot  full  of  dough,  together  with  a  good  pan,  that  I  may 
bake  my  cakes/'  "  That  thou  shalt  have,''  answered  the 
landlord ;  and  when  the  soldier  had  all  he  required,  he 
went  ^^^th  it  at  nightfall  into  the  house. 

Having  struck  a  light,  he  carried  all  his  gear  into  an 
apartment  on  the  first  story,  in  which  there  still  remained 
a  table  and  two  chairs,  and  then  made  a  large  fire  on  the 
hearth,  by  which  he  placed  his  dough,  that  it  might  rise  a 
little.  He  next  broke  the  necks  off"  his  bottles,  and  so  did 
not  long  continue  altogether  sober,  though  he  well  knew 
what  he  said  and  did.  Thirst  being  now  succeeded  by 
hunger,  he  took  his  pan,  set  it  on  the  fire,  and  threw  into 
it  a  good  ladleful  of  dough.  The  cake  promised  well, 
smelt  most  temptingly,  was  already  brown  on  one  side, 
and  the  soldier  was  in  the  act  of  turning  it,  when  some- 
thing suddenly  fell  down  the  chimney  into  the  pan,  and 
the  cake  was  in  the  ashes  ! 

The  soldier  was  not  a  little  angry  at  this  disaster,  but 
reconciled  himself  to  his  fate  and  filled  the  pan  anew. 
While  the  cake  was  baking,  he  looked  at  what  had  fallen 
down  the  chimney  and  found  it  was  an  arm-bone.  At 
this  the  brave  warrior  began  to  laugh,  and  said :  "  You 
want  to  frighten  me,  but  you  won't  do  it  with  your  horse's 
bone."  He  then  seized  the  pan,  to  take  out  the  cake, 
preferring  to  eat  it  half  baked  rather  than  undergo  a 
second  disappointment ;  but  in  the  same  instant  a  rattling 
was  heard  in  the  chimney,  a  number  of  bones  fell  into 
the  pan,  and  the  cake  into  the  ashes. 

"  Now,  by  Jove,"  said  he,  "  that  is  too  bad.  They  ought 
to  let  me  be  quiet,  for  I  am  hungry.  To  pitch  the  whole 
back-bone  of  a  colt  into  my  pan  ! "  But  he  was  grievously 
mistaken,  for  it  was  the  back-bone  of  a  human  being. 
Highly  enraged  he  seized  the  bones  and  dashed  them  with 
such  violence  against  the  wall  that  they  flew  in  pieces. 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  245 

Out  of  humour  lie  again  sat  down  by  the  pan  and  made 
several  attempts  to  bake  his  cake,  but  every  time  down 
fell  one  or  other  bone,  and,  by  way  of  conclusion,  a  skull, 
which  the  soldier  hurled  as  far  as  he  could  send  it. 

"  Now  the  sport  will  be  at  an  end,"  said  he,  and  began 
again  to  bake,  and  this  time  without  interruption,  so  that 
he  had  a  good  dishful  of  cakes  on  the  table,  and  had 
already  sat  down  and  was  eating  comfortably,  when  the 
clock  struck.  He  counted ;  it  was  twelve.  In  the  same 
instant  he  looked  up,  and  saw  that  in  the  corner  facing 
him  the  bones  had  united  and  stood  there  as  a  hideous 
skeleton  with  a  white  linen  over  its  shoulders.  The  soldier 
rubbed  his  eyes,  thinking  it  a  dream,  but  seeing  that  it 
was  a  real  skeleton,  he  called  to  it  merrily  :  "  Ha  Mr. 
Death  !  how  goes  it  ?  you  are  uncommonly  thin.  But 
come  and  eat  and  drink  w4th  me,  provided  cake  and  wine 
will  not  fall  through  your  body."  The  skeleton  made  no 
answer,  but  merely  pointed  with  its  finger.  "  Well,  speak 
then,  if  you  are  from  God,"  said  he  laughing ;  "  but  if 
from  the  devil,  make  yourself  scarce."  The  skeleton  con- 
tinued pointing,  but  said  nothing,  and  the  soldier  growing 
tired  of  this,  ate  on  leisurely,  taking  no  further  notice  of 
its  movements.  It  now  struck  half-past  twelve,  and  the 
skeleton  striding  out  of  its  corner,  approached  the  table. 
^'  Ah,"  cried  the  soldier,  "  say  what  you  want,  but  keep  at 
a  distance,  else  w^e  are  no  longer  friends."  The  skeleton 
then  stretching  forth  its  hands,  touched  that  of  the  sol- 
dier and  burned  a  hole  in  it.  '^  Hui,  the  devil  !  "  cried 
he,  "  what  ^s  this  ?  "  at  the  same  time  snatching  up  an 
empty  bottle  and  hurling  it  at  the  skeleton  ;  but  it  flew 
in  vacant  space.  He  was  now  in  a  towering  passion,  and 
would  thrust  the  spectre  out,  but  he  grasped  the  empty 
air,  the  skeleton  constantly  making  signs  and  pointing 
towards  the  door. 

The  soldier  at  length  growing  weary  of  this  dumb  show, 


246  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

took  up  the  light  and  said  :  "  Well,  I  ^11  go  with  you,  do 
you  only  go  first /^ 

The  skeleton  went  first  as  far  as  the  stairs,  and  made  a 
sign  to  the  soldier  that  he  should  go  down ;  but  he  was 
prudent  enough  not  to  do  so,  saying  :  ^'  Go  you  fii'st, 
always  first ;  you  shall  not  break  my  neck.  They  thus 
descended  into  a  passage,  in  which  lay  a  heavy  stone, 
ha\ang  an  iron  ring  in  it.  The  ghost  made  a  sign  to  him 
to  raise  the  stone,  but  he  laughed  and  said :  "If  you  want 
to  lift  up  the  stone,  you  must  do  it  yourself.^'  The  ghost 
did  so,  and  the  soldier  then  saw  that  there  was  a  great 
hole  beneath  it,  in  w^hich  stood  three  iron  pots.  ''  Do  you 
see  that  money  ?  ''  said  the  skeleton.  "  Aha,  countryman, 
you  speak  Flemish/^  cried  the  soldier,  highly  delighted, 
"  that 's  capital.  Yes,  I  see  something  that  looks  like  a 
ten-guilder  piece." 

The  ghost  now  drew  up  the  three  pots  and  said :  "  This 
is  money  which  I  concealed  before  my  death."  "  So," 
said  the  soldier,  "  you  are  dead  then  ?  "  The  ghost  con- 
tinued without  answering,  "  I  had  to  bum  in  hell  as  long 
as  the  money  was  not  found.  You  have  released  me  from 
hell."  "  A  pretty  fellow  you  !"  said  the  soldier  ;  "in  gra- 
titude for  the  service,  you  have  burnt  my  hand."  "  I  shall 
burn  no  more,"  said  the  ghost  laughing;  "just  feel  my 
hand  now,  it^s  quite  cold."  But  the  other  drawing  back 
his  hand,  cried :  "  ^luch  obliged  all  the  same,  no  cere- 
mony ;  I  know  you  birds."  "  Now  I  beseech  you  to 
bestow  one  of  the  pots  on  the  poor,  to  give  one  to  the 

church  that  masses  may  be  said  for  my  soul,  and  " 

"  This  is  an  awkward  business,"  exclaimed  the  soldier, 
"  I  am  not  your  lackey.  But  what  were  you  going  to 
say  ?  "  "  The  third  pot  is  for  you,"  whispered  the  ghost. 
And  the  soldier  leaped  and  danced  and  fell  into  the  hole 
and  his  light  with  him,  so  that  he  sat  in  the  dark.  "  Ho 
spritekin,"  cried  he,  "  give  me  a  lift  out !  "  But  the  ghost 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  247 

had  vanished,  and  he  had  to  scramble  out  as  well  as  he 
could.  When  he  again  found  himself  safe  on  the  ground, 
he  felt  for  his  candle  and  for  the  stairs,  went  up,  and  lay 
down  to  sleep. 

On  the  following  day  he  did  as  the  ghost  had  directed, 
gave  one  pot  to  the  poor,  another  to  the  church,  and  found 
so  much  in  the  third,  that  he  became  a  very  rich  man, 
rode  every  day  in  a  coach,  and  went  every  day  to  the 
tavern. 

MARIKEN  OF  NYMWEGEN. 

At  the  time  when  Duke  Arent  of  Gelderland  was  taken 
prisoner  by  his  son,  Duke  Adolf  and  his  confederates 
(a.d.  1465),  there  dwelt  about  three  miles  from  Nym- 
wegen  a  pious  priest,  named  Gysbrecht,  who  had  with 
him  a  beautiful  young  girl,  named  Mariken,  the  daughter 
of  his  sister,  her  mother  being  dead.  This  maiden  super- 
intended the  good  man^s  household,  and  was  exceedingly 
active  and  vigilant. 

Now  it  once  happened  that  the  priest  had  occasion  for 
various  articles  that  could  only  be  got  in  Nymwegen,  as 
candles,  oil,  vinegar  and  matches;  so  he  gave  Mariken 
eight  stivers  and  sent  her  to  the  city,  at  the  same  time 
enjoining  her,  if  her  purchases  were  not  made  in  time  for 
her  to  return  by  daylight,  to  go  and  pass  the  night  at  her 
aunt^s ;  for  she  was  a  lively,  handsome  girl,  and  a  mis- 
chance might  but  too  easily  befall  her.  Mariken  promised 
so  to  do,  and  went  to  Nymwegen.  But  scarcely  had  her 
uncle  lost  sight  of  her  when  he  repented  of  having  suffered 
her  to  go,  and  said  to  himself :  "  Would  that  I  had  kept 
her  at  home ;  it  is  too  dangerous  to  send  young  damsels 
and  women  alone  about  the  country;  for  the  villany  of  the 
world  is  very  manifold.^^  Yet  what  was  he  to  do  ?  He 
must  have  a  light  when  it  was  dark,  and  he  must  also 
eat ;  besides  which,  it  was  now  too  late ;  for  IMariken  was 
already  far  far  away. 


24:8  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

The  aunt,  to  whom  he  had  recommended  his  niece, 
busied  herself  much  with  pohtics,  and  was  an  enthusiastic 
partisan  of  Duke  Adolf.  She  had  just  been  conversing 
with  several  other  women  concerning  him,  and  had  in  the 
course  of  her  haranguing  become  so  excited,  that  she  ap- 
peared more  like  a  furious  female  devil  than  a  respectable 
Christian  woman,  when  Mariken  entered  the  room.  It 
was  grown  too  late  for  the  good  lass  to  think  of  returning 
home,  she  had  therefore  followed  her  nucleus  injunction, 
and  now  greeted  her  aunt  in  these  gentle  and  courteous 
terms  :  "  Dear  aunt  !  may  our  Lord  sweeten  all  your  suf- 
fering, and  protect  those  whom  you  love  against  every 
evil."  But  the  aunt  turning  her  head,  assailed  her  with 
these  unchristianlike  words  :  "  Ha  ha  !  welcome  devil,  how 
goes  it  in  hell  ?''  Mariken,  though  horrified  at  the  dreadful 
expressions,  quietly  deposited  her  purchases  in  a  corner, 
and  modestly  requested  a  night^s  lodging.  But  for  her 
petition  the  aunt  had  no  ears ;  for  she  was  sunk  too  deep 
in  politics.  The  poor  girl  again  and  more  earnestly  be- 
sought her,  but  to  as  little  purpose  as  before :  she  went 
on  raving  :  "  What !  thou  drivest  the  devil  into  my  head ; 
but  I  will  bind  him,  I  will  swathe  and  lace  him  on  a  pil- 
low like  a  child :  I  hardly  know  whether  I  am  standing 
on  my  head  or  my  feet," — and  much  more  in  the  same 
strain.  Vexed  and  saddened,  IMariken  packed  her  pur- 
chases together,  resolving  to  pass  the  night  under  the  blue 
vault  of  heaven  rather  than  at  her  aunt^s,  and  said :  "  I 
will  now  ask  nothing  more  from  any  living  soul,  even 
should  the  real  devil  himself  come  to  me."  She  then  left 
the  house  of  her  aunt  and  the  city  of  Nymwegen,  and 
walked  on  and  on,  in  the  hope  of  reaching  home. 

But  when  alone  in  the  open  country,  and  overpowered 
by  fatigue  and  hunger,  she  could  proceed  no  further,  she 
abandoned  herself  to  despair,  and  weeping  bitterly  ex- 
claimed :   "  Oh  lielp  me,  help  me,  me  unhappy  maiden, 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  249 

God  or  devil;  it  is  the  same  to  me;^^  and  she  hehl  her 
hands  before  her  face^  and  dried  her  humid  eyes  with  her 
apron.  While  so  doing,  she  was  startled  by  suddenly  see- 
ing an  elegant  personage  stand  before  her,  who  in  a  friendly 
voice  said  to  her :  "  Tell  me,  pretty  damsel,  why  you  are 
so  afflicted/-'  Mariken  was  not  a  little  terrified  at  hearing 
herself  addressed  by  one,  of  whom  the  instant  before  she 
had  not  seen  a  trace  -,  but  the  stranger  continued  :  "  You 
must  not  be  terrified,  my  fair  maiden ;  for  I  love  you  most 
heartily,  and  if  you  are  content,  I  will  make  you  a  lady  of 
ladies/''  This  somewhat  tranquillized  Mariken,  who  said : 
"  But  tell  me  then,  dear  friend,  truly  who  you  are  t'^  The 
stranger  answered :  ^^  A  master  of  all  arts  am  I,  and  if 
you  will  love  me,  I  will  teach  you  instantly  the  seven 
liberal  arts,  to  wit.  Music,  Khetoric,  Logic,  Grammar, 
Geometry,  Arithmetic  and  Alchymy."  Mariken  stared  on 
hearing  all  these  erudite  names  repeated,  and  felt  quite 
pleased  at  the  idea  of  learning  so  much ;  but  she  insisted 
beforehand  on  knowing  the  stranger^s  name.  ^^That  I 
can  tell  you,^^  said  he ;  "  I  am  called  Monen  with  one  eye  ; 
but  that  is  not  all  that  you  have  to  expect  from  me :  of 
gold  and  jewels,  for  instance,  and  money,  you  shall  never 
be  in  want,  if  you  only  grant  me  your  love.^^  "  Is  that 
true?"  said  Mariken  with  astonishment,  ^Hhen  I  really 
have  nothing  to  object ;  there  is,  however,  another  thing 
besides,  that  I  would  gladly  learn,  and  that  is  the  art  of 
necromancy.  My  uncle  has  a  beautiful  book  about  it, 
with  which  he  could  do  wonders,  and  drive  the  devil 
through  a  pinhole.     That  art  I  must  also  learn." 

This  was  a  hard  blow  for  the  stranger,  for  at  no  price 
would  he  willingly  have  taught  that  art;  and  therefore 
said :  "  Desist  from  that  wish,  my  love,  the  art  of  necro- 
mancy is  a  very  dangerous  one,  and  many  a  one  has  lost 
his  life  by  it.  Think  only  that  in  the  conjuring  of  spirits, 
if  you  fail  but  in  one  word,  or  even  in  a  single  syllable,  it 

M  5 


250  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

is  all  over  with  you,  and  tlien  I  can  no  more  call  you  my 
heart's  delight.  But  in  compensation  I  will  instruct  you 
in  the  great  art  of  understanding  every  language  in  the 
world ;  and  that  I  would  fain  believe  will  be  more  pleasing 
to  my  beloved/'  Mariken  agreed  to  the  proposal,  and 
requested  the  stranger  to  begin  his  instruction  forthwith. 
But  he  said:  "I  have  previously  one  request  to  make, 
dear  girl,  and  that  is  that  from  henceforth  you  change 
your  name;  for  I  cannot  endure  it :  Mariken  !  ah  !''  To 
this  the  damsel  would  not  consent ;  so  when  Monen  saw 
that  for  the  moment  his  object  was  not  attainable,  he 
contented  himself  with  the  promise  she  made  him,  never 
to  make  the  sign  of  the  holy  cross.  He  then  spoke  on 
indifferent  subjects,  but  by  degrees  returned  to  that  of 
changing  her  name,  and  proposed  that,  instead  of  the  odd, 
ill-sounding  ]\Iariken,  she  should  assume  the  more  usual 
and  more  euphonic  appellation  of  Emmeken.  AVith  this 
proposal  she  complied,  and  immediately  after  they  both 
set  out  for  Bois-le-Duc  and  Antwerp.  Before  they  reached 
the  first-mentioned  place  Mariken  was  already  in  posses- 
sion of  all  that  had  been  promised  by  Monen,  without 
being  conscious  how  it  came  to  pass. 

Master  Gysbrecht  in  the  mean  while  knew  not  what  to 
think  about  his  niece.  Two,  three,  four  days  had  passed, 
and  she  was  still  absent.  The  house  became  more  and 
more  melancholy  to  the  good  man.  At  length,  unable  to 
endure  suspense  any  longer,  he  took  his  stick,  and  pro- 
ceeded to  his  sister  in  Nymwegen ;  for  he  expected  as  a 
certainty  to  find  Mariken  there.  But  the  impious  woman 
scoffed  at  his  anxiety,  and  when  Gysbrecht  earnestly  im- 
plored her  to  tell  him  where  jMarikcn  could  be  found,  she 
answered  :  "  How  should  I  know  ?  She  was  here  a  week 
ago,  and  I  sent  her  to  the  devil,  with  whom  she  is  most 
probably  rambling  about.'' 

The  good  man  was  now  inconsolable,  but  strove  gra- 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  251 

dually  to  collect  himself,  addressed  a  fervent  prayer  to  our 
Lady  of  Aix-la-Chapelle  and  St.  Servatius  of  Maestricht, 
and  with  tottering  steps  returned  to  his  lonely  dwelling. 

But  the  aunt^s  barbarous  malediction  did  not  go  un- 
punished; for  a  few  days  after,  the  castellain  to  whose 
safe  custody  Duke  Arent  had  been  intrusted,  set  his  cap- 
tive at  liberty,  who  was  received  with  loud  demonstrations 
of  joy  in  Bois-le-Duc.  At  this  the  wicked  woman  was  so 
bitterly  enraged  that  she  no  longer  knew  what  she  did, 
and  in  her  fury  laid  violent  hands  on  herself. 

Of  all  this  Mariken  knew  nothing.     She  was  quietly 
staying  with  Monen  at  the  Tree  Tavern  in  the  great  market- 
place at  Antwerp.     This  was  a  notorious  house,  where  all 
kinds  of  rabble  were  in  the  habit  of  assembling :  prosti- 
tutes, thieves,  sharpers,  swindling  tradesfolk,  and  the  Lord 
knows  what  besides,  all  of  whom  raved  and  rioted  so  that 
it  was  horrible  to  hear.     Some  of  these  hght  gentry  soon 
introduced   themselves   to    Mariken    and   Monen,    being 
strongly  attracted   by  the  beauty  of  the  former.     But 
IMariken  turning  to  her  companion,  said :  "  Tell  me,  my 
love,  is  not  that  geometry,  when  I  count  the  drops  of  wine 
in  the  can  yonder ?^^     Monen  answered:  '^'^  Quite  right, 
child,  you  have  well  retained  the  art  I  taught  you  yester- 
day."    The  guests  were  astounded  at  the  young  woman's 
erudition,  but  their  w^onder  increased  when  Monen  in- 
formed them  she  was  mistress  of  all  the  seven  arts,  and 
among  the  rest  of  rhetoric,  which  was  the  oldest  of  all. 
They  wished  to  have  a  specimen,  and  this  flattered  the 
damsel,  who  rising  repeated  a  poetical  piece,  which  was  so 
ingenious  that  the  verses  at  the  end,  and  in  the  middle, 
and  everywhere,  rimed  together ;  so  that  a  number  of  per- 
sons soon  gathered  round  her,  listening  to  her  with  open 
mouths.     Monen  had  in  the  mean  time  slipt  away  from 
her,  and  mingled  with  the  listeners,  where  by  giving  a 
push  to  one  and  a  push  to  another,  he  soon  set  them  all 


252  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

at  loggerheads  together.  This  so  dehghted  Monen,  \\ho, 
as  every  one  will  see,  was  no  other  than  the  incarnate 
Satan  himself,  that  he  resolved  to  make  a  longer  stay  at 
The  Tree ;  ''  For,"  said  he  to  himself,  ''  if  he  above  yonder 
puts  no  stop  to  me,  I  shall  in  a  year's  time  get  more  than 
a  thousand  souls  into  my  clutches.^' 

Emmeken  was  not  pleased  with  this  spectacle,  and  often 
thought  within  herself  that  Monen  was  not  one  of  the 
best  of  persons;  and  this  thought  was  the  more  lively 
within  her,  when  she  called  to  mind  the  promise  she  had 
made,  never  to  make  the  sign  of  the  cross.  But  while  she 
was  thus  standing  and  pondering,  a  pair  of  jovial  com- 
panions approached  her,  and  all  the  good  suggestions  of 
her  conscience  were  away,  and  she  amused  herself  with  the 
two  frivolous  sparks. 

Thus  did  Emmeken,  or  Mariken,  live  during  a  period 
of  six  years,  and  Monen  took  more  and  more  delight  in 
her.  But  now  a  longing  rose  in  her  heart  to  see  once 
again  her  uncle  Gysbrecht  and  her  other  friends  and 
acquaintances,  to  whom  she  would  gladly  have  shown  how 
learned  she  had  become.  At  this  wish  Monen  was  far 
from  feeling  pleased,  and  strove  to  dissuade  Mariken  from 
harbouring  it ;  but  she  said :  "  I  am  resolved  on  gomg,'' 
and  he  was  compelled  to  comply;  so  they  set  out  for 
Nymwegen,  and  arrived  there  on  the  day  of  the  fair.  On 
that  day  a  play  in  a  booth  was  annually  performed  there, 
and  Enmieken  was  desirous  of  seeing  it,  for  she  had  often 
heard  her  uncle  say  how  delightful  it  was.  But  Monen 
expressed  anger  at  her  intention,  and  wondered  how  so 
learned  a  person  could  feel  an  interest  in  such  tritles ;  for 
he  feared  that  from  the  pious  drama,  which  usually  had 
more  useful  influence  on  the  people  than  preaching  and 
teaching,  she  might  contract  other  thoughts,  and  become 
unfaithful  to  him.  But  Emmeken  persisted  in  her  reso- 
lution, and  he  was  forced  to  accompany  her  to  the  place. 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  253 

On  their  arrival  Mascheroen,  wlio  Lad  just  entered^  was 
saying,  ^^I  am  Brelierio  Mascheroen,  the  advocate  of 
Lucifer,  and  will  call  God  to  account  for  being  more 
clement  to  men,  who  are  perpetually  sinning,  than  to  us 
devils,  who  have  sinned  but  once,  and  for  that  once  must 
burn  eternally  and  without  hope  in  the  abyss  of  hell/^ 
Having  said  this,  he  turned  to  the  Lord  and  called  him  to 
account.  Whereupon  God  said:  "I  have  declared  and 
promised  that  whosoever  repents  in  time  shall  find  grace 
to  eternity."  Mascheroen  replied :  "  But  that  was  not  in 
our  time  in  the  Old  Testament,  and  therefore  I  maintain 
that  we  suffer  unjustly."  Christ  now  rose  and  said  : 
"  \VTiy  then  did  I  die,  unless  to  change  all  that,  and  bring 
all  men  to  grace  ?  You  prefer  an  unjust  complaint,  Mas- 
cheroen, and  my  father  is  quite  right."  "  If  that  is  the 
case,"  rejoined  the  advocate,  "  then  God  ought  now  to  be 
much  more  rigorous  towards  man  than  formerly  in  the 
Old  Testament,  and  that  it  cannot  be  said  he  is,  Sir 
Christ."  Then  God  the  Father  spoke:  "Yes,  that  is 
true,  and  if  mankind  do  not  mend  their  ways,  I  will  cause 
my  sharp  sword  of  justice  to  fall  upon  them." 

Then  our  Lady,  w4io  also  was  present,  took  this  greatly 
to  heart,  and  besought  her  son  at  least  to  send  forewarn- 
ings  to  mankind,  such  as  comets,  double  suns,  earthquakes 
and  the  like.  But  Jesus  was  inexorable  and  persisted  in 
his  anger,  because  man  only  grew  worse  and  worse  the 
oftener  he  was  warned. 

"  Come,  my  dear  Emmeken,"  cried  Monen  impatiently, 
"what  good  can  you  derive  from  such  babble?  Come, 
let  us  talk  on  more  rational  subjects."  But  Emmeken 
would  not  stir  a  foot's  breadth  from  the  spot,  and  the  less 
so,  as  ^Mascheroen  having  just  asked  whether  God  would 
not  allow  him  to  torment  mankind,  Mary  in  most  beauti- 
ful and  touching  expressions  implored  him  to  forgive  them. 
Then  did  bitter  repentance  cut  through  the  very  heart  of 


254  NETHERLANDISH  TllADITIONS. 

Mariken,  and  notwitlistanding  Monen^s  reiterated  pro- 
posals to  drink  a  can  of  wine  with  him  in  the  finest 
hosteh-y  in  the  city,  she  would  not  leave  the  place.  Monen 
now  waxed  wroth,  and  vociferated :  '^  By  the  lungs  and 
spleen  of  Lucifer,  come  away  from  here,  or  I  will  carry 
thee  with  shoes  and  stockings  to  hell  V^  And  with  these 
words  he  darted  with  Emmeken,  like  an  arrow,  up  into 
the  air^ 

Poor  ivlariken  would  inevitably  have  been  lost,  had  the 
wicked  fiend  after  his  falling  again  been  able  to  grasp  her ; 
but  he  was  prevented  by  her  uncle.  Master  Gysbrecht, 
who  being  come  to  Nymw^gen,  as  a  spectator  of  the  dra- 
matic representation,  was  fortunately  close  at  hand.  He 
recognised  her  instantly,  sprang  quickly  towards  her,  and 
by  his  powerful  prayer  scared  the  furious  Monen  away 
from  her.  When  Emmeken  recovered  and  perceived  her 
uncle,  she  was  overjoyed,  confessed  to  him  her  course  of 
life  during  the  last  seven  years,  and  implored  his  forgive- 
ness, being,  as  she  said,  already  sufficiently  miserable  in 
being  condemned  to  eternity.  This,  however,  ^Master 
Gysbrecht  would  not  admit,  but  with  edifying  words  ex- 
horted her  to  repentance  and  amendment,  through  which 
she  might  be  sure  of  eternal  happiness. 

Monen  in  the  mean  time  continued  standing  by  her 
side ;  for  he  would  gladly  have  taken  his  Emmeken  with 
him.  But  on  his  once  venturing  to  dart  upon  her,  Gys- 
brecht put  his  arm  round  her,  and  in  a  threatening  voice 
said :  ''  Take  care  of  thyself,  accursed  sprite ;  for  if  thou 
attemptcst  any  violence,  I  will  read  to  thee  something 
from  my  breviary  that  shall  soon  drive  thee  hence. '^  Then 
seeing  that  all  was  lost,  jMonen  roared  and  howled  terri- 
fically :  "  Oh  me,  wretched  sprite  !  what  will  become  of 
me  !  How  they  will  torture  me  with  red-hot  tongs,  if  I 
lose  her !  What  will  become  of  me!^'  at  the  same  time 
^  Here  some  lines  seem  waiitiiio:,  the  narrative  being  evidently  imperfect. 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  255 

emitting  red^  raging  flames  from  his  nose,  moutli  and  ears, 
so  that  it  was  appalling  to  behold.  This,  however,  did 
not  disturb  Master  Gysbrecht,  who  calmly  taking  Mari- 
ken  by  the  hand,  led  her  to  the  dean,  who  was  a  very 
learned  and  holy  priest. 

When  the  dean  had  heard  the  recital  of  Mariken^s  sins, 
he  said  that  he  could  not  forgive  them,  for  that  they  were 
too  great  and  manifold.  At  this  Gysbrecht  was  troubled, 
and  proceeded  with  her  to  the  church,  and  thence  took 
with  him  the  holy  eucharist,  being  resolved  on  going  to 
the  bishop  of  Cologne,  but  fearing  violence  from  Monen 
on  his  journey  thither.  And  it  was  soon  manifest  that 
the  prudent  priest  had  done  well ;  for  Monen  was  con- 
stantly at  hand,  and  from  time  to  time  tore  down  huge 
branches  of  oak  and  hurled  at  them,  though  of  course 
without  effect,  as  God  protected  the  pious  travellers. 

When  Magister  Gysbrecht  had  laid  the  affair  before  the 
bishop  of  Cologne,  and  related  to  him  every  particular,  the 
prelate  said :  "  My  dear  son !  this  is  a  sin  of  which  it  is 
not  in  my  power  to  grant  forgiveness,  that  can  only  be 
obtained  from  the  pope  at  Rome.''  Still  Gysbrecht  de- 
spaired not,  but  full  of  confidence  went  with  Mariken  over 
hill  and  dale  until  they  reached  the  holy  city.  No  sooner 
was  the  pope  apprized  of  the  affair  than  he  caused  Mariken 
to  appear  before  him,  and  heard  her  confession.  But  on 
learning  that  she  had  been  the  devil's  mistress,  and  that^ 
on  her  account  and  through  her,  more  than  two  hundred 
persons  had  lost  their  lives,  the  holy  father  was  horror- 
stricken,  and  exclaimed:  "0  God  and  Father,  how  can 
such  things  be  possible  !  Great,  exceedingly  great  are  the 
mercy  and  grace  of  the  Lord,  but  so  deeply  I  hardly  dare 
dive  into  the  treasure."  He  then  sank  in  profound  medi- 
tation, and  commanded  Gysbrecht  to  come  to  him  and 
thus  spoke  :  "  My  good  and  faithful  son  !  although  I  am 
the  holy  father,  I  know  not  whether  I  can  remit  such 


256  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

frightful  sins :  but  let  three  rings  of  iron  be  made,  and 
close  them  round  your  niece^s  neck  and  arms.  When  these 
shall  eitlier  be  worn  out,  or  fall  off  spontaneously,  then 
are  her  sins  forgiven. 

Gysbrecht  did  so,  and  travelled  back  with  ]\Iariken  to 
Nymwcgen,  where  she  entered  the  convent  of  the  Con- 
verted Sisters.  He  there  bade  her  an  affectionate  farewell, 
and  enjoined  her  to  persevere  in  her  penance,  as  heaven 
would  then  without  doubt  forgive  her  her  sins. 

There  IMariken  lived  for  very  many  years,  in  the  most 
rigid  austerity  and  retirement,  the  rings  constantly  re- 
maining on  her  neck  and  arms.  But  when  she  was  very 
old  and  felt  that  her  end  was  nigh,  an  angel  suddenly 
appeared  by  her  bed  and  touched  the  rings,  which  instantly 
fell  off.     She  then  piously  slept  in  the  Lord. 

Her  grave  was  long  after  to  be  seen  in  the  conventual 
church,  on  the  stone  of  which  her  w^hole  history  was  in- 
scribed; and  the  three  rings  were  hung  on  the  adjacent 
wall,  as  memorials  and  proofs  of  its  veracity. 

THE  DEVIL  OF  NEDERBRAEKEL. 

The  servant  of  a  rich  farmer  having  spent  all  his  money, 
came  towards  home  one  evening  reeling  with  drunkenness. 
Dark  thoughts  passed  through  the  brain  of  the  miserable 
being,  who  dreaded  both  the  cudgel  of  his  master  and  the 
consequences  of  an  empty  pocket.  In  his  weak  but  ex- 
cited state  of  mind  he  resolved  to  sell  his  soul  to  the  devil, 
in  the  hoj)e  of  escape  from  so  dreary  a  prospect ;  and  on 
reaching  a  cross-way,  he  summoned  all  the  devils,  and 
swore  that  his  soul  was  for  sale.  A  devil  came,  but  told 
him  that  he  could  not  attain  his  object  unless  he  pre- 
viously offered  a  black  hen  to  the  prince  of  the  infernal 
realms,  which  he  promised  to  do.  For  this  purpose,  when 
the  clock  struck  twelve  at  night  was  the  time  appointed. 
When  the  awful  hour  approached  the  man  stood  ready 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  257 

with  the  black  hen,  which  he  had  stolen  from  his  master, 
under  his  frock,  and  hardly  had  the  clock  struck  the  first 
stroke,  before  all  the  devils  made  their  appearance.  Their 
chief  stepping  forwards,  took  the  hen,  which  the  man  drew 
forth  trembling.  The  bargain  was  now  concluded,  and  as 
an  acknowledgement  of  the  agreement,  the  man  was  re- 
quired to  set  his  signature  in  blood  in  a  little  book  that 
the  devil  had  brought  with  him. 

The  man  on  his  return  was  not  reprimanded  by  his 
master,  and  his  pockets  were  never  empty.  Whenever  he 
put  his  hand  in  he  drew  forth  a  piece  of  seventy-five  cents, 
with  which  he  paid  his  reckoning,  when  he  had  been 
drinking  in  an  alehouse.  Once  when  he  was  watching  his 
master's  sheep,  they,  through  his  heedlessness,  ran  into  a 
neighbour's  field,  where  they  did  serious  injury  to  the 
corn.  This  the  peasant,  to  whom  the  land  belonged,  had 
witnessed,  and  came  running  with  the  intention  of  inflict- 
ing chastisement  on  the  shepherd  for  the  damage  done. 
The  latter  was  too  well  aware  of  the  bodily  strength  of  the 
peasant  not  to  feel  terrified;  but  the  craft  of  the  devil 
came  to  help  him  out  of  his  peril.  Both  shepherd  and 
sheep  were  transformed  into  dung-heaps  before  the  peasant 
could  reach  the  spot,  where  he  stood  staring  about  him  in 
the  utmost  astonishment. 

Thus  did  he  continue  to  live ;  but  the  five  years,  at  the 
expiration  of  which  the  devil  was  to  become  possessor  of 
his  soul,  were  nearly  ended,  and  the  seller  dreaded  nothing 
more  than  that  moment.  What  does  he  do  ? — He  goes 
to  the  priest  of  Nederbraekel,  to  whom  he  makes  a  full 
confession.  The  priest,  naturally  well-disposed  to  rescue 
an  erring  Christian  soul  from  the  fire  of  hell,  causes  him 
first  to  perform  an  act  of  penitence,  and  then  tells  him  to 
come  to  him  on  the  following  day,  being  the  dreaded  day 
of  settlement.  The  man  had  hardly  been  an  hour  in  the 
house  of  the  holy  pastor,  before  a  great  noise  of  chains 


258  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

and  deviliy  was  heard  in  the  chimney.  The  man,  who 
was  sitting  close  beneath,  was  seized  wdth  unutterable 
terror,  and  not  without  cause ;  for  he  was  lifted  on  high, 
and  seemed  for  ever  lost ;  but  the  priest,  who  had  founded 
his  hope  on  the  efficacy  of  his  prayers,  cast  himself 
promptly  on  his  knees  and  repeated  the  gospel  of  St.  John. 
The  man  in  the  mean  while  being  incessantly  cast  up  and 
down,  fell  at  length,  half  dead  with  fright,  miserably 
bruised  and  bloody,  to  the  ground,  with  the  little  book  by 
his  side ;  and  the  devil  was  away  and  continued  away. 

THE  DEVIL  OUT\YITTED. 

There  once  lived  in  Louvain  a  rich  merchant,  who  had 
gained  all  his  money  and  possessions  by  selling  himself 
body  and  soul  to  the  devil.  With  his  riches  the  man 
possessed  also  much  craft,  and  could  help  himself  when 
others  could  neither  advise  nor  aid;  and  so  it  proved, 
when  at  the  expiration  of  seven  years,  the  devil  came  for 
the  purpose  of  fetching  him. 

He  took  the  devil  in  a  friendly  manner  by  the  hand  and, 
as  it  was  just  evening,  said  :  ''  Wife,  bring  a  light  quickly 
for  the  gentleman."  "  That  is  not  at  all  necessary,"  said 
the  devil,  "  I  am  merely  come  to  fetch  you."  "  Yes,  yes, 
that  I  know  very  well,"  said  the  merchant,  "only  just 
grant  me  the  time  till  this  little  candle-end  is  burnt  out, 
as  I  have  a  few  letters  to  sign  and  to  put  on  my  coat." 
"  Very  well,"  said  the  devil,  ''  but  only  till  the  candle  is 
burnt  out."  "  Good,"  said  the  merchant,  and  going  into 
the  next  room,  ordered  the  maid-servant  to  place  a  large 
cask  full  of  water  close  to  a  very  deep  pit  that  was  dug  in 
the  garden.  The  men-seiTants  also  carried,  each  of  them, 
a  cask  to  the  spot ;  and  when  all  was  done,  they  were  or- 
dered each  to  take  a  shovel,  and  stand  round  the  pit.  The 
merchant  then  returned  to  the  devil,  who  seeing  that  not 
more  than  about  an  inch  of  candle  remained,  said  laugh- 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  259 

ing  :  "  Now  get  yourself  ready,  it  will  soon  be  burnt  out." 
"  That  I  see,  and  am  content ;  but  I  shall  hold  you  to 
your  word,  and  stay  till  it  is  burnt.''  ''Of  course,"  an- 
swered the  devil,  "  I  stick  to  my  word."  ''  It  is  dark  in 
the  next  room,"  continued  the  merchant,  "  bvit  I  must 
find  the  great  book  with  clasps,  so  let  me  just  take  the 
light  for  one  moment."  "  Certainly,"  said  the  devil, 
''hwt  I'll  go  with  you."  He  did  so,  and  the  merchant's 
trepidation  was  now  on  the  increase.  AVhen  in  the  next 
room,  he  said  on  a  sudden  :  "  Ah,  now  I  know,  the  key 
is  in  the  garden  door."  And  with  these  words  he  ran  out 
with  the  light  into  the  garden,  and  before  the  devil  could 
overtake  him,  threw  it  into  the  pit,  and  the  man  and  the 
maids  poured  water  upon  it,  and  then  filled  up  the  hole 
with  earth.  Now  came  the  devil  into  the  garden  and 
asked  :  "  Well,  did  you  get  the  key  ?  And  how  is  it  wdth 
the  candle?  Where  is  it?"  ''The  candle?"  said  the 
merchant.  "Yes,  the  candle."  "  Ha,  ha,  ha!  it  is  not 
yet  burnt  out,"  answered  the  merchant  laughing,  "  and 
will  not  be  burnt  out  for  the  next  fifty  years ;  it  hes  there 
a  hundred  fathom  deep  in  the  earth."  When  the  devil 
heard  this  he  screamed  awfully,  and  went  off  with  a  most 
intolerable  stench  ^ 

THE  FREISCHUTZ. 
There  was  once  a  fowler  who  for  a  long  time  could 
never  bring  down  a  bird.  One  day,  when  wandering  about 
the  woods  in  despair,  his  employer  having  threatened  to 
dismiss  him,  there  suddenly  stood  a  well-clad  man  before 
him,  who  asked  him  the  cause  of  his  sorrow.  The  fowler 
told  him  the  reason,  at  which  the  other  laughed  heartily. 
"  Why  do  you  laugh  at  and  ridicule  me  ?  "  asked  the 
fowler ;  "  do  so  again,  and  you  will  get  a  bullet  in  your 
carcase."  At  this  the  man  laughed  yet  more  and  said : 
1  See  vol.  ii,  p.  182. 


260  XETHERLAXDISH  TRADITIONS. 

''  A  bullet  from  you  ?  one  must  be  a  pretty  good  shot  to 
hit  me  at  three  paces^  and  you  are  but  a  bungler/^  "  You  ^11 
not  say  that  twice/^  cried  the  fowler,  choking  with  anger, 
then  levelled  his  piece  and  fired.  The  stranger  continued 
laughing,  and  said,  offering  him  the  bullet :  "  There,  take 
your  bullet  back,  it  ^s  of  no  use."  The  fowler  now  felt 
somewhat  alarmed,  but  was  soon  relieved  by  the  other 
saying  :  "  Let  me  have  a  shot.  Do  you  see  that  sparrow 
sitting  on  the  church  steeple  yonder  ?  I  ^11  bring  it  down 
for  you."  "Do  if  you  can,"  said  the  fowler  laughing, 
and  at  the  same  instant  the  report  was  heard  and  the 
sparrow  fell.  "  You  shall  shoot  so  too,"  continued  the 
stranger,  "  and  hit  whatever  you  wish,  without  even  see- 
ing it ;  and  if  you  see  it,  let  it  be  as  far  off  as  it  will,  you 
shall  hit  it,  if  you  will  only  give  me  your  signature  and 
make  an  engagement  with  me  for  seven  years.  I  merely 
require  your  soul."  "  Done,"  said  the  fowler,  "  I  agree  ; 
but  on  condition  that  you  always  tell  me  what  I  shoot  at." 
"  Granted,"  said  the  stranger.  The  man  then  signed  his 
name  on  a  paper  with  his  blood,  and  the  devil  disap- 
peared. 

For  seven  years  the  fowler  shot  so  that  it  was  wonder- 
ful to  see,  and  received  from  his  master  a  stipend  such  as 
no  fowler  in  the  whole  world  had  ever  received.  But  when 
the  last  day  but  one  had  arrived,  he  was  very  sad,  know- 
ing that  the  devil  would  come  for  him  on  the  following 
morning.  His  wife  observing  his  affliction,  inquired  the 
cause,  and,  after  some  hesitation,  he  told  her  how  he  had 
entered  into  a  compact  with  the  devil,  under  the  condition 
that  the  fiend  should  always  tell  him  what  he  was  shoot- 
ing at,  when  the  game  was  somewhat  distant.  "  Then  I 
can  help  you,  my  dear  man/^  said  the  wife  laughing; 
"  only  go  out  boldly  with  your  gun,  but  be  careful  to  shoot 
at  nothing  without  first  asking  what  it  is."  The  fowler 
went  out,  and  no  sooner  was  he  away  than  the  wife  stript 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  261 

herself  naked,  smeared  her  whole  body  with  syrup,  and 
then  rolled  herself  in  a  feather  bed,  which  she  had  cut 
open  for  the  purpose,  so  that  she  more  resembled  a  bird 
than  a  human  being.  She  then  went  and  sprang  about 
the  field.  Shortly  after  came  her  husband  with  the  devil, 
when  the  latter  seeing  this  singular  feathered  animal,  cried 
out  to  the  fowler:  "There,  fire  !  ''  "But  what  is  it?'' 
asked  the  fowler.  The  devil  looked  and  looked,  but  could 
not  make  out  what  it  was,  and  at  last  reluctantly  said  : 
"  I  really  cannot  exactly  say."  "  Ha  ha  ha  !  then  is  our 
covenant  at  an  end,''  said  the  fowler,  laughing  heartily ; 
and  the  devil  vanished  with  an  intolerable  stench.  The 
wife  laughed  still  more,  and  joyfully  embraced  her  thus 
rescued  husband. 

THE  BARN  OF  MONTECOUVEZ. 

After  an  abundant  harvest,  a  young  farmer,  who  had 
neglected  to  repair  his  barn,  knew  not  how  to  shelter  his 
corn.  As  he  was  walking  about  the  fields,  in  a  melan- 
choly mood,  and  looking  at  his  beautiful  grain,  a  gentle- 
man stept  up  to  him  and  inquired  the  way  to  the  castle 
of  Catelet.  The  farmer  undertook  to  guide  him  thither. 
On  their  way  the  stranger  asked  his  companion  why  he 
appeared  so  sad,  and  the  latter  related  to  him  the  unfor- 
tunate plight  in  which  he  found  himself.  On  hearing  it, 
the  stranger  offered  to  assist  him,  if  he  would  enter  into  a 
compact  with  him  to  be  his  vassal  after  a  year,  and  attend 
him  in  his  possessions  as  a  serf.  With  this  proposal  the 
poor  farmer  complied,  but  with  the  condition  that  he 
should  have  a  home  for  his  wife  and  children,  to  which 
the  stranger  with  a  grisly  laugh  agreed.  The  farmer  then 
subscribed  the  contract,  according  to  which  the  barn  must 
be  ready  before  the  first  cock-crowing :  having  no  ink,  he 
signed  it  with  his  blood.  They  then  separated ;  the  stranger 
went  towards  the  castle,  and  soon  disappeared  from  the 
sight  of  the  farmer,  who  returned  to  his  dwelling. 


262  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

The  nearer  he  approached  his  house,  the  more  suspi- 
cious did  the  contract  appear  into  which  he  had  entered, 
and  still  more  so  when  he  saw,  by  the  side  of  the  house, 
the  workmen  sent  by  the  stranger  busily  engaged  in  lay- 
ing beam  on  beam  and  brick  on  brick,  though  at  the  same 
time  not  a  sound  of  hammer  or  plane,  saw  or  axe  was  to 
be  heard ;  and  yet  towering  oaks  were  brought  and  sawed 
into  pieces,  huge  piles  of  stone  were  hewn  and  shaped. 

Thus  amazed  and  troubled  he  entered  his  dwelling, 
where  his  wife  was  sitting  in  no  less  trepidation  and  asto- 
nishment; for  dog  and  cat,  cocks  and  hens,  ducks  and 
geese  were  thronging  about  her  and  crying,  while  the 
horses  in  the  stable  were  kicking  and  foaming. 

But  most  terrified  of  all  was  a  large  cock,  the  finest  of 
the  whole  neighbourhood,  and  of  all  the  animals  of  the 
place  the  greatest  favourite  of  his  mistress.  This  bird, 
when  he  could  find  no  other  refuge  from  fear  and  danger, 
flew  into  his  mistress's  lap,  but  who  in  her  fright  pushed 
him  from  her,  and,  crossing  herself,  cried  out  for  help. 
No  sooner,  however,  had  the  cock  recovered  himself  from 
his  fall  than  he  sent  forth  a  loud  cock-a-doodle-doo.  ilt 
the  same  instant  there  resounded  from  the  barn  a  tre- 
mendous noise,  so  that  the  earth  trembled,  all  the  work- 
men vanished  in  an  instant,  and  the  barn  remained  un- 
finished. On  the  following  morning  the  villagers  were 
not  a  little  surprised  at  seeing  the  beautiful  barn  full  of 
sheaves  of  every  kind ;  for  they  could  not  conceive  how 
they  had  all  come  there,  and  the  farmer  took  good  care 
not  to  let  a  syllable  transpire  of  his  adventure. 

The  hole,  which  remained  unclosed  in  the  gable,  could 
not  be  filled  up  by  any  means  whatever,  and  continues 
open  unto  this  day ;  from  which  time  also  a  cock  on  the 
farm  always  crows  earlier  than  every  other  in  the  village. 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  263 


THE  DEVIL'S  BARN  AT  GALLEMAERDE. 

Some  hundred  years  ago^  the  occupier  of  the  farm  to 
which  the  above-named  barn  belonged  was  so  unfortunate 
as  to  suffer  the  loss  of  it,  whether  by  wind  or  fire  I  cannot 
say  j  but  so  much  is  certain,  that  it  was  in  August,  and 
that  on  the  following  day  he  was  to  carry  his  corn.  In 
his  despair  the  farmer  was  wandering  about  his  fields, 
when  suddenly  a  person  appeared  before  him  who  asked 
him  the  cause  of  his  sadness,  whereupon  the  farmer  related 
to  him  the  whole  matter.  "  0,  is  that  all?^^  said  the 
stranger,  when  the  man  had  ended  his  story ;  "  that  I  can 
easily  remedy.  If  you  will  just  write  your  name  in  your 
blood  on  this  parchment,  your  barn  shall  be  fixed  and 
ready  to-morrow  before  the  cock  crows ;  if  not,  our  con- 
tract is  void.^^  While  saying  these  words  the  stranger 
drew  from  his  pocket  a  slip  of  parchment,  and  having 
pricked  the  hand  of  the  farmer  with  a  needle,  the  latter 
signed  his  name  on  it  with  the  trickhng  blood.  The  poor 
man,  however,  soon  repented  of  having  so  thoughtlessly 
sold  his  soul  to  the  devil,  and  from  sheer  anxiety  could 
not  sleep  ;  and  his  wife,  when  informed  of  the  bargain  he 
had  made,  could  also  get  no  sleep,  but  was  as  troubled 
and  terrified  as  himself. 

But  woman^s  craft  excels  all  other  craft,  says  an  old 
proverb,  the  truth  of  which  was  here  manifested.  For 
long  before  the  time  of  cock-crowing,  the  wife  jumped  out 
of  bed  and  ran  before  the  house,  where  she  saw  an  endless 
multitude  of  workmen  employed  on  the  barn.  But  ob- 
serving that  there  was  still  a  portion  of  the  side-wall  to  be 
completed,  she  quickly  clapped  her  mouth  between  her 
hands,  and  cried  with  all  her  might  cock-a-doodle-doo  ! 
cock-a-doodle-doo  !  and  was  followed  by  all  the  cocks  in 
the   neighbourhood,  each   of  which   sent  forth    a  hearty 


264  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

cock-a-doodle-doo.     At  the  same  instant  every  workman 
vanished,  and  the  barn  remained  unfinished. 

Since  that  time  repeated  attempts  have  been  made  to 
close  up  the  hole,  but  the  devil  always  comes  in  the  night 
and  breaks  it  open  again,  out  of  pure  spite  for  having 
been  so  tricked  by  a  farmer^s  wife. 

now  TO  BECOME  INVISIBLE. 

Fomierly  there  were  many  persons  here  (in  Bierbeck) 
who  could  make  themselves  invisible,  by  means  of  a  little 
bone,  which  they  carried  about  them.  This  bone  they  ob- 
tained in  the  following  manner.  They  went  at  night, 
between  the  hours  of  twelve  and  one,  to  a  crossway,  having 
on  one  side  a  hedge  or  only  a  bush.  On  this  they  laid  a 
black  cat,  tied  up  in  a  sack,  as  an  offering  to  the  devil. 
On  the  following  morning  the  cat  would  be  gone,  but  a 
small  bone  would  be  found  at  the  bottom  of  the  sack, 
which  possessed  the  virtue  required. 

THE  TRAVELLING  MOTHER. 

When  a  whirlwind  rages  on  the  earth,  and  carries  every- 
thing along  with  it,  many  persons  regard  it  as  a  natural 
phenomenon ;  but  it  is  nothing  else  than  the  Travelling 
Mother,  who  is  making  her  circuit. 

THE  LYING-IN  WOMAN. 
In  the  neighbourhood  of  towns  there  is  often  to  be  seen 
a  whirlwind  suddenly  descending  or  rising.  One  may  then 
be  quite  certain  that  in  that  very  moment  a  woman  hard 
by  has  died  in  childbed  without  having  by  confession  pre- 
viously purified  herself  from  a  deadly  sin.  Into  heaven 
she  may  not  come,  and  therefore  passes  down  to  hell ;  but 
there  they  dare  not  receive  her,  because,  through  the  pains 
she  has  suffered,  she  has  already  made  ample  atonement ; 
and  thus  she  again  ascends,  seeking  a  permanent  place. 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  265 

WANNE  THEKLA. 
Wanne  Thekla  is  the  queen  of  the  elves  and  witches^  as 
well  as  of  the  spirits  in  general  that  fly  through  the  air. 
When  the  weather  is  dark  and  stormy^  she  plays  her  part. 
At  night  she  descends  on  earth  followed  by  a  long  train 
of  her  companions^  and  dances,,  and  springs,  and  drinks  on 
the  Pottelberg,  where  a  gibbet  formerly  stood.  On  the 
Leije,  which  flows  through  the  city,  she  has  a  beautiful  ship, 
in  which,  after  the  revels  of  the  night,  she  and  her  com- 
panions sail  away  at  the  command  of  "  Wind  mit  viercn^^' 

THE  EVERLASTING  JEW. 
In  the  year  1640,  two  citizens,  who  dwelt  in  the  Tan- 
ners^ street  at  Brussels,  met  in  the  Forest  of  Soignies  an 
old  man,  whose  clothes  appeared  much  the  worse  for  wear, 
and  were  besides  extremely  old-fashioned.  They  invited 
him  to  accompany  them  to  the  hostelry,  which  he  did,  but 
refused  to  sit  down,  and  drank  standing.  As  he  walked 
with  the  two  citizens  towards  the  gate,  he  told  them  many 
things,  most  of  which  were  relations  of  events  that  had 
taken  place  several  hundi-ed  years  before;  whence  the 
citizens  sooiir'  discovered  that  their  companion  must  be 
Isaac  Laquedem  the  Jew,  who  refused  to  let  our  Lord  rest 
at  his  door ;  and  they  left  him  filled  with  horror  ~. 

ELVES. 

Egg-shells  may  often  be  observed  floating  on  the  water ; 
in  these  the  Elves  swim  about.  It  is  likewise  said  that 
the  Jbubbles,  which  are  frequently  to  be  seen  on  ponds 
where  there  are  no  fish,  are  inhabited  by  them. 

1  Lit.  Wind  with  four ;  probably  an  allusion  to  the  expression  fahren 
mit  vieren  (Pferden),  to  go  or  drive  with  four  {horses) ;  in  other  words  : 
Sail  away  with  all  speed ;  thus  comparing  their  course  by  water  to  a  land 
journey  with  horses. 

^  See  p.  59,  and  vol.  ii.  p.  212. 

N 


266  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

The  Elf-leaf,  or  Sorceresses'  plant,  is  particularly  grateful 
to  them,  aud  therefore  ought  not  to  be  plucked. 

There  are  also  wicked  Elves,  that  prepare  the  poison  in 
certain  plants.  Experienced  shepherds  are  careful  not  to 
let  their  flocks  feed  after  sunset.  "  Nightwort,''  say  they, 
"  belongs  to  the  Elves,  and  whoever  takes  it  must  die.'' 
Nor  does  any  man  dare  to  sleep  in  a  meadow  or  pasture 
after  sunset,  for  he  would  have  everything  to  fear. 

In  Brabant  there  are  many  little  hills,  called  by  the 
people  Elfin-bergs,  in  which  these  Elves  dwell. 

FLABBAERT. 

As  some  young  men  were  returning  home  from  the  fair 
at  Kerselaere,  one  of  them,  a  brother  of  the  priest,  and  a 
notorious  swearer,  began  to  curse  and  swear  most  awfully, 
and  particularly  against  Flabbaert,  a  red  sprite  that  haunts 
that  neighbourhood.  This  went  on  smoothly  for  a  while, 
but  at  length  Flabbaert  grew  tired  of  it,  so  seizing  the 
youth  by  the  crag,  he  dipped  him  a  few  times  in  the  water, 
and  then  dashed  him  on  shore  so  that  every  rib  in  his 
body  cracked. 

When  the  priest  heard  of  it  on  the  following  day,  he 
did  not  pity  his  brother,  but  said  he  was  rightly  served ; 
he,  however,  banished  the  sprite  for  a  hundi-ed  years  to 
the  shores  of  the  Red-sea. 

WHY  THE  JEWS  DO  NOT  EAT  SWINE'S  FLESH. 
When  our  Lord  was  living  on  earth,  he  once  journeyed 
through  Flanders,  and  there  were  some  dozens  of  Jews 
standing  together,  who  laughed  at  and  ridiculed  him,  when 
they  saw  him  at  a  distance.  "  Wait,"  said  one  of  them, 
''we  '11  make  a  trial  of  his  miraculous  power,  and  see  whether 
he  can  guess  well."  And  thereupon  they  placed  one  of  the 
set  under  a  tub,  and  when  Jesus  came  up,  they  asked  him 
to  tell  them  what  was  under  the  tub.     "  That  I  will  tell 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  267 

you  instantly/^  said  Jesus,  "it^s  a  swine/'  At  this  the 
Jews  laughed,  thinking  they  had  tricked  him,  and  hfted 
up  the  tub.  But  what  great  eyes  did  they  not  make,  when 
their  quondam  comrade,  in  the  form  of  a  swine,  and 
uttering  a  most  furious  grunt,  shpt  from  under  the  tub, 
and  ran  to  a  herd  of  swine  that  happened  to  be  just 
passing !  Then  all  the  Jews  ran  after  it,  in  the  hope  of 
catchmg  their  companion,  but  were  unable  to  distinguish 
one  pig  from  another,  so  alike  were  they  all.  And  to  this 
day  the  Jews  eat  no  pork,  because  they  are  afraid  of  killing 
and  devouring  a  descendant  of  that  swine. 

THE  SPECTRES'  MASS. 
A  woman  of  Hofstade  was  going  to  the  city  one  morn- 
ing early :  her  way  lay  by  an  old  chapel,  which  within  the 
last  ten  years  has  been  demohshed,  in  which  she  perceived 
a  light.     On  entering,  she  found  the  place  full  of  forms 
with    white   kerchiefs    round   their   heads  ;    and   as  she 
stood  gazing,  three  priests    came  from  the  sacristy  and 
approached  the  high  altar;    they  were  followed  by  the 
sacristan  and  choristers,  and  the  mass  commenced.     But 
they  did  not  move  about  like  living  beings,  but  seemed  to 
float  lightly  on  the  earth;  their  robes  also  appeared  quite 
faded.     At  this  spectacle  the  woman  was  struck  with  a 
shuddering  horror,  and  was  quitting  the  chapel,  but  the 
door  was  closed  and  she  was  compelled  to  remain.    ^^Qien 
the  mass  was  over,  the  priests  melted  into  air,  the  lights 
went  out,  and  all  the  white  forms  vanished.     At  the  same 
moment  the  chapel  clock  struck  one. 

When  the  sacristan  opened  the  door  in  the  morning,  he 
found  the  woman  lying  on  the  pavement  half  dead  with 
fear  ^ 

^  See  p.  8,  and  vol.  ii.  p.  204. 

n2 


268  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

ALVINA. 
When  the  wind  loudly  howls  and  whistles,  they  say  in 
West  Flanders  :  "  Hark  !  Alvina  weeps."  Alvina  was  the 
beautiful  daughter  of  a  king,  who,  in  consequence  of  her 
marriage,  was  cursed  by  her  parents  to  wander  about  to 
all  eternity.  On  this  tradition  there  is  an  old  popular 
ballad,  of  which  I  have  been  unable  to  obtain  more  than 
a  few  lines ;  among  others,  the  following : — 

Ik  voel  dat  ik  moet  gaen  I  feel  that  I  must  go 

Vliegen  in  de  winden,  flying  in  the  winds, 

Zoo  lang  de  wereld  staet.  As  long  as  the  world  stands, 

En  nooit  geen  troost  meer  vinden.  And  never  more  comfort  find. 

Adieu  Kinders,  lieve  \TUchten !  Adieu,  children,  dear  fruits  ! 

Adieu  Man,  die  de  oorzaek  zijt.  Adieu,  husband,   who   art   the 

cause. 

Unmoeden    moet    voor    eeuwig  Incessantly  must  for  ever  sigh  ! 


zuchten 


ROODSELKEN. 

In  the  great  flax  fields  of  Flanders  there  grows  a  plant 
the  bright  green  leaves  of  which  are  sprinkled,  as  it  were, 
with  red  spots  :  whence  its  name  of  Roodselkcn.  Accord- 
ing to  the  tradition,  this  plant  stood  under  the  cross,  and 
was  sprinkled  with  the  Saviour's  blood,  which  was  never 
after  washed  off,  neither  by  rain  nor  snow. 

THE  BURNING  LAND-MEASURER. 
A  land-measurer  near  Farsum  had  in  his  life-time  acted 
dishonestly.  When  he  had  a  piece  of  land  to  measure,  he 
suffered  himself  to  be  bribed  by  one  or  other,  and  then 
allotted  to  the  party  more  than  was  just.  For  which  cause 
he  was  condemned  after  his  death  to  wander  as  a  burning 
man  with  a  burning  measuring-staff;  and  so  he  yet  mea- 
sures every  nigl 


:ht^ 


'  See  pp.  11,  158,  and  vol.  ii.  pp.  97,  202,  211. 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  269 

COWLS  HUNG  ON  SUNBEAMS. 
In  the  time  of  Wigbold_,  fourth  abbot  of  Adewert,  mo- 
nastic disciphne  was  there  in  full  flower.  There  is  even  a 
tradition  that  all  the  monks  of  that  house  lived  in  such 
holy  simplicity^  that  they  frequently  hung  their  caps  and 
cowls  on  the  rays  of  the  sun,  not  knowing  better  than  that 
they  were  long  poles.  The  fame  of  their  holy  life  was 
widely  spread_,  and  many  persons  renounced  the  world,  for 
the  sake  of  serving  the  Lord  in  their  society  ^ 

WHITE  MAIDENS  (WITTE  JUFFERS)  AND  WHITE  WOMEN 
(WITTE  WIJVEN)  IN  FRIESLAND. 

At  the  time  of  the  emperor  Lothair  there  were  many 
ghosts  and  spectres  in  Friesland.  They  dwelt  on  the 
summits  of  small  hills,  in  artificial  caverns,  but  which 
were  the  work  of  no  human  hands.  They  were  usually 
called  Witte  Wijven.  Of  their  figure  nothing  certain  is 
known.  Nightly  wanderers,  shepherds,  watchmen  in  the 
corn-fields,  pregnant  women  and  children  they  frequently 
carried  off  to  their  caverns  and  subterraneous  places,  from 
which  sighs,  crying  of  children  and  sobs  were  often  heard 
to  issue.  On  this  account  a  careful  watch  was  held  over 
pregnant  women,  and  young  children,  that  the  White 
Women  might  not  carry  them  away.  One  of  them  still 
haunts  near  Bierum,  others  near  Golinse,  Eenum,  Farsum, 
etc." 

At  the  present  day  they  are  called  Witte  Juffers,  and  are 
distinguished  from  the  Witte  Wijven,  who  are  said  to  be 
of  a  quite  opposite  character.  They  give  aid  to  women  in 
labour,  lead  wanderers  back  to  the  right  road,  and  in  every 
respect  show  themselves  kind  and  friendly  towards  man- 
kind. Their  habitations,  too,  are  less  repulsive,  and  are 
often  in  the  vicinity  of  towns  and  villages.     They  are  for 

1  See  vol.  ii.  p.  259.  -  See  page  71. 


'i/0  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

the  most  part  hills,  or  caves  overgrown  with  trees,  as  that 
near  Lochem  in  Holland,  where  three  Witte  Wijven  dwell 
together.  In  Friesland  and  Drenthe  every  child  knows 
them,  \yhoever  approaches  such  caves  or  hills,  or  enters 
them,  will  see  wonderful  things. 

THE  THREE  SISTERS. 
Near  Louvain  are  three  graves,  in  which  the  bodies  of 
three  pious  sisters  are  buried.  Before  the  graves  three 
clear  springs  gush  forth,  and  thither  Christian  folks  fre- 
quently go  on  pilgrimage,  particularly  to  obtain  a  cure 
for  women  who  are  suffering  under  disease.  But  in  order 
to  know  whether  a  woman  will  recover  or  die  of  the  malady, 
the  custom  is  to  take  a  hood  belonging  to  her  and  lay  it 
on  the  w^ater.  If  it  sinks,  no  recovery  is  to  be  looked  for ; 
if  it  swims,  the  disease  is  curable.  It  is,  however,  neces- 
sary to  pray  fervently  and  to  bring  an  offering,  which 
must  consist  of  a  needle,  a  thread  of  yarn  and  some  corn, 
all  obtained  by  begging. 

ST.  GERTRUD'S  MINNE  (MEMORY). 

St.  Gertrud  had  withdrawn  from  the  world,  in  order  to 
devote  her  days  to  the  service  of  God.  But  a  knight,  who 
had  previously  been  in  love  with  her,  did  not  on  that  ac- 
count relinquish  his  hopes,  but  continued  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  the  convent,  notwithstanding  Gertrudes  re- 
peated declaration  never  to  swerve  from  her  vow.  Seeing 
that  all  his  endeavours  were  vain,  he  summoned  the  devil 
to  his  aid,  and  assigned  his  soul  to  him  at  the  expiration 
of  seven  years,  for  which  Satan  promised  to  help  him  to 
attain  his  object.  But  the  seven  years  passed,  and  the  aid 
of  the  evil  one  had  effected  nothing.  Nevertheless  he  in- 
sisted on  having  the  soul  of  the  knight,  who  was  compelled 
to  submit  to  his  fate. 

Now  appeared   St.  John  to  Gertrud  in  a  dream,  and 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  271 

announced  to  her  the  danger  in  which  the  knight  was 
placed;  whereupon  Gertrud^  who  had  in  the  mean  time 
become  abbess  of  her  cloister^  immediately  on  rising  as- 
sembled all  her  nuns,  accompanied  by  whom  she  proceeded 
to  the  convent  gate,  just  as  the  devil  was  passing  with  his 
prey.  Approaching  the  knight  she  presented  to  him  a 
cup  of  w  ine,  which  she  exhorted  him  to  empty  to  the  pro- 
tection of  St.  John.  The  knight  did  so,  and  had  scarcely 
swallowed  the  last  drop,  when  the  covenant,  torn  in  pieces, 
fell  at  his  feet,  accompanied  by  a  hideous  howl  of  the  foul 
fiend. 

Hence  St.  Gertrud  is  represented  holding  in  one  hand 
a  crosier,  and  in  the  other  a  cup,  and  from  this  event 
originates  the  custom  of  drinking  to  Sinte  Geerteminne. 

THE  LILY. 

There  was  once  in  days  of  yore  a  conjurer  who  cut 
people's  heads  off  and  set  them  on  again.  One  day,  when 
he  was  practising  his  art,  a  travelling  journeyman  entered 
the  room  as  a  spectator.  On  the  table  before  the  conjurer 
there  stood  a  large  glass  filled  with  distilled  water,  out  of 
which  grew  a  white  lily  every  time  the  conjurer  cut  a  head 
off,  which  he  called  the  lily  of  life.  When  the  conjurer 
had  cut  a  head  off,  the  traveller  quickly  stept  up  to  the 
table,  and  with  a  sharp  knife  severed  the  stalk  of  the  lilv;, 
without  being  observed  by  any  one;  so  that  when  the 
conjurer  would  replace  the  head,  the  operation  failed, 
whereupon  he  was  seized  and  burnt  for  a  murderer. 

This  took  place,  as  I  have  often  heard  my  father  relate, 
in  the  year  1528,  and  that  anterior  to  the  French  Revolu- 
tion the  judicial  acts  concerning  it  were  still  to  be  seen, 

THE  FEATHER  HEART. 
In  a  family  of  iny  acquaintance  the  following  story  has 
often  been  related  to  me. 


<i/«i  NETHERLAXDISH  TRADITIONS. 

A  young  maiden  lay  sick,  and  to  all  appearance  in- 
curable. All  the  physicians  had  emploj^ed  their  skill  on 
her,  but  all  was  in  vain.  At  length  the  mother  went  to 
an  old  Capuchin  friar,  to  whom  she  related  her  case,  and 
who  spoke  to  her  thus  :  "  My  dear  woman,  your  daughter's 
malady  is  not  to  be  cured  by  physicians,  that  is  impossible, 
for  she  is  bewitched;  but  cut  open  the  paillasse  and  the 
feather-bed,  on  which  she  lies,  and  in  one  of  the  two  you 
will  find  a  heart  of  feathers,  which  must  instantly  be  cast 
into  the  fire.'' 

The  woman  followed  the  friar's  advice,  and  in  fiict  a 
heart  of  feathers  was  found  in  the  feather-bed.  No  sooner 
was  it  burnt  than  her  daughter  recovered. 

LOVE-MAGIC. 
Take  a  host,  or  holy  wafer,  but  which  has  not  yet  been 
consecrated,  write  on  it  certain  words  with  blood  from  the 
ring-finger,  and  then  let  a  priest  say  five  masses  over  it. 
Divide  the  wafer  in  two  equal  parts,  of  which  keep  one, 
and  give  the  other  to  the  person  whose  love  you  desire  to 
gain.  

Some  persons  make  images  of  earth,  wax,  precious 
stones,  or  mixtures  of  certain  things.  These  they  baptize 
with  the  name  of  the  person  whom  they  wish  to  inspire 
with  love,  and  with  the  same  ceremonies  that  the  priests 
employ  in  real  baptisms ;  excepting  that  they  call  on  and 
conjure  the  devil,  and  add  scandalous,  blasphemous  words. 
They  then  melt  the  image,  when  at  the  same  time  the 
heai't  of  the  person,  whose  name  the  image  bears,  will  be 
inspired  with  love,  though  it  had  previously  been  insen- 
sible to  that  passion. 


In  a  mansion  in  the  town  of  N —  there  sat  three  youn<i- 
damsels,  on  the  eve  of  a  festival,  at  a  covered  table,  on 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  273 

which  were  three  plates,  and  at  which  so  many  vacant 
places  were  left  for  the  coming  bridegrooms.  These  they 
expected  after  the  performance  of  the  prescribed  cere- 
monies. But  there  appeared  only  two  young  nobles,  who 
attached  themselves  to  two  of  the  young  ladies  at  the  table. 
The  third  came  not.  At  this  the  third  damsel,  after  long 
expectation,  growing  impatient,  looked  out  of  the  window, 
when  exactly  opposite  to  her  she  saw  a  coffin,  in  which  lay 
a  young  person  exactly  resembling  herself.  This  apparition 
so  shocked  her,  that  she  fell  sick  and  died  soon  after. 


Three  maidens  were  sitting  stark  naked  at  a  table,  each 
having  a  glass  before  her,  one  containing  water,  another 
beer,  and  the  third  wine.  They  were  awaiting  their  bride- 
grooms. First  appeared  a  serving-man,  who  took  the  glass 
of  water  and  departed.  Then  came  a  cooper,  who  took 
the  glass  of  beer  and  went  his  way.  Next  entered  a  vil- 
lage schoolmaster,  who  snatched  up  the  glass  of  wine  and 
carried  it  oiF. 

The  result  of  the  process  proves  its  efficacy.  The  lass, 
who  had  a  glass  of  water  before  her,  married  a  serving- 
man,  with  whom  she  had  little  bread  and  plenty  of  water. 
The  second  got  a  cooper  for  her  husband,  with  whom  she 
suffiired  no  want,  though  her  life  was  a  miserable  one,  for 
she  had  nothing  but  pain  and  suffering.  How  it  fared 
with  the  third  I  never  heard,  for  she  went  to  another 
country  with  her  husband,  who  was  a  schoolmaster  ^ 


When  the  girls  in  Belgium  desire  to  see  their  lovers  in 

a  dream,  they  lay  their  garters  crosswise  at  the  foot  of  the 

bed,  and  a  little  looking-glass  under  the  pillow.     They 

then  in  a  dream  see  the  image  of  their  future  husband 

appearing  in  the  glass. 

1  See  p.  142. 

n5 


27i  NETHERLAXDISH  TRADITIONS. 

On  the  first  Friday  of  every  month,  they  also  repeat  the 

following : 

Lune,  luue,  belle  lime,  i 

Faites  me  voir  en  mon  dormant 
Le  mari  que  j'am-ai  en  mon  vivant. 

If  a  girl  finds  an  entire  com  in  her  bread  and  butter, 
she  can  see  her  future  husband.  For  this  purpose  she 
must  stick  the  corn  in  a  crack  of  the  door,  and  then  keep 
watch.     The  third  person  that  passes  is  the  future  one. 

Others  say  that  the  future  one  will  merely  be  of  the 
same  trade  with  the  third  person  that  passes  by  the  house. 


If  a  girl  desires  to  be  sure  whether  her  sweetheart  still 
loves  her,  she  must  fold  her  garter  three  times,  over  every 
fold  pronounce  certain  words,  then  lay  it  under  her  pillow^, 
and  without  uttering  a  syllable,  go  to  bed.  If  at  mid- 
night she  sees  her  lover  looking  fresh  and  well,  then  all  is 
right,  and  she  will  soon  be  married ;  but  if  in  his  stead  a 
corpse  appears,  she  may  give  up  all  hope,  for  she  will 
never  get  her  lover.  In  either  case  the  lover  has  much 
to  sufi"er  during  the  night. 

THIEF'S  FOOT.— THIEF'S  HAND.— THIEF'S  FINGER. 
In  West  Flanders,  not  far  from  Bailleul,  a  thief  was 
taken,  on  whom  was  found  the  foot  of  one  that  had  been 
haViged,  which  he  used  for  the  purpose  of  putting  people 
to  sleep. 

Two  fellows  once  came  to  Huy,  who  pretended  to  be 
exceedingly  fatigued,  and  when  they  had  supped  would 
not  retire  to  a  sleeping  room,  but  begged  their  host  would 
allow  them  to  take  a  nap  on  the  hearth.  But  the  maid- 
servant, who  did  not  like  the  looks  of  the  two  guests,  re- 
mained by  the  kitchen  door  and  peeped  through  a  chink, 
when  she  saw  that  one  of  them  drew  a  thief  s  hand  from 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  Ji/0 

his  pocket,  tlie  fingers  of  wliich,  after  having  rubbed  them 
with  an  ointment,  he  lighted,  and  they  all  burned  except 
one.  Again  they  held  this  finger  to  the  fire,  but  still  it 
would  not  burn,  at  which  they  appeared  much  surprised, 
and  one  said :  "  There  must  surely  be  some  one  in  the 
house  who  is  not  yet  asleep.'^  They  then  hung  the  hand 
with  its  four  burning  fingers  by  the  chimney,  and  went 
out  to  call  their  associates.  But  the  maid  followed  them 
instantly  and  made  the  door  fast,  then  ran  up-stairs,  where 
the  landlord  slept,  that  she  might  wake  him,  but  was 
unable,  notwithstanding  all  her  shaking  and  calling. 

In  the  mean  time  the  thieves  had  returned  and  were 
endeavouring  to  enter  the  house  by  a  window^  but  the 
maid  cast  them  down  from  the  ladder.  They  then  took 
a  difi'erent  course,  and  would  have  forced  an  entrance,  had 
it  not  occurred  to  the  maid  that  the  burning  fingers  might 
probably  be  the  cause  of  her  master^s  profound  sleep.  Im- 
pressed with  this  idea  she  ran  to  the  kitchen,  and  blew 
them  out,  when  the  master  and  his  men-servants  instantly 
awoke,  and  soon  drove  away  the  robbers. 


In  the  village  of  Alveringen  there  formerly  lived  a  sor- 
ceress, who  had  a  thief  s  finger,  over  which  nine  masses 
had  been  read.  For  being  acquainted  with  the  sacristan, 
she  had  wrapt  it  in  a  cloth  and  laid  it  on  the  altar,  telling 
him  it  was  a  relic.  With  this  finger  she  performed  won- 
derful things.  When  she  had  lighted  it — for  such  fingers 
burn  like  a  candle — every  one  in  the  house  where  she 
might  be  was  put  to  sleep.  She  would  then  steal  money 
and  everything  else  that  she  fancied,  until  she  was  at  last 
detected,  and  the  stolen  property  found  in  her  possession. 

THE  MAGIC  SWORD. 
Mynheer  Hincke  Van  Wurben  had  a  magic  sword  that 


27G  NETHERLAXDISII  TRADITIONS. 

had  been  given  to  him  by  a  monk.  It  had  been  bought 
at  the  hour  in  ^vhich  Mars  ruled ;  the  cross  was  forged  on 
a  Tuesday,  and  on  that  day  was  finished;  in  the  hilt  a 
piece  of  wood  was  enclosed  that  had  been  struck  by 
thunder.  All  this  was  performed  in  the  hour  of  ]\Iars. 
A  sword  so  prepared  causes  the  sw^ords  of  all  opponents  to 
lly  in  pieces. 

If  a  man  desires  not  to  be  wounded  by  any  one,  let  him 
bind  on  his  right  arm  a  serpent^ s  skin  covered  over  with  a 
tanned  eel-skin.  Then  let  an  iron  token  be  forged  from 
a  piece  of  an  exccutioner^s  sword,  but  in  the  hour  of  ]\Iars, 
and  set  it  in  a  ring.  Then  if  the  person  be  about  to  light, 
let  him  press  the  ring  against  his  forehead,  and  place  it 
on  the  finsrer  next  to  the  little  fin2:er  of  his  right  hand. 
Round  the  ring  let  there  be  engraven  the  words,  "  0  Cas- 
tres,  prince  of  arms,  through  the  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac 
and  Jacob. ^^ 

WITCHES'  OINTMENT. 

Sorceresses  destroy  with  their  ceremonies  both  baptized 
and  unbaptized  children  (especially  the  former,  when  a 
cross  has  not  been  made  or  a  prayer  said  over  them),  as 
well  in  the  cradle  as  by  the  side  of  their  parents,  whence 
the  latter  often  think  that  they  have  smothered  the  child. 
When  the  infant  is  buried,  the  witches  steal  the  corpse 
out  of  the  coffin,  put  it  into  a  kettle,  and  boil  it  until  the 
flesh  falls  from  the  bones.  From  the  more  solid  parts  of 
this  decoction  they  make  an  ointment,  by  means  of  which 
they  exercise  their  arts,  transform  themselves,  etc.  The 
fluid  they  pour  into  bottles,  and  whoever  drinks  of  it  and 
lets  certain  ceremonies  be  performed  over  him  by  the  sor- 
ceresses,   becomes  initiated   in    their    arts  and   a  master 

thereof. 

MILK-TAKING.— MILK  BEATEN. 

An  old  sorceress  would  from  envy  take  the  milk  from  a 
neighbour's  cow,  and  for  this  purpose  went  with  a  knife 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  277 

before  the  place  in  wliich   the  cow  was,  placed  herself 
towards  the  moonlight,  and  repeated  these  words: 

Hier  snyd  ick  een  spaen  Here  cut  I  a  chip 

In  mollekens  ghewaen.  In  the  dairy's  wall, 

Ende  een  ander  daer  toe.  And  another  thereto. 

So  neem  ick  liet  melck  van     So  take  I  the  milk  from  this  cow. 
deser  koe. 

The  owner  of  the  cow  hearing  this,  took  a  thick  cord  and 

ran  to  the  sorceress,  whom  he  beat  unmercifully,  at  the 

same  time  saying : 

Hier  slaen  ick  eenen  slach.  Here  strike  I  a  stroke, 

Ende  eenen  andern  als  ick  mach.  And  another  as  I  may, 
Ende  den  derden  daer  toe.  And  a  third  thereto. 

So  behoud  ick  d'  melck  metter     So  keep  I  the  milk  mth  the  cow. 
koe. 

This  was  the  best  method  he  could  adopt. 


When  a  sorceress  steals  milk,  there  is  no  better  way  to 
punish  her  than  the  one  I  am  about  to  communicate. 
AYlien  such  a  woman  has  by  her  arts  milked  all  the  milk 
from  a  cow,  the  cow  must  soon  after  be  milked  again.  Let 
the  milk  thus  obtained  be  set  on  the  fire  and  made  Avarm, 
and  when  it  is  sufficiently  warm,  beat  it  with  a  stick  until 
not  a  drop  is  left  in  the  vessel.  The  milk  that  is  flowing 
on  the  ground  may  also  be  beaten,  for  the  more  the  beat- 
ing the  better,  as  every  stroke  given  to  the  milk  the 
sorceress  gets  on  her  back  from  the  devil.  It  has  often 
happened  here  (Laeken)  that  sorceresses  have  been  con- 
fined to  their  bed  for  a  week  and  more,  from  having  been 

so  beaten  ^ 

CORN-STEALING. 

A  sorceress  walked  round  a  field  that  was  full  of  ripe 
corn,  repeating  the  verse  "  Super  aspidem,''  etc.     On  her 
return  home  she  instantly  went  up  into  the  loft,  took  a 
1  See  p.  77,  and  Grimm,  D.  M.  p.  1025. 


278  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

tube,  and  repeated  the  same  verse,  when  all  the  corn  fell 
through  the  tube  down  before  her,  not  a  grain  being  left 
in  the  field. 

A  SORCERESS  CAUGHT. 

About  the  end  of  the  16th  century  the  following  event 
took  place  in  West  Flanders.  A  peasant  was  sitting  ^nth 
his  son  drinking  in  an  alehouse,  and,  as  was  the  custom, 
made  a  mark  on  his  dung-fork  with  chalk  for  every  jug 
of  beer  he  drank.  When  about  leaving  the  house  he  called 
for  the  hostess,  and  asked  her  how  much  he  had  drunk ; 
but  the  hostess  asked  him  in  her  turn,  how  many  marks 
he  had  on  his  fork.  The  peasant  refused  to  tell  her,  and 
the  woman  grew  angry,  and  said  in  her  rage  :  ^^  For  this 
thou  shalt  not  reach  home  to-night,  be  assured  of  that,  or 
I'll  never  come  back."  The  peasant  laughed  at  this, 
threw  the  money  on  the  table  for  what  he  had  really  con- 
sumed, and  went  away. 

But  when  he  came  to  the  water  and  entered  the  boat, 
he  could  not  move  it  from  the  shore,  and  therefore  called 
to  three  soldiers  who  happened  to  be  passing :  "  Halloo, 
comrades,  will  you  help  me  to  push  my  boat  off?  I  will 
gladly  give  you  a  drink  of  beer."  The  soldiers  came  to 
his  aid,  but  all  was  in  vain,  for  the  boat  was  and  continued 
fixed.  ^'  Wait  a  moment,"  said  one  of  the  soldiers,  panting 
and  sweating  with  exertion,  ^^  let  us  throw  the  things  out 
of  the  boat  that  are  lying  there  in  the  middle ;  then  it  will 
no  doubt  go  better."  They  did  so,  and  scarcely  had  they 
thrown  out  the  last  ])icce  wlien  they  discovered  an  enor- 
mous toad  in  the  bottom  of  the  boat,  with  eyes  like  glow- 
ing coals.  One  of  the  soldiers,  drawing  his  sword,  stabbed 
the  monster  through  the  body  and  cast  it  into  the  water, 
where  the  others  gave  it  many  wounds  in  the  belly ;  for  it 
swam  in  the  water  on  its  back. 

They  now  again  applied  themselves  to  move  the  boat, 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  279 

when  it  went  without  any  trouble,  at  which  the  peasant 
was  so  pleased,  that  taking  the  soldiers  by  the  arm,  he 
returned  with  them  to  the  alehouse.  After  he  had  ordered 
some  beer,  he  inquired  of  the  maid  where  her  mistress 
was.  "  Ah,^^  said  she,  "  my  mistress  is  in  bed  at  the  point 
of  death.-"  "Haha,^^  said  the  peasant,  laughing,  "dost 
thou  think  I  am  not  sober  ?  Why  I  saw  her  not  a  quarter 
of  an  hour  ago,  and  she  was  then  quite  lively  and  well, 
and  gave  me  a  precious  scolding."  "  It  is  so,  neverthe- 
less," answered  the  maid,  "  you  may  see  her  yom'self,  if 
you  like." 

Thereupon  the  peasant  and  the  three  soldiers  went  into 
the  room  where  the  woman  was  lying  and  piteously  moan- 
ing with  pain ;  for  she  had  many  wounds  precisely  corre- 
sponding to  those  that  had  been  inflicted  on  the  toad. 
The  peasant  asked  the  maid  how  it  had  all  happened,  but 
she  answered  she  knew  not,  as  her  mistress  had  not  been 
out  of  the  house. 

The  peasant  then  hastened  to  the  magistrate,  to  whom 
he  related  the  affair,  whence  it  appeared  evident  that  the 
toad  was  no  other  than  the  hostess,  who  had  assumed  the 
form  of  that  reptile,  for  the  purpose  of  preventing  the  man 
from  returning  home. 

WITCHERY  EXPELLED. 
Sorceresses  melt  lead  and  pour  it  into  cold  water,  where 
it  immediately  assumes  a  human  form.  They  then  ask 
the  person  bewitched,  into  what  part  of  his  or  her  body, 
who  has  caused  the  evil,  they  wish  it  to  be  sent.  When 
the  patient  has  told  them  this,  they  make  a  cut  or  prick 
with  a  knife  in  that  part  of  the  leaden  image,  at  the  same 
time  saying  where  the  party  is  that  has  inflicted  the  evil, 
but  without  mentioning  their  name.    The  perpetrator  then 

gets  the  evil  ^ 

1  See  vol.  ii.  p.  47. 


280  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

THE  GRAVEDIGGER. 

It  was  on  All-Saints^  day,  and  the  gravedigger  was  ill 
with  a  fever,  and  his  gossip  came  to  see  him.  "  Is  it  not 
unlucky/^  said  the  gravedigger,  ^'  that  I  am  ill,  and  must 
go  to-night  in  the  cold  and  snow  to  dig  a  grave  ?  "  "  0, 
I  ^11  do  that  for  you,^^  said  the  gossip,  ''  that 's  but  a  little 
service."     The  gravedigger  gladly  accepted  it. 

The  gossip  having  provided  himself  with  a  spade  and 
pick-axe,  and  warmed  his  inward  man  a  little  at  the  ale- 
house, went  about  ten  o^ clock  to  the  churchyard,  and  had 
finished  his  job  by  half-past  eleven.  But  just  as  he  was 
about  to  return  home  there  came  a  long  procession  of 
white  friars,  each  bearing  a  taper  in  his  hand,  who  made 
the  round  of  the  churchyard,  and  as  they  passed  by  the 
gossip  let  their  tapers  fall  before  him,  and  the  last  threw 
him  a  large  ball  with  two  wicks. 

The  gossip  thought  within  himself,  ''  Haha,  the  grave- 
digger  said  nothing  about  the  monks.  The  wax  will  pay 
me  for  my  labour.  In  a  month  or  two  I  will  sell  it  and 
get  a  pretty  bit  of  money  out  of  it,  which  my  wife  need 
know  nothing  about."  He  then  gathered  up  all  the  pieces, 
wrapped  them  in  a  cloth,  and  hid  them  under  his  bed. 

The  next  day  was  the  festival  of  All-Souls.  The  gossip 
had  gone  early  to  bed,  but  could  not  sleep.  As  the  clock 
was  striking  twelve,  three  knocks  were  heard  at  his  door. 
The  man  instantly  jumi)ed  up,  opened  the  door,  and 
behold,  there  stood  the  white  monks  of  the  preceding 
night,  only  that  they  had  no  lights.  They  marched  into 
the  house  two  and  two,  then  into  the  chamber,  walked 
round  it,  and  ranged  themselves  round  the  bed,  on  which 
the  gossip  had  fallen  backwards  through  terror.  On  a 
sudden  their  white  mantles  fell  from  their  shoulders,  and 
the  gossip  saw  from  under  the  bed-clothes  in  which  he  had 
wrapped  himself  up  to  the  ears,  that  they  were  all  skele- 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  281 

tons^  but  to  each  of  which  one  or  other  part  was  wanting, 
to  one  an  arm,  to  another  a  leg,  to  another  the  back-bone, 
and  to  the  last  the  head.  At  the  same  time  there  was  a 
movement  under  the  bed;  the  cloth  came  forth  spon- 
taneously, and  unfolded  itself  in  the  middle  of  the  room, 
when  the  gossip  saw  that  the  supposed  wax  lights  were 
all  bones,  and  the  large  ball  with  two  wicks  a  grinning 
skull.  The  skeletons  now  cried  out  all  together  :  "  Give 
me  my  leg-bone,^^  "  Give  me  my  arm-bone,^'  "  Give  me 
my  back-bone/^  "Give  me  my  rib  :^'  all  of  which  the 
gossip  was  obliged  to  give  back  even  to  the  last  piece, 
which  was  the  head,  and  which  he  replaced  on  the  last 
one ;  but  who  had  no  sooner  got  it  on  his  shoulders,  than 
seeing  a  violin  hanging  on  the  wall,  he  took  it  down  and 
handed  it  to  the  gossip,  that  he  might  play  on  it,  at  the 
same  time  placing  himself  behind  him  with  extended  arms, 
as  if  he  would  beat  time.  The  other  skeletons  then, 
taking  each  other's  hand,  began  a  dance,  and  made  a  most 
appalling  clatter.  As  to  the  poor  gossip,  he  lost  all  sense 
of  hearing  and  seeing,  but  durst  not  leave  off  playing; 
for  every  time  he  slackened  he  got  a  box  on  the  ear  from 
the  skeleton  behind  him.  And  all  this  lasted  till  morning, 
when  the  skeletons  put  on  their  cloaks  and  went  away. 

The  gossip  and  his  wife  never  uttered  a  syllable  in  their 
lives  about  this  adventure  until  their  last  confession,  when 
they  related  the  whole  to  their  spiritual  father. 

THE  COFFIN. 
Dr.  Abraham  Van  der  Meer,  an  upright  and  zealous 
Reformer,  relates  in  his  Memorabilia,  that  his  grand- 
mother, while  residing  at  the  Hague,  being  one  summer 
night  unable  to  sleep,  placed  herself,  about  four  o'clock  in 
the  morning,  at  the  window,  and  there  saw  a  coffin  coming 
up  the  Spui  Straat,  but  without  any  one  else  seeming  to 
notice  it.     It  moved  on  untd  it  stood  up  erect  before  a 


282  NETHEKLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

house,  where  it  vanished  in  an  open  window.  Before  six 
weeks  had  expired  every  inmate  of  that  house  had  died  of 
the  plague. 

ZEVENBERGEN. 

Before  arriving  at  Dort_,  there  is  to  be  seen  by  the  high 
road  a  large  body  of  water,  in  the  middle  of  which  a  lonely 
church  tower  raises  its  head. 

There  stood  formerly  the  rich  and  populous  city  of 
Zevenbergen,  the  inhabitants  of  which  made  use  of  gold 
and  silver  as  if  they  had  been  copper.  All  the  latches  of 
their  doors,  all  the  hasps  of  their  windows  were  of  pui'e 
gold ;  all  the  nails  in  their  houses,  all  their  kitchen  uten- 
sils were  of  silver.  In  short  their  riches  are  not  to  be 
described,  and  were  attended  with  an  arrogance  still  less 
susceptible  of  description. 

At  one  time  it  happened  that  every  night  a  mermaid 
came  flying,  and  seated  herself  on  the  top  of  the  tower  of 
the  church,  which  was  dedicated  to  St.  Lobbctjen,  and 
there  sang : 

Zevenbergen  sol  vergaeii,  Zevenbergen  shall  perish. 

En   Lobbetjens   toren   blyven     And  Lobbetjen's  tower  remain 
staen.  standing. 

This  song  every  one  heard,  but  no  one  heeded  it,  or,  in 
consequence  of  it,  turned  from  his  arrogance.  At  length 
God  grew  weary,  and  in  one  night  there  arose  so  frightful 
a  storm  of  wind  and  rain,  accompanied  by  thunder,  over 
the  city,  that  it  perished  in  one  instant,  all  except  the 
church,  which  remained  standing  and  yet  remains,  as  the 
mermaid  had  sung.  Over  the  site  of  the  city  an  expanse 
of  water  spread  itself. 

Fishermen  who  navigate  the  lake  assert  that  they  have 
frequently  seen  the  glittering  gilded  roofs  of  Zevenbergen ; 
but  no  one  has  ever  ventured  to  descend  into  its  mysterious 
depths. 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  283 

HOW  COUNT  BALDWIN  OF  FLANDERS  MARRIED  A  DEVIL. 

When  Count  Baldwin  the  Ninth  of  Flanders  had  dis- 
dainfully refused  to  marry  the  beautiful  princess  Beatrix, 
daughter  of  the  king  of  France,  the  emperor  of  Constan- 
tinople came  and  sought  her  hand  and  obtained  her  from 
her  father.     At  this  Baldwin  being  much  discontented, 
took  leave  of  the  most  potent  and  noble  king  of  France, 
and  returned  to  his  town  of  Noyon,  where  he  remained 
three  days.     On  the  fourth  day,  having  a  great  desire  to 
hunt  in  the  forest  of  Noyon,  he  assembled  his  huntsmen 
and  followers,  and  went  out  with  staff  in  hand  accompa- 
nied by  his  hounds.     In  the  forest  they  lighted  on  a  wild 
boar  of  extraordinary  size  and  power,  and  quite  black.  On 
hearing  the  dogs  it  fled,  with  the  hunters  close  after  it, 
but  it  killed  four  of  the  best  hounds  that  were  at  the 
chase.     At  this  the  count  was  bitterly  vexed,  and  swore 
that  he  would  never  return  until  he  had  slain  the  boar_, 
which  then  ran  out  of  the  forest  of  Noyon  and  fled  into 
that  of  Mormay,  and  hastened  to  reach  a  spot  where  it 
could  rest  in  peace.     But  the  count  pursued  it  with  his 
staff,  leaving  his  attendants  far  behind,  and  now  springing 
from  his  horse  and  grasping  his  staff  with  both  hands, 
said  :  "  Boar,  turn  hitherwards,  for  it  must  gratify  thee 
to  encounter  the  count  of  Flanders.^^     The  boar  instantly 
rose  and  rushed  on  the  count,  who  struck  it  with  such 
force  that  it  fell  stunned  to  the  earth.     He  then  killed  it, 
and  placing  himself  upon   it,   fell   into  deep   reflection, 
emerging  from  which  he  was  greatly  surprised  that  none 
of  his  followers  had  joined  him.     After  sitting  thus  a 
w^hile,  he  looked  round  and  saw  a  young  damsel  coming 
towards  him,   quite  alone   and  mounted  on   a  jet-black 
palfrey.     The  count  instantly  rose  to  meet  her,  and  taking 
hold  of  the  rein  of  her  palfrey,  said  :  "  Lady,  you  are  right 
welcome  to  me.^^     And  the  lady  in  a  soft  voice  returned 


28i  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

his  greeting.  The  count  then  asked  her  why  she  rode  so 
entirely  unattended,  and  she  gently  answered :  "  Sir,  such 
is  the  will  of  the  Almighty  Father.  I  am  the  daughter  of 
an  Eastern  king,  who  would  bestow  me  in  marriage  against 
my  will ;  but  I  swore  and  made  an  oath  to  God  that  I 
would  never  take  a  husband,  unless  it  were  the  richest 
count  in  Christendom.  I  therefore  left  my  home,  attended 
by  a  numerous  suite,  but  have  now  no  one  with  me,  having 
parted  from  them,  as  I  feared  they  might  conduct  me  back 
to  my  father ;  for  I  had  made  a  vow  that  I  would  never 
return  until  I  had  met  with  the  count  of  Flanders,  whom 
I  had  heard  so  highly  praised. ^^ 

While  the  count  looked  on  the  lady,  he  thought  much 
of  what  she  had  said,  and  she  pleased  him  beyond  measure, 
so  that  he  felt  an  ardent  passion  for  her,  and  said :  '^  Fair 
damsel,  I  am  the  count  of  Flanders  whom  you  seek,  and  I 
am  the  richest  count  under  heaven,  having  fourteen  coun- 
ties subject  to  me;  and  as  you  have  been  seeking  me,  I 
will,  if  it  be  agreeable  to  you,  take  you  to  wife."  At  this 
the  lady  expressed  her  satisfaction  and  willingness,  pro- 
vided he  were  what  he  represented  himself.  The  count 
then  asked  the  lady  her  name,  also  that  of  her  father,  and 
over  what  realm  he  reigned.  She  answered  him  that  her 
baptismal  name  was  Melius,  "but,"  continued  she,  "the 
name  of  my  father  you  shall  never  know  ;  such  is  the  will 
of  God,  and  you  must  not  inquire  further,  for  it  may  not 
be  otherwise."  The  count  then,  who  was  possessed  by 
the  evil  spirit,  setting  his  horn  to  his  mouth,  blew  a  loud 
blast,  for  his  people  to  come  to  him  ;  and  there  came 
Henry  count  of  Valenciennes,  Walter  of  St.  Omer^s,  and 
many  others.  They  asked  him  whether  he  had  taken  no- 
thing, and  he  answered :  "  Yes,  I  have  taken  the  noblest 
boar  in  the  world,  and  God  has  also  sent  me  this  fair 
damsel  whom  you  here  see,  and  whom,  as  she  is  willing, 
I  mean  to  make  my  wife."     At  this  the  count  of  Valen- 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  285 

ciennes  gazed  on  the  lady^  who  was  very  elegantly  attired, 
and  rode  on  a  palfrey  than  which  none  could  be  more 
beautiful.  Notwithstanding  all  this,  the  count  greatly 
blamed  the  count  of  Flanders  for  his  intention  of  making 
her  his  lawful  wife,  and  said,  "  Sir,  how  do  you  know  who 
she  is  ?  she  is  perhaps  a  young  damsel  who  might  be  yours 
for  money.  If  she  pleases  you,  retain  her  as  long  as  it 
may  be  agreeable  to  you,  and  then  let  her  go ;  for  so  great 
a  prince  as  you  must  act  wisely."  Then  said  the  count 
of  Flanders  to  the  count  of  Valenciennes  :  "  Speak  more 
discreetly,  for  my  heart  bids  me  to  marry  this  damsel." 
At  this  his  followers  were  much  afflicted.  The  count  then 
went  away,  taking  with  him  the  head  of  the  boar,  and 
proceeded  to  Cambray,  accompanied  by  the  lady,  whom  he 
married,  and  celebrated  their  nuptials  with  great  feastings. 
She  soon  became  pregnant,  and  at  the  end  of  nine  months 
gave  birth  to  a  daughter,  who  at  her  baptism  received  the 
name  of  Jane,  and  had  afterwards  a  second  daughter,  who 
was  named  Margaret.  In  the  thirteen  years,  during  w^hich 
this  woman  lived  with  Baldwin,  she  laid  heavy  burthens 
on  the  people  and  did  much  evil  in  the  country,  for  which 
the  count  was  severely  blamed.  She  w^ent,  indeed,  to 
church  and  heard  divine  service,  and  also  partook  of  the 
holy  sacrament,  until  the  elevation  of  the  host  in  the 
mass ;  but  then  she  would  leave  the  church,  at  which  the 
people  greatly  w^ondered  and  expressed  themselves  very 
mysteriously. 

At  this  time  the  emperor  of  Constantinople  was  in  great 
trepidation,  because  Acquillan,  Sultan  of  Sura,  had  laid 
siege  to  Constantinople  with  a  hundred  thousand  Saracens, 
and  laid  waste  all  the  surrounding  country.  The  emperor 
therefore  summoned  all  his  friends,  and  assembled  an  army 
of  forty  thousand  Christians.  But  one  day,  making  a 
sally  and  engaging  with  the  Saracens,  he  was  slain  in  the 
conflict ;  whereupon  his  army  returned,  bearing  the  body 


286  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

of  their  emperor,  whom  they  honourably  buried,  and  then 
proceeded  to  adopt  measures  for  the  further  defence  of  the 
city ;  for  the  Sultan  Acquillan  had  sworn  not  to  depart 
before  he  had  taken  Constantinople ;  but  the  Christians, 
nevertheless,  still  found  means  to  defend  it. 

During  this  time,  Baldwin  with  his  wife  Melius  Was  in 
the  county  of  Flanders.  There  it  befell  that,  on  Easter  day 
in  the  year  of  grace  1188,  the  count  of  Flanders  and  the 
countess  Melius  with  a  noble  train  were  at  their  palace  of 
Wynandael,  and  thither  many  counts  and  barons,  vassals 
of  the  count,  were  summoned  and  came  accordingly.     On 
this  day  the  count  held  a  splendid  court,  and  when  the 
hour  of  repast  arrived,  he  placed  himself  with  his  guests 
at  table.     While  thus  sitting,  there  appeared  before  him 
an  aged  hermit  leaning  on  a  staff,  and  apparently  a  hun- 
dred years  old,  who  prayed  the  count,  in  the  name  of  God, 
to  give  him  a  dinner.     The  count  graciously  granted  his 
request,  and  bade  one  of  the  attendants  take  care  of  the 
old  man,  and  a  place  was  assigned  him  at  a  table  opposite 
to  the  count,  but  apart  from  the  rest.     The  countess  had 
not  then  entered  the  hall,  but  she  came  shortly  after,  and 
seated  herself  by  the  count,  as  was  her  wont.     ^Yhen  the 
hermit  saw  her  he  was  struck  with  fear,   and  instantly 
began  to  tremble,  and  repeatedly  crossed  himself,   and 
could  neither  eat  nor  drink.     And  when  the  lady  saw  the 
hermit,  she  was  sorely  disquieted,  for  she  feared  he  would 
cause  her  some  great  calamity,  and  therefore  prayed  the 
count  to  send  him  away,  saying :  ^^  Sir,  he  knows  more 
artifices  than  any  one  besides,  and  I  cannot  look  upon 
him ;  I  therefore  beseech  you  to  order  his  departure. ^^ 

At  this  the  count  said:  "Wife,  it  is  good  to  bestow 
alms  on  those  that  ask  them ;  but  he  who  receives  and 
needs  them  not  is  foolish ;  therefore  it  is  my  pleasure  that 
the  hermit  be  served  and  recruit  his  strength."  The  count 
then  turning  towards  the  hermit,  who  sat  apparently  lost 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  287 

in  thought,  and  neither  ate  nor  drank,  said  to  him  :  "  My 
good  man,  why  eat  you  not  ?  Conceal  it  not  from  me,  if 
you  desire  aught  else ;  ask  for  it,  and  it  shall  be  given 
jou."  The  hermit  then  rose,  and  addressing  the  count 
and  all  the  nobles  present,  exhorted  them  to  cease  from 
eating  and  drinking,  for  that  they  were  in  great  peril,  and 
then  continued  :  "  But  dread  not  before  it  is  time  to  dread, 
for  that  w^hich  ye  will  soon  see  will  inspire  you  with  great 
dread.  Nevertheless,  put  your  trust  in  God  and  it  cannot 
harm  you.''^  At  this  address  all  were  wonder-struck,  and 
every  one  sat  silent  and  still,  and  ceased  from  eating  and 
drinking.  The  hermit  then  conjured  the  countess  in  the 
name  of  the  Almighty,  and  said  to  her  :  "  Thou  devil,  who 
sojournest  in  the  body  of  this  woman,  I  conjure  thee,  in 
the  name  of  the  Lord,  who  for  us  suffered  a  painful  death 
on  the  cross,  who  drove  thee  from  his  holy  paradise,  with 
all  the  evil  spirits  who  had  sinned  through  their  pride ; 
and  by  the  holy  sacraments,  which  God  hath  appointed ; 
and  by  his  great  power,  which  will  endure  for  ever,  that 
thou  depart  from  this  company,  and  that  ere  thou  goest, 
thou  confess  before  all  these  lords  why  the  count  of  Flan- 
ders hath  been  seduced  by  thee,  that  all  may  know  it ; 
and  that  thou  go  to  the  place  whence  thou  earnest,  with- 
out touching  aught  with  harmful  hand,  whatsoever  it 
may  be.^' 

Allien  the  lady  heard  herself  thus  exorcised,  without 
the  power  of  resistance,  or  of  doing  further  injury  to  the 
count,  or  of  remaining  longer  in  Flanders,  she  began  to 
speak  and  confess  before  all,  saying  :  "  I  am  one  of  the 
angels  that  God  cast  from  paradise,  from  which  circum- 
stance we  suffer  more  misery  than  any  one  can  conceive, 
and  would  gladly  see  every  one  treading  in  our  path,  that 
God  might,  together  with  all  others,  also  forgive  us.  Nor 
for  thus  seeking  help  can  any  one  justly  blame  us.  The 
count  in  this  case  could  but  ill  guard  against  us  when  he 


288  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

yielded  to  the  sin  of  pride,  and  refused  to  marry  the 
daughter  of  the  king  of  France.  God  then  permitted  that 
I  should  enter  the  body  of  a  royal  maiden  of  the  East  who 
had  died,  and  was  one  of  the  fairest  on  earth.  I  entered 
her  corpse  in  the  night  and  raised  it  np_,  and  it  had  no 
other  soul  than  me  ;  for  her  soul  was  where  it  was  destined 
to  be.  And  the  count  could  not  withstand  the  temptation 
to  make  her  his  wife,  and  I  left  him  but  little  enjoyment  of 
life  for  thirteen  years,  and  have  inflicted  much  evil  on  the 
land  of  Flanders;  and  yet  more  dearly  would  he  have 
paid,  had  he  not  been  ever  mindful  of  his  Creator,  and 
crossed  himself  on  rising  and  on  lying  down  to  rest.  His 
two  daughters  I  have  lost,  in  consequence  of  their  having 
been  baptized.  I  have  nothing  more  to  say,  but  now  re- 
turn to  the  East  country,  to  give  this  body  back  to  its 
grave. '^  Having  thus  spoken  she  vanished  without  doing 
injury  to  any  one,  only  carrying  along  with  her  a  little 
pillar  from  one  of  the  windows  of  the  hall.  At  this 
the  count  and  all  present  were  struck  with  amazement, 
and  rose  from  table,  and  the  count  bending  his  head  to 
the  good  hermit,  prayed  him  to  say  what  it  were  best 
for  him  to  do ;  when  the  hermit  counselled  him  to  go  to 
the  pope  and  from  him  obtain  pardon  for  his  sins ;  and 
then  took  his  departure. 

For  three  days  the  count  continued  lost  in  reflection 
within  his  palace ;  on  the  fourth  he  proceeded  to  Bruges. 
While  there  he  was  much  ridiculed  and  insulted;  the 
people  pointed  at  him  in  the  streets,  and  the  children 
cried  out :  "  Come  and  see,  there  is  the  count  that  mar- 
ried the  devil. ^^  The  like  took  place  also  in  Ghent  and 
Arras.  Seeing  this,  he  made  a  vow  to  go  to  Jerusalem, 
and  provided  for  the  administration  of  his  dominions ;  but 
he  first  went  to  Rome,  where  the  pope  received  him  with 
great  honour,  and  took  him  into  his  private  chamber, 
where  the  count  confessed  to  him  his  sins.     At  his  con- 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  289 

fession  the  holy  father  was  much  astonished^  and  imposed 
on  him,  as  an  atonement,  to  journey  to  Constantinople 
and  aid  the  noble  empress,  the  daughter  of  the  king  of 
France,  who  was  besieged  by  the  Sultan  Acquillan.  The 
pope  then  remitted  all  his  sins,  and  Baldwin  proceeded  on 
liis  way  to  Constantinople. 

The  count  of  Flanders,  to  whom  the  foregoing  legend  relates,  was  the 
same  who  was  raised  to  the  dignity  of  emperor  of  the  East,  and  who 
perished  so  miserably,  having  been  taken  prisoner  by  the  Bulgarians  in 
the  battle  of  Adrianople  (a.  1206),  and  after  the  mutilation  of  his  limbs, 
left  a  prey  to  the  beasts  of  the  forest.  His  wife  was  not  a  devil,  but  Man' 
of  Champagne,  a  daughter  of  the  sister  of  the  French  king,  Philip  Au- 
gustus. The  story  of  his  escape  from  prison,  return  to  Flanders,  and  exe- 
cution, as  an  impostor,  at  Lisle,  is  well  known.  Tieck's  tale,  '  Der  Grie- 
chische  Kaiser,'  is  founded  on  this  tradition. 


THE  POACHER  OF  WETTEREN-OVERBEKE. 
At  Wetteren-Overbeke  there  was  a  poacher  who  had 
been  out  the  whole  day  but  shot  nothing.  His  ill-luck 
made  him  obstinate,  so  that  he  stayed  in  the  field,  in  the 
hope  of  meeting  with  some  game,  and  not  being  obliged 
to  return  home  without  having  taken  something.  It  was 
just  midnight,  when  by  the  moonlight  he  saw  a  hare 
frisking  about  amiong  the  clover.  He  aimed  at  the  animal 
and  fired,  but  the  recoil  of  his  piece  against  his  shoulder 
was  so  strong  that  it  felled  him  to  the  ground.  On  rising 
and  examining  the  piece,  he  found  that  the  barrel  was  be- 
come quite  crooked.  This  seemed  very  unaccountable  to 
him,  as  he  had  not  loaded  it  with  a  heavier  charge  than 
usual.  At  the  same  instant,  the  animal,  that  he  thought 
dead,  started  up,  and,  instead  of  running  away,  came  to- 
wards him.  WTiat  sees  he  next  ?  The  hare  was  trans- 
formed to  a  black  ball  slowly  rolling  along  !  The  poor 
poacher  took  to  his  heels  in  terror,  fully  convinced  it  was 
no  other  than  the  devil  himself  that  was  in  chase  of  him. 
The  ball  in  the  mean  while  continued  rolling  after  him, 

o 


290  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

and  grew  bigger  and  bigger.  At  length,  \^^th  the  sweat 
pouring  from  him  through  fear  and  running,  he  succeeded 
in  climbing  up  a  tall  tree,  where  he  hoped  to  be  in  safety ; 
but  the  black  ball  came  rolling  on  to  the  tree,  and  was 
now  become  so  great  that  it  darkened  all  before  the  eyes 
of  the  poacher.  Deadly  terror  now  seized  him ;  "  this 
monster,"  thought  he,  "  can  be  no  other  than  a  warning 
from  heaven,  because  I  have  transgressed  the  laws  of  my 
superiors."  Then  falling  on  his  knees,  he  made  a  vow 
never  to  poach  again,  when  the  black  ball  instantly  dis- 
appeared. 

THE  BLOODY  COACH  AT  ANTWERP. 
This  is  a  wonderfully  beautiful  carriage  with  four  horses. 
In  it  sits  a  lady  richly  clad,  who  carries  with  her  many 
sweetmeats  and  dainties,  for  the  purpose  of  enticing 
such  children  as  are  out  playing  late  in  the  streets;  to 
whom  she  also  promises  that  she  will  give  them  at  her 
castle  her  little  daughter  for  a  playmate.  If  her  artifice 
fails,  she  will  drag  them  into  the  carriage  by  force,  and 
stop  their  mouths,  to  prevent  their  crying  out.  She  then 
conveys  the  poor  little  creatures  far  away  to  a  great  castle, 
where  their  great  toes  are  cut  off  and  they  are  suffered  to 
bleed  to  death.  Their  blood  is  used  as  a  bath  for  a  great 
king,  who  is  suffering  from  a  grievous  malady.  It  is  ob- 
served that  the  children,  whose  blood  can  cure  him,  must 
all  be  under  seven  years  of  age. 

THE  SAND-GATE  AT  MECHLIN. 
In  the  sixteenth  century  the  Sand-gate  at  Mechlin  was 
used  as  a  powder-magazine.  In  the  night  of  the  7th 
August,  1546,  a  terrific  storm  burst  over  the  city,  and  the 
Hghtning  struck  the  Sand-gate.  A  tremendous  stroke 
shook  the  whole  earth  around,  the  tower  fiew  in  a  thou- 
sand fragments  in  all  directions,  a  sliower  of  hot  stones 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  291 

fell  on  the  city,  and  several  hundred  houses  were  either 
shattered  to  pieces  or  greatly  damaged.  The  city  ditches 
were  dried  up,  and  the  fishes  were  found  lying  about 
boiled  or  roasted.  Above  four  hundred  persons  were  in- 
stantly struck  dead,  many  others  died  afterwards  of  the 
injuries  they  had  suffered ;  while  others,  as  cripples,  bore 
to  the  end  of  their  lives  the  marks  of  this  calamity. 

Shortly  after  this  event  some  merchants  from  Friesland 
arrived  at  Mechlin,  who  anxiously  desired  to  see  the  spot 
where  the  Sand-gate  had  stood.  Having  been  conducted 
thither,  they  related  that  at  the  very  hour  when  the  Sand- 
gate  was  shivered  to  atoms,  they  were  near  a  mill  in  Fries- 
land,  where  they  saw  many  devils  in  the  air  directing  their 
flight  towards  IMechlin.  Of  these  one  was  heard  to  call 
to  his  companion  in  a  horrible  voice :  "  Ha,  Krombeen 
(Crooked-leg),  take  the  mill  along  with  you.''  To  which 
Krombeen  answered,  "  I  can't,  I  can't,  I  must  hasten  to 
Mechlin ;  Kortstaert  (Short-tail)  is  behind  us  ;  the  mill  is 
left  for  him."  And  in  fact,  the  mill  was  struck  down  on 
the  same  night. 

During  this  storm,  which  did  injury  not  only  in  Mech- 
lin, but  in  the  whole  country  around,  the  sacristans  of  the 
village  churches  ran  to  sound  the  alarm  bells.  The  sa- 
cristan of  Putte  would  also  do  the  like ;  yet  notwithstand- 
ing all  his  efforts,  the  good  man  could  not  get  into  the 
church,  but  was  twice  held  back.  In  his  vexation  he  ex- 
claimed :  ^'  Surely  here  must  be  more  than  one  devil  at 
work."  A  devil,  who  was  sitting  in  a  tree  close  by, 
hearing  the  words,  answered  :  ''  No,  there  you  are  wrong, 
I  am  here  quite  alone,  the  others  arc  all  off  to  Mechlin." 

CHESS  WITH  THE  DEVIL. 
In  the  forest  of  Clairmarais,  near  Cambray,  are  to  be 
seen  the  ruins  of  a  convent  of  the  same  name,  concerning 
the  origin  of  which  there  is  the  following  tradition  : — 


293  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

On  the  spot  where  it  stoocl^  a  magnificent  castle  once 
raised  its  lofty  towers,  but  that  was  long,  very  long  ago, 
more  than  seven  hundred  years  having  passed  since  that 
time.  In  this  castle  dwelt  a  powerful  knight,  who  had  a 
beautiful  wdfc,  but  who  was  exceedingly  haughty,  and  too 
proud  to  associate  with  any  person  that  was  not,  like  her- 
self, noble.  The  knight  had  once  ridden  out,  and  when 
evening  came  had  not  returned.  In  the  mean  time  an- 
other knight  begged  for  admission  into  the  castle,  which 
the  lady  readily  granted,  and  let  him  come  into  her  bed- 
chamber. There  the  stranger  soon  began  w^th  flattering 
words  to  gain  the  lady^s  favour,  and  at  length  told  her, 
that  out  in  the  forest  he  had  met  with  an  old  man,  who 
loudly  swore  he  would  be  revenged  on  her  for  having 
driven  him  from  the  castle.  He  had  also  declared  that  he 
was  father  to  the  lady  of  the  castle,  and  that  she  w^as  not 
of  noble  blood,  but  that  he  had  exchanged  her  for  a  dead 
child  with  her  supposed  father,  while  she  w^as  yet  in  the 
cradle.  With  such  and  other  discourses  the  stranger,  who 
called  himself  Brudemer,  so  instigated  the  woman,  that 
she  hurried  with  him  to  the  gate,  and  there  stabbed  her 
father.  They  then  hurried  back  into  the  castle,  and  sat 
down  to  a  game  of  chess. 

After  some  time  the  door  flew  open,  and  the  lord  of 
Clairmarais  entered  the  apartment  with  looks  of  fury. 
At  the  sight  of  him  Brudemer  burst  into  a  loud  laugh, 
while  the  noble  lady  was  ready  to  sink  into  the  earth,  and 
grew  deadly  pale.  But  the  knight  approaching  her,  cried 
out,  at  the  same  time  raising  his  sword :  "  Let  the  devil 
fetch  thee,  thou  parricide,  thou  adulteress  !  "  But  before 
he  could  strike,  Brudemer  seized  her  by  the  head,  saying  : 
''  I  accept  her,^^  and  vanished  with  her  accompanied  by  an 
appalling  clap  of  thunder. 

Not  until  late  on  the  following  day  did  the  knight 
wake  out  of  the  state  of  stupefaction,  into  which  these 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  293 

dreadful  occurrences  had  thrown  him,  and  then  he  resolved 
on  having  no  more  intercourse  with  the  world.  He  after- 
wards entered  into  the  monastery  of  the  holy  St.  Bcrtin^ 
where  he  died  a  happy  death. 

The  castle  was  then  forsaken,  no  one  being  willing  to 
dwell  in  it ;  for  every  night  an  awful  tumult  was  heard 
there,  nor  did  any  one  return  who  ventured  to  enter  it. 

At  length  a  pious  Benedictine  had  the  courage  one 
evening  to  explore  the  castle.  After  having  passed  through 
many  apartments,  he  sat  down  to  rest  in  a  small  cabinet. 
Shortly  after  his  entrance  the  door  flew  open,  and  a  tall 
personage,  on  whose  breast  hung  an  escutcheon  bearing 
the  name  of  Brudemer,  and  with  a  deadly  pale  lady  on 
his  arm,  stept  in.  Behind  them  came  a  brilliant  train  of 
servants,  and  these  were  followed  by  eight  young  men, 
bearing  heavy  chests  on  their  shoulders.  The  knight 
pointed  to  a  table,  on  which  there  v*^as  a  chess-board,  and 
then  to  a  chair  standing  by  the  table,  in  which  the  monk 
immediately  placed  himself.  The  knight  sat  down  in  one 
opposite,  and  both  began  to  play.  The  monk  played  with 
the  utmost  caution,  and  calculated  every  move  most  care- 
fully, and  soon  felt  confident  that  he  should  overcome  his 
adversary,  when  the  lady  pointed  to  a  pawn,  which  the 
knight  immediately  moved.  This  changed  the  entire  face 
of  the  game,  and  placed  the  monk  in  the  greatest  jeopardy  ; 
for  he  well  knew  that  his  soul  would  belong  to  the  evil 
one,  if  he  lost.  At  this  move,  too,  the  whole  company  gave 
a  loud  laugh.  The  monk  now  began  to  repent  of  his 
temerity,  but  resolved  on  making  a  virtue  of  necessity,  so 
after  a  fervent  prayer,  pushed  a  pawn  against  that  of  his 
opponent.  The  knight  seeing  this  became  thoughtful,  for 
the  game  was  now  again  in  favour  of  the  monk,  and  every 
move  improved  the  position  of  the  latter,  let  him  do  what- 
ever he  might.  When  both  had  now  made  some  further 
moves,  and  the  game  was  manifestly  in  the  hands  of  the 


294  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

pious  ecclesiastic,  there  came  at  once  a  violent  shock,  the 
monk  was  thrown  down,  and  everything  vanished. 

On  the  following  morning  the  fortunate  player  found  a 
female  skeleton  in  rags  and  tatters  lying  by  the  side  of  the 
overthrown  chess-table,  and  at  the  door  eight  chests  full 
of  gold  and  silver.  He  buried  the  dry  bones  in  the  castle 
yard,  and  then  transformed  the  castle  into  a  cloister,  at- 
tached to  which  he  erected  a  beautiful  church,  and  became 
the  first  prior. 

FALKENBERG. 

A.t  the  old  castle  of  Falkenberg,  in  the  province  of  Lim- 
burg,  a  spectre  w^alks  by  night,  and  a  voice  from  the  ruins 
is  heard  to  cry  :  ''  Murder  !  murder  1 "  and  it  cries  towards 
the  north  and  the  south,  and  the  east  and  the  west ;  and 
before  the  crier  there  go  tw^o  small  flames,  which  accom- 
pany him  whithersoever  he  turns.  And  this  voice  has 
cried  for  six  hundred  years,  and  so  long  have  also  the  two 
flames  w^andered. 

Six  hundred  years  ago  the  beautiful  castle  stood  in  its 
full  glory,  and  was  inhabited  by  two  brothers  of  the  noble 
race  of  Falkenberg.  Their  names  were  Waleram  and 
Reginald,  and  they  both  loved  AlLx,  the  daughter  of  the 
count  of  Cleves.  But  Waleram  was  the  favoured  lover. 
His  mother  and  the  father  of  Alix  readily  consented  to 
their  union,  and  shortly  after,  the  ceremony  was  performed 
with  a  splendour  becoming  their  rank. 

But  lleginald  meditated  dark  vengeance  both  on  his 
brotlier  and  Alix ;  and  when  the  feast  was  over  and  the 
young  pair  were  about  to  be  led  to  the  bridal  chamber,  he 
hastened  before  them  and  concealed  himself  behind  the 
bed.  Lost  in  sweet  dreams  of  love  and  happiness,  the 
youthful  couple  thought  not  on  their  cruel  brother,  and 
hardly  had  they  ascended  the  nu})tial  couch,  when  llegi- 
nald rushed  forth  and  planted  his  dagger  first  in  the  breast 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  295 

of  Waleram,  and  then  in  that  of  Alix.  Waleram^s  first 
impulse  was  to  clap  his  hand  on  his  flowing  wound^  his 
next  to  grasp  the  murderer,  with  whose  face  his  bloody 
hand  came  in  contact ;  but  his  strength  failed  him,  and 
he  sank  back  lifeless.  Reginald  fled,  after  having  cut  a 
lock  from  the  head  of  the  unfortunate  Alix. 

On  the  following  day  there  was  loud  lament  and  deep 
sorrow  in  the  castle  of  Falkenberg ;  for  every  one  loved 
Waleram  on  account  of  his  kind  and  benevolent  heart,  and 
Alix,  whose  soul  was  as  beautiful  as  her  body.  No  one 
doubted  that  Reginald  was  the  assassin,  and  men  were 
sent  in  every  direction  to  seize  him,  but  he  was  nowhere 
to  be  found. 

At  this  time  there  dwelt  in  a  forest  near  Falkenberg  a 
holy  hermit,  who  day  and  night  lay  in  prayer  before  the 
altar  of  a  little  chapel  that  stood  near  his  hermitage.  It 
was  near  midnight,  when  some  one  knocked  at  the  door 
of  the  chapel,  and  in  the  name  of  heaven  prayed  for  ad- 
mission. The  recluse  rose  from  prayer,  opened  the  door, 
and  recognised  Reginald,  who,  shedding  bitter  tears,  in- 
stantly fell  at  his  feet,  and  besought  him  to  hear  his  con- 
fession. The  hermit  raised  him  and  led  him  to  a  seat, 
and  Reginald  confessed  all,  and  as  a  proof,  showed  him 
the  form  of  a  hand  stamped  with  blood  on  his  countenance, 
and  which  he  could  not  with  any  water  wash  away.  Wlien 
the  man  of  God  had  heard  all,  he  said,  shuddering :  "  It 
is  not  granted  to  me  to  absolve  from  sin  so  enormous ; 
but  pass  the  night  with  me  in  prayer ;  it  may  be  that  God 
will  then  give  me  to  know  what  you  shall  do  in  order  to 
obtain  his  forgiveness.^^  With  these  words  he  knelt  before 
the  altar,  and  Reginald  knelt  by  his  side:  they  both 
prayed. 

When  day  began  to  dawn,  the  hermit  rose  and  said : 
^'  This  is  the  behest  of  heaven.     You  shall  go  hence  a 


296  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

humble  and  pious  pilgrim,  and  ever  journey  towards  tlie 
north,  until  you  find  no  more  earth  on  which  to  tread :  a 
sign  will  then  announce  to  you  the  rest/^  Reginald 
answered  :  "  Amen/^  craved  the  holy  mail's  blessing,  stept 
to  the  lamp  at  the  altar,  where  he  burned  the  lock  he  had 
taken  of  Alix^s  hair,  as  he  had  been  commanded  by  the 
hermit,  then  left  the  chapel  and  journeyed  as  a  pilgrim 
on  and  on,  and  ever  towards  the  north.  And  with  him 
went  two  forms,  one  white  on  his  right  hand,  one  black 
on  his  left ;  and  the  black  figure  whispered  in  his  ear  much 
about  his  youth  and  the  joys  of  the  world,  while  his  white 
attendant  exliorted  him  to  repentance,  and  to  continue  his 
journey,  and  set  before  his  soul  the  everlasting  joy  of 
the  blessed. 

Thus  had  he  journeyed  for  many  a  day,  and  many  a 
week,  and  many  a  month,  when  one  morning  he  found  no 
more  earth  under  his  feet,  and  saw  the  wide  ocean  before 
him.  At  the  same  moment  a  boat  approached  the  shore, 
and  a  man  that  sat  in  it  made  a  sign  to  him,  and  said : 
"  We  were  expecting  thee.''  Then  Reginald  knew  that  this 
was  the  sign,  and  stept  into  the  boat,  still  attended  by  the 
two  forms ;  and  they  rowed  to  a  large  ship  with  all  her 
sails  set ;  and  when  they  were  in  the  ship,  the  boatman 
disappeared  and  the  ship  sailed  away.  Reginald  with  his 
two  attendants  descended  into  a  room  below,  where  stood 
a  table  and  chairs.  Each  of  the  two  forms  then  taking  a 
seat  at  the  table,  the  black  one  drew  forth  a  pair  of  dice, 
and  they  began  playing  for  the  soul  of  Reginald. 

Six  hundred  years  has  that  ship  been  sailing  without 
either  helm  or  helmsman,  and  so  long  have  the  two  been 
playing  for  Reginald's  soul.  Their  game  will  last  till  the 
last  day.  ]\Iariners  that  sail  on  the  North  Sea  often  meet 
with  the  infernal  vessel. 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  ^\)7 

THE  MONK  OF  AFFLIGIIEM. 
Towards  the  close  of  the  eleventh  century  a  most  extra- 
ordinary event  took  place  at  the  abbey  of  Afflighem. 

It  was  one  day  announced  to  the  pious  Fulgentius,  who 
at  that  time  was  abbot,  that  a  stranger  monk  of  venerable 
aspect  had  knocked  at  the  gate  and  been  admitted,  who 
said  he  was  one  of  the  brethren  of  the  cloister.  The  abbot 
caused  him  to  be  brought  before  him,  and  asked  him  who 
he  was  and  whence  he  came  ?  whereunto  the  monk  an- 
swered, that  he  had  that  morning  sung  matins  with  the 
rest  of  the  brotherhood ;  that  when  they  came  to  the  verse 
of  the  89th  Psalm,  where  it  is  said :  "  A  thousand  years 
in  thy  sight  are  but  as  yesterday,"  he  had  fallen  into  deep 
meditation,  and  continued  sitting  in  the  quire  when  all  the 
others  had  departed.  A  little  bird  had  then  appeared  to 
him,  which  sang  most  sweetly,  and  which,  because  it  had 
so  delighted  him,  he  had  followed  into  the  forest,  from 
whence,  after  a  short  stay,  he  was  now  returned,  but 
found  the  abbey  so  changed  that  he  no  longer  knew  it. 
On  Fulgentius  asking  him  about  his  abbot,  and  also  the 
name  of  the  king  that  reigned  at  the  time,  it  was  found,  to 
their  great  astonishment,  that  both  had  been  dead  three 
hundred  years  before. 

The  monk  was  startled,  and  said :  "  Verily  I  now  see 
that  a  thousand  years  are  as  yesterday  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lord.''  He  then  prayed  the  abbot  to  impart  to  him  the 
holy  sacraments,  and,  after  partaking  of  them,  died  a  holy 
and  edifying  death. 

A  similar  legend  is  related  of  the  abbey  of  Heisterbach,  opposite  Bonn, 
and  of  some  other  abbeys.  The  story  has  been  well  paraphrased  in  German 
verse  by  E.  Wegener.     See  Nordischer  Telegraph,  No.  31. 

ST.  JULIAN  THE  FERRYMAN. 
Many  hundred  years  ago  there  lived  in  the  province  of 
Saiutonge  a  young  and  rich  nobleman,  whose  name  was 

o  5 


298  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

Julian.  His  chief  delight  was  in  the  chase,  and  he  found 
little  pleasure  in  prayer  and  exercises  of  piety. 

One  day,  when  following  a  hart,  he  penetrated  far  into 
the  deep  forest ;  but  when  he  seemed  to  be  on  the  point 
of  capturing  it,  the  animal  suddenly  stood  still,  turned  its 
head,  and  in  an  audible  voice  said  to  Julian :  ''  Stop, 
Julian,  and  cease  from  pursuing  me.  Think  rather  of 
averting  thy  appalling  destiny;  for  I  announce  unto  thee, 
that  with  thy  own  hand  thou  wilt  slay  both  father  and 
mother.^' 

Julian  was  horror-struck  at  this  dreadful  prediction,  and 
turning  his  horse,  rode  home,  firmly  resolved  to  flee  from 
his  native  country  and  never  to  return,  that  he  might  avoid 
the  fate  which,  according  to  the  words  of  the  hart,  hung 
over  him.  AVitliout  saying  a  word  to  his  parents,  without 
considering  how  he  was  to  support  himself,  he  let  his  horse 
go  whithersoever  it  would,  until  from  fatigue  it  could  pro- 
ceed no  further.  Having  no  money,  he  sold  it  and  bought 
a  lute,  with  which  he  continued  his  journey,  ever  straight 
forwards;  for  his  sole  remaining  wish  was  to  withdi'aw 
himself  from  his  paternal  abode  as  far  as  possible. 

A  year  had  passed,  when  one  evening,  faint  and  ill,  he 
reached  a  castle  in  the  Ardennes.  The  lord  of  the  castle, 
a  man  of  kind  disposition,  received  him  hospitably,  and 
desired  his  daughter,  whose  name  was  Basilissa,  to  take 
charge  of  the  poor  minstrel ;  for  he  was  an  enthusiastic 
lover  of  music,  both  instrumental  and  vocal.  But  when 
the  beautiful  maiden  brought  him  the  cup  to  drink,  and 
manifested  such  tender  solicitude  for  him,  his  heart  was 
seized  with  a  glowing  passion,  and  he  seemed  at  tlie  same 
moment  to  be  perfectly  recovered.  "When,  however,  he 
called  to  mind  that  now,  without  name  or  rank,  he  could 
never  aspire  to  the  hand  of  Basilissa,  his  heart  was  ready 
to  break.  For  a  long  time  he  knew  not  what  course  to 
follow,  but  at  length  resolved  on  parting  from  her  and 


NlJTU±:KL.Ai\l>iSU    XltAUliiUA^s. 


again  setting  ont  on  his  lonely  wandering.  On  tlie  third 
day,  therefore,  after  his  arrival  he  went  to  the  lord  of  the 
castle,  for  the  purpose  of  taking  leave;  but  the  good 
knight  would  not  allow  him  to  depart,  pressing  him  to 
prolong  his  stay,  a  request  in  which  Basilissa  joined,  and 
which  Julian  found  himself  quite  unable  to  withstand. 

Some  days  after,  there  was  a  great  feast  at  the  castle, 
and  Julian  sang  at  the  table  and  played  such  sweet  melo- 
dies that  all  were  enraptured.  On  the  following  morning 
a  splendid  joust  was  to  be  held,  of  which,  when  Julian  was 
apprized,  his  old  passion  rose  within  him,  and  he  prayed 
the  lord  of  the  castle  to  be  allowed  to  break  a  lance.  The 
permission  was  granted,  and  he  bore  himself  so  gallantly 
that  the  prize  was  awarded  to  him  in  preference  to  every 
other.  With  equal  bravery  he  conducted  himself  in  a  feud, 
in  which  his  host  was  shortly  afterwards  engaged,  and  vv^ho 
at  length  conceived  such  a  regard  for  him  that  he  gave 
him  his  only  daughter,  the  beautiful  Basilissa,  in  marriage. 
Shortly  after  these  events  his  father-in-law  died,  and  Julian 
became  lord  of  the  castle  and  surrounding  country. 

The  remembrance  of  the  dreadful  prediction  was,  how- 
ever, never  absent  from  his  mind,  and  fervent  as  were  his 
longings  to  see  his  parents  again,  he  never  ventured  even 
to  ask  tidings  of  them,  fearing  always  that  the  words  of 
the  hart  might  prove  true.  To  free  himself  from  this  de- 
pressing thought,  he  had  recourse  to  his  former  pastime, 
the  chase. 

To  Julian's  parents  the  loss  of  their  son  was  a  severe 
blow.  Their  happiness  was  at  an  end,  and  they  finally 
resolved  to  seek  him,  and  not  to  return  till  they  had  found 
him.  Clad  as  pilgrims,  they  set  out  on  their  wanderings ; 
they  went  from  province  to  province,  from  city  to  city, 
from  village  to  village,  everywhere  inquiring  after  their 
lost  son,  but  no  one  could  give  them  any  tidings.  At 
length  they  arrived  in  Belgium.     When  straying  in  the 


300  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

forest  of  Ardennes,  they  inquired  of  a  rustic  whether  he 
could  inform  them  of  a  shelter,  and  he  directed  them  to 
the  neighbouring  castle,  where  they  arrived  faint  and  help- 
less in  the  morning.  The  castle  was  their  son^s.  They 
knocked  and  were  admitted  by  the  porter.  Julian  had 
been  out  in  the  forest  since  sunrise ;  the  servants  therefore 
waked  Basilissa,  who  soon  came  forth  and  gave  the  aged 
couple  a  friendly  reception.  When  they  had  recruited  their 
strength  they  related  their  history  to  the  lady  of  the  castle, 
and  how  they  had  been  wandering  for  four  years  in  search 
of  their  son.  Basilissa  immediately  knew  them  for  the 
parents  of  her  consort ;  for  he  had  frequently  spoken  to 
her  of  his  departure  from  home,  though  without  divulging 
the  cause.  Overjoyed  at  the  thought  of  bearing  such  glad 
tidings  to  her  husband,  and  at  the  same  time  of  so  agree- 
ably surprising  the  venerable  pair,  she  kept  silence,  and 
caused  them  to  lie  down  in  her  own  bed,  that  they  might 
rest  their  weary  limbs.  Awaiting  Julianas  return,  she 
then  went  to  church,  there  to  render  thanks  for  the  happy 
event. 

Julianas  horse  had  in  the  mean  time  wounded  itself  by 
stumbling  over  a  stone,  through  which  accident  he  was 
compelled  to  return.  On  arriving  at  the  castle,  he  in- 
stantly proceeded  to  his  bedchamber,  where  he  expected 
still  to  find  his  wife,  when  seeing  in  his  bed  a  man  with  a 
woman  dressed  in  Basilissa's  clothes,  he  instantlv  thoudit 
that  she  was  faithless,  and  grasping  his  sword,  in  his  blind 
fury  he  stabbed  both  the  sleepers. 

Could  he  have  a  presentiment  how  terribly  he  had  ful- 
filled the  prediction  ?  for  scarcely  had  he  done  the  deed 
when  he  was  seized  with  bitter  repentance.  Pursued  by 
the  wail  and  last  groans  of  his  victims,  lie  was  rushing 
from  the  castle,  when  the  pious  Basilissa  returning  from 
church  stept  up  to  him.  Julian  started  as  one  wlu)  trusted 
not  his  own  eyesight.     She  wished  to  draw  him  into  their 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIOXS.  301 

bedchamber,  that  be  migbt  enjoy  tbe  pleasure  of  again 
seeing  bis  parents ;  but  be  beld  ber  back,  requesting  only 
an  answer  to  tbe  question,  wbo  tbe  sleepers  were  tbat  be 
bad  found  tbere  ?  When  Basilissa  had  informed  him  what 
they  had  related  to  ber,  he  fell  to  the  earth  as  if  struck 
by  lightning.  Trembling  with  a  dreadful  presentiment, 
she  hurried  to  the  chamber;  she  shook  them  both,  but 
she  shook  two  corpses,  and  with  a  cry  of  horror  she  threw 
herself  on  the  blood-stained  bed. 

It  was  long  before  Julian  recovered  his  recollection. 
He  then  with  tearful  eyes  confessed  all,  and  communi- 
cated to  her  the  hart^s  prediction.     ^'^  And  now,"  said  he, 
"  farewell,  beloved  of  my  heart,  and  pray  for  me  and  for- 
give me  j  for  I  go  from  this  place  to  atone  for  my  sins.""^ 
Basilissa  then  falling  on  his  neck  answered :  "  No,  that 
you  shall  not  do,  my  beloved  husband ;  but  if  you  persist 
in  doing  so,  I  will  be  your  companion  whithersoever  you 
go."     And  she  was  so,  and  on  the  following  morning  left 
the  castle  with  Julian,  and  they  continued  their  journey 
till  they  came  to  a  little  river  called  the  Dender,  and  to 
the  spot  on  which  the  town  of  Ath  now  stands.     At  that 
time  pilgrims,  on  their  way  to  the  image  of  our  blessed 
Lady  of  Hal,  had,  at  the  risk  of  their  lives,  to  ford  the 
river,   there  being  no  bridge  there.     For  which  reason 
Julian  formed  the  resolution  to  build  a  hut  on  the  bank 
and  buy  a  boat,  in  which  to  ferry  the  pilgrims  across,  by 
which  pious  work  he  hoped  to  obtain  forgiveness  of  his 
great  sin. 

For  seven  years  he  had  ferried  from  one  bank  to  the 
other,  when  one  dark,  rainy  night,  after  be  had  retired 
fatigued  with  Basilissa  to  their  bed  of  straw,  they  heard 
from  the  opposite  bank  a  person  in  a  mournful  voice  beg- 
ging to  be  ferried  over.  Julian  instantly  rose,  dressed 
himself,  and,  in  spite  of  wind  and  weather,  turned  his  boat 
towards  the  left  bank  of  the  river.     Basihssa  knelt  by  bis 


302  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

side  in  the  frail  skifT  and  prayed ;  for  the  water  raged  so 
wildly  that  they  expected  to  sink  at  every  instant.  On 
reaching  the  other  shore  they  found  an  old  pilgrim  with 
dripping  garments,  lying  on  the  earth  and  groaning  pite- 
ously.  They  immediately  threw  their  cloaks  over  him  and 
bore  him  into  the  bark,  which  now  appeared  to  push  itself 
off,  and  rapidly  yet  tranquilly  to  steer  towards  the  hut ; 
though  the  waves  were  angrily  dashing  around  it,  and  the 
winds  awfully  raging.  When  they  reached  the  bank,  Julian 
fastened  the  boat,  while  Basilissa  prepared  their  straw  bed 
for  the  pilgrim,  they  themselves  lying  by  him  on  the  hard, 
cold  earth,  having  previously  kindled  a  fire  and  refreshed 
the  aged  man  with  some  warm  milk. 

But  suddenly  a  brilliant  light  diffused  itself  in  the  hut, 
the  pilgrim  rose,  his  wet  garments  fell  off,  and  he  stood 
in  divine  majesty  and  splendour.  It  was  the  Lord  Jesus 
himself.  Julian  and  Basilissa  fell  on  their  knees  trembling ; 
but  Jesus  said:  "Thou  hast  made  sufficient  atonement, 
Julian ;  thy  sin  is  forgiven  thee,  and  I  await  thee  and  thy 
faithful  wife."    With  these  words  he  vanished. 

On  the  following  day,  as  some  persons  were  fishing  in 
the  neighbourhood,  they  heard  melodies  of  heavenly  sweet- 
ness issuing  from  the  hut.  On  approaching  and  opening- 
it,  they  found  husband  and  wife  kneeling,  dead,  encircled 
with  a  heavenly  light.  They  buried  them  honourably. 
At  a  later  period  many  miracles  have  taken  place  at  their 
grave,  and  on  the  spot  where  the  hut  had  stood  was  erected 
the  beautiful  church  still  existing  of  the  hospitable,  holy 
Julian. 

LOHENGRIN  AND  ELSA.— LOHENGRIN  AND  BELAYE. 

Many  hundred  years  ago  there  was  a  duke  of  Brabant 
and  Limburg,  who  had  a  beautiful  daughter  named  Elsa. 
When  this  duke  lay  on  his  death-bed,  he  commended  his 
daughter  to  one  of  his  vassals,  whose  name  was  Frederic  of 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  OUD 

Telramonde^  and  who  was  everywhere  known  and  honoured 
as  a  vahant  warrior,  but  was  particularly  esteemed,  because 
at  Stockholm  in  Sweden  he  had  overcome  a  fierce  dragon, 
and  thereby  acquired  a  hero's  fame.     But  Frederic  soon 
became  proud  and  presumptuous,  and  would  make  Elsa 
his  wife,  and  even  falsely  asserted  that  she  had  engaged 
her  word  to  be  faithful  to  him.     But  Elsa  charged  him 
with    falsehood,  and  gave  no  ear  to  his  suit.      At  this 
Frederic  was  bitterly  exasperated,  and  more  resolved  than 
ever  to  compel  her  to  give  him  her  hand.    With  this  ob- 
ject he  laid  a  complaint  before  the  emperor  Henry,  sur- 
named  the  Fowler  ^,  and  obtained  from  him  a  decree  that 
Elsa  should  choose  a  champion,  who  in  honourable  combat 
should  engage  with  Frederic,  that  the  voice  of  God  might 
decide  either  for  or  against  him.     But  Elsa  would  select 
no  champion,  placing  her  sole  hope  in  fervent  prayer  to 
the  Lord,  from  whom  alone  she  expected  help  and  support. 
One  day  at  Montsalva  on  the  Graal  the  bells  were  rung 
w^hich  are  always  a  token  that  some  one  is  in  need  of 
immediate  aid,  and  Lohengrin,  the  son  of  Parcival,  w^as 
chosen  as  deliverer  of  the  oppressed.   While  his  horse  w^as 
standing  ready  for  its  rider,  w4io  was  in  the  act  of  setting 
his  foot  in  the  stirrup,  behold,  a  swan  appeared  on  the 
v/ater,  drawing  a  little  boat  after  it.     Lohengrin  regarded 
this  as  a  sign  from  heaven,  and  ordered  his  horse  to  be  led 
back  to  its  stable,  for  he  would  enter  the  boat  and  follow 
the  swan.     And  he  did  so,  and  commended  himself  to 
God,  and  in  firm  reUance  on  him,  took  no  food  with  him. 
After  the  swan  had  conducted  him  for  five  days,  it  plunged 
its  bill  into  the  w^ater  and  drew  out  a  small  fish,  which  it 
shared  with  Lohengrin,   and  then  continued  its  course. 
But  let  us  now  return  to  Elsa,  the  daughter  of  the  duke 
of  Brabant  and  Limburg. 

Elsa  had  in  the  mean  while  called  all  her  vassals  to- 
1  He  reigned  from  919  to  936. 


301  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

gcther  ;  for  one  day  passed  after  another^  and  no  one  came 
forward  in  her  cause.  But  when  these  had  assembled, 
there  came  the  swan  with  the  boat  swimming  up  the 
Scheldt,  having  Lohengrin  on  board,  sleeping  on  his 
shield.  When  the  swan  reached  the  bank,  Lohengrin 
woke,  sprang  on  shore,  and  was  received  by  Elsa  with 
unutterable  joy  and  gratification.  His  helmet,  shield  and 
sword  were  then  brought  from  the  boat,  when  the  swan 
disappeared,  returning  by  the  way  it  came. 

When  the  first  demonstrations  of  joy  were  over,  Lohen- 
grin asked  the  duchess  under  what  evil  she  was  suffering, 
and  learned  from  her  how  Frederic  was  striving  to  ensnare 
her,  and  had  falsely  accused  her  to  the  emperor,  and  that 
now  her  cause  was  to  be  decided  by  the  judgement  of  God. 
Lohengrin  then  assured  her  that  he  would  be  her  cham- 
pion, when  Elsa  immediately  assembled  all  her  kindred 
and  subjects,  who  came  to  Saarbriicken,  whence  in  a  body 
they  proceeded  to  Mentz.  The  emperor,  who  was  keeping 
his  court  at  Frankfurt,  came  also  thither,  and  the  day  for 
the  combat  was  fixed,  and  the  lists  erected.  After  both 
champions  had  asserted  the  justness  of  their  cause,  the 
conflict  began;  but  Lohengrin  proved  victorious,  and 
Frederic  of  Telramonde  fell,  and  confessed  that  he  had 
falsely  accused  the  duchess  Elsa,  in  punishment  for  which, 
according  to  the  usage  of  the  time,  he  suffered  death  by 
the  axe.  In  reward,  Lohengrin  obtained  the  hand  of  the 
fair  Elsa  of  Brabant,  and  their  nuptials  were  celebrated 
with  suitable  magnificence.  But  Lohengrin  at  the  same 
time  besought  his  wife  never  to  ask  his  name  nor  whence 
he  came ;  for  if  she  did  either  the  one  or  the  other,  he 
could  no  longer  continue  with  her. 

Lohengrin  and  Elsa  had  long  lived  together  in  peace 
and  happiness,  and  he  proved  a  wise  and  just  prince  in 
the  territories  of  Brabant  and  Limburg ;  but  it  chanced 
that  in  a  tournament  he  dangerously  wounded  the  duke  of 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  305 

Cleves  in  the  arm_,  at  which  the  duchess  being  exasperated^ 
and  at  the  same  time  envious  of  Elsa,  said  to  her :  "  Your 
Lohengrin  may  be  a  doughty  hero^  and  possibly  a  Chris- 
tian also ;  but  no  one  knows  either  whence  he  springs  or 
who  he  isj  so  strangely  did  he  make  his  appearance  here." 
At  these  words  the  fair  Elsa  was  sorely  troubled,  and  at 
night,  when  lying  in  bed  with  her  husband,  she  wept 
bitterly.  Lohengrin  observing  this,  said  to  her:  "My 
dear  wife,  why  do  you  weep  ?"  To  which  Elsa  answered  : 
"  The  duchess  of  Cleves  has  caused  me  bitter  affliction.''' 
Hearing  this,  Lohengrin  was  silent  and  inquired  no 
further.  The  following  night  the  same  question  was  asked 
and  the  same  answer  given,  but  Lohengrin  still  preserved 
silence,  refraining  from  all  further  inquiry.  But  the  third 
night  the  fair  Elsa,  quite  unable  longer  to  preserve  her 
compliance  with  her  husband^s  injunction,  thus  addressed 
him :  "  My  beloved  lord  and  husband,  I  beseech  you  to 
tell  me  where  you  were  born  and  from  whom  you 
spring ;  for  my  heart  assures  me  that  you  must  be  of  a 
very  noble  race.'' 

At  daybreak  Lohengrin  rose  and  disclosed  to  her  where 
he  was  born  and  from  whom  he  sprang,  and  that  Parcival 
was  his  father,  that  God  had  sent  him  to  her  from  the 
Graal,  and  also  that  he  could  no  longer  live  with  her. 
Causing  then  his  two  children  to  be  brought  to  him,  he 
kissed  them  affectionately,  gave  them  his  horn  and  his 
sword,  exhorting  them  to  make  a  good  use  of  it.  To  Elsa 
he  gave  a  ring  which  he  had  formerly  received  from  his 
mother.  When  all  this  was  done,  the  swan  came  again 
with  the  boat,  into  which  Lohengrin  stept  and  glided  away 
down  the  Scheldt.  Elsa  had  sunk  in  a  swoon ;  when  she 
recovered,  she  was  afflicted  and  wept  bitterly  for  the  loss 
of  her  beloved  consort,  which  she  never  ceased  to  deplore. 

But  Lohengrin  arrived  in  the  land  of  Lyzaboria,  where 
he  espoused  the  beautiful  Belaye,  who  loved  him  beyond 


306  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

measure,  and  was  particularly  cautious  not  to  make  any 
inquiry  respecting  his  descent,  and  was  always  sad  when 
he  was  not  with  her,  being  in  constant  fear  of  his  proving 
inconstant.  But  Lohengrin  could  not  always  sit  at  home, 
and  therefore  went  frequently  to  the  chase ;  at  which  time 
the  fair  Belaye  would  utter  no  word,  but  would  sit  as  if 
life  had  taken  its  flight,  and  she  was  under  the  influence 
of  some  evil  spell. 

One  of  her  women  then  advised  her,  that,  in  order  to 
attach  Lohengrin  more  closely  to  her,  she  should  cut  a 
piece  of  flesh  from  his  side  and  eat  it.  But  Belaye  was  in- 
dignant at  the  suggestion,  and  declared  she  would  sooner 
suffer  herself  to  be  buried  alive  than  hurt  even  a  finger  of 
her  husband :  she  at  the  same  time  withdrew  from  her 
woman  all  her  favour  and  confidence.  Hereupon  this 
treacherous  woman  went  and  uttered  her  base  falsehoods 
to  the  friends  of  the  beautiful  Belaye,  who  immediately 
resolved  to  cut  off"  from  Lohengrin  a  piece  of  his  flesh, 
in  order  that  Belaye  might  recover.  Therefore,  when  the 
hero  had  one  day  returned  fatigued  from  the  chase  and 
had  fallen  asleep,  they  proceeded  to  their  nefarious  work. 
But  Lohengrin  at  the  same  time  had  a  dream,  in  which  he 
saw  thousands  of  swords  directed  against  him,  when  start- 
ing from  his  sleep,  he  darted  such  fierce  looks  on  those 
base  men  that  they  all  trembled ;  then  raising  his  hand, 
he  laid  about  him  and  slew  more  than  a  hundred  of  them. 
But  they,  recovering  courage  and  helping  one  another, 
succeeded  in  inflicting  an  incurable  wound  in  his  left  arm. 
On  seeing  this,  they  felt  in  their  hearts  overcome  by  the 
valour  he  had  displayed,  and  fell  at  his  feet. 

When  Belaye  was  informed  of  this,  she  died  of  grief 
and  horror,  and  was  embalmed  with  Lohengrin,  placed  in 
a  coffin,  and  buried  with  great  solemnity.  At  a  later  period 
a  convent  was  erected  over  their  grave,  and  the  bodies  of 
both  are  there  still  shown  to  pilgrims.     And  all  this  hap- 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  307 

pened  five  himdred  years  after  the  birth  of  our  beloved 
Lord  ^,  and  from  that  time  the  country  of  Lyzaboria  has, 
after  Lohengrin,  been  called  Lothriugia. 

THE  KNIGHT  AND  THE  SWAN. 

Duke  Godfrey  of  Brabant  died  leaving  no  male  heirs ; 
but  had  in  his  testament  provided  that  his  territories 
should  devolve  on  his  duchess  and  his  daughter.  To  this, 
however,  his  brother,  the  powerful  duke  of  Saxony,  paid 
little  regard,  but,  in  defiance  of  the  complaints  of  the 
widow  and  orphan,  took  possession  of  the  country,  which 
according  to  the  German  law  could  not  be  inherited  by  a 
female. 

The  duchess  hereupon  resolved  to  lay  her  case  before 
the  king,  and  as  Charles  came  shortly  after  into  Belgium, 
and  purposed  holding  a  diet  at  Nymwegen,  she  appeared 
there  with  her  daughter,  and  demanded  justice.  The  duke 
of  Saxony  was  there  also,  for  the  purpose  of  answering  the 
complaint. 

It  happened  as  the  king  was  looking  through  a  window 
of  the  court,  that  he  observed  a  white  swan  swimming 
towards  him  on  the  Rhine,  drawing  after  it,  by  a  silver 
chain,  a  little  boat,  in  which  lay  a  sleeping  knight ;  his 
shield  was  his  pillow,  and  near  him  lay  his  helm  and 
hauberk.  The  swan  navigated  like  a  skilful  seaman,  and 
brought  the  boat  to  land.  At  this  spectacle  Charles  and 
his  court  were  greatly  surprised ;  every  one  forgot  the 
complaint  of  the  two  princesses,  and  ran  down  to  the  river. 
In  the  mean  while  the  knight  had  woke  and  quitted  the 
bark.  The  king  received  him  courteously,  took  him  by 
the  hand,  and  led  him  towards  the  castle.  On  leaving 
the  boat  the  young  hero  said  to  the  bird  :  "  Proceed  pros- 
perously on  thy  way  back,  dear  swan  !     AVhen  I  again 

1  A  singular  anachronism.     See  p.  303,  note. 


308  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

require  thee  I  will  call  thee."  The  swan  instantly  began 
its  course,  and  with  the  boat  was  soon  out  of  sight.  Every 
one  regarded  the  strange  guest  with  eager  curiosity; 
Charles  returned  to  his  tribunal,,  and  assigned  a  seat  to 
the  young  knight  among  the  other  princes. 

The  duchess  of  Brabant,  in  the  presence  of  her  beau- 
tiful daughter,  now  gave  a  full  statement  of  her  complaint, 
after  which  the  duke  of  Saxony  made  his  defence,  finally 
offering  to  do  battle  for  his  rights,  and  calling  on  the 
duchess  to  name  a  champion  to  oppose  him  in  defence  of 
her  cause.  At  this  she  was  overcome  with  fear,  for  the 
duke  was  a  renowned  warrior,  against  whom  no  one  would 
venture  to  contend.  In  vain  did  she  cast  her  eyes  round 
the  hall,  no  one  appeared  ready  to  offer  himself.  At  length 
the  knight,  who  had  been  brought  thither  by  the  swan, 
arose  and  offered  to  be  her  champion ;  whereupon  both 
sides  armed  for  the  conflict,  when  after  a  long  and  obs- 
tinate strife,  victory  declared  herself  on  the  side  of  the 
knight  of  the  swan.  The  duke  of  Saxony  lost  his  life,  and 
the  inheritance  of  the  duchess  was  again  free. 

Then  the  duchess  and  her  daughter  made  obeisance  to 
the  hero  who  had  so  gallantly  fought  in  their  behalf,  and 
who  accepted  the  offered  hand  of  the  daughter,  though 
under  the  condition,  that  she  should  never  ask  whence  he 
came,  nor  from  what  race  he  sprang;  for  if  she  did,  he 
must  forsake  her. 

The  duke  and  the  young  duchess  had  two  children,  who 
were  both  amiable  and  well-nurtured;  but  their  mother 
was  ever  more  and  more  weighed  down  by  the  reflection 
that  she  knew  not  who  was  their  father ;  till  at  length 
she  ventured  on  the  forbidden  inquiry.  The  knight  was 
fearfully  affected  and  said  :  "  Now  hast  thou  destroyed 
our  happiness  and  seen  me  for  the  last  time."  The 
duchess  repented,  but  it  was  too  late  ;  all  the  people  fell 
at  his  feet  and  implored  him  to  remain.     But  the  warrior 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  6{j\) 

armed  himself,  and  tlie  swan  came  swimming  with  the 
same  Uttle  boat.  He  then  kissed  both  his  children,  bade 
his  wife  farewell,  and  gave  his  benediction  to  all  the 
people ;  after  which  he  entered  the  boat,  went  his  way 
and  never  retm-ned.  The  duchess  was  sorely  afflicted  at 
her  loss,  but,  nevertheless,  educated  her  children  with 
great  care.  From  these  children  many  noble  races  derive 
their  descent, — the  houses  of  Gelderland  and  Cleves,  also 
the  counts  of  Rheineck,  all  of  whom  bear  the  swan  in 
their  coat- armour. 

GODFREY  OF  BOUILLON  AND  THE  SWAN. 

While  the  valiant  duke  Godfrey  of  Bouillon  lay  with  his 
army  of  crusaders  before  the  holy  city  of  Jerusalem,  he 
one  day  looked  towards  heaven  and  perceived  a  flying  swan. 
Four  times  it  flew  round  his  head,  and  having  so  flown, 
it  rose  a  little,  then  flew  towards  Jerusalem,  to  a  tower, 
where  it  descended  :  and  that  was  the  tower  through  which 
Godfrey,  in  storming  the  city,  forced  an  entrance. 

THE  KNIGHT  WITH  THE  SWAN. 

In  the  kingdom  of  Lillcfort,  which  lay  in  Flanders, 
there  lived  in  days  of  yore  a  king  whose  name  was  Pirion, 
and  who  had  a  wicked  woman  for  his  wife,  named  Mata- 
bruna.  By  this  woman  he  had  a  son,  named  Oriant,  who, 
on  the  death  of  his  father,  was  crowned  king  of  Lillcfort. 

It  happened  that  King  Oriant  with  his  nobles  rode  out 
to  the  chase,  and  saw  a  hart,  which  they  pursued  for  a 
considerable  time.  At  length  it  sprang  into  a  brook  and 
thus  escaped  from  the  hunters.  Oriant  on  seeing  this 
turned  his  horse  and  came  to  a  fountain  where  he  dis- 
mounted, and  sat  down  under  a  tree  to  rest.  While  thus 
sitting  there  came  a  beautiful  and  noble  maiden  with  four 
female  attendants,  a  knight  and  two  man-servants.     Ad- 


310  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

dressing  Oriant,  who  was  sitting  with  his  dogs  by  his 
side,  she  said  :  "  Sir,  why  do  you  hunt  in  my  domain, 
and  who  has  given  you  permission  so  to  do  ?  I  saw  how 
the  hart  you  were  in  chase  of  escaped  from  you  and  leapt 
into  the  water ;  but  had  you  taken  it,  it  would  not  have 
been  yours.    I  desire  that  you  will  withdraw  from  lience.^^ 

When  King  Oriant  heard  the  fair  Beatrix  speaking  so 
wisely,  he  formed  the  design  of  making  her  his  wife,  and 
said  in  a  soft  voice  :  "  Beautiful  damsel,  I  would  not 
willingly  act  in  opposition  to  your  will,  but  here  I  may 
lawfully  hunt,  for  I  am  Oriant,  king  of  Lillefort,  and  all 
things  hereabout  are  at  my  disposal .^^  When  the  knight, 
who  was  named  Samari,  heard  this,  he  sprang  from  his 
horse,  fell  on  his  knees,  greeted  the  king  and  said :  "  Sir 
king,  forgive  my  lady  for  that  wherein  she  has  erred  to- 
wards you ;  for  she  knew  you  not,  and  is  now  fully  sen- 
sible of  her  fault.^''  ^^  It  is  already  forgiven,^^  answered 
the  king,  "but  she  must,  nevertheless,  atone  for  it.^^ 
Then  addressing  himself  to  the  lady,  he  said  :  "  Fair 
maiden,  if  you  will  be  my  bride,  I  will  crown  you  as  queen 
of  Lillefort. ^^  And  having  made  this  promise  and  con- 
firmed it  by  oaths,  he  conducted  the  beautiful  Beatrix  to 
his  palace,  where  the  marriage  should  be  solemnized  with 
great  pomp  and  rejoicings. 

When  Matabruna  heard  that  Oriant  was  about  to  marry 
the  damsel  that  he  had  met  while  hunting,  she  went  to 
him  boiling  with  anger.  But  Oriant  laughed  when  he 
saw  her,  and  said  :  "  Rejoice,  for  I  have  found  the  most 
beautiful  female  that  lives  on  the  earth.^'  ^Matabruna 
filled  with  rage  answered :  "  My  dear  son,  it  causes  me 
unutterable  grief,  that  you,  who  could  have  to  wife  the 
greatest  lady  in  the  world,  should  marry  a  simple  indivi- 
dual.*^ But  Oriant  persisted,  and  the  wicked  mother  also 
appeared  content,  though  in  her  heart  there  rankled  the 
bitterest  malice  against  Beatrix. 


NETHERLANDISH  TKAHlTlOiNS.  Oil 

When  Oriant  had  for  a  time  enjoyed  the  love  of  the 
fair  Beatrix^  she  became  pregnant.  At  this  time  an  enemy- 
having  invaded  the  territory  of  Lillefort^  the  king  with  his 
chivah-y  prepared  to  take  the  field ;  but  previous  to  his  de- 
parture^ he  commended  his  wife  to  the  tender  care  of  his 
mother,  which  she  promised  to  bestow^  and  then  vfith 
many  tears  bade  them  farewell. 

But  scarcely  had  the  king  departed  when  Matabruna 
began  to  carry  her  wicked  designs  into  effect.     She  sum- 
moned the  midwife  to  her  presence,  and  caused  her  to 
swear  never  to  divulge  that  which  she  was  about  to  impart 
to  her.     When  the  midwife  had  so  sworn,  Matabruna  said  : 
^'  You  are  well  aware  what  a  detriment  my  son^s  marriage 
has  been  to  the  country ;  for  which  reason  I  would  fain 
estrange  him  from  his  wife,  which  it  will  be  easy  to  effect, 
as  she  is  pregnant.^^     To  this  the  woman  answered :  "  If 
it  seem  good  to  you,  I  will  destroy  the  child.^^     "  That  is 
not  enough,^'  replied  Matabruna ;   "  Beatrix  is  very  large, 
and  will,  therefore,  most  probably  bear  twins :  these  you 
shall  put  aside,  and  in  their  stead  show  her  two  young 
dogs.     I  will  then  give  the  children  to  one  who  will  carry 
them  away,  so  that  they  shall  no  more  be  heard  of.^^     To 
this  plan  the  midwife  agreed  and  promised  to  carry  it  out. 
When  the  time  for  Beatrixes  delivery  drew  near,  these 
wicked  women  held  two  puppies  in  readiness.     Instead, 
however,  of  two  children,  as  they  had  expected,  Beatrix 
bore  seven,  six  sons  and  a  daughter,  all  of  whom  had  silver 
chains  round  their  necks,   as  a  proof  of  their  mother^s 
nobility.    Bnt  this  in  nowise  deranged  Matabruna^s  plan  : 
she  took  seven  puppies,  and  caused  them  to  be  laid  in  the 
place  of  the  children,  when  the  midwife  exclaimed :  '^  0 
queen,  what  is  this  ?  you  have  brought  forth  seven  young 
dogs  !  "     Then  in  haste  came  Matabruna,  feigning  to  be 
greatly  hon-ified,  and  said  :  "  Make  away  with  the  animals 
and  bury  them,  that  the  king  may  preserve  his  honour 


61.^  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

and  the  affair  be  no  more  spoken  of."  Beatrix  in  the 
mean  while  lay  weak  and  senseless,  and  when  she  recovered, 
Matabruna  came,  and  with  cruel  words  reproached  her  for 
having  given  birth  to  seven  dogs ;  and  when  Beatrix  de- 
sired to  see  them,  they  were  brought  to  her.  At  the  sight 
of  them  she  was  horror-struck,  and  conscious  that  the  king 
would  now  withdraw  his  love  from  her  and  put  her  to 
death.  The  midwife  with  her  hypocritical  words  pretended 
to  console  her,  saying  that  the  king  should  know  nothing 
of  the  matter ;  but  Beatrix  was  not  to  be  comforted,  and 
saw  in  death  alone  the  end  of  her  sufferings. 

Matabruna  in  the  mean  time  called  to  her  a  servant 
named  Marcus,  and  said :  "  Friend,  thou  must  do  me  a 
service,  but  must  keep  it  a  secret.  The  queen  has  given 
birth  to  six  sons  and  a  daughter,  all  of  whom  bear  silver 
chains  round  their  necks,  a  sign  that  they  will  all  one  day 
be  great  thieves  and  murderers.  Therefore  must  they  be 
destroyed,  lest  they  bring  disgrace  on  the  king.  This  office 
thou  shalt  execute  ;  for  the  queen  believes  she  has  brought 
forth  seven  puppies. ^^  Marcus  promised  to  perform  her 
will,  took  the  seven  babes  in  his  cloak  and  rode  with  them 
into  the  forest.  But  when  he  saw^  how  beautiful  they 
w^ere,  he  was  struck  with  compassion,  and  resolved  to  let 
them  live ;  therefore  having  kissed  them  and  shed  many 
tears  over  them,  he  rode  back  to  Lillefort,  where  he  told 
Matabruna  that  he  had  destroyed  them,  who  was  over- 
joyed at  the  intelligence,  and  now  resolved  to  accomplish 
the  death  of  Beatrix. 

While  the  children  lay  piteously  moaning  in  the  forest, 
they  were  heard  by  an  old  man  who  dwelt  hard  by,  and 
who  on  coming  to  them  and  seeing  them  so  forsaken, 
burst  into  tears,  and  having  wrapt  them  in  his  cloak, 
carried  them  to  his  hut.  There  he  purposed  warming, 
and,  as  far  as  it  was  in  his  power,  feeding  them  ;  but  that 
was  rendered  needless,  God  having  sent  a  white  goat  to 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  313 

the  hut,  which  offered  her  teats  to  the  babes  and  allowed 
them  to  suck;  and  this  continued  until  they  grew  large 
and  ran  with  the  goat  into  the  thicket.  Then  the  old 
man,  who  was  named  Helias,  made  them  clothing  of  leaves, 
to  cover  their  nakedness. 

King  Oriant  had  in  the  mean  time  overcome  all  his 
enemies,  and  was  on  his  way  home ;  for  he  longed  greatly 
to  know  how  it  had  gone  wdth  his  beloved  wife.  But 
when  Matabruna  heard  that  he  was  coming,  she  hastened 
to  meet  him,  and  no  sooner  were  they  together  than  she 
began  to  weep,  and  said :  "Ah  my  dear  son,  I  rejoice  that 
you  are  here  again,  although  my  heart  is  oppressed  on 
account  of  your  wife.^^  On  hearing  this  the  king  was 
overwhelmed  with  surprise  and  apprehension,  and  asked 
what  had  taken  place,  whether  Beatrix  were  dead  or  alive  ? 
To  which  Matabruna  replied :  "  No,  she  is  not  dead,  but 
what  has  occurred  relating  to  her  is  so  shocking  that  I 
cannot  express  it.^^  The  king  then  urged  her,  and  in- 
sisted on  knowing  what  had  happened,  when  Matabruna 
informed  him  that  Beatrix  had  been  delivered  of  seven 
puppies,  and  called  the  midwife  as  a  witness.  This  news 
aflflicted  Oriant  beyond  measure,  and  he  went  ^^ith  one 
confidential  knight  into  a  chamber  and  wept  bitterly,  until 
overcome  with  the  weight  of  his  sorrow,  he  fell  asleep  ; 
while  the  noble  lady  Beatrix  was  in  another  apartment  no 
less  afflicted  than  her  consort. 

On  the  following  day  King  Oriant  assembled  his  coun- 
cil, ecclesiastic  and  secular,  and  said  :  "  I  have  caused  you 
to  meet  here  that  we  may  deliberate  on  what  is  to  be  done 
with  my  queen."  He  then  laid  the  whole  case  before 
them.  A  wise  man  thereupon  rose,  and  turning  towards 
the  king  said  :  "  Sir  king,  at  your  desire  I  will  answer 
you  in  the  name  of  all  these  lords,  and  say  what  seems 
good  to  us.  You  shall  not  put  the  queen  to  death,  but 
keep  her  in  honourable  custody,  and  leave  the  rest  to  God, 


314  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

who  will  make  the  truth  manifest/^  This  counsel  greatly 
comforted  the  king,  for  he  ardently  loved  Beatrix,  and  he 
therefore  adoj^ted  it,  although  a  wicked  knight  arose  and 
proposed  that  she  should  be  burnt.  So  Beatrix  was  con- 
ducted to  an  apartment  by  two  knights  and  honourably 
served. 

The  old  man  in  the  mean  time  took  the  most  affectionate 
care  of  the  children ;  in  one  of  the  boys  he  took  especial 
delight,  and  named  him  after  himself  Helias.  It  once 
happened  that  one  of  Matabruna's  huntsmen,  named 
Savari,  came  into  the  forest  and  found  the  children  with 
silver  chains  round  their  necks,  just  as  they  w^ere  eating 
apples  with  their  bread.  The  huntsman  found  great  plea- 
sure in  them  and  followed  them  into  the  hut,  that  he 
might  learn  who  they  were.  On  seeing  the  huntsman, 
the  old  man  was  alarmed  lest  some  harm  might  befall  the 
children ;  but  the  huntsman  having  dispelled  his  fears,  he 
related  to  him  how  he  had  found  and  reared  them. 

At  this  recital  the  huntsman  w^as  astonished,  and  on  his 
return  related  the  whole  to  Matabruna,  who  instantly  felt 
convinced  that  these  were  Oriant's  children,  and  therefore 
ordered  him  to  destroy  them,  threatening  him  that,  in  the 
event  of  his  non-compliance,  she  would  have  him  put  to 
death.  Surprised  and  terror-struck  the  man  promised  to 
execute  her  command,  at  which  Matabruna  was  tranquil- 
lized, and  going  to  those  who  had  conveyed  the  children 
to  the  forest,  she  caused  their  eyes  to  be  put  out. 

The  huntsman  Savari,  taking  seven  men  with  him,  went 
out  for  the  purpose  of  destroying  the  children.  On  their 
way  they  came  to  a  village  where  a  great  number  of  persons 
were  assembled,  in  consequence,  as  they  were  informed,  of 
a  woman  having  just  been  burnt  for  the  murder  of  her 
child.  This  touched  the  heart  of  Savari,  who  said  to  his 
associates :  "  Behold  a  mirror  for  us  :  this  woman  has 
been  burnt  for  having  killed  one  infant,  and  we  are  to 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  315 

destroy  seven /^  On  which  the  others  said  :  "  No^  we  will 
not  destroy  them^  but  only  take  their  chains  from  them 
and  carry  them  to  Matabriina^  as  a  token  of  their  death." 
They  then  entered  the  forest  and  came  to  the  hut,  where 
they  found  only  six  of  the  children,  the  old  man  havinp; 
taken  the  seventh  with  him  to  the  village,  to  fetch  bread. 
Seeing  the  strangers,  the  children  cried  piteously  from 
terror  and  surprise ;  but  Savari  said :  "  Be  still,  dear 
children,  we  will  not  harm  you,"  and  took  the  chains  from 
their  necks,  when  at  the  instant  all  the  six  were  trans- 
formed into  white  swans,  which  flew  up  in  the  air,  and 
mournfully  wailed  and  screamed.  At  this  Savari  and  his 
companions  were  so  terrified  that  they  fell  in  a  swoon, 
and  on  recovering  trembled  with  fright  and  said  :  "  Let 
us  quickly  leave  this  place,  we  have  already  been  here  too 
long :  we  will  take  the  six  chains  to  Matabruna,  and  say 
we  have  lost  the  seventh." 

But  when  they  brought  only  six  chains  to  Matabruna, 
she  was  bitterly  enraged,  and  would  not  be  pacified  until 
they  offered  to  pay  her  the  value  of  the  seventh,  which 
they  accordingly  did.  This  wicked  woman  then  sent  the 
chains  to  a  goldsmith  that  he  might  make  a  cup  of  them. 
When  the  goldsmith  had  placed  one  of  the  chains  in  the 
fire,  to  prove  whether  it  were  good  silver,  it  became  so 
heavy  that  it  outweighed  all  the  other  chains  together. 
He  therefore  gave  the  others  to  the  custody  of  his  wife, 
and  made  of  the  one  two  silver  beakers,  one  of  which  he 
took  to  Matabruna,  and  kept  the  other  for  himself. 

In  the  mean  while  the  old  man  with  Helias  had  re- 
turned home,  and  sought  for  the  six  children  without 
finding  them.  On  the  following  morning  Helias  came  to 
the  pond  in  which  the  swans  were  swimming,  and  was  not 
a  little  surprised  when  they  came  to  him.  He  gave  them 
bread  which  they  ate,  and  allowed  him  to  caress  them. 

p2 


816  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

And  this  he  repeated  from  day  to  day,  and  never  entered 
the  thicket  without  first  going  to  the  pond. 

But  God  heard  the  prayer  of  the  unhappy  mother, 
Beatrix,  and  let  it  be  announced  to  the  old  man,  that  the 
six  boys  and  the  girl  were  the  offspring  of  king  Oriant, 
and  also  that  six  of  them  had  been  transformed.  AMiere- 
upon  calling  Hehas  to  him,  the  old  man  told  him  all,  and 
Helias  then  took  leave  of  him,  recommending  the  swans 
to  his  tender  care.  He  then  went  to  the  king,  clad  in 
leaves,  barefooted  and  bareheaded,  with  a  club  in  his 
hand,  for  the  purpose  of  asserting  his  mother's  rights  and 
innocence. 

The  foes  of  the  hapless  Beatrix  had  in  the  mean  while 
prevailed  on  the  king  to  pronounce  judgement  on  her  and 
cause  her  to  suffer  death.  She  was,  consequently,  one 
day  brought  from  her  prison  and  conducted  before  Oriant, 
that  she  might  in  his  presence  defend  herself;  for  a  false 
i^night,  suborned  by  IMatabruna,  had  preferred  new  charges 
against  her.  On  entering  the  hall,  Beatrix  made  humble 
obeisance  to  the  king,  fell  on  her  knees,  and  prayed  so 
fervently  for  grace,  that  every  one,  and  the  king  above  all, 
felt  profound  pity  for  her.  Oriant  then  asked  the  false 
knight  of  what  he  accused  her,  and  the  knight  answered, 
that  she  had  wished  to  give  him  poison,  for  the  purpose 
of  destroying  both  the  king  and  Matabruna.  Thereupon 
the  king  rose  and  said  :  '^  Wife,  you  are  heavily  accused  ; 
what  say  you  ?  Tell  the  truth,  and  if  you  are  guilty,  you 
shall  die  a  shameful  death,  if  no  one  will  defend  your 
cause."  But  Beatrix  again  falling  on  her  knees  said: 
'^  My  dear  lord,  I  know  that  I  shall  find  no  one  who  will 
do  so ;  nevertheless,  I  swear  to  you  and  all  these  lords, 
that  I  have  never  harboured  such  a  thought,  so  true  as 
God  is  almighty,  to  whom  I  leave  all  vengeance  on  my 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  317 

When  sentence  of  death  was  about  to  be  pronounced, 
tbe  young  Helias  with  his  club  just  reached  the  royal 
courts  when  a  man  stepping  towards  him,  inquired  his 
business.    "  I  seek  the  false  knight,  Marcus/'  said  Helias. 
"  I  am  he,"  answered  the  man  in  jest,  whereupon  Hehas, 
raising  his  club,  struck  him  dead  to  the  earth.     At  this 
another  attendant  came  up  and  attempted  to  seize  him, 
but  HeUas  defended  himself  and  said  :  ''  Away  from  me, 
for  I  will  not  rest  until  I  have  slain  that  false  knight, 
Marcus,  who  has  unjustly  accused  my  mother.^'     When 
one  of  the  attendants  heard  this,  he  whispered  to  Hehas 
that  Marcus  was  then  in  the  hall,  that  he  had  accused 
Beatrix  of  much,  but  that  no   one  gave    credit   to  the 
charges,  as  the  queen  was  greatly  beloved.     When  Helias 
heard  the  man  speak  thus,  he  embraced  him,  and  the  man 
conducted  him  to  the  hall,  where   many  a  heavy  heart 
sighed  for  Beatrix.     And  Hehas  entered  the  hall,  and  ap- 
peared before  the  king,  who  immediately  asked  him  whom 
he  sought.     ''  I  seek  Marcus,"  said  he.    The  false  knight, 
Marcus,  being  pointed  out  to  him,  he  sprang  to  him, 
crying  aloud:  ''Thou  false  traitor!  I  challenge  thee  to 
battle,  and  thou  shalt  engage  with  me,"  at  the  same  time 
striking  him  such  a  blow  with  his  fist  that  Marcus  fell  to 
the  earth,  and  would  have  been  slain  outright,  had  not  the 
other  knights  stept  forth  and  parted  them.    On  seeing  this, 
the  king  said  to  Hehas  :  ''  What  makes  thee  so  daring  in 
my  presence  ?  "     The  youth  answered  :  "  Sir,  1  am  come 
hither  to  tell  you  truly  all  that  has  taken  place."     ^'  Do 
BO,"   said   the  king,   and  Helias  proceeded:    "My  dear 
mother,  cease  now  to  weep  and  mourn,  for  I  will  restore 
you  to  happiness."    When  the  king  heard  these  words,  he 
was  greatly  astonished  ;  but  Helias,  turning  towards  him, 
said  :  ''  Sir,  be  it  known  to  you  that  it  is  your  mother 
]\Iatabruna  alone  who  has  caused  so  much  evil  to  my 
mother."     And  thereupon  he  related  to  the  king  every- 


318  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

thing,  from  beginning  to  end_,  and  offered  to  remain  as  a 
prisoner  at  the  court,  until  the  truth  of  his  account  should 
have  been  confirmed  by  witnesses.  At  this  the  king  was 
still  more  astonished,  and  demanded  of  Beatrix  what  she 
knew  of  the  matter,  who  answered  :  ^'  Sir,  I  know  nothing ; 
for  when  I  was  in  travail,  I  was  overcome  with  pain,  and 
knew  not  what  took  place.  Whether  your  mother  has 
done  good  or  evil  will  be  made  to  appear.  Into  the  hands 
of  God  and  this  stripling  I  give  the  defence  of  my  honour, 
and  pray  you  to  supply  him  with  whatever  he  may  require 
for  the  conflict. ^^ 

The  queen  was  then  led  to  a  fair  apartment,  and  the 
king  proceeded  to  his  mother,  Matabruna,  to  whom  he 
related  all  that  had  passed.  She  changed  colour  on  hear- 
ing it,  but  hoped  by  smooth  words  to  conceal  her  treachery. 
The  king,  however,  gave  no  heed  to  them,  but  went  and 
ordered  Marcus  to  be  committed  to  prison.  He  then 
caused  beautiful  armour  to  be  prepared  for  Helias,  and 
afterwards  went,  as  if  going  to  the  chase,  to  visit  the  old 
man  in  the  forest,  that  from  him  he  might  hear  a  confir- 
mation of  what  the  youth  had  related.  The  old  man^s 
narrative  tallied  in  every  particular  with  what  he  had 
heard  from  TIclias,  and  the  king  was  bitterly  grieved  on 
account  of  the  injustice  Beatrix  had  suffered  at  his  hands. 

On  his  return  he  instantly  set  the  queen  at  libcrt}',  and 
ordered  Matabruna  to  be  cast  into  prison  and  to  be  guarded 
by  four  attendants.  He  then  ordered  Marcus  before  him, 
that  he  might  do  battle  with  Helias.  ^^larcus,  on  enter- 
ing the  lists,  felt  weighed  down  with  apprehension,  though 
he  would  not  let  it  appear,  but  with  a  loud  voice  called  to 
Helias  :  "  Come,  thou  foolish  stripling ;  it  shall  soon  be 
seen  what  thou  canst  do  against  mc.^^  Helias  answered  : 
"  O,  thou  false  traitor,  I  rejoice  in  having  to  contend  with 
thee,  to  avenge  my  mother,  and  defend  her  honour  !  " 
They  then  rushed  to  the  encounter,  and  Helias  struck  the 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  319 

false  knight  together  with  his  horse  to  the  earth,  whereat 
Marcus  enraged  and  astounded,  exclaimed :  "  Stripling  ! 
though  such  be  thy  prowess,  thou  shalt,  nevertheless,  soon 
feel  the  strength  of  my  arm/^     To  which  Helias  replied : 
"  Come  boldly  on,  I  fear  thee  not/^     Hehas  having  now 
somewhat  lowered  his  lance,  Marcus  took  advantage  of  the 
circumstance,  and  treacherously  wounded  him  in  a  place 
that  was  unprotected,   so  that  the  blood   flowed.     The 
people  were  struck  with  apprehension  at  this  mishap,  but 
God  did  not  forsake  Helias.    On  seeing  his  blood  flow,  he 
became  yet  more  embittered,  and  cried  to  Marcus  :  "  O, 
thou  false  traitor,  was  it  not  enough  for  thee  to  attempt 
the  destruction  of  my  mother,  but  thou  must  deal  treache- 
rously by  me  ?     But  with  God^s  aid  I  will  requite  thee  !  " 
Then  rushing  a  second  time  against  each  other,  Helias 
struck  his  adversary's  helmet  from  his  head,  and  grasping 
his  sword,  so  assailed  him  that  he  could  not  move  a  limb, 
and  smote  ofl"  his  right  arm.     When  the  traitor  found 
himself  overcome,  he  yielded   himself  to  the   mercy  of 
Helias,  and  said :    ^'  Youth,  thou  hast  conquered  me,  I 
yield,  tell  me  w^ho  thou  art.''     Helias  answered  :  "  I  am 
a  son  of  King  Oriant  and  his  faithful  queen,  Beatrix,  and 
must  see  thee  dead  before  I  quit  these  lists.'^    '^  Grant  me 
my  life  and  make  me  thy  captive,'^  said  Marcus,  "  that  I 
may  confess  all ;  and  send  for  the  goldsmith  who  had  the 
chains."     While  he  was  thus  speaking,  the  judges  of  the 
field  approached,  and  adjudged  the  victory  to  Helias,  who 
desired  them  instantly  to  summon  King  Oriant,  his  queen 
and  all  the  lords ;  and  when  this  was  done,  Marcus  re- 
lated all  that  had  taken  place,  and  when  he  had  finished 
his  confession,  the  king,  clasping  his  beloved  wife  in  his 
arms,  with  tearful  eyes  implored  her  forgiveness.     They 
afterwards  all  proceeded  to  the  palace,  and  rendered  thanks 
to  God  for  the  victory  of  Helias  ;  but  the  false  knight  was 
hung  by  the  legs  on  a  gibbet. 


320  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

After  these  events  had  taken  place,  and  great  feastings 
and  tournaments  had  been  held,  the  king  summoned 
Matabruna^s  goldsmith  before  him,  that  he  might  ascer- 
tain the  truth  respecting  the  silver  chains.  The  goldsmith 
brought  with  him  the  five  chains  and  the  beaker,  and  re- 
lated to  the  king  the  story  of  the  sixth.  When  he  had 
finished,  the  king  said :  "  You  speak  like  an  honest  man, 
and  therefore  all  is  forgiven/-'  The  king  and  the  queen 
then  took  the  chains,  kissed  them,  and  wept  for  their 
children,  who  had  been  turned  into  swans.  Then  came 
the  other  Marcus,  whose  eyes  jMatabruna  had  caused  to  be 
put  out,  and  Oriant  asked  him  how  he  came  by  his  blind- 
ness, when  Marcus  gave  him  a  full  account  of  his  having, 
by  the  order  of  Matabruna,  conveyed  the  children  away 
and  left  them  in  the  forest.  When  this  was  told  to  ^lata- 
bruna,  she  gave  the  men  that  had  been  placed  over  her  as 
a  guard  so  much  to  drink  that  they  fell  asleep,  and  then 
fled  to  a  strong  castle,  where  she  believed  herself  secure 
against  all.     The  attendants  were  severely  punished. 

Helias  having  been  informed  that  the  king  had  five  of 
the  chains,  went  to  him  and  prayed  to  have  them,  and 
swore  that  he  would  enjoy  no  rest  until  he  had  found  his 
brothers  and  sister.  Scarcely  had  he  uttered  these  words, 
than  it  was  announced  that  six  beautiful  white  swans  had 
come  out  of  the  forest  and  settled  in  the  castle  moat.  At 
this  intelligence  Helias  with  the  king  and  queen  hurried 
forth.  When  the  swans  saw  Helias  they  flapped  their 
wings  for  joy,  and  he  stroked  their  plumage.  He  then 
showed  them  the  chains,  at  the  sight  of  which  they  pressed 
round  him,  and  he  hung  a  chain  round  the  necks  of  five 
of  them,  when  they  were  instantly  turned  to  a  human  form, 
and  ran  to  their  dear  parents  to  kiss  and  embrace  them. 
When  the  last  swan  saw  there  was  no  chain  for  him,  he 
was  much  afflicted,  and  strove  to  pluck  every  feather  from 
his  wings;  but  Helias  mourned  with  him,  and  sought  to 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  321 

comfort  him,  and  the  swan,  as  in  gratitude,  bowed  down 
his  head.  There  was  now  great  rejoicing  at  the  court,  and 
King  Oriant  summoned  all  his  knights  and  nobles  together, 
and  bestowed  his  kingdom  on  his  son  Helias,  and  left  him 
at  liberty  to  take  what  vengeance  he  thought  proper  on 
Matabruna.  Helias  then  stormed  and  took  the  castle  to 
w^hich  she  had  fled,  took  her  prisoner,  and  ordered  her  to 
be  burnt  alive. 


When  Helias  had  long  ruled  over  the  realm  of  Lillefort 
in  peace  and  tranquillity,  he  saw  one  morning,  when 
looking  through  the  window,  the  swan,  his  brother,  drawmg 
after  him  a  little  boat.  Helias  in  this  recognised  a  sign 
from  God,  and  ordering  his  armour  and  silver  shield  to  be 
brought,  took  leave  of  his  parents  and  friends,  and  entered 
the  boat.  Hereat  the  swan  was  overjoyed,  and  beat  with 
its  wings,  and  departed  with  the  boat,  which  in  a  short 
time  was  far  far  away  from  Lillefort. 

At  this  time  the  emperor,  Otto  the  First ^,  was  holding 
an  imperial  diet  in  the  city  of  Nymwegen,  at  which  the 
count  of  Ardennes  preferred  a  complaint  against  the 
duchess  of  Billoen^,  whose  inheritance  he  would  unjustly 
seize,  and  uttered  gross  calumnies  against  her,  that  she 
had  poisoned  her  husband,  and  during  his  absence  of  three 
years  beyond  sea,  had  given  birth  to  an  illegitimate 
daughter,  whereby  the  territory  of  Billoen  now  fell  to  him, 
the  count  of  Ardennes.  The  emperor  said :  '^  Woman, 
these  are  heavy  charges,  and  if  you  cannot  prove  your 
innocence,  you  must  die."  The  count  of  Ardennes  pro- 
ceeded, and  said :  "  Sir  emperor,  in  proof  of  the  truth,  I 
cast  down  my  glove,  and  will  engage  in  combat  with  any 
one,  be  he  who  he  may.'^  On  hearing  this,  the  emperor 
commanded  the  duchess  to  seek  a  champion  to  fight  for 

1  He  reigned  from  936  to  973.  ^  Bouillon. 

p5 


322  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

her.  The  good  woman  looked  on  all  sides,  but  found 
none. 

Then  on  a  sudden  the  clear  notes  of  a  horn  were  heard 
from  the  Rhine,  and  the  emperor  with  all  who  were  there 
assembled  hastened  to  the  windows,  from  whence  they  saw 
the  swan  with  the  boat,  in  which  Helias  stood  completely 
armed,  as  was  befitting  a  gentle  knight.  The  emperor 
was  greatly  astonished  at  seeing  the  swan  depart  with  the 
boat,  after  Ilelias  had  landed,  and  caused  the  knight  to 
appear  before  him ;  while  the  duchess,  who  had  observed 
the  whole,  felt  her  heart  comforted,  and  said  to  her 
daughter :  ^'  I  this  night  dreamed  that  I  was  contending 
against  the  count,  and  that  I  was  condemned  to  be  burnt ; 
but  that  there  came  a  swan  which  brought  water  to  quench 
the  fire,  and  that  from  the  water  there  sprang  a  fish,  at 
the  sight  of  which  every  one  trembled.  Therefore  do  I 
believe  that  this  knight  will  deliver  me.^^ 

When  Helias  appeared  before  the  emperor,  he  greeted 
him  courteously,  and  the  emperor  did  the  like  to  him,  and 
inquired  of  him  who  he  was  and  whence  he  came.  Helias 
answered :  ^'  I  am  a  poor  knight,  and  go  out  seeking  ad- 
ventures, and  Vv'ill  faithfully  serve  you,  if  you  require  me."*' 
The  emperor  replied :  "  If  you  are  a  knight  in  search  of 
adventures,  you  have  found  one  here,  aud  can  fight  for  the 
honour  of  the  duchess  of  Billoen,  who  is  accused  of  a 
heinous  crime."  Helias  then  turning,  cast  a  glance  on 
the  duchess,  who  appeared  to  him  an  honourable  lady; 
but  when  he  looked  on  her  daughter,  his  heart  was  smitten 
with  love.  He  then  requested  permission  of  the  emperor 
to  speak  alone  with  the  duchess,  which  was  readily  granted. 
He  asked  her  whether  she  were  innocent  or  guilty  ?  and 
the  duchess  answered  in  a  firm  tone,  "  I  am  innocent." 
Helias  answered :  "  Lady,  you  have  then  found  a  cham- 
pion ;  I  will  defend  your  honour." 

Thereupon  Helias,  again  approaching  the  emperor,  said  : 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  323 

"  Sir  emperor,  let  liim  now  enter  tlie  lists  who  accuses  this 
lady,  for  the  purpose  of  compassing  her  death ;  for  I  am 
ready  to  engage  with  him."  When  he  had  so  spoken,  the 
count  came  forwards  and  said :  "  Friend,  what  is  it  you 
desire?  You  appear  very  bold  in  a  cause  which  in  no 
wise  concerns  you."  To  which  Helias  answered :  "  There 
lies  my  glove,  which  I  cast  down  for  the  honour  of  God, 
of  these  noble  ladies,  and  of  myself,  and  you  shall  this  day 
see  what  a  knight  of  adventure  can  perform."  The  count 
then  took  up  the  glove,  and  the  emperor  inquired  when 
they  would  fight,  which  Helias  was  desirous  of  doing  on 
that  day.  The  lists  were  therefore  quickly  made  ready, 
and  Helias  appeared  in  armour  with  his  silver  shield,  and 
the  count  in  arms  no  less  excellent.  The  emperor  with 
his  nobles,  the  duchess  with  her  daughter,  and  an  innu- 
merable body  of  people,  were  spectators. 

The  knights  encountered  each  other  with  such  impetu- 
osity that  their  lances  were  shivered,  and  then  had  recourse 
to  their  good  swords,  when  Helias  plied  his  weapon  so 
vigorously  that  the  count  with  difficulty  could  defend  him- 
self, and  addressed  his  adversary  thus  :  ^'  0,  noble  knight 
of  the  swan,  make  peace  with  me,  so  that  I  may  attain  my 
object,  and  I  will  bestow  on  you  my  daughter  with  ihQ 
fertile  land  of  Ardennes."  This  address  exasperated  Helias, 
who  answered :  "  Do  you  imagine  that  I  will  imitate  you 
in  your  treachery?  Rather  would  I  allow  myself  to  be 
hewed  limb  by  limb ;  therefore  say  no  more ;  for  I  swear 
to  you  that  I  will  grant  you  no  grace,  and  in  your  despite 
will  marry  the  duchess's  daughter."  At  this  tlie  count 
was  filled  with  rage,  and  struck  Helias  with  such  force  on 
the  arm  that  the  sword  fell  from  his  hand ;  but  instantly 
springing  from  his  horse,  he  seized  the  count,  tore  the 
shield  from  his  neck,  and  wrenched  his  sword  from  him. 
The  count  prayed  for  grace,  but  Helias  heeded  not  his 
prayer,  and  with  his  sword  struck  ofi"  his  head. 


324  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

Having  thus  overcome  his  adversary,  Hehas  presented 
himself  before  the  emperor,  who  received  him  nobly.  The 
duchess  also  came  with  her  daughter,  and  thanked  him, 
and  said  :  "  Sir,  you  have  restored  to  me  my  lands ;  I  give 
them  back  to  you  together  with  my  daughter.^^  At  this 
Helias  was  highly  gratified,  and  on  the  following  day  the 
marriage  was  solemnized  with  great  pomp  and  splendour. 
When  the  feastings  had  lasted  for  a  fortnight,  the  new 
duke  took  leave  of  the  emperor,  after  having  sworn  fealty  to 
him,  and  departed  with  his  consort  for  Billoen,  where  he 
soon  arrived  and  was  received  with  great  joy,  after  having 
gallantly  defended  himself  on  the  road  against  the  friends 
and  kindred  of  the  count.  Shortly  after  his  wife  became 
pregnant,  and  when  the  time  came,  she  gave  birth  to  a 
daughter,  who  was  named  Ida,  who  grew  up  in  virtue,  and 
was  mother  of  the  noble  prince  Godfrey,  and  his  brothers, 
Baldmn  and  Eustace. 

One  day  when  the  duchess  was  riding  out  with  her 
husband,  she  asked  him  of  what  country  he  was,  and  what 
friends  and  kindred  he  had.  But  he  would  not  answer 
her,  and  desired  her  never  to  repeat  the  question,  for  that 
if  she  did  he  must  part  from  her.  She  said  no  more  on 
the  subject,  and  both  lived  in  great  harmony  for  six  years. 

But  gradually  the  duchess  lost  all  remembrance  of  the 
prohibition,  and  one  day,  -svhen  alone  with  Helias,  she  said 
to  him  :  "  My  beloved  husband,  I  would  fain  know  of  what 
descent  you  are.^^  Helias  was  much  troubled  hereat  and 
sorrowfully  answered :  "  I  have  told  you  that  you  should 
never  know,  and  therefore  should  never  inquire.  I  must 
now  leave  you,  and  shall  go  to-morrow  to  Nymwcgen  and 
take  leave  of  the  emperor.^^  The  duchess  wept  bitterly 
and  called  her  daughter,  that  she  might  add  her  entreaties 
to  her  own,  and  thus  divert  him  from  his  purpose.  But 
Helias  told  them  that  it  might  not  be ;  and  having  assem- 
bled his  nobles,  he  commended  to  them  the  mother  and 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  325 

daughter,  together  with  the  territory  of  Billoen.  He  was 
yet  speaking  when  the  swan  appeared,  making  a  great 
noise  with  its  wings,  as  if  calling  Helias,  who  now  took  a 
sad  leave  of  all,  and  followed  by  the  tears  of  the  inhabit- 
ants, entered  the  boat,  and  was  instantly  drawn  away  by 
the  swan. 

But  the  duchess  and  her  daughter  hastened  to  Nym- 
wegen,  at  which  place  they  arrived  before  the  knight  of 
the  swan.  There  they  related  to  the  emperor  all  that  had 
taken  place,  and  prayed  for  his  intercession  and  aid. 
While  they  were  thus  speaking,  the  sound  of  Helias's  horn 
was  heard  from  the  Rhine,  and  shortly  after  he  himself 
appeared  before  the  emperor.  But  earnestly  as  the  em- 
peror besought  him  not  to  forsake  the  duchess  and  her 
beautiful  daughter,  it  was  all  in  vain.  Helias  now  prayed 
the  emperor  to  aid  and  protect  the  two  ladies,  and  having 
received  that  prince's  assurance  that  his  prayer  was 
granted,  again  entered  his  boat.  The  swan  beat  with  its 
wings  on  seeing  him,  and  soon  both  found  themselves  in 
Lillefort. 

King  Oriant  was  sitting  at  table  with  his  queen  and 
their  five  children  when  the  boat  arrived.  At  the  lively 
notes  of  Helias's  horn,  they  all  rushed  to  the  windows  of 
the  palace,  and  on  seeing  the  two  brothers,  they  hastened 
down  to  embrace  and  kiss  them.  Their  mother's  first 
question  was  :  "  My  son,  where  hast  thou  been  so  long  ? '' 
To  which  Helias  answered :  "  My  mother,  that  I  will  tell 
you  at  another  time.''  She  then  asked  what  was  become 
of  the  swan,  and  Helias  informed  her  that  it  had  remained 
in  the  water ;  upon  which  the  mother  said :  "  I  this  night 
dreamed  that  the  swan  would  recover  its  human  form,  if 
the  two  beakers  were  shown  to  it."  This  seemed  good  to 
all,  and  when  the  swan  saw  the  two  beakers  which  the 
goldsmith  had  made  of  its  chain,  it  was  instantly  restored 
to  its  human  figure,  and  received  the  name  of  Esmeri; 


326  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

and  there  was  consequently  great  rejoicing  in  tlie  whole 
court. 

Some  time  after  Helias  assembled  all  his  friends  and 
relations^  and  recounted  to  them  his  adventures,  and  w^hen 
he  had  finished,  said  :  "  I  now  bid  all  of  you  farewell ;  for 
I  am  about  to  leave  the  world,  that  I  may  expiate  my  sins 
and  pray  for  all  of  you/^  At  this  the  w4iole  court  wept, 
though  no  one  ventured  to  utter  a  word  against  his  resolve. 
Helias  then  went,  with  a  staff  in  his  hand,  to  a  monastery 
which  his  father  had  founded,  and  was  received  by  the 
monks  with  much  gladness.  He  afterwards  caused  a 
beautiful  and  spacious  castle  to  be  built  in  the  Ardennes, 
exactly  resembling  that  of  Billoen,  and  to  which  he  gave 
the  same  name.  On  the  monastery  he  bestowed  great 
franchises,  and  placed  in  it  thirty  monks,  to  pray  day  and 
night,  and  lived  himself  according  to  the  rules  of  the 
monastery. 

The  duchess  of  Billoen  and  her  daughter  lived  in  the 
mean  while  in  constant  grief  and  affliction  for  the  loss  of 
Helias ;  for  all  the  messengers  that  she  had  sent  out,  to 
get  tidings  of  him,  had  returned  without  success.  She  at 
length  despatched  a  servant,  named  Pucius,  to  Jerusalem, 
in  search  of  Helias,  who,  finding  no  trace  of  him  there, 
resolved  on  wandering  to  Rome.  On  this  journey,  how- 
ever, he  and  his  companions  lost  their  way,  and  came  to 
the  Ardennes,  and  to  the  very  castle  that  Helias  had  caused 
to  be  erected.  At  the  sight  of  it  Pucius  said  :  ''  Behold, 
here  we  are  in  my  country,  for  this  castle  appears  to  me 
exactly  like  that  of  Billoen."  They  then  went  to  an  inn 
in  the  village  that  was  adjacent  to  the  castle,  and  inquired 
where  they  were,  and  received  answers  to  all  their  ques- 
tions, and  were,  moreover,  informed  that  King  Oriant  and 
Beatrix  had  left  Lillefort  and  taken  their  abode  at  Billoen, 
that  they  might  be  near  their  beloved  son  Helias.  AVhcn 
Pucius  heard  this  he  was  overjoyed  and  thanked  God. 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  327 

On  the  following  morning  lie  went  to  the  castle  of 
Billoen^  and  the  king  and  queen  with  their  children  came 
to  meet  him,  when  Esmeri,  recognising  his  clothes,  asked 
him  whence  he  came.  Pucius  answered,  that  he  was  in 
search  of  the  knight  of  the  swan,  by  whose  wife  he  had 
been  sent  out.  At  this  intelligence  Esmeri  was  rejoiced, 
and  announced  it  to  the  king  and  queen,  to  whom  Pucius 
must  then  relate  all  concerning  the  duchess  :  he,  more- 
over, told  them  that  her  grand-daughter,  Ida,  was  married 
to  the  count  of  Bonen  ^  Pucius  was  now  conducted  into 
the  castle  and  nobly  entertained.  On  the  following  morn- 
ing he  accompanied  Esmeri  to  Helias,  whom  they  found 
on  his  knees  at  prayer.  On  recognising  Pucius,  the 
knight  of  the  swan  fell  on  his  neck  and  kissed  him,  and 
inquired  after  the  duchess  and  his  daughter.  Pucius  in- 
formed him  of  everything,  and  received  from  him  his 
wedding  ring  to  take  to  the  duchess  as  a  token,  and  also 
many  costly  presents  for  Ida. 

Pucius  immediately  set  out  on  his  way  home,  after 
having  taken  leave  of  King  Oriant  and  Beatrix,  from  whom 
he  likewise  received  precious  gifts  for  his  mistress,  and 
shortly  after  arrived  in  Billoen,  just  as  the  duchess  with 
her  daughter  and  son-in-law  were  sitting  at  table.  Having 
presented  the  ring  to  the  duchess,  together  with  the  other 
presents,  he  recounted  all  his  adventures.  At  his  narra- 
tive the  duchess  was  highly  gratified,  and  with  her 
daughter  immediately  made  preparations  for  their  journey ; 
but  the  count  of  Bonen  remained  at  home  with  his  three 
sons,  Godfrey,  Baldwin  and  Eustace. 

When  the  two  ladies  arrived  at  the  castle  of  Billoen,  they 
learned  that  Helias  was  lying  in  his  bed  sick,  and  were 
sadly  grieved  thereat.  But  Helias  called  them  to  him, 
and  they  all  wept  for  joy  at  seeing  each  other  again  so 

^  Boulogne. 


328  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

unexpectedly.  A  few  days  afterwards  Helias  became 
worse,  and  his  malady  at  length  so  increased  that  he  died. 
This  event  caused  such  affliction  to  the  duchess  that  she 
fell  sick  and  soon  followed  her  consort  to  the  grave.  Ida 
then,  reluctant  to  remain  where  she  had  suffered  such 
heavy  losses,  returned  to  her  husband,  and  the  people 
moui-ncd  bitterly  for  a  long  time. 

POPULAR  BELIEF  K 

1.  If  a  bride  tears  her  bridal  dress,  it  is  not  good  :  she 
will  undergo  much  trouble. 

2.  A  person  should  never  give  away  the  rings  of  dead 
friends  or  relatives  :  it  is  a  sure  sign  that  the  giver  will 
also  soon  die. 

3.  If  a  loaf  lies  topsy-turvy,  it  is  not  good. 

4.  If  a  knife  lies  the  wrong  way  (verkeerd),  it  forebodes 
quarreling. 

5.  If  fire  springs  out  on  the  hearth,  you  may  be  sure 
of  soon  receiving  a  visit. 

6.  To  see  lady-birds  forebodes  good  luck. 

7.  Those  who  do  not  like  cats  will  not  get  handsome 
wives. 

8.  Monday^s  haste  is  seldom  good. 

9.  If  the  skeleton  of  a  horse^s  foot  be  placed  in  the 
stable,  the  horses  cannot  be  bewitched. 

10.  To  recover  from  an  ague,  let  a  person  tie  his 
garter  round  the  gallows. 

11.  Between  Easter  and  Whitsuntide  the  unfortunate 
make  love. 

12.  The  eggs  of  jMaundy  Thursday  (Witten  Donder- 
dag)  are  good  against  thunder  and  lightning  ^. 

'  From  Wolf's  Wodana,  Gent.  1843,  pp.  110-114,  and  pp.  221-225. 
2  In  Denmark  on  this  day  (llvid-torsdag)  the  peasants  put  nine  kinds 
of  herbs  in  their  soup.     The  Germans  have  a  similar  superstition. 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  329 

13.  St.  John's  wort  gathered  before  sunrise  is  good 
against  lightning. 

14.  To  be  lucky  at  play,  a  person  should  carry  about 
him  a  clover  leaf  of  four  lobes. 

15.  It  is  not  good  to  comb  the  hair  or  cut  the  nails  on 
a  Friday. 

16.  A  spider  seen  in  the  morning  forebodes  good  luck; 
in  the  afternoon  bad  luck. 

17.  For  an  ague  it  is  good  to  enclose  a  spider  between 
the  two  halves  of  a  nutshell,  and  wear  it  about  the  neck  ^ 

18.  To  cure  the  toothache,  rub  the  teeth  with  a  bone 
from  the  churchyard :  it  is  an  infallible  remedy. 

19.  If  the  bed  of  a  dying  person  stands  in  a  cross  di- 
rection with  the  rafters,  he  will  have  a  long  and  painful 
death. 

20.  Two  forks  across  forebode  strife  or  enmity. 

21.  To  overthrow  a  saltcellar  is  not  good  :  strife  will 
follow. 

22.  When  an  egg  is  eaten  the  shell  should  be  broken. 

23.  To  be  secure  against  ague,  eat  on  Easter-day  two 
eggs  that  were  weighed  on  Good  Friday. 

24.  To  eat  no  flesh  on  Easter-day  is  good  for  the  tooth- 
ache. 

25.  If  a  person  feels  a  tickling  in  the  palm  of  the  hand, 
he  will  receive  money. 

26.  The  howling  of  a  dog  forebodes  the  death  of  a 
person  in  the  neighbourhood. 

27.  If  on  Christmas  eve  you  take  a  piece  of  fir  and 
stick  it  in  the  fire,  but  let  it  not  be  quite  burnt  out,  and 
put  what  remains  under  the  bed,  thunder  will  never  fall 
on  the  house. 

28.  Three  candles  burning  in  one  room  forebode  a  mar- 
riage ^. 

1  See  Ashmole's  Diary. 

2  In  such  case  the  Danes  say,  "  0  there  is  a  bride  in  the  room." 


330  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

29.  Rain  on  Friday  rain  on  Sunday. 

30.  It  is  not  good  to  be  married  on  a  Friday. 

31.  To  get  out  of  bed  with  the  right  foot  first  forebodes 
good  luck  for  the  whole  day. 

32.  Eggs  laid  on  Whit-Sunday  should  be  carefully  pre- 
served. If  there  be  a  fire^  let  one  of  them  be  cast  into 
the  flames^  and  the  lire  will  have  no  more  power. 

33.  If  a  bride  desires  to  have  good  luck  and  prosperity 
in  her  wedded  state,  she  must_,  on  coming  out  of  the 
church  from  her  wedding,  enter  her  house  under  two 
sabres  laid  crosswise  over  the  door. 

34.  Eggs  laid  during  the  twelve  days  of  Christmas 
should  be  carefully  preserved  ;  and  if  a  hen  is  about  to  sit, 
place  them  under  her,  when  all  the  other  eggs  under  her 
will  produce  beautiful,  large  chickens. 

35.  On  Christmas  night,  at  twelve  o'clock,  all  the 
cattle  rise  up  and  continue  standing  for  some  time,  and 
then  again  lie  down. 

36.  Nothing  that  is  sown  on  Christmas  eve  perishes, 
although  it  should  be  sown  on  the  snow. 

37.  If  the  sun  shines  on  Candlemas  day  (Feb.  2),  the 
flax  will  prosper. 

38.  That  which  is  sown  on  Shrove  Tuesday  will  always 
continue  green. 

39.  As  many  fogs  as  there  are  in  ^larch,  so  many  bad 
fogs  will  come  also  after  Easter,  and  in  August. 

40.  On  St.  Andrew's  day  place  a  glass  full  of  water  on 
a  table :  if  it  runs  over  spontaneously,  a  wet  year  may  be 
looked  for;  but  if  it  continues  full,  that  indicates  a  dry 
year. 

41.  To  wash  the  hands  well  in  the  morning  is  a  power- 
ful means  against  witches  and  sorceresses. 

42.  If  the  sun  shines  while  it  rains,  the  witches  are 
baking  cakes. 

43.  Mistletoe  hung  over  the  bed  is  good  against  the 
nightmare. 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  331 

44.  If  a  woman  desires  to  have  a  compliant  husband, 
let  her  take  old  iron  nails,  of  which  let  a  ring  be  made  on 
a  Friday  during  mass,  and  afterwards  lay  the  gospels  upon 
it,  and  say  a  Pater  noster  daily.  Then  if  she  wears  that 
ring  on  her  finger,  she  will  have  a  husband  ready  to  grant 
her  wishes  for  a  year. 

45.  If  a  woman  wishes  her  husband  to  love  her,  let  her 
take  a  portion  of  her  hair  and  offer  it  on  the  altar  thrice 
with  a  lighted  wax  taper.  As  long  as  she  carries  that  on 
her  head,  he  will  cherish  a  fervent  love  for  her. 

46.  When  a  cold  trembling  creeps  over  the  limbs,  it  is 
usual  for  a  person  to  say :  ''  They  are  riding  over  my 
grave. ^^ 

47.  When  it  rains  while  the  sun  shines  there  is  a  fair 
in  hell. 

48.  Two  knives  laid  across  forebode  misfortune. 

49.  W^hen  a  child  falls  into  the  fire,  you  must,  before 
taking  it  out,  turn  the  loaf,  if  it  lies  topsy-turvy.  In  Den- 
dermonde  and  thereabouts  they  make  a  cross  on  the  loaf 
with  a  knife. 

50.  Unlucky  at  play,  lucky  in  marriage. 

51.  He  has  a  mole^s  foot  in  his  bag,  is  said  of  one  that 
wins  at  play. 

52.  WTien  the  cats  sit  with  their  backs  turned  to  the 
fire,  it  will  rain. 

53.  If  a  person  has  long  had  the  ague,  to  get  rid  of  it 
he  should  tie  a  wisp  of  straw  to  a  tree  at  the  moment  when 
the  fit  is  coming  on,  and  then  run  till  the  fit  is  past. 

54.  To  turn  a  chair  round  forebodes  fighting. 

55.  Mariners  promise  to  eat  no  flesh  on  Easter-day,  that 
they  may  be  safe  from  storms  at  sea. 

56.  A  tickling  in  the  palm  of  the  htind  betokens  the 
getting  of  blows. 

57.  In  Furncs  nobody  will  hire  a  maid-servant  on  a 
Friday,  nor  will  a  maid  enter  her  service  on  that  day. 


332  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

58.  The  person  towards  whom  at  dinner  the  point  of  a 
knife,  that  lies  with  the  edge  up,  is  directed,  will  be  mar- 
ried within  that  year. 

59.  If  two  persons  in  a  company,  at  the  same  moment, 
begin  telling  the  same  piece  of  news,  they  will  be  married 
at  the  same  time. 

60.  Boiling  dish-water  betokens  that  the  person  who  has 
to  wash  the  dishes  will  not  be  married  within  seven  years. 

61.  For  thirteen  to  sit  at  table  it  is  ill-boding.  The 
person  that  then  sits  under  the  beam  is  a  traitor.  Of  the 
thirteen  one  will  die  in  that  year. 

62.  To  see  lambs  when  out  walking  is  good ;  pigs  and 
crows  bad.  To  see  a  crow  flying  over  the  paternal  roof 
signifies  bad  news — misfortune. 

63.  Dandelion.  Children  blow  off  the  feathery  seeds 
and  ask  :  "  How  old  shall  I  be  ?"  As  often  as  they  blow 
before  the  last  are  blown  off,  so  many  years  will  they  live. 
The  girls  ask  on  the  same  occasion :  "  Does  he  love  me  ? 
Yes — a  little — much — no.^^  The  word  that  is  uttered 
when  the  last  seeds  fly  off  is  the  sentiment  which  they 
imagine  to  be  in  the  breast  of  their  lover.  The  same 
operation  is  performed  with  the  dandelion,  in  order  to 
know  what  o^ clock  it  is. 

64.  Many  persons,  when  their  leg,  their  arm,  their 
hand  or  their  foot  is  asleep,  make  a  cross  on  it  with  the 
thumb,  to  make  the  tingling  cease.  Others,  when  they 
gape,  make  a  cross  before  the  mouth. 

65.  When  a  drowned  person  is  touched  by  a  near  kins- 
man, he  begins  to  bleed  at  the  nose. 

66.  When  the  ducks  dive,  bad  weather  may  be  ex- 
pected. The  rain  will  soon  cease  when  the  chickens  take 
shelter. 

67.  A  sorceress  cannot  rise  from  sitting  if  a  woman 
clandestinely  places  her  wedding  ring  under  her  chair ^ 

^  Sec  a  similar  superstition  at  p.  239. 


NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS.  333 

68.  When  after  cutting  the  hair  you  throw  the  cuttings 
into  a  fire  of  green  woodj  the  hair  will  never  grow  after- 
wards. 

69.  Hair  that  is  cut  off  should  never  be  thrown  into  the 
street :  it  may  be  taken  up  by  a  witch,  who  by  its  means 
can  bewitch  the  person  to  whom  it  belonged. 

70.  When  a  person  sneezes  and  no  one  says  "  God  bless 
you/^  a  witch  has  powder  to  bewitch  the  sneezer. 

71.  If  a  woman  loses  her  wedding  ring,  she  will  soon 
be  separated  from  her  husband  by  death  or  otherwise. 

72.  Neither  a  knife  nor  scissors  may  be  given  to  a 
friend :  they  cut  love. 

73.  Let  no  one  take  a  bone  home  with  him  from  the 
churchyard  :  the  dead  will  torment  him  till  he  returns  it^ 

74.  If  a  knife  be  thrown  off  the  table  and  fall  on  the 
back,  it  betokens  an  approaching  wedding. 

75.  When  the  priest  during  mass  turns  and  says  orate 
fratres,  he  closes  his  eyes,  that  he  may  not  see  the  witches, 
w4io  then  stand  all  with  their  backs  towards  the  altar. 

IQi.  If  a  little  spark  shines  on  the  wick  of  a  candle,  it 
betokens  unexpected  news.  When  many  such  sparks 
shine  round  the  flame,  forming  a  circle,  then  will  a  person 
triumph  over  his  enemies. 

11 .  In  conjuring  the  devil  it  is  necessary  to  have  a  light ; 
words  spoken  in  the  dark  having  no  power. 

78.  If  a  damsel  cannot  endure  a  dog,  she  will  never  get 
a  good  husband. 

79.  If  a  person  is  troubled  with  ague,  he  should  stand 
naked  opposite  to  the  rising  sun,  and  at  the  same  time 
repeat  a  certain  number  of  Pater  nosters  and  angelical 
salutations. 

80.  St.  Lupuses  Cake.  They  bake  a  triangular  cake  in 
honour  of  the  Holy  Trinity,  making  in  it  five  holes,  in 
remembrance  of  the  five  wounds  of  Christ.     This  they 

J  See  p.  280. 


334  NETHERLANDISH  TRADITIONS. 

give  as  alms,  in  honour  of  St.  Lupus,  to  the  first  beggar 
that  presents  himself  by  chance,  not  intentionally ;  in  the 
belief  that  their  flocks  and  herds  are  thereby  rendered 
secure  from  wolves  (lupi).  This  custom  is  common  about 
Tirlemont  and  Louvain. 

81.  It  is  a  custom  to  immerse  the  images  of  saints  in 
water,  in  order  to  obtain  rain. 

83.  If  a  person  has  an  ague,  let  him  go,  early  in  the 
morning  (in  der  uchte),  to  an  old  willow,  make  three  knots 
in  a  branch,  and  say :  "  Good  morning,  old  one  j  I  give 
thee  the  cold  ;  good  morning,  old  oneM^' 

I  Westeudorp,  N,  Myth,  p.  518;     See  also  p,  164. 


INDEX. 


ixDAM,  creation  of,  1. 

Afflighem,  story  of  the  monk  of,  297. 

Ague,153, 164,328,329,331,333,334. 

Alrun,  49,  156,  157. 

Altar-cup  at  Viol,  story  of  the,  70. 

Alvina,  268. 

Amputation  of  a  limb,  charm  for  the, 
162. 

Andrew's  (St.)  Eve  and  Day,  super- 
stitions on,  142-145,  330! 

Animals,  superstitions  connecte  Jwith, 
180. 

Apoplexy,  charms  for  the,  169. 

April  (First  of),  custom  on  the,  136. 


B. 


Baldwin  (Count)  marries  a  devil,  283. 

Baptism,  160. 

Barmgrund.     See  Scald-head. 

Basilisk,  account  of  the,  29. 

Beacon-burning  in  North  Friesland,  5. 

Bees,  death  to  be  announced  to  them, 
161. 

Belief  (Popular)  Netherlandish,  328. 

Bell  at  Coenhausen,  118. 

Bell-pond,  story  of  tlie,  118. 

Bier-esel,  157. 

Birds,  superstitions  connected  with, 
180. 

Birth  and  Baptism,  customs  and  su- 
perstitions relative  to,  160,  sq. 


Black  School,  account  of  the,  12. 
Blood,  charms  to  stanch,  163,  168. 
Bone  from  the  churchyard,  333. 
Breast-hone  of  a  goose,  183. 
Bride,  superstition  concerning  a,  328, 

330. 
Brooms  bound  in  the  Twelfths,  their 

virtues,  151. 
Burn,  charms  for  a,  167. 
BUsemaun,  48. 


C. 


Calves,  riding  on,  235. 

Candlemas,  superstitions  relating  to, 
134,  330. 

Card-players,  anecdote  of,  4. 

Cat,  the  devil's,  18;  Cats  of  Stock- 
hem,  236 ;  superstitions  relating  to, 
328,331. 

Changelings,  stories  of,  43-45  ;  must 
be  swept  out,  157. 

Chess  with  the  devil,  291. 

Chimken,  49. 

Christmas,  customs  and  superstitions 
of,  145-149,  329,  330. 

Clairmarais,  convent  of,  291. 

Clover,  sui)erstition  of  a  four-lobed, 
184,  329. 

Coach  (The  bloody)  at  Antwerp,  290. 

Communion  Cup  at  Viul,  70. 

Corn-stealing,  277.' 

Cowls  hung  on  sunbeams,  269. 

Cows  speak  on  New  Year's  eve,  7. 


336 


INDEX. 


Creation  of  Adam,  1. 
Crows,  superstition  concerning,  142. 
Cuckoo,   its   origin,    131 ;   questions 
put  to  it,  ib. 

D. 

Dancers,  anecdotes  of,  3,  sg. 

Days  (Unlucky),  185. 

Dead,  divine  service  of  the,  8. 

Death  and  Burial,  customs  and  super- 
stitions relative  to,  161,  sg.,  328. 

Deer-stealer  in  the  Harz,  126. 

Demons  of  the  Mine,  story  of  the,  97. 

Devil,  dances  a  lady  to  death,  3,  4  ; 
plays  at  cards,  4  ;  spins,  7  ;  teaches 
in  'the  Black  School,  12;  as  the 
builder  Zi,  38  ;  builds  a  house  with 
ninety-nine  windows,  39 ;  at  Car- 
ron-St.-Martin,  232  ;  seduces  Ma- 
riken  of  Nymwegen,  248 ;  of  Ne- 
derbraekel,  256  ;  a  black  hen  sacri- 
ficed to  him,  ib. ;  outwitted,  258- 
263  ;  destroys  the  Sand-gate  at 
Mechlin,  295  ;  chess  with  him, 
.  291 ;  plays  at  dice  for  a  soul,  296 ; 
how  to  conjure  him,  333. 

Diseases.     See  Wounds. 

Divining  Rod,  141. 

Dizziness,  charm  for,  168. 

Dog,  70,  180,  329,  333. 

Dragedukke  described,  34. 

Drak,  155. 

Drake  (Kobold,  Fire-drake),  super- 
stitions relating  to  the,  155,  sg. 

Dwarfs  (Dwarge),  31.  See  Under- 
ground Folk. 

Dwarf. smithies,  205. 

E. 

Easter,  customs  and  superstitions  at, 
134-136. 

Eckwadt  Church,  story  of  its  building, 
38. 

Eggs, shells  of,  to  be  broken,  174,329  ; 
elves  swim  in  the  shells,  265  ;  of 
Maundy  Thursday,  328  ;  good 
ai,'ainst'  ague,  329 ;  against  fire, 
330  ;  if  laid  at  Christmas,  330. 

Ehrengang  (Walk  of  honour),  1. 

Ekke  Nekkepenn,  story  of,  40. 

Elder,  superstitions  connected  with 
the,  182. 

Elements   and  Natural   Phenomena, 


superstitions   connected  with  the, 

183. 
Elves  swim  in  egg-shells,  265. 
Erysipelas,  charms  for  the,  170,  171. 
Excrescence,  charm  for  an,  172. 
Eyes,  charm  for  bad,  163,  173. 

F. 

Fabricius  (Pastor),  story  of,  13. 

Falkenberg,  tale  of,  294. 

Fast-reading,  14. 

Fast-writing,  14. 

Fever,  the  seventv-seventh,  164. 

Fiddler,  story  of  a,  228,  230,  231. 

Field,   etc.,    superstitions   connected 

with  the,  175,  sgg. 
Finger,  charm  for  pain  in  the,  172. 
Finn  (Father),  39. 
Fir-cone  (Silver),  story  of  a,  115. 
Fire,  charms  against  a,  166,  179. 
Fire-drake,  155. 
Flabbaert,  a  sprite,  266. 
Flames  in  the  Water,  30. 
Flerus,  200. 
Fogs,  330. 

Foot,  charm  for  a  sprained,  1 72. 
Foreseeing,  story  of,  69. 
Fountain,  Frau  HuUe's,  99. 
Frederic  Barbarossa,  enchanted  in  the 

KyfFhauser,  101,  102,  105. 
Freischiitz,  127,  159,  259. 
Frick  (Old),  account  of,  80. 
Friday,  330,  331. 

G. 

Gauden  (Fru),  account  of,  74. 

Gaue  (Fru)  makes  her  tour  in  the 

Twelfths,  153. 
Gertrud's  (St.)  Minne,  270. 
Goblin,  83;  how  to  obtain  a,  141. 
Gode  (Fru),  account  of,   73 ;  makes 

her  tour  in  the  Twelfths,  153. 
Godfrey  of  Bouillon,  anecdote  of,  309. 
Congers,  account  of  the,  10. 
Gout,  charms  for  the,  168,  169. 
Gramra,  spectre  at,  9. 
Gravedigger,  story  of  a,  280. 
Giibich,  account  of  the,  109. 

II. 

Ilackelnbcrg  (Hans  von),  stories  of, 
91-95. 


INDEX. 


337 


Hair-cutting:  and  combing,  329,  333. 

Hair-snatching,  145. 

Hameln,  story  of  the  children  of,  119. 

Hans  Diimkt,  story  of,  58. 

Harke  (Fran),  account  of,  87. 

Harrows,  superstition  of  sitting  under 

two,  22,  82. 
Harvest  Customs,  141,  142. 
Head-ache,  charm  for  the,  173. 
Heart  (the  Feather-),  2/1. 
Heckethaler,  account  of  the,  76. 
Hel-horse,  account  of  the,  30. 
Helldink.     See  Erysipelas, 
Hen  (a  black)  sacrificed  to  the  devil, 

256. 
Hildesheim,  the  rose  at,  122. 
Hilge,  charms  for  the,  165. 
Holda  (Hulde).     See  Hulle. 
Horn  (The  Oldenburg),  128. 
Horses  speak  on  New  Year's  eve,  7 ; 

the  Long  Horse,  27;  one  comes 

out  of  the  water,  80 ;    a  woman 

transformed  to  a,  235  ;  of  a  horse's 

foot,  328. 
Horse-Mare,  account  of  the,  75. 
Horseshoe,  185. 
House,  superstitions  connected  with 

a,  174,  sqq. 
House  with  ninety-nine  windows,  39. 
Hiibichenstein,  traditions  of  the,  109- 

118. 
Huggel,  Smith  in  the,  123. 
Hulle  (Frau),  account  of,  98 ;  in  the 

K>ifhauser,  100. 
Hiinensteine  in  the  Ukermark,  79. 
Hunt  (The  ^Yild),  218. 
Huntsman  (The  Wild),  158,  218,  220. 
Husband,  how  to  have  a  good,  331. 

I.     J. 

Use  (Princess),  stories  of,  88-90. 
Ilsenstein,  88,  sqq. 
Image  (Carved),  story  of  a,  41. 
Invisible,  how  to  become,  264. 
Jack  o'  Lanterns,  stories  of,  85,  158, 

220. 
Jew  (the  Wandering),  story  of,  59, 

265. 
Jews,  why  thev  eat  no  swine's  flesh, 

266. 
John   (St.)    Baptist  appears  to   St. 

Gertrud,  270. 


John's  (St.)  blood,  the  juice  of  a 
plant  so  called,  24. 

John's  (St.)  day,  customs  and  super- 
stitions, 139-141. 

John's  (St.)  hand,  a  plant,  140. 

Jug  (the  blind),  49. 

Julian  (St.),  legend  of,  297. 

Jiiterbogk,  the  smith  of,  103. 

K. 

Kaboutermannekens,  187-192. 
Kettle  (Magic),  superstitious  process 

with  a,  17. 
Kielkropp,  story  of  a,  46. 
Klabautermann,  account  of  the,  49. 
Klabautersmanneken,  account  of  the, 

75. 
Kludde,  193-195. 
Knife,  Scissors,  etc.,  328,  329,  331, 

332,  333. 
Kobolds,  stories  of,  83,  84 ;  how  to 

obtain  one,  141 ;  described,  155,  *g'. 
Kortstaert,  a  devil,  291. 
Krombeen,  a  devil,  291. 
Kyffhiiuser,  traditions  of  the,  100- 

102. 


L. 


Lady-bird,  182,  328. 

Lady  (our)  on  horseback,  2. 

Land-divider,  judgement  on  a  false, 

14,  242,  268. 
Lily  of  life,  271. 
Limb,  amputation  of  a,  charm  for, 

162. 
Lime-tree  in  Nortorf,  2. 
Lodder,  205-208. 
Lohengrin,  story  of,  302. 
Love-magic,  272-274, 
Lucy  (St.),  184. 
Liiningsberg,  the  White   Ghosts  of 

the,  120. 
Lupus  (St.),  his  cake,  333. 
Lying-in  Woman,  264, 

M. 

Maere.     See  Nightmare. 
Magpies,  witches  ride  on,  138  ;  pow- 
der of,  its  virtue,  153. 
Malegy's  Palfrey,  story  of,  220-228, 


INDEX. 


Man  in  the  Moon.     See  Moon. 
Mannigfual,  account  of  the,  28. 
Mariken  of  Nyuiwegen,  247-256. 
Marriage,  customs  and  superstitions 

relative  to,  159,  sq.,  330,  333. 
Mjirt.     See  Nightmare. 
Martin  (St.),  goose  on  his  day,  142. 
May-day,  customs  and  superstitions 

on,  136-138. 
Mechlin,  destruction  of  the  Sand-gate 

of,  290. 
Michael  (St.),  custom  on  his  day,  142. 
Midsummer.     See  St.  John's  Day. 
Milk   ahstracted   hy  witchcraft,    77, 

276;  beaten,  277. 
Mill-stone   suspended    by    a    silken 

thread,  35. 
Mines,  monk  of  the,  96  ;  Demons  of 

the,  97. 
Moleskin,  purse    of,    186;  a   mole's 

foot,  331. 
Monk  of  Afflighem,  297. 
Monoloke,  account  of  the,  19. 
Moon  (Man  in  the),  story  of  the,  57. 
Murderer  cited,  17. 
Murraue,  account  of  the,  154,  sq. 


N. 


Nappelfangs,  145. 

Necker,  or  Nix,  198,  199. 

Nederbrackel,  devil  of,  256. 

Nesskuk,  48. 

New  Year,  customs  and  superstitions 

on,  149-151. 
New  Year's    eve,  cows    and  horses 
speak  on,  7  ;  water  turned  to  wine 
on,  8. 
Nickelmann  (Nick),  account  of  the, 

87,88. 
Jsightmare,  account  of  the,  29  ;  su- 
perstitions relating  to  the,  154,  sq., 
202-205;   mistletoe  good  against 
the,  330. 
Night-raven,  account  of  the,  97. 
Niske,  48. 
Nisser.     See  Puks. 
Niss-Puk,  48.     See  Puks. 
Nix,  account  of  the,  158,  199. 
Nixen,  story  of  three,  199. 
Nortorf,  Lime-tree  in,  2. 

O. 

Ointment  (Witches'),  how  made,  276. 


Oldenburg  Horn,  128. 
Onnerbiinkissen,  32. 
Oriant  (King),  story  of,  309-328. 
Osschaert,  195-198. 
Otto,  count  of  Oldenburg,  obtains  a 
horn,  1 28. 


P. 


Palfrey  (Malegv's),  220-228. 

Peter  (Saint),  i03,  105,  183. 

Pingel  is  dead,  37. 

Piper  at  Hameln,  119. 

Plants — elf-leaf  or  sorceresses'  plant, 
266 ;  nightwort,  ib. ;  roodselken, 
268;  St.John's  wort,  329;  a  clover- 
leaf  of  four  lobes,  ib. ;  mistletoe  , 
330  ;  dandelion,  332. 

Pleiades,  origin  of  the,  131. 

Poacher,  story  of  a,  289. 

Potterv  made  by  the  Underground 
Folk,  33. 

Puks  (Nisser),  stories  of,  55,  56,  75. 

Puherklaes,  49. 

R. 

Rain,  charm  against,  180  ;  on  a  Fri- 
day, 330  ;  how  to  get,  334. 

Ranzau  Familv,  traditions  of  the,  50- 
54. 

Ravens,  180. 

Rickets,  charm  for  the,  169. 

Ringworm,  charms  for  the,  166,  170, 
174. 

Roppert  (Ruprecht),  49. 

Rose  at  Hildesheim,  122. 

Rose,  charms  for  the,  165,  171. 

Ruprecht  (Knecht),  account  of,  146, 
147. 

Rupture,  cure  for  a,  173. 


S. 


Scald-head,  charms  for,  1 70. 
Schack,  countess  Anna  Sophia,  story 

of,  9. 
Service  (Divine)  of  the  dead,  8. 
Shadow,  story  of  the  man  without  a, 

62. 
Ship  (Giant),  account  of  the,  28. 
Shirt,  effect  of  turning  one's,  70. 
Shrovetide,  customs  and  superstitions 

at,  99,  133,  sq.,  330. 


INDEX. 


33^ 


Sieve,  superstitious  practices  with  a, 

15. 
Smith  in  the  Hiiggel,  123. 
Smith  of  Jiiterbogk,  story  of  the,  103. 
Smith  (the  Underground),  33. 
Smoking  a  chihi,  64. 
Snail,  verses  to  the,  181. 
Snake-king,  account  of  the,  56  ;  of  a 

snake  in  the  old  Duborg,  57. 
Sneezing,  333. 
Spectres,  stories  of,  9,  10,  120,  243  ? 

their  mass,  267,  280,  sq. 
Spider,  if  seen  in  the  morning,  329  ; 

good  against  ague,  ib. 
Spinning,  none  on  Saturday  evening, 
6,174;  nor  in  the  twelve  days  of 
Christmas,    7,    99,    151;    nor  on 
Thursday  evening,  174. 
Springs   (salubrious)   near    Louvain, 

270. 
Stars,  North  Frisic  belief  concerning 
them,  57  ;  names  of  constellations, 
184. 
Staven-Wiifke,  account  of  the,  11. 
Storks,   their    departure,   142  ;   first 

seen,  180. 
Stot,  charm  for  the,  167. 
Subterraneans.      See     Underground 

Folk. 
Sun,  when  it  shines  during  rain,  331. 
Swan  stories,  302-328. 
Sword  (Magic),  how  fabricated,  275. 

T. 

Tetter.     See  Ringworm. 

Thief,  how  to  detect  a,  175,  176; 
how  to  yix  a,  176-178  ;  to  release 
a,  177. 

Thief's  foot,  hand,  finger,  superstition 
connected  with  a,  274,  sq. 

Thunder,  57,  183,  329. 

Thunderstones,  superstitions  concern- 
ing them,  57. 

Tooth-ache,  charms  for  the,  165,166, 
329. 

Travelling  Mother,  264. 

Trees,  announcing  a  death  to  the,  161. 

Twelfthtide,  customs  and  supersti- 
tions of,  151-153 ;  supernatural 
beings  of,  153,  154. 

U. 
Underground  Folk,  account  of  the,  30, 


31  ;  help  to  eat  wedding  dinners' 
31  ;  a  procession  of,  32  ;  their 
dwellings,  if/.  ;  their  pottery,  33  ; 
lend  their  kettles,  ib. ;  one  invited 
to  a  christening,  34,  35  ;  their 
hatred  of  drums,  35  ;  invite  a  couple 
to  be  gossips,  il/. ;  steal  beer,  37  ; 
attempt  to  steal  a  woman,  41  ;  one 
of  their  children  caught,  42  ;  they 
emigrate,  47  ;  lick  up  milk,  49  ;  at 
a  marriage  feast,  107  ;  steal  peas, 
108  ;  one  begs  an  ear  of  bai'ley,  i6. ; 
one  gives  a  girl  a  distaff  of  flax,  109  ; 
in  the  Hiibichenstein,  109-117; 
superstitions  concerning  the,  157. 
Unnererske,  31.  See  Underground 
Folk. 

W. 

Wagoner  (the   eternal),   account   of 

the,  97. 
Walpurgis  Night,  superstitions  of,137. 
Wanue  Thekla,  265. 
Wapper  of  Antwerp  (the  Long),  209- 

217. 
Warts,  charm  for,  172,  174. 
Water  turned  to  wine  on  New  Year's 

eve,  8. 
Waud,  153. 
Waxen  image,  sorcery  practised  with 

a,  24. 
Weather,  how  to  foretell  the,  147. 
Wedding-Feast  at  Carrou-Saint-Mar- 

tin,  232-234. 
Wepelrot  explained,  149. 
Werwolf,  27  ;  cannot  enter  a  field  of 

rye,   ib. ;    a   woman-werwolf,   76  ; 

of  the  w^erwolf's  girdle,  107,  201. 
Whirlwind,  cause  of  the,  264. 


White  maidens,  1 


269. 


White  women,   J 

White  Women  in  Femern,  71. 

Whitlow,  charm  for  a,  172. 

Whitsuntide,  customs  and  supersti- 
tions at,  138,  139. 

Wind-knots,  account  of,  23. 

Windowing  explained,  148. 

Witches  and  Witchcraft.  — Witches 
in  Friesland,  19;  their  meetings, 
21  ;  how  to  know  them,  22  ;  their 
present  to  a  musician,  23 ;  can 
change  the  wind,  ib. ;  make  waxen 
images,  24  ;  stuff"  in  dissension,  ib. ; 
take  butter,  25,  68  ;  hand  of  one 
q2 


340 


INDEX. 


severed,  26 ;  one  as  a  bare,  ih. ; 
stories  of,  64,  sqq. ;  one  boiled  in 
oil,  67  ;  bewitcb  calves,  69  ;  abs- 
tract n)ilk,  77  ;  discovery  of,  78 ; 
tbeir  ride,  81;  burnt,  95,  238; 
how  to  see  them,  137,  138,  149; 
various  superstitions  concerning 
them,  137, 138, 208,  220,  228-232, 
235-241  ;  as  cats,  236;  ointment, 
276  ;  take  milk  and  com,  277  ;  one 
caught,  278  ;  how  to  expel  witch- 
craft, 279  ;  preservative  against, 
330  ;  w^hen  the  sun  shines,  ib. ; 
various  superstitions,  332. 

Witches'  Butter,  138. 

Witte  Juffers,  \  opq 

Witte  Wijven,  J  '^'^^• 


W6d,     ■) 

Wfis,       \  (F] 
Wasen,  J 


ru),  153. 


Wode,  stories  of  the,  59-62. 

Wolterkens,  48. 

Wounds,   Diseases,  &c.,  charms  for, 

162-173. 
Wrist,  charm  for  a  sprained,  173. 
Wunder-blume,  account  of  the,  106. 
Wiinschelruthe,  141. 


Z. 


Zahnrose,  charm  for  the,  164. 
Zevenbergen,  its  destruction,  282. 
Zi  the  builder,  account  of,  38. 
Ziegler  (Pastor),  story  of,  14. 


THE  END. 


LONDON: 

PRINTED   BY    RICHARD   TAYLOR, 
RED  LION  COURT,  FLEET  STREET. 


FLAMMAM. 


•    m 

Date  Due 

1 

■jj^Y^n.^ 

1 

1 

Ph|l 

^^H 

|HH| 

^ 

IBI 

h 

^^^^f 

^■E^ 

1 

^^^m 

^ 

k   /  "'^ 

i 

r  ^n^ 

!4 

^^S 

k 

^ 

"^ 

^^^ 

i^^^^l 

1 

[ 

1 

t^      ii 

! 

^jS       f
