Three diftinét Knocks, 

Or the Door of the moft 

ANTIENT FREE-MASONRY, 

Opening to all Men, 

Neither Naked nor Cloath’d, 

| 
| 
Bare-foot,nor Shod, &c. 
$ 

Being an univerfal De‘cription of all its Branches, 
FROM 

Its firft Rife to this prefent Time, 

As it is delivered in all Lodge: : 

Giving an exaét Account of all their Proceedings in making a Bro- 

ther, with the Three Obligations or Oaths belonging to the Firit 

. Second, and Third Degrees of Mafonry, viz. The Enter’d Ap- 

prentice, Fellow-Craft, and Mafter-Mafon ; with the Obligati- 
on belonging to the Chair, and the Gripe and Word. Alto, 

Full Defcriptions of the Drawing upon the Floor of the Lodge, 
with the Three Steps,,and a Pane ufed at the making of, a 
Brother ; with Songs to be fung after graye Bufinets is done, 
and the Examination of a Brother, whereby he may get Ad- 
mittance into a Lodge, without going through the Obliga- 
tions. With, ‘ 

‘The Author’s Reafons for opening the Door of Mafonry to all 
the World: Alfo the Charaéter of fome Matters of Lodges at 
this Time. 

ee 
By 4——O——_/ 1. 
Member of a Lodge in Eng/and at this Time. 
eee 

Printed and fold by Tuomas Witxinson, Bookfeller and 

» Stationer, (No. 40) Winetavern-Strext, Corner of 
Coox-Street: Where may be had all Kind of School- 
Books, Novels, Hiftories, Plays, Merchants Account-Books, 
with every Article in the Stationary Way. 

— 

Neen nM ten See ene nee ee ee ee a ee a ee ee oe ee ee eo ek Se cry 

andes 
ety een eae 

SS 

Tur Ricut WorRSHIPrUL 

“COMPANY or FAITHFUL 

IRISH MASTERS 

Of Number I, 

And the whole Fraternity which it may be of 
Service to —— 

AES Sh 

caufe they are all Mafters, and in Partnerfhip; befides, 
they would be angry if Idid hot give them that Ho- 
nour; for they that are not Mafters, can’t be admit- 
ted: But it may be of Service to the younger Brothers, be- 
caufe it will let them into the Tricks that are carry’d on, 
which you can’t come at under Six or Seven Years, and the 

Expence of a greatmany Pounds; but here you may Iearn 
A 2 it 

[ Am obliged to dedicate my Book to Number I, be- 

4009 

it allin a Month, and go and lecture as well as the beft 
of them. But if you belong to any Lodge, you mutt 
- give a Shillingevery Quarter to Number I, to feaft their 
d—mn’d Guts, and perhaps your Family want it at home: 
But this Family of P/uto have the Impudence of the D—I, 
to fay if you don’t fend a Shilling when they want it, you 
thall be excluded all Lodges whatfoever: And thus there'go 
Four or Five Shillings a Year, you don’t know for what; 
befides other Expences, which is ten times as much. I could 
give you a Lift of Expences for one Year only, would make 
you ttare; but it does not fignify, for any man that has beers 
a Mafon Half a year, and comes to read this Book, will 
know what I fay to be true, and more fo if he reads it outs 
for it will let him into things he never thoyght of but now h¢ 
will {ce them as plain as poffible. - 

Pray, Brother, what is the matter that Six or Eight or 
Ten Brethern, that like to learn Mafonry, can’t meet at a 
Brother’s Houfe when they pleafe, and fpend their Six-pence 
with Pleafure, and depart in Peace, without wrangling and 
cheating one another; which too often. happens of late, by _ 
admitting of bad Men, and laying Charges upon them that 
are not honeft enough to keep one Tittle thereof; which I 
could {peak of Two or Three who were made Mafters laft 
St. Fobn’s Day, and in a Month’s Time turned out the moft 
forfworn Villains in the World. 

Therefore, I advife all young Brethren to meet as afore- 
faid; firft at one Brother’s Houfe, and then at another, that 
isin the public Way: For what Occafion have you to be 
confin’d to any particular Lodge, when you may hold a 
Lodge where you pleafe, and when you pleafe; having 
either Three , Five, Seven, or Eleven, and as many more as 
you pleafe; andthus you will be of Service one to another, 
without fending your Money to the grand Number I, as 
they call it, qwhich they tell you is for Charity; but if it be, 
Jam afraid they make themfelves the Poor: Thus I advi 
you further, that you have nothing to do with them, f 
they are Wolves in Sheeps Cloathing. z 

It was the Cuftom among the Primative Mafons, and alfo 
among the Primitive Chriftians, to vifit one another 5 for it 
i faid as Iron fharpens Iron, fo fhall one Man fharpen ano- 

. ther. : 

But methinks Ihear fome young Brethr.n fay, Who fhall 
inftru& us? I anfwer: Buy this Book, t ou wilt have In- 
ftruétions ewough. But perhaps you will fay, How thall I 
know that it is right? Get fome faithful Jri/bman, for Two 
or Three ‘Times, and you will foon fee that this Book is 
right; for they all underitand Mafonry, even the loweift 
Clafs of them, if they are once made; for then it is the 
chief of their Bufinefs. Inthe Winter they have a little 
Money out of the Box of Number I, to buy them a few 
Cloaths, fo you may have one of them any Night only pay- 
ing for what he eats and drinks, for they never pay any 
thing; but if they can lay hold of the Money, they will: 
Sol charge you to take care of that, and you may do well 
enough with them, paying their Expences of the Night: . 
Or you may havea faithful Inftru@or from Number I; the 
Secretary, or the like, with One or Two with him; but 
they muft be all free, becaufe they come to inftru& the 
young Brethren; and fometimes you muft pay a Coach-hire 
aoe or the like, according to the Situation of the 

ce. 

_ Therefore it is the beft way not to be troubled with them, 

__ butas littleas you can help; yet I would have you try, and 

yen will find what I fay to be true; for it is by Experience. 

could fay ten times more, but I don’t care to be too harfh; 

Tonly give you Hints, whereby, with a little Experience, 

you will find it all out; and.a great deal more Villainy that 

~ iscarry’d on, and three Parts of the Free-Mafons know no- 
thing about the matter. 

For they pretended to fo much Holinefs at firfe when I 
éame to Bilan; I thought they were Gods, but I foon 
found them d—ls. For at firft I found all their pretended 
Friendfhip not to be real, becaufe they had fo much of it * 

that made me fick, and I dare fay fome of you, Brethern,) 
have: 

hy Me 
have been as fick with their pretended Hongfty, as ever I 
was. 

- But with all their Wit, they never could find me out, that 
Fnever was made a Mafon, or received any of following 
Obligations; yet I have been a Member of feveral Lodges, 
both Antient and Modern, and Royal Arch; and have been 
Matter of fome Lodges in England. will tell you how L 
came at it without being made; as follows. 

Tama German, born near Berlin; and being acquainted 
with an Englifh Family, who had a large Quantity of Books, 
and being intimate with their Children, 1 learnt a little 2x- 
glifh, and took great delight in reading of Englifh Books, 
which I could have when I would. About the Year 1740, 
(1 was then upwards of 20 Years old) as, I was a looking in 
my Neighbour’s Library, I found a Pamphlet, called Ma- 
ifonry Diffecied, an Englifh Book; 1 read it with great At- 
tention, becaufe 1 had heard of Mafonry to bea very bad 
Thing; fo 1 took great Notice of this Book, and could fay 
it all by Heart, or very near, and concluded it was the whole 
Thing, but it was not, yet there was enough to get Admit- 
tance into a Lodge. For, 

About Two or Three Years after, I went to Paris; 1 
had not been there long, before I work’d with a Man that 
was a Mafon, and belonged to a Lodge in Paris. We fell 
in Difcourfe about Mafonry, (I had heard that he was one* 
before) Lafk’d him if he was a Free-Mafon; he faid are 
you? I faid I am; and he afk’d me where] was made, I 
iaid at Berlin. He afk’d me fome Queftions, which Lan- 
{wer'd out of the Book, and happened to be rights fo he 
fhook me by the Hand and call’d me Brother, and took me 
to his Lodge, which 1 became a Member of, and belong’d 
to it whilft I ftaid there, which was Two ar Three Years ; 
then my Bufinefs led me to England. When [fet out, they 
gave mea Certificate, and were very forry to part from me, 
but defir’d me to remember them to all Brothers in England, 
which I did not forget. 1 went to a Modern Lodge, as the 
Trifh call them, whofe grand Lodge is held at the Devil ‘Ta- 
vern, but I don’t care to mention the Lodge. They ne-, 
ver difputed me when I fhew’d them my Certificate, for they 

“were fond of hearing how Mafons proceeded in other Coun- 
tries, which is juft the fame as_it is here only one Thing in 
the Matter’s Part, and that I fhall {peak of in the sree 

‘art, 

(a7! &) 

Part. Then-Iwas invited to an Jrifb Lodge, that call’d 
themfelves the moft antient Mafons, and held their grand 
Lodge at the Five Bell Tavern in the Strand, which is the 
whole Subje& of this Book; but the other I don’t meddle 
with, becaufe there is a Book already publifhed, called Ma- 
Sonry Diffected, whith was publifhedin the Year 1730; and 
I believe was all the Mafonry that was made ufe of at that 
Time; but it is not half that is ufed now, though it is the 
nigheft that was ever wrote about the Matter before this. 

Indeed there have been many Books writ about Ma- 
fonry, but moft to draw the Reader’s Mind from off the a- 
forefaid Book; for I have read them all that have been pub- 
lith’d thefe Twenty Years, and I never faw any Mafonry 
but in the aforefaid Book. ‘There was one publifh’d the 
other Day, call’d, 4 Mafler Key to Free Mafonry, but it is 
not the Thing, tho’ it is fomething about the Matter, but fo 
very little, that it is not worth {peaking of; there is not one 
Thing right, only fome of the Words, but not in their pro- 

Places. I wonder that any Man can pretend to write a 

k of a Thing that he knows nothing of, but by picking | 
a Bit here and there. For no Man is able to fpeak or write 
this Secret, without he has vifited Lodges fome Years. He 
fpeakes of Drawing upon the Cieling with a Pencil, that 
ews he knew nothing of the Matter, to fill, People’s 
Cieclings full of Marks and Scratches, which would be foon 
known to all the World.’ All Men that ever faw any, 
Thing of Mafonry, know that their Drawing is upon the 
Floor, (and that is the Reafon of the Mop and Pail) but any 
Man that reads my Book with attention, will find it right, 
by his own Judgment only; for I will affure you there was 
never fuch an exaé account before publifh’d; which I hope 
will give entire Satisfaction to all Lovers of ‘Truth; fo I fhalf 

. yemain, 

Your moft obedient | 
Humble Servant 
W 

O— V——n. 

N. B. The Stile of the aforefaid and following Apoligies may 
not be fo fine as it foould, but I hope the Reader will ex- 
cufe as Iam not anEnglifhman; but I affure you my Meaning 
is Truth and Fuftice, and I bope will be underfleed. ape 

4h 

CG. 
(Fuft Publifoed,) 
TE 

CONSTITUTION 

OF THE 

Antient and Honourable FRATERNITY 
OF 

Free and Accepted MASONS. 
CONTAINING, 
The HISTORY of MASONRY, 
FROM 
The Creation, throughout the known World, with 
their Charges, Regulations, &. &c. 

Calculated, not only for the 
Inftruction of every new-made M A SON; 
: ' But, alfo, for the 
Information of all who intend to become Brethern 
_ COLLECTED and DIGESTED, 

By ORDER of the GRAND LODGE, 
FROM THEIR 
Old Records, Faithful Traditions, and Lodge-Books. 
EMBELLISHED, 

With a Copperplate Frontifpiece, reprefenting the Ceremony 
of a New Brother receiving the Mord from the mofi refpect- 
able MASTER, ina full Aj embly of the FeLtow Crarn, 

an accurate Plan of the Drawing on the Floor’ of a Lodge, 

and feveral other curious Copperplates. ! 
literfperfed with Variety of Notes and Remarks, never before 
publithed. ; 
Defigned for the USE of LODGES, 
Being a curious apd antient Hiftory from the Creatign to the 
prefent Time, 
DAG: Bo Dehn : 
Printed for THOMAS WILKINSON, in Winetavern-Street, 
the Corner of Cook-Street. ° 
At faid Wilkinfon’s may be bad all the Sorts of Frrz- 
* Mason Booxs now extent. : 

K 9.) 
SOI ANDY We ODED Re 
a THF | . 
EXPLANATION 
OF THE ; 
FOLLOWING FIGURE, 
Which is all the 
Drawing that is ufed in this Sort of Mafonry, 

* GALLED , 
"The Mos'r ANTIENT, by the Trifomen. 

rT is generally done with Chalk or Charcoal 
on the Floor; that is the Reafon that they 
want a Mop and Pail fo often as they do: For 
. When a Man has been made a Mafon, they waih: 
it out; but People have taken Notice and made 
Game of them about the Mop and Pail: So fome 
Lodges ufe Tape and little Nails to form the fame 
‘Thing, and fo keep the World more ignorant of 
the Matter, 

g Note, 

{ 1 ) 

Note, This Plan is drawn on the Floor, Eaft and 
Weft: The Mafter ftands in the Eaft, with the 
Square about his Neck, and the Bible.before him, 
which he takes up and walks forward to the Weft, 
near the firft Step of an oblong Square ; where he 
kneels down, in order to give that folemh Obli- 
gation to him that has already knelt down, with 
his Left-knee bare, bent upon the firft Step; his 
Right-foot forms a Square, with his naked Right- 
hand upon the holy Bible, &c. 

And fo to the Second and Third Degree of Ma- 
fonry, as is fhewn upon the Steps. 

CFuft Publifbed, ) 

SOLOMON in all his GLORY: 
OR THE 

MASTER-MASON. 

Being ai rue Guide to the inmoft Receffes of FREE- 
MASONRY, both Ancient and Modern. 
CONTAINING _ 

A minute Account of the Proceedings from an En- 
tered:/ ipprentige to a l’afl-Mafier, with the dif- 

ferent Signs, Words, and Gripes, &e. 

EAST 

ek 
EAST 
Tue MASTER’s PLACE. 

Senior Wannun’s Place o O “o Pass-Masrer's Place 

The Pafs- 
Matter hath 
theCompais 
and Sun, 
witha Line 
of Cords a~ 
bouthis neck 
viz. 65 De- 
grees, 

far Junior War- 

b ‘ wm DeEN’splace 

Secretary’s Ow © with the 
Place “with o cA Piumb-Rule 
the Crof- > about — his 

Pens about x Ae 
his. Neck, ™ The fenior 
Warden has 
The Matter the Level a- 
and his two bout his 
Deaconshave Neck, and 
each of them The fenior 
a Black-Rod and junior 
in theirhands WarDENS 
Re eas 

Ww. olumn 
t ey silen their Hands 
the Lodge or by them 5 

which will 

and clofe ir. 

a ts Be | be made 

The MASTER’s Strep | plain in the 
You kneel with both Knee aoe part? 
C Pane ey WO ee ee ey are a~ 
Tue CRAFT" Sree. bout twenty 
You kneelwith the right-knee Inches bigh. 

Tue APPRENTICES’s Strep. 
You kneel with the Left-knee. 

_~_-—--_--———— 
Senior Deacon O Junior Deacan O 

“LSaM 

( 32 9 
( Fuft Publifoed, ) 

JACHIN and BOAZ; 

OR, AN 

AUTHENTIC: EE Y 

Toth DOOR of « 

FREE-MASONRY. 

Calculated not only for the Inftruction of every New- 
Made Mason, but alfo for the information of all 

who intend to become BRETHREN, 
CoNnTAINUN @, 

I A circumftantial Account of all the Procceedings in making a 
Mafon, with the feveral Obligations of an Entered Appren- 
tice, Fellow Craft, and Matter; and alfo the Sign, Grip, 
and Pafs-Word of each Degree; with the Ceremony of the 

_ _ Mop dnd Pail. 

, Il..'The Manner of opening a Lodge, and fecting the Craft to 

fork. 

iII. The Entered Apprentice, Fellow-Craft and Mafter’s Lec- 
tures, verbatim, as delivered in all Lodges; with the Songs 
at the Conclufion of each Part, 

- IV. The Origin of Mafonry ; Defcription of Solomon’s Tcm- 
ple; Hiftory of the Murder of the Grand Mafter Hiram by 
the three Fellow-Crafts; the Manner of the Affatiins being 
difcovered, and their Punifhment; the Burial of Hiram by 
King Solomon’s Order ; with the tive Points of Fellowthip. 

V. The Ceremony of the Inftalement of the Mafers of the 
different Lodges on St. John’s Day. 

VI. A fafe and eafy Method propoted by which a Man may ob- 
tain Admittance into any Lodge without palling through the 
Form required, and thereby fave a Guinea or two in his 
Pocket. 

ILLUSTRATED WITH 

An accurate Plan of the Deawtne onthe Floor of a Lodge. 

‘And interfpered with Variety of Nores andRemarks necetlary 

_ to explain and fender the Whole clear to the meaneft Capacity. 

SS ne ee 
ByaGEN TLE MAN belonging to the Jerufalem Lodge ; a 
frequent Vifitor at thé Queen’s-Arms, St, Paul’s Church Yard 5 
the Florn, in Fleet-Street ; Crown and Anchor, Strand; and 
the Salutation, Newgate-Street. 

Try me; prove me. 

D-—-U--B-L- ]- N: 

Printed for THOMAS WILKINSON, in Winetavern-Strect, 

the Corner of Cagt-Strect. 

At faid Wilkinfon’s may be had all the Sorts of Fren- 
Mason Booxs now extent. 

C33.) 
SCRE ES OL RRO OLR 
RS a aR OB 

LL this Figure is wafhed out with a Mop, 
asaforefaid, as foon as he has received the 
Obligation. 

Then a Table is put in the Place where this 
Figure was, and they all fit round it; but every 
Man fitteth in the fame Place as he ftood before 
The Figure was wafhed out, viz. the Mafter in 
the Eaft, the fenior Warden in the Weft, &c. 

Every Man has a Glafs fet him, and a large 
Bowl of Punch, or what they like, is fet in the 
Center of the Table; and the fenior Deacon 
chatges (as_they call it)in the North and Eaft, , 
and the junior Deacon in the South and Wet; 
for i it is their Duty fo to do, z% e. to fill all the 
Glaffes. 

Then the Mafter takes up his Glafs, and gives 
a Yoaft to the King and the Craft, with Three 
Times Three in the Apprentice’s and they all 
fay Ditto, and drink all together, minding the 
Mafter’s Motion: They do the fame with the em- 
pty Glafs that he doth; that is, he draws it a-crofs 
his Throat Three Times (which is the Penalty of 

the eee of your Throat being cut a-crofs) 
and 

G74) 

and then makes Three Offers to put it down: At 
the third, they all fet. their Glaffes down toge- 
ther, and which they call firing: Then they hold 
the Left-hand Breaft-high, and clap Nine Times 
with the Right, their Foot going at the fame 
Time: When this is done, they all fit down. 

(Fuft Publifbed.) : 
Masonry Diffected: 

Being an Univerfal and Genuine 

DESCRIPTION 

Of all its Branches, from the Original to the Pre- 
fent Time: As it is delivered in the Conftituted 
Regular Lodges, both in City and Country, ac- 
cording to the feveral Degrees of Admiifions. 

Giving an Impertial Account of their Regular 
proceedings in initiating their New Members in 
the whole Three Degree of Free-Mafonry. 

BOCA EOCENE ANI CLA OL ADEE 
VMN ION GOON MOY HOC MOON Hind OM 

THE 
Three diftinét Knocks, 

Or the Door of the mo 

ANTIENT FREE-MASONRY, 

Opening toall Men, Gc. 

—_—_—_—_———_ C—O 

How to open a Lodge, to fet the Men to Work. 

Mafter, to the junior Deacon. 

H A Tis the chief care of a mafon? 
Anfwer: To fee that his Lodge is tyl’d. 
Maf. Pray do your Duty. 

N.B. ‘The junior Deacon goes and gives Three Knocks at 
the Door; and if there is nobody nigh, the Tyler without 
anfwereth with Three Knocks: The junior Deacon tells 
the Mafter, and fays; Worfhipful, the Lodge is tyPd. 
Maf. to jun. Dea. The junior Deacon’s Place, in the 

Lodge? 

Deacon’s 

¢ x67") 

Deacon’s Anf. At the Back of the fenior Warden, er at 
his Right hand if he permits hin. 

Mal. Your Bufinefs. 

Deacon’s Anf. ‘To carry Meflages from the fenior to the 
junior Warden, fo that they may be difperfed round the 
Lodge. - Cy r 

Maf. to the fen. Ded. ‘The fenior Deacon’s Place in the 
Lodge? ‘ 

Sen. Deacon’s Anf. At the Back of the Mafter, or at his 
Right-hand if he permits him. 

Maf. Your Bufinefs there ? ! 

Sen. Dea. Anf. ‘To catry Maffages from the Matter to 
the fenior Warden. 

Maf. The junior Warden’s Place in the Lodge? 

Deacon’s Anf: Inthe South. > £ 

Maf. .to the jun. Warden. Lili Bufinefs there ? 

Sen. Warden’s Anf. The better to obferve the Sun, at 

high Meridian to call the Men off from Work: to refrefh- _ 

ment, and to fee that they come on in‘due Time, that the 
Matter may have Pleafure and profit thereby. 

Maf. The fenior Warden’s Place in the ies ? 

Jun: Warden’s Anf. In the Wet. } 

Mat. to the fen. Warden. Your Bufinefs there? . 

Sen. Warden’s Anf. As the Sun fets in the Weft to clofe 
the Day, fo the Senior ftands in the Weft to clofe the Lodge; 
paying the Hirelings their Wages, and difmifling them 
trom their Labour. : 

Maf. The Matter’s Place in the Lodge? 

Sen. Warden’s Anf. In the Eaft. 

Maf. His Bufinefs there. 

Sen. Warden’s Anf. As the Sun rifes. in the Eaft to open 
the Day, fo the Mafter ftands in the Eaft to open his Lodge 
to fet his Men to Work. : 
N. B. Then the Mafter takes off his Hat, which he alway. 

has on but atthis Time, and puts it on again as foon as 

the Lodge is open; but all the reft keep theirs off, and 

he declares the Lodge open as follows. Le 4 

Maf. This Lodge is open in the Name of God and holy 
St. Fobn, forbidding all curfing and {wearing, whifpering, 
and all profane Difcourfe whatfoever, under no Iefs Penalty 
than what the Majority fhall think proper; not lefs than One 
Penny a Time, nor more than Six-pence. 

N.B. Then he gives Three Knocks upon the Table with a — ’ 

wooden Hammer, and puts on his Hat; then they all fit 

down, and begin their Lecture, as follows. 

The 

ary EM 
0 
ye les P 

(97) 
The enter’d Apprertice’s Leature. 

‘Maf. JD Rrother, Isthere any Thing between ySuand me? 
Anf. There is Worthipful. 
Maf. What is it, Brother? 
Anf. A Secret. 
~ Maf. What is that Secret, Brother? 
Anf.-Mafonry. 
Maf, Then Ea A you are a Mafon ? 
__ Anf. Lam fo taken and accepted amongft Brothers’ and 
Fellows. “g 
a ag Pray what Manner of Man ought a Mafon Manto 

Anf. A Man that is born of a Free Woman. 
Maf. Where was you firft prepar’d to be made a Mafon? 
Anf. In my, Heart. ; 
Maf. Where was you next prepar’d? 
_ Ant. In a Room adjoining to the Lodge. 
Maf. How was you prepar’d, Brother. 
An‘. 1 was neithersnaked nor cleathed, bare-foot nor fhod, 
depriv’d of all Metal, hood-wink’d with a cable Tow about 
-my Neck, where I was led to the Door of the Lodge in a 
-haliing-moving Pofture, by the Hand of a Friends, whom I 
afterwards found to be a Brother... 
Maf. How did you know it to be a Door, you being 
blinded? 
Ant. By finding a Stoppage, and afterwards an Entrance 
or Admittance. . ; ; 
Maf. How-got you Admittance ? 
Anf, By three diftinét Knocks. 
Maf. What was faid to you within? 
Anf. Who comes there. ‘ 
Maf. Your Anfwer, Brother? 
Anf. One who begs to have and receive Part of the Be- 
nefit of this right worfhipful Lodge, dedicated to St. Fobr’s 
as many Brothers and Fellows havé done before me. 
~ Mat. How do you expeét to obtain it? 
Anf. By being free born and well réported. 
Maf. What was faid to you then? ‘ 
Anf. Enter.) , - 

_ Maf. How did you enter, and upon what? 
Ani. Upon the Point of a Sword or Spear, or fome War- 
_ tikeInftrument, prefented to my naked left Breait. 
_ Maf. What was faid to you then? 
~ Ang. Twas atk’d if I felt any ‘Thing. . 
bay € Mat. 

( 8 ) 

Maf. What was your Anfwer ? 

Anf. I did, but I could ‘ce nothing. 

Maf. ~74u have told me how you was received, pray who 
received you ? 

Anf. The Junior Warden. 

Maf. How did he difpofe of you? 

Anf. He deliver'd me to the Mafter, who ordered me ,to 
Kneel 'own and receive the Benefit of a Prayer. 

' Brethren, let us Pray. 

Lord God, thou great and univerfal Mafon of the 
World, and firit Builder of Man, as it were a Temples 
be with us, O Lord, as thou haft promifed, when two or 
three are gathered together in thy Name, thou will be in the 
midit of them; be with us, O Lord, and blefs all our Un- 
dertakings, and grant that this our Friend, may hecome a 
faithtul Brother. Let Grace and Peace be multiplied unto 
him, through the Knowledge of our Lord Jeius Chrift: 
And grant, O Lord, as he putteth forth his Hand to thy 
Holy Word, that he may alfo put forth his Hand to ferve a 
Brother, but not to hurt himfelf or his family; that where- 
by may be given to us great and precious Promifes, that 
by this we may be Partakers of thy divine Nature, having 
eicaped the Corruption that is in this World, through Luft. 
O Lord God, add to our Faith Virtue, and to Virtue 
Knowledge, and to Knowledge Temperance, and to Tem~ 
perance Prudence, and to Prudence Patience, and to Patience 
Godlinefs, and to Godlinefs Brotherly Love, and to Brother- 
ly Love Charity; and grant, O taal that Mafonry may be 
bleft throughout the World, and thy Peace be upon us, O 
Lord; and grant that we may be all united as one, through 
our Lord Jefus Chrift, who liveth and reigncth for ever and 
ever. Amen. ‘ , 
Maf. After you had received this Prayer, what was faid to 
ou? 
Anf. J was afk’d who I put my Truft in. 
Maf. Your Anfwer, Brother 
Anf. In God. © 
Mal. What was the next Thing faid to you?» 
Anf. I was taken by the Right-hand, and he faid rife Up 
and iollow your Leader, and tear no Danger. ’ 
Maf. After all this, how was you difpos’d of ? i 
aint. I was led three Times round the Lodge. e\ 
Maf. Where did you meet with the firt Oppofition? 
: ~ Ant. 

U. 9g) 
* Anf. At: the back of the Junior Warden in the South, 
where I gavethe fame three Knocks as at the Door. 

Maf. What Anfwer did he give you? 

Ant. He faid, who comes there? 

Maf. Your An{wer? 

Anf., The fameas at the Door, one who begs to have and 
feceive, fc. ; 

Maf. Where did you mect with the fecond Oppofition ? 

Anf. At the Back of the: Senior Warden in the Wett, 
where I made the fame Repetition as at the Door. He faid, 
who comes here? One who begs to have and receive, &'c. 
© Maf. Where did you meet with the third Oppfition ? 

Anf. At the Back of the Mafter in the Eaft, where I made 
the Repetition as before. 

Mat.) ‘What did the Matter do with you ? 

~~ Anf. He order’d nie back to the Senior Warden in the 
Welt, to receive Inftru€tions. : ‘ 
_. Maf. What weve the Inftru&tions he gave you? . 

Anf. He taught me to take one Step upon the firit Step of 
a tight Angle oblong Square, with my left Knee bare benr, 
my Body upright, my right Foot forming a Square, m; 
naked Right-hand upon the Holy Bible, with the Square anu 
‘Compal thereon, my Left-hand fupporting the fame ; where 
I took that folemu Obligation or Oath of a Mafon. : 

Maf. Brother, Can you repeat that Obligation ? 

Anf. I will do my Endeavour, with your Aflifance, 
Worhhipful. 
Maf. Stand up and begin. 
Anf. I. W Vv 5 
Of my own free Will and Accord, and ia the Prefence of 

Almighty God, and this right Worthipful Lodge, dedicated 

- ttoSt. Fabn, do hereby and hereon. oft folemnly and fincere- 

ly fwear, that 1 will always hail, conceal, and never will re- 

veal any of the fecret Myiteries of Free Mafonry, that thal 

be delivered to me new, of any ‘Time hereafter, except it he 

to a trie and lawful Brother, or in a jut and lawfui Lodge 

of Brothers and Fellows, him or them whom I fhail find to 
be fuch, after juft Trial and due Examination. 

1 furthermore do fwear, that I will not write it, print it, 

cut it, paint itor flint it, mark it, fain it, or engrave it, or 

-canfe fo to be, done, upon any thing moveable, or inmpvea- 

ble, under the Canopy of Heaven, whereby it may become 

legible or intelligible, or the leaft Appearance of the Cha- 

_ ra@terof a Letter, whereby the fecret Art may be unlawful- - 

ty obtained. All this 1 {wear, with a ftrong and fteady Re- 

Sie G4 ' — folution 

. 

( 20 ) 
folution to perform the fame, without any Hefitation, mental 
Refervation, or Self-evafion of Mind in me whatfoever, un- 
der no teis Penaly than to have my Throat cut acrofs, my 
Tongue torn out by the Root, and that to be buried in the 
Sands of the Sea, at Low-Water, Mark, a Cable’s Length 
from the Shore, where the’ Tide ebbs and flows twice in 
Twenty-four Hours; fohelp me God, and keep me ftedfatt, 
in this my entered Apprentice’s Obligation. 
[He kiffés the Book.} 

Pinde merum Genia. 

N. B. After this Obligation they drink a Toatt to the Heart 
that conceals, and to the Tongue that never reveals. 

The Matter in the Chair gives it, and they all fay Ditto, 
and they draw the Glaffes acrofe their Throats, as atorefaid. 

Maf. Now, Brother, after you received this Obligations 
what was the firit Thing that was faid to you? ; 

Anf. I was afk’d what I moft defired ¢ 

Mat. What was your Anfwer? 

Anf. To be brought to Light, 

Maf. Who brought you to Light? 

Anf. The Matter and the reft of the Brethren. 

Maf. When you were thus brought to Light, what were 
the firft Thing you faw ? ' 

Anf. Bible, Square and Compafs. 

Maf. What was it they told you they fignified? , 

Anf. Three great Lights in Matonry. ? 

Maf. Explain them, Brother. : ‘ 

Anf. The Bible to rule and govern our Faith; the Square, 
to fquare our Aétions; the Compaffts is to keep us within 
Rounds with all Men, particularly with a Brother. r 

Maf. What were the next Things that were fhewn to 

ou? 
, Anf.” Three Candles, which I was told were ‘Fhree leffes 
Lights in Matonry. 

Maf. What da they reprefent-? 

Anf. ‘The Sun, Moon, and Matfter-Mafon, 

Maf. Why fo, Brother? 

Anf. There is the Sun to rule the Day, the Moon to rule 
the Night, and the Mafter-Mafon his Lodge, or at Jeat - 
ought a todo. ‘ 

Maf. What was then done to you? bees 

Anf. The Matter took me by the Right*hand, and gave 
me the rt and Word of an enter’d Apprentice, and faid, 
Je up Brot er, Boza. Bt SS 

NB, 

ae 
.NoB. Sometiites they fhew you the Sign before this Gripe 
and Word is given, which is Boaz: It is the enter’d 
Apprentice’s Word, and the Gripe thereto belonging 
is'to pinch with your Right-thumb Nail,, upon the firft 
Joint of your Brother's Right-hand. 
Maf. Have you got this Gripe and Word, Brother? 
Anf. I have, Worshipful. P 
Maf. Give it to your next Brother, 
N. B. Then he takes his next Brother by the Right-hand, 
and gives him the Gripe and Word, as. before defcribe 
ed: Hetells the Mafter, that is right. 

4 According to the following Proof. 
_ The ft. Brother gives himthe Gripes fig 
~The ad. Brother fays What's this? 9 | iy 

~ 1ft. Bro. ‘The Gripe of an enter’d Apprentice. 
ad. Bro. Has it got a Name? : 
_ aft. Bro. It has. , 
2d. Bro. Will you give itme? 
if. Bro. Tif letter it with you or halve ® 
2d. Bro, Vli-halyg¢ it with you. 
ift. Bro. Begin. burp 
ad. Bro. No,,.you'begin firkky 
:BO- 

ad. Bro. A Zz. Sa bitin 7 
lf Bro. BOYZ. oi: 20 Pons 
2d+ Bro. It isright,,Worfhipful Matter. 9). 
_ Maf, What; was.the next Thing that was fhown to you? 
Anf. The due Guard or Sign, of an enter’d Apprentice, , 
N.B. The duc Guard or Signy as they call it, is by draw- 
~ ing your Right-hand a-crofs your ‘Throat. edgeways, 
' which is to’ put you in mind of the Penalty of your Obli- 
gation; that you would fooner have your Throat cut ar 
crofs, than difcover the Secrets of Mafonry: Which I 
_ eail mere Nonfenfe, and all that perufe this will fay the 
fame, when they are convinc’d that this is the whole 
’ Thing; which they foon will find out, only by talking ont’ 
of this Book to fome that you know to be Mafonss but 
not-to let them know that you have read it; You may lay 
that you was madeat fome Lodge in the great and 
then fhew them the Signs and Gripes, and the Words 
_» thereunto belonging 4 ali which are fully deferib’d in this 
 Book:.'Then he will foon own you foronc.of the Frar 
ternity, and take you to his Lodge, as they did me... 
.” Maf. Have you got that duc Guard, of Sign, of an ene 

ter’d Apprentice? Re ae 
a. NB, 

4, 

( 22 ) 
N. B. He/draws his Right-hand a-crofs his ‘Throat (as afore- 
faid), to fhew the Mafter that he has. 

Mal. After all this, what was faid to you? 

Anf. Iwas order’dto be taken back, and invefted with 
what I had been divefted of; and to be brought hack to re- 
turn Thanks, and to reccive the Benefit of a LeQure, if 
‘Time would permit. { 

Maf. After you was invefted of what you had been di- 
wefted of, what was donc to you? vi 
~ Anf. Iwas brought back to the North-weft Corner of the 
Lodge, in order to return Thanks ? 

Mal. How-did you return Thanks ? 

Anf. I food in the North-weit Corner of the Lodge, and, 
with the Inftruétion of a Brother, 1 faid; Matter, fenior 
and junior Wardens, fenjor and junior Deacons, and the reft 
of the Brethern of this Lodge, I return you Thanks for 

‘the Honour you have done me, in making mea Mafon; and 
admitting me a Member of this worthy Society. 

Maf. What was faid to you then? 

_ Anf. The Matter call’d- me up to the North Raft Corner 
of the Lodge, or at his Right-hand. aiid 

Maf. Did he prefent you withiany Thing ? 

Anf. He prefented me with an Apron; which he put on 
me; he told me it was a Badge of Innocency more antient 
than the Golden Fleece or the Roman/agle; more ho- 
nour’d than the Star and Garter,: or, anyother Order under 
theSun, that’could be: confer’d upén me at that’ Tire, of 

7 

any Time hereafter. vo wh od De. 
Maf. What were ‘the next) Things that “were! fhewn to 
you? I beiavcd { 

Anf. Twas fat down by the Matter’s Right-hand, and he 
fhew’d me the working ‘lools of an enter’d Apprentice. 

Maf. What were they ? ; 

Anf. The 24 Inch Gauge, the Square and common Ga- 
vel, or fetting Maul. 

Maf. What are their Ufes? : 

Anf. The ‘Square to fquare my Work, the 24 Inch 
Gauge to meafure my Work, the common Gavel to knock, 
off all faperfuous “Matters, whereby the Square may fit 
eafy and juit. y ae : 

(. Brother, as we are not all working Mafons, we ap- 
ply them to our Morals, which we call fpiritualizing; ex- 
lain them. : : : aie 

Anf. The 24 Inch. Gauge reprefents the 24 Hours of the 
Day. : 1 6 aes 

Me Mal. 

ae 
~ Mat. How do you {pand them, Brother? 
Ant. Six Hours to work in, Six Hours to ferve God, and 
_ Six to ferve a’ Friend or a Brother, as°far as lies in my 
Power, | without being detrimental to myfelf or Family. 
N. B. This is all the enter’d Apprentice’s Le€ture, which 
gives the full Deicription of his making, and is enough 
_ foran Apprentice to learn to get Admittance ina Lodge; 
but there are fome foolifh Reafons why a Man thould be 
ferv’d fo, which I hall thew you hereafter. But me- 
thinks I hear fome fay, Iam furpriz’d that a Gentleman 
of good Senfe and Reafon would fuffer himfelf to be us’d 
fo; to be robb’d of all his Money, and all Manner of 
Metal, and almoit ttripp’d naked, and blinded, with a 
Halter about his Neck !. fo fay 1. But the Reafon is, no 
Man ever was made a Mafon, but has fome Friends there 
that were Matons already, and perhaps under fome Obli- 
gation, who will fay, we were terv’d fo before, and were 
not afraid; ut you will hear the Reaton for it all, then’ 
you will be fatisfied, and fay our Meaning is good. I 
mytelf have feen feveral that would not go through it, ’till 
their Friends have preached the aforelaid Doérine. I 
_ know feveral that have receiv’d the firft Step, and would 
go no farther; for there was one Mr. 7+——s, a Clergy- 
man, and Curate of St. Mary Over’s, in Southwark, fo 
angry and furpriz’d, that he woula have been glad to have 
made his Efcape from them, provided it had been in his 
Power; but they would not permit him ’till he had re- 
ceived the Apprentice’s Obligations, which they call the 
firft Pill, that you fhan’t difcover what you have {een 
but when he got away, he never came near them more, 
and thought himfelf very ill-us’d. Two or three more 
were jurpriz’d in that Manner at the fame Lodge, viz. at 
Number I heid then at J—*+s, at the Mitre on the 
Broad Wall, Chriff Church in Surry, and feveral other 
Lodges that I have heard of; but this I know to be faét. 
Alfo the Matter of a Lodge, who had made a‘great ma- 
_ ny Fools, by getting One Pound Five Shillings from each 
of them: ‘There was half the Money fpent, and the other 
half kept in the Box for charitable Ufess but when they 
rpg to the amount f many Pounds, the Matter in 
the Chair, who is fworn moi wickedly not to robe the 
» Ledge (but to ferve it) which he did, by carrying it all 
off, and faid he wanted Charit y¥> therefore he would keep, 
“it, and they might do their worft and be d—n’d; and 
feveral more that I have known to do fuch ‘Tricks, bi I 
: on’t 

( 4) 
don’t care to mention their Names, having faid cnough to 
be underftood. I think the above Number confirms the 
Charaéter, before they would ferve a Brother, they would _ 
rob him, or take away his Gharaéter, whereby he may 
Jofe his Bufinefs. I could tell you a great many bad 
‘Things they have done one to another, although they are. 
{worn fo bitterly to the contrary; but it would fwell my 
Pamphlet into a large Volume. Therefore, I fhall pro- 
¢ced to the Apprentice’s Reafons, as I promis’d yous but 
there is one bad Thing that I cannot leate out, which 
one Brother did to another. 
A diftrefs’d Brother, being a little in Debt was oblig’d 
“to obf{cond from his Habitation, till his Affairs were fet- 
tled. He ow’d a Brother Thirteen or Fourteen Shillings, 
it was no more, I declare. He came into this diftrefs’d — 
Brother’s Honfe whilft he was from Home, and brought - 
proper ‘Officers to feize his Effects, which. frighten’d his 
Wife and Children greatly, for he faid he would take 
them all. The Brother’s wife faid, what for Fourteen 
Shillings? and told him if he would ftay till Sunday, her 
Hufband would be at Home, and hop’d would bring fome 
‘Moncey with him; but if he did not, it fhould be paid on 
the Sunday following, by fome Means or.other; but he 
faid he would not ftays fhe defir’d he would, as it was 
but Two or Three Lays, but to no purpole; fo he took 
to the value of Three Pounds for the Poole Shillings, 
and carry’d them off. Here is an Inftance of Mafonry! 
which the World takes to he a charitable good Thing. 

But obferve what a forfworn Villain he muft be, as 
you wil find when you examine all the Obligations or 
Oaths; Fourteen Shillings could not hurt him or his Fa- 
mily, for he was worth Hundreds. 

I thall fay no more,*becauie I would not be too fevere; 
tho’ I have faid enough to difplay their Villainy, which 
I hope will be a Caution to all others. 

Now I fhall proceed to the enter’d Apprentices. 

RE VATSLOs N ie 

Maf, Why was you ncither naked nor cloath’d, bare-foot 
nor fhod, with a Cable-tow (or Halter) about your Neck? _ 
Anf. If 1 had recanted, and ran out in the Street, the - 
People would ave faid I was mad; but if a Brother had 
feen me, he would have brought'me back, and feen me 
done Juitice by. ‘i in 

(See ( 25 ) 
~ N.B What a foolifh Reafon is this, for Men of Under- 
ftanding to difpute about! 

~ Maf. Why was you hoodwink’d? 
_ — Anf. That my Heart might conceal, before my Eyes did 
_ aifcover. 

_~ Maf. The fecond Reafon Brother? 
_ _Anf. As I was in Darknefs at that ‘Time, I fhould keep 
ail the World in Darknefs. 
Maf. Why was you depriv’d of all Metal ? 
Anf. That I fhould bring nothing offenfive, or defeinfive, 
into the Lodge. 
Mat. Give me the fecond Reafon Brother ? 
Anf. As I was poor and pennylefs when I was made a 
Mafon, it inform’d me that H fhould affift all poor and pen- 
‘nylefs Brethren, as far as lay in my Power. 
Maf. Brother, you told me you gave Three diftin® 

_ Knocks at the Door: Pray what do they fignify? 

Anf. A certain Text in Scripture. 
Maf. What is that Text, Brother? 
_ Anf. Afk, and you fhall have; feck, and you fhall find; 
“knock, and it fhall be open’d unto you. 
Maf. How do you apply this Taxt in Mafonry ? 
Anf. I fought in my Mind; I afk’d of my Friend; I 
4 “knock’d and the Door of Mafonry became open unto me. 
Maf. Why had you a Sword, Spear, or {ome other war- 
Jike Inftrument, prefented to your naked Left-breaft parti- 
cularly ? 
; poe becaufe the Left-breaft is the neareft the Heart, that 
it might be the more a Prick to my Confcience as it prick’d 
my Flefh at that time. 
Maf. Why were you led Three Times round the Lodge ? 
Anf. That all the Brethren might fee 1 was duly prepar’d. 
Maf. When you was made an Apprentice, why was your 
Left-knee bare bent. 

_ _ Anf. Becaufe the Left-knee is the weakeft part of my Bo- 
dy, andan enter’d Apprentice is the weakeit Part of Ma- 
fonry, which I was then entering into. 

N. B. There are fome more Reafons, but they are fo foolifh 
that they are not worth mentioning; fo { thall proceed 
to the Form of the Lodge, as follows. é 

Mal. ROTHER, we have been talking a great while 
about a Lodge; Pray what makes a Lodge? 
Ani. A certain Number i ec mict together to work. 

‘ 

i 26 ) 

Maf. Pray what Number makes a Lodge? 

Ant. Three, Five, Seven, or Eleven. 

Mat. Why do ‘Three make a Lodge, Brother? 

Anf. Becaufe there were three Grand Mafons it the 
building of the World, and alfo that noble Piece of Archi- 
teéture’ Mans which are fo complete in Proportion, that 
the Antients began their Architecture by the fanic Rules. 

Mal. ‘The fecond Reafon, Brother? 

Ant. There were Three Grand Mafons at the building of 
Salomon’ s Temple. 

Maf. Why do Five make a: Lodge ? 

Anf. Becaufe every Man is enducd with Five Senfes. 

Maf. What are the Five Senfes? y 

Ant. Hearing, Secing, Smelling, Tafting, and Feeling. 

Mai. What Uie are thole Five Senfes to you in Ma~ 
fonry? 

Anf.. Three are of great Ufeto me, viz Hearing, See- 
ing, and Feeling. 

Maf. What ute are they; Brother? 

Anf. Hearing, isto hearthe Word; Seeing, isto fee the 
Sign; Feeling, is to fecl the Gripe; that I: may know a 
Brother, as wellin the Dark as in the Light. 

Maf. Whiy fhould Seven make a Lodge? 

Anf. Beeaufe there are Seven liberal Sciences. 

Maf. Will you name'them, Brother ? 

Anf. Grammar, Rhetorick, Logick, Arithmetick, Ged 
metry, Mufick, and Aftronomy. 

Maf. Brother, what do thoie Sciences teach you? 

Anf. Grammer teaches me the Art of Writing and {peak- 
ing the Language,wherein I learn according to the Firft, 
Second, and Third Concord. ; 

Maf. What doth Rhetorick teach you ? 

Ant. ‘The Art of Ipeaking and difcourfing upon any To- 

ick whatloever. . 

Maf. What doth Logick teach you? } 

Anf. ‘The Art of reafoning well, whereby you may find 
out ‘Truth from Falfhood. . . 

Maf. What doth Atithmetick teach you? 

Anf. The Virtue of Numbers. 

Maf. What doth Geometry teach you? 

Anf. ‘The Art of meafuring, whereby the Egystains found — ‘ 

out their own Land, or the fame Quantity which they had — 
before the overflowing of the River Ni/e, which frequently 
-us’d to flow to water their Country; at which Time they 
“Med to the Mountains till it went off again, which made — 
them 

ee ar C 47) 
. them have continual Quarrel about their Lands; for every 

Man thought he was rebb’d and had not his Right, till 

 £uelid found: out Geometry, and meafured every Man his 

Due, and gave them Pians of each Man’s Ground, wit! 

_ the juft Quantity that belonged to hims then they all were 
sfatisfy’d; und the fame Rule is continued in all Nations to 
this Day. 
Mal. What doth Mufick teach you, Brother? 
. Anf. The Virtue of Sounds. 
Maf. What doth Aftronomy teach you? 
Anf. The Knowledge of the Heaven*y Bodies. 

N.B. See Brand?’s Attronomical Tables, and you wili 
have a full defcription of the lafk Science. But I believe 
you may content yourfelf without any other Authors upon 

_ this Head; for] go as far as any of the Free Mafons do 
intheir Lectures, and rather further; which lam obliged 
todo to make it plain, that it may be uiderftood to the 
meaneft Capacity. That which is not in the Leéture is 
marked thus, NV. B. 

Maf. Why fhould Eleven make a Lodge, Brother? 
_ Anf. ‘There were. Eleven) Patriarchs, when ‘Jofeph was 
fold into Egypt, and fuppoled to be loft. 
~*~ Maf. The fecond Reaton, Brother? 
_ « Anf. There were but Eleven Apoitles when ‘Fudas had be- 
trayed Chritt. 
| Mat. Of what form is your Lodge? 
Anf. An Oblong Square. 
~ Maf How long, Brother? 
. “Ant. From Eaftto Wet. 
ee Maf. How wide, Brother ? 
Anf. Between North and South. 
~ Maf. How high, Brother? 
Anf. From the Earth to the Heavens. 
_ Maf. How deep» Brother? 
Anf. From the Surface of. the Earth to the Center. 
Maf. Why is your Lodge faid tg be from the Surface to 
_ the Center of the Earth? 
rf _.Anf. Becaufe'that'Mafonry is Univerfal. 
: - Maf. Why js your Lodge fituated Eafl and Weft? 
op Becaufe all Churches and Chapels are or ought to 

be fo. i 
ca -'Maf. Why fo, Brother? 

_ Anf. Becaufe the Gofpel was firft preached in the Eaft, 
___ and extended itfelf into the Welt. ” 
—Maf. What fupports your vie 
Ta ae 2 

Ant. 

< 

( 28 ) 

Anf. Three great Pillars. 

Maf. What are their Names ? 

Anf. Wifdom, Strength, and Beauty. 

Maf. Who doth the Pillar of Wifdom reprefent ? 

Anf. The Mafter in the Eaft. 

Maf. Who doth the Pillar of Strength reprefent? 

Anf. The Senior Warderrin the Weit. 5 

Maf. Who doth the Pillar of Beauty reprefent ? 

Anf. The Junior Warden in the South. 

Mai. Why fhould the Matter reprefent the Pillar of 
Wifdom ? 

Anf. Becaufe he gives Inftruétions to the Crafts to carry 
on their Work in a proper Manner, with good Harmony ? 

Mal. Why fhould the fenior Warden reprefent the Pillar 
of Strength ? , 

Anf. As the Sun {ets to finifh the Day, fo the fenior War- 
den itands in the Weit to pay the Hirelings their Wages, 
which is the Strength and Support of all Bufinets. 

Maf. Why fhould the junior Warden reprefent the Pillar 

of Beauty? 

Ant. Becaufe he ftands in the South, at high Twelve at 
Noon, which is the Beauty of the Day, to call the Men off 
from Work to Retrefhment, and to fee that they come on 
again in due Time, that the Mafter may have Pleafure and 
Profit therein. 

Maf. Why ist faid that your Lodge is fupported by thofe 
Three great Pillars, Wifdom, Strength and Beauty ? 

Anf. Becaufe Wifdom, Strengthand Beauty, arethe Finifh- 
ers of all Works, and nothing can be carried on without 
them. ; 

Maf. Why fo, Brother? 

Anf. Becaufe there is Wifdom to contrive, Strength te 
fupport, and Beauty to adorn. 

_ Maf. Had you any covering to your Ladge? 

Anf. Yes, a cloudy Canopy, of divers Colours, or the 
Clouds. 

Maf. How blows a Mafon’s Wind, Brother ? 

Anf. Duc Eaft and Weft. 

Maf. Whatis it o’Clock, Brother? 

Ant. High ‘Twelve. 

Maf. Call the men off from Work to Refrefhment, and 

fee that they come on again in due time. 

[The End of the enter’d Apprentice’s Ledlure) 

{ 29 ) 

The enter’d Apprentice’s Song, which is fung after grave 
Bufinefs is done, or after making a Brother. 
I. 

OME let us prepare, 
We Brothers a Pav, 
Affembled on merry Occafion ; 
Let’s drink, laugh, and fing; 
Our Wine has a Spring ; 
Here’s a Healh to an Accepted Mafon. 
Il. 

‘The World is in pain 
Our Secrets to gain, 
And fill Ict them wonder and gaze on3 
They ne’er can divine 
The Word or the Sign 
Of a Free and an Accepted Mafen, 
Tu. 

"Tis This, and’tis That, 
They cannot tell Wbat, 
Why fo many Great Men of the Nation, 
Should Aprons put on, 
To make themfelves one 
With aFree and an Accepted Mafon. 
IV. 

Great Kings, Dukes and Lords, 

Have laid by their Svords, 
Our My/’ry to put a good Grace on, 

And ne’er been afham’d 

To hear themfelves nam’d 
Witha free and an mea Mafon,. 

Antiquity’s Pride 
We have on our Side, 
And it maketh Men juft in their Station: 
‘ There’s naught but what’s goad, 
. To be underftood 
By a Free and an eee ae: 

We’er true and fincere, 
And juft tothe fair, 
Who will truft'us on every Occafion 5 
; No Mortal can more 
The Ladies adore, 
Than a Free and an Accepted Mafor. 

€ 30>) 
Vii. 
‘Then join Hand in Hand, 
T’cach other firm ftand, 
Let’s be merry and put a bright Face on: 
What Mortal can boaft 
So Noble a Toaft, 
Asa Free and an Accepted Mafon. 
Vil. 
We're true and fincere, 
And jutt to the Farr, 
Who will truft us on ev’ry Occafion 5 
No Mortal can more 
The Ladies adore, 
‘Thana Free andan Accepted Mafon. 

N. B. When they {mg the aforefaid Song, they all ftand 

_ round a great Table, and join Hands acrofs, that is, your 
Right-hand takes hold of your Left-hand Man’s Left- 
hand; and your Left-hand Man, with his Right-hand, 
takes hold of his left Man’s Left-hand, and fo croffing alt 
round. But when they fay the laft verfe, they jump up 
all together, ready to thake the Floor down: I myfelf 
have been below, where there has been a Lodge, and 
have heard the People fay, L—d d—mn their bloods, 
What are they doing? They will fhake the Place down, 
Pil ftay here no longer. This. they call driving of Piles, 
ta amufe the World; but they fhall not be amufed any 
fonger, but fhall know every Particular, and the foolith 
Reafons they give for them. , \ 

How they call of the Men from Work to Refrefbment. 

HE Matter whifpers to the fenior Deacon at his Right- 
hand, and fays, ’tis my Will and Pleafure that this 
Lodge is called off from Work to Refrefhment during Plea- 
fure; then the fenior Deacon carries it to the junior Warden, 
and whifpers the fame Words in his Ear, and he whifpers it 
in the Ear of the junior Deacon at his Right-hand and he 
carries it to the junior Warden and whifpers the fame to him, 
who declares it with a loud Voice, and {ays it is our Matter’s 

Will and Pleafure, that this Lodge is called from Work to Re- ~ 
frefhment, during Pleafure; then he fetsup his Column, and - 

the fenior lays his down; for the Care of the Lodge is in the 
Hands of the junior Warden while they are at Retrefhment: 
N. B. The fenior and junior Warden shave each of them a 
Column in their Hand; about T'went y Inches long, which 
reprefents 

Cat" 
reprefents the Two Columns of the Porch at S/emon’s 
Temple, Boaz and JAcHIN™. 
The fenior is Boaz, or Strength. 
The junior is Jachin, or to eftablifh. 

How to call on to Work again. 

T is the fame as calling off from Work, only with this 
| Difference; it is our Mafter’s Will and Pleafure that this 
Lodge is called off from Refrefhment to Work then the 
junior lays down his Column, and the fenior Warden fets u 
hiss {0 they proceed to a Leéture, which they call Work. 
N. B. If ‘Time does not permit for the Craft’s. Leéture, as 

it very {eldom does, having gone through the aforefaid 
Leéture, then they clofe the Lodge; which is much the 
fame as opening, only with this Difference; the fenior’ 
Warden declars it, and fays. 
_ It is our Mafter’s Will and Pleafure, that this Lodge 
» ftand clos’d till the firft or third Wedneflay in the next 
Month, (or according to the Nights that their Lodge is held 
on) except a Lodge of Emergency, and that you fhall have 
timely Notice of; then they take off their Jewels, and ger 
as drumk as Free-Mafons may be; and fing and get drunk 
and that’s all, Ge. K ; 

The FELLOW CRAFTY s Part: 
Maf. B RO'THER, are you a Fellow Craft? 

Anf. Tam; try me, prove me. 

Mat. Where was you made a Craft ? 

Anf. Ina juit and lawful Lodge of Crafts. 

_ Mat. How was you prepar’d to be made a Craft ? 

Anf. ] was neither naked nor cloath’d, barefoot ner fhod, 

ina halting moving Pofture, deprived of all Metal, 1 was 
‘led to the Door of the Lodge by the Hand of a Brother. 

Mat. How got you Admittance ? 

Anf. By Three diftin@ Knocks. 

Maf. What was faid to you within? 

Anf. Who comes there. 

Maf. Your Anfwer, Brother? 

Anf. One who hath ferv’d his Time juftly and lawfully ae 
an enter’d Apprentice, and now begs to become more pers 
fe& in Mafonry, by being admitted a Fellow Craft. 

Maf. How do you expeét to attain it ? 

' Anf. By the Benefit of a Pafs-word, PP 
* Vide 1 Kings, Chap. 7. + 

€ 32 ) 

Maf: Have you got that Pals-word ? 

Anf. I have. 

Maf. Givesit me? 

Anf! SurpnoLetu*. : 

Maf. What did he fay to you then? 

Anf. Pafs, Shibboleth. 

Maf. What became of -you then? 

Anf. Twas led twice round the Lodge. 

Maf. Where did you meet with the firft Oppofition ? 

Anf. At the Back of the fenior Warden, where I made the 
fame Repetition as at the Door. 

Maf. Where did you meet with the fecond Oppofition ? 

Anf. -At the Back of the Matter, were I made the fame 
Repetition as at the Door. ' 

Maf. What did he do with you? 

Anf. He ordered me back tothe fenior Warden, to receive 
Inftruétion. 

Maf. What Inftruciions did he give you? 

Anf. He taught me to fhew the Mafter my due Guard, 
and to take two Steps upon the fecond Step of a right-angled 
oblong Square, with my Right-knee bent bare, my Left- 
foot forming a Square, my body upright, my Right-hand up- 
on the Holy Bible, my Left-arm fupported by the Point of 
the Compaties, forming a Square; where I took the Obli- 
gation of a Fellow-Cratt. 

Maf. Have you got that Obligation, Brother? 

Anf. Ihave, Worthipful. 

Maf. Will you repeat it, Brother? 

Maan I'll domy Endeavour, with your Affiftance, Wor= 
ipful. 7 
Mat. Stand up and begin. 

aor (aay SS 

Of my own Will and Accord, and in the Prefence of Al- 
mighty God and this right worfhipful Lodge, dedicated to 
St. Fobn, do hereby, and hereon, moft folemnly and fin- 
cerely fwear, that I will.always hail, conceal, and never 
will reveal that Part of a Fellow-Craft to an enter’d Appren- 
tice, or cither of them, except it be in a true and lawful 
Lodge of Crafts, him or them, whom I fhall find to be 
fuch after juft Trial and due Examination. : cs 

I furthermore do fwear, that I will anfwer all Signs and 
Summonfes fent to me from a Lodge of Crafts, within the 
Length of my Cable-Tow. ; 1 sfc. 

* Vide Judges, Chap. 12. 

; 

. 

€\33>) 

Talfo fwear that Iwill not wrong a Brother, or fee him 
_wrong’d, but give him timely Notice of all approaching 
Dangers whatfoever, as far as my Knowledge leads me. J 
will alfo ferve & Brother as far as lies in my Power, without 
being detrimental to myfelf or Family; and I will keep all 
‘my Brother’s Secrets as my own, that {hall be delivered to 

meas fuch, Murder and ‘Treafon only excepted. 
And that at my own free Will: All this I {wear with a firm 
and fteady Refolution to perform the fame, without any 
Equivocation or Hefitation in me whatfoever, under no lefs 

Penalty than to have my Heart torn from under my naked 

~ Left-breaft, and given to the Vultures of the Air as a Prey : 
So help me God,. and keep me ftedfaft in this my Crati’s 

Obligation. 
; [He kiffes the Book.] 
N. B. The Length of the Cable-Tow is Three Miles ; 
_ therefore if a Brother is Three Miles from his Lodge, he 
is clear of all Fines, and of this Obligation; for it faith 
within the Length of my Cable-Tow. 
_ Maf. After you receiv’d this Obligation, what was fhewn 
to you? U 
Anf. The Sign of a Fellow-Cratt. 

| N.B. This Sign is by putting your Right-hand to your Left- 

_breatt, and keeping yous Thumb f{quare, and your Left- 

hand upright, forming a Square. 

Maf. What was next done to you? 

Anf. He took me by the Right-hand and gave me the 
Gripe and Word of a Fellow-Cratt and Pafs-Gripe. 

~ WN. B. The Pafs Gripe is by putting your Thumb-nail be- 

tween the firft and4econd Joint of the Right-hand, and 
. the-Word is Shibboleth. ‘The Craft’s Gripe is on the {e- 

cond Joint of the aforefaid Hand, and the Word is Jachin. 

Maf. What did he then do to you? : 

Anf. He took me by the Right-hand, and faid, rife up, 
Brother Jachin. 

Maf. What did he then do to you? 

__ Anf. He order’d me back, and to be invefted of what Thad 
heen divefted of and brought back in order to return thanks. 
WN. B He returns Thanks in the fame Manner as the Ap- 

RT eal only with this Difference, for admitting a fellow- 
~ Maf. After you was thus admitted a Fellow-Craft, did you 

"ever work as a Craft ? . 

_ Anf. Yes, in the Building of the Temple, 

~ Maf. Where did you receive your Wages? 
Cc Anf. 

4 b= 
r 

( 34 ) 

Anf. In the middle Chamber. 

Maf. When you came to the Door of the middle Chamber, 
who did you fee? ' 

Anf. A Warden. 

Maf. What did he demand of you? 

Anf. ‘The pafs-word of a Craft. 

Maf. Did you give it him? 

Anf: I did. 

Maf. What is it ? 

Ant. SHivpoLeTH. _ 

Maf. How got you to the middie Chamber? 

Anf. ‘Tlirough the Porch. ; 

Maf.. Did you fee any Thing worth your Notice? 

Anf. I did. 

Maf. What was it? 

Anf. Two fine Brals Pillars. 

Maf. What were they called ? 

Anf.' Boaz and JAcHIN. 

Maf. How high were thefe Pillars? : 

Anf. ‘Thirty-Ave Cubits, with a Chapiter Five Cubits, 
which makes it Forty high*. 

N. B. In the Firft of Kings, Chap. vii. Ver. 20. it fays, 
They were but 18 Cubits high; and a Line of 12 Cubits 
meafured them round, thatis, ab. 4 Cubits Diameter, ° 
which is greatly out of proportion, ‘according to all Orders 
that ever were or ever will bes; as any one muft fay, that ~__ 
underftands Archite€ture, for it isnot quitefour Diameters 
and an Half, which is too fhort by Four Diameters‘atleafl3 
for if they were in the Darick Order, they fhould be Eight 
Diameters. ‘Therefore, how thick and clumfy they mufk 
Jook} to be but half the Height the fhould be, or a little 
beater. As for Example, fuppofe the Monument upon 
Bifk-Street-hill, whichis after the Derick Order, was but 
half the Height, and the fame Diameter, how would it 
look ? very thick and clumfy, likeas it wereall ofaLump, — 

But this can’t be the Thing with thefe Two Columns for _ 
it is plain that So/omon’s Temple was a grand Building, 
andevery Thing in Proportion, and it anfwers cxadlly 
with the Corinthian or Compofite Order, for it is Ten — 
Diameters high, or thereabouts; and it is faid in Chap. _ 
iii. Ver. 1§. of the fecond Book of Chronicles, 35 Cubits — 
high, and the Chapiters, 5 Cubits each, which makes — 
40 Cubjts; the Diameter 4 Cubits, and the aforefaid 
= Order 
Vide 2 Chron, Chap. iii ver. 15, gee 

Pons Pr 
te ahs 
©. 

( 35 ) 

Order is 10 Diameters high, that is, 4 Times 10 is 40, 
which is jut 60 Feet high of our Englifh Meature*. 

- Maf.. What were they adorned with, Brother? 

Anf. Two Chapiters, Five Cubits high each. 
Maf. What elfe were they adorned with ? 

Ant. Net-work, Lily-work and Pomegranates. 
Maf. Were they hollow, Brother? 

Anf. ‘They were hollow. 

Maf. How thick was the Rind or Shell ? 

Anf. Four Inches, or a Hand’s Breadth. 

Maf. Where were they caft? 

Anf. On the Plain of Fordan, in Clay Ground, between 
Succoth and Zartha where the reft of Salomon’s holy Veliets 
were catt. 

Matt. Who cat them? : 

Anf. Hiram tate the Widow’s Son. ' 

NV. B. Some Matters of Lodges will argue upon Reafons 

about the holy Veffels inthe Temple, and the, Windows 

and Doors, the Length, Breadth and Height of apa 

‘Thing inthe Temple, Saying, why was it fo and fo? 

One will give one Reafon, and another will give another 
‘ Reafon, and thus they will continue for Two or Three 

Hours in this Part and the Matter-Part; but this happens 

but very feldom, except an Jrifhman fhould come, who 

likes to hear himfelf talking, afking, wliy were they round ? 

Why were they fquare? Why were they hollow? Why 

were the Stones coftly ? Why were they hewn Stowes and 
~ faw’d Stones, &c. fome give one Reafon and fome give a- 

nother; thus you fee that every Man’s Reafon is-not alike. 

"Therefore, if I give you my Reafon, it may not be like 

another; but any Man that reads the foregoing:and fol- 

lowing Work, and confults the 5th, 6th, 7th arld- 8th 

Chapters of the firft Book of Aings, and the 2d, 3d, and 

4th of the fecond, Book of Chronicles, may reafon’as well 

as the beft of them; for I have laid all the Rules down 

Plain to go by. 

[The End of the Fellow Grafts Part.) 

* There are Three Sorts of Cubits, wz. the King’s Gubir, 
‘Three Feet Exgli/h Meafure ; the holyCubit, One Foot Six Inches, _ 
the common Cubit, One Foot Nine Inches : Therefore, whenever 
you fead ofthe Word Cubit inthe Bible, it is one Foot Six Inches. 

E2 The 

( 36 ) 
Te FELLOW-CRAFTS Song. 

L ¢ 
Lt | AIL, Masonry! Thou Craft divine! 
Glory of Earth, from Heaven reveal’d; 
Which do’ft eth Jewels precious rie 
From all but Mafons Eyes conceal’d 
‘Cuorus. 
Thy Praifes due who can rehearfe 
Innervous Profe, or flowing Verfe? 
Il. 

= 

As Men from Brutes diftinguifh’d are, 
As Mafons other Men excels; 
For what’s in Knowledge choice and rear 
But in his Breaft fecurely dwells ? 
Cuorus. 
Fis filent Free and fa ithful Heart 
Preferves the Secrets of the Art. 
Ii. 
Fem fcorching Heat, and piercing Cold; 
From Bealts, whofe Roar the Foreft rends 4 
From the Affaults of Warriors bold 2 
The Mafons Art Mankind defends. y 
Cuorus. 
Be to this Art due Honour paid, 
From which Mankind receives fuch Aid, 
IV. 
Enfigns of State, that feed our Pride, NY 
DiftinGtions troublefome and vain ! , 
ay Mafons true arclaid afide: 
Arts free-born Sons fuch Toys difdain 
Cuorus. 
Ennobled ra the Name they bear 
Diflinguifbed by the badge By wear. 

Sweet Fellow-Ship, from ue free : 
Friendly Converfe of Brotherhood 5 \ 
The Ledge’s latting Cement be! 
Which has for Ages firmly ftood. 
Cuorus. 
ALodge, thus built for Ages “alls 
Has lafled, and will ever left, 

(“ae 
a VI. 

‘Then in our Songs be Juftice done 

To thofe who have enrich’d the Art, 

From Febal down to Burlington, 

let each Brother bear a Part. 
Cuorus. 
Let noble Mafons Healths go round; 
Their Praife in Lofty Lodge refound. 

N.B. The Fellow-Craft’s Clap is by forming the Craft’s 
Sign, i. e. by holding yourLeft-hand up, keepingit fquare, 
then clap with your Right-hand and Left together, and from 
thence trike your Lett-breaft with your Right-hand; then 
ftrike your Apron, and your Right-foot going at the fame 

_ Time. This is done altogether as one Clap, or at leaft 
fhould be, which makes a great Shaking on the Floor, and 
what they call driving of Piles to amufethe World; but 
they fhall not be amufed any longer, but fhall have the 
Truth. Nay, I have known fome Lodges that have had 
Shores fet below to fupport the Floor, while they have 
been at work as they call it. . 

How ta difeover a Mafon by drinking with him in company, and 
what Degree of Mafonry he has pafi, and none of the Com- 
pany can difcover it but Mafons. 

F he takes his Pot or Glafs, and draws it acrofs his Throat 

before he drinks or after, then he is an Apprentice, be- 

¢caufe that is the Penalty of his Obligation, that he would 
have his Throat cut a-crofs before he would difcover any 

‘Thing of Mafonry. 

Or, if he draws it a-crofs his Left-breaft, touching the 
fame he is a Craft, for that isthe Penalty of the Craft’s 
Obligation, 7. e. He would fooner have his Heart torn from 
ynder his naked Left-breaft, and givento the Vultures of the 
Air as a Prey, than difcover any Part of Mafonry. 

Or, if he draws it a-crofs his Belly, he is a Matter, forthat 
is the/ Penalty of the Mafter’s Obligation; i. e. he would foo- 
ner have his Body fever’d in twos one Part carried. to the 
South and the other to the North, his’ Bowels burnt to Athes 
intheSouth, than he would difcover any Part of Mafonry. 
N.B. He may do the fame with his. naked Pigherhand as 

witha Pot or Glafs, but itis lefs taken notice of with a Pot 

or Glafs than with your Hand. 

But in the Lodge they always drink out of Glaffes, and 

put them, down. as is faid in the Apprentice’s Part; but if it is 

a Lodge of all Mafter Mafons, before they fet the Glafs down 
upon 

( 38 ) 

upon the Taule where:they all fit round, as aforefaid, they 
draw it a-crofs their Throat, from thence a-crofs ;their Left- 

breaft, touching the fame, from thence a-crofs their Belly ; 

and then making Three Motions to fet it down, at the Third : 

fet it down altogether; the Mafter gives the Word, faying, — 
Here goes one, two and thre¢, fetting it down;.but if it is _ ie 

a Craft’s Lodge, they draw it twice acrofs their Throats and 

onceto their breaft; and if itisan Apprentice’s Lodgethey draw 

it three times acrofs their Throats, and {et it down at the 

third motion, as aforefaid. wey? 

Thus they will many Times continue exercifing till mor- . 
ning, though their Family want them at Home. Come, they 
will fay, Ict us have the other Fire, then we will go! Says — 
another, we can’t for our bow! is out! Then fays another, 
fet us have it fill’d again! This hasbeenthe RuinofMafonry, 
which was far from the firft Defign of it; but Liquor makes . 
men forget that they are men, and makes all good Things. 
hecome corrupted and bad. ; 

Cura fugit multo diluiturque mero 

Tune Dolor &. Cure rugaque Frantis abeft. 

Full Bowls, or chafe or elfe diffolve our Cares, 

‘Then far away are banifh’d Griefs and Fears, 

Nor thoughtful Wrinkle in the Face appears. ©. 

Thus a great many People thik that it is great Service 
fora man tobe made a Mafon; foit is, to be his Ruin; Rew) 
and when he is in the greateft Diftrefsthey will talk againft ‘hy 
him, becaufehe can’t pay what they demand. Ican’t 

fay that leverknewany Mafon of late Years get any Thing _ 

by going to Lodges, without he is a Publican that keeps — 

the Houte. Although they are fworn to-ferve a Brother, — if 

T never knew they did, but hurthim. [have knownaMa- 

fon to arreft a Brother, {ummon a Brother from the Court, 

of Requefts, and feize a Brother’s Goods for lefs than A se 

Twenty Shillings. I have likewife known them put a Bro- ia ie 

ther in Gaol, and do him a great deal more Mifchief, 

which I don’t care to fpeak too plain to their Confeiences, 
which Tam in hopes to foften; for. when it hasbeenin 
their Power to ferve a Brother, they have, at the fame 

Time, endeavoured to ruin him. “Therefore, Thopethis 

_ will be a Warning to all honeft Men to keep fromthefe 

Oaths, without they intend to perform them, for rer ae. 4 2 BS 
eg folemn. 72 » el dato dee 

think I have heard fome fay, it is furprizing that they — 

all thould be bad! No, God forbid they fhould, but I 

* will tell you the Reafon why they are fo. There 

‘ 

(39 ) 

There area great many good Men, Members of Lodg- 
@s, that little think of the Villainy that is carried on among 
fome of them; but when he finds them out, he'll leave 
the Lodge, and be no more concerned with them, but he 
will not tell his Reafons to the World; if he did, he would 
be forfworn. I have known fome young Brethern to have 
found them out a little after they were made, and have 
left the Lodge upon that Account. . This is the Keafon 
that they act fo contrary to their Obligation, becaufe ho- 
neft Men can’t bear it long, fo the Scum of the Earth are 
left to be Matters of Lodges. 

: The MASTE R's Part. 

Mat. HERE have you been Brother ? 

: Anf. I have been to the Weft. 

Maf. And where are you going. 

_Anf. To the Eaft. ; 
_ ~ Maf. What makes*you leave the Weft and go to the 
Eaft ? 

Ant. Becaufe the Light of the Gofpel was firft hewn in 
the Eaft. 

Maf What are you going to do in the Eaft ? 

Anf. To feck fora Lodge of Matters. 

Maf. ‘Then I prefume you area Mafter Mafon, Brother ? 

_ Anf. Lam fo taken amongft Matters. 

Maf. Where was you paft, Matter ? 

Anf. Ina Lodge of Matters. 

Maf. How was you prepar’d to be made a Matter ? 

Anf. I had my Shoes taken from off: my Feet. with both 
my Armsand Breait naked, depriv’d of all Metal. I was led 
to the Door of the Lodge. | 

N. B.In the Craft’s Part, the Right-breaft is naked, and 

the right Shoe off, and in the Apprentice’s Part the 
Left-arm and Left-breaft is naked, with the Left Shoe 
off, and the Matter’s Part as aforefaid in the LeGture. 

Maf. How got you Admittance?“ 

Anf. By Three diftinét-Knocks. 

Maf. What was faid to you then within ? 
~ Anf. Who comes there ! : 

+ Maf- Your Anfwer, Brother ? 

Anf. One who hath juftly and lawfully ferved his Time as 
an enter’d Apprentice, and fome Time a Fellow-Cratt, now 
begs, to become more perfc@ in Mafonry, to be made a Mat- 

Mat; 

( 40 ) 

Maf. How do you expect to attain it ? 

Anf. By the Benefit of a pafs-word. 

Maf. Will you give me that pafs-word)? 

Anf. I will 

Maf. Give it methen ? 

‘Anf. Tusa Cain. 

Maf. What was faid to you then ? 

Anf. Enter Tusarcatn. 

Maf. How was you difpos’d of? 

Anf. I was led once round the Lodge ? 

Maf. Where did yo meet with the firft Oppofition ? 

Anf. At the Back of the Matter. ° 

Maf. What did he demand of you ? 

Anf. The fame as at the Door. 

Maf. How did ‘he difpofe of you ? 

Anf. He order’d me back to the fenior Warden in the 
Weft, to receive Inflructions. ; 

Maf. What were the Inftru€tions you received of the fe- 
enior Warden ? %- 

Anf. He taught me, as I ftood in the Welt, to fhew the 
Matter in the Eaft my due Guard or Sign of an Apprentice, 
andto take one Step upon the Frit Step of the Right-Angle 
Oblong Square, my other Foot forming a Square. 

Secondly, Iywas taught to take Two Steps upon. the fame 
Oblong Square, fhewing him the Sign of a Fellow-Craft. 

Thirdly, I was taught to take ‘Three Steps upon the fame | 
Oblong Square, with both my Knees bent bare, my Body 
upright, my Right hand upon the Holy Bible, both the Points 
of the Compaffes extended to my Right and Left Breaft, 

where I took that folemn Obligation or Oath of a Matter — 

Mafon. 
‘Maf. Can you repeat the Obligation you fpeak of ? 
Anf. Pildo my Endeavour, Worthipfal, with your Aflift- 
ance. 
Maf. Stand up and begin, Brother. 
Anf. I. W Vv ’ , tasay 
OF my own free Will and Accord, and in the Prefence of 

. 

a? 

Almighty God, and this right worfhipful Lodge, dedicated 
to St. Fobn, do hereby and hereon moft folemnly and rycen ewes 

{wear, that I will always hail, conceal, and neverwill reveal, 
that Part of a Mafter Mafon to a Fellow-Craft, no more than > 

that of a Fellow-Craft to an enter’d Apprentice, or any of 
them to the reft of the World; except it be to atrue and” 

lawful Lodge of Mafters, him, or them, whom‘l fhall find 

FY 
7 

Met, 
re 

f, 

to be fuch, after juft Trial and due Examination. ; i‘ ox e 

ioe eo Sa 
, [furthermore do fwear, that I will anfwer all Signs and 
Summontes, fent to mefrom a Lodge of Matters, within the 
ength of my Cable-tow. 
-_ Lalio will keep all my Brothers Secrets as mysown, that are 
_ deliver’d to meas fuch; Murder and ‘Treafon excepted, and 
_ that at my own free Will : I will not wrong a Brother or (ee. 
_ him wrong’d, but give him tinicly Notice of all approaching 
Mangers, as far as my knowledge leads me. 
y Lalfo will ferve a Brother as far as lies in my power, with- 
gut b ng detrimental to myfelf or Family. 
_ And I furthermore do promife, that .I will not have any 
~ carnal Converfation with a Brother's Wife, Sifter or Daugh- 
ter, and that I will never difcover what is done in the Lodge, 

but that! will be agreeable to all Laws whatfoever. All this 
fwear, wjtha'firm and fteady refolution to perform the 
fame without any Hefitation in me whatfoever, under no lefs 
ty than to have my Body fever’d'in two, the one Part 
ible he South and the other to the North ; my Bow- 
burnt to Afhes in the South, and the Afhes to be featter’d 
ethe Four Winds, that fuch a vile Wretch aI fhould 
emember’d no more amongit any Manner of Men, (par- 
tic ularly. Mafons) fo help me God, and keep me ftedfatt ip 
this my Mafter’s Obligation. 

ne oe He kiffes the Rook.J 
spat What was fhewn to you after you had received this 
gation f ad betes! : a 
‘One of the Mafter’s Signs. 
It is by drawing your Right-hand edgeways acrofs your 
_ Belly, which is the Penalty of your Matter’s Obliga- 
tion. He takes you then ‘by the Apprentice’s Gripe, 

and fays, what’s this? You fay the Gripe of an en- 
, -ter’d Apprentice. =: 
_ Maf. Has it got a Name ? | 

» Anf. It has. : 

f{. Will you give it me?» 

Boaz 

faf. Will you be of or from ? 

Anf. From. tS ; 

From what, Brother ? 

Anf. From an enter’d Apprentice to a Fellow-Crafe. 

af. Pafs Brother. _ i Rae : 

B. Then‘he puts his Thumb between the Firlt and Se- 

cond Joint, which is the Pafs Gripe, and you fay 

SHIBBOLETH. } fleas a 
bg AB As swane 2, Bere 8 Mat. 

(. 42...) 

Maf. What was done to you then ? © ' tad 

Ani. He took me by the Gripe of a Fellow-Craft, an&® 
taid what is this ? ‘ 

Mal. YourAnfwer} Brother ? 

Anf. ‘The Gripe of a Fellow-Crait- 

Mat. Has it got a Name ? rh 

anf. A: has. 

Maf. Will you give it the? 

Ani. JACHIN. 

Maf. What was faid to you then * 

Anf. Rile up, Brother Jactin, Obligated Matter. 

Maf. What was faid to you then, Brother ? 

Ant. He told me] then reprefented one of the greateft 
Meninthe World, our grand Matter Hiram, who was kill’d 
ju at the Finifhing of the firft Temple, as you shall hear. 

‘There were Fifteen Fellow-Cratts, finding the Temple al- 
moft finifh’d, and they had not received the Mafter’s Word, 
becaufe their ‘Time was not come, therefore they agreed to 
extort it from their Mater Hiram the firit Opportunity, 
that they might pais for Matters in other Countries, and have 
Matters Wages; but Twelve of thefe Crafts recanted, and — 
the other Three were refolv’d to carry it on3 their Names 
were Fubela, Fubslo, and Fubelum. ~ 'Thele Three Crafts” * 
knowing it-was always the Mafter’s Cuitom at high Twelve 
at Noon, when the Men were call’d off to Refrefhiment, to 
po into Sandium Sancorum, to pray to thetrue andliving God: pm, 
‘Thole Three Ruifians placed ‘themfelves at the Three En- 
trances of the ‘Temple, viz. The Weft Door, the South 
and Eait Door. a5 

‘There was no entrance in at the North, becaufe the Sun 
dart no Rays trom thence; Thus they waited while he had 
anade his Prayer to the Lord, to have the Word and Gripe 
as he came out, or his Life; but fome Mafons fay as he went — 
in. . So Hiram came to the Eaft Door, and Fubela demanded 
the Mafter’s Word : He told him he did not rective it infuch — 

a manner; but he muft wait, and Time and a little patience Cm 
would bring him to it, for it was not in his power to deliver. Pi 
it alone, except ‘Three together, viz. Solomon, King of Yracls 
Hirem, King of Tyre; and Hiram Abiff: He not being {a- 5 aw, 
tistied with this anfwer, ftruck him acrofs.the Throat with = 
a Twenty-four Inch Gauge: He fled from thence to the . 
South Door, where he thought to have made his wa 3 Mote 
he was accofted in the fame Manner by Fubel, towhomhe 
gave the fame Anfwer as they former; but he not being fg- - 
. ished, gave him aBlow with the Square upon his Leh beatt S 

which 

( 43 ) 

which made him reel: But having recover’d his Strength, 
$: fied to the Weft Door, where he thought to have made 
is Rfcape: But he was accofted in the fame Manner, as at 
the two other Doors, by Fubelum, to whom he made the 
fame Reply as before; but he not being fatisfied therewith, 
gave him a greater Blow than either of the former, with a 
common Gavel, or Setting-maul, upon his Head, which 
ov'dhis Death. After this they carried him out at the 
eft Door, and hid him in a Heap of Rubbifh till high 

‘Twelve at Night, when they found Means to bury him on 

the fide of a Hill, in a handiome Grave, Six Foot Eaft and 

Wett, and Six Foot perpendicular. 

WV. B. Some Mafons fay that he was not carry’d out at the 
~ Welt Door, but was bury’d in the Place where he was 
— Killed. 

; They hold that the Three Ruffians took upa Stone 
inthe Temple, and made a Hole and put him in, and 
cover’d him over with the Stone, and carry’d the 

* Rubbith out in their Aprons; but which it is I can’t 
fay, nor come at the exaé& Truth: For fome Mafons 
fay he was carry’d out, and fome fay not; fo I leave 

~ it to them to determine. 
Mal. After you was thus knock’d down, what was faid to 
you then? 

Anf. He faid I reprefented one of the greateft Men in the 

World, our Grand-Matter Hiram, lying dead. 

“N. B. ‘The junior Warden ftrikes you with a Twenty-four 
“Inch Gauge, acrofs your Throat; the fenior Warden 
_ ftrikes you with the Square, upon your Left-breaft; and the 
| Matter ftrikes you upon the head and kills you: So you 
are laid down upon the Floor on your Back, fuppos’d to be 
dead, tho’ you are not hurt; but only to reprefent the 
Death of your Mater Hiram. — 
The French have a very folemn Way of reprefenting 
kis Death; for when you come into the Lodge to be 
_made a Matter, there is a Brother laid down in the Place 
where you are to lie, with his Face all befmear’d with 
Blood; and they fay to you, Brother, don’t be frighten’d, 
for one of our Brothers is kill’d, becaufe he would not de-- 
liver the Mafter’s Word and Gripe to Three Fellow-Crafts, 
that had no Right to it; andit isthe Duty of us all foto 

OGRE 

7 

—— 

, do; todie before we will deliver any Part of Matonry to 
_ them that have no Right to it. 
ad _ When you kneel down to receive the Obligation the fup- 

~. -ppled dead Man lies behind yous and while you are reading 
Fa 

the 

(44 
the Obligation and Hittory ofhisDeath, he gets upunknown 
to you, and you are laid down in his Place, as aforefaid, 
according to the Znglifh Method: And this is all the Differ- 

sence between the /rench and Lngii/b in their making of > 

Mafons. 

Mati What was faid to you then? : fxs 

Anf. Ae Llay upon my Back, he gave methe whole Ac- 
count how /diram was found, and of his rifing and taking the 
‘Three Raffians that murder'd him. 

Our Matter Hiram being miffing, as he did not come to 
view the Work as ufual, fo King So/omon mate great Enquiry 
after him, and could not hear any Thing .of. hitn, therefore 
he fuppos’d him dead? ‘Che Twelve Fellow-Cratts that had 
recanted, hearing thefame Report, their Con{ciences pricking 
them, went and acquainted King Se/amon with White Aprons 
and Gloves, as Badges of their Innocency;! and King So/omon 
fent them in fearch of the Three Ruffians which had abfcon- 

ded: They divided into Four Parts, "Fhreet North, Fhree - 

South, Three Eaft and Three Weft: One of. thofe: Parties 
travell'd down to the Sea of Foppa; one of them fat himfelf 

down to rei by the Side of a Rock, he hearing a frightful’ _ 
Lamentation ina Clift of the: Rock. Oh! thatl bad had ~~ 

say Throat cut acrofs, and my Tongue torn ‘out. by the 

Root, and that buried in the Sands of the Sea at low-water — 

Mark, a Cable Length trom Shore, where the Tide ebbs and 
flows in 24 Hours, rather than | had beén concerned in the 

Death of out Matter Hiram. Says the other; Oh! that I 

had had my Heart torn from under my naked Left-breaft, 

and given tothe Vultures of the Airas a Prey, rather than 4 

had been concerned in the Death of fo good a Mafter. But 
Oh! fays fubelum, 1 {truck him more hard than you both, 

for I killed him : Oh ! that Thad had my Body fever’d intwo - 

one Part carried to the South, and the other to the North ;. 
my Bowels burnt to Afhes in the South, and the Afhes fcat- 
tered before the Four Winds of the Karth, rather than Tf had 
been concerned in the Death of our Mafter Hiram. 

This Brother hearing this forrowful Lamentation, hailed 

the other Two, and they went into the Clift of the Rock, - 

and took them and bound them, and ‘brought them before 
King So/omon, and they owned what had pafs’d, and what 
they had doac, and did not defire to live; therefore Sa/omon 
order’d their own Sentences to be laid upon them : Says he, 

they have fign’d their owh Death, and let it be upon them as_ 

they-have faid. 

Fubela 

He ey 

( ‘45 °) 
-Fubela was taken out his Throat‘ eut’acrofs, ec. | Fu- 
belo’s Heart was torn from under his naked Left-breaft, &¢, 
~ Fubelum’s Body was fever’d in two, and one Part carry’d to 

the South, and the other. to the North, €ec- : 

After this King So/omon fent thofe 12 Crafts to raife their 
Matter Hiram, in order that he might’ be interred, in the 
* Sanéium Sanéigram. And. Solomon, told them,’ that. if they 
could not find a Key-word in him, or about him, it was loft; 
for thére were but Three inthe World that.kuew jt, and it 
never can bedeliver’d without; we 'Phree are togethers but 
pow One isdead, therefore it is loft. But for the future, the 
’ firlt occafion’d Sign and Word thatis {poke at his rifing, flza!l 
be his ever after. So they went to raife him; and when they 

- chad clear’d the Rubbith; they faw their Mafter lic dead, ima 

uifed Condition ; for he having already lain 15 Days, thoy 
difted up both their Hands above their Heads ina great Sur- 
_prize, and Gd, O Lord my God (which is the grand Sign 
_6f a Mafter Mafon). . 
(Mat, | How, was he rais’d,, Prother, when they had thus 
found him lying dead? 

Anf. By the Five Points of Fellowhhip. NG 

Maf. What are the Five Points of Fellowfhip? 

Anf. He was taken by the enter’d Apprentice’s Gripe, but 
the Skin is fuppofed to flip off; he was then taken by the 
‘Craft’s Gripe, and that flipped alfo: ‘Then he was taken’by a 
more firm Gripe, that is their Four Fingers Nails of their 

- Right-hand tuck into the Writt of his Right-hand (whichis 
the Gripe of a Mafter), and pulling withallyour Might, with 

» your Right-foot to his Right-foot, and his Right-knee to your 

. 

ght-knee, and his Right-breaft to your Right-breaft, and 
your Left-hand fupporting his Back, and whifperin his ear, 

_ and fay MAHArone; that is, almoft rotten tothe Bone, 

which is the Matter’s Word. 

_ ” Maf. Brother, it feems that you could not be raifed but by 

‘ 

the Five points of Fellowfhip: Pray will you explain them. 
Anf. 1/7, Handin Hand is, that I always will put forth 
» my Hand to ferve a Brother as far as lies in my Power. 
2d. Foot to Foot is that 1 never will be afraid to goa Foot 
out of my Way to ferve a Brother. 
34. Kaee to Knee is, that when I kneel down to Prayers, 
pane hever to for@&t to pray for my Brother as.well as my-- 
elf. : 
| 4. Breaft to Breaft, is to fhow E will keep my Brother’s 
‘Seerets as: my own. 
: 5tb. 

( 45 ) 

sth. The Left-hand fupporting the Back, is that I always 

will be willing to fupport a Brother as far as lies in my Power. 
The MASTER’s Reafons. 

Maf. Why are you depriv’d of all Metal ? . 

Anf.’ Becaufe, at the Building of Sz/omon’s Temple, there 
was neither Axe, Hammer, or the Sound of any metal Too}, 
heard in the building of that wonderful Fabrick. 

Maf. Why fo, Brother? 

Anf. Becaufe it fhould not be polluted. 

Maf. How is it poffible, Brother, that fuch a large buil- 
ding fhould be carry’d on, without the found of fome metal 
Tool ? 

Anf. It was prepar’d in the Foreft of Lebanon, and brought 
down upon proper Carriages, and fet-up with wooden Mauls 
made for that Purpofe. 

Maf. Why were both your Shoes taken from off your Feet? 

Anf. Becaufe the Place whereon I ftood, when I was made 
a Mafon, was holy Ground ; for the Lord faid unto Mofes, 
pull off thy Shoes, for the Place whercon thou ftandeft is ho-- 
ly Ground. c 

Maf. What fupports your Lodge ? 

Anf. Three great Pillars. 

Maf. What are their Names ? 

Anf. Wifdom, Stength and Beauty. 

Maf. Who do they reprefent ? ; ; 

Anf. Three Grand-matters ; “Solomon, King of Irae! ; 
Hlirm, King of Tyre; and Hiram Abiff, which was the 
Widow’s Son who was killed. 

Maf. Were all thofe Three Grand-Mafters concerned in 
the building of So/oman’s Temple? 

Anf. They were. 

Maf. What was their Bufinefs ? 

Anf. Solomon for finding Provifion, and Money to pay the 
Hirelings; Hiram, King of Tyre, for finding materials for 
the Work 5 Hiram Abiff, for performing the Work. 

[Thus concludes the Mafter’s Part, which is fufficient for all 

Lodges; but fome will enlarge upon the aforefaid Parts, and 

run cut of the Rules of Mafonry.| 

The Charge given io the Officers of a Ladge. 
ND firft of the Mafter belonging to the Chair 3 which 
they call inftalling a Matter for the’Chair. 

4. B. He kneels down in the South, upon both Knees ; and 

the late Mafter gives him the following Obligation, 
before he refigns the Chair. Anf. 

i tags) 
Ant.” 1W — 
_ Of my own free Will and Accord, and in the Prefence of 

Almigty God and this right worfhipful Lodge, dedicated to 
St. Fobn, do hereby, and hereon, moft folemnly and fincerely 
fwear, that I will not deliver the Word and Gripe belonging 
to the Chair whilft Iam in the Chair, or any Time heie- 
after, except it be toa Mafter in the Chair, or paft Matter, 
him or them whom I fhall find to be fuch after jutt Trial and 
due Examination. 

Ifurthermore do {wear I will a& as Matter of this Lodge, 
till next St. Fobn’s Day, and I will fill the Chair every 
~ Lodge Night, if I am within the Length of my Cable- 
Tow. 

“T alfo further promife that I will not wrong this Lodge, 
but I will do all Things for the Good of Mafonry in gene- 
tal; and I willnot reign arbitrarily, but be agreeable to 
the reft of the Brethren. J alfo will keep good Orders in 
this Lodge, as far as lies in my Power, “till next St. ‘fobn’s 

All this I fwear with a firm and fteady refolution to per- 
form the fame, without any Hefitatton in me whatfoever, 
Under no lefs than the Four former Penalties, w/z« 

ift. My Throat cut acrofs, &?c. 

2d. My ‘Tongue torn out, &e. 

3d. My Heart torn from my Lef-breaft, &¥c. 

4th My Body fever’d in two, €c. 

So help me God, and keep me ftedfaft in this myObligatioa 

belonging to the Chair. 

[He kiffes the Book.] 

Then the late Matter takes off his Jewel and puts it upos 
him, and takes him by the Mafter’s Gripe, and raifes him 
off his Knees, and whilpers in his Ear the Word, which is 
Cuippitum, or an excellent Mafon; then he flips his 
Hand from the Matter’s Gripe to his Elbow, and ftrikes his 
Nails in as you do in the other Gripe at the Wrift. This is 
the Word and Gripe belonging to the Chair. 

N. B. 'The fenior and junior Warden, and Secretary, re- 
ceive the fame Obligation as he in the Chair, only with 
this Difference, they have neither Gripe nor Word. 
Therefore I have no Occafion to infert it over again, 
as itis thefame, and the fame Penalties. 

The Mafler’s Clap. 

Is by holding both Hands above your Head, and ftriking 
upon your Apron, and both Feet going at the fame ‘Time 
teady to fhake the Floor down} this they call the grand fig 

° 

4 

( 48 ) 

of a Matfter Mafon. “They give two: Reafons for this Siens 

viz. When the faw their Matter Hiram lye dead, they lift- 
ed up their Hands in a furprize, and faid, OLord, my God! 

Second. When. Solomon dedicated the Temple to the Lord, : 

he ftood up, and lifting op both his Hands faid, O Lord 

my God, great art Thou above all Gods, for in this Hour ° 

will I adore thy Name. : 
Thus 1 finifh the whole Three Degrees of the moff antient Free- 
Mafonry, with the Gripe and Word belonging to the Chair. 

How to go through an Examination at the Door of a 

Free-Mafow's Ladge; and get Admittance though 
ever fuch a Stranger, } : 

HEN you cometo the Door of the Lodge, where 
\ V the ‘Tylerftands with a drawn Sword, afk him if there 
isany Admittance; he'll fay I will go in and afk. Then 

the Matter, or fome other Man, will come out to prove 

you. Firft draw your Right-hand edge-ways acrofs your 

Throat ; he will fay what ts that? You fay thedue Guard — iu 

of an enter’d Apprentice; then he will take you by the firft : 

Joint of your Right-hand, and prefs upon it with his Right- 
thumb Nail, and fay what is this ? 
Anf. ‘The Gripe of an enter’d Apprentice. 
Mal. Has it got a Name? 
Anf. It has. 
Maf. Will you give itime ? 
Anf. Vil Letter it with you, orhalve it. 
Mat. Begin. 
Anf. BO 
Maf. A Z.. 
Anf. BOAZ. 
Maf. Will you be of or from? 
Anf. From. 
Mat. From what ? 
Anf. From an enter’d Apprentice to’a Fellow-Craft, 
N.B. Then he will:put his Thuntb from off the Apprena 
tice’s Gripe towards the Crait’s, or between hoth. 
Maf. What’s this? ; 
Anf. The Pafs-Word of a Craft, 
Maf. Will you give itame ? 

wy 

1, 

Anf. Suizpote ru. ae Logit: 
Maf. Pafs SH1BBOLED H.: uh Li 103 yigus 
N. B. 

_ eae € 49 ) 

Then he puts his Thamb ‘to the fecond Joint, and 
ys, what’sthis?) — ; ; 

. The Gripe of, a Fellow- Craft. 

f. Has it got a Name? hep ets 

‘Tt has. “i ae « ; 

_Wilkyou giveitme?- 

I wilkLetter it with you or halve it with you. 

Pil Letter it with you. ; 

: \CHTIN is the Word you demanded. » 
Maf. you be of or from ? 
Anf. From. =a a ae 
faf. From what > E 
From a Craft ta.a Matter. ’ 
ive methé Fellow-Craft’s Sign ? 
sur Right-hand to your Lett-breaft, your Thumb 
and your Left-hand ey Rpt forming 
uare, then he takes you by the s Gripe. 
a dee thie a hg gsi 
 Anf. The Gripe of a Mafter Mafon. 
‘Maf. Hasit ter Name? . 
Anf. It hat, and fomething elfe thereunto, belonging. 
_ Maf. What is that, Brothet, as I may venture to call 
ou fo now, Ihbelieve. ~~ , ‘ 
- Anf. The Five Points of Fellowhhip. 
eid af. Will you give , Alea Brother? Rei) 
“a. f Fi draw your ‘Hand acrofs your Belly, then lif 
© both Hands up above your Head, and fay, O Lord m 
God, and thon take hiny by the Mafter’s Gripe, whic 
cis your Right-hand to his Right-hand, and put, your 
—___-- Right-foot to his Right-foot, your Right-kinee to. his 
ae “Right-knee, your Right-breatt to his Right-breait, and 
Patt Sag Left-hand to his Back, and whifper in his Ear, 

fay, MAHHABONE. ; 
‘Thefe are the Five Points of Fellowhhip, ‘and Word and 
yipe thereunto gonsing as has been before deferib’d. 
'Fhefe are all the Signs, Gripes and Words, that are uf 
ongft Mafons at this Day, February 26, 1760. ‘ 
x eee GS 3 The 

Kee ot 
v7 5 
an 

t 

( so’) : 
The Defcription of the Infide of a certain Lodge in the 
County of S y, at this Time. 

Ludus & Ultrices pofuere Cubilia Cure, ; 

Pallentefque habitant Morbi triftifque Sene&tus 5 

Et metus & malefuada Fames, & turpis Egeftas 

(Terribiles vifu Forma) Lethumque, Laborque. 

‘Tum Confanguineus Lethi Sopor & mala Mentis, 

Guadia, Mortiferumque adverfo in Limine Bellum 

Ferreique Eumenidum Thalami & mala Difcordia demens, 

Vipereum Crinem vittis innixa cruentis, 
fEnxiw NVI, 

The Defcription of the Mafter in the Chair of the afore~ 
faid Lodge; his Name is B—fury and Difcordia T. 
mix’d up with Fraud: Avery fine Compofition in- 
decd, after having received the aforefaid Obligations, 

——Faror impius intus. 

Sxva fendens fuper Arma & centum vinatus, 

Ahenis. 

Poft Tergum nodis fremit horridus Ore cruento. 
Vide Finer I, 

Grande Doloris. 

ingenium eft miferifque venit folertia Rebus. i 
Vide Ovip, Metam, VI. | 

Intermuere Tubs {ciflo Difcordsa crine, 

Extulit ad fuperos Stygivm Caput hujus in Ore. 

Coneretus Sanguis contufaque Lumina ficbant, 

Stabant irati fcabra rubigine dentes. ; 

Toba Lingua fluens obfefla draconibus ora 

Atque toto laceratum Pe@tore veltem, 

Sanguinca tremulum quatiebat Lampada dextra. 
PeTRONIUs ARBITER. 

Brethren, How long will ye judge unjuftly, and accept 

the Perfonsiof the Wicked. : 
Pfalm Ixxxii. Ver. 2. 

+ 

$0) 
All the Words cir that belong to the 

RIPES. 
In Hebrew thus, 

TheAppRENTICE’s Ir fignifies Strength, and 

Wihid ‘is it belongs to the Senior 
: ‘ Warden. 
BO A Z. a You may have feen him 

carry it at Burials. 
This fignities to eftablifh 
Jin the Lord, and it belongs 
to the Junior Warden. 
Bh). They are about ‘Twenty 
7 Inches long, to reprefent 
‘| the Two Pillars, Boaz and 
Jachin, as aforefaid. 

The Crart’s 
Word is 
JACHIN. 

SS a 
This fignifies Plenty, or 
an Ear of Corn and Fall of 
Water, which is Peace and 
as Plenty. The Battle was 
Thaw fought in a Corn-Field neat 
UTE Oe aFallof Water. This Word 

difcovers the enemy. | ' 
Vide the 'T welfth Chap- 

ter of Judges 

This fignifies rotten, or 
> decayed re ie pane) 
? It is the Word that is 
cea ‘e a tad whifpered in your Ear at the 
aS SID — | rifing of your Mafter, and is 
MAHHABONE. cer never to be {poke out ; for 
; they receive it as folemn as 
the Name of God. 
ne 
‘The Signatication of this 
is, that he was the Inven- 
. tor of Brafs, Iron, and o- 
Th 73 ther Metals: His Father 
res eed was the Father of Mufick : 

The Crar‘t’s 
* Pafs-Word is 
SHIBBOLETH. 

—_— 

_— 

Pafs- Word is Byap)e12) He rofe from Cain, of the 
75% fifth Generation 5 and his 
Abeer ventana Son, ‘Tubalcain, became 

excellent in all Metals 5 

‘which Hix a™ itaproved. 
wiride the Fourth Chapter 

of Gexefis, NOTE. 

we Re ete a 

N ‘0 F £. Sweat mei tee 
. > ~/ é we 
HE Matter always fits in the Eaft, or fland with the 
2 Bible before him ; and if it is the Apprentice’s 
he opens it about the Second Epiftle of Peter, wit 
Compafles Jaid thereon, and the Points of them’ : 
with a Jittle Box Square or Lignum Fite, about 4 Incheseach 
Way, and the Points of the Compafes point to the Welt, 
and the “wo Points of the Square point to the Eat. Tf ir 
is the Craft’s Leéture, the Mafter fhews-one Point ofthe 
Conipafles, the Bible being open at the 12th Chapter of~ 
Fudgese Ai it is the Matter’s Ledture, the Bibleis opened, 
about: the Seventh Chapter of the Kirft Book of Kings, and.” 
both the Points of the Compailés-are fhewn upon. theSquare. | 
‘This is the Fortu they tia when they work, as they calbit. 
‘The Reafon of their drinking Three Times ‘Three is, bes 1) 
caufe there were aritiently but ‘Three Words, ‘Three Signs 
and Three Grips; but there have been! Three added, viz. 
‘Che Grand Sign of a Mailer, the Pafs-Gripe of a Fellow= 
“Craft; and Pats-Word, whichis Twelve in all for you to — 
remember; vz. ‘The Word, Sign and Gripe of an‘enter’d— 
Apprentice is Lhree: “The Word, Sign Gripe, Pafs-Grip 
and Pals-Wordof a Fellow-Cratt are Five: And the Ma 
_ hath Four, wz. The Sign, the Grand Sign, the Gripe 

Word, which erePwelve, as aforeiaid. 

+ eerie 

sf oes FotiNedes? 2 hy 
Fah Publifted) 
‘The Battle of AUGHRI M: or, the F 
 Monfieur St. RUTH. A ‘Tragedy, By Rehert / 
_ ton—To which is perfixed, “An Extrait fioar ; 
 Higory of Inciand ; Not in any former Adiaon. 

Leese 

"7 

' 
-y2y (4% , 

a> ie z “ tr 24, is 
¥ 5 2 
» Smee 
Fak 
y 3 
, : ¥ 4 
‘ ; 

EREE. M ASONRY 

eg AR R 
(GRAND- Ore T 
wz D1 S COVE RE D 

[anoxia and Sold by T. WILKINSON, 
ese ed Winretavern m Street DUBLIN.
