History of the Peloponnesian War (Thomas Hobbes, 1629)
======================================================================
Thomas Hobbes's 1629 translation, the first English Thucydides translated directly from Greek. Public domain. EarlyPrint text.

Eight bookes of the Peloponnesian
 Warre written by Thucydides the
sonne of Olorus. Interpreted with
  faith and diligence immediately
   out of the Greeke by Thomas
Hobbes secretary to ye late Earle
 of Deuonshire — History of the
    Peloponnesian War. English

           Eight bookes of the
           Peloponnesian Warre written by
           Thucydides the sonne of Olorus.
           Interpreted with faith and
           diligence immediately out of the
           Greeke by Thomas Hobbes
           secretary to ye late Earle of
           Deuonshire — History of the
           Peloponnesian War. English

Table of contents
   Title page
   TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE, SIR WILLIAM CAVENDYSSHE,
   Knight of the BATH, Baron of HARDWICKE, and Earle of
   DEVONSHIRE.
   TO THE READERS.
   These errours of the Presse, I desire the Reader to correct with his Penne,
   thus.
   OF THE LIFE AND HISTORY OF THVCYDIDES.
   The names of the places of Greece occurring in Thucydides, or in the
   Mappe of Greece, brie y noted out of diuers Authors, for the better
   manifesting of their scituation, and enlightning of the History.
         A
         B

   C
   D
   E
   G
   H
   I
   L
   M
   N
   O
   P
   R
   S
   T
   Z

1. THE FIRST BOOKE OF THE HISTORY OF THVCYDIDES. The
principall Contents.
2. THE SECOND BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF THVCYDIDES. The
principall Contents.
3. THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE HISTORY OF THVCYDIDES. The
principall Contents.
4. THE FOVRTH BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF THVCYDIDES. The
principall Contents.
5. THE FIFTH BOOKE OF THE HISTORY OF THVCYDIDES. The
principall Contents.
6. [Figure] THE SIXTH BOOKE OF THE HISTORY OF
THVCYDIDES. The principall Contents.
7. THE SEVENTH BOOKE OF THE HISTORIE OF THVCYDIDES.
The principall Contents.
8. THE EIGHTH BOOK OF THE HISTORIE OF THVCYDIDES.
The principall Contents.

Appendix A THE TABLE.
    Appendix A.1 A
    Appendix A.2 B
    Appendix A.3 L
    Appendix A.4 D
    Appendix A.5 E
    Appendix A.6 F
    Appendix A.7 G
    Appendix A.8 H
    Appendix A.9 I
    Appendix A.10 K
    Appendix A.11 L
    Appendix A.12 M
    Appendix A.13 N
    Appendix A.14 O
    Appendix A.15 P
    Appendix A.16 Q
    Appendix A.17 R
    Appendix A.18 S
    Appendix A.19 T
    Appendix A.20 W
    Appendix A.21 X
    Appendix A.22 G
    Appendix A.23 Z
Appendix B §

            §
§
ΕΝΔΟΞΟΤΑΤΗ ΛΑΚΕΔΑΙΜΩΝ                                              

ΕΛΛΑΣ

ΕΛΛΑΔΟΟΣ ΕΛΛΑΣ ΑΘΗΝΑΙ

ΑΡΧΙΔΑΜΟΣ

ΠΕΡΙΚΛΗΣ

ΟΙ ΑΡΙΣΤΟΙ

ΘΟΥΚΥΔΙΔΗΣ

ΚΤΗΜΑ ΕΣ ΑΕΙ

ΟΙ ΠΟΛΛΟΙ

Eight Bookes Of the PELOPONNESIAN WARRE Written by
THVCYDIDES the sonne of OLORVS.

Interpreted with Faith and Diligence Immediately out of the Greeke By Thomas
Hobbes Secretary to the late Earle of Deuonshire

LONDON Imprinted for Hen: Seile, and are to be sold at the Tigres Head in
Paules churchyard. 1629.

Cecill sculp.

             TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE,
             SIR WILLIAM CAVENDYSSHE,
             Knight of the BATH, Baron of
             HARDWICKE, and Earle of
             DEVONSHIRE.
 Right Honourable,                                                        
I Take con dence from your Lordships goodnesse, in the very entrance of this
Epistle, to professe, with Simplicitie, and according to the faith I owe my Master
now in Heauen, That it is not vnto your selfe, but to your Lordships Father, that
I Dedicate this my Labour, such as it is. For neither am I at liberty to make
choice of one, to whom I may present it as a voluntary Oblation, being bound in
duty to bring it in as an Account, to him, by whose Indulgence, I had both the
time, and Ammunition to performe it: Nor if such Obligation were remoued,
know I any to whom I ought to Dedicate it rather. For by the experience of
many yeeres I had the honour to serue him, I know this, There was not any, who
more really, and lesse for Glories sake, fauoured those that studied the Liberall
Arts liberally, then My Lord, your Father did; nor in whose house a        
man should lesse need the Vniuersity, then in his. For his own studie, it was
bestowed, for the most part, in that kind of Learning, which best deserueth the
paines and houres of Great Persons, History, and Ciuill knowledge, and directed
not to the Ostentation of his reading, but to the Gouernment of his Life, and
the Publike good. For he so read, that the Learning he tooke in by study, by
iudgement he digested, and conuerted into Wisdome, and ability to bene t his
Countrey; to which also hee applyed himselfe with Zeale, but such as tooke no
  re, either from Faction or Ambition. And as he was a most able man, for
soundnesse of aduice, and cleere expression of himselfe, in matters of di culty
and consequence, both in publike and priuate; so also was he one whom no man

was able either to draw, or iustle out of the straight path of Iustice▪ Of which
vertue I know not whether hee deserued more, by his seuerity, in imposing it (as
he did, to his last breath) on himselfe, or by his Magnanimity in not exacting it
to himselfe from others. No man better discerned of Men; and therefore was he
constant in his Friendships, because he regarded not the Fortune, nor
Adhaerence, but the Men; with whom also he conuersed with an opennesse of
heart, that had no other guard then his owne Integrity, and that Nil Conscire. To
his Equalles hee carried himselfe equally; and to his inferiours familiarly; but
maintaining his Respect fully, and onely, with the natiue splendour of his worth.
In summe, hee was one in whom might plainely bee perceiued, that Honour and
Honesty are but the same thing, in the di erent degrees of persons. To 
him therefore, and to the memory of his worth, be consecrated this, though
vnworthy O ering.

And now, imitating in this Ciuill Worship, the Religious worship of the Gentiles,
who when they Dedicated any thing to their Gods, brought and presented the
same to their Images; I bring & present this Guift of mine, the History of
THVCYDIDES translated into English, with much more diligence then
elegance, to your Lordship, who are the Image of your Father, (for neuer was a
man more exactly coppied out, then he in you, ) and who haue in you the seeds
of his vertues already springing vp. Humbly intreating your Lordship to esteeme
it amongst the Goods that descend vpon you, and in your due time to read it. I
could recommend the Author vnto you, not impertinently, for that he had in his
veynes the blood of Kings; but I chuse rather to recommend him for his
writings, as hauing in them pro table instruction for Noblemen, and such as
may come to haue the mannaging of great and waighty actions. For I may
con dently say, that notwithstanding the excellent both Examples and Precepts
of Heroique Vertue you haue at home, this Booke will conferre not a little to
your institution; especially, when you come to the yeeres, to frame your life by
your owne Obseruation. For in History, actions of honour and dishonour doe
appeare plainely and distinctly, which are which; but in the present Age they are
so disguised, that few there bee, and those very carefull, that bee not grossely
mistaken in them. But this, I doubt not, is super uously spoken by mee to your

Lordship: Therefore I end with this prayer, That it will please God to 
giue you Vertues sutable to the faire dwelling he hath prepared for them, and the
happinesse that such Vertues leade vnto, both in, and after this world.

Your Lordships most humble Seruant, THO. HOBBES.

             TO THE READERS.
THough this Translation haue already past the Censure of some,            
whose Iudgements I very much esteeme; yet, because there is something, I know
not what, in the censure of a Multitude, more terrible then any single
Iudgement, how seuere or exact soeuer, I haue thought it discretion in all men,
that haue to doe with so many, and to me, in my want of perfection, necessary, to
bespeake your Candor. Which that I may vpon the better reason hope for, I am
willing to acquaint you brie y, vpon what grounds I vndertooke this Worke at
 rst; and haue since, by publishing it, put my selfe vpon the hazard of your
censure, with so small hope of glory, as from a thing of this nature can be
expected. For I know, that meere Translations, haue in them this property, that
they may much disgrace, if not well done; but if well, not much commend the
doer.

It hath beene noted by diuers, that Homer in Poesie, Aristotle in Philosophy,
Demosthenes in Eloquence, and others of the Ancients, in other knowledge, doe
still maintaine their Primacy, none of them exceeded, some not approached, by
any, in these later Ages. And in the number of these, is iustly ranked also our
Thucydides; a Workeman no lesse perfect in his worke, then any of the former;
and in whom (I beleeue with many others) the Faculty of writing History is at
the highest. For the principall and proper worke of History, being to instruct, and
enable men, by the knowledge of Actions past, to beare themselues prudently in
the present, and prouidently towards the Future, there is not extant any other
(meerely humane) that doth more fully, and naturally performe it, then this of
my Author. It is true, that there be many excellent and pro table Histories
written since; and in some of them, there be inserted very wise discourses, both
of Manners and Policie. But being discourses inserted, and not of the contexture
of the Narration, they indeed commend the knowledge of the Writer, but not
the History it selfe, the nature whereof, is meerely narratiue. In others, there bee
subtile coniectures, at the secret aymes, and inward cogitations of such as fall

vnder their Penne; which is also none of the least vertues in a History, 
where the coniecture is throughly grounded, not forced to serue the purpose of
the Writer, in adorning his stile, or manifesting his subtilty in coniecturing. But
these coniectures cannot often be certaine, vnlesse withall so euident, that the
narration it selfe may be su cient to suggest the same also to the Reader. But
Thucydides is one, who, though he neuer digresse to reade a Lecture, Morall or
Politicall, vpon his owne Text, nor enter into mens hearts, further then the
actions themselues euidently guide him, is yet accounted the most Politique
Historiographer that euer writ. The reason whereof I take to bee this: He lleth
his Narrations with that choice of matter, and ordereth them with that
Iudgement, and with such perspicuity and e cacy expresseth himselfe, that, as
Plutarch saith, he maketh his Auditor a Spectator. For he settteh his Reader in
the Assemblies of the People, and in the Senates, at their debating; in the Streets,
at their Seditions; and in the Field at their Battels. So that looke how much a
man of vnderstanding, might haue added to his experience, if he had then liued,
a beholder of their proceedings, and familiar with the men, and businesse of the
time; so much almost may he pro t now, by attentiue reading of the same here
written. He may from the narrations draw out lessons to himselfe, and of
himselfe be able, to trace the drifts and counsailes of the Actors to their seate.

These Vertues of my Author did so take my a ection, that they begat in me a
desire to communicate him further; which was the rst occasion that moued
mee to translate him. For it is an errour we easily fall into, to beleeue, that
whatsoeuer pleaseth vs, will be, in like manner and degree, acceptable to all; and
to esteeme of one anothers Iudgement, as we agree in the liking, or dislike of the
same things. And in this errour peraduenture was I, when I thought, that as
many of the more iudicious, as I should communicate him to, would a ect him
as much as I my selfe did. I considered also, that he was exceedingly esteemed of
the Italians and French in their owne Tongues; notwithstanding that he bee not
very much beholding for it to his Interpreters. Of whom (to speake no more
then becomes a Candidate of your good opinion in the same kinde) I may say
this, That whereas the Author himselfe, so carrieth with him his owne light
throughout, that the Reader may continually see his way before him, and by that

which goeth before, expect what is to follow, I found it not so in them. The
cause whereof, and their excuse may bee this: They followed the Latine of
Laurentius Valla, which was not without some errours, and he a Greeke Copie,
not so correct as now is extant. Out of French hee was done into English, (for I
neede not dissemble to haue seene him in English) in the time of King Edward
the sixth; but so, as by multiplication of errour, hee became at length 
traduced, rather then translated into our Language. Hereupon I resolued to take
him immediately from the Greeke, according to the Edition of Aemilius Porta;
not refusing, or neglecting any version, Comment, or other helpe I could come
by. Knowing that when with Diligence and Leasure I should haue done it,
though some error might remaine, yet they would be errors but of one descent;
of which neuerthelesse I can discouer none, and hope they bee not many. After I
had nished it, it lay long by mee, and other reasons taking place, my desire to
communicate it ceased.

For I saw, that, for the greatest part, men came to the reading of History, with an
a ection much like that of the People, in Rome, who came to the spectacle of
the Gladiators, with more delight to behold their bloud, then their Skill in
Fencing. For they be farre more in number, that loue to read of great Armies,
bloudy Battels, and many thousands slaine at once, then that minde the Art, by
which, the A aires, both of Armies, and Cities, be conducted to their ends. I
obserued likewise, that there were not many, whose eares were well accustomed
to the names of the places they shall meet with in this Histroy; without the
knowledge whereof, it can neither patiently be read ouer, perfectly vnderstood,
nor easily remembred; Especially being many, as heere it falleth out; because in
that Age, almost euery City, both in Greece and Sicily, the two maine scenes of
this Warre, was a distinct Common wealth by it selfe, and a party in the Quarrell.

Neuerthelesse I haue thought since, that the former of these considerations
ought not to be of any weight at all, to him that can content himselfe with the
Few and better sort of Readers; who, as they onley iudge, so is their approbation
onely considerable. And for the di culty arising from the ignorance of places, I
thought it not so insuperable, but that with conuenient pictures of the

Countries it might be remoaed. To which purpose, I saw there would be
necessary, especially two; a Gene●rall Mappe of Greece, and a Generall Mappe
of Sicily. The latter of these, I found already extant, exactly done, by Philip
Cluuerius; which I haue caused to be cut, and you haue it at the beginning of the
Sixth Booke. But for Mappes of Greece, su cient for this purpose, I could light
on none. For neither are the Tables of Ptolomie▪ and descriptions of those that
follow him, accommodate to the time of Thucydides; and therefore few of the
Places by him mentioned, therein described: nor are those that bee, agreeing
alwayes with the truth of History. Wherefore I was constrained to draw one (as
well as I could) my selfe. Which to doe, I was to rely, for the maine Figure of the
Countrey, on the moderne description now in reputation; and in that to set
downe those Places especially (as many as the Volume was capable of) which
occurre in the reading of this Author, and to assigne them that             
situation, which, by trauell in Strabo, Pausanias, Herodotus, and some other
good Authors, I saw belonged vnto them. And to shew you that I haue not
played the Mountibanke in it, putting downe exactly some few of the Principall,
and the rest at aduenture, without care, and without reason, I haue ioyned with
the Mappe an Index, that pointeth to the Authors which will iusti e me, where
I di er from others. With these Mappes, and those few briefe notes in the
Margine, vpon such passages, as I thought most required them, I supposed the
History might be read with very much bene t, by all men of good Iudgement
and Education, (for whom also it was intended from the beginning by
Thucydides) and haue therefore at length made my Labour publike, not without
hope to haue it accepted. Which if I obtaine, though no otherwise then in vertue
of the Authors excellent matter, it is su cient.

T. H.

              These errours of the Presse, I
              desire the Reader to correct with
              his Penne, thus.
                   Error.        Correct.
Pag. 32. l. 5.     Maydonia,     Mygdonia.
Pag. 39. l. 5.     their,        other.
Pag. 54▪ l. 33.34. Cyrus,        Cyprus.
Pag. 71. l. 28.    from,           to.
Pag. 85. l. 41.    assessed,       assessed.
Pag. 129. l. 36.   of Cyllene,     to Cyllene.
Pag. 131. l. 19.   act,            art.
Pag. 133. l. 9.    amazed.         amused.
Pag. 142. l. 21.   Oenia,          Oenias.
Pag. 151. l. 36.   liknesse,       sicknesse.
Pag. 205. l. 31.   encounter,      encounter them.
Pag. 245. l. 12.   necessities,    necessaries.
Pag. 250. l. 35.     rst           forth.
Pag. 254. l. 14.   Phanocis,       Phanotis.
Pag. 256. l. 1.    Thessalonians, Thessalians.
Pag. 268. l. 40.   this,           his.
Pag. 278. l. 12.   Gerastion,      the month Gerastion.
Pag. 282. l. 2.    Arrhibaeans, Arrhiboeus.
l. 26.             this for power. this power.
l. 27.             and as these. and as for these.
p. 314. l. 4       which,          with.

p. 334. l. 5.      but,               yet.
p. 416. l. 14.     in,                into.
p. 457. l. 4.      whole,             the whole.
p. 488. l. 40.     Tissaphepnes, Theramenes.

                                     In the Margine.
Error. Correct
       Now the Gulfe of Venice, called so      So called from Iüs an Illyrian. Now
P. 14.
       from Iüs an Illyrian,                   the Gulfe of Venice.
P.
       went,                                   sent.
117.
P.
       desire,                                 deterre.
364.

   In the Life of the Author.
Error.       Correct.
P. 5. l. 34, a ection, a ectation.

             OF THE LIFE AND HISTORY OF
             THVCYDIDES.
WEe reade of diuers men that beare the name of Thucydides. There is 
Thucydides a Pharsalian, mentioned in the eighth Booke of this History; who
was publike Hoste of the Athenians, in Pharsalus, and chancing to be at Athens,
at the time that the gouernment of the 400 began to goe downe, by his
interposition, and perswasion, kept asunder the Factions then arming
themselues, that they fought not in the City to the ruine of the Common-
wealth. There is Thucydides the son of Milesias, an Athenian, of the towne of
Alope, of whom Plutarch speaketh in the Life of Pericles; and the same in all
probabilitie, that in the rst Book of this History, is said to haue had the charge
of 40 Gallies, sent against Samos, about 24 yeeres before the beginning of this
Warre. Another Thucydides the sonne of Ariston, an Athenian also, of the
Towne of Acherdus, was a Poet, though of his verses there be nothing extant.
But Thucydides the writer of this History, an Athenian, of the Towne of
Halimus, was the sonne of Olorus, (or Orolus) and Hegesipyle. His Fathers
name is commonly written Olorus though in the Inscription on his Tombe, it
was Orolus. Howsoeuer it be written, it is the same that was borne by diuers of
the Kings of Thrace, and imposed on him, with respect vnto his descent from
them. So that though our Author (as Cicero saith of him Lib. 2. De Oratore)
had neuer written an History, yet had not his name not bin extant, in regard of
his Honour and Nobility. And not onely Plutarch, in the Life of Cimon, but
also almost all others that haue touched this point, a rme directly that he was
descended from the Thracian Kings. Adducing this for proofe, that he was of
the house of Miltiades, that famous Generall of the Athenians, against the
Persians at Marathon; which they also proue by this, that his Tombe was a long
time extant amongst the Monuments of that Family. For neere vnto the Gates of
Athens, called Melirides, there was a place named Coela, and in it the
Monuments called Cintoniana, belonging to the Family of Miltiades, in which,

none but such as were of that Family, might be buried. And amongst those was
the Monument of Thucydides, with this inscription, Thucydides Oroli
Halimusius. Now Miltiades is confessed by all, to haue descended from Olorus,
King of Thrace, whose daughter another Miltiades, Grandfather to this,
married, and had children by. And Miltiades, that wonne the memorable victory
at Marathon, was heire to goodly possessions, and Cities in the Chersonnesus of
Thrace, ouer which also hee raigned. In Thrace lay also the possessions of
Thucydides and his wealthy Mines of Gold, as he himselfe professeth in his
fourth Booke. And although those riches might come to him by a Wife (as is also
by some a rmed) which he married in Scapte-Hyle, a City of Thrace, yet euen
by that marriage, it appeareth, that his a aires had a relation to that Countrey,
and that his Nobility was not there vnknowne. But in what degree of kindred
Miltiades, and he, approached each other, is not any where made manifest. Some
also haue coniectured that hee was of the house of the Pisistratides; the ground
of whose coniecture hath beene onely this, that he maketh honourable mention
of the gouernment of Pisistratus, and his sonnes, and extenuateth the glory of
Harmodius and Aristogiton; prouing that the freeing of the State of Athens
from the tyranny of the Pisistratides, was falsly ascribed to their fact (which
proceeded from priuate reuenge, in a quarrel of Loue) by which the tyranny
ceased not, but grew heauier to the State, till it was at last put downe by 
the Lacedaemoniaus. But this opinion, as it is not so well grounded, so neither is
it so well receiued as the former.

Agreeable to his Nobility, was his institution in the study of Eloquence, and
Philosophy· For in Philosophy, he was the Scholler (as also was Pericles and
Socrates) of Anaxagoras, whose opinions, being of a straine aboue the
apprehension of the vulgar procured him the estimation of an Atheist, which
name they bestowed vpon all men that thought not as they did, of their
ridiculous Religion, and in the end, cost him his life. And Socrates after him for
the like causes, vnder▪ went the like fortune. It is not therefore much to be
regarded, if this other disciple of his, were 〈◊〉 some reputed an Athiest to. For
though he were none, yet it is not improbable, but by the light of naturall
reason, he might see enough in the Religion of these 〈◊〉, to make him thinke it

vaine, and superstitious; which was enough to make him an Atheist, in the
opinion of the People. In some places of his History, hee noteth the
aequiuocation of the Oracles; and yet hee con rmeth an assertion of his owne▪
touching the time this Warre lasted, by the Oracles prediction. He taxeth Nicias
for being to punctuall in the obseruation of the Ceremonies of their Religion▪
when he ouerthrew himselfe and his Army, and indeed the whole Dominion and
liberty of his Countrey by it. Yet he commendeth him in another place for his
worshipping of the Gods, and saith in that respect, hee least of all men deserued
to come to so great a degree of Calamity as he did. So that in his writings our
Authour appeareth to be, on the one side not superstitious, on the other side
not an Atheist.

In Rhetorique, he was the Disciple of Antiphon▪ one (by his discription in the
eighth Booke of this History) for power of speech almost a miracle, and feared
by the People, for his eloquence. Insomuch as in his latter dayes he liued retyred,
but so as he gaue counsell to, and writ Orations for other men that resorted vnto
him, to that purpose. It was he that contriued the deposing of the People, and
the setting vp of the gouernment of the 400. For which also he was put to death,
when the People againe recouered their authority; notwithstanding that he
pleaded his owne cause, the best of any man to that day.

It need not be doubted, but from such a Master, Thucydides was su ciently
〈◊〉, to haue become a great Demagogue, and of great authority with the People.
But it seemeth he had no desire at all to meddle in the gouernment, because in
those times it was impossible for any man to giue good and pro table counsell
for the Common-wealth and not incurre the displeasure of the People For their
opinion was such of their owne power, and of the facility of atchieuing
whatsoeuer action they vndertooke, that such men onely swayed the Assemblies,
and were esteemed w●se and good Common-wealths men, as did put them
vpon the most dangerous and desperate enterprizes. Whereas he that gaue them
temperate, and discreet aduice, was thought a Coward, or not to vnderstand, or
else to maligne their power. And no maruell; for much prosperity (to which they
had now for many yeeres been accustomed) maketh men in loue with

themselues; and it is hard for any man to loue that counsell which maketh him
loue himselfe the lesse. And it holdeth much more in a Multitude, then in one
Man; For a man that reasoneth with himselfe, will not be ashamed to admit of
timerous suggestions in his businesse, that he may the stronglyer prouide; but in
publique deliberations before a Multitude, Feare, (which for the most part
aduiseth well, though it execute not so) seldome or neuer sheweth it selfe, or is
admitted. By this meanes it came to passe amongst the Athenians, who thought
they were able to doe any thing, that wicked men and atterers draue them
headlong into those actions that were to ruine them; and the good men either
durst not oppose, or if they did, vndid themselues. Thucydides therefore, that he
might not be either of them that committed, or of them that su ered euill,
forbore to come into the Assemblies, and propounded to himselfe, a priuate life
as farre as the eminency of so wealthy a person, and the writing of the History he
had vndertaken, would permit.

For his opinion touching the gouernment of the State, it is manifest that he least
of all liked the Democracy. And vpon diuers occasions, hee noteth the emulation
and contention of the Demagogues, for reputation, and glory of wit; with their
crossing of each others counsels to the dammage of the Publique; the
inconstancy of Resolutions, caused by the diuersity of ends, and power 
of Rhetorique in the Orators; and the desperate actions vndertaken vpon the
 attering aduice of such as desired to attaine, or to hold what they had attained
of authority and sway amongst the common people. Nor doth it appeare, that
he magni eth any where the authority of the Few▪ amongst whom he saith
euery one desireth to be chiefe, and they that are vnderualued, beare it with lesse
patience then in a Democracy; whereupon sedition followeth, and dissolution of
the gouernment. Hee prayseth the gouernment of Athens, when it was mixt of
the Few and the Many; but more he commendeth it, both when Pisistratus
raigned (sauing that it was an vsurped power) and when in the beginning of this
Warre, it was Democraticall in name, but in e ect Monarchicall vnder Pericles.
So that it seemeth that as he was of Regall descent, so he best approued of the
Regall Gouernment. It is therefore no maruell, if he meddled as little as he could
in the businesse of the Common-wealth, but gaue himselfe rather to the

obseruation and recording of what was done by those that had the mannaging
thereof. Which also he was no lesse prompt diligent and faithfull by the
disposition of his mind, then by his fortune, dignity, and wisedome, able to
accomplish. How he was disposed to a worke of this nature, may be vnderstood
by this, that when being a young man he heard Herodotus the Historiographer
reciting his History in Publique, (for such was the fashion both of that, and
many Ages after) he felt so great a sting of aemulation, that it drew teares from
him, insomuch as Herodotus himselfe tooke notice how violently his mind was
set on letters, and told his Father Olorus. When the Peloponnesian Warre began
to breake out, he coniectured truely, that it would prooue an Argument worthy
his labour; and no sooner it began, then he began his History; pursuing the
same, not in that perfect manner, in which we see it now, but by way of
Commentary, or plaine Register of the Actions and passages thereof, as from
time to time they fell out, and came to his knowledge. But such a Commentary
it was, as might perhaps deserue to be preferr'd before a History written by
another. For it is very probable that the eighth Booke is left the same it was when
he rst writ it, neither beauti ed with Orations, nor so well Cemented at the
Transitions, as the former seuen Bookes are. And though he began to write as
soone as euer the Warre was on foot, yet began he not to perfect and polish his
History, till after he was banished.

For notwithstanding his retyred life vpon the Coast of Thrace, where his owne
possessions lay, he could not auoyd a seruice of the State, which proued to him
afterwards very vnfortunate. For whilest he resided in the Ile Thasus, it fell out
that Brasidas the Lacedaemonian, besieged Amphipolis, a Citie belonging to the
Athenians, on the Con nes of Thrace, and Macedony, distant from Thasus,
about halfe a dayes sayle. To relieue which, the Captaine thereof for the
Athenians, sent to Tbucydides, to leuy a power and make haste vnto him, (for
Thucydides was one of the Strategi, that is, had authority to raise forces in those
parts, for the seruice of the Common-wealth. ) And he did accordingly. But he
came thither one night too late, and found the City already yeelded vp. And for
this he was afterwards banished, as if he had let slip his time through negligence,
or purposely put it o , vpon feare of the Enemy. Neuerthelesse he put himselfe

into the Citie of Eion, and preserued it to the Athenians, with the repulse of
Brasidas, which came downe from Amphipolis, the next morning, and assaulted
it. The author of his banishment is supposed to haue been Gleon, a most violent
Sycophant in those times, and thereby also a most acceptable Speaker amongst
the people. For where a aires succeed amisse, though there want neither
prouidence, nor courage in the Conduction, yet with those that iudge onely
vpon euents, the way to calumny is alwayes open, and Enuy, in the likenesse of
Zeale to the Publique good, easily ndeth credit for an accusation.

After his Banishment he liued in Scapt●-Hyle, a Citie of Thrace, before
mentioned, as Plutarch writeth; but yet so as he went abroad; and was present at
the Actions of the rest of the Warre as appeareth by his owne words in his ft
Booke. Where he saith, that he was present at the Actions of both parts, and no
lesse at those of the Peloponnesians, by reason of his exile, then those of the
Athenians. During this time also, he perfected his History, so far as is now to be
seene; nor doth it appeare that after his exile, he euer againe enioyed his 
Countrey. It is not cleere in any Author, where, or when, or in what yeere of his
owne Age, he dyed. Most agree that he dyed in Banishment; yet there be that
haue written, that after the defeat in Sicily, the Athenians decreed a generall
reuocation of all banished persons, except those of the Family of Pisistratus; and
that he then returned, and was afterwards put to death at Athens. But this is very
vnlikely to be true, vnlesse by after the defeat in Sicily, he meant so long after,
that it was also after the end of the Peloponnesian Warre, because Thucydides
himselfe maketh no mention of such returne, though he out-liued the whole
War, as is manifest by his words in the ft Booke. For he saith he liued in
banishment twenty yeeres after his charge at Amphipolis; which happened in the
eighth yeere of this Warre, which in the whole, lasted but 27 yeeres compleat.
And in another place he maketh mention of the razing of the Long-walles
betweene Peiraeus, and the Citie; which was the last stroke of this Warre. They
that say he dyed at Athens, take their coniecture from his Monument which was
there. But this is not a su cient Argument; for he might bee buried there
secretly, (as some haue written he was) though he dyed abroad; or his
Monument might be there, and (as others haue a rmed) he not buried in it. In

this variety of coniecture there is nothing more probable then that which is
written by Pausanias, where he describeth the Monuments of the Athenian
Citie, and saith thus. The worthy Act of Oenobius, in the behalfe of Thucydides,
is not without honour (meaning that he had a Statue. ) For Oenobius obtained to
haue a Decree passed for his returne; who returning was slaine by treachery, and
his Sepulchre is neere the Gates called Melirides. He dyed, as saith Marcellinus,
after the seuen and ftieth yeere of his Age. And if it be true that is written by A.
Gellius, of the Ages of Hellanicus, Herodotus, and Thucydides, then died he not
before the sixty eighth yeere. For if he were forty when the Warre began, and
liued (as he did, certainly) to see it ended he might be more when he dyed, but
not lesse then sixty eight yeeres of Age. What children be left, is not manifest.
Plato in Menone, maketh mention of Milesias and Stephanus, sonnes of a
Thucydides, of a very Noble Family; but it is cleere that they were of
Thucydides, the Riuall of Pericles, both by the name Milesias, and because this
Thucydides also, was of the Family of Miltiades, as Plutarch● eth ● eth in the
Life of Cimon. That he had a sonne, is a rmed by Marcellinus, out of the
authority of Polemon, but of his name there is no mention, saue that a learned
man readeth there, in the place of 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ... (which is in the imperfect
Copie) Timotheus. Thus much of the person of Thucydides.

Now for his writings, two things are to bee considered in them, Truth, and
Eloquution. For in Truth consisteth the Soule, and in Eloquution the Body of
History. The latter without the former, is but a picture of History; and the
former without the latter, vnapt to instruct. But let vs see how our Author hath
acquitted himselfe in both. For the Faith of this History, I shall haue the lesse to
say, in respect that no man hath euer yet called it into question. Nor indeed
could any man iustly doubt of the truth of that Writer, in whom they had
nothing at all to suspect of those things that could haue caused him either
voluntarily to lie, or ignorantly to deliuer an vntruth. He ouertasked not
himselfe by vndertaking an History of things done long before his time, and of
which he was not able to informe himselfe. He was a man that had as much
meanes, in regard both of his dignity and wealth, to nd the truth of what he
relateth, as was needfull for a man to haue. He vsed as much diligence in search

of the truth, (noting euery thing whilest it was fresh in memory, and laying out
his wealth vpon intelligence, ) as was possible for a man to vse. He a ected least
of any man the acclamations of Popular Auditories, and wrote not his History
to win present applause, as was the vse of that Age, but for a Monument to
instruct the Ages to come. Which he professeth himselfe, and Entitleth his
Booke 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, A Possession for euerlasting. He was farre from the
necessity of seruile Writers, either to feare or atter. And whereas he may
peraduenture be thought to haue beene maleuolent towards his Countrey,
because they deserued to haue him so, yet hath he not written any thing that
discouereth any such passion. Nor is there any thing written of them that
tendeth to their dishonour, as Athenians, but onely as People; and that by the
necessity of the narration, not by any sought digression. So that no word of his,
but their own actions do sometimes reproach them. In summe, if the 
truth of a History did euer appeare by the manner of relating, it doth so in this
History; So cohaerent, perspicuous and perswasiue is the whole Narration, and
euery part therof.

In the Eloquution also; Two things are considerable, Disposition or Method,
and Stile. Of the Disposition here vsed by Thucydides, it will be su cient in this
place, brie y to obserue onely this. That in his rst Booke, rst he hath by way
of Exordium, deriued the State of Greece from the Cradle, to the vigorous
stature it then was at, when he began to write; and next, declared the causes,
both reall and pretended of the Warre hee was to write of, In the rest, in which
hee handleth the Warre it selfe, he followeth distinctly and purely the order of
time throughout; relating what came to passe from yeere to yeere, and
subdiuiding each yeere into a Summer and Winter. The grounds and motiues of
euery action, he setteth down before the action it selfe, either Narratiuely, or else
contriueth them into the forme of Deliberatiue Orations, in the persons of such
as from time to time bare sway in the Common-wealth. After the actions, when
there is iust occasion, he giueth his iudgement of them, shewing by what meanes
the successe came either to be furthered or hindered. Digressions for instructions
cause, and other such open conueyances of Precepts (which is the Philosophers
part) he neuer vseth, as hauing so cleerely set before mens eyes, the wayes and

euents, of good and euill counsels, that the Narration it selfe doth secretly
instruct the Reader, and more e ectually then possibly can be done by Precept.

For his Stile, I referre it to the iudgement of diuers antient and competent
Iudges. Plutarch in his Booke▪ De gloria Atheniensium, saith of him thus.
Thucydides aymeth alwayes at this, to make his Auditor a Spectator, and to cast
his Reader into the same passions that they were in, that were beholders. The
manner how Demosthenes aranged the Athenians on the rugged shore before
Pylus. How Brasidas vrged the Steeresman to runne his Gally a ground; how he
went to the Ladder, or place in the Gally for descent, how he was hurt, and
swowned, and fell downe on the ledges of the Gally; how the Spartans fought after
the manner of a Land-ﬁght vpon the Sea, and the Athenians of a Sea-ﬁght vpon
Land. Againe, in the Sicilian Warre, how a battell was fought by Sea and Land,
with equall fortune. These things, I say, are so described, and so euidently set before
our eyes, that the mind of the Reader is no lesse aﬀected therewith, then if hee had
beene present in the Actions. There is for his perspecuity. Cicero in his Booke
entituled Orator, speaking of the a ection of diuers Greeke Rhetoricians, saith
thus. And therefore Herodotus and Thucydides are the more admirable. For
though they liued in the same Age with those J haue before named, (meaning
Thrasymachus, Gorgius, and Theodorus) yet were they farre from this kind of
delicacy, or rather indeed foolery. For the one without rubbe, gently glideth like a
still River, and the other (meaning Thucydides) runnes stronglier, and in matter
of Warre, as it were, bloweth a trumpet of Warre. And in these two (as saith
Theophrastus) History hath rowsed her selfe, and aduentured to speake, both
more copiously, and with more ornament then in those that were before them. This
commends the grauity, and the dignity of his language. Againe in his second
Booke, De Oratore, thus. Thucydides in the Art of speaking, hath in my opinion
far exceeded them all. For he is so full of matter, that the number of his sentences,
doth almost reach to the number of his words; and in his words he is so apt, and so
close, that it is hard to say, whether his words do more illustrate his sentences, or his
sentences his words. There is for the pithinesse and strength of his Stile. Lastly, for
the purity, and propriety, I cite, Dionysius Halicarnassius, whose testimony is
the stronger in this point, because he was a Greeke Rhetorician for his faculty,

and for his a ection, one that would no further commend him, then of necessity
he must. His words are these. There is one vertue in Eloquence, the chiefest of all
the rest, and without which there is no other goodnesse in speech. What is that?
That the language be pure and retaine the propriety of the Greeke tongue. This
they both obserue diligently. For Herodotus is the best rule of the Ionique, and
Thucydides of the Attique Dialect. These testimonies are not needfull to him
that hath read the History it selfe, nor at all, but that this same Dionysius hath
taken so much paines, and applyed so much of his faculty in Rhetorique to the
extenuating of the worth thereof; Moreouer, I haue thought it necessary to take
out the principall obiections he maketh against him, and without many words of
mine owne, to leaue them to the consideration of the Reader. And rst 
Dionysius saith thus. The principall, and most necessary oﬃce of any man that
intendeth to write a History, is to chuse a Noble Argument, and gratefull to such
as shall reade it. And this, Herodotus, in my opinion, hath done better then
Thucydides. For Herodotus hath written the ioynt History, both of the Greekes
and Barbarians, to saue from obliuion, &c. But Thucydides writeth one onely
Warre, and that neither honourable, nor fortunate; which principally were to bee
wished neuer to haue beene; and next, neuer to haue been remembred, nor knowne
to posterity. And that he tooke an euill Argument in hand, he maketh it manifest
in his proeme, saying, That many Cities were in that Warre made desolate, and
vtterly destroyed, partly by Barbarians, partly by the Greekes themselues: so
many banishments, and so much slaughter of men as neuer was the like before,
&c. So that the hearers will abhorre it, at the ﬁrst propounding. Now by how much
it is better to write of the wonderfull acts both of the Barbarians, and Grecians,
then of the pittifull and horrible calamities of the Grecians, so much wiser is
Herodotus in the choyce of his Argument, then Thucydides.

Now let any man consider whether it be not more reasonable to say. That the
principall, & most necessary oﬃce of him that will write a History, is to take such
an Argument, as is both within his power well to handle, and proﬁtable to
posterity that shall reade it. Which Thucydides, in the opinion of all men▪ hath
done better then Herodotus. For Herodotus vndertooke to write of those things, of
which it was impossible for him to know the truth; and which delight more the

eare with fabulous Narrations, then satisﬁe the mind with truth. But Thucydides
writeth one Warre, which, how it was carried from the beginning to the end, he
was able certainely to informe himselfe. And by propounding in his Proeme, the
miseries that happened in the same, he sheweth that it was a great Warre, and
worthy to be knowne, and not to be concealed from posterity, for the calamities that
then fell vpon the Grecians; but the rather to be truely deliuered vnto them for that
men proﬁt more by looking on aduerse euents, then on prosperity. Therefore by how
much mens miseries doe better instruct, then their good successe, by so much was
Thucydides more happy in taking his Argument, then Herodotus was wise in
chusing his.

Dionysius againe, saith thus. The next oﬃce of him that will write a History, is to
know where to begin, and where to end. And in this point Herodotus seemeth to be
farre more discrect then Thucydides. For in the ﬁrst place he layeth downe the
cause, for which the Barbarians began to iniure the Grecians; and going on,
maketh an end at the punishment, and the reuenge taken on the Barbarians. But
Thucydides begins at the good estate of the Grecians, which being a Grecian, and
an Athenian, he ought not to haue done; nor ought he, being of that dignity
amongst the Athenians, so euidently to haue laid the fault of the Warre vpon his
owne City, when there were other occasions enough to which he might haue
imputed it. Nor ought he to haue begun with the businesse of the Corcyraeans, but
at the more Noble Acts of his Countrey, which they did immediately after the
Persian Warre, (which afterward in conuenient place he mentioneth, but it is but
cursorily, and not as he ought. ) And when he had declared those, with much
aﬀection, as a louer of his Countrey, then he should haue brought in, how that the
Lacedaemonians, through enuy and feare, but pretending other causes, began the
Warre, and so haue descended to the Corcyraean businesse, and the Decree
against the Megareans, or whatsoeuer else he had to put in. Then in the ending of
his History, there be many errours committed. For though he professe he was
present in the whole warre, and that he would write it all, yet he ends with the
Nauall battell at Cynossema, which was fought in the 21 yeere of the warre;
whereas it had beene better to haue gone through with it, and ended his History

with that admirable, and gratefull returne of the banished Athenians from
Phile, at which time the City recouered her liberty.

To this I say. That it was the duty of him that had vndertaken to write the History
of the Peloponnesian Warre, to begin his Narration no further of, then at the
causes of the same, whether the Grecians were then in good, or in euill estate. And
if the iniury, vpon which the warre arose, proceeded from the Athenians, then the
writer, though an Athenian, and honoured in his Countrey, ought to declare the
same, and not to seeke, nor take, though at hand, any other occasion to transferre
the fault. And that the Acts done before the time comprehended in the warre he
writ of, ought to haue been touched but cursorily, and no more then may serue for
the enlightning of the History to follow, how Noble soeuer those Acts haue 
beene. Which when he had thus touched, without aﬀection to either side, and not
as a louer of his Countrey, but of truth, then to haue proceeded to the rest, with the
like indiﬀerency, And to haue made an end of writing, where the Warre ended,
which he vndertooke to write; not producing his History beyond that period, though
that which followed were neuer so admirable and acceptable. All this Thucydides
hath obserued.

These two criminations, I haue therefore set downe at large, translated almost
verbatim▪ that the iudgement of Dionysius Halicarnassius, may the better
appeare, concerning the mayne and principall vertues of a History. I thinke there
was neuer written so much absurdity in so few lines. He is contrary to the
opinion of all men that euer spake of this subiect besides himselfe, and to
common sense. For he makes the scope of History not pro t by writing truth,
but delight of the hearer▪ as if it were a Song. And the Argument of History, he
would not by any meanes haue to containe the calamities and misery of his
Countrey, (these he would haue buried in silence) but onely their glorious and
splendid actions. Amongst the vertues of an Historiographer, hee reckons
a ection to his Countrey; study to please the hearer; to write of more then his
Argument leades him to; and to conceale all actions that were not to the honour
of his Countrey. Most manifest vices. He was a Rhetorician, and it seemeth he
would haue nothing written, but that which was most capable of Rhetoricall

ornament. Yet Lucian▪ a Rhetorician also, in a Treatise, entituled, How a History
ought to be written, saith thus, That a writer of History, ought in his writings, to
be a forraigner, without Countrey, liuing vnder his owne Law onely, subiect to no
King, nor caring what any man will like, or dislike, but laying out the matter as
it is.

The third fault he nds, is this That the method of his History is gouerned by
the time rather then the periods of seuerall actions. For he declares in order what
came to passe each Summer, and Winter, and is thereby forced sometimes, to
leaue the Narration of a siege, or sedition, or a Warre, or other action, in the
middest, and enter into a Relation of somewhat else▪ done at the same time, in
another place, and to come to the former againe when the time requires it. This
saith hee, causeth confusion in the mind of his hearer, so that he cannot
comprehend distinctly the seuerall parts of the History.

Dionysius aymeth still at the delight of the present hearer; though Thucydides
himselfe professe that his scope is not that, but to leaue his worke for a perpetuall
possession to posterity. And then haue men leasure enough to comprehend him
throughly. But indeed, whosoeuer shall reade him once attentiuely, shall more
distinctly conceiue of euery action this way, then the other; and the method is
more naturall; for as much as his purpose being to write of one Peloponnesian
Warre, this way he hath incorporated all the parts thereof into one body, so that
there is vnity in the whole, and the seuerall Narrations are conceiued onely as
parts of that; Whereas the other way, he had but sowed together many little
Histories, and left the Peloponnesian Warre (which he tooke for his subiect) in a
manner vnwrltten; for neither any part▪ nor the whole, could iustly haue carryed
such a Title.

Fourthly, he accuseth him for the method of his rst Booke, in that he deriueth
Greece, from the infancy thereof to his owne time; and in that he setteth downe
the Narration of the quarrels about Corcyra, and Potidaea, before he entreateth
of the true cause of the Warre, which was the greatnesse of the Athenian
dominion, feared and enuyed by the Lacedaemonians.

For answer to this, I say thus. For the mentioning of the antient State of Greece,
he doth it brie y▪ insisting no longer vpon it then is necessary for the well
vnderstanding of the following History. For without some generall notions of
these rst times, many places of the History are the lesse easie to be vnderstood,
as depending vpon the knowledge of the originall of seuerall Cities and
Customes, which could not be at all inserted into the History it selfe, but must
be either supposed to before knowne by the reader, or else be deliuered to him in
the beginning, as a necessary Preface And for his putting rst the Narration of
the Publique, and auowed cause of this Warre, and after that the true and inward
motiue of the same, the reprehension is absurd. For it is plaine that a cause of
Warre, divulged and auowed, how ight soeuer it be, comes within the taske of
the Historiographer, no lesse then the Warre it selfe, for without a     
pretext, no Warre followes. This pretext is alwayes an iniury receiued, or
pretended to be receiued. Whereas the inward motiue to hostility is but
coniecturall, and not of that euidence, that a Historiographer should be alwayes
bound to take notice of it; as enuy to the greatnesse of another State, or feare of
an iniury to come. Now let any man iudge, whether a good writer of History,
ought to handle, as the principall cause of Warre, proclaimed iniury, or
concealed enuy. In a word the Image of the Method vsed by Thucydides in this
point, is this. The Quarrell about Corcyra, passed on this manner; and the
Quarrell about Potidaea, on this manner; (relating both at large) and in both, the
Athenians were accused to haue done the iniury. Neuerthelesse the
Lacedaemonians had not vpon this iniury entred into a Warre against them, but
that they enuyed the greatnesse of their power, and feared the consequence of their
ambition. I thinke a more cleare, and naturall order cannot possibly be deuised.

Againe he sayes, that he maketh a Funerall Oration (which was solemnely done
on all occasions through the Warre) for 15 Horsemen onely, that were slaine at
the Brookes called Rheiti; and that for this reason onely, that he might make it in
the person of Pericles, who was then liuing, but before another the like occasion
happened, was dead.

The manner of the Athenians was, that they that were slaine the rst, in any
Warre, should haue a solemne Funerall, in the suburbs of the Citie. During this
Warre, they had many occasions to put this custome in practise. Seeing therefore
it was t to haue that custome, & the forme of it knowne, and that once for all,
the manner being euer the same, it was ttest to relate it on the rst occasion,
what number soeuer they were that were then buried; which neuerthelesse is not
likely to haue been so few as Dionysius saith. For the Funerall was not celebrated
till the Winter after they were slaine, so that many more were slaine before this
solemnity, and may all be accounted amongst the rst. And that Pericles
performed the o ce of making their Funerall Oration, there is no reason
alledged by him, why it should be doubted.

Another fault hee nds, is this; That he introduceth the Athenian Generals in a
Dialogue, with the Inhabitants of the Ile of Melos, pretending openly, for the
cause of their inuasion of that Ile, the power and will of the State of Athens, and
reiecting vtterly, to enter into any disputation with them, concerning the equity
of their cause; which he saith, was contrary to the dignity of the State.

To this may be answered; That the Proceeding of these Generals was not vnlike
to diuers other Actions, that the people of Athens openly tooke vpon them; and
therefore it is very likely they were allowed so to proceed. Howsoeuer, if the
Athenian People gaue in charge to these their Captaines, to take in the Iland, by
all meanes whatsoeuer, without power to report backe vnto them rst, the
equity of the Ilanders cause, as is most likely to be true, I see then no reason the
Generals had to enter into disputation with them, whether they should
performe their charge, or not, but onely whether they should doe it by faire, or
foule meanes; which is the point treated of in this Dialogue. Other Cauils he
hath, touching the matter, and order of this History, but not needfull to be
answered.

Then for his phrase, he carpeth at it in in nite places, both for obscure and
licentious. He that will see the particular places, he reprehendeth, let him read
Dionysius himselfe, if he will; for the matter is too tedious for this place. It is

true, that there be some Sentences in him, somewhat long, not obscure to one
that is attentiue; and besides that, they are but few. Yet is this the most important
fault he ndeth. For the rest, the obscurity that is, proceedeth from the
profoundnesse of the Sentences, containing contemplations of those humane
passions, which either dissembled, or not commonly discoursed of, doe yet carry
the greatest sway with men, in their publique conuersation. If then one cannot
penetrate into them without much meditation, we are not to expect a man
should vnderstand them at the rst speaking. Marcellinus saith, he was obscure
on purpose, that the Common people might not vnderstand him. And not
vnlikely; for a wise man should so write (thogh in words vnderstood by all men)
that wise men only should be able to commend him. But this obscurity is not to
be in the Narrations of things done, not in the descriptions of places, or of
battels▪ in all which, Thucydides is most perspicuous, as Plutarch in 
the words before cited▪ hath testi ed of him. But in the Characters of mens
humours and manners, and applying them to a aires of consequence, it is
impossible not to be obscure to ordinary capacities, in what words soeuer a man
deliuer his mind; If therefore Thucydides in his Orations, or in the Description
of a Sedition, or other thing of that kind, be not easily vnderstood, it is of those
onely that cannot penetrate into the nature of such things, and proceedeth not
from any intricacy of expression. Dionysius further ndeth fault with his vsing
to set word against word, which the Rhetoricians call Antitheta. Which, as it is
in some kind of speech, a very great vice, so is it not vnproper in Characters; and
of comparatiue discourses, it is almost the onely Stile.

And whereas he further taxeth him for licentiousnesse in turning Nownes into
Verbes, and Verbes into Nownes, and altering of Genders, Cases, and Numbers,
as hee doth sometimes for the more e cacy of his Stile, & without Soloecisme, I
leaue him to the answer of Marcellinus; who sayes, That Dionysius ﬁndeth fault
with this, as being ignorant (yet he was a professed Rhetorician) that this was the
most excellent, and perfect kind of speaking.

Some man may peraduenture desire to know, what motiue Dionysius might
haue, to extenuate the worth of him, whom he himselfe acknowledgeth to haue

beene esteemed by all men, for the best by farre of all Historians that euer writ,
and to haue been taken by all the Antient Orators▪ and Philosophers, for the
measure and rule of writing History. What motiue he had to it, I know not; but
what glory he might expect by it, is easily knowne. For hauing rst preferred
Herodotus, his Countreyman▪ a Halicarnassian, before Thucydides, who was
accounted the best, and then conceiuing that his owne History might perhaps be
thought not inferiour to that of Herodotus, by this computation he saw the
honour of the best Historiographer falling on himselfe; Wherin (in the opinion
of all men) he hath misreckoned. And thus much for the obiections of Denis of
Halicarnasse.

It is written of Demosthenes, the famous Orator, that he wrote ouer the History
of Thucydides with his owne hand, eight times. So much was this Worke
esteemed, euen for the eloquence. But yet was this his eloquence not at all t for
the barre, but proper for History, and rather to be read, then heard. For words
that passe away (as in publike Orations they must) without pause, ought to be
vnderstood with ease, and are lost else; though words that remaine in writing▪
for the Reader to meditate on, ought rather to be pithy, and full. Cicero
therefore doth iustly set him a part, from the ranke of Pleaders, but withall, he
continually giueth him his due for History. Lib. 2. De Oratore. What great
Rhetorician euer borrowed any thing of Thucydides? yet all men praise him, I
confesse it, as a wise, seuere, graue Relator of things done. Not for a Pleader of
Causes at the Barre, but a Reporter of Warre in History. So that he was neuer
reckoned an Orator, nor if he had neuer written a History, had his name therefore
not been extant, being a man of Honour and Nobility. Yet, none of them imitate
the gravity of his Words and Sentences; but when they haue vttered a kinde of
lame and disioynted stuﬀe, they presently thinke themselues brothers of
Thucydides. Againe, in his Booke, De optimo Oratore, he saith thus. But here
will stand vp Thucydides; For his eloquence is by some admired; and iustly. But
this is nothing to the Orator wee seeke; for it is one thing to vnfold a matter by way
of Narration; another thing to accuse a man, or cleere him by Arguments. And in
Narrations, one thing to stay the hearer; another to stirre him. Lucian, in his
Booke entituled, How a History ought to be written, doth continually exempli e

the vertues which he requires in an Historiographer, by Thucydides. And if a
man consider well that whole Discourse of his, he shall plainely perceiue, that
the Image of this present History, praeconceiued in Lucians minde, suggested
vnto him all the Precepts he there deliuereth. Lastly, heare the most true and
proper commendation of him, from Iustus Lipsius, in his Notes to his Booke, De
Doctrina Ciuili, in these words. Thucydides, who hath written, not many, nor
very great matters, hath perhaps yet won the Garland from all that haue written
of matters, both many and great. Euery where for Eloquution graue; short and
thicke with sense; sound in his iudgements; euery where secretly instructing, and
directing a mans life and actions. In his Orations and Excursions, almost Diuine.
Whom the oftner you read, the more you shall carry away, yet neuer be dismissed
without appetite. Next to him is Polybius, &c. And thus much concerning the
Life and History of Thucydides.

            The names of the places of
            Greece occurring in Thucydides,
            or in the Mappe of Greece,
            brieﬂy noted out of diuers
            Authors, for the better
            manifesting of their scituation,
            and enlightning of the History.
A                                                                      

A

    ABas, a City of the Locrians of Opus, con ning on Hiampolis, which is a
    City of Phocis. Pausanias in Phocicis.
    Abdera, a City scituate next beyond the Riuer Nestus, towards the East▪
    Strab. Epitome lib. 7. Nestus a Riuer of the territory of Abdera. Herodotus,
    lib. 7.
    Abydus, a City on the entrance of Hellespont, betweene Lampsacus and
    Ilium, equally distant from both. In sight of Ilium, and is distant from the
    mouth of the Riuer Aesepus by Sea 700 furlongs. Strab. lib. 13.
    Acanthus, a City neere to the Jsthmus of Mount Athos, and (as in the
    Epitome of Straboes seuenth Booke) in the Bay of Singus. But it appeareth
    by Herodotus in his seuenth Booke, that it lyeth on the other side, in the Bay
    of Strymon; where he saith, that the Isthmus of Mount Athos is of twelue
    furlongs length, and reacheth from Acanthus to the Sea that lyeth before
    Torone. And in another place of the same Booke he saith, that the Fleete of
    Xerxes sayled through the Ditch (which Xerxes had caused to bee made

through the said Isthmus) from Acanthus, into the Bay, in which are these
Cities, Singus, &c.
Acarnania, a region in Greece, diuided from Epirus by the Bay of
Ambracia. Pol. lib. 4. it reacheth from Ambracia to the Riuer Achelous;
and is diuided from the Aetolians by Achelous. Srab. lib. 10.
Achaeum, a City of Troas, opposite to the Ile Tenedos. Strab. lib. 13.
Achaia, a Region of Peloponnesus, con ning on Elis, Arcadia, and
Sicyonia, bounded on one side with Elis, at the Promontory of Araxus, and
on the other side with the Territory of Sicyon. Strab. lib. 8. It hath in it 12
Cities in this order, beginning at that part which con neth on Sicyonia.
Pellene, Aegirae, Aegae, Bura, Helice, Aegium, Rhypes, Patrae, Pharae,
Olenus, Dyme, Tritaea. Herodotus lib. 1. Strab. lib. 9. It is also a part of
Thessaly, in which are the Phtiotae. Herod. lib. 7. Strab. lib. 9.
Acharnae, a Towne of Attica, distant from Athens about 60. Furlongs;
Thucyd. lib. 2. and lyeth toward the North of it, as may be collected out of
the narration of the iourney of Archidamus with his Armie, in the same
Booke.
Achelous, a riuer that riseth in the Mountaine Pindus, and running
through the Territories of Agrae●s, and Amphilochia, and by the City of
Stratus, deuideth the maritime parts of Acarnania from Aetolia. Strabo lib.
10. Achelous riseth in Pindus, and runneth through Dolopia, Agraeis,
Amphilochia, by the City of Stratus, and by the City Oenias into the Sea.
Thucyd. lib. 2. in the later end.

     Acheron, —
     Acherusia,
Acherusia is a Lake which issueth into the Sea, neere vnto Cheimerium, a
Promontory of Thesprotis, and into this Lake falleth the Riuer Acheron.
Thuc. lib. 1. Acheron commeth out of the Lake Acherusia, into the Hauen
Glycys. Strab. lib. 7. Acheron commeth out of Molossis, and falleth into
the Lake Acherusia, which Liuy calleth the Bay of Thesprotis: Liuy, lib. 8.
Acriae, a Citie of Laconia; betweene it and Gythium the riuer Eurotas
goeth out into the Sea. Strabo lib. 8. From Helos, which is at the mouth of

Eurotas, it is 30 furlongs distant, and from the Promontory of Taenarus
230 furlongs. Pausan. in Laconicis.
Acritas, a Promontory ioyning to the Territory of Methone, and is the
beginning of the Bay of Messenia. Strabo. lib. 8.

     Acrothoi, —
     Acrothos prom.
     Acrothoon, —
Acrothoi are the People of a City in the Territorie of Acte, in which Acte is
the Mountaine Athos. Thucyd. lib. 4. Acrothos is a Promontory of Mount
Athos, towards the Bay of Strymon. And Acrothoon a City in the same.
Herodotus lib. 7. In stead of this Acrothos and Acrothoon, Ptolomie hath
Athosa, a Citie and Promontory. Acroton, a Towne on the top of Mount
Athos. Pliny, lib. 4.
Acte is that Territory wherein standeth the Mountaine Athos, disioyned
from the Continent by a Ditch made by the King of Persia, and hath in it
these Cities, Sane, Dion, Thyssus, Cleonae, Acrothoi, Olophyxus. Thucyd. lib.
4.
Actium, a Temple of Apollo, vpon the shore. It is scituate where the Bay of
Ambracia is narrowest. Polybius. lib. 4. In the mouth of the Bay of
Ambracia, not farre from Anactorium. Strab. lib. 10.
Adramyttium & sinus Adramyttenus, - The Bay of Adramyttium (taken in
the greatest extent) beginneth at the Promontory of Lectus, and endeth at
the Promontory of Canae, which is opposite to Mal●a of Lesbos. And the
Bay of 〈◊〉 (properly so called) beginneth at the Promontory of Gargara,
and endeth at the Promontory of Pyrrha. And the Citie of Adramyttium is
within the Promontory of Pyrrha. Strabo lib. 13.
Aedepsa, a City of Euboea, ouer against Opus, a City of the Locrians.
Strab. lib. 9.
Aedessa, a City of Macedonia, in the way called by Strabo, Ignatia, from
Apollonia and Dyrrachium (or Epidamnus) to Thessalonica (or Therme, )
and lyeth betweene Thessalonica and the Eordians. Strab. lib. 7.

Aegae, a City of Euboea, opposite to the mouth of the Riuer Cephissus.
Strab. libro 9. It is also the name of a Citie of Achaia in Peloponnesus,
betweene Helice and Bura. Herodotus, lib. 1. Pausan. in Achaicis. It is the
name also of another City in Aeolia, lying vp from the Sea behinde the
Territory of Cyme. Strab. lib. 13.
Aegina, an Iland ouer against Epidaurus, in the Saronian Bay. Strab. lib. 8.
Pausan. in Cor.
Aegirae, a City of Achaia, betweene Pellene and Aegae. Herod. lib. 1. Strab.
lib. 9. Opposite to Parnassus. Polyb. lib. 4. Also a City of Lesbos, where the
Iland is narrowest betweene the Bay of Pyrrha, and the other Sea. Strab. lib.
13.
Aegitium a Towne in Aetolia, amongst the Hils, 80 furlongs distant from
the Sea. Thucyd. lib. 3.
Aegium, a City of Achaia, betweene Helice and Rhypes. Herodot. lib. 1.
Strab. lib. ●. distant from Patrae 160 Furlongs. Pausan. in Achaicis.
Aegos potamos, a Riuer in the Thracian Chersonnesus, distant from Sestos
15 furlongs. Xenophon. Graecorum 2.
Aemathia, a Region of Macedonia, placed by Ptolomie betweene Thessaly
and the Riuer Axius.
Aemus, a Mountaine of Thrace, which diuideth it almost in the middest,
and reacheth from the Pannonian Mountaines, to Pontus Euxinus. Strab.
lib. 7.
Aenia, a City in the Bay of Therme, last in order from Potidaea towards
Therme. Herodotus lib. 7. It is distant from Thessalonica, (which is the
same with Therme) 120 Furlongs, and opposite to Pydna. Liuy lib. 44 in
the beginning.
Aenus, a City between the Riuer Hebrus and the Bay of Melas▪ 
(.i. the Blacke Bay, ) Herod. lib. 7. Appian. lib. 4. Ciuilium.
Aenianes, a Greeke Nation, inhabiting in Mount Octa, part of them aboue
the Aetolians, (that is, so as the Aetolians are between them and the Sea)
They border on the Locri Epicnemides, in such manner, as the Aetolians
doe on the Locri Oz●lae, Strab. l. 9, 10.

Aeolis, a Greeke Nation inhabiting by the Sea side in Asia from the
Promontory of Lectus to the Riuer Hermus. Strabo. lib. 13.
Aesepus, a Riuer in Troas, rising out of Mount Ida, falling into Propontis,
in that part which is neerest to Zelcia, about seuen hundred furlongs from
Abydus by Sea. Strab. lib. 13.
Aethea, a City of Laconia, not farre from Thurium, as may be gathered out
of Thucydides. lib. 1.
Aetolia, a Region diuided from the Acarranians, on the parts toward the
Sea, by the Riuer Achelous; con ning on the East, with the Locrians called
Ozolae. On the North it hath the Athamanes, and part of the Aenianes.
Strab. lib. 10. Aetolia, Locris, Phocis, and Boeotia are diuided from each
other by paralell lines, drawne from the West Northwards. Idem. lib. 9.
Agora, a City neere to the Thracian Chersonnesus. They that goe to it from
Sestus, leaue Cardia on the left hand. Herod. lib. 7. where he describeth the
way of the Persian Army.
Agraeis, a Region North of Acarnania. The riuer Achelous rising out of the
Mountaine Pindus, passeth rst through Dolopia, then through Agraeis,
and lastly, through Acarnania, by the City of Stratus, and the City of
Oeneias, into the Sea. Strab. lib. 10. Thucydid. lib. 3. in the later end.
〈◊〉, a Nation dwelling at the head of the Riuer Strymon, in the Mountaine
〈◊〉. Strab. in the Epitome of the end of 〈…〉 Books. Thucydides in his second
Booke, seemeth to place them also thereabouts
A●alcomene, a City of Macedonia by the Riuer Erigon. Strab. lib. 7. Also a
City of 〈◊〉, neere the Lake Copais.
Aliacmon, a Riuer of Macedonia. It riseth out of the Mountaines called
Canaluuij, according to Ptolomie: Liuy hath 〈◊〉, a City by the Riuer
Aliacmon, neere the Mountaines which hee calleth Cambunij, which are
likely to bee the same. Liu. lib. 42. It mixeth waters with Lydius, the
con uent of which two Riuers diuide Bottia from Macedonia. Herodot.
lib. 7.
〈◊〉, a Region of Macedonia, of whose scituation I nde nothing, but in
Ptolomies Tables, who putteth it betweene 46 and 47 Degrees of longitude,
and betweene 41 and 42 of latitude. Ptolomie in his tenth Table of Europe.

Alonnes●s, a little Iland lying before Magnesia of Thessaly. Strab. lib. 9.
Also a City in the Chersonnesus of Erythraea, betwene Casystus and the
Promontory Argenum. Strab. lib. 14.
Alope, a City of the Locri Epicnemides, distant from Elatea of Phocis 120
furlongs, from Cynus the Hauen of the Opuntians, 90 furlongs. Strab. lib.
9.
Alpheus, a Riuer of Peloponnesus, rising in the Territory of Megalopolis,
neere vnto the Springs of Eurotas, Strab. lib. 8. deuideth Laconia from
Megalopolis, and from Tegea. Pausanias in Arcadicis. It runnes by Heraea.
Idem ibidem. and Polybius, libro 4. It goeth out into the Sea neere
Olympia. Strab. lib. 8. Pausanias saith it goeth out aboue Cyllone, the
Hauen of the Eleans; but it is contrary to all other, both antient and
moderne Geographers.
Alyzea, a City on the Sea-coast of Acarnania, betweene the City Palyre, and
the Promontory Crithota. Strab. lib. 10.
Ambracia, & sinus Ambracius, Ambracia is a City in the bottome of the
Ambracian Bay, vpon the Riuer Aracti●●s, a little remote from the Sea.
Strab. lib. 7. The Ambracian Bay deuideth Epirus from Acarnania. Polyb.
lib. 4.
Amo●gos, an Iland, one of the Sporades. Strab. lib. 10.
Ampelus, a Promontory of Torone. Herod. lib. 7.
Amphilochia, a Region lying North of Acarnania, South of Dolopia,
through it runneth the Riuer Achelous, Strab. lib. 10.
Amphipolis, Called formerly the Nine-wayes, a City scituate on the Riuer
Strymon, the Riuer running on both sides it: 25 furlongs from Eion.
Herod. lib. 7. Thuc. lib. 4.
Amphissa, a City of the Locrians called Ozolae, con ning on the Territory
of Crissa. Herodotus. lib. 8. Strab. lib. 9. Distant from Delphi one hundred
and twenty furlongs. Paus. in Phocicis.
Amyclae▪ a Citie of Laconia, twenty furlongs from Sparta towards the Sea.
Pol. lib. 4.

Anactorium, a City of Acarnania, within the Gulfe of Ambracia, forty
furlongs from Actium. Strab. lib. 10. in the mouth of the Ambracian Bay.
Thucyd. lib. 1.
Anaea, a City in Asia, by the Sea-side ouer against the Ile Samos. Thucydid.
lib. 4.
Anapus a Riuer of Acarnania, mentioned by Thucydides, lib. 2. it should
seeme by the History (that it runneth betweene Stratus and Oeneias. Liuy
mentioneth a Riuer there about also called Peletarus. lib. 43. it may bee it is
ehe same.
Anaphe, an Iland not farre from Thera. Strab lib. 10.
Andania, a City of Messenia, on the con nes of Arcadia. Paus. in Messen.
Andros, an Iland, one of the Cyclades, Strab. lib. 10. vide Cyclades.
Antandrus, a City of Troas. Herod. lib. 5. in the Bay of Adramyttium,
(properly so called. ) Strab. lib. 13. vnder Mount Jda. Thuydid. lib. 3.
Anthedon, a City of Boeotia, on the shore opposite to Euboea, the vtmost
on that shore towards Locris. Strab. lib. 9.
Anthemus, a territory in Macedonia, not farre from Grestonia, as may bee
gathered out of Thucyd. lib. 2.
Anthena, a City of the Territory of Cynuria. Thucyd. lib. 5. at the foot of
the Hill Parnethus, Paus. in Corinthiacis.
Anticyra, a City of Phocis vpon the Sea-side, next after Crissa towards
Boeotia. Strab. lib. 9. Also a City of the Melians, vpon the Riuer Spercheius.
Idem.
Antirrhium, Which is called also Rhium Molychricum, is that Promontory
which with the opposite Promontory of Achaia, called Rhium,
comprehendeth the streight of the Crissaean (or Corinthian) Bay, of 5
furlongs breadth. Strab lib. 8. It is neere to the City Molycria, Strab. lib. 9.
and to the East of it. Idem. lib. 10.
Antissa, a City of Lesbos, betweene the Promontory of Sigrium, and the
City Methymna. Strab. lib. 13.
Antitanes, a Nation whom Strabo calleth Atintanes, and placeth in the
Mountaines of Epirus. Strab. lib. 7. Appianus hath also Atintanes: and
Liuy, lib. 45. maketh them as an addition to the fourth part of Macedonia,

in the deuision of that Kingdome by Paulus Aemilius. So that it may bee
gathered that the Atintanes, whom Thucydides calleth Antitanes, and
numbreth amongst Epiroticall Nations, are scituate on the con nes of
Epirus and Macedonia.
Aous, a Riuer of Jllyris. After Epidamnus (saith Strabo, describing the Sea-
coast towards Epirus) are the Riuers Apsus, and Aous. Strab. lib. 7. Neere
to it standeth Apollonia. Ibidem. Plutarch hath Anius instead of it, in the
life of Caesar. In this Riuer it was that he tooke Boat to crosse the Ionian
Sea vnknowne, and was forced backe by Tempest.
Aphrodisia, a Towne of Laconia, neere the Sea side. Thucyd. lib. 4.
Aphytis, a City in Pallene, Herodot. lib. 7. Thucyd. lib. 1. betweene
Potydaea and Menda. Strab. in the Epitome of the end of his seuenth Booke.
Apidanus, a Riuer of Achaia in Thessalie. Herodotus. lib. 7. It falleth into
Peneus. Idem. It runneth by Pharsalus. Strab. lib. 8.
Apodoti, a Nation, part of the Aetolians, neerest to the Sea. Thucyd. lib. 3.
Apollonia, a City of Illyris, in the Ionian Gulfe, Herodot. lib. 9. vpon the
Riuer Aous, threescore furlongs from the Sea. Strab. lib. 7. Also a City
betweene Therme and Amphipolis. Itinerar. Peutinger. Itiner. Antonini. A
Chalcidique Citty Athen. 8.
Apsus, a Riuer of Illyris, betweene Epidamnus and Apollonia. Strab. lib. 7.
Aracthus, a Riuer of Epirus, rising out of the Hill Stympha, in the
Territory of the Paroraei, (peraduenture the same with Parauaei) and
running by the Citty of Ambracia into the Ambracian Bay. Strab. lib. 7.
Araxus, a Promontory in the con nes of Elis and Arcadia. Strab. lib. 8.
Arcadia, a Region of Peloponnesus, in the middest of it; bounded with
Elis, Achaia, Argolica, Laconia and Messenia, Strab. lib. 8.
Argenum, a Promontory of Erythraea in Asia, lying out betweene
Alonnesus and the A●ty Erythrae, opposite to, and distant 60 furlongs
from Posideum a Promontory of Chius. Strab. lib. 14.
Arginusae, are three Ilands lying neere to the Promontory of         
Cane in Aeolis, opposite to Malea, a Promontory of Lesbos. Strab. lib. 13.
Argilus, a City by the Sea-side, West of the Riuer Strymon, Herod. lib. 7.
not farre from Amphipolis. Thucyd. lib. 4.

       Argos,
       Argolica,
Argos is a City of Argia, much celebrated in History; It standeth from the
Sea forty furlongs. Paus. in Corinthiacis. In all Mappes that I haue yet
seene, it is placed vnreasonably farre from the Sea; but it appeares by the
beginning of the rst Booke of Herodotus, where hee speaketh of the
women of Argos, that came downe to the Sea-side, to the Ships of the
Phoenicians: and by Thucydides, lib. 5. where hee relateth, that the Argiues
were building Walles to reach vnto the Sea from their City, that it cannot
be farther from it then is by Pausanias set downe. Argolica con neth on
Laconia, Arcadia, Isthmus. Strab lib. 8.
Argos Amphilochicum, a City of Amhilochia, vpon the side of the Bay of
Ambracia. Thuc. lib. 2.22 miles from Ambracia. Liuy. lib. 48.
Arnae, a City of the Chalcidaeans neere Acanthus, as it seemeth by Thucyd.
lib. 4.
Arne, a City of Thessaly, Thucyd. lib. 1. in that part of Thessaly which is
called Estio●is. Strab. lib. 9.
Arrhianae, a place in the Thracian Chersonnesus, opposite to Abydus.
Thucyd. lib. 8.
Arnissa, a City of Macedonia, on the con nes of Lyncus. Thucyd. lib. 4.
Artemisium, a Temple of Diana by the Sea-side, in Euboea, at the streights
of it, not farre from Thermopilae, Herodot. lib. 7. Famous for a Battell by
Sea, fought there betweene the Grecian and Persian Fleet.
Asine, a maritime City in Argolica, (or Argia) the rst in the Bay of
Hermione, Strab. lib. 8. Also a maritime City of Messenia, and the rst in
the Bay of Messenia, Strab. lib. 8. betweene the Promontory Acritas, and
the City Colonides, forty furlongs from each. Pausan. in Messenicis. Also a
City of Laconia, by the Sea-side, betweene Taenarus the Promontory, and
Gythium. Strab. lib. 8. Also a City of Laconia, neere Cardamyle. Herod.
lib. 8.
Asopus, a Riuer running betweene Plataea and Thebes, Thucyd. lib. 2. It
diuideth the Territory of the Plataeans from that of the Thebans, and

runneth within tenne furlongs of Thebes. Pausan. in Boeoticis. According
to Strabo, it runneth into the Sea by Tanagra, Strab. lib. 9. But according
to Ptolomle▪ Cephisus, and Asopus, and Ismenus meete all in Boeotia, and
Asopus passing through Attica, entreth into the Sea by the Promontory
Cynosura. Ptolom. Tab. 10. It is also the name of a Riuer rising about
Phlius in Peloponnesus, and entring into the Sea neere Corinth. Pausanias
in Corinthiacis. It is also the name of a City in Laconia, by the Sea-side,
distant from the Promontory Onugnathos two hundred furlongs, and
from the City Acriae, threescore furlongs. Pausanias in Laconicis.
Astacus, a maritime City of Acarnania, betweene the Promontory
Crithota, and mouth of the Riuer Achelous. Strab. lib. 10.
Asteria, an Iland betweene Ithaca and Cephallenia. Strab. lib. 10.
Astypalaea, an Iland, one of the Sporades, lying farre within the maine Sea.
Strabo, libro 10. Also a Promontory of the Territory of Mindus, in Asia.
Strab. lib. 14.
Atalante, a little Iland in the Bay of Opus, betweene Euboea and Boeotia,
ouer against the City of Opus, Strab. lib. 9. Thucyd. lib. 2.
Atarneus, a City of Aeolis, ouer against Lesbos. Herodot. lib. 1. betweene
Pitane and Adramyttium. Strab. lib. 13.
Athamanes, a Nation inhabiting on the North of the Aetolians, the last of
the Epirotes. Strab. lib. 9. aboue the Aetolians (that is, more remote from
the Sea then the Aetolians) Idem. lib. 10.
Athens, Hellados Hellas, the most renowned City of Greece, scituate in
Attica, about 40 furlongs from Piraeus, and the Sea. Strab. lib. 9. Thucyd.
lib. 2.
Athos, a famous Mountaine in the Chersonnesus called Acte, abutting on
the Aegaean Sea. Thucyd. lib. 4. and beginning at the Ditch made by
Xerxes, of twelue furlongs length, betweene Acanthus, and the Sea
opposite to Torone. Herodotus, lib. 7.
Atrax, a City of Thessaly, by which Peneus runneth, before it come to
Larissa, Strab. lib. 9.
Attica, a famous Region of Greece, bounding on the Territory of Megara,
on the shore, ouer against Salamis, Strab. lib. 9. and on the Territory of the

    Boeotians by Sea at Oropus. Idem. by Land at Panactum, Thucydid. lib. 5.
    at Oenoe, Thucyd. lib. 2. at Hysiae, Idem. lib. 2.
    Aulis, a Village in Boeotia, of the Territorie of Tanagra, by the Sea side,
    thirty furlongs from Delium, Strab. lib. 9.
    Aulon, a place neere the Sea side, in the Bay of Strymon, neere which the
    Lake Bolbe issueth into the Sea, and is some where betweene Arnae of
    Chalcidea, and Argilus, as may be gathered out of Thucydides, lib. 4.
    Axius, a Riuer of Macedonia, rising in the Mountaine Scardus. Ptolomie. It
    diuideth Bottia from Mygdonia, Herodot. lib. 7. it falleth into the Bay of
    Therme, betweene Therme and Pella. Strab. Epit. lib. 7.
    Azorus a Citty of Perhaebia. Liuy lib. 44.

B
B

    BErmius, a Mountaine of Macedonia, Herodot. libro 8. at the foote
    whereof standeth the Citie Berrhoea. Strab. Epitom. lib. 7.
    Berrhoea, a City of Macedonia, betweene Pydna, from which it is distant
    seuenteene miles, and Thessalonica (or Therme, ) from which it is distant
    one and fty miles. Itiner. Antonini Pij.
    Bisaltia, a Region of Macedonia, neere the Riuer Strymon, containing the
    Citie of Argilus, and the Countrey about it. Herodot. lib. 7.
    Bistonis, a Lake in Thracia, close by the City Dicaea. Herod. lib. 7.
    Boea, a City of Laconia, betweene the Promontories of Onugnathos and
    Malea. Strab. lib. 8. directly opposite to Cythera, in the vtmost part of the
    Bay of Boca, which begins at Onugnathos, and ends at Malea. The
    Territory of Boea ioyneth to that of Epidaurus Limera. Pausan. in
    Laconicis.
    Boeotia, a Region of Greece, betweene Attica and Phocis, reaching from
    Sea to Sea. Strab. lib. 9.
    Boium, a City of Doris. Thuc. lib. 1. Strab. lib. 9.

    Bolbe, a Lake in Myg●lonia, Thucyd. lib. 1. A Lake not far from Olynthus.
    Herodotus, lib. 8. It is called Bolyce by Athenaeus, lib. 8. It goeth out into
    the Sea by Aulon and Bromiscus, which are two places betweene Arnae in
    Chalcidea, and Amphipolis. Thucyd. lib. 4.
    Bolyssus, a place in Chius. Thucyd lib. 8.
    Bome, a Towne of the Aetolians, towards the Melian Bay. Thucyd. lib. 3.

          Bottia, or
          Bottiaea, or
          Bottiaeis, —
    A Region of Macedonia, lying to the Sea, deuided from Mygdonia by the
    Riuer Axius, and from Macedonia by the con uent of the Riuers,
    Aliacmon and Lydius. Herod. lib. 7.
    Branchidae, a Towne where there was a Temple of Apollo, on the Milesian
    shore.
    Herodot. lib. 7. betweene the Promontory of Posideum, and the City
    Miletus. Strab. lib. 14.
    Brauron, a Towne of Attica, betweene Prasiae and Marathon, on the Sea-
    side towards Euboea. Strab. lib. 9.
    Bri●essus, a Mountaine in Attica, betweene Eleusis and Acharnae. Thuc.
    lib. 2.
    Bromiscus, a Towne neere the Sea, betweene Acanthus and Argilus.
    Thucyd. lib. 4.
    Budorus, a Promontory of the Iland Salamis, lying out towards Megara.
    Scholiastes ad Thuc. lib. 2.
    Buphras, a Mountaine of Messenia, about Pylus. Thucyd. lib. 4.
    Bura, a City of Achaia, betweene Helice and Aegirae, distant from Helice
    thirty furlongs, and from Aegirae, seuenty two furlongs. Paus. in Achaicis.
    Byzantium, called now Constantinople, scituate at the entrance of the
    Bosphorus. Strab. lib. 12.

C

C

    Caicus, a Riuer of Asia, which passing by Pergamus, falleth into the Bay of
    Elaea, in Aeolis, betweene Elaea and Pitane. Strab. lib. 13.
    Calauria, an Iland in the Bay of Hermione, lying iust before Troezen. Strab.
    lib. 8.
    Calliae, a Towne of the Aetolians, towards the Melian Bay. Thucyd. lib. 3.
    Calydon, a City of the Aetolians, neere the Sea, vpon the Riuer Euenus.
    Strab. lib. 10.
    Cambunij, Mountaines of Macedonia, betweene it and Peroebia. Liuy, lib.
    42, 44.
    Cameiros, a City of the Dorians in Asia, Herod. lib. 1. It standeth in the
    Iland Rhodus. Strab. lib. 14. Thucyd. lib. 8.
    Canae, a City and Promontory of Aeolis, distant from Elaea towards Jonia
    100 furlongs, and as much from Malea, a Promontory of Lesbos, 
    to which it is opposite▪ Strab. lib. 13.
    Canastraea, A Promontory of Pallene. Herod.. lib. 7. Strab. Epit. l●b. 7.
    Liuy, lib. 44.
    Caphareus, a Hauen of Euboea, on the out side, not farre from Geraestus.
    Herodot. ●ib. 7.
    Caphyae, a City of Arcadia, not farre from Orchomenus. Polyb. lib. 4. the
    Riuer Ladon runneth betweene it and Psophis. Paus. in 〈◊〉.
    Cardamyle, a City of Laconia, betweene Phanae and Leuctra, by the Sea
    side, in the Messenian Bay. Strab. lib. 8. distant from the Promontory of
    Taenarus 400. Furlongs. Paus. in Laconicis. It is also a City in the Iland
    Chios. Thucyd lib. 8.
    Cardya, a City in the Isthmus of the Thracian Chersonnesus, vpon the Sea-
    side in the black Bay [or Bay of Melas] Herod. lib. 6.
    〈◊〉▪ an Iland in that Sea, which called from it Mar● Ca●●athium, hath
    to the North, the Sea called ●carium, to the South, the 〈◊〉 Sea, to the
    West, the Cretik and African Seas. Strab. in the end of the tenth Booke.
    Carye, a Towne in Arcadia, betweene 〈◊〉 and Phe●eum, in the con nes of
    both, distant from Pheneum threescore Furlongs. Paus. in Arcadicis.

〈◊〉, a City of Euboea, at the foot of the Mountaine Ocha▪ Strab. lib. 10.
Marathon a City of Attica, is equally distant from it and Athens. Paus. in
Atticis.
Casus, an Iland in the Carpathian Sea, f●●m Carpati●●s 80 furlongs, and
from 〈◊〉 a Promontory of Crete, 250. in quantity 80 furlongs about.
Strab. lib. 10.
〈◊〉, a Hauen in the Chersonnesus of 〈◊〉▪ at the foot of the Mountaine
Corycus. Strab. lib. 14.
〈◊〉, a maritime City of Lycia, subiect to the Rhodians, by the Riuer Calbis.
Strab. 〈◊〉. 14.
〈◊〉, a Riuer of Asia, falling into the S●a at Ephesus, so as the mouth of it is
the Hauen of the Ephesians, Strab. lib. 14. When 〈…〉 made a iourney
against Sardes, they left their Fleet at Cor●●sus, and then went vp by the
Riuer Caistrus, and then ouer the Mountaine 〈◊〉, and so to 〈◊〉. Herod.
〈◊〉. 5.
〈◊〉, a Region of Attica, betweene the Hils 〈◊〉 and 〈◊〉. Thucyd. l●b. ●.
〈◊〉, a place mentioned in the rst Booke of Thucydides. Pliny hath the
Iland 〈◊〉, opposite to 〈◊〉, and Distant from it 6 miles. The Scholiast. and
〈◊〉. put it in the West parts of Peloponne●●●▪ falsely.
Cuneum, a Promontory of Euboea, opposite to the Promontory of
Cnemides of the Locrians, and to Thermopylae, Strab. l●b. 9.
Cenchreae, a Hauen of the Corinthians, on the side of the Isthmus that
lyeth towards Athens. Thucyd. lib. 8. Cenchreae on one side, and
●●chaeum on the other, containe the Isthmus. Paus in Corinthiacis.

Ceos, an Iland, one of the Cyclades, the neerest to the Iland Helena, Strab.
lib. 10.
Cephallenia, an Iland ouer against Acarnania, distant from Leucadia tenne
furlongs, Strab. lib. 10. Thucyd. lib. 2. and hath in it 4 Cities, Pale, Same,
Prone, Cranij, Thucyd. lib. 2.
Cephissus, a Riuer, which rising about Lilaea, a City of Phocis, and going
by Elatea, Daulia and Phanotis, Cities of Phocis, and Chaeronea and
Coronea, Cities of Boeotia, falleth into, at Coronea, and lleth the Lake

called Copais. Afterwards, an Earthquake opening the way, it went on to
the Sea, and entred it at Larymna, a Towne of Boeotia, opposite to Aegae
of Euboea. Strab. lib. 9. Also a Riuer of Attica, rising in the Territory of
Eleusis, and falling into the Sea by Piraeus. Paus. in Atticis.
Ceraunij, Mountaines of Epirus, on the Sea-side, in the entrance of the
Jonian Gulfe. Strab. lib. 7.
Ceraunus, a Towne betweene Cnidus and Halicarnassus, from whence also
the Bay there is called the Ceraunian Bay. Strab. lib. 14.
Cerdylium, a Hill of the Argilians, beyond Strymon, neere Amphipolis.
Thucyd. lib. 2.
Cercine, a Mountaine betweene Thracia and Macedonia, the same
deuideth the Paeonians from the Sintians. Thucyd. lib. 4.
Cestrine, a Region of Epirus, deuided from Thesprotis by the Riuer
Thyanis. Thucyd. lib. 1. The Champians and Thesprotians haue all the Sea
coast from the mountaines called Ceraunij, to the Ambracian Bay,
(therefore Cestrine seemeth part of the Chaonians) Strab. lib. 7. called
Cestrine from Cestrinus the sonne of Helenus. Paus. in Corinthiacis.
Chaeronea, a City of Boeotia, con ning on Phocis, twenty furlongs distant
from Panopeus or P●anotis, and scituate vpon the Riuer Cephissus.
Pausan. in Phocicis. Strab. lib. 9.
Chalce, an Iland, one of the Sporades, distant from Telos 80 Furlongs, and
from Carpathus 400 Furlongs. Strab. lib. 10.
Chalcedon, a City of Bithynia, ouer against Byzantium▪ Strab. lib. 12. in
the mouth of Pontus Euxinus. Ibid. Thucyd. lib. 4.
Chalcis, a City of Euboea, at the Euripus. Herodot. lib. 7. Strab. lib. 10▪
Also a Citie of Aetolia, vpon the Riuer Euenus, on the East side of it, Strab.
lib. 10. beneath Calydon. Idem lib. 9.
Chalcidea, a Region ioyning to Thrace, containing most of the Townes
vpon or neere the Sea, from the mouth of the Riuer Strymon, to Potidaea
in Pallene. This may bee gathered out of Thucydides. It was so named, for
that they were Colonies of Chalcis in Euboea, either immediate or deriued.
Challaei, the people of a City of the Locri Ozolae. Thucyd. lib. 3.

Chaonia, a maritime Region of Epirus, beginning at the Mountaines called
Ceraunij, and together with Thesprotis reaching as farre as the Ambracian
Bay. Strab. lib. 7. It is diuided from Thesprotis by the Riuer Thyanis.
Thucyd. lib. 1.
Che●dorus, a small Riuer of Macedonia, which rising in Grestonia,
runneth into the Riuer Axius. Herod. lib. 7.
Cheimerium, a Promontory of Epirus, betweene the Ilands called Sybota,
and the the mouth of the Riuer Acheron. Strab. lib. 7. vide Acheron.
Chelonata, a Promontory of Elis, between the Promontories of Araxus and
●●thys. Strab. lib. 8.

Chersonnesus signi eth any portion of Land that is almost enuironed with
the Sea; but for the most part, when there is no word added to determine
the signi cation, it is here that Territory of Thrace, which is included with
these three Seas, Propontis, Hellespont, and the Blacke Bay, Melas. Strab.
Epit. lib. 7. In the Isthmus of this Chersonnesus standeth the City Cardya,
at the side toward the Blacke Bay, and Pactya on the part toward Propontis.
Herod. lib. 6.
Chius, now called Scio, an Iland and City of the Ionians. Herod. lib. 1.
distant from Lesbos about 400. Furlongs, and 900. furlongs in circuit.
Strab. lib. 13.
Chrusis, a part of Mygdonia so called▪ Steph.
Chrysopolis, a Village of the Chalcedonians, in the mouth of Pontus. Strab.
lib. 12.
Cimolis, an Iland, one of the Cyclades. vide Cyclades. It lyeth West of
Sicinus, Pholegandros, and Lagusa. Strab. lib. 10.
Cirrha, a City of Phocis, in the Corinthian Bay, ouer against Sicyon. Strab.
lib. 9. distant from Delphi threescore furlongs▪ from Delphi to Cirrha
runnes the Riuer Plistus. It is the Hauen or Towne of shipping for Delphi.
It con neth vpon Locris. Pausan. in Phocicis. He maketh it the same with
Crissa. vide Crissa.
Citarius a Mountaine of Macedonia, ioyning to Olympus, out of which
riseth the Riuer Eurotas. Strab. Epit. lib. 7.

Cithaeron, a Mountaine of Attica. When the Persian Campe vnder
Mardonius lay about Asopus in the Territory of Plataea, the Army of the
Grecians that were encamped at the foot of Cithaeron, were opposite to
them. Herod. lib. 9. Plataea is betweene Cithaeron and the City of Thebes.
Strab. lib. 9.
Citium, a City of Cyprus. *
Claros, an Iland, one of the Sporades. Ex Ortelij thesauro. Also a City
belonging to the Colophonians, Paus. in Achai. betweene the mouth of the
Riuer Caystrus and the City of Colophon. Strab. lib. 14.
Clazomenae, an Ionique City in Lydia. Herodot. lib. 1. Scituate in the
Chersonnesus of Erythrae, con ning on the Erythraeans, these being
within, the Clazomenians without the Chersonnesus. Betweene
Clazomenae and Teos, acrosse the Isthmus it is but fty Furlongs, but
round about by Sea, a thousand Furlongs. Presently without the Isthmus,
where it is narrowest, stands Clazomenae. Strab. lib. 13. Before it lye 8 little
Ilands. Idem. lib. 14.
Cleitor, a City of Arcadia, betweene Psophis and Caphyae. Polyb. lib. 4. It
con neth on the Territory of Pheneum, towards the East. Paus. in
Arcadicis.
Cleonae, a City of Argia, betweene Argos and Corinth, con ning on the
Phliasians. Paus. in Corinthiacis. Also a City in the territory where Mount
Athos standeth. Herod. lib. 7. Thucyd. lib. 4.
Cnemides, a Promontory of Locris, distant from Cynus, the          
Hauen of the Opuntians, towards Thermopylae, 50 Furlongs. Strab. lib. 9.
Cnidus, a City of the Dorians in Asia, by the Sea called Triopium. Herod.
lib. 1. On the North it hath the Ceraunian Bay; on the South, the Rhodian
Sea. Strab. lib. 14.
Colonae, an vpland City of Hellespont, in the Territory of Lampsacus.
Strab. lib. 13. Also a maritime City of Troas, 140 furlongs from J●um,
betweene Hamaxitus and Larissa. Jd. lib. 13.
Colonides, a maritime Citie of Messenia, betweene Asine and the mouth of
the Riuer Pamisus, distant from Asine 40 Furlongs. Paus. in Messeniacis.

Colophon, an Ionique City in Lydia, Herod. lib. 1. betweene Ephesus and
Lebedus: from Lebedus 120 furlongs: from Ephesus 70 furlongs. Strab. lib.
14.
Colo●honiorum portus, a Hauen not farre from Torone. Thucyd. lib. 5.
Cop● & Copais lacus. Cope is a City of Boeotia, scituate on the North part
of the Lake Copais. Strab. lib. 9. Paus. in Boeoticis.
Corassi●e, Two little Ilands on the West of the Iland Patmus. Strab. lib.
10.
Corcyra, now called Corfu, an Iland ouer against Epirus, whose East parts
are opposite to the Ilands called Sybota, and West parts, to the Hauen
called Onchimus. Strab. lib. 7.
Coressus, a Towne of the Territory of Ephesus, by the Sea side, neere to the
mouth of the Riuer Caystrus. Herodotus. lib. 5.
Corinthus, a famous City, neere the Isthmus of Peloponnesus.
Coronea, a City of Boeotia, vpon the Riuer Cephisus, where it entreth into
the Lake Copais, and not far from the Hill Helicon. Strab. lib. 9.
Corontae, a City of Acarnania. Thucydid. lib. 4.
Cortyta, a Towne neere the Sea in Laconia. Thucyd. lib. 4.
Corycus, a Mountaine in the Chersonnesus of Erythrae, between Teos and
Erythrae. Strab. lib. 13.
Coryphasium, a Promontory of Messenia, distant from Methone 100
furlongs: in this Promontory stood the Fort of Pylus. Paus. in Messeniacis.
Cos, a Iland with a City in it of the same name. It belonged to the Doriens
of Asia. Herodot. lib. 1. called Cos Meropidis, Thucyd. lib. 8, because
inhabited of old by the Meropians. It lyeth in the Carpathian Sea, Strab.
lib. 10. Opposite to Termerium, a Promontory of the Mindians. Id. lib.
14.
Cranaon a City in the Champaigne of Thessaly, Strab. lib. 9. The same may
be gathered out of Liuy, lib. 42.
Cranij, a people of Cephallenia. Thucyd. lib. 2. About the straight of that
Iland. Strab. lib. 10.
Crate●ei, a Hauen neere the City of Phocaea in Aeolis. Thucyd. lib. 8.

Crenae, Id est, the Welles▪ a place in Acar●nania, not farre from Argos.
Thucydid. lib. 3.
Creusa, a Sea-Towne of Boeotia, vpon the Bay of Crissa, belonging to the
City Thespiae. Strab. lib. 9. Pausan. in Boeoticis.
Crissa, vnde sinus Crissaeus, a Sea Towne of Phocis, between Cirrha &
Anticyra, from which the Bay of Corinth is called also the Crissaean Bay,
Strab. lib. 9. This Bay is called now the Bay of Lepanto.
Crithota, a Promontory of Acarnania, lying out into the Sea, betweene the
City Alyzea, and the mouth of the Riuer Achelous. Strab. lib. 10.
Crocylium, a Towne in Aetolia, of the Region inhabited by the Apodoti.
Thuc. lib. 3.
Crommyon, a Towne in the Isthmus of Corinth, Thucyd. lib. 4. Paus. in
Corinthiacis. betweene Schoenus and the Rockes called Scironides, and
con neth on Megaris. Strab. lib. 8.
Cyclades, Ilands in the Aegaean Sea, so called, for that they lye round about
the Iland Delos. Their number and order, according to Strabo, is this,
Helena, Ceos, Cythnus, Seriphus, Melos, Siphnus, Cimolis, Prepesinthus,
Otearus, Naxus, Parus, Syrus, Myconus, Tenus, Andrus, Gyarus. Strab. lib.
10.
Cyllene, a Sea-towne of Elis in Peloponnesus, belonging to the City of Elis,
and where their shipping lay, 60 furlongs distant from Araxus. Strab. lib. 8.
and from Elis 120 furlongs. Paus. in 2. Eliacorum. Also a Mountaine, the
highest in Peloponnesus, on the con nes of Arcadia and Achaia, neere
Pheneum. Paus. in Arcadicis.
Cyme, a City of Aeolis, on the Sea-coast, Her. l. 1. the last of the maritime
Cities of Aeolis, towards Ionia, as may be gathered out of Strab. lib. 13.
Cynos-sema, a Promontory of the Thracian Chersonnesus, not farre from
Abydus. Thucyd. lib. 8. ouer against the mouth of the Riuer Rhodius,
which falleth into the Sea betweene Abydus and Dardanum. Strab. lib. 13.
Cynus, a Towne of Locris, vpon the Sea towards Euboea, belonging to the
City of Opus, distant from the Promontory Cnemides 50 furlongs, in the
entrance of the Bay of Opus. Strab. lib. 9. Liuy lib. 28.

    Cynuria, a territory on the border betweene Argia and Laconia, toward the
    Sea-side, containing the Cities Thyrea and Anthena. Thucyd lib. 5. Paus. in
    Corinthiacis.
    Cyphanta, a maritime Towne of Laconia, distant from Zarex on one side
    16. furlongs, from Prasiae on the other 200. Paus. in Laconicis.
    Cypsela, a Castle in Parrhasia, a Territory of Arcadia, neere to Sciritis of
    Laconia. Thuc. lib. 5.
    Cyrrhus, a City of Macedonia, not farre from Pella. Thucyd. lib. 2.
    Cyrrhestae, that is, the people of Cyrrhus are placed there▪ abouts by
    Pliny, lib. 4.
    Cytinium, a City of Doris on the side of Pernassus▪ Thuc. lib. 3. Strab lib.
    9.
    Cythera, an Iland opposite to Malea, a Promontory of Laconia and distant
    from it forty furlongs. Strab. lib. 8. opposite directly to the City Boea.
    Paus. in Laconicis. In it are two Cities, Cythera and Scandea. Thucyd. lib.
    4. Paus. in Laconicis.
    Cythnus, an Iland, one of the Cyclades. vide Cyclades.
    Cyzicus, an Iland and City in Propontis, Strab. lib. 12. distant from Zeleia,
    which is a City neere the Sea, on the Riuer Aesepus 190 furlongs. Id. lib.
    13.

D
D

    DArdanus & Dardanum. Dardanus is a City on the Sea side from
    Abydus, 70 furlongs, betweene it and Rhoetium. Strab. lib. 13. It con neth
    on Abydus. Herodot. lib. 7. Dardanum, is a Promontory betweene Abydus
    and Dardanus. Strab. l●b. 13.
    Da●sylis, a Region of Bithynia, lying vp●● Propontis. Ptolomy and Strabo
    mention the Towne Dascyclos or Das●ylium, which Strabo saith standeth
    vpon the Lake Dascylitis, by the Riuer Rhind●cus, Strab. lib. 12. It was a

Prouince subiect to the Persians in the time of Xerxes, and gouerned by
Megabates, his Lieutenant. Thucyd. lib. 1.
Daulia, a Citie of Phocis, on the East of Delphi, vpon the Riuer Cephissus,
and at the foot of Pernassus. Strab. lib. 9. Pausanias in Phocicis.
Decelea, a Towne in Attica, in the way betweene Oropus and Athens,
distant from Athens 120 Furlongs, and not much more from Boeotia.
Thuc. lib. 7.
Delium, a Temple of Apollo by the Sea-side in the Territory of Tanagra.
Thucyd. lib. 4. Paus. in Boeoticis. opposite to Chalcis of Euboea. Herod. lib.
6.
Delos, an Iland, and in it a City with a Temple consecrated to Apollo,
Thucyd. lib. 3. It is distant from Andros 15 miles, and as many from
Myconus. Plin. lib. 4.
Delphi, a City of Phocis, famous for the Temple and Oracle of Apollo. It
standeth at the foot of the Hill Pernassus. Herod. lib. 8. on the South part
of the hill. Strabo lib. 9. threescore furlongs from the Sea. Paus. in Phocicis.
Delphinium, a Towne in the Ile Chius, not farre from the City Chius, and
by the Sea-side, Thucyd. lib. 8.
Dercaei, a people of Thrace. *
Dicaea, a City of Thrace, betweene Abdera and Maronea, Herod. lib. 7.
Dictidij, a people in Mount Athos, Thuc. lib. 8.
Dion, a City, and in it a Temple of Iupiter, standing at the Sea side, at the
foot of Olympus, Thucid. lib. 4. Strab. Epit. lib. 7. Also a City in Mount
Athos. Thuc. lib. 4.
Doberus, a City of Paeonia, at the foot of Cercine. Thuc. lib. 2.
Doliche, a Citie of the Perrhaebians, not far from the Mountaines called
Cambunij. Liuy, lib. 44.
Dolopia, a Region on the South side of the hill Pindus, on the North of the
Amphilochians, and con ning on Phthiotis of Thessaly. Strab. lib. 9, 10.
Doris, a Region con ning on the Melians, and with a narrow corner
running in betweene them and Phocis. Herod. lib. 8. It lyeth on the East
part of Parnassus, and deuideth the Locrians called Ozolae, from the
Locrians called Opuntians. It was called Tetrapolis, because it contained

    these 4 Cities, Erineus, Boium, Cytinium, and Pindus. Strab. lib. 9. The
    Doriens are also a Nation in Asia, by the Sea side, ioyning to Caria, of
    which were numbred, the inhabitants of the Ilands Rhodes and 
    Cos, and the Cities Cnidus and Hal. carnassus. Strab. lib. 14.
    Doriscus Campus, a large Champaigne by the side of the riuer Hebrus in
    Thrace, where Xerxes passing on towards Greece, mustred his mighty
    Armie. Herodot. lib. 7.
    Drabescus, a City of Edonia, beyond the Riuer Strymon. Thucyd. lib. 1.
    Drecanum a Promontory of the Iland Cos, distant from the City Cos, 200
    furlongs. Strab. lib. 14.
    Dremyssa, an Iland lying before Clazomenae. Thucyd. lib. 8. Liuy, lib. 38.
    vide Clazomenae.
    Droi, a people of Thrace. *
    Dyme, a Citty of Achaia, the neerest to the con nes of Elis. Strab. lib. 8.
    Pausan. in Achaicis.

E
E

    EChinades, Ilands, lying in and out before the mouth of the Riuer
    Achelous. Thuc. lib. 3. Strab. lib. 10.
    Edonia, a Region of Thrace, lying to the Riuer Strymon, and the Sea; It
    had in it Amphipolis, Drabescus, and other Cities. Thuc. lib. 1. by which the
    scituation thereof may be su ciently vnderstood.
    Eidomene, a City of Macedonia, not farre from Doberus. Thuc. lib. 2. Plin.
    lib. 4.
    Eion, a City of Thrace, on the riuer Strymon. Herod. lib. 7. In the mouth of
    Strymon, 25 furlongs from Amphipolis. Thucyd. lib. 4.
    Elaea, a Sea-towne in Aeolis, belonging to the City of Pergamus, distant
    from the mouth of the Riuer Caicus towards Ionia, 12 furlongs: and from
    Canae 100 furlongs. Strab. lib. 13.

Ela●aea, a City of Phocis, by the Riuer Cephissus, con ning on the
Locrians. Strab. lib. 9. Pausanias in Phocicis. It standeth in the straights of
the Phoccan Mountaines. Strab. lib. 9.
El●utherae, a Towne of Attica, betweene Eleusis and Plataea, on the
border of Attica. Paus. in Attic. Id. in Boeotic.
Eleus, a City of Chersonnesus to the North of Lemnos, Herod. lib. 6.
Eleusis, a Sea-towne of Attica, Strab. lib. 8. on the con nes of Megaris.
Pausanias in Atticis.
Elis. Elis and Messenia are two Regions, that take vp the West part of
Peloponnesus. Elis is bounded on the North by the Promontory Araxus,
and diuided from Messenia in the parts towards the Sea, by the Riuer
Neda. Strab. lib. 8. Elis the principall City thereof is distant from the Sea
120 Furlongs, and from Olympia almost three hundred. Pausan. in ﬁne
secundi Eliacorum.
Ellom●nus, a Towne in Neritum of the Territory of Leucadia, Thuc. lib. 3.

      Elymio●ae,
      Elimaea, —
a Nation of Macedonia, which Ptolomy placeth on the Sea-side vpon the
Ionian Gulfe. Liuy hath the City Elimaea at the foot of the Mountaines
Cambunij, and by the Riuer Aliacmon, Liu. lib. 42.
Embatus, a Towne of Erythraea. Thuc. lib. 3. on the part toward Lesbos, as
may bee probably coniectured by the History.
Enipeus, a Riuer of Thessaly, which falleth into the Riuer Peneus. Herodot.
lib. 7. But rst it receiueth into itselfe the water of Apidanus, that passeth
by Pharsalus. Strab. lib. 8. It riseth in the Mountaine Othrys. Id. ibid.
Eorda, a Region of Macedonia, betweene the Lyncestians and Thessalonica
(or Thersa) in the way called Ignatia, that leadeth from Epidamnus to
Thessalonica, Strab. lib. 7.
Ephesus, an Ionique City in Lydia. Herod. lib. 1. at the mouth of the Riuer
Caistrus, on the side towards Mycale. Strab. lib. 13.

Ephyre, a City of Thesprotis, vpon the Riuer Thyamis. Strab. lib. 7. Thuc.
lib. 1. Also a City of Agraeis. Strab. lib. 7. & lib. 10.
Epidamnus, a City afterwards called Dyrrachium, now Durazzo, scituate
on the Ionian Gulfe, amongst the Taulantij, Illyrians. Thucyd. lib. 1. next
without the Bay called Rhizicus. Strab. lib. 7.
Epidaurus, a City of Argia by the Sea-side, in the inmost part of the
Saronian Bay. Strab. lib. 8.
Epidaurus Limera, a maritime City of Laconia, in the Bay of Argos, 300
furlongs from the Promontory of Malea. Pausan. in Laconicis.
Erae, a City in Erythraea, betweene Teos and Casystus. Strab. lib. 13.
Eressus, a City in the Ile Lesbos, between Pyrrha, and the Promontory
Sigrium. Strabo, libro 13.
Eretria, a City of Euboea, between Chalcis and Gerestus. Strab. lib. 10.
opposite to Oropus in Attica Strab. lib. 9.
Erigon, a Riuer of Macedonia, arrising in Illyris, and falling into the Riuer
Axius. Liu. lib. 39. Strab. lib. 7.
Erineus, a City of Doris. Thucyd. lib. 1. Strab. lib. 9. Also a Hauen in the
Territory of Rhypes, in Achaia. Thuc. lib. 7. Pausan. in Achaicis.
Erythrae, an Ionique City. Herodot. lib. 1. It standeth in the middest of the
Chersonnesus, betweene the Promontory Argenum and the Mountaine
Mimas, and before it lye certaine Ilands called Hip●i. Strab. lib. 13. Also a
Towne in the con nes of Attica, not farre from Plataea. Thucyd. lib. 3.
Herod. lib. 9.
Estiotis, a Region of Thessaly, con ning on the Mountaines Olympus and
Ossa. Herodot. lib. 1. It is the West part of Thessaly, and lyeth betweene
Mount Pindus and the vpper Macedonie. Strab. lib. 9.
Euboea, an Iland lying opposite to the Continent of Attica, and Boeotia,
and Locris, extending from Sunium, as far as Thessaly. The length of it is
reckoned from the Promontory Ceneum, to the Promontory Geraestus.
Concaua Euboeae is all that shore that is from the Euripus to Geraestus.
Strab. lib. 10. Herodotus maketh it to bee on the other side of the Iland.
Herod. lib. 7. It seemes therefore that Concaua Euboeae is not the proper

    name of a place, but an appellation signifying any hollow bending of the
    shore.
    Euenus, a Riuer, which rising amongst the Boij, a Nation of Aetolia,
    runneth by Chalcis and Calydon, and then bending toward the West, by
    Pleuron into the Sea. Strab. lib. 10.
    Eurotas, a Riuer of Laconia, rising in the Territory of Megalopolis, and
    passing by the City of Lacedaemon, on the East side of it, falleth into the
    Sea neere Helos, betweene Gythium and Acria. Strab. lib. 8. Also a Riuer
    of Thessaly, rising out of the Hill Citarius, and falling into the Riuer
    Peneus. Strab. lib. 7. Epit.
    Eurytanes, a Nation of Aetolians, one of the three. Apodoti being those
    that dwelt toward the Sea; Ophtonei, those toward the Melians, Thucyd.
    lib. 3. Eurytanes therefore must be those toward Agraeis and Athamania.

G
G

    GAlepsus, a City not farre from Torone. The Fleet of Xerxes compassing the
    Promontory of Ampelus, passed by these Cities, Torone, Galepsus, Sermyla,
    &c. Herodot. lib. 7.
    Gapsolus, a City of Thrace, not far from Amphipolis. Thucyd. lib. 4.
    Ortelius thinketh it the same with Galepsus: but it is more probable by the
    History to be another.
    Gargara, a Promontory in Asia, 260 furlongs within the Promontory of
    Lectus, and is the beginning of the Bay of Adramyttium, properly so called.
    Strab. lib. 13.
    Geraestus, a Promontory of Euboea. Geraestus and Petalia are opposite to
    Sunium, a Promontory of Attica. Strab. lib. 10. Geraestus is betweene the
    City Styra, and Eretria. Jdem. lib. 10.
    Geranea, a Hill in Megaris, neere the entrance of the Isthmus. Thucyd. lib.
    1. Paus. in Atticis.
    Glauce, a City in Ionia, neere the Mountaine Mycale▪ Thucyd. lib. 8.

    Gigonus, a Promontory not farre from Potidaea. Thuc. lib. 2. Herod. lib. 7.
    Gomphi, a City of Thessaly, in the Region called Estiotis. Strab. lib. 9.
    neere to the springs of Peneus. Plin. lib. 4. The neerest of the Thessalian
    Cities to Epirus. Liuy, lib. 32.
    Gonnus, a City of the Perrhaebians in Thessaly, at the foot of Olympus.
    Strab. lib. 9. in the entrance to Tempe. Polyb. lib. 17. Liuy, lib. 44. twenty
    miles distant from Larissa, Liu▪ lib. 36. Gonnus, is in the entrance out of
    Macedonia through the Perrhaebians into Thessaly. Herod. lib. 7.
    Gortynia, a City of Macedonia, not farre from the Hill Cercine. Thucyd.
    lib. 2.
    Granicus, a Riuer in Hellespont, rising in Mount Ida, neere xnto Scepsis,
    and falling into Propontis betweene the City Priapus, and the mouth of the
    Riuer Aesepus. Strab. lib. 13.
    Grestonia, a Region of Macedonia, ioyning to Mygdonia, in which riseth
    the Riuer Chedorus. Herod. lib. 7.
    Gyarus, a small Iland, one of the Cyclades. Vide Cyclades.
    Gyrton, a City of Perrhaebia, at the foot of Olympus. Strab. lib. 9. before
    Gonnus to such as come out of Macedonia, by the Mountaines called
    Cambunij. Liuy, libro 44.
    Gythium, a City of Laconia, the Harbour of the Lacedaemonian Shipping
    betweene Asine and Acriae. Strab. lib. 8. distant 230 furlongs 
    from the Promontory of Taenarus. Paus. in Laconicis.

H
H

        HAlias Thucydidi,
        Halieis Straboni,
        Halice Pausaniae, —
    A maritime Towne of Argia, in the Bay of Hermione. Strabo, lib. 8.
    betweene Asine and Hermione, two hundred and fty furlongs from

Asine. Paus. in Corinthiacis.
Haliartus, a citie of Boeotia, by the side of the Lake Copais, towards
Helicon. Strab. lib. 9. It con neth on the Territory of Thespiae. Paus. in
Boeoticis.
Halicarnassus, a City of the Doreans in Asia. Herod. lib. 1. In the bottome
of the Ceraunian Bay. Strab. lib. 14.
Halimus, a Towne of Attica, next after Phaleron, towards the Promontory
of Sunium. Strab. lib. 9. In this Towne was Thucydides borne, the Author
of this History.
Halisarna, a Towne in the Iland Cos, neere vnto the Promontory of Lacter.
Strab. lib. 14.
Hamaxitus, a City of Troas, vnder the Promontory of Lectus. Strab. lib. 13.
Harmatus, a City in the Continent, ouer against Methymna of Lesbos.
Thuc. lib. 8.
Harpagium, a place on the con nes of Priapus and Cyzicus. Strab. lib. 13.
Hebrus, a Riuer of Thrace, falling into the Sea betweene Aenus and
Doriscus. Herod. lib. 7.
Helena, an Iland, one of the Cyclades, adiacent to the Continent of Attica,
and extending from Sunium to Thoricus. Strab. lib. 10.
Helice, a Citie of Achaia, on the Sea-side, betweene Aegium and Bura,
distant from Aegium forty furlongs. Pausan. in Achaicis.
Helos, a Laconique City, by the side of the Riuer Eurotas, not farre from
the Sea. Strab. lib. 8. distant from Gythium a hundred furlongs, and from
Acriae thirty, Paus. in Laconicis.
Heraea, a City of Arcadia, in the con nes of Elis, vpon the Riuer Alpheus.
Polyb. lib. 4. Paus. in Arcadicis. It con neth on Megalopolis; and the Riuer
Ladon runneth within 15 furlongs of it. Pausan. in Arcadicis.
Heraclea, a City of the Melians, built by the Lacedaemonians, within the
straight of Thermopylae, distant from it forty furlongs, and from the Sea
twenty. Thucyd. lib. 3. Strab. lib. 9. Also a City in the Bay of Latmus,
betweene Miletus and Pyrrha, distant from Pyrrha 100 furlongs. Strab. lib.
14. Also a City of the Sinti, a people of Macedonia, called Heraclea Sintica.
Liu. lib. 45.

    Hermione, a maritime City in Argia, betweene Asine and Troezen. Strab.
    lib. 8. Paus. in Corinthiacis. From it is named the Bay of Hermione, which
    hath in it in order these three Cities, Asine, Hermione, Troezen. Strab. lib.
    8. Pausanias in Corinthiacis. But Strabo seemeth to make the Bay of
    Hermione to begin at the Promontory Scyllaeum, and to end at Epidaurus.
    Quaere.
    Hermus, a Riuer diuiding Aelis from Jonia, ▪ Strab. lib. 14. It runneth
    through the Plaines that lye before the Citie Sardis, and entreth the Sea by
    Phocaea. Herod. lib. 1.
    Hessij, the people of a City of the Locri Ozolae. Thucyd. lib. 3.
    Hestiaea, a City of Euboea, not farre from the Promontory Ceneum. Strab.
    lib. 10. The Territory of Hestiaea is called Hestiotis, and is ouer against
    Thessaly, as may appeare out of Herod. lib. 7.
    Hyaei, The people of a City of the Locri Ozolae. Thucyd. lib. 3.
    Hyampolis, a City of Phocis, con ning on Abas, a City of the Locrians of
    Opus. Paus. in Phocicis.
    Hysiae, a Towne of Attica, on the con nes of Plataeis. Herodot. lib. 9.
    Thucyd. lib. 3. Vide Oenoe. Also a Towne of Argia, on the con nes of
    Tegea, in the way betweene Tegea and Argos. Pausanias in Corinthiacis.

I
I

    Iassus, a maritime City of Asia, scituate in an Iland, neere to the
    Continent. Strab. lib. 14. in that Bay which on the side towards Miletus
    hath Posideum for bound, and on the other side, the City Mindus. Polyb.
    lib. 16. The Bay is called sinus Bargilcaticus. Jidem.
    Icarus, or Icaria, an Iland on the West of the Ile Samos. Strab. lib. 10.
    distant from it 80 furlongs. Idem, lib. 14.
    Icthys, a Promontory of Elis, neere the Citie of Phia. Thucyd. lib. 2. Vide
    Phia.
    Icus, an Iland lying before Magnesia. Strab. lib. 9.

    Ida, a Mountaine of Asia, extending from Lectus and the places on the
    Adramyttian Bay, to the City Zeleia by Propontis. Strab. lib. 12.
    Idacus, a place in the Thracian Chersonnesus, opposite to Abydus and
    Dardanus. Thuc. lib. 8.
    Idomenae, two Hill toppes so called, betweene Ambracia and Argos
    Amphilochicum. Thucyd. lib. 3.
    Ielysus, a City in the Iland of Rhodes, betweene Cameirus and the City of
    Rhodes. Strab. lib. 14.
    Jlium siue Troia, a famous City in Asia, 170 furlongs from Abydus,
    standing from the Sea towards the Mountaine Ida. Strab. lib. 13.
    Imbros, an Iland not farre from the Thracian Chersonnesus. Thucyd. lib. 8.
    It is distant from Lemnos two and twenty miles, and from the Ile
    Samothrace, that lyeth before the Riuer Hebrus, two and thirty miles. Plin.
    lib. 4.
    Iolcus a maritime Towne of Thessaly, in the Pegasean Bay, not farre from
    Demetrias. Liu. lib. 4.
    Ionia, a Region inhabited by the Grecians in Asia, by the Sea-side, reaching
    from Posideum a Promontory of Miletus, on the South, to Phocaea, and
    the mouth of the Riuer Hermus, on the North, Strab. l●b 14.
    Ionian Gulfe. The Ionian Gulfe, or the Ionian Sea, is the vtmost part of the
    Adriatique Sea, beginning at the Ceraunia Mountaines. Strab. lib. 7.
    Ios, an Iland on the Coast of Crete, equally distant from Therasia an
    Anaphe. Strab. lib. 10.
    Ipnenses, The people of a City of the Locri Ozolae. Thucyd. lib. 3.
    Ismaris, a Lake in Thrace, betweene Stryma and Maronea. Herod. lib. 7.
    Istone, a Hill in the Ile Corcyra. Thuc. lib. 3.
    Ithaca, an Iland ouer against Cephallenia, and neere to it. Strab. lib. 10.
    Ithome, a Hill in Messenia, neere the Sea, and on it a City, which was
    afterward the Cittadell of the City 〈◊〉, that was built after the
    Peloponnesian Warre, by Epaminondas. Paus. in Messenicis.

L

L

    LAconia, a Region of Peloponnesus, con ning on Messenia, Argia, and
    Arcadia. Strab. lib. 8. diuided from the Territory of Megalopolis of
    Arcadia, by the Riuer Alpheus. ●aus. in Arcadicis.
    Lact●r, the most Southerne Promontorie of the Ile Cos. Strab. lib. 14.
    Lacedemon, the head City of Laconia, on the West side of the Riuer
    Eurotas, remote from the Sea, beneath the Mountaine Taygetus. Strab.
    l●b. 8. Polyb. lib. 5.
    ●ade, a small Iland, lying before the City Myletus. Herod. li●. 6. Thucyd.

    lib. 8. Paus. in Atticus▪
    Ladon, a Riuer rising in the Territory of Cleitor in Arcadia, passing by the
    border of Heraea, and falling into the Riuer P●neus in Elis, neere to Pylus.
    Paus in Arcadicis, & Eliacorum secundo.
    Lagusa, an Iland on the West of the Iland Ios. Strab. lib. 10.
    Lampsacus, a maritime City in Hellespont, from Abydus▪ towards
    Propontis, distant 170 furlongs. Strab. lib. 13.
    Laodicea, a Towne of the Territory of Orestis in Arcadia. Thucyd. lib. 4.
    Larissa, a City of Thessaly, on the Riuer Peneus. Strab. lib. 9. Also a City of
    Tract▪ betweene Achaenni and Colonae. Strabo, lib. 13.
    Latmus, and the Bay of Latmus. -Latmus, a Mountaine at the bottome of
    the Bay of Latmus, which Bay beginneth at Posideum in the Territorie of
    Miletus, and endeth at the Promontorie of Pyrrha, betweene which places
    by the shore, it is two hundred furlongs▪ and streight ouer, but thirty.
    Strabo, libro 4. Latmus is also an Iland in those parts, as appeareth by
    Thucydides, lib. 2. but I can nde no mention of it in any other Author.
    Laurium, a Mountaine and Towne in Attica, not far from S●●ium,
    betweene Sunium and Athens. Paus. in Atticis. The Athenians 
    had siluer Mines in this Mountaine. Thuc. Herod.
    Leaei, a Nation dwelling on the Riuer Strymon, and the border betweene
    Thrace and Macedonie. Thucyd. lib. 2.

Lebedus, an Ionique City in Lydia. Herod. lib. 1. Scituate on the Sea-side,
betweene Colophon and Teus, distant from each 120 furlongs. Strab. l●b.
14.
Lechaeum, a Hauen of the Corinthians in the Crissaean or Corinthian Bay.
Betweene lechaeum and Cenchreae is contained the Corinthian Isthmus.
Paus. in Corinthiacis.
Lectus, a City and Promontory of Troas, the beginning of the Bay of
Adramyttium, Strab. lib. 14.
Lennos, an Iland in the Aegean Sea, on the East of the Mountaine Athos,
so as the shaddow of the Mountaine falleth sometimes vpon it. Plin. lib. 4.
Strab. Epitom. lib. 7.
Lepreum, a City of Elis, forty furlongs from the Sea. Pa●s. Fl●a●orum
secundo. On the con nes of Arcadia. Thucyd. lib. 5.
Lerus, an Iland, one of the Sporades, neere to Patmos. Strab. lib. 10.
Lesbos, an Iland ouer against Aeolis in Asia, distant from Lemnos, Tenedos,
and Chios almost equally; lesse then ue hundred furlongs from the
farthest of them. It reacheth in length betweene Lectus and Canae 560
furlongs, and is in compasse 1100 furlongs. Strab. lib. 13.
Leucas, a Peninsula, distant from Actium 240 furlongs. Strab. lib. 10. now
an Iland, and called Santa Maura.
Leuctra, a Towne in Boeotia, betweene Plataea and Thespiae. Strab. lib. 9.
Also a Towne of Laconia in the Messenian Bay, betweene T●urides and
Cardamyle, distant f●●m Cardamyle 60 furlongs▪ and from Taenarus
three hundred and forty. Strab. lib. 8. Paus. in Laconicis.
Leucimna, the most Easterne Promontory of the Ile Corcyra, opposite to
the Ilands called Sybota, Strab. lib. 7.
Lilaea, a City of Phocis, distant from Delphi by Pernassus 180 furlongs.
Paus. in Phocicis.
Limnaea, a City on the con nes of Agraeis, on the West to the Riuer
Achelous, as may be gathered out of Thucyd. lib. 3.
Lin●ij, a City of the Iland Rhodes, scituate on the right hand to them that
sayle from the City of Rhodes Southward. Strab. lib. 14.

    Lissus, a small Riuer of Thrace, betweene Mesembria and Stryma. Herod
    lib. 7.
    Locri, a Nation of Greece, whereof one part, called Locri Ozolae, inhabite
    on the West of Pernassus, and con ne on Aetolia. Strab. lib. 9. And the
    other part, called Locri Opuntij, are diuided from the Ozolae by the
    Mountaines Pernassus and the Region of Doris. Idem, lib. 9. Part of the
    Opuntians are called Epicnemides, for that they dwell neere the
    Promontory called Cnemides.
    Loryma, a City in the opposite Continent to Rhodes, betweene Cnidus
    and Physcus, where the shore beginneth to turne Northward. Strab. lib.
    14. distant twenty miles from Rhodes. Liuy, libro 45.
    Lycaeum, a mountaine in Arcadia, neere to the con nes of Laconia, and
    Megalopolis. Paus. in Arcadicis. Not far from Tegea. Strab. lib. 8.
    Lychnidus, a City of Illyris, on the Con nes of Macedonie, in the Ignatian
    way, that leadeth from Apollonia to Therme. Strab. lib. 7.
    Lydius, a Riuer of Macedonie. Lydius and Aliacmon meeting in one,
    deuide Bottiaea from Macedonie. Herodot. lib. 7.
    Lyncus, a Region and City of the vpper Macedonia, the people are called
    Lynchesti by Thucyd. lib. 4, and placed by Strabo in the way betweene
    Epidamnus and Therme, which hee calles the Ignatian way. Strab. lib. 7.

M
M

    MAcedonia, a famous Kingdome, bordered with Thracia, Epirus, Illyris,
    and Thessaly
    Mady●us, a City in the Thracian Chersonnesus. Betweene Sestus amd
    Madytus, is the shortest cut ouer the Hellespont, of not aboue seuen
    furlongs. Herod. lib. 7.
    Maeander, a Riuer of Caria. The mouth of it is fty furlongs from Pyrrha,
    the beginning of the Latmian Bay. Strab. lib. 14.

Maedi, a people of Thrace, bordering on Maceconie. Polyb. lib. Thucyd. lib.
2.
Moenalia, a Territory of Arcadia, belonging to the City Maenalus, which
City is about threescore and tenne furlongs from Megalopolis. Paus. in
Arcadicis.
Magnesia, a City of Thessaly, the Territorie whereof extendeth from the
Mountaine Ossa and the Lake Boebeis, to the Mountaine Pelion. Strab. lib.
9. Before the Continent of Magnesia, lyeth the Iland Scyathus. Herodot. lib.
7. Also a City of Ionia called Magnesia on Maeander, aboue the Citie of
Myus. Strabo, libro 14.
Mal●a, a Promontory of Laconia, betweene which and Taenarus is
comprehended the Laconian Bay. Strab. lib. 8. Also the most Southerne
Promontory of Lesbos, opposite to Canae. Strab. lib. 13.
Mantinea, a City of Arcadia, con ning on Argia, Tegea, Methydrium, and
Orchomenus. Paus. in Arcadicis.
Marathon, a Towne in Attica, ouer against Eretria of Euboea. Herod. lib. 6.
Betweene Rhamnus and Brauron. Strab. lib. 9. Equally distant from
Athens and from Carystus in Euboea. Paus, in Atticis.
Marathusa, an Iland lying before Clazomenae. Thucyd. lib. 8. Vide
Clazomenae.
Maronea, a Citie of Thrace, lying to the Aegean Sea. Xerxes, after he had
passed the Riuer Lissus, went on toward Greece by these Cities, Maronea,
Dicaea, Abdera, &c. Herod. lib. 7.
Mecyberna, a maritime Towne in the Bay of Torone, seruing for the
shipping of the City Olynthus. Strab. Epitom. lib. 7. The Fleet of Xerxes
beeing come about Ampelus, (This is a Promontory neere Torone, ) passed
by these Cities, Torone, Galepsus, Sermyla, Mecyberna, &c. Herodot. lib. 7.
Medeon, a Citie of Amphilochia, on the West of the Riuer Achelous. The
Army of the Peloponnesians hauing passed the Riuer Achelous, out of
Aetolia, went on into Agraeis by these Cities in order, Phytia, Medeon, and
Limnaea. Thucyd. lib. 3.
Megalopolis, a City of Arcadia, built after the Peloponnesian Warre, by
Epaminondas. The Territory thereof con neth on Laconia, Messenia,

Heraea, Orchomenus, Mantinea, and Tegea. It standeth on the Riuer
Helisson, not farre from Alpheus. Pausan. in Arcadicis.
Megara, a City con ning with Attica at Eleusis▪ distant from the Sea 18
furlongs. Paus. in Atticis. Strab. lib. 8.
Melas, a Riuer, and a Bay into which it entreth, on the West of the
Thracian Chersonnesus. Herod. lib. 7.
Melena, a Promontory of the Iland Chios, ouer against the Ile Psyra.
Strabo, libro 15.
Melienses, and the Melian Bay. The Melienses are next to Thessaly
Southward. Strab. lib. 8. The Melian Bay beginneth at the Promontory
Cnemides. Id. lib. 9.
Melitea, a City of Thessalie, neere the Riuer Enipeus. Strab. lib. 9.
betweene Pharsalus and Heraclea. Thucyd. lib. 4.
Melos, an Iland, one of the Cyclades Vide Cyclades. Distant from the
Promontorie Scyllaeum seuen hundred furlongs. Strab. lib. 10.
Mende, a Citie in the Chersonnesus of Pallene. Herod. lib. 7. betweene
Aphytis and Scione. Strab. Epit. lib. 7.
Mesembria, a maritime City of Thrace, neere Doriscus, the last in the shore
of Doriscus towards the West. Herod. lib. 7.
Messenia, a Region on the West part of Peloponnesus, con ning on Elis,
Arcadia, and Laconia, deuided from Elis on the parts to the Sea, by the
Riuer Neda, and con ning with Laconia at Thurides. Strab. lib. 8. Paus. in
Messenicis. Of the Messenian Bay, the rst Towne is Asine, the last
Thurides. Idem, lib. 8. The City of Messene was built after the
Peloponnesian Warre, by Epaminondas, vnder the Hill Ithome. Paus. in
Messenicis. Vide Ithome.
Methone, a City of Macedonia, forty furlongs from Pydna. Strab. Epit. lib.
7. Also a City in Argia, betweene Epidaurus and Troezen. Strab. lib. 8.
Scituate in a Chersonnasus belonging to the Troezenians. Paus. in
Corinthiacis. Strabo calleth it Methana. Also a maritime City of Messenia,
betweene the Promontories Coryphasium and Acritas. Strab. lib. 8. Paus.
in Corinthiacis. Pausanias calleth it Mothone. It is now called Modeno.
Messapij, the people of a City of the Locri Ozolae. Thucyd. lib. 2.

Methydrium, a City of Arcadia, con ning on Mantinea, distant from
Megalopolis 170 furlongs. Paus. in Arcadicis.
Methymna, a City of Lesbos, betweene the Promontories Sigrium and
Malea, distant from Malea 340 furlongs, and from Sigrium 210. Strab. lib.
13.
Miletus, an Ionique City of Caria, the farthermost toward the 
South. Herodot. lib. 1. next to Posideu●, in the Latmian ●ay. Strab. lib.
14.
Mimas, a Hill in the Chersonnesus of Erythrae, betweene the Cities
Erythrae and Clazomenae, Strab. lib. 13.
Mindus, a maritime Citie of Caria, betweene the Promontorie of
Astypalaea, and the City Iasus. Strabo. libro 14.
Minöe, an Iland, as Thucyd. a Promontory as Strabo saith, that maketh
Nisaea a Hauen. Strab. lib. 9. Thucyd. lib. 2.
Mitylene, the chiefe City of Lesbos, scituate betweene Methymna and
Malea, distant from Malea threescore and ten furlongs, from 〈◊〉 one
hundred and twenty furlongs. Strab. lib. 13.
Melossians, a people of Epirus. Thucydid. lib. 1. dwelling by the Riuer
Acheron. Liuy, lib. 8.
Molychria, a City of the Locri Ozolae, on the Sea side, next to Antirrhium,
on the part toward Euenus. Paus. in Phocicis.
Manychia, a Promontory of Attica, which with Piraeus made the Harbour
of the Athenian shipping, with three faire Hauens within it. Strab. lib. 9.
Mycale, a Promontory ouer against the Ile Samos, Herodot. lib. 1. A
Mountaine neere to Priene, opposite to Samos, which with Posideum a
Promontory of Samos, maketh the streight of seuen furlongs ouer. Strab.
lib. 14.
Mycalessus, a City of Boeotia, betweene Thebes and Chalcis of Euboea.
Paus. in Boeoticis. Thucyd. lib. 7.
Mycenae, a City once the head of Argia, on the left hand to those that goe
from Cleonae to Argos, distant from Argos fty furlongs. Strab. lib. 8.
Paus. in Corinthiacis.
Myconus, an Iland, one of the Cyclades. Vide Cyclades.

    Mygdonia, a Region of Macedonia, deuided from Bottiaea by the Riuer
    Axius, and and reaching vnto Pallene. Herodot. libro 7.
    Mylasa, an vpland City of Caria, neerest to the Sea at Physcus. Strab. lib. 14.
    Myonnesus, a maritime City of Ionia, betweene Teos and Lebedus. Strab.
    lib. 14.
    Myrcinus, a City of the Edonians in Thrace, by the Riuer Strymon.
    Herodot. lib. 5.
    Myus, an Ionique City, 30 furlongs aboue the mouth of the Riuer
    Maeander. Strabo, lib. 14. Also a City of the Locri Ozolae, neere Amphissa,
    and thirty furlongs more remote from the Sea. Paus. in Phocicis.

N
N

    NAupactus, a City of the Locri Ozolae, neer to Antirrhium, within the
    Crissaean Bay. Strab. lib. 9. and next to it is Oeanthea. Paus. in Phocicis.
    Nauplia, a City of Argia, in the Argiue Bay, next after Temenium, towards
    the Promontory Scyllaeum. Strab. lib. 8.
    Naxus an Iland, one of the Cyclades. Vide Cyclades.
    Neda, a Riuer of Peloponnesus, rising in the Mountaine Lycaeum.
    Pausanias in Arcadicis. and passing through Messenia. Jdem in Messenicis.
    It diuideth the maritime parts of Elis and Messenia. Strab. lib. 8.
    Nemea, a Forrest and Towne, The Forrest betweene Cleonae and Phlius.
    Strab. lib. 8. The Towne betweene Cleonae and Argos. Paus. in Corinth.
    Neritum, The Chersonnesus of Leucas, since cut o and made an Iland by
    the Corinthians. Strab. lib. 10.
    Nestus, a Riuer of Thrace, that goeth out into the Sea, neere to the City
    Abdera. Herod. lib. 7. on the West side of Abdera. Strab. Epit. lib. 7.
    Nisaea the Hauen Towne to the City of Megara. Pegae and Nisaea
    comprehend the Isthmus, and are distant from each other 120 furlongs.
    Strab. lib. 8. On the East of the Iland Minoe. Id. lib. 9.

    Nisyra, an Iland, one of the Sporades, 60 furlongs from the Ile Cos, and as
    many from the Ile Telos, in compasse 80. furlongs. Strab. lib. 10.
    Non●●ris, a City of Arcadia, to the West of Pheneum, and enclining to
    the right hand▪ Paus. in Arcadicis.
    Notium, a Towne on the Sea-side, belonging to the Colophonians, and
    distant from Colophon two miles. Liuy, lib. 37. Also a place in the Ile
    Chius, betweene the Promontory Melena and the Hauen Phanae. Distant
    from the City Chius by Land threescore furlongs, by Sea 300. Strab. lib.
    14.
    Nympheum, a Promontory of Mount Athos, towards the Bay of Singus.
    Strab. Ep. lib. 7

O
O

    OChe, a Mountaine, the greatest of Euboea, neere to the City Carystus.
    Strab. lib. 10.
    Odomanti, a people of Thrace, neere the Mountaine Pangaeum. Herod.
    lib. 7.
    Odrysae, a people of Thrace. Thucyd. libro 2.
    Oeanth●i, a maritime City of the Locri Ozolae. Paus. in Phocicis. Ouer
    against Aegirae of Achaia. Polyb. lib. 4.
    Oenias, a Citie of Acarnania, by the Sea side, opposite to the Promontory
    Araxus, in Peloponnesus, and con ning on Aetolia. Polyb. lib. 4. on the
    East side of the Riuer Achelous, at the mouth of it. Strab. lib. 10.
    Oeneon, a City of the Locri Ozolae, not far from Naupactus, as may be
    gathered out of Thucyd. lib. 3.
    Oenoe, a Towne on the border of Attica, towards Boeotia. Thucyd. lib. 2.
    Oenoe and Hysiae the last of the Townes of Attica, towards Boeotia, on
    that part which is remotest from Chalcis and Euboea. Herodot. libro 5.
    Oenophyta, a place in Boeotia. Thucyd. lib. 2. but whereabouts, I cannot
      nde.

Oenussae, certaine Ilands vpon the Coast of Chius. Herod. lib. 1. Thucyd.
lib. 8.
Oeta, a Mountaine neere Thermopylae: that part which is neere
Thermopylae, for about twenty furlongs, is properly called Octa, though
the whole tract from Thermopylae, as farre as the Bay of Ambracia, bee
commonly also called Oeta. Strab. lib. 9.
Oezyme, a City of the Eidonians. Thucyd. lib. 4. Beyond the Riuer
Strymon, and by the Sea-side, according to Ptolomie.
Olcarus, an Iland, one of the Cyclades. Vide Cyclades.
Olenus▪ a city of Achaia, betweene Patrae and Dyme, at the mouth of the
Riuer Peirus. Paus. in Achaicis.
Olpae, a Castle by the side of the Bay of Ambracia, neere to Argos
Amp●alochicum. Thucyd. lib. 3.
Olpe, a city of the Locri Ozolae. Thucyd. lib. 3. but whereabouts I know
not.
Olophyxus, a city in Mount Athos. Herod. lib. 7.
Olympia, a place in Elis, with a Temple dedicate to Iupiter, vpon the side of
the Riuer Alpheus, distant from the Sea 80 furlongs. Strab. lib. 8.
Olympus, a Mountaine, which is the bound of Thessaly on the North, and
of Macedonia on the South, betweene it and the Mountaine Ossa, in a
narrow Valley, runneth the Riuer Peneus, Herod. lib. 7. Paus. Eliacoram
secundo,
Olynthus, a city of the Bottiaeans driuen out of Bottiaea by the
Macedonians. Herod. lib. 8. The Bottiaeans driuen out of Bottiaea, seated
themselues on the borders of the Chalcideans towards Thrace. Thucyd. lib.
2. Olynthus standeth somewhat remote from the Sea, and about threescore
furlongs from Potidaea. Id. lib. 2. Mecyberna, which standeth on the Bay
of Torone, serued them for the place of their shipping. Strab. Epit. lib. 7▪
Onugnathos, a Promontory of Laconia, betweene which and Malea, is the
city and Bay of Boca. Paus. in Laconicis.
Ophionei, a people of Aetolia, toward the Melian Gulfe. Thucyd. lib. 3.
Opus, the chiefe city of the Locri Opuntij, distant from the Sea fteene
furlongs, opposite to Aedepsa in Euboea. Strab. lib. 9.

    Orchomenus; a city of Boeotia, con ning on Phocis, through the Territory
    whereof the Riuer Cephissus passeth from Chaeronea into the Lake
    Copais. Strab. lib. 9. Paus. in Boeoticis.
    Also a city of Arcadia, con ning on Mantinea and Pheneum. Pausanias in
    Arcadicis.
    Orestis, a Region of Macedonia, con on Epirus. Thucyd. lib. 2. not farre
    from Elymaea. Liu. lib. 31.

         Orestium
         or Orestasium
    A city of Arcadia, in the way betweene Sparta and the Jsthmus. Herodot. lib.
    9. and betweene Megalopolis and Tegea. Paus. in Arcadibis.
    Oreus, a citie of the Hestiaeans, in Euboea. Thucydid. lib. 1. Strab. lib. 9.
    not farre from the Promontory of Ceneum. Id. lib. 9. the rst 
    City of Euboea on the left hand to them that come from the Bay of 〈◊〉, (or
    Pegasaean Bay) toward Chalcis. 〈◊〉, lib. 9.
    Orneae, a City of Argia, on the borders of the Phliasian and Sicyonian
    Territories. Paus in Corinthiacis.
    Orebiae, a City of Euboea, not farre from Aegae. Strab. lib. 9.
    O●opas, a maritime towne in Attica, towards Euboea, and opposite to
    Eretria. Strab. lib. 9. It is distant from Eretria 60 furlongs. Thucyd. l●b. 8.
    Ossa, a Mountaine of Thessaly. Betweene Ossa and 〈◊〉, in a narrow valley,
    runneth the Riuer Peneus. Herod. lib. 7.
    Othrys, a Mountaine bounding Thessaly on the South. Herod. lib. 7. It
    hath on the North ●ide the Ph●hiotae, but reacheth also, to the
    Dolopians. Strab. lib. 9.

P
P

    PActolus, a Riuer of Asia the lesse, rising in the Mountaine Tinolus, and
    falling into the Riuer Hermus. Strab. lib. 13. It runneth through the

Market-place of Sardes. Herod. lib. 5.
〈◊〉, a City standing in the Isthmus of the thracian Chersonnesus, toward
Propontis. Herod. lib. 6.
〈◊〉, a Region of Macedonia, reaching on one side to the Riuer Strymon.
Herodot. lib. 5. on the other side to the Riuer Axius. Paus. Eliacorum
primo, in the beginning.
Pale, a City of Cephallenia, in the narrow part therof, neere to the Bay.
Strab. lib. 10.
Pa●yre, a maritime City of Acarnania, betweene Leucas and Alyzea. Strab.
lib. 10.
Par●●sus, a Riuer of Messenia, rising betweene Tharium and Arcadia, and
falling into the Sea in the middest of the Messenian Bay. Strab. lib. 8.
Panactum, a Towne in Attica, on the con nes of Boeotia▪ Thucyd. lib. 5.
〈◊〉, a People of Thrace. * Thucyd. lib. 2.
Pangaeum, a Mountaine in Thrace, aboue the Region called the Pierian
Bay. Thucyd. lib. 2. Vide Pierian Bay.
Panopeus, the same with Phanotis. Vide Phanotis.
Panormus, a Hauen of Achaia, neere to Rhium. Thucyd. lib. 2. opposite to
Naupactus. Polyb. lib. 4. Distant from Rhium within the Crissaean Bay 15
furlongs. Strab. lib. 9. Also a Towne in the Territory of Miletus. Thucyd.
lib. 8.
Parasia, a City of Thessaly. Thu●. l. 1. Where abouts in Thessaly I nd not.
Parauaei, a Nation of Epirus, neere to the Molossians. Thucyd. lib. 2.
Plutarch. in quaest. Graecis. quaest. 13, 26.
Parium, a maritime City of Hellespont, between Lampsacus & Priapus.
Strab. lib. 13.
Parnassus, a Mountaine, on whose West part are the Locri Ozolae; East part,
the Pheceans and Doreans; and which extendeth to the Mountaines that
runne along from Thermopylae to the Ambracian Bay, and meeteth with
them at a right angle. Strab. lib. 9
Parnethus, a Hill in Peloponnesus, wherein are the bounds of Argia,
Tegeae, and Laconia. Paus. in Corinthiacis. Also a Hill in Attica. Thucyd.

lib. 2.
Paros, an Iland, one of the Cyclades. Vide Cyclades.
Parrhasia, a City and Territory of Arcadia, bordering vpon Laconia. Thuc.
lib. 5.
Patmus, an Iland, one of the Sporades, on the West of Icarus. Strab. lib. 10.
Patrae, a maritime City of Achaia, distant from Rhium, fty furlongs;
from Olenus 80 furlongs. Paus. in Achaicis. Strab. lib. 8.
Pegae, a City in the Mountainous part of Megaris. Paus. in Achaicis. Pegae
and Nisaea comprehend the Corinthian Isthmus. Stra. lib. 8.
Pegasaea, a City of Thessaly, in the Pegasaean Bay. Herod. lib. 7.
Pe●raice, a small Territory on the con nes of Attica and Boeotia, neere to
Oropus. Thucyd. lib. 2.
Pelasgiotis, a Region of Thessaly, between Estiotis, and the Territory of
Magnesia. Stra. lib. 9.
Pele, an Iland lying before Clazomenae. Thucyd. lib. 8, vide Clazomenae.
Pelion, a Mountaine in the Territory of Magnesia in Thessaly, ioyned to the
Mountaine Ossa. Herod. lib. 7.
Pella, a City of Macedonie, wherein Alexander the Great was borne. It
standeth in a Lake betweene the Riuers Axius and Lydius. Strab. Epit. lib.
7.
Pellene, a City of Achaia, con ning on Sicyonia and Pheneum, distant
from the Sea threescore furlongs, and from Aegirae 120 furlongs. Paus. in
Achaicis. Also a Peninsula of Macedonie, betweene the Bay of Torone, and
the Bay of Therme. Herod. libro 7. Thucyd▪ lib. 4.
Pelagonia, a Region of Macedonia, toward Illyris. Liuy. lib. 45.
Peloponnesus, that part of Greece within the Isthmus of Corinth, now
called Morea.
Peneus, a Riuer of Thessaly, rising in the Mountain Pindus. neere to
Macedonie. Stra. l. 7. running by Lari a, and thence through Tempe into
the Sea. Idem. lib. 9. It diuideth Ossa from Olympus with a narrow valey,
and receiueth into it the Riuers Apidanus, Enipeus, and others. Herod. lib.
7. Also a Riuer of Peloponnesus, betweene the Promontory Chelonata,
and the Towne Cyllene. Strab. lib. 8.

Peparethus, an Iland that lyeth before Magnesia. Strab. lib. 9.
Pergamus, a City of the Pierians of Thrace vnder the Mountaine
Pangaeum. Herod. lib. 7. Also an Aeolique City, 120 furlongs from the
Sea, by the side of the Riuer Caicus. Strab. lib. 13.
Perinthus, a maritime City of Thrace, on the side of Propontis.
Perrhaebi, a People of Thessaly, that inhabite the Mountainous Countrey
about Olympus, from the City Atrax, as farre as to Tempe, and the City
Gyrton. Strab. lib. 9. Out of Macedonie into Thessaly there lyeth a way
through the Perrhaebi, by the City Gonnus. Herod. lib. 7.
Petalia, a Promontory of Euboea, against which, lye the Ilands called also
Petaliae, opposite to the Promontory Sunium in Attica. Strab. lib. 10.
Placium, a City of Thessaly, betweene Pharsalus and Dion. Thucyd. lib. 4.
Phagres. Phagres in Thucydides, Niphagres in Herodotus, a City of the
Pierians, betweene Pangaeum and the Sea, Thucyd. lib. 2. Herod. lib. 7.
Phaleron, a maritime Towne of Attica, betweene Piraeus and Halimus.
Strab. lib. 8. It was heeretofore the Hauen of Athens. Paus. in Atticis.
distant from Athens 20 furlongs. Idem in Arcadicis.
Phanae, a Hauen in the Ile Chios. Liuy, lib. 44. betweene the Promontory
Posideum, and the shore called Notium. Strab. lib. 14.
Phanotis, a City of Phocis, vpon the Riuer Cephissus. Strab. lib. 9. the same
with Panopeus, distant 20 furlongs from Chaeronea in Boeotia. Paus. in
Phocicis.
Pharae, a City in the Messenian Bay, next after Cardamyle, Westward.
Strab. lib. 8. aboue it, within the Land, are Thurium and Anthea,
fourescore furlongs distant from it. Paus. in Laconicis. Also a City of
Achaia, vpon the Riuer Peirus, distant from Patrae, 150 furlongs, from the
Sea 70 furlongs, Paus. in Achaicis.
Pharsalus, a City of Thessaly, by the Riuer Apidanus, Strab. lib. 8.
Pharybus. Pharybus to Ptolomy, but in Liuy Baphyrus, a Riuer of
Macedonia, falling into the Sea neere to the City Dion. Liu.
Pheia, a City of Elis, betweene the mouth of the Riuer Alpheius, and the
Promontory Icthys. Strab. lib. 8.

Pheneum, a City of Arcadia, con ning on Pellene and Aegirae, Cities of
Achaia, and on Stymphalus, Nonacris, and Cleitor, Cities of Arcadia. Paus.
in Arcadicis.
Pherae, a City of Thessaly, neere the Lake Boebeis, and con ning on
Pelion, and the Territory of Magnesia. Strab. lib. 9.
Phile, a Towne of Attica, con ning on Tanagra of Boeotia. Strab. lib. 9.
Phlius, a City neere the head of the Riuer Asopus in Achaia, the Territory
whereof is inclosed as it were in a circle, with the Territories of Sicyon,
Cleonae, and Stymphalus. Strab. lib. 8.
Phocaea, an Ionique City in Lydia, at the mouth of the Riuer Hermus.
Herod. lib. 1. the bound of Jonia that way. Strab. libro 14.
Phocis, a Region of Greece, betweene the Locri Ozolae and Boeotia. Aetolia,
Locris, Phocis, Boeotia, lye paralell one to another. The Phocaeans inhabite
the East side of Pernassus, Strab. lib. 9. and extend by the Sea-side from
Cirrha to Anticyra. Paus. in Phocicis.
Phoenicus portus, a Hauen in Messenia, neere the Promontory Acritas,
betweene it and the City Methone. Pausanias in Messenicis. Also a hauen
in the Peninsula Erythraea, vnder the Hill Mimas. Thucyd. lib. 8.
Phologandros, an Iland to the West of the Iland Ios. Strab. lib. 10.
Phrygij, a place in Attica, neere Acharnae. Thucyd. lib. 2.
Phygalca, a City of Arcadia, on the con nes of Messenia, Polyb. lib. 4. vpon
the Riuer Lymax, which falleth into the Riuer Neda. Paus. in Arcadicis.
Phyrcus, a Castle not farre from Lepreum in Elis. Thuc. lib. 5.
Physca, a City of Macedonia. Thucyd. lib. 2. Ptolomie placeth it 
about the Riuer Chedorus, not farre from the Riuer Axius.
Physcus, a maritime City of Caria, betweene Loryma and Caunus,
opposite to Rhodes. Strab. lib. 14.
Phytia a City on the West side of the Riuer Achelous, not farre out of the
way from Stratus, into Agraeis, as may be gathered out of Thucydides, lib.
3.
Pieria, a maritime City of Macedonie, touching on one side the Riuer
Peneus. Strab. lib. 9. and on the other side the con uent of the Riuers

Lydius and Aliacmon, where begins Bottiaea, according to Herodotus, lib.
7.
Pierius sinus, a tract of Land betweene the Mountaine Pangaeum and the
Sea, in which standeth the City Phagres. Thucydid. lib. 2. Pergamus and
Niphagres, Townes of the Pierians, vnder the Hill Pangaeum, on the West
of the Riuer Nestus. Herodot. lib. 7.
Pindus, a Mountaine bounding Thessaly, on the West. Herodot. lib. 7. It
hath on the South the Dolopians; on the North, Macedonie. Strab. lib. 9.
Also a City of the Region called Doris, one of the foure for which it was
called Tetrapolis, and standeth aboue Eringus, Strab. lib. 9.
Piraeus, a Towne and Hauen of Attica, seruing for the shipping of Athens,
in the middest betweene Pegae and Sunium. Strab. lib. 8. distant from
Athens 40 furlongs. Thucyd. lib. 2. Also a desart Hauen in the Territory of
Corinth, the vtmost towards Epidaurus. Thucyd. lib. 8.
Piresia, a City of Thessaly, neere the mouth of the Riuer Peneus. Ex
interprete Orphei Argonaut.
Pitane, an Aeolique City in the shore of Asia. Herod. lib. 1. betweene
Atarneus and the mouth of the Riuer Caicus. Strab. lib. 13. Also a City of
Messenia, on the con nes of Elis. Strab. lib. 8.
Plataea, a City of Boeotia, seuenty furlongs from Thebes. Betweene these
Cities runneth the Riuer Asopus. Thucyd. lib. 2. Paus. in Boeoticis. It
standeth betweene Mount Cithaeron and Thebes, neere the con nes of
Attica and Megaris. Strab. lib. 9.
Pleuron, a City of Aetolia, between Chalcis and Calydon, vpon the Riuer
Euenus, on the Sea-side, West of Chalcis and the mouth of the Riuer.
Strab. lib. 10.
Polichna, a Towne in the Continent of Asia, neere to Clazomenae. Thucyd.
lib. 8.
Polis, a village of the Locri Ozolae. Thucyd. lib. 3.
Posideum, a Temple dedicated to Neptune: and because those Temples
were for the most part in Promontories, and places open to the Sea, diuers
Promontories haue beene so called. There is Posideum a Promontory of
Chius, opposite to the Promontory of Argenum in Erythraea, and

betweene the City Chius and the Hauen Phanae. Strab. lib. 14. Also a
Promontory of the Milesians, the vtmost of Jonia Southward. Strab. lib.
14. Also a Promontory of Samos, which with Mycale in the Continent,
make the straight there of seuen furlongs ouer. Strab. lib. 14. Also a
Promontory of Pellene, neere the City of Menda. Thuc. lib. 5. Of two
Promontories that are in Pallene, (Canastraea being one) this is the lesser.
Liuy, lib. 44. Also a Temple in the Corinthian Isthmus, where were
celebrated the Isthmian Games.
Potidea, a City in Pallene. Herodot. lib. 7. in the very Isthmus of it. Thuc.
lib. 1. Cassand●ea is a City in the streight that ioineth Pellene to
Macedonie, enclosed on one side with the Toronaean Bay; on the other,
with the Macedonian Sea. Liu. lib. 44. Cassandrea was formerly called
Potidaea. Strab. Epit. lib. 7.
Potidania, a City of Aetolia, on the con nes of the Locri Ozolae. Thucyd.
lib. 3.
Prasiae, a maritime City of Laconia, in the Bay of Argos. Strab. lib. 8.
Pausan. in Laconicis. the last Laconian City towards Argos, and distant
from Cyphanta 200 furlongs. Paus. in Laconicis. Also a Towne in Attica,
by the Sea side towards Euboea, betweene Thoricus and Brauron. Strab.
lib. 9.
Preposinthus, an Iland, one of the Cyclades. Vide Cyclades.
Priapus, a City lying vpon Propontis, betweene Lampsacus and the Riuer
Granicus, Strab. lib. 13.
Priene, an Ionique City in Caria. Herodot. lib. 1. betweene the mouth of
Maeander, and the Mountaine Mycale. Strab. lib. 14.
Proconnesus, an Iland in Propontis, ouer against the shore that is betweene
Parium and Priapus. Strab. lib. 13.
Prone, a City of Cephallenia. Thucyd. lib. 2. Strab. lib. 10.
Propontis, the Sea betweene Hellespont and Pontus Euxinus. Strab. lib. 2.
Proschion, a City of Aetolia, not far from Pleuron, but more remote from
the Sea. Strab. lib. 10.
Prose, an Iland ouer against Messenia, not farre from Pylus. Thucyd. lib. 4.

    Psyra, an Iland, distant fty furlongs from Melaena a Promontory of
    Chius, Strab. lib. 44.
    Psyttal●a, an Iland betweene the Continent of Attica, and the Ile Salamis.
    Herod. lib. 7.
    Psophis, a City of Arcadia, in the West parts thereof, towards Achaia and
    Elis. Polyb. lib. 4.
    Pteleum, a Towne on the Sea side in Erythraea. Thucyd. lib. 8.
    Phthiotis, the South part of Thessaly, reaching in length to Mount Pindus,
    and in breadth as farre as Pharsalus. Strab. lib. 9.
    Ptychia, a small Iland, neere to the City Corcyra. Thucyd. lib. 4.
    Pydna, a Macedonian City in Pieria, Strab. Epit. lib. 7. opposite to Aenea.
    Liu.
    Pylus, a City of Messenia, in the Promontory Coryphasium, distant from
    Methone 100 furlongs. Paus. in Messenicis. Thucyd. lib. 4.5. Also a City of
    Elis, at the con uent of Peneus and Ladon. Paus. Eliacorum secundo.
    Pydius, a Riuer betweene Abydus and Dardanus. Thucyd. lib. 8. It seemeth
    to bee the same which Strabo calleth Rhodius. Vide Rhodius.
    Pyrrhae, a Promontory of Asia the lesse, which with Gargara (another
    Promontory) distant from it 120 furlongs, maketh the Bay of
    Adramyttium, properly so called. Strab. lib. 13. Al●o a City of Lesbos, on
    the Sea-side towards Greece, distant from Mitylene, which is on the other
    Sea, 80 furlongs. Strab. lib. 13. Also a City of Jonia, in the Latmian Bay.
    Strab. lib. 14.

R
R

    RHamnus, a maritime Towne of Attica, betweene Marathon and Oropus,
    distant from Marathon 60 furlongs. Pausan. in Atticis.
    Rheiti, certaine Brookes of salt water, supposed to come from the Sea
    betweene Attica and Euboea, vnder ground, as from the hither Sea, and

    rising in Attica, to fall into the Saronian Bay, as a lower Sea, betweene
    Piraeus and Eleusis. Pausan. in Atticis & Corinthiacis.
    Rhenea, an Iland, foure furlongs distant from Delos. Strab. lib. 10. It lyeth
    before Delos, as Sphacteria before Pylus. Pau●. in ﬁne Messenicorum.
    Polycrates Tyrant of Samos, tyed it to Delos with a chaine. Thucyd. lib. 3.
    Rhium, a Promontory of Achaia, between Patrae and Aegium, which with
    Antirrhium, maketh the straight of the Corinthian (or Crissaean) Bay, of
      ue furlongs ouer. Strab. lib. 8. Rhium Achaicum, and Antirrhium,
    (which is also called Rhium Molychricum) are the iawes of the Corinthian
    Bay. Liuy, lib. 28.
    Rhodope, a Mountaine of Thrace. *
    Rhodius, a Riuer in the Hellespont, betweene Abydus and Dardanus.
    Strab. lib. 13.
    Rhodus, an Iland in the Carpathian Sea, 920 furlongs in compasse,
    inhabited by the Doreans. Strab. lib. ●4.
    Rhoetium, a City of Hellespont. Thucyd. lib. 8. on the Sea-side, between
    Dardanum and Sigeum. Strab. lib. 13.
    Rhypes, a City of Achaia, thirty furlongs from Aegium. Paus. in Achaicis.

S
S

    SAla, a City of the Samothracians, in the shore of Doriscus. Herod. lib. 7.
    Salamis, an Iland adiacent to Eleusis of Attica. Strab. lib. 8. Paus. in Atticis.
    Same, a City in the Iland Cephallenia, at the passage betweene it and
    Ithaca. Strab. lib. 10.
    Samia, a City of Elis, a little aboue Samicum, betweene which Cities
    runneth the Riuer Anigrus. Paus. Eliacorum primo.
    Samicum, a maritime City of Elis, the rst beyond the Riuer Neda, at the
    mouth of the Riuer Anigrus. Paus. Eliacorum primo.
    Saminthus, a Towne of Argia, in the plaines of Argos towards Nemea.
    Thucyd. l●b. 5.

Samothracia, an Iland in the Aegean Sea, ouet against the mouth of the
Riuer Hebrus. Plin. lib. 4.
Samus, an Ionique Iland, and City of the same name. The Iland is sixe
hundred furlongs about, and Posideum a Promontory thereof, not aboue
seuen furlongs from the Continent. The City standeth on the 
South part of it, at the Sea-side. Strab. lib. 14.
Sa●e, a City in Pallene. Herod. l●b. 7. Strab. Epit. lib. 7. Also a City by the
side of the Ditch made by Xerxes, in Mount 〈◊〉, without the same, and to
the Bay of Singus. Herod. lib. 7. Thucyd. lib. 4.
Sardes, the chiefe City of the Lydians, scituate vnder the Hill Timolus.
Strab lib. 13. Through it runneth the Riuer Pactolus. Herod. lib. 5.
Scamander, a Riuer of Troas, rising in Mount Jda. S●●neis, and
Scamander meete in a Fenne, and then goe out into the Sea by one
Channell, at Sigeum. Strab. lib. 13.
Scandarium, a Promontory of the Iland Cos, neere the City Cos, opposite
to Termerium, a Promontory of the Continent. Strab. lib. 14.
Scandea, a City in the Iland Cythera. Paus. in Laconicis.
Scepsis, a City of Troas, in the highest part of Mount Ida. Strab. lib. 13.
Scione, a City in Pallene. Herod. lib. 7. betweene Minde and Sane. Strab.
Epit. lib. 7.
Sciritis, the territory of Scirus, a Laconian Towne on the con nes of
Parrhasia in Arcadia, neere to Cypsela. Thucyd. lib. 1.
Schoenus, a Hauen of the Territory of Corinth, at the narrowest part of the
Isthmus, betweene Cenchreae and Crommyon. Strab. lib. 8.
Sco●us, a City of Chalcidea, not far from ●●ynthus. Strab. lib. 9.
Scomius, a Mountaine in Thrace, out of which riseth the Riuer Strymon.
Thucyd. lib. 2.
Scyathus, an Iland in the Aegean Sea, lying before the territory of
Magnesia. Strab. lib. 9. Betweene Scyathus and the Continent of
Magnesia, there is a narrow straight. Herod l●b. 7.
Scyllaeum, a Promontory of Peloponnesus, the bound of the Bay of Argos,
towards Corinth. Strab lib. 8.

Scyrus, an Iland in the Aegean Sea, lying ouer against the Continent of
Magnesia, Strab. lib. 9. betweene Euboea and Lesbos. Plin. lib. 4.
Sellasia, a Towne in Laconia, betweene Lacedaemon and the Hill
Parnethus, which is the bound of Laconia and Argia. Paus. in. Laconicis.
Selymbria, a City of Thrace, by the side of Propontis.
Sepias, a Promontory of Magnesia. Herod. lib. 7. the beginning of the
Pegasaean Bay. Ptolomie.
Seriphus, an Iland, one of the Cyclades. Vide Cyclades.
Serrium, a Promontory; the vtmost Westward, of the shore of Doriscus in
Thrace Herod. lib. 7.
S●rmyla, a City of Chalcidea, vpon the Toronaean Bay. The Nauy of
Xerxes beeing come about the Promontory Ampelus, passed by these Cities,
Torone, Galepsus, Sermyla, &c. Herod. lib. 7.
Sestus a City of the Thracian Chersonnesus, thirty furlongs from Abydus,
but neerer to Propontis then Abydus is. Strab. lib. 13.
Sicinus, an Iland not farre from Melos, on the West of the Iland Ios. Strab.
lib. 10.
Sicyon, a City of Peloponnesus, betweene Corinth and Achaia, distant a
hundred furlongs from Phlius. Paus. in Corinth.
Sidussa, a Towne by the Sea-side in Erythraea. Thucyd. lib. 8.
Sigeum, a City and Promontory of Troas, at the mouth of the Riuer
Scamander. Strab. lib. 13.
Sigrium, the most northerne Promontory of the Ile Lesbos, betweene
Eressus and Antissa. Strab. lib. 13.
Simoeis, a Riuer of Troas, which running into a Fenne, ioyneth there with
the Riuer Scamander. Strab. lib. 13.
Singus, and the Bay of Singus. A Towne, and Bay taking name from it,
betweene Mount Athos and Torone. Herodotus. lib. 7.
Sintij, a people about Amphipolis. Liu. lib. 44. deuided from Paeonia by the
Mountaine Cercine. Thuc. lib. 2.
Siphae, a City of Boeotia, vpon the Crissaean Bay. Paus. in Boe●ticis.
Siphnus, an Iland, one of the Cyclades. Vide Cyclades.

Smyrna, a maritime City of Asia, in the Bay called from it the Bay of
Smyrna, beyond Clazomenae towards Aeolis. Strab. l. 14.
Solium, a maritime Towne of Acarnania. Thucyd. Scholiast. ad lib. 2.
Sparta, the same with Lacedaemon. Strab. lib. 10. Vide Lacedaemon.
Spartolus, a City of the Bottiaeans, on the border of the Chalcideans. Thuc.
lib. 2.
Spercheius, a Riuer that riseth in Dol●pia, at a Mountaine called
Tymphestus, and falleth into the Melian Bay, tenne furlongs within
Thermopylae. Strab. lib. 9.
Sphacteria, a little Iland lying before Pylus of Messenia. Thucyd. lib. 4.
Pausan. in Messenicis.
Sporades, Ilands vpon the Coast of Caria, and of Creta. Strab. lib. 8.
Stagirus, a City in the Bay of Strymon, betweene Argilus and Acanthus.
Herodot. lib. 7.
Stratus, a City of the Amphilochians in Acarnania, vpon the Riuer
Achelous. Thucyd. lib. 3. two hundred furlongs from the Riuers mouth.
Strab. lib. 10.
Strophades, Ilands ouer against Messenia, about 400 furlongs from the
Continent. Strab. lib. 8.
Stryma, a City on the Coast of Thrace, next after Mesembria, towards
Macedonia, Herod. lib. 7.
Strymon, a Riuer deuiding Thrace from Macedonie. It riseth in the Hill
Scomius, Thucyd. lib. 2. It passeth by Amphipolis, on both sides of it, and
falleth into the Sea at the City Eion. Herodot. lib. 7. It is said to rise out of
the Mountaine Rhodope. Strab. Epit. lib. 7. But it is probable that the Hill
Scomius is part of Rhodope.
Stymphalus, a City of Arcadia, con ning on the Territory of Phlius. Paus.
in Arcadicis Strab. lib. 8.
Styra, a City in Euboea, neere to the City Carystus. Strab. lib. 10.
Sunium, a Promontory and Towne in Attica, towards Euboea, betweene
the Saronean Bay and the Sea towards Euboea. Strab. lib. 10. and distant
from Euboea three hundred furlongs. Idem. lib. 9.

    Sybota, Ilands betweene Leucimne, a Promontory of Corcyra, and the
    Continent. Strab. lib. 7. Thucyd. lib. 1. Also a Hauen by the Promontory
    of Cheimerium, in the same Continent. Thucyd. lib. 1.
    Syme, an Iland ouer against the Continent of Caria, betweene Loryma and
    Cnidus. Strab. lib. 14.
    Syros, an Iland, one of the Cyclades. Vide Cyclades.

T
T

    TAenarus, a Promontory of Laconia, betweene the Laconian and the
    Messenian Bayes. Paus. in Laconicis. Also a maritime City of Laconia, in
    the Messenian Bay, distant from Taenarus the Promontory forty furlongs.
    Paus. in Laconicis.
    Tanagra, a City of Boeotia, con ning on Attica, thirty furlongs from Aulis,
    a Hauen on the Euboean Sea. Strab. lib. 9.
    Taulantij, a People of Illyris, about Dyrrachium (or Epidamnus) Strab. lib.
    7. Thucyd. lib. 1.
    Taigetus, a Mountaine of Laconia, beginning at the Sea, aboue Thurides,
    and reaching vp towards Arcadia, as farre as Amyclae and Lacedaemon.
    Strab. lib. 8.
    Tegea, a City of Arcadia, betweene Argos and Lacedaemon. Thucyd. lib. 5.
    Herodot. lib. 6. Polyb. lib. 4. the Territory thereof con neth with the
    Argiues at Hysiae, with Laconia at the Riuer Alpheus, and with the
    Territory of Thyrea at the Hill Parnethus. Paus. in Arcad. These Cities of
    Peloponnesus, Argos, Tegea, and Mantinea, though much celebrated in
    History, are placed with little consideration of any History, in all the Maps
    that I haue hitherto seene.
    Teichiussa, a Castle of the Milesians in the Bay of Iassus. Thucyd. lib. 8.
    Telos, an Iland ouer against Triopium. Her. lib., 7. a narrow Iland, in
    circuit 140 furlongs, adiacent to Cnidus. Strab. lib. 10.

Temenium, a Towne in Argia, distant from Argos 26 furlongs. Strab. lib.
●. from Nauplia 50 furlongs. Paus. in Corinth.

Tempe, a pleasant Valley betweene the Mountaines Ossa and Olympus:
through it runneth the Riuer Peneus. Herod. lib. 7. Strab. lib. 9. Liu. lib.
44.
Tenedus, an Iland in circuit about 80 furlongs, opposite to the Continent
of Troas, at Achaeum, betweene Sigeum and Larissa, and distant from it 40
furlongs. Strab. lib. 13.
Tenos, an Iland, one of the Cyclades. Vide Cyclades.
Teos▪ a maritime City of Ionia, scituate in the very Isthmus of the
Erythraean Chersonnesus, distant from Lebedus 120 furlongs. Strab. lib.
14.
Termerium, a Promontory of the Mindians, opposite to the Ile Cos. Strab.
lib. 14.
Teuglussa, an Iland not farre from Halicarnassus. Thucyd. lib. 8.
Thassus, an Iland vpon the Coast of Thrace, halfe a dayes sayle from
Amphipolis. Thucyd. lib. 4.
Thebae, the principall City of Boeotia, scituate neere the Riuers 
Ismenus and Asopus. Strab lib. 9. distant from Plataea 70. furlongs.
Thucyd. lib. 2.
Thera, an Iland on the Coast of Crete, distant from a Promontory thereof
called Dion, seuenty furlongs, Strab. lib. 10.
Therasia, a small Iland neere to Thera. Strab. lib. 10.
Therme and the Thermaean Bay. Therme is a City in the bottome of the
Thermaean Bay; and the Thermaean Bay is presently within Pallene.
Herod. lib. 7.
Thermopylae, the straight entrance into Greece out of Thessaly, of about
halfe an Acres breadth, betweene the Mountaine Oeta and the Melian Bay.
Called Thermopylae, from hot waters that rise there (which the Grecians
call Thermae, ) and from Gates made there by the Phoceans in old time,
(which they call Pylae. ) Herod. lib. 7. This streight is distant from Chalcis
in Euboea 530. furlongs. Strab. lib. 9.

Thespiae, a City of Boeotia, vnder Mount Helicon, on the con nes of the
City Aliartus. Paus. in Boeoticis. neere to the Crissaean Bay. Strab. lib. 9.
Thesprotis, a maritime Region of Epirus, bordering on the Ambraciotes
and Leucadian●s. Herod. lib. 8. The Chaones and Thesproti haue the
whole coast, from the Ceraunian Mountaines to the Bay of Ambracia.
Strab. lib. 7.
Thessalia, a Region of Greece, contained within the Mountaines Olympus,
Ossa, Pelion, (which is to the Sea, ) Othrys and Pyndus. Herod. lib. 7. where
hee layeth out the bounds of Thessaly exactly.
Thoricus, a maritime Towne of Attica, toward the Euboean Sea, next
beyond the Promontory Sunium. Strab. l. 9. Vide Helena.
Thracia, a Kingdome bordering on Macedonie, at the Riuer Strymon,
described at large by Thucyd. lib. 2.
Thrio, and Thriasij campi. Thria or Thrio, a Towne of Attica, between
Athens and Eleusis, ouer against Salamis. The Fields belonging to it, are
called Thriasij Campi, and the shore Thriasium litus. Strab. 9. Herod. lib.
8.
Thronium, a City of Locris, vpon the Melian Bay, betweene the
Promontory Cnemides, and Thermopylae. Strab. lib. 9.
Thurides, a City in the Messenian Bay, the rst towards the East, distant
from the Promontory Taenarus 70 furlongs. Paus. in Laconicis.
Thurium, a City of Laconia, 80 furlongs aboue Pharae. Paus. in
Messenicis.
Thyamis, a Riuer of Epirus, diuiding Thesprotis from Cestrine. Thucyd.
lib. 1.
Thyamus, a Hill on the consines of Agraeis and Amphilochia, not farre
from Argos Amphilochicum. Thucyd. lib. 3.
Thyrea, a maritime City, in the Bay of Argos, in the Territory called
Cynuria, It con neth on Argia and Laconia. Thucyd. lib. 5. and on the
Territory of Tegea. Paus. in Arcadicis,
Thyssus, a City in Mount Athos. Thuc. lib. 4. Herod. lib. 7.
Tichium, a City of Aetolia, in the part inhabited by the Apodoti. Thuy. lib.
8.

    Tithorea, a City in the top of Pernassus, called also Neon, 80 furlongs from
    Delphi. Paus. in Phocicis.
    Tmolus, a Mountaine betweene the Riuer Câystrus and the City of Sardes.
    Herod. lib. 5. Sardes standeth at the foote of Tmolus, and out of this Hill
    riseth the Riuer Pactolus. Strab. lib. 13.
    Tolophon, a City of the Locri Ozolae. Thuc. lib. 3.
    Tomeus, a Hill neere to Pylus in Messenia. Thucyd. lib. 4.
    Torone, and the Bay of Torone. — Torone is a Chalcidique City, betweene
    the Singitique and Toronaean Bayes, neere the Promontory Ampelus.
    Herod. lib. 7. The place of the Toronaean Bay is vnderstood out of Liuy,
    lib. 44. where he saith, that Cassandrea (or Potidaea) standeth betweene the
    Macedonian Sea, and the Bay of Torone.
    Tragea, an Iland neere to Samos. Thuc. l. 1. Tragaeae, Ilands about Miletus.
    Strab l●b. 14.
    Triopium, a Promontory of the Cnidians. Thuc. lib. 8. Vide cnidus.
    Tripodiscus, a Village of Megaris. Thucyd. lib. 4.
    Tritaea, a City of Achaia, remote from the Sea, distant from Pharae 120
    furlongs. Paus. in Achaicis. Also a City of the Locri Ozolae. Thucyd. lib., 3.
    Troas, a Territory of Asia the lesse, vpon the side of the Aegaean S●a,
    betweene Aeolis and Hellespont. Strab. lib. 13.
    Troezen, a maritime City of Argia, the vtmost in the Bay of Hermione.
    Strab. lib. 8. con ning on Epidauria. Pausan. in Corinthiacis.
    Troia. Vide Ilium.
    Trogilium, a Promontory, and foot of the Mountaine Mycale, ouer against
    the Ile Samos, which with Posi●eum a Promontory of that Ile, maketh the
    streight there of seuen furlongs ouer. Strab. lib. 14.

Z
Z

    ZAcynthus, an Iland ouer against Peloponnesus. Strab. lib. 10. Now called
    Zante.

Zarex, a maritime City of Laconia, distant on one side from Epidaurus
Limera 100 furlongs, and from Cyphanta on the other side, sixteene
Furlongs. Paus. in Laconicis.
Zeleia, a City vnder Mount Ida▪ toward Propontis, distant from Cyzicus
190. furlongs, and from the Sea 80. furlongs. Strab. lib. 13.
Zona, a City on the shore of Doriscus in Thrace. Herod. lib. 7.

              1. THE FIRST BOOKE OF THE
              HISTORY OF THVCYDIDES.
              The principall Contents.
The estate of Greece, deriued from the remotest knowne Antiquity 
thereof, to the beginning of the Peloponnesian Warre. The Occasion and
Pretexts of this Warre, arising from the Controuersies of the Athenians with the
Corinthians, concerning Corcyra and Potidaea. The Lacedaemonians, instigated
by the Confederates, vndertake the Warre; not so much at their instigation, as of
enuie to the greatnesse of the Athenian Dominion. The degrees by which that
Dominion was acquired. The Warre generally decreed by the Confederates at
Sparta. The Demands of the Lacedaemonians. The obstinacy of the Athenians;
and their Answer, by the aduice of Pericles.

THVCYDIDES an Athenian, wrote the Warre of the Peloponnesians and the
Athenians, * as they warred against each other;          * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
beginning to write, as soone as the Warre was on foot,
with expectation it should proue a great one, and most worthy the relation, of all
that had beene before it: Coniecturing so much, both from this, that they
  ourished on both sides in all manner of prouision: and also because 
hee saw the rest of Greece, siding with the one or the other Faction; some then
presently, and some intending so to doe. For this was certainely the greatest
Commotion that euer happened amongst the Grecians, reaching also to part of
the * Barbarians, and, as a man may say, to most         *
Nations. For the Actions that preceded this, and those The common appellation 〈◊〉 by
againe that are yet more ancient, though the truth of the
                                                             Grecians, to ll Nations
                                                                             ●

                                                         besides 〈◊〉.
them, through length of time, cannot by any meanes To make it appeare that this
cleerely be discouered; yet for any Argument that        Warre was greater then any
                                                         before it, the Author sheweth the
(looking into times farre past) I haue yet light on to   imbecillity of former times;
                                                             describing 3. Periods; 1. From

perswade me, I doe not thinke they haue beene very              the beginning of the Grecian
                                                                memory, to the Warre of Troy.
great, either for matter of Warre, or otherwise.                2. The Warre it selfe 3. The
                                                                time from thence, to the present
For it is euident, that that which now is called *              Warre which he writeth.

Hellas, was not of old constantly inhabited; but that, The     state of Greece before the
                                                          Troian Warre.
at rst, there were often remouals, euery one easily
leauing the place of his abode, to the violence alwayes * Greece.
of some greater number. For whiles Tra cke was not, nor mutuall entercourse,
but with feare, neither by Sea nor Land; and euery man so husbanded the
ground, as but barely to liue vpon it, without any *      * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
stocke of * Riches; and planted nothing, (because it
                                                          * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Aristot.
was vncertaine when another should invade them, and Whatsoeuer is estimated by
carry all away, especially, not hauing the defence of     money.

Walls) but made account to be Masters in any place, of such necessary
sustenance, as might serue them from day to day, they made little di culty to
change their habitations. And for this cause, they were of no ability at all, eyther
for greatnesse of Cities, or other prouision. But the fattest Soyles were alwaies
the most subiect to these changes of Inhabitants; as that which is now called
Thessalia, and Boeotia, and the greatest part of Peloponnesus, (except Arcadia)
and of the rest of Greece, whatsoeuer was most fertile. For, the goodnesse of the
Land increasing the power of some particular men, both caused Seditions,
(whereby they were ruin'd at home) and withall, made them more obnoxious to
the insidiation of strangers. From hence it is, that *    * The territory of the Athenian
Attica, from great antiquity, for the sterility of the    City, so called, from Atthis, the
                                                          Daughter of Cranaus.
Soyle, free from Seditions, hath beene inhabited euer
by the same * People. And it is none of the least         * The Athenians had an opinion
euidences of what I haue said, That Greece, by reason of themselues, that they were not
                                                          descended from other Nations,
of sundry transplantations, hath not in other parts       but that their Ancestors were
receiued the like augmentation. For, such as by Warre, euer the Inhabitants of Attica:
                                                          wherefore they also stiled
or Sedition, were driuen out of other           themselues 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, .i.
places, the most potent of them, as to a place of         men of the same Land.
stability, retired themselues to Athens; where
receiuing the Freedome of the Citty, they long since so increased the same in

number of People, as Attica, being incapable of them it selfe, they sent out
Colonies into Ionia.

And to me, the imbecillity of ancient times, is not a little demonstrated also by
this [that followeth. ] For before the Trojan Warre, nothing appeareth to haue
beene done by Greece in Common; nor indeed was it, as I thinke, called all by
that one name of Hellas; nor before the time of Hellen, the sonne of Deucalion,
was there any such name at all. But Pelasgicum (which was the farthest
extended) and the other parts, by Regions, receiued their names from their owne
Inhabitants. But Hellen and his Sonnes being strong The originall of the name
in Phthiotis, and called in, for their ayde, into other    Hellas.

Cities; these Cities, because of their conversing with them, began more
particularly to be called Hellenes: and yet could not that name of a long time
after prevaile vpon them all. This is coniectured principally out of Homer; for,
though borne long after the Trojan Warre, yet he giues them not any where that
* name in generall; nor indeed to any, but those, that * The name of Hellenes not
with Achilles came out of Phthiotis, and were the rst giuen to all the Grecians in the
                                                           time that Homer wrote his
so called. But in his Poemes, he mentionenh                Poemes.
Danaans, Argiues, and Achaeans; nor doth he
likewise vse the word Barbarians; because the Grecians, as it seemeth vnto me,
were not yet distinguished by one common name of Hellenes, oppositely
answerable vnto them. The Grecians then, neyther as they had that Name in
particular by mutuall entercourse, nor after, vniversally so termed, did euer
before the Trojan Warre, for want of strength and          The Troian Warre was the ﬁrst
correspondence, enter into any Action, with their          Enterprise where the Grecians
                                                           combined their forces.
Forces ioyned. And to that Expedition they came
together, by the meanes of Navigation, which the most part of Greece had now
receiued.

For Minos was the most ancient of all, that by report       Minos, King of Creta, the ﬁrst
we know to haue built a Nauy: and he made himselfe          that had a Nauy.

Master of the now * Grecian Sea; and both                   * Before that time, it was called
commanded the Iles called Cyclades, and also was the        the Carian Sea.

 rst that sent Colonies into most of the same, expelling thence the Carians, and
constituting his owne Sonnes there for Gouernours, and also freed the Seas of
Pirates, as much as hee could, for the better comming in (as is likely) 
of his owne Reuenue.

For the Grecians in old time, and such Barbarians as, A Digression, touching the
in the Continent, liued neere vnto the Sea, or else       Piracie & Robberies of old time;
                                                          with other Notes of
inhabited the Ilands, after once they beganne to crosse Saulvagenesse.
ouer one to another in Ships, became Theeues, and
went abroad vnder the conduct of their most puissant men, both to enrich
themselues, and to fetch in maintenance for the weake: and falling vpon Towns
vnforti ed, and scatteringly inhabited, ri ed them, and made this the best
meanes of their liuing; Being a matter at that time no Robbing had in honour.
where in disgrace, but rather carrying with it
something of glory. This is manifest by some that dwell on the Continent,
amongst whom, so it be performed Nobly, it is still esteemed as an Ornament.
The same also is prooued by some of the ancient Poets, who introduce men
questioning of such as saile by, on all Coasts alike, whether they bee Theeues, or
not; as a thing neyther scorned by such as were asked, nor vpbraided by those
that were desirous to know. They also robbed one another within the maine
Land: And much of Greece vseth that old custome, as the Locrians called
Ozolae, * the Acarnanians, and those of the               * In distinction to the other
Continent in that quarter, vnto this day. Moreouer, Locrians, called Opuntij.
the fashion of wearing Iron, remaineth yet with the people of that Continent,
from their old Trade of Theeuing.

For once they were wont throughout all Greece, to        Continuall wearing of Armour
goe armed, because their Houses were vnfenced, and in fashion.
travailing was vnsafe, and accustomed themselues, like the Barbarians, to the
ordinary wearing of their Armour. And the Nations of Greece that liue so yet,
doe testi e, that the same manner of life was anciently vniversall to all the rest.
Amongst whom, the Athenians were the rst that laid The Athenians grew ﬁrst ciuill.
by their Armour, and growing ciuill, passed into a

more tender kinde of life. And such of the Rich as were any thing stepped into
yeeres, layd away, vpon the same delicacie, not long after, the fashion of wearing
linnen Coates, and * golden Grashoppers, which they * The Athenians, holding
were wont to binde vp in the lockes of their haire:       themselues to be sprung from the
                                                          ground they liued on, wore the
from whence also the same Fashion, by reason of their Grashopper for a kinde of
a nity, remained a long time in vse amongst the           Cognizance, because that Beast is
                                                          thought to be generated of the
ancient Ionians. But the moderate kind of Garment, Earth.
and conformable to the wearing of these times, was
  rst taken vp by the Lacedaemonians; amongst whom also, both in 
other things, and especially in the culture of their bodies, the Nobility obserued
the most equality with the Commons. The same were also the rst, that when
they were to contend in the * Olympicke Games,            * Exercises of diuers kindes
stript themselues * naked, and anoynted their bodies instituted in honour of Iupiter,
                                                          at Olympia in Peloponnesus, to
with oyntment: whereas in ancient times, the              which resorted such out of Greece,
Champions did also in the Olympicke Games vse             as contended for Prizes.

Breeches; nor is it many yeeres since this custome        * This was perhaps the cause,
ceased. Also there are to this day amongst the            why it was a capitall crime, for
                                                          Women to be Spectators of the
Barbarians, especially those of Asia, Prizes              Olympicke exercises.
propounded of ghting with Fists, and of Wrestling,
and the Combattants, about their priuie parts, weare Breeches in the Exercise. It
may likewise by many other things bee demonstrated, that the old Greekes vsed
the same forme of life, that is now in force amongst the Barbarians of the present
Age.

As for Cities, such as are of late Foundation, and since The Cities of Greece, how seated,
the increase of Navigation, in as much as they haue         and for what causes.

had since, more plenty of riches, haue beene walled about, and built vpon the
Shore; and haue taken vp Isthmi, [that is to say, neckes of Land between Sea and
Sea] both for Merchandise, and for the better strength against Con ners. But
the old Cities, men hauing beene in those times, for the most part, infested by
Theeues, are built farther vp, as well in the Ilands, as in the Continent. For
others also that dwelt on the Sea side, though not Sea-men, yet they molested

one another with Robberies; and euen to these times, those people are planted
vp high in the Countrey.

But these Robberies were the exercise especially of the Ilanders; namely, the
Carians, and the Phoenicians: for by them were the       The Carians and Phoenissians,
greatest part of the * Ilands inhabited. A testimony     were those that committed the
                                                         most robberies.
whereof, is this: The Athenians, when in this present *
Warre they hallowed the Ile of Delos, and had digged * The Cyclades.
vp the Sepulchers of the Dead, found that more then * Vide Lib. 4. in the beginning.
halfe of them were Carians, * knowne so to bee, both
by the armour buried with them, and also by their        * The Carians hauing invented
manner of buriall at this day. And when Minos his        the Crest of the Helmet, and the
                                                         handle of the Target, and also
Nauy was once a oat, Nauigators had the Sea more         the drawing of Images on their
free: For hee expelled the Malefactors out of the        Targets, had therefore a Helmet
                                                         and a Buckler buryed with
Ilands, and in the most of them, planted Colonies of them, and had their heads laid
his owne. By which means, they who inhabited the         towards the West.
Sea-coasts, becomming more addicted to Riches, grew
more constant to their dwellings; of whom, some growne now rich, 
compassed their Townes about with Walls. For out of desire of gaine, the meaner
sort vnderwent servitude with the mighty; and the mighty with their wealth,
brought the lesser Cities into subiection. And so it came to passe, that rising to
power, they proceeded afterward to the Warre against Troy.

And to mee it seemeth, that a Agamemnon got            The Action of Troy.
together that Fleet, not so much for that hee had with
                                                       a The Sonne of Atreus, the Sonne
him the b Suters of Helena, bound thereto by oath to of Pelops.
Tyndareus, as for this, that hee exceeded the rest in  b
power. For they that by tradition of their Ancestours, The opinion was, that
know the most certainety of the Acts of the            Tyndareus, the Father of
                                                       Helena, tooke an Oath of all his
Peloponnesians, say, That rst, Pelops, by the          Daughters Sutors, that if
abundance of wealth which he brought with him out violence were done to him that
                                                       obtained her, all the rest should
of Asia, to men in want, obtained such power           helpe to revenge it. And that
amongst them, as, though hee were a Stranger, yet the Menelaus hauing married her,

Countrey was called after his name. And that this        and Paris the Sonne of Priam,
                                                         King of Troy taken her away,
power was also increased by his Posterity: For,          Agamemnon, in the behalfe of
Euristheus being slaine in Attica, by the c Heracleides, his Brother Menelaus, drew
                                                         them by this Oath to the Siege of
Atreus, that was his d Vncle by the Mother, (and was Ilium.
then abiding with him as an exiled person, for feare of Peloponnesus, so called from
his Father, for the * death of Chrysippus) and to        Pelops.
                                                         The increase of the power of the
whom Euristheus, when he vndertooke the                  Pelopians.
Expedition, had committed Mycenae, and the
                                                         c A kindred and race of men,
gouernment thereof, for that he was his Kinsman;         whereof was Hercules. This
when as Euristheus came not backe, (the Mycenians Family was persecuted by
being willing to it, for feare of the Heracleides, and   Euristheus, who was of the House
                                                         of Perseus, and driuen into
because he was an able man, and made much of the         Attica, thither he following
Common people) obtained the Kingdome of                  them, was slaine by the
                                                         Athenians.
Mycenae, and of whatsoeuer else was vnder
Euristheus, for himselfe: And the power of the e         d Astidamia, the Mother of
                                                         Euristheus, was Atreus his Sister.
Pelopeides became greater then that of the f Perseides.
To which greatnesse g Agamemnon succeeding, and *
                                                         Atreus and Thyestes, Sonnes of
also farre excelling the rest in Shipping, tooke that    Pelops, at the impulsion of their
Warre in hand, as I conceiue it, and assembled the said Mother, slew this Crysippus, who
Forces, not so much vpon fauour, as by feare. For it is was their halfe Brother, viz. by
                                                         the Father; and for this fact,
cleere, that he himselfe both conferred most Ships to Atreus ﬂed to Euristheus.
that Action, and that some also hee lent to the          Atreus King of Mycenae, after
Arcadians. And this is likewise declared by Homer (if the death of Pelops.
any thinke his testimony su cient) who, at the           e The House of Pelops.
deliuery of the Scepter vnto him, calleth him, Of        f The House of Perseus.
many Iles, and of all Argos King. Now he could not,
                                                         g The Sonne of Atreus, heyre to
liuing in the Continent, haue beene Lord of the          the power of both Houses, both of
Ilands, other then such as were adjacent, which          the Pelopeides, and of the
                                                         Perseides.
cannot bee many, vnlesse hee had also had a Nauy.
And by this Expedition, we are to estimate what were those of the Ages before it.

Now seeing Mycenae was but a small Citie, or if any other of that Age 
seeme but of light regard, let not any man for that cause, on so weake an

Argument, thinke that Fleet to haue beene lesse then Mycenae, though no great Citie,
the Poets haue said, and Fame reported it to bee. For, yet was of great power.
if the City of Lacedaemon were now desolate, and nothing of it left, but the
Temples, and oores of the buildings, I thinke it would breed much vnbeliefe in
posterity long hence, of their power, in comparison of the Fame. For although of
* ue parts of Peloponnesus, it possesse * two, and         * 1. Laconia. 2. Arcaedia. 3.
hath the leading of the rest, and also of many             Argolica. 4. Messenia. 5. Elis.
                                                           Morea.
Confederates without; yet the Citie being not close
built, and the Temples and other Edi ces not costly, * Laconia, Messenia.
and because it is but scatteringly inhabited, after the ancient manner of Greece,
their power would seeme inferiour to the report.           The City of Sparta lesse, and the
Againe, the same things happening to Athens, one           City of Athens, greater, then for
                                                           the proportion of their power.
would coniecture by the sight of their Citie, that their
power were double to what it is. Wee ought not therefore to bee incredulous,
[concerning the Forces that went to Troy, ] nor haue in regard so much the
externall shew of a Citie, as the power: but we are to thinke, that that Expedition
was indeed greater then those that went before it, but yet inferiour to those of
the present Age; if in this also we may credit the Poetry of Homer, who being a
Poet, was like to set it foorth to the vtmost. And yet euen thus it commeth short.
For hee maketh it to consist of 1200. Vessels: those that were of Boeotians,
carrying 120. men apiece, and those which came with A Suruey of the Fleet sent to
Philoctetes, 50. Setting forth, as I suppose, both the Troy.
greatest sort, and the least, and therefore of the bignesse of any of the rest, hee
maketh in his Catalogue, no mention at all: but declareth, that they who were in
the Vessels of Philoctetes, serued both as Mariners and Souldiers: for he writes,
that they who were at the Oare, were all of them Archers. And for such as
wrought not, it is not likely that many went along, except * Kings, and such as
were in chiefe authority, especially being to passe the * As Achyles, Vlysses, Ajax,
Sea with Munition of Warre, * and in Bottomes              Diomedes, Patroclus, and the
                                                           like.
without Deckes, built after the old and Peiraticall
fashion. So then, if by the greatest and least, one        * The whole number of men,
                                                           estimating the Ships at a
estimate the meane of their Shipping, it will appeare, medium to carry 85. men apiece,
that the whole number of men considered, as sent           which is the meane betweene

ioyntly from all Greece, were not very many. And the 120. and 50, come to 102000.
                                                           men, carried in these 1200.
cause heereof was not so much want of           Ships. Yet the Author makes it a
men, as of wealth. For, for want of victuall, they         light matter in respect of the
                                                           present Warre.
carryed the lesser Army, and no greater then they
hoped might both follow the Warre, and also maintaine it selfe. When vpon
their arriuall, they had gotten the vpper hand in ght, (which is manifest; for else
they could not haue forti ed their Campe) it appeares, that from that time
forward, they employed not there their whole power, but that for want of
victuall, they betooke themselues, part of them to the tillage of Chersonesus,
and part to fetch in Booties: whereby diuided, the Trojans the more easily made
that tenne yeeres resistance; as being euer a Match for so many as remained at the
Siege. Whereas, if they had gone furnished with store of prouision, and with all
their Forces, eased of Boothaling and Tillage, since they were Masters of the
Field, they had also easily taken the Citie. But they stroue not with their whole
power, but onely with such a portion of their Army, as at the seuerall occasions
chanced to bee present: when as, if they had pressed the Siege, they had wonne
the place, both in lesse time, and with lesse labour. But through want of money,
not onely they were weake matters all that preceded this Enterprize; but also this,
(which is of greater name then any before it)              The pouerty of the Greekes was
appeareth to bee in fact beneath the Fame, and report, the cause why the Troians could
                                                           so long hold out.
which, by meanes of the Poets, now goeth of it.

For also after the Trojan Warre, the Grecians              The state of Greece, after the
continued still their shiftings, and transplantations;     Troian Warre.

insomuch as neuer resting, they improued not their power. For the late returne
of the Greekes from Ilium, caused not a little innouation; and in most of the
Cities there arose seditions; and those which were driven out, built Cities for
themselues in other places. For those that are now called Boeotians, in the
sixtieth yeere after the taking of Troy, expelled Arne by the Thessalians, seated
themselues in that Country, which now Boeotia, was then called Cadmeis. (But
there was in the same, a certaine portion of that          Boeotia, more anciently
Nation before, of whom also were they, that went to Cadmeis.
the Warfare of Troy. ) And in the eightieth yeere, the Doreans, together with the

Heracleides, seazed on Peloponnesus. And with much adoe, after long time,
Greece had constant rest; and shifting their seates no longer, at length sent
Colonies abroad. And the Athenians planted Ionia,         The Jonians were the Colonies of
and most of the Ilands; and the               the Athenians.
Peloponnesians, most of Italy, and Sicily, and also certaine parts of the rest of
Greece. But these Colonies were all planted after the Trojan Warre.

But when the power of Greece was now improoued, and the desire of money
withall, their reuenues being enlarged, in most of the Cities there were erected
Tyrannies: (for before that time, Kingdomes with        The diﬀerence 〈◊〉 Tyranny,
honours limited, were hereditary. ) And the Grecians and 〈◊〉 Authority.
built Nauies, and became more seriously addicted to the a aires of the Sea. The
Corinthians are said to haue been the rst that changed the forme of shipping,
into the neerest to that which is now in vse; and at    At Corinth were made 〈◊〉 ﬁrst
Corinth are reported to haue beene made the rst         〈◊〉, or 〈◊〉 of there ti
                                                                       ▪          of
                                                                                   ●●

                                                        Oare, one aboue another.
Gallies of all Greece. Now it is well knowne, that
Aminocles the Ship-wright of Corinth, built 4. Ships at Samos. And from the
time that Aminocles went to Samos, vntill the end of this present Warre, are at
the most but 300. yeeres. And the most ancient nauall Battaile that we know of,
was fought betweene the * Corinthians and the           * By this it 〈…〉 Thucydides 〈…〉
Corcyraeans, and from that Battaile to the same time, whole〈◊〉.
are but 260. yeeres. * For Corinth seated on an         * B Periander, 〈…〉 of Corinth,
                                                                 ●

Isthmus, had beene alwaies a place of Tra que;          〈…〉 of his Sonne 〈◊〉 Herod. in
                                                                               ▪

                                                        Thalia.
because the Grecians of old, from within and without
Peloponnesus, trading by Land more then by Sea, had no other intercourse one
to another, but thorow the Corinthians Territory.       The meanes of the wealth of
And was also wealthy in money, as appeares by the       Corinth.

Poets, who haue surnamed this Towne the Rich. And after the Grecians had
commerce also by Sea, then likewise hauing furnished Corinth surnamed the Rich.
themselues with a Nauy, they scowred the Sea of
Pirates, and a ording Tra que both by Sea and Land, mightily increased their
City in reuenue of money. After this, the Iönians in the times of Cyrus, rst
King of the Persians, and of his Sonne Cambyses, got together a great Nauie, and

making warre on Cyrus, obtained for a time the       The Ionians had a Nauy in
dominion of that part of the Sea that lyeth on their Cyrus his time.

owne Coast. Also Polycrates, who in the time of Cambyses, Tyrannized in
Samos, had a strong Nauy, wherewith he subdued       Polycrates Tyrant of Samos, had
divers of the Ilands; and amongst the rest, hauing   a Nauy in the time of Cambyses.

wonne Rhenea, hee consecrated the same to Apollo of Delos. The * Phocaeans
likewise, when they were building the Citty of       * The Phocaeans in the time of
Marseilles, ouercame the Carthagineans in a sight at Tarquinius, came into the
                                                     Mouth of Tyber, entred into
Sea.                                                 amity with the Romans, and
                                                     thence went and built Marseilles
These were the greatest Nauies extant, and yet euen  amongst the Sauage Nations, of
                                                     the Ligurians, and Gaules.
these, though many Ages after the time of  Iustin l. 42.
Troy, consisted is it seemes, but of a few Gallies, and
were made vp with Vessels of ftie Oares, and with long Boates, as well as those
of former times. And it was but a little before the *    * Medes and Persians vsed heere
Medan Warre, and death of Darius, successor of           promiscuously the Medan
                                                         Monarchy, being translated to
Cambyses in the Kingdome of Persia, that the Tyrants the Persians.
of Sicily, and the Corcyraeans had of Gallies any
number. For these * last, were the onely Nauies worth * Of the Corinthians, Iönians,
speaking of, in all Greece, before the invasion of the   and Phoceans.

Medes. And the People of Aegina, and the Athenians, Egina.
had but small ones, and the most of them consisting
but of fty Oares a piece; and that so lately, as but from the time, that the
Athenians making Warre on Aegina, and withall expecting the comming of the
Barbarian, at the perswasion of Themistocles, built      The shipping of Greece very
those Ships, which they vsed in that Warre; and these meane before this Warre.
also, not all had Deckes.

Such were then the Nauies of the Greekes, both ancient and moderne.
Neuerthelesse, such as applyed themselues to navall businesse, gained by them
no small power, both in reuenue of money, and in dominion ouer other people.
For with their Nauies (especially those men that had not su cient Land, where
they inhabited, to maintaine themselues) they subdued the Ilands. But as for

Warre by Land, such as any State might acquire power by, there was none at all.
And such as were, were onely betweene Borderer and Borderer. For the Grecians
had neuer yet gone out with any Army to conquer any The causes why the Grecians
Nation far from home; because the lesser Cities,       neuer ioyned their forces in any
                                                       great action.
neither brought in their Forces to the great ones, as
Subiects, nor concurred as Equals, in any common Enterprize; but such as were
neighbours, warred against each other, hand to hand. For the Warre of old,
betweene the Chalcideans and the Eretrians, was it, wherein the rest of Greece
was most divided, and in league with either partie.

As others by other meanes were kept backe from          The Ionians kept downe by the
growing great, so also the Ionians by this, That the    Persian.

Persian A aires prospering, Cyrus and the Persian Kingdome, after the defeat of
Croesus, made warre vpon all that lyeth from the Riuer Halys to the Sea side,
and so subdued all the Citties which they possessed in the Continent, & Darius
afterward, when he had ouercome the Phoenissian Fleet, did the like vnto them
in the Ilands.

And as for the Tyrants that were in the Grecian Cities, who forecasted 
onely for themselues, how, with as much safety as was possible, to looke to their
owne persons, and their owne Families, they resided for the most part in the
Cities, and did no Action worthy of memory, vnlesse it were against their
neighbours: for, as for the Tyrants of Sicily, they were already arrived at greater
power. Thus was Greece for a long time hindred, that neither ioyntly it could
doe any thing remarkable, nor the Cities singly be adventrous.

But after that the * Tyrants both of Athens, and of the * Pisistratus nd his sonnes
                                                                      ●

rest of Greece, where Tyrannies were, were the most,
and last of them (excepting those of Sicily, put downe The Lacedaemonians put downe
by the Lacedaemonians, (for Lacedaemon, after it was the Tyrants through all Greece.
built by the Doreans that inhabited the same, though it hath bin longer troubled
with seditions, then any other Citie we know, yet hath it had for the longest
time, good Laws, and bin also alwaies free from Tyrants. For it is vnto the end of

this Warre, 400. yeeres, and somewhat more, that the Lacedaemonians haue vsed
one and the same gouernment: and thereby being of power themselues, they also
ordered the A aires in the other Cities) [I say] after the dissolution of Tyrannies
in Greece, it was not long before the Battaile was fought by the Medes, against
the Athenians, in the Fields of Marathon. And in the tenth yeere againe after
that, came the * Barbarian, with the * great Fleet into * Xerxes.
Greece, to subdue it. And Greece being now in great * A Fleet of 1200. Gallies, and
danger, the leading of the Grecians that leagued in        2000. Hulks of the round
that Warre, was giuen to the Lacedaemonians, as to         manner of building. Cer . ●

                                                           Nepos in vita Themistoclis.
the most potent State. And the Athenians, who had
purposed so much before, and already stowed their necessaries, at the comming
in of the Medes, went * a ship-boord, and became Sea- *
men. When they had ioyntly beaten backe the                The Athenians being
                                                           admonished by the Oracle, for
Barbarian, then did the Grecians, both such as were        their safety against the Medes, to
revolted from the King, and such as had in common put themselues within Walls of
                                                           wood: Themistocles interpreting
made Warre vpon him, not long after, devide
                                                           the Oracle, they went into their
themselues into Leagues, one part with the                 Gallies.
Athenians▪ and the other with the Lacedaemonians; All Greece deuided into two
                                                           Leagues, the Lacedaemonians
these two Citties appearing to bee the mightiest; for and their League, and the
this had the power by Land, and the other by Sea. But Athenians and their League.
this Confederation lasted but a while: for afterwards,
the Lacedaemonians and the Athenians, being at *           * This variance began vpon this,
variance, warred each on other, together with their        That Cimon hauing beene sent
                                                           for to ayd the Lacedaemonians
                                                                        ●
seuerall Confederates. And the rest of         against the Helots, was sent
Greece, where any discord chanced to arise, had            backe with his Athenians, out of
                                                           distrust the Lacedaemonians
recourse presently to one of these. In so much, that       had of their forward spirit:
from the Warre of the Medes to this present Warre,         which the Athenians tooke for a
                                                           disgrace.
being continually [exercised▪ ] sometimes in peace,
sometimes in Warre, either one against the other, or against revolted
Confederates, they arrived at this Warre, both well furnished with Military
provisions, and also expert, because their practice was with danger.

The Lacedaemonians governed not their Confederates so, as to make them
Tributaries, but onely drew them by faire meanes to The manner how the
embrace the * Oligarchy, convenient to their owne         Lacedaemonians dealt with
Policy. But the Athenians, having with time, taken        their Confederates.

into their hands the Gallies of all those that stood out, * The gouernment of the Few,
(except the Chians and Lesbians) * reigned over them, that is to say, of the Nobility.
                                                          The manner how the Athenians
and ordained euery of them to pay a certaine tribute handled their Confederates.
of money. By which meanes, their * owne particular
                                                          * Hence it is, that through all
provision was greater in the beginning of this Warre, this History, Subiects and
then when in their ourishing time, the League             Confederates are taken for the
                                                          same thing, especially with the
betweene them and the rest of Greece remaining            Athenians.
whole, it was at the most.
                                                              * Of the People of Athens it selfe,
                                                              excluding their Confederates.
Such then I nde to haue beene the state of things
past, hard to be beleeued, though one produce proofe for euery particular
thereof. For Men receiue the report of things, though of their owne Countrey, if
done before their owne time, all alike, from one as from another, without
examination.

For the vulgar sort of Athenians thinke, that          Digression, to shew how
Hipparchus was the Tyrant, and slaine by Harmodius negligently men receiue the fame
                                                       of things past, by the example of
and Aristogeiton; and know not that Hippias had the their error touching the Story of
gouernment, as being the eldest sonne of Pisistratus, Hippias the sonne of Pisistratus,
                                                       which it seemes he willingly
and that Hipparchus and Thessalus were his brethren; mentions, both heere and
and that Harmodius and Aristogeiton, suspecting        heereafter, on light occasion.
that some of their Complices had that day, and at that
instant, discouered vnto Hippias somewhat of their treason, did forbeare
Hippias, as a man forewarned, and desirous to e ect somewhat, though with
danger, before they should be apprehended, lighting on Hipparchus, slew him,
neere the Temple called Leocorium, whilest he was setting forth the *
Panathenaicall Show. And likewise divers other things * Panathenaica, were
now extant, and which Time hath not yet involued in Solemnities instituted by
                                                       Theseus, in memory of that he
oblivion, haue beene conceiued amisse by other         had drawn together all the

Grecians; as that the Kings of Lacedaemon, in giving Athenians that liued dispersed
                                                         in Attica, into the Citie of
their su rages, had not * single, but double Votes.      Athens Paus. in Arcad.
And that * Pitanate was a band of Souldiers, so called
                                                         * Lucan seemeth to retaine the
there, whereas there was neuer any such. So impatient same errour, in Harmodias.
of labour are the most men, in the search of truth,
                                              [Pageand
                                                    24b] * A Tribe of the
embrace soonest, the things that are next to             Lacedaemonians.
hand.

Now he, that by the Arguments heere adduced, shall frame a Iudgement of the
things past, and not beleeue rather, that they were such as the Poets haue sung,
or Prose-writers haue composed, more delightfully to the eare, then
conformably to the truth, as being things not to bee disprooued, and by length
of time, turned for the most part into the nature of Fables without credit; but
shall thinke them heere searched out, by the most euident signes that can be, and
su ciently too, considering their antiquity; hee, I say, shall not erre. And though
men alwaies iudge the present Warre wherein they liue, to be greatest; and when
it is past, admire more those that were before it; yet if they consider of this
Warre, by the Acts done in the same, it will manifest it selfe to bee greater, then
any of those before mentioned.

What particular persons haue spoken, when they were The diligence of the Author in
about to enter into the Warre, or when they were in it, the enquirie of the truth of what
                                                         he wrote: both touching the
were hard for mee to remember exactly, whether they Orations, and the Actions.
were speeches which I haue heard my selfe, or haue
receiued at the second hand. But as any man seemed, to mee, that knew what
was neerest to the * summe of the truth, of all that     * To the analogie and ﬁtnesse of
hath beene vttered, to speake most agreeably to the      what was to be said: so that
                                                         though he vsed not their words,
matter still in hand, so haue I made it spoken heere.    yet he vsed the arguments that
But of the Acts themselues done in the Warre, I          best might serue to the purpose,
                                                         which at any time was in hand
thought not t to write all that I heard from all
                                                                                          ▪

Authors, nor such as I my selfe did but thinke to bee true; but onely those
whereat I was my selfe present; and those of which with all diligence I had made
particular enquirie. And yet euen of those things, it was hard to know the

certainty, because such as were present at every Action, spake not all after the
same manner, but as they were a ected to the Parts, or as they could remember.

To heare this History rehearsed, for that there bee        The vse of this History.
inserted in it no Fables, shall bee perhaps not
delightfull: But hee that desires to looke into the truth of things done, and
which (according to the condition of humanity) may bee done againe, or at least,
their like, hee shall nde enough heerein, to make him thinke it pro table: And
it is compiled rather for an * EVERLASTING                 * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
POSSESSION, then to be * rehearsed for a Prize.
                                                     * Both Poet, and
                                                     Historiographers of old, recited
The greatest Action before this, was that  their Histories to captate glory.
                                                     This emulation of glory in their
against the Medes, and yet that, by * two Battels by writings, he calleth 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉
Sea, and as many by Land, was soone decided. But, as 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
for this Warre, it both lasted long, and the harme it
                                                           [...].
did to Greece▪ was such, as the like, in the like space,
                                                           * 〈…〉 Sea, viz. o e 〈◊〉, and 〈…〉.
had never beene seene before. For neither had there
                                                                            ●

                                                           And 2. 〈…〉 Thermopyle, 〈…〉.
euer bin so many Cities expugned, and made desolate,
what by the Barbarians, and what by the Greekes warring on one another, (and
some Cities there were, that when they were taken, changed their inhabitants; )
nor so much banishing and slaughter, some by the Warre, some by sedition, as
was in this. And those things which concerning former time, there went a fame
of, but in fact rarely con rmed, were now made             Earthquakes, Eclipses, Famine,
credible: As Earthquakes, generall to the greatest part Pestilence, concomitants of this
                                                           Warre.
of the World, and most violent withall; Eclipses of the
Sunne, oftner then is reported of any former time; Great droughts in some
places, and thereby Famine; and that which did none of the least hurt, but
destroyed also its part, the Plague. All these Euils entred together with this
Warre, which began from the time that the Athenians and Peloponnesians brake
the League, which immediately after the Conquest of * Euboea, had beene
concluded betweene them for thirty yeeres. The             * By the Athenians.
Causes why they brake the same, and their Quarrels, I Negroponte.
haue therefore set downe rst, because no man should

bee to seeke, from what ground so great a Warre amongst the Grecians could
arise. And the truest Quarrell, though least in speech, I conceiue to bee the
growth of the Athenian power; which putting the Lacedaemonians into feare,
necessitated the Warre. But the Causes of the breach The causes of the Warre. Feare
of the League, publikely voyced, were these.              necessitates the Warre in the
                                                              Lacedaemonians.

EPIDAMNVS is a Citie scituate on the right hand to such as enter into the
Iönian Gulfe; bordering vpon it, are the Taulantij,      The ﬁrst pretext.
Barbarians, a people of Illyris. This was planted by     Dyrrhachium. Durazzo.
the * Corcyraeans, but Captaine of the Colony, was       Now the Gulfe of Venice, called
one Phalius, the sonne of Heratoclidas a Corinthian, so from 〈◊〉 in Jllyrian.
                                                         〈◊〉, now Slauonia, and
of the linage of Hercules, and according to an ancient Dalmatia.
Custome, called to this charge out of the *
                                                         * Jnhabitants of Corcyra, now
Metropolitan Citie; besides that the Colony it selfe,    Corfù.
consisted in part, of Corinthians, and others of the
                                                         * Corcyra was a Colony of
Dorique Nation. In processe of time, the Citie of        Corinth, and Epidamnus of
Epidamnus, became great and populous;  Corcyra.
and hauing for many yeeres together beene annoyed
with sedition, was by a Warre, as is reported, made vpon them by the con ning
Barbarians, brought low, and deprived of the greatest part of their power. But
that which was the last accident before this Warre, was, that the Nobility, forced
by the Commons to y the Cittie, went and ioyned with the Barbarians, and
both by Land and Sea, robbed those that remained within. The Epidamnians
that were in the Towne, oppressed in this manner, sent their Ambassadours to *
Corcyra, as being their Mother Cittie, praying the       * Corf .  ●

Corcyraeans not to see them perish, but to reconcile
vnto them, those whom they had driven forth, and to put an end to the
Barbarian Warre. And this they intreated in the forme of * Suppliants, sitting
downe in the Temple of Iuno. But the Corcyraeans, *
not admitting their supplication, sent them away         Either the Epidamnians had▪

                                                         oﬀended the Corcyraeans, or the
againe, without e ect. The Epidamnians now               manner was 〈◊〉 those 〈◊〉, to
despairing of reliefe from the Corcyraeans, and at a     t ke Sanctuary, not only for
                                                               ●

stand how to proceed in their present a aires, sending crimes   but for obtaining aid in
                                                         extremities, tacitely disclaiming

to Delphi, enquired at the Oracle, whether it were not all other helpe, saue that of the
                                                          Gods, and those to whom they
best to deliuer vp their Citie into the hands of the      trade supplication.
Corinthians, as of their Founders, and make tryall        The Epidanians neglected by
what ayde they should obtaine from thence. And            their Mother Citie Corcyra,
                                                                           ▪

                                                          procure the protection of the
when the Oracle had answered, That they should            Corinthians.
deliuer it, and take the Corinthians for their Leaders,
they went to Corinth, and according to the advice of the Oracle, gaue their Citie
to them, and declared how the rst Founder of it was a Corinthian, and what
answer the Oracle had giuen them, intreating their helpe, and that they would
not stand by, beholding their destruction. And the Corinthians vndertooke their
defence, not onely for the equity of the cause, (as thinking them no lesse their
owne, then the Corcyraeans Colonie) but also for hatred of the Corcyraeans,
who being their Colony, yet contemned them, and allowed them not their due
honour in publique meetings, nor in the distribution of the Sacri ce, began at a
Corinthian, as was the custome of other Colonies; but being equall to the
richest Graecians of their time, for store of money, and strongly furnished with
ammunition of Warre, had them in contempt. Also they sticked not sometimes
to boast how much they excelled in shipping; and that Corcyra had beene once
inhabited by the * Phaeace●, who ourished in glory * By Homer this Ile is called
of nauall a aires; which was allso the cause,  Phaeacia.
why they the rather prouided themselues of a Nauie; and they were indeed not
without power that way; for when they began this Warre they had 120. Gallies.
The Corinthians therefore hauing all these                The Corinthians send
criminations, against them, relieued Epidamnus            inhabitants to Epidamnus.

willingly, not only giuing leaue to whosoeuer would, to goe and dwell there, but
also sent thither a Garrison of Ambraciotes, Leucadians, and of their owne
Citizens; which succours, for feare the Corcyraeans should haue hindred their
passage by Sea, marched by Land to Apollonia. The Corcyraeans vnderstanding
that new inhabitants, and a Garrison were gone to Epidamnus, and that the
Colonie was deliuered to the Corinthians, were vexed extremely at the same; and
sayling presently thither, with 25. Gallies, and          The Corcyraeans angry at the
afterwards with another Fleet, in an insolent manner aydes sent by the Corinthians,
                                                          make Warre on Epidamnus.
commanded them, both to recall those whom they

had banished, (for these * banished men of                * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉. Diuers
Epidamnus, had beene now at Corcyra, and pointing occasions force men from their
                                                          Country. Sentence of Law which
to the Sepulchers of their Ancestors, and claiming        is commonly called Banishment.
kindred, had intreated the Corcyraeans to restore         Prescription, when the Sentence
                                                          is death, for which cause they ﬂy
them) and to send away the Garrison and Inhabitants into banishment: But those that
sent thither by the Corinthians. But the Epidamnians are here meant, are such as in
gaue no eare to their commandements. Whereupon, Seditions            being the weaker
                                                          Faction, ﬂy for feare of being
the Corcyraeans with forty Gallies, together with the murdered, which I call heere,
banished men, (whom they pretended to reduce) and banished           men; or might call
                                                          them perhaps better Outlawes or
with the Illyrians, whom they had ioyned to their         Fugitiues, but neither of them
part, warred vpon them; and hauing laid Siege to the properly. The Florentines, and
                                                          other places of Italy, that were or
Citty, made Proclamation, that such of the                are Democraticall, wherein such
Epidamnians as would, and all strangers, might depart banishment can onely happen,
                                                          call the properly Fuoru citi.
safely, or otherwise, were to bee proceeded against as
                                                                                   ●

Enemies. But when this prevailed not, the place being an Isthmus, they enclozed
the Citty in on euery side. The Corinthians, when         The Corcyraeans besiege
newes was brought from Epidamnus, how it was              Epidamnus.

besieged, presently made ready their Armie, and at the same time caused a
Proclamation to bee made, for the sending thither of a Colony, and that such as
would goe, should haue equall and like priuiledges, with those that were there
before: and that such as desired to bee sharers in the same, and yet were vnwilling
to goe along in person, at that present, if they would contribute 50. Corinthian
Drachmaes, might stay behind. And they were very many, both that went, and
that laid downe their siluer. Moreouer, they sent to      The Corinthians send an Armie
the Megareans, for feare of being stopped in their        to relieue it.

passage by the Corcyraeans, to ayde them with some Gallies, who                 
accordingly furnished out 8. the Citizens of Pale in Cephalonia, 4. They also
required Gallies of the Epidaurians, who sent them 5. Cephalonia.
the Citizens of Hermione, 1. the Traezenians, 2. the
Leucadians, 10. the Ambraciotes, 8. Of the Thebans and Phliasians they
required money; of the Eleans, both money, & empty Gallies; and of the
Corinthians themselues, there were ready 30. Gallies, and 3000. * men of Armes.
The Corcyraeans, aduertised of this preparation, went to Corynth, in company

of the Ambassadors of the Lacedaemonians, & of the * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, Men in
Sycionians, whom they took with them, and required armour.
the Corinthians to recall the Garrison and Inhabitants, which they had sent to
Epidamnus, as being a City, they said, wherwith they had nothing to do; or if
they had any thing to alledge, they were content to       The Corcyraeans oﬀer to stand
haue the cause iudicially tryed, in such Citties of       to Arbitrement.

Peloponnesus, as they should both agree on, and they then should hold the
Colonie, to whom the same should be adiudged. They said also, That they were
content to referre their cause to the Oracle at Delphi: that Warre they would
make none, but if they must needes haue it, they should by the violence of them,
be forced in their owne defence, to seeke out * better * Meaning the Athenians.
friends then those whom they already had. To this the
Corinthians answered, that if they would put o with The Corinthians vnwilling to
their Fleet, and dismisse the Barbarians from before      accept it, and not without cause.

Epidamnus, they would then consult of the matter: for before they could not
honestly doe it: Because whilest they should bee pleading the case, the
Epidamnians should be su ering the misery of a Siege. The Corcyraeans replyed
to this, That if they would call backe those men of theirs already in Epidamnus,
that then they also would doe, as the Corinthians had required them; or
otherwise, they were content to let the men on both sides stay where they were,
and to suspend the Warre, till the cause should be decided. The Corinthians not
assenting to any of these propositions, since their       The Corinthian Fleet.
Gallies were manned, and their Confederates present,
hauing defyed them rst by a Herald, put to Sea with 75. Gallies, and * 2000.
men of Armes, and set sayle for Epidamnus, against * Either heere or before, it is
the Corcyraeans. Their Fleet was commanded by             likely the number hath beene
                                                          mis-written: for a little before
Aristaeus, the sonne of Pellicas, Callicrates, the sonne hee sayes they had made ready
of Callias, and Timanor the sonne of Timanthes: and 3000.
the Land Forces by Archetimus, the sonne of
Eurytimus, and Isarchidas the sonne of Isarchus. After they were               
come as farre as * Actium▪ in the Territory of            * A Hauen famous afterward,
                                                          for the Battell betweene
Anactorium, (which is a Temple of Apollo, and             Augustus Caesar, and Marcus
ground consecrated vnto him in the mouth of the           Antonius.

Gulfe of Ambracia) the Corcyraeans sent a Herauld
to them, at Actium, to forbid their comming on, and in the meane time manned
out their Fleet▪ and hauing repaired, and made t for seruice their old Gallies,
and furnished the rest with things necessary, shipped their Munition, and went
aboard. The Herauld was no sooner returned from the Corinthians, with an
answer not inclining to peace, but hauing their Gallies already manned and
furnished, to the number of 80. Sayle, (for * forty         The Corcyraean Fleet.
attended alwayes the Siege of Epidamnus) they put to *
Sea, and arranging themselues, came to a Battell: In        It is said 〈◊〉, that the
which the Corcyraeans were cleerely Victors; and on Corcyraeans had i all 1 0  ●     ●

the part of the Corinthians, there perished 15. Gallies. Gallies,     which number agreeeth
                                                            with this 80. that 〈◊〉, and the
And the same day it happened likewise, that they that 40. that maintained the Siege.
besieged Epidamnus, had the same rendred vnto               The Corcyraeans haue the
                                                            victory at Sea, and on the same
them, with Conditions, That the Strangers therein           day take the Citty.
found, should be ransomed, and the Corinthians kept
in bonds, till such time as they should be otherwise disposed of. The Battell being
ended, the Corcyraeans, after they had set vp their * * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Turning,
Trophie in Leucimna, a Promontory of Corcyra, slew particularly turning the backe.
                                                            Trophies, Monuments, in
their other prisoners, but kept the Corinthians still in remembrance of hauing made
bonds. After this, when the Corinthians with their          the Enemy turne their backes.
                                                            These were vsuall in those times,
vanquished Fleet, were gone home to Corinth, the            now out of date.
Corcyraeans, Masters now of the whole Sea in those
parts, went rst, and wasted the Territory of Leucas, a Corinthian Colonie, and
then sayled to Cyllene, which is the Arsenall of the        Santa Maura, now an Iland,
Eleans, and burnt it, because they had, both with           then a Peninsula.

money and shipping, giuen ayde to the Corinthians.

And they were Masters of those Seas, and infested the The Corcyraeans Masters of the
Confederates of Corinth, for the most part of that       Sea.

yeere; till such time as in the beginning of the Summer following, the
Corinthians sent a Fleet and Souldiers vnto Actium, the which for the more safe
keeping of Leucas, and of other Citties their friends, encamped about
Chimerium in Thesprotis: and the Corcyraeans, both with their Fleet and Land

Souldiers, lay ouer against them in Leucimna. But       Thesprotis, part of Albania.
neither part stirred against the other, but after they
had lyen quietly opposite all the Summer, they retyred in Winter, both the one
side and the other to their Cities.

All this yeere, as well before as after the Battaile, the The Corinthians prepare a
Corinthians being vexed at the Warre with  greater Name.
the Corcyraeans, applyed themselues to the building of Gallies, and to the
preparing of a Fleet, the strongest they were able to make, and to procure
Mariners out of Peloponnesus, and all other parts of Greece. The Corcyraeans
hauing intelligence of their preparations, beganne to Both Corcyraeans and
feare, and (because they had neuer beene in League        Corinthians send their
                                                          Ambassadours to Athens.
with any Grecian Citty, nor were in the Roll of the
Confederates, either of the Athenians, or Lacedaemonians) thought it best now,
to send to Athens, to see if they could procure any ayde from thence. This being
perceiued by the Corinthians, they also sent their Ambassadours to Athens, lest
the addition of the Athenian Nauy, to that of the Corcyraeans, might hinder
them from carrying the Warre as they desired. And the Assembly at Athens
being met, they came to pleade against each other; and the Corcyraeans spake to
this e ect.

 1.1. THE ORATION OF THE Ambassadours of
 CORCYRA.
 MEN of Athens, It is but Iustice, that such as come to implore the ayde of
 their neighbours, (as now doe wee) and cannot pretend by any great bene t or
 League, some precedent merit, should before they goe any further, make it
 appeare, principally, that what they seeke conferreth pro t, or if not so, yet is
 not prejudiciall at least, to those that are to grant it: and next, that they will
 bee constantly thankfull for the same. And if they cannot doe this, then not to
 take it ill, though their suite bee rejected. And the Corcyraeans being fully
 perswaded that they can make all this appeare on their owne parts, haue

therefore sent vs hither, desiring you to ascribe them to the number of your
Confederates. Now so it is, that we haue had a Custome, both vnreasonable
in respect of our Suite to you, and also for the present vnpro table to our
owne estate. For, hauing euer till now, beene vnwilling to admit others into
League with vs, we are now not onely suiters for League to others, but also left
destitute by that meanes, of friends in this our Warre with the Corinthians.
And that which before wee thought wisdome, namely, not to enter with
others into League, because wee would not at the discretion of others enter
into danger, wee now nde to haue beene our weaknesse, and imprudence.
Wherefore, though alone wee repulsed the Corinthians, in the late Battell by
Sea, yet since they are set to inuade vs with greater preparation, out of
Peloponnesus, and the rest of Greece; and seeing with our owne          
single power we are not able to goe through; and since also the danger, in case
they subdue vs, would bee very great to all Greece; it is both necessary that wee
seeke the succours, both of you, and of whomsoeuer else wee can; and we are
also to be pardoned, though we make bold to crosse our former custome of
not hauing to doe with other men, proceeding not from malice, but error of
iudgement. Now if you yeeld vnto vs, in what wee request, this coincidence
(on our part) of need, will on your part bee honourable, for many reasons.
First, in this respect, that you lend your helpe to such as haue su ered, and
not to such as haue committed the iniustice. And next, considering that you
receiue into League, such as haue at stake their whole fortune, you shall so
place your bene t, as to haue a testimony of it, if euer any can be so indeleble.
Besides this, the greatest Nauie but your owne, is ours: Consider then, what
rarer hap, and of greater griefe to your enemies, can befall you, then that that
power, which you would haue prized aboue any money, or other requitall,
should come voluntarily, and without all danger or cost, present it selfe to
your hands; bringing with it reputation amongst most men; a gratefull minde
from those you defend; and strength to your selues. All which haue not
happened at once to many. And few there bee of those that sue for League,
that come not rather to receiue strength, and reputation, then to conferre it. If
any heere thinke, that the Warre wherein wee may doe you seruice, will not at
all bee, hee is in an errour, and seeth not, how the Lacedaemonians, through

feare of you, are already in labour of the Warre; and that the Corinthians,
gracious with them, and enemies to you, making way for their Enterprize,
assault vs now, in the way to the invasion of you heereafter, that wee may not
stand amongst the rest of their common Enemies, but that they may be sure
before-hand, either to weaken vs, or to strengthen their owne estate. It must
therefore be your part, we o ering, and you accepting the League, to beginne
with them, and to anticipate plotting, rather then to counterplot against
them. If they object injustice, in that you receiue their Colonie, henceforth let
them learne, that all Colonies, so long as they receiue no wrong from their
Mother Citie, so long they honour her; but when they su er injurie from her,
they then become alienate: for they are not sent out to be the Slaues of them
that stay, but to be their equals. That they haue done vs the injurie, is
manifest; for when wee o ered them a judiciall tryall of the Controversie,
touching Epidamnus, they chose to prosecute their quarrell, rather by Armes
then Iudgement. Now let that which they haue done vnto vs, who are their
kindred, serue you for some Argument, not to bee seduced by their demands,
and made their instruments before you bee aware. For hee liues            
most secure, that hath fewest bene ts bestowed by him vpon his Enemies, to
repent of. As for the Articles betweene you and the Lacedaemonians, they are
not broken by receiuing vs into your League, because wee are in League with
neither partie. For there, it is said, That whosoeuer is Confederate of neither
party, may haue accesse lawfully to either. And sure it were very vnreasonable▪
that the Corinthians should haue the libertie to man their Fleet out of the
Cities comprised in the League, and out of any other parts of Greece, and not
the least out of * places in your Dominion; and wee * A Cephalonia.
                                                            ●

bee denyed both the League now propounded, and
also, all other helpe from whence soeuer. And if they impute it to you as a
fault, that you grant our request; wee shall take it for a greater, that you grant
it not. For therein you shall reject vs, that are invaded, and bee none of your
Enemies; and them, who are your Enemies, and make the invasion, you shall
not onely not oppose, but also su er to raise vnlawfull Forces in your
Dominions; Whereas you ought in truth, either not to su er them to take vp
Mercenaries in your States, or else to send vs succours also; in such manner as

 you shall thinke good your selues; but especially by taking vs into your
 League, and so aiding vs. Many commodities, as wee said in the beginning,
 wee shew vnto you, but this for the greatest, that whereas they are your
 Enemies, (which is manifest enough) and not weake ones, but able to hurt
 those that stand vp against them, wee o er you a Nauall, not a Terrestriall
 League; and the want of one of these, is not as the want of the other: Nay
 rather, your principall aime, if it could be done, should bee, to let none at all
 haue shipping but your selues; or at least, if that cannot bee, to make such
 your friends, as are best furnished therewith. If any man now thinke thus, that
 what we haue spoken, is indeed pro table, but feares if it were admitted, the
 League were thereby broken: let that man consider, that his feare ioyned with
 strength, will make his Enemies feare, and his con dence, hauing (if hee reject
 vs) so much the lesse strength, will so much the lesse be feared. Let him also
 remember, that hee is now in consultation, no lesse concerning Athens, then
 Corcyra; wherein hee forecasteth none of the best, (considering the present
 estate of a aires) that makes a question, whether against a Warre at hand, and
 onely not already on foot, hee should ioyne vnto it, or not, that Citty which
 with most important advantages, or disadvantages, will be friend or enemie.
 For it lyeth so conveniently for sayling into Italy, and Sicily, that it can both
 prohibit any Fleet to come to Peloponnesus from thence, and convoy any
 comming from Peloponnesus thither▪ and is also for diuers other vses most
 commodious. And to comprehend all in briefe, consider whether wee bee to
 bee abandoned, or not, by this. For Greece hauing but three Nauies 
 of any account, yours, ours, and that of Corinth, if you su er the other two to
 ioyne in one, by letting the Corinthians rst seaze vs, you shall haue to ght by
 Sea at one time, both against the Corcyraeans and the Peloponnesians;
 whereas by making League with vs, you shall with your Fleet augmented, haue
 to deale against the Peloponnesians alone.

Thus spake the Corcyraeans, and after them, the Corinthians, thus.

1.1. THE ORATION OF THE Ambassadours of
CORINTH.
THe Corcyraeans in their Oration hauing made mention not onely of your
taking them into League, but also, that they are wronged, and vniustly warred
on; it is also necessarie for vs rst to answer concerning both those points, and
then afterwards to proceed to the rest of what we haue to say, to the end you
may fore-know, that ours are the safest demands for you to embrace, and that
you may vpon reason reject the needy estate of those others. Whereas they
alleadge in defence of their refusing to enter League with other Cities, that the
same hath proceeded from modesty, the truth is, that they tooke vp that
Custome, not from any vertue, but meere wickednesse; as being vnwilling to
call any Confederate for a witnesse of their euill actions, and to bee put to
blush by calling them. Besides, their Citty being by the scituation su cient
within it selfe, giueth them this point, that when they doe any man a wrong,
they themselues are the Iudges of the same, and not men appointed by
consent. For going seldome forth against other Nations, they intercept such,
as by necessity are driven into their Harbour. And in this consisteth their
goodly pretext, for not admitting Confederates, not because they would not
bee content to accompany others in doing euill, but because they had rather
doe it alone; that where they were too strong, they might oppresse; and when
there should bee none to obserue them, the lesse of the pro t might be shared
from them, and that they might escape the shame when they tooke any thing.
But if they had beene honest men, (as they themselues say they are) by how
much the lesse they are obnoxious to accusation, so much the more meanes
they haue, by giuing, and taking what is due to make their honesty appeare.
But they are not such, neither towards others, nor towards vs. For being our
Colony, they haue not onely beene euer in reuolt, but now they also make
warre vpon vs, and say they were not sent out to be injured by vs; but we say
againe, that wee did not send them forth to bee scorned by them, 
but to haue the leading of them, and to bee regarded by them, as is t. For our

other Colonies both honour and loue vs much, which is an argument, seeing
the rest are pleased with our actions, that these haue no iust cause to bee
o ended alone; and that without some manifest wrong, wee should not haue
had colour to warre against them. But say wee had beene in an errour, it had
beene well done in them, to haue giuen way to our passion, as it had beene
also dishonourable in vs, to haue insulted ouer their modesty. But through
pride and wealth, they haue done vs wrong, both in many other things, and
also in this, that Epidamnus being ours, which whilest it was vexed with
Warres, they neuer claimed, assoone as wee came to relieue it, was forcibly
seazed by them, and so holden. They say now, that before they tooke it, they
o ered to put the cause to tryall of Iudgement: But you are not to thinke, that
such a one will stand to Iudgement, as hath advantage, and is sure already of
what hee o ereth to pleade for; but rather hee that before the tryall, will admit
equality in the matter it selfe, as well as in the pleading: whereas contrarily
these men, o ered not this specious pretence of a Iudiciall tryall, before they
had besieged the Citty, but after, when they saw wee meant not to put it vp.
And now hither they bee come, not content to haue beene faulty in that
businesse themselues, but to get in you, into their confederacy? no; but into
their conspiracy; and to receiue them in this name, that they are enemies to vs.
But they should haue come to you then, when they were most in safety; not
now, when we haue the wrong, and they the danger; and when you, that never
partaked of their power, must impart vnto them of your ayde; and hauing
beene free from their faults, must haue an equall share from vs of the blame.
They should communicate their power before-hand, that meane to make
common the issue of the same; and they that share not in the crimes, ought
also to haue no part in the sequele of them. Thus it appeares that wee come
for our parts, with arguments of equity and right; whereas the proceedings of
these other, are nothing else but violence and rapine. And now we shall shew
you likewise, that you cannot receiue them in point of Iustice. For although it
bee in the Articles, that the Cities written with neyther of the parties, may
come in, to whether of them they please; yet it holds not for such as doe so, to
the detriment of eyther; but onely for those that hauing reuolted from neither
part, want protection, and bring not a Warre with them in stead of peace to

those (if they bee wise) that receiue them. For you shall not onely be
Auxiliaries vnto these; but to vs, in stead of Confederates, Enemies. For if you
goe with them, it followes, they must defend themselues, not           
without you. You should doe most vprightly, to stand out of both our wayes;
and if not that, then to take our parts against the Corcyraeans, (for betweene
the Corinthians and you, there are Articles of peace, but with the Corcyraeans
you neuer had so much as a Truce) and not to constitute a new Law of
receiving one anothers Rebels. For neither did we giue our votes against you,
when the Samians revolted, though the rest of Peloponnesus was diuided in
opinion: But plainely alledged, That it was reason, that euery one should haue
liberty to proceed against their owne revolting Confederates. And if you shall
once receiue and ayde the doers of wrong, it will bee seene, that they will come
ouer as fast from you to vs; and you shall set vp a Law, not so much against vs,
as against your selues. These are the points of Iustice wee had to shew you,
conformable to the Law of the Grecians. And now wee come to matter of
aduice, and claime of fauour; which (being not so much your enemies as to
hurt you, nor such friends as to surcharge you) wee say, ought in the present
occasion, to bee granted vs by way of requitall: For when you had want of
Long Barques against the Aeginetae, a little before the Medan War, you had
20. lent vnto you by the Corinthians; which bene t of ours, and that other
against the Samians, when by vs it was, that the Peloponnesians did not ayd
them, was the cause both of your victory against the Aeginetae, and of the
punishment of the Samians. And these things were done for you in a season,
when men, going to ght against their enemies, neglect all respects, but of
victory. For euen a mans Domesticke a aires are ordered the worse, through
eagernesse of present contention. Which bene ts considering, and the yonger
sort taking notice of them from the elder, be you pleased to defend vs now in
the like manner. And haue not this thought, that though in what wee haue
spoken there bee equity; yet, if the Warre should arise, the pro t would be
found in the contrary. For vtility followeth those actions most, wherein we
doe the least wrong; besides that the likelihood of the Warre, wherewith the
Corcyraeans frighting you, goe about to draw you to iniustice, is yet obscure,
and not worthy to moue you to a manifest and present hostility with the

 Corinthians; but it were rather t for you indeed, to take away our former
 iealousies concerning the * Megareans. For the last * This which was done against
 good turne done in season, though but small, is able the Corinthians, by the
                                                         Athenians that ayded Megara,
 to cancell an accusation of much greater moment. is related afterwards in this
 Neither su er your selues to be drawne on, by the       ﬁrst Booke.

 greatnesse of the Nauy which now shall bee at your
 seruice by this League; for to doe no iniurie to our equals, is a rmer power,
 then that addition of strength, which (puft vp with present shewes) men are
 to acquire with danger. And since wee bee come to this, which once before
 wee said at Lacedaemon, that euery one ought to proceed, as hee 
 shall thinke good, against his owne Confederates, wee claime that liberty now
 of you; and that you that haue beene helped by our votes, will not hurt vs now
 by yours, but render like for like; remembring, that now is that occasion,
 wherein hee that aydeth vs, is our greatest friend; and hee that opposeth vs,
 our greatest enemy. And that you will not receiue these Corcyraeans into
 League against our wills, nor defend them in their iniuries. These things if you
 grant vs, you shall both doe as is t, and also advise the best for the good of
 your owne a aires.

This was the e ect of what was spoken by the Corinthians.

Both sides hauing beene heard, and the Athenian people twice assembled; in the
former Assembly, they approued no lesse of the reasons of the Corinthians,
(then of the Corcyraeans; ) but in the latter, they changed their mindes; not so,
as to make a League with the Corcyraeans, both o ensiue and defensiue, that
the Friends and Enemies of the one, should be so of A League defensiue made
the other, (for then, if the Corcyraeans should haue       betweene the Athenians and
                                                           Corcyraeans.
required them to goe against Corinth, the Peace had
beene broken with the Peloponnesians) but made it onely defensiue, that if any
one should invade Corcyra or Athens, or any of their Confederates, they were
then mutually to assist one another. For they expected, that euen thus, they
should grow to Warre with the Peloponnesians, and were therefore vnwilling to
let Corcyra, that had so great a Nauie, to fall into the hands of the Corinthians;

but rather, as much as in them lay, desired to breake them one against another;
that if need required, they might haue to doe with the Corinthians, and others
that had Shipping, when they should be weakned to their hands. And the Iland
seemed also to lye conveniently for passing into Italy, and Sicily. With this minde
the people of Athens receiued the Corcyraeans into League; and when the
Corinthians were gone, sent tenne Gallies not long after to their ayde. The
Commanders of them were Lacedaemonius the sonne They ayde Corcyra with tenne
of Cimon, Diotimus, the sonne of Strombichus, and Gallies.
Proteas, the Sonne of Epicles; and had order not to ght with the Corinthians,
vnlesse they invaded Corcyra, or o ered to land there, or in some other place of
theirs. Which if they did, then with all their might to oppose them. This they
forbade, because they would not breake the Peace concluded with the 
Peloponnesians. So these Gallies arriued at Corcyra.

The Corinthians, when they were ready, made                The Corinthian Fleet.
towards Corcyra with 150. Saile; (viz.) of the Eleans,
10. of the Megareans, 12. of the Leucadians, 10. of the Ambraciotes, 27. of the
Anactorians, 1. and 90. of their owne. The Commanders of these, were men
chosen out of the said severall Cities, for the seueral parts of the Fleet which they
sent in; & ouer those of Corinth, was Xenocleides, the son of Euthicles, with 4.
others. After they were all come together, vpon the Coast of the Continent ouer
against Corcyra, they sayled from Leucas, and came to Cheimerium, in the
Countrey of Thesprotis. In this place is a 〈◊〉, and aboue it, further from the Sea,
the Cittie of Ephyre, in that part of Thesprotis, which is called Eleatis; and neere
vnto it, disbogueth into the Sea the Lake Acherusia, and into that (hauing rst
passed through Thesprotis) the Riuer Acheron, from which it taketh the Name.
Also the Riuer Thyanis runneth heere, which divideth Thesprotis from *
Cestrine, betwixt which two Riuers, ariseth this           * Cestrine the Territory of
Promontory of Cheimerium. To this part of the              Cestria, part of Chaonia.

Continent came the Corinthians, and encamped. The The Corcyraean Fleet.
Corcyraeans vnderstanding that they made against
them, hauing ready 110. Gallies vnder the conduct of Miciades, Aesimides, and
Eurybatus, came and incamped in one of the Ilands called Sybota. And the

tenne Gallies of Athens were also with them. But their Land-forces stayed in the
Promontory of Leucimna, and with them 1000. men of Armes of the
Zacynthians that came to ayde them. The Corinthians The Corinthians set forward.
also had in the Continent the aydes of many
Barbarians, which in those quarters haue beene euermore their friends. The
Corinthians, after they were ready, and had taken aboard three dayes prouision
of victuall, put o by night from Cheimerium, with purpose to ght; and about
breake of day, as they were sayling, descryed the Gallies of the Corcyraeans,
which were also put o from Sybota, and comming on to ght with the
Corinthians. Assoone as they had sight one of another, they put themselues into
order of Battaile. In the right * wing of the             * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, The Gallies
Corcyraeans were placed the Gallies of Athens; and        stood all one by one, in a row,
                                                          and the right wing were those
the rest being their owne, were diuided into three        that were on the right hand
Commands, vnder the three Commanders, one vnder from the middest; and the left
                                                          wing, those on the left hand.
one. This was the order of the Corcyraeans. The
Corinthians had in their right wing the Gallies of Megara, and of              
Ambracia; in the middle, other their Confederates in Megara.
order, and opposite to the Athenians, and right wing
of the Corcyraeans, they were themselues placed, with such Gallies as were best
of Sayle, in the left. The * Standard being on either     * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, A Picture
side lift vp, they ioyned Battell; hauing on both parts, or Image h d vp, as the Earle
                                                                        ●●

                                                          amongst the Romanes.
both many men of Armes, and many Archers and
Slingers, but after the old fashion, as yet somewhat      The Battell.
vnskilfully appointed. The Battell was not so
arti cially as cruelly fought; neere vnto the maner of a ght at Land. For after
they had once runne their Gallies vp close aboard one of another, they could not
for the number and throng, be easily gotten asunder againe, but relyed for the
victory, especially vpon their men of Armes, who fought where they stood,
whilst the Gallies remained altogether without motion. Passages through each
other they made none, but fought it out with courage and strength, rather then
with skill: insomuch as the Battell was in euery part, not without much tumult
and disorder. In which the Athenian Gallies, being alwaies, where the
Corcyraeans were oppressed, at hand, kept the enemies in feare, but yet began

no assault, because their Commanders stood in awe of the prohibition of the
Athenian people. The right wing of the Corinthians was in the greatest distresse;
for the Corcyraeans with twenty Gallies, had made them turne their backes, and
chased them dispersed, to the Continent; and sayling to their very Campe, went
aland, burnt their abandoned Tents, and tooke away their Baggage; so that in
this part the Corinthians and their Confederates were vanquished, and the
Corcyraeans had the victory. But in the left wing, where the Corinthians were
themselues, they were farre superiour; because the        The Corinthians haue the better.
Corcyraeans had twenty Gallies of their number,
which was at rst lesse then that of the Corinthians, absent in the chase of the
Enemie. And the Athenians, when they saw the Corcyraeans were in distresse,
now ayded them manifestly, whereas before, they had abstained from making
assault vpon any. But when once they ed out▪ right, and that the Corinthians
lay sore vpon them▪ then euery one fell to the businesse, without making
di erence any longer▪ and it came at last to this necessity, that they vndertooke
one another, Corinthians, and Athenians.                  The Athenians and Corinthians
                                                              ﬁght.
The Corinthians, when their enemies ed, 
staid not to fasten the Hulles of the Gallies they had sunke, vnto their owne
Gallies, that so they might tow them after; but made after the men, rowing vp
and downe, to kill, rather then to take aliue; and through ignorance (not
knowing that their right wing had beene discom ted) slew also some of their
owne friends. For the Gallies of eyther side being many, and taking vp a large
space of Sea, after they were once in the medly, they could not easily discerne
who were of the Victors, and who of the vanquished party. For this was the
greatest Nauall Battell, for number of Ships, that euer had beene before, of
Grecians against Grecians. When the Corinthians had chased the Corcyraeans to
the shore, they returned to take vp the broken Gallies, and bodies of their dead,
which for the greatest part they recouered, and brought to Sybota, where also lay
the Land-forces of the Barbarians, that were come to ayde them. This Sybota is a
desart Hauen of Thesprotis. When they had done,           Sybota of the Continent, a
they re-vnited themselues, and made againe to the         Hauen.

Corcyraeans; and they likewise, with such Gallies as they had t for the Sea,

remaining of the former Battell, together with those of Athens, put foorth to
meete them, fearing lest they should attempt to land vpon their Territory. By
this time the day was farre spent, and the * Song          * Paean, a Hymne, to Mars in
which they vsed to sing when they came to charge,          the beginning of ﬁght: to Apollo
                                                           after the victory.
was ended, when suddenly the Corinthians beganne
to row a Sterne: for they had descried twenty Athenian Gallies, sent from
Athens to second the former tenne; for feare lest the A supply of 20. Sayle from
Corcyraeans (as it also fell out) should bee ouercome, Athens.
and those tenne Gallies of theirs bee too few to defend them. When the
Corinthians therefore had sight of these Gallies,          The Corinthians fall oﬀ.
suspecting that they were of Athens, and more in
number then they were, by little and little they fell o . But the Corcyraeans
(because the course of these Gallies was vnto them more * out of sight) descryed
them not, but wondred why the Corinthians rowed a * (viz.) more behind their backes.
Sterne; till at last some that saw them, said they were
Enemies; and then retired also the Corcyraeans. For by this time it was darke,
and the Corinthians had turned about the heads of their Gallies, and dissolued
themselues. And thus were they parted, and the Battell ended in night.

The Corcyraeans lying at Leucimna, these twenty Athenian Gallies, 
vnder the command of Glaucon, the sonne of Leagrus, and Androcides, the
sonne of Leogorus; passing through the middest of the oating Carkasses, and
wrecke, soone after they were descryed, arriued at the Campe of the Corcyraeans
in Leucimna. The Corcyraeans at rst, (being night) were afraid they had beene
Enemies, but knew them afterwards; so they anchored there.

The next day, both the thirty Gallies of Athens, and as The Corcyraeans oﬀer Battell
many of Corcyra as were t for seruice, went to the      againe.

Hauen in Sybota, where the Corinthians lay at Anchor, to see if they would
 ght. But the Corinthians, when they had put o from the Land, and arranged
themselues in the wide Sea, stood quiet, not meaning of their owne accord to
beginne the Battell▪ both for that they saw the supply of fresh Gallies from
Athens, and for many di culties that happened to them, both about the safe

custody of their Prisoners aboard, and also for that beeing in a desart place, their
Gallies were not yet repaired; but tooke thought rather how to goe home, for
feare lest the Athenians, hauing the Peace for already broken, in that they had
fought against each other, should not su er them to depart. They therefore
thought good to send afore vnto the Athenians, certaine men, without
priviledge of Heraulds, for to sound them, and to say in this manner.

Men of Athens, You doe vniustly to beginne the Warre, and violate the Articles:
For whereas wee goe about to right vs on our Enemies, The Corinthians expostulate
you stand in our way, and beare Armes against vs. If with the Athenians, to ound  ●

                                                           their purpose.
therefore you bee resolued to hinder our going against
Corcyra, or whatsoeuer place else wee please, dissolue the Peace, and laying hands
ﬁrst vpon vs that are heere, vse vs as Enemies.

Thus said they: and the Corcyraeans, as many of the Armie as heard them, cryed
out immediately, to take and kill them. But the Athenians made answer thus▪

Men of Peloponnesus, Neither doe wee beginne the Warre, nor breake the Peace;
but wee bring ayde to these our Confederates, the          The answer of the Athenians.
Corcyraeans: if you please therefore to goe any whither
else, wee hinder you not; but if against Corcyra, or any place belonging vnto it, we
will not suﬀer you.

When the Athenians had giuen them this answer, the Corinthians made ready to
goe home, and set vp a Trophie in Sybota of the           The Corinthians goe home Both
                                                                                      ▪

Continent. And the Corcyraeans also, both tooke vp the Corcyraeans and
                                                          Corinthians challenge the
the wrecke, and bodies of the dead, which carried         victory, and both set vp Trophies.
euery way by the Waues, and the Wind that 
arose the night before, came driuing to their hands; and, as if they had had the
victory▪ set vp a Trophie likewise in Sybota the Ilands. The victory was thus
challenged on both sides, vpon these grounds: The Corinthians did set vp a
Trophie, because in the Battell they had the better all day, hauing gotten more of
the wrecke and dead bodies, then the other, and taken no lesse then 1000.
Prisoners, and sunke about 70. of the Enemies Gallies. And the Corcyraeans set

vp a Trophie, because they had sunke 30. Gallies of the Corinthians, and had,
after the arriuall of the Athenians, recouered the wrecke and dead bodies, that
droue to them, by reason of the Wind; and because the day before, vpon sight of
the Athenians, the Corinthians had rowed a Sterne, and went away from them:
and lastly, for that when they went to Sybota, the Corinthians came not out to
encounter them. Thus each side claimed victory.

The Corinthians in their way homeward, tooke in Anactorium, a Towne seated
in the mouth of the Gulfe of Ambracia, by deceipt;       The Corinthians in their way
(this Towne was common to them, and to the               home, take Anactorium, and
                                                         keepe 50. of the best men
                                                                 ●
Corcyraeans) and hauing put into it Corinthians          prisoners, being Corcyraeans,
onely, departed, and went home. Of the Corcyraeans and vse them well.
800. that were seruants, they sold; and kept prisoners
250. whom they vsed with very much fauour, that they might bee a meanes, at
their returne, to bring Corcyra into the power of the Corinthians▪ the greatest
part of these, being principall men of the Citie. And thus was Corcyra deliuered
of the Warre of Corinth, and the Athenian Gallies went from them. This was the
  rst Cause, that the Corinthians had of Warre against the Athenians; namely,
because they had taken part with the Corcyraeans in a Battell by Sea, against the
Corinthians, with whom they were comprized in the same Articles of Peace.

PRESENTLY after this, it came to passe, that other di erences arose betweene
the Peloponnesians and the Athenians, to induce the The second pretext of the Warre.
Warre. For whilest the Corinthians studied to bee
reuenged, the Athenians, who had their hatred in         Potidaea suspected.
iealousie, commanded the Citizens of Potidaea, a
Citie seated in the Isthmus of Pallene, a Colony of the Corinthians, but
confederate and tributary to the Athenians, to pull      Potidaea commanded to giue
downe that part of the Wall of their Citie, that stood Hostages, and to pull downe part
                                                         of their Wall.
towards Pallene, and to giue them            
Hostages, and also to send away, and no more receiue the Epidemiurgi,
(Magistrates so called) which were sent vnto them yeere by yeere, from Corinth;
fearing lest through the perswasion of * Perdiccas, and * King of Macedonia.

of the Corinthians, they should reuolt, and draw to reuolt with them their other
Confederates in Thrace. These things against the Potideans, the Athenians had
precontriued, presently after the Nauall Battell fought at Corcyra. For the
Corinthians and they were now manifestly at di erence; and Perdiccas, who
before had beene their Confederate and friend, now warred vpon them. And the
cause why hee did so, was, that when his Brother Philip and Derdas ioyned in
Armes against him, the Athenians had made a League with them. And therefore
being afraid, hee both sent to Lacedaemon, to negotiate the Peloponnesian
Warre, and also reconciled himselfe to the Corinthians, the better to procure the
reuolt of Potidaea; and likewise he practised with the Chalcideans of Thrace,
and with the Bottieans, to reuolt with them. For if hee could make these
con ning Cities his Confederates, with the helpe of them, hee thought his Warre
would bee the easier. Which the Athenians perceiuing, and intending to preuent
the reuolt of these Citties, gaue order to the Commanders of the Fleet, (for they
were now sending thirty Gallies, with a thousand men The Athenians giue order to the
of Armes, vnder the command of Archestratus, the          Generals they were sending
                                                          against Perdiccas, to secure their
sonne of Lycomedes, and tenne others into the             Cities in those parts.
Territories of Perdiccas) both to receiue Hostages of
the Potideans, and to demolish their Walles; and also to haue an eye to the
neighbouring Cities, that they reuolted not. The Potidaeans hauing sent
Ambassadours to Athens, to try if they could perswade the people not to make
any alteration amongst them; by other Ambassadours, whom they sent along
with the Ambassadours of Corinth to Lacedaemon, The Potidaeans seeke the
dealt with the Lacedaemonians at the same time, if        protection of the
                                                          Lacedaemonians.
need required, to be ready to reuenge their quarrell.
When after long sollicitation at Athens, and no good done, the Fleet was sent
away against them, no lesse then against Macedonia; and when the Magistrates
of Lacedaemon had promised them, if the Athenians went to Potidaea, to invade
Attica, then at last they reuolted, and together with them, the Chalcideans and
Bottieans, all mutually sworne in the same                The reuolt of Potidaea, Bottiea,
Conspiracy. For Perdiccas had also              and Chalcid a, from the
                                                                          ●●

                                                          Athenians.
perswaded the Chalcideans, to abandon and pull
downe their maritime Townes, and to goe vp and dwell at Olynthus, and that

one City to make strong: And vnto those that remoued, gaue part of his owne,
and part of the Territorie of Maydonia, about the Lake Bolbe, to liue on, so long
as the Warre against the Athenians should continue. So when they had
demolished their Cities, and were gone vp higher into the Countrey, they
prepared themselues to the Warre.

The Athenian Gallies, when they arriued in Thrace, The Athenian Fleet, ﬁnding
found Potidaea and the other Cities, already reuolted. Potidaea and other Cities
                                                        already lost, goe into
And the Commanders of the Fleet conceiuing it to be Macedonia.
impossible, with their present forces, to make Warre
both against Perdiccas and the Townes reuolted, set saile againe for Macedonia,
against which they had beene at rst sent out, and there staying, ioyned with
Philip, and the brothers of Derdas, that had invaded the Countrey from aboue.

In the meane time, after Potidaea was revolted, and whilest the Athenian Fleet
lay on the Coast of Macedonia, the Corinthians,         The Corinthians send their
fearing what might become of the Citie, and making Forces to Potidaea to defend it.
the danger their owne, sent vnto it, both of their owne Citie, and of other
Peloponnesians, which they hired, to the number of 1600. men of Armes, and
400. * light armed. The charge of these was giuen to * Archers, darters, and the like,
Aristaeus, the sonne of Adimantus, for whose sake       that wore not Armour on their
                                                        bodies, and were called 〈◊〉 〈◊〉
most of the Voluntaries of Corinth went the Voyage: 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, naked.
(for hee had beene euer a great Fauourer of the
Potidaeans. ) And they arriued in Thrace, after the reuolt of Potidaea, forty
dayes.

The newes of the reuolt of these Cities, was likewise quickly brought to the
Athenian people; who hearing withall of the Forces sent vnto them, vnder
Aristaeus, sent forth against the places reuolted, 2000. The Athenians send forces
men of Armes, and 40. Gallies, vnder the Conduct of against Potidaea.
Callias, the Sonne of Calliades. These comming rst into Macedonia▪ found
there the former thousand, (who by this time had         Therme, after called
taken Therme, and were now besieging the City of         Thessalonica, now Salonichi.

Pydna; ) and staying, helped for a while to besiege it with the rest. But shortly
after, they tooke composition; and hauing made a *         * or scarce honourable.
necesary League with Perdiccas, (vrged thereto by the
a aires of Potidaea, and the arriuall there of Aristaeus) departed from
Macedonia. Thence comming to Berrhoea, they                Veria.
attempted to take it: but when they could not doe it,
they turned backe, and marched towards Potidaea by Land. They                  
were of their owne number 3000. men of Armes, besides many of their
Confederates; and of Macedonians that had serued with Philip and Pausanias
600. Horse-men. And their Gallies, 70. in number, sayling by them along the
Coast, by moderate Iournies, came in three dayes to Gigonus, and there
encamped.

The Potidaeans and the Peloponnesians vnder Aristaeus, in expectation of the
comming of the Athenians, lay now encamped in the The Athenians and those with
Isthmus, neere vnto Olynthus, and had the Market        Aristaeus, prepare themselues for
                                                        Battell.
kept for them without the Citie: and the leading of
the Foot, the Confederates had assigned to Aristaeus, and of the Horse, to
Perdiccas: (for hee fell o againe presently from the Athenians, and hauing left
Iölaus Gouernour in his place, tooke part with the Potidaeans. ) The purpose of
Aristaeus was, to haue the body of the Armie with himselfe within the *
Isthmus, and therewith to attend the comming on of * The Isthmus of Pallene, where
the Athenians, and to haue the Chalcideans and their they were.
Confederates without the Isthmus, and also the 200. Horse vnder Perdiccas, to
stay in Olynthus, and when the Athenians were past by, to come on their backs,
and to encloze the Enemie betwixt them. But Callias the Athenian Generall, and
the rest that were in Commission with him, sent out before them their
Macedonian Horsemen, and some few of their Confederates to Olynthus, to
stop those within from making any sally from the Towne, and then dislodging,
marched on towards Potidaea. When they were come on as far to as the Isthmus,
and saw the Enemie make ready to ght, they also did the like, and not long
after, they ioyned Battell. That wing wherein was Aristaeus himselfe, with the
chosen men of the Corinthians and others, put to ight that part of their

Enemies that stood opposite vnto them, and followed execution a great way. But
the rest of the Army of the Potidaeans and Peloponnesians were by the
Athenians defeated, and ed into the Citie. And              The Victory falleth to the
Aristaeus, when hee came backe from the Execution, Athenians.
was in doubt what way to take, to Olynthus, or to Potidaea. In the end, hee
resolued of the shortest way, and with his Souldiers about him, ranne as hard as
hee was able into Potidaea, and with much adoe got in at the Peere, through the
Sea, cruelly shot at, and with the losse of a few, but safety of the greatest part of
his company. Assoone as the Battell beganne, they that should haue 
seconded the Potideans from Olynthus, (for it is at most but 60. Furlongs o ,
and in sight) aduanced a little way to haue ayded them; and the Macedonian
Horse opposed themselues likewise in order of Battell, to keepe them backe. But
the Athenians hauing quickly gotten the Victory, and the Standards being taken
downe; they retyred againe, they of Olynthus, into that Citie; and the
Macedonian Horsemen, into the Armie of the Athenians. So that neither side
had their Cauallery at the Battell. After the Battell, the Athenians erected a
Trophie, and gaue truce to the Potideans, for the taking vp of the bodies of their
dead. Of the Potideans and their friends, there dyed somewhat lesse then 300.
and of the Athenians themselues 150. with Callias, one of their Commanders.

Presently vpon this, the Athenians raised a Wall before The Athenians beginne to besiege
the Citty, on the part towards the Isthmus, which        Potidaea.

they kept with a Garrison, but the part to Pallene-ward, they left vnwalled. For
they thought themselues too small a number, both to keepe a guard in the
Isthmus, and withall to goe ouer and forti e in Pallene, fearing lest the
Potidaeans and their Confederates should assault them when they were deuided.
When the people of Athens vnderstood that Potidaea was vnwalled on the part
toward Pallene, not long after they sent thither 1600. men of Armes, vnder the
Conduct of Phormio, the Sonne of Asopius: who            The Athenians send Phormio
arriuing in Pallene, left his Gallies at Aphytis, and    with 6000. men of Armes, to
                                                         Potidaea.
marching easily to Potidaea, wasted the Territory as
hee passed through. And when none came out to bid him Battell, hee raised a
Wall before the Citie, on that part also that looketh towards Pallene. Thus was

Potidaea on both sides strongly besieged; and also            Potidaea straightly besieged on
from the Sea, by the Athenian Gallies, that came vp           all sides.

and rode before it.

Aristeus, seeing the Citie enclosed on euery side, and without hope of safety,
saue what might come from Peloponnesus, or some other vnexpected way, gaue
aduice to all but 500. taking the opportunity of a Wind, to goe out by Sea, that
the prouision might the longer hold out for the rest; The aduice of Aristaeus, to carry
and of them that should remaine within, o ered           all the people but 500. men out
                                                         of the City, that their victuall
himselfe to bee one. But when his counsell tooke not might the better hold out,
place, beeing desirous to settle their businesse, and    refused.

make the best of their a aires abroad, hee got out by
Sea, vnseene of the Athenian Guard, and  Aristaeus getteth out of the
staying amongst the Chalcideans, amongst other           Citty vnseene of the Athenians.
                                                                   ▪

actions of the Warre, laid an Ambush before Sermyla, And staying in Chalcidica, slew
and slew many of that Citie, and sollicited the sending certaine of the City of Sermyla,
                                                         by ambushment.
of ayd from Peloponnesus. And Phormio, after the
Siege laid to Potidaea, hauing with him his 1600. men Phormio wasteth the Territories
                                                         of the Chalcideans and
of Armes, wasted the Territories of the Chalcideans      Bottieans.
and Bottieans, and some small Townes he tooke in.

These were the Quarrels betweene the Peloponnesians and the Athenians. The
Corinthians quarrelled the A●heni●ans, for besieging Potidaea, and in it, the
men of Corinth and Peloponnesus. The Athenians quarrelled the
Peloponnesians, for causing their confederate and tributary City to reuolt; and
for that they had come thither, and openly fought against them in the behalfe of
Potidaea. Neuerthelesse the Warre brake not openly forth as yet, and they yet
abstained from Armes; for this was but a particular action of the Corinthians.

BVT when Potidaea was once besieged, both for their The sollicitation of the Warre by
mens sakes that were within, and also for feare to lose the Corinthians, and other
                                                        Confederates of the
the place, they could no longer hold. But out of hand, Lacedaemonians.
they procured of their Confederates to goe to

Lacedaemon; and thither also they went themselues, with clamours and
accusations, against the Athenians, that they had broken the League, and
wronged the Peloponnesians. The Aeginetae, though not openly by
Ambassadours, for feare of the Athenians, yet priuily Complaints exhibited against
instigated them to the Warre as much as any; alledging the Athenians in the Councell of
                                                          Sparta.
that they were not permitted to gouerne themselues
according to their owne Laws, as by the Articles they ought to haue beene So the
Lacedaemonians hauing called together the Confederates, and whosoeuer else
had any iniustice to lay to the charge of the Athenians, in the ordinary *
Councell of their owne State commanded them to            * Of the Ephori, & those that
speake. Then presented euery one his accusation; and had the Soueraignety, that is to
                                                          say, before the Aristocratie.
amongst the rest, the Megareans, besides many other
their great di erences, laid open this especially, That contrary to the Articles,
they were forbidden the Athenian Markets and Hauens. Last of all, the
Corinthians, when they had su ered the Lacedaemonians to be incensed rst by
the rest, came in, and said as followeth.

                                                                          
   1.1. THE ORATION OF THE
   Ambassadours of CORINTH.
   MEn of Lacedaemon, your own delity, both in matter of estate &
   conuersation, maketh you the lesse apt to beleeue vs, when we accuse
   others of the contrary. And heereby you gaine indeed a reputation of
   equity, but you haue lesse experience in the a aires of Forraine States. For
   although we haue oftentimes foretold you, that the Athenians would doe
   vs a mischiefe; yet from time to time when we told it you, you neuer would
   take information of it; but haue suspected rather, that what we spake, hath
   proceeded from our owne priuate di erences. And you haue therefore
   called hither these Confederates, not before wee had su ered, but now,
   when the euill is already vpon vs. Before whom, our speech must bee so
   much the longer, by how much our obiections are the greater, in that wee
   haue both by the Athenians beene iniured, and by you neglected. If the

Athenians lurking in some obscure place, had done these wrongs vnto the
Grecians, wee should then haue needed to proue the same before you, as to
men that knew it not. But now what cause haue wee to vse long discourse,
when you see already that some are brought into seruitude, and that they
are contriuing the like against others, and especially against our
Confederates, and are themselues, in case Warre should be made against
them, long since prepared for it? For else they would neuer haue taken
Corcyra, and holden it from vs by force, nor haue besieged Potidaea,
whereof the one was most commodious for any action against Thrace; and
the other had brought vnto the Peloponnesians a most faire Nauie. And of
all this, you are your selues the authors, in that you su ered them, vpon
the end of the Persian Warre, to forti e their Citie, and againe afterwards
to raise their Long Walles, whereby you haue hitherto depriued of their
liberty, not onely the States by them already subdued, but also your owne
Confederates. For not he that bringeth into slauery, but he that being able
to hinder it, neglects the same, is most truely said to doe it; especially if
they assume the honour to be the esteemed Deliuerers of Greece, [as you
doe. ] And for all that, we are hardly yet come together, and indeed not
yet, with any certaine resolution what to doe. For the question should not
haue beene put, Whether, or not, wee haue receiued iniurie, but rather, in
what manner we are to repaire it. For they that doe the wrong, hauing
consulted vpon it before-hand, vse no delay at all, but come vpon them
whom they meane to oppresse, whilest they be yet irresolute. And we
know, not onely that the Athenians haue incroached vpon their 
neighbours, but also by what wayes they haue done it. And as long as they
thinke they carry it closely, through your blindnesse, they are the lesse
bold. But when they shall perceiue that you see, and will not see, they will
then presse vs strongly indeed. For (Lacedaemonians) you are the onely
men of all Greece, that sitting still, defend others, not with your Forces,
but with promises; and you are also the onely men, that loue to pull
downe the power of the Enemie, not when it beginneth, but when it is
doubled. You haue indeede a report to bee sure; but yet it is more in fame
that, then in fact. For we our selues know, that the Persian came against

Peloponnesus, from the vtmost parts of the Earth, before you encountred
him, as became your State. And also now you conniue at the Athenians,
who are not as the Medes, farre o , but hard at band; choosing rather to
defend your selues from their inuasion, then to inuade them; and by
hauing to doe with them when their strength is greater, to put your selues
vpon the chance of Fortune. And yet wee know, that the Barbarians own
errour, and (in our Warre against the Athenians) their owne ouersights,
more then your assistance, was the thing that gaue vs victory. For the hope
of your ayde, hath beene the destruction of some, that relying on you,
made no preparation for themselues by other meanes. Yet let not any man
thinke that we speak this out of malice, but only by way of expostulation:
for expostulation is with friends that erre, but accusation, against enemies
that haue done an iniurie. Besides, if there bee any that may challenge to
exprobrate his neighbour, we thinke our selues may best doe it, especially
on so great quarrels as these, whereof you neither seeme to haue any
feeling, nor to consider what manner of men, and how di erent from you
in euery kinde the Athenians bee, that you are to contend withall: For they
loue innovation, and are swift to devise, and also to execute what they
resolue on. But you on the contrary are onely apt to saue your owne; not
devise any thing new, nor scarce to attaine what is necessary. They againe
are bold beyond their strength, adventurous aboue their owne reason, and
in danger hope still the best: Whereas your actions are euer beneath your
power, and you distrust euen what your iudgement assures; and being in a
danger, neuer thinke to bee deliuered. They are stirrers, you studiers: they
loue to bee abroad, and you at home the most of any. For they make
account by beeing abroad to adde to their estate; you, if you should goe
forth against the State of another, would thinke to impayre your owne.
They, when they ouercome their enemies, aduance the farthest, and when
they are ouercome by their enemies, fall o the least; and as for their
Bodies, they vse them in the seruice of the Common-wealth, as if they
were none of their owne; but their minds, when they would          
serue the State, are right their owne. Vnlesse they take in hand what they
haue once aduised on, they account so much lost of their owne. And when

they take it in hand, if they obtaine any thing, they thinke lightly of it, in
respect of what they looke to winne by their prosecution. If they faile in
any attempt, they doe what is necessary for the present, and enter presently
into other hopes. For they alone, both haue and hope for at once,
whatsoeuer they conceiue, through their celerity in execution of what they
once resolue on. And in this manner they labour and toyle, all the dayes of
their liues. What they haue, they haue no leasure to enioy, for continuall
getting of more. Nor Holiday esteeme they any, but whereon they e ect
some matter pro table; nor thinke they ease with nothing to doe, a lesse
torment, than laborious businesse. So that, in a word, to say they are men,
borne neither to rest themselues, nor su er others, is to say the truth. Now
notwithstanding, (men of Lacedaemon) that this Citie, your Aduersary,
bee such, as wee haue said; yet you still delay time; not knowing, that those
onely are they, to whom it may su ce for the most part of their time to sit
still, who (though they vse not their power to doe iniustice) yet bewray a
minde vnlikely to swallow injuries; but placing equity belike in this, that
you neither doe any harme to others, nor receiue it, in defending of your
selues. But this is a thing, you hardly could attaine, though the States
about you were of the same condition. But (as we haue before declared)
your Customes are in respect of theirs antiquated, and of necessity (as it
happeneth in Artes) the new ones will preuaile. True it is, that for a City
liuing for the most part in peace, vnchanged customes are the best; but for
such as bee constrained to vndergoe many matters, many deuices will be
needfull. Which is also the reason, why the Athenian Customes, through
much experience, are more new to you, then yours are to them. Here
therefore giue a Period to your slacknesse, and by a speedy invasion of
Attica, as you promised, relieue both Potidaea, and the rest: lest otherwise
you betray your friends and kindred to their cruellest enemies; and lest wee
and others, be driuen through despaire, to seeke out some other League.
Which to doe, were no iniustice, neither against the Gods, Iudges of mens
Oathes, nor against Men, the hearers of them. For not they breake the
League, who being abandoned, haue recourse to others; but they that
yeeld not their assistance, to whom they haue sworne it. But if you meane

   to follow the businesse seriously, wee will stay; for else, wee should doe
   irreligiously, neither should wee nde any other, more conformable to our
   manners, then your selues. Therefore deliberate well of these points, and
   take such a course, that Peloponnesus may not by your leading, 
   fall into worse estate, then it was left vnto you by your Progenitors.

Thus spake the Corinthians.

The Athenian Ambassadours (who chanced to bee residing in Lacedaemon,
vpon their businesse) when they heard of this             The Athenian Ambassadours,
Oration, thought it t to present themselues before        residing in Lacedaemon, vpon
                                                          their businesse, desire to make
the Lacedaemonians, not to make Apologie for what answer to the Oration of the
they were charged with by the other Citties, but to       Corinthians.

shew in generall, that it was not t for them in this
case to take any sudden resolution, but further time to consider. Also they
desired to lay open the power of their Citty; to the elder sort, for a remembrance
of what they knew already; and to the yonger, for an information of what they
knew not: supposing, that when they should haue spoken, they would encline to
quietnesse, rather then to Warre. And therefore they presented themselues
before the Lacedaemonians, saying, That they also, if they might haue leaue,
desired to speake in the Assembly; who willed them to come in: And the
Athenians went into the Assembly, and spake to this e ect.

 1.1. THE ORATION OF THE Ambassadours of
 ATHENS.
 THough our Ambassage was not to this end, that wee should argue against
 our Confederates, but about such other A aires as the Citie was pleased to
 employ vs in; yet hauing heard of the great exclamation against vs, wee came
 into the Court, not to make answer to the criminations of the Cities (for to
 pleade before you here, were not to pleade before the Iudges either of them or
 vs) but to the end you may not be drawne away, to take the worst resolution,

at the perswasion of the Confederates, in matters of so great importance. And
withall, touching the summe of the Oration made against vs, to informe you,
that what wee possesse, wee haue it iustly, and that our Citie deserueth
reputation. But what neede wee now to speake of matters long past,
con rmed more by heare-say; then by the eyes of those that are to heare vs
relate them? But our actions against the Persian, and such as you your selues
know as well as wee, those, though it bee tedious to heare them euer objected,
wee must of necessity recite. For when wee did them, we hazarded our selues
for some bene t, of which, you as had your parts in the substance, so must
wee haue ours (if that be any bene t) in the commemoration. And 
wee shall make recitall of them, not by way of deprecation, but of
protestation, and declaration of what a Citty (in case you take ill advice) you
haue to enter the list withall. Wee therefore say, that wee not onely rst and
alone, hazarded Battell against the Barbarian in the Fields of Marathon, but
also afterwards, when hee came againe, beeing vnable to resist him by Land,
embarqued our selues, euery man that was able to beare Armes, and gaue him
Battell amongst the rest, by Sea, at Salamis; which was the cause that kept him
backe from sailing to Peloponnesus, and laying it waste Cittie after Cittie: for
against so many Gallies, you were not able to giue each other mutuall succour.
And the greatest proofe of this is the Persian himselfe, who when his Fleet was
ouercome, and that hee had no more such Forces, went away in haste, with
the greatest part of his Armie. Which being so, and euident, that the whole
State of the Grecians, was embarqued in their Fleet, we conferred to the same,
the three things of most aduantage; namely, the greatest number of Gallies,
the most prudent Commander, and the most liuely courage. (For of 400.
Gallies in the whole, our owne were few lesse then two thirds) and for
Commander, Themistocles, who was the principall cause that the Battell was
fought in the * streight, whereby he cleerely saued      * Of Salamis.
the whole businesse, and whom, though a Stranger,
you your selues haue honoured for it, more then any man that came vnto you;
and a forwardnesse wee shewed, more adventurous then any other, in this,
that when none of them had ayded vs by Land before, and the rest of the
Cities, as farre as to our owne, were brought into servitude, wee were

neuerthelesse content, both to quit our Citie, and lose our goods, and euen in
that estate, not to betray the Common Cause of the Confederates, or diuided
from them, to bee vnvsefull; but to put our selues into our Nauie, and
vndergoe the danger with them, and that without passion against you, for not
hauing formerly defended vs in the like manner. So that we may say, that wee
haue no lesse conferred a bene t vpon you, then wee receiued it from you.
You came indeed to ayde vs, but it was from Cities inhabited, and to the end
you might still keepe them so; and when you were afraid, not of our danger,
but your owne: whereas wee, comming from a Citty no more in * being, and
putting our selues into danger, for a Citty, hopelesse * The Athenians, at the
euer to bee againe; saued both you (in part) and our comming in of the Persian,
                                                         when they put themselues into
selues. But if wee had ioyned with the Persian,          their Gallies, left their Citie to
fearing (as others did) to haue our Territories          the Army of the Persians by
                                                         Land, and sent their Wiues
wasted; or afterwards, as men lost, durst not haue       and children into Aegina, mis,
put our selues into our Gallies, you must not haue and Traezena.
fought with him by Sea, because your Fleet had
beene too small; but his a aires had succeeded as hee would himselfe.
Therefore (men of Lacedaemon) we deserue not so great envie of 
the Grecians, for our courage at that time, and for our prudence, and for the
dominion wee hold, as wee now vndergoe. Which dominion wee obtained not
by violence, but because the Confederates, when your selues would not stay
out the reliques of the Warre against the Barbarian, came in, and intreated vs
to take the command, of their owne accord. So that at rst wee were forced to
aduance our Dominion to what it is, out of the nature of the thing it selfe; as
chie y for feare, next for honour, and lastly for pro t. For when wee had the
enuie of many, and had reconquered some that had already revolted, and
seeing you were no more our friends, as you had beene, but suspected and
quarelled vs, wee held it no longer a safe course, laying by our power, to put
our selues into your danger. For the reuolts from vs, would all haue beene
made to you. Now it is no fault for men in danger, to order their a aires to the
best. For you also (men of Lacedaemon) haue command ouer the Cities of
Peloponnesus, and order them to your best advantage: and had you, * when
the time was, by staying it out, beene envied in your Command, as wee know

well, you would haue beene no lesse heauy to the        * That is, when Pausanias,
Confederates, then wee, you must haue beene             King of Lacedaemon, pursuing
                                                        the Reliques of the Persian
constrained to rule imperiously; or to haue falne       Warre, through his pride and
into danger. So that, though ouercome by three the insolent Command, procured
                                                        the hatred of the Confederates
greatest things, honour, feare, and pro t, wee haue so farre, as the Lacedaemonian
both accepted the dominion deliuered vs, and refuse State calling 〈◊〉 home, they put
                                                        themselues vnder the leading of
againe to surrender it, wee haue therein done           the Athenians.
nothing to be wondered at, nor beside the manner
of men. Nor haue wee beene the rst in this kinde, but it hath beene euer a
thing xed, for the weaker to be kept vnder by the stronger. Besides; we tooke
the gouernment vpon vs, as esteeming our selues worthy of the same; and of
you also so esteemed, till hauing computed the commodity, you now fall to
allegation of equity; a thing which no man that had the occasion to atchieue
anything by strength, euer so farre preferred, as to diuert him from his pro t.
Those men are worthy of commendation, who following the naturall
inclination of man, in desiring rule ouer others, are iuster, then for their
power they need. And therefore if another had our power, we thinke it would
best make appeare our owne moderation; and yet our moderation hath
vndeseruedly incurred contempt, rather then commendation. For though in
pleas of Couenants with our Confederates, when in our owne Citty we haue
allowed them triall, by Laws equall both to them and vs, the Iudgement hath
beene giuen against vs, we haue then neuerthelesse beene reputed contentious.
None of them considering that others, who in other places haue dominion,
and are toward their subiect States lesse moderate then wee, yet are neuer
vpbrayded for it. For they that haue the power to compell, need not at all to
goe to Law. And yet these men hauing beene vsed to converse with 
vs vpon equall termes, if they lose any thing which they thinke they should
not, eyther by sentence, or by the power of our gouernment, they are not
thankfull for the much they retaine, but take in worse part the little they
forgoe, then if at rst, laying Law aside, wee had openly taken their goods by
violence. For in that kinde also, they themselues cannot deny, but the weaker
must giue way to the stronger. And men, it seemes, are more passionate for
iniustice, then for violence. For that, comming as from an equall, seemeth

 rapine; and the other, because from one stronger, but necessity. Therefore
 when they su ered worse things vnder the Medes dominion, they bore it, but
 thinke ours to bee rigorous. And good reason; for to men in subiection, the
 present is euer the worst estate. Insomuch as you also, if you should put vs
 downe, and reigne your selues, you would soone nde a change of the loue,
 which they beare you now for feare of vs, if you should doe againe, as you *
 did for a while, when you were their Commanders * Meaning the Jmperious and
 against the Medes. For not onely your owne              tyranicall command of
                                                         Pausanias.
 institutions are di erent from those of others, but
 also when any one of you comes abroad [with charge, ] he neither vseth those
 of yours, nor yet those of the rest of Greece. Deliberate therfore of this a great
 while, as of a matter of great importance; and do not vpon the opinions and
 criminations of others, procure your owne trouble. Consider before you
 enter, how vnexpected the chances of Warre bee: for a long Warre for the most
 part endeth in calamity, from which we are equally far o , and whether part it
 will light on, is to be tryed with vncertainety. And men when they goe to
 Warre, vse many times to fall rst to action, the which ought to come behind,
 and when they haue already taken harme, then they fall to reasoning. But
 since we are neither in such errour our selues, nor doe nde that you are; wee
 advise you, whilest good counsell is in both our elections, not to breake the
 peace, nor violate your Oathes; but according to the Articles, let the
 controuersie bee decided by Iudgement; or else wee call the Gods you haue
 sworne by to witnesse, that if you beginne the Warre, we will endeuour to
 reuenge our selues the same way that you shall walke in before vs.

Thus spake the Athenians.

After the Lacedaemonians had heard both the complaints of the Confederates
against the Athenians, and the Athenians Answer,         The Lacedaemonians amongst
they put them euery one out of the Court, and            themselues take counsell how to
                                                         proceed.
consulted of the businesse amongst themselues. And
the opinions of the greatest part concurred in this, That the Athenians had done

vniustly, & ought speedily to be warred on: But Archidamus their King, a man
reputed both wise and temperate, spake as followeth.

                                                                    
  1.1. THE ORATION OF ARCHIDAMVS.
  MEN of Lacedaemon, both I my selfe haue the experience of many
  Warres, and I see you of the same age with mee, to haue the like; insomuch
  as you cannot desire this Warre, either through inexperience (as many doe)
  nor yet as apprehending it to bee pro table or safe. And whosoeuer shall
  temperately consider the Warre wee now deliberate of, will nde it to bee
  no small one. For though in respect of the Peloponnesians, and our
  neighbour States, wee haue equall strength, and can quickly bee vpon
  them; yet against men, whose Territory is remote, and are also expert
  Seamen, and with all other things excellently furnished, as money, both
  priuate and publike, Shipping, Horses, Armes, and number, more then
  any one part of Greece besides; and that haue many Confederates, paying
  them Tribute; against such, I say, why should we lightly vndertake the
  Warre? And since wee are vnfurnished, whereon relying, should we make
  such haste to it? On our Nauie? But therein we are too weake. And if we
  will prouide and prepare against them, it will require time. On our
  money? But therein also we are more too weake; for neither hath the State
  any, nor will priuate men readily contribute. But it may be, some rely on
  this, that wee exceed them in Armes, and multitude of Souldiers, so that
  we may waste their Territories with incursions. But there is much other
  Land vnder their dominion, and by Sea they are able to bring in
  whatsoeuer they shall stand in need of. Againe, if wee assay to alienate
  their Confederates, wee must ayde them with Shipping, because the most
  of them are Ilanders. What a Warre then will this of ours bee? For vnlesse
  we haue the better of them in Shipping, or take from them their reuenue,
  whereby their Nauy is maintained, we shall doe the most hurt to our
  selues. And in this case to let fall the Warre againe, will be no honour for
  vs, when we are chie y thought to haue begun it. As for the hope, that if

we waste their Countrey, the Warre will soone be at an end; let that neuer
lift vs vp: for I feare we shall transmit it rather to our children. For it is
likely the Athenians haue the spirit not to be slaues to their earth, nor as
men without experience, to be astonished at the Warre. And yet I doe not
aduise that wee should stupidly su er our Confederates to bee wronged,
and not apprehend the Athenians in their plots against them; but onely,
not yet to take vp Armes, but to send and expostulate with them, making
no great shew neither of war, nor of su erance: and in this meane time to
make our provision, and make friends, both of Greeks & Barbarians, such
as in any place wee can get, of power either in shipping or            
money (nor are they to be blamed, that being laid in wait for, as wee are by
the Athenians, take vnto them, not Grecians only, but also Barbarians for
their safety) and withall to set forth our owne. If they listen to our
Ambassadours, best of all; if not, then two or three yeeres passing ouer our
heads, being better appointed, wee may warre vpon them, if we will. And
when they see our preparation, and heare words that import no lesse, they
will perhaps relent the sooner; especially, hauing their grounds vnhurt,
and consulting vpon commodities extant, and not yet spoiled. For wee
must thinke their Territorie to bee nothing but an Hostage, and so much
the more, by how much the better husbanded. The which wee ought
therefore to spare as long as wee may, lest making them desperate, we make
them also the harder to expugne. For if vnfurnished as wee bee, at the
instigation of the Confederates, we waste their Territory, consider if in so
doing, we doe not make the Warre both more dishonourable to the
Peloponnesians, and also more di cult. For though accusations, as well
against Cities, as priuate men, may bee cleered againe, a warre for the
pleasure of some, taken vp by all, the successe whereof cannot bee
foreseene, can hardly with honour be letten fall againe. Now let no man
thinke it cowardise, that being many Cities, we goe not presently, and
invade that one City; for of Confederates that bring them in money, they
haue more then wee; and Warre is not so much Warre of Armes, as Warre
of Money, by meanes whereof Armes are vsefull; especially when it is a
Warre of Land-men, against Sea-men. And therefore let vs rst prouide

our selues of money, and not rst raise the Warre, vpon the perswasion of
the Confederates. For wee that must be thought the causes of all euents,
good or bad, haue also reason to take some leasure, in part to foresee them.
As for the slacknesse and procrastination, wherewith wee are reproached
by the Confederates, bee neuer ashamed of it; for the more haste you make
to the Warre, you will bee the longer before you end it, for that you goe to
it vnprouided. Besides, our Citie hath beene euer free, and well thought
of. And this which they obiect, is rather to be called a Modesty proceeding
vpon iudgement. For by that it is, that we alone, are neither arrogant vpon
good successe, nor shrinke so much as others in aduersity. Nor are wee,
when men prouoke vs to it with praise, through the delight thereof,
moued to vndergoe danger, more then wee thinke t our selues; nor when
they sharpen vs with reprehension, doth the smart thereof a iot 
the more preuaile vpon vs. And this modesty of ours▪ maketh vs both
good Souldiers, and good Counsellours: good Souldiers, because shame
begetteth modesty, and valour is most sensible of shame; good
Counsellours, in this, that wee are brought vp more simply, then to
disesteeme the Lawes, and by seuerity, more modestly then to disobey
them. And also in that, that wee doe not, like men exceeding wise in things
needlesse, nde fault brauely with the preparation of the Enemie, and in
e ect not assault him accordingly; but doe thinke our neighbours
cogitations like our owne, and that the euents of Fortune cannot be
discerned by a speech; and doe therefore alwayes so furnish our selues
really against the enemy, as against men well aduised. For we are not to
build our hopes vpon the ouersights of them, but vpon the safe foresight
of our selues. Nor must wee thinke that there is much di erence betweene
man and man, but him onely to bee the best, that hath beene brought vp
amongst the most di culties. Let vs not therefore cast aside the
institutions of our Ancestours, which wee haue so long retained to our
pro t; nor let vs, of many mens liues, of much money, of many Cities, and
much honour, hastily resolue in so small a part of one day, but at leasure;
the which wee haue better commodity then any other to doe, by reason of
our power. Send to the Athenians, about the matter of Potidaea, send

   about that wherein the Confederates say they are iniured; and the rather,
   because they bee content to referre the cause to Iudgement: And one that
   o ereth himselfe to Iudgement, may not lawfully be invaded, as a doer of
   iniurie, before the iudgement be giuen; and prepare withall for the Warre;
   so shall you take the most pro table counsell for your selues, and the most
   formidable to the Enemy.

Thus spake Archidamus.

But Sthenelaidas, then one of the Ephori, stood vp last of all, and spake to the
Lacedaemonians in this manner:

 1.1. THE ORATION OF STHENELAIDAS.
 FOr my part, I vnderstand not the many words vsed by the Athenians; for
 though they haue beene much in their owne praises, yet they haue said
 nothing to the contrary, but that they haue done iniury to our Confederates,
 and to Peloponnesus. And if they carried themselues well against the Medes,
 when time was, and now ill against vs, they deserue a double punishment,
 because they are not good as they were, and because they are euill, as they were
 not. Now are we the same we were, and meane not (if we be wise) either to
 conniue at the wrongs done to our Confederates, or deferre to          
 repaire them; for the harme they su er, is not deferred. Others haue much
 money, many Gallies, and many Horses; and wee haue good Confederates, not
 to be betrayed to the Athenians, nor to bee defended with words; (for they are
 not hurt in words) but to be ayded with all our power, and with speed. Let no
 man tell mee, that after wee haue once receiued the iniurie, wee ought to
 deliberate. No, it belongs rather to the doers of iniurie, to spend time in
 consultation. Wherefore (men of Lacedaemon) decree the Warre, as
 becommeth the dignity of Sparta; and let not the Athenians grow yet greater,
 nor let vs betray our Confederates, but in the name of the Gods, proceed
 against the doers of iniustice.

Hauing thus spoken, being himselfe Ephore, hee put it to the question in the
Assembly of the Lacedaemonians; and saying afterwards, that hee could not
discerne whether was the greater cry (for they vsed there to giue their votes viua
voce, and not with * Balles) and desiring that it might * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉. Properly
bee euident that their minds were enclined most to        lapillus, Calculus. A little stone
                                                          or ball, which hee that gaue his
the Warre, he put it vnto them againe, and said, To       voyce, put into a Box, eyther on
whomsoeuer of you it seemeth that the Peace is broken, the aﬃrmatiue or negatiue part,
                                                          as he pleased. The Athenians
and that the Athenians haue done vniustly, let him        vsed Beanes, white and blacke.
arise, and goe yonder. And withall he shewed them a The Venetians now vse Balls,
                                                          and the distinction is made by
certaine place: And to whomsoeuer it seemeth otherwise, the Box inscribed with yea and
let him goe to the other side. So they arose, and the     no.
Roome was diuided, wherein farre the greater number The Lacedaemonians by
were those, that held the Peace to bee broken.            question conclude that the
                                                                Athenians had broken the Peace.
Then calling in the Confederates, they told them, that
for their owne parts, their sentence was, That the Athenians had done them wrong;
But yet they desired to haue all their Confederates called together, and then to put
it to the question againe, that if they would, the Warre might bee decreed by
Common consent. This done, their Confederates went home, and so did also
afterwards the Athenians, when they had dispatched the businesse they came
about. This Decree of the Assembly, that the Peace was broken, was made in the
foureteenth yeere of those thirty yeeres, for which a Peace had beene formerly
concluded, after the actions past in Euboea.               Negroponte.

THE LACEDAEMONIANS gaue Sentence, that the The true cause of this Warre
Peace was broken, and that Warre was to bee made,        being the feare the
                                                         Lacedaemonians had of the
not so much for the words of the Confederates, as for power of Athens, the Author
feare the Athenian greatnesse should still encrease: For digresseth, to shew how that
                                                         power grew ﬁrst vp.
they saw that a great part of Greece was     
falne already into their hands. Now the manner how the Athenians came to the
administration of those a aires, by which they so raised themselues, was this:

After that the Medes, ouercome by Sea and Land,          The meanes by which the
were departed, and such of them as had escaped by        Athenians came to haue the
                                                         command of the common Forces
Sea to * Mycale, were there also vtterly ouerthrowne, of Greece against the Persian, by
Leotychides King of the Lacedaemonians, then             which they raised their Empire.

Commander of the Grecians at Mycale, with their          * A Promontorie in 〈◊〉 the 〈…〉
Confederates of Peloponnesus, went home: But the of Xerxes ﬂeet w s defeated, the
                                                                          ●

                                                         same day 〈…〉 Land-forces were
Athenians with their Confederates of Iönia, and the 〈◊〉 defeated by Pausanias 〈…〉     ▪

Hellespont, as many as were already reuolted from the with the slaughter of Mardonius
                                                         their Generall, and 〈◊〉 most
* King, staid behinde, and besieged Sestus, holden       their whole 〈◊〉 of 300000. men.
then by the Medes, and when they had layne before it
                                                         *
all the Winter, they tooke it, abandoned by the
                                                         Of Persia.
Barbarians; and after this they set sayle from the       The Athenians returne to their
Hellespont, euery one to his owne Citie. And the *       City.
body of the Athenians, assoone as their Territory was *
cleere of the Barbarians, went home also, and fetcht     〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, the State.
thither their Wiues and Children, and such goods as That is, they made Athens
                                                         againe the Seate of their
they had, from the places where they had bin put out gouernment, whereas before it
to keep, and went about the reparation of their City & was in the Fleet and Campe still
Walles. For there were yet standing some pieces of the remouing.
                                                         They repaire their Citie, and
circuit of their Wall, and likewise a few houses,        wall it.
(though the most were downe) which the principall
of the Persians had reserued for their owne lodgings. The Lacedaemonians
hearing what they went about, sent thither their         The Lacedaemonians advise
Ambassadours, partly because they would themselues them to the contrary for their
                                                         owne ends, pretending the
haue beene glad, that neyther the Athenians, nor any Common good.
other had had Walles; but principally, as incited
thereto by their Confederates, (who feared not only the greatnesse of their
Nauie, which they had not before, but also their courage shewed against the
Persians) and entreated them, not to build their Walles, but rather to ioyne with
them, in pulling downe the Walles of what Cities soeuer without Peloponnesus
had them yet standing: Not discouering their meaning, and the iealousie they
had of the Athenians; but pretending this, that if the Barbarian returned, hee
might nde no forti ed Citie, to make the Seate of his Warre, as hee did of

Thebes: and that Peloponnesus was su cient for them all, whereinto to retire,
and from whence to withstand the Warre. But the Athenians, by the aduice of
Themistocles, when the Lacedaemonian                      Themistocles adviseth them to
Ambassadours had so said, dismissed them presently build on.
with this Answer, That they would presently send Ambassadours about the
businesse they spake of, to Lacedaemon. Now Themistocles willed 
them to send himselfe to Lacedaemon for one, and          His subtilty in deluding the
that as speedily as they could; but such as were chosen Lacedaemonians.
Ambassadours with him, not to send away presently, but to stay them till the
Walles were so raysed, as to ght vpon them from a su cient height; and that all
the men in the Citie, in the meane time, both they,       The building hastened.
and their Wiues and Children, sparing neither priuate
nor publike edi ce, that might aduance the worke: but pulling all downe
whatsoeuer, should helpe to raise it. When hee had thus instructed them,
adding, that hee would himselfe doe the rest at Lacedaemon, he tooke his
Iourney. And when hee came to Lacedaemon, he              Themistocles goeth to
went not to the State, but delaying the time, excused Lacedaemon Ambassadour.
himselfe; and when any of those that were in O ce, asked him why hee did not
present himselfe to the State, answered, That he stayed for his fellow-
Ambassadours, who vpon some businesse that fell out, were left behind, but he
expected them very shortly, and wondred they were not come already. Hearing this,
they gaue credit to Themistocles, for the loue they bore him; but when others
comming thence, averred plainely, that the Wall went vp, and that it was come to
good height already, they could not then choose but belieue it. Themistocles,
when hee saw this, wished them not to bee led by          He adviseth the
reports, but rather to send thither some of their owne, Lacedaemonians to send
                                                          Ambassadours, to see if the Wall
such as were honest men, and hauing informed              went vp, or not.
themselues, would relate the truth. Which they also
did. And Themistocles sendeth priuily to the              He sendeth Letters to Athens
Athenians, about the same men, to take order for          secretly, to haue those
                                                          Ambassadours stayed, till the
their stay, with as little apparence of it as they could, returne of himselfe and his
and not to dismisse them, till their owne                 fellowes from Lacedaemon.

Ambassadours were returned. (For by this time were

arriued those that were ioyned with him, namely, Abronychus, the sonne of
Lysicles, and Aristides, the sonne of Lysimachus, and brought him word that the
Wall was of a su cient height. ) For hee feared lest the Lacedaemonians, when
they knew the truth, would refuse to let them goe. The Athenians therefore kept
there those Ambassadours, according as it was written to them to doe.
Themistocles comming now to his audience before             And hearing that the Walles
the Lacedaemonians, said plainely, That the Citie of        were ﬁnished, he iustiﬁeth it.

Athens was already walled, and that suﬃciently, for the defence of those within:
And that if it shall please the Lacedaemonians, vpon any occasion to send
Ambassadours vnto them, they were to send thenceforward, as to men 
that vnderstood what conduced both to their owne, and also to the common good of
all Greece. For when they thought it best to quit their Citie▪ and put themselues
into their Gallies, he said they were bold to doe it, without asking the aduice of
them. And in Common Counsell, the aduice of the Athenians was as good as the
aduice of them: And now at this time their opinion is, that it will bee best, both for
themselues in particular, and for all the Confederates in common, that their Citie
should bee walled. For that in strength vnequall, men cannot alike and equally
aduise for the common beneﬁt of Greece. Therefore (said hee) eyther must all the
Confederate Cities bee vnwalled, or you must not thinke amisse of what is done by
vs. The Lacedaemonians when they heard him,                 The Lacedaemonians dissemble
though they made no shew of being angry with the            their dislike.

Athenians, (for they had not sent their Ambassadours to forbid them, but by
way of aduice, to admonish them not to build the Wall; besides they bare them
a ection then, for their courage shewne against the Medes) yet they were
inwardly o ended, because they missed of their will. And the Ambassadours
returned home of either side, without complaint.            The Walles of Athens built in
Thus the Athenians quickly raised their Walles, the         haste.

structure it selfe making manifest the haste vsed in the building. For the
Foundation consisteth of stones of all sorts; and those in some places
vnwrought, and as they were brought to the place. Many Pillars also taken from
* Sepulchers, and polished Stones were piled together * The Walles of Athens made of
amongst the rest. For the circuit of the City was set       Chappels & Tombes. Cor▪

                                                            Nepos, in vita Themist.
euery way further out, and therefore hastening, they

tooke alike whatsoeuer came next to hand. Themistocles likewise perswaded
them to build vp the rest of * Peiraeus, (for it was        * This was before a Village, and
begun in the yeere that himselfe was * Archon of            now made the Athenian
                                                            Arsenall.
Athens) as conceiuing the place both beautifull, in
that it had three naturall Hauens, and that beeing          * The Gouernour of the Citie for
                                                            that yeere.
now Sea-men, it would very much conduce to the
enlargement of their power. For hee was indeede the rst man that durst tell
them, that they ought to take vpon them the command of the Sea, and withall
presently helped them in the obtaining it. By his           Themistocles author to the
counsell also it was, that they built the Wall of that      Athenians of assuming the
                                                            dominion of the Sea, and of
breadth about Piraeus, which is now to be seene. For fortifying Peiraeus.
two Carts carrying stones, met, and passed vpon it
one by another. And yet within it, there was neither Rubbish nor Morter, [to ll
it vp, ] but it was made all of great stones, cut square, and bound              
together with Iron and Lead. But for height, it was raised but to the halfe at the
most of what he had intended. For hee would haue had it able to hold out the
Enemie, both by the height and breadth; and that a few, and the lesse seruiceable
men might haue su ced to defend it, and the rest haue serued in the Nauie. For
principally hee was addicted to the Sea, because (as I thinke) he had obserued,
that the Forces of the King had easier accesse to invade them by Sea, then by
Land; and thought that Piraeus was more pro table The reason why Themistocles
then the City aboue. And oftentimes hee would               was most addicted to aﬀaires by
                                                            Sea.
exhort the Athenians, that in case they were oppressed
by Land, they should goe downe thither, and with their Gallies, make resistance
against what Enemie soeuer. Thus the Athenians built their Walles, and tted
themselues in other kinds, immediately vpon the departure of the Persians.

In the meane time was Pausanias the sonne of         Pausanias sent Generall of the
Cleombrotus, sent from Lacedaemon, Commander Greekes, to pursue the reliques of
                                                     the Persian Warre.
of the Grecians, with twenty Gallies out of
Peloponnesus. With which went also 30. Saile of Athens, besides a multitude of
other Confederates, and making Warre on Cyprus, subdued the greatest part of

the same: and afterwards, vnder the same Commander, came before *
Byzantium, which they besieged, and wonne.          * Constantinople.

But Pausanias being now growne insolent, both the           Pausanias growing insolent, the
rest of the Grecians, and specially the Iönians, who        Jonians oﬀended, desire the
                                                            protection of the Athenians.
had newly recouered their liberty from the King,
o ended with him, came vnto the Athenians, and requested them for *
consanguinities sake to become their Leaders, and to * The Ionians were all Colonies
protect them from the violence of Pausanias. The            of the people of Athens

Athenians accepting the motion, applyed themselues both to the defence of
these, and also to the ordering of the rest of the a aires there, in such sort as it
should seeme best vnto themselues. In the meane time the Lacedaemonians sent
for Pausanias home, to examine him of such things as Pausanias sent for home, to
they had heard against him. For great crimes had            answer to certaine accusations.

beene laid to his charge by the Grecians that came from thence; and his
gouernment was rather an imitation of Tyranny, then a Command in Warre.
And it was his hap to bee called home at the same time, that the Confederates, all
but the Souldiers of Peloponnesus, out of hatred to him, had turned to the
Athenians. When he came to Lacedaemon, though he In his absence, the Grecians giue
were censured for some wrongs done to           the Athenians the leading of
                                                            them.
priuate men, yet of the greatest matters he was acquit,
especially of Medizing, the which seemed to bee the most euident of all. Him
therefore they sent Generall no more, but Dorcis, and Pausanias acquit, but sent
some others with him, with no great Army; whose             Generall no more.

command the Confederates refused, and they nding that, went their wayes
likewise. And after that, the Lacedaemonians sent no The Grecians refuse the
more; because they feared lest such as went out, would command of Dorcis, sent from
                                                            Sparta to be their Generall.
proue the worse for the State, (as they had seene by
Pausanias, ) and also because they desired to be rid of the Persian Warre,
conceiuing the Athenians to bee su cient Leaders, and at that time, their
friends.

When the Athenians had thus gotten the Command, by the Confederates owne
accord, for the hatred they bare to Pausanias, they then set downe an order,
which Cities should contribute money for this Warre The Athenians assesse their
against the Barbarians, and which, Gallies. For they      Confederates, for the sustaining
                                                          of the Warre     ▪
pretended to repaire the iniuries they had su ered, by
laying waste the Territories of the King. And then rst came vp amongst the
Athenians, the O ce of * Treasurers of Greece, who        * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
were receiuers of the * Tribute, (for so they called this * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉. The
money contributed. ) And the rst Tribute that was         originall of the Tribute paid to
taxed, came to * 460. Talents. The Treasurie was at * the Athenians        ▪

Delos, and their meetings were kept there, in the *       * 86250. pound sterling.
Temple.
                                                              * Not at Athens, because they
                                                              would not seeme to challenge a
Now vsing their authority at rst, in such maner, as           propriety in that mony.
that the Confederates liued vnder their own Laws,         * Of Apollo.
and were admitted to Common Councell; by the War,
and administration of the common a aires of Greece, from the Persian War to
this, what against the Barbarians, what against their own innouating
Confederates, and what against such of the Peloponnesians as chanced alwaies in
euery Warre to fall in, they e ected those great matters following; which also I
haue therefore written, both because this place hath beene pretermitted by all
that haue written before me. (For they haue either compiled the Grecian acts
before the invasion of the Persians, or that invasion only. Of which number is
Hellanicus, who hath also touched them in his             The History of the time betweene
Attique Historie, but brie y, and without exact           the Persian and Peloponnesian
                                                          War, pretermitted by other
mention of the times; ) and also because they carry       Writers, brieﬂy deliuered by
with them a demonstration of how the Athenian             Thucydides.

Empire grew vp.

And rst, vnder the Conduct of Cimon, the sonne of The steps of the Athenians
Miltiades, they tooke Eion, vpon the Riuer Strymon, toward their great Dominion.
from the Medes by siege, and carried away  The Athenians take Lion.
the Inhabitants Captiues. Then the Ile Scyros, in the And Scyros.

Aegean Sea, inhabited by the Dolopes, the Inhabitants whereof they also carried
away Captiues, and planted therein a Colony of their owne. Likewise they made
Warre on the Caristians, (alone, without the rest of       And Carystus.
the Euboeans) and those also after a time, came in by
composition. After this they warred on the reuolted Naxians, and brought them
in by siege. And this was the rst Confederate Citie, And Naxus, their Confederate,
which contrary to the Ordinance▪ they depriued of now Ni sia.    ●

their free estate; though afterwards, as it came to any of their turnes, they did the
like by the rest.

Amongst other causes of reuolts, the principall was       The cause of reuolts from the
their failing to bring in their Tribute, and Gallies, and Athenians.
their refusing (when they did so) to follow the Warres. For the Athenians exacted
strictly, and were grieuous to them, by imposing a necessity of toyle, which they
were neither accustomed nor willing to vndergoe. They were also otherwise not
so gentle in their gouernment as they had beene, nor followed the Warre vpon
equall termes, and could easily bring backe to their subiection, such as should
revolt. And of this the Confederates themselues were the causes: for through this
refusall to accompanie the Armie, the most of them, to the end they might stay
at home, were ordered to excuse their Gallies with Money, as much as it came to.
By which meanes, the Nauy of the Athenians was increased at the cost of their
Confederates, and themselues vnprouided, and without meanes to make Warre,
in case they should reuolt.

After this, it came to passe, that the Athenians and      The Athenians defeate the
their Confederates, fought against the Medes, both by Persian, vpon the Riuer of
                                                          Eurymedon.
Land and by Water, vpon the Riuer of Eurymedon, in
Pamphylia; and in one and the same day, the Athenians had Victory in both; and
tooke or sunke all the Phoenician Fleet, to the number of 200. Gallies. After this
againe happened the revolt of Thasus, vpon a              They warre on Thasus.
di erence about the places of Trade, and about the
Mines they possessed in the opposite parts of Thrace. And the Athenians going
thither with their Fleet, ouerthrew them in a Battell at Sea, and landed in the

Iland; But hauing about the same time sent 10000. of their owne and of their
Confederates people, into the Riuer of Strymon, for a Colonie to be planted in a
place called then the Nine-wayes, now Amphipolis. They wonne the 
said Nine-wayes, which was held by the Eidonians;          They take Amphypolis, and
but advancing farther, towards the heart of the            afterwards receiue a great
                                                           ouerthr w at Drabescus 〈◊〉
                                                                     ●
Countrey of Thrace, they were defeated at Drabescus, Thrace.
a Citie of the Eidonians, by the whole power of the
Thracians, that were Enemies to this new-built Towne of the Nine-wayes. The
Thasians in the meane time, being ouercome in diuers Battels, and besieged,
sought ayde of the Lacedaemonians, and entreated them to divert the Enemie by
an invasion of Attica: which, vnknowne to the Athenians, they promised to doe,
and also had done it, but by an Earth-quake that then The Lacedaemonians 〈…〉 to
happened, they were hindred. In which Earth-quake, invade 〈…〉 hindred by an
                                                           Earth-quake.
their * Helotes, and of neighbouring Townes the
Thuriatae, and Aetheans, reuolted, and seazed on           *

Ithome. Most of these Helotes were the posterity of The         Lacedaemonians employed
                                                           the 〈…〉 Warre, and 〈…〉
the ancient Messenians, brought into seruitude in          husbandry, and 〈…〉 workes,
former times; whereby also it came to passe, that they which     w s 〈…〉 by this k nd of
                                                                      ●

                                                           men, and they 〈…〉 by 〈◊〉
                                                                                   ●

were called all Messenians. Against these had the          Helotes, because the ﬁrst of them
Lacedaemonians a Warre now at Ithome. The                  so employed were Captiues of
                                                                          ▪

                                                           the Towne of Helos in Laconia.
Thasians in the third yeere of the Siege, rendred          Thasus rendred to the
themselues to the Athenians, vpon condition to raze Athenians.
their Walles; to deliuer vp their Gallies; to pay both the
money behinde, and for the future, as much as they were wont; and to quit both the
Mines and the Continent. The Lacedaemonians, when the Warre against those in
Ithome grew long, amongst other their Confederates, The Lacedaemonians send for
sent for aide to the Athenians; who also came with no ayde to the Athenians, in their
                                                           Warre against Ithome.
small Forces, vnder the command of Cimon. They
were sent for principally, for their reputation in murall assaults, the long
continuance of the Siege, seeming to require men of ability in that kinde;
whereby they might perhaps haue gotten the place by force. And vpon this
Iourney, grew the rst manifest dissension betweene The ﬁrst dissention betweene the
the Lacedaemonians and the Athenians. For the              Lacedaemonians and the

Lacedaemonians, when they could not take the place Athenians.
by assault, fearing lest the audacious and innovating humour of the Athenians,
whom withall they esteemed of a * contrary Race,         * The Lacedaemonians were
might, at the perswasion of those in Ithome, cause       Doreans, the Athenians,
                                                         Ionians.
some alteration, if they staid; dismissed them alone of
all the Confederates, not discouering their iealousie, but alledging, that they had
no further need of their Seruice. But the Athenians perceiuing that they were
not sent away vpon good cause, but onely as men suspected, made it a heynous
matter; and conceiving that they had better deserued The Athenians being had in
at the Lacedaemonians hands, as soone as  suspicion by the
                                                         Lacedaemonians, ioyne with the
they were gone, left the League which they had made Argiues.
with the Lacedaemonians against the Persian, and
became Confederates with their Enemies the Argiues; and then both Argiues
and Athenians tooke the same Oath, and made the same League with the
Thessalians.

Those in Ithome, when they could no longer hold            The Helotes in Ithome, after ten
out, in the tenth yeere of the Siege, rendred the place yeeres siege, compound, and quit
                                                           Peloponnesus.
to the Lacedaemonians, vpon condition of security to
depart out of Peloponnesus, and that they should no more returne; and whosoeuer
should bee taken returning, to bee the Slaue of him that should take him. For the
Lacedaemonians had before beene warned by a certaine answer of the Pythian
Oracle, to let goe the Suppliant of Iupiter Ithometes. So they came forth, they, and
their Wiues, and their Children. And the Athenians, for hatred they bore to the
Lacedaemonians, receiued them, and put them into * The Athenians receiue them,
Naupactus, which Citie they had lately taken from          and place them in Naupactus.

the Locrians of Ozolae. The Megareans also reuolted * Lepanto.
from the Lacedaemonians, and came to the League of Megara reuolteth from the
the Athenians, because they were holden downe by           Lacedaemonians to the
the Corinthians, with a Warre about the limits of their Athenians.
Territories. Wherevpon Megara and Pegae were put into the hands of the
Athenians; who built for the Megareans, the long Walles, from the Citie to *
Nisaea, and maintained them with a Garrison of their owne. And from hence it

was chie y, that the vehement hatred grew of the        * The Hauen and Arsenall of
Corinthians against the Athenians. Moreouer, Inarus, Megara.
the sonne of Psammetticus, an African, King of the      The Athenians send an Armie
Africans that con ne on Aegypt, making Warre from into Egypt, to ayde the Rebels
                                                        against the King of Persia.
Marea, aboue Pharus, caused the greatest part of
Aegypt to rebell against the King Artaxerxes; and when hee had taken the
gouernment of them vpon himselfe, hee brought in the Athenians to assist him;
who chancing to be then warring on Cyrus, with 200. Gallies, part their owne,
and part their Confederates, left Cyrus, and went to him. And going from the
Sea, vp the Riuer of Nilus, after they had made themselues Masters of the Riuer,
and of two parts of the Citie of * Memphis, assaulted * Cairo.
the third part, called the White-Wall. Within were of
the Medes and Persians, such as had escaped, and of the Aegyptians, such as had
not revolted amongst the rest. The Athenians came also with a Fleet to Halias,
and landing their Souldiers, fought by Land with the The Athenians ﬁght by Sea,
Corinthians and Epidaurians, and the          against the Corinthians and
                                                        Epidaurians.
Corinthians had the Victory. After this, the Athenians
fought by Sea against the Fleet of the Peloponnesians After that, against the
at * Cecryphalea, and the Athenians had the Victory. Peloponnesians.
After this againe, the Warre being on foot of the       * Some Iland 〈…〉 Peloponnesus▪

Athenians, against the Aeginetae, a great Battell was whose 〈◊〉 is not now know .
                                                                                ●●

                                                        Then against the Aegineta▪
fought betweene them by Sea, vpon the Coast of
Aegina, the Confederates of both sides being at the same; in which the
Athenians had the Victory; and hauing taken 70. Gallies, landed their Armie,
and besieged the Citie, vnder the Conduct of Leocrates, the sonne of Straebus.
After this, the Peloponnesians desiring to ayde the     The Corinthians ayde Aegina
Aeginetae, sent ouer into Aegina it selfe three
hundred men of Armes, of the same that had before ayded the Corinthians and
Epidaurians, and with other Forces, seazed on the top of * Geranea. And the
Corinthians, and their Confederates, came downe         * A ridge of a 〈…〉 the entrance
from thence, into the Territory of Megara; supposing into the 〈◊〉.
that the Athenians, hauing much of their Armie absent in Aegina, and in
Aegypt, would be vnable to ayde the Megareans, or if they did, would be forced

to rise from before Aegina. But the Athenians stirred not from Aegina, but
those that remained at Athens, both yong and old, vnder the conduct of
Myronides, went to Megara; and after they had fought with doubtfull victory,
they parted asunder againe; with an opinion in both sides, not to haue had the
worse in the Action. And the Athenians (who notwithstanding had rather the
better) when the Corinthians were gone away, erected a Trophie. But the
Corinthians hauing beene reviled at their returne, by the ancient men of the
Citie, about 12. dayes after, came againe prepared, and set vp their Trophie
likewise, as if the Victorie had beene theirs. Heerevpon vpon the Athenians
sallying out of Megara, with a huge shout, both slew The Corinthians receiue a great
those that were setting vp the Trophie, and charging losse in Megaris.
the rest, got the victory▪ The Corinthians being ouercome, went their way; but
a good part of them, being hard followed, and missing their way, lighted into the
inclosed ground of a priuate man, which fenced with a great Ditch, had no
passage through: which the Athenians perceiuing, opposed them at the place by
which they entred, with their men of Armes, and encompassing the ground with
their light armed Souldiers, killed those that were entred, with stones. This was a
great losse to the Corinthians; but the rest of their Armie got home againe.
About this time the Athenians began the building of their long                  
Walles, from the Citie downe to the Sea, the one          The Athenians build their long
reaching to the Hauen called Phaleron, the other to       Walles, from both sides of the
                                                          City to the Sea.
Peiraeus. The Phoceans also making Warre vpon
Bocum, Cytinium, and Erineus, Townes that belonged to the * Doreans, of
whom the Lacedaemonians are descended, and                * The Doreans, the Mother
hauing taken one of them, The Lacedaemonians,             Nation of the Lacedaemonians,
                                                          inhabited a little Countrey on
vnder the conduct of Nicomedes, the sonne of              the North side of Phocis, called
Cleombrotus, in the place of Pleistoanactes, sonne of Doris, and Terapolis, from the
                                                          foure Cities it contained; of
King Pausanias, who was yet in minority, sent vnto        which those here mentioned were
the ayde of the Doreans, 1500. men of Armes of their three, and the fourth was
owne, and of their Confederates tenne thousand. And Pindus.
when they had forced the Phoceans vpon composition to surrender the Towne
they had taken, they went their wayes againe. Now, if they would goe home by
Sea through the * Crissaean Gulfe, the Athenians          * Gulfe of Corinth.

going about with their Fleet, would bee ready to stop
them; and to passe ouer Geranea, they thought vnsafe, because the Athenians
had in their hands Megara, and Pegae: For Geranea was not onely a di cult
passage of it selfe, but was also alwayes guarded by the Athenians. They thought
good therefore to stay amongst the Boeotians, and to consider which way they
might most safely goe through. Whilest they were there, there wanted not some
Athenians, that priuily sollicited them to come to the Citie, hoping to haue put
the people out of gouernment, and to haue demolished the Long Walles, then in
building. But the Athenians, with the whole power of The Lacedaemonians ﬁght with
their Citie, and 1000. Argiues, and other                 the Athenians at Tanagra.

Confederates, as they could be gotten together, in all 14000. men, went out to
meet them: for there was suspition that they came thither to depose the
Democracie. There also came to the Athenians certaine Horsemen out of
Thessaly, which in the Battell turned to the Lacedaemonians. They fought at
Tanagra of Boeotia, and the Lacedaemonians had the Victory, but the slaughter
was great on both sides. Then the Lacedaemonians entring into the Territories
of Megara, and cutting downe the Woods before them, returned home by the
way of Geranea and the Isthmus. Vpon the two and sixtieth day after this Battell,
the Athenians, vnder the conduct of Myronides,            The Athenians ouerthrow the
made a Iourney against the Boeotians, and ouerthrew Boeotians at Oenophyta, [that is
                                                          to say, the Vineyards] and
them at Oenophyta, and brought the Territories of         subdue Boeotia and Phocis.
Boeotia and Phocis vnder their obedience; and withall
razed the Walles of Tanagra, and tooke of the wealthiest of the               
Locrians of Opus, 100. Hostages; and nished also at the same time, their long
Walles, at home. After this, Aegina also yeelded to the Athenians, on these
conditions, That they should haue their Walles pulled Aegina yeelded to the Athenians.
downe, and should deliuer vp their Gallies, and pay
their taxed tribute for the time to come. Also the Athenians made a Voyage about
Peloponnesus, wherein they burnt the Arsenall of the The Athenians sayle round
Lacedaemonians Nauie, tooke * Chalcis, a Citie of the Peloponnesus, and waste it.
Corinthians; and landing their Forces in Sycionia,        * A Citie of Corinthians, neere
ouercame in ght those that made head against them. the Riuer Tuenas.
All this while the Athenians stayed still in Aegypt, and saw much variety of

Warre. First the Athenians were Masters of Aegypt. And the King of Persia sent
one Megabazus, a Persian, with money to Lacedaemon, to procure the
Peloponnesians to invade Attica, and by that meanes to draw the Athenians out
of Aegypt. But when this tooke no e ect, and money was spent to no purpose,
Megabazus returned with the money he had left, into Asia. And then was
Megabazus the sonne of Zopirus, a Persian, sent into Aegypt, with great Forces,
and comming in by Land, ouerthrew the Aegyptians The end of the Athenians Forces
and their Confederates in a Battell, draue the Grecians in Aegypt.
out of Memphis, and nally inclosed them in the Ile of Prosopis; There hee
besieged them a yeere and a halfe, till such time as hauing dreined the Channell,
and turned the Water another way, he made their Gallies lye aground, and the
Iland for the most part Continent, and so came ouer, and wonne the Iland with
Land-Souldiers. Thus was the Armie of the Grecians lost, after sixe yeeres Warre;
and few of many passing through Africa, saued themselues in Cyrene: but the
most perished. So Aegypt returned to the obedience of the King, except onely
Amyrtaeus, that raigned in the Fennes, for him they could not bring in, both
because the Fennes are great, and the people of the Fennes, of all the Aegyptians
the most warlike. But Inarus, King of the Africans, and Author of all this stirre
in Aegypt, was taken by treason, and cruci ed. The        A supply of Athenians going to
Athenians moreouer had sent fty Gallies more into Aegypt, defeated by the forces of
                                                          the King.
Aegypt, for a supply of those that were there already;
which putting in at Mendesium, one of the mouthes of Nilus, knew nothing of
what had happened to the rest: and being assaulted from the Land by the Armie,
and from the Sea by the Phoenician Fleet, lost the greatest part of          
their Gallies, and escaped home againe with the lesser part. Thus ended the great
expedition of the Athenians, and their Confederates into Aegypt.

Also Orestes the sonne of Echecratidas, King of the Thessalians, driuen out of
Thessaly, perswaded the Athenians to restore him:      The Athenians invade Thessaly
And the Athenians, taking with them the Boeotians
and Phocaeans, their Confederates, made Warre against * Pharsalus, a Citie of
Thessaly; and were Masters of the Field, as farre as   * Famous for the Battell
they strayed not from the Armie, (for the Thessalian betweene Iul Caesar, and Cn.
                                                                        ▪

                                                            Pompeius.

Horsemen kept them from straggling) but could not
winne the Citie, nor yet performe any thing else of what they came for, but came
backe againe without e ect, and brought Orestes with them. Not long after this,
a thousand Athenians went aboard the Gallies that lay at Pegae, (for Pegae was in
the hands of the Athenians) vnder the command of Pericles the sonne of
Xantippus, and sayled into Sicyonia, and landing, put to ight such of the
Sicyonians as made head; and then presently tooke vp The Athenians vnder Pericles
forces in Achaea; and putting ouer, made Warre on      besiege Oeniades.

Oenias, a Citie of Acarnania, which they besieged; neuerthelesse they tooke it
not, but returned home.

Three yeeres after this, was a Truce made betweene the Truce for 5. yeere betweene the
Peloponnesians and Athenians for ue yeeres; and the Athenians and Peloponnesians.
Athenians gaue ouer the Grecian Warre, and with 200. Gallies, part their owne,
and part their Confederates, vnder the conduct of Cimon, made Warre on
Cyprus. Of these, there went 60. Sayle into Aegypt,     The Athenians warre on Cyprus.
sent for by Amyrtaeus, that reigned in the Fennes, and
the rest lay at the Siege of Citium. But Cimon there dyeth.
dying, and a Famine arising in the Armie, they left
Citium, and when they had passed Salamine in Cyprus, fought at once both by
Sea and Land, against the Phoenicians, Cyprians, & Cilicians and hauing gotten
victory in both, returned home, and with them the rest of their Fleet, now come
backe from Aegypt. After this, the Lacedaemonians The Holy Warre.
tooke in hand the Warre, called the Holy Warre; and
hauing wonne the Temple at Delphi, deliuered the possession thereof to the
Delphians. But the Athenians afterward, when the Lacedaemonians were gone,
came with their Armie, and regaining it, deliuered the possession to the
Phocaeans. Some space of time after this, the Outlawes of Boeotia, being seazed
of Orchomenus and Chaeronea, and certaine other places of Boeotia, the
Athenians made Warre vpon those places, being their Enemies, with a 
thousand men of Armes of their owne, and as many The Athenians recouer
of their Confederates as seuerally came in, vnder the Chaeronea, taken by the
                                                        Boeotian Outlawes.
conduct of Tolmidas, the sonne of Tolmaeus. And

when they had taken Chaeronea, they carried away the Inhabitants Captiues,
and leauing a Garrison in the Citie, departed. In their returne, those Outlawes
that were in Orchomenus, together with the Locrians of Opus, and the Euboean
Outlawes, and others of the same Faction, set vpon them at Coronea, and
ouercomming the Athenians in Battell, some they           The Athenians defeated at
slew, and some they tooke aliue. Wherevpon the            Coronea by the Outlawes, lose
                                                          Boeotia.
Athenians relinquished all Boeotia, and made peace,
with condition to haue their Prisoners released. So the Outlawes and the rest,
returned, and liued againe vnder their owne Lawes.        Euboea reuolteth from the
Not long after, revolted Euboea from the Athenians; Athenians.
and when Pericles had already passed ouer into it with the Athenian Armie,
there was brought him newes, that Megara was              Megara reuolteth    ▪

likewise revolted, and that the Peloponnesians were
about to invade Attica, and that the Megareans had slaine the Athenian
Garrison, except onely such as ed into Nisaea. Now the Megareans, when they
reuolted, had gotten to their ayd, the Corinthians, Epidaurians, and Sicyonians.
Wherefore Pericles forthwith withdrew his Armie from Euboea; and the
Lacedaemonians afterward brake into Attica, and wasted the Countrey about
Eleusine, and Thriasium, vnder the conduct of Pleistoonax, the sonne of
Pausanias, King of Lacedaemon, and came no further on, but so went away.
After which the Athenians passed againe into Euboea, and totally subdued it;
the Hestiaeans they put quite out, taking their           Euboea subdued by the
Territory into their owne hands; but ordered the rest Athenians.
of Euboea, according to composition made. Being returned from Euboea,
within a while after, they made a Peace with the Lacedaemonians and their
Confederates, for thirty yeeres, & rendred Nisaea,        Peace for 30. yeeres, betweene the
Achaia, Pegae, and Troezene, (for these places the        Athenians and Peloponnesians.

Athenians held of theirs) to the Peloponnesians. In the sixth yeere of this Peace,
fell out the Warre betweene the Samians and Milesians, concerning Priene; and
the Milesians being put to the worse, came to Athens, and exclaimed against the
Samians; wherein also certaine priuate men of Samos it selfe, tooke part with the
Milesians, out of desire to alter the forme of Gouernment. Wherevpon the
Athenians went to Samos with a Fleet of forty Gallies, and set vp the Democratie

there, and tooke of the Samians 50. Boyes,  The Athenians warre vpon
and as many men, for Hostages; which when they had Samos.
put into Lemnos, and set a Guard vpon them, they         ● S alimine.
came home. But certaine of the Samians (for some of
them, not enduring the popular gouernment, were ed into the Continent)
entring into a League with the mightiest of them in Samos, & with Pissuthnes,
the sonne of Hystaspes, who then was Gouernour of Sardis, and leuying about
700. auxiliary Souldiers, passed ouer into Samos in the euening, and rst set
vpon the popular Faction, and brought most of them into their power, and then
stealing their Hostages out of Lemnos, they reuolted, and deliuered the
Athenian Guard, and such Captaines as were there, into the hands of
Pissuthnes, and withall prepared to make Warre against Miletus. With these also
reuolted the Byzantines. The Athenians, when they heard of these things, sent to
Samos 60. Gallies, 16. whereof they did not vse, (for some of them went into
Caria, to obserue the Fleet of the Phoenicians, and some to fetch in succours
from Chius and Lesbos; ) but with the 44. that remained, vnder the command
of Pericles and 9. others, fought with 70. Gallies of the Samians, (whereof
twenty were such as serued for transport of Souldiers, ) as they were comming all
together from Miletus; and the Athenians had the Victory. After this came a
supply of forty Gallies more from Athens, and from Si . Mitilene.
                                                          ●

Chios and Lesbos 25. With these hauing landed their
men, they ouerthrew the Samians in Battell, and besieged the City; which they
enclosed with a triple Wall, and shut it vp by Sea with their Gallies. But Pericles
taking with him 60. Gallies out of the Road, made haste towards Caunus and
Caria, vpon intelligence of the comming against them of the Phoenician Fleet.
For Stesagoras with ue Gallies, was already gone out of Samos, and others out
of other places, to meete the Phoenicians. In the meane time, the Samians
comming suddenly forth with their Fleet, and falling vpon the Harbour of the
Athenians, which was vnforti ed, sunke the Gallies that kept watch before it,
and ouercame the rest in ght; insomuch as they became Masters of the Sea
neere their Coast, for about foureteene dayes together, importing and exporting
what they pleased. But Pericles returning, shut them vp againe with his Gallies;
and after this, there came to him from Athens a supply of forty Sayle, 

with * Thucydides, Agnon, and Phormio, and twenty * Not the Writer of the History.
with Tlepolemus and Anticles; and from Chios and
Lesbos, forty more. And though the Samians fought against these a small battell
at Sea, yet vnable to hold out any longer, in the ninth moneth of the Siege, they
rendred the Citie vpon composition: Namely, to           Samos yeelded to the Athenians.
demolish their Walles; to giue Hostages; to deliuer vp
their Nauy; and to repay the money spent by the Athenians in the Warre, at dayes
appointed. And the Byzantines also yeelded, with condition to remaine subiect to
them, in the same manner as they had beene before their revolt.

Now not many yeeres after this, happened the matters The businesse about Corcyra and
before related, of the Corcyraeans and the Potidaeans, Potidaea, before related.
and whatsoeuer other intervenient pretext of this Warre. These things done by
the Graecians, one against another, or against the Barbarians, came to passe all
within the compasse of ftie yeeres, at most, from the time of the departure of
Xerxes, to the beginning of this present Warre: In      Betweene the Persian and
which time, the Athenians both assured their            Peloponnesian Warre, ﬁfty
                                                        yeeres.
Gouernment ouer the Confederates, and also much
enlarged their own particular wealth. This the Lacedaemonians saw, & opposed
not, saue now and then a little, but (as men that had euer before beene slow to
Warre without necessity, and also for that they were hindred sometimes with
domestique Warre) for the most part of the time stirred not against them; till
now at last, when the power of the Athenians was advanced manifestly indeed,
and that they had done iniury to their Confederates; they could forbeare no
longer, but thought it necessary to goe in hand with the Warre with all diligence,
and to pull downe, if they could, the Athenian greatnesse. For which purpose, it
was by the Lacedaemonians themselues decreed, That the Peace was broken, and
that the Athenians had done vniustly. And also hauing sent to Delphi, and
enquired of Apollo, whether they should haue the better in the Warre, or not;
they receiued (as it is reported) this Answer: That if  The Oracle consulted by the
they warred with their whole power, they should haue Lacedaemonians, encourageth
                                                        them to the Warre.
victory, and that himselfe would be on their side, both
called and vncalled.

Now when they had assembled their Confederates again, they were to put it to
the question amongst them, Whether they should make Warre, or not. And the
Ambassadours of the seuerall Confederates comming Consultation of the
in, and the Councell set, aswell the rest      Peloponnesians in generall,
                                                           whether they should enter into a
spake what they thought t, most of them accusing           Warre, or not.
the Athenians of iniurie, and desiring the Warre; as
also the Corinthians, who had before intreated the Cities, euery one seuerally to
giue their Vote for the Warre, fearing lest Potidaea should bee lost before helpe
came, being then present, spake last of all to this e ect.

 1.1. THE ORATION OF THE Ambassadours of
 CORINTH.
 COnfederates, we can no longer accuse the Lacedaemonians, they hauing
 both decreed the Warre themselues, and also assembled vs to doe the same. For
 it is t for them who haue the command in a common League, as they are
 honoured of all before the rest, so also (administring their priuate a aires
 equally with others) to consider before the rest, of the Common businesse.
 And though as many of vs as haue already had our turnes with the Athenians,
 need not bee taught to beware of them; yet it were good for those that dwell
 vp in the Land, and not as wee, in places of tra que on the Sea side, to know,
 that vnlesse they defend those below, they shall with a great deale the more
 di culty, both carry to the Sea, the commodities of the seasons, and againe
 more hardly receiue the bene ts a orded to the inland Countries from the
 Sea; and also not to mistake what is now spoken, as if it concerned them not;
 but to make account, that if they neglect those that dwell by the Sea, the
 calamity will also reach vnto themselues; and that this consultation
 concerneth them no lesse then vs, and therefore not to bee afraid to change
 their Peace for Warre. For though it bee the part of discreet men to be quiet,
 vnlesse they haue wrong, yet it is the part of valiant men, when they receiue
 iniury, to passe from Peace into Warre, and after successe, from Warre to come
 againe to composition: and neither to swell with the good successe of Warre,

nor to su er iniurie, through pleasure taken in the ease of Peace. For hee
whom pleasure makes a Coward, if hee sit still, shall quickly lose the
sweetnesse of the ease that made him so. And hee that in Warre, is made proud
by successe, obserueth not, that his pride is grounded vpon vnfaithfull
con dence. For though many things ill aduised, come to good e ect, against
Enemies worse aduised; yet more, thought well aduised, haue falne but badly
out, against well-aduised enemies. For no man comes to execute a thing, with
the same con dence hee premeditates it▪ for we deliuer opinions in safety,
whereas in the Action it selfe, wee faile through feare. As for the Warre at this
time, wee raise it, both vpon iniuries done vs, and vpon other               
su cient allegations; and when we haue repaired our wrongs vpon the
Athenians, we will also in due time lay it down. And it is for many reasons
probable, that wee shall haue the victory. First, because wee exceed them in
number: and next, because when wee goe to any action intimated, we shall be
all of one * fashion. And as for a Nauie, wherein          * All Land Souldiers, all of one
consisteth the strength of the Athenians, wee shall manner of Arming and
                                                           discipline.
prouide it, both out of euery ones particular wealth,
and with the money at Delphi and Olympia. For taking this at interest, wee
shall bee able to draw from them their forraigne Mariners, by o er of greater
wages: for the Forces of the Athenians, are rather mercenarie then domesticke.
Whereas our owne power is lesse obnoxious to such accidents, consisting
more in the persons of men then in money. And if wee ouercome them but in
one Battell by Sea, in all probability they are totally vanquished. And if they
hold out, wee also shall with longer time apply our selues to Nauall a aires.
And when wee shall once haue made our skill equall to theirs, we shall surely
ouermatch them in courage. For the valour that wee haue by nature, they shall
neuer come vnto by teaching; but the experience which they exceed vs in, that
must wee attaine vnto by industry. And the money wherewith to bring this to
passe, it must be all our parts to contribute. For else it were a hard case, that
the Confederates of the Athenians should not sticke to contribute to their
owne seruitude; and wee should refuse to lay out our money, to bee reuenged
of our enemies, and for our owne preseruation, and that the Athenians take
not our money from vs, and euen with that doe vs mischiefe. Wee haue also

many other wayes of Warre; as the reuolt of their Confederates, which is the
principall meanes of lessening their reuenue; * the       * Though this be here said in
building of Forts in their Territorie, and many other the person of a Corinthian, yet
                                                          it was neuer thought on by any
things which one cannot now foresee. For the course of that side, till Alcibiades put
of Warre is guided by nothing lesse then by the           it into their heads, when he
                                                          reuolted from his Countrey.
points of our account, but of it selfe contriueth
most things vpon the occasion. Wherein, he that complies with it, with most
temper, standeth the rmest; and hee that is most passionate, oftenest
miscarries. Imagine wee had di erences each of vs about the limits of our
Territorie, with an equall Aduersary; wee must vndergoe them. But now the
Athenians are a match for vs all at once, and one Citie after another, too
strong for vs. Insomuch that vnlesse wee oppose them ioyntly, and euery
Nation and City set to it vnanimously, they will ouercome vs asunder,
without labour. And know, that to be vanquished (though it trouble you to
heare it) brings with it no less then manifest seruitude: which, but to mention
as a doubt, as if so many Cities could su er vnder one, were very
dishonourable to Peloponnesus. For it must then bee thought, that wee are
either punished vpon merit, or else that wee endure it out of feare, 
and so appeare degenerate from our Ancestours; for by them the liberty of all
Greece hath beene restored; whereas wee for our parts, assure not so much as
our owne; but claiming the reputation of hauing deposed Tyrants in the
seuerall Cities, su er a Tyrant Citie to be established amongst vs. Wherein we
know not how we can auoyd one of these three great faults, Foolishnesse,
Cowardise, or Negligence. For certainely, you auoyde them not, by imputing it
to that which hath done most men hurt, Contempt of the Enemie: for
Contempt, because it hath made too many men miscarry, hath gotten the
name of Foolishnesse. But to what end should wee obiect matters past, more
then is necessary to the busines in hand? wee must now by helping the
present, labour for the future. For it is peculiar to our Countrey to attaine
honour by labour; and though you be now somewhat aduanced in honour
and power, you must not therefore change the custome; for there is no reason
that what was gotten in want, should be lost by wealth. But wee should
con dently goe in hand with the Warre, as for many other causes, so also for

 this, that both the God hath by his Oracle aduised vs thereto, and promised to
 bee with vs himselfe: and also for that the rest of Greece some for feare, and
 some for pro t, are ready to take our parts. Nor are you they that rst breake
 the Peace, (which the God, in as much as hee doth encourage vs to the Warre,
 iudgeth violated by them) but you ght rather in defence of the same. For not
 hee breaketh the Peace, that taketh reuenge, but hee that is the rst invader· So
 that, Seeing it will be euery way good to make the Warre, and since in
 common wee perswade the same; and seeing also that both to the Cities, and
 to priuate men, it will bee the most pro table course, put o no longer,
 neither the defence of the Potidaeans, who are Doreans, and besieged (which
 was wont to bee contrary) by Iönians, nor the recouery of the liberty of the
 rest of the Grecians. For it is a case that admitteth not delay, when they are
 some of them already oppressed: and others (after it shall be knowne wee met,
 and durst not right our selues) shall shortly after vndergoe the like. But thinke
 (Confederates) you are now at a necessity, and that this is the best advice. And
 therefore giue your Votes for the Warre, not fearing the present danger, but
 coueting the long Peace proceeding from it. (For though by warre groweth the
 con rmation of Peace, yet for loue of ease to refuse the warre, doth not
 likewise auoyde the danger. But making account, that a Tyrant Citie set vp in
 Greece, is set vp alike ouer all, and reigneth ouer some already, and the rest in
 intention, we shall bring it againe into order by the warre; and not onely liue
 for the time to come out of danger our selues, but also deliuer the 
 already enthralled Grecians out of seruitude. Thus said the Corinthians.

The Lacedaemonians, when they had heard the              The Warre decreed by all the
opinion of them all, brought the * Balles to all the     Confederates.

Confederates present, in order, from the greatest State * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉. The
to the least; And the greatest part gaue their Votes for fashion it seemeth, as now in
                                                         some places, to prsent a Box or
the Warre. Now after the War was decreed, though it Vrne, and a little Ball, or stone
were impossible for them to goe in hand with it          or beane, to him that gaue his
                                                         Vote, to the end hee might put
presently, because they were vnprouided, and euery       his Ball into the part of the Vrne
State thought good without delay, seuerally to furnish that was for aﬃrmation or
                                                         negation, as he saw cause.
themselues of what was necessary, yet there passed not

fully a yeere in this preparation, before Attica was invaded, and the Warre openly
on foot.

IN THE MEANE TIME, they sent Ambassadours to The Lacedaemonians send
the Athenians, with certaine Criminations, to the end Ambassages to the Athenians,
                                                            about expiation of Sacriledges,
that if they would giue eare to nothing, they might         only to pick better quarrels for
haue all the pretext that could bee, for raising of the the Warre.
Warre. And rst the Lacedaemonians, by their
Ambassadours to the Athenians, required them to * * Excommunication extending
banish such as were vnder curse of the Goddesse             also to posterity.

Minerua, for Pollution of Sanctuary. Which Pollution was thus. There had
beene one Cylon an Athenian, a man that had beene Victor in the Olympian
exercises, of much Nobility and power amongst those of old time, and that had
married the Daughter of Theagenes, a Megarean, in those dayes Tyrant of
Megara. To this Cylon, asking counsell at Delphi, the God answered, That on the
greatest Festiuall day, hee should seaze the Cittadell of Athens. Hee therefore
hauing gotten Forces of Theagenes, and perswaded his Friends to the Enterprize,
seazed on the Cittadell, at the time of the Olimpicke Holidayes in Peloponnesus,
with intention to take vpon him the Tyranny: Esteeming the Feast of Iupiter to
bee the greatest; and to touch withall on his Particular, in that he had beene
Victor in the Olympian exercises. But whether the Feast spoken of, were * meant
to be the greatest in Attica, or in some other place,       * The Oracles were alwayes
neither did hee himselfe consider, nor the Oracle           obscure, that evasion might be
                                                            found to salue their credit; and
make manifest. For there is also amongst the                whether they were the imposture
Athenians the Diasia, which is called the greatest Feast of the Deuill, or of men, which is
                                                            the more likely, they had no
of Iupiter Meilichius, and is celebrated without the        presention, nor secure wise
City; wherein, in the con uence of the whole people, coniecture of the future.
many men o ered Sacri ces▪ not of liuing Creatures,
but * such as was the fashion of the Natiues of the         * Images of liuing creatures,
place. But hee, supposing hee had rightly vnderstood made of paste.
the Oracle, laid hand to the enterprise; and when the Athenians heard 
of it, they came with all their Forces out of the Fields, and lying before the
Cittadell, besieged it. But the time growing long, the Athenians wearied with the

Siege, went most of them away, and left both the Guard of the Cittadell, * and
the whole businesse to the nine Archontes, with            * The Gouernours or Rulers of
absolute authority to order the same, as to them it        the City.

should seeme good. For at that time, most of the afa aires of the Common-
weale were administred by those 9. Archontes. Now those that were besieged
with Cylon, were for want both of victuall and Water, in very euill estate; and
therefore Cylon, and a Brother of his, ed priuily out; but the rest, when they
were pressed, and some of them dead with famine, sate downe as suppliants, by
the * Altar that is in the Cittadell: And the Athenians, * of Minerua.
to whose charge was committed the guard of the
place, raysing them, vpon promise to doe them no harme, put them all to the
Sword. * Also they had put to death some of those          * The Lacedaemonians that 〈◊〉
that had taken Sanctuary at the Altars of the * Seuere raigne of Codrus 〈◊〉 Athens,
                                                           and were defected, some of them
Goddesses, as they were going away. And from this, the being entered the City, could not
Athenians, both themselues and their posterity, were get aw y, but sate at those 〈◊〉,
                                                                    ●

                                                           and were dismissed safe, but
called * accursed and sacrilegious persons. Heereupon some of them slaine as they 〈…〉.
the Athenians banished those that were vnder the
                                                           * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
curse: and Cleomenes, a Lacedaemonian, together            Eumenides.
with the Athenians, in a Sedition banished them
                                                           * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
afterwards againe: and not onely so, but dis-enterred
and cast forth the bodies of such of them as were dead. Neuerthelesse there
returned of them afterwards againe; and there are of their race in the Citie vnto
this day. This Pollution therefore the Lacedaemonians required them to purge
their Citie of. Principally forsooth, as taking part with the Gods; but knowing
withall, that Pericles the sonne of Xantippus, was by the Mothers side one of
that Race. For they thought, if Pericles were banished, the Athenians would the
more easily bee brought to yeeld to their desire. Neuerthelesse, they hoped not
so much, that hee should bee banished, as to bring him into the enuie of the
Citie, as if the misfortune of him, were in part the cause of the Warre. For being
the most powerfull of his time, and hauing the sway of the State, hee was in all
things opposite to the Lacedaemonians, not su ering the Athenians to giue
them the least way, but inticing them to the Warre.        Pericles alwayes aduerse to the
                                                               Lacedaemonians.

Contrariwise the Athenians required the Lacedaemonians to banish 
such as were guilty of breach of Sanctuary at Toenarus. For the Lacedaemonians,
when they had caused their Helotes▪ Suppliants in       The 〈…〉 Lacedaemonians to
                                                        expiate the violation of 〈◊〉 also
the Temple of Neptune at Toenarus, to forsake           on their parts.
Sanctuary, slew them. For which cause, they
themselues thinke it was, that the great Earthquake happened afterwards at
Sparta.

Also they required them to purge their Citie of the pollution of Sanctuary, in
the Temple of Pallas Chalcioeca, which was thus:         The occasion and maner of the
After that Pausanias the Lacedaemonian was recalled death of 〈◊〉 in the Temple of 〈◊〉
                                                         Chalcioeca   ▪
by the Spartans from his charge in Hellespont, and
hauing bin called in question by them, was absolued, though hee was no more
sent abroad by the State, yet hee went againe into Hellespont, in a Gallie of
Hermione, as a priuate man, without leaue of the Lacedaemonians, to the
Grecian Warre, as hee gaue out, but in truth to negotiate with the King, as hee
had before begunne, aspiring to the Principality of Greece. Now the bene t that
hee had laid vp with the King, and the beginning of the whole businesse, was at
  rst from this: When after his returne from Cyprus he had taken Byzantium,
when he was there the rst time, (which being holden by the Medes, there were
taken in it, some neere to the King, and of his kindred) vnknowne to the rest of
the Confederates, hee sent vnto the King those neere ones of his which hee had
taken, and gaue out, they were runne away. This hee practised with one
Gongylus, and Eretrian, to whose charge hee had          Pausanias practiseth with the
committed both the Towne of Byzantium, and the           King of Persia against the State
                                                         of Greece,
Prisoners. Also he sent Letters vnto him, which
Gongylus carried, wherein, as was afterwards knowne, was thus written.

 The Letter of Pausanias to the King.

 PAVSANIAS, Generall of the Spartans, being desirous to doe thee a courtesie,
 sendeth backe vnto thee these men, whom hee hath by Armes taken prisoners:
 And I haue a purpose, if the same seeme also good vnto thee, to take thy
 Daughter in marriage, and to bring Sparta and the rest of Greece, into thy
 subiection. These things I account my selfe able to bring to passe, if I may
 communicate my counsels with thee. If therefore any of these things doe like
 thee, send some trusty man to the Sea side, by whose mediation wee may
 conferre together.

These were the Contents of the Writing. Xerxes being pleased with 
the Letter, sends away Artabazus the sonne of Pharnaces, to the Sea side, with
commandement to take the gouernment of the Prouince of Dascylis, and to
dismisse Megabates, that was Gouernour there before: and withall, giues him a
Letter to Pausanias, which hee commanded him to send ouer to him with speed
to Byzantium, and to shew him the Seale, and well and faithfully to performe,
whatsoeuer in his a aires, he should by Pausanias be appointed to doe.
Artabazus, after hee arriued, hauing in other things done as hee was
commanded, sent ouer the Letter, wherein was written this answer.

 The Letter of Xerxes to Pausanias.
 THVS saith King Xerxes to Pausanias: For the men which thou hast saued,
 and sent ouer the Sea vnto mee, from Byzantium, thy bene t is laid vp in our
 House, indelebly registred for euer: And I like also of what thou hast
 propounded: And let neither night nor day make thee remisse in the
 performance of what thou hast promised vnto mee. Neither bee thou hindred
 by the expence of Gold and Siluer, or multitude of Souldiers requisite,
 whithersoeuer it bee needfull to haue them come: But with Artabazus, a good
 man, whom I haue sent vnto thee, doe boldly both mine and thine owne
 businesse; as shall bee most t, for the dignity and honour of vs both.

Pausanias hauing receiued these Letters, whereas he      Pausanias groweth proud vpon
was before in great authority, for his conduct at        the receipt of these Letters.

Plataea, became now many degrees more eleuated; and endured no more to liue
after the accustomed manner of his Countrey, but went apparelled at
Byzantium, after the fashion of Persia; and when hee went through Thrace, had
a Guard of Medes and Aegyptians, and his Table likewise after the Persian
manner. Nor was hee able to conceale his purpose, but in tri es made apparant
before-hand, the greater matters hee had conceiued of the future. Hee became
moreouer di cult of accesse, and would bee in such cholericke passions toward
all men indi erently, that no man might indure to approch him; which was also
none of the least causes why the Confederates turned from him to the
Athenians. When the Lacedaemonians heard of it, they called him                
home the rst time. And when being gone out the second time without their
command, in a Gallie of Hermione, it appeared that hee continued still in the
same practices; and after hee was forced out of Byzantium by siege of the
Athenians, returned not to Sparta, but newes came, that hee had seated himselfe
at Colonae, in the Countrey of Troy, practising still with the Barbarians, and
making his abode there for no good purpose: Then the Ephori forbore no
longer, but sent vnto him a publique O cer, with the * Scytale, commanding
him not to depart from the O cer; and in case hee        * Scytale, properly a Staﬀe; here,
refused, denounced Warre against him. But he,            a forme of Letter, vsed by the
                                                         Lacedaemonians, in this
desiring as much as he could to decline suspition, and manner; they had two round
beleeuing that with money hee should bee able to         staues of one bignesse, whereof
                                                         the State kept one, and the man
discharge himselfe of his accusations, returned vnto whom they employed abroad,
Sparta the second time. And rst he was by the Ephori kept the other; and when they
commited to ward; (for the Ephori haue power to doe would        write, they wrapped about
                                                         it a small thong of Parchment;
this to their King, ) but afterwards procuring his       and hauing thereon written,
enlargement, hee came forth, and exhibited himselfe tooke      it oﬀ againe, and sent
                                                         onely that thong, which wrapped
to Iustice, against such as had any thing to alledge     likewise about the other staﬀe,
against him. And though the Spartans had against         the letters ioyned againe, and
                                                         might be read. This serued in
him no manifest proofe, neither his enemies, nor the stead of Cyfre. It seemes
whole Citie, whereupon to proceed to the                 Pausanias retained his Staﬀe,
                                                         from the time he had charge at
punishment of a man, both of the Race of their           Byzantium.

Kings, and at that present in great authority: for
Plistarchus the Sonne of Leonidas being King, and as yet in minority, Pausanias,
who was his Cousin german, had the tuition of him: yet by his licentious
behauiour, and a ectation of the Barbarian customes, hee gaue much cause of
suspicion, that hee meant not to liue in the equality of the present State. They
considered also, that hee di ered in manner of life, from the discipline
established: amongst other things, by this, that vpon the Tripode at Delphi,
which the Grecians had dedicated, as the best of the Pausanias his ambition, in
spoile of the Medes, hee had caused to bee inscribed of dedication of the Tripode at
                                                          Delphi.
himselfe in particular, this Elegiaque Verse:

    PAVSANIAS, Greeke Generall,
    Hauing the Medes defeated,
    To Phoebus in record thereof,
    This gift hath consecrated.
But the Lacedaemonians then presently defaced that inscription of 
the Tripode, and engraued thereon by name, all the Cities that had ioyned in the
ouerthrow of the Medes, and dedicated it so, This therefore was numbred
amongst the o ences of Pausanias, and was thought to agree with his present
designe, so much the rather, for the condition hee was now in. They had
information further, that hee had in hand some           Pausanias accused of practice
practice with the Helotes: and so hee had: For hee       with the Helotes.

promised them, not onely manumission, but also freedome of the Citie, if they
would rise with him, and cooperate in the whole businesse. But neither thus,
vpon some appeachment of the Helotes, would they proceed against him, but
kept the custome which they haue in their owne cases, not hastily to giue a
peremptory Sentence against a Spartan, without vnquestionable proofe. Till at
length (as it is reported) purposing to send ouer to Artabazus his last Letters to
the King, hee was bewrayed vnto them by a man of Argilus, in time past, his *
Minion, and most faithfull to him: who being             * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, taken both
terri ed with the cogitation, that not any of those      in good and bad sense, for a
                                                         man with whom another man
which had beene formerly sent, had euer returned, got 〈◊〉 in loue.

him a Seale like to the Seale of Pausanias, (to the end that if his iealousie were
false, or that hee should need to alter any thing in the Letter, it might not bee
discouered) and opened the Letter, wherein (as he had Hee sends Letters to the King,
suspected the addition of some such clause) hee found which are opened by the way.
himselfe also written downe to bee murdered. The Ephori, when these Letters
were by him shewne vnto them, though they beleeued the matter much more
then they did before, yet desirous to heare somewhat themselues from Pausanias
his owne mouth; (the man being vpon designe gone to Taenarus into Sanctuary,
and hauing there built him a little Roome with a partition, in which hee hid the
Ephori; and Pausanias comming to him, and asking the cause of his taking
Sanctuary▪ ) they plainely heard the whole matter. For the man both
expostulated with him, for what hee had written about him, and from point to
point discouered all the practice: saying, that though hee had neuer boasted vnto
him these and these seruices concerning the King, hee must yet haue the honour,
as well as many other of his seruants, to bee slaine.      Pausanius, by the arte of the
And Pausanias himselfe both confessed the same             Ephori, made to betray himselfe.

things, and also bade the man not to be troubled at what was past,            
and gaue him assurance to leaue Sanctuary, entreating him to goe on in his
iourney with all speed, and not to frustrate the businesse in hand.

Now the Ephori, when they had distinctly heard him, for that time went their
way, and knowing now the certaine truth, intended to apprehend him in the
Citie. It is said, that when hee was to bee apprehended in the Street, hee
perceiued by the countenance of one of the Ephori        He ﬂyeth into Sanctuary
comming towards him, what they came for: and when
another of them had by a secret becke, signi ed the matter for good will, he
ranne into the * Close of the Temple of Pallas           * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉. Both the
Chalciaeca, and got in before they ouertooke him.        Temple & the ground
                                                                     ▪

                                                         consecrated, wherin stande to the
Now the * Temple it selfe was hard by, and entring       Temple, Al , and ediﬁces for
                                                                         ●●

into a House belonging to the Temple, to auoyd the the se of their Religion.
                                                                 ●

iniurie of the open ayre, there staid. They that         * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉. The
pursued him, could not then ouertake him: but            Temple or Church of the
                                                         Goddesse.
afterwards they tooke o the roofe and the doores of

the house, and watching a time when hee was within, beset the House, and
mured him vp, and leauing a Guard there, famished him. When they perceiued
him about to giue vp the Ghost, they carried him as hee was, out of the House,
yet breathing, and being out, hee dyed immediately. After hee was dead, they
were about to throw him into the * Caeada, where          * Caeada, a pit neere
they vse to cast in Malefactors: yet afterwards they      Lacedaemon.

thought good to bury him in some place thereabouts: But the Oracle of Delphi
commanded the Lacedaemonians afterward, both to remoue the Sepulcher from
the place where hee dyed, (so that he lyes now in the entry of the Temple, as is
euident by the inscription of the Piller) and also (as hauing beene a Pollution of
the Sanctuary, ) to render two bodies to the Goddesse of Chalciaeca, for that
one. Whereupon they set vp two brazen Statues, and dedicated the same vnto
her for Pausanias. Now the Athenians (the God himselfe hauing iudged this a
Pollution of Sanctuary) required the Lacedaemonians to banish out of their
Citie, such as were touched with the same.

At the same time that Pausanias came to his end, the Themistocles in the same
Lacedaemonians by their Ambassadours to the             Treason.

Athenians, accused Themistocles, for that hee also had medized together with
Pausanias, hauing discouered it by proofes against Pausanias, and desired that
the same punishment might be likewise in icted vpon him.                     
Whereunto consenting, (for he was at this time in banishment by * Ostracisme,
and though his ordinary residence was at Argos, hee *
trauelled to and fro in other places of Peloponnesus, ) A kinde of banishment, wherein
                                                        the Athenians wrote vpon the
they sent certaine men in company of the                shell of an Oyster the name of
Lacedaemonians, who were willing to pursue him,         him they would banish: vsed
                                                        principally against great men,
with command to bring him in, wheresoeuer they
                                                        whose power or faction they
could nde him. But Themistocles hauing had notice feared might breed alteration in
of it before-hand, yeth out of Peloponnesus into        the State: and was but for
                                                        certaine yeeres.
Corcyra, to the people of which Citie, he had           Themistocles, pursued by the
formerly beene bene ciall. But the Corcyraeans          Athenians and Peloponnesians,
alleaging that they durst not keep him there, for feare ﬂyeth to Corcyra.
of displeasing both the Lacedaemonians and the Athenians, conuey him into the

opposite Continent: and being pursued by the men thereto appointed, asking
continually which way hee went, hee was compelled at a streight, to turne in
vnto Admetus, King of the Molossians, his enemie.          Thence is put ouer to the maine
The King himselfe beeing then from home, hee               Land, and goeth to the King of
                                                           the Melossions.
became a suppliant to his Wife, and by her was
instructed, to take their * Sonne with him, and sit        * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉. Cornelius
downe at the Altar of the House. When Admetus not Nepos in the life of Themistocles,
                                                           saies it was their daughter.
long after returned, hee made himselfe knowne to
him, and desired him, that though hee had opposed him in some suite at
Athens, not to reuenge it on him now, in the time of his ight: saying, that being
now the weaker, he must needes su er vnder the stronger; whereas noble
reuenge is of equals, vpon equall termes: and that hee had beene his Aduersary
but in matter of pro t, not of life; whereas, if hee deliuered him vp (telling him
withall, for what, and by whom hee was followed) hee depriued him of all
meanes of sauing his life. Admetus hauing heard him, bade him arise, together
with his Sonne, whom he held as he sate: which is the most submisse
supplication that is.

Not long after came the Lacedaemonians and the Athenians, and though they
alledged much to haue him, yet hee deliuered him not, but sent him away by
Land to Pydna, vpon the * other Sea (a City belonging Thence he is conueyed to Pydna.
to * Alexander) because his purpose was to goe to the *
                                                          * The Aegean Sea.
King: where nding a Ship bound for Iönia, hee
                                                          * King of Macedonia.
embarqued, and was carried by foule weather vpon
the the Fleet of the Athenians, that besieged Naxus. * Of Persia.
Being afraid, hee discouered to the Master (for hee was
vnknowne) who hee was, and for what hee ed, and In danger to be cast vpon the
said, that vnlesse hee would saue him, hee  Athenians Fleet at Naxus, he
                                                          maketh himselfe knowne to the
meant to say, that hee had hired him to carry him         Master of the Ship.
away for money. And that to saue him, there needed
no more but this, to let none goe out of the Ship, till the weather serued to bee
gone. To which if hee consented, hee would not forget to requite him according
to his merit. The Master did so; and hauing lyen a day and a night at Sea, vpon

the Fleet of the Athenians, he arriued afterward at Ephesus. And Themistocles
hauing liberally rewarded him with money, (for hee      He arriueth at Ephesus.
receiued there, both what was sent him from his
friends at Athens, and also what he had put out at Argos, ) hee tooke his iourney
vpwards, in company of a certaine Persian of the *      * The Low-countries of Asia
Low-Countries, and sent Letters to the King             lying to the Aegean Sea.

Artaxerxes, the Sonne of Xerxes newly come to the Kingdome, wherein was
written to this purpose:

 His Letter to Artaxerxes.
 I THEMISTOCLES am comming vnto thee, who, of all the Grecians, as long
 as I was forced to resist thy Father that invaded mee, haue done your House
 the maniest damages; yet the bene ts I did him, were more, after once I with
 safety, hee with danger was to make retreat. And both a good turne is already
 due vnto mee, (writing here, how hee had forewarned him of the Grecians
 departure out of Salamis, and ascribing the then not breaking of the Bridge,
 falsely vnto himselfe. ) and at this time to doe thee many other good seruices, I
 present my selfe, persecuted by the Grecians for thy friendships sake. But I
 desire to haue a yeeres respite, that I may declare vnto thee the cause of my
 comming my selfe.

The King, as is reported, wondred what his purpose might bee, and commanded
him to doe as he had said. In this time of respite, hee learned as much as hee
could of the Language and fashions of the place; and a yeere after comming to
the Court, he was great with the King, more then euer had beene any Grecian
before; both for his former dignity, and the hope of Greece, which hee promised
to bring into his subiection; but especially for the tryall hee gaue of his wisdome.
For Themistocles was a man, in whom most truely             The praise of Themistocles.
was manifested the strength of naturall        
iudgement, wherein hee had something worthy admiration, di erent from other

men. For by his naturall prudence, without the helpe of instruction before or
after, he was both of extemporary matters, vpon short deliberation, the best
discerner, and also of what for the most part would bee their issue, the best
coniecturer. What hee was perfect in, hee was able also to explicate: and what hee
was vnpractised in, he was not to seeke how to iudge of conueniently. Also hee
foresaw, no man better, what was best or worst in any case that was doubtfull.
And (to say all in few words) this man, by the naturall goodnesse of his wit, and
quicknesse of deliberation, was the ablest of all men, to tell what was t to bee
done vpon a sudden. But falling sicke, hee ended his His death.
life: some say hee dyed voluntarily by Poyson, because
hee thought himselfe vnable to performe what hee had promised to the King.
His monument is in * Magnesia in Asia, in the Market * There is another Citie of that
place: for hee had the gouernment of that Countrey, name in Greece.
the King hauing bestowed vpon him Magnesia, which yeelded him fty Talents
by yeere for his * bread; and Lampsacus for his Wine, * Cornelius Nepos in the life of
(for this City was in those dayes thought to haue store Themistocles, sayes that the King
                                                          gaue him these Cities with these
of Wine, ) and the Citty of Myus for his meate. His       words, Magnesia to ﬁnde him
bones are said, by his Kindred to haue beene brought bread, Lampsacus wine, and
                                                          Myus meat.
home by his owne appointment, and buryed in
Attica, vnknowne to the Athenians: for it was not lawfull to bury one there, that
had ed for Treason. These were the ends of Pausanias the Lacedaemonian, and
Themistocles the Athenian, the most famous men of all the Grecians of their
time. And this is that which the Lacedaemonians did command, and were
commanded, in their rst Ambassage, touching the banishment of such as were
vnder the curse.

AFTER THIS, they sent Ambassadours againe to Athens, commanding them
to leuy the Siege from before Potidaea, and to su er The Athenians by
Aegina to bee free; but principally, and most plainely Ambassadours command the
                                                       abrogation of the Act against the
telling them, that the Warre should not bee made, in Megareans.
case they would abrogate the Act concerning the
Megareans. By which Act, they were forbidden both the Fayres of Attica, and all
Ports within the Athenian dominion. But the Athenians would not obey them,

neither in the rest of their Commands, nor in the abrogation of that 
Act; but recriminated the Megareans, for hauing tilled holy ground, and vnset-
out with bounds: and for receiuing of their Slaues that reuolted. But at length,
when the last Ambassadours from Lacedaemon were arriued, namely,
Rhamphias, Melesippus, and Agesander, and spake          The last Ambassadours from
nothing of that which formerly they were wont, but Lacedaemon, require the
                                                         Athenians to lay down their
onely this, That the Lacedaemonians desire that there dominion.
should be Peace, which may bee had, if you will suﬀer
the Grecians to bee gouerned by their owne Lawes. The The Athenians consult what to
Athenians called an Assembly, and propounding their answer.
opinions amongst themselues, thought good, after they had debated the matter,
to giue them an answer once for all. And many stood forth, and deliuered their
mindes on eyther side, some for the Warre, and some, that this Act concerning
the Megareans, ought not to stand in their way to Peace, but to bee abrogated.
And Pericles the sonne of Xantippus, the principall man, at that time, of all
Athens, and most su cient both for speech and action, gaue his aduice in such
manner as followeth.

 1.1. THE ORATION OF PERICLES.
 MEN of Athens, I am still not onely of the same opinion, not to giue way to
 the Peloponnesians (notwithstanding, I know that men haue not the same
 passions in the Warre it selfe, which they haue when they are incited to it, but
 change their opinions with the events) but also I see, that I must now aduise
 the same things, or very neere to what I haue before deliuered. And I require
 of you, with whom my counsell shall take place, that if wee miscarry in ought,
 you will eyther make the best of it, as decreed by Common Consent, or if wee
 prosper, not to attribute it to your owne wisdome onely. For it falleth out
 with the euents of Actions, no lesse then with the purposes of man, to
 proceed with vncertainety: which is also the cause, that when any thing
 happeneth contrary to our expectation, wee vse to lay the fault on Fortune.
 That the Lacedaemonians, both formerly, and especially now, take counsell

how to doe vs mischiefe, is a thing manifest. For whereas it is said, [in the
Articles] that in our mutuall controuersies, we shall giue and receiue trials of
Iudgement, and in the meane time, eyther side hold what they possesse, they
neuer yet sought any such tryall themselues, nor will accept of the same
o ered by vs. They will cleere themselues of their accusations, by 
Warre rather then by words: and come hither no more now to expostulate,
but to command. For they command vs to arise from before Potidaea, and to
restore the Aeginetae to the liberty of their owne Lawes, and to abrogate the
Act concerning the Megareans. And they that come last, command vs to
restore all the Grecians to their liberty. Now let none of you conceiue that wee
shall goe to Warre for a tri e, by not abrogating the Act concerning Megara,
(yet this by them is pretended most, and that for the abrogation of it, the
Warre shall stay; ) nor retaine a scruple in your mindes, as if a small matter
moued you to the Warre: for euen this small matter containeth the tryall and
constancy of your resolution. Wherein if you giue them way, you shall
hereafter bee commanded a greater matter, as men that for feare will obey
them likewise in that. But by a sti e-deniall, you shall teach them plainely, to
come to you heereafter on termes of more equality. Resolue therefore from
this occasion, eyther to yeeld them obedience, before you receiue damage; or if
wee must haue Warre, (which for my part I thinke is best, ) be the pretence
weighty or light, not to giue way, nor keepe what wee possesse, in feare. For a
great and a little claime, imposed by equals vpon their neighbours, before
Iudgement, by way of command, hath one and the same vertue to make
subiect. As for the Warre, how both wee and they be furnished, and why wee
are not like to haue the worse, by hearing the particulars, you shall now
vnderstand. The Peloponnesians are * men that liue * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
by their labour, without money, eyther in particular,
or in common stocke. Besides, in long Warres, and by Sea, they are without
experience; for that the Warres which they haue had one against another, haue
beene but short, through pouerty; and * such men * as liue by their labour.
can neither man their Fleets, nor yet send out their
Armies by Land very often; because they must bee farre from their owne
wealth, and yet by that be maintained; and be besides barred the vse of the Sea.

It must bee a * stocke of money, not forced              * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
Contributions, that support the Warres, and such as
liue by their labour, are more ready to serue the Warres with their bodies, then
with their money. For they make account that their bodies will out-liue the
danger, but their money they thinke is sure to bee spent; especially if the
Warre (as it is likely) should last. So that the Peloponnesians and their
Confederates, though for one Battell they bee able to stand out against all
Greece besides, yet to maintaine a Warre against such as haue their
preparations of another kinde, they are not able; in as much as not hauing one
and the same counsell, they can speedily performe nothing vpon the occasion;
and hauing equality of vote, and being of seuerall * * Of the Peloponnesians and
races, euery one will presse his particular  their Confederates, some were
                                                         Doreans some Aeolians, some
                                                                ▪
interest; whereby nothing is like to bee fully           Boeotians.
executed. For some will desire most to take reuenge
on some enemie, and others to haue their estates least wasted; and being long
before they can assemble, they take the lesser part of their time to debate the
Common businesse, and the greater, to dispatch their owne priuate a aires.
And euery one supposeth that his owne neglect of the Common estate, can
doe little hurt, and that it will bee the care of some body else to looke to that,
for his owne good: Not obseruing how by these thoughts of euery one in
seuerall, the Common businesse is ioyntly ruined. But their greatest hindrance
of all, will be their want of money, which being raised slowly, their actions
must bee full of delay, which the occasions of warre will not endure. As for
their fortifying here, and their Nauie, they are matters not worthy feare. For it
were a hard matter for a Citie equall to our owne, in time of peace to forti e
in that manner, much lesse in the Countrey of an Enemie, and wee no lesse
forti ed against them. And if they had a Garrison here, though they might by
excursions, and by the receiuing of our Fugitiues, annoy some part of our
Territory; yet would not that bee enough both to besiege vs, and also to
hinder vs from sayling into their Territories, and from taking reuenge with
our Fleet, which is the thing wherein our strength lyeth. For wee haue more
experience in Land-seruice, by vse of the Sea, then they haue in Sea-seruice, by
vse of the Land. Nor shall they attaine the knowledge of nauall a aires easily.

For your selues, though falling to it immediately vpon the Persian warre, yet
haue not attained it fully. How then should husbandmen, not Sea-men,
whom also wee will not su er to apply themselues to it, by lying continually
vpon them with so great Fleets, performe any matter of value? Indeed, if they
should bee opposed but with a few Ships, they might aduenture, encouraging
their want of knowledge, with store of men; but awed by many, they will not
stirre that way; and not applying themselues to it, will bee yet more vnskilfull,
and thereby more cowardly. For knowledge of Nauall matters, is an Art as well
as any other, and not to be attended at idle times, and on the * by; but
requiring rather, that whilest it is a learning, nothing * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
else should bee done on the by. But say they should
take the money at Olympia and Delphi, and therewith, at greater wages, goe
about to draw from vs the Strangers employed in our Fleet; this indeed, if
going aboard both our selues, and those that dwell amongst vs, wee could not
match them, were a dangerous matter. But now, wee can both doe this, and
(which is the principall thing) wee haue Steeresmen, and other necessary men
for the seruice of a Ship, both more and better of our owne Citizens, then are
in all the rest of Greece. Besides that, not any of these Strangers,          
vpon tryall, would bee found content to y his owne Countrey, and withall
vpon lesse * hope of victory, for a few dayes increase * That is, of victory by Sea,
of wages, take part with the other side. In this          where they were to be employed.

manner, or like to this, seemeth vnto mee to stand the case of the
Peloponnesians: Whereas ours is both free from what in theirs I haue
reprehended, and hath many great aduantages besides. If they inuade our
Territory by Land, wee shall inuade theirs by Sea. And when wee haue wasted
part of Peloponnesus, and they all Attica, yet shall theirs bee the greater losse.
For they, vnlesse by the sword, can get no other Territory in stead of that wee
shall destroy: Whereas for vs, there is other Land, both in the Ilands, and
Continent: For the dominion of the Sea is a great matter. Consider but this; If
we dwelt in the Ilands, whether of vs then were more inexpugnable? Wee must
therefore now, drawing as neere as can bee to that imagination, lay aside the
care of Fields and Villages, and not for the losse of them, out of passion, giue
battell to the Peloponnesians, farre more in number then our selues; (for

though wee giue them an ouerthrow, wee must ght againe with as many
more: and if wee bee ouerthrowne, we shall lose the helpe of our
Confederates, which are our strength; for when we cannot warre vpon them,
they will revolt) nor bewaile yee the losse of Fields or Houses, but of mens
bodies: for men may acquire these, but these cannot acquire men. And if I
thought I should preuaile, I would aduise you to goe out, and destroy them
your selues, and shew the Peloponnesians, that you will neuer the sooner obey
them for such things as these. There be many other things that giue hope of
victory, (* in case you doe not, whilest you are in this * Thucydides hath his mind
Warre, striue to enlarge your dominion, and                here, pon the Defeat in Sicily,
                                                                    ●

                                                           which fell out many yeeres after
vndergoe other voluntary dangers; for I am afraid of the death of Peric        ●●●●    hereby
our owne errours, more then of their designes, ) but          hereby
                                                               ●     it seemes, 〈…〉 his
                                                           speech more to what Pericles
they shall bee spoken of at another time, in               might ha e said, then to what
                                                                        ●

prosecution of the warre it selfe. For the present, let he did say. 〈◊〉 also e  ●

                                                           professeth in generall of his
vs send away these men with this Answer: That the course in setting downe
Megareans shall haue the liberty of our Fayres and         Speeches. Besides, he maketh
                                                           Pericles here to answer point by
Ports, if the Lacedaemonians will also make no
                                                           point to the Oration of the
banishment of vs nor of our Confederates, as of            Corinthians at Lacedaemon, as
Strangers. For neither our Act concerning Megara,          if hee had beene by, when it was
                                                           deliuered: and vseth the same
nor their banishment of Strangers, is forbidden in the manner in all opposite
Articles. Also, that we will let the Grecian Cities be     Orations.

free, if they were so when the Peace was made; and if
the Lacedaemonians will also giue leaue vnto their Confederates, to vse their
freedome, not as shall serue the turne of the Lacedaemonians, but as they
themselues shall euery one thinke good. Also, that wee will stand to Iudgement
according to the Articles, and will not beginne the Warre, but bee reuenged on
those that shall. For this is both iust, and for the dignity of the City 
to answer. Neuerthelesse, you must know, that of necessity Warre there will
bee; and the more willingly wee embrace it, the lesse pressing we shall haue
our enemies; and that out of greatest dangers, whether to Cities or priuate
men, arise the greatest honours. For our Fathers, when they vndertooke the
Medes, did from lesse beginnings, nay abandoning the little they had, by
wisdome rather then Fortune, by courage rather then strength, both repell the

 Barbarian, and aduance this State to the height it now is at. Of whom wee
 ought not now to come short, but rather to reuenge vs by all meanes vpon our
 enemies, and doe our best to deliuer the State vnimpayred by vs, to posterity.

Thus spake Pericles.

The Athenians liking best of his aduice, decreed as hee would haue them,
answering the Lacedaemonians according to his direction, both in particular as
hee had spoken, and generally, That they would doe nothing on command, but
were ready to answer their accusations vpon equall      The Answer of the Athenians to
termes, by way of arbitrement. So the Ambassadours the Ambassadours of
                                                        Lacedaemon.
went home, and after these, there came no more.

These were the Quarels and di erences on eyther side, before the Warre: which
Quarels beganne presently vpon the businesse of Epidamnus and Corcyra.
Neuerthelesse, there was still commerce betwixt them, and they went to each
other without any Herald, though not without iealousie. For the things that had
passed, were but the confusion of the Articles, and matter of the Warre to follow.

FINIS.

              2. THE SECOND BOOK OF
              THE HISTORY OF
              THVCYDIDES.
              The principall Contents.
The entry of the Theban Souldiers into Plataea, by the Treason of       
some within. Their repulse and slaughter. The irruption of the Peloponnesians
into Attica. The wasting of the Coast of Peloponnesus by the Athenian Fleet.
The Publike Funerall of the rst slaine. The second inuasion of Attica. The
Pestilence in the City of Athens. The Ambraciotes warre against the Amphilochi.
Plataea assaulted. Besieged. The Peloponnesian Fleet beaten by Phormio, before
the Straight of the Gulfe of Crissa. The same Fleet repaired, and re-inforced and
beaten againe by Phormio, before Naupactus. The attempt of the
Peloponnesians on Salamis. The fruitlesse expedition of the Thracians against
the Macedonians. This in the rst 3. yeeres of the Warre.

THE Warre between the Athenians and the Peloponnesians beginneth now,
from the time they had no longer commerce one with THE FIRST YEERE OF THE
another without a Herald, and that hauing once         WARRE.

begun it, they warred without intermission. And it is written in order by
Summers and Winters, according as from time to time the seuerall matters came
to passe.

The Peace, which after the winning of Euboea, was concluded for                 
thirty yeeres, lasted foureteene yeeres; but in the fteenth yeere, being the forty
eighth of the Priesthood of * Chrysis, in Argos:          * Priestesse of Iuno. By whose
Aenesias being the Ephore at Sparta, and Pythadorus Priesthood they reckoned their
                                                          yeeres.
Archon of Athens, hauing then * two moneths of his
gouernment to come, in the sixth moneth after the         *
Battell at Potidaea, and in the beginning of the Spring,

three hundred and odde Thebans, led by Pythangelus The Athenians began their
                                                         yeeres about the Summer Sollace.
the Sonne of Philides, and Diemporus, the sonne of Plataea surprised by the
Oenotoridas, * Boeotian Rulers, about the rst Watch Thebans by Treason.
of the night, entred with their Armes into Plataea, a * Peto 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉. There
Citie of Boeotia, and Confederate of the Athenians. were11. of 〈◊〉 in all, and had
                                                         the 〈◊〉 command of the
They were brought in, and the Gates opened vnto
                                                         Boeotians in their Warres, 〈◊〉.
them, by Nauclides and his Complices, men of
Plataea, that for their owne priuate ambition, intended both the destruction of
such Citizens as were their enemies, and the putting of the whole City vnder the
subiection of the Thebans. This they negotiated with one Eurymachus, the
Sonne of Leontiadas, one of the most potent men of Thebes. For the Thebans
foreseeing the Warre, desired to praeoccupate Plataea, (which was alwayes at
variance with them) whilest there was yet Peace, and the Warre not openly on
foot. By which meanes, they more easily entred vndiscouered, there being no
order taken before for a Watch. And * making a stand * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉. The
in their Armes in the Market place, did not (as they     Thebans execute not the designe
                                                         of the Traytors.
that gaue them entrance would haue had them) fall
presently to the businesse, and enter the Houses of their Aduersaries, but
resolued rather to make fauourable Proclamation, and to induce the Cities to
composition and friendship. And the Herald proclaimed, That if any man,
according to the ancient custome of all the Boeotians, But oﬀer composition.
would enter into the same league of Warre with them,
hee should come, and bring his Armes to theirs: supposing the Citie by this
meanes, would easily be drawne to their side. The Plataeans, when they
perceiued that the Thebans were already entred, and The Plataeans accept it.
had surprized the Citie, through feare, and opinion
that more were entred then indeed were, (for they could not see them in the
night) came to composition, and accepting the condition, rested quiet, and the
rather, for that they had yet done no man harme. But whilest that these things
were treating, they obserued that the Thebans were       The Plataeans take heart.
not many, and thought that if they should set vpon
them, they might easily haue the victory. For the Plataean Commons 
were not willing to haue revolted from the Athenians. Wherefore it was thought

  t to vndertake the matter; and they vnited themselues, by digging through the
Common Walles, betweene house and house, that                And vnite themselues by digging
they might not be discouered as they passed the              through the Common Walles of
                                                             their Houses.
Streets. They also placed Carts in the Streets (without
the Cattell that drew them) to serue them in stead of a Wall; and euery other
thing they put in readinesse, as they seuerally seemed necessary for the present
enterprize. When all things according to their meanes, were ready, they marched
from their Houses, towards the enemies; taking their time whilest it was yet
night, and a little before breake of day; because they would not haue to charge
them, when they should bee emboldned by the light, and on equall termes, but
when they should by night bee terri ed, and inferiour to them in knowledge of
the places of the Citie. So they forthwith set vpon them, and came quickly vp to
hand-stroakes. And the Thebans seeing this, and              They assault the Thebans.
  nding they were deceiued, cast themselues into a
round gure, and beat them backe in that part where the assault was made: and
twice or thrice they repulsed them: But at last, when both the Plataeans
themselues charged them with a great clamour, and their Wiues also and
Families shouted, and screeched from the Houses, and withall threw stones and
Tyles amongst them; the night hauing beene also very wet, they were afraid, and
turned their backes, and ed heere and there about the Cittie; ignorant for the
most part, in the darke and durt, of the wayes out, by The Thebans ﬂy, but cannot get
which they should haue beene saued (for this accident out.
fell out vpon the change of the Moone) and pursued by such as were well
acquainted with the wayes to keepe them in; insomuch as the greatest part of
them perished. The Gate by which they entred, and which onely was left open, a
certaine Plataean shut vp againe, with the head of a Iaueline, which hee thrust
into the Staple, in stead of a bolt: so that this way also their passage was stopped.
As they were chased vp and downe the City, some climbed the Walles, and cast
themselues out, and for the most part dyed; some came to a desart Gate of the
City, and with a Hatchet giuen them by a Woman, cut the staple, and got forth
vnseene: but these were not many: for the thing was soone discouered: 
others againe were slaine, dispersed in seuerall parts of the Citie. But the greatest
part, and those especially who had cast themselues before into a Ring, happened

into a great Edi ce, adioyning to the Wall, the doores The Thebans penned vp in a
whereof being open, they thought had beene the            House, which they entred into, by
                                                          mistaking the doore for the City
Gates of the Citie, and that there had beene a direct     Gate.
way through to the other side. The Plataeans seeing
them now pend vp, consulted whether they should burne them as they were, by
  ring the House, or else resolue of some other punishment. At length, both
these, and all the rest of the Thebans that were straggling in the Citie, agreed to
yeeld themselues and their Armes to the Plataeans, at They yeeld to discretion
discretion. And this successe had they that entred into
Plataea.

But the rest of the Thebans, that should with their       The whole power of Thebes come
whole power haue beene there before day, for feare the to rescue their Fellowes.
surprize should not succeed with those that were in, came so late with their ayde,
that they heard the newes of what was done, by the way. Now Plataea is from
Thebes, 70. Furlongs, and they marched the slowlier, for the raine which had
falne the same night. For the Riuer Asopus was swolne so high, that it was not
easily passable; so that what by the foulenesse of the way, and what by the
di culty of passing the Riuer, they arriued not, till their men were already some
slaine, and some taken prisoners. When the Thebans vnderstood how things had
gone, they lay in waite for such of the Plataeans as were without: (for there were
abroad in the Villages, both men, and houshold stu e, The Thebans seeke to intercept
as was not vnlikely, the euill happening vnexpectedly, the Plataeans in the Villages.
and in time of peace; ) desiring, if they could take any Prisoners, to keepe them
for exchange for those of theirs within, which (if any were so) were saued aliue.
This was the Thebans purpose. But the Plataeans,          The Plataeans send to the
whilest they were yet in Councell, suspecting that        Thebans, to be gone, and promise
                                                          to release their prisoners.
some such thing would bee done, and fearing their
case without, sent a Herald vnto the Thebans, whom they commanded to say,
That what they had already done, attempting to surprize their Citie in time of
Peace, was done wickedly, and to forbid them to doe any iniury to those without,
and that otherwise they would kill all those men of theirs that they had aliue;
which, if they would withdraw their forces out of their Territory, they would

againe restore vnto them. Thus the Thebans say, and that the                 
Plataeans did sweare it. But the Plataeans confesse not that they promised to
deliuer them presently, but vpon treaty, if they should agree, and deny that they
swore it. Vpon this the Thebans went out of their Territory; and the Plataeans,
when they had speedily taken in whatsoeuer they had The Thebans goe oﬀ, and the
in the Countrey, immediately slew their Prisoners.       Plataeans fetch in their men
                                                         and goods, and kill their
They that were taken were 180. and Eurymachus,           prisoners.
with whom the Traytors had practised, was one.
When they had done, they sent a Messenger to Athens, and gaue truce to the
Thebans to fetch away the bodies of their dead, and ordered the City as was
thought conuenient for the present occasion.

The newes of what was done, comming straightway to Athens, they instantly
laid hands on all the Boeotians then in Attica, and sent an O cer to Plataea, to
forbid their further proceeding with their Theban Prisoners, till such time as
they also should haue advised of the matter: for they The Athenians lay hands on
were not yet aduertised of their putting to death. For such Boeotians as were in Attica.
the rst Messenger was sent away when the Thebans rst entred the Towne; and
the second, when they were ouercome, and taken prisoners. But of what
followed after, they knew nothing. So that the Athenians when they sent, knew
not what was done, and the O cer arriuing, found that the men were already
slaine. After this, the Athenians sending an Armie to Plataea, victualled it, and
left a Garrison in it, and tooke thence both the Women and Children, and also
such men as were vnseruiceable for the Warre.            They victuall Plataea, and put a
                                                             Garrison into it, and take out
                                                             their vnnecessary people.
This action falling out at Plataea, & the Peace now
cleerly dissolued, the Athenians prepared themselues for Warre; so also did the
Lacedaemonians and their Confederates; intending on either part to send
Ambassadours to the King, and to other Barbarians, Preparation of both sides for the
wheresoeuer they had hope of succours; and             Warre.

contracting Leagues with such Cities as were not vnder their owne command.
The * Lacedaemonians, besides those Gallies which      * of Persia.
they had in Italy and Sicily, of the Cities that tooke

part with them there, were ordered to furnish, *          * The Lacedaemonian League,
proportionably to the greatnesse of their seuerall        or Lacedaemonian party, not
                                                          particularly that State.
Cities, so many more, as the whole number might
amount to 500. Sayle, and to prouide a Summe of money attessed, and in other
things not to stirre farther, but to receiue the Athenians, comming but with one
Gally at once, till such time as the same should be ready. The                
Athenians on the other side, suruayed their present Confederates, and sent
Ambassadours to those places that lay about Peloponnesus, as Corcyra,
Cephalonia, Acarnania, and Zacynthus, knowing that as long as these were their
friends, they might with the more security make Warre round about vpon the
Coast of Peloponnesus.

Neither side conceiued small matters, but put their whole strength to the Warre.
And not without reason. For all men in the beginnings of enterprises, are the most
eager. Besides, there were then in Peloponnesus many young men, and many in
Athens, who for want of experience, not vnwillingly vndertooke the Warre. And
not onely the rest of Greece stood at gaze, to behold the two principall States in
Combate, but many * Prophecies were told, and many Prophecies and Oracles
* sung by the Priests of the Oracles, both in the Cities preceding the Warre.
about to warre, and in others.                           * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Prophecies
                                                             in Prose.
There was also a little before this, an Earthquake in   * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, Sung. For
Delos, which in the memory of the Grecians, neuer       those Prophecies which the
shooke before; and was interpreted for, and seemed to Oracles    deliuered by their
                                                        Priests, were in verse, and were
bee a signe of what was to come afterwards to passe. not called 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉,
And whatsoeuer thing then chanced of the same           but 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.

nature, it was all sure to bee enquired after. But mens The aﬀections of the Grecians to
a ections for the most part went with the               wards the combatant States.

Lacedaemonians; and the rather, for that they gaue out, they would recouer the
Grecians liberty. And euery man, both priuate and publike person, endeuoured
as much as in them lay, both in word and deede to assist them; and thought the
businesse so much hindred, as himself was not present at it. In such passion were
most men against the Athenians; some for desire to be deliuered from vnder

their gouernment, and others for feare of falling into it. And these were the
preparations and a ections brought vnto the Warre.

But the Confederates of either party, which they had The Confederates of the
when they began it, were these: The Lacedaemonians Lacedaemonians.
had all Peloponnesus within the Isthmus, except the Argiues and Achaeans: (for
these were in amity with both, saue that the P●llenians at rst, onely of all
Achaia, tooke their part; but afterwards all the rest did so likewise) and without
Peloponnesus, the Megareans, Locrians, Boeotians, Phocaeans, Ambraciotes,
Leucadians, and Anactorians. Of which the Corinthians, Megareans,
Sicyonians, Pellenians, Eleans, Ambraciotes, and Leucadians found 
Shipping. The Boeotians, Phocaeans, and Locrians, Horsemen; and the rest of
the Cities, Footmen. And these were the Confederates of the Lacedaemonians.
The Athenian Confederates were these: The Chians, The Confederates of the
Lesbians, Plataeans, the Messenians in Naupactus,          Athenians.

most of the Acarnanians, the Corcyraeans, Zacynthians, and other Cities their
Tributaries amongst those Nations. Also that part of Caria which is on the Sea
Coast, and the Doreans adioyning to them, Iönia, Hellespont, the Cities
bordering on Thrace, all the Ilands from Peloponnesus to Crete on the East, and
all the rest of the Cyclades, except Melos and Thera. Of these the Chians,
Lesbians, and Corcyraeans found Gallies, the rest Footmen and money. These
were their Confederates▪ and the preparation for the Warre on both sides.

The Lacedaemonians, after the businesse of Plataea, sent Messengers presently
vp and downe Peloponnesus, and to their Confederates without, to haue in
readinesse their Forces, and such things as should bee necessary for a Forraigne
expedition, as intending the inuasion of Attica. And The Lacedaemonians 〈◊〉 meete
when they were all ready, they came to the               in the Isthmus, inuade Attica.

Rendezuous in the Isthmus, at a day appointed, two thirds of the Forces of
euery Citie. When the whole Army was gotten together, Archidamus, King of
the Lacedaemonians, Generall of the Expedition, called together the
Commanders of the seuerall Cities, and such as were in authority, and most
worthy to bee present, and spake vnto them as followeth.

2.1. THE ORATION OF ARCHIDAMVS.
MEn of Peloponnesus, and Confederates, not onely The Oration of Archidamus in
our Fathers haue had many Warres, both within and the Councell of Warre, in the
                                                          Army of the League.
without Peloponnesus, but wee our selues also, such
as are any thing in yeeres, haue beene su ciently acquainted therewith; yet did
wee neuer before set forth with so great a preparation as at this present. And
now, not onely wee are a numerous and puissant Armie that inuade▪ but the
State also is puissant, that is inuaded by vs. Wee haue reason therefore to shew
our selues, neitheir worse then our Fathers, nor short of the opinion
conceiued of our selues. For all Greece, is vp at this Commotion, obseruing vs:
and through their hatred to the Athenians, doe wish that we may accomplish
whatsoeuer wee intend. And therefore though wee seeme to invade 
them with a great Army, and to haue much assurance, that they will not come
out against vs, to battell, yet wee ought not for this, to march the lesse
carefully prepared, but of euery City, as well the Captaine, as the Souldier, to
expect alwayes some danger or other, in that part wherein hee himselfe is
placed. For the accidents of Warre are vncertaine; and for the most part the
Onset begins from the lesser number, and vpon passion. And oftentimes the
lesser number, being afraid, hath beaten backe the greater with the more ease,
for that through contempt they haue gone vnprepared. And in the Land of an
Enemie, though the Souldiers ought alwaies to haue bold hearts, yet for
action, they ought to make their preparations, as if they were afraid. For that
will giue them both more courage to goe vpon the enemy, and more safety in
  ghting with him. But wee invade not now a Citie that cannot defend it selfe,
but a City euery way well appointed. So that wee must by all meanes expect to
be fought withall, though not now, because we be not yet there, yet hereafter,
when they shall see vs in their Countrey, wasting and destroying their
possessions: For all men, when in their owne ght, and on a sudden, they
receiue any extraordinary hurt, fall presently into choler; and the lesse they
consider, with the more stomach they assault. And this is likely to hold in the
Athenians somewhat more then in others; for they thinke themselues worthy

 to haue the command of others, and to inuade and waste the territory of their
 neighbours, rather then to see their neighbours waste theirs. Wherefore, as
 being to Warre against a great Citie, and to procure, both to your Ancestours
 and your selues, a great fame, eyther good or bad, as shall bee the event; follow
 your Leaders in such sort, as aboue all things you esteeme of order and
 watchfulnesse. For there is nothing in the world more comely, nor more safe,
 then when many men are seene to obserue one and the same order.

Archidamus hauing thus spoken, and dismissed the Councell, rst sent
Melesippus, the Sonne of Diacritus, a man of Sparta, Archidamus sends before him
to Athens, to try if the Athenians, seeing them now       an Ambassadour to the
                                                          Athenians.
on their iourney, would yet in some degree remit of
their obstinacy. But the Athenians neither receiued       And tryes all other meanes to
him into their Citie, nor presented him to the State: right his Country, before Warre.
for the opinion of Pericles had already taken place, not to receiue from the
Lacedaemonians neither Herald nor Ambassadour, as long as their Armie was
abroad. Therefore they sent him backe without audience, with commandment
to be out of their borders the selfe-same day; and that hereafter if they 
would any thing with them, they should returne euery one to his home, and
send their Ambassadours from thence. They sent with The Ambassadours from
him also certaine persons, to conuoy him out of the Archidamus conv yed backe
                                                                          ●

                                                          without Conference.
Countrey, to the end that no man should conferre
with him: who when hee came to the limits, and was to bee dismissed, vttered
these words: This day is the beginning of much euill vnto the Grecians: and so
departed.

When hee returned to the Campe, Archidamus                Archidamus marcheth forward.
perceiuing that they would not relent, dislodged, and
marched on with his Armie into their Territory. The Boeotians with their
appointed part, and with Horsemen, ayded the Peloponnesians; but with the
rest of their Forces, went and wasted the Territorie of Plataea.

Whilest the Peloponnesians were comming together in the Isthmus, and when
they were on their March, before they brake into Attica, Pericles the sonne of
Xantippus, (who with nine others was Generall of the Athenians) when he saw
they were about to breake in, suspecting that Archidamus, either of priuate
courtesie, or by command of the Lacedaemonians, to Pericles imagining Archidamus
bring him into iealousie (as they had before for his         might spare his grounds,
                                                             promiseth, if he did, to giue
sake commanded the excommunication) might                    them to the State.
oftentimes leaue his Lands vntouched, told the
Athenians before-hand in an Assembly, That though The speech of Pericles to the
Archidamus had beene his guest, it was for no ill to the Assembly at Athens, touching the
                                                             meanes of the Warre, &c.
State, and howsoeuer, if the Enemie did not waste his
Lands and Houses, as well as the rest, that then hee gaue them to the Common-
wealth. And therefore desired That for this hee might not bee suspected. Also hee
aduised them concerning the businesse in hand, the same things hee had done
before, That they should make preparation for the Warre, and receiue their goods
into the City; that they should not goe out to Battell, but come into the City, and
guard it. That they should also furnish out their Nauy, wherein consisted their
power, and hold a carefull hand ouer their Confederates, telling them, how that
in the money that came from these, lay their strength, and that the Victory in
Warre consisted wholly in Counsell, and store of money. Further, hee bade them
bee con dent, in that there was yeerely comming in to The Treasure of the people of
the State, from the Confederates, for Tribute, besides       Athens.

other reuenue * 600. Talents, and remaining yet then * 600. Talents, of our money
in the Citadell * 6000. Talents of siluer coine. (for the about 112500. pounds.
greatest summe there had beene, was * 10000. Talents, * 6000 Talents, of our money
wanting 300. out of which was taken that which had about 1125000. pounds.
beene expended vpon the Gate-houses of  * 9700. Talents, 1818750.
the Cittadell, and vpon other buildings, and for the         pounds sterling.

charges of Potidaea. ) Besides the vncoyned gold and siluer of priuate and publike
Oﬀerings; and all the dedicated Vessels, belonging to the Shewes and Games, and
the spoiles of the Persian, and other things of that nature, which amounted to no
lesse then * 500. Talents. Hee added further, that much * 500. Talents. 93750. pound.
money might bee had out of other Temples without the

Citie, which they might vse; And if they were barred the vse of all these, they might
yet vse the ornaments of gold about the * Goddesse her * Minerua.
selfe; and said, that the Image had about it, the weight
of * 40. Talents of most pure Gold, and which might all * The weight of 40. Talents in
bee taken oﬀ; but hauing made vse of it for their safety, gold, at 3. 〈…〉 ounce, coines to
                                                          9000. pound.
hee said, they were to make restitution of the like
quantity againe. Thus hee encouraged them, touching matter of money. Men of
Armes he said they had 13000. besides the 16000. that were employed for the
guard of the Citie, and vpon the Walles, (for so many at the rst kept watch at
the comming in of the Enemy, young and old together, and Strangers that dwelt
amongst them, as many as could beare Armes. ) For the length of the Phalerian
Wall, to that part of the circumference of the Wall of The length of the walles to which
the City where it ioyned, was 35. Furlongs; and that the Watchmen were appointed.
part of the circumference which was guarded (for some of it was not kept with a
Watch, namely the part betweene the Long Walles and the Phalerian) was 43.
Furlongs: and the length of the Long-Walles downe to Piraeus, (of which there
was a Watch onely on the outmost) was 40. Furlongs: and the whole compasse of
Piraeus, together with Munychia, was 60. Furlongs, (whereof that part that was
watched, was but halfe. ) He said further, they had of Horsemen, accounting
Archers on horsebacke, 1200, and 1600. Archers, and of Their Gallies.
Gallies ﬁt for the Sea, 300. All this and no lesse had
the Athenians, when the invasion of the Peloponnesians was rst in hand, and
when the warre beganne. These and other words spake Pericles, as hee vsed to
doe, for demonstration, that they were likely to outlast this Warre.

When the Athenians had heard him, they approued The Athenians fetch in their
of his words, and fetcht into the Citie their Wiues and Wiues and Children and
                                                        substance into the Citie.
Children, and the furniture of their houses, pulling
downe the very Timber of the houses themselues. Their sheepe and Oxen they
sent ouer into Euboea, and into the Ilands ouer against them. Neuerthelesse this
remouall, in respect they had most of them beene accustomed to the 
Countrey life, grieued them very much.

This custome was from great antiquity, more familiar The Athenians 〈…〉 to liue in the
with the Athenians, then any other of the rest of            Countrey.

Greece. For in the time of Cecrops, and the rst Kings, downe to Theseus, the
Inhabitants of Attica had their seuerall * Bourghes,         * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
and therein their * Common-Halles, and their
                                                             * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉. Guild-
Gouernours; and, vnlesse they were in feare of some Hal es, places where those that
                                                                     ●

danger, went not together to the King for aduice, but administred the State did meete:
                                                             where also some, for honours
euery City administred their owne a aires, and               cause and seruice, were a lowed
deliberated by themselues. And some of them had also dyet, and wherein Vesta was
                                                             worshipped, and a light
their particular Warres, as the Eleusinians, who ioyned continually burned; o that  ●       ▪

with Eumolpus against * Erectheus. But after Theseus some thence deriue the name,
                                                             making 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉
came to the Kingdome, one who besides his wisdome, quasi 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
was also a man of very great power; hee not onely set
good order in the Countrey in other respects, but also *TheseusKing of the Athenians
                                                                      ﬁrst brought the
                                                                                        ▪

dissolued the Councels and Magistracies of the rest of inhabitants of Attica to make
the Townes; and assigning them all one Hall, and one Athens their capitall Citie.
Councell-house, brought them all to cohabite in the Citie that now is; and
constrained them, enioying their owne as before, to * * Not that they must needes
vse this one for their Citie, which (now, when they all dwell in it, but make it the seate
                                                             of the gouernment, and pay their
paide their duties to it) grew great, and was by             duties to it. This caused the Citie
Theseus so deliuered to posterity. And from that time to grow both populous and
                                                             potent, because now the whole
to this day, the Athenians keepe a holiday at the            Nation vnited into one Citie,
publique charge to the * Goddesse, and call it *             made vse of the Sea, which
                                                             deuided they could not haue
Synaecia. That which is now the Cittadell, and the           done.
part which is to the South of the Cittadell, was before
                                                             * Minerua.
this time the Citie. An argument whereof is this, That
the Temples of the Gods are all set either in the            * Cohabitation.
Cittadell it selfe; or, if without, yet in that quarter. As,
that of Iupiter Olympius, and of Apollo Pythius, and of Tellus, and of Bacchus in
Lymnae, (in honour of whom, the old * Bacchanals             * There were in Athens 3.
were celebrated on the twelfth day of the moneth of * Bacchanals; whereof this of
                                                             Bacchus in Limnae, [that is, in
Anthesterion, according as the Iönians, who are              the Marishes] was principall;
deriued from Athens, doe still obserue them) besides another were the Rurall

other ancient Temples scituate in the same part.             Bacchanals, and the third the
                                                             City Bacchanals.
Moreouer, they serued themselues with water for the
best vses, of the Fountaine, which, now the Nine-            * This Moneth fell about ou
                                                                                      ●

                                                             Ianuary, and was the second of
pipes, built so by the Tyrants, was formerly, when the their Winter quarter.
Springs were open, called Calliröe, and was neere.
And from the old custome, before Marriages, and other holy Rites, they ordaine
the vse of the same water to this day. And the Cittadell, from the ancient
habitation of it, is also by the Athenians still called the Citie.

The Athenians therefore had liued a long time, gouerned by Lawes of 
their owne in the Countrey Townes; and after they        The 〈◊〉 remoue 〈…〉 the Borough
were brought into one, were neuerthelesse (both for 〈◊〉 into the Citie, vnwillingly.
the custome which most had, as well of the ancient time, as since, till the Persian
Warre, to liue in the Countrey with their whole families; and also especially▪ for
that since the Persian Warre, they had already repayred their Houses and
furniture) vnwilling to remoue. It pressed them likewise, and was heauily taken,
besides their Houses, to leaue the a things that         a Altars, Chappels, Household
pertained to their Religion, (which, since their old     gods.

forme of gouernment, were become patriall, ) and to change their manner of life,
and to bee no better then banished euery man his Citie. After they came into
Athens, there was habitation for a few, and place of     Athens thronged with the
retire, with some friends or kindred. But the greatest comming in of the Countrey.
part seated themselues in the empty places of the City, and in Temples, and in all
the Chappells of the b Heroes, (sauing in such as were b Men 〈◊〉 to be gotten between
in the Cittadell, and the c Eleusinium, and other           Deity, 〈◊〉 a Mortall, 〈…〉 as
                                                               ●

                                                         exceed the 〈…〉 men 〈◊〉 many
places strongly shut vp. ) The d Pelasgicum also, vnder degrees in Magnanimity.
the Cittadell, though it were a thing accursed to dwell
                                                         c 〈◊〉, a Temple in Athens, vsed
in it, and forbidden by the end of a verse in a Pythian with great religion.
Oracle, in these words, — Best is the Pelasgicon empty,
                                                         d
was neuerthelesse for the present necessity inhabited. Pelasgicum, a place by the
And in my opinion, this Prophecie now fell out           Cittadell, where the Pelasgians
                                                         once fortiﬁed themselues, against
contrary to what was lookt for. For the vnlawfull        the Athenians, and for that
dwelling there, caused not the calamities that befell    cause there was la d a curse
                                                                             ●

the Citie, but the Warre caused the necessity of        vpon the habitation of it. Paus.
                                                        in Atticis.
dwelling there: which Warre the Oracle not naming, An old Prophecy against
foretold onely, that it should one day bee inhabited    dwelling in the Pelasgicum.
vnfortunately. Many also furnished the Turrets of the
Walles, and whatsoeuer other place they could any of them get. For when they
were come in, the Citie had not place for them all▪ But afterwards they had the
Long-Walles diuided amongst them, and inhabited there, and in most parts of
Piraeus. Withall they applyed themselues to the businesse of the Warre, leuying
their Confederates, and making ready a hundred          The Athenians make ready 100.
Gallies to send about Peloponnesus. Thus were the       Gallies to send about
                                                        Peloponnesus.
Athenians preparing.

The Armie of the Peloponnesians marching forward, The Peloponnesians Armie
came rst to Oenoe, a Towne of Attica, the place          assault Oenoe, a frontier Towne
                                                         of Attica, in vain.
where they intended to breake in; and encamping
before it, prepared with Engines, and by other meanes, to assault the 
Wall. For Oenoe lying on the Con nes betweene Attica and Boeotia, was walled
about, and the Athenians kept a Garrison in it for defence of the Countrey,
when at any time there should bee Warre. For which cause they made
preparation for the assault of it, and also spent much time about it otherwise.

And Archidamus for this was not a little taxed, as         Archidamus taxed of
thought to haue bin both slow in gathering together backwardnesse, and fauour to
                                                           the Athenians.
the forces for the Warre, and also to haue fauoured the
Athenians, in that he encouraged not the Army to a forwardnesse in it. And
afterwards likewise, his stay in the Isthmus, and his slownesse in the whole
iourney, was laid to his charge, but especially his delay at Oenoe. For in this time
the Athenians retired into the Citie: whereas it was thought, that the
Peloponnesians marching speedily, might but for his delay, haue taken them all
without. So passionate was the Armie of Archidamus, for his stay before Oenoe.
But expecting that the Athenians, whilest their Territory was yet vnhurt, would
relent, and not endure to see it wasted, for that cause (as it is reported) hee held
his hand. But after, when they had assaulted Oenoe, and tryed all meanes, but

could not take it, and seeing the Athenians sent no Herald to them, then at
length arising from thence, about 80. dayes after that which happened to the
Thebans that entred Plataea, the Summer, and Corne being now at the highest,
they fell into Attica; led by Archidamus, the sonne of Zeuxidamus, King of the
Lacedaemonians. And when they had pitched their          Archidamus with his Army
Campe, they fell to wasting of the Countrey, rst         entreth into Attica.

about Eleusis, and then in the plaine of Thriasia; and put to ight a few
Athenian Horsemen, at the Brookes called Rheiti. After this, leauing the
Aegaleon on the right hand, they passed through Cecropia, till they came vnto
Acharnas, which is the greatest towne in all Attica, of And comes to Acharnas, and
those that are called * Demoi; and pitching there, both stayes there long, cutting downe
                                                         their Corne and Trees.
forti ed their Campe, and staid a great while wasting
the Countrey thereabout.                                 * Burroughes.

Archidamus was said to haue staid so long at Acharnas, with his Armie in Battell
array, and not to haue come downe all the time of his The Designe of Archidamus in
invasion, into the Champaigne, with this intention. staying so long at Acharnas.
Hee hoped that the Athenians ourishing in number of young men, and better
furnished for Warre, then euer they were before would perhaps haue 
come forth against him, and not endured to see their elds cut downe and
wasted; and therefore seeing they met him not in Thriasia, hee thought good to
try if they would come out against him lying now at Acharnas. Besides, the place
seemed vnto him commodious for the Army to lye in; and it was thought also
that the Acharnans beeing a great piece of the Citie (for they were 3000. men of
Armes) would not haue su ered the spoiling of their Lands, but rather haue
vrged all the rest to goe out and ght. And if they came not out against him at
this inuasion, they might hereafter more boldly, both waste the Champaigne
Countrey, and come downe euen to the Walles of the Citie. For the Acharnans,
after they should haue lost their owne, would not bee so forward to hazard
themselues for the goods of other men: But there would bee thoughts of
Sedition in one towards another in the Citie. These were the cogitations of
Archidamus, whilest he lay at Acharnas.

The Athenians, as long as the Armie of the Enemie lay about Eleusis, and the
Fields of Thrius, and as long as they had any hope it would come on no further,
(remembring that also Plistoanax the sonne of Pausanias, King of Lacedaemon,
when 14. yeeres before this Warre, hee entred Attica with an Armie of the
Peloponnesians, as farre as Eleusis, and Thriasia, retired againe, and came no
further; for which hee was also banished Sparta, as thought to haue gone backe
for money) they stirred not. But when they saw the Army now at Acharnas, but
60. Furlongs from the Citie, then they thought it no longer to bee endured; and
when their Fields were wasted (as it was likely) in their sight, (which the yonger
sort had neuer seene before, nor the elder, but in the Persian Warre) it was taken
for a horrible matter; and thought t, by all, especially by the youth, to goe out,
and not to endure it any longer. And holding Councels apart one from another,
they were at much contention, some to make a sally, The Athenians hardly containe
and some to hinder it. And the Priests of the Oracles, themselues from going out to
                                                           ﬁght.
giuing out Prophecies of all kindes, euery one made
the interpretation according to the sway of his owne a ection. But the
Acharnans conceiuing themselues to bee no small part of the Athenians, were
they that whilest their owne Lands were wasting, most of all vrged their going
out. Insomuch as the Citie was euery way in tumult, and in choler           
against Pericles, remembring nothing of what hee had formerly admonished
them; but reuiled him, for that being their Generall, hee refused to leade them
into the Field, and imputing vnto him the cause of all their euill: but Pericles
seeing them in passion for their present losse, and ill aduised, and being
con dent hee was in the right touching not sallying, assembled them not, nor
called any Councell, for feare lest being together, they might vpon passion rather
then iudgement commit some error: But looked to the guarding of the Citie,
and as much as hee could, to keepe it in quiet. Neuerthelesse he continually sent
out Horse-men, to keepe the Scowts of the Armie from entring vpon, and doing
hurt to the Fields neere the Citie. And there happened at Phrygij a small
Skirmish, between one troope of Horse of the Athenians (with whom were also
the Thessalians) and the Horsemen of the Boeotians; A Skirmish betweene the
wherein the Athenians and Thessalians had not the          Athenian and Boeotian Horse.

worse, till such time as the Boeotians were ayded by the comming in of their men

of Armes, and then they were put to ight, and a few of the Athenians and
Thessalians slaine; whose bodies notwithstanding they fetcht o the same day,
without leaue of the Enemie: and the Peloponnesians the next day erected a
Trophie. This ayde of the Thessalians was vpon an ancient League with the
Athenians, and consisted of Larissaeans, Pharsalians, Parasians, Cranonians,
Peirasians, Gyrtonians, Pheraeans. The Leaders of the Larissaeans, were
Polymedes and Aristonus, men of contrary factions in their Citie. Of the
Pharsalians, Meno. And of the rest, out of the seuerall Cities, seuerall
Commanders.

The Peloponnesians seeing the Athenians would not come out to ght,
dislodging from Acharnas, wasted certaine other       Archidamus remoues from
Villages, betweene the Hils Parnethus, and Brelissus. Acharnas.

Whilest these were in Attica, the Athenians sent the The Athenians send 100. Gallies
hundred Gallies which they had prouided, and in          to infest the Sea-Coast of
                                                         Peloponnesus.
them 1000. men of Armes, and 400. Archers, about
Peloponnesus; the Commanders whereof were Charcinus, the sonne of
Xenotimus; Proteus, the sonne of Epicles; and Socrates, the sonne of Antigenes:
who thus furnished, weighed Anchor, and went their way.

The Peloponnesians, when they had stayd in Attica as The Peloponnesians goe home.
long as their prouision lasted, went home through
Boeotia, not the way they came in; but passing by Oropus, wasted the 
Countrey (called Peiraice which is of the tillage of the Oropians, Subiects to the
People of Athens; and when they were come backe into Peloponnesus, they
disbanded, and went euery man to his owne Citie.

When they were gone, the Athenians ordained                 The Athenians set by 1000
Watches both by Sea and Land, such as were to               Talents and 100. Gallies, for
                                                            defence against an inuasion by
continue to the end of the Warre. And made a Decree, Sea.
to take out a thousand Talents of the money in the
Cittadell, and set it by, so as it might not bee spent, but the charges of the Warre
bee borne out of other monies; and made it capitall for any man to moue, or

giue his vote for the stirring of this money, for any other vse, but onely (if the
Enemie should come with an Armie by Sea to inuade the Citie) for necessity of
that defence. Together with this money, they likewise set apart 100. Gallies, and
those to be euery yeere the best; and Captaines to be appointed ouer them,
which were to bee employed for no other vse then the money was, and for the
same danger, if need should require.

The Athenians that were with the 100. Gallies about Peloponnesus, and with
them the Corcyraeans with the ayde of 50. Sayle more, and certaine others of the
Confederates thereabout, amongst other places which they infested in their
course, landed at Methone, a Towne of Laconia, and The Athenians assault Methone.
assaulted it, as being but weake, and few men within.
But it chanced that Brasidas, the sonne of Tellis, a Spartan, had a Garrison in
those parts, and hearing of it, succoured those of the Towne with 100. men of
Armes: wherewith running through the Athenian Army, dispersed in the Fields,
directly towards the Towne, hee put himselfe into Methone; and with the losse
of few of his men in the passage, hee saued the place, Brasidas defendeth it.
and for this aduenture, was the rst that was praised at
Sparta, in this Warre. The Athenians putting o from thence, sailed along the
Coast, and put in at Pheia, of Elis, where they spent two dayes in wasting the
Countrey, and in a Skirmish ouerthrew 300. choice men of the lower Elis,
together with other Eleans thereabouts, that came forth to defend it. But the
Wind arising, and their Gallies being tossed by the weather, in a harbourlesse
place, the most of them imbarqued, and sayled about the Promontory called
Icthys, into the Hauen of Pheia. But the Messenians They take Pheia, a Town of Elis.
and certaine others that could not get       
aboard, went by Land to the Towne of Pheia, and ri ed it: and when they had
done, the Gallies that now were come about tooke them in, and leauing Pheia,
put forth to Sea againe: by which time a great Army of Eleans was come to
succour it; but the Athenians were now gone away, and wasting some other
Territory.

About the same time the Athenians sent likewise thirty Gallies about * Locris,
which were to serue also for a Watch about Euboea.
Of these, Cleopompus the sonne of Clinias had the      * That Locris 〈◊〉 chiefe Citie 〈…〉
                                                       where the Locri 〈…〉.
conduct, and landing his Souldiers in diuers parts▪
both wasted some places of the Sea-coast, and won the Towne of Thronium, of
which hee tooke Hostages; and ouercame in ght at Alope, the Locrians that
came out to ayde it.

The same Summer, the Athenians put the Aeginetae, man, woman, and childe,
out of Aegina, laying to their charge, that they were   The inhabitants of Aegina
the principall cause of the present Warre. And it was remoued by the Athenians.
also thought the safer course to hold Aegina, being adjacent to Peloponnesus,
with a Colonie of their own people; and not long after they sent Inhabitants
into the same. When the Aeginetae were thus banished, the Lacedaemonians
gaue them Thyraea to dwell in, and the occupation of And receiued by the
the Lands belonging vnto it, to liue on; both vpon      Peloponnesians.

hatred to the Athenians, and for the bene ts receiued at the hands of the
Aeginetae, in the time of the Earthquake, and insurrection of their Helotes. This
Territory of Thyraea, is in the border betweene Argolica and Laconica▪ and
reacheth to the Sea side. So some of them were placed there, and the rest
dispersed into other parts of Greece.

Also the same Summer, * on the rst day of the         Ecclipse of the Sunne and Starres
Moneth, according to the Moone, (at which time it     discerned.

seemes onely possible) in the afternoone, happened an * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉. The ﬁrst
Eclipse of the Sunne; the which after it had appeared day of the moneth, according to
                                                      the Moone, in 〈…〉: for though
in the forme of a crescent, and withall some Starres  their 〈…〉, yet was it not so exact,
had been discerned, came afterwards againe to the     as 〈◊〉 the Moone changed often
                                                      on the ﬁrst day.
former brightnesse.

The same Summer also the Athenians made Nymphodorus the sonne of Pythos,
of the Citie of Abdera, (whose Sister was married to The Athenians seeke the fauour
Sitalces, and that was of great power with him) their * of Sytalces King Thrace, and
                                                                       ▪

                                                              Perdiccas, King of Macedonia.

Host, though before they tooke him for an Enemie, * That is, the man at whose
and sent for him to Athens, hoping by his meanes to house, and by whom any publike
                                                         person was to be entertained that
bring Sitalces the sonne of Teres, King of Thrace, into came from Athens to Abdera.
their League. This Teres, the Father of Sitalces, was
the rst that aduanced the Kingdome of the Odrysians, aboue the                
power of the rest of Thrace. For much of Thrace consisteth of free States; And *
Tereus that tooke to wife (out of Athens) Procne the * See the Table of Tereus and
Daughter of Pandion, was no kinne to this Teres, nor Procne in Ouids Meta       ●▪

of the same part of Thrace. But that Tereus was of the Citie of Daulia, in the
Countrey now called Phocis, then inhabited by the Thracians. (And the fact of
the Women concerning It●s was done there; and by the Poets, where they
mention the Nightingall, that Bird is also called Daulias. And it is more likely
that Pandion matched his Daughter with this man for vicinity, and mutuall
succour, then with the other, that was so many dayes iourney o , as to Odrysae.
) And Teres, which is also another name, was the rst that seazed on the
Kingdome of Odrysae. Now Sitalces, this mans sonne, the Athenians got into
their League, that they might haue the Townes lying on Thrace, and * Perdiccas
to bee of their party. Nymphodorus, when hee came * King of Macedon.
to Athens, made this League betweene them and
Sytalces, and caused Sadocus, the sonne of Sitalces, to Sadocus the Sonne of Sitalces,
bee made free of Athens, and also vndertooke to end King of Thrace, made a Citizen
                                                         of Athens.
the Warre in * Thrace. For hee would perswade
Sitalces to send vnto the Athenians, a Thracian Armie * The Warre about Potidaea.
of Horsemen and Targettiers. Hee likewise reconciled Perdiccas to the
Athenians, and procured of him the restitution of Therme. And Perdiccas
presently ayded the Athenians and Phormio▪ in the Warre against the
Chalcideans. Thus were Sitalces, the sonne of Teres, King of Thrace, and
Perdiccas the sonne of Alexander, King of Macedonia, made Confederates with
the Athenians.

The Athenians being yet with their hundred Gallies The Athenians take Solium and
about Peloponnesus, tooke Solium, a Towne that         〈◊〉, and the Ile of Cephalonia.

belonged to the Corinthians, and put the Palirenses onely of all the Acarnanians,

into the possession both of the Towne and Territorie Hauing also by force taken
Astacus, from the Tyrant Euarchus, they draue him thence, and ioyned the place
to their League. From thence they sayled to Cephalonia, and subdued it without
battell. This Cephalonia is an Iland lying ouer against Acarnania, and Leucas,
and hath in it these foure Cities, the Pallenses, Cranij, Samei, and Pronaei. And
not long after returned with the Fleet to Athens.

About the end of the Autumne of this Summer, the Athenians, both
themselues, and the Strangers that dwelt  The Athenians inuade Megaris.
amongst them, with the whole power of the Citie,
vnder the conduct of Pericles the sonne of Xantippus, inuaded the Territory of
Megara. And those Athenians likewise that had beene with the hundred Gallies
about Peloponnesus, in their returne (being now at Aegina) hearing that the
whole power of the Citie was gone into * Megaris,      * The Territory of Megara.
went and ioyned with them. And this was the greatest
Armie that euer the Athenians had together in one      The Athenians greatest Armie.
place before; the Citie being now in her strength, and
the Plague not yet amongst them; (For the Athenians of themselues were no
lesse then 10000. men of Armes, (besides the 3000. at Potidaea) and the
Strangers that dwelt amongst them, and accompanyed them in this inuasion,
were no fewer then 3000. men of Armes more, besides other great numbers of
light-armed Souldiers. And when they had wasted the greatest part of the
Countrey, they went backe to Athens. And afterwards, yeere after yeere, during
this Warre, the Athenians often inuaded Megaris,       The Athenians duely once a
sometimes with their Horsemen, and sometimes with yeere inuade Megaris.
their whole Armie, vntill such time as they had wonne * Nisaea.
                                                           * The Arsenall of Megara▪
Also in the end of this Summer, they forti ed
Atalante, an Iland lying vpon the Locrians of Opus, desolate till then, for a
Garrison against Theeues, which passing ouer from Opus, and other parts of
Locris, might annoy Euboea. These were the things      The end of the ﬁrst Summer.
done this Summer, after the retreat of the
Peloponnesians out of Attica.

The Winter following, Euarchus of Acarnania,            Euarchus the Tyrant recouereth
desirous to returne to Astacus, preuaileth with the     Astacus.

Corinthians, to goe thither with 40. Gallies, and 1500. men of Armes, to re-
establish him; to which he hired also certaine other Mercenaries for the same
purpose. The Commanders of this Armie were Euphamidas the sonne of
Aristonymus, Timoxenes the sonne of Timocrates, and Eumachus the sonne of
Chrysis. When they had re-established him, they endeuoured to draw to their
party some other places on the the Sea-Coast of Arcanania, but missing their
purpose, they set sayle homeward. As they passed by the Coast of Cephalonia,
they disbarqued in the Territory of the Cranij, where, vnder colour of
Composition, they were deceiued, and lost some part of their Forces. For the
assault made vpon them by the Cranij, being vnexpected, they got o , with
much adoe, and went home.

The same Winter the Athenians, according to their ancient custome, 
solemnized a publike Funerall of the rst slaine in this Warre, in this manner:
Hauing set vp a Tent, they put into it the * bones of The manner of the Athenians,
the dead, three dayes before the Funerall, and euery      in burying the bones of the ﬁrst
                                                          slaine in the 〈◊〉.
one bringeth * whatsoeuer he thinkes good to his *
owne. When the day comes of carrying them to their * 〈…〉 was when a 〈…〉, and the
                                                          〈◊〉 after was onely of 〈◊〉 bones,
buriall, certaine Cypresse Co ns are carried along in or (the powder of 〈…〉) his ashes.
Carts, for euery Tribe one, in which are the bones of
                                                          * Oﬀerings, Incense, and 〈◊〉 of
the men of euery Tribe by themselues. There is            buriall.
likewise borne an empty Hearse couered ouer, for
                                                          * To his owne friends slaine.
such as appeare not, nor were found amongst the rest
when they were taken vp. The Funerall is accompanied by any that will, whether
Citizen or Stranger; and the Women of their Kindred are also by at the buriall,
lamenting and mourning. Then they put them into a publique Monument,
which standeth in the fairest * Suburbs of the Citie,     * The Ceramicum.
(in which place they haue euer interred all that dyed in
the Warres, except those that were slaine in the Fields of Marathon; who, because
their vertue was thought extraordinary, were therefore buried there-right) and
when the earth is throwne ouer them, some one, thought to exceede the rest in

wisdome and dignity, chosen by the Citie, maketh an Oration, wherein hee
giueth them such praises as are t: which done, the Companie depart: And this
is the forme of that Buriall; and for the * whole time * By the ﬁrst slaine in the 〈…〉
of the Warre, whensoeuer there was occasion, they        vnderstood either the ﬁrst euery
                                                         yeere in the 〈◊〉 Warre, or else
obserued the same. For these rst, the man chosen to the seuerall actions of this great
make the Oration, was Pericles, the sonne of             Warre, are counted as seuerall
                                                         Warres, and 〈◊〉 the ﬁrst slaine
Xantippus, who when the time serued, going out of in any of them, had the honour
the place of buriall into a high Pulpit▪ to be heard the of this buriall.
further o by the multitude about him, spake vnto
them in this manner:

 2.1. THE FVNERALL ORATION made by
 PERICLES.
 THough most that haue spoken formerly in this place, haue commended the
 man that added this Oration to the Law, as honourable for those that dye in
 the Warres; yet to mee it seemeth su cient, that they who haue shewed their
 valour by action should also by an action haue their honour, as now you see
 they haue, in this their sepulture performed by the State; and not to haue the
 vertue of many hazarded on one, to be beleeued as that one shall 
 make a good or bad Oration. For, to speake of men in a iust measure, is a hard
 matter and though one do so, yet he shall hardly get the truth rmely
 beleeued. the fauourable hearer, and hee that knowes what was done, will
 perhaps thinke what is spoken, short of what hee would haue it, and what it
 was; and hee that is ignorant, will nde somewhat on the other side▪ which
 hee will thinke too much extolled; especially if hee heare ought aboue the
 pitch of his owne nature. For to heare another man praised, ndes patience so
 long onely, as each man shall thinke he could himselfe haue done somewhat of
 that hee heares. And if one exceed in their praises, the hearer presently
 through enuie thinkes it false. But since our Ancestors haue so thought good,
 I also, following the same ordinance, must endeuour to bee answerable to the
 desires and opinions of euery one of you, as farre forth as I can. I will beginne

at our Ancestours, being a thing both iust and honest, that to them rst bee
giuen the honour of remembrance in this kinde: For they hauing beene
alwayes the inhabitants of this Region, by their valour haue deliuered the
same to succession of posterity, hitherto, in the state of liberty: For which they
deserue commendation; but our Fathers deserue yet more; for that besides
what descended on them, not without great labour of their owne, they haue
purchased this our present Dominion, and deliuered the same ouer to vs that
now are. Which in a great part also, wee our selues, that are yet in the strength
of our age here present, haue enlarged; and so furnished the Citie with euery
thing, both for peace and warre, as it is now all su cient in it selfe. The
actions of Warre, whereby all this was attained, and the deedes of Armes, both
of our selues and our Fathers, in valiant opposition to the Barbarians, or
Grecians, in their Warres against vs, amongst you that are well acquainted
with the summe, to auoide prolixity, I will passe ouer. But by what
institutions wee arriued at this▪ by what forme of gouernment, and by what
meanes we haue aduanced the State to this greatnesse, when I shall haue laide
open this, I will then descend to these mens praises. For I thinke they are
things both t for the purpose in hand, and pro table to the whole company,
both of Citizens and Strangers, to heare related. Wee haue a forme of
gouernment, not fetched by imitation from the Lawes of our neighbouring
States, (nay, wee are rather a patterne to others, then they to vs) which,
because in the administration, it hath respect, not to a few, but to the
multitude, is called a Democracie. Wherein though there bee an equality
amongst all men in point of Law, for their priuate controuersies; yet in
conferring of dignities, one man is preferred before another to publique
charge, and that according to the reputation, not of his * House, 
but of his vertue, and is not put backe through          * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, A part.
pouertie, for the obscurity of his person, as long as But here he meanes a part or
                                                         family in the Common wealth.
hee can doe good seruice to the Common wealth.           Carping secretly at the
And we liue not onely free in the administration of Lacdaemonians, that had none
                                                         came to the supreme Oﬃce, but
the State, but also one with another, voyd of            the Heracleides.
iealousie, touching each others daily course of life;
not o ended at any man for following his owne humour, nor casting on any

man * censorious lookes, which though they bee no * He glanceth againe at the
punishment, yet they grieue. So that conuersing one Lacedaemonians, because they
                                                          euer looked sowrely on soft and
with another for the priuate without o ence, wee          loose behauiour.
stand chie y in feare to transgresse against the
publique; and are obedient alwayes to those that gouerne, and to the Lawes,
and principally to such Lawes as are written for protection against iniurie, and
such vnwritten, as bring vndeniable shame to the transgressours. Wee haue
also found out many wayes to giue our mindes recreation from labour, by
publike institution of Games and Sacri ces for all the dayes of the yeere, with
a decent pompe and furniture of the same by               The Athenians had Sacriﬁces
priuate men; by the daily delight whereof, wee expell and Games, publike or priuate,
                                                          for euery day of the yeere.
sadnesse. Wee haue this further, by the greatnesse of
our City, that all things, from all parts of the Earth are imported hither;
whereby we no lesse familiarly enioy the commodities of all other Nations,
then our owne. Then in the studies of Warre, wee excell our Enemies in this:
wee leaue aur Citie open to all men, nor was it euer seene, that by * banishing
of strangers, we denyed them the learning or sight of * This is spoken with enuie
any of those things, which if not hidden, an Enemie towards the Lacedaemonians
                                                          that prohibited Strangers to
might reape aduantage by, not relying on secret           dwell amongst them.
preparation and deceipt, but vpon our owne
courage in the action. They in their discipline hunt after valour, presently
from their youth, with laborious exercise, and yet wee that liue remissely,
vndertake as great dangers as they. For example, the Lacedaemonians inuade
not our dominion by themselues alone, but with the ayde of all the rest. But
when wee inuade our neighbours, though wee ght in hostile ground, against
such as in their owne ground, ght in defence of their owne substance, yet for
the most part wee get the victorie. Neuer Enemie yet fell into the hands of our
whole Forces at once, both because wee apply our selues much to Nauigation,
and by Land also send many of our men into diuers Countries abroad. But
when ghting with a part of it, they chance to get the better, they boast they
haue beaten the whole; and when they get the worse, they say they are beaten
by the whole. And yet when from ease, rather then studious labour, and vpon
naturall, rather then doctrinall valour, wee come to vndertake any danger, wee

haue this oddes by it, that we shall not faint before-hand with the meditation
of future trouble, and in the action wee shall appeare no lesse con dent then
they that are euer toyling, procuring admiration to our Citie, as well in this, as
in diuers other things. For we also giue our selues to brauery, and 
yet with thrift; and to Philosophy, and yet without molli cation of the minde.
And we vse riches rather for opportunities of action, then for verball
ostentation: And hold it not ashame to confesse pouerty, but not to haue
auoided it. Moreouer there is in the same men, a care, both of their owne, and
of the publique a aires, and a su cient * knowledge * In Athens no man so 〈◊〉 but
of State matters, euen in those that labour with their was a Statesman. So S. Luke,
                                                        Act. 7. 2 . All the Athenians
                                                                 ●
hands. For we onely, thinke one that is vtterly         〈…〉 time in 〈…〉 and telling of
ignorant therein, to be a man not that meddles with 〈…〉 Character 〈…〉 without
                                                        employment.
nothing, but that is good for nothing. We likewise,
weigh what we vndertake, and apprehend it perfectly in our mindes; not
accounting words for a hindrance of action, but that it is rather a hindrance to
action, to come to it without instruction of words before. For also in this we
excell others; daring to vndertake as much as any, and yet examining what wee
vndertake; whereas with other men, ignorance makes them dare, and
consideration, dastards; and they are most rightly reputed valiant, who
though they perfectly apprehend, both what is dangerous, and what is easie,
are neuer the more thereby diuerted from aduenturing. Againe, we are
contrary to most men in matter of bounty. For we purchase our friends, not
by receiuing, but by bestowing bene ts. And he that bestoweth a good turne,
is euer the most constant friend, because hee will not lose the thankes due
vnto him, from him whom he bestowed it on. Whereas the friendship of him
that oweth a bene t is dull and at, as knowing his bene t not to be taken for
a fauor, but for a debt; So that we onely, doe good to others, not vpon
computation of pro t, but freenesse of trust. In summe, it may be said, both
that the City is in generall a Schoole of the Grecians▪ and that the men here,
haue euery one in particular, his person disposed to most diuersity of actions,
and yet all with grace and decency. And that this is not now, rather a brauery
of words, vpon the occasion, then reall truth, this power of the Citie, which
by these institutions we haue obtained, maketh euident. For it is the onely

power now found greater in proofe, then fame; and the onely power, that
neither grieueth the invader when he miscarries, with the quality of those he
was hurt by, nor giueth cause to the subiected States to murmure, as being in
subiection to men vnworthy. For both with present and future Ages we shall
be in admiration, for a power, not without testimony, but made euident by
great arguments, and which needeth not either a         Hee magniﬁes the Athenian
Homer to praise it, or any other such, whose Poems power aboue that which the 〈◊〉
                                                        had at Troy, which needed
may indeed for the present, bring delight, but the      Homer to make it 〈…〉, but this
truth will afterwards confute the opinion conceiued power uld seeme great by
                                                                ●●

                                                        Trophies and reall monuments
of the actions. For we haue opened vnto vs by our       of their actions.
courage, all Seas, and Lands, and set vp 
eternall Monuments on all sides, both of the euill we haue done to our
enemies, and the good wee haue done to our friends. Such is the Citie for
which these men (thinking it no reason to lose it) valiantly ghting, haue
dyed. And it is t that euery man of you that bee left, should bee like-minded,
to vndergoe any trauell for the same. And I haue therefore spoken so much
concerning the Citie in generall, as well to shew you, that the stakes betweene
vs and them, whose Citie is not such; are not equall; as also to make knowne
by e ects, the worth of these men I am to speake of; the greatest part of their
praises being therein already deliuered. For what I haue spoken of the Citie,
hath by these and such as these beene atchieued: Neither would praises and
actions appeare so leuelly concurrent in many other of the Grecians, as they
doe in these; the present revolution of these mens liues seeming vnto mee an
argument of their vertues, noted in the rst act thereof, and in the last
con rmed. For euen such of them as were worse then the rest, doe
neuerthelesse deserue that for their valour shewne in the Warres for defence of
their Countrey, they should bee preferred before the rest. For hauing by their
good actions abolished the memory of their euill, they haue pro ted the State
thereby, more then they haue hurt it by their priuate behauiour. Yet there was
none of these, that preferring the further fruition of his wealth, was thereby
growne cowardly, or that for hope to ouercome his pouerty at length, and to
attaine to riches, did for that cause withdraw himselfe from the danger. For
their principall desire was not wealth, but reuenge on their Enemies, which

esteeming the most honourable cause of danger, they made account through
it, both to accomplish their reuenge, and to purchase wealth withall; putting
the vncertainety of successe, to the a count of their hope; but for that which
was before their eyes, relying vpon themselues in the Action; and therein
chusing rather to ght and dye, then to shrinke and bee saued. They ed from
shame, but with their bodies, they stood out the Battell; and so in a moment,
whilest Fortune inclineth neither way, left their liues not in feare, but in
opinion of victory. Such were these men, worthy of their Country; and for
you that remaine, you may pray for a safer furtune; but you ought not to bee
lesse venturously minded against the enemie; not weighing the pro t by an
Oration onely, which any man amplifying, may recount, to you that know as
well as hee, the many commodities that arise by ghting valiantly against your
enemies, but contemplating the power of the Citie in the actions of the same
from day to day performed, and thereby becomming enamoured of it. And
when this power of the Citie shall seeme great to you, consider then, that the
same was purchased by valiant men, and by men that know their duty, and by
men that were sensible of dishonour when they were in ght; and 
by such men, as though they failed of their attempt, yet would not bee
wanting to the Citie with their vertue, but made vnto it a most honourable
contribution. For hauing euery one giuen his body to the Common-wealth,
they receiue in place thereof, an vndecaying commendation, and a most
remarkeable Sepulcher, not wherein they are buried so much, as wherein their
glory is laid vp, vpon all occasions, both of speech and action, to bee
remembred for euer. For to famous men, all the earth is a Sepulcher: and their
vertues shall bee testi ed, not onely by the inscription in stone at home, but
by an vnwritten record of the minde, which more then of any Monument,
will remaine with euery one for euer. In imitation therefore of these men, and
placing happinesse in liberty, and liberty in valour, bee forward to encounter
the dangers of Warre. For the miserable and desperate men, are not they that
haue the most reason to bee prodigall of their liues, but rather such men, as if
they liue, may expect a change of fortune, and whose losses are greatest, if they
miscarry in ought. For to a man of any spirit, Death, which is without sense,
arriuing whilest hee is in vigour, and common hope, is nothing so bitter, as

after a tender life to bee brought into miserie. Wherefore I will not so much
bewaile, as comfort you the parents, that are present, of these men. For you
know that whilest they liued, they were obnoxious to manifold calamities,
whereas whilest you are in griefe, they onely are happy, that dye honourably, as
these haue done: and to whom it hath beene granted, not only to liue in
prosperity, but to dye in it. Though it bee a hard matter to disswade you from
sorrow, for the losse of that, which the * happinesse * Children
                                                               ▪

of others, wherein you also when time was, reioyced
your selues, shall so often bring into your remembrance (for sorrow is not for
the want of a good neuer tasted, but for the priuation of a good wee haue
beene vsed to) yet such of you as are of the age to haue children, may beare the
losse of these, in the hope of more. For the later children will both draw on
with some the obliuion of those that are slaine, and also doubly conduce to
the good of the Citie, by population and strength. For it is not likely that they
should equally giue good counsell to the State, that haue not children to bee
equally exposed to danger in it. As for you that are past hauing of children,
you are to put the former and greater part of your life, to the account of your
gaine, and supposing the remainder of it will bee but short, you shall haue the
glory of these for a consolation of the same. For the loue of honour neuer
groweth old, nor doth that vnpro table part of our life take delight (as some
haue said) in gathering of wealth, so much as it doth in being honoured. As
for you that are the children or brethren of these men, I see you shall haue a
di cult taske of aemulation. For euery man vseth to praise the         
dead; so that with oddes of vertue, you will hardly get an equall reputation,
but still be thought a little short. For men enuy their Competitors in glory,
while they liue, but to stand out of their way, is a thing honoured with an
a ection free from opposition. And since I must say somewhat also of
feminine vertue, for you that are now Widdowes: I shall expresse it all in this
short admonition. It will bee much for your honour; not to recede from your
Sexe, and to giue as little occasion of rumour amongst the men, whether of
good or euill, as you can. Thus also haue I, according to the prescript of the
Law, deliuered in word what was expedient; and those that are here interred,
haue in fact beene already honoured; and further, their children shall bee

 maintained till they be at mans estate, at the charge The children of such as were the
 of the Citie, which hath therein propounded both ﬁrst slaine in an Warre, were
                                                                            ●

                                                         kept at the charge of the Citie,
 to these, and them that liue, a pro table Garland in till they came to mans estate.
 their matches of valour. For where the rewards of
 vertue are greatest, there liue the worthiest men. So now hauing lamented
 euery one his owne, you may be gone. Such was the Funerall made this
 Winter, which ending, ended the ﬁrst yeere of this Warre.

In the very beginning of Summer, the                    THE SECOND YEERE.
Peloponnesians, and their Confederates, with two
thirds of their forces, as before inuaded Attica, vnder The second inuasion of Attica, by
the conduct of Archidamus, the sonne of                 the Lacedaemonians.

Zeuxidamas, King of Lacedaemon, and after they had encamped themselues,
wasted the countrey about them.

They had not beene many dayes in Attica, when the plague rst began amongst
the Athenians, said also to haue seazed formerly on      The plague at Athens.
diuers other parts, as about Lemnos, and elsewhere;
but so great a plague, and mortality of men, was neuer remembred to haue
hapned in any place before. For at rst, neither were the Physicians able to cure
it, through ignorance of what it was, but dyed fastest themselues, as being the
men that most approached the sicke, nor any other art of man auailed
whatsoeuer. All supplications to the Gods, and enquiries of Oracles, and
whatsoeuer other meanes they vsed of that kind, proued all vnpro table;
insomuch as subdued with the greatnesse of the euill, they gaue them all ouer. It
began (by report) rst, in that part of Aethiopia that lyeth vpon Aegypt, and
thence fell downe into Aegypt and Afrique, and into It began in Aethiopia.
the greatest part of the Territories of the * King. It
inuaded Athens on a sudden; and touched rst vpon * of Persia.
those that dwelt in Pyraeus; insomuch as 
they reported that the Peloponnesians had cast poyson into their Welles, for
Springs there were not any in that place. But            The Peloponnesians supposed to
afterwards it came vp into the high City, and then       haue poysoned their Welles

they dyed a great deale faster. Now let euery man Physitian, or other, concerning
the ground of this sickenesse, whence it sprung, and what causes hee thinkes able
to produce so great an alteration, speake according to his owne knowledge, for
my owne part, I will deliuer but the manner of it, and lay open onely such
things, as one may take his marke by, to discouer the same if it come againe,
hauing beene both sicke of it my selfe, and seene          The Author sicke of this disease.
others sicke of the same. This yeere, by confession of
all men, was of all other, for other diseases, most free and healthfull. If any man
were sicke before, his disease turned to this; if not, yet The discription of the Disease.
suddenly, without any apparant cause preceding, and
being in perfect health, they were taken rst with an extreame ache in their
heads, rednesse and in ammation of the eyes; and then inwardly, their throats
and tongues, grew presently bloody, and their breath Ache of the head.
noysome, and vnsauory. Vpon this, followed a
                                                           Rednesse of the eyes. Sore throat.
sneezing and hoarsenesse, and not long after, the          Vnsauourie breath.
paine, together with a mighty cough, came downe
into the breast. And when once it was settled in the * * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉. neere taken
stomacke, it caused vomit, and with great torment          for the stomach.

came vp all manner of bilious purgation that               Vomitings.
Physitians euer named. Most of them had also the
Hickeyexe, which brought with it a strong convulsion, and in some ceased
quickly, but in others was long before it gaue ouer.       Hickyexe.
Their bodies outwardly to the touch, were neither
very hote nor pale, but reddish liuid, and be owred        Extreme heate of their bodies.
with little pimples and whelkes; but so burned             Liuid pustules.
inwardly, as not to endure any the lightest cloathes or
linnen garment, to be vpon them, nor any thing but meere nakednesse, but
rather, most willingly, to haue cast themselues into the cold water. And many of
them that were not looked to, possessed with insatiate thirst, ranne vnto the
Welles, and to drinke much, or little, was indi erent, Insatiate thirst.
being still, from ease, and power to sleepe, as farre as
euer. As long as the disease was at the height, their      Want of sleepe.
bodies wasted not, but resisted the torment beyond all

expectation, insomuch, as the most of them either dyed of their inward burning,
in nine or seuen dayes, whilest they had yet strength, After 7. or 9. dayes, death.
or if they escaped that, then the disease falling downe
into their bellies, and causing there great exulcerations, and                   
immoderate loosenesse, they dyed many of them              〈◊〉 in the belly.
afterwards through weakenesse. For the disease
                                                           [...]
(which tooke rst the head) began aboue, and came
downe, and passed through the whole body; and he that ouercame the worst of
it, was yet marked with the losse of his extreme parts; 〈◊〉 of the parts where the
for breaking out both at their priuy members, and at diseases brake out.
their ngers and toes, many with the losse of these escaped. There were also
some that lost their eyes, and many that presently vpon their recouery, were
taken with such an obliuion of all things whatsoeuer, Obliuion of all things done
as they neither knew themselues, nor their                 before their sickenesse.

acquaintance. For this was a kind of sickenesse which farre surmounted all
expression of words, and both exceeded humane nature, in the cruelty wherwith
it handled each one, and appeared also otherwise to be none of those diseases
that are bred amongst vs, and that especially by this. For all both birds and
beasts, that vse to feed on humane esh, though many Birds and Beasts perished that
men lay abroad vnburied, either came not at them, or red on Carkasses.
tasting perished. An argument whereof as touching the birds, is the manifest
defect of such fowle, which were not then seene, neither about the Carcasses, or
any where else; But by the dogges, because they are familiar with men, this e ect
was seene much cleerer. So that this disease (to passe ouer many strange
particulars, of the accidents, that some had di erently, from others) was in
generall such as I haue showne, and for other vsuall sickenesses, at that time, no
man was troubled with any. Now they died, some for Want of attendance.
want of attendance, and some againe with all the care
and Physicke that could be vsed. Nor was there any, to say, certaine medicine,
that applied must haue helped them; for if it did good to one, it did harme to
another; nor any di erence of body, for strength or weaknesse that was able to
resist it; but it carried all away, what Physicke soeuer was administred. But the
greatest misery of all was, the deiection of mind, in      Deiection of mind.

such as found themselues beginning to be sicke (for
they grew presently desperate, and gaue themselues ouer without making any
resistance) as also their dying thus like sheepe, infected by mutuall visitation, for
the greatest mortality proceeded that way. For if men forbore to visite them, for
feare, then they dyed forlorne, whereby many Families became empty, 
for want of such as should take care of them. If they forbore not, then they died
themselues, and principally the honestest men. For out of shame, they would
not spare themselues, but went in vnto their friends, especially after it was come
to this passe, that euen their domestiques, wearied with the lamentations of
them that died, and ouercome with the greatnesse of the calamity, were no
longer moued therewith. But those that were recouered, had much compassion
both on them that died, and on them that lay sicke, as hauing both knowne the
misery themselues, and now no more subiect to the danger. For this disease
neuer tooke any man the second time, so as to be            No man sicke of it mortally the
mortall. And these men were both by others counted second time.
happy, and they also themselues, through excesse of present ioy, conceiued a
kind of light hope, neuer to die of any other sickenesse hereafter. Besides the
present a iction, the reception of the countrey people, and of their substance
into the Citie, oppressed both them, and much more the people themselues that
so came in. For hauing no houses, but dwelling at that time of the yeere in
sti ing boothes, the mortality was now without all forme; and dying men lay
tumbling one vpon another in the streetes, and men Men dyed in the streets.
halfe dead, about euery Conduit through desire of
water. The Temples also where they dwelt in Tents, were all full of the dead that
died within them; for oppressed with the violence of the Calamitie, and not
knowing what to doe, men grew carelesse both of holy, and prophane things
alike. And the Lawes which they formerly vsed touching Funerals, were all now
broken; euery one burying where hee could nde roome. And many for want of
things necessary, after so many deathes before, were forced to become impudent
in the Funerals of their friends. For when one had          Disorder in their Funerals.
made a Funeral * Pile, another getting before him,
                                                            * A pile of wood, which when
would throw on his dead, and giue it re. And when they had laid the Corpes on it,
one was in burning, another would come, and hauing

cast thereon him whom he carried, goe his way againe. they ﬁred, and afterwards
                                                          buried the bones.
And the great licentiousnesse, which also in other
kindes was vsed in the Citie, began at rst from this      Licentiousnesse of life iustiﬁed.

disease. For that which a man before would dissemble, and not acknowledge to
be done for voluptuousnesse, he durst now doe freely, seeing before his eyes such
quicke reuolution▪ of the rich dying, and men worth nothing,                    
inheriting their estates; insomuch as they iusti ed a speedy fruition of their
goods, euen for their pleasure; as men that thought they held their liues but by
the day. As for paines, no man was forward in any action of honour, to take any,
because they thought it vncertaine whether they should dye or not, before they
atchieued it But what any man knew to bee delightfull, and to bee pro table to
pleasure, that was made both pro table and honourable. Neither the feare of the
Gods, nor Lawes of men, awed any man. Not the             Neglect of Religion and Law.
former, because they concluded it was alike to
worship or not worship, from seeing that alike they all perished: nor the latter,
because no man expected that liues would last, till he receiued punishment of his
crimes by iudgement. But they thought there was now ouer their heads, some
farre greater Iudgement decreed against them; before which fell, they thought to
enioy some little part of their liues. Such was the misery into which the
Athenians being falne, were much oppressed; hauing not onely their men killed
by the Disease within, but the enemy also laying waste their Fields and Villages
without. In this sicknesse also, (as it was not vnlikely Predictions called to minde.
they would) they called to minde this Verse, said also
of the elder sort to haue beene vttered of old:

    A Dorique Warre shall fall,
     * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉. And a great * Plague withall.
Now were men at variance about the word, some           An ambiguous Prophe i    ● ●

saying it was not 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, (.i. the Plague) expounded by the euent.

that was by the Ancients, mentioned in that verse, but 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, (.i.
Famine. ) But vpon the present occasion the word 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, deseruedly
obtained. For as men su ered, so they made the Verse to say. And I thinke, if

after this, there shall euer come another Dorique Warre, and with it a Famine,
they are like to recite the Verse accordingly. There was also reported by such as
knew, a certaine answer giuen by the Oracle to the Lacedaemonians, when they
enquired whether they should make this Warre, or not, That if they warred with
all their power, they should haue the Victorie, and that the * God himselfe would
take their parts: and thereupon they thought the          * Apollo, to whom the Heathen
present misery to bee a ful lling of that Prophecie.      attributed the immission of all
                                                          epidemicke or ordinary diseases.
The Peloponnesians were no sooner entred 
Attica, but the sicknesse presenlty began, and neuer came into Peloponnesus, to
speake of, but raigned principally in Athens, and in such other places afterwards
as were most populous. And thus much of this Disease.

After the Peloponnesians had wasted the Champaigne Countrey, they fell vpon
the Territory called * Paralos, as farre as to the       * by the Sea 〈◊〉  ▪

Mountaine Laurius, where the Athenians had Siluer
Mines, and rst wasted that part of it which looketh towards Peloponnesus, and
then that also which lyeth toward Andros and Euboea: and Pericles, who was
also then Generall, was still of the same minde hee was of in the former inuasion,
that the Athenians ought not to goe out against them to battell.

Whilst they were yet in the Plaine, & before they       Pericles with 100. 〈…〉
entred into the Maritime Country, he furnished an       Athenians, about 〈◊〉.

hundred Gallies to goe about Peloponnesus, and as soone as they were ready, put
to Sea. In these Gallies hee had foure thousand men of Armes; and in Vessels
then purposely rst made to carry Horses, three hundred Horsemen. The
Chians and Lesbians ioyned likewise with him with ftie Gallies. This Fleet of
the Athenians, when it set foorth, left the Peloponnesians still in Paralia, and
comming before Epidaurus, a Citie of Peloponnesus, they wasted much of the
Country therabout, and assaulting the Citie, had a hope to take it, though it
succeeded not. Leauing Epidaurus, they wasted the Territories about, of
Traezene, Halias, and Hermione, places all on the Sea-coast of Peloponnesus.
Putting o from hence, they came to Prasiae, a small maritime Citie of Laconica,
and both wasted the Territory about it, and tooke and razed the Towne it selfe:

and hauing done this, came home, and found the Peloponnesians not now in
Attica, but gone backe.

All the while the Peloponnesians were in the Territorie of the Athenians, and the
Athenians abroad with their Fleet, the sicknesse, both The Peloponnesians depart out
in the Armie and Citie, destroyed many, in so much as of Attica.
it was said, that the Peloponnesians, fearing the sicknesse (which they knew to
bee in the Citie, both by fugitiues, and by seeing the Athenians burying their
dead) went the sooner away out of the Countrey. And yet they stayed there
longer in this inuasion, then they had done any time before; and wasted euen the
whole Territory: for they continued in Attica almost forty daies.

The same Summer, Agnon the sonne of Nicias, and Cleopompus the 
Sonne of Clinias, who were ioynt Commanders with The Athenian Fleet returned
Pericles, with that Armie which hee had employed           from Peloponnesus, go to
                                                                              ●

                                                           Potidaea with ill successe, by
before, went presently and made Warre vpon the             reason of the sickenesse.
Chalcidians of Thrace, and against Potidaea, which
was yet besieged. Arriuing, they presently applyed Engins, and tryed all meanes
possible to take it; but neither the taking of the Citie, nor any thing else,
succeeded worthy so great preparation. For the sickenesse comming amongst
them, a icted them mightily indeed, and euen deuoured the Army. And the
Athenian Souldiers which were there before, and in health, catched the
sickenesse from those that came with Agnon. As for Phormio, and his 1600.
they were not now amongst the Chalcideans; and Agnon therefore came backe
with his Fleet, hauing of 4000 men in lesse then 40. dayes, lost 1050. of the
plague. But the Souldiers that were there before, staid vpon the place, and
continued the siege of Potidaea.

After the second inuasion of the Peloponnesians, the Athenians (hauing their
  elds now the second time wasted, and both the          The Athenian people vexed at
sickenesse, and warre, falling vpon them at once)        once both with the Warre &
                                                         Pestilence, grow impatient
changed their mindes, and accused Pericles, as if by his toward Pericles.
meanes they had been brought into these calamities,

and desired earnestly to compound with the Lacedaemonians, to whom also
they sent certaine Ambassadours, but they returned without e ect. And being
then at their wits end, they kept a stirre at Pericles. And hee, seeing them vexed
with their present calamity, and doing all those things which he had before
expected, called an Assembly (for he was yet Generall) with intention to put
them againe into heart, and asswaging their passion, to reduce their mindes to a
more calme, and lesse dismayed temper; and standing forth, he spake vnto them,
in this manner.

 2.1. THE ORATION OF PERICLES.
 YOur anger towards me, commeth not vnlooked for, (for the causes of it I
 know) and I haue called this Assembly therefore, to remember you, and
 reprehend you for those things, wherin you haue either beene angry with me,
 or giuen way to your aduersity, without reason. For I am of this opinion, that
 the publike prosperity of the Citie, is better for priuate men, then if 
 the priuate men themselues were in prosperity, and the publique wealth in
 decay. For a priuate man, though in good estate, if his Countrey come to
 ruine, must of necessity be ruined with it; whereas hee that miscarrieth, in a
   ourishing Common-wealth, shall much more easily be preserued. Since then
 the Common-wealth is able to beare the calamities of priuate men, and euery
 one cannot support the calamities of the Common-wealth, why should not
 euery one striue to defend it? and not (as you now, astonished with
 domestique misfortune) forsake the common safety, and fall a censuring both
 me that counselled the Warre, and your selues, that decreed the same as well as
 I. And it is I you are angry withall, one, as I thinke my selfe, inferiour to none,
 either in knowing what is requisite, or in expressing what I know, and a louer
 of my Countrey, and superior to money. For he that hath good thoughts, and
 cannot cleerely expresse them, were as good to haue thought nothing at all.
 He that can do both, and is ill a ected to his Countrey, will likewise not giue
 it faithfull counsell. And he that will doe that too, yet if he be superable by
 mony, will for that alone set all the rest to sale. Now if you followed my aduice

in making this Warre, as esteeming these vertues to bee in mee, somewhat
aboue the rest, there is sure no reason I should now be accused of doing you
wrong. For though to such as haue it in their owne election (being otherwise
in good estate) it were madnesse to make choice of Warre; yet when we must
of necessitie, either giue way, and so without more adoe, be subiect to our
Neighbours, or else saue our selues from it by danger, he is more to be
condemned that declineth the danger, then he that standeth to it. For mine
owne part, I am the man I was, and of the minde I was, but you are changed,
wonne to the Warre, when you were entire, but repenting it vpon the
dammage, and condemning my counsell, in the weakenesse of your owne
iudgement. The reason of this is, because you feele already euery one in
particular, that which a icts you, but the euidence of the pro t to accrew to
the Citie in generall, you see not yet. And your mindes deiected with the great
and sudden alteratoin, cannot constantly maintaine what you haue before
resolued. For that which is sodaine and vnexpected, and contrary to what one
hath deliberated, enslaueth the spirit; which by this disease principally, in the
necke of the other incommodities, is now come to passe in you. But you that
are borne in a great Citie, and with education suteable, how great soeuer the
a iction be, ought not to shrinke at it, and eclipse your reputation (for men
doe no lesse condemne those that through cowardize lose the glory they haue,
then hate those that through impudence, arrogate the glory they haue not)
but to set aside the griefe of your priuate losses, and lay your hands to the
common safety. As for the toyle of the Warre, that it may perhaps 
be long, ●nd we in the end neuer the neerer to the victory; though that may
su ce which I haue demonstrated at other times, touching your causelesse
suspition that way; yet this I will tell you moreouer, touching the greatnesse of
your meanes for dominion, which neither you your selues seeme to haue euer
thought on, nor I touched in my former Orations; nor would I also haue
spoken it now, but that I see your mindes deiected more then there is cause
for. That though you take your dominion to extend onely to your
Confederates, I a rme that of the two parts of the world of manifest vse, the
Land and the Sea, you are of the one of them, entire Masters, both of as much
of it, as you make vse of, and also of as much more as you shall thinke t your

selues. Neither is there any King or Nation whatsoeuer, of those that now are,
that can impeach your Nauigation, with the Fleet and strength you now goe.
So that you must not put the vse of Houses, and Lands, (wherein you now
thinke your selues depriued of a mighty matter) into the ballance with such a
power as this, nor take the losse of these things heauily in respect of it; but
rather set little by them, as but a light ornament and embellishment of wealth,
and thinke, that our libertie, as long as we hold fast that, will easily recouer
vnto vs, these things againe; whereas subiected once to others, euen that
which we possesse besides will be diminished. Shew not your selues both
wayes inferiour to your Ancestors, who not onely held this (gotten by their
owne labours, not left them) but haue also preserued, and deliuered the same
vnto vs, (For it is more dishonour to lose what one possesseth, then to
miscarrie in the acquisition of it) and encounter the enemie not onely with
magnanimitie, but also with disdaine: for a coward may haue a high minde,
vpon a prosperous ignorance, but he that is con dent vpon iudgement to be
superiour to his enemy, doth also disdaine him, which is now our case. And
courage (in equall fortune) is the safer for our disdaine of the enemy, where a
man knowes what he doth. For he trusteth lesse to hope, which is of force
onely in vncertainties, and more to iudgement vpon certainties, wherein there
is a more sure foresight. You haue reason besides to maintaine the dignitie the
Citie hath gotten for her Dominion, (in which you all triumph) and either
not decline the paines, or not also pursue the honour. And you must not
thinke the question is now of your liberty, and seruitude onely; Besides the
losse of your rule ouer others, you must stand the danger you haue
contracted, by o ence giuen in the administration of it. Nor can you now giue
it ouer (if any fearing at this present, that that may come to passe, encourage
himselfe with the intention of not to meddle hereafter) for already 
your gouernment is in the nature of a tyranny, which is both vniust for you to
take vp, and vnsafe to lay downe. And such men as these, if they could
perswade others to it, or liued in a free Citie by themselues, would quickly
ouerthrow it. For the quiet life can neuer be preserued, if it be not ranged with
the actiue life; nor is it a life conducible to a Citie that reigneth, but to a
subiect Citie, that it may safely serue. Be not therfore seduced by this sort of

 men, nor angry with me, together with whom your selues did decree this
 Warre, because the enemy inuading you hath done what was likely he would,
 if you obeyed him not. And as for the sickenesse (the onely thing that
 exceeded the imagination of all men) it was vnlooked for, and I know you hate
 me somewhat the more for that, but vniustly, vnlesse when any thing falleth
 out aboue your expectation fortunate, you will also dedicate vnto me that.
 Euils that come from heauen, you must beare necessarily, and such as proceed
 from your enemies valiantly; for so it hath beene the custome of this Citie to
 doe heretofore, which custome let it not bee your part to reuerse: Knowing
 that this Citie hath a great name amongst all people, for not yeelding to
 aduersity, and for the mighty power it yet hath, after the expence of so many
 liues, and so much labour in the Warre; the memory whereof, though we
 should now at length miscarry (for all things are made with this Law, to decay
 againe) will remaine with posterity for euer. How that being Grecians, most
 of the Grecians were our subiects; That we haue abidden the greatest Warres
 against them, both vniuersally and singly, And haue inhabited the greatest and
 wealthiest Citie, Now this, hee with the quiet life will condemne, the actiue
 man will aemulate, and they that haue not attained to the like, will enuy. But
 to be hated, and to displease, is a thing that happeneth for the time to
 whosoeuer hee be that hath the command of others; and he does well that
 vndergoeth hatred, for matters of great consequence. For the hatred lasteth
 not, and is recompenced both with a present splendor, and an immortall glory
 hereafter. Seing then you foresee both what is honourable for the future, and
 not dishonourable for the present, procure both the one, and the other by
 your courage now. Send no more Heraulds to the Lacedaemonians, nor let
 them know that the euill present does any way a ict you; for they whose
 mindes least feele, and whose actions most oppose a calamity, both amongst
 States, and priuate persons are the best.

In this speech did Pericles endeauour to appease the anger of the Athenians
towards himselfe, and withall to withdraw their thoughts from the present
a iction; But they, though for the State in generall, they were won, 
and sent to the Lacedaemonians no more, but rather enclined to the Warre, yet

they were euery one in particular, grieued for their seuerall losses. The poore,
because entring the Warre with little, they lost that little, and the rich, because
they had lost faire possessions, together with goodly houses, and costly furniture
in them, in the Countrey; but the greatest matter of all was, that they had Warre
in stead of Peace. And altogether, they deposed not         Pericles ﬁned in a summe of
their anger, till they had rst ned him in a summe of money.
money. Neuerthelesse, not long after, (as is the fashion of the multitude) they
made him Generall againe, and committed the whole State to his administration.
For the sense of their domestique losses was now dulled, and for the need of the
Common-wealth, they prised him more then any other whatsoeuer. For as long
as he was in authority in the Citie, in time of Peace, he gouerned the same with
moderation, and was a faithfull watchman of it, and Athens at the greatest in the time
in his time it was at the greatest. And after the Warre of Pericles.
was on foot, it is manifest that he therein also fore-saw what it could doe. Hee
liued after the Warre began, two yeeres and sixe            The death of Pericles.
moneths And his foresight in the Warre was best
knowne after his * death. For he told them, that if they * Plutarch sayes, he dyed of the
would be quiet, and looke to their Nauy, and during Plague.
this Warre, seeke no further dominion, nor hazzard the Citie it selfe, they should
then haue the vpper hand. But they did contrary in all, and in such other things
besides, as seemed not to concerne the Warre, managed the State, according to
their priuate ambition and couetousnesse, pernitiously both for themselues, and
their Confederates. What succeeded well, the honour and pro t of it, came most
to priuate men; and what miscarried, was to the Cities detriment in the Warre.
The reason whereof was this, that being a man of great power, both for his
dignity and wisdome, & for bribes, manifestly the           The commendation of Pericles.
most incorrupt, he freely controuled the multitude,
and was not so much led by them, as he led them. Because (hauing gotten his
power by no euill Artes) he would not humour them in his speeches, but out of
his authority, durst anger them with contradiction. Therefore whensoeuer he
saw them out of season insolently bold; he would with his Orations put them
into a feare, and againe when they were afraid without reason, he               
would likewise erect their spirits, and imbolden them. It was in name a State

Democraticall, but in fact, A gouernment of the principall Man. But they that
came after, being more equall amongst themselues, and a ecting euery one to be
the chiefe, applyed themselues to the people, and let goe the care of the
Common-wealth. From whence, amongst many other errours, as was likely in a
great and dominant Citie, proceeded also the voyage into Sicily, which was not
so much vpon mistaking those whom they went against, as for want of
knowledge in the senders, of what was necessary for those that went the voyage.
For through priuate quarrels about, who should beare the greatest sway with the
people, they both abated the vigour of the Armie, and then also rst troubled
the State at home with diuision. Being ouerthrowne in Sicily, and hauing lost,
besides other ammunition, the greatest part of their Nauy, and the Citie being
then in sedition, yet they held out 3 yeeres, both against their rst enemies, and
the Sicilians with them, and against most of their reuolted Confederates besides,
and also afterwards against Cyrus the Kings sonne, who tooke part with, and
sent money to the Peloponnesians, to maintaine their Fleet; and neuer shrunke
till they had ouerthrowne themselues with priuate dissentions. So much was in
Pericles aboue other men at that time, that he could foresee by what meanes the
Citie might easily haue out-lasted the Peloponnesians in this Warre.

The Lacedaemonians and their Confederates, made The Lacedaemonians Warre
Warre the same Summer with 100 Gallies, against           against Zacynthus.

Zacynthus, an Iland lying ouer against Elis. The          Z nt .
                                                          ●   ●

Inhabitants whereof were a Colony of the Achaeans
of Peloponnesus, but Confederates of the people of Athens. There went in this
Fleet, 1000 men of Armes, and Cnemus a Spartan for Admirall, who landing,
wasted the greatest part of the Territory. But they of the Iland not yeelding, they
put o againe, and went home.

In the end of the same Summer, Aristaeus of Corinth, The Lacedaemonian
and Anaristus, Nicolaus, Pratodemus, and Timagoras Ambassadors taken by the
                                                       Athenian Ambassadors in
of Tegea, Ambassadours of the Lacedaemonians, and Thrace and went to Athens.
Polis of Argos, a priuate man, as they were trauelling
into Asia to the King, to get mony of him, and to draw him into their league,

tooke Thrace in their way, and came vnto Sitalces the sonne of Teres, 
with a desire to get him also, if they could, to forsake the league with Athens,
and to send his forces to Potidaea, which the Athenian Army now besieged, and
not to aide the Athenians any longer: and withall to get leaue to passe through
his Countrey to the other side of Hellespont, to goe, as they intended, to
Pharnabazus, the sonne of Pharnaces, who would conuoy them to the King. But
the Ambassadours of Athens, Learchus, the sonne of Callimachus, and
Ameiniades the sonne of Philemon, then resident with Sitalces, perswaded
Sadocus the sonne of Sitalces, who was now a Citizen of Athens, to put them
into their hands, that they might not goe to the King, and doe hurt to the Citie,
whereof hee himselfe was now a member. Whereunto condiscending, as they
iourneyed thorow Thrace, to take ship to crosse the Hellespont, * he
apprehended them before they got to the ship, by           * A 〈◊〉 act of Sadocus, to gratiﬁe
such others as he sent along with Learchus, and            the Athenians, because they had
                                                           made him free of 〈◊〉 Citie.
Ameiniades, with command to deliuer them into their
hands; And they, when they had them, sent them away to Athens. When they
came thither, the Athenians fearing Aristaeus, lest escaping, he should doe them
further mischiefe, (for he was manifestly the authour of all the businesse of
Potidaea, and about Thrace) the same day put them all to death, vniudged, and
desirous to haue spoken, and threw them into the           The Athenians put them to
Pits, thinking it but iust, to take reuenge of the         death.

Lacedaemonians that began it, and had slaine and throwne into Pits, the
Merchants of the Athenians, and their Confederates, whom they tooke sayling
in * Merchants ships, about the Coast of                   * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ships of the
Peloponnesus. For in the beginning of the Warre, the round forme of building for the▪

                                                           vse of Merchants, not for the vse
Lacedaemonians slew, as enemies, whomsoeuer they of Warre, as were Gallies, and
tooke at Sea, whether Confederates of the Athenians, other Vessels of the long forme of
                                                           building.
or neutrall, all alike.

About the same time, in the end of Summer, the Ambraciotes, both they
themselues, and diuers Barbarian Nations by them         The Ambraciotes warre on
raised, made Warre against Argos of Amphilochia,         Acarnania.

and against the rest of that Territory. The quarrell betweene them and the

Argiues, arose rst from hence. This Argos and the rest of Amphilochia, was
planted by Amphilochus the sonne of Amphiraus, after the Troian Warre; who
at his returne, misliking the then State of Argos, built this Citie in the Gulfe of
Ambracia, and called it Argos, after the name of his owne Countrey. And it was
the greatest Citie, and had the most wealthy Inhabitants of all Amphilochia. But
many generations after, being fallen into misery, they communicated 
their Citie with the Ambraciotes, bordering vpon Amphilochia. And then they
 rst learned the Greeke language now vsed, from the Ambraciotes, that liued
among them. For the rest of the Amphilochians, were Barbarians. Now the
Ambraciotes in processe of time, draue out the Argiues, and held the Citie by
themselues. Whereupon the Amphilochians submitted themselues to the
Acarnanians, and both together called in the Athenians, who sent 30 Gallies to
their aide, and Phormio for Generall. Phormio being arriued, tooke Argos by
assault, and making slaues of the Ambraciotes, put the Towne into the ioynt
possessions of the Amphilochians and Acarnanians; and this was the beginning
of the League betweene the Athenians and Acarnanians. The Ambraciotes
therefore deriuing their hatred to the Argiues from this their captiuity, came in
with an Armie partly of their owne, and partly raised amongst the Chaonians,
and other neighbouring Barbarians now in this Warre. And comming to Argos,
were masters of the eld; but when they could not take the Citie by assault, they
returned, and disbanding, went euery Nation to his         The end of the second Summer.
owne. These were the Acts of the Summer.

In the beginning of Winter, the Athenians sent 20 Gallies about Peloponnesus,
vnder the command of Phormio, who comming to lie at * Naupactus, guarded
the passage that none might goe in, or out, from           * Lepanto.
Corinth, and the Crissaean Gulfe. And other 6
Gallies, vnder the Conduct of Melesander▪ they sent into Caria, and Lycia, as
well to gather tribute in those parts, as also to hinder the Peloponnesian Pirates,
lying on those Coasts from molesting the Nauigation of such * Merchant-ships
as they expected to come to them from Phaselis,            * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
Phoenicia, and that part of the Continent. But
Melesander landing in Lycia, with such forces of the Athenians and their

Confederates, as he had aboard, was ouercome in battaile, and slaine, with the
losse of a part of his Army.

The same Winter, the Potidaeans vnable any longer to Potidaea rendred to the
endure the siege, seeing the inuasion of Attica by the Athenians.
Peloponnesians, could not make them rise, and seeing their victuall failed, and
that they were forced, amongst diuers other things done by them, for necessity
of food, to eate one another, propounded at length to Xenophon the sonne of
Euripedes, Hestiodorus, the sonne of Aristoclidas, and Phaenomachus, 
the sonne of Callimachus, the Athenian Commanders that lay before the Citie,
to giue the same into their hands. And they, seeing both that the Armie was
already a icted by lying in that cold place, and that the State had already spent
2000. Talents vpon the Siege, accepted of it. The         375000. pound sterling.
conditions agreed on, were these: To depart, they and
their Wiues and Children, and their auxiliar Souldiers, euery man with one sute
of cloathes, and euery woman with two; and to take with them euery one a certaine
summe of money for his charges by the way. Hereupon a Truce was granted them
to depart▪ and they went, some to the Chalcideans, and others to other places, as
they could get to. But the people of Athens called the Commanders in question,
for compounding without them; conceiuing that they might haue gotten the
Citie to discretion. And sent afterwards a Colonie to Potidaea of their owne
Citizens. These were the things done in this Winter. And so ended the second
yeere of this War, written by Thucydides.

The next Summer, the Peloponnesians and their         THE THIRD YEERE.
Confederates came not into Attica, but turned their
Armes against Plataea, led by Archidamus the sonne The siege of Plataea.
of Zeuxidamus, King of the Lacedaemonians, who
hauing pitched his Campe was about to waste the Territory thereof. But the
Plataeans sent Ambassadours presently vnto him, with words to this e ect:
Archidamus, and you Lacedaemonians, you doe neither iustly, nor worthy your
selues and Ancestours, in making Warre vpon Plataea. For Pausanias of
Lacedaemon, the sonne of Cleombrotus, hauing (together with such Grecians as

were content to vndergoe the danger of the battell that The Plataeans speech to
was fought in this our Territory) deliuered all Greece Archidamus.
from the slauery of the Persians, when hee oﬀered Sacriﬁce in the Market place of
Plataea, to Iupiter the deliuerer, called together all the Confederates, and granted
to the Plataeans this priuiledge; That their Citie and Territory should bee free:
That none should make any vniust Warre against them, nor goe about to subiect
them; and if any did, the Confederates then present, should to their vtmost
ability, reuenge their quarell. These priuiledges your Fathers granted vs for our
valour, and zeale in those dangers. But now doe you the cleane contrary; for you
ioyne with our greatest enemies, the Thebans, to bring vs into subiection. Therefore
calling to witnesse the Gods then sworne by, and the Gods both of your 
and our Countrey, we require you, that you doe no dammage to the Territory of
Plataea, nor violate those Oathes; but that you suﬀer vs to enioy our libertie in such
sort as was allowed vs by Pausanias.

The Plataeans hauing thus said, Archidamus replyed, and said thus. Men of
Plataea, If you would doe as ye say, you say what is iust. The Answer of Archidamus to
For as Pausanias hath granted to you, so also bee you       the Plataeans.

free; and helpe to set free the rest, who hauing beene partakers of the same dangers
then, and being comprized in the same oath with your selues, are now brought into
subiection by the Athenians. And this so great preparation and Warre is only for
the deliuerance of them, and others: of which if you will especially participate,
keepe your oathes, at least (as we haue also aduised you formerly) be quiet, and
enioy your owne, in neutrality; receiuing both sides in the way of friendship,
neither side in the way of faction. Thus said Archidamus. And the Ambassadours
of Plataea, when they had heard him returned to the Citie, and hauing
communicated his answer to the people, brought word againe to Archidamus,
That what hee had aduised, was impossible for them to The reply of the Plataeans.
performe, without leaue of the Athenians, in whose
keeping were their wiues and children; and that they feared also, for the whole
Citie, lest when the Lacedaemonians were gone, the Athenians should come and
take the custody of it out of their hands; or that the Thebans comprehended in the
oath of receiuing both sides, should againe attempt to surprize it. But Archidamus

to encourage them, made this answer: Deliuer you            The answer of Archidamus to
vnto vs Lacedaemonians, your Citie and your houses, their reply.
shew vs the bounds of your Territory, giue vs your trees by tale, and whatsoeuer else
can be numbred, and depart your selues whither you shall think good, as long as
the Warre lasteth, and when it shall be ended, we will deliuer it all vnto you
againe: in the meane time, we will keepe them as deposited, and will cultiuate
your ground, and pay you rent for it, as much as shall suﬃce for your
maintenance.

Hereupon the Ambassadours went againe into the City, and hauing consulted
with the people, made answer, That they would ﬁrst acquaint the Athenians with
it, and if they would consent, they would then accept the The Plataeans reply again, and
condition: till then, they desired a suspension of armes, desire to know the pleasure of the
                                                            people of Athens.
and not to haue their Territory wasted. Vpon this he
granted them so many dayes truce as was requisite for their returne, and for so
long, forbore to waste their Territory. When the Plataean Ambassadours were
arriued at Athens, and had aduised on the matter with the Athenians, they
returned to the City with this answer: The Athenians The Athenians message to the
say thus: That neither in former times, since wee were Plataeans.
their Confederates, did they euer abandon vs to the iniuries of any, nor 
will they now neglect vs, but giue vs their vtmost assistance. And they coniure vs by
the oath of our Fathers, not to make any alienation touching the league.

When the Ambassadours had made this report, the Plataeans resolued in their
councels, not to betray the Athenians, but rather to endure, if it must bee, the
wasting of their Territory before their eyes, and to su er whatsoeuer misery
could befall them; and no more to goe forth, but from the Walles to make this
Answer: That it was impossible for them to doe as the The Plataeans last answer to
Lacedaemonians had required. When they had                Archidamus from the Wall.

answered so, Archidamus the King, rst made a protestation to the Gods and
Heroes of the Countrey, saying thus: All ye Gods and Archidamus protestation.
Heroes, protectors of Plataeis, bee witnesses, that wee
neither invade this Territory, wherein our Fathers, after their vowes vnto you,

ouercame the Medes, and which you made propitious for the Grecians to ﬁght in,
vniustly now in the beginning; because they haue ﬁrst broken the League they had
sworne: nor what wee shall further doe will bee any iniury, because, though we
haue oﬀered many and reasonable conditions, they haue yet beene all refused.
Assent ye also to the punishment of the beginners of iniury, and to the reuenge of
those that beare lawfull armes.

Hauing made this protestation to the Gods, hee made ready his Armie for the
Warre. And rst hauing felled Trees, he therewith made a Palizado about the
Towne, that none might goe out. That done, he raised A mount raised against Plataea.
a Mount against the Wall, hoping with so great an
Armie all at worke at once, to haue quickly taken it. And hauing cut downe
Wood in the Hill Cithaeron, they built a Frame of Timber, and watled it about
on either side, to serue in stead of Walles, to keepe the Earth from falling too
much away, and cast into it stones, and earth, and whatsoeuer else would serue
to ll it vp. 70. dayes and nights continually they powred on, diuiding the worke
betweene them for rest in such manner, as some might bee carrying, whilest
others tooke their sleepe and foode. And they were vrged to labour, by the
Lacedaemonians that commanded the Mercenaries of the seuerall Cities, and
had the charge of the worke. The Plataeans seeing the The Plataeans raise their Wall
Mount to rise, made the frame of a Wall with Wood, higher against the mount, by a
                                                           frame of Timber, in which they
which hauing placed on the Wall of the Citie, in the layed their Brickes.
place where the Mount touched, they built it within
full of Brickes, taken from the adioyning Houses, for that purpose 
demolished, the Timber seruing to binde them together, that the building might
not bee weakned by the height. The same was also couered with Hides and
Quilts, both to keepe the Timber from shot of wilde- re, and those that
wrought, from danger. So that the height of the Wall was great on one side, and
the Mount went vp as fast on the other. The Plataeans vsed also this deuice; they
brake a hole in their owne Wall, where the Mount ioyned, and drew the earth
from it into the Citie. But the Peloponnesians, when The Plataeans deuice to draw
they found it out, tooke clay, and therewith daubing the earth from the Mount
                                                           thorow the Wall. The
Hurdles of Reeds, cast the same into the chinke,

which mouldring not, as did the earth, they could not Peloponnesians remedy that
                                                            euill.
draw it away. The Plataeans excluded heere, gaue ouer
that Plot, and digging a secret mine, which they            The Plataeans fetch the earth
carried vnder the mount from within the Citie by            away from vnder the Mount by
                                                            a Mine.
coniecture, fetched away the earth againe, and were a
long time vndiscouered; so that still casting on, the Mount grew still lesse, the
earth being drawne away below, and settling ouer the part where it was voyded.
The Plataeans neuerthelesse, fearing that they should not be able euen thus to
hold out, beeing few against many, deuised this further: they gaue ouer working
at the high Wall, against the Mount, and beginning at The Plataeans make another
both ends of it, where the Wall was low, built another Wall within that which was to
                                                            the Mount.
Wall in forme of a Crescent, inward to the Citie, that
if the great Wall were taken, this might resist, and put the Enemy to make
another Mount; and by comming further in, to bee at double paines, and
withall, more encompassable with shot. The Peloponnesians, together with the
raising of their Mount, brought to the Citie their          The Peloponmesians assault the
Engines of battery; one of which, by helpe of the           Wall with Engines.

Mount, they applyed to the high Wall, wherewith they much shooke it, and put
the Plataeans into great feare; and others to other parts of the Wall, which the
Plataeans partly turned aside, by casting Ropes about The Plataeans defence against
them, and partly with great beames, which being             the Engines.

hung in long iron chaines, by either end vpon two other great beames, setting
ouer, and enclining from aboue the Wall, like two hornes, they drew vp to them
athwart, and where the Engine was about to light, slacking the chaines, and
letting their hands goe, they let fall with violence, to breake the beake of it. After
this, the Peloponnesians seeing their Engines auailed not, and                  
thinking it hard to take the City by any present violence, prepared themselues to
besiege it. But rst they thought t to attempt it by re, being no great Citie,
and when the Wind should rise, if they could, to burne it. For there was no way
they did not thinke on, to haue gained it without expence and long siege.
Hauing therefore brought Faggots, they cast them            The Peloponnesians throw
from the Mount, into the space betweene it and their Faggots and ﬁre into the Towne,
                                                            from the Mount.
new Wall, which by so many hands was quickly lled;

and then into as much of the rest of the Citie, as at that distance they could
reach: and throwing amongst them re, together with Brimstone and Pitch,
kindled the Wood, and raised such a ame, as the like A great Fire.
was neuer seene before, made by the hand of man. For
as for the woods in the Mountaines, the trees haue indeed taken re, but it hath
bin by mutuall attrition, and haue amed out of their own accord. But this re
was a great one, and the Plataeans that had escaped other mischiefes, wanted
little of being consumed by this. For neere the Wall they could not get by a great
way: and if the Wind had beene with it (as the enemy hoped it might) they could
neuer haue escaped. It is also reported, that there fell much raine then, with great
Thunder, and that the ame was extinguished, and the danger ceased by that.
The Peloponnesians, when they failed likewise of this, retayning a part of their
Armie, and dismissing the rest, enclosed the Citie about with a Wall; diuiding
the circumference thereof to the charge of the seuerall Cities. There was a Ditch
both within and without it, out of which they made their Brickes; and after it
was nished, which was about the * rising of                *
Arcturus, they left a guard for one halfe of the Wall, In the beginning of September.
(for the other was guarded by the Boeotians) and           The siege laid to Plataea.

departed with the rest of their Armie, and were
dissolued according to their Cities. The Plataeans had before this, sent their
Wiues and Children, and all their vnseruiceable men to Athens. The rest were
besieged, beeing in number, of the Plataeans themselues, 400. of Athenians, 80.
and 100 Women to dresse their meate. These were all when the Siege was rst
laid, and not one more, neither free nor bond in the Citie. In this manner was
the Citie besieged.

The same Summer, at the same time that this Iourney was made against Plataea,
the Athenians with 2000. men of Armes of their owne Citie, and 200. 
Horsemen, made Warre vpon the Chalcideans of          The Athenians send an Armie
Thrace, and the Bottiaeans▪ when the Corne was at against the Chalcidaeans.
the highest, vnder the conduct of Xenophon the sonne of Eurypides, and two
others. These comming before Spartolus in Bottiaea, destroyed the Corne, &
expected that the Town should haue bin rendred by the practice of some within.

But such as would not haue it so hauing sent for aid to Olynthus before, there
came into the Citie for safegard thereof, a supply both of men of Armes, and
other Souldiers from thence. And these issuing forth of Spartolus, the Athenians
put themselues into order of Battell vnder the Towne it selfe. The men of Armes
of the Chalcideans, and certaine auxiliaries with them, were ouercome by the
Athenians, and retired within Spartolus. And the Horsemen of the Chalcideans,
and their light-armed Souldiers, ouercame the            The Athenians foughten with by
Horsemen, and light-armed of the Athenians; but          the Chalcideans at Spartolus.

they had some few Targettiers besides, of the Territory called Chrusis. When the
Battell was now begun, came a supply of other Targettiers from Olynthus,
which the light armed Souldiers of Spartolus perceiuing, emboldned both by
this addition of strength, and also as hauing had the better before, with the
Chalcidean Horse, and this new supply, charged the Athenians afresh. The
Athenians heereupon retired to two companies they had left with the Carriages;
and as oft as the Athenians charged, the Chalcideans retired; and when the
Athenians retired, the Chalcideans charged them with their shot. Especially the
Chalcidean Horsemen rode vp, and charging them where they thought t,
forced the Athenians in extreme a right, to turne their backes, and chased them
a great way. The Athenians ed to Potidaea, and hauing afterwards fetched away
the bodies of their dead vpon truce, returned with the remainder of their Armie,
to Athens. Foure hundred and thirty men they lost, and their chiefe
Commanders all three. And the Chalcideans and Bottiaeans, when they had set
vp a Trophie, and taken vp their dead bodies,            And ouerthrowne, with the losse
disbanded and went euery one to his Citie.               of 3. Commanders.

Not long after this, the same Summer, the                   The Ambraciotes invade
Ambraciotes and Chaonians, desiring to subdue all           Acarnania, together with the
                                                            Lacedaemonians.
Acarnania, and to make it reuolt from the Athenians,
perswaded the Lacedaemonians to make ready a Fleet out of the Confederate
Cities, and to send 1000. men of Armes into Acarnania; saying, that if 
they ayded them both with a Fleet, and a Land Armie at once, the Acarnanians
of the Sea-cost being thereby disabled to assist the rest, hauing easily gained
Acarnania, they might be Masters afterward both of Zacynthus and Cephalonia,

and the Athenians hereafter lesse able to make their voyages about
Peloponnesus; and that there was a hope besides to take Naupactus. The
Peloponnesians assenting, sent thither Cnemus, who was yet Admirall, with his
men of Armes, in a few Gallies immediately; and withall sent word to the Cities
about, as soone as their Gallies were ready, to sayle with all speed to Leucas. Now
the Corinthians were very zealous in the behalfe of the Ambraciotes, as being
their owne Colony. And the Gallies which were to goe from Corinth, Sicyonia,
and that part of the Coast, were now making ready; and those of the Leucadians,
Anactorians, and Ambraciotes, were arriued before, and stayed at Leucas for
their comming. Cnemus and his 1000. men of Armes, when they had crossed
the Sea vndiscryed of Phormio, who commanded the 20. Athenian Gallies that
kept watch at Naupactus, presently prepared for the Lepanto.
War by Land. He had in his Army, of Grecians, the
Ambraciotes, Leucadians, Anactorians, and the              The Armie of the Ambraciotes
thousand Peloponnesians he brought with him; and and their Confederates.
of Barbarians, a thousand Chaonians, who haue no King, but were led by
Photius and Nicanor, which two being of the Families eligible had now the
annuall gouernment. With the Chaonians came also the Thesprotians, they also
without a King. The Molossians, and Antitanians were led by Sabylinthus,
protector of Tharups their King, who was yet in minority. The Paraueans were
led by their King Oraedus; and vnder Oroedus, serued likewise, by permission of
Antiochus their King, a thousand Orestians. Also Perdiccas sent thither,
vnknowne to the Athenians, a thousand Macedonians; but these last were not
yet arriued. With this Armie began Cnemus to march, without staying for the
Fleet from Corinth. And passing through Argia, they destroyed Limnaea, a
Towne vnwalled. From thence they marched towards They goe toward Stratus. Stratus
Stratus, the greatest Citie of Acarnania; conceiuing       the greatest Citie of Acarnania.

that if they could take this rst, the rest would come easily in. The Acarnanians
seeing a great Army by Land was entred their Countrey already, and expecting
the enemy also by Sea, ioyned not to succour Stratus, but guarded euery one his
owne, and sent for ayde to Phormio. But he answered them, that since
there was a Fleet to bee set forth from Corinth, he could not leaue Naupactus
without a guard. The Peloponnesians and their Confederates, with their Armie

diuided into three, marched on towards the Citie of the Stratians, to the end that
being encamped neere it, if they yeelded not on parley, they might presently
assault the Walles. So they went on, the Chaonians and other Barbarians in the
middle; the Leucadians, and Anactonians; and such others as were with these,
on the right hand▪ and Cnemus, with the Peloponnesians and Ambraciotes on
the left; each Armie at great distance, and sometimes out of sight one of another.
The Grecians in their march, kept their order, and         Warinesse of the Grecians.
went warily on, till they had gotten a conuenient place
to encampe in. But the Chaonians con dent of               Rashnesse of the Chaonians.
themselues, and by the inhabitants of that Continent
accounted most warlike, had not the patience to take in any ground for a
Campe, but carried furiously on, together with the rest of the Barbarians;
thought to haue taken the Towne by their clamour, and to haue the Action
ascribed onely to themselues. But they of Stratus, aware of this, whilest they
were yet in their way, and imagining, if they could        Stratagem of the Stratians.
ouercome these, thus deuided from the other two
Armies, that the Grecians also would be the lesse forward to come on, placed
diuers▪ Ambushes not farre from the Citie, and when the enemies approached,
fell vpon them, both from the Citie, and from the Ambushes at once, and
putting them into a right, slew many of the Chaonians vpon the place: And the
rest of the Barbarians seeing these to shrinke, staid no longer, but ed outright.
Neither of the Grecian Armies had knowledge of this Skirmish, because they
were gone so farre before, to chuse (as they then thought) a commodious place
to pitch in. But when the Barbarians came backe vpon them running, they
receiued them, and ioyning both Campes together, stirred no more for that day.
And the Stratians assaulted them not, for want of the ayde of the rest of the
Acarnanians, but vsed their slings against them, and troubled them much that
way. For without their men of Armes, there was no stirring for them. And in this
kinde the Acarnanians are held excellent.

When night came, Cnemus withdrew his Armie to the Riuer Anapus, 
from Stratus 80. Furlongs, and fetched o the dead bodies vpon truce, the next
day. And, whereas the Citie Oeniades was come in of it selfe, he made his retreat

thither, before the Acarnanians should assemble with their succours; and from
thence went euery one home. And the Stratians set vp The Peloponnesians and
a Trophie of the Skirmish against the Barbarians.      Ambraciotes retire without
                                                            eﬀect.

In the meane time the Fleet of Corinth, and the other Phormio with 20 Gallies of
Confederates, that was to set out from the Crissaean Athens, ouercommeth 47 of the
                                                            Peloponnesian Gallies.
Gulfe, and to ioyne with Cnemus, to hinder the lower
Acarnanians from ayding the vpper, came not at all; but were compelled to ght
with Phormio, and those twenty Athenian Gallies that kept watch at
Naupactus, about the same time that the Skirmish was at Stratus. For as they
sayled along the shore, Phormio waited on them till they were out of the
streight, intending to set vpon them in the open Sea. And the Corinthians and
their Confederates went not as to ght by Sea, but furnished rather for the
Land-seruice in Acarnania; and neuer thought that the Athenians with their
twenty Gallies, durst ght with theirs, that were seuen and forty. Neuerthelesse,
when they saw that the Athenians, as themselues sayled by one shore, kept ouer
against them on the other, and that now when they went o from Patrae in
Achaia, to goe ouer to Acarnania in the opposite Continent, the Athenians
came towards them from Chalcis, and the Riuer Euenus, and also knew that
they had come to anchor there the night before, they found they were then to
  ght of necessity, directly against the mouth of the Straight. The Commanders
of the Fleet were such as the Cities that set it foorth, had seuerally appointed;
but of the Corinthians, these; Machon, Isocrates, and The order of the Peloponnesian
Agatharchidas. The Peloponnesians ordered their             Gallies.

Fleet in such manner, as they made thereof a Circle, as great as, without leauing
the spaces so wide as for the Athenians to passe through, they were possibly able;
with the stemmes of their Gallies outward, and sternes inward, and into the
middest thereof, receiued such small Vessels as came with them; and also ue of
their swiftest Gallies, the which were at narrow passages to come forth in
whatsoeuer part the Enemy should charge.

But the Athenians with their Gallies ordered one after The order of the Athenian
one in le, went round them, and shrunke them vp        Gallies, and the Stratagem of
                                                            Phormio.

together, by wiping them euer as they past, and putting them in                 
expectation of present ght. But Phormio had before forbidden them to ght,
till he himselfe had giuen them the signall. For he hoped that this order of theirs
would not last long, as in an Army on Land, but that the Gallies would fall foule
of one another, and be troubled also with the smaller vessels in the middest. And
if the wind should also blow out of the Gulfe, in expectation whereof he so went
round them, and which * vsually blew there euery           * A set wind which blow euery
morning, hee made account they would then instantly morning there from the East,
                                                           caused, as it seemeth, by the
be disordered. As for giuing the onset, because his        approach of the Sunke.
Gallies were more agile then the Gallies of the enemy,
he thought it was in his owne election, and would bee most opportune on that
occasion. When this wind was vp, and the Gallies of the Peloponnesians being
already contracted into a narrow compasse, were both waies troubled, by the
wind, and withall by their owne lesser vessels that encumbred them; and when
one Gallie fell foule of another, and the Mariners laboured to set them cleere
with their poles, and through the noyse they made, keeping o , and reuiling
each other, heard nothing, neither of their charge, nor of the Gallies direction;
and through want of skill, vnable to keepe vp their Oares in a troubled Sea,
rendred the Gallie vntractable to him that sate at the Helme, Then, and with this
opportunity he gaue the signall. And the Athenians charging, drowned rst one
of the Admirall Gallies, and diuers others after it, in the seuerall parts they
assaulted; and brought them to that passe at length, that not one applying
himselfe to the ght, they ed all towards Patrae and The Peloponnesians ﬂy.
Dyme, Cities of Achaia. The Athenians, after they
had chased them, and taken twelue Gallies, and slain most of the men that were
in them, fell o , and went to Molychrium; and when they had there set vp a
Trophie, and consecrated one Gallie to Neptune, they returned with the rest to
Naupactus. The Peloponnesians with the remainder of their Fleet, went
presently along the Coast of Cyllene, the Arsenall of the Eleans; and thither,
after the Battell at Stratus, came also Cnemus, from Leucas, and with him those
Gallies that were there, and with which this other Fleet should haue beene
ioyned.

After this, the Lacedaemonians sent vnto Cnemus to the Fleet, Timocrates,
                                                          Preparation for another ﬁght.
Brasidas, and Lycophron to be of his Councell, with
command to prepare for another better ght, and not to su er a few 
Gallies to depriue them of the vse of the Sea. For they thought this accident
(especially being their rst proofe by sea) very much against reason; and that it
was not so much a defect of the Fleet, as of their courage neuer comparing the
long practice of the Athenians, with their own short study in these businesses.
And therefore they sent these men thither in passion: who being arriued with
Cnemus, intimated to the Cities about, to prouide their Gallies, and caused
those they had before, to be repayred. Phormio likewise sent to Athens, to make
knowne both the Enemies preparation, and his owne former victory; and withall
to will them to send speedily vnto him, as many Gallies as they could make
ready; because they were euery day in expectation of a new ght. Heereupon
they sent him twenty Gallies, but commanded him that had the charge of them,
to goe rst into Crete.

For Nicias a Cretan of Gortys, the publike Host of the Twenty saile of Athenians, sent
Athenians, had perswaded them to a voyage against          to ayde Phormio, stay in Crete.

Cydonia, telling them they might take it in, being now their Enemie. Which he
did, to grati e the Polichnitae, that bordered vpon the Cydonians. Therefore
with these Gallies hee sayled into Crete, and together with the Polichnitae,
wasted the Territory of the Cydonians; where also, by reason of the Winds, and
weather vn t to take Sea in, hee wasted not a little of his time.

In the meane time, whilest these Athenians were Wind-bound in Crete, the
Peloponnesians that were in Cyllene, in order of        The Peloponnesians saile by the
Battell sayled along the Coast to Panormus of Achaia, Coast of Panormus.
to which also were their Land-forces come to ayde them. Phormio likewise
sayled by the shore to Rhium Molychricum, and anchored without it, with
twenty Gallies, the same hee had vsed in the former Battell. Now this Rhium
was of the Athenians side, and the other Rhium in Peloponnesus, lyes on the
opposite shore, distant from it at the most but seuen furlongs of Sea; and these
two make the mouth of the Crissaean Gulfe. The Peloponnesians therefore

came to an anchor at Rhium of Achaia, with 77. Gallies, not farre from
Panormus, where they left their Land Forces. After they saw the Athenians, and
had lyen sixe or seuen daies one against the other, meditating and prouiding for
the Battell, the Peloponnesians not intending to put o without         
Rhium into the wide Sea, for feare of what they had su erd by it before; nor the
other to enter the Streight, because to ght within, they thought to be the
Enemies aduantage. At last, Cnemus, Brasidas, and the other Commanders of
the Peloponnesians, desiring to ght speedily, before a new supply should arriue
from Athens, called the Soldiers together, and seeing the most of them to be
fearefull through their former defeat, and not forward to ght againe,
encouraged them rst with words to this e ect.

 2.1. THE ORATION OF CNEMVS.
 MEn of Peloponnesus, If any of you be afraid of the Battell at hand, for the
 successe of the Battell past, his feare is without ground. For you know, wee
 were inferiour to them then in preparation, and set not forth as to a ght at
 Sea, but rather to an expedition by Land. Fortune likewise crossed vs in many
 things; and somewhat wee miscarried by vnskilfulnesse: so as the losse can no
 way be ascribed to cowardise. Nor is it iust, so long as we were not ouercome
 by meere force, but haue somewhat to alledge in our excuse, that the mind
 should bee deiected for the calamity of the euent. But we must thinke, that
 though Fortune may faile men, yet the courage of a valiant man can neuer
 faile: and not that we may iusti e cowardise in any thing, by pretending want
 of skill, and yet bee truely valiant. And yet you are not so much short of their
 skill, as you exceede them in valour. And though this knowledge of theirs,
 which you so much feare, ioyned with courage, will not bee without a
 memory also, to put what they know in execution, yet without courage, no
 act in the world is of any force in the time of danger. For feare confoundeth
 the memory, and skill without courage auaileth nothing. To their oddes
 therefore of skill, oppose your oddes of valour; and to the feare caused by your
 ouerthrow, oppose your being then vnprouided. You haue further now, a

 greater Fleet, and to ght on your owne shore; with your aydes at hand, of
 men of Armes: and for the most part, the greatest number, and best prouided,
 get the victory. So that wee can neither see any one cause in particular, why
 wee should miscarry; and whatsoeuer were our wants in the former Battell,
 supplyed in this, will now turne to our instruction. With courage therefore,
 both Masters and Mariners, follow euery man in his order, not          
 forsaking the place assigned him. And for vs, wee shall order the battaile as
 well as the former Commanders; and leaue no excuse to any man of his
 cowardize. And if any will needes be a coward, hee shall receiue condigne
 punishment, and the valiant shall be rewarded according to their merit. Thus
 did the Commanders encourage the Peloponnesians.

And Phormio, he likewise doubting that his Souldiers Phormio doubteth of the courage
were but faint-hearted, and obseruing they had          of his Soldiers.

consultations apart, and were afraid of the multitude of the enemies Gallies,
thought good, hauing called them together, to encourage, and admonish them
vpon the present occasion. For though he had alwayes before told them, and
predisposed their mindes to an opinion, that there was no number of Gallies so
great, which setting vpon them, they ought not to vndertake, and also most of
the Souldiers had of long time assumed a conceit of themselues, that being
Athenians, they ought not to decline, any number of And encourageth them.
Gallies whatsoeuer, of the Peloponnesians; yet when
he saw that the sight of the enemy present had deiected them, he thought t to
reuiue their courage, and hauing assembled the Athenians, said thus.

 2.1. THE ORATION OF PHORMIO.
 SOuldiers, hauing obserued your feare of the enemies number, I haue called
 you together, not enduring to see you terri ed with things that are not
 terrible. For rst, they haue prepared this great number, and oddes of Gallies,
 for that they were ouercome before, and because they are euen in their owne
 opinions too weake for vs. And next, their present boldnesse proceeds onely

from their knowledge in Land-seruice, in con dence whereof (as if to be
valiant, were peculiar vnto them) they are now come vp; wherin hauing for
the most part prospered, they thinke to doe the same in seruice by Sea. But in
reason the oddes must be ours in this, as well as it is theirs in the other kinde.
For in courage they exceed vs not, and as touching the aduantage of either
side, we may better be bold now, then they. And the Lacedaemonians, who are
the leaders of the Confederates, bring them to ght, for the greatest part (in
respect of the opinion they haue of vs) against their wills. For else they would
neuer haue vndertaken a new battaile, after they were once so cleerely
ouerthrowne. Feare not therefore any great boldnesse on their part. 
But the feare which they haue of you, is farre, both greater, and more certaine,
not onely for that you haue ouercome them before, but also for this, that they
would neuer beleeue you would goe about to resist, vnlesse you had some
notable thing to put in practice vpon them. For when the enemy is the greater
number as these are now, they invade chie y vpon con dence of their
strength. But they that are much the fewer must haue some great and sure
designe when they dare ght vnconstrained. Wherewith these men now
amazed, feare vs more for our vnlikely preparation, then they would if it were
more proportionable. Besides, many great Armies haue beene ouercome by
the lesser, through vnskilfulnesse, and some also by timorousnesse, both
which we our selues are free from. As for the battaile, I will not willingly ght
it in the Gulfe, nor goe in thither; seeing that to a few Gallies with
nimblenesse and art, against many without art, streightnesse of roome is
disaduantage. For neither can one charge with the beake of the Gallie as is t,
vnlesse hee haue sight of the enemy a farre o , or if he be himselfe ouer-
pressed, againe get cleere. Nor is there any getting through them, or turning to
and fro, at ones pleasure, which are all the workes of such Gallies, as haue their
aduantage in agility; but the Sea- ght would of necessitie be the same with a
battaile by Land, wherein the greater number must haue the better. But of
this, I shall my selfe take the best care I am able. In the meane time keepe you
your order well in the Gallies, and euery man receiue his charge readily; and
the rather because the enemy is at Anchor so neere vs. In the ght, haue in
great estimation, order and silence, as things of great force in most Military

 actions, especially in a ght by Sea; and charge these your enemies according
 to the worth of your former Acts. You are to ght for a great wager, either to
 destroy the hope of the Peloponnesian Nauies, or to bring the feare of the Sea
 neerer home to the Athenians. Againe, let mee tell you, you haue beaten them
 once already; and men once ouercome, will not come againe to the danger so
 well resolued as before. Thus did Phormio also encourage his Souldiers.

The Peloponnesians, when they saw the Athenians           The stratagem of the
would not enter the Gulfe▪ and Streight, desiring to Peloponnesians.
draw them in against their willes, weighed Anchor, and betime in the morning
hauing arranged their Gallies by foure and foure in a ranke, sayled along their
owne Coast, within the Gulfe, leading the way, in the same order as they had lien
at Anchor with their right wing. In this wing they had placed 20 of their swiftest
Gallies, to the end that if Phormio, thinking them going to                   
Naupactus, should for safegard of the Towne, sayle along his owne Coast
likewise, within the Straight, the Athenians might not be able to get beyond that
wing of theirs, and auoyd the impression, but be enclosed by their Gallies on
both sides. Phormio, fearing (as they expected) what might become of the
Towne now without guard, as soone as he saw them from Anchor, against his
will, and in extreme haste, went aboord, and sayled along the Shoare, with the
Land forces of the Messenians, marching by to ayde The Peloponnesians giue the
him. The Peloponnesians, when they saw them sayle onset.
in one long File, Gally after Gally, and that they were now in the Gulfe, and by
the Shoare, (which they most desired) vpon one signe giuen, turned suddenly,
euery one as fast as he could vpon the Athenians, hoping to haue intercepted
them euery Gallie. But of those, the eleuen formost, auoyding that wing, and the
turne made by the Peloponnesians, got out into the open Sea. The rest they
intercepted, and driuing them to the Shoare, sunke them.

The men, as many as swamme not out, they slew, and the Gallies, some they tyed
to their owne, and towed them away empty, and one with the men and all in her
they had already taken. But the Messenian succours on Land, entring the Sea
with their Armes, got aboord of some of them, and ghting from the Deckes,

recouered them againe, after they were already towing away. And in this part, the
Peloponnesians had the victory, and ouercame the Gallies of the Athenians.
Now the 20 Gallies that were their right wing, gaue chase to those eleuen
Athenian Gallies, which had auoyded them when they turned, and were gotten
into the open Sea. These ying toward Naupactus, arriued there before the
enemies, all saue one, and when they came vnder the Temple of Apollo, turned
their beake heads, and put themselues in readinesse for defence, in c●se the
enemy should follow them to the Land. But the Peloponnesians as they came
after, were * Paeanizing, as if they had already had the * Singing the hymne of victory.
victory; and one Gallie which was of Leucas, being
farre before the rest, gaue chase to one Athenian Gallie, that was behind the rest
of the Athenians. Now it chanced that there lay out into the Sea, a certaine Ship
at Anchor, to which the Athenian Gally rst comming, fetcht a compasse about
her, and came backe full butt against the Leucadian Gallie that gaue 
her chase, and sunke her. Vpon this vnexpected and vnlikely accident they began
to feare, and hauing also followed the chase, as being victors, disorderly, some of
them let downe their Oares into the water, and hindred the way of their Gallies
(a matter of very ill consequence, seeing the enemy was so neere) and staid for
more company. And some of them through ignorance of the Coast, ranne vpon
the Shelues. The Athenians seeing this, tooke heart againe, and together with
one clamour, set vpon them; who resisted not long,        The Athenians haue the victory.
because of their present errours committed, and their
disarray; but turned, and ed to Panormus▪ from whence at rst they set forth.
The Athenians followed, and tooke from them sixe Gallies, that were hindmost,
and recouered their own which the Peloponnesians had sunke by the Shoare,
and tyed a sterne of theirs. Of the men, some they slew, and some also they tooke
aliue. In the Leucadian Gally that was sunke neere the ship, was Timocrates, a
Lacedaemonian, who, when the Gally was lost, runne Timocrates a Lacedaemonian
himselfe thorow with his sword, and his body draue Commander slayeth himselfe.
into the Hauen of Naupactus. The Athenians falling o , erected a Trophy in the
place from whence they set forth to this victory, & took vp their dead, and the
wracke, as much as was on their own shore, and gaue truce to the enemy to doe
the like. The Peloponnesians also set vp a Trophy, as if they also had had the

victory, in respect of the ight of those Gallies which they sunke by the Shoare;
and the Gally which they had taken, they consecrated to Neptune, in Rhium of
Achaia, hard by their Trophy. After this, fearing the supply which was expected
from Athens, they sayled by night into the Crissaean Gulfe, and to Corinth, all
but the Leucadians. And those Athenians, with twenty Gallies out of Crete, that
should haue beene with Phormio before the battaile, not long after the going
away of the Gallies of Peloponnesus, arriued at Naupactus; And the Summer
ended.                                                   The end of the third Summer.

But before, the Fleet gone into the Crissaean Gulfe, and to Corinth, was
dispersed. Cnemus, and Brasidas, and the rest of the Commanders of the
Peloponnesians, in the beginning of Winter,              The Peloponnesians resolue to
instructed by the Megareans, thought good to make attempt the surprize of Piraeus.
an attempt vpon Piraeus, the Hauen of the Athenians. Now it was without
guard, or barre, and that vpon very good cause, considering how               
much they exceeded others in the power of their Nauy. And it was resolued, that
euery Mariner with * his Oare, his Cushion, and * one * It may be hence gathered, that
Thong for his Oare to turne in, should take his way by in the Gallies of old, there was
                                                         but one man to one Oare.
Land from Corinth, to the other Sea, that lyeth to
Athens, and going with all speed to Megara, lanch        * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, a piece of
                                                         Leather wherein their Oare
forty Gallies out of Nisaea, the Arsenall of the         turned.
Megareans, which then were there, and sayle presently
into Piraeus. For at that time, there neither stood any Gallies for a watch before
it, nor was there any imagination, that the enemies would on such a sudden
come vpon them. For they durst not haue attempted it openly, though with
leasure; nor if they had had any such intention, could it but haue been
discouered. As soone as it was resolued on; they set presently forward, and
arriuing by night, lanched the said Gallies of Nisaea, and set Sayle, not now
towards Piraeus, as they intended, fearing the danger, The Peloponnesians dare not
and a wind was also said to haue risen, that hindred     execute their designe, but turne
                                                         to Salamis.
them, but toward a Promontory of Salamis, lying out
towards Megara.

Now, there was in it, a little Fort, and vnderneath in the Sea, lay three Gallies
that kept watch, to hinder the importation and exportation of any thing, to or
from the Megareans. This Fort they assaulted, and the Gallies they towed empty
away after them. And being come vpon the Salaminians vnawares, wasted also
other parts of the Iland.

By this time the res * signifying the comming of          * Fires lifted vp, if they were still,
enemies, were lifted vp towards Athens, and a righted signiﬁed friends comming, if
                                                          waued, enemies. Scholiastes.
them more then any thing that had happened in all
this Warre. For they in the Citie thought the enemies had been already in
Piraeus. And they in Piraeus thought the Citie of the Salaminians had been
already taken, and that the enemy would instantly come into Piraeus. Which,
had they not been afraid, nor been hindred by the wind, they might also easily
haue done. But the Athenians, as soone as it was day, came with the whole
strength of the Citie, into Piraeus, and lanched their Gallies, and imbarking in
haste, and tumult, set sayle toward Salamis, leauing for the guard of Piraeus, an
Army of Foot. The Peloponnesians vpon notice of those succours, hauing now
ouer-runne most of Salamis, and taken many prisoners, and much other booty,
besides the three Gallies from the Fort of Budorus, went backe in all 
haste to Nisaea. And somewhat they feared the more, for that their Gallies had
lyen long in the water, and were subiect to leaking. And when they came to
Megara, they went thence to Corinth againe by Land. The Athenians likewise,
when they found not the Enemy at Salamis, went home; and from that time
forward, looked better to Piraeus, both for the shutting of the Ports, and for
their diligence otherwaies.

About the same time, in the beginning of the same     The King of Thrace maketh
Winter, Sytalces an Odrysian, the sonne of Teres,     Warre on the King of Macedon.

King of Thrace, made Warre vpon Perdiccas the sonne of Alexander King of
Macedonia, and vpon the Chalcideans bordering on Thrace; vpon two
promises; one of which hee required to be performed to him, and the other hee
was to performe himselfe. For Perdiccas had promised somewhat vnto him, for
reconciling him to the Athenians, who had formerly oppressed him with Warre,

and for not restoring his Brother Philip to the Kingdome, that was his Enemie,
which hee neuer paid him; And Sytalces himselfe had couenanted with the
Athenians, when he made League with them, that he would end the Warre
which they had against the Chalcideans of Thrace. For these causes therefore hee
made this Expedition; and tooke with him both Amyntas, the sonne of Philip,
(with purpose to make him King of Macedonia) and also the Athenian
Ambassadours then with him for that businesse, and Agnon the Athenian
Commander. For the Athenians ought also to haue ioyned with him against the
Chalcideans, both with a Fleet, and with as great Land-forces as they could
prouide.

Beginning therefore with the Odrysians, he leuied rst those Thracians that
inhabite on this side the Mountaines Aemus and Rhodope, as many as were of
his owne dominion, downe to the shore of the Euxine Sea, and the Hellespont.
Then beyond Aemus he leuied the Getes, and all the Nations betweene Ister and
the Euxine Sea. The Getes, and people of those parts, are borderers vpon the
Scythians, and furnished as the Scythians are, all Archers on Horsebacke. He
also drew forth many of those Scythians that inhabite the Mountaines, and are
free-States, all Sword-men, and are called Dij, the greatest part of which are on
the Mountaine Rhodope; whereof some he hyred, and some went as 
Voluntaries. He leuied also the Agrianes, and Leaeans, and all other the Nations
of Paeonia, in his owne Dominion. These are the vtmost bounds of his
Dominion, extending to the Graeans and Leaeans, Nations of Paeonia, and to
the Riuer Strymon; which rising out of the Mountaine Scomius, passeth
through the Territories of the Graeans and Leaeans▪ The description of Thrace.
who make the bounds of his Kingdome toward
Paeonia, and are subiect onely to their owne Lawes. But on the part that lyeth to
the Triballians, who are also a free people, the Treres make the bound of his
Dominion, and the Tilataeans. These dwell on the North side of the Mountaine
Scomius, and reach Westward, as farre as to the Riuer Oscius, which commeth
out of the same Hill Nestus and Hebrus doth; a great and desart Hill adioyning
to Rhodope.

The Dimension of the Dominion of the Odrysians by the Sea side, is from the
Citie of the Abderites, to the mouth of Ister in the Euxine Sea; and is, the neerest
way, foure dayes, and as many nights Sayle for a *       * A ship that vseth onely Sailes,
round Ship, with a continuall fore-wind. By Land         of the round forme of building,
                                                         and seruing for burthen, in
likewise, the neerest way, it is from the Citie Abdera, distinction to Gallies, and all
to the mouth of Ister, eleuen dayes iourney for an       other vessels of the long forme of
                                                         building, seruing for the
expedite Footman. Thus it lay in respect of the Sea.     Warres.

Now for the Continent; from Byzantium to the Leaeans, and to the Riuer
Strymon (for it reacheth this way farthest into the maine Land) it is for the like
Footman, thirteene dayes iourney. The Tribute they receiued from all the
Barbarian Nations, and from the Cities of Greece, in the reigne of Seuthes, (who
reigned after Sitalces, and made the most of it) was in gold and siluer, by
estimation, * 400. Talents by yeere. And Presents of      * 75000. pound sterling.
gold and siluer came to as much more. Besides
Vestures, both wrought and plaine, and other furniture, presented not onely to
him, but also to all the men of authority, and Odrysian Nobility about him. For
they had a custome, which also was generall to all Thrace, contrary to that of the
Kingdome of Persia, to receiue rather then to giue: and it was there a greater
shame to be asked and deny, then to aske and goe without. Neuerthelesse they
held this custome long, by reason of their power: for without gifts, there was
nothing to be gotten done amongst them. So that this Kingdome arriued
thereby to great power: for of all the Nations of Europe, that lye           
betweene the * Ionian Gulfe, and the Euxine Sea, it       * The Adriatique Sea.
was, for reuenue of money, and other wealth, the          Mar Maggiore.
mightiest; though indeed for strength of an Army, and
multitudes of Souldiers, the same be farre short of the Scythians: For there is no
Nation, not to say of Europe, but neither of Asia, that The great power of the Scythians.
are comparable to this, or that as long as they agree,
are able, one Nation to one, to stand against the Scythians: and yet in matter of
counsell and wisdome in the present occasions of life, they are not like to other
men.

Sitalces therefore, King of this great Countrey, prepared his Armie, and when all
was ready, set forward, and marched towards Macedonia. First, through his
owne Dominion; then ouer Cercine, a desart Mountaine diuiding the Sintians
from the Paeonians, ouer which he marched the same way himselfe had formerly
made with Timber, when he made Warre against the Paeonians. Passing this
Mountaine, out of the Countrey of the Odrysians, they had on their right hand
the Paeonians, and on the left, the Sintians and Maedes, and beyond it, they
came to the Citie of Doberus in Paeonia. His Army, as hee marched, diminished
not any way, except by sicknesse, but encreased, by the accession of many free
Nations of Thrace, that came in vncalled, in hope of Booty. Insomuch as the
whole number is said to haue amounted to no lesse then 150000. men. Wherof
the most were foot, the Horse being a third part, or thereabouts. And of the
Horse, the greatest part were the Odrysians themselues, and the next most, the
Getes. And of the Foot, those Sword-men, a free Nation, that came downe to
him out of the Mountaine Rhodope, were most warlike. The rest of the
promiscuous multitude, were formidable onely for their number. Being all
together at Doberus, they made ready to fall in, from the Hilles side, into the
lower Macedonia, the dominion of Perdiccas. For there are in Macedonia, the
Lyncestians, and the Helimiotes, and other High-land Nations, who though
they bee Confederates, and in subiection to the other, yet haue their seuerall
Kingdomes by themselues. But of that part of the now Macedonia which lyeth
toward the Sea, Alexander, the Father of this            The beginning of the Kingdome
Perdiccas, and his Ancestors, the Temenidae, who         of Macedonia. The Macedonian
                                                         Kings descended of the
came out of Argos, were the rst possessors, and          Temenidae, a Family in Argos,
raigned in the same; hauing rst driuen out of Pieria of the Peloponnesians.
the Pierians, (which afterwards seated        
themselues in Phagres, and other Townes beyond Strymon, at the foot of
Pangeum; From which cause, that Countrey is called the Gulfe of Pieria to this
day, which lyeth at the foot of Pangeum, and bendeth toward the Sea) and out of
that which is called Bottia, the Bottiaeans, that now border vpon the
Chalcideans. They possessed besides a certaine narrow portion of Paeonia, neere
vnto the Riuer of Axius, reaching from aboue downe to Pella, and to the Sea.
Beyond Axius they possesse the Countrey called Mygdonia, as farre as to

Strymon, from whence they haue driuen out the Eidonians. Furthermore they
draue the Eordians out of the Territory, now called Eorda, (of whom the greatest
part perished, but there dwell a few of them yet about Physca) and the
Almopians out of Almopia. The same Macedonians subdued also other
Nations, and hold them yet, as Anthemus, Grestonia, and Bisaltia, and a great
part of the Macedonians themselues. But the whole is called Macedonia, and was
the Kingdome of Perdiccas the sonne of Alexander, when Sitalces came to
inuade it. The Macedonians vnable to stand in the        The Macedonians retire into
Field against so huge an Armie, retired all within their their walled towns.
strong Holds, and walled Townes, as many as the Countrey a orded; which were
not many then; but were built afterwards by Archelaus the sonne of Perdiccas,
when he came to the kingdome, who then also laid         Archelaus the sonne of Perdiccas,
out the high wayes straight, and tooke order both for the ninth King of Macedon, of
                                                         the Family of the Temenidae.
matter of Warre, as Horses and Armes, and for other
prouision, better then all the other 8. Kings that were before him. The Thracian
Army arising from Doberus, invaded that Territory rst, which had beene the
Principality of Philip, and tooke Eidomene by force; but Gortynia, Atalanta,
and some other Townes he had yeelded to him, for the loue of Amyntas the
sonne of Philip, who was then in the Armie. They also assaulted Europus, but
could not take it. Then they went on further into Macedonia, on the part that
lyes on the right hand of Pella, and Cyrrhus; but within these, into Bottiaea and
Pieria they entred not, but wasted Mygdonia, Grestonia, and Anthemus. Now
the Macedonians had neuer any intention to make head against them with their
Foot, but sending out their Horsemen, which they had procured from their
Allyes of the higher Macedonia, they assaulted the Thracian Armie, in such
places, where few against many, they thought they might doe it with 
most conuenience; and where they charged, none was able to resist them, being
both good Horsemen, and well armed with Brestplates; but enclosed by the
multitude of the Enemies, they fought against manifold oddes of number: so
that in the end they gaue it ouer, esteeming themselues too weake to hazard
Battell against so many.

After this, Sitalces gaue way to a conference with Perdiccas, touching the
motiues of this Warre. And forasmuch as the
                                                          Sitalces and Perdiccas come to a
Athenians were not arriued with their Fleet, (for they conference about the motiues of
thought not that Sitalces would haue made the             the Warre.
Iourney) but had sent Ambassadours to him with
Presents, he sent a part of his Army against the Chalcideans and Bottiaeans,
wherewith hauing compelled them within their walled Townes, he wasted and
destroyed their Territory. Whilest he stayed in these parts, the Thessalians
Southward, and the Magnetians, and the rest of the        The Grecians, at the comming of
Nations subiect to the Thessalians, and all the           this Army, stand vpon their
                                                          Guard, fearing they were called
Grecians as far as to Thermopylae, were afraid he         in by the Athenians to subdue
would haue turned his Forces vpon them, and stood them.
vpon their guard. And Northward those Thracians
that inhabite the Champaigne Countrey beyond Strymon, namely the
Panaeans, Odomantians, Droans, and Dersaeans, all of them free-States, were
afraid of the same. He gaue occasion also to a rumour, that hee meant to leade
his Army against all those Grecians that were enemies to the Athenians, as called
in by them to that purpose, by vertue of their League. But whilest hee stayed, hee
wasted the Chalcidean, Bottiaean, and Macedonian Territories; and when hee
could not e ect what he came for, and his Army both wanted victuall, and was
a icted wtih the coldnesse of the season; Seuthes the sonne of Spardocus, his
cousin German, and of greatest authority next himselfe, perswaded him to make
haste away. Now Perdiccas had dealt secretly with         Seuthes, corrupted by Perdiccas,
Seuthes, and promised him his Sister in marriage, and perswadeth Sitalces to returne.
money with her: and Sitalces at the perswasion of him, after the stay of full
thirty dayes, wherof he spent eight in Chalcidea▪ retyred with his Army, with all
speed, into his owne Kingdome. And Perdiccas shortly after gaue to Seuthes his
Sister Stratonica in marriage, as hee had promised. This was the issue of this
Expedition of Sitalces.

The same Winter, after the Fleet of the              Phormio putteth suspected
Peloponnesians was dissolued, the          persons out of Stratus and
                                                     Corontae.
Athenians that were at Naupactus, vnder the conduct

of Phormio, sayled along the Coast to Astacus, and disbarking, marched into the
inner parts of Acarnania. Hee had in his Army, 400. men of Armes that hee
brought with him in his Gallies, and 400. more Messenians. With these he put
out of Stratus, Corontae, and other places, all those whose delity hee thought
doubtfull. And when he had restored Cynes the sonne of Theolytus to
Corontae, they returned againe to their Gallies. For they thought they should
not be able to make Warre against the Oeniades, (who onely of all Acarnania are
the Athenians Enemies) in respect of the Winter. For the Riuer Achelous,
springing out of the Mountaine Pindus, and running The course of the Riuer Achelous.
through Dolopia, and through the Territories of the
Agraeans, and the Amphilochians, and through most part of the Champaigne of
Acarnania, passing aboue by the City of Stratus, and falling into the Sea by the
Citie of the Oeniades, which also it moateth about with Fens, by the abundance
of Water, maketh it hard lying there for an Army in time of Winter. Also most of
the Ilands Echinades lye iust ouer against Oenia, hard by the mouth of
Achelous▪ And the Riuer being a great one, continually heapeth together the
grauell; insomuch that some of those Ilands are become Continent already, and
the like in short time is expected by the rest. For not onely the streame of the
Riuer is swift, broad, and turbidous, but also the Ilands themselues stand thicke,
and because the Grauell cannot passe, are ioyned one to another, lying in and
out, not in a direct line, nor so much as to giue the Water his course directly
forward into the Sea. These Ilands are all Desart, and The Fable of Alcmaeon.
but small ones. It is reported, that Apollo by his
Oracle did assigne this place for an habitation to Alcmaeon the sonne of
Amphiraus, at such time as he wandred vp and downe for the killing of his
Mother; telling him, That he should neuer be free from the terrours that haunted
him, till he had found out, and seated himselfe in such a Land, as when he slew
his Mother, the Sunne had neuer seene, nor was then Land, because all other
Lands were polluted by him. Hereupon being at a Non-plus, as they say, with
much adoe hee obserued this ground congested by the Riuer Achelöus, and
thought there was enough cast vp to serue his turne, already, since the time of
the slaughter of his Mother, after which it was now a long time that 
hee had beene a Wanderer. Therefore seating himselfe in the places about the

Oeniades, hee reigned there, and named the Countrey after the name of his
sonne Acarnas. Thus goes the report, as we haue          Acarnania whence so called.
heard it concerning Alcmaeon. But Phormio and the
Athenians leauing Acarnania, and returning to Naupactus, in the very
beginning of the Spring, came backe to Athens, and brought with them such
Gallies as they had taken, and the Free-men they had taken Prisoners, in their
 ghts at Sea, who were againe set at liberty by exchange of man for man. So
ended that Winter, and the third Yeere of the Warre      The end of the third yeere of the
written by THVCYDIDES.                                   Warre.

             3. THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE
             HISTORY OF THVCYDIDES.
             The principall Contents.
Attica inuaded by the Peloponnesians. The Mitylenians reuolt, and 
are receiued by the Peloponnesians at Olympia, into their league. The Athenians
send Paches to Mitylene to besiege it. Part of the besieged Plataeans escape
through the forti cations of the enemie. The Commons of Mitylene, armed by
the Nobility for a sally on the enemy, deliuer the towne to the Athenians. The
residue of the Plataeans yeeld to the besiegers, and are put to the sword. The
proceedings vpon the Mitylenians, and their punishment. The sedition in
Corcyra. Laches is sent by the Athenians into Sicily. And Nicias into Melos.
Demosthenes ghteth against the Aetolians vnfortunately; and afterwards against
the Ambraciotes fortunately. Pythadorus is sent into Sicily, to receiue the Fleet
from Laches. This in other three yeeres of this Warre.

THe Summer following, the Peloponnesians, and           THE FOVRTH YEERE.
their Confederates at the time when Corne was at the
highest, entred with their Army into Attica, vnder the The Peloponnesians inuade
Conduct of Archidamus, the son of Zeuxidamus,           Attica.

King of the Lacedaemonians, & there set them downe, and wasted the Territory
about. And the Athenian horsemen, as they were wont, fell vpon the enemy
where they thought t, and kept backe the multitude of light-armed 
Souldiers, from going out before the men of Armes, and infesting the places
neere the Citie. And when they had stayed as long as their victuall lasted, they
returned, and were dissolued according to their Cities.

After the Peloponnesians were entred Attica, Lebsos The Reuolt of Lesbos.
immediately, all but Methymne, reuolted from the
Athenians; which though they would haue done before the Warre, and the

Lacedaemonians would not then receiue them, yet euen now they were forced to
reuolt sooner then they had intended to doe. For they stayed to haue rst
straightened the mouth of their Hauen with Dammes of Earth, to haue nished
their Walles, and their Gallies then in building, and to haue gotten in all that was
to come out of Pontus, as Archers, and Victuall, and whatsoeuer else they had
sent for.

But the Tenedians, with whom they were at oddes,         The intention of the Lesbians to
and the Methymnians, and of the Mitylenians              reuolt, discouered to the
                                                         Athenians.
themselues, certaine particular men, vpon Faction,
beeing Hostes to the Athenians, made knowne vnto them, that the Lesbians
were forced to goe all into Mitylene; that by the helpe of the Lacedaemonians,
and their Kindred the Boeotians, they hastned all manner of prouision necessary
for a Reuolt, and that vnlesse it were presently preuented, all Lesbos would be
lost.

The Athenians (a icted with the Disease, and with the Warre now on foot, and
at the hottest) thought it a dangerous matter, that Lesbos, which had a Nauie,
and was of strength entire, should thus bee added to the rest of their Enemies;
and at rst receiued not the accusations, holding them therefore the rather
feigned, because they would not haue had them true.

But after, when they had sent Ambassadours to Mitylene, and could not
perswade them to dissolue themselues, and vndoe their preparation, they then
feared the worst, and would haue preuented them.         The Athenians send 40. Gallies
And to that purpose, suddenly sent out the 40. Gallies to Lesbos.
made ready for Peloponnesus with Cleippedes and 2. other Commanders. For
they had bin aduertised, that there was a Holiday of Apollo Maloeis to be kept
without the Citie, and that to the celebration thereof the Mitylenians 
were accustomed to come all out of the Towne; and they hoped, making haste,
to take them there vnawares. And if the attempt succeeded, it was well; if not,
they might command the Mitylenians to deliuer vp their Gallies, and to
demollish their Walles; or they might make Warre against them, if they refused.

So these Gallies went their way. And tenne Gallies of Mitylene which then
chanced to be at Athens, by vertue of their League to The Athenians imprison such of
ayde them, the Athenians stayed, and cast into prison Mitylene as were at Athens, and
                                                          stay their Gallies.
the men that were in them. In the meane time a
certaine man went from Athens into Euboea by Sea, and then by Land to
Geraestus, and nding there a Ship ready to put o , hauing the Wind
fauourable, arriued in Mitylene, three dayes after he set forth from Athens, and
gaue them notice of the comming of the Fleet. Hereupon they not onely went
not out to Malo●●s, as was expected, but also stopped the gappes of their
Walles and Ports, where they were left vn nished, and placed guards to defend
them.

When the Athenians, not long after, arriued, and saw this, the Commanders of
the Fleet deliuered to the Mitylenians what they had in charge, which not
harkened vnto, they presently fell to the Warre. The Mitylenians vnprouided,
and compelled to a Warre on such a sudden, put out some few Gallies before the
Hauen to ght: but being driuen in againe by the Gallies of Athens, they called
to the Athenian Commanders to parly; desiring, if they could, vpon reasonable
conditions, to get the Gallies for the present sent away.

And the Athenian Commander allowed the Conditions, hee also fearing they
should bee too weake to make Warre against the  The Athenians giue the
whole Iland.                                    Mitylenians time to purge
                                                           themselues at Athens.

When a cessation of Armes was granted, the Mitylenians amongst others, sent to
Athens▪ one of those that had giuen inteligence there of their Designe, and had
repented him after of the same, to try if they could perswade them to withdrawe
their Fleet from them, as not intending any innouation. Withall they sent
Ambassadours at the same time to Lacedaemon,             The Mitylenians sent to
vndiscouered of the Fleete of the Athenians, which       Lacedaemon for ayde.

was riding at Anchor in * Malea, to the North of the * This Malea seemeth not to be
Citie; being without any con dence of their the Promontory of Malea,
                                                         of itylene Mitylene, but some
                                                            ●
successe at Athens. And these men after an ill voyage, other neerer place, & on the
                                                           North side of the Citie.

                                                                     f
through the wide Sea, arriuing at Lacedaemon,
negotiated the sending of aide from thence. But when The Mitylean Ambassadors
their Ambassadours were come backe from Athens, speed not at Athens.
without e ect, the Mitylenians, and the rest of Lesbos, saue only Methymne,
(for these, together with the Imbrians, Lemnians, and some few other their
Confederates, ayded the Athenians) prepared themselues for the Warre. And the
Mitylenians with the whole strength of the City, made a sally vpon the Athenian
Campe, and came to a Battell; wherein though the           They sally out vpon the
Mitylenians had not the worse, yet they lay not that Athenians, but without successe.
night without the Walles, nor durst trust to their strength, but retyring into the
Towne, lay quiet there, expecting to try their fortune, with the accession of such
forces, as (if any came) they were to haue from Peloponnesus. For there were
now come into the Citie, one Meleas a Laconian, and They lye still, expecting helpe
Hermiondas a Theban, who hauing bin sent out               from Peloponnesus.

before the reuolt, but vnable to arriue before the comming of the Athenian
Fleet, secretly, after the end of the Battel, entred the Hauen in a Gally, and
perswaded them to send another Gally along with them, with other
Ambassadors to Sparta; which they did. But the             The Athenians send for the
Athenians much con rmed by this the Mitylenians            aydes of their Confederates.

cessation, called in their Confederates, who because they saw no assurance on
the part of the Lesbians, came much sooner in then it was thought they would
haue done; & riding at Anchor to the South of the Citie, forti ed two Camps,
on either side one, and brought their Gallies before both the Ports, and so quite
excluded the Mitylenians from the vse of the Sea. As for the Land, the Athenians
held so much onely as lay neere their Campes, which was not much; And the
Mitylenians and other Lesbians, that were now come to ayde them, were Masters
of the rest. For Malea serued the Athenians for a station onely for their Gallies,
and to keepe their Market in. And thus proceeded the Warre before Mitylene.

About the same time of the same Summer, the          The Athenians send Asopius the
Athenians sent likewise thirty Gallies into          sonne of Phormio, with 20.
                                                     Gallies about Peloponnesus.
Peloponnesus, vnder the conduct of Asopius the
sonne of Phormio. For the Acarnanians had desired them to send some sonne or

kinsman of Phormio for Generall into those parts. These, as they sayled by,
wasted the maritime Countrey of Laconia, and then sending backe 
the greatest part of his Fleet to Athens, Asopius himselfe with twelue Gallies went
on to * Naupactus. And afterwards hauing raised the * Lepanto.
whole power of Acarnania, he made Warre vpon the
Oeniades, and both entred with his Gallies into the Riuer of Achelous, and with
his Land-forces wasted the Territory. But when the Oeniades would not yeeld,
hee disbanded his Land-forces, and sayled with his Gallies to Leucas, and landed
his Souldiers on the Territory of Neritum; but in going o , was by those of the
Countrey that came out to defend it, and by some few of the Garrison Souldiers
there, both himselfe and part of his Company slaine. Asopius slaine.
And hauing vpon truce receiued from the Leucadians
their dead bodies, they went their wayes.

Now the Ambassadours of the Mitylenians, that went The Mitylenian Ambassadours
out in the rst Gally, hauing beene referred by the     sent to Lacedaemon, are
                                                       appointed to attend the generall
Lacedaemonians to the generall meeting of the          Assembly of the Grecians at
Grecians at Olympia, to the end they might determine Olympia.
of them, together with the rest of the Confederates,
went to Olympia accordingly. It was that * Olympiade * Olympiade 88.
wherein Dorieus of Rhodes was the second time
Victor. And when after the solemnity, they were set in Councell, the
Ambassadours spake vnto them in this manner.

 3.1. THE ORATION OF THE Ambassadours of
 MITYLENE.
 MEN of Lacedaemon, and Confederates, We know the receiued custome of
 the Grecians: For they that take into League such as reuolt in the Warres, and
 relinquish a former League, though they like them as long as they haue pro t
 by them, yet accounting them but Traitours to their former Friends, they
 esteeme the worse of them in their iudgement. And to say the truth, this

iudgement is not without good reason, when they that reuolt, and they from
whom the reuolt is made, are mutually like-minded and a ected, and equall in
prouision and strength, and no iust cause of their reuolt giuen. But now
betweene vs and the Athenians it is not so. Nor let any man thinke the worse
of vs, for that hauing beene honoured by them in time of peace, we haue now
reuolted in time of danger. For the rst point of our speech, especially now we
seeke to come into League with you, shall bee to make good the iustice and
honesty of our reuolt. For we know there can bee neither rme                 
friendship betweene man and man, nor any communion betweene Citie and
Citie to any purpose whatsoeuer, without a mutuall opinion of each others
honesty, and also a similitude of customes otherwayes. For in the di erence of
mindes is grounded the diuersity of actions. As for our League with the
Athenians, it was rst made, when you gaue ouer the Medan Warre, and they
remained to prosecute the reliques of that businesse: Yet wee entred not such a
League, as to be their helpers in bringing the Grecians into the seruitude of
the Athenians; but to set free the Grecians from the seruitude of the Medes.
And as long as they led vs as equals, wee followed them with much zeale; but
when wee saw they remitted their enmity against the Medes, and led vs to the
subiugation of the Confederates, we could not then but bee afraid. And the
Confederates through the multitude of distinct Councels, vnable to vnite
themselues for resistance, fell all but our selues and the Chians into their
subiection; and wee hauing still our owne Lawes, and being in name a free
State, followed them to the Warres; but so, as by the examples of their former
actions, we held them not any longer for faithfull Leaders. For it was not
probable, when they had subdued those, whom together with vs they tooke
into league, but that, when they should bee able, they would doe the like also
by the rest. It is true that if we were now in liberty all, wee might bee the better
assured, that they would forbeare to innouate; but since they haue vnder them
the greatest part already, in all likelihood they will take it ill, to deale on equall
termes with vs alone; and the rest yeelding, to let vs onely stand vp as their
equals. Especially when by how much they are become stronger by the
subiection of their Confederates, by so much the more are wee become
desolate. But the equality of mutuall feare, is the onely band of faith in

Leagues. For hee that hath the will to transgresse, yet when he hath not the
oddes of strength, will abstaine from comming on. Now the reason why they
haue left vs yet free, is no other, but that they may haue a faire colour to lay
vpon their domination ouer the rest; and because it hath seemed vnto them
more expedient to take vs in by policy, then by force. For therein they made
vse of vs, for an argument, that hauing equall vote with them, wee would
neuer haue followed them to the Warres, if those against whom they led vs,
had not done the iniury. And thereby also they brought the stronger against
the weaker, and reseruing the strongest to the last, made them the weaker, by
remouing the rest. Whereas if they had begunne with vs▪ when the
Confederates had had both their owne strength, and a side to adhere to, they
had neuer subdued them so easily. Likewise our Nauy kept them in some
feare, lest vnited and added to yours, or to any other, it might haue 
created them some danger. Partly also we escaped by our obseruance toward
their Commons and most eminent men▪ from time to time. But yet we still
thought we could not doe so long, considering the examples they haue shewed
vs in the rest, if this Warre should not haue fallen out. What friendship then
or assurance of liberty was this, when we receiued each other with alienated
a ections? when whilst they had Warres, they for feare courted vs, and when
they had Peace, we for feare courted them? and whereas in others, good will
assureth loyalty, in vs it was the e ect of feare? So it was more for feare then
loue, that we remained their Confederates; and whomsoeuer security should
  rst embolden, he was rst likely by one meanes or other to breake the league.
Now if any man thinke we did vniustly, to reuolt vpon the expectation of euill
intended, without staying to be certaine, whether they would doe it or not, he
weigheth not the matter aright. For if we were as able to contriue euill against
them, and againe to deferre it, as they can against vs, being thus equall, what
needed vs to be at their discretion? But seeing it is in their hands to inuade at
pleasure, it ought to be in ours to anticipate. Vpon these pretentions
therefore, and causes, Men of Lacedaemon & Confederates, we haue reuolted;
the which are both cleare enough for the hearers to iudge vpon, that we had
reason for it, and weighty enough to a right, and compell vs to take some
course for our owne safety; which we would haue done before, when before

the Warre, we sent Ambassadours to you about our reuolt, but could not,
because you would not then admit vs into your league. And now when the
Boeotians inuited vs to it, we presently obeyed. Wherein wee thought we
made a double reuolt, one from the Grecians, in ceasing to doe them
mischiefe with the Athenians, and helping to set them free; and another from
the Athenians, in breaking rst, and not staying to be destroyed by them
hereafter. But this reuolt of ours hath beene sooner then was t, and before
we were prouided for it. For which cause also the Confederates ought so
much the sooner to admit vs into the league, and send vs the speedier aide,
thereby the better, at once, both to defend those you ought to defend, and to
annoy your enemies. Whereof there was neuer better opportunity then at this
present. For the Athenians being both with the likenesse, and their great
expences consumed, and their Nauy diuided, part vpon your own Coasts, and
part vpon ours, it is not likely they should haue many Gallies spare, in case you
againe this Summer inuade them, both by Sea and Land; but that they should
either be vnable to resist the inuasion of your Fleet or be forced to come o
from both our Coastes. And let not any man conceiue that you shall herein, at
your owne danger defend the Territory of another. For though            
Lesbos seeme remote, the pro t of it will be neere you. For the Warre will not
be, as a man would thinke, in Attica, but there, from whence commeth the
pro t to Attica. This pro t is the reuenue they haue from their Confederates;
which if they subdue vs, will still be greater. For neither will any other reuolt,
and all that is ours will accrew vnto them; and wee shall be worse handled
besides, then those that were vnder them before. But aiding vs with diligence
you shall both adde to your league a Citie, that hath a great Nauy (the thing
you most stand in need of) and also easily ouerthrow the Athenians by
subduction of their Confederates; because euery one will then be more
con dent to come in▪ and you shall auoyd the imputation of not assisting
such as reuolt vnto you. And if it appeare that your endeuour is to make them
free, your strength in this Warre will be much the more con rmed. In
reuerence therefore of the hopes which the Grecians haue reposed in you, and
of the presence of Iupiter Olympius, in whose Temple here, we are in a
manner suppliants to you, receiue the Mitylenians into league, and ayde vs.

 And doe not cast vs o , who, (though, as to the exposing of our persons, the
 danger be our owne) shall bring a common pro t to all Greece, if we prosper,
 and a more common detriment to all the Grecians, if through your
 in exiblenesse we miscarry. Be you therefore men, such as the Grecians
 esteeme you, and our feares require you to be. In this manner spake the
 Mitylenians,

And the Lacedaemonians, and their Confederates,         The Mitylenians taken into the
when they had heard, and allowed their reasons,         Lacedaemonian league.

decreed not onely a League with the Lesbians, but also againe to make an
inuasion into Attica. And to that purpose, the Lacedaemonians appointed their
Confederates there present, to make as much speed as they could with two parts
of their forces, into the Isthmus; And they themselues being rst there, prepared
Engines in the Isthmus for the drawing vp of Gallies, The Lacedaemonians prepare
with intention to carry the Nauy from Corinth to the for the inuasion of Attica, both
                                                        by Sea and Land.
other Sea that lyeth towards Athens, and to set vpon
them both by Sea and Land. And these things diligently did they. But the rest of
the Confederates assembled but slowly, being busied in the gathering in of their
fruits, and weary of Warfare.

The Athenians perceiuing all this preparation to bee made, vpon an opinion of
their weaknesse, and desirous to let them see they were deceiued, as being able
without stirring the Fleet at Lesbos, easily to master one Fleet that          
should come against them out of Peloponnesus,             The Athenians to make shew of
manned out 100 Gallies, and imbarked therein              their power, and to deterre the
                                                          enemy from their enterprize,
generally, both Citizens (except those of the degree of send 100 Gallies, not so much to
* Pentacosiomedimni, and * Horsemen) and also             waste Peloponnesus, as to confute
                                                          the opinion which the Lesbian
strangers that dwelt amongst them; And sayling to the Ambassadors had put into the
Isthmus, made a shew of their strength, and landed        Lacedaemonians of their
                                                          weakenesse.
their Souldiers in such parts of Peloponnesus, as they
thought t. When the Lacedaemonians saw things so * A degree estimated by their
                                                          wealth, as if one should say, men
contrary to their expectation, they thought it false,     that had 500 Chaldrons
which was spoken by the Lesbian Ambassadors; and

esteeming the action di cult, seeing their              reuenue, as they reckon in
                                                        Scotland.
Confederates were not arriued, and that newes was
brought of the wasting of the Territory neere their     * Horsemen, such as kept a Horse
                                                        to serue the State, and were
City, by the 30 Gallies formerly sent about             valued at 300 Chaldrons.
Peloponnesus by the Athenians, went home againe;
and afterwards prepared to send a Fleet to Lesbos, and intimated to the Cities
rateably to furnish 40 Gallies, and appointed Alcidas, who was to goe thither
with them, for Admirall. And the Athenians, when they saw the Peloponnesians
gone, went likewise home with their hundred Gallies.

About the time that this Fleet was out, they had surely The greatnesse of the Athenian
the most Gallies (besides the beauty of them) together Nauy, & occasion of their great
                                                        expence of money.
in action in these employments; yet in the beginning
of the War, they had both as good, and more in number. For 100 attended the
guard of Attica, Euboea, and Salamis, and another 100 were about
Peloponnesus▪ besides those that were at Potidaea and in other places. So that in
one Summer, they had in all, 250 Sayle. And this, together with Potidaea, was it,
that most exhausted their treasure. For the * men of    * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, A man &
Armes that besieged the Citie, had each of them two Armes had double pay for
                                                        himselfe and for a seruant.
drachmaes a day, one for himselfe, and another for his
man, & were 3000 in number that were sent thither at rst, and remained to the
end of the Siege; besides 1600 more, that went with Phormio and came away
before the Town was won. And the Gallies had all the same pay. In this maner
was their money consumed, and so many Gallies employed, the most indeed that
euer they had manned at once.

About the same time that the Lacedaemonians were in the Isthmus, the
Mitylenians marched by Land, both they and their         The Mitylenians goe with a
auxiliaries, against Methymne, in hope to haue had it power to Methymne, hoping to
                                                         haue it betrayed.
betrayed vnto them; and hauing assaulted the Citie,
when it succeeded not the way they looked for, they went thence to Antissa,
Pyrrha, and Eressus; and after they had settled the a aires of those       
places, and made strong their wals, returned speedily home. When these were

gone, the Methymneans likewise made War vpon Antissa, but beaten by the
Antissians▪ and some auxiliaries that were with them, they made haste againe to
Methymne, with the losse of many of their Souldiers. But the Athenians being
aduertized hereof, and vnderstanding that the Mitylenians were masters of the
Land, and that their own Soldiers there were not enough to keep them in, sent
thither, about the beginning of Autumne, Paches, the The Athenians send
sonne of Epicurus, with 1000 men of Armes, of their Paches th th 1000 men of
                                                                   ●●    ●●

                                                          Armes to Mitylene.
owne Citie, who supplying the place of Rowers
themselues, arriued at Mitylene, and ingirt it with a single wall. Saue that in
some places, stronger by Nature then the rest, they onely built Turrets, and
placed guards in them. So that the Citie was euery way strongly besieged, both
by Sea and Land; And the Winter began.

The Athenians standing in need of mony for the             The end of the fourth Summer.
Siege, both contributed themselues, and sent thither *
200 Talents of this their rst contribution, & also         * 37500 pound sterling.
dispatched Lysicles, and 4 others with 42 Gallies, to
leuie money amongst the Confederates. But Lysicles, after he had beene to and
fro and gathered money in diuers places, as he was going vp from Myus, thorow
the Plaines of Maeander in Caria, as farre as to the hill Sandius, was set vpon
there by the Carians and Anaetians, and himselfe with a great part of his
Souldiers, slaine.

Figure 1. Plataea                                                               

A. the mount of earth Cast up by the Peloponnesians. B. The wall built inwards
by the Plataeans to frustrate the e ect of the mount C. The worke of the
Peloponnesians. D. The place wher the Plataean go ouer. E. The ditch with out,
full of water

As for the Wall of the Peloponnesians, it was thus built. It consisted of a double
Circle, one towards Plataea, and another outward, in The description of the
case of an assault from Athens. These two Walles were fortiﬁcation of the
                                                             Peloponnesians about Plataea.

distant one from the other about sixteene foot; and
that sixteene foot of space which was betwixt them, was disposed and built into
Cabines for the Watchmen, which were so ioyned and continued one to another,
that the whole appeared to be one thicke Wall, with Battlements on either side.
At euery tenne Battlements, stood a great Tower of a iust breadth, to
comprehend both Walles▪ and reach from the outmost to the inmost front of
the whole, so that there was no passage by the side of a Towre, but through the
middest of it. And such nights as there happened any storme of Raine, they vsed
to quit the Battlements of the Wall, and to watch vnder the Towres, as being not
farre asunder, and couered beside ouer▪ head. Such was the forme of the Wall
wherein the Peloponnesians kept their Watch. The          The description of the Plataeans
Plataeans, after they were ready, and had attended a      going ouer the Enemies Walles.

tempestuous night, and withall Moonelesse, went out of the Citie, and were
conducted by the same men that were the Authors of the Attempt. And rst
they passed the Ditch that was about the Towne, and then came vp close to the
Wall of the Enemy, who, because it was darke, could not see them comming; and
the noyse they made as they went could not be heard for the blustering of the
wind. And they came on besides at a good distance one from the other, that they
might not bee betrayed by the clashing of their Armes; and were but lightly
armed, and not shod but on the left foot, for the more steddinesse in the wet.
They came thus to the Battlements, in one of the spaces betweene Towre and
Towre, knowing that there was now no Watch kept there. And rst came they
that carried the Ladders, and placed them to the Wall; then 12. lightly armed,
onely with a Dagger and a Brestplate, went vp, led by Ammeas, the 
sonne of Coraebus, who was the rst that mounted; and they that followed him,
went vp into either Towre 6. To these succeeded others lightly-armed, that
carryed the Darts, for whom they that came after, carried Targets at their backes,
that they might bee the more expedite to get vp, which Targets they were to
deliuer to them, when they came to the Enemy. At length, when most of them
were ascended, they were heard by the Watchmen that were in the Towres; for
one of the Plataeans taking hold of the Battlements, threw downe a Tyle, which
made a noyse in the fall; and presently there was an Alarme. And the Armie ran
to the Wall; for in the darke and stormie night, they knew not what the danger

was. And the Plataeans that were left in the Citie, came forth withall, and
assaulted the Wall of the Peloponnesians, on the opposite part to that where
their men went ouer. So that though they were all in a tumult in their seuerall
places, yet not any of them that watched, durst stirre to the ayde of the rest, nor
were able to coniecture what had happened. But *          * There is no mention of these
those three hundred that were appointed to assist the 300. where the Author relateth
                                                          the laying of the siege: But it
Watch vpon all occasions of neede, went without the must be vnderstood.
Wall, and made towards the place of the clamor. They
also held vp the res, by which they vsed to make knowne the approach of
Enemies, towards Thebes. But then the Plataeans likewise, held out many other
 res from the Wall of the Citie, which for that purpose they had before
prepared, to render the res of the Enemie insigni cant, and that the Thebans
apprehending the matter otherwise then it was, might forbeare to send help, till
their men were ouer, and had recouered some place of safety.

In the meane time, those Plataeans, which hauing scaled the Wall rst, and slaine
the Watch, were now masters of both the Towres, not onely guarded the
passages, by standing themselues in the entries, but also applying Ladders from
the Wall to the Towres, and conueying many men to the toppe, kept the enemies
o with shot, both from aboue and below. In the meane space, the greatest
number of them hauing reared to the Wall many Ladders at once, and beaten
downe the Battlements, passed quite ouer betweene the Towres, and euer as any
of them got to the other side, they stood still vpon the brinke of the 
Ditch without, and with Arrowes and Darts, kept o those that came by the
outside of the Wall to hinder their passage. And when the rest were ouer, then
last of all, and with much adoe, came they also downe to the Ditch, which were
in the two Towres. And by this time, the three hundred that were to assist the
Watch, came and set vpon them, and had lights with them; by which meanes the
Plataeans that were on the further brinke of the Ditch, discerned them the better
from out of the darke, and aimed their Arrowes and Darts at their most
disarmed parts. For, standing in the darke, the lights of the Enemie made the
Plataeans the lesse discernable. Insomuch as these last passed the Ditch, though
with di culty and force. For the Water in it was frozen ouer, though not so hard

as to beare, but watrie, and such as when the Wind is at East, rather then at
North: and the Snow which fell that night, together with so great a Wind as that
was, had very much increased the Water, which they waded thorow, with scarce
their heads aboue. But yet the greatnesse of the storme was the principall meanes
of their escape.

From the Ditch, the Plataeans, in troope, tooke the way towards Thebes, leauing
on the left hand the Temple of Iuno, built by Androcrates, both for that they
supposed, they would least suspect the way that led to their Enemies, and also
because they saw the Peloponnesians with their lights pursue that way, which by
Mount Cithaeron, and the Oake-heads, led to Athens. The Plataeans, when they
had gone 6. or 7. Furlongs, forsooke the Theban way, and turned into that
which led towards the Mountaine, to Erythrae, and Hysiae, and hauing gotten
the Hilles, escaped through to Athens, being 212. persons of a greater number:
for some of them returned into the Citie, before the rest went ouer; and one of
their Archers was taken vpon the Ditch without. And so the Peloponnesians
gaue ouer the pursuite, and returned to their places. But the Plataeans that were
within the City, knowing nothing of the euent, and those that turned backe
hauing told them, that not a man escaped, as soone as it was day, sent a Herald to
entreat a Truce, for the taking vp of their dead bodies; but when they knew the
truth, they gaue it ouer. And thus these men of Plataea passed through the
Forti cation of their Enemies, and were saued.                          

About the end of the same Winter, Salaethus a            salaethus a Lacedaemonian,
Lacedaemonian, was sent in a Gallie to Mitylene, and entreth secretly into Mitylene,
                                                         and conﬁrmeth them with hope
comming, rst to Pyrrha, and thence going to              of speedy aide.
Mitylene by Land, entred the Citie by the dry
channell of a certaine Torrent, which had a passage through the Wall of the
Athenians, vndiscouered. And hee told the Magistrates, that Attica should
againe be inuaded, and that the 40. Gallies which were to aide them, were
comming; and that himselfe was sent afore, both to let them know it, and withall
to giue order in the rest of their a aires. Heereupon the Mitylenians grew

con dent, and hearkned lesse to composition with the Athenians. And the
Winter ended, and the fourth yeere of this Warre written by Thucydides.

In the beginning of the Summer, after they had sent THE FIFTH YEERE.
Alcidas away with the * 42. Gallies, whereof he was      * It should be 40. Attica the
Admirall, vnto Mitylene, both they and their             fourth time inuaded.
Confederates inuaded Attica; to the end, that the
Athenians troubled on both sides, might the lesse send supply against the Fleet
now gone to Mitylene. In this Expedition, Cleomenes was Generall, in stead of
Pausanias the sonne of Plistoanax, who being King,       Pausanias King of Lacedaemon.
was yet in minority, and Cleomenes was his Vncle by
the Father. And they now cut downe, both what they had before wasted and
began to grow againe, and also whatsoeuer else they had before praetermitted.
And this was the sharpest inuasion of all but the second. For whilest they stayed
to heare newes from their Fleet at Lesbos, which by this time they supposed to
haue beene arriued, they went abroad, and destroyed most part of the Countrey.
But when nothing succeeded according to their hopes, and seeing their Corne
failed, they retyred againe, and were dissolued according to their Cities.

The Mitylenians in the meane time, seeing the Fleet came not from
Peloponnesus, but delayed the time, and their victuals failed, were constrained to
make their composition with the Athenians, vpon this Salaethus armes the Commons
occasion. Salaethus, when hee also expected these         for a Sally. They mutiny, and
                                                          giue vp the Towne.
Gallies no longer, armed the Commons of the Citie,
who were before vnarmed, with intention to haue made a Sally vpon the
Athenians; but they, as soone as they had gotten Armes, no longer obeyed the
Magistrates, but holding Assemblies by themselues, required the rich 
men, either to bring their Corne to light, and diuide it amongst them all, or else
they said, they would make their composition by deliuering vp the Citie to the
Athenians.

Those that managed the State, perceiuing this, and vnable to hinder it, knowing
also their owne danger, in case they were excluded out of the composition, they

all ioyntly agreed to yeeld the Citie to Paches, and his Army; with these
conditions, To be proceeded withall at the pleasure of the people of Athens; and
to receiue the Armie into the Citie, and that the Mitylenians should send
Ambassadors to Athens, about their owne businesse: And that Paches till their
returne, should neither put in bonds, nor make Slaue of, nor slay any Mitylenian.
This was the e ect of that composition. But such of the Mitylenians as had
principally practized with the Lacedaemonians, being afraid of themselues,
when the Army was entred the Citie, durst not trust Some of the Mitylenians fearing
to the Conditions agreed on, but tooke Sanctuary at the worst, take Sanctuary.
the Altars. But Paches hauing raised them, vpon           Whom Paches perswadeth to
promise to doe them no iniury, sent them to Tenedos, rise.
to be in custody there, till the people of Athens should And sendeth them to bee in
                                                          custody at Tenedos.
haue resolued what to doe. After this, he sent some
Gallies to Antissa, and tooke in that Towne, and ordered the a aires of his
Armie as he thought conuenient.

In the meane time, those 40 Gallies of Peloponnesus The voyage of Alcidas with 40
which should haue made all possible haste, tri ed       Gallies into Ionia     ▪

away the time about Peloponnesus▪ and making small speed in the rest of their
Nauigation, arriued at Delos, vnknowne to the Athenians at Athens. From
thence sayling to Icarus and Myconum, they got rst intelligence of the losse of
Mitylene. But to know the truth more certainly, they Alcidas with his Fleet, at
went thence to Embatus in Erythraea. It was about       Embatus is assured of the losse of
                                                        Mitylene.
the seuenth day after the taking of Mitylene, that they
arriued at Embatus, where vnderstanding the certainty, they went to counsell,
about what they were to doe vpon the present occasion and Teutiaplus an Elean,
deliuered his opinion to this e ect.

Alcidas, and the rest that haue command of the              The aduise of Teutiaplus in the
Peloponnesians in this Army, it were not amisse, in my Councell of Warre.
opinion, to goe to Mitylene, as we are, before aduice be giuen of our arriuall. (For
in all probability, we shall ﬁnd the City, in respect they haue but lately won it,
very weakly guarded) and to the Sea, (where they expect no enemy, and we are

chieﬂy strong) not guarded at all. It is also likely that their land              
Souldiers are dispersed, some in one house, and some in another, carelesly as
victors. Therefore if we fall vpon them suddenly, and by night, I thinke, with the
helpe of those within (if any bee left there that will take our part) we may be able
to possesse our selues of the Citie. And we shall neuer feare the danger, if we but
thinke this, that all Stratagems of Warre whatsoeuer, are no more, but such
occasions as this, which if a Commander auoid in himselfe, and take the
aduantage of them, in the enemy, he shall for the most part haue good successe.
Thus said he, but preuailed not with Alcidas. And            The aduice of certaine Outlawes
some others, Fugitiues of Ionia, and those Lesbians          of Ionia and Lesbos.

that were with him in the Fleet, gaue him counsell, That seeing he feared the
danger of this, he should seaze some Citie of Ionia, or Cume in Aeolia, that
hauing some Towne for the seat of the Warre, they might from thence, force Ionia
to reuolt, whereof there was hope, because the Ionians would not be vnwilling to see
him there. And if they could withdraw from the Athenians this their great
reuenue, and withall put them to maintaine a Fleet against them, it would be a
great exhausting of their treasure. They said besides, that they thought they should
be able to get Pissuthnes, to ioyne with them in the Warre.

But Alcidas reiected this aduice likewise, inclining      The cowardly resolution of
rather to this opinion, that since they were come too Alcidas.
late to Mitylene, they were best to returne speedily into Peloponnesus.
Whereupon putting o from Embatus, he sayled by the Shoare to Myonnesus of
the Teians, and there slew most of the prisoners he had taken by the way. After
this hee put in at Ephesus, and thither came              He killeth his prisoners.
Ambassadours to him from the Samians of Anaea,
and told him, that it was but an ill manner of setting The Samians sharpely
the Grecians at liberty, to kill such as had not lift vp  reprehend him.

their hands against him, nor were indeed enemies to the Peloponnesians, but
Confederates to the Athenians by constraint. And that vnlesse he gaue ouer that
course, he would make few of the enemies, his friends; but many now friends, to
become his enemies. Wherefore vpon these words of the Ambassadours, he set
the Chians, and some others, all that he had left aliue, at liberty. For when men

saw their Fleet, they neuer ed from it, but came vnto them as to Athenians;
little imagining that the Athenians being masters of the Sea, the Peloponnesians
durst haue put ouer to Ionia.

From Ephesus, Alcidas went away in haste, indeed ed; for he had bin descried by
the Salaminia, and the * Paralus, (which by chance       Alcidas maketh hast from
were then in their course for Athens, )                  Ephesus homeward.

whilest he lay at Anchor about Claros, and  * The names of two Gallies of
fearing to bee chased, kept the wide Sea, meaning by Athens.
his good will, to touch no Land, till hee came into Peloponnesus. But the newes
of them came to Paches from diuers places, especially from Erythraea: for the
Cities of Ionia being vnwalled, were afraid extremely, lest the Peloponnesians
sayling by, without intention to stay, should haue pillaged them as they passed.
But the Salaminia and the Paralus hauing seene him at Claros, brought the
newes themselues. And Paches thereupon made great Paches pursueth the
haste after, and followed him as farre as Latmos * the Peloponnesians, and is glad he
                                                         ouer taketh them not.
Iland: but when he saw hee could not reach him, he
came backe againe; and thought he had a good turne, * Jn distinction to Latmus the
                                                         Mountaine. But I can ﬁnde no
seeing hee could not ouertake those Gallies vpon the mention of th Latmus the
                                                                       ●●

wide Sea, that the same were not compelled, by being Iland in any of the Geographers.
taken in some place neere Land, to forti e themselues,
and so to giue him occasion with guards and Gallies, to attend them.

As hee came by, in his returne, hee put in at Notium, a Paches restoreth Notium to the
City of the Colophonians, into which the                Colophonians, driuen out by
                                                        sedition.
Colophonians came and inhabited, after the * Towne
aboue, through their owne sedition, was taken by        * The City of Colophon, 2. miles
Itamanes and the Barbarians. (This Towne was taken higher into the Land.
at the time when Attica was the second time inuaded by the Peloponnesians. )
They then that came downe, and dwelt in Notium, falling againe into sedition,
the one part hauing procured some forces, Arcadians and Barbarians of
Pissuthnes, kept them in a part of the Towne, which they had seuered from the
rest with a Wall, and there, with such of the Colophonians of the high Towne, as

being of the Medan faction, entred with them, they gouerned the Citie at their
pleasure: and the other part which went out from these, and were the Fugitiues,
brought in Paches. He, when he had called out Hippias, Captaine of the
Arcadians that were within the said wall, with         Paches parlieth with Hippias.
promise, if they should not agree, to set him safe and
sound within the Wall againe; and Hippias was there-vpon come to him;
committed him to custody, but without bonds; and withall assaulting the Wall
on a sudden, when they expected not, tooke it, and slew as many of the
Arcadians and Barbarians as were within. And when hee had done, brought
Hippias in againe, according as hee had promised. But after he had 
him there, laid hold on him, and caused him to bee     His equiuocation with Hippias
shot to death; and restored Notium to the              whom he put to death contrary to
                                                       promise.
Colophonians, excluding onely such as had Medized.
Afterwards the Athenians sent Gouernours to Notium of their owne, and
hauing gathered together the Colophonians out of all Cities whatsoeuer, seated
them there vnder the Law of the Athenians.

Paches, when he came backe to Mieylene, tooke in Pyrrha and Eressus; and
hauing found Salaethus the Lacedaemonian hidden in Paches taketh Pyrrha, and
Mitylene, apprehended him, and sent him, together Eressus.
with those men he had put in custody at Tenedos, and He apprehendteh Salaethus in
                                                           Mitylene.
whomsoeuer else he thought Author of the Reuolt, to
Athens. Hee likewise sent away the greatest part of his Armie, and with the rest
stayed, and settled the State of Mitylene, and the rest of Lesbos as he thought
conuenient.

These men, and Salaethus with them, being arriued at The Athenians slay Salaethus
Athens, the Athenians slew Salaethus presently,          〈…〉 to 〈…〉 the siege of 〈◊〉.

though hee made them many o ers, and amongst other, to get the Armie of the
Peloponnesians to rise from before Plataea, (for it was yet besieged) but vpon the
rest they went to Councell; and in their passion decreed to put them to death;
not onely those men there present, but also all the men of Mitylene that were of
age, and to make slaues of the Women and children: The cruell decree of the
                                                           Athenians in their passion

                                                                           p
laying to their charge the Reuolt it selfe, in that they against the Mityleans.

reuolted not, being in subiection as others were: And withall the Peloponnesian
Fleet, which durst enter into Ionia to their ayde, had not a little aggrauated that
Commotion. For by that, it seemed that the Reuolt was not made without
much premeditation. They therefore sent a Gally to enforme Paches of their
Decree, with command to put the Mitylenians presently to death. But the next
day they felt a kind of repentance in themselues, and The Athenians repent of their
began to consider what a great and cruell Decree it      decree, and consult anew.

was, that not the Authors onely, but the whole Citie should be destroyed. Which
when the Ambassadors of the Mitylenians, that were there present, & such
Athenians as fauoured them vnderstood, they wrought with those that bare
o ce, to bring the matter again into debate; wherin they easily preuailed,
forasmuch as to them also it was well knowne, that the most of the Citie were
desirous to haue meanes to consult of the same anew. The Assembly beeing
presently met, amongst the opinions of diuers others, Cleon also, 
the sonne of Cleaenetus, who in the former Assembly Cleon most popular, and most
had won to haue them killed, being of all the Citizens violent,
most violent, and with the people at that time farre the most powerfull, stood
forth, and said in this manner.

 3.1. THE ORATION OF CLEON.
 I Haue often on other occasions thought a Democratie vncapable of
 dominion ouer others; but most of all now, for this your repentance
 concerning the Mitylenians. For through your owne mutuall security and
 opennesse, you imagine the same also in your Confederates, and consider not,
 that when at their perswasion you commit an errour, or relent vpon
 compassion, you are softned thus, to the danger of the Common-wealth, not
 to the winning of the a ections of your Confederates. Nor doe you consider,
 that your gouernment is a Tyranny, and those that be subiect to it, are against
 their willes so, and are plotting continually against you, and obey you not for
 any good turne, which to your owne detriment you shall doe them, but onely

for that you exceed them in strength, and for no good will. But the worst
mischiefe of all is this, that nothing wee decree shall stand rme, and that we
will not know, that a City with the worse Lawes, if immoueable, is better then
one with good Lawes, when they bee not binding; and that a plaine wit
accompanied with modesty, is more pro table to the State, then dexterity
with arrogance; and that the more ignorant sort of men, doe for the most part
better regulate a Common-wealth, then they that are wiser. For these loue to
appeare wiser then the Lawes, and in all publike debatings to carry the victory,
as the worthiest things wherein to shew their wisdome; from whence most
commonly proceedeth the ruine of the States they liue in. Whereas the other
sort, mistrusting their owne wits, are content to be esteemed not so wise as the
Lawes, and not able to carpe at what is well spoken by another; and so making
themselues equall Iudges, rather then contenders for mastery, gouerne a State
for the most part well. Wee therefore should doe the like, and not be carried
away with combates of eloquence and wit, to giue such counsell to your
multitude, as in our owne iudgements wee thinke not good. For my owne
part, I am of the opinion I was before; and I wonder at these men, that haue
brought this matter of the Mitylenians in question againe, and thereby cause
delay, which is the aduantage onely of them that doe the iniury. 
For the su erer by this meanes comes vpon the doer with his anger dulled,
whereas reuenge, the opposite of iniurie, is then greatest, when it followes
presently. I doe wonder also, what he is that shall stand vp now to contradict
mee, and shall thinke to proue, that the iniuries done vs by the Mitylenians,
are good for vs, or that our calamities are any dammage to our Confederates.
For certainely he must either trust in his eloquence, to make you beleeue, that
that which was decreed, was not decreed, or moued with lucre, must with
some elaborate speech endeuour to seduce you. Now of such matches [of
eloquence] as these, the Citie giueth the prizes to others, but the danger that
thence proceedeth, she her selfe sustaineth. And of all this, you your selues are
the cause, by the euill institution of these matches, The nature of the multitude in
in that you vse to bee spectators of words, and           counsell, liuely set forth.

hearers of actions, beholding future actions in the words of them that speake
well, as possible to come to passe; and actions already past, in the Orations of

such as make the most of them, and that with such assurance, as if what you
saw with your eyes, were not more certaine, then what you heare related. You
are excellent men for one to deceiue with a speech of a new straine, but
backward to follow any tryed aduice: slaues to strange things, contemners of
things vsuall. You would euery one chie y giue the best aduice, but if you
cannot, then you will contradict those that doe. You would not be thought to
come after with your opinion; but rather if any thing bee acutely spoken, to
applaud it rst, and to appeare ready apprehenders of what is spoken, euen
before it be out; but slow to preconceiue the sequell of the same. You would
heare, as one may say, somewhat else then what our life is conuersant in; and
yet you su ciently vnderstand not that, that is before your eyes. And to
speake plainely, ouercome with the delight of the eare, you are rather like vnto
spectators, sitting to heare the contentions of Sophisters, then to men that
deliberate of the state of a Common-wealth. To put you out of this humour, I
say vnto you, that the Mitylenians haue done vs more iniury, then euer did
any one Citie. For those that haue reuolted through Aggrauation of the Reuolt of
the ouer-hard pressure of our gouernment, or that the Mitylenians.
haue beene compelled to it by the enemy, I pardon them; but they that were
Ilanders, and had their Citie walled, so as they needed not feare our Enemies,
but onely by Sea; in which case also they were armed for them with su cient
prouision of Gallies; and they that were permitted to haue their owne Lawes,
and whom wee principally honoured, and yet haue done thus; what haue they
done but conspired against vs, and rather warred vpon vs, then reuolted from
vs, (for a reuolt is onely of such as su er violence) and ioyned with our
bitterest Enemies to destroy vs? This is farre worse then if they    
had warred against vs for encreasing of their owne power. But these men
would neyther take example by their neighbours calamity, who are, all that
reuolted, already subdued 〈◊〉, nor could their owne present felicity, make
them afraid of changing it into misery. But being bold against future euents,
and ayming at matters aboue their strength, though below their desires, haue
taken Armes against vs, and preferred force before iustice. For no sooner they
thought they might get the victory, but immediately, though without iniury
done them, they rose against vs. But with Cities that come to great and

vnexpected prosperity, it is vsuall to turne insolent. Whereas most commonly
that prosperity which is attained according to the course of reason, is more
  rme then that which commeth unhoped for. And such Cities, as one may
say, doe more easily keepe o an aduerse, then maintaine a happy fortune.
Indeed we should not formerly haue done any honour, more to the
Mitylenians, then to the rest of our Confederates; for then they had neuer
come to this degree of insolence. For it is naturall to men to contemne those
that obserue them, and to haue in admiration such as will not giue them way.
Now therefore let them be punished according to their wicked dealing; and let
not the fault be laid vpon a few, and the people bee absolued; for they haue all
alike taken Armes against vs. And the Commons, if they had beene
constrained to it, might haue ed hither▪ and haue recouered their Citie
afterwards againe. But they, esteeming it the safer aduenture, to ioyne with the
Few, are alike with them culpable of the Reuolt. Haue also in consideration,
your Confederates; And if you in ict the same punishment on them that
reuolt vpon compulsion of the Enemie, that you doe on them that reuolt of
their owne accord, who thinke you will not reuolt, though on light pretence;
seeing that speeding they winne their liberty, and failing, their case is not
incurable? Besides▪ that against euery City wee must bee at a new hazard both
of our persons and fortunes. Wherein with the best successe, wee recouer but
an exhausted Citie, and lose that, wherein our strength lyeth, the reuenue of
it; but miscarrying, wee adde these Enemies to our former; and must spend
that time in warring against our owne Confederates, which wee needed to
employ against the Enemies, we haue already. Wee must not therefore giue our
Confederates hope of pardon, either impetrable by words, or purchaseable by
money, as if their errours were but such as are commonly incident to
humanity. For these did vs not an iniury vnwillingly, but wittingly 
conspired against vs; whereas it ought to bee inuoluntary, whatsoeuer is
pardonable. Therefore both then at rst, and now againe I maintaine, that
you ought not to alter your former Decree, nor to o end in any of these three
most disaduantagious things to Empire, Pittie, Delight in plausible speeches,
and Lenity. As for Pitty, it is iust to shew it on them that are like vs, and will
haue pitty againe; but not vpon such as not onely would not haue had pitty

vpon vs, but must also of necessity haue beene our enemies for euer hereafter.
And for the Rhetoricians that delight you with their Orations, let them play
their prizes in matters of lesse weight, and not in such wherein the City for a
little pleasure, must su er a great dammage, but they for their well speaking,
must well * haue. Lastly for Lenity, it is to be vsed    * Meaning that the Orators are
towards those that will be our friends hereafter,        bribed and hired to giue
                                                         counsell to the Common-wealth,
rather then towards such, as being su ered to liue, according to the desire of other
will still be as they are, not a iot the lesse our       States.

enemies. In summe I say onely this, that if you
follow my aduice, you shall doe that, which is both iust in respect of the
Mitylenians, and pro table for your selues; whereas if you decree otherwise,
you doe not grati e them, but condemne your selues. For if these haue iustly
reuolted, you must vniustly haue had dominion ouer them. Nay though your
dominion be against reason, yet if you resolue to hold it, you must also, as a
matter conducing thereunto, against reason punish them; or else you must
giue your dominion ouer, that you may be good without danger. But if you
consider what was likely they would haue done to you, if they had preuailed,
you cannot but thinke them worthy the same punishment; nor be lesse
sensible you that haue escaped, then they that haue conspired; especially they
hauing done the iniurie rst. For such as doe an iniury without precedent
cause, persecute most, and euen to the death, him they haue done it to; as
iealous of the danger his remaining Enemy may create him. For hee that is
wronged without cause, and escapeth, will commonly bee more cruell, then if
it were against any Enemy on equall quarell. Let vs not therefore betray our
selues, but in contemplation of what you were neere su ering, and how you
once prized aboue all things else, to haue them in your power, requite them
now accordingly. Bee not softned at the sight of their present estate, nor forget
the danger that hung ouer our own heads so lately: Giue not onely vnto these
their deserued punishment, but also vnto the rest of our Confederates a cleere
example, that death is their sentence, whensoeuer they shall rebell. Which
when they know, you shall the lesse often haue occasion to neglect 
your Enemies, and ght against your owne Confederates. To this purpose
spake Cleon.

After him, Diodotus the sonne of Eucrates, who also in the former Assembly
opposed most the putting of the Mitylenians to death, stood forth, and spake as
followeth.

 3.1. THE ORATION OF DIODOTVS.
 I Will neither blame those who haue propounded the businesse of the
 Mitylenians, to be againe debated, nor commend those that nd fault with
 often consulting in a aires of great importance. But I am of opinion that
 nothing is so contrary to good counsell as these two, haste and anger: whereof
 the one is euer accompanied with madnesse, and the other with want of
 iudgement. And whosoeuer maintaineth, that words are not instructers to
 deeds, either hee is not wise, or doth it vpon some priuate interest of his owne.
 Not wise, if hee thinke that future and not apparent things, may bee
 demonstrated otherwise then by words: Interessed, if desiring to carry an ill
 matter, and knowing that a bad cause will not beare a good speech, hee goe
 about to deterre his opposers and hearers by a good calumniation. But they, of
 all others, are most intolerable, that when men giue publike aduice, will accuse
 them also of bribery. For if they charged a man with no more, but ignorance,
 when he had spoken in vaine, hee might yet depart with the opinion of a
 foole. But when they impute corruption also, if his counsell take place, he is
 still suspected, and if it doe not take place, he shall be held not onely a foole,
 but also voide of honesty. The Common-wealth gets no good by such courses;
 for through feare heereof, it will want counsellours, and the State would doe
 their businesse for the most part well, if this kinde of Citizens were they that
 had least ability in speaking; for they should then perswade the City to the
 fewer errours. For a good Statesman should not goe about to terri e those
 that contradict him, but rather to make good his counsell vpon liberty of
 speech. And a wise State ought not, either to adde vnto, or on the other side,
 to derogate from the honour of him that giueth good aduice; nor yet punish,
 nay nor disgrace the man whose counsell they receiue not. And then, neither

would hee that lighteth on good aduice, deliuer any thing against his owne
conscience, out of ambition of further honour, and to please the Auditory;
nor hee that doth not, couet thereupon, by gratifying the people some way or
other, that hee also may endeere them. But wee doe here the contrary, and
besides, if any man be suspected of corruption, though hee giue the best
counsell that can be giuen, yet through enuy, for this vncertaine 
opinion of his gaine, we lose a certaine bene t to the Common-wealth. And
our custome is to hold good counsell, giuen suddenly, no lesse suspect, then
bad. By which meanes, as he that giues the most dangerous counsell, must get
the same receiued, by fraud; so also he that giues the most sound aduice, is
forced by lying to get himselfe beleeued. So that, the Common-wealth is it
alone, which by reason of these suspitious imaginations, no man can possibly
bene t, by the plaine and open way, without arti ce. For if any man shall doe
a manifest good vnto the Common-wealth, he shall presently be suspected of
some secret gaine vnto himselfe in particular. We therefore, that in the most
important a aires, and amidst these iealousies doe giue our aduice, haue need
to foresee farther then you, that looke not farre, and the rather, because we
stand accountable for our counsell, and you are to render no account of your
hearing it. For if the perswader, and the perswaded, had equall harme, you
would be the more moderate Iudges. But now, according to the passion that
takes you, when at any time your a aires miscary you punish the sentence of
that one onely that gaue the counsell, not the many sentences of your owne,
that were in fault as well as his. For my owne part, I stood not forth with any
purpose of contradiction, in the businesse of the Mitylenians, nor to accuse
any man. For wee contend not now, if we be wise, about the iniury done by
them, but about the wisest counsell for our selues. For how great soeuer be
their fault, yet I would neuer aduise to haue them put to death, vnlesse it bee
for our pro t; nor yet would I pardon them, though they were pardonable,
vnlesse it be good for the Common-wealth. And in my opinion, our
deliberation now is of the future, rather then of the present. And whereas
Cleon contendeth, that it will be pro table for the future, to put them to
death, in that it will keepe the rest from rebelling, I, contending likewise for
the future, a rme the contrary. And I desire you not to reiect the pro t of my

aduice, for the faire pretexts of his, which agreeing more with your present
anger against the Mitylenians, may quickly perhaps win your consent. We
pleade not iudicially with the Mitylenians, so as to need arguments of equity,
but we consult of them, which way we may serue our selues of them to our
most aduantage hereafter. I say therefore, that death hath been in States,
ordained for a punishment of many o ences, and those not so great, but farre
lesse then this. Yet encouraged by hope, men hazzard themselues. Nor did any
man euer yet enter into a practice, which he knew he could not goe through
with. And a Citie when it reuolueth, supposeth it selfe to be better furnished,
either of themselues, or by their Confederates, then it is, or else it would neuer
take the enterprise in hand. They haue it by nature, both men and 
Cities to commit o ences; nor is there any Law that can preuent it. For men
haue gone ouer all degrees of punishment, augmenting them still, in hope to
be lesse annoyed by Malefactors; and it is likely that gentler punishments were
in icted of old, euen vpon the most haynous crimes; but that in tract of time,
men continuing to transgresse, they were extended afterwards, to the taking
away of life; and yet they still transgresse. And therefore either some greater
terrour then death must be deuised, or death will not bee enough for coertion.
For pouerty will alwayes adde boldnesse to necessity; and wealth,
couetousnesse to pride and contempt. And the other. [middle] fortunes, they
also through humane passion, according as they are seuerally subiect to some
insuperable one or other, impell men to danger. But Hope and Desire, worke
this e ect in all estates. And this as the Leader▪ that as the companion; this
contriuing the enterprize, that suggesting the successe, are the cause of most
crimes that are committed. And being least discerned, are more mischieuous,
then euils seene. Besides these two, Fortune also puts men forward as much as
any thing else. For presenting her selfe sometimes vnlookt for, she prouoketh
some to aduenture, though not prouided, as they ought for the purpose; and
specially Cities; because they venture for the greatest matters, as liberty and
dominion ouer others; and amongst a generality, euery one, though without
reason, somewhat the more magni es himselfe in particular. In a word, it is a
thing impossible, and of great simplicitie to beleeue, when humane nature is
earnestly bent to doe a thing▪ that by force of Law, or any other danger, it can

be diuerted. We must not therefore, relying on the security of capitall
punishment, decree the worst against them, nor make them desperate, as if
there were no place to repent, and as soone as they can, to cancell their
o ence. For obserue; if a Citie reuolted▪ should know it could not hold out, it
would now compound, whilst it were able, both to pay vs our charges for the
present, and our tribute for the time to come. But the way that Cleon
prescribeth, what Citie, thinke you, would not prouide it selfe better, then
this did; and endure the siege to the very last, if to compound late, and soone
be all one? And how can it be but detriment to vs, to be at charge of long
sieges, through their obstinacy, and when we haue taken a Citie, to nde it
exhausted, and to lose the reuenue of it for the future? And this reuenue is the
onely strength we haue against our enemies. Wee are not then to be exact
Iudges in the punition of o enders, but to looke rather how by their
moderate punishment, we may haue our Confederate Cities, such as they may
be able to pay vs tribute; and not thinke to keepe them in awe by the rigour of
Lawes, but by the prouidence of our owne actions. But wee to the 
contrary, when w●●ecouer a Citie, which hauing beene free, and held vnder
our obedience by force, hath reuolted iustly, thinke now, that we ought to
in ict some cruell punishment vpon them; whereas we ought rather, not
mightily to punish a free Citie reuolted, but mightily to looke to it before it
reuolt; and to preuent the intention of it; but when we haue ouercome them,
to lay the fault vpon as few as we can. Consider also, if you follow the aduice
of Cleon, how much you shall o end likewise in this other point. For in all
your Cities, the Commonalty are now your friends, and either reuolt not with
the few, or if they be compelled to it by force, they presently turne enemies to
them that caused the reuolt; whereby when you goe to Warre, you haue the
Commons of the aduerse Citie on your side. But if you shall destroy the
Commonalty of the Mitylenians, which did neither partake of the reuolt, and
as soone as they were armed, presently deliuered the Citie into your hands,
you shall rst doe vniustly to kill such as haue done you seruice, and you shall
e ect a worke besides, which the great men doe euery where most desire. For
when they haue made a Citie to reuolt, they shall haue the people presently on

 their side; you hauing foreshewne them by the example, that both the guilty
 and not guilty must vndergoe the same punishment.

 Whereas indeed, though they were guilty, yet wee ought to dissemble it, to the
 end that the onely party, now our friend, may not become our enemie. And
 for the assuring of our dominion, I thinke it farre more pro table, voluntarily
 to put vp an iniurie, then iustly to destroy such as wee should not. And that
 same, both Iustice and proﬁt of reuenge, alledged by Cleon, can neuer possibly
 bee found together in the same thing.

 You therefore, vpon knowledge that this is the best course, not vpon
 Compassion, or Lenitie (for neither would I, haue you wonne by that) but
 vpon consideration of what h●th beene aduised, bee ruled by mee, and
 proceede to iudgement at your owne leasure, against those whom Paches hath
 sent hither as guilty, and su er the rest to enioy their Citie. For that will bee
 both good for the future, and also of present terrour to the enemie. For hee
 that consulteth wisely, is a sorer enemie, then hee that assaulteth with the
 strength of action vnaduisedly.

 Thus spake Diodotus.

After these two opinions were deliuered, the one most opposite to 
the other, the Athenians were at contention which they should decree; and at
the holding vp of hands, they were both sides almost equall: but yet the sentence
of Diodotus preuailed. Whereupon they presently in The Sentence 〈…〉 A Gallie sent
haste sent away another Gallie, lest not arriuing before 〈…〉 the former, with a Sentence
                                                          of mercy. The speed of this latter
the former, they should nde the Citie already             Gallie to ouertake the former
destroyed. The rst Gallie set forth before the second, that carried the Decree of death.
a day and a night. But the Mitylenian Ambassadours
hauing furnished this latter with Wine and Barley Cakes, and promised them
great rewards, if they ouertooke the other Gallie, they rowed diligently, at one
and the same time both plying their Oares, and taking their refection of the said
Barley Cakes steeped in Wine and Oyle; and by turnes part of them slept, and

the other part rowed. It happened also that there blew no Winde against them;
And the former Gallie making no great haste, as going in so sad an errand,
whereas the former proceeded in the manner before The Commons of 〈◊〉 very neere
mentioned, arriued indeed rst, but onely so much, as 〈◊〉.
Paches had read the Sentence, and prepared to execute what they had decreed.
But presently after came in the other Gallie, and saued the Citie from being
destroyed. So neere were the Mitylenians to the danger.

But those whom Paches had sent home, as most culpable of the Reuolt, the
Athenians, as Cleon had aduised, put to death; beeing Aboue a thousand principall
in number somewhat aboue a thousand.                  authors of the Reuolt executed.

They also razed the Walles of Mitylene▪ and tooke from them all their Gallies.
After which they imposed on the Lesbians no more Tribute, but hauing diuided
their land, (all but that of the Methymnaeans) into 3000 parts, 300 of those
parts, of the choisest Land, they consecrated to the Gods. And for the rest, they
sent men by lot out of their owne Citie to possesse it, of whom the Lesbians at
the rent of * two Minae of Siluer yeerely, vpon a Lot, * 6 pound 5 shillings sterling
                                                                                   ▪

had the Land againe to bee husbanded by themselues.
The Athenians tooke in all such Townes also, as the Mitylenians were Masters of
in the Continent; which were afterwards made Subiects to the People of Athens.
Thus ended the businesse touching Lesbos.

The same Summer, after the recouery of Lesbos, the Nicias taketh Minoa, an
Athenians, vnder the conduct of Nicias,  land ad cen to 〈◊〉.
                                                            ●●        ●●

the sonne of Niceratus, made Warre on Minoa, an Iland adiacent to Megara. For
the Megareans had built a Tower in it, and serued themselues of the Iland for a
place of Garrison. But Nicias desired that the Athenians might keepe their
Watch vpon Megara, in that Iland, as beeing neerer, and no more at Budorus
and Salamis; to the end that the Peloponnesians might not goe out thence with
their Gallies, vndiscryed, nor send out Pirates, as they had formerly done, and to
prohibit the importation of all things to the Megareans by Sea. Wherefore when
he had rst taken two Towres that stood out from Nisaea, with Engines applyed

from the Sea, and so made a free entrance for his Gallies, betweene the Iland and
the rme Land, he tooke it in with a Wall also from the Continent, in that part
where it might receiue ayde by a bridge ouer the Marishes; for it was not farre
distant from the maine Land. And, that being in few dayes nished, hee built a
Fort in the Iland it selfe, and leauing there a Garrison, carried the rest of his
Armie backe.

It happened also about the same time of this Summer, The Plataeans yeeld the City.
that the Plataeans hauing spent their Victuall, and
beeing vnable longer to hold out, yeelded their Citie in this manner to the
Peloponnesians. The Peloponnesians assaulted the Walles, but they within were
vnable to ght. Wherevpon the Lacedaemonian Commander, perceiuing their
weaknesse, would not take the place by force, (for he The Lacedaemonians refuse to
had command to that purpose from Lacedaemon, to take Plataea by force, but w ll    ●

                                                          haue it by voluntary surrender.
the end that if they should euer make peace with the
Athenians, with conditions of mutuall restitution of such Cities as on eyther
side had beene taken by Warre, Plataea, as hauing come in of its own accord,
might not be thereby recouerable; ) but sent a Herald to them, who demanded
whether or no they would giue vp their City voluntarily into the hands of the
Lacedaemonians, and take them for their Iudges, with power to punish the
o enders, but none without forme of Iustice. So said the Herald: and they (for
they were now at the weakest) deliuered vp the Citie accordingly. So the
Peloponnesians gaue the Plataeans food for certaine dayes, till the Iudges, which
were ue, should arriue from Lacedaemon. And when they were come, no
accusation was exhibited, but calling them man by man, they asked 
of euery one, onely this question: Whether they had Vniust proceeding of the
done to the Lacedaemonians, and their Confederates in Lacedaemonians.
this Warre, any good seruice? But the Plataeans hauing sued to make their
answer more at large, and hauing appointed Astymachus the sonne of Asopolaus,
and Lacon the sonne of Adimnestus (who had been heretofore the Hoste of the
Lacedaemonians) for their Speakers, said as followeth.

3.1. THE ORATION OF THE PLATAEANS.
MEn of Lacedaemon, relying vpon you, we yeelded vp our Citie, not
expecting to vndergoe this, but some more Legall manner of proceeding, and
we agreed not to stand to the iudgement of others, (as now we doe) but of
your selues onely; conceiuing we should so obtaine the better iustice. But now
we feare we haue beene deceiued in both. For we haue reason to suspect, both
that the tryall is capitall, and you the Iudges partiall. Gathering so much, both
from that, that there hath not been presented any accusation, to which we
might answer, and also from this, that the interrogatory is short, and such, as
if we answer to it with truth, we shall speake against our selues; and be easily
conuinced, if we lie. But since we are on all hands, in a straight, we are forced
(and it seemes our safest way) to try what we can obtaine by pleading. For, for
men in our case, the speech not spoken, may giue occasion to some to thinke,
that spoken, it had preserued vs. But besides other inconueniences, the
meanes also of perswasion, goe ill on our side. For if we had not knowne one
another, we might haue helped our selues by producing testimony in things
you knew not. Whereas now, all that we shall say, will be before men that
know already what it is. And we feare, not that you meane, because you know
vs inferiour in vertue to your selues, to make that a crime, but lest you bring vs
to a iudgement already iudged, to grati e some body else. Neuerthelesse, we
will produce our reasons of equity, against the quarrell of the Thebans, and
withall make mention of our seruices done, both to you, and to the rest of
Greece, and make tryall, if by any meanes we can perswade you. As to that
short interrogatory, Whether we haue any way done good in this present
Warre to the Lacedaemonians and their Confederates, or not? If you aske vs as
enemies, wee say, that if we haue done them no good, we haue also done them
no wrong. If you aske vs as friends, then we say, that they rather haue done vs
the iniury, in that they made Warre vpon vs. But in the time of the 
Peace, and in the Warre against the Medes, we behaued our selues well▪ for the
one, we brake not rst, and in the other, we were the onely Boeotians that
ioyned with you for the deliuery of Greece. For though we dwell vp in the

land▪ yet we fought by Sea at Artemisium, and in the battell, fought in this
our own territory we were with you; and whatsoeuer dangers the Grecians in
those times vnderwent, we were partakers of all, euen beyond our strength.
And vnto you Lacedaemonians, in particular, when Sparta was in greatest
a right, after the Earthquake, vpon the Rebellion of the Helotes, and seazing
of Ithome, we sent the third part of our power to assist you, which you haue
no reason to forget. Such then wee shewed our selues in those ancient and
most important a aires. It is true, wee haue beene your enemies since, but for
that you are to blame your selues. For when oppressed by the Thebans, we
sought league of you, you reiected vs, and bade ws goe to the Athenians that
were neerer hand, your selues being farre o . Neuerthelesse, you neither haue
in this Warre, nor were to haue su ered at our hands any thing that mis
became vs. And if we denyed to reuolt from the Athenians, when you bade vs,
we did you no iniury in it. For they both ayded vs against the Thebans, when
you shrunke from vs; and it was now no more any honesty to betray them.
Especially hauing beene well vsed by them, and we our selues hauing sought
their league, and been made denizens also of their Citie. Nay, we ought rather
to haue followed them in all their commands with alacrity. When You, or the
Athenians haue the leading of the Confederates, if euill be done, not they that
follow are culpable, but you that lead to the euill. The Thebans haue done vs
many other iniuries; but this last, which is the cause of what wee now su er,
you your selues know what it was. For we auenged vs but iustly of those that
in time of Peace, and vpon the day of our Nouiluniall Sacriﬁce, had surprized
our Citie; and by the Law of all Nations it is lawfull to repell an assailing
enemy; and therefore there is no reason you should punish vs now for them.
For if you shall measure Iustice by your, and their present bene t in the Warre,
it will manifestly appeare, that you are not Iudges of the Truth, but respecters
onely of your pro t. And yet if the Thebans seeme pro table to you now, we,
and the rest of the Grecians were more pro table to you then, when you were
in greater danger. For though the Thebans are now on your side, when you
inuade others; yet at that time when the Barbarian came in to impose
seruitude on all, they were on his. It is but Iustice, that with our present
o ence (if wee haue committed any) you compare our forwardnesse then;

which you will nde both greater then our fault, and augmented also by the
circumstance of such a season, when it was rare to nd any                 
Grecian that durst oppose his valour to Xerxes power; and when they were
most commended, not that with safety helped to further his inuasion▪ but
that aduentured to doe what was most honest, though with danger. But we
being of that number, and honoured for it amongst the rst, are afraid lest the
same shall be now a cause of our destruction, as hauing chosen rather to
follow the Athenians iustly, then you pro tably. But you should euer haue the
same opinion, in the same case; And thinke this onely to be pro table, that
doing what is vsefull for the present occasion, you reserue withall a constant
acknowledgement of the vertue of your good Confederates. Consider also,
that you are an example of * honest dealing, to the * It doth not appeare by any
most of the Grecians. Now if you shall decree           thing in the time of this 〈◊〉,
                                                        that the Lacedaemonians
otherwise then is iust, (for this iudgement of yours is deserued any reputation for
conspicuous) you that be praised, against vs, that be Iustice, but contrarily they
                                                        appear by this 〈…〉 other
not blamed, take heed that they doe not dislike, that actios, not to 〈◊〉 teemed of
                                                                ●

                                                                        ●●

good men should vndergoe an vniust sentence             iustice at ll 〈…〉 their owne
                                                                    ●

                                                        interest or passion.
though at the hands of better men; or that the
spoyle of vs that haue done the Grecians seruice, should be dedicated in their
Temples. For it will be thought a horrible matter, that Plataea should be
destroyed by Lacedaemonians, and that you, wheras your Fathers in honour
of our valour, inscribed the name of our Citie, on the Tripode at Delphi,
should now blot it out of all Greece, to grati e the Thebans. For we haue
proceeded to such a degree of calamity, that if the Medes had preuailed, we
must haue perished then; and now the Thebans haue ouercome vs againe in
you, who were before our greatest friends▪ and haue put vs to two great
hazzards, one before, of famishing if we yeelded not, and another now, of a
Capitall sentence. And we Plataeans, who euen beyond our strength haue
been zealous in the defence of the Grecians, are now abandoned and left
vnreleeued by them all. But we beseech you for those gods sakes, in whose
names once we made mutuall league, and for our valours sake shewne in the
behalfe of the Grecians, to be moued toward vs, and (if at the perswasion of
the Thebans, you haue determined ought against vs, ) to change your mindes,

and reciprocally to require at the hands of the Thebans, this courtesie, that
whom you ought to spare, they would be contented not to kill, and so receiue
an honest bene t, in recompence of a wicked one, and not to bestow pleasure
vpon others, and receiue wickednesse vpon your selues in exchange. For
though to take away our liues be a matter quickely done yet to make the
infamy of it cease, will be worke enough. For being none of your enemies, but
welwillers, and such as haue entred into the Warre vpon constraint, you
cannot put vs to death with Iustice. Therefore if you will iudge vncorruptly,
you ought to secure our persons, and to remember that you receiued vs by our
owne voluntary submission, and with hands vpheld (and it is the 
Law among Grecians, not to put such to death) besides that, we haue from
time to time been bene ciall to you. For looke vpon the sepulchres of your
Fathers, whom slaine by the Medes, and buried in this Territory of ours, we
haue yeerely honoured at the publike charge, both with Vestments and other
Rites; and of such things as our Land hath produced, we haue o ered vnto
them the rst fruits of it all, as friends in an amicable Land, and Confederats
vse to doe, to those that haue formerly been their fellowes in Armes. But now
by a wrong sentence, you shall doe the contrary of this. For consider this:
Pausanias, as he thought, enterred these men in amicable ground, and
amongst their friends. But you, if you slay vs, and of Plataeis, make Thebais,
what doe you but leaue your Fathers and kinred depriued of the honours they
now haue, in an hostile Territory, and amongst the very men that slew them?
And moreouer, put into seruitude that soyle whereon the Grecians were put
into liberty? and make desolate the Temples wherein they prayed, when they
preuailed against the Medes? and destroy the Patriall sacri ces which were
instituted by the Builders and Founders of the same?

These things are not for your glory, men of Lacedaemon, nor to violate the
common institutions of Greece, and wrong your progenitors, nor to destroy
vs that haue done you seruice, for the hatred of another, when you haue
receiued no iniury from vs your selues. But to spare our liues, to relent, to
haue a moderate compassion, in contemplation, not onely of the greatnesse of
the punishment, but also of who we are, that must su er, and of the

 vncertainty where calamity may light, and that vndeseruedly; which wee, (as
 becommeth vs, and our need compelleth vs to doe) cry aloud vnto the
 common gods of Greece to perswade you vnto; producing the oath sworne by
 your Fathers, to put you in minde; and also wee become here, Sanctuary men,
 at the sepulchres of your Fathers, crying out vpon the dead, not to su er
 themselues to be in the power of the Thebans, nor to let their greatest friends
 be betrayed into the hands of their greatest enemies; remembring them of that
 day, vpon which, though we haue done glorious acts in their company, yet wee
 are in danger at this day of most miserable su ering. But to make an end of
 speaking (which is, as necessary, so most bitter to men in our case, because the
 hazzard of our liues commeth so soone after, ) for a conclusion we say, that it
 was not to the Thebans that we rendred our Citie (for we would rather haue
 dyed of Famine, the most base perdition of all other) but we came out on trust
 in you. And it is but iustice, that if wee cannot perswade you, you 
 should set vs againe in the estate we were in, and let vs vndergoe the danger at
 our owne election. Also we require you, Men of Lacedaemon, not onely, not
 to deliuer vs Plataeans, who haue beene most zealous in the seruice of the
 Grecians, especially being Sanctuary men, out of your owne hands, and your
 owne trust, into the hands of our most mortall Enemies the Thebans, but also
 to be our sauiours, and not to destroy vs vtterly, you that set at liberty all other
 Grecians. Thus spake the Plataeans.

But the Thebans, fearing lest the Lacedaemonians might relent at their Oration,
stood forth, and said, that since the Plataeans had had the liberty of a longer
speech (which they thought they should not) then for answer to the question
was necessary, they also desired to speake, and being commanded to say on,
spake to this e ect.

 3.1. THE ORATION OF THE THEBANS.
 IF these men had answered brie y to the question, and not both turned
 against vs with an accusation, and also out of the purpose, and wherein they

were not charged, made much apologie and commendation of themselues in
things vnquestioned, wee had neuer asked leaue to speake; but as it is, we are
to the one point to answer, and to confute the other, that neither the faults of
vs, nor their owne reputation may doe them good, but your Sentence may bee
guided, by hearing of the truth of both. The quarell betweene vs and them,
arose at rst from this, that when wee had built Plataea last of all the Cities of
Boeotia, together with some other places, which, hauing driuen out the
promiscuous Nations, wee had then in our dominion, they would not (as was
ordained at rst) allow vs to be their Leaders, but beeing the onely men of all
the Boeotians, that transgressed the common ordinance of the Countrey,
when they should haue beene compelled to their duty, they turned vnto the
Athenians, and together with them did vs many euils, for which they likewise
su ered as many from vs. But when the Barbarian inuaded Greece, then, say
they, that they of all the Boeotians onely also, Medized not. And this is the
thing wherein they both glory most themselues, and most detract from vs.
Now wee confesse they Medized not, because also the Athenians did not.
Neuerthelesse when the Athenians afterwards inuaded the rest of 
the Grecians, in the same kinde then of all the Boeotians, they onely Atticized.
But take now into your consideration withall, what forme of gouernment we
were in both the one and the other, when wee did this. For then had wee our
Citie gouerned, neither by an Oligarchy, with Lawes common to all, nor by a
Democratie, but the State was mannaged by a Few with authority absolute,
then which there is nothing more contrary to Lawes, and moderation, nor
more approaching vnto Tyranny. And these Few, hoping yet further, if the
Medes preuailed, to increase their owne power, kept the people vnder, and
furthered the comming in of the Barbarian. And so did the whole Citie; but it
was not then Master of it self; nor doth it deserue to bee vpbraided with what
it did when they had no Lawes, [but were at the will of others. ] But when the
Medes were gone, and our City had Lawes, consider now, when the Athenians
attempted to subdue all Greece, and this Territory of ours with the rest,
wherein through sedition they had gotten many places already, whether by
giuing them Battell at Coronea, and defeating them, we deliuered not Boeotia
from seruitude then, and doe not also now with much zeale assist you in the

asserting of the rest, and nde not more Horses, and more prouision of Warre,
then any of the Confederates besides. And so much bee spoken by way of
Apologie to our Medizing. And wee will endeuour to proue now, that the
Grecians haue beene rather wronged by you, and that you are more worthy of
all manner of punishment. You became, you say, Confederates and Denizens
of Athens, for to bee righted against vs; against vs then onely the Athenians
should haue come with you, and not you with them haue gone to the
inuasion of the rest; especially, when if the Athenians would haue led you
whither you would not, you had the League of the Lacedaemonians, made
with you against the Medes, which you so often obiect, to haue resorted vnto;
which was su cient not onely to haue protected you from vs, but which is
the maine matter, to haue secured you to take what course you had pleased.
But voluntarily, and without constraint, you rather chose to follow the
Athenians. And you say it had beene a dishonest thing, to haue betrayed your
benefactors. But it is more dishonest, and more vniust by farre, to betray the
Grecians vniuersally, to whom you haue sworne, then to betray the Athenians
alone; especially when these goe about to deliuer Greece from subiection, and
the other to subdue it. Besides, the requitall you make the Athenians is not
proportionable, nor free from dishonesty; for you, as you say your selues,
brought in the Athenians to right you against iniuries, and you cooperate
with them in iniurying others. And howsoeuer, it is not so           
dishonest to leaue a bene t vnrequited, as to make such a requitall, as though
iustly due, cannot be iustly done. But you haue made it apparent, that euen
then, it was not for the Grecians sake, that you alone of all the Boeotians,
medized not, but because the Athenians did not; yet now, you that would do
as the Athenians did, and contrary to what the Grecians did, claime fauour of
these, for what you did for the others sake. But there is no reason for that; But
as you haue chosen the Athenians, so let them helpe you in this tryall. And
produce not the Oath of the former League, as if that should saue you now;
for you haue relinquisht it, and contrary to the same, haue rather helped the
Athenians to subdue the Aeginetae▪ and others, then hindred them from it.
And this you not onely did voluntarily, and hauing Lawes, the same you haue
now, and none forcing you to it, as there did vs, but also reiected our last

inuitation, (a little before the shutting vp of your Citie) to quietnesse and
neutrality. Who can therefore more deseruedly bee hated of the Grecians in
generall, then you, that pretend honesty to their ruine? And those acts
wherein formerly, as you say, you haue beene bene ciall to the Grecians, you
haue now made apparent to be none of yours, and made true proofe of what
your owne nature inclines you to. For with Athenians you haue walked in the
way of iniustice. And thus much wee haue laid open touching our
inuoluntary Medizing, and your voluntary Atticizing. And for this last iniury
you charge vs with, namely the vnlawfull inuading of your City in time of
peace, and of your New-moone Sacriﬁce, we doe not thinke, no not in this
action, that wee haue o ended so much as you your selues. For though wee
had done vniustly, if wee had assaulted your Citie, or wasted your Territory as
enemies, of our owne accord, yet when the prime men of your owne Citie,
both for wealth and Nobility, willing to discharge you of forraigne League,
and conforme you to the common institutions of all Boeotia, did of their
owne accord call vs in, wherein lyeth the iniurie then? For they that leade
transgresse, rather then they that follow. But as wee conceiue, neither they nor
wee haue transgressed at all. But being Citizens, as well as you, and hauing
more to hazzard, they opened their owne Gates, and tooke vs into the Citie as
Friends, not as Enemies, with intention to keepe the ill-a ected from beeing
worse, and to doe right to the good. Taking vpon them to bee moderators of
your Councels, and not to depriue the Citie of your persons: but to reduce
you into one body with the rest of your kindred; and not to            
engage you in hostility with any, but to settle you in peace with all. And for an
argument, that wee did not this as enemies, wee did harme to no man, but
proclaimed, that if any man were willing to haue the City gouerned after the
common forme of all Boeotia, he should come to vs. And you came willingly
at rst, and were quiet; but afterwards when you knew we were but few,
(though we might seeme to haue done somewhat more then was t to doe,
without the consent of your multitude) you did not by vs, as wee did by you,
  rst innouate nothing in fact, and then with words perswade vs to goe forth
againe, but contrary to the composition, assaulted vs. And for those men you
slew in the a ray, we grieue not so much (for they su ered by a kinde of Law)

but to kill those that held vp their hands for mercie, whom taken aliue, you
afterwards had promised to spare, was not this a horrible cruelty? you
committed in this businesse three crimes, one in the necke of another. First
the breach of the composition, then the death that followed, of our men, and
thirdly, the falsifying of your promise, to saue them, if we did no hurt to any
thing of yours in the Fields. And yet you say that we are the transgressors, and
that you for your parts deserue not to vndergo a iudgement. But it is
otherwise. And if these men iudge aright, you shall be punished now for all
your crimes at once. We haue herein men of Lacedaemon, beene thus large,
both for your sakes, and ours. For yours, to let you see, that if you condemne
them, it will bee no iniustice; for ours, that the equity of our reuenge may the
better appeare. Be not moued with the recitall of their vertues of old (if any
they had) which though they ought to helpe the wronged, should double the
punishment of such as commit wickednesse, because their o ence doth not
become them. Nor let them fare euer the better for their lamentation, or your
compassion, when they cry out vpon your Fathers Sepulchers, and their owne
want of friends. For we on the other side a rme, that the Youth of our Citie
su ered harder measure from them, and their Fathers, partly slaine at
Coronea, in bringing Boeotia to your Confederation, and partly aliue and
now old, and depriued of their children, make farre iuster supplication to you
for reuenge. And pitty belongeth to such as su er vndeseruedly, but on the
contrary, when men are worthily punished, (as these are) it is to bee reioyced
at. And for their present want of friends, they may thanke themselues. For of
their owne accord they reiected the better Confederates. And the Law hath
beene broken by them, without precedent wrong from vs, in that 
they condemned our men spitefully, rather then iudicially; in which point wee
shall now come short of requiting them; for they shall su er Legally, and not,
as they say they doe, with hands vpheld from battell, but as men that haue put
themselues vpon triall by consent.

Maintaine therefore (yee Lacedaemonians) the Law of the Grecians, against
these men that haue transgressed it▪ and giue vnto vs, that haue su ered
contrary to the Law, the iust recompence of our alacritie in your seruice. And

 let not the words of these, giue vs a repulse from you. But set vp an example to
 the Grecians, by presenting vnto these men, a tryall, not of words, but of facts;
 which if they be good, a short narration of them will serue the turne; if ill,
 compt Orations doe but veyle them. But if such as haue the authority, as you
 haue now, would collect the matter to a head, and according as any man
 should make answer thereunto, so proceed to sentence, men would be lesse in
 the search of faire speeches, wherewith to excuse the foulenesse of their
 actions. Thus spake the Thebans.

And the Lacedaemonian Iudges, conceauing their            The Lacedaemonians proceed
Interrogatory to stand well, Namely, whether they had with their question.
receiued any beneﬁt by them or not, in this present War, (For they had indeed
intreated the both at other times, according to the ancient league of Pausanias,
after the Medan Warre, to stand neutrall and also a little before the Siege, the
Plataeans had reiected their proposition of being common friend to both sides,
according to the same league) taking themselues in respect of these their iust
o ers, to be now discharged of the league, and to haue receiued euill at their
hands, caused them one by one to be brought forth, and hauing asked them
againe the same question, Whether they had any way beneﬁted the
Lacedaemonians, and their Confederates in this present Warre, or not? as they
answered, Not, led them aside and slew them, not exempting any. Of the
Plataeans themselues they slew no lesse then 200; Of Athenians, who were
besieged with them, 25. The Women they made               The Plataeans are put to death.
slaues▪ and the Thebans assigned the Citie for a yeere, 25 Athenians slaine with them.
or thereabouts, for an habitation to such Megareans,
as in sedition had been driuen from their owne, and to all those Plataeans, which
liuing, were of the Theban faction. But afterwards,       Plataea pulled downe.
pulling it all downe to the very foundation, they built
a Hospitall in the place, neere the Temple of Iuno, of 200 foot            
diameter, with chambers on euery side in circle, both aboue and below; vsing
therein the roofes, and doores of the Plataeans buildings. And of the rest of the
stu e, that was in the Citie wall, as Brasse and Iron, they made Bedsteds, and
dedicated them to Iuno, to whom also they built a stone Chappell of 100 foote

ouer. The Land they con scated, and set it to farme afterwards for ten yeeres to
the Thebans. So farre were the Lacedaemonians alienated from the Plataeans,
especially, or rather altogether for the Thebans sake, The Lacedaemonians in their
whom they thought vsefull to them in the Warre now sentence vpon the Plataeans,
                                                        haue more respect to their owne
on foot. So ended the businesse at Plataea, in the      proﬁt, then to the merit of the
fourscore and thirteenh yeere after their league made cause.
with the Athenians.

The 40 Gallies of Peloponnesus, which hauing been The 40 Gallies, with Alcidas,
sent to ayde the Lesbians, ed, as hath beene related, come weather-beaten home.
through the wide Sea, chased by the Athenians, and tossed by stormes on the
Coast of Crete, came thence dispersed, into Peloponnesus, and found thirteene
Gallies, Leucadians, and Ambraciotes, in the Hauen of Cystene, with Brasidas
the sonne of Tellis, come thither to be of counsell with Alcidas. For the
Lacedaemonians, seeing they failed of Lesbos, determined with their Fleet
augmented to sayle to Corcyra, which was in sedition, (there being but twelue
Athenian Gallies about Naupactus) to the end they might be there before, the
supply of a greater Fleet should come from Athens. So Brasidas and Alcidas
employed themselues in that.

The sedition in Corcyra, began vpon the comming            The sedition of Corcyra
home of those Captiues, which were taken in the            occasioned by the Captiues that
                                                           came from Corinth.
battels by Sea, at Epidamnus, and released afterwards
by the Corinthians, at the ransome, as was voyced, of eighty talents, for which
they had giuen security to their Hostes; but in fact, for that they had perswaded
the Corinthians, that they would put Corcyra into          Who perswade the renouncing of
their power. These men going from man to man,              their league with Athens.

solicited the Citie to reuolt from the Athenians. And two Gallies being now
come in, one of Athens, another of Corinth, with Ambassadors from both those
States, the Corcyreans vpon audience of them both, decreed to hold the
Athenians for their Confederates, on Articles agreed on; but withall to remaine
friends to the Peloponnesians, as they had formerly been. There was one Pithias,
voluntary Hoste of the Athenians, and that had bin principall Magistrate of the

people. Him, these men called into iudgement, and laid to his charge 
a practice to bring the Citie into the seruitude of the Athenians. He againe,
being acquit, called in question, ue of the wealthiest Pithias, one of the Athenian
of the same men, saying, they had cut * certaine Stakes faction, accused and absolued,
                                                                           ▪

                                                          accuseth some of the other
in the ground, belonging to the Temples both of           faction.
Iupiter, and of Alcinus, vpon euery of which, there
                                                          * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Stakes;
lay a penalty of a * Stater. And the cause going against either for Vine props, which are
them, they tooke Sanctuary in the Temples, to the         particulary called 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉
                                                          〈◊〉 〈◊〉 or for other profane vse.
end, the summe being great, they might pay it by
portions, as they should be taxed. But Pithias (for he * Of our mony about 15 shillings
                                                          7 pence halfe-penny.
was also of the Senate) obtained that the Law should
proceed. These ue being by the Law excluded the Senate, and vnderstanding
that Pithias, as long as he was a Senator, would cause the people to hold for
friends and foes, the same that were so to the Athenians, conspired with the rest,
and armed with Daggers, suddenly brake into the Senate house, and slew both
Pithias and others, as well priuate men as Senators, to Pithias and others slaine in the
the number of about sixty persons; onely a few of         Senate.

those of Pithias his faction, escaped into the Athenian Gallie that lay yet in the
Harbour. When they had done this, and called the Corcyreans to an Assembly,
they told them, that what they had done, was for the best, and that they should
not be now in bondage to the Athenians. And for the future they aduised them
to be in quiet, and to receiue neither party, with more then one Gallie at once;
and to take them for enemies, if they were more. And when they had spoken,
forced them to decree it accordingly. They also presently sent Ambassadors to
Athens, both to shew that it was t for them to doe what they had done, and
also to disswade such Corcyreans as were ed thither of the other faction, from
doing any thing to their preiudice, for feare the matter should fall into a relapse.

When these arriued, the Athenians apprehended both the Ambassadors
themselues, as seditious persons, and also all those Corcyreans whom they had
there preuailed with; and sent them to custody in Aegina. In the meane time,
vpon the comming in of a Gallie of Corinth, with Ambassadours from
Lacedaemon, those that mannaged the State, assayled the Commons, and

ouercame them in ght. And night comming on, the The Lacedaemonian faction
Commons ed into the Citadell, and the higher parts assayle the Commons.
of the Citie, where they rallyed themselues, and encamped, and made themselues
Masters of the Hauen called the Hallaique Hauen. But the Nobility 
seazed on the Market place (where also the most of them dwelt, ) and on the
Hauen on the side toward the Continent.

The next day they skirmished a little with * shot, and * Arrowes, Darts, Stones, and the
both parts sent abroad into the Villages to solicite the like missile weapons.
slaues with promise of liberty, to take their parts. And the greatest part of the
slaues tooke part with the Commons; and the other side had an aide of 800 men,
from the Continent.

The next day but one they fought againe, and the        The Commons ouercome the
people had the Victory, hauing the oddes, both in       O gar hicalls.
                                                              ●   ●

strength of places, and in number of men. And the women also manfully
assisted them, throwing Tyles from the houses, and enduring the tumult, euen
beyond the condition of their Sexe. The Few began to ie about twilight, and
fearing lest the people should euen with their shout take the Arsenall, and so
come on and put them to the sword, to stoppe their passage, set re on the
houses in circle about the Market place, and vpon others neere it. Much goods
of Merchants was hereby burnt, and the whole City, if the wind had risen and
carried the ame that way, had been in danger to haue been destroyed. When the
people had gotten the Victory, the Corinthian Gallie stole away, and most of the
auxiliaries, gat ouer priuily into the Continent.

The next day Nicostratus, the sonne of Diotrephes, an Athenian Commander,
came in with 12 Gallies, and 500 Messenian men of Armes, from Naupactus,
and both negotiated a reconciliation, and induced them (to the end they might
agree) to condemne ten of the principall authors of the Sedition (who presently
 ed) and to let the rest alone, with Articles both betweene themselues, and with
the Athenians to esteeme friends and enemies, the same the Athenians did.
When he had done this, he would haue been gone, but the people perswaded

him before he went, to leaue behind him, ue of his Gallies, the better to keepe
their aduersaries from stirring, and to take as many of theirs, which they would
man with Corcyreans, and send with him. To this he agreed, and they made a
List of those that should imbarke, consisting altogether of their enemies. But
these, fearing to be sent to Athens, tooke Sanctuary in the Temple of 
Castor and Pollux; But Nicostratus endeauoured to raise them, and spake to
them▪ to put them into courage: but when hee could not preuaile, the people
(arming themselues on pretence, that their di dence to goe along with
Nicostratus proceeded from some euill intention) tooke away their Armes out of
their houses, and would also haue killed some of them, such as they chanced on,
if Nicostratus had not hindred them.

Others also when they saw this, tooke Sanctuary in the Temple of Iuno, and they
were in all aboue foure hundred. But the people fearing some innouation, got
them by perswasion to rise, and conueying them into the Iland that lyeth ouer
against the Temple of Iuno, sent them their necessaries thither.

The Sedition standing in these termes, the fourth or Alcidas and the Peloponnesians
  fth day after the putting ouer of these men into the arriue and ﬁght at Sea against
                                                        the Corcyraeans.
Iland, arriued the Peloponnesian Fleet from Cyllene,
where, since their voyage of Ionia, they had lyen at Anchor, to the number of
three and ftie saile. Alcidas had the command of these, as before, and Brasidas
came with him as a Counsellour. And hauing rst put in at Sybota, a Hauen of
the Continent, they came on the next morning by breake of day toward
Corcyra.

The Corcyraeans being in great tumult and feare, both of the Seditious within,
and of the inuasion without, made ready threescore Gallies, and still as any of
them were manned, sent them out against the Enemie; whereas the Athenians
had aduised them to giue leaue to them to goe forth rst, and then the
Corcyraeans to follow after with the whole Fleet together. When their Gallies
came forth thus thinne, two of them presently turned to the Enemie, and in
others, they that were aboord, were together by the eares amongst themselues,

and nothing was done in due order. The Peloponnesians seeing their confusion,
opposed themselues to the Corcyraeans with twenty Gallies onely, the rest they
set in array against the twelue Gallies of Athens, whereof the Salaminia and the
Paralus were two.

The Corcyraeans hauing come disorderly vp, and by few at once, were on their
part, in much distresse; but the Athenians, fearing the Enemies number, and
doubting to bee invironed, would neuer come vp to charge the         
Enemie where they stood thicke, nor would set vpon the Gallies that were placed
in the middest, but charged one end of them, and drowned one of their Gallies:
and when the Peloponnesians afterwards had put their Fleet into a circular
  gure, they then went about and about it, endeuouring to put them into
disorder; which they that were ghting against the Corcyraeans perceiuing, and
fearing such another chance as befell them formerly at Naupactus, went to their
ayde, and vniting themselues, came vpon the Athenians all together.

But they retyring, rowed a sterne, intending that the Corcyraeans should take
that time to escape in; they themselues in the meane time going as leasurely
backe as was possible, and keeping the enemie still a head. Such was this Battell,
and it ended about Sun-set.

The Corcyraeans fearing lest the Enemie in pursuit of their Victorie, should
haue come directly against the Citie, or take aboord the men which they had put
ouer into the Iland, or doe them some other mischiefe, fetcht backe the men
into the Temple of Iuno againe, and guarded the City.

But the Peloponnesians, though they had wonne the Battell, yet durst not
inuade the Citie, but hauing taken thirteene of the Corcyraean Gallies, went
backe into the Continent from whence they had set forth. The next day they
came not vnto the Citie, no more then before, although it was in great tumult
and a right: and though also Brasidas (as it is reported) aduised Alcidas to it, but
had not equall authority; but onely landed Souldiers Alcidas a coward.
at the Promontory of Leucimna, and wasted their
Territory.

In the mean time the people of Corcyra, fearing extremely, lest those Gallies
should come against the Citie, not onely conferred with those in Sanctuary, and
with the rest, about how the Citie might be preserued, but also induced some of
them to goe aboard. For notwithstanding the sedition, they manned 30. Gallies,
in expectation that the Fleet of the enemy should haue entred. But the
Peloponnesians hauing beene wasting of their Fieldes, till it was about noone,
went their wayes againe. Within night, the Corcyraeans had notice 
by res of threescore Athenian Gallies comming toward them from Leucas,
which the Athenians, vpon intelligence of the           Threescore saile of Athenians
Sedition, and of the Fleet to goe to Corcyra vnder      come to ayde the Corcyraean
                                                        Commons.
Alcidas, had sent to ayde them, vnder the conduct of
Eurymedon, the Sonne of Thucles.

The Peloponnesians therefore, as soone as night came, The Peloponnesians depart with
sayled speedily home, keeping still the shore, and        their Fleet▪

causing their Gallies to bee carried ouer at the Isthmus of Leucas, that they
might not come in sight, as they went about. But the People of Corcyra hearing
of the Attique Gallies, comming in, and the going o of the Peloponnesians,
brought into the Citie those * Messenians, which          * that came with Nicostratus.
before were without, and appointing the Gallies
which they had furnished, to come about into the Hillaique Hauen, whilest
accordingly they went about, slew all the contrary        The people, vpon the comming in
Faction they could lay hands on; and also afterwards of the Athenians, most cruelly
                                                          put to death whomsoeuer they
threw ouer-boord, out of the same Gallies, all those      can of the contrary Faction.
they had before perswaded to imbarque, and so went
thence. And comming to the Temple of Iuno, they perswaded 50. of those that
had taken Sanctuarie, to referre themselues to a legall tryall; all which they
condemned to dye. But the most of the Sanctuary men, that is, all those that
were not induced to stand to tryall by Law, when they saw what was done, killed
one another there-right in the Temple, some hanged themselues on Trees, euery
one as he had means, made himselfe away. And for 7. daies together that
Eurymedon stayed there with his 60. Gallies, the Corcyraeans did nothing but

kill such of their City as they tooke to bee their Enemies, laying to their charge a
practice to haue euerted the popular gouernment.

Amongst whom, some were slaine vpon priuate               Description of the behauiour of
hatred, and some by their debtors, for the money          the people in this sedition.

which they had lent them. All formes of death were then seene, and (as in such
cases it vsually falles out) whatsoeuer had happened at any time, happened also
then, and more. For the Father slew his Sonne; men were dragged out of the
Temples, and then slaine hard by; and some immured in the Temple of Bacchus,
dyed within it. So cruell was this Sedition; and seemed so the more, because it
was of these the rst. For afterwards, all Greece, as a man may say, was in
commotion; and quarrels arose euery where betweene the Patrons of 
the Commons, that sought to bring in the Athenians, and the Few, that desired
to bring in the Lacedaemonians. Now in time of peace, they could haue had no
pretence, nor would haue beene so forward to call them in; but beeing Warre,
and Confederates to bee had for eyther party, both to hurt their Enemies, and
strengthen themselues, such as desired alteration, easily got them to come in.
And many and heynous things hapned in the Cities through this Sedition,
which though they haue beene before, and shall be euer, as long as humane
nature is the same, yet they are more calme, and of di erent kinds, according to
the * seueral coniunctures. For in peace and              * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, changes of
prosperity, aswell Cities as priuate men, are better      the 〈◊〉 of things.

minded, because they bee not plunged into necessity of doing any thing against
their will▪ but War taking away the a uence of daily necessaries, is a most
violent Master, & conformeth most mens passions to the present occasion. The
Cities therefore being now in Sedition, and those that fell into it later, hauing
heard what had beene done in the former, they farre exceeded the same in
newnesse of conceipt, both for the art of assailing, and for the strangenesse of
their reuenges. The receiued value of names imposed The manners of the seditions.
for signi cation of things, was changed into arbitrary:
For inconsiderate boldnesse, was counted true hearted manlinesse; prouident
deliberation, a hansome feare; modesty, the cloake of cowardice; to be wise in
euery thing, to be lazie in euery thing. A furious suddennesse was reputed a

point of valour. To re-aduise for the better security, was held for a faire pretext of
tergiuersation. Hee that was erce, was alwayes trusty; and hee that contraried
such a one, was suspected. Hee that did insidiate, if it tooke, was a wise man; but
hee that could smell out a Trap laid, a more dangerous man then hee: But hee
that had beene so prouident, as not to neede to doe the one or the other, was
said to bee a dissoluer of society, and one that stood in feare of his aduersary. In
briefe, he that could outstrip another in the doing of an euill act, or that could
perswade another thereto, that neuer meant it, was commended. To bee kinne to
another, was not to be so neere as to be of his society, because these were ready to
vndertake any thing, and not to dispute it. For these * * The vniting of Companies
Societies were not made vpon prescribed  vnder certaine Lawes, for the
                                                           more proﬁtable mannaging of
Lawes of pro t, but for rapine, contrary to the Lawes their Trades and arts, seemeth to
established. And as for mutuall trust amongst them, it haue beene in vse then, as now.
was con rmed not so much by * diuine Law, as by the
communication of guilt. And what was well aduised * By oath.
of their aduersaries, they receiued with an eye to their
actions, to see whether they were too strong for them, or not, and not
ingenuously. To be reuenged was in more request, then neuer to haue receiued
iniurie. And for Oathes (when any were) of reconcilement, being administred in
the present for necessity, were of force to such as had otherwise no power: but
vpon opportunity, he that rst durst, thought his reuenge sweeter by the trust,
then if he had taken the open way. For they did not onely put to account the
safenesse of that course, but hauing circumuented their Aduersary by fraud,
assumed to themselues withall, a masterie in point of wit. And dishonest men
for the most part are sooner called able, then simple men honest. And men are
ashamed of this title▪ but take a pride in the other. The cause of all this is desire
of rule, out of Auarice and Ambition, and the zeale of * contention from those
two proceeding. For such as were of authority in the * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 properly
Cities, both of the one and the other Faction,             that spight which reigneth in two
                                                           aduersaries whilest they contend,
preferring vnder decent titles, one the politicall         or eagernesse in striuing.
equality of the multitude▪ the other the moderate
Aristocratie, though in words they seemed to be seruants of the Publique, they
made it in eﬀect but the Prize of their contention. And striuing by whatsoeuer

meanes to ouercome, both ventured on most horrible outrages, and prosecuted
their reuenges still further, without any regard of Iustice, or the publike good,
but limiting them, each Faction, by their owne appetite: and stood ready,
whether by vniust sentence, or with their owne hands, when they should get
power, to satis e their present spight. So that neither side made account to haue
any thing the sooner done for Religion [of an Oath, ] but hee was most
commended, that could passe a businesse against the haire with a faire Oration.
The neutrals of the Citie were destroyed by both Factions; partly because they
would not side with them, and partly for enuie that they should so escape.

Thus was wickednesse on foot in euery kind, throughout all Greece, by the
occasion of their sedition. Sincerity (whereof there is much in a generous nature)
was laughed downe. And it was farre the best course, to stand                
di dently against each other, with their thoughts in battell array, which no
speech was so powerfull, nor Oath terrible enough to disband. And being all of
them, the more they considered, the more desperate of assurance, they rather
contriued how to auoid a mischiefe, then were able to rely on any mans faith.
And for the most part, such as had the least wit, had In seditions and confusion, they
the best successe; for both their owne defect, and the that distrust their wits, suddenly
                                                          vse their hands, and defeate the
subtilty of their aduersaries, putting them into a great Stratagems of the more subtile
feare to be ouercome in words, or at least in pre-        sort.

insidiation, by their enemies great craft, they therefore
went roundly to worke with them, with deedes. Whereas the other, not caring
though they were perceiued, and thinking they needed not to take by force, what
they might doe by plot, were thereby vnprouided, and so the more easily slaine.

In Corcyra then were these euils for the most part committed rst; and so were
all other, which either such men as haue beene gouerned with pride, rather then
modesty, by those on whom they take reuenge, were like to commit in taking it;
or which such men as stand vpon their deliuery from long pouerty, out of
couetousnes (chie y to haue their neighbours goods) would contrary to iustice
giue their voices to▪ or which men, not for couetousnes, but assailing each other

on equall termes, carried away with the vnrulinesse of their anger, would cruelly
and inexorably execute.

And the common course of life being at that time confounded in the Citie; the
nature of man, which is wont euen against Law to doe euill, gotten now aboue
the Law, shewed it selfe with delight, to be too weake for passion, too strong for
iustice, and enemie to all superiority. Else they would neuer haue preferred
reuenge before innocence, nor lucre (whensoeuer the enuie of it was without
power to doe them hurt) before iustice. And for the Lawes common to all men
in such cases, (which, as long as they be in force, giue hope to all that su er
iniury) men desire not to leaue them standing, against the neede a man in danger
may haue of them, but by their reuenges on others, to be beforehand in
subuerting them. Such were the passions of the Corcyraeans rst of all other
Grecians, towards one another in the City. And Eurymedon and the Athenians
departed with their Gallies.                               The Athenian Fleet goes away.

Afterwards, such of the Corcyraeans as had ed (for there escaped 
about 500. of them) hauing seazed on the Forts in the 500. of the Nobility that escaped,
Continent, impatronized themselues of their owne          seaze on such places as belonged
                                                          to the Corcyraeans in the
Territory on the other side, and from thence came         Continent.
ouer and robbed the Ilanders, and did them much
hurt; and there grew a great Famine in the Citie. They likewise sent
Ambassadours to Lacedaemon and Corinth, concerning their reduction; and
when they could get nothing done, hauing gotten boates, and some auxiliary
souldiers, they passed, a while after, to the number of They come ouer & fortify
about 600. into the Iland. Where when they had set themselues in Istone.
 re on their Boates, that they might trust to nothing, but to make themselues
masters of the Field, they went vp into the Hill Istone, and hauing there forti ed
themselues with a Wall, infested those within, and were masters of the Territory.

In the end of the same Summer, the Athenians sent            The Athenians send 20. Gallies
twenty Gallies into Sicily, vnder the command of             into Sicily, in pretence to ayde
                                                             the Leontines, but with intention
Laches the sonne of Melanopus, and Chariadas the             to hinder the comming of corne
                                                             from thence into Peloponnesus,

sonne of Euphiletus: For the Syracusians and the         and to spy out the possibility of
                                                         subduing that Iland.
Leontines were now warring against each other. The
Confederates of the Syracusians were all the Dorique Cities, (except the
Camarinaeans) which also in the beginning of this Warre were reckoned in the
League of the Lacedaemonians, but had not yet ayded them in the Warre. The
Confederates of the Leontines, were the Chalcidique Cities, together with
Camarina. And in Italy, the Locrians were with the Syracusians; but the
Rhegians, according to their consanguinity, tooke part with the Leontines. Now
the Confederates of the Leontines, in respect of their ancient alliance with the
Athenians, as also for that they were Ionians obtained of the Athenians, to send
them Gallies; for that the Leontines were depriued by the Syracusians of the vse
both of the Land and Sea. And so the People of Athens sent ayde vnto them,
pretending propinquity, but intending, both to hinder the transportation of
Corne from thence into Peloponnesus, and also to tast the possibility of taking
the States of Sicily into their own hands. These arriuing at Rhegium in Italy,
ioyned with the Confederates, and beganne the Warre; The end of the ﬁfth Summer.
and so ended this Summer.

The next winter, the Sicknesse fell vpon the            The Plague againe at Athens.
Athenians againe (hauing in deed neuer totally left the
Citie, though there was some intermission, and continued aboue a 
yeere after. But the former lasted two yeeres: insomuch as nothing a icted the
Athenians, or empaired their strength more then it. For the number that dyed of
it, of men of Armes enrolled, were no lesse then 4400. and Horsemen, 300. of
the other multitude, innumerable. There happened also at the same time many
Earthquakes, both in Athens, and in Euboea, and also amongst the Boeotians;
and in Boeotia, chie y at Orchomenus.

The Athenians and Rhegians that were now in Sicily, The Athenians inuade the
made Warre the same Winter on the Ilands called the Lipareans, and Ilands called the
                                                        Iles of Aeolus.
Ilands of Aeolus, with thirty Gallies. For in Summer it
was impossible to Warre vpon them for the shallownesse of the Water. These
Ilands are inhabited by the Lipareans, who are a Colonie of the Cnidians, and

dwell in one of the same Ilands, no great one, called Lipara, and thence they goe
forth, and husband the rest, which are Dydime, Strongyle, and Hiera. The
Inhabitants of those places haue an opinion, that in Hiera, Vulcan exerciseth the
craft of a Smith. For it is seene to send forth abundance of re in the day time,
and of Smoake in the night. These Ilands are adiacent to the Territorie of the *
Siculi, and Messanians, but were Confederates of the * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉. There are
Syracusians. When the Athenians had wasted their          in Thucidides mentioned 〈◊〉
                                                          〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 and 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉
Fields, and saw they would not come in they put o         〈◊〉 〈◊〉, 〈…〉 later is the 〈◊〉 of
againe and went to Rhegium. And so ended this               he inhabitants ofSicily 〈◊〉
                                                             ●

                                                          generall, the former, re onely
Winter, and the fth yeere of this Warre, written by
                                                                                 ●

                                                          those that 〈…〉 that name
Thucydides.                                               antiently 〈◊〉 Italy, and
                                                             comming ouer into Sicily, gaue
                                                             that name to the Iland.
The next Summer, the Peloponnesians and their
Confederates came as farre as the Isthmus, vnder the   HE SIXTH YEERE.
                                                             ●

conduct of Agis the Sonne of Archidamus, intending
to haue inuaded Attica; but by reason of the many Earthquakes that then
happened, they turned backe, and the inuasion proceeded not.

About the same time, (Euboea being then troubled with Earthquakes) the Sea
came in at Orobiae, on the part which then was Land, Earthquakes about Euboea, and
and being impetuous withall, ouer owed most part of inundations.
the Citie, whereof part it couered, and part it washed downe, and made lower in
the returne; so that it is now Sea, which before was Land. And the People, as
many as could not preuent it by running vp into the higher ground, perished.
Another inundation like vnto this, hapned in the Ile of Atalanta, on the Coast
of Locris of the Opuntians, and carried away part of the Athenians 
Fort there, and of two Gallies that lay on dry Land, it brake one in pieces.

Also there happened at Peparethus a certaine rising of the water, but it brake not
in. And a part of the Wall, the * Towne-house, and      * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
some few houses besides, were ouerthrowne by the
Earthquakes. The cause of such inundation, for my       The naturall cause of
part, I take to be this; that the Earthquake, where it  Inundation giuen by the Author.

was very great, did there send o the Sea, and the Sea returning on a sudden,
caused the Water to come on with greater violence. And it seemeth vnto me, that
without an Earthquake, such an accident could neuer happen.

The same Summer, diuers others, as they had seuerall occasions, made Warre in
Sicily. So also did the * Sicilians amongst themselues, * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
and the Athenians with their Confederates. But I will
make mention, onely of such most memorable things, as were done either by the
Confederates there with the Athenians, or against the Athenians by the Enemie.

Charaeades the Athenian Generall being slaine by the Syracusians, Laches, who
was now sole Commander of the Fleet, together with the Confederates, made
Warre on Mylae, a Towne belonging to Messana.          The Athenians win Mylae.
There were in Mylae two companies of Messanians in
Garrison, the which also laid a certaine Ambush for those that came vp from the
Fleet. But the Athenians and their Confederates, both put to ight those that
were in ambush, with the slaughter of the most of them, and also assaulting their
Forti cation, forced them on composition, both to render the Citadell, and to
goe along with them against Messana. After this, vpon the approach of the
Athenians and their Confederates, the Messanians compounded likewise, and
gaue them Hostages, and such other security as was     And Messana.
requisite.

The same Summer, the Athenians sent thirtie Gallies The Athenians send
about Peloponnesus, vnder the command of                Demosthenes with 30. Gallies
                                                        about Peloponnesus.
Demosthenes the sonne of Antisthenes, and Proclus
the sonne of Theodorus; and 60. Gallies more, with 2000. men of Armes,
commanded by Nicias the sonne of Niceratus, into        And Nicias with 60. Gallies into
Melos. For the Athenians, in respect that the *         the Iland of Melos.

Melians were Ilanders, and yet would neither bee their * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉. The
Subiects, nor of their League, intending to  Melians mentioned a little after
                                                        this, are not Ilanders, nor termes
subdue them. But when vpon the wasting of their         〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, but 〈◊〉 〈◊〉
                                                              〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.

Fields they still stood out, they departed from Melos, and sayled to Oropus, in
the opposite Continent.

Beeing there arriued within night, the men of Armes left the Gallies, and
marched presently by Land to Tanagra in Boeotia. To which place, vpon a signe
giuen, the Athenians that were in the Citie of Athens, The Army of Nicias, and
came also forth with their whole Forces, led by        another Armie from the Citie of
                                                       Athens, meete vpon a signe
Hipponnicus the sonne of Callias, and Eurymedon        giuen, at Tanagra in Boeotia.
the sonne of Thucles, and ioyned with them; and
pitching their Campe, spent the day in wasting the Territory of Tanagra, and lay
there the night following.

The next day they defeated in Battell, such of the       They ouercome the Tanagrians
Tanagrians as came out against them, and also certaine in battell.
succours sent them from Thebes; and when they had taken vp the Armes of
those that were slaine, and erected a Trophie, they returned backe, the one part
to Athens, the other to their Fleet. And Nicias with his 60. Gallies, hauing rst
sailed along the Coast of Locris, and wasted it, came home likewise.

About the same time, the Peloponnesians erected the The Lacedaemonians build the
Colonie of Heraclea in Trachinia, with this intention: City Heraclea.
The * Melians in the whole containe these three parts: * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, A people of
Paralians, Hi●rans, and Trachinians. Of these the       Thessaly, neere the Melian
                                                        Gulfe.
Trachinians being a icted with Warre from the
Oeteans their borderers, thought at rst to haue ioyned themselues to the
Athenians; but fearing that they would not bee faithfull vnto them, they sent to
Lacedaemon; choosing for their Ambassadour Tisamenus. And the Dorians,
who are the Mother Nation to the Lacedaemonians, sent their Ambassadours
likewise with him, with the same requests. For they also were infested with Warre
from the same Oeteans.

Vpon audience of these Ambassadours, the Lacedaemonians concluded to send
out a Colonie, both intending the reparation of the iniuries done to the
Trachinians and to the Doreans; and conceiuing withall, that the Towne would

stand very commodiously, for their Warre with the      The commodious seate 〈◊〉 this
Athenians; inasmuch as they might thereby haue a       new City for the Warre.

Nauie ready, where the passage was but short, against Euboea; and it would
much further their conuoyance of Souldiers into Thrace. And they 
had their minde wholly bent to the building of the place.

First therefore they asked counsell of the Oracle in Delphi; and the Oracle
hauing bidden them doe it, they sent Inhabitants thither, both of their owne
people, and of the neighbours about them, and gaue leaue also to any that
would, to goe thither, out of the rest of Greece, saue onely to the Ionians,
Achaians, and some few other Nations.

The Conductors of the Colonie were three Lacedaemonians, Leon, Alcidas, and
Damagon: who taking in it hand, built the Citie which is now called Heraclea▪
from the very Foundation; being distant from Thermopylae fortie Furlongs, and
from the Sea twenty. Also they made houses for Gallies to lye vnder, beginning
close to Thermopylae, against the very streight, to the end to haue them the
more defensible.

The Athenians, when this Citie was peopled, were at rst afraid, and thought it
to bee set vp especially against Euboea; because from thence to Ceneum, a
Promontory of Euboea, the passage is but short. But it fell out afterwards
otherwise then they imagined; for they had no great harme by it. The reason
whereof was this: That the Thessalians who had the Townes of those parts in
their power, and vpon whose ground it was built,        The Thessalians infest the new
a icted these new planters with a continuall Warre, Citie with continuall Warre, for
                                                        feare they should be too great.
till they had worne them out, though they were many
indeed in the beginning, (for being the foundation of the Lacedaemonians,
euery one went thither boldly, conceiuing the Citie to bee an assured one) and
chie y the Gouernours themselues, sent thither from Lacedaemon, vndid the
businesse, and dispeopled the City by frighting most The seuerity of the
men away, for that they gouerned seuerely, and          Lacedaemonians gouernment
                                                            dispeopled the Citie of Heraclea,
                                                            and frighted men from it.

sometimes also vniustly, by which meanes their            The Lacedaemonians alwayes
                                                          seuere, not alwaies iust.
neighbours more easily preuailed against them.

The same Summer, and about the same time that the Demosthenes warreth on Leucas.
Athenians stayed in Melos, those other Athenians that
were in the thirtie Gallies about Peloponnesus, slew rst certaine Garrison
Souldiers in Ellomenus, a place of Leucadia, by Ambushment. But afterwards
with a greater Fleet, and with the whole power of the Acarnanians 
(who followed the Army, all (but the Oeniades) that could beare Armes) and
with the Zacynthians, and Cephalonians, and fteene Gallies of the
Corcyraeans, made Warre against the City it selfe of Leucas. The Leucadians,
though they saw their Territorie wasted by them, both without the Isthmus, and
within, (where the Citie of Leucas standeth, and the Temple of Apollo) yet they
durst not stirre, because the number of the Enemie was so great. And the
Acarnanians entreated Demosthenes the Athenian Generall to Wall them vp,
conceauing that they might easily be expugned by a Siege, and desiring to be rid
of a Citie their continuall Enemy. But Demosthenes Demosthenes inuadeth Aetolia
was perswaded at the same time by the Messenians,         at the perswasion of the
                                                          Messenians.
that seeing so great an Armie was together, it would
bee honourable for him to inuade the Aetolians, principally, as being Enemies to
Naupactus; and that if these were subdued, the rest of the Continent
thereabouts would easily bee added to the Athenian dominion. For they
alledged, that though the Nation of the Aetolians were great and Warlike, yet
their habitation was in Villages vnwalled, and those at great distances; and were
but light-armed, and might therefore with no great di culty bee all subdued,
before they could vnite themselues for defence. And they aduised him to take in
hand rst the Apodotians, next, the Ophionians, and after them the
Eurytanians, which are the greatest part of Aetolia, of a most strange language,
and that are reported to eate raw esh; for these beeing subdued, the rest would
easily follow.

But hee, induced by the Messenians, whom he           The ambition of Demosthenes,
fauoured, but especially because hee thought, without the chiefe cause of his

the Forces of the People of Athens, with the               vnfortunate Enterprize in
                                                           Aetolia.
Confederates onely of the Continent, and with the
Aetolians, to inuade Boeotia by Land, going rst through the Locri Ozolae, and
so to Cytinium of Doris, hauing Pernassus on the right hand, till the descent
thereof into the Territory of the Phocaeans, (which people, for the friendship
they euer bore to the Athenians, would, he thought, be willing to follow his
Armie, and if not, might be forced) and vpon the Phocaeans bordereth Boeotia.
Putting o therefore with his whole Armie, against the minds of the
Acarnanians, from Leucas, he sailed vnto Solium by the shoare, and there hauing
communicated his conceit with the Acarnanians, when they would not approue
of it, because of his refusall to besiege Leucas, he himselfe with the 
rest of his Armie, Cephalonians, Zacynthians, and 300. Athenians, the Souldiers
of his own Fleet, (for the fteene Gallies of Corcyra were now gone away)
warred on the Aetolians, hauing Oeneon, a Citie of Locris, for the seate of his
Warre. Now these Locrians called Ozolae, were Confederates of the Athenians,
and were to meete them with their whole power in the heart of the Countrey.
For being Con ners on the Aetolians, and vsing the same manner of arming, it
was thought it would bee a matter of great vtility in the Warre, to haue them in
their Armie; for that they knew their manner of ght, and were acquainted with
the Country. Hauing lyen the night with his whole Armie in the * Temple of
Iupiter Nemeius, (wherein the Poet Hesiodus is             * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉. The whole
reported by them that dwell thereabout to haue dyed, consecrated ground wherein the
                                                           Temple stood, not the Church
foretold by an Oracle, that hee should dye in Nemea) only. Hesiod the Poet said to
in the morning betimes he dislodged, and marched           haue dyed in this Temple of
                                                           Jupiter Nemeius.
into Aetolia.

The rst day hee tooke Potidania, the second day,       Potidania. Crocylium. Tichium.
Crocylium, the third, Tichium. There he stayed, and
sent the booty hee had gotten, to Eupolium in Locris. For he purposed, when
hee had subdued the rest, to inuade the Ophionians Ophionei.
afterwards, (if they submitted not) in his returne to
Naupactus.

But the Aetolians knew of this preparation when it was rst resolued on; and
afterwards, when the Armie was entred, they were       The Aetolians vnite against the
vnited into a mighty Armie to make head. Insomuch inuasion of Demosthenes.
as that the furthest o of the Ophionians, that reach out to the Melian Gulfe,
the Bomians and Callians came in with their aydes.     Bomians. Callians.

The Messenians gaue the same aduice to Demosthenes that they had done
before; and alleadging that the Conquest of the Aetolians would bee but easie,
willed him to march with all speed against them, Village after Village, and not to
stay till they were all vnited, and in order of Battell against him, but to attempt
alwayes the place which was next to hand. Hee, perswaded by them, and
con dent of his fortune, because nothing had crossed him hitherto, without
tarrying for the Locrians that should haue come in with their aides, (for his
greatest want was of Darters light-armed) marched to Aegitium, which
approaching, hee wonne by force, the men hauing ed Aegitium.
secretly out, and encamped themselues on 
the Hilles aboue it: for it stood in a Mountainous place, and about eighty
Furlongs from the Sea. But the Aetolians, (for by this The Aetolians giue Demosthenes
time they were come with their Forces to Aegitium) a great ouerthrow.
charged the Athenians and their Confederates, and running downe vpon them,
some one way, some another, from the Hilles, plyed them with their Darts. And
when the Armie of the Athenians assaulted them, they retired; and when it
retired, they assaulted. So that the Fight for a good while, was nothing but
alternate chase and retreate; and the Athenians had the worst in both.

Neuerthelesse, as long as their Archers had Arrowes, and were able to vse them,
(for the Aetolians, by reason they were not armed, were put backe still with the
shot) they held out. But when vpon the death of their Captaine, the Archers
were dispersed, and the rest were also wearied, hauing a long time continued the
said labour of pursuing and retyring, and the Aetolians continually a icting
them with their Darts, they were forced at length to y; and lighting into
Hollowes without issue, and into places they were not acquainted withall, were
destroyed. For Chromon a Messenian, who was their Guide for the wayes, was

slaine. And the Aetolians pursuing them still with Darts, slew many of them
quickly, whilest they ed, being swift of foot, and without Armour. But the
most of them missing their way, and entring into a Wood, which had no passage
through, the Aetolians set it on re, and burnt it about them.

All kinds of shifts to y, and all kindes of destruction were that day in the Armie
of the Athenians. Such as remained, with much adoe, got to the Sea, and to
Oeneon, a Citie of Locris, from whence they rst set forth.

There dyed very many of the Confederates, and a hundred and twenty men of
Armes of the Athenians; that was their number, and all of them able men. These
men of the very best dyed in this Warre: Procles also was there slaine, one of the
Generals. When they had receiued the bodies of their dead from the Aetolians
vnder truce, and were gotten againe to Naupactus, they returned with the Fleet
to Athens. But they left Demosthenes about               Demosthenes afraid to come
Naupactus, and those parts, because hee was afraid of home.
the Athenian People, for the losse that had happened.

About the same time, the Athenians that were on the Coast of Sicily, 
sayled vnto Locris, and landing, ouercame such as    The Athenian Fleet in Singly
made head; and tooke in Peripolium, scituate on the sayle to Locris, and take
                                                     Peripolium.
Riuer Halex.

The same Summer, the Aetolians hauing sent their     The Aetolians and
Ambassadours, Telephus an Ophionian, Boryades, an Peloponnesians make a iourney
                                                     against Naupactus.
Eurytanian, and Tisander an Apodotian, to Corinth
and Lacedaemon, perswaded them to send an Armie against Naupactus, for that
it harboured the Athenians against them. And the Lacedaemonians, towards the
end of Autumne, sent them three thousand men of Armes, of their
Confederates; of which ue hundred were of Heraclea, the new-built Citie of
Trachinia. The Generall of the Armie was Eurylochus a Spartan, with whom *
Massarius and Menedatus went also along, Spartans * These are afterwards called
likewise.                                            Macarius & Menedatus.

When the Armie was assembled at Delphi, Eurylocus sent a Herald to the
Locrians of Ozolae, both because their way lay through them to Naupactus, and
also because hee desired to make them reuolt from the Athenians. Of all the
Locrians, the Amphissians cooperated with him most, as standing most in feare
for the enmitie of the Phocaeans. And they rst giuing Hostages, induced
others, (who likewise were afraid of the comming in of the Armie) to doe the
like: the Myonians rst, beeing their neighbours, (for this way is Locris of most
di cult accesse) then the Ip●aeans, Messapians, Tritaeans, Challaeans,
Tolophonians, Hessians, and the O●antheans. All these went with them to the
Warre. The Olpaeans gaue them Hostages, but followed not the Armie. But the
Hyeans would giue them no Hostages, till they had taken a Village of theirs
called Polis.

When euery thing was ready, and hee had sent the Hostages away to Cytinium in
Doris, hee marched with his Armie towards Naupactus, through the Territorie
of the Locrians. And as hee marched, hee tooke Oeneon, a Towne of theirs, and
Eupolium, because they refused to yeeld vnto him.

When they were come into the Territory of Naupactus, the Aetolians being
there already to ioyne with them, they wasted the Fields about, and tooke the
Suburbes of the Citie, being vnforti ed. Then they went to Molychrium, a
Colonie of the Corinthians, but subiect to the People of Athens, and 
tooke that. Now Demosthenes the Athenian, (for euer since the Aetolian
businesse, he abode about Naupactus) hauing been praeaduertised of this Army,
and being afraid to lose the Citie, went amongst the Acarnanians, and with
much adoe, because of his departure from before Leucas, perswaded them to
relieue Naupactus, and they sent along with him in       Demosthenes relieueth
his Gallies 1000 men of Armes; which entring were        Naupactus.

the preseruation of the City; for there was danger, the walles being of a great
compasse, and the defendants few, that else they should not haue been able to
make them good. Eurylochus, and those that were with him, when they
perceyued that those forces were entred, and that it was impossible to take the
Citie by assault, departed thence, not into Peloponnesus, but to Aeolis, now

called Calydon, and to Pleuron, and other places thereabouts, and also to
Proschion in Aetolia. For the Ambraciotes comming to them, perswaded them
to vndertake, together with themselues, the enterprize against Argos, and the
rest of Amphilochia, and Acarnania, saying withall, that if they could ouercome
these, the rest of that Continent would enter into the league of the
Lacedaemonians. Whereunto Eurylochus assented, and dismissing the
Aetolians, lay quiet in those parts with his Armie, till such time, as the
Ambraciotes being come with their forces before Argos, he should haue need to
aid them. And so this Summer ended.                        The end of the sixt Summer.

The Athenians that were in Sicily, in the beginning of The Athenians in Sicily assault
Winter, together with the Grecians of their league,       Nessa.

and as many of the * Siculi, as hauing obeyed the         * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
Syracusians by force, or being their Confederates
before, had now reuolted, warred ioyntly against *        * Nessa; rather Inessa. The
Nessa, a town of Sicily, the Citadell whereof, was in     Inhabytants he calleth Inessaei.
                                                          lib. 6.
the hands of the Syracusians; and they assaulted the
same; but when they could not winne it, they retyred. In the retreat, the
Syracusians that were in the Cittadell, sallied out vpon the Confederates, that
retired later then the Athenians; and charging put a part of the Army to ight,
and killed, not a few.

After this, Laches, and the Athenians, Landed sometime at Locris; and
ouercame in battell, by the Riuer Caicinus, about 300 Locrians, who with
Proxenus the sonne of Capiton, came out to make resistance; and when they had
stripped them of their Armes, departed.

The same Winter also, the Athenians hallowed the Ile Delos hallowed.
of Delos, by the admonition indeed of a 
certaine Oracle. For Pisistratus also the Tyrant, hallowed the same before, not all,
but onely so much as was within the prospect of the Temple. But now they
hallowed it all ouer in this manner. They tooke away all Sepulchers whatsoeuer,
of such as had dyed there before; and for the future, made an Edict, that none

should bee su ered to dye, nor any Woman to bring        An Edict, that none should be
forth child in the Iland; but when they were neere the   suﬀered to be borne or dye in
                                                         Delos.
time, either of the one or the other, they should bee
carried ouer into Rhenea.

This Rhenea is so little a way distant from Delos, that Polycrates the Tyrant of
Samos, who was once of great power by Sea, and had the dominion of the other
Ilands, when hee wonne Rhenea, dedicated the same to Apollo of Delos, tying it
vnto Delos with a Chaine. And now after the              Rhenea an Iland, 〈…〉 and
hallowing of it, the Athenians instituted the keeping▪ dedicated to 〈◊〉 of Delos.
euery fth yeere, of the Delian Games.                    The Athenians 〈◊〉 the
                                                         quinqueniall 〈◊〉 at Delos.

There had also in old time beene great concourse in Delos, both of Ionians, and
of the Ilanders round about. For they then came to see the Games, with their
Wiues and Children, as the Ionians doe now the Games at Ephesus.

There were likewise Matches set of bodily exercise, and of Musicke; and the
Citties did seuerally set forth Dances. Which things to haue beene so, is
principally declared by Homer, in these Verses of his Hymne to Apollo.

     Hom. Hym. ad Apoll. 〈◊〉But thou, Apollo, takest most delight▪
     146:
                            In Delos. There assemble in thy sight,
    The long coate Ions with their Children deare,
    And venerable Bedfellowes; and there,
    In Matches set, of Buﬀets, Song, and Dance,
    Both shew thee pastime, and thy Name advance.
That there were also Matches of Musique, and that men resorted thither to
contend therein, hee againe maketh manifest in these Verses of the same Hymne.
For after hee hath spoken of the Delian Dance of the Women, hee endeth their
praise with these Verses, wherin also he maketh mention of himselfe.

    But well: let Phoebus and Diana bee                              
     Hom Hymn. ad Apoll. ver. Propitious; and farewell you each one;
     ●   65.

                             But yet remember me when I am gone:
    And if of earthly men you chance to see
    Any toyl'd Pilgrim, that shall aske you, Who,
    O Damsels, is the man that liuing here,
    Was sweet'st in Song, and that most had your eare?
    Then all, with a ioynt murmur, thereunto
    Make answer thus; A man depriu'd of seeing,
    In th'lle of Sandie Chios is his beeing.
So much hath Homer witnessed touching the great meeting, and solemnity
celebrated of old, in the Ile of Delos. And the Ilanders, and the Athenians, since
that time, haue continued still to send Dancers along with their Sacri cers, but
the Games, and things of that kind were worne out, as is likely, by aduersity. Till
now that the Athenians restored the Games, and added the Horse-race, which
was not before.

The same Winter the Ambraciotes, (according to their The Ambraciotes and
promise made to Eurylochus) when they reteyned his Peloponnesians make Warre
                                                        against the Acarnanians and
Armie, made Warre vpon Argos in Amphilochia, with Amphilochians vnfortunately.
three thousand men of Armes, and inuading Argia,
they tooke Olpae, a strong Fort on a Hill by the Sea- They take Olpae.
side, which the Acarnanians had forti ed, and vsed
for the place of their common meetings, for matters of Iustice, and is distant
from the Citie of Argos, which stands also on the Sea-side, about twenty ue
furlongs. The Acarnanians with part of their Forces, came to relieue Argos, and
with rest they encamped in that part of Amphilochia which is called Crenae, to
watch the Peloponnesians that were with Eurylochus, that they might not passe
through to the Ambraciotes without their knowledge; and sent to Demosthenes,
who had beene Leader of the Athenians in the expedition against the Aetolians,
to come to them, and bee their Generall.                The Acarnanians make
                                                         Demosthenes their Generall.
They sent also to the twenty Athenian Gallies, that
chanced to be then on the Coast of Peloponnesus, vnder the Conduct of
Aristoteles, the sonne of Timocrates, and Ierophon, the sonne of Antimnestus.

In like manner the Ambraciotes that were at Olpae,     The Ambraciotes at Olpae, send
sent a messenger to the Citie of Ambracia,  to the Ambraciotes at home, to
                                                       come to their ayde.
willing them to come to their ayde with their whole
power; as fearing that those with Eurylochus would not bee able to passe by the
Acarnans, and so they should bee either froced to ght alone, or else haue an
vnsafe Retreat.

But the Peloponnesians that were with Eurylochus, as soone as they vnderstood
that the Ambraciotes were come to Olpae, dislodging from Proschion, went
with all speede to assist them. And passing ouer the Riuer Achelous, marched
through Acarnania, (which, by reason of the aydes sent to Argos, was now
disfurnished, ) on their right hand they had the Citie of Stratus, and that
Garrison; on the left, the rest of Acarnania. Hauing past the Territory of the
Stratians, they marched through Phytia, and againe by the vtmost limits of
Medeon, then through Limnaea, then they went into the Territory of the
Agraeans; which are out of Acarnania, and their friends, and getting to the Hill
Thiamus, which is a desart Hill, they marched ouer it, and came downe into
Argia, when it was now night; and passing betweene the Citie of the Argiues,
and the Acarnans that kept watch at the Welles, came vnseene, and ioyned with
the Ambraciotes at Olpae.

When they were all together, they sate downe about breake of day, at a place
called Metropolis, and there encamped. And the Athenians not long after with
their 20. Gallies, arriued in the Ambracian Gulfe, to the aide of the Argiues. To
whom also came Demosthenes with 200. Messenian men of Armes, and
threscore Athenian Archers. The Gallies lay at Sea, before the Hill vpon which
the Fort of Olpae standeth. But the Acarnanians, and those few Amphilochians
(for the greatest part of them the Ambraciotes kept backe by force) that were
come already together at Argos, prepared themselues to giue the Enemy Battell,
and chose Demosthenes with their owne                    Demosthenes chosen Generall.
Commanders, for Generall of the whole League. Hee,
when hee had brought them vp, neere vnto Olpae, there encamped. There was
betweene them a great Hollow; and for ue dayes together, they stirred not; but

the sixth day both sides put themselues into array for the Battell. The Armie of
the Peloponnesians reached a great way beyond the other, for indeed it was
much greater; but Demosthenes, fearing to bee encompassed, placed an Ambush
in a certaine hollow way, and t for such a purpose, of armed and           
vnarmed Souldiers, in all to the number of 400. which in that part where the
number of the Enemies ouer-reached, should in the heate of the battell rise out
of Ambush, and charge them on their backes. When the Battels were in order on
either side, they came to Blowes. Demosthenes with the Messenians, and those
few Athenians that were there, stood in the right        The Battell betweene the
Wing; and the Acarnanians (as they could one after       Ambraciotes and
                                                         Acarnanian .●
another bee put in order) and those Amphilochian
Darters which were present, made vp the other. The Peloponnesians and
Ambraciotes were ranged promiscuously, except onely the Mantineans, who
stood together, most of them in the left Wing, but not in the vtmost part of it,
for Eurylochus and those that were with him, made the extremity of the left
Wing against Demosthenes, and the Messenians.

When they were in ght, and that the Peloponnesians with that Wing ouer-
reached, and had encircled the right Wing of their Enemies, those Acarnanians
that lay in Ambush, comming in at their backes, charged them, and put them to
 ight, in such sort as they endured not the rst brunt; The Ambraciotes and
and besides, caused the greatest part of the Armie       Peloponnesians ﬂy.

through a right to runne away. For when they saw that part of it defeated,
which was with Eurylochus, which was the best of their Armie, they were a great
deale the more a raid. And the Messenians that were in that part of the Armie
with Demosthenes, pursuing them, dispatched the greatest part of the
execution. But the Ambraciotes that were in the right Wing, on that part, had
the Victorie, and chased the Enemie vnto the Citie of Argos; but in their
Retreat, when they saw that the greatest part of the Armie was vanquished, the
rest of the Acarnanians setting vpon them, they had much adoe to recouer
Olpae in safety; and many of them were slaine, whilest they ranne into it out of
array, and in disorder. Saue onely the Mantineans; for these made a more orderly

Retreat then any part of the Armie. And so this Battell ended, hauing lasted till
the Euening.

The next day, * Menedaius, (Eurylochus and *              * called before Menedatus and
Macarius beeing now slaine) taking the Command            Massarius.

vpon him, and not nding how, if hee staid, hee            * called before Menedatus and
should bee able to sustaine a Siege,         Massarius.
wherein hee should both bee shut vp by Land, and also with those Attique
Gallies by Sea; or if hee should depart, how hee might doe it safely, had speech
with Demosthenes, and the Acarnian Captaines, both about a Truce for his
departure, and for the receiuing of the bodies of the slaine. And they deliuered
vnto them their dead; and hauing erected a Trophie, tooke vp their owne dead,
which were about three hundred; but for their departure they would make no
Truce openly, nor to all: but secretly, Demosthenes, with his Acarnanian fellow-
Commanders, made a Truce with the Mantineans, and with Menedaius, and the
rest of the Peloponnesian Captaines, and men of most worth, to bee gone as
speedily as they could; with purpose to disguard the Ambraciotes, and
multitude of mercenary Strangers, and withall to vse Demosthenes suﬀereth the
this as a meanes to bring the Peloponnesians into         principall Peloponnesians to
                                                          retire from Olpae secretly; to
hatred with the Grecians of those parts, as men that disgard the Ambraciotes of their
had treacherously aduanced their particular interest. ayd, and procure the
                                                          Peloponnesians the hatred of the
Accordingly they tooke vp their dead, and buryed          Nations thereabouts.
them as fast as they could; and such as had leaue,
consulted secretly touching how to bee gone.

Demosthenes and the Acarnanians had now intelligence, that the Ambraciotes
from the Citie of Ambracia, according to the message Denosthenes sendeth part of his
sent to them before from Olpae, (which was, that they Armie to lye in Ambush by the
                                                       wayes by which the Ambraciote
should bring their whole power through Amphilochia supplies were to come from the
to their ayde) were already on their March, (ignorant Citie       ▪

of what had passed here) to ioyne with those at Olpae.
And hereupon he sent a part of his Armie presently forth, to beset the wayes

with Ambushment, and to preoccupate all places of strength, and prepared
withall, to encounter with the rest of his Armie.

In the meane time, the Mantineans, and such as had The Mantineans retire from
part in the Truce, going out, on pretence to gather     Olpae.

Pot-hearbs, and Fire-wood, stole away by small numbers, and as they went, did
indeed gather such things as they pretended to goe forth for; but when they were
gotten farre from Olpae, they went faster away. But     The Ambraciotes goe after them,
the Ambraciotes, and others that came forth in the      and are slaine to the number of
                                                        200.
same manner, but in greater troopes, seeing the others
goe quite away, were eager to bee gone likewise, and ranne out-right, as desiring
to ouertake those that were gone before. The Acarnanians at rst thought they
had gone all without Truce alike, and pursued the Peloponnesians, 
and threw darts at their owne Captaines for forbidding them, and for saying that
they went away vnder truce, as thinking themselues betrayed. But at last they let
goe the Mantineans▪ and Peloponnesians, and slew the Ambraciotes onely. And
there was much contention, and ignorance, of which was an Ambraciote, and
which a Peloponnesian. So they slew about 200 of them, and the rest escaped
into Agraeis, a bordering Territory, where Salynthius The rest escape to Salynthius,
King of the Agraeans, and their friend, receiued them. King of the Agraeans.

The Ambraciotes, out of the Citie of Ambracia, were Demosthenes goeth out to meet
come as farre as Idomene. Idomene are two high hils, the supply of Ambraciotes that
                                                       came from the Citie.
to the greater whereof, came rst vndiscouered that
night, they whom Demosthenes had sent afore from the Campe, and seazed it.
But the Ambraciotes got rst to the lesser, and there encamped the same night.
Demosthenes after Supper, in the twilight, marched forward with the rest of the
Army, one halfe whereof himselfe tooke with him, for the assault of the Campe,
and the other halfe he sent about through the Mountaines of Amphilochia.

And the next morning before day, he inuaded the       The Ambraciotes surprized in
Ambraciotes, whilest they were yet in their lodgings, their lodgings.
and knew not what was the matter, but thought rather, that they had been some

of their owne company. For Demosthenes had placed the Messenians on
purpose in the formost rankes, and commanded them to speake vnto them as
they went, in the Dorique Dialect, and to make the Sentinels secure; Especially,
seeing their faces could not be discerned, for it was yet night. Wherefore they put
the Army of the Ambraciotes to ight, at the rst             The Ambraciotes put to ﬂight.
onset, and slew many vpon the place. The rest ed as
fast as they could towards the Mountaines. But the wayes being beset, and the
Amphilochians being well acquainted with their owne Territory, and armed but
lightly, against men in Armour, vnacquainted, and vtterly ignorant which way
to take; they light into hollow wayes, and to the places forelayed with Ambushes,
and perished. And hauing been put to all manner of shift for their liues, some
  ed towards the Sea, and when they saw the Gallies of Athens sayling by the
Shoare, (this accident concurring with their defeate, ) swamme to them, and
chose rather in their present feare, to be killed of those in the Gallies, then by the
Barbarians, and their most mortall enemies the Amphilochians. The 
Ambraciotes with this losse, came home a few of many in safety to their Citie.
And the Acarnanians hauing taken the spoyle of the dead, and erected their
Trophies, returned vnto Argos.

The next day there came a Herald from those Ambraciotes which ed from
Olpae, into Agraeis; to demand leaue to carry away the bodies of those dead,
which were slaine after the rst battell, when, without Truce, they went away
together with the Mantineans, and with those that had Truce. But when the
Herald saw the Armors of those Ambraciotes, that came from the City, he
wondred at the number. For he knew nothing of this last blow, but thought they
had been the Armors of those with them. Then one asked him, what hee
wondred at, and how many hee thought were slaine.       The conference of the Herald
For he that asked him the question, thought, on the from the Ambraciotes in
                                                        Agraeis, with one of
other side, that he had been a Herald, sent from those Demosthenes his Army, about
at Idomene. And he answered, about 200. Then he         the number of the slaine.

that asked, replyed, and said, Then these are not the
armours of them, but of aboue a thousand. Then, said he againe, they belong not to
them that were in the battell with vs. The other answered, yes, if you fought

yesterday in Idomene. But we fought not yesterday at all, but the other day in our
retreate. But we yet fought yesterday with those Ambraciotes that came from the
Citie to ayde the rest. When the Herald heard that, and knew that the ayde from
the Citie was defeated, he burst out into Aimees, and astonished with the
greatnesse of the present losse, forthwith went his way, without his errand, and
required the dead bodies no further. For this losse was greater then in the like
number of dayes happened to any one Citie of Greece, in all this Warre. I haue
not written the number of the slaine, because it was said to be such, as is
incredible, for the quantity of the City. But this I know, that if the Acarnanians,
and Amphilochians, as Demosthenes, and the                The Acarnanians will not let the
Athenians would haue had them, would haue                 Athenians subdue the
                                                          Ambraciotes vtterly, because they
subdued Ambracia, they might haue done it euen            thought the Ambraciotes better
with the shout of their voyces; but they feared now,      neighbours then the Athenians.

that if the Athenians possessed it, they would proue
more troublesome Neighbors vnto them then the other.

After this, hauing bestowed the third part of the spoyles vpon the Athenians,
they distributed the other two parts according to the Cities. The Athenians part
was lost by Sea. For those 300 compleat Armors which are dedicated 
in the Temples in Attica, were pick'd out for Demosthenes himselfe, and he
brought them away with him. His returne was withall the safer for this action,
after his defeate in Aetolia. And the Athenians that were in the twenty Gallies
returned to Naupactus.

The Acarnanians, and Amphilochians, when the Athenians, and Demosthenes
were gone, granted Truce at the Citie of the Oeniades to those Ambraciotes and
Peloponnesians that were ed to Salynthius, & the Agraeans, to retyre, the
Oeniades being gone ouer to Salynthius, and the         League for 100 yeeres betweene
Agraeans likewise. And for the future, the              the Ambraciotes and
                                                        Acarnanians.
Acarnanians, & Amphilochians made a league with
the Ambraciotes for an hundred yeeres, vpon these conditions. That neither the
Ambraciotes, with the Acarnanians, should make Warre against the
Peloponnesians, nor the Acarnanians with the Ambraciotes, against the

Athenians. That they should giue mutuall ayde to one anothers Countrey. That
the Ambraciotes should restore, whatsoeuer Townes or bordering ﬁelds they held of
the Amphilochians, ; and that they should at no time ayde Anactorium, which
was in hostility with the Acarnanians. And vpon this composition, the Warre
ended. After this, the Corinthians sent a Garrison of about 300 men of Armes
of their owne Citie to Ambracia, vnder the Conduct of Xenoclides the sonne of
Euthycles; who with much di culty passing through Epirus, at length arriued.
Thus passed the businesse in Ambracia.

The same Winter the Athenians that were in Sicily,        The Athenian Fleet in Sycily,
inuaded Himeraea by Sea, ayded by the * Sicilians that inuade Himeraea.
inuaded the skirts of the same by Land. They sayled * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
also to the Ilands of Aeolus. Returning afterwards to
Rhegium, they found there Pythodorus, the sonne of Pythodorus sent to take the Fleet
Isolochus, with certaine Gallies, come to receiue charge from Laches.
of the Fleet commanded by Laches. For the Sicilian Confederates had sent to
Athens, and perswaded the people, to assist them with a greater Fleet. For
though the Syracusians were masters by Land, yet seeing they hindred them, but
with few Gallies from the liberty of the Sea, they made preparation, and were
gathering together a Fleet, with intention to resist them. And the Athenians
furnished out forty Gallies to send into Sicily, conceiuing that the Warre there
would the sooner be at an end, and desiring withall to traine their 
men in nauall exercise. Therefore Pythodorus, one of the Commanders, they
sent presently away with a few of those Gallies, and intended to send Sophocles
the sonne of Sostratides, and Eurymedon the sonne of Toucles, with the greatest
number afterwards. But Pythodorus hauing now the Command of Laches his
Fleet, sayled in the end of Winter, vnto a certaine Garrison of the Locrians,
which Laches had formerly taken, and ouerthrowne in a Battell there by the
Locrians, retired.

The same Spring, there issued a great * streame of Fire * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, a streame
out of the Mountaine Aetna, as it had also done in      of ﬁre; and was a kind of melted
                                                        stone, gushing out of the sides of
former times, and burned part of the Territory of the the Mountaine.

Cataneans, that dwell at the Foot of Aetna, which is The ﬁre breaketh out of and
the highest Mountaine of all Sicily. From the last time Aetna, burneth the Fields of
                                                          Catana,
that the re brake out before, to this time, it is said to
bee fty yeeres. And it hath now broken out thrice in all, since Sicily was
inhabited by the Grecians. These were the things that came to passe this Winter.
And so ended the sixth yeere of this War, written by THVCYDIDES.

              4. THE FOVRTH BOOK OF THE
              HISTORY OF THVCYDIDES.
              The principall Contents.
The Athenians take and forti e Pylus in Laconia. The                  
Lacedaemonians, to recouer it, put ouer 400. of their best men into the Iland
Sphacteria: whom the Athenians, hauing ouercome the Lacedaemonian Fleet,
doe there besiege. The Athenians and Syracusians ght in the Streight of
Messana. Cleon engageth himselfe rashly to take or kill the Lacedaemonians in
Sphacteria within 20. dayes, and by good fortune performeth it. The Sedition
ceaseth in Corcyra. Nicias invadeth Peloponnesus. The Sicilians agreeing, take
from the Athenians their pretence of sayling vpon that Coast with their Fleet.
The Athenians take Nisaea, but faile of Megara. The ouerthrow of the
Athenians at Delium. The Cities on the Con nes of Thrace, vpon the comming
of Brasidas, revolt to the Lacedaemonians. Truce for a yeere. And this in three
yeeres more of the same Warre.

THE Spring following, when Corne beganne to bee THE SEVENTH YEERE.
in the eare, tenne Gallies of Syracusae, and as many of
Locris, went to Messena in Sicily, called in by the       Messina.
Citizens themselues, and tooke it; and Messana
reuolted from the Athenians. This was done by the         Messana reuolteth from the
practice chie y of the Syracusians, that saw the place Athenians.
to bee commodious for inuasion of Sicily, and feared lest the Athenians some
time or other hereafter, making it the seate of their Warre, might         
come with greater forces into Sicily, and inuade them from thence; but partly
also of the Locrians, as being in hostility with the Rhegians, & desirous to make
Warre vpon them on both sides. The Locrians had           [...]
now also entred the Lands of the Rhegians with their
whole power; both because they would hinder them from assisting the

Messenians and because they were sollicited therevnto by the banished men of
Rhegium, that were with them. For they of Rhegium Rheggi .         ●

had beene long in Sedition, and were vnable for the
present to giue them Battell, for which cause, they the rather also now inuaded
them. And after they had wasted the Countrey, the Locrians withdrew their
Land-forces, but their Gallies lay still at the guard of Messana, and more were
setting forth, to lye in the same Harbour, to make the Warre on that side.

About the same time of the Spring, and before Corne The 〈◊〉 inuasion of 〈◊〉.
was at full growth, the Peloponnesians and their
Confederates, vnder the Conduct of Agis the sonne of Archidamus, King of the
Lacedaemonians, inuaded Attica, and there lay and wasted the Countrey about.

And the Athenians sent fortie Gallies into Sicily, the The Athenians send forty
same which they had prouided before for that             Gallies into Sicily.

purpose, and with them the other two Generals, Eurymedon & Sophocles. For
Pythodorus, who was the third in that Commission, was arriued in Sicily before.
To these they gaue commandment also, to take order Whome to put in by the way at
as they went by, for the state of those Corcyraeans that Corcyra, being full 〈◊〉 sedition,
                                                         the Outlawes holding the Field,
were in the Citie, and were pillaged by the Outlawes and the Commons, the Citie.
in the Mountaine: and threescore Gallies of the
Peloponnesians were gone out, to take part with those in the Mountaine; who▪
because there was a great Famine in the Citie, thought they might easily be
masters of that State. To Demosthenes also (who euer since his returne out of
Acarnania had liued priuately) they gaue authority, at his owne request, to make
vse of the same Gallies, if hee thought good so to doe, about Peloponnesus.

As they sayled by the Coast of Laconia, and had          Demosthenes vrgeth to put 〈◊〉 at
intelligence that the Peloponnesian Fleet was at         Pylus.

Corcyra already, Eurymedon and Sophocles hasted to Corcyra; but
Demosthenes willed them to put in rst at Pylus, and when they had done what
was requisite there, then to proceed in their Voyage. But whilest they denyed to
doe it, the Fleet was driuen into Pylus by a Tempest that then arose 

by chance. And presently Demosthenes required              [...]
them to forti e the place, alledging that hee came with
them for no other purpose, and shewing how there was great 〈…〉 Timber and
Stone, and that the place it selfe was naturally strong, and desart, both it, and a
great deale of the Countrey about. For it lyeth from Sparta about ●00. Furlongs,
in the Territory that belonging once to the Messenians, is called by che
Lacedaemonians, Coryphasion. But they answered him, that there were many
desart Promontories in Peloponnesus, if they were minded to put the Citie to
charges in taking them in. But there appeared vnto         The commodity of Pylus.
Demosthenes a great di erence betweene this place
and other places; because there was heere a Hauen, and the Messenians, the
ancient Inhabitants thereof, speaking the same language the Lacedaemonians
did, would both be able to annoy them much by excursions thence, and be also
faithfull Guardians of the place.

When hee could not preuaile, neither with the Generals, nor with the Souldiers,
hauing also at last communicated the same to the Captaines of Companies, hee
gaue it ouer, till at last, the weather not seruing to bee gone, there came vpon the
Souldiers lying idle, a desire, occasioned by dissention, The Athenians build the Fort of
to Wall in the place of their owne accord. And falling Pylus.
in hand with the worke, they performed it, not with yron tooles to hew stone,
but picked out such stones as they thought good, and afterwards placed them as
they would seuerally t. And for Morter, where it needed, for want of Vessels,
they carried it on their backes, with their bodies enclining forward, so as it might
best lye, and their hands clapsed behinde, to stay it from falling; making all
possible haste to preuent the Lacedaemonians, and to nish the most assaileable
parts, before they came to succour it. For the greatest part of the place was strong
by nature, and needed no fortifying at all.

The Lacedaemonians were that day celebrating a certaine Holiday, and when
they heard the newes, did set lightly by it; conceiuing, The Lacedaemonians at home
that whensoeuer it should please them to goe thither, regard the taking of Pylus but
                                                         lightly.
they should nde them either already gone or easily

take the place by force. Somewhat also they were retarded, by reason that their
Armie was in Attica. The Athenians hauing in sixe dayes nished the 
Wall to the Land, and in the places where was most need left Demosthenes with
  ue Gallies to defend it, and with the rest, hastend on in their course for
Corcyra, and Sicily.

The Peloponnesians that were in Attica, when they           The Lacedemonians army, and
were aduertised of the taking of Pylus, returned            〈◊〉 take it more to heart.

speedily home. For the Lacedaemonians, and Agis their King, tooke this accident
of Pylus to concerne their owne particular. And the inuasion was withall so
early, (Corne being yet greene) that the most of them were scanted with victuall;
the Armie was also much troubled with the weather, which was colder then for
the season; so as for many reasons it fell out, that they returned sooner now, then
at other times they had done; and this inuasion was the shortest; for they
continued in Attica, in all but fteene dayes.

About the same time Simonides an Athenian                The Athenians take Eion in
Commander, hauing drawne a few Athenians                 Thrace, and 〈◊〉 it againe.

together out of the Garrisons, and a number of the Confederates of those parts,
tooke the Citie of Eion in Thrace, a Colonie of the Mend●eans, that was their
Enemie, by Treason; but was presently againe driuen out by the Chalcideans and
Bottiaeans, that came to succour it, and lost many of his Souldiers.

When the Peloponnesians were returned out of Attica, they of the Citie of
Sparta, and of other the next neighbouring Townes, The Lacedaemonians by Sea
went presently to the ayde of Pylus; but the rest of the and Land, seeke to recouer Pylus.
Lacedaemonians came slowlier on, as beeing newly come from the former
Expedition. Neuerthelesse they sent about, to the Cities of Peloponnesus, to
require their assistance with all speed at Pylus; and also to their threescore Gallies
that were at Corcyra. Which, transported ouer the Isthmus of Leucas▪ arriued at
Pylus, vnseene of the Athenian Gallies lying at Zacynthus. And by this time their
Armie of foot was also there. Whilest the                   Zante.
Peloponnesian Gallies were comming toward Pylus,

Demosthenes sent two Gallies secretly to Eurymedon Demosthenes sends to call backe
and the Athenian Fleet at Zacynthus, in hall haste, to the ﬂeete to helpe him.
tell them, that they must come presently to him, for as much as the place was in
danger to bee lost. And according as Demosthenes his message imported, so the
Fleet made haste. The Lacedaemonians in the meane time prepared 
themselues to assault the Fort both by Sea and Land; hoping easily to winne it▪
beeing a thing built in haste, and not many men             The Lacedaemonians prepare
within it. And because they expected the comming of themselues to assault the Fort.
the Athenian Fleet from Zacynthus, they had a purpose, if they tooke not the
Fort before, to barre vp the entries of the Harbour. For the Iland called
Sphacteria, lying iust before, and very neere to the        The scituation of the Ile
place, maketh the Hauen safe, and the entries straight; Sphacteria.
one of them▪ neerest to Pylus, and to the Athenian Forti cation, admitting
passage for no more but two Gallies in Front; and the other which lyeth against
the other part of the Continent, for not aboue eight or nine. The Iland, by
beeing desart, was all Wood, and vntrodden, in bignesse about fteene Furlongs
ouer. Therefore they determined with their Gallies thicke set, and with the
Beake-heads outward, to stop vp the entries of the Hauen. And because they
feared the Iland, lest the Athenians putting men into it, should make Warre
vpon them from thence, they carried ouer men of Armes into the same, and
placed others likewise along the shoare of the Continent. For by this meanes the
Athenians at their comming should nde the Iland their Enemie, and no meanes
of landing in the Continent. For the Coast of Pylus it selfe, without these two
entries, being to the Sea harbourlesse, would a ord them no place from whence
to set forth to the ayde of their fellowes. And they, in all probability, might by
siege, without battell by Sea, or other danger, winne the place, seeing there was
no prouision of Victuall within it, and that the Enemie tooke it but on short
preparation. Hauing thus resolued, they put ouer into The Lacedaemonians put ouer
the Iland their men of Armes, out of euery Band by          420 men of Armes, besides their
                                                            seruants into the Ile Sphacteria,
Lot; some also had beene sent ouer before by turnes; ouer against Pylus.
but they which went ouer now last, and were left
there, were 420, besides the Helotes that were with them. And their Captaine
was Epitadas the sonne of Molobrus,

Demosthenes, when he saw the Lacedaemonians bent Demosthenes prepareth himselfe
to assault him, both from their Gallies, and with their to keepe the Lacedaemonians
                                                           from landing on the shoare.
Armie by Land, prepared also to defend the place And
when hee had drawne vp his Gallies, all that were left him, vnto the Land, hee
placed them athwart the Fort, and armed the Mariners that belonged to them,
with Bucklers. though bad ones, and for the greatest part made of 
Osiers. For they had no meanes in a desart place to prouide themselues of
Armes. Those they had, they tooke out of a Peiraticall Boate, of thirty Oares,
and a * Light-horseman of the Messenians, which            * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
came by by chance. And the men of Armes of the
Messenians were about 40. which hee made vse of amongst the rest. The greatest
part therfore, both of armed and vnarmed, he placed on the parts of the Wall
toward the Land, which were of most strength, and commanded them to make
good the place against the Land-forces, if they assaulted it; and hee himselfe,
with 60. men of Armes, chosen out of the whole number, and a few Archers,
came forth of the Fort to the Sea-side, in that part where he most expected their
landing. Which part was of troublesome accesse, and stonie, and lay to the wide
Sea. But because their Wall was there the weakest, he thought they would be
drawne to aduenture for that. For neither did the Athenians thinke they should
euer haue beene mastred with Gallies, which caused them to make the place to
the Sea-ward the lesse strong; and if the Peloponnesians should by force come to
land, they made no other account but the place would bee lost. Comming
therefore in this part to the very brinke of the Sea, hee put in order his men of
Armes, and encouraged them with words to this e ect.

 4.1. THE ORATION OF DEMOSTHENES to his
 Souldiers.
 YOV that participate with mee in the present danger, let not any of you in this
 extremity, goe about to seeme wise, and reckon euery perill that now besetteth
 vs; but let him rather come vp to the Enemie with little circumspection, and
 much hope, and looke for his safety by that. For things that are come once to a

 pinch, as these are, admit not debate, but a speedy hazard. And yet if wee
 stand it out, and betray not our aduantages with feare of the number of the
 Enemie, I see well enough, that most things are with vs. For I make account,
 the di cultie of their landing makes for vs: which, as long as wee abide our
 selues, will helpe vs, but if wee retire, though the place be di cult, yet when
 there is none to impeach them, they will land well enough. For whilest they
 are in their Gallies, they are most easie to be fought withall; and in their
 disbarking being but on equall termes, their number is not greatly 
 to bee feared; for though they bee many, yet they must ght but by few, for
 want of roome to ght in. And for an Armie to haue oddes by Land, is
 another matter, then when they are to ght from Gallies, where they stand in
 need of so many accidents to fall out opportunely from the Sea. So that I
 thinke their great di culties doe but set them euen with our small number.
 And for you, that bee Athenians, and by experience of disbarking against
 others, know, that if a man stand it out, and doe not, for feare of the sowsing
 of a Waue, or the menacing approach of a Gallie, giue backe of himselfe, hee
 can neuer bee put backe by violence; I expect that you should keepe your
 ground, and by ghting it out vpon the very edge of the water, preserue both
 your selues and the Fort.

Vpon this exhortation of Demosthenes, the Athenians The Athenians take heart.
tooke better heart, and went downe, and arranged
themselues close by the Sea. And the Lacedaemonians The Lacedaemonians assault the
came and assaulted the Fort, both with their Armie by Fort by Land, and seeke to force
                                                        landing from their Gallies.
Land, and with their Fleet, consisting of three and
fortie Gallies, in which was Admirall, Thrasymelidas, the sonne of Cratesicles, a
Spartan; and he made his approach where Demosthenes had before expected
him. So the Athenians were assaulted on both sides, both by Sea and by Land.

The Peloponnesians diuiding their Gallies into small numbers, because they
could not come neere with many at once, and resting betweene, assailed them by
turnes; vsing all possible valour, and mutuall encouragement, to put the
Athenians backe, and gaine the Fort.

Most eminent of all the rest was Brasidas: For hauing The valour of Brasidas.
the Command of a Gallie, and seeing other Captaines
of Gallies, and Steeresmen (the place beeing hard of accesse) when there
appeared sometimes possibility of putting ashoare, to bee a raid, and tender of
breaking their Gallies, hee would cry out vnto them, saying, They did not well,
for sparing of Wood, to let the Enemie fortiﬁe in their Countrey. And to the
Lacedaemonians hee gaue aduice, to force landing with the breaking of their
Gallies; and prayed the Confederates, that in requitall of many beneﬁts, they
would not sticke to bestow their Gallies at this time vpon the Lacedaemonians, and
running them ashoare, to vse any meanes whatsoeuer to Land, and to 
get into their hands both the Men in the Ile, and the Fort.

Thus hee vrged others; and hauing compelled the Steeresman of his owne Gallie
to runne her ashore, hee came to the * Ladders, but       * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, Ladders or
attempting to get downe, was by the Athenians put         Plankes to disbarke by      ▪

                                                          Brasidas swouneth by reason of
backe, and after he had receiued many wounds,             his wounds.
swouned, and falling vpon the * ledges of the Gallie,
his Buckler tumbled ouer into the Sea, which brought * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉. For the       ●▪

to Land, the Athenians tooke vp, and vsed afterwards place on the outside of the Gally
                                                          for Souldiers to stand and ﬁght
in the Trophie which they set vp for this assault. Also on, betweene the Rowers and the
the rest endeauoured with much courage to come a          water.

land; but the place being ill to land in, and the
Athenians not boudging, they could not doe it. So that at this time Fortune
came so much about, that the Athenians fought from the Land, Laconique
Land, against Lacedaemonians in Gallies; and the Lacedaemonians from their
Gallies, fought against the Athenians, to get landing in their owne now hostile
Territory. For at that time there was an opinion farre spred, that these were
rather Land-men, and expert in a Battell of Foot; and that in maritime and
nauall actions the other excelled.

This day then, and a part of the next, they made               The Lacedaemonians, after
sundry assaults, and after that gaue ouer. And the             three dayes assault, without
                                                               eﬀect, giue ouer that course.
third day they sent out some Gallies to Asine, for

Timber, wherewith to make Engines; hoping with Engines to take that part of
the Wall that looketh into the Hauen; which, though it were higher, yet the
landing to it was easier.

In the meane time arriue the fortie Athenian Gallies The Athenian Fleet returne
from Zacynthus; for there were ioyned with them           from Zacynthus, to ayde the
                                                          Athenians in Pylus.
certaine Gallies of the Garrison of Naupactus, and
foure of Chios. And when they saw both the Continent and the Iland full of
men of Armes, and that the Gallies that were in the Hauen would not come
foorth, not knowing where to cast Anchor, they sayled for the present to the Ile
Prote, being neere, and desart, and there lay for that night.

The next day, after they had put themselues in order, they put to Sea againe,
with purpose to o er them Battell, if the other would come foorth into the wide
Sea against them, if not, to enter the Hauen vpon them. But the           
Peloponnesians neither came out against them, nor had stopped vp the entries of
the Hauen, as they had before determined, but lying still on the shoare, manned
out their Gallies, and prepared to ght, if any entred, in the Hauen it selfe,
which was no small one. The Athenians vnderstanding this, came in violently
vpon them, at both the mouths of the Hauen▪ and          The Athenians ouercome
                                                         Peloponnesian ﬂeete in the
most of the Lacedaemonian Gallies, which were            Hauen of Pylus
already set out, and opposed them, they charged, and
put to ight. And in following the chase, which was but short, they brake many
of them, and tooke ue, whereof one with all her men in her; and they fell in
also, with them that ed to the shoare; and the Gallies which were but in
manning out, were torne and rent, before they could put o from the Land.
Others they tyed to their owne Gallies, and towed them away empty. Which the
Lacedaemonians perceiuing, and extremely grieued with the losse, because their
fellowes were heereby intercepted in the Iland, came in with their ayde from the
Land, and entring armed into the Sea, tooke hold of the Gallies with their hands,
to haue pulled them backe againe; euery one conceiuing the businesse to proceed
the worse, wherein himselfe was not present. So there arose a great a ray about
the Gallies, and such as was contrary to the manner of them both. For the

Lacedaemonians out of eagrenesse, and out of feare, did (as one may say)
nothing else but make a Sea- ght from the Land; and the Athenians, who had
the victory, and desired to extend their present fortune to the vtmost, made a
Land- ght from their Gallies. But at length, hauing wearied and wounded each
other, they fell asunder; and the Lacedaemonians recouered all their Gallies, saue
onely those which were taken at the rst onset. When they were on both sides
retired to their Campes, the Athenians erected a Trophie, deliuered to the
Enemie their dead, and possessed the wrecke, and immediately went round the
Iland with their Gallies▪ keeping watch vpon it, as       The Athenians getting the
                                                          victory beseege the men cut oﬀ
hauing intercepted the men within it. The
                                                          from the army, in the Iland.
Peloponnesians in the meane time, that were in the
Continent, and were by this time assembled there with their succours from all
parts of Peloponnesus, remained vpon the place at Pylus.

As soone as the newes of what had passed was related at Sparta, they 
thought t, in respect the losse was great, to send the Magistrates downe to the
Campe, to determine, vpon view of the state of their The Magistrates of Sparta come
present a aires there, what they thought requisite to to view the state of the Campe,
                                                        and conclude these to send to
be done. These, when they saw there was no              Athens about peace.
possibility to relieue their men, and were not willing
to put them to the danger either of su ering by Famine, or of being forced by
multitude, concluded amongst themselues, to take Truce with the Athenian
Commanders, as farre as concerned the particulars of Pylus, if they also would
bee content, and to send Ambassadours to Athens,        Truce betweene the Armies, till
about agreement, and to endeuour to fetch o their Ambassadours might be sent to
                                                        Athens.
men as soone as they could. The Athenian
Commanders accepting the proposition, the Truce was made, in this manner.

 4.1. The Articles of the Truce.
 THAT the Lacedaemonians should deliuer vp, not onely those Gallies
 wherein they fought, but also bring to Pylus, and put into the Athenians

 hands, whatsoeuer Vessels of the * long forme of       * Out of this and other places
 building were any where else in Laconia.               i● appeares, that the shipping
                                                        of those times was of two formes,
                                                        long and round The long,
 That they should not make any assault vpon the         which principally vsed the
 Fort, neither by Sea nor Land. That the Athenians      Oare, serued for the Warres;
                                                        the round, which vsed onely the
 should permit the Lacedaemonians that were in the      saile, serued for Merchants vses
 Continent, to send ouer to those in the Iland, a       and transportation of
                                                        prouision. Of the ﬁrst sort were
 portion of ground corne, agreed on, to wit, to euery   all Gallies▪ whether of one,
 one two Attique * Choenickes of Meale, and two *       two, three, or more 〈◊〉 of Oares;
                                                        of the latter were the Ships
 Cotyles of Wine, and a piece of Flesh; and to euery    called 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
 of their seruants halfe that quantitie.
                                                        * a Choenix▪ a measure of
                                                        about three pintes of ours.
 That they should send this, the Athenians looking
 on, and not send ouer any Vessell by stealth.          * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, a quarter
                                                        of a Choenix.

 That the Athenians should neuerthelesse continue garding of the Iland,
 prouided that they landed not in it; and should not invade the Peloponnesian
 Armie neither by Land nor Sea.

 That if eyther side transgressed in any part thereof, the truce was then
 immediately to bee voyd, otherwise to hold good till the returne of the
 Lacedaemonian Ambassadours from Athens.

 That the Athenians should convoy them in a Gallie vnto Athens, and backe.
 That at their returne the Truce should end, and the Athenians should restore
 them their Gallies, in as good estate as they had receiued them.

Thus was the Truce made, and the Gallies were deliuered to the  
Athenians, to the number of about threescore: and the Ambassadours were sent
away; who arriuing at Athens, said as followeth.

4.1. THE ORATION OF THE
LACEDAEMONIAN Ambassadours.
MEN of Athens, the Lacedaemonians haue sent vs hither, concerning our
men in the Iland, to see if wee can perswade you to such a course, as being
most pro table for you, may in this misfortune, be the most honourable for
vs, that our present condition is capable of. We will not be longer in discourse
then standeth with our custome, being the * fashion * Breuity of speech was so
with vs, where few words su ce, there indeed not to customary and naturall to the
                                                        Laconians, that it grew to a
vse many; but yet to vse more, when the occasion        prouerbe.
requireth that by words wee should make plaine that
which is to bee done in actions of importance. But the words we shall vse, wee
pray you to receiue, not with the minde of an Enemie, nor as if wee went
about to instruct you, as men ignorant, but for a remembrance to you, of
what you know, that you may deliberate wisely therein. It is now in your
power to assure your present good fortune with reputation, holding what you
haue, with the addition of honour and glory besides; and to auoyd that which
befalleth men vpon extraordinary successe, who through hope, aspire to
greater fortune, because the fortune they haue already, came vnhoped for.
Whereas they that haue felt many changes of both fortunes, ought indeed to
bee most suspicious of the good. So ought your Citie, and ours especially,
vpon experience, in all reason to bee. Know it, by seeing this present
misfortune falne on vs, who being of greatest dignity of all the Grecians, come
to you, to aske that, which before wee thought chiefely in our owne hands to
giue. And yet wee are not brought to this through weakenesse, nor through
insolence vpon addition of strength, but because it succeeded not with the
power wee had, as we thought it should which may as well happen to any
other, as to our selues. So that you haue no reason to conceiue, that for your
power, and purchases, fortune also must be therefore alwaies yours. Such wise
men as safely reckon their prosperity in the account of things doubtfull, doe
most wisely also addresse themselues towards aduersity; and not thinke that

Warre will so farre follow, and no further, as one shall please more or lesse to
take it in hand; but rather so farre as fortune shall leade it. Such men also
seldome miscarrying, because they bee not puft vp with the con dence of
successe, choose then principally to giue ouer, when they are in their better
fortune. And so it will bee good for you, men of Athens, to doe 
with vs; and not, if reiecting our aduice, you chance to miscarry (as many
wayes you may) to haue it thought hereafter that all your present successes
were but meere fortune.

Whereas, on the contrary, it is in your hands, without danger, to leaue a
reputation to posterity both of strength and wisedome. The Lacedaemonians
call you to a Peace, and end of the Warre, giuing you peace, and alliance, and
much other friendship and mutuall familiarity, requiring for the same, onely
those their men that are in the Iland; though also we thinke it better for both
sides, not to try the chance of Warre; Whether it fall out that by some occasion
of safety o ered, they escape by force, or being expugned by siege, should be
more in your power then they be. For wee are of this mind, that great hatred is
most safely canceld, not when one that hauing beaten his enemy, and gotten
much the better in the Warre, brings him through necessity to take an oath,
and to make peace on vnequall termes; but when hauing it in his power,
lawfully so to doe, if he please, he ouercome him likewise in goodnesse, and
contrary to what he expects, be reconciled to him on moderate conditions.
For in this case, his enemy being obliged, not to seeke reuenge, as one that had
beene forced, but to requite his goodnesse, will, for shame, be the more
enclined to the conditions agreed on. And naturally, to those that relent of
their owne accord, men giue way reciprocally, with content; but against the
arrogant, they will hazard all, euen when in their owne iudgements they be
too weake. But for vs both, if euer it were good to agree, it is surely so at this
present, and before any irreparable accident be interposed. Whereby wee
should be compelled besides the common, to beare you a particular eternall
hatred, and you be depriued of the commodities we now o er you. Let vs be
reconciled while matters stand vndecided, and whilst you haue gained
reputation, and our friendship, and we not su ered dishonour, and but

 indi erent losse. And we shall not onely our selues preferre Peace before
 Warre, but also giue a cessation of their miseries to all the rest of the Grecians,
 who will acknowledge it rather from you, then vs. For they make Warre, not
 knowing whether side begun; but if an end be made, (which is now for the
 most part in your owne hands) the thankes will bee yours.

 And by decreeing the Peace, you may make the Lacedaemonians your sure
 friends, in as much as they call you to it, and are therein not forced, but
 grati ed. Wherein consider how many commodities are like to ensue, for if we
 and you goe one way, you know the rest of Greece, being inferior 
 to vs, * will honour vs in the highest degree. Thus       * 〈…〉 Greece 〈…〉 Athenians, to
 spake the Lacedaemonians, thinking that in times          tyrannize it.

 past, the Athenians had coueted Peace, and been hindered of it by them, and
 that being now oﬀered, they would gladly accept of it.

But they, hauing these men intercepted in the Iland, thought they might
compound at pleasure, and aspired to greater matters. To this, they were set on,
for the most part by Cleon, the sonne of Cleaenetus, a popular man, at that time,
and of greatest sway with the multitude. He perswaded them to giue this answer:

That they in the Iland ought ﬁrst to deliuer vp their Armes, and come themselues
to Athens, and when they should be there, if the          The insolent demaund of the
Lacedaemonians would make restitution of Nisaea,          people of 〈◊〉 by the aduice of
                                                          Cleon.
and Pegae, and Traezen, and Achaia, (the which they
had not won in Warre, but had receiued by former Treaty, when the Athenian,
being in distresse, and at that time, in more need of Peace then now, yeelded
them vp into their hands) then they should haue their men againe, and peace
should be made, for as long as they both should thinke good.

To this answer, they replyed nothing, but desired that The Lacedaemonians desire to
Commissioners might be chosen to treat with them, speake before a priuate
                                                       Committee.
who by alternate speaking, and hearing, might quietly
make such an agreement, as they could perswade each other vnto. But then

Cleon came mightily vpon them, saying, he knew before, that they had no
honest purpose, and that the same was now manifest, in that they refused to
speake before the people, but sought to sit in consultation, onely with a few;
And willed them, if they had ought to say, that was reall, to speake it before them
all. But the Lacedaemonians nding, that although they had a mind to make
Peace with them, vpon this occasion of aduersity, yet it would not be t to
speake in it before the multitude, lest speaking, and not obtaining, they should
incurre * calumny with their Confederates, and seeing *
withall, that the Athenians would not grant what they Viz for buying Peace at the cost
sued for, vpon reasonable conditions, they went backe of    the Confederates subiection,
                                                         for the thing they durst not
againe without e ect.                                    propound before the people was
                                                        〈◊〉, that by the amity of these
Vpon their returne, presently the Truce at Pylus was at two great states the rest of Greece
                                                        would be forced to serueth 〈◊〉▪
an end, and the Lacedaemonians, according to            which they 〈…〉 their Oration, as
                                                        I haue noted before.
agreement, demanded restitution of their Gallies. But
                                                        The Ambassadors returne
the Athenians, laying to their charge, an assault made without eﬀect, and the Truce
vpon the Fort, contrary to the Articles,  endeth The Athenians cauill,
and other matters of no great importance, refused to and    keepe the Gallies of the
                                                        Lacedaemonians.
render them; standing vpon this, that it was said that
the accord should be voyd, vpon whatsoeuer the lest transgression of the same.
But the Lacedaemonians denying it, and protesting this detention of their
Gallies for an iniury, went their wayes, and betooke themselues to the Warre. So
the Warre at Pylus was on both sides renued with all The Warre at Pylus goes on.
their power.

The Athenians went euery day about the Iland with two Gallies, one going one
way, another, another way, and lay at Anchor about it euery night with their
whole Fleet, except on that part which lyeth to the open Sea, and that onely
when it was windy. From Athens also, there came a supply of thirty Gallies
more, to guard the Iland, so that they were in the whole threescore and ten. And
the Lacedaemonians made assaults vpon the Fort, and watched euery
opportunity that should present it selfe, to saue their men in the Iland.

Whilest these things passed, the Syracusians, and their The Syracusians and Athenians
Confederates in Sicily, adding to those Gallies that lay ﬁght in the straight betweene
                                                           Messana and Rhegium.
in Garrison at Messana, the rest of the Fleet which        Messana.
they had prepared, made Warre out of Messana,
instigated thereto, chie y, by the Locrians, as enemies to the Rhegians, (whose
Territory they had also inuaded with their whole forces by Land) and seeing the
Athenians had but a few Gallies present, and hearing that the greater number
which were to come to them, were employed in the siege of the * Iland, desired
to try with them a Battell by Sea; for if they could get * Sphacteria.
the better with their Nauie, they hoped, lying before
Rhegium, both with their Land-forces on the Field side, and with their Fleet by
Sea, easily to take it into their hands, and thereby strengthen their a aires. For
Rhegium a * Promontorie of Italy, and Messana in           * Rhegium, being a promontory,
Sicily lying neere together, they might both hinder the and deriued from 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉
                                                           〈◊〉 〈◊〉, which signiﬁes to breake,
Athenians from lying at Anchor there against them, makes it probable thatSicily was
and make themselues Masters of the Streight. This          once a part of Italy, and there
                                                           broken of by some Earthquake,
Streight is the Sea betweene Rhegium and Messana, but yet Scylla is neerer to Sicily
where Sicily is neerest to the Continent, and is that      then Rhegium is.
which is called * Charybdis, where Vlysses is said to      * Charybdis, here taken for the
haue passed through; which, for that it is very narrow, name of the whole strait, is but a
                                                           part neere to Messana, betweene
and because the Sea falleth in there, from two great       it and Pelorus, subiect to
maines, the Tyrrhene and Sicilian, and is rough, hath extraordinary agitation in
therefore not without good cause beene esteemed In stormy weather, but nothing i          ●

                                                           that it was, or was fared to be of
this Straight then, the Syracusians and        old.
their Confederates, with somewhat more then 30.            The Syracusians and 〈◊〉 ﬁght at
Gallies, were constrained in the later end of the day to Sea.
come to a Sea- ght, hauing bin drawne forth about
the passage of a certaine Boat, to vndertake 16. Gallies of Athens, and 8. of
Rhegium; and being ouercome by the Athenians, fell o with the losse of one
Gallie, and went speedily, each side to their own Campe at Messana, and
Rhegium; and the night ouertooke them in the action. After this the Locrians
departed out of the Territory of the Rhegians; and the Fleet of the Syracusians
and their Confederates came together to an Anchor at * Pelori●, and had their

Land-forces by them. But the Athenians and               * a 〈◊〉 of Sicily, hard by
Rhegians came vp to them, and nding their Gallies Messana.
empty of men, fell in amongst them, and by meanes of a Grapnel * cast into one
of their Gallies, they lost that Gallie, but the men     * cast in by the Souldiers on
swam out. Vpon this the Syracusians went aboard,         shore.

and whilest they were towed along the shore towards Messana, the Athenians
came vp to them againe and the Syracusians * opening themselues, charged rst,
and sunke another of their Gallies; so the Syracusians passed on to the Port of
Messana, hauing had the better in their passage by the shore, and in the Sea-
 ght, which were both together in such manner as is declared.

The Athenians, vpon newes that Camarina should by The Messanians warre on the
Archias and his complices bee betrayed to the             Citie of Naxus, and receiue a
                                                          great losse.
Syracusians, went thither. In the meane time the
Messanians with their whole power, by Land, and also with their Fleet, warred
on Naxus a * Chalcidique Citie, & their borderer. The * of those which were founded by
  rst day hauing forced the Naxians to retire within      the Chalcideans of Greece.

their Walls, they spoiled their elds; the next day they sent their Fleet about into
the Riuer Acesine, which spoiled the Countrey as it went vp the Riuer, & with
their Land-forces assaulted the City. In the meane time many of the Siculi,
Mountainers, came down to their assistance against the Messanians; which when
they of Naxus perceiued, they tooke heart, and encouraging themselues with an
opinion, that the Leontines, and all the rest of the Grecians their Confederates,
had come to succour them, sallied suddenly out of the Citie, and charged vpon
the Messanians, and put them to ight, with the slaughter of a thousand of their
Souldiers, the rest hardly escaping home. For the Barbarians fell vpon them, and
slew the most part of them in the High-wayes. And the Gallies that 
lay at Messana, not long after, diuided themselues, and went to their * seuerall
homes.                                                    * Syracusa and Locris.

Hereupon the Leontines and their Confederates,        The Athenians and Leontines
together with the Athenians, marched presently        attempt to take Messana.

against Messana, as being now weakned, and assaulted it, the Athenians with

their Fleet, by the Hauen; and the Land-forces, at the Wall to the Field. But the
Messanians, and certaine Locrians with Demoteles, who after this losse had
beene left there in Garrison, issuing forth, and falling suddenly vpon them, put a
great part of the Leontines Armie to ight, and slew many; but the Athenians,
seeing that, disbarked, and relieued them; and comming vpon the Messanians
now in disorder, chased them againe into the Citie. Then they erected a Trophie,
and put ouer to Rhegium. After this, the Grecians of Sicily warred one vpon
another, without the Athenians.

All this while the Athenians at Pylus besieged the        The Athenians are much
Lacedaemonians in the Iland; and the Armie of the         troubled to watch the Iland.

Peloponnesians in the Continent remained still vpon the place. This keeping of
Watch was exceeding painefull to the Athenians, in respect of the want they had,
both of Corne and Water; for there was no Well but one, and that was in the
Fort it selfe of Pylus, and no great one. And the greatest number turned vp the
grauell, and drunke such water as they were * like to * The water which is found by
 nde there. They were also scanted of roome for their digging in the Sea-sands is
                                                          commonly fresh, being strained,
Campe; and their Gallies not hauing place to ride in, and so purged of the saltnesse in
they were forced by turnes, some to stay ashore, and the passage of the water through
                                                          the sand, but not so good as
others to take their victuall, and lye o at Anchor. But further oﬀ from the Sea.
their greatest discouragement was, the time which
they had stayed there, longer then they had thought to haue done; for they
thought to haue famished them out in a few dayes, being in a desart Iland, and
hauing nothing to drinke but salt water. The cause        The shift of the Lacedaemonians
hereof were the Lacedaemonians, who had *                 to relieue the besieged with
                                                          victuall.
proclaimed that any man that would, should carry in
Meale, Wine, Cheese, and all other esculents necessary * to the people of the Countrey
                                                          about.
for a Siege, into the Iland, appointing for the same a
great reward of siluer: and if any Helote should carry in any thing, they promised
him liberty. Heereupon diuers with much danger, imported victuall; but
especially the Helotes, who putting o from all parts of Peloponnesus,
wheresoeuer they chanced to bee, came in at the parts of the Iland that lay to the
wide Sea. But they had a care aboue all, to take such a time as to bee 

brought in with the Wind. For when it blew from the Sea, they could escape the
watch of the Gallies easily. For they could not then lye round about the Iland at
Anchor. And the Helotes were nothing tender in putting ashoare▪ for they
ranne their Gallies on ground, valued at a price in money, and the men of Armes
also watched at all the landing places of the Iland. But as many as made attempt
when the weather was calme, were intercepted. There were also such as could
diue, that swam ouer into the Iland through the Hauen, drawing after them in a
string, Bottles lled with * Poppy, tempred with            * A medicine for hunger and
Honie, and pounded Lintseed: wherof some at the            thirst, not meate. Scholiastes.

  rst passed vnseene, but were afterwards watched. So that on either part they
vsed all possible art, one side to send ouer food, the other to apprehend those
that carried it.

The People of Athens being aduertised of the state of their Armie, how it was in
distresse, and that victuall was transported into the     The Athenians are angry, that
Iland, knew not what they should doe to it, and feared their Armie is detained so long
                                                          in the siege of the Iland.
lest Winter should ouertake them in their Siege;
fearing not onely that to prouide them of necessaries about Peloponnesus, and
in a desart place withall, would bee a thing impossible, but also that they should
be vnable to send forth so many things as were requisite, though it were
Summer; and againe, that the parts thereabout being without Harbour, there
would bee no place to lye at Anchor in against them, but that the Watch there
ceasing of it selfe, the men would by that meanes escape, or in some foule
weather bee carried away in the same Boats that brought them meate. But that
which they feared most, was, that the Lacedaemonians seemed to haue some
assurance of them already, because they sent no more to negotiate about them.
And they repented now, that they had not accepted of the Peace. But Cleon
knowing himselfe to be the man suspected for              Cleon to auoyd the enuie of
hindering the agreement, said, that they who brought hindering the peace, engageth
                                                          himselfe ere hee was aware, to
the newes, reported not the truth. Whereupon, they fetch those that were besieged in
that came thence, aduising them, if they would not        the Iland, home to Athens.

beleeue it, to send to view the estate of the Army, he
and Theogenes were chosen by the Athenians to view it. But when hee saw that

hee must of force eyther say as they said; whom hee before calumniated, o●
saying the contrary be proued a lyer▪ hee aduised the Athenians,               
seeing them enclined of themselues, to send thither greater forces, then they had
before thought to doe, that it was not t to send to view the place, nor to lose
their opportunity by delay, but if the report seemed vnto them to bee true, they
should make a voyage against those men, and glanced at Nicias the sonne of
Niceratus, then * Generall, vpon malice, and with          * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, The
language of reproach. Saying it was easie, if the          Magistrate to whose authority
                                                           was committed the leuying and
Leaders were men, to goe and take them there in the mustering of Souldiers.
Iland. And that himselfe, if hee had the Command,
would doe it. But Nicias, seeing the Athenians to bee Cleon vndertaketh to fetch those
in a kinde of tumult against Cleon, for that when hee in the Iland prisoners to Athens.
thought it so easie a matter, hee did not presently put it in practice, & seeing also
he had vpbraided him, willed him to take what strength hee would, that they
could giue him, and vndertake it. Cleon supposing at rst that he gaue him this
leaue but in words, was ready to accept it; but when he knew he would giue him
the authority in good earnest, then he shrunke backe, and said, that not he, but
Nicias was Generall; being now indeed afraid, and hoping that he durst not haue
giuen ouer the o ce to him. But then, Nicias againe bade him doe it, and gaue
ouer his command to him, for so much as concerned Pylus, and called the
Athenians to witnesse it. They (as is the fashion of the multitude) the more
Cleon declined the Voyage, and went backe from his Cleon taken at his word, would
word, pressed Nicias so much the more to resigne his * haue declined the employment,
                                                           but cannot
power to him, and cryed out vpon Cleon to goe.
Insomuch as not knowing how to disengage himselfe * his power to leuy Souldiers.
of his word, hee vndertooke the Voyage, and stood forth, saying, that he feared
not the Lacedaemonians, and that hee would not carry any man with him out of
the Citie, but onely the Lemnians and Imbrians that then were present, and
those Targettieres that were come to them from Aenus, and 400. Archers out of
other places, and with these, he said, added to the Souldiers that were at Pylus
already, he would within twenty dayes, either fetch away the Lacedaemonians
aliue, or kill them vpon the place.

This vaine speech moued amongst the Athenians some laughter,            and was heard
                                                           A glorious boast of Cleon well
with great content of the wiser sort. For of two           taken.
bene ts, the one must needs fall out; either to be rid
of Cleon, (which was their greatest hope) or if they were deceiued in that, then
to get those Lacedaemonians into their hands. Now when he had 
dispatched with the Assembly, and the Athenians had by their voices decreed
him the Voyage, he ioyned vnto himselfe Demosthenes, one of the Commanders
at Pylus, and presently put to Sea. Hee made choice of Demosthenes for his
Companion, because he heard that hee also, of himselfe, had a purpose to set his
Souldiers a land in the Ile. For the Armie hauing su ered much by the
straightnesse of the place, and being rather the besieged, then the besieger, had a
great desire to put the matter to the hazard of a Battell: con rmed therein the
more, for that the Iland had been burnt. For hauing beene for the most part
wood, and (by reason it had lyen euer desart) without The reason why Demosthenes
path, they were before the more afraid, and thought it durst not land in the Iland to
                                                           subdue the besieged by ﬁght.
the aduantage of the Enemie; for assaulting them out
of sight, they might annoy a very great Armie that should o er to come aland.
For their errours, being in the Wood, and their preparation could not so well
haue beene discerned: whereas all the faults of their owne Armie should haue
beene in sight. So that the Enemy might haue set vpon them suddenly, in what
part soeuer they had pleased; because the onset had beene in their owne election.
Againe, if they should by force come vp to ght with the Lacedaemonians at
hand in the thicke Woods, the fewer, and skilfull of the wayes, hee thought
would bee too hard for the many and vnskilfull. Besides, their owne Armie
beeing great, it might receiue an ouerthrow before they could know of it,
because they could not see where it was needfull to relieue one another.

These things came into his head, especially from the losse hee receiued in
Aetolia. Which in part also happened, by occasion of the Woods. But the *
Souldiers, for want of roome, hauing beene forced to * The Athenian Souldiers.
put in at the outside of the Iland, to dresse their
dinners with a watch before them, and one of them hauing set re on the Wood,
it burnt on by little and little, and the Wind afterwards rising, the most of it was

burnt before they were aware. By this accident,           The wood of the Iland burnt by
Demosthenes the better discerning that the                accident.

Lacedaemonians were more then hee had inagined, hauing before, by victuall
sent vnto them, thought them not so many, did now prepare himselfe for the
Enterprize, as a matter deseruing the Athenians vtmost care, and as hauing
better commodity of landing in the Iland, then before he had; and 
both sent for the forces of such Confederates as were neere, and put in
readinesse euery other needfull thing. And Cleon,         Cleon arriueth at Pylus.
who had sent a Messenger before to signi e his
comming, came himselfe also with those forces which he had required, vnto
Pylus. When they were both together, rst they sent a Herald to the Campe in
the Continent, to know if they would command those in the Iland to deliuer vp
themselues and their Armes without battell, to be held with easie imprisonment,
till some agreement were made touching the maine Warre. Which when they
refused, the Athenians for one day held their hands, but the next day, hauing put
aboord vpon a few Gallies, all their men of Armes, they put o in the night, and
landed a little before day on both sides of the Iland,    The Athenians inuade the
both from the Mayne, and from the Hauen, to the           Iland:

number of about 800 men of Armes, and marched vpon high speed towards the
formost watch of the Iland. For thus the Lacedaemonians lay quartered. In this
formost watch were about thirty men of Armes. The middest, and euenest part
of the Iland, and about the water, was kept by Epitadas their Captaine, with the
greatest part of the whole number. And another part of them, which were not
many, kept the last guard towards Pylus, which place to the Sea-ward was on a
Cli e, and least assaileable by Land. For there was also a certaine Fort which was
old, and made of chosen, not of hewne stones, which they thought would stand
them in stead in case of violent retreat. Thus they were quartered. Now the
Athenians presently killed those of the formost guard, And kill those that were in the
(which they so ran to) in their Cabins, and as they       ﬁrst and most remote watch
                                                          from Pylus.
were taking Armes. For they knew not of their
landing, but thought those Gallies, had come thither to Anchor in the night,
according to custome, as they had been wont to doe. Assoone as it was morning,
the * rest of the Army also landed, out of somewhat       * Viz the light-armed.

more then 70 Gallies, euery one with such Armes as
he had; being all that rowed▪ (except only the *        * Thalamij. There were three
                                                        rankes of 〈◊〉 amongst the
Thalamij) eight hundred Archers; Targuetiers as
                                                        Athenians, the vppermost called
many; all the Messenians that came to aide them, and Thranitae, the second Zygitae,
as many of them besides, as held any place about        and the ast Thalami ae, or
                                                                      ●            ●

                                                        Thalamij. In the Gally called a
Pylus, except onely the Garrison of the Fort it selfe▪ Bir me, there were no
                                                                  ●

Demosthenes then disposing his Army by two              Ze gi    ●    , in a 〈◊〉 were all 3.
                                                                      ●●●

                                                        rankes, in a Quadrireme and
hundred, and more in a company, and in  vpwards, all the middle rankes
some lesse, at certaine distances, seazed on all the    were Zenguae: onely the
                                                        vppermost were Thranitae, and
higher grounds, to the end that the enemies             〈…〉 Thalamitae.
compassed about on euery side, might the lesse know
what to doe, or against what part to set themselues in The Athenians diuide
battel, and be subiect to the shot of the multitude     themselues into many troopes,
                                                        against the maine body of the
from euery part; and when they should make head         Lacedaemonian Souldiers.
against those that fronted them, be charged behind;
and when they should turne to those that were opposed to their ancks, be
charged at once both behind and before. And which way soeuer they marched,
the light-armed, and such as were meanliest prouided of Armes, followed them
at the backe, with Arrowes, Darts, Stones, and Slings, who haue courage enough
afarre o , and could not be charged, but would ouercome ying, and also presse
the enemies when they should retyre. With this designe, Demosthenes, both
intended his landing at rst, and afterwards ordered his forces accordingly in the
action. Those that were about Epitadas, who were the The ﬁght betweene the
greatest part of those in the Iland, when they saw that Athenians, and the
                                                        Lacedaemonians, in the middle
the formost guard was slaine, and that the Army         of the Iland.
marched towards them, put themselues in array, and
went towards the men of Armes of the Athenians, with intent to charge them;
for these were opposed to them in front, and the light-armed Souldiers on their
  ancks, and at their backs. But they could neither come to ioyne with them, nor
any way make vse of their * skill. For both the light-  * The skill of ﬁghting, a
armed Souldiers kept them o , with shot from either standing ﬁght, was thought a
                                                        peculiar vertue of the
side, and the men of Armes aduanced not. Where the Lacedaemonians, as the Sea-
light-armed Souldiers approached neerest, they were

driuen backe; but returning, they charged them             ﬁght was thought to the
                                                           Athenians.
afresh, being men armed lightly, and that easily got
out of their reach by running, especially the ground being vneasie, and rough, by
hauing been formerly desert; so that the Lacedaemonians in their Armour, could
not follow them. Thus for a little while they skirmished one against another, a
farre o . But when the Lacedaemonians were no longer able to run out after
them, where they charged, these light-armed Souldiers seeing them lesse earnest
in chasing them, and taking courage chie y from their sight, as being many times
their number, and hauing also been vsed to them so much, as not to thinke them
now so dangerous as they had done, for that they had not receiued so much hurt
at their hands, as their subdued mindes, because they were to ght 
against the Lacedaemonians, had at their rst landing pre-iudged, contemned
them, and with a great cry ran all at once vpon them, casting Stones, Arrowes,
and Darts, as to euery man came next to hand. Vpon this cry, and assault, they
were much terri ed, as not accustomed to such kind of ght; and withall a great
dust of the woods lately burnt, mounted into the ayre, so that by reason of the
Arrowes, and Stones, that together with the dust ew from such a multitude of
men, they could hardly see before them. Then the battell grew sore on the
Lacedaemonians side, for their * Iackes now gaue way * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉. A kind of
to the Arrowes, and the Darts that were throwne,           quilted Armour, or of Stuﬀe
                                                           close beaten like
                                                                       ●●      lt.
stucke broken in them, so as they could not handle
themselues, as neither seeing before them, nor hearing any direction giuen them,
for the greater noyse of the enemy; but (danger being on all sides) were hopelesse
to saue themselues vpon any side by ghting. In the end, many of them being
now wounded, for that they could not shift their ground, they made their retreat
in close order, to the last guard of the Iland, and to the watch that was there.
When they once gaue ground, then were the light-armed Souldiers much more
con dent then before, and pressed vpon them with a mighty noyse. And as
many of the Lacedaemonians as they could intercept in their retreat, they slew;
but the most of them recouered the Fort, and together The Lacedaemonians retire to
with the watch of the same, put themselues in order the Fort, where the last guard
                                                           was placed.
to defend it in all parts that were subiect to assault.
The Athenians following, could not now encompasse and hemme them in, for

the strong situation of the place, but assaulting them in the face, sought onely
how to put them from the wall. And thus they held The Athenians assault them
out a long time, the better part of a day, either side     there.

tyred with the ght, and with thirst, and with the Sunne, one endeauouring to
driue the enemy from the top, the other to keepe their ground. And the
Lacedaemonians defended themselues easilier now then before, because they
were not now encompassed vpon their ancks. When there was no end of the
businesse, the Captaine of the Messenians said vnto Cleon, and Demosthenes,
that they spent their labour there in vaine, and that if they would deliuer vnto
him a part of the Archers, and light-armed Souldiers, to get vp by such a way as
he himselfe should nd out, and come behinde vpon their backes, 
hee thought the entrance might bee forced. And hauing receiued the Forces hee
asked, hee tooke his way from a place out of sight to the Lacedaemonians, that
hee might not be discouered; making his approach under the Cli es of the Iland,
where they were continuall; In which part, 〈…〉 the naturall strength therof, they
kept no watch; and with much labour, and hardly            Some of the Athenians climbe vp
vnseene, came behinde them. And appearing                  behind the Lacedaemonians
                                                           vnseene, and appeare at their
suddenly from aboue at their backes, both terri ed         backes.
the Enemies with the sight of what they expected not,
and much con rmed the Athenians with the sight of what they expected. And
the Lacedaemonians being now charged with their shot both before and behind,
were in the same case (to compare small matters with great) that they were in at *
Thermopylae. For then they were slaine by the              * 5000. Lacedaemonians, vnder
Persians, shut vp on both sides in a narrow path. And their King Leonidas, in the
                                                           Streight of Thermopyle,
these now being charged on both sides, could make          withstood 300000. Persians, till
good the place no longer, but ghting, few against          they were circumuented, and
                                                           charged both before and
many, and beeing weake withall for want of foode,          behinde, and so all slaine.
were at last forced to giue ground, and the Athenians Herod. lib. 7.
by this time, were also Masters of all the entrances.

But Cleon and Demosthenes, knowing that the more they gaue backe, the faster
they would bee killed by their Armie, staid the ght, and held in the Souldiers,
with desire to carry them aliue to Athens, in case their spirits were so much

broken, and their courage abated by this miserie, as vpon Proclamation made,
they would bee content to deliuer vp their Armes. So they proclaimed, that they
should deliuer vp their Armes and themselues to the Athenians, to be disposed
of as to them should seeme good.

Vpon hearing heereof, the most of them threw downe The Lacedaemonians yeeld.
their Bucklers, and shooke their hands aboue their
heads, signifying their acceptation of what was proclaimed. Whereupon a Truce
was made, and they came to treat, Cleon and Demosthenes of one side, and
Styphon the sonne of Pharax, on the other side. For of them that had Command
there, Epitadas, who was the rst, was slaine; and Hippagretes, who was chosen
to succeed him, lay amongst the dead, though yet aliue; and this man was the
third to succeed in the Command by the * Law, in case * This manner of s bordaining
                                                                             ●

the others should miscarry. Styphon, and  diuers Commanders to be chiefe
                                                           in succession was in those times
                                                                        ▪
those that were with him, said they would send ouer mu h vsed.   ●

to the Lacedaemonians in the Continent, to know
what they there would aduise them to; but the Athenians letting none goe
thence, called for Heralds out of the Continent; and the question hauing beene
twice or thrice asked, the last of the Lacedaemonians that came ouer from the
Continent, brought them this Answer: The                   The Lacedaemonians yeeld vp
Lacedaemonians bid you take aduice touching your           their Armes, and are carried
                                                           prisoners to Athens.
selues, such as you shall thinke good, prouided you doe
nothing dishonourably. Whereupon hauing consulted, they yeelded vp
themselues and their Armes; and the Athenians attended them that day, and the
night following, with a watch. But the next day, after they had set vp their
Trophie in the Iland, they prepared to bee gone, and committed the prisoners to
the custody of the Captaines of the Gallies. And the Lacedaemonians sent ouer a
Herald, and tooke vp the bodies of their dead. The         The number of the slain, and of
number of them that were slaine and taken aliue in         the prisoners.

the Iland, was thus. There went ouer into the Iland in all, foure hundred and
twenty men of Armes; of these were sent away aliue, three hundred wanting
eight, and the rest slaine. Of those that liued, there were of the Citie it selfe of

Sparta, one hundred and twenty. Of the Athenians there dyed not many, for it
was no standing ght.

The whole time of the siege of these men in the Iland, from the ght of the
Gallies, to the ght in the Iland, was 72. dayes; of which, for 20. dayes, victuall
was allowed to bee carried to them, that is to say, in the time that the
Ambassadours were away, that went about the Peace; in the rest, they were fed by
such onely as put in thither by stealth, and yet there was both Corne and other
food left in the Iland. For their Captaine Epitadas had distributed it more
sparingly then hee needed to haue done. So the Athenians and the
Peloponnesians departed from Pylus, and went home both of them with their
Armies. And the promise of Cleon, as senselesse as it was, tooke e ect: For
within twenty dayes he brought home the men, as he had vndertaken.

Of all the accidents of this Warre, this same fell out the most contrary to the
opinion of the Grecians. For they expected that the Lacedaemonians should
neuer, neither by Famine, nor whatsoeuer other             The yelding of the
necessity, haue bin constrained to deliuer  Lacedaemonians was contrary to
                                                           the opinion had of their vertue.
vp their Armes, but haue dyed with them in their
hands, ghting as long as they had beene able; and would not beleeue that those
that yeelded, were like to those that were slaine: and when one afterwards, of the
Athenian Confederates, asked one of the prisoners, by way of insulting, if they
which were slaine, were valiant men; hee answered, that a Spindle (meaning an
Arrow) deserued to bee valued at a high rate, if it could know who was a good
man. Signifying, that the slaine were such as the Stones and Arrowes chanced to
light on.

After the arriuall of the men, the Athenians ordered, The Lacedaemonian prisoners
that they should be kept in bonds, till there should     kept in bonds at Athens, to be
                                                         made vse of in making the peace,
bee made some agreement; and if before that, the         or else vpon the ﬁrst inuasion of
Peloponnesians should inuade their Territory, then to Attica to be slaine.
bring them forth & kill them. They tooke order also
in the same Assembly, for the settling of the Garrison at Pylus. And the

Messenians of Naupactus, hauing sent thither such men of their own as were
 ttest for the purpose, as to their natiue Countrey, (for Pylus is in that Countrey
which belonged once to the Messenians) infested Laconia with Robberies, and
did them much other mischiefe, as being of the same Language.

The Lacedaemonians, not hauing in times past beene acquainted with robberies,
and such Warre as that, and because their Helotes ranne ouer to the Enemie,
fearing also some greater innouation in the Countrey, tooke the matter much to
heart; and though they would not be knowne of it to the Athenians, yet they
sent Ambassadours, and endeuoured to get the restitution both of the Fort of
Pylus, and of their men. But the Athenians aspired to greater matters; and the
Ambassadours, though they came often about it, yet were alwayes sent away
without e ect. These were the proceedings at Pylus.

Presently after this, the same Summer, the Athenians Nicias warreth in the Territory
with 80. Gallies, 2000. men of Armes of their own          of Corinth with good fortune.

City, and 200. Horse, in boats built for transportation of Horses, made War
vpon the Territory of Corinth. There went also with them, Milesians,
Andrians, and Carystians of their Confederates. The Generall of the whole
Army was Nicias the sonne of Niceratus, with 2. other in Commission with him.
Betimes in a morning, they put in at a place betweene Chersonesus and Rheitus,
on that shore, aboue which standeth the Hill Solygius, whereon the 
Dorians in old time sate downe, to make Warre on the Corinthians in the Citie
of Corinth, that were then Aeolians, and vpon which there standeth now a
Village, called also Solygia. From the shore where the Gallies came in, this Village
is distant twenty furlongs, and the Citie of Corinth, sixtie, and the Isthmus
twenty. The Corinthians hauing long before from            The Corinthians hearing of
Argos had intelligence, that an Armie of the               their comming assemble then
                                                                         ▪

                                                           forces to hinder their landing.
Athenians was comming against them, came all of
them with their forces to the Isthmus, (saue onely such as dwelt without the
Isthmus, and ue hundred Garrison Souldiers, absent in Ambracia and
Leucadia) all the rest of military age came forth, to attend the Athenians, where
they should put in. But when the Athenians had put to shore in the night

vnseene, and that aduertisement thereof was giuen them by signes put vp into
the ayre, they left the one halfe of their Forces in Cenchrea, lest the Athenians
should goe against Crommyon, and with the other halfe made haste to meete
them. Battus, one of their Commanders, (for there          The Athenians and Corinthians
were two of them present at the Battell) with one          ﬁght.

Squadron, went toward the Village of Solygia, being an open one, to defend it;
and Lycophron with the rest charged the Enemie. And rst they gaue the onset
on the right wing of the Athenians, which was but newly landed before
Chersonesus, and afterwards they charged likewise the rest of the Armie. The
Battell was hot, and at hand-stroakes: And the right wing of the Athenians and
Carystians (for of these consisted their vtmost Files) sustained the charge of the
Corinthians, and with much adoe draue them backe. But as they retyred, they
came vp, (for the place was all rising ground) to a dry Wall, and from thence,
being on the vpper ground, threw downe stones at them; and after hauing sung
the * Poean, came againe close to them; whom when * A Hymne accustomed to be
the Athenians abode, the Battell was againe at hand- sung, one before Battell, another
                                                           after victory.
stroakes. But a certaine Band of Corinthians that
came in, to the ayde of their owne left wing, put the right wing of the Athenians
to ight, and chased them to the Sea-side. But then from their Gallies they
turned head againe, both the Athenians, and the Carystians. The other part of
their Armie continued ghting on both sides, especially the right wing of the
Corinthians, where Lycophron fought against the left wing of the Athenians: for
they expected that the Athenians would attempt to goe to Solygia; 
so they held each other to it a long time, neither side giuing ground. But in the
end (for that the Athenians had Horse men, which did them great seruice, seeing
the other had none) the Corinthians were put to ight, and retired to the Hill,
where they laid downe their Armes, and descended no The Corinthians are put to
more, but there rested. In this Retreat, the greatest      ﬂight.

part of their right wing was slaine, and amongst others, Lycophron, one of the
Generals. But the rest of the Army being in this manner, neither much vrged,
nor retiring in much haste, when they could do no other, made their Retreat vp
the Hill, & there sate downe The Athenians seeing them come no more downe
to Battel, ri ed the dead bodies of the Enemy, and tooke vp their owne, and

presently erected a Trophie on the place. That halfe of the Corinthians that lay
at Cenchrea, to watch the Athenians, that they went not against Crommyon,
saw not this Battell, for the Hill Oneius; but when they saw the dust, and so
knew what was in hand▪ they went presently to their ayde: so did also the * old
men of Corinth from the Citie, when they                  * It was said before, that all the
vnderstood how the matter had succeeded. The              Corinthians of military age
                                                          were come forth.
Athenians, when all these were comming vpon them
together, imagining them to haue been the succours of the neighbouring Cities
of Peloponnesus, retired speedily to their Gallies; carrying with them the booty,
and the bodies of their dead, all saue two, which not nding, they left. Being
aboard, they crossed ouer to the Ilands on the other side, and from thence * sent
a Herald, and fetched away those two dead bodies          * To fetch oﬀ the dead by a
which they left behinde. There were slaine in this        Herald, was a confession of
                                                          being the weaker; but yet Nicias
battell, Corinthians, two hundred and twelue, and         chooseth rather to renounce the
Athenians, somewhat vnder fty.                            reputation of victory, then omit
                                                     an act of piety. Besides, the people
                                                     tooke meruailously all the
The Athenians putting o from the Ilands, sayled the neglect of the dead bodies, as
same day to Crommyon, in the Territory of Corinth, may appeare by their sentence on
                                                     the Captaines after the Battell at
distant from the City a hundred and twenty Furlongs: Arginusae.
where anchoring, they wasted the Fields, and stayed
                                                         The Athenians waste other parts
all that night. The next day, they sailed along the      of the same Coast.
shore, rst to to the Territory of Epidaurus, whereinto
they made some little incursion from their Gallies; and then went to Methone,
betweene Epidaurus and Troezen, and there tooke in the Isthmus of
Chersonnesus with a Wall, and placed a Garrison in it, which afterwards
exercised robberies in the Territories of Troezen, Halias, and Epidaurus; and
when they had forti ed this place, they returned home with their            
Fleet.

About the same time that these things were in doing, The execution of the Corcyraean
Eurymedon and Sophocles, after their departure from banished men, and end of that
                                                        sedition.
Pylus with the Athenian Fleet, towards Sicily, arriuing
at Corcyra, ioyned with those of the Citie, and made Warre vpon those

Corcyraeans, which lay encamped vpon the Hill Istone, and which, after the
sedition, had come ouer, and both made themselues masters of the Field, and
much annoyed the Citie: and hauing assaulted their forti cation, tooke it. But
the men all in one troupe, escaped to a certaine high ground, and thence made
their composition, which was this; That they should Truce granted to the banished
deliuer vp the Strangers that ayded them; and that        men, with condition that the
                                                          same should bee voyd, if any of
they themselues, hauing rendred their Armes, should them oﬀered to make an escape.
stand to the iudgement of the People of Athens.
Heereupon the Generals granted them truce, and transported them to the Iland
of Ptychia, to bee there in custodie till the Athenians should send for them; with
this condition, That if any one of them should be taken running away, then the
truce to bee broken for them all.

But the Patrons of the Commons of Corcyra, fearing The fraud of the Corcyraeans to
lest the Athenians would not kill them when they            entrappe the banished men.

came thither, deuise against them this plot. To some few of those in the Iland,
they secretly send their friends, and instruct them to say, as if, forsooth, it were
for good will, that it was their best course, with all speed, to get away, (and
withall, to o er to prouide them of a Boat) for that the Athenian Commanders
intended verily to deliuer them to the Corcyraean people.

When they were perswaded to doe so, and that a Boat The truce broken, and the
was treacherously prepared, as they rowed away, they outlawes put into the hands of
                                                       the Commons.
were taken, and the Truce being now broken, were all
giuen vp into the hands of the Corcyraeans. It did much further this Plot, that
to make the pretext seeme more serious, and the agents in it lesse fearefull, the
Athenian Generals gaue out, that they were nothing pleased that the men should
be carried home by others, whilest they themselues were to goe into Sicily, and
the honour of it be ascribed to those that should conuoy them. The Corcyraeans
hauing receiued them into their hands, imprisoned      The Corcyraeans take the
them in a certaine Edi ce, from whence afterwards      Outlawes out by scores, and
                                                       make them passe the Pikes.
they tooke them out by twenty at a time, and made
them passe through a Lane of men of Armes, bound together, and 

receiuing stroakes and thrusts from those on eyther side, according as any one
espyed his Enemie. And to hasten the pace of those that went slowliest on,
others were set to follow them with Whips.

They had taken out of the Roome in this manner, and slaine, to the number of
threescore, before they that remained knew it, who thought they were but
remoued, and carried to some other place. But when The outlawes refuse to goe out to
they knew the truth, some or other hauing told them, execution.
they then cryed out to the Athenians, and said, that if they would themselues kill
them, they should doe it; and refused any more to go out of the Roome, nor
would su er, they said, as long as they were able, any man to come in. But
neither had the Corcyraeans any purpose to force entrance by the doore, but
getting vp to the top of the House, vncouered the roofe, and threw Tyles, and
shot Arrowes at them. They in prison defended themselues as well as they could,
but many also slew themselues with the Arrowes shot They kill themselues.
by the Enemie, by thrusting them into their throats,
and strangled themselues with the cords of certaine beds that were in the
Roome, and with ropes made of their owne garments rent in pieces. And hauing
continued most part of the night, (for night              The miserable end of the
ouertooke them in the action) partly strangling           banished men, which was also
                                                          the end of the sedition.
themselues, by all such meanes as they found, and
partly shot at from aboue, they all perished. When day came, the Corcyraeans
laid them one * acrosse another in Carts, and carried * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, signiﬁeth
them out of the City. And of their Wiues, as many as properly, after the manner that
                                                          Matts or Hurdles are platted.
were taken in the Forti cation, they made bond-
women. In this manner were the Corcyraeans that kept the * Hill, brought to
destruction by the Commons. And thus ended this           * Istone.
farre-spred sedition, for so much as concerned this
present Warre: for of other seditions there remained nothing worth the relation.
And the Athenians being arriued in Sicily, whither        The Athenians take Anactorium
they were at rst bound, prosecuted the Warre there, from the Corinthians, and put it
                                                          into the hands of the
together with the rest of their Confederates of those Acarnanians
parts.

In the end of this Summer, the Athenians that lay at Naupactus, went forth with
an Armie, and tooke the City of * Anactorium,          * This City belnoged to the
belonging to the Corinthians, and lying at the mouth Corcyraeans and Corinthians in
                                                       common, but a little before this
of the Ambracian Gulfe, by Treason. And when they Warre, the Corinthians carry
had put forth the Corinthians, the Acarnanians held away captiues the men that were
                                                       in it, and possesse it alone: and
it with a Colonie sent thither from all     those Corcyraeans wrought the
parts of their owne Nation. And so this Summer         Sedition before related.
ended.                                                 The end of the seuenth Summer.

The next Winter, Aristides the sonne of Archippus, 〈◊〉, an Ambassadour from the
one of the Commanders of a Fleet which the                King of Persia to the
                                                          Lacedaemonians, intercepted,
Athenians had sent out to gather Tribute from their and brought to Athens, and his
Confederates, apprehended 〈…〉, in the Towne of            Letters 〈◊〉.

Eion, vpon the Riuer 〈◊〉 going from the King to
Lacedaemon. When he was brought to Athens, the Athenians translated his
Letters out of the Assyrian Language into Greeke, and The King of Persia's Letters to
read them▪ wherein▪ amongst many other things that the Lacedaemonians translated
                                                          into Greeke, and read at Athens.
were written to the Lacedaemonians, the principall
was this, That hee knew not what they meant; for many Ambassadours came, but
they spake not the same things: If therefore they had any thing to say certaine, they
should send somebody to him, with this Persian. But Artaphernes they send
afterwards away in a Gallie, with Ambassadours of their owne, to Ephesus. And
there encountering the newes, that King Artaxerxes, the the sonne of Xerxes, was
lately dead, (for about that time he dyed) they returned home.

The same Winter also, the Chians demolished their        The Chians are suspected, and
new Wall, by command of the Athenians, vpon              forced to pull downe their new
                                                         built Walles.
suspition that they intended some innouation,
notwithstanding they had giuen the Athenians their faith, and the best security
they could, to the intent they should let them bee as they were. Thus ended this
Winter, and the seuenth yeere of this Warre, written by Thucydides.

The next Summer, in the very beginning, at a change THE EIGHTH YEERE.
of the Moone, the Sunne was eclipsed in part; and in
the beginning of the same Moneth, happened an Earthquake.

At this time, the Mitylenian, and other Lesbian           The Lesbian Outlawes make
Outlawes, most of them residing in the Continent,         warre vpon the Athenians
                                                          dominions, in the Continent
with mercenary Forces out of Peloponnesus, and            neere Lesbos.
some which they leauied where they were, seaze on
Rhoetium, and for two thousand Phocean Staters, render it againe, without
doing them other harme. After this they came with their Forces to Antander,
and tooke that Citie also by Treason. They had likewise a Designe, to set free the
rest of the Cities called * Actaeae, which were in the    * Littorales. Cities scituate on the
occupation formerly of the Mitylenians, but subiect Sea-shore.
to the Athenians: but aboue all the rest, Antander, which when they had once
gotten, (for there they might easily build Gallies, because there was 
store of Timber; and mount Ida was aboue their heads) they might issue from
thence with other their preparation, and infest Lesbos which was neere, and
bring into their power the Aeolique Townes in the Continent. And this were
those men preparing.

The Athenians the same Summer, with sixty Gallies, The Athenians led by Nicias,
2000 men of Armes, and a few horsemen, taking with subdue Cythera, an Iland ouer
                                                        against Laconia, and inhabited
them also the Milesians, and some other of their        by Lacedaemonians
Confederates made Warre vpon Cythera, vnder the
Conduct of Nicias the sonne of Niceratus, Nicostratus the sonne of Diotrephes,
and Autocles the sonne of Tolmaeus. This * Cythera is * Now Cerigo.
an Iland vpon the Coast of Laconia, ouer against
Malea. The Inhabitants be Lacedaemonians, of the same that dwell about them.

And euery yeere there goeth ouer vnto them from Sparta a Magistrate called *
Cytherodices. They likewise sent ouer men of Armes * The Iudge of Cythera.
from time to time, to lie in Garrison there, and tooke
much care of the place. For it was the place where their * ships vsed to put in

from Aegypt, and Libro, and by which Laconia was * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, ships of the
the lesse infested by theeues from the Sea, being that round forme of building.
                                                            Merchant ships.
way onely subiect to that mischiefe. For the Iland
lyeth wholly out, into the Sicilian and Creticke Seas: The Athenians arriuing
with their Army, with ten of their Gallies, and 2000 men of Armes of the
Milesians, tooke a towne lying to the Sea, called Scandea, and with the rest of
their forces, hauing landed in the parts of the Iland towards Malea, marched into
the Citie it selfe of the Cythereans, lying likewise to the Sea. The Cythereans
they found standing all in Armes prepared for them; and after the battell began,
the Cythereans for a little while made resistance; but soone after turned their
backs, and ed, into the higher part of the Citie; and The Cythereans yeeld to Nicias,
afterwards compounded with Nicias and his fellow- referring themselues to the people
                                                            of Athens for any thing but
Commanders, That the * Athenians should determine death.
of them whatsoeuer they thought good, but death.
                                                            * The Athenian people.
Nicias had had some conference with certaine of the
Cythereans before; which was also a cause that those things which concerned the
accord both now and afterwards, were both the sooner, and with the more
fauour dispatched. For the Athenians did but remoue The Athenians remoue them
the Cythereans, and that also because they were             from their seats.

Lacedaemonians, and because the Iland lay in that maner vpon the coast of
Laconia. After this composition, hauing as they went by receiued               
Scandea, a Towne lying vpon the Hauen, and put a guard vpon the Cythereans,
they sayled to Asine & most of the Townes vpon the Sea-side. And going
sometimes a-land, and staying where they saw cause, wasted the Countrey for
about seuen dayes together. The Lacedaemonians though they saw the
Athenians had Cythera, and expected withall that            The Lacedaemonians begin to be
they would come to Land, in the same manner, in             deiected with their great losses.

their owne Territory, yet came not foorth with their vnited forces to resist them;
but distributed a number of men of Armes into sundry parts of their Territory,
to guard it wheresoeuer there was need, and were otherwise also exceeding
watchfull, fearing lest some innouation should happen in the State; as hauing
receiued a very great and vnexpected losse in the *         * Sphacteria, where their 〈◊〉
Iland, and the Athenians hauing gotten Pylus and            were taken, and carried to

Cythera, and as being on all sides encompassed with a Athens.
busie and vnauoydable Warre; In so much that contrary to their custome they
ordayned 400 * Horsemen, and some Archers. And if * The Lacedaemonians 〈…〉 their
euer they were fearefull in matter of Warre, they were armed 〈…〉, or men of Armes, in
                                                          〈◊〉 valour and skill in ﬁght,
so now, because it was contrary to their owne way, to they gloried much, as a 〈…〉, and
contend in a Nauall Warre, and against Athenians,         as for 〈…〉, and light-armed 〈…〉
                                                          made lesse 〈…〉 such 〈…〉 as were
who thought they lost whatsoeuer they not                 brought in 〈…〉 Confederates.
attempted. Withall, their so many mis-fortunes, in so
short a time, falling out so contrary to their owne expectation, exceedingly
a righted them. And fearing lest some such calamity should againe happen, as
they had receiued in the * Iland, they durst the lesse to * Sphacteria.
hazzard battell; and thought that whatsoeuer they
should goe about, would miscarry, because their mindes not vsed formerly to
losses, could now warrant them nothing. As the            The Athenians waste the Coast
Athenians therefore wasted the Maritime parts of the of Laconia.
Country▪ and disbarked neere any Garrison, those of the Garrison for the most
part stirred not, both as knowing themselues singly to be too small a number,
and as being in that maner deiected. Yet one Garrison fought about Cortyta, and
Aphrodisia, and frighted in, the straggling rabble of light-armed Souldiers, but
when the men of Armes had receiued them, it retyred againe, with the losse of a
few whom they also ri ed of their Armes. And the Athenians, after they had
erected a Trophie, put o againe, and went to Cythera. From thence they sayled
about to Epidaurus, called * Limera, and hauing           * So called from 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉
wasted some part of that Territory, came to Thyrea,       〈◊〉, a 〈◊〉, because it is full of
                                                          〈◊〉. Maluasia.
which is of the Territory called Cynuria, 
but is neuerthelesse the middle border betweene Argia The Athenians burne Thyrea,
and Laconia. The Lacedaemonians possessing this           slay and make prisoners of all
                                                          the Inhabitants being Aeginetae.
Citie, gaue the same for an habitation to the
Aeginetae, after they were driuen out of Aegina, both for the bene t they had
receiued from them, about the time of the Earthquake, and of the insurrection
of the Helotes, and also for that being subiect to the Athenians, they had
neuerthelesse gone euer the same way with the Lacedaemonians. When the
Athenians were comming towards them, the Aeginetae left the Wall which they

hapned to be then building toward the Sea-side, and retired vp into the Citie
aboue, where they dwelt, and which was not aboue tenne Furlongs from the Sea.
There was also with them, one of those Garrisons which the Lacedaemonians
had distributed into the seuerall parts of the Countrey, and these, though they
helped them to build the Fort below, yet would not now enter with them into
the Towne, (though the Aeginetae intreated them) apprehending danger in
being coopt vp within the Walles; and therefore retiring into the highest ground,
lay still there, as nding themselues too weake to giue them Battell. In the meane
time the Athenians came in, and marching vp, presently, with their whole
Armie, won Thyrea, and burnt it, and destroyed whatsoeuer was in it. The
Aeginetae, as many as were not slaine in the a ray, they carried prisoners to
Athens; amongst whom Tantalus also, the sonne of         Tantalus a Lacedaemonian
Patroclus, Captaine of such Lacedaemonians as were Captaine carried prisoner to
                                                         Athens.
amongst them, was wounded▪ and taken aliue. They
carried likewise with them some few men of Cythera, whom for safeties sake
they thought good to remoue into some other place. These therefore, the
Athenians decreed, should be placed in the * Ilands.     The Decree of the Athenian
And that the rest of the Cythereans, at the Tribute of people concerning the
                                                         Cythereans, the Aeginetae taken
foure Talents, should inhabite their owne Territorie.    in Thyrea, and Tantalus a
That the Aeginetae, as many as they had taken, (out Lacedaemonian that was
                                                         amongst them.
of former inueterate hatred) should bee put to death.
And that Tantalus should be put in bonds amongst         * Cyclades. The Aeginetae put to
                                                         death.
those Lacedaemonians that were taken in the * Iland.
                                                             * Sphacteria. The Sicilians make
In Sicily the same Summer, was concluded a cessation a generall peace, by the aduice of
of Armes, rst, betweene the Camarinaeans and the Hermocrates,        and so dismisse the
                                                        Athenians, that waited to take
Geloans. But afterwards the rest of the Sicilians,      aduantage of their discord    ▪

assembling by their Ambassadours out of euery City
at Gela, held a Conference amongst themselues, for making of a Peace: wherein,
after many opinions deliuered by men disagreeing, and requiring           
satisfaction, euery one as hee thought himselfe preiudiced, Hermocrates the
sonne of Hermon, a Syracusian, who also preuailed with them the most, spake
vnto the Assembly, to this e ect.

4.1. THE ORATION OF HERMOCRATES for
Peace.
MEN of Sicily, I am neither of the least Citie, nor of the most a icted with
Warre, that am now to speake, and to deliuer the opinion which I take to
conduce most to the common bene t of all Sicily. Touching Warre, how
calamitous a thing it is, to what end should a man, particularizing the euils
thereof, make a long speech before men that already know it? For neither doth
the not knowing of them necessitate any man to enter into Warre, nor the
feare of them, diuert any man from it, when he thinkes it will turne to his
aduantage. But rather it so falles out, that the one thinkes the gaine greater
then the danger; and the other prefers danger before present losse. But least
they should both the one and the other doe it vnseasonably, exhortations vnto
peace are pro table, and will be very much worth to vs, if we will follow them,
at this present. For it was out of a desire that euery Citie had to assure their
owne, both that we fell our selues into the Warre, and also that wee endeuour
now, by reasoning the matter, to returne to mutuall amity. Which if it succeed
not so well, that we may depart satis ed euery man with reason, wee will be at
Warres againe. Neuerthelesse you must know, that this Assembly, if we be
wise, ought not to bee onely for the commodity of the Cities in particular, but
how to preserue Sicily in generall, now sought to bee subdued (at least in my
opinion) by the Athenians. And you ought to thinke, that the Athenians are
more vrgent perswaders of the Peace then any words of mine; who hauing, of
all the Grecians, the greatest power, lye here with a few Gallies, to obserue our
errours, and by a lawfull title of alliance, hansomely to accommdate their
naturall hostility, to their best aduantage. For if wee enter into a Warre, and
call in these men, who are apt enough to bring their Armie in, vn●called, and
if we weaken our selues at our owne charges, and withall cut out for them the
dominion here, it is likely, when they shall see vs spent, they will sometime
hereafter come vpon vs, with a greater Fleet, and attempt to bring all these
States into their subiection. Now, if we were wise, we ought rather to call in

Confederates, and vndergoe dangers, for the winning of                      
somewhat that is none of ours, then for the empayring of what we already
haue; and to beleeue, that nothing so much destroyes a Citie as Sedition; and
that Sicily, though wee the inhabitants thereof, bee insidiated by the
Athenians, as one body, is neuerthelesse Citie against Citie in Sedition within
it selfe. In contemplation whereof, wee ought, man with man, and Citie with
Citie, to returne againe into amity, and with one consent, to endeuour the
safety of all Sicily; and not to haue this conceit, that though the * Dorians be
the Athenians enemies, yet the * Chalcideans are           * The Dorians and Ioni ans
                                                                                ●

safe, as being of the race of the Ionians. For they        are two Nations, 〈◊〉 which
                                                           almost 〈…〉 Greece 〈…〉. The
inuade not these diuided races, vpon hatred of a           Chalcidean and Athenians
                                                                      ●

side, but vpon a couetous desire of those necessities 〈…〉 and the Lacedomonians
                                                           and most of Peloponi
which we enioy in common. And this they haue
                                                                              ●●●●

                                                           were Dorians. 〈…〉 that the
proued themselues, in their comming hither to ayde Chalcidean be thought safe,
                                                                      ●

the Chalcideans. For though they neuer receiued any though         〈◊〉 Athenians inuaded
                                                           Sicily but the Dorians not.
                                                                 ▪

aide by vertue of their League, from the
                                                           * The Dorians and Ioni ans
Chalcideans, yet haue they on their part beene more are two Nations, 〈◊〉 which
                                                                                ●

forward to helpe them, then by the League they             almost 〈…〉 Greece 〈…〉. The
were bound vnto. Indeed the Athenians, that couet Chalcidean and Athenians
                                                                      ●

                                                           〈…〉 and the Lacedomonians
and meditate these things, are to be pardoned. I           and most of Peloponi
                                                                              ●●●●

blame not those that are willing to reigne, but those were Dorians. 〈…〉 that the
                                                           Chalcidean 〈◊〉 he thought
                                                                      ●
that are most willing to be subiect. For it is the         safe, though 〈◊〉 Athenians
nature of man, euery where to command such as              inuaded Sicily but the
                                                                          ▪

                                                           Dorians not.
giue way, and to be shye of such as assaile. Wee are
too blame, that know this, and doe not prouide accordingly, and make it our
  rst care of all, to take good order against the common feare. Of which wee
should soone bee deliuered, if wee would agree amongst our selues. For the
Athenians come not against vs out of their owne Countrey, but from theirs
here, that haue called them in. And so, not warre by Warre, but all our
quarrels shall be ended by peace, without trouble. And those that haue beene
called in, as they came with faire pretence to iniure vs, so shall they with faire
reason bee dismissed by vs without their errand. And thus much for the pro t
that will be found by aduising wisely concerning the Athenians. But when

Peace is confessed by all men to be the best of things, why should wee not
make it also in respect of our selues? Or doe you thinke perhaps, if any of you
possesse a good thing, or bee pressed with an euill, that Peace is not better
then Warre, to remoue the later, or preserue the former, to both? or that it
hath not honours, and eminence more free from danger? or whatsoeuer else
one might discourse at large concerning Warre? Which things considered, you
ought not to make light of my aduice, but rather make vse of it, euery one to
prouide for his owne safety. Now if some man bee strongly conceited to goe
through with some designe of his, be it by right or by violence, let him take
heed that hee faile not, so much the more to his griefe, as it is contrary to his
hope; knowing that many men ere now, hunting after reuenge on 
such as had done them iniury, and others trusting by some strength they haue
had, to take away anothers right, haue the rst sort, in stead of being
reuenged, been destroyed, and the other in stead of winning from others, left
behind them what they had of their owne. For reuenge succeeds not according
to Iustice, as that because an iniury hath beene done, it should therefore
prosper, nor is strength therefore sure, because hopefull. It is the instability of
Fortune, that is most predominant in things to come▪ which though it be the
most deceiueable of all things yet appeares to be the most pro table. For
whilest euery one feare it alike, we proceed against each other with the greater
prouidence. Now therefore terri ed doubly, both with the implicite feare of
the incertainty of euents, and with the terrour of the Athenians present, and
taking these for hindrances su cient, to haue made vs come short of what we
had seuerally conceiued to e ect, let vs send away our enemies that houer ouer
vs, and make an eternall peace amongst our selues, or if not that, then a Truce,
at least, for as long as may be, and put o our priuate quarrels to some other
time. In summe, let vs know this, that following my counsell, we shall euery of
vs haue our Cities free, whereby being Masters of our selues, we shall be able
to remunerate according to their merit, such as doe vs good or harme.
Whereas reiecting it and following the counsell of others, our contention shall
no more be how to be reuenged, or at the best, if it be, we must be forced to
become friends to our greatest enemies, and enemies to such as we ought not.
For my part, as I sayd in the beginning, I bring to this the greatest Citie, and

 which is rather an assaylant then assayled; and yet foreseeing these things, I
 hold it t to come to an agreement, and not so to hurt our enemies, as to hurt
 our selues more. Nor yet through foolish * spight        * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
 will I looke to be followed as absolute in my will,
 and master of Fortune, which I cannot command; but will also giue way
 where it is reason. And so I looke the rest should doe as well as I; and that of
 your selues, and not forced to it by the enemy. For it is no dishonour to be
 ouercome kinsmen of kinsmen, one Dorian of another Dorian; and one
 Chalcidean of another of his owne race, or in sum, any one by another of vs
 being neighbours, and cohabiters of the same Region, encompassed by the
 Sea, and all called by one name Sicilians. Who, as I conceiue, will both warre
 when it happens, and againe by common conferences make peace, by our
 owne selues. But when Forrainers inuade vs, we shall, if wise, vnite all of vs to
 encounter them; in as much as being weakned singly, wee are in danger
 vniuersally. As for Confederates, let vs neuer hereafter, call in any, nor
 Arbitrators. For so shall Sicily attaine these two bene ts, to be ridde of the
 Athenians, and of Domestique Warre for the present, and to be 
 inhabited by our selues with liberty, and less insidiated by others for the time
 to come.

Hermocrates hauing thus spoken, the Sicilians followed his aduice, and agreed
amongst themselues, That the Warre should cease,        The substance of the conditions
euery one retaining what they then presently enioyed. of the Peace in Sicily.
                                                        Camarana.
And that the Camarinaeans should haue Morgantina,
paying for the same vnto the Syracusians, a certaine summe of money then
assessed.

They that were Confederates with the Athenians, calling such of the Athenians
vnto them, as were in authority, told them that they also were willing to
compound, and be comprehended in the same Peace; The Athenians depart Sicily,
And the Athenians approuing it, they did so; and         and their Commanders
                                                         punished as suspected to haue left
hereupon the Athenians departed out of Sicily. The Sicily for a bribe.
people of Athens, when their Generals came home

banished two, namely Pythadorus and Sophocles; and laid a Fine vpon the third,
which was Eurymedon, as men that might haue subdued the estates of Sicily,
but had been * bribed to returne. So great was their    * Nothing was more frequent in
fortune at that time, that they thought nothing could the Athenian Assemblies at this
                                                        time, then when things went
crosse them, but that they might haue atchieued both amisse, to accuse one another of
easie, and hard enterprises with great & slender forces bribery: for it was a sure way to
                                                        win fauour with the people, who
alike. The cause whereof, was the vnreasonable          thought that nothing was able to
prosperity of most of their designes, subministring     resist their power.
strength vnto their hope.

The same Summer the Megareans in the Citie of Megara, pinched both by the
Warre of the Athenians, who inuaded their Territory, The Athenians attempt to take
with their whole forces, euery yeere twice, and by their Megara by treason.
owne Outlawes from Pegae, who in a sedition driuen out by the Commons,
grieuously a icted them with robberies, began to talke one to another, how it
was t to call them home againe, and not to let their Citie by both these meanes
to be ruined. The friends of those without, perceiuing the rumour, they also▪
more openly now, then before, required to haue it brought to Counsell. But the
Patrons of the Commons, fearing that they with the The heads of the Commons doe
Commons, by reason of the miseries they were in          hinder the returne of the
                                                         Outlawes plot, the betraying of
should not be able to carry it against the other side,   the City to the Athenians.
made an o er to Hippocrates the sonne of Ariphron▪
and Demosthenes the sonne of Aristhenes, Commanders of the Athenian Army, to
deliuer them the City, as esteeming that course lesse dangerous for themselues,
then the reduction of those whom they had before driuen out. And they agreed,
that rst, the Athenians should possesse themselues of the Long-              
walls, (these were about eight furlongs in length, and The plot laid by the Traitors for
reached from the Citie to Nisaea, their Hauen)           the putting of the Athenians into
                                                         the Towne.
thereby to cut of the aide of the Peloponnesians, in
Nisaea, in which (the better to assure Megara to the side) there lay no other
Souldiers in Garrison, but they. And then afterwards, that these men, would
attempt to deliuer them the City aboue, which would the more easily succeed, if
that were e ected rst. The Athenians therefore, after all was done, and said on

both sides, and euery thing ready, sayled away by night to * Minoa, an Iland of
the Megareans, with 600 men of Armes led by              * This Iland lying before the
Hippocrates, and satte downe in a certaine pit, out of Hauen Nisaea, made the Port,
                                                         and the Athenians kept in it, an
which Bricks had beene made for the walles, and          ordinary Garrison, euer since
which was not farre o . But they that were with the they tooke it ﬁrst, and could see
                                                         all the Hauen, and what vessels
other Commander Demosthenes, light-armed                 lay in it, but could not enter.
Plataeans, and others called Peripoli, lay in ambush at
the Temple of Mars, not so farre o as the former. And none of the Citie
perceiued any thing of this, but onely such as had peculiar care to know the
passages of this same night. When it was almost day, The plot of the Traitors, to giue
the Megarean Traitors did thus. They had beene           the Athenians the Long-wals.

accustomed long, as men that went out for * booty,       * To get booty from the
with leaue of the Magistrates, of whom they had          Athenians.

obtained by good O ces, the opening of the * Gates, * Not the Gates of Megara, but
to carry out a little Boate, * such as wherein the       the Gates in the Long-wals neere
                                                         vnto Nisaea, as appeares by the
watermen vsed an Oare in either hand, and to             Narration.
conueigh it by night, downe the Ditch to the Sea-side
                                                         * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
in a Cart; and in a Cart to bring it backe againe, and
set it within the Gates; to the end that the Athenians which lay in Minoa, might
not know where to watch for them, no Boat being to be seene in the Hauen. At
this time was that Cart at the Gates, which was opened according to custome, as
for the * Boate. And the Athenians, seeing it (for so it * To take it in, for it was almost
was agreed on) arose from their Ambush, and ran          morning.

with all speed, to get in before the Gates should bee shut againe, and to be there
whilest the Cart was yet in the Gates and kept them open. And rst those
Plataeans, and Peripoli, that were with Demosthenes, The Athenians win the
ranne in, in that same place where the Trophie is now Longwals.
extant; and ghting presently within the Gates (for those Peloponnesians that
were * neerest heard the stirre) the Plataeans ouercame * Those that watched in that
those that resisted, and made good the Gates for the part of Nisaea, which was
                                                         neerest to this Gate of the Long-
Athenian men of Armes, that were comming after.          wals.

                                                                              

After this, the Athenian Souldiers, as they entred, went vp euery one to the wall,
and a few of the Peloponnesians that were of the Garrison, made head, at rst,
and fought, and were some of them slaine, but the most of them took their
heeles; fearing in the night, both the enemy that charged them, and also the
traitors of the Megareans that fought against them, apprehending that all the
Megareans in generall had betrayed them. It chanced also that the Athenian
Herald, of his owne discretion, made Proclamation, that if any Megarean would
take part with the Athenians, he should come and lay downe his Armes. When
the Peloponnesians heard this, they stayed no longer, but seriously beleeuing
that they ioyntly warred vpon them, ed into Nisaea. As soone as it was day, the
walls being now taken, and the Megareans being in a tumult within the Citie,
they that had treated with the Athenians, and with them, the rest▪ as many as
were conscious, said it was t to haue the gates            The Traitors giue aduice to open
opened, and to goe out and giue the enemy battell.         the Gates and giue battell.

Now it was agreed on betweene them, that when the * * Of the City it selfe of Megara.
gates were open, the Athenians should rush in. And
that themselues would be easily knowne from the rest, to the end they might
haue no harm done them, for that they would besmeare themselues with some
ointment. And the opening of the gates would be for their greater safety. For the
4000 men of Armes of Athens, and 600 horsemen which according to the
appointment were to come to them, hauing marched all night, were already
arriued. When they had besmeared themselues and            The Treason discouered.
were now about the gates one of those who were
priuy discouered the conspiracy to the rest that were not. These ioyning their
strength, came all together to the gates, denying that it was t to goe out to ght;
(For that neither in former times when they were stronger then now, durst they
do so) or to put the Citie into so manifest a danger. And said, that if they would
not be satis ed, the battell should be there right. Yet they discouered not that
they knew of the practice, but only, as hauing giuen good aduice, meant to
maintaine it. And they stayed at the gates▪ insomuch as the traitors could not
perform what they intended. The Athenian                   The Athenians failing of
Commanders, knowing some crosse accident had               Megara, take Nisaea, and
                                                           demolisheth the Long-walls.
hapned, and that they could not take the Citie by

assault, fell to enclosing of Nisaea with a wall, which if they could take before
ayde came, they thought Megara would the sooner yeeld. Iron was quickly
brought vnto them from Athens, and Masons, and whatsoeuer els 
was necessary. And beginning at the * wall they had         * [...]
won, when they had built crosse ouer to the other
side, from thence both wayes they drew it on to the Sea on either side Nisaea,
and hauing distributed the wo●●e amongst the Army, as well the Wall as the
Ditch, they serued themselues of the stones and brickes of the suburbes, &
hauing felled trees, and timber, they supplyed what was defectiue, with a strong
Palissado; the houses also themselues of the suburbs, when they had put on
battlements, serued them for a forti cation. All that day they wrought, the next
day about Euening they had within very little nished. But then, they that were
in Nisaea, seeing themselues to want victuall, (for they had none but what came
day by day from the Citie aboue) & without hope that the Peloponnesians could
quickly come to relieue them, conceiuing also that the Megareans were their
enemies, compounded with the Athenians on these termes, To be dismissed
euery one at a certaine ransome in mony; to deliuer vp their armes; and the
Lacedaemonians, both the Captaine, and whosoeuer of them else was within, to be
at discretion of the Athenians. Hauing thus agreed, they went out. And the
Athenians, when they had * broken o the Longwals * Not pulled them downe 〈…〉 so
from the City of Megara, and taken in Nisaea,               farre, as 〈◊〉 to 〈◊〉 defence to any
                                                            part of the City 〈…〉 to the walls
prepared for what was further to be done. Brasidas          of the Citie.
the sonne of Tellis, a Lacedaemonian, happened at this
time to be about Sicyon and Corinth, preparing of an army to go into Thrace.
And when he heard of the taking of the Longwals,            Brasidas saueth Megara from
fearing what might become of the Peloponnesians in being rendered to the Athenians.
Nisaea, and lest Megara should be won, sent vnto the Boeotians, willing them to
meet him speedily with their forces at Tripodiscus (a village of Megaris, so called,
at the foot of the hill Geranea) and marched presently himselfe with 2700 men
of armes of Corinth, 400 of Phlius, 600 of Sicyon, and those of his owne, all that
he had yet leuied; thinking to haue found Nisaea yet vntaken. When he heard
the contrary (for he set rst towards Tripodiscus in the night) with 300 men
chosen out of the whole army, before newes should           〈…〉 into the City.

arriue of his comming, he came vnseene of the
Athenians that lay by the Sea side, to the City of Megara, pretending in word, &
intending also in good earnest, if he could haue done it, to attempt vpon Nisaea,
but desiring to get into Megara to con rme it, and required to be let in, for that
he was, he said, in hope to recouer Nisaea. But the Megarean Factions being
afraid, * one, lest he should bring in the  * The Patrons of the Commons.
Outlawes, and cast out them; the * other, lest the
Commons, out of this very feare, should assault them, * The Nobility.
wherby the City (being at battell within it selfe, and
the Athenians lying in wait so neere) would be lost, receiued him not, but
resolued on both sides to sit still, and attend the successe. For both the one
faction and the other expected, that the Athenians, and these that came to
succour the City, would ioyne battell; and then they might with more safety,
such as were the fauoured side, turne vnto them that had the victory. And
Brasidas, not preuailing, went backe to the rest of the Brasidas goeth backe to
* Army. Betimes in the morning, arriued the                Tripodiscus.

Boeotians, hauing also intended to come to the aide of * At Tripodiscus.
Megara, before Brasidas sent, as esteeming the danger
to concerne themselues, and were then with their whole forces come forward as
farre as Plataea. But when they had receiued also this message, they were a great
deale the more encouraged; and sent 2200 men of Armes, and 200 horse, to
Brasidas, but went backe with the greater part of their Army. The whole Army
being now together of no lesse then 6000 men of            The Boeotians come with their
Armes. And the Athenian men of Armes lying indeed forces, and ioyne with Brasidas.
in good order, about Nisaea, and the Sea side, but the light-armed straggling in
the Plaines, the Boeotian horsemen came vnexpected vpon the light-armed
Souldiers, and droue them towards the Sea. For in all The Boeotian, and Athenian
this time till now, there had come no aide at all to the horse skirmish.
Megareans from any place. But when the Athenian horse went likewise out to
encounter them, they fought, and there was a battell between the horsemen of
either side, that held long, wherein both sides claimed the victory For the
Athenians slew the Generall of the Boeotian horse, and some few others, and
ri ed them, hauing themselues bin rst chased by them to Nisaea. And hauing

these dead bodies in their power, they restored them vpon truce, and erected a
Trophie. Neuerthe lesse, in respect of the whole action, neither side went o
with assurance, but parting asunder, the Boeotians went to the Army, and the
Athenians to Nisaea.

After this, Brasidas with his Army, came downe neerer The whole Army on either side,
to the Sea, and to the City of Megara; and hauing         face one another, but neither side
                                                          willing to begin.
seazed on a place of aduantage, set his Army in battell
array, and stood still. For they thought the Athenians would bee assaylants, and
knew the Megareans stood obseruing whether side should haue the Victory; and
that it must needs fall out well for them both wayes; rst, because 
they should not be the assaylant, and voluntarily begin the battel and danger;
since hauing shewed themselues ready to ght, the victory must also * iustly be
attributed to them * without their labour. And next it * Brasidas if he saued the Towne
must fall out well in respect of the Megareans. For if from the Athenians had is    ●

                                                          end. Therfore by shewing him
they should not haue come in sight, the matter had        selfe ready if the Athenians
not beene any longer in the power of fortune, but         would not ﬁght, he gained this,
                                                          that he should 〈…〉 into the
they had without all doubt been presently depriued of towne, which 〈◊〉 all e came
                                                                                ●

the City, as men conquered. Whereas now, if haply,        for, and therefore 〈…〉 be counted
                                                          Victor.
the Athenians declined battell likewise, they should
obtaine what they came for without stroake stricken. * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, without
Which also indeed came to passe. * For the Megareans, dust.
when the Athenians went out and ordered their Army * The period is somewhat long,
without the Long-wals, but yet (because the enemy         and seemes to be one of them that
                                                          gaue occasion to Dionysius
charged not) stood also still, (their Commanders          Halicarnasius, to 〈◊〉 the
likewise, considering that if they should begin the       Authors elocution.

battell, against a number greater then their owne, after
the greatest part of their enterprize was already atchieued, the danger would be
vnequall; For if they should ouercome, they could win but Megara, and if they
were vanquished, must lose the best part of their men of Armes; Whereas the
enemy, who out of the whole power, and number that was present in the eld,
did aduenture but euery one a part, would in all likelihood, put it to the hazzard)
And so for a while a ronted each other, and neither doing any thing, withdrew

againe, the Athenians rst into Nisaea, and afterwards the Peloponnesians to the
place from whence they had set forth; then, I say, the Megareans, such as were
the friends of the Outlawes, taking heart, because they The Megareans receiue Brasidas
saw the Athenians were vnwilling to ght, set open         and his Armie.

the Gates to Brasidas as Victor, and to the rest of the Captaines of the seuerall
Cities; And when they were in, (those that had practised with the Athenians,
being all the while in a great feare) they went to Councell. Afterwards, Brasidas,
hauing dismissed his Confederates, to their seuerall Cities, went himselfe to
Corinth, in pursute of his former purpose to leuy an Army for Thrace. Now the
Megareans that were in the Citie, (when the Athenians also were gone home) all
that had chiefe hand in the practice with the Athenians, knowing themselues
discouered, presently slipt away; but the rest, after     The Megarean Outlawes
they had conferred with the friends of the Outlawes, recalled, and sworne to forget
                                                          former quarrell.
recalled them from Pegae, vpon great         
oathes administred vnto them, no more to remember former quarrels, but to
giue the Citie their best aduice.

These, when they came into O ce, tooke a view of the Armes, and disposing
bands of Souldiers in diuers quarters of the Citie, picked out of their enemies,
and of those that seemed most to haue co-operated in the treason with the
Athenians, about a hundred persons; and hauing           The Outlawes being in
constrained the people to giue their sentence vpon       authority, put to death 100 of
                                                         the aduerse faction.
them * openly, when they were condemned, slew
them; and established in the Citie, the estate almost of * Because they should not da   ●●

                                                         but to condemne them, 〈◊〉 they
an Oligarchy. And this change of gouernment, made would not haue den             ●●●  their
by a few vpon sedition, did neuerthelesse continue for   sentence had past  by secret
                                                         suﬀrage.
a long time after.

The same Summer, when Antandrus was to be                The Mitylenian Outlawes lose
furnished by the Mitylenians as they intended,           the City of Antandrus which
                                                         they had intended to fortiﬁe and
Demodicus, and Aristides, Captaines of certaines         make the seat of their Warre.
Gallies, set forth by the Athenians to fetch in Tribute,
being then about Hellespont (for Lamachus that was the third in that

Commission, was gone with ten Gallies into Pontus) hauing notice of the
preparation made in that place; and thinking it would be dangerous to haue it
happen there, as it had done in Anaea, ouer against Samos, in which the Samian
Outlawes, hauing setled themselues, ayded the Peloponnesians in matters of the
Sea, by sending them Steersmen, and both bred trouble within the Citie, and
entertained such as ed out of it, leuyed an Army amongst the Confederates,
and marched to it, and hauing ouercome in ght, those that came out of
Antandrus against them, recouered the place againe. And not long after,
Lamachus that was gone into Pontus, as he lay at       Lamachus loseth his ten Gallies
Anchor in the Riuer Calex, in the territory of         by a sudden Land-ﬂood, in
                                                       Pontus.
Heraclea, much raine hauing fallen aboue in the
Countrey, and the streame of a Land Flood comming suddenly downe, lost all
his Gallies, and came himselfe and his Army through the Territory of the
Bithynians, (who are Thracians dwelling in Asia, on the other side) to
Chalcedon, a Colony of the Megareans, in the mouth of Pontus Euxinus, by
Land,

The same Summer likewise, Demosthenes, Generall Demosthenes goeth to
of the Athenians, with fortie Gallies, presently after  Naupactus, vpon designe against
                                                        the Boeotians.
his departure out of Megaris, sayled to Naupactus. For
certaine men in the Cities thereabouts, desiring to change the forme of the
Boeotian gouernment, and to turne it into a Democratie, according 
to the gouernment of Athens, practised with him and Hippocrates, to betray
vnto him the estates of Boeotia: Induced thereunto, principally by Ptoecdorus a
Theban Outlaw. And they ordered the designe thus. The Plot laid betweene certaine
Some had vndertaken to deliuer vp Siphae. (Siphae is a Boeotians, and the Athenians,
                                                        how to bring Boeotia into the
Citie of the Territory of Thespiae, standing vpon the power of the Athenians.
Sea side, in the Crissaean Gulfe) and Chaeronea
(which was a Towne that payed duties to Orchomenus, called heretofore
Orchomenus in Minyeia, but now Orchomenus in Boeotia) some others, of
Orchomenus, were to surrender into their hands. And the Orchomenian
Outlawes had a principall hand in this, and were hyring Soldiers to that end out
of Peloponnesus. This Chaeronea is the vtmost Towne of Boeotia towards

Phanocis in the Countrey of Phocis, and some Phocians also dwelt in it. On the
other side, the Athenians were to seaze on Delium, a place consecrated to Apollo,
in the Territory of Tanagra, on the part toward Euboea. All this ought to haue
been done together vpon a day appointed, to the end, that the Boeotians might
not oppose them with their forces vnited, but might be troubled euery one to
defend his owne. And if the attempt succeeded, and that they once forti ed
Delium, they easily hoped, though no change followed in the state of the
Boeotians for the present, yet being possessed of those places, and by that
meanes, continually fetching in prey, out of the Countrey, because there was for
euery one a place at hand to retire vnto, that it could not stand long at a stay; but
that the Athenians ioyning with such of them, as rebelled, and the Boeotians not
hauing their forces vnited, they might in time order the State to their owne
liking. Thus was the Plot layed.

And Hippocrates himselfe, with the forces of the Citie, was ready when time
should serue to * march; but sent Demosthenes              * Towards 〈◊〉.
before, with forty Gallies to Naupactus; to the end
that he should leuy an Army of Acarnanians, and other their Confederates in
these quarters, and sayle to Siphae, to receiue it by Treason. And a day was set
downe betwixt them, on which these things should haue been done together.

Demosthenes, when he arriued and found the Oeniades by compulsion of the
rest of Acarnania, entred into the Athenian Confederation, and had himselfe
raised all the Confederates thereabouts, made Warre, rst vpon Salynthius, and
the Agraeans, and hauing taken in other places thereabouts, stood 
ready when the time should require, to goe to Siphae.

About the same time of this Summer, Brasidas marching towards the Cities
vpon Thrace, with 1700 men of Armes, when he came to Heraclea in Trachinia,
sent a Messenger before him to his friends at        Brasidas passeth through
Pharsalus, requiring them to be guides vnto him, and Thessalie, with 1500 〈…〉 of
                                                     Armes, to 〈…〉 that deliberated a
to his Army. And when there were come vnto him,      reuolt.
Panaerus, and Dorus, and Hippolochidas, and

Torylaus, and S●rophacus, (who was the publique Hoste of the Chalcideans) all
which met him Melitia, a towne of Achaia, he marched on. There were other of
the Thessalians also that conuoyed him; and from Larissa, he was conuoyed by
Niconidas a friend of Perdiccas. For it had beene hard to passe Thessaly without
a guide, howsoeuer, but especially with an Army. And to passe through a
neighbour Territory without leaue, is a thing that all Grecians alike are iealous
of. Besides, that the people of Thessaly had euer borne good a ection to the
Athenians. Insomuch, as if by custome, the gouernment of that Countrey had
not beene * Lordly, rather then a * Common-wealth * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈…〉
he could neuer haue gone on. For also now as he          * [...]
marched forward, there met him at the Riuer
Enipeus, others of a contrary mind to the former, that forbad him, and told him
that he did vniustly to goe on without the common consent of all. But those
that conuoyed him answered, that they would not bring him through against
their wils; but that comming to them on a sudden, they conducted him as
friends. And Brasidas himselfe said▪ he came thither a friend, both to the
countrey, and to them; and that he bore Armes, not The soft answer of Brasidas,
against them, but against the Athenians their enemies. notwithstanding hee was
                                                         resolued to passe.
And that he neuer knew of any enmity, between the
Thessalians, & Lacedaemonians, wherby they might not vse one anothers
ground; and that euen now he would not goe on without their consent; for
neither could hee; but onely entreated them not to stop him. When they heard
this, they went their wayes. And he, by the aduice of his guides, before any
greater number should vnite to hinder him, marched Brasidas goeth apace through
on with all possible speed▪ staying no whereby the       Thessaly.

way; and the same day he set forth from Melitia, he reached Pharsalus, and
encamped by the Riuer Apidanus. From thence he went to Phacium. From
thence, into Peraebia. The Peraebians, though subiect to the                
Thessalonians, set him at Dion, in the Dominion of Perdiccas, a little City of the
Macedonians, scituate at the foot of Olympus, on the side toward Thessalie. In
this manner, Brasidas ran through Thessalie, before any there could put in
readinesse to stop him; and came into the Territorie of the Chalcideans, and to
Perdiccas. For Perdiccas, and the Chalcideans, all that had reuolted from the

Athenians, when they saw the a aires of the                The cause why Perdiccas and the
Athenians prosper, had drawne this Armie out of            Chalcideans called in the
                                                           Lacedaemonians into those
Peloponnesus for feare: the Chalcideans, because they parts.
thought the Athenians would make Warre on them
  rst, as hauing been also incited thereto, by those Cities amongst them that had
not reuolted; and Perdiccas, not that he was their open enemy, but because he
feared the Athenians for ancient quarrels; but principally because he desired to
subdue Arrhibaeus, King of the Lyncesteans. And the The cause why the
ill successe which the Lacedaemonians in these times Lacedaemonians so willingly
                                                           sent an army to them.
had, was a cause that they obtained an Armie from
them, the more easily.

For the Athenians vexing Peloponnesus, and their particular * Territory Laconia
most of all, they thought the best way to diuert them, * By incursions and forraging
was to send an Armie to the Confederates of the           the Contry, from Pylus, and the
                                                          Iland Cythera.
Athenians, so to vexe them againe. And the rather,
because Perdiccas, and the Chalcideans were content to maintain the Armie,
hauing called it thither to helpe the Chalcideans in their reuolt. And because also
they desired a pretence to send away part of their *      * their seruants.
Helotes, for feare they should take the opportunity of
the present state of their a aires, the enemies lying     An impious Policy of the
now in Pylus to innouate. For they did also this          Lacedaemonians, in the
                                                          destroying their Helotes.
further. Fearing the youth, and multitude of their
Helotes, (For the Lacedaemonians had euer many Ordinances, concerning how
to look to themselues against the Helotes, ) they caused Proclamation to be
made, that as many of them, as claimed the estimation, to haue done the
Lacedaemonians best seruice in their Warres should be made free; feeling them
in this manner, and conceiuing that as they should euery one out of pride deeme
himselfe worthy to be rst made free, so they would soonest also rebell against
them. And when they had thus preferred about 2000, which also with Crownes
on their heads, went in procession about the Temples, as to receiue their liberty,
they, not long after made them away, and no man knew how they perished. And
now at this time with all their hearts they sent away 700 men of            

Armes more of the same men, along with Brasidas. The rest of the Army were
Mercinaries hired by Brasidas, out of Peloponnesus. But Brasidas himselfe the
Lacedaemonians sent out, chie y, because it was his owne desire.
Notwithstanding the Chalcideans also longed to haue him, as one esteemed also
in Sparta, euery way an actiue man. And when he was The praise of Brasidas.
out, he did the Lacedaemonians very great seruice. For
by shewing himselfe at that present iust, and moderate towards the Cities, hee
caused the most of them to reuolt, and some of them he also tooke by Treason.
Whereby it came to passe, that if the Lacedaemonians pleased to come to
composition (as also they did) they might haue Townes to render and receiue
reciprocally.

And also long after, after the Sicilian Warre, the vertue, and wisedome which
Brasidas shewed now, to some knowne by experience, by others, beleeued vpon
from report, was the principall cause that made the Athenian Confederates
a ect the Lacedaemonians; For being the * rst that         * The ﬁrst that went abroad for
went out, and esteemed in all points for a worthy          Gouernour into other States,
                                                           since this Warre. For ﬁfty yeeres
man, he left behind him an assured hope, that the rest before this Warre, Pausanias
also were like him.                                        hauing the gouernment of the
                                                                Grecian Confederates, at
                                                                Bizantium, behaued himselfe
Being now come into Thrace, the Athenians vpon                  insolently, and then Cimon an
notice, thereof, declared Perdiccas an enemy, as                Athenian by the vertues now
                                                                praised in Brasidas, got the
imputing to him this expedition, and reinforced the             Confederates to leaue the
Garrisons in the parts thereabouts.                             Lacedaemonians, and aﬀect the
                                                                Athenians. Brasidas ioyned with
                                                                Perdiccas, marcheth towards
Perdiccas with Brasidas and his Army, together with             Lincus.
his owne Forces, marched presently against
Arrhibaeus the sonne of Bromerus, King of the Lyncestheans, a people of
Macedonia, con ning on Perdiccas his dominion, both for a quarrell they had
against him, and also as desiring to subdue him.

When he came with his Army, and Brasidas with him, Brasidas refusing to make
to the place where they were to haue fallen in, Brasidas Warre on Arrhibaeus.
told him that hee desired, before hee made Warre, to draw Arrhibaeus by parly, if

he could, to a League with the Lacedaemonians. For For the oﬀer of Arrhibaeus.
Arrhibaeus had also made some pro er by a Herald,
to commit the matter to Brasidas arbitrement. And         And through the aduice of the
the Chalcidean Ambassadours being present, gaue           Chalcideans.

him likewise aduice, not to thrust himselfe into danger in fauour of Perdiccas, to
the end they might haue him more prompt in their owne a aires. 
Besides, the Ministers of Perdiccas, when they were at Lacedaemon, had spoken
there, as if they had meant to bring as many of the places about him as they
could, into the Lacedaemonian League. So that Brasidas fauoured Arrhibaeus,
for the publique good of their owne State. But            Giueth therein distaste to 〈◊〉.
P●rdic●●●● said that he brought not Brasidas
thither, to be a Iudge of his Controuersies, but to destroy those enemies which
he should shew him. And that it will be an iniury, seeing he payes the halfe of his
Army, for Brasidas to parly with Arrhibaeus. Neuerthelesse, Brasidas whether
Perdiccas would, or not, and though it made a quarrell, had conference with
Arrhibaeus, by whom also hee was induced to withdraw his Army. But from that
time forward, Perdiccas in stead of halfe, paid but a third part of his Army, as
conceiuing himselfe to haue been iniured.

The same Summer, a little before the Vintage, Brasidas hauing ioyned to his
owne, the forces of the Chalcideans, marched to         Brasidas commeth before
Acanthus, a Colony of the Andrians. And there arose Acanthus.
sedition about receiuing him, betweene such as had ioyned with the Chalcideans
in calling him thither, and the common people. Neuerthelesse, for feare of their
fruits which were not yet gotten in, The multitude was won by Brasidas to let
him enter alone, and then (after he had said his mind) to aduise what to doe
amongst themselues. And presenting himselfe before And is receiued without his
the multitude, (for he was not vneloquent, though a army.
Lacedaemonian, ) he spake to this e ect.

 4.1. THE ORATION OF BRASIDAS.

MEN of Acanthus, The reason why the Lacedaemonians haue sent me, and
this Army abroad, is to make good what we gaue out in the beginning for the
cause of our Warre against the Athenians, which was, that we meant to make a
Warre for the Libertie of Greece. But if we be come late, as deceiued by the
Warre there, in the opinion we had, that we our selues should soone haue
pulled the Athenians downe, without any danger of yours, no man hath
reason therefore to blame vs. For we are come assoone as occasion serued, and
with your helpe will do our best, to bring them vnder. But I wonder why you
shut me forth of your gates and why I was not welcome. For we 
Lacedaemonians haue vndergone this great danger, of passing many dayes
iournie through the Territory of Strangers, and shewed all possible zeale, be
cause we imagined that we went to such Confederates, as before wee came,
had vs present in their hearts, and were desirous of our comming. And
therefore it were hard, that you should now bee otherwise minded, and
withstand your owne, and the rest of the Grecians liberty; not onely in that
your selues resist vs, but also because others whom I goe to, will be the lesse
willing to come in; making di culty, because you to whom I came rst,
hauing a ourishng City, and being esteemed wise, haue refused vs: For which
I shall haue no su cient excuse to pleade, but must be thought either to
pretend to set vp liberty vniustly, or to come weake, and without power to
maintaine you against the Athenians. And yet against this same Army I now
haue, when I went to encounter the Athenians at Nisaea, though more in
number, they durst not hazzard battell. Nor is it likely that the Athenians will
send forth so great a number against you, as they had in their Fleet there at
Nisaea. I come not hither to hurt, but to set free the Grecians, and I haue the
Lacedaemonian Magistrates bound vnto me by great Oathes, that whatsoeuer
Confederates shall be added to their side, at least by mee, shall still enioy their
owne Lawes. And that wee shall not hold you as Confederates to vs, brought
in either by force, or fraud, but on the contrary, be Confederates to you, that
are kept in seruitude by the Athenians. And therefore I clayme not onely that
you be not iealous of mee, especially hauing giuen you so good assurance, or
thinke me vnable to defend you, but also that you declare your selues boldly
with mee. And if any man be vnwilling so to doe, through feare of some

particular man, apprehending that I would put the Citie into the hands of a
few, let him cast away that feare; for I came not to side, nor doe I thinke I
should bring you an assured liberty, if neglecting the ancient vse here, I should
enthrall, either the Multitude, to the Few, or the Few to the Multitude. For to
be gouerned so, were worse then the domination of a Forrainer. And there
would result from it to vs Lacedaemonians, not thankes for our labours, but
in stead of honour and glory, an imputation of those * crimes, for which we
make Warre amongst the Athenians, and which              * Ambition and desire to
would be more odious in vs then in them, that neuer subdue other States.
pretended the * vertue. For it is more dishonourable, * The desire to assert other
at least, to men in dignity, to ampli e their estate by States.
specious fraud, then by open violence. For the later assayleth with a certaine
right of power giuen vs by Fortune, but the other, with the treachery of a
wicked conscience.

But besides the oath which they haue sworne already, the greatest 
further assurance you can haue, is this, That our actions weighed with our
words, you must needs beleeue, that it is to our pro t to doe, as I haue told
you. But if after these promises of mine, you shall say, you cannot, and yet for
as much as your a ection is with vs, will claime impunity for reiecting vs; Or
shall say that this liberty I o er you seemes to bee accompanied with danger,
and that it were well done to o er it to such as can receiue it, but not to force
it vpon any. Then will I call to witnesse the Gods, and * Heroes of this place,
that my counsell which you refuse, was for your          * [...]
good, and will indeuour by wasting of your
Territory to compell you to it. Nor shall I thinke I doe you therein, any
wrong; But haue reason for it from two necessities, one, of the
Lacedaemonians, lest whilest they haue your a ections, and not your society,
they should receiue hurt from your contribution of money to the Athenians;
another, of the Grecians, lest they should be hindered of their liberty by your
example; for otherwise indeed we could not iustly doe it; nor ought we
Lacedaemonians to set any at liberty against their wills, if it were not for some
common good. We couet not dominion ouer you, but seeing we haste to make

 others lay downe the same, we should doe iniury to the greater part, if
 bringing liberty to the other States in generall, we should tolerate you to crosse
 vs. Deliberate well of these things▪ striue to be the beginners of Liberty in
 Greece, to get your selues eternall glory, to preserue euery man his priuate
 estate from dammage, and to inuest the whole Citie with a most honourable *
 Title. Thus spake Brasidas.                              * 〈◊〉 Title of a free City.

The Acanthians, after much said on either side, partly for that which Brasidas
had e ectually spoken, and partly for feare of their    The reuolt of 〈◊〉.
fruits abroad, the most of them decreed to reuolt from
the Athenians, hauing giuen their votes in secret. And when they had made him
take the same oath, which the Lacedaemonian Magistrates tooke, when they sent
him out; namely, that what Confederates soeuer he should ioyne to the
Lacedaemonians, should enioy their owne Lawes, they receiued his Army into
the City. And not long after, reuolted Stagyrus,        The reuolt of Stagyrus.
another Colony of the Andrians. And these were the
Acts of this Summer.

In the very beginning of the next Winter, when the     The end of the eighth Summer.
Boeotian Cities should haue been deliuered to
Hippocrates and Demosthenes, Generals of the Athenians, and that 
Demosthenes should haue gone to Siphae, and            [...]
Hippocrates to Delium, hauing mistaken the dayes,
on which they should haue both set forward, Demosthenes went to Siphae *
  rst, and hauing with him the Acarnans, and many      * [...]
Confederates of those parts in his Fleet, yet lost his
labour. For the Treason was detected by one Nicomachus a Phocean, of the
Towne of Phanotis, who told it vnto the                The Treason detected.
Lacedaemonians, and they againe vnto the Boeotians.
Whereby the Boeotians concurring vniuersally to relieue those places, (for
Hippocrates was not yet gone to trouble them in their owne seuerall Territories)
preoccupied both Siphae, and Chaeronea. And the Conspirators knowing the
errour, attempted in those Cities no further.

But Hippocrates hauing raised the whole power of the Citie of Athens, both
Citizens and others that dwelt amongst them, and all Hippocrates 〈…〉 Delium.
strangers, that were then there, arriued * afterwards at
Delium, when the Boeotians were now returned from *
Siphae, and there stayed, and tooke in Delium a           After Demosthenes ha been at
                                                                               ●

                                                          Siphae 〈…〉 was too late.
Temple of Apollo with a wall; in this manner. Round
                                                          He fortiﬁeth 〈◊〉.
about the Temple, and the whole consecrated ground,
they drew a Ditch, and out of the Ditch, in stead of a wall, they cast vp the earth,
and hauing driuen downe piles on either side, they cast thereinto the matter of
the Vineyard about the Temple, which to that purpose they cut downe, together
with the Stones and Bricks of the ruined buildings. And by all meanes
heightened the forti cation, and in such places as would giue leaue, erected
Turrets of wood vpon the same. There was no Edi ce of the Temple standing,
for the Cloyster that had been was fallen downe. They began the worke, the
third day after they set forth from Athens, and wrought all the same day, and all
the fourrh and the ft day, till dinner. And then being The army of the Athenians,
most part of it nished, the campe came backe from hauing taken Delium, begin to
                                                          retire.
Delium, about ten Furlongs homewards. And the
light-armed Souldiers went most of them presently away, but the men of Armes,
laid downe their Armes there, and rested. Hippocrates staid yet behind, and
tooke order about the Garrison, and about the nishing of the remainder of
forti cation. The Boeotians tooke the same time to        The Boeotians follow them
assemble at Tanagra; and when all the Forces were
come in, that from euery Citie were expected, and when they vnderstood that
the Athenians drew homewards, though the rest of the * Boeotian 
Commanders, which were eleuen, approued not               * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, eleuen in
giuing battell, because they were not now in Boeotia number.
(for the Athenians, when they laid downe their Armes, were in the Con nes of
Oropia) yet Pagondas the sonne of Aioladas, being the * Boeotian Commander *
for Thebes, whose turne it was to haue the leading of * It seemes that the seuerall
the Army, was, together with Arianthidas the sonne of States of Boeotia being free of
                                                          〈…〉, and holding altogether,
Lysimachidas, of opinion to ght, and held it the best were vnited vnder power no
course to try the fortune of a battell; wherefore calling resent from them seuerally 〈◊〉
                                                                                      ▪

them vnto him euery Company by it selfe, that they           the Warres, and then they had
                                                             the leading of the common forces
might not be all at once from their Armes, he                by 〈◊〉.
exhorted the Boeotians to march against the
                                                             * It seemes that the seuerall
Athenians, and to hazzard battell, speaking in this          States of Boeotia being free of
manner.                                                      〈…〉, and holding altogether,
                                                             were vnited vnder power no
                                                             resent from them seuerally 〈◊〉▪
                                                             the Warres, and then they had
 4.1. THE ORATION OF                                         the leading of the common forces
                                                             by 〈◊〉.
 PAGONDAS to his Souldiers.
 MEN of Boeotia, it ought neuer to haue so much as entred into the thought
 of any of vs the Commanders, that because we nde not the Athenians now
 in Boeotia, it should therefore be vn t to giue them battell. For they, out of a
 bordering Countrey haue entred Boeotia, and forti ed in it, with intent to
 waste it, and are indeed enemies in whatsoeuer ground wee nd them, or
 whencesoeuer they come, doing the acts of hostility. But now if any man
 thinke it also vnsafe, let him henceforth be of another opinion. For
 prouidence in them that are inuaded, endureth not such deliberation
 concerning their owne, as may be vsed by them, who retaining their owne, out
 of desire to enlarge, voluntarily inuade the estate of another. And it is the
 custome of this Countrey of yours, when a forraine enemy comes against you,
 to ght with him, both on your owne, and on your neighbours ground alike;
 but much more you ought to doe it, against the Athenians, when they be
 borderers. * For liberty with all men, is nothing else * So that so score a a State
                                                                             ●

 but to be a match for the Cities that are their          hath a neighbour strong enough
                                                          to 〈◊〉 it, it is 〈◊〉 more to be
 neighbours. With these then that attempt the             thought a 〈◊〉 State.
 subiugation, not onely of their neighbours, but of
 estates farre from them, why should we not try the vtmost of our fortune? We
 haue for example, the estate that the Euboeans ouer against vs, and also the
 greatest part of the rest of Greece do liue in vnder them. And you must know,
 that though others ght with their neighbours, about the bounds of their
 Territories, wee if we be vanquished shall haue but one bound amongst vs all;
 so that wee shall no more quarrell about limits. For if they enter, 

 they will take all our seuerall states into their owne possession by force. So
 much more dangerous is the neighbourhood of the Athenians, then of other
 people. And such as vpon con dence in their strength inuade their
 neighbours, (as the Athenians now doe) vse to bee bolde in warring on those
 that sit still, defending themselues onely in their owne Territories; whereas
 they be lesse vrgent to those that are ready to meete them without their owne
 limits, or also to beginne the Warre when opportunity serueth. We haue
 experience hereof in these same men; for after wee had ouercome them at
 Coronea, at what time through our owne sedition, they held our Countrey in
 subiection, wee established a great security in Boeotia, which lasted till this
 present. Remembring which, wee ought now, the elder sort to imitate our
 former acts there, and the yonger sort, who are the children of those valiant
 Fathers, to endeuour not to disgrace the vertue of their Houses; but rather
 with con dence that the God, whose Temple forti ed they vnlawfully dwell
 in, will bee with vs, the Sacri ces wee o ered him appearing faire, to march
 against them, and let them see, that though they may gaine what they couet,
 when they inuade such as will not ght, yet men that haue the generosity to
 hold their owne in liberty by battell, and not inuade the state of another
 vniustly, will neuer let them goe away vnfoughten.

Pagondas with this exhortation perswaded the Boeotians to march against the
Athenians, and making them * rise, led them speedily * It was the fashion in those
on, for it was drawing towards night, and when he         times, for the Souldiers to sit
                                                          downe with their Armes by
was neere to their Army, in a place, from whence by       them, when they staide any
the interposition of a Hill they saw not each other,      where in the Field.

making a stand, he put his Armie into order, and
prepared to giue Battell. When it was told Hippocrates, who was then at
Delium, that the Boeotians were marching after them, he sends presently to the
Armie, commanding them to bee put in array, and not long after hee came
himselfe, hauing left some 300. Horse about Delium, both for a guard to the
place, if it should be assaulted, and withall to watch an opportunity to come
vpon the Boeotians when they were in ght. But for these, the Boeotians
appointed some Forces purposely to attend them. And when all was as it should

be, they shewed themselues from the toppe of the Hill. Where they sate downe
with their Armes, in the same order they were to ght The order of the Army of the
in; being about seuen thousand men of Armes, of           Boeotians.

light-armed Souldiers, aboue tenne thousand, a thousand                
Horsemen, and ue hundred Targettiers. Their right Wing consisting of the
Thebans, and their partakers; In the middle battell were the Haliartians,
Coronaeans, Copaeans, and the rest that dwell about the * Lake; In the left were
the Thespians, Tanagraeans, and Orchomenians. The * The Lake Copais.
Horsemen, and light-armed Souldiers were placed on
either wing. The Thebans were ordered by twenty ue in File, but the rest, euery
one as it fell out. This was the preparation and order of the Boeotians.

The Athenian men of Armes, in number, no fewer          The order of the army of the
then the enemy, were ordered by eight in File           Athenians.

throughout. Their Horse they placed on either Wing; but for light-armed
Souldiers, armed as was t, there were none, nor was there any in the City. Those
that went out, followed the Campe, for the most part without Armes, as being a
generall expedition both of Citizens, and Strangers; and after they once began to
make homeward, there stayed few behind. When they were now in their order,
and ready to ioyne battell, Hippocrates the Generall came into the Army of the
Athenians, and encouraged them, speaking to this e ect.

 4.1. THE ORATION OF HIPPOCRATES to his
 Souldiers.
 MEN of Athens, my exhortation shall be short, but with valiant men, it hath
 as much force as a longer, and is for a remembrance, rather then a command.
 Let no man thinke, because it is in the Territory of another, that we therefore
 precipitate our selues into a great danger that did not concerne vs. For in the
 Territory of these men, you ght for your owne. If wee get the victory, the
 Peloponnesians will neuer inuade our Territories againe, for want of the
 Boeotian Horsemen. So that in one battell, you shall both gaine this Territory,

 and free your owne. Therefore march on against the enemy, euery one as
 becommeth the dignity, both of his naturall Citie, (which he glorieth to be
 chiefe of all Greece) and of his Ancestors, who hauing ouercome these men at
 Oenophyta, vnder the Conduct of Myronides, were in times past Masters of
 all Boeotia.

Whiles Hippocrates was making this exhortation, and had gone with 
it ouer halfe the Army, but could proceed no further, the Boeotians, (for
Pagondas likewise made but a short exhortation, and The Boeotians interrupt the
had there sung the Paean) came downe vpon them            Oration.

from the hill. And the Athenians likewise went forward to meet them, so fast,
that they met together running. The vtmost parts of both the Armies neuer
came to ioyne, hindred both by one, and the same cause, for certaine currents of
water kept them asunder. But the rest made sharpe battell; standing close, and
striuing to put by each others Bucklers. The left wing of the Boeotians, to the
very middle of the Army was ouerthrowne by the Athenians, who in this part
had to deale, amongst others principally with the Thespians. For whilest they
that were placed within the same wing, gaue backe, and were circled in by the
Athenians in a narrow compasse, those Thespians that were slaine, were hewed
downe in the very ght. Some also of the Athenians themselues, troubled with
inclosing them, through ignorance slew one another. So that the Boeotians were
ouerthrowne in this part, and ed to the other part, where they were yet in ght.
But the right wing wherein the Thebans stood, had the better of the Athenians,
and by little and little, forced them to giue ground, and followed vpon them
from the very rst. It hapned also that Pagondas, whilst the left wing of this
Army was in distresse, sent two Companies of Horse secretly about the hill;
whereby that wing of the Athenians which was victorious, apprehending vpon
their sudden appearing that they had bin a fresh Army, was put into a right, and
the whole Army of the Athenians, now doubly terri ed, by this accident, and by
the Thebans that continually won ground, & brake their ranks, betooke
themselues to ight. Some ed toward Delium, and the sea; and some towards
Oropus; others toward the mountaine Parnethus, and The Athenians ﬂie.
others other wayes, as to each appeared hope of safety.

The Boeotians, especially their horse, & those Locrians that came in, after the
enemy was already defeated, followed, killing them. But night surprising them,
the multitude of them that ed, was the easier saued. The next day, those that
were gotten to Oropus and Delium, went thence by Sea to Athens, hauing left a
Garrison in Delium, which place, notwithstanding this defeat, they yet retayned.
The Boeotians, when they had erected their Trophy, taken away their owne
dead, ri ed those of the enemy, and left a guard vpon the place,                 
returned backe to Tanagra, and there entred into consultation, for an assault to
be made vpon Delium. In the meane time, a Herald sent from the Athenians, to
require the bodies, met with a Herald by the way, sent by the Boeotians, which
turned him backe by telling him he could get nothing done, till himselfe was
returned from the Athenians. This Herald, when he Dispute about giuing leaue to
came before the Athenians, deliuered vnto them what the Athenians to take vp their
                                                             dead.
the Boeotians had giuen him in charge; namely, That
they had done iniustly, to transgresse the vniuersall law The message of the Boeotians to
of the Grecians; being a constitution receiued by them the Athenians.
all, that the Inuader of anothers countrey, shall abstaine from all holy places in
the same. That the Athenians had fortiﬁed Delium, and dwelt in it, and done
whatsoeuer else men vse to doe in places profane, and had drawne that water to the
common vse, which was vnlawfull for themselues to haue touched, saue onely to
wash their hands for the sacriﬁce. That therfore the Boeotians, both in the behalfe
of the god, and of themselues, inuoking Apollo, and all the interessed * spirits, did
warne them to be gone, and to remoue their stuﬀe out of * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
the Temple. After the Herald had said this, the              The message of the Athenians to
Athenians sent a Herald of their owne to the                 the 〈◊〉, by a friend of their
Boeotians▪ Denying that either they had done any             owne.

wrong to the holy place already, or would willingly doe any hurt to it hereafter.
For neither did they at ﬁrst enter into it, to such intent; but to requite the greater
iniuries which had beene done vnto them. As for the law which the Grecians haue,
it is no other, but that they which haue the dominion of any territory, great or
small, haue euer the Temples also, & besides the accustomed rites, may
superinduce what other they can. For also the Boeotians, and most men else, all
that hauing driuen out another nation, possesse their territory, did at ﬁrst inuade

the Temples of others, and make them their owne. That therefore, if they could win
from them more of their Land, they would keepe it; and for the part they were now
in, they were in it with a good will, and would not out of it, as being their owne.
That for the water, they medled with it vpon necessity, which was not to be ascribed
to insolence, but to this, that ﬁghting against the Boeotians that had inuaded their
territory ﬁrst, they were forced to vse it. For whatsoeuer is forced by War, or
danger, hath in reason a kind of pardon, euen with the god himselfe. For the
Altars, in cases of inuoluntary oﬀences, are a refuge; and they are said to violate
Lawes, that are euill without constraint, not they that are a little bold vpon
occasion of distresse.

That the Boeotians themselues, who require restitution of the holy places, for a
redemption of the dead, are more irreligious by farre, then they, who, rather then
let their Temples goe, are content to goe without, that which were ﬁt for 
them to receiue. And they bad him say plainly, That they would not depart out of
the Boeotian Territory, for that they were not now in it, but in a Territory which
they had made their owne by the * Sword; And               * 〈◊〉, by the 〈◊〉.
neuerthelesse, required Truce according to the
Ordinances of the Countrey, for the fetching away of the dead. To this the
Boeotians answered, That if the dead were in Boeotia The reply of the Boeotians.
they should quit the ground, and take with them,
whatsoeuer was theirs. But if the dead were in their owne Territory, the Athenians
themselues knew best what to doe. For they thought, that though Oropia, wherein
the dead lay, (for the battell was fought in the border betweene Attica and
Boeotia) by subiection belonged to the Athenians, yet they could not fetch them
o by force; and for Truce, that the Athenians might come safely on Athenian
ground, they would giue none, but conceiued it was a handsome answer, to say,
That if they would quit the ground, they should obtaine whatsoeuer they required.
Which when the Athenian Herald heard, he went his way without e ect. The
Boeotian presently sent for Darters and Slingers from the Townes on the Melian
Gulfe, and with these, and with two thousand men of Armes, of Corinth, and
with the Peloponnesian Garrison that was put out of Nisaea, and with the
Megareans, all which arriued after the battell, they marched forthwith to

Delium, and assaulted the wall; and when they had attempted the same many
other wayes, at length they brought to it an Engine, wherewith they also tooke it,
made in this manner. Hauing slit in two a great Mast, they made hollow both
the sides, and curiously set them together againe in       The forme of an Engine,
forme of a Pipe. At the end of it in chaines they hung wherewith they let the wall on
                                                           ﬁre▪
a Caldron, and into the Caldron from the end of the
Mast, they conveyed a snowt of Iron, hauing with Iron also armed a great part of
the rest of the wood. They carried it to the wall, being farre o , in Carts, to that
part where it was most made vp, with the matter of the Vineyard, and with
wood. And when it was to, they applied a paire of great bellowes to the end next
themselues, and blew. The blast passing narrowly through into the Caldron, in
which were coales of re, brimstone, and pitch, raised an exceeding great ame,
and set the wall on re; so that no man being able to Delium recouered by the
stand any longer on it, but abandoning the same, and Boeotians.
betaking themselues to ight, the wall was by that meanes taken.

Of the Defendants, some were slaine, and 200 taken prisoners. The 
rest of the number recouered their Gallies, and got home. Delium thus taken on
the seuenteenth day after the battell, and the Herald, which not long after, was
sent againe about the fetching away of the dead, not knowing it, the Boeotians
let him haue them, and answered no more as they had The Boeotians deliuer to the
formerly done. In the battell there dyed Boeotians few Athenians their dead.
lesse then ue hundred. Athenians few lesse then a thousand, with Hippocrates
the Generall; but of light-atmed Souldiers, and such as carried the prouisions of
the Army, a great number.

Not long after this battell, Demosthenes, that had been with his Army at Siphae,
seeing the Treason succeeded not, hauing aboord his Gallies, his Army of
Acarnanians, and Agraeans, and foure hundred men Demosthenes landing in 〈◊〉, is
of Armes of Athens, landed in Sicyonia. But before all beaten backe by the Inhabitants.
his Gallies came to Shoare, the Sicyonians, who went out to defend their
Territory, put to ight such as were already landed, and chased them backe to
their Gallies; hauing also slaine some, and taken some aliue. And when they had

erected a Trophy, they gaue Truce to the Athenians for the fetching away of their
dead.

About the time that these things past at Delium, dyed Sitalces King of Thrace, dyeth,
Sitalces, King of the Odrysians, ouercome in battell, in and Seuthes his brothers sonne
                                                         succeedeth him.
an expedition against the Triballians; And Seuthes the
son of Spardocus, his brothers sonne, succeeded him, in the kingdome both of the
Odrysians, and of the rest of Thrace, as much as was before subiect to Sitalces.

The same Winter, Brasidas, with the Confederates in Brasidas goeth to Amphipolis.
Thrace, made Warre vpon Amphipolis; a Colony of
the Athenians, scituated on the Riuer Strymon. The place whereon the City
now standeth, Aristagoras of Miletus, had formerly attempted to inhabite, when
he ed from King Darius, but was beaten away by the The originall of Amphipolis.
Edonians. Two and thirty yeeres after this, the
Athenians assayed the same, and sent thither ten thousand of their owne Citie,
and of others as many as would goe. And these were destroyed all by the
Thracians at Drabescus.

In the 29 yeere after, conducted by Agnon the sonne of Agnon Founder of Amphipolis.
Nisias, the Athenians came againe, and hauing driuen
out the Edonians, became Founders of this place, formerly called the Nine-
wayes. This Army lay then at Eion, a Towne of Tra que by the Sea-side, subiect
to the Athenians, at the mouth of the Riuer Strymon; ue and            
twenty Furlongs from the Citie; Agnon named this City Amphipolis, because it
was surrounded by the Riuer Strymon, that runnes on either side it. When he
had taken it in, with a long wall from Riuer to Riuer, he put Inhabitants into
the place, being conspicuous round about, both to the Sea, and Land.

Against this Citie marched Brasidas with his Armie, dislodging from Arnae in
Chalcidea. Being about twilight come as farre as Au●on and Bromiscus, where
the Lake Bolbe entreth into the Sea, hee caused his Armie to suppe, and then
marched forward by night. The weather was foule, and a little it snowed, which
also made him to march the rather, as desiring that none of Amphipolis, but

onely the Traytors, should bee aware of his comming. The Argilians co betray●●

For there were both Argilians that dwelt in the same Amphipolis.
Citie, (now Argilus is a Colonie of the Andrians) and others, that contriued this,
induced thereunto, some by Perdiccas, and some by the Chalcideans. But aboue
all, the Argilians beeing of a City neere vnto it, and euer suspected by the
Athenians, and secret enemies to the place, as soone as opportunity was o ered,
and Brasidas arriued, (who had also long before dealt vnderhand with as many of
them as dwelt in Amphipolis, to betray it) both receiued him into their owne
Citie, and reuolting from the Athenians, brought the Argilus reuolteth.
Armie forward the same night, as farre as to the bridge
of the Riuer. The Towne stood not close to the Riuer, nor was there a Fort at the
Bridge then, as there is now, but they kept it onely with a small guard of
Souldiers. Hauing easily forced this guard, both in respect of the Treason, and of
the weather, and of his owne vnexpected approach,          Brasidas winneth the Bridge,
hee passed the Bridge, and was presently master of         and is master of all betweene it
                                                           and the Citie.
whatsoeuer the Amphipolitans had, that dwelt
without. Hauing thus suddenly passed the Bridge, and many of those without
beeing slaine, and some ed into the Citie, the Amphipolitans, were in very great
confusion at it, and the rather, because they were iealous one of another. And it
is said, that if Brasidas had not sent out his Armie to take bootie, but had
marched presently to the Citie, hee had in all likelihood taken it then. But so it
was, that he pitched there, and fell vpon those without, and seeing nothing
succeeded by those within, lay still vpon the place. But the contrary 
Faction to the Traytors, being superiour in number, whereby the Gates were not
opened presently, both they and Eucles the Generall, who was then there for the
Athenians, to keep the towne, sent vnto the other          The Amphipolians send for aide
Generall, Thucydides the sonne of Olorus, the Writer of to Thucydides, the Author of this
                                                           Historie.
this Historie, who had charge in Thrace, and was now
about Thasus (which is an Iland, and a Colonie of the Parians, distant from
Amphipolis, about halfe a dayes sayle) requiring him to come and releeue them.

When he heard the newes, he went thitherwards in all haste, with seuen Gallies
which chanced to be with him at that time. His purpose principally was, to

preuent the yeelding vp of Amphipolis, but if he should faile of that, then to
possesse himselfe of Eion, before Brasidas his comming.

Brasidas in the meane time, fearing the aid of the Gallies, to come from Thasus,
and hauing also beene informed that Thucydides possessed mines of gold in the
parts of Thrace thereaboues, and was thereby of ability amongst the principall
men of the Continent, hasted by all meanes to get Amphipolis, before he should
arriue; lest otherwise at his comming the Commons of Amphipolis, expecting
that he would leuy Confederates, both from the Sea side, and in Thrace, and
releeue them, should thereupon refuse to yeeld. And to that end, o ered them a
moderate composition, causing to be proclaimed, That whosoeuer
Amphipolitan, or Athenian would, might continue to Brasidas, fearing to be
dwell there, and enioy his owne, with equall and like preuented by Thucydides,
                                                         hasteth by ea e conditions, to
                                                                      ●
forme of gouernment. And that he that would not,         procure the Towne to yeeld.
should haue ﬁue dayes respit to be gone, and carry
away his good.

When the Commons heard this, their mindes were turned; and the rather,
because the Athenians amongst them were but few, and the most, were a
promiscuous multitude; And the kinsmen of those that were taken without,
 ocked together within, and in respect of their feare, they all thought the
Proclamation reasonable. The Athenians thought it so, because they were
willing to goe out, as apprehending their owne danger to be greater, then that of
the rest, and withall, not expecting aid in haste; and the rest of the multitude, as
being thereby both deliuered of the danger, and withall to retaine their Citie,
with the equall forme of gouernment. Insomuch, that they which          
conspired with Brasidas, now openly iusti ed the o er to be reasonable, and
seeing the minds of the Commons were now turned, and that they gaue eare no
more to the words of the Athenian Generall, they compounded, and vpon the
conditions proclaimed, receiued him. Thus did these Amphipolis yeelded.
men deliuer vp the City.

Thucydides with his Gallies, arriued in the euening of Thucydides commeth too late to
the same day at Eion. Brasidas had already gotten          releeue Amph   ●●●●   lis, and
                                                           putteth himselfe into Eion.
Amphipolis▪ and wanted but a night of taking Eion
also, for if these Gallies had not come speedily to relieue it, by next morning it
had beene had.

After this, Thucydides assured Eion, so as it should bee safe, both for the
present, though Brasidas should assault it, and for the future; and tooke into it,
such as according to the Proclamation made, came downe from Amphipolis.
Brasidas, with many Boats came suddenly downe the Riuer to Eion, and
attempted to seaze on the point of the ground lying out from the wall into the
Sea, and thereby to command the mouth of the Riuer; he assayed also the same,
at the same time by Land, and was in both beaten o ; And defendeth it against
but Amphipolis hee furnished with all things             Brasidas.

necessary.

Then reuolted to him Myrcinus, a City of the Edonians, (Pittacus, the King of
 Great inclination of the people of the Edonians, being slaine by the sons of Goaxis, and
 those parts to come in to          by Braure his owne wife. ) And not long after,
 Brasidas.
                                    Gapselus also, and Oesyme, Colonies of the Thasians.
Perdiccas also after the taking of these places, came to him, and helped him in
assuring of the same. After Amphipolis was taken, the Athenians were brought
into great feare; especially, for that it was a City that The Athenians begin to feare.
yeelded them much pro t, both in Timber which is
sent them for the building of Gallies, and in reuenue of money; and because also,
though the Lacedaemonians had a passage open to come against their
Confederates (the Thessalians conuoying them) as farre as to Strymon, yet if
they had not gotten that Bridge, the Riuer being vpwards, nothing but a vast
Fenne, and towards Eion, well guarded with their Gallies, they could haue gone
no further, which now they thought they might easily doe; and therefore feared
lest their Confederates should reuolt. For Brasidas both shewed himselfe
otherwise very moderate, and also gaue out in speech, that he was sent forth to
recouer the liberty of Greece. And the Cities, which were subiect to the

Athenians, hearing of the taking of Amphipolis, and what assurance 
he brought with him, and of his gentlenesse besides, were extremely desirous of
innouation; and sent Messengers priuily to bid him draw neere, euery one
striuing who should rst reuolt. For they thought they might doe it boldly,
falsely estimating the power of the Athenians to be lesse then afterwards it
appeared, and making a iudgment of it according to blind wilfulnesse, rather
then safe forecast. It being the fashion of men, what they wish to be true to
admit, euen vpon an vngrounded hope, and what they wish not, with a *
Magistrall kind of arguing to reiect. Withall, because * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
the Athenians had lately receiued a blow from the
Boeotians, and because Brasidas had said, not as was the truth, but as serued best
to allure them, that when he was at Nisaea, the Athenians durst not ght with
those forces of his alone, they grew con dent thereon, and beleeued not that any
man would come against them. But the greatest cause of all was, that for the
delight they tooke at this time to innouate, and for that they were to make triall
of the Lacedaemonians, not till now angry, they were content by any meanes to
put it to the hazzard. Which being perceiued, the Athenians sent Garrison
Souldiers into those Cities, as many as the shortnesse The Athenians send Garrisons to
of the time, and the season of Winter would permit. the places therabouts.
And Brasidas sent vnto Lacedaemon, to demand greater forces; and in the meane
time prepared to build Gallies on the Riuer of Strymon. But the
Lacedaemonians, partly through enuy of the                Brasidas enuied at home.
principall men, and partly, because they more a ected
the redemption of their men taken in the * Iland, and * Sphacteria.
the ending of the Warre, refused to furnish him.

The same Winter, the Megareans hauing recouered       The Megareans demolish their
their Long-walls, holden by the Athenians, rased them Long-wals, which were before but
                                                      disioyned from the City, by the
to the very ground.                                   Athenians.

Brasidas, after the taking of Amphipolis, hauing with Brasidas inuadeth the Territory
him the Confederates, marched with his Army into        of Acte, where Athos standeth.

the Territory called Acte. This Acte is that prominent Territorie, which is

disioyned from the Continent, by a Ditch made by the * King. And Athos a high
mountaine in the same, determineth at the Aegean         * Xerxes when he inuaded
Sea. Of the Cities it hath, one is Sane, a Colony of the Greece.
Andrians, by the side of the said Ditch, on the part which looketh to the Sea,
towards, Euboea; The rest are Thyssus, Cleonae, Acrothoi, Olophyxus, 
and Dion, and are inhabited by promiscuous Barbarians of * two languages;
some few there are also of the Chalcidean Nations but * The Greeke, and their owne
the most are Pelasgique, of those Tyrrhene Nations       Barbarian.

that once inhabited Athens, and Lemnos; and of the Bisaltique and
Chrestonique Nations, and Edonians; and dwell in small Cities, the most of
which yeelded to Brasidas. But Sane, and Dion held out; for which cause he
stayed with his Army and wasted their Territories. But seeing they would not
hearken vnto him, he led his Army presently against Torone of Chalcidea, held
by the Athenians. He was called in by the Few, who       Torone reuolteth to Brasidas.
were ready withall to deliuer him the Citie, and         The manner how the Towne was
arriuing there a little before breake of day, he sate    betrayed.
downe with his Army at the Temple of Castor and
Pollux, distant about three Furlongs from the Citie. So that to the rest of the
City, and to the Athenian Garrison in it, his comming was vnperceiued. But the
Traitors knowing hee was to come, (some few of them, being also priuily gone to
him) attended his approach, and when they perceiued he was come, they tooke
in vnto them seuen men▪ armed onely with Daggers, (for of twenty appointed
at rst to that seruice, seuen only had the courage to go in, and were led by
Lysistratus of Olynthus) which getting ouer the wal towards the main Sea
vnseen, went vp (for the Towne standeth on a hils side) to the watch that kept
the vpper end of the Towne, and hauing slaine the watchmen, brake open the
Posterne Gate towards Canastraea. Brasidas this while, with the rest of his
Army, lay still, and then comming a little forward, sent 100 Targettiers before,
who when the Gates should be opened, and signe agreed on be set vp, should
run in rst. These men expecting long, and wondering at the matter, by little
and little were at length come vp close to the City. Those Toroneans within,
which helped the men that entred to performe the enterprize, when the Posterne
Gate was broken open, and the Gate leading to the Market place opened

likewise, by cutting asunder the Barre, went rst and fetch some of them about
to the Posterne, to the end that they might suddenly a right such of the Towne
as knew not the matter, both behind, and on either side; and then they put vp
the signe appointed, which was re, and receiued the rest of the Targettiers by
the Gate that leadeth to the Market place.

Brasidas, when he saw the signe, made his Army rise, and with a huge 
cry of all at once, to the great terrour of those within, entred into the City
running. Some went directly in by the Gate, and some by certaine squared
Timber-trees, which lay at the wall (which hauing been lately downe, was now
againe in building) for the drawing vp of Stone.            The Towne taken.
Brasidas therefore, with the greatest number, betooke
himselfe to the highest places of the City, to make sure the winning of it, by
possessing the places of aduantage.

But the rest of the Rabble ran dispersed here and there, without di erence.
When the Towne was taken, the most of the Toronaeans were much troubled,
because they were not acquainted with the matter, but the Conspirators, and
such as were pleased with it, ioyned themselues presently with those that entred.
The Athenians (of which there were about fty men of Armes asleepe in the
Market place) when they knew what had happened, The Athenians escape into a
  ed all, except some few that were slaine vpon the       Castle of the same called
                                                          Lecythus.
place, some by Land, some by water in two Gallies
that kept watch there, and saued themselues in Lecythus; which was a Fort
which they themselues held, cut o from the rest of the City to the Sea-ward, in
a narrow Isthmus. And thither also ed all such Toronaeans as were a ected to
them. Being now day, and the City strongly possessed, Brasidas caused a
Proclamation to be made, that those Toronaeans which were ed with the
Athenians, might come backe, as many as would, to their owne, and Inhabite
there in security. To the Athenians he sent a Herald, bidding them depart out of
Lecythus, vnder Truce, with all that they had, as a place that belonged to the
Chalcideans. The Athenians denyed to quit the place, but the Truce they desired
for one day, for the taking vp of their dead. And Brasidas granted it for two. In

which two dayes, hee forti ed the buildings neere, and so also did the Athenians
theirs. Hee also called an Assembly of the Toronaeans, and spake vnto them, as
hee had done before to the Acanthians, adding, That Brasidas his speech to the
there was no iust cause, why either they that had           Toronaeans.

practised to put the Citie into his hands, should be the worse thought of, or
accounted Traitors for it, seeing that they did it, with no intent to bring the Citie
into seruitude, nor were hired therevnto with money, but for the beneﬁt, and
libertie of the Citie; or that they which were not made acquainted with
it, should thinke, that themselues were not to reape as much good by it as the others.
For he came not to destroy either City, or man But had therefore made that
Proclamation touching those that ﬂed with the Athenians, because he thought
them neuer the worse for that friendship, and made account when they had made
tryall of the Lacedaemonians, they would shew as much good will also vnto them,
or rather more, in as much as they would behaue themselues with more equity; and
that their present feare, was onely vpon want of tryall. Withall, he wished them to
prepare themselues to be true Confederates for the future, and from hence forward,
to looke to haue their faults imputed. For, for what was past he thought they had
not done any wrong, but suﬀered it rather from other men that were too strong for
them and therefore were to be pardoned, if they had in ought beene against him.

When he had thus said, and put them againe into heart, the Truce being expired,
he made diuers assaults vpon Lecythus. The               Brasidas 〈…〉.
Athenians fought against them from the Wall, though
a bad one, and from the houses, such as had Battlements, and for the rst day,
kept them o . But the next day, when the enemies were to bring to the Wall a
great Engine, out of which they intended to cast re vpon their Woodden
Fences, and that the Army was now comming vp to the place where they
thought they might best apply the Engine, and which was easiest to be assaulted,
The Athenians, hauing vpon the top of the building, erected a Turret of Wood,
and carried vp many Buckets of Water, and many men being also gone vp into it,
the building ouercharged with weight, fell suddenly to the ground, and that
with so huge a noyse, that though those which were neere and saw it, were
grieued more then afraid, yet such as stood further o , especially the farthest of

all, supposing the place to be in that part already taken, ed as fast as they could
towards the Sea, and went aboord their Gallies.

Brasidas, when he perceiued the Battlements to be abandoned, and saw what
had happened, came on with his Army, and presently got the Fort, and slew all
that he found within it. But the rest of the Athenians, which before abandoned
the place, with their Boats and Gallies, put themselues into Pallene.

There was in Lecythus a Temple of MYNERVA.

And when Brasidas was about to giue the assault, hee had made           
Proclamation, that whosoeuer rst sealed the wall, should haue * 30 Minae of
siluer, for a reward. Brasidas now conceiuing that the * 9 pound, 15 shillings
                                                            ●

place was won, by meanes not humane, gaue those 30 sterling.
minae, to the Goddesse, to the vse of the Temple. And then pulling downe
Lecythus, he built it anew, and consecrated vnto her the whole place. The rest of
this Winter, he spent in assuring the places he had already gotten, and in
contriuing the conquest of more. Which Winter ending, ended the eighth yeere
of this Warre.

The Lacedaemonians, and Athenians, in the Spring of the Summer following,
made a cessation of Armes, presently, for a yeere,         THE NINTH YEERE.
hauing reputed with themselues; the Athenians, that Truce for a yeare. The motiues to
Brasidas should by this meanes cause no more of their Truce on either side.
Cities to reuolt, but that by this leasure they might
prepare to secure them; and that if this suspension liked them, they might
afterwards make some agreement for a longer time; The Lacedaemonians, that
the Athenians fearing what they feared, would vpon the taste of this
intermission of their miseries, and weary-life, be the willinger to compound, and
with the restitution of their men, to conclude a Peace for a longer time. For they
would faine haue recouered their men, whilest Brasidas his good fortune
continued, and whilest, if they could not recouer them, they might yet (Brasidas
prospering, and setting them equall with the Athenians) try it out vpon euen

termes, and get the victory. Whereupon a suspension of Armes was concluded,
comprehending both themselues, and their Confederates, in these words:

Concerning the Temple and Oracle of Apollo Pythius, The Articles of the Truce.
it seemeth good vnto vs, that whosoeuer will, may
without fraud, and without feare, aske counsell thereat, according to the Lawes of
his Countrey. The same also seemeth good to the Lacedaemonians and their
Confederates, here present, and they promise moreouer, to send Ambassadors to the
Boeotians and Phoceans, and doe their best to perswade them to the same.

That concerning the treasure belonging to the god, we shall take care to ﬁnd out
those that haue oﬀended therein, both wee and you, proceeding with right and
equity, according to the Lawes of our seuerall States. And that whosoeuer else will,
may doe the same, euery one according to the Law of his owne Countrey.

If the Athenians will accord that each side shall keepe within their 
owne bounds, retaining what they now possesse, the Lacedaemonians, and the rest
of the Confederates, touching the same, thinke good thus,

That the Lacedaemonians in Coryphasium, stay within the mountaines of
Buphras, and Tomeus, and the Athenians in Cythera, without ioyning together in
any League, either we with them, or they with vs.

That those in Nisaea and Minoa, passe not the high way, which from the Gate of
Megara, neere the Temple of Nisus, leadeth to the Temple of Neptune, and so
straight forward to the Bridge that lies ouer into Minoa. That the Megareans passe
not the same High-way, nor into the Iland which the Athenians haue taken;
Neither hauing commerce with other.

That the Megareans keepe what they now possesse in Troezen, and what they had
before by agreement with the Athenians, and haue free Nauigation, both vpon the
Coastes of their owne Territories, and their Confederates.

That the Lacedaemonians and their Confederates shall passe the Seas not in a *
long Ship, but in any other boat, rowed with Oares, of
burden not exceeding 500 Talents. That the Heralds       * Long ships were of vse for the
and Ambassadors that shall passe betweene both sides Warre,        and therefore here
                                                         excluded yet they lead leaue to
for the ending of the Warre, or for trials of Iudgement, vse vessels that w nt with the
                                                                             ●

                                                         Oare, so they were of another
may goe, and come, without impeachment, with as          forme.
many followers as they shall thinke good, both by Sea,
and Land.

That during this time of Truce, neither we nor you receiue one anothers fugitiues,
free, nor bond.

That you to vs, and we to you shall aﬀord Law according to the vse of our seuerall
States, to the end our Controuersies may be decided Iudicially, without Warre.

This is thought good by the Lacedaemonians, and their Confederates. But if you
shall conceiue any other Articles more faire, or of more equity then these, then shall
you goe and declare the same at Lacedaemon. For neither shall the
Lacedaemonians, nor their Confederates refuse any thing, that you shall make
appeare to be iust. But let those that goe, goe with full Authority, euen as you doe
now require it of vs That this Truce shall be for a yeere.

The people decreed it. Acamantis was * President of the * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
Assembly. Phaenippus the * Scribe. Niciades *
                                                         * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
Ouerseer, and Laches pronounced these words: With
good fortune to the people of Athens, a suspension of *name〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, was the
                                                                of an Oﬃcer that kept the
Armes is concluded, according as the Lacedaemonians Cittadell, which Oﬃce was but
and their Confederates haue agreed; And  for a day, and be that had it,
                                                         was one of 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
they consented before the people, that the suspension
should continue for a yeere; beginning that same day, being the fourteenth of the
moneth * Elaphebolion. In which time the                 * February.
Ambassadors and Heralds going from one side to the
other, should treat about a ﬁnall end of the Warres. And that the Commanders of
the Army, and the Presidents of the City calling an Assembly, the Athenians

should hold a Councell touching the manner of Embassage, for ending of the
Warre ﬁrst. And the Ambassadors there present should now immediately sweare
this Truce for a yeere. The same Articles, the Lacedaemonians propounded, and
the Confederates agreed vnto, with the Athenians, and their Confederates in
Lacedaemon, on the twelfth day of the Geraslion. The men that agreed vpon
these Articles, and * sacri ced, were these, viz. Of the * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, they
Lacedaemonians, Taurus the sonne of Echetimidas,         sacriﬁced at the making of all
                                                         accords betweene Cities.
Athenaeus the sonne of Pericleidas, and Philocharidas,
the sonne of Eryxidaedas. Of the Corinthians, Aeneas the sonne of Ocytes, and
Euphamidas the sonne of Aristonymus. Of the Sicyonians; Damotimas the sonne
of Naucrates, and Onesimus the sonne of Megacles. Of the Megareans, Nicasus
the sonne of Cenalus, and Menecrates the sonne of Amphidorus. Of the
Epidaurians, Amphias the sonne of Eupaeidas; Of the Athenians, the Generals
themselues, Nicostratus the sonne of Diotrephes, Nicias the sonne of Niceratus,
and Autocles the sonne of Tolmaeus. This was the Truce, and during the same,
they were continually in Treaty, about a longer Peace.

About the same time, whilest they were going to and fro, Scione a Citty in
Pallene reuolted from the Athenians to Brasidas. The The reuolt of Scione.
Scionaeans say that they be Pellenians descended of
those of Peloponnesus, and that their Ancestors passing the Seas from Troy, were
driuen in by a Tempest, which tossed the Achaeans vp and downe▪ and planted
themselues in the place they now dwell in. Brasidas vpon their reuolt, went ouer
into Scione by night, and though he had a Gallie, with him that went before, yet
he himselfe followed a loofe, in a Light-horseman. His Brasidas goeth ouer in a a Boat,
reason was this, that if his Light-horseman should be but with a Gally before him,
                                                         and his reason.
assaulted by some greater Vessell, the Gally would
defend it; But if hee met with a Gally equall to his owne, hee made account that
such a one would not assault his Boat, but rather the Gally, whereby he might in
the meane time goe through in safety. When he was ouer, and had called the
Scionaeans to assembly, he spake vnto them as hee had done before 
to them of Acanthus, and Toronae, adding, That they Brasidas his speech to the 〈◊〉.
of all the rest were most worthy to be commended, in as

much as Pallene, being cut oﬀ in the Isthmus by the Athenians that possesse
Potidaea, and being no other then Ilanders, did yet of their owne accord come forth
to meet their liberty, and stayed not through cowardlinesse, till they must of
necessity haue been compelled to their owne manifest good. Which was an
argument, that they would valiantly vndergoe any other great matter, to haue
their State ordered to their mindes. And that he would verily hold them for most
faithfull friends to the Lacedaemonians, and also otherwise doe them honour. The
Scionaeans were erected with these words of his; and now euery one alike
encouraged, as well they that liked not what was done, as those that liked it,
entertained a purpose, stoutly to vndergoe the Warre; and receiued Brasidas both
otherwise honourably, and crowned him with a              The honour done to Brasidas by
Crowne of gold, in the name of the Citie, as the          the 〈◊〉.

deliuerer of Greece. And priuate persons honoured him with Garlands, and
came to him, as they vse to doe, to a Champion that hath wonne a prize. But he
leauing there a small Garrison for the present, came backe, and not long after,
carried ouer a greater Army, with designe, by the helpe of those of Scione, to
make an attempt vpon Menda and Potidaea. For he thought the Athenians
would send succours to the place, as to an Iland, and desired to preuent them.
Withall he had in hand a practise with some within to haue those Cities
betrayed. So he attended, ready to vndertake that enterprize.

But in the meane time, came vnto him in a Gally,        Brasidas receiueth newes of the
Aristonymus for the Athenians, and Athenaeus for        suspension of Armes.

the Lacedaemonians, that carried about the newes of the Truce. Whereupon he
sent away his Army againe to Torone. And these men related vnto Brasidas, the
Articles of the agreement. The Confederates of the Lacedaemonians, in Thrace
approued of what was done, and Aristonymus had in all other things
satisfaction; But for the Scionaeans, whose reuolt by computation of the dayes,
he had found to be after the making of the Truce, he denyed that they were
comprehended therein. Brasidas said much in contradiction of this, and that the
Citie reuolted before the Truce, and refused to render Diﬀerence betweene the
it. But when Aristonymus had sent to Athens▪ to         Athenians and
                                                        Lacedaemonians, about the
informe them of the matter, the Athenians were ready resti tution of Scione, which
                                                               ●

presently to haue sent an Army against Scione. The        reuolted after the 〈◊〉 made, but
                                                          before the Lacedaemonians
Lacedaemonians in the meane time, sent  kn w of i .  ●     ●

Ambassadours to the Athenians, to tell them, that
they could not send an Army against it without breach of the Truce, and vpon
Brasidas his word; challenged the City to belong vnto them, o ering themselues
to the decision of Law. But the Athenians would by no meanes put the matter to
iudgement. But meant, with all the speed they could The Athenians prepare to
make, to send an Army against it. Being angry at the Warre on Scione.
heart, that it should come to this passe, that euen Ilanders durst reuolt, & trust
to the vnpro table helpe of the strength of the Lacedaemonians by Land.
Besides, touching the time of the reuolt, the Athenians had more truth on their
side then themselues alleadged. For the reuolt of the Scioneans was after the
Truce two dayes. Whereupon, by the aduice of Cleon, Decree of the Athenians against
they made a Decree, to take them by force, and to put Scione.
them all to the Sword. And forbearing Warre in all places else, they prepared
themselues onely for that.

In the meane time reuolted also Menda in Pallene, a The reuolt of Menda.
Colony of the Eretrians. These also Brasidas receiued
into protection, holding it for no wrong, because they came in openly in time of
Truce. And somewhat there was also, which he charged the Athenians with,
about breach of the Truce. For which cause the Mendaeans had also beene the
bolder, as * sure of the intention of Brasidas, which     * Sure he would not reiect them.
they might guesse at by Scione, in as much as he could
not be gotten to deliuer it. Withall, the Few were they, which had practised the
reuolt, who being once about it, would by no meanes giue it ouer, but fearing
lest they should bee discouered, forced the multitude, contrary to their owne
inclination to the same. The Athenians being hereof presently aduertised, and
much more angry now then before, made preparation to Warre vpon both, and
Brasidas expecting that they would send a Fleet against them, receiued the
women and children of the Scionaeans, and Mendaeans into Olynthus in
Chalcidea, and sent ouer thither 500 Peloponnesian men of Armes, and 300
Chalcidean Targettiers, and for Commander of them all, Polydamidas. And

those that were left in Scione, and Menda, ioyned in the administration of their
a aires, as expecting to haue the Athenian Fleet immediately with them.

In the meane time Brasidas, and Perdiccas, with ioynt Perdiccas and Brasidas ioyntly
forces march into Lyncus against Arrhibaeus, the           inuade Arrhibaeus.

second time. Perdiccas led with him the power of the Macedonians 
his subiects, and such Grecian men of Armes as dwelt among them. Brasidas
besides the Peloponnesians that were left him, led with him the Chalcideans,
Acanthians, and the rest, according to the Forces they could seuerally make. The
whole number of the Grecian men of Armes were about 3000. The horsemen,
both Macedonians▪ and Chalcideans, somewhat lesse then 1000, but the other
Rabble of Barbarians was great. Being entred the Territory of Arrhibaeus, and
  nding the Lyncesteans encamped in the eld, they also sate downe opposite to
their Campe. And the Foot of each side, being lodged vpon a hil, and a Plain
lying betwixt them both, the horsemen ran downe into the same, and a skirmish
followed, rst betweene the Horse onely of them both; but afterwards, the men
of Armes of the Lyncesteans, comming downe to aide their Horse from the hill,
and o ring battell rst, Brasidas and Perdiccas drew The Lyncesteans ﬂie.
downe their Army likewise, and charging, put the
Lyncestians to ight, many of which being slaine, the rest retired to the hill top,
and lay still. After this, they erected a Trophy and stayed two or three dayes
expecting the Illyrians, who were comming to               Perdiccas expecteth mercenary
Perdiccas vpon hire, and Perdiccas meant afterwards aide out of Illyris.
to haue gone on against the Villages of Arrhibaeus one after another, and to
haue sitten still there no longer. But Brasidas hauing his thoughts on Menda, lest
if the Athenians came thither before his returne, it should receiue some blow;
seeing withall that the Illyrians came not, had no liking to doe so, but rather to
retire. Whilest they thus varied, word was brought         The Illyrians come and turne to
that the Illyrians had betrayed Perdiccas, & ioyned        Arrhibaus.

themselues with Arrhibaeus. So that now it was thought good to retyre, by them
both, for feare of these, who were a warlike people, but yet for the time when to
march, there was nothing concluded by reason of their variance. The next night,
the Macedonians, and multitude of Barbarians (as it is vsuall with great Armies

to be terri ed vpon causes vnknowne) being suddenly a righted and supposing
them to be many more in number then they were, and euen now vpon them,
betooke themselues to present ight, & went home. The Macedonians vpon a
And Perdiccas, who at rst knew not of it, they           sudden feare run away, and
                                                         desert Brasidas.
constrained when he knew, before he had spoken with
Brasidas, (their Campes being farre asunder) to be gone also. Brasidas betimes in
the morning, when hee vnderstood that  Brasidas his retreat.
the Macedonians were gone away without him, and
that the Illyrians▪ and Arrhibaeans were comming vpon him, putting his men of
Armes into a square forme, and receiuing the multitude of his light-armed into
the middest, intended to retire likewise. The youngest men of his Souldiers, he
appointed to run out vpon the enemy, when they charged the Army any where
with shot; and he himselfe with three hundred chosen men, marching in the
Rere, intended, as he retyred, to sustaine the formost of the enemy ghting, if
they came close vp. But before the enemie approached, hee encouraged his
Souldiers, as the shortnesse of time gaue him leaue, with words to this e ect.

 4.1. THE ORATION OF BRASIDAS to his
 Souldiers.
 MEN of Peloponnesus, If I did not mistrust, in respect you are thus
 abandoned by the Macedonians, and that the Barbarians which come vpon
 you, are many, that you were afraid, I should not at this time instruct you, and
 encourage you as I doe. But now against this desertion of your companions,
 and the multitude of your enemies, I will endeuour with a short instruction
 and hortatiue, to giue you encouragement to the full. For, to be good
 Souldiers, is vnto you naturall, not by the presence of any Confederates, but
 by your owne valour; and not to feare others for the number, seeing you are
 not come from a Citie where the Many beare rule ouer the Few, but the Few
 ouer Many, and haue gotten this for power by no other meanes then by
 ouercomming in ght. And as these Barbarians, whom through ignorance
 you feare, you may take notice both by the former battels, fought by vs against

 them before, in fauour of the Macedonians, and also by what I my selfe
 coniecture, and haue heard by others, that they haue no great danger in them.
 For when any enemy whatsoeuer maketh shew of strength, being indeed
 weake, the truth once knowne, doth rather serue to embolden the other side,
 whereas against such as haue valour indeed, a man will bee the boldest, when
 hee knoweth the least. These men here, to such as haue not tryed them, doe
 indeed make terrible o ers; for the sight of their number, is fearefull; the
 greatnesse of their cry intolerable; and the vaine shaking of their 
 weapons on high, is not without signi cation of menacing. But they are not
 answerable to this, when with such as stand them, they come to blowes. For
   ghting without order, they will quit their place without shame, if they be
 once pressed, and seeing it is with them, honourable alike to ght, or run
 away, their valours are neuer called in question. And a battell wherein euery
 one may doe as he list, a ords them a more handsome excuse to saue
 themselues. But they trust rather in their standing out of danger, and
 terrifying vs a farre o , then in comming to hands with vs, for else they would
 rather haue taken that course then this. And you see manifestly, that all that
 was before terrible in them, is in e ect little, and serues onely to vrge you to be
 going, with their shew and noyse. Which if you sustaine at their rst comming
 on, and againe withdraw your selues still, as you shall haue leasure, in your
 order and places, you shall not onely come the sooner to a place of safety, but
 shall learne also against hereafter, that such a Rabble as this, to men prepared
 to endure their rst charge, doe but make a ourish of valour, with threats
 from a farre, before the battell; but to such as giue them ground, they are eagre
 enough to seeme couragious, where they may doe it safely.

When Brasidas had made his exhortation, he led away Brasidas draweth away his
his Army. And the Barbarians seeing it, pressed after army, and the Barbarians
                                                         follow him.
them with great cryes and tumult, as supposing he
 ed. But seeing that those who were appointed to runne out vpon them, did so,
and met them, which way soeuer they came on; and that Brasidas himselfe with
his chosen band sustained them where they charged close, and endured the rst
brunt, beyond their expectation, and seeing also that afterwards continually

when they charged, the other receiued them and fought, and when they ceased,
the other retired, then at length the greatest part of the Barbarians forbore the
Grecians, that with Brasidas were in the open eld, and leauing a part to follow
them with shot, the rest ranne with all speed after the The Illyrians pursue the
Macedonians which were ed, of whom, as many as Macedonians, leauing part of
                                                           their army to follow Brasidas.
they ouertooke, they slew; and withall, praepossessed
the passage, which is a narrow one betweene two hills, giuing entrance into the
Countrey of Arrhibaeus▪ knowing that there was no other passage, by which
Brasidas could get away. And when he was come to the very strait, they were
going about him, to haue cut him o . He, when he saw this, commanded the
300 that were with him, to runne euery man as fast as Brasidas seazeth the top of the
he could to one of the tops, which of         hill by which he was to passe.
them they could easiliest get vp to, and try if they could driue downe those
Barbarians that were now going vp to the same, before any greater number was
aboue to hemme them in. These accordingly fought with, and ouercame those
Barbarians vpon the hill, and thereby the rest of the Army marched the more
easily to the top. For this beating of them from the vantage of the hill, made the
Barbarians also afraid, so that they followed them no further, conceiuing withall,
that they were now at the Con nes, & already escaped through. Brasidas, hauing
now gotten the hils, & marching with more safety, came rst the same day to
Arnissa, of the dominion of Perdiccas. And the             The spight of Brasidas Souldiers
Soldiers of themselues being angry with the                against the Macedonians for
                                                           abandoning them.
Macedonians, for leauing them behind, whatsoeuer
teems of Oxen, or fardles fallen from any man (as was likely to happen in a
retreat, made in feare, and in the night) they lighted on by the way, the Oxen
they cut in pieces, & took the fardles to themselues. And from this time did
Perdiccas rst esteem Brasidas as his enemy, and            Perdiccas and Brasidas fall out.
afterwards hated the Peloponnesians, not with
ordinary hatred for the Athenians sake; but being vtterly fallen out with him,
about his own particular interest, sought meanes as soone as he could, to
compound with these, & to be disleagued from the other.

Brasidas at his returne out of Macedonia to Torone, found that the Athenians
had already taken Menda, and therefore staying there (for he thought it
impossible to passe ouer into Pallene, and to recouer Menda) he kept good
watch vpon Torone. For about the time that these things passed amongst the
Lyncesteans, the Athenians after all was in readinesse, set sayle for Menda and
Scione, with 50 Gallies, whereof 10 were of Chius, and 1000 men of Armes of
their owne City, 600 Archers, 1000 Thracian Mercenaries, and other Targettiers
of their owne Confederates thereabouts, vnder the conduct of Nicias the sonne
of Niceratus, and Nicostratus the son of Diotrephes. These lanching from Potidaea
with their Gallies, and putting in at the Temple of        The Mendaeans encampe
Neptune, marched presently against the Mendaeans. without the Citie.
The Mendaeans with their own forces, 300 of Scione that came to aide them,
and the aydes of the Peloponnesians, in all 700 men of Armes, and Polydamidas
their Commander, were encamped vpon a strong hill without the City Nicias
with 120 light-armed Souldiers of Methone, and 60 chosen men of Armes of
Athens, and all his Archers attempting to get vp by a path that was 
in the hills side, was wounded in the attempt, and         Nicias wounded.
could not make his way by force. And Nicostratus
with all the rest of the Army, going another way farther about, as he climbed the
hill being hard of accesse, was quite disordered, and the whole Army wanted
little of being vtterly discom ted. So for this day, seeing the Mendaeans and their
Confederates stood to it, the Athenians retired, and pitched their Campe. And
at night the Mendaeans retired into the City. The next day the Athenians sayling
about vnto that part of the City which is towards Scione, seazed on the
suburbes, and all that day wasted their elds, no man comming forth to oppose
them; for there was also sedition in the Citie, and the Sedition 〈…〉
                                                                  ▪

300 Scionaeans the night following went home
againe. The next day, Nicias with the one halfe of the Army marched to the
Con nes, and wasted the Territory of the Scionaeans, and Nicostratus at the
same time with the other halfe, sate down against the City, before the higher
Gates towards Potidaea. Polydamidas (for it fell out that the Mendaeans, &
their aides had their Armes lying within the wall, in this part) set his men in
order for the battell, and encouraged the Mendaeans to make a sally. But when

one of the faction of the Commons in sedition, said to the contrary, that they
would not goe out, and that it was not necessary to ght, and was vpon this
contradiction, by Polydamidas pulled and molested, the Commons in passion
presently tooke vp their Armes, and made towards the Peloponnesians, and such
other with them as were of the contrary faction, and falling vpon them, put
them to ight, partly with the suddennesse of the charge, and partly through the
feare they were in of the Athenians, to whom the          The Gates opened to the
Gates were at the same time opened. For they              Athenians vpon sedition.

imagined that this insurrection was by some appointment made betweene them.
So they ed into the Cittadell, as many as were not presently slaine, which was
also in their owne hands before. But the Athenians (for now was Nicias also
come backe, and at the Towne side) rushed into the City, with the whole Army,
and ri ed it, not as opened to them by agreement, but as taken by force. And the
Captaines had much adoe to keepe them that they also killed not the men. After
this, they bade the Mendaeans vse the same forme of Menda pillaged by the
gouernment they had done before, and to giue              Athenians.

iudgement vpon those they thought the principall authors of the             
reuolt, amongst themselues. Those that were in the Cittadell, they shut vp with
a wall reaching on both sides to the Sea, and left a guard to defend it; and hauing
thus gotten Menda, they led their Army against            The Athenians leade their army
Scione.                                                   against Scione.

The Scionaeans, and the Peloponnesians, comming out against them, possessed
themselues of a strong hil before the Citie, which if the enemy did not winne, he
should not be able to enclose the City with a wall. The Athenians hauing
strongly charged them with shot, and beaten the defendants from it, encamped
vpon the hill, and after they had set vp their Trophy, prepared to build their wall
about the Citie. Not long after, whilest the Athenians were at worke about this,
those aides that were besieged in the Cittadell of Menda, forcing the watch by
the Sea-side, came by night, and escaping most of them through the Campe
before Scione, put themselues into that City.

As they were enclosing of Scione, Perdiccas sent a       Perdiccas maketh Peace with the
Herald to the Athenian Commanders, and concluded Athenians.
a Peace with the Athenians, vpon hatred to Brasidas, about the retreat made out
of Lyncus, hauing then immediately begun to treat of the same. For it happened
also at this time, that Ischagoras a Lacedaemonian was leading an Army of foot
vnto Brasidas. And Perdiccas, partly because Nicias aduised him, seeing the
Peace was made, to giue some cleare token that he would be rme, and partly
because he himselfe desired not that the Peloponnesians should come any more
into his Territories, wrought with his hostes in Thessaly, hauing in that kind,
euer vsed the prime men, and so stopped the Army and Munition, as they would
not so much as try the Thessalians, whether they would let them passe or not.
Neuerthelesse Ischagoras, and Ameinias, and Aristeus themselues went on to
Brasidas, as sent by the Lacedaemonians to view the state of a aires there. And
also tooke with them from Sparta, contrary to the        The Lacedaemonians make yong
Law, such men as were but in the beginning of their men gouernours of Cities.
youth to make them gouernours of Cities, rather then to commit the Cities to
the care of such as were there before. And Clearidas the sonne of Cleonymus,
they made gouernour of Amphipolis, and Epitelidas the sonne of Hegesander,
gouernour of Torone.

The same Summer, the Thebans demolished the             The wals of Thespiae demolished
walles of the Thespians, laying Atticisme to their      by the Thebans.

charge. And though they had euer meant to doe it, yet now it was 
easier, because the ower of their youth was slaine in the battell against the
Athenians.

The Temple of Iuno in Argos, was also burnt downe The Temple of Iuno in Argos
the same Summer, by the negligence of Chrysis the       burnt by negligence of an old
                                                        woman Priest.
Priest, who hauing set a burning Torch by the
Garlands, fell asleepe, insomuch as all was on re, and amed out before shee
knew. Chrysis the same night, for feare of the Argiues, ed presently to Phlius,
and they according to the Law formerly vsed, chose another Priest in her roome,
called Phaeinis. Now when Chrysis ed, was the           Phaeinis, Priest of Juno, in the
                                                             place of Chrysis.

                                                            p    f   y
eighth yeere of this Warre ended, and halfe of the
ninth.

Scione in the very end of this Summer was quite enclosed, and the Athenians
hauing left a guard there, went home with the rest of Siege laid to Scione.
their Army.                                            The end of the ninth Summer.

The Winter following, nothing was done betweene the Athenians and the
Lacedaemonians, because of the Truce. But the              Battell betweene the
Mantineans, and the Tegeatae, with the Confederates Mantineans and the Tegeatae.
of both, fought a battell at Laodicea, in the Territory of Orestis, wherein the
victory was doubtfull, for either side put to ight one Wing of their enemies,
both sides set vp Trophies, and both sides sent of their spoyles vnto Delphi.
Neuerthelesse, after many slaine on either side, and equall battell, which ended
by the comming of night, the Tegeatae lodged all night in the place, and erected
their Trophie then presently, whereas the Mantineans turned to Bucolion, and
set vp their Trophie afterwards.

The same Winter ending, and the Spring now approaching, Brasidas made an
attempt vpon Potidaea; For comming by night, he           Brasidas attempteth Potidaea.
applyed his Ladders, and was thitherto vndiscerned.
He tooke the time to apply his Ladders, when the Bell passed by, and before he
that carried it to the next, returned. Neuerthelesse, being discouered, he scaled
not the Wall, but presently againe withdrew his Army with speed, not staying till
it was day. So ended this Winter, and the ninth yeere The end of the ninth yeere.
of this Warre written by THVCYDIDES.

              5. THE FIFTH BOOKE OF THE
              HISTORY OF THVCYDIDES.
              The principall Contents.
The former yeeres Truce ended, Cleon warreth on the Chalcidicke 
Cities, and recouereth Torone. Phaeax is sent by the Athenians, to moue a Warre
amongst the Sicilians. Cleon and Brasidas, who were on both sides the principall
maintainers of the Warre, are both slaine at Amphipolis. Presently after their
death, a Peace is concluded, and after that againe, a League betweene the
Lacedaemonians and the Athenians. Diuers of the Lacedaemonian Confederates
hereat discontented▪ seeke the Confederacy of the Argiues. These make League,
  rst with the Corinthians, Eleans, and Mantineans, then with the
Lacedaemonians; and then againe (by the arti ce of Alcibiades) with the
Athenians. After this the Argiues make Warre vpon the Epidaurians; and the
Lacedaemonians vpon the Argiues. The Athenian Captaines and the Melians
treate by way of Dialogue, touching the yeelding of Melos, which the Athenians
afterwards besiege and winne. These are the Actes of almost sixe yeeres more of
the same Warre.

THE Summer following, the Truce for a yeere, which The Truce for a yeere expired.
was to last till the * Pythian Holidayes, expired.      *
During this Truce, the Athenians remoued the            Exercises dedicated to Apollo,
Delians out of Delos; because though they were          and celebrated at Delphi, about
consecrated, yet for a certaine crime committed of old, the
                                                            12 of the moneth
                                                        Elaphobolium, as may be
they esteemed them polluted persons; because also       gathered by the beginning of the
they thought there wanted this part to make perfect Truce on that day.
                                                        The Delians remoued out of
the purgation of the Iland; in the purging  Delos, vpon superstition.
whereof, as I declared * before, they thought they did
                                                        * 〈◊〉. 3. pag. 201.
well to take vp the sepulchres of the dead. These

Delians seated themselues afterwards, euery one as he        The Delians●eat ●eat
came, in Adramyttium in Asia, a Towne giuen vnto             themselues in Adramyttium.

them by Pharnaces.

After the Truce was expired, Cleon preuailed with the Cleon goeth out with an 〈◊〉, into
Athenians, to be sent out with a Fleet against the       the parts vpon Thrace.

Cities, lying vpon Thrace; He had with him of Athenians, 1200 men of Armes,
and 300 horsemen; Of Confederates more, and thirty Gallies. And rst arriuing
at Scione, which was yet besieged, he tooke aboord some men of Armes, of those
that kept the siege, and sayled into the Hauen of the Colophonians, not farre
distant from the Citie of Torone. And there hauing heard by fugitiues, that
Brasidas was not in Torone, nor those within             He assaulteth Torone.
su cient to giue him battell, hee marched with his
Army to the City, and sent ten of his Gallies about into the * Hauen. And rst
he came to the New-wall, which Brasidas had raised * Into the Hauen of Torone.
about the Citie to take in the Suburbs, making a
breach in the Old-wall, that the whole might be one Citie. And Pasitelidas, a
Lacedaemonian, Captaine of the Towne, with the           Pasitelidas with the Garrison of
Garrison there present, came to the defence, & fought the Towne, endeuoureth to
                                                         defend it.
with the Athenians that assaulted it. But being
oppressed, (and the Gallies which were before sent about, being by this time
come into the Hauen) Pasitelidas was afraid, lest those Gallies should take the
Towne, vnfurnished of defendants, before he could get backe, and that the
Athenians on the otherside should winne the wall, and he be intercepted
betweene them both; and thereupon abandoned the wall, and ran backe into the
Citie. But the Athenians that were in the Gallies,       Cleon taketh Torone.
hauing taken the towne before he came, and the
Land-army following in after him, without resistance, and entring the City by
the breach of the Old-wall, slew some of the Peloponnesians, and Toronaeans on
the place, and some others, amongst whom was the Captaine Pasitelidas, they
tooke aliue. Brasidas was now comming with aide          Pasitelidas, a Lacedaemonian
towards Torone, but aduertised by the way, that it was Captaine, taken aliue.
already lost, went backe againe, being about forty Furlongs short of preuenting

it. Cleon and the Athenians erected two Trophies, one at the Hauen, another at
the Wall.

The Women and Children of the Toronaeans, they made slaues, but the men of
Torone, and the Peloponnesians, and such Chalcideans as were               
amongst them, in all, about 700; they sent away          Seuen hundred men sent
prisoners to Athens. The Peloponnesians were             prisoners to Athens.

afterward, at the making of the Peace, dismissed, the rest were redeemed, by the
Olynthians by exchange of man for man.

About the same time the Boeotians tooke Panactum, Panactum taken by the
a Fort of the Athenians, standing in their Con nes, by Boeotians.
treason.

Cleon, after he had settled the Garrison in Torone,         Cleon goeth to Amphipolis.
went thence by Sea about the mountaine Athos, to
make Warre against Amphipolis.

About the same time Phaeax the sonne of Erasistratus, Phaeax sent Ambassador to the
who with two others was sent Ambassador into Italy, Sicilians.
and Sicily, departed from Athens with two Gallies. For the Leontines, after the
Athenians, vpon the making of the Peace, were gone out of Sicily, receiued many
strangers into the freedom of their City, and the Commons had a purpose also
to haue made diuision of the Land. But the great men perceiuing it, called in the
Syracusians, and draue the Commons out. And they The Leontine Commons driuen
wandred vp and down euery one as he chanced, & the out of the City by the
                                                        Syracusians.
great men, vpon conditions agreed on with the
Syracusians, abandoning and deserting that city, went The Leontine Nobility become
to dwell with the priuiledge of free Citizens in        Syracusians, and goe to Syracusa
                                                        to dwell.
Syracusa. After this againe, some of them, vpon
dislike, relinquished Syracusa, and seazed on Phoceae, a certaine place, part of
the City of the Leontines, and vpon Bricinniae, a Castle in the Leontine
Territory; thither also came vnto them most of the Commons, that had before
been driuen out, and settling themselues, made Warre from those places of

strength. Vpon intelligence hereof, the Athenians sent The Leontines make War on the
Phaeax thither, to perswade their Confederates there, Syracusians.
and, if they could, all the Sicilians ioyntly, to make    Phaeax moueth the Sicilians to
Warre vpon the Syracusians that were now beginning Warre vpon the Syracusians.
to grow great, to try if they might thereby preserue the common people of the
Leontines. Phaeax arriuing, preuailed with the Camarinaeans, and Agrigentines:
but the businesse nding a stop at Gelas, hee went         The Gelans stop the motian
vnto no more, as conceiuing he should not be able to made by Phaeax.
perswade them. So he returned through the cities of the Siculi vnto Catana,
hauing been at Bricinniae, by the way, and there encouraged them to hold out▪
and from Catana he set saile, and departed. In his voyage to Sicily, both going
and comming, hee dealt as hee went by, with sundry Cities also of Italy, to enter
into friendship with the Athenians.

He also lighted on those Locrians, which hauing dwelt once in            
Messina, were afterwards driuen out againe; being the same men, which after the
Peace in Sicily, vpon a sedition in Messina, wherein one of the factious called in
the Locrians, had been then sent to inhabite there, and now were sent away
againe. For the Locrians held Messina for a while. Phaeax therfore chancing to
meet with these; as they were going to their owne City, did them no hurt,
because the Locrians had been in speech with him about an agreement with the
Athenians. For when the Sicilians made a generall        Phaeax maketh Peace with the
Peace, these onely of all the Confederates, refused to Locrians.
make any Peace at all with the Athenians. Nor indeed would they haue done it
now, but that they were constrained thereunto by the Warre they had with the
Itonians, and Melaeans their owne Colonies and borderers. And Phaeax, after
this, returned to Athens.

Cleon, who was now gone from Torone, and come about to Amphipolis,
making Eion the seat of the Warre, assaulted the Citie Cleon maketh Warre on
of * Stagirus, a Colony of the Andrians, but could not Amphipolis.
take it; But Gampselus, a Colony of the Thasians hee * Stagirus the Citie where
tooke by assault. And hauing sent Ambassadours to Aristotle was borne.

Perdiccas, to will him to come to him with his forces, Gampselus taken by Cleon.
according to the League, and other Ambassadors into
Thrace vnto Poll●s, King of the Odoma●ians, to take Brasidas sitteth downe ouer
vp as many mercenary Thracians, as he could, he lay against Cleon, at Cerdylium.
still in Eion, to expect their comming. Brasidas vpon notice hereof, sate downe
ouer against him at Cerdylium. This is a place belonging to the Argilians,
standing high, and beyond the Riuer, not farre from Amphipolis, and from
whence hee might discerne all that was about him. So that Cleon could not but
be seene, if he should rise with his Army to goe against Amphipolis; which he
expected he would doe; and that in contempt of his small number, he would goe
vp with the Forces he had then present. Withall he furnished himselfe with 1500
mercenary Thracians, and tooke vnto him all his Edonians, both horsemen, and
Targettiers. He had also of Myrcinians, and                The Forces of Brasidas.
Chalcideans, 1000 Targettiers▪ besides them in
Amphipolis. But for men of Armes, his whole number was at the most 2000;
and of Grecian horsemen 300. With 1500 of these, came Brasidas, and sate down
at Cerdylium, the rest stood ready ordered with Clearidas their Captaine, within
Amphipolis. Cleon for a while lay still, but was afterwards forced to 
doe as was expected by Brasidas. For the Souldiers         Cleon goeth vp to Amphipolis
being angry with their stay there, and recounting with against his owne minde.
themselues, what a command his would be, and with what ignorance, and
cowardize, against what skill and boldnesse of the other, and how they came
forth with him against their wils; he perceiued their muttering, and being
vnwilling to o end them with so long a stay in one place, dislodged, and led
them forward. And he tooke the same course there, which hauing succeeded well
before at Pylus, gaue him cause to thinke himselfe to haue some iudgement. For
he thought not that any body would come forth to           Cleon, not expecting a
                                                                               ●●    lly,
giue him battell, and gaue out, he went vp principally     vieweth the 〈◊〉 of the Towne.

to see the place: And stayed for greater forces; not to secure him in case he
should be compelled to ght, but that he might therewith enuiron the Citie on
all sides at once, and in that manner take it by force. So he went vp, and set his
Army down on a strong hill before Amphipolis, standing himselfe to view the
Fens of the riuer Strymon, and the scituation of the Citie towards Torace; and

thought he could haue retired againe at his pleasure without battell. For neither
did any man appeare vpon the walls, nor come out of the Gates which were all
fast shut; insomuch as he thought he had committed an errour, in comming
without Engines, because he thought he might by such meanes haue wonne the
Citie, as being without defendants. Brasidas, as soone Brasidas putteth himselfe into
as he saw the Athenians remoue, came downe also          Amphipolis.

from Cerdylium, and put himselfe into Amphipolis. He would not su er them
to make any sally, nor to face the Athenians in order of battell, mistrusting his
owne Forces, which he thought inferiour, not in number (for they were in a
manner equall) but in worth (for such Athenians as were there, were pure, and
the Lemnians, and Imbrians which were amongst them, were of the very ablest)
but prepared to set vpon them by a wile. For if he       A stratagem of Brasidas.
should haue shewed to the enemy, both his number,
and their Armour, such as for the present they were forced to vse, he thought
that thereby he should not so soone get the victory, as by keeping them out of
sight, and out of their contempt, till the very point. Wherefore chusing to him
selfe 150 men of Armes, and committing the charge of the rest to Clearidas▪ he
resolued to set suddenly vpon them before they should retire; as not 
expecting to take them so alone another time, if their succours chanced to arriue.
And when he had called his Souldiers together, to encourage them, and to make
knowne vnto them his designe, he said as followeth.

 5.1. THE ORATION OF BRASIDAS to his
 Souldiers.
 MEN of Peloponnesus, as for your Countrey, how by valour it hath euer
 retained her liberty; and that being Dorians, you are now to ght against
 Ionians, of whom you were euer wont to get the victory, let it su ce that I
 haue touched it thus brie y. But in what manner I intend to charge, that, I am
 now to enforme you of; lest the venturing by few at once, and not altogether,
 should seeme to proceed from weaknesse, and so dishearten you. I doe
 coniecture that it was in contempt of vs, and as not expecting to bee fought

 withall, that the enemy both came vp to this place, and that they haue now
 betaken themselues carelesly, and out of order to view the Countrey. But he
 that best obseruing such errours in his enemies, shall also, to his strength, giue
 the onset, not alwayes openly, and in ranged battell, but as is best for his
 present aduantage, shall for the most part attaine his purpose. And these wiles
 carry with them the greatest glory of all, by which deceiuing most the enemy, a
 man doth most bene t his friends. Therefore whilest they are secure without
 preparation, and intend, for ought I see, to steale away, rather then to stay, I
 say, in this their loosnesse of resolution, and before they put their minds in
 order, I for my part, with those I haue chosen, will, if I can, before they get
 away, fall in vpon the midst of their Army, running. And you Clearidas,
 afterwards, as soone as you shall see me to haue charged▪ and (as it is
 probable) to haue put them into a right, take those that are with you, both
 Amphipolitans, and all the rest of the Confederates, and setting open the
 Gates, runne out vpon them, and with all possible speed, come vp to stroke of
 hand (for there is great hope this way to terri e them, seeing they which come
 after, are euer of more terrour to the enemy, then those that are already
 present, and in ght. ) And be valiant, as is likely you should that are a
 Spartan; and you Confederates, follow manfully, and beleeue that the parts of
 a good Souldier, are willingnesse, sense of shame, and obedience to his
 Leaders; and that this day you shall either gaine your selues liberty by your
 valour, and to be called Confederates of the Lacedaemonians, or else not
 onely to serue the Athenians your selues, and at the best if you be 
 not led Captiues, nor put to death, to be in greater seruitude then before, but
 also to be the hinderers of the liberty of the rest of the Grecians. But be not
 you cowards, seeing how great a matter is at stake: and I for my part will make
 it appeare, that I am not more ready to perswade another, then to put my selfe
 into action.

When Brasidas had thus said, he both prepared to goe Brasidas prepareth to assault the
out himselfe, and also placed the rest that were with army of the Athenians.
Clearidas before the Gates, called the Thracian Gates, to issue forth afterwards
as was appointed. Now Brasidas hauing been in sight, when he came downe

from Cerdylium, and againe when he sacri ced in the City, by the Temple of
Pallas, which place might be seene from without, it was told Cleon, whilst
Brasidas was ordering of his men, (for he was at this time gone o a little to looke
about him) that the whole Army of the enemies was plainly to be discerned
within the Towne, and that the feet of many men, and Cleon is admonished of a sally
horses, ready to come forth, might be discerned from towards:
vnder the Gate. Hearing this, he came to the place, and when he saw it was true,
being not minded to ght, vntill his aides arriued, and yet making no other
account, but that his retreat would be discouered, he And leadeth his army backe.
commanded at once to giue the signall of retreat, and
that, as they went, the left Wing should march formost, which was the only
meanes they had to withdraw towards Eion. But when he thought they were
long about it, causing the right Wing to wheel about, and lay open their
disarmed parts to the enemy, hee led away the Army himselfe. Brasidas at the
same time, hauing spied his opportunity, and that the Army of the Athenians
remoued, said to those about him, and the rest, These men stay not for vs; it is
apparant by the wagging of their Speares, and of their Brasidas taketh this opportunity
heads. For where such motion is, they vse not stay for the for this sally.
charge of the enemy: Therefore open me some body the Gates appointed, and let vs
boldly and speedily sally forth vpon them. Then hee went out himselfe at the
Gate towards the Trench, and which was the rst Gate of the Long-wall, which
then was standing, and at high speed tooke the straightway, in which, as one
passeth by the strongest part of the Towne, there standeth now a Trophy. And
charging vpon the midst of the Athenian Army, which was terri ed both with
their owne disarray, and the valour of the man forced them to ie. And
Clearidas, (as was appointed) hauing issued out, by the Thracian            
Gates, was withall comming vpon them. And it fell out that the Athenians by
this vnexpected and sudden attempt, were on both sides in confusion; and the
left wing which was next to Eion, and which indeed was marching away before,
was immediately broken o , from the rest of the Army, and ed. When that was
gone, Brasidas comming vp to the right wing, was           Brasidas is wounded and
there wounded. The Athenians saw not when he fell,         ●●   lleth.

and they that were neere, tooke him vp, and carried him o . The right wing

stood longer to it; and though Cleon himselfe presently ed, (as at rst he
intended not to stay) and was intercepted by a Myrcinian Targettier, and slaine,
yet his men of Armes casting themselues into a circle, Cleon ﬂieth, and is slaine.
on the top of a little hill, twice or thrice resisted the
charge of Clearidas, and shrunke not at all, till begirt with the Myrcinian and
Chalcidean horse, and with the Targettiers, they were Brasidas his army getteth the
put to ight by their Darts. Thus the whole Army of victory.
the Athenians, getting away with much adoe ouer the hills, and by seuerall
wayes: all that were not slaine vpon the place, or by the Chalcidean horse, and
Targettiers, recouered Eion. The other side taking vp Brasidas out of the battell,
and hauing so long kept him aliue, brought him yet breathing into the City. And
he knew that his side had gotten the victory; but          Brasidas liueth onely so long as
expired shortly after. When Clearidas with the rest of to know he had the victory.
the Army, were returned from pursute of the enemy, they ri ed those that were
slaine, and erected a Trophie.

After this the Confederates following the Corpes of The honour done to Brasidas
Brasidas, all of them in their Armes, buried him in the after his death.
City at the publique charge, in the entrance of that which is now the Market
place. And the Amphipolitans afterwards hauing taken in his Monument with a
wall, * killed vnto him, as to a * Heroe, honoured him * Killed sacriﬁces vnto him.
with Games and anniuersary sacri ce, and attributed
                                                         * Ors mig d.
                                                                  ●    ●

their Colony vnto him, as to the Founder; pulling
downe the Edi ces of * Agnon, and defacing               * Who was their true Founder.
whatsoeuer Monument might maintaine the memory
of his foundation. This they did both for that they esteemed Brasidas for their
preseruer, and also because at this time, through feare of the Athenians, they
courted the Lacedaemonians for a League. As for Agnon, because of their
hostility with the Athenians, they thought it neither expedient for 
them to giue him honours, nor that they would be acceptable vnto him if they
did. The dead bodies they rendred to the Athenians; of whom there were slaine
about 600, and but seuen of the other side, by reason, that it was no set battell,
but fought vpon such an occasion and precedent a right. After the dead were

taken vp, the Athenians went home by Sea, and Clearidas, and those with him,
stayed to settle the estate of Amphipolis.

About the same time of the Summer now ending, Ramphias, Antocharidas, and
Epicydidas, Lacedaemonians, were leading a supply       Supplies going to Brasidas, stay
towards the parts vpon Thrace, of 900 men of Armes, by the way at Heraclea.
and when they were come to Heraclea, in Trachinia they stayed there, to amend
such things as they thought amisse; Whilst they stayed, this battell was fought.
And the Summer ended.

The next Winter they that were with Ramphias, went The end of the tenth Summer.
presently forward, as farre as the hill Pierium in      The supplies going to Brasidas,
Thessaly. But the Thessalians forbidding them to goe hearing of his death, returne to
                                                        Lacedaemon.
on, and Brasidas to whom they were carrying this
Army being dead, they returned homewards; conceiuing that the opportunity
now serued not, both because the Athenians were vpon this ouerthrow gone
away, and for that they themselues were vnable to performe any of those
designes, which the other had intended. But the principall cause of their returne
was this, that they knew at their comming forth, that the Lacedaemonians had
their mindes, more set vpon a Peace, then Warre.

Presently after the battell of Amphipolis, and returne of Rhamphias out of
Thessaly, it fell out, that neither side did any act of  The Athenians, and
Warre, but were inclined rather to a Peace; the          Lacedaemonians encline to
                                                         Peace.
Athenians for the blow they had receiued at Delium,
and this other, a little after, at Amphipolis; and       The causes why the Athenians
because they had no longer that con dent hope in         desired Peace.

their strength, on which they relyed, when formerly they refused the Peace, as
hauing conceiued vpon their present successe, that they should haue had the
vpper hand.

Also they stood in feare of their owne Confederates, lest emboldned by these
losses of theirs, they should more and more reuolt, and repented that they made
not the Peace, after their happy successe at Pylus, when occasion was o ered to

haue done it honourably. And the Lacedaemonians          The causes why the
on the other side did desire Peace, because  Lacedaemonians desired peace
the Warre had not proceeded as they expected: for they had thought they should
in a few yeeres haue warred downe the power of Athens, by wasting their
Territory; and because they were falne into that calamity in the Iland, the like
whereof had neuer happened vnto Sparta before: because also their Countrey
was continually rauaged by those of Pylus and Cythera, and their Helotes
continually ed to the Enemie; and because they feared lest those which
remained, trusting in them that were runne away, should in this estate of theirs,
raise some innouation, as at other times before they had done. Withall it hapned,
that the 30. yeeres peace with the Argiues was now vpon the point of expiring;
and the Argiues * would not renue it, without            * Ampe idas and Lichas we 〈◊〉
                                                                   ●

restitution made them of Cynuria; so that to warre       to Argos 〈…〉 but the Argiues 〈…〉
                                                         Lacedaemonians 〈…〉 Athenians,
against the Argiues and the Athenians both at once, refused it.
seemed impossible. They suspected also, that some of
the Cities of Peloponnesus would reuolt to the Argiues, as indeed it came
afterwards to passe. These things considered, it was by both parts thought good
to conclude a Peace; but especially by the Lacedaemonians, for the desire they
had to recouer their men taken in the Iland; for the Spartans that were amongst
them, were both of the prime men of the City, and their kinsmen. And therfore
they began to treat, presently after they were taken.

But the Athenians, by reason of their prosperity, would not lay downe the War
at that time on equall termes. But after their defeat at Delium, the
Lacedaemonians knowing they would be apter now to accept it, made that
Truce for a yeere, during which they were to meet, and consult about a longer
time. But when also this other ouerthrow happened to the Athenians at
Amphipolis, and that both Cleon and Brasidas were slaine (the which on either
side were most opposite to the Peace; the one, for that Cleon and Brasidas opposers of
hee had good successe and honour in the Warre; the the Peace for seuerall ends.
other, because in quiet times his euill actions would more appeare, and his
calumniations bee the lesse beleeued) those two that in the two States aspired
most to bee chiefe, Pleistoanax the sonne of Pausanias, and Nicias the sonne of

Niceratus, who in Military charges had beene the          Pleistoanax and Nicias
most fortunate of his time, did most of all other desire perswaders to Peace.
to haue the Peace goe forward; Nicias, because he was desirous, hauing hitherto
neuer beene ouerthrowne, to carry his          Nicias his ends in seeking Peace.
good fortune through, and to giue both himselfe, and
the Citie rest from their troubles for the present; and for the future to leaue a
name, that in all his time hee had neuer made the Common-wealth miscarry:
which hee thought might be done by standing out of danger, and by putting
himselfe as little as hee might into the hands of         The reason why Pleistoanax
Fortune: And to stand out of danger is the bene t of desired the peace.
Peace. Pleistoanax had the same desire, because of the imputation laid vpon him,
about his returne from exile, by his enemies, that suggested vnto the
Lacedaemonians vpon euery losse they receiued, that the same befell them, for
hauing contrary to the Law repealed his banishment. For they charged him
further, that hee and his Brother Aristocles, had suborned the Prophetesse of
Delphi, to answer the * Deputies of the                   * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
Lacedaemonians when they came thither, most               Ambassadours to the Oracles 〈◊〉
                                                          so called.
commonly with this, That they should bring backe the
seed of the * Semigod, the sonne of Iupiter, out of a     * Hercules, from whom
strange Countrey into his owne: and that if they did      Pleistoanax was descended.

not, they should plow their land with a siluer plough: and so at length to haue
made the Lacedaemonians, 19. yeeres after, with such Dances and Sacri ces as
they who were the rst founders of Lacedaemon had ordained to be vsed, at the
enthroning of their Kings, to fetch him home againe, who liued in the meane
time in exile in the Mountaine Lycaeum, in a House whereof the one halfe was
part of the Temple of Iupiter, for feare of the Lacedaemonians, as being
suspected to haue taken a bribe to withdraw his Armie out of Attica.
                                                              Pleistoanax banished for
Being troubled with these imputations, and                    withdrawing his Army out of
                                                              Attica.
considering with himselfe, there being no occasion of
calamity in time of Peace, and the Lacedaemonians thereby recouering their
men, that he also should cease to bee obnoxious to the calumniations of his

enemies; whereas in Warre, such as had charge, could not but bee quarrelled
vpon their losses, hee was therefore forward to haue the Peace concluded.

And this Winter they fell to treaty, and withall the Lacedaemonians braued them
with a preparation already making against the Spring, The Lacedaemonians desiring
sending to the Cities about for that purpose, as if they the peace, make shew of Warre.
meant to forti e in Attica, to the end that the Athenians might giue them the
better eare. When after many meetings, and many demands, on eyther side, it
was at last agreed, that Peace should be        Peace concluded.
concluded, each part rendring what they had taken in
the Warre, saue that the Athenians should hold Nisaea, (for when they likewise
demanded Plataea, and the Thebans answered, that it was neither taken by force,
nor by treason, but rendred voluntarily, the Athenians said that they also had
Nisaea in the same manner. ) The Lacedaemonians             The Boeotians, Corinthians,
calling together their Confederates, and all but the        Eleans, and Megareans, refuse
                                                            to be comprehended.
Boeotians, Corinthians, Eleans, and Megareans, (for
these disliked it) giuing their votes for the ending of the Warre, they concluded
the Peace, and con rmed it to the Athenians with sacri ce, and swore it, and the
Athenians againe vnto them, vpon these Articles.

The Athenians, and Lacedaemonians, and their           THE ARTICLES OF THE
Confederates, haue made Peace, and sworne it, Citie by PEACE BETWEENE THE
                                                       ATHENIANS, AND THE
Citie, as followeth:                                   LACEDAEMONIANS.

Touching the publique Temples, it shall bee lawfull to whomsoeuer will, to
sacriﬁce in them, and to haue accesse vnto them, and to aske counsell of the Oracles
in the same, and to send their * Deputies vnto them,     * 〈…〉 about matters of Religion.
according to the custome of his Countrey, securely both
by Sea and Land.

The whole place consecrate, and Temple of Apollo, in Delphi, and Delphi it selfe,
shall be gouerned by their owne Law, taxed by their owne State, and iudged by
their owne Iudges, both City and Territory, according to the institution of the
place.

The Peace shall endure betweene the Athenians, with their Confederates, and the
Lacedaemonians with their Confederates, for ﬁftie yeeres, both by Sea and Land,
without fraud, and without harme-doing.

It shall not be lawfull to beare Armes, with intention of hurt, neither for the
Lacedaemonians and their Confederates, against the Athenians, nor for the
Athenians and their Confederates, against the Lacedaemonians, by any Art or
Machination whatsoeuer.

If any Controuersie shall arise betweene them, the same shall be decided dy Law,
and by Oath, in such manner as they shall agree on.

The Lacedaemonians and their Confederates, shall render Amphipolis to the
Athenians.

The Inhabitants, of whatsoeuer City the Lacedaemonians shall render vnto the
Athenians, shall be at liberty, to goe forth whither they will, with bagge and
baggage.

Those Cities which paid the tribute, taxed in the * time * Which was the ﬁrst time that
of Aristides, continuing to pay it, shall be gouerned by the Athenians began to
                                                          command the rest of Greece or
                                                                                   ●
their owne Lawes, and now that the Peace  〈◊〉 the end of the Medan
is concluded, it shall be vnlawfull for the Athenians, or Warre, the Lacedaemonians left
                                                          that Command, the Athenians
their Confederates, to beare Armes against them, or to vndertooke it, and taxed the
doe them any hurt, as long as they shall pay the said     seuerall Cities w th tribute
                                                                          ●

                                                          towards the Warre. The War
tribute. The Cities are these, Argilus, Stagirus,         ended, the tribute ended not.
Acanthus, Scolus, Olynthus, Spartolus. And they shall
be Confederates of neither side, neither of the Lacedaemonians, nor of the
Athenians. But if the Athenians can perswade these Cities vnto it, then it shall bee
lawfull for the Athenians to haue them for Confederates, hauing gotten their
consent.

The Mecybernians, Sanaeans, , and Singaeans, shall inhabite their owne Cities,
on the same conditions, with the Olynthians and Acanthians.

The Lacedaemonians, and their Confederates, shall render Panactum vnto the
Athenians. And the Athenians shall render to the Lacedaemonians, *
Coryphasium, Cythera, Methone, Pteleum, and           * The promontory 〈…〉 stood, put
Atalante.                                             〈◊〉 for 〈◊〉.

They shall likewise deliuer whatsoeuer Lacedaemonians are in the prison of
Athens, or in any prison of what place soeuer, in the Athenian dominion; and
dismisse all the Peloponnesians, besieged in Scione, and all that Brasidas did
there put in, and whatsoeuer Confederates of the Lacedaemonians are in prison,
either at Athens, or in the Athenian State. And the Lacedaemonians and their
Confederates, shall deliuer whomsoeuer they haue in their hands of the Athenians,
or their Confederates, in the same manner.

Touching the Scioneans, Toronaeans, and Sermylians, and whatsoeuer other Citie
belonging to the Athenians, the Athenians shall doe with them, what they thinke
ﬁt.

The Athenians shall take an Oath to the Lacedaemonians and their
Confederates, Citie by Citie; and that Oath shall be the greatest that in each Citie
is in vse; The thing that they shall sweare, shall be this. I stand to these Articles,
and to this Peace, truely and sincerely. And the Lacedaemonians and their
Confederates, shall take the same Oath to the Athenians. This oath they shall on
both sides euery yeere renew, and shall erect Pillars, [inscribed with this Peace] at
Olympia, * Pythia, and in the Isthmus; at Athens,              * By Delphi where the Pythian
within the Cittadell; and at Lacedaemon, in the *              games were kept.

Amycleum.                                                      * Amyclaeum, a Temple of
                                                                Apollo.
And if any thing be on either side forgotten, or shall be
thought ﬁt vpon good deliberation to be changed; it shall be lawfull for them to doe
it, * in such manner as the Lacedaemonians, and           * This Article displeased the
Athenians shall thinke ﬁt, ioyntly.                       Confederates of Lacedaemon,
                                                                because the Articles might by this
                                                                be changed without them.
This Peace shall take beginning from the 
24 of the moneth Artemisium, Pleistolas being Ephore, at Sparta, and the 15 of *

Elaphebolium, after the account of Athens, Alcaeus,            * February.
being Archon.

They that tooke the Oath, and sacriﬁced, were these; of the Lacedaemonians,
Pleistolas, Damagetus, Chionis, Metagenes, Acanthus, Daidus, Ischagoras,
Philocaridas, Zeuxidas, Anthippus, Tellis, Alcenidas, Empedias, Menas,
Laphilus. Of the Athenians these, Lampon, Isthmionicus, Nicias, Laches,
Euthidemus, Procles, Pythadorus, Agnon, Myrtilus, Thrasycles, Theagenes,
Aristocoetes, Iolcius, Timocrates, Leon, Lamachus, Demosthenes

This Peace was made in the very * end of Winter, and * Jt appeares here that the
the Spring then beginning, presently after the Citie      Moneth Elaphobolion amongst
                                                          the Athenians was the last
Bacchanals, and full tenne yeeres, and some few dayes Moneth of their Winter
ouer, after the rst inuasion of Attica, and the           quarter.
beginning of this Warre. But now for the certainety
hereof, let a man consider the times themselues, and not trust to the account of
the names of such as in the seuerall places bare chiefe o ces, or for some honour
to themselues, had their names ascribed, for markes to the actions foregoing. For
it is not exactly knowne who was in the beginning of his o ce, or who in the
middest, or how he was, when any thing fell out. But if one reckon the same by
Summers and Winters, according as they are written, The true way of accounting the
hee shall nde by the two halfe yeeres, which make the yeres of this Warre.
whole, that this rst Warre was of tenne Summers, and as many Winters
continuance.

The Lacedaemonians (for it fell vnto them by lot to      The Lacedaemonians begin to
begin the restitution) both dismissed presently those performe the Articles, &
                                                         presently deliuer their prisoners.
Prisoners they had then in their hands, and also sent
Ambassadours, Ischagoras, Menas, and Philocharidas into the parts vpon
Thrace, with command to Clearidas to deliuer vp Amphipolis to the Athenians,
& requiring the rest of their Confederates there to accept of the Peace in such
manner as was for euery of them accorded. But they would not doe it, because
they thought it was not for their aduantage. And         The Amphipolitans refuse to
                                                               render themselues vnder the

Clearidas also, to grati e the Chalcideans, surrendred Athenians.
not the City, alledging that hee could not doe it whether they would or not. And
comming away soone after with those Ambassadours to Lacedaemon, both to
purge himselfe, if he should bee accused by those with Ischagoras, 
for disobeying the States command, and also to try if Clearidas endeuoureth to
the Peace might by any meanes be shaken: when he          dissolue the Peace.

found it rme, hee himselfe beeing sent backe by the Lacedaemonians, with
command principally to surrender the place, and if he could not doe that, then
to draw thence all the Peloponnesians that were in it, immediately tooke his
iourney. But the Confederates chanced to bee present themselues in
Lacedaemon, and the Lacedaemonians required such of them as formerly
refused, that they would accept the Peace: but they, vpon the same pretence on
which they had reiected it before, said, That vnlesse it were more reasonable,
they would not accept it. And the Lacedaemonians seeing they refused,
dismissed them, and by themselues entred with the Athenians into a League;
because they imagined that the Argiues would not          The Lacedaemonians make
renue their Peace (because they had refused it before, league with the Athenians.
when Ampelidas and Lichas went to Argos, ) and held them for no dangerous
Enemies without the Athenians: and also conceiued, that by this meanes the rest
of Peloponnesus would not stirre; for if they could, they would turne to the
Athenians. Wherefore the Ambassadours of Athens being then present, and
conference had, they agreed, and the Oath and League was concluded on, in the
termes following.

The Lacedaemonians shall be Confederates with the Athenians for ﬁftie yeeres.
                                                         THE ARTICLES OF THE
If any enemie inuade the territory of the                LEAGVE BETWEENE THE
                                                         LACEDAEMONIANS AND
Lacedaemonians, and doe the Lacedaemonians any           THE ATHENIANS.
harme, the Athenians shall ayde the Lacedaemonians
against them in the strongest manner they can possibly. But if the Enemie, after he
hath spoiled the Countrey, shall be gone away, then that Citie shall be held as
enemie both to the Lacedaemonians and to the Athenians, and shall be warred

vpon by them both; and both Cities shall againe lay downe the Warre ioyntly.
And this to be done iustly, readily, and sincerely.

And if any enemie shall inuade the Territories of the Athenians, and doe the
Athenians any harme, then the Lacedaemonians shall ayde the Athenians
against them, in the strongest manner they can possibly. But if the enemie, after
hee hath spoiled the Countrey, shall bee gone away, then shall that Citie be held for
enemie both to the Lacedaemonians and to the Athenians, and shall bee warred
vpon by both, and both the Cities shall againe lay downe the Warre 
together. And this to bee done iustly, readily, and sincerely.

If their slaues shall rebell, the Athenians shall assist the Lacedaemonians with all
their strength possible.

These things shall be sworne vnto by the same men on eyther side that swore the
peace, and shall be euery yeere renewed by the Lacedaemonians at their comming
to the * Bacchanals at Athens; and by the Athenians at * Bacchanalia Vrbica. Which
their going to the Hyacinthian Feast at Lacedaemon; were celebrated yerely, not much
                                                          before this time.
and either side shall erect a Piller [inscribed with this
League] one at Lacedaemon, neere vnto Apollo in the Amycleum, another at
Athens, neere Minerua in the Citadell.

If it shall seeme good to the Lacedaemonians and Athenians to adde or take away
anything touching the League, it shall be lawfull for them to doe it ioyntly.

Of the Lacedaemonians tooke the Oath, these, Pleistoanax, Agis, Pleistolas,
Damagetus, Chionis, Metagenes, Acanthus, Daidus, Ischagoras, Philocharidas,
Zeuxidas, Anthippus, Alcinadas, Tellis, Empedias, Menas, Laphilus. Of the
Athenians, Lampon, Istmionicus, Laches, Nicias, Euthydemus, Procles,
Pythodorus, Agnon, Myrtilus, Thrasycles, Theagenes, Aristocrates, Iolcius,
Timocrates, Leon, Lamachus and Demosthenes.

This League was made not long after the Peace. And the Athenians deliuered to
the Lacedaemonians the men they had taken in the Iland; and by this time began

the Summer of the eleuenth yeere. And hitherto hath The Athenians deliuer the
beene written these tenne yeeres which this rst Warre prisoners taken at Pylus.
continued, without intermission.

After the Peace and League made betweene the              THE ELEVENTH YEERE.
Lacedaemonians and Athenians, after the tenne yeeres
Warre, Pleistolas being Ephore at Lacedaemon, and Alcaeus Archon of Athens;
though there were Peace to those that had accepted it; yet the Corinthians and
some Cities of Peloponnesus, endeuoured to ouerthrow what was done, and
presently arose another stirre, by the Confederates, against Lacedaemon. And
the Lacedaemonians also after a while became suspect The Lacedaemonians slacke in
vnto the Athenians, for not performing somewhat           performance of the Articles of the
                                                          Peace.
agreed on in the Articles. And for sixe yeeres and
tenne moneths, they abstayned form entring into each others Territories with
their Armes: but the Peace being but weake, they did each other abroad what
harme they could; and in the end, were forced to dissolue the Peace, 
made after those ten yeeres, and fell againe into open War. This also hath the
same Thucydides of Athens, written from point to point, by Summers and
Winters, as euery thing came to passe, vntill such time as the Lacedaemonians,
and their Confederates, had made an end of the Athenian dominion, and had
taken their Long-wals and Peiraeus. To which time         From the beginning to this end
from the beginning of the War, it is in all 27 yeeres. As of the Warre 27 yeeres.
for the composition betweene, if any man shall thinke it not to be accounted
with the War, he shal think amisse. For let him look into the actions that passed
as they are distinctly set down, and he shall nd, that, The time of this Peace, not to be
that deserueth not to be taken for a Peace, in which      esteemed Peace.

they neither rendred all, nor accepted all, according to the Articles. Besides, in
the Mantinean and Epidaurian wars, and in other actions, it was on both sides
infringed. Moreouer, the Confederates on the borders of Thrace continued in
hostility as before; and the Boeotians had but a truce from one ten dayes to
another. So that with the rst ten yeeres war, and with this doubtfull cessation &
the war that followed after it, a man shal nd, counting by the times, that it came
to iust so many yeeres, and some few dayes; & that those who built vpon the

prediction of the Oracles, haue this number onely to The number of yeeres which the
agree. And I remember yet, that from the very             whole Warre lasted     ▪

beginning of this War and so on till the end, it was vttered by many, that it
should be of thrice 9 yeeres continuance. And for the time therof I liued in my
strength, & applied my mind to gaine an accurate knowledge of the same. It
hapned also that I was banished my countrey for 20        Thucydides, for his ill successe at
yeeres, after my charge at Amphipolis; whereby being Amphipolis, banished Athens for
                                                          20 yeeres.
present at the a aires of both, and especially of the
Lacedaemonians, by reason of my exile, I could▪ at leasure the better learn the
truth of all that passed. The quarrels therefore, & perturbations of the Peace,
after those ten yeres, & that which followed, according as from time to time the
Warre was carried, I will now pursue.

After the concluding of the 50 yeeres Peace, and the The Corinthians contriue with
League which followed, and when those Ambassadors the Argiues to make a League in
                                                          Peloponnesus without the
which were sent for, out of the rest of Peloponnesus, Lacedaemonians.
to accept the said Peace, were departed from
Lacedaemon, the Corinthians (the rest going all to their owne Cities) turning
 rst to Argos, entred into Treaty with some of the Argiue Magistrates, to this
purpose, That the Lacedaemonians had made a Peace and League with the
Athenians, their heretofore mortall enemies, tending not to the            
bene t, but to the enslauing of Peloponnesus, it behoued them to consider of a
course, for the safety of the same, and to make a Decree, That any City of the
Grecians that would, and were a free City, and admitted the like, and equall trials
of Iudgement with theirs, might make a League with the Argiues, for the one
mutually to aide the other, and to assigne them a Few men, with absolute
authority from the State, to treat with; and that it should not be motioned to the
People, to the end, that if the multitude would not agree to it, it might be
vnknowne that euer they had made such a motion; a rming that many would
come into this Confederacy vpon hatred to the Lacedaemonians. And the
Corinthians, when they had made this ouerture, went home. These men of
Argos, hauing heard them, and reported their proposition, both to the
Magistrates, & to the People, the Argiues ordered the same accordingly, and

elected 12 men, with whom it should be lawfull for       Twelue men chosen at Argos to
any Grecian to make the League that would, except        treate about a League.

the Lacedaemonians, and the Athenians, with neither of which they were to
enter into any League, without the consent of the Argiue People. And this the
Argiues did the more willingly admit, as well for that they saw the
Lacedaemonians would make Warre vpon them, (for the Truce betweene them
was now vpon expiring) as also because they hoped to haue the Principality of
Peloponnesus. For about this time Lacedaemon had but a bad report, and was in
contempt for the losses it had receiued. And the Argiues in all points were in
good estate, as not hauing concurred in the Attique War, but rather been in
peace with both, and thereby gotten in their reuenue. Thus the Argiues receiued
into League all such Grecians as came vnto them.

First of all therefore, came in, the Mantineans, and      The Mantineans enter League
their Confederates; which they did for fear of the        with the Argiues.

Lacedaemonians. For a part of Arcadia, during the warre of Athens, was come
vnder the obedience of the Mantineans, ouer which, they thought, the
Lacedaemonians, now they were at rest, would not permit them any longer to
command. And therfore they willingly ioyned with the Argiues, as being they
thought, a great City, euer enemy to the Lacedaemonians, & gouerned as their
owne by Democracy. When the Mantineans had reuolted the rest of
Peloponnesus began also to mutter amongst themselues, that it was t for them
to do the like; conceiuing that there was somewhat in The rest of Peloponnesus encline
it, more then they knew, that made the  to the same League.
Mantineans to turne and were also angry with the Lacedaemonians amongst
many other causes, for that it was written in the Articles of the Attique Peace,
That it should be lawfull to adde vnto, or take away      The Article of adding and
from the same, whatsoeuer should seeme good to the two altering 〈◊〉.
Cities of the Lacedaemonians and the Athenians. For this was the Article that the
most troubled the Peloponnesians, and put them into a iealousie that the
Lacedaemonians might haue a purpose ioyning with the Athenians to bring
them into subiection. For in iustice the power of changing the Articles, ought to
haue beene ascribed to all the Confederates in generall. Whereupon▪ many

fearing such an intention, applyed themselues to the Argiues, euery one seuerally
striuing to come into their League.

The Lacedemonians perceiuing this stirre to begin in Peloponnesus; and that the
Corinthians were both the contriuers of it, and entred The Lacedaemonians
themselues also into the League with Argos, sent          expostulate with the
                                                          Corinthians, about this League
Ambassadors vnto Corinth, with intention to preuent with Argos.
the sequell of it, and accused them, both for the whole
designe, and for their owne reuolt in particular, which they intended to make
from them, to the League of the Argiues; saying that they should therein
infringe their oath, and that they had already done vniustly, to refuse the Peace
made with the Athenians; for as much as it is an Article of their * League, that
what the maior part of the Confederates should            * The Peloponnesian League
conclude, vnlesse it were hindred by some God or          against Athens.

Heroe, the same was to stand good. But the Corinthians (those Confederates
which had refused the Peace as well as they, being now at Corinth; for they had
sent for them before) in their answer to the Lacedaemonians, did not openly
alledge the wrongs they had receiued; as that the Athenians had not restored
Solium, nor Anactorium, nor any thing else they had in this Warre lost, but
pretended not to betray those of Thrace, for that they The Apologie of the Corinthians
had in particular taken an oath vnto them, both when for their refusing the Peace.
(together with Potidaea) they rst reuolted, and also another afterwards. And
therefore they said they did not breake the oath of their League, by reiecting the
Peace with Athens. For hauing sworne vnto them by the Gods, they should in
betraying them, o end the Gods. And whereas it is said, Vnlesse some God or
Heroe hinder it, This appeareth to be a Diuine            Their answer touching their
hinderance. Thus they answered for their old oath.        League with Argos.

Then, for their League with the Argiues, they gaue this answer: That 
when they had aduised with their friends, they would doe afterwards what
should be iust. And so the Ambassadors of Lacedaemon went home. At the
same time were present also in Corinth, the Ambassadors of Argos, to inuite the

Corinthians to their League, and that without delay. But the Corinthians
appointed them to come againe at their next sitting.

Presently after this, came vnto them an Ambassage         The Eleans make a league ﬁrst
also from the Eleans. And rst, they made a League         with Corinth, then with Argos.

with the Corinthians; and going thence to Argos, made a League with the
Argiues▪ according to the * declaration before            * The decree of the Argiues that
                                                          any Grecian the 2 2
mentioned. The Eleans had a quarrell with the                               ●   ●

                                                          Commissioners by them chosen to
Lacedaemonians concerning Lepreum. For the                that purpose.
Lepreates, hauing heretofore warred on certaine of the
Arcadians, and for their aid called the Eleans into their Confederacy, with
condition to giue them the moity of the Land to be won from them, when the
Warre was ended, the Eleans gaue vnto the Lepreates, the whole Land to be
enioyed by themselues, with an imposition thereon of a * Talent to be paid to
Iupiter Olympian, which they continued to pay, till       * 180 pound ten shillings
the beginning of the Athenian Warre. But afterwards, sterling.
vpon pretence of that Warre, giuing ouer the payment, the Eleans would haue
forced them to it againe. The Lepreates for helpe, hauing recourse to the
Lacedaemonians, and the cause being referred to their decision, the Eleans
afterwards, vpon suspition that the Lacedaemonians would not do them right,
renounced the reference, and wasted the Territory of the Lepreates. The
Lacedaemonians neuerthelesse gaue sentence, That          Quarrell of the Eleans against
the Lepreates should be at liberty to pay it, or not, and the Lacedaemonians.
that the Eleans did the iniury; and because the Eleans had not stood to the
reference, the Lacedaemonians put into Lepreum, a Garrison of men of Armes.
The Eleans taking this, as if the Lacedaemonians had receiued their reuolted
City, and producing the Article of their League, That what euery one possessed,
when they entred into the Attique Warre, the same they should possesse when they
gaue it ouer, reuolted to the Argiues, as wrong'd, and entred league with them, as
is before related.

After these, came presently into the Argiue League,          The Corinthians▪ and the
the Corinthians, and the Chalcideans vpon Thrace.            Townes vpon Thrace enter into
                                                             the league with Argos.

The Boeotians also, and Megareans threatned as
much, but because they thought the Argiue Democracy would not be so
commodious for them, who were gouerned according to the           
gouernment of the Lacedaemonians by Oligarchie, they stirred no further in it.

About the same time of this Summer, the Athenians The Athenians recouer Scione.
expugned Scione, slew all that were within it at mans
estate, made slaues of the women and children, and gaue their Territory to the
Plataeans.

They also replanted the Delians, in Delos, both in      The Delians replanted in Delos.
consideration of the defeates they had receiued after
their expulsion, and also because the Oracle at Delphi had commanded it.

The Phoceans and Locrians also began a Warre at that time against each other.
                                                              Phocis and Locris in Warre
And the Corinthians and Argiues, being now leagued,
went to Tegea▪ to cause it to reuolt from the             The Corinthians seeke to turne
                                                          the Cities of Peloponnesus and
Lacedaemonians; conceiuing it to be an important          other Confederates from the
piece of Peloponnesus▪ and making account, if they Lacedaemonians to the Argiues.
gained it to their side, they should easily obtaine the
whole. But when the Tegeates refused to become enemies to the
Lacedaemonians, the Corinthians, who till then had beene very forward, grew
lesse violent, and were afraid, that no more of the rest would come in.
Neuerthelesse they went to the Boeotians, and solicited them to enter into
league with them, and the Argiues, and to doe as they did. And the Corinthians
further desired the Boeotians to goe along with them to Athens, and to procure
for them the like ten dayes Truce, to that which was The Corinthians seeke the ten
made betweene the Athenians and Boeotians,                dayes Truce with Athens, as the
                                                          Boeotians had it.
presently after the making of the fty yeeres Peace, on
the same termes that the Boeotians had it; and if the Athenians refused, then to
renounce theirs, and make no more Truces hereafter without the Corinthians.
The Corinthians hauing made this request, the             The Boeotians take time to
Boeotians willed them touching the League with the answer, concerning a League

Argiues to stay a while longer, and went with them to with Argos.
Athens, but obtained not the ten dayes Truce, the Athenians answering, that if
the Corinthians were Confederates with the Lacedaemonians, they had a Peace
already. Neuerthelesse, the Boeotians would not         The Athenians deny the ten
relinquish their ten dayes Truce, though the            dayes Truce to the Corinthians.

Corinthians both required the same, and a rmed that it was so before agreed
on. Yet the Athenians granted the Corinthians a cessation of Armes, but *
without solemne rati cation.                            * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉. The
                                                             Lacedaemonians demolish the
                                                             Fort of Cypsela.
The same Summer the Lacedaemonians with their
whole power, vnder the Conduct of Pleistoanax, the sonne of            
Pausanias, King of the Lacedaemonians, made Warre vpon the Parrhasians of
Arcadia, subiects of the Mantineans, partly as called in, by occasion of sedition,
and partly because they intended, if they could, to demolish a forti cation which
the Mantineans had built, and kept with a Garrison in Cypsela, in the Territory
of the Parrhasians, towards Sciritis of Laconia. The Lacedaemonians therefore
wasted the Territory of the Parrhasians. And the Mantineans leauing their owne
Citie to the Custody of the Argiues, came forth to aide the Parrhasians their
Confederates. But being vnable to defend both the Fort of Cypsela, and the
Cities of the Parrhasians too, they went home againe; and the Lacedaemonians
when they had set the Parrhasians at liberty, and demolished the forti cation
went home likewise.

The same Summer, when those Souldiers which went The Lacedaemonians put a
out with Brasidas, and of which Clearidas, after the   Garrison into Lepreum, of men
                                                       newly enfranchised.
making of the Peace, had the charge, were returned
from the parts vpon Thrace, the Lacedaemonians made a decree, that those
Hel●t●s which had fought vnder Brasidas, should receiue their liberty, and
inhabite where they thought good; but not long after, they placed them,
together with such others as had been newly enfranchised in Lepreum, a City
standing in the Con nes betweene Laconia, and the Eleans, with whom they
were now at variance.

Fearing also lest those Citizens of their owne, which had been taken in the *
Iland, and had deliuered vp their Armes to the             * Sphacteria, ouer against Pylus.
Athenians, should vpon apprehension of disgrace for
that calamity, if they remained capable of honours,        The Lacedaemonians disable
make some innouation in the State, they disabled           those that were taken in
                                                           Sphacteria, to 〈◊〉 oﬃce, or to
them, though some of them were in o ce already;            make bargain.
and their disablement was this, That they should
neither beare oﬃce, nor be capable to buy and sell, yet in time they were againe
restored to their former honours.

The same Summer also, the Dictideans tooke                      The Dictideans take Thyssus
Thyssus, a Towne in Mount Athos, and Confederate                from the Athenians.

of the Athenians.

This whole Summer there was continuall commerce Iealousie betweene the Athenians
betweene the Athenians and the Peloponnesians;           and Lacedaemonians.

neuerthelesse they began, both the Athenians, and the Lacedaemonians, to haue
each other in suspition immediately after the Peace, in respect of the places not
yet mutually surrendred. For the Lacedaemonians, to whose lot it fell to make
restitution rst, had not rendred Amphipolis, and the other Cities, 
nor had caused the Peace to be accepted by the           Amphipolis not yet rendred nor  ▪

Confederates vpon Thrace, nor by the Boeotians, nor the Peace accepted in the pa t       ●

                                                         〈◊〉 Thrace, nor by the 〈◊〉 and
Corinthians, though they had euer professed, that in Corinthians.
case they refused, they would ioyne with the
Athenians, to bring them to it by force, and had pre xed a time (though not by
writing) within the which, such as entred not into this Peace, were to be held as
enemies vnto both. The Athenians therefore, when they saw none of this really
performed, suspected that they had no sincere intention, and thereupon refused
to render Pylus, when they required it; nay, they        The Athenians refuse to render
repented that they had deliuered vp the prisoners they Pylus.
tooke in the Iland; and detained the rest of the Townes they then held, till the
Lacedaemonians should haue performed the conditions on their part also. The
Lacedaemonians, to this, alledged, That they had done what they were able to doe.

For they had deliuered the Athenian prisoners that were in their hands, and had
withdrawne their Souldiers from the parts vpon               The Apologie of the
Thrace, and whatsoeuer else was in their owne power to Lacedaemonians for 〈…〉 the
                                                             Articles.
performe. But Amphipolis they said, was not in their
power to surrender. That they would endeuour to bring the Boeotians and
Corinthians, to accept the Peace, and to get Panactum restored, and all the
Athenian prisoners in Boeotia, to be sent home. And therefore desired them to
make restitution of Pylus, or if not so, at lest to draw out of it, the Messenians and
Helotes (as they for their part had drawne their Garrisons out of the Townes vpon
Thrace) and if they thought good, to keepe it with a Garrison of Athenians. After
diuers, and long Conferences had this Summer, they The Athenians draw the ▪

so farre preuailed with the Athenians, at the last, as       Messenians and Helotes out of
                                                             Pylus.
they drew thence, all the Messenians, and Helotes,
and all other Laconian fugitiues, and placed them in Cranij, a City of
Cephallenia. So for this Summer there was Peace, and The end of the eleuenth
free passage from one to another.                            Summer.

In the beginning of Winter, (for now there were other The Lacedemonian Ephores
Ephores in o ce; not those in whose time the Peace endeuour to dissolue the peace.
was made, but some of them that opposed it) Ambassadours being come from
the Confederates; and the Athenian, Boeotian, and Corinthian Ambassadors
being already there, and hauing had much conference together, but concluded
nothing, Cleobulus, and Xenares, Ephores that most desired the dissolution of
the Peace, when the rest of the Ambassadorus were gone home, entred into
priuate Conference with the Boeotians and Corinthians, exhorting 
them to runne both the same course; and aduised the A proposition of a league
Boeotians to enduour rst to make a League             betweene the Lacedaemonians,
                                                      Argiues, Boeotians and
themselues with the Argiues, and then to get the      Corinthians.
Argiues together with themselues, into a League with
the Lacedaemonians. For that they might by this meanes avoyd the necessity of
accepting the Peace with Athens. For the Lacedaemonians would more regard
the friendship and League of the Argiues, then the enmitie and dissolution of
the Peace with the Athenians. For hee knew the Lacedaemonians had euer

desired to haue Argos their friend vpon any reasonable conditions, because they
knew that their Warre without Peloponnesus, would thereby bee a great deale
the easier. Wherefore they entreated the Boeotians to put Panactum into the
hands of the Lacedaemonians, to the end that if they could get Pylus for it in
exchange, they might make War against the Athenians the more commodiously.

The Boeotians and Corinthians being dismissed by Xenares and Cleobulus, and
all the other Lacedaemonians of that Faction, with these points to be deliuered
to their Common-wealths, went to their seuerall          The Argiues propound a League
Cities. And two men of Argos, of principall authority to the Boeotians and
                                                         Corinthians.
in that Citie, hauing waited for, and met with them by
the way, entred into a treaty with them, about a League betweene the Argiues
and the Boeotians, as there was betweene them and the Corinthians, and the
Eleans, and Mantineans already. For they thought, if it succeeded, they might the
more easily haue either Warre or Peace, (forasmuch as the cause would now bee
common) either with the Lacedaemonians, or whomsoeuer else it should be
needfull.

When the Boeotian Ambassadors heard this, they were wel pleased. For as it
chanced, the Argiues requested the same things of them, that they, by their
friends in Lacedaemon, had beene sent to procure of the Argiues. These men
therefore of Argos, when they saw that the Boeotians And promise to send
accepted of the motion, promised to send              Ambassadours into Boeotia to
                                                      that purpose.
Ambassadours to the Boeotians about it, and so
departed.

When the Boeotians were come home, they related there what they had heard,
both at Lacedaemon, and by the way, from the Argiues. The Gouernours of
Boeotia were glad thereof, and much more forward in it now, then formerly they
had beene, seeing that not onely their friends in Lacedaemon         
desired, but the Argiues themselues hastned to haue done the selfe-same thing.
Not long after this, the Ambassadors came to them from Argos, to solicite the
dispatch of the businesse before propounded, but the gouernours of Boeotia

commended onely the proposition, and dismissed them, with promise to send
Ambassadors about the League to Argos. In the            The Boeotians propound an oath
meane time the Gouernours of Boeotia thought t,          betwene themselues, the
                                                         Corinthians, Chalcideans, and
that an oath should rst be taken by themselues, and Megareans, of mutuall
by the Ambassadors from Corinth, Megara, and the assistance.
Confederates vpon Thrace, to giue mutuall assistance
vpon any occasion to them that should require it, and neither to make War nor
Peace without the common consent. And next that the Boeotians and
Megareans, (for these two ran the same course) should make a League with the
Argiues. But before this oath was to be taken, the Gouernors of Boeotia
communicated the busines to the 4 Boeotian Councels, in the which the whole
authority of the State consisteth, and withall presented their aduice, That any
City that would, might ioyne with them, in the like oath for mutuall assistance.
But they that were of these Councels approued not the proposition, because
they feared to o end the Lacedaemonians in being sworne to the Corinthians,
that had reuolted from their confederacy. For the        The Argiue league with the
Gouernors of Boeotia had not reported vnto them,         Boeotians, falleth oﬀ.

what had past at Lacedaemon, how Cleobulus, and Xenares the Ephores, and
their friends there, had aduised them, to enter rst into league with the Argiues,
and Corinthians, and then afterwards to make the same league with the
Lacedaemonians. For they thought that the Councels, though this had neuer
been told them, would haue decreed it no otherwise then they vpon
premeditation should aduise: So the businesse was checked, and the
Ambassadors from Corinth, and from the Cities vpon Thrace, departed without
e ect. And the Gouernors of Boeotia, that were before minded, if they had
gotten this done, to haue leagued themselues also with the Argiues, made no
mention of the Argiues in the Councels at all, nor sent the Ambassadors to
Argos, as they had before promised, but a kind of carelessenesse and delay
possessed the whole businesse.

The same Winter the Olynthians tooke Mecyberne,            Mecyberne taken from the
held with a Garrison of the Athenians by assault.          Athenians by assault.

After this the Lacedaemonians (for the conferences         The Lacedaemonians enter into
betweene the Athenians and the Lacedaemonians              a League with the Boeotians,
                                                           knowing it to be against Iustice.
about restitution reciprocall continued 
still) hoping that if the Athenians should obtaine from the Boeotians, Panactum;
that then they also should recouer Pylus, sent Ambassadors to the Boeotians,
which request that Panactum, and the Athenian prisoners might be put into the
hands of the Lacedaemonians, that they might get Pylus restored in exchange.
But the Boeotians answered, that vnlesse the Lacedaemonians would make a
particular League with them, as they had done with the Athenians, they would
not doe it. The Lacedaemonians, though they knew they should therein wrong
the Athenians, for that it was said in the Articles, that neither party should make
either League, or Warre, without the others consent, yet such was their desire to
get Panactum, to exchange it for Pylus, and withall, they that longed to breake
the Peace with Athens, were so eager in it, that at last they concluded a league
with the Boeotians, Winter then ending, and the Spring approaching. And
Panactum was presently pulled downe to the ground. So ended the eleuenth
yeere of this Warre.

In the Spring following, the Argiues, when they saw THE TWELFTH YEERE.
that the Ambassadors which the Boeotians promised
to send vnto them, came not, and that Panactum was The Argiues seeke Peace with the
razed, and that also there was a priuate league made    Lacedaemonians.

betweene the Boeotians and the Lacedaemonians, were afraid lest they should on
all hands be abandoned, and that the Confederates would all goe to the
Lacedaemonians. For they apprehended that the Boeotians had been induced,
both to raze Panactum, and also to enter into the Athenian Peace, by the
Lacedaemonians; and that the Athenians, were priuy to the same. So that now
they had no meanes to make league with the Athenians neither▪ whereas before
they made account that if their truce with the Lacedaemonians continued not,
they might vpon these di erences, haue ioyned themselues to the Athenians.
The Argiues being therfore at a stand, and fearing to haue Warre all at once with
the Lacedaemonians, Tegeats, Boeotians, and Athenians, as hauing formerly
refused the truce with the Lacedaemonians, and imagined to themselues the

principality of all Peloponnesus, they sent Ambassadors with as much speed as
might be, Eustrophus & Aeson persons, as they thought most acceptable vnto
them, with this cogitation, that by compounding with the Lacedaemonians, as
well as for their present estate they might, howsoeuer the world went, they
should at least liue at quiet.

When these Ambassadors were there, they fell to treat of the Articles 
vpon which the agreement should be made. And at rst the Argiues desired to
haue the matter referred, either to some priuate man, The Territory of Cynuria,
or to some City, concerning the Territory of Cynuria, ground of the quarrels betweene
                                                             Lacedaemon and Argos.
about which they haue alwayes di ered, as lying on
the borders of them both (it containeth the Cities of Thyrea and Anthena, and
is possessed by the Lacedaemonians) But afterwards, the Lacedaemonians not
su ering mention to be made of that, but that if they would haue the Truce goe
on as it did before, they might; the Argiue Ambassadours, got them to yeeld to
this, That for the present, an accord should be made for ﬁfty yeeres, but withall,
that it should be lawfull neuerthelesse, (if one             An odde condition of a Truce.
challenged the other thereunto) both for Lacedaemon,
and Argos to try their Titles to this Territory by battell, so that there were in
neither City, the Plague or a Warre to excuse them; (as once before they had
done, when as both sides thought they had the victory. ) And that it should not
be lawfull for one part to follow the chase of the other, further then to the bounds
either of Lacedaemon or Argos.

And though this seemed to the Lacedaemonians at rst to be but a foolish
proposition, yet afterwards, (because they desired by all meanes to haue
friendship with the Argiues) they agreed vnto it, and put into writing what they
required. Howsoeuer, before the Lacedaemonians would make any full
conclusion of the same, they willed them to returne rst to Argos, and to make
the People acquainted with it, and then, if it were accepted, to returne at the
Hyacinthian Feast and sweare it. So these departed.

Whilest the Argiues were treating about this, the       The Lacedaemonian
Lacedaemonian Ambassadors, Andromenes, and              Ambassadors require Pylus in
                                                        exchange for Panactum.
Phaedimus, and Antimenidas, Commissioners for
receiuing of Panactum, and the prisoners from the Boeotians, to render them to
the Athenians, found that Panactum was demolished, and that their pretext was
this, That there had been anciently an Oath by occasion of di erence betweene
the Athenians and them, That neither part should inhabite the place solely, but
ioyntly, both. But for the Athenian prisoners, as many as the Boeotians had, they
that were with Andromenes receiued, conuoyed and deliuered them vnto the
Athenians, and withall told them of the razing of Panactum, alledging it as
rendred, in that, no enemy of Athens should dwell in it hereafter.

But when this was told them, the Athenians made it a haynous            
matter, for that they conceiued that the               The Athenians take in euill
Lacedaemonians had done them wrong, both in the part, both the razing of
                                                       Panactum, and the League
matter of Panactum which was pulled downe, and         made with the Boeotians.
should haue beene rendred standing; and because also
they had heard of the priuate League made with the Boeotians, whereas they had
promised to ioyne with the Athenians in compelling such to accept of the Peace,
as had refused it; withall they weighed whatsoeuer other points the
Lacedaemonians had beene short in, touching the performance of the Articles,
and thought themselues abused; so that they answered the Lacedaemonian
Ambassadours roughly, and dismissed them.

This di erence arising betweene the Lacedaemonians, The Argiues make League with
and the Athenians, it was presently wrought vpon by Athens by meanes of
                                                               ▪

                                                    Alcibiades.
such also of Athens, as desired to haue the Peace
dissolued.

Amongst the rest was Alcibiades the sonne of Clinias, a man though yong in
yeeres, yet in the dignity of his Ancestors honoured as much as any man of what
Citie soeuer: Who was of opinion, that it was better to ioyne with the Argiues;
not onely for the matter it selfe, but also out of stomacke, labouring to crosse the

Lacedaemonians, because they had made the Peace by The cause why Alcibiades
the meanes of Nicias, and Laches, without him;            desireth to breake with the
                                                          Lacedaemonians.
whom for his youth they had neglected, and not
honoured, as for the ancient hospitality betweene his house and them, had been
requisite, which his father had indeed renounced, but he himselfe by good
O ces done to those prisoners, which were brought from the Iland, had a
purpose to haue renewed. But supposing himselfe on all hands disparaged, he
both opposed the Peace at rst, alledging that the Lacedaemonians would not be
constant; and that they had made the Peace, onely to get the Argiues by that
meanes away from them, and afterwards to inuade the Athenians againe, when
they should be destitute of their friends; And also as soone as this di erence was
on foote, he sent presently to Argos of himselfe,         Alcibiades sendeth for the
willing them with all speed to come to Athens, as         Argiues to Athens to make a
                                                          League.
being thereunto inuited, and to bring with them the
Eleans and Mantineans, to enter with the Athenians into a League, the
opportunity now seruing; and promising that he would helpe them all he could.

The Argiues hauing heard the message, and knowing that the Athenians had
made no League with the Boeotians, and that they were at great              
quarrell with the Lacedaemonians, neglected the Ambassadors they had then in
Lacedaemon, (whom they had sent about the Truce) and applied themselues to
the Athenians, with this thought, that if they should haue Warre, they should by
this meanes be backed with a City that had been their ancient friend, gouerned
like their owne by Democracy, and of greatest power by Sea. Whereupon they
presently sent Ambassadours to Athens to make a League; and together with
theirs, went also the Ambassadors of the Eleans, and Mantineans. Thither also
with all speed came the Lacedaemonian Ambassadors, The
Philocharidas, Leon, and Endius, persons accounted Lacedaemonian          ●●●●   bassado
                                                         urs    ●●●bassadours 〈◊〉 to
most gracious with the Athenians, for feare, lest in     Athens, to 〈…〉 their League with
their passion, they should make a League with the        the Argiues.

Argiues; and withall to require the restitution of Pylus
for Panactum, and to excuse themselues concerning their League with the
Boeotians, as not made for any harme intended to the Athenians.

Now speaking of these things before the Councell, and how that they were come
thither with full power to make agreement concerning all Controuersies betwixt
them, they put Alcibiades into feare, lest, if they should say the same before the
people, the multitude would be drawne vnto their side; and so the Argiue
League fall o . But Alcibiades deuiseth against them Alcibiades perswadeth the
this plot. He perswadeth the Lacedaemonians not to Lacedaemonian Ambassadors,
                                                           to deny before the people, that
confesse their plenary power before the people, and        they had power to conclude.
giueth them his faith, that then Pylus should be
rendred, (for he said he would perswade the Athenians to it, as much as he now
opposed it) and that the rest of their di erences should be compounded. This he
did to alienate them from Nicias, and that by accusing them before the people,
as men that had no true meaning, nor euer spake one and the same thing, he
might bring on the league with the Argiues, Eleans, & Mantineans. And it came
to passe accordingly. For when they came before the people, and to the question,
whether they had full power of concluding, had (contrary to what they had said
in Councell) answered no, the Athenians would no longer endure them, but
gaue eare to Alcibiades, that exclaimed against the        Alcibiades inueigheth against
Lacedaemonians farre more now then euer, and were the Lacedaemonians.
ready then presently to haue the Argiues, and those others with them brought
in, and to make the League▪ But an Earthquake happening, before 
any thing was concluded, the assembly was adiourned. In the next dayes
meeting, Nicias, though the Lacedaemonians had             Nicias endeuoreth to haue the
been abused, and he himselfe also deceiued, touching Peace goe on with the
                                                           Lacedaemonians.
their comming with full power to conclude, yet he
persisted to a rme, that it was their best course to be friends with the
Lacedaemonians, and to deferre the Argiues businesse, till they had sent to the
Lacedaemonians againe to be assured of their intention; saying, that it was
honour vnto themselues, and dishonour to the Lacedaemonians to haue the
Warre put o . For, for themselues, being in estate of prosperity, it was best to
preserue their good fortune, as long as they might; whereas to the other side,
who were in euill estate, it should be in place of gaine to put things as soone as
they could to the hazzard. So he perswaded them to send Ambassadours,
whereof himselfe was one, to require the Lacedaemonians, (if they meant

sincerely) to render Panactum standing, and also            Nicias is sent Ambassador to
Amphipolis: and if the Boeotians would not accept of Lacedaemon to get satisfaction
                                                            about performance of the
the Peace, then to vndoe their League with them,            Articles.
according to the Article, That the one should not
make league with any, without the consent of the other. They willed him to say
further; That they themselues also, if they had had the will to doe wrong, had ere
this made a league with the Argiues, who were present then at Athens, for the
same purpose. And whatsoeuer they had to accuse the Lacedaemonians of
besides, they instructed Nicias in it, and sent him and the other, his fellow
Ambassadours, away. When they were arriued, and had deliuered what they had
in charge, and this last of all, That the Athenians would make League with the
Argiues, vnlesse the Lacedaemonians would renounce their League with the
Boeotians, if the Boeotians accepted not the Peace, the Lacedaemonians denyed to
renounce their league with the Boeotians, (for Xenares the Ephore, and the rest
of that faction carried it) but at the request of Nicias, they renued their former
Oath. For Nicias was afraid he should returne with nothing done, and be carped
at (as after also it fell out) as author of the             Nicias was the Author of the
Lacedaemonian Peace.                                        Peace betweene the Athenians
                                                            and the Lacedaemonians, and
                                                            that Peace was therefore called
At this returne, when the Athenians vnderstood that         Nicia.
nothing was e ected at Lacedaemon, they grew
presently into choler, and apprehending iniury (the Argiues, and their
Confederates being there present, brought in by Alcibiades, they    
made a Peace, and a League with them, in these words.

The Athenians, and Argiues, and Mantineans, and     THE ARTICLES OF THE
Eleans, for themselues, and for the Confederates    LEAGVE BETWEENE THE
                                                    ATHENIANS AND THE
commanded by euery of them, haue made an accord for ARGIVES, &c.
100 yeeres without fraud or dammage▪ both by Sea
and Land.

It shall not be lawfull for the Argiues nor Eleans, nor Mantineans, nor their
Confederates to beare Armes against the Athenians, or the * Confederates vnder

the command of the Athenians, or their Confederates,      * Confederates were of two sorts
by any fraud or machination whatsoeuer. And the           such as on equall 〈◊〉 entred
                                                          League with other, and such as
Athenians, Argiues, and Mantineans, haue made             〈…〉 by compulsion, or as subiects;
League with each other for 100 yeeres on these termes.    both called in the Greeke, 〈◊〉 〈◊〉
                                                          〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 properly, but not
                                                          properly Confederates.
If any enemy shall inuade the Territory of the
Athenians▪ then the Argiues, Eleans, and Mantineans shall goe vnto Athens, to
assist them according as the Athenians shall send them word to doe, in the best
manner they possibly can. But if the enemy after hee haue spoyled the Territory
shall be gone backe, then their Citie shall be held as an enemy to the Argiues,
Eleans, Mantineans, and Athenians, and Warre shall be made against it, by all
those Cities. And it shall not be lawfull for any of those Cities to giue ouer the
Warre, without the consent of all the rest.

And if an enemy shall inuade the Territory, either of the Ar●giues, or of the
Eleans, or of the Mantineans, then the Athenians shall come vnto Argos, Elis, and
Mantinea▪ to assist them, in such sort as those Cities shall send them word to doe,
in the best manner they possibly can. But if the enemy after he hath wasted their
Territory, shall be gone backe, then their Citie shall be held as an enemy, both to
the Athenians, and also to the Argiues, Eleans, and Mantineans, and Warre shall
be made against it, by all those Cities; and it shall not be lawfull for any of them
to giue ouer the Warre against that Citie, without the consent of all the rest.

There shall no armed men be suﬀered to passe through the Dominions either of
themselues, or of any the Confederates vnder their seueuerall commands to make
Warre in any place whatsoeuer; vnlesse by the suﬀrage of all the Cities, Athens,
Argos, Elis, and Mantinea, their passage be allowed.

To such as come to assist any of the other Cities, that Citie which sendeth them shal
giue maintenance for thirtie dayes after they shal arriue in the Citie that sent for
them; and the like at their going away. But if they will vse the Army for a longer
time, then the Citie that sent for them, shall ﬁnd them maintenance, at the rate of

three Oboles of Aegina a day for a man of Armes, and of a Drachma of Aegina
for a horseman.

The Citie which sendeth for the aydes, shall haue the leading, and   
command of them, whilest the Warre is in their owne Territory: But if it shall
seeme good vnto these Cities to make a Warre in common, then all the Cities shall
equally participate of the command.

The Athenians shall sweare vnto the Articles both for themselues, and for their
Confederates; and the Argiues, Eleans, Mantineans, and the Confederates of these
shal euery one sweare vnto them Citie by Citie, and their oath shall be the greatest
that by custome of the seuerall Cities is vsed, and with most perfect * hoastes, and
in these words: I will stand to this League according to * Beasts oﬀered in sacriﬁce.
the Articles thereof, iustly, innocently, and sincerely,
and not transgresse the same by any Art or Machination whatsoeuer.

This oath shall be taken at Athens, by the Senate, and the O cers of the
Commons, and administred by the Prytaneis. At Argos it shall be taken by the
Senate, and the Councell of Eighty, and by the Artynae, and administred by the
Councell of Eighty. At Mantinea it shall be taken by the procurators of the
people, and by the Senate, and by the rest of the Magistrates, and administred by
the Theori, and by the Tribunes of the Souldiers. At Elis it shall be taken by the
procurators of the people, and by the O cers of the Treasury, and by the
Councell of 600, and administred by the Procurators of the People, and by the
Keepers of the Law.

This oath shall be renued by the Athenians, who shall goe to Elis, and to
Mantinea, and to Argos, thirty dayes before the Olympian Games; and by the
Argiues, Eleans, and Mantineans, who shall come to Athens, ten dayes before the
Panathenaean Holy-dayes.

The Articles of this League and Peace and the oath, shall be inscribed in a pillar of
stone; by the Athenians in the Cittadell; by the Argiues in their Market place,
within the Precinct of the Temple of Apollo; and by the Mantineans in their

Market place, within the precinct of the Temple of Iupiter. And at the Olympian
Games, now at hand, there shall be erected ioyntly by them all, a brazen pillar in
Olympia, [with the same inscription. ]

If it shall seeme good to these Cities to adde any thing to these Articles; whatsoeuer
shall be determined by them all in common Councell, the same shall stand good.

Thus was the League and the Peace concluded, and that which was made before
betweene the Lacedaemonians & the Athenians, was notwithstanding, by
neither side renounced.

But the Corinthians, although they were the Confederats of the              
Argiues, yet would they not enter into this League;       The Corinthians 〈…〉 the 〈◊〉
nay, though there were made a League before this,         with 〈◊〉, and encline againe to
                                                          the Lacedaemonians.
betweene them and the Argiues, Eleans, and
Mantineans, that where one, there all, should haue Warre, or Peace, yet they
refused to sweare to it; but said that their League defensiue was enough, whereby
they were bound to defend each other, but not to take part one with another in
inuading. So the Corinthians fell o from their Confederates, and inclined
againe to the Lacedaemonians.

This Summer were celebrated the Olympian Games, The Olympian Games.
in which Androsthenes an Arcadian, was the rst time
Victor in the exercise called * Pancratium. And the     *
Lacedaemonians were by the Eleans prohibited the        Pancratium consisted of
                                                        wrastling and ﬁghting with
Temple there; so as they might neither sacri ce, nor    Fish.
contend for the prizes, amongst the rest; for that they The Lacedaemonians forbidden
had not payed the Fine set vpon them, (according to the exercises, and why.
an Olympique Law) by the Eleans, that laide to their
charge that they had put Souldiers into the Fort of Phyrcon, and into Lepreum
in the time of the Olympique Truce.

The Fine amounted vnto * 2000 Minae, which was *             * 6●5 pound sterling.
two Minae for euery man of Armes, according to the
                                                             * 6 pound 5 shillings sterling

Law. But the Lacedaemonians by their Ambassadours
which they sent thither, made answer, That they had beene vniustly condemned,
alledging that the Truce was not published in         Contention between the
Lacedaemon, when their Souldiers were sent out.       Lacedaemonians and Eleans,
                                                           before the Grecians, at Olympia,
                                                           about a 〈…〉 vpon the
To this the Eleans said againe, That the Truce was         Lacedaemonians, by the Eleans,
already begunne amongst themselues, who vsed to            of breaking the Olympi●●●
                                                           Truce.
publish it ﬁrst in their owne Dominion, and thereupon,
whilest they lay still, and expected no such matter, as in time of Truce, the
Lacedaemonians did them the iniury at vnawares.

The Lacedaemonians hereunto replyed, That it was not necessary to proceed to the
publishing of the truce in Lacedaemon at all, if they thought themselues wronged
already; but rather, if they thought themselues not wronged yet, then to doe it by
way of preuention, that they should not Arme against them afterwards.

The Eleans stood sti ely in their rst Argument; that they would neuer be
perswaded but iniury had been done them; but were neuerthelesse contented, If
they would render Lepreum, both to remit their own part of the money, and also to
pay that part for them which was due vnto the God.

When this would not be agreed vnto, they then required this, not 
that they should render Lepreum vnlesse they would, but that then they should
come to the Altar of Iupiter Olympian, seeing they desired to haue free vse of the
Temple, and there before the Grecians to take an oath, to pay the ne at least
hereafter. But when the Lacedaemonians refused that also, they were excluded
the Temple, the sacri ces, and the games, and sacri ced at home; But the rest of
the Grecians, except the Lepreates, were all admitted to be spectators.
Neuerthelesse, the Eleans fearing lest they would come and sacri ce there by
force, kept a guard there of their yongest men, in Armes, to whom were added
Argiues and Mantineans, of either Citie 1000, and certaine Athenian horsemen,
who were then at Argos, waiting the celebration of the Feast. For a great feare
possessed all the Assembly, lest the Lacedaemonians should come vpon them
with an Army; and the rather, because Lichas the sonne of Arcesilaus, a

Lacedaemonian, had been whipped by the Serjeants Lichas a Lacedaemonian
vpon the Race, for that when his Chariot had gotten whipped vpon the Olympian
                                                       Race.
the prize, after Proclamation made, that the Chariot
of the Boeotian State had wonne it (because he himselfe was not admitted to
run) he came forth into the Race, and crowned his Chariotier, to make knowne
that the Chariot was his owne. This added much vnto their feare, and they verily
expected some accident to follow. Neuerthelesse, the Lacedaemonians stirred
not, and the Feast passed ouer.

After the Olympian Games, the Argiues and their Confederates went to
Corinth, to get the Corinthians into their League, and the Lacedaemonian
Ambassadors chanced to be there also; and after much conference, and nothing
concluded, vpon occasion of an Earthquake, they brake o the conference, and
returned euery one to his owne Citie. And so this Summer ended.
                                                         The twelfth Summer.
The next Winter, the men of Heraclea in Trachinia,
fought a battell against the Aelians, Delopians, Melians, and certaine
Thessalians. For the neighbour Cities, were enemies to this Citie, as built to the
preiudice onely of them, and both opposed the same from the time it was rst
founded, annoying it what they could, and also in this battell ouercame them,
and slew Xenares a Lacedaemonian, their Commander, with some others,
Heracleots. Thus ended this Winter, and the twelfth yeere of this Warre.

In the very beginning of the next Summer, the Boeotians tooke          
Heraclea miserably a icted, into their owne hands,      THE THIRTEENTH YEERE.
and put Hegesippidas a Lacedaemonian out of it, for
his euill gouernment. They tooke it, because they feared, lest whilest the
Lacedaemonians were troubled about Peloponnesus, it should haue beene taken
in by the Athenians. Neuerthelesse the Lacedaemonians were o ended with
them for doing it.

The same Summer Alcibiades the sonne of Clinias, being Generall of the
Athenians, by the practice of the Argiues, and their Confederates, went into
Peloponnesus, and hauing with him a few men of Armes, and Archers of

Athens, and some of the Confederates which he tooke vp there, as he passed
through the Countrey with his Army, both ordered such a aires by the way
concerning the League, as was t; and comming to the Patraeans, perswaded
them to build their walls downe to the Sea-side, and purposed to raise another
wall himselfe towards Rhium in Achaia. But the Corinthians, Sicyonians, and
such others as this wall would haue preiudiced, came forth and hindred him.

The same Summer fell out a Warre betweene the Epidaurians and the Argiues;
the pretext thereof was about a Beast for sacri ce,       Warre betweene the
which the Epidaurians ought to haue sent, in              Epidaurians and Argiues.

consideration of their pastures, to Apollo Pythius, and had not done it; the
Argiues being the principall owners of the Temple. But Alcibiades, and the
Argiues had indeed determined to take in the City, though without pretence at
all, both that the Corinthians might not stirre, and also that they might bring
the Athenian succours from Aegina, into those parts a neerer way, then by
compassing the Promontory of Scyllaeum. And therefore the Argiues prepared,
as of themselues, to exact the sacri ce by inuasion.

About the same time also, the Lacedaemonians with their whole forces, came
forth as farre as Leuctra, in the Con nes of their owne Territory towards
Lycaeum, vnder the Conduct of Agis, the sonne of Archidamus their King. No
man knew against what place they intended the Warre; No not the Cities
themselues out of which they were leuyed. But when in the sacri ces which they
made for their passage, the tokens obserued were vnlucky, they went home again,
and sent word about to their Confederates (being now the moneth * Carneius)
to prepare themselues after the next * Feast * Their holy moneth, in which
of the New Moone (kept by the Dorians, ) to be          they kept a Feast to Apollo.

againe vpon their march. The Argiues; who set forth * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
the 26 day of the moneth before * Carneus, though
they celebrated the same day, yet all the time they     * Iuly▪

continued inuading and wasting Epidauria. And the
Epidaurians called in their Confederates to helpe them, whereof some excused
themselues vpon the quality of the moneth, and others came but to the

Con nes of Epidauria, and there stayed. Whilst the Argiues were in Epidauria,
the Ambassadours of diuers Cities, solicited by the Athenians, met together at
Mantinea, where in a conference amongst them, Ephamidas of Corinth said,
That their actions agreed not with their words, for as   Ambassadors meet about Peace,
much as whilst they were sitting there to treat of a     but cannot agree.

Peace, the Epidaurians with their Confederates, and the Argiues stood armed in
the meane time against each other in order of battell. That it was therefore ﬁt that
some body should goe ﬁrst vnto the Armies from either side, and dissolue them,
and then come againe and dispute of Peace.

This aduice being approued, they departed, and withdrew the Argiues from
Epidauria; and meeting afterwards againe in the same place, they could not for
all that agree; and the Argiues againe inuaded and wasted Epidauria.

The Lacedaemonians also drew forth their Army against Caryae, but then againe
their sacri ce for passage, being not to their mind, they returned. And the
Argiues, when they had spoyled about the third part of Epidauria, went home
likewise. They had the assistance of one thousand men of Armes of Athens, and
Alcibiades their Commander; but these hearing that the Lacedaemonians were
in the eld, and seeing now there was no longer need of them, departed, and so
passed this Summer.

The next Winter the Lacedaemonians vnknowne to The end of the thirteenth
the Athenians▪ put 300 Garrison Soldiers vnder the Summer.
Command of Agesippidas, into Epidaurus by Sea. For which cause the Argiues
came and expostulated with the Athenians, that whereas it was written in the
Articles of the League, that no enemy should be su red to passe through either
of their Dominions, yet had they su ered the Lacedaemonians to passe by * Sea;
and said they had wrong, vnlesse the Athenians would * The Argiues acknowledge the
againe put the Messenians, and Helotes into Pylus     Sea on their owne coast, 〈◊〉 be of
                                                      the Dominion of Athens.
against the Lacedaemonians. Hereupon the
Athenians, at the perswasion of Alcibiades, wrote vpon the * Laconian pillar
[vnder the inscription of the Peace] that  * Which was erected for the
                                                             Articles of the Peace to bee

the Lacedaemonians had violated their oath, and they written in.
drew the Helotes out of * Cranij, and put them againe * Jn Cephalonia where they had
into Pylus, to infest the Territory with driuing of   before placed them.

booties, but did no more.

All this Winter, though there was Warre betweene the Argiues and Epidaurians;
yet was there no set battell, but onely Ambushes and Skirmishes, wherein were
slaine on both sides, such as it chanced.

But in the end of Winter, and the Spring now at hand, the Argiues came to
Epidaurus with Ladders, as destitute of men by reason of the Warre, thinking to
haue wonne it by assault, but returned againe with their labour lost. And so
ended this Winter, and the thirteenth yeere of this Warre.

In the middle of the next Summer, the Lacedaemonians seeing that the
Epidaurians, their Confederates, were tyred, and that THE FOVRETEENTH
of the rest of the Cities of Peloponnesus, some had      YEERE.

already reuolted, and others were but in euill termes, and apprehending that if
they preuented it not, the mischiefe would spread still farther, put themselues
into the eld with all their owne forces, both of         Preparation of the
themselues and their Helotes, to make Warre against Lacedaemonians against Argos.
Argos, vnder the Conduct of Agis the sonne of Archidamus their King. The
Tegeates went also with them, and of the rest of Arcadia, all that were in the
Lacedaemonian League. But the rest of their Confederates both within
Peloponnesus, and without, were to meet together at Phlius. That is to say, of
the Boeotians 5000 men of Armes, and as many Light-armed, 500 horse, and to
euery * horseman, another man on foot, which             * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉
                                                                          ▪

holding the horses Mane, ran by with equall speed. Of
Corinthians, 2000 men of Armes, and of the rest more or lesse, as they were. But
the Phliasians, because the Army was assembled in their owne Territory, put
forth their whole power. The Argiues hauing had notice both formerly of the
preparation of the Lacedaemonians, and afterward of their marching on to ioyne
with the rest at Phlius, brought their Army likewise into the eld. They had with

them the aides of the Mantineans, and their Confederates, and 3000 men of
Armes of the Eleans; and marching forward, met the * * The Lacedaemonians,
Lacedaemonians at Methydrium, a Towne of Arcadia, Tegeates, and some Arcadians,
                                                       not the whole League which was
                                                                            ▪
each side seazing on a hill. And the Argiues prepared not yet vnited.
to giue battell to the Lacedaemonians, whiles they
were single. But Agis dislodging his Army by night, marched on to 
Phlius to the rest of the Confederates, vnseene. Vpon The Lacedaemonians and their
knowledge hereof, the Argiues betimes in the           Confederates meet at Phlius.
morning retyred rst to Argos, and afterwards to the The Argiues go to meet them at
                                                       the Forrest of Nemea.
Forrest of Nemea, by which they thought the
Lacedaemonians and their Confederates would fall in. But Agis came not the
way which they expected, but with the Lacedaemonians, Arcadians, and
Epidaurians, whom he acquainted with his purpose, tooke another more
di cult way to passe, and came downe into the Argiue Plaines. The Corinthians
also, and Pellenians, and Phliasians, marched another The Lacedaemonians come into
troublesome way; Onely the Boeotians, Megareans,       the Plaines before Argos.

and Sicyonians, were appointed to come downe by the way of the Forrest of
Nemea, in which the Argiues were incamped; to the end that if the Argiues
should turne head against the Lacedaemonians, these might set vpon them at the
backe with their horse.

Thus ordered, Agis entred into the Plaines, and spoyled Saminthus, and some
other Townes thereabouts. Which when the Argiues vnderstood, they came out
of the Forest somewhat after breake of day to oppose them, and lighting among
the Phliasians and Corinthians, slew some few of the Phliasians, but had more
slaine of their owne, by the Corinthians, though not many. The Boeotians,
Megareans, and Sicyonians, marched forward towards Nemea, and found that
the Argiues were departed. For when they came downe, and saw their Country
wasted, they put themselues into order of battell; and the Lacedaemonians, on
the other side did the same; and the Argiues stood       The Argiues enclosed betweene
intercepted in the middest of their enemies. For in the the Lacedaemonians and the
                                                         Boeotians.
Plaine between them and the City, stood the
Lacedaemonians, and those with them; aboue them were the Corinthians,

Phliasians, and Pellenians; and towards Nemea were And the Lacedaemonians
the Boeotians, Sicyonians, and Megareans. And            enclosed betweene the army of
                                                         the Argiues and their Citie.
horsemen they had none, for the Athenians alone, of
all their Confederates, were not yet come. Now the generality of the Army of the
Argiues, and their Confederates, did not thinke the danger present so great, as
indeed it was, but rather that the aduantage in the battell would be their own,
and that the Lacedaemonians were intercepted, not onely in the Argiues
Territory, but also hard by the Citie. But two men of Argos, Thrasyllus, one of
the ue Commanders of the Army, and Alciphron, * * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 He that ▪

entertayner of the Lacedaemonians, when  lodged, the Lacedaemonians
                                                         when any of them came to Argos.
the Armies were euen ready to ioyne, went vnto Agis,
and dealt with him to haue the battell put o , for as much as the Argiues were
content and ready, both to propound, and accept of Propositions of Peace made by
equall Arbitrators, in whatsoeuer the Lacedaemonians two priuate men of Argos:
should charge them withall, and in the meane time, to haue peace with them
solemnely con rmed.

This these Argiues said of themselues, without the        And accepted by Agis, without
command of the generality, and Agis, of himselfe          the knowledge of the rest of the
                                                          Commanders.
likewise, accepting their proposition, without
deliberation had with the maior part, and hauing communicated it onely to
some one more of those that had charge in the Army, made Truce with them for
foure moneths; in which space, they were to performe the things agreed vpon
betwixt them. And then presently he withdrew hir Armie, without giuing
account to any of the rest of the League why he did so. Agis withdraweth his Army,
The Lacedaemonians, and the Confederates followed and is censured for it by the
                                                          Confederates.
Agis, according to the Law, as being their Generall,
but amongst themselues taxed him exceedingly, for that hauing a very faire
occasion of battell, the Argiues being inclosed on all sides, both by their Horse
and Foot, hee yet went his way, doing nothing worthy the great preparation they
had made. For this was in very truth the fairest Army that euer the Grecians had
in the eld vnto this day; but it was most to be seene, when they were *
altogether in the Forrest of Nemea. Where the Lacedaemonians were with their

whole Forces, besides the Arcadians, Boeotians,          * That is going home for till then
Corinthians, Sicyonians, Pellenians, Phliasians, and they were neuer altogether in
                                                         Nemaea      ▪
Megareans; and these all chosen men of their seuerall
Cities, and such as were thought a match, not onely for the League of the
Argiues, but for such another added to it. The Army thus o ended with Agis,
departed, and were dissolued, euery man to his home. The Argiues were much
more o ended with those of their Citie, which without the consent of the
multitude, had made the Truce, they also supposing that the Lacedaemonians
had escaped their hands in such an aduantage, as they neuer had the like before;
in that the battell was to haue been fought vnder their City walls, and with the
assistance of many and good Confederates. And in their returne, they began to
stone Thrasyllus, at the Charadrum, (the place where Thrasyllus punished for
the Souldiers before they enter into the City from       propounding the Peace.

warfare, vse to haue their Military causes heard) but he ying to the 
Altar, saued himselfe, neuerthelesse they con scated his goods.

After this, the Athenians comming in, with the ayde The Athenians instigate the
of 1000 men of Armes, and 300 Horse, vnder the          Argiues to breake the Truce.

Conduct of Laches and Nicostratus, the Argiues (for they were afraid for all this,
to breake the Truce with the Lacedaemonians) willed them to be gone againe,
and when they desired to treat, would not present them to the People, till such
time as the Mantineans, and Eleans (who were not yet gone) forced them vnto it
by their importunity. Then the Athenians, in the presence of Alcibiades, that
was Ambassadour there, spake vnto the Argiues, and their Confederates, saying,
That the Truce was vnduely made, without the assent of the rest of their
Confederates, and that now (for they were come time enough) they ought to fall
againe to be Warre, and did by their words so preuaile The Argiues breake the Truce,
with the Confederates, that they all, saue the Argiues, and besiege Orchomenus.
presently marched against * Orchomenus of Arcadia. * 〈…〉 Orchomenus 〈…〉.

And these, though satis ed, stayed behind at rst, but afterwards they also went;
and sitting downe before Orchomenus, ioynely besieged, and assaulted the same;
desiring to take it in as well for other causes, as chie y for that the Hostages

which the Arcadians had giuen to the Lacedaemonians, were there in custody.
The Orchomenians fearing the weakenesse of their wals, and the greatnesse of
the Army, and lest they should perish, before any reliefe arriued, yeelded vp the
Towne on conditions: To be receiued into the League; Orchomenus yeelded.
to giue Hostages for themselues; and to surrender the
Hostages h●ld there by the Lacedaemonians, into the hands of the Mantineans.

The Confederates after this, hauing gotten Orchomenus, sate in Councell,
about what Towne they should proceed against next. The Eleans gaue aduice to
goe against * Lepreum, but the Mantineans, against     * As being in particular 〈◊〉 with
Tegea. And the Argiues and Athenians concurred in it.
opinion with the Mantineans. But the Eleans taking it in euill part, that they did
not decree to goe against Lepreum, went home; but The Argiues goe next against
the rest prepared themselues at Mantinea, to goe       Tegea, which displeaseth the
                                                       Eleans, and they 〈◊〉 home.
against Tegea, which also some within had a purpose
to put into their hands.

The Lacedaemonians, after their returne from Argos The Lacedaemonians question
with their foure moneths Truce, seuerely questioned their King, for suﬀering the
                                                         Argiues to goe oﬀ vnsoughten.
Agis, for that vpon so faire an opportunity, as they
neuer had before, he subdued not Argos to the State; for so many and so good
Confederates, would hardly be gotten together againe at one time. 
But when also the newes came of the taking of Orchomenus, then was their
indignation much greater, and they presently resolued, contrary to their owne
custome, in their passion, to raze his house, and ne him in the summe of *
10000 Drachmaes. But he besought them that they          * 312 pound 10 shillings
would doe neither of these things yet, and promised sterling.
that leading out the Armie againe, he would by some valiant action cancell those
accusations; or, if not, they might proceed afterwards to doe with him
whatsoeuer they thought good. So they forbore both the Fine, and the razing of
his house; but made a decree for that present, such as had neuer beene before,
that tenne Spartans should bee elected and ioyned with him as Councellours,
without whom it should not be lawfull for him to leade the Army into the eld.

In the meane time came newes from their side in Tegea, that vnlesse they came
presently with aide, the Tegeans would reuolt to the The Lacedaemonians put their
Argiues, and their Confederates; and that they wanted Army into the ﬁeld to rescue
                                                      Tegea.
little of being reuolted already.

Vpon this, the Lacedaemonians with speed leuyed all their forces, both of
themselues, and their Helotes, in such number, as they had neuer done before,
and marched vnto Orestium in Maenalia, and appointed the Arcadians, such as
were of their League, to assemble, and follow them at the heeles to Tegea.

The Lacedaemonians being come entire to Orestium, from thence sent backe
the sixt part of their Armie (in which they put both the yongest and the eldest
sort) for the custody of the Citie, and with the rest marched on to Tegea; and
not long after, arriued also their Confederates of Arcadia.

They sent also to Corinth, and to the Boeotians, Phoceans, and Locrians, to come
with their aydes with all speed to Mantinea. But these had too short a warning,
nor was it easie for them, vnlesse they came altogether, and stayed for one
another, to come through the enemies Countrey, which lay betweene, and
barred them of passage. Neuerthelesse, they made what hast they could. And the
Lacedaenians taking with them, their Arcadian             The Lacedaemonians waste the
Confederates present, entred into the Territory of        Territory of Mantinea.

Mantinea, and pitching their Camp by the Temple of Hercules, wasted the
Territory about.

The Argiues, and their Confederates, as soone as they came in sight, 
seazed on a certaine place forti ed by nature, and of hard accesse, and put
themselues into battell array. And the Lacedaemonians marched presently
towards them, and came vp within a stone or a darts cast. But then one of the
ancient men of the Army cryed out vnto Agis, seeing him to goe on against a
place of that strength, that he went about to amend one fault with another▪
signifying that he intended to make amends for his former retreat from Argos,
which hee was questioned for, with his now vnseasonable forwardnesse. But he,
whether it were vpon that increpation, or some other suddaine apprehension of

his owne, presently withdrew his Army before the ght began, and marching
vnto the Territory of Tegea, turned the course of the water into the Territory of
Mantinea; touching which water, because into what part soeuer it had his
course, it did much harme to the Countrey, the Mantineans, and Tegeates were
at Warres. Now his drift was, by the turning of that water to prouoke those
Argiues, and their Confederates which kept the hill, when they should heare of
it, to come down, and oppose them, that so they might ght with them in the
Plaine. And by that time he had stayed about the water a day, he had diuerted
the streame. The Argiues, & their Confederates were at rst amazed at this their
sudden retreat, from so neere them; and knew not what to make of it. But when
after the retreat they returned no more in sight, and that they themselues lying
still on the place, did not pursue them, then began they anew to accuse their
Commanders, both for su ering the Lacedaemonians to depart formerly, when
they had them inclosed at so faire an aduantage before Argos; and now againe,
for not pursuing them when they ran away, but giuing them leaue to saue
themselues, & betraying the Army. The Commanders for the present, were
much troubled hereat, but afterwards they drew downe the Armie from the
Hill, and comming forth into the Plaine, encamped, The Argiues come downe from
as to goe against the enemie. The next day the Argiues their aduantage, to seeke the
                                                         enemy.
and their Confederates put themselues into such
order as (if occasion serued) they meant to ght in & the Lacedaemonians
returning from the water to the temple of Hercules, the same place where they
had formerly encamped, perceiue the enemies to be all of them in order of battell
hard by them, come downe already from the hill Certainely the              
Lacedaemonians were more a righted at this time,         The Lacedaemonians put
then euer they had beene to their remembrance            themselues in order hastily.

before. For the time they had to prepare themselues was exceeding short, and
such was their diligence that euery man fell immediately into his owne Ranke,
Agis the King commanding all, according to the Law. For whilest the King hath
the Army in the eld, all things are commanded by him, and he signi eth what is
to be done, to the * Polemarchi, they to the Lochagi, * Polemarchi Martials of the
these to the Pentecontateres, and these againe to the ﬁeld. The Commanders of
                                                         Regiments, Colonels.
Enomatarchi, who lastly make it knowne, euery one Pentecontateres, Captaines of

to his owne Enomatia. In this manner, when they         Companies. Enomatarchi,
                                                        Captaines of the fourth part of
would haue any thing to be done, their commands         Company. An Enomatia, was in
passe through the Army, and are quickly executed. For this Army thirty two Souldiers.
almost all the Lacedaemonian Army, saue a very few,
are Captaines of Captaines, and the care of what is to be put in execution, lyeth
vpon many. Now their left Wing consisted of the *       * A Band of the
Sciritae, which amongst ahe Lacedaemonians haue         Lacedaemonians so called,
                                                        perhaps from Scirus, a Towne in
euer alone that place. Next to these were placed the    Laconia.
Brasidian Souldiers lately come out of Thrace, and
with them, * those that had been newly made free.       * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
After them in order, the rest of the Lacedaemonians,
Band after Band; and by them Arcadians, rst the Heraeans, after these the
Maenalians. In the right Wing were the Tegeates, and a few Lacedaemonians in
the point of the same Wing. And vpon the out side of either Wing, the
horsemen. So stood the Lacedaemonians. Opposite to them, in the right Wing,
stood the Mantineans, because it was vpon their owne The order of the battell of the
Territory, and with them such Arcadians as were of      Argiues.

their League. Then the 1000 chosen Argiues which the City had for a long time
caused to be trayned for the Warres, at the publique charge; and next to them the
rest of the Argiues. After these the Cleonaeans, and Orneates, their Confederaes.
And lastly, the Athenians with the Horsemen (which were also theirs) had the
left Wing. This was the order and preparation of both the Armies.

The Army of the Lacedaemonians appeared to be the greater. But what the
number was, either of the particulars of either side, or in generall, I could not
exactly write. For the number of the Lacedaemonians, agreeable to the secrecy of
that State, was vnknowne; and of the other side, for the ostentation 
vsuall with all men, touching the number of themselues was vnbeleeued.
Neuerthelesse the number of the Lacedaemonians may be attained by
computing thus. Besides the Sciritae, which were 600. there fought in all seuen *
Regiments, in euery Regiment were foure *                  * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, lesse then
Companies, in each Company were foure *                    ordinary Regimets with vs, more
                                                           then ordinary Companies.
Enomatiae, and of euery Enomatia, there stood in

Front, foure; but they were not ranged all alike in File, * Companies of 50, but more or
but as the Captaines of Bands thought it necessary.       lesse in them as occasion serued.

But the Army in generall was so ordered, as to be eight * Enomatia, the fourth part of a
men in depth, and the rst Ranke of the whole,             Pentecostye. By this account
                                                          euery Enomatia had 32. euery
besides the Sciritae, consisted of 448 Souldiers.         Pentecostye 128. euery Band or
                                                               〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 512. the
Now when they were ready to ioyne, the                         whole Army besides the Sciritae
                                                               3584, and with the Sciritae
Commanders made their hortatines, euery one to                 which are 600.4184. which
those that were vnder his owne command. To the                 number riseth also thus, 448 in
                                                               ranke 8 in File, make 3584, and
Mantineans it was said, That they were to ﬁght for             then the 600 Sciritae, as before
their Territory, and concerning their liberty, and             make 4184. light-armed
                                                               Souldiers, which vsually farre
seruitude, that the former might not be taken from             exceeded the number of men of
them, and that they might not againe taste of the later.       Armes are not reckoned. The
                                                               hortatiue to the Argiues, and
The Argiues were admonished, That whereas
                                                               their Confederates.
anciently they had the leading of Peloponnesus, and
in it an equall share, they should not now suﬀer themselues to be depriued of it for
euer; and that withall, they should now reuenge the many iniuries of a City, their
neighbour and enemy. To the Athenians it was remembred, how honourable a
thing it would be for them, in company of so many and good Confederates, to be
inferior to none of them; and that if they had once vanquished the
Lacedaemonians in Peloponnesus, their owne Dominion would become both the
more assured, and the larger by it, and that no other would inuade their Territory
hereafter. Thus much was said to the Argiues and their Confederates. But the
Lacedaemonians encouraged one another, both of           The Lacedaemonians encourage
themselues, and also by the * manner of their            one another.

Discipline in the Warres; taking encouragement, being * They vsed before battell to sing
valiant men, by the commemoration of what they           Songs containing
                                                         encouragement, to dye for their
already knew, as being well acquainted, that a long      Countrey.
actuall experience, conferred more to their safety, then
any short verball exhortation, though neuer so well deliuered. After this followed
the battell.

The Argiues and their Confederates, marched to the charge with great violence,
and fury. But the Lacedaemonians, slowly, and with
many Flutes, according to their Military Discipline,    The ﬁght.

not as a point of Religion, but that marching euenly, and by measure, their
Rankes might not be distracted, as the greatest Armies, when they 
march in the face of the Enemy vse to be.

Whilest they were yet marching vp, Agis the King thought of this course. All
Armies doe thus; In the Con ict they extend their right Wing, so as it commeth
in vpon the Flanke of the left Wing of the enemy; and this happeneth for that,
that euery one through feare seeketh all he can to couer his vnarmed side, with
the Shield of him that standeth next him on his right hand, conceiuing, that to
be so locked together, is their best defence▪ The beginning hereof, is in the
leader of the rst File on the right hand, who euer striuing to shift his vnarmed
side from the enemy, the rest vpon like feare follow after. And at this time, the
Mantineans in the right Wing, had farre encompassed the Sciritae: and the
Lacedaemonians on the other side, and the Tegeates, were come in, yet farther,
vpon the Flanke of the Athenians, by as much as they had the greater Army.
Wherfore Agis fearing lest his left Wing should be encompassed, & supposing
the Mantineans to be come in farre, signi ed vnto the Sciritae and Brasidians, to
draw out part of their Bands, and therewith to equalize their left Wing, to the
right Wing of the Mantineans, and into the void space, he commanded to come
vp Hipponoidas, and Aristocles, two Colonels with their Bands, out of the right
Wing, and to fall in there, and make vp the breach: Conceiuing that more then
enough would be still remaining in their right Wing, and that the left Wing
opposed to the Mantineans, would be the stronger. But it happened (for he
commanded it in the very onset, and on the sodaine) both that Aristocles, and
Hipponoidas refused to go to the place commanded (for which they were
afterwards banished Sparta, as thought to haue disobeyed out of cowardise) and
that the enemy had in the meane time also charged. And when those which he
commanded to goe to the place of the Sciritae, went not, they could no more
reunite themselues, nor cloze againe the empty space. But the Lacedaemonians,
though they had the worst at this time in euery point, for skill, yet in valour they

manifestly shewed themselues superior. For after the The Lacedaemonians haue the
  ght was once begun, notwithstanding that the right disaduantage for order, but
                                                          aduantage of valour.
Wing of the Mantineans did put to ight the Sciritae
& Brasidians, and that the Mantineans, together with their Confederates, and
those 1000 chosen men of Argos, falling vpon them in Flanke, by the
breach not yet clozed vp, killed many of the Lacedaemonians, and put to ight,
and chased them to their Carriages, slaying also certaine of the elder sort, left
there for a guard, so as in this part the Lacedaemonians were ouercome. But with
the rest of the Army, and especially the middle battell, where Agis was himselfe,
and those which are called, the 300 horsemen, about him, they charged vpon the
eldest of the Argiues, and vpon those which are named, the ﬁue Cohorts, and
vpon the Cleonaeans, and Orneates, and certaine Athenians aranged amongst
them, and put them all to ight. In such sort, as many The Lacedaemonians haue the
of them neuer strooke stroake, but as soone as the        victory.

Lacedaemonians charged, gaue ground presently, and some for feare to be
ouertaken, were trodden vnder foot. As soone as the Army of the Argiues and
their Confederates had in this part giuen ground, they began also to breake, on
either side. The right Wing of the Lacedaemonians and Tegeates had now with
their surplusage of number hemmed the Athenians in, so as they had the danger
on all hands, being within the circle, pend vp; and without it, already
vanquished. And they had been the most distressed part of all the Army had not
their horsemen come in to helpe them. Withall it fell out that Agis when he
perceiued the left Wing of his owne Army to labour, namely, that which was
opposed to the Mantineans, and to those thousand Argiues, commanded the
whole Army to goe and relieue the part ouercome. By which meanes the
Athenians, and such of the Argiues as together with them, were ouerlaid whilst
the Army passed by and declined them, saued themselues at leasure. And the
Mantineans with their Confederates, and those chosen Argiues, had no more
mind now of pressing vpon their enemies, but seeing their side was ouercome,
and the Lacedaemonians approaching them, presently turned their backs. Of the
Mantineans the greatest part were slaine, but of those chosen Argiues, the most
were saued, by reason the ight, and going o , was neither hasty nor long. For

the Lacedaemonians ght long and constantly till they haue made the enemy to
turne his backe, but that done, they follow him not farre.

Thus or neere thus, went the battell, the greatest that The Lacedaemonians 〈…〉 the
had been of a long time betweene Grecians, and             enemy farre.

Grecians, and of two the most famous Cities. The Lacedaemonians 
laying together the Armes of their slaine enemies, presently erected a Trophie,
and ri ed their dead bodies. Their owne dead they tooke vp, and carried them to
Tegea, where they were also buried, and deliuered to the Enemie theirs, vnder
truce. Of the Argiues, and Orneates, and Cleonaeans Number of the 〈◊〉     ▪

were slaine 700. of the Mantineans, 200. and of the
Athenians, with the Aeginetae, likewise 200. and both the Captaines. The
Confederates of the Lacedaemonians were neuer pressed, and therfore their losse
was not worth mentioning. And of the Lacedaemonians themselues, it is hard to
know the certainety, but it is said there were slaine three hundred.

When it was certaine they would ght, Pleistoanax the other King of the
Lacedaemonians, and with him both old and yong, came out of the Citie to
haue ayded the Armie, and came forth as farre as Tegea; but being aduertised of
the Victory, they returned. And the Lacedaemoni●ans sent out to turne backe
also those Confederates of theirs which were comming to them from Corinth,
and from without the Isib●nus. And then they also went home themselues, and
hauing dismissed their Confederates (for now were the Carneian Holidaies)
celebrated that Feast. Thus in this one Battell they wiped o their disgrace with
the Grecians: for they had beene taxed both with         The Lacedaemonians recouer
cowardise, for the blow they receiued in the Iland, and their reputation.
with imprudence and slacknesse in other occasions. But after this, their
miscarriage was imputed to Fortune, and for their mindes, they were esteemed to
haue been euer the same they had beene.

The day before this Battell, it chanced also that the Epidaurians with their whole
power inuaded the Territory of Argos, as being emptied much of men; and
                                                         The Epidaurians enter the
                                                         territory of Argos.

whilest the Argiues were abroad, killed many of those
that were left behinde to defend it.

Also three thousand men of Elis, and a thousand          The Athenians build a Fort
Athenians, besides those which had beene sent before, before Epidaurus.
being come after the Battell to ayde the Mantineans, marched presently all, to
Epidaurus, & lay before it all the while the Lacedaemonians were celebrating the
Carneian Holidaies: and assigning to euery one his part, began to take in the
Citie with a Wall. But the rest gaue ouer; only the Athenians quickly nished a
Forti cation, (which was their taske) wherein stood the Temple of 
Iuno. In it, amongst them all they left a Garrison, and went home euery one to
his owne Citie: And so this Summer ended.                The end of the twelfth Summer.
                                                           Peace concluded betweene the
In the beginning of the Winter following, the           Argiues and Lacedaemonians.
Lacedaemonians, presently after the end of the
Carneian Holidaies, drew out their Armie into the Field, and being come to
Tegea, sent certaine propositions of agreement before to Argos. There were
before this time many Citizens in Argos, well-a ected to the Lacedaemonians,
and that desired the deposing of the Argiue People, and now after the Battell,
they were better able by much to perswade the people to composition, then they
formerly were. And their designe was, rst, to get a Peace made with the
Lacedaemonians, and after that a League, and then at last to set vpon the
Commons.

There went thither, Lichas the sonne of Archesilaus, entertainer of the Argiues
in Lacedaemon, and brought to Argos two propositions; one of Warre, if the
Warre were to proceed; another of Peace, if they would haue Peace. And after
much contradiction, (for Alcibiades was also there) the Lacedaemonian Faction,
that boldly now discouered themselues, preuailed with the Argiues to accept the
proposition of Peace, which was this.

It seemeth good to the Councell of the Lacedaemonians,     THE ARTICLES.
to accord with the Argiues on these Articles:

The Argiues shall redeliuer vnto the Orchomenians their * children, and vnto the
Maenalians their * men, and vnto the Lacedaemonians * Hostages which they tooke of the
those * men that are at Mantinea.                     Orchomenians.

                                                            * Hostages of the Maenalians.
They shall withdraw their Souldiers from Epidaurus,
and raze the Fortiﬁcation there. And if the Athenians *giuen
                                                         Hostages of the Arcadians
                                                              to the Lacedaemonians,
depart not from Epidaurus likewise, they shall bee held and by them kept in
                                                        Orchomenus, and at the taking
as Enemies both to the Argiues and to the               of Orchomenus by the Argiue
Lacedaemonians, and also to the Confederates of them League, carried away to
both.                                                   Mantinea.

If the Lacedaemonians haue any men of theirs in custody, they shall deliuer them
euery one to his owne Citie.

And for so much as concerneth the * God, the Argiues        * Apollo, to whom the
shall accept composition with the Epidaurians, vpon an      Epidaurians should haue sent a
                                                            beast for sacriﬁce, in name of
* Oath which they shall sweare, touching that               their pastures, but not doing it,
controuersie, and the Argiues shall giue the forme of       the Argiues went about to force
                                                            them to it.
that Oath.
                                                            * An Oath to send the beast for
All the Cities of Peloponnesus, both small and great,       sacriﬁce hereafter.

shall bee free, according to their patriall Lawes.

If any without Peloponnesus shall enter into it, to doe it harme, the 
Argiues shall come forth to defend the same, in such sort as in a Common Councell
shall by the Peloponnesians be thought reasonable.

The Confederates of the Lacedaemonians, without Peloponnesus, shall haue the
same conditions which the Confederates of the Argiues, and of the
Lacedaemonians haue, euery one holding his owne.

This composition is to hold from the time, that they shall both parts haue shewed
the same to their Confederates, and obtained their consent.

And if it shall seeme good to either part to adde or alter any thing, their
Confederates shall be sent vnto, and made acquainted therewith.

These Propositions the Argiues accepted at rst, and the Army of the
Lacedaemonians returned from Tegea, to their owne City. But shortly after,
when they had commerce together, the * same men        * The Lacedaemonian faction.
went further, and so wrought, that the Argiues
renouncing their League with the Mantineans, Eleans, and Athenians, made
league and alliance with the Lacedaemonians in this forme.

It seemeth good to the Lacedaemonians and Argiues, to      The League betweene the Argiues
make League and alliance for ﬁfty yeeres, on these         and Lacedaemonians.

Articles:

That either side shall allow vnto the other, equall and like trials of Iudgement,
after the forme vsed in their Cities.

That the rest of the Cities of Peloponnesus (this League and Alliance
comprehending also them) shall be * free, both from the * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
lawes, and payments of any other City then their owne,
holding what they haue, and aﬀording equall, and like tryals of iudgement,
according to the forme vsed in their seuerall Cities.

That euery of the Cities, Confederate with the Lacedaemonians without
Peloponnesus, shall be in the same condition with the Lacedaemonians, and the
Confederates of the Argiues, in the same with the Argiues, euery one holding his
owne.

That if at any time there shall need an expedition to be vndertaken in common,
the Lacedaemonians, and the Argiues shall consult thereof, and decree, as shall
stand most with equity towards the Confederates; and that if any Controuersie
arise betweene any of the Cities either within, or without Peloponnesus, about
limits or other matter, they also shall decide it.

That if any Confederate Citie bee at contention with another, it shall haue
recourse to that City, which they both shall thinke most indiﬀerent; but
the particular men of any one City, shall be iudged according to the Law of the
same.

Thus was the Peace and League concluded, and whatsoeuer one had taken from
other in the Warre, or whatsoeuer one had against another otherwise, was all
acquitted.

Now when they were together settling their businesse, The Argiues and
they ordered, that the Argiues should neither admit Lacedaemonians make an order
                                                      that the Athenians shall quit the
Herald or Ambassage from the Athenians, till they     Fort.
were gone out of Peloponnesus, and had quit the
Forti cation, nor should make Peace or Warre with any, without consent of the
rest.

And amongst other things which they did in this heat, They sollicite the townes vpon
they sent Ambassadors from both their Cities, to the Thrace to reuolt from the
                                                       Athenians.
Townes lying vpon Thrace, and vnto Perdiccas, whom
they also perswaded to sweare himselfe of the same League. Yet he reuolted not
from the Athenians presently, but intended it; because he saw the Argiues had
done so▪ and was himselfe also anciently descended out of Argos. They likewise
renewed their old oath with the Chalcideans, and tooke another besides it.

The Argiues sent Ambassadors also to Athens, requiring them to abandon the
Forti cation they had made against Epidaurus. And Demosthenes being sent to fetch
the Athenians considering that the Souldiers they had their Souldiers from the Fort,
                                                         deliuereth the same by a wile to
in it, were but few, in respect of the many other that the Epidaurians.
were with them in the same, sent Demosthenes
thither to fetch them away. He, when he was come, and had exhibited for a
pretence, a certaine exercise of naked men without the Fort, when the rest of the
Garrison were gone forth to see it, made fast the Gates, and afterwards hauing
renewed the League with the Epidaurians, the Athenians by themselues put the
Fort into their hands.

After the reuolt of the Argiues from the League, the The Mantineans forsake the
Mantineans also, though they withstood it at rst, yet League of Athens.
being too weake without the Argiues, made their Peace with the
Lacedaemonians, and laid downe their command ouer the * other Cities. And
the Lacedaemonians and Argiues, with a thousand       * Which they had the leading of
men of either City, hauing ioyned their Armes, the    in Arcadia.

Lacedaemonians rst, with their single power,          Sicyon, and Argos reduced to
reduced the gouernment of Sicyon to a smaller         Oligarchies.

number, and then they both together dissolued the Democracy at Argos.

And the Oligarchy was established conformable to the State of     
Lacedaemon. These things passed in the end of Winter, and neere the Spring.
And so ended the foureteenth yeere of this Warre.

The next Summer the Dictidians seated in Mount Athos, reuolted from the
Athenians, to the Chalcideans.                     THE FIFTEENTH YEERE.

And the Lacedaemonians ordered the State of Achaia, The Dictidians reuolt from
after their owne forme, which before was otherwise. Athens.
But the Argiues, after they had by little and little       Achaia Oligarchized. Argos
                                                           relapseth into a Democracy.
assembled themselues, and recouered heart, taking
their time when the Lacedaemonians were celebrating their exercises of the
naked youth, assaulted the Few, and in a battell fought within the City, the
Commons had the victory, & some they slew, other they draue into exile. The
Lacedaemonians, though those of their faction in Argos sent for them, went not
a long time after, yet at last they adiourned the exercises, and came forth with
intention to giue them aid, but hearing by the way, at Tegea, that the Few were
ouercome, they could not be entreated, by such as had escaped thence, to goe
on, but returning, went on with the celebration of their exercises. But
afterwards, when there came Ambassadors vnto them, both from the Argiues in
the City, & from them that were driuen out, there being present also their
Confederates, and much alledged on either side, they concluded at last, that
those in the City had done the wrong, and decreed to goe against Argos with

their Army; but many delayes passed, and much time was spent betweene. In the
meane time the common people of Argos, fearing the The Argiues come againe to the
Lacedaemonians, & regaining the League with              League of Athens, and with long
                                                         walls take in a way from their
Athens, as conceiuing the same would turne to their City to the Sea.
very great aduantage, raise long walls from their City,
downe to the Sea-shore; to the end that if they were shut vp by Land, they might
yet, with the helpe of the Athenians, bring things necessary into the City by Sea.
And with this their building, some other Cities of Peloponnesus were also
acquainted. And the Argiues, vniuersally themselues, and wiues, and seruants,
wrought at the wal; and had workemen, and hewers of stone from Athens. So
this Summer ended.                                       The end of the ﬁfteenth
                                                             Summer.
The next Winter, the Lacedaemonians vnderstanding,
that they were fortifying, came to Argos with their     The Lacedaemonians Army
Army, they and their Confederates, all but the          comes to Argos, and razeth the
                                                        wals which they were building.
Corinthians, & some practice they had beside, within
the City it selfe of Argos. The Army was commanded by Agis the sonne of
Archidamus, King of the Lacedaemonians. But those things which 
were practizing in Argos, and supposed to haue beene already mature, did not
then succeed. Neuerthelesse they tooke the walles that They take Hysi a Towne in
                                                                           ●

were then in building, and razed them to the ground; Argia.
and then after they had taken Hysiae, a towne in the Argiue Territory, and slaine
all the freemen in it, they went home, and were dissolued euery one to his owne
City.

After this, the Argiues went with an Army into          The Argiues spoyle the Territory
Phliasia, which when they had wasted, they went         of Phliasia.

backe. They did it, because the men of Phlius had receiued their Outlawes; for
there the greatest part of them dwelt.

The same Winter the Athenians shut vp Perdiccas in Macedonia, from the vse of
the Sea; Obiecting that hee had sworne the League of The Athenians quarrell
the Argiues, and Lacedaemonians, and that when they Perdiccas, and barre him the vse
                                                             of the Sea.

had prepared an Army, vnder the command of Nicias the sonne of Niceratus, to
goe against the Chalcideans vpon Thrace, and against Amphipolis, he had
broken the League made betwixt them, and him; and by his departure, was the
principall cause of the dissolution of that Army, and was therefore an enemy.
And so this Winter ended, and the fteenth yeere of this Warre.

The next Summer went Alcibiades to Argos, with twenty Gallies, and tooke
thence the suspected Argiues, and such as seemed to THE SIXETEENTH YEERE.
sauour of the Lacedaemonian faction, to the number
of 300, and put them into the neerest of the Ilands Alcibiades fetcheth away 300
subiect to the Athenian State.                      Citizens of Argos for
                                                        Lacedaemonisme.

The Athenians made Warre also against the Ile of Melos, with 30 Gallies of their
owne, 6 of Chios, and 2 of Lesbos. Wherein were of The Athenians warre against
their owne, 1200 men of Armes, 300 Archers, and 20 the Iland of Melos.
Archers on horsebake, and of their Confederates, and Ilanders, about 1500 men
of Armes. The Melians are a Colony of the Lacedaemonians, and therefore
refused to be subiect, as the rest of the Ilands were, vnto the Athenians; but
rested at the rst newtrall, and afterwards when the Athenians put them to it, by
wasting of their Land, they entred into open Warre.

Now the Athenian Commanders Cleomenes the sonne of Lycomedes, and Licias
the sonne of Lisimachus, being encamped vpon their Land with these forces,
before they would hurt the same, sent Ambassadors to deale with them rst by
way of conference. These Ambassadors the Melians refused to bring before the
multitude, but commanded them to deliuer their message before the 
Magistrates, and the Few, and they accordingly said as followeth.

 5.1. DIALOGVE BETWEENE THE ATHENIANS
 and MELIANS.
 Ath.

  SInce we may not speake to the multitude, for feare lest when they heare
  our perswasiue and vnanswerable Arguments, all at once in a continued
  Oration▪ they should chance to bee seduced, (for we know that this is the
  scope of your bringing vs to audience before the Few) make surer yet that
  point, you that sit heere; answer you also to euery particular, not in a set
  speech, but presently interrupting vs, whensoeuer any thing shall bee said
  by vs, which shall seeme vnto you to be otherwise. And rst answer vs,
  whether you like this motion, or not?

Wherevnto the Councell of the Melians answered,
Mel.
  The equity of a leasurely debate is not to be found fault withall; but this
  preparation of warre, not future, but already heere present, seemeth not to
  agree with the same. For we see that you are come to bee Iudges of the
  conference, and that the issue of it, if we bee superiour in argument, and
  therefore yeeld not, is likely to bring vs Warre; and if we yeeld, seruitude.

Ath.
  Nay, if you be come together to reckon vp suspitions of what may bee, or
  to any other purpose, then to take aduice vpon what is present, and before
  your eyes, how to saue your Citie from destruction, let vs giue ouer. But if
  this be the point, let vs speake to it.

Mel.
  It is reason, and pardonable for men in our cases, to turne both their words
  and thoughts vpon diuers things: Howsoeuer, this consultation being held
  onely vpon the point of our safety, we are content, if you thinke good, to
  goe on with the course you haue propounded.

Ath.
  As we, therefore, will not, for our parts, with faire pretences, (as That
  hauing defeated the Medes, our raigne is therefore lawfull, or That we come
  against you for iniury done) make a long discourse without being beleeued;

  so would we haue you also not expect to preuaile, by saying, either, That
  you therefore tooke not our parts, because you were a Colonie of the
  Lacedaemonians; or, that you haue done vs no iniury; but out of those
  things which we both of vs doe really thinke, let vs goe through, with that
  which is fesible; both you▪ and wee, knowing, that in humane disputation,
  iustice is then only agreed on, when the necessity is equall. Whereas they
  that haue oddes of power, exact as much as they can, and the weake yeeld to
  such conditions as they can get.

Mel.
  Well then, (seeing you put the point of pro t in the place of      
  that of Iustice) we hold it pro table for our selues, not to ouerthrow a
  generall pro t to all men, which is this, That men in danger, if they pleade
  reason, and equity, nay, though somewhat without the strict compasse of
  Iustice, yet it ought euer to doe them good; And the same most of all
  concerneth you, forasmuch as you shall else giue an example vnto others, of
  the greatest reuenge that can bee taken, if you chance to miscarry.

Ath.
  As for vs, though our dominion should cease, yet wee feare not the sequell.
  For not they that command, as doe the Lacedaemonians, are cruell to those
  that are vanquished by them, (yet wee haue nothing to doe now with the
  Lacedaemonians, ) but such as hauing beene in subiection, haue assaulted
  those that commanded them, and gotten the victory. But let the danger of
  that be to our selues. In the meane time, wee tell you this, that wee are here
  now, both to enlarge our owne dominion, and also to conferre about the
  sauing of your Citie. For wee would haue dominion ouer you, without
  oppressing you, and preserue you, to the pro t of vs both.

Mel.
  But how can it be pro table for vs to serue, though it be so for you to
  command?

Ath.
  Because you by obeying, shall saue your selues from extremity; and wee not
  destroying you, shall reape pro t by you.

Mel.
  But will you not accept that wee remaine quiet, and be your friends,
  (whereas before wee were your enemies, ) and take part with neither?

Ath.
  No. For your enimity doth not so much hurt vs, as your friendship will be
  an argument of our weakenesse, and your hatred, of our power, amongst
  those whom we beare rule ouer.

Mel.
  Why? Doe your Subiects measure equity so, as to put those that neuer had
  to doe with you, and themselues, who for the most part haue beene your
  owne Colonies, and some of them after reuolt conquered, into one and the
  same consideration?

Ath.
  Why not? For they thinke they haue reason on their side, both the one sort
  and the other; and that such as are subdued, are subdued by force, and such
  as are forborne, are so through our feare. So that by subduing you, besides
  the extending of our dominion ouer so many more Subiects, we shall also
  assure it the more ouer those wee had before, especially being masters of the
  Sea, and you Ilanders, and weaker (except you can get the victory) then
  others whom wee haue subdued already.

Mel.
  Doe you thinke then, that there is no assurance in that which we
  propounded? For here againe (since driuing vs from the plea of 
  equity, you perswade vs to submit to your pro t) when we haue shewed
  you what is good for vs, we must endeuour to draw you to the same, as far

  forth as it shall be good for you also. As many therefore as now are neutrall▪
  what doe you but make them your enemies, when beholding these your
  proceedings, they looke that hereafter you will also turne your Armes vpon
  them? And what is this, but to make greater the Enemies you haue already,
  and to make others your Enemies euen against their wills, that would not
  else haue beene so?

Ath.
  We doe not thinke that they shall be euer the more our Enemies, who
  inhabiting any where in the Continent, will bee long ere they so much as
  keepe guard vpon their liberty against vs. But Ilanders vnsubdued, as you
  bee, or Ilanders o ended with the necessity of subiection which they are
  already in, these may indeed, by vnaduised courses, put both themselues
  and vs into apparent danger.

Mel.
  If you then to retaine your command, and your vassals, to get loose from
  you, will vndergoe the vtmost of danger, would it not in vs that be already
  free, be great basenesse and cowardise, if we should not incounter any thing
  whatsoeuer, rather then su er our selues to be brought into bondage?

Ath.
  No, if you aduise rightly. For you haue not in hand a match of valour vpon
  equall termes, wherein to forfet your honour, but rather a consultation
  vpon your safety, that you resist not such as be so farre your ouermatches.

Mel.
  But wee know, that in matter of Warre, the euent is sometimes otherwise
  then according to the di erence of the number in sides. And that if we
  yeeld presently, all our hope is lost; whereas, if wee hold out, we haue yet a
  hope to keepe our selues vp.

Ath.

  Hope, the comfort of danger, when such vse it as haue to spare, though it
  hurt them, yet it destroyes them not. But to such as set their rest vpon it,
  (for it is a thing by nature prodigall) it at once by failing maketh it selfe
  knowne; and knowne, leaueth no place for future caution. Which let not
  be your owne case you that are but weake, and haue no more but this one
  stake. Nor bee you like vnto many men, who though they may presently
  saue themselues by humane meanes, will yet when (vpon pressure of the
  Enemie) their most apparent hopes faile them, betake themselues to blinde
  ones, as Diuination, Oracles, and other such things, which with hopes
  destroy men.

Mel.
  Wee thinke it (you well know) a hard matter for vs to combate your power
  and fortune, vnlesse wee might doe it on equall termes. Neuerthelesse we
  beleeue, that for fortune wee shall bee nothing inferiour, as hauing the
  Gods on our side, because wee stand innocent, against men         
  vniust. And for power, what is wanting in vs, will be supplied by our
  League with the Lacedaemonians, who are of necessity obliged, if for no
  other cause, yet for consanguinities sake, and for their owne honour to
  defend vs. So that we are con dent, not altogether so much without reason,
  as you thinke.

Ath.
  As for the fauour of the Gods, we expect to haue it as well as you, for we
  neither doe, nor require any thing contrary to what mankind hath decreed,
  either concerning the worship of the Gods, or concerning themselues. For
  of the Gods we thinke, according to the common opinion; and of men,
  that for certaine, by necessity of Nature, they will euery where raigne ouer
  such as they be to strong for. Neither did we make this Law, nor are we the
    rst that vse it made, but as we found it, and shall leaue it to posterity for
  euer so also we vse it. Knowing that you likewise, and others that should
  haue the same power which we haue, would doe the same. So that for as
  much as toucheth the fauour of the Gods, we haue in reason no feare of

  being inferiour. And as for the opinion you haue of the Lacedaemonians,
  in that you beleeue they will helpe you for their owne honour, wee blesse
  your innocent mindes, but a ect not your folly. For the Lacedaemonians,
  though in respect of themselues, and the constitutions of their owne
  Countrey, they are wont▪ for the most part, to be generous, yet in respect
  of others, though much might be alledged, yet the shortest way one might
  say it all thus, That most apparantly of all men, they hold for honourable
  that which pleaseth, and for iust, that which pro teth. And such an
  opinion maketh nothing for your now absurd meanes of safety.

Mel.
  Nay for this same opinion of theirs we now the rather beleeue that they will
  not betray their owne Colony, the Melians; and thereby become per dious
  to such of the Grecians as be their friends, and bene ciall to such as be their
  enemies.

Ath.
  You thinke not then that what is pro table, must bee also safe, and that
  which is iust and honouorable, must be performed with danger, which
  commonly the Lacedaemonians are least willing of all men, to vndergoe for
  others.

Mel.
  But we suppose that they will vndertake danger for vs, rather then for any
  other; and that they thinke that we will be more assured vnto them, then
  vnto any other; because for action wee lye neere to Peloponnesus, and for
  a ection, are more faithfull then others for our neerenesse of kinne.

Ath.
  The security of such as are at Warres, consisteth not in the good will of
  those that are called to their aide, but in the power of those meanes they
  excell in. And this the Lacedaemonians themselues vse to          
  consider more then any; and therefore out of di ●dence in their owne

  forces, they take many of their Confederates with them, though to an
  expedition but against their neighbours. Wherefore it is not likely, we being
  Masters of the sea, that they will euer passe ouer into an Iland.

Mel.
  Yea, but they may haue others to send; and the Cretique sea is wide,
  wherein, to take another, is harder for him that is Master of it, then it is for
  him that will steale by, to saue himselfe. And if this course faile, they may
  turne their Armes against your owne Territory, or those of your
  Confederates not inuaded by Brasidas. And then you shall haue to trouble
  your selues, no more about a Territory that you haue nothing to do withall,
  but about your own and your Confederates.

Ath.
  Let them take which course of these they will, that you also may nd by
  experience, and not be ignorant, that the Athenians, neuer yet gaue ouer
  siege, for feare of any diuersion vpon others. But we obserue, that whereas
  you said you would consult of your safety▪ you haue not yet in all this
  discourse said any thing, which a man relying on, could hope to be
  preserued by. The strongest arguments you vse, are but future hopes, and
  your present power, is too short to defend you against the forces already
  aranged against you. You shall therefore take very absurd counsaile, vnlesse
  excluding vs, you make amongst your selues, some more discreet
  conclusion; For when you are by your selues, you will no more set your
  thoughts vpon shame, which, when dishonour and danger stand before
  mens eyes▪ for the most part vndoeth them. For many, when they haue
  foreseene into what dangers they were entring, haue neuerthelesse beene so
  ouercome by that forcible word, dishonour, that that which is but called
  dishonour, hath caused them to fall willingly into immedicable calamities
  & so to draw vpon themselues, really by their owne madnesse, a greater
  dishonour then could haue befalne them by fortune. Which you, if you
  deliberate wisely, will take heed of, and not thinke shame to submit to a
  most potent Citie, and that vpon so reasonable conditions, as of League,

  and of enioying your owne, vnder tribute. And seeing choice is giuen you
  of Warre, or safety▪ doe not out of peeuishnesse take the worse. For such
  doe take the best course, who though they giue no way to their equals, yet
  doe fairely accomodate to their superiours, and towards their inferiours, vse
  moderation. Consider of it therefore, whilest we stand o , and haue often
  in your minde, that you deliberate of your Countrey, which is to be happy
  or miserable in & by this one consultation. So the Athenians went aside
  from the conference; and the Melians after they had decreed the very same
  things which before they had spoken, made answer vnto them in this manner.

Mel.
  Men of Athens, our resolution is no other then what you haue 
  heard before; nor will we in a small portion of time, ouerthrow that liberty
  in which our City hath remained for the space of 700 yeeres since it was
    rst founded. But trusting to the fortune by which the Gods haue
  preserued it hetherto, and vnto the helpe of men, that is, of the
  Lacedaemonians, wee will doe our best to maintaine the same. But this we
  o er; To be your friends; Enemies to neither side; and you to depart out of our
  Land after agreement, such as we shall both thinke ﬁt. Thus the Melians
  answered; to which the Athenians, the conference being already broken oﬀ,
  replyed thus.

Ath.
  You are the onely men, (as it seemeth to vs by this consultation) that thinke
  future things more certaine, then things seene, and behold things
  doubtfull, through desire to haue them true, as if they were already come to
  passe. As you attribute and trust the most, vnto the Lacedaemonians, and
  to Fortune, and Hopes; So will you be the most deceiued. This said, the
  Athenian Ambassadors departed to their Campe, The Athenians and Melians
  and the Commanders, seeing that the Melians stood agree not.
  out, fell presently to the War, and diuiding the worke among the seuerall
  Cities, encompassed the City of the Melians with a wall. The Athenians
  afterwards, left some forces of their owne, and of    The City of Melos besieged.

    their Confederates, for a guard, both by Sea and
    Land, and with the greatest part of their Army, went home. The rest that
    were left, besieged the place.

About the same time, the Argiues, making a Road         The Argiues loose 80 men by an
into Phliasia, lost about▪ 80 of their men, by ambush Ambushment of the Phliasians.
laid for them by the men of Phlius, and the outlawes of their owne City.

And the Athenians that lay in Pylus, fetched in thither The Athenians in Pylus infest
a great booty from the Lacedaemonians;                   Laconia.

notwithstanding which the Lacedaemonians did not warre vpon them, as
renouncing the Peace, but gaue leaue by Edict onely, to any of their people that
would to take booties reciprocally in the Territory of the Athenians.

The Corinthians also made Warre vpon the                    The Corinthians Warre on the
Athenians, but it was for certaine controuersies of         Athenians.

their owne, and the rest of Peloponnesus stirred not.

The Melians also tooke that part of the wall of the    The Melians leeue●●leeue   ●●

Athenians by an assault in the night, which looked     their owne.
                                                                 ●

towards the Market place, and hauing slaine the men that guarded it, brought
into the Towne both Corne, and other prouision whatsoeuer they could buy for
money, and so returned and lay still. And the Athenians from        
thenceforth kept a better watch. And so this Summer ended.
                                                            The end of the ﬁfteenth
The Winter following, the Lacedaemonians being              Summer.
about to enter with their Army into the Territory of
the Argiues, when they perceiued that the sacri ces which they made on the
border, for their passage, were not acceptable, returned. And the Argiues, hauing
some of their owne Citie in suspition, in regard of this designe of the
Lacedaemonians, apprehended some of them▪ and some escaped.

About the same time, the Melians tooke another part of the wall of the
Athenians, they that kept the siege, being then not many. But this done, there

came afterwards fresh forces from Athens, vnder the Conduct of Philocrates the
sonne of Demeas. And the Towne being now strongly besieged, there being also
within some that practised to haue it giuen vp, they yeelded themselues to the
discretion of the Athenians, who slew all the men of Military age, made slaues of
the women and children, and inhabited the place with a Colony sent thither
afterwards, of ue hundred men of their owne.

                                                                     

              6.                                              
Figure 1. ANTIENT SICELE ACCORDING TO THE Description of Philip
Ch●erius

              THE SIXTH BOOKE OF THE
              HISTORY OF THVCYDIDES.
              The principall Contents.
Sicily described. The causes and pretences of the Sicilian Warre, with 
the consultation and preparation for the same. Alcibiades, one of the Generals
of the Army accused of defacing the Images of Mercury, is su ered for that
present to depart with the Armie. The Athenian Army commeth to Rhegium,
thence to Catana. From thence Alcibiades is sent for home, to make answer to
his accusations, and by the way escaping, goeth to Lacedaemon. Nicias
encampeth neere Syracuse, and hauing ouercome the Armie of the Syracusians
in Battell, returneth to Catana. The Syracusians procure aydes amongst the rest
of the Sicilians. Alcibiades instigateth and instructeth the Lacedaemonians
against his Countrey. Nicias returneth from Catana to Syracuse, and encamping
in Epipolae, besiegeth the Citie, and beginneth to encloze them with a double
Wall, which was almost brought to perfection in the beginning of the eighteenth
yeere of this Warre.

THe same Winter the Athenians with greater Forces then they had before sent
out with Laches and Eurymedon, resolued to goe         The Athenians resolue to inuade
againe into Sicily, and if they could wholly to subdue Sicily.

it. Beeing for the most part ignorant both of the greatnesse of the Iland, and of
the multitude of people, as well Greekes as Barbarians The greatnesse of Sicily and the
                                                                              ▪

that inhabited the same; and that they vndertooke a inhabitants.
Warre not much lesse then the Warre against the Peloponnesians.           

For the compasse of Sicily is little lesse then eight dayes sayle for a Ship, * and
though so great, is yet diuided with no more then           * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
twenty Furlongs, Sea measure, from the Continent.

It was inhabited in Old time, thus; and these were the Nations that held it. The
most ancient Inhabitants in a part thereof, are said to haue been the Cyclopes,
and Laestrigones, of whose Stocke, and whence they Cyclopes and Laestrigones.
came, or to what place they remoued, I haue nothing
to say. Let that su ce which the Poets haue spoken, and which euery particular
man hath learned of them.

After them, the rst that appeare to haue dwelt therein, are the Sicanians, as they
say themselues; nay, before the other, as being the *    Sicanians.
naturall breed of the Iland. But the truth is, they were * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
Iberians, and driuen away by the Ligyans from the
bankes of Sicanus, a Riuer on which they were seated in Iberia. And the Iland
from them came to be called Sicania, which was           Sicania, Trinacria.
before Trinacria. And these two inhabit yet in the
Westerne parts of Sicily.

After the taking of Ilium▪ certaine Troians, escaping Troians.
the hands of the Grecians, landed with small Boats in
Sicily, and hauing planted themselues on the borders of the Sicanians, both the
Nations in one were called Elymi, and their Cities were Eryx, and Egesta.

Hard by these came and dwelled also certaine Phoceans, who comming from
Troy, were by tempest carried rst into Africke, and thence into Sicily. But the
Siculi passed out of Italy, (for there they inhabited)  Siculi.
 ying from the Opici, hauing, as is most likely, and as

it is reported, obserued the Straight, and with a fore-wind, gotten ouer, in Boats
which they made suddenly on the occasion, or perhaps by some other meanes.

There is at this day a people in Italy, called Siculi. And Italy it selfe got that name
after the same manner, from a King of Arcadia, called Italus. Of these a great
Army crossing ouer into Sicily, ouerthrew the Sicanians in battell, and draue
them into the South, and West parts of the same; and in stead of Sicania, caused
the Iland to be called Sicilia, and held and inhabited the best of the Land, for
neere 300 yeeres after their going ouer, and before any of the              
Grecians came thither. And till now, they possesse the midland, and North parts
of the Iland.

Also the Phoenicians inhabited the Coast of Sicily on all sides, hauing taken
possession of certaine Promontories, and little Ilands Phoenicians.
adiacent, for Trades sake with the Sicilians. But after
that many Grecians were come in by Sea, the Phoenicians abandoned most of
their former habitations, and vniting themselues, dwelt in Mo●ya, and Soloeis,
and Panormus, vpon the borders of the Elymi; as relying vpon their League with
the Elymi, and because also, from thence, lay the shortest Cut ouer vnto
Carthage. These were the Barbarians, and thus they inhabited Sicily.

Now for Grecians, rst a Colony of Chalcideans,       Chalcideans.
vnder Thucles their Conductor, going from Euboea,
built Naxus, and the Altar of Apollo * Archegetes,   * Id est, 〈◊〉 guide.
now standing without the City, vpon which the *
Ambassadors employed to the Oracles, as often as     * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
they lanch from Sicily, are accustomed to o er their
  rst sacri ce. The next yeere Archias, a man of the Corinthians.
Herculean Family, carried a Colony from Corinth,
and became Founder of Syracuse, where rst he draue the Siculi out of that *
Iland, in which the inner part of the City now       * Nasus, Ortygia, an Jland part
standeth, not now enuironed wholly with the Sea, as of the Citie of Syracuse.

it was then. And in processe of time, when the City also that is without, was
taken in with a wall, it became a populous Citie.

In the fth yeere after the building of Syracuse, Thucles, and the Chalcideans,
going from Naxus, built Leontium, expelling thence the Siculi, and after that
Catana, but they that went to Catana, chose Euarchus for their Founder. About
the same time arriued in Sicily, also Lamis, with a Colony from Megara, and rst
built a certaine Towne called Trotilus, vpon the Riuer Pantacius, where for a
while after he gouerned the estate of his Colony in common with the
Chalcideans of Leontium. But afterwards, when he            Megareans.
was by them thrust out, and had builded Thapsus, he
dyed; and the rest going from Thapsus, vnder the Conduct of Hyblon, a King of
the Siculi, built Megara, called Megara-Hyblea. And after they had there
inhabited, 245 yeeres, they were by Gelon a Tyrant of Syracuse, put out both of
the City and Territory. But before they were driuen thence, namely 100 yeeres
after they had built it, they sent out Pammilus, and built the Citie of Selinus.
This Pammilus came to them from Megara, their owne                          
Metropolitan City, and so together with them founded Selinus. Gela was built
in the 45 yeere after Syracuse, by Antiphemus, that brought a Colony out of
Rhodes, and by Entymus, that did the like out of            Rhodians and Cretans.
Crete, ioyntly. This City was named after the name of
the Riuer, Gela, and the place where now the City standeth, and which at rst
they walled in, was called Lindij. And the Lawes which they established, were the
Dorique. About 108 yeeres after their owne foundation, they of Gela built the
Citie of Acragante, calling the City after the name of the Riuer, and for their
Conductors, choze Aristonous, and Pythilus, and gaue vnto them the Lawes of
Gela. Zancle was rst built by Pirates, that came from Messana ﬁrst built by Pirats of
Cumae, a Chalcidean City in Opicia; but afterwards Cumae.
there came a multitude and helped to people it, out of Chalcis, and the rest of
Euboea; and their Conductors were Prieres, and Crataemenes; one of Cumae,
the other of Chalcis. And the name of the City was at Euboeans.
  rst Zancle, so named by the Sicilians, because it hath
the forme of a Sicle, and the Sicilians call a Sicle, Zanclon. But these Inhabitants

were afterwards chased thence by the Samians, and          Samians and other Ionians.
other people of Ionia, that in their ight from the
Medes, fell vpon Sicily.

After this, Anaxilas, Tyrant of Rhegium, draue out       Rhegium.
the Samians, and peopling the City with a mixt people
of them, and his owne, in stead of Zancle, called the place by the name of his
owne Countrey from whence he was anciently descended, Messana. After
Zancle, was built Himera, by Eucleides, Simus, and Sacon; the most of which
Colony were Chalcideans; but there were also amongst them certaine Outlawes
of Syracuse, the vanquished part of a Sedition, called the Myletidae. Their
language grew to a Meane betweene the Chalcidean, and Dorique; but the lawes
of the Chalcidean preuailed. Acrae, and Chasmenae, Acrae, Chasmenae.
were built by the Syracusians. Acrae 20 yeeres after
Syracuse; and Chasmenae, almost 20 after Acrae.          Camarina.
Camarina was at rst built by the Syracusians, very
neere the 135 yeere of their owne Citie, Dascon, and Menecolus, being the
Conductors. But the Camarinaeans hauing been by the Syracusians driuen from
their seat by Warre, for reuolt, Hippocrates, Tyrant of Gela, in processe of time,
taking of the Syracusians, that Territory for ransome of certaine Syracusian
prisoners, became their Founder, and placed them in Camerina againe.

After this againe, hauing beene driuen thence by Gelon they were 
planted the third time in the same Citie. These were the Nations, Greekes and
Barbarians, that inhabited Sicily.

And though it were thus great, yet the Athenians longed very much to send an
Armie against it, out of a desire to bring it all vnder   The cause and pretence of the
their subiection (which was the true motiue) but as       Athenians to inuade it.

hauing withall this faire pretext of aiding their kindred & new Confederates. But
principally they were instigated to it by the Ambassadors of Egesta who were at
Athens, and earnestly pressed them thereto. For bordering on the territory of the
Selinuntians, they had begun a War about certain things concerning marriage, &

about a piece of ground that lay doubtfully between them. And the Selinuntians
hauing leagued themselues with the Syracusians, infested them with War both
by Sea and by Land. Insomuch as the Egestaeans putting the Athenians in
minde of their former League with the Leontines, made by Laches, prayed them
to send a Fleet thither in their ayde; alleaging amongst many other things, this as
principall, That if the Syracusians who had driuen the Leontines from their seat,
should passe without reuenge taken on them, and so proceed by consuming the
rest of the allies of the Athenians there, to get the whole power of Sicily into
their hands, it would be dangerous, lest hereafter some time or other, being
Doreans, they should with great Forces ayde the Doreans for a nity, and being a
Colonie of the Peloponnesians, ioyne with the Peloponnesians, that sent them
out, to pull downe the Athenian Empire. That it were wisdome therfore, with
those Confederates they yet retain, to make head against the Syracusians, and the
rather, because for the defraying of the Warre, the Egestaeans would furnish
money su cient, of themselues. Which things when the Athenians had often
heard in their Assemblies, from the mouthes of the Egestaean Ambassadours,
and of their Aduocates and Patrons, they decreed to send Ambassadors to
Egesta, to see rst, whether there were in their Treasury & Temples so much
wealth as they said there was, and to bring word in what termes the Warstood
betweene that City & the Selenuntians▪ & Ambassadors were sent into Sicily
accordingly.

The same Winter the Lacedaemonians and their Confederates, all but the
Corinthians, hauing drawn out their forces into the The Lacedaemonians waste part
Territory of the Argiues, wasted a small  of Argolica, and put the
                                                        Outlawes of Argos into Ornea.
part of their elds, and carried away certaine Cart-
loades of their Corne. Thence they went to Orneae, and hauing placed there the
Argiue Outlawes, left with them a few others of the rest of the Armie, and then
making a composition for a certaine time, that they of Orneae▪ and those
Argiues should not wrong each other, they carried their Armie home. But the
Athenians arriuing not long after with 30. Gallies, and 600. men of Armes, the
people of Argos came also forth with their whole power, and ioyning with them,
sate downe betimes in the morning before Orneae. But when at night the Army

went somewhat farre o to lodge, they within ed out, and the Argiues the next
day perceiuing it, pulled Orneae to the ground, and went home; and so also did
the Athenians not long after with their Gallies,

Also the Athenians transported certaine Horsemen by The Athenians warre vpon
Sea, part of their owne, and part Macedonian           Macedonia.

fugitiues, that liued with them, into Methone, and rauaged the Territorie of
Perdiccas. And the Lacedaemonians sent vnto the Chalcideans vpon Thrace,
who held Peace with the Athenians from ten dayes to ten dayes, appointing
them to ayde Perdiccas. But they refused. And so ended the Winter, and the
sixteenth yeere of this Warre, written by Thucydides.

The next Summer, early in the Spring, the Athenian THE SEVENTEENTH
Ambassadours returned from Sicily, and the                 YEERE.

Ambassadors of Egesta with them, and brought, in           The Athenian 〈◊〉 the Voyage of
siluer vncoined, sixtie Talents, for a moneths pay of      〈◊〉, and Alcibiades, Nicias, and
                                                           Lamachus for Generals.
sixtie Gallies, which they would intreat the Athenians
to send thither. And the Athenians hauing called an Assembly, and heard both
from the Egestaean and their own Ambassadors, amongst other perswasiue, but
vntrue Allegations, touching their Money, how they had great store ready, both
in their Treasurie and Temples, decreed the sending of sixtie Gallies into Sicily,
and Alcibiades the sonne of Clinias, Nicias the sonne of Niceratus, and
Lamachus the sonne of Xenophanes, for Commanders, with authority absolute,
the which were to ayde the people of Egesta against the Selinuntians, and
withall, if they had time spare, to plant the Leontines anew in their Citie, and to
order all other the a aires of Sicily, as they should thinke most for the pro t of
the Athenians.

Fiue dayes after this the people assembled againe, to consult of the 
meanes how most speedily to put this Armada in readinesse, and to decree such
things as the Generals should further require for the Expedition. But Nicias
hauing heard that himselfe was chosen for one of the Generals, and conceiuing
that the State had not well resolued, but a ected the Conquest of all Sicily, a

great matter vpon small aed super ciall pretences, stood forth, desiring to haue
altred this the Athenians purpose, and spake as followeth.

 6.1. THE ORATION OF NICIAS.
 THough this Asembly was called to deliberate of our preparation, & of the
 maner how to set forth our Fleet for Sicily; yet to me it seemeth▪ that we
 ought rather, once again, to consult, whether it be not better, not to send it at
 all, then vpon a short deliberation in so weighty an a aire, and vpon the credit
 of strangers, to draw vpon our selues an impertinent Warre. For my owne
 part, I haue honour by it; and for the danger of my person, I esteeme it the
 least of all men, not but that I thinke him a good member of the Common-
 wealth, that hath regard also to his owne person and estate: for such a man
 especially will desire the publike to prosper, for his owne sake. But as I haue
 neuer spoken heretofore, so nor now will I speake any thing that it against my
 conscience; for gaining to my selfe a preheminence of honour; but that onely
 which I apprehend for the best. And although I am sure, that if I goe about to
 perswade you to preserue what you already hold, and not to hazard things
 certaine, for vncertaine and future, my words will bee too weake to preuaile
 against your humour; yet this I must needes let you know, that neither your
 haste is seasonable, nor your desires easie to be atchieued. For I say, that going
 thither, you leaue many Enemies heere behinde you, and more you endeuour
 to draw hither. You perhaps thinke that the League will bee rme, that you
 haue made with the Lacedaemonians, which though as long as you stir not,
 may continue a League in name, (for so some haue made it of our owne side)
 yet if any considerable forces of ours chance to miscary, our enemies will soone
 renew the Warre, as hauing made the peace, constrained by calamities, and
 vpon termes of more dishonor 〈…〉 then our selues. Besides, in the League it
 selfe, we haue many things controuer●ed; and some there be, that refuse
 vtterly to accept it, and they none of the weakest, whereof * some 
 are now in open Ware against vs, and * others,           * The Corinthians.
 because the Lacedaemonians stir not, maintaine
                                                         * The Boeotians.

onely a Truce with vs from ten to ten dayes, and so
are contented yet to hold their hands. But peraduenture when they shall heare
that our power is distracted (which is the thing wee now hasten to doe) they
will bee glad to ioyne in the Warre with the Sicilians against vs, the
confederacy of whom they would heretofore haue valued aboue many other.
It behoueth vs therefore to consider of these things, and not to run into new
dangers, when the state of our owne Citie hangeth vnsettled, nor seeke a new
dominion, before we assure that which we already haue. For the Chalcideans
of Thrace, after so many yeeres reuolt, are yet vnreduced: and from others in
diuers parts of the Continent, we haue but doubtfull obedience. But the
Egestaeans, being forsooth our Confederates, and wronged, they in all haste
must be ayded; though to right vs on those by whom we haue a long time our
selues beene wronged, that wee deferre. And yet if we should reduce the
Chalcideans into subiection, wee could easily also keepe them so. But the
Sicilians, though wee vanquish them, yet being many, and farre o , wee
should haue much adoe to hold them in obedience. Now it were madnesse to
inuade such, whom conquering, you cannot keepe, and failing, should lose
the meanes for euer after to attempt the same againe· As for the Sicilians, it
seemeth vnto me, at least, as things now stand, that they shall bee of lesse
danger to vs, if they fall vnder the Dominion of the Syracusians, then they are
now; And yet this is it that the Egestaeans would most a right vs with: for
now the States of Sicily in seuerall, may perhaps be induced, in fauour of the
Lacedaemonians, to take part against vs: whereas then, being reduced into
one, it is not likely they would hazard with vs state against state. For by the
same meanes that they, ioyning with the Peloponnesians may pull downe our
Dominion, by the same it would bee likely that the Peloponnesians would
subuert theirs. The Grecians there will feare vs most, if we goe not at all; next,
if we but shew our Forces, and come quickly away. But if any misfortune
befall vs, they will presently despise vs, and ioyne with the Grecians here to
inuade vs. For wee all know, that those things are most admired which are
farthest o , and which least come to giue proofe of the opinion conceiued of
them. And this (Athenians) is your owne case now with the Lacedaemonians,
and their Confederates, whom because beyond your hope you haue

ouercome, in those things for which at rst you feared them, you now in
contempt of them, turne your Armes vpon Sicily. But we ought not to be
puft vp vpon the misfortunes of our enemies, but to bee con dent then onely,
when we haue mastered their designes. Nor ought wee to thinke 
that the Lacedaemonians set their mindes on any thing else, but how they may
yet for the late disgrace, repaire their reputation, if they can, by our
ouerthrow; and the rather because they haue so much, and so long laboured
to win an opinion in the world of their valour. The question with vs therfore
(if we be well aduised) will not be of the Egestaeans in Sicily, but how we may
speedily defend our Citie against the insidiation of them that fauour the
Oligarchy. Wee must remember also that we haue had now some short
recreation from a late great Plague, and great Warre, and thereby are improued
both in men and money; which it is most meet we should spend here vpon
our selues, and not vpon these Outlawes which seeke for aide. Seeing it
maketh for them, to tell vs a specious lye; who contributing onely words,
whilest their friends beare all the danger, if they speed well, shal be disobliged
of thankes, if ill, vndoe their friends for company. Now if there be any * man
here; that, for ends of his owne, as being glad to be * Heglanceth at Alcibiades.
Generall, especially being yet too yong to haue
charge in chiefe, shall aduise the expedition, to the end he may haue
admiration for his expence vpon horses, and helpe from his place to defray
that expence, su er him not to purchase his priuate honour and splendor
with the danger of the publike fortune. Beleeue rather that such men though
they robbe the publique, doe neuerthelesse consume also their priuate wealth.
Besides, the matter it selfe is full of great di culties, such as it is not t for a
yong man to consult of, much lesse hastily to take in hand. And I seeing those
now that sit by and abette the same man, am fearefull of them, and doe on the
other side exhort the elder sort (if any of them sit neere those other) not to be
ashamed to deliuer their minds freely; as fearing, that if they giue their voyce
against the Warre, they should be esteemed cowards; nor to doate, (as they
doe) vpon things absent, knowing that by passion, the fewest actions and by
reason the most doe prosper; but rather for the bene t of their Countrey,
which is now cast into greater danger, then euer before, to hold vp their hands

 on the other side, and decree, That the Sicilians, within the limits they now
 enioy, not misliked by you, and with liberty to saile by the shoare, in the Ionian
 Gulfe, and in the maine of the Sicilian Sea, shall possesse their owne, and
 compound their diﬀerences within themselues. And for the Egestaeans, to
 answer them in particular, thus; That as without the Athenians they had begun
 the War against the Selinuntians, so they should without them likewise end it.
 And, that we shall no more hereafter, as wee haue vsed to doe, make such men
 our Confederates, as when they doe iniury, we must maintaine it▪ 
 and when we require their assistance, cannot haue it. And you the President,
 (if you thinke it your o ce to take care of the Common-wealth, and desire to
 be a good member of the same) put these things once more to the question,
 and let the Athenians speake to it againe. Thinke (if you be afraid to infringe
 the orders of the Assembly) that before so many witnesses, it will not be made
 a crime, but that you shall be rather thought a Physitian of your Country, that
 hath swallowed down euill councell. And he truely dischargeth the duty of a
 President, who laboureth to doe his Countrey the most good, or at least will
 not willingly doe it hurt. Thus spake Nicias.

But the most of the Athenians that spake after him, were of opinion, that the
voyage ought to proceed, the Decree already made, not to be reuersed. Yet some
there were that said to the contrary. But the expediton was most of all pressed by
Alcibiades the sonne of Clinias, both out of desire he The motiues of Alcibiades to
had to crosse Nicias, with whom he was likewise at            further his voyage.

oddes in other points of State, and also for that he had glanced at him
inuidiously in his Oration, but principally for that he a ected to haue charge,
hoping that himselfe should be the man, to subdue both Sicily and Carthage, to
the State of Athens, and withall, if it succeeded, to increase his owne priuate
wealth and glory. For being in great estimation with the Citizens, his desires were
more vaste, then for the proportion of his estate, both in maintaining of horses
and other his expences, was meet. Which proued afterwards none of the least
causes of the subuersion of the Athenian Common-wealth. For most men
fearing him, both for his excesse in things that concerned his person, and forme
of life, and for the greatnesse of his spirit, in euery particular action he

vndertooke, as one that aspired to the Tyranny, they became his enemy. And
although for the publique, he excellently managed the Warre, yet euery man
priuately dipleased with his course of life, gaue the charge of the Warres to
others, and thereby, not long after, ouerthrew the State; Alcibiades at this time
stood forth, and spake to this e ect.

                                                                         
   6.1. THE ORATION OF ALCIBIADES.
   MEN of Athens, It both belongeth vnto me, more then to any other, to
   haue this charge, and withall, I thinke my selfe (for I must needs begin
   with this, as hauing beene touched by Nicias, ) to be worthy of the same.
   For those things, for which I am so much spoken of, doe indeed purchase
   glory to my progenitors, and my selfe, but to the Common-wealth, they
   conferre both glory and pro t. For the Grecians haue thought our Citie, a
   mighty one, euen aboue the truth, by reason of my braue appearance at
   the Olympian Games; whereas before they thought easily to haue warred it
   downe. For I brought thither seuen Chariots, and not onely wonne the
     rst, second, and fourth prize, but carried also in all other things, a
   magni cence worthy the honour of the victory. And in such things as
   these, as there is honour to be supposed, according to the Law; so is there
   also a power conceiued, vpon sight of the thing done. As for my * expences
   in the Citie, vpon setting forth of shewes, or          * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, the
   whatsoeuer else is remarkeable in me, though            exhibition of 〈…〉 or other
                                                           festiual spectacles.
                                                                 ●
   naturally it procure enuy in other Citizens, yet to
   Strangers, this also is an Argument of our greatnesse. Now, it is no
   vnpro table course of life, when a man shall at his priuate cost, not onely
   bene t himselfe, but also the Common-wealth. Nor doth he that beareth
   himselfe high vpon his owne worth, and refuseth to make himselfe fellow
   with the rest, wrong the rest; for if he were in distresse, he should not nde
   any man that would share with him in his calamity. Therefore, as we are
   not so much as saluted when we be in misery; so let them likewise be
   content to be contemned of vs when we ourish; or if they require

equality, let them also giue it. I know that such men, or any man else, that
excelleth in the glory of any thing whatsoeuer, shall as long as he liueth be
enuied, principally of his equals; and then also of others, amongst whom
he conuerseth; but with posterity, they shall haue kindred claimed of
them, though there he none; and his Countrey will boast of him, not as of
a stranger, or one that had been a man of leud life, but as their owne
Citizen, and one that had atchieued worthy and laudable acts. This being
the thing I ayme at, and for which I am renowned, consider now whether I
administer the publique the worse for it or not. For hauing reconciled
vnto you the most potent States of Peloponnesus without much, either
danger, or cost, I compelled the Lacedaemonians to stake all that euer they
had, vpon the Fortune of one day of Mantinea.

And this hath my youth and Madnesse, supposed to haue               
beene very madnesse, with familiar and t words, wrought vpon the power
of the Peloponnesians, and shewing reason for my passion, made my
madnesse now no longer to be feared. But as long as I ourish with it, and
Nicias is esteemed fortunate, make you vse of both our seruices. And
abrogate not your Decree touching the voyage into Sicily, as though the
power were great you are to encounter withall. For, the number wherewith
their Cities are populous, is but of promiscuous Nations, easily shifting,
and easily admitting new commers; and consequently not su ciently
armed any of them for the defence of their bodies, nor furnished, as the
custome of the place appointeth, to ght for their Countrey. But what any
of them thinkes hee may get by faire speech, or snatch from the Publike by
sedition, that onely he lookes after, with purpose if he faile, to runne the
Countrey. And it is not likely, that such a rabble, should either with one
consent giue eare to what is told them, or vnite themselues for the
administration of their a aires in common; but if they heare of faire o ers,
they will one after one be easily induced to come in; especially, if there be
seditions amongst them, as we heare there are. And the truth is, there are
neither so many men of Armes as they boast of; nor doth it appeare, that
there are so many Grecians there in all, as the seuerall Cities haue euery

one reckoned for their owne number. Nay, euen Greece hath much belyed
it selfe, and was scarce su ciently armed in all this Warre past. So that the
businesse there, for all that I can by Fame vnderstand, is euen as I haue told
you, and will yet bee easier. For wee shall haue many of the Barbarians,
vpon hatred of the Syracusians, to take our parts against them there, and if
wee consider the case aright, there will bee nothing to hinder vs at home.
For our Ancestors hauing the same Enemies which they say we leaue
behinde vs now in our voyage to Sicily, and the Persian besides, did
neuerthelesse erect the Empire wee now haue, by our onely oddes of
strength at Sea.

And the hope of the Peloponnesians against vs, was neuer lesse then now it
is, though their power were also as great as euer; for they would bee able to
inuade our Land, though wee went not into Sicily; and by Sea they can
doe vs no harme though wee goe, for we shall leaue a Nauie su cient to
oppose theirs, behinde vs. What therefore can wee alleadge with any
probability for our backwardnesse? or what can wee pretend vnto our
Confederates, for denying them assistance? whom wee ought to defend,
were it but because wee haue sworne it to them; without obiecting that
they haue not reciprocally ayded vs. For wee tooke them not into League,
that they should come hither with their aydes, but that by         
troubling our enemies there, they might hinder them from comming
hither against vs. And the way whereby we, and whosoeuer else hath
dominion, hath gotten it, hath euer beene the cheerefull succouring of
their associates that required it, whether they were Greekes or Barbarians.
For if we should all sit still, or stand to make choyce, which were t to be
assisted, and which not, we should haue little vnder our gouernment of
the estates of other men, but rather hazzard our owne. For when one is
growne mightier then the rest, men vse not onely to defend themselues
against him, when he shall inuade, but to anticipate him, that he inuade
not at all. Nor is it in our power to be our owne caruers, how much we will
haue subiect to vs; but considering the case we are in, it is as necessary for
vs to seeke to subdue those that are not vnder our Dominion, as to keepe

   so, those that are: I est if others be not subiect to vs, we fall in danger of
   being subiected vnto them. Nor are we to weigh quietnesse in the same
   ballance that others doe, vnlesse also the institution of this State, were like
   vnto that of other States. Let vs rather make reckoning by enterprising
   abroad; to encrease our power at home, and proceed in our voyage; that we
   may cast downe the haughty conceit of the Peloponnesians, and shew
   them the contempt and slight account we make of our present ease, by
   vndertaking this our expedition in to Sicily. Wherby, either conquering
   those States, wee shall become masters of all Greece, or weaken the
   Syracusians, to the bene t of our selues, and our Confederates. And for
   our security to stay; (if any City shall come to our side) or to come away (if
   otherwise) our Gallies will a ord it. For in that, we shall be at our owne
   liberty, though all the Sicilians together were against it. Let not the speech
   of Nicias, tending onely to lazinesse, and to the stirring of debate betweene
   the yong men and the old, auert you from it; but with the same decency
   wherewith your Ancestors consulting yong and old together, haue
   brought our Dominion to the present height, endeauour you likewise to
   enlarge the same. And thinke not that youth, or age, one without the
   other, is of any e ect, but that the simplest, the middle sort, and the
   exactest iudgements tempred together, is it that doth the greatest good;
   and that a State, as well as any other thing, will, if it rest, weare out of it
   selfe, and all mens knowledge decay; whereas by the exercise of Warre,
   experience will continually increase, and the Citie will get a habit of
   resisting the enemy, not with words, but action. In summe this is my
   opinion, that a State accustomed to bee actiue, if it once grow idle, will
   quickely be subiected by the change; and that they of all men are most
   surely planted, that with most vnity obserue the present Lawes 
   and customes, though not alwaies of the best. Thus spake Alcibiades.

The Athenians, when they had heard him, together with the Egestaeans and
Leontine Outlawes, who beeing then present, entreated, and (obiecting to them
their Oath) begged their helpe in forme of Suppliants, were farre more earnestly

bent vpon the Iourny then they were before. But Nicias, when he saw he could
not alter their resolution with his Oration, but thought hee might perhaps put
them from it by the greatnesse of the prouision, if he should require it with the
most, stood forth againe, and said in this manner.

 6.1. THE ORATION OF NICIAS.
 MEN of Athens, Forasmuch as I see you violently bent to this Expedition,
 such e ect may it take, as is desired. Neuerthelesse I shall now deliuer my
 opinion vpon the matter, as it yet standeth. As farre as we vnderstand by
 report, we set out against great Cities, not subiect one to another, nor needing
 innouation, whereby they should be glad, out of hard seruitude, to admit of
 easier Masters; nor such as are likely to preferre our gouernment before their
 owne liberty; but many, as for one Iland, and those Greeke Cities. For besides
 Naxus and Catana, (which two I hope will ioyne with vs, for their a nity
 with the Leontines, ) there are other seuen, furnished in all respects after the
 manner of our owne Army, and especially those two, against which wee bend
 our Forces most, Selinus, and Syracuse. For there are in them, many men of
 Armes, many Archers, many Darters, besides many Gallies, and a multitude of
 men to man them. They haue also store of money, both amongst priuate men,
 and in their Temples. This haue the Selinuntians. The Syracusians haue a
 Tribute beside, comming in from some of the Barbarians. But that wherein
 they exceed vs most, is this, that they abound in Horses, and haue Corne of
 their owne, not fetcht in from other places. Against such a power, we shall
 therefore neede, not a Fleet only, and with it a small Army, but there must
 great Forces goe along of Land-souldiers, if we meane to do any thing worthy
 our designe, and not to be kept by their many horsemen from landing;
 especially if the Cities there, terri ed by vs should now hold all together, &
 none but the Egestaeans proue our friends, & furnish vs with a Cauallery to
 resist them. And it would be a shame either to come backe with a 
 repulse, or to send for a new supply afterwards, as if wee had not wisely
 considered our enterprize at rst. Therefore we must goe su ciently prouided

from hence, as knowing that we goe farre from home, and are to make War in
a place of disaduantage, and not as when we went as Confederates, to ayde
some of our Subiects here at home, where wee had easie bringing in of
necessaries to the Campe, from the Territories of Friends. But we goe farre o ,
and into a Countrey of none but strangers, and from whence in Winter, there
can hardly come a messenger vnto vs in so little as foure moneths. Wherefore I
am of opinion, that we ought to take with vs many men of Armes, of our
owne, of our Confederates, and of our Subiects, and also out of Peloponnesus
as many as wee can get, either for loue or money: and also many Archers and
Slingers, whereby to resist their Cauallery; and much spare Shipping, for the
more easie bringing in of prouision. Also our corne, I meane, Wheate and
Barly parched, we must carry with vs from hence in * Ships; and Bakers from
the Milles, hired, and made to worke by turnes, that * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Ships of the
the Armie, if it chance to be weather-bound, may        round building, going onely
                                                        with sayles, without oares after
not be in want of victuall. For being so great, it will the fashion of our ships. In
not bee for euery Citie to receiue it. And so for all   distinction from Gallies.

things else, we must as much as wee can, prouide
them our selues, and not rely on others.

Aboue all, we must take hence as much money as we can; for as for that which
is said to bee ready at Egesta, thinke it ready in words, but not in deed: For
although wee goe thither with an Army not onely equall vnto theirs, but also,
(excepting their men of Armes for Battell) in euery thing exceeding it, yet so
shall we scarce be able, both to ouercome them, and withall to preserue our
owne. We must also make account, that wee goe to inhabite some City in that
forraigne and hostile Countrey, and either the rst day we come thither, to
bee presently Masters of the Field, or failing, bee assured to nde all in
hostility against vs. Which fearing, and knowing that the businesse requires
much good aduice, and more good fortune (which is a hard matter, being we
are but men) I would so set forth, as to commit my selfe to Fortune as little as
I may, and take with me an Armie, that in likelihood should be secure. And
this I conceiue to be both the surest course for the Citie in generall, and the

 safest for vs that goe the Voyage. If any man be of a contrary opinion, I resigne
 him my place.

Thus spake Nicias, imagining that either the Athenians would, vpon the
multitude of the things required, abandon the Enterprize: or if he were forced to
goe, he might goe thus with the more security.

But the Athenians gaue not ouer the desire they had of the voyage, 
for the di culty of the preparation, but were the         The Athenians vpon this speech,
more in amed thereby to haue it proceed; and the          made to desire them from the
                                                          enterprize, are the more
contrary fell out of that which he before expected. For encouraged to it.
they approued his counsell, and thought now there
would be no danger at all, and euery one alike fell in loue with the enterprize.
The old men, vpon hope to subdue the place they went to, or that at least, so
great a power could not miscarry; and the yong men, vpon desire to see a
forraigne Countrey, and to gaze, making little doubt but to returne with safety.

As for the common sort, and the Souldiers, they made account to gaine by it,
not onely their wages for the time, but also so to ampli e the State in power, as
that their stipend should endure for euer. So that through the vehement desire
thereunto of the most, they also that liked it not, for feare (if they held vp their
hands against it) to be thought euill a ected to the State, were content to let it
passe.

And in the end a certaine Athenian stood vp, and calling vpon Nicias, said, he
ought not to shift o , nor delay the businesse any longer, but to declare there
before them all, what forces he would haue the Athenians to decree him. To
which, vnwillingly, he answered, and said, hee would consider of it rst with his
fellow-Commanders; Neuerthelesse, for so much as he could iudge vpon the
sudden, he said, there would need no lesse then 100 Gallies; whereof for
transporting of men of Armes, so many of the Athenians owne, as they
themselues should thinke meet, and the rest to be sent for to their Confederates.
And that of men of Armes, in all, of their owne, and of their Confederates, there

would be requisite no lesse then 5000 but rather more, if they could be gotten,
and other prouision proportionable. As for Archers, both from hence, and from
Crete, and Slingers, and whatsoeuer else should seeme necessary, they would
prouide it themselues, and take it with them.

When the Athenians had heard him, they presently decreed that the Generals
should haue absolute authority, both touching the greatnesse of the preparation,
and the whole voyage, to doe therein, as should seeme best vnto them for the
Common-wealth. And after this, they went in hand with the            
preparation accordingly, and both sent vnto the Confederates, and enrolled
Souldiers at home. The City had by this time recouered her selfe from the
sicknesse, and from their continuall Warres, both in number of men t for the
Warres, growne vp after the ceasing of the Plague, and in store of money
gathered together by meanes of the Peace; whereby they made their prouisions
with much ease. And thus were they employed in preparation for the voyage.

In the meane time the Mercuries of Stone,                 The faces of all the Images of
throughout the whole City of Athens, (now there           Mercury, throughout Athens,
                                                          pared plaine.
were many of these of square-stone, set vp, by the Law
of the place, and many in the porches of priuate houses, & in the Temples) had
in one night, most of them their faces pared, and no man knew who had done it.
And yet great rewards out of the Treasury had been propounded to the
discouerers; and a Decree made that if any man knew of any other profanation,
he might boldly declare the same, were he Citizen, Stranger, or Bondman. And
they tooke the fact exceedingly to heart, as ominous to the expedition, and done
withall, vpon conspiracy, for alteration of the State, and dissolution of the
Democracie.

Hereupon, certaine Strangers dwelling in the City, and certaine Seruing-men,
reuealed something, not about the Mercuries, but of the paring of the Statues of
some other of the Gods, committed formerly, through wantonnesse, and too
much Wine, by yong men, and withall, how they had in priuate houses, acted
the Mysteries of their Religion, in mockery; amongst whom they also accused

Alcibiades. This, they that most enuyed Alcibiades,        Alcibiades accused for hauing in
because he stood in their way, that they could not         mockery, acted the celebration of
                                                           the Mysteries of their Religion.
constantly beare chiefe sway with the people, making
account to haue the Primacy, if they could thrust him out, tooke hold of, and
exceedingly aggrauated, exclaiming, that both the mockery of the Mysteries, and
the paring of the Mercuries, tended to the deposing of the People; and that
nothing therein was done without him, alleaging for argument, his other excesse,
in the ordinary course of his life, not conuenient in a popular estate. He, at that
present, made his Apologie, and was there ready, if he had done any such thing,
to answer it, before he went the voyage, (for by this time, all their preparation
was in readinesse) and to su er Iustice, if he were guilty, and if             
absolued, to resume his charge. Protesting against all accusations to bee brought
against him in his absence, and pressing to be put to death then presently, if he
had o ended; and saying, that it would not be discreetely done, to send away a
man accused of so great crimes, with the charge of such an Armie, before his
tryall. But his enemies fearing lest if he came then to He desires to come to his Tryall
his Tryall, he should haue had the fauour of his           before his going forth, but is not
                                                           suﬀered.
Armie, and lest the people which loued him, because
the Argiues and some of the Mantineans serued them in this Warre, onely for his
sake, should haue beene molli ed, put the matter o , and hastned his going out,
by setting on other Orators to aduise, that for the present he should goe, and
that the setting forward of the Fleet should not bee retarded, and that at his
returne he should haue a day assigned him for his Tryall. Their purpose being,
vpon further accusation, which they might easily contriue in his absence, to
haue him sent for backe, to make his answer. And thus it was concluded that
Alcibiades should goe.

After this, the Summer being now halfe spent, they put to Sea for Sicily. The
greatest part of the Confederates, and the Ships that The Athenian Fleet putteth to
carried their Corne, and all the lesser vessels, and the Sea.
rest of the prouision that went along, they before appointed to meet vpon a day
set, at Corcyra, thence all together to crosse ouer the Ionian Gulfe, to the
Promontory of Iapigia. But the Athenians themselues, and as many of their

Confederates as were at Athens, vpon the day             The description of the setting
appointed, betimes in the morning, came downe into forth of the Fleet.
Peiraeus, and went aboard to take Sea. With them came downe in a manner the
whole multitude of the City, aswell Inhabitants as strangers: The Inhabitants, to
follow after such as belonged vnto them, some their friends, some their kinsmen,
and some their children; lled both with hope, and lamentations; hope of
conquering what they went for, and lamentation, as being in doubt whether
euer they should see each other any more, considering what a way they were to
goe from their owne Territory. And now when they were to leaue one another to
danger, they apprehended the greatnesse of the same, more then they had done
before, when they decreed the Expedition. Neuerthelesse their present strength,
by the abundance of euery thing before their eyes prepared for the Iourney, gaue
them heart againe in beholding it. But the strangers & other               
multitude came only to see the show, as of a worthy and incredible Designe. For
this preparation, being the rst Grecian Power, that euer went out of Greece
from one onely Citie, was the most sumptuous, and the most glorious of all that
euer had been set forth before it, to that day. Neuerthelesse for number of
Gallies, and men of Armes, that which went out with Pericles to Epidaurus, and
that which Agnon carried with him to Potidaea, was not inferiour to it. For there
went foure thousand men of Armes, three hundred Horse, and one hundred
Gallies, out of Athens it selfe; and out of Lesbos and Chios ftie Gallies, besides
many confederates that accompanied him in the voyage. But they went not farre,
and were but meanely furnished. Whereas this Fleet, as being to stay long
abroad, was furnished for both kinds of seruice, in which of them soeuer it
should haue occasion to be employed, both with shipping, and Land-Souldiers.

For the shipping, it was elaborate with a great deale of cost, both of the
Captaines of Gallies, and of the Citie. For the State allowed a Drachma a day to
euery Mariner; the * empty Gallies which they sent        * empty, in respect of those that
forth, being of nimble ones 60. and of such as carried carried prouision.
their men of Armes, 40. more. And the Captaines of Gallies both put into them
the most able seruants, and besides the wages of the State, vnto the [vppermost
banke of Oares, called the] * Thranitae, and to the seruants, gaue somewhat of

their owne; and bestowed great cost otherwise euery * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉. There
one vpon his owne Gallie, both in the * Badges, and being three bankes of Oares, one
                                                        aboue another, the vppermost
other rigging, each one striuing to the vtmost, to haue were called Thranitae, the
his Gally, both in some ornament, and also in           middlemost Zeugi e, and the●

                                                        lowest Thalamitae where of the
swiftnesse, to exceed the rest.
                                                                                   ▪

                                                        Thranitae managed the longest
                                                                Oare, and therefore in respect of
And for the Land-forces, they were leauied with                 their greater labour, might
                                                                deserue a greater pay.
exceeding great choice, and euery man endeuoured to
excell his fellow in the brauery of his Armes, and        * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉. The Images
                                                          which being set on the fore-part
vtenciles that belonged to his person. Insomuch as        of the Gallie, did giue it the
amongst themselues, it begate quarrell about              name for the most part.
precedencie, but amongst other Grecians, a conceit,
that it was an ostentation rather of their power and riches, then a preparation
against an Enemie. For if a man enter into account of the expence, as well of the
publike, as of priuate men that went the voyage, namely, of the publike, what
was spent already in the businesse, and what was to be giuen to the
Commanders to carry with them; and of priuate men, what euery 
one had bestowed vpon his person, and euery Captaine on his Gallie, besides
what euery one was likely, ouer and aboue his allowance from the State, to
bestow on prouision for so long a Warfare, and what the Merchant carried with
him for Tra que, he will nde the whole summe carrried out of the Citie, to
amount to a great many Talents. And the Fleet was no lesse noysed amongst
those against whom it was to goe, for the strange boldnesse of the attempt, and
gloriousnesse of the show, then it was for the excessiue report of their number,
for the length of the voyage, and for that it was vndertaken with so vast future
hopes, in respect of their present power.

After they were all aboard, and all things laid in, that they meant to carry with
them, silence was commanded by the Trumpet; and after the Wine had beene
carried about to the whole Army, and All, aswell the Generals as the Souldiers,
had * drunke a health to the Voyage, they made their * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉. Jt was a
prayers, such as by the Law were appointed for before forme amongst the Grecians,
                                                           and other Nations then, both
their taking Sea, not in euery Galley apart, but all       before great Enterprizes to wish

together, the Herald pronouncing them: And the           good fortune; and at the making
                                                         of League and Peace, to ratiﬁe
company from the shoare, both of the Citie, and          what they did, by drinking one
whosoeuer else wished them well, prayed with them. to another.
And when they had sung the Paean, and ended the
Health, they put forth to Sea. And hauing at rst gone out in a long File, Gally
after Gally, they after went a vie by Aegina. Thus hasted these to be at Corcyra;
to which place also the other Armie of the Confederates were assembling.

At Syracuse they had aduertisement of the Voyage        The Syracusians, vpon the same
from diuers places; neuerthelesse it was long ere any   of their comming, doe some
                                                        beleeue it, and some not.
thing would be beleeued. Nay, an Assembly beeing
there called, Orations were made, such as follow, on both parts, aswell by them
that beleeued the report touching the Athenian Armie to be true, as by others
that a rmed the contrary. And Hermocrates the sonne of Hermon, as one that
thought hee knew the certainety, stood forth, and spake to this e ect.

                                                                          
   6.1. THE ORATION OF
   HERMOCRATES.
   COncerning the truth of this Inuasion, though perhaps I shall bee
   thought as well as other men, to deliuer a thing incredible; and though I
   know that such as bee either the Authors or relaters of matter incredible,
   shall not onely not perswade, but bee also accounted fooles; neuerthelesse
   I will not for feare thereof, hold my tongue, as long as the Common
   wealth is in danger; being con dent that I know the truth heereof
   somewhat more certainely then others doe. The Athenians are bent to
   come, euen against vs, (which you verily wonder at) and that with great
   Forces, both for the Sea and Land, with pretence indeed to ayde their
   Confederates, the Egestaeans, and to replant the Leontines, but in truth
   they aspire to the dominion of all Sicily, and especially of this Citie of ours,
   which obtained, they make account to get the rest with ease. Seeing then
   they will presently bee vpon vs, aduise with your present means, how you

may with most honour make head against them, that you may not bee
taken vnprouided through contempt, nor be carelesse through incredulity;
and that such as beleeue it, may not be dismayed with their audaciousnes,
and power. For they are not more able to doe hurt vnto vs, then we be
vnto them, neither indeed is the greatnes of their Fleet without some
aduantage vnto vs. Nay it will be much the better for vs, in respect of the
rest of the Sicilians; for being terri ed by them, they will the rather league
with vs. And if we either vanquish or repulse them without obtaining
what they come for (for I feare not at all the e ecting of their purpose)
verily it will bee a great honour to vs, and in my opinion not vnlikely to
come to passe. For in truth there haue beene few great Fleets, whether of
Grecians or Barbarians, sent far from home, that haue not prospered ill.
Neither are these that come against vs, more in number then our selues,
and the neighbouring Cities for surely we shall all hold together vpon
feare. And if for want of necessaries in a strange Territorie they chance to
miscarry, the honour of it will be left to vs against whom they bend their
councels, though the greatest cause of their ouerthrow should consist in
their owne errours. Which was also the case of these very Athenians, who
raised themselues by the misfortune of the Medes, (though it happened for
the most part contrary to reason) because in name they went only against
the Athenians. And that the same shall now happen vnto vs, is not
without probability.

Let vs therefore with courage put in readinesse our owne fortes, let vs send
to the Siculi, to con rme those we haue, and to make peace and league
with others; and let vs send Ambassadors to the rest of Sicily, 
to shew them that it is a common danger; and into Italy, to get them into
our League, or at least that they receiue not the Athenians. And in my
iudgement, it were our best course to send also to Carthage; for euen they
are not without expectation of the same danger. Nay, they are in a
continuall feare, that the Athenians will bring the Warre vpon them also,
euen to their Citie. So that vpon apprehension that if they neglect vs, the
trouble will come home to their owne doore, they will perhaps, either

secretly, or openly, or some way assist vs. And of all that now are, they are
the best able to doe it, if they please. For they haue the most gold and
siluer, by which both the Wars, and all things else are the best expedited.
Let vs also send to Lacedaemon and to Corinth, praying them not onely to
send their succours hither with speed, but also to set on foot the Warre
there. But that which I thinke the best course of all, though through an
habit of sitting still, you will hardly be brought to it, I will neuerthelesse
now tell you what it is. If the Sicilians all together, or if not all, yet if wee,
and most of the rest, would draw together our whole Nauie, and with 2.
moneths prouision goe and meet the Athenians at Tarentum, and the
Promontory of Iapygia, and let them see, that they must ght for their
passage ouer the Ionian Gulfe, before they ght for Sicily, it would both
terri e them the most, and also put them into a consideration, That we, as
the watchmen of our Countrey, come vpon them out of an amicable
Territory, (for we shall be receiued at Tarentum) whereas they themselues
haue a great deale of Sea to passe with all their preparations, and cannot
keepe themselues in their order for the length of the voyage. And that for
vs, it will be an easie matter to assaile them, comming vp as they doe,
slowly and thinne. Againe, if lightning their Gallies, they shall come vp to
vs more nimbly, and more close together, we shall charge vpon them
already wearied, or we may, if we please, retire againe into Tarentum.
Whereas they, if they come ouer but with a part of their prouisions, as to
  ght at Sea, shall bee driuen into want of victuals in those desart parts, and
either staying be there besieged, or attempting to go by, leaue behind them
the rest of their prouision, and be deiected, as not assured of the Cities,
whether they will receiue them or not. I am therefore of opinion, that
dismaid with this reckoning, they will either not put ouer at all from
Corcyra, or whilest they spend time in deliberating, and in sending out to
explore, how many, and in what place wee are, the season will bee lost, and
Winter come; or deterred with our vnlooked for opposition, they will giue
ouer the Voyage. And the rather, for that (as I heare) the man of most
experience amongst their Commanders, hath the charge against his will,
and would take a light occasion to returne, if he saw any              

  considerable stop made by vs, in the way. And I am very sure, we should be
  voyced amongst them to the vtmost. And as the reports are, so are mens
  minds; and they feare more such as they beare will begin with them, then
  such as giue out, that they will no more but defend themselues. Because
  then they thinke the danger equall. Which would be now the case of the
  Athenians. For they come against vs with an opinion that we will not
    ght; deseruedly contemning vs, because we ioyned not with the
  Lacedaemonians to pull them downe. But if they should see vs once bolder
  then they lookt for, they would be terri ed more with the vnexpectednes,
  then with the truth of our power it selfe. Be perswaded therfore,
  principally to dare to doe this; or if not this, yet speedily to make your
  selues otherwise ready for the War; and euery man to remember, that
  though to shew contempt of the enemy be best in the heate of ght, yet
  those preparations are the surest, that are made with feare and opinion of
  danger. As for the Athenians, they come, and I am sure are already in the
  way, and want onely, that they are not now here. Thus spake Hermocrates.

But the people of Syracuse were at much strife amongst themselues, some
contending, that the Athenians would by no meanes come, and that the reports
were not true; and others, that if they came, they would doe no more harme,
then they were likely againe to receiue. Some contemned and laughed at the
matter: but some few there were that beleeued Hermocrates, and feared the
euent. But Athenagoras, who was chiefe Magistrate of the People, and at that
time most powerfull with the Commons, spake as followeth:

 6.1. THE ORATION OF ATHENAGORAS.
 HE is either a Coward, or not well a ected to the State, whosoeuer he be, that
 wisheth the Athenians not to be so mad, as comming hither, to fall into our
 power. As for them that report such things as these, and put you into feare,
 though I wonder not at their boldnesse, yet I wonder at their folly, if they
 thinke their ends not seene. For they that are afraid of any thing themselues,

will put the Citie into a right, that they may shaddow their owne with the
Common feare. And this may the reports doe at this time, not raised by
chance, but framed on purpose, by such as alwaies trouble the State. But if
you meane to deliberate wisely, make not your reckoning by the reports of
these men, but by that which wise men, and men of great                
experience, (such as I hold the Athenians to bee) are likely to doe. For it is not
probable, that leauing the Peloponnesians, and the Warre there not yet surely
ended, they should willingly come hither to a new Warre, no lesse then the
former; Seeing, in my opinion, they may bee glad that wee inuade not them,
so many, and so great Cities, as wee are. And if indeed they come, (as these
men say they will) I thinke Sicily more su cient to dispatch the Warre, then
Peloponnesus, as being in all respects better furnished: and that this our owne
Citie, is much stronger then the Armie which they say is now comming,
though it were twice as great as it is. For I know, they neither bring Horses
with them, nor can get any heere, saue onely a few from the Egestaeans, nor
haue men of Armes, so many as wee, in that they are to bring them by Sea. For
it is a hard matter to come so farre as this by Sea, though they carried no men
of Armes in their Gallies at all, if they carry with them all other their
necessaries; which cannot be small against so great a Citie. So that I am so far
from the opinion of these others, that I thinke the Athenians, though they
had here another Citie as great as Syracuse, and con ning on it, and should
from thence make their Warre, yet should not be able to escape from being
destroyed euery man of them; much lesse now, when all Sicily is their enemie.
For in their Campe, fenced with their Gallies, they shall be couped vp, and
from their Tents, and forced munition, neuer be able to stirre farre abroad,
without being cut o by our Horsemen. In short, I thinke they shall neuer be
able to get landing; so much aboue theirs do I value our own Forces. But these
things, as I said before, the Athenians considering, I am very sure, will looke
vnto their owne; and our men talke here of things that neither are, nor euer
will bee; who I know haue desired, not onely now, but euer, by such reports as
these, or by worse, or by their actions, to put the multitude in feare, that they
themselues might rule the State. And I am afraid, lest attempting it often, they
may one day e ect it. And for vs, we are too poore-spirited, either to foresee it

ere it be done, or fore-seeing to preuent it. By this meanes our Citie is seldome
quiet, but subiect to sedition, and contention not so much against the
enemie, as within it selfe; and sometimes also to Tyranny and Vsurpation.
Which I will endeuour (if you will second me) so to preuent hereafter, as
nothing more of this kinde shall befall you. Which must be done, rst by
gaining you the Multitude, and then by punishing the Authors of these Plots,
not onely when I nde them in the action, (for it will bee hard to take them
so) but also for those things which they would, and cannot doe. 
For one must not onely take reuenge vpon an Enemie for what he hath
already done, but strike him rst for his euill purpose; For if a man strike not
  rst, he shall rst be strucken. And as for the Few, I shall in somewhat
reprooue them, in somewhat haue an eye to them, and in somewhat aduise
them. For this I thinke will be the best course to auert them from their bad
intentions. Tell me, forsooth, (I haue asked this question often) you that are
the yonger sort, what would you haue? would you now beare o ce? the Law
allowes it not. And the Law was made, because ye are not now su cient for
gouernment, not to disgrace you when you shall be su cient. But forsooth,
you would not be ranked with the multitude. But what Iustice is it, that the
same men should not haue the same priuiledges? Some will say, that the
Democracy is neither a well-gouerned, nor a iust State, and that the most
wealthy, are aptest to make the best gouernment. But I answer rst,
Democracy is a name of the whole; Oligarchy, but of a part. Next, though the
Rich are indeed ttest to keepe the Treasure, yet the wise are the best
Counsellors, and the Multitude, vpon hearing, the best Iudge. Now in a
Democracy all these, both ioyntly and seuerally participate equall priuiledges.
But in the Oligarchy, they allow indeed to the Multitude, a participation of all
dangers; but in matters of pro t, they not onely incroach vpon the Multitude,
but take from them, and keepe the whole. Which is the thing that you the
Rich, and the Yonger sort a ect, but in a great City cannot possibly embrace.
But yet, O ye, the most vnwise of all men, vnlesse you know that what you
a ect, is euill, and if you know not that, you are the most ignorant of all the
Grecians I know, or, ye most wicked of all men, if knowing it▪ you dare doe
this: yet I say, informe your selues better, or change your purpose, and help to

 ampli e the common good of the Citie, making account that the good
 amongst you, shall not onely haue an equall, but a greater share therin then
 the rest of the multitude. Whereas if you will needes haue all, you shall runne
 the hazzard of losing all. Away therefore with these rumours, as discouered,
 and not allowed. For this City, though the Athenians come, will be able to
 defend it selfe with honour. And we haue Generals to looke to that matter.
 And if they come not, (which I rather beleeue) it will not, vpon the terrour of
 your reports, make choyce of you for Commanders, and cast it selfe into
 voluntary seruitude. But taking direction of it selfe, it both iudgeth your
 words, virtually as facts, and will not vpon words let goe her present liberty,
 but endeuour to preserue it, by not committing the same actually to your
 discretion. Thus said Athenagoras.

Then one of their Generals rising vp, forbad any other to stand forth,
and spake himselfe to the matter in hand, to this       The speech of one of the
e ect:                                                  Syracusian Generals.

It is no wisedome, neither for the speakers to vtter such calumnies one against
another, nor for the hearers to receiue them. We should rather consider, in respect
of these reports, how we may in the best manner, both euery one in particular, and
the City in generall, be prepared to resist them when they come. And if there be no
need, yet to furnish the Citie with Horses, and Armes, and other Habiliments of
War can doe vs no hurt. As for the care hereof, and the musters, wee will looke to
it, and will send men abroad, both to the Cities, and for spials, and doe
whatsoeuer else is requisite. Somewhat we haue done already, and what more we
shall hereafter ﬁnd meet, we will from time to time report vnto you. Which when
the Generall had said, the Syracusians dissolued the Assembly.

The Athenians were now all in Corcyra, both they and their Confederates. And
 rst the Generals tooke a view of the whole Army, and The Athenians put out from
put them into the order wherein they were to Anchor, Corcyra.
and make their Nauall Campe, and hauing diuided them into three squadrons,
to each squadron they assigned a Captaine by lot, to the end that being at Sea,

they might not come into want of water, or harbors, or any other necessaries,
where they chanced to stay, & that they might otherwise be the more easie to be
gouerned, when euery squadron had his proper Commander. After this they
sent before them three Gallies, into Italy, and Sicily, to bring them word what
Cities in those parts would receiue them, whom they appointed to come backe
and meet them, that they might know whether they might be receiued or not,
before they put in. This done, the Athenians with all The quantity of the Army.
their prouisions put out from Corcyra, towards Sicily,
hauing with them in all 134 Gallies, and two Rhodian Long-boats of fty Oares
a piece. Of these, a hundred were of Athens it selfe, whereof sixty were expedite
the other forty, for transportation of Souldiers. The rest of the Nauy belonged
to the Chians, and other the Confederates. Of men of Armes they had in all
5100. Of these, there were of the Athenians themselues 1500 enrolled, and 700
more [of the poorer sort, called] Thetes, hired, for defence of the Gallies. The
rest were of their Confederates, some of them being their subiects. Of Argiues
there were 500. Of Mantineans and Mercinaries, 2●0. Their               
Archers in all, 480. Of which 80 were Cretans. Rhodian Slingers they had 700.
Of Light-armed Megarean fugitiues 120, and in one vessell made for
transportation of horses, 30 horsemen. These were the forces that went ouer to
the Warre at rst. With these went also 30 Ships, carrying necessaries, wherein
went also the Bakers, and Masons, and Carpenters, and all Tooles of vse in
forti cation. And with these 30 Ships went 100 Boates, by constraint, and many
other Ships and Boats that voluntarily followed the Army for Trade, which then
passed altogether from Corcyra ouer the Ionian Gulfe. And the whole Fleet
being come to the Promontory of Iapygia, and to Tarentum, and such other
places as euery one could recouer, they went on by the coast of Italy, neither
receaued of the States there, into any Citie, nor allowed any Market, hauing
onely the liberty of Anchorage and water, (and that also at Tarentum, and Locri
denied them) till they were at Rhegium, where they all came together againe,
and settled their Campe in the Temple of Diana, (for neither there were they
su ered to come in) without the Citie, where the Rhegians allowed them a
Market. And when they had drawne their Gallies to Land, they lay still. Being
here, they dealt with the Rhegians, who where Chalcideans, to aid the Leontines,

Chalcideans likewise. To which was answered, that they would take part with
neither, but what the rest of the Italians should conclude, that also they would
doe. So the Athenians lay still, meditating on their Sicilian businesse, how they
might carry it the best; and withall expected the returne from Egesta, of the three
Gallies which they had sent before them, desiring to know if so much money
were there or not, as was reported by their messengers at Athens.

The Syracusians in the meane time from diuers parts, The Syracusians certainly
and also from their spies, had certaine intelligence,   knowing of their comming
                                                        prepare for their defence.
that the Fleet was now at Rhegium, and therefore
made their preparations with all diligence, and were no longer incredulous; but
sent vnto the Siculi, to some Cities, men to keepe them from reuolting; to
others, Ambassadors; and into such places as lay vpon the Sea, Garrisons; And
examined the forces of their owne City, by a view taken of the Armes and Horse,
whether they were complete or not, and ordered all things as for a Warre at hand,
and onely not already present.

The three Gallies sent before to Egesta, returned to the Athenians at 
Rhegium, and brought word, that for the rest of the The hope of the Athenians of
money promised there was none, onely there               money from Egesta frustrated.

appeared thirty Talents. At this, the Generals were presently discouraged, both
because this rst hope was crossed, and because also the Rhegians, whom they
had already begun to perswade to their League, and whom it was most likely
they should haue wonne, as being of kinne to the Leontines, and alwayes
heretofore fauourable to the Athenian State, now refused. And though to Nicias
this newes from the Egestaeans was no more then he expected, yet to the other
two, it was extreme strange. But the Egestaeans, when The fraud of the Egestaeans.
the rst Ambassadors from Athens went to see their
Treasure, had thus deceiued them. They brought them into the Temple of
Venus, in * Eryx, and shewed them the holy Treasure, * Eryx was a City neere Egesta,
Goblets, Flagons, Censers, and other Furniture, in no and subiect to it.
small quantity, which being but siluer, appeared to the eye a great deale aboue
their true value in money. Then they feasted such as came with them, in their

priuate houses, and at those feastings exhibited all the gold and siluer vessell they
could get together, either in the Citie of Egesta it selfe, or could borrow in other,
as well Phaenician, as Grecian Cities, for their owne. So all of them in a manner
making vse of the same Plate; and much appearing in euery of those houses, it
put those which came with the Ambassadors, into a very great admiration, in so
much as at their returne to Athens, they stroue who should rst proclaime, what
wealth they had seene. These men, hauing both been abused themselues, and
hauing abused others, when it was told that there was no such wealth in Egesta,
were much taxed by the Souldiers. But the Generals went to councell vpon the
businesse in hand.

Nicias was of this opinion, That it was best to goe presently with the whole Fleet
to Selinus, against which they were chie y set forth; The seuerall opinions of the
and if the Egestaeans would furnish them with money Generals, touching how to
                                                         proceed. The opinion of Nicias.
for the whole Army, then to deliberate further vpon
the occasion, if not, then to require maintenance for the 60 Gallies set forth at
their own request, & staying with them, by force or composition, to bring the
Selinuntians and them to a Peace. And thence passing along by other of those
Cities, to make a shew of the power of the Athenian State, and of their
readinesse to helpe their friends and Confederates, and so to goe          
home, vnlesse they could light on some quicke and vnthought of meanes▪ to
doe some good for the Leontines, or gaine some of the other Cities to their owne
League, and not to put the Common-wealth in danger at her owne charges.

Alcibiades said it would not doe well to haue come out from Athens with so
great a power, and then dishonourably without e ect The opinion of Alcibiades.
to goe home againe. But rather to send Heralds to
euery City but Selinus and Syracuse, and assay to make the Siculi to reuolt from
the Syracusians; and others to enter League with the Athenians, that they might
ayde them with men and victuall. And rst to deale with the Messenians, as
being seated in the passage, and most opportune place of all Sicily for comming
in; and hauing a Port and Harbour su cient for their Fleet; and when they had
gained those Cities, and knew what helpe they were to haue in the Warre, then

to take in hand Syracuse and Selinus; vnlesse these would agree with the
Egestaeans, and the other su er the Leontines to be replanted.

But Lamachus was of opinion, that it was best to goe The opinion of Lamachus.
directly to Syracuse, and to ght with them as soone
as they could, at their City, whilest they were yet vnfurnished and their feare at
the greatest. For that an Army is alwaies most terrible at rst; But if it stay long
ere it come in sight, men recollect their spirits, and contemne it the more when
they see it. Whereas if it come vpon them suddenly, while they expect it with
feare, it would the more easily get the Victory, and euerything would a right
them; as the sight of it (for then they would appeare most for number) and the
expectation of their su erings, but especially the danger of a present Battell. And
that it was likely, that many men might be cut o in the Villages without, as not
beleeuing they would come; and though they should be already gotten in, yet
the Army being master of the Field, and sitting downe before the City, could
want no money, and the other Sicilians would then neglect leaguing with the
Syracusians, and ioyne with the Athenians, no longer standing o , and spying
who should haue the better. And for a place to retire vnto, and Anchor in, he
thought Megara most t, being desart, and not far from Syracuse, neither by Sea
nor Land. Lamachus said this, but came afterwards to the opinion of Alcibiades.

After this, Alcibiades with his owne Gallie hauing passed ouer to       
Messana, and propounded to them a League, and not Alcibiades seeketh league with
preuailed, they answering, that they would not let the the Messanians, but is denyed.
Army in, but allow them onely a Market without the Walles, returned backe to
Rhegium. And presently the Generals hauing out of The Athenians goe with part of
the whole Fleet manned threescore Gallies, and taken their Fleet to Naxus.
prouision aboard, went along the shore to Naxus, hauing left the rest of the
Armie with one of the Generals at Rhegium. The Naxians hauing receiued them
into the City, they went on by the Coast, to Catana. And to Catana.

But the Cataneans receiuing them not, (for there were some within that
fauoured the Syracusians) they entred the Riuer of Terias, and hauing stayed

there all that night, went the next day towards Syracuse, leasurely with the rest of
their Gallies; but tenne they sent before into the great They send tenne Gallies to view
Hauen, not to stay, but to discouer if they had           Syracuse, and the Hauens.

lanched any Fleet there, and to proclaime from their Gallies, that the Athenians
were come to replant the Leontines on their owne, according to League and
a nity, and that therefore such of the Leontines as were in Syracuse, should
without feare goe forth to the Athenians, as to their friends and benefactors.

And when they had thus proclaimed, and well considered the Citie, and the
Hauens, and the region where they were to seate themselues for the Warre, they
returned to Catana.

An Assembly being called at Catana, though they         Catana surprized.
refused to receiue the Army, they admitted the
Generals, and willed them to speake their minds. And whilest Alcibiades, was in
his Oration, and the Citizens at the Assemblie, the Souldiers hauing secretly
pulled downe a little Gate, which was but weakely built, entred the City, and
were walking vp and downe in the Market. And the Catanaeans, such as
fauoured the Syracusians, seeing the Army within, for feare stole presently out of
the Towne, being not many. The rest concluded the League with the Athenians,
and willed them to fetch in the rest of the Army from Rhegium. After this, the
Athenians went backe to Rhegium, and rising from thence, came to Catana with
their whole Army together.

Now they had newes from Camarina, that if they         The Athenians goe to Camerina,
would come thither, the Camarinaeans  but are not receiued.
would ioyne with them, and that the Syracusians were manning their Nauy.
Whereupon with the whole Army they went along the Coast, rst to Syracuse,
where not nding any Nauy manned, they went on to Camarina. And being
come close vp to the shore, they sent a Herald vnto them; but the Camarinaeans
would not receiue the Army; alledging that they had taken an Oath, not to
receiue the Athenians with more then one Gallie, vnlesse they should haue sent
for more, of their owne accord. Hauing lost their labour, they departed, and

landed in a part of the Territorie of Syracuse, and had gotten some booty. But
the Syracusian Horsemen comming out, and killing some stragglers of the light-
armed, they returned againe to Catana.

Heere they nde the Gallie called Salaminia, come          Alcibiades called home, to
thither from Athens, both for Alcibiades, who was         answer about the Mercuries.

commanded to come home, to purge himselfe of such things as were laid to his
charge by the State, and also for other Souldiers, that were with him, whereof
some were accused for prophanation of the Mysteries, and some also for the
Mercuries. For the Athenians, after the Fleet was put to Sea, proceeded
neuerthelesse in the search of those that were culpable, both concerning the
Mysteries, and the Mercuries. And making no enquirie into the persons of the
informers, but through iealousie admitting of all sorts, vpon the report of euill
men, apprehended very good Citizens, and cast them into prison. Choosing
rather to examine the fact, and nde the truth by torments, then that any man,
how good soeuer in estimation, being once accused, should escape
vnquestioned.

For the People hauing by fame vnderstood, that the Tyranny of Pisistratus and
his sonnes, was heauie in the latter end, and withall, that neither themselues, nor
Harmodius, but the Lacedaemonians ouerthrew it, were euer fearefull, and
apprehended euery thing suspiciously.

For the fact of Aristogiton and Harmodius, was            Digression touching the deposing
vndertaken vpon an accident of loue, which vnfolding of the Tyranny of Pisistratus
                                                          and his sons.
at large, I shall make appeare that neither any other,
nor the Athenians themselues report any certainety, either of their owne Tyrants,
or of the fact. For the old Pisistratus dying in the Tyranny, not Hipparchus, (as
the most thinke) but Hippias, who was his eldest sonne, succeeded 
in the gouernment. Now Harmodius, a man in the ower of his youth, of great
beautie, was in the power of one Aristogiton, a Citizen of a middle condition,
that was his Louer. This Harmodius hauing beene sollicited by Hipparchus the
sonne of Pisistratus, and not yeelding, discouered the same vnto Aristogiton.

Hee apprehending it (as Louers vse) with a great deale of anguish, and fearing
the power of Hipparchus, lest hee should take him away by force, fell presently
as much as his condition would permit, to a contriuing how to pull downe the
Tyranny. In the meane time, Hipparchus, hauing againe attempted Harmodius,
and not preuailed, intended, though not to o er him violence, yet in secret, as if
forsooth he did it not for that cause, to doe him some disgrace. For neither was
the gouernment otherwise heauy till then, but carried without their euill will.
And to say the truth, these Tyrants held vertue and wisdome in great account for
a long time; and taking of the Athenians but a twentieth part of their reuenues,
adorned the Citie, mannaged their Warres, and administred their religion
worthily. In other points they were gouerned by the Lawes formerly established,
saue that these tooke a care euer, to preferre to the Magistracy men of their owne
adherence. And amongst many that had the annuall o ce of Archon, Pisistratus
also had it, the sonne of Hippias, of the same name with his Grandfather, who
also when he was Archon, dedicated the Altar of the twelue Gods in the Market-
place, and that other in the Temple of Apollo Pythius. And though the People of
Athens, amplifying afterwards that Altar which was in the Market-place, thereby
defaced the Inscription, yet that vpon the Altar that is in the Temple of Apollo
Pythius, is to bee seene still, though in Letters somewhat obscure, in these words.

    PISISTRATVS the sonne of HIPPIAS
    erected this to stand
    Ith' Temple of Apollo Pythius;
    witnesse of his command.
And that Hippias being the elder Brother, had the gouernment, I can a rme, as
knowing it by a more exact relation then other men. And it may be 
knowne also by this, It appeares that of all the legitimate brethren, this onely had
children, as is both signi ed by the Altar, and also by that Pillar, which for a
testimony of the iniustice of the Tyrants, was erected in the Athenian Cittadell.
In which there is no mention of any sonne of Thessalus, or of Hipparchus, but
of ue sonnes of Hippias, which he had by Myrrhine, the daughter of Callias
the sonne of Hyperochidas. For it is probable that the eldest was rst married, and

in the forepart of the Pillar, his name after his fathers, was the rst; not without
reason, as being both next him in age, and hauing also inioyed the Tyranny. Nor
indeed could Hippias haue easily taken on him the gouernment on a sudden, if
his brother had dyed, seazed of the Tyranny, and he been the same day to settle it
on himselfe. Whereas he retained the same with abundant security, both for the
customary feare in the people, and diligence in the Guard; and was not to seeke,
like a younger brother, to whom the gouernment had not continually been
familiar. But Hipparchus came to be named for his mis-fortune, and thereby
grew an opinion afterwards, that he was also Tyrant.

This Harmodius therefore that had denyed his sute, hee disgraced, as he before
intended. For when some had warned a sister of his, a Virgin, to be present, to
carry a little Basket in a Procession, they reiected her againe when she came, and
said, that they had neuer warned her at all, as holding her vnworthy the honour.
This was taken heauily by Harmodius; but Aristogiton, for his sake, was farre
more exasperated then he. Whereupon, with the rest of the Conspirators he
made all things ready for the execution of the designe. Onely, they were to stay
the time of the Holiday, called the great Panathenaea, vpon which day onely,
such Citizens as lead the Procession, might without suspition be armed in good
number. And they were to begin the fact themselues, but the rest were to helpe
them against the * Halbardiers.                             * The Guard of Hippias the
                                                           Tyrant.
Now the Conspirators for their better security, were
not many; for they hoped that such also as were not priuie to it, if they saw it
once vndertaken, being vpon this occasion, armed, would assist, in the recouery
of their owne liberty. When this Holiday was come, Hippias was gone out of the
Citie, into the place called Ceramicum, with his guard of               
Halbardiers, & was ordering the procession, how it was to goe. And Harmodius
and Aristogiton, with each of them a Dagger, proceeded to the fact. But when
they saw one of the Conspirators, familiarly talking with Hippias, (for Hippias
was very a able to all men) they were afraid, and beleeued that they were
discouered, and must presently haue beene apprehended. They resolued
therefore (if it were possible) to be reuenged rst vpon him that had done them

the wrong, and for whose sake they had vndergone all this danger; and, furnisht
as they were, ran furiously into the Citie, and nding Hipparchus, at a place
called Leocorium, without all regard of themselues, fell vpon him, and with all
the anger in the world, one vpon iealousie, the other vpon disgrace, strooke, and
slew him. Aristogiton, for the present, by meanes of the great con uence of
people, escaped thorow the Guard, but taken afterwards▪ was vngently handled;
but Harmodius was slaine vpon the place.

The newes being brought to Hippias, in the *              * A street without the walls of
Ceramicum, he went not towards the place where the Athens, where they vsed to bury
                                                          their 〈◊〉 in the Warres. Lib. 1
                                                                                      ▪
fact was committed but presently vnto those that were 〈◊〉 named from 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉
armed for the solemnity of the shewes, and were farre 〈◊〉, a Potter, or asPaus. from
                                                          one Ceramus.
o , that he might be with them before they heard of
it, and composing his countenance, as well as he could, to dissemble the
calamity, pointed to a certaine place, and commanded them to repaire thither,
without their Armes. Which they did accordingly, expecting that he would haue
told them somewhat. But hauing commanded his Guard to take those Armes
away, he then fell presently to picking out of such as he meant to question, and
whosoeuer else was found amongst them with a Dagger. For with Shields and
Speares, to be in the head of the Procession, was of custome.

Thus was the enterprize rst vndertaken vpon quarrell of Loue, and then vpon a
sudden feare, followed this vnaduised aduenture of Harmodius and Aristogiton.
And after this time the Tyranny grew sorer to the Athenians then it had been
before. And Hippias standing more in feare, not onely put many of the Citizens
to death, but also cast his eye on the States abroad, to see if he might get any
security from them, in this alteration at home. Hee therefore                 
afterwards (* though an Athenian, and to a                 * A woman of Athens, a Citie
Lampsacen) gaue his daughter Archedice vnto                〈…〉 and ciuility, to a man of
                                                           Lampsacus, a Citie 〈◊〉 famous
Aeantidas the sonne of Hippocles, Tyrant of                for 〈◊〉 and eﬀeminacy.
Lampsacus, knowing that the Lampsacens were in
great fauour with King Darius. And her Sepulchre is yet to be seene, with this
Inscription.

     Archedice, the Daughter of King Hippias,
     who in his time,
     Of all the Potentates of Greece was prime,
     this dust doth hide.
     Daughter, Wife, Sister, Mother vnto Kings she was,
     yet free from pride.
And Hippias, after he had raigned three yeeres more in Athens, and was in the
fourth deposed by the Lacedaemonians, and the exiled * Alemaeonides, went
vnder Truce to Sigeum, and to Aeantidas, at            * A Family descended from a
Lampsacus, and thence to King Darius, from whence noble Citizen of Athen , named  ●

                                                       Alema 〈◊〉, who being in exile,
twenty yeeres after in his old age, he came to         solicited the Lacedaemonians to
Marathon with the Medan Army.                          expose the Tyrants of Athens.

The People of Athens bearing this in minde, * and         *
remembring all that they had heard concerning them, He had 〈…〉 him to be 〈◊〉 out of
                                                          the State of Athens.
were extremely bitter, and full of iealousie towards
                                                          The iealousie and passionate
those that had been accused of the Mysteries, and         fury of the people, in enquiry 〈◊〉
thought all to haue been done vpon some                   the authors of the oﬀences,
                                                          touching the Mysteries and
Oligarchicall or Tyrannicall Conspiracy. And whilest Mercuries.
they were passionate vpon this surmise, many worthy
men had already been cast in prison, and yet they were not likely so to giue ouer,
but grew daily more saluage, and sought to apprehend more still. Whilest they
were at this passe, a prisoner that seemed most to be One of the prisoners is perswaded
guilty, was perswaded by one of his fellow prisoners, by a fellow-prisoner, to appeach
                                                          some man, whether true or not
to accuse some body, whether it were true or not true, true, and doth so.
(for it is but conjecturall on both sides, nor was there
euer, then, or after, any man that could say certainly, who it was that did the
deed) who brought him to it by telling him, that though he had not done it, yet
he might be sure to saue his owne life, and should deliuer the City from the
present suspition. And that he should be more certaine of his owne safety, by a
free confession, then by comming to his tryall, if he denied it. Hereupon, he
accused both himselfe and others for the Mercuries.

The people of Athens, gladly receiuing the certainty (as Diuers
                                                            they thought)
                                                                   men accused of    the
                                                                                 of the
fact: and hauing been much vexed before,  paring of the Mercuries.
to thinke that the Conspirators should neuer perhaps
be discouered to their Multitude, presently set at          But onely to some few of the
liberty the accuser, and the rest with him, whom he         Great-men▪

had not appeached, but for those that were accused, they appointed Iudges, and
all they apprehended, they executed. And hauing condemned to dye, such as
  ed, they ordayned a summe of money to be giuen to those that should slay
them. And though it were all this while vncertaine, whether they su ered iustly,
or vniustly, yet the rest of the Citie had a manifest ease for the present. But
touching Alcibiades the Athenians tooke it extreme ill, through the iustigation
of his enemies, the same that had opposed him before he went. And seeing it was
certaine (as they thought) for the Mercuries, the other crime also concerning the
Mysteries, whereof he had beene accused, seemed a great deale the more to haue
bin committed by him vpon the same reason, and conspiracy against the people.

For it fell out withall, whilest the City was in a tumult Presumptions against
about this, that an Army of the Lacedaemonians, was Alcibiades.
come as farre as the Isthmus, vpon some designe against the Boeotians.

These therefore they thought were come thither, not against the Boeotians, but
by appointment of him, and that if they had not rst apprehended, the persons
appeached, the Citie had been betrayed. And one night they watched all night
long in their Armes, in the Temple of Theseus, within the Citie. And the friends
of Alcibiades in Argos, were at the same time suspected of a purpose, to set vpon
the People there, whereupon the Athenians also deliuered vnto the Argiue
People, those * Hostages which they held of theirs in * 300 in number. lib. 5.
the Ilands, to be slaine. And there were presumptions
against Alcibiades, on all sides. Insomuch, as             Alcibiades sent for home.
purposing by Law to put him to death, they sent, as I
haue said, the Gally called Salaminia, into Sicily, both for him, and the rest with
him, that had been accused: But gaue command to those that went, not to
apprehend him, but to bid him follow them, to make his purgation; because

they had a care, not to giue occasion of stirre, either amongst their owne, or the
enemies Souldiers, but especially, because they desired, that the Mantineans, and
the Argiues, who they thought followed the Warre by his perswasion, might not
depart from the Army. So hee, and the rest accused with him in his 
owne Gallie, in companie of the Salaminia, left Sicily, and set saile for Athens.
But being at Thuria, they followed no further, but left Alcibiades ﬂyeth.
the Gally, and were no more to be found: fearing
indeed to appeare to the accusation. They of the Salaminia made search for
Alcibiades and those that were with him for a while, but not nding him,
followed on their course for Athens. Alcibiades, now an Out-law, passed shortly
after in a small Boat from Thuria into Peloponnesus, and the Athenians
proceeding to iudgement vpon his not appearing, condemned both him and
them to death.

After this, the Athenian Generals that remained in       The Athenian Generals in Sicily
Sicily, hauing diuided the Armie into two, and taken goe to Selinus and Egesta.
each his part by lot, went with the whole towards Selinus, and Egesta, with
intention both to see if the Egestaeans would pay them the money, and withall
to get knowledge of the designes of the Selinuntians, and learne the state of their
controuersie with the Egestaeans. And sayling by the Coast of Sicily, hauing it
on their left hand, on that side which lyeth to the Tyrrhene Gulfe, they came to
Himera, the onely Grecian Citie in that part of Sicily: which not receiuing them,
they went on, and by the way tooke Hyccara, a little They take Hyccara.
Towne of the Sicanians, Enemie to the Egestaeans,
and a Sea-Towne; and hauing made the inhabitants Slaues, deliuered the Towne
to the Egestaeans, whose Horse-forces were there with them.

Thence the Athenians wlth their Landmen returned through the Territory of
the Siculi, to Catana; and the Gallies went about with the Captiues. Nicias going
with the Fleet presently from Hyccara to Egesta, when hee had dispatched with
them his other businesse, and receiued thirty Talents of Money, returned to the
Armie. The Captiues they ransomed, of which they made 120. Talents more.
Then they sailed about to their Confederates of the Siculi, appointing them to

send their Forces; and with the halfe of their owne they came before Hybla, in
the Territory of Gela, an Enemy City, but tooke it not, and so ended this
Summer.                                                  The end of the seuenteenth
                                                               Summer.
The next Winter the Athenians fell presently to make
preparation for their iourney against Syracuse. And       The Syracusians contemne the
the Syracusians on the other side prepared to inuade Athenians.
the Athenians. For seeing the Athenians had not presently vpon the 
  rst feare, and expectation of their comming, falne vpon them, they got euery
day more and more heart. And because they went far from them into those
other parts of Sicily, and assaulting Hybla, could not take it, they contemned
them more then euer: and prayed their Commanders, (as is the manner of the
multitude when they bee in courage) seeing the Athenians came not vnto them,
to conduct them to Catana. And the Syracusian Horsemen, which were euer
abroad for Scowts, spurring vp to the Campe of the Athenians, amongst other
scornes, asked them, whether they came not rather to dwell in the Land of
another, then to restore the Leontines to their owne?

The Athenian Generals hauing obserued this, and           Nicias his stratagem to get easie
being desirous to draw forth the Syracusians whole        landing and encamping by
                                                          Syracuse.
power as farre as might bee from the Citie, to bee able
in the meane time, without empeachment, going thither in the night, by Sea, to
seaze on some conuenient place to encampe in; for they knew they should not
bee able to doe it so well in the face of an Enemie prepared, nor if they were
knowne to march by Land, for that the Syracusian Horsemen being many,
would greatly annoy the light-armed, and other multitude, they themselues
hauing no Horsemen there: whereas thus they might possesse themselues of a
place where the Horse could not doe them any hurt at all to speake of, (now the
Syracusian Outlawes that were with them, had told them of a place neere the
Temple Olympieum, which also they seazed) I say, the Athenian Generals, to
bring this their purpose to e ect, contriued the matter thus: They send a man,
of whose delity they were well assured, and in the opinion of the Syracusian
Commanders, no lesse a friend of theirs.

This man was a Catanaean, and said he came from Catana, from such and such,
whose names they knew, and knew to bee the remnant of their wel-willers in
that City. He told them that the Athenians lay euery night within the Towne,
and far from their Armes, and that if with the whole power of their Citie, at a
day appointed, betimes in a morning, they would come to their Campe, those
friends of the Syracusians would shut the Athenians in, and set re on their
Gallies, by which meanes, the Syracusians assaulting the Palizado, might easily
winne the Campe. And that the Catanaeans that were to helpe them 
herein were many and those he came from, already prepared for it.

The Syracusian Commanders hauing beene also otherwise encouraged, and
hauing intended a preparation to goe against Catana, though this Messenger had
not come, did so much the more vnaduisedly beleeue the man and straight wayes
being agreed of the day, on which they were to bee there, sent him away. These
Commanders (for by this time the Selenuntians, and some other their
Confederates were come in) appointed the Syracusians, vniuersally to set
forwards by a day. And when all their necessaries were in readinesse, and the day
at hand in which they were to be there, they set forwards toward Catana, and
encamped the night following vpon the banckes of the Riuer Simethus, in the
Territory of the Leontines. The Athenians vpon aduertisement that they were
set forth, rising with their whole Armie, both themselues, and such of the Siculi,
and others as went with them, and going aboard their Gallies and Boates in the
beginning of the night, set sayle for Syracuse. In the morning betimes, the
Athenians disbarked ouer against Olympieum, to make their Campe. And the
Syracusian Horsemen, who were at Catana before the rest, nding the Campe
risen, came backe to the Foot, and told them. Whereupon they went all together
backe to the ayde of the Citie. In the meane time, the The Athenians land, pitch their
way the Syracusians had to goe being long, the            Campe, and entrench themselues
                                                          ere the Syracusians returne.
Athenians had pitched their Campe at leasure in a
place of aduantage, wherein it was in their owne power to beginne Battell when
they list, and where, both in and before the Battell, the Syracusian Horsemen
could least annoy them. For on one side, there were Walles, and Houses, and
Trees, and a Lake that kept them o ; on the other side steepe Rockes; and

hauing felled Trees hard by, and brought them to the Sea-side, they made a
Palizado both before their Gallies, and toward Dascon. And on that part that
was most accessible to the Enemy, they made a Fort with stone, (the best they
could nde, but vnwrought) and with Wood, and withall pulled downe the
Bridge of the Riuer Anapus.

Whilest this was doing, there came none to empeach The Syracusian Army commeth
them from the Citie. The rst that came against them, backe.
were the Syracusian Horsemen, and by and by after, all the Foot together. And
though at rst they came vp neere vnto the Campe of the Athenians, 
yet after, seeing the Athenians came not out against them, they retired againe,
and crossing to the other side of the Helorine high-way, stayed there that night.

The next day the Athenians and their Confederates prepared to ght, and were
ordered thus: The Argiues and the Mantineans had the right Wing, the
Athenians were in the middle, and the rest of their Confederates in the other
Wing. That halfe of the Army which stood foremost, was ordered by eight in
File; the other halfe towards their Tents, ordered likewise by eights, was cast into
the forme of a long square, and commanded to obserue diligently, where the rest
of the Army was in distresse, and to make specially thither. And in the middest
of these so arranged, were receiued such as carried the The Athenians and Syracusians
Weapons and Tooles of the Army.                           prepare to ﬁght.

The Syracusians arranged their men of Armes, who were Syracusians of all
conditions, and as many of their Confederates as were present, by sixteene in
File. They that came to ayde them, were chie y the Selinuntians, and then the
Horse-men of the Geloans, about two hundred; and of the Camar●naeans,
about twenty Horsemen, and fty Archers. The Cauallery they placed in the
right point of the Battell, being in all no lesse then a thousand two hundred, and
with them the Darters. But the Athenians intending to begin the Battell, Nicias
went vp and downe the Army, from one Nation to another, to whom, and to all
in generall, he spake to this e ect.

 6.1. THE ORATION OF NICIAS to his Army.
 WHat neede I, sirs, to make a long exhortation, when this Battell is the thing
 for which we all came hither? For in my opinion, the present preparation is
 more able to giue you encouragement, then any Oration, how well soeuer
 made, if with a weake Armie. For where we are together, Argiues,
 Mantineans, Athenians, and the best of the Ilanders, how can we choose,
 amongst so many and good Confederates, but conceiue great hope of the
 victory? especially against tagge and ragge, and not chosen men, as wee are our
 selues, and against Sicilians, who though they contemne vs, cannot stand
 against vs; their skill not being answerable to their courage. It   
 must bee remembred also, that wee be farre from our owne, and not neere to
 any amicable Territory, but such as we shall acquire by the sword. My
 exhortation to you (I am certaine) is contrary to that of the enemy. For they
 say to theirs, You are to ght for your Countrey, I say to you, You are to ght
 out of your Countrey, where you must either get the victory, or not easily get
 away. For many Horsemen will be vpon vs. Remember therefore euery man
 his owne worth, and charge valiantly, and thinke, the present necessity, and
 streight we are in, to be more formidable then the enemy.

Nicias, hauing thus exhorted the Army, led it               The battell betweene the
presently to the charge. The Syracusians expected not Athenians and Syracusians.
to haue fought at that instant, and the Citie being neere, some of them were
gone away; and some, for haste, came in running; and though late, yet euery one,
as he came, put himselfe in, where was the greatest number. For they wanted
neither willingnesse, nor courage, either in this, or any other battell, being no
lesse valiant, so farre forth as they had experience, then the Athenians. But the
want of this, made them, euen against their wils, to abate also somewhat of their
courage.

Neuerthelesse, though they thought not the Athenians would haue begun the
battell, and were thereby constrained to ght on a sudden, yet they resumed

their Armes, and came presently forward to the encounter.

And rst, the Casters of Stones, and Slingers, and Archers of either side,
skirmished in the middest betweene the Armies, mutually chasing each other, as
amongst the Light-armed, was not vnlikely.

After this, the Southsayers brought forth their sacri ces according to the Law of
the place, and the Trumpets instigated the men of Armes to the battell. And
they came on to ght, the Syracusians for their Countrey, and their liues for the
present, and for their liberty in the future. On the otherside, the Athenians, to
win the Country of another, and make it their owne, and not to weaken their
owne by being vanquished. The Argiues, and other free Confederates, to helpe
the Athenians to conquer the Countrey they came against, and to returne to
their owne with Victory. And their Subiect-confederates came also on with great
courage, principally, for their better safety, as desperate, if they    
ouercame not, and withall vpon the by, that by helping the Athenians to subdue
the Countrie of another, their owne subiection might be the easier.

After they were come to handstroakes, they fought long on both sides. But in
the meane time there hapned some claps of Thunder, and ashes of Lightning,
together with a great showre of Raine; insomuch as it added to the feare of the
Syracusians that were now ghting their rst battell, and not familiar with the
Warres; whereas to the other side that had more experience, the season of the
yeere seemed to expound that accident; and their greatest feare proceeded from
the so-long resistance of their enemies, in that they were not all this while
ouercome. When the Argiues rst, had made the Left Wing of the Syracusians,
to giue ground, and after them, the Athenians also had done the like to those
that were arranged against them, then the rest of the The Athenians haue the victory.
Syracusian Army was presently broken and put to
 ight. But the Athenians pursued them not farre, (because the Syracusian
Horsemen being many, and vnvanquished, whensoeuer any men of Armes
aduanced farre from the body of the Army, charged vpon them, and still draue
them in againe) but hauing followed as farre as safely they might in great troopes,

they retyred againe, and erected a Trophie. The Syracusians hauing rallyed
themselues in the Helorine way, and recouered their order, as well as they could
for that time, sent a guard into Olympieum, lest the Athenians should take the
treasure there, and returned with the rest of the Army into the Citie. The
Athenians went not to assault the Temple, but gathering together their dead,
laid them vpon the funerall re, and stayed that night vpon the place. The next
day they gaue Truce to the Syracusians to take vp their dead (of whom, and of
their Confederates, were slaine about 260.) and gathered vp the bones of their
owne. Of the Athenians and their Confederates, there dyed about fty. And
thus, hauing ri ed the bodies of their dead enemies, they returned to Catana.
For it was now Winter, and to make War there, they thought it yet vnpossible,
before they had sent for Horsemen to Athens, and leuyed other amongst their
Confederates there in Sicily; to the end they might not bee altogether ouer
mastered in Horse▪ and before they had also both leuyed mony there, and
receiued more from Athens, and made League with certaine Cities, 
which they hoped after this Battell, would the more easily hearken thereunto;
and before they had likewise prouided themselues of victuals, and other things
necessary, as intending the next Spring to vndertake Syracuse againe. With this
mind they went to winter at Naxus and Catana.

The Syracusians, after they had buried their dead,         Hermocrates encourageth the
called an Assembly, and Hermocrates the sonne of           Syracusians, and is chosen
                                                           Generall with two more.
Hermon, a man not otherwise second to any in
wisdome, and in warre, both able for his experience, and eminent for his valour,
standing forth, gaue them encouragement, and would not su er them to be
dismayed with that which had hapned. Their courage, he said, was not ouercome,
though their want of order had done them hurt. And yet in that, they were not so
farre inferiour, as it was likely they would haue beene. Especially being (as one
may say) home-bred artiﬁcers, against the most experienced in the Warre of all
the Grecians. That they had also beene hurt by the number of their Generals and
Commanders, (for there were ﬁfteene that commanded in chiefe) and by the
many supernumerary Souldiers vnder no command at all. Whereas, if they
would make but a few and skilfull Leaders, and prepare Armour this Winter, for

such as want it, to encrease as much as might be, the number of their men of
Armes, and compell them in other things to the exercise of Discipline, in all reason
they were to haue the better of the Enemie. For valour they had already, and to
keepe their order, would be learnt by practice; and both of these would still grow
greater; Skill, by practising with danger; and their Courage would grow bolder of
it selfe, vpon the conﬁdence of Skill. And for their Generals, they ought to chuse
them few and absolute, and to take an Oath vnto them, to let them lead the Armie
whithersoeuer they thought best. For by this meanes, both the things that require
secrecie would the better be concealed, and all things would be put in readinesse
with order, and lesse tergiuersation.

The Syracusians, when they had heard him, decreed The Syracusians send for ayde
all that he aduised, and elected three Generals, Him, into Peloponnesus.
Heraclides the sonne of Lysimachus, and Sicanus the sonne of Exegestus. They
sent also Ambassadours to Corinth and Lacedaemon, as well to obtaine a
League with them, as also to perswade the Lacedaemonians to make a hotter
Warre against the Athenians, and to declare themselues in the quarrell of the
Syracusians, thereby eyther to withdraw them from Sicily, or to          
make them the lesse able to send supply to their Army which was there already.

The Athenian Army at Catana, sayled presently to       The Athenian attempt 〈…〉 saile.
Messana▪ to receiue it by Treason of some within, but
the plot came not to e ect. For Alcibiades when hee was sent for from his
charge, being resolued to y, and knowing what was to bee done, discouered the
same to the friends of the Syracusians in Messana, who with those of their
Faction slew such as were accused, and being armed vpon occasion of the
Sedition, obtained to haue the Athenians kept out. And the Athenians, after 13
dayes stay, troubled with tempestuous weather, prouision also failing, and
nothing succeeding, returned againe to Naxus; and hauing forti ed their Campe
with a Palizado, they wintred there, and dispatched a Gallie to Athens for
money, and Horsemen to be with them early in the Spring.

The Syracusians this Winter raised a Wall before their The Syracusians enlarge the
Citie, all the length of the side towards Epipolae,       compasse of their Walles, and
                                                          burne the Tents of the Athenians
including * Temenitis; to the end, if they chanced to by Catana.
bee beaten, they might not bee so easily enclosed, as
                                                          * The ground belonging to the
when they were in a narrower compasse. And they put Temple of Apollo.
a Guard into Megara, and another into Olympieum:
and made Palizadoes on the Sea-side, at all the places of landing. And knowing
that the Athenians wintred at Naxus, they marched with all the power of the
Citie vnto Catana, and after they had wasted the Territory, and burnt the
Cabines and Campe where the Athenians had lodged before, returned home.

And hauing heard that the Athenians had sent            〈…〉 both from 〈…〉 City.
Ambassadours to Camarina, according to a League
made before in the time of ●aches, to try if they could win them to their side,
they also sent Ambassadours to oppose it. For they suspected that the
Camarinaeans had sent those succors in the former Battell with no great good
will, and that now they would take part with them no longer, seeing the
Athenians had the better of the day, but would rather ioyne with the Athenians
vpon the former League. Hermocrates therefore and others, being come to
Camarina from the Syracusians, and Euphemus and others from the Athenians,
when the Assembly was met, Hermocrates desiring to increase their enuy to the
Athenians, spake vnto them to this e ect.

                                                                           
   6.1. THE ORATION OF
   HERMOCRATES.
   MEN of Camarina, we come not hither, vpon feare that the Forces of the
   Athenians here present may a right you, but lest their Speeches which
   they are about to make, may seduce you, before you haue also heard what
   may be said by vs. They are come into Sicily with that pretence indeed
   which you heare giuen out, but with that intention which wee all suspect.
   And to me they seeme not to intend the replantation of the Leontines, but

rather our supplantation; for surely it holdeth not in reason, that they who
subuert the Cities yonder, should come to plant any Citie heere; nor that
they should haue such a care of the Leontines, because Chalcideans, for
kindreds sake, when they keepe in seruitude the Chalcideans themselues of
Euboea, of whom these heere are but the Colonies. But they both hold the
Cities there, and attempt those that are here in one and the same kind. For
when the Ionians, and the rest of the Confederates, their owne Colonies,
had willingly made them their Leaders in the Warre, to auenge them of the
Medes, the Athenians laying afterwards to their charge, to some, the not
sending of their Forces, to some, their Warre amongst themselues, and so
to the rest the most colourable criminations they could get, subdued them
all to their obedience. And it was not for the liberty of the Grecians, that
these men, nor for the liberty of themselues, that the Grecians made head
against the Medes; but the Athenians did it, to make them serue, not the
Medes, but them, and the Grecians to change their Master, as they did, not
for one lesse wise, but for one worsewise. But intruth we come not to
accuse the Athenian State (though it be obnoxious enough) before you
that know su ciently the iniuries they haue done; but farre rather to
accuse our selues, who though we haue the examples before our eyes, of
the Grecians there, brought into seruitude for want of defending
themselues; and though wee see them now, with the same sophistry of
replanting the Leontines, and their kindred, and ayding of their
Confederates the Egestaeans, prepare to doe the like vnto vs, doe not yet
vnite our selues, and with better courage, make them to know, that we be
not Ionians, nor Hellespontines, nor Ilanders, that changing, serue alwaies
the Mede, or some other Master; but that wee are Doriens, and free-men,
come to dwell here in Sicily out of Peloponnesus, a free Country. Shall we
stand still till we be taken Citie after Citie? when we know, that that only
way we are conquerable, and when we nd them wholly bent 
to this, that by drawing some from our alliance with their words, and
causing some to weare each other out with Warre, vpon hope of their
Confederacie, and winning others by other t language, they may haue the
power to doe vs hurt. But we thinke, though one of the same Iland perish,

yet if he dwell far o , the danger will not come to vs; and before it arriue,
we count vnhappy onely him that su ereth before vs. If any therefore be
of this opinion, that it is not he, but the Syracusian, that is the Athenians
Enemie, and thinketh it a hard matter, that he should endanger himselfe
for the Territorie that is mine, I would haue him to consider, that he is to
  ght not chie y for mine, but equally for his owne in mine, and with the
more safety, for that I am not destroyed before, and he thereby destitute of
my helpe, but stand with him in the Battell. Let him also consider, that the
Athenians come not hither to punish the Syracusians for being enemies to
you, but by pretence of mee, to make himselfe the stronger by your
friendship. If any man heere enuieth, or also feareth vs, (for the strongest
are still lyable vnto both) and would therefore wish that the Syracusians
might be weakned, to make them more modest, but not vanquished for
their owne safeties sake, that man hath conceiued a hope beyond the
power of man. For it is not reasonable, that the same man should be the
disposer both of his desires, and of his fortune. And if his ayme should
faile him, he might, deploring his owne misery, peraduenture wish to
enioy my prosperity againe. But this will not bee possible to him that shall
abandon me, and not vndertake the same dangers, though not in title, yet
in e ect the same that I doe. For though it be our power in title, yet in
e ect it is your own safety you shall defend. And you men of Camarina,
that are our borderers, and likely to haue the second place of danger, you
should most of all haue foreseene this, and not haue aided vs so dully. You
should rather haue come to vs, and that which if the Athenians had come
  rst against Camarina, you should in your need haue implored at our
hands, the same you should now also haue beene seene equally to hearten
vs withall, to keepe vs from yeelding. But as yet, neither you▪ nor any of
the rest haue beene so forward. Perhaps vpon feare, you meane to deale
euenly betweene vs both, and alledge your League with the Athenians. You
made no League against your friends, but against your enemies, in case any
should inuade you: and by it you are also tyed to ayde the Athenians when
others wrong them, but not when (as now) they wrong their neighbour.
For euen the Rhegians, who are Chalcideans, refuse to helpe them in

replanting the Leontines, though these also be Chalcideans. And then it
were a hard case, if they suspecting a bad action vnder a faire iusti cation,
are wise without a reason, and you, vpon pretence of reason, 
should ayde your naturall enemies, and helpe them that most hate you, to
destroy your more naturall kindred.

But this is no iustice; to ght with them is iustice, and not to stand in feare
of their preparation. Which, if wee hold together, is not terrible, but is, if
contrarily (which they endeuour) we bee disvnited. For neither when they
came against vs being none but our selues, and had the vpper hand in
(Battell, could they yet e ect their purpose, but quickly went their wayes.
There is no reason therefore wee should bee afraid, when wee are all
together, but that wee should haue the better will to vnite our selues in a
League. And the rather, because wee are to haue ayde from Peloponnesus,
who euery way excell these men in Militarie su ciencie. Nor should you
thinke that your purpose to ayde neither, as being in League with both, is
either iust in respect of vs, or safe for your selues. For it is not so iust in
substance, as it is in the pretence. For if through want of your ayde, the
assailed perish, and the assailant become Victor, what doe you by your
neutrality, but leaue the safety of the one vndefended, and su er the other
to doe euill? Whereas it were more noble in you, by ioyning with the
wronged, and with your kindred, both to defend the Common good of
Sicily, and keepe the Athenians, as your friends, from an act of iniustice.
To be short, wee Syracusians say, That to demonstrate plainely, to you, or
to any other, the thing you already know, is no hard matter; but wee pray
you, and withall, if you reiect our words, wee protest, that whereas the
Ionians, who haue euer beene our enemies, doe take counsell against vs,
you that are Doriens as well as wee, betray vs. And if they subdue vs,
though it bee by your counsels that they doe it, yet they onely shall haue
the honour of it. And for the prize of their victory, they will haue none
other but euen the Authors of their victory. But if the victory fall vnto vs,
euen you also, the cause of this our danger, shall vndergoe the penalty.
Consider therefore now, and take your choice, whether you will haue

  seruitude without the present danger, or sauing your selues with vs, both
  auoyd the dishonour of hauing a Master, and escape our enmity, which is
  likely otherwise to be lasting.

  Thus spake Hermocrates.

After him, Euphemus, Ambassadour from the Athenians, spake thus.

                                                                  
  6.1. THE ORATION OF EVPHEMVS.
  THough our comming were to renew our former League, yet seeing wee
  are touched by the Syracusian, it will bee necessary wee speake something
  heere of the right of our Dominion. And the greatest testimonie of this
  right he hath himselfe giuen, in that he said the Ionians were euer enemies
  to the Doriens. And it is true. For being Ionians, we haue euer endeuoured
  to nde out some meanes or other, how best to free our selues from
  subiection to the Peloponnesians, that are Doriens, more in number then
  wee, and dwelling neere vs. After the Medan Warre, hauing gotten vs a
  Nauie, wee were deliuered thereby from the command and leading of the
  Lacedaemonians; there beeing no cause why they should rather bee
  Leaders of vs, then wee of them, saue onely that they were then the
  stronger. And when wee were made Commanders of those Grecians
  which before liued vnder the King, wee tooke vpon vs the gouernment of
  them, because wee thought, that hauing power in our hands to defend our
  selues, we should thereby be the lesse subiect to the Peloponnesians. And
  to say truth, wee subiected the Ionians and Ilanders, (whom the
  Syracusians say we brought into bondage, being our kindred) not without
  iust cause: for they came with the Medes against ours their Mother Citie,
  and for feare of losing their wealth, durst not reuolt, as wee did, that
  abandoned our very Citie. But as they were content to serue, so they
  would haue imposed the same condition vpon vs. For these causes, wee
  tooke vpon vs our dominion ouer them, both as worthy of the same, in

that wee brought the greatest Fleet, and promptest courage to the seruice
of the Grecians: whereas they, with the like promptnesse in fauour of the
Medes, did vs hurt: and also as being desirous to procure our selues a
strength against the Peloponnesians. And follow any other wee will not,
seeing wee alone haue pulled downe the Barbarian, (and therefore haue
right to command) or at least haue put our selues into danger more for the
liberty of the Peloponnesians, then of all the rest of Greece, and our owne
besides. Now to seeke meanes for ones owne preseruation is a thing
vnblameable. And as it is for our owne safeties cause that wee are now
heere, so also wee nde that the same will be pro table for you. Which wee
will make plaine, from those very things which they accuse, and you, as
most formidable, suspect vs of; being assured, that such as suspect with
vehement feare, though they may be wonne for the present with the
sweetnesse of an Oration, yet when the matter comes to            
performance, will then doe as shall be most for their turne. Wee haue told
you that wee hold our Dominion yonder vpon feare; and that vpon the
same cause wee come hither now, by the helpe of our friends, to assure the
Cities heere, and not to bring you into subiection, but rather to keepe you
from it.

And let no man obiect, that we be sollicitous for those that are nothing to
vs. For as long as you be preserued, and able to make head against the
Syracusians, wee shall be the lesse annoyed by their sending of Forces to
the Peloponnesians. And in this point you are very much vnto vs. For the
same reason, it is meete also, that wee replant the Leontines, not to subiect
them, as their kindred in Euboea, but to make them as puissant as wee can;
that being neere, they may from their owne Territory, weaken the
Syracusians in our behalfe. For as for our Warres at home, wee are a match
for our enemies, without their helpe. And the Chalcidean, (whom hauing
made a slaue yonder, the Syracusian said, wee absurdly pretend to
vindicate into liberty heere) is most bene ciall to vs there, without Armes,
paying money onely; but the Leontines, and other our friends heere, are
the most pro table to vs, when they are most in liberty.

Now to a Tyrant or Citie that raigneth, nothing can bee thought absurd, if
pro table, nor any man a friend, that may not bee trusted to. Friend or
Enemy he must bee, according to the seuerall occasions. But here it is for
our bene t not to weaken our friends, but by our friends strength to
weaken our enemies. This you must needs beleeue, in as much as yonder
also, wee so command ouer our Confederates, as euery of them may bee
most vsefull to vs. The Chians and Methymnaeans redeeme their liberty,
with prouiding vs some Gallies: the most of the rest, with a Tribute of
money, somewhat more pressing. Some againe of our Confederates are
absolutely free, notwithstanding that they be Ilanders, and easie to be
subdued. The reason whereof is this: they are scituate in places
commodious about Peloponnesus. It is probable therefore, that heere also,
we will so order our a aires, as shall be most for our owne turne, and most
according to our feare (as we told you) of the Syracusians. For they a ect a
dominion ouer you; and hauing by aduantage of your suspicion of vs,
drawne you to their side, will themselues by force, or (if we goe home
without e ect) by your want of friends, haue the sole command of Sicily.
Which, if you ioyne with them, must of necessity come to passe. For
neither will it be easie for vs to bring so great Forces againe together, nor
will the Syracusians want strength to subdue you, if we bee absent. Him
that thinketh otherwise, the thing it selfe conuinceth: for when 
you called vs in, to ayde you, at the rst, the feare you pretended was onely
this, that if we neglected you, the Syracusians would subdue you, and we
thereby should participate of the danger. And it were vniust, that the
argument you would needs haue to preuaile then with vs, should now
haue no e ect with your selues; or that you should be iealous of the much
strength we bring against the power of the Syracusians, when much rather
you should giue the lesse eare vnto them. We cannot so much as stay here
without you; and if becomming per dious, we should subdue these States,
yet we are vnable to hold them, both in respect of the length of the voyage,
and for want of meanes of guarding them▪ because they be great, and
prouided after the manner of the Continent. Whereas they, not lodged
nee●● you in a Campe, but inhabiting neere you in a Citie of greater

power then this of ours, will be alwayes watching their aduantages against
you: And when an opportunity shall be o ered against any of your Cities,
will be sure not to let it slip. This they haue already made to appeare, both
in their proceedings against the Leontines, and also otherwise. And yet
haue these the face to moue you against vs that hinder this, and that haue
hitherto kept Sicily from falling into their hands. But we on the otherside,
inuite you to a farre more reall safety, and pray you not to betray that
safety, which we both of vs hold from one another at this present, but to
consider, that they by their owne number haue way to you alwayes,
though without Confederates, whereas you shall seldome haue so great an
ayde againe to resist them. Which if through your iealousie, you su er to
goe away without e ect, or if it miscarry, you will hereafter wish for the
least part of the same, when their comming can no more doe you good.
But (Camarinaeans) bee neither you nor others, moued with their
calumnies. We haue told you the very truth, why wee are suspected; and
summarily wee will tell it you againe, clayming to preuaile with you
thereby. We say, we command yonder, lest else we should obey, and we
assert into liberty the Cities here, lest else we should be harmed by them.
Many things wee are forced to be doing, because many things we haue to
beware of. And both now, and before, we came not vncalled, but called, as
Confederates to such of you as su er wrong. Make not your selues Iudges
of what we doe, nor goe about as Censors (which were now hard to doe)
to diuert vs; but as farre as this busie humour, and fashion of ours, may be
for your owne seruice, so farre take, and vse it. And thinke not the same
hurtfull alike to all, but that the greatest part of the Grecians haue good by
it. For in all places, though we be not of any side, yet both he that looketh
to be wronged, and hee that contriueth to doe the wrong, by 
the obuiousnesse of the hope that the one hath of our ayd, and of the feare
that the other hath of their owne danger, if we should come, are brought
by necessity, the one to moderation against his will, the other into safety,
without his trouble. Refuse not therefore, the security now present,
common both to vs that require it, and to your selues. But doe as others
vse to doe; come with vs, and in stead of defending your selues alwayes

   against the Syracusians, take your turne once, and put them to their guard,
   as they haue done you. Thus spake Euphemus.

The Camarinaeans stood thus a ected: They bare               The resolution of the
good will to the Athenians; saue that they thought           Camarinaeans for
                                                             New re y
                                                                 ●   ●● ▪
they meant to subiugate Sicily; And were euer at strife
with the Syracusians about their borders. Yet because they were afraid that the
Syracusians that were neere them, might as well get the victory, as the other, they
had both formerly sent them some few horse, and also now resolued for the
future, to helpe the Syracusians, but vnderhand, and as sparingly as was possible;
and withall, that they might no lesse seeme to fauour the Athenians, then the
Syracusians, especially after they had wonne a battell, to giue for the present an
equall answer vnto both. So after deliberation had, they answered thus: That for
as much as they that warred, were both of them their Confederates, they thought it
most agreeable to their oath, for the present, to giue ayde to neither. And so the
Ambassadours of both sides went their wayes. And the Syracusians made
preparation for the Warre by themselues.

The Athenians being encamped at Naxus, treated            The Athenians seeke to winne the
with the Siculi, to procure as many of them as they       Siculi.

might, to their side. Of whom, such as inhabited the Plaine, and were subiect to
the Syracusians, for the most part, held o ; but they that dwelt in the most
inland parts of the Iland, being a free people, and euer before dwelling in
Villages, presently agreed with the Athenians; and brought Corne into the
Army, and some of them also money. To those that held o , the Athenians went
with their Army, and some they forced to come in, and others they hindred from
receiuing the aydes, and garrisons of the Syracusians. And hauing brought their
Fleet from Naxus, where it had been all the Winter till They bring their Fleet to
now, they lay the rest of the Winter at Catana, and re- Catana.
erected their Campe formerly burnt by the Syracusians.

They sent a Gally also to Carthage, to procure amity, and what helpe 
they could from thence: And into Hetruria, because some Cities there had of

their owne accord promised to take their parts. They They send for ayde to Carthage,
sent likewise to the Siculi about them, and to Egesta, and into Hetruria  ▪

appointing them to send in all the Horse they could, And prepare to besiege Syracuse.
and made ready Brickes, and Iron, and whatsoeuer
else was necessary for a Siege, and euery other thing they needed, as intending to
fall in hand with the Warre, early the next Spring.

The Ambassadours of Syracuse, which were sent to       The Syracusians pray ayde of the
Corinth and Lacedaemon, as they sayled by,             Corinthians and
                                                       Lacedaemonians.
endeauoured also to moue the Italians, to a regard of
this action of the Athenians. Being come to Corinth, they spake vnto them, and
demanded ayde▪ vpon the * Title of consanguinity.      * Corinth was the mother C y
                                                                                 ●●

                                                       of Syracuse.
The Corinthians hauing forthwith, for their owne
part, decreed cheerefully to ayde them, sent also Ambassadours from themselues,
along with these to Lacedaemon, to helpe them to perswade the
Lacedaemonians, both to make a more open Warre against the Athenians, at
home, and to send some forces also into Sicily.

At the same time that these Ambassadours were at        Alcibiades at Lacedaemon,
Lacedaemon, from Corinth, Alcibiades was also there instigateth the Lacedaemonians
                                                        against his Countrey.
with his fellow fugitiues; who presently vpon their
escape, passed ouer from Thuria, rst to Cyllene, the Hauen of the Eleans, in a
Ship, and afterwards went thence to Lacedaemon, sent for by the
Lacedaemonians themselues, vnder publique security. For he feared them for his
doings about Mantinea. And it fell out, that in the Assembly of the
Lacedaemonians, the Corinthians, Syracusians, and Alcibiades, made all of them
the same request. Now the Ephores and Magistrates, though intending to send
Ambassadours to Syracuse, to hinder them from compounding with the
Athenians, being yet not forward to send them ayde, Alcibiades stood foorth,
and sharpned the Lacedaemonians, inciting them with words to this e ect:

 6.1. THE ORATION OF ALCIBIADES.

IT will be necessary that I say something rst concerning mine owne
accusation, lest through iealousie of me, you bring a preiudicate eare to the
common businesse. My Ancestors hauing on a certaine quarrell 
renounced the * o ce of receiuing you, I was the          * [...]
man that restored the same againe, and shewed you
all possible respect, both otherwise, and in the *        * 〈…〉 at Athens.
matter of your losse at Pylus. Whilest I persisted in
my good will to you▪ being to make a Peace at Athens, by treating the same
with my aduersaries, you inuested them with authority, and me with disgrace.
For which cause, if in applying my selfe afterwards to the Mantineans, and
Argiues, or in any thing else I did you hurt, I did it iustly. And if any man
heere were causelesly angry with mee then, when hee su ered, let him bee now
content againe, when hee knowes the true cause of the same. Or if any man
thinke the worse of mee for enclining to the People, let him acknowledge, that
therein also hee is o ended without a cause. For wee haue beene alwayes
Enemies to Tyrants, and what is contrary to a Tyrant, is called the People; and
from thence hath continued our adherence to the multitude. Besides, in a
City gouerned by Democracie, it was necessary in most things to follow the
present course; neuerthelesse wee haue endeuoured to bee more moderate,
then suteth with the now headstrong humour of the People. But others there
haue beene, both formerly and now, that haue incited the Common People to
worse things then I, and they are those that haue also driuen out mee. But as
for vs, when wee had the charge of the whole, wee thought it reason, by what
forme it was growne most great and most free, and in which we receiued it, in
the same to preserue it. For though such of vs as haue iudgement, doe know
well enough what the Democracie is, and I no lesse then another, (insomuch
as I could inueigh against it; But of confessed madnesse nothing can be said
that's new) yet wee thought it not safe to change it, when you our Enemies
were so neere vs. Thus stands the matter touching my own accusation. And
concerning what we are to consult of both you and I, If I know any thing,
which your selues doe not, heare it now. We made this voyage into Sicily, rst,
(if we could) to subdue the Sicilians; after them the Italians; after them, to
assay the dominion of Carthage, & Carthage it selfe. If these or most of these

enterprizes succceded, then next wee would haue vndertaken Peloponnesus,
with the accession both of the Greeke Forces there, and with many mercenarie
Barbarians, Iberians, and others of those parts, confessed to bee the most
warlike of the Barbarians that are now. We should also haue built many
Gallies, besides these which we haue already, (there being plenty of Timber in
Italy) with the which besieging Peloponnesus round, and also taking the
Cities thereof with our Land-forces, vpon such occasions as should arise from
the Land, some by assault, and some by siege, wee hoped easily to 
haue debelled it, and afterwards to haue gotten the dominion of all Greece. As
for Money and Corne to facilitate some points of this, the places wee should
haue conquered there, besides what heere wee should haue found, would
su ciently haue furnished vs.

Thus, from one that most exactly knoweth it, you haue heard what is the
Designe of the Fleete now gone, and which the Generals there, as farre as they
can, will also put in execution.

Vnderstand next, that vnlesse you ayde them, they yonder cannot possibly
hold out. For the Sicilians, though inexpert, if many of them vnite, may well
subsist; but that the Syracusians alone, with their whole power already beaten,
and withall kept from the vse of the Sea, should withstand the Forces of the
Athenians already there, is a thing impossible. And if their Citie should be
taken, all Sicily is had, and soone after Italy also, and the danger from thence,
which I foretold you, would not be long ere it fell vpon you. Let no man
therefore thinke, that hee now consulteth of Sicily onely, but also of
Peloponnesus, vnlesse this bee done with speed. Let the Armie you send bee
of such, as being aboord, may row, and landing, presently be armed. And
(which I thinke more pro table then the Armie it selfe) send a Spartan for
Commander, both to traine the Souldiers already there, and to compell vnto
it such as refuse. For thus will your present friends bee the more encouraged,
and such as bee doubtfull, come to you with the more assurance. It were also
good to make Warre more openly vpon them heere, that the Syracusians
seeing your care, may the rather hold out, and the Athenians bee lesse able to

send supply to their Armie. You ought likewise to forti e Decelea in the
Territory of Athens, a thing which the Athenians themselues most feare, and
reckon for the onely euill they haue not yet tasted in this Warre. And the way
to hurt an Enemie most, is to know certainely what he most feareth, and to
bring the same vpon him. For in reason a man therefore feareth a thing most,
as hauing the precisest knowledge of what will most hurt him. As for the
commodities which your selues shall reape, and depriue the Enemie of, by so
fortifying, letting much passe, I will summe you vp the principall. Whatsoeuer
the Territory is furnished withall, will come most of it vnto you, partly taken,
and partly of its owne accord. The reuenue of the Siluer Mines in Laurium,
and whatsoeuer other pro t they haue from their Land, or * from their
Courts of Iustice, will presently be lost. And, which * As Fees, and Fines, which
is worst, their Confederates will be remisse in         would cease in the Townes
                                                        abroad, the Enemy continually
bringing in their reuenue, and will care little for the lying vpon them, or not be able
Athenians, if they beleeue once that you follow the to be conueyed to the City.
Warre to the vtmost.

That any of these things be put in act, speedily and earnestly,      
(Men of Lacedaemon) it resteth onely in your selues: for I am con dent, and I
thinke I erre not, that all these things are possible to bee done. Now I must
craue this, that I bee neither the worse esteemed, for that hauing once beene
thought a louer of my Countrey, I goe now amongst the greatest Enemies of
the same, against it; nor yet mistrusted, as one that speaketh with the zeale of a
Fugitiue. For though I ye from the malice of them that draue mee out, I shall
not (if you take my counsell) y your pro t. Nor are you enemies so much,
who haue hurt but your enemies, as they are, that haue made enemies of
friends. I loue not my Countrey, as wronged by it, but as hauing liued in
safety in it. Nor doe I thinke, that I doe heerein goe against any Countrey of
mine, but that I farre rather seeke to recouer the Countrey I haue not. And
hee is truely a louer of his Countrey, not that refuseth to inuade the Countrey
hee hath wrongfully lost, but that desires so much to bee in it, as by any
meanes hee can, hee will attempt to recouer it. I desire you therefore,
(Lacedaemonians) to make vse of my seruice, in whatsoeuer danger or labour,

 con dently, seeing you know, (according to the common saying) if I did hurt
 you much when I was your enemie, I can helpe you much when I am your
 friend. And so much the more, in that I know the state of Athens, and but
 coniectured at yours. And considering you are now in deliberation vpon a
 matter of so extreme importance, I pray you thinke not much to send an
 Armie both into Sicily and Attica, as well to preserue the great matters that are
 there, with the presence of a small part of your Force, as also to pull downe the
 power of the Athenians, both present and to come; and afterwards to dwell in
 safety your selues, and to haue the leading of all Greece; not forced, but
 voluntary, and with their good a ection.

 Thus spake Alcibiades.

And the Lacedaemonians, thuogh before this they had a purpose of their own
accord, to send an Army against Athens, but had         The Lacedaemonians resolue to
delayed and neglected it, yet when these particulars    send Gylippus into Sicily.

were deliuered by him, they were a great deale the more con rmed in the same,
conceiuing that what they had heard, was from one that euidently knew it.
Insomuch as they had set their minds already vpon the fortifying at Decelea, and
vpon the sending of some succours into Sicily, for the present. And 
hauing assigned Gylippus the sonne of Cleandridas, vnto the Syracusian
Ambassadours for chiefe Commander, they willed him to consider, both with
them and the Corinthians, how best (for their present meanes) and with greatest
speed, some helpe might bee conueyed vnto them in Sicily. He thereupon
appointed the Corinthians to send him two Gallies presently to Asine, and to
furnish the rest they meant to send, and to haue them ready to saile when
occasion should serue. This agreed vpon, they departed from Lacedaemon.

In the meane time the Gallie arriued at Athens, which The Athenians resolue to send
the Generals sent home for money and Horsemen.        prouision and Horsemen.

And the Athenians vpon hearing, decreed to send both prouision and
Horsemen to the Armie. So the Winter ended, and the seuenteenth yeere of this
Warre, written by Thucydides.

In the very beginning of the next Spring, the             THE EIGHTEENTH YEERE.
Athenians in Sicily, departed from Catana, and sailed
by the Coast to Megara of Sicily. The inhabitants         The Athenians burne the Fields
whereof, in the time of the Tyrant Gelon, the             of certaine Towns of the Siculi,
                                                          and take Centoripa.
Syracusians, (as I mentioned before) had driuen out,
and now possesse the Territory themselues. Landing heere, they wasted the
Fields, and hauing assaulted a certaine small Fortresse of the Syracusians, not
taking it, they went presently backe, part by Land, and part by Sea, vnto the
Riuer Tereas. And landing againe in the plaine Fields, wasted the same, and
burnt vp their Corne; and lighting on some Syracusians, not many, they slew
some of them; and hauing set vp a Trophie, went all againe aboard their Gallies.
Thence they returned to Catana, and tooke in victuall. Then with their whole
Army they went to Centoripa, a small Citie of the Siculi, which yeelding on
composition, they departed, and in their way, burnt vp the Corne of the
Inessaeans and the Hyblaeans. Being come againe to Catana, they nd there 250
Horsemen, arriued from Athens, without Horses,            They receiue money and
though not without the furniture, supposing to haue Horsemen from Athens.
Horses there; and 30 Archers on horsebacke, and 300 Talents of siluer.

The same Spring the Lacedaemonians led forth their The Lacedaemonians inuade
Army against Argos, and went as far as to Cleonae;   Argia.

But an Earthquake hapning, they went home againe. But the Argiues inuaded
the Territory of Thyrea, con ning on their owne, and The Argiues take a great Booty
tooke a great Booty from the Lacedaemonians, which in Thyr a         .● ●●●

they sold for no lesse then * 25 Talents.            * 4717 pound, 10 shillings
                                                              sterling.

Figure 1. SYRACVSE BESEEGED BY the 
Athenians

A. Acradina. B. Nasos. C. Sycha or Tycha. D. Temenitis. E. Epipolae. F. The
quarieand Prison. G. The fort of labdalum. H. Euryalus. I. The Campe of the
Athenians. K. The walles made by the Athenians to beseege the Citty. L. Heapes
of Stones Layd ready for the nishing of the wall▪ M. The Marishes. N. The

wall made by The Syracusians. O. leon. P. Trogilus. Q. Thapsus. R. The great
Hauen. S. The little Hauen. T. Plemmyrium. V. Dascon. W. Olympiaeum. X.
The high way to Helorus. Y. The riuer Anapus. Z. The lake Lysimelia▪

Not long after, the Commons of Thespiae, set vpon them that had 
the gouernment; but not preuailing, were part        The Commons of Thespiae set
apprehended, and part escaped to Athens, the         vpon the Few, but with ill
                                                     successe.
Athenians hauing also ayded them.

The Syracusians the same Summer, when they heard that the Athenians had
Horsemen sent to them from Athens, and that they were ready now to come
against them, conceiuing, that if the Athenians gat not Epipolae a rocky ground,
and lying iust against the City, they would not bee able, though Masters of the
Field, to take in the City with a Wall; intended therefore, lest the Enemie should
come secretly vp, to keepe the passages by which there was accesse vnto it, with a
Guard. For the rest of the place is to the outside high Epipolae a high
and steepe, falling to the City by degrees, and on the groun    ●●●●  fore the City of
                                                          Syr ●●
inside wholly subiect to the eye. And it is called by the
Syracusians, Epipolae, because it lyeth aboue the leuell of the rest. The
Syracusians comming out of the Citie with their whole power, into a Meddow
by the side of the Riuer Anapus, betimes in the morning, (for Hermocrates and
his fellow-Commanders had already receiued their charge) were there taking a
view of their Armes; but rst they had set apart 700. men of Armes vnder the
leading of Diomilus, an Outlaw of Andros, both to guard Epipolae, and to be
ready together quickly, vpon any other occasion wherein there might be vse of
their seruice. The Athenians the day following, hauing beene already mustred,
came from Catana with their whole Forces, and landed their Souldiers at a place
called Leon (6 or 7 furlongs from Epipolae) vnperceiued, and layed their Nauie
at Anchor vnder Thapsus. Thapsus is almost an Iland, lying out into the Sea, and
ioyned to the Land with a narrow Isthmus, not farre from Syracuse, neither by
Sea nor Land. And the nauall Forces of the Athenians hauing made a Palizado
acrosse the said Isthmus, lay there quiet. But the Land-Souldiers marched at
high speed toward Epipolae, & gat vp by Euryalus, before the Syracusians could

come to them from out of the Meddow, where they were mustering.
Neuerthelesse they came on, euery one with what speed hee could, not onely
Diomilus with his 700, but the rest also. They had no lesse to goe from the
Meddow, then 25 Furlongs, before they could reach the Enemy: The Syracusians
therefore comming vp in this manner, and thereby defeated in Battell at
Epipolae) withdrew themselues into the Citie. But Diomilus was            
slaine, and 300 of the rest. The Athenians after this    Diomilus slaine.
erected a Trophie, and deliuered to the Syracusians
the bodies of their dead vnder Truce, and came downe the next day to the Citie.
But when none came out to giue them battell, they retired againe, and built a
Fort vpon Labdalum, in the very brinke of the            The Athenians fortiﬁe
precipices of Epipolae; on the side that looketh         Labdalum.

towards Megara, for a place to keepe their Vtensiles and Money in, when they
went out either to ght or to worke.

Not long after, there came vnto them from Egesta three hundred Horsemen:
and from the Siculi, namely the Naxians and some others, about one hundred:
and the Athenians had of their owne two hundred and fty; for which they had
Horses, part from the Egestaeans and Cataneans, and part they bought. So that
they had together in the whole, sixe hundred and ftie Horsemen. Hauing put a
Guard into Labdalum, the Athenians went downe to * Syca, and raised there a
Wall in circle, very quickly, so that they strooke a      * Tyca, or Tycha, it was a
terrour into the Syracusians with the celerity of the     Temple of Fortune, part of the
                                                          City of Syracusa.
worke. Who therefore comming forth, intended to
haue giuen them Battell, and no longer to haue neglected the matter. But when
the Armies were one set against the other, the Syracusian Generals perceiuing
their owne to bee in disarray, and not easily to bee embattailed, led them againe
into the Citie, saue onely a certaine part of their Horsemen, which staying, kept
the Athenians from carrying of Stone, and straggling farre abroad from their
Campe. But the Athenians with one Squadron of men of Armes, together with
their whole number of Horse, charged the Horsemen of the Syracusians, and
put them to ight. Of whom they slew a part, and erected a Trophy for this
Battell of Horse.

The next day the Athenians fell to worke vpon their The Athenians begin to build on
Wall, to the North side of their circular Wall, some      the North side of the
                                                          Fortiﬁcation wherein they lay,
building, and some fetching Stone and Timber, which the Wall wherewith to beg t  ●●

they still laid down toward the place called Trogilus, the City.
in the way by which the Wall should come, with the
shortest compasse from the great Hauen to the other Sea. The Syracusians, by
the perswasion of their Generals, and principally of Hermocrates, intended not
to hazard Battell with their whole power against the Athenians any more, but
thought t rather in the way where the Athenians were to bring                
their wall, to raise a counterwall, which if they could but doe, before the wall of
the Athenians came on, it would exclude their further building. And if the
Athenians should set vpon them as they were doing it, they might send part of
the Army to defend it, and pre-occupate the accesses to it with a Palizado. And if
they would come with their whole Army to hinder them, then must they also be
forced to let their owne worke stand still. Therefore     The Syracusians make a crosse
they came out, and beginning at their owne Citie,         wall in their way.

drew a crosse wall beneath the circular Forti cation of the Athenians, and set
woodden Turrets vpon it, made of the Oliue-trees, which they felled in the
ground belonging to the Temple. The Athenian Nauy was not yet come about
into the great Hauen, from Thapsus, but the Syracusians were masters of the
places neere the Sea; and the Athenians brought their prouision to the Army
from Thapsus, by land.

The Syracusians, when they thought both their Palizadoe, and wall su cient,
and considering that the Athenians came not to empeach them in the worke, as
they that feared to diuide their Army, and to be therby the more easie to be
fought withall, & that also hasted to make an end of their owne wall, wherewith
to encompasse the Citie, left one squadron for a guard of their workes, and
retyred with the rest, into the Citie. And the Athenians cut o the Pipes of their
Conduits, by which their water to drinke was conueyed vnder-ground into the
Towne.

And hauing obserued also, that about noone the Syracusians kept within their
Tents, and that some of them were also gone into the Citie, and that such as
were remaining at the Palizado, kept but negligent watch, they commanded
three hundred chosen men of Armes, and certaine other picked out and Armed
from amongst the vnarmed, to runne suddenly to that Counterwall of the
Syracusians. The rest of the Army diuided in two, went one part with one of the
Generals, to stop the succour which might be sent from the Citie, and the other
with the other Generall, to the Palizado, next to the Gate of the Counterwall.
The three hundred assaulted and tooke the Palizado; the guard whereof
forsaking it, ed within the wall into the Temple ground, and with them entred
also their pursuers, but after they were in, were beaten out againe by 
the Syracusians, and some slaine, both of the Argiues and Athenians, but not
many. Then the whole Army went backe together, and pulled downe the wall,
and plucked vp the Palizado, the Pales whereof they carried with them to their
Campe, and erected a Trophie. The next day, the           〈…〉 build from their owne
Athenians beginning at their Circular wall, built         Fortiﬁcation, to the 〈…〉, towards
                                                          the great Hauen.
onwards to that Cragge ouer the Marishes, which on
that part of Epipolae, looketh to the great Hauen, and by which, the way to the
Hauen, for their wall to come through the Plaine and Marish, was the shortest.
As this was doing, the Syracusians came out againe, and made another Palizado,
beginning at the Citie, through the middle of the Marish, and a Ditch at the side
of it, to exclude the Athenians from bringing their wall to the Sea. But the
Athenians, when they had nished their worke, as farre as to the Cragge,
assaulted the Palizado and Trench of the Syracusians againe. And hauing
commanded their Gallies to be brought about from Thapsus, into the great
Hauen of Syracusa, about breake of day, went straight downe into the Plaine;
and passing through the Marish, where the ground was Clay, and rmest, and
partly vpon Boards, and Planckes, won both the            The Athenians take their
Trench and Palizado, all but a small part, betimes in     Palizado againe.

the morning, and the rest not long after. And here also they fought; and the
victory fell to the Athenians. The Syracusians, those of the Right-wing, ed to
the City, and they of the Left, to the Riuer. The three hundred chozen
Athenians, desiring to cut o their passage, marched at high speed towards the *

Bridge; but the Syracusians fearing to be preuented        * [...]
(for most of the Horsemen were in this number) set
vpon these three hundred, and putting them to ight, draue them vpon the right
Wing of the Athenians, and following, a righted also the formost guard of the
Wing. Lamachus seeing this, came to aide them with a few Archers from the left
Wing of their owne, and with all the Argiues; and passing ouer a certaine Ditch,
hauing but few with him, was deserted and slaine,          Lamachus slaine.
with some sixe or seuen more. These the Syracusians
hastily snatched vp, and carried into a place of safety, beyond the Riuer. And
when they saw the rest of the Athenian Army comming towards them, they
departed. In the meane time they that ed at rst to the Citie, seeing 
how things went, tooke heart againe, and reimbattailed themselues against the
same Athenians that stood ranged against them before, and withall sent a
certaine portion of their Armie against the circular Forti cation of the
Athenians vpon Epipolae; supposing to nde it               Nicias assaulted in his Campe,
without defendants, and so to take it. And they tooke defendeth it.
and demolished the out-worke tenne * Plethers in           * ea Plethers, 680 〈…〉 Plether
                                                              ●                ▪

length; but the Circle it selfe was defended by Nicias, containing, 〈◊〉 to Suidas, 68.
                                                           cubits.
who chanced to be left within it for in rmity. For he
commanded his seruants to set re on all the Engines, and whatsoeuer woodden
matter lay before the Wall, knowing there was no other possible meanes to saue
themselues, for want of men. And it fell out accordingly. For by reason of this
  re, they came no neerer, but retired. For the Athenians hauing by this time
beaten backe the Enemie below, were comming vp to relieue the Circle; and
their Gallies withall (as is before mentioned) were going about from Thapsus,
into the great Hauen. Which they aboue perceiuing, speedily made away, they,
and the whole Armie of the Syracusians, into the Citie; with opinion that they
could no longer hinder them, with the strength they now had, from bringing
their Wall through vnto the Sea. After this the Athenians erected a Trophie, and
deliuered to the Syracusians their dead, vnder Truce; and they on the other side
deliuered to the Athenians, the body of Lamachus, and of the rest slaine with
him. And their whole Armie, both Land and Sea-forces being now together,
they began to incloze the Syracusians with a double Wall, from Epipolae and the

Rockes, vnto the Sea-side. The necessaries of the Army were supplyed from all
parts of Italy: and many of the Siculi, who before stood aloofe to obserue the
way of Fortune, tooke part now with the Athenians, to whom came also three
Penteconteri [long-boates of 50. Oares apiece] from Hetruria; and diuers other
wayes their hopes were nourished. For the Syracusians also, when there came no
helpe from Peloponnesus, made no longer account to subsist by Warre, but
conferred, both amongst themselues, and with Nicias, of composition: for
Lamachus being dead, the sole command of the Armie was in him. And though
nothing were concluded, yet many things (as was likely with men perplexed, and
now more straitely besieged then before) were propounded vnto Nicias, and
more amongst themselues. And the present ill successe, had also bred 
some iealousie amongst them, one of another. And         The Syracusians change their
they discharged the Generals, vnder whose conduct        Generals.

this hapned, as if their harme had come, either from their vnluckinesse, or from
their per diousnesse, and chose Heraclides, Eucles, and Tellias in their places.

Whilest this passed, Gylippus of Lacedaemon, and the Gylippus despaireth of Sicily,
Corinthian Gallies were already at Leucas, purposing and seekes to saue Italy.
with all speed to goe ouer into Sicily. But when terrible reports came vnto them
from all hands, agreeing in an vntruth, That Syracuse was already quite enclosed,
Gylippus had hope of Sicily no longer, but desiring to assure Italy, he, and
Pythen, a Corinthian, with two Laconicke and two Corinthian Gallies, with all
speede crossed the Ionique Sea to Tarentum. And the Corinthians were to man
tenne Gallies of their owne, two of Leucas, and three of Ambracia, and come
after. Gylippus went rst from Tarentum to Thuria, as Ambassadour, by his
Fathers right, who was free of the Citie of Tarentum; but not winning them to
his side, hee put out againe, and sailed along the Coast of Italy. Passing by the
Terinaean Gulfe, hee was put from the shore (by a wind which in that quarter
bloweth strongly against the North) and driuen into the maine Sea; and after
another extreme Tempest, brought in againe, into Tarentum, where he drew vp
such of his Gallies as had beene hurt by the weather, and repaired them.

Nicias hearing that hee came, contemned the small       Nicias despiseth the comming of
number of his Gallies, as also the Thurians had before, Gylippus.
supposing them furnished as for Piracie, and appointed no Watch for them yet.

About the same time of this Summer, the Lacedaemonians inuaded the
Territory of Argos, they and their Confederates, and wasted a great part of their
Land. And the Athenians ayded the Argiues with thirty Gallies, which most
apparantly broke the Peace betweene them and the Lacedaemonians. For before,
they went out from Pylus with the Argiues and Mantineans, but in the nature of
Free-booters; and that also not into Laconia, but other parts of Peloponnesus.
Nay, when the Argiues haue often entreated them, but onely to Land with their
Armes in Laconia, and hauing wasted neuer so little of their Territory, to
returne, they would not. But now, vnder the Conduct of                 
Pythodorus, Laespodius, and Demaratus, they landed in the Territory of
Epidaurus Limera, and in Prasia, and there and in other places wasted the
Countrey, and gaue vnto the Lacedaemonians a most iusti able cause to ght
against the Athenians. After this, the Athenians being departed from Argos with
their Gallies, and the Lacedaemonians gone likewise home, the Argiues inuaded
Phliasia, and when they had wasted part of their Territory, and killed some of
their men, returned.

             7. THE SEVENTH BOOKE OF
             THE HISTORIE OF
             THVCYDIDES.
             The principall Contents.
Gylippus arriueth at Syracuse, checketh the fortune of the               
Athenians, and cutteth o their workes with a Counterwall. The
Lacedaemonians inuade Attica, and forti e Decelea. The Confederates of each
side are sollicited for supplies to be sent to Syracuse. Two battels fought in the
great Hauen; in the rst of which the Syracusians are beaten, in the second,
superiour; Demosthenes arriueth with a new Army, and attempting the workes
of the enemy in Epipolae by night, is repulsed with great slaughter of his men.
They ght the third time, and the Syracusians hauing the Victory, blocke vp the
Hauen with Boats. A Catalogue of the Confederates on each side. They ght
againe at the Barres of the Hauen, where the Athenians losing their Gallies,
prepare to march away by land. In their march they are a icted, beaten, and
  nally subdued by the Syracusians; The death of Nicias and Demosthenes, and
misery of the Captiues in the Quarry; which hapned in the ninteenth yeere of
this Warre.

GYlippus, and Pythen, hauing repaired their Gallies, Gylippus and Pythen resolue to
from Tarentum, went along the Coast to Locri              goe to Syracuse.

Epizephyrij. And vpon certaine intelligence now, that Syracuse was not wholly
enclozed, but that comming with an Army, there was entrance still by Epipolae,
they consulted whether it were better to take Sicily on their right hand, and
aduenture into the Towne by Sea, or on the left, and so rst to goe to 
Himera, and then taking along both them and as many other as they could get to
their side, to goe into it by Land. And it was resolued to goe to Himera; the
rather, because the foure Attique Gallies, which Nicias (though he contemned

them before) had now when he heard they were at Locri, sent to wait for them,
were not arriued yet at Rhegium. Hauing preuented this guard, they crossed the
Streight, and touching at Rhegium, and Messana by the way, came to Himera.
Being there, they preuailed so farre with the Himeraeans, that they not onely
followed them to the War themselues, but also           They tooke the ayde of 〈…〉 of
furnished with Armour, such of Gylippus and             Himera.

Pythens Mariners as wanted. For at Himera they had drawne their Gallies to
Land. They likewise sent to the Selenuntians, to meet them at a place assigned
with their whole Army. The G●loans also, and other of the Siculi, promised to
send them Forces, though not many; being much the willinger to come to the
side, both for that Archonidas was lately dead, who raigning ouer some of the
Siculi in those parts, and being a man of no meane power, was friend to the
Athenians, and also for that Gylippus seemed to come from Lacedaemon with a
good will to the businesse. Gylippus taking with him▪ of his owne Mariners,
and Sea-Souldiers, for whom he had gotten Armes, at the most 700. and
Himeraeans with Armour, and without, in the whole 1000. and ●00 Horse, and
some Light-armed Selinuntians, with some few Horse of the G●loans, and of
the Siculi in all, about 1000. marched with these towards Syracuse.

In the meane time, the Corinthians, with the rest of 〈…〉 Gallies 〈…〉, make 〈…〉, and
their Gallies, putting to Sea from Leucas, made after, 〈…〉 ﬁrst, 〈◊〉 the 〈◊〉 from
                                                          compounding.
as they were, euery one with what speed he could, and
Gongylus, one of the Corinthian Commanders, though the last that set forth,
arriued rst at Syracuse with one Gallie, and but a little before the comming of
Gylippus. And nding them ready to call an Assembly about an end of the
Warre, he hindred them from it, and put them into heart, relating, both how the
rest of the Gallies were comming, and also Gylippus the sonne of Cleandridas for
Generall, sent vnto them by the Lacedaemonians. With this the Syracusians were
recon rmed, and went presently out with their whole Army to meet him; for
they vnderstood now that he was neere. He, hauing taken Iëgas, a Fort in his way
as he passed through the Territory of the Siculi, and imbattelled his 
men, commeth to Epipolae, and getting vp by               Gylippus 〈…〉.
Euryalus, where also the Athenians had gotten vp

before, marched together with the Syracusians, towards the wall of the
Athenians. At the time when he arriued, the Athenians had nished a double
wall, of seuen or eight furlongs towards the great Hauen, saue onely a little next
the Sea, which they were yet at worke on. And on the other side of their Circle,
towards Trogilus, and the other Sea, the Stones were for the most part laid ready
vpon the place, and the worke was left in some places halfe, and in some wholly
 nished. So great was the danger that Sycrause was now brought into.

The Athenians, at the sodaine comming on of Gylippus, though somewhat
troubled at rst, yet put themselues in order to receiue Gylippus oﬀereth the Athenians
him. And he, making a stand when he came neere,           ﬁue dayes Truce to be gone in.

sent a Herald to them, saying, That if they would abandon Sicily within ue
dayes, with bagge and baggage, he was content to giue them Truce. Which the
Athenians contemning, sent him away without any answer. After this, they were
putting themselues into order of battell, one against another; but Gylippus
  nding the Syracusians troubled, and not easily falling into their rankes, led
backe his Army in a more open ground. Nicias led not the Athenians out against
him, but lay still, at his owne Forti cation. And Gylippus seeing he came not vp,
withdrew his Army, into the top called Temenites, where he lodged all night.
The next day, he drew out the greatest part of his        The Syracusians win
Army, and imbattelled them before the Forti cation Labdalum.
of the Athenians, that they might not send succour to any other place, but a part
also, they sent to the Fort of Labdalum, and tooke it, and slew all those they
found within it. For the place was out of sight to the Athenians. The same day
the Syracusians tooke also an Athenian Gally, as it entred into the great Hauen.

After this, the Syracusians, and their Confederates    The Syracusians build a wall
began a wall through Epipolae, from the City towards vpwards, through Epipolae, to
                                                       stop the proceeding of the Wall
the single crosse wall vpwards; that the Athenians,    of the Athenians.
vnlesse they could hinder it, might be excluded from
bringing their owne wall any further on. And the Athenians by this time, hauing
made an end of their wall to the Sea, were come vp againe; and Gylippus (for
some part of the wall was but weake) rising with his Army by night, 

went to assault it; but the Athenians also knowing it (for they lodged all night
without the wall) went presently to releeue it; which Gylippus perceiuing, againe
retired. And the Athenians, when they had built it higher, kept the watch in this
part themselues, and diuided the rest of the Wall to the charge of their
Confederates. Also it seemed good to Nicias to forti e The Athenians fortiﬁe
the place called Plemmyrium, (it is a Promontory ouer Plemmyrium.
ouer against the Citie, which shooting into the entrance of the great Hauen,
streightneth the mouth of the same) which forti ed, he thoght, would facilitate
the bringing in of necessaries to the Army. For by this meanes, their Gallies
might ride neerer to the * Hauen of the Syracusians, * Vi 〈◊〉 Hauen.
                                                                ●    ▪

and not vpon euery motion of the Nauy of the
enemies, to be to come out against them▪ as they were before, from the bottome
of the [great] Hauen. And he had his mind set chie y now, vpon the Warre by
Sea, seeing his hopes by Land deminished, since the arriuall of Gylippus. Hauing
therefore drawne his Army, and Gallies to that place, he built about it three
Forti cations, wherein he placed his baggage, and where now also lay at Road
both his great vessels of Carriage, and the nimblest of his Gallies. Hereupon
principally ensued the rst occasion of the great losse of his Sea-Souldiers. For
hauing but little water, and that farre to fetch, and his Mariners going out also to
fetch in wood, they were continually intercepted by the Syracusian Horsemen
that were masters of the Field. For the third part of the Syracusian Cauallery,
were quartered in a little Towne called * Olympieum, * 〈…〉 Iupiter Olympius.
to keepe those in Plemmyrium, from going abroad to
spoyle the Countrey.

Nicias was aduertized moreouer of the comming of      〈◊〉 sendeth 20 Gallies 〈◊〉 lye in
the rest of the Corinthian Gallies, and sent out a    wai for the ayd comming from
                                                                ●

                                                      Peloponnesus.
guard of twenty Gallies, with order to wait for them
about Locri, and Rhegium, and the passage there, into Sicily.

Gylippus in the meane time, went on with the wall      Gylippus goeth on with his wall,
through Epipolae, vsing the Stones laid ready there by and ﬁghteth with the 〈◊〉, twice
                                                       and in the latter battell hauing
the Athenians, and withall drew out the Syracusians the Victory, he ﬁnished his wall,

and their Confederates beyond the point of the same, and 〈◊〉 excluded the proceeding
                                                          of the wall of the Athenians.
and euer as hee brought them forth, put them into
their order; and the Athenians on the other side imbattelled themselues against
them. Gylippus, when he saw his time, began the battell; and being come to
hands, they fought betweene the Forti cations of them both, where 
the Syracusians and their Confederates had no vse at all of their Horsemen. The
Syracusians and their Confederates being ouercome, and the Athenians hauing
giuen them Truce to take vp their dead, and erected a Trophie, Gylippus
assembled the Armie, and told them, That this was not theirs, but his owne fault,
who by pitching the Battell so farre within the Fortiﬁcations, had depriued them of
the vse both of their Cauallery, and Darters; and that therefore hee meant to bring
them on againe; and wished them to consider, that for Forces they were nothing
inferiour to the Enemie: and for courage, it were a thing not to be endured, that
being Peloponnesians and Doriens, they should not master, and driue out of the
Countrey, Ionians, Ilanders, and a rabble of mixed Nations.

After this, when he saw his opportunity, hee brought on the Armie againe.
Nicias and the Athenians, who thought it necessary, if not to beginne the Battell,
yet by no meanes to set light by the Wall in hand (for by this time it wanted little
of passing the point of theirs, and proceeding, would giue the Enemie
aduantage, both to winne, if hee fought, and not to ght, vnlesse hee listed) did
therefore also set forth to meete the Syracusians.

Gylippus, when hee had drawne his men of Armes further without the Walles
than hee had done before, gaue the onset. His Horsemen and Darters hee placed
vpon the Flanke of the Athenians, in ground enough, to which neither of their
Walles extended. And these Horsemen, after the ght was begunne, charging
vpon the left Wing of the Athenians next them, put them to ight; by which
meanes the rest of the Armie was by the Syracusians ouercome likewise, and
driuen headlong within their Forti cations. The night following, the
Syracusians brought vp their Wall beyond the Wall of the Athenians, so as they
could no longer hinder them, but should bee vtterly vnable, though masters of
the Field, to encloze the City.

After this, the other 12 Gallies of the Corinthians▪    The rest of the Gallies come in
                                                        from Peloponnesus, vnseene of
Ambraciotes and Leucadians, vndescryed of the
                                                        the Athenians that were set to
Athenian Gallies that lay in waite for them, entred the watch them.
Hauen, vnder the Command of Erasinedes, a
Corinthian, and helped the Syracusians to nish what remained, to the crosse
Wall.

Now Gylippus went vp and downe Sicily, raysing Forces both for Sea
and Land, and solliciting to his side all such Cities as Gylippus goeth about Sicily, and
formerly either had not beene forward, or had wholly sendeth into Peloponnesus for
                                                          more ayde.
abstained from the Warre. Other Ambassadours also,
both of the Syracusians and Corinthians, were sent to Lacedaemon and
Corinth, to procure new Forces to be transported either in Ships or Boats, or
how they could, because the Athenians had also sent to Athens for the like. In
the meane time the Syracusians both manned their Nauie, and made tryall of
themselues, as intending to take in hand that part also; and were otherwise
exceedingly encouraged.

Nicias perceiuing this, and seeing the strength of the Enemie, and his owne
necessities dayly increasing, hee also sent Messengers Nicias writeth to Athens for
to Athens, both at other times, and often, vpon the       supply, and to be ea ed of his
                                                                              ●

                                                          charge.
occasion of euery action that passed; and now
especially, as nding himselfe in danger, and that vnlesse they quickly sent for
those away that were there already, or sent a great supply vnto them, there was
no hope of safety: and fearing lest such as hee sent, through want of vtterance or
iudgement, or through desire to please the Multitude, should deliuer things
otherwise then they were, hee wrote vnto them a Letter. Conceauing that thus
the Athenians should best know his minde, whereof no part could now be
suppressed by the Messenger, and might therefore enter into deliberation vpon
true grounds.

With these Letters, and other their instructions, the Messengers tooke their
Iourney; and Nicias in the meane time, hauing a care to the well guarding of his

Campe, was wary of entring into any voluntarie dangers.

In the end of this Summer, Euetion, Generall for the The Athenians besiege
Athenians, with Perdiccas, together with many          Amphipolis.

To●acians, warring against Amphipolis, tooke not the Citie; but bringing his
Gallies about into Strymon, besieged it from the Riuer lying at Imeraeum: And
so this Summer ended.                                  The end of the eighteenth
                                                          Summer.
The next Winter, the Messengers from Nicias arriued
at Athens; and hauing spoken what they had in charge, and answered to such
questions as they were asked, they presented the Letter, which the Clerke of the
Citie, standing foorth, read vnto the Athenians, containing as       
followeth.

 THE LETTER OF NICIAS to the People
 of Athens.
 ATHENIANS, You know by many other my Letters, what hath passed
 formerly: nor is it lesse needfull for you to bee informed of the state we are in,
 and to take counsell vpon it at this present. When we had in many Battels
 beaten the Syracusians, against whom we were sent, and had built the Walles
 within which we now lye, came Gylippus a Lacedaemonian, with an Armie
 out of Peloponnesus, and also out of some of the Cities of Sicily; and in the
   rst Battell was ouercome by vs; but in the second, forced by his many
 Horsemen and Darters, we retired within our Workes. Whereupon giuing
 ouer our walling vp of the Citie, for the multitude of our enemies, we now sit
 still. Nor can we indeed haue the vse of our whole Army, because some part of
 the men of Armes are employed to defend our Walles. And they haue built a
 single Wall vp to vs, so that now we haue no more meanes to encloze it, except
 one should come with a great Army, and winne that crosse-wall of theirs by
 assault. And so it is, that wee who seemed to besiege others, are besieged our

selues, for so much as concerneth the Land. For wee cannot goe farre abroad
by reason of their Cauallery. They haue also sent Ambassadours for another
Armie into Peloponnesus; and Gylippus is gone amongst the Cities of Sicily,
both to sollicite such to ioyne with him in the Warre, as haue not yet stirred;
and of others to get, if he can, both more Land-souldiers, and more munition
for their Nauie. For they intend (as I haue beene informed) both to assault our
Wall by Land with their Armie, and to make tryall what they are able to doe
with their Nauy by Sea. For though our Fleet (which they also haue heard)
were vigorous at rst, both for soundnesse of the Gallies, and entirenesse of
the men; yet our Gallies are now soaked, with lying so long in the water, and
our men consumed. For we want the meanes to hale aland our Gallies, and
trim them, because the Gallies of the Enemie, as good as ours, and more in
number, doe keepe vs in a continuall expectation of assault, which they
manifestly endeuour. And seeing it is in their owne choice to attempt or not,
they haue therefore liberty to dry their Gallies at their pleasure. For they lye
not, as we, in attendance vpon others. Nay, we could hardly doe it, though we
had many Gallies spare, and were not constrained, as now, to               
keepe watch vpon them with our whole number. For should we abate, though
but a little, of our obseruance, we should want prouision, which as we are,
being to passe so neere their Citie, is brought in with di culty; and hence it is,
that our Mariners, both formerly haue beene, and are now wasted. For our
Mariners, fetching wood and water, and forraging farre o , are intercepted by
the Horsemen; and our Slaues, now wee are on equall termes, runne ouer to
the Enemie. As for strangers, some of them hauing come aboard by
constraint, returne presently to their Cities; and others hauing beene leuied at
  rst with great wages, and thinking they came to enrich themselues rather
then to ght, now they see the Enemie make so strong resistance, both
otherwise beyond their expectation, and especially, with their Nauie, partly
take pretext to bee gone, that they may serue the Enemie, and partly, (Sicily
beeing large) shift themselues away, euery one as hee can. Some there are also,
who hauing bought heere * Hyccarian slaues, haue * These were they, which Nicias
gotten the Captaines of Gallies to accept of them in 〈…〉 the taking of Hyccara,
                                                          made sale of, himselfe.
the roome of themselues, and thereby destroyed the

 purity of our Nauall strength. To you I write, who know how small a time any
 Fleet continueth in the height of vigour, and how few of the Mariners are
 skilfull, both how to hasten the course of a Gallie, and how to containe the
 Oare. But of all, my greatest trouble is this, that being Generall, I can neither
 make them doe better, (for your natures are hard to be gouerned) nor get
 Mariners in any other place, (which the Enemy can doe from many places) but
 must of necessity haue them from whence wee brought both these we haue,
 and those we haue lost. For our now Confederate Cities, Naxus and Catana,
 are not able to supply vs. Had the Enemie but this one thing more, that the
 Townes of Italy, that now send vs prouision, seeing what estate we are in, and
 you not helpe vs, would turne to them, the Warre were at an end, and wee
 expugned, without another stroke. I could haue written to you other things,
 more pleasing then these, but not more pro table, seeing it is necessary for
 you to know certainely the a aires heere, when you goe to councell vpon
 them; withall, (because I know your natures to bee such, as though you loue
 to heare the best, yet afterwards when things fall not out accordingly, you will
 call in question them that write it) I thought best to write the truth for my
 owne safeties sake. And now thinke thus, that though we haue carried our
 selues, both Captaines and Souldiers, in that for which we came at rst hither,
 vnblameably; yet since all Sicily is vnited against vs, and another Army
 expected out of Peloponnesus, you must resolue (for those we haue here, are
 not enow for the Enemies present forces) eyther to send for these away, or to
 send hither another Army, both of Land and Sea-souldiers, no             
 lesse the● the former, and money, not a little; and also a Generall to succeed
 me who am able no longer to stay heere, being troubled with the stone in the
 Kidney. I must craue your pardon. I haue done you many good seruices in the
 conducts of your Armies when I had my health. What you will doe, doe in the
 very beginning of Spring, and delay it not. For the Enemie will soone haue
 furnished himselfe of his Sicilian aydes; And though those from Peloponnesus
 will bee later, yet if you looke not to it, they will get hither partly vnseene, as
 before, and partly by preuenting you with speed.

These were the Contents of the Letter of Nicias.

The Athenians, when they had heard it read, though The Athenians conclude to send
they released not Nicias of his Charge, yet for the      a new Army to Syracuse.

present till such time as others chosen to be in Commission might arriue, they
ioyned with him two of those that were already in the Armie, Menander and
Euthydemon, to the end that hee might not sustaine the whole burthen alone in
his sicknesse. They concluded likewise to send another Armie, aswell for the Sea
as the Land, both of Athenians enrolled, and of their Confederates. And for
fellow-Generals with Nicias, they elected Demosthenes the sonne of Alcisthenes,
and Eurymedon the sonne of Thucles. Eurymedon they sent away presently for
Sicily, about the time of the Winter Solstice, with tenne Gallies, and twenty
Talents of Siluer, to tell them there, that ayde was comming, and that there was
care taken of them. But Demosthenes staying, made preparation for the Voyage,
to set out early the next Spring; and sent vnto the Confederates, appointing
what Forces they should prouide, and to furnish himselfe amongst them, with
Money, and Gallies, and men of Armes.

The Athenians sent also twenty Gallies about Peloponnesus, to watch that none
should goe ouer into Sicily, from Corinth or             They send twenty Gallies to
Peloponnesus. For the Corinthians, after the             Naupactus, to keep the
                                                         Corinthians from transporting
Ambassadours were come to them, and had brought their forces into Sicily.
newes of the amendment of the a aires in Sicily,
thought it was well that they had sent thither those other Gallies before; but
now they were encouraged a great deale more, and prepared men of Armes to be
transported into Sicily in Ships, and the Lacedaemonians did the like for the rest
of Peloponnesus. The Corinthians manned ue and twenty Gallies, to present
Battell to the Fleet that kept watch at Naupactus, that the Ships with 
the men of Armes, whilest the Athenians attended these Gallies so embattailed
against them, might passe by vnhindered.

The Lacedaemonians, as they intended before, and           The Lacedaemonians prepare to
being also instigated to it by the Syracusians and         inuade Attica, and fortiﬁe
                                                           Decelea, supposing the
Corinthians, vpon aduertisement now of the                 Athenians to haue broken the
Athenians new supply for Sicily, prepared likewise to      Peace.

inuade Attica, thereby to diuert them. And Alcibiades also importunately vrged
the fortifying of Decelea, and by no meanes to warre remissely. But the
Lacedaemonians were heartned thereunto principally, because they thought the
Athenians hauing in hand a double War, one against them, and another against
the Sicilians, would be the easilier pulled downe; and because they conceiued the
breach of the last Peace was in themselues; for in the former Warre, the iniury
proceeded from their own side, in that the Thebans had entred Plataea in time of
peace, And because also, whereas it was inserted in the former Articles, that
Armes should not bee carried against such as would stand to tryall of
Iudgement, they had refused such tryall when the Athenians o ered it. And they
thought all their misfortunes had deseruedly befalne them for that cause;
remembring amongst others, the calamity at Pylus. But when the Athenians
with a Fleet of thirty Sayle had spoiled part of the Territory of Epidaurus, and of
Prasiae▪ and other places, and their Souldiers that lay in Garrison in Pylus, had
taken bootie in the Countrey about; And seeing that as often as there arose any
controuersie touching any doubtfull point of the Articles, the Lacedaemonians
o ering tryall by Iudgement, they refused it; Then indeed, the Lacedaemonians
conceiuing the Athenians to bee in the same fault that themselues had beene in
before, betooke themselues earnestly to the Warre. And this Winter they sent
about vnto their Confederates, to make ready Iron, and all Instruments of
Forti cation. And for the ayde they were to transport in Ships to the Sicilians,
they both made prouision amongst themselues, and compelled the rest of
Peloponnesus to doe the like. So ended this Winter, and the eighteenth Yeere of
the Warre, written by Thucydides.

The next Spring, in the very beginning, earlier then    THE NINETEENTH YEERE.
euer before, the Lacedaemonians and their
Confederates entred with their Armie into Attica,       The Peloponnesians inuade
vnder the command of Agis the sonne of  Attica, and fortiﬁe Decelea.
Archidamus, their King. And rst they wasted the Champaigne Countrey, and
then went in hand with the Wall at Decelea, diuiding the worke amongst the
Armie according to their Cities. This Decelea is from the Citie of Athens, at the
most, but 120. Furlongs, and about as much, or a little more from Boeotia. This

Fort they made in the plaine, and in the most opportune place that could bee, to
annoy the Athenians, and in sight of the Citie. Now the Peloponnesians and
their Confederates in Attica went on with their forti cation.

They in Peloponnesus sent away their Ships with the men of Armes about the
same time into Sicily. Of which, the Lacedaemonians, The Peloponnesians send away
out of the best of their Helotes, and men made newly their men of Armes for Sicily.
free, sent in the whole sixe hundred, and Eccritus a Spartan for Commander.
And the Boeotians three hundred, vnder the Conduct of Xenon and Nicon,
Thebans, and Hegessander a Thespian. And these set foorth rst, and put to Sea
at Taenarus in Laconia. After them a little, the Corinthians sent away ue
hundred more, part from the Citie it selfe of Corinth, and part mercenarie
Arcadians, and Alexarchus a Corinthian for Captaine. The Sicyonians also sent
two hundred with them that went from Corinth, and Sargeus a Sicyonian for
Captaine. Now the 25 Corinthian Gallies that were manned in Winter, lay
opposite to the twenty Gallies of Athens which were at Naupactus, till such time
as the men of Armes in the Ships from Peloponnesus might get away; for which
purpose they were also set out at rst, that the Athenians might not haue their
mindes vpon these Ships, so much as vpon the Gallies.

In the meane time also, the Athenians, whilest          The Athenians send out
Decelea was fortifying, in the beginning of the Spring, Demosthenes toward Sicily.
sent twenty Gallies about Peloponnesus, vnder the command of Caricles the
sonne of Apollodorus, with order when hee came to Argos, to take aboord the
men of Armes which the Argiues were to send them, according to League; and
sent away Demosthenes (as they intended before) into Sicily, with threescore
Gallies of Athens, and ue of Chios, and one thousand two hundred men of
Armes of the Roll of Athens, and as many of the Ilanders as they could get,
prouided by their subiect Confederates of all other necessaries for the Warre: But
he had order to ioyne rst with Charicles, and helpe him to make Warre rst
vpon Laconia. So Demosthenes went to Aegina, and stayed there            
both for the remnant of his owne Army, if any were left behind, and for
Charicles till he had taken aboord the Argiues.

In Sicily, about the same time of the Spring, Gylippus Gylippus perswadeth the
also returned to Syracuse, bringing with him from the Syracusians to ﬁght by Sea.
Cities hee had dealt withall, as great forces as seuerally hee could get from them;
And hauing assembled the Syracusians, he told them, that they ought to man as
many Gallies as they could, and make triall of a battell by Sea, and that he hoped
thereby to performe somewhat to the bene t of the Warre, which should be
worthy the danger. Hermocrates also was none of the least meanes of getting
them to vndertake the Athenians with their Nauy, who told them, That neither
the Athenians had this skill by Sea, hereditary, or from euerlasting, but were more
Inland-men then the Syracusians, and forced to become Sea-men by the Medes:
And that to daring men, such as the Athenians are, they are most formidable that
are as daring against them. For wherewith they terriﬁe their neighbours, which is
not alwayes the aduantage of power, but boldnesse of enterprizing, with the same
shall they i● like manner be terriﬁed by their enemies. He knew it, he said,
certainely, that the Syracusians by their vnexpected daring to encounter the
Athenian Nauy, would get more aduantage in respect of the feare it would cause,
then the Athenians should endammage them by their oddes of skill. He bade
them therefore, to make triall of their Nauy, and to be afraid no longer. The
Syracusians on these perswasions of Gylippus and Hermocrates, and others, if
any were, became now extremely desirous to ght by Sea, and presently manned
their Gallies.

Gylippus, when the Nauy was ready, drew out his         The Syracusians win
whole power of Land Souldiers in the beginning of       Plemmyrium, but are beaten by
                                                        Sea.
night, meaning to goe himselfe and assault the
Forti cations in Plemmyrium. Withall, the Gallies of the Syracusians, by
appointment, 35 of them came vp towards it, out of the great Hauen, and 45
more came about out of the little Hauen, where also was their Arsenall, with
purpose to ioyne with those within, and to goe together to Plemmyrium, that
the Athenians might be troubled on both sides. But the Athenians hauing
quickly manned 60 Gallies to oppose them; with 25 of them, they fought with
the 35 of the Syracusians in the great Hauen, and with the rest went 
to meete those that came about from the little Hauen. And these fought

presently before the mouth of the great Hauen, and held each other to it for a
long time; one side endeuouring to force, the other to defend the entrance. In
the meane time Gylippus (the Athenians in Plemmyrium being now come
downe to the water side, and hauing their mindes          The Syracusians winne the
busied vpon the ght of the Gallies) betimes in the        workes of the Athenians in
                                                          Plemmyrium.
morning, and on a sudden assaulted the Forti cations,
before they could come backe againe to defend them; and possessed rst the
greatest, and afterwards the two lesser: for they that watched in these, when they
saw the greatest so easily taken, durst stay no longer. They that ed vpon the
losing of the rst Wall, and put themselues into Boats, and into a certaine Ship,
got hardly into the Campe; for whilest the Syracusians in the great Hauen, had
yet the better in the ght vpon the water, they gaue them chase with one nimble
Gally. But by that time that the other two Walles were taken, the Syracusians
vpon the water were ouercome, and the Athenians which ed from those two
Walles, got to their Campe with more ease. For those Syracusian Gallies that
fought before the Hauens mouth, hauing beaten backe the Athenians, entred in
disorder, and falling foule one on another, gaue away the Victorie vnto the
Athenians, who put to ight not onely them, but also The Athenians 〈◊〉 victory by
those other, by whom they had before beene                〈◊〉.

ouercome within the Hauen, and sunke eleuen Gallies of the Syracusians, and
slew most of the men aboord them, saue onely the men of three Gallies, whom
they tooke aliue. Of their owne Gallies they lost onely three.

When they had drawne to Land the wrecke of the Syracusian Gallies, and
erected a Trophie in the little Iland ouer against Plemmyrium, they returned to
their Campe. The Syracusians, though such were their successe in the Battell by
Sea, yet they wonne the Forti cation in Plemmyrium, and set vp three Trophies,
for euery Wall one. One of the two Walles last taken, they demolished, but two
they repayred, and kept with a Garrison.

At the taking of these Walles, many men were slaine, and many taken aliue, and
their goods, which all together was a great matter, were all taken. For the
Athenians vsing these Workes for their storehouse, there was in them 

much wealth and Victuall, belonging vnto Merchants, and much vnto
Captaines of Gallies: For there were Sayles within it for fortie Gallies, besides
other furniture, and three Gallies drawne to Land. And this losse of
Plemmyrium was it that most and principally empayred the Athenians Army.
For the entrance of their prouision was now no longer safe, (for the Syracusians
lying against them there with their Gallies, kept them out) and nothing could be
brought in vnto them but by ght, and the Armie besides was thereby otherwise
terri ed and deiected.

After this the Syracusians sent out twelue Gallies, vnder the command of
Agatharchus a Syracusian. Of which one carried Ambassadours into
Peloponnesus, to declare what hope they had now of their businesse, and to
instigate them to a sharper Warre in Attica. The other eleuen went into Italy,
vpon intelligence of certaine Vessels laden with commodities comming to the
Athenians Army: which also they met with, and destroyed most of them; and
the Timber which for building of Gallies, the Athenians had ready framed, they
burned in the Territory of Caulonia.

After this they went to Locri, and riding heere, there came vnto them one of the
Ships that carried the men of Armes of the Thespians; whom the Syracusians,
tooke aboord, & went homeward by the Coast. The Athenians that watched for
them with 20 Gallies at Megara, tooke one of them, and the men that were in
her, but could not take the rest: So that they escaped through to Syracuse.

There was also a light Skirmish in the Hauen of Syracuse, about the Piles which
the Syracusians had driuen downe before their old Harbour, to the end that the
Gallies might ride within, and the Athenians not annoy them by assault. The
Athenians hauing brought to the place a Ship of huge greatnesse, forti ed with
Woodden Turrets, and couered against Fire, caused certaine men with little
Boats, to goe and fasten Cords vnto the Piles, and so broke them vp with
craning. Some also the Diuers did cut vp with Sawes. In the meane time the
Syracusians from the Harbour, and they from the great Ship, shot at each other,
till in the end, the greatest part of the Piles were by the Athenians 

gotten vp. But the greatest di culty was to get vp those Piles which lay hidden;
for some of them they had so driuen in, as that they came not aboue the Water.
So that hee that should come neere, was in danger to bee throwne vpon them as
vpon a Rocke. But these also for reward the Diuers went downe, and sawed
asunder. But the Syracusians continually draue down other in their stead. Other
deuices they had against each other, (as was not vnlikely betweene Armies so
neere opposed) and many light Skirmishes passed, and attempts of all kindes
were put in execution.

The Syracusians moreouer sent Ambassadours, some Corinthians, some
Ambraciotes, and some Lacedaemonians, vnto the Cities about them, to let
them know, that they had wonne Plemmyrium, and that in the Battell by Sea,
they were not ouercome by the strength of the Enemie, but by their own
disorder; and also to shew what hope they were in, in other respects, and to
intreat their ayd both of Sea and Land-forces, forsomuch as the Athenians
expecting another Army, if they would send ayde before it came, whereby to
ouerthrow that which they had now there, the Warre would be at an end. Thus
stood the a aires of Sicily.

Demosthenes, as soone as his forces which he was to Demosthenes in his way to Sicily,
carry to the succour of those in Sicily, were gotten     fortiﬁeth a necke of Land in
                                                         Laconia.
together, put to Sea from Aegina, and sayling into
Peloponnesus, ioyned with Charicles, and the 30. Gallies that were with him.
And hauing taken aboord some men of Armes of the Argiues, came to Laconia,
and rst wasted part of the Territory of Epidaurus Limera. From thence, going
to that part of Laconia which is ouer against the Iland Cythera, (where is a
Temple of Apollo) they wasted a part of the Countrey, and forti ed an Isthmus
there, both that the Helots might haue a refuge in it, running away from the
Lacedaemonians, and that Freebooters from thence, as from Pylus, might fetch
in Prizes from the Territory adioyning. As soone as the place was taken in,
Demosthenes himselfe went on to Corcyra, to take vp the Confederates there,
with intent to goe thence speedily into Sicily. And Charicles hauing staid to

 nish, and put a Garrison into the Forti cation, went afterwards with his thirty
Gallies to Athens; and the Argiues also went home.

The same Winter also came to Athens a thousand and three hundred 
Targettiers, of those called Machaerophori, of the race The aydes of the Thracians come
of them that are called Dij, and were to haue gone       too late to goe into Sicily.

with Demosthenes into Sicily. But comming too late, the Athenians resolued to
send them backe againe into Thrace, as being too chargeable a matter to
entertaine them onely for the Warre in Decelea; for their pay was to haue beene a
Drachma a man by the day. For Decelea being this         The incommodities which befell
Summer forti ed, rst by the whole Army, & then by the Athenians by the
                                                         fortiﬁcation in Decelea.
the seueral Cities maintained with a Garrison by
turnes, much endamaged the Athenians, and weakned their estate, both by
destroying their commodities, and consuming of their men, so as nothing more.
For the former inuasions hauing beene short, hindred them not from reaping
the bene t of the earth for the rest of the time; but now, the Enemy continually
lying vpon them, and sometimes with greater forces, sometimes of necessity with
the ordinary Garrison making incursions, and fetching in bootie, Agis the King
of Lacedaemon being alwayes there in person and diligently prosecuting the
Warre, the Athenians were thereby very grieuously a icted: for they were not
onely depriued of the fruit of the Land, but also aboue twenty thousand of their
slaues ed ouer to the Enemy, wher●● the greatest part were Arti cers.

〈…〉 lost all their Sheepe and Oxen. And by the 〈◊〉 going out of the Athenian
Horsemen, making 〈…〉, and defending the Countrey, their 〈…〉 partly lamed,
through incessant labour in rugged grounds, & partly wounded by the Enemy.
And their proteron, which formerly they vsed to bring in from 〈◊〉 by Oropus,
the shortest way, through Decelea by Lan●, they were now forced to fetch in by
Sea, at great cost, about the Promontory of Sunium. And whatsoeuer the City
was wont to be serued withall from without, it now wanted, and in stead of a
Citie was become as it were a Fort. And the Athenians watching on the
Battlements of the Wall, in the day time by turnes, but in the night, both Winter
and Summer, all at once, (except the Horsemen) part at the Walles, and part at

the Armes, were quite tyred. But that which pressed them most, was that they
had two Warres at once. And yet their obstinacie was so great, as no man would
haue beleeued, till now they saw it. For being besieged at home,         
from the Forti cation of the Peloponnesians, no man would haue imagined,
that they should not onely not haue recalled their Armie out of Sicily, but haue
also besieged Syracuse there, a Citie of it selfe no lesse then Athens, and therein
so much haue exceeded the expectation of the rest of the Grecians, both in
power and courage, (who in the beginning of this Warre conceiued, if the
Peloponnesians inuaded their Territory, some of them, that they might hold out
two yeeres, others three, no man more) as that in the seuenteenth yeere after they
were rst inuaded, they should haue vndertaken an expedition into Sicily, &
being euery way weakned already by the former Warre, haue vndergone another,
not inferiour to that which they had before with the Peloponnesians. Now their
Treasure being by these Warres, and by the detriment sustained from Decelea,
and other great expences that came vpon them, at a very low ebbe, about this
time they imposed on such as were vnder their dominion, a twentieth part of all
goods passing by Sea, for a Tribute, by this meanes to improue their commings
in. For their expences were not now as before, but so much greater, by how
much the Warre was greater, and their reuenue besides cut o .

The Thracians therefore, that came too late to goe       The Thracians sent backe, in
with Demosthenes, they presently sent backe, as being their way sacke the city of
                                                         Mycalessus.
vnwilling to lay out money in such a scarcity; and
gaue the charge of carrying them backe to Dijtrephes, with command as he went
along those Coasts, (for his way was through the *       * The straight betweene Euboea
Euripus) if occasion serued, to do somewhat against and Boeotia.
the Enemie. He accordingly landed them by Tanagra and hastily fetched in some
small booty. Then going ouer the Euripus from Chalcis in Euboea, he
disbarqued againe in Boeotia, and led his Souldiers towards Mycalessus, and lay
all night at the Temple of Mercury vndiscouered, which is distant from
Mycalessus about sixteene furlongs. The next day he commeth to the City, being
a very great one, and taketh it. For they kept no Watch, nor expected that any
man would haue come in and assaulted them, so farre from the Sea. Their Walles

also were but weake, in some places falne downe, and in others low built, and
their Gates open through security. The Thracians entring into Mycalessus,
spoiled both Houses and Temples, slew the people,          The barbarous cruelty of the
without mercy on old or young, but killed  Thracians.
all they could light on, both women and children, yea, and the labouring Cattell,
and whatsoeuer other liuing thing they saw. For the Nation of the Thracians,
where they dare, are extreme bloody, equall to any of the Barbarians. Insomuch
as there was put in practise at this time, besides other disorder, all formes of
slaughter that could be imagined. They likewise fell vpon the Schoolehouse
(which was in the Citie a great one, and the children newly entred into it) and
killed them euery one. And the calamity of the whole City, as it was as great as
euer befell any, so also was it more vnexpected, and more bitter. The Thebans
hearing of it, came out to helpe them; and ouertaking the Thracians before they
were gone farre, both recouered the booty, and chased them to the Euripus, and
to the Sea, where the Gallies lay that brought them. Some of them they killed, of
those most, in their going aboord. For swimme they could not; and such as were
in the small Boats, when they saw how things went a-land, had thrust o their
Boats, and lay without the Euripus. In the rest of the retreat, the Thracians
behaued themselues not vnhandsomely, against the Theban Horsemen, by
whom they were charged rst; but running out, and againe rallying themselues
in a circle, according to the manner of their Countrey, defended themselues well,
and lost but few men in that action. But some also they lost in the City it selfe,
whilest they stayed behind for pillage. But in the whole, of 1300, there were
slaine, onely 250. Of the Thebans and others that came out to helpe the Citie,
there were slaine Horsemen, and men of Armes, one with another, about 20,
and amongst them Scirphondas of Thebes, one of the Gouernours of Boeotia.
And of the Mycalessians there perished a part. Thus went the matter at
Mycalessus, the losse which it receiued, being for the quantity of the City, no
lesse to be lamented, then any that happened in the whole Warre.

Demosthenes going from Corcyra, after his fortifying in Laconia, found a Ship
lying in Phia of Elis, and in her certaine men of Armes of Corinth, ready to goe

into Sicily. The Ship he sunke, but the men escaped, and afterwards getting
another Shippe, went on in their voyage.

After this, Demosthenes being about Zacynthus, and Cephallenia, 
tooke aboord their men of Armes, and sent to            Eurymedon commeth to
Naupactus for the Messenians. From thence he            Demosthenes out of 〈◊〉, and
                                                        telleth him of the taking of
crossed ouer to the Continent of Acarnania, to          Plemmyrium.
Alyzea, and Anactorium, which belonged to the
Athenians. Whilest he was in these parts, he met with Eurymedon out of Sicily,
that had been sent in Winter vnto the Army with commodities, who told him
amongst other things, how he had heard by the way, after he was at Sea, that the
Syracusians had wonne Plemmyrium. Conon also the Captaine of Naupactus
came to them, and related, that the 25 Gallies of Corinth that lay before
Naupactus, would not giue ouer Warre, and yet delayed to ght, and therefore
desired to haue some Gallies sent him, as being vnable with his 18 to giue battell
to 25 of the enemy. Whereupon Demosthenes▪ and Eurymedon sent 20 Gallies
more to those at Naupactus, the nimblest of the whole Fleet, by Conon
himselfe; And went themselues about furnishing of       Demosthenes and Eurymedon
what belonged to the Army. Of whom Eurymedon            leuy forces for Sicily
                                                                          ▪

went to Corcyra, & hauing appointed them there to man 15 Gallies, leuyed men
of Armes; for now giuing ouer his course to Athens, he ioyned with
Demosthenes, as hauing been elected with him, in the charge of Generall; and
Demosthenes tooke vp Slingers and Darters, in the parts about Acarnania.

The Ambassadours of the Syracusians, which after the Nicias ouerthroweth the new
taking of Plemmyrium, had been sent vnto the Cities supply going to Syracuse from
                                                         the neighbouring Cities, and
about, hauing now obtained, and leuyed an Army           killeth 800 of them.
amongst them, were conducting the same to Syracuse.
But Nicias, vpon intelligence thereof, sent vnto such Cities of the Siculi as had
the passages, and were their Confederates, the Centoripines, Halicycaeans, and
others, not to su er the enemy to goe by, but to vnite themselues and stop them;
for that they would not so much as o er to passe any other way, seeing the
Agrigentines had already denyed them. When the *         * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.

Sicilians were marching, the * Siculi, as the Athenians * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
had desired them, put themselues in Ambush in three
seuerall places, and setting vpon them vnawares, and on a sodaine, slew about
eight hundred of them, and all the Ambassadours, saue onely one, a Corinthian,
which conducted the rest that escaped, being about 1500, to Syracuse.

About the same time, came vnto them, also the ayde of the              
Camarinaeans, 500 men of Armes, 300 Darters, and 300 Archers. Also the
Geloans sent them men for ue Gallies, besides 400 Darters, and 200 Horsemen.
For now all Sicily (except the Agrigentines, who were Newtrall) but all the rest,
who before stood looking on, came in, to the Syracusian side against the
Athenians. Neuerthelesse, the Syracusians, after this blow receiued amongst the
Siculi, held their hands, and assaulted not the Athenians for a while.

Demosthenes and Eurymedon hauing their Army now ready, crossed ouer from
Corcyra, and the * Continent with the whole Army, * The Continent about
to the Promontory of Iäpygia. From thence they went Acarnania, for there was
                                                         Demosthenes; and at Corcyra
to the Chaerades, Ilands of Iäpygia, and here tooke in was Eurymedon.
certaine Iäpygian Darters, to the number of 250, of
the Messapian Nation. And hauing renewed a certaine ancient alliance, with
Artas, who raigned there, and granted them those Darters, they went thence to
Metapontium, a City of Italy. There by vertue of a League, they got two Gallies,
and 200 Darters, which taken aboord they kept along the Shoare, till they came
to the Territory of Thuria. Here they found the aduers faction to the Athenians
to haue been lately driuen out in a sedition. And because they desired to muster
their Army here, that they might see if any were left behind, and perswade the
Thurians to ioyne with them freely in the War, (and as things stood) to haue for
friends and enemies, the same that were so to the Athenians, they staied about
that in the Territory of the Thurians.

The Peloponnesians, and the rest, who were at the same time in the 25 Gallies
that for safegard of the Ships, lay opposite to the   The battell by Sea, before
Gallies before Naupactus, hauing prepared             Naupactus, betweene the
                                                          Corinthians and Athenians.

themselues for battell, and with more Gallies, so as they were little inferiour in
number to those of the Athenians, went to an Anchor vnder Erineus of Achaia
in Rhypica. The place where they rid, was in forme like a halfe-Moone, and their
Land forces they had ready on either side to assist them, both Corinthians, and
other their Confederates of those parts, embattelled vpon the points of the
Promontory, and their Gallies made vp the space betweene, vnder the command
of Polyanthes, a Corinthian. Against these, the Athenians came vp, with 33
Gallies from Naupactus, commanded by Diphilus. The Corinthians at rst lay
still, but afterwards when they saw their time, and the Signall giuen, 
they charged the Athenians, and the ght began. They held each other to it long.
The Athenians sunke three Gallies of the Corinthians. And though none of
their owne were sunke, yet seauen were made vnseruiceable, which hauing
encountred the Corinthian Gallies a-head, were torne on both sides between the
beake and the oares, by the beakes of the Corinthian Gallies, made stronger for
the same purpose. After they had fought with equall fortune, and so as both
sides challenged the victory, (though yet the Athenians were masters of the
wrecks, as driuen by the wind into the maine, and because the Corinthians came
not out to renew the ght) they at length parted. There was no chasing of men
that ed, nor a prisoner taken on either side, because the Peloponnesians and
Corinthians ghting neere the Land, easily escaped, nor was there any Gally of
the Athenians sunke. But when the Athenians were gone backe to Naupactus,
the Corinthians presently set vp a Trophie, as victors, in regard that more of the
Athenian Gallies were made vnseruiceable, than of theirs; and thought
themselues not to haue had the worse, for the same reason that the others
thought themselues not to haue had the better. For the Corinthians thinke they
haue the better, when they haue not much the worse, and the Athenians thinke
they haue the worse, when they haue not much the better. And when the
Peloponnesians were gone, and their Armie by Land dissolued, the Athenians
also set vp a Trophie in Achaia, as if the victorie had beene theirs, distant from
Erineus, where the Peloponnesians rid, about twenty Furlongs. This was the
successe of that battell by Sea.

Demosthenes and Eurymedon, after the Thurians had put in readinesse to goe
with them, 700. men of Armes▪ and 300. Darters, commanded their Gallies to
                                                        Demosthenes and Eurymedon
go along the Coast, to Croton, and conducted their come along the shore of Italy,
Land-souldiers, hauing rst taken a muster of them all and take vp forces.
vpon the side of the Riuer Sycaris, through the
Territory of the Thurians. But comming to the Riuer Hylias, vpon word sent
them from the men of Croton, that if the Army went thorow their Territory, it
should be against their will, they marched downe to the Sea side, and to the
mouth of the Riuer Hylias, where they stayed all that night, and were met by
their Gallies.

The next day imbarking, they kept along the shore, and touched at 
euery Towne sauing Locri, till they ariued at Petra, in the Territory of Rhegium.

The Syracusians in the meane time, vpon intelligence 〈…〉 make ready 〈◊〉 Gallies to
of their comming on, resolued to try againe what they ﬁght with the Athenians there,
                                                         before the supply came.
could doe with their Nauy, and with their new supply
of Land-men, which they had gotten together on purpose, to ght with the
Athenians, before Demosthenes and Eurymedon should arriue. And they
furnished their Nauie, both otherwise, according to the aduantages they had
learnt in the last battell, and also made shorter the    Their maner of strengthning
heads of their Gallies, and thereby stronger, and made the Gallies.
                                                            ●●

beakes to them of a great thicknesse, which they also strengthned with rafters
fastned to the sides of the Gallies; both within and without, of 6 cubits long, in
such manner as the Corinthians had armed their Gallies a-head to ght with
those before Naupactus. For the Syracusians made account, that against the
Athenian Gallies, not so built, but weake before, as not vsing so much to meet
the Enemie a-head, as vpon the side, by fetching a compasse, they could not but
haue the better; and that to ght in the great Hauen, many Gallies in not much
roome, was an aduantage to them, for that vsing to direct encounter, they
should breake with their rme and thicke beakes, the hollow and in rme
foreparts of the Gallies of their Enemies; and that the Athenians in that narrow
roome, would want meanes both to goe about, and to goe through them, which

was the point of Art they most relyed on. For as for their passing through, they
would hinder it themselues as much as they could, and for fetching compasse,
the straightnesse of the place would not su er it. And that ghting a-head,
which seemed before to be want of skill in the Masters [to doe otherwise, ] was it
they would now principally make vse of; for in this would bee their principall
aduantage. For the Athenians, if ouercome, would haue no retiring, but to the
Land, which was but a little way o , and little in compasse, neere their owne
Campe, and of the rest of the Hauen themselues should be Masters, and the
Enemie being prest, could not choose, thronging together into a little roome,
and all into one & the same place, but disorder one another, (which was indeed
the thing that in all their battells by Sea, did the Athenians the greatest hurt,
hauing not, as the Syracusians had the liberty of the whole Hauen to 
retire vnto) and to goe about into a place of more roome, they hauing it in their
power to set vpon them from the maine Sea, and to retire againe at pleasure, they
should neuer be able; especially hauing Plemmyrium for enemy, and the Hauens
mouth not being large. The Syracusians hauing deuised thus much ouer and
aboue their former skill and strength, and far more con dent now since the
former Battell by Sea, assaulted them both with their Army and with their Nauy
at once. The Landmen from the City Gylippus drew sooner out a little, and
brought them to the Wall of the Athenians Campe, vpon the side towards the
Citie; and from Olympieum, the men of Armes, all that were there, and the
Horsemen and light-armed of the Syracusians, came vp to the Wall on the other
side. And by and by after came sailing forth also the Gallies of the Syracusians,
and their Confederates. The Athenians that thought at rst, they would haue
made the attempt only with their Landmen, seeing also the Gallies on a sudden
comming towards them, were in confusion, and some of them put themselues in
order vpon and before the Walles, against those that came from the Citie, and
others went out to meete the Horsemen and Darters, that were comming in
great numbers, and with speed from Olympieum, and the parts without. Others
againe went aboord, and withall came to ayde those ashore; but when the Gallies
were manned, they put o , being 75. in number, and The Athenians and Syracusians
those of Syracuse about 80. Hauing spent much of            ﬁght.

the day in charging and retiring, and trying each other, and performed nothing

worth the mentioning, saue that the Syracusians sunke a Gallie or two of the
Athenians, they parted againe, and the Land-souldiers retired at the same time
from the Wall of the Athenian Campe. The next day the Syracusians lay still,
without shewing any signe of what they meant to doe. Yet Nicias seeing that the
Battell by Sea was with equality, and imagining that they would ght againe,
made the Captaines to repaire their Gallies, such as had beene torne, and 2 great
Ships to be mored, without those Piles which he had driuen into the Sea before
his Gallies, to bee instead of a Hauen inclozed. These Ships he placed about 2
acres breadth asunder, to the end if any Gally chanced to bee pressed, it might
safely runne in, and againe goe safely out at leasure. In performing of 
this, the Athenians spent a whole day from morning vntill night.

The next day the Syracusians assaulted the Athenians The Athenians and Syracusians
againe with the same Forces both by Sea and Land,          ﬁght againe.

that they had done before, but begunne earlier in the morning, and being
opposed Fleet against Fleet, they drew out a great part of the day, now againe, as
before, in attempting vpon each other without e ect. Till at last Ariston the
sonne of Pyrrhichus, a Corinthian, the most expert         The stratagem of Ariston, a
Master that the Syracusians had in their Fleet,            Master of a Gally.

perswaded the Commanders of the Nauie, to send to such in the Citie as it
belonged to, and command that the Market should bee speedily kept at the Sea-
side, and to compell euery man to bring thither whatsoeuer hee had t for
meate, and there to sell it, that the Mariners disbarking, might presently dine by
the Gallies sides, and quickly againe vnlooked-for, assault the Athenians afresh
the same day.

This aduice being liked, they sent a Messenger, and the Market was furnished.
And the Syracusians suddenly rowed a-sterne, towards the Citie, and disbarking,
dined there-right on the shore. The Athenians supposing they had retired
towards the Citie, as vanquished, landed at leasure, and amongst other
businesse, went about the dressing of their dinner, as not expecting to haue
fought againe the same day. But the Syracusians suddenly going aboord, came
towards them againe. And the Athenians in great tumult, and for the most part

vndined, imbarking disorderly, at length with much adoe went out to meete
them. For a while they held their hands on both sides, and but obserued each
other; But anon after, the Athenians thought not t by longer dallying, to
ouercome themselues with their owne labour, but rather to ght as soone as they
could; and thereupon at once with a ioynt shout, charged the Enemie, and the
 ght began. The Syracusians receiued and resisted their charge; and ghting, as
they had before determined, with their Gallies head to head with those of the
Athenians, and prouided with beakes for the purpose, brake the Gallies of the
Athenians very much, between the heads of the Gallies and the oares. The
Athenians were also annoyed much by the Darters from the Deckes, but much
more by those Syracusians, who going about in small Boats, passed vnder the
rowes of the Oares of the Enemies Gallies, and comming close to      
their sides, threw their Darts at the Mariners from thence.

The Syracusians hauing fought in this manner with the vtmost of their strength,
in the end gat the victory, and the Athenians, betweene the two Ships, escaped
into their harbour. The Syracusian Gallies chased them as farre as to those Ships,
but the Dolphins hanging from the Masts ouer the entrance of the harbour,
forbad them to follow any further. Yet there were two Gallies, which vpon a
iollity after victory approached them, but were both lost, of which one with her
men and all was taken. The Syracusians, after they had The Syracusians haue the
sunke seuen Gallies of the Athenians, and torne many victory.
more, and of the men had taken some aliue, and killed others, retired, and for
both the battels erected Trophies, and had already an assured hope, of being
farre superiour by Sea, and also made account to subdue the Army by Land.
And they prepared to assault them againe in both kindes.

In the meane time Demosthenes, and Eurymedon               Demosthenes and Eurymedon,
arriued with the Athenian supply, being about 73           with a new Army arriue at
                                                           Syracuse.
Gallies, and men of Armes of their owne, and of their
Confederates about 5000. Besides Darters, as well Barbarians as Greekes, not a
few, and Slingers, and Archers, and all other prouision su cient. For the
present, it not a little daunted the Syracusians and their Confederates, to see no

end of their danger, and that notwithstanding the fortifying in Decelea, another
Army should come now, equall, and like vnto their former, and that their power
should be so great in euery kind. And on the other side, it was a kind of
strengthening after weakenesse, to the Athenian Army that was there before.
Demosthenes, when hee saw how things stood, and thinking it vn t to loyter,
and fall into Nicias his case (For Nicias, who was formidable at his rst
comming, when he set not presently vpon Syracuse, but Wintred at Catana,
both grew into contempt, and was preuented also by the comming of Gylippus
thither, with an Army out of Peloponnesus. The which if Nicias had gone
against Syracuse at rst, had neuer been so much as sent for. For supposing
themselues to haue been strong enough alone, they had at once both found
themselues too weake, and the City been enclosed with a Wall, whereby though
they had sent for it, it could not haue helped them, as it did)               
Demosthenes I say considering this, and that he also, euen at the present, and the
same day was most terrible to the enemy, intended          Demosthenes attempteth to win
with all speed to make vse of this present terriblenesse the Wall which the Syracusians
                                                           had built through Epipolae, to
of the Army. And hauing obserued that the Crosse-          exclude the proceeding of the
wall of the Syracusians, wherewith they hindred the Wall of the Athenians.
Athenians from enclosing the Citie, was but single,
and that if they could be Masters of the ascent to Epipolae, and againe of the
Campe there, the same might easily be taken, (for none would haue stood
against them) hasted to put it to triall, and thought it his shortest way to the
dispatching of the Warre. For either he should haue successe, he thought, and so
winne Syracuse, or he would lead away the Army, and no longer without
purpose consume, both the Athenians there with him, and the whole State. The
Athenians therefore went out, and rst wasted the Territory of the Syracusians,
about the Riuer Anapus, and were the stronger as at rst, both by Sea and Land.
For the Syracusians durst neither way goe out against them, but onely with their
Horsemen and Darters from Olympieum.

After this, Demosthenes thought good to try the Wall, which the Athenians had
built to enclose the City withall, with Engines, but seeing the Engines were
burnt by the Defendants ghting from the Wall, and that hauing assaulted it in

diuers parts with the rest of his army, he was, notwithstanding put backe, he
resolued to spend the time no longer, but (hauing gotten the consent of Nicias,
and the rest in Commission, thereunto) to put in execution his designe for
Epipolae, as was before intended. By day, it was thought impossible not to be
discouered, either in their approach, or in their ascent. Hauing therefore rst
commanded to take ue dayes prouision of Victuall, and all the Masons and
Workmen, as also store of Casting Weapons, and whatsoeuer they might need, if
they ouercame, for Forti cation, He, and Eurymedon, and Menander, with the
whole Army, marched about midnight to Epipolae, leauing Nicias in the
Campe. Being come to Epipolae at Euryalus (where also the Army went vp
before) they were not onely not discouered by the Syracusians that kept the
Watch, but ascending, tooke a certaine Forti cation of the Syracusians there, and
killed part of them that kept it. But the greatest number escaping, ranne
presently to the Campes, of which there were in Epipolae three          
walled about, without the City, one of Syracusians, one of other Sicilians, and
one of Confederates, and carried the newes of their comming in, and told it to
those 600 Syracusians that kept this part of Epipolae at the rst, who presently
went forth to meet them. But Demosthenes and the Athenians lighting on
them, though they fought valiantly, put them to ight, and presently marched
on, making vse of the present heat of the Army, to nish what he came for,
before it were too late. And others going on, in their rst course tooke the
Crosse-wall of the Syracusians, they ying that kept it, and were throwing
downe the Battlements thereof. The Syracusians and their Confederates, and
Gylippus, and those with him, came out to meet them, from their Campes, but
because the attempt was vnexpected, and in the night, they charged the
Athenians timorously, and were euen at rst forced to retire. But as the
Athenians aduanced more out of order, chie y as hauing already gotten the
victory, but desiring also, quickly to passe through all that remained yet
vnfoughten with, (lest through their remissenesse in following, they might
againe rally themselues, ) the Boeotians withstood them rst, and charging,
forced them to turne their backs. And here the Athenians were mightily in
disorder, and perplexed, so that it hath been very hard to be informed of any
side, in what manner each thing passed. For if in the day time, when things are

better seene, yet they that are present cannot tell how all things goe, saue onely
what euery man with much adoe seeth neere vnto himselfe: How then in a
battell by night, (the onely one that hapned betweene great Armies in all this
Warre) can a man know any thing for certaine? For though the Moone shined
bright, yet they saw one another no otherwise then (as by Moone-light was
likely) so as to see a body, but not be sure whether it were a friend, or not. And
the men of Armes on both sides being not a few in number, had but little
ground to turne in. Of the Athenians, some were already ouercome, others went
on in their rst way. Also a great part of the rest of the Army was already, part
gotten vp, and part ascending, and knew not which way to march; For after the
Athenians once turned their backes, all before them was in confusion; and it was
hard to distinguish of any thing for the noyse. For the Syracusians 
and their Confederates preuailing, encouraged each other, and receiued the
assailants with exceeding great shouts, (for they had no other meanes in the night
to expresse themselues. ) And the Athenians sought each other, and tooke for
Enemies all before them, though friends, and of the number of those that ed.
And by often asking the Word, there being no other meanes of distinction, all
asking at once, they both made a great deale of stirre amongst themselues, and
reuealed the Word to the Enemie. But they did not in like manner know the
Word of the Syracusians, because these, beeing victorious, and vndistracted,
knew one another better. So that when they lighted on any number of the
Enemie, though they themselues were more, yet the Enemy escaped, as knowing
the Watch-word; but they, when they could not answer, were slaine. But that
which hurt them most, was the tune of the * Paean,         * A Hymne with Trumpets or
which being in both Armies the same, draue them to other loud musique, both before
                                                           and after battell.
their wits end. For the Argiues and Corcyraeans, and
all other of the Dorique Race on the Athenians part, when they sounded the
Paean, terri ed the Athenians on one side, and the Enemy terri ed them with
the like on the other side. Wherefore at the last falling one vpon another in
diuers parts of the Armie, friends against friends, and Countreymen against
Countreymen, they not onely terri ed each other, but came to hand-strokes,
and could hardly againe be parted.

As they ed before the Enemie, the way of the descent from Epipolae, by which
                                                           The Athenians ﬂy.
they were to goe backe, being but straite, many of
them threw themselues downe from the Rockes, and dyed so: and of the rest
that gate downe safely into the Plaine, though the greatest part, and all that were
of the old Armie, by their knowledge of the Countrey escaped into the Campe,
yet of these that came last, some lost their way, and straying in the Fields, when
the day came on, were cut o by the Syracusian Horsemen that ranged the
Countrey about.

The next day the Syracusians erected two Trophies, one in Epipolae at the
ascent, and another, where the rst checke was giuen by the Boeotians. The
Athenians receiued their dead vnder Truce; and many there were that dyed, both
of themselues and of their Confederates. But the Armes taken, were 
more then for the number of the slaine: for of such as were forced to quit their
Bucklers, and leape downe from the Rockes, though some perished, yet some
there also were that escaped.

After this, the Syracusians hauing by such vnlooked The 〈…〉 more supplies, 〈◊〉 to
for prosperity recouered their former courage, sent     winne the 〈◊〉 Campe.

Sicanus with fteene Gallies to Agrigentum being in sedition, to bring that Citie
if they could to their obedience. And Gylippus went againe to the Sicilian Cities
by Land, to raise yet another Army, as being in hope to take the Campe of the
Athenians by assault, considering how the matter had gone in Epipolae.

In the meane time the Athenian Generals went to Councell vpon their late
ouerthrow, and present generall weaknesse of the        The Athenian Commanders
Army. For they saw, not onely that their designes       take councell what to doe.

prospered not, but that the Souldiers also were weary of staying. For they were
troubled with sicknesse, proceeding from a double cause; this being the time of
the yeere most obnoxious to diseases, and the place where they lay, moorish and
noysome. And all things else appeared desperate.

Demosthenes thought t to stay no longer; and since       The aduice of 〈◊〉
the execution of his Designe at Epipolae had failed,

deliuered his opinion for going out of the Hauen whilest the Seas were open, and
whilest, at least with this addition of Gallies, they were stronger then the Army of
the Enemy. For it was better, hee said, for the Citie to make Warre vpon those
which fortiﬁe against them at home, then against the Syracusians, seeing they
cannot now be easily ouercome; and there was no reason why they should spend
much money in lying before the City. This was the opinion of Demosthenes.

Nicias, though he also thought their estate bad, yet was vnwilling to haue their
weaknesse discouered, and by decreeing of their departure openly with the Votes
of many, to make knowne the same to the enemy. For if at any time they had a
minde to bee gone, they should then bee lesse able to doe it secretly. Besides, the
estate of the Enemie, in as much as hee vnderstood it better then the rest, put
him into some hope that it might yet grow worse then their owne, in case they
pressed the Siege, especially beeing already Masters of the Sea, farre and neere,
with their present Fleet. There was moreouer a party for the              
Athenians in Sycrause that desired to betray the State into their hands, and that
sent messengers vnto him, and su ered him not to rise and be gone. All which
hee knowing, though hee were intruth doubtfull what opinion to be of, and did
yet consider, neuerthelesse openly in his speech, hee was against the withdrawing
of the Armie, and said, That he was sure, the People of 〈…〉 of Nicias.
Athens would take it ill, if hee went thence without
their order: For that they were not to haue such Iudges, as should giue sentence vpon
their owne sight of things done, rather then vpon the report of Calumniators, but
such as would beleeue whatsoeuer some ﬁne speaker should accuse them of. That
many, nay most of the Souldiers heere, who now cry out vpon their misery, will
there cry out on the contrary, and say the Generals haue betrayed the State, and
come away for a bribe. That hee would not therefore, knowing the nature of the
Athenians so well, chuse to bee put to death vniustly, and charged with a
dishonourable crime by the Athenians, rather then, if he must needes doe one, to
suﬀer the same at the hand of the Enemy by his owne aduenture. And yet, he said,
the State of the Syracusians was still inferiour to their owne: For paying much
money to strangers, and laying out much more on Forts without and about the
Citie, hauing also had a great Nauie, a yeere already in pay, they must needs

want money at last, and all these things faile them. For they haue spent already
two thousand Talents, and are much in debt besides. And whensoeuer they shall
giue ouer this course, and make pay no longer, their strength is gone, as being
auxiliary, and not constrained to follow the Warre, as the Athenians are.
Therefore it was ﬁt, he said, to stay close to the Citie, and not to goe away, as if they
were too weake in money, wherein they were much superiour.

Nicias, when he spake this, assured them of it, as knowing the state of Syracuse
precisely, and their want of money; and that there were some that desired to
betray the Citie to the Athenians, and sent him word not to goe. Withall hee had
now con dence in the Fleet, which▪ as being before ouercome, he had not. As
for lying where they did, Demosthenes would by no meanes heare of it. But if
the Armie might not be carried away without order from the Athenians, but
must needes stay in Sicily, then he said they might goe to Thapsus, or Catana,
from whence by their Land men they might inuade, and turne much
of the Countrey to them, and wasting the Fields of the Enemies, weaken the
Syracusians, and bee to ght with their Gallies in the maine Sea, and not in a
narrow (which is the aduantage of the Enemy) but in a wide place, where the
bene t of skill should bee theirs, and and where they should not be forced in
charging and retyring, to come vp, and fall o in narrow and circumscribed
limits. In summe he said, he by no meanes liked to stay where they were, but
with all speed, no longer delaying the matter, to arise and be gone. Eurymedon
also gaue the like counsell. Neuerthelesse vpon the contradiction of Nicias, there
grew a kind of sloth and procrastination in the businesse, and a suspition
withall, that the asseueration of Nicias, was grounded on somewhat that he
knew aboue the rest, and therevpon the Athenians deferred their going thence,
and stayed vpon the place.

In the meane time Gylippus and Sycanus returned vnto Syracuse. Sicanus
without his purpose at Agrigentum (for whilest he was yet in Gela, the sedition
which had beene raised in the behalfe of the          Gylippus returneth with another
Syracusians was turned into friendship; ) but         Armie from the Cities of Sicily.

Gylippus not without another great Army out of Sicily, besides the men of

Armes, which hauing set-forth from Peloponnesus in Ships the Spring before,
were then lately arriued at Selinus from out of Africke. For hauing beene driuen
into Africke, and the Cyreneans hauing giuen them two Gallies with Pilots, in
passing by the shore they ayded the Euesperitae, besieged by the Africans, and
hauing ouercome the Africans, they went on to Neapolis, a Towne of tra que
belonging to the Carthaginians, where the passage into Sicily is shortest, and but
two dayes and a nights saile ouer. And from thence they crossed the Sea to
Selinus. As soone as they were come, the Syracusians againe presently prepared
to set vpon the Athenians, both by Sea and Land. The Athenian Generals seeing
them haue another Armie, and their owne not bettering but growing euery day
worse then other, but especially as being pressed to it by the sicknesse of the
Souldiers, repented now that they remoued not before; and Nicias being now no
longer against it, as he was, but desirous onely that it might not be concluded
openly, gaue order vnto all, as secretly as was possible, to put forth of the
Harbour, and to be ready, when the signe should be giuen.

But when they were about it, and euery thing was ready, the Moone 
hapned to bee eclipsed. For it was full Moone. And       The Athenians out of
not onely the greatest part of the Athenians called      superstition forbeare to remoue,
                                                         because of an eclipse of the
vpon the Generals to stay, but Nicias also (for hee was Moone.
addicted to superstition, and obseruations of that
kind somewhat too much) said, that it should come no more into debate,
whether they should goe or not, till the three times nine dayes were past, which
the Southsayers appoint in that behalfe. And the Athenians, though vpon going,
stayed still for this reason.

The Syracusians also, hauing intelligence of this, were The Syracusians assault the
encouraged vnto the pressing of the Athenians much Athenian Campe with their
                                                        Land-souldiers.
the more, for that they confessed themselues already
too weake for them, both by Sea and Land; for else they would neuer haue
sought to haue runne away.

Besides, they would not haue them sit downe in any other part of Sicily, and
become the harder to be warred on; but had rather there-right, and in a place
most for their owne aduantage, compell them to ght by Sea. To which end they
manned their Gallies, and after they had rested as long as was su cient, when
they saw their time, the rst day they assaulted the Athenians Campe, and some
small number of men of Armes, and Horsemen of the Athenians sallyed out
against them by certaine Gates, and the Syracusians intercepting some of the
men of Armes, beat them backe into the Campe. But the entrance being strait,
there were 70 of the Horsemen lost, and men of Armes some, but not many.

The next day, they came out with their Gallies, 76 in The Syracusians ouercome the
number, and the Athenians set forth against them        Athenians againe by Sea.

with 86; and being come together, they fought. Eurymedon had charge of the
Right Wing of the Athenians, and desiring to encompasse the Gallies of the
Enemies, drew forth his owne Gallies in length more toward the shoare; and was
cut o by the Syracusians, that had rst ouercome the middle battell of the
Athenians from the rest, in the bottome and inmost part of the Hauen; and
both slaine himselfe, and the Gallies that were with him lost. And that done, the
rest of the Athenian Fleet was also chased and driuen ashore.

Gylippus, when he saw the Nauy of the Enemie vanquished, and carried past the
Piles, and their owne Harbour, came with a part of his Armie to the 
peere, to kill such as landed, and to cause that the Syracusians might the easilier
pull the Enemies Gallies from the shore, whereof themselues were Masters. But
the Tuscans, who kept guard in that part for the Athenians, seeing them
comming that way in disorder, made head, and charging these rst, forced them
into the Marish, called Lysimelia. But when afterwards a greater number of the
Syracusians and their Confederates came to helpe them, then also the Athenians,
to helpe the Tuscans, and for feare to lose their Gallies, fought with them, and
hauing ouercome them, pursued them, and not onely slew many of their men of
Armes, but also saued the most of their Gallies, and brought them backe into
the Harbour. Neuerthelesse the Syracusians tooke eighteene, and slew the men
taken in them. And amongst the rest, they let driue before the Wind, (which

blew right vpon the Athenians) an old Ship, full of Faggots and Brands set on
 re, to burne them. The Athenians on the other side, fearing the losse of their
Nauie, deuised remedies for the re, and hauing quenched the ame, and kept
the Shippe from comming neere, escaped that danger.

After this the Syracusians set vp a Trophie, both for the Battell by Sea, and for
the men of Armes which they intercepted aboue before the Campe, where also
they tooke the Horses. And the Athenians erected a Trophie likewise, both for
the ight of those Footmen, which the Tuscans draue into the Marish, and for
those which they themselues put to ight with the rest of the Armie.

When the Syracusians had now manifestly ouercome their Fleet (for they feared
at rst the supply of Gallies that came with Demosthenes) the Athenians were in
good earnest vtterly out of heart. And as they were     The Athenians deiected, repent
much deceiued in the euent, so they repented more of of the voyage.
the Voyage. For hauing come against these Cities, the onely ones that were for
institution like vnto their owne, and gouerned by the People, as well as
themselues, and which had a Nauie, and Horses, and greatnesse, seeing they
could create no dissention amongst them, about change of gouernment, to
winne them that way, nor could subdue it with the greatnesse of their Forces,
when they were farre the stronger, but misprospered in most of their designes,
they were then at their wits end. But now, when they were also           
vanquished by Sea (which they would neuer haue thought) they were much
more deiected then euer.

The Syracusians went presently about the Hauen          The 〈◊〉 intend to 〈…〉 the
without feare, and meditated how to shut vp the         Athenians & reckon vpon the
                                                                   ▪

                                                        glory of 〈…〉 victory.
same, that the Athenians mought not steale away
without their knowledge, though they would. For now they studyed not onely
how to saue themselues, but how to hinder the safety of the Athenians. For the
Syracusians conceiued (not vntruely) that their owne strength was at this present
the greater, and that if they could vanquish the Athenians, and their
Confederates, both by Sea and Land, it would be a mastery of great honour to

them, amongst the rest of the Grecians. For all the rest of Greece should be one
part freed by it, and the other part out of feare of subiection hereafter. For it
would be vnpossible for the Athenians, with the remainder of their strength to
sustaine the Warre that would be made vpon them afterwards; and they being
reputed the authors of it, should be had in admiration, not only with all men
now liuing, but also with posterity. And to say truth, it was a worthy Mastery,
both for the causes shewne, and also for that they became Victors not of the
Athenians onely, but many others their Confederates, nor againe they
themselues alone, but their Confederates also, hauing been in ioynt command
with the Corinthians and Lacedaemonians) and both exposed their City to the
 rst hazard, and of the busines by Sea performed the greatest part themselues.

The greatest number of Nations, except the generall The Nations that were at the
Roll of those which in this Warre adhaered to Athens, Warres of Syracuse on one side
                                                          or other.
and Lacedaemon, were together at this one City; And
this number on both sides, against Sicilie, and for it, some to helpe winne, and
some to helpe saue it, came to the Warre at Syracuse, not on any pretence of
right, nor as kindred to aid kindred, but as pro t or necessity seuerally chanced
to induce them. The Athenians being Ionique went Athenians.
against the Syracusians that be Dorique, voluntarily.
With these, as being their Colonies, went the             Lemnians. Imbrians.
Lemnians, and Imbrians, and the Aeginetae, that
dwelt in Aegina then, all of the same language and        Aeginetae.
institutions with themselues.

Also the Hestiaeans of Euboea. Of the rest, some        Hestiaeans of Euboea.
went with them as their subiects, and      
some as their free Confederates, and some also hired. Subiects and Tributaries, as
the Eretrians, Chalcideans, Styrians, and Carystians, Eretrians, Chalcideans.
from Euboea. Ceians, Andrians, Tenians, from out of Styrians, Car     ●●●  Ceians, 〈◊〉
                                                        Tenians, 〈◊〉, Samians, Chiefe
                                                                                   ▪
the Ilands. Milesians, Samians, and Chians, from
Ionia. Of these the Chians followed them as free, not as tributaries of money,
but of Gallies. And these were almost all of them Ionians, descended from the

Athenians, except onely the Carystians, that are of the Nation of the Dryopes.
And though they were subiects and went vpon constraint, yet they were Ionians
against Dorians. Besides these, there went with them Aeolians, namely the
Methymnaeans, subiects to Athens, not tributaries of Methymnaeans, Tenedians,
mony, but of Gallies, & the Tenedians and Aeolians Aeolians.
tributaries. Now here, Aeolians were constrained to ght against Aeolians,
namely against their Founders the Boeotians, that tooke part with the
Syracusians. But the Plataeans, and onely they, being Boeotians, fought against
Boeotians vpon iust quarrell. The Rhodians and              Plataeans.
Cytherians Dorique both, by constraint, bore Armes Rhodians and Cytherians.
one of them, namely the Cytherians a Colony of the
Lacedaemonians with the Athenians, against the Lacedaemonians that were
with Gylippus; and the other, that is to say, the Rhodians, being by descent
Argiues, not onely against the Syracusians, who were also Dorique, but against
their owne Colony the Gelans which tooke part with the Syracusians. Then of
the Ilanders about Peloponnesus, there went with            Cephallenians,
them the Cephallenians, and Zathythians, not but         ●● Za cynthians.

that they were free States, but because they were kept in awe as Ilanders by the
Athenians who were masters of the Sea. And the              Corcyreans.
Corcyraeans, being not only Dorique, but
Corinthians, fought openly against both Corinthians and Syracusians, though a
Colony of the one, and of kin to the other: which they did necessarily (to make
the best of it) but indeed no lesse willingly, in respect of their hatred to the
Corinthians. Also the Messenians now so called, in Naupactus, were taken along
to this Warre, and the Messenians at Pylus then             Messenians.
holden by the Athenians. Moreouer the Megarean
                                                            Megareans.
Out-lawes though not many▪ by aduantage taken of
their misery, were faine to ght against the S●linuntians, that were Megareans
likewise. But now the rest of their Army was rather voluntary. The Argiues not
so much for the League, as for their enmity with the Argiues.
Lacedaemonians and their present              
particular spleene, followed the Athenians to the Warre though Ionique, against
Dorians. And the Mantineans and other Arcadian Mercenaries went with him,

as men accustomed euer to inuade the enemy shewed Mantineans and other
them, and now for gaine, had for enemies as much as Arcadians.
any those other Arcadians which went thither with the Corinthians. The
Cretans, and Aetolians were all Mercenary, and it fell Cretans. Aetolians.
out, that the Cretans, who together with the
Rhodians were Founders of Gela, not onely tooke not part with their Colony,
but fought against it willingly for their hire. And some Acarnanians also went
with them for gaine, but most of them went as             Acarnanians.
Confederates, in loue to Demosthenes, and for good
will to the State of Athens. And thus many, within the bound of the Ionian
Gulfe. Then of Italians fallen into the same necessity of seditious times, there
went with them to this Warre, the Thurians, and           Thurians.
Metapontians. Of Greeke Sicilians, the Naxians and
Catanaeans. Of Barbarian, the Egestaeans, who also Metapontians, Naxians.
drew with them the most of those Greeke Sicilians.        Catanaeans, Egestaeans
Without Sicily, there went with them some Thuscans,
vpon quarrels betweene them and the Syracusians;          Tuscans.
and some Iäpygian Mercenaries. These were the
                                                         ●I pygians.
Nations that followed the Army of the Athenians.

On the other side, there opposed them, on the part of the Syracusians, the
Camarinaeans their borderers. And beyond them            Syracusians. Camarinaeans.
againe the Gelans. And then (the Agrigentines not
stirring) beyond them againe the same way, the Seli●●ntians. These inhabite the
part of Sicily, that lyeth opposite to Africke. Then the Himeraeans.
Himeraeans, on the side that lyeth to the Terrhen sea,
where dwel only Grecians, of which, these also onely ayded them. These were
their Confederates of the Greeke Nation, within Sicily; all Doreans and free
States. Then of the Barbarians there, they had the       Siculi.
Siculi, all but what reuolted to the Athenians. For
Grecians without Sicily, the Laecedaemonians sent        Lacedaemonians.
them a Spartan Commander, with some Helotes and
the rest * Freed-men. Then ayded them, both with Gallies and with Land-men

the Corinthians onely; and for kindreds sake the          * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Newly
Leucadians, and Ambraciotes. Out of Arcadia, those made 〈◊〉, of accounted among
                                                          the people.
Mercenaries sent by the Corinthians. And Sicyonians
on constraint. And from without Peloponnesus, the Corinthians. Leucadians,
                                                          Ambraciotes, Arcadian
Boeotians. To the forraigne aydes, the Sicilians          Mercenaries. Sicyonians.
themselues, as being great Cities; added 
more in euery kinde then as much againe; for they got together men of Armes,
Gallies and Horses, great store, and other number in abundance. And to all
these againe the Syracusians themselues, added, as I may say, aboue as much
more, in respect of the greatnesse, both of their Citie, and of their danger.

These were the succours assembled on either part, and which were then all there,
and after them came no more, neither to the one side nor the other. No maruell
then, if the Syracusians thought it a noble mastery, if to the victorie by Sea
already gotten, they could adde the taking of the whole Athenian Armie, so
great as it was, and hinder their escape both by Sea and Land.

Presently therefore they fall in hand with stopping vp the mouth of the great
Hauen, beeing about eight Furlongs wide, with           The Syracusians shut vp the
Gallies laid crosse, and Lighters and Boats vpon their Hauen.
Anchors, and withall prepared whatsoeuer else was necessary, in case the
Athenians would hazard another Battell, meditating on no small matters in any
thing.

The Athenians seeing the shutting vp of the Hauen, and the rest of the Enemies
designes, thought good to goe to councell vpon it: and the Generals, and
Commanders of Regiments, hauing met, and considered their present want,
both otherwise, and in this, that they neither had prouision for the present, (for
vpon their resolution to bee gone, they had sent before to Catana, to forbid the
sending in of any more) nor were likely to haue for the future, vnlesse their
Nauy got the vpper hand, they resolued to abandon their Campe aboue, and to
take in some place, no greater then needs they must, neere vnto their Gallies,
with a Wall, and leauing some to keepe it, to goe aboard with the rest of the

Armie, and to man euery Gallie they had, seruiceable and lesse seruiceable, and
hauing caused all sorts of men to goe aboord, and ght it out, if they gat the
victory, to goe to Catana; if not, to make their retreat in order of Battell, by Land
(hauing rst set re on their Nauy) the neerest way vnto some amicable place,
either Barbarian or Grecian, that they should best be able to reach vnto before
the Enemy. As they had concluded, so they did; for they both came downe to the
shore from their Campe aboue, and also manned euery Gallie they 
had, and compelled to goe aboord euery man of age, of any ability whatsoeuer.
So the whole Nauie was manned, to the number of a hundred and tenne Gallies,
vpon which they had many Archers and Darters, both Acarnanians and other
strangers, and all things else prouided, according to their meanes and purpose.
And Nicias, when almost euery thing was ready, perceiuing the Souldiers to bee
deiected, for beeing so farre ouercome by Sea, contrary to their custome, and yet
in respect of the scarcity of victuall, desirous as soone as could be to ght, called
them together, and encouraged them then the rst time, with words to this
e ect.

 7.1. THE ORATION OF NICIAS.
 SOuldiers, Athenians, and other our Confederates, though the tryall at hand
 will be common to all alike, and will concerne the safety and Countrey, no
 lesse of each of vs, then of the Enemie: (For if our Gallies get the victory, we
 may euery one see his 〈…〉 againe) yet ought wee not to bee discouraged, like
 men of no experience, who failing in their rst aduentures, euer after carry a
 〈◊〉 sutable to their misfortunes. But you Athenians heere present, hauing bad
 experience already of many Wars, and you our Confederates, that haue
 alwayes gone along with our Armies, remember how often the euent falleth
 out otherwise in Warr, then one would thinke; and in hope that Fortune will
 once also be of our side, prepare your selues to ght againe, in such manner as
 shall be worthy the number you see your selues to bee. What 〈◊〉 thought
 would be helpes in the narrownesse of the Hauen, against ●uch a multitude
 of Gallies as will be there, and against the prouision of the Enemie vpon their

Deckes, whereby wee were formerly 〈…〉, we haue with the Masters now
considered them all, and as well as our present meanes will permit, made them
ready. For many Archers and Darters shall goe aboord, and that multitude,
which if wee had beene to ght in the maine Sea, wee would not haue vsed,
because by slugging the Gallies, it would take away the vse of Skill, will
neuerthelesse bee vsefull heere, where wee are forced to make a Land- ght
from our Gallies. Wee haue also deuised, instead of what should haue beene
prouided for in the building of our Gallies, against the thicknesse 
of the beakes of theirs, which did most hurt vs, to lash their Gallies vnto ours
with Iron Grapnels, whereby (if the men of Armes doe their part) wee may
keepe the Gallies which once come close vp, from falling backe againe. For we
are brought to a necessity now, of making it a Land- ght vpon the Water; and
it will be the best for vs, neither to fall backe our selues, nor to su er the
Enemie to doe so. Especially, when, except what our men on Land shall make
good, the shore is altogether hostile. Which you remembring, must therefore
  ght it out to the vtmost, and not su er your selues to bee beaten backe vnto
the shore. But when Gallie to Gallie shall once be falne close, neuer thinke any
cause worthy to make you part, vnlesse you haue rst beaten o the men of
Armes of the Enemy, from their Deckes. And this I speake to you rather, that
are the men of Armes, than to the Mariners, in as much as that part belongeth
rather vnto you that ght aboue; and in you it lyeth, euen yet to atchieue the
Victory for the most part with the Land-men. Now for the Mariners, I aduise,
and withall beseech them, not to bee too much daunted with the losses past,
hauing now, both a greater number of Gallies, and greater Forces vpon the
Deckes. Thinke it a pleasure worth preseruing, that being taken, by your
knowledge of the language, and imitation of our fashions for Athenians,
(though you be not so) you are not only admired for it through all Greece, but
also partake of our dominion, in matter of pro t, no lesse then our selues; and
for awfulnesse to the Nations subiect, and protection from iniury, more. You
therefore that alone participate freely of our Dominion, cannot with any
iustice betray the same. In despight therefore of the Corinthians, whom you
haue often vanquished, and of the Sicilians, who, as long as our Fleet was at
the best, durst neuer so much as stand vs, repell them, and make it appeare,

 that your knowledge, euen with weaknesse and losse, is better then the
 strength of another, with Fortune. Againe, to such of you as are Athenians, I
 must remember this, that you haue no more such Fleets in your Harbours,
 nor such able men of Armes, and that if ought happen to you but victory,
 your Enemies here will presently bee vpon you at home; and those at home
 will bee vnable to defend themselues, both against those that shall goe hence,
 and against the Enemy that lyeth there already. So one part of vs shall fall into
 the mercy of the Syracusians, against whom you your selues know, with what
 intent you came hither, and the other part which is at home, shall fall into the
 hands of the Lacedaemonians. Being therefore in this one battell to ght both
 for your selues and them, be therfore valiant now, if euer, & beare in mind
 euery one of you, that you that goe now aboard, are the Land-forces, the Sea-
 forces, the whole estate, and great name of Athens. For which, if 
 any man excell others in skill or courage, he can neuer shew it more
 opportunely then now, when he may both helpe himselfe with it, and whole.

Nicias hauing thus encouraged them, commanded presently to goe aboord.

Gylippus and the Syracusians, might easily discerne that the Athenians meant to
  ght, by seeing their preparation. Besides, they had aduertisement of their
purpose to cast Iron Grapnels into their Gallies. And as for euery thing else, so
also for that, they had made prouision. For they couered the fore-part of their
Gallies, and also the Deckes for a great way, with Hydes, that the Grapnels cast
in, might slip, and not be able to take hold. When all was ready, Gylippus
likewise, and other the Commanders, vsed vnto their Souldiers this hortatiue.

 7.1. THE ORATION OF GYLIPPVS, and the
 Syracusian Generals.
 THAT not onely our former acts haue beene honourable, but that wee are to
  ght now also for further honour, (Men of Syracuse, and Confederates) the
 most of you seeme to know already (for else you neuer would so valiantly haue

vndergone it. ) And if there be any man that is not so sensible of it as he
ought, wee will make it appeare vnto him better. For whereas the Athenians
came into this Countrey, with designe, rst to enslaue Sicily, and then, if that
succeeded, Peloponnesus, and the rest of Greece. And whereas already they
had the greatest dominion of any Grecians whatsoeuer, either present or past,
you, the rst that euer withstood their Nauy, wherewith they were euery
where Masters, haue in the former Battels ouercome them, and shall in
likelyhood ouercome them againe in this. For men that are cut short, where
they thought themselues to exceed, become afterwards further out of opinion
with themselues, then they would haue beene, if they had neuer thought so.
And when they come short of their hope, in things they glory in, they come
short also in courage, of the true strength of their forces. And this is likely
now to be the case of the Athenians. Whereas with vs, it falleth out, that our
former courage, wherewith, though vnexperienced, we durst stand them,
being now con rmed, and an opinion added of being the stronger, giueth to
euery one of vs a double hope. And in all enterprizes, the greatest 
hope conferreth for the most part the greatest courage. As for their imitation
of our prouisions, they are things we are acquainted withall, and we shall not
in any kinde be vnprouided for them. But they, when they shall haue many
men of Armes vpon their Deckes, (being not vsed to it) and many (as I may
terme them) * Land-Darters, both Acarnanians, and * [...]
others, who would not be able to direct their Darts,
though they should t, how can they choose but put the Gallies into danger,
and be all in confusion amongst themselues, mouing in a fashion * not their
owne? As for the number of their Gallies, it will        * [...]
helpe them nothing (if any of you feare also that, as
being to ght against oddes in number. ) For many in little roome, are so
much the slower to doe what they desire, and easiest to bee annoyed by our
munition. But the very truth you shall now vnderstand by these things,
whereof we suppose we haue most certaine intelligence.

Ouerwhelmed with Calamities, and forced by the di culties which they are
in at this present, they are growne desperate, not trusting to their Forces, but

 willing to put themselues vpon the decision of Fortune, as well as they may,
 that so they may either goe out by force, or else make their retreat afterward by
 Land, as men whose estates cannot change into the worse.

 Against such confusion therefore, and against the fortune of our greatest
 enemies, now betraying it selfe into our hands, let vs ght with anger, and
 with an opinion, not onely that it is most lawfull, to ful ll our hearts desire
 vpon those our enemies that iusti ed their comming hither, as a righting of
 themselues against an assailant; but also, that to be reuenged on an Enemie, is
 both most naturall, and, as is most commonly said, the sweetest thing in the
 world. And that they are our Enemies, and our greatest Enemies, you all well
 enough know, seeing them come hither into our dominion, to bring vs into
 seruitude. Wherein if they had sped, they had put the men to the greatest
 tortures, the women and children to the greatest dishonesty, and the whole
 Citie to the most ignominious * name in the world. * viz. the name of Subita.
 In regard whereof, it is not t that any of you should
 be so tender, as to thinke it gaine, if they goe away without putting you to
 further danger, for so they meane to doe, though they get the victory: But
 e ecting (as it is likely we shall) what wee intend, both to be reuenged of
 these, and to deliuer vnto all Sicily their liberty, which they enioyed before,
 but now is more assured. Honourable is that Combate, and rare are those
 hazards, wherein the failing bringeth little losse, and the successe, a great deale
 of Pro t.

When Gylippus, and the Commanders of the Syracusians had in this 
manner encouraged their Souldiers, they presently put their men aboord,
perceiuing the Athenians to doe the same.

Nicias perplexed with this present estate, and seeing Nicias encourageth his Souldiers
how great and how neere the danger was, being now anew.
on the point to put forth from the Harbour, and doubting (as in great battels it
falleth out) that somewhat in euery kind was still wanting, and that he had not
yet su ciently spoken his mind, called vnto him againe, all the Captaines of

Gallies, and spake vnto them euery one by their fathers, their tribes, and their
proper names, and entreated euery one of them that had reputation in any kind,
not to betray the same; and those whose Ancestors were eminent, not to deface
their hereditary vertues; remembring them of their Countries liberty, and the
vncontrolled power of all men to liue as they pleased, and saying whatsoeuer else
in such a pinch men are accustomed, not out of their store to * vtter things stale,
and in all occasions the same, touching their Wiues, * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉. To speake
Children, and patriall Gods, but such things as being old or 〈◊〉 Sentences.
thought by them auaileable in the present discouragement, they vse to cry into
their eares. And when he thought he had admonished He prepareth to ﬁght.
them not enough, but as much as the time would
permit, he went his way, and drew out those forces that were to serue on Land,
to the Sea side, and embattelled them so, as they might take vp the greatest
length of ground they were able, thereby, so much the more to con rme the
courage of them that were aboord. And Demosthenes Menander, and Eudemus,
(for those of the Athenian Commanders went aboord) putting forth of the
Harbour, went immediately to the Locke of the Hauen, and to the passage that
was left open, with intention to force their way out. But the Syracusians and
their Confederates, being out already with the same number of Gallies, they had
before disposed part of them to the guard of the open passage, and the rest in
circle about the Hauen, to the end they might fall vpon the Athenians from all
parts at once, and that their Land-forces might withall be neere to aide them,
wheresoeuer the Gallies touched. In the Syracusian Nauy, commanded Sicanus,
and Agatharchus, each of them ouer a Wing, and Pythen, with the Corinthians,
had the middle Battell. After the Athenians were come to the Locke 
of the Hauen, at the rst charge they ouercame the Gallies placed there to guard
it, and endeauoured to breake open the barres thereof. But when afterwards the
Syracusians and Confederates came vpon them from euery side, they fought not
at the Locke only, but also in the Hauen it selfe. And the battell was sharpe, and
such as there had neuer before been the like. For the The Athenians 〈…〉 ight.
                                                                         ●

courage wherewith the Mariners on both sides
brought vp their Gallies to any part they were bidden, was very great, and great
was the plotting and counterplotting, and contention one against another of the

Masters. Also the Souldiers, when the Gallies boorded each other, did their
vtmost to excell each other in all points of skill that could be vsed from the
Decks, and euery man in the place assigned him▪ put himselfe forth to appeare
the formost. But many Gallies falling close together in a narrow compasse (for
they were the most Gallies that in any battell they had vsed, and fought in the
least roome, being little fewer on the one side and the other, then 200.) they
ranne against each other, but seldome, because there was no meanes of retiring,
nor of passing by, but made assaults vpon each other oftner, as Gally with Gally,
either ying, or pursuing chanced to fall foule. And as long as a Gally was
making vp, they that stood on the Decks, vsed their Darts and Arrowes, and
Stones in abundance, but being once come close, the Souldiers at hand-stroakes
attempted to boord each other. And in many places it so fell out, through want
of roome, that they which ran vpon a Gally on one side, were runne vpon
themselues on the other; and that two Gallies, or sometimes more, were forced
to lye aboord of one, and that the Masters were at once to haue a care, not in one
place onely, but in many together, how to defend on the one side, and how to
o end on the other. And the great noise of many Gallies fallen foule of one
another, both amazed them and tooke away their hearing of what their *
Directors directed; for they directed thicke and loud * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
on both sides, not onely as Art required▪ but out of
their present eagernesse; the Athenians crying out to theirs, to force the passage,
and now, if euer, valiantly to lay hold vpon their safe returne to their Country;
and the Syracusians and their Confederates, to theirs, how honourable a thing to
euery one of them it would be, to hinder their escape, and by this        
Victory to improue, euery man, the honour of his owne Countrey. Moreouer,
the Commanders of either side where they saw any man without necessity to
row a Sterne, would call vnto the Captain of the Gally by his name, & aske him,
The Athenians, whether he retired, because he thought the most hostile Land to
be more their friend then the Sea, which they had so long beene masters of? The
Syracusians theirs, whether when they knew that the Athenians desired earnestly
by any meanes to ie, they would neuerthelesse ie from the Flyers? Whilest the
Con ict was vpon the Water, the Land-men had a Con ict and sided with them
in their a ections. They of the place, contending for increase of the honours

they had already gotten, and the Inuaders fearing a worse estate than they were
already in. For the Athenians, who had their whole fortune at stake in their
Gallies, were in such a feare of the euent, as they had neuer been in the like; and
were thereby of necessity to behold the ght vpon the Water, with very di erent
passions. For the sight being neere, and not looking all The diuersity of passion 〈◊〉
of them vpon one and the same part, he that saw their them tha      ●●●   held the sight,
                                                            from the Shoare.
owne side preuaile, tooke heart, and fell to calling
vpon the Gods, that they would not depriue them of their safety; and they that
saw them haue the worse, not onely lamented, but shriked out-right, and had
their minds more subdued by the sight of what was done, then they, that were
present in the battell it selfe. Others that looked on some part where the ght
was equall, because the contention continued so, as they could make no
iudgment on it, with gesture of body on euery occasion, agreeable to their
expectation, passed the time in a miserable perplexity. For they were euer within
a little either of escaping, or of perishing. And one might heare in one and the
same Army, as long as the ght vpon the Water was indi erent, at one & the
same time, Lamentations, Shouts, That they won, That they lost, and whatsoeuer
else a great Army, in great danger is forced di erently to vtter. They also that
were aboord, su ered the same, till at last the Syracusians and their
Confederates, after long resistance of the other side, The Athenians ﬂye.
put them to ight, & manifestly pressing, chased them
with great clamor & encouragement of their owne, to the Shoare. And the Sea-
forces making to the Shore, some one way, and some another, except only such
as were lost by being far from it, escaped into the Harbour. And the 
Army that was vpon the Land, no longer now of di erent passions, with one
and the same vehemence, all with shrikes and sighes, vnable to sustaine what
befell, ran part to saue the Gallies, part to the defence of the Campe; and the
residue, who were far the greatest number, fell presently to consider euery one of
the best way to saue himselfe. And this was the time, wherein of all other they
stood in greatest feare, and they su ered now, the like to what they had made
others to su er before at Pylus. For the Lacedaemonians then, besides the losse
of their Fleet, lost the men which they had set ouer into the Iland, and the
Athenians now (without some accident not to be expected) were out of all hope

to saue them selues by Land. After this cruell battell, and many Gallies and men
on either side consumed, the Syracusians and their Confederates hauing the
victory, tooke vp the wrecke, and bodies of their dead, and returning into the
City, erected a Trophy. But the Athenians, in respect of the greatnesse of their
present losse, neuer thought vpon asking leaue to take vp their dead or wreck,
but fell immediately to consultation how to bee gone the same night. And
Demosthenes comming vnto Nicias, deliuered his opinion, for going once
againe aboard, and forcing the passage, if it were possible, betimes the next
morning; saying that their Gallies which were yet remaining, and seruiceable,
were more then those of the Enemy. (for the Athenians had yet left them about
60, and the Syracusians vnder 50.) But when Nicias approued the aduice, and
would haue manned out the Gallies, the Mariners refused to goe aboord, as
being not onely deiected with their defeat, but also without opinion of euer
hauing the vpper hand any more. Whereupon they now resolued all, to make
their retreat by Land. But Hermocrates of Syracuse           The stratagem of Hermocrates,
suspecting their purpose, and apprehending it as a           to hinder the escape of the
                                                             Athenians.
matter dangerous, that so great an Army going away
by Land, and sitting downe in some part or other of Sicily, should there renue
the War, repayred vnto the Magistrates, and admonished them, that it was not t
through negligence, to su er the Enemy in the night time to goe their wayes,
(alledging what he thought best to the purpose) but that all the Syracusians and
their Confederates should goe out and forti e in their way, and prepossesse all
the narrow passages with a guard. Now they were all of them of the 
same opinion, no lesse then himselfe, and thought it t to be done, but they
conceaued withall, that the Souldier now ioyfull, and taking his ease after a sore
battell, being also holiday, (for it was their day of sacri ce to Hercules) would
not easily be brought to obey. For through excesse of ioy for the victory, they
would most of them, being holiday, be drinking, and looke for any thing, rather
then to be perswaded at this time to take Armes againe, and goe out. But seeing
the Magistrates vpon this consideration thought it hard to be done,
Hermocrates not preuailing, of his own head contriued this. Fearing lest the
Athenians should passe the worst of their way in the night, and so at ease out-
goe them, as soone as it grew darke, he sent certaine of his friends, and with

them certaine Horsemen, to the Athenian Campe, who approaching so neere as
to be heard speake, called to some of them to come forth, as if they had beene
friends of the Athenians (for Nicias had some within that vsed to giue him
intelligence) and bade them to aduise Nicias not to dislodge that night, for that
the Syracusians had beset the waies, but that the next day, hauing had the leasure
to furnish their Armie, they might march away. Vpon this aduertisement they
abode that night, supposing it had beene without fraud. And afterwards,
because they went not presently, they thought good to stay there that day also;
to the end that the Souldiers might packe vp their necessaries as commodiously
as they could, and be gone, leauing all things else behind them, saue what was
necessary for their bodies. But Gylippus and the           Gylippus goeth out with his
Syracusians, with their land-forces, went out before       Forces, and besets the way.

them, and not only stopped vp the waies in the Countrey about, by which the
Athenians were likely to passe, and kept a guard at the foords of brookes and
riuers, but also stood embattelled to receiue and stop their Army in such places
as they thought conuenient. And with their Gallies they rowed to the Harbour
of the Athenians, and towed their Gallies away from the shore; some few
whereof they burnt, as the Athenians themselues meant to haue done; but the
rest, at their leasure, as any of them chanced in any place to driue ashore, they
afterwards haled into the City. After this, when euery The Athenians march away
thing seemed vnto Nicias and Demosthenes,                  from before Syracuse by Land.

su ciently prepared they dislodged, being now the third day from their ght by
Sea.

It was a lamentable departure, not onely for the particulars, as that 
they marched away with the losse of their whole Fleet, & that in stead of their
great hopes, they had endangered both themselues and the State, but also for the
dolorous obiects, which were presented both to the eye and minde of euery of
them in particular, in the leauing of their Campe. For their dead lying vnburyed,
when any one saw his friend on the ground, it strooke him at once, both with
feare and griefe. But the liuing that were sicke or wounded, both grieued them
more then the dead, and were more miserable. For with intreaties and
lamentations they put them to a stand, pleading to bee taken along by

whomsoeuer they saw of their fellowes or familiars, and hanging on the neckes
of their Camerades, and following as farre as they were able. And when the
strength of their bodies failed, that they could goe no further, with Ay-mees and
imprecations, were there left. Insomuch as the whole Armie lled with teares,
and irresolute, could hardly get away, though the place were hostile, and they
had su ered already, and feared to su er in the future, more then with teares
could bee expressed, but hung downe their heads, and generally blamed
themselues. For they seemed nothing else, but euen the people of some great
City expugned by siege, and making their escape. For the whole number that
marched, were no lesse, one with another, then 40000. men. Of which, not
onely the ordinary sort carried euery one what he thought he should haue
occasion to vse; but also the men of Armes & Horsemen, contrary to their
custome, carried their victuals vnder their Armes, partly for want, & partly for
distrust of their seruants, who from time to time ran ouer to the enemy; but at
this time went the greatest number: and yet what they carried, was not enough
to serue the turne. For not a iot more prouision was left remaining in the
Campe. Neither were the su erings of others, and that equal diuision of misery,
which neuerthelesse is wont to lighten it, in that we su er with many, at this
time so much as thought light in it selfe. And the rather, because they considered
from what splendor and glory which they enioyed before, into how low an estate
they were now falne: For neuer Grecian Army so di ered from it selfe. For
whereas they came with a purpose to enslaue others, they departed in greater
feare of being made slaues themselues, and in stead of Prayers and 
Hymnes, with which they put to Sea, they went backe againe with the contrary
maledictions; and whereas they came out Sea-men, they departed Land-men,
and relyed not vpon their Nauall forces, but vpon their men of Armes.
Neuerthelesse, in respect of the great danger yet hanging ouer them, these
miseries seemed all but tolerable. Nicias perceiuing the Armie to be deiected, and
the great change that was in it, came vp to the Rankes, and encouraged and
comforted them, as far as for the present meanes he was able. And as he went
from part to part, he exalted his voyce more then euer before, both as being
earnest in his exhortation, and because also he desired that the bene t or his
words might reach as farre as might be.

7.1. THE ORATION OF NICIAS to his a icted
Army.
AThenians, and Confederates, we must hope still, euen in our present estate.
Men haue beene saued ere now from greater dangers then these are. Nor
ought you too much to accuse your selues, either for your losses past, or the
vndeserued miseries we are now in. Euen I my selfe, that haue the aduantage
of none of you in strength of body, (you see how I am in my sicknesse) nor am
thought inferiour to any of you for prosperity past, either in respect of mine
owne priuate person, or otherwise, am neuerthelesse now in as much danger
as the meanest of you. And yet I haue worshipped the Gods frequently
acording to the Law, and liued iustly and vnblamably towards men. For which
cause, my hope is still con dent of the future, though these calamities, as
being not according to the measure of our desert▪ doe indeed make me feare.
But they may perhaps cease. For both the Enemies haue already had su cient
fortune, and the Gods if any of them haue beene displeased with our Voyage,
haue already su ciently punished vs. Others haue inuaded their neighbours
as well as wee, and as their o ence, which proceeded of humane in rmity, so
their punishment also hath beene tolerable. And we haue reason now, both to
hope for more fauour from the Gods, (for our case deserueth their pitty rather
then their hatred) and also not to despaire of our selues, seeing how good and
how many men of Armes you are, marching together in order of Battell. Make
account of this, that wheresoeuer you please to sit downe, there presently of
your selues you are a City, such as not any other in Sicily can        
either easily sustaine, if you assault, or remoue, if you be once seated. Now for
your March, that it may be safe and orderly, looke to it your selues, making no
other account any of you but what place soeuer he shall be forced to ght in,
the same, if he win it, must be his Country and his Walles. March you must
with diligence, both night and day alike, for our victuall is short; and if we can
but reach some amicable Territory of the Siculi, (for these are still rme to vs
for feare of the Syracusians, ) then you may thinke your selues secure. Let vs

 therefore send before to them, and bid them meete vs, and bring vs forth some
 supplies of victuall. In summe, Souldiers, let me tell you, it is necessary that
 you be valiant; for there is no place neere, where being cowards, you can
 possibly be saued. Whereas if you escape thorow the Enemies at this time▪
 you may euery one see againe whatsoeuer any where he most desires, and the
 Athenians may re-erect the great power of their City, how low soeuer falne.
 For the men, not the Walles, nor the empty Gallies, are the Citie.

Nicias, as he vsed this hortatiue, went withall about the Armie, and where he
saw any man straggle and not march in his Ranke, he brought him about, and
set him in his place. Demosthenes hauing spoken to the same or like purpose,
did as much to those Souldiers vnder him; and they marched forward, those
with Nicias in a square Battallion, and then those with Demosthenes in the
Rere. And the men of Armes receiued those that carried the Baggage, and the
other multitude, within them.

When they were come to the Foord of the Riuer Anapus, they there found
cettaine of the Syracusians and their Confederates        The Athenians march, and the
embattelled against them on the banke, but these they Syracusians assault them
                                                          alwaies as they goe
put to ight, and hauing wonne the passage, marched
forward. But the Syracusian Horsemen lay still vpon them, and their Light-
armed plyed them with their Darts in the anke. This day the Athenians
marched forty Furlongs, and lodged that night at the foot of a certaine Hill. The
next day, as soone as it was light, they marched forwards, about 20 Furlongs, and
descending into a certaine Champaigne ground, encamped there, with intent
both to get victuall at the houses, (for the place was inhabited) and to carry water
with them thence; for before them, in the way they were to passe, for many
Furlongs together there was little to bee had. But the Syracusians in 
the meane time got before them, and cut o their passage with a wall. This was
at a steepe Hill, on either side wherof was the Channel of a torrent with steep
and rocky banks, and it is called Acraeum Lepas. The next day the Athenians
went on. And the Horsemen and Darters of the Syracusians, and their
Confederates, being a great number of both, pressed them so with their Horses

and Darts, that the Athenians after long ght, were compelled to retire againe
into the same Campe: But now with lesse victuall then before, because the
Horsemen would su er them no more to straggle abroad. In the morning
betimes they dislodged, and put themselues on their march againe, and forced
their way to the Hill which the Enemy had forti ed, where they found before
them, the Syracusian Foot embattelled in great length aboue the Forti cation,
on the Hils side (for the place it selfe was but narrow. ) The Athenians, comming
vp assaulted the Wall, but the shot of the Enemy, who were many, and the
steepnesse of the Hill (for they could easily cast home from aboue) making them
vnable to take it, they retired againe and rested. There hapned withall some claps
of Thunder, and a showre of Raine, as vsually falleth out at this time of the
yeere, being now neere Autumne, which further disheartened the Athenians,
who thought that also this did tend to their destruction. Whilst they lay still,
Gylippus and the Syracusians sent part of their Army, to raise a Wall at their
backs, in the way they had come, but this the Athenians hindred, by sending
against them part of theirs. After this, the Athenians retiring with their whole
Army into a more Champaigne ground, lodged there that night; and the next
day went forward againe. And the Syracusians with their Darts from euery part
round about, wounded many of them; and when the Athenians charged, they
retired, and when they retired, the Syracusians charged; and that especially vpon
the hindmost, that by putting to ight a few, they might terri e the whole Army.
And for a good while the Athenians, in this manner withstood them, and
afterwards, being gotten ue or six Furlongs forward, Nicias and Demosthenes rise 〈◊〉
they rested in the Plaine; and the Syracusians went        the night, and march a contrary
                                                           way, Nicias formost, and in
from them to their owne Campe.                             order, but Demosthenes in the
                                                             Ree●e▪ slower and more in
This night it was concluded by Nicias and                    disorder.

Demosthenes, seeing the miserable estate of their Army, and the want already of
all necessaries, and that many of their men, in many assaults of the 
Enemy were wounded, to lead away the Army as farre as they possible could, not
the way they purposed before, but toward the Sea, which was the contrary way
to that which the Syracusians guarded. Now this whole iourney of the Army lay
not towards Catana, but towards the other side of Sicily, Camarina, and Gela,

and the Cities, as well Grecian, as Barbarian, that way. When they had made
many res accordingly, they marched in the night, and (as vsually it falleth out in
all Armies, and most of all in the greatest, to be subiect to a right and terrour,
especially marching by night, and in hostile ground, and the enemy neere) were
in confusion. The Army of Nicias leading the way, kept together and got farre
afore, but that of Demosthenes, which was the greater halfe, was both seuered
from the rest, and marched more disorderly. Neuerthelesse, by the morning
betimes they got to the Sea side, and entring▪ into the Helorine way, they went
on towards the Riuer Cacyparis, to the end when they came thither to march
vpwards along the Riuers side, through the heart of the Countrey. For they
hoped that this way, the Siculi to whom they had sent, would meet them. When
they came to the Riuer, here also they found a certaine guard of the Syracusians,
stopping their passage with a Wall, and with Pyles. When they had quickly
forced this guard, they passed the Riuer, and againe marched on, to another
Riuer called Erineus, for that was the way which the Guides directed them. In
the meane time the Syracusians, and their Confederates, as soone as day
appeared, and that they knew the Athenians were gone, most of them accusing
Gylippus, as if he had let them go with his consent, followed them with speed
the same way, which they easily vnderstood they were gone, and about dinner
time ouertooke them. When they were come vp to             Demosthenes ouertaken by the
those with Demosthenes, who were the hindmost,             enemy, resisteth as long as he
                                                           can, and is taken.
and had marched more slowly and disorderly then the
other part had done, as hauing been put into disorder in the night, they fell vpon
them, and fought. And the Syracusian Horsemen hemmed them in, and forced
them vp into a narrow compasse, the more easily now, because they were diuided
from the rest. Now the Army of Nicias was gone by this time 150 Furlongs
further on. For he led away the faster, because he thought not that 
their safety consisted in staying and ghting voluntarily, but rather in a speedy
retreat, and then onely ghting when they could not choose. But Demosthenes
was both in greater, and in more continuall toyle, in respect that he marched in
the Reere, and consequently was pressed by the Enemy. And seeing the
Syracusians pursuing him, he went not on, but put his men into order to ght,
till by his stay he was encompassed, and reduced, he and the Athenians with him

into great disorder. For being shut vp, within a place enclosed round with a Wall,
and which on either side had a way open, amongst abundance of Oliue trees,
they were charged from all sides at once with the Enemies shot. For the
Syracusians assaulted them in this kind, and not in close battell, vpon very good
reason. For to hazzard battell against men desperate, was not so much for theirs,
as for the Athenians aduantage. Besides, after so manifest successes, they spared
themselues somewhat, because they were loth to weare themselues out before
the end of the businesse, and thought by this kind of ght, to subdue and take
them aliue. Whereupon, after they had plyed the Athenians & their
Confederates, all day long from euery side with shot, and saw that with their
wounds, and other annoyance, they were already tired; Gylippus, and the
Syracusians, and their Confederates, rst made Proclamation, that if any of the
Ilanders would come ouer to them, they should be at liberty; And the men of
some few Cities went ouer. And by and by after they made agreement with all
the rest, that were with Demosthenes, That they should deliuer vp their Armes,
and none of them be put to death, neither violently, nor Demosthenes yeeldeth.
by bonds, nor by want of the necessities of life. And they
all yeelded, to the number of 6000 men, and the siluer they had, they laid it all
downe, casting it into the hollow of Targets, and lled with the same, foure
Targets. And these men, they carried presently into the Citie.

Nicias and those that were with him attained the same day to the Riuer Erineus,
which passing, he caused his Armie to sit downe vpon a certaine ground more
eleuate then the rest; where the Syracusians the next day ouertooke and told
him, That those with Demosthenes had yeelded themselues, and willed him, to
do the like. But he, not beleeuing it, tooke Truce for a Horseman to 
enquire the truth. Vpon returne of the Horseman, and word that they had
yeelded, he sent a Herald to Gylippus and the Syracusians, saying, That he was
content to compound on the part of the Athenians, to repay whatsoeuer money
the Syracusians had laid out, so that his Army might The oﬀer of Nicias to redeeme
be su ered to depart. And that till payment of the        his army, not accepted.

money were made, he would deliuer them Hostages, Athenians, euery Hostage
rated at a Talent. But Gylippus and the Syracusians refusing the condition,

charged them, and hauing hemmed them in, plyed them with shot, as they had
done the other Army, from euery side, till euening. This part of the Armie was
also pinched with the want both of victuall and other necessaries. Neuerthelesse
obseruing the quiet of the night, they were about to march. But no sooner tooke
they their Armes vp, then the Syracusians perceiuing it, gaue the Alarme.
Whereupon the Athenians nding themselues discouered, sate downe againe; all
but 300, who breaking by force through the guards, marched as farre as they
could that night. And Nicias when it was day, led his Army forward, the
Syracusians and their Confederates still pressing them in the same manner,
shooting and darting at them from euery side. The Athenians hasted to get the
Riuer Asinarus, not onely because they were vrged on euery side by the assault
of the many Horsemen, and other multitude, and thought to be more at ease
when they were ouer the Riuer, but out of wearinesse also, and desire to drinke.
When they were come vnto the Riuer, they rushed in without any order, euery
man striuing who should rst get ouer. But the pressing of the Enemy, made the
passage now more di cult. For being forced to take the Riuer in heaps, they fell
vpon and trampled one another vnder their feet; and falling amongst the
Speares, and vtensiles of the Armie, some perished presently, and others catching
hold one of another, were carried away together downe the streame. And not
only the Syracusians standing along the farther banke being a steepe one, killed
the Athenians with their shot from aboue, as they were many of them greedily
drinking, and troubling one another in the hollow of the Riuer, but the
Peloponnesians came also downe▪ and slew them with their Swords, and those
especially that were in the Riuer. And suddenly the water was         
corrupted. Neuerthelesse they drunke it, foule as it was, with blood and mire,
and many also fought for it. In the end, when many dead lay heaped in the
Riuer, and the Armie was vtterly defeated, part at the Riuer, and part (if any gat
away) by the Horsemen, Nicias yeelded himselfe vnto Gylippus, (hauing more
con dence in him then in the Syracusians) To be for his owne person at the
discretion of him and the Lacedaemonians, and no further slaughter to be made
of the Souldiers. Gylippus from thenceforth commanded to take prisoners. So the
residue, except such as were hidden from them (which were many) they carried
aliue into the Citie. They sent also to pursue the 300. which brake through their

guards in the night, and tooke them. That which was left together of this Armie,
to the publike, was not much; but they that were conueyed away by stealth were
very many: and all Sicily was lled with them, because they were not taken, as
those with Demosthenes were, by composition. Besides, a great part of these
were slaine; for the slaughter at this time was exceeding great, none greater in all
the Sicilian Warre. They were also not a few that dyed in those other assaults in
their March. Neuerthelesse many also escaped, some then presently, and some by
running away after seruitude, the Rendez-uous of whom was Catana.

The Syracusians and their Confederates, being come together, returned with
their prisoners, all they could get, and with the spoile, into the Citie. As for all
other the prisoners of the Athenians and their Confederates, they put them into
the * Quarries, as the safest custodie. But Nicias and * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉,
Demosthenes they killed, against Gylippus his will.
For Gylippus thought the victory would be very honourable, if ouer and aboue
all his other successe, he could carry home both the Generals of the Enemy to
Lacedaemon. And it fell out, that the one of them, Demosthenes, was their
greatest Enemy, for the things he had done in the *         * Sphacteria.
Iland, and at Pylus; and the other, vpon the same
occasion, their greatest friend; For Nicias had earnestly laboured to haue those
prisoners which were taken in the Iland, to bee set at liberty, by perswading the
Athenians to the Peace. For which cause the Lacedaemonians were inclined to
loue him. And it was principally in con dence of that, that he rendred himselfe
to Gylippus. But certaine Syracusians, (as it is reported) some of        
them for feare (because they had beene tampering with him) lest being put to
the torture, hee might bring them into trouble, whereas now they were well
enough; and others (especially the Corinthians) fearing he might get away by
corruption of one or other, (being wealthy) and worke them some mischiefe
afresh, hauing perswaded their Confederates to the same, killed him. For these,
or for causes neere vnto these, was hee put to death, being the man that of all the
Grecians of my time, had least deserued to be brought to so great a degree of
misery. As for those in the Quarries, the Syracusians handled them at rst but
vngently. For in this hollow place, rst the Sunne and su ocating ayre (being

without roofe) annoyed them one way: and on the other side, the nights
comming vpon that heate, autumnall and cold, put them, by reason of the
alteration, into strange diseases. Especially, doing all things for want of roome, in
one and the same place, and the Carkasses of such as dyed of their wounds, or
change of ayre, or other like accident, lying together there on heaps. Also the
smell was intollerable, besides that they were a icted with hunger and thirst. For
for eight moneths together, they allowed them no more but to euery man a *
Cotyle of water by the day, and two Cotiles of Corne. * A small measure, about halfe
And whatsoeuer misery is probable that men in such a our Pyne.
place may su er, they su ered. Some 70 dayes they liued thus thronged.
Afterwards, retaining the Athenians, and such Sicilians and Italians as were of
the Army with them, they sold the rest. How many were taken in all, it is hard to
say exactly; but they were 7000 at the fewest. And this was the greatest action
that hapned in all this Warre, or at all, that we haue heard of amongst the
Grecians, being to the Victors most glorious, and most calamitous to the
vanquicted. For being wholly ouercome▪ in euery kinde, and receiuing small
losse in nothing, their Army, and Fleet, and all that euer they had, perished (as
they vse to say) with an vniuersall destruction. Few of many returned home.
And thus passed the businesse concerning Sicily.

              8. THE EIGHTH BOOK OF THE
              HISTORIE OF THVCYDIDES.
              The principall Contents.
The Reuolt of the Athenian Confederates, and the O ers made by 
Tissaphernes, and Pharnabazus, the Kings Lieutenants of the lower Asia, draw
the Lacedaemonians to the Warre in Ionia, and Hellespont. First in Ionia, and
the Prouinces of Tissaphernes, who by the Councell of Alcibiades, and
conniuence of Astyochus, hindereth their proceedings. Alcibiades in the meane
while to make way for his returne into his countrey, giueth occasion of sedition
about the gouernment, whence ensued the authority of the 400, vnder the
pretext of the 5000; the recalling of Alcibiades by the Army; and at length by his
countenance the deposing againe of the 400, and end of the Sedition. But in the
meane time they lose Euboea. Mindarus, Successor of Astyochus, nding
himselfe abused by Tissaphernes, carrieth the Warre to Pharnabazus, into
Hellespont, and there presently loseth a Battell to the Athenians before Abydus,
being then Summer, and the 21 yeere of the Warre.

WHen the newes was told at Athens, they beleeued            The feare and sorrow of the
not a long time, though it were plainly related, and by Athenians vpon the hearing of
                                                            the newes.
those very Souldiers that escaped from the defeat it
selfe, that all was so vtterly lost, at it was. When they knew it, they were mightily
o ended with the Orators that furthered the Voyage, as if they themselues had
neuer decreed it, They were angry also with those that gaue out Prophecies, and
with the Soothsayers, and with whosoeuer else had at rst by any               
diuination put them into hope that Sicily should be subdued. Euery thing, from
euery place, grieued them; and feare and astonishment, the greatest that euer
they were in, beset them round. For they were not onely grieued for the losse
which both euery man in particular, and the whole City sustained, of so many
men of Armes Horsemen, and seruiceable men, the like whereof they saw was

not left, but seeing they had neither Gallies in their Hauen nor money in their
Treasurie, nor furniture in their Gallies, were euen desperate at that present of
their safety, and thought the Enemy out of Sicily, would come forthwith with
their Fleet into Piraeus, (especially after the vanquishing of so great a Nauy) and
that the Enemie here would surely now, with double preparation in euery kinde,
presse them to the vtmost, both by Sea and Land, and be aided therein by their
reuolting Confederates. Neuerthelesse, as farre as their The Athenians resolue to stand
meanes would stretch, it was thought best to stand it it out.
out, and getting materials and money where they could haue it, to make ready a
Nauie, and to make sure of their Confederates, especially those of Euboea; and
to introduce a greater frugality in the Citie, and to erect a Magistracie of the
elder sort, as occasion should be o ered, to praeconsult of the businesse that
passed. And they were ready, in respect of their present feare, (as is the Peoples
fashion) to order euery thing aright. And as they          The end of the nineteenth
resolued this, so they did it. And the Summer ended. Summer.

The Winter following, vpon the great ouerthrow of The Grecians take part all of
the Athenians in Sicily, all the Grecians were presently them against the Athenians.
vp against them. Those who before were Confederates of neither side, thought
  t no longer, though vncalled, to abstaine from the Warre, but to goe against the
Athenians of their owne accord, as hauing not onely euery one seuerally this
thought, that had the Athenians prospered in Sicily, they would afterwards haue
come vpon them also, but imagined withall, that the rest of the Warre would be
but short whereof it would be an honour to participate. And such of them as
were Confederates of the Lacedaemonian, longed now more then euer, to be
freed as soone as might be of their great toyle. But aboue all, the Cities subiect to
the Athenians, were ready, euen beyond their ability, to reuolt, as        
they that iudged according to their passion, without admitting reason in the
matter, that the next Summer they were to remaine with victory. But the
Lacedaemonians themselues tooke heart, not onely          The hopes of the
from all this, but also principally from that, that their Lacedaemonians.
Confederates in Sicily, with great power, hauing another Nauy now necessarily
added to their owne, would in all likelihood be with them in the beginning of

the Spring. And being euery way full of hopes, they purposed without delay to
fall close to the Warre; making account, if this were well ended, both to be free
hereafter from any more such dangers as the Athenians, if they had gotten Sicily,
would haue put them into, and also hauing pulled them downe, to haue the
principality of all Greece, now secure vnto themselues.

Whereupon Agis their King went out with a part of his Armie the same Winter
from Decelea, and leuied money amongst the              Agis leuieth money.
Confederates, for the building of a Nauy. And
turning into the Melian Gulfe vpon an old grudge, tooke a great Booty from the
Oetaeans, which hee made money of, and forced those of Pthiotis, being
Achaians, and others in those parts, Subiects to the Thessalians, (the Thessalians
complaining, and vnwilling) to giue him Hostages, and Money. The Hostages he
put into Corinth, and endeuoured to draw them into the League.

And the Lacedaemonians imposed vpon the States confederate, the charge of
building 100 Gallies, [that is to say] on their owne      The Lacedaemonians appoint a
State, and on the Boeotians, each 25. On the              Fleet of 100. Gallies, to be made
                                                          ready amongst the Cities of
Phoceans and Locrians, 15. On the Corinthians, 15. League,
On the Arcadians, Sicyonians, and Pellenians, 10.
And on the Megareans, Troezenians, and Hermionians, 10. And put all things
else in readinesse, presently with the Spring to beginne the Warre.

The Athenians also made their preparations, as they The Athenians build their
had designed, hauing gotten Timber, and built their Nauy, and contract their
                                                      charges.
Nauie this same Winter, and forti ed the Promontory
of Sunium, that their Corne-boats might come about in safety. Also they
abandoned the Fort in Laconia, which they had built as they went by for Sicily.
And generally where there appeared expence vpon any thing vnusefull, they
contracted their charge.

Whilest they were on both sides doing thus, there   The Euboeans oﬀer to reuolt to
came vnto Agis, about their reuolt from  Agis.
the Athenians, rst the Ambassadours of the Euboeans. Accepting the motion,

he sent for Alcamenes the sonne of Sthenelaidas, and for Melanthon, from
Lacedaemon, to goe Commanders into Euboea. Whom, when he was come to
him, with about 300 freed-men, he was now about to send ouer. But in the
meane time came the Lesbians, they also desiring to      The Lesbians oﬀer to reuolt to
reuolt, and by the meanes of the Boeotians, Agis         Agis.

changed his former resolution, and prepared for the reuolt of Lesbos, deferring
that of Euboea, and assigned them Alcamenes, the same that should haue gone
into Euboea, for their Gouernour. And the Boeotians promised them tenne
Gallies, and Agis other tenne, Now this was done, without acquainting
therewith the State of Lacedaemon. For Agis, as long as he was about Decelea
with the power he had, had the Law in his owne hands, to send what Armie, and
whither he listed, and to leuy men and mony at his pleasure. And at this time,
the Confederates of him (as I may call them) did better obey him, then the
Confederates of the Lacedemonians did them at home. For hauing the power in
his hands, he was terrible wheresoeuer he came. And he was now for the
Lesbians. But the Chians and Erythraeans, they also The Chians and Erit     ●●●     ans
desiring to reuolt, went not to Agis, but to the         〈◊〉 to reuolt.

Lacedaemonians in the City, and with them went also an Ambassadour from
Tissaphernes, Lieutenant to King Darius in the low Countries of Asia. For
Tissaphernes also instigated the Peloponnesians, and Tissaphernes Lieutenant of the
promised to pay their Fleet. For he had lately begged lower Asia, laboureth to haue the
                                                         Lacedaemonians 〈◊〉 vnto him.
of the King the Tribute accruing in his owne
Prouince, for which he was in arrearage, because he could receiue nothing out of
any of the Greeke Cities, by reason of the Athenians. And therefore he thought
by weakning the Athenians, to receiue his Tribute the better, and withall to draw
the Lacedaemonians into a League with the King, and thereby, as the King had
commanded, to kill or take aliue Amorges, Pissuthnes his bastard sonne, who was
in rebellion against him about Caria. The Chians therefore and Tissaphernes,
followed this businesse ioyntly.

Caligetus the sonne of Laophon, a Magarean, and      Pharnabazus Lieutenant of
Timagoras the sonne of Athenagoras, a Cyzicene, both Helespont, laboureth the li e for
                                                                                ●

                                                     himselfe.
banished their owne Cities, and abiding with

Pharnabazus the sonne of Pharnaces came also about the same time to
Lacedaemon, sent by Pharnabazus, to procure a Fleet for the            
Hellespont, that he also, if he could, might cause the Athenian Cities in his
Prouince to reuolt for his Tributes sake, and be the rst to draw the
Lacedaemonians into league with the King. 〈◊〉 the same things that were desired
before by Tissaphernes. Now Pharnabazus and Tissaphernes treating apart,
there was great canuasing at Lacedaemon, betweene the one side, that perswaded
to send to Ionia and Chius, and the other, that would haue the Armie and Fleet
goe rst into the Hellespont. But the Lacedaemonians indeed approued best by
much of the businesse of the Chians, and of Tissaphernes. For with these
cooperated Alcibiades, hereditary Guest and friend of Endius, the Ephore of
that yeere, in the highest degree; insomuch as in respect of that guesthood,
Alcibiades his family receiued a Laconique name. For Endius was called Endius *
Alcibiadis. Neuerthelesse the Lacedaemonians sent         * [...]
  rst one Phrynis, a man of those parts, to Chius, to
see if the Gallies they had, were so many as they reported, and whether the Citie
were otherwise so su cient as it was said to be. And when the messenger
brought backe word that all that had beene said, was true, they receiued both the
Chians acd the Erythraeans presently into their League▪ and decreed to send
them forty Gallies, there being at Chius, from such places as the Chians named,
no lesse then 60 already. And of these at rst they were about to send out tenne,
with Melancridas for Admirall; but afterwards, vpon occasion of an Earthquake,
for Melancridas they sent Chalcideus, and in stead of tenne Gallies, they went
about the making ready of ue onely, in Laconia. So the Winter ended, and
nineteenth yeere of this Warre, written by Thucydides.

In the beginning of the next Summer, because the       THE TWENTIETH YEERE.
Chians pressed to haue the Gallies sent away, and
feared lest the Athenians should get notice what they were doing, (for all their
Ambassadours went out by stealth) the                  The Lacedaemonians send to
Lacedaemonians send away to Corinth three Spartans, Corinth, to hasten away the Fleet
                                                       to Chius.
to will them with all speed to transport their Gallies
ouer the Isthmus, to the other Sea towards Athens, and to goe all to Chius,

aswell those which Agis had made ready to goe to Lesbos, as the rest. The
number of the Gallies of the League, which were then there, being forty wanting
one.

But Calligetus and Timagoras, who came from Pharnabazus, would 
haue no part in this Fleet that went for Chius, nor would deliuer the Money,
twenty ue Talents, which they had brought with          〈…〉 10 shillings 〈◊〉.
them to pay for their setting forth, but made account
to goe out with another Fleet afterwards by themselues.

When Agis saw that the Lacedaemonians meant to send rst to Chius, he
resolued not of any other course himselfe, but the Confederates assembling at
Corinth, went to councell vpon the matter, and           The Confederates in councell at
concluded thus, That they should goe rst to Chius, Corinth set downe an order for
                                                         the Warre following, with which
vnder the command of Chalcideus who was making to beginne, and which to follow.
ready the ue Gallies in Laconia; And then, to Lesbos,
vnder the charge of Alcamenes, intended also to be sent thither by Agis; and
lastly into Hellespont, in which voyage they ordained that Clearchus the sonne
of Rhamphias should haue the Command; and concluded to carry ouer the
Isthmus, rst the one halfe of their Gallies, and that those should presently put
to Sea, that the Athenians might haue their mindes more vpon those, then on
the other halfe to bee transported afterwards. For they determined to passe that
Sea openly, contemning the weaknesse of the Athenians, in respect they had not
any Nauy of importance yet appearing. As they resolued, so presently they
carried ouer one and twenty Gallies. But when the rest vrged to put to Sea, the
Corinthians were vnwilling to goe along, before they should haue ended the
celebration of the Isthmian Holidayes, then come. Heerevpon Agis was content
that they for their parts should obserue the Isthmian Truce; and he therefore to
take the Fleet vpon himselfe as his owne.

But the Corinthians not agreeing to that, and the time The Athenians vnderstand the
passing away, the Athenians got intelligence the          purpose of the Chians to reuolt.

easilier of the practice of the Chians, and sent thither Aristocrates, one of their

Generals, to accuse them of it. The Chians denying the matter, hee commanded
them, for their better credit, to send along with him some Gallies for their ayde,
due by the League; and they sent seuen. The cause why they sent these Gallies,
was the Many not acquainted with the practice, and the Few and conscious not
willing to vndergoe the enmity of the multitude, without hauing strength rst,
and their not expecting any longer the comming of the Lacedaemonians,
because they had so long delayed them.

In the meane time, the Istmian Games were celebrating, and the              
Athenians (for they had word sent them of it) came       The Athenians 〈…〉
and saw; and the businesse of the Chians grew more Peloponnessia Gallies 〈◊〉
                                                         Piraeus, a desart 〈◊〉 and there
apparent. After they went thence, they tooke order       besiege 〈◊〉.
presently, that the Fleet might not passe from
Cenchreae vndiscouered. And after the Holidayes were ouer, the Corinthians
put to Sea for Chius, vnder the conduct of Alcamenes. And the Athenians at
  rst, with equall number came vp to them, and endeuoured to draw them out
into the maine Sea. But seeing the Peloponnesians followed not farre, but turned
another way, the Athenians went also from them. For the seuen Gallies of Cbius,
which were part of this number, they durst not trust. But afterwards hauing
manned thirty seuen others, they gaue chase to the Enemy by the shore, and
draue them into Piraeus, in the Territorie of Corinth, (this Piraeus is a desart
Hauen, and the vtmost vpon the Con nes of Epidauria. ) One Gallie that was
farre from Land, the Peloponnesians lost, the rest they brought together into the
Hauen. But the Athenians charging them by Sea with their Gallies, and withall
setting their men aland, mightily troubled and disordered them, brake their
Gallies vpon the shore, and slew Alcamenes their Commander. And some they
lost of their owne.

The ght being ended, they assigned a su cient number of Gallies to lye
opposite to those of the Enemy, and the rest to lye vnder a little Iland, not farre
o , in which also they encamped, and sent to Athens for supply. For the
Peloponnesians had with them for ayde of their Gallies, the Corinthians the next
day, and not long after, diuers others of the Inhabitants thereabouts. But when

they considered that the guarding of them in a desart place would be painefull,
they knew not what course to take, and once they thought to haue set the Gallies
on re; but it was concluded afterwards to draw them to the Land, and guard
them with their Land-men, till some good occasion should bee o ered for their
escape. And Agis also, when he heard the newes, sent vnto them Thermon, a
Spartan.

The Lacedaemonians hauing beene aduertised of the departure of these Gallies
from the Isthmus, (for the Ephores had commanded The voyage of Chalcideus and
Alcamenes, when he put to Sea, to send him word by Alcibiades to Chius.
a Horseman) were minded presently to haue sent away the ue            
Gallies also that were in Laconia, and Chalcideus the Commander of them, and
with him Aleibiades; but afterwards, as they were ready to goe out, came the
newes of the Gallies chased into Peiraeus: which so much discouraged them, in
respect they stumbled in the very entrance of the Ionique Warre, that they
purposed now, not onely not to send away those Gallies of their owne, but also
to call backe againe some of those that were already at Sea.

When Alcibiades saw this, he dealt with Endius, and the rest of the Ephores
againe, not to feare the Voyage, alleaging that they would make haste, and be
there before the Chians should haue heard of the misfortune of the Fleet. And
that as soone as he should arriue in Ionia himselfe, he could easily make the
Cities there to reuolt, by declaring vnto them the weaknesse of the Athenians,
and the diligence of the Lacedaemonians, wherein he should be thought more
worthy to bee belieued then any other. Moreouer to Endius hee said, that it
would be an honour in particular to him, that Ionia should reuolt, and the King
be made Confederate to the Lacedaemonians, by his owne meanes, and not to
haue it the mastery of Agis, for he was at di erence with Agis. So, hauing
preuailed with Endius and the other Ephores, he tooke Sea with 5 Gallies,
together with Chalcideus of Lacedaemon, and made haste.

About the same time, came backe from Sicily those 16 Sixteene Gallies of Peloponnesus
Gallies of the Peloponnesians, which hauing ayded    intercepted, and hardly
                                                           handled, in their returne from

Gylippus in that Warre, were intercepted by the way, Sicily, by the Athenians, arriue
                                                        in Corinth.
about Leucadia, and euill intreated by twenty seuen
Gallies of Athens, that watched thereabouts, vnder the command of Hyppocles
the sonne of Menippus, for such Gallies as should returne out of Sicily. For all
the rest, sauing one, auoyding the Athenians, were arriued in Corinth before.

Chalcideus and Alcibiades, as they sayled, kept prisoner euery man they met
with by the way, to the end that notice might not be giuen of their passage, and
touching rst at Corycus in the Continent, where they also dismissed those
whom they had apprehended, after conference there with some of the
Conspirators of the Chians, that aduised them to goe to the Citie, without
sending them word before, they came vpon the Chians suddenly and
vnexpected. It put the Commons into much wonder and                   
astonishment, but the Few had so ordered the matter beforehand, that an
Assembly chanced to be holden at the same time. And when Chalcideus, and
Alcibiades had spoken in the same, and told them that many Gallies were
comming to them, but not that those other Gallies were besieged in Peiraeus, the
Cbians rst, and afterwards the Erythraeans, reuolted Chius and 〈…〉
from the Athenians.

After this, they went with three Gallies to Clazomenae, and made that City to
reuolt also. And the Clazomenians presently crossed Clazomenae reuolteth.
ouer to the Continent, and there forti ed Polichna,
least they should need a retyring place, from the little Iland wherein they dwelt.
The rest also, all that had reuolted, fell to fortifying, and making of preparation
for the Warre.

This newes of Chius was quickly brought to the Athenians, who conceiuing
themselues to be now beset with great and euident danger, and that the rest of
the Confederates, seeing so great a City to reuolt,    The Athenians abrogate the
would be no longer quiet, in this their present feare, decree touching the 1000 Talents
                                                       reserued for the extremities of
decreed that those * 1000 Talents, which through all State, and furnish out a Fleet
this Warre, they had a ected to keepe vntouched,       with the money.

forthwith abrogating the punishment ordained for         * 187500 pounds sterling.
such, as spake or gaue their su rages to stirre it,
should now be vsed, and therewith Gallies, not a few, manned. They decreed
also to send thither out of hand, vnder the command of Strombichides the sonne
of Diotimas, 8 Gallies, of the number of those that besieged the Enemy at
Peiraeus, the which, hauing forsaken their charge to giue chase to the Gallies that
went with Chalcideus, and and not able to ouertake them, were now returned,
and shortly after also to send Thrasicles to help them with 12 Gallies more,
which also had departed from the same guard vpon the Enemy. And those 7
Gallies of Chius, which likewise kept watch at Peiraeus with the rest, they
fetched from thence, and gaue the bondmen that serued in them their liberty,
and the chaynes to those that were free. And in stead of all those Gallies, that
kept guard vpon the Gallies of the Peloponnesians, they made ready other with
all speed in their places, besides 30 more which they intended to furnish out
afterwards. Great was their diligence, and nothing was of light importance, that
they went about for the recouery of Chius.

Strombichides in the meane time arriued at Samos, and taking into 
his company, one Samian Gally, went thence to Teus, and entreated them not to
stirre. But towards Teus, was Chalcideus also comming with 23 Gallies from
Chius, and with him also the Land-forces of the Clazomenians, and Erythraeans,
whereof Strombichides hauing been aduertized, he put forth againe, before his
arriuall, and standing o at Sea, when he saw the many Gallies that came from
Chius, he ed towards Samos, they following him.          Teus re olteth.
                                                              ●

The Land-forces, the Teans would not at the rst
admit, but after this ight of the Athenians, they brought them in. And these
for the most part held their hands for a while, expecting the returne of
Chalcideus from the chase; but when he stayed somewhat long, they fell of
themselues to the demolishing of the wall built about the Citie of Teus, by the
Athenians, towards the Continent; wherein they were also helped by some few
Barbarians that came downe thither, vnder the leading of Tages, Deputy
Lieutenant of Tissaphernes.

Chalcideus, and Alcibiades, when they had chased Strombichides into Samos,
armed the Mariners that were in the Gallies of Peloponnesus, and left them in
Chius, in stead of whom they manned with Mariners of Chius, both those, and
20 Gallies more, and with this Fleet they went to Miletus, with intent to cause it
to reuolt. For the intention of Alcibiades, that was acquainted with the
principall Milesians, was to preuent the Fleet which was to come from
Peloponnesus, and to turne these Cities rst, that the honour of it might be
ascribed to the Chians, to himselfe, to Chalcideus, and (as he had promised) to
Endius, that set them out, as hauing brought most of the Cities to reuolt, with
the Forces of the Chians onely, and of those Gallies that came with Chalcideus.
So these, for the greatest part of their way vndiscouered, and arriuing, not much
sooner then Strombichides, and Thrasicles, (who now chancing to be present
with those 12 Gallies from Athens, followed them with Strombichides) caused
the Milesians to reuolt. The Athenians following them at the heeles with 19
Gallies, being shut out by the Milesians, lay at Anchor Miletus reuolteth.
at Lada, an Iland ouer against the City.

Presently vpon the reuolt of Miletus, was made the rst League   
betweene the King, and the Lacedaemonians by Tissaphernes and Chalcideus, as
followeth.

The Lacedaemonians and their Confederates, haue         League betweene Tissa●phernes
made a League with the King and Tissaphernes, on        and the Lacedaemonians.

these Articles.

Whatsoeuer Territory or Cities the King possesseth, and his Ancestors haue
possessed, the same are to remaine the Kings.

Whatsoeuer money or other proﬁt redounded to the Athenians from their Cities,
the King, and the Lacedaemonians are ioyntly to hinder, so as the Athenians may
receiue nothing from thence, neither money nor other thing.

The King and the Lacedaemonians, and their Confederates, are to make ioynt
Warre against the Athenians. And without consent of both parts, it shall not be

lawfull to lay downe the Warre against the Athenians, neither for the King, nor
for the Lacedaemonians and their Confederates.

If any shall reuolt from the King, they shall be enemies to the Lacedaemonians,
and their Confederates. And if any shall reuolt from the Lacedaemonians, and
their Confedetates, they shall in like manner be enemies to the King.

This was the League.

Presently after this, the Chians set out ten Gallies more, and went to Anaea,
both to hearken what became of the businesse at Miletus, and also to cause the
Cities there, abouts to reuolt. But word being sent them from Chalcideus, to goe
backe, and that Amorges was at hand with his Army, they went thence to the
Temple of Iupiter. Being there they descryed 16 Gallies more, which had beene
sent out by the Athenians vnder the charge of Diomedon, after the putting to
Sea of those with Thrasycles, vpon sight of whom they ed, one Gally to
Ephesus, the rest towards Teos. Foure of them, the Athenians tooke, but empty,
the men being gotten on Shore; the rest escaped into the City of Teos. And the
Athenians went away againe towards Samos.

The Chians putting to Sea againe, with the remainder Lebedus and Erae reuolt.
of their Fleet, and with the Land-forces, caused rst
Lebedus to reuolt, and then Erae. And afterwards returned, both with their Fleet
and Land-men, euery one to his owne.

About the same time, the twenty Gallies of             The Peloponnesians in 〈◊〉
Peloponnesus, which the Athenians had formerly         escape.

chased into Peiraeus, and against whom they now lay with a like         
number, suddenly forced their passage, and hauing the victory in ght, tooke
foure of the Athenian Gallies, and going to Cenchreae, prepared afresh for their
voyage to Chius and Ionia. At which time there came also vnto them from
Lacedaemon, for Commander, Astyochus, who was [...]
now Admirall of the whole Nauy.

When the Land-men were gone from Teos, Tissaphernes himselfe came thither
                                                     [...]
with his Forces, and he also demolished the Wall, as
much as was left standing, and went his way againe.

Not long after the going away of him, came thither Diomedon with tenne
Gallies of Athens, and hauing made a Truce with the Teians, that he might also
bee receiued, he put to Sea againe, and kept the shore to Erae, and assaulted it,
but failing to take it, departed.

It fell out about the same time, that the Commons of Samos, together with the
Athenians who were there with three Gallies, made an insurrection against the
great men, and slew of them in all about two hundred. And hauing banished
foure hundred more, and distributed amongst themselues their Lands and
Houses, (the Athenians hauing now, as assured of their delity, decreed them
their liberty) they administred the a aires of the Citie from that time forward,
by themselues, no more communicating with the *            * [...]
Ge●mori, nor permitting any of the Common people
to marry with them.

After this, the same Summer, the Chians, as they had begunne, perseuering in
their earnestnesse to bring the Cities to reuolt, euen without the
Lacedaemonians, with their single forces, and desiring to make as many fellowes
of their danger, as they were able, made Warre by themselues with thirteene
Gallies, against Lesbos, (which was according to what was concluded by the
Lacedaemonians, namely to goe thither in the second place, and thence into the
Hellespont. ) And withall, the Land-forces, both of such Peloponnesians as were
present, and of their Confederates thereabouts, went [...]
along by them to Clazomenae and Cyme. These
vnder the command of Eualas a Spartan, and the Gallies, of Deiniadas, a man of
the parts thereabouts. The Gallies putting in at Methymna, caused that Citie to
reuolt rst. ****************************

Now Astyochus the Lacedaemonian Admirall, hauing set forth as he 
intended from Cenchreae, arriued at Chius. The third day after his comming

thither, came Leon and Diomedon into Lesbos, with 25 Gallies of Athens; for
Leon came with a supply of tenne Gallies more, from Athens afterwards.
Astyochus in the euening of the same day, taking with The Athenians recouer
him one Gally more of Chius, tooke his way toward              tylene.
                                                              ●●●

Lesbos, to helpe it what he could, and put in at Pyrrha, and the next day at
Eressus. Here he heard that Mitylene was taken by the Athenians, euen with the
shout of their voyces. For the Athenians comming vnexpected, entred the
Hauen, and hauing beaten the Gallies of the Chians, disbarked, and ouercame
those that made head against them, and wonne the Citie. When Astyochus
heard this, both from the Eressians, and from those Chian Gallies that came
from Methymna with Eubulus, (which hauing beene left there before, as soone
as Mitylene was lost, ed, and three of them chanced to meete with him, for one
was taken by the Athenians) he continued his course for Mitylene no longer, but
hauing caused Eressus to reuolt, and armed the Souldiers he had aboord, made
them to march toward Antissa and Methymna by Land, vnder the conduct of
Eteonicus, and he himselfe with his owne Gallies, and those 3. of Chius, rowed
thither along the shore, hoping that the Methymnaeans, vpon sight of his
Forces, would take heart, and continue in their reuolt. Astyochus seeing hee could doe no
But when in Lesbos all things went against him, he       good at Lesbos returned to Chios.

reimbarqued his Army, and returned to Chios. And the Landmen that were
aboord, and should haue gone into Hellespont, went againe into their Cities.
After this came to them sixe Gallies to Chios, of those of the Confederate Fleet
at Cenchreae. The Athenians, when they had reestablished the State of Lesbos,
went thence, and tooke Polichna, which the Clazomenians had fortifyed in the
Continent, and brought them all backe againe into the Citie, which is in the
Iland, saue onely the authors of the reuolt, (for these The Athenians recouer
got away to Daphnus) and Clazomenae returned to          Clazomenae.

the obedience of the Athenians.

The same Summer, those Athenians that with twenty Gallies lay in the Ile of of
Lada, before Miletus, landing in the Territory of Miletus, at Panormus, slew
Chalcideus the Lacedaemonian Commander, that            Chalcideus slayne.
came out against him but with a few; and set vp a

Trophie, and the third day after departed. But the Milesians pulled 
downe the Trophie, as erected where the Athenians were not Masters.

Leon and Diomedon, with the Athenian Gallies that The Athenians make sharp war
were at Lesbos, made Warre vpon the Chians by Sea, vpon Chius.
from the Iles called Oinussae, which lye before Chius, and from Sidussa, and
Pteleum (Forts they held in Erythraea and from Lesbos. They that were aboard,
were men of Armes of the Roll, compelled to serue in the Fleet. With these they
landed at Cardamyle; and hauing ouerthrowne the Chians that made head, in a
Battell at Bolissus, and slaine many of them, they recouered from the Enemy all
the places of that quarter. And againe they ouercame them in another Battell at
Phanae, and in a third at Leuconium. After this, the Chians went out no more
to ght; by which meanes the Athenians made spoile of their Territory,
excellently well furnished. For except it were the          Praise of the Chians.
Lacedaemonians, the Chians were the onely men that
I haue heard of, that had ioyned aduisednesse to prosperity, and the more their
Citie increased, had carried the more respect in the administration thereof to
assure it. Nor ventured they now to reuolt (lest any man should thinke, that in
this act at least they regarded not what was the safest) till they had many and
strong Confederates, with whose helpe to try their fortune; nor till such time as
they perceiued the People of Athens (as they themselues could not deny) to haue
their estate, after the defeat in Sicily, reduced to extreme weaknesse.

And if through humane misreckoning, they miscarryed in ought, they erred
with many others, who in like manner had an opinion, that the State of the
Athenians would quickly haue beene ouerthrowne.

Beeing therefore shut vp by Sea, and hauing their Lands spoyled, some within
vndertooke to make the Citie returne vnto the Athenians. Which though the
Magistrates perceiued, yet they themselues stirred not, but hauing receiued
Astyochus into the City, with foure Gallies that were with him from Erythrae,
they tooke aduice together, how by taking Hostages, or some other gentle way,

to make them giue ouer the Conspiracy. Thus stood the businesse with the
Chians.

In the end of this Summer (a thousand ue hundred men of Armes 
of Athens, and a thousand of Argos (for the               The Athenians ﬁght wit the
                                                                              ●

Athenians had put Armour vpon ue hundred Light- Milesians and begunne to
                                                                   ▪

                                                          besiege the 〈◊〉.
armed of the Argiues) and of other Confederates a
thousand more, with forty eight Gallies, reckoning those which were for
transportation of Souldiers, vnder the conduct of Phrynichus, Onomacles, and
Scironidas, came in to Samos, and crossing ouer to Miletus, encamped before it.
And the Milesians issued forth with eight hundred men of Armes of their owne,
besides the Peloponnesians that came with Chalcideus, and some auxiliar
strangers with Tissaphernes, (Tissaphernes himselfe being also there with his
Cauallery) and fought with the Athenians and their Confederates. The Argiues,
who made one Wing of themselues, aduancing before the rest, and in some
disorder in contempt of the enemie, as being Ionians, and not likely to sustaine
their charge, were by the Milesians ouercome, and lost no lesse then 300 of their
men. But the Athenians, when they had rst ouerthrowne the Peloponnesians,
and then beaten backe the Barbarians and other multitude, and not fought with
the Milesians at all, (for they, after they were come from the chase of the Argiues,
and saw their other Wing defeated, went into the Towne) sate downe with their
Armes, as being now masters of the Field, close vnder the Wall of the Citie. It fell
out in this Battell, that on both sides the Ioniques had the better of the
Doriques. For the Athenians ouercame the opposite Peloponnesians, and the
Milesians the Argiues. The Athenians, after they had erected their Trophy, the
place being an Isthmus, prepared to take in the Towne with a Wall; supposing if
they got Miletus, the other Cities would easily come in. In the meane time it was
told them about twi-light, that the ue and fty            The Athenians rise from
Gallies from Peloponnesus and Sicily were hard by,        Miletus, vpon the comming of
                                                          55 Gallies from Peloponnesus.
and onely not already come. For there came into
Peloponnesus out of Sicily, by the instigation of Hermocrates, to helpe to
consummate the subuersion of the Athenian State, twenty Gallies of Syracuse,
and two of Selinus. And the Gallies that had beene preparing in Peloponnesus

beeing then also ready, they were, both these and the other, committed to the
charge of Theramenes, to bee conducted by him to Astyochus the Admirall.
And they put in rst at Eleus, an Iland ouer against Miletus, and beeing
aduertised there, that the Athenians lay before the Towne, they went 
from thence into the Gulfe of Iäsus, to learne how the a aires of the Milesians
stood. Alcibiades comming a horsebacke to Teichiussa, of the Territory of
Miletus, in which part of the Gulfe the Peloponnesian Gallies lay at Anchor,
they were informed by him of the Battell; for Alcibiades was with the Milesians,
and with Tissaphernes present in it. And he exhorted them (vnlesse they meant
to lose what they had in Ionia, and the whole businesse) to succour Miletus with
all speed, and not to su er it to be taken in with a Wall. According to this they
concluded to goe the next morning and relieue it. Phrynichus, when hee had
certaine word from Derus, of the arriuall of those Gallies, his Colleagues
aduising to stay, and ght it out with their Fleet, said, that he would neither do it
himselfe, nor su er them to doe it, or any other, as long as he could hinder it. For
seeing he might ght with them hereafter, when they should know against how
many Gallies of the Enemy, & with what addition to their owne, su ciently, and
at leasure made ready, they might do it; he would neuer, he said, for feare of
being vpbraided with basenesse, (for it was no basenesse for the Athenians to let
their Nauy giue way vpon occasion; but by what meanes soeuer it should fall
out, it would be a great basenesse to be beaten) be swayed to hazard battell
against reason, and not only to dishonour the State, but also to cast it into
extreme danger. Seeing that since their late losses, it hath scarce beene t, with
their strongest preparation, willingly, no nor vrged by precedent necessity, to
vndertake, how then without constraint to seeke out voluntary dangers?
Therefore he commanded them with all speede to take aboord those that were
wounded, and their Land men, and whatsoeuer Vtensiles they brought with
them but to leaue behind whatsoeuer they had taken in the territory of the
Enemy, to the end that their Gallies might be the lighter, and to put o for
Samos, and thence, when they had all their Fleete together to make out against
the Enemy, as occasion should be o ered.

As Phrynichus aduised this, so he put it in execution, and was esteemed a wise
man, not then onely, but afterwards, nor in this onely, but in whatsoeuer else he
had the ordering of. Thus the Athenians presently in the euening, with their
victory vnperfect, dislodged from before Miletus. From Samos, the 
Argiues in haste, and in anger for their ouerthrow, went home.

The Peloponnesians setting forth betimes in the morning from Teichiussa, put
in at Miletus, and stayed there one day. The next day The Peloponnesians and
they tooke with them those Gallies of Chius, which Tissaphernes, take 〈◊〉, wherein
                                                           was Amorges, Rebell to the King,
had formerly been chased together with Chalcideus, whom they take prisoner.
and meant to haue returned to Teichiussa, to take
aboord such necessaries as they had left a Shore; But as they were going,
Tissaphernes came to them with his Land-men, and perswaded them to set vpon
Iäsus, where Amorges the Kings Enemy then lay. Whereupon they assaulted
Iasus vpon a sodaine, and (they within not thinking but they had been the Fleet
of the Athenians) tooke it. The greatest praise in this action was giuen to the
Syracusians. Hauing taken Amorges, the bastard sonne of Pissuthnes, but a
Rebell to the King, the Peloponnesians deliuered him to Tissaphernes, to carry
him, if he would, to the King, as he had order to doe. The City they pillaged,
wherein, as being a place of ancient riches, the Army got a very great quantity of
money. The auxiliary Souldiers of Amorges, they receiued, without doing them
hurt, into their owne Army, being for the most part Peloponnesians. The Towne
it selfe they deliuered to Tissaphernes, with all the prisoners, as well free, as
bond, vpon composition with him, at a Darique stater by the poll. And so they
returned to Miletus. And from hence they sent Paedaritus the sonne of Leon,
whom the Lacedaemonians had sent hither to to be Gouernour of Chius, to
Erythrae, and with him, the bands that had ayded Amorges, by Land, and made
Philip Gouernour there, in Miletus. And so this            The end of the 20 Summer.
Summer ended.

The next Winter Tissaphernes, after he had put a Garrison into Iasus, came to
Miletus, and for one moneths pay, (as was promised on his part at Lacedaemon)
he gaue vnto the Souldiers through the whole Fleet after an Attique * Drachma a

man by the day. But for the rest of the time he would * 7 pence halfepenny, of our
pay but * 3 oboles, till he had asked the Kings         money.

pleasure; and if the King commanded it, then he said * 3 pence halfepenney farthing.
he would pay them the full Drachma. Neuerthelesse This diminution of their
                                                        stipend, proceeded from the
vpon the contradiction of Hermocrates Generall of       counsell which Alcibiades gaue
the Syracusians (for Theramenes was but slacke in       to Tissaphernes, as is hereafter
                                                        declared.
exacting pay, as not being Generall, but onely to
deliuer the Gallies that came with him, to Astyochus. ) It was agreed 
that but for the ue Gallies that were ouer and aboue, [...]
they should haue more then 3 oboles a man. For to 55
Gallies, he allowed three Talents a moneth, and to as many, as should be more
then that number, after the same proportion.

The same Winter the Athenians that were at Samos, (for there were now come in
35 Gallies more from home, with Charminus, Strombichides, and Euctemon,
their Commanders) hauing gathered together their Gallies, as well those that had
been at Chius, as all the rest, concluded, distributing to euery one his charge by
Lot, to goe lye before Miletus with a Fleet; but against Chius, to send out both a
Fleet, and an Army of Landmen. And they did so. For Strombichides Onomacles,
and Euctemon, with thirty Gallies, and part of those 1000 men of Armes that
went to Miletus, which they caried along with them in vessels for transportation
of Souldiers, according to their Lot, went to Chius, and the rest remaining at
Samos with 74 Gallies, were Masters of the Sea, and went to Miletus.

Astyochus, who was now in Chius, requiring              〈…〉, thence to 〈◊〉, and Cyme.
Hostages in respect of the Treason, after he heard of
the Fleet that was come with Theramenes, and that the Articles of the League
with Tissaphernes were mended, gaue ouer that busines; and with 10 Gallies of
Peloponnesus, and 10 of Chius, went thence, and assaulted Pteleum, but not
being able to take it, he kept by the Shore to Clazomenae. There hee summoned
those within to yeeld, with o er to such of them as fauoured the Athenians, that
they might go vp and dwell at Daphnus. And Tamos the Deputy Lieutenant of
Ionia, o ered them the same. But they not hearkning thereunto, he made an

assault vpon the Citie being vnwalled, but when he could not take it, he put to
Sea againe, and with a mighty Wind, was himselfe carried to Phocaea, and Cyme,
but the rest of the Fleet put in at Marathusa, Pele, and Drimyssa, Ilands that lye
ouer against Clazomenae. After they had stayed there 8 dayes in regard of the
Winds, spoyling and destroying, and partly taking aboord whatsoeuer goods of
the Clazomenians lay without, they went afterwards to Phocaea, and Cyme, to
Astyochus. While Astyochus was there, the                   The Lesbians oﬀer to turne to
Ambassadours of the Lesbians came vnto him,                 Astyochus.

desiring to reuolt from the Athenians, and as for him, they preuailed with him,
but seeing the Corinthians and the other Confederates were                   
vnwilling, in respect of their former ill successe there, hee put to Sea for Chius.
Whither, after a great Tempest, his Gallies, some from one place, and some from
another, at length arriued all.

After this, Paedaritus, who was now at Erythrae, whither he was come from
Miletus by Land, came ouer with his Forces into Chius. Besides those Forces hee
brought ouer with him, he had the Souldiers which were of the ue Gallies that
came thither with Chalcideus, and were left there to the number of ue
hundred, and Armour to Arme them.

Now some of the Lesbians hauing promised to reuolt, Astyochus
communicated the matter with Paedaritus and the Chians, alleaging how meete
it would be to goe with a Fleet, and make Lesbos to reuolt, for that they should
eyther get more Confederates, or fayling, they should at least weaken the
Athenians. But they gaue him no eare; and for the       Astyochus, and Paedaritus the
Chian Gallies, Paedaritus told him plainely, he should Gouernour of Ch disagree.
                                                                          ●●

haue none of them. Whereupon Astyochus taking with him ue Gallies of
Corinth, a sixth of Megara, one of Hermione, and those of Laconia which he
brought with him, went towards Miletus to his Charge; mightily threatning the
Chians, in case they should neede him, not to helpe them.

When he was come to Corycus in Erythraea, hee stayed there; and the Athenians
from Samos lay on the other side of the point, the one not knowing that the

other was so neere. Astyochus, vpon a Letter sent him from Pedaritus, signifying
that there were come certaine Erythraean Captiues dismissed from Samos, with
designe to betray Erythrae, went presently backe to Erythrae, so little he missed
of falling into the hands of the Athenians. Paedaritus also went ouer to him, and
hauing narrowly enquired touching these seeming Traytors, and found that the
whole matter was but a pretence, which the men had vsed for their escape from
Samos, they acquitted them, and departed, one to Chius, the other, as hee was
going before, towards Miletus.

In the meane time, the Army of the Athenians beeing The Athenian Gallies tossed
come about by Sea from Corycus, to Argenum,              with Tempest.

lighted on three long Boats of the Chians, which when they saw, they presently
chased. But there arose a great Tempest, and the long Boats of Chius 
with much adoe recouered the Harbour. But of the Athenian Gallies, especially
such as followed them furthest, there perished three, driuen ashore at the Citie
of Chius; and the men that were aboord them, were part taken, and part slaine;
the rest of the Fleet escaped into a Hauen called Phoenicus, vnder the Hill
Mimas; from whence they got afterwards to Lesbos, and there fortifyed.

The same Winter, Hippocrates setting out from              The Athenians take the Gallies
Peloponnesus with tenne Gallies of Thurium,                of the Peloponnesians, sent to
                                                           waft in the Ships of Corne from
commanded by Dorieus the sonne of Diagoras, with Aegypt to Cnidus.
two others, and with one Gallie of Laconia, and one
of Syracuse, went to Cnidus. This City was now reuolted from Tissaphernes:
and the Peloponnesians that lay at Miletus hearing of it, commanded that (the
one halfe of their Gallies remaining for the guard of Cnidus) the other halfe
should goe about Triopium, and help to bring in the Ships which were to come
from Aegypt. This Triopium is a Promontory of the Territory of Cnidus, lying
out in the Sea, and consecrated to Apollo. The Athenians vpon aduertisement
hereof, setting forth from Samos, tooke those Gallies that kept guard at
Triopium, but the men that were in them escaped to Land. After this they went
to Cnidus, which they assaulted, and had almost taken, being without Wall; and
the nexr day they assaulted it againe; but being lesse able to hurt it now then

before, because they had fenced it better this night, and the men also were gotten
into it, that ed from their Gallies vnder Triopium, they inuaded and wasted the
Cnidian Territory, and so went backe to Samos.

About the same time, Astyochus being come to the        They assault the City of Cnidus,
Nauy at Miletus, the Peloponnesians had plenty of all but cannot win it.
things for the Army. For they had not onely su cient pay, but the Souldiers also
had store of money yet remaining of the pillage of Iasus. And the Milesians
vnderwent the Warre with a good will. Neuerthelesse the former Articles of the
League made by Chalcideus with Tissaphernes seemed defectiue, and not so
aduantagious to them as to him. Whereupon they agreed to new ones, in the
presence of Tissaphernes, which were these.

The Agreement of the Lacedaemonians and their Confederates, with 
King Darius and his children, and with Tissaphernes, The second League betweene the
for league and amity, according to the Articles      Lacedaemonians and the King
                                                     of Persia
following.

Whatsoeuer Territories or Cities doe belong vnto King Darius, or were his Fathers,
or his Ancestours, Against those shall neither the Lacedaemonians goe to make
Warre, nor any way to annoy them. Neither shall the Lacedaemonians, nor their
Confederates, exact Tribute of any of those Cities. Neither shall King Darius, nor
any vnder his Dominion, make Warre vpon, or any way annoy the
Lacedaemonians, or any of the Lacedaemonian Confederates.

If the Lacedaemonians or their Confederates shall neede any thing of the King, or
the King of the Lacedaemonians, or of their Confederates, what they shall
perswade each other to doe, that if they doe it, shall be good.

They shall, both of them, make Warre ioyntly against the Athenians and their
Confederates; And when they shall giue ouer the Warre, they shall also doe it
ioyntly.

Whatsoeuer Army shall be in the Kings Countrey, sent for by the King, the King
shall defray.

If any of the Cities comprehended in the League made with the King, shall inuade
the Kings Territories, the rest shall oppose them, and defend the King to the vtmost
of their power.

If any Citie of the Kings, or vnder his Dominion, shall inuade the
Lacedaemonians, or their Confederates, the King shall make opposition, and
defend them, to the vtmost of his power.

After this accord made, Theramenes deliuered his             Theramenes goeth to Sea in a
Gallies into the hands of Astyochus, and putting to          Light-horseman, and is cast
                                                             away.
Sea in a Light-horseman, is no more seene.

The Athenians that were now come with their Armie from Lesbos to Chius, and
were Masters of the Field, and of the Sea, fortifyed      The Chians in distresse send for
                                                                                   ▪

Delphinium, a place both strong to the Land-ward,         ayde to Astyochus.

and that had also a Harbour for Shipping, and was not farre from the Citie it
selfe of Chius. And the Chians, as hauing beene disheartned in diuers former
Battels, and otherwise, not onely, not mutually well a ected, but iealous one of
another, (for Tydeus and his Complices, had bin put to death by Paedaritus for
Atticisme, and the rest of the City was kept in awe, but by force, and 
for a time) stirred not against them. And for the causes mentioned, not
conceiuing themselues, neither with their owne strength, nor with the helpe of
those that Paedaritus had with him, su cient to giue them battell, they sent to
Miletus, to require aide from Astyochus. Which when Astyochus refuseth to ayde them,
he denyed them, Paedaritus sent Letters to                and is complained on by
                                                          Paedaritus his Letters to the
Lacedaemon, complaining of the wrong. Thus                State.
proceeded the a aires of the Athenians at Chius. Also
their Fleet at Samos went often out, against the Fleet of the Enemy at Miletus;
but when theirs would neuer come out of the Harbour to encounter them, they
returned to Samos, and lay still.

The same Winter, about the Solstice, went out from Peloponnesus towards
                                                        The Gallies that were prouided
Ionia, those 27 Gallies, which at the procurement of for Pharnabazus let forth
Calligetus of Megara, and Timagoras of Cyzicus, were towards Jonia.
made ready by the Lacedaemonians for Pharnabazus.
The Commander of them was Antisthenes a Spartan, with whom the
Lacedaemonians sent eleuen Spartans more, to bee of Antisthenes and 11 other
councell with Astyochus, whereof Lichas the sonne of Spartans sent with absolute
                                                        authority into Ionia.
Arcesilaus was one. These had Commission, that
when they should bee arriued at Miletus, besides their generall care to order
euery thing to the best, they should send away these Gallies, eyther the same, or
more, or fewer, into the Hellespont to Pharnabazus, if they so thought t, and
and to appoint Clearchus the sonne of Rhamphias, that went along in them, for
Commander. And that the same eleuen, if they thought it meete, should put
Astyochus from his Charge, and ordaine Antisthenes in his place: for they had
him in suspition for the Letters of Paedaritus.

These Gallies holding their course from Malea through the maine Sea, and
arriuing at Melos, lighted on tenne Gallies of the Athenians, whereof three they
tooke, but without the men, and red them.

After this, because they feared lest those Athenian Gallies that escaped from
Melos, should giue notice of their comming, to those in Samos, (as also it fell
out) they changed their course, and went towards Crete, and hauing made their
Voyage the longer, that it might be the safer, they put in at Caunus in Asia. Now
from thence, as being in a place of safety, they sent a They arriue at Caunus in Asia.
Messenger to the Fleet at Miletus for a Conuoy.

The Chians and Paedaritus about the same time, notwithstanding 
their former repulse, and that Astyochus was still         [...]
backward, sent messengers to him, desiring him to
come with his whole Fleet, to helpe them being besieged, and not to su er the
greatest of their Confederate Cities in all Ionia, to be thus shut vp by Sea, and
rauaged by Land, as it was. For the Chians hauing many slaues, more then any

one State, except that of the Lacedaemonians, whom for their o ences they the
more vngently punished because of their number, many of them, as soone as the
Athenians appeared to be settled in their forti cations, ran ouer presently to
them, and were they, that knowing the territory so well, did it the greatest spoile.
Therefore the Chians said he must helpe them, whilest there was hope and
possibility to do it. Delphinium being still in fortifying, and vnfurnished, and
greater fences being in making, both about their Campe and Fleet Astyochus
though he meant it not before, because he would haue made good his threats,
yet when he saw the Confederates were willing, he was bent to haue relieued
them.

But in the meane time came the messenger from the 27 Gallies, and from the
Lacedaemonian Counsellours, that were come to            Astyochus is diuerted from
Caunus. Astyochus therefore esteeming the wafting in helping the Chians, and goeth to
                                                         waft in the 27 Gallies of
of these Gallies, whereby they might the more freely Peloponnesus, that lay at
command the Sea, and the safe comming in of those Caunus.
Lacedaemonians, who were to looke into his actions, a
businesse that ought to be preferred before all other, presently gaue ouer his
iourney for Chius, and went towards Caunus.

As he went by the Coast, he landed at Cos Meropidis, being vnwalled, and
throwne downe by an Earth-quake, which had hapned there, the greatest verily
in mans memorie, and ri ed it, the Inhabitants being ed into the Mountaines;
and ouerrunning the Countrey, made bootie of all that came in his way, sauing
of freemen, and those he dismissed. From Cos he went by night to Cnidus: but
found it necessary, by the aduice of the Cnidians, not to land his men there, but
to follow, as he was, after those 20 Gallies of Athens, wherwith Charminus one
of the Athenian Generals gone out from Samos, stood watching for those 27
Gallies that were come from Peloponnesus, the same that Astyochus himselfe
was going to conuoy in. For they at Samos had had intelligence from Miletus of
their comming and Charminus was lying for them about Syme,             
Chalce, Rhodes, and the Coast of Lycia: For by this time hee knew that they were
at Caunus. Astyochus therefore desiring to out-goe the report of his comming,

went as he was, to Syme, hoping to nde those Gallies out from the shore. But a
shoure of raine, together with the cloudinesse of the Skie, made his Gallies to
misse their course in the darke, and disordered them.

The next morning, the Fleet being scattered, the left A ﬁght betweene the
Wing was manifestly discryed by the Athenians,             Peloponnesian and Athenian
                                                           Fleets, wherein the Athenians
whilest the rest wandred yet about the Iland: And          had the worse.
thereupon Charminus and the Athenians put forth
against them with twenty Gallies, supposing they had beene the same Gallies
they were watching for, from Caunus. And presently charging, sunke three of
them, and hurt others, and were superiour in the ght, till such time as, contrary
to their expectation, the greater part of the Fleet came in sight, and enclozed
them about. Then they betooke themselues to ight, and with the losse of sixe
Gallies, the rest escaped into the Iland of Teuglussa; and from thence to
Halicarnassus.

Afrer this the Peloponnesians putting in at Cnidus, and ioyning with those
seuen and twenty Gallies that came from Caunus, went all together to Syme,
and hauing there erected a Trophie, returned againe, and lay at Cnidus.

The Athenians, when they vnderstood what had passed in this battell went from
Samos with their whole Nauie to Syme. But neither went they out against the
Nauie in Cnidus, nor the Nauy there, against them. Whereupon they tooke vp
the furniture of their Gallies at Syme, and assaulted Loryma, a Towne in the
Continent, and so returned to Samos.

The whole Nauy of the Peloponnesians being at Cnidus, was now in repayring,
and refurnishing with such things as it wanted; and withall, those eleuen
Lacedaemonians conferred with Tissaphernes (for hee also was present)
touching such things as they disliked in the Articles before agreed on, and
concerning the Warre, how it might bee carried for the Tissaphernes and the
future, in the best and most aduantagious manner for Lacedaemonians disagreee
                                                         about the Articles of their
them both. But Lychas was he that considered the         League.
businesse most neerely, and said, that neither the rst

League, nor yet the later by Theramenes, was made as it ought to      
haue beene. And that it would be a very hard Condition, that whatsoeuer
Territories the King and his Ancestours possessed before, he should possesse the
same now: for so he might bring againe into subiection all the Ilands, and the
Sea, and the Locrians, and all as farre as Boeotia; and the Lacedaemonians, in
stead of restoring the Grecians into liberty, should put them into subiection to
the rule of the Medes. Therefore he required other and better Articles to bee
drawne, and not to stand to these. As for pay, in the new Articles they would
require none. But Tissaphernes cha ng at this, went his way in choler, and
nothing was done.

The Peloponnesians sollicited by Messengers from the great men of Rhodes,
resolued to goe thither, because they hoped it would Rhodes reuolteth to the
not proue impossible, with their number of Seamen, Peloponnesians.
and Army of Land-Souldiers, to bring that Iland into their power; and withall
supposed themselues able, with their present Confederates to maintaine their
Fleet, without asking money any more of Tissaphernes. Presently therefore, the
same Winter, they put forth from Cnidus, and arriuing in the Territory of
Rhodes, at Cameirus, rst frighted the Commons out of it, that knew not of the
businesse; and they ed. Then the Lacedaemonians called together both these,
and the * Rhodians of the two Cities, Lindus and         * The City of Rhodes was not
Iëlysus, and perswaded them to reuolt from the           then built.

Athenians. And Rhodes turned to the Peloponnesians. The Athenians at the
same time hearing of their designe, put forth with their Fleet from Samos,
desiring to haue arriued before them, and were seene in the maine Sea, too late,
though not much. For the present they went away to Chalce, and thence backe
to Samos, but afterwards they came forth with their Gallies diuers times, and
made Warre against Rhodes, from Chalce, Cos, and Samos. Now the
Peloponnesians did no more to the Rhodians, but leauie money amongst them,
to the summe of * thirty two Talents, and otherwise * 6000 pounds sterling.
for fourescore dayes that they lay there, hauing their
Gallies haled ashore, they meddled not.

In this time, as also before the going of the Peloponnesians to Rhodes, came to
passe the things that follow.

Alcibiades, after the death of Chalcideus, and Battell Alcibiades ﬂyeth to
at Miletus, being suspected by the Peloponnesians;         Tissaphernes, and crosseth the
                                                           busines of the Peloponnesians.
and Astyochus hauing receiued letters        
from them from Lacedaemon, to put him to death, (for he was an enemy to
Agis, and also otherwise not well trusted) retired to Tissaphernes, rst for feare,
and afterwards to his power hindred the a aires of the Peloponnesians. And
being in euery thing his instructer, he not only cut shorter their pay, insomuch
as from a * Drachma, he brought it to 3 * oboles, and * 7 pence halfepenny.
those also not continually paid; aduising Tissaphernes * 3 pence halfepenny farthing.
to tel them, how that the Athenians, men of a long
                                                           He aduiseth Tissaphernes to
continued skill in Nauall a aires, allowed but three
                                                           shorten their pay.
oboles to their owne, not so much for want of money,
but lest the Mariners, some of them growing insolent, by super uity, should
disable their bodies, by spending their money on such things as would weaken
them, and others should quit the Gallies, with the         And to corrupt the Captaines.
arrere of their pay in their Captaines hands for a
pawne; but also gaue counsell to Tissaphernes, to giue money to the Captaines
of the Gallies, and to the Generals of the seuerall Cities (saue onely those of
Syracuse) to giue way vnto it. For Hermocrates, the        The integrity of Hermocrates.
Generall of the Syracusians was the onely man, that in
the name of the whole League stood against it. And for the Cities that came to
require money, he would put them backe himselfe, and answer them in
Tissaphernes his name, and say, namely to the              Alcibiades answereth in
Chians▪ that they were impudent men, being the             Tissaphernes name, to the Cities
                                                           that call on him for money,
                                                                      ●

richest of the Grecian States, and preserued by            and puts them oﬀ.
Strangers, to expect neuerthelesse, that others, for
their liberty, should not only venture their persons, but maintaine them with
their purses. And to other States, that they did vniustly, hauing laid out their
mony before they reuolted, that they might serue the Athenians, not to bestow
as much, or more now vpon themselues. And told them, that Tissaphernes, now

he made Warre at his owne owne charges, had reason to be sparing, but when
money should come downe from the King, he would then giue them their full
pay, and assist the Cities as should be t. Moreouer, he He counselleth Tissaphernes to
aduised Tissaphernes not to be too hasty to make an prolong the War, and aﬄict
                                                        both sides.
end of the Warre, nor to fetch in the Phoenician Fleet
which was making ready, nor take more men into pay, whereby to put the whole
power both by Sea and Land, into the hands of one. But to let the Dominion
remaine diuided into two, that the King, when one side troubled him, might set
vpon it with the other. Whereas the Dominion both by Sea and              
Land being in one, he will want, by whom to pull downe those that hold it,
vnlesse with great danger and cost, he should come and try it out himselfe. But
thus the danger would be lesse chargeable (he being but at a small part of the
cost, ) and he should weare out the Grecians one against another, and himselfe in
the meane time remaine in safety.

He said further, that the Athenians were tter to        He aduiseth him, of the two, to
partake dominion with him then the other, for that      fauour the Athenians, the
                                                        rather, as ﬁtter to helpe subdue
they were lesse ambitious of power by Land; and that the Grecians,
their speeches and actions tended more to the Kings
purpose: For that they would ioyne with him to subdue the Grecians, that is to
say, for themselues, as touching the dominion by Sea, and for the King, as
touching the Grecians in the Kings Territories. Whereas the Lacedaemonians on
the contrary, were come to set them free. And it was not likely but that they that
were come to deliuer the Grecians from the Grecians, will (if they ouercome the
Athenians) deliuer them also from the Barbarians.

He gaue counsell therefore, rst to weare them out both, and then, when he had
clipped, as neere as he could, the wings of the Athenians, to dismisse the
Peloponnesians out of his Countrey. And                  Tissaphernes guided by the
Tissaphernes had a purpose to doe accordingly, as        counsell of Alcibiades, hindreth
                                                         the successe of the
farre as by his actions can be coniectured: For          Peloponnesians.
hereupon he gaue himselfe to beleeue Alcibiades, as
his best Counsellour in these a aires, and neither paid the Peloponnesians their

wages, nor would su er them to ght by Sea, but pretending the comming of
the Phoenician Fleete, whereby they might afterwards ght with oddes, he
ouerthrew their proceedings, and abated the vigour of their Nauy, before very
puissant, and was in all things else more backward, then hee could possibly
dissemble.

Now Alcibiades aduised the King and Tissaphernes to this, whilest he was with
them, partly, because he thought the same to bee          Alcibiades aymeth at his returne
indded the best course, but partly also, to make way to Athens, by making shew of his
                                                          power with Tissaphernes.
for his owne returne into his Countrey: knowing, that
if he destroyed it not, the time would one day come, that he might perswade the
Athenians to recall him. And the best way to perswade them to it, he thought
was this, to make it appeare vnto them, that he was powerfull with Tissaphernes.
Which also came to passe. For after the Athenian Souldiers at Samos 
saw what power he had with him, the Captaines of Gallies, and principall men
there, partly vpon Alcibiades his owne motion, who had sent to the greatest
amongst them, that they should remember him to the best sort, and say, that he
desired to come home, so the gouernment might bee in the hands of a Few, not
of euill persons, nor yet of the Multitude that cast him Motion made for the recalling
out; and that he would bring Tissaphernes to be their of Alcibiades, & deposing of the
                                                          People.
friend, and to warre on their side; but chiefely of their
owne accords had their mindes enclined to the deposing of the popular
gouernment.

This businesse was set on foot rst in the Campe, and from thence proceeded
afterwards into the Citie. And certaine persons went ouer to Alcibiades out of
Samos, and had conference with him. And when he had vndertaken to bring to
their friendship, rst Tissaphernes, and then the King, in case the Gouernment
were taken from the People, (for then, he said, the King might the better rely
vpon them) they that were of most power in the City, who also were the most
toyled out, entred into great hope, both to haue the ordering of the State at
home themselues, and victory also ouer the enemy.       Conspiracy in the Army at
And when they came backe to Samos, they drew all        Samos, against the Democracie
                                                             of Athens.

such as were for their purpose into an Oath of Conspiracie with themselues, and
to the Multitude gaue it out openly, that if Alcibiades might be recalled, and the
People put from the Gouernment, the King would turne their friend, and
furnish them with Money. Though the Multitude were grieued with this
proceeding for the present, yet for the great hope they had of the Kings pay, they
stirred not.

But they that were setting vp the Oligarchy, when they had communicated thus
much to the Multitude, fell to consideration anew, and with more of their
Complices, of the things spoken by Alcibiades. And the rest thought the matter
easie, and worthy to be beleeued: but Phrynichus,           Phrynichus is against the
who yet was Generall of the Army, liked it not, but         recalling of Alcibiades.

thought (as the truth was) that Alcibiades cared no more for the Oligarchy then
the Democracie, nor had any other ayme in it, but onely by altering the
Gouernment that then was, to be called home by his associates. And said, they
were especially to looke to this, that they did not mutiny for the King, who could
not very easily be induced (the Peloponnesians being now as much               
masters at Sea as themselues, and hauing no small Cities within his Dominions)
to ioyne with the Athenians, whom he trusted not, and to trouble himselfe, when he
might haue the friendship of the Peloponnesians, that neuer did him hurt.

As for the Confederate Cities to whom they promise Oligarchy, in that they
themselues doe put downe the Democracie, he said, he knew full well, that neyther
those which were already reuolted would the sooner returne to, nor those that
remained, be euer the more conﬁrmed in their obedience thereby. For they would
neuer bee so willing to be in subiection, either to the Few, or to the People, as they
would be to haue their liberty, which side soeuer it were that should giue it them.
But would thinke, that euen those which are termed the * Good men, if they had
the Gouernment, would giue them as much to doe, as           * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉. The 〈◊〉
the People, being Contriuers and authors to the People, men, or Aristocracy, a diﬀerence
                                                             from the Oligarchy, which was
of doing those mischiefes against them, out of which         of the richest sort onely. For the
they make most proﬁt vnto themselues. And that if the Good men who in the
                                                             Democracie are the Peoples
Few had the rule, then they should be put to death           mi ons, and put the People
                                                                    ●●

vnheard, and more violently then by the former,           vpon all they doe, will doe the
                                                          same things themselues, when
whereas the People is their refuge, and moderator of the they haue the Soueraignety in
others insolence. This he said, hee was certaine that the their hands.
Cities thought, in that they had learned the same by the
actions themselues. And that therefore what was yet propounded by Alcibiades, he
by no meanes approued.

But those of the Conspiracy there assembled, not onely approued the present
proposition, but also made preparation to send Pisander and others
Ambassadours to Athens, to negotiate concerning the reduction of Alcibiades,
the dissolution of the Democracie, and the procuring vnto the Athenians the
friendship of Tissaphernes.

Now Phrynichus knowing that an ouerture was to bee made at Athens for the
restoring of Alcibiades, and that the Athenians would The treason of Phrynichus
embrace it; and fearing lest being recalled he should      against the State, for feare of
                                                           Alcibiades.
doe him a mischiefe (in regard hee had spoken against
it) as one that would haue hindred the same, betooke himselfe to this course He
sends secret Letters to Astyochus, the Lacedaemonian Generall, who was yet
about Miletus, and aduertised him, that Alcibiades         He writes secret Letters to
vndid their a aires, and was procuring the friendship Astyochus.
of Tissaphernes for the Athenians, writing in plaine termes the whole businesse,
and desiring to bee excused, if hee rendred euill to his enemy, with 
some disaduantage to his Countrey. Astyochus had before this, laid by the
purpose of reuenge against Alcibiades, especially when he was not in his owne
hands. And going to him to Magnesia, and to                Astyochus appeacheth him to
Tissaphernes, related vnto them, what aduertisement Alcibiades.
he had receiued from Samos, and made himselfe the appeacher. For he adhered
(as was said) to Tissaphernes for his priuate lucre, both in this, and in diuers
other matters, which was also the cause, that concerning the pay, when the
abatement was made, hee was not so stout in opposing it, as hee ought to haue
beene. Hereupon Alcibiades sendeth Letters presently to those that were in
o ce at Samos, accusing Phrynichus of what hee had done, and requiring to

haue him put to death. Phrynichus perplexed with this discouery, & brought
into danger indeed, sends againe to Astyochus, blaming what was past, as not
well concealed and promised now, to be ready to deliuer vnto him the whole
Armie at Samos, to be destroyed; writing from point Phrynichus sends to Astyochus
to point, (Samos being vnwalled) in what manner he againe, and oﬀers to put the
                                                       whole army into his hands.
would doe it, and saying, that since his life was
brought in danger, they could not blame him, though he did this, or any other
thing, rather then be destroyed by his most deadly enemies. This also Astyochus
reuealed vnto Alcibiades.

But Phrynichus hauing had notice betimes how he           The deuice of Phrynichus to
abused him, and that Letters of this from Alcibiades auoyd the danger.
were in a manner come, he anticipates the newes himselfe, and tels the Armie,
That whereas Samos was vnwalled, and the Gallies rid not all within, the Enemy
meant to come and assault the Harbour; That hee had sure intelligence hereof;
and that they ought therefore with all speed to raise a Wall about the Citie, and
to put Garrisons into other places thereabouts. Now Phrynichus was Generall
himselfe, and it was in his owne power to see it done. They then fell to walling,
wherby Samos (which they meant to haue done howsoeuer) was so much the
sooner walled in. Not long after came Letters from Alcibiades, that the Army
was betrayed by Phrynichus, and that the Enemy purposed to inuade the
Harbour where they lay. But now, they thought not Alcibiades worthy to be
beleeued, but rather that hauing foreseene the designe of the enemy, he went
about out of malice, to fasten it vpon Phrynichus, as conscious of it likewise. So
that he did him no hurt by telling it, but bare witnesse rather of that 
which Phrynichus had told them of before.

After this Alcibiades endeuoured to encline and perswade Tissaphernes to the
friendship of the Athenians; for though Tissaphernes [...]
feared the Peloponnesians, because their Fleete was
greater then that of the Athenians, yet if hee had beene able, he had a good will
to haue beene perswaded by him▪ especially in his anger against the
Peloponnesians, after the dissension at Cnidus, about the League made by

Theramenes, (for they were already falne out, the Peloponnesians being about
this time in Rhodes) wherein that which had beene before spoken by Alcibiades,
how that the comming of the Lacedaemonians was to restore all the Cities to
their liberty, was now verifyed by Lichas, in that he said, it was an Article not to
be su ered, that the King should hold those Cities, which he and his Ancestors
then or before had holden. Alcibiades therefore, as one that laboured for no
tri e, with all his might applyed himselfe to Tissaphernes.

The Athenian Ambassadours sent from Samos with Pisander, being arriued at
Athens, were making their propositions to the People. Pisander getteth the Athenians
And related vnto them summarily the points of their to be content with the Oligarchy,
                                                         and to giue him and others
businesse, and principally this, That if they would call Commission to treat with
home Alcibiades, and not suﬀer the Gouernment to         Alcibiades.

remaine in the hands of the People, in such manner as
it did, they might haue the King for their Confederate, and get the victory of the
Peloponnesians. Now when many opposed that point touching the Democracie,
and the enemies of Alcibiades clamoured withall, that it would bee a horrible
thing hee should return by forcing the Gouernment, when the * Eumolpidae,
and * Ceryces bare witnesse against him concerning       * Eumolpidae, a Family
the Mysteries, for which he ed, and prohibited his       descended from Eumolpus, the
                                                         author at Athens of the
returne vnder their curse. Pisander, at this great       Mysteries of Ceres. This Familie
opposition and querimony, stood out, and going           had 〈◊〉 chiefe authority in
                                                         matter that concerned those
amongst them, tooke out one by one those that were Rites.
against it, and asked them, Whether, now that the
                                                         * Ceryces, Heralds in War,
Peloponnesians had as many Gallies at Sea to oppose Ambassadours in peace. Suidas
them, as they themselues had, and Confederate Cities, They pronounced all formall
                                                         words in the Ceremonies of their
more then they, and were furnished with money by the Religion, and were a Family
King and Tissaphernes, the Athenians being without, descended from Ceryx the sonne
                                                         of Mercury.
they had any other hope to saue their State, but by
perswading the King to come about to their side? And they that were asked hauing
nothing to answer, then in plaine termes hee said vnto them, This you cannot
now obtaine, except wee administer the State with more moderation, 
and bring the power into the hands of a Few, that the King may rely vpon vs. And

wee deliberate at this time, not so much about the forme, as about the preseruation
of the State; for if you mislike the forme, you may change it againe hereafter. And
let vs recall Alcibiades, who is the onely man that can bring this to passe.

The People hearing of the Oligarchy, tooke it very haynously at rst; But when
Pisander had proued euidently, that there was no other way of safety, in the end,
partly for feare, and partly because they hoped againe to change the
Gouernment, they yeelded thereunto. So they ordered, that Pisander, and tenne
others, should goe, and treate, both with Tissaphernes, and with Alcibiades, as
to them should seeme best, Withall, vpon the             Phrynichus accused by Pisander,
accusation of Pisander against Phrynichus, they          and discharged of 〈◊〉
                                                         command.
discharged both Phrynichus, and Scironidas, his
fellow-Commissioner, of their Command, and made Diomedon and Leon
Generals of the Fleet in their places.

Now the cause why Pisander accused Phrynichus, and said he had betrayed Iäsus
and Amorges, was onely this, hee thought him a man vn t for the businesse now
in hand with Alcibiades.

Pisander, after he had gone about to all those Combinations (which were in the
Citie before, for obtaining of places of Iudicature, and of Command) exhorting
them to stand together, and aduise about deposing the Democracie; and when
he had dispatched the rest of his businesse, so as there should be no more cause
for him to stay there, tooke Sea with those other tenne, to goe to Tissaphernes.

Leon and Diomedon arriuing the same Winter at the Leon and Diomedon warre vpon
Athenian Fleet, made a Voyage against Rhodes, and the Peloponnesian Nauy at
                                                       Rhodes.
 nding there the Peloponnesian Gallies drawne vp to
Land, disbarked, and ouercame in battell such of the Rhodians as made head;
and then put to Sea againe, and went to Chalce. After this they made sharper
Warre vpon them from Cos. For from thence they could better obserue the
Peloponnesian Nauy, when it should put o from the Land.

In this while, there arriued at Rhodes, Xenophontidas a Laconian, sent out of
Chius from Paedaritus, to aduertise them, that the
                                                         Chius distressed and
                                                                          ▪
Forti cation of the Athenians there, was now             Paedaritus the Captaine slaine.
  nished, and that vnlesse they came and relieued them
with their whole Fleeet, the State of Chius must vtterly be lost. And 
it was resolued to relieue them. But Paedaritus in the meane time, with the
whole power both of his owne auxiliar Forces, and of the Chians, made an
assault vpon the Forti cation which the Athenians had made about their Nauy,
part whereof he wonne, and had gotten some Gallies that were drawne aland.
But the Athenians issuing out vpon them, rst put to ight the Chians, and
then ouercame also the rest of the Army about Paedaritus, and slew Paedaritus
himselfe, and tooke many of the Chians prisoners, and much Armour. After this
the Chians were besieged both by Sea and Land more narrowly, and great famine
was in the City.

Pisander, and the other Athenian Ambassadours that Alcibiades vnable to make good
went with him, when they came to Tissaphernes,            his word, in bringing
                                                          Tissaphernes to the Athenians
began to conferre about the agreement. But                side, demandeth excessiue
Alcibiades (for he was not sure of Tissaphernes,          conditions, to make the breach
                                                          appeare to proceed from the
because he stood in feare too much of the                 Athenians, and to saue his own
Peloponnesians, and had a purpose besides, as             credit.
Alcibiades himselfe had taught him, to weaken both
sides yet more) betooke himselfe to this shift; that Tissaphernes should breake
o the Treaty, by making to the Athenians exorbitant demands. And it seemed
that Tissaphernes and hee aymed at the same thing; Tissaphernes for feare; and
Alcibiades, for that when he saw Tissaphernes not desirous to agree, though the
o ers were neuer so great, he was vnwilling to haue the Athenians thinke hee
could not preswade him to it, but rather that he was already perswaded and
willing, and that the Athenians came not to him with su cient o ers. For
Alcibiades being the man that spake for Tissaphernes, though he were also
present, made vnto them such excessiue demands, that though the Athenians
should haue yeelded to the greatest part of them, yet it must haue beene
attributed to them, that the Treaty went not on. For they demanded rst, That

all Ionia should be rendred. Then againe The adiacent Ilands, and other things,
which the Athenians stood not against. In ne, at the third meeting, when he
feared now plainely to be found vnable to make good his word, he required,
That they should suﬀer the King to build a Nauy, and sayle vp and downe by
their Coast, wheresoeuer, and with what number soeuer of Gallies hee himselfe
should thinke good.

Vpon this, the Athenians would treate no longer, esteeming the Conditions
intolerable, and that Alcibiades had abused them; and so went away 
in a chafe to Samos.

Presently after this the same Winter, Tissaphernes           ●●● saphernes hearkeneth 〈◊〉
went to Caunus, with intent both to bring the             to the Peloponnesians.

Peloponnesians backe to Miletus, and also, (as soone as he should haue agreed
vnto new Articles such as he could get) to giue the Fleet their pay; and not to fall
directly out with them, for feare, lest so many Gallies wanting maintenance,
should either bee forced by the Athenians to ght, and so bee ouercome, or
empied of men, the businesse might succeed with the Athenians according to
their owne desire, without him. Besides, he was afraid, lest looking out for
maintenance, they should make spoile in the Continent. In consideration, and
foresight of all which things, he desired to counterpoise the Grecians. And
sending for the Peloponnesians, hee gaue them their pay, and now made the
third League, as followeth.

In the thirteenth yeere of the raigne of Darius,       The third League betweene
Alexippidas being Ephore in Lacedaemon, Agreement Tissaphernes and the
                                                       Peloponnesians.
was made in the Plaine of Maeander, betweene the
Lacedaemonians and their Confederates on one part, and Tissaphernes, and
Hieramenes, and the sonnes of Pharnaces on the other part; concerning the aﬀaires
of the King, and of the Lacedaemonians, and their Confederates.

That whatsoeuer Countrey in Asia belongeth to the King, shall be the Kings still.
And that concerning his owne Countries, it shall bee lawfull for the King to doe
whatsoeuer hee shall thinke meete.

That the Lacedaemonians and their Confederates shall not inuade any the
Territories of the King, to harme them; nor the King, the Territories of the
Lacedaemonians or their Confederates.

If any of the Lacedaemonians or their Confederates shall inuade the Kings
Countrey to doe it hurt, the Lacedaemonians and their Confederates shall oppose
it. And if any of the Kings Countrey shall inuade the Lacedaemonians, or their
Confederates, to doe them hurt, the King shall oppose it.

That Tissaphernes shall, according to the rates agreed on, maintaine the present
Fleet, till the Kings Fleet arriue.

That when the Kings Nauy shall be come, the Lacedaemonians and their
Confederates shall maintaine their owne Nauie themselues, if they 
please; or if they will haue Tissaphernes to maintaine it, he shall doe it: And that
the Lacedaemonians and their Confederates, at the end of the Warre, repay
Tissaphernes what soeuer money they shall haue receiued of him.

When the Kings Gallies shall be arriued, both they, and the Gallies of the
Lacedaemonians and their Confederates, shall make the Warre ioyntly,
according as to Tissaphernes, and the Lacedaemonians and their Confederates
shall seeme good. And if they will giue ouer the Warre against the Athenians, they
shall giue it ouer in the same manner.

Such were the Articles.

After this Tissaphernes prepared for the fetching in of the Phoenician Fleet,
according to the Agreement, and to doe whatsoeuer else hee had vndertaken,
desiring to haue it seene, at least, that he went about it.

In the end of this Winter, the Boeotians tooke Oropus Oropus taken by Treason.
by Treason. It had in it a Garrison of Athenians. They
that plotted it, were certaine Eretrians, and some of Oropus it selfe, who were
then contriuing the reuolt of Euboea. For the place being built to keepe Eretria

in subiection, it was impossible, as long as the Athenians held it, but that it
would much annoy both Eretria, and the rest of Euboea. Hauing Oropus in
their hands already, they came to Rhodes to call the Peloponnesians into
Euboea. But the Peloponnesians had a greater inclination to relieue Chius now
distressed; and putting to Sea, departed out of Rhodes with their whole Fleet.
When they were come about Triopium, they discryed the Athenian Fleet in the
maine Sea, going from Chalce. And neither side assaulting other, they put in, the
one Fleet at Samos, the other at Miletus, For the Peloponesians saw they could
not passe to relieue Chius, without a Battell. Thus ended this Winter, and the
twentieth yeere of this Warre, written by Thucydides.

The next Summer, in the beginning of the Spring,         THE ONE AND
Dercylidas a Spartan, was sent by Land into              TWENTIETH YEERE.

Hellespont, with a small Army, to worke the reuolt of Abydus, a Colonie of the
Milesians. And the Chians at the same time, whilest The Chians ﬁght against the
Astyochus was at a stand how to helpe them, were         Athenians that besieged them.

compelled by the pressure of the Siege, to hazzard a Battell by Sea.

Now whilest Astyochus lay in Rhodes, they had receiued into the 
Citie of Chius, after the death of Paedaritus, one Leon a Spartan, that came
along with Antisthenes as a priuate Souldier, and with him twelue Gallies that
lay at the guard of Miletus, whereof ue were Thurians, foure Syracusians, one
of Anaea, one of Miletus, and one of Leons owne. whereupon the Chians
issuing forth with the whole force of the City, seazed a certain place of strength,
and put forth thirty sixe Gallies against thirty two of the Athenians, and fought.
After a sharpe ght, wherein the Chians and their associates had not the worst;
and when it beganne to bee darke, they retired againe into the City.

Presently after this, Dercylidas being arriued now in Abydus and Lampsacus reuolt.
Hellespont from Miletus, by Land, Abydus reuolted,
to him, and to Pharnabazus. And two dayes after, reuolted also Lampsacus.

Strombichides hauing intelligence of this, made haste       Strombichides recouereth
thither from Chius, with foure and twenty Sayle of          Lampsacus.

Athenians, (those being also of that number, which transported his men of
Armes. ) And when hee had ouercome the Lampsacens that came out against
him, and taken Lampsacus, being an open Towne, at the rst shout of their
voyces, and made Prize of all the goods they found, and of the Slaues, he placed
the Free-men there againe, and went against Abydus. But when that Citie
neither yeelded, nor could be taken by assault, he crossed ouer from Abydus to
the opposite shore, and in Sestus, a Citie of Chersonnesus, (possessed heretofore
by the Medes) he placed a Garrison, for the custody of the whole Hellespont.

In the meane time, not onely the Chians had the Sea at more command, but
Astyochus also, and the Army at Miletus, hauing beene aduertised what past in
the ght by Sea, and that Strombichides and those Gallies with him were gone
away, tooke heart. And Astyochus going to Chius, with two Gallies fetched away
the Gallies that were there, and with the whole Fleet now together, went against
Samos. But seeing they of Samos, by reason of their iealousie one towards
another, came not against him, hee went backe againe to Miletus. For it was
about this time, that the Democracie was put downe at Athens.

For after that Pisander and his fellow-Ambassadours The Democracy at Athens put
that had beene with Tissaphernes, were come to            downe by Pisander and his
                                                          fellowes.
Samos, they both assured their a aires yet better in
the Army, and also prouoked the principall men of the Samians to 
attempt with them the erecting of the Oligarchy; though there were then an
insurrection amongst them against the Oligarchy. And withall the Athenians at
Samos, in a conference amongst themselues,                The authors of the Oligarchy
deliberated, how, since Alcibiades would not, to let      resolue to leaue out Alcibiades
                                                                                     ▪

                                                          and to gouerne the State with
him alone▪ (for indeed they thought him no t man their priuate meanes for
to come into an Oligarchy) but for themselues, seeing themselues.
they were already engaged in the danger, to take care, both to keepe the businesse
from a relapse, and withall to sustaine the Warre, and to contribute money, and
whatsoeuer else was needfull, with alacrity, out of their priuate estates, and no
more to toyle for other then themselues. Hauing thus aduised, they sent
Pisander with halfe the Ambassadorus presently home, to follow the businesse

there, with command to set vp the Oligarchy in all Cities they were to touch at
by the way, the other halfe they sent about, some to one part of the State, and
some to another. And they sent away Diotrephes to his Charge, who was now
about Chius, chosen to goe Gouernour of the Cities vpon Thrace.

Hee, when he came to Thasus, deposed the People.          The Athenians hauing set vp the
And within two moneths at mos●, after he was gone, Oligarchy in Thasus, it presently
                                                          reuolteth from them.
the Thasians forti ed their Citie, as needing no longer
an Aristocracy with the Athenians, but expecting liberty euery day by the helpe
of the Lacedaemonians. For there were also certaine of them with the
Peloponnesians, driuen out by the Athenians; and these practised with such in
the City as were for their purpose, to receiue Gallies into it, and to cause it to
reuolt. So that it fell out for them iust as they would haue it, that that estate of
theirs, was set vp without their danger, and that the People was deposed, that
would haue withstood it. Insomuch as at Thasus it fell out contrary to what
those Athenians thought, which erected the Oligarchy; and so, in my opinion, it
did in many other places of their Dominion. For the Cities now growne wise,
and withall resolute in their proceedings, sought a direct liberty, and preferred
not before it, that outside of a well-ordered Gouernment, introduced by the
Athenians.

They with Pisander, according to the order giuen        The proceeding of Pisander in
them, entring into the Cities, as they went by,         setting vs the Oligarchy.

dissolued the Democracies, & hauing in some places obtained also an 
ayde of men of Armes, they came to Athens, and found the businesse for the
greatest part dispatched to their hands, by their Complices, before their
comming. For certaine yong men combining themselues, had not onely
murdered Androcles priuily, a principall Patron of the Popular gouernment, and
one that had his hand the farthest in the banishment of Alcibiades; whom they
slew for two causes: for the sway hee bare amongst the People, and to grati e
Alcibiades, who they thought would returne, and get them the friendship of
Tissaphernes; but had also made away diuers men vn t for their Designe, in the
same manner. They had withall an Oration ready made, which they deliuered in

publike, wherein they said, That there ought none to receiue wages, but such as
serued in the Warres, nor to participate of the Gouernment, more then 5000, and
those, such as by their purses and persons were best able to serue the Common-
Wealth.

And this with the most carried a good shew, because they that would set forward
the alteration of the State, were to haue the mannaging of the same. Yet the
People and the * Councell of the Beane, met still, but * The Senate or Councell of 500.
debated nothing, saue what the Conspirators thought
 t. Nay, all that spake were of that number, and had considered before what they
were to say. Nor would any of the rest speake against them, for feare, and
because they saw the Combination was great; and if any man did, he was quickly
made away by one conuenient meanes or other, and no enquirie made after the
deed doers, nor Iustice prosecuted against any that was suspected.

But the People were so quiet, and so afraid, that euery man thought it gaine to
escape violence, though he said neuer a word. Their hearts failed them, because
they thought the Conspirators more then indeed they were: and to learne their
number, in respect of the greatnesse of the Citie, and for that they knew not one
another, they were vnable.

For the same cause also was it impossible for any man that was angry at it, to
bemone himselfe, whereby to be reuenged on them that conspired. For he must
haue told his mind, either to one he knew not, or to one he knew & trusted not.
For the Populars approached each other, euery one with iealousie, as 
if they thought him of the plot. For indeed there were such amongst them, as no
man would haue thought would euer haue turned to the Oligarchy; and those
were they that caused in the Many that di dence, and by strengthning the
iealousie of the populars one against another, conferred most to the security of
the Few. During this opportunity, Pisander, and they that were with him
comming in, fell in hand presently with the remainder of the businesse. And rst
they assembled the People, and deliuered their opinion, for tenne men to bee
chosen with power absolute, to make a draught of Lawes, and (hauing drawne

them) to deliuer their opinion at a day appointed, before the People, touching
the best forme of gouernment for the Citie.

Afterwards, when that day came, they summoned the Assembly to Colonus,
(which is a place consecrated to Neptune, without the City, about two Furlongs
o ) And they that were appointed to write the Lawes, presented this, and onely
this, That it should be lawfull for any Athenian to deliuer whatsoeuer opinion hee
pleased, imposing of great punishments vpon whosoeuer should eyther accuse
any that so spake, of violating the Lawes, or otherwise do him hurt. Now here
indeed it was in plaine termes propounded, That not any Magistracy of the
forme before vsed, might any longer be in force, nor any Fee belong vnto it, but that
ﬁue Prytanes might be elected, and these ﬁue choose a The forme of the new Oligarchy.
hundred, and euery one of this hundred take vnto him
three others. And these 400 entring into the Councell-house, might haue absolute
authority to gouerne the State as they thought best, and to summon the 5000, as oft
as to them should seeme good. He that deliuered this       Pisander a principall man of
opinion was Pisander, who was also otherwise, openly the Oligarchals.
the forwardest to put downe the Democracie. But he Antiphon another setter vp of the
that contriued the whole businesse, how to bring it to Few.
this passe, and had long thought vpon it, was Antiphon, a man for vertue not
inferiour to any Athenian of his time, and the ablest The praise of Antiphon.
of any man, both to deuise well, and also to expresse
well, what he had deuised. And though he came not into the assemblies of the
People, nor willingly to any other debatings, because the Multitude had him in
iealousie for the opinion they had of the power of his eloquence, yet when any
man that had occasion of suite, eyther in the Courts of Iustice, or in the
Assembly of the People, came to him for his counsell, this one man 
was able to help him most. The same man, when afterwards the gouernment of
the Foure hundred went downe, and was vexed of the People, was heard pleade
for himselfe, when his life was in question for that businesse, the best of any man
to this day.

Phrynichus also shewed himselfe an earnest man for 〈◊〉 Another author of the
the Oligarchy, and that more eminently then any        Oligarchy.

other, because he feared Alcibiades, and knew him to be acquainted with all his
practices at Samos with Astyochus; and thought in all probability, that he would
neuer returne, to liue vnder the gouernment of the Few. And this man in any
matter of weight, appeared the most su cient to bee relyed on.

Also Theramenes the sonne of Agnon, an able man both for elocution and
vnderstanding, was another of the Principall of those that ouerthrew the
Democracie. So that it it is no maruell if the businesse tooke e ect, being by
many and wise men conducted, though it were a hard one. For it went sore with
the Athenian People, almost a hundred yeeres after the expulsion of the Tyrants,
to be now depriued of their liberty, hauing not onely not beene subiect to any,
but also for the halfe of this time, beene enured to dominion ouer others.

When the Assembly (after it had passed these things, The 400 enter vpon the Senate,
no man contradicting) was dissolued, then afterwards and dismisse the Senate of 500,
                                                         called the Councell of the Beane.
they brought the Foure hundred into the Councell-
house, in this manner. The Athenians were euermore partly on the Walles, and
partly at their Armes in the Campe, in regard of the Enemie that lay at Decelea.
Therefore on the day appointed, they su ered such as knew not their intent, to
goe forth, as they were wont. But to such as were of the Conspiracy, they quietly
gaue order, not to goe to the Campe it selfe, but to lagge behind at a certaine
distance, and if any man should oppose what was in doing, to take Armes and
keepe them backe. They to whom this charge was giuen, were the Andrians,
Tenians, three hundred Carystians, and such of the Colonie of Aegina which
the Athenians had sent thither to inhabite, as came on purpose to this action
with their owne Armes. These things thus ordered, the Foure hundred, with
euery man a secret Dagger, accompanyed with one hundred and twenty yong
men of Greece, (whom they vsed for occasions of shedding bloud) 
came in vpon the * Counsellors of the Beane, as they     * The Senate or Councel of 500
                                                                                 ●

sate in the Counsell-house, and commanded them to 〈…〉.
take their Salary, and be gone, which also they brought ready with them, for the

whole time they were behind, and payed it to them as they went out. And the
rest of the Citizens mutined not, but rested quiet.

The 400 being now entred into the Counsell-house, created * Prytanes amongst
themselues by lot▪ and made their prayers and             * These were 〈…〉 Councell of the
sacri ces to the Gods, all that were before vsuall at the 500, in number 50 and in 〈◊〉
                                                                             ▪

                                                          moderated and put the 〈◊〉 in
entrance vpon the Gouernment. And afterwards,             that Councell, and also in the
receding farre from that course, which in the             Assemblies of the 〈◊〉.

administration of the State, was vsed by the People, sauing that for Alcibiades his
sake, they recalled not the Outlawes, in other things they gouerned the
Common-wealth imperiously. And not onely slew some, though not many, such
as they thought t to be made away, and imprisoned some, and con ned others
to places abroad, but also sent Heralds to Agis, King of the Lacedaemonians,
who was then at Decelea, signifying that they would come to composition with
him, and that now he might better treat with them, then he might before with
the vnconstant People.

But he, not imagining that the Citie was yet in quiet, Agis, in hope that the City was
nor willing, so soone, to deliuer vp their ancient        in sedition, commeth to assault
                                                          it, but is repulsed.
liberty, but rather that, if they saw him approach with
great forces, they would be in tumult, not yet beleeuing fully, but that some
stirre or other would arise amongst them, gaue no answer at all to those that
came from the Fourehundred, touching the composition; but hauing sent for
new, and great forces out of Peloponnesus, came downe himselfe not long after,
both with the Army at Decelea, and those new commers, to the Athenian
Walles. Hoping that they would fall into his hands according to his desire, at
least the more easily for their confusion, or perhaps at the very rst shout of their
voyces; in respect of the tumult that in all likelihood was to happen both within
and without the Citie. For, as for the Long-walles, in regard of the few
Defendants likely to be found vpon them, he thought he could not faile to take
them. But when he came neere, and the Athenians were without any the least
alteration within, and had with their Horsemen which they sent out, 
and a part of their men of Armes, and of their Light-armed, and of their

Archers, ouerthrowne some of his men that approached too neere, and gotten
some armes and bodies of the slaine; recti ed thus, he with drew his Armie
againe; and himselfe, and such as were with him before stayed in their place at
Decelea; but, as for those that came last, after they had stayed a while in the
Countrey, he sent them home againe. After this, the The 400 send to Lacedaemon to
                                                                      ▪

400, notwithstanding their former repulse, sent            procure a Peace.

Ambassadors vnto Agis anew, and he now receiuing them better, by his aduice
they sent Ambassadours also to Lacedaemon, about an agreement, being
desirous of Peace.

They likewise sent 10 men to Samos, to satis e the            They sent to Samos, to excuse
Army, and to tell them, That the Oligarchy was not set their doings to the army.
vp, to any preiudice of the Citie, or Citizens, but for the safety of the whole State.
And that they which had their hands in it, were 5000, and not 400 onely.
Notwithstanding that the Athenians by reason of warfare, and imployment
abroad, neuer assembled, of how great consequence soeuer was the matter to be
handled, so frequent, as to be 5000 there at once. And hauing in other things
instructed them how to make the best of the matter, they sent them away
immediately after the gouernment was changed, fearing (as also it fell out) lest
the Sea-faring multitude, would not onely not continue in this Oligarchicall
forme themselues, but (the mischiefe beginning there) would depose them also.

For in Samos there was a commotion about the              The Oligarchy assaulted at
Oligarchy already. And this that followeth, happened Samos by the Populars.
about the same time that the 400 were set vp in Athens. Those Samians that had
risen against the Nobility, and were of the Peoples side, turning when Pisander
came thither, at the perswasion of him and of those Athenians in Samos that
were his Complices, conspired together to the number of 300, and were to haue
assaulted the rest as Populars; and one Hyperbolus, a lewd fellow, who, not for
any feare of his power, or for any dignity, but for wickednesse of life, and
dishonour he did the Citie, had beene banished by Ostracisme, they slew;
abetted therein both by Charminus, one of the Commanders, and by other
Athenians that were amongst them, who had giuen them their faith; and

together with these they committed other facts of the same kind, and were fully
bent to haue assaulted the Popular side, but they hauing gotten           
notice thereof, made knowne the designe both to the Generals, Leon, and
Diomedon, (for these being honoured by the People, endured the Oligarchy
vnwillingly) and also to Thrasibulus, and Thrasillus, whereof one was Captaine
of a Gally, and the other Captaine of a Band of a men of Armes, and to such
others continually as they thought stood in greatest opposition to the
Conspirators; and required of them, that they would not see them destroyed,
and Samos alienated from the Athenians, by the only means of which their
Dominion had till this time kept it selfe in the state it is in. They hearing it, went
to the Souldiers, and exhorted them one by one, not to su er it, especially to the
Paralians, (who were all Athenians and Freemen, come thither in the Gally called
Paralus, and had alwayes before been enemies to the Oligarchy. And Leon, and
Diomedon, whensoeuer they went forth any whither, left them certaine Gallies
for their guard. ) So that when the 300 assaulted them, the Commons of the
Samians, with the helpe of all these, and especially of the Paralians, had the
vpper hand, and of the 300, slew 30. Three of the chiefe authors, they banished,
and burying in obliuion the fault of the rest, gouerned the State from that time
forward as a Democratie.

The Paralus, and it Chaereas the sonne of Archestratus, The Army send to Athens to
a man of Athens, one that had been forward in the          signiﬁe their doings against the
                                                           Oligarchy at Samos, not
making of this change, the Samians, and the Souldiers knowing that the Oligarchy was
dispatched presently away to Athens, to aduertise          then in authority at Athens.

them of what was done; for they knew not yet that the
gouernment was in the hands of the 400. When they arriued, the 400 cast some
two or three of these of the Paralus into prison; the rest, after they had taken the
Gally from them, and put them aboord another Military Gally, they
commanded to keepe guard about Euboea. But Chaereas, by some meanes or
other, getting presently away, seeing how things went, came backe to Samos, and
related to the Army all that the Athenians had done, aggrauating it to the
vtmost; As that they punished euery man with stripes, to the end that none should
contradict the doings of those that bore rule; and that their wiues and children at

home were abused; and that they had an intention further to take and imprison
all that were of kinne to any of the Army which was not of their faction, to the
intent to kill them if they of Samos would not submit to their authority. And
many other things he told them, adding lyes of his owne.                

When they heard this, they were ready at rst to haue The Democracy re-established in
fallen vpon the chiefe authors of the Oligarchy, and      the army.

vpon such of the rest as were partakers of it. Yet afterwards, being hindred by
such as came betweene, and aduised them not to ouerthrow the State, the enemy
lying so nere with their Gallies to assault them, they gaue it ouer. After this,
Thrasybulus the sonne of Lycas, and Thrasyllus, (for these were the principall
authors of the change) determining now openly to reduce the State at Samos to
a Democracy, tooke oathes of all the Souldiers, especially of the Oligarchicals,
the greatest they could deuise, both that they should be subiect to the Democracy,
and agree together, and also that they should zealously prosecute the Warre
against the Peloponnesians, and withall be enemies to the 400, and not haue to
doe with them by Ambassadours. The same oath was taken by all the Samians
that were of age, and the Athenian Souldiers communicated with them their
whole a aires, together with whatsoeuer should succeed of their dangers. For
whom and for themselues, they made account there was no refuge of safety, but
that if either the 400, or the enemy, at Miletus, ouercame them, they must needs
perish.

So there was a contention at this time, one side compelling the Citie to a
Democracy; the other, the Army to an Oligarchy. And presently there was an
Assembly of the Souldiers called, wherein they depriued the former
Commanders, and such Captaines of Gallies as they had in suspition, of their
charge▪ and chose others, both Captaines of Gallies, and Commanders in their
places, of which Thrasybulus and Thrasyllus were two. And they stood vp and
encouraged one another, both otherwise, and with this, That they had no cause
to be deiected for the Cities reuolting from them; For  The army encourageth it selfe
they at Athens, being the lesser part, had forsaken     against the City and State at
                                                        home, by comparison of their
them, who were not onely the greater part, but also     strength.

euery way the better prouided. For they hauing the whole Nauy could compell the
rest of the cities, subiect vnto them, to pay in their mony, as well now, as if they were
to set out from Athens it selfe. And that they also had a Citie, namely Samos, no
weake one, but euen such a one, a● when they were enemies, wanted little of taking
the Dominion of the Sea from the Athenians. That the seat of the Warre, was the
same it was before; and that they should be better able to prouide themselues of
things necessary, hauing the Nauie, then they should be that were at 
home in the City. And that they at Athens were Masters of the entrance of Piraeus
both formerly by the fauour of them at Samos, and that now also, vnlesse they
restore them the Gouernment, they shall againe bee brought to that passe, that
those at Samos shall bee better able to barre them the vse of the Sea, then they shall
bee to barre it them of Samos. That it was a triﬂe and worth nothing which was
conferred to the ouercomming of the Enemy by the Citie, and a small matter it
would be to lose it, seeing they had neither any more Siluer to send them (for the
Souldiers shifted for themselues) nor yet good direction which is the thing for which
the Citie hath the command of the Armies. Nay that in this point they erred which
were at Athens, in that they had abrogated the Lawes of their Countrey, whereas
they at Samos did both obserue the same themselues, and endeuour to constraine
the other to doe so likewise. So that such of them in the Campe as should giue good
councell, were as good as they in the Citie. And that Alcibiades, if they would
decree his security and his returne, would with all his heart procure the King to bee
their Confederate. And that which is the maine thing, if they fayled of all other
helpes, yet with so great a Fleet, they could not faile of many places to retire to, in
which they might ﬁnde both Citie and Territorie.

When they had thus debated the matter in the Assembly, and encouraged one
another, they made ready, as at other times, whatsoeuer was necessary for the
Warre. And the tenne Ambassadours which were sent to Samos from the Foure-
hundred, hearing of this by the way, at Delos, whither they were come already,
stayed still there.

About the same time also, the Souldiers of the               Vpon the murmur of the
Peloponnesian Fleet at Miletus murmured amongst              Souldiers against Astyochus, he

themselues, that Astyochus and Tissaphernes               goeth to Samos to oﬀer the
                                                          Athenians battell, who refuse it.
ouerthrew the state of their A aires. Astyochus, in
refusing to ght, both before, when their owne Fleete was stronger, and that of
the Athenians but small, and also now, whilest they were said to bee in sedition,
and their Fleet diuided; and in expecting the Phoenician Fleet, in fame, not in
fact to come from Tissaphernes; And Tissaphernes, in that hee not onely
brought not in that Fleete of his, but also impaired theirs, by not giuing them
their pay, neither fully nor continually: And that they therefore            
ought no longer to delay time, but to hazard battell. This was vrged principally
by the Syracusians.

Astyochus and the Confederates, when they heard of the murmur, and had in
Counsell resolued to ght, especially after they were informed that Samos was in
a tumult, putting forth with their whole Fleet, to the number of 121 Sayle, with
order giuen to the Milesians to march by Land to the same place, went to
Mycale. But the Athenians being come out from Samos with their Fleet of 82
Gallies, and riding now at Glauce of the Territory of Mycale, (for in this part
toward Mycale, Samos is but a little way from the Continent) when they
descryed the Peloponnesian Fleet comming against them, put in againe to Samos
as not esteeming themselues a su cient number to hazard their whole fortune
on the Battell. Besides, they stayed for the comming of Strombichides from
Hellespont to their ayde, (for they saw that they of Miletus had a desire to ght)
with those Gallies that went from Chius against Abydus; for they had sent vnto
him before. So these retired into Samos. And the Peloponnesians putting in at
Mycale, there encamped, as also did the Land-forces of the Milesians, and others
of the Countrey thereabouts. The next day, when they meant to haue gone
against Samos, they receiued newes that Strombichides with his Gallies was
arriued out of Hellespont, and thereupon returned presently to Miletus. Then
the Athenians on the other side, with the addition of The Athenians oﬀer battell to
these Gallies, went to Miletus, being now one            the Peloponnesians and they
                                                         refuse it.
hundred and eight Sayle, intending to ght: but when
no body came out against them, they likewise went backe to Samos.

Immediately after this, the same Summer, the Peloponnesians, who refused to
come out against the Enemy, as holding themselues        The Peloponnesians send part of
                                                         their Fleet towards the
with their whole Fleete too weake to giue them           Hellespont, but there went
Battell, and were now at a stand how to get Money for through but onely tenne Gallies.
the maintenance of so great a number of Gallies, sent
Clearchus the sonne of Rhamphias with fortie Gallies (according to the order at
 rst from Peloponnesus) to Pharnabazus. For not onely Pharnabazus himselfe
had sent for, and promised to pay them, but they were aduertised besides, by
Ambassadours, that Byzantium had a purpose to reuolt. Hereupon these
Peloponnesian Gallies hauing put out into the maine Sea, to the end 
that they might not be seene as they passed by, and tossed with Tempests, part of
them (which were the greatest number) and Clearchus with them, got into
Delos, and came afterwards to Miletus againe: (but Clearchus went thence
againe into the Hellespont by Land, and had the command there, ) and part
vnder the charge of Elixus a Megarean (which were tenne Sayle, went safely
through into the Hellespont, and caused Byzantium to reuolt. And after this,
when they of Samos heard of it, they sent certaine Gallies into Hellespont, to
oppose them, and to be a guard to the Cities thereabouts; and there followed a
small ght betweene them, of eight Gallies to eight, before Byzantium.

In the meane time, they that were in authority at Samos, and especially
Thrasybulus, who after the forme of Gouernment         Alcibiades i recalled, and
                                                                     ●

changed, was still of the minde to haue Alcibiades     commeth to Samos.

recalled, at length in an Assembly perswaded the Souldiers to the same. And
when they had decreed for Alcibiades, both his returne, and his security, he went
to Tissaphernes, and fetched Alcibiades to Samos, accounting it their onely
meanes of safety, to winne Tissaphernes from the Peloponnesians to themselues.
An Assembly being called, Alcibiades complained of, and lamented, the calamity
of his owne exile, and speaking much of the businesse of the State, gaue them no
small hopes of the future time, hyperbolically magnifying his own power with
Tissaphernes, to the end that both they which held the Oligarchy at home,
might the more feare him, and so the Conspiracies      He manifesteth his power with
dissolue, and also those at Samos the more honour      Tissaphernes   ▪

him, and take better heart vnto themselues: and withall, that the Enemy might
obiect the same to the vtmost to Tissaphernes, and fall from their present hopes.
Alcibiades therefore, with the greatest boast that could bee, a rmed that
Tissaphernes had vndertaken to him, that as long as he had any thing left, if hee
might but trust the Athenians, they should neuer want for maintenance, no,
though hee should bee constrained to make Money of his owne bed; and that he
would fetch the Phoenician Fleet now at Aspendus, not to the Peloponnesians,
but to the Athenians. And that then onely hee would rely vpon the Athenians,
when Alcibiades called home, should vndertake for them.

Hearing this and much more, they chose him presently for Generall, 
together with those that were before, and commited Alcibiades Generall of the
vnto them the whole gouernment of their a aires.          Athenian army.

And now there was not a man that would haue sold his present hopes, both of
subsisting themselues, and being reuenged of the Foure-hundred, for any good
in the world; and were ready euen then, vpon those words of his, contemning
the Enemie there present, to set sayle for Piraeus. But he, though many pressed
it, by all meanes forbade their going against Piraeus, being to leaue their Enemies
so neere; but since they had chosen him Generall, he was, he said, to goe to
Tissaphernes rst, and to dispatch such businesse with him as concerned the
Warre. And as soone as the Assembly brake vp, he tooke his iourney accordingly,
to the end that he might seeme to communicate euery thing with him, and for
that he desired also to bee in more honour with him, and to shew that hee was
Generall, and a man capable to doe him good or hurt. And it happened to
Alcibiades, that he awed the Athenians with Tissaphernes, and Tissaphernes
with the Athenians.

When the Peloponnesians that were at Miletus heard The Peloponnesians murmur
that Alcibiades was gone home, whereas they             against Tissaphernes and
                                                        Astyochus.
mistrusted Tissaphernes before, now they much more
accused him. For it fell out, that when at the comming of the Athenians with
their Fleet before Miletus, they refused to giue them Battell, Tissaphernes
became therby a great deale slacker in his payment, & besides that he was hated

by them before this, for Alcibiades sake, the Souldiers now, meeting in
Companies apart, reckoned vp one to another, the same matters which they had
noted before, and some also, men of value, and not the common Souldier alone,
recounted this withall, how they had neuer had their full stipend, that the
allowance was but small, and yet not continually paid, and that vnlesse they
either fought, or went to some other place where they might haue maintenance,
their men would abandon the Fleet, and that the cause of all this was in
Astyochus, who for priuate lucre gaue way to the humour of Tissaphernes.
Whilest these were vpon this consideration, there happened also a certaine
tumult about Astyochus. For the Mariners of the Syracusians and Thurians, by
how much they were a multitude, that had greater liberty then the 
rest, with so much the stouter importunity, they demaunded their pay. And he
not onely gaue them somewhat an insolent answer, but also threatned Dorieus,
that amongst the rest spake for the Souldiers vnder himselfe, and lift vp his sta e
against him. When the Souldiers saw that, they tooke Mutiny against 〈◊〉        ▪

vp a cry like Seamen indeed, all at once, and were
running vpon Astyochus, to haue stricken him. But foreseeing it, he ed to an
Altar, and was not stricken, but they were parted againe.

The Milesians also tooke in, a certaine Fort in Miletus, The Milesians take in the Fort
built by Tissaphernes, hauing priuily assaulted it, and made in 〈◊〉 City by
                                                         Tissaphernes.
cast out the Garrison that was within it. These things
were by the rest of the Confederates, and especially by the Syracusians, well
approued of, but Lichas liked them not; saying, it behoued the Milesians, and
the rest dwelling within the Kings Dominion, to haue obeyed Tissaphernes in all
moderate things, and till such time as the Warre should haue been well
dispatched, to haue courted him. And the Milesians, for this and other things of
this kind were o ended with Lichas, and afterwards when hee dyed of
sickenesse, would not permit him to bee buried in that place, where the
Lacaedaemonians then present, would haue had him.

Whilest they were quarrelling about their businesse with Astyochus and
Tissaphernes, Mindarus commeth in from                 Mindarus successor to Astyochus,
                                                            taketh charge of the Army, and

                                                                g f           y
Lacedaemon to succeed Astyochus in his charge of the Astyochus goeth home.

Fleet. And as soone as he had taken the Command vpon him, Astyochus
departed. But with him Tissaphernes sent a Carian, named Cauleites, one that
spake * both the Languages, both to accuse the         * Both Greeke and Persian.
Milesians about the Fort, and also to make an
Apologie for himselfe. Knowing that the Milesians went principally to exclaime
vpon him, and that Hermocrates went with them, and would bewray how
Tissaphernes vndid the businesse of the Peloponnesians, with Alcibiades, and
dealt on both hands. For he was continually at enimity with him, about the
payment of the Souldiers wages; and in the end, when Hermocrates was
banished from Syracuse, and other Commanders of the Syracusian Fleet,
namely, Potamis, Miscon, and Demarchus, were arriued at Miletus, Tissaphernes
lay more heauy vpon him, being an Outlaw then before, and accused him
amongst other things, that he had asked him mony, and because he could not
haue it, became his Enemie. So Astyochus and Hermocrates and the 
Milesians went their way to Lacedaemon.

Alcibiades by this time was come backe from          The Ambassassadours from the
Tissaphernes, to Samos▪ And those Ambassadours of 400 to excuse the charge at
                                                     Athens.
the Foure-hundred, which had beene sent out before
to molli e and to informe those of Samos, came from Delos, now, whilest
Alcibiades was present.

An Assembly being called, they were o ering to speake, but the Souldiers at rst
would not heare them, but cryed out to haue them put to death, for that they
had deposed the People; yet afterwards with much adoe they were calmed, and
gaue them hearing. They declared, That the change had beene made for the
preseruation of the City, not to destroy it, nor to deliuer it to the Enemy; for they
could haue done that before now, when the Enemy during their gouernment
assaulted it. That euery one of the 5000 was to participate of the Gouernment in
their turnes. And their friends were not (as Chaereas had laid to their charge)
abused, nor had any wrong at all, but remained euery one quietly vpon his owne.

Though they deliuered this and much more, yet the Souldiers beleeued them
not, but raged still, and declared their opinions, some in one sort, some in
another, most agreing in this to goe against Piraeus▪ Alcibiades saueth the Athenian
                                                          State.
And now Alcibiades appeared to be the rst and
principall man in doing seruice to the Common-wealth. For when the
Athenians at Samos were carried headlong to inuade themselues, (in which case
most manifestly the Enemy had presently possessed himselfe of Ionia and
Hellespont) it was thought that hee was the man that kept them from it. Nor
was there any man at that time able to haue held in the Multitude, but himselfe.
He both made them to desist from the voyage and rated o from the
Ambassadors, those that were in their owne particular incensed against them;
whom also he sent away, giuing them their answer himselfe: That he opposed not
the gouernment of the 5000, but willed them to remoue the 400, and to establish
the Councell that was before of 500. That if they had frugally cut oﬀ any expence,
so that such as were employed in the Warres might be the better maintained, he
did much commend them for it. And withall hee exhorted them to stand out, and
giue no ground to their Enemies; for that as long as the City held out, there was
great hope for them to compound; but if eyther part miscarry once,       
eyther this at Samos, or the other at Athens, there would none be left for the
Enemy to compound withall.

There chanced to be present also the Ambassadors of the Argiues, sent vnto the
Popular faction of the Athenians in Samos, to assist them. These Alcibiades
commended, and appointed to be ready when they should be called for, and so
dismissed them. These Argiues came in with those of the Paralus, that had beene
bestowed formerly in the military Gally by the Foure-hundred, to goe about
Euboea, and to conuoy Lespodias, Aristophon, and Melesias, Ambassadors from
the Foure-hundred, to Lacedaemon. These as they sayled by Argos, seazed on the
Ambassadours, and deliuered them as principall men in deposing of the People,
to the Argiues, and returned no more to Athens, but came with the Gallie they
then were in, to Samos, and brought with them these Ambassadours from the
Argiues.

The same Summer, Tissaphernes, at the time that the Peloponnesians were
o ended with him most, both for the going home of Tissaphernes        goeth to the
                                                          Phoenician Fleet at Aspendus.
Alcibiades, and diuers other things, as now manifestly
Atticizing, with purpose, as indeed it seeemed, to cleere himselfe to them,
concerning his accusations, made ready for his iourney to Aspendus for the
Phoenician Fleet, and willed Lichas to goe along with him; saying that he would
substitute Tamos his Deputy Lieutenant ouer the Army, to pay the Fleet whilest
himselfe was absent.

This matter is diuersly reported, and it is hard to know with what purpose he
went to Aspendus, and yet brought not the Fleet away with him. For it is
knowne that 147 Sayle of Phoenicians were come forward as far as Aspendus,
but why thy came not thorow, the coniectures are various. Some thinke it was
vpon designe (as hee formerly intended) to weare out the Peloponnesian Forces,
(for which cause also, Tamos, who had that charge,        Coniectures of diuers vpon his
made no better, but rather worse payment then             going.

himselfe. ) Others, that hauing brought the Phoenicians as far as Aspendus, he
might dismisse them for money; (for he neuer meant to vse their seruice. ) Some
againe said, it was because they exclaimed so against it a● Lacedaemon, and that
it might not bee said he abused them, but that hee went openly to a Fleete really
set out.

For my owne part, I thinke it most cleare, that it was to the end to 
consume, and to ballance the Grecians, that he            The opinion of the Author.
brought not those Gallies in. Consuming them, in
that he went thither, and delayed the time; and equalizing them, in that bringing
them to neither, he made neither party the stronger. For if he had had a mind to
end the Warre, it is manifest hee might haue beene sure to haue done it. For if he
had brought them to the Lacedaemonians, in all reason he had giuen them the
victory, who had a Nauie already, rather equall then inferiour to that of their
Enemies.

But that which hurt them most, was the pretence hee alledged for not bringing
the Fleet in, for he said they were not so many sayle as the King had ordained to
be gotten together. But sure he might haue ingratiated himselfe more in this
businesse, by dispatching it with lesse of the Kings Money, then by spending
more. But whatsoeuer was his purpose, Tissaphernes went to Aspendus, and
was with the Phoenicians, and by his owne appointment, the Peloponnesians
sent Philip a Lacedaemonian with him with two Gallies, as to take charge of the
Fleet.

Alcibiades, when he heard that Tissaphernes was gone Alcibiades, knowing that
to Aspendus, goes after him with thirteene Gallies,     Tissaphernes would neuer bring
                                                        on the Fleet, goeth after him, to
promising to those at Samos, a safe and great bene t, make the Peloponnesians thinke,
which was, that he would either bring those             the Fleet was stand for his & the
                                                        Athenians sakes.
Phoenician Gallies to the seruice of the Athenians, or
at least hinder their comming to the Peloponnesians; knowing, as is likely, the
minde of Tissaphernes by long acquaintance, that hee meant not to bring them
on, and desiring, as much as he could, to procure him the ill will of the
Peloponnesians, for the friendship shewne to himselfe and to the Athenians,
that hee might thereby the better engage him to take their part. So hee presently
put to Sea, holding his course for Phaselis and Caunus vpwards.

The Ambassadours of the Foure-hundred being              Sedition at Athens, about the
returned from Samos to Athens, and hauing related change of the Oligarchy into
                                                         Democracy againe.
what they had in charge from Alcibiades, how that he
exhorted them to hold out, and not giue ground to the Enemy, and that he had
great hopes to reconcile them to the army, and to ouercome the Peloponnesians;
whereas many of the sharers in the Oligarchy, were formerly discontented, and
would gladly, if they could haue done it safely, haue quitted the businesse, they
were now a great deale more con rmed in that minde. And already 
they had their meetings apart, and did cast aspersions on the Gouernment, and
had for their ring-leaders, some of the heads of the Oligarchicals, and such as
bare O ce amongst them, as Theramenes the sonne of Agnon, and Aristocrates
the sonne of Sicelias, and others, who though they were partakers with the

foremost in the a aires of State, yet feared, as they said, Alcibiades, and the
Armie at Samos; and ioyned in the sending of Ambassadours to Lacedaemon,
because they were loth, by singling themselues from the greater number, to hurt
the State, not that they dismissed the State into the hands of a very few. But said,
that the 5000 ought in fact to be assigned, and not in voice onely, and the
Gouernment to be reduced to a greater equality. And this was indeede the forme
pretended in words by the 400. But the most of them, through priuate
ambition, fell vpon that, by which an Oligarchy made out of a Democracy, is
chie y ouerthrowne. For at once they claymed euery Ambition of the Oligarchicals
one, not to be equall, but to bee farre the chiefe.         amongst themselues,
                                                            ouerthroweth their Gouernment.
Whereas in a Democracie, when election is made,
because a man is not ouercome by his equals, he can better brooke it. But the
great power of Alcibiades at Samos, and the opinion they had that the Oligarchy
was not like to last, was it that most euidently encouraged them; and therevpon
they euery one contended, who should most eminently become the Patron of
the People.

But those of the Foure-hundred that were most opposite to such a forme of
Gouernment, and the principall of them, both Phrynichus, (who had beene
Generall at Samos, and was euer since at di erence with Alcibiades) and
Aristarchus, a man that had beene an aduersary to the People, both in the
greatest manner, and for the longest time; and Pisander and Antiphon, and
others of the greatest power, not onely formerly, as soone as they entred into
authority, and afterward when the State at Samos reuolted to the People, sent
Ambassadours to Lacedaemon, and bestirred themselues for the Oligarchy, and
built a wal in the place called Eetioneia, but much more afterwards, when their
Ambassadours were come from Samos, and that they saw not onely the
Populars, but also some others of their own party, thought trusty before, to bee
now changed. And to Lacedaemon they sent Antiphon and Phrynichus, with
tenne others, with all possible speed, as fearing their aduersaries,       
both at home and at Samos, with Commission to              〈…〉 fortiﬁe the●●●th of the
make a Peace with the Lacedaemonians on any                Hauen   〈◊〉.

tolerable conditions whatsoeuer, or howsoeuer, and in this time went on with

the building of the Wall in Eeteoneia with greater diligence then before. The
scope they had in this Wall, as it was giuen out by Theramenes the sonne of
Agnon was not so much to keepe out those of Samos, in case they should
attempt by force to enter into Piraeus, as at their pleasure to be able to let in
both the Gallies, and the Land-forces of the Enemies. For this Eetionea is the
Peere of the Piraeus, close vnto which is the mouth of the Hauen; and therefore
they built this Wall, so to another Wall, that was built before to the Continent,
that a few men lying within it, might command the entrance. For the end of
each Wall was brought to the Tower vpon the very mouth of the Hauen, as well
of the old Wall towards the Continent, as of the new which was built within it
to the water. They built also an open * ground-gallery, * [...]
an exceeding great one, and close to their new Wall
within Piraeus, and were Masters of it, and constrained all men, as well to bring
thither their corne, which they had already come in, as to vnload there
whatsoeuer should come in afterward, and to take & sell it from thence.

These things Theramenes murmured at long before, and when the
Ambassadours returned from Lacedaemon, without Theramenes murmureth
compounding for them all in generall, he gaue out,         against their fortifying in
                                                           Eetioneia.
that this Wall would endanger the vndoing of the
Citie. For at this very instant, there hapned to be riding on the Coast of Laconia,
42 Gallies, (amongst which were some of Tarentum, some of Locri, some
Italians, and some Sicilians) set out from Peloponnesus, at the instance of the
Euboeans, bound for Euboea, and commanded by Hegesandridas the sonne of
Hegesander, a Spartan. And these Theramenes said were comming, not so much
towards Euboea, as towards those that forti ed in Eetioneia, and that if they
were not looked to, they would surprize the City. Now some matter might
indeed be gathered also from those that were accused, so that it was not a meere
slander. For their principall designe was to retaine the Oligarchy, with dominion
ouer their Confederates; but if they failed of that, yet being masters of the
Gallies and of the forti cation▪ to haue subsisted free themselues; If barred of
that, then, rather then to bee the onely  The scope of the Oligarchicals.
men to su er death▪ vnder the restored Democracie,

to let in the Enemy, and without either Nauy or Forti cation, to haue let what
would haue become of the City, and to haue compounded for the safety of their
owne persons.

Therefore they went diligently on with the Forti cation, wherein were Wickets
and Entries, and backe-wayes for the Enemy, and desired to haue it nished in
time. And though these things were spoken but amongst a few before, and in
secret, yet when Phrynichus, after his returne from his Lacedaemonian
Ambassage, was by a certaine Watchman wounded trecherously in the Market-
place, when it was full, as he went from the Councell- Phrynichus murthered.
house, and not farre from it, fell instantly dead, and
the murtherer gone; and that one of his Complices, an Argiue, taken by the
Foure-hundred, and put to the torture, would confesse no man of those named
to him, nor any thing else, sauing this, that many men vsed to assemble at the
house of the Captaine of the Watch, and at other houses, then at length, because
this accident bred no alteration, Theramenes, and Aristocrates, and as many
other, either of the 400, or out of that number, as were of the same faction,
proceeded more boldly to assault the Gouernment. For now also the Fleet being
come about from Laconia, and lying vpon the Coast of Epidaurus, had made
incursions vpon Aegina. And Theramenes thereupon alledged, that it was
improbable that those Gallies holding their course for Euboea, would haue put
in at Aegina, and then haue gone backe againe to lye at Epidaurus, vnlesse they
had beene sent for by such men as he had euer accused of the same; and that
therefore there was no reason any longer to sit still. And in the end, after many
seditious and suspitious speeches, they fell vpon the Theramenes and his Faction set
State in good earnest. For the Souldiers that were in     themselues against the rest of the
                                                          400.
Piraeus, employed in fortifying Eetioneia, (amongst
whom was also Aristocrates, Captaine of a Band of men, and his Band with him)
seazed on Alexicles, principall Commander of the Souldiers vnder the Foure-
hundred, an eminent man of the other side, and carrying him into a house, kept
him in hold. As soone as the newes heereof was brought vnto the Foure-
hundred, (who chanced at the same time to be sitting in the Councel-house)

they were ready al of them presently to haue taken Armes,                   
threatning Theramenes and his Faction.

He to purge himselfe was ready to goe with them, and to helpe to rescue
Alexicles, and taking with him one of the Commanders, who was also of his
Faction, went downe into Piraeus. To helpe him went also Aristarchus, and
certaine Horse-men of the yonger sort.

Great and terrible was the tumult. For in the Citie they thouhht Piraeus was
already taken, and him that was laid in hold, slaine. And in Piraeus they expected
euery houre the power of the City to come vpon them. At last the ancient men,
stopping them that ranne vp and downe the City to arme themselues, and
Thucydides of Pharsalus, the Cities * Host, being then * 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉. He that
there, going boldly and close vp to euery one he met, lodged the Athenians, when any
                                                         of them came to Pharsalus.
and crying out vnto them, not to destroy their
Countrey, when the Enemy lay so neere waiting for an aduantage with much
adoe quieted them, and held their hands from spilling their owne blood.
Theramenes comming into Piraeus, for he also had command ouer the
Souldiers, made a shew by his exclaiming, of beeing angry with them; but
Aristarchus and those that were of the contrary side, were extremely angry in
good earnest. Neuerthelesse the Souldiers went on with their busines, and
repented not a iot of what they had done. Then they asked Theramenes, if hee
thought this Forti cation were made to any good end, and whether it were not
better to haue it demolished. And he answered, that if they thought good to
demolish it, he also thought the same. At which word they presently got vp,
both the Souldiers, and also many others, of Piraeus, and fell a digging downe of
the Wall.

Now the prouocation that they vsed to the Multitude, was in these words: That
whosoeuer desired that the Soueraignety should be in        The souldiers pull downe the
the 5000 in stead of the 400, ought also to set himselfe to Wall they had built in
                                                            Eetioneia.
the worke in hand. For notwithstanding all this, they
thought t as yet to vayle the Democracie with the name of the Fiue-thousand,

and not to say plainely, Whosoeuer will haue the Soueraignety in the People, lest
the 5000. should haue bin extant indeed, and so a man by speaking to some or
other of them, might doe hurt to the businesse, through ignorance. And for this
cause it was, that the Foure-hundred would neither let the Fiue-         
thousand bee extant, nor yet let it bee knowne that they were not. For to make
so many participant of the a aires of State, they thought was a direct
Democracie, but to haue it doubtfull, would make them afraid of one another.
The next day▪ the Foure-hundred, though out of order, yet met together in the
Councell-house, and the Souldiers in Piraeus hauing enlarged Alexicles, whom
they had before imprisoned, and quite razed the Forti cation, came into the
Theater of Bacchus, neere to Munychia, and there sate downe with their Armes,
and presently, according as they had resolued in an Assembly then holden,
marched into the City, and there sate downe againe in the Temple of Castor and
Pollux. To this place came vnto them certaine men elected by the Foure-
hundred, and man to man reasoned and perswaded with such as they saw to be
of the mildest temper, both to be quiet themselues, & to restraine the rest;
saying, that not onely the Fiue-thousand should be made knowne who they
were, but that out of these, such should be chosen in turnes, to be of the Foure-
hundred, as the Fiue-thousand should thinke good; and entreating them by all
meanes, that they would not in the meane time ouerthrow the City, and force it
into the hand of the Enemy. Hereupon the whole number of the men of Armes,
after many reasons, alledged to many men, grew calmer, and feared most the
losse of the whole City. And it was agreed betwixt them, that an Assembly
should be held, for making of accord, in the Temple A day appointed for an
of Bacchus at a day assigned.                           assembly, wherein to treat of
                                                          agreement.

When they came to the Temple of Bacchus, and wanted but a little of a full
Assembly, came newes that Hegesandridas with his 42 Gallies, came from
Megara along the Coast towards Salamis. And now there was not a Souldier, but
thought it the very same thing that Theramenes and his party had before told
them, That those Gallies were to come to the Fortiﬁcation, and that it was now
demolished to good purpose. But Hegesandridas, perhaps vpon appointment,
houered vpon the Coast of Epidaurus, and thereabouts; but it is likely, that in

respect of the sedition of the Athenians, he staid in those parts, with hope to
take hold of some good aduantage. Howsoeuer it was, the Athenians, as soone as
it was told them, ran presently with all the power of the City, downe 
to Piraeus; lesse esteeming their domestique Warre, then that of the Common
Enemy, which was not now farre o , but euen in the Hauen. And some went
aboord the Gallies that were then ready, some lanched the rest, and others ranne
to defend the Walles, and mouth of the Hauen.

But the Peloponnesian Gallies being now gone by, and gotten about the
Promontory of Sunium, cast Anchor betweene                The battell between the
Thoricus and Prasiae, and put in afterwards at            Athenians and the Fleet of
                                                          Hegesandridas at Eretria.
Oropus The Athenians with all speede, constrained to
make vse of tumultuary Forces, such as a Citie in time sedition might a ord, and
desirous with all haste to make good their greatest stake, (for Euboea, since they
were shut out of Attica, was all they had) sent a Fleet vnder the command of
Timocharis, to Eretria. Which arriuing▪ with those Gallies that were in Euboea
before, made vp the number of sixe and thirty Sayle; and they were presently
constrained to hazard Battell. For Hegesandridas brought out his Gallies from
Oropus, when hee had rst there dined.

Now Oropus is from Eretria about threescore Furlongs of Sea. Whereupon the
Athenians also, as the Enemy came towards them, beganne to embarke,
supposing that their Souldiers had beene some where neere vnto the Gallies; but
it fell out, that they were gone abroad to get their dinner, not in the Market (for
by set purpose of the Eretrians, to the end that the Enemy might fall vpon the
Athenians that embarked slowly, before they were ready, and force them to come
out and ght nothing was there to bee sold) but in the vtmost Houses of the
Citie. There was besides a signe set vp at Eretria, to giue them notice at Oropus,
at what time to set forward.

The Athenians drawne out by this deuice, and ghting before the Hauen of
Eretria, made resistance neuerthelesse for a while, but afterwards they turned
their backes, and were chased ashore. Such as ed to The Athenians defeated.

the City of the Eretrians, taking it for their friend, were handled most cruelly,
and slaughtered by them of the Towne; but such as got to the Fort in Eretria,
holden by the Athenians, saued themselues: And so did so many of their Gallies
as got to Chalcis.

The Peloponnesians, after they had taken twelue Athenian Gallies 
with the men, whereof some they slew, and some they tooke prisoners, erected a
Trophie; and not long after, hauing caused all Euboea to reuolt, saue onely
Oreus (which the Athenians held with their owne         Euboea reuolteth.
forces) they settled the rest of their businesse there.

When the newes of that which had hapned in Euboea, The lament 〈…〉 the Athenians
was brought to Athens, it put the Athenians into the vpon the losse of Euboea.
greatest astonishment that euer they had beene in before. For neither did their
losse in Sicily, though then thought great, nor any other at any time so much
a right them, as this. For now when the Army at Samos was in rebellion, when
they had no more Gallies, nor men to put aboord, when they were in Sedition
amonst themselues, and in continuall expectation of falling together by the
eares▪ then in the necke of all, arriued this great Calamity; wherein they not
onely lost their Gallies, but also, which was worst of all, Euboea, by which they
had receiued more Commodity then by Attica. How then could they choose but
be deiected? But most of all they were troubled, and that for the neerenesse, with
a feare least vpon this victory, the enemy should take courage, and come
immediately into Piraeus, now empty of Shipping, of which they thought
nothing wanting, but that they were not there already. And had they beene any
thing aduenturous, they might easily haue done it, and then, had they stayed
there and besieged them, they had not onely encreased the Sedition, but also
compelled the Fleet to come away from Ionia, to the ayde of their kinred and of
the whole City, though Enemies to the Oligarchy; and in the meane time gotten,
the Hellespont, Ionia, the Ilands and all places euen to Euboea, and as one may
say, the whole Athenian Empire into their power. But the Lacedaemonians not
onely in this, but in many other things were most          The Lacedaemonians
commodious enemies to the Athenians to Warre               commodious enemies to the
                                                         Athenians.

withall. For being of most di erent humours, the one
swift, the other slow, the one aduenturous, the other The Lacedaemonians let slip the
timerous, the Lacedaemonians gaue them great           aduantage which they might
                                                       haue had, if in prosecution of the
aduantage, especially when their greatnesse was by     victory, they had come to
Sea. This was euident in the Syracusians, who being in Piraeus      ▪

condition like vnto them, warred best against them.

The Athenians vpon this newes, made ready notwithstanding                  
twenty Gallies, and called an Assembly, one then        The Athenians settle their
presently in the place called Pnyx, where they were     Gouernment, and put an end to
                                                        the Sedition, by deposing the
wont to assemble at other times, in which hauing        400, & setting vp the 5000.
deposed the Foure-hundred, they decreed the
Soueraignety to the Fiue-thousand, of which number were all such to bee, as were
charged with Armes; and from that time forward to Salariate no man for
Magistracy, with a penalty on the Magistrate receiuing the Salary, to be held for
an execrable person. There were also diuers other Assemblies held afterwards,
wherein they elected Law-makers, and enacted other things concerning the
Gouernment. And now rst, (at least in my time) the Athenians seeme to haue
ordered their State aright; which consisted now of a moderate temper, both of
the Few, and of the Many. And this was the rst thing, that after so many
misfortunes past, made the City againe to raise her head.

They decreed also the recalling of Alcibiades, and     They recall Alcibiades.
those that were in exile with him; and sending to him,
and to the Army at Samos, willed them to fall in hand with their businesse.

In this change, Pisander and Alexicles, and such as     Most of the Oligarchicals ly
                                                                                  ●

were with them, and they that had beene principall in ly to the enemy.
                                                              ●

the Oligarchy, immediately withdrew themselues to Decelea. Onely Aristarchus
(for it chanced that hee had charge of the Souldiers) Aristarchus betrayeth Oenoe.
tooke with him certaine Archers, of the most
Barbarous, and went with all speede to Oenoe. This was a Fort of the Athenians
in the Con nes of Boeotia, and (for the losse that the Corinthians had receiued

by the Garrison of Oenoe, ) was, by voluntary Corinthians, and by some
Boeotians by them called in to ayde them, now besieged. Aristarchus therefore
hauing treated with these, deceiued those in Oenoe, and told them, that the City
of Athens had compounded with the Lacaedaemonians, and that they were to
render vp the place to the Boeotians, for that it was so conditioned in the
Agreement. Whereupon, beleeuing him, as one that had authority ouer the
Souldiery, and knowing nothing because besieged, vpon security for their passe,
they gaue vp the Fort. So the Boeotians receiue Oenoe; and the Oligarchy and
Sedition at Athens cease.

About the same time of this Summer, when none of those, whom 
Tissaphernes, at his going to Aspendus, had               Mindarus with the
substituted to pay the Peloponnesian Nauie, at            Peloponnesian Fleet, seeing
                                                          Tissaphernes and the
Miletus, did it; and seeing neither the Phoenician        Phoenician Fleet came not,
Fleet, nor Tissaphernes came to them; and seeing          resolues to goe to Pharnabazus in
                                                          the Hellespont.
Philip, that was sent along with him, and also another,
one Hippocrates a Spartan, that was lying in Phaselis, had written to Mindarus
the Generall, That the Fleete was not to come at all, and in euery thing
Tissaphernes abused them; seeing also that Pharnabazus had sent for them, and
was willing, vpon the comming to him of their Fleete, for his owne part also, as
well as Tissaphernes, to cause the rest of the Cities within his owne Prouince to
reuolt from the Athenians; Then at length, Mindarus hoping for bene t by him,
with good order, and sudden warning, that the Athenians at Samos might not
bee aware of their setting foorth, went into the Hellespont with seauenty three
Gallies, besides sixteene, which the same Summer were gone into the Hellespont
before, and had ouer-runne part of Chersonnesus. But tossed with the Winds,
hee was forced to put in at Icarus, and after hee had staid there through ill
weather some ue or sixe dayes, he arriued at Chios.

Thrasyllus hauing beene aduertised of his departure from Miletus, hee also puts
to Sea from Samos, with ue and fty Sayle, hasting Mindarus stayeth by the way at
to bee in the Hellespont before him. But hearing that Chius, Thrasyllus in the meane
                                                       time out-goes him, and watches
hee was in Chios, and conceiuing that hee would stay for his going by at Lesbos.

there, hee appointed Spyes to lye in Lesbos, and in the Continent ouer against it,
that the Fleet of the Enemy might not remoue without his knowledge; and hee
himselfe going to Methymna, commanded prouision to bee made of Meale, and
other necessaries, intending, if they stayed there long, to goe from Lesbos, and
inuade them in Chios.

Withall, because Eressus was reuolted from Lesbos, he purposed to goe thither
with his Fleet, if hee could, to take it in. For the most potent of the
Methymnaean Exiles had gotten into their society, about fty men of
Armes, out of Cyme, and hired others out of the Continent, and with their
whole number, in all three hundred, hauing for their Leader Anaxarchus a
Theban, chosen in respect of their descent from the Thebans, rst assaulted
Methymna, but beaten in the attempt, by the Athenian Garrison that came
against them from Mitylene, and againe in a Skirmish without the Citie, driuen
quite away, they passed by the way of the Mountaine to Eressus, and caused it to
reuolt. Thrasyllus therefore intended to goe thither with his Gallies, and to
assault it. At his comming, hee found Thrasybulus there also before him, with
 ue Gallies from Samos: For hee had beene aduertised of the Out-lawes
comming ouer; but beeing too late to preuent them, hee went to Eressus, and lay
before it at Anchor. Hither also came two Gallies of Methymna, that were going
home from the Hellespont; so that they were in all threescore and seuen Sayle,
out of which they made an Armie, intending with Engines, or any other way
they could, to take Eressus by assault.

In the meane time, Mindarus, and the Peloponnesian Mindarus and his ﬂeete steale
Fleet that was at Chios, when they had spent two        by into the Hellespont vnseen of
                                                        those that watched their going,
dayes in victualling their Gallies, and had receiued of in Lesbos.
the Chians three Chian * Tessaracostes a man, on the
                                                        * a Tessaracoste, seemeth 〈…〉
third day put speedily o from Chius; and kept farre b ne a coyne amongst the
                                                               ●

from the shore, that they might not fall amongst the Chians and the fortieth part of
                                                        some other greater coyne.
Gallies at Eressus. And leauing Lesbos on the left
hand, went to the Continent side, and putting in at a Hauen in Craterei,
belonging to the Territory of Phocaea, and there dining, passed along the

Territory of Cyme, and came to Arginusae in the Continent, ouer against
Mitylene, where they supped. From thence they put forth late in the night, and
came to Harmatus, a place in the Continent ouer against Methymna, and after
dinner going a great pace by Lectus, Larissa, Hamaxitus, and other the Townes
in those parts, came before midnight to Rhaetium; this now is in Hellespont.
But some of his Gallies put in at Sigeum, and other places thereabouts.

The Athenians that lay with eighteene Gallies at          The Athenians at Sestus with 18
Sestus, knew that the Peloponnesians were entring         Gallies steale out of the
                                                          Hellespont, but are met by
into the Hellespont, by the Fires▪ both those which Mindarus, and 4 of them taken.
their owne Watchmen put vp, & by the many which
appeared on the Enemies shore▪ and therefore the same night, in all haste, as
they were, kept the shore of Chersonnesus, towards Elaeus, desiring 
to get out into the wide Sea, and to decline the Fleete of the Enemie; and went
out vnseene of those sixteene Gallies that lay at Abydus, (though these had
warning before from the Fleete of their friends that came on, to watch them
narrowly, that they went not out) but in the morning, beeing in sight of the
Fleete with Mindarus, and chased by him, they could not all escape, but the
most of them got to the Continent, and into Lemnos; onely foure of the
hindmost were taken neere Elaeus; whereof the Peloponnesians tooke one with
the men in her, that had run her selfe a-ground at the Temple of Protesilaus, and
two other without the men, and set re on a fourth, abandoned vpon the shoare
of Imbrus.

After this they besieged Elaeus the same day, with those Gallies of Abydus,
which were with them, and with the rest, being now all together fourescore and
sixe Sayle. But seeing it would not yeeld, they went away to Abydus.

The Athenians, who had beene deceiued by their          The Athenians hast from Lesbos
Spyes, and not imagining that the Enemies Fleete        after the Peloponnesians into
                                                        Hellespont.
could haue gone by without their knowledge, and
attended at leasure the assault of Eressus, when now they knew they were gone,
immediately left Eressus, and hasted to the defence of Hellespont. By the way

they tooke two Gallies of the Peloponnesians, that hauing ventured into the
Maine more boldly in following the Enemy, then the rest had done, chanced to
light vpon the Flett of the Athenians.

The next day they came to Elaeus, and stayed, and thither, from Imbrus, came
vnto them those other Gallies that had escaped from the Enemy. Heere they
spent ue dayes in preparation for a Battell. After this, they fought in this
manner. The Athenians went by the shore, ordering their Gallies one by one,
towards Sestus. The Peloponnesians also, when they saw this, brought out their
Fleet against them from Abydus.

Beeing sure to ght, they drew out their Fleete in        The Athenians and
length, the Athenians along the shoare of                Peloponnesians ﬁght, and the
                                                         Athenians get the victory.
Chersonnesus, beginning at Idacus, and reaching as
farre as Arrhianae, threescore and sixe Gallies. And the                   
Peloponnesians, from Abydus to Dardanus, fourescore and sixe Gallies. In the
right Wing of the Peloponnesians, were the Syracusians; in the other, Mindarus
himselfe, and those Gallies that were nimblest. Amongst the Athenians,
Thrasyllus had the left Wing, and Thrasybulus the right, and the rest of the
Commanders, euery one the place assigned him.

Now the Peloponnesians laboured to giue the rst onset, and with their left
Wing to ouer-reach the right Wing of the Athenians, and keepe them from
going out, and to driue those in the middle, to the shore which was neere. The
Athenians, who perceiued it, where the Enemy went about to cut o their way
out, put foorth the same way that they did, and out-went them.

The left Wing of the Athenians was also gone forward by this time, beyond the
point called * Cynos-sema, by meanes whereof that      * The Sepulcher of Hecuba. 〈◊〉
                                                                                    ▪

part of the Fleet which was in the middest, became
both weake and diuided, especially when theirs was the lesse Fleet; and the
sharpe and angular gure of the place about Cymos-sema tooke away the sight
of what passed there, from those that were on the other side.

The Peloponnesians therefore charging this middle part, both draue their Gallies
to the dry Land, and beeing farre superiour in ght, went out after them, and
assaulted them vpon the shore. And to helpe them, neither was Thrasibulus
able, who was in the right Wing, for the multitude of the Enemies that pressed
him; nor Thrasyllus in the left Wing, both because hee could not see what was
done for the Promontory of Cynos-sema, and because also hee was kept from it
by the Syracusians and others, lying vpon his hands, no fewer in number then
themselues. Till at last the Peloponnesians, bold vpon their victory, chasing
some one Gally, some another, fell into some disorder, in a part of their Armie.
And then those about Thrasybulus, hauing obserued that the opposite Gallies
sought now no more to go beyond them, turned vpon them, and ghting, put
them presently to ight. And hauing also cut o from the rest of the Fleet, such
Gallies of the Peloponnesians, of that part that had the victory, as 
were scattered abroad, some they assaulted, but the greatest number they put
into a right vnfoughten. The Syracusians also, whom those about Thrasyllus
had already caused to shrinke, when they saw the rest y, ed out-right.

This defeat being giuen, and the Peloponnesians hauing for the most part
escaped, rst to the Riuer Pydius, and afterwards to Abydus; though the
Athenians tooke but few of their Gallies, (for the narrownesse of the Hellespont
a orded to the Enemy a short retreat) yet the Victory was the most seasonable to
them that could be. For hauing till this day stood in      The courage of the Athenians
feare of the Peloponnesian Nauie, both for the losse erected with this victory.
which they had receiued by little and little, and also for their great losse in Sicily,
they now ceased eyther to accuse themselues, or to thinke highly any longer of
the Nauall power of their Enemies. The Gallies they tooke were these; eight of
Chios, ue of Corinth, of Ambracia two, of Leucas, Laconia, Syracuse, and
Pellene, one apiece. Of their owne they lost fteene.

When they had set vp a Trophie in the Promontory of Cynos-sema, and taken
vp the wreckes, and giuen truce to the Enemies to fecth away the bodies of their
dead, they presently sent away a Gally with a Messenger, to carry newes of the
Victory to Athens. The Athenians, vpon the comming in of this Gally, hearing

of their vnexpected good fortune, were encouraged much, after their losse in
Euboea, and after their sedition, and conceiued that their estate might yet keepe
vp, if they plyed the businesse couragiously.

The fourth day after this Battell, the Athenians that were in Sestus, hauing
hastily prepared their Fleet, went to Cyzicus which      The Athenians recouer Cyzicus,
was reuolted, and espying as they past by, the eight     and take 8 Gallies of the
                                                         Peloponnesians.
Gallies come from Byzantium, riding vnder
Harpagium and Priapus, set vpon them, and hauing also ouercome those that
came to their ayde from the Land, tooke them. Then comming to Cyzicus,
being an open Towne, they brought it againe into their owne power, and leauied
a summe of Money amongst them.

The Peloponnesians in the meane time going from Abydus to                 
Elaeus, recouered as many of their Gallies formerly   The Peloponnesians recouer some
taken, as remained whole. The rest, the Eleusians had of their Gallies taken, at Elaeus.
burnt. They also sent Hippocrates and Epicles into    They send for the Fleet with
Euboea, to fetch away the Fleet that was there.       Hegesand id out of Euboea.
                                                                    ●   ●

About the same time also, returned Alcibiades to        Alcibiades returneth from
Samos, with his thirteene Gallies from Caunus and       Aspendus to Samos.

Phaselis, reporting that he had diuerted the Phoenician Fleete from comming to
the Peloponnesians, and that hee had inclined Tissaphernes to the friendship of
the Athenians, more then hee was before. Thence manning out nine Gallies
more, hee exacted a great summe of money of the Halicarnasseans, and forti ed
Cos. Being now almost Autumne, hee returned to          He fortiﬁeth Cos    ▪

Samos.

The Peloponnesians being now in Hellespont, the        The Antandri ns put out the
                                                                        ●

Antandrians (who are Aeolians) receiued into the       Garrison of Tissaphernes out of
                                                       their Cittadell.
City men of Armes from Abydus by Land, through
Mount Ida, vpon iniury that had beene done them by Arsaces, a Deputy
Lieutenant of Tissaphernes. This Arsaces hauing fained a certaine Warre, not
declared against whom, had formerly called out the chiefest of the Delians, (the

which in hallowing of Delos by the Athenians were turned out, and had planted
themselues in Adramyttium) to goe with him to this War. And when vnder
colour of amity and confederacy hee had drawne them out, he obserued a time
when they were at dinner, and hauing hemmed them in with his owne Souldiers
murdered them with darts. And therefore, for this acts sake, fearing lest hee
might doe some vnlawfull pranke against them also, and for that hee had
otherwise done them iniury, they cast his Garrison out of their Cittadell.

Tissaphernes hearing of this, (being the act of the     Tissaphernes goeth toward
Peloponnesians, as well as that at Miletus, or that at  Hellespont, to recouer the fauour
                                                        of the Peloponnesians.
Cnidus, for in those Cities his Garrisons had also
beene cast out in the same manner) and conceiuing that hee was deepely charged
to them, and fearing lest they should doe him some other hurt; and withall not
enduring that Pharnabazus should receiue them, and with lesse time and cost,
speed better against the Athenians then hee had done, resolued to make a
iourney to them in the Hellespont, both to complaine of what was 
done at Antandrus, and to cleere himselfe of his accusations, the best he could,
as well concerning the Phoenician Fleet, as other matters. And rst he put in at
Ephesus, and o ered Sacri ce to Diana.                  The end of the one and twentieth
                                                             Summer.
When the Winter following, this Summer shall bee
ended, the one and twentieth yeere [of this Warre] shall bee compleat.

FINIS.

           Appendix A THE TABLE.
Appendix A.1 A                                                   

A

    ABdera. 138. B.
    Abydus, reuolteth from the Athenians. 504. B.
    Acanthus reuolteth from the Athenians 260. C.
    Acarnamans. why so called. 143. A. Theeues 4. C. their League with
    Athens. 119. B. good slingers. 127. D.
    Acesine, a Riuer of Sicily. 225. D.
    Achaia, Oligarchized. 339. A.
    Acharnae, a great part of the Athenian Citie 94. A.B.
    Achelous. 14●. B.
    Acheron. 26. B.
    Acherusia. ibid.
    Acrae, when and by whom built. 352. D.
    Aeragante, when and by whom built. 352. A.
    Act▪ 272. D.
    Actium. 18. A.
    Aeginetae. They incense the Lacedaemonians against the Athenians. 35. C.
    Aegina, yeelded to the Athenians. 57. A. They are receiued by the
    Lacedaemonians into Thyrea. 97. B. and taken by the Athenians, are put to
    death. 243. C.
    Aegitium. 197. E. 198. A.
    Aegypt. The Athenians in Aegypt defeated. 57. D.
    Aemus. 137▪ D.
    Aenus. 228. D.
    Aeolian Ilands. 192. B.
    Aetna, burneth. 209. B.

Aetolia. 196. B.
Agamemnon his power. 6. A.
Agis withdraweth his Army from Argos, and why▪ 327. B. he leuieth
money in Thessaly. 471. B. his power when he was at Decelea. 472. B.
Agraei. 142. B.
Agraeis. 203. B.
Agrianes. 138. A.
Alcamenes slaine. 475. C.
Alcibiades, how he crosseth Nicias, and deceiuing the Lacedaemoan
Ambassadors, procureth a League betweene the Athenians and Argiues.
316. C. & sequ. he goeth with charge into Peloponnesus. 323. B. presseth
the Sicilian expedition, and why. 358. B. is accused for the defacing of the
Mercuries. 365. D. his opinion touching the mannaging of the Sicilian
Warre. 377. A. is called home to his tryall. 379. B. he vnbetrayeth Messana.
392. A. his aduice to the Lacedaemonians, to forti e Decelea. 402. C. He
 yeth to Tissaphernes. 493. E he counselleth Tissaphernes against the
Lacedaemonians. 494. D. seeketh to returne to Athens. 495. D. he deludeth
the Athenians, in demaund of intollerable conditions, and why. 501. B. his
returne propounded at Athens. 499. C. he is made Generall of the
Athenian Army at Samos. 516. A. his returne decreed at Athens. 528. B. he
hindereth the Army of the Athenians, from inuading the Citie of Athens.
518. C. he goeth after Tissaphernes to Aspendus, & why. 520. C.
Alcidas sent to relieue Mitylene. 158. B. his behauiour in that voyage. 160.
C. his returne with his Fleet into Peloponnesus, 182. B. his charge against
Corcyra at Sybota. 185. B.
Alcmaeon, 143. A.
Almopia. 140. B.
Alope. 97. B.
Alyzea▪ 431. A.
Ambrabian Gulfe. 18. A. 118. D.
Ambraciotes Warre against the Acarnanians. 125. D. are defeated at
Idomenae. 206. D.
Amorges, a Rebell against the King of Persia. 485. B.

Amphipolis, called the Ninewayes. 53. A. taken by Brasidas. 271. A.
refuseth to be rendred to the Athenians. 302. B.
Anactorium. 18. A. 3. B. C. 208. C. 239. E. 431. A.
Anaea. A City ouer against Samo●. 253. C. the Anaeans were Samians.
160. C.
Anapus, a Riuer in Acarnania 128. A. a Riuer neere Syracuse. 387. D. 405.
B.
Androsthenes, Victor in the Olympique Games. 321. B.
Antandrus, taken by the Outlawes of Mitylene. 240. E.
Anthemus, 140. B.
Anthesterion, 91. D.
Antiphon, 497 D. 498. A.
Antitanes, 126. C.
Aphrodisia, 242. D.
Aphytis, 34. C.
Apidanus, 255. E.
Apodoti, 196. C.
Apollo Maloeis, 146. E.
Arcadians, borrowed Ships for the Troian Warre. 6. D.
Archedice, daughter of Hippias, her Epitaph. 383. A.
Archidamus, King of Lacedaemon, Generall of the Peloponnesians, 87. C.
blamed for his delay at Oenöe, 93. A. his purpose in staying at Acharn●.
94. A. his protestation against Plataea. 122. B.
Archon. the nine Archontes. 66. A.
Arcturus, 124. C.
An Argilian betrayeth Pausanias. 70. C.
Argenum, 487. E.
Argiues. They refuse to renue the Truce with Sparta, and why. 298. B. they
treat of League against the Lacedaemonians, with the rest of the Grecians.
306. B. they seeke Peace with Sparta, 314. C. they make League with
Athens. 319. A. their Army intercepted, betweene the Armies of their
enemies, 326. C. they renounce their League with the 〈◊〉, 337. 
B.

〈◊〉▪ 6. C. Argos Amphilochicum, 11●. D. inuaded by the Ambraciotes▪
2●●. C. Argos Oligarchized, againe ●●lapseth into a Democracy, 239▪ A.
〈◊〉, 17. D. 32. C. 33. E. 34▪ D.
〈◊〉▪ 12. D▪ his fact against the Tyrants, 379▪ D. & sequen●●●.
〈◊〉 his Stratagem, 4●6. A.
〈◊〉. A property of all Armies 〈◊〉▪ what it is, 33●. A. greatnesse of the
Athenian Army set forth for Sicily, 374. D.
〈◊〉 ordinarily worne, 4. C. 〈◊〉 by rst, by the Athenians, 9. C.
〈◊〉, Ambassadour from the King of Persia, to Sparta▪ taken by the
Athenians, and his Letters read, 240. A.
〈◊〉, 73. B. his death, 240 B.
〈◊〉, a Magistracy in Argos, 220. B.
〈◊〉, 242. A.
〈◊〉▪ the sonne of Phormio, ●38. D
〈◊〉 49. C▪ 98. D. 142. A.
〈◊〉, Generall of the 〈◊〉▪ 480. A. his danger, 487. C. he discloseth the
Treason of 〈◊〉 to Alcibiades, 49●. A. in danger to be slaine by mutiny▪
517. A. discharged of his command, 517▪ C.
〈◊〉▪ 99. C. ●92. E.
〈◊〉, the rst of the Grecians that g●ew ciuill, 4. C. they wore the
Grashopper in their 〈◊〉 4 D. their manner of gouerning their
Confederates, 〈…〉. their disposition, 37. D. 3● A. ●0●. A. B. C. they
●●eake the League by ayding the 〈◊〉, 27. D. they wall their Citie, 47. B.

their victory at the Riuer 〈◊〉, 52. D. their reputation for Murall assaults,
5●. D. how they gat the leading of Gr●ece, 51. A. the Grecians hate them
in the beginning of this Warre. 78. D. 79. B. they refuse to heare the
messenger from Archidamus, 88. D. their custome of liuing in the
Countrey Townes, 91. A. 9●. A. their reuenue and treasure. 89. D. their
forces, 90. C. they loued to heare and tell newes, 103. A. they seeke peace
with the Lacedaemonians, 112. C. they question their Commanders for
compounding with Potidaea, 120. B. they desire to Conquer Sicily, 191. D.

    they banish their Commanders for returning out of Sicily, 247 B. they
    withhold the Gallies of the Peloponnesians at Pylus, vpon a Cauill, 224. A.
    they refuse to render Pylus, and why, 311. B. they Warre on Macedonia,
    354. B. they break the Peace with Lacedaemon, 411. A, Their miserable
    rising from Syracuse, and their nall defeate, 459 A. & sequ. they were tter
    to bee friends of the Persians, then were the Lacedaemonians, and why,
    495. A. & sequentia.
    Athens, made great by Theseus, 91. B. greatest in the time of Pericles, 116.
    B.
    Athos, 272. D. by what Nations inhabited, 273. A.
    Atreus, 6. B.
    Attica, sterile ground, 2. D. how it became populous, 3. A. inuaded, 59. D.
    93. C. 106. C. 145. D. 158. C. 212. B. 422. E.
    Axius, 140. A.

Appendix A.2 B
B

    BAcchanal Holidaies 91. D. City Bacchanals celebrated in the end of
    Winter, 302. B.
    Battles, by Sea betweene the Corcyraeans & Corinthians, 18. B. 27. A.
    betweene the Athenians and Aeginetae, 55 A. betweene the Athenians and
    Peloponnesians, at Cecryphaleia, 55. A. at Halias, 54. E. betweene the
    Athenians and the Samians, 60. C. betweene the Athenians and
    Phoenicians, &c. 58. D. between Phormio and the Peloponnesians, 128. B.
    againe, 134. B. between the Peloponnesians & Corcyraeans, 185. C.
    betweene the Lacedaemonians and Athenians at Pylus, 218. C. betweene
    the Syracusians, and Athenians in the Straight of Messana, 225. A.
    betweene the Syracusians and Athenians, in the great Hauen. 424. D.
    againe, 436. A. againe, 444. D. againe▪ 455. A. between the Athenians and
    Corinthians, 432. D. betweene the Athenians and Peloponnesians at
    Eretria, 526. C. at Cynossema, 532. A. by Land, betweene the Athenians

and Corinthians at Potidaea, 33. C. betweene the Athenians and
Peloponnesians in Megaris, 55. C. at Tanagra, 56. D. betweene the
Athenians and Boeotians at Coronea, 59. A. betweene the Ambraciotes
and Acarnanians, 204. A betweene the Athenians and Corinthians, at
Solygia, 236. C. betweene the Athenians and Boeotians at Delium, 265. A.
betweene the Lacedaemonians and Argiues▪ 332. D betweene the
Syracusians and Athenians, 389. C. betweene the same by night, 439. A.
between the Athenians and Peloponnesians at Miletus, 483. B.
Berrhoea, 32. E.
a Bell vsed in going the round, 287. D.
the Best man, 45. B.
Birds dyed of the Pestilence, 108 B.
Bisaltia, 140. B.
Bithynians, are Thracians on Asia side of the Bosphorus, 253. D.
Boeotarchontes, 262. A.
Boeotia, rtile ground, 2. C. called formerly, Cadme●s, 8 D. The
Boeotians, came from Arne, in Thessaly, ibi●. are ouercome in battell at
Oenophyta, 56. E. they ouercome at Coronea▪ 59. A. they take Heraclea
into protection, 323. A.
Boium, 56. A.
Bolbe, the Lake, 32. A.
Bolissus, 482. B.
Bomians, 197. C.
Bottiaeis reuolteth from the Athenians, 31. E. the Athenians and
Bottiaeans ght, 125. A.
Bottia, 140. A.
Brasidas saues Methone, and is publikely praysed at Sparta, 96. C. ioyned as
a Counsellour with Cnemus, 185. C. swowneth of his wounds at Pylus,
218. B. hee passeth through Thessaly, ●55. A. refuseth to ayde 
Perdiccas, 258. A. taketh Acanthus, 258. B. is praised by the Author, 257.
A. is enuyed at Sparta, 272. C. he taketh Torone, 274. A. and Lecythus,
275. D. is honoured by the Scionaeans, 279. he receiueth Menda that

    reuolted from the Athenians, 280. B. his retreat out of Lyncus, 283. C. he
    attempteth Potidaea by night, 287. C. his Stratagem against Cleon at
    Amphipolis. 293. D. his death, buriall, and honours, 296. A. & seqn.
    Bucolium, 287. B.
    Budorus, 136. E.
    Buphras, 277. A.
    Buriall. How the Carians were buried. 5. D.

Appendix A.3 L
L

    CAEadas▪ 71. C.
    Callians, 197. C.
    Callias Generall of the Athenians at Potidaea, 33. B. 34. B.
    Calliroc, a Fountaine, or the Nine●pipes, 91. D.
    Calydon, 200. B.
    Camarina, when, and by whom built, 352. D. refuseth to receiue the
    Athenians, 379. D.
    Canastraea, 273. C.
    Cardamylae, 482. A.
    Carians, inhabited the Cyclades, 3. D. addicted to robbery, 5. c. expelled
    the Cyclades by Minos, 3. E. knowne by their forme of buriall▪ 5. D.
    Carneius, a Moneth kept holy by the Doreans, 323. E. Carneian Holidayes,
    335. C.D.
    Caryae, 324, C. 50.
    Carystus, 52. A.
    Catalogue of the Confederates of both sides at Syracuse, 446, D. Catalogue
    of the Confederates of the Lacedaemonians and Athenians, 86. D. & sequ.
    Catana surprized by the Athenians, 378. D. when and by whom built. 351.
    C.
    Caulonia, 426. C.
    Cause of the Peloponnesian Warre. 14. C. 46. D.

Cenchreae. 236. B.
Cephallenia, 98. D. 99. D.
Cerdylium, 292. C.
Cestrine, 26. B.
Cercine, 139. B.
Cheronaea, 58. ●. taken by the Athenians, 59. A. the Boeotian Outlawes
seeke to betray it. 254. A. subiect to the City of Orchomenus, 253. D.
Chalcideans, they reuolt from the Athenians, 3●. E. they retyre to
Olynthus, 32. A. they procure an Armie out of Peloponnesus, and why,
265. B. they League with the Argiues, 308. D.
Chalcideus slaine. 481. E.
Chalcis, 57. A. 128. C.
Challaeans, 199. C.
Chaonians, 125. D. 126. C. defended by the men of Stratus, 127. C.
Cheimerium, 18 D. 26. B.
Chians not depriued of liberty by the Athenians, and why, 150. C. forced
to raze their City Wall. 240. C. desire to bee protected by the
Lacedaemonians, 472. C. reuolt from the Athenians. 473. C. 477. B. kept
by the Athenians from the vse of the Sea. 482. D.
Chrusis a Territory, 125. B.
Chrysis, woman Priest of Juno at Argos, slept whilest the Temple was red.
287. A.
Cimon, 53. C. taketh Eion, 51. E. warreth on Cyprus, 58. C. dyeth before
Citium, ibid.
Cithaeron, 122. D.
Claros the City, 161. A.
Clazomenae, 486. C.
Clearidas endeuoureth to dissolue the Peace, 303. A.
Cleobulus, 311. D.
Cleon hindreth the Peace with the Lacedaemonians, 223. B. vndertaketh
the expugning of Sphacteria, 228. c. his boast, ibid. D he warreth on
Amphipolis, 292. B. is in contempt with his Army, 293. A. winneth
Torone, 291. A. is slaine at Amphipolis, 296. B.

Cleonae, 273. A.
Cnemus ouercome at Sea by Phormio, 135. B. his iourney against Argos
Amphilochicum, 126. A.
Colony, 69. A.
Colophon, 161, B. Hauen of the Colophonians, neere Torone, 290. B·
Combinations for O ces. 500. C.
Corcyra Metrapolitan of Epidamnus, 15. A. strong in shipping, 15. D.
called of old Phrygia, 15. E. conueniently situated, for passage into Sicily,
25, D. Corcyraeans not accustomed to league with others, 22 B. 19. D.
masters of the Sea, 18. D. diuerse of them taken by the Corinthians in
Anactorium. 30. C. their sedition beginneth, 182. D▪ the great men take
Sanctuary, 185. A. they encampe on Istone, 191. B.
Corinthians protect Epidamnus, ●5. C. their expostulation with the
Athenians, 29. C. Corinthia inuaded by the Athenians, 235. D. Corinth
how farre from the Sea that looketh towards Athens, 236. A. Corinthians
fall o from the Lacedaemonians to the Argiues, and why. 305. D. they fall
o againe from the Argiues, and why, 321. A. they resolue to ayde the
Syracusians, 400. B.
Coron●a, 53. A.
Corontae, 142. A.
Cortyta, 242. D.
Corycus, 476. D. 487. C.E.
Coryphasium, 213. A.
Cos, 491. D.
Councell of the Beane 509. A.
Cranij▪ 98. D. 99. D. 31●. D.
Crissaean Gulfe, 56. B. 128. A. 126. A. 131. D.
Crocylium, 197. C.
In Customes, as in Arts, the newest preuaile, 35. C. Custome of the
Lacedaemonians, not hastily to condemne a Spartan, 70. B. Custome of
the Thracians touching gifts, 138. D.
Cyclades gouerned by the sonnes of Minos, 3. E.

    Cyclopes, 350 A.
    Cydonia, 130. B.
    Cyllene, 18. C. 130. C.
    Cylon, 66. B.
    Cyme, 486. D.
    Cynossema, 532. B.
    Cynuria, 24●. A. 315. A.
    Cyreneans, 443. C.
    Cyrrhus, 140. D.
    Cythera, opposite to Mal●●, 241. B. taken by the Athenians, 141. ●●
    Cytherodices, 241. B. Cytheraeans remoued into the Cyclades, 
    243. D.
    〈◊〉, 56. A.
    〈◊〉 recouered by the Athenians. 533. D.

Appendix A.4 D
D

    DAphnus, 486. C.
    D●sco●, 387. D.
    Da●lia, 98. A.
    Decel●a. The incommodities arising to the Athenians by the forti cation
    there, 428. B.D.
    Delphi, 17. B.
    Delos▪ the Treasury of the Athenian Tributes, 53. C. Delos consecrated,
    200. E. no man might bee borne, or su ered to dye in Delos, 201. B. Delian
    Games, 201. B. Delians driuen out of Delos, are receiued into
    Adramyttium, 290. A. replanted in Delos, 309. A.
    〈◊〉, in the Territory of 〈◊〉, 254. B. taken by the 〈◊〉. ●61. B. Battell at
    Deli●●, 265. A.

    〈◊〉. Democracy conspired against at Athens, 56. C. Democracy dissolued
    at Argos, 338. E. Democracy what it is. 401. B.
    Demosthenes inuadeth Aetolia, 196 B. is defeated, 198 D. feareth to
    returne to Athens, 198. E. hee maketh Peace with the Peloponnesians shut
    vp in Olpae, and why, 205· B. his acts in Acarnania, 202. D. & sequ. he
    attempteth Siph● in Boeotia, 261. A. he taketh in Pylus, 212. D. he
    putteth the Fo●t before Epidaurus into the hands of the Epidaurians, and
    how, 338. hee arriueth at Syracuse, 437. C. his attempt on Epipolae, 438.
    C. aduiseth to rise from before Syracuse, 441. C. is taken Prisoner, 464. D.
    〈◊〉, 141 C.
    〈◊〉 brother to Perdiccas. 31. B.
    Dialogue betweene the Athenians and Melians, 341. A.
    D●●tyia●s, 339. A.
    Didyme, ●92. B.
    〈◊〉, 137. E.
    Diomilus. a Fugitiue of A●dres, 405. C. slaine at Epipolae, 406. A.
    Dion in Macedonie, 256. A.
    Dion in Mount Athos, 273. A.
    Doberus, 139. C.
    Dolopia, 142. B.
    Dorieus of Rhodes victor in the Olympian Games, 149. B.
    Doris, Metrapolitan of the Lacedaemonians. 56. A.
    Drabescus, 53. A.
    Droans, 141, C.
    Drimyssa, 486. D.
    Dyme, 129. D.

Appendix A.5 E
E

    EArthquake attributed to the violation of Religion, 67. A. Earthquake at
    Delos, 86. B. Earthquake hindreth the Lacedaemonians from inuading

Attica 53. B. 192. D. Earthquakes 240. C. 232. D. 318. A. 192. A. 193. A.
their naturall cause, 193. B.
Echinades. 142. B. C.
Eclipse of the Sunne, 97. D. 240. C. of the Moone, 444, A. it keepeth
Nicias from remouing from before Syracuse. ibib.
Eetioneia fortifyed, by whom, and why, 522. A.
Egestaean Ambassadours at Athens, 354. C. the Egestaeans deceiue the
Athenians, and how, 376. B.
Eidomene, 140. C.
Eidonia, 140. B Eidonians, 53. A.
Eion, 51, E. 214. C. 240. A.
Elaphebolion, 302. A.B.
Eleans, their League with Corinth 308. A. their quarrell with the Lepreates,
308. B. and with the Lacedaemonians, 308. C. they leaue the Argiue Army,
and why, 328. D. they refuse to be comprehended in the Peace betweene
the Lacedaemonians and Athenians, 300. A.
Eleatis, 26. B. 93. C.
Eleus, an Iland adiacent to Miletus, 483. E.
Enipeus, 255. C.
Eorda, 140. B.
Ephesus, 73. A.
Ephori, their power to imprison their King, 69. B.
Ephyre, 26. B.
Epidamnus, 14. D. Epidamnians implore the ayde of the Corcyraeans, 15.
B. they put themselues into the protection of the Corinthians, ibid.
Epidaurus taken by the Corcyraeans, 18. B.
Epidaurus, 111. C. Epidaurian war, 323. C. Epidaurus besieged by the
Athenians, 335. D. Epidaurus Limera, 242. E.
Epidemiurgi, Magistrates, 31. A.
Epipolae, 405. B.
Erae reuolteth from the Athenians, 479. D.
Eressus, 162. A. reuolteth, 481. B. 529. D.
Eretrians betray the Athenians, 526. C.

    Erineus, 56. A.
    Erythrae, 157. D. 161. A.
    Euarchus, Tyrant of Astacus, 98. D. 99. C.
    Euboea reuolteth from the Athenians, 59. B. recouered by Pericles, 59. C.
    Euboea, 147. B. Euboeans send to Agis for protection, 472. A.
    Euenus, 128. C.
    Euesperitae, 443. C.
    Eupolium, 199. D.
    Euristheus, 6. B.C.
    Europus, 140 D.
    Euryalus, 405. D. 415. A▪
    Eurymedon slaine, 444. D.
    Eurytanians, 196. C.
    Euxine Sea, 137. D.
    Exaction cause of reuolt. 52. B.

Appendix A.6 F
F

    FAble of Alcmaeon, 142. D.
    Factions of the Grecians, 12. A.
    Fattest soyles most subiect to change of inhabitants, 2. C.
    Feare the cause of faith in Leagues, 150. C.
    Feare of iniury to come, cause of Warre, 151. B.
    Fire. A great re in Plataea, 124. ●. Fires signi cant, 136. C. 187. A. Fire
    breaketh out of Aetna, 209. B.
    Fleet of Athenians at Salamis, how great, 40. B. the Fleet for Sicily, 366. C.
    how great, 374. D. not receiued by the cities of Sicily, 375. B.C.
    Fort before Epidaurus, 335. E. the Forti cation of the Peloponnesians
    about Plataea, 155. A.
    Funerall at Athens for the rst slaine in the Warre. 100. A.

Appendix A.7 G
G                                                                

    GA●●es Olympian▪ 5. A.
    Gapselus, 271. C. 292. B.
    Garments of the Lacedaemonian Nobility, 5. A.
    Gela, when, and by whom built, 352. A.
    Geomori, 480. C.
    Geraestus, 147. B.
    Geranea, 55. B. 56. B. D. 250. C.
    Getes, 139. C.
    Gigonus, 33. A.
    Gongylus, keepeth the Syracusians from yeelding to the Athenians, 414. D.
    Gortynia, 140. D.
    Grashoppers worne by the Athenians, 4. D.
    Greece, diuided into Leagues, 11. D.
    Grestonia, 140. B.
    Guifts, the custome of the Thracians to take gifts 38. D.
    Gylippus, Generall of the Peloponnesians at Syracuse, 404▪ A▪ arriueth at
    Syracuse, 415. A. his message to the Athenians, 415. B.

Appendix A.8 H
H

    HAlias, 54. E. 111. C.
    Harmodius, 12. C. solicited to loue by Hipparchus, 380. A.
    Hellanicus the Historiographer▪ 51. D.
    Hellas, whence so called. 3. B.
    Hellen, the sonne of Deucalion, 3. B.
    Helorine way, 388. A.

Helotes, 33. B. why called Messenians, ib. the plots of the Lacedaemonians
to keepe them weake, 256. D.
Heraclea, when, and by whom built, 195. C. infested by the Thessalians,
ibid. commodiously seated for the Warre against Athens, 194. D. Heraclea,
255, A. weakned by the Dolopians, 322. D.
Heracleides, 3. B. 8. D.
Hermione, 111. C.
Hermocrates banished, 517. D.
Hestiaeans put out of Euboea by the Athenians, 59. C.
Hirea, Vulcans shop, 192. B.
Himera, when and by whom built, 352, C. inuaded by the Athenians, 208.
C. it aydeth Gylippus, 414. B.
Hipparchus brother to Hippias the Tyrant of Athens slaine by Harmodius
and Aristogiton, 12, D. solliciteth Harmodius for loue, and is denyed, 380▪
A. disgraceth Harmodius, 381. C. how slaine, 38●. B. why thought
afterwards to haue beene the Tyrant▪ 381. C.
Hippias, Tyrant of Athens, 12. C. 380. E. eldest sonne of Pisistratus, ibid.
driuen out of Athens by the Lacedaemonians, returneth with the Persians
to Marathon, 383. B.
Hippias, an Arcadian, slaine by Paches, contrary to faith, 161. E.
Hippocrates taketh Delium, 261. B.
Holy Warre, 58. D.
some Holiday or other at Athens continually, 102. B.
Homer, 3. B.
Hope, 343. C. D.
Horsemen. 400. Horsemen ordained by the Lacedaemonians. 242. B.
Horsemen, a degree in estate at Athens, 153. A.
Hyccara, 385. C.
Hyperbolus, 510. D.
Hysiae of Attica, 157. D.
Hysiae of Argia, taken by the Lacedaemonians 340. A.
Hyperbolus, 510. D.

Appendix A.9 I
I

    IAssus taken by the Peloponnesians, 489. B.
    I●thys Promontory, 96. E.
    Ida, 241. A.
    Idomenae, 206. B.
    Iëgas, 414 E.
    Jllyrians betray Perdiccas, 281. C.
    Jmages of Mercury at Athens defaced, 365 B.
    Imbrians, 148. A. Jmbros, 128 D.
    Inarus a Rebell, cruci ed, 57. D.
    Inessa, 200. C. Inessaeans, 404.
    Inscription on the Tripode by Pausanias, 69. E. by the Lacedaemonians, 70.
    A.
    Jnvndation at Orobiae, 192. D. at Atalanta, 192 E.
    Iönia, planted with Athenians, 3. A. 8. E.
    Jsthmi, taken by the building of Cities, 5. B. Jsthmus of Pallene, 30. D.
    Istone, 191. B.
    Italy, whence so named, 350. D.
    Jthome, 53. B. yeelded vp. 54. A.
    Itonians, 292. B.
    Iunoes Temple at Argos, burnt, 287. A.

Appendix A.10 K
K

    KIng of Lacedaemon had but one Vote in Councell▪ 12. D.
    Kingdomes with honours limited, 11. D.

Appendix A.11 L

L

    LAcedaemonians▪ Lacedaemonian Noblemen, plaine in their garments, 4.
    A Lacedaemonians pulled downe the Tyrants of Greece, 11. B. how they
    gouerned their Confederates. 12. A. their disposition, 37. D. slow to Warre
    without necessity, 61. C. Pretend the liberty of Greece, 86. C. they would
    haue no walled Cities without Peloponnesus, and why, 47. C. they are
    hindred from the inuasion of Atcica, by an Earthquake, 192. D. their
    gouernment alwayes seuere, not alwayes iust, 195. D. 400 Lacedaemonians
    put into the Ile Sphacteria, 215. D. they desire to treat for their men at
    Pylus, with a priuate Committee. 223 C. their men taken in Sphacteria,
    put in bonds, 235. B. they seeke Peace secretly▪ 235 D▪ their policy in
    destroying their Helotes, 256. D. they seeke Peace, and why, 298▪ A. their
    men taken in Pylus, deliuered, 304. C. they seeke League with the Argiues▪
    and why▪ 312 A. their Ambassadors roughly vsed at Athens, 316 B. they
    make League priuately with the Boeotian, 314. B. they warre on Argos,
    325. C. their Army at Leuctra, 323. D. they are excluded from the
    Olympian Games 322. A. and ned in a Summe of money, 321. C. their
    Discipline in charging the enemy, 332. D. they ght long for a victory, but
    follow the enemy not farre, 334. D they make ready 100 Gallies for the
    Jonian warre, 471. C. commodious enemies for the Athenians, 527. D.
    Labdalum, 406. A.                                                   
    Lada, 478. D.
    Laestrigones. 350. A.
    Lamachus, his opinion touching the Conduction of the Sicilian Warre,
    377. C. slaine. 408. D.
    Lampsacus, 74. C. reuolteth from the Athenians, 504 recouered againe,
    ibid.
    Laotheca, 287. B.
    Larissa, 255. B.
    Latinos, the land, 161. B.
    Leaeans 138 A.

〈◊〉, Two great Leagues in Greece, 11. D. League defensiue betweene the
Athenians, and Corcy●●●●ns, 25. B. League betweene the Ambraciotes,
and Acarnanians, 208. B. betweene the Athenians and Lacedaemonians,
303. C. betweene the Argiues, and Eleans, &c. 308. A. betweene the
Argives and Lacedaemonians, 337. B. betweene the Lacedaemonians and
Tissaphernes, 479. A. againe. 489. A. againe, 502. B.
〈◊〉 reuolteth from the Athenians, 479. D.
Lecythus, 274. B 275. D.
L●mn●s, 60. B. 148. A. 228. D.
Leocorium, 12. D.
〈◊〉, neere Syracuse 405. C
Leortines ayded by the Athenians 191. D. Leontine Commons driuen out
by the Few. 291. B. the Leontine Nobility go to dwell at Syracuse. 291. C.
they seaze on certaine places of their owne Territory, ibid. Leontium. 351.
C
Leotychides, Generall at Mycale. 47. A.
Leprea●es, quarrell with the Eleans●08 ●08 B.
Lesbos, 148. A. receiued into the League of the Peloponnesians, 152. C.
reuolteth from the Athenians▪ 472. A.
Letter▪ Letter of Nicias to the Athenian People, 419. A. of Xexes to
Pausanias. 68 B.
Leucas, ●8. D. 26. B. 149. A. 196. A
Leucimna, 18. D. 26. C.
Leuconium 482. B.
Leuctra of Arcadia, 323. D.
Lichas, a Lacedaemonian whipped, 322. A. sent with authority into Ionia.
490. B. C. hated by the Milesians, 517. C.
Limnaea, 126. D.
Lipara, 192. B.
Lochagi, 331. B.
Locri Ozolae. Theeues▪ 4. C.

    Locris in Italy, Confederate with Syracuse, 191, C▪ Locrians make Peace
    with the Athenians, 292. B.
    Lycaeum, 299. C. 323. D.
    Lynchestians, 139. D▪ 256 B. 257. D.

Appendix A.12 M
M

    MAcedonia. The beginning of the Raigne of the Temenidae, 139· D. the
    discription of that Kingdome▪ 140. B.
    Maedi, 139. B.
    Maenalia, 329. C.
    Magistracy▪ A new Magistracy erected at Athens, 470. C. Epidemiurgi
    Magistrates at Potidaea. 31. A. Cytherodices, a Magistracy; 241. B.
    Magnesia of Asia, 74 B.
    Magnetians 141. B.
    Maleu, 147. E 148. D.
    Malocis Apollo, 146. E. 147. B.
    Mantineans and Tegeates ght, 287. B. their League with the Argiues, 306.
    D. their League with the Lacedaemonians, 338. D.
    Marathusa, 486 D.
    Mecyberne taken from the Athenians, 313 D,
    Medeon, 203. B.
    Megareans forbidden commerce in Attica, 35 D. they reuolt from the
    Corinthians, 54. B. they reuolt from the Athenians, 59. B. they expect the
    euent of battell betweene Brasidas and the Athenians, 251. A. Megarean
    Outlawes recalled, 252. E. set vp the Oligarchy. 253. B. they refuse to be
    comprehended in the Peace betweene the Athenians and Lacedaemonians,
    300. A. Megaris inuaded by the Athenians, 98. E. Megara attempted by the
    Athenians, 248. A. Treason in Megara discouered, 250. B.
    Megara Hyblaea, 404. B. when and by whom built, 351. D.
    Melicis, 194. C.

Melij, 292. B. their Dialogue with the Athenians, 341. A.
Meliteia, 255. B.
Melos, 87. B. 193. E. besieged by the Athenians, 346. B. taken and sacked,
347. B.
Menda reuolteth from the Athenians, 280. B.
Messana, 193. C. reuolteth from the Athenians, 211. D. Messanians inuade
Naxus, 225. C. Messana, why called Zancle. 352. C
Messapians, 199. C.
Methone, 96. C. 237. D. 354. C.
Methymne, 148. A. reuolteth from the rest of Lesbos, 146. A.
Methymnaeans Warre on Antissa. 154. A.
Methydrium, 325. D.
Miletus reuolteth from the Athenians, 478 D.
Mindarus, General of the Peloponnesians, 517. C. goeth into Hellespont,
529. A.
Minoa, 248. B. taken by Nicias. 172. A.
Minos, rst that had a great Nauy, 5 D, 3. D. freed the Sea of Pirates, 5. D.
Master of the Sea. 3. D.
Mitylenians, 147. B. why not depriued of liberty, 150. D. Mitylenian
Commons yeeld the City to the Athenians, 158. D. sentence at Athens
against Mitylene, 162. C. 1000 Mitylenians put to death. 171. C.
Mitylenian Outlawes lose Antandrus, 253. B.
Molossians, 126. C.
Molychrium, 129 D. 199. E.
Moneth. Elaphebolium, 278. A. 302. A. Gerastion, 278 B. Artemisium 302.
A. Carneius, 323. E
Mount raised against Plataea, 122 C.
Mycale, 47. A.
Mycalessus, 429. E.
Mycenae, 3. C.
Mygdonia, 32. A. 140 A.
Mylae, 193. C.
Myonnesus, 160. C.

    Myrcinus, 271. C.
    Myronides, 55. C.
    Myus, 74. C. 154. C.

Appendix A.13 N
N

    NAuie rst built by Minos, 3. D The Nauies of old time in Greece, 10. B.
    the Nauy of the Athenians at the greatest when, 153. C.
    Naupactus, 54. B. 119. C. defended by Demosthenes, 200. A. 
    Naxus, the Iland, rst of the Athenian Confederates, that was brought in
    to seruitude, 52. A.
    Naxus of Sicily, 225. C. when, and by whom built, 351. B.
    Neapolis of Africke, 443. C.
    Nemea the Forrest, 326. B.
    Neritum, 149. A.
    Nicias goeth with an Army to Melos, 193. D. giueth his power to leuy
    Souldiers, to Cleon, 228. C. winneth Cythera, 241. D. goeth Ambassadour
    to Lacedaemon, 318. B. chosen Generall for the Sicilian voyage, 354. D. his
    opinion touching the mannaging of that Warre 376. D. his Stratagem to get
    landing at Syracuse, 386. B. is assaulted in his Campe, 409. A. why
    vnwilling to rise from before Syracuse, 442. A. he yeeldeth himself to
    Gylippus, 466. A. his death, 467. A.
    Nicias of Crete, 130 B.
    Nisaea besieged by the Athenians, 249. D. rendred. 250. B.
    Notium, 161. B. 162. A. the Number of the Lacedaemonian Army against
    the Argiues, how computed, 332. A.
    Nymphodorus of Abdera, 97. D.

Appendix A.14 O
O

OAre. One man to one Oare in a Trireme, 136. A.
Oath. Forme of the Oath at the making of the Peace betweene the
Lacedaemonians and the Athenians, 301. D.
Odomantians, 141. C. 292. C.
Odrysae, 98. A. B. 137. D.
Oeantheans, 199. C.
Oeneon, 199. D.
Oenias, 58. B. 128. A. compelled by the Acarnanians into the Athenian
League, 254. D.
Oenöe, 92. D. betrayed to the Boeotians. 528. C.
Oenophyta, 56 E.
Oenussae, 482. A.
Oezyme, 271. C.
Oligarchy, of the 400 at Athens, 507. C. & sequ. they enter the Senate
house, 508. C. they begin to decline, 520. D. are assaulted by the Populars,
523. C.
Olophyxus, 273. A.
Olpae, 203. A. taken by the Ambraciotes, 202. C.
Olympia, 149. B.
Olympian Games, 5. A. 321. B.
Olympiade, eighty eighth, 149. C.
Olympiaeum, 386. C. 387. C. 392. C.
Olympus, 256, A.
Olynthus, 32. A. 34. A. 280. D.
Oneius, 237 B.
Ophionians, 196. C. 197. C.
Opus, 57. A.
Oracle. The Corcyraeans referre their cause to the Oracle at Delphi, 17. B.
Oracle at Delphi consulted by the Epidamnians, 15. C. Oracle at Delphi
encourageth the Lacedaemonians, 61. D. 110, D.
Oraedus, King of the Parauaeans, 126. C.
Oration of the Corinthians at Athens, 22. B. at Sparta, 62. A. of the
Corcyraeans at Athens, 19 C. of the Athenians at Lacedaemon, 34 C. of

    Archidamus, 43. A. of Sthenclaidas, 45. D. of Pericles at Athens, 75. C. of
    Archidamus to his Army▪ 87. D. of Pericles at the Funerall, 100. D. of
    Pericles to the incensed People, 112. D. of Phormio to his Souldiers, 132.
    C. of Cnemus to his Souldiers, 131. B. of the Mitylenians at Olympia, 149
    B. of Cleon against the Mitylenians, 163▪ of Diodotus for them, 167. of
    the Plataeans, 173. of the Thebans, 177. of Demosthenes to his Souldiers,
    216. C. of the Lacedaemonians at Athens, 221. A. of Hermocrates to the
    Sicilians at Gela, 244. of Pagondas to his Souldiers, 262. of Hippocrates to
    his Souldiers, 264. of Brasidas to the Acanthians, 258. D. to the Scionaeans,
    278. to the Toronaeans, 274. to his Souldiers in Lyncus, 282. B. to his
    Souldiers in Amphipolis, 294. A. Of Nicias against the Sicilian voyage, 355.
    againe, 362. to his Souldiers, 388. to his Souldiers about to ght in the great
    Hauen, 450. B. to his Souldiers when hee rose from before Syracuse, 460.
    B. Of Alcibiades for the Sicilian Voyage, 359. against the Athenians at
    Lacedaemon, 400. D. of Hermocrates in Syracuse, 369. A at Camarina,
    393. A of Athenagoras, 371. D. of a Syracusian Generall, 374 A. of
    Euphemus at Camarina, 396. A.
    Orchomenus seased by the Boeotian Outlawes, 58. E.
    Orchomenus of Arcadia, besieged by the Argiues, and taken, 328. B.C.
    Orestes King of Thessaly, 58. A.
    Orestis of Epirus, 287. B.
    Orestium, 329. C.
    Orneae pulled downe, 354. B.
    Orobiae, 192. D.
    Oropus, 96. A. taken from the Athenians by treason, 503. B.

Appendix A.15 P
P

    PAches, killeth Hippias, Captaine of the Arcadians in Notium, by fraud,
    162. A.
    Paedaritus slaine, 501. A.

Paeonia, 140. A.
Paeonians, 139. B.
Pallas Chalci●cà 67. A. 71. B.
Pallene, 30. D. 34. C.
Panactum taken by the Boeotians, 291. A pulled downe, and why, 315. D.
Panathenaea, 1●. D. 320. C.
Pancratium, 32●, C.
Palenses, 98. D.
Palirenses, 98. D.
Pangaeum, 140. A.
Panormus of Achaia, 130. C. of Milesia, 481. D.
Paralia, 111. A.C.
Paralians, 194 C.
Paralus, the name of a Gally, 160. E.
Patrae, 128 C. 129. C. 323. B.
Pausanias hated by the Confederates, 51. B. winneth most of Cypru●, 50.
C. his insolent behauiour, ibid. sent for home, 50. D. his pride, 68. C.
driuen out of Byzantium, he goeth to Colonae, 69. B. his Inscription on
the Tripode, 69. D. his Medizing, 67. C. his letter to Xerxes, 67. D he
conspireth with the Helotes, 70. B is betrayed by an Argilian, 70. C. taketh
Sanctuary, 71. A. his death, 71. B.
Peace betweene the Lacedaemonians and Athenians for 30 yeres, 59. D.
Peace in Sicily, made by Hermocrates, 247. A. Peace betweene 
the Lacedaemonians and Athenians, for 50 yeeres, 300. B not liked by the
Confederates, 302. D why desired by the Lacedaemonians, 297. D. 298. D.
crossed by the Ephores, 311. D. the Peace made after the rst ten yeeres
Warre, no Peace, 305. B. broken in the Mantinean and Epidaurus Warre,
ibid.
P●g●, 56. B.
Penance, 96. A.
Pelasgium, 92. B.
Pelia, 140. A.

P●lopi●es, 6. C.
Peloponnesus, whence so called, 6. B inhabited by the Doreans, 8. D.
Peloponnesian Warre, after the Persian 50 yeeres, 61. B. Peloponnesus
inuaded by the Athenians, 9●. B. 111. B.
Pecoris, 225. B.
Pelops, ●. B.
Pen●acos●omedimni, 153. A.
Peparethus▪ 193. A.
Perdiccas, King of Macedony, solliciteth the Lacedaemonians to the Warre,
12. B. reuolteth from the Athenians, 33. B. procureth an Army out of
Peloponnesus, 256. B. declared by the Athenians for their enemy, 257. C.
betrayed by the Illyrians, 281. D. yeth out of Lyncus, and deserteth
Prasida●, 281. E. maketh Peace with the Athenians, 286. B. stoppeth the
passage of the Lacedaemonians through Thessa●●, 286. C. is barred the
vse of the Sea by the Athenians, and why, ●40, B.
Periclis warreth on Samos, 60. B. besiegeth Oeneus, 58▪ B. descended of a
Stocke that was vnder the curse for violation of Sanctuary▪ 66. ●. enemy to
the Lacedaemonians, 66. E. blamed by the Athenians, as author of the
Warre, 95. A. giues his Land to the State, in case it were spared by the
Enemy, 89. C. his death, and praise, 116. B. & sequ.
Peripolium, 199. A.
Pero●hia, 285. E.
Perseides, 6. E.
Pestilence at Athens, 106. C. 121. E.
Phacium, 255. E.
Phaeax sent into Sicily, 291. B. moueth Warre against Syracuse, 291. D.
Phaecinis. Priest of Juno, 287. A.
Phagres, 140. A.
Phalcron, 56. A.
Phanotis, 254. B.
Pharsalus, 58. A. 215. D.
Phaselis, 119. D.

Pheia, 96. D.
Philip, brother to Perdiccas, 31. B.
Phliasia, wasted by the Argiues, 340. A.
Phlius, 326. A.
Phoceae, 291. C.
Phocaea, 486. D.
Phoenicians, addicted to Robbery, 5. C. their Cities in Sicily, 351. A.
Phoenicia, 119. D.
Phoenicus, a Hauen, 488 A.
Phormio wasteth Ch●lcidea, 35. A. sent to Potidaea. 34 C. sent to
Naupactus, 119▪ C. ghteth with the Corinthians, 128. B. with Cnemus,
135. B. putteth suspected persons out of Stratus and Corontae, 141. E.
Phrygij a place in Corinthia, 95 B.
Phrynichus, refuseth battle, and why. 484 B. his art to elude the accusation
of Alcibiades, 498. C his death ●23. B.
Phthiotis, 3 B.
Phyr●on, 32. B.
Physca, 140. B.
Phytia, 203. B.
Picria, 140. D.
Piraeus, better to the Athenians than their Citie, 50. A. when walled in, 49.
C. attempted by the Peloponnesians, 135. D. Piraeus of Corinthia. 475. B.
Pisander laboureth the recalling of Alcibiades, and deposing of the People,
499. C. accuseth Phnynichus, 500. B. is a principall man in the setting vp
of the 400 at Athens, 507 C.
Pisistratus, the son of Hippias the Tyrant, 380. C.
Pitanate, 12. E.
Pithius, with 60 more Senators slaine in Corcyra, in the Senate, 123. B.
Pits. Men throwne into Pits, 118. C.
Plague, vide Pestilence.
Plataea surprised, 82. A. victualled by the Atheniaas, 85. C. attempby re,
124 B, by Engines, 123. C. besieged, 124. C. yeelded, 172 C. escape of 212

    Plataeans, 155. C. Platae demolished, 181. D.
    Plataeis inuaded by the Lacedaemonians, 120. C.
    Pleistoanax banished, 94. C. desireth Peace, and why, 299. B.
    Plemmyrium forti ed by Nicias, 416. A. taken by the Syracusians, 425. D.
    Pleuron, 200. B.
    Polis Argi●is, 117. D.
    Poppy tempered with hony sent ouer into Sphacteria, 227. B.
    Potidania, 197. C.
    Potidaea, 30. D. reuolteth 31. D. is besieged, 34. D. the Potidaeans eate one
    another, 119. E. they yeeld, 120. A.
    Prasiae, 111. C.
    Priene, 59. D.
    Pronaei. 98. D.
    Prophecies rife before great Warres, 86. B.
    Prophecy at Delphi, procured by subordination, 292. B.
    Proschio●, 200. B. 203. A.
    Prote, 218 D.
    Patanes, 509. A.
    Pteleum, 301. B. 482▪ A. 486. C.
    Pydna, 32. D.
    Pylus, 213. A. forti ed by the Athenians, 213. C. kept by Messenians, 235.
    B.
    Pyrrha, 162. A.

Appendix A.16 Q
Q

    the Quarell about Epidamnus, 14. D
    the Quarries a prison at Syracuse, 466. C.
    the Question how put in the Assembly at Sparta, 46. B.
    Question to be answered by the Plataeans, 173. A.

Appendix A.17 R
R

    REligion neglected in the time of the Pestilence, 110. B. the opinion of the
    Athenians, touching the Gods, 344. A.
    Reuolt. Causes of reuolts, 52. B.
    Rhegium, 191. C. 234. D.
    Rheiti, 93 D.
    Rheitas, 235. E.
    Rhenea, tyed to Delos, with a chaine, 201. B.
    Rhium Molychricum, 130. D.
    Rhium Acha●cum, 130. D. 323. B.
    Rhodes, 493. C.
    Rhodope, 137. D. 139. C.
    Rhoetium, 240. D.
    Robbing had in honou, 4. B.

Appendix A.18 S
S                                                                   

    SAbylinthus King of the Agraeans, 126. C.
    Sadocus made free of the Citty of Athens. 98. B betraieth the
    Lacedaemonian Ambassadours. 118. B.
    Salaethus, entreth secretlie into Mitylene, and con rmeth it against the
    Athenians. 158. A is taken. 162. A. and put to death. at Athens. 162. B.
    Salaminia, the name of a Trireme. 160. E.
    Salamis ouer-run by the Peloponnesians. 136. B.
    Samos besieged. 60 C. yelded. 61. A. Samos in Sedition. 510. C
    Sane. 272. E.
    Sanctuary, 15. B. 66. B

Scione, 278. C. besieged by the Athenians, 286. B. expugned, and giuen to
the Plataeans, 309. A.
Sciritae, 331. B.
Scomius, 138. D.
Scyllaeum, 323. D.
Scyros, 52. A.
Scytale, 69. A.
Scythians. their power. 139. A.
Sea. The Argiues acknowledge the dominion of the Sea vpon their owne
Coast, to belong to the Athenians, 314. D.
Seditions most incident to fertile Countries, 2. C. Sedition in Corcyra, 182.
C. manners of the seditious described, 187. D. & sequ. the Nobility in the
sedition of Corcyra how destroyed. 239. A.
Selinus, 443. A. when built, 351. E.
Sentence. The cruell sentence of the Athenians against the Mitylenians,
162. C.
Sermyla, 35. A.
Shipping of Greece what it was before the Peloponnesian Warre, 10. A
Sicani, 350. B.
Sicily described, 349. & sequ. Sicilians make peace amongst themselues at
Gela, 243. C. the Sicilian Voyage resolued on at Athens, 354. D.
Siculi, 350. C.
Sicyon Oligarchized. 338. D.
Sidussa, 482. A.
Sintians, 139. B.
Siphae, 254. B.
Sitalces King of Thrace leagues with the Athenians, 98. C. warreth on
Macedonie, 137. B. retireth thence, 141. D.
Solium, 98. D.
Solygia, 236. A.
Spartans taken in Sphacteria. 298. C.
Spartolus, 12●. B.
Sphacteria how scituate, 215. A. B.

    Stagirus reuolteth, 260. D. assaulted by Cleon, 292. B.
    The Standard in battell, 27. A.
    Sthenelaidas, 45. D.
    Stratagem of Ariston▪ 436. A.
    Stratus. The Chaonians ouerthrowne by Ambush at Stratus, 127. C.
    Strymon, 52. C. 138. A. 271. D. 293. B.
    Sybota, the Ilands. 26. C. 30. A. Sybota the Hauen, 28. B. 185. C.
    Syca, 406. B.
    Syme, 492. A. C.
    Synoecia, why, and by whom instituted, 91. C.
    Syracuse, when and by whom built, 351. C. the Syracusians displace their
    Generals, and why, 410. A. Syracuse how neere to being taken by the
    Athenians, 415. B. the Syracusians begin to treat with Nicias, 409. D. they
    shut vp the mouth of the Great Hauen. 449. B.

Appendix A.19 T
T

    TAges, Deputy Lieutenant to Tissaphernes, 478. B.
    Talent. A Talent pay for a moneth to a Gallie, 354. C. a Ship of 500 Talents
    burthen, 276. C.
    Tnaearus. Temple of Neptune at Taenarus, 67. A.
    Tanagra, 56, D. 194. B. 254. B. 429 C.
    Tantalus, a Lacedaemonian, taken, and added to the prisoners taken at
    Pylus, 243. D.
    Tegea, 328. D. 336. A. 339. B. Tegeans and Mantineans ght at Orestium,
    287. B. Tegeans refuse the Argiue League, 309. B.
    Temple of Juno built in the ruines of Platea, 182. A.
    A Tenth of the Land in Lesbos consecrated, 171. D.
    Tereas, 404. C.
    Teres, 98. A.
    Tereus, ibid.

Teuglussa, 492. B.
Teus reuolteth, 478. A.
Teutiaplus his aduice to Alcidas, 169. D.
Thalamij, 230. D.
Thapsus, when and by whom built, 351. D. Thapsus▪ 405. C.
Tharups, King of the Molossians and Antitanes, 126. C.
Thassus reuolteth from the Athenians, 52. D. is subdued, 53. B.
Oligarchized by the Athenians, reuolteth from them. ●05. ●
Thebes, seate of the Warre mad● by Xerxes, 47. D. distant from Plataea 70
furlongs. 84. C.
Thebans, attempting to surpriz Plataea, taken Prisoners, 84. ● slaine, 85.
A.
Themistocles, 10. B. 40. C. aduiseth to wall in the City of Athens, 47. D.
deludeth the Lacedaemonians, 48. A. C. addicted to the a aires by Sea, 50.
A author to the Athenians to take vpon them the Dominion of the Sea, 49.
D. his Letter to Artaxerxes, 73. A. his praise, 73. E. his death and buriall,
74. B. C.
Theramenes a Lacedaemonian cast away at Sea, 489. D.
Theramenes the Athenian, 522. C.
Therme, 32. D. 98. C.
Thermopylae, 195. B. 141. B.
Theseus, reduceth the Athenians to one City, 91. B.
Thespiae, 254. B. the Walles of Thespiae razed, 286. E. Thespian
Commons assault the Few, 405. A.
Thesprotis, 18. D. 26. B.
Thessalians, 141. B. they infest Heraclea, 195. C.
Thyamus, 203. B.
Thrace described, 138. C. Thracian custome in receiuing gifts, 138. D. the
Thracian Army in Macedonie, 139. C. Thracians sacke Mycalessus, 429. E.
Thriasian elds. 93. C.
Thronium, 97. B.

Thucydides his diligence in writing this History, 13. C. is sicke of the
Pestilence, 107. B. he defendeth Eion, 271. A▪ B. is banished for twenty
yeeres, and when, 305. C. liued throughout the whole Warre, 
ibid.
Thyrea, 97, C. 315. A. 243. A. C.
Thassus, 273. A.
Tichium, 197. C.
Timocrates, 135 C.
Tissaphernes seeketh the Lacedaemonian League, 472. C. is well a ected to
the Athenians, 499 A. why he brought not the Phoenician Fleet from
Aspendus, 519. D.
T●lophonians, 199. C.
Ton●●us, 277. A.
Torone, 263. B 274. A.
Trachinians, 194. C.
Tribute, when rst assessed by the Athenians. 51. B.
Trinacria, 350. B.
Triopium, 488. B.
Tripodiscus, 250 C.
Tritaeans, 199. C.
Troezen, 111. C.
Trogalus, 406. B.
The Troian Warre, rst ioynt actiof the Grecians, 3. A. the Troian Fleet, 7.
C.
Trotilu●, w●en and by whom built 351. D.
Truce for 5 yeeres betweene the Lacedaemonians and Athenians, 58. C.
Truce at Pylus, 220. B. Truce for a yeere betweene the Lacedaemonians and
the Athenians, 276 B. ended, 289. D. Truce betweene the Lacedaemonian
and Argiue Armies▪ 327. A.
Tyrants, 11. A. Tyranny of the Pis●stratides easie, 380. D. Tyranny
opposite to Democracy, 401. B.

Appendix A.20 W
W

    WAlling of Townes when it beganne in Greece, 6. A. the Walles of Athens
    built in hast, 48 A. 49. B. the Wall about Piraeus, 49. D. the Long-walles of
    Athens begun, 56. A. nished, 57. A. inhabited, 92. D. the Long-walles of
    Megara built by the Athenians, 54 C. Long-walles at Argos, 339. C. razed,
    340 A. Long-walles from Patrae to Rhium, 323 B. the Walles of Tanagra
    razed, 57 A. a new Wall before Syracuse, 302 B. the Walles of the Athenians
    to encloze Syracuse, 406 D. 415 A. Wall of the racusians, to cut o the
    Walles of the Athenians, 407 A. E. 415 D. 417. D.
    Warre. The Warres of old time▪ 10 C. betweene the Chalcideans and
    Eretrians, 10 D. Warre against Sparta decreed at Athens, 46 D. the holy
    Warre, 58 D. Warre of the Athenians against Samos, 59 E. War of the
    Athenians in Aegypt, ended, 57 C. beginning of the Peloponnesian Warre,
    81 D. Warre preuentiue iusti ed, 151 B. Warre between the Argiues and
    Epidaurians, 223 C. the children of such as dyed in the Warre, kept by the
    Athenian People, till they were at mans estate, 106 D.
    Watch-word. 440 A.
    Wind. A set wind euery morning blowing from the mouth of the Crissaean
    Bay, 129 A.
    Woods. The aduantage of Woods in ght. 22● B. the Woods in Sphacteria
    set on re; and burnt vp by accident, 229 D.

Appendix A.21 X
X

    Xenares, Ephore of Lacedaemon seeketh to dissolue the Peace, 311. D. 318.
    D.
    Xerxes his Fleet, 11 C. his Letter to Pausanias, 68. B.

Appendix A.22 G
G

    YEere. The rst Yeere of the Peloponnesian Warre, 81 D. the second, 106
    C. the third, yeere, 120 B. the fourth, 145 D. the fth, 158 B. the sixth, 192
    C. the seuenth, 211 D. the eighth, 240 C the ninth, 276 B. the tenth, 289
    D. the eleuenth, 304 C. the twelfth, 314 B. the thirteenth, 323 A. the
    foureteenth, 325 B. the fteenth, 339 A. the sixteenth, 340 C, the
    seuenteenth, 354 C, the eighteenth, 404 B. the nineteenth, 422 D. the
    twentieth, 473 D. the one and twentieth, 503 D. the number of yeeres that
    the whole Warre lasted, 305 A. B. how the yeeres of the Warre ought to be
    reckoned, 302 B. C.
    Yongmen for want of experience loue Warre, 86 B. Yong men made
    Gouernours of Cities, contrary to the Lawes, 286. D.

Appendix A.23 Z
Z

    ZAcynthus, 117. C.
    Zancle, 352. B.

FINIS.