Toxemia Explained: The True Interpretation of the Cause of Disease
John Henry Tilden
Toxemia Explained: The True Interpretation of the Cause of Disease. Denver: published by the author, 1926.
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/john-h-tilden-toxemia-explained-the-true-interpretation-of-the-cause-of-disease).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Toxemia Explained:
The True
Interpretation

Of The Cause Of
Disease


By Dr. John H. Tilden


Originally published 1926


TOXEMIA EXPLAINED


REVISED EDITION


THE TRUE INTERPRETATION
OF THE CAUSE OF DISEASE


HOW TO CURE IS AN OBVIOUS SEQUENCE


AN ANTIDOTE TO FEAR, FRENZY AND THE POPULAR MAD
CHASING AFTER SO-CALLED CURES


By J. H. TILDEN, M. D.
DENVER, COLORADO


Copyright 1926, 1927, 1928, 1930, 1935
By J.H. Tilden
Denver, Colorado


DEDICATION


WHAT more can be asked by any doctor or layman than
a philosophy of the cause of disease that gives a perfect
understanding of all the so-called diseases?


To know cause supplies even the layman with a
dependable knowledge of how to avoid building disease,
and how to cure. When people know how to avoid disease
they know an immunization that immunizes rationally.


Dependable knowledge of what disease really is and its
cause is man’s salvation; and when it can be had with no
more effort than that required to read carefully and
understandingly Toxemia Explained, there is little excuse
for anyone, lay or professional, to live in ignorance of it.


Knowledge is power. Knowledge of how to have health
gives greatest power.


Few people know anything about the cause of disease. To
them this book is dedicated and the freedom from medical
superstition it will bring them.

—J. H. TILDEN.


Table of Contents


Preface---6

Introduction to Toxemia—16
Toxemia Explained — 29
Enervation Is General — 79

Poise —90

The Causes of Enervation — 115
Retrospection — 142

A Few Suggestions — 144

Dr. Tilden’s Tensing Exercises — 150


PREFACE


FROM time immemorial man has looked for a savior;
and, when not looking for a savior, he is looking for a cure.
He believes in paternalism. He is looking to get something
for nothing, not knowing that the highest price we ever pay
for anything is to have it given to us.


Instead of accepting salvation, it is better to deserve it.
Instead of buying, begging, or stealing, a cure, it is better to
stop building disease. Disease is of man’s own building,
and one worse thing than the stupidity of buying a cure is to
remain so ignorant as to believe in cures.


The false theories of salvation and cures have built man
into a mental mendicant, when he should be the arbiter of
his own salvation, and certainly his own doctor, instead of
being a slave to a profession that has neither worked out its


own salvation from disease nor discovered a single cure in
all the age-long period of man’s existence on earth.


We hear of diet cures, dietitians, balanced rations, meat
diets, vegetable diets, and other diets—chemically prepared
foods of all kinds. The reading public is bewildered with


hundreds of health magazines and thousands of health

ideas. There are thousands writing on health who would not
recognize it if they should meet it on the street. Fanaticism,
bigotry, stupidity, and commercialism are the principal
elements in the dietetic complex that is now belaboring the
public.


Cures are what the people want, and cures are what
doctors and cultists affect to make; but at most only relief is
given.


The periodicity which characterizes all functional
derangements of the body lends color to the claims of cure-
mongers that their remedy has cured their patients, when
the truth is that the so-called disease “ran its course.” The
truth is that the so-called disease was a toxemic crisis, and
when the toxin was eliminated below the toleration point,
the sickness passed—automatically health returned. But the
disease was not cured; for the cause (enervating habits) is
continued, toxin still accumulates, and in due course of
time another crisis appears. Unless the cause of Toxemia is
discovered and removed, crises will recur until functional
derangements will give way to organic disease.


The entire profession is engaged in doctoring crises of
Toxemia—curing (?) and curing (?) until overtaken with
chronic disease of whatever organ was the seat of the toxin
crises.


THERE ARE NO CURES


Nature returns to normal when enervating habits are
given up. There are no cures in the sense generally
understood. If one has a tobacco heart, what is the remedy?
Stop the use of tobacco, of course. If the heart is worn out
from shock, as we see it among gamblers, or among men
who are plunging in the stock market, what will cure?
Drugs? No! Removing the cause.


Every so-called disease is built within the mind and body
by enervating habits. The food and dietetic insanity that
constitutes the headliner on the medical stage just now is
causing the people to demand a diet that will cure them of
their peculiar maladies. The idea prevails that some
peculiar diet will cure rheumatism or any other disease.
Diet or food will not cure any disease.


A fast, rest in bed, and the giving-up of enervating habits,
mental and physical, will allow nature to eliminate the


accumulated toxin; then, if enervating habits are given up,
and rational living habits adopted, health will come back to
stay, if the one CURED will “stay put.” This applies to any
so-called disease. Yes, it fits your disease—you who write
to find out if the Tilden system of cure applies to your case.
Yes; cannot you realize that law and order pervades the
universe? And it is the same from nebula to stone, from
stone to plant, from plant to animal, from animal to man,
from man to mind, and from mind to super-mind—God. To
use a blanket expression: Law and order pervades the
universe, the same yesterday, today and forever, and is the
same from star-dust to mind—from electron to mind.
Toxemia explains how the universal law operates in health
and disease. One disease is the same as another; one man
the same as another; one flower the same as another; the
carbon in bread, sugar, coal, and the diamond is the same.
Yes, one disease can be cured (?) the same as another,
unless the organ acted on by toxemic crises is destroyed.


For example: If wrong eating is persisted in, the acid
fermentation first irritates the mucous membrane of the
stomach; the irritation becomes inflammation, then
ulceration, then thickening and hardening, which ends in
cancer at last. The medical world is struggling to find the
cause of cancer. It is the distal end of an inflammatory
process whose proximal beginning may be any irritation.


The end is degeneration from a lack of oxygen and
nutriment, and, in degenerating, the septic material enters
the circulation, setting up chronic septic poisoning called
cancer cachexia.


Disease is a common expression of universal enervation.
An understanding of physiology and pathology necessitates
a firm grip on evolution as expressed in biology; or
reasoning will go astray occasionally.


Modern cures and immunization are vanity and vexation;
they are founded on the foolish principle of reasoning from
effect, is disease, to cause. The organ which is suffering
from many crises of Toxemia is discovered—it may be
ulcer of the stomach, then the ulcer is cut out; it may be
gallstone, then the stone is cut out; it may be fibroid tumor
of the womb, then the tumor or womb is cut out. The same
may be said of other effects—the medical armament is
turned loose on a lot of effects. This is accepted by the
public mind as efficient treatment of disease, when in fact it
is a stupid removing of effects. And that is not the worst of
such blundering. The operators have not the slightest idea
of the cause of the effects they so skillfully remove.


In other derangements the same lack of knowledge of
cause prevails. In the treatment of deficiency diseases, the
lacking element is supplied from the laboratory; but
nothing is done in the line of restoring the organ to
normality. Why? Because medical science has not
discovered why organs fail to function properly; and until
this discovery is made, scientific blundering will continue.


THE WORLD NEEDS THE SCIENCE OF SURGERY


If mutilation (unnecessary surgery) is required in nine
hundred and ninety-nine cases to perfect the skill required
in the thousandth case, the question of the need of high-
class surgery must be answered by the mutilated or
vandalized class.


Is war necessary? What would be the answer of the
7,485,000 who were killed in the late World War, if the
question were submitted to them? Estimate $5,000 as the
man-power loss for each man; then the world lost
$37,425,000,000 in this one item alone. Surgery costs the
world, in vandalizing the bodies of men, women, and
children, as much every year. Is it worth that much for all
the real good it does? Why is so much surgery thought to
be necessary? Because of the ignorance of the people,


egged on by a science-mad or selfish profession. It is more
spectacular to operate than to teach people how to live to
avoid chronic disease and operations.


ARE PALLIATIVES EVER NECESSARY?


It is doubtful if the palliation which doctors and cultists
give is worth the disadvantage that the sick habit taught the
patients by their doctor brings them.


The drug habit taught the thousands certainly
overbalances any relief given. Drugs to relieve pain are
never necessary. Twenty-five years in which I used drugs,
and thirty-three in which I have not used drugs, should
make my belief, that drugs are unnecessary and in most
cases injurious, worth something to those who care to know
the truth.


YES, VENEREAL DISEASES CAN BE CURED
WITHOUT DRUGS


I make no exception of syphilis, and stand ready to
demonstrate the truth of what I say at any time and
anywhere to a committee of doctors.


Nature cures—nature can eliminate syphilis, or any type
of infection, if all enervating habits are given up and a
rational mode of living adopted.


STIMULANTS ARE SUBTILELY UNDERMINING


So insidious in their action are all stimulants that the
unwary are surprised by finding themselves more or less
slaves to them when they are not conscious of using them
to excess.


The coffee headache is an example. A time comes when
it is not convenient to get the usual breakfast cup. A
dullness or languid feeling appears three or four hours after
breakfast, that cannot be accounted for until some friend
suggests that perhaps it is due to missing the coffee; but the
victim is not convinced until he proves it true by trying it
out several times. Some develop a headache, and still
others are troubled with gaping or yawning and a feeling of
oppression, due to heart enervation brought on from the use
of coffee.


At first stimulants gently remove awareness—remove tire
and actuate the mind and body. It should be obvious to


reasoning minds that borrowed activity must be paid for
sooner or later.


Using nerve-energy in excess of normal production
brings on enervation. Few people waste nerve-energy in
one way only. Food is a stimulant. Overeating is
overstimulating. Add to this excess one or two other
stimulants—Coffee or tobacco—excessive venery,
overwork and worry, and one subject to that amount of
drain of nerve-energy will become decidedly enervated.
Elimination falls far short of requirements; consequently
toxin accumulates in the blood. This adds a pronounced
auto-toxin stimulation to that coming from overstimulating
habits, and completes a vicious circle. This complex stands
for a disease- producing Toxemia, which will be permanent
except as toxin crises—so-called acute diseases—lower the
amount of toxin, again to accumulate and continue until the
habits that keep the body enervated are controlled. Perfect
health cannot be established until all enervating habits have
been eliminated.


DEFINITION of Toxemia and crises of
Toxemia:—In the process of tissue building—
metabolism—there is cell building—
anabolism—and cell destruction—catabolism.
The broken down tissue is toxic and in
health—when nerve energy is normal—it is
eliminated from the blood as fast as evolved.
When nerve energy is dissipated from any
cause—physical or mental excitement or bad
habits—the body becomes enervated, when
enervated, elimination is checked, causing a
retention of toxin in the blood or Toxemia.
This accumulation of toxin when once
established will continue until nerve energy is
restored by removing the causes. So-called
disease is nature’s effort at eliminating the
toxin from the blood. All so-called diseases are
crises of Toxemia.


Introduction to Toxemia


THE medical world has built an infinite literature without
any (except erroneous and vacillating) ideas of cause.
Medicine is rich in science, but now, as well as in all past
time, it suffers from a dearth of practical ideas. The average
doctor is often educated out of all the common-sense he
was born with. This, however, is not his fault. It is the fault
of the system. He is an educated automaton. He has facts—
scientific facts galore—without ideas. Ford has mechanical
facts—not more, perhaps, than thousands of other
mechanics, but he joined them to an idea which made him a
multimillionaire. Millions have facts, but no ideas.
Thousands of doctors have all the scientific data needed,
but they have not harnessed their science to commor-sense
and philosophy.


Without a clear conception of cause, cure must remain
the riddle that it is.


The late Sir James Mackenzie—while living, the greatest
clinician in the world—declared: “In medical research the
object is mainly the prevention and cure of disease.” If
cause is not known, how is prevention or cure possible—as,


for example, by producing a mild form of smallpox or other
so-called disease by poisoning a healthy person by
introducing into his body the pathological products of said
disease? Certainly only pathological thinking can arrive at
such conclusions. Vaccines and autogenous remedies are
made from the products of disease, and the idea that disease
can be made to cure itself is an end-product of pathological
thinking. This statement is not so incongruous after we
consider the fact that all search and research work to find
cause by medical scientists has been made in dead and
dying people. As ridiculous as it may appear, medical
science has gone, and is still going, to the dead and dying to
find cause.


If prevention and cure mean producing disease, surely
prevention and cure are not desirable. If prevention can be
accomplished, then cures will not be needed.


At the time of his death, Mackenzie was laboring to
discover prevention. A more worthy work can not be
imagined. But the tragedy of his life was that he died from
a preventable diseases he could have cured the disease that
killed him if his conception of cause had been in line with
the Truth of Toxemia—the primary cause of all disease.


In spite of Mackenzie’s ambition to put the profession in
possession of truth concerning prevention and cure, he died
without a correct idea of even in what direction to look for
this desirable knowledge’ as evidenced by such statements
as: “Our problems being the prevention of disease, we
require a complete knowledge of disease in all its aspects
before we can take steps to prevent its occurrence.” There
is the crux of the whole subject. It is not disease; it is cause
“fn all its aspects” that we need to know before we can take
steps to prevent “disease.” Mackenzie stated the following
concerning diagnosis:


But it appears to be unlikely that in the present
state of medicine there would be any great
dissimilarity in the proportions of diagnosed and
undiagnosed eases in many series of investigation
such as we have made. The proportion depends, not
on the skill or training of individual practitioners,
but on the unsatisfactory state of all medical
knowledge. The similarity of the statistical records
from the institute and from private practice goes
far to support this view. In spite of the additional
time given at the institute to the examination of
cases which are undiagnosable in general practice,
and the assistance given by the special
departments—clinical groups—in their
investigation, they remain profoundly obscure,
although we know that it is from among them that


there will gradually emerge the cases of advanced
organic disease and the end-results which form so
large a proportion of the inmates of hospital wards.
And the tragedy is that many of them suffer from
no serious disabilities, and might, but for our
ignorance, be checked on their downward course.


Isn’t this about as sharp a criticism of medical
inefficiency as Tilden has ever made?


This brings vividly to mind the statement, made only a
short time ago, by Dr. Cabot, of Boston, that he himself
was mistaken in his diagnoses about fifty per cent of the
time—that he had proved it by post-mortems. Such a
statement as this, coming from a man of his standing,
means much. To me it means that diagnosis is a
meaningless term; for, as used, it means discovering what
pathological effects—what changes—have been brought
about by an undiscovered cause. Diagnosis means, in a few
words, discovering effects which, when found, throw no
light whatever on cause.


Again I quote Mackenzie: “The knowledge of disease is
so incomplete that we do not yet even know what steps
should be taken to advance our knowledge.” This being
true, there is little excuse for laws to shut out or prevent
cults from practicing less harmful palliations. How many


reputable physicians have the honesty of Sir James
Mackenzie?


In spite of Mackenzie’s high and worthy ambitions, he
could not get away from the profession’s stereotyped
thinking. The early symptoms of disease he declared held
the secret of their cause, and he believed an intense study of
them would give the facts. But functional derangements are
of the same nature and from the same universal cause that
ends in all organic so-called diseases. All so-called diseases
are, from beginning to end, the same evolutionary process.


The study of pathology—the study of disease—has
engaged the best minds in the profession always, and it
surely appears that the last word must have been spoken on
the subject; but the great Englishman believed, as all
research workers believe, that a more intense and minute
study of the early symptoms of disease will reveal the
cause. There is, however, one great reason why it cannot,
and that is that all symptom-complexes—diseases—from
their initiation to their ending, are effects, and the most
intense study of any phase or stage of their progress will
not throw any light on the cause.


Cause is constant, ever present, and always the same.
Only effects, and the object on which cause acts, change,


and the change is most inconstant. To illustrate: A catarrh
of the stomach presents first irritation, then inflammation,
then ulceration, and finally induration and cancer. Not all
cases run true to form; only a small percentage evolve to
ulcer, and fewer still reach the cancer stage. More exit by
way of acute food-poisoning or acute indigestion than by
chronic diseases.


In the early stages of this evolution there are all kinds of
discomforts: more or less attacks of indigestion, frequent
attacks of gastritis—sick stomach and vomiting. No two
cases are alike. Nervous people suffer most, and some
present all kinds of nervous symptoms—insomnia,
headaches, etc. Women have painful menstruation and
hysterical symptoms—some are morose and others have
epilepsy. As the more chronic symptoms appear, those of
the lymphatic temperament do not suffer so much. As the
disease progresses, a few become pallid and develop
pernicious anemia, due to gastric or intestinal ulceration
and putrid protein infection; in others the first appearance
of ulcer is manifested by a severe hemorrhage; others have
a cachexia and a retention of food in the stomach, which is
vomited every two or three days, caused by a partial
closing of the pylorus. These are usually malignant cases.


To look upon any of these symptom-complexes as a
distinct disease, requiring a distinct treatment, is to fall into
the diagnostic maze that now bewilders the profession and
renders treatment chaotic.


It should be known to all discerning physicians that the
earliest stage of organic disease is purely functional,
evanescent, and never autogenerted so far as the affected
organ is concemed, but is invariably due to an extraneous
irritation (stimulation, if you please), augmented by
Toxemia. When the irritation is not continuous, and toxin is
eliminated as fast as developed, to the toleration point,
normal functioning is resumed between the intervals of
irritation and toxin excess.


For example: a simple coryza (running at the nose—cold
in the head), gastritis or colonitis. At first these colds,
catarrahs, or inflammations are periodic and functional;
but, as the exciting cause or causes—local irritation and
Toxemia—become more intense and continuous, the
mucous membranes of these organs take on organic
changes, which are given various names, such as irritation,
inflammation, ulceration, and cancer. The pathology
(organic change) may be studied until doomsday without
throwing any light on the cause; for from the first irritation
to the extreme ending—cachexia—which may be given the


blanket term of tuberculosis, syphilis, or cancer, the whole
pathologic panorama is one continuous evolution of
intensifying effects.


Germs and other so-called causes may be discovered in
the course of pathological development, but they are
accidental, coincidental, or at most auxiliary—or, to use the
vernacular of law, obiter dicta.


The proper way to study disease is to study health and
every influence favorable or not to its continuance. Disease
is perverted health. Any influence that lowers nerve-energy
becomes disease- producing. Disease cannot be its own
cause; neither can it be its own cure, and certainly not its
own prevention.


After years of wandering in the jungle of medical
diagnosis—the usual guesswork of cause and effect, and
the worse-than- guesswork of treatment, and becoming
more confounded all the time—I resolved either to quit the
profession or to find the cause of disease. To do this, it was
necessary to exile myself from doctors and medical
conventions; for I could not think for myself while listening
to the babblings of babeldom. I took the advice found in
Matt. 6:6. According to prevailing opinion, unless a doctor
spends much time in medical societies and in the society of


other doctors, takes postgraduate work, travels, etc., he
cannot keep abreast of advancement.


This opinion would be true if the sciences of medicine
were fitted to a truthful etiology (efficient cause) of disease.
But, since they are founded on no cause, or at most
speculative and spectacular causes, as unstable as the sands
of the sea, the doctor who cannot brook the bewilderment
of vacillation is compelled to hide away from the voices of
mistaken pedants and knowing blatherskites until
stabilized. By that time ostracism will have overtaken him,
and his fate, metaphorically speaking, will be that of the
son of Zacharias.


An honest search after truth too often, if not always, leads
to the rack, stake, cross, or the blessed privilege of
recanting; but the victim, by this time, decides as did the
divine Jew: “Not my will, but shine, be done;” or, as
Patrick Henry declared: “Give me liberty or give me
death!” The dying words of another great Irishman is the
wish, no doubt, of every lover of freedom and truth:


That no man write my epitaph; for, as no man
who knows my motives dares now vindicate them.
let not prejudice or ignorance asperse them. Let
them and me rest in peace, and my tomb remain


other times and other men can do justice to my
character. When my country takes her place among
the nations of the earth, then, and not until then, let
my epitaph be written. (Emmet).


The truth is larger than any man, and, until it is
established, the memory of its advocate is not important. In
the last analysis, is not the truth the only immortality? Man
is an incident. If he discovers a truth, it benefits all who
accept it. Truth too often must pray to be delivered from its
friends.


I must acknowledge that I have not been very courteous
to indifferent convention; and the truth I have discovered
has suffered thereby. It has always appeared to me that the
attention of fallacy-mongers cannot be attracted except by
the use of a club or shillalah; and possibly my style of
presenting my facts has caused too great a shock, and the
desired effect has been lost in the reaction.


That I have discovered the true cause of disease cannot be
successfully disputed. This being true, my earnestness in
presenting this great truth is justifiable.


When I think back over my life, and remember the
struggle I had with myself in supplanting my old beliefs
with the new—the thousands of times I have suspected my
own sanity—I then cannot be surprised at the opposition I
have met and am meeting.


My discovery of the truth that Toxemia is the cause of all
so-called diseases came about slowly, step by step, with
many dangerous skids.


At first I believed that enervation must be the general
cause of disease; then I decided that simple enervation is
not disease, that disease must be due to poison, and that
poison, to be the general cause of disease, must be
autogenerated; and if disease is due to an autogenerated
poison. what is the cause of that autogeneration? I dallied
long in endeavoring to trace disease back to poison taken
into the system, such as food eaten after putrescence had
begun, or from poisoning due to the development of
putrescence after ingestion. In time I decided that poisoning
per se is not disease. I observed where poisoning did not
kill; some cases reacted and were soon in full health, while
others remained in a state of semi-invalidism. I found the
same thing true of injuries and mental shock. It took a long
time to develop the thought that a poisoned or injured body,
when not overwhelmed by Toxemia. would speedily return


to the normal, and when it did not, there was a sick habit—
a derangement of some kind—that required some such
contingency to bring it within sense-perception.


To illustrate: An injury to a joint is often complicated
with rheumatism; the rheumatism previous to the injury
was potentially in the blood.


Just what change had taken place in the organism which,
under stress of injury or shock of any kind, would cause a
reaction with fever I could not understand until the
Toxemic Theory suggested itself to my mind, after which
the cause of disease unfolded before me in an easy and
natural manner. And now the theory is a proved fact.


After years of perplexing thought and “watchful waiting,”
I learned that all disease, of whatever nature, was of slow
development; that without systemic preparation even so-
called acute systemic diseases could not manifest.


In a few words: Without Toxemia there can be no
disease. I knew that the waste-product of metabolism was
toxic, and that the only reason why we were not poisoned
by it was because it was removed from the organism as fast
as produced. Then I decided that the toxin was retained in
the blood, when there was a checking of elimination. Then


the cause of the checking had to be determined. In time I
thought out the cause. I knew that, when we had a normal
nerve-energy, organic functioning was normal. Then came
the thought that enervation caused a checking of
elimination. Eureka! The cause of all so-called diseases is
found! Enervation checks elimination of the waste-products
of metabolism. Retention of metabolic toxin—the first and
only cause of disease!


Those who would be freed from the bondage of medical
superstition should study “Toxemia Explained.”


Toxemia Explained


NO ONE on the outside of the medical profession knows
so well as doctors themselves the great need of more
knowledge of what disease really is. Never in the history of
so-called medical science has there been so much research
work done as in the past decade; but with every new
discovery there follows very closely on its heels the stark
and stalking nemesis that chills the honest and earnest
researchers to the bone—the inevitable word Failure. Why
inevitable? Because, back in the beginning of man’s
reasoning on the subject of his discomforts, his pains, and
his sicknesses, he made the monstrous mistake that
something outside of himself—outside of his own
volition—had wished him harm. Man being a religious
animal, he early thought he had in some manner offended
one of his many deities. The history of how man evolved
the idea of disease being an entity is too long to do more
than allude to it in a book of this kind. Any of the old
mythologies may be referred to by those who are curious
enough to look the matter up. That man is still saturated
with centuries of mythological inheritance was brought out
vividly when the germ theory was introduced. It answered
the instinctive for demoniacal possession! At last man’s


search for the demon—the author of all his woes—had

been rewarded, and a satisfactory apology could be made to
his conscience for all his apparent shortcomings. However,
seventy years of vicarious atonement for man’s sins by the
demon germ are waning, and reason be praised if the
microbe is the last excuse that man can make for his sins of
omission and commission before the throne of his own
reason!


Medical science is founded on a false premise—namely,
that disease is caused by extraneous influences, and that
drugs are something that cures or palliates discomfort. The
term “medical” means pertaining to medicine or the
practice of medicine. Anything used in a remedial way
carries the idea of curing, healing, correcting, or affording
relief, and this doctoring is all done without any clear
understanding of cause.

The words “medical,” “medicine,” “disease,” and “cure”
have become concrete in our understanding, and shape our
thoughts and beliefs. And so arbitrary are these beliefs that
new schools and cults are forced to the conventional
understanding. They may declare that an impinged nerve is
the cause of any pathology. But they do not trouble
themselves to find why one impinged nerve creates a
pathology and another does not.


The psychologist does not trouble himself to explain why
worry in one subject causes disease and in another it does
not; why hope in one subject cures and in another it does
not; why negation does not always cure; why faith does not
always cure; begging the question by declaring that there
was not faith enough, etc. No fool is a bigger fool than the
fool who fools himself.


Why should not all new schools of thought be found
harking back to their mother-thought—I say, why not? So
long as the idea that disease is a reality, an individuality, an
entity, is firmly fixed in the mind, even those in research
work will be controlled and directed in their labors by the
conventional understanding. That is why every wonderful
discovery soon proves a mistaken belief.


There is no hope that medical science will ever be a
science; for the whole structure is built around the idea that
there is an object—disease—that can be cured when the
right drug—remedy, cure—is found.


It is my intention to portray the common, every-day
foibles of scientific medicine so that the people may see the
absurdities concerning disease and cure which they are and
have been hoodwinked into believing by the blare of


explanation of the cause of so-called diseases, hoping, by
contrasting the old and new, to start a few to thinking and
building new brain-cells, which in time may supersede the
old and conventional.


Until Toxemia was discovered and elaborated by myself
into a medical philosophy there was no real medical
philosophy. The cause and cure of disease is and has been a
medley of guesswork and speculation which has
confounded the best and most industrious medical minds in
every generation.


Today, as never before, the brightest minds in the
profession are delving into research work, endeavoring to
find the efficient cause of disease. But they are doomed to
disappointment; for they fail at their beginning. Why?
Because all the work that has ever been done in searching
for cause has been along the line of critical study and
examination of effects; and certainly reasoning minds
cannot believe that an effect can be its own cause. No one
believes in spontaneous generation. The remnant of this
belief was annihilated by Pasteur’s discovery of germs as
the cause of fermentation—a discovery so profound that it
created a frenzy in the medical world; and, as in every
epidemic of frenzy, mental poise was lost. The importance
of the germ as a primary or efficient cause of disease was


accepted nolens volens, willy nilly. Everyone was swept off
his feet. As in all sudden gushes in change of belief, it was
dangerous not to agree with the mob spirit; hence opposing
or conservative voices were suppressed or ostracized.


The germ frenzy was fierce for two or three decades; but
now it is a thing of the past and will soon be, if not now, a
dead letter.


Cause of disease is being looked for everywhere, and no
less a personage than the late Sir James Mackenzie, in
“Reports of the St. Andrews Institute for Clinical
Research,” Volume I, declared: “The knowledge of disease
is so incomplete that we do not yet even know what steps
should be taken to advance our knowledge.” At another
time he wrote: “Disease is made manifest to us only by the
symptoms which it produces; the first object in the
examination of a patient is the detection of symptoms, and
therefore the symptoms of disease form one of the main
objects of our study.”


THE VALUE OF SYMPTOMATOLOGY


Sir James, when living, was probably the greatest
clinician of the English-speaking world; yet he had not


outlived the medical superstition that disease is a positive
entity, and that the way to find disease is to trace symptoms
to their source. But if a symptom is traced to its source,
what of it? A pain is traced to its source, and we find that it
comes from the head. The head does not cause the pain.
Then we find that there are symptoms of hyperemia—too
much blood in the head. The pressure from too much blood
in the head causes the pain. Then pressure must be the
disease? No. Then too much blood is the disease—
hyperemia? Certainly; too much blood in the head was a
cause. What is it that causes congestion? We find that pain
is a symptom. Pressure causes pain; it, too, is a symptom.
Too much blood in the head causes pressure; it also is a
symptom. Pain, pressure, hyperemia are, all three,
symptoms. In time the walls of the blood-vessels weaken,
and the pressure ruptures one of the vessels. Hemorrhage
into the brain causes death from apoplexy. Is the ruptured
blood-vessel the disease? No. Is hemorrhage into the brain
the disease? No; it is a symptom. Is death from hemorrhage
the disease?


If the hemorrhage is not severe enough to cause death,
but does produce some form of paralysis—and there can be
many kinds—is paralysis a disease? Haven’t we been
traveling along a chain of symptoms from headache to
paralysis? We have not found anything to which all these


symptoms point as disease; and, according to the
requirements of Sir James Mackenzie, disease is made
manifest to us only by symptoms. Here we have a chain of
symptoms beginning with pain, ending in hemorrhage and
death or paralysis, without giving us any indication
whatever of cause as understood. Any other chain, namely,
stomach symptoms, ending in pyloric cancer, will not give
any more indication of disease at the various stages than the
foregoing illustration.


The first symptom we have of any chain of symptoms is
discomfort or pain. In any stomach derangement we have
pain, more or less aggravated by food. Catarrh follows, or
more often precedes, it—or what we call inflammation or
gastritis. Gastritis continues, with a thickening of the
mucous membrane. A time comes when there is ulceration.
This will be called a disease, and is recognized as ulcer of
the stomach; but it is only a continuation of the primary
symptom of catarrh and pain. The ulcer is removed, but the
symptom of inflammation and pain continues, and other
ulcers will follow. This state eventually merges into
induration or hardening of the pyloric orifice of the
stomach. When this develops, there is more or less
obstruction to the outlet causing occasional vomiting, and,
on thorough examination, cancer is found.


If we analyze the symptoms from the first pain and
catarrh in the stomach, we shall kind the chain of
symptoms running along. The first symptom to be noticed
is pain. On examination, we find a catarrhal condition of
the stomach; and this catarrhal condition is not a disease—
it is a symptom. Catarrhal inflammation continues, with the
thickening of the mucous membrane, which finally ends in
ulceration. Ulceration is not the disease; it is only a
continuation of the inflammatory symptom. If the ulcer is
removed, it does not remove the disease; it only removes a
symptom. These symptoms continue until there is a
thickening and induration of the pyloris, which is called
cancer. And yet we have not discovered anything but
symptoms from beginning to end.


By removing the cancer, the question of what the disease
is has not been answered. Cancer being the end-symptom,
it cannot be the cause of the first symptom.


Any other so-called disease can be worked out in the
same way. Pain and catarrh are the first symptoms, as a
rule, that call a physician’s or a patient’s attention to
anything being wrong; and pain and catarrh are not the
disease. When the cause of the pain is found, it too will be
found a symptom and not a disease. And this will be true to
the end.


It is no wonder that diagnosticians become perplexed in
their search after disease, because they have confounded
symptoms and disease. The fact of the matter is, it is
impossible to put the finger on any ending of a chain of
symptoms and say: “This is the disease.” In the beginning
of this analysis we showed that headache, or pain in the
head, is not a disease; and when we had finished we found
that hemorrhage or apoplexy is not a disease—it is only a
continuation of the primary symptoms.


“Disease is made manifest to us only by symptoms which
it produces.” This statement tacitly infers that there are
diseases and symptoms, and that through symptoms we
may find disease. When we undertake to trace symptoms to
disease, we are in the dilemma of a mountain-climber who
on reaching the top of one mountain, finds other peaks, and
higher ones, farther on and on.


That Mackenzie had been baffled in his search for fixed
disease is indicated in the following, which I quote from
the reports mentioned before:


Many diseases are considered to be of a
dangerous nature, and many attempts are made to
combat the danger, with, however, no perception of
its nature. This is particularly the case with


epidemic diseases, such as measles, influenza,
scarlet fever, and diphtheria. As a consequence,
proposals have at different times been put forward
to treat individuals who suffer these diseases upon
some general plan, without consideration of the
peculiarities of the individual case—and thus we
get that rule-of-thumb treatment which is shown in
the indiscriminate use of a serum or vaccine.


During influenza epidemics there is always a cry
for a universal method of treatment, and attempts
are made to meet this cry in the shape of so-called
specifics and vaccines.


When a great authority declares that dangerous diseases
are combated without any perception of their nature—and
that, too, in spite of the germ theory—it should be obvious
to thinking minds that the germ theory has been weighed
and found wanting. Yet, when something must be done,
and nothing better has been discovery, “serums and
vaccines may be used indiscriminately.”


That the “rule of thumb” is the rule governing all thinking
conceming symptoms, diseases, their cause and treatment,
is so obvious that anyone possessing a reasoning mind, not
camouflaged by scientific buncombe, should read as he
runs.


Medicine rests on a sound scientific foundation.
Anatomy, physiology, biology, chemistry, and all collateral
sciences that have a bearing on the science of man, are
advanced to great perfection. But the so-called sciences of
symptomatology, disease, diagnosis, etiology, and the
treatment of disease go back to superstition for their
foundation. We see the incongruity of jumbling real science
with delusion and superstition. Disease is believed to be an
entity; and this idea is necessarily followed by another as
absurd—namely, cure. Around these two old assumptions
has grown an infinite literature that confounds its builders.


TRUTH AS FAMOUS MEN SEE IT


When a man’s knowledge is not in order, the more of it he has, the
greater will be his confusion— (Herbert Spencer.)


Confusion worse confounded is the only explanation that
can be given of the theory and practice of medicine. Of
course, it is hoary with age, and is one of the learned
professions. With much just pride can the rank and file
point to its aristocracy—its long list of famous dead as well
as living physicians? What has made most of them famous?
The same that has made others famous in and out of the
professions—namely, personal worth and education.


Franklin was not a doctor; yet he was as great as any
doctor, and could use his gray matter in advising the sick as
well as those not sick. He appeared to have a sense-
perception for truth; and I would say that his discrimination
is the leading, if not the distinguishing, trait that has

divided, and always will divide, the really great from the
mediocre majority. They are the leaven that leaveneth the
whole herd of humanity—the quality of character that
could not be found in all Sodom and Gomorrah.


There was another discriminating mind in the eighteenth
century—another Benjamin, who also was a signer of the
Declaration of Independence—Benjamin Rush, a
physician, a luminary that brought distinction to medical
science. He was larger than his profession. He left seeds of
thought which, if acted upon by the profession, would have
organized medical thought and prevented the present-day
confusion. He left on record such golden nuggets as:


Much mischief has been done by the nosological
arrangement of diseases... . Disease is as mucha
unit as fever... . Its different seats and degrees
should no more be multiplied into different
diseases than the numerous and different effects of
heat and light upon our globe should be multiplied
into a plurality of suns.


The whole materia medica is infected with the
baneful consequences of the nomenclature of
disease; for every article in it is pointed only
against their names. ... By the rejection of the
artificial arrangement of diseases, a revolution
must follow in medicine. ... The road to
knowledge in medicine by this means will likewise
be shortened; so that a young man will be able to
qualify himself to practice physic at a much less
expense of time and labor than formerly, as a child
would learn to read and write by the help of the
Roman alphabet, instead of Chinese characters.


Science has much to deplore from the
multiplication of diseases. It is as repugnant to
truth in medicine as polytheism is to truth in
religion. The physician who considers every
different affection of the different parts of the
same system as distinct diseases, when they arise
from one cause, resembles the Indian or African
savage who considers water, dew, ice, frost, and
snow as distinct essences; while the physician who
considers the morbid affections of every past of the
body, however divers)fied they may be in their
form or degrees, as derived from one cause,
resembles the philosopher who considers dew, ice,
frost, and snow as different modifications of water,
and as derived simply from the absence of heat.


Humanity has likewise much to deplore from this
paganism in medicine. The sword will probably be
sheathed forever, as an instrument of death, before
physicians will cease to add to the mortality of
mankind by prescribing for the names of diseases.


There is but one remote cause of disease....
These remarks are of extensive application, and, if
duly attended to, would deliver us from a mass of
error which has been accumulating for ages in
medicine; I mean the nomenclature of diseases from
their remote causes. It is the most offensive and
injurious part of the rubbish of our science.


The physician who can cure one disease by a
knowledge of its principles may by the same means
cure all the diseases of the human body; for their
causes are the same.


There is the same difference between the
diseases as limited by genera and species, and of
principles, that there is between the knowledge we
obtain of the nature and extent of the sky, by
viewing a few feet of it from the bottom of a well,
and viewing from the top of a mountain the whole
canopy of heaven.


I would as soon believe that ratafia was intended
by the Author of Nature to be the only drink of


man, instead of water, as believe that the
knowledge of what relates to the health and lives of
a whole city, or nation, should be confined to one,
and that a small or a privileged, order of men.


From a short review of these facts, reason and
humanity awake from their long repose in
medicine, and unite in proclaiming that it is time to
take the cure of pestilential epidemics out of the
hands of physicians, and to place it in the hands of
the people.


Dissections daily convince us of our ignorance of
the seats of disease, and cause us to blush at our
prescriptions.... What mischief have we done under
the belief of false facts, if I may be allowed the
expression, and false theories! We have assisted in
multiplying diseases. We have done more—we have
increased their mortality.


I shall not pause to beg pardon of the faculty for
acknowledging, in this public manner, the
weaknesses of our profession. I am pursuing Truth,
and while I can keep my eye fixed upon my guide, I
am indifferent whither I am led, provided she is my
leader.


Oliver W. Holmes, M. D., was a man who gave dignity
and respectability to the profession. He was a literary man,
and from his beginning to his end, was always larger than


his profession. He once said: “I firmly believe that, if the
whole materia medica could be sunk to the bottom of the
sea, it would be all the better for mankind and all the worse
for the fishes.” “Breakfast-Table Series” will be read by the
intelligent people of the future, who will know nothing of
Holmes’ fight for women against the dirty hands of herd-
doctors and their consequences—puerperal fever.


“AEquanimitas” will keep Osler in the minds of
intelligent people “Osler’s Practice of Medicine” will be
found only in the shops of bibliomaniacs. Such men as
Osler keep the dead weight of mediocre medicine from
sinking to oblivion by embellishing medical fallacies with
their superb personalities and their literary polish.


Throughout all the ages the finest minds have sensed the
truth concerning the cause of disease, and this has bulked
large against medical insanities and inanities.


A very striking picture of the medical herd was made by
“Anonymous” in his essay on “Medicine” in “Civilization
in the United States.”


It has been remarked above that one of the chief
causes of the unscientific nature of medicine and
the antiscientific character of doctors lies in their


inflate credulity and inability to think
independently. This contention is supported by the
report on the intelligence of physicians recently
published by the National Research Council. They
are found by more or less trustworthy psychologic
tests to be lowest in intelligence of all the
professional men, excepting only dentists and
horse-doctors. Dentists and horse-doctors are ten
per cent less intelligent. But since the quantitative
methods employed certainly carry an experimental
error of ten per cent or even higher, it is not
certain that the members of the two more humble
professions have not equal or even greater
intellectual ability. It is significant that engineers
head the list in intelligence. In fact, they are rated
sixty per cent higher than doctors.


This wide disparity leads to a temptation to
interesting psychological probings. Is not the
lamentable lack of intelligence of the doctor due to
lack of necessity for rigid intellectual discipline?
Many conditions conspire to make him an
intellectual cheat. Fortunately for us, most diseases
are self-limiting. But it is natural for the physician
to turn this dispensation of nature to his advantage
and to intimate that he has cured John Smith, when
actually nature has done the trick. On the contrary,
should Smith die, the good doctor can assume a
pious expression and suggest that, despite his own
incredible skill and tremendous effort, it was God’s
(or nature’s) will that John should pass beyond.


Now, the engineer is open to no such temptation.
He builds a bridge or erects a building, and disaster
is sure to follow any misstep in calculation or fault
in construction. Should such a calamity occur, he is
presently discredited and disappears from view.
Thus he is held up to a high mark of intellectual
rigor and discipline that is utterly unknown in the
world the doctor inhabits.


The critic appears to think that “one of the chief causes of
the anti-scientific character of doctors lies in their innate
credulity and inability to think independently.” I presume
he means that the doctors cannot think independently; for if
medicine, scientific or unscientific, could think at all, it
might have thought itself out of its present-day muddle.


The only thing that saves all physicians from the above
indictment is that they are not examined on the cause and
treatment of disease. If average physicians pass low on
“trustworthy psychological tests,” it does not speak very
well for the higher education which put so many medical
schools out of business a few years ago. But these
psychological tests may be fitted to educational standards
which are assembled with intelligence left out. Intelligence,
like the cause of disease, is a force in nature that can be
used under the proper environments; but it cannot be


monopolized to the exclusion of all mankind. Gladstone in
youth was passed upon by the psychological test of his
teacher, and pronounced incorrigible; yet at eighty-six he
was wielding an ax and translating Virgil.


SCIENTIFIC TESTS


People should not take too seriously to heart verdicts
resting on scientific tests, where a very large part of the
integral is scientific assumption and presumption. The New
York Life Insurance Company turned me down more than


fifty years ago.


“Anonymous,” whoever he is, writes well, and as that of
an iconoclast, his style is quite fetching. But, to save his
bacon, it was well that he criticized from ambush; for he
would make an excellent target. From my point of view, I
find him as vulnerable as any Standard A type of
professional men.


He shows his medical length and breadth when he says:
“Of all the dreadful afflictions that plague us, a few may be
cured or ameliorated by the administration of remedies.”
That was said by medical men now one and two hundred


years dead, and with no more aplomb than that of the
doctors of today in the literary class of our “Anonymous.”


“Dreadful afflictions” do not “plague us.” If we are
plagued by disease, it is of our own building; and all five
need to do to get back to comfort and health is to quit
building disease; then our subconscious self gets busy
cleaning house.


“Anonymous” could not have made a statement that
would have been more perfectly one hundred per cent
fallacy. He says: “A few may be cured.” That is a mild
statement coming from one of the ambushed Caesars of
scientific medicine. I presume he means that there is a
contingent possibility that a few can be cured. This is false;
for “afflictions” or disease cannot be cured. Nature—our
subconsciousness—has a full monopoly on the power to
cure. Healing is nature’s prerogative, and she cannot, if she
would, delegate it to doctors or to the academies of medical
science.


What a glorious legacy, vouchsafed by the powers that
be! What a sad plight humanity would be in if medical
commercialism had a monopoly on healing or curing the
sick! It does very well, however, as it is vending its
camouflage cures of all kinds. But when mankind awakens


to a full realization of the truth that for all past time it has
been buying a pretense of power of which it alone
possesses a monopoly, old hoary-headed Aesculapius will
be unfrocked and thrown out of business—staff, snake, and
all.


“Anonymous,” fearing that the statements, “A few may
be cured,” was too strong, added the modifying phrase “or
ameliorated;” which, in medical parlance, means palliated,
relieved, etc. This in reality is the whole truth concerning
so-called remedies or cures. And when the truth is known
that curing, or the power to throw off disease and get well
is wholly within the subconscious and is personal, we will
know that curing and palliating by the administration of
remedies—drugs, serums, vaccines, surgery, feeding to
keep up the strength, etc_—are superfluous, meddlesome,
and on the order of throwing a monkey-wrench into the
machinery.


After criticizing “Anonymous” for what we know,
inferentially, that he stands for, we will quote the remainder
of what he says concerning the treatment of the “dreadful
afflictions that plague us.” He further declares:


And an equally small number improved or were
abolished by surgical interference. But, in spite of


the relatively few diseases to which surgery is
beneficial, the number of surgeons that flourished
in the land is enormous. The fundamental
discoveries of Pasteur, and their brilliant
application by Lister, were quickly seized upon in
America. The names of Bull, Halstead, Murphy, the
brothers Mayo, Cushing, and Finney are to be
ranked with those of the best surgeons of any
nation. In fact, we may be said to lead the world—
to use an apt Americanism—in the production of
surgeons [and surgical plants], just as we do in that
of automobiles, baby carriages, and antique
furniture.


“A few diseases may be cured or ameliorated.” I say,
never cured; and amelioration is a form of building disease.


A delicate woman became my patient, after suffering
from megrim for twenty-two years and taking more or less
palliatives from twenty-two different doctors—a few
widely known, one a neurologist of more than national
fame; the majority of whom told her that there was no cure,
but that, when she changed life, the headaches would cease.
This was a “bum” guess; for she declared that her suffering
had been greater the past two years, since her menstruation
has ceased, than ever before. Just how much the
psychological suggestion, made by fifteen or twenty
doctors, that she would not get well for a given time, had to


do with prolonging her headaches, no one can tell. Drug
palliation is always inclined to enervate and build Toxemia.
This woman had been relieved by hypodermics of
morphine—a fiendish treatment. There should be a law
against such malpractice. But the majority never handicap
themselves with prohibitory laws.


My prescription was: No more smoking in the home (the
husband being an inveterate smoker); stay in bed; fast, take
a tub bath and an enema every night until a paroxysm of
headache had been missed.


The paroxysms had been coming weekly, beginning on
Tuesday and leaving her prostrate until Friday. Orders were
given for a hot bath to be given to full relief, even if it
required an hour. The patient had only one paroxysm after
becoming my patient, and that required three-quarters of an
hour in a hot bath to relieve. The husband became very
enthusiastic over the fact that his wife had been of her pain
without drugs for the first time in twentytwo years. My
comment on his outburst of rejoicing was: “Your smoking
and the doctor’s drugging were responsible for her
unnecessary suffering during nearly a quarter of a century.”


Drugging pain of any kind checks elimination and
prevents the human organism from cleaning house. In this


case of megrim, every time an eliminating crisis developed’
the doctor slammed the doors of egress shut and barred
them with morphine. My prescription reversed the order; it
opened all the doors, with the result that she never had
another headache after the one that the hot bath relieved. Of
course, I tinkered with her eating and other habits
afterward. People are never sick who have no bad habits.


About the same time I advised another woman who had
suffered weekly from paroxysms of megrim for sixteen
years. Like the first case, she had been medicated by many
doctors, and told she need not look for a cure until after the
change of life. The woman, too, had one paroxysm after
giving up drug palliation and making a few changes in her
daily habits.


There were two patients with a “dreadful affliction,”
which was kept “dreadful” by a senseless and criminal
medication—and that, too, by physicians holding degrees
from class A colleges.


I refer to these two cases to illustrate what “Anonymous”
means by saying: “Few diseases may be cured or
ameliorated.” Megrim is not cured; and if doping, as these
two cases were doped, is ameliorating, some other name
should be used in designating the procedure.


CRISES


According to the Toxin Philosophy, every so-called
disease is a crisis of Toxemia; which means that toxin has
accumulated in the blood above the toleration-point, and
the crisis, the so-called disease—call it cold, “flu,”
pneumonia, headache, or typhoid fever—is a vicarious
elimination. Nature is endeavoring to rid the body of toxin.
Any treatment that obstructs this effort at elimination
baffles nature in her effort at self-curing.


Drugs, feeding, fear, and keeping at work prevent
elimination. A cold is driven into chronic catarrh; “flu”
may be forced to take on an infected state; pneumonia may
end fatally if secretions are checked by drugs; we already
know what becomes of headache; typhoid will be forced
into a septic state and greatly prolonged, if the patient is not
killed.


The above illustrates how “a few cases may be cured or
ameliorated.” But the story is different when the attending
physician knows that every so-called disease is a complex
of symptoms signifying a crisis of Toxemia—nature’s
house-cleaning. And she—nature—can succeed admirably
if not interfered with by venders of poison, who are
endeavoring to destroy an imaginary entity lurking


somewhere in the system, which is mightily increased and
intensified by the venders’ cures or amelioratives.


It is a real pleasure for the doctor who knows that he
cannot cure anything, to watch nature throw off all these
symptoms by elimination, if he is willing to do a little
“watchful waiting” and “keep hands off.” The patient will
he comfortable most of the time, and will say, when asked
how he is: “T feel all right; I am comfortable.” Patients
never answer in that way when drugged and fed. Yes, when
nature is not hindered by officious professional meddling,
sick people can truthfully say, when well over a crisis of
house- cleaning: “I had a very comfortable sickness.”
Nature is not revengeful. Great suffering, chronic and fatal
maladies, are built by the incorrigibleness of patients, and
the well-meaning but belligerent efforts of the doctors who
fight the imaginary foe without ceasing. The people are so
saturated with the idea that disease must he fought to a
finish that they are not satisfied with conservative
treatment. Something must be done, even if they pay for it
with their lives, as tens of thousands do every year. This
willingness to die on the altar of medical superstition is one
very great reason why no real improvement is made in
fundamental medical science. When the people demand
education—not medication, vaccination, and
immunization—they will get it.


Is there nothing for a doctor to do? Yes, of course! He
should enter the sick-room with a smile and a cheerful
word, free from odors, and neat and clean; be natural, and
free from affectations. He should not tell at how many
confinements he officiated the night before, or how many
thousands he has had in the past ten years. Professional
lobbying is not appropriate in the sickroom. Patients should
have confidence in their doctor; and if he does a lot of
medico- political lying, the patient will know it, and it
sloughs confidence.


He should advise an enema daily—a stomach-wash if it is
needed; something warm to the feet; perfect quiet; no food,
liquid or solid, and positively no drugs, but all the water
desired; a warm bath at night; a hot bath when necessary
for pain, and as often as necessary to secure comfort. Rest,
warmth, fresh air, and quiet are curative. Then the
physician should educate his patient into proper living
habits, so as to avoid future crises of Toxemia.


When this regime is carried out, and Doctor Nature is
allowed full control, the pessimistic statement of
“Anonymous” that “a few diseases may be cured or
ameliorated” can be changed to read: All acute so-called
diseases can be cured; and the patient will stay cured if he
will practice self-control concerning the enervating habits


that brought on his crises of Toxemia. Where this is carried
out faithfully, so-called chronic diseases will never be built.


ALL DISEASES ONCE INNOCENT


Cancer, tuberculosis, Bright’s disease, and all chronic
diseases were once innocent colds “ameliorated,” and
which returned and were “ameliorated” again and again;
each time accompanied by a greater constitutional
enervation, and a greater constitutional toleration for toxin-
poisoning, requiring a greater requisition of mucous
membrane through which to eliminate the toxin.


Research is being carried on vigorously in an attempt to
find the cause of disease; the conception of disease being
that it is individual. Here is where investigators meet their
Waterloo. All the so-called diseases are increasing
symptom complexes due to repeated crises of Toxemia.
They have no independent existence. As soon as Toxemia
is controlled, they disappear, unless an organ has been
forced by innumerable crises to degenerate. Even organic
change, when the organ is not destroyed, will be overcome
by correcting the life and getting rid of the cause—crises of
Toxemia.


To find the cause of cancer, start with colds and catarrh,
and watch the pathology as it travels from irritation,
catarrh, inflammation, induration, ulceration to cancer.


As well try to find the cause of man by ignoring his
conception, embryonic life, childhood, manhood, etc.


All symptoms of all so-called diseases have one origin.
All diseases are one. Unity in all things is nature’s plan.
Polytheism is gone, and everything pertaining to it and
coming out of it must go.


HERD-BELIEFS


Few realize man’s possibilities if his handicaps are
removed—handicaps which are old beliefs and herd-
instincts.


The Toxemic Philosophy is founded on the truth that
there is no such thing as cure. In this it differs from all the
so-called curing systems. Every pretense or promise of
cure, in all lines of therapeutics, is false. This cannot be
grasped by all minds until time for thinking has allowed the
idea to soak in. Convention and superstition have the floor,
and they are unwilling to sit down and listen to the other


side. Many learn slowly, others not at all, and still others
are put to sleep mentally by truth.


There are ox-cart minds in every generation. The recent
episode at Dayton, Tennessee, should cure the enthusiasm
of those who think the world has outgrown superstition. I
have bucked up against medical superstitions of all kinds
all my life, and I know that clear-thinking minds are as
scarce as hens’ teeth. Many compliment me on my clear
reasoning on medical subjects; but the moment I cross the
border-line into their ethical, moral and theological
preserves, they remind me of my trespassing in no
uncertain terms. Even my own profession is quick to ink
the waters of my reasoning by declaring that I am an
infidelt—a word that fills the elect with abhorrence. Who is
an infidel? One who rejects a senseless convention. Didn’t
Christ repudiate the Jehovic cult?


The average mind prefers the old interpretation of to the
“new-fangled” definitions. Until the world agrees on one
dictionary, one Bible, and one God, the tempest in the
teapot of misunderstanding will continue to ebullate,
sending the atomized fundamentalists heavenward and the
anatomized modernists hellward.


Of course, God made man. He made everything. But why
not find out just how He made him? Surely there is as much
“glory to God” in discovering just how He did it as in
accepting an infantile interpretation which up to date has
got us nowhere. When we know how man is made, we shall
understand the laws of his being; and it will not be
necessary for him to die of apoplexy, stone in the gall-
bladder or kidney, hardening of the arteries, or any other
so-called disease caused by breaking the laws of his body
and mind.


If we do our duty to our children, shall we teach them the
laws of their being and how to respect them, or shall we go
on in the same old way, and, when they get sick from
breaking the laws of their being and ruin their health, call a
surgeon who will cut out God’s mistakes? Think it over; or,
if you’re too fanatical or bigoted to think, pay a surgeon to
cut out the effects of wrong living, and continue the cause.


LET US REASON TOGETHER!


Let us do a little homely reasoning. We are inclined to be
awed by the word “infinite.” The infinite is limitless to our
limited comprehension—t is a relative term and
ambiguous; but, as we grow in experience, our once limited


comprehensions take on extended dimensions. Each
person’s infinite is personal and varies from every other
person’s comprehension. We cannot think in terms of the
limitless, and we should not try; for, if we know the
analysis of an atom of salt, we know the analysis of the
infinite amount there is in the world. This is true of all
elements. If we know the analysis of a pound of butter, we
know the analysis of the infinite amount contained in the
world. If we know all about a man, we know all about all
men. If we know what finite love is, we know that infinite
love is of the same character.


We should keep our feet on the ground—stay on earth—
and be satisfied that all worlds are like our world.
HOW TO MEASURE THE INFINITE


We know all by an intensive study of a part. If we know
all about one disease, we know all about all diseases.


We shall tell the reader all about Toxemia, and then he
should know all about all diseases; for Toxemia is the basic
cause of all diseases.


Instead of beginning at the top of any subject, we should


begin at the bottom and work up. The usual way for our
finite minds is to accept the infinite on faith; then to us the
comprehensible does not agree with our preconception, our
faith is shocked, our house of belief is divided against

itself, and we fall. This is the parting of the ways; and we
must reconcile our faith and knowledge by transferring our
faith to the belief that the road to all knowledge is by way

of the comprehensible. We must either do this or live in
doubt concerning the knowable, and accept the unknowable
on faith.


Every truth squares itself with every other truth; every
department of science and reason blends into a unit. The
laws of life are those of the cosmos; the laws of the
universe are the laws of God. The road to an understanding
of God is from rock to man, and through man to God.
Every step must be a block of truth, or God, the goal, will
be sidestepped. Behold the head-on collision of the
Christian world and the wholesale massacre that took place
during the World War—all due to undigested truth. The
world is full of truth; but mental indigestion, due to wrong
food combinations, is universal.


Many think they know what I mean when I use the word


“Toxemia,” having referred to the dictionary for its
definition.


TOXEMIA, THE BASAL CAUSE
OF ALL SO-CALLED DISEASES


Toxin Poisoning—Toxin: Any of a class of poisonous
compounds of animal, bacterial, and vegetable origin—any
poisonous ptomaine. (Standard Dictionary.)


There are so many ways for the blood to become
poisoned that, unless what I mean by “Toxemia” is
thoroughly comprehended, there must be a confused
understanding. This explanation is made necessary because
even professional men have said to me: “Oh, yes, I believe
in the poisoning resulting froin retained excretions
(constipation) and ptomaine (food) poisoning.”


As stated before, a ptomaine poisoning resulting from the
ingestion of food that has taken on a state of putrescence, or
a poisoning resulting from this change taking place in food
after it has been eaten, and which is generally called
autotoxemia, is not an autogenerated poisoning. Both of
these poisons are generated on the outside of the body, and
must be absorbed before the blood can be poisoned. Food
or poison in the intestines is still on the outside of the body.
A suppurating wound, ulcer, or chancre is on the outside of
the body, and if it causes septic (blood) poisoning, it will be
because the waste-products are not allowed to drain—to


escape. The discharge being obstructed, it becomes septic,
and its forced absorption poisons the blood. Even vaccinia
fails to produce septic poisoning, because its poison is
discharged on the surface—on the outside of the body.
Occasionally the waste-products are forced to enter the
blood because of faulty dressings; then septic poisoning,
with death, follows.


THE DEADLY GERM


It should not be forgotten that unobstructed free drainage
from wounds, ulcers, canals, ducts, keep them aseptic (non-
poisonous). The deadly germ on the hands, lips, drinking-
cups, hanging-straps of street cars—in fact, found
anywhere and everywhere—is not deadly until it gets
mixed up with man’s deadly dirty, filthy physical and
mental habits. There are people who cannot be taught
cleanliness; they either scrub their bodies raw or neglect
them overtime. It is an art to wear clothes and maintain a
state of cleanliness conducive to health. Venereal and all
skin diseases, including the eruptive fevers, are fostered by
clothes. There is something more than prejudice,
fanaticism, and partisanship in my reiterated allusions to
the congenerie relationship of syphilis, vaccination, and
smallpox. The kinship would have been settled long ago if


vaccine and vaccinia were not commercialized. Will those
with millions invested, and turning out large dividends,
willingly be convinced that they are engaged in the
wholesale syphilization of the people? It is not in keeping
with our commercialized religion.


The deadly germ must be mixed with retained, pent-up
waste-products before it becomes metamorphosed into its
deadly toxic state. The dog or other animal licks it out of
his wound. When the “deadly germ” is osculated into the
mouth, and from there into the stomach, it is digested. The
normal secretions of the body, on the outside as well as on
the inside of the body, are more than enough to get away
with all the “deadly germs” allotted to each person.


Normal persons are deadly to all germs and parasites
peculiar to the human habitat.


Normal people have no need of heaven or hell; these are
conjurations of ignorance and filth on the search for
artificial immunization. Truth immunizes the germ fallacy.

Cures and immunization are the products of a civilization
that does not civilize. Creedal religion is a cure and an
immunization for those who would be good if evil did not
betide them.


Self-control and a knowledge of the limitations of our
privileges bring to us the best in life; then, if we are
contented to live one world at a time, we shall have the best
preparation for the tomorrows (future) as they come. If we
live well today—live for health of mind and body today—
we need not worry about the germs that come tomorrow.


Those who preach fear of germs today are the mental
offspring of those who have preached fear of God, devil,
hell, and heaven in the past. They do not know that the fear
which they inculcate is more to be dreaded than the object
of their warning. Fear does a thousand times more harm
than any other one cause of Toxemia.


Nature goes her limit in the prevention or absorption of
any and all poisons. The indurated wall built at the base of
ulceration is a conservative measure—it is to prevent
absorption. In the matter of prevention, nature sometimes
goes too far, and builds tumors and indurations so dense as
to obstruct the circulation; then degeneration takes place,
with slow absorption of the septic matter. This poisoning
takes place very insidiously. It is called cachexia, and the
names given to this pathology are syphilis or cancer; or, if
of the lungs, it is called tuberculosis.


This may be thought a very great digression from the
subject of Toxemia; but, as all pathological roads lead to
Rome—the unity of all diseases—an apology is not
necessary.


THE MEDICAL WORLD IS LOOKING FOR CURES


The medical world has been looking for a remedy to cure
disease, notwithstanding the obvious fact that nature needs
no remedy—she needs only an opportunity to exercise her
own prerogative of self-healing.


A few years ago a sick doctor offered dollars for a cure
for cancer. If he had known the cause of disease, instead of
being scientifically educated, he would not have died
believing in the possibility of a cure, after nature had
passed her eternal fiat of unfitness in his case. Cancer is the
culmination of years of abuse of nutrition, and years of
Toxemia from faulty elimination. Forcing the bowels to
move is an old and conventional method of so-called
elimination which gets rid of the accumulation in the
bowels, causing an extra amount of water to be thrown out
by the kidneys and bowels; but this forcing measure adds to
enervation by its overstimulation, and further inhibits
elimination proper—elimination of waste- products in the


blood, the source of all disease- producing toxins. The most
powerful eliminant is a fast. In other words, give nature
rest, and she needs no so-called cures. Rest means: Stay in
bed, poise mind and body, and fast. Nature then works
without handicaps, unless fear is created by all the old fear-
mongers, professional and lay, sending to the patient the
warning: “It is dangerous to fast; you may never live
through it.” These wiseacres do not know that there is a
vast difference between fasting and starving.


Here is a hint for those kill-joys who are afraid to allow
their patients to fast: You know, or think you do, that
people who are forced to stay in bed from injury never do
well, and this is especially true of old people. Why?
Because they are overfed.


GERMS AS A CAUSE OF DISEASE


Germs as a cause of disease is a dying fallacy. The
bacteriological deadmarch is on, and those with their ears
to the ground can hear it. Intuition is forcing the active
medical minds to fortify against the coming revulsion; they
are buckling on the armor of endocrinology.
Endocrinology, focal infection, autogenous and synthetic
remedies, vaccine and serum immunization, are some of the


high points in the science of medicine today; but there is a
lack of fundamental unity to the system; and nature abhors
chaos as she does a vacuum.


Toxemia accepts the germ (organized ferment) as it does
the enzyme (unorganized ferment). Both are necessary to
health.


My theories have received but little attention except from
plagiarists. A few, a very few, physicians know what I
stand for. Those few, however, are enthusiastic, and have
proved to their own satisfaction that the theory has a
universal application. Many attempt to work Toxemia
along with some little two-by-four pet curing system—it
means petting a little personal pride; but it will not work.
Toxemia is big enough for the best in any man.


What more can be asked by any doctor than a philosophy
of cause that gives a perfect understanding of the cause of
all so-called diseases? To know cause supplies even the
layman with a dependable cure and an immunization that
immunizes rationally. Dependable knowledge is man’s
salvation; and when it can be had with as little effort as that
required for a thorough understanding of the Philosophy of
Toxemia there is little excuse for any man, lay or
professional, to hazard ignorance of it.


Toxin—the designating poison in Toxemia—is a product
of metabolism. It is a constant, being constantly generated;
and when the nerve-energy is normal, it is as constantly
eliminated as fast as produced.


The body is strong or weak, as the case may be,
depending entirely on whether the nerve-energy is strong or
weak. And it should be remembered that the functions of
the body are carried on well or badly according to the
amount of energy generated.


IMPORTANCE OF NERVE-ENERGY


Without nerve-energy the functions of the various organs
of the body cannot be carried on. Secretions are necessary
for preparing the building-up material to take the place of
worn-out tissue. The worn-out tissue must be rrmoved—
eliminated—from the blood as fast as it is formed, or it
accumulates, and, as it is toxic, the system will be
poisoned. This becomes a source of enervation.


Elimination of the waste- products of tissue-building is
just as necessary as the building-up process. As these two
important functions depend on each other, and as both


depend on the proper amount of nerve-energy to do their
work well, it behooves all people who would enjoy life and
health to the full to understand in what way they may be
frugal in using nerve-energy so that they may learn how to
live conservatively or prudently, thereby enjoying the
greatest mental and physical efficiency, and also the
longest life. (See chapter on “Enervating Habits.”)


To the ignorant, thoughtless, and sensual such suggestion
and advice will seem unnecessary, or perhaps the whims or
preachments of a crotchety person, or the qualms of a sated
sensualist; but it is the writer’s belief that the more sober
and thoughtful will welcome a knowledge that will help
them to become masters of themselves. So far the masses
have trusted their health and life to a profession that has
failed to make good. I say this advisedly; for now the
supposed masters in the profession are looking for the
causes of disease, and it should be obvious to any thinking
mind that, until the cause of disease is found, certainly no
dependable advice can be given as to how to avoid disease.


Fifty-eight years of independent thinking, unbiased by
sect or creed, have enabled me to discover the true cause of
disease; and it is so simple that even a child can learn to
protect itself against the said-to-be “diseases peculiar to
children.”


“These are the times that try men’s souls.” If Tom Paine
were here now, he would change the wording of that line to
read: “These are the times that try men’s nerves.” Nerve-
energy and good money are the commodities that are spent
very rapidly these days. Chasing the dollar causes great
waste of energy; and the dollar has been chased so much
that it has developed wanderlust to such a degree that men
enervate themselves catching up with a few, but prostrate
themselves endeavoring to break them of their wander-
habit. There are many ways to use up nerve-energy. It
should be the ambition of everybody to conserve all the
nerve-energy possible for the extraordinary amount
required to keep the speeding-up necessary to adjust
humanity to the automobile pace. This will come in time.


Man adjusted himself to the change from the ox-cart,
Dobbin the flea- bitten, string-halt, and blind, and the
steamboats, on which our forebears took their honeymoon
trips, to the “steam-cars” and high- stepping bays and
family carriage.


Many will go into the hands of the receiver before the
nervous system becomes adjusted to high-power
automobiles and flying-machines.


Without nerve-energy the functions of the body cannot be
carried on properly. The present-day strenuousness causes
enervation, which checks elimination, and the retained
toxins bring on Toxemia.


Everything that acts on the body uses up energy. Cold
and heat require the expenditure of nerve-energy to adjust
the body to the changes.


After middle life, those who would keep well and live to
be old must have a care concerning keeping warm and
avoiding chilling of the body. They must let up on table
pleasures and practice self-restraint in all ways. Allowing
the feet to be cold for any length of time allowing the body
to chill when a top-coat would prevent—is using up nerve-
energy very fast.

Work with worry will soon end in flagging energy—
enervation.


As no provision is made for the demand of an extra
supply of energy at a given time, it is necessary, very
necessary, to know how to conserve what we have and
build more.


CONSERVATION OF ENERGY THE GREATEST
THERAPEUTIC MEASURE


Now that I have found that enervation is the source of the
cause of the only disease (Toxemia) to which mankind is
heir, it is easy to see that the so-called science of medicine,
as practiced, is an ally extraordinary of all the causes of
enervation, and becomes a builder of disease instead of
curing or ameliorating man’s sufferings. Every so-called
cure in its very nature causes enervation. Even the drugs
used to relieve pain end in making a greater pain, and
sometimes kill. The drugs to relieve cough in pneumonia
sometimes kill the patient. Removing stone from the gall-
bladder does not cure the cause, and more stones form.


Rest from habits that enervate is the only way to put
nature in line for curing. Sleep and rest of body and mind
are necessary to keep a sufficient supply of energy. Few
people in active life rest enough.


WHY ENERVATION IS THE CAUSE AND NOT
THE DISEASE


Enervation per se is not disease. Weakness, lost power, is
not disease; but, by causing a flagging of the elimination of


tissue-waste, which is toxic, the blood becomes charged
with toxin, and this we call Toxemia—poison in the blood.
This is disease, and when the toxin accumulates beyond the
toleration-point, a crisis takes place; which means that the
poison is being eliminated. This we call disease, but it is

not. The only disease is Toxemia, and what we call diseases
are the symptoms produced by a forced vicarious
elimination of toxin through the mucous membrane.


When the elimination takes place through the mucous
membrane of the nose, it is called a cold—catarrh of the
nose; and where these crises are repeated for years, the
mucous membrane thickens and ulcerates, and the bones
enlarge, closing the passage, etc. At this stage hay-fever or
hay-asthma develops. When the throat and tonsils, or any
of the respiratory passages, become the seat of the crises of
Toxemia, we have croup, tonsilitis, pharyngitis, laryngitis,
bronchitis, asthma, pneumonia, etc. What is in a name? All
are symptoms of the expulsion of toxin from the blood at
the different points named, and are essentially of the same
character and evolving from the one cause namely,
Toxemia—crises of Toxemia.


This description can be extended to every organ of the
body; for any organ that is enervated below the average
standard from stress of habit, from work or worry, from


injury, or from whatever cause, may become the location of
crises of Toxemia. The symptoms presented differ with
each organ affected; and that gives color to the belief that
every symptom-complex is a separate and distinct disease.
But, thanks to the new light shed upon nomenclature
(naming disease) by the Philosophy of Toxemia, every
symptom-complex goes back to the one and only cause of
all so-called diseases—namely, Toxemia.


The symptoms that are called gastritis (catarrh of the
stomach) are very unlike the symptoms of cystitis (catarrh
of the urinary bladder); yet both are caused by crises of
Toxemia—both become the locations for the vicarious
elimination of toxin from the blood.


It should be obvious to the discerning how extraordinarily
illogical it is to treat catarrh of the nose as a local disease;
or, when crises are repeated until ulceration takes place,
and the mucous membrane becomes so sensitive that dust
and pollen cause sneezing and watering of the eyes—
symptoms called hay-fever—to treat these symptoms as a
distinct disease caused by pollen. Rest and total abstinence
from food, liquid and solid, and reforming all enervating
habits, will restore nerve-energy; the elimination of toxin
through the natural channels will take place, and full health
will return. This state will remain permanently if the


erstwhile victim of hay-fever, or any other so-called
disease, will “stay put.”


The first elimination of toxin through the nose is called a
cold. When this elimination is continuous, with
exacerbation—toxin crises (fresh colds)}—occasionally,
ulceration takes place, bony spurs form, and hay-fever
develops. These are all symptoms of toxin elimination. The
cause is the same from the first cold to hay-fever. The
catarrhal discharge that continues throughout the interims
of fresh colds (crises of Toxemia) is chronic catarrh, named
such in medical nomenclatures, and treated locally as
though it were an independent, fiendish entity; when the
truth is that the victim of so-called chronic catarrh keeps his
system enervated by tobacco, alcohol, sugar and sweets of
all kinds, coffee, tea, excessive eating of butter and bread,
too much rich cooking, excessive eating of all foods, excess
of sensual pleasures, etc. ( See chapter on “Causes of
Enervation.’’)


Keeping the system enervated prevents the
reestablishment in full of elimination through the normal
excretory organs. The organism, as time runs on, becomes
more tolerant of toxin, and the “catching-cold habit” shows
fewer (colds) crises of Toxemia. A greater number of the
mucous membranes are requisitioned to carry out vicarious


elimination. The whole organism begins to show
deterioration. The so- called chronic diseases begin to
manifest. In catarrh of the stomach the mucous membrane
takes on thickening, hardening, ulceration, and cancer—all
many distinctive diseases. But they are no more distinctive
than President Washington was distinct from the boy
George who cut down his father’s cherry tree. Cancer was
once the symptom-complex of a so-called cold; but,
according to the Philosophy of Toxemia, it is the end of
many crises of Toxemia. As the crises continued,
symptoms changed, in accordance with the organic
degeneration caused by the crises of Toxemia.


Every so-called disease has the same inception, evolution,
and maturity, differing only as the organic structure
involved differs.

Treating the various symptom-complexes as distinct
entities is fully as scientific as salving the end of a dog’s
tail for its sore ear.


All diseases are the same fundamentally.


The cause travels back to Toxemia, caused by enervation,
which checked elimination; and enervating habits of body


and mind are the primary causes of lost resistance
enervation.


Every chronic disease starts with Toxemia and a toxemic
crisis. The crises are repeated until organic changes take
place. The chain of symptoms range from cold or catarrh to
Bright’s disease, tuberculosis, cancer, syphilis, ataxia, and
other so-called diseases; all, from beginning to end,
symptoms of the cumulative effects of crises of Toxemia.


Enervation Is General


EVERYBODY was surprised at the large percentage of
our young manhood plucked by the medical examining
boards during the World War. To that surprise, add the one
which the Philosophy of Toxemia adds, and thinking
people should he appalled.


The examining boards passed all young men who did not
show a developed pathology; which meant all who did not
show some change of organ or tissue—structural change.


When it is known that functional derangements precede
structural changes by months and even years, it should be
quite obvious that there were more young men passed by
the boards who were potentially ill or unable to carry on
than were plucked. Time has proven this generally
unknown fact true; for before the war was over ninety-five
per cent of the American army had received hospital
attention for sickness, other than injury, from one to five
times. And the boys who did not get over to France died by
the thousands from the “flu.”


What does this mean? It means that life as it is lived
causes the people generally to be enervated. And when
nerve-energy drops below normal, the elimination of toxin
—a natural product of metabolism is checked, and it is
retained in the blood, bringing on Toxemia—the first, last,
and only efficient cause of all so-called diseases.


It should be obvious to discerning, minds that the amount
of toxin in the blood must vary with each individual, and
that the degree of resistance also must vary with each
individual. An amount would cause a toxemic crisis in one
would apparently have no effect on another. An enervating
cause—the usual immunization—that would scarcely
produce a reaction at one time in a given subject might
send the same subject to a hospital at another time, or even
be fatal instanter. Active anaphylaxis is the alibi or apology
of the pro-vaccinators; but it does not change the fact that
vaccines are poisons, even if they are “pure,” regardless of
the iterated and reiterated protests that they are innocent
and harmless.


The amount of harm done the army by vaccination and
the harm that immunizing with vaccines and serums has
done and is doing, except wholesale vandalism.


The average doctor cannot think, and the others do not
dare to think except conventionally out loud. I do not know
where to place the men of the medical profession who are
capable of thinking, but who refuse to allow reason to
guide them in their thinking in the matter of so-called
immunization. Can class-consciousness or class- bigotry
explain? Surely knavishness is unfit. It has been said of me,
because of my stand against the germ theory and
vaccination, that I have “peculiar views;” by some, that I
am “an ignoramus.” If I am, it is strange that fundamentally
I find my thoughts and beliefs running parallel with one of
the greatest thinkers of the nineteenth century— the famous
English philosopher, Herbert Spencer. I was browsing in
my library a few days ago, and picked up “Facts and
Comments.” I turned to “Vaccination,” and in it found
more worthwhile, constructive thought, in a short essay of
less than three pages, than can be found in all medical
literature on the same subject. I have decided to quote the
whole essay, and I shall be pleased if others get the mental
kick out of it that I have enjoyed:


“When once you interfere with the order of
nature, there is no knowing where the results will
end,” was the remark made in my presence by a
distinguished biologist. There immediately escaped
from him an expression of vexation at his lack of


reticence; for he saw the various uses I might make
of the admission.


Jenner and his disciples have assumed that when
the vaccine virus has passed through a patient’s
system he is safe, or comparatively safe, against
smallpox, and that there the matter ends. I will not
here say anything for or against this assumption.*


*Except, indeed, by quoting the statement of a well-
known man, Mr. Kegan Paul, the publisher, respecting his
own experience. In his “Memoirs” (pp. 260-61) he says,
respecting his smallpox when adult: “I had had smallpox
when a child, in spite of vaccination, and had been
vaccinated but a short time before. I am the third of my
own immediate family who have had smallpox twice, and
with whom vaccination has always taken.”


I merely propose to show that there the matter
does not end. The interference with the order of
nature has various sequences other than that
counted upon. Some have been made known.


A Parliamentary Return issued in 1880 (No. 392)
shows that, comparing the quinquennial periods
1847-1851 and 1874-1878, there was in the latter a
diminution in the deaths from all causes of infants
under one year old of 6,600 per million births per
annum; while the mortality caused by eight


specified diseases, either directly communicable or
exacerbated by the effects of vaccination, increased
from 20,524 to 41,353 per million births per
annum—more than double. It is clear that far more
were killed by these other diseases than were saved
from smallpox.*


*This was in the days of arm-to-arm vaccination, when
medical men were certain that other diseases (syphilis, for
instance) could not be communicated through the vaccine
virus. Anyone who looks into the Transactions of the
Epidemiological Society of some thirty years ago will kind
that they were suddenly convinced to the contrary by a
dreadful case of wholesale syphilization. In these days of
calf-lymph vaccination, such dangers are excluded; not that
of bovine tuberculosis, however. But I name the fact as
showing what amount of faith is to be placed in medical
opinion.


To the communication of diseases thus
demonstrated must be added accompanying effects.
It is held that the immunity produced by
vaccination implies some change in the components
of the body—a necessary assumption. But now, if
the substances composing the body, solid or liquid
or both, have been so modified as to leave them no
longer liable to smallpox, is the modification
otherwise inoperative? Will anyone dare to say that


it produces no further effect than that of shielding
the patient from a particular disease? You cannot
change the constitution in relation to one invading
agent and leave it unchanged in regard to all other
invading agents. What must the change be? There
are cases of unhealthy persons in whom a serious
disease, as typhoid fever, is followed by improved
health. But these are not normal cases; if they
were, a healthy person would become more healthy
by having a succession of diseases. (Toxemia
explains this phenomena.—Ed.) Hence, as a
constitution modified by vaccination is not made
more able to resist perturbing influences in general,
it must be made less able. Heat and cold and wet
and atmospheric changes tend ever to disturb the
balance, as do also various foods, excessive
exertion, mental strain. We have no means of
measuring alterations in resisting power. and hence
they commonly pass unremarked. There are,
however, evidences of a general relative debility.
Measles is a severer disease than it used to be, and
deaths from it are very numerous. Influenza yields
proof. Sixty years ago, when at long intervals an
epidemic occurred, it seized but few, w as not
severe, and left no serious sequelae; now it is
permanently established, affects multitudes in
extreme forms, and often leaves damaged
constitutions. The disease is the same, but there is
less ability to withstand it.


There are other significant facts. It is a familiar
biological truth that the organs of sense and the
teeth arise out of the dermal layer of the embryo.
Hence abnormalities affect all of them; blue-eyed
cats are deaf, and hairless dogs have imperfect
teeth. (“Origin of Species,” Chap. 1.) The like
holds of constitutional abnormalities caused by
disease. Syphilis in its earlier stages is a skin
disease. When it is inherited, the effects are
malformation of teeth, and in later years iritis
(inflammation of the iris.) Kindred relations hold
with other skin diseases; instance the fact that
scarlet fever is often accompanied by loosening of
the teeth, and the fact that with measles often go
disorders—sometimes temporary, sometimes
permanent—of both eyes and ears. May it not be
thus with another skin disease—that which
vaccination gives? If so, we have an explanation of
the frightful degeneracy of teeth among young
people in recent times; and we need not wonder at
the prevalence of weak and defective eyes among
them. Be these suggestions true or not, one thing is
certain: The assumption that vaccination changes
the constitution in relation to smallpox, and does
not otherwise change it, is sheer folly.


“When once you interfere with the order of nature, there
is no knowing where the results will end.”


Interfering with the order of nature is a vast subject—one
without end; but nature “comes smiling through,” except
when overwhelmed. Health—good health—is a greater
force than bad—than every interference—and can correct
every evil effect that is not fatal, if the influence is
removed.


Stimulants, continued over a long period, cause a gradual
deterioration, and finally, unless the habit is stopped, end
fatally. Toxin is a stimulant and a natural product of
metabolism. When the body is normal, the toxin is removed
as fast as generated; but when any enervating habit is
practiced beyond the power of recuperation, the toxin
accumulates, and Toxemia is established—which means
that the body has lost its protecting power. Now, if vaccine
or any infection gains entrance into the blood, “there is no
knowing where the effects will end.”


Toxemia throws light on this perplexing point. When an
infection takes place in a person with normal resistance,
creating a vaceinia—a local skin inflammation—and pus-
formation occurs, it usually ends with the healing of the
abcess. If inoculation of smallpox virus is made in the
Jemnerian way, by inserting the virus subcutaneously—
splitting the skin and rubbing it in—violent septic infection


takes place, causing death in many cases. Laws were
passed in England many years ago prohibiting this practice.


In toxemic subjects, a local infection set up by the virus
of sepsis from any source vaccination, a badly cared- for
injury, a wound that fails to drain, an infected tooth, sinus,
etc.—causes a septic fever of a malignant type, which is
liable to end in death or in invalidism. A system badly
enervated and toxemic, has little power to resist; and when
the blood is very toxemic, it is very vulnerable to the
influence of any infection.


Where the infection is not so malignant as to overwhelm
the system, due to the virulence of the infecting agent, or to
the enervation and toxemic state being so great as to have
destroyed resistance, the patient may rally from the crisis
and get well under the proper management. If, however, the
management is bad, the patient may linger in a state of
semi-invalidism for a few months or years, and finally die.


Mr. Roosevelt’s illness and taking-off at least twenty-five
years too soon was a pronounced type of such
derangement. The great and forceful man was
pronouncedly toxemic. He was injured, as everybody
knows, on one of his trips into the jungles. Infection took
place, which probably would have killed a less robust man.


He returned home, and continued enervating habits,
preventing his fine body from cleaning house.


Such cases can be brought back to the normal, but never
under conventional treatment.


When toxemic subjects are infected, the infection will
never be eliminated entirely until enervation and Toxemia
are overcome. Unless patients of this character are put to
bed and fasted until elimination is completed, then fed
properly, and taught how to eat within their limitations, and
unless they are willing to give up all enervating habits,
there is no hope of their ever getting well. These subjects
often develop tuberculosis, Bright’s disease, and other
lingering so- called diseases. Our federal hospitals are full
of young men who will never get well; for Toxemia is
developed faster than it is thrown ok. Scientific medicine is
helpless.


Nature’s order is interfered with by enervating habits
until Toxemia is established; then a vaccination, or an
infection from any source, acts sooner or later as a
firebrand in causing the most vulnerable organ to take on
organic change. The organ, however, has nothing to do
with cause, and directing treatment to the organ is
compounding fallacy. Types of such nonsense are blood-


transfusion for pernicious anemia; gland treatment for
gland impotency; cutting out stones, ulcers, tumors, etc.


There is no question but that one of the most pernicious
practices in vogue today is treating so-called disease with
disease, and immunizing with the products of disease.


One of the first things to do to get rid of any so-called
disease is to get rid of Toxemia; for it is this state of the
blood that makes disease possible. Infection, drug-and
food-poisoning may kill; but if they do not, they will be
short-lived in a subject free frown enervation and Toxemia.
Conversely, the poisoning will linger in the system until
Toxemia is overcome; then elimination will remove all
traces of infection.


Syphilitic infection in a pronouncedly toxemic subject is
thrown into great virulency by conventional treatment. The
infection is the least offender of the trio. Add fear and
wrong eating, and we have a formidable symptom-
complex, justifying all that professional syphilomaniacs say
and write about the disease. Remove Toxemia, drugging,
fear, and vile eating, and there is little left. What there is
can easily be thrown out by nature.


WE are builders of tomorrow, and we need not pay a
fortune-teller—a doctor, lawyer, preacher, banker—to
tell us what will happen to us tomorrow. “Nothing will
happen. The inevitable will come. We shall inherit the
fruits of today’s sowing.


Poise


THE state or quality of being balanced. Figuratively,
equanimity; repose.

Equanimity—Evenness of mind or temper; composure;
calmness. (Standard Dictionary.)


I presume that, to be technically poised, we should be
anatomically, physiologically, and chemically balanced;
but, as asymmetry is the rule, we cannot hope to be
balanced. We can, however, strive for equanimity—
evenness of mind and temper.


Contentment comes with striving, not with possession.
Apparently this is not always true; for we see people very
dissatisfied and unhappy who are busy.


Someone has said: “Blessed is the man who has found
work.” This means that he is fully occupied and contented
with his work, not its emoluments. No man is satisfied with
work that has nothing in it but the dollars he gets out of it.
Nothing but creative work satisfies the mind.


What is there in it? Advancement, self-development, and
a chance in the future to do good are about as little as will
satisfy ambition.


To make for contentment, the work must occupy and
satisfy the mind. Idle minds are dissatisfied minds. If asked
what prescription I would give children to secure their
future happiness, I would say: Teach then to love work!
work! work! We have overworked the old saying: “All
work and no play makes Jack a dull boy.” Now it is
reversed to: ‘All play and no work makes Jack a bandit. ‘


If parents cannot keep children busy, the city, county, or
state should furnish work—not in industrial schools, but the
work that is best suited to each child. A child must be busy.
Christ got busy at twelve years of age and earlier. We must
be busy.


As I said, contentment comes with striving, not with
possession. This is a law of psychology as | well as of
physics. We should be happy that we are not contented; for;
if we were, we should not have anything to overcome—no
reason for striving—and, of course, fail to enjoy the work
and labor of attaining.


“Man never is, but always to be blest. (Pope.)” Because
Pope made that statement, it should not be taken too
seriously. I have found many people blest who did not
know it. There are more blessings in disguise than are
found in the limelight. One of the commonest blessings of
mankind is that about ninety-nine per cent of our wants we
never realize. If most people could cut out time as often as
they wish, their lives would be greatly shortened: “I wish it
were this time next year.” “I wish now were ten years from
now; I should then be through college and established in
business.”


The disposition of most people is to seek abridgement.
Nature abhors a vacuum, and that is what abridgements are.
“Get-Rich- Quick Wallingford” is the ideal of all.


Short-cuts to success; a salesmanship that means coercing
the vacillating—those of weak will, those who can be
persuaded to buy prematurely, those who do not know their
own minds; in short, inducing people to buy what they do
not need and cannot afford is called good salesmanship.
What is the matter with the people today? General
indebtedness. The sales-people have made more than they
know how to spend wisely on themselves—they do not
know how to fill their vacuums. Those who have been
persuaded to run in high when they should have stayed in


low—or, what would have been better, continued to ride a
bicycle or remained on foot—are distressed because of
premature supply. Both extremes lack poise, and build
restlessness and dissatisfaction. The automobile is a
necessity; but it has been forced into a luxury that has far
outrun necessity. It has built great fortunes at one end, and
marked poverty at the other end, that will create a financial
disease called panic, unless remedied soon. Panic is another
name for a vacuum which will be filled with much
unhappiness. A prediction of five years ago.


Getting through school without filling in the time well, by
short-cuts, ponies, and favoritism, builds vacuity. Time and
honest labor are necessary for building character,
education, and ability in any and all lines. In the physical as
well as in the mental world the old Latin apothegm applies:
Cito maturum, cito putridum—”Soon ripe, soon rotten.”
Athletes die early. Why? Development is forced. Excessive
use of the muscular system forces an extra supply of blood
to the muscles. This in turn forces an extra supply of food
to meet the demand of waste and supply. Overstimulation
enervates, and the toxin fails to be carried out as rapidly as
formed; hence Toxemia is established, which gradually
brings on degeneration of heart and blood-vessels. “No
chain is stronger than its weakest link.” In athletics’ the
strongest links are in constant use for all the strength they


have. The stability that youth gives tissue is rapidly ageing,
with the result that the athlete dies of senility in youth.
Fitzsimmons was called the “grand old man of the ring” at
thirty-five. In this saying, which was meant to be a
compliment to the king of athletes, was an expression of
scientific knowledge beyond understanding in the sporting
world—subconsciously building better than they knew; for
in reality he had aged himself by stressing his body.


Youth wants to move faster than good, substantial growth
justifies. Young professional men are in hot-haste to
succeed their predecessors, always confident that they can
do more than fill their places.


Today inexperience is hot- footing civilization to a quick
maturity, and obviously to a premature end. Hot-haste has
il-prepared even those with age to be safe advisers.
Knowledge not seasoned by time, experience, and poise
never matures.


Poise and equanimity have become meaningless terms in
this age. The elements of success which make for ideal
maturity are lacking in the welding influence of time and
experience. The present-day mind is athletic; it is
prematurely aged at the expense of time, which is required
for stabilizing. Hospitals, penitentiaries, and insane


asylums cannot be built fast enough to accommodate the
prematurely senile. That is what disease is—old-age tissue
outrunning the supply of new.


Too many abridgments, from the kindergarten to the high
school and on through college, leave vacuums to be filled
by the lies of civilization, and the disease and unhappiness
that false knowledge and immature judgment bring.


Personal peculiarities, affectations, and petty habits of all
kinds are boomerangs that return to poison life’s sweet
dreams.


Nature smiles on those who are natural; but those who
persist in grimacing, mentally or physically, she joins in a
conspiracy to distort them at their pleasure. We can be
happy and contented, or we can be unhappy and
discontented. We can make our choice, and nature will do
the rest.


I just came from a drug-store into which I had stepped to
purchase a tube of camphor ice. The druggist fumbled, and,
being self-conscious, his self-pity made it necessary for
him to say that he was feeling bad and had been lying down
most of the afternoon. He accompanied his remarks with a
sick grimace of his features and a bodily expression of


weakness. He, no doubt, would have enjoyed discussing his
discomforts with me, but I ignored the subject and passed
out. He is cultivating a sick habit that will spoil his life and
make of him a bore to all except those who frequent his
shop hunting cures. “Misery loves company.” People with
the sick habit flock together, and never appear to tire
recounting and comparing their discomforts. The most
insignificant symptoms are retained in memory for years.
Self-pity causes them to exaggerate, and in time they
believe the worst possible about themselves. Such a life is
ruined, unless complete reformation is made. This state of
mind brings on enervation and Toxemia. The symptoms are
a general nervousness, indigestion, constipation, coated
tongue, anxiety concerning cancer or some other malady
that may prove fatal. The muscular system is more or less
tensed. The constipation is accompanied by an abnormal
contraction of the rectum. The entire body is abnormally
tense. Such patients have difficulty in going to sleep, and
when they are about to drop off to sleep they are awakened
with a jerk—a violent contraction of all the muscles. These
people are light sleepers, and complain that they do not
sleep at all. A few complain of headache and nausea. They
are imitators, and often develop new symptoms after
reading about disease or listening to others relating their


symptoms.


Many of these cases of neurosis are operated upon for
various supposed abdominal derangements. Too often
doctors treat such people for what they say is the matter
with them. Occasionally we find self-sacrificing, amiable
women who are never robust, but who live and work
beyond their strength for others. These mothers in early life
had ambitions for a career, and the disappointment brought
on a profound enervation, permanently impairing nutrition;
for the one great sorrow prevented a full return to normal.
Fortunately, surcease was found in doing for others; and in
time making others happy became a vicarious nepenthe so
perfect that those whom they soothed with their sweet
smiles and cheering words often said: “Aunt Mary, you
must have lived a charmed life in which no sorrow ever
entered.” The answer would be more smiles and
encouragement.


Those who find a life of service to take the place of
ambition’s jilts have made no mistake in the selection of
the Great Physician; but those who seek cures outside of
self are hunting cures in a Fool’s Paradise.


Cures! There are no cures. The subconscious builds
health or disease according to our order. If we send
impulses of irritation, discontent, unhappiness,


complaining, hate, envy, selfishness, greed, lust, etc., the
subconscious builds us in the image of our order.


If we send to the subconscious sensual impulses, our
order is returned to us blear-eyed, with swollen features,
headaches, bad breath, pain here, pain there, blurred
intellect, carelessness in business, of friends, and of self.
We interpret our state of disease, and send for a doctor,
who finds albumin in the urine, rheumatism in the joints, a
leaky heart, threatened apoplexy, dropsy, et alii. We take
his dope, his operations, his immunizations; but we
continue to send sensual impulses— big dinners, strong
cigars, lascivious indulgences. The doctor does no good.
Another and another is sent for. Skillful examinations are
Other doctors examine, who find tuberculosis. And at last
real skill is discovered in a physician who finds cancer. But
all the time our orders are going to the subconscious, and
the returns are made faithfully in the image of their maker.


The truth is that we are not needing a doctor at all. We
need a physician who will erect a reconciliation between
our subconscious maker and ourselves. What we need is to
be taught self-control, poise) equanimity, repose. And when
these impulses are sent over the sympathetic nerves to our


subconscious maker, we shall begin to receive images of a
more man, until an approach to perfection is attained.


Self-control, with an ideal of just the kind of person we
should like to be held before the subconscious all the time,
will be returned to us just as we order. We are made in the
image of the ideal we hold before our maker—the
subconscious. We must live it, however. Simply holding an
ideal will not get us anywhere. If our ideal is for sobriety,
getting drunk will not bring our dreams true. If our ideal is
for perfect health, we certainly cannot expect a sensual life
to build it.


We may have an ideal image, but if we do not live it, a
distortion will be created.


A disgruntled, complaining habit, builds that kind of an
individual.


If we refuse to live composed, poised, and relaxed, we
become tense and build discomfort. A contracted brow
builds headache. A tense, fixed state of the muscular
system brings on muscle-fatigue, which may be treated as
neuralgia, neuritis, or rheumatism. A slight injury to any
part of the body, coddled, nursed, and kept without motion,


may start a fixation of the muscles, causing more pain from
muscle-fatigue than from the injury.


Enough neurotics have been relieved and cured of
muscle-fatigue to put two schools of spine manipulators in
good standing with the people.


All through the ages mountebanks, magnetic healers, and
various cults of “laying on of hands” have worked among
people who had time to nurse a slight injury into a very
large fatigue disease. Fortunes have been made out of vile-
smelling liniments because of the supposed cures made by
rubbing the dope on sprained backs and joints. The same
cures could have been made by simply rubbing the parts;
but the minds that go with spineless people, who have time
to wait for miraculous cures, could not be made to believe
that a cure could be excreted without that mysterious
healing property associated with evil-looking and vile-
smelling medicaments.


A sensitive, insignificant pile tumor may set up such a
tense state of the entire muscular system as to render the
subject a confirmed invalid. Such a case became a patient
of mine a few weeks ago. On examination, I found an
extreme contraction of the sphincter muscles. His entire
body was tense, and, of course, he had muscle-fatigue,


which caused him to believe that he was a very sick man. I
had him lie down, and I taught him how to relax; then I
introduced a finger into his rectum—very slowly, to avoid
giving pain as much as possible. I was about thirty minutes
bringing relaxation of the anal muscles. While
manipulating, I was advising relaxation of his body. Before
he left my office he declared that he felt better than he had
for two years, notwithstanding the fact he had been in a
hospital and otherwise treated most of that time. I gave him
instructions on how to poise, how to manipulate the rectum
and anus. All his stomach troubles, and discomforts
generally, passed away in a week.


I have seen many invalids of nervous type who had been
treated by many doctors and for many diseases. Tension of
the entire body was one of the pronounced symptoms, and
health could not be brought back until this habit was
overcome.


The discomforts complained of by those who have tumor
of the womb, goiter, cystitis, stomach and bowel
derangements, rest largely on a basis of nervous tension,
which must be overcome before comfort and full health
will return.


Position in standing, walking, sitting, and lying down
may be such as to cause tension. We have occupational
diseases and emotional diseases; and lack of poise
complicates all of these so-called diseases and brings on
tension.


Children are prone to become nervous and excited when
tired. When allowed to eat heartily, when excited and tired,
they have indigestion. Extreme cases develop convulsions.
Fear and anxiety are two elements that lead on to chorea.


Poise of mind and body should receive attention early as
well as late in life.


Good health late in life indicates self-control, moderation
in all things, and equanimity—poise.


Moderation does not mean the same to all people. Some
men call three to six cigars a day moderate indulgence;
others believe that one to six a month is temperate. Those
who have an irritable heart and stomach are immoderate
when they use tobacco at all.


Fortunate is the person who knows his limitations and
respects them. Of such a person it may be said that he is
poised.


IMMUNIZATION


Wouldn’t it be incongruous if in the evolution of man
such an important element as autoimmunization should be
left out. No animal has been forgotten in the great scheme
of creation. Powers of offense and defense have been
wisely provided, and to suppose that king of all animals—
man—should be left defenseless is most absurd. No, man is
provided with a nervous system, at the head of which is a
brain capable of thinking, which can come to the aid of a
flagging nervous system and help to renew it.


When the nervous system is normal—when there is full
nerve-energy—man is normal and immune to disease.
Disease begins to manifest only when environments and
personal habits use up energy faster than it is renewed. This
contingency the properly educated mind begins to remedy
at once by removing or overcoming all enervating
influences.


Man’s immunization to disease requires a life so well
ordered that his nerve-energy is kept at or near normal.
When nerve-energy is prodigally squandered, he is forced
into a state of enervation; then elimination of the waste-
products is checked, leaving the waste—toxin—in the
blood, causing Toxemia self-poisoning—the first, last and
only true disease that man is heir to. All other poisons are
accidental and evanescent, and without Toxemia can have
no entree to the system. Poisons may be swallowed,
injected or inoculated into the body and poison or even kill;
but such an experience is not to be classed as disease, any
more than a broken leg or a gunshot wound.


Toxin is a normal, natural product of the system, always
present. Being a constant, it answers every requirement for
a universal cause of all so-called diseases. All the different
symptom complexes, which are given special names, take
their names frown the organs involved in the toxin crisis;
but they are not individual—they are only symptoms of
vicarious elimination. For example: Tonsilitis, gastritis,
bronchitis, pneumonia, colonitis, are each and every one
Toxemic crises, differing only in location and symptoms.
So-called diseases are just so many different locations
where toxin is being eliminated. All are different
manifestations of one disease Toxemia.


Toxemia is the only explanation of why so many young
men were refused by the examining boards during the late
war. Many were sent over to France who soon found the
hospitals for they were near the limit of their toxin-
resistance. The excitement used up their nerve-energy. The
enervation was quickly followed by Toxemia. Their
sicknesses were given names, but the truth was that they
had Toxemia, and their diseases were crises of Toxemia,
which means vicarious elimination.


After the numerous vaccinations to which the boys were
subjected on entering the army, probably fear or
apprehension was next in order of enervating influences.


DIAGNOSIS A MEDICAL DELUSION


Diagnosing according to modern medical science is a
scheme of symptomatology that means nothing except a
guide in discovering organic change—pathological change;
and if no change or pathology is found, the case is sent
home, with the advice to return again in a few months; or
perhaps it will be kept under observation for a while. Even
cases presenting pathological changes, such as we see in
rheumatic arthritis, | have known of being sent home for
six months, because no point of infection could lee found.


The patient would be sent away with the statement: “After
a thorough examination, we cannot find the cause of your
disease. Come back in about six months, and it may be
showing up in that time.” So much for the influence that
focal infection has on the mind of the profession. Suppose
infected teeth were found. or sinus infection, what of it?
What causes the teeth and sinuses to be infected? Why is
rheumatism a symptom of infection, and the focal
infections not a symptom of rheumatism?


The truth is that rheumatism, infected teeth, and sinus
infections, as well as every other pathology found in the
body, are effects. Symptoms without lesions represent
functional derangements which have not been repeated
long enough or often enough to cause organic change. If, as
diagnosis goes, the cause is to be found in the disease, at
what stage are we to look for it? Is it at the beginning, or in
the fully developed organic change, or in the dead man?
Mackenzie believed that it should be looked for at the very
beginning, which meant with him the earliest change. He
believed that an intensive study at this stage would discover
cause. This was a mistaken idea of his, which is proved by
the fact that the cause of rheumatism and cancer cannot be
found early or late, and that those who believe germs cause
disease cannot find them until pathology is found. It
appears to me, after being in the game for over fifty years,


that a plan which has received so much labor without
reward should be abandoned.


Diagnosis is so fraught with the element of uncertainty
that no reliance can be placed upon it.


Research occupies an army of laboratory experts in
hunting the cause of disease, and also cures. They are
doomed to fail; for how is it possible to find cause in
effects?


The specialist is so limited in his knowledge of the
philosophy of health and disease that he becomes deluded
on the subject; and this delusion often causes him to see
meningitis, appendicitis, ovaritis—or any disease that
happens to be the subject of his specialty—in every case
brought to him. As a matter of fact, most attacks of disease
of any and all kinds get well, whether treated or not, if they
have not passed from functional to organic.


This statement needs a little explanation. It is said that
eighty per cent who fall sick get well, or could get well
without the aid of a doctor. All so-called attacks of disease
of whatever kind are crises of Toxemia, which means
vicarious elimination of Toxin that has accumulated above
the saturation (toleration) point. These crises may be


symptoms which we call cold, “flu,” tonsilitis, gastritis,
headache, or some other light malady. They come today
and are gone in a few days. If treated, we say they were
cured. If they are not treated, we say they got well without
treatment. The truth is that the surplus toxin—the amount
accumulated above the point which can be maintained with
comfort—is eliminated, and comfort returns. This is not a
cure; it is one of nature’s palliations. When the cause or
causes of enervation are discovered and removed, the
nerve-energy returns to normal. Elimination removes toxin
as fast as developed by metabolism. This is health—this is
all there is to any cure. In a few words: Stop all enervating
habits; stop eating; rest until nerve-energy is restored to
normal. When this is accomplished the patient is cured. A
short or long fast is beneficial to most sick people. Those
who are afraid of fasting should not fast. All other so-called
cures are a delusion, and at the most a passing palliation;
but enough such cures are performed daily to keep a large
army of doctors and cultists in bread, butter, and a degree
of respectability. The cured patients, however, glacier-like,
move steadily down to the river Styx —thousands and
thousands of them years before their time, many even
before their prime, and all maintaining a false belief
concerning what disease is, and a more foolish notion
concerning cures.


TOXEMIA SIMPLIFIES THE
UNDERSTANDING OF DISEASE


When a child shows symptoms of high fever, pain, and
vomiting, what is the disease? It may be indigestion frown
overeating or eating improper food. It may be the beginning
of gastritis, scarlet fever, diphtheria, meningitis, infantile
paralysis, of some other so-called disease. The treatment,
according to the Philosophy of Toxemia, may be positive
and given with confidence. There need be no waiting for
developments, no guessing, no mistakes. What is done is
the correct treatment for any so-called disease, named or
not named. Get rid of the exciting causes, whatever they
are. Ninety-nine times out of a hundred the stomach and
bowels are full of undigested foods. Wash out the bowels,
and get rid of this source of infection. Then give a hot bath
of sufficient duration to furnish complete relief from any
pain. When discomfort returns, give another bath. Use an
enema every day, and twice daily if symptoms demand.


So long as there is fever, rest assured that the bowels are
not cleaned out. Provide plenty of fresh air and water, and
keep the patient quiet. See to it that nothing but water goes
into the stomach until the fever and discomfort are entirely
overcome; then give very light food at first.


A child that is given meat and eggs and an excess of milk
is liable to develop putrefactive diseases. It is doubtful (and
I believe impossible) if any child brought up on fruit, whole
wheat and other grains, and vegetables can ever evolve


diphtheria, scarlet fever, or smallpox, or develop septic
fever—typhoid.


The methods of the regular practice of medicine are in
keeping with the habits of body and mind that lead to
malignant disease, epidemics, etc. As a man thinketh, so is
he.


The regular profession believes in antitoxin, vaccine, and
autogenous remedies; and these remedies fit the
psychology of a mode of living that leads to vicious types
of disease.


Most people are in sympathy with impossible cures—
cures without removing causes.


All so-called cures will some day be proved a delusion.
Remember that children will not be sick if they are not
toxemic. Let the local manifestations be what they may, the
basic cause is always the same—Toxemia plus septic
infection; and if this state is not added to by food, cases


treated in this way will be aborted—jugulated, if you
please. Doctors who have seen only regular practice will
declare that the cases recovering in this manner are
irregular and lacking in intensity. Of course, they are not
typical; for they have not been complicated with fear and
disease- building treatment.


Doctors will say: “Suppose it is a case of diphtheria?
Antitoxin should be used, for it is a specific.” What is
diphtheria? A toxemic subject with gastro-intestinal catarrh
becomes infected from decomposition of animal food eaten
in excess of digestive powers. The symptoms are those of
tonsilitis, showing a grayish exudite covering the tonsils or
other parts of the throat, accompanied by a disagreeable,
pungent, fetid breath. There is great prostration. Subjects
developing these symptoms have been living haphazardly.
Their eating has been too largely of animal foods and
starch—the conventional mixtures—and devoid of raw
vegetables and fruit. The only animal food may be milk,
and the patient a young child. There have been running
before, for a longer or shorter term, gastric irritation,
constipation, perhaps several gastric attacks—acute
indigestion.


In some cases the physical state is so vicious that a severe
development of gastro- intestinal putrefaction may end
fatally in from one to three days. These are the cases
supposed to be overwhelmed by the diphtheritic toxin,
which means an acute protein-poisoning— intestinal
putrefaction—in a subject already greatly enervated and
toxemic.


ACUTE MALIGNANCY DEFINED


Malignancy occurs in toxemic subjects who have been
carrying continuously a state of gastrointestinal indigestion
from a surfeit of food, in which animal substances, possibly
only milk, predominated. The entire organism is more or
less infected by the protein decomposition. A feast-day
comes along; an excess produces a crisis; and the organism,
which is enervated and toxemic to the point of no
resistance, is overwhelmed by septic poisoning.


WHAT CAUSES FATALITY


Fatal cases in all epidemics are food-drunkards who are
very much enervated, toxemic and infected from
putrescence in the bowels.


It is a crime to feed anything to the sick. No food should
be given until all symptoms are gone; then fruit and
vegetable juices (never any animal foods not for weeks). A
hot bath should be administered three times daily. Wash out
the bowels by enemas every few hours, until all putrescent
debris is throughly cleared out; and, when possible, give a
gastric ravage daily, until the stomach and bowels are
thoroughly cleared of all putrescence. The life of the patient
depends upon getting rid of the putrid food still remaining
in the bowels, before enough putrescence is absorbed to
cause death. All epidemic diseases are wholesale food-
poisonings among people who are pronouncedly enervated
and toxemic. The poisoning by food is on the order of
poisoning by chemicals. Those who have least resistance
(are most enervated and toxemic) suffer most and succumb
the easiest; for the poisoning brings on a crisis of Toxemia,
and the two nerve-destroying influences overwhelm the
reduced resistance, and may end in death unless wisely
treated. All acute diseases are gastro- intestinal infections
acting on toxemic subjects. The more enervated and
toxemic the subject, the more severe the crisis. Certainly
anyone with intelligence should see the danger in giving
food when the exciting cause of the disease is food-
poisoning.


Keep the patient warm and quiet, and in good air. More
treatment is meddlesome. Getting rid of putrefaction is
most important. Such diseases develop only in those of
pronounced enervation and toxemic, and those of very bad
eating habits.


TO SUM UP


To sum up briefly the difference between the toxemic
methods and “regular medicine”: Toxemia is a system
based on the true cause of disease—namely Toxemia.
Before Toxemia is developed, natural immunization
protects from germs, parasites, and all physical vicissitudes.


Toxin is a by-product as constant and necessary as life
itself. When the organism is normal, it is produced and
eliminated as fast as produced. From the point of
production to the point of elimination, it is carried by the
blood; hence at no time is the organism free from toxin in
the blood. In a normal amount it is gently stimulating; but
when the organism is enervated, elimination is checked.
Then the amount retained becomes overstimulating—
toxic—ranging from a slight excess to an amount so
profound as to overwhelm life.


The treatment is so simple that it staggers those who
believe in curing. Heroic treatment is disease- building.
Find in what way nerve-energy is wasted, and stop it—stop
all nerve-leaks. Then returning to normal is a matter of
time, in which nature attends to all repairs herself. And she
resents help—medical officiousness.


In writing and giving advice, I often make the mistake of
taking for granted that the consultant understands what I
have in mind. Why should he, when I have not given oral
or written expression to my meaning?


In the matter of stopping nerve-leaks, it is easy for me to
say: “Find out in what way nerve-energy is wasted, and
stop it—stop all nerve-leaks,” etc. I am appalled at my
stupidity in saying to a patient to stop enervating himself,
and allowing the matter to end by naming one or two gross
enervating habits; for example: Stop worry; stop smoking;
stop stimulants; control your temper; stop eating too
rapidly; stop allowing yourself to become excited. Stopping
one enervating habit benefits; but dependable health brooks
no enervating habits at all.


The Causes of Enervation


TO UNDERSTAND disease, it is necessary to know
cause; and, as Toxemia is the cause of all diseases, and as
enervation—an enervated body and mind—is the cause of
Toxemia, it behooves those who are sick and want to get
well, and who want to know how to stay well, to know
what causes enervation.


A normal, healthy person is one who is poised (self-
controlled), and who has no nerve-destroying habits. A
self-controlled man is a man who is not controlled, kicked,
cuffed, or driven by habits.


Man is either the master of himself, or his appetite and
sensual pleasures master him. If the former, he enjoys
health until worn out; and he should go down at from
ninety to one hundred and fifty years of age. If he is
inclined to the latter, yet has his habits more or less under
control—is moderate—he may live from sixty to ninety
years. But if he is a sensualist—is controlled by habits and
passions, sits up after bedtime to take a last smoke or eat a
lunch or gets up in the night and smokes (I knew a
celebrated physician who used tobacco to secure sleep; he
died at fifty-four years of age), or takes a drink to quiet his


nerves and make him sleep, or goes the limit venereally—
he becomes irritable, grouchy, and dies prematurely.


Excesses transform a man into a disgusting brute. The
word “brute” is used here to express the state of one being
devoid of self-control. Those of fine constitutions are often
converted into neurotics, who have left health and comfort
far behind. Many know comfort only for short periods, and
then at the instigation of drugs or stimulants.


The youths of our country are fast developing a state of
multi-inebriety—jazz, tobacco, alcohol, and petting parties;
are developing a sex-neurosis that will he followed by a
generation of paralytics, epileptics, insane, morons, idiots,
and monstrosities, embracing all who do not die of acute
disease.


This class live from thirty until the chloroforming age—
sixty years. The majority die early in life. We are fast
coming to an age of impotence. I knew one of superior
mind who died of ataxia at thirty-five. I quote a few lines
from his own writings concerning his state the last year of
his life:


Could I but crystallize these midnight tears
And gather from their beaded bitterness


A rosary for burning lips to press,

Some pain-born token of these joyless years,

To teach the faith that saves, the hope that cheers;
Then would I bid these fountains of distress
Flow fast and free, if their sad floods could bless

Or murmur peace in some poor sufferer’s ears.


My world has shrunk at last to this small room,
Where, like a prisoner, I must now remain.

I’d rather be a captive in the gloom
Of some damp dungeon, tearing at my chain;
For then, perchance, my freedom I might gain.

Ah God! to think that I must languish here,
Fettered by sickness and subdued by pain,

To die a living death from year to year,

Joy banished from my breast and Sorrow brooding

there.


I often think how once these stumbling feet,

That now can scarcely bear me to my bed,
Were swift to follow, as the wind is fleet,

That baleful beam that to destruction led;


Thou domineering power, or love, or lust,
Or passion, or whatever else thou art,
How have thy crimson roses turned to dust
And strewn their withered leaves upon this heart!
Though through my vitals now they venomed dart
Strikes like an adder’s sting, yet still I feel
From Egypt’s flesh-pots it is hard to part;


And my weak, wandering glances often steal
Back to sweet sinful things, until my senses reel.


Still one retreat is left, to which I flee:

Dear dreamy draught, in which I often steep
Body and soul, I turn again to thee,
And drift down Lethe’s stream out on Oblivion’s
sea.


Thirty-five years is a short life for a brain to live that can
conjure the English language as the above snatches
indicate. Thousands pay the price that this man paid, but
very few can win so much admiration and sympathy with
their swan-songs. Few people can read the psychology of
swan-songs. Often they are an epitome of a lifetime.


ENERVATING HABITS
BABIES


Babies should not be trundled about too much; should not
sleep in their mothers’ arms; should not be exposed to
bright lights, loud talking, noises, too much heat or cold;
should not be jolted about in baby-buggies, automobiles,
trains, street cars.


The very young are made sick by too much excitement of
all kinds. Very young children should be kept quiet enough
to favor sleep all the time, except when bathed and when
clothes are changed. They should not he taken up every
time they do any fretting. All that is needed is to make
them dry and change their positions.


Young children should not be fed oftener than every four
hours, and not that often unless they are awake. To awaken
a child for food is very unnecessary and harmful.


A human being is a cerebro-spinal dynamo, and should
be kept as much as possible in a static state, conserving
nerve-energy for future use. Poise or self-controteaching
a child to be contented alone—must be started at birth.


Children need no entertainment. When left alone, they
find entertainment in becoming acquainted with
themselves.


Children that are coddled in the matter of being
entertained—dancing attendance on them—develop
discontent and bring on enervation, which favors “the
diseases peculiar to children.”


CHILDREN


Children of school age are enervated by being urged in
school work, exercise, and all kinds of excitement. Play
should he limited. When hysteria shows up, stop the play.


Much study, examinations, exercise without desire,
competitive examinations of all kinds, causes a capricious
craving for food. When a growing child is forced to the
limit of its nervous capacity, nature must conserve in some
way; and as there is no way to sidestep convention’s eternal
grind, the normal desire for food is lost.


Forced Feeding to Increase Weight—The whole system
of school feeding, is one of destroying health by
enervating, if not killing the child.


The federal government is ruining thousands of our
young men, teaching them the sick habit. The government
should give them a pension and turn them loose. The
present coddling is pernicious, not only for the ex-soldier,
but also for those who are interested in keeping their
hospital jobs.


Doctors must be able to detect cunning and craft. The
sick habit often starts as a joke, an experiment—just to see


how those interested will take it—and ends in deceiving the
deceiver.


A common habit, and one that often leads to a sick habit,
is self-pity—being sorry for one’s self. Children are
inclined to play sick to buy what they want.


Giving even school lunches enervates by building
dissatisfaction. It is disease-building. Children must be
given an independent spirit—pride will save the world.
Then, to add to all this routine of nerve-destroying customs
of our schools, teeth must be straightened; which means
pressure on nerve and more or less irritation. The tonsils
and appendix must be removed. This is a pernicious
medical fad. Feed right, and there will be no excuse for
operations.


Vaccine and serums must be used to immunize from
disease that results from the enervation brought on from all
preceding causes. This is another senseless fad, besides it is
disease building.


People are sick from wrong living. Operations remove
erects. Stop the cause, and disease goes away. Nature cures,
when allowed to do so, by removing the causes of
enervation.


Children Pampered and Spoiled.—This brings on the bad
and enervating habits of irritability, wilfulness, overeating,
improper eating, and temper. Many of the older children
use tobacco, coffee, and an excessive amount of sweets and
pastry. Self-abuse begins early in many, and is the cause of
stomach symptoms. Adolescence comes with excessive
dancing, loss of sleep, smoking, drinking, lasciviousness,
venereal disease, and the fear springing from the
contemplation of the consequences. Irritable children are
hard to do anything for. The reason they are irritable is
because they are pampered and not made to mind.


It is a crime not to control children. They should be
compelled to obey. But do not wait until they are sick. A
cranky irritability will help bring on disease and keep a
child sick.


Fear.—Fear is the greatest of all causes of enervation.
Children are subject to many fears. They are educated to
fear the dark, the bogy-man, and punishment. Parents often
keep children in a state of fear by irritably cuffing them for
the slightest excuse. There are many parents who do their
“scrapping” before their children. It is a dreadfully
common thing to do.


Outlawry begins at home and at the breast of the mother.
A child that cannot respect its parents will not respect the
laws of the state or nation. No parent is respected who is
not obeyed at once and without capitulation. Unconditional
surrender is the discipline necessary for character-building.
But children will not obey laws that parents disregard.


In domestic infelicity are born disease and crime, and no
amount of doctoring by doctors of medicine, law, and
theology can cure; for none of them removes the cause.
Those who die of chronic disease have no self-control.


There is much fear and anxiety in a child’s life. No child
can thrive living in a state of fear in home, school, or
church. Discipline taught by respected parents brings love
and not fear.


Longevity has increased since hell-fire and brimstone
have ceased to be taught and to build fear. A morality kept
intact by fear is not health-imparting, and is not a morality
at all. Remove the fear, and mob license succeeds it. Fear
and love are antidotal. Man has been taught to fear God,
and at the same time love Him. Where the fear is real, the
love is fictitious. Love being the basis on which ethics is
built, a love founded on fear builds humbug ethics; and this


is the foundation of all the conventional lies of our
civilization.


Fear in all lines concerning children, from their
conception to their birth, and on through school life, social
life, and marriage, leads to enervation. The dearth of worth-
while knowledge of how to feed and otherwise care for
children keeps up an unnecessary worry with parents
concerning their health. How to teach the young to avoid
breaking their health and handicapping their minds by
excesses in play, eating, drinking, in controlling temper and
emotions, and in self-pollution is a knowledge sadly
lacking in nearly all homes. Disease follows these excesses
in the young. There is not a habit so self-destructive and so
generally practiced as venereal excitement; and there is no
habit receiving so little attention from parents.


Ataxia is supposed to be caused by syphilis, but in fact, it
is caused by cerebro-spinal enervation, brought on from
sensuality in all forms—particularly venereal. Subjects of
this disease usually begin onanism early in life. Parents
should teach children to avoid destroying habits. I have had
locomotor-ataxia cases confess to me that they began their
self-pollution as early as eight years of age. Ten to fifteen
are the years when active pollution begins. Unless a
physician is very tactful, youths will not confess. I will say


that very few boys have been untruthful to me. This
practice is not quite so common with the opposite sex.


The physical abuse in this line is not nearly so enervating
as allowing the mind to dwell on sex-subjects. Lascivious
dreaming debauches the victim as much as excessive
venery. Early pollution, followed by excessive venery,
often communizes a mind that would shine in the forum
and in intellectual pursuits. There is a difference, however,
in garrulity and garrulous parroting, and giving a feast of
reason. Bright intellects at twenty and twenty-five often
degenerate into mediocrity at forty-five because of brain-
enervation due to venereal excess. Add to sex- abuse,
tobacco, coffee, tea, alcohol, and excessive or wrong
eating, and no wonder man at sixty is fit for little else than
chloroforming, if nature has not already administered
euthanasia.


ADULTS


Adults, too, have much fear in their lives. The bread-and-
butter problem gives anxiety; but when enough has been
accumulated, so that fear along this line is unnecessary,
fear is felt that something may happen that will put them


back in the breadline. Why? There is no confidence in
business ethics—there is no God in business.


Business Worries.—Business wotries are a source of
enervation. Business—any business—is not the cause of
worry. A work well done is a delight, and anything that
delights is character- building. A work slovenly carried on
dissatisfies; but the worrier never looks within to find the
cause. This life brings enervation in time, and disease as a
sequel; then more worries looking for a cure. Business is
what a man makes of it. A thorough understanding of
business, with honesty and industry, removes all worries
and saves nerve- energy. Worry does not build efficiency;
neither is inefficiency removed by worrying. Worry, lack of
control over the emotions, improper eating, stimulants, all
build disease.


Nothing is so conducive to poise as a thorough
understanding of one’s personal habits and occupation.
Bluff and bluster may put the idea of efficiency “across” to
the people for a time; but, as surely as chickens come home
to roost, the truth will out. Worry, even though presenting a
smooth exterior, will break through; the worker will break
down—disease will claim him for its own. Housewives
who carry a burden of worry become enervated and lose
health. The cause of their worry is lack of control of eating,


lack of control of the emotions, lack of care of the body,
and lack of efficiency. Instead of resolutely going to work
to remove all the defects, they are downed by them. An
uncontrollable temper must be downed, or it will down the
one who gives way to it. Gossip is not an admirable quality,
and, unless overcome, it will in time drive friends away.
Envy and jealousy are cancers that eat the soul out of those
who indulge them. What is left to love when the soul is
gone?


When anyone, from indolence and health-destroying
habits, allows himself to gravitate below the standard
expected of him by his friends, he must not be surprised
when they run away from him.


Who are the old people who are left alone? Those who
have lived selfish lives—who have demanded
entertainment when they should have been entertaining
themselves. Happiness and entertainment must come from
within—from a love of service, work, books. If this
fountain of youth and pleasure is not found before old age
creeps over us, we shall find ourselves alone. Even in the
midst of a throng we shall be alone, forever alone. What
could be more pathetic?


Self-Indulgence.—Self-indulgence is contrary to ethics


and brings its condemnation. What about the ethics of
gluttons—what about their religion? Excess in everything
follows on the heels of abnormal selfish indulgence.
Coming under this head are self-pity and a desire for cure.
Extravagant habits, even if there is an inexhaustible supply,
builds a self-destructive morale, on the heels of which, like
a nemesis, runs the trail to premature death. The causes are
called heart disease, apoplexy, paralysis, kidney disease,
suicide, etc.; but what is in a name? Names are all
misleading; for the cause—first, last, and all the time—is a
selfish body and mind—destructive self-indulgence.


A study of nature reveals the fact that man must live for
service; not giving alms, but helping others to help
themselves.


Self-indulgence in the use of stimulants, even in
moderation, is a constant drain on the nervous system; and
a time comes when the last cigar, the last cup of coffee, the
last hearty meal, snaps the vital cord; and the contingency
is always unexpected and a surprise.


Overwork is said to enervate; but this is an excuse behind
which are hidden many bad habits that kill, rather than the
work. Work without pleasure in the work is enervating and
disease-building; an unsatisfied mind—a desire to engage


in some other work before efficiency has been attained in
the work engaged in; more desire for pay than to do good
work. A work is never well done until it takes on the
individuality of the worker. We should work with the
creative instinct. Our work should be created in the image
of its creator —love of the creator—of the work’ not the
emoluments.


Dissatisfaction and overworked emotions are enervating.
Worry, fear, grief, anger, passion, temper, overjoy,
depression, dissatisfaction, self-pity, pride, egotism, envy,
jealousy, gossip, lying, dishonesty, failing to meet
obligations and appointments, taking advantage of
misunderstandings, abusing the credulity of friends,
abusing the confidence of those who confide in us—all
enervate and in time build incurable disease.


Grief._—Grief is enervating. Those who are very
enervated and toxemic will be prostrated by grief, and,
unless put to bed and kept warm and quiet, and without
food, may die. Food eaten under such circumstances will
not digest, but acts as a poison. Some people are made
invalids for life by a great grief.


Shock.—Shock, mental or physical, may enervate so
greatly as to kill by heart failure, or be followed by


permanent nervousness. Wrong eating or overeating may
prevent a return to health. The shell-shock that many
soldiers suffered during the World War was converted into
permanent invalidism by tobacco and other enervating
habits. Certainly overeating prevents a return to health.


Anger.—Anger is very enervating. A daily shock of anger
will build profound enervation. A temper that flies at the
slightest provocation ruins digestion and builds
nervousness. Unless controlled, epilepsy may evolve, and
cancer may end life. The chronic grouch is liable to build
ulcer or cancer of the stomach. Those who cannot control
their temper often build rheumatic arthritis, hard arteries,
gall-stone, and early old age.


Egotism.—Because of self-love, selfishness, misanthropy,
and distrust, the egotist sees unfriendliness in all the acts of
others—every hand is against him. This causes enervation
and Toxemia, which lead on to many nervous
derangements, and even insanity. A misanthrope loves self
above everything and everybody. The moment the nearest
and dearest friend is suspected, the friend’s head comes off
figuratively. The egotist hates all who fail to feed his
vanity. Hate and anger are always on tap, but draped with a
mocking smile when finesse or stratagem demands.
Friendship, honor, honesty, and veracity must go when


self-interest is being impinged upon or neglected. Men of
this type have no gratitude. They demand everything, and
give nothing without an ulterior motive. Where egotism is
mild, it may not go beyond a disagreeable, overbearing
selfishness.


Selfishness.—A selfish nature always looks after self first.
A common type of selfishness is interpreted as love of
children. But when a son or daughter marries against the
father’s wish, disinheritance follows. Why? Because
ambition is piqued. Love is oftener a selfish ambition than
affection. Selfishness leads on to enervation and Toxemia.


Ambition.—Ambition of a selfish type brings on ill-
health; for it meets with so many disappointments. Where
successful, it enables the one who succeeds to gratify his
sensual nature, resulting in all the so-called diseases
following in the wake of selfish gratification. A noble
ambition goes with self-control and service to mankind,
and health and long life are two of the rewards. Ambition
for display, ostentation, gives an evanescent gratification;
but it costs more in wasted nerve-energy than it is worth.


Thousands of semi-invalid women bring on toxemic
crises as their reward for giving dinners and displaying
dress, homes, and furnishings.


Women gratify silly, stupid ambitions, and pay for their
thrills in broken health.


Many waste more energy at an afternoon card party than
they can renew in a week.


Envy.—Envy of a low and disease- producing type is of a
begrudging nature. The man possessing this kind of envy is
a vandal. He will slip a monkey- wrench into the machinery
of those whom he envies. He will poison reputations by
innuendo.


Who steals my purse steals trash; ‘tis something,
nothing;

“Twas mine, ‘tis his, and has been slave to
thousands;

But he who filches from me my good name

Robs me of that which not enriches him,

And makes me poor indeed. (Shakespeare.)


When safe, such a person will go the limit in doing even
bodily harm to those whose merits tower over his. Laudable
envy is that of a desire to equal in success the one envied.
To rejoice in the success of others, and try to equal them,
where the success has been achieved on merit, builds a
healthy mind and body.


Love and Jealousy.—According to Solomon: “Love is
strong as death; jealousy is cruel as the grave.” Solomon
should have known.


Shakespeare knew about everything worth knowing up to
his time. He said:


How many fools serve maddened jealousy!
The venomed clamors of a jealous woman
Poison more deadly than a mad dog’s tooth.


The systematic poisoning of overwrought emotions has
been known since reasoning began; but, aside from
knowing that ‘a poison is generated in the system” from
great anger, love, jealousy, hate, and grief, just what the
poison is, and the modus operandi of its production, have
never been satisfactorily explained until made clear by the
Philosophy of Toxemia. The pathology of jealousy
Shakespeare knew well, as evidenced by the words he put
into the mouths of some of his characters.


Excessive emotion—jealousy, for example, or great
anger— precipitates a profound enervation, which inhibits
elimination. This floods the blood with toxin, and brings on
a malignant Toxemia in the form of toxin drunkenness,
which in people of a belligerent nature causes them to run


amuck. Murder, several murders, are sometimes
committed. In those with more consideration for others—
those with less self-love—suicide ends the psychological
storm.


Jealousy and unrequited love, when not malignant—
developing in a viscious, unmoral subject—in time
undermine the constitution by keeping up a gradually
increasing state of enervation and Toxemia. Catarrhal
inflammations and ulcerations get better and worse, with no
hope of final recovery until the causes of enervation are
overcome namely, enervating habits of mind and body, of
which jealousy is chief.


Overeating.—Overeating is a common and universal
enervating habit; eating too much fat—cream, butter, fat
meats, oils, rich pastries, sweets; eating too often; eating
between meals, and checking digestion with water- drinking
between meals.


Food-inebriety is more common than alcohol-inebriety.
The subconscious is as busy as a hive of bees substituting,
antidoting, and in reparation work; substituting one
stimulating excess for another—demanding whiskey,
tobacco, opium, etc., for gluttonous eating; thrills, shocks,
sensual excesses for food-poisoning. Ungratified sense-


demands are appeased by food excesses or other stimulants;
and when nature is balked in her demands, the victim runs
amuck.


A French sheep-herder’s daughter, being opposed by her
father in marrying a lover, killed the parent while he slept
by their campfire. A short time after the tragedy some men
came upon the camp and discovered the girl eating her
father’s heart, which she had cut out and roasted in the fire.
When surprised at her cannibalistic feast, she held up what
was left of the heart, and, with a sardonic laugh, declared:
“He broke my heart, and I am eating his.”


Only a short time ago the overwrought nerves of a jazz-
and alcohol-crazed girl forced her to kill her mother
because the latter undertook to oppose her in the
gratification of her subconscious demands for more
stimulation.


When enervation and Toxemia have reached the stage of
inebriety seen in the two girls mentioned above, civil and
moral laws have abdicated to the subconscious laws, which,
like cosmic law and order, are unmoral, but run true to
necessity.


Psychological, like physical, cyclones are out of the
regular order, yet they are obeying the laws of their nature.
They have no scruples to gainsay, but tear through order as
ruthlessly as fiends.


Every human being should know that such phenomena
are potential to him, and that the road to such catastrophes
is enervating habits.


Prohibition is a beautiful ideal, but it is palliating one
social disease while it is building a greater.


What mother would not rather have her son brought home
from the corner grog-shop drunk than see him escorted to
jail hand-cuffed to an officer?


Enervation and Toxemia focused on the brain bring out
neurotic states, with all kinds of symptom-complexes.
Drunkenness substitutes for bank robbery and other
outlawry. So long as food-drunkenness retains its prestige
Sundays, and deciding our brawls on Monday—it will take
more than statutes to enforce law and order. Most of our
laws are made while the law-makers are drunk on food and
tobacco.


Drunkenness and crime of all kinds are vicarious toxin
eliminations—crises of Toxemia. Enforcing temperance
and control of crime must fail In object—namely, causing
people to be temperate and law-abiding. The reason should
be obvious to the student of nature. Our wants are based on
our subconscious needs; sentiment and ethics have nothing
to do with it. Our subconscious is not moral nor immoral; it
belongs to the Great Cosmos, which is systematic, perfect
in order, but unmoral. Intemperance of any kind establishes
a want which, if not satisfied in the usual way, will turn to
other ways of being satisfied. The surgeon, laws, and
anodynes perhaps relieve effects, but cures are based on
removing causes. Legislatures are quack doctors. Self-
control is the only cure. To develop self-control, the need
must be understood.


The gluttonous build putrefaction in the bowels. Nerve-
energy is used up in resisting systemic infection. The
supply of blood to the surface of the body for purposes of
warmth—radiation—tesisting cold and heat, is called to the
mucous membrane of the gastro-intestinal canal to
neutralize the septic material that is about to enter the
system through the absorbents. The mucous membrane
becomes turgid with blood, establishing a mucorrhea
(excessive secretion of mucus). This is what we call
catarrh. This secretion mechanically obstructs absorption of


putrescence, and also antidotes the poison by bringing the
antibodies from the blood.


A battle-royal is on all the time in the intestines of the
gluttonous. The subconscious musters all the help possible,
and when the system is drained of autogenerated antidotes,
the victim is sent by his subconscious to find alcohol,
tobacco, coffee, tea, condiments, and more food. Moral
preachments, and prohibitory laws passed by Solons drunk
on toxin. bowel putrescence, and tobacco, like all
monstrosities, are abortions.


Insatiable desire for food and stimulants means an
enervated state of the body brought on from
overindulgence—overstimulation.


A driving desire for food three times a day means
enervation; trouble is only a little farther on. The wise will
get busy and correct appetites.


Perverted appetites are built by overeating; eating rich
food until enjoyment is lost for staple or plain foods;
excessive use of stimulants—alcohol, tobacco, coffee, tea;
excessive use of butter, salt, pepper, and rich dressings,
eating without a real hunger (real hunger will take the
plainest foods with a relish); eating when sick or


uncomfortable; eating at all hours, between meals; eating
until uncomfortable.


Gossips are always slanderers, and slanderers are always
and forever potential liars. If they do not know that they are
broadcasting lies, they are criminally careless in not
endeavoring to find whether the tale they gossip is true or
not. Gossip enervates the gossiper.


Gossips are always enervated, for they live in fear of
being discovered. Their secretions are always acid. They
are inclined to develop pyorrhea and mucous-membrane
infections. They are slow to recover from catarrhal crises of
Toxemia.


Gossips are empty-headed slaves to their habits of slander
and spite; they are malignant parasites that feed upon
carrion. They are the lowest type of criminals; hell
monsters that kill with their breath. They often die of
cancer.


Sycophancy.—Flatterers look like friends, as wolves like
dogs. (Byron.) He hurts me most who lavishly commends.
(Churchill.)


A real sycophant, like all people who are not honest, lives
a life that enervates, and which nature condemns early.


Dishonesty.—Dishonesty eventually hardens the arteries,
and cancer ends a miserable existence.


Religiosity.—Morbidly pious, yet practicing the foregoing
habits and ending in premature death.


A saving religion, Christian, Jewish or Mohammedan, is
one free from mental and physical habits that
overstimulate, enervate and intoxicate.


If Toxemic get rid of enervating habits. Cures—prayers,
drugs, surgery—all honest or dishonest cures—will not
cure. Get rid of cause and stay rid of it, then health returns
and abides perpetually.


Retrospection


MORE might have been said, and no doubt better said,
about how we human beings vandalize our minds and
bodies; but enough has been told for open-minded people
to see that the only nemesis on our heels is our habits. O.
W. Holmes, in his “The Autocrat of the Breakfast Table,”
had this to say concerning habit:


Habit is the approximation of the animal system
of the organic. It is a confession of failure in the
highest function of being, which involves a
perpetual self- determination, in full view of all
existing circumstances.


Autonomy or self-government is met at the threshold of
life by all the conventional superstitions, and educated into
a lot of habits, such as curing without removing cause.
This, combined with man’s inclination to hedonism (the
doctrine that pleasure is the only good), leads to a life of
failure, in spite of man’s potential desire to rise above the
forces that hold him down. “Toxemia Explained” will help
all who study it carefully to understand what disease is, and
how it is brought on. This knowledge will help the wise.
and self- controlled to sidestep disease, and the medical
octopus that unwittingly vandalizes the sick.


The profession is made up of an army of educated men;
and I believe the majority are gentlemen, and are
endeavoring to serve humanity. Education and ethics, when
established on fallacy and given the prestige of numbers—
given an overwhelming majority—can make the fallacy
true, so far as the herd is concerned.


All Task of laymen or the profession is honestly to put
my philosophy to the acid test. Yes, prove, if possible, that
I am mistaken, and then give me what is coming to me!


Man makes his own diseases. This book tells how he does
it. And he is the one who can bring back health. He and his
subconsciousness alone can cure. Doctors cannot cure.
Only very rarely is surgical vandalism a dernier resort,
unless bad treatment forces unnecessary emergencies.


The body is strong or weak, as the case may be,

depending entirely on whether the nerve-energy is strong or weak.
And it should be remembered that the functions of the body are
carried on well or badly according to the amount of energy generated.


A Few Suggestions


THE following suggestions may be of assistance to those
who wish to maintain their present state of good health, or
help them to bring themselves from their present state of
impaired health to that of good health. Those who are badly
handicapped, and who wish more detailed information, will
have to have the advice fitted to their particular cases
through individual instructions.


The first thing on awaking in the morning, the Tilden
system of tensing exercises should be practiced for from
fifteen to thirty minutes. (See exercises at the end of this
chapter.) Following the exercise, go to the bathroom and,
while standing in warm water, take a quick, warm sponge-
bath. Then follow this with plenty of dry-towel or friction-
mitten rubbing. At night, before retiring, give the body a
thorough friction rubbing again. If not convenient to take
the warm sponge-bath in the morning, use the dry rub in the
morning and the warm sponge-bath at night before retiring.


Eat three meals a day and no more; no eating nor drinking
between meals. Use the following rules to guide you in
“when to eat, when not to eat, and how to eat”:


Rule No. 1.—Never eat unless you have been absolutely
comfortable in mind and body from the previous mealtime.


Rule No. 2.—Thoroughly masticate and insalivate every
mouthful of starchy food, and give the rest of your food
plenty of attention.


Rule No. 3.—WNever eat without a keen relish.


If the bowels do not move during the day, before retiring
at night use a small enema—a pint of warm water. Put it
into the bowels and allow it to remain for five to ten
minutes; then solicit a movement. Proper mastication, right
combinations of food, and plenty of tensing exercise to the
abdomen will bring about proper bowel action.

As to what to eat—For those in ordinarily good health the
following rules will serve as a guide:


Fruit Breakfast
Starch Lunch
Regulation Dinner


or


Starch Breakfast
Fruit Lunch
Regulation Dinner


The regulation dinner may be taken at noon in place of
the lunch, if it is more convenient.


Fruit Breakfast.—Any kind of fresh fruit or berries
followed with either milk, fifty-fifty (half warm milk and
half hot water), or teakettle tea (hot water with two or three
tablespoons of cream to the cup).


Starch Breakfast.—Toast, Shredded Wheat, Triscuit, Rye
Crisp, well-baked muffins, corn bread or biscuit, griddle-
cakes, waffles, cooked cereal (any one of foregoing),
followed with fresh or cooked fruit, without sugar. The dry
starches should be eaten with a little butter, and not soaked
up with milk or cream. This insures thorough mastication.
The cereals should be taken with a little cream and salt—no
milk or sugar. The griddle-cakes and waffles may be
accompanied with honey and butter, followed with teakettle
tea.


If desired, the starch breakfast may be followed with
fresh fruit instead of a beverage.


Starch Lunch.—The same as the starch breakfast.
Occasionally a piece of plain cake and ice-cream.


Fruit Lunch.—The same as the fruit breakfast.
Occasionally a piece of fruit pie and a piece of cheese, or
some form of dessert, followed with fresh fruit.


Regulation Dinner.—No. 1: Meat, two cooked non-
starchy vegetables, and a combination salad.


No. 2: Starch, two cooked non-starchy vegetables, and a
combination salad.


Meat: Any kind of fresh meat, cheese, nuts, eggs, bacon,
fish, or fowl.


Starch: Potatoes (sweet or Irish), macaroni, rice, Hubbard
squash, dry beans and peas, tapioca, pumpkin, or any of the
starches listed above.


Cooked Non-starchy Vegetables: Beets, carrots, parsnips,
cabbage, lettuce, cauliflower, Brussels sprouts, green corn,
green beans and peas, asparagus, onions, eggplant, salsify,
tomatoes, cucumbers, celery, spinach, greens, summer
squash, etc.


Combination Tilden Salad: Lettuce, tomatoes, and
cucumber; lettuce, celery and apple; lettuce, apple, and
orange, or any other fruit. Dress with salt, oil, and lemon
juice.


Regulation Dinner No. 1—should be taken every other
day, and Dinner No. 2 the alternate days.


Of course, there are many variations and additions to the
above suggestions, but details cannot he gone into in this
book. Those who wish to have more detailed suggestions
should read the monthly periodical, Dr. Tilden’s Health
Review and Critique, and his Cook Book.


DR. Tilden’s Tensing Exercises


Begin by tensing the leg muscles from the toes to the
body, as follows: First extend the toes as far as you can;
then grip, as it were, by forcing the toes forward toward the
heels, and at the same time make the muscles of the legs
hard to the body. Completely relax. Do not repeat the
tension again until muscles are soft; then tense again,
repeating the contraction and extension.


Tense the hands and arms in the same way. Extend the
fingers as far as possible, making the muscles hard to the
shoulders; then grip the fingers and shut the fist, hardening
the muscles to the shoulders. Do this five times; then tense
the legs five times; then the hands and arms again.


Fold a pillow and put under the shoulders, so that when
the head drops back it will not touch anything. Lift the head
forward, the chin to the chest; drop the head back again as
far as it will go; then lift. Do this four or five times. Then,
with the pillow still under the shoulders, lock the fingers
under the head, allowing the head to rest in the hands.
Swing the head from side to side, up and down, and rotate,
carrying each movement as far as possible.


Then push the folded pillow down under the hips and go
through the leg movements of riding a bicycle. Then, with
legs extended in the air, move each leg from side to side,
allowing one to pass the other, scissor- fashion; changing,
however, each time they pass, having first one leg forward
and then the other.


Tense the abdomen, making the muscles as hard as
possible, and at the same time kneading the muscles with
the hands. This exercise is necessary for overcoming
constipation. In women, the uterine ligaments will be
strengthened, lifting and overcoming falling and misplaced
positions of the womb. The muscles of the bladder and
rectum will be improved by these exercises. Piles—
prolapsus of the rectal mucous membrane—will be
overcome. An irritable bladder and prostate enlargements
will be benefited by these exercises.


Then sit up and turn the face to the right as far as
possible; then to the left as far as possible; then allow the
head to drop over, so as to bring the ear close to the
shoulder, and then carry it over to the opposite shoulder.


These movements of the head and neck are necessary to
remove deposits that take place between the vertebrae, and
in grooves and openings in bones where the nerves and


arteries pass. If the hearing is bad, these movements will
improve it. If the sense of smell is not so acute as it should
be, by keeping up the exercises the olfactory nerve will be
freed and the power of smell will be improved. The taste,
too, will be bettered. All the nerves of special sense will be
invigorated. The pneumogastric nerve and all the vital
nerves controlling vital organs are invigorated by this
exercise. When nerves are pressed upon by organic
deposits to be absorbed. The muscles of the neck will
develop; the muscles of the face will develop, one will
grow to look and feel younger.


These exercises must be gone through with, not only
before getting up, but every three or four hours during the
day. You may think that this is very laborious, but it is the
price you must pay to get well. So begin at once, and be
faithful!


Sit on the edge of the bed, and sway the body from side
to side as far as possible, then follow with a twisting
movement, attempting to look behind over the shoulders.
Sit up in bed, and sway backward and forward, compelling
the spine to bend from the small of the back up to the head,
forward and backward. This loosens up the spine and


invigorates the nerves that are sent off to the lower part of
the body.


Get on the knees and elbows; then push the body forward
as far as possible without falling upon the abdomen; then
push back as far as possible. Go back and forth, while in
this position, until tired, then drop on either the left or right
shoulder while the hips are highly elevated. This is called
the knee-shoulder position. The knee and elbow position,
movements.” It is necessary to practice both these
movements and positions in overcoming constipation,
prolapsus of the bowels, rectum, or womb, and piles.


Place the forefingers over the closed eyes, and rub gently
from side to side. Then remove the fingers and rotate the
eyeballs, reversing the movement to relieve the tire.


Place the forefingers on the wings of the nose; press
together and move from side to side.


When the weather is nice, it is well to walk in the open
air as often as possible.
