The Tale of the Two Brothers (Anpu and Bata) — Flinders Petrie (1895)
=====================================================================
The Tale of the Two Brothers (Anpu and Bata) from Flinders Petrie's Egyptian Tales: Translated from the Papyri, First Series (1895) — the ancient Egyptian story of Anpu and Bata from Papyrus D'Orbiney, with Petrie's commentary, public domain. Among the oldest surviving stories in the world. Scan via Internet Archive.

ANPU AND BATA 



37 



worker, there was not his equal in the whole 
land ; behold, the spirit ^of • a god was in 
him. 

Now after this the younger brother fol- 




Y.e. 

THE RETURN AT EVEN 



lowed his oxen in his daily manner ; and 
every evening he turned again to the house, 
laden with all the herbs of the field, with 
milk and with wood, and with all things of 



the field. And he put them down before his 
elder brother, who was sitting with his wife ; 
and he drank and ate, and he lay down in his 
stable with the cattle. ^ And at the dawn of 
day he took bread which he had baked, and 
laid it before his elder brother ; and he took 
with him his bread to the field, and he drave 
his cattle to pasture in the fields. And as he 
walked behind his cattle, they said to him, 
'*^ Good is the herbage which is in that 
place ; " and he listened to all that they said, 
and he took them to the good place which 
they desired. And the cattle which were 
before him became exceeding excellent, and 
they multiplied greatly. 

Now at the time of ploughing his elder 
brother said unto him, '' Let us make ready 
for ourselves a goodly yoke of oxen for 
ploughing, for the land has come out from 
th^jW-Attr, Jt is fit for ploughing. More- 
over, do thou come to the field with corn, 
for we will begin the ploughing in the mor- 
row morning.'' Thus said he to him ; and 



39 



his younger brother did all things as his elder 
brother had spoken unto him to do them. 

And when the morn was come, they went 
to the fields with their things ; and their 
hearts were pleased exceedingly with their 
task in the beginning of their work. And 




GOING TO THE FIELDS 



it came to pass after this that as they were in 
the field they stopped for corn, and he sent 
his younger brother, saying, ^' Haste thou, 
bring to us corn from the farm.*' And the 
younger brother found the wife of his elder 
brother, as she was sitting tiring her hair. 
He said to her, " Get up, and give to me 



40 



corn, that I may run to the field, for my 
elder brother hastened me ; do not delay." 
She said to him, *'Go, open the bin, and thou 
shalt take to thyself according to thy will, 
that I may not drop my locks of hair while I 
dress them/' 




WAITING FOR CORN 



The youth went into the stable ; he took 
a large measure, for he desired to take much 
corn ; he loaded it with wheat and barley ; 
and he went out carrying it. She said to 



ANPU AND BATA 41 

him, '' How much of the corn that is wanted, 
is that which is on thy shoulder ? " He said 
to her, *^ Three bushels of barley, and two of 
wheat, in all five ; these are w^hat are upon 
my shoulder : " thus said he to her. And 
she conversed with him, saying, " There is 
great strength in thee, for I see thy might 
every day." And her heart knew him with 
the knowledge of youth. And she arose and 
came to him, and conversed with him, say- 
ing, '* Come, stay with me, and it shall be 
well for thee, and I will make for thee beauti- 
ful garments." Then the youth became like 
a. panther of the south with fury at the evil 
speech which she had made to him ; and she 
feared greatly. And he spake unto her, say- 
ing, " Behold thou art to me as a mother, thy 
husband is to me as a father, for he who is 
elder than I has brought me up. What is 
this wickedness that thou hast said to me ? 
Say it not to me again. For I will not tell 
it to any man, for I will not let it be uttered 
by the mouth of any man." He lifted up 



his burden, and he went to the field and came 
to his elder brother ; and they took up their 
work, to labour at their task. 

Now afterward, at eventime, his elder 
brother was returning to his house ; and the 
younger brother was following after his oxen, 
and he loaded himself with all the things of 
the field ; and he brought his oxen before 
him, to make them lie down in their stable 
which was in the farm. And behold the. 
wife of the elder brother was afraid for the 
words which she had said. She took a 
parcel of fat, she became like one who is 
evilly beaten, desiring to say to her husband, 
" It is thy younger brother who has done this 
wrong.'' Her husband returned in the even, 
as was his wont of every day ; he came unto 
his house ; he found his wife ill of violence ; 
she did not give him water upon his hands 
as he used to have, she did not make a light 
before him, his house was in darkness, and 
she was lying very sick. Her husband said 
to her, ''Who has spoken with thee.^'' 



43 



Behold she said, '' No one has spoken 
with me except thy younger brother. When 
he came to take for thee corn he found me 
sitting alone ; he said to me, ' Come^ let us 




THE DARK RETURN 



stay together, tie up thy hair : ' thus spake he 
to me. I did not listen to him, but thus 
spake I to him : ' Behold, am I not thy 
mother, is not thy elder brother to thee as 
a father ? ' And he feared, and he beat me 
to stop me from making report to thee, and 
if thou lettest him live I shall die. Now 



44 



behold he is coming in the evening ; and I 
complain of these wicked words^ for he 
would have done this even in daylight." 

And the elder brother became as a panther 
of the south ; he sharpened his knife ; he 




THE AMBUSH 



took it in his hand ; he stood behind the 
door of his stable to slay his younger brother 
as he came in the evening to bring his cattle 
into the stable. 

Now the sun went down, and he loaded 



ANPU AND BATA 45 

himself with herbs in his daily manner. 
He came, and his foremost cow entered 
the stable, and she said to her keeper, 
" Behold thou thy elder brother standing 
before thee with his knife to slay thee ; flee 
from before him." He heard what his first 
cow had said ; and the next entering, she 
also said likewise. He looked beneath the 
door of the stable ; he saw the feet of his 
elder brother ; he was standing behind the 
door, and his knife was in his hand. He 
cast down his load to the ground, and betook 
himself to flee swiftly ; and his elder brother 
pursued after him with his knife. Then the 
younger brother cried out unto Ra Harakhti, 
saying, " My good Lord ! Thou art he who 
divides the evil from the good." And Ra 
stood and heard all his cry ; and Ra made 
a wide water between him and his elder 
brother, and it was full of crocodiles ; and 
the one brother was on one bank, and the 
other on the other bank ; and the elder 
brother smote twice on his hands at not 



slaying him. Thus did he. And the 
younger brother called to the elder on the 
bank, saying, '* Stand still until the dawn of 
day; and when Ra ariseth, I shall judge with 
thee before Him, and He discerneth between 
the good and the evil. For I shall not be 
with thee any more for ever ; I shall not be 
in the place in which thou art ; I shall go to 
the valley of the acacia." 

Now when the land was lightened, and the 
next day appeared, Ra Harakhti arose, and 
one looked unto the other. And the youth 
spake with his elder brother, saying, '' Where- 
fore earnest thou after me to slay me in crafti- 
ness, when thou didst not hear the words of 
my mouth ^ For I am thy brother in truth, 
and thou art to me as a father, and thy wife 
even as a mother : is it not so.^ Verily, when 
I was sent to bring for us corn, thy wife said 
to me, ' Come, stay with me ; ' for behold 
this has been turned over unto thee into 
another wise.'' And he caused him to under- 
stand of all that happened with him and his 



47 



wife. And he swore an oath by Ra Har- 
akhti, saying, '' Thy coming to slay me by 
deceit with thy knife was an abomination/' 
Then the youth took a knife, and cut off of 
his flesh, and cast it into the water, and the 
fish swallowed it. He failed ; he became 




THE CANAL OF RA 



faint ; and his elder brother cursed his own 
heart greatly ; he stood weeping for him afar 
ofi^; he knew not how to pass over to where 
his younger brother was, because of the 
crocodiles. And the younger brother called 
unto him, saying, '' Whereas thou hast devised 



48 ANPU AND JBATA 

an evil thing, wilt thou not also devise a good 
thing, even like that which I would do unto 
thee ? When thou goest to thy house thou 
must look to thy cattle, for I shall not stay 
in the place where thou art ; I am going to 
the valley of the acacia. And now as to 
what thou shalt do for me ; it is even that 
thou shalt come to seek after me, if thou 
perceivest a matter^ namely, that there are 
things happening unto me. And this is 
what shall come to pass, that I shall draw 
x)ut my soul, and I shall put it upon the top 
of the flowers of the acacia, and when the 
acacia is cut down, and it falls to the ground, 
and thou comest to seek for it, if thou 
searchest for it seven years do not let thy 
heart be wearied. For thou wilt find it, and 
thou must put it in a cup of cold water, and 
expect that I shall live again, that I may 
make answer to what has been done wrong. 
And thou shalt know of this, that is to say, 
that things are happening to me, when one 
shall give to thee a cup of beer in thy hand, 



ANPU AND BATA 49 

and it shall be troubled ; stay not then, for 
verily it shall come to pass with thee/' 

And the youth went to the valley of the 
acacia ; and his elder brother went unto his 
house ; his hand was laid on his head, and he 
cast dust on his head ; he came to his house, 
and he slew his wife, he cast her to the dogs, 
and he sat in mourning for his younger 
brother. 



Now many days after these things, the 
younger brother was in the valley of the 
acacia ; there was none with him ; he spent 
his time in hunting the beasts of the desert, 
and he came back in the even to lie down 
under the acacia, which bore his soul upon 
the topmost flower. And after this he built 
himself a tower with his own hands, in the 
valley of the acacia ; it was full of all good 
things, that he might provide for himself a 
home. 

And he went out from his tower, and he 
5 



50 



met the Nine Gods, who were walking forth 
to look upon the whole land. The Nine 
Gods talked one with another, and they said 
unto him, *' Ho ! Bata, bull of the Nine 
Gods, art thou remaining alone? Thou 



-<.C^- 







-^^^'^m, 



^>^u^ 



THE HOUSE IN THE VALLEY 



hast left thy village for the wife of Anpu, 
thy elder brother. Behold his wife is slain. 
Thou hast given him an answer to all that 
was transgressed against thee.'' And their 
hearts were vexed for him exceedingly. And 
Ra Harakhti said to Khnumu^ '' Behold, 



51 



frame thou a woman for Bata, that he may 
not remain alive alone/' And Khnumu 
made for him a mate to dwell with him. 




THE PROn-fECY 



She was more beautiful in her Hmbs than 
any woman who is in the whole land. The 
essence of every god was in her. The 
seven Hathors came to see her : they said 



with one mouth, '' She will die a sharp 
death/' 

And Bata loved her very exceedingly, and 
she dwelt in his house ; he passed his time 
in hunting the beasts of the desert, and 
brought and laid them before her. He said, 
'' Go not outside, lest the sea seize thee ; for 
I cannot rescue thee from it, for I am a 
woman like thee ; my soul is placed on the 
head of the flower of the acacia; and if 
another find it, I must fight with him." 
And he opened unto her his heart in all its 
nature. 

Now after these things Bata went to hunt 
in his daily manner. And the young girl 
went to walk under the acacia which was 
by the side of her house. Then the sea saw her, 
and cast its waves up after her. She betook 
herself to flee from before it. She entered her 
house. And the sea called unto the acacia, 
saying, '' Oh, would that I could seize her ! " 
And the acacia brought a lock from her 
hair, and the sea carried it to Egypt, and 



53 



dropped it in the place of the fullers of 
Pharaoh's linen. The smell of the lock of 
hair entered into the clothes of Pharaoh ; and 
they were wroth with the fullers of Pharaoh, 
saying, ''The smell of ointment is in the 
clothes of Pharaoh." And the people were 
rebuked every day, they knew not what they 




THE RAVISHING SEA 



should do. And the chief fuller of Pharaoh 
walked by the bank, and his heart was very 
evil within him after the daily quarrel with 
him. He stood still, he stood upon the 
sand opposite to the lock of hair, which was 
in the water, and he made one enter into the 
water and bring it to him ; and there was 



54 



found in it a smell, exceeding sweet. He 
took it to Pharaoh ; and they brought the 
scribes and the wise men, and they said unto 
Phai-aoh, ''This lock of hair belongs to a 




TPIE CHIEF FULLER OF PHARAOH 

daughter of Ra Harakhti : the essence of 
every god is in her, and it is a tribute to 
thee from another land. Let messengers go 
to every strange land to seek her : and as for 



ANPU AND BATA 55 

the messenger who shall go to the valley of 
the acacia, let many men go with him to 
bring her." Then said his majesty, " Excel- 
lent exceedingly is what has been said to us ; " 
and they sent them. And many days after 
these things the people who were sent to strange 
lands came to give report unto the king : 
but there came not those who went to the 
valley of the acacia, for Bata had slain them, 
but let one of them return to give a report 
to the king. His majesty sent many men 
and soldiers, as well as horsemen, to bring 
her back. And there was a woman amongst 
them, and to her had been given in her hand 
beautiful ornaments of a woman. And the 
girl came back with her, and they rejoiced 
over her in the whole land. 



And his majesty loved her exceedingly, 
and raised her to high estate ; and he spake 
unto her that she should tell him concerning 
her husband. And she said, '' Let the acacia 



be cut down, and let one chop it up." And 
they sent men and soldiers with their weapons 
to cut down the acacia ; and they came to 
the acacia, and they cut the flower upon 
which was the soul of Bata, and he fell dead 
suddenly. 

And when the next day came, and the 
earth was lightened, the acacia was cut down. 
And Anpu, the elder brother of Bata, entered 
his house, and washed his hands ; and one 
gave him a cup of beer, and it became 
troubled ; and one gave him another of wine, 
and the smell of it was evil. Then he took 
his staff, and his sandals, and likewise his 
clothes, with his weapons of war; and he 
betook himself forth to the valley of the 
acacia. He entered the tower of his younger 
brother, and he found him lying upon his 
mat ; he was dead. And he wept when he 
saw his younger brother verily lying dead. 
And he went out to seek the soul of his 
younger brother under the acacia tree, under 
which his younger brother lay in the evening. 



ANPU AND BATA 57 

He spent three years in seeking for it, but 
found it not. And when he began the fourth 
year, he desired in his heart to return into 
Egypt ; he said " I will go to-morrow morn : " 
thus spake he in his heart. 

Now when the land hghtened, and the next 
day appeared, he was walking under the. acacia ; 
he was spending his time in seeking it. And 
he returned in the evening, and laboured at 
seeking it again. He found a seed. He 
returned with it. Behold this was the soul 
of his younger brother. He brought a cup 
of cold water, and he cast the seed into it : 
and he sat down, as he was wont. Now 
when the night came his soul sucked up the 
water ; Bata shuddered in all his limbs, and 
he looked on his elder brother ; his soul was 
in the cup. Then Anpu took the cup of 
cold water, in which the soul of his younger 
brother was ; Bata drank it, his soul stood 
again in its place, and he became as he had 
been. They embraced each other, and they 
conversed together. 



58 



And Bata said to his elder brother, '' Behold 
I am to become as a great bull, which bears 
every good mark ; no one knoweth its his- 
tory, and thou must sit upon my back. When 
the sun arises I shall be in the place where my 
wife is, that I may return answer to her ; and 




THE REUNION 



thou must take me to the place where the 
king is. For all good things shall be done 
for thee ; for one shall lade thee with silver 
and gold, because thou bringest me to Pharaoh, 
for I become a great marvel, and they shall 
rejoice for me in all the land. And thou 
shalt go to thy village.'* 



59 



And when the land was lightened, and the 
next day appeared, Bata became hi the form 
which he had told to his elder brother. And 
Anpu sat upon his back until the dawn. He 




ANPU ON THE BULL 



came to the place where the king was, and 
they made his majesty to know of him ; he 
saw him, and he was exceeding joyful with him. 
He made for him great offerings, saying, 



6o ANPU AND BATA 

'' This is a great wonder which has come to 
pass." There were rejoicings over him in 
the whole land. They presented unto him 
silver and gold for his elder brother, who 
went and stayed in his village. They gave 
to the bull many men and many things, and 
Pharaoh loved him exceedingly above all that 
is in this land. 

And after many days after these things, 
the bull entered the purified place ; he stood 
in the place where the princess was ; he began 
to speak with her, saying, ''Behold, I am 
ahve indeed." And she said to him, " And, 
pray, who art thou ? " He said to her, " I 
am Bata. I perceived when thou causedst 
that they should destroy the acacia of Pharaoh, 
which was my abode, that I might not be 
suffered to live. Behold, I am alive indeed, 
I am as an ox." Then the princess feared 
exceedingly for the words that her husband 
had spoken to her. And he went out from 
the purified place. 

And his majesty was sitting, making a 



ANPU AND BATA 6i 

good day with her : she was at the table of 
his majesty, and the king was exceeding 
pleased with her. And she said to his 
majesty, " Swear to me bv God, saying, 
' What thou shalt say, I will obey it for thy 
sake.' " He hearkened unto all that she said, 
even this. '' Let me eat of the hver of the 
ox, because he is fit for nought : " thus spake 
she to him. And the king was exceeding 
sad at her words, the heart of Pharaoh grieved 
him greatly. And after the land was lightened, 
and the next day appeared, they proclaimed a 
great feast with offerings to the ox. And 
the king sent one of the chief butchers 
of his majesty, to cause the ox to be sacri- 
ficed. And when he was sacrificed, as he 
was upon the shoulders of the people, he 
shook his neck, and he threw two drops of 
blood over against the two doors of his 
majesty. The one fell upon the one side, on 
the great door of Pharaoh, and the other upon 
the other door. They grew as two great 
Persea trees, and each of them was excellent. 



62 



And one went to tell unto his majesty, 
'' Two great Persea trees have grown, as a 
great marvel of his majesty, in the night by 
the side of the great gate of his majesty." And 








^.ei^^s 



bata's tersea trees 



there was rejoicing for them in all the land, 
and there were offerings made to them. 

And when the days were multiplied after 
these things, his majesty was adorned with 
the blue crown, with garlands of flowers on 



ANPU AND BATA 63 

his neck, and he was upon the chariot of pale 
gold, and he went out from the palace to 
behold the Persea trees : the princess also was 
going out with horses behind his majesty. 
And his majesty sat beneath one of the 
Persea trees, and it spake thus with his wife : 
'' Oh thou deceitful one, I am Bata, I am 
alive, though I have been evilly entreated. I 
knew who caused the acacia to be cut down 
by Pharaoh at my dwelling. I then became 
an ox, and thou causedst that I should be 
killed.'^ 

And many days after these things the " 
princess stood at the table of Pharaoh, and 
the king was pleased with her. And she said 
to his majesty, " Swear to me by God, saying, 
' That which the princess shall say to me I 
will obey it for her.' " And he hearkened 
unto all she said. And he commanded, ''Let 
these two Persea trees be cut down, and let 
them be made into goodly planks.'' And he 
hearkened unto all she said. And after this 
his majesty sent skilful craftsmen, and they 



cut down the Persea trees of Pharaoh ; and 
the princess, the royal wife, was standing 
looking on, and they did all that was in her 
heart unto the trees. But a chip flew up, 
and it entered into the mouth of the princess ; 
she swallowed it, and after many days she bore 
a son. And one went to tell his majesty, 
'' There is born to thee a son." And they 
brought him, and gave to him a nurse and 
servants ; and there were rejoicings in the 
whole land. And the king sat making a 
merry day, as they were about the naming of 
him, and his majesty loved him exceedingly 
at that moment, and the king raised him to 
be the royal son of Kush. 

Now after the days had multiplied after 
these things, his majesty made him heir of 
all the land. And many days after that, when 
he had fulfilled many years as heir, his majesty 
flew up to heaven. And the heir said, " Let 
my great nobles of his majesty be brought 
before me, that I may make them to know all 
that has happened to me," And they brought 



REMARKS 65 

also before him his wife, and he judged with 
her before him, and they agreed with him. 
They brought to him his elder brother ; he 
made him hereditary prince in all his land. 
He was thirty years king of Egypt, and he 
died, and his elder brother stood in his place 
on the day of burial. 

Excellently finished in peace, for the ka 
of the scribe of the treasury Kagabu, of the 
treasury of Pharaoh, and for the scribe Hora, 
and the scribe Meremapt, Written by the 
scribe Anena, the owner of this roll. He who 
speaks against this roll, may Tahuti smite 
him. 



REMARKS 

This tale, which is perhaps, of all this 

series, the best known in modern times, has 

often been published. It exists only in one 

papyrus, that of Madame d'Orbiney, pur- 

6 



chased by the British Museum in 1857. The 
papyrus had belonged to Sety 11. when crown 
prince, and hence is of the XlXth Dynasty. 
Most of the great scholars of this age have 
worked at it : De Rouge, Goodwin, Renouf, 
Chabas, Brugsch, Ebers, Maspero, and 
Groff have all made original studies on it. 
The present translation is, however, a fresh 
one made by Mr. Griffith word for word, 
and shaped as little as possible by myself in 
editing it. The copy followed is the publica- 
tion by Birch in " Select Papyri," part ii. pis. 
ix. to xix. Before considering the details of 
the story, we should notice an important 
question about its age and composition. 
That it is as old as the XlXth Dynasty 
in its present form is certain from the 
papyrus ; but probably parts of it are older. 
The idyllic beauty of the opening of it, with 
V the simplicity and directness of the ideas, and 
the absence of any impossible or marvellous 
feature, is in the strongest opposition to the 
latter part, where marvel is piled on marvel in 



REMARKS 67 

pointless profusion. In the first few pages 
there is not a word superfluous or an idea out 
of place in drawing the picture. That we have 
to do with an older story lengthened out by- 
some inartistic compiler, seems only too prob- 
able. And this is borne out by the colophon. 
In the tales of the Shipwrecked Sailor, and of 
Sanehat, the colophon runs — " This is finished 
from beginning to end, even as it was found 
in the writing," and the earlier of these two 
tales follows this with a blessing on the tran- 
scriber. But, apparently conscious of his 
meddling, the author of Anpu and Bata ends 
with a curse : ''Written by the scribe Anena, 
the owner of this roll. He who speaks against 
this roll, may Tahuti smite him." This points 
to a part of it at least being newly composed 
in Ramesside times ; while the delicate beauty 
of the opening is not only far better than the 
latter part, but is out of harmony with the forced 
and artificial taste of the XlXth Dynasty. 
At the same time, the careful drawing of 
character is hardly akin to the simple, matter- 



of-fact style of Sanehat, and seems more in 
keeping with the emotional style of the 
Doomed Prince. If we attribute the earlier 
part to the opening of the XVIIIth Dynasty — 
the age of the pastoral scenes of the tombs of 
El Kab, which are the latest instances of such 
sculptures in Egypt — we shall probably be 
nearest to the truth. 

— The description of Bata is one of the most 
beautiful character-drawings in the past. The 
self-denial and sweet innocence of the lad, his 
sympathy with his cattle, ''listening to all 
that they said," and allowing them their 
natural wishes and ways, is touchingly ex- 
pressed. And those who know Egypt will 
know that Bata still lives there — several Batas 
I have known myself. His sweetness of 
manner, his devotion, his untiringly earnest 
work, his modesty, his quietness, makes Bata 
to be one of the most charming friends. Bata 
I have met in many places, Bata I have loved 
as one of the flowers of human nature, and 
Bata I hope often to meet again in divers 



REMARKS 69 

forms and varied incarnations among the 
fellah lads of Egypt. 

The touches of description of Bata are 
sHght, and yet so pointed. His growing to 
be an excellent worker ; his return at evening 
laden with all the produce, just as may be seen 
now any evening as the lads come in bearing 
on their backs large bundles of vegetables for 
the house, and of fodder for the home-driven 
cattle ; his sleeping with his cattle in the 
stable ; his zeal in rising before dawn to 
make the daily bread for his brother, ready to 
give him when he arose ; and then his driving 
out the cattle to pasture — all contrasts with 
his elder brother's life of ease. The making 
of the bread was rightly the duty of Anpu's 
wife ; she ought to have risen to grind the 
corn long before dawn, as the millstones may 
now be heard grinding in the dark, morning 
by morning ; she ought to have baked the 
bread ready for the toiler who spent his whole 
day in the field. But it was the ever-willing 
Bata who did the work of the house as well as 



the work of the farm. ''Behold the spirit of 
a god was in him." 

The driving in of the cattle at night is still 
a particular feature of Egyptian life. About 
an hour before sunset the tether ropes are 
drawn in the fields, and the cattle file off, 
with a little child for a leader — if any ; the 
master gathers up the produce that is required, 
some buffalo is laden with a heap of clover, 
or a lad carries it on his back, for the evening 
feed of the cattle, and all troop along the path 
through the fields and by the canal. For two 
or three miles the road becomes more and 
more crowded with the flocks driven into it 
from every field, a long haze of dust lies 
glowing in the crimson glory of sunset over 
the stream of cows and buffaloes, sheep and 
goats, that pour into the village. Each beast 
well knows his master and his crib, and turns 
in at the familiar gate to the stable under the 
house, or by the side of the hut ; and there 
all spend the night. Not a hoof is left out in 
the field ; the last belated stragglers come in 



REMARKS 71 

while the gleam of amber still edges the night- 
blue sky behind the black horizon. Then the 
silent fields lie under the brightening moon, 
glittering with dew, untrodden and deserted. 
It is not cold or climate that leads men to this 
custom, but the unsafety of a country bordered 
by unseen deserts, whence untold men may 
suddenly appear and ravage all the plain. 

The ploughing scene next follows, on " the 
land coming out from the water " ; as the 
inundation goes down the well-known banks 
and ridges appear, " the back-bones of the 
land," as they were so naturally called ; and 
when the surface is firm enough to walk on — 
with many a pool and ditch still full — the 
ploughing begins on the soft dark clay. 

The catastrophe of the story — the black 
gulf of deceit that suddenly opens under 
Bata's feet — has always been seen to be 
strikingly like the story of Joseph. And — 
as we have noticed — there is good reason for 
the early part of this tale belonging to about 
the beginning of the XVIIIth Dynasty, so it 



is very closely allied in time as well as 
character to the account of Joseph. In this 
part again is one of those pointed touches, 
which show the power of the poet — for a 
poem in prose this is — '' her heart knew him 
with the knowledge of youth." 

On reaching the mistaken revenge of Anpu, 
we see the sympathy of Bata with his cattle, 
and his way of reading their feelings, returned 
to him most fittingly by the cows perceiving 
the presence of the treachery. '' He heard 
what his first cow had said ; and the next 
entering she also said likewise.'' 

After this we find a change ; instead of the 
simple and natural narrative, full of human 
feeling, and without a touch of impossibility, 
every subsequent episode involves the super- 
natural ; Ra creating a wide water, the 
extraction of the soul of Bata, his miraculous 
wife, and all the transformations — these have 
nothing in common with the style or ideas of 
the earlier tale. 

Whence this later tangle came, and how 



REMARKS 73 

much of it is drawn from other sources, we 
can hardly hope to explain from the fragments 
of literature that we have. But strangely there 
is a parallel which is close enough to suggest 
that the patchwork is due to popular myth- 
ology. In the myths of Phrygia we meet 
with Atys or Attis, of whom varying legends 
are told. Among these we glean that he was 
a shepherd, beautiful and chaste ; that he fled 
from corruption ; that he mutilated himself ; 
lastly he died under a tree, and afterwards 
was revived. All this is a duplicate of the 
story of Bata. And looking further, we see 
parallels to the three subsequent transforma- 
tions. Drops of blood were shed from the 
Atys-priest ; and Bata, in his first transforma- 
tion as a bull, sprinkles two drops of blood 
by the doors of the palace. Again, Atys is 
identified with a tree, which was cut down 
and taken into a sanctuary ; and Bata in his 
second transformation is a Persea tree which 
is cut down and used in building. Lastly, 
the mother of Atys is said to have been a 



virgin, who bore him from placing in her 
bosom a ripe almond or pomegranate ; and in 
his third transformation Bata is born from a 
chip of a tree being swallowed by the princess. 
These resemblances in nearly all the main 
points are too close and continuous to be a 
mere chance, especially as such incidents are 
not found in any other Egyptian tale, nor in 
few — if any — other classical myths. It is not 
impossible that the names even may have 
been the same ; for Bata, as we write it, was 
pronounced Vata (or Vatiu or Vitiou, as 
others would vocalise it), and the digamma 
would disappear in the later Greek form in 
which we have Atys. 

The most likely course seems to have been 
that, starting with a simple Egyptian tale, the 
resemblance to the shepherd of the Asiatic 
myth, led to a Ramesside author improving 
the story by tacking on the branches of the 
myth one after another, and borrowing the 
name. If this be granted, we have here in 
Bata the earliest indications of the element^ 



REMARKS 75 

of the Atys mysteries, a thousand years before 
the Greek versions. 

Returning now from the general structure to 
the separate incidents, we note the expression 
of annoyance where the elder brother ''smote 
twice on his hands/' This gesture is very 
common in Egypt now, the two hands being 
rapidly shd one past the other, palm to palm, 
vertically, grating the fingers of one hand 
over the other ; the right hand moving down- 
wards, and the left a httle up. This implies 
that there is nothing, that a thing is worthless, 
that a desired result has not been attained, or 
annoyance at want of success ; but the latter 
meanings are now rare, and more latent than 
otherwise, and this tale points to the gesture 
being originally one of positive anger, though 
it has been transferred gradually to express 
mere negative results. 

The valley of the acacia would appear from 
the indications to have been by the sea, and 
probably in Syria ; perhaps one of the half- 
desert wadis toward Gaza was in the writer'^ 



mind. The idea of Bata taking out his heart, 
and placing it on the flower of a tree, has 
seemed hopelessly unintelligible. But it 
depends on what we are to understand by 
the heart in Egyptian. Two words are well 
known for it, hati and ah ; and as it is un- 
likely that these should be mere synonyms, 
we have a presumption that one of them does 
not mean the physical heart, but rather the 
mental heart. We are accustomed to the 
same mixture of thought ; and far the more 
common usage in English is not to employ 
the name to express the physical heart, but 
for the will, as when we say '^ good-hearted"; — 
for the spring of action, " broken-hearted ''; — 
for the feelings, '^hard-hearted"; — for the 
passions, ^^ an affair of the heart "; — or for the 
vigour, as when a man in nature or in act is 
'' hearty." The Egyptian, with his meta- 
physical mind, took two different words 
where we only use one ; and when we read 
of placing the heart {Jiati) out of a man, we 
are led at once by the analogy of beliefs in 



REMARKS 77 

other races to understand this as the vitality 
or soul. In the ^'Golden Bough" Mr. 
Frazer has explained this part of natural 
metaphysics ; and in this, and the following 
points, I freely quote from that work as a 
convenient text-book. The soul or vitality 
of a man is thought of as separable from the 
body at will, and therefore communicable to 
other objects or positions. In those positions 
it cannot be harmed by what happens to the 
body, which is therefore deathless for the 
time. But if the external seat of the soul be 
attacked or destroyed, the man immediately 
dies. This is illustrated from the Norse, 
Saxons, Celts, Italians, Greeks, Kabyles, 
Arabs, Hindus, Malays, Mongolians, Tar- 
tars, Magyars, and Slavonians. It may well, 
then, be considered as a piece of inherent 
psychology : and following this interpreta- 
tion, I have rendered "heart" in this sense 
" soul " in the translation. 

The Nine Gods who meet Bata are one of 
the great cycles of divinities, which were dif- 



ferently reckoned in various places. Khnumu 
is always the formative god, who makes man 
upon the potter's wheel, as in the scene in the 
temple of Luqsor. And even in natural birth 
it was Khnumu who " gave strength to the 
limbs,'' as in the earlier '' Tales of the Magi- 
cians." The character of the wife of Bata is 
a very curious study. The total absence of 
the affections in her was probably designed as 
in accord with her non-natural formation, as 
she could not inherit aught from human 
parents. Ambition appears as the only emo- 
tion of this being ; her attacks on the trans- 
formations of Bata are not due to dislike, but 
only to fear that he should claim her removal 
from her high station ; she '' feared exceed- 
ingly for the words that her husband had 
spoken to her." Her Lilith nature is in- 
capable of any craving but that for power. 

The action here of the seven Hathors we 
have noticed in the remarks on the previous 
tale of the Doomed Prince. The episode of 
the sea is very strange ; and if we need find 



REMARKS 79 

some rationalising account of it, we might 
suppose it to be a mythical form of a raid of 
pirates, who, not catching the woman, carried 
off something of hers, which proved an object 
of contention in Egypt. But such renderings 
are unlikely, and we may the rather expect 
to find some explanation in a mythological 
parallel. 

The carrying of the lock of hair to Pharaoh, 
and his proclaiming a search for the owner, is 
plainly an early form of the story of the little 
slipper, whose owner is sought by the king. 
The point that she could not be caught except 
by setting another woman to tempt her w4th 
ornaments, anticipates the modern novelist's 
saying, " Set a woman to catch a woman." 

The sudden death of Bata, so soon as the 
depository of his soul was destroyed, is 
a usual feature in such tales about souls. 
But it is only in the Indian forms quoted by 
Mr. Frazer that there is any revival of the 
dead ; and in no case is there any transfor- 
mation like that of Bata. Perhaps none but 



8o ANPU AND BATA 

an Egyptian or a Chinese would have credited 
Anpu with wandering up and down for four 
years seeking the lost soul. But the idea of 
returning the soul in water to the man is 
found as a magic process in North America 
('' Golden Bough," i. 141). 

The first transformation of Bata, into a 
bull, is clearly drawn from the Apis bull of 
Memphis. The rejoicings at discovering a 
real successor of Apis are here, the rejoicings 
over Bata, who is the Apis bull, distinguished 
as he says by '' bearing every good mark." 
These marks on the back and other parts 
were the tokens of the true Apis, who was 
sought for anxiously through the country on 
the death of the sacred animal who had lived 
in the sanctuary. The man who, like Anpu, 
brought up a true Apis to the temple would 
receive great rewards and honours. 

The scene where the princess demands the 
grant of a favour is repeated over again by 
Esther at her banquet, and by the daughter 
of Herodias. It is the Oriental way of doing 



REMARKS 8i 

business. But the curious incongruity of 
making a great feast with offerings to the ox 
before sacrificing it, appears inexplicable until 
we note the habits of other peoples in slaying 
their sacred animals at certain intervals. This 
tale shows us what is stated by Greek authors, 
that the Egyptians slew the sacred Apis at 
stated times, or when a new one was dis- 
covered with the right marks. The annual 
sacrifice of a sacred ram at Thebes shows that 
the Egyptians were familiar with such an 
idea. And though it was considered by the 
writer of this tale as a monstrous act, yet the 
off^erings and festivity which accompanied it 
are in accordance with the strange fact found 
by Mariette, that in the three undisturbed 
Apis burials which he discovered there were 
only fragments of bone, and in one case a 
head, carefully embalmed with bitumen and 
magnificent offerings of jewellery. The 
divine Apis was eaten as a sacred feast. 

The reason that the princess desires the 
liver is strangely explained by a present belief 
7 



on the Upper Nile. The Darfuris think that 
the liver is the seat of the soul (''Golden 
Bough," ii. 88) ; and hence if she ate the 
liver she would destroy the soul of Bata, or 
prevent it entering any other incarnation. 

The next detail is also curiously significant. 
If a bull was being sacrificed we should 
naturally suppose the blood would fiow, and 
that a few drops would not be noticed. 
Here, however, two drops are said to fall, 
and this was when the bull " was upon the 
shoulders of the people.'' Now it is a very 
general idea that blood must not be allowed 
to fall upon the ground ; the eastern and 
southern Africans will not shed the blood of 
cattle ("Golden Bough," i. 182); and 
strangely the Australians avoid the falling of 
blood to the ground by placing the bleeding 
persons upon the shoulders of other men. 
This parallel is so close to the Egyptian tale 
that it seems as if the bull was borne " on 
the shoulders of the people," that his blood 
should not fall to the ground ; yet in spite ot 



REMARKS 83 

this precaution '' he shook his neck, and he 
threw two drops of blood over against the 
doors of his majesty." In these drops of 
blood was the soul of Bata, in spite of the 
princess having eaten his liver ; and we know 
how among Jews, Arabs, and other peoples, 
the blood is regarded as the vehicle of the 
soul or life. 

The evidence of tree worship is plainer 
here than perhaps in any other passage of 
Egyptian literature. The people rejoice for 
the two Persea trees, '' and there were 
offerings made to them." 

The blue crown worn by the king was the 
war cap of leather covered with scales of 
copper : it is often found made in dark blue 
glaze for statuettes, and it seems probable 
that the copper was superficially sulphurised 
to tint it. Such head-dress was usually worn 
by kings when riding in their chariots. The 
pale gold or electrum h^re mentioned was the 
general material for decorating the royal 
chariot, 



The miraculous birth of Bata in his third 
transformation is, as we have noticed, closely 
paralleled by the birth of Atys from the 
almond. The idea at the root of this is that 
of self-creation or self-existence, as in the 
usual Egyptian phrase, '^ bull of his mother." 

The king flying up to heaven is a regular 
expression for his death : '' the hawk has 
soared,'' '' the follower of the god has met 
his maker,'' so Sanehat describes it (see ist 
series, pp. 97, 98). 

This hawk-form of the king may be con- 
nected with the hawk bearing the double 
crown which is perched on the top of the 
ka name of each king. That hawk is not 
Horus, nor even the king deified as Horus, 
because the emblem of life is given to it by 
other gods (as by Set on a lintel of XVIIIth 
Dynasty from Nubt), and therefore the hawk 
is the human king who could perish, and not 
an immortal divinity. Further, this hawk- 
king is always perched on the top of the 
drawing of the doorway to the sepulchre 



REMARKS 85 

which bears the ka name of the king ; and 
when we see the drawings of the ba bird or 
soul flying down the well to the sepulchre, it 
appears as if the hawk were the royal ba bird 
(ordinary men having a ba bird with a human 
head) ; and that the well-known first title of 
each king represents the royal soul or ba bird 
perched on the door of the sepulchre, resting 
on his way to and from the visit to the corpse 
below. The soul or ba of the king at his 
death thus flew away as a hawk to meet the 
sun. 

The veil drawn over the fate of the 
inhuman princess is well conceived. That 
she should die a sharp death has been fore- 
told ; but how Bata should slay the divine 
creation — his wife — his mother — is a matter 
that the scribe reserv^es in silence ; we only 
read that '' he judged with her before him, 
and the great nobles agreed with him.'' That 
judgment is best left among the things un- 
written. 



The strange manner in which we can see 
Incident after incident in the latter part of 
the tale, each to refer to some ceremony or 
behef, even imperfect as our knowledge of 
such must be, and the evidence that the 
whole being of Bata is a transference of the 
myth of Atys, must lead us to look on this, 
the marvellous portion, as woven out of a 
group of myths, ceremonies, and beliefs 
which were joined and explained by the 
formation of such a tale. How far it is 
due to purely Egyptian ideas, indicated by 
the Apis bull and the analogies in present 
African beliefs, and how far it is Asiatic and 
belonging to Atys, it would be premature to 
decide. But from the weird confusion and 
mystery of these transformations, we turn 
back with renewed pleasure to the simple 
and sweet picture of peasant life, and the 
beauty of Bata, and we see how true a 
poet the Egyptian was in feeling and in 
expression. 



xixth dynasty, 
ptolemaic writing
