Egyptian Secrets of Albertus Magnus (English translation, 1900)
===============================================================
Pseudo-Albertus Magnus — Egyptian Secrets; or, White and Black Art for Man and Beast (English translation, 1900), public domain. The famous German grimoire of folk magic (original c. 1725) — charms, remedies, and 'sympathetic' magic for man and beast; the 1900 English translation. Scan via Internet Archive.

BOSTON 

PUBLIC 

LIBRARY 


price; 

ALBER 

'JUS 

HAS 

ms 

Being  the  Approved,  Verified,  Sym| 

EGYPTIAN  S 

lathetic  and  Natural 

mm 

---OB  .  - 

White  and  Blai 

ck  Art  for 

Man  and  1 

Beast. 

REVEALING  T 

Forbidden  Knowledge 
of  Ancient  Philc 

HE 

and  Mysteries 
isophers. 

^/AlbectuA-  A’l 

sJ  ' 

^ALBERTUS  MAGNUS 

BEING  THE  APPROVED,  VERIFIED,  SYMPATHETIC  AND  NATUBAfc 

EGYPTIAN  SECRETS 

OR, 

WHITE  AND  BLACK  ART  FOR  MAN  AND  BEAST 

1HE  BOOK  OF  NATURE  AND  THE  HIDDEN  SECRETS 
AND  MYSTERIES  OF  LIFE  UNVEILED;  BEING  THE 

Forbidden  Knowledge  of  Ancient  Philosophers 

B 7  that  celebrated  Student,  Philosopher,  Chemist,  Naturalist, 
Psychomist,  Astrologer,  Alchemist,  Metallurgist,  Sorcerer, 
Explanator  of  the  Mysteries  of  Wizards  and  Witch¬ 
craft;  together  with  recondite  Views  of  numerous 
Arts  and  Sciences — Obscure,  Plain,  Prac¬ 
tical,  Etc.,  Etc. 

TRANSLATED  FROM  TIIE  GERMAN 
CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  I. 

S7>  secure  Men  and  Beasts  against  Evil  Spirits — To  become  Strong— 
To  Stop  the  Blood — When  Suffering  from  Burns — For  the  Wild 
Fire — For  the  Sweeny  Disease — For  Cramps — For  Worms — Fcr  all 
kinds  -of  Fevers — For  Cclic — to  Heal  Ruptures  of  Young  and  Aged 
People — For  Epilepsy — Fcr  Scabs — For  Putrid  Mouths — For  Sore 
Eyes — For  Erysipela  . — For  Pestilence — When  a  Child  is  Liver 
Grown — For  Consumptive  Lungs — For  Gravel--For  Dysentery — For 
Cancer — How  to  detect  a  Thief — For  the  Gout — For  Arthritis — 
For  Sore  Breasts — How  to  Recover  Stolen  Property — Tc  make  a 
Thief  own  up — For  Hysterics — To  Prevent  Danger  /of  Fire  from 
ycur  House — To  Secure  a  House  so  that  no  Fire  will  ever  go  eat 
therein — Hew  to  Quench  Fire — For  Toothache — For  the  Itch — Foi 
Bad  Hearing — To  Destroy  Bed  B"gs — To  make  an  Incombustible 
Oil — To  drive  away  Spiders  and  House  -Flies — To  Destroy  Rats 
and  Mice — A  Curious  Performance  to  Improve  Common  Wine,  and 
make  the  same  Good  in  a  ouick  way — How  to  make  Wine  Good 
and  Wholesome — To  make  Wine  Clear  in  a  quick  manner — To 
Discern  all  Diseases  by  examining  the  Water — For  Hydrophobia, 
and  many  other  Approved  Wonderful  Performances,  hitherto  un¬ 
known,  and  u»  ”’  printed  for  the  Benefit  of  Mankind,  for  the  first 
time. 


&FJ5<?£ 
.  /\S 
i  qodzx 

RL 


TO  THE  KIND  READER 


I  herewith  commit  to  the  perusal  of  the  reader  a  collection 
of  approved  remedies — sympathetic  as  well  as  natural — reme¬ 
dies  sufficient  in  number  as  may  be  deemed  needful  for  house¬ 
hold  purposes.  Knowing,  from  experience,  how  many  an  hon¬ 
est  citizen  hath  been  robbed  of  his  entire  estate  through  the 
machination  of  bad  and  malicious  people,  having  his  live 
stock  destroyed  and  the  usefulness  of  his  cows  tampered 
with;  and  still  further,  how  many  a  man  hath  been  tortured 
and  tantalized  at  night,  from  early  childhood,  by  wicked  peo¬ 
ple  of  that  ilk;  so  much  so  that  they  could  hardly  bear  it 
any  longer,  had  it  not  been  for  the  timely  aid  rendered  them 
by  exorcising  these  rabbles,  if  this  be  even  done  by  calling 
upon  the  Bedgoblin  or  “Puck.”  Moveover,  many  such  troubled 
people  were  made  unhappy  in  their  wedlock,  and  robbed  of 
all  their  children.  Besides  all  this  I  know  of  a  place,  of 
which  the  minister  of  the  Gospel  who  officiates  there  assures 
me,  that  the  influence  of  but  one  wicked  female  residing  there 
has  caused  the  ruin  of  the  entire  village,  since  there  is  hard¬ 
ly  man  or  beast  existing  in  the  place  which  had  not  been 
tampered  with  and  attacked  by  that  wicked  person.  But, 
through  the  grace  of  God,  every  one  of  these  people  have  been 
rescued  by  the  means  of  the  Bedgoblin,  as  set  forth  in  the 
second  article  of  this  little  book. 

Whenever  said  remedy  is  to  be  applied,  in  case  the  house  of 
him  whom  it  is  intended  to  assist  is  called  aloud  three  times 
with  devotion,  and  by  adding  both  his  Christian  and  all  his 
other  names,  the  usefulness  thereof  will  be  readily  enough 
perceived,  the  matrimonial  peace  will  be  re-established,  the 
children  wlil  recover,  thrf’  cows  will  again  become  useful,  no 
matter  how  much  reduced  in  body  they  have  been;  but  a  few 
weeks  will  elapse,  and  the  cows  will  show  as  much  sound 
flesh  as  they  ever  possessed  heretofore.  Thus  it  happens 


PREFACE 


tv 


that  this  collection  contains  a  number  of  curious  perform¬ 
ances  of  magic,  every  one  of  which  is  worth  far  more  than 
the  reader  pays  for  this  entire  book. 

For  the  purpose  of  rendering  a  great  service  to  mankind, 
this  book  was  issued,  in  order  to  bridle  and  check  the  doings 
of  the  Devil. 

Whatever  objections  may  be  raised  against  this  book  by 
disbelief  and  jealousy,  these  pages  will,  despite  all  such  ob¬ 
jections,  contain  naught  else  but  truth  divine,  since  Christ 
himself  hath  commanded  that  all  ye  may  perform,  ye  shall 
do  in  the  name  of  God,  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  so  that 
the  Devil  may  not  possess  any  power  over  anything  whatso¬ 
ever  to  do  his  will;  and  it  will  thus  happen  unto  many  per¬ 
sons,  as  was  experienced  by  Job,  who,  having  lost  his  fortune 
and  his  children,  by  his  endurance  and  perseverance  in  the 
belief  of  God,  and  the  blessings  of  the  good  deeds  which  were 
performed  by  him  every  day,  Job  wrested  the  power  from 
the  Devil,  and  he  afterward  became  wealthier  than  he  ever 
was  before.  Thus  we  also  must  act,  that  is,  bless  our  pos¬ 
sessions,  our  homes,  and  entrust  them  to  the  care  of  the  Lord, 
and  doubtless  the  Devil  will  have  to  retire  and  succumb. 

I,  therefore,  beseech  every  one,  into  whose  hands  this  book 
may  come,  not  to  treat  the  same  lightly  or  to  destroy  the 
same,  beoause,  by  such  action,  he  will  defy  the  will  of  God, 
and  God  will,  in  return  therefore  destroy  him,  and  cause  him 
to  suffer  eternal  punishment  and  grim  damnation.  But  to 
him  who  properly  esteems  and  values  this  book,  and  never 
abuses  its  teachings,  will  not  only  be  granted  the  usefulness 
of  its  contents,  but  he  will  also  attain  everlasting  joy  and 
blessing. 

Now  remains  merely  to  add  a  note:  Wherever  the  “2  N.  N.” 
occurs,  both  the  baptismal  name  and  all  other  names  of  him 
whom  you  intend  to  help,  add  or  assist,  will  have  to  be  added, 
while  the  t  t  t  signify  the  highest  name  of  God,  which  should 
always  be  added  in  conclusion.  Every  sympathetic  formula 
should  be  repeated  three  times. 

And  now,  I  submit  this  book  to  you,  dear  reader,  for  your 
best  use  and  profit,  in  the  name  of  God  the  Father,  the  Son, 
and  the  Holv  Spirit.  Amen!  Yea,  even  so  be  it. 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS 


OR 


If  a  Human  Being  or  Beast  is  attacked  by  Evil  Spirits,  how  to 
restore  him  and  make  him  well  again. 

Thou  &rch-6orcerer,  thou  has  attacked  N.  N.;  let  that  witch¬ 
craft  recede  from  him  into  thy  marrow  and  into  thy  bone,  let 
it  be  returned  unto  thee.  I  exorcise  thee  for  the  sake  of  the 
five  wounds  of  Jesus,  thou  evil  spirit,  and  conjure  thee  for 
the  five  wounds  of  Jesus  of  this  flesh,  marrow  and  bone;  I 
exorcise  thee  for  the  sake  of  the  five  wounds  of  Jesus,  at  this 
very  hour  restore  to  health  again  N.  N.,  in  the  name  of  God 
the  Father,  God  the  Son,  and  of  God  the  Holy  Spirit.  Three 
times. 

If  a  Man  or  Beast  is  attacked  by  Wicked  People,  and  how  to 

banish  them  forever  from  the  House  so  that  they  may 
never  be  able  to  do  any  Harm. 

Bedgoblin  and  all  ye  evil  spirits,  I  forbid  you  my  bedstead, 
my  eouch;  I  forbid  you,  in  the  name  of  God,  my  house  and 
home;  I  forbid  you,  in  the  name  of  the  Holy  Trinity,  my  blood 
and  fieBh,  my  body  and  soul;  I  forbid  you  all  the  nail  holes  in 
my  bouse  and  home,  till  you  have  traveled  over  every  hillock, 
waded  through  every  water,  have  counted  all  the  leaflets  of 
the  trees,  and  counted  all  the  starlets  in  the  sky,  until  that 
beloved  day  arrives  when  the  mother  of  God  will  bring  forth 
her  second  Son.  t  t  t 

This  formula,  three  times  spoken  in  the  house  of  the  person 
whom  we  seek  to  aid,  always  adding,  in  the  right  place,  both 
his  baptismal  and  other  names,  has  been  found  excellent  in 
many  hundred  cases. 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


For  Gangrene  or  Mortification. 

Christ  the  Lord  went  through  the  field,  and  met  a  person 
who  was  sick  of  palsy.  Christ  the  Lord  spake:  Whither  art 
thou  going,  thou  cold  face?  The  face  thus  addressed  replied: 
I  will  enter  into  that  man.  Christ  the  Lord  said:  What  wilt 
thou  do  in  the  body  of  that  man?  I  will  shatter  his  bones  to 
death,  eat  his  flesh,  and  drink  his  blood.  Christ  the  Lord 
sayeth;  Thou  palsied  face,  thou  shalt  not  do  so;  pebble  stones 
thou  must  devour,  bifter  herbs  thou  shalt  pluck;  from  a  well 
thou  must  dr'.hk,  and  therein  shalt  thou  sink,  t  t  t 
On  a  Frid*.  it  was,  when  our  Lord  was  tortured.  As  this 
is  the  case,  l  ■>  may  Christ  deliver  me  from  Cramp,  from 
palsy,  and  apparition.  In  the  second  place,  thou  shalt  stand 
quietly,  half  of  the  back,  shank  or  leg,  or  any  other  limb  or 
member,  I  may  possess  on  my  body,  be  the  same  dull,  blind, 
pliable  or  pliant;  therefore,  cramp,  palsy  or  apparition,  thou 
canst  go  no  further,  such  eommandeth  unto  thee  the  man  who 
suffered  death  upon  the  cross  as  Jesus  Christ;  He  who  by  His 
bitter  tortures  and  by  His  death  hath  been  sacrificed.  All 
may  move — foliage  and  grasses,  all  things  which  upon  earth 
do  grow,  as  also  our  dear  Master  Jesus  Christ’s  water  and 
blood;  that  he  may  do  unto  all  believing  Christian  people, 
who  bent  themselves  on  account  of  His  great  nature,  while 
the  holy  body  hung  on  His  Cross.  Therefore,  the  Jews  spake: 
Maeter,  thou  didst  first  comfort  the  cramp,  the  palsy  and  the 
apparition;  but  Jesus  replied:  Cramp,  palsy  and  apparitions 
I  do  not  have.  Be  it  woman  or  man;  so  help  me  Christ,  the 
Joy  and  comfort  of  the  sacred  cross  of  Him  who  is  arisen  out 
of  corruption’s  womb;  burst  ye  the  spell,  break  from  your 
gloom!  By  the  joy  He  caused  unto  His  mother,  Jesus  of  Naz¬ 
areth,  God  be  merciful  to  me,  a  poor  sinner,  t  t  t 

Whoever  carries  this  letter  with  him  on  his  person,  so  as 
to  be  enabled  to  recite  the  same  at  will,  will  never  more  of 
cramp,  palsy  or  apparition  become  ill. 

For  Gangrene  of  Man  or  Beast. 

Three  lords  are  riding  between  two  ladies.  The  flret  is 
called  St.  Luke,  the  other  St.  Mark,  the  third  St  John.  They 
hold  forth  their  arm,  bless  that  face  so  warm;  extend  theii 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


7 


hands,  bless  the  face  so  charmingly;  they  stretch  oat  their 
thumbs,  they  bless  Sodoma.  t  t  t  Three  times,  and  the 
Lord's  Prayer. 

For  the  Worm  on  any  part  of  the  Limb,  wherever  it  may  be. 

Worm,  I  conjure  thee,  by  the  beams  of  sacred  daylight; 
worm,  I  conjure  thee,  by  the  mystic  shades  of  night;  worm, 
I  conjure  thee  by  those  five  wounds;  worm,  I  conjure  thee 
by  those  holy  three  nails  of  Christ;  worm,  I  conjure  thee, 
by  the  power  of  God  Almighty,  if  thou  be  green,  blue,  white, 
black  or  red.  that  thou  shalt  now  be  lying  in  the  finger  stark 
and  dead,  and  may  this  be  counted  as  penance  J  r  thee,  t  t  t 
Three  times  to  be  recited,  and  every  time  the  he  est  name  of 
the  Lord  is  repeated,  blow  over  the  diseased  limb. 

For  the  Worms  in  the  Body. 

God  went  upon  an  acre  field,  upon  red  acre  land.  He  made 
three  furrows,  and  found  three  worms.  The  first  was  black, 
the  other  was  white,  the  third  was  red;  forthwith  N.  N.  all 
thy  worms  are  dead,  t  t  t  Move  three  times  with  the  finger 
around  the  navel,  while  pronouncing  the  three  holiest  names. 

For  the  Worm  on  Limb  or  Member. 

Take  fresh  ox  gall,  heat  it,  md  dip  the  limb  or  member  thus 
affected  therein.  Use  the  mixture  as  hot  as  you  are  able  to 
bear  it.  The  worm  will  die. 

For  Griping  Pain  or  Colic. 

An  old  tuft  head,  an  old  body  coat,  a  glass  of  rue  wine;  bow* 
els,  cease  thy  griping  pain.  T1  ree  times.  Excellent! 

For  Fever. 

.  Nut  tree,  I  come  unto  thee;  take  the  seventy-seven  fevers 
/rom  me.  I  will  persist  thereii.  t  t  t 

This  must  be  written  upon  a  scrap  of  paper,  and,  with  the 
same,  hie  to  a  nut  tree  ere  the  sun  rises.  Cut  a  piece  of  the 
bark,  insert  the  paper  under  it,  recite  the  above  sentence 
three  times,  and  put  the  bark  in  its  place  again,  so  that  It 
may  grow  together. 


8 


▲LBBRTUS  MAGNUS;  OR. 


To  transplant  the  Rupture  of  a  Young  Man. 

Cut  three  tufts  of  hair  from  the  centre  of  his  head;  tie  the 
same  in  a  clean  cloth,  carry  it  into  another  district,  (county), 
and  bury  it  under  a  young  willow  tfee,  so  that  it  may  grow 
together,  t  t  t  Proved. 

For  the  Sweeny  in  all  Limbs  and  Members  of  Man  or  aeasi. 

N.  N.,  (these  N.'s  signify  the  names  of  him  whom  we  intend 
to  help,  and  these  will  have  to  be  caned,  then  speak:)  thou 
swinest  in  thy  flesh;  thou  swinest  in  thy  blood.  N.  N.,  (here 
again,  both  baptismal  and  family  names  are  pronounced,) 
sloth  leave  thy  marrow;  sloth  leave  thy  bone;  sloth  leave  thy 
nerve;  sloth  leave  thy  blood;  sloth  be  removed  from  thy  skin. 
N.  N.  sloth,  go  into  the  wild  sea,  where  neither  man  nor  beast 
may  be,  and  be  not  able  to  multiply,  t  t,  t 

Another  Remedy  for  the  Sweeny. 

Shank  leg  swine,  as  God  the  Father;  shank  leg  swine,  as 
God  the  son;  shank  leg  swine,  as  God  the  Holy  Spirit!  Shank 
(or  arm)  swine,  be  prone,  like  stone,  t  t  t  Three  times. 

For  Erysipelas  or  St.  Anthony's  Fire. 

I  strolled  through  a  red  forest,  and  in  the  red  forest  there 
was  a  red  church,  and  in  the  red  church  stood  a  red  Altar, 
and  upon  the  red  altar  there  lay  a  red  knife;  take  the  red 
knife  and  cut  red  bread,  t  t  t 

For  Epilepsy  or  Fits. 

Take  some  part  of  the  hind  leg  of  a  calf,  also  part  of  a 
bone  of  a  human  body,  from  a  graveyard;  pulverise  both,  mix 
the  mass  well,  and  give  the  patient  three  points  of  a  knife  full. 
If  a  person  is  attacked  by  this  disease,  and  falls  upon  the 
ground,  you  must  let  him  lie  and  not  touch  him.  t  t  f 

For  Scabs. 

At  the  burial  of  any  person,  proceed  to  a  running  stream, 
and  draw  water  from  it  with  your  hands,  and  pour  it  over 
the  head.  While  the  water  runs  downward,  draw  the  water 
also  downward;  and  whenever  the  water  is  poured  upon  the 
head,  do  not  cease  to  utter:  Call,  recede  and  leave,  like  the 
dead  In  the  grave. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


This  ought  to  be  done  during  the  chiming  or  tolling  of  the 
funeral  bells,  without  much  noise.  Water  must  be  continualy 
drawn  during  the  tolling  of  the  bells. 

For  the  Haiah. 

Three  maidens  went  helter-skelter,  hurry,  click,  over  moun¬ 
tains  and  hillocks,  mighty  quick.  The  first  spake:  The  Ally 
has  the  haish.  The  other  said:  It  has  it  not.  The  third 
ejaculated:  It  has  it.  t  t  t 

To  prevent  Scars  or  Pock  Marks  to  remain  when  a  Person  has 
received  Burns  on  any  Limb  or  Member  of  the  Body. 

St.  Lawrence  sat  upon  his  steed.  God,  the  Lord,  bless  his 
burns,  that  they  may  not  grow  deep  into  the  flesh,  and  eat  into 
his  body  fresh.  In  the  name  of  God  the  Father,  God  the  Son, 
and  God  the  Holy  Ghost.  Amen. 

Three  times  spoken,  and  each  time,  while  repeating  the  three 
holy  names,  must  be  blown  over  the  burns,  from  the  body  out¬ 
wards. 

For  the  Wild  Fire  of  Man  and  Beast. 

Wild  fire,  wild  burning,  aching  and  pain,  curdled  blood  and 
gangrene,  God  embrace  thee.  The  Lord  save  thee.  God  is  the 
most  Supreme  Being.  He  is  alone  able  to  dispel  and  drive 
away  wild  fire,  gangrene,  erysipelas  and  curdled  blood;  also, 
do  away  with  all  your  sores,  with  all  that  pains  you.  Three 
times  to  be  spoken,  and  each  time  blowing  the  three  highest 
attributes  of  divinity  over  the  wounds. 

For  Burns. 

Away  burns,  undo  the  band;  if  cold  or  warm,  cease  the  hand. 
God  save  thee,  N.  N.;  thy  flesh,  thy  blood,  thy  marrow,  thy 
bone,  and  all  thy  veins.  They  all  shall  be  saved,  for  warm 
and  cold  brands  reign,  t  t  t  Three  times  spoken. 

Another  Remedy  for  the  Same  Ailment. 

Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  St.  Peter  walked  over  thn  field. 
They  saw  and  smelt  a  wild,  hot  fiery  brand.  Christ,  with  his 
powerful  hand  quenched  N.  N.  his  wild,  hot,  fiery  brand,  so 
that  no  longer  fire  is  sent,  and  friendly  becomes  that  element. 


ALBBRTUB  MAGNUS;  OR, 


id 


Jmt  like  our  dear  matron's  child  again  became  well,  t  t  t 
Three  times. 

An  Ointment  for  Bums. 

Take  lime;  slake  it  off  with  water  drawn  from  a  brook 
whilst  running  downward.  One-half  water  and  the  other  half 
linseed  oil.  After  this,  add  a  small  piece  of  white  lead,  ground 
fine.  Render  it  to  the  subsistence  of  a  salve. 

To  atill  the  Blood. 

Three  blissful  hours  are  to  this  world  bestowed.  In  the 
first  of  these  hours  God  was  born,  in  the  other  hour  God  died, 
tn  the  other  hour,  however,  God  was  resurrected.  Now,  I  call 
the  three  blissful  hours,  and  quiet  thee,  N.  N.,  so  that  thy 
water  and  thy  blood  may  be  healed  from  all  ailment  and 
wounds,  and  henceforth  may  thou  in  health  abound,  t  t  t 
Three  times. 

For  Swellings. 

Swelling,  swelling,  swelling,  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  I  com¬ 
mand  thee,  that  thou  shalt  cause  N.  N.,  as  little  pain  as  the 
three  nails  caused  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  Those  nails 
were  driven  through  his  hands  and  feet  by  the  wicked  Jews, 
f  t  t  Three  times. 

The  salves  for  burns  and  sores  are  likewise  applied  for 
worms  and  swelling. 

Still  Another  Remedy  for  Swellings. 

Blissful  be  the  day,  blissful  be  that  hour,  when  thou  wilt 
neither  be  smitten  with  swellings  or  boils,  till  the  Virgin 
Mhry  with  another  son  will  toil,  t  t  t 

For  a  Putrid  Mouth. 

Job,  Job,  traveled  through  the  land;  he  carried  a  rod  in  his 
hand;  then  God,  the  Lord,  in  a  vision  did  appear,  and 
spfike:  Job,  Job.  why  mournest  thou,  my  dear?  Lord,  why 
should  I  not  feel  very  sad,  since  wild  and  putrid  is  the  tongue 
Aid  the  mouth  of  my  child  it  t  Three  times 

Wash  for  a  Putrid  Mouth. 

Tike  of  refined  white  vitriol,  five  cents  worth.  Dissolve  in 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


11 


a  quart  of  water,  and  dip  a  clean  rag  therein,  wherewith  to 
wash  the  mouth. 

When  a  Bone  is  Wrenched ,  Dislocated  or  Sprained.  (For  Man 

and  Beast.) 

A  deer  ran  over  a  meadow  to  graze.  He  went  to  his  green, 
grasihg  place,  when,  lo!  he  sprained  his  leg  upon  a  stone.  But 
Jesus,  the  Lord,  beheld  the  scene,  and  healed,  with  ointment 
of  lard  and  fat,  his  sore,  and  swiftly  the  deer  ran,  as  fast  as 
before. 

Another  Remedy  for  the  same  Trouble. 

I  or  you  have  sprained  the  leg.  They  have  crueified  Jesus 
upon  the  cross.  If  to  Him  crucifixion  caused  no  pain,  thy  leg 
will  not  be  hurt  from  this  sprain,  t  t  t  Three  times. 

For  Sore  Eyes. 

Blissful  and  holy  is  the  day  on  which  Christ,  the  iLord,  was 
bora,  fly  away  my  blindness.  Logoo-maloo,  the  wicked  blind 
Jew,  who  pierced  the  Saviour's  side  through  and  through ;  from 
this  stab  issued  water  and  blood,  which  for  N.  N.’s  eyes  will 
be  very  wholesome  and  good,  t  t  t 

When  an  Animal  treads  on  a  Nail,  speak  thus: 

This  is  the  nail  which  was  used  to  nail  Christ,  the*  Lord; 
that  it  may  not  swell  or  fester,  and  no  other  injurv  may 

tanee.  t  t  t 

For  Wounds  and  Stopping  of  Blood. 

Blessed  Is  the  d^v  on  which  Jesus  Christ  was  born;  blessed 
{%  the  day  on  which  J  ’s  Christ  died;  blessed  is  the  day  on 
Which  Jesus  Christ  arose  nom  the  dead.  These  are  holy  three 
hours;  by  these,  N.  N  I  stop  thy  blood.  Thy  sores  shall 
neither  swell  nor  fester;  no  more  shall  that  happen,  than  that 
the  Virglfl  Mary  will  bear  another  son.  t  t  t 

To  Stop  the  Blood. 

Upon  Christ’s  grave  three  lilies  grow.  The  first  is  named 
Youth;  the  other,  Virtue’s  Truth;  the  third,  SUBUL.  Blood 

•top.  f  T  t 


12 


ATJ3ERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR. 


When  an  Animal  hat  Gangrene. 

Mix  a  shot  of  gun-powder  with  the  water,  ahdrlet  the  animal 
take  it.  It  will  certainly  derive  benefit  therefrom. 

When  the  Milk  leaves  a  Goto. 

Take  a  new  earthen  vessel,  for  which  you  must  pay  without 
bartering.  In  this  dish  place  the  water  of  such  an  afflicted 
cow,  whilst  calling  the  three  highest  names;  also  put  a  knife, 
with  three  cents,  in  the  dish.  Thereupon  put  the  dish  in  a 
locked  chest,  and  this  chest  again  in  another  larger  chest, 
and  the  latter  in  a  trough,  so  tha/  the  earthen  vessel  is  closed 
up  by  three  locks.  If,  after  this,  somebody  calls  to  obtain  some* 
thing  from  you,  do  not  give  it  to  him. 

For  the  Erysipelas  of  Animals. 

Write  upon  a  paper  as  follows,  and  give  it  with  the  food  to 
the  cattle:  Three  virgin  maidens  went  over  the  land.  One 
carries  a  piece  of  bread  in  the  hand.  The  one  said:  we  will 
divide  it  and  cut  it;  the  other  spake:  we  will  heal  the  erysi* 
pelas  of  N.  N.’s  cow.  t  t  t 

Three  times  spoken,  written  upon  a  piece  of  paper,  and,  In  a 
bit  of  bread,  given  to  the  cow. 

When  a  Person ,  Adult  or  Child  is  Swelled. 

Take  a  handful  of  crowfoot,  daisies  with  or  without  the  roots, 
one  white  onion,  with  the  skin,  a  handful  of  cimprefoil,  cut  all 
these  fine  and  mix  together,  then  take  four  ounces  of  butter, 
made  of  goat  milk,  which  must  be  melted  in  these  articles,  and 
boil  the  herbs.  Believe  it  long.  Press  this  through  a  cloth, 
stir  It  like  lard,  let  it  stand  awhile.  Apply  it  to  the  person 
that  has  the  swelling,  by  greasing  the  same  from  the  pit  of  the 
stomach,  around  the  ribs,  several  times. 

For  Impure  Air. 

Take  three  shrubs  of  rue,  three  of  haslenut,  and  three  of 
junipers.  Fumigate  with  these. 

To  know  when  Cattle  are  Plagued  by  Witches. 

The  hair  stand  on  end,  or  bristles  on  the  head,  and  they  gen* 
vrally  sweat  by  night  or  near  dawn  of  day. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


IS 


How  to  cause  that  a  Cote  will  not  hear  a  Steer,  but  a  Cow  Calf. 

Take  the  purification  of  the  cow,  when  it  calves,  and  bury  it 
under  an  apple  tree,  then  she  will  bear  a  cow-calf  the  next  time. 

When  Pestilence  rages  among  the  Cattle. 

Take  juniper  vinegar,  teriac  and  powder  of  rosemary  roots, 
a  grip  full  thereof  mixed  with  the  teriac  and  vinegar,  and  pour 
out  as  a  drink  to  the  cattle,  and  then  let  them  fast  for  three 
hours. 

That  no  III  may  befall  the  Cattle. 

Whenever  you  bake,  you  should  give  them  the  slake  water 
to  drink,  and  naught  will  happen  to  them. 

How  to  Wean  Calves. 

On  the  third  day  before  full  moon,  this  should  be  done,  and 
splendid  large  cattle  will  be  the  result. 

When  the  Udder  and  the  Stroke  of  a  Cow  are  Sore. 

Take  radish  leaves,  pound  them  in  a  mortar,  press  them  out, 
and  apply  this  to  the  udder  and  stroke  with  a  feather. 

When  Cattle  Swell  >Up. 

Scrape  from  your  finger  nails  as  much  as  possible  with  a 
knife,  and  give  it  to  your  cattle,  with  bread.  Very  sure. 

When  Cattle  or  Horses'  Jawbone  is  Set. 

Take  the  three  fingers  used  in  swearing  an  oath,  put  them 
into  the  mouth  of  the  animal  and  speak:  Hep  hada,  Hep  hada, 
Hep  hada,  open  thyself,  t  t  t  Three  times. 

When  Cattle  is  Bewitched. 

Take  witchcraft  balsam,  glow  worm  oil,  black  juniper  berry, 
oil  of  rue,  oil  of  turpentine,  two  cents  w’orth  of  each.  Give  this 
mixture  to  the  cattle;  also,  some  balsam  of  sulphur. 

When  a  person  is  troubled  with  a  tumor  or  desires  to  remove. 

Corns. 

When  they  bury  an  old  man,  and  the  funeral  bells  are  ring¬ 
ing,  the  following  should  be  spoken:  they  are  sounding  the 
funeral  bell  and  what  I  now  grasp  may  soon  be  well  and  what 
111  I  grasp  do  take  away,  like  the  dead  one  in  the  grave  does 


14 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


lay.  t  t  t  Whilst  reciting  the  sentenoe,  always  hold  the 
troubled  part  in  the  hand,  and  regarding  the  corns,  move  over 
them  with  your  fingers  after  cutting  out  the  corns,  and  as  long 
as  they  are  tolling  the  bells  repeat  the  above.  As  soon  as  the 
dead  body  begins  to  bleach  the  tumor  or  the  corns  will  disap^ 
pear.  Probate  in  the  case  of  a  male,  wait  for  the  funeral  of  one 
of  that  sex;  in  the  case  of  a  female  wait  until  a  female  is  to 
be  buried. 

When  a  Sore  fails  to  Break  open. 

Take  virgin-parchments  as  large  as  the  sore,  put  it  first  in 
water  and  then  on  the  sore  spot.  Propatum! 

For  Swelling  of  the  Body. 

Take  wheat  flour,  eggs,  saffron,  vinegar,  and  mix  it  into  a 
salve.  Apply  the  same  as  a  poultice.  Excellent. 

An  Ointment  for  Consumptive  Limbs. 

Take  lard  of  bear,  fox  and  badger,  tallow  ofva  deer,  juniper 
berry,  oleum  philosophorum  and  some  soap,  of  each  two  ounces,, 
and  mix  a  handful  of  corimon  nettle  chopped  very  fine,  boll  in 
wine  to  the  thickness  of  a  salve  or  ointment.  Apply  to  the 
afflicted  member  often  mornings  and  evenings.  Approved. 

For  the  Engerling  in  Sheep. 

Mix  speedwell  among  the  salt  when  feeding,  and  the  shfeep 
will  neither  rot  nor  die.  Approved. 

For  One  who  cannot  hold  his  Water. 

Take  talons  of  a  buck,  burn  them  to  powder  and  give  it  in 
a  beverage  to  the  afflicted. 

When  a  Cow  has  lost  her  Milk. 

Milk  the  eow  upon  the  bottom  of  the  tub,  put  the  tub  in  a 
safe  place,  so  that  nothing  can  be  added  to  its  contents,  take  a 
knife  wherewith  to  draw  a  cross  through  the  milk,  and  dip  it 
three  times  into  the  milk.  Keep  the  tub  with  the  milk  in 
safety.  Continue  this  for  several  days  in  succession. 

When  a  Cow ,  after  having  Calved,  will  not  cleanse  herself. 

Take  haxlewort  with  the  herb,  cut  it  fine,  and  give  it  to  the 
cow  in  water  or  wine;  or  you  may  give  the  cow  a  handful  of 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


IS 


wintergreen  or  three  leaves  of  common  carrots,  and  the  animal 
will  soon  be  all  right. 

When  Cattle  cannot  make  Water. 

Take  a  good  handful  of  parsley  roots,  and  of  the  herb  itself, 
cut  fine,  mix  in  water  or  wine,  and  give  it  to  the  cattle. 

To  make  a  Cow  give  a  good  supply  of  Milk. 

When  a  cow,  for  the  first  time,  calves,  or  while  carrying  a 
calf,  give  her  half  of  the  tail  of  an  eel  on  a  half  slice  of  bread, 
and  henceforth  she  will  give  milk  in  abundance. 

To  cause  a  Cow  to  become  Pregnant. 

Take  nine  knots  of  an  earl  tree  in  the  spring  of  the  year,  pul¬ 
verize  them,  and  give  to  the  cow  upon  newly  baked  bread. 

For  Rupture  of  any  Animal. 

On  New  Year’s  day  thou  shalt  give  to  every  cattle,  laurel 
beans  to  eat  before  thou  feedest  them. 

Remedy  for  Ulcer  or  Abscess  of  the  Lungs.  A  Powder  for  the 

Cattle. 

Take  white  (hawk-weed)  wool  herb,  Veronica,  Liver  herbs, 
snake  root,  such  as  grows  upon  the  trunks  of  oak  trees,  cross 
sage,  ysops,  wormwood,  nasturtium,  bay  leaves,  juniper  berries, 
brown  bethunia,  lavender,  both  the  leaves  and  flowers  thereof, 
walnut  tree  ashes.  Pulverize  all  these  ingredients,  and  give 
weekly,  a  powder.  In  a  very  aggravated  case,  give  one  every 
two  days,  and  when  necessary,  even  twice  a  day,  and  thereupon 
give  of  the  following  preparation  a  wine-glassful. 

An  especially  approved  Powder  for  the  Gravel. 

Burn  the  blood  of  a  hare  and  the  entire  skin  in  a  new  earth- 
ern  pot  to  ashes,  and  give  it  to  the  patient  dissolved  in  warm 
water.  Let  him  take  a  spoonful  before  breakfast.  It  is  aston¬ 
ishing  what  a  powerful  effect  this  powder  exercises. 

A  oertain  Remedy  against  the  protruding  of  Navels  of  Infants , 
also  to  prevent  the  Navel  from  growing  too  large. 

Vegetable  wax  herb  and  the  seeds  thereof  to  be  tied  upon  the 
child’s  navel,  and  the  ailment  will  abate.  Or,  put  a  poultice 


If 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


made  of  ship8pitch  or  rosin,  and  apply  externally,  which  also 
is  very  efficacious. 

A  very  good  Recipe  or  the  Colic. 

Take  a  spoonful  of  olive  or  sweet  oil,  pounded  crab  eyes, 
and  four  carefully  dried  and  pulverized  peels  of  oranges,  dis¬ 
solved  in  good,  warm  wine.  It  relieves  the  pain  immediately. 

An  Easy  and  Efficacious  Remedy  for  the  Dysentery. 

The  patient  need  only  take  a  piece  of  the  red  mortar  from  a 
bake  oven,  as  large  as  an  egg,  prepared  as  follows:  Pound  it 
in  a  mortar,  and  boil  in  river  water,  but  take  it  cold.  The  ail' 
ment  will  cease  almost  instantly. 

A  certain  Poor  Woman's  Oood  and  Simple  Remedy  for  the 

Worms. 

’inis  poor  woman  had  a  child  which  was  afflicted  by  worms. 
She  made  use  of  the  manure  puddle,  wherein  she  dipped  a 
cloth,  and  laid  the  same  frequently  over  the  body  of  the  child, 
and  thus  the  child  was  freed  from  this  terrible  ailment 

When  the  Udder  of  a  Cow  is  Bevntched. 

Take  blue  bottle  flowers,  of  which  make  a  wreath;  milk 
3very  stroke  back  of  the  legs  three  times  upon  the  wreath; 
after  this  let  the  cow  eat  that  wreath,  and  speak  the  following 
words:  cow,  I  here  give  you  bottle  flowers  that  thou  wouldst 
give  me  milk  at  once,  that  will  not  sour.  Furthermore,  when¬ 
ever  the  cattle  is  driven  out  for  the  first  time,  in  early  spring, 
give  to  every  piece  of  cattle  a  piece  of  beef  meat  about  a  half 
a  finger  long.  This  push  down  their  throat  after  sprinkling  it 
with  a  little  salt.  This  will  free  them  from  becoming  putrid 
and  con*""*ting  erysipelas. 

When  a  Cow  does  not  Change  herself. 

Whenever  a  cow  does  pot  soon  enough  become  purified  after 
calving,  give  her  hazelnut  roots  to  eat 

To  save  the  Cattle  from  Putrid  Fever. 

Cut  a  stick  from  an  earl  tree  on  Christmas  night,  put  it  in 
the  manger,  out  of  which  the  cattle  feeds,  and  speak:  I  lay 
thee  in  the  manger  like  Christ  was  laid  Into  the  manger  at 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


17 


■  111  - 

Bethlehem,  and  that  my  cattle  becomes  as  little  putrid  as 
Christ’s  body  ever  became  putrid,  t  t  t 

In  the  spring  time,  drive  the  cattle  the  first  time  with  that 
stick  used  on  Christmas  night;  after  that,  save  the  stick  in 
the  manger,  but  change  it  again  every  Christmas  night  for  a 
new  one. 

When  Cattle  are  affected  with  Jaundice. 

Take  sponge  (fungus)  of  an  apple  tree,  old  shoe  soles  and 
christianwort,  also  attic  root,  grind  all  to  powder  and  give  to 
the  afflicted  cattle,  at  night-time,  a  spoonful. 

Secret  Remedy  of  the  great  Theophrastus  Paracelsus  for  Heal¬ 
ing  the  Cancer. 

This  celebrated  recipe  is  composed  as  follows:  When  a 
human  being  takes  hold  with  his  right  hand  of  a  live  mole, 
and  keeps  the  mole  so  long  with  a  tight  grip  until  it  dies, 
such  a  hand  obtains  by  dint  of  this  miraculous  proceeding, 
such  marvelous  power,  that  cancer  boils,  repeatedly  rubbed, 
by  moving  up  and  down  with  this  hand  will  break  open,  cease 
to  form  again,  and  entirely  vanish. 

A  particular  Performance  by  which  it  is  caused  that  a  Person 
will  always  obtain  Right  before  a  Court  of  Justice. 

Take  the  herb  called  suntull  (skunk  cabbage)  gathered  dur* 
ing  the  month  of  August,  while  the  sun  stands  in  the  sign  of 
the  lion,  wrap  a  little  thereof  in  a  bay  leaf,  add  a  dandelion 
to  it,  carry  this  talisman  on  your  person,  and  you  will  have 
the  best  of  everybody,  and  receive  the  greatest  advantage 
from  it. 

Another  Trial  to  Detect  a  Thief. 

When  all  the  articles  mentioned  above  are  taken  and  laid 
upon  the  head,  the  person  robbed  may  see  the  entire  form  and 
appearance  of  the  thief. 

Experiment  made  by  a  Mecklenburg  Farmer ,  and  by  him  re¬ 
lated  how  to  prevent  any  Dog  from  getting  Mad. 

This  man  said:  Dogs  should  have  scraped  silver  filings 
given  to  them  upon  a  piece  of  bread  and  butter,  Christmas  eve. 
New  Year’s  eve,  and  on  the  eve  of  Epiphany.  Dogs  thus 
treated  will  never  become  mad  or  rabid. 


18 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


J"  i—^— ^  11  ■  ■  "■  ■  ■  ■■■■  i  — — . . 

An  Approved  Remedy  to  prevent  Horses  from  becoming  Stiff. 

Put,  three  Sundays  in  succession,  before  the  rising  of  the 
sun,  three  handfuls  of  saTt,  and  seventy-two  juniper  berries 
in  the  manger  so  that  the  horse  will  eat  them,  and  wash  the 
hind  shanks  with  warm  vinegar.  Horses  so  treated  will  never 
become  stiff  nor  stubborn. 

A  splendid  and  hitherto  Secret  Remedy  for  the  Cure  of  the 

severest  Pains  caused  by  Oout  to  effect  a  Cure  in  fifteen 

Minutes. 

After  roasting  a  large  and  fine  orange  or  lemon  upon  hot 
ashes,  remove  the  peelings,  pound  them  with  anna  Flor.  Cassia 
in  a  glass  mortar,  and  mix  it  with  some  breast  milk  to  a 
poultice.  This  is  an  approved  remedy  and  has  relieved  many 
persons. 

A  Remedy  for  the  Fever  ly  the  Use  of  which  an  old  Lady  of 
Nobility  has  aided  many  People. 

This  matron  of  a  noble  family  cut  the  ear  of  a  cat,  let  three 
drops  of  the  blood  fall  in  some  Brandy,  added  a  little  pepper 
thereto,  and  gaVe  it  to  the  patient  to  drink. 

An  excellent  Ointment  for  Old  Sores  on  the  Feet. 

The  following  articles  are  necessary  to  make  this  ointment: 
one  ounce  of  deer’s  tallow,  two  ounces  of  bees’  wax,  a  like 
portion  of  white  rosin,  half  ounce  of  white  lead,  three  ounces 
of  white  bolus,  six  ounces  of  sweet  oil,  two  ounces  incense 
and  mastic.  The  rosin  and  oil  are  left  to  boil  together,  and 
melt  the  wax  therein,  until  it  becomes  stiff.  After  it  has 
cooled  off  mix  all  the  other  articles  to  it;  after  they  have  been 
pounded,  stir  them  well,  and  save  up  for  use.  Before  apply¬ 
ing  this  ointment  to  old  sores,  wash  them  first  with  warm 
sweet  wine,  then  apply  the  ointment,  and  all  wilt  be  well  done 
to  effect  a  result 

A  Secret  Remedy  of  much  Efficacy  for  Gravel. 

A  hare  caught  in  the  month  of  March,  you  must  burn,  with 
skin  and  hair,  until  it  becomes  powder.  Take  bruised  seed  of 
parsley,  add  honey  enough  to  make  a  syrup.  Give  to  the  pa¬ 
tient  early  in  the  morning,  before  breakfast,  and  at  night 
before  going  to  bed.  The  gravel  will  break,  and  cease  for  ever. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


19 


For  Toothache  and  Neuralgia. 

Write  down,  with  a  goose-quill  and  ink,  new  made— but  be 
careful  that  nothing  is  wasted  from  the  quill  but  what  belongs 
to  shape  the  pen — on  the  outside  of  the  cheek,  where  the  pain 
Is  situated,  the  following  signs:  “Mot,  Tot,  Fot.”  After  this 
being  done,  light  a  candle,  and  proceed  therewith  under  the 
chimney.  Burn  the  pen  by  the  light  under  the  hearth,  until 
not  a  vestige  thereof  remains.  All  this  must  be  done  noise¬ 
lessly,  while  a  person  who  suffers  the  pain  must  at  once  put 
the  head  in  a  bandage,  retire  to  bed,  and  remain  quiet,  and 
by  no  means,  speak  a  word  to  anybody  for  twenty-four  hours. 

When  a  Man  or  Cattle  is  Plagued  by  Goblins,  or  Ill-disposed 

People. 

Go  on  Good  Friday,  or  Golden  Sunday,  ere  the  sun  rise  In 
the  East,  to  a  hazlenut  bush,  cut  a  stick  therefrom  with  a 
sympathetic  weapon,  by  making  three  cuts  above  the  hand  to¬ 
ward  the  rise  of  the  sun,  in  the  name  of  the  f  f  f  Carry  the 
stick  noiselessly  into  the  house,  conceal  it  so  that  no  one  can 
get  hold  of  it.  When  a  man  or  beast  is  plagued  by  evil  dis¬ 
posed  people,  walk  three  times  around  such  a  haunted  person, 
while  pronouncing  the  three  holiest  names;  after  this  pro¬ 
ceeding,  take  off  thy  hat  and  hit  it  with  the  stick  and  thus 
you  smite  the  wicked  being. 

For  Haunted  Horses  or  Cattle. 

Take  the  left-hand  glove  of  a  woman  afflicted  with  lheu- 
matism  in  the  right  arm,  steep  it  in  fresh  water,  and  allow  the 
animals  to  drink  thereof. 

For  the  Swelling  of  Cattle. 

Give  the  cattle  three  roots  of  crowfoot  flowers  (ranunculus) 
to  eat 

When  we  are  perplexed  to  know  what  ails  the  Cattle. 

«*«• 

Take  half  of  an  ounce  of  powdered  alum  mixed  with  salt, 
and  give  it  to  the  cattle. 

When  Cattle  has  too  much  Gall. 

(Jive  it  as  soon  as  possible  croton  flowers  to  eat. 


20 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


When  a  PersoJi  is  Prevented  from  Passing  Water. 

Take  a  good  handful  of  hare's  hair,  burn  it  till  it  becomis 
powder,  wrap  it  in  a  handkerchief,  add  three  handfuls  of 
watercresses  and  a  half  a  quart  of  wine,  boil  the  powder  and 
herbs  therein.  Drink  it  warm. 

For  Fresh  Wounds. 

Fresh  is  the  wound,  blessed  is  the  day!  happy  the  hour  I 
found  soon  to  stop  and  arrest  thee,  so  that  thou  neither  swell 
nor  fester  until  mountains  meet,  t  t  t 

For  Arthritis  or  Pains  in  the  Limbs. 

Take  two  handfuls  of  fresh  juniper  berries,  bruise  them,' 
boil  them  in  a  pint  of  old  wine,  add  a  glassful  of  brandy  and 
put  the  whole  in  a  cloth  that  is  folded  four  times,  and  this 
apply  to  the  place  where  the  pain  is  located.  It  is  an  approved 
remedy. 

For  Sore  Breasts. 

Take  distilled  glori,  five  cents’  worth;  juniperberry  salt,  five 
cents;  white  beeswax,  three  cents;  mercury  precipitate,  two 
cents;  and  let  the  mass  be  mixed  in  an  earthen  pot,  on  the 
fire  until  it  becomes  stiff  like  a  salve.  Stir  it  well,  put  some 
of  it  on  linen,  and  apply  once  per  day,  upon  the  breast. 

To  Stay  a  Shot. 

Shot  stand  still  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  give  neither  fire 
nor  flame,  as  sure  as  the  rock  of  Gibraltar  remains  firm,  f  t  t 
While  dissolving  it,  say:  God  saw  his  joy  and  glory! 

To  compel  a  Thief  to  return  the  Stolen  Property. 

Obtain  a  new  earthen  pot  with  a  cover,  draw  water  from  the 
under  current  of  a  stream  while  calling  out  the  three  holiest 
names.  FiH  the  vessel  one-third,  take  the  same  to  your  home, 
set  it  upon  the  fire,  take  a  piece  of  bread  from  the  lower  crust 
of  a  loaf,  stick  three  pins  into  the  bread,  boil  all  in  the  vessel, 
add  a  few  dew  nettles.  Then  say:  Thief,  male  or  female, 
bring  my  stolen  articles  back,  whether  thou  art  boy  or  girl; 
thief,  if  thorn  art  woman  or  man,  I  compel  thee,  in  the  name, 
t  t  t 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


21 


Remedy  to  Remove  the  Secundines  of  a  Cow. 

Take  bay  leaves  for  three  cents,  boil  them  In  a  pint  of  wine 
vinegar,  take  it  from  the  fire,  cool  it,  then  let  a  hen's  egg  re¬ 
main  in  the  fluid  over  night.  After  this  steam  the  vinegar 
from  the  egg  and  hay  leaves,  mix  the  egg  with  the  vinegar, 
and  give  it  to  the  cow  for  a  drink.  Should  it  not  be  efficient, 
dry  the  bay  leaves,  powder  and  boil  them  again  in  a  pint  of 
vinegar.  Let  the  mass  stand  over  night  and  pour  it  into  the 
oowa,  adding  the  powdered  bay  1  eaves. 

TO  make  a  Magnetic  Compass  v)hich  will  serve  to  Discover  the 
Treasures  and  Ores  in  the  Bowels  of  the  Earth. 

For  this  purpose  a  magnet  made  of  the  plusquam  perfection, 
accompanied  by  the  prime  material  of  which  all  metals  grow 
Is  requisite:  with  this,  the  magnet  of  the  compass  must  be 
strengthened.  Around  the  compass  are  engraved  the  charac¬ 
teristic  signs  of  all  the  seven  metals.  If  it  is  desired  now  to 
ascertain  what  kind  of  a  metal  is  most  likely  to  be  found  in 
a  hidden  treasure  or  in  ore  beneath  the  earth,  it  will  be  only 
necessary  to  hie  to  that  particular  spot,  where  the  magnetic 
rod  has  given  the  indication,  but  you  must  put  your  foot  there 
where  the  perpendicular  shows  its  attractions,  and  take  ot 
every  metal  a  small  piece,  that  is,  one  as  heavy  as  the  other, 
and  lay  it  upon  the  resp.  character  and  the  needle  will  rotate 
to  that  metal  which  predominates  under  the  surface  of  the 
earth,  and  there  it  Will  stand  still. 

A  Secret  and  curious  Piece  of  Marvel ,  to  Discern  in  a  Mirroi 

what  an  Enemy  designs  at  the  Distance  of  Three  Miles 

or  more. 

Obtain  a  good  plain  looking  glass,  as  large  as  you  please, 
and  have  it  framed  on  three  sides  only;  upon  the  left  side  it 
should  be  left  open.  Such  a  glass  must  be  held  toward  the 
direction  where  the  enemy  is  existing  and  you  will  be  able  to 
discern  all  his  markings,  manceuverings,  his  doings  and  work 
tngs.  Was  effectually  used  during  the  thirty  years’  war. 

To  Destroy  Worms. 

The  cancer  is  healed  by  means  of  a  plaster  made  of  the 
yellow  of  an  egg,  enzian,  Blaster  herbs  and  centifolium,  all 
mixed  up  to  a  powder.  This  preparation  apply  often. 


22 


ALBBRTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


A  Remedy  hitherto  Secret  against  Sloth  and  8tough,  commonly 

called  Sweeny . 

Dig  three  burdock  roots  on  a  Friday  before  the  sun  rises 
cut  off  trery  one  of  these  roots,  three  round  slices,  sew  them 
in  a  cloth,  bind  them  over  the  sweeny  limb  or  member,  and 
let  It  remain  there  from  two  to  four  days,  repeat  as  before  until 
the  part  affected  stops  to  ooze  matter.  The  roots  may  be 
green  or  dry,  it  is  all  the  same,  if  you  only  take  care  to  dig 
them  on  a  Friday  before  sunrise.  Has  been  sufficiently  tried 
on  man  and  beast 

To  prevent  Fire  Arms  from  being  Bewitched. 

Take  nine  blades  of  straw  from  under  a  sow  while  she  is 
nursing  young  pigs,  therefrom  put  nine  knots  Into  the  shaft 
and  insert  them  between  the  two  barrel  loops,  and  such  a  gun 
cannot  be  bewitched. 

Secret  Remedy  for  Healing  the  Cancer . 

At  the  waning  of  the  moon,  take,'  several  mornings  in  sue* 
cession,  a  spoonful  of  elder  flower  seed  in  sweet  milk;  or  In 
case  the  moon  is  waning,  give  to  a  child,  plagued  by  worms,  a 
small  teaspoonful  of  sweet  oil,  and  when  the  last  quarter  of 
the  moon  appears,  the  third  spoonful,  and  the  entire  stock  of 
worms  wilt  be  passed  by  the  child. 

Hysterics  accompanied  by  Fainting. 

Take  the  warts  commonly  growing  on  the  shanks  of  steers 
cut  them  fine,  dry  them  in  an  iron  pan  over  a  glowing  flame 
until  they  become  yellowish,  bruise  them  gently  and  give  of 
this  powder  as  much  as  the  point  of  a  table-knife  will  hold,  in 
wine  or  other  liquor,  to  the  patient,  who  must  keep  herself 
warm. 

Against  Violent  Headaches. 

Iron  herb  hung  around  the  neck,  or  the  essence  thereof 
sprinkled  upon  the  brow  and  temples,  will  cure  the  most 
violent  headaches. 

Account  of  an  Experienced  Fortune  Hunter,  how  Treasures  be¬ 
neath  the  Earth  Rise  and  Fall. 

It  one  is  contemplating  to  dig  up  a  treasure,  he  should 
above  all  other  things  know,  whenever  the  treasure  stands 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


2» 


highest,  to  rise  with  the  sun  and  return  again  with  the  sink¬ 
ing  of  the  same.  If  the  treasure  happens  to  be  hidden  in  an 
open  field,  the  affair  will  soon  be  righted  by  digging  around, 
crosswise,  or  undermining,  so  that  the  treasure  can  be  reached 
from  below,  but  one  must  not  be  tardy  in  constructing  the 
posts  or  galleries  in  order  to  prop  the  treasure  in  time,  be¬ 
cause  the  digger  might  otherwise  be  buried  underneath  the 
falling  heap.  But,  if  it  can  be  so  conducted  that  the  sun  can 
shine  crosswise  under  the  treasure,  it  may  be  raised,  since  the 
goblins  of  the  earth  have  no  longer  the  power  to  remove  the 
same. 

Marvelous  Performances  of  an  Experienced  Pigeon  Fancier. 

To  prevent  Pigeons  from  deserting  the  Pigeon  Coops  or 

Dove  Cots ,  alsoy  that  no  Pigeon  Hawk  can  catch  them. 

Let  the  pigeons  be  put  into  the  cot  on  a  Friday,  pluck  off 
two  feathers  from  the  right  wing  of  every  pigeon  before  they 
are  left  to  fly  into  the  coop.  These  feathers  should  be  fastened 
by  a  tack  in  the  coop,  so  to  prevent  them  from  falling  or 
flying  away  from  the  coop,  because  as  long  as  the  feathers  re¬ 
main  in  the  coop  no  pigeon  will  desert,  and  no  hawk  will  catch 
them;  but  it  must  never  be  forgotten  to  put  some  stonewort 
or  some  chickweed  into  their  drinking  water. 

A  specific  Piece  of  Art  by  which  all  Dangers  of  Conflagrations 
are  Avoided  from i  a  Dwelling  House . 

Take  in  the  evening  or  in  the  morning  a  black  hen  from  its 
nest,  cut  its  throat,  throw  it  upon  the  ground,  cut  the  stomach 
of  the  hen  from  out  of  the  body,  but  nothing  else,  and  be  care¬ 
ful  to  leave  everything  else  inside.  After  this  proceeding  try 
to  obtain  a  piece  of  gold  quartz.  The  piece  must  be  large  as  a 
saucer.  These  two  articles  wrap  up  together;  take  an  egg 
laid  on  Green  Thursday,  wrap  the  three  pieces  thus  obtained 
up  in  bees’-wax  and  put  all  in  an  octagon  pot  of  clay,  cover 
the  same  tightly,  and  bury  it  under  the  housedoor  sill.  Such 
a  house  is  protected  from  all  dangers  of  fire,  although  the 
flames  may  surround  it 

A  useful  Way  to  make  Boots  Waterproof. 

Take  four  ounces  of  sweet  olive  oil  sixteen  ounces  of  tal* 


24 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


low,  four  ounces  of  turpentine,  eight  ounces  of  common  lard, 
and  four  ounces  of  new  yellow  bees’-wax,  mix  together,  and 
after  drying  the  boots,  no  matter  what  kind  of  leather  they 
may  be,  well  dried  and  slowly  warmed,  grease  them  with  this 
mixture  thoroughly,  and  no  water  will  penetrate  through, 
them,  and  the  feet  will  remain  dry  therein. 

To  Fasten  a  Thief. 

Mary  toiled  and  bore  the  child,  three  angels  were  her  nurses, 
the  first  is  named  Saint  Michael,  the  other’s  name  Saint 
Gabriel,  the  third  is  called  St.  Peter.  Three  thieves  approach 
to  steal  the  child  of  Mary;  Mary  spake:  Saint  Peter  bind. 
Saint  Peter  said:  I  have  bound  it  with  iron  fetters,  with 
God’s  own  hands,  that  they  must  stand  like  a  stick,  and  look 
like  a  buck  until  they  are  able  ta  count  all  the  stars,  all  rain 
drops  that  fall  into  the  ocean,  all  grains  of  sand  fro  and  to. 
If  they  cannot  do  this  they  must  stand  like  a  stick,  must  ever 
look  like  a  buck,  till  I  may  see  them  with  my  own  eyes,  and 
with  my  tongue  can  bid  them  to  arise  and  order  them  to  go 
without  ado.  Thus  I  forbid  the  thieves  my  own,  my  all,  and 
make  the  thief  repent  and  fall,  t  t  t  Give  the  thief  three 
times  three  strokes,  and  bid  him  depart  hence,  in  the  name 
of  the  Lord. 

For  Violent  Toothaches. 

Take  a  new  nail,  pick  with  this  the  tooth  till  it  bleeds,  then 
take  this  nail  and  insert  it  in  a  place  where  neither  sun  or 
moon  ever  shines  into,  perhaps,  in  the  rafters  of  the  bin  in  a 
cellar,  toward  the  rising  of  the  sun;  at  the  first  stroke  upon 
the  nail  call  the  name  of  him  whom  you  design  to  help,  and 
speak:  Toothache  fly  away,  by  the  second  stroke:  Toothache 
cease,  pain  allay!  ‘  t  t  t 

When  a  Splinter  or' Thorn  is  Sticking  in  the  Leg. 

Take  a  white  garlic  onion,  cut  it  fine,  take  the  same  weight 
of  pitch,  render  the  pitch  down  and  dissolve  the  onion  therein 
until  it  becomes  the  thickness  of  a  plaster,  which  must  be  put 
upon  the  sore  spot,  which  will  soon  heal,  and  the  thorn  may 
be  easily  removed. 


EGYPTIAN  9BCRETS. 


25 


Eyewater  which  makes  the  Sight  Clear,  so  that  no  Spectacles 

are  needed 

Take  some  good  brandy  of  nettles,  one  drachm  of  ginger, 
camphor,  fishberry,  herb  and  nasturtium,  of  each  one  drachm, 
of  cloves  one  scruple,  of  rue  toothwort,  eyebalm  so  much  as 
may  be  held  between  two  fingers  (one  pinch).  Bruise  all 
these  articles,  and  put  into  the  brandy,  and  distill  it  in  the  sun, 
during  the  winter  season  twenty-four  days  in  a  warm  room. 
Dip  your  finger  therein  and  rub  the  eyelids  therewith,  morn¬ 
ing  and  evenings,  this  will  keep  the  eyes  clear,  and  make 
them  strong  without  the  use  of  spectacles. 

An  Amulet  against  Cramp. 

Take  white  root  of  rhubarb,  pulverize  the  same,  and  fill  with 
such  powder  a  square  pouch  made  of  linen,  about  three  thumbs 
in  size.  The  patient  should  carry  the  pouch  or.  a  string  around 
his  neck  that  it  will  touch  the  bare  skin  in  the  neighborhood 
of  the  stomach. 

For  Costive  People. 

Take  half  of  a  scruple  or  veronica  or  speedwell.  Probatum 
est! 

Ointment  for  the  Scurvy. 

Take  a  'glass  of  wine,  a  glass  of  brandy,  unwashed  butter, 
smear  soap,  white  beeswax,  salt,  pepper,  cloves  and  a  little  of 

sulphur  flower. 

A  Secret  Art  to  banish  Chicken  Lice. 

Strew  malaxis  herbs  upon  the  floor  of  the  hen-house,  let  it 
remain  eight  days  therein,  then  wash  it  all  clean  again  aud 

the  lice  will  have  vanished. 

For  Bad  Hearing. 

Take  the  oil  with  which  the  bells  of  churches  are  greased, 
and  smear  it  behind  the  afflicted  ears,  and  relief  will  not  fail 
to  come  at  once. 

To  make  a  Saddle  which  will  Press  no  Horse. 

When  a  saddle  is  lined  underneath  with  the  rough  skin  of 
young  does  or  fawns  such  a  saddle  will  press  no  horse. 


26 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


Secret  Remedy  of  an  experienced  Farrier  for  the  Swelling  of 

Horses. 

Take  a  newly  spun  yarn  from  the  staple  or  reel,  boll  the 
same,  and  tie  It  while  hot  upon  the  swellings  of  the  horse, 
twice  a  day. 

When  a  Person  cannot  pass  Water. 

Take  some  black  carroway  seed,  light  colored  incense  grains, 
and  let  these  evaporate  upon  coals,  and  inhale  the  vapors. 
Approved  remedy. 

When  Delivery  is  too  Slow. 

Obtain  from  your  apothecary  some  Ursula;  drink,  and  take 
it  according  to  directions. 

After  Accouchment. 

Take  linseed  oil,  hempseed  oil,  two  ounces  of  each,  and  three 
or  four  yolks  of  eggs,  stir  well  in  a  dish,  smear  upon  a  cloth, 
and  lay  it  upon  the  abdomen.  Most  excellent. 

For  Consumptive  Lungs. 

Take  the  ashes  of  juniper  twigs,  dissolve  them  in  vinegar, 
and  give  it  to  the  cattle. 

Against  Milk  Thieves. 

Take  twigs  of  the  hazel  poplar  tree,  put  them  over  the  en¬ 
trance  of  the  stable  door  where  the  cattle  go  in  and  out  In 
case  the  cow  is  about  to  calve,  break  oak  leaves  from  a  young 
clearing,  and  feed  them  with  it. 

For  the  Worm. 

Take  of  serpentine-tree  bark,  and  grind  it  to  a  powder,  mix 
with  rock  salt,  and  rub  the  tongues  and  roof  of  the  mouth  of 
the  cattle  therewith. 

For  the  Erysipelas  of  Cattle. 

Take  a  scarlet  red  lozenge,  cut  it  small,  give  it  to  the  cattle 
upon  bread  to  eat.  Or,  give  three  may  flowers. 

How  to  drive  away  Bed  Bugs. 

Fern  leaves  gathered  between  the  last  two  days  of  the  month 
of  June,  and  put  under  the  bed,  will  drive  away  the  bed  bugs 
sure. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


27 


To  make  One's  Self  Invisible. 

You  must  obtain  the  ear  of  a  black  cat,  boil  it  in  the  milk  of 
i  black  cow,  then  make  a  thumb  cover  of  it  and  wear  it  on  the 
thumb,  and  no  one  will  be  able  to  see  you. 

How  to  be  able  to  see  in  the  Darkest  Night. 

Grease  the  eyes  with  the  blood  of  a  bat. 

To  make  an  Dicombustible  Oil. 

Common  oil  mixed  with  a  strong  lye  and  distilled,  and  the 
uppermost  essence  skimmed  therefrom.  The  latter  is  incom¬ 
bustible. 

How  to  Kill  Bed  Bugs. 

Take  of  wormwood  and  rue  a  handful  of  each,  mix  them 
with  common  oil,  also  enough  water,  so  that  both  water  and 
oil  will  cover  the  herbs;  after  this  boil  the  mass  so  long  until 
all  the  water  evaporates,  whereupon  squeeze  the  herbs  in  a 
press  to  obtain  all  the  oil  possible,  and  add  a  like  quantity  of 
mutton  tallow;  with  this  saturate  the  bedsteads,  and  the  bugs 
will  die. 

To  banish  Spiders,  House  Flies ,  Onats  or  Mosquitoes  from  a 

House  or  Place. 

Engrave  the  figure  of  a  spider  or  fly  upon  a  piece  of  copper 
or  tin,  in  the  centre,  engrave  from  one  to  twenty  to  the  sign 
of  the  fish  rising  over  the  horizon  in  the  zodiac,  and  while  en¬ 
graving,  pronounce  these  words:  This  is  the  image  which 
drives  away  all  flies  or  spiders,  forever  and  ever.  Afterward 
conceal  the  plate  in  the  centre  of  the  house  or  suspend  it  in 
the  middle  of  the  house,  or  conceal  it  in  the  wall,  where  no  one 
can  take  it  away.  This  burying  in  the  ground  or  concealing, 
must  be  accomplished  when  prlma  facies  taurus  rises,  and 
thus  it  will  come  to  pass  that  in  such  a  house,  no  fly.  etc.,  shall 
be  seen. 

Tf>  ]>e8trop 

in  such  tood  £*■  thiy  may  like,  mix  merr-iy,  or  Durrn.  iea&, 
or  particles  of  iron,  produced  by  forging  or  black  hellebore. 


28 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


How  to  Improve  all  sorts  of  Inferior  Wines.  A  Recipe  hith¬ 
erto  kept  secret ,  but  known  a  long  time  since  to  a  certain 

Elector  of  Mayence. 

Take  some  superior  tartar,  smeit  the  same  in  a  large  cruci¬ 
ble,  but  the  fire  under  it  must  be  fanned  by  a  bellows,  until 
the  tartar  shows  a  blue  flame,  when  a  wire  is  inserted.  This 
will  usually  happen  within  an  hour  and  a  half,  then  it  must 
be  poured  out,  and  quickly  pounded  in  a  warm  mortar,  to  the 
size  of  small  shot  and  then  put  into  a  distilling  apparatus, 
add  slowly  so  much  of  alcohol  to  cover  the  tartar,  three  fingers 
in  height,  shake  well  together.  Expose  it  for  several  days  and 
nights  to  a  gentle,  warm  temperature,  but  stir  it  three  times 
every  day,  the  apparatus,  however,  must  be  well  corked  up. 
After  the  alcohol  has  obtained  a  fine  red  color,  the  same  will 
be  drained  off,  and  a  like  quantity  of  other  alcohol  poured  in; 
hence  this  extraction  is  performed  three  times.  After  this, 
then,  all  the  extracts  are  poured  together,  and  distilled  in  an 
elambic  to  a  liquid.  But  should  it  be  noticed  that  the  alcohol 
becomes  water,  cease  at  once,  in  order  to  avoid  that  spirit  of 
vitriol  (phlegm)  becomes  mixed  with  it.  Of  this  spirit,  about 
one-half  pound  is  made  to  run  through  a  large  tube  into  a  cask 
of  new-made  wine  or  most  in  such  a  manner,  so  as  not  too 
rapidly  to  fall  into  it,  but  gently  run  over  the  new  wine  like' 
oil  runs  smoothly  over  water;  *but,  to  accomplish  this  result, 
the  cask  must  not  be  entirely  full  by  two  fingers  in  height,  to 
give  the  spirit  a  chance  to  play  and  flow  gently  over  the  sur¬ 
face  of  the  wine.  This  done,  the  cask  is  covered,  but  not  closed 
with  a  bung,  until  one  day  and  one  shall  have  passed,  after 
that  time  fill  up  entirely  to  have  it  ferment,  and  the  task  will 
be  accomplished. 

Another  excellent  Way  to  make  Inferior  and  Bad  Wine  verf 

Good  and  Wholesome. 

Rec.  sal.  tartari,  three  ounces,  cremoris  tartari,  four  ounce 
dissolve  the  sal.  tart,  in  rain  water,  put  it  in  a  glass  vessej 
upon  glowing  ashes,  let  it  remain  so  until  it  begins  to  show 
bubbles,  then  add  the  crem.  tart,  by  putting  half  a  spoonful 
in  at  a  time,  until  it  dissolves  no  longer.  Then  filter  and  pre¬ 
serve  it.  To  mix  some  of  this  fluid  to  some  spoiled  wine  will 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


29 


improve  the  latter  greatly.  Or  this:  Rec.  sal  tartari  per  de- 
liquium  twelve  ounces,  cremor,  tartari  four  ounces,  proceed 
therewith  as  set  forth  above,  to  add  of  this  a  few  drops  in  a 
glass  of  wine  acts  very  good. 

A  Secret  and  most  Excellent  Masterpiece ,  how  to  Draw  off 
or  Distill  a  very  good  and  costly  wine. 

The  cask  in  which  the  wine  is  kept  must  be  very  nicely 
cleansed  and  rinsed,  then  pulverize  one  ounce  of  cinnamon 
bark,  one  ounce  of  Spanish  pepper,  one  quart  of  enizian,  one 
ounce  of  cloves,  one  drachm  of  sulphur  flower,  and  one  ounce 
of  sugar;  mix  all  these  powdered  articles  together  in  a  bag 
of  linen  about  a  span  long,  then  close  the  cask  with  a  bung, 
and  let  it  rest  quiet  for  three  weeks,  yhen  the  wine  will  be 
found  to  be  elegant. 

To  manufacture  a  Golden  Ring ,  by  which  not  only  House  and 
Home,  but  also  Man  and  Beast  are  secured  against  all  Mis¬ 
fortunes,  Pestilential  Epidemics  and  Diseases,  and  are  se¬ 
cured  against  the  Arts  and  Wiles  of  the  Powers  of  the  Devil. 

May  God  direct  and  rule,  that  this  hour,  day  and  year  and 
all  the  time  may  be  as  good  and  blessed  as  our  dear  Lord 
Jesus  Christ;  that  grant  God,  the  Father,  and  God  the  Son, 
and  God  the  Holy  Spirit.  Amen. 

May  God,  the  Father,  make  a  golden  ring  around  this  house, 
around  this  stable,  around  all  men  and  beasts  that  belongeth 
thereto  and  goeth  in  and  out  of  it;  also  around  my  fields  and 
forests,  yea,  this  very  ring  encircles  our  beloved  Mary  with 
her  dear  infant,  Jesus  Christ  they  protect,  watch  over,  main¬ 
tain,  shelter,  cover  and  defend  all  mankind,  both  male  and 
female,  small  and  large,  young  and  old,  as  likewise,  all  cattle, 
onen,  steers,  cows  and  calves,  horses  and  foals,  sheep,  goats, 
beef-cattle,  and  swine,  geese,  ducks,  chickens,  pigeons,  large 
and  small,  whatever  Is  contained  in  this  house  and  these 
stables  and  all  that  cometh  in  and  goeth  out;  for  all  misfor¬ 
tunes,  evil,  colic  wild  Are,  losses,  epidemics,  and  other  dis¬ 
eases;  for  all  bad  and  heated  blood;  for  all  bad  and  malicious 
enemies  and  storms;  for  all  evil  hours,  day  and  night;  for 
all  magic  power  of  witchcraft,  and  the  designs  and  powers  of 


30 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


the  deyil  and  his  infernal  hosts,  to  be  visible  or  invisible,  or 
for  all  wicked  people  who  contemplate  to  rob  me,  that  they 
may  not  be  able  to  carry  or  spoil  aught,  anything  that  these 
people  and  animals,  young  and  old,  large  and  small,  nothing 
excepted*  whatsoever  belongeth  to  these  premises  and  their 
surroundings,  and  goeth  out  and  cometh  in,  from  whence  and 
hence  that  no  loss  may  occur,  nor  any  evil  be  done  at  home  or 
abroad,  in  the  field  pr  in  the  woods,  in  the  meadows  and  on 
the  plains,  in  grass,  wood  or  heath,  whether  it  works  or  rests, 
sits,  lays,  runs,  err  stands,  they  shall  all  now  for  all  time  to 
come  be  included  in  this  ring,  and  be  secure  and  protected 
from  bullet  and  sword,  by  the  very  holy  blood-drops  of  the 
dear  beloved  infant,  Jesus  Christ,  which  he  hath  suffered  and 
shed  for  us  by  his  circumcision  and  upon  the  cross  and  thereby 
vouchsafed  and  sealed  his  love  everlasting,  for  such,  they,  the 
magicians  will  find  no  herb  which  may  open,  break  or  move 
or  pervert,  because  our  dear  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  protects  and 
defendeth  such  with  his  ever  holy  hands,  and  his  supremely 
sacred  five  wounds,  at  all  times,  by  day  and  by  night,  and  at 
all  hours,  forever  and  ever  eternally.  In  the  name  of  God 
the  Father,  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Spirit 

Three  Fridays  in  succession,  in  the  morning,  this  should  be 
repeated  three  times  over  house  and  all  the  estates,  and  all 
that  lives  and  dwells  therein  will  be  protected  from  all  evil 
and  harm. 

For  Rows  and  Fights. 

In  the  name  of  God,  I  do  begin,  lame  your  hands  and  feet 
because  you  sin,  God  grant  that  I  may  come  out  best  or  never 
I’ll  find  peace  nor  rest,  the  true  Son,  Master,  Jesus  Christ  died 
on  the  cross  for  all  mankind,  t  t  t 

For  the  Colic. 

Mother  was  troubled,  mother  tolled  and  labored,  lay  against 
that  very  wall,  where  God  did  send  them  all.  In  the  name  of 
God,  the  Sen  and  the  Holy  Spirit 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


31 


For  Cunning  Thieves,  may  they  be  ever  so  sly.  Pronounce 
this  grace  every  morning  three  times,  over  all  thy  posses¬ 
sions,  witk  devotion. 

Our  dear  mother  in  a  garden  came.  Three  angels  comforted 
her  there.  The  first  is  named-  St.  Michael;  the  other,  St. 
Gabriel;  the  third,  St.  Peter.  Then  spake  Peter  to  our  be¬ 
loved  Mary:  I  saw  three  thieves  enter  there.  They  intend  to 
steal  thy  dear  child  and  kill  it.  But  the  beloved  mother  Mary 
said:  Peter,  bind;  St.  Peter,  bind;  and  Peter  bound  them 
with  iron  bands,  with  God’s  own  hands,  and  with  his  holy  five 
wounds,  for  this  be  with  Gabriel,  upon  this  day  and  night,  and 
this  entire'  year,  and  forever  and  all  times,  my  possessions 
bound.  Whoever  attempts  to  steal  therefrom,  must  stand  still, 
like  a  stick,  and  see  like  a  brick,  and  must  stand  quiet.  He 
must  go  upward,  that  he  cannot  depart  from  hence  until  I  per¬ 
mit  him  to  proceed  from  thence.  With  my  own  tongue  I  must 
tell  him  this.  This  is  my  order  and  Gabriel’s  will,  which  now, 
by  day  and  night,  and  all  the  year,  for  all  times  to  come,  will 
utter  to  every  thief,  for  them  to  repent.  For  this  may  God 
his  blessing  lend.  God  the  Father,  God  the  Son,  and  God  the 
Holy  Spirit.  Amen. 

To  Protect  tlfe  Body  from  the  Dangers  of  all  kinds  of  Weapons, 
Projectiles  and  Quns,  Shafts,  Lancets,  Swords,  Knives 
Rapiers,  Daggers,  and  Hellebards. 

Jesus,  the  true  God  and  man,  protect  me,  N.  N.,  from  all 
sorts  of  arms  and  weapons,  be  they  of  iron,  steel,  lead,  or  be 
tfiey  nails,  knives  or  wood,  whatever  was  made  and  grew  since 
the  birth  of  Christ,  is  now  forged,  or  may  yet  be  forged,  at 
any  future  time,  of  whatever  material.  Jesus  Christ,  the  true 
God  and  man,  protect  me,  N.  N.;  from  murder  and  from  cannon 
balls,  from  bullets  and  swords,  from  thunder  and  lightning, 
fire  and  water,  chains  and  prison,  from  poison  and  sorcery, 
from  mad  dogs  and  from  shedding  of  blood,  and  from  sudden 
death.  Save  me,  Lord  God.  Jesus,  the  true  God  and  man,  pro¬ 
tect  me,  N.  N.,  from  all  sorts  of  arms  and  weapons,  and  all 
those  who  desire  to  overpower  me.  Cause  that  all  their  might 
ind  strength  to  be  lost,  and  be  vain. 

N.  N.,  hold  and  aim  your  armament  and  sword  or  lancet 


s» 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


toward  the  cross  of  Christ  and  his  sacred  five  wounds,  in  all 
my  troubles,  and  at  all  times;  and  command  all  shot  and  fire¬ 
arms  that  the>  nay  fail  to  give  fire;  and  all  swords,  spears, 
lancets,  and  hellebards,  and  other  pointed  instruments,  that 
their  edges  may  become  as  soft  as  the  blood  of  Christ,  who 
suffered  on  the  cross.  Jesus,  protect  N.  N.,  wherever  I  may 
he,  against  all  enemies,  be  they  visible  or  invisible,  secret  or 
open.  The  eternal  Godhead  may  save  and  protect  me  through 
the  bitter  sufferings,  death  and  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ, 
and  through  his  holy  rose-colored  blood,  which  he  shed  upon 
the  cross.  Jesus  begotten  at  Nazareth,  born  in  Bethlehem, 
die<J  in  Jerusalem,  crucified  and  tortured;  'these  are  truthful 
words  which  are  written  in  this  letter,  that  I  may  not  be 
captured  by  any  murderer,  or  any  other  man,  be  killed, 
whipped,  wounded,  nor  be  laid  in  fetters;  let  move  away 
from  me,  or  yield  my  will.  Fly  and  vanish  until  I  shall  recall 
them,  all  enemies  and  all  arms,  weapons  and  armament,  tnay 
they  be  called  by  whatever  name.  None  will  injure  me.  All 
their  power  be  lost  on  me.  Lead  and  iron  projectiles,  remain 
quiet  in  your  armament,  for  the  sake  of  the  martyred  Jesus 
Christ  and  his  holy  five  wounds.  In  the  name  of  tl\e  Father, 
the  Son  and  the  Holy  Spirit. 

In  case  a  person  has  a  tumor  growing,  or  warts  of  any  kind 
upon  his  body,  he  or  she  shall  go  to  church  and,  When  he  no¬ 
tices  two  persons  speaking  to  each  other,  he  shall  touch  the 
humor  or  wart,  and  recite  three  times:  What  I  see  1b  a  great 
sin  and  shame,  and  what  I  touch  may  vanish  soon. 

When  a  couple  of  Oxen  are  to  he  trained,  speak,  while  putting 
the  yoke  upon  them,  as  follows : 

Bless  or  Brown,  take  the  yoke  upon  thee.  Patient  be,  like 
Jesus  Christ  was  patient  t  t  t 

To  Tame  a  Balky  and  Wild  Horse. 

Brown,  Rap,  Fox,  or  gray  horse,  be  so  tame  and  gentle,  that 
whenever  I  sit  upon  thy  back  and  rfde  thee,  thou  wilt  bear  me 
with  as  much  patience  as  Jesus  Christ  was  meek,  patient,  and 
bumble,  t  t  t 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


33 


That  Nobody  may  hurt  you  and,  how  to  be  Secured  against  all 

Assailants. 

Now  1  will  walk  over  the  threshold  I  met  three  men,  not 
yet  very  old.  The  first  was  God  the  Father,  the  other  wa* 
God  the  Son;  the  third  was  God  the  Holy  Spirit.  *They  protect 
my  body  and  soul,  blood  and  flesh,  that  in  no  well  I  fall,  that 
wateT  may  not  swell  me  at  all,  that  a  rabid  dog  may  never 
bite  me,  that  shot  and  stone  may  never  smite  me,  that  spear 
and  knife  may  never  cut  me;  that  never  a  thief  may  steal  the 
least  from  me.  Then  it  shall  become  like  our  dear  Saviour's 
sweat.  Whoever  is  stronger  and  mightier  than  these  th*ee 
men,  he  may  come  hither,  assail  me  if  he  can,  or  forever  keep 
his  peace  with  me.  t  t  t 

Powerful  Prayer,  whereby  one  may  Protect  Himself  against 

Bullet  and  Sword,  against  Visible  and  Invisible  Enemies. 

or  all  Possible  Evil  and  Dangers 

Count  Philip  of  Flanders  had  a  subject  who  had  forfeited  hi? 
life;  and  as  the  Count  wanted  to  have  the  delinquent  exe¬ 
cuted,  no  executioner  was  able  to  perform  the  act.  No  sword 
would  cut  his  head  off.  This  astonished  the  count,  and  he 
spoke  thus:  How  shall  I  divine  this?  Tell  me  how  this  comes 
to  pass,  and  I  will  pardon  thee  Whereupon  the  poor  sinner 
showed  him  the  letter,  and  he  copied  the  same,  as  did  all  hi? 
servants.  If  you  have  to  go  to  obtain  advice,  or  to  a  court  of 
justice,  take  this  letter  upon  your  right  side,  and  you  will  not 
be  subdued  or  conquered  by  any  one.  When  you  do  not  have 
the  favor  of  your  husband  or  of  your  wife,  take  this  letter  to 
your  aid,  and  the  favor  will  soon  be  regained  When  a 
woman  is  in  her  trouble  hang  this  letter  on  her  neck  and  she 
will  bear  with  much  patience.  If  one’s  nose  is  bleeding,  and 
will  not  cease,  put  this  letter  upon  such  person’s  head — the 
blood  will  soon  be  stopped.  Wherever  this  letter  is  put  under 
the  roof  of  a  house,  such  property  is  secure  from  storm  and 
lightning. 

“The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  who  was  God  and  man  in  one 
person,  protect  me,  N  N.,  from  all  sorts  of  weapons  and  arms, 
projectiles  and  guhs,  long  apd  short  swords,  knives,  daggers, 
carbiDes.  hellebardes.  and  ail  sham,  cutting  and  eoinled 


M 


At.jBBRTU8  MAGNUS;  OR. 


vnpou;  from  lancets  and  spears,  short  or  long  rifles,  mus- 
ksts,  etc.,  wrought  and  forged  since  the  birth  of  Christ,  of  all 
kinds  «of  metal,  be  they  of  steel  or  iron,  brass  or  lead,  metal 
or  wood.  Jesus  Christ,  the  true  Lamb  of  God,  save  me,  N. 
from  all  kinds  of  shot  guns  and  projectiles,  by  maintaining  the- 
covenant,  like  the  Holy  Mary,  before  and  after  the  miraculous 
birth,  render  their  weapons  to  become  as  soft  as  the  drops  of 
blood  shed  by  our  Saviour  upon  Mount  Olivet  Jesus  Christ 
protect  me,  N.  N.,  from  all  evil  reports  behind  my  back;  from 
apoplexy,  sudden  death,  witchcraft  drying  and  stopping  of 
well  water;  from  all  kinds  of  enemies,  visible  and  invisible. 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  let  me,  N.  N.,  not  be  lost  but  wander  with 
me,  and  be  with  me,  until  my  last  moments,  and  leave  me  not 
that  I  may  not  die  here.  That  vouchsafe  me,  God  the  Father, 
God  the  Son,  and  God  the  Holy  Spirit  Amen. 

The  Holy  Trinity  be  with  me  and  by  me.  It  protect  me, 
N.  K,  the  one  Godhead.  Jesus  Christ  be  with  me  upon  the 
water  and  upon  the  land;  in  the  forest  mountains  or  valley;  In 
village,  town  and  city;  wheresoever  I  stand  or  walk,  sit  or  lay, 
or  whither  I  roam.  Lord  Jesus  Christ  save  me,  N.  N.,  from 
all  enemies,  be  they  visible  or  invisible,  secret  or  open.  It 
protect  me,  N.  N.,  the  one  God,  through  his  bitter  sufferings 
and  death,  and  by  his  rose-colored  blood,  which  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  shed  upon  the  Cross.  Jesus  Christ  was  conceived  in 
Nasareth,  bom  in  Bethlehem.  These  are  valuable  and  dear 
words,  written  down  in  this  letter.  Therefore  all  must  suc¬ 
cumb  to  me,  N.  N.,  that  is,  vanish  until  I /recall  them;  and 
must  loose  all  their  arms  and  armor,  defence  and  weapon,  that 
they  may  give  way  and  yield  and  vanish,  until  I  call  them 
again,  and  lose  all  their  strength  and  power,  like  Pharaoh 
lost  his  might  Blood  and  strength  retain  your  powers,  like 
Christ  retained  his,  when  he  was  tortured,  and  with  his  Holy 
five  wounds  ye  shall  be  nailed  down  and  bound.  The  arma¬ 
ment  must  vanish,  like  those  men  vanished  who  tied  the  hands 
of  Lord  Jesus  upon  the  cross,  in  the  name  of  the  Father, 
the  Son  and  the  Holy  Spirit  Jesus  crossed  Che  Red  Sea, 
looked  into  the  Holy  Land,  and  said:  Tom  shell  be  all  ropes 
and  bands;  all  arms  and  weapons  shall  be.  brclrv*:  all  eyes 
must  be  blinded,  those  that  are  sinful ;  no  hero  or  *uy  weapon 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


38 


shall  overpower  me.  That  water  shall  not  cut — be  it  iron  or 
steel,  brass  or  lead,  nor  whatever  it  may  be — must  not  hurt 
me,  ah!  God.  May  it  be  blessed,  like  the  cup  and  the  bread, 
like  the  real  bread  of  life,  which  the  Lord  gave  to  His  twelve 
disciples,  in  the  name  of  God  the  Father,  the  Son  and  the 
Holy  Ghost.  The  blessing  of  the  Divine  Being,  how  He  blessed 
Lot,  when  he  sent  to  make  peace,  may  come  over  me;  the  bles¬ 
sing  of  the  Lord  when  he  blessed  Joseph,  it  come  over  me,  N. 
N.;  the  blessing  of  thy  Lord  over  the  archangel  Gabriel,  when 
he  carried  the  joyful  message  to  the  Virgin  Mary,  it  may  come 
over  me,  N.  N.  In  the  name  of  God  the  Father,  the  Son  and 
the  Holy  Ghost. 

In  the  beginning  was  the  Word,  and  the  word  was  with 
God,  and  the  Word  was  God.  All  things  were  made  by  him; 
and  without  him  was  not  anything  made  that  was  made.  In 
him  was  life;  and  the  life  was  the  light  of  men.  And  the  light 
shineth  in  darkness;  and  the  darkness  comprehendeth  it  not. 
There  was  a  man  sent  from  God  whose  name  was  John.  The 
same  came  for  a  witness,  to  bear  witness  of  the  Light  that  all 
men  through  him  might  believe.  He  was  not  that  Light,  but 
was  sent  to  bear  witness  of  that  Light.  That  was  the  true 
Light,  which  lighteth  every  man  that  cometh  into  the  world, 
He  was  in  the  world,  and  the  world  was  made  by  him,  and 
the  world  knew  him  hot.  He  came  unto  his  own,  and  his  own 
received  him  not.  But  as  many  as  received  him,  to  them  gave 
he  power  to  become  the  Sons  of  God,  even  to  them  that  believe 
on  his  name:  Which  were  born,  not  of  blood  nor  of  the  will 
of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but  of  God.  And  the  Word 
was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us  (and  we  beheld  his  glory, 
the  glory  as  of  the  only  begotten  of  the  Father),  full  of  grace 
and  truth,  visibly  and  openly  protect  me,  N.  N.,  the  eternal 
Godhead,  by  the  bitter  sufferings  and  death,  and  through  his 
rose-colored  blood,  which  he  shed  from  the  Holy  Cross.  Jesus 
was  begotten  at  Nazareth. 

These  are  truthful  words,  as  very  stone  is  written  down  in 
this  letter,  that  I  will  not  be  captured  by  any  murderer,  nor 
bound  in  fetters;  all  shots,  arms  and  weapons  will  vanish 
before  me,  N.  N.,  and  lose  all  their  power.  Keep  all  thy  armor 
and  weapons,  by  the  Almighty,  in  the  name  of  God  the  Father, 


36 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


and  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Spirit.  Jesus  walked  over  the  Red 
Sea.  He  looked  into  the  Holy  Land.  All  cords  and  bands 
must  break  and  bend;  the  eyes  of  my  foes  shall  become 
blinded.  Protect  me,  N.  N.,  that  no  stone  shall  fall,  nor  iron, 
nor  steel,  metal  or  lead  that  I  may  be  well  blessed,  lfke  the 
very  heavenly  bread  which  the  Saviour  gave  to  the  twelve  dis¬ 
ciples,  in  the,  name  of  God  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy 
Spirit.  The  blessing  God  bestowed  upon  the  first  created  being 
may  be  inherited  by  me,  N.  N.  Further:  love  my  right  hand, 
when  I  come  into  a  strange  land,  that  neither  foe  nor  sorcerer 
may  bewitch  nor  stun  me.  t  t  ! 

For  the  Epilepsy  and  Palsy. 

Willow  tree,  I  now  beseech  thee,  I  pray  thee  take  away  from 
me  my  seventy  and  seventy  times  epilepsy.  This  must  be 
spoken  three  times,  three  Fridays  in  succession,  when  the 
moon  is  waning;  mornings,  before  sunrise,  go  to  a  running 
water,  and  direct  the  face  in  the  direction  whence  the  water 
runs,  and  upon  three  willow  barks  make  three  knots  in  the 
name  of  the  holiest  being, 

ss.  sytz  X  X  Z. 

X  E.  S.  X  IL  A.  G.  M.  U.  A.  H.  O.  N.  C.  S.  H.  ss.  H. 

Ghost. 

Jesus  of  Nazareth,  Jesus  beware  the  words  of  God  as  to  the 
blessing  over  the  archangel  Gabriel. 

For  a  Ruptured  Child. 

When  a  child  is  afflicted  with  rupture,  grease  it  with  lard 
from  a  fox,  and  the  rupture  will  soon  heal. 

When  a  Cow  gives  Blood  in  the  Milk. 

Take  cowlip  herbs  and  feed  it  to  the  cow,  also  boil  these 
herbs  in  water  and  wash  the  udder  with  it;  afterward,  milk 
the  cow  over  a  glowing  fire  and  let  the  smoke  envelope  the 
udder. 

For  Oout  and  Palsy. 

God  greet  thee  and  take  thee  away,  cold  face  I  banish  thee 
this  day  in  the  name  of  God  and  the  last  judgment  day,  go 
away  and  leave  this  marrow  and  bone,  vanish  from  this  fleeh 
and  blood,  and  I  will  praise  our  Lord  and  God. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


IT 


A  particular  "Way  to  recover  Stolen  Goods. 

Mark  'well  whence  the  thief  left  and  by  which  door;  from 
it  cut  three  pieces  of  wood  while  pronouncing  the  three  most 
sacred  names,  take  these  scraps  of  wood  to  a  wagon,  but  in  a 
noiseless  manner,  take  a  wheel  off  the  wagon  and  insert  the 
wood  in  the  nave,  again  pronouncing  the  three  holiest  names, 
then  drive  the  wheel  backward  and  ejaculate:  Thief,  thief, 
return  with  the  stolen  article,  thou  shalt  be  compelled  by  the 
omniscience  of  God  the  Father,  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Spirit. 
God  the  Father  calls  thee  back,  God  the  Son  turn  thy  footsteps 
that  thou  must  return,  God  the  Holy  Spirit  guide  thee  to  re¬ 
trace  thy  steps  until  thou  again  reachest  this  place.  By  dint 
of  God’s  power  thou  must  come  back,  by  the  wisdom  of  the 
Son  of  God  thou  shalt  enjoy  no  peace  nor  rest  till  all  the  stolen 
things  are  returned  to  the  rightful  owner.  By  the  grace  of 
God  the  Holy  Ghost,  thou  must  run  and  leap,  canst  neither 
rest  nor  sleep  till  thou  shalt  arrive  at  that  place  where  thou 
has  committed  the  theft.  God  the  Father  bind  thee,  God  the 
Son  compel  thee,  God  the  Holy  Ghost  cause  thee  to  return. 
The  wheel,  thou  must  not  rapidly  turn,  or  the  soles  of  his  feet 
may  blister  and  burn,  he  will  in  pain  and  anguish  cry,  and 
ere  you  catch  him,  thus  may  die;  Thou  shalt  come  in  the 
name  of  the  Father,  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Spirit.  Thief,  thou 
must  come,  f  t  t  Thief  thou  must  come,  t  t  t  If  thou  art 
mightier,  thief,  thief,  thief,  than  God  and  the  Holy  Trinity, 
then  stay  where  thou  art.  The  ten  commandments  force  thee 
to  observe  not  to  steal,  hence  thou  must  return,  t  t  t  Amen. 

When  the  Milk  leaves  the  Cows. 

Take  camphor,  eggs  and  black  carraway  seed,  give  it  to  the 
cattle,  it  does  them  good. 

For  the  Lung  Rot  of  Cattle. 

Take  orris  root,  cardamon  root,  boil  in  two  quarts  of  wine 
and  nine  pints  of  water,  till  one  pint  has  evaporated.  Pour 
out  one-half  pint  for  the  cattle  to  drink,  mornings  and  even¬ 
ts#*.  iff  it  is  very  good. 


ALBERTOS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


For  Stitching  Faint  in  Woman  or  ChUd, 

Take  fo&t’a  milk  and  a  warm  roll,  and  boll  together,  and 
apply  the  poultice  as  warm  as  possible  upon  the  ailing  spot 
and  tie  a  towel  around  it  It  will  be  cured. 

To  Drive  away  Swellings. 

Take  aniseed  oil,  turpentine  oil,  of  each  one-half  an  ounoe^ 
stir  well  and  apply  upon  the  swelling.  It  will  soon  improve. 

To  be  enabled  to  shoot  securely ,  upon  the  Stand,  the  Chase,  or 

in  the  Field. 

In  the  morning  after  rising,  quietly  say  the  following  while 
taking  the  rifle  in  your  hands:  Rifle,  I,  N.  N.,  take  hold  of  thee 
In  the  name  of  God  the  Father,  God  the  Son,  and  God  the  Holy 
Spirit  and  accompany  this  grace  by  moving  the  palm  of  the 
hand  over  the  barrel,  continuing  thus:  That  thou  shalt  be 
obedient  to  me,  in  all  cases  whatsoever,  upon  the  stand,  or  for 
shooting  wild  game,  thou  shalt  never  fall,  and  wherever  I 
wish  to  hit  may  surely  hit  in  the  name  t  t  t  three  times,  and 
the  following  words  inscribed  upon  the  upper  part  of  the  bar¬ 
rel:  Abia,  Dabia,  Fabia. 

Ointment  for  a  Boil  that  fails  to  Break. 

Take  some  covidalis  for  five  cents,  a  little  honey,  saffron, 
the  yolk  of  an  egg,  and  a  little  flour;  put  all  of  these  articles 
into  an  earthen  pot,  mix  well.  This  will  give  a  most  excellent 
plaster. 

A  Remedy  to  cure  the  Cough. 

When  cherries  are  in  season,  dry  the  stems  of  bla$k  cherries 
between  two  sheets,  of  paper  to  prevent  them  from  becoming 
dusty,  save  them  in  a  paper  box.  Draw  tea  therefrom,  for  every 
drawing  take  about  four  saucers  full  of  water,  and  as  many 
cherry  stems  as  may  be  held  between  three  fingers.  Boil  like 
any  other  tea,  and  continue  to  take  this  tea  till  the  coughing 
ceases.  The  most  violent  cough  may  be  cured  by  this  remedy. 

Another  Remedy  to  cure. a  Cough. 

Roast  an  onion,  rub  the  soles  of  the  feet  therewith,  and  the 
ailment  will  cease;  or  take  strong  brandy,  dip  a  soft  doth 
therein  and  wet  the  soles  of  the  feet,  mornings  and  evenings* 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


39 


For  Sores  on  any  part  of  the  Body .  whether  caused  by  Pound¬ 
ing  or  Cutting  especially  when  Erysipelas  follows. 

Take  five  cents’  worth  of  saffron,  very  little  of  white  iead, 
and  two  spoonfuls  of  goat’s  milk,  make  an  ointment  thereof, 
apply  with  a  rag  to  the  sore  spot. 

A  Sympathetic  Remedy  for  Fever. 

Walk  to  a  nut  tree  before  sunrise,  cut  therefrom  a  piece 
lengthwise,  write  your  name  upon  a  paper,  and  put  it  in  the 
empty  space  made  by  the  cut,  and  speak:  Nut  tree  I  come  unto 
thee,  take  the  seventy-seven  different  fevers  from  me,  I  will 
persist  therein  in  the  name  of  God,  etc.,  and  while  pronouncing 
this,  place  the  cutling  in  its  place  again,  that  it  may  grow 
again  together.  It  helps  at  once. 

For  Pain  in  the  Back. 

Buy  five  cents’  worth  of  old  sweet  oil,  same  quantity  of 
vobolium,  sperm  oil,  baiberry  oil — mix  these  four  articles  to¬ 
gether,  and  grease  the  back  therewith. 

For  Colic. 

Take  a  few  bay  leaves  and  soak  them  in  brandy  in  a  warm 
room.  As  soon  as  the  colic  is  felt,  take  from  one  to  four 
spoonfuls  of  this  remedy. 

To  cure  Frosted  Feet. 

Take  a  white  woolen  cloth  which  has  never  been  used  be¬ 
fore,  burn  it  to  ashes,  strew  these  ashes  upon  the  afflicted  feet 
and  they  will  heal. 

To  strengthen  the  Procreative  Organs. 

Take  twelve  ounces  of  imperial  spices,  two  pounds  of  white 
sugar,  twenty-four  grains  of  opium,  one  ounce  of  borax,  four 
ounces  prepared  steel  filings,  twenty  drops  of  cinnamon  oil, 
twenty  drops  of  oil  of  cloves;  of  these  articles  prepare  a 
aowder.  Take  a  pinch,  or  as  much  as  covers  the  point  of  a 
■able  knife,  every  hour  throughout  the  day.  Bathe  the  body 
■*ften  in  warm  water,  and  the  organs  in  cold  water.  After 
Ihis  cure  vou  will  be  stronger  than  ever  before. 


40 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


To  drive  away  Tine  Fretters  and  Wall  Lice. 

Take  four  ounces  of  arsenic,  two  ounces  of  antimonium, 
eleven  and  one  half  ounces  of  mercury,  one  quart  of  hog’s 
lard,  which  must  be  rendered  in  turpentine;  of  these  ingredi* 
ents  make  an  ointment,  and  smear  the  places  therewith, 
wherever  these  insects  prevail. 

For  Intestine  Colic  of  Horses. 

Move  your  hand  three  times  over  the  back  of  the  horse,  and 
speak,  Oh!  Jerusalem,  thou  city  of  the  Jews,  wherein  Christ 
hath  been  crucified,  where  he  changed  into  water  and  blood, 
this  shall  be  good  for  horses  warm,  colic  and  fefes,  in  the 
name,  f  t  t  Whatever  is  troubling  thee,  all  shall  be  healed, 
t  t  t  Whenever  you  say  this  grace,  always  tap  the  left  side, 
and  it  will  be  more  efficacious. 

When  Cattle  is  affected  by  Knots. 

Mix  some  leaven,  or  yeast,  and  apply  to  his  throat. 

When  a  Horse  has  the  Fifes ,  or  Vifes,  or  Worms. 

Throw  his  water  into  the  left  shoe,  and  then  pour  a  little 
of  the  water  Into  the  right  ear,  and  the  horse  will  be  cured. 

For  White  Swelling ,  and  Joint  Water. 

Hogs  manure  and  a  little  excrementis  hippo,  put  in  a  left 
shoe  and  tie  over  the  afflicted  spot,  and  it  will  cease. 

When  the  Limb  of  a  Horse  becomes  Less  or  Decays. 

Take  common  nettles  and  rub  the  member  or  limb  there¬ 
with,  afterward  take  crabs  alive,  pound  them  so  that  they 
pass  water,  and  with  such  water  wash  the  animal. 

When  a  Person  is  Cut  or  Pounded. 

Speak  thus:  Wholesome  is  the  wound,  wholesome  is  the 
hour  and  sound,  that  this  may  not  swell  or  fester  again  until 
the  seas  run  dry. 

For  Suppuration  of  Man  or  Beast. 

Take  a  field  toad  which,  during  harvest  time,  had  been  put 
upon  a  stick,  and  placed  in  a  position  toward  the  rising  sun 
where  it  died.  Of  such  a  toad  take  the  corresponding  limb 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


41 


of  that  part  of  which  the  patient  suffers,  be  it  man  or  beast, 
and  tie  it  to  the  ailing  limb. 

To  Secure  One'8  Self  against  Wicked  People  whilst  Traveling , 
and  being  in  Danger  of  being  Attacked. 

Speak  three  times:  Two  wicked  eyes  have  overshadowed 
me,  but  three  other  eyes  are  overshadowing  me  too,  the  one  of 
God,  the  Father,  the  other  of  God  the  Son,  the  third  of  God 
the  Holy  Spirit,  they  watch  my  blood  and  flesh,  my  marrow 
and  bone,  and  all  other  large  and  small  limbs,  they  shall  be 
protected  in  the  name  of  God.  t  t  t 

When  a  Horse  has  Swelled  Legs. 

Take  bark  of  white-horned  shrub  and  some  cones  of  a  l!r 
tree,  boil  in  lye,  and  wash  the  limbs  therewith. 

For  a  Putrid  Mouth. 

Take  blackberry  leaves  boiled  in  water  and  wine,  put  a  little 
alum  to  it.  The  mouth  rinsed  therewith,  will  have  a  good 
effect 

For  Gravel. 

Take  hurbum  oviga  aurea,  grind  to  powder,  give  the  pa¬ 
tient  every  morning  a  spoonful  in  an  egg,  and  let  him  fast 
afterward  four  hours.  The  patient  will  urinate  an  hour  there¬ 
after,  and  after  using  this  remedy  for  about  ten  or  twelve 
days,  all  the  gravel  in  his  kidneys  will  break,  and  he  will 
pass  them  without  suffering  any  pain. 

For  the  Colic  of  Infants. 

Hast  thou  heartburn  and  colic?  Leave  this  rib,  N.  N„  like 
Jesus  Christ  left  his  manger,  t  t  t  Three  timoe  repeated. 
The  two  N.  N.  signify  the  name  of  him  who  is  to  be  comforted. 

Now  I  step  out  in  God’s  great  name,  now  6tep  out  in  his 
might  and  fame,  now  I  step  out  in  God’s  footstep  right  which 
is  against  all  spirits’  might.  God.  the  Father  before  me  it, 
God,  the  Son  behind  me  and  at  my  side.  God,  the  Holy  Spirit 
is  within  and  with  me.  t  t  t  Speak  three  times  and  move 
with  the  hand  over  the  sore. 


42 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


For  a  Plaster . 

Take  olive  or  sweet  oil,  camphor,  red  lead,  five  cents’  worth 
of  each,  and  prepare  into  an  ointment. 

For  the  Toothache. 

Write  upon  a  piece  of  paper,  Quosum  sinioba  zenni  tantus 
lect  veri,  and  hang  it  on  a  string  over  the  back. 

For  the  Goitre. 

Take  goitre  fungus  and  burn  it  to  a  powder  over  a  coal 
fire  or  alcohol  flame.  Take  of  this  powder  mornings  and 
evenings,  on  an  empty  stomach;  as  much  as  two  five  cent 
pieces  will  cover. 

To  Heal  the  Hernia  or  Rupture. 

Write  the  name  of  the  patient  upon  paper,  drill  a  hole  in 
three  prune  trees,  and  prepare  an  oaken  bolt,  and  put  into 
every  hole  the  three  most  sacred  names,  drive  every  one  of 
these  bolts  in  with  three  strokes,  and  pronounce  the  following 
sentence;  N.  N.,  I  drive  your  rupture  into  this  tree,  God  may 
thy  physician  be;  Rupture  forget  thy  growth  and  walk,  like 
our  Lord  forget  one  man;  hernia  leave  my  flesh  and  bone. 
Rupture,  rupture,  rupture,  depart  hence  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord,  etc.  I  beseech  thee  in  the  name  of  the  living  God,  that 
thou  may  heal  upon  the  rod,  that  thou  may  become  sound  and 
straight,  and  growest  stronger  every  day.  Hepheta  open  thy¬ 
self!  t  t  t  A.  0.  B.  Tibas. 

To  prevent  that  the  Fire  on  the  Hearth  becomes  extinguished. 

When  a  new  house  is  built,  write  upon  three  separate  pieces 
of  paper:  Deus  Pater,  Deus  Filius,  Deus  Spiritus  Sanctus  in 
Oleum  Trinitatis  Sun  and  Moon  have  their  course  over  water 
and  over  land,  that  no  fire  and  flame  in  this  house  shall  cease, 
above  inscriptions  be  placed,  and  on  three  corners  under  the 
For  this,  three  tin  boxes  must  be  made,  and  in  each  one  the 
threshold  or  stones  be  laid,  so  that  they  do  not  decay  or 
moulder  in  the  ground,  and  the  fires  in  such  a  house  will  never 
go  ont. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


43 


When  Cattle  is  Afflicted  with  Warts ,  Tumors ,  etc. 

Anna  Important,  Anna  Jesus  Christ,  break  spontaneous 
growth  and  blister  wherever  thou  art;  cattle  is  plagued  by 
tumor  and  warts,  in  mouth  and  on  the  head,  in  the  throat,  or 
on  the  glands,  in  blood,  in  flesh,  depart  from  hence,  into  the 
lake  over  the  fence,  but  not  into  the  flesh,  t  t  t  Press  the 
yoke  of  an  egg  into  the  throat  of  the  animal,  in  the  name,  t  t  t 

How  to  cure  a  Boil  or  Swelling  on  the  Face. 

Procure  five  cents’  worth  of  melioration  plaster,  (easy  plas¬ 
ter,)  put  it  on  the  boil  before  going  to  bed.  Another  most 
excellent  remedy  is  Ungufntum  Balsilicon. 

To  prevent  Persons  doing  Evil  unto  you ,  whom  you  suspect 
of  hearing  Malice ,  or  designing  Evil  against  you. 

Welcome,  in  the  name  of  God.  ye  brethren  tru  and  God,  we 
all  have  drank  of  the  Saviour’s  blood.  God  th>  I  .ther  be  with 
me;  God  the  Son  be  with  you;  God  the  'Ic  j  Spirit  be  with  us 
all.  Let  us  meet  In  union  and  part  from  each  other  in  peace, 
t  t  t  Three  times  spoken. 

A  good  Plaster  for  Open  Sores. 

Take  five  cents’  worth  of  bees-wax,  the  same  quantity  of 
ropemakers’  resin,  some  few  ounces  of  beef  suet,  a  few  tea¬ 
spoonfuls  of  sweet  oil,  that  is,  the  same  quantity  in  weight  of 
each  of  the  ingredients,  boil  over  a  quick  fire  to  the  substance 
of  a  ealve,  and  use  like  a  plaster. 

For  Fevers. 

Write  upon  three  almond  kernels  the  following  words,  and 
take  them  three  mornings  in  succession: 

“Hasta,  Hava,  Shaver.” 

Then  purchase  five  cents’  worth  of  camphor,  and  make  small 
lozenges  from  it,  and  suspend  these  from  your  neck.  Leave 
them  three  days  and  three  nights  in  that  position,  and  remove 
them  at  the  same  hour  of  the  day  that  they  were  fastened  to 
your  body. 

To  Extirpate  Rats  and  Mice. 

Take  fine  iron  or  steel  filings.  Mix  the  same  with  ground 
willow  wood  into  a  dough.  If  this  dough  is  put  into  the  mouse 
holes,  the  mice  will  be  eager  to  devour  it,  and  soon  die. 


44 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUB;  OR, 


2.  Take  leaves  of  white  hellebore,  mixed  with  fine  wheat 
flour,  and  knead  into  a  stiff  dough,  with  honey.  This  dough 
put  into  the  holes  when  the  rats  and  mice  run  in  and  out. 
They  will  eagerly  devour,  and  surely  die. 

3.  Or,  take  bitter  almonds  and  fine  wheat  flour,  make  a  stiff 
dough,  and  dispose  of  it  as  already  stated. 

4.  Take  potassa,  and  strew  into  the  mouse  and  rat  holes. 
This  sometimes  kills  the  entire  brood  in  a  few  hours. 

5.  Take  Haleeia  seed,  and  throw  it  into  the  holes.  This  they 
eat  with  greediness,  and  certain  death  will  follow. 

6.  Take  the  rinds  of  wild  gourds  or  pumpkins.  Mix  the  same 
with  equal  portions  of  wolf’s  wort  (Chrysanthemum)  and 
barley  flour.  Of  these  articles  make  a  stiff  dough.  Rats  and 
mice  eating  of  this  will  meet  sure  death. 

7.  Take  the  head  of  a  rat  or  mouse,  draw  the  skin  there- 
from,  and  put  the  head  in  the  place  where  these  vermin  con¬ 
gregate,  and  they  will  fly  at  once  in  great  haste,  as  if  they 
were  bewitched,  and  never  more  return  for  fear  that  it  might 
be  done  unto  them  as  to  their  dead  kindred. 

8.  Another  good  exterminator  is  to  take  the  herb  skunk 
cabbage,  symplocarpus  foetid  us  angustlfolium,  and  fumigate 
the  place  infested  with  the  mice.  As  long  as  this  odor 
touches  their  nostrils  they  will  stay  away. 

When  a  Cow  loaf  the  Milk. 

Insoribe  the  following  words  upon  an  iron  spade:  Mura, 
Martha,  Marscha,  T.  X.  T.  Make  a  spade  red  hot,  dip  into 
the  milk  of  suoh  a  cow  three  times,  and  three  Fridays  in  at  c- 
cession  repeat  this.  It  is  magnificent 

For  Griping  Paine  or  Colic. 

The  mother  of  God  journeyed  over  the  land,  when  the  Sav¬ 
iour  met  her  with  His  band.  The  Saviour  spoke  thus; 
Whither  art  thou  going 7  The  Virgin  Mary  replied:  I  will 
plague  mankind.  The  Saviour  said:  Nay,  thou  shalt  not  do 
so.  t  t  t  Three  times,  and  with  the  thumb  move  around 
the  body. 

To  prevent  lameness,  when  the  veins  ore  cut  or  torn. 

TUu  cart  worms,  pound  them  in  old  grease,  and  tie  this 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


45 


tepid  mass  over  the  wounds,  and  on  the  fourth  day  thereafter 
the  veins  will  have  healed  together,  and  without  pain. 

To  cause  the  Hair  to  Grow  wherever  you  wish. 

Take  milk  of  a  slut,  and  saturate  therewith  the  spot  wher¬ 
ever  the  hair  is  desired  to  grow.  Probatum  est! 

To  Ascertain  whether  a  Sick  Person  will  become  well  again. 

Cut  a  piece  of  bread,  rub  the  patient’s  teeth  therewith,  and 
throw  it  before  a  dog.  If  he  eats  it,  the  patient  will  recover. 
Otherwise,  the  disease  is  dangerous. 

To  Prevent  from  being  Wounded. 

Whoever  digs  up  St.  Peter’s  root  in  the  morning  of  St. 
Peter’s  day,  before  the  sun  rises,  and  carries  these  roots 
around  the  neck,  is  sure  not  to  be  wounded.  But  such  a 
person  must  be  careful  not  to  drink  liquor  while  carrying  the 
roots. 

Also,  whoever  digs  knot  grass,  on  St.  John’s  day,  in  the 
morning  before  sunrise,  and  carries  the  same,  will  not  be 
wounded. 

Another  Preventive  for  the  Same. 

Dig  meadow  rue  in  the  sign  of  the  zodiac  virgo,  eat  them 
before  breakfast,  before  beginning  to  fight  or  battle.  Pro¬ 
batum  est. 

To  Drive  away  Lice  and  Nits  from  the  Head. 

To  drink  powder  of  hartshorn  dissolved  in  wine,  prevents 
the  growing  of  these  vermin  on  the  head.  If  such  powder  is 
strewn  upon  the  head,  all  lice  and  nits  will  surely  die. 

For  Gravel,  a  Simple  and  Effective  Art. 

This  herb  boiled  in  beer,  and  drank  mornings  and  evenings, 
is  a  miraculous  remedy. 

How  to  draw  the  Poison  from  a  Body. 

Drink  four  ounces  of  rosemary  water,  it  will  neutalize  the 
poison  and  stengthen  heart  and  brain. 

A  Good  Salve  for  Itchy  Hands. 

'afee  meadow  rue,  boil  in  olive  oil,  mix  a  little  bees-wax 


46 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


therewith,  so  that  it  becomes  a  salve.  Grease  the  hands  with 
It,  and  soon  they  will  be  all  well. 

To  Restore  Manhood. 

Buy  a  pike  as  they  are  sold  in  the  fish-market,  carry  it 
noiselessly  to  a  running  water,  there  let  whale  oil  run  into 
the  snout  of  the  fish,  throw  the  fish  into  the  running  water, 
and  then  walk  stream  upward,  and  you  will  recover  your 
strength  and  former  powers. 

Another  Remedy  for  the  Above. 

Take  a  IWw  fresh  laid  egg,  if  possible,  one  that  is  yet  warm. 
Pour  Whale  oil  over  it,  and  boil  the  egg  in  it;  the  oil  then 
should  be  poured  intb  a  running  water,  stream  downward, 
never  then  open  the  egg  a  little,  carry  "it  to  an  ant's 

hill,  ot  the  large  red  specie,  as  are  found  in  fir-trees  forest, 
and  there  bfiry  the  egg.  As  soon  as  the  ants  have  devoured 
the  egg,  the  weak  and  troubled  person  will  be  restored  to  for¬ 
mer  strength  and  vigor. 

Remedy  for  the  Hydrophobia. 

The  “SWabiah  Mercury,"  a  Germs::  -^sHy,  printed  at  Stutt¬ 
gart,  Germany,  contains  in  No.  181,  Mommy,  September  10, 
1810  the  following  article,  with  regard  to  hydrophobia,  which 
deserves  id  be  reproduced  and  embodied  into  this  book: 

"The  tduftty-Physlclan,  Ur.  Schaller,  in  Baireuth,  has  re¬ 
cently  performed  a  very  successful  cure,  at  the  country-seat  of 
the  Master  of  the  Royal  Forest,  Baron  de  Hardenberg  in  Karo- 
linenreuth.  The  doctor  has  successfully  restored  to  her 
wonted  health  a  fobr-year-old  girl,  who  was  bitten  by  a  mad 
dog,  detfpite  all  the  symptoms  of  hydrophobia,  having  al¬ 
ready  been  developed,  by  the  application  of  belladonna  and 
water  of  distilled  laurel-berries.  Thus  it  was  proven  that 
there  is  fetliy  a  remedy  for  this  terrible  malady,  even  after 
it  has  taken  hold  of  the  unfortunate  victim. 

A  similar  power  is  ascribed  to  aniseed  oil,  If  several  drops 
thereof,  poured  into  the  wounds,  made  by  the  biting  of  the 
rabid  animal,  or  of  any  other  poisonous  animal  or  bird.  The 
oil  put  on  a  cloth,  and  laid  upon  the  wound,  will  draw  the 
poison  therefrom,  and  leave  no  injurious  effects. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


47 


To  Clarify  Wine. 

Take  a  half  nutmeg,  two  ounces  of  cinnamon  bark,  two 
ounces  of  cloves,  four  ounces  of  white  sugar,  one  dram  of 
cream  of  tartar,  then  take  white  sugar,  and  render  down  in 
an  earthen  pot;  this  done,  take  a  glass  of  water  pour  it  into 
the  pot  after  the  sugar  dissolves,  and  take  the  pot  from  the 
fire,  then  add  a  pint  of  wine,  stir  all,  and  pour  the  mixture 
into  the  cask.  Repeat  this  procedure  several  times,  let  the 
wine  settle  for  an  hour,  and  after  this  the  wine  will  be  as 
clear  and  fine  as  good  old  wine. 

An  (approved  Method  to  turn  Conflagrations  and  Epidemics  to 

Usefulness. 

The  following  is  the  invention  of  a  Gypsy  King  of  Egypt, 
who  confessed  Christianity.  Anno  1714,  on  the  10th  day  of 
June,  there  were  executed,  in  the  kingdom  of  Prussia,  six 
gypsies,  by  suffering  death  on  the  gallows;  the  seventh  of 
them,  however,  who  was  a  man  of  eighty  years,  was  con¬ 
demned  to  be  beheaded  on  the  16th  of  the  same  month.  But 
a  conflagration  taking  place,  meantime,  turned  to  good  luck 
for  the  aged  man.  He  was  liberated,  and  taken  to  the  scene 
of  the  fire,  for  the  purpose  of  having  him  try  his  arts  and 
mysterious  workings.  What  he  accomplished,  to  the  great 
astonishment  of  all  present,  he  stayed  the  conflagration,  by  a 
miracle,  within  the  #brief  period  of  a  quarter  of  an  hour;  and, 
for  this  deed,  he  was  pardoned,  and  entirely  liberated.  Such 
was  approved  by  the  royal  President,  Government  and  the 
Superintendent  General  at  Koenigsberg,  and  made  public  in 
print. 

First:  printed  at  Koenigsberg,  Prussia,  by  Alexander  Bau¬ 
man,  Anno  1715. 

Thou  art  welcome,  thou  fiery  guest,  do  not  grasp  further, 
but  spare  the  rest. 

That  fire  I  count  to  thy  ransom,  in  the  name  of  the  Father, 
the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost. 

I  command  thee,  fire,  by  the  power  of  God,  that  thou  wouldst 
stand  still,  and  not  further  proceed;  as  true  as  Christ  stood 
on  the  river  Jordan,  when  he  was  baptized  by  Holy  St.  John; 


48 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


that  I  count  to  thy  ransom,  oh,  firs,  in  the  name  of  the  Holy 

Trinity. 

I  command  thee,  fire,  by  the  power  of  God.  that  thou  wouldat 
allay  thy  flames,  as  true  as  Mary  remaineth  so  chaste  and  pure; 
for  this  cease  thy  rage,  oh,  terrible  fire.  This  I  count  to  thee, 
oh,  terrible  fire,  for  ransom’s  sake,  in  the  name  of  the  Holy 
Trinity. 

I  command  thee,  fire,  thou  wouldst  thy  violent  heat  allay,  for 
the  sake  of  Christ’s  blood.  Thy  rage  now  stay,  for  the  blood 
which  he  shed  for  our  sins  and  his  death.  All  this  I  accept 
as  a  ransom  for  thy  sake,  in  the  name  of  God  the  Father,  the 
Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Jesus  Nazarenus,  King  of  the  Jews,  help  us  out  of  these  dan¬ 
gers  of  fire,  and  protect  this  land  and  its  borders  from  all  epi¬ 
demics  and  from  pestilence. 

Whoever  keeps  this  letter  in  his  house,  he  will  not  suffer 
from  conflagrations;  and  if  any  parturient  woman  carries  this 
letter  upon  her  person,  no  sorcery,  apparition  or  witchcraft  can 
harm  her.  Also,  every  one  who  keeps  this  letter  at  home,  or 
carries  the  same  on  his  person,  will  be  secure  from  dire  epi¬ 
demics  and  pestilence,  t  t  t 

Truthful  Discovery  by  an  Old  and  Celebrated  Physician  how  to 
tell  all  Diseases  by  the  Water. 

1.  That  water  which  in  the  surface  is  lead  colored  or  shews 
a  lead  colored  circle  around  the  muddy  substance,  indicates  a 
clodded  brain.  Also,  epilepsy  and  other  troublesome  condition 
of  the  head. 

2.  The  water  of  a  person  who  dies  of  apoplexy  shows  a 
green  circle,  with  blueish  bubbles  therein,  and  the  circle  trem¬ 
bles. 

3.  A  patient  having  a  diseased  head,  passes  water  of  a  lead 
color.  The  circle  on  the  surface  is  also  greenish.  This  is  a 
symptom  of  death. 

*4.  A  subtile  froth  of  the  water,  with  lead  colored  surface,  in¬ 
dicates  heat  of  the  lungs,  the  heart,  the  breast,  and  of  the  liver, 
while  a  reddish  water  always  proves  a  heated  liver.  Red  gravel 
in  the  water,  without  fever  and  pains  in  the  loins,  signifies  heat 
of  the  liver  and  kidneys.  A  cloudy,  foaming  water,  of  yellow- 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


40 


lah  and  greenish  hue,  indicates  great  heat  of  the  liver.  Pur* 
blood  in  the  water,  accompanied  by  pains  and  severe  stitches 
in  the  right  side,  is  a  sure  sign  of  blood  in  the  liver.  A  reddish 
and  cloudy  water  indicates  bile  in  the  liver,  especially  should 
the  water  be  mixed  with  matter  or  pus,  and  has  a  very  offensive 
odor.  Water  mixed  with  a  red  and  blackish  substance,  indi¬ 
cates  a  greatly  inflamed  liver. 

5.  A  red,  thick  water,  and,  when  shaken,  showing  a  saffron 
yellow  color,  indicates  jaundice. 

6.  A  thick,  fattish  and  white  water  indicates  consumption, 
while  a  cloudy,  lead-colored  water,  when  the  clouds  first  appear 
on  the  bottom,  forebodes  consumption;  and  a  pale  water  of  a 
consumptive  person  is  a  certain  sign  of  an  early  death. 

7.  If  the  fever  is  violent,  a  blackish  water  indicates  violent 
headaches  and  loss  of  reason.  A  black  water,  at  the  breaking 
of  a  fever,  which  so  remaineth  until  the  seventh  day,  is  a 
foreboding  that  the  patient  is  recovering  from  fever.  A  black 
water  in  a  fever,  while  the  patient  perspires  on  the  head,  neck 
and  back,  is  a  sign'of  early  death.  A  water  of  greenish  color, 
with  a  circle  around  it  during  a  heavy  fever,  signifies  head 
disease.  Reddish,  soft  gravel  in  the  water,  during  the  pre¬ 
valence  of  a  fever,  signifies  a  burnt  fluid.  A  clayish,  fatty 
water,  during  fevers,  is  a  sign  of  consumption  and  marasmus. 

8.  If  a  man  is  attacked  by  a  violet  fever,  the  water  will  be 
very  red,  and  much  bad  pus  oozes  out  with  it. 

9.  Irritation,  painfulness,  heat  or  difficulty  in  discharging 
water,  may  arise  from  a  variety  of  causes;  but  by  far  the 
most  common  is  the  irritation  produced  by  the  presence  of 
bile  in  the  water  caused  by  a  deranged  state  of  the  liver. 

10.  A  water  containing  a  little  matter,  indicates  boils  of 
the  kidneys.  Red  or  yellowish  curls  in  the  water,  show  heat 
in  the  kidneys.  Hair  curls  in  the  water,  when  they  are  coarse, 
and  soon  vanish  when  the  trial  glass  is  shaken,  are  a  criterion 
of  constipation  and  coarseness,  and  dingy  mould  of  the  kid¬ 
neys. 

11.  When  the  water  has  become  scaly  and  the  patient  com¬ 
plains  of  spasmodic  pains  in  the  abdomen,  it  is  a  sign  of 
irregularity  in  the  bowels,  and  originates  from  a  diseased  blad¬ 
der.  Water  containing  much  pus  or  matter  indicates  a  boil 


QO  ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


in  the  bladder.  White,  hard  water,  having  a  bad  odor,  im- 
dicates  a  diseased  bladder.  Whitish  and  hard  water,  with  a 
sediment  on  the  bottom  of  the  vessel,  is  a  sure  sign  of  grav«l 
in  the  bladder. 

How  a  Farmer  may  be  enabled  to  Predict  the  Future  State  of 
the  Weather  during  the  Year ,  from  the  first  day  of  Janu¬ 
ary,  or  from  the  Days  of  the  First  WeeK  in  which  the  Hew 
Year's  Day  Comes. 

If  New-Year’s  Day  falls  upon  a  Sunday,  a  quiet  and  gloomy 
winter  may  be  expected,  followed  by  a  stormy  spring,  a  dry 
summer,  and  a  rich  vintage.  When  New-Year’s  Day  comes  on 
a  Monday,  a  varied  winter,  good  spring,  dry  summer,  cloudy 
weather,  and  an  inferior  vintage  may  be  expected.  When 
New-Year’s  comes  on  a  Wednesday,  a  hard,  rough  winter,  a 
blustry,  dreary  spring,  an  agreeable  summer,  and  a  blessed 
vintage  may  be  hoped  for.  If  the  first  of  the  year  happens 
to  come  on  Thursday,  a  temperate  winter,  agreeable  spring,  a 
dry  summer,  and  a  very  good  vintage  will  follow.  If  on  a 
Friday  the  year  begins,  a  changeable,  irregular  winter,  a  fine 
spring,  a  dry  and  comfortable  summe.,  and  a  rich  harvest  will 
be  the  result.  If  New-Year’s  Day  comes  on  Saturday,  a  rough 
winter,  bleak  winds,  a  wet  and  dreary  spring,  and  destruction 
of  fruit  will  be  the  consequence. 

How  to  Prevent  Pigeons  from  Flying  away  or  Staying  away 

from  the  Coop. 

Take  a  small  board  from  a  bier  from  which  a  small  child 
was  buried  which  died  before  baptism.  Lay  the  board  under 
the  pigeon  hole,  and  they  will  return  again,  provided  they 
are  not  caged  up,  even  if  they  should  be  carried  many  miles 
from  their  home.  But  if  you  desire  that  your  pigeons  bring 
strange  pigeons  along,  you  must  give  them  mortar  and  lime 
from  an  old  bake  oven  to  eat,  mix  such  lime  with  a  little  an 
(seed.  They  love  to  eat  this,  and  while  other  pigeons  smell 
the  odor  of  yours,  they  will  follow  and  fly  with  them  to  the 
coop. 

When  Milk  is  Stolen  by  Witchcraft. 

Wash  the  outside  of  the  milk  pails  wMch  you  use  for  milk¬ 
ing  with  essence  of  Tonquin  bean.  Repeat  tbis  several  times 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


51 


while  milking  the  cows,  and  the  witches’  butter  and  cheese 
will  hare  a  bad  odor,  such  as  is  frequently  observed. 

To  Glue  Broken  Glass  Together. 

Take  jUbumen,  (white  of  eggs,)  mix  unslaked  lime  to  It,  and, 
with  this  glue,  broken  glass  and  earthen  dishes  may  be 
mended. 

An  Excellent  Recipe  for  Pestilence. 

Take  garlic  and  rue.  Boil  in  good  wine  vinegar.  Drink  this 
mornings  and  evenings.  It  is  a  sure  cure. 

The  Art  of  Extinguishing  Fire  without  the  aid  of  Water. 

Inscribe  the  following  letters  upon  each  side  of  a  plate,  and 
throw  it  into  the  Are,  and  forthwith  the  fire  will  be  ex¬ 
tinguished: 


S  A 

T 

O 

R 

A  R 

E 

P 

O 

T  E 

N 

E 

T 

0  P 

E 

R 

A 

R  0 

T 

A 

9 

For  Epilepsy. 

Purchase  a  half-grown  black  rooster.  Capon  the  fowl.  Take 
a  nutmeg,  and  put  it  into  the  plaoe  from  which  you  make  the 
cut  Leave  this  nutmeg  in  its  place  until  the  rooster  is  fat. 
Then  kill  the  fowl,  withdraw  the  nutmeg,  and  scrape,  evenings 
and  mornings,  the  point  of  a  knife  full,  and  add  it  to  a  spoon¬ 
ful  of  soup,  which  is  given  to  the  patient  Furthermore,  the 
baptismal  name  of  the  afflicted  person  must  be  written  six 
times  upon  a  piece  of  paper,  and  lay  it  under  the  head  of  a 
corpse.  Furthermore,  perspire  in  a  linen  cloth,  and  wrap 
around  a  dead  person.  If  it  is  a  female  who  has  this  disease 
add  to  the  powder  made  by  burning  to  a  crisp  a  lock  of  her 
hair.  In  case  of  a  male  person,  leech  him,  and  dip  a  rag  into 
blood,  and  let  it  be  buried  with  the  corpse.  Probate. 

How  to  make  Yourself  Bold  and  Amiable. 

The  stone  oalled  Actorius  is  to  be  found  in  the  craw  of  any 
old  capon.  He  who  wears  such  a  stone  on  his  neck,  will  al¬ 
ways  remain  bold  and  beloved  by  all  mankind. 


K2  ALBERTUS  MAGNUS:  OR, 


How  to  Manage  in  Selling  Cattle  yov  wish  to  Dispose  of. 

Drive  through  a  running  water,  and  pour  three  handfuls  of 
tMater  over  the  animal,  and  speak  each  time  as  follows: 

Every  one  shall  run  after  me  to  purchase  my  cattle  from 
me.  As  true  as  Christ  baptized  with  the  water  from  the  river 
Jordan,  30  I,  too,  baptize  thee,  t  t  t 

To  Vanquish  a  Man. 

I,  N.  N.,  will  breathe  on  thee,  three  drops  of  blood  I  draw 
from  thee.  The  first  from  thy  heart,  the  other  from  thy  liver, 
the  third  from  thy  vigorous  life.  By  this  I  take  all  thy 
strength,  and  thou  losest  the  strife,  t  t  t  Three  times. 

Against  Worms  in  the  Body  of  a  Man. 

St.  Peter  and  Jesus  moved  upon  the  acre.  They  dug  up  three 
furrows,  where  they  found  three  worms.  The  one  was  white, 
the  other  is  black,  the  third  is  red.  Henceforth,  N.  N..  all  thy 
worms  are  dead.  Three  times. 

A  Blessing  and  Orace  for  all. 

Jesus,  I  will  arise.  Jesus,  do  go  with  me.  Jesus,  put  my 
heart  into  thine  own  bosom.  Christ  is  ascended!  Bliss  hath 
invested  him,  woes  that  molested  him,  trials  that  tested  him, 
gloriously  ended,  t  t  t 

For  the  Toothache. 

St.  Peter  stood  under  an  oak  tree.  Then  spake  our  beloved 
Redeemer  to  Peter:  Why  art  thou  sad  and  weary?  Peter 
replied:  Why  should  I  not  feel  sad  and  dread,  since  all  the 
teeth  decay  in  my  head.  Whereupon  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
spake  unto  Peter!  Peter,  hie  to  the  cool  and  lonely  nook, 
tliere  runs  a  clear  water  in  a  mountain  “brook.  Take  water 
thereof  in  thy  deca/ing  mouth,  and  spew  it  again  into  the 
running  brook,  t  t  t  This  done  three  times  in  succession, 
and  each  time  the  three  highest  names  pronounced.  This  re¬ 
peat  for  three  days  in  succession. 

To  Stay  a  Shot. 

Three  drops  of  blood  flowed  over  the  holy  face  of  our  Lord. 
These  three  holy  blood  drops  Are  moved  before  the  touch-hole 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


53 


of  the  weapon,  and  remain  as  pure  as  the  mother  of  God.  No 
more  shall  fire  and  smoke  from  thy  barrel  and  touch-hole  go. 
Gun,  let  neither  fire  nor  smoke  from  thy  barrel  move,  nor 
heat  Now,  I  go  thither,  because  God  the  Lord  moves  with 
me;  God  the  Son  accompanies  me;  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  he 
soars  o’er  me  forever  and  ever,  that  bullet  and  sword  will 
hurt  me  never,  t  t  t  Three  times. 

To  Banish  all  Robbers ,  Murderers ,  and  Foes. 

God  be  with  you,  brethren.  Desist  you,  thieves,  robbers, 
murderers,  waylayers,  and  warriors  in  meekness,  because  we 
all  have  partaken  of  the  rose-colored  blood  of  Jesus  Christ. 
Your  rifles,  guns,  and  cannons  be  spiked,  with  the  holy  drops 
of  our  Redeemer’s  blood.  All  sabres  and  deadly  weapons  be 
dosed,  with  the  five  wounds  of  our  dear  Master,  Jesus  Christ. 
Three  roses  are  blooming  on  Jesus*  heart  The  first  is  kind, 
the  other  is  mighty,  the  third  represents  God’s  strong  will. 
Under  these,  ye  thieves  and  murderers  are  become  still,  as  long 
aa  I  will,  and  ye  are  banished,  and  your  foul  deeds  have  van¬ 
ished.  t  t  t 

To  alleviate  Pains. 

Oar  dear  Lord  and  Redeemer  Christ  suffered  much  boils  and 
wounds  but  never  had  them  tied  and  bound.  They  fester  not, 
they  pester  not  neither  do  they  ever  suppurate.  Jonas  was 
hllnd,  but  the  heavenly  child  was  kind,  and  spake  to  him:  As 
true  as  with  the  holy  wounds  thou  art  smitten,  they  will  not 
OQltUs,  nor  ever  fester;  but  from  them  I  take  water  and  blood, 
bt  It  for  N.  N.’s  pains  and  wounds  ever  good.  Holy  is  the 
mao  who  all  sores  and  wounds  can  heal,  t  t  t 

When  that  shall  be  Released  again ,  speak: 

Change  plaos,  and  ssnse  ensnare:  be  free,  be  here  and  there! 
God  psroetveth  his  joy  and  glory,  t  t  t 

A  Good  Way  to  Stay  a  Thief. 

Three  lilies  grow  upon  Jesus’  grave.  The  first  is  courage 
dlvlnt;  the  other,  God's  blood,  so  fine;  the  third  is  God’s  will, 
a&der  which,  ye  thieves,  must  hold  still.  Stand  still  you  thief. 
No  mors  oar  Lord  Jesus  descendeth  from  the  cross.  Thou 
shalt  not  bt  able  to  leave  this  spot.  This  I  command  thee. 


54  ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


in  the  name  of  the  four  Evangelists  and  the  heavenly  ele¬ 
ments  in  the  waters  or  in  the  shot,  in  the  court  of  Justice  or 
before  an  apparition.  This  I  bow  unto  thee  by  the  day  of 
doom,  that  thou  standest  still,  and  not  further  proceed,  till  all 
the  stars  in  the  heaven  I  shall  see  and  the  sun  will  shine 
bright.  I  herewith  stop  all  thy  leaping  and  escaping.  This, 
I  command  thee,  in  the  name  of  God  the  Father,  the  Son  and 
the  Holy  Ghost. 

When  you  desire  to  set  them  free  again,  order  them  to  de¬ 
part  hence,  in  the  name  of  the  Lord. 

To  Cause  the  Return  of  Stolen  Goods. 

Go  early  in  the  morning,  ere  the  sun  rises,  to  a  juniper 
tree,  and.  at  sunrise,  bend  it  to  the  ground,  and  put  a  stone 
upon  it.  Under  this  stone  and  tree  lay  the  skull  of  a  criminal 
and  speak:  Juniper  tree,  I  bend  and  press  thee  until  the 
thief  shall  return  N.  N.’s  stolen  property  to  its  place,  t  t  t 
When  the  thief  has  returned  the  stolen  booty,  move  the  stone 
from  whence  you  took  it,  and  put  the  bush  in  its  proper  posi¬ 
tion. 

To  Restore  the  Usefulness  of  a  Cow. 

Write  the  words  given  below  upon  three  scraps  of  paper,  and 
nail  one  on  the  outside  of  the  stable  door,  the  other  on  the 
manger,  and  the  third  tie  to  the  left  horn  of  the  cattle,  and 
speak : 


L. 

bian 

t 

punctum 

t 

sobat 

t 

L. 

bian 

t 

punctum 

t 

sobat 

t 

L. 

bian 

t 

punctum 

t 

sobat 

t 

This  assault  and  trouble  shall  cause  thee  no  more  pain,  as 
it  be  to  our  dear  Lord  in  heaven  and  all  his  disciples,  as  Mttle 
as  God  the  Father,  as  little  as  God  the  Son,  as  little  as  God  the 
Holy  Ghost,  t  t  t 

Whenever  Cattle  are  Troubled  with  the  Diarrhoea. 

Take  a  good  handful  of  lintels,  boil  them  in  water  till  they 
become  stiff,  and  feed  the  cattle  with  this.  Cheese  may  also 
be  applied. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


55 


To  Cut  a  Stick  wherewith  to  Punish  a  Witch  that  has  At • 

tacked  the  Cattle. 

Mark  well,  and  observe  when  the  new  moon  shines  on  a 
Tuesday  before  sunrise,  or,  perhaps,  on  a  Golden  Sunday, 
which  will  occur  whenever  a  Friday  and  Sunday  come  to¬ 
gether,  or,  perhaps,  on  Good  Friday,  also  before  the  rising  of 
the  sun,  hie  thee  to  a  hazelnut  bush,  which  you  may  have 
selected  beforehand.  Stand  before  the  stick  toward  the  rising 
of  the  sun,  take  hold  thereof,  in  the  name  of  God,  with  both 
hands,  and  speak:  Stick,  1  grasp  thee,  in  the  name  of  God 
the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  thou  shalt  be 
obedient  to  me,  that  I  may  surely  hit  him  whom  I  design  to 
whip.  Whereupon  take  thy  knife,  and  cut  the  stick  in  three 
cuts,  whUe  pronouncing  the  three  highest  names,  and  carry 
it  quietly  to  thy  home,  and  guard  it  well,  that  no  person  steals 
it.  If  you  intend  to  whip  a  witch  which  hath  assaulted  a 
beast  or  human  being,  go  into  the  reap,  house,  and  pray,  before 
proceeding  thence,  three  times,  with  great  devotion,  the  article 
dedicated  to  the  Bedgoblin,  (which  is  the  second  article  in 
this  book),  so  that  she  may  be  destroyed  by  fire,  and  no  evil 
ipirit  may  enter  into  house  or  stable;  otherwise  the  cats 
would  get  madam  to  scratch  the  eyes  out  of  your  head.  Then 
move  round  the  man  or  beast  so  bewitched  three  times,  back¬ 
ward.  Now  take  off  the  hat,  put  it  upon  the  floor,  and  batter 
so  long  upon  the  hat  as  thou  may  chose.  It  will  certainly  hit 
the  witch;  and  even  if  you  should  hammer  holes  into  your 
hat,  even  the  witch  will  then  receive  holes  in  his  (or  her) 
head.  If  thou  desirest  to  flog  one  who  is  living  at  a  distance 
from  you,  who  deserves  a  beating,  then  place  your  coat  upon 
a  witch’s  ladder  or  shears,  or  upon  a  threshold,  and  call  the 
name  of  him  (or  her)  you  design  to  whip,  and  you  will  hit 
him  (or  her)  just  as  well  as  if  he  (or  she)  be  present.  But 
upon  the  stick  thou  must  inscribe:  Abiam,  Dabiam,  Fabiam. 
Probatum  est! 

For  the  Fever. 

Suspend,  upon  a  Friday,  a  letter  containing  the  names  set 
forth  below,  between  the  hours  of  eight  and  nine,  upon  the 
patient’s  neck,  in  the  following  manner: 


66 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


Fold  together,  and  tie  it  in  grayish  red  cloth,  which  must 
be  unbleached,  and  pierce  through  the  cloth  and  the  letter, 
three  holes.  Draw  red  thread  through  them,  while  calling 
the  three  holiest  names.  Suspend  the  same  around  the  neck  of 
the  patient,  and  let  it  remain  eleven  days.  After  taking  it  ofl, 
burn  it  before  the  lapse  of  one  hour: 
HBRHCHTHBRH 
HBRHCHTHBR 
HBRHCHTHB 
HBGHCHTHB 
HBRHCHTH 
H  B  R  H  C  H  T 

H  B  R  H  C  H 

H  B  R  H  C 

H  B  R  H 

H  B  R 

H  B 
H 

For  a  Toothache. 

Take  a  new,  but  useless  nail.  Pick  the  teeth  well  with  It, 
till  they  are  bleeding.  Then  take  the  nail,  and  drive  it  into  a 
rafter,  toward  the  rising  sun,  where  neither  sun  nor  moon 
shines,  and  speak,  at  the  first  stroke,  Toothache,  vanish;  at 
the  second  stroke.  Toothache,  banish;  at  the  third  stroke, 
Toothache,  thither  fly. 

W hen  a  Beast  has  the  Erysipelas,  and  the  Water  looks  as  Red 

as  Blood. 

Write  the  letters  below  upon  a  hen's  egg,  and  give  it  the  ani¬ 
mal  to  eat: 

t  KaorKSSOrEzonrh 

arKOCtztzahuroxKaotza 

EaESxiixarotttox 

To  Protect  Cattle  against  the  Rot. 

Stew  some  juniperberry  ashes  in  vinegar,  and  give  it  to  the 
afflicted  cattle.  It  stops  the  rot. 

For  the  Goblins  and  Puppets  who  deprive  the  Cows  of  their 

Milk. 

The  appended  formula,  written  upon  a  scrap  of  paper,  and 
nailed  in  a  secluded  spot  in  a  stable. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


*7 


f  Janna 

t  Sarult 

t  Dutter 

t  Jer 

t 

or 

t  Janna 

t  Sarult 

t  Dutter 

t  Jer 

t 

or 

f  Janna 

t  Sarult 

t  Dutter 

t  Jer 

t 

or 

For  Spots  and  Cataracts  on  the  Eyes. 

When  man  or  beast  is  hit  in  the  eye,  so  that  a  skin  grows 
over  the  eye,  suspend  the  following  words  from  the  neck  of 
such  a  person  or  beast:  Gaa,  Saga,  Fassaa. 

For  Griping  Pains  and  Colic. 

Grips  and  colic,  I  bless  thee  on  this  holy  day,  that  thou 
wilt  get  from  my  cattle  and  horses  away,  t  t  t  Three  times 
recited.  Afterward  take  a  spoonful  of  chimney  soot,  another 
handful  of  ashes  from  juniper  wood,  half  a  quart  of  old  wine. 
*nd  give  all  at  once  to  the  animals. 

To  Cause  a  Cow  to  Give  a  Good  Supply  of  Milk. 

During  Christmas  night  take  the  milt  of  a  herring,  and  the 
sinew  thereof;  also,  bay  leaves,  saffron,  black  carraway  seed, 
and  mix  together;  spread  upon  four  pieces  of  bread,  and  give 
it  to  the  cow. 

A  Drink  for  Sick  Cattle. 

Take  vinum  crecum,  enzian,  alum,  sulphur,  mesturtian  roots, 
angelicum  of  Indian  cucumbers,  (medeola,)  steep  it  and  give 
it  to  the  cattle,  but  warm. 

Tor  Pulmonary  Diseases ,  Consumption,  Jaundice  and  Black 

Disease. 

Purchase  fifteen  cents’  worth  of  aniseed  oil.  An  aged  per¬ 
son  may  take  twice  per  day,  in  the  morning  before  breakfast, 
and  evening  before  retiring  to  bed,  twelve  drops  in  a  spoonful 
of  brandy.  If  he  feels  improvement,  continue  thus  till  no 
more  slime  passes,  then  cease  to  take  this  drink.  Many  a 
person  suffering  from  diseased  lungs  and  jaundice  have  been 
cured  thoroughly  by  this  most  excellent  and  simple  remedy. 
For  young  men  and  females  it  is  not  of  any  use;  except  for 
barren  women,  in  such  a  case  it  may  be  taken  from  three  to 
four  days,  but  during  this  time  abstain  from  all  excitement, 
otherwise  it  will  be  of  no  use. 


ALBERTU8  MAGNUS;  OR, 


A  certain  Art  to  kill  FHes. 

Take  sweet  milk,  add  black  pepper  to  it,  mix  well,  and  leave 
it  tor  the  flies  to  eat.  All  flies  that  partake  ot  it  will  die. 

When  a  Man  Loses  his  Speech  or  the  Tonsils  Fall. 

If  the  speech  is  impeded  or  the  tonsils  swollen,  grease  the 
centre  of  the  head  with  grease  from  a  stork,  end  the  power  of 
speech  will  return. 

Hou>  the  Oil  of  Earth  Worms  are  Made,  and  what  Good  Use  is 

made  thereof. 

It  serves  in  cases  of  anthritis  or  neuralgia  as  well  as  for 
the  withering  of  limbs  and  warts  on  hands  and  feet,  corns  on 
feet,  heels,  ruptures,  and  other  injuries  of  all  kinds.  Put  the 
earth  worms  into  a  pot  and  wrap  the  same  up  in  a  loaf  of 
bread,  bake  it  in  a  bake  oven  as  long  as  is  necessary  for 
bread  to  bake,  then  put  it  in  a  glass  vessel,  and  distil  in  the 
sun. 

The  Usefulness  of  Black  Snails. 

They  cure  withered  limbs  and  warts  on  hands  and  feet,  corns 
on  feet,  heels,  ruptures  and  other  hurts.  Put  the  snails  into 
a  pot.  add  a  good  deal  of  salt  and  keep  it  nine  days  in  the 
ground.  After  this  distil  in  a  glass  in  the  sun. 

To  make  an  Ointment  for  the  Cure  of  the  Itch. 

Take  green  corn  or  broom  seed,  press  the  sap  therefrom, 
trail  it  in  the  same  manner  that  a  mush  is  cooked,  add  five 
cents’  worth  of  sulphur  and  quarter  pound  of  lard.  Rub  the 
body  with  it  every  night. 

How  to  make  the  Genuine  Forest  Ointment  for  Healing  Gan¬ 
grene  and  other  Sores. 

Take  8ymplocarpus,  forest  manna,  vernonica  or  speedwell, 
alsine  pubescens,  centifolium;  press  the  sap  from  these  herbs, 
then  take  white  rosin  or  pitch,  tallow  and  butter;  render  it 
down,  add  the  sap  and  boil  together;  add  five  cents’  worth  of 
verdigris.  This  is  the  genuine  forest  salve. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


59 


To  make  a  Salve  when  a  Man  apparently  becomes  Crooked  and 
causes  the  Belief  that  he  is  Betoitched. 

Take  parsnip  roots  and  carrots,  and  make  an  ointment  there¬ 
of,  and  grease  the  limbs  crosswise  against  the  grain  of  the 
skin  with  this  mixture. 

For  a  Felon  on  the  Finger. 

Take  fresh  ox  gall,  boil  it,  and  apply  as  warm  as  one  can 
bear  it,  by  dipping  the  finger  therein,  and  "keep  it  there  until 
it  becomes  cold.  Thus  the  felon  or  worm  dies  soon. 

When  a  Person  has  a  Cancer  on  Breast  or  Check. 

One  ounce  of  sassafras  boiled  in  beer,  the  pot  well  sealed, 
so  that  the  fumes  do  not  evaporate.  Drink  thereof.  If  the 
sore  is  open,  pulverize  bone3  of  a  corpse,  and  strew  into  the 
wounds.  This,  also,  heals  constant  discharge  from  the  blad¬ 
der,  etc. 

When  a  Cow's  Usefulness  is  taken ,  to  find  out  the  Person,  and 
mark  the  same .  who  caused  the  Trouble. 

On  the  day  of  the  patron  Demetrius,  enter  a  grocery  store, 
buy  a  steel,  purchase  and  pay  for  the  same  without  bartering, 
and  have  it  forged  on  this  very  day.  The  steel  must  be  square, 
about  a  span  in  length,  as  thick  as  a  foot  measure,  and,  what¬ 
ever  the  blacksmith  may  ask,  you  must  pay.  Early  in  the 
morning  take  milk  from  the  cow  in  the  name  of  God  before 
the  witch  milks.  After  this  make  a  fire  upon  the  hearth, 
put  the  steel  into  the  fire  till  it  grows  red,  then  take  a  pair  of 
wooden  tongs  and  draw  the  steel  from  the  fire,  and  put  the 
steel  into  the  dish  wherein  the  milk  is  and  keep  it  there  so 
long  till  the  milk  is  all  evaporated.  If  the  milk  is  entirely 
dried  out,  the  witch  who  caused  the  mischief  must  die;  but  in 
case  the  milk  is  not  entirely  dried  out,  the  witch  will  contract 
blisters  upon  hands  and  face,  so  that  she  will  not  be  able  for 
a  long  period  to  expose  herself  before  the  people. 

For  Hysterics. 

Take  dried  chicken  manure,  grind  it  to  powder,  and  give  a 
pinch  of  it  to  the  patient  in.  a  prune.  It  is  a  quick  remedy. 


60 


ALBERTUS  MAQNU8;  OR, 


To  Join  Stones  or  Broken  Glass. 

Take  mastich,  grind  it  well  with  pure  water,  take  the  ‘ptieee 
of  stone  or  glass,  apply  the  mastich  to  it,  and  let  it  dry,  then 
lift  it  over  a  Are  to  soften  the  mastich.  Put  the  pieeee  together 
and  they  will  become  perfectly  joined. 

Or,  take  gipsum  (plaster  of  Paris)  dissolve  la  albumen 
(white  of  eggs)  and  smear  it  on  the  edges  that  are  to  be 
united.  This,  too,  is  a  good  paste. 

To  Repair  Broken  Glasses. 

Take  half  pitch,  half  rosin,  melt  together,  put  on  the  pieces 
put  them  together,  and  warm  over  the  fire.  It  will  beoome 
solid;  then  scrape  the  pitch  from  the  rents  and  paint  them 
with  oil  paint. 

To  make  a  Water  which  will  Soften  all  Things . 

Take  sal  ammoniac,  nitre  and  cream  of  tartar,  in  equal  por¬ 
tions.  Let  it  boil  over  a  quick  Are;  whatever  is  put  therein 
will  become  soft. 

To  Soften  Glass. 

Take  soluble  glass  or  verre,  burn  it  in  a  retort  to  water, 
and  dissolve  in  this  same  water  some  gum  arabic;  this  will  so 
soften  the  glass,  that  it  may  be  wrapped  up  like  a  cloth. 

Or,  take  eggs,  and  mix  with  quick  lime,  and  put  the  flaae 
therein.  It  becomes  soft  in  this  manner. 

An  Excellent  Hardening. 

Take  radish  wort,  as  large  as  you  can  obtain  them,  bruise 
them,  and  harden  in  the  sap. 

Or,  take  old  urine,  put  the  same  in  a  new  earthen  pot, 
let  it  be  boiled  down  three  times  to  one-half  of  the  original 
quantity.  In  this  fluid  harden  most  metals. 

Also,  take  acre-worms,  called  larves,  as  many  as  you  choose 
to  take,  and  scurvy-grass  in  like  quantity,  boil  well  together, 
distil  in  an  alembic  just  the  same  as  rosewater  U  distilled.  la 
this  substance  you  can  harden  whatever  you  desire. 


INDEX  TO  VOL.  I. 


A  certain  Art  to  kill  Flies . . 58 

Ailments  of  Cattle,  perplexities  about .  19 

Antiiritis  or  Pain  in  the  Limbs .  19 

Banish  Robbers,  Murderers  and  Foes . 20,  53 

Bedbugs,  how  to  drive  them  away . 26,  27 

Black  Snails,  usefulness  of .  58 

Blessing  and  Grace  for  all .  52 

Blood,  to  still  the . . .  10 

Blood,  to  stop  the .  11 

Boils  or  Swellings  in  the  Face . 38,  43 

Bone,  wrenched,  dislocated  or  sprained .  11 

Boots,  how  to  make  them  waterproof .  23 

Broken  Glass,  how  to  repair . 51,  60 

Burns,  Ointments,  for,  etc.. . 9,  10 

Calves,  to  wean .  13 

Cancer  . 17,  22 

Cattle,  when  plagued  by  Witches .  12 

Cattle,  Pestilence  among .  13 

Cattle,  that  no  111  may  befall .  13 

Cattle,  Swelling  of .  13 

Cattle  or  Horses'  Jawbone,  when  set . .  13 

Cattle,  Bewitched  .  13 

Cattle,  when  they  cannot  make  Water .  15 

Cattle,  how  to  dispose  of .  52 

Cattle,  to  protect  against  the  Rot .  56 

Chicken  Lice  .  25 

Colic,  recipe  for . 7,  16,  30,  39,  41 

Conflagration,  to  avoid  from  Dwelling  Houses .  23 

Conflagrations  and  Epidemics .  47 

Consumptive  Limbs,  ointment  for .  14 

Consumptive  Lungs  .  26 

Corns,  to  remove .  13 

Costiveness  . . 25 

Cough,  Remedy  to  cure  a .  38 

Cramp,  Palsy,  and  Apparitions .  6 

Cow,  when  the  Milk  leaves  the . 37,  44 

Cow,  that  she  will  not  bear  a  Steer,  but  a  Cow  Calf .  13 

Cow,  Sore  Udder  and  Teats .  13 

Cow,  when  she  will  not  change  herself . 14,  16 

CoW,  to  give  a  good  supply  of  Milk . 14,  15 

Cow,  to  cause  her  to  become  Prolific .  15 

Cow,  when  Blood  is  in  her  Milk .  36 

Oow,  how  to  restore  the  usefulness  of . 54 

Otw's  usefulness  is  taken,  how  to  find  who  caused  the 
trouble .  69 


61 


62 


INDEX  TO  VOLUME  I. 


.  i  ■  -■  -  ■  — "  - - - ■■■■■■■  i  d 

Cunning  Thieves  .  31 

Cut,  when  a  Person  is,  or  Pounded .  40 

Decay,  when  the  Limb  of  a  Horse  becomes  less  or  decays..  40 

Delivery,  when  too  slow .  26 

Diarrhoea,  when  Cattle  are  Troubled  with .  54 

Dog,  to  prevent  him  from  becoming  Mad .  17 

Drink  for  Sick  Cattle . . .  57 

Dysentery,  an  easy  Remedy  for  the .  16 

Engerling  Worm  or  Grub  in  Sheep .  14 

Epilepsy  or  Fits . . 8,  36,  51 

Erysipelas  of  Animals . 12,  26 

Erysipelas  or  St.  Anthony’s  Fire .  8 

Eye  Water,  to  clear  the  Sight .  25 

Eyes,  Spots  and  Cataracts  on .  57 

Fefes,  when  a  Horse  has  the,  Vifes,  or  Worms .  40 

Felon  on  the  Finger . 59  Fever  . 18,  39,  43 

Fights  and  Rows . 30 

Fire  Arms,  to  prevent  from  *being  Bewitched .  22 

Fire,  to  prevent  from  going  out  on  the  Hearth .  42 

Fire,  to  Extinguish  without  Water. .  51 

Flies,  how  to  kill .  58 

Forest  Ointment,  how  to  make .  58 

Frosted  Feet,  to  Cure .  39 

Gall,  too  much  in  Cattle .  19 

Gangrene  or  Mortification . 6,  12 

Gangrene  of  Man  and  Beast .  6 

Glass,  to  Soften .  60 

Goblins,  when  plagued  by,  or  ill-disposed  People .  19 

Goitre  .  42 

Golden  Ring,  by  which  not  only  House  and  Home,  but  also 
Man  and  Beast,  are  secure  against  all  Misfortunes,  Epi¬ 
demics,  and  Diseases,  and  secure  against  all  Wiles  of 

the  Devil .  29  Gout,  and  Palsy .  36 

Gout,  Remedy  fbr  the .  17 

Gravel,  Remedy  for  the . 15,  18,  41,  45 

Griping  Pain  or  Colic.. . 7,  16,  30,  39 

Hair  to  Grow  wherever  you  wish . 46 

Haish,  for  the .  9 

Horses,  to  Prevent  from  becoming  Stiff .  18 

Hardening,  an  Excellent .  60 

Hard  Hearing  .  25 

Haunted  Horses  or  Cattle .  19 

Headache  .  22  Hernia  or  Rupture . 42 

Horse,  to  Tame  a  Balky  or  W'ild .  32 

How  to  make  Yourself  Bold  and  Amiable .  51 

Human  Being  or  a  Beast,  attacked  by  Evil  Spirits .  5 

Hydrophobia  . ' .  46 

Hysterics,  accompanied  by  Fainting . . 22,  59 


INDEX  TO  VOLUME  I. 


63 


Incombustible  Oil . 27  Impure  Air .  12 

Intestine  Colic  of  Horses .  40 

Invisible,  to  make  One’s  Self .  27 

Itchy  Hands,  Salve  fori5,  58  Jaundice  in  Cattle  . 17 

Lameness,  when  Veins  are  cut  or  torn .  44 

Lice  and  Nits .  45  Lung  Rot  of  Cattle .  37 

Magnetic  Compass,  to  Discover  Buried  Treasures .  21 

Man  or  Beast  attacked  by  Wicked  People .  5 

Man,  how  to  Vanquish.  ...  52  Mice,  how  to  Destroy...  27 

Milk,  when  a  Cow  has  lost  her  Milk .  14 

Milk  Thieves  . . 26,  50 

Milk  of  a  Cow,  when  Bloody .  36 

Milk,  when  it  leaves  the  Cow... .  12 

Mirror  to  see  what  an  Enemy  designs — distant  three  or  four 

miles  .  21 

Nail,  when  an  Animal  treads  on .  11 

Navels  of  Infants .  15  Neuralgia  . . . .  19 

Oil  of  Earth  Worms,  how  made . 58 

Ointment  for  Consumptive  Limbs .  14 

Ointment  to  open  a  Boil .  38 

Ointment  for  the  Cure  of  the  Itch . , ...  58 

Old  Sores  on  the  Feet .  18 

Oxen,  when  a  couple  of,  are  to  be  Trained .  32 

Pain  in  the  Back .  39 

Pains,  to  Alleviate .  53 

Palsy  and  Epilepsy..;....  36  Pestilence  . 51 

Pigeons,  how  to  prevent,  from  Deserting  their  Coops _ 23,  50 

Powder  for  the  Gravel . 15 

Plaster,  for . 42,  43 

Poison,  to  draw  from  a  Body .  45 

Powerful  Means,  whereby  one  may  Protect  Himself  against 
Bullet  and  Sword,  against  Enemies,  or  all  possible  Evil 

and  Danger . 33 

Prevent  Persons  from  doing  Evil  unto  you .  43 

Procreative  Organs,  to  strengthen .  39 

Protect  the  Body  from  the  Dangers  of  Weapons,  etc . 31 

Pulmonary  Diseases,  Consumption,  Jaundice,  etc .  57 

Punish  a  Witch  that  has  attacked  Cattle .  55 

Putrid  Fever,  to  Save  Cattle  from .  16 

Putrid  Mouth  . 10,  41  Rats  and  Mice .  43 

Remedy  for  Ulcer  or  Abscess  of  the  Lungs .  15 

Right  before  a  Court  of  Justice .  17 

Rupture  of  a  Young  Man .  8 

Rupture  of  any  Animal. . .  15  Rupture  of  a  Child . 36 

Saddle  which  will  Press  no  Horse . . .  25 

Salve  for  Itchy  Hands .  45 

Salve,  when  a  Man  apparently  becomes  Crooked,  how  to 
Make . . . 59  Scabs  . . . .  8 


6ft  INDEX  TO  VOLUME  I. 


Scars  or  Pock  Marks,  to  Prevent .  9 

Scurvy  .  25 

Secure  against  Wicked  People  whilst  Traveling .  41 

Secundines  of  Cow,  to  Remedy .  21 

See,  how  to.  in  the  Darkest  Night .  27 

Shoot  securely,  upon  the  Stand,  the  Chase,  or  in  the  Field.  38 

Sick  Person,  to  ascertain  whether  she  will  Recover .  45 

Sore  Breasts .  20  Sore  Eyes  . 11 

Sore,  when  it  fails  to  Break  Open .  14 

Sores  caused  by  Pounding  or  Cutting,  when  Erysipelas 

follows  . 39 

Speech,  when  a  Man  loses,  or  Tonsils  Fall .  58 

Spiders,  House  Flies,  Gnats,  or  Mosquitoes,  how  to  banish.  27 

Splinter  or  Thorn  Sticking  in  the  Leg .  24 

Stay  a  Shot . 20,  52 

Stitching  Pains  in  Woman  or  Child . .  . .  38 

Stolen  Goods,  how  to  Recover .  37 

Stolen  Property,  to  compel  a  Thief  to  Return . 20,  54 

Stones  or  Broken  Glass,  how  to  Mend .  60 

Suppuration  on  Man  or  Beast .  40 

Sweeny  in  Man  or  Beast . 8,  22 

Swelled,  when  a  Person  is .  12 

Swelled  Legs  . of  Horses .  41 

Swelling  of  Horses  _ 21,  26  Swelling  of  the  Body _ 14 

Swellings  . 10,  19,  38 

That  Nobody  may  Hurt  you — how  to  be  Secure  against 

Assailants .  33  Thief,  to  Detect .  17 

Thief,  to  Fasten  a .  24  Toothache  . 24.  42,  52 

Treasures,  to  Discover  Buried .  22 

Treasures,  how  they  beneath  the  Earth  Rise  and  Fall . 21 

Udder  of  a  Cow,  when  Bewitched .  16 

Urine,  to  tell  by  the,  all  Diseases .  48 

Vine  Fretters  and  Wall  Lice,  to  drive  away .  40 

Virility  of  Manhood,  how  to  Restore .  46 

Warts  or  Tumors . .  43 

Water,  when  Unable  to  Pass . 20,  26 

Water,  for  one  who  cannot  Hold  his .  14 

Water,  to  make  a,  which  will  Soften  all  Things .  60 

Weather,  how  to  Prognosticate .  50 

White  Swelling  and  Joint  Water  (Hydrospy) .  40 

Wild  Fire  of  Man  and  Beast. .  9 

Wine,  how  to  Clarify.  Wines,  how  to  Improve  In¬ 
ferior  . 28,  29.  47 

Witches,  to  know  when  Cattle  are  Plagued  by .  12 

Worm  in  any  part  of  the  Body . 7,  21,  26,  52 

Wounds  and  Stopping  of  Blood .  11 

Wounds,  Fresh  . 20 

Wounded,  to  Prevent  from  being . 45 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS 

BEING  THE  APPROVED,  VERIFIED,  SYMPATHETIC  AND  NATURAL 

EGYPTIAN  SECRETS 

OB, 

WHITE  AND  BUCK  ART  FOR  MAN  AND  BEAST 

THE  BOOK  OF  NATURE  AND  THE  HIDDEN  SECRETS 
AND  MYSTERIES  OF  LIFE  UNVEILED;  BEING  THE 

Forbidden  Knowledge  of  Ancient  Philosophers 

By  that  celebrated  Student,  Philosopher,  Chemist,  Naturalist, 
Psychomist,  Astrologer,  Alchemist,  Metallurgist,  Sorcerer, 
Explanator  of  the  Mysteries  of  Wizards  and  Witch¬ 
craft;  together  with  recondite  Views  of  numerous 
Arts  and  Sciences — Obscure,  Plain,  Prac¬ 
tical,  Etc.,  Etc. 

TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  GERMAN 
CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II. 

Chiefly  many  Horse  Cures — To  Restore  the  Sight  to  Blind 
Horses — to  Cure  Broken  Legs  of  Horses — To  Cite  Witches 
— More  than  Ten  different  Methods  to  Mark  Witches — 
How  to  Prevent  Witches  from  Entering  a  Stable — 

To  Cure  Man  or  Beast  of  the  Bites  of  Rabid 
Animals  —  Ointments  for  Burns  —  For 
Toothache — For  the  Gout — For  Asth¬ 
ma — For  Neuralgia — For  Con¬ 
sumption — To  Heal  Ruptures 
— To  Cure  Epilepsy — To 
Heal  Unhealthy  Dis¬ 
charges,  and  many 
other  Cures. 


65 


TO  THE  READER 


The  recipes  noted  in  this  book  have  been  successfully  ap¬ 
plied,  used  and  approved  of,  by  an  experienced  man  for  many 
years,  and  have  been  found  to  be  very  appropriate  remedies; 
and  hence  they  may  be  recommended  to  every  one  who  will  use 
them  with  care,  provided  such  person  has  the  true  belief. 
These  important  remedies  would  have  still  remained  unpub¬ 
lished,  had  it  not  been  for  the  fact  that  the  proprietor  of  the 
same  had  the  inclination  to  assist  an  unfortunate  family  with 
the  result  of  this  publication,  and  thus  it  happened  that  they 
were  printed,  and  that  perishing  family  derive  the  benefit  from 
the  sale  of  this  book  by  obtaining  a  livelihood,  and  the  public 
are  also  benefited  thereby.  Inasmuch  as,  at  this  Juncture,  all 
looks  so  gloomy  in  society,  the  writer  of  this  expects  that  no 
pirate  of  books  will  wrongfully  seise  this  work  and  reprint 
the  same,  if  such  an  one  does  not  wish  to  incur  the  eternal 
curse,  and  even  condemnation  from  such  an  act  While  we 
recommend  it  to  the  protection  of  God  and  the  Holy  Trinity, 
that  they  may  be  watching  the  same,  and  set  the  Angel 
Michael  as  watch  and  guard  over  the  undertaking,  so  that 
no  pirate  may  rob  the  real  and  legal  owner  of  the  means  of 
deriving  his  daily  bread  from  the  sale  of  this  publication,  and 
cheat  him  of  his  property  by  the  peril  of  losing  his  blessed¬ 
ness,  such  a  being  would  never  find  rest  nor  quiet,  by  day  or 
night,  neither  here  below  nor  in  the  hereafter,  by  seeking  to 
defraud  the  publisher  of  his  own.  This  would  God  the  Father, 
Son,  and  Holy  Spirit  grant. 

Mirathe  saepy  Satonich  petanish  pistau  ytmye  higarin  ygei- 
rion  temgaron — aycon,  dunsnas  caflilacias  satas  claeius  jocony, 
hasihaja  yeynino  Stephatitas  beaae  Ind,  Doneny  eya  hidue 
reu  vialta  eye  vahaspa  Saya  Salna  bebia  euci  yaya  Elencke  na 
vena  Serna. 

(Signed) 

Hltertua  SDaanua. 


66 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS 


OB 


For  the  Swelling  of  the  Cattle. 

Whatever  I  embrace  with  my  right  arm,  that  it  may  not  re¬ 
ceive  any  harm;  and  three  times  move  with  the  right  hand 
over  the  back;  t  t  t  To  be  recited  three  times,  Probatum. 

For  the  Fever. 

Take  the  water  of  the  patient  and  mix  it  with  some  flour  and 
make  a  dough  thereof,  of  which  seventy-seven  small  cakes 
are  made,  each  one  as  large  as  a  lintel;  proceed  before  sunrise 
to  an  ant-hill  and  throw  the  cakes  therein.  As  soon  as  the 
insects  have  devoured  the  cakes,  the  fever  vanishes.  Pro¬ 
batum. 

For  Cataract  of  the  Eye . 

Take  half  an  ounce  of  prepared  tutia,  and  blow  this  through 
a  goose  quill  into  the  animal’s  eyes. 

For  Spots  in  the  Eye. 

Take  two  drachm?  tutia,  half  drachm  white  vitriol,  one 
half  of  an  ounce  ros*  honey,  make  a  salve  thereof,  and  use 
it  to  grease  the  eyee  therewith. 

To  Heal  Boils  on  the  Hoofs. 

Take  two  ounces  of  nitric  spirit,  one  drachm  of  sperm  oil, 
mix  well,  and  steep  the  boil  in  it.  After  this  rub  with  the 
Egyptian  salve. 

To  make  a  good  Ointment  for  Burns. 

Take  two  ounces  of  turpentine,  three  ounces  of  yellow  bees’- 
wax,  six  ounces  of  linseed  oil;  mix  upon  a  coal  Are  and  grease 
the  sore  therewith. 


67 


ALBERT  US  MAGNUS;  OR, 


88 


For  Falling  of  the  Womb  and  Cough. 

Take  orange  peels,  aloes  one  drachm,  and  five  cents*  worth 
of  carrots.  Put  in  a  bottle,  shake  well,  and  take  evenings  and 
mornings  a  good  draught  of  it  till  the  cure  is  effected. 

To  stop  the  Bleeding  of  a  Wound. 

Paint  the  wound  with  nitric  spirit. 

To  make  a  Blister. 

Take  cantharides  (Spanish  fly  powder),  4  ounces;  turpen¬ 
tine,  8  ounces;  yellow  bees’-wax,  4  ounces;  linseed  oil,  6 
ounces.  Mix  these  ingredients  to  a  plaster. 

To  Extirpate  Warts. 

Take  blossoms  of  the  walnut  tree,  rub  the  warts  with  them, 
and  they  will  soon  heal. 

To  cite  a  Witch. 

Take  an  earthen  pot,  not  glazed,  yarn  spun  by  a  girl  not 
yet  seven  years  old.  Put  the  water  of  the  bewitched  animal 
into  the  pot,  then  take  the  egg  of  a  black  hen  and  some  of 
the  yarn  and  move  the  latter  three  times  round  the  egg,  and 
ejaculate  in  the  three  devils’  name;  after  this  put  the  egg  into 
the  water  of  the  pot,  seal  the  lid  of  the  vessel  tightly  that  no 
fumes  may  ooze  therefrom,  but  observe  that  the  head  of  the  lid 
is  below.  While  setting  the  pot  upon  the  fire,  pronounce  the 
following:  Lucifer,  devil  summon  the  sorcerer  before  the 
witch  or  me,  in  the  three  devils’  name. 

In  Case  one  Suffers  from  a  Theft. 

If  something  is  stolen  from  you,  proceed  also  as  stated  above, 
take  likewise  water,  draw  it  from  a  brook  stream  downward, 
and  cut  three  splinters  from  the  threshold  over  which  the 
thief  did  run.  The  water  must  be  drawn  in  the  three  names 
of  the  devil. 

That  no  Witch  may  leave  a  Church. 

Purchase  a  pair  of  new  shoes,  grease  them  on  Saturday  with 
grease  on  the  outer  sole,  then  put  them  on  and  walk  to  the 
church,  and  no  witch  can  find  the  way  out  of  the  church 
without  you  proceed  before  her. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


19 


Of  Witches  and  Sorcery. 

Fasten  a  squill  (sea  onion)  over  the  principal  door  of  the 
house,  and  no  person  will  come  to  trouble  you  in  the  dwelling. 

To  Beat  Witches. 

Let  the  sweepings,  which  are  swept  together  in  a  house  for 
three  days  remain  in  a  heap,  and  on  the  third  day  cover  it 
with  a  black  cloth  made  of  drilling,  then  take  a  stick  of  an 
elm  tree  and  flog  the  dirt  heap  bravely,  and  the  sorceress 
must  assist,  or  you  will  batter  her  to  death.  Probatum. 

For  Sorcery. 

Take  elmwood  on  a  Good  Friday,  cut  the  same  while  calling 
the  holiest  names.  Cut  chips  of  this  wood  from  one  to  two 
inches  in  length.  Cut  upon  them,  in  the  three  holiest  names, 
three  crosses,  t  t  t  Wherever  such  a  slip  is  plaoed,  all 
sorcery  will  be  banished. 

To  Cause  a  Witch  to  Die  within  One  Minute. 

First,  try  to  obtain  a  piece  of  the  heart  of  the  cattle  which 
had  been  attacked,  then  take  a  little  butter  and  fry  the  piece 
therein,  as  if  prepared  for  eating,  then  take  three  nails  from 
the  coffin  of  a  corpse,  and  pierce  with  them  the  heart  through 
and  through.  Piercing  the  heart  and  killing  the  witch,  are 
facts  of  the  same  moment.  All  will  be  correct  at  once.  Good 
and  approved. 

To  Burn  a  Witch  so  that  she  receives  Pock  Marks  over  her 

entire  Body. 

Take  butter  from  the  household  larder,  render  it  down  in  an 
iron  pan  until  it  broils,  then  take  ivy  or  wintergreen,  and 
fry  it;  take  three  nails  of  a  coffin  and  stick  them  in  that  sauce; 
carry  the  mass  to  a  place  where  neither  sun  nor  moon  shines 
into,  and  the  witch  will  be  sick  for  half  of  a  year. 

When  a  Horse  is  Sick  or  has  the  Blind  Fistula. 

Take  of  camphor,  for  five  cents;  saffron,  five  cents;  olive 
oil,  fire  cents,  and  give  it  in  a  glass  of  wine.  It  helps  certain 
sure. 


70 


ALJ3ERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


For  Influenza,  Toothache,  and  Headache. 

I  implore  thee,  by  the  living  God,  that  thou  may  draw  the 
disease  from  the  body  of  N.  N.,  and  hurt  him  as  little  as  it 
did  hurt  the  Lord  JesuB  to  be  crueitled;  this  commands  you 
God  the  Father,  Son  and  Holy  Spirit.  Three  times  spoken. 

A  Magic  for  One  who  has  been  Infatuated  by  Illicit  Love  to  a 

Female. 

Such  a  person  must  put  a  pair  of  shoes  on,  and  walk  therein 
until  his  feet  perspire,  but  must  walk  fast,  so  that  the  feet  do 
not  smell  badly;  then  take  off  the  right  shoe,  drink  some  beer 
or  wine  out  of  this  shoe,  and  he  will  from  that  moment  lose 
all  affection  for  her. 

A  Banishment. 

Three  trees  are  standing  on  Jesus’  heart — the  first  is  called 
humlyty,  the  other  forbearing,  the  third  is  called,  if  it  pleases, 
Go<L  Rider,  horse,  or  walker  on  foot,  ye  shalt  not  stand  still* 
and  not  move  from  hence  until  I  grant  permission. 

While  pronouncing  this,  the  hat  must  be  placed  on  the  back 
of  the  head,  and  the  right  hand  put  three  times  thereto.  When 
designing  to  release  them,  grasp  the  hat  with  the  left  hand, 
and  put  the  hat  as  it  was  before,  keep  the  hat  in  the  left  hand 
and  beat  with  the  hat  in  the  direction  where  they  are  wanted 
to  move  to  or  remove  from  hence. 

The  sufferings  of  Christ  I  bear  upon  me.  Oh!  trouble  leave 
me,  I  hold  thee  fast  for  Christ’s  sake  and  blood,  that  removes 
all  ill  from  me,  by  his  sweat  and  death,  by  his  holy  five 
wounds  so  red,  through  his  resurrection  and  ascension  to 
heaven  may  give  that  God  will  protect  me  as  long  as  I 
live,  t  t  t 

To  Stay  a  Rider  or  Several  Horsemen. 

In  meekness  I  begin  my  work,  stop  rider,  walker,  robber 
■top,  8 top  ye  thieves.  In  meekness  desist,  from  evil  shrink, 
since  Jesus’  blood  did  we  drink;  your  musket  and  your  rifle 
be  stopped  with  Jesus’  blood,  your  sabres,  knives,  swords,  hal¬ 
bards  and  spear,  they  be  as  soft  as  Christ’s  five  holy  wounds. 
Since  only  three  roses  upon  the  Saviour’s  heart  do  bloom,  the 
first  is  benign*  the  second  of  good  mind,  the  third  is  the  will 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


71 


ft  God.  While  ye  remain  under  these  flowers,  ye  must  stand 
•t01  as  long  as  I  will,  but  not  through  me,  but  for  the  sake  of 
Hod  the  Father,  God  the  Son,  and  God  the  Holy  Spirit,  ye  are 
eonjured  and  banished,  t  t  t 

While  pronouncing  grace  reverse  the  knife  in  your  trouser 
pocket,  and  tie  a  knot  in  your  shirt  or  your  handkerchief. 

if  you  wish  to  let  them  ride  away  again,  speak.  Ride 
thither  in  the  bad  name  of  all  evil  spirits. 

To  Cause  the  Return  of  Stolen  Property. 

Take  three  pieces  of  bread,  three  pinches  of  salt  and  three 
pieces  of  hog's  lard,  make  a  strong  flame,  put  all  the  articles 
upon  this  fire,  and  say  the  following  words,  while  keeping 

alone: 

I  put  bread,  salt  and  lard  for  the  thief  upon  the  fire,  for 
thy  sin  and  temerity  so  dire.  I  place  them  upon  thy  lungs, 
liver  and  heart,  that  thou  art  troubled  with  terror  and  smart, 
a  distress  shall  come  over  thee  with  dread  as  if  thou  wert 
to  be  smitten  dead,  all  veins  in  thy  body  shall  burst  and  break, 
and  great  havoc  and  trouble  shall  make,  that  thou  shalt  have 
no  peace  nor  rest,  till  what  thou  hast  stolen  thou  hast  returned 
and  brought  all  back  from  whence  it  were  taken.  Three  times 
to  recite  and  every  time  the  three  holiest  names  spoken. 

For  the  Toothache. 

Bay  leaf  flour  for  five  cents;  fennel  powder  for  five  cents. 
A  handful  wheaten  flour  and  one  egg;  bake  a  cake  of  this, 
and  put  upon  the  ears  during  the  night 

To  Lay  Spirits  hy  an  Anathema. 

Ye  persons  ’*^3  uie  rur  a  moment  till  I  draw  three 
bkvwh  drays  from  you,  which  ye  have  forfeited.  The  first  I 
-*%w  from  your  teeth,  the  other  from  your  lung,  the  third  I 
draw  from  your  heart’s  own  main;  with  this  I  take  your 
hosts  away  and  ye  shall  stand  till  I  remove  from  ye  the 
iron  band,,  t  t  t  Three  times  spoken. 

Another  Anathema. 

Welcome,  ye  brethren,  be  of  good  cheer,  we  have  partaken 
Of  Christ's  blood  there  and  here,  and  if  we  had  not  drank  it. 


7* 


ALBERTU8  MAGNUS;  OR, 


yet  we  surely  would  do  so  when  next  time  we  met  God  tho 
Father  who  is  with  me,  God  the  Son  who  is  with  thee,  God 
the  Holy  Spirit  who  is  between  us  all,  that  we  In  peace  may 
part,  in  peace  may  call,  that  never  a  sword  ye  may  be  able  to 
draw,  no  pistol  may  fire,  no  rifle  nor  cannon  discharge.  God 
aid  me  to  vanquish  you  all. 

For  the  Mange  or  Itch  of  Sheep . 

Black  tobacco,  fir-wood;  linden-wood,  pigeon  manure; 
chicken  fat,  aquafortis,  oil  of  turpentine;  rapefeed  oil,  aqua¬ 
fortis,  aloes;  equal  parts  of  each.  Make  an  ointment  of  theee 
articles  and  grease  the  sheep  therewith. 

For  the  Purging  of  the  Sheep. 

Laurel  oil  and  excecizlum  made  into  a  salve,  tad  the  body 
greased  with  it;  Spanish  fly,  five  cents;  laurel  oil,  five  cents; 
evorbium,  five  cents;  lard  one  quart,  and  three-points  of  a 
knife  full  of  salt.  All  of  these  mix  cold  and  grease  several 
days  in  succession. 

For  a  Rupture. 

Take  red  bolus  and  cognac  brandy,  make  a  plaster  thereof, 
smear  upon  some  sheepskin,  and  apply  the  same  to  the  af¬ 
fected  spot  while  warm. 

For  the  Chicken  Pox. 

A  certain  cure  for  this  disease,  to  save  the  eyes  of  the 
children,  take  roots  of  rue  and  roots  of  sassafras,  and  suspend 
them  from  the  child's  neck.  Probatum  est. 

To  Prevent  every  Person  from  Hitting  the  Target. 

Put  a  splinter  of  wood  which  has  been  hit  by  a  thunder  bolt 
behind  the  target.  No  person  will  be  able  to  hit  such  a  target 

To  cause  Rifles  or  Muskets  to  miss  Fire. 

Speak  theee  words:  Arx  Area  Nos*  jl,  when  you  are  able 
to  look  into  the  barrel  of  some  person's  gun  and  it  will  fail 
to  discharge;  but  if  you  desire  it  to  ffire  fire  recall  theee 
words  backward. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


7S 


To  prevent  a  Person  from  Firing  a  Gun  while  you  are  looking 

into  the  Barrel. 

Pronounce:  Pax  Sax  Sarax. 

To  make  One’s  Self  Shot  Proof. 

Dig  and  stick  mouse-ear  herb  on  a  Friday,  during  the  half 
or  full  of  the  moon,  tie  in  a  white  cloth  and  suspend  it  from 
the  body.  Probatum. 

Or  carry  these  words  upon  your  body:  Light,  Bettie,  Clo- 

TENTAL,  SOBATH,  ADONAY,  ALBOA,  FLOBAT. 

To  Compel  a  Dog ,  Horse ,  or  other  Animal  to  Follow  You. 

Casper  guide  thee,  Balthasar  bind  thee,  Melchior  keep  thee, 
three  times.  These  words  utter  into  the  right  ear. 

To  compel  a  Thief  to  Return  Stolen  Articles. 

Upon  this  stone  I  pray  to  the  Lord,  that  he  may  give  me 
three  nails  upon  my  word,  the  first  I  hammer  through  his 
tongue,  the  other  through  his  heart  and  his  lung,  the  third 
through  all  his  limbs  and  his  members,  that  the  thief  to  return 
the  things  may  remember,  that  he  may  have  neither  peace 
nor  rest  like  the  Virgin  Mary  bore  her  child  upon  straw,  in 
tbe  name  of  God  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Spirit. 

To  prevent  a  Person  to  Escape. 

Take  a  needle  wherewith  the  gown  of  a  corpse  was  sewed, 
and  draw  this  needle  through  the  hat  or  shoe  of  him  whom 
you  seek  to  fasten,  and  he  cannot  escape. 

For  a  Horse  that  cannot  Stall. 

Take  hare  leap  herb,  tie  a  stone  to  it,  and  let  the  horse  drink 
over  it,  and  forthwith  the  horse  will  have  an  opening. 

To  See  what  Others  cannot  See. 

Take  a  cat’s  eye,  lay  it  in  salt  water,  let  it  remain  there  for 
three  days,  and  then  for  six  days  into  the  rays  of  the  sun, 
after  this  have  it  set  in  silver,  and  hang  it  around  your  neck. 

To  Draw  Moles  from  their  Holes. 

Take  sulphur  and  garlic,  place  it  over  the  holes,  and  the 
moles  must  come  out  immediately. 


74 


ALBERTU8  MAGNUS;  OR, 


To  Obtain  Money. 

Take  the  eggs  of  a  swallow,  boll  them,  return  them  to  the 
nest,  and  If  the  old  swallow  brings  a  root  to  the  nest,  take  It, 
put  It  into  your  purse,  and  carry  it  in  your  pocket,  and  be 
happy. 

To  Open  Locke. 

Kill  a  green  frog,  expose  it  to  the  sun  for  three  days,  powder 
or  pulverize  it.  A  little  of  this  powder  put  into  a  lock  will 
open  the  same. 

To  Understand  the  Song  of  Birds. 

Take  the  tongue  of  a  vulture,  lay  it  for  three  days  and  three 
nights  in  honey,  afterward  under  your  tongue,  and  thus  you 
will  understand  all  the  songs  of  birds. 

To  Stop  the  Bleeding  of  a  Wound. 

Take  a  small  bone  of  a  human  body  and  put  into  the  wound, 
and  the  blood  will  cease  to  flow. 

To  Drive  away  Bed  Bugs. 

Take  the  scrapings  of  the  hoof  which  the  farrier  cuts  when 
shoeing  a  horse,  boil  them  well  in  water,  with  it  wash  the 
bedsteads  or  whatever  may  be  infested  with  the  pests.  Has 
been  satisfactorily  tried. 

To  Purchase  Cheaply  and  Sell  at  a  High  Price. 

Cateh  a  white  weasel,  take  its  head  off,  and  carry  in  your 
right  side  pocket.  Probatum. 

When  a  Horse  has  a  Skin  growing  over  the  Retina  of  the  Eye. 

Take  of  fresh  butter  a  piece  as  large  as  a  pigeon’s  egg  and 
knead  with  saffron.  Put  it  into  the  eye  of  the  horse,  bandage 
the  eye,  and  in  twenty-four  hours  the  skin  will  have  vanished. 

Take  one  pound  of  fresh  butter,  which  has  not  been  water¬ 
ed,  put  it  into  a  pan,  heat  it,  bake  twenty  cakes  of  it,  keep 
the  lard  for  future  use.  A  spoonful  of  the  same  put  into  a 
beverage  for  a  drink,  and  to  desist  from  drinking  anything 
else,  and  used  as  long  as  is  desired,  will  cure.  Probatum. 

To  Sharpen  Scythes  for  Mowing. 

R.  kitr.,  arvitr.,  romain  erad,  vitr.,  alb.,  []  r  ermd,  of  each 
for  five  cents,  all  pulverized,  and  some  of  it  always  kept  nights 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


75 


in  a  dish  put  upon  the  grindstone,  and  sharpen  therewith  the 
scythe,  and  it  will  be  in  good  condition  for  mowing. 

For  Bites  of  Rabid  Dogs. 

Write  these  words  upon  a  letter,  and  hang  the  same  around 
the  neck  of  man  or  beast: 

t  Paga  t  Chaga  t  Pagula  t  Chagula  t  Pagula;  has  been 
tried  on  man  or  beast 

How  to  Discern  all  Secrets  and  Invisible  Things. 

If  you  find  a  white  adder  under  a  hazelnut  shrub,  which 
had  twelve  other  vipers  as  its  twelve  guardsmen  with  it,  and 
the  hazelnut  bush,  under  which  they  lay,  bears  commonly 
medlers,  you  must  eat  the  white  adder  with  your  other  food, 
and  you  will  be  enabled  to  see  and  discern  all  secret  and 
otherwise  hidden  things. 

Hoto  a  Midwife  in  Nuremberg  Stopped  the  Blood  of  Patients. 

Jesus  born  at  Bethlehem,  Jesus  crucified  at  Jerusalem,  as 
true  as  these  words  are,  to  truly  understand  N.  N.  (here  call 
the  namd  of  him  whom  you  desire  to  help)  that  thy  blood  will 
now  be  stopped,  in  the  name  of  God  the  Father,  the  Son,  and 
the  Holy  Spirit. 

To  make  yourself  Shot  Proof. 

Dig  and  stitch  mouse-ear  roots  on  a  Friday,  during  full 
xnoon  or  half  moon,  tie  it  in  a  white  handkerchief,  and  wear 
it  around  the  neck.  Probatum. 

Or  this:  Carry  the  following  words  on  your  person:  Ligbt, 
Beff,  Cletemati,  Adonai,  Cleona,  Florit. 

Another. 

In  June,  on  SS.  Peter  and  Paul’s  Day,  dig  blue  waywort 
roots,  fifteen  minutes  before  twelve  o’clock;  also  procure 
the  herb  of  this  plant.  If  you  carry  this  herb  with  you,  and 
they  bind  or  fetter  you,  all  ropes,  fetters  and  locks,  will  spring 
open;  neither  can  you  be  shot. 

Or:  Take  wild  radishes,  eat  them  before  breakfast,  and  no 
one  will  be  able  to  flog  you,  and  while  you  carry  them  in  your 
mouth  you  will  be  able  to  vanquish  all  your  enemies. 


ALBERTOS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


7« 


Or:  He  who  can  devour  his  own  s&licin,  he  is  entirely  un¬ 
conquerable. 

How  to  make  One's  Self  Agreeable  to  All. 

Carry  a  whoop’s  eye  on  your  person.  If  you  carry  it  in 
front  of  your  breast,  all  your  enemies  will  become  kind  to 
you,  and  if  you  carry  it  in  your  purse  you  make  a  good  bar¬ 
gain  on  all  what  you  sell. 

To  Fasten  a  Person  that  he  may  not  Escape. 

Take  a  needle  wherewith  the  gown  from  a  corpse  had  been 
sewed  and  put  this  needle  into  the  foot  prints  of  the  person 
you  seek  to  fasten.  And  never  will  that  person,  so  treated, 
be  able  to  get  away. 

To  have  Good  Luck  in  Playing ,  and  how  to  make  Yourself 

Liked  by  People. 

Take  the  right  thumb  in  your  hand,  and  put  the  hand  in 
your  right-band  pocket  whenever  a  delinquent  is  executed, 
and  thus  you  will  secure  good  luck  in  playing  and  be  liked 
by  your  fellow-men. 

To  Prevent  Hares  from  Destroying  the  Cabbage. 

Take  garlic,  press  out  the  sap,  sprinkle  over  cabbage  seed 
and  sow  the  same.  Probatum. 

To  Try  if  a  Person  is  Chaste. 

Sap  of  radish  squeezed  into  the  hand  will  prove  what  you 
wish  to  know.  If  they  do  not  fumble  or  grabble  they  are  all 
right. 

How  to  Cause  your  Intended  Wife  to  Love  you. 

Take  feathers  from  a  rooster’s  tail,  press  them  three  times 
into  her  hand.  Probatum. 

Or:  Take  a  turtle  dove  tongue  into  your  mouth,  talk  to 
your  friend  agreeably,  kiss  her  and  she  will  love  yon  so 
dearly  that  she  cannot  love  another. 

When  you  wish  that  your  Sweetheart  shall  not  deny  you. 

Take  the  turtle  dove  tongue  into  your  mouth  again  and  kiss 
her,  and  she  will  accept  your  suit. 

Or:  Take  salt,  cheese  and  flour,  mix  it  together,  put  it  into 
her  room,  and  she  will  have  no  rest  until  she  sees  you. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


77 


An  Ambrose-stone. 

Steal  the  eggs  of  a  raven,  boil  them  hard,  lay  them  again 
into  the  nest  and  the  raven  will  fly  across  the  sea  and  bring  a 
stone  from  abroad  and  lay  it  over  the  eggs  and  they  will  be¬ 
come  at  once  soft  again.  If  such  'a  stone  is  wrapped  up  into 
a  bay  leaf  and  is  given  to  a  prisoner,  that  prisoner  will  be 
liberated  at  once.  Whoever  touches  a  door  with  such  a  stone, 
to  him  that  door  will  be  opened,  and  he  who  puts  that  stone 
into  his  mouth  will  understand  the  song  of  every  bird. 

To  Stop  the  Blood  of  One  whose  Name  is  only  Known. 

Three  roses  are  under  our  beloved  Master’s  heart;  the  first 
is  humility,  the  second  gentleness.  Oh,  blood  with  N.  N., 
stand  still,  is  what  our  Lord  asks,  and  his  will,  t  t  t 

When  a  Horse  is  Costive. 

Give  it  horseradish,  enzian  and  Christmas  roots. 

For  Burns. 

I  have  been  burnt,  Christ  the  Lord  was  crucified.  If  to  him 
the  crucifying  did  no  harm,  the  burning  will  not  harm  thee, 
t  t  t  But  if  you  do  it  for  some  other  person  speak  thus: 
Thou  hast  burnt  thyself,  N.  N.  If  you  are  not  near  this  per¬ 
son  you  may  nevertheless  aid  him  if  you  only  know  his  name. 

Take  unwatered  butter  and  move  it  round  the  burnt  spot, 
and  after  this  put  the  butter  for  nine  days  in  a  quiet,  secluded 
place. 

An  Approved  Representation. 

Bind  Peter,  bind  Peter,  bind  Peter,  bind  for  me  all  those 
thieves,  both  male  and  female,  who  steal  from  my  home  or 
my  estates,  or  have  the  intention  of  doing  so,  bind  them  with 
iron  bands  and  with  the  Lord’s  own  hands,  with  the  holy  five 
wounds,  and  with  the  true  twelve  hours,  that  they  must  stand 
tor  me  like  a  stick  and  look  like  a  buck,  count  for  me  the 
stars  that  stand  in  the  firmament,  they  look  upon  the  Lord’s 
foliage,  herbage  and  grass,  which  groweth  on  earth,  the 
heaven  be  their  cover,  the  earth  be  their  shoe.  If  ye  are 
stronger  than  God  then  ye  may  irom  hence  depart,  but  in 
?ase  ye  are  not  stronger  than  God,  stand  still  untP  T  tree  you 


78 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


by  my  will.  For  this  may  give  aid  God  the  Father,  God  the 
Son  and  God  the  Holy  Spirit. 

Solution. 

Go  ye  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  whence  you 
come  from,  to  this  end  help  ye  God  the  Father,  God  the  8on 
and  God  the  Holy  Spirit 

When  Something  ts  Stolen  from  You,  how  to  Cause  its  Return. 

Take  a  bit  of  bread  and  a  pinch  of  salt  also  a  piece  of  lard, 
and  put  all  these  things  upon  the  fire  and  flame,  and  speak: 
This  all  I  put  into  the  fiery  glow,  for  all  thy  sin  and  haughti¬ 
ness;  the  lard  shall  cause  thy  veins  to  break,  the  salt  shall 
embitter  thy  life,  that  your  tongue  will  smart  and  blister, 
and  smarting,  galling  be  to  you  that  bread  as  if  thou  shouldst 
be  stricken  dead.  In  the  name  of  God  the  Father,  God  the 
Son  and  God  the  Holy  Spirit.  Three  times  spoken  and  before 
three  times  twenty-four  hours  will  elapse,  he  (the  thief)  will 
be  there,  and  you  tell  him  to  depart  in  the  name  of  God. 

For  Bed  Bugs  in  Bedsteads. 

One  ounce  mercury,  two  ounces  hog’s  lard  rendered  down, 
then  take  a  drachm  of  bruised  wolfswort,  one  drachm  juniper- 
berry  oil,  make  into  a  salve  and  apply  the  same  to  the  cracks 
and  screw-holes  of  the  bedsteads.  A  good  remedy.  Probatum. 

An  Excellent  way  to  Prove  whether  a  Person  is  a  Witch  or  not. 

First.  Try  to  obtain  St.  John’s  roots  and  one  ounce  of  herb 
of  the  same  plant  called  moto.  Write  the'  following  letters 
upon  a  scrap  of  paper  and  put  to  the  root  and  herbs: 

S  A  T  O  R  t  Cross  of  Christ  mildepos 

A  R  E  P  O  t  Cross  of  Christ  mesepos 

T  E  N  E  T  t  Cross  of  Christ  Habenepos 

OPERA 
ROTAS 

This  must  be  sewed  up  in  a  piece  of  leather,  and  if  you  wish 
to  see  the  witch,  only  carry  the  paper  with  you,  but  it  must 
be  taken  in  the  hour  when*  the  first  quarter  of  the  moon  oc¬ 
curs. 

You  will  then  perceive  that  no  witch  can  remain  in  the  same 
room  with  you. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


79 


If  a  Horse  has  Eaten  too  much  and  is  Swelled. 

Take  from  four  to  live  pounds  of  fresh  milk;  mix  a  few 
pinches  of  black  snuff  tobacco  in  the  milk,  or  instead  of  the 
tobacco  some  vinegar  and  ground  leaven  or  yeast  This  give 
to  the  sick  animal,  whereupon  it  should  be  slowly  driven 
around.  The  horse  will  soon  have  an  opening,  and  is  saved 
in  an  easy  manner  from  the  disease. 

When  an  Animal  is  Sprained  on  the  Shoulder  Blade  or  in  any 

other  Limb  or  Member. 

In  order  to  dispose  of  the  curdled  blood  it  is  necessary  to 
mix  an  equal  part  of  mutton  tallow  with  turpentine.  Grease 
the  limb  therewith  and  rub  gently. 

When  a  Child  is  Bewitched. 

Stand  with  the  child  toward  the  morning  sun,  and  speak: 
Be  welcome  in  God’s  name  and  sunshine,  from  whence  didst 
brightly  beam,  aid  me  and  my  dear  child  and  feign  my  songs 
serenely  stream.  To  God  the  Father  sound  my  praise,  help 
praise  the  Holy  Ghost  that  he  restore  my  child  to  health,  I 
praise  the  heavenly  host,  t  t  t 

For  the  Erysipelas. 

Take  a  quart  of  fresh  milk,  dog’s  waste  stirred  therein  and 
strained  through  a  cloth.  This  is  a  good  internal  medicine.. 


Or  make  for  External  Use: 


Tormantil  wort 

- 

•  • 

• 

- 

1 

drachm 

Dragon  blood 

• 

•  m 

m 

• 

• 

2 

ounces 

Red  chalk  stone 

- 

•  • 

m 

• 

• 

1 

drachm 

Mix  together  and  put  in  milk. 

For  Sore  Feet. 

Wounds  so  good,  I  stop  your  smart  with  God’6  own  blood, 
that  ye  never  swell,  nor  fester,  till  the  dear  mother  of  God 
shall  bear  another  son.  t  t  t  Satora  robote  Netabe  ratotta. 
S.  t  t  t 

To  Compel  a  Thief  to  Return  Stolen  Property. 

Tn  the  name  of  the  Holy  Trinity,  I  urge  and  conjure,  N  N 
tnou  thief,  male  or  female  thief,  in  the  name  of  Go<i 


80 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


knows  all,  through  Aaron  the  high  priest,  through  whose  aid 
I  compel  and  vanquish  all  devils,  this  be  imparted  to  you, 
Moloch  and,  Lucifer  too  will  be  sent,  as  also  St.  Michael,  St 
Gabriel,  St.  Raphael  with  many  thousand  legions  of  obedient 
spirts  and  holy  angels  of  God,  this  be  thy  compulsion,  thy 
obedience,  this  be  thy  ransom,  this  be  thy  plague,  this  be  thy 
obligation:  Asteroth,  God  in  Gods  and  of  God,  the  thief  who 
robbed  N.  N.,  that  thief,  be  it  male  or  female,  bring  hither  to 
me  in  my  N.  N.  house  with  the  articles  stolen.  Beelzubub  be 
bound,  Lucifer  be  bound.  Satan  be  bound  with  the  rays  which 
emanate  from  the  holy  countenance  of  God;  the  God  who 
hath  given  to  Moses  the  commandments,  he  would  aid  me, 
N.  N.,  out  of  trouble,  he  dishonor  you!  But  I  who  keep  the 
commandment,  love  the  law,  that  law  be  God,  a  powerful  God, 
a  conqueror,  a  comforter  and  savior.  Moloch,  Lucifer,  Aste¬ 
roth  Pemeoth  Forni  gator.  Aneetor,  Somiator,  sleep  ye  not, 
awake,  the  strong  hero  Holaha,  the  powerful  Eaton,  the 
mighty  Tetragramaton;  Athe,  Alpha  et  Omega,  compel  ye 
that  the  thief  may  return  the  stolen  articles  into  the  house  of 
N.  N„  and  that  the  thief  shall  have  neither  rest  nor  peace 
through  sand  and  land,  through  sea  or  air,  on  mountain  or 
rock,  thou  accursed  devil,  lead  the  thief  back  into  my  house 
with  all  the  stolen  goods, 

Befiold  the  mighty  God.  St.  Zapheel  be  thy  prayer,  be  thy 
compulsion,  the  ark  of  God,  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the 
dwelling  of  the  Lord  shall  aid  me  to  bring  the  rope  for  ye 
devils,  and  for  this  be  God  in  God  my  helper  in  need  and 
trouble.  Jehovah.  Saboah.  Emanuel,  ah  Jathos  Noio  sottjs, 
Ishiros,  Kiriel  aios  Fius  Imago  Via  veritas  Salvator.  Oberator 
Tetragramatum  Stoch  Nahus  tribelasus  Spenter  omnipotens 
Venus,  Sanitus.  Trinus,  Imenesus,  Virtus,  Principitatis,  Lib¬ 
erator  Manus  Erohye,  Mediator  Imbrator  Oulus  Prillus.  teris 
Judaea  arnes  humuisien.  Psalm  91.  Pray;  Satan,  thou  ac¬ 
cursed  devil,  hast  thou  heard  the  power  of  Adonay,  our  great 
Lord,  then  thou  must  through  the  power  of  Jehovah  at  once 
compel  the  thief  who  has  robbed  N.  N.  and  force  him  (or  her) 
that  these  stolen  things  be  returned  into  my  N.  N.’s  house. 

Immanuel  is  thy  commander,  Sada  drive  thee  with  the  thief 
into  my  house.  Ishiros  force  thee,  agios  Imperator  Dominus 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


81 


God  Alpha  and  Omega  may  send  his  heavenly  power,  Cheru¬ 
bim  and  Seraphim,  these  mighty  princes  of  heaven.  St. 
Michael,  St.  Gabriel,  St.  Sephael,  St.  Uriel  the  transparent 
and  penetrating  mediator  be  mediator  between  thee  and  me. 
Hereby  I  conjure  the  thief  that  thou  be  obedient  and  tractable 
like  the  lightning’s  flash,  obedient  to  Almighty  God;  to  this 
end  help  me,  God  Father,  Son  and  Holy  Spirit. 

When  a  Cow  has  Calved  or  has  the  Fever  and  to  Prevent  that 
her  Milk  be  taken  Daring  that  Year. 

After  the  cow  has  calved,  the  appended  words  should  he 
given,  and  when  the  animal  has  the  fever  a  letter  must  be 
suspended  on  her  a  Friday  between  the  hours  of  twelve  and 
one.  The  letters  taken  three  days  in  succession  at  an  uneven 
hour  is  probatum. 

S  A  T  0  R 
A  R  E  P  O 
TENET 
OPERA 
ROTAS 

To  Allay  Pains  Wherever  they  be. 

To-day  is  a  holy  sacred  day,  that  Gpd  will  not  cause  you 
any  pain  to  bear,  which  thou  may  have  on  any  part  of  your 
body,  be  it  man,  horse,  cattle,  or  anything  living,  all  the  same, 
t  God  greet  thee  dear  son  t  Edward, 
t  God  greet  thee  dear  spouse  Otto, 
t  God  greet  thee  son,  Holy  Spirit 
Tetragramatum. 

I  beseech  thee.  Oh,  holy  Trinity,  help  this  N.  N.,  that  all 
his  pains  may  cease,  whatever  they  may  be  called  and  all  that 
eometh  from  evil  .things.  Christ  commandeth,  Christ  van- 
quisheth,  Christ  became  a  being  in  flesh  for  thy  sake  and  to 
protect  thee  against  all  evil.  Jesus  Christ  of  Nazareth.  the 
crucified  Saviour,  with  Mary  his  beloved  mother,  help  this 
N.  N.  from  all  evil  whatever  name  it  may  bear.  Amen,  t  t  t 
Jesus  Nazarenus  Rex  Judaeorum. 

For  a  Costive  Cow. 

Take  cleanswort,  sage,  meadow  mint,  hedge  turnips,  bruise 
and  mix  them  well  and  boil  in  three  quarts  of  water;  also 


ALBBRTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


93 


put  a  rusty  rick  into  the  water  as  well  as  three  hands  full  of 
salt  while  pronouncing  the  three  holiest  names. 

After  this  do  for  the  Colic  as  follow 

Body,  I  conjure  thee,  by  the  holy  gospel  and  the  holy  three, 
that  thou  wilt  move  into  the  rightful  place  and  bed;  or  thou 
wilt  cause  both  me  N.  N.  and  my  cow  a  certain  death,  f  t  t 
This  three  times  repeated  is  surely  Probatum. 

For  a  Fractured  Leg  and  Open  Sores. 

Whoever  fractures  a  leg  or  receives  any  other  injury  from 
a  fall,  etc.,  should  say  the  following  prayer  and  grace  three 
times  over  the  injured  part,  as  will  be  taught  hereafter,  by 
N.  N.,  pronounce  the  man’s  name  an<J  bend  the  leg  toward  the 
rising  sun:  N.  N.,  I  will  bend  and  smooth  thy  leg  and  keep 
i«.  free  from  all  wild  flesh  and  maggots  fresh,  this  shall  allay 
all  terrible  sores  and  smarts.  At  the  entrance  to  my  right  I 
behold  a  sinner  on  the  cross,  whose  legs  and  arms  were  bent 
and  broken,  in  the  middle  I  behold  our  Saviour  meek,  whom 
the  nails  did  not  in  the  least  cause  pain;  as  true  as  in  the 
holy  cross  taken  no  limb  nor  bone  nor  his  leg  was  broken. 
I  now  in  the  name  of  the  mediator  I  will  cure  all  sores  and 
breaks  will  heal,  that  they  be  well  as  heretofore,  may  they  be 
caused  by  falling  shooting  or  magic,  sores  by  arms  of  lead, 
glass,  silver,  steel  or  ore.  It  shall  be  done  as  surely  as  St. 
John  has  baptized  the  holy  man. 

OVANO,  ObLAMO,  08PERGO, 

These  three  names  should  be  always  pronounced  after  the 
above  grace,  instead  of  the  three  holy  names. 

How  to  Cure  a  Fractured  Leg. 

When  a  human  being  or  any  animal  fractures  an  arm  or 
leg.  set  it  first  that  it  may  meet  correctly  together;  after  this 
is  done  lay  both  of  your  hands  around  the  fracture  and  pro¬ 
nounce  the  following  grace  three  times  over  the  same  and 
shingle  the  limb  and  bandage  it,  that  it  may  stay  well  to¬ 
gether  and  not  draw  apart,  the  leg  will  heal  with  God’s  help, 
as  it  had  been  heretofore. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


83 


Speak  also  thus: 

Broken  leg  may  God  the  Father  heal  thee,  be  healed  in  the 
name  of  God  the  Son,  it  heal  thee,  the  Holy  Spirit.  Grant 
God  that  thou  shouldst  be  like  stone  or  bone,  as  thou  hast 
fcsen  before.  This  help  the  dear  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  whom 
never  a  bone  did  break,  t  t  t  Three  times.  Probatum. 

To  cut  a  Stick  wherewith  to  drive  away  Moles  and  to  flog  a 

Person. 

When  new  moon  comes  on  a  Tuesday,  go  early  in  the  morn¬ 
ing,  before  the  sun  rises,  to  a  hazelnut  shrub  which  grew  in 
one  year,  bend  thy  face  toward  the  sun  and  cut  this  stick  in 
three  cuts,  in  the  three  highest  names,  and  speak  the  ap¬ 
pended  words.  When  you  come  to  a  mole’s  hill,  put  your 
jacket  upon  that  mole’s  hill,  and  flog  the  same  bravely  and 
no  mole  will  throw  up  earth,  and  you  will  also  give  a  flogging 
to  a  person  by  calling  his  name,  in  the  same  manner. 

Hola  Noa  Massa. 

When  an  Animal  is  Stupid. 

When  an  animal  is  stupid,  when  it  runs  around  as  if  it  had 
the  rams,  or  when  it  carries  the  head  upon  one  side,  which 
signifies  a  sort  of  woe  or  pain,  it  may  arise  from  heat  and 
superfluous  blood;  hence  it  would  be  good  to  bleed  such  a 
beast  three  or  four  times,  especially  on  a  Friday.  In  all  cases, 
however  an  animal  should  suffer  from  such  an  ailment,  pro¬ 
nounce  the  following  grace  three  times  over  it,  the  first  time 
stand  upon  the  right  side  of  the  animal;  the  second  time  its 
left  side;  the  third  time  again  upon  the  right  side,  and  while 
saying  the  grace  move  constantly  your  hand  over  the  back  of 
the  animal. 

Blood  forget  thy  motion,  just  as  our  Lord  God  does  unto  a 
man  who  on  the  Sabbath  day  stands  still  and  not  listen  to  the 
holy  gospel’s  will,  t  t  t 

For  Worms  and  Colic. 

Heart  worm,  fruit  worm  and  colic,  I  command  you  by  the 
holy  judgment  of  the  Lord,  that  ye  shall  quietly  lay  and  never 
move,  nor  stay,  till  the  mother  of  God  is  heard  from  again. 


84 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  0 ft, 


For  Lung  Disease. 

When  the  lung  disease  rages  in  any  place,  a  good  remedy 
and  preventive  for  healthy  cattle  is  the  following:  Write 
the  words  given  below  upon  a  piece  of  paper  and  make  thereof 
a  cylindric  bag  and  put  therein  the  powder  hereunto  described* 
and  let  the  cattle  take  it  evenings  after  feeding  them,  but 
only  once,  and  such  cattle  will  not  catch  the  contagion.  But 
In  case  the  cattle  is  already  sick,  give  three  evenings  in  suc¬ 
cession  such  a  package  and  it  will  become  well  again. 

N.  N.,  here  pronounce  the  name  of  the  cattle,  thus  I  write 
and  prescribe  for  thy  lungs,  as  also  for  the  rot,  in  the  name  of 
the  Father,  the  Son  and  Holy  Spirit. 

This  latter  is  to  be  written  upon  paper  and  the  mentioned 
roll  made  thereof,  therein  piit  lung  herbs  as  grows  on  the 
trunks  of  oak  trees,  juniper  berries  and  the  upper  branches 
of  juniper  shrubs,  as  one  as  much  as  of  the  other,  dry  it  and 
then  pulveri^\  and  of  this  powder  take  three  good  pinches, 
put  the  same  in  the  three  highest  names  in  the  cylinder  roll 
and  give  it  to  the  cattle  evenings  after  feeding  time  with  tbs 
paper  as  has  been  described  above.  This  and  confidence  In 
God  will  surely  help. 

For  the  Colic. 

Colic,  I  embrace  thee,  colic,  I  surround  thee,  I  denounce  that 
from  this  flesh  and  blood  now  flee.  Beware  thee,  God,  blood 
and  flesh  the  heavenly  host;  save  thee  God  the  Holy  Ghost 

For  Flush  and  Neuralgic  Pains  of  Man  and  Beast. 

Flush  and  rush,  I  conjure  thee,  three  fathoms  beneath  the 
earth  to  flee,  thus  pray  N.  N.,  to  the  Lord,  that  the  ailment 
vanish  and  banish  henceforth,  until  the  mother  of  God  an¬ 
other  son  will  bear  and  thus  thy  pain  shall  vanish  I  swear, 
t  t  t 

For  the  Stirring. 

Buy  a  cord  for  one  cent,  quiet  homeward  thy  footsteps  bant* 
then  some  knots  dratfn  on  that  cord,  with  it  hit  without 
speaking  one  word  the  side  of  the  bail  but  never  the  tap  wfttfe 
out  fail. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


85 


For  Influenza  tn  the  Eyes  of  Man  or  Beast. 

I  too  beseech  thee  In  the  name  of  God,  the  Father,  Son  and 
Holy  Spirit.  Influenza  I  mean  thee,  that  thou  may  vanish 
and  cease  and  my  body  release,  as  the  body  in  the  grave,  cease 
by  night  and  by  day,  like  the  body  in  the  grave  does  decay. 

t  t  t 

Pray  the  Lord’s  prayer,  one  creed,  and  aid  me  helper,  bless 
in  pangs  and  distress. 

A  sure  Remedy  for  Children  having  Measlei  so  that  they  may 

not  Lose  their  Eyesight. 

Roots  of  rue,  roots  of  sabisses,  hang  around  the  neck  of  the 
patient,  is  probatum. 

When  a  Cow  is  Costive. 

Boil  linseed  in  water,  give  it  as  a  drink  to  the  cow.  It  will 
surely  help. 

For  the  Palsy. 

God  greet  thee,  thou  cold,  cold  face,  in  the  name  of  God 
and  the  judgment  day,  through  God  and  the  Holy  Spirit  shalt 
thou  depart  from  this  flesh  and  blood,  in  the  name  of  God 
the  Father,  and  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Spirit;  three  Fridays 
in  succession;  on  every  occasion,  three  times  to  repeat. 

A  Verse  for  the  Hair  Worm. 

God  the  Lord  went  Zacre,  upon  a  fertile  acre,  he  made  three 
furrows,  he  caught  three  worms.  The  first  is  the  battle  worm, 
khe  other  the  gnat  worm,  the  third  is  the  hair  worm;  battle 
worm,  gnat  worm,  and  hair  worm  rush  from  out  this  flesh 
worm,  t  t  t 

An  Approved  Oil  for  Lame  Limbs. 

Take  wool,  herb  flowers,  put  them  into  a  glass,  and  after  this 
in  an  ant  hill  one  knee  deep,  and  tie  a  bladder  around  the 
glass.  Let  the  glass  remain  there  for  ten  days  and  the  con¬ 
tents  will  turn  to  water,  wherewith  anoint  the  limbs  when¬ 
ever  they  pain. 

for  the  Gravel,  a  simple  but  efficient  Art. 

Boil  a  broth  of  Eben  herbs;  drink  of  this,  morning  and  eve¬ 
ning.  Eben  herbs  is  transecantia  virginica.  This  cure  is  ex- 

celtemt- 


86 


ALBBRTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


To  Cure  Wort*. 

Rub  the  wart  with  nut  blossoms  till  they  heal. 


To  make  an  Herb  Wine. 


1.  Horse  Radish. 

2.  Rockmoss  Flowers. 

3.  Stone  Flowrets. 

4.  Coxcomb. 


5.  Veronica. 

C.  Rue. 

7.  Sage. 

8.  Grape  Hyacinth. 


9.  Lung  Wort; 

of  each  a  handful;  five  cents’  worth  of  rose  blood,  one-half 
pound  of  barley,  one  quart  of  water  and  one  quart  of  wine, 
wherein  the  herbs  have  to  be  boiled  until  one  pint  evaporate*. 
Drink  morning  and  evening  one  glassful  thereof. 


When  a  "Woman  Suffers  from  not  being  Regular. 

Boil  the  wood  of  red  grapes  in  red  or  white  wine,  and  let 
the  person  drink  it. 

To  drive  Boils  and  SwellinQs  away. 

Go  to  a  butcher,  who  Is  about  slaughtering  a  cow,  speak  to 
him,  but  beseech  him  three  times  for  the  sake  of  God,  give 
me  the  bladder  containing  the  water.  Let  the  water  after 
this  run  out,  so  that  the  water  of  the  sick  man  may  run  Into 
the  bladder;  thereupon  hang  the  bladder  in  the  smoke  with 
the  water  in  it.  It  will  surely  help. 

For  the  Gout  or  Sweeny  of  Man  and  Beast. 

If  you  have  gout  in  your  body,  between  skin  and  flesh,  then 
help  you  God  the  Father,  Son  and  Holy  Spirit.  As  little  as 
God  the  Father  was  gouty  as  little  shalt  thou  be  gouty, 
neither  the  Holy  Trinity  had  the  gout,  this  be,  for  the  seventy- 
seven  times  gout,  a  good  cure,  t  t  t 


When  a  Cow  Loses  her  Milk. 

Go  to  the  potter  and  buy  a  new  pot,  do  not  ask  the  price, 
but  give  him  twenty-five  cents  or  more;  thereupon  catch  the 
cow’s  water  in  the  pot,  and  pour  it  into  a  good  trough,  stop 
the  key-hole  up.  Take  a  tile,  paste  it  in  front  and  rear,  then 
take  a  few  glasses  of  milk  from  the  cow  and  pour  into  the 
tile,  make  a  Are  under  it,  and  when  the  milk  boils,  take  the 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


87 


water  pour  It.  Into  the  milk;  take  a  new  broom  which  bad 
never  been  used,  with  It  hit  bravely  therein,  and  if  you  wish 
to  hit  the  witch  Kt.HI  better,  then  take  the  broom-handle  and 
flog  bravely  upon  the  vessel. 

Excellent  Drops  for  the  Stomach. 

Take  ten  cents’  worth  of  eastorcum,  five  cents  worth  of 
cinnamon,  five  cents’  worth  of  cloves,  twenty  centra’  worth  of 
chinin,  three  cents’  worth  of  nutmeg,  five  cents’  worth  of  en- 
zian  root,  and  a  little  orange  peel.  Distil  in  a  pint  of  alcohol. 
Let  it  draw  in  a  temperate  warmth  for  a  few  weeks,  then 
filter  through  paper,  and  let  it  run  into  a  glass  bottle.  The 
species  fill  up  with  fresh  alcohol,  and  let  it  stand  until  again 
ready  for  use,  then  filter  and  so  forth. 

To  Prevent  Anybody  from  taking  Anything  belonging  to  you. 

Inscribe  the  appended  letters  upon  a  stick,  and  put  it  there¬ 
to: 

t  Z.  t  D.  I.  A.  t  B.  t  Z.  t  S.  A. 

B.  Z.  t  H.  V.  W.  F.  f  B.  E.  R.  S.  t  t  t 

For  Frosted  Feet. 

Take  deer’s  tallow,  one  ounce  of  virgin  wax,  and  one  ounco 
laurel  oil.  Let  these  run  together,  add  a  little  brandy,  smear 
upon  three  plasters,  and  apply  to  the  feet.  It  is  a  sure  cure. 

When  a  Horse  stubbornly  refuses  to  be  Shod .  speak  into  his 

Ear . 

+  Caspar  raise  thee.  Melchior  bind  thee,  f  Balthasar  sur¬ 
round  thee,  t  t  t 

This  formula  may  also  be  used  when  a  piece  of  cattle  strays* 
away  or  for  making  game  stand.  It  will  only  be  necessary  to 
say.  by  the  last  name,  where  it  may  be  wanted:  Balthasar 
conduct  thee  back. 

For  the  Worm  on  the  Finger. 

Write  the  following  words  upon  a  paper,  and  tie  it  around 
the  sore  finger,  or  the  horse's  nindquarters,  wherever  the  worm 
is,  and  it  will  die:  Afriass,  aesteias,  Sru6,  Srus,  Sras,  Ates- 
toos,  Xaaja  t  se  do  t  da  da  t  Abia  Am  bles  t  Greem  Er  A. 
ran  t  C  y  y  t  Um  t  t  t 


88  ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


For  the  Salt  Rheum. 

Camphor,  fire  cents;  olive  oil,  five  cents;  white  lead,  five 
cents  some  silver  litherage,  and  a  little  wine  vinegar.  Make 
into  a  salve  paint  on  a  plaster,  and  apply. 

To  Transfix  a  Rider. 

In  the  name  of  the  Holy  Trinity,  God  Father,  God  Son,  God 
the  Holy  Spirit,  here  I  fasten  thee,  rider  and  warrior.  Mother 
Mary  shall  decide  over  you.  The  paradise  is  opened  unto  him. 
Therewith  I  am  closed  with  my  goods  and  chattels.  Hold 
therein  hellish  fire  flames,  as  true  as  Christ  was  cruoified 
upon  the  cross. 

Solution. 

With  these  words,  by  which  I  fixed  you,  I  again  release 
thee,  t  t  t 

Another  formula  for  the  Same. 

Horse  and  rider,  I  affix  ye.  and  by  the  holy  three  hours. 
Horse  and  rider,  I  fix  ye,  by  the  holy  five  words  and  wounds, 
as  Jesus  Christ  spake  while  on  the  Cross.  God  the  Father 
will  cause  thee  to  appear,  God  the  Son  will  bind  thee,  and 
God  the  Holy  Ghost  will  not  liberate  thee  until  I  bid  thee  to 
depart  hence,  t  t  t 

To  Fix  a  Thief. 

Mary  walked  with  her  dear  child,  when  two  thieves  came 
by,  and  quickly  took  it  away  from  her.  But  Mary  spake  to 
St.  Peter:  St.  Peter,  St.  Peter  bind.  St.  Peter  said:  I  have 
bound  him  with  Jesus'  bands,  with  his  five  holy  wounds  my 
goods  have  bound.  Whoever  steals  from  me,  shall  stand  like 
a  stick,  and  look  around  like  a  buck.  If  he  can  count  more 
than  all  the  stars  which  stand  on  the  sky,  can  count  all 
leaves,  all  blades  of  grass,  all  drops  of  rain,  all  flakes  of  snow, 
he  may  depart  with  hi6  stolen  goods.  If  he  cannot  do  this,  he 
stands  on  this  place  for  a  ransom,  until  I  may  be  able  to  view 
him  with  my  own  eyes,  and  with  my  own  mouth  bid  him  to  go 
thither. 

Solution. 

Depart  in  the  name  of  the  Holy  Trinity. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


89 


To  Make  a  Mirror  in  which  Everything  may  he  Discerned. 

Procure  a  looking  gl«M,  *uch  as  are  commonly  sold.  In¬ 
scribe  the  character*  noted  below  upon  it.  Inter  it  on  the 
crossing  of  two  pathway*,  during  an  uneven  hour.  On  the 
third  day  thereafter,  hie  to  the  place  at  same  hour,  and  take 
it  out:  but  you  must  not  be  the  first  person  to  look  into  the 
glass.  It  is  best  to  let  a  dog  or  a  cat  take  the  first  look  into 
the  mirror:  S.  Solam  S.  Tattler  &  Ecbogardner  Gematar. 

When  a  Person  has  taken  a  Fatal  Step  how  to  Help  and 

Alleviate. 

Now,  I  step  out  in  God’s  great  name,  now  step  out  in  his 
might  and  fame,  now  I  step  out  in  God’s  foot  step,  right  which 
is  against  all  spirits  might.  God  the  Father,  before  me  is, 
God  the  Son  behind  me  and  at  my  side,  God  the  Holy  Spirit  is 
within  and  with  me.  t  t  t  Speak  three  times  and  move  with 
the  hand  over  the  sore. 

A  Grace  for  Robbers  and  Murderers. 

Be  happy  brethren.  Brethren,  thus  your  proud  race  run. 
We  have  all  partaken  of  Christ’s  own  blood;  but  ye  cannot 
shoot  me,  cannot  stab  me,  cannot  flog  nor  punish  me,  be¬ 
cause  God,  our  Lord,  will  not  permit  it.  God  the  Father  be 
with  thee,  God  the  Son  be  with  us  all,  God  the  Holy  Ghost 
be  with  all  of  us.  We  will  meet  in  joy,  and  part  in  peace, 
t  t  t  Three  times. 

If  a  Person  cannot  Churn  out. 

Gilien  now  Punctum,  Sabot  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  Holy  King  of 
the  Jews,  t  t  t 

Tbeee  words  affix  upon  the  stirring  dish  or  churn. 

Another  for  the  same  Purpose. 

Take  a  card — the  nine  of  hearts — and  a  knife,  on  which 
three  crosses  are  engraved.  Put  these  two  articles  under 
the  stirring  dish  or  churn,  and  all  will  work  well. 

To  Fasten  a  Thief  upon  your  Estate. 

I,  N.  N.  [here  pronounce  your  name],  can  you  pass  over 
my  estate  whether  you  walk  or  ride;  without  the  roof  under 


90 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  Oft, 


the  roof,  if  you  are  not  able,  so  be  you  fixed  to  stand  still, 
and  count  first  all  rain  drops,  all  snow  flakes,  all  the  stars 
which  move  on  the  firmament,  all  the  blades  of  green  grass 
that  groweth  upon  the  earth,  all  grains  of  sand  in  the  ocean, 
and  all  the  springs  that  are  beneath  the  earth.  If  you  can¬ 
not  count  all  these  things,  you  shall  and  must  stand  like  a 
log,  stand  like  a  buck,  and  like  a  goat  must  look.  Thus, 
Peter,  bind;  St.  Peter,  fasten  with  God’s  own  hand,  and  ye 
thieves  are  fastened  and  affixed  as  long  as  it  pleases  me.  In 
his  wicked  position,  be  the  thief  fixed  to  stand,  fixed  to  the 
land,  and  now  stand  still,  till  Judas  departs  from  hell.  Judas 
dare  not  leave  the  lower  region;  hence  the  thief  must  quiet 
stand  still,  till  I  may  with  my  own  eyes  and  hand,  see  and 
feel  that  wicked  wight;  and  bid  him  to  depart  with  all  his 
might,  t  t  t  Three  times  spoken. 

Remember  where  thy  possessions  lay,  and  with  the  right 
finger  or  hand  point  to  them.  This  obey. 

To  release:  Without  trouble  to  thee  or  me,  depart  from 
hence,  in  the  name  of  the  Evil  One,  without  mirth  or  glee. 

To  Regain  the  Stolen  Property. 

Take  three  crumbs  of  bread,  three  pinches  of  salt,  and 
three  very  small  portions  of  lard.  Then  make  a  strong  fire, 
lay  all  these  nine  articles  upon  it,  and  speak  these  words, 
while  remaining  alone: 

I  lay  for  the  thief,  bread,  salt  and  lard,  upon  the  flame,  for 
thy  sin  is  hard;  I  lay  it  upon  thy  lung,  liver  and  heart,  that 
thou  may  feel  a  bitter  smart.  It  shall  come  upon  thee,  need 
and  dread,  as  it  approaches  a  dire  death.  All  veins  shall  in 
thy  body  burst,  and  cause  thee  pain  and  quenchless  thirst; 
that  thou  shalt  have  no  peace  or  rest,  till  all  the  theft  thou 
hast  returned  and  place  it  where  thou  hast  taken  the  plunder, 
or  be  caught  by  lightning  and  thunder,  t  t  t  Recite  three 
times. 

When  yon  have  a.  Stnrained  Lim*- 

They  have  crecrned  the  Saviour  on  the  holy  cross.  It  did 

t  -'art  him.  It  did  not  pain  him.  Hence  thy  sores  and  thy 
.Tains  will  hurt  thee  not.  Become  well  again,  f  t  t  Speak 
three  times 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


91 


If  desirous  to  See  Miraculous  Things. 

Take  Argentumorium  and  wrap  it  up  in  a  rag,  and  write, 
with  wolf’s  blood,  upon  parchment: 

t  Ada  t  t  Aba  ebe  t  t  thanat  do  t  Zancha  Agola  t  Zaboha  t 

Whoever  carries  these  words  on  his  person  will  be  honored 
by  every  one.  What  he  asks  for  he  will  receive.  If  held  be¬ 
fore  a  lock,  the  same  will  open  unto  him. 

When  a  Cow  Loses  her  milk. 

Take  camphor,  five  cents’  worth;  three  bits  of  assafcetida  (or 
devil’s  dirt),  three  small  spoonfuls  of  black  sulphur,  six 
spoonfuls  of  stove  soot,  a  little  of  five-finger  herb  and  iron 
herb,  and  milk  of  the  troubled  cow.  Stir  these  things  well 
together,  and  pour  them  all  into  a  pail. 

After  a  Cow  has  Lost  her  Milk . 

If  you  find  half  of  a  horseshoe,  put  it  into  the  milk  while 
it  boils.  Take  a  switch  of  three-year-old  hazelnut  shrub — but 
they  must  not  be  bitten  off,  but  have  the  knots  from  above. 
With  them  beat  into  the  milk,  and  speak  thus:  I  burn  and  beat 
thee,  Trott  and  Morth,  in  all  the  devil’s  names,  till  thou  unto 
me,  N.  N.,  (here  pronounce  the  name  of  him  you  seek  to  aid), 
will  return  the  milk  of  my  cow.  Assafcetida  of  the  size  of  a 
bean,  and  magic  balsam  for  five  cents,  put  therein,  and  given 
upon  a  piece  of  bread  three  or  four  mornings  in  succession. 
In  the  morning  early,  and  evening  after  feeding. 

Another  Remedy  for  the  same  Ailment. 

Take  the  milk,  water  and  e*crementis.  Put  it  in  an  unglazed 
pot  with  a  lid  upon  it,  and  seal  it  tightly,  so  that  the  fumes 
cannot  escape.  Put  it  upon  a  fire,  and  allow  it  to  boil  down 
gently.  But  duriDg  twenty-four  hours  following  this  boiling, 
you  must  not  lend  anything  unless  somebody  asks  it  “for 
God's  sake.” 

How  to  Shoot  with  Accuracy. 

Take  a  needle,  wherewith  the  gown  of  a  corpse  had  been 
sewed,  and  drive  it  into  the  stock,  and  you  will  shoot  ac¬ 
curately. 


92 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


Or: 

Take  the  entrails  of  a  trout  caught  between  Christmas  and 
New  Year,  and  put  them  upon  a  copper  lid.  Bum  them  to 
powder.  Put  it  into  the  stock  of  your  gun.  Also  In  a  little 
bag,  and  hang  it  under  the  right  arm.  You  will  then  be  able 
to  shoot  whatever  you  desire.  If  you  carry  the  same  under 
your  left  arm,  you  will  be  gay  and  hapf>y. 

To  make  One's  Self  Shot-Proof. 

According  to  this  formula,  on  the  day  of  Peter  and  Paul, 
at  vesper  tide,  there  spring  open  waywort  roots,  of  which 
hunters  and  men  of  the  forest  believe  that  he  who  carries  them 
on  his  person  cannot  be  hit  or  shot. 

To  Catch  Fish. 

Take  valerian,  or  cocculus  Indicus,  and  make  small  cakes 
thereof  with  flour;  throw  these  into  the  deep*  As  soon  as  a 
fish  eats  thereof,  it  will  become  intoxicated,  and  float  upon 
the  surface. 

Another: 

Camphor,  wheat  flour,  Arund  Arda  ololivar  aa  Zsz.  Mix 
together,  and  it  will  become  a  salve.  If  you  then  proceed  to 
fish,  anoint  your  hands  and  shins  therewith,  and  miracles  you 
will  experience. 

To  Ascertain  t chether  a  Sick  Person  will  Die  or  not. 

Take  a  piece  of  bread,  place  it  before  the  sick  one’s  brow, 
then  throw  it  before  a  dog.  If  he  eats  it,  the  patient  recovers; 
if  he  rejects  it,  the  sick  one  dies. 

How  to  cause  Blind  Horses  to  See  again,  and  how  to  Remove 

the  Cataract. 

Early  on  Good  Friday  morning,  dig  Antemonlum.  Shall 
take!  six  rad  Valerian,  or  you  may  also  do  so  on  any  Sunday 
or  Friday.  Three  of  these  roots  cut  fine,  as  near  the  eyes  as 
you  can;  the  other  three  dry  and  pulverize  them.  Then  take 
an  egg  and  let  the  white  thereof  run  out,  and  put  the  yolk  in, 
and  add  salt  until  the  egg  shell  is  filled.  Then  skillfully  close 
it,  and  set  it  end  ways  upon  hot  ashes,  till  it  becomes  hard 
like  a  stone.  Be  careful  not  Co  boll  it  over,  because  it  wiil 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


93 


never  be  good.  Pulverize  it,  and  fill  with  this  egg  the  quill 
of  a  feather,  and  blow  the  contents  gently  into  the  horse’s 
eyes.  Although  it  pains,  it  will  destroy  the  skin  that  grew 
over  the  eye,  and  make  it  see  again.  Probatum. 

How  to  Obtain  a  good  Memory . 

Take  the  gall  of  a  partridge,  and  with  it  grease  the  temples 
every  month,  and  your  memory  will  be  like  that  of  Mnemon. 

To  Drive  away  and  Vanquish  all  Foes. 

Whoever  carries  the  hemlock  herb,  with  the  heart  of  a  mole, 
m  his  person,  vanquishes  all  his  enemies,  so  that  they  will  not 
>e  able  to  trouble  him.  Such  a  man  will  obtain  much.  When 
his  herb  is  laid  under  the  head  of  a  sick  person,  the  sick  one, 
when  he  sings,  will  get  well;  if  he  cries,  he  will  die. 

To  Make  a  Black  Horse  White. 

Take  goat’s  gall,  and  paint  the  horse  with  it,  and  it  will  turn 
white. 

A  certain  way  to  Stop  the  Blood. 

Take  bread  and  leaven,  and  mix  with  brandy  to  a  plaster, 
and  bind  with  it,  sores  and  wounds. 

For  a  Stubborn  Horse. 

On  Walpurgis  night,  thy  reverence,  I  hope,  will  one  enable, 
to  curb  thy  temperament  unstable;  for  zigcag  courses  we  are 
wont  to  keep,  be  kind  enough  and  gently  light  us  up  the  steep. 

For  the  day  of  Labor  Pains.  A  certain  Remedy.  First  of  all 
write  the  Following  in  one  Line  upon  a  Paper: 

AbhzPObL9hbmgn 
Subratum  nome  nex  gr. 

After  this  the  patient’s  name  in  the  center.  Under  this  in¬ 
scribe  the  following  words,  also  t  in  one  row: 

t  Ecgitar  t  Circabato  t  Bessiabato  t  Argon  t  Vigaro  Tanet. 

Put  this  into  a  bag  of  leather  and  sew  the  same  up,  but  the 
seam  must  be  on  the  right  side. 

N.  B.  This  must  be  made  without  a  knot,  on  thread  or 
band,  and  hung  up  during  an  uneven  hour. 


•4 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


When  a  Child  is  Attacked. 

Cot  three  corners  of  a  table  edge  from  below,  of  every  edge 
a  chip  and  a  grain  of  salt,  and  a  bit  of  bread,  also  a  little  of 
hack’s  beard.  All  this  do  noiselessly,  and  suspend  on  the 
child's  neck,  with  a  little  unbleached  yarn  during  an  uneven 
hour,  and  with  these  N.  N.  words  call  the  child’s  name,  via: 
This  I  suspend  for  ransom  sake;  in  the  name  of  God  the 
Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Spirit. 

To  cause  the  Return  of  Stolen  Goods. 

Write  upon  two  pieces  of  paper,  the  following  words,  and  lay 
the  one  over  the  door,  and  the  other  under  the  threshold,  and 
the  thief  will  return  on  the  third  day  and  bring  back  the  stolen 
articles,  via:  Abraham  t  bound  it,  Isaac  t  redeemed  and  found 
it,  Jacob  f  carried  it  home;  it  is  bound  as  tightly  as  steel  and 
iron,  chains  and  fetters,  t  t  t 

For  Marasmus  of  Man  or  Beast. 

Dig  mouse-ear  herb  on  St  John’s-day,  hang  herb  and  roots 
around  the  neck  of  the  afflicted,  be  it  man  or  beast 

For  the  Toothache. 

Write  upon  three  roads  with  a  horseshoe  nail,,  these  words: 
Kex,  Par,  Mox.  ppo,  in  folio,  and  drive  the  nail  tightly  into 
the  wall;  as  long  as  the  nail  remains  fast  the  teeth  will  hurt 
no  more. 

Whether  a  Patient  Dies  or  Recovers. 

Take  his  water,  drop  some  milk  of  a  woman,  who  is  nursing 
a  male  child,  therein;  if  the  milk  settles  upon  the  ground,  the 
patient  dies;  but  if  it  floats  above,  he  recovers. 

To  Disgust  a  Person  who  is  Addicted  to  Gambling. 

Give  sow's  milk  to  one  who  is  addicted  to  gambling,  and  be 
will  feel  disgusted  when  he  wishes  to  play. 

If  a  Horse  is  Costive. 

Let  tt  take  crabs*  eyes,  for  five  oents,  and  in  fifteen  minutes 
the  core  is  effected. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


95 


An  excellent  Eyewater  for  Man  and  Beast. 

When  blind,  and  the  eyes  are  covered  with  a  skin,  or  the 
eyes  are  darkened  and  dim,  take  the  eggs  of  red  ants  and  put 
them  into  a  small  glass.  Draw’  a  water  therefrom.  This 
glass  containing  the  eggs  must  be  kept  well  corked,  so  that 
nothing  may  ooze  out,  then  put  the  phial  into  dough  of  rye 
flour  and  bake  in  the  oven  with  other  bread,  and  when  taheo 
from  the  oven  let  cool  off  with  the  other  loaves,  then  carefully 
remove  the  bread  from  the  glass,  so  as  not  to  break  the  same 
and  the  ant  eggs  will  prove  to  have  turned  into  water.  This 
water  apply  four  or  five  times,  as  may  be  necessary,  to  the 
afflicted  eye,  every  time  one  drop  only.  This  has  been  tried 
on  man  and  beast. 

To  Dry  up  the  Water  in  Cases  of  Gouty  Diseases. 

Take  the  skull  of  a  corpse,  scrape  some  bone-dust  off  the 
cranium  with  your  knife  and  strew  into  the  wounds. 

When  a  Grapevine  Breaks  or  Warps. 

Dig  red  raspberry  roots  and  suspend  them  to  the  broken 
vine.  It  will  cause  the  vine  to  be  all  right  again. 

To  produce  a  Light  by  which  a  Hidden  Treasure  may  be  Found 

in  a  House. 

Take  incense,  sulphur,  pure  wax  and  yarn,  boil  it  and  make 
thereof  a  candle,  and  whenever  the  light  extinguishes  there 
the  money  is  concealed. 

To  Wean  a  Tippler  from  Drinking  Wine. 

Take  an  apple,  put  it  into  the  hand  of  a  dying  man,  and  let 
the  apple  remain  there  till  the  person  dies.  If  you  desire  the 
tippler  to  drink  only  half  the  quantity  he  usually  takes,  give 
him  one-half  of  the  apple  to  eat;  but  if  you  wish  him  to  ab¬ 
stain  totally  from  strong  drinks  give  him  the  entire  apple  to 
eat.  But  the  drunkard  must  not  be  aware  of  your  designs. 

To  make  a  Person  dislike  Gambling. 

Speak  to  an  executioner,  give  me  some  wood  of  a  whip 
wherewith  you  have  beaten  criminals,  and  flog  the  gambler 
with  this  upon  his  naked  body,  and  never  more  thereafter  will 
he  gamble. 


H 


ALBBRTU8  MA0HU8;  OR, 


While  Travelling . 

Say  cvei  y  morning:  Grant  me,  oh  Lord,  a  good  and  pleiesi 
hour,  that  all  sick  people  may  recover,  and  all  distressed  li 
body  or  mind,  repose  or  grace  may  And,  and  guardian  attgli 
may  over  them  hover;  and  all  those  captive  and  In  bondage 
fettered;  may  have  their  conditions  and  troubles  bettered;  to 
all  good  travellers  on  horse  or  foot,  we  wish  a  safe  journey 
Joyful  and  good,  and  good  women  in  labor  and  toil  a  eafe  4  ► 
livery  and  Joy. 

That  none  map  Vanquish  you.  and  how  to  Open  Locks. 

Take  the  eye  of  a  raven,  lay  it  into  an  ant's  hill  for  elg|lt 
days,  and  you  will  And  a  little  stone  thereby,  that  stone  cs*/y 
with  you  upon  your  person. 

For  the  Fever. 

Take  a  fresh  laid  egg,  boil  it  very  hard,  then  while  hot  fcjel 
it,  and  inscribe  the  following  words  upon  it: 

t  Aha  t  Mahy  t  Froha;  then  eat  it  hot  in  three  bites,  und 
after  this  fast. 

When  you  have  Lost  your  Manhood . 

When  you  are  infatuated  and  bewitched  by  a  Woman,  so 
that  you  may  not  love  any  other,  then  take  blood  of  a  buck  and 
grease  your  head  therewith,  and  you  will  soon  be  ail  right 
again. 

That  a  Horse  will  not  be  Tired, 

Put  links  from  the  chain  of  a  gallows  bird,  or  nettles  of 
the  blade  of  an  executor’s  steel  into  your  spurs. 

If  Something  is  Stolen  from  your  House. 

Inscribe  over  the  door  of  the  house  these  names,  and  It  wilt 
be  found  again: 

t  Chamacha,  t  Amacha,  t  Amschala,  f  Waystou,.f  A  lam,  f  f 
Blast  Lamach, 

That  Every  one  will  Buy  from  you,  be  it  what  It  may. 

Take  a  twig  of  a  whlsp  wherewith  a  person  lu*d  been  Issued. 
Make  a  small  ring  and  wind  red  silk  around  it,  ana  pen  is  on 
your  Anger.  If  you  wish  to  sell  anything  It  will  be  paid  for 
as  you  desire. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


A  Wolfs  Blessing. 

The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  St  Peter,  one  morning  travelling 
together,  while  Holy  Mary  proceedeth  to  a  heather,  she  said: 
Ah,  dear  Lord,  whence  shall  we  hie,  we  will  journey  over  hill 
and  dale,  protect  therefore,  dear  Lord,  my  flock  wherever  It 
be,  St  Peter  takes  his  key  and  therefore  closes  every  wolfs 

jaw,  that  they  no  bone  no  lamb  may  gnaw,  t  t  t  Three 
times. 

When  an  Animal  has  broken  a  Bone ,  and  its  Blood  Curdles . 

First  of  all,  set  the  fractured  limb,  and  in  case  you  are  not 
near  the  animal  take  a  chair  or  leg  of  a  bedstead,  call  both 
the  names  of  owner,  and  that  of  a  beast,  as  also  the  broken 
leg  of  the  animal.  This  leg  must  be  taken  on  the  bedstead  or 
chair,  right  or  left,  fore  or  hind  leg  corresponding  with  that  of 
the  animal  in  your  right  or  left  hand,  as  the  case  may  be, 
tie  it  and  speak:  Foot  I  heal  thee  in  the  name  of  God  the 
Father,  and  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost.  Into  depth  of  na¬ 
ture  peer — only’  believe,  there’s  a  miracle  here!  Recite  the 
Lord’s  Prayer  three  times,  add  the  Creed,  and  three  times  re¬ 
cited.  It  helps. 

When  a  Bog  is  bitten  by  a  Mad  Dog. 

The  following  words  shall  be  given  to  him  in  a  drink: 
Ckiium  f  Cinium  t  Gossium  t  Strassus  t  God  t  Strassus. 

When  a  Horse  has  Sprained  his  Foot. 

Take  a  stone  from  under  a  water-spout,  and  put  the  horse's 
leg  upon  it,  and  say : 

I  place  myself  upon  a  hard  stone,  I  have  an  ailment  on 
my  leg  bone  which  causes  me  much  pain,  be  this  pain  black 
or  white,  grey  or  red,  in  less  than  three  days  it  shall  be 
dead,  t  t  t  Three  times  spoken.  Probatum. 

When  a  Horse  has  been  Pushed  and  Hurt,  speak  these  Words 
Noiselessly  and  mdve  the  Left  Foot  over  the  Sore. 

Aete  Bandte,  to  Brante  bede.  t  t  t  Three  times. 

For  Stopping  the  Blood. 

There  stood  three  roses  upon  our  Saviour’s  grave. — the  first 
is  mild  the  other  is  good,  the  third  shall  stop  thy  blood, 
t  t  t  Three  times. 


ALBERT  US  MAGNUS;  OR, 


To  Cut  Fortune  Wand . 

Proceed  In  the  forenoon  before  twelve  o’clock  to  a  haselnat 
shrub,  which  grew  within  one  year  and  has  two  twigs,  then 
place  yourself  toward  the  rising  sun,  and  take  the  twigs  in 
both  hands  and  speak:  I  conjure  thee,  one  summer  long, 
hasel  rod,  by  the  power  of  God,  by  the  obedience  of  Jesus 
Christ  of  Nazareth,  God  and  Mary’s  own  son,  who  died  on 
the  cross,  and  by  the  power  of  God,  by  the  truth  of  God  arose 
from  the  dead;  God  the  Father,  Son  and  Holy  Ghost,  who  art 
the  very  truth  thyself,  that  thou  showest  me  where  silver 
and  gold  is  hidden. 

A  Blessing  for  Enemies. 

This  grant  God  the  Father,  God  the  Son,  and  God  the  Holy 
Spirit 

Now  I  will  rise  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and  will  wander 
in  his  path  by  his  word  and  will  beseech  our  Saviour  Christ 
that  he  may  lend  me,  upon  this  very  day,  three  of  his  angels, 
for  this  I  pray;  the  first  he  may  protect  me,  the  other  keep 
me  without  weapon  or  arms,  the  third  may  keep  my  body 
from  all  harm  and  keep  my  soul,  my  blood  and  flesh,  and 
keep  my  courage  ever  fresh.  Whoever  is  stronger  as  Jesus 
Christ,  he  may  approach  and  assail  my  flesh  and  blood.  In 
the  name  of  God  the  Father,  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost  I 
praise  thee  heavenly  host 

This  may  grant  God  the  Father,  God  the  Son,  and  God  the 
Holy  Spirit.  *t  t  t 

For  Decayed  Lungs. 

Take  sparry  gypsum  or  selenite... 5  cents'  worth. 


Saltpetre  . 5  “  u 

Black  Sulphur  . 5  “  “ 

Blue  vitriol  (copperas) . 1  “  “ 

Copper- water  . 2  “  " 


mix  well,  and  give  a  half  teaspoonful,  night  and  morning,  to 
the  cattle. 

When  you  put  the  Yoke  upon  an  Ox,  for  the  Frst  Time ,  Speak: 

Ox;  I  lay  the  yoke  upon  thee,  in  the  name  of  the  Saint 
FrandBcus,  and  bear  it  like  nnr  dearly  beloved  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  bore  his  cross,  t  t  t  Three  times. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


99 


To  cast  Bullets  wherewith  to  have  Good  Luck. 

The  seventeenth  day  in  Christmas  month,  when  this  day 
comes  in  the  sign  of  Sagittarius,  or  when  the  new  moon 
comes  on  a  Friday,  cast  your  bullets,  and  you  will  be  lucky. 

For  all  Sorts  of  Swellings. 

Take  white  sulphur,  pound  it  fine,  put  It  in  good  beer  or 
wine,  add  one-fourth  part  vinegar  thereto,  also  one-eighth 
olive  oil,  let  it  boil,  and  with  this  the  swellings  anoint. 

To  Extirpate  Caterpillars. 

Take  a  new  broom,  stand  with  it  on  the  fourth  corner  of 
land  or  acre,  and  throw  crosswise  in  the  other  corner  in  the 
devil’s  name,  and  say:  Caterpillars  clear  out  in  the  devil’s 
name.  When  doing  this,  there  must  be  a  notch  somewhere. 
Then  throw  the  broom  away  from  the  land  or  acre,  as  far  as 
you  can  possibly  throw  it.  Probatum. 

A  Black  Ointment ,  very  Wholesome  for  Various  Things  es¬ 
pecially  for  Sore  Hoofs. 

Take  1  pound  of  old  lard. 

“  1  pound  of  gunpowder. 

“  1  pound  of  turpentine. 

“  1  pound  of  honey. 

“  1  quart  of  saltpetre. 

“  2  ounces  of  white  vitriol. 

“  1  ounce  of  copperwater. 

“  A  small  glass  of  good  wine  vinegar. 

“  One  handful  of  salt; 

Bruise  and  mix,  and  boil  well  in  vinegar,  but  prevent  run¬ 
ning  over;  the  lard  must  not  be  added  till  the  other  articles 
are  well  boiled,  then  you  may  add  the  lard  also  warm,  stir  it 
all  well  together,  then  let  it  get  cold.  This  plaster  heals  burns, 
gangrene  and  boils. 


When  Cattle  Cough. 

Powder  wormwood,  give  it  to  the  cattle  with  the  food,  or 
take  black  sulphur  and  laurel;  make  some  powder  thereof, 
and  give  it  to  the  cattle  with  a  handful  of  feed.  It  certainly 
helps. 


100 


ALBERTOS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


For  Swellings. 

Oh,  thou  swelling!  oh,  thou  swellings!  oh,  thou  swellings! 
oh  thou  injured  part!  Now,  I  beseech  thee,  for  the  sake  of 
the  holy  cross,  whereupon  Christ  our  Lord  so  meekly  suf¬ 
fered,  by  our  Lord  Jesus'  holy  five  wounds  which  never  swell 
and  never  fester,  and  cause  no  gangrene  and  suppuration. 
Three  times  during  every  twenty-four  hours  to  recite. 

A  Plaster  for  a  Sore  Breast. 

1  quart  of  rosin,  1  quart  of  wax, 

1  quart  of  lard,  1  quart  of  linseed  oil. 

Unwatered  butter,  Saffron  for  five  cents. 

All  these  articles  boil  together,  and  strain  through  a  white 
cloth,  and  let  it  grow  cold. 

When  a  Man  has  Trod  on  a  Thorn  or  Briar ,  Glass,  Etc. 

Buy  red  lead  or  minium,  paint  the  sore  spot,  and  draw  it  out 

For  the  Flux. 

Take  camphor  gum,  Venetian  soap,  green  juniper  berries, 
and  cognac  brandy;  put  all  in  a  little  bag  and  apply. 

When  the  Lungs  of  Cattle  Swell. 

Take  some  sand  stone,  put  it  into  a  bake-oven  till  it  be¬ 
comes  right  hot,  then  put  it  into  a  pail  of  fresh  water.  Let 
the  cattle  drink  thereof,  and  be  relieved. 

For  the  Itch  or  Scab. 

Take  precipitate,  lard  and  white  hen’s  manure,  make  a  lye 
thereof,  and  wash  the  skin  therewith. 

For  the  Erysipelas. 

God  grant,  God  the  Father,  God  the  Son,  and  God  the  Holy 
Spirit.  Thou  wild  fire  I  stop  thee,  to  this  end  help  me  dear 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  no  one  may  be  able  to  aid  thee,  wild 
fire  flee,  as  his  own  son  were  he.  Wild  fire,  I  am  the  man 
who  can  compel  thee  to  desist,  t  t  t  Three  times. 

To  Stop  Bleeding. 

Was  it  not  a  happy  hour  when  Jesus  Christ  was  born,  was  it 
not  a  fortunate  hour  when  Jesus  Christ  arose  from  the  dead. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


101 


Th«M  thfM  bltssfal  boars  stop  thy  bleeding  and  heal  thy 
Trnaais,  Mat  they  May  not  swell  er  fester,  and  within  three 
or  Xtee  Says  be  weS  again,  t  t  t 

When  a  Wmuw  mtffert  from  a  Local  Weaknttt, 

Conaway  seed  eO.  j sniper  brandy,  and  jaaiperberry  etl. 
sf  sash  toa  cents'  worth.  When  the  pain  le  felt,  one  or  two 

teaopooafals  thereof  to  be  taken. 

Per  fhs  fata*  Anthony fs  P*re. 

Take  a  ptoee  of  fee  tong,  sad  eew  It  la  oae  of  the  patieafs 
gartosato  (without  hie  knewtodge),  and  during  the  remainder 
ef  his  Mfe  he  wlU  he  entirety  free  from  this  disease. 

For  0»sa  ■Seres. 

Take  hag's  lard  of  the  atee  ef  a  bean,  beat  it,  pet  the  folk 
ef  an  egg  sad  some  — frnn  thereto;  stir  H  weM  together.  It 

Aatoood.  tw  eeals;  etl  sf  terpentine,  fire  seats;  ott  sf 
Jaalper,  See  seats;  ah  and  stir  well.  Grease  tbs  swell  tog 

For  Coops  Isfrd  Blood. 

Take  tee  easts*  worth  sf  asaeo,  make  a  plaator  of  It,  aad 
pat  It  agsa  the  tafary  saes  or  twice. 

Whs*  JUMP  Snags  are  Good  for. 

They  f  tanlopn  warts  and  earns  so  bands  aad  toot,  heal 
mptarno  aad  other  Isjnrtos  They  ssnst  be  prepared  thas*. 
Pat  ell  the  nolle  together  to  a  pot,  throw  mneh  salt  thereto, 
bnry  toe  pot  for  atos  daps,  after  this  distil  the  matter  to  a 
glass  to  toe  oaa. 

Tho  toag  Sager,  wtlb  three  toreingers,  pat  tolo  the  ao«d, 
aad  ear  torse  ttoms:  Hide  to.  Hefeda,  tltonia  gpen.  be 
opened,  f  t  t 

VNs  a  Itnos  has  Imbibed  too  smmS. 

Take  faagas  of  a  linden  tree,  oowhalf  quart  ef  aid  wins, 
sns  half  part  sf  water,  pear  toe  totter  oa  the  faagas,  1st  II 


102 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


draw  for  twenty-four  hours,  and  drink  mornings,  noon  and 
eyenlngs  thereof,  one  teaspoonful.  It  is  a  sure  cure. 

A  Salve  for  Gouty  Limbs. 

Take  dogs'  lard  for  five  cents,  oil  of  white  fir-tree  cones  five 
cents,  olday  for  five  cents,  seal  oil  for  five  cents,  a  quart  of 
lard,  hi  which  all  the  others  are  rendered  down,  and  the 
gouty  limb  anointed  with  this  salve. 

Another  Remedy  for  Gouty  Limbs. 

Take  rabbits'  lard,  four  ounces;  brandy,  two  ounces;  deer’s 
marrow,  nine  ounces;  dog’s  lard,  nine  ounces;  fox  lard,  five 
ounoes;  Juniper  oil,  three  ounces;  laurel  oil,  five  ounces;  all 
this  well  mixed,  and  applied  while  warm. 

A  Receipt  for  Man  and  Beast  against  Injuries. 

Take  alder  tree  bark,  two  handfuls;  wormwood,  two  hand¬ 
fuls;  rue,  two  handfuls;  small  sage  two  handfuls;  garlic,  two 
handfuls;  carraway,  two  handfuls.  Mix  these  all  together, 
and  fumigate  stables,  outhouses  and  other  apartments  there¬ 
with.  It  is  a  good  disinfectant. 

When  Horses  have  the  Itch. 

Take  one  pound  of  gunpowder,  one  pound  of  linseed  oil, 
one  pound  of  carraway  seed,  and  one  pound  of  sulphur.  Make 
a  lye  of  chicken  manure,  pour  the  above  substance  therein, 
and  wash  the  horse  with  this  solution. 

To  Drive  away  Lice. 

Pishberry  and  lard  mixed  together,  and  the  head  anointed 
therewith. 

A  Drink  for  Horses. 

Watercreases,  green  Juniperberries,  hartshorn,  Venetian 
soap.  Of  these  make  a  beverage. 

A  Plaster  for  the  Worm. 

Spirltu8  Sails,  gall  of  glass,  brown  garlic,  yeast,  common 
nettle  roots,  honey,  Venetian  glass,  of  all,  three  cents’  worth, 
turpentine,  whiskey,  lampblack,  sperm  oil,  swallow  water. 
Mixed  well  together,  and  applied  as  plaster. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


103 


When  a  Rifle  or  Shot  Qun  is  Beioitched. 

Take  five  cents’  worth  of  liquid  amber,  assafcetida,  river 
water,  and  mix  well  together.  With  the  mixture  clean  well 
and  the  rag,  with  which  the  scouring  was  done,  hang  up  in 
the  smoke,  or  put  in  a  new-made  grave. 

For  Dropsy 

Three  flowers  stand  upon  the  grave  of  the  Saviour  Jesut 
Christ.  The  one  signifies  goodness  of  God,  the  other,  humility, 
the  third,  God’s  will.  Water,  stand  still,  t  t  t 

A  Good  Ointment  for  Wounds. 

Take  one-half  quart  of  vinegar,  one-hhlf  pint  of  honey,  one 
ounce  of  verdigris,  one  ounce  of  dragon’s  blood,  one  ounce  of 
bolus  minium,  two  ounces  mastic,  one  ounce  incense,  and  three 
ounces  oil  of  turpentine.  All  mixed  well  together. 

To  Prevent  Eyes  from  Becoming  Blind. 

Take  pea  straw,  boil  it,  and  let  the  fumes  fumigate  the  eyes. 

Take  arum  water  and  blue  vitriol,  and  paint  the  eyes  with  It 
by  using  a  black  hen's  feather.  Also,  take  the  herbs,  and  wipe 
the  eyes  therewith.  Probatum! 

A  Water  for  all  Sorts  of  Injuries. 

Take  blue  vitriol,  white  rose  water,  turpentine,  aquafortis 
and  bon  together  until  it  becomes  an  ointment,  and  then  apply. 

When  a  Woman  arrives  at  Change  of  IAfe. 

Aaron  roots  boiled  in  old  wine,  and  of  this  beverage  drlnir 
before  breakfast,  and  evenings  before  going  to  bed. 

For  Swollen  Shanks  or  Arms. 

Take  brown  hartshorn  spirits,  some  camphor  spirits,  three 
ounces  opodeldoc,  and  with  it  grease  the  limbs. 

To  be  Sure  of  Three  Certain  Shots  per  Day. 

Take  the  heart  of  a  whoop,  hang  it  under  the  right  arm 
whenever  you  fire  a  shot. 

To  Kill  Powder. 

Take  half  of  a  pound  of  gunpowder,  three  drachms  saltpetre, 
three  drachms  campnor,  three  drachms  chalk,  one  handful  ot 
Juniper  tree  iouage.  Let  stand  two  or  three  days.  Probatum. 


ALBERTOS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


104 


How  to  Prevent  Feeling  Cold  in  Winter. 

Take  nettlewort,  garlic,  pour  lard  to  It,  and  boil  together. 
Whoa  hand*  and  fact  are  greased  with  this  ointment,  one  will 
not  feel  cold. 

To  Catch  many  Fiehee. 

Take  rose  corn  and  mustard  grain,  and  the  foot  of  a  weasel. 
Hang  them  In  a  net,  and  the  fish  will  there  congregate. 

When  a  Horse  hoe  Overleaped  Himself, 

Speak  thus:  Brese  is  the  wound,  the  hour  blessed  and 
sound.  Happy  is  the  man  who  is  able  to  cure  this  horse, 
t  t  t  Three  times. 

An  Old  Drink  for  Horses  and  Cattle . 

Take  dragon's  blood,  native  antimony,  white  rock  oil,  saff¬ 
ron,  of  each  five  cents'  worth,  and  one  egg.  AH  of  this  mixed 
in  a  pint  of  wine  and  given  as  a  drink. 

When  Labor  is  Difficult. 

Give  her  another’s  milk  to  drink,  or  a  parsnip  which  must 
be  finely  bruised;  tie  the  same  over  the  body,  she  will  soon 
be  easy  and  come  to  rest. 

Yellow  Jaundice  of  Men  and  Women. 

Take  felder  roots,  the  middle  bark,  scrape  it  and  boil  it,  and 
give  every  two  hours,  two  or  three  tablespoonfuls  for  a  period 
of  six  mornings  and  evenings. 

For  Felons  on  Men  and  Beasts. 

t  Ribhq  t  Hasba  f  E  b  n  L  H 
a  t  KacKaabula  t  KasHaS 
t  a  f  a  o  t  b  t  o  ttfof 

Write  the  above  upon  a  scrap  of  paper,  and  put  upon  the 
sore  spot. 

tf  you  Desire  to  Becurely  Shoot,  put  under  the  Barrel  of  year 

Oun,Xtc.,  the  following: 

D.  BWDWSHHDF8KOMWVR 
VJSKNuFMUBSOMi 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


105 


To  be  Secure  against  a  Shot. 

O  Josaphat,  o  Tomosath,  o  Plasorath;  these  words  pro¬ 
nounce  backward  Jarot  three  times. 

When  a  Person  has  an  Open  Cranium. 

Lift  your  head  upward  to  heaven.  I  view  in  the  realms 
above,  I  view  the  house  of  God  in  love.  It  looks  upon  me,  the 
Holy  Trinity,  who  can  allay  my  troubled  head,  t  t  t 

When  a  Horse  is  Foundered. 

Give  iron  herb  (vervain)  with  the  feed,  it  helps  surely. 


For  Yellow  Knots  on  Cattle. 


Master  wort, 
Castornell  wort, 
Tormentil  wort, 
Juniper  berries. 


4  ounces  Vines  of  rue, 

4  “  Wormwood  seed, 

4  “  Burnt  hartshorn,  3  o*., 

4  “  Black  sulphur,  and 

Red  Antimonium. 

Of  all  these  articles  make  a  powder,  and  give  to  old  cattle 
from  one  to  two  ounces  every  morning  before  feeding,  then 
let  it  stand  for  two  hours  and  after  this  feed  it,  but  give  no 
drink  before  evening. 


When  an  Animal  becomes  Suddenly  III  and  Remains  Motion¬ 
less. 

This  is  a  certain  indication  of  internal  inflammation.  Take 
two  spoonfuls  of  fresh  ashes  and  a  half  a  spoonful  of  gun¬ 
powder,  one  quart  of  cow’s  milk,  pour  it  altogether;  or,  make 
a  lye  of  grape-vine  ashes  mixed  with  goats’  milk,  to  measure 
altogether  one  quart.  In  case  goats’  milk  cannot  be  obtained, 
take  sweet  oil  for  ten  cents,  and  mix  it.  with  the  lye.  Pour  it 
out  to  the  animal  as  soon  as  the  above  indications  are  noticed 
It  will  surely  heip. 

If  you  have  given  these  prescribed  articles  lo  (he  animal, 
and  it  becomes  soon  better,  the  head  of  the  animal  should  be 
lifted  up  for  the  period  of  fifteen  minutes,  or  tic  the  same,  no 
that  the  blood  can  run  toward  the  hear)  But  if  the  aPmont 
is  on  a  foot,  the  animal  lifts  the  font  up  and  cannot  stand 
on  it,  in  such  a  case  take  two  spoonfuls  of  fresh  ashes,  one 
half  spoonful  of  black  sulphur,  one-half  upoonful  oi  gun- 


ALBERTOS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


1* 


powder,  end  one  pint  of  fresh  cow's  milk,  mix  this  well  and 
pour  into  the  sick  animal,  thereupon  take  hold  of  the  injured 
foot  If  the  skin  puffs  and  swells  and  showB  great  heat,  and 
aleo  rustles,  rub  the  leg  violently  toward  the  hoofs;  then  make 
a  bandage  of  a  flour-bag,  and  tie  the  foot  tightly  so  that  the 
heat  or  flux  may  not  be  able  to  extend  farther  upward,  there¬ 
upon  cut  the  skin  open  about  a  finger's  length  under  the  sore, 
and  press  it  well,  wash  out  with  brandy,  and  the  disease  will 
not  extend  any  further.  Then  withdraw  the  bandage  from 
the  foot,  take  fresh  glue  and  mix  it  with  vinegar  to  a  plaster, 
and  tie  it  upon  the  wound,  this  will  draw  the  heat  out. 

Great  care  is  to  be  taken  that  the  ailment  does  not  extend 
to  the  other  feet  But  should  the  heat  extend  upward,  take  a 
sharp  knife  and  cut  the  skin  open,  that  it  receives  air,  and 
apply  the  same  glue  and  vinegar  plaster  to  it;  or,  take  an  iron 
for  letting  blood,  and  with  it  slit  the  skin  whenever  the  dis¬ 
ease  shows  itself.  A  poisonous  steam  will  ooze  out,  and  thus 
the  animal  may  be  kept  alive.  All  this  must  be  done,  how¬ 
ever,  before  twelve  hours  elapse. 

For  Stoppage  of  Water  in  Man  or  Woman. 

Take  rock  flint  stone,  five  cents;  emetic  tartar  water,  ten 
eents;  crab’s  eye,  -five  cents;  one  handful  of  cornelllan  cher¬ 
ries,  and  a  small  glass  of  brandy.  All  this  mix  well,  and  par¬ 
take  two  or  three  times  thereof.  It  will  surely  help. 

An  Excellent  Remedy  for  Apoplexy. 

Take  a  considerable  portion  of  linden-tree  blossoms  and 
May  flowers,  six  ounces  of  fresh  bay  leaves,  bruise  in  a  mortar 
to  a  mush.  Then  take  a  pint  of  blue  violet  sap,  in  this  dis¬ 
solve  hrhlte  rock  candy  sugar  as  much  as  will  dissolve  therein; 
pour  this  over  the  mush  and  mix  well  in  the  mortar  Then 
strain  all  the  juice  out  through  a  cloth;  wormwood  salt  dis¬ 
solved  in  a  half  pint  )s  added  thereto  and  all  is  to  be  rectified 
in  a  retort,  also  through  an  alembic  distil  so  that  no  phlegm 
remains  in  the  mixture.  Thus  an  excellent  spirit  will  be  ob¬ 
tained,  which  must  be  kept  In  a  glass  vessel  hermetically 
■sued. 

Whoever  is  attacked  with  apoplexy  may  take  one-half  tea- 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


107 


spoonful  of  this  spirit  dissolved  in  linden  blossom  water,  or 
other  distilled  water  in  good  wine,  etc.  It  will  certainly  prove 
a  good  remedy,  and  secure  good  health  for  future. 

For  Colic. 

Take  a  handful  of  camomile  flowers,  boil  them  in  goats' 
milk.  Pour  it  out  to  the  horse.  It  is  a  good  remedy. 

When  a  Person  suffers  from  a  heavy  Fall,  Etc. 

Take  hot  ashes,  six  ounces  filings,  four  ounces  gold-litharge, 
three  ounces  oil  of  turpentine,  two  ounces  oil  of  roses  or  olive 
oil. 

These  articles  mix  together,  and  boil  till  the  matter  be¬ 
comes  like  an  ointment,  grease  a  piece  of  linen  with  it,  and 
apply  to  the  injured  part. 

When  the  Lungs  and  Liver  of  Cattle  are  Diseased. 

Take  green  juniper  berries  and  gentian  and  lung  herbs, 

make  powder  thereof;  give  it  a  few  times  to  the  cattle.  It 

will  certainly  alleviate. 

When  a  Horst'  has  Hair  Worms. 

Take  ginger,  pepper,  chicken  manure,  warm  cow  manure 
and  vinegar;  mix  together,  and  pour  it  out  to  the  horse  for  a 
drink.  Probatum. 

For  Swellings. 

Take  hempseed,  wool  herbs,  carrots.  and  boil  in  vinegar. 

Make  a  tepid  poultice  thereof,  and  apply  to  the  swelling,  be 

it  evon  near  the  heart.  A  quick  relief  will  rewmd  the  trouble. 

For  Coagulated  lilood  i»;  I  nubs. 

Take  oil  of  dill  and  grease  the  limbs  therewith.  It  helps. 

Cot  Proud  Flesh. 

Take  copper  water  one  ounce,  white  bees’-wax,  rosin  and 
olive  oil.  Pound  and  mix  together.  Apply  .to  the  flesh.  It  de 
stroys  the  proud  tleuk 

ror  Swelled  Knees. 

Take  neinpsoed,  mangolt,  dog’s  wort,  pound  them,  add 
vinegar;  let  them  boil  and  apply  in  tepid  temperature.  Or 
take  honey,  oakum  and  vinegar,  boil  together,  and  apply  in 
ymltice  form. 


lot 


ALBERTOS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


When  the  Breast  of  a  Horse  4*  Swollen. 

Take  tallow  from  a  back  as  lard,  saffron,  tree-salt,  wool  oil, 
gunpowder,  linseed  oil;  mix  together,  and  apply  as  a  plaster. 

For  all  aorta  of  Brtoat  Swellings,  Heart  Swellings,  or  Swell¬ 
ings  of  th€  Genital  Organs  of  Animals. 

Take  skunk  cabbage  herb,  linseed,  wool  herbs,  red  bolus; 
mix  together,  and  apply  as  a  plaster. 

For  the  Glanders  of  Horses. 

Take  sweet  oil,  mercury,  gunpowder  and  saltpetre,  mix  well 
together  and  pour  into  the  nostrils  of  the  horse,  or,  take  the 
blood  of  a  white  goose^  chicken  manure,  sweet  oil,  and  salt¬ 
petre,  put  this  also  into  the  nostrils. 

When  a  Horse  has  the  Staggers. 

Take  the  white  of  several  eggs,  one  quart  of  sweet  oil;  mix 
and  pour  it  before  feeding  into  the  horse’s  throat.  Probatum. 

For  the  breaking  out  of  Felons. 

Take  Venetian  glass,  pulverise  it,  Spanish  pepper,  honey  and 
winter  galls;  mix  together,  spread  it  upon  a  stone-bear-cloth 
and  apply  to  the  horse’s  sores;  let  it  remain  for  three  days 
and  the  worm  will  ooze  out. 

Another  Remedy  for  the  same  Ailment. 

Take  cooper’s  water,  filings,  verdigris,  linseed  oil,  mllano 
pepper.  Of  these  make  an  ointment,  and  apply  to  the  felon. 

When  it  becomes  Difficult  to  Churn. 

Put  the  following  words  into  the  stirring  dish  or  churn: — 

Gillicum,  Punctum,  Satbot,  Jesus  Nasarenus,  holy  King  of 
the  Jews,  t  t  t 

An  Ointment  for  all  kinds  of  Wounds. 

Take  deer’s  tallow,  beefs  marrow,  chicken  fat,  coal  oil, 
sweet  oil;  mix  all  well  together. 

To  Stop  the  Water  in  cases  of  Dropsy. 

Take  leaven  from  a  baker,  tie  it  around  the  ailing  member, 
then  bum  the  leaven  to  powder  and  blow  into  the  sore. 

Or:  Take  laurel  leaves,  pulverise  them,  and  apply  to  the 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS 


109 


injured  parts,  or  take  the  dandruff  of  a  horse's  head  and  put 
it  into  the  wound. 

Or:  Powdered  dog’s  waste. 

A  Go^i  Ointment. 

White  rosin,  five  cents,  linseed  oil,  five  cents;  wagon 
grease,  three  cents:  two  handfuls  of  lamp  black,  the  white  of 
three  eggs,  dust  apple,  and  boil  together. 

To  make  a  good  Green  Salve. 

Butter,  tire  cents;  Grease,  five  cents; 

Halm  Oil,  five  cents;  Verdigris,  five  cents; 

mix  together;  or  take  ashes,  lard,  and  anguish  honey,  of  a 
like  Quantity,  and  make  an  ointment  thereof  by  mixing. 

A  Good  Ointment  for  Wounds. 

Take  a  quart  of  flrtree-harz  or  rosin,  same  quantity  of  wax, 
also  of  wagon  grease  and  tallow,  the  same  quantity.  Put  all 
of  these  ingredients  into  an  unglazed  pot  and  boil,  after  this 
mix  turpentine  oil  with  it. 

To  make  a  Splendid  Horn  Salve. 

Take  tallow,  wax,  grease,  beef’s  marrow  and  oil  of  turpen¬ 
tine,  and  mix  all  these  articles  well.  Or  take  five  grains  chlor¬ 
ide  of  antimony,  hog’s  lard,  hoof  lard,  sugar  honey,  sheep 
tallow,  olive  oil,  linseed  oil,  and  mix  all  these  articles  together. 

For  a  Felon. 

Red  bolus,  two  spoonfuls  ground;  alantis  root,  two  spoonfuls 
ground;  seventree,  two  spoonfuls  ground;  acorns,  two  spoon¬ 
fuls  ground;  white  bolus,  two  spoonfuls  ground;  white  chalk, 
two  spoonfuls  ground;  garlic,  three  spoonfuls  ground;  as- 
safcetida,  five  cents’  worth;  pulverize  and  mix  well  together. 

This  give  to  a  horse  mornings,  before  feeding,  in  fresh 
water.  After  this  burn  a  mole,  powder  it,  and  strew  into  the 
wound. 

For  old  Sores  which  no  Person  could  Heal. 

Take  sassafras  and  sarsaparilla  for  ten  cents;.  Indian  boiufi 
and  coral  bolus,  each  for  twdnty  cents. 


no 


ALBERTOS  MAGNUS;  OR. 


For  the  Prolapsus. 

Three  women  are  sitting  on  the  sands,  they  have  intestines 
in  their  hands — of  man,  horse  or  cattle,  they  are — the  first 
matron  moves  it,  the  second  closes  it,  the  third  puts  it  in 
shape  again,  t  t  t 

For  St.  Anthony's  Fire  for  Cattle. 

Inscribe  upon  a  scrap  of  paper,  this: 

Aoo,  Maoo,  Magola. 

Give  it  to  the  cattle  to  eat 

To  Compel  the  Return  of  Stolen  Goods. 

Take  off  the  left  shoe,  and  with  the  left  foot  advance  when 
you  step  out,  and  put  manure  upon  the  big  toe,  hold  the  left 
foot  out.  Make  a  fire  of  grape  vine  wood  at  twelve  at  mid¬ 
night,  throw  the  manure  into  the  fire  in  the  devil's  name  and 
speak.  Ensuer,  this  I  throw  upon  the  burn,  so  long  till  the 
thief  returns  my  stolen  goods,  as  sure  as  God  hath  cast  thee 
into  the  abyss  of  hell,  when  the  thief  retiarns  my  own,  bid  him 
leave  in  the  devil’s  name.  Probatum  esL 

The  Costweness  of  Horses. 

Take  a  handful  of  oak  lung  herbs  and  a  handful  of  veronica, 
a  handful  swallow  roots,  and  a  pint  of  water.  Boil  all  of 
these;  it  is  good  for  the  purpose. 

For  Bewitched  Cattle. 

Sulphur,  five  cents;  Magic  balm,  five  cents. 

Balsam,  five  cents;  Mithridat,  five  cents. 

Blue  finherb  water,  five  cents. 

Mix  these  all  together,  and  give  at  once  to  drink.  Probatum. 
But  this  must  be  given  while  the  cow  is  being  milked. 

A  Certain  Remedy  for  Stubborn  Horses. 

Native  antimony,  five  cents;  copper  water,  five  cents;  vitriol, 
five  cents;  oleum  philos,  five  cents;  half  of  these  must  be 
burnt;  the  other  half  dissolve  in  twelve  quarts  of  water,  of 
vitriol  and  copper,  put  half  of  each  into  the  water,  likewise 
ashes  of  grape  vines  and  old  shoes  pulverised.  Put  this  into 
the  injury  and  wash  clean  with  water.  Repeat  twice  or  three 
times  per  day. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


Ill 


For  Marasmus  of  Children. 

The  child  must  be  carried  in  the  morning  toward  the  rising 
Bun,  then  speak:  Be  welcome  in  the  name  of  God,  thou  sun¬ 
shine,  whence  comest  thou  so  mild,  help  me  and  my  dear  child. 
God  the  heavenly  Father,  pray,  that  my  child  help  he  may. 
Beseech  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  by  the  heavenly  host  he  may  re¬ 
turn  the  natural  blood  and  flesh  unto  my  child. 

That  no  Person  will  Deny  Anything  to  you. 

Take  a  rooster,  three  years  old,  throw  it  into  a  new  earthen 
pot,  and  pierce  it  through,  then  put  it  into  an  ant’s  hill,  and 
let  it  remain  until  the  ninth  day  thereafter,  then  take  it  out 
again  and  you  will  find  in  its  head  a  white  stone,  which  you 
must  carry  on  your  person,  and  then  nobody  will  deny  you 
anything. 

For  Lung  Disease. 

Pour  milk  in  the  ear. 

Alum,  five  cents;  blue  vitriol,  one  grain;  sulphur,  five 
cents;  sulphur  flowers,  five  cents;  laurel-leave  flour,  five  cents. 
Take  a  good  glassful  of  wine  vinegar  and  one  glassful  of  old 
wine;  mix  well  together,  and  give  it  in  the  drink  of  the  sick 
animal. 

For  an  Open  Head. 

Now  protect  thy  head  the  name  of  God,  I  looked  from  out 
the  window,  and  beheld  the  mansion  of  God,  I  saw  a  man  pure 
and  white,  who  can  bless  thy  head  and  grant  thee  blissfulness, 
t  t  t 

That  no  Horse  will  get  Blind. 

Take  quail’s  lard,  put  it  in  the  eyes  twice  per  day,  and  hang 
saladine  herbs  around  its  neck.  Such  a  horse  will  never  be¬ 
come  blind. 

For  the  Jaundice  of  Horses. 

Take  sour  or  bitter  mustard,  and  mix  with  it  the  feed  for 
the  horse.  It  will  recover  at  once. 

To  Btop  the  Blood. 

Three  roses  upon  God’s  acre  stood — the  one  is  called  humil¬ 
ity,  the  other  gentleness,  the  third  stops  the  blood,  t  t  t 


112 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


When  a  Person  cannot  hold  his  Water. 

Take  three  pinches  of  egg-shell  powder,  of  eggs  from  which 
the  young  chicks  came  out. 

For  Pestilence  write  over  the  Door: 

1.  t  2.  7,  D.  1.  A.  t  B  I  2.  S.  A.  V.  t  2 
t,  H.  6  f.  t.  B.  F.  2.  S.  1 1  t 

For  Robbers  and  Thieves! 

I  conjure  thee,  by  the  holy  rose-colored  blood,  that  thou  wilt 
do  no  injury  to  my  body  or  life,  and  to  this  end  may  God  aid 
me.  God  the  Father,  God  the  Son  and  Holy  Ghost  Gun  re¬ 
tain  thy  fire  and  shot,  as  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  kept 
meekly  upon  the  cross. 


For  the  Fever. 

Take  ten  cents’  worth  of  broom  kerbel,  powder  dry,  put 
these  into  a  glass  of  old  wine,  and  let  it  stand  twenty-four 
hours.  Whenever  the  fever  comes  make  two  portions  of  the 
mixture,  and  take  the  greater  part  thereof,  and  eat  nothing  for 
half  an  hour  afterward;  then  take  the  remaining  part  and 
fast  for  one  hour. 

To  Discern  the  Thief  who  Robbed  you. 

Take  the  seed  of  sunflowers,  which  you  must  gather  in  the 
sign  of  the  Lion  in  the  month  of  August.  Wrap  the  same  up 
over  a  wolf’s  tooth;  then  take  a  bay  leaf  and  wrap  the  tooth 
therein,  then  take  the  tooth,  put  it  above  your  head,  and  you 
will  see  the  thief. 

For  the  Monkfall  of  Cattle. 

Take  one-h&lf  of  a  pound  of  blue  lily  rocks;  three  handfuls 
of  bleached  barley;  one  quart  of  wine;  one  half  pint  of 
water;  boil  all  these  together  to  a  mush;  divide  into  three 
parts  for  three  drinks.  Repeat  every  six  hours.  Probatum. 

Another. 

Obtain  one  half  of  a  quart  of  slakening  water  from  an 
apothecary,  alum  for  five  cents;  mix  with  this  water,  and 
give  it  to  the  old  cattle  to  drink.  /It  helps. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


113 


When  Cattle  are  Swelled. 

Take  quarter  of  an  ounce  of  Dutch  snuff,  put  it  into  the 
cattle’s  throat,  so  as  it  must  swallow  the  stuff.  It  is  a  -sudden 
cure. 

To  Purify  the  Blood. 

Five  cents’  worth  tincture  of  myrrh;  pint  of  wine;  mix 
and  let  it  stand  over  night.  Mornings  before  breakfast  take 
a  wine-glass  full  thereof.  It  helps. 

A  certain  Remedy  for  the  Eyes. 

Take  a  jug  which  holds  a  pint,  put  waywort  flowers  therein. 
Seal  it  hermetically,  and  inter  it  for  a  period  of  fourteen  days 
in  a  climber  heep  (sweepings),  then  take  the  water  and  wash 
your  eyes  therewith. 

When  a  Person  cannot  pass  Water. 

Take  rock-flint,  burning  water,  crab’s  eyes,  a  handful  of 
cornelian  cherries,  add  a  glass  of  brandy.  Take  this  two  or 
three  times.  It  helps. 

Gold  Roots  for  the  Teething  of  Children. 

When  children  are  teething  suspend  gold  roots  around  their 
necks,  and  they  will  get  their  teeth  without  pain.  Such  root, 
carried  on  your  person,  secures  the  wearer  against  all  harm. 

Waywort!  heals  heart  woe  and  stomach  pain.  Whoever  car¬ 
ries  the  roots  on  his  person  his  eyes  will  be  cured.  Dog’s 
dribbling  and  chacis  waxes  and  vanes  like  the  moon,  its  flow¬ 
ers  heal  those  who  suffers  from  too  large  a  spleen  or  milt. 

Nasturtian  roots  powdered,  and  laid  upon  the  eyes,  give 
clear  and  brilliant  eyes.  The  sap  to  drink  will  cure  liver  com¬ 
plaint;  whoever  carries  the  root  on  his- person  will  be  favored 
by  the  ladies.  Taken  in  food,  it  is  good  for  cancer. 

When  you  catch  a  whoop,  you  will  find  a  stone,  which  you 
must  put  under  the  head  of  a  sleeping  person,  and  that  person 
will  be  compelled  to  impart  to  you  all  secrets  which  he  may 
know.  If  you  carry  a  badger’s  foot  with  you,  all  your  affairs 
will  be  fortunate,  and  you  will  not  be  perplexed,  nor  err. 

Whoop  eyes  make  a  man  benign.  If  you  carry  the  eye  with 
you  you  will  be  in  good  repute  by  the  authorities;  and  if  you 
will  carry  the  head  no  one  will  cheat  you. 


114 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


If  you  carry  the  head  of  a  crow  upon  your  breast,  all  must 
love  you  who  have  dealings  with  you. 

When  you  catch  a  mole  and  put  it  into  a  pot,  while  it  lives, 
and  ignite  sulphur,  all  moles  will  gather  together. 

When  you  put  a  mole  into  an  earthen  pot,  and  boil  the 
same,  and  with  this  water  wash  the  hair,  the  hair  will  turn 
white. 

During  the  month  of  August  take  a  swallow  from  its  nest. 
In  its  stomach  you  will  find  a  stone,  which  you  may  wrap  into 
a  linen  handkerchief,  hang  under  your  left  arm.  It  is  a  good 
thing  against  slanderers,  and  makes  you  agreeable  among  the 
people. 

A  snail  is  said  to  have  a  starlet  in  its  head,  and  when  found 
it  is  good  for  one  who  is  afflicted  with  kidney  disease. 

When  a  Person  has  Sprained  Himself. 

Take  juniper  berries  and  hay  flowers,  bruise  them  and  boil 
in  good  old  wine.  Apply  as  a  poultice. 

For  the  Breaking  of  Felons. 

Take  Venetian  glass,  half  an  ounce  of  pepper,  honey,  beef 
gall.  Mix  all  these  articles  and  pound  them.  Spread  them 
upon  a  hairy  cloth,  and  tie  around  .the  felon  of  the  horse.  Let 
it  remain  from  three  to  four  days. 

For  the  Felons. 

Give  the  first  three  scraps  from  the  hoof  of  a  horse  which  is 
being  shod  for  the  first  time. 

When  a  Horse  has  Eaten  some  Impure  Stuff. 

Take  two  quarts  of  water,  put  some  Venetian  soap  therein, 
and  make  a  good  lather.  Mix  for  drink,  warm. 

Or:  Take  alum  for  five  cents;  cream  tartar,  five  cents; 
saltpetre,  five  cents;  red  bolus,  three  cents;  sternutative  pow¬ 
der,  two  cents;  Spanish  pepper,  stonebreak,  blue  vitriol,  white 
vitriol,  dragon’s  blood,  grey  sulphur,  laurel  leaves. 

Have  these  ingredients  mixed  and  pounded  together.  Take 
the  first  day  one  point  of  a  knifeful,  morning  and  evenings, 
followed  by  common  nettle  seed  powdered  in  wine  sweetened 
with  honey.  It  will  relieve  an  old  cough  and  clears  the  breast, 
causes  easy  breathing  and  is  good  for  cold  on  the  lungs. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


115 


Another  Cure  for  Dysentery. 

Acron-Copaulus  grind  to  powder,  and  take  every  morning 
three  pinches  thereof,  or  as  much  as  will  lay  upon  the  point 
of  a  tableknife,  three  times. 

Still  Another. 

Take  a  small  glassful  of  brandy,  the  yolk  of  a  fresh  laid 
egg,  and  put  it  in  the  brandy.  Mix  the  yellow  well  with  the 
brandy.  Give  this  to  the  patient.  It  helps  at  once. 

For  Gangrene,  Hot  or  Cold. 

Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  went  over  the  land.  He  blessed  the 
«old  and  warm  brand,  that  the  warm  brand  may  not  burn  him, 
and  not  take  hold  of  the  body  till  the  mother  of  God  will  bear 
another  son.  t  t  t 

For  Dysentery. 

Boil  an  egg  and  eat  it  as  hot  as  you  can,  without  bread  or 
salt. 

For  the  Water  between  the  Skin  and  Flesh. 

Take  dog’s  bone,  burn  it  to  powder,  and  strew  it  into  the 
wounds.  It  is  a  sure  remedy. 

When  a  Cow  Loses  her  Milk. 

Give  to  such  a  cow  some  of  her  own  milk,  or  take  the  milk 
pail,  and  milk  the  cow  upon  the  bottom  of  the  pail,  in  the 
high  name  of  God,  and  draw  a  cross  with  a  knife  through  the 
milk  upon  the  bottom  of  the  pail,  and  stab  into  it  After  this 
pour  the  milk  in  a  running  water,  down  the  stream. 

When  a  Horse  has  Worms. 

Take  vinegar  and  egg  shells,  chimney  soot  and  pepper.  Mix 
all  together,  give  it  to  the  horse,  and  the  worms  will  all  die. 

When  a  Horse  is  badly  Shot. 

Take  waywort  knots,  of  an  uneven  number,  ana  lay  them 
upon  the  sore  hoof. 

When  a  Horse  is  Stabbed  and  Bleeds. 

Take  lard  and  a  hot  iron,  and  let  the  blood  run  upon  it.  t  t  t 


116 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


For  the  Flesh  Worms  of  Cattle. 

Cut,  on  a  Good  Friday,  before  sunrise,  alderwood,  without 
making  a  noise,  and  make  a  block  of  it  Probatum. 

For  Flux,  Catarrh  and  Sorcery. 

Speak  in  the  name  of  God  the  Father,  and  the  Son,  and  the 
Holy  Ghost. 

Oh,  God!  I  know  not  what  has  happened  to  you.  Help 
thee,  God  the  Father  and  our  dear  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Alas! 
alack!  I  know  not  what  has  happened  to  you.  Help  thee. 
God  the  Son,  and  our  dear  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Ah,  God!  I 
know  not  what  has  happened  unto  thee.  Help  thee  God  the 
Holy  Ghost,  and  our  beloved  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  With  God 
the  Father  I  seek-  thee,  with  God  the  Son  I  find  thee,  with  God 
the  Holy  Ghost  I  drive  away  thy  coughing,  be  thou  palsy, 
vision  or  sorcery;  be  healed  on  this  very  day.  Heal,  heal! 
fast  and  quickly,  like  the  fast  running  sun  and  moon,  and  the 
>yind,  and  the  fast  spreading  Gospel,  which  the  Priest  reads 
at  Mass  time,  t  t  t  Three  times  spoken. 

When  an  Animal  Loses  its  Usefulness. 

DFWSHHDESSZUzeoWVTVTDVI17F9 
w  I  x  s  V  t  t  t 

For  Distempered  Horses. 

Take  one  ounce  of  rhubarb,  antimonium,  quarter  ounce 
black  snuff.  Pour  this  three  or  four  times  into  the  nostrils, 
but  mix  it  first  in  a  glassful  of  wine  and  vinegar. 

For  Bewitched  Cattle. 

Take  five  cents’  worth  of  sulphur  balsam,  five  cents’  worth 
of  magic  balsam,  five  cents’  worth  of  mithridat,  and  five  cents’ 
worth  of  blue  tin  herb  water.  Mix  well  in  their  own  milk. 
Probatum. 

To  Cure  the  Headache. 

Take  carrot-sap,  and  inhale  it  through  the  nose,  and  yotu 
aching  head  will  be  cured  at  once. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


117 


An  Old  Drink  for  Horses  and  Cattle. 

Five  cents’  worth  of  dragon’s  blood,  five  cents’  worth  of 
antimony,  five  cents’  worth  of  white  rock  oil,  five  cents’  worth 
of  saffron,  and  one  egg.  All  poured  together  in  a  pint  of  wine. 

An  Amulet  for  the  Colic. 

Staftfotr,  AtrfetP  tof 
Ttefnte  t  t,  O  t  P  t  e  t  r  t  »  t 
R  t  o  f  t  t  a  s 

When  a  Woman  cannot  Bear  Easy. 

Inscribe  upon  a  wooden  plate  the  above  amulet,  then  wash 
it  off  with  wine,  and  give  it  to  the  woman  to  drink. 

To  Heal  Burns. 

Take  linseed  oil  and  wax,  of  one  as  much  as  of  the  other, 
and  render  in  a  pan  together.  Paint  the  sore  with  a  feather, 
mornings  and  evenings.  Probatum. 

For  the  Cattle. 

With  God  the  Father  I  seek  thee,  with  God  the  Son  I  find 
thee,  with  God  the  Holy  Ghost  I  drive  thee  away,  t  t  t 
To  Heal  Injuries  on  Man ,  Cattle  or  Horse. 

Cut  down  a  burdock  bush,  and  put  it  into  your  house,  so 
that  it  may  wither.  Then  take  a  thread  from  a  reel  which 
had  never  been  washed,  and  speak:  Burdock  bush,  I  bind  thee 
that  thou  shalt  heal  the  injury  of  this  man  (or  beast,  as  the 
case  may  be),  be  it  boils,  sores,  gout,  swellings,  or  whatever 
it  may  be.  Double  the  thread,  and  move  around  the  bush, 
where  the  thickest  part  is,  in  the  name  of  God  the  Father, 
and  make  a  knot,  then  repeat  the  same  in  the  name  of  God  the 
Son,  and  make  another  knot,  and  repeat  the  same  motion, 
while  saying  in  the  name  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  again  make 
a  knot,  and  say  then:  What  I  and  thou  cannot  heal,  that  may 
heal  the  Holy  Trinity.  After  this,  put  the  bush  in  a  place 
where  no  air  moves,  and  the  injury  will  be  healed  from  the 
*©ot.  Probatum. 

To  Make  Yourself  Invisible. 

Pierce  the  right  eye  of  a  bat,  and  carry  it  with  you,  and  you 

will  be  invisible. 


118 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


For  the  Founder  of  a  Horse. 

Let  such  an  afflicted  horse  drink  the  water  wherein  a  gown 
was  washed,  and  which  she  wore  daring  the  time  of  her  illness, 
and  the  ailment  will  soon  vanish. 

To  Quench  a  Fire. 

Run  three  times  around  the  lire,  and  say:  Fire,  thou  hot 
flame,  Christ  the  worthy  map  rules  thee.  Thou  fire,  stand 
still.  It  is  my  will.  Do  not  spread  out  any  further.  In  the 
name  of  God  the  Father,  God  the  Son,  and  God  the  Holy 
Spirit.  Amen. 

When  you  Hear  Something  said,  that  you  may  not  Forget  it. 

Take  the  heart  of  a  swallow,  boil  it  in  milk,  and  carry  it 
on  your  person,  and  you  will  remember  all  you  hear. 

When  Cattle  have  Soft  Feet. 

Take  five  cents’  worth  of  aquafortis,  fifteen  cents'  worth  of 
brandy,  three  or  four  eggs,  and  put  all  into  a  dish,  and  let  it 
remain  a  while.  It  will  cook  itself.  With  this  grease  the 
hoofs  every  day  two  or  three  times. 

When  Cattle  are  Costive. 

Cut  soap  into  five  pieces,  put  them  into  a  pint  of  milk,  warm 
it,  and  give  it  to  the  cattle  twice.  It  is  a  sure  remedy. 

When  a  Sore  on  a  Horse  Breaks  Oven. 

fake  laurel  leaves,  grind  them  to  powder,  put  them  into  the 
sore,  and  tie  it  with  hemp  oakum. 

To  Still  the  Wild  Water. 

Take  an  apple  of  a  hawthorn  bush,  let  it  dry,  pulverise  it, 
put  it  into  the  boil,  and  it  will  cease  at  once. 

For  Shooting  Pains . 

Carry  upon  your  body: 

A  RILL.  AT.  GOLL.  GOTTZO. 

For  Bewitched  Cattle. 

Take  retting  mugwort  (artemisia  on  the  evening  of  the  day 
of  Philippi  and  Jacobi.)  and  put  over  the  door  where  the  cattl* 
go  in  and  out,  and  no  cattle  can  be  bewitched.  Probatum. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


119 


For  Suppurating  Limbs  (Sweeny)  on  Man  or  Beast. 

Suppuration  and  foul  matter,  I  forbid  thee  the  blood  of  my 
cattle,  (or  of  human  beings),  the  blood  and  flesh,  marrow 
and  bone,  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  in  thfe  name  of  God 
the  Father,  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost.  Toward  the  rising 
sun,  three  Fridays  in  succession,  and  before  the  rising  of 
the  same,  also  three  succeeding  Fridays,  this  must  be  done, 
always  rubbing,  with  both  nands  from  above  downward.  Al¬ 
ways  to  repeat  three  times,  and  always  to  recite  three  Lord 
Prayers  and  three  Creeds.  Probatum. 

When  the  Teeth  of  Cattle  are  getting  Soft. 

Take  a  handful  of  mush  meal,  put  it  upon  the  lid  of  an 
earthen  pot,  let  it  get  hot,  and  then  rub  the  teeth  of  the  cattle 
therewith.  Probatum. 

For  the  Sprains  of  Cattle. 

Call  the  cattle  by  name  and  speak:  Hast  thou  sprained, 
wrenched,  or  overstepped  thyself,  the  sprains  or  oversteppings 
shall  never  hurt  you.  Our  Lord  Jesus  was  innocently  cruoi- 
fled,  and  it  did  not  hurt  him,  so  the  sprains  and  wrenched 
limbs  will  never  hurt  thee  in  the  least,  t  t  t 

That  nothing  Serious  may  ever  Happen  to  Cattle  during  the 

Entire  Year. 

During  Good  Friday  night  between  the  hours  of  eleven  and 
twelve,  you  must  rub  every  animal,  cattle  or  horse,  etc.,  over 
the  back,  and  stroke  with  your  right  hand  in  the  three  highest 
names,  three  times,  and  speak;  This  I  do  unto  thee  for  boils 
and  tumors,  wild  blood,  griping  pains  and  colic,  and  for  all 
ailments  and  injuries,  and  for  all  bad  people  who  by  night 
will  plague  thee,  t  t  t  Then  you  must  cut  a  cross  on  the 
tail  of  the  cattle,  and  also  make  a  little  incision  on  both 
points  of  the  ears,  thus  nothing  serious  will  happen  during 
the  entire  year. 

Take  bay  leaves  five  cents,  for  five  cent6  arrow  root,  engian, 
linden  tree  fungus,  larch  tree  fungus,  pepper,  assatetida,  one 
load  of  gunpowder  and  a  nutmeg,  all  dissolved  in  one  quart 
of  wine,  to  be  taken  as  hot  as  possible. 


J20 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


To  Heal  Swellings. 

Bruise  common  nettles,  such  as  have  a  white  blossom,  tie 
these  over  the  sores,  and  the  swelling  will  vanish.  This  rem* 
edy  is  also  good  when  the  boils  are  accompanied  by  erysipelas 

For  Horny  Excrescences  or  Spavin. 

Take  mustard  flour,  make  a  plaster  thereof  by  mixing  it 
with  saliva.  Apply  to  the  injury  three  mornings  in  succession. 

To  make  the  Hair  Grow  wherever  you  Chose. 

Take  dog’s  milk  and  paint  the  spot  therewith,  wherever  you 
fish  to  have  the  hair  grow.  It  will  surely  grow. 

To  Extirpate  a  Tumor  and  Abscess. 

Proceed  to  the  place  where  carrions  are  placed,  and  obtain 
a  >iece  of  an  old  bone,  with  it  rub  the  tumor,  then  bury  this 
be  le  under  the  spout  of  the  roof,  where  neither  sun  nor  moon 
sh.nes  or  darts  any  rays.  The  ailment  will  vanish. 

For  a  Swollen  Foot  of  a  Horse. 

Take  potter’s  remnants  and  powder  made  from  an  old  shoe, 
also  a  handful  of  salt,  and  good  vinegar;  stir  it  all  together, 
paint  the  foot  all  over,  and  the  swelling  will  vanish. 

For  the  Killing  of  Hoof  Worms  in  Cattle. 

Christ  the  Lord  journeyed  over  the  acre,  upon  Joseph’s 
acre;  he  opens  three  furrows,  he  caught  three  worms;  the 
first  was  white,  the  other  was  black,  and  third  was  dead  and 
herewith  N.  N.,  all  thy  worms  are  dead,  t  t  t  Three  times. 

For  the ,  Erysipelas  of  Cattle. 

Prepare  a  good  wine  soup,  therein  scrape  two  nutmegs.  Let 
the  cattle  Irink  this.  The  disease  w:  l  disappear. 

For  Rotten  Lungs  of  Cattle. 

Arrow  root,  five  cents;  saltpetre,  fiv,e  cents;  red  bolus,  three 
^ents;  sternutative  powder,  one  cent;  blue  vitriol,  three  cents; 
dragon  s  blood,  five  cents;  laurel  leaves,  three  cents;  verdigris, 
three  cents;  cream  a  tartar,  two  cents;  Spanish  pepper,  two 
cents;  chipped  stone,  one  cent;  white  vitriol,  three  cents;  mix 
all  together  and  pulverize.  Mix  with  a  little  wine  vinegar, 
and  put  a  small  quantity  into  the  nostrils  of  the  sick  cattle. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


121 


For  Swollen  Udder. 

Three  matron*  traveled  over  Mount  Sinai,  the  first  spake: 
My  cow  has  swelled  teats;  the  other  said:  It  may  be;  the 
third  apake:  It  be  so,  or  it  is  so;  so  help  her  the  name  Jesus 
Christ,  t  t  t  Three  times. 

For  the  Inflammation  of  Cattle. 

When  cattle  remain  still  in  one  place  without  moving,  this 
is  a  sign  at  inward  burning  fever.  Take  native  sulphur,  white 
chalk,  and  gunpowder,  grind  it  to  a  fine  powder.  Take  of 
these  ingredients  half  a  spoonful,  also  a  fresh  laid  egg;  mix 
all  these  articles  with  fresh  vinegar,  and  pour  out  to  the 
cattle  for  a  drink.  After  this  tie  the  cow’s  head  up  for  a 
quarter  of  an  hour.  It  surely  helps,  and  the  cow  will  recover. 

For  Shrubby  Feet  of  Horses. 

Take  wheaten  flour,  boil  it  to  a  mush,  then  render  pitch 
into  it,  as  much  as  you  deem  necessary.  Thereof  make  a 
plaster,  put  it  upon  a  strong  cloth,  wrap  it  around  the  foot, 
let  it  remain  for  three  days,  after  this  tear  it  off;  and  the 
bristles  will  hang  to  the  plaster.  But  the  hair  must  before 
this  procedure  be  nicely  cut  off,  then  take  the  gown  of  a  fe¬ 
male,  wash  it,  wet  a  cloth  therein  and  lay  it  upon  the  horse’s 
foot 

A  Wholesome  Powder  which  Heals  all  sorts  of  Injuries 

Quickly. 

Take  wormwood  and  fern  leaves,  also  the  roots  of  these,  of 
the  latter  double  the  quantity,  bruise  the  herbs  and  mix  them 
together,  also  add  powdered  sugar,  and  take  lees  or  dregs  of 
wine  as  they  come  from  the  barrel;  all  these  articles  mix  and 
put  into  a  new  earthen  pot,  which  must  be  well  closed  and 
sealed  up,  to  prevent  evaporation.  Expose  the  pot  to  a  quick 
lire  until  the  contents  turn  to  a  powder.  This  powder  use 
for  the  injured  spots  or  parts.  It  will  certainly  help. 

To  Heal  up  Wounds. 

An  herb  called  buckwheat  corn,  has  long  stems,  the  root 
thereof  is  white  as  snow,  resembling  a  fine  hair.  Take  this 
herb,  and  boil  with  the  root  and  stem  in  wine  and  water,  and 
paint  the  woundB  therewith.  Probatura. 


122 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


A  Blessing  for  All. 

God  has  created  water  and  wine,  that  ailments  and  Injuries 
may  be  cured  inwardly  and  outwardly,  like  Lamas  pierced 
Christ's  right  side.  Thus  the  injury  may  not  bleed,  fester 
nor  swell,  t  t  t 

To  Heal  Open  Sores . 

Egypsiatum  is  a  balm  of  much  efficacy.  For  proud  flesh, 
use  vitriol  upon  the  sor  j,  this  will  eat  the  flesh  up. 

For  Flush  and  Rush  of  Blood. 

Oh,  thou  wild  accursed  flush  and  rush,  thou  hast  already 
raged  in  this  blood  and  flesh,  now  vanish  from  this  flesh  and 
blood,  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Spir¬ 
it.  One  glassful  of  vinegar  for  five  cents,  pepper  for  two 
cents,  and  a  little  saffron  added  thereto,  is  an  exoellent  rem¬ 
edy. 

When  Cattle  have  Broken  or  Sprained  Limbs— How  to  Cure 
them  without  having  seen  the  Injury. 

Call  the  name  of  cattle  and  that  of  its  owner,  and  proceed 
to  a  chair  or  bedstead,  and  take  the  foot,  front  or  rear,  right 
or  left,  into  both  of  your  hands  and  speak:  I  heal  thee  In 
the  name  of  God  the  Father,  and  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Spirit, 
who  believes  in  skill  of  science  still,  it  heals  as  fast  at  hie 
own  will,  t  t  t  Three  Lord’s  Prayers  and  three  Creeds,  re¬ 
cited  three  times  in  succession.  Probatum. 

For  the  Colic,  if  we  only  Know  the  Name  of  the  Patient. 

A  horn  of  a  deer,  a  piece  of  a  bread  crust,  a  glass  of  red 
wine.  These  three  pieces,  N.  N.,  shall  be  for  thy  colic  and 
womb.  Womb  so  good,  womb  God’s  blood,  womb  return  into 
thy  place,  womb  return  with  all  good  grace,  or  thy  flesh  and 
blood  wilt  enter  the  grave,  t  t  t 

To  Prevent  the  Milk  from  being  Taken  from  a  Cow. 

When  a  cow  has  calved,  press  a  whole  egg  into  her  throat 
and  during  this  same  year  no  one  can  take  her  milk  clan¬ 
destinely. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


123 


When  a  Man  has  Power  and  cannot  Urinate. 

Beg  for  a  sow’s  bladder,  for  God’s  sake,  and  fill  it  with  soft 
rain-water.  Then  tie  the  bladder  tight,  and  hang  it  in  the 
smoke,  and  drink  one  teaspoonful,  four  times  a  day. 

When  Cattle  are  Swelling  Up. 

Take  a  woman’s  gown,  and  tie  the  cattle  therewith.  Pro- 
batum. 

When  a  Cow  Loses  the  Butter  Stuff ,  how  to  Help  Her. 

Put  these  words  under  the  churn,  as  follows: 

Ellieue  XLumZundwv  Meillum  X 
Lume  Z  im  s  v  E  v  X  eill  im  X  Luie  Z 
un  d  v  s  r  x. 

This  is  also  applicable  when  a  cow  has  borne  a  calf.  Give 
her  the  same  words  to  swallow;  and  when  she  has  the  fever, 
hang  the  letters  round  her  neck,  on  a  Friday,  between  the 
nours  of  11  and  12,  and  let  her  take,  three  days  in  succession, 
such  a  letter,  before  eating  anything  else,  in  the  morning  at 
an  uneven  hour.  Repeat  eight  days  in  succession.  Probatum. 

For  Poisonous  Air  and  Pestilence. 

To  suspend  on  man  or  beast,  on  a  Friday,  before  sunrise, 
at  an  uneven  hour,  the  following: 

S  A  T  0  R 
A  R  E  P  O 
TENET 
OPERA 
ROTAS 

t JtCfStHSbylSannet 
USMmateronnyfSbabe2 
S  t 

For  Hydrophobia. 

Inscribe  upon  a  loaf  of  bread,  on  the  upper  crust,  the  fol¬ 
lowing  words,  and  give  it  to  either  man  or  beast  to  eat,  as 
the  case  may  require: 

Gerum,  Heaium  Lada  Frium,  hide  thyself. 

To  Exterminate  a  Tumor  or  Excrescence. 

Take  five  cents’  worth  of  yew  salve,  five  cents  worth  of 
Zillo,  five  cents’  worth  of  lard,  five  cents’  worth  of  laurel  oil. 


124 


ALBERT  US  MAGNUS;  OR, 


and  make  an  ointment  thereof.  Smear  upon  a  strip  ef  ItMB, 
and  apply  externally. 

When  Cattle  cannot  Pass  Urine. 

Take  some  iron  herb  water  and  cornelian  cherries.  If  this 
does  not  relieve,  take  five  cents’  worth  of  dragon’s  blood,  and 
let  it  be  drark. 

For  all  Sorts  of  Spots  or  Blisters  on  the  Eyes. 

Pronounce  the  following  sentence  three  times,  and  blow 
three  times  over  the  eyes,  while  pronouncing  the  three  highest 
names : 

Our  dear  Lord  Jesus  Christ  breaks  skin  and  blisters  by  his 
holy  breath,  which  emanated  from  his  holy  sides,  while 
the  cross  he  was  placed,  t  t  t 

For  the  Windfall*  in  Horses. 

Take  three  ounces  of  rendered  lard,  one  ounce  of  laurel  oil, 
and  one  ounce  of  powdered  Spanish  fly.  Pound  these  articles, 
put  them  into  a  tin  box,  clip  the  hair  carefully  from  the  galls, 
and  put  the  plaster  carefully  thereon.  Tie  the  horse  until  the 
gall  runs  out,  so  that  the  horse  cannot  tear  it  open  with  his 
teeth.  Apply  mornings  and  evenings. 

if oto  to  Heal  the  Same. 

Take  two  parts  of  wine  and  one  part  of  sweet  oil.  Boil  wall, 
and  heal  the  horse’s  wounds,  after  uBing  the  above  remedy. 

For  Jaundice. 

Take  black  hellebore,  hazel  roots,  ensian,  four  ounees  of 
each,  and  make  a  powder  thereof,  and  give,  mornings  and 
evenings,  a  teaspoonful  of  it. 

For  Diarrhoea. 

Take  of  coxcomb  three  parts,  horse-bone  two  parts,  two  parts 
of  shoe-sole,  powder  all  this  and  mix  together,  and  give  ttisrs 
of  two  spoonfuls  morning  and  evening. 

When  Cattle  have  Drank  too  Fast  after  being  Overheated. 

Take  of  mitriat  three  pinches,  pulverised  juniperberries  one 
ounce,  laurel  oil  half  an  ounce,  sixteen  drops  of  pranas  vir* 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


125 


■  . .  . .  *  - - — .  1 

ginae;  mix  in  a  pint  of  warm  wine,  and  drench  the  cattle  there¬ 
with. 

For  the  Wind  Colic. 

Take  water,  perhaps  half  a  pint;  powdered  masterwort, 
three  drachms;  olive  peels  and  laurel  oil,  of  each  one  drachm; 
and  mix  some  goat’s  milk  therewith,  with  a  little  soap  and 
salt  into  the  horse’s  fundament.  Tie  the  horse  up  so  that  it 
cannot  lay  down. 

For  Diarrhoea. 

Take  of  tormentilwort  and  wallwort  of  each  two  ounces, 
mix  three  pomegranates  and  two  ounces  of  orange  peels,  bay 
leaves,  mastix,  of  each  one  ounce.  Of  these  articles  make  a 
powder  and  give  a  spoonful  evenings  and  mornings  mixed 
with  the  food,  when  it  is  wet. 

To  Heal  Injuries. 

Speak:  Itum,  Otum,  Utum.  Three  times.  t  ♦  f 

For  Yelldw  Jaundice. 

Recite  three  times:  Water  do  not  flow,  be  it  then  that  thou 
wilt  offer  me  to  grow  and  repeat  seven  and  seventy-seven 
times  the  blow,  t  t  t 

Another  Remedy  for  the  same  Ailment. 

Buy  aniseed  for  six  cents  of  an  apothecary;  let  from  twelve 
to  fifteen  drops  thereof  be  dissolved  in  a  spoonful  of  brandy, 
and  take  inwardly  two  or  three  times  per  day.  The  jaundice 
will  thus  be  cured  within  a  few  days. 

For  all  sorts  of  Sorcery  of  Man  and  Beast. 

The  appended  formula  suspend  upon  man  or  beast,  which 
may  have  been  bewitched,  during  an  uneven  hour. 

t  I  N  t  R  I  t 
S  A  T  0  R 
A  R  E  P  O 
TENET 
OPERA 
ROTAS 
C  t  M  f  B  f 

And  then  proceed  at  once  up  into  your  house,  cut  or  file  od 


126 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


the  spars  so  that  it  becomes  like  flour,  and  take  three  pinches 
of  wheat  flour  and  of  salt.  Give  all  of  these  articles  mixed, 
to  the  person  or  cattle  in  the  three  highest  name.  The  bad 
man  will  appear! 

For  Milk  Thieves. 

Take  an  apron  and  spread  it  with  calves’  blood,  put  such 
apron  upon  the  back  of  the  cow  for  several  days,  and  when  it 
has  become  dry,  repeat  as  before.  Repeat  this  three  times, 
and  the  witch  will  smell  so  much  of  this  that  no  one  can 
bear  to  remain  in  her  presence,  ahd  the  witch  will  come  and 
beseech  of  you  to  stop  the  smearing.  When  putting  the  blood 
on  the  first  time,  close  the  house  well,  that  no  one  may  enter, 
then  sweep  the  room  backward,  put  the  sweepings  into  a 
black  apron,  lay  it  upon  the  kitchen  step,  and  strike  upon  It 
with  a  hammer,  and  thus  you  will  sweep  the  witch. 

That  the  Use  of  a  Cow  may  not  be  Taken. 

Take  camphor,  eggs  and  black  carraway,  give  it  to  the  cat¬ 
tle  and  keep  it  in  use. 

If  you  know  that  the  animal  is  taken,  tatfe  all  the  milk 
from  the  udder,  then  spit  into  it  three  times,  stir  the  milk  and 
the  former  usefulness  of  the  cow  returns. 

If  a.  cow  gives  blood  with  the  milk,  give  it  to  her  to  drink, 
and  she  will  cease  to  give  blood. 

After  a  young  cow  calves  for  the  first  time,  £ive  her  a  piece 
of  rock  salt,  and  thus  will  obtain  a  healthy  cow,  and  of  such  a 
cow  the  use  cannot  be  taken. 

To  Prevent  Bees  from  Flying  Away. 

Take  the  root  of  a  blue  lily,  put  it  into  the  bee  hive.  Pro- 
batum. 

An  Ointment  for  Burns. 

Take  one  pound  of  glue  lard,  render  it  down  in  an  earthen 
dish,  pour  one-quater  of  a  pound  of  linseed  oil  to  it,  mix  it 
well  till  it  becomes  cold.  If  you  desire  to  improve  this,  add 
four  ounces  of  the  liquid  storax  thereto,  which  will  give  it  a 
bitter  taste.  With  this  mixture  all  burns  and  injuries  caused 
by  inward  heat  may  be  cured;  also  flesh  wounds  and  mort'fl 
ations.  During  daytime  paint  the  injured  part  over  twic 


EGYPTIAN  BICCUKTH. 


127 


The  glue  lard  you  can  obtain  from  almost  any  currier  or 
tanner. 

How  to  make  Ants ’  Oil  and  what  it  is  Good  for. 

It  is  so  valuable  for  the  eyes  and  ears,  that  it  can  hardly 
be  described.  Put  a  lot  of  ants’  eggs  into  a  pot.  Wrap  it  up 
in  a  loaf  of  bread,  and  afterward  distil  it  in  a  glass  by  expos¬ 
ing  it  to  the  sun. 

Thou  asketh:  How  do  we  obtain  the  ant  eggs  from  an  ants’ 
hill?  Sweep  a  place  clean  near  such  a  hill,  put  green  briars 
or  twigs  thereon,  stir  with  a  stick  into  the  hill,  and  the  ants 
will  carry  all  their  eggs  under  the  twigs  or  briars. 

I  will  prove  unto  thee,  where  to  obtain  the  incense.  See 
after  St.  James’s  Day  in  the  ants’  hills,  you  will  then  find 
places  with  rosin  or  pitch.  This  is  incense.  Removest  thou 
such  a  hill,  thou  wilt  find  holes  thereunder  where  incense  is 
stored  away  in  plenty. 

For  Toothache. 

When  a  person  is  troubled  with  toothache,  the  teeth  are  de¬ 
cayed  and  hollow,  take  cornelian  cherries  and  wax,  make  lit¬ 
tle  cakes  thereof,  and  put  them  upon  a  hea^d  iron,  cover  them 
over  with  a  pot,  which  has  a  hole  in  the  bottom,  let  the  va¬ 
pors  rise  through  a  funnel  into  the  mouth,  and  the  worms 
will  fall  out  of  the  teeth. 

For  Asthma. 

When  a  person  suffers  from  asthma,  and  has  a  heavy 
breath,  procure  of  an  apothecary  morsell  willy  file,  and  eat 
thereof,  mornings  early. 

Take  skin  nettles,  cut  them  fine,  pour  brandy  over  it,  also 
rose  leaves.  Take  inwardly  morning  and  evening. 

For  Freckles. 

When  persons  have  freckles,  catch  the  dew  that  settles  on 
wheat,  mix  with  rose-water  and  oil  of  lilies.  With  this  water 
wash  the  face.  It  drives  all  the  freckles  away,  and  adds  to 
the  beauty  of  the  face  by  improving  the  complexion. 

A  Cure  for  a  Hard  Disease. 

Drink  the  milk  of  a  young  sow,  having  pigs  for  the  first 
time.  It  helps. 


in 


ALBERTOS  MAGNUS;  OR. 


For  Consumption. 

When  consumption  has  taken  hold  of  a  person,  let  him 
take  a  good  glass  of  wine  in  the  evening.  The  first  water  such 
a  sick  person  passes  after  drinking  such  wine,  let  run  out, 
but  the  second  and  third  time  put  the  water  in  a  glass  vessel. 
Let  this  stand  in  a  cellar  for  twenty-four  hours  till  it  clears. 
Thereupon  take  a  good  portion  of  loaf  sugar  and  melt  the 
same  in  a  copper  pan.  Of  the  water  hour  as  much  as  is  pure 
and  clear  into  the  melted  sugar,  and  let  it  boil  up  like  a  soup. 
Rub  the  chest  morning  and  evening  with  a  wineglass  full 
thereof.  It  will  also  cure  the  gravel  of  the  bladder. 

Another  RerrCedy  for  Consumption. 

One  of  the  main  cures  for  healing  consumption  Is  the 
following:  Take  lung  herbs,  liver  herbs,  (mandragora  and 
May  apple,)  scrape  it  fine,  put  virgin  honey  and  a  little  wine 
to  it  Let  it  dry  over  the  fire.  Morning  and  evening  as 
much  powder  thereof  taken  as  will  cover  the  point  of  a  table 
knife.  It  helps. 

For  Neuralgia  and  Arthritis. 

When  a  person  has  neuralgia  in  the  limbs,  also  palsy  and 
is  deformed,  catch  an  ant  hill  in  a  bag.  Boil  the  same  and 
wrap  very  warm  round  the  limbs.  Grease  also  with  rain¬ 
worm  oil. 

To  Cure  Discharges. 

Take  one  ounce  of  amber  oil  in  four  portions  inwardly. 
Make  ah  ointment  of  burnt  alum,  house-leek  and  wuite  lilies, 
and  diligently  anoint  therewith. 

How  discharges  are  cured  in  Vienna  by  Saint  Marx.  The 
patient ‘must  have  a  clean  room,  which  is  debarred  of  all  fresn 
air;  near  the  room  must' be  situated  a  small  bath-room,  where¬ 
in  the  patient  may  be  enabled  to  take  a  sweat  bath.  Give  to 
the  patient  Venetian  mithridat.  Heat  brickstones  and  put 
them  into  the  bath-room  and  pour  water  thereon.  This  will 
cause  the  patient  to  perspire  and  sweat  the  disease  out 

The  following  must  be  the  beverage  for  the  patient,  via.: 
Take  one  pound  of  unslaked  lime,  pour  eight  quarts  of  water 
upon  it  Let  it  stand  over  night,  then  draw  the  water  off, 


EGYPTIAN  8BCRBT8. 


119 


led  mix  therein  two  ounoee  sassafras,  two  ounces  sarsaparilla, 
two  ounces  licoHoe  root,  one  drachm  saffron,  two  ounces  rock 
Tundf.  This  pour  into  the  wounds  and  sores.  Take  also  the 
«*rtfc  which  eats  carry  upon  the  sod. 

for  CMrogra  or  Gout. 

When  a  person  feels  that  he  will  he  smitten  with  the  gout, 
he  must  take  hold  of  an  ant  bill  and  put  the  same  into  a  bag; 
cook  it  and  poultice  very  hot,  and  thus  frighten  the  disease 
away. 

For  Matter  Dischargee. 

Take  the  excrementis  of  a  gander  and  tie  ft  warm  orer  the 
organ. 

To  Prevent  Witches  from  entering  a  Stable. 

Take  white  elfencoop  wood,  make  pings  therefrom,  mad 
drive  them  into  all  the  doors  and  thresholds  of  the  stable, 
and  no  witch  can  enter.  If  a  witch  is  already  in  the  house, 
it  cannot  leave. 

When  the  Milk  of  a  Cow  is  Taken. 

Take  a  new  cover  of  a  pot,  which  has  never  been  used.  Make 
it  red  hot.  Take  a  dish  whereon  this  lid  will  fit.  Then  put 
a  dish  over  it,  and  milk  bravely,  while  the  cover  yet  glows 
red,  and  it  will  boil  and  come  to  pass  that  the  witch  will  he 
covered  all  over  with  spots.  Then  pour  the  milk  into  tne 
dish,  and  cover  it  that  nothing  can  get  to  it  But  prior  to 
this,  let  the  cattle  take  the  following  characters; 


z 

4- 

m^mm 

s 

___ 

_ 

+* 

_ — 

— 

— 

'  1 

- 

— 

MWstOEVFELSDKECK34WGtRAUEXI 
A.  M.  E.  R.  A.  Sator  Arepo  Tenet  Opera  Rotas  Hagobeas 
Agablet  gricherma  alle  maas  nastia  Helenfasz  Marablium. 
Make  three  crosses  with  black  carraway  seed  oil  upon  the 
other  side  of  the  paper,  and  with  holy  oil. 

That  a  Horse  may  not  become  Stiff  or  Founder. 

Pliny  writes:  Hang  a  large  wolf’s  tooth  around  its  neck. 


ISO 


ALBERTTTS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


When  a  Horse  has  eaten  Feathers. 

Take  the  stomach  of  a  hen  and  give  it  to  the  horse  to  eat 

To  make  a  Blind  Horse  Bee  again.  ( From  a  Turkish  Horse 

Doctor .) 

Take  a  fish  called  asche,  and  make  an  oil  of  it,  which  is 
done  in  the  following  manner:  procure  a  new  earthen  pot, 
holding  half  a  quart,  and  put  it  upon  another  pot  holding  but 
a  pint  These  inter  so  that  they  keep  on  top  of  each  other, 
and  the  one  above  stands  over,  and  projecting  above  the 
ground.  Seal  hermetically  so  that  no  air  can  get  in;  but  in 
the  bottom  must  be  five  holes,  so  as  to  permit  the  oil  to  run 
into  the  ldwer  pot.  The  fish  must  be  placed  in  the  upper  pot 
▲round  the  upper  pot  make  a  fire,  and  the  fish  will  melt,  and 
the  oil  will  flow  into  the  lower  vessel.  Take  this  oil,  and 
grease  the  horse’s  eyes  therewith  frequently  during  the  day. 
In  the  course  of  four  weeks  horses  so  treated  will  see  again. 

To  Drive  the  Worms  from  the  Com. 

If  the  worms  come  into  the  corn,  take  oilbqrry  wood,  bum 
It  to  powder,  strew  such  powder  over  the  com  and  all  the 
worms  must  die. 

To  Remove  Itch  and  Lice  from  Cattle. 

Proceed  to  a  place  where  the  oaks  have  been  cleared,  and 
upon  the  stumps,  after  a  rain,  you  will  find  a  yellow  water. 
Taka  a  quart  of  this  water,  which  you  may  gather  with  a 
clean  sponge  or  cloth,  and  pour  to  it  a  pint  of  herring  sauce, 
such  as  remains  in  a  cask  or  keg  after  the  last  fish  has  been 
taken  out.  All  this  mix,  and  with  this  liquid  wash  the  places 
where  the  cattle  are  lousy  or  have  the  itch.  Thus  lice  and 
itch  are  banished  visibly. 

When  a  Cow  Loses  her  Milk. 

In  such  a  case,  let  the  cow  drink  her  own  milk,  mornings 
before  feeding,  and  the  milk  will  return. 

When  a  Person  or  Cattle  hone  been  bitten  by  a  Poisonous 
Animal  or  have  been  Poisoned. 

Catch  a  large  toad  on  the  thirtieth  of  a  month,  during  the 
days  of  the  moon’s  period.  Spear  this  toad  and  let  it  dry 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


1S1 


In  the  sun.  On  whatever  1b  poisoned,  lay  this  dry  toad.  It 
reduces  the  swelling  and  draws  the  poison  out  It  is  also 
good  in  time  of  pestilence.  Every  housekeeper  should  supply 
herself  with  such  a  toad.  It  will  do  her  good. 

For  a  Weak  and  Dull  Head. 

When  a  person  has  a  weak  head  and  is  often  absent-minded, 
take  hold  of  an  ant's  hill,  put  them  into  a  bag,  boil  the  same 
for  six  hours  in  a  kettle  of  water.  Draw  this  water  upon  bot¬ 
tles  and  distil  it  in  the  sun.  With  such  water  wash  the  weak 
and  dull  head.  If  the  disease  is  very  bad,  bathe  the  patient  in 
suoh  water.  The  blood  of  asses  should  also  be  drank. 

To  Drive  the  Mice  away  from  Bams. 

Burn  a  rotten  crab  to  powder,  fumigate  the  barns  with  It 
and  all  the  mice  therein  will  die. 

For  Ruptured  Children. 

An  approved  powder,  by  the  grace  of  God,  for  a  child  having 
been  ruptured.  It  has  helped  many  a  person  already.  Take 
Mack  and  white  roots  of  crowfoot,  scrape  them  clean  and 
grind  them  fine,  sift  through  a  sieve.  Give  every  morning 
before  breakfast,  in  a  spoon,  while  the  moon  is  waning.  To 
an  infant  only  three  pinches  thereof.  Can  also  be  used  with 
advantage  by  grown  persons. 

To  Oild  Tin,  Glass  or  Leather. 

Take  four  pounds  of  linseed  oil,  boil  it  in  a  glazed  earthen 
pot,  so  long  till  a  feather  dipped  therein  burns  up;  then  mix 
sixteen  ounces  of  varnish  and  eight  ounces  of  aloes  therewith. 
Stir  all  well  together  and  boil  till  it  obtains  the  thickness  of 
a  syrup.  Should  the  color  be  too  light,  mix  from  three  to 
four  ounces  aloes  thereto,  and  less  varnish,  and  the  color 
will  be  a  shade  darker  and  nearer  the  gold  color.  After  this 
color  has  boiled  sufficiently  long,  take  it  off  the  fire  so  that 
the  flame  may  not  touch  it,  otherwise  it  \^111  all  burn  up. 
8ave  it,  the  older  it  is,  the  better  it  will  be.  If  you  desire 
now  to  gild  tin  or  glass,  paint  with  a  paint  brush  and  it  will 
resemble  the  color  of  gold. 


ALBBRTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


186 


Truthful  Prognostics  from  Egypt,  found  in  the  Library  of  Dr. 
Plein  Horatio,  Astronomer  of  the  Khedive  of 
Egypt:  as  follows: 

Whereas,  forty-two  days  of  an  entire  year  are  unfortunate 
days,  according  to  a  Greek  author,  he  who  gets  sick  on  one 
of  these  days  mentioned  hereafter,  will  not  easily  recover. 


vis.: — 

The  1,  2,  6,  11,  17,  18 . January 

The  8,  16,  17 . February 

The  1,  12,  13,  15 . March 

The  3,  15,  17,  18 . April 

The  8,  10,  17,  30 . May 

The  1,  7,  10 . June 

The  1,  5,  6 . July 

The  1,  3,  18,  20 . August 

The  15,  18,  30 . September 

The  15,  17 . October 

The  1,  7,  11 . November 

The  1,  7,  11 . December 


Hereby  is  to  be  noted: 

1.  A  child  born  on  such  a  day  will  not  live  long,  and  if  it 
lives,  it  will  be  of  poor  health  and  vigor. 

2. '  If  persons  marry  on  any  of  these  days,  they  will  be  apt 
to  separate,  and  live  in  quarrel  and  poverty. 

3.  If  a  person  commences  a  voyage  on  such  a  day,  he  will 
generally  return  home  sick,  or  meet  with  an  accident  in  body 
or  goods. 

4.  On  such  days  do  not  commence  to  build,  sell  no  young 
cattle,  nor  sow  or  plant  anything.  Do  what  you  may,  it  will 
all  come  to  trouble. 

5.  During  these  mentioned  forty-two  days,  five  days  are  es¬ 
pecially  unlucky  days,  on  which  no  journey  should  be  taken, 
namely:  The  3d  of  March,  the  17th  of  August,  the  1st,  2d  and 
30th  of  September.  To  this  must  be  again  noted  thereof,  three 
days  are  especially  unlucky  days,  and  any  man  shedding  blood 
on  such  a  day  will  surely  die  within  seven  or  eight  days  there¬ 
after,  as  namely: 

The  1st  of  April,  on  which  Judas  the  traitor  was  born. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


133 


The  1st  of  August  the  devil  was  rejected  from  heaven. 

The  first  of  December  Sodom  and  Gomorrha  was  destroyed. 

Whoever  is  born  on  any  of  these  unhappy  days,  he  will  die 
of  a  violent  death,  or  will  be  disgraced  before  the  world,  and 
seldom  reaches  old  agecf. 

A  Remedy  for  Restless  Persons. 

The  water  of  the  herb  called  hen-bane,  is  good  for  those  who 
have  unnatural  restiveness.  The  head  should  often  be  bathed 
therewith,  or  cloth  soaked  in  this  water,  and  laid  on  the  tem¬ 
ple,  will  restore  natural  rest  and  sleep. 

When  a  Cow  Loses  her  Use ,  how  to  Mark  the  Witch. 

Milk  such  a  cow  on  a  Friday  morning  before  sunrise.  Take 
the  milk-pail,  turn  it  over,  and  milk  over  the  bottom  of  the 
pail  two,  three  or  four  times,  until  you  obtain  a  few  pots  of 
milk.  Then  you  will  also  have  to  procure  nine  small  pieces  of 
wood,  which  you  must  either  steal  or  beg  for  God’s  sake,  but 
you  may  return  them  afterward.  Then  make  a  fire,  take  an 
iron  pan,  wherein  boil  the  milk,  in  which  put  three  tufts  of 
hair  of  the  cow,  one  from  between  the  horns,  one  from  the 
shoulder-bone,  one  from  the  loins.  Thereafter  take  a  handful 
of  salt  and  a  half  handful  of  chimney  soot  Now  take  three, 
spades  or  three  scythes,  heat  them  in  fire  and  temper  them 
off  in  the  milk,  turn  them  crosswise  therein.  Then  take  a 
hog's  bladder,  put  the  milk  therein,  and  hang  in  the  smoke. 

If  this  does  not  help,  write  the  characters  upon  spade  or 
scythes  as  follows: — B.  D. 


INDEX  TO  VOL.  II 


Agreeable  to  all,  how  to  make  one’s  self . 76 

Ambrose  Stone  .  77 

Ant’s  Oil,  how  to  make . 137 

Apoplexy,  an  excellent  remedy  for . 106 

Approved  representation  .  77 

Asthma  . , . 127 

Banishment,  a . , .  70 

Bear  easy,  when  a  woman  cannot . 117 

Bed  Bugs,  to  drive  away . 74,  77 

Bees  from  flying  away,  to  prevent . 126 

Bewitched  Cattle  . 110;  116 

Birds,  to  understand  the  song  of .  74 

Black  horse,  to  make  it  white . 93 

Black  Ointment,  wholesome  for  various  things . 98 

Black  Snails,  what  they  are  good  for . 101 

Bleeding  of  a  Wound,  to  stop . 68,  74 

Blessing  for  All . „ . 122 

Blessing  for  Enemies . 98 

Blind  Horses  to  see  again . 92,  130 

Blister,  to  make . ■, . . .  68 

Blood  of  Patients,  how  to  stop . 74,  97 

Blood,  to  purify  the . 113 

Blood,  to  stop  the,  of  one  whose  name  is  only  known . 77 

Boils  and  Swelling .  86 

Boils  on  the  Hoof,  to  heal . 67 

Breast  Swellings,  Heart  Swellings,  etc . 108 

Broken  Bone,  and  when  the  blood  curdles .  97 

Bullets  to  cast,  wherewith  to  have  good  luck . 99 

Burns,  to  make  an  ointment  for . . ,67,  77 

Butter  Stuff,  when  a  Cow  loses  her . . . 123 

Buy,  that  everybody  will,  from  you .  96 

Caterpillars,  to  destroy . 99 

Cattle,  are  costive .  86 

Cattle,  cannot  pass  water . 124 

Cattle,  for  the  swelling  of . 67,  113 

Cattle,  yellow  knots  in . 105 

Chicken  Pox  .  72 

Child  is  bewitched,  when  a .  79 

Child,  when  a  woman  cannot  give  birth  to  a . 117 

Churn,  when  it  becomes  difficult  to . 108 

Churning  of  butter,  if  a  person  cannot  churn  out . 108 

Colic  . 81,  84,  107,  117 

Coagulated  Blood  . 89,  101 

Consumption  . 138 


134 


INDEX  TO  VOLUME  II. 


135 


Costiveness  of  Cows . 81,  85 

Costiveness  of  Horses . 77,  94 

Cough  of  Cattle .  98 

Cow  losing  her  milk . 86,  91,  115 

Cow,  having  calved,  to  prevent  her  milk  being  taken  during 

year  .  81 

Decayed  Lungs  .  98 

Diarrhoea  . 124 

Distempered  Horses  . 116 

Dog,  horse  or  other  animal  to  run  after  you,  to  compel. ...  73 

Drink  for  Horses . 102,  117 

Dropsy  . 103 

Dysentery,  two  cures  for . . . 115 

Erysipelas  . . 79,  100 

Escape,  to  present  a  person  to .  73 

Eye,  cataract  of  the. . .  67 

Eyes,  spots  in  the .  67 

Eye-water,  excellent  .  95 

Eyes,  certain  remedy  for  the . 103,  113 

Fall,  when  a  person  suffers  from  a . 107 

Felons  of  men  and  beasts . 104,  108,  114 

Fever  . 67,  96 

Fish,  to  catch .  92 

Flush  and  Rush  of  Blood . 122 

Flux,  for  the . 100 

Foes,  to  drive  away  all .  93 

Fortune’s  Wand,  to  cut  a . 98 

Founder,  that  a  horse  may  never  get  stiff  or . 118 

Foundered,  when  a  horse  is . 105 

Fractured  Legs  and  Open  Sores . .  82 

Freckles  . 127 

Frosted  Feet  .  87 

Gambling,  to  disgust  a  person  against . 94,  95 

Gangrene,  hot  or  cold . 115 

Glanders  of  a  Horse . 108 

Gold  Roots  for.  the  teething  of  Children . ..113 

Gout  and  Sweeny . , . 86,  102 

Gravel  .  85 

Grape  Vine,  when  it  breaks  or  warps . „ . 95 

Green  Salve,  etc.  (the  celebrated  genuine) . 109 

Gun,  to  prevent  a  person  from  firing  a . 73 

Hair,  to  grow  wherever  you  choose,  how  to  make . 120 

Hair  Worm .  85 

Hard  Disease,  cure  for  a . 127 

Hares  from  destroying  Cabbage,  how  to  prevcii . 

Headache  . 116 

Heal  Injuries . 121 

4t srfc  Wine  .  86 


136  INDEX  TO  VOLUME  II. 


Hidden  Treasures,  how  to  be  found .  . K 

Horse  Is  Sick,  or  has  the  Blind  Fistula,  when  a . 69 

Horse  is  Swollen,  when  the  Breast  of  a . 108 

Horse  refuses  to  be  Shod . 87 

Horae  Salve,  or  Horse  Ointment . 109 

Horae  that  cannot  stall . .  73 

Horae  that  will  not  get  'fired.. . 96 

Horse,  when  it  has  been  pushed  and  hurt . 115 

Horses  and  Cattle,  an  old  drink  for . 102 

Hydrophobia  . . 123 

Intended  wife  to  love  you,  how  to  cause .  76 

Inflammation  of  Cattle . ,.121 

Influenza,  Toothache,  Headache .  70 

Illicit  Love,  a  magic  for  one  who  is  infatuated  by . 70 

Injuries,  a  water  for  all  sorts  of . ...103 

Injuries  of  man  or  beast . . . 117 

Invisible  things,  how  to  discern . 75 

Invisible,  how  to  make  yourself . 117 

Imbibed,  when  a  person  has  too  much,  is  dead  drunk . 101 

Impure  stuff,  when  a  Horse  has  eaten  some . 1 114 

Itch  of  Horses . 102 

Itch  or  Scab . 100 

Jaundice  of  Horses....... . 104 

Labor  Pains  . 93,  104 

Lame  Limbs  .  85 

Lice,  to  drive  away . 102 

Lockjaw  of  Animals . 101 

Locks  to  Open .  74 

Lung  and  Liver  of  Cattle,  diseased . 100,  107 

Lung  bisease  . 84 

Mad  Dog,  when  bitten  by  a . 97 

Man,  Cattle  or  Horses,  to  heal  injuries  on . 102 

Mange  or  Itch  of  Sheep .  72 

Manhood,  when  you  have  lost  your .  96 

Marasmus  . 94,  111 

Memory,  to  obtain  a  good. . 93 

Measles  in  Children .  85 

Miee,  to  drive  away . 131 

Milk  from  being  taken  from  a  cow,  to  prevent . 122 

Milk  Thieves  . 126 

Mirror,  to  make  a,  in  which  everything  may  be  discerned..  89 

Moles  from  their  holes,  to  draw . 73,  83 

Money,  how  to  obtain . 74 

Monkfall  of  Cattle . 112 

Neuralgic  Pains  or  flush  of  man  and  beaftt .  84 

Ointment,  a  good  for  any  purpose . 103 

Open  Cranium,  when  a  person  has  a . 105 

Open  Head  . Ill 


INDEX  TO  VOLUME  II. 


137 


Open  Sores  . 101 

Ox,  how  to  put  the  Yoke  the  first  time  upon . 98 

Pains,  how  to  allay .  81 

Palsy .  85 

Patient,  whether  he  Dies  or  Recovers . 94 

Person,  if  chaste,  how  to  try .  78 

Person  will  deny  you  anything,  that  no .  86 

Pestilence  . 112 

Plaster  for  the  Worm . 102 

Playing,  how  to  have  good  luck  in .  76 

Poisonous  Air  and  Pestilence . 123 

Powder,  a  wholesome . 121 

Powder,  to  kill . 103 

Prevent  anybody  from  taking  anything  belonging  to  you..  87 

Proud  Flesh . 107 

Purchase  cheaply,  and  sell  at  high  prices . 74 

Rabid  Dogs,  for  bites  of .  75 

Rider  or  several  horsemen,  to  stay .  70 

Rifles  or  Muskets  to  miss  fire,  to  cause .  72 

Robbers  and  Murderers  . 89,  112 

Rotten  Lungs  of  Cattle . 120 

Rupture .  72 

Ruptured  Children . 131 

Salt  Rheum .  88 

Scythes  for  Mowing,  to  sharpen .  74 

See  miraculous  things .  91 

See,  if  a  Person  is  Chaste .  76 

See  what  others  cannot  see .  73 

Sheep,  for  the  purging  of .  72 

Shoot,  to  shoot  with  accuracy . 91,  104 

Shooting  Pains  .  92 

Shotgun  is  bewitched,  when  a . 103 

Shotproof,  to  make  One’s  Self . . . 73,  75 

Shots  per  day,  to  be  sure  of  Three . 103 

Shrubby  feet  of  horses . 121 

Sick  Persons,  to  ascertain  whether  they  will  Live  or  Die..  92 

Soft  Feet,  when  Cattle  have . ..118 

Sorcery . 116 

Sore  Feet .  79 

Sore  on  Horse  breaks  open,  when  a . 122 

Spavin  .  93 

Sprains  . 97,  114 

Sores,  which  no  Person  can  Heal . 109 

Spirits,  to  lay,  by  anathema .  71 

Sprained  Limb  . 90 

St.  Anthony’s  Fire . 101,  110 

Staggers,  when  a  Horse  has  the . 108 

Stirring  Butter  . 88 


138 


INDEX  TO  VOLUME  II. 


Stolen  Property,  to  cause  the  return  of.. 71,  73,  78,  79,  90,  94 

Stomach,  Drops  .  87 

Stoppage  of  Water  in  Man  or  Woman . 106 

Stubborn  Horses  . 93,  110 

Stupid,  when  an  Animal  is .  83 

Suddenly  ill  when  an  animal  becomes . 82 

Suppurating  Limbs  . 119 

Sweetheart  shall  not  Deny  you .  76 

Swellings  of  every  kind . 79,  100,  107 

Target,  to  prevent  a  person  from  hitting  the .  72 

Teeth  of  Cattle  are  getting  soft . 119 

Theft,  in  case  one  suffers  from .  68 

Thief,  to  fix  a . . 88,  89 

Tin,  Glass  or  Leather,  to  gild . 131 

Tippler,  to  wean  a  Drunkard  from  drinking .  95 

Toothache  . 71,  94 

Transfix  a  Rider . 88 

Traveling,  a  charm  while .  96 

Truthful  Prognostics  . 132 

Tumor  or  Abscess,  to  extirpate . 120 

Usefulness,  when  an  animal  loses  its . 116 

Use  of  a  Cow  may  not  be  taken,  that  the . 126 

Vanquish,  that  no  one  may  vanquish  you,  and  how  to  open 

locks  . 96 

Water  in  cases  of  Dropsy . 108 

Warts,  to  Extirpate .  68 

Water,  to  dry  up  the,  in  cases  of  gouty  diseases . 95 

Water,  when  a  person  cannot  hold  his . — 112 

Weak  and  Dull  Head . 131 

When  a  woman  suffers  from  not  being  regular .  86 

When  a  person  has  taken  a  false  step,  how  to  help,  etc....  89 

Windgall  in  horses  . 124 

Witch,  an  excellent  way  to  prove  whether  a  person  is - 78 

Witch,  that  no,  mdy  leave  a  church .  68 

Witch,  to  burn  a,  so  that  she  receives  pock-marks .  69 

Witch,  to  catch  a . 68 

Witch,  to  cause  a,  to  die  within  one  minute .  69 

Witches  and  Sorcery .  69 

Wolf's  Blessing  or  Charm .  97 

Womb  Disease  . 68 

Worm  on  the  Finger .  87 

Worms  and  Colic  . 83,  115 

Worms  from  the  Corn,  to  drive . 130 

Wounds,  a  good  ointment  for . 103,  108 

Yellow  Jaundice  of  men  and  women . 1$4 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS 


THE  APPROVED,  VERIFIED,  SYMPATHETIC  AND  NATT7BAI, 

EGYPTIAN  SECRETS 

OB, 

WHITE  AND  BLACK  ART  FOR  MAN  AND  BEAST 

THE  BOOK  OF  NATURE  AND  THE  HIDDEN  SECRETS 
AND  MYSTERIES  OF  LIFE  UNVEILED;  BEING  THE 

Forbidden  Knowledge  of  Ancient  Philosophers 

By  that  celebrated  Student,  Philosopher,  Chemist,  Naturalist 
Psychomist,  Astrologer,  Alchemist,  Metallurgist,  Sorcerer, 
Ezplanator  of  the  Mysteries  of  Wizards  and  Wlteh- 
craft;  together  with  recondite  Views  of  numerous 
Arts  and  Sciences — Obscure,  Plain,  Prac¬ 
tical,  Etc.,  Etc. 

TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  GERMAN 
CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  III. 

Recipes  for  Heart  Blood — For  Frozen  Feet  or  — Whca 

a  Man  or  Beast  Becomes  Blind — An  Ointment  for  Various 
Poisonous  Boils  and  Pimples — For  Arthritis  of  Chil¬ 
dren — How  to  Make  a  Melancholy,  Dejected,  Low- 
Spirited  Man  Happy  Again — An  Excellent  Eye 
Water  for  Man  and  Beast — For  Laboring 
Pains  and  Prolapsus — For  Gum  Shot 
Wounds,  whether  Caused  hr  Iron  or 
Lead — Wounds  Made  by  Thoms  and 
Briars — How  to  Draw  Missiles  from 
the  Body  Again—  and  many  other 
approved  recipes  which  have 
heretofore  never  been 
saifra*  public. 


139 


PREFACE 


The  wonderful  cures  that  have  been  effected  by  me  at  home 
and  abroad,  on  man  and  beast,  have  caused  and  Induced  many 
persons  to  express  their  desire  to  have  some  of  my  remedies, 
which  bare  proved  so  efficient,  published.  My  intention,  how¬ 
ever,  was  not  to  have  a  great  deal  of  my  treatment  of  human 
ailments  and  diseases  put  into  print,  so  as  not  subject  myself 
to  the  critic  and  censure  of  the  learned.  For  such  reasons  I 
have  published  in  this  volume  but  few  domestic  medicines  for 
mankind,  and  given  more  space  and  attention  to  the  treatment 
of  dumb  animals.  For  the  cure  of  cattle,  sheep,  and  hogs 
especially,  though  for  horses,  there  wD  be  fi  nd  in  this  little 
book,  quite  a  number'  of  treatments  for  all  sorts  of  diseases 
and  injuries,  whatever  they  may  be  called;  also  the  manner 
of  treatment  of  animals,  when  they  are  well,  and  how  to  pre¬ 
vent  many  injuries.  All  medicines  mentioned  herein,  have 
been  tried  and  proved  by  me,  personally,  during  a  practice  of 
many  years  and  have  ever  been  found  efficacious. 

My  heartfelt  wish  therefore  is,  that  this  book  may  prove  to 
the  reader  a  source  of  great  value,  and  a  recommendation  to 
the  author. 

(Signed) 

aibertus  flDngnue. 


140 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS 

OR 


To  Quench  Burning  Thirst  and  Inward  Heat. 

Take  a  drachm  of  white  eyestone  mixed  with  a  quart  of 
fresh  well-water  and  shake  it  until  the  water  becomes  entirely 
white.  If  it  should  be  preferred  sweet,  white  sugar  may  be 
added.  To  drink  at  meal  times  and  during  the  day  will  allay 
the  burning  thirst  and  great  heat. 

For  a  Heated  Stomach . 

Take  one  pint  of  white  rose  vinegar,  one  half  pound  of 
sugar,  boil  these  in  a  very  clean  brass  pan,  as  long  as  it  takes 
to  boil  a  soft  egg,  and  use  it  instead  of  salt  to  the  meat  at 
meal  time.  It  is  a  good  sauce,  healthy  and  agreeable. 

Also:  Take  a  fresh  or  dried  cherry  Into  the  mouth  and 
keep  the  stone  on  the  tongue,  it  restrains  violent  thirst  at 
home  and  abroad.  Further:  The  sour  fibres  of  grape  vines 
will  also  quench  the  thirst.  Also:  A  piece  of  pectine  chewed 
and  kept  during  the  entire  day  in  the  mouth,  while  traveling^ 
is  good  to  still  the  thirst. 

For  Feverish  Thirst. 

Before  retiring  at  night,  make  a  julep  of  quince  roses  or 
sorrel  juice.  But  in  lieu  of  these  take  rose  sugar,  and  make 
a  julep  thereof,  or  drink  milk  of  almonds,  or  eat  raisins. 
These  things  will  cause  an  easy  rest  and  sleep,  and  strengthen 
the  heart  and  liver.  Also:  The  juice  of  currants,  or  a  julep 
of  strawberry  juice,  are  excellent  for  quenching  the  thirst. 

For  Bronchitis. 

If  a  person  is  troubled  with  great  heat  of  the  body,  and  to 
have  bronchitis,  such  a  person  must  receive  attention  inward- 

141 


142 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


ly  as  well  as  outwardly.  In  the  first  place,  apply  the  recipe  of 
white  eyestone  as  given  above.  The  mouth  has  to  be  cleaned 
three  times  per  day  with  the  domestic  powder. 

When  bronchitis,  however,  has  developed  itself,  (it  may  in 
some  cases  be  used  from  the  commencement  of  the  disease,) 
bruise  house-leak  leaves,  press  them  through  a  cloth,  take 
mornings  after  rising,  and  evenings  before  laying  down,  three 
spoonfuls  of  the  juice,  with  as  much  goat’s  milk,  it  will  soothe 
the  pain,  and  alleviate  the  disease. 

Note. 

A  horse  affected  with  this  disease,  feed  evenings  and  morn¬ 
ings  with  pure  oats,  and  give  it  for  a  drink  a  pail  of  pure 
water.  When  the  horse  takes  its  mouth  out  of  the  water,  hold 
a  clean  dish  under  its  mouth,  in  order  to  catch  all  the  water 
that  runs  out  of  the  mouth  again,  therein;  this  water  strain 
through  a  cloth,  and  give  to  the  sick  two  or  three  spoonfuls 
thereof,  and  rinse  the  mouth  with  the  domestic  powder. 
Henry  de  Kaltenthal  has  used  it  during  war  times,  and  became 
fully  convinced  of  its  curative  qualities. 

Another  Remedy  for  the  Bronchitis. 

Take  three  male  crabs,  but  no  female,  pound  them  alive 
In  a  mortar,  pour  three  spoonfuls  of  white  vinegar  thereon, 
then  press  the  juice  through  a  cloth,  and  take  it  evenings 
before  retiring  to  bed.  Wet  a  woolen  cloth  therewith,  rinse 
the  mouth  thoroughly  with  it,  and  gargle  with  such  water. 
If  It  does  not  help  at  once,  continue  the  cure  for  two  or  three 
days  in  succession. 

Another  Remedy  for  the  Same  Disease. 

Take  fresh  turnips,  grind  them  on  the  grater,  press  the 
juice  out,  and  with  it  rinse  the  mouth  frequently.  In  lieu  of 
fresh  turnips,  dried  ones  will  answer  the  same  purpose.  A 
handful  of  these  boil  in  a  quart  of  water,  wherewith  rinse 
and  gargle  the  mouth  and  throat  frequently.  It  does  not  mat¬ 
ter  if  the  patient  should  swallow  some  of  this,  it  allays  the 
heat 


EGYPTIAN  8ECRETS. 


143 


Still  another  Remedy  for  the  Above  Disease. 

Put  dried  quinces  in  fresh  water,  gargle  the  throat  there¬ 
with,  and  let  it  remain  awhile  in  the  mouth.  It  cools  and 
purifies  well.  But  if  such  quinces  can  be  obtained,  grate  them 
upon  a  grater,  put  them  in  well-water  and  apply  as  stated. 
The  best  remedy,  however  is  the  following,  which  may  be  had 
at  all  hours.  Take  a  quart  of  fresh  well-water,  a  quart  of 
small  raisins,  two  ounces  brown  rock  candy,  ten  figs,  some 
licorice  root  cut  fine,  and  five  fall  roses  (white  are  the  best). 
Take  twelve  leaves  of  small  sage,  let  all  of  these  articles  boil, 
about  as  long  as  eggs  have  to  boil,  then  take  it  off  the  fire. 

For  the  White  and  Bloody  Dysentery . 

As  soon  as  a  person  notices  the  approach  of  this  disease,  put, 
wherever  you  have  to  go,  two  or  three  handfuls  of  salt  there¬ 
in,  and  let  it  stand  thus  over  night.  This  do  on  the  first  day. 

Also:  Then  take  some  gold  filings,  as  much  as  salt  is  used 
in  an  egg,  put  into  a  chicken  broth.  It  strengthens  mightily. 
Pearls  prepared  for  twelve  hours,  and  as  much  taken  thereof 
as  salt  is  used  to  an  egg,  also  in  chicken  broth,  also  the  same 
quantity  of  corals,  it  strengthens  and  increases  the  appetite. 
Meanwhile,  burn  rye-bread  water  in  the  following  manner: 

Take  rye  bread,  as  warm  as  it  comes  from  the  bake-oven, 
break  It  Into  pieces,  but  do  not  cut  it.  The'  bread  put  into  a 
distilling  apparatus,  and  distil  quickly  water  therefrom,  the 
faster  the  better.  As  soon  as  you  have  gathered  three  spoon¬ 
fuls,  take  it;  the  remainder  save  in  a  well  corked  phial.  As 
soon  as  these  breadcrumbs  have  been  put  into  the  flame  of  a 
coal  fire,  let  some  one  else  break  or  crumble  the  crusts  fine, 
put  them  in  a  tin  can,  be  t hr;  same  large  or  small,  just  as  you 
may  desire,  a  smaller  or  larger  quantity  of  water;  then  fill 
the  pot  with  red  wine,  let  it  stand  over  night,  and  the  next 
day  distil  water  therefrom. 

In  case  the  dysentery  will  not  cease,  give  of  this  water  to 
an  infant  a  few  drops  thereof;  to  a  child  ten  years  old,  one 
spoonful,  and  to  an  adult  from  five  to  six  spoonfuls  per  day. 

When  the  patient  becomes  visibly  weaker,  give  him  daily 
gold,  pearls  and  corals  to  take,  according  to  directions  as 
above.  This  will  strengthen  his  heart.  While  the  flux  pre- 


144 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


vails,  the  strength  of  the  patient  is  waning.  The  wife  for 
the  patient  must  be  in  accordance  to  his  state  of  weakness, 
it  must  not  be  too  much  loaded  with  gold  nor  too  sour  or  too 
strong. 

All  nourishment  to  be  given  to  the  patient  should  be  of  & 
binding  nature.  At  the  same  ratio  as  the  red  flux  ceases,  the 
nourishment  of  a  binding  nature  should  also  cease  in  propor¬ 
tion.  Before  a.  convalescent  takes  any  food,  let  him  first  try 
some  good  old  rose  sugar  or  old  quinces,  and  if  the  stomach  is 
very  sore  and  weak,  try  some  old  quince  jelly. 

If  the  patient  feels  chilly,  add  six  spoonfuls  of  malvasier  to 
this  jelly.  In  want  of  this  article  take  a  good,  strong,  old 
wine.  Let  this  boil  over  the  fire,  put  it  upon  a  piece  of  white 
leather,  apply  it  to  the  navel  as  hot  as  it  can  be  borne.  When¬ 
ever  the  patient  wishes  to  eat,  remove  the  plaster,  but  after 
the  meal  apply  it  again  to  the  stomach.  This  plaster  is  good 
for  eight  days  and  strengthens  the  stomach. 

In  case  all  the  above  given  remedies  avail  nothing,  or  the 
dysentery  increases  rapidly,  while  the  bread  water  is  being 
prepared,  take  a  three-finger  pinch  of  pulvis  rhei  in  wine  or 
warm  broth  twice  per  day. 

For  Griping  Pains  and  Straining. 

Rarely  ever  is  dysentery  without  griping  pains  or  strain¬ 
ing.  In  such  cases  the  patient  should  have  every  night,  before 
retiring  to  bed,  a  quart  of  warm  goat’s  milk  sweetened  with 
sugar.  The  dish  into  which  the  goat’s  milk  is  to  be  milked, 
must  be  made  warm  before  milking.  Hence  it  is  necessary 
that  the  goat’s  milk  be  near  at  hand;  whenever  such  milk 
gets  cold  it  must  not  be  warmed.  This  beverage  quenches  the 
thirst,  gives  nourishment,  heals  the  injured  intestines,  and 
soothes  the  strains.  It  may  be  drank  as  long  as  the  pain  lasts. 

In  case  the  griping  pains  do  not  yet  cease,  the  patient  should 
have  three  or  four  drops  of  scorpion  oil  rubbed  over  the  navel. 
If  this  does  not  help  either,  then  take  matronfs  vulgaris,  cut 
them  off  from  the  stem  a  span  high,  strip  flowers  and  herbs 
from  the  stem,  perhaps  a  good  handful,  cut  them  fine,  add  an 
egg  thereto,  also  two  spoonfuls  of  flower  and  three  spoonfuls 
of  vinegar,  stir  it  well  together  and  bake  it  in  lard  or  olive 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


146 


oil  until  it  resembles  that  of  a  cake.  Then  put  it  as  warm  as 
you  can  stand  it  upon  the  navel,  and  put  a  cloth  folded  four 
times  over  it.  When  it  becomes  cold  warm  it  again  in  the  lard 
or  oil,  as  before  mentioned.  With  God’s  aid  this  will  prove 
beneficent. 

To  secure  Natural  Sleep  and  Rest. 

Take  oil  of  mace  and  rose  salve,  of  one  as  much  as  of  the 
other;  mix  well  together;  with  this  anoint  the  temples,  the 
neck,  the  nostrils,  the  pulses  on  both  arms,  and  the  soles  of 
the  feet.  Repeat  this  several  days  in  succession  before  retiring 
to  bed.  It  brings  on  the  natural  sleep. 

How  to  Stop  the  Blood. 

When  a  horse  bleeds  so  hard  that  the  blood  cannot  be 
stopped,  take  sour  vinegar  and  dip  the  horse’s  nostrils  therein. 
When  a  man  or  woman  bleeds  hard,  let  the  breasts  be  dipped 
in  the  strong  vinegar,  and  the  blood  will  cease  to  flow. 

To  Stop  the  Blood ,  if  the  Bleeding  Person  is  Absent. 

Call  the  injured  by  his  Christian  name,  and  draw  a  stick 
from  a  hedge  above  you,  and  the  upper  part  below,  and  call 
again  that  name,  then  plant  the  hedge  stick  again  in  the 
ground,  in  the  name  of  #od  the  Father,  the  Son  and  Holy 
Ghost,  Amen.  Then  say  a  Lord’s  Prayer,  an  Ave  Maria  and 
a  Creed. 

Another  Remedy  for  the  Same. 

If  a  person  bleeds  put  both  his  hands  into  cold  water,  if  this 
does  not  help,  let  his  hands  and  arms  be  immersed  in  water 
up  to  elbow  and  shoulder  blade. 

A  Remedy  for  Nose  Bleeding. 

Dip  a  little  wadding  in  good  ink,  insert  it  into  the  nose  or 
other  bleeding  injuries.  It  will  stop  the  blood. 

For  Gathered  Breasts. 

Take  orange,  nine  seeds,  a  few  drachms,  and  sweat,  the 
oftener  the  better. 

Likewise:  sweet  oil,  aspen  wood,  sage,  wax  and  ot.termcnlg 
herbs  and  roots  dried  and  powdered,  of  which  a  salve  is  to  be 
made.  Apply  to  a  piece  of  leather,  and  lay  this  plaster  over 


146 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


the  milt,  but  should  commence  near  the  back  bone  and  extend 
toward  the  stomach  of  the  size  of  a  hand. 

Another  for  the  Same  Trouble. 

Blood  forget  thy  flow  and  thy  go,  and  may  the  Lord  forget 
him  who  utters  false  witness  and  is  partial  in  his  judgment 
before  court,  knowingly  and  wantonly.  In  the  name  of  God 
the  Father,  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Spirit  This  recite  three 
times.  If  it  is  done  for  a  dumb  animal,  speak  its  name  or  put 
yourself  close  to  it. 

To  drive  away  the  Secundines. 

Of  chickwood  one  ounce,  dissolve  in  warm  wine  is  a  certain 
and  reliable  remedy. 

When  Dropsy  threatens  the  System. 

Take  three  drops  of  amber  oil  in  wine,  and  the  purging  will 
cause  the  dropsy  to  desist 

For  Loose  Teeth. 

Take  an  armful  of  fiypitory  straw,  wash  the  same  clean  of 
all  impurities,  bruise  it  in  a  mortar,  press  the  juice  out,  put 
the  same  into  a  pan,  boil  over  a  slow  fire  and  skim  it  well; 
then  add  as  much  old  clarified  honey  thereto  as  there  is  juice 
in  the  pan,  and  again  boil  it  and  skim  it.  Draw  in  glass  bot¬ 
tles.  It  will  keep  for  a  long  time. 

Of  this  take  some  to  rub  the  gums  therewith;  you  may 
also  drink  it;  it  fastens  the  teeth  again.  To  add  a  little  burnt 
alum  would  be  well,  in  case  the  teeth  are  very  loose. 

A  spoonful  of  this  sap  given  to  children  having  worms  will 
drive  them  away. 

For  Gravel,  Obstruction  of  Water  in  Old  and  Aggravated  Case*. 

A  certain  Cure  effected  within  Ten  or  Twelve  Days. 

Take  herbum  ovlga  orea,  pulverize  it,  and  give  the  patient 
every  morning  a  tablespoonful  in  an  egg,  but  let  him  fast  after 
taking  this  for  fonr  hours,  and  in  less  than  one  hour  the  pa¬ 
tient  will  urinate.  If  this  remedy  is  used  for  ten  or  twelve 
days  in  succession,  all  gravel  and  stone  in  the  kidneys  will 
break,  and  pass  off  without  pain. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


147 


How  to  have  a  nearly  painless  and  safe  Childbirth,  whon  the 

natural  Pains  are  at  hand. 

Take  a  handful  of  white  mugwort  or  artemisia,  a  similar 
quantity  of  melissa,  four  ounces  lavender  flowers,  all  these 
herbs  must  be  dried,  four  ounces  galligan,  four  ounces  cin¬ 
namon,  two  ounces  fennel  seed.  All  these  things  cut  fine  and 
pound  them,  afterward  two  pints  of  wine  poured  over,  it  and 
boiled  down  over  a  quick  fire;  then  strain  through  a  cloth 
and  frequently  give  the  patient  to  drink.  Sweeten  the  bever¬ 
age  either  with  honey  or  sugar. 

N.  B. — When  the  birth  is  a  still-born  child,  add  to  the  above 
drink  a  handful  of  senna  and  another  of  seventrec. 

An  approved  Remedy  to  carry  off  the  Secundines, 

Take  salt  of  the  size  of  a  pea,  and  mace  of  the  same  quan¬ 
tity.  These  articles  lay  upon  the  right  knee,  and  take  it  there¬ 
from,  with  the  mouth  chew  it  and  swallow  It;  or,  it  may  be 
spit  out  again,  then  cough  twice  or  thrice  as  hard  as  possible. 
If  it  does  not  pass  yet,  let  the  proceedings  bo  repeated  by 
placing  the  stuff  on  the  left  knee. 

If  the  above  remedy  is  not  yet  umple,  try  the  following; 

Take  one-eighth  of  an  ounce  of  amber,  and  one-sixteenth 
of  an  ounce  of  mace.  These  give  to  the  patient  in  warm  wine 
and  a  little  sugar,  and  let  them  keep  themselves  warm. 

An  approved  Remedy  for  Jaundice. 

Procure  from  five  to  ten  cents’  worth  of  aniseed  oil,  pour 
from  fourteen  to  fifteen  drops  in  a  spoonful  of  brandy,  liquor 
or  meat  broth,  and  take  morning  before  breakfast,  or  an  equal 
dose  before  dinner,  and  after  supper  an  equal  quantity.  When 
this  medicine  is  used  up  the  jaundice  will  have  vanished. 
Probat  um. 

This  aniseed  preparation  is  not  only  an  excellent  remedy 
for  Jaundice,  but  also  good  for  lung  and  other  diseases,  but 
the  quantity  should  be  Increased.  A  man  of  forty-six  years 
suffering  from  pulmonary  disease,  whom  the  physician  had 
given  up,  considered  it  useless  to  give  him  any  more  medicine, 
was  advised  by  some  friend  to  use  the  aniseed  cure.  The 
patient  procured  forthwith  two  dollars’  worth  of  aniseed  at 
once,  and  within  a  fortnight  was  entirely  cured,  and  is  still 


148 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


alive  enjoying  the  best  of  health.  This  oil  is  really  a  re- 
juvehator. 

For  the  Jaundice. 

Take  a  large  white  onion,  cut  the  herbage  therefrom,  bore 
a  hole  into  the  bulb,  put  a  piece  of  the  size  of  a  nut  of  tefiak 
therein,  also  one  ounce  of  powdered  saffron,  mix  all  well  to¬ 
gether  and  put  it  into  the  onion,  and  boil  carefully  over  a  Are 
so  as  not  to  burn  it.  After  having  boiled  sufficiently  long,  put 
it  in  a  linen  cloth,  press  the  juice  well  out  of  it  Give  this  to 
the  patient  mornings  before  breakfast  to  drink.  It  will  surely 
cure. 

To  Extinguish  Moles  and  Marks. 

Take  of  nitre,  white  cream  of  tartar,  one  pinch  of  each, 
pound  separately,  then  mix:  it,  and  after  sifting  put  it  in  a 
deep  dish  until  it  burns  up  and  becomes  like  a  cake,  thep  put 
it  in  another  dish,  pour  water  over  it,  stir  it  with  the  finger 
till  it  dissolves,  afterward  strain  through  a  filter,  pour  it  into 
a  new  earthen  pot  upod  the  fire,  but  not  to  boil,  merely  to  dry 
and  pulverize. 

After  this  is  done,  take  nine  ounces  of  distilled  vinegar,  two 
ounces  of  brandy,  put  into  a  glass  and  mix  the  powder  pre¬ 
pared  in  the  above  manner  therewith;  let  it  distil  in  the  sun 
for  three  days  and  save  it  for  use.  In  using  it,  wash  morn¬ 
ing  and  evening  the  moles  with  it,  and  but  a  few  days  will 
elapse  to  show  the  result  to  be  a  pure  white  skin  and  quite 
free  from  moles  or  freckles. 

For  Swollen  Feet  and  Pains  of  the  Skin. 

The  bark  of  elderberry  mixed  with  strong  salt  water,  should 
be  used  as  a  wash  for  sore  feet  and  other  injuries  of  the  skin. 

For  Round  or  Maw  Worms. 

The  Juice  of  elderberries,  mixed  with  honey,  taken  Inwardly, 
will  kill  the  round  worms  In  the  body,  but  It  should  be  given 
prudently,  according  to  the  vigor  and  age  of  the  respective 
parties. 

Row  to  Restore  "Nature  when  arrested  by  Cold  or  III  Health* 

When  women  are  thus  suffering,  they  should  take  the  sap 
or  juice  of  the  elder  bark,  or,  apply  the  bruised  leaves  of  this 
shrub  warm  upon  the  body. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


*4» 


A  Mnsk  for  the  Stomach  or  Bellyaches  of  Infante, 

Take  one-half  ounce  of  good  rose  water,  the  same  quantity 
of  larkspur  water  and  curly  balsam-apple,  flower  water,  also 
fire  cents'  worth  vof  wormwood  seed  syrup,  some  five  cents' 
worth  of  pulverized  tragacanth.  All  of  these  ingredients  must 
be  well  mixed  together  and  sweetened  with  sugar,  then  add  a 
little  spring-water,  boil  it  gently  in  a  dish  and  let  it  cool  o<L 
but  take  care  that  it  does  not  sour.  Let  the  child  eat  three, 
but  seldom  as  much  as  four,  teaspoonfuls  thereof. 

A  good  Remedy  for  the  Four  Days’  Fever, 

Take  therlak,  wormwood  and  nutmeg,  of  each,  one  and  a 
naif  drachms,  and  five  drops  of  spir.  vitr. 

These  articles  carefully  mixed  in  three  spoonfuls  of  cardo- 
benedict  water,  give  two  or  three  hours  before  you  expect  the 
fev*?r  to  return.  After  taking  this,  drink  a  good  gill  of  first 
class  cognac  brandy,  i^erspire  after  taking  the  dose,  but  be 
sure  the  patient’s  bowels  have  been  opened  within  the  last 
twenty-four  hours. 


A  Splendid  Eye  Water, 

Take  white  rose  water,  or  in  case  that  cannot  be  had,  red 
rose  water,  and  a  little  native  camphor,  five  grains  of  white 
vitriol,  pound  into  a  mortar,  then  pour  the  rose  water  over  it; 
shake  well.  Before  retiring  to  sleep,  wet  a  clean  linen  cloth 
In  this  water  and  rub  the  eyes  with  it  It  is  also  good  to  dear 
the  freckles  of  the  face. 

How  to  make  a  good  Stomach  Plaster. 

Take  two  ounces  of  melted  wax,  in  which  stir  a  dracjtUD  of 
each  of  the  following:  ground  cloves,  nutmeg,  alba  eevatrla 
and  turpentine. 

After  straining  all  these  articles  through  a  cloth,  add  ten 
grains  of  wormwood  oil,  stir  all  well  together  till  It  becomes 
cold,  spread  it  upon  a  piece  of  muslin;  when  cold,  paint  bal* 
sam  of  cloves  over  It,  wherewith  it  may  be  freshened  up  from 
tim<?  to  time  Apply  to  the  stomach  externally,  it  is  a  very 
efficacious  remedy. 


150 


ALBERTOS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


For  Constipated  Persons ,  hoto  to  open  the  Bowels  within  One 

Hours *  Time. 

Take  a  dose  of  salts  and  senna,  such  as  apothecaries  sell. 

How  to  make  a  Gravel  Water . 

Take  parsley,  radishes,  shave  grass  (horse-tail,  Dutch  rush), 
and  cornelian  cherries,  put  these  together  in  the  alembic.  It 
is  a  very  efficient  remedy. 

A  good  Recipe  for  a  Person  suffering  from  a  Fall. 

Give  him  a  good  draught  of  linseed  oil  to  drink,  also  some 
chervil  water.  But  in  case  the  fall  was  a  very  violent  one, 
give  mummio  and  spermaceti  made  warm  in  wine  vinegar. 
This  has  been  used  frequently  with  great  effect. 

How  to  distil  a  Water  to  cause  a  Perspiration. 

Take  a  good  handful  of  cardobenedict  herbs,  same  quantity 
of  wormwood  centifolium,  cut  fine  and  put  into  a  dish,  sprinkle 
these  well  with  some  good  old  wine.  Let  it  stand  and  soak  for 
four  days;  then  take  a  drachm  of  cinnamon,  a  whole  lemon 
put  into  a  glass,  pour  again  good  old  wine  over  it,  and  let  it 
stand  again  for  four  days,  cut  it  into  fine  pieces  and  distil  in 
the  alembic.  The  result  will  be  an  excellent  water  for  sweat* 
ing  the  patient. 

For  the  Cough  of  Infants. 

Take  violet  roots,  powdered  licorice  root,  of  each  one-hall 
of  an  ounce,  one  drachm  brown  bithynia  root,  a  pinch  of 
saffron,  four  ounces  candy  sugar  (white).  All  these  articles 
pound  to  a  fine  powder  and  mix  well  together.  Give  as  much 
as  will  cover  the  point  of  a  knife,  whenever  required. 

A  valuable  Recipe  for  Pulmonary  and  other  Consumptions , 
also  a  Drink  for  the  Breast ,  a  wonderful  Beverage. 

Speedwell  (veronica),  scabiosas,  magwort,  a  handful  of 
hyssop,  sage,  acremening,  bethunia,  blue  violets,  hair  of  a 
handful;  five  ounces  sweet  angelica,  alantis  roots,  licorice 
root,  waywort,  aniseed,  licorice  juice,  rhubarb,  senna,  of  these 
articles  four  ounces;  of  carraway  seed  and  field  fennel,  two 
ounces.  The  dried  herbs  as  well  as  the  roots,  must  be  cut 
fine  and  pounded;  then  pour  a  good  quart  of  pure  spring 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


153 


water  over  It,  let  it  remain  standing  over  night,  then  put  it 
in  a  new  covered  pot,  boil  down  one-half  of  its  volume,  and 
it  will  be  all  right  and  ready  for  use. 

A  good  Herb  Wine  for  a  Laxative. 

Take  white  waywort  roots,  three  ounces  of  alantis  roots, 
one  and  one-half  drachm  white  nettle  blossoms,  one  and  one- 
half  ounce  benedictus  roots,  a  stem  of  wormwood  herbs,  all 
together  a  good  handful,  one-half  ounce  of  lemon  peels;  also 
of  rhubarb,  one-half  ounce,  one  and  one-half  ounce  of  senna, 
half  an  ounce  of  prepared  coriander,  a  few  white  andrones, 
a  little  aniseed,  one-half  ounce  violet  roots,  sweet  angelica, 
one  ounce  of  good  sloe  blossoms.  Take  for  dinner  and  supper, 
?n  soup,  a  spoonful  of  this  mixture,  or  take  every  day  twice 
*he  cardobenedictus  powder. 

For  Erysipelas . 

Take  of  rhubarb,  turbirbium  and  diogrite,  a  scruple  of  each. 
Pulverize,  mix  well,  and  take  in  good  warm  wine. 

N.  R. — Before  taking  the  medicament,  take  the  day  previous 
a  drachm  of  prepared  cream  of  tartar  in  warm  wine.  Keep 
warm  and  do  pot  go  into  the  fresh  air.  Take  also  a  warm 
beverage  of  beer  or  good  wine  with  an  egg  beaten  in,  and 
sweetened  with  sugar,  but  eat  no  specified  food.  This  will 
purify  the  blood. 

Another  approved  Remedy  for  Erysipelas. 

Whoever  is  troubled  with  erysipelas  on  the  foot  or  any 
other  limb,  should  pronounce  the  following,  holding  his  face 
near  the  sores:  Oh,  thou  all-burning  and  inflamed  carbuncle 
and  fiery'  spark,  how  art  thou  so  hot,  how  art  thou  so  dark, 
with  the  aid  of  God  I  seek  thee,  with  God  the  Son  I  find  thee, 
with  God  the  Holy  Ghost  I  banish  thee.  In  the  name  of  God 
the  Father,  God  the  Son,  and  God  the  Holy  Spirit.  While 
pronouncing  these  three  holiest  names,  blow  outwardly  over 
the  erysipelas. 

A  good  Ointment  for  Serious  Warts. 

Make  a  white  turnip  hollow  inside  by  taking  the  pit  out, 
put  freeh  butter  therein,  also  a  fresh  hen’s  egg.  Let  these 
articles  be  rendered  by  broiling  inside,  pour  through  a  cloth, 


152 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


with  a  little  rose  water  added,  and  boil  it  till  it  becomes  the 
consistency  of  a  salve.  This  is  a  very  reliable  ointment 

To  Drive  away  Warts. 

Speak  over  the  warts  thus:  Vanish  in  flaming  ether,  sala¬ 
mander!  Flow  together,  step  forward,  and  finish  thus,  in 
the  natne  of  God  the  Father,  God  the  Son  and  God  the  Holy 
Spirit.  This  must  be  repeated  three  times,  and  each  time  while 
pronouncing  the  three  holiest  names,  blow  over  the  warts,  and 
in  a  very  few  weeks  they  will  vanish,  so  that  none  will  know 
whence  they  have  gone  to. 

To  Drive  away  the  Oout  and  Neuralgia. 

Speak  thus:  The  bells  will  soon  ring  out  and  sound,  the 
chiming  out  of  gout  and  flux,  that  ye  no  longer  shall  my  life 
embrace,  this  horrid  pain  is  out  of  place,  go  hence,  depart, 
be  laid  now  in  thy  grave,  that  I  no  longer  fear  for  thee  may 
have,  this  grant  me  God  the  Father,  Ged  the  Son  and  God 
the  Holy  Spirit.  While  pronouncing  each  of  these  holy  names, 
make  a  motion  with  the  hand  over  the  feet,  downward,  and 
if  the  ailment  is  in  both  feet  it  must  be  pronounced  three 
times  over  each  foot.  If  it  is  a  neuralgic  pain,  stroke  with 
the  hands  outward  bent  over  the  seat  of  the  pain. 

To  Extirpate  Corns. 

Commence  by  softening  the  corn  in  a  foot-bath,  then  cut 
the  corn  as  close  as  possible.  In  case  of  a  man,  wait  for  the 
funeral  of  a  man;  in  case  of  a  woman,  wait  for  the  funeral 
af  a  female;  be  seated  in  your  bed-room,  take  off  the  stock¬ 
ing  and  move  the  index  finger  over  the  corn,  and  speak  thus: 
What  I  touch  may  vanish,  what  I  hold  may  depart  like  the 
dead  in  the  tomb,  in  the  name  of  God  the  Father,  the  Son 
and  Holy  Spirit.  As  long  as  the  bells  are  tolling  speak  the 
above  formula,  and  continue  to  move  over  the  corn,  and  say 
constantly  as  follows:  And  “what  I  touch  may  vanish  like 
the  dead  in  the  grave,”  three  times,  but  always  pronounce  the 
three  highest  names. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


16S 


For  Bloodshot  or  Red  Eyes. 

Take  white  autumn  roses,  soak  them  three  hours  in  aqua 
roaarum  (rose  water),  then  tie  them  over  the  eye,  but  do  not 
expose  yourself  to  the  open  air  for  the  day. 

For  Marasmus  for  Old  and  Young  Folks. 

Take  seventeen  good  corals,  twenty-five  genuine  pearls, 
thirteen  Tresh  arthritis  grains,  take  the  black  skin  from  the 
latter,  then  take  a  stem  of  rosemary  and  the  same  of  mar¬ 
joram,  a  thimble  full  of  mousear  herbs,  a  good  sized  chicken 
stomach,  all  of  these  articles  well  dried  and  pounded  fine  in 
&  mortar.  Of  this  powder  the  patient  may  take  every  day 
three  times  the  quantity  covering  the  points  of  a  table  knife, 
In  anything  palatable  to  the  sick  person. 

In  using  this  powder,  draw  water  from  a  brook  against  the 
stream,  put  therein  consumption  herbs  and  a  large  common 
field  bean  straw,  also  a  handful  of  hazel  poplar  leaves  and  the 
same  quantity  of  camomile  flowers.  Boil  well  in  a  new 
earthen  pot  and  bathe  morning  and  evening  arms  and  hands 
therein. 

An  excellent  Stomach  Tonic. 

Take  of  each  of  the  following  articles  one-half  an  ounce, 
viz.:  Orange  peels,  good  cinnamon,  mace,  nutmeg,  fresh 

violet  roots,  and  half  a  drachm  of  white  ginger,  cardamon 
seed,  white  nettle  blossoms,  cubebs,  paradies  apple  grains; 
one  and  a  half  drachms  quinces,  one  drachm  Spanish  peppei 
and  one  drachm  aniseed.  After  sweetening  \^ell  with  sugar, 
it  may  be  taken  evening  and  morning  as  a  tonic  for  the  stom¬ 
ach.  Chicken  stomachs  may  be  added  thereto  as  one  may 
desire. 

An  Ointment  for  Sore  Breasts. 

Take  a  pure  cold  cast-lead  lye  three  or  four  ounces,  one 
point  of  a  knife  full  of  saffron,  pure  linseed  oil,  two  or  three 
ounces,  two  ounces  of  good  vinegar,  the  whites  of  two  or  three 
eggs,  these  things  beat  together,  then  take  rye  flour,  which 
is  unbolted,  stir  it  until  it  gets  stiff.  Take  a  white  cloth,  of 
the  form  of  the  breast,  cut  a  small  hole  therein  so  that  the 
nipple  draws  out,  and  put  the  salve  upon  a  cloth  and  apply  it 


154 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


to  the  breast  till  it  becomes  hard.  When  used  in  good  season 
before  waiting  too  long,  it  will  allay  the  pains,  but  if  it  is 
neglected  too  long  it  must  need  suppurate,  the  ointment  draws 
it  open  and  heals  it.  It  must  not  be  cut  or  rubbed  or  washed. 

A  good  Relief  for  a  Person  who  met  with  a  Fall  upon  the 

Breast. 

Soon  after  meeting  with  such  an  accident,  give  the  patient 
a  good  draught  of  linseed  oil  to  drink,  and  procure  from  a 
druggist  one-half  an  ounce  of  dragon’s  blood,  take  also  one- 
half  a  wine  glass  of  chervil  water,  one-half  of  the  same  quan¬ 
tity  linden  blossom  water,  mix  the  dragon’s  blood  with  the 
distilled  water,  warm  it  and  let  the  patient  drink  it. 

For  a  Youth  contracting  Hernia  or  Rupture. 

Cut  three  bunches  of  hair  from  the  crown  of  the  head,  tie 
it  in  a  clean  cloth,  carry  it  noiselessly  into  another  distriet 
(county),  and  bury  it  under  a  young  willow  tree  so  that  it 
may  grow  together  therewith.  It  is  a  sure  remedy. 

For  a  Cough. 

Take  violet  root,  pounded  licorice  of  each  onc'half  an  ounce, 
brown  bethynia  roots,  four  drachms,  point  of  a  knife  full  of 
saffron,  four  ounces  of  white  rock  candy.  All  these  pounded 
fine,  and  mix  well  together  and  the  point  of  a  knife  full  given 
to  the  patient  whenever  required  will  be  beneficent. 

A  good  Black  Plaster. 

Take  one-half  pound  of  olive  oil,  a  quarter  of  a  pound  of 
silver  litherage,  a  quart  of  good  vinegar;  rose  vinegar  would 
be  the  best  for  the  purpose.  Stir  all  these  articles  together  in 
a  pan  placed  upon  the  fire  till  the  mass  becomes  black.  Then 
pour  it  into  pure  water,  and  grind  it  upon  a  stone  or  board 
together.  It  is  a  good  remedy  for  all  sorts  of  injuries. 

For  Bad  Hearing. 

Take  bell  grease,  such  as  is  used  in  greasing  the  bells  in 
belfries,  and  grease  behind  the  ears  therewith. 

A  Wash  for  Ladies,  to  obtain  a  fair  and  beautiful  Physi¬ 
ognomy. 

Take  bread  crumbs,  put  them  into  goat's  milk  whey,  strain 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


155 


>r  distil  it,  paint  the  face  with  it  and  it  will  become  fair  and 
beautiful. 

To  Facilitate  Healthy  Sleep. 

Procure  two  rabbit  ears,  place  them  under  the  pillow  of  a 
person  who  cannot  sleep,  without  his  knowledge. 

For  Neioly-Born  Children. 

For  their  first  bath  take  one  and  one-half  of  a  quart  of  red 
wine  and  a  quart  of  simple  peonia  leaves  boiled.  In  this  fluid 
bathe  the  infants. 

A  good  Pomatum  for  Sore  Heads. 

Take  one-half  of  a  pound  of  butter,  such  as  was  never  wa¬ 
tered,  ginger,  pepper,  of  each  one-half  an  ounce,  and  one  ounce 
of  copper  water,  half  an  ounce  of  cloves,  and  some  laurel 
leaves  and  stove  soot. 

All  these  articles  pounded  and  mixed  together,  and  boiled 
up  in  the  butter  until  it  is  rendered  completely.  When  it 
becomes  cold  grease  the  head  therewith.  It  heals  splendidly. 

An  Ointment  for  the  Itch  or  Mange . 

A  glass  of  ordinary  wine,  a  glass  of  cognac  brandy,  butter, 
hog’s  lard  and  cereat,  of  each  one  ounce,  salt  and  pepper,  bolus 
and  a  little  sulphur. 

For  Mole  and  Liver  Spots. 

White  camphor,  Venetian  borax,  of  each  one  ounce,  bean 
meal,  four  points  of  a  knife  full,  white  precipitate  of  mer¬ 
cury,  two  ounces  lemon,  rose  water,  sugar,  parsnip  water,  white 
lily  water,  of  each  one  ounce,  prepared  saltpetre  lozenges  and 
a  few  grains  of  linseed.  Distil  for  three  days  in  the  heat, 
afterward  press  through  a  cloth  and  put  in  a  cool  place.  This 
will  be  an  excellent  water  for  liver  spots.  Before  washing 
with  it,  add  a  little  alum  and  the  white  of  an  egg,  and  a  little 
of  red  snails,  and  grease  therewith.  It  is  a  great  medicament. 

How  to  Beautify  the  Face. 

In  the  first  place  take  twelve  or  twenty-four  fresh  eggs, 
put  them  in  a  glazed  pot,  pour  boiled  vinegar  over  the  eggs, 
cover  this  well  and  keep  it  for  eighteen  days  in  a  cellar;  then 


156 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


pour  the  vinegar  off,  soak  two  loaves  of  wheaten  bread  in  a 
quart  of  goat’s  milk,  then  take  white  wort,  cut  fine  and  mix 
together,  put  all  in  an  alembic  and  distil  to  a  water. 

An  Ointment  for  the  Face  for  Heat,  and  Cold. 

Procure  one  pound  of  bay  leaves,  pound  them  Ivell  in  a 
mortar,  boil  one  pound  of  sweet  oil  in  a  pan,  afterward  strain 
the  same  through  a  cloth,  then  put  it  again  into  a  pan,  pour 
seven  pounds  of  good  Spanish  wine  (port  wine  or  sherry 
wine),  one  pound  unwashed  butter,  boil  all  this  slowly,  after¬ 
ward  put  another  ounce  of  well  pulverized  incense  thereto. 
Then  take  the  pan  from  the  fire,  stir  well  together  and  expose 
it  to  the  air  in  a  glass  vessel,  so  that  it  will  thicken.  After¬ 
ward  the  face  may  be  anointed  therewith,  whenever  it  is  re¬ 
quired. 

A  Domestic  Injection. 

Take  poplar  leaves,  violet  stems,  camomile  flowers,  white 
maple  leaves,  ottermenig,  red  oats,  of  each  a  handful;  these 
articles  boil  in  a  pint  of  broth  of  mutton  or  lamb;  also,  one 
spoonful  of  good  honey,  four  spoonfuls  of  sweet  oil  and  the 
yellow  of  an  egg. 

For  Straining  Pains. 

Take  incense,  mastix,  viola  colophony  and  rose  water,  of 
one  as  much  as  of  the  other,  and  let  the  vapors  thereof  go 
toward  your  person. 

When  a  Person  cannot  pass  Water. 

Take  black  carraway  seed,  light  grains  of  incense,  of  each 
one  ounce,  lay  upon  live  coals,  and  inhale  the  fumes.  It  is  a 
well  confirmed  remedy. 

How  to  retain  the  passing  Labor  Pains. 

According  to  the  Pharmacopoea  a  tonic  is  made  by  phar- 
macutists  called  the  ursuline  drink.  This  is  to  be  given  ac¬ 
cording  to  direction,  and  all  will  be  right. 

For  the  After  Pains. 

Take  linseed  oil,  hempseed  oil,  of  each  two  ounces,  and 
three  yolks  of  eggs.  This  put  into  a  dish  and  stir  well  together. 
Put  on  a  cloth,  and  apply  to  the  stomach  of  the  patient. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


IS7 


For  the  Flooding. 

Water  of  balm  (melissesj,  pennyroyal  water,  of  each  one 
ounce,  and  eleven  drops  of  carbuncle  water,  to  drink. 

For  Putrid  Mouths  or  the  Scurvy. 

Brunnelle  water,  Norway  maple  leaves  and  strawberry 
water.  With  these  waters  rinse  the  mouth  clean,  and  with  a 
hornscraper  well  scraped,  roast  mush  meal  upon  a  new  lid, 
put  it  in  rose  honey  and  paint  the  mouth  therewith. 

A  Oargle  for  a  Putrid  Moiith. 

Take  turnips,  autumn  roses,  juniperberries,  lancet  herbs, 
white  iron  herbs,  blackberry  roots,  of  each  a  handful,  boil  In 
a  clean  pot,  and  with  this  water  gargle. 

How  to  Wean  a  Child  without  producing  Pains  in  the  Breast. 

Take  some  hazelnut  leaves,  about  one  month  old,  parsley, 
and  strew  it  under  three  different  doors  to  the  sweepings. 
Apply  this  in  a  new  rag  to  the  breast. 

A  good  Powder  for  Marasmus  of  Children. 

Seventeen  good  pearls,  thirteen  corals,  a  chicken  stomach,  a 
sprig  of  green  rosemary,  green  marjoram,  nine  palsy  grains, 
three  sprigs  of  mouse-ear  herbs. 

A  good  Stomach  Plaster  for  a  Bewitched  Child 

Take  a  little  of  the  oil  of  alrhonds,  a  little  deer’s  tallow,  as 
much  of  rose  vinegar  and  one  ounce  of  carraway  seed.  All 
these  articles  pounded  together,  put  upon  a  blue  paper,  and 
lay  it  upon  the  child’s  stomach. 

But  before  using  the  plaster,  the  mother  must,  after  eating 
supper,  cut  three  pieces  of  bread  thin,  while  sticking  the  knife 
three  times  through  the  bread,  and  put  this  knife  under  the 
child’s  back  during  the  night.  If  the  child  is  bewitched,  the 
knife  will  be  rusty  all  over  on  the  next  morning;  then  tak$ 
the  bread  from  the  knife,  put  butter  thereon,  and  give  it  to  a 
black  dog  to  eat,  while  you  must  put  an  old  shirt  on  the  child, 
which,  after  remaining  for  three  days  and  three  nights  upon 
the  child’s  person,  must  be  taken  off  and  interred  with  the 
above  mentioned  plaster.  This  has  to  be  done  noiselessly,  be¬ 
fore  sunrise,  and  under  an  alderwood  shrub. 


ALBERTU8  MAGNUS;  OR, 


m 


A  good  Platter  for  an  Obscure  Disease. 

Assafostida,  whole  saffron,  a  bulb  of  garlic,  a  handful  or 
house  leek,  mixed  with  the  white  of  two  eggs.  Put  upon  a 
cloth,  and  apply  to  the  sore  spot 

An  Excellent  Ointment  for  Erysipelas. 

Take  the  flowers  of  St  John's  herb,  wool  flowers,  white  lily 
leaves,  red  rose  leaves,  of  each  a  good  handful;  pour  one 
pound  of  swfeet  oil  over  it  and  distil  in  the  sun.  When  pre¬ 
paring  the  ointmexrl  take  two  thimblefuls  of  oil  and  one  Of 
cut  bees-wax  and  render  it  down  in  the  oil,  and  with  the  oint¬ 
ment  thus  obtained  grease  the  injury. 

Another  Recipe  for  the  same  Ailment. 

Goat’s  milk,  butter  and  saffron,  rendered  down  and  applied 
as  a  salve. 

For  Erysipelas. 

Take  eight  drops  of  white  eyestone  oil  Camber  oil).  In  two 
ounces  of  elder  flower  water,  and  perspire. 

A  good  Remedy  for  the  Gout. 

Take  rendered  goat's  milk  butter,  roast  cow  manurfe  therein, 
apply  to  a  cloth  and  put  upon  the  patient’s  sores. 

For  the  Tympanitis  and  Dropsy. 

Three  ounces  of  aniseed,  one-half  an  ounce  of  glycerine,  one- 
half  pound  of  raisins  and  one  quart  of  old  wine'  poured  there¬ 
on.  After  every  meal  take  a  glassful  of  it. 

Subcarbonate,  wormwood  salt,  centauris  salt,  cardobene- 
dictum  salt,  and  prepared  cream  of  tartar,  of  each  one  drachm, 
well  mixed  together.  Take  every  morning  in  soup,  or  chicken 
broth,  a  good  size  knife  point  full  thereof. 

A  Good  Powder  for  the  Gravel. 

Crab’s  eyes  and  fir  tree  needles,  of  each  one  ounce,  of  wild 
briar  seed,  three  ounces.  The  skin  of  a  chicken’s  stomach, 
and  prepared  cream  of  tartar,  two  ounces,  orange  peels,  four 
ounces,  and  eight  ounces  of  brown  rock  candy. 

Pulverize  fine  all  these  articles,  and  take  every  morning 
three  large  pinches  thereof,  especially  when  the  moon  is  wan¬ 
ing,  and  bathe  often  in  tepid  water. 


jvft  if  i  IAIV  Sl'jf  tlh  1  5. 


159 


An  excellent  Purifier  for  Womb  Disease. 

Cinnamon,  cloves,  mace,  ginger,  long  black  pepper,  .lemons, 
of  each  one  drachm;  sage,  mellsses,  rue,  balsam,  majoram, 
white  maple,  rosemary,  elder  flowers,  sloe  blossoms,  of  each 
one  handful;  angelica,  waywort.  and  benedictus  water,  of  each 
one  ounce;  wormwood,  woodwort,  and  parsnips,  of  each  one 
and  one-half  ounces;  one  lemon  and  one  orange,  with  the 
skins,  soaked  in  one  and  one-half  quart  of  wine,  and  three 
days  after  this  distilled  in  an  alembio,  will  produce  the  de¬ 
sired  extract. 

To  prevent  that  any  harm  may  come  to  the  Cattle. 

Give  them  the  quenching  water  of  a  blacksmith  to  drink. 

For  Loose  Teeth,  of  Cows. 

Mix  alum  and  vinegar  together  and  rub  the  teeth  of  the 
cattle  therewith. 

When  the  Livers  of  Cows  rot 

Give  to  the  cow  on  St.  Martin  day  (November  10th),  a 
piece  of  quince,  and  during  the  ensuing  year  the  liver  of  such 
a  cow  will  not  rot. 

For  Bewitched  Cattle. 

Take  sabintree,  pound  it  to  powder,  mix  salt  with  it,  and 
rub  the  tongue  and  roof  of  the  mouth  with  it,  and  it  will  re¬ 
main  healthy. 

When  a  Cow  is  plagued  with  Erysipelas. 

Take  elder  blossoms  and  give  the  cow  to  eat  and  the  disease 
will  leave.  Or,  drive  the  cow  upon  the  meadow,  and  pay  at¬ 
tention  where  the  cow  treads  with  her  right  hind  leg  Dig 
that  sod  out  with  a  knife  and  turn  it  over;  when  it  becomes 
yellow  or  withered  the  erysipelas  will  vanish. 

Another  Remedy  for  the  Disease. 

Take  a  red  woolen  cloth,  scarlet  is  the  best,  cut  it  fine,  and 
give  it  to  the  cattle  to  eat  in  bread.  It  helps.  Also  give  three 
stems  of  mayflower  to  the  cow. 

Another. 

Take  a  cup  of  red  wine,  boil  a  spoonful  of  carraway  therein 


110 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


and  let  the  cattle  drink  it.  Some  hedge  blossoms,  of  an  uneven 
number,  is  also  good  to  take — that  is,  three,  five,  seven  or 
nine,  according  to  the  strength  of  the  cattle. 

Still  another. 

Take  fresh  fish  roe,  put  them  upon  live  coals,  and  let  the 
cow  inhale  the  fumes  through  the  nose.  If  the  cattle,  in  the 
eighth  year,  has  many  pimples  and  blisters  on  the  tongue  and 
udder,  take  melissa  or  liver  herb  (mandagora),  heathen, 
wound  herbs,  and  snake  root.  Put  all  these  herbs  into  a  pail, 
and  pour  water  over  them.  As  often  as  the  cattle  drinks 
thereof,  fill  it  up  again.  Only  every  two  or  three  days  the 
herbs  have  to  be  renewed.  Also  suspend  from  the  neck  of 
such  sick  cows  Easterlurlay  herbs  wrapped  up  in  a  cloth. 

When  Cattle  is  Plagued  icith  too  much  Bile. 

Take  fungus  of  apple  tree,  old  shoe  soles,  some  Christian 
wort  (such  as  is  sold  by  apothecaries),  and  skunk  cabbage, 
groupd  to  powder,  and  at  night,  when  the  cattle  receive  no 
more  food  for  the  day,  give  a  spoonful  of  this  medicament. 

When  Cattle  Swell  up. 

Take  three  roots  of  way  wort,  and  let  the  cattle  eat  it. 

When  Cattle  are  Rato  and  Sore. 

When  a  horse  or  ox  is  ridden  raw  and  sore,  wash  the  sore 
two  or  three  times  a  day  with  a  strong  infusion  of  black  oak 
bark. 

How  to  Wean  Calves. 

On  the  third  day  before  full  moon,  calves  should  be  weaned, 
and  you  will  have  beautiful  large  cattle. 

For  the  Worms  of  Cattle. 

Give  such  an  animal  one  teaspoonful  of  wormseed  three 
times  a  day. 

Another  Remedy  for  the  same. 

Give  the  animal  some  of  the  green  fungus,  such  as  grows 
upon  manure  puddles. 

How  Madame  de  Vellberg  had  her  powder  prepared. 

Liver  herb,  such  as  grows  on  oaken  tree  trunks,  melissa, 
cardobened  ictus  powder,  veronica,  aspen  leaves,  wood  herbt. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


161 


Samile's  powder,  snake  herb,  degmentes,  mayflower,  brown 
bethtmiaa,  wormwood,  oak  leaves,  fungus  of  apple  trees,  ashes 
of  juniper  tree  wood,  pear  tree  wood  ashes,  walnut  and  grape 
vine  ashes,  ottermening,  alpis  roots,  hoof  roots,  nettle  seed, 
gunpowder,  and  as  mueh  salt  as  the  above  articles  make  al¬ 
together. 

When  Cattle  Die  suddenly. 

Wash  such  cattle  with  the  cooling-off  water  of  smith  shops, 
or  such  as  is  used  by  bakers  before  the  bake  oven;  or  arise 
on  &  Sunday  morning,  before  sunrise,  and  take  a  sieve,  re¬ 
verse  It,  put  ashes  on  it,  and  sift  it  over  the  cattle,  and  the 
lice  will  vanish  from  their  skin,  or  take  bark  of  a  birch,  and 
hang  it  around  the  cattle's  neck. 

When  Cattle  are  Plagued  by  Worms  in  Sore  Parts  or  Wounds. 

Take  hawk  weed,  suspend  it  from  the  sick  beast's  neck,  and 
the  vermin  will  drop  from  their  wounds. 

When  Sheep  Die. 

Take  sheep  milk,  mix  it  with  water,  and  drench  your  sheep 
with  it. 

When  an  Animal  Belches  up,  and  the  Seat  of  the  Ailment  is 

Unknown. 

Take  half  an  ounce  of  pulverised  alum,  mix  salt  with  it, 
and  give  it  in  one  dose  to  the  cattle. 

When  Animals  are  Bilious. 

Give,  in  good  season,  croton  flowers  to  eat.  It  will  Improve 

them. 

Another  Remedy  for  the  same  Ailment. 

Take  three  handfuls  of  hemp  seed  and  the  same  quantity 
of  chickweed.  Give  It  internally,  and  tie  linden  tree  peelings 
around  their  body,  and  the  disease  will  stop. 

When  a  Cow  will  not  Purify  after  Calving. 

Take  haxelwort  and  herb,  cut  it  all  up  together,  and  give  it 
to  the  cow  In  water  or  wine. 

Another  for  the  same  Disease. 

Tako  one  handful  of  wintergreen,  and  let  the  cow  eat  it. 


r62 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 

Still  Another. 

Give  the  three  leaves  of  a  house-leek  to  the  cow,  and  the 
purification  will  soon  take  place. 

When  Cattle  cannot  pass  Urine. 

Take  a  handful  of  parsley  roots,  and  the  herb  thereof,  cut 
fine,  boil  well  in  water  or  wine,  and  let  the  cattle  take  it. 

When  a  Witch  besets  the  Animals. 

Take  enzian,  juniper  berries,  ashes  of  pear  tree  wood,  and 
salt,  of  one  as  much  as  of  the  other,  of  aloes  and  almond  nuts, 
half  the  quantity.  Pound  all  pure  and  fine.  Mix  well  to¬ 
gether.  After  having  a  pail  full  of  this  powder,  take  a  good 
handful  of  house  leek,  and  cut  it  fine.  Of  this  give  to  the  cat¬ 
tle  as  much  as  may  be  taken  between  three  fingers,  and  push 
It  into  their  throats.  Cut  off  of  such  cattle’s  tail  a  tuft  of 
hair,  so  that  it  may  perspire  freely.  This  should  be  done  dur¬ 
ing  the  waning  of  the  moon,  and  treat  the  animals  every 
morning  to  a  fumigation  with  juniper  berries. 

Nettleseed  mixed  with  salt  is  also  good  at  all  times. 

For  the  Swellings  of  Beasts. 

Let  a  man  scrape  from  his  finger  nails  as  much  as  possible, 
and  give  to  the  cattle  or  horse  upon  bread.  Probatum. 

A  Powder  for  Open  and  Sore  Feet. 

Take  garden  rose  leaves,  as  well  as  hedge  roses,  either  white 
or  red,  lancet  shaped  waywort.  Make  a  separate  powder  of 
each,  and  then  mix  both  together.  Wash  the  injury  of  the 
cattle  with  it,  and  strew  of  the  powder  into  the  same.  It  will 
heal. 

To  cause  a  Cow  to  give  plenty  of  Milk. 

When  a  cow  bears  the  first  calf,  give  her  half  of  an  eel’s 
tail  in  half  a  loaf  of  bread,  or  however  best  it  may  be  given, 
and  the  cow  will  certainly  give  a  great  deal  of  milk. 

When  an  Epidemic  is  raging  among  Cattle. 

Take  juniper  berry  vinegar,  teriak  and  pulverized  horse 
hoof  roots.  Of  the  latter  article  as  much  as  the  size  of  a 
walnut.  Mix  well  in  vinegar.  Give  the  cattle  this  drink,  and 
let  them  have  neither  food  nor  drink  fof  three  hours  after 
taking  the  medicine. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


163 


^  «  I—  ‘  '  “ 

For  the  Sudden  Dying  of  Cattle. 

Faruwind  roots,  bruised  and  boiled  in  water,  and  both  roots 
and  water  given  to  the  cattle  or  swine,  mixed  with  their  feed. 
It  is  an  excellent  remedy. 

For  the  Superabundance  of  Blood  in  Sheep  or  Cattle. 

Take  two  good  handfuls  of  red  lintels  (such  as  are  used  in 
cooking),  a  good  handful  of  oaken  worm  meal  (such  as  is 
found  between  the  bark  and  the  wood),  a  handful  of  pulver¬ 
ized  bay  leaves,  a  handful  of  select  tormentil  (the  red  are 
the  best),  and  one-half  of  a  salt  cake.  Mix  all  together  with 
the  sheep  or  cattle  feed.  Salt  once  a  day,  and,  in  aggravated 
cases,  twice  every  day  therewith. 

For  the  Witches. 

Take  the  core  of  a  quince,  and  give,  on  St.  Mary’s  Eve, 
every  animal,  such  a  core  to  eat. 

Another  for  the  Witches. 

Give  to  a  human  being  or  dumb  animal,  on  St.  Martin’s 
Eve  (tenth  November,  c.  a.),  three  garlic  bulbs  to  eat. 

Another  Remedy  for  the  Same  Disease. 

Take  soot  and  burned  bread,  pulverized,  and  some  salt.  Mix 
together,  and  give  to  the  cattle. 

When  Cattle  have  the  Dysentery. 

Boil  a  large  handful  of  lintels,  till  they  become  very  stiff, 
and  give  them  to  the  cattle.  Repeat  this  so  long  as  it  helps. 
Give  also  some  cottage  cheese. 

A  Powder  for  the  Lung  Rot  of  Cattle. 

Take  white  wool  herbs,  veronica,  liverwort,  snakeroot,  such 
as  grows  upon  the  trunks  of  oaks,  cross  sage,  wild  balsam, 
aspen  leaves,  wormwood,  mengan  roots,  laurel  leaves,  juniper- 
berries,  brown  bethunias,  lavender  (herbs  as  well  as  flowers), 
and  ashes  of  grape  vines  and  of  walnut  wood.  All  these  ar¬ 
ticles  pulverize.  Give  once  a  week,  but  in  very  aggravated 
cases,  every  two  days,  or  when  necessary,  even  twice  a  day; 
and  afterward  give  of  the  following  water: 


164 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  Oft, 


■  ■  . —  ■  —  . .  —  —  ■>-■■■■■  i  — — — i — ^ 

A  Drink. 

Take  lung  herbs,  suoh  as  grow  upon  oalc  tree  trunks,  worm¬ 
wood,  and  pating  herbs,  of  each  a  like  quantity.  Put  water  in 
a  kettle  or  earth  pot,  and  let  these  articles  boil  well  together, 
and  give  this  beverage  as  stated  above.  Such  sick  cattle  must 
not  drink  near  water  where  healthy  animals  drink. 

When  the  Vomit  rages  among  Cattle. 

Take  gunpowder,  sabintree,  and  beech  ashes,  of  one  as  much 
as  of  the  other.  Powder  all  fine.  Of  this  give  the  cattle  a 
good  tablespoonful  at  once.  This  is  also  good  for  horses. 
When  this  bad  disease  rages,  it  should  be  given  every  three 
or  four  weeks  once,  even  if  the  animals  are  well.  But  imme¬ 
diately  after  giving  this  medicine,  let  the  animal  fast  for  three 
hours. 

When  Cattle  are  Sick ,  and  the  Disease  is  not  known. 

On  St.  Walpurgls  Day,  early,  before  sunrise,  break  cowslip 
flowers,  powder  them,  and  let  the  cattle  take  them. 

A  Remedy  to  apply  to  Cows  During  Christmas  in  order  to 
make  them  give  plenty  of  milk. 

Take  the  milk  and  sinew  of  a  herring,  bay  leaves,  saffron, 
and  black  carraway  seed.  Mix  well  together.  Put  it  upon 
four  pieces  of  bread,  and  give  these  four  pieces  to  four  differ¬ 
ent  OOW8. 

A  Remedy  for  the  Vomit. 

On  New  Year's  Day,  give  every  animal  throe  bay  leaves, 
before  feeding  them  with  anything  else. 

What  to  give  a  Calving  Cow,  soon  after  Calving ,  to  make  her 

give  much  Milk. 

As  soon  as  she  has  calved,  milk  her.  Warm  two  quarts  of 
boer,  but  do  not  boil  it.  In  this  let  a  piece  of  butter  or  lard, 
twice  as  large  as  a  hen’s  egg,  be  dissolved;  also,  a  goodly 
portion  of  saffron,  powdered,  and  one-half  of  a  powdered 
quince.  Let  all  this  be  drank  by  the  cow  at  once,  and  she  will 
give  much  milk. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


165 


When  a  Cow  is  hard  to  become  with  Calf. 

Take  nine  knots  of  an  alder  tree,  in  the  spring  of  the  year, 
powder  them,  and  give  to  the  cow  upon  a  fresh  baked  piece 
of  bread.  It  has  been  tried  with  success. 

Remedy  dgainst  all  Injuries  and  Diseases  of  Horses. 

Take  arsenic,  the  size  of  a  small  pea,  and  oil  lard,  the  else 
of  a  walnut.  These  two  articles  mix  well  together.  Take  a 
piece  of  leather  the  size  of  the  rough  or  bristly  part.  Do  not 
apply  the  plaster  too  thick,  and  let  it  remain  upon  the  sore 
for  three  days  and  three  nights.  On  the  fourth  day,  take  a 
quart  of  larget,  and  wash  it  out  in  fresh  water.  Take  the 
white  of  one  or  two  eggs.  Mix  all  these  things  well,  so  that 
they  make  an  ointment.  Put  it  where  the  former  plaster  was, 
until  the  leather  falls  off,  as  it  had  been  before.  Then  take 
the  salve,  with  the  albumen,  and  put  a  large  plaster  upon  the 
other.  Boil  a  water  of  heart’s-ease  herb  and  attlic,  and  wrash 
it  out.  Then  take  the  dry  powder,  and  heal  therewith  the  sore, 
and  no  rough  spot  will  appear  thereafter.  Probatum!  The 
first  plaster,  however,  should  not  be  left  on  any  longer  than 
three  days  and  three  nights,  as  it  will  eat  in  too  deeply. 

Another  Remedy  for  Irritation  and  Bristles. 

Take  alum,  copper  water,  snowball,  verdigris,  an  ounce  of 
each.  Powder  all  these  articles  fine,  add  half  a  pound  of  lard, 
render  it  down,  pour  water  to  it,  mix  the  above  articles  there¬ 
to,  let  them  boil  thoroughly  ,and  make  an  ointment  thereof. 

Another  Remedy  for  the  same  Ailment . 

Pound  garlic,  and  mix  with  it  honey  to  a  mush.  Make  a 
plaster  of  tow  or  oakum  the  size  of  the  injured  parts.  Apply 
as  hot  as  the  horse  will  stand  it.  Let  it  reipain  for  two  days, 
then  put  a  fresh  one  on  again.  If  you  notice  that  it  heals, 
grease  it  with  honey;  but  in  case  it  does  not  heal,  put  more 
plaster  on  it. 

Another  Remedy. 

Take  goblins,  put  them  into  a  glass  vessel,  and  pour  so 
much  oil  upon  them  that  they  will  die  at  once.  Leave  it  stand 
for  fourteen  days  in  the  sun,  for  distillation.  With  this  mass 


166 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


grease  the  horse’s  sores  twice  every  day.  They  will  contract 
holes,  but  that  does  not  matter.  Continue  to  grease,  until  all 
is  healed  up.  But  after  they  are  healed,  take  erbls  herbs  and 
crab  water,  of  each  an  even  proportion,  and  wash  the  sorts 
until  they  become  dry  Take  bacon,  and  water,  and  grea se 
well. 

Still  another  Remedy. 

Procure  four  ounces  of  the  herb  of  armatilles,  powder  them, 
and  add  two  ounces  of  lime,  slakened  with  aquafortis  to  a  thin 
lhush.  With  this  ointment  grease,  and  put  the  powder  over 
the  grease.  Rub  it  well  every  morning  with  saliva.  This 
remedy  is  also  good  for  open  fistula. 

Another  Remedy  for  the  above  Disease. 

Take  a  potful  of  pigeon  manure,  and  boil  it  well.  Then  add 
some  vinegar.  Apply  as  a  warm  poultice,  mornings  and  even* 
ingB.  After  removing  the  poultice,  put  the  matter  again  into 
the  pot,  stir  it,  and  use  as  before.  Such  a  potful  of  manure 
may  be  used  for  eight  days,  but  after  that  time  a  fresh  potful 
has  to  be  procured.  This  fs  a  well  approved  art. 

When  the  Hoofs  of  Cattle  fall  off. 

Take  the  leaves  of  cochlearia  (scurvy  grass),  and  put  them 
Into  a  clean  earthen  pot,  wbll  covered  and  sealed  up,  so  that 
no  vapors  can  escape.  Then  put  It  into  h  bake-oven,  and  let 
dry  to  powder.  Afterward  sift  through  a  bolting  cloth,  until 
it  becomes  very  fine.  Dry  the  feet  well  With  a  clean  dry  rag, 
and  then  apply  the  powder.  The  feet  must  not  be  tied  up. 
Repeat  twice  per  day,  as  above  directed. 

Should  the  udder  and  teats  be  so  sore  that  the  skin  peels 
off,  take  leaves  of  radishes,  pound  them  in  a  mortar,  press 
the  Juice  through  a  cloth,  and  apply  it  to  the  udder  and  teat 
by  means  of  a  feather;  but  do  not  touch  them  with  your  bare 
hands. 

A  Orand  Art  to  Stop  the  Cramp. 

Edoae  f  Veoatp  t  Beoaev  f 

This  suspend  to  the  patient  till  the  cramp  leaves. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


167 


When  the  Udder  of  a  Cow  is  Bewitched. 

Make  three  wreaths  of  corydalis,  and  milk  through  these 
three  times  toward  the  feet.  Then  give  the  cow  these  three 
wreaths  to  eat,  while  speaking  the  following  words:  Cow,  1 
give  thee  these  wreaths,  thou  wilt  return  the  milk  to  me,  in 
the  name  of  God  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Spirit. 
Amen. 

When,  in  early  spring,  the  cattle  are  driven  out  for  the  first 
time,  push  a  piece  of  dried  beef  into  the  throat  of  each  animal. 
Put  a  little  salt  on  it.  Such  cattle  will  be  free  from  erysipelas 
during  the  coming  year,  and  also  secure  against  the  rot. 

When  a  cow  is  slow  to  purify  herself,  after  calving,  give 
hazelwort,  or  dried  leaven  of  the  size  of  a  hen’s  egg,  in  pure 
vinegar  and  dissolve  it. 

When  the  navel  of  a  calf  is  too  large,  take  fresh  well  water, 
put  some  salt  into  it,  and  wash  twice  a  day,  mornings  and 
evenings,  the  navel  with  it.  But  do  not  rub  from  above  or 
below,  but  only  from  one  side  to  the  other. 

For  Worms  of  Cattle. 

Take  a  little  earth  from  under  the  entrance  to  the  sitting 
room,  a  little  garlic  and  chalk,  and  scrape  a  little  from  a  deer’s 
antlers.  Mix  well  together,  pour  a  little  good  vinegar  to  it, 
and  pour  it  out  into  the  cattle.  Probatum. 

A  Powder  for  the  Rot  of  Cattle. 

Procure  five  cents’  worth  of  bay  leaves,  enzian,  a  little  sul¬ 
phur,  and  one  cent’s  worth  of  chalk;  also,  ashes  of  pear  tree 
wood,  walnut  wood,  and  juniper  tree  wood.  Mix  with  stove 
soot,  of  one  as  much  of  the  other.  Let  the  cattle  take  thereof, 
mornings  and  evenings,  and  always,  after  taking  the  powder, 
let  it  fast  for  several  hours. 

How  to  Discern  what  ails  the  Cattle. 

Look  sharp  into  the  animal’s  eyes.  If  the  lower  streak  in 
the  eye  is  dim  and  dark,  the  cow  is  dropsical.  If  the  two 
middle  veins  are  dull  and  dim,  then  it  has  the  rot.  But  if  the 
hinder-wart  vein  appears  dim,  then  the  animal  is  bilious.  If 
they  are  all  pure  and  red,  then  the  beast  is  healthy  and  noth- 
mg  ails  it. 


168 


ALBERT  US  MAGNUS;  OR, 


For  all  sorts  of  Palsy,  be  they  wherever  they  may ,  for  young 
as  well  as  old  People.  An  Amulet  to  suspend  from  the  neclc 
of  Adults  and  to  be  laid  under  the  Body  of  Infants. 

Oh,  palsy!  oh,  palsy!  how  painful  thou  art,  this  complaint 
I  to  our  Lord  must  impart,  and  in  his  holy  name,  who  suffered 
death  on  the  cross  innocently,  N.  N.t  palsy  and  gout,  very 
death  to  life.  Upon  a  green  meadow  he  was  met  by  St.  Ann. 
St.  Ann  spake:  t  Palsy  and  gout,  whither  are  ye  going?  The 
gout  spake:  We  propose  to  enter  into  the  body  of  N.  N.  We 
want  to  cross  into  his  flesh  and  suck  his  blood.  Then  spake 
again  the  holy  woman,  St.  Ann:  t  Palsy  and  t  gout,  I  com¬ 
mand  ye,  by  the  power  of  God,  and  by  the  great  anathema, 
thou  running  palsy,  thou  constant  gout,  t  thou  raging  gout,  f 
thou  taking  gout,  t  thou  cold  gout,  t  thou  hot  gout,  t  thou 
blood  gout,  f  thou  marrow  gout,  t  thou  venomoua  gout,  thou 
goutiest  gout  of  all  gouts,  I  hereby  command  and  order  ye, 
by  the  power  of  God  and  by  the  highest  anathema,  to  return 
to  the  wild  regions  of  mater  alma,  from  whence  ye  came  my 
limbs  to  lame,  thence  ye  shall  hie  again,  and  your  ransom  re¬ 
tain,  while  I  my  usual  freshness  regain,  t  t  t 

Prescription  for  Epilepsy. 

Violet  water  is  excellent  for  epileptic  fits,  especially  for 

children. 

Water  of  peonies,  miicd  with  the  violet  water,  of  each 
about  fifty  cents’  worth,,  and  taken  from  thirty  to  forty  drops 
every  morning,  before  b:  •  kfast,  and  evening,  before  going  to 
bed.  Give  each  time  one  rice  of  it. 

A  good  Prescription  -  Fractures  of  Men  and  Beasts. 
Take  badger  lard,  re:  \  dog’s  lard,  vomb  fat,  wild 

lard,  red  butter,  at  a  oil,  verdigris,  wild  cat  lard, 

a-  rd,  snake  fat,  yeTutv  r.ve,  aeer’s  taliow,  laurel  oil,  sperm 
oh,  ct  each  five  cents’  worth.  >jix  all  the-se  articles  well  to- 
rCiLer,  grease  the  fracture  with  \i,  and  tie  a  linen  over  it. 

An  Qln:  >.,rnt  for  the  Fistula. 

one  pound  of  g-.  bacon,  one  pound  of  saltpetre,  one 
.  d  of  gelder  roses,  s.  :.re  verdigris.  Pulverize  all  these 
irr’.cl&s  fine  and  let  th*  <  s < on  melt  in  them.  Temper  all  well 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


169 


together,  and  stir  until  it  becomes  cold  and  firm.  It  Is  ap¬ 
proved. 

For  Irritable  and  Bristly  Horses. 

Take  a  handful  of  gunpowder,  pound  it  fine,  add  the  albumen 
of  an  egg,  and  unwatered  butter  of  the  size  of  a  hen’s  egg. 
Mix  well,  and  grease  the  raw  parts  therewith.  It*  would  be 
well  to  wash  them  first  with  a  good  lye. 

Another  Remedy  for  the  same  Disease. 

One  pound  of  good  bacon,  one  ounce  of  good  laurel  oil,  five 
cents’  worth  of  hellebore,  and  one  ounce  of  mercury,  prepared 
with  linseed  oil.  Of  these  articles  prepare  a  salve,  and  apply 
to  the  injuries;  but  always  wash  them  first  right  clean  with 
a  cold  lye. 

How  to  Heal  Raw  Flesh  Spots  within  twenty-four  hours. 

In  the  first  place,  split  and  cut  the  four  streaks  on  their  feet, 
in  the  middle.  Then  take  three  ounces  of  powdered  bay 
leaves,  the  whites  of  twenty  eggs,  two  ounces  of  teriac,  two 
quarts  of  strong  wine,  and  boil  all  together  to  one-half  of  its 
original  volume.  Let  the  horse  drink  this  as  warm  as  he  can 
bear  it.  Then  soak  a  woolen  blanket  in  cold  water,  cover  the 
horse  with  it,  and  put  the  belly-band  on,  that  the  blanket  will 
not  fall  off,  and  let  it  remain  for  twenty-four  hours.  Give  it 
neither  food  nor  drink  during  this  time.  After  this  you  may 
ride  him  again,  and  feed  carefully.  This  is  a  well  ap¬ 
proved  art. 

When  a  Horse  is  Sore  and  Oozes  Blood. 

Put  bacon  or  soap  into  his  posterior. 

When  a  Horse  Swells  Up. 

Take  water  cresses,  pound  it,  press  the  juice  out  and  mix 
*-ye  flour  with  it  to  a  thin  mush.  Apply  to  the  swellings  of 
the  horse. 

For  the  Swelling  of  a  Horse's  Shoulder  Blade. 

Take  vinegar,  cow’s  manure,  salt  and  polermis.  Make  a 
mush  of  it,  and  paint  with  this  twice  a  day. 


170 


ALBERTUS  MAONU8;  OR, 


When  the  Shoulder  Blade  is  Swelled  or  Sprained. 

Take  rye  bread  crumbs.  If  this  is  not  handy,  take  rye  flour, 
soot  from  a  bake  oven,  two  or  three  spoonfuls  of  honey,  the 
albumen  of  three  eggs,  two  spoonfuls  of  polermium,  and  small 
cuttings  of  hemp  oakum.  Mix  brandy  and  vinegar.  Apply 
as  a  poultice,  as  warm  as  the  horse  can  bear  it,  on  a  woolen 
cloth.  Should  be  done  soon  after  the  swelling  appears. 

A  Plaster  for  the  above  Swellings. 

Foliage  of  balsam  poplars,  wool  herbs,  linseed  oil,  and  vin- 
umgrecum,  powdered,  and  mixed  together,  and  by  adding 
goat's  milk,  wine  and  vinegar,  make  into  an  ointment.  Put 
upon  a  rag,  and  apply  warm  to  the  horse’s  swellings. 

When  a  Horse  is  injured  by  Pressure. 

Take  one  and  a  half  quart  of  good  white  wine,  old  urine, 
the  same  quantity.  Boil  these  things  together  in  a  new 
earthen  pot.  Cover  well,  so  that  no  fumes  evaporate,  put  a 
handful  of  salt  to  it.  Wash  the  injury  with  some  fresh  and 
pure  water.  Then  take  the  boiled  fluid,  and  sprinkle  the  in¬ 
juries  with  a  feather  or  sponge.  Wash  the  injured  part  once 
or  twice  a  day. 

When  the  Shanks  of  a  Horse  are  Swelled ,  and  the  Flux 

appears. 

Take  four  quarts  of  white  wine,  four  ounces  of  alum,  four 
ounces  copper  water,  garlic  straw,  herb  of  centifolium,  rose¬ 
mary  sage,  of  all  these  herbs  a  good  handful.  Put  into  a  pot, 
cover  well  so  that  the  steam  does  not  evaporate*.  Let  one- 
third  part  boil  down.  Before  applying  this  remedy  ride  the 
horse.  But  it  must  not  be  driven  through  water.  Bathe  or 
wash  -six  or  seven  times  with  the  above  wash  every  other  day 
during  the  summer  season.  Then  ride  it  through  running 
water  stream  upward  for  half  of  an  hour,  and  fifteen  days  in 
succession,  and  the  shanks  will  become  right  again.  During 
the  winter  season,  substitute  flrtree  cones  boiled  in  a  kettle 
and  wash  for  fifteen  days  with  such  water  and  dispense  with 
the  riding  into  water. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


171 


If  a  Horse  is  Injured  by  Pressure,  Swellings  or  Tumors  which 

have  to  be  Cut. 

After  cutting  the  horse,  approach  to  the  front  of  the  horse, 
tear  some  few  hairs  out  under  its  mane,  and  pronounce:  In 
the  name  of  the  Father,  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Spirit;  then 
walk  around  the  horse  and  take  also  a  few  hairs  from  under 
the  throat  and  speak  as  before.  Walk  again  around  the  horse 
and  take  some  hair  from  the  tail  and  pronounce  the  same 
blessing,  then  walk  again  around  the  horse  and  stand  still 
just  as  you  received  the  horse.  Pray  the  Lord’s  Prayer  three 
times,  three  Ave  Marias  and  the  Creed  once.  Now,  take  the 
hair  altogether,  bore  a  hole  into  a  pear-tree,  put  the  hair 
therein,  or  draw  the  bark,  and  put  the  hair  between.  Pro- 
batum! 

When  a  Horse  becomes  Scabby. 

Take  agrimonium  and  flee  herbs  and  lard,  of  one  as  much 
as  of  the  other.  Put  all  these  things  into  a  new  pot  and  cover 
well,  so  that  no  fumes  evaporate.  Expose  to  a  strong  flame 
and  burn  it  to  powder.  Put  of  native  alum  and  sulphur,  an 
even  quantity,  pulverize  and  mix  these  altogether.  Whenever 
you  wish  to  use  this,  take  for  one  horse  a  handful  of  the  alum 
and  sulphur  powder,  and  an  equal  part  of  the  powder  made 
of  the  burned  herbs,  also  white  rosin,  three  cents,  pound  of 
butter  or  lard,  one  pound  of  bacon.  Put  all  these  articles 
into  a  pan,  melt  together  as  long  as  is  necessary  to  cook  a 
mush.  Apply  this  as  warm  to  the  horse  as  your  hand  will 
bear  it,  rub  it  well  into  the  skin.  But  before  applying  stir  all 
thoroughly,  otherwise  the  best  will  remain  upon  the  bottom. 
Keep  the  horse  dry,  but  do  not  cover  it.  Continue  this  until 
the  horse  is  healed.  The  herbs  should  be  gathered  on  the 
thirtieth  day  of  the  month. 

When  a  Horse's  Urinary  Organs  are  Obstructed. 

Tie  parsley  roots  under  its  snout,  or  put  some  olive  oil  in  a 
spoon  or  into  the  hand,  and  pour  into  the  sick  animal’s  ear. 

A  Plaster  that  will  cause  Suppuration  and  which  Heals. 

Take  rye  bread,  and  three  or  four  times  the  quantity  of  salt 
to  it  These  two  articles  put  into  a  pea  soup  which  Is  not 
torded.  Make  a  thick  mush  of  it  and  apply  to  the  injuries. 


172 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


When  a  Horse  has  the  Itch  or  an  Old  Sore. 

Put  valerian* and  toothwort  into  a  pot  of  water.  Give  this 
to  the  horse  to  drink  until  the  sores  heal.  Then  take  cabbage 
leaves  and  fernwort.  cut  and  mix  together,  and  mix  a  spoonful 
with  the  fodder  whenever  you  feed  the  horse. 

When  a  Horse  cannot  pass  the  Urine. 

Take  good  wine  and  a  goodly  portion  of  beef’s  suet,  warm 
these,  wash  the  organs  of  the  horse  therewith  as  warm  as 
your  hand  can  bear  it. 

To  purify  the  Urine. 

Take  attic  boiled  in  water,  and  give  it  to  the  horse  to  drink. 
Then  take  aspen  leaves,  grind  it  to  powder,  and  then  mix  with 
the  feed  of  the  animal. 

For  the  Jaundice  of  Horses. 

On  the  night  of  St.  Martin's  Day,  and  on  the  morning  of  the 
same  day,  give  to  the  horse  early  red  barley  to  eat,  and  dur¬ 
ing  the  same  year  the  horse  will  not  suffer  from  yellow  jaun¬ 
dice. 

For  the  Colic. 

The  disease  is  discovered  thus:  When  a  horse  becomes  sick 
and  drops  the  head  and  often  rises  bv  starts,  or  when  it  prior 
to  the  days  of  labor  pains  draws  the  hips  in,  or  lays  down  its 
head,  etc.,  then  these  are  signs  of  colic.  Take  teriac,  saffron 
and  good  wine,  mix  well  and  let  the  horse  drink  it  warm. 
Then  ride  it  gently  around  and  cover  it  well. 

For  Erysipelas ,  etc.,  of  Man  and  Beast. 

Wild  fire,  wild  brand,  flux  and  pains,  coagulated  blood  and 
gangrene,  I  embrace  thee,  the  Lord  our  God  embrace  thee,  he 
is  the  sublimest  being,  who  alone  is  able  to  drive  away  wild 
fire,  wild  brand,  flux  and  pain,  coagulated  pain  and  gangrene 
as  well  as  all  other  injuries,  t  t  t 

For  the  Gripes  and  Colic  of  Horses  and  Cattle. 

Gripes  and  colic  I  bless  ye  to-day,  on  this  sacred  day,  that 
ye  from  horse  or  cattle  pass  away,  t  t  t  Then  take  a  hand¬ 
ful  of  chimney  soot,  one  handful  of  ashes  of  juniper-tree  wood 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


173 


and  a  pint  of  good  old  wine.  Warm  it,  and  pour  out  for  the 
animals  to  drink. 

For  Yellow  Knots. 

Take  fodder,  liver  of  sulphur  and  wormwood,  of  one  as 
much  as  of  the  other,  and  let  the  horse  take  it  in  a  drink, 
every  time  three  points  of  a  table  knife. 

When  a  Horse  is  Restive. 

Take  wood,  such  as  has  been  struck  by  a  thunderbolt,  make 
a  whip  of  it,  and  scourge  and  flog  the  horse  therewith,  and  the 
ailment  will  vanish. 

When  one  of  the  Eyes  of  a  Horse  threatens  to  get  Blind. 

Take  wagon  grease  of  a  wheel  that  has  been  run,  grease  the 
eye-skin  of  the  horse  ^ith  it.  It  helps,  and  will  contribute 
greatly  to  the  healthiness  of  the  eyes. 

For  the  Colic  of  Human  Beings. 

Take  of  rosemary,  marjoram,  bolay,  nugwort,  melisses,  of 
each  three  sprigs,  all  with  the  blossoms  steeped  in  good  old 
brandy.  Take  one,  two  or  even  three  spoonfuls  thereof.  If 
it  will  not  cease,  take  from  the  upper  hole  of  a  bake-oven  three 
knife  points  full  of  soot,  rub  gently  to  fine  powder,  and  take 
in  a  spoonful  of  brandy. 

For  the  Cataract  in  Horses’  Eyes. 

Take  one  ounce  of  goose  grease,  one  ounce  of  virgin  honey, 
then  strain  it,  half  drachm  saffron,  half  an  ounce  pounded 
orange  peels,  one  drachm  of  pulverized  ginger.  All  this  mix 
well  together,  and  once  every  day  put  a  little  into  the  horse's 
eyes. 

How  to  discover  the  Disease  of  a  Horse . 

Take  one  ounce  of  venitian,  teriac,  boar’s  root,  angelica  and 
orange  peels  of  each  two  ounces;  pulverize  all  these  articles 
fine.  Give  it  in  a  pint  of  wine  to  the  horse.  The  horse  should 
aiso  be  bled  under  the  tongue  and  ridden. 

An  excellent  Eye  Water  for  Man  and  Beast. 

Fennel  water,  eye-bright  herb  water,  water  r,f  sulphate  of 
zinc,  water  of  linden  blossoms,  coxs^-j,,  of  each  one  ounce. 
Well  mixed  and  shaken,  ard  *4.  cashed  therewith. 


174 


ALBERTOS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


When  a  Horse  is  Restive. 

Give  it  valerian  roots  to  eat. 

When  a  Horse  is  Constipated. 

Draw  a  feather  through  honey,  and  rub  the  hinder  .part  of 
the  horse  with  it.  The  horse  will  be  well  forthwith. 

When  a  Person  is  wounded  by  Qun-Shot ,  whether  by  Iron  or 

Lead ,  or  if  a  Thorn  or  Splinter  is  sticking  in  the  Flesh ,  how 

to  Remove  it. 

Roots  of  plmpernella,  wash  and  roast  in  8t.  Mary’s  butter, 
pour  warm  on  a  cloth,  moistened  with  frdsh  water  and  you 
will  obtain  an  ointment,  which  apply  lq  4  TJnen  cloth  and 
plaoe  upon  the  injured  spot,  and  the  missile  will  ooze  out. 
Leaves  of  balm  or  mother  herb  may  also  be  mixed  with  this 
salve. 

For  Labor  Pains  or  Falling  of  the  Womb. 

Cut  a  rabbit’s  liver  into  small  pieces,  roast  them  well  upon 
a  turn  spit,  then  powder  it  in  a  mortar,  mix  one  ounce  of  white 
sugar,  one  ounce  of  ginger,  one  ounce  df  cloves,  all  of  which 
must  be  pulverized.  Give  the  patient  one-half  an  ounce,  and 
no  more,  upon  bread  to  eat,  or  give  it  in  a  drink.  This  has 
often  been  tried  with  great  satisfaction. 

When  a  Horse  4s  Charmed  or  ^ifjoiictled. 

This  will  bb  discerned  when  the  animat  constantly  sweats, 
retains  the  food  or  hay  a  long  time  in  4JN  ftjouth;  for  this 
take:  Pern  leaves,  Roman  camomile,  dill,  Of  «lch  one  ounce, 
ground  to  powder,  and  without  any  danger  bum  and  pulverize 
one  ounoe  of  fish  bones,  one  ounce  of  wood  «uch  as  floats 
upon  running  water,  and  must  be  obtained  before  sunrise. 
Ail  these  articles  well  mixed  and  In  three  different  motions 
poured  out  into  one  quart  of  wine  vinegar,  no  matter  at  what 
hour  or  time.  Whenever  the  horse  is  to  toe  this  drink,  take 
a  bone  of  a  dog,  and  hang  it  under  the  right  side  of  the  horse’s 
mane.  By  this  usage  the  charm  will  cease  and  eventually 
subside. 

When  a  Coio  is  Constipated. 

Take  some  bees’-wax,  melt  it  and  pour  it  into  one  pint  of 
warm  milk,  stir  it  well,  then  beat  four  eggs,  yolks  and  whites 
together,  and  give  to  the  cow  all  at  once. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


175 


For  the  Spleen  or  Milt  Disease. 

Boil  the  following  articles  well  together:  one  egg,  one 
pint  of  wine,  a  little  juniper  salt,  angelica,  a  little  pepper, 
saffron,  a  little  of  the  powder  of  alcion  herbs,  from  one  to 
three  pinches  of  rasped  hartshorn,  and  given  to  the  cattle  as 
warm  as  possible.  Under  the  throat  will  appear  a  swelling, 
which  must  be  greased  with  good  brandy  and  saffron,  and  a 
ring  must  be  made  around  the  swelling,  of  saffron  and  brandy. 
Also  open  the  swelling  and  wash  it  out  with  brandy  and 
saffron. 

A  sure  Remedy  for  Bristly  Horses . 

Take  five  cents'  worth  of  each,  of  copper  water  and  blue 
prepared  vitriol,  and  half  of  this  quantity  of  alentis.  Put  all 
of  this  in  two  quarts  of  fr^sh  water  and  wash  the  horse’s  in¬ 
juries  morning  and  evenings  with  this.  After  this  take  some 
alum,  and  burn  it  upon  an  old  spoon,  also  burn  some  grape 
vines  to  ashes,  and  an  old  shoe  likewise.  Sift  it  through  a 
fine  sieve.  Afterward  take  the  alant  and  the  latter  two  ar¬ 
ticles,  and  the  horse  is  washed  with  the  above  water,  strew 
some  of  the  powder  upon  the  injured  parts.  If  this  is  done  in 
the  morning  the  horse  must  rest  afterward  for  one  hour  before 
using  it  for  work.  In  the  evening  do  as  well  as  it  will  suit 
the  case. 

For  the  Lung  Rot  of  Cattle. 

Take  of  alantis  wort,  five  cents;  verdigris,  five  cents;  salt¬ 
petre,  five  cents;  cream  of  tartar  very  little,  red  bolus,  sternu¬ 
tative  powder,  blue  vitriol,  white  vitriol,  dragon’s  blood,  grey 
sulphur,  bay  leaves,  Spanish  pepper.  All  these  ingredients 
well  mixed  together  in  wine  vinegar  and  poured  into  the  nos¬ 
trils.  For  a  large  animal  use  a  large  tablespoonful  each  time. 
For  a  calf,  half  that  quantity. 

For  Decayed  Lungs  of  Cattle. 

Of  cognac  brandy  and  sweet  oil,  one  glassful,  saffron,  four 
knife  points  full,  teriak,  four  knife  points  full,  white  chalk 
gunpowder,  the  same  quantity.  When  the  ailment  is  not  very 
severe,  give  it  in  two  different  doses,  but  in  an  aggravated 
case,  in  three  doses  Put  it  into  the  nostrils.  It  is  a  most  ex** 
cellent  remedy  lor  the  disease. 


1V0  ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


For  Biliousness. 

Before  feeding  the  cattle  in  the  morning,  give  them  a  hand¬ 
ful  of  oats,  and  nothing  more  for  one  hour.  This  will  take  the 
bile  off.  Fumigate  morning  and  evening  as  follows:  Wood¬ 
worm,  rue,  assafoedita,  juniper  berries,  juniper  wood,  garlic, 
black  tobacoo,  put  all  these  articles  into  an  old  earthen  pot, 
under  which  coals  are  burning,  and  let  the  fumes  go  directly 
under  the  nostrils  of  the  cattle  and  fumigate  over  belly  and 
back.  Probatum. 

Another  Remedy  for  too  much  Gull. 

In  the  year  1203  the  bilious  fever  raged  in  a  certain  place, 
when  it  happened  that  a  man  traveling  with  a  jug  of  brandy, 
entered  a  stable  and  poured  some  brandy  into  a  glass,  and 
spoke  thus:  Good  morning,  ye  brethren,  your  health,  ye 
brothers,  and  drank  the  brandy  all  up,  and  gave  to  every 
animal  of  this  brandy  till  the  jug  was  emptied.  His  cattle 
was  thus  saved,  while  all  the  other  stock  in  town  died.  Pro¬ 
batum. 

For  the  Thrush  of  Cattle. 

Rub  the  thrush  of  the  animal  with  a  slice  of  bread  on  which 
a  little  salt  is  sprinkled.  Afterward  it  must  be  well  nibbed 
with  vinegar,  salt  and  garlic,  a  little  pepper  may  alao  be 
added.  Should  a  hole  be  eaten  in,  put  blue  vitriol  (copperas) 
into  it  and  grease  then  with  honey. 

For  the  St.  Anthony's  Fire. 

Flush  I  seek  thee  with  God  the  Father,  flush  I  seek  thee 
with  God  the  Son,  flush  I  seek  thee  with  God  the  Holy  Spirit. 

I  drive  thee  away  in  the  name  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  t  f  t  Three 
times  recited. 

When  Cattle  have  Thrush  in  their  Afoutn . 

Take  black  rock  oil,  turpentine,  sperm  oil,  of  each  a  like 
quantity.  Grease  from  two  to  three  times  per  day. 

An  Ointment  for  xyarious  kinds  of  Pimples  and  Boils ,  also  for 

Small-Pox,  etc. 

Take  some  unwatered  butter,  raw  bees’-wax,  pitch,  saffron, 
for  five  cents,  some  sulphur;  the  sulphur  must  be  melted  in 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


177 


a  pan,  afterward  add  the  wax,  pitch,  saffron,  and  last  the 
butter,  let  it  boil  well  together,  as  long  as  a  soft  egg,  or  till 
it  foams  over.  Put  it  upon  a  rag  and  tie  as  warm  as  it  can 
be  borne  upon  the  pimples  and  kept  tight  by  means  of  an¬ 
other  band.  This  is  an  excellent  thing  for  poisonous  eruptions 
of  all  kinds.  Probatum. 

For  the  Fits  of  Children. 

Take  five  cents’  worth  of  marine  glue,  of  which  a  lozeng© 
Is  to  be  made,  and  between  eleven  and  twelve  o’clock  is  to  be 
laid  into  a  child’s  cap.  On  the  third  day  thereafter  at  the 
same  hour  it  is  to  be  taken  away,  then  powdered,  and  give  to 
the  child  every  day  thereof  some  little  into  the  child’s  food, 
and  the  disease  vanishes.  Probatum. 

For  the  Bad  Hearing  of  Horses. 

Take  horseradish  and  salt,  pound  it  well  in  a  mortar,  and 
the  sap  pressed  out,  and  a  few'  drops  poured  into  the  ear  of 
the  horse.  It  is  also  good  for  man. 

To  make  a  sad  person  mirthful,  when  the  Ailment  is  caused 

by  the  blood. 

Storkbill  herbs,  bolus  and  rue,  of  one  as  much  as  of  the 
other,  and  make  into  a  powder.  Of  this  give  the  patient  a 
spoonful  every  day.  It  strengthens  him,  and  he  will  be  happy 

again. 

For  Frozen  Hands  or  Feet. 

When  feet  are  frozen,  or  a  person  has  other  frozen  limb6, 
let  them  mix  turpentine  with  salt  till  it  becomes  a  salve.  This 
apply  twice  a  day  regular  for  several  days  in  succession  to 
the  frozen  parts.  It  is  an  efficacious  remedy. 

When  Cattle  has  a  Felon  on  its  Foot. 

Burn  copperas  upon  a  brickstone  and  apply  to  the  sores.  It 
will  heal  fast. 

For  a  Heavy  Cough,  originating  from  the  Kidneys. 

Take  bacon  and  garlic,  let  these  render  down  together,  apply 
to  the  back  near  where  the  kidneys  are  situated,  three  or  four 
times  while  being  near  the  stove. 


178 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


When  an  Animal  treads  into  a  Nail . 

Take  antimony  and  butter,  mix  it  together,  and  grease  the 
Wound  with  it,  and  in  forty-eight  hours  it  will  be  better. 

For  the  Womb  Disease  or  Colic ,  when  the  Patient  is  not 
Present,  and  the  Name  of  the  same  is  only  known. 

A  deer’s  antlers  and  a  slice  of  rye  bread,  also  a  glass  of  red 
wine  shall  for  N.  N.’s  colic  and  womb  be  very  fine.  Womb  and 
blood,  womb  remain  good,  or  thou  wilt  bring  flesh  and  blood 
to  the  grave.  In  the  name  of  God  the  Father,  the  Son  and 
the  Holy  Spirit.  Recite  three  times.  Probatum. 

For  the  Heart  Blood. 

Three  lillies  are  growing  upon  thy  heart,  the  first  is  named 
God  the  Father,  the  other  God  the  Son,  the  third.  God’s  will 
I  command  the  heart  blood  stand  still.  In  the  name  of  God 
the  Father,  God  the  Son  and  God  the  Holy  Spirit  This  and 
the  name  of  the  patient  repeat  three  times,  and  lay  the  hands 
with  the  thumbs  cross-wise  over  each  other. 

For  the  Swelling  up  of  Cattle. 

Put  the  right  arm  across  the  cattle,  the  left  one  under  it 
where  you_  stand,  and  speak:  What  I  with  my  right  arm  sur¬ 
round,  may  it  not  break  and  bouiid;  in  the  name  of  God  the 
Father,  God  the  Son,  and  God  the  Holy  Spirit.  Three  times 
Repeat. 

Blood  Stopping. 

For  an  injury  either  caused  by  stabbing  or  cutting,  an  ap¬ 
proved  stopping  of  the  blood  is,  to  let  thirty  or  forty  drops  of 
oil  of  turpentine  trickle  into  the  injury. 

For  the  Cataract  in  the  Eyes  of  a  Horse. 

Take  green  spiderwort,  give  it  to  the  horse  with  its  food 
for  a  period  of  fourteen  days  and  it  will  cease. 

For  Cancer. 

Mix  ottermening  and  goat's  gall  together,  and  grease  the 
impurity  with  it.  If  it  is  the  worm,  boil  walnut -leaves  in 
vinegar  and  use  as  a  wash. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


179 


For  Obstruction  of  the  Urine. 

Take  iron  herb  water,  five  cents;  wild  cherry,  five  cents; 
dragon’s  blood  and  selterswater;  mix  all  and  give  the  patient 
to  drink. 

How  to  make  Wild  Game  and  other  Animals  Stand. 

Upon  our  Lord’s  heart,  three  roses  stand,  the  first  called 
kindness  in  every  land,  the  other  called  blossom,  the  third 
called  deer  (or  whatever  animal  it  may  be,  call  its  name), 
stand  still.  No  more  than  our  Saviour  from  the  cross  ran 
away,  no  more  shalt  thou  from  the  place  leave  to-day,  till  I 
myself  bid  thee  thither  to  leap,  by  the  four  elements  of  heaven 
I  order  thee  to  stand,  forbid  thee  to  stand,  forbid  thee  to 
jump,  leap  or  crawl  over  the  sand;  tragta,  gramontetta,  ang- 
tela.  t  t  t 

When  a  Man  or  an  Animal  is  in  Danger  of  getting  Blind. 

Speak  thus:  There  sat  three  poor  blind  persons  upon  the 
street  of  God,  then  speak  our  beloved  Lord  Jesus  Christ:  Ye 
poor  blind  folks,  why  sit  ye  here?  We  sit  here,  because  we 
cannot  see  the  Almighty  and  may  not  know  him.  Then  spake 
again  our  beloved  Lord  Jesus  Christ  with  his  mouth  and 
breath:  I  will  bless  you  all  for  your  fiery  brand,  and  bless 
you  for  weapon  and  arms,  for  white  and  for  yellow,  for  fall 
and  cut  and  for  nails,  that  he  may  depart,  like  Judas  left  the 
garden,  and  that  man  left  who  did  the  rope  wind,  wherewith 
the  wicked  our  Saviour  did  bind  when  he  was  bound  upon 
the  cross.  I  know  not  what  has  befallen  thee  that  be  thy 
ransom  for  the  sake  of  Christ.  Blow  three  t  t  t  Into  the 
eyes,  in  the  name  of  God  the  Father,  the  Son  and  the  Holy 
Spirit. 

For  a  Fractured  Leg  of  a  Horset  when  the  Injury  is  of  a  recent 

Occurrence. 

Take  new  fresh  water,  one  pound  of  rosin,  wallwort  and 
toothwort,  all  pounded  and  well  mixed,  and  then  wax  and  rosin 
stirred  in  until  it  becomes  an  ointment.  Of  this  put  upon  a 
linen  cloth  and  tie  while  warm  over  the  horse.  After  this 
proceed  to  shingle  the  fracture.  Let  the  plaster  remain  for 
three  days,  and  then  renew  the  painting  of  the  leg. 


180 


ALBERTOS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


When  a  Horse  Falls  upon  or  wrenches  his  Backbone. 

Hie  thee  to  a  graveyard  and  procure  a  skull,  put  it  into  fresh 
water  in  a  wooden  vessel,  and  let  the  horse  drink  three  weeks 
therefrom,  and  it  will  become  well  again.  Then  take  the  head 
of  the  dead  again  to  its  place  from  whence  you  took  it. 

To  Heal  Proud  Flesh. 

Take  the  sap  of  nettles,  grease  the  injury  therewith,  also 
dry  nettles  to  powder.  It  is  an  approved  remedy,  dries  and 
heals  also  neuralgic  pains. 

How ,  to  Prevent  a  Horse  from  Contracting  the  Glanders ,  a 

Well-Approved  Piece  of  Art. 

To  accomplish  this  take  the  following  articles:  Iron  herbs, 
green  juniperberries,  wall  rue,  of  each  two  handfuls,  bacon, 
turnips,  lung-wort,  bay  leaves,  speedwell  (veronica),  of  each 
of  these  three  handfuls,  coriander  fifteen  ounces,  enzian  six¬ 
teen  ounces.  All  these  articles  must  be  well  pulverized,  and 
every  third  day  in  the  morning  give  to  the  horse  a  small 
handful  of  it  with  its  feed,  which  must  be  moistened  with 
the  following  water:  Gipsy  wound  herbs,  swallow  roots,  the 
large  specie  of  fern  roots,  catnip,  mugwort,  verbena,  enzian,  of 
each  three  handfuls.  Put  all  these  herbs  in  a  cloth,  and  then 
into  a  tub  of  running  water;  with  it  moisten  the  food  and  let 
the  horse  drink  of  it  every  day.  These  herbs  should  be  often 
renewed. 

For  all  Sorts  of  Injury  of  Horses  under  the  Saddle. 

Waywort  roots  should  be  tied  over  the  injury  when  sup¬ 
puration  oozes  out  Let  him  eat  the  roots,  and  you  may  use 
the  horse  for  riding  without  trouble. 

An  Ointment  for  the  Eyes  of  Horses. 

Take  three  ounces  of  leaf  lard,  one  spoonful  of  honey;  in 
case  the  eye  is  inflamed  and  looks  reddish,  take  as  much  as 
the  point  of  a  knife  of  ginger;  in  case  the  eye  is  not  red,  take 
half  of  that  quantity  of  pepper,  and  grease  the  eyes  with  oint¬ 
ment  But  if  no  inflammation  is  noticeable,  take  only  the 
lard  and  honey  to  anoint. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


181 


When  a  Horse  Leans  its  Head  to  One  Side,  it  is  an  Indication 

of  the  Worm  in  the  Ear. 

Take  freah  baoon,  add  wine  and  vinegar,  let  this  boil  well, 
aa<l  put  it  into  the  horse’s  ear  lukewarm. 

For  Bony  Excrescences  of  Horses. 

Make  a  dough  of  fine  wheat  flour,  put  this  as  a  poultice 
upon  the  horse’s  leg  for  a  period  of  three  days.  If  the  spavin 
is  still  open  on  the  fourth  day,  open  the  bandage,  and  apply 
hog  manure,  wheat  flour  with  saliva  upon  the  injury  and  let 
this  remain  three  or  four  days,  and  the  spavin  will  be  re¬ 
leased  from  the  true  bone. 

To  Prevent  a  Traveler  from  III  Befalling  Him. 

If  it  is  a  rider  on  horseback,  say:  Rider  of  good  cheer;  if 
a  foot  traveler,  say:  Hero,  cheerful  be  and  good,  we  have 
partaken  of  Christ’s  own  blood.  God  in  heaven  is  my  shield, 
the  earth  is  my  shoe,  greet  thee  God  my  jnan,  if  thou  art 
stronger  than  God,  come  on  and  attack  me,  thou  art  not  able 
to  fetter  me,  not  able  to  stab  me,  thou  canst  not  hit  me,  be¬ 
cause  God  the  Lord  does  prevent,  who  to  me  his  aid  has  lent. 
God  the  8on  is  with  thee,  God  the  Holy  Spirit  of  the  union 
three,  stands  between  us  very  close  and  hard,  that  in  peace 
»nH  happiness  we  may  part,  t  t  t  This  must  be  recited  three 
times  in  succession,  and  no  one  will  harm  the  traveler. 

When  the  Co%o  Loses  her  Milk ,  how  to  Cause  its  Return. 

Of  such  a  cow  obtain  a  pot  full  of  milk,  pour  such  in  three 
different  times  into  a  running  water  stream  upward  in  the 
three  highest  names.  It  must  be  used  three  times — morning, 

evening,  and  again  morning. 

A  Good  Way  to  Stop  the  Constipation  of  Cattle. 

Take  three  handfuls  of  peas,  let  them  be  well  cooked,  so 
that  the  shell  falls  off,  then  take  some  olive  oil,  some  butter, 
two  ounces  of  good  soap,  one  spoonful  of  beef  marrow;  let  ail 
theee  boll  well  together,  pour  a  pot  full  of»  milk  to  it,  and 
give  it  to  the  cattle  as  warm  as  it  can  bear  it. 


182 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 

A  Good  Salve  for  the  Eyes. 

Take  vitriol  of  the  size  of  a  pea  and  dissolve  in  soft  water 
in  a  phial.  Apply  morning  and  evening  to  the  eye. 

When  a  Horse  does  not  Eat. 

Rub  its  teeth  well  with  pepper  and  garlic,  and  it  will  soon 
eat  again  with  great  appetite.  It  is  a  good  remedy. 

Remedy  against  the  Biting  of  Rabid  Dogs. 

The  St.  Petersburgh  Miscellaneous  Essays  for  the  Science 
of  Pathology,  volume  of  1511,  relates  the  following:  Mora* 
chetti,  operator  in  a  hospital  in  Moscow,  who,  while  sojourn¬ 
ing  in  the  province  of  Ukrain,  was  requested  one  day  to  ren¬ 
der  medical  aid  to  fifteen  persons,  all  of  whom  had  been  bit¬ 
ten  by  a  mad  dog.  While  he  was  preparing  for  the  necessary 
arrangements,  there  appeared  a  committee  composed  of  sev¬ 
eral  old  persons,  who  came  to  beseech  the  doctor  to  permit  a 
certain  peasant  to  attend  to  the  unfortunate  patients,  since 
this  peasant  had  obtained  a  great  celebrity  for  many  years, 
by  his  successful  healing  of  hydrophobia. 

The  prayer  having  been  granted,  the  peasant  gave  to  four¬ 
teen  of  the  sick  a  strong  decoction  of  sumit  and  fl.  genista 
luteae  tinctoriae,  (one  and  one-half  of  a  pound  daily),  and  ex¬ 
amined  them  twice  daily,  under  their  tongues,  where,  as  this 
farmer  said,  little  knots  would  form  containing  the  poisonous 
matter.  As  soon  as  these  knots  in  reality  appeared  (of  which 
Dr.  Marochetti  convinced  himself  satisfactorily),  they  were 
opened  and  cauterized  with  a  red  hot  needle,  whereupon  the 
patient  had  to  gargle  his  throat  with  the  decoction  of  the  gen- 
iate.  The  result  of  this  was,  that  the  fourteen,  (of  which  only 
two,  which  had  been  bitten  last,  did  not  show  these 
knots),  were  discharged  after  six  weeks’  cure  in  an  entirely 
healthy  condition. 

A  little  girl,  however,  the  fifteenth  of  the  bitten  party,  who 
had  been  treated  in  the  usual  way,  was  attacked  on  the  sev¬ 
enth  day  by  hydrophobia,  and  died  eight  hours  after  its  ap¬ 
pearance.  Those  who  had  been  thoroughly  cured.  Dr.  Maro¬ 
chetti  saw  three  years  afterward  and  all  of  the  fourteeen  were 
bale  and  hearty. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


m 


Five  years  after  this  occurrence,  Dr.  Marochetti  had  occa¬ 
sion  to  verify  this  important  discovery  in  Podolia.  He  was  en¬ 
trusted  with  the  treatment  of  twenty-six  persons  who  had 
been  bitten  by  a  rabid  dog.  The  sick  were  composed  of  nine 
men,  eleven  women  and  six  children.  A  decoction  of  genista 
was  forthwith  prepared  and  the  attentive  examination  of  the 
tongues  resulted  as  follows:  Five  men,  all  the  women  and 
three  children  showed  the  mentioned  little  knots,  those  who 
had  been  severely  wounded,  already  on  the  third  day,  the  oth¬ 
ers  on  the  fifth,  seventh  and  ninth  day  respectively.  One  pa¬ 
tient,  a  woman,  who  had  received  but  a  slight  bite  on  the  leg, 
showed  only  on  the  twenty-first  day,  the  appearance  of  the 
knots.  Even  those  seven  on  whose  tongues  these  knots  never 
appeared  continued  to  drink  the  decoction  for  six  weeks  and 
all  of  them  were  cured.  These  knots  must,  however,  be  opened 
within  twenty-four  hours  of  their  appearance,  or  the  poison 
may  return  to  the  other  parts  of  the  body,  and  the  patient 
would  thus  be  helplessly  lost. 

An  Art ,  how  to  Quench  Fire  without  Water. 

Inscribe  the  following  letters  upon  every  side  of  a  plate, 
and  throw  it  into  the  fire.  It  will  go  out  of  itself. 

S  A  T  O  R 
A  R  E  P  O 
TENET 
OPERA 
ROTAS 

A  Preventive,  which  must  be  carried  upon  the  Body,  for  the 

Arts  and  Wiles  of  Gypsies. 

Just  the  same  as  the  prophet  Jonah,  the  prototype  of  Christ 
had  been  provided  for  during  three  days  and  three  nights  in 
a  body  of  the  whale,  so  may  the  Al-migbty  God  protect  me 
against  all  danger  with  his  fatherly  kindness.  J.  J.  J. 

How  to  fa  a  Thief  so  that  he  must  stand  still.  This  grace 
should  be  pronounced  on  a  Thursday  in  the  morning  before 
sunrise,  under  the  canopy  of  Heaven. 

Ye  thieves,  I  hereby  conjure  ye,  that  ye  may  be  obedient,  the 
same  as  Christ  was  obedient  to  his  Heavenly  Father  till  he 
was  put  upon  the  cross;  and  y€  shall  stand  still  for  me  and 


184 


ALBERTOS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


not  depart  from  under  my  eyee;  in  the  name  of  the  Trinity, 
I  order  ye  by  the  power  of  God  and  the  incarnation  of  Jeana 
Christ  not  to  go  from  hence,  t  t  t  like  Christ  the  Lord  stood 
on  the  shores  of  Jordan,  when  St.  John  baptised  him.  Thus 
I  conjure  thee,  horse  and  rider,  that  ye  will  stand  for  me 
and  not  leave  from  under  my  eyes,  like  Christ  our  Lord  was 
steadfast,  when  fastened  on  the  oross,  and  redeemed  the  pa¬ 
triarchs  and  all  mankind  from  the  powers  of  helL  Te  thieves, 
I  bind  ye,  like  Christ  the  Lord  bound  hell,  thus  are  ye  fet¬ 
tered,  ye  thieves,  t  t  t  with  those  works  ye  were  bound  and 
fixed,  I  again  release  you  all. 

An  Extraordinary  quick  Banishment. 

Thou  rider  and  footman  ye  come  from  thence,  under  your 
hat  you  are  sprinkled  with  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  by  his 
holy  five  wounds  your  rifle,  gun  and  pistol  be  bound.  Sword, 
dagger  and  knife  are  banished  and  bound,  in  the  name  of 
God  the  Father,  the  Son  and  tho  Holy  Spirit.  This  must  be 
spoken  three  times. 

Dissolved  again. 

Rider  and  footman,  when  I  conjured  ye  at  this  time,  depart 
from  hence  in  the  name  of  Christ,  by  God’s  own  word,  and 
Christ  our  Lord  depart  in  peace  for  ever  henceforth. 

How  to  cause  a  Thief  to  return  Stolen  Goods. 

Proceed  early  in  the  morning,  before  sunrise,  to  a  pear 
tree,  and  take  three  nails  from  e.  bier,  or  nails  of  a  hoof 
which  have  never  been  used,  and  hold  up  the  nails  toward  the 
rising  of  the  sun,  and  speak  as  follows: 

O,  thief!  I  fasten  thee  with  this  first  nail!  I  fasten  it  into 
thy  brow  and  skull,  that  what  thou  hast  stolen  thou  must 
return  to  the  place  from  which  it  was  taken.  Thou  sh< 
feel  so  sick  and  so  sad,  at  that  place  where  thou  hast  commit¬ 
ted  the  theft,  like  the  disciple  Judas  felt  when  ho  betrayed 
Jesus.  The  other  nail,  which  I  into  thy  lung  and  liver  will 
fasten,  that  thou  to  return  the  plunder  will  hasten,  thou 
ghalt  feel  so  sick  and  feel  so  wee,  that  It  will  attract  thee  to  that 
place  to  go,  just  like  Fiiate  does  feel  the  pangs  of  hall.  The 
third  naii  thief,  which  into  thy  foot  I  hammer  and  bum,  that 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


185 


the  8  to  ten  things  thou  at  once  wilt  return  to  the  very  place 
from  whence  thou  hast  stolen  them.  0,  thief!  I  bind  thee 
and  compel  thee,  by  these  three  nails,  which  had  been  thrust 
through  Christ's  holy  feet  and  hands,  to  return  all  thou  hast 
taken,  t  t  t  The  nails  must  be  greased  with  lard  of  penitent 
sinners. 

To  be  given  to  Cattle  against  Witchcraft  and  Diabolical 

Mischief. 

S  A  T  O  R 
A  R  E  P  0 
TENET 
OPERA 
ROTAS 

To  prevent  a  Wound  from  Hurting. 

Speak  thus:  The  wounds  I  bind  in  three  names,  that  thou 
will  retain,  flame,  water,  marasmus,  and  swelling,  in  the  name 
of  the  Holy  Trinity.  This  must  be  recited  three  times.  Then 
move  with  a  thread  three  times  around  the  wound,  put  it  into 
the  right  corner  toward  the  sun.  and  speak:  I  there  put  thee, 
that  thou  wilt  attract  gouty  water,  dropsy,  and  suppuration, 
and  all  what  may  be  injurious  to  the  wound,  fit  Amen. 
Recite  the  Lord’s  Prayer,  and  trust  in  God. 

How  to  stay  the  Pains  of  a  Fresfi  Wound. 

Our  beloved  Lord  Jesus  Christ  had  many  bolls  and  wounds, 
tut  never  had  them  bound.  They  dr.  not  become  sore,  they 
faster  not,  neither  do  they  suppurate.  Jonas  was  blind,  when 
I,  the  heavenly  child,  said  unto  him:  As  true  .is  the  holy 
3ve  wounds  were  inflicted,  and  did  not  curdie  oor  fester. 
From  them  1  take  water  and  blood,  that,  is  for  all  hurts  and 
injuries  good.  Holy  is  the  man  who  can  heal  all  wounds  and 
ail  injuries,  t  t  t  Amen. 

An  Art,  how  to  Stop  the  Blood,  which  is  good  at  all  t-iv i.-v. 

As  soon  as  you  have  cut  or  lirrt.  yourself,  speak:  O,  bliss¬ 
ful  wounda!  O,  blissful  hour,  blessed  is  the  day  when  Ch**  v 
was  bors.  in  tho  name  of  f  f  t  Amea. 


186 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


An  Amulet  to  carry  on  your  Person. 

Carry  these  words  with  you,  and  no  one  will  be  able  to  as¬ 
sail  you:  Aganla,  Azaria,  and  Misael,  praise  ye  the  Lord,  for 
He  has  redeemed  us  from  hell  and  rescued  us  from  death, 
and  preserved  us  in  the  fire.  Therefore  may  the  Lord  prevent 
the  fire  against  us. 

I. 

N.  I.  R 

I. 

A  Preventive  from  all  Harm  from  Weapons. 

Jesus,  God  and  man  may  protect  me.  N.  N.,  against  all 
arms  and  weapons,  short  or  long  of  range;  for  all  metal  and 
material  retain  thy  fire,  like  Mary  kept  their  purity,  before 
as  well  as  after.  Christ  bind  up  all  guns,  like  Jesus  bound  up 
humanity  in  meekness.  Jesus  exhort  all  arms  and  weapons, 
like  Mary,  the  mother  of  God,  was  secured  against  sin.  Thus 
may  the  three  drops  of  blood  which  Christ  perspired  on  Mount 
Olivet  Jesus  Christ  protect  me  against  manslaughter  and 
burning  fire.  Jesus,  let  me  not  die,  and,  much  less,  not  be 
confounded  and  damned,  without  partaking  of  the  holy  sacra¬ 
ment.  So  help  me  God  the  Father,  Son  and  Holy  Spirit, 
Amen. 

Security  from  Firearms  and  Animals. 

Jesus  traveled  through  the  Red  Sea,  and  beheld  the  land; 
hence  must  break  all  fetters  and  band.  Break  and  become 
useless  all  guns,  rifles,  cannons  and  pistols.  All  false  wit¬ 
nesses  become  silent.  The  blessing  God  hath  given,  while  cre¬ 
ating  the  first  of  mankind,  may  come  ever  me  for  all  times. 
The  blessing  given  to  Joseph  in  his  dream,  that  Mary,  with 
Jesus,  should  flee  into  Egypt,  may  this  blessing  cover  me 
forever.  Holy  and  lovely  be  the  t  in  my  right  hand,  thus  I 
journey  over  the  entire  land,  where  no  one  will  be  robbed, 
killed,  and  betrayed,  and  no  one  will  ever  be  waylaid.  That  no 
one  will  harm  me,  and  no  one  can  charm  me,  no  dog  to  bite, 
no  wild  beast  to  fight  me,  from  all  this  protect  my  flesh  and 
my  blood,  though  especially  for  sins  and  false  witnesses  and 
slanderers’  tongues,  which  reach  from  earth  toward  the  very 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


187 


gates  of  heaven.  By  the  power  of  the  four  Evangelists,  in 
the  name  of  God  the  Father,  God  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Spirit. 
Amen. 

A  perfect  Security  against  Shot. 

The  peace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  me,  N.  N.  Oh! 
shot  stand  still,  in  the  name  of  the  mighty  prophets  Agtion 
and  Elias,  and  kill  me  not.  Oh!  shot,  stay,  stand  still!  I  con¬ 
jure  thee,  by  heaven  and  earth,  and  by  the  will  of  the  judg¬ 
ment  day,  that  thou  wilt  not  insult  me,  I  being  a  child  of 
God.  t  t  t  Amen. 

Rejecting  Ball  and  Bullet. 

The  heavenly  and  holy  trumpets,  they  blow  away  all  bul¬ 
lets,  missiles  and  misfortunes  from  me.  I  fly  under  the  tree 
of  life,  which  beareth  twelve  different  kinds  of  fruit.  I  stand 
behind  the  holy  altar  of  the  Christian  church.  I  commend 
myself  to  the  Holy  Trinity,  which  concealed  N.  N.  behind 
the  Corpus  Christi.  I  commend  myself  to  Christ’s  holy 
wounds,  that  no  man’s  hands  may  capture  me  in  bonds;  that 
I  may  not  be  hit,  nor  shot,  nor  stabbed,  nor  thrown;  neither 
assailed  or  injured,  or  wounded  by  any  one;  that  help  me, 
N.  N.,  who  this  little  book  carries  on  his  person,  who  is  se¬ 
cure  from  all  his  foes,  be  they  visible  or  invisible.  He,  too, 
who  carries  this  book  ever  with  him,  cannot  die  without  the 
corpse  of  Christ,  nor  can  such  person  drown  in  any  water, 
nor  burn  in  any  fire,  and  no  unjust  verdict  will  ever  be  ren¬ 
dered  against  him.  To  this  end,  help  me  t  t  f 

How  to  Heal  the  Broken  Legs  of  Sheep  or  other  Animals. 

Fractured  leg,  I  bless  thee  this  very  day,  as  now  the  dear 
Lord,  the  Father,  as  now  the  dear  Lord  the  Son,  as  now  the 
dear  Lord  the  Holy  Spirit  will  order  it.  Wholesome  be  this 
hour,  when  our  beloved  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  born.  Now  I 
take  this  hour,  and  over  this  wound  I  cover,  that  this  broken 
leg  may  Dot  swell  nor  fester  till  the  mother  of  God,  shall 
have  another  son.  t  t  t 

For  such  a  broken  leg,  the  following  plaster  must  be 
u»»d:  Some  good  gunpowder,  made  fine,  leaven,  half  the  size 


188 


ALBERTUS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


of  an  egg,  an 3  the  whites  of  two  eggs.  Stir  and  beat  together, 
and  apply  over  the  wound.  It  is  approved. 

For  the  Cough. 

Take  juniperberries,  sugar  bread  and  wormwood.  Cook  to¬ 
gether,  and  apply  warm  over  the  stomach. 

How  to  Free  Yourself  of  all  Ropes  and  Fetters. 

Just  as  the  Son  was  obedient  to  the  Father  unto  his  death 
on  the  cross,  thus  protect  me,  the  eternal  God  to-day,  by  his 
rose-colored  blood,  through  his  holy  five  wounds,  which  he 
received  upon  the  cross,  just  so  I  must  be  loosened  and 
blessed,  as  the  cup  and  the  very  heavenly  bread  which  Jesus 
offered  unto  his  twelve  disciples  on  Holy  Thursday.  JeeuB 
crossed  the  Red  Sea,  and  saw  the  land,  hence  shall  break  all 
fetters  and  bands.  Broken  be  all  arms,  weapons,  and  missiles 
become  dull  and  useless. 

The  blessing  which  God  bestowed  when  he  created  man 
may  come  over  me,  N.  N.,  at  all  times.  The  blessing  God 
rendered  unto  Joseph  when  he  fled  with  Mary  and  Jesus  into 
Egypt,  be  it  with  me  forevermore,  that  I  may  be  worthy  and 
good.  The  cross  is  my  right  hand,  wherewith  I  travel  the 
open  land,  that  I  may  not  be  waylaid  and  robbed,  nor 
whipped,  injured,  or  hurt  in  any  way.  Thus  protect  me,  God, 
all  my  flesh  and  blood,  from  evil  hours  and  from  false  tong¬ 
ues  no  less  such  as  reach  from  earth  to  heaven,  through  the 
power  of  holy  Evangelist  St  John,  in  the  name  of  f  t  t 

When  a  Person  goes  out  to  Battle ,  and  speaks  the  folloioing , 
he  will  he  Secure  against  Swords  and  other  Weapons  which 
may  be  Drawn  against  him. 

God  greet  ye,  brothers  of  good  cheer.  Ye  have  drank  of 
Christ’s  blood.  This  I  have  drank  for  your  own  good.  God 
the  Father  is  with  me.  God  the  Son,  he  is  with  ye.  God  the 
Holy  Spirit  be  between  us  two  and  be  with  us  all  that  no 
one  be  able  to  draw  the  sword  from  the  hilt.  Lord  Jesus  I  am 
thine.  I  lean  myRelf  upon  the  help  of  God  the  Father,  t  t  1 
I  commend  myself  to  the  sweet  name  of  Jesus  Christ  who  la 
above  me. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


189 


As  true  as  the  Lord  liveth  and  soars  above,  so  true  will 
his  holy  angels  protect  me  with  his  love  and  protect  my  going 
in  and  coming  out,  hither  and  thither.  God  the  Father  be  my 
power.  God  the  Son  be  my  strength.  God’s  holy  angels  defy 
and  chase  all  my  foes  and  all  bands  of  thieves,  and  protect 
me  against  all  ills  and  grievances.  As  sun  and  moon  stood 
still  at  Joshua’s  command,  when  he  fought  the  Philistine’s  on 
Jordan’s  strand.  Three  roses  stand  upon  the  dear  Lord’s 
brow,  the  first  is  kind,  the  second  is  meek,  the  third  is  his 
divine  will,  whoever  is  under  it  must  stand  fixed  and 
still,  t  t  t 

A  Protection  for  all  who  carry  this  Blessing  with  them.  They 

will  possess  a  Grand  Secret  which  no  other  being  will  un¬ 
derstand. 

Christ,  in  the  midst  of  peace,  went  with  his  disciples  abroad. 
St.  Matthew,  St.  Mark,  St.  Luke,  St.  John.  The  Four  Evan¬ 
gelists  protect  me,  N.  N.,  by  the  everpraised  majesty  and  unity 
of  God.  J.  J.  J.  Amen.  I.  C.  V.  J.  I.  R.  3,  121,  be  with  me  at 
all  distances,  t  t  t  Amen. 

How  to  Shoot  Securely. 

Take  the  heart  of  a  bat,  and  the  liver  at  that,  and  mix  it 
with  the  lead  when  thou  doth  bullets  cast,  and  thou  will  shoot 
all  things  dead.  Take  a  skull,  and  place  the  die  under  it,  pour 
the  lead  through  the  eye-holes  into  the  mould,  and  with  such 
bullets  and  balls  shoot.  Probatum! 

To  Prevent  Mice  from  doing  any  Injury  in  Barns ,  Bins 

and  Stables. 

Mark  well,  when  you  harvest  the  corn,  or  whatever  It  is, 
and  when  you  bring  the  first  load  home,  and  while  putting 
the  first  sheaves  into  the  barn,  take  the  same  into  your  right 
hand  and  speak:  Here  I  place  for  man  his  bread,  but  mice  and 
vermin  be  it  death.  In  the  name  of  God  the  Father,  and  the 
Son  and  the  Holy  Spirit. 

A  good  Way  to  Fix  Thieves. 

Three  lilies  stand  upon  our  Lord’s  holy  grave.  The  first 
is  God’s  courage,  the  other  God’s  blood,  the  third  God’s  will. 


190 


ALBERTITS  MAGNUS;  OR, 


Thief,  stand  still.  No  more  as  Jesus  Christ  descended  from 
the  t.  shall  thou  from  this  spot  depart.  That  I  command  in 
the  name  of  the  four  Evangelists  and  the  four  elements  of 
heaven,  whether  in  water  or  by  shot,  before  court  or  face  to 
face,  that  thou  remainest  affixed.  Stand  still,  scapegrace. 
Stand  still,  till  all  the  stars  of  heaven  I  behold,  and  the  sun 
darts  its  rays,  whether  warm  or  cold.  Thus  I  forbid  thy 
leaping  and  running.  This  I  order  thee,  thief  stop  thy  ways 
so  cunning,  in  the  name  t  t  t  Amen.  This  must  be  spoken 
three  times. 

When  the  Urine  of  a  Person  is  Mixed  with  Blood. 

Take  three  spoonfuls  of  sweet  oil,  boil  it  in  a  little  earthen 
$ot  filled  with  wine.  Drink  it  for  three  days,  it  will  surely 
help.  Or,  boil  juniperberries  in  water,  give  it  to  the  patient 
for  several  days  morning  and  evening.  It  is  a  sure  cure. 

How  to  remove  Neuralgia  in  Arm  or  Foot  by  a  Vapor  Bath. 

Take  juniper  tree  sprouts,  wild  lettuce,  oak  tree  sprouts, 
speedwell,  alant  roots,  onions  and  camomiles.  Boil  these  ar¬ 
ticles  in  water,  and  apply  repeatedly  as  a  poultice  over  arm  or 
foot,  and  they  will  remove  neuralgia  from  the  limbs. 

To  secure  Children  against  Jaundice,  Rheumatism  and  Epi* 
lepsy  during  their  entire  Lifetime 

Powder  the  part  known  as  the  core  in  the  centre  of  a  leg 
of  young  lamb  or  mutton,  and  mix  an  equal  quantity  (by 
weight)  of  hipscratch  to  it,  and  let  it  be  taken  in  milk  or 
in  mush,  and  the  young  ones  will  be  ever  free  of  the  ail¬ 
ment. 

To  Stop  Sanguinous  Discharges. 

Take  hartshorn,  scrape  it,  and  burn  it  to  powder,  mix  dried 
fennel  seed  also  powdered.  Give  the  powder  to  drink  in  rain¬ 
water,  and  the  result  will  be  achieved. 

N.  B.  Do  not  take  too  much  hartshorn,  so  that  it  does 
not  stop  too  quickly. 


EGYPTIAN  SECRETS. 


191 


To  Prevent  Children  having  Measles  from  becoming  Blind. 

As  soon  as  the  children  get  sick  from  measles,  hang  on 
their  necks  the  roots  of  purnellac,  and  your  sorrows  may 
cease.  Probatum. 

How  to  Draw  out  a  Thorn  or  Splinter. 

Take  carrots  bruised  with  honey  and  make  a  powder  there¬ 
of.  Put  over  the  injury,  it  will  draw  the  substance  out  and 
soothe  the  pains. 

For  Aches  in  Back  and  Loins. 

Take  the  roots  of  wool  herbs,  pound  it  to  powder,  put  the 
same  into  wine,  and  let  it  stand  for  twenty-four  hours.  After 
this,  boil  the  wine  and  drink  half  of  an  ounce  of  it  each 
time.  The  backache  as  well  as  the  pains  of  loins  will  never 
trouble  you  again. 

For  Cramp  in  the  Stomach. 

Take  a  handful  of  hipptree  seed  pods,  boil  them  soft  in 
a  pint  of  water,  and  drink  this  tea,  or  cook  them  with  dried 
prunes,  and  eat  them  repeatedly. 

When  a  Person  has  the  Gravel. 

Take  the  seed  of  wild  rose  apples,  acorns,  and  red  hazel¬ 
nut  blossoms,  grind  them  to  powder  and  drink  this  mixed 
with  wine. 

That  no  Wolf  or  Dog  may  Bite  or  Bark  at  You. 

Speak  the  following:  Thus  did  it  happen,  on  a  Friday  it 
was,  when  our  Lord  God  rode  over  a  field  of  grass,  he  carried 
neither  money  nor  purse  with  him;  for  he  owned  naught 
but  his  five  holy  wounds.  May  God  protect  us  against  wolves, 
dogs  and  hounds,  he  gave  to  St.  Peter  the  keys  for  the  locks, 
wherewith  to  close  the  jaws  of  wolves  and  of  dogs.  In  the 
name  of  t  t  t 


'S  •  ^ '  n 


' 


. 


•  I  ■ 


BOSTON  PUBLIC  LIBRARY, 


BOS 


ON 


PUBL C  L BRARY 


3  9999  03308  051  4
