Slave Religion

This page intentionally left blank

SLAVE

RELIGION

The “Invisible Institution” 
in the Antebellum South

Updated Edition

ALBERT J. RABOTEAU

OXEORD

UNIVERSITY PRESS

2004

OXFORD

UNIVERSITY PRESS 
Oxford New York

Auckland Bangkok Buenos Aires Cape Town Chennai 
Dar es Salaam Delhi Hong Kong Istanbul Karachi Kolkata 
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Mumbai Nairobi 
Sao Paulo Shanghai Taipei Tokyo Toronto

Copyright © 1978, 2004 by Oxford University Press, Inc.

First published by Oxford University Press, Inc., 1978.

First issued as an Oxford University Press paperback, 1980.

Updated edition issued by Oxford University Press, 2004.

198 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10016 
www.oup.com

Oxford is a registered trademark of Oxford University Press

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, 
without the prior permission of Oxford University Press.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Raboteau, Albert J.

Slave religion : the “invisible institution” in the antebellum South / Albert J. Raboteau. — 
Updated ed. 
p, cm.

Includes bibliographical references and index.

ISBN 0-19-517413-5 (cIoth)-ISBN 0-19-517412-7 (pbk.)

1. African Americans— Southern States— Religion.

2. Slaves— Religious life— Southern States.

3. Southern States— Church history.

I. Title.

BR563.N4R25 2004 
299.6’0975'09034— dc22 2004054704

Grateful acknowledgment is made to Presence Africaine for permission to quote an 
abridged translation of the poem “Souffles” by Birago Dop from Leurres et Lueurs (Paris: 
Presence Africaine, 1960).

987654321

Printed in the United States of America 
on acid-free paper

To the memory of my stepfather, Royal L. Woods 
and to the memory of my mother, Mabel S. Woods

This page intentionally left blankPrinted in the United States of America 
on acid-free paper

To the memory of my stepfather, Royal L. Woods 
and to the memory of my mother, Mabel S. Woods

This page intentionally left blank

It is our duty to proceed from what is near to what is distant, 
from what is known to that which is less known, to gather the 
traditions from those who have reported them, to correct them 
as much as possible and to leave the rest as it is, in order to 
make our work help anyone who seeks truth and loves wisdom.

ABU’L-RAYHAN MUHAMMAD AL-BIRUNI (973-1050)

Lord! Lord! baby, I hope yo’ young fo’ks will never know 
what slavery is, an’ will never suffer as yo’ foreparents. O 
God! God! I’m livin’ to tel’ de tale to yo’, honey. Yes, Jesus, 
yo’ve spared me.

MINNIE FULKES, FORMER SLAVE

We are bound to search the intelligible actions of men, for 
some indications of their inner significance.

THOMAS MERTON

This page intentionally left blank

PrefaceMINNIE FULKES, FORMER SLAVE

We are bound to search the intelligible actions of men, for 
some indications of their inner significance.

THOMAS MERTON

This page intentionally left blank

Preface

Until recently, the history of the black Church was a subject 
largely ignored by historians of religion in America despite the 
wide recognition that black religious institutions have been the 
foundation of Afro-American culture. An agency of social control, 
a source of economic cooperation, an arena for political activity, a 
sponsor of education, and a refuge in a hostile white world, the 
black Church has been historically the social center of Afro- 
American life. One still looks in vain, however, for a major history 
of Afro-American religion. Valuable pioneering work was done 
by W.E.B. Du Bois in The Souls of Black Folks and The Negro 
Church , both published in 1903; by Carter G. Woodson in his 
History of the Negro Church , published in 1921; and by E. Frank- 
lin Frazier, whose 1953 lecture series on black religion was 
gathered and issued in 1964 as The Negro Church in America. 
However, the field still remains a fertile area for exploration. One 
of the purposes of this book is to serve as a rough sketch for 
further, more exhaustive examination of this important subject. 1

Little enough has been written on the history of the visible 
institutions of black religion: the independent black denomina- 
tions and churches. Much less has there been discussion of what 
might be termed “the invisible institution” — black religion under 
slavery. Part of the problem has been the assumption that sources 
for a study of slave religion simply do not exist. Daniel Boorstin

X

PREFACE

succinctly stated this assumption in the chapter entitled “Invisible 
Communities: The Negroes’ Churches” in The Americans-. The 
National Experience:X

PREFACE

succinctly stated this assumption in the chapter entitled “Invisible 
Communities: The Negroes’ Churches” in The Americans-. The 
National Experience:

But . . . organized white churches did not encompass the reli- 
gious life of the Southern Negro. The Negro developed a 
religious life of his own. Much of this life remained unre- 
corded because many of the independent Negro religious 
meetings were illegal, and most of their participants, includ- 
ing sometimes even the preacher, were illiterate. Still we do 
know that such religious meetings were not uncommon, and 
that they became the nucleus, and later the whole organized 
form, of Negro communities. The Negroes’ religious life 
thrived in institutions that were often invisible to the white 
masters, and that are barely visible to the historian today . 2We should speak of the “invisibility” of slave religion with irony: 
it is the neglect of slave sources by historians which has been the 
main cause of this invisibility. Studies by John Blassingame, Ster- 
ling Stuckey, Lawrence Levine, Eugene Genovese, and others 
have demonstrated the fallacy in assuming that slaves left no ar- 
ticulate record of their experience. Blassingame’s The Slave Com- 
munity and Slave Testimony , Genovese’s Roll, Jordan Roll, and 
Levine’s Black Culture and Black Consciousness eloquently prove 
that there are indeed valid sources deriving from the slaves 
themselves. I have tried to investigate slave narratives, black auto- 
biographies, and black folklore in order to gather, literally out of 
the mouths of former slaves, the story of their religious experi- 
ences during slavery. Supplementing these sources with the more 
traditional ones of travel accounts, missionary reports, and jour- 
nals of white observers, I have attempted to picture the religion of 
American slaves in all its complexity. It has been my special 
concern to preserve the texture of the slave testimony and to avoid 
forcing the experience reflected in that testimony into any precon- 
ceived theoretical framework. I hope that the failings of this narra- 
tive will not obscure the wisdom and the rich humanity of the 
story that the former slaves had to tell . 3

PREFACE

xi

What were the origins of black religion in America? What 
aspects of African religions were retained by the slaves? How did 
the evangelization and conversion of African slaves to Christianity 
take place? What was the nature of the religion to which the slave 
was converted? What, if anything, was distinctive about religion 
in the slave quarters? These are the general questions that I have 
attempted to answer.I am indebted to many people for assistance in the conception 
and writing of this study. I wish to express my appreciation to 
Sydney Ahlstrom, who served as adviser for the doctoral disserta- 
tion upon which this book is based. I am also grateful to John 
Blassingame, whose course in Afro-American history was the 
source of several crucial insights which led to my choice of slave 
religion as a research topic. My thanks are also due C. Duncan 
Rice, Wayne Meeks, Charles Davis, James Dittes, Hans Frei, 
Winthrop Jordan, Lawrence Levine and Sheldon Meyer for their 
interest and encouragement. Susan Rabiner and Parke Puter- 
baugh I thank for sensitive and careful editing. To Sylvia Foster I 
owe thanks for creative assistance in research, and to Margaret 
Brewton, Teruko Ohashi, and Sylvia Turner for cheerful clerical 
assistance. Most of all, I am grateful to my wife Katherine for her 
critical readings and for her confidence that this work would 
someday be finished.

This page intentionally left blank

Contents

I THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

1. The African Diaspora, 3

2. Death of the Gods, 43

II “THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION”

3. Catechesis and Conversion, 95

4. The Rule of Gospel Order, 151

5. Religious Life in the Slave Community, 211

6. Religion, Rebellion, and Docility, 289 
Conclusion: Canaan Land, 319 
Afterword, 323

Notes, 335 
Index, 389

This page intentionally left blank

Slave Religion

This page intentionally left blank

I

The African Heritage

This page intentionally left blank

1

The African Diaspora

Hear more often things than beings, 
the voice of the fire listening, 
hear the voice of the water.

Hear in the wind

the bushes sobbing,

it is the sigh of our forebears.

Those who are dead are never gone:

they are there in the thickening shadow.

The dead are not under the earth:

they are in the tree that rustles,

they are in the wood that groans,

they are in the water that runs,

they are in the water that sleeps,The dead are not under the earth:

they are in the tree that rustles,

they are in the wood that groans,

they are in the water that runs,

they are in the water that sleeps,

they are in the hut, they are in the crowd,

the dead are not dead.

Those who are dead are never gone, 
they are in the breast of the woman, 
they are in the child who is wailing 
and in the firebrand that flames.

The dead are not under the earth:

they are in the fire that is dying,

they are in the grasses that weep,

they are in the whimpering rocks,

they are in the forest, they are in the house,

the dead are not dead.

BIRAGO DIOP

The ENSLAVEMENT of an

estimated ten million Africans over a period of almost four centu- 
ries in the Atlantic slave trade was a tragedy of such scope that it 
is difficult to imagine, much less comprehend . 1 When these Afri- 
cans were brought to slavery in the mines, plantations, and house- 
holds of the New World, they were tom away from the political, 
social, and cultural systems that had ordered their lives. Tribal 
and linguistic groups were broken up, either on the coasts of 
Africa or in the slave pens across the Atlantic. Most brutal of all, 
the exigencies of the slave trade did not allow the preservation of 
family or kinship ties.In the New World slave control was based on the eradication of 
all forms of African culture because of their power to unify the 
slaves and thus enable them to resist or rebel. Nevertheless, Afri- 
can beliefs and customs persisted and were transmitted by slaves 
to their descendants. Shaped and modified by a new environment, 
elements of African folklore, music, language, and religion were 
transplanted in the New World by the African diaspora. Influ- 
enced by colonial European and indigenous native American cul- 
tures, aspects of the African heritage have contributed, in greater 
or lesser degree, to the formation of various Afro-American cul- 
tures in the New World. One of the most durable and adaptable 
constituents of the slave’s culture, linking African past with 
American present, was his religion. It is important to realize, 
however, that in the Americas the religions of Africa have not 
been merely preserved as static “Africanisms” or as archaic “reten- 
tions.” The fact is that they have continued to develop as living 
traditions putting down new roots in new soil, bearing new fruit 
as unique hybrids of American origin. African styles of worship, 
forms of ritual, systems of belief, and fundamental perspectives 
have remained vital on this side of the Atlantic, not because they 
were preserved in a “pure” orthodoxy but because they were 
transformed. Adaptability, based upon respect for spiritual power 
wherever it originated, accounted for the openness of African reli-

4

THE AFRICAN DIASPORA

5

gions to syncretism with other religious traditions and for the 
continuity of a distinctively African religious consciousness. At 
least in some areas of the Americas, the gods of Africa continued 
to live — in exile. 2

African Religious TraditionsAfrican Religious Traditions

Among the Africans who became slaves in the Americas were 
those, such as the Wolof, Serer, Mandinke, Bambara, Fulani, and 
Hausa, who were Muslim or at least had been influenced by 
Islam. The ancient kingdoms of Ghana, Mali, and Songhay had 
been centers of Muslim influence in the western Sudan. South of 
the Sahara, along the coasts of “Guinea,” and through inland 
kingdoms, people had been exposed to Islam through trade with 
North African Muslims, through conquest, through colonization, 
and through conversion. In feet, the first black Africans with 
whom white Europeans came into contact on the coast of West 
Africa were “black Moors” (as distinguished from “tawny 
Moors,” i.e., light-skinned Berbers). In the fifteenth century Por- 
tuguese sailors in the service of Prince Henry ventured beyond 
the Canary Islands and Cape Bojador and sailed along the coast of 
West Africa in search of trade, wealth, and the legendary Chris- 
tian king Prester John. In a kind of prologue to the Atlantic slave 
trade, the Portuguese by the 1440s were capturing Berber and 
Negro Moors from the coasts of Mauretania and the Senegambia 
region. According to the Portuguese chronicler Gomes Eannes 
De Azurara, over nine hundred Africans had been seized and 
brought to Lisbon as slaves by 1448. 3

An eighteenth-century traveler observed that while some West 
African towns had mosques and though some Muslim “Foolas 
and Mandingoes attend to the ceremonial duties of their religion 
with such strictness as well might cause Christians to blush,” yet 
“they still entertain a degree of belief in the powers of witchcraft 
and in those of . . . charms.” It is clear that elements of Islam were 
often mixed with or adapted to forms of traditional African belief.

6

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE6

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

A case in point is recorded for Dahomey: “Among the amulets , or 
charms , the principal is a scrap of parchment containing a sen- 
tence of the Koran, which the natives purchase from the Moors 
who visit the country.” As we shall see, Muslim slaves became 
particularly noted in the New World for the power of their magi- 
cal charms. 4

Similarly, it is possible that a few enslaved Africans may have 
had some contact with Christianity in their homeland. Attempts 
to establish European Christianity along the coast of West Africa 
date from the time of Portuguese missionaries in the early six- 
teenth century. John Barbot, in his account of Guinea, written 
around 1682, notes that:

The Portuguese missionaries have undergone great labours, 
and run mighty hazards to convert some of them [Africans in 
the region of the Gambia] to Christianity, ever since the be- 
ginning of the last, and during this century, but with little 
success: for though some seem to embrace the doctrines, yet 
many mix it with pagan idolatry and Mahometanism; others 
are no sooner baptiz’d but they return to their wild natural 
way of living . 5French Capuchins were working on the Gold Coast in 1635 and 
Portuguese Capuchins were sent out to the kingdom of Ouwere 
in 1683. There were some African converts among the creole 
societies — made up of mulattoes of Portuguese-African 
descent — which grew up around the European forts on the 
coasts of Guinea. The Portuguese had some success in the 
Kongo where the Mani-Kongo or premier king, Nzinga 
Mbemba, was converted to Christianity and was baptized as 
Dom Affonso I (1506-1543). In general, however, the early 
missionaries had very limited success and did not penetrate the 
interior. Not until Christianized slaves began to return from Eu- 
rope and America to Africa in the late eighteenth century did 
the expansion of Christianity on the West Coast of Africa begin. 
Christianity was carried further inland by the invasion of Euro- 
pean and American missionaries shortly before and contempo-

THE AFRICAN DIASPORA

7

rary with nineteenth-century colonization. Though Islam — and 
to a much smaller extent, Christianity — had extended into sub- 
Saharan Africa, by far the greatest number of those Africans 
who fell victim to the Atlantic trade came from peoples who 
held the indigenous and traditional beliefs of their fathers . 6Over the four centuries of the Atlantic trade, slaves were seized 
from many parts of Africa — Central, South, and East — as well as 
West Africa. The problem of the provenience of American slaves 
is a difficult one, complicated by the lengthy duration of the trade. 
Various European and American countries exported and im- 
ported slaves at different periods from various points of the Afri- 
can coast, depending on the availability of slaves, the wishes of 
African slave traders, and other exigencies of the market. As a 
result, slaves bound for the Americas came from many different 
nations, tribes, and language groups. Records of the slave ships 
mention points of embarkation but are often hazy about the origi- 
nal homelands of the human cargo. On this side of the Atlantic, 
the ethnic names supplied by slave merchants and owners to 
newly arrived Africans were frequently confused and inexact. Nev- 
ertheless, it is clear that a large percentage of American slaves 
came from West Africa and from the Congo-Angola region. This 
vast territory stretched along the coast from Senegambia in the 
northwest to Angola in the southeast; it extended several hundred 
miles inland, and embraced societies and cultures as diverse as 
those of the Mandinke, the Yoruba, the Ibo and the Bakongo . 7

There were, and are, too many significant differences among 
the religions of various West African peoples, not to mention local 
variations within any single people, to permit putting them all 
into a single category. However, similar modes of perception, 
shared basic principles, and common patterns of ritual were wide- 
spread among different West African religions. Beneath the diver- 
sity, enough fundamental similarity did exist to allow a general 
description of the religious heritage of African slaves, with supple- 
mentary information concerning particular peoples, such as the 
Akan, Ewe, Yoruba, Ibo and others, whose influences upon the

8

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE8

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

religions of Afro-Americans have long been noted. It is important 
to remember also that no single African culture or religion, once 
transplanted in alien soil, could have remained intact: it was in- 
evitable that the slaves would build new societies in the Americas 
which would be structured in part from their diverse back- 
grounds in different African societies, in part from the experience 
of enslavement in a new environment. A common religious heri- 
tage then resulted from the blending and assimilation of the many 
discrete religious heritages of Africans in the New World . 8

Common to many African societies was belief in a High God, or 
Supreme Creator of the world and everything in it. It was also 
commonly believed that this High God, often associated with the 
sky, was somewhat removed from and uninvolved in the activities 
of men, especially so when compared with the lesser gods and 
ancestor-spirits who were actively and constantly concerned with 
the daily life of the individual and the affairs of society as a whole . 9 
Early travelers were quick to note that Africans believed in a High 
God who transcended ritual relationships with humans. Describ- 
ing religion on the Slave Coast, William Bosman, a Dutch factor, 
remarked that the Africans had an “idea of the True God and 
ascribe to him the Attributes of Almighty, and Omnipresent.”It is certain that . . . they believe he created the Universe, and 
therefore vastly preferr him before their Idol-Gods But yet 
they do not pray to him, or offer any Sacrifices to him; for 
which they give the following Reasons. God, they say, is too 
high exalted above us, and too great to condescend so much as 
to trouble himself or think of Mankind; Wherefore he com- 
mits the Government of the World to their Idols; to whom, as 
the second, third and fourth Persons distant in degree from 
God, and our appointed lawful Govemours, we are obliged to 
apply ourselves. And in firm Belief of this Opinion they qui- 
etly continue . 10

Occasionally individuals and communities did pray to the High 
God but sacrifice to him was rare; it was generally the other gods 
and the spirits of deceased ancestors who received the most atten-

THE AFRICAN DIASPORA

9THE AFRICAN DIASPORA

9

tion, since they had been delegated to attend to “the affairs of 
mankind .” 11 Usually, in the traditional religions of West Africa 
the High God is the parent of the other and lesser gods, who are 
sometimes seen as mediators between man and God. Among the 
Yoruba, for example, Olorun is viewed as being above all other 
gods, and sacrifice to any one of them is concluded in his name. 
Among other peoples, such as the Ga, there appears to be no 
overarching High God, but one god who is senior to many, a 
kind of primus inter pares , for each Ga village. The Ibo supreme 
deity is Chukwu (from Chi-Uku, Great Spirit), Chineke the Cre- 
ator God, who controls rain and fertility and from whom the chi, 
or soul, of a man originates. According to the Bakongo, God 
(Nzambi) is invisible, the source of rain, seeds, health, and chil- 
dren. From him, nkisi , or sacred medicine, which figures impor- 
tantly in Kongo religious life, receives its power. Nzambi is not 
sacrificed to but is “called upon in times of sighing and difficulty.” 
Though it would be a mistake to assume that the High God is 
forgotten or never appealed to, it is nevertheless a fundamental 
characteristic of West African religious life that the worshiper is 
most concerned with the lesser gods and spirits . 12The lesser divinities or secondary gods are numerous. Some are 
worshiped generally, others only locally. Among some West Afri- 
can peoples there are pantheons, or groups of gods, associated 
with natural forces and phenomena. Sky pantheons include the 
god of thunder, lightning, and rainstorm. The gods of the earth 
govern fertility and punish wickedness by sending smallpox and 
other virulent diseases. Water divinities dwell in or are identified 
with lakes, rivers, and the sea. Still other nature spirits may reside 
in trees, hills, winds, and animals. European travelers frequently 
identified African gods with demons or devils and accused Afri- 
cans of devil worship. Or they mistook the image of the god for 
the god himself and called them fetish worshipers. However, the 
representation of the gods as fetishes is a mistake. A fetish, prop- 
erly speaking, is simply a charm or amulet, and the place or object 
where the god dwells is properly called a shrine; neither should

10

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE10

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

be confused with the gods themselves. Africans refer to these 
spirits by various names: the Ashanti know them as abosom; the 
Ewe-speaking Fon of Dahomey name them vodun; the Ibo wor- 
ship them as alose; and the Yoruba call them orisha. 13 It is these 
gods who govern the forces of the world and affect the affairs of 
men for good or ill. The gods may be benevolent or malevolent, 
as willful and arbitrary as humans. Therefore, people must main- 
tain proper relations with them through dutiful praise, sacrifice, 
and obedience. Generally speaking, the gods have altars, shrines, 
and temples dedicated to their worship. Devotees are careful to 
wear certain colors and to eat certain foods which their particular 
god favors or conversely, to avoid those colors and foods their god 
has ruled taboo. The individual personalities of the gods are re- 
vealed in myths that establish the relationship of one god to 
another and define each god’s sphere of activity in the world. In 
these myths much of the cosmology of West African peoples is 
articulated . 14The various cults usually have priests and devotees who are 
active in their service to the gods. It is the role of the priest to 
offer worship and proper ritual sacrifice to the gods and to preside 
at periodic festivals honoring gods and ancestors. In addition, 
priests often serve as skilled diviners and herbalists. Devotees, 
known among the Yoruba and the Fon as iyaworisha and vodunsi, 
i.e., “wife of the orisha ” or “wife of the vodun ” (though there are 
men devotees as well as women), are initiated into a cult over a 
more or less lengthy period of training, which involves a novitiate 
in which the novice “dies,” is instructed in the rites of the god, 
learns a secret language, and finally is “resurrected,” to public 
celebration, as an initiate of the cult. The devotees have become 
mediums of their gods and upon the occasion of a ritual ceremony 
they may become possessed. In states of ecstatic trance, described 
by anthropologists of religion as “spirit possession,” the vodunsi 
and iyaworisha dance out in mime the character of a god, becom- 
ing for a time the god’s mouthpiece. Known as “the horse of the 
god" or “the owner of the god” or “the one mounted by the god,”

THE AFRICAN DIASPORA

11

the ecstatic behavior of the possessed is highly stylized and con- 
trolled. The identity of the god can be recognized from the dance 
and demeanor of the possessed devotee. Normally, an individual 
would become a devotee of the god of his or her mother or father. 
But occasionally a nonfamilial god may choose an individual for 
his spouse and will “fight” with that person by sending illness or 
misfortune until the individual yields and undergoes initiation 
into the god’s cult. Through divination the chosen one discovers 
the identity of the orisha and his will . 15Men had to take into account, besides the gods, the power of a 
“world of spirits.” Indeed the religious life of the peoples of the 
Kongo focused not upon a pantheon but upon a large range of 
minkisi, or sacred medicines, embodying spirits who could harm 
or cure. If the taboos of the minkisi were not observed, these 
minkisi could become malevolent. It was widely believed by West 
Africans that certain trees, like the iroko, the baobab, and the 
silk-cotton housed spirits who could grant to supplicants the 
blessing of fertility . 18

In the traditional religion of West Africa, the power of the gods 
and spirits was effectively present in the lives of men, for good or 
ill, on every level — environmental, individual, social, national, and 
cosmic. Aspects of reality seen as impersonal from a modem 
scientific viewpoint were not only personified but personalized, 
i.e., placed within the context of social relationships. The gods 
and men related to one another through the mediation of sacrifice, 
through the mechanism of divination, and through the phenome- 
non of spirit possession. Widely shared by diverse West African 
societies were several fundamental beliefs concerning the relation- 
ship of the divine to the human; belief in a transcendent, benevo- 
lent God, creator and ultimate source of providence; belief in a 
number of immanent gods, to whom people must sacrifice in 
order to make life propitious; belief in the power of spirits animat- 
ing things in nature to affect the welfare of people; belief in priests 
and others who were expert in practical knowledge of the gods 
and spirits; belief in spirit possession, in which gods, through

12

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE12

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

their devotees, spoke to men. Certainly not every West African 
society shared all these beliefs and some societies emphasized dif- 
ferent ones more than others. The Yoruba and the Fon, for ex- 
ample, developed a much more highly articulated pantheon than 
did the Ibo, the Efik, or the Bakongo. Nevertheless, the outline, 
in most of its parts, holds as a description of the theological per- 
spective of a wide range of West African peoples . 17

In addition to the gods, a powerful class of spirits in the world 
of traditional West African religions are the ancestors. Through- 
out West Africa, the ancestors, both those who died long ago and 
those of more recent memory, are revered as founders of villages 
and kinship groups. It is believed that, as custodians of custom 
and law, the ancestors have the power to intervene in present 
affairs and, moreover, to grant fertility and health to their descen- 
dants, for whom they mediate with the gods. Among the Mende, 
for example, the “mediator role of the ancestors is assumed to be 
possible because they are spirit and therefore have ready access to 
ngewo [God] who is also spirit .” 18 Indeed, some gods are the 
divinized ancestors of sibs, or kinship groups. According to M.J. 
Field, writing of the Ga, “most people are, in practice, more afraid 
of offending these [dead forefathers] than of offending the gods, 
though in theory . . . they give the higher place to the gods.” 1 * A 
person neglects the veneration of his ancestors at the risk of sick- 
ness, misfortune, even death. If one suffers ill fortune, he might 
discover in a dream or through divination that an angry ancestor 
is punishing him for neglecting to offer sacrifice.It is commonly held that ancestors are born again in their de- 
scendants. A resemblance between a grandchild and his deceased 
grandfather, for example, is proof that the latter has been reincar- 
nated in the former. West African parents turn to diviners to 
determine which ancestor’s spirit has returned in their newborn 
child. Barrenness is a serious curse, since it prevents the reincar- 
nation of ancestors within their lineage group. Elderly people are 
respected and revered in part because they preserve the memory 
of the dead and are closer chronologically to the ancestors . 20

THE AFRICAN DIASPORA

13

The ancestors are watchful guardians of the customs of the 
people. If anyone deviates from them, he or she may be punished.

The living never forget that they are the trustees of the dead.

The continuity of customs must be faithfully preserved. A 
custom, rite, or ceremony is a link with the dead who insti- 
tuted it quite as much as it is the right of the god who re- 
ceived it. The dead are always watching to see that the living 
preserve what their forefathers established. And since the 
dead have power to bestow either blessing or adversity . . . the 
welfare of the living is felt to be bound up with the faithful 
performance of ancient custom . 21Because of the powerful position of the ancestors, burial rites 
become very important. Improper or incomplete funeral rites can 
interfere with or delay the entrance of the deceased into the spiri- 
tual world and may cause his soul to linger about, as a restless and 
malevolent ghost. Funeral ceremonies are long, complex, and ex- 
pensive, but it would be a great disgrace for a family not to 
observe the proper rites, even if they must go into debt to do so. 
Before a funeral is complete, several customs must be observed: 
preparation of the body for burial, the wake, interment, “mourn- 
ing after burial, and later mourning at varying periods.” The 
graves of the deceased of some West African peoples are elabo- 
rately decorated with the personal effects of the individuals buried 
there . 22

Rites honoring the ancestors vary from the simple private offer- 
ing of food and drink, a gesture that may occur anytime, to more 
elaborate public ceremonies such as the adae ceremonies held by 
the Ashanti twice every forty-three days, in which the stools of 
past clan rulers, representing their spirits, are fed and honored. 
There are societies, such as the Yoruba Egungun society and the 
Ibo Mmo society, that foster the cult of the ancestors. Members of 
these societies go about masked and ceremonially garbed imitat- 
ing the dead on certain ritual occasions in order to warn the 
errant living to mend their ways . 23

Magic is an integral part of religious life for many African

14

THE AFRICAN HERITAGEMagic is an integral part of religious life for many African

14

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

peoples. It is intimately related to medicine in traditional African 
belief because illness and death are not due to “natural” causes 
alone but to “spiritual” causes as well. It is the priest-diviner-herb- 
alist, or “root doctor,” versed in the use of herbs, barks, leaves, 
and roots, to whom one goes for a diagnosis of these causes and 
for prescriptions to ameliorate illness . 24 Prevention, however, re- 
mains the best cure. Therefore the use of charms and amulets is 
widespread. Often called ju-jus, gris-gris, or fetishes in travel ac- 
counts, they are believed to bear spiritual power. Talismans pro- 
tect individuals from illness or witchcraft; charms placed at entry- 
ways protect villages, compounds, houses, and fields from thieves, 
unless the thief has a countercharm powerful enough to negate 
the force of the protective charm . 25Medicine can be used for healing and protection or for harming 
and killing enemies. A very common method of offensive medi- 
cine was described by Bosman: “they cause some Victuals and 
Drink to be Exorcised by the Feticheer or Priest, and scatter it in 
some place which their Enemy is accustomed to pass; firmly be- 
lieveing that he who comes to touch this conjured stuff shall 
certainly dye soon after .” 26 Hair cuttings, nail clippings, personal 
sponges, or anything else that is physically close to a person may 
be used by experts in medicine, so personal effects must be care- 
fully disposed of lest they fall into an enemy’s hands. The use of 
medicine is especially important in warding off witchcraft, a phe- 
nomenon as greatly feared in Africa as it was in Europe and 
America. It is thought that the witch, usually a woman but occa- 
sionally a man, can cause illness and death, often involuntarily, by 
eating an individual’s soul. While the witch is asleep, her spirit 
leaves her body and flies to a meeting of witches where a soul is 
consumed. The spirit of the witch may assume the body of an 
animal in order to travel to meetings, and it is believed that if the 
animal is killed while bearing the witch’s spirit, the sleeping body 
of the witch will die at the same instant. Witch hunters make a 
profession of identifying witchcraft and cursing its effects. When a 
person has been killed by witchcraft, the corpse may force its

THE AFRICAN DIASPORA

15

bearers to lurch back and forth through the town until it stops 
before the home or the person of the guilty witch. The accused 
will have to confess guilt or undergo trial by ordeal to prove 
innocence . 27In general, if people want to determine guilt or innocence or 
to seek the answer to any important question in West Africa they 
will turn to priest-diviners, who are skilled in reading the fate of 
individuals and the wills of ancestors or gods by means of simple 
or elaborate systems of divination. Simpler methods include inter- 
preting omens, reading the entrails, of a fowl, or water gazing. 
More elaborate is the Yoruba If a system (adapted in Dahomey 
as Fa) of divination. In the Ifa system, a baba-lawo, “father of 
mysteries,” casts a chain of eight halves of palm nuts or else 
sixteen separate nuts, and then, reading the pattern of the cast, he 
marks the permutations on a tray covered with wood dust. Each 
permutation corresponds to an odu, or saying, of which there are 
two hundred and fifty-six. To each odu is attached a number of 
verses conveying a myth or story that points to the answer of the 
client’s problem . 28

Religious beliefs are carried into action through ritual. Closely 
interwoven with the ritual experience of West African peoples is 
the vibrant pattern of music. Dancing, drumming, and singing 
play a constant and integral part in the worship of the gods and 
the ancestors. Among the Yoruba and the Fon, the orisha and the 
vodun are called to take possession of their devotees by the songs 
and the drumming of the cult group, each of the gods having his 
or her owm songs and rhythms. When “mounted” by their gods, 
the devotees dance to the accompaniment of songs and music the 
distinctive steps revelatory of their gods. So essential are music 
and dance to West African religious expression that it is no exag- 
geration to call them “danced religions .” 29

Thus the religious background of the slaves was a complex 
system of belief, and in the life of an African community there was 
a close relationship between the natural and the supernatural, the 
secular and the sacred. “The heavenly world,” in the words of

16

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE16

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

Pierre Verger, was “not distant . . . and the believer” was “able to 
speak directly with his gods and benefit from their benevo- 
lence .” 30 The welfare of the community and of each individual 
within it derived from the close relationship of man to the gods, 
the ancestors, and the unseen spirits. The harmony of that rela- 
tionship was the ground of good; its disruption the source of evil. 
This religious view of life had been handed down by the fore- 
fathers and was “expressed in laws and customs hallowed by time 
and myth .” 31 To what extent did this religious heritage continue 
to live in the experience of Africans enslaved in a New World?

The Gods in Exile

The gods of Africa were carried in the memories of enslaved 
Africans across the Atlantic. To be sure, they underwent a sea 
change. African liturgical seasons, prescribed rituals, traditional 
myths, and languages of worship were attenuated, replaced, and 
altered, or lost. Still, much remained, and particularly in Latin 
America the gods lived on in the beliefs and rituals of the slaves’ 
descendants. Candomble in Brazil, santeria in Cuba, shango in 
Trinidad, and vaudou in Haiti, all attest to the vitality and dur- 
ability of African religious perspectives. And it should be empha- 
sized that it is the continuity of perspective that is significant, 
more so than the fact that the cults of particular African gods, 
such as Shango or Elegba, have been transmitted to the New 
World. For new as well as old gods have come to be worshiped by 
Afro-Americans, but the new, like the old, have been perceived in 
traditionally African ways.In Jamaica, for example, where the African gods have not sur- 
vived by name, the basic theology of West African religions is 
apparent in two religious groups, the Convince cult and Cumina. 
The Convince cult, whose members are called Bongo men, traces 
its roots back to Jamaican maroons (runaway slaves) who fled to 
the Blue Mountains in eastern Jamaica where they fought against 
British forces until their independence was recognized by treaty

THE AFRICAN DIASPORA

17

in 1739. The Bible and Christian hymns are important in Con- 
vince, but its basic theology, as described by Donald Hogg, is 
African:

[Convince] rests on the assumption that men and spirits exist 
within a single, unified social structure, interact with one 
another and influence each other’s behavior. The principles of 
cooperation and reciprocity govern the relations between cult 
members and certain of these spirits. Bongo Men . . . believe 
that spiritual power is morally neutral — that it can be put to 
both constructive and malevolent purposes by spirits who 
have it and by persons who can influence them. It makes little 
sense, they reason, to propitiate spirits who are neither poten- 
tially dangerous nor immediately useful. God and Christ, 
whom they consider too benevolent to worry about and too 
remote and otherworldly to be of much practical value, there- 
fore merit little attention from them. Bongo Men focus their 
concern instead on lesser, more accessible spirits who take an 
immediate interest in material human affairs and have greater 
influence upon phenomenal events. They deal exclusively 
with ghosts . . . 3aThe ghosts that Bongo men venerate most are not those of the 
recent dead, which lack power, but the strong spirits of African 
ancestors, slaves, or maroons. To these ghosts Bongo men offer 
animal sacrifice. And it is these ghosts that take possession of 
their descendants. Here, as in Africa and elsewhere in Affo-Amer- 
ica, the possessing spirit is said to “mount” and ride his “horse.” 33 
In Jamaican Cumina, also termed “African Cumina” and “ma- 
roon dance,” no African gods, except Shango, the Yoruban god of 
thunder, are venerated, and yet the African influence on Cumina 
belief underlies the veneration of three, classes of spirits — sky 
gods, who rank highest; then earthbound gods; and last, ances- 
tors. All three types of spirits possess their mortal followers and 
can be identified by the African rituals associated with them: by 
their food preferences, drum rhythms, and style of dancing. 34

Worship of African gods by name, and in ways remarkably 
similar to forms of worship in Africa, is characteristic of Afro-

18

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

American cults in Brazil, Trinidad, Cuba, and Haiti. In Brazil, 
slavery was introduced around the middle of the sixteenth century 
and was not abolished until 1888, although by 1852 the slave 
trade was being suppressed, with difficulty. Over this period of 
three centuries slaves were brought at various times from the 
Western Sudan, Guinea, Angola, Congo, and Mozambique. The 
Yoruba, Fon, Fanti, Ashanti, Hausa, Tapa, Mandinke, Fulbe, and 
Bantu peoples were all represented on the slave ships sailing into 
the Bay of All Saints, Bahia, which for two centuries served as the 
main port of entry. Among the slaves, traditional African beliefs 
(and, to a degree, Islam) continued to exist and were syncretized 
with Portuguese Catholic and Indian beliefs into new Afro-Brazil- 
ian forms, which came to be known as candomble in Bahia, as 
macumba in Rio de Janeiro, and as shango or catimbo in northeast- 
ern Brazil. 36The seitas (sects) of candomble are roughly organized into 
Active “nations” — Nago (Yoruba), Gege (from Adja or Fon), and 
Angola-Congo (Bantu)— representing different African traditions. 
In Bahia, as in Africa, borrowings between Yoruba and Fon the- 
ologies have occurred, and in Brazil Gege and Nago cults have 
largely fused. The Bantu seita has also come under the influence of 
Yoruba-Dahomean forms. Why this is so is a problem. One theory 
that attempts to explain the predominance of Yoruba-Da-homean 
influence is that the majority of Bantu became field hands on rural 
plantations, whereas the Yoruba and Fon were prized as house 
servants and so were numerous in the cities, where it was easier to 
form “nations.” Another thesis is that the religion of the Yoruba 
and the Fon was supported in Africa by highly organized social 
structures that made them more resistant to European 
influence in the New World than the less systematized Bantu 
religions. Very possibly the highly articulated pantheon of Yoruba 
and Dahomean gods influenced the more magic-oriented tra- 
ditions of Congo- Angola, particularly since Gege-Nago traditions 
were fed by continued contact between Bahia and West Africa. 
However valid these conjectures may be, it is true that the orisha

THE AFRICAN DIASPORA

19

and the vodun are worshiped in Brazil in essentially the same 
manner as in Africa . 38THE AFRICAN DIASPORA

19

and the vodun are worshiped in Brazil in essentially the same 
manner as in Africa . 38

In candomble the core of ritual is formed around sacrifice, 
praise, drumming, singing, and possession. Praise and sacrifice 
are offered to the gods to ensure their favor and blessing. As in 
Africa, the orisha and vodun have personal characteristics, particu- 
lar emblems, sacred foods, feast days, and favorite colors. Priests 
or priestesses (paes or maes de santo) have charge of the gods’ 
temples, the conduct of worship, and the training of cult mem- 
bers. Devotees (filhas or filhos de santo ) serve as attendants and, in 
possessed state, as mediums of the gods. Bahian devotees, some- 
times called by the Dahomean term vodunsi, are initiated into the 
service of a god in a novitiate that closely parallels the initiation of 
vodunsi in Dahomey. Possessed by her god, the initiate dresses in 
the colors of the god, wears or carries the god’s emblems, and 
mimics the character of the god in dance. When the gods enter 
“the heads” of their devotees in possession, they are greeted with 
drumming and singing (in African languages in some seitas). A 
significant difference between ceremonial spirit possession in 
Brazil and Africa is that in Africa a single god has a cult and 
temple devoted to his or her worship alone, whereas in Bahia, a 
seita includes numerous gods, who may possess their devotees at 
any one service . 37Prominent among the African orisha and vodun of candomble 
are Eshu (Legba), messenger of the gods, to whom a special first 
offering is made at the beginning of ceremonies so that he will 
open the way, and to ensure that as divine trickster he will not 
disrupt the proper order and decorum of the service; Ogun, the 
god of iron and war, the first god after Eshu to be invoked; 
Oshossi, god of the hunt; Shopona (Sakpata), the earth god who 
punishes mankind with disease, especially smallpox; Yemoja, 
“mother of waters,” whose offerings are thrown into the sea; 
Oshun, the African Aphrodite of voluptuous beauty; Shango, god 
of thunder, whose emblem in Bahia, as in Africa, is the double- 
edged ax, and whose “thunderstones” are kept on the altars of

Oshe Shango, dance wand for the 
thundergod. Reprinted, by permis- 
sion, from Robert Ferris Thomp- 
son, Black Gods and Kings (Bloo- 
mington: Indiana University Press, 
1976 ).

THE AFRICAN DIASPORA

21

Nago-Gege cult houses. The identities of the gods in Bahia, as 
explicated in myth and visibly embodied in the gestures and 
dances of their “horses,” closely parallel their traits in Africa. An 
important exception, which will be discussed later, is the iden- 
tification of the gods with Catholic saints . 38The cults of the major Yoruba and Dahomean gods have also 
been transplanted in Trinidad, Cuba, and Haiti, but with signi- 
ficant variations and numerous additions. Many of the gods or 
“powers” worshiped in shango are not of African but of Trinida- 
dian origin. Eshu, Ogun, Yemanja, and Shango are worshiped, 
but the myths attached to the gods in Africa have either disap- 
peared or been replaced by Catholic hagiography in Trinidad. 
There is an interesting trace of one Yoruba legend about the god 
Shango. Shango, it is said, has a sibling by the name of Oba Koso 
(identified with St. Anthony). Among the Yoruba the words Oba 
ko so refer to a legend that Shango, as fourth king of the city-state 
Oyo, was defeated in battle and in shame left his city and hanged 
himself. The priest and members of Shango’s cult in Africa deny 
this, and whenever it thunders they claim the divinized Shango is 
manifesting his power and reiterate the saying “Oba ko so” (The 
king did not hang). In Trinidad this cry of praise has become the 
name of a new god, Shango’s brother . 39

A combination of fidelity to African religious traditions and 
divergence from them has also been characteristic of the Afro-Cu- 
ban cult of santeria. As in candomble and shango , Yoruba 
influence has been significant. Members of the cult refer to them- 
selves as Lucumi, from the Yoruba greeting, “Oluki mi” (My 
friend) ; many of the Yoruba gods, identified with the santos , are 
worshiped; possession by the gods occurs in the African manner; 
animal sacrifice, the Ifa system of divination, Shango’s thunder- 
stones, Yoruba bata ritual drums, and Yoruba hymns, all figure 
prominently in Lucumi worship . 40 Thunderstones, the Neolithic 
celts familiar in several West African religions, are essential to the 
rituals of santeria, but in Cuba the stones are interpreted differ- 
ently. According to William Bascom, the “real power of the san-

22

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE22

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

tos resides in the stones . . . without which no santeria shrine 
could exist.” Santeros believe that the most powerful stones were 
carried from Africa by slaves who had swallowed them. The 
power of the stones is conferred by “baptism” in a mixture of 
herbs and blood. By allowing the blood of sacrificial animals to 
fall upon the stones, the santos are fed. If the gods are well fed, in 
annual ceremonies lasting for three nights, there will be frequent 
possession, which in turn increases the power of the stones. 
Charms and beads dedicated to the santos receive their power 
from contact with the stones and from treatment with herbs and 
blood. Thus, in Cuba, the “concept of the stones ( piedras ) is 
equivalent not to the Yoruba okuta (stone) but to the Yoruba 
iponri , which is the material object which represents the power of 
a deity and to which its sacrifices are actually presented .” 41

There is, however, an amazingly exact equivalency between 
the Yoruba and the Afro-Cuban systems of divination, known as 
Ifa. Lucumi diviners are called babalawo (“father of mysteries”) 
and cast palm nuts (ikin) or a chain ( opele ) of seeds just as their 
Yoruba counterparts do. Bascom has observed that “That same 
names for the sixteen figures ( odu ) of Ifa are given in the same 
order as in Nigeria . . . The first verse (ese Ifa) of the first odu 
. . . recorded in Yoruba in Ife, was given in Cuba as the first verse 
of the same odu ." 42The most immediately apparent innovation that santeria, 
shango, and candomble have brought to African theological per- 
spectives is the identification of African gods with Catholic saints. 
Initially the veneration of saints must have provided the slaves 
with a convenient disguise for secret worship of African gods. 
Moreover, African religions have traditionally been amenable to 
accepting the “foreign” gods of neighbors and of enemies. It has 
not been unusual for one people to integrate the gods of another 
into their own cult life especially when social changes, such as 
migration or conquest, required mythic and ritualistic legitima- 
tion. Furthermore, Catholic popular piety has long been open to 
syncretism with “pagan” belief and practice. No fundamental con-

THE AFRICAN DIASPORA

23

tradiction existed between veneration of the Virgin Mary and the 
saints in Catholic piety, on the one hand, and devotion to the 
orisha and vodun in African religions, on the other. The Portu- 
guese, Spanish, or French colonist appealed to the saints for suc- 
cor, he lit candles to honor them, knelt before their images, ob- 
served their feast days, and trusted them as intermediaries be- 
tween him and his God. And while, doctrinally, the Holy Trinity 
was most blessed and alone deserving of all worship, in practice 
the line between veneration and adoration was frequently crossed 
in popular devotion to the Virgin and the saints. Catholic notions 
about the role of Christ, Mary, guardian angels, and patron saints 
as intercessors with the Father in heaven for men on earth proved 
quite compatible with African ideas about the intervention of les- 
ser gods in the day-to-day affairs of human life, while the supreme 
god remained benevolent and providential but distant.The logic of particular identifications between orisha and saint 
seems to have been based sometimes on the similarity of powers 
assigned to them. St. Barbara, for example, the protectress against 
thunder and lightning, was identified in Bahia with Shango, god 
of thunder and lightning, despite the difference in gender. The 
malevolent aspect of Eshu-Elegba led to his identification with 
the devil at Bahia and T rinidad, while in Cuba his role as divine 
messenger, the “opener of roads,” caused him to be matched with 
St. Peter, “keeper of the keys” to the Kingdom of Heaven. St. 
Raphael, the archangel who in the Bible heals Tobit, is known in 
santeria as Osanyin, the god of healing, who dispenses cool me- 
dicinal leaves . 43

Other identifications seem to be iconographic, based upon the 
similarity between emblems of gods and saints. For example, 
Oshossi, god of the hunt, is known as St. George or as St. Mi- 
chael the archangel, both traditionally depicted in Christian ico- 
nography as warriors with swords in hand. In Cuba, Orunmila, 
the god of divination, is also called St. Francis, perhaps because 
Francis is traditionally pictured wearing a rosary, which re- 
sembles the opele chain used in Ifa divination. In Haiti, Damballa-

24

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE24

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

wedo, the rainbow god of Ouidah, symbolized as a serpent, is 
sometimes identified with Moses because of the miracle of the 
brazen serpent and sometimes with St. Patrick, pictured driving 
the snakes from Ireland. In West Africa the birth of twins is 
looked upon by some peoples with reverence as a sacred occur- 
rence. Known among the Yoruba as Ibeji, the spirits of twins are 
the object of cults and are represented by twin statuettes. In Bahia 
and Cuba, the Ibeji, naturally enough, are syncretized with the 
twin saints Cosmas and Damian, whose feast day in September 
occasions the offering of the Ibeji’s favorite food to the image of 
the saints. Yemoja, mother of the gods and of the waters, has been 
syncretized with the Virgin Mary under several of her titles. Cor- 
relations are also made between Ogun and St. John the Baptist; 
Oshun and the Virgin of Cobre (patroness of Cuba); Shopona, 
lord of smallpox, and St. Lazarus, the beggar covered with sores 
in the New Testament parable. In Trinidad, according to Her- 
skovits, the names of gods and saints are hyphenated in common 
usage, e.g., “Ogun-St. Michael,” and they are referred to inter- 
changeably when, for instance, a picture of John the Baptist is 
identified as a picture of Shango . 44Correlation of saints with gods is only one aspect of syncretism 
between Catholic and African forms. Candles, crucifixes, and 
chromolithographs are blended with rituals associated with Afri- 
can gods. In Trinidadian shango , for example, the annual cere- 
mony of the shangoists, which lasts for four nights, “begins with a 
prayer meeting in which an incense burner, lighted candles, Cath- 
olic prayers, original prayers, and the dismissal of Eshu-Satan are 
the important elements. Ogun-St. Michael is then summoned 
with one of his drum rhythms . . . Other male powers, followed 
by the female powers, are then invited .” 45 In candomble the drums 
themselves are offered sacrifice and even baptized in the presence 
of godparents according to Catholic ritual. Syncretism arises from 
the fact that “cult members are simultaneously worshipers of the 
African gods and communicants of the Catholic Church” and see 
nothing strange about being so . 46 Nevertheless, the notion of syn-

THE AFRICAN DIASPORA

25THE AFRICAN DIASPORA

25

cretism must not be pushed too far. While African gods have been 
identified with Catholic saints, it is Ogun, for example, who pos- 
sesses, not St. Michael. And while Catholic liturgical calendars 
have replaced African ones, on the feast days of the saints the gods 
are fed with African-style sacrifice. On the deepest levels the par- 
ish church and the cult house remain parallel and separate. Even 
with the addition of Catholic forms, the African provenience of 
worship in the cult houses is clear. As anthropologist Michel 
Laguerre has pointed out in reference to Haitian vaudou, syncre- 
tism between Catholicism and Afro-American cults has largely 
been a syncretism of material and magic. Blessed objects (candles, 
pictures, holy water), gestures, and prayers have been appropri- 
ated from Catholicism for use in the cults because they are be- 
lieved to possess magical power. To add the power of Christianity 
to that of African cults made sense, for “it is better to rely upon 
two magics instead of one.” 47Perhaps nowhere in New World slavery did the revolutionary 
potential of this syncretism between African and Catholic magics 
emerge as clearly as it did in Haiti. The Code Noir of 1685 
legislated that all slaves brought to the French possessions in 
America must receive instruction and baptism within eight days 
of arrival. Baptism was not difficult but instruction was another 
matter. Thirty-seven years later, Fr. Jean-Baptiste Labat objected 
that the slaves used Christianity to disguise their African beliefs: 
“The Negroes do without a qualm, what the Philistines did; they 
put Dagon with the Ark and secretly preserve all the superstition 
of their ancient idolatrous cult alongside the ceremonies of Chris- 
tianity.” In a decree of the Conseil du Cap of 1761 the clergy 
were still complaining that the slaves were guilty of mingling “the 
Holy utensils of our religion with profane and idolatrous objects” 
and of altering “the truths and dogmas of religion.” 48

The preservation of African cults alongside Christianity in 
Saint-Domingue (as Haiti was formerly called) could not be taken 
lightly by civil authorities, either. According to an anonymous 
tract issued in the middle of the eighteenth century,

26

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

The dance called at Surinam Watur mama, and in our colonies 
“the water mother,” is strictly forbidden to them. They make a 
great mystery of it, and all that is known of it is that it excites 
very much their imagination. They become excessively exalted 
when they meditate a wicked plan. The chief of the plot be- 
comes so ecstatic that he loses consciousness; when he regains 
consciousness, he claims that his God has spoken to him and 
has commanded the enterprise, but as they do not worship the 
same God they hate each other and spy on each other recipro- 
cally, and these plans are almost always denounced . 48The comment that the “slaves do not worship the same God” and 
“hate each other” reflects the divisive effect of the African slaves’ 
diverse origins and suggests the potential threat to the slavehold- 
ing regime if a common religion were to help unite them. The 
point was, as subsequent events would show, well taken.

Religion played a significant role in the early slave revolts led 
by Macandal and Biassou. Under one rebel leader, Hyacinthe, 
fifteen thousand slaves went into battle, supported by the belief 
that their chief had the power to render bullets harmless and 
confident that if they died on the field they would return to Af- 
rica. The revolt led by Boukman in 1791 was inaugurated by an 
awesome religious ceremony concluded by a blood pact. Though 
it would be wrong to view the Haitian War of Independence as a 
religious war, Sidney Mintz is right in stating that Vaudou surely 
played a critical role in the creation of a viable armed resistance by 
the slaves against the master classes.” 50

Dahomey has commonly been noted as the predominant influ- 
ence on vaudou , but among the slaves who contributed their lives 
to making Saint-Domingue France’s richest colony in the New 
World were Africans from the whole of West Africa and beyond, 
from Senegal to Congo. African religious influences upon vaudou 
came from many African nations, a fact commemorated perhaps in 
the division of the loa (gods) into nations, or “ranks,” according 
to origin. Perhaps at one time these divisions actually did corre- 
spond to national divergences among the slaves of Saint-Do- 
mingue. The two main divisions are the nations of Rada and

THE AFRICAN DIASPORA

27THE AFRICAN DIASPORA

27

Petro. Rada (Allada or Arada in Dahomey) applies to the rites for 
gods thought to be mainly of Dahomean origin. Petro is conjec- 
tured to have originated with an influential eighteenth-century 
houngan (priest), Don Petro. The Petro rank consists of a num- 
ber of loa who are native to Haiti as well as gods from African 
nations other than Dahomey. There are also subgroups of loa 
named after African nations, such as Ibo, Bambara, and Hausa, or 
after African areas, such as Congo, Wangol (Angola), and Siniga 
(Senegal ). 51

Haitians believe in Gran-Met (the Supreme Being), but in vau- 
dou it is the loa who relate actively to human affairs. In Haiti, as 
in Africa and elsewhere in the Caribbean, possession by the loa , 
or mystere, as they are called, is the climax of vaudou ritual. When 
possessing his devotee ( hounsi ), a loa is located in the head and is 
called mait tete. An individual usually gains a malt tete by inherit- 
ing him from his family or by being seized and possessed by a 
“wild” ( bozal ) loa, which must first be identified by a. houngan, or 
priest-diviner, and then “set” or established by “baptism” in a rite 
called lave tete. Each loa has a character manifested by the behav- 
ior of the possessed hounsi, and within a given area this behavior 
is so standardized that the loa is recognizable. But the style of 
behavior for a loa may vary significantly from area to area. Indeed, 
loa venerated in one district may be totally unknown in another. 
The unity of vaudou as a religion — and the same might be said of 
other Afro-American cults — lies not in doctrinal or ritual unifor- 
mity but in a common and basic African theological perspective . 52The preservation of this perspective in Brazil and the Carib- 
bean has frequently been explained by referring to the presence of 
Catholicism, which, it is argued, tended to reinforce African reli- 
gious traditions because of its openness to syncretism. There is, as 
we shall see, some truth in this argument, but the reality is more 
complex, for there are Afro -Protestant cults in the Caribbean as 
well.

Besides the regular, orthodox Christian denominations, several 
black Jamaican groups, such as Revival and Pocomania, represent

28

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

nonorthodox syntheses of Protestant and African beliefs. Among 
the Jamaican slaves the most successful Christian denomination 
were the Baptists. First preached in Jamaica in 1787, by George 
Liele, an ex-slave from Georgia, the Baptist message took hold 
and was supported by other North American blacks who had 
emigrated to the British island with their Loyalist owners after 
the outbreak of the American Revolution. It was not long, how- 
ever, before independent churches under the direction of Jamai- 
can leaders started to reinterpret Christian doctrine. By the 
middle of the nineteenth century, African and Baptist beliefs had 
begun to fuse in the Native Baptist movement, the precursor of 
present-day Revivalist groups in Jamaica. 53In two of these groups, Revival and Pocomania, services culmi- 
nate in African-style possession. However, it is the Old Testament 
prophets, the four evangelists of the New Testament, the apostles, 
the archangels, and the Holy Ghost who take possession of mem- 
bers, not the gods of Africa. Revivalists believe that God the 
Father created the world and dwells in “highest heaven.” He 
never descends to visit the services nor to possess the believers. 
Jesus, according to the members of Revival, does visit their ser- 
vices and a “love feast” is held in his memory, but he, like the 
Father, does not possess. Deceased members, however, may re- 
turn to possess their relations among the faithful. The choreogra- 
phy of possession movement in Revival is very similar, as we shall 
see, to the techniques of trance-dance in vaudou, santeria, 
candomble, shango , and West African cults. 54

In Trinidad, the Spiritual Baptists, or Shouters, are especially 
interesting because of their subtle interweaving of African reli- 
gious customs with a rigidly orthodox Christian creed. Strict 
Fundamentalists, the Spiritual Baptists subscribe to the five- 
point platform of the early twentieth-century Fundamentalist 
movement in the United States. The five points of the funda- 
mentalist platform are biblical inerrancy, authenticity of Gospel 
miracles, the Virgin Birth, the physical Resurrection of Jesus, 
and the satisfaction theory of the Atonement. At the same time

THE AFRICAN DIASPORA

29THE AFRICAN DIASPORA

29

there are affiliations between Spiritual Baptists and Trinidadian 
shangoists. Some leaders of shango cults mix ritual elements 
from “Yoruba work” with those of Spiritual Baptist worship; 
others conduct services in both rites at separate times. Baptism 
is the crucial event in the religious life of the Shouters. Before 
receiving baptism, a candidate must first testily to having had a 
dream or vision, which is tested by the leaders of the church. Up 
to this point the process of initiation is traditionally Baptist, but 
then deviation begins. After a candidate presents his dream, he 
enters upon a period of instruction in which he is given his own 
special hymn, psalm, and biblical verse to foster reception of the 
spirit. For some Shouters, there is a further initiation, called 
“mourning ground,” a period of retreat in which the novice 
travels deeper into the mysteries of faith and is rewarded with 
new powers. During the period of “mourning,” the initiate fasts, 
abstains from salted food, and refrains from washing. During 
this time, saints visit the mourner and reveal to him their likes 
and dislikes, their sacred foods and feast days. Each mourner 
receives a charism, or power, corresponding to his new role in 
the life of the church. For each charism a new name, a saint’s 
name, is bestowed upon the novice. He also receives three cloth 
bands — a “sighting” band and a “study” band which are placed 
over his eyes, and a “dead” band which is tied around the head 
and chin. The color of each cloth band symbolizes the charism 
which the initiate receives. Several features of this mourning 
ceremony resemble the rites of cult initiation in West Africa. 
Death-resurrection motifs, fasting and lying quiet, reception of a 
new role and a new name, color symbolism, and prohibition of 
salt in food offerings to the gods are all similar features of initia- 
tion in West African and Brazilian cults. Moreover, as we shall 
see in the next chapter, there are intriguing analogies between 
the “mourning ground” of Spiritual Baptists in Trinidad and the 
“mourning ground” of black Protestants in the United States . 55 
The Revivalist cults of Jamaica and the Spiritual Baptists of 
Trinidad indicate that in certain contexts Protestantism, like Ca-30

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

tholicism, has proved amenable to the continuity of African reli- 
gious traditions.

African religious influence on Afro-American societies has 
manifested itself not only in the cult of the gods but also in 
ancestor worship, magical practices, and ritual-performance style. 
Veneration of the ancestors must have been all the more poignant 
for African slaves in the Americas because it had been so closely 
tied to the land and the kin from whom they had been taken. But 
the cult of the ancestors, like that of the gods, was not restricted 
to the soil of Africa. As noted above, the most powerful ghosts 
venerated in the Convince cult of Jamaica are the African ances- 
tors. In Haiti, at the annual Yam Festival, before any yams are 
eaten some must be offered to the dead, those recently deceased, 
those forgotten, and those who never left Africa. In the Bantu- 
influenced macumba cult of Rio de Janeiro cult members become 
possessed by pretos velhos, the spirits of their black ancestors. In 
Bahia the Yoruban Egungun society represents the dead to their 
descendants as in Nigeria. In the cult houses of Sao Luiz do 
Maranhao a feast to honor the dead is celebrated annually (inter- 
estingly enough, on the analogous Catholic feast — All Souls Day). 
Vaudouists occasionally hold mange-morts, or feasts for the dead, 
and commonly place dishes of food for the deceased next to graves 
and tombs . 56Burial rites in Afro-Brazilian and Afro-Caribbean cults, as in 
West Africa, tend to be long-drawn-out affairs, involving several 
stages before the burial is complete. It may take months for the 
spirit of the deceased to be separated from his family, associates, 
and environs. For example, in some Brazilian cult centers, there is 
a seven-night ritual called acheche for deceased members, during 
which the ancestor-spirits are asked to welcome the soul of the 
departed. Occasionally the cult objects formerly used by a mem- 
ber who has died are taken to the coast and placed in the sea to be 
received by his or her spirit. Similarly, West African burial cus- 
toms have left traces in present-day services in Jamaica such as 
the “nine-night ceremony,” in which the spirit of the deceased

THE AFRICAN DIASPORA

31

returns on the ninth night after death and takes possession of the 
leader of the ceremony. Through the possessed leader the “spirit 
may explain what should be done with his property; or, if the 
death was not a natural one, it may name the person who was the 
cause of death; or, if anyone in the family has suffered, or is about 
to suffer, some trouble or an accident, the cause of the misfortune 
may be explained.” If the burial customs have been carried out 
properly, then the spirit of the deceased will not trouble the liv- 
ing. But if the funeral was improper or incomplete, the “duppy,” 
or ghost of the dead person, may cause misfortune . 57Because it is believed that fatality may be due to unnatural 
causes such as witchcraft, discovery of the cause of death is of 
religious, not just medical, concern. If a vaudouist, for instance, 
were struck down by lightning or smallpox, he would not be 
allowed a normal burial because, as in Dahomean and Yoruban 
belief, the deceased would be presumed guilty of an offense which 
the gods have seen fit to punish by death. The West African 
custom of carrying the corpse is also commonly employed in the 
Caribbean in order to determine if a witch was responsible for the 
death. In Surinam (Dutch Guiana) the coffin-carrying ceremony 
is used to question the spirit of the deceased about the cause of his 
death and about the possibility of the deceased having been a 
witch himself. Priests question the spirit as the coffin is carried on 
the heads of two bearers. From the movement of the coffin about 
the village, the priests decipher the spirit’s answers to their ques- 
tions . 58 A similar burial custom was described for Jamaican slave 
funerals in the early eighteenth century:

When one is carried out to his Grave, he is attended with a 
vast Multitude, who conduct his Corpse in something of a 
ludicrous manner. They sing all the way, and they who bear it 
on their shoulders, make a Feint of stopping at every Door 
they pass, pretending that if the deceased Person had received 
any Injury the Corpse moves towards that House, and that 
they can’t avoid letting it fall to the Ground, when before the 
Door . 59

32

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE32

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

As has been frequently noted, African slaves in many areas of 
the New World were convinced that death would free them to 
return to Africa. This notion was based not simply upon nostalgia 
for the homeland but upon a firm religious belief in reincarnation. 
To be properly understood, reincarnation should be placed in the 
context of the traditional West African conception of the soul as a 
complex entity — that is, the individual has several spiritual com- 
ponents. One’s personality-soul appears before God after death to 
account for its deeds. When a person sleeps, this soul may 
wander; dreams are in fact the experiences met by the wandering 
soul. Linked with the soul is a shadow which is not immortal and 
dies with the body. Each person also possesses a spirit which 
serves as moral guide and which is the spirit of God within man. 
It returns to God upon death. There is also a guardian spirit, 
identified by the Yoruba and the Fon as an ancestor-spirit reincar- 
nated in a descendant. The Yoruba offer sacrifice to the guardian- 
spirit to ensure the propitious development of the person’s destiny 
which the ancestor-spirit has chosen before birth . 80

Praying to one’s guardian angel is a widespread Catholic prac- 
tice, but the custom has taken on a distinctly African tone among 
rural Afro-Brazilians in Maranhao, who believe that everyone has 
two spirits, a soul and a guardian angel. While a person sleeps, 
the soul may wander from its body. The body, the soul, and the 
guardian angel all cast shadows. When the angel’s shadow is 
visible it is a sign that the angel has been fed by prayer and so is 
strong. If a person neglects his guardian angel, it may grow too 
weak to protect the soul from the attack of witches, magic, or 
natural dangers . 61The African complex-soul concept has also been influential in 
Dutch Guiana, where it is believed that the spirit of an individual, 
his akra , should be fed by sacrifice lest it become angry and refuse 
to protect the person from evil forces. The akra, which is given at 
birth, may venture out of the body while a person sleeps, and it 
departs at death. A person’s shadow may also wander abroad and 
may fall prey to witchcraft. After death the yorka, or ghost of the

THE AFRICAN DIASPORA

33

deceased, continues to exist and may be appealed to by relatives 
for protective aid . 62THE AFRICAN DIASPORA

33

deceased, continues to exist and may be appealed to by relatives 
for protective aid . 62

The magical lore of Africa, combined with European and In- 
dian magical customs, figured prominently in the daily lives of the 
slaves and their descendants. Because magical beliefs tend to be 
similar worldwide, and because it is the nature of magical think- 
ing to be eclectic, it is rarely possible to speak with certainty 
about the origins of particular magical practices. Still, it is appar- 
ent that the integral connection between magic, medicine, and 
religion characteristic of many African societies has been repli- 
cated in the Afro-American cults of Brazil and the Caribbean. 
That spirits or powers may be embodied in material objects or 
charms, and may be manipulated by the knowledgeable to harm 
people or to protect them, is the basic axiom underlying countless 
variables of magical technique. Among the Bush Negroes of Suri- 
nam each charm has its own taboos that must be obeyed if the 
charm is to keep its power. Universally it is believed that charms 
can work for the good of their owners either by defensive protec- 
tion or by offensive aggression against potential evils, such as 
witches, sickness, misfortune, or the animosity of others. Evil 
magic — that is, magic directed by another at you — is a constant 
possibility and if a person inexplicably falls ill or experiences mis- 
fortune he consults a diviner to find out the cause and a curandeiro 
(possibly the same person) to heal by means of magic and medi- 
cine combined . 63The profession of medicine man or conjurer requires extensive 
knowledge not only of magical tradition but also of herbal medi- 
cine. The professional knowledge of the magician-doctor can be 
used to create protective or aggressive charms, depending upon 
the wishes of the client. His knowledge may therefore be a source 
of danger or of safety. Sorcerers specialize in the “offensive” side 
of the profession, “harming others at the request of clients, by the 
use of charms, poisons,” and in Jamaican obeah, “shadow catch- 
ing.” The dual potential of magic for help or harm was apparently 
differentiated in Jamaica into two separate religious systems,

34

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

obeah and myalism, during the slave period. Obeah, according to 
early accounts, involved the use of magic for evil. Obeah men 
caught the duppy, or shadow of a person, in a bowl of water and 
then stabbed it through the heart or tied it spellbound under a 
silk-cotton tree. Myalism, on the other hand, was good medicine, 
an antidote to sorcery and witchcraft. Myal men, or angel men, as 
they were also called, were skilled herbalists who knew the de- 
vices of the obeah men and had the power to release captured 
duppies. The myal man was also the leader of a cult, which 
included dancing and possession-trance. As Orlando Patterson 
has pointed out, obeah and myalism had several important func- 
tions in Jamaican slave society: protection against thieves, detec- 
tion of guilt, and revenge by conjuring or outright poisoning. 
And obeah, it can be argued, supported rebellion, since “the 
obeah-man was essential in administering oaths of secrecy, and, in 
cases, distributing fetishes which were supposed to immunize the 
insurgents from the arms of the whites .” 64While the objects used as charms and the prescriptions for their 
use are limitless, there are some widespread similarities across 
Afro-American cultures. Grave dirt, hair cuttings, and nail clip- 
pings are generally thought of as particularly powerful materials 
for offensive charms, and crossroads are pointed out as especially 
strong places for working magic. Chickens with frizzy feathers are 
adept at scratching up buried charms. And red pepper can be an 
effective antidote to witchcraft when sprinkled on the skin of a 
witch who has left it behind to wander. Charms came from every- 
where. From Islam: in Brazil, Muslim slaves were known for the 
power of their talismans, and during the slave revolt of 1835 in 
Bahia, Muslim slaves wore talismans made of verses from the 
Koran written in Arabic on scraps of parchment. So noted were 
the Muslim Mandinke for their magic that the term mandinga 
came to mean magic and mandingueiros sorcerers in Brazil, Uru- 
guay, and Argentina. From traditional West African religions: the 
thunderstones of Shango are particularly effective in healing, ac- 
cording to the devotees of candomble in Bahia. From Catholicism:

THE AFRICAN DIASPORA

35

Trinidadian shangoists believe that during Lent the good powers 
may be too busy praying to be available for “work,” so cult mem- 
bers may be forced to call upon evil powers for help. In Jamaican 
Cumina the Bible is used as a charm against malignant forces, as 
are crucifixes, blessed medals, stones, herbs, and leaves. A veri- 
table pharmacopoeia of religious-magical-medicinal objects crowd 
the sanctuaries of cult houses in Brazil, Haiti, and Cuba. The 
apparently random justaposition of statues of saints, emblems of 
gods, and medicinal charms belies a coherent world view of spiri- 
tual power, in which religion, magic, and medicine are embraced 
as one . 65Perhaps the most obvious continuity between African and Afro- 
American religions is the style of performance in ritual action. 
Drumming, singing, and dancing are essential features of African 
and Afro-American liturgical expression and are crucial to the cere- 
monial possession of cult members by their gods. It is the rhythms 
of the drums which call upon the gods to manifest themselves in 
candomble, shango, vaudou, and santeria. In the cult houses of Ba- 
hia the drums themselves are treated with the greatest respect; 
periodically sacrifices are offered to their spirits, and possessed 
devotees dance facing the drums and bow to them. In the annual 
shango ceremonies in Trinidad, the drums are of the African type, 
played in trio. The smallest of the three is called oumaylee (the 
Yoruban term for middle-size drum) and a calabash rattle, resem- 
bling the Yoruban shekere, is also played. More important, how- 
ever, than the similarity of particular instruments to African mod- 
els is the resemblance of function and style. Even in cults to which 
the drum was forbidden the percussive emphasis and the poly- 
rhythmic character of the music and its functional relation to spirit 
possession are clear indications of African liturgical influence. 
Among the Spiritual Baptists of Trinidad, for example, possession 
by the Holy Spirit occurs not to the beat of drum rhythms but to 
the sound of “Sankeys,” Protestant hymns from the Sankey-Moody 
hymnal. Beneath the tunes of the Sankeys, however, beats a differ- 
ent musical impulse. At a Shouter service recorded by Frances and

36

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE36

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

Melville Herskovits, the first few verses of the hymn “Jesus, Lover 
of My Soul” had barely been sung when suddenly “the singers 
continuing the melody began to change their rhythms, introducing 
hand clapping as the tempo became faster, until the hymn was 
transmuted into a swing idiom which in the proper setting would 
result in spirit possession.” At another ceremony, “the people car- 
rying the melodic line sang slightly faster, while the song-leader 
and a few others ornamented it with harmonized ‘ram-bam-bam, 
bam, bam, ram-a-bam’ simulating drums and making the song 
irresistible to patting feet and hand-clapping.” This hymn with its 
percussive ornamentation accompanied the testimony of a Shouter 
who “overcome by the spirit . . . danced on his knees, moving 
backward and forward in a kind of body-swing .” 86

The phenomenon of possession is the climax of the service in 
every one of the cults we have noted. Whether the possessing 
spirit is Shango in candomble, an ancestor in the Convince cult, a 
spirit in Cumina, or the Holy Spirit in the Shouters’ service, the 
ritual context in which possession occurs and the physiological 
behavior of the possessed are strikingly uniform. Anthropologist 
Morton Marks, applying the insights of sociolinguistics to Afro- 
American song style, has suggested that certain stylistic codes are 
part of the structure of “performance events” in Afro-American 
cultures. These codes, he contends, establish a ritual context for 
possession and are consistent across different Afro-American soci- 
eties so that it is possible for a Brazilian member of Umbanda and 
a Cuban devotee of santeria to recognize immediately when the 
lead singer of a North American gospel group has “caught a 
spirit,” i.e., become possessed . 67On this same point, George Simpson, describing the possession 
state among Jamaican Revivalists, has noted “muscular move- 
ments, particularly of the neck, shoulder, and back muscles” 
which “are identical with those reported by observers of Haitian 
vodun, Cuban santeria , Brazilian candomble, Trinidadian shango, 
and West African cults.” He goes on to describe the choreography 
which facilitates spirit possession in Revival meetings. One of the

THE AFRICAN DIASPORA

37

most common techniques, called “laboring in the spirit,” “consists 
of a counter-clockwise dance around the altar, the ‘table,’ or the 
‘seal’ (flagpole outside the church) during which evil spirits are 
trampled underfoot. As the body bends forward breath is ex- 
pelled, and the participant groans and overbreathes on the up- 
swing. This ‘trumping’ (also called ‘jumping’ and ‘spiritual danc- 
ing’) produces dizziness in some persons and thus facilitates the 
onset of spirit possession.” Whatever the validity of Simpson’s 
physiological explanation for the occurrence of the phenomenon, 
his description of the counterclockwise, hitching dance movement 
in Revival “trumping” bears a marked resemblance to styles of 
religious dancing elsewhere in the Caribbean and to nineteenth- 
century descriptions of the “ring-shout” as performed by freed- 
men in the southern United States . 68

When the gods arrive in Brazilian and Caribbean cult houses, 
they are greeted by song sometimes in African languages or mix- 
tures of Creole and African words. A praise song to Eshu sung in 
Yoruban by Afro- Bahians makes reference to the god’s provocative 
phallic-style coiffure and to his role as messenger opener-of the 
road:

Ibarabo — o mojuba

0 great one, I pay obeisance,

Iba Koshe omo deko

A young child does not confront 
Elegbara

The powerful one;

Omojuba

1 pay obeisance 
lleba Eshu Iona

To Eleba Eshu, who is on the road.

Odara kolori onego

The good one, who has no head for dancing,

Sho-sho-sho abeThe powerful one;

Omojuba

1 pay obeisance 
lleba Eshu Iona

To Eleba Eshu, who is on the road.

Odara kolori onego

The good one, who has no head for dancing,

Sho-sho-sho abe

The stubborn knife

Kolori eni — ijo

Has no head for dancing

THE AFRICAN DIASPORA

39

Eshu tiriri 
Eshu the awesome,

Bara abebe 
O powerful knife!

Tiriri Iona

The Awesome one, on the road . 69

In addition to oral praise, material sacrifice must be offered to the 
gods. In candomble , vaudou, and the other cults, ritual sacrifice 
mediates the relationship between gods and men, as it does in 
Africa. The unavailability of certain African foods favored by the 
gods did not lessen the responsibility felt by their devotees to 
propitiate them with fit offerings in America.In the cult houses of Haiti, Brazil, Surinam, Jamaica, Trinidad, 
and Cuba, the gods of Africa have been remembered by the slaves 
and their descendants — not only remembered but worshipped in 
exile in ways that have remained vigorously traditional and at the 
same time creatively adaptive. The reasons for and circumstances 
surrounding the transmission of African religious perspectives 
and customs in different Afro-American societies are as varied as 
the histories of those societies. In the case of Bahia, it has been 
suggested that the urban environment and continuous contact 
with West Africa were significant factors in the development of 
candomble. According to this argument, it was easier for urban 
slaves, who were under less rigid supervision than plantation 
slaves and could associate with free blacks, to seek out others of 
similar ethnic and linguistic background. This process of re- 
groupment was assisted in the early nineteenth century, it seems, 
by municipal governments that encouraged African-style dances 
as occasions for slaves to reidentify with their separate tribal ori- 
gins. As contemporary observers explained, the authorities be- 
lieved that if the slaves maintained their tribal identities, old ani- 
mosities would keep them from uniting and would prevent their 
common experience of oppression from binding them into a rebel- 
lious force. The urban religious confraternities, according to Bas- 
tide, also aided in the process of regroupment by secretly facilitat-

40

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

ing the preservation of African languages and religions beliefs. As 
a result, “the African religions are purer and richer in the large 
cities than in the rural areas.” 70

The most important factor contributing to the vitality of Afri- 
can religious influence in Brazil was the continuous contact be- 
tween Bahia and West Africa. As Donald Pierson notes:The most important factor contributing to the vitality of Afri- 
can religious influence in Brazil was the continuous contact be- 
tween Bahia and West Africa. As Donald Pierson notes:

Bahian Negroes long maintained direct contact with the West 
Coast. Even after the extinction of the slave traffic, vessels 
regularly plied between Bahia and Lagos, repatriating nostal- 
gic emancipated Negroes and returning with West Coast prod- 
ucts much prized by Africans and their descendants in 
Brazil . 71

Through continued contact, African myths, rituals, and beliefs in 
Bahia could be reinforced and “corrected” from their sources by 
those who had seen how they were used in Africa. To quote 
Bastide again:

Certainly, the passage of time eroded in the long run even the 
most established traditions in the new environment. But trade 
continually renewed the sources of life by establishing a per- 
manent contact between the early slaves or their children and 
those newly arrived ... so that there has been over the course 
of the entire period of slavery a renewal of religious values as 
these values tended to weaken . 72

It is a mistake to view present-day candomble, he continues, as the 
lineal descendant of ancient cults stretching back continuously 
into the early days of colonial Brazil. Instead, the seitas were 
organized at a relatively recent date, around the end of the eigh- 
teenth century or the beginning of the nineteenth. For example, 
Pierre Verger has stated that the Casa das Minas of Sao Luiz do 
Maranhao was probably founded in 1796 by exiled members of 
the royal-lineage group from Dahomey. Other cult houses have 
been traced to slaves seized as contraband after 1815 and freed 
upon arrival in Brazil. Bastide claims that the candomble of En- 
genho Velho in Bahia was founded by two priestesses of the 
Shango cult enslaved in the early nineteenth century. “Thus,” he

THE AFRICAN DIASPORA

41THE AFRICAN DIASPORA

41

concludes, “we ought to depict the religious life of Africans in 
Brazil as a succession of discontinuous events, of traditions inter- 
rupted and recovered, but which nevertheless maintain, from gen- 
eration to generation, under the most diverse forms possible, the 
same fidelity to the spirituality or spiritualities of Africa.” 73

Similarly, in Cuba and Trinidad the relatively late importation 
of significant numbers of Africans in the nineteenth century prob- 
ably contributed to the formation of shango and santeria. In Trini- 
dad nearly 7,000 free Africans were imported between 1841 and 
1861 to increase the labor force after emancipation had been de- 
clared in the British West Indies. Another 8,854 Africans, liber- 
ated by the British navy from slavers bound for Cuba and Brazil, 
were settled in Trinidad between 1834 and 1867. Attempting to 
explain the Yoruban influence upon Cuban santeria, Bascom has 
theorized that relatively large numbers of Yoruba came to Cuba 
late in the trade because of the Dahomean wars against Abeokuta 
and surrounding towns in the nineteenth century and “as the 
result of the Fulani conquest of Ilorin, Old Oyo” and other Yoru- 
ban cities during the 1830s. 74Another factor contributing to both the continuity and the rein- 
terpretation of African religious traditions was the existence of 
societies of maroons, or escaped slaves. Within maroon communi- 
ties, African traditions had opportunities to develop relatively free 
from European suppression for various periods of time. It would 
be a mistake, however, to assume that the maroon societies of 
Jamaica or Dutch Guiana, for example, were “pure” re-creations 
of African societies on this side of the Atlantic. The diverse Afri- 
can origins of the maroons necessitated modifications in customs 
in order to ensure social unity, Moreover, maroon communities 
were not totally isolated from colonial Europeans. Trade involved 
contact, and an occasional Christian missionary worked among 
the maroons. When troops finally conquered the maroon republic 
of Palmares in Brazil, they found villages with Catholic shrines. 
Explorers in remote areas of Brazil encountered Indians and mes- 
tizos who had learned the rudiments of Christianity from escaped

42

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

slaves in the eighteenth century. According to Bastide, there were 
maroons in Surinam who prayed Catholic prayers while facing, 
Muslim style, the city of Cayenne, and in several Djuka villages 
the Judaism of the maroons’ former masters had influenced their 
religion . 75The historical circumstances, then, in which religious traditions 
from Africa have been transmitted to New World societies have 
varied from society to society. Some traditions extend relatively 
far into the past of colonial slavery; others have died out with the 
passage of time; and still others have developed out of more recent 
contact with Africa. Moreover, Afro-American cults have modi- 
fied traditions and added new ones. Yet, despite discontinuity and 
innovation, the fundamental religious perspectives of Africa have 
continued to orient the lives of the descendants of slaves in the 
New World. Worship of the gods, veneration of the ancestors, 
African-style drumming and dancing, rites of initiation, priests 
and priestesses, spirit possession, ritual sacrifice, sacred emblems 
and taboos, extended funerals, and systems of divination and 
magic all attest to the living African heritage of black people in 
Brazil and the Caribbean. When placed in hemispheric perspec- 
tive, it is clear that the African diaspora in North America was 
another story altogether. At first glance it would appear, as many 
have concluded, that the African past of black people in the 
United States has vanished. Why does the African religious heri- 
tage remain so patently vital in some areas of Afro-America and 
not in others? The continuity or discontinuity of African religious 
tradition in the United States is the subject of an ongoing debate 
of basic importance to the study of slave religion.

2

Death of the Gods

Let us rejoice in and adore the wonders of God’s infinite love in bringing 
us from a land semblant of darkness itself, and where the divine light of 
revelation (being obscured) is in darkness. Here the knowledge of the 
true God and eternal life are made manifest; but there was nothing in us 
to recommend us to God . . .

PHYLLIS WHEATLEYPHYLLIS WHEATLEY

I had always been told from the time I was a small child that I was a 
Negro of African stock. That it was no disgrace to be a Negro and had it 
not been for the white folks who brought us over here from Africa as 
slaves, we would never have been here and would have been much better 
off.

“AUNT” ADELINE, FORMER SLAVE

In ONE of her earliest poems 
Phyllis Wheatley reflected upon her religious heritage:

‘Twas mercy brought me from my Pagan land,

Taught my benighted soul to understand

That there’s a God, that there’s a Saviour too ... 1

According to B. B. Thatcher, in his Memoir of Phillis Wheatley , 
the black poet remembered nothing of her African past with the 
exception of one ritual, “her mother’s custom of pouring out water 
before the sun at his rising." Thatcher remarks that this “no doubt, 
was a custom of the tribe to which she belonged, and was one of 
their religious rites .” 2 There were other slaves, however, who 
remembered far more of their African past than Phyllis Wheatley 
did and who held a different view of their forced migration from 
their native lands.

Charles Ball, in the narrative of his life under slavery, recounted 
a slave funeral at which he assisted:Charles Ball, in the narrative of his life under slavery, recounted 
a slave funeral at which he assisted:

I assisted her and her husband to inter the infant . . . and its 
father buried with it, a small bow and several arrows; a little 
bag of parched meal; a miniature canoe, about a foot long, and 
a little paddle, (with which he said it would cross the ocean to 
his own country) a small stick, with an iron nail, sharpened 
and fastened into one end of it; and a piece of white muslin, 
with several curious and strange figures painted on it in blue 
and red, by which, he said, his relations and countrymen 
would know the infant to be his son, and would receive it 
accordingly, on its arrival amongst them ... He cut a lock of 
hair from his head, threw it upon the dead infant, and closed 
the grave with his own hands. He then told us the God of his 
country was looking at him, and was pleased with what he 
had done . 3

According to Ball, the father of the dead infant was a “native of a 
country far in the interior of Africa” who claimed to have been a 
“priest in his own nation .” 4 Of the native Africans among the 
slaves, Ball states:

44

DEATH OF THE GODS

45

They are universally of opinion, and this opinion is founded in 
their religion, that after death they shall return to their own 
country, and rejoin their former companions and friends, in 
some happy region ... 5

African-born slave Chloe Spear, brought as a child to Boston, like 
Phyllis Wheatley, “wished for death; supposing that when she 
died, she would return to her country and friends.” This belief 
was derived, according to her biographer, “from a superstitious 
tradition of her ancestors, who, she said, supposed that the first 
infant born in a family after the decease of a member, was the 
same individual come back again.” 6Nor did all slaves agree that embracing the Christian gospel 
meant accepting enslavement as a “providential mercy,” as Euro- 
pean traveler Fredrika Bremer learned from a conversation with a 
“Lucumi” slave on a Florida plantation around 1850:

‘You have come hither from Africa?’ He replied, Yes; that he 
had been smuggled hither from Cuba many years ago. He was 
now overseer on a plantation, and was very well off. He was a 
Christian and seemed pleased to be so. He spoke very sensibly 
and cheerfully, and had a good, open countenance.

‘You do not wish to return to Africa?’ said I. ‘Oh yes, Missis; 
oh yes, that I do:’ replied he; there I should be still better off.’

‘But people often kill one another there,’ remonstrated I. ‘Oh 
but nobody troubles themselves about that. And there are a 
great many good people who live there at peace.’ ‘But look 
here, my friend,’ said Colonel Mac I., who is a strong Calvin- 
ist; ‘if you had remained in Africa, you would not have be- 
come a Christian as you are now, and then the devil, in the 
end, would have had you!’ The negro laughed, looked down, 
shook his head . . . and at length exclaimed, again looking up 
with an expression of humor and inventive acuteness, ‘Now, 
Massa, look’ee here! The Gospel is now being preached over 
the whole of Africa, and if I had remained there, what was to 
hinder me from being one who heard it as well there as here?’

To this there was no reply to be made, and the . . . negro had . 
the last word . 7

Some slaves, like the ancestor of Leonard Haynes, rejected

46

THE AFRICAN HERITAGETo this there was no reply to be made, and the . . . negro had . 
the last word . 7

Some slaves, like the ancestor of Leonard Haynes, rejected

46

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

Christianity. Recounting a family tradition, Haynes states: “My 
grandfather of three generations came over from the Gold Coast of 
Africa and was sold to a Mr. Haynes in Georgia. My grandfather 
was an African priest. This fact made him hostile to Christian 
preachers and to the religion of the Christians. Hence, he refused to 
join with the other slaves in their religious gatherings . . .” 8 
There were, moreover, a few Muslim slaves from Africa who 
continued, as best they could, to observe the customs of Islam. 
“Muh gran come from Africa,” remarked Rosa Grant of Possum 
Point, Georgia. “Huh membuh when I wuz a chile seein muh 
gran Ryna pray. Ebry mawnin at sun-up she kneel on duh flo in 
uh ruhm an bow obuh an tech uh head tuh duh flo tree time. Den 
she say a prayuh. I dohn membuh jis wut she say, but one wud 
she say use tuh make us chillun laugh. I membuh it was ‘ashane- 
gad.’ Wen she finish prayin she say ‘Ameen, ameen, ameen.’ ” 
Similarly, Katie Brown of Sapelo Island, Georgia, was a descen- 
dant of Belali Mahomet, a Muslim slave and driver. “ . . . Belali 
an he wife Phoebe pray on duh bead,” Katie recounted. “Dey wuz 
bery puhticluh bout duh time dey pray and dey bery regluh bout 
duh hour. Wen duh sun come up, wen it straight obuh head an 
wen it set, das duh time dey pray. Dey bow tuh duh sun and hab 
lill mat tuh kneel on. Duh beads is on a long string. Belali he pull 
bead an he say, ‘Belambi, Hakabara, Mahamadu.’ Phoebe she say, 
‘Ameen, Ameen.’ ” Charles Lyell visiting Hopeton Plantation on 
St. Simon’s Island, Georgia, before 1845, encountered “Old 
Tom,” head driver for the plantation, a Foulah who had remained 
a strict Muslim, though his children and grandchildren had “ex- 
changed the Koran for the Bible.” Omar ibn Said, a slave in 
North Carolina, wrote an autobiographical fragment in Arabic 
script in 1831 in which he recalled:Before I came to the Christian country, my religion was the 
religion of Mohammed, the Apostle of God — may God have 
mercy upon him and give him peace! I walked to the mosque 
before day-break, washed my face and head and hands and 
feet. I prayed at noon, prayed in the afternoon, prayed at

DEATH OF THE GODS

47

sunset, prayed in the evening. I gave alms every year ... I 
went on pilgrimage to Mecca . . . When I left my country I 
was thirty-seven years old; I have been in the country of the 
Christians twenty-four years.

During those twenty-four years Omar had converted to Christi- 
anity:

When I was a Mohammadan I prayed thus: ‘Thanks be to 
God, Lord of all worlds, the merciful the gracious, Lord of 
the day of Judgement, thee we serve, on thee we call for help. 
Direct us in the right way, the way of those on whom thou 
hast had mercy, with whom thou hast not been angry and 
who walk not in error. Amen.’ — But now I pray ‘Our 
Father’ ... in the words of our Lord Jesus the Messiah.®

According to the Reverend Charles Colcock Jones, “The Mo- 
hammedan Africans remaining of the old stock of importations, 
although accustomed to hear the Gospel preached, have been 
known to accommodate Christianity to Mohammedanism. ‘God,’ 
say they, ‘is Allah, and Jesus Christ is Mohammed — the religion 
is the same, but different countries have different names.’ ” Some 
religious customs observed by the slaves seemed to combine Afri- 
can and Christian elements. For example, on the Sea Islands, as 
Rachel Anderson recalled, at harvest time: “We hab a big feas. All 
night we shouts an in duh mawnin right at sunrise we pray an 
bow low tuh duh sun.” Alex Anderson described the practice of 
river baptisms: “Duh preachuh and duh candidates goes down in 
duh watuh. Den duh preachuh make a prayuh tuh duh ribbuh 
and duh ribbuh washes duh sin away .” 10Despite these countervailing examples, it seems that in the 
United States the experience of Phyllis Wheatley, if not her theo- 
logical explanation of it, has been the rule rather than the excep- 
tion. Under British North American slavery, it seems that the 
African religious heritage was lost. Especially does this appear so 
when black religion in the United States is compared with the 
cults of Brazil and the Caribbean. In candomble, vaudou, santeria , 
and shango “the acceptance of Christianity by the African slaves,

48

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

and its transmission to their descendants, has by no means meant 
the disappearance of African beliefs or patterns of worship,” but 
to a large extent has led to their continuity in a new “unified 
system of belief and ritual .” 11 Why was the same not true of slaves 
in the United States? Two conflicting answers have been pro- 
posed: one is that African retentions in the United States were 
negligible because the African was almost totally stripped of his 
culture by the process of enslavement; and the other, that the 
slave system did not destroy the slaves’ African culture and a 
considerable number of Africanisms continue to define Afro- 
American culture in the United States. The foremost advocate of 
the former position is E. Franklin Frazier; of the latter, Melville J. 
Herskovits . 12

The DebateThe Debate

Herskovits’ most complete and most careful statement of his thesis 
is The Myth of the Negro Past. The myth that Herskovits was 
intent on destroying was the belief that the American Negro had 
no past except a history of primitive savagery in Africa from 
which he had been delivered by contact with European civiliza- 
tion in America. For Herskovits the destruction of this myth was 
not simply a matter of detached scholarship. It also had important 
practical ramifications in the struggle against racism. To deny 
that the black American had a culture and history of significance 
and sophistication in Africa and to suggest that African culture 
was not advanced enough to endure contact with superior Euro- 
pean culture was to imply that Negroes were an inferior people. 
Furthermore, Herskovits thought it important to recognize the 
historical relevance of African retentions in order to evaluate cul- 
tural differences between white and black Americans in scientific 
rather than racist terms. Discrepancies between white and black 
values and behavior were due not to “culture lag,” i.e., backward- 
ness on the part of the blacks but to a different cultural back- 
ground whose roots lay in Africa . 13

DEATH OF THE GODS

49DEATH OF THE GODS

49

As an anthropologist, Herskovits was interested particularly in 
the study of culture contact and acculturation. To the debate over 
African retentions he brought an amazingly broad perspective, 
informed by extensive field work in Dahomey, Dutch Guiana, 
Haiti, Trinidad, and, to a lesser degree, Brazil. He studied the 
“New World Negro” in the light of his research in the slaving 
area of West Africa where a large number of Afro-Americans 
originated. In discussing the culture of black people in the United 
States he insisted that the situation of North American Negroes 
be placed on a spectrum or continuum with other Afro-American 
societies. The scale of African retentions stretches from Dutch 
Guiana with the strongest and most integral examples of African 
culture, at one end, to the United States with the weakest and 
most fragmentary evidence of African influence, at the other. Her- 
skovits thought it important to view the United States in com- 
parison with other areas of the hemisphere where Africanisms are 
apparent in order to discover clues to more subtly disguised Afri- 
can patterns of culture in the United States . 14

In contrast to Haiti and Brazil, African retentions in the United 
States cannot be ascribed with any certainty to definite areas of 
West Africa such as Nigeria or Dahomey. Herskovits compen- 
sates for this difficulty by defining West Africa as a single -culture 
area with an overall similarity and unity despite local differences. 
He suggests a “base line” of West African culture to serve as a 
measure for determining Africanisms in the United States; fur- 
thermore, within the general culture of West Africa there is a 
focus, and this focus is religion. Throughout New World Negro 
cultures the strongest Africanisms are to be found in religion . 15 
Herskovits divided the myth of the Negro past into five state- 
ments, or submyths, and then proceeded to rebut each statement.The first myth is: “Negroes are naturally of childlike character, 
and adjust easily to the most unsatisfactory social situations, 
which they accept readily and even happily ...” On the contrary, 
Herskovits argues, Africans and Afro-Americans are neither 
childlike nor naive, but have developed a sophisticated world

50

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

view. A mark of the sophistication of their world view has been a 
refusal to interpret life in terms of a simplistic dichotomy between 
good and evil. This world view has allowed them to “adapt to 
everyday situations of all sorts.” Besides, blacks were not content 
with slavery. Slaves resisted individually and rebelled collectively 
from the earliest days of slavery in Hispaniola . 16

The second myth states: “Only the poorer stock of Africa was 
enslaved, the more intelligent members of the African community 
raided having been clever enough to elude the slaver’s nets.” Her- 
skovits answers that the slave trade was not selective of the dregs 
of African society. There were instances when troublesome rivals 
who belonged to royal or priestly ranks were sold into slavery by 
wary rulers attempting to safeguard their thrones. When priests of 
the water cult in the coastal area of Dahomey, for example, proved 
intransigent, the conquering king of Abomey solved the problem 
by selling them into slavery . 17“Since,” according to the third myth, “the Negroes were 
brought from all parts of the African continent, spoke diverse 
languages, represented greatly differing bodies of custom, and, as 
a matter of policy, were distributed in the New World so as to 
lose tribal identity, no least common denominator of understand- 
ing or behavior could have possibly been worked out by them.” 
Not so, contends Herskovits, since the majority of slaves came 
from the “areas lying in the coastal belt of West Africa and the 
Congo.” He denies that a large number of slaves were brought 
from more than two or three hundred miles inland. Within this 
central slaving area there were two main language groups, Sudan- 
ic and Bantu. Within each group distinct dialects had a great deal 
of similarity in basic structure. Moreover, resemblances between 
the two large groups do exist. Finally, the slaving regions repre- 
sented a unified cultural area. Therefore, the separation of tribes 
during slavery did not create an insurmountable “barrier to the 
retention of African customs in generalized form, or of their un- 
derlying sanctions and values.” Slaves from differing tribes had a 
basis for communication when they “learned words from the lan-

DEATH OF THE GODS

51

guage of their masters and poured these into African speech 
molds .” 18 Herskovits goes on to make an even stronger assertion: 
just as European words were translated into African speech pat- 
terns, so European culture was translated into African value and 
behavior systems. Therefore, “the reasons most often advanced to 
account for the suppression of Africanisms in the New World 
turned out to be factors that encouraged their retention .” 19 This is 
an extremely important contention, which will be examined later.“Even granting,” goes myth number four, “enough Negroes of 
a given tribe had had the opportunity to live together, and that 
they had the will and ability to continue their customary modes of 
behavior, the cultures of Africa were so savage and relatively so 
low in the scale of human civilization that the apparent superiority 
of European customs as observed in the behavior of their masters 
would have caused and actually did cause them to give up such 
aboriginal traditions as they may otherwise have desired to pre- 
serve.” This belief is based upon a biased ethnology and a simplis- 
tic understanding of acculturative process. The culture of West 
Africa was neither savage nor low and was not automatically 
overwhelmed by contact with supposedly superior European cul- 
ture. Africa was an active partner in the acculturative relationship, 
states Herskovits. However, in the United States, Herskovits ad- 
mits, African religious behavior had to be reinterpreted “in light 
of a new theology.” Two factors determined the degree of reinter- 
pretation necessary. The first was the intensity of the exposure of 
slaves to European culture, as determined by the ratio of blacks to 
whites. The smaller the number of slaves, the more complete was 
the control of the master; the tighter the supervision, the more 
intense was the pressure to acculturate. A second factor influ- 
enced the slaves to reinterpret African behavior: traditional Afri- 
can openness to the “new and foreign.” This characteristic Afri- 
can acceptance was particularly manifest in religion, where “both 
conquered and conquerors often took over the gods of their oppo- 
nents.” The resilience of slaves’ attitudes toward new gods fre- 
quently led to “slightly modified African sanctions supporting

52

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE52

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

forms of a given institution that are almost entirely European.” In 
other words, a “principle of disregard for outer form while retain- 
ing inner values” is “characteristic of Africans everywhere” and is 
“the most important single factor making for an understanding of 
the acculturative situation .” 20

The fifth and final myth is: “The Negro is thus a man without 
a past.” Herskovits asserts that the Negro does indeed have a 
past, a cultural history which makes him a distinctive participant 
on the American scene, as distinctive as the Swedish, German, 
or Irish immigrant. In brief, “the civilizations of Africa, like 
those of Europe, have contributed to American culture as we 
know it today .” 21

It is necessary in analyzing Herskovits’ thesis and the evidence 
he adduces in its support to remember that he is attacking a 
myth. Demythologizers often run the risk of erring on the side of 
overstatement. This is a fault of which Herskovits is not innocent. 
Perhaps none took him to task for it more forcefully than the 
black sociologist E. Franklin Frazier, the foremost spokesman for 
a position diametrically opposed to Herskovits’. While admitting

the existence of African retentions in Latin America and the 
Caribbean, Frazier denies that African culture was able to survive 
the conditions of slavery to any significant extent in the United 
States. He admits that a few individual slaves remembered some- 
thing of their background in Africa. However, exceptions prove 
the rule: African traditions and practices did not take root and 
survive in the United States.

These isolated instances only tend to show how difficult it was 
for slaves, who had retained a memory of their African back- 
ground, to find a congenial milieu in which to perpetuate the 
old way of life . . . The slaves, it seems, had only a vague 
knowledge of the African background of their parents ... 22It is Frazier’s position that the process of enslavement and the 
passing of earlier generations bom in Africa destroyed the culture 
of the slaves. The vacuum thus created was filled by Christianity, 
which became the new bond of social cohesion. The new world-

DEATH OF THE GODS

53

view which gave meaning to life was Christianity, articulated in 
the images and stories of the Bible, as accepted by the slaves and 
celebrated in their spirituals . 23

Deculturation began, according to Frazier, on the other side of 
the Atlantic, before the Africans even set foot on the slave ships. 
The fact that many slaves were captured in intertribal warfare and 
the demands of the plantation work force ensured that a large 
percentage of the slave population was young and male. And 
young males “are poor bearers of the cultural heritage of a 
people.” In the coastal barracoons slaves were mixed together 
without regard for kinship or tribal ties. The trauma of the 
Middle Passage further isolated slaves from countrymen who 
spoke the same language or observed the same traditions . 24On this side of the Atlantic the size of the plantation where the 
slave ended his journey was a significant factor in either allowing 
for or reducing African cultural retentions. On the larger planta- 
tions, where the black population was much larger than the 
white, there was less opportunity for contact and so the process of 
acculturation was slow. But, Frazier contends, the majority of 
slaves in the United States were situated on smaller plantations 
and farms: “In some of the Upland cotton regions of Alabama, 
Mississippi, Louisiana, and Arkansas the median number of 
slaves per holding did not reach twenty, while in regions of gen- 
eral agriculture based mainly upon slave labor in Kentucky, 
Maryland, Missouri, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Ten- 
nessee the median number of slave holdings were even smaller .” 25 
The process of “seasoning” (“breaking in”) new slaves required 
the prohibition of African languages. “Salt-water” (African-born) 
Negroes were looked down upon by slaves already used to the 
ways of plantation America, and social pressure was exerted upon 
them to learn new customs . 26 Slaves were under continual sur- 
veillance and control. On the small farms the slaves worked with 
their white owners; on larger plantations they toiled under the eye 
of the driver and overseer. Gatherings of five or more slaves with- 
out the presence of a white observer were universally forbidden.

54

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE54

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

In addition, the mobility of the slave population and the destruc- 
tion of familial stability due to the internal slave trade made social 
cohesion an impossibility. Therefore, Frazier concludes, “It is im- 
possible to establish any continuity between African religious 
practices and the Negro church in the United States .” 27 Here the 
“Negroes were plunged into an alien civilization in which what- 
ever remained of their religious myths and cults had no meaning 
whatever.” African memories were forgotten, African patterns of 
behavior and attitudes toward the world lost their meaning. 
Slaves had to develop “new habits and attitudes” in order “to 
meet new situations .” 28

Frazier takes Herskovits to task for basing his assertions on 
flimsy evidence. Herskovits had not been able “to refer African 
survival in the United States to a specific tribe or a definite area.” 
When he argues that the spirit of African belief is preserved under 
the adoption of European religious forms, Frazier counters that 
this simply means that the “existence of such survivals cannot be 
validated on scientific grounds.” A case in point is Herskovits’ 
attempt to explain the popularity of the Baptist church among 
black Americans by reference to water cults in Africa. The Bap- 
tists successfully proselytized Negroes, says Frazier, not because 
they practiced baptism by immersion but because they were ener- 
getic proselytizers with strong appeal for lower classes . 29

Frazier admits that in the “magic and folk beliefs of the rural 
Negroes in the United States, some African elements have proba- 
bly been retained.” However, he hastens to add, it is a very difficult 
task to separate African from European folk belief. And as the 
Afro-Americans “have emerged from the world of the folk” the 
majority “have sloughed off completely the African heritage .” 30The debate has been a lasting one. The positions represented 
by Herskovits and Frazier have continued in one form or another 
to inform a variety of discussion on black history and culture, 
including the fields of music, folklore, language, and art. There 
are those who deny that there is any difference between white and 
black Americans except color. There are those who ground black

DEATH OF THE GODS

55

identity and black pride upon a reclamation of historical continu- 
ity with the African past. There are those who identify black 
rebellion with the survival of African culture. The ideological 
conflicts between separatists and integrationists have involved 
judgments about the survival of African culture in the United 
States. Commentators on black religious life have been subject to 
ideological pressures to take a stand in the Herskovits-Frazier 
debate, understanding that wider implications would derive from 
their conclusions. Given the implications and emotions involved 
in the issues, it is a difficult but, for that reason, all the more 
necessary task to evaluate the evidence with care and open-mind- 
edness, to be aware of one’s own preconceptions and not to draw 
hasty conclusions.

Cases in Point:

Baptism by Immersion and Spirit Possession

The weakest part of Herskovits’ argument is his contention that 
he has found African retentions in the institutional form and the- 
ology of certain types of black churches. He is more convincing 
when he speaks of “patterns of motor behavior” and folk belief, 
but here, too, he weakens his credibility by overstatement.

Herskovits begins his chapter on “Africanisms in Religious 
Life” with the following statement:Herskovits begins his chapter on “Africanisms in Religious 
Life” with the following statement:

Underlying the life of the American Negro is a deep religious 
bent that is but the manifestation here of a similar drive that, 
everywhere in Negro societies, makes the supernatural a ma- 
jor focus of interest. The tenability of this position is apparent 
when it is considered how in an age marked by skepticism, 
the Negro has held fast to belief. Religion is vital, meaningful, 
and understandable to the Negro of this country because . . . 
it is not removed from life, but has been deeply integrated into 
the daily round. It is because of this, indeed, that everywhere 
compensation in terms of the supernatural is so immediately 
acceptable to this underpriviledged folk, and causes them, in 
contrast to other underprivileged groups elsewhere in the

56

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

world, to turn to religion rather than to political action or 
other outlets for their frustration . 3156

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

world, to turn to religion rather than to political action or 
other outlets for their frustration . 31

Arthur Huff Fauset’s critique of this generalization is significant, 
especially because it has been widely held that black people are 
somehow “naturally” religious. Fauset denies statistically that 
Afro-Americans are greater churchgoers than other Americans . 32 
As to the importance of the church in the black community, it is a 
fact explained by the intransigence of white racism which rele- 
gated black control to one social institution, the church. There is 
no proof that religion as a compensatory force among the under- 
privileged has been more widespread among the black poor than 
it has been among the oppressed of other ethnic backgrounds. 
Besides, religion has also functioned as a spur to resistance, self- 
assertion, and rebellion in black history. Finally, when given the 
chance, as for example during the period of Reconstruction, 
blacks have turned readily to political action. Herskovits’ general- 
ization about the “religious bent characteristic of Negroes every- 
where” reveals a characteristic problem in his method: How is 
such an assertion to be proved, disproved, or even taken? As an 
impressionistic remark it has a certain validity. Religion has 
played a central role in Afro-American culture in the United 
States. But it is a different matter to ground the “scientific” hy- 
pothesis that religion forms the focus of black culture in both the 
New World and in Africa on the observation that black people 
have a “religious bent.” The sweeping generalization only seems 
to weaken credibility concerning particular examples.Turning to specific institutional characteristics of the black 
churches, Herskovits found Africanisms in the worship of “shout- 
ing” churches. Listening to the radio broadcasts of black church 
services he concluded that “spirit possession by the Holy Ghost” 
inspired “motor behavior that is not European but African .” 33 
The rhythmic hand-clapping and antiphonal participation of the 
congregation in the sermon, and the theological view in which 
“God, Jesus, and the Holy Ghost are all concerned with the

DEATH OF THE GODS

57DEATH OF THE GODS

57

immediate fate of those who worship them,” strike Herskovits as 
“deviations from the practices and beliefs of white Baptists.” The 
immediacy of God in the services he heard, the manner in which 
“the Holy Ghost visits with the minister, taking messages to God 
from those in need of help,” seemed to Herskovits to reflect the 
African heritage of the worshippers . 34 The theological example is 
not convincing. A sense of the immediacy of God, of his involve- 
ment in daily life is not a deviation from the beliefs of white 
Baptists or indeed of many other Christians. The role of the Holy 
Spirit as a messenger seems to be a sermonic conceit that is not 
foreign to Christian belief . 35 Hand-clapping and congregational 
response would not be in the least surprising to white holiness 
and pentecostal church members, nor would “spirit possession.” 
Perhaps the most frequently attacked example of a specific Afri- 
can survival cited by Herskovits is baptism by immersion which 
he links to water cults in Nigeria and Dahomey. The strong 
appeal of the Baptist denomination for Negroes was due partially 
to the West African religious background, where water cults are 
extremely important. The Baptists’ insistence on immersion was 
an attractive rite to Africans familiar with water cults because the 
concept of baptism is one “that any African would find readily 
understandable.” In Africa, Dutch Guiana, and Haiti, possession 
by water spirits drives the possessed devotee to hurl himself 
bodily into a stream, pond, or river. Similarly in the baptismal 
service of rural black Baptists the spirit occasionally falls upon the 
new Christian emerging from the water, causing him to shout. 
Therefore, baptism through “the transmutation of belief and be- 
havior under acculturation . . . furnished one of the least difficult 
transitions to a new form of belief . 36 There are two objections that 
can be made to Herskovits’ comments on baptism by immersion. 
While Herskovits embraces the principle “that the acculturative 
process in each locality is to be analyzed in terms of the peculiari- 
ties of its own historic past and its own socio-economic present,” 
he violates this principle too frequently by glossing over signi- 
ficant differences . 37 Because he views the whole of Afro-America58

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

as a spectrum or continuum, he sometimes blurs important dis- 
tinctions and argues from an example in one area to an invalid 
application in another. The applicability of his analogy that just as 
spirit possession occurs in the water cults in Africa, so is shouting 
associated with baptism in the United States breaks down upon 
careful examination. The African devotee is possessed by the god 
who has replaced his personality and who impels him into the 
water, the god’s own element, whereas the tradition which lies 
behind baptism by immersion is Judeo-Christian and the descent 
of the Spirit on this occasion has the warrant of Scripture: “ . . . 
he will baptize with the Holy Spirit .” 38

The second criticism, made by every critic of Herskovits, is that 
the appeal of the Baptist denomination for Afro-Americans did 
not derive from their African background but from the attraction 
of evangelical religion to the slaves. To be fair to Herskovits, it is 
necessary to point out that he lists several other reasons for the 
spread of the Baptist denomination among black people: the en- 
ergy of the Baptist evangelists, the personal emotional appeal of 
revivalism, the ease with which a Baptist congregation could be 
founded, the opportunity for even the unlearned to preach. Her- 
skovits clearly saw the African water cults as only part of the 
explanation.Furthermore, there is a crucial aspect of Herskovits’ argument 
which often goes ignored in the discussion of slave acculturation: 
the suggestion that at least some African religious concepts and 
behavior were not totally dissimilar to certain beliefs and practices 
charateristic of evangelical Protestantism. Perhaps the religious 
heritage of American Protestants and the African religious back- 
ground were not completely antithetical. Culture contact was not 
in every case culture conflict with either Africa or Europe emer- 
ging victorious. The acculturative process was broader and more 
complex than simple retention or destruction of Africanism. Ele- 
ments of African behavior and belief could have been modified by 
contact with European culture and could have merged with it in a 
new syncretistic form. Conversely, European traits could have

DEATH OF THE GODS

59

been shaped and reinterpreted by the slaves in the light of their 
African past. On the one hand, the similarity of some traits may 
make it very difficult or even impossible to separate what is African 
from what is European in origin; on the other hand, this very 
commonality might have served to reinforce certain African ele- 
ments while others withered under severe prohibition and attack. 
That some elements of African religion survived in the United 
States not as separate enclaves free of white influence but as aspects 
hidden under or blended with similar European forms is a thesis 
worth considering in more detail, especially since there are strong 
arguments for its validity in the areas of music, folklore, and lan- 
guage. There were two areas of commonality between African and 
European religion where mutual reinterpretation and syncretism 
possibly occurred: ecstatic behavior and magical folk-belief.Ecstatic behavior, in the form of spirit possession, is, as we have 
seen, central to the liturgy of West African peoples and their 
descendants in many parts of the New World. Commonly, the 
rites of worship consist in drumming the rhythms of the gods, 
singing their songs, creating a setting so that they will come 
down and “ride” their devotees in states of possession. The pos- 
sessed takes on the personality of the god, dancing his steps, 
speaking his words, bearing his emblems, acting out his character 
in facial expression and bodily gesture.

In the United States slaves and their descendants were not 
possessed by the gods of their fathers but they did engage in a 
type of ecstatic behavior called shouting. Is there a relationship 
between the phenomenon of shouting in black revivalistic 
churches in the United States and spirit possession in West Af- 
rica, South America, and the Caribbean?

Shouting was a common, if sensational, occurrence at the fron- 
tier camp meetings. While several accounts of these meetings 
stressed the slaves’ peculiar propensity for shouting, white revival- 
ists also shouted and jerked, barked and laughed a holy laughter 
as w'ell . 39 Herskovits theorizes that it was the influence of the 
black participants in the camp meetings that accounted for the

60

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

pattern of ecstatic behavior which emerged. In support of this 
contention, he refers to a description by Frederick Morgan Da- 
venport which contrasts ecstatic behavior at a revival in Northern 
Ireland with one in Kentucky. The account states:I wish in closing to call attention to the difference in type of 
the automatisms of Kentucky and Ulster. In Kentucky the 
motor automatism, the voluntary muscles in violent action, 
were the prevailing type, although there were many of the 
sensory. On the other hand, in Ulster the sensory automa- 
tisms, trance, vision, the physical disability and the sinking of 
muscular energy were the prevailing types, although there 
were many of the motor. I do not mean that I can explain it . 40

Davenport and Frazier explained the difference in behavior as a 
matter of chance. Herskovits thought the difference was due to the 
influence of the slaves upon the white revivalists in Kentucky. He 
states that “the tradition of violent possession associated with these 
meetings is far more African than European, and hence there is 
reason to hold that, in part at least, it was inspired in the whites by 
this contact with Negroes .” 41 Herskovits supported his contention 
by referring to the difference between black and white revival ser- 
vices in the twentieth century as described by Hortense Powder- 
maker in After Freedom. At Negro revivals the participants were 
more active than were white congregations; “greater rhythm and 
spontaneity” were characteristic of the black revivalists; the black 
preacher’s sermon was more melodic and regular, less halting than 
the white minister’s; black congregations moved less convulsively 
and more smoothly than their white counterparts. Powdermaker 
attributed these motor differences to social conditioning, “the re- 
pression caused by the interracial situation” which “finds relief in 
unrestrained religious behavior.” Herskovits held that the differ- 
ences between white and black congregations “in the manifestation 
of ecstasy and hysteria” served to “underscore the differences be- 
tween the worship characteristic of the cultures from which the 
ancestors of these two groups were derived .” 42Although ecstatic behavior in response to the revivalist preach-

DEATH OF THE GODS

61

ing of the camp meetings was an experience common to slaves 
and slaveholders on the frontier of late eighteenth- and early nine- 
teenth-century America, the special responsiveness of the slaves to 
revivals was noted by several witnesses. One observer remarked: 
“By no class is a camp meeting hailed with more unmixed delight 
than by the poor slaves.” 43 In 1807 Jesse Lee, a Georgia evangel- 
ist, noted: “The first day of the meeting, we had a gentle and 
comfortable moving of the spirit of the Lord among us; and at 
night it was much more powerful than before, and the meeting 
was kept up all night without intermission. However, before day 
the white people retired, and the meeting was continued by the 
black people.” 44 John Leland noted in 1790 that slaves in Vir- 
ginia “commonly are more noisy in time of preaching than the 
whites, and are more subject to bodily exercise, and if they meet 
with an encouragement in these things, they grow extravagant.” 
In the camp meeting the slaves met with encouragement. The 
proclivity of the slaves for “bodily exercises” was not due to any 
innate emotionalism; nor was it totally due to the need of an 
oppressed class to release pent-up tension. Rather, the slaves 
tended to express religious emotion in certain patterned types of 
bodily movement influenced by the African heritage of dance. 45

Slaves and ex-slaves sought and welcomed the presence of the 
Spirit, which moved worshipers to shout and dance not only 
during the special “seasons of revival” but also during regular 
church services (whenever allowed). Frederick Law Olmsted vis- 
ited a black church in New Orleans where he experienced 
firsthand the power of evangelical preaching to arouse ecstatic 
behavior.As soon as I had taken my seat, my attention was attracted by 
an old negro near me, whom I supposed for some time to be 
suffering under some nervous complaint; he trembled, his 
teeth chattered, and his face, at intervals, was convulsed. He 
soon began to respond aloud to the sentiments of the preach- 
er, in such words as these: “Oh, yes!” and similar expressions 
could be heard from all parts of the house whenever the

62

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

speaker’s voice was unusually solemn, or his language and 
manner eloquent or excited.

Sometimes the outcries and responses were not confined to 
ejaculations of this kind, but shouts, and groans, terrific 
shrieks, and indescribable expressions of ecstasy — of pleasure 
or agony — and even stamping, jumping, and clapping of 
hands were added ... I was once surprised to find my own 
muscles all stretched, as if ready for a struggle — my face glow- 
ing, and my feet stamping — having been infected ' uncon- 
sciously. ... I could not, when my mind reverted to itself, 
find any connection or meaning in the phrases of the speaker 
that remained in my memory; and I have no doubt it was his 
“action” rather than his sentiments, that had given rise to the 
excitement of the congregation . 48

After attempting to capture the strong rhythm of the preacher’s 
sermon with each beat marked by the antiphonal response of the 
congregation, Olmsted went on to describe the effect of the ser- 
vice on one of the worshipers.The preacher was drawing his sermon to a close . . . when a 
small old woman, perfectly black, among those in the gallery, 
suddenly rose, and began dancing and clapping her hands; at 
first with a slow and measured movement, and then with 
increasing rapidity, at the same time beginning to shout “ha! 
ha!” The women about her arose also, and tried to hold 
her . . . The woman was still shouting and dancing, her head 
thrown back and rolling from one side to the other. Gradually 
her shout became indistinct, she threw her arms wildly about 
instead of clapping her hands, fell back into the arms of her 
companions, then threw herself forward and embraced those 
before her, then tossed herself from side to side, gasping, and 
finally sunk to the floor, where she remained . . . kicking, as if 
acting a death struggle . 47

To what extent, if any, did a tradition of African spirit possession 
influence such ecstatic behavior? There are two issues involved in 
comparing African spirit possession with the religious behavior of 
slaves and their descendants in American “shouting” churches. As 
Erika Bourguignon has succinctly stated:

DEATH OF THE GODS

63

What is generally spoken of as “spirit possession” actually 
involves two distinct aspects, two distinct levels of ethno- 
graphic “fact”: an observable behavior pattern and a system of 
cultural beliefs and interpretations. These, however, in turn 
structure expectations and therefore behavior . 48

In other words, though not separated in fact, there are two as- 
pects which should be distinguished for the sake of clarity in 
discussion: the faith context in which the possession experience 
occurs and the patterned style of outward response by which the 
ecstatic experience is manifest.On the level of theological interpretation and meaning, African 
spirit possession differs significantly from the shouting experience 
found in the revivalist tradition of American evangelicalism. In 
the central possession cults of the Yoruba and Fon peoples the 
devotees are possessed by a god — in the cults of Haiti and Brazil, 
by several gods in succession — whose personality displaces that of 
the human medium. The advice, commands, gestures, and iden- 
tity of the god are transmitted through the possessed. Personality 
traits of the god are expressed in the patterned action of the 
possessed devotee who makes the god present to the cult commu- 
nity. It is believed that the possessed “has been invaded by a 
supernatural being and is thus temporarily beyond self-control, 
his ego being subordinated to that of the [divine] intruder .” 49 The 
devotee becomes the carrier of the god, taking up the god’s em- 
blems, wearing his sacred colors, tasting his favorite food and 
drink. Comparing Haitian vaudouists with Spiritual Baptists 
(Shakers) from St. Vincent, Erika Bourguignon distinguishes be- 
tween African and Protestant forms of spirit possession. “While 
the Haitian,” she states, “impersonates specific, well-delineated 
anthropomorphic entities, with complex personalities and a great 
range of possible activities, the Vincentian does not.” She adds 
that the “Haitian trancer sings and dances, smokes, drinks and 
eats,” and sometimes “may climb a tree or dive into water” while 
possessed. “Most importantly, while the Haitian interacts with 
others during his possession trance, with spirits possessing people

64

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE64

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

and with other human beings, the Vincentian does not.” Instead, 
the Vincentian’s attention “is drawn inward to his interaction 
with the Spirit.” Though the Vincentian trancers “participate in a 
common experience,” they do not interact with each other as the 
Haitians do “from the standpoint of a personal transformation.” 
The “manner of operation” in both experiences, Bourguignon 
concludes, “is distinct in its formal and in its ideological fea- 
tures .” 50 While Bourguignon is specifically comparing Haitian to 
Vincentian types of spirit possession, her differentiation is applica- 
ble to the North American possession experience as well. The 
context of belief shapes the possession experience and determines 
the manner in which the experience is interpreted. While there 
may be similar effects — ego enhancement and catharsis, to name 
only two — on this level of faith event, there are major differences 
between spirit possession as it occurs in African and Latin Ameri- 
can cults, on the one hand, and the ecstatic shouting experience of 
United States revivalism, on the other. There is a discontinuity, 
then, between the African heritage of spirit possession and the 
black shouting tradition in the United States. The African gods 
with their myriad characteristics, personalities, and myths do not 
“mount” their enthusiasts amid the dances, songs, and drum 
rhythms of worship in the United States. Instead it is the Holy 
Spirit who fills the converted sinner with a happiness and power 
that drives him to shout, sing, and sometimes dance.

A different possession belief was held by the slave in North 
America. One explication of this belief was given by an ex-slave 
preacher and recorded in God Struck Me Dead:A different possession belief was held by the slave in North 
America. One explication of this belief was given by an ex-slave 
preacher and recorded in God Struck Me Dead:

The old meeting house caught on fire. The spirit was there. 
Every heart was beating in unison as we turned our minds to 
God to tell Him of our sorrows here below. God saw our need 
and came to us. I used to wonder what made people shout but 
now I don’t. There is a joy on the inside and it wells up so 
strong that we can’t keep still. It is fire in the bones. Any time 
that fire touches a man, he will jump . 51

It is in the context of action, the patterns of motor behavior

DEATH OF THE GODS

65

preceding and following the ecstatic experience, that there may be 
continuity between African and American forms of spirit posses- 
sion. While the rhythms of the drums, so important in African 
and Latin American cults, were by and large forbidden to the 
slave in the United States, hand-clapping, foot-tapping, rhythmic 
preaching, hyperventilation, antiphonal (call and response) sing- 
ing, and dancing are styles of behavior associated with possession 
both in Africa and in this country.

The strong emphasis on rhythmic preaching, singing, moving, 
and dancing in the religious behavior of the American slaves has 
long been noted by observers. Ex-slave Robert Anderson de- 
scribed the patterns of religious expression which he saw in his 
youth during slavery:

The colored people . . . have a peculiar music of their own, 
which is largely a process of rhythm, rather than written music.The colored people . . . have a peculiar music of their own, 
which is largely a process of rhythm, rather than written music.

Their music is largely, or was ... a sort of rhythmical chant. It 
had to do largely with religion and the words adopted to their 
quaint melodies were largely of a religious nature. The stories 
of the Bible were placed into words that would fit the music 
already used by the colored people. While singing these songs, 
the singers and the entire congregation kept time to the music 
by the swaying of their bodies or by the patting of the foot or 
hand. Practically all of their songs were accompanied by a 
motion of some kind . . . the weird and mysterious music of the 
religious ceremonies moved old and young alike in a frenzy of 
religious fervor . . . We also had religious dances, which were 
expressions of the weird, the fantastic, the mysterious, that was 
felt in all our religious ceremonies . 52

It appears from early accounts that the African tradition of 
“danced religion” retained a strong hold on the religious behavior 
of the slaves. Rev. Morgan Godwin, who arrived to minister to 
Marston Parish in York County, Virginia, in 1665, later wrote of 
the religious dancing of the slaves:

. , . nothing is more barbarous and contrary to Christianity, 
than their . . . Idolotrous Dances, and Revels; in which they 
usually spend the Sunday . . . And here, that I may not be

66

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

thought too rashly to impute Idolotry to their Dances; my 
conjecture is raised upon this ground ... for that they use 
their Dances as a means to procure Rain; Some of them having 
been known to beg this liberty upon the Week Days, in order 
thereunto ... 53During the seventeenth and much of the eighteenth century there 
was a great deal of indifference, reluctance, and hostility to the 
conversion of the slaves. (Not until the successive waves of reli- 
gious revival known as the Great Awakening began in the 1740s 
did incidents of slave conversion occur in any sizable numbers.) 
In the face of this religious indifference some forms of African 
religious behavior seem to have continued. Rev. John Sharpe 
complained in 1712 that even Christianized slaves in New York 
“are buried in the Common by those of their country and com- 
plexion without the office; on the contrary the Heathenish rites 
are performed at the grave by their countrymen . . . ” 54 And Alex- 
ander Hewatt noted in 1779 that in South Carolina “the negroes 
of that country, a few only excepted, are to this day as great 
strangers to Christianity, and as much under the influence of 
Pagan darkness, idolatry, and superstition, as they were at their 
first arrival from Africa ...” He was particularly disturbed that 
Sundays and “Holidays are days of idleness ... in which the 
slaves assemble together in alarming crowds for the purposes of 
dancing, feasting and merriment.” 55 Later Methodist, Presbyte- 
rian, and Baptist revivalists condemned these secular forms of 
amusement and taught the slaves that conversion required their 
abandonment. While evangelical missionaries prohibited dancing 
as sinful, they afforded the slaves a morally sanctioned context for 
a sacralized type of dancing in the emotionally charged setting of 
the revival. In 1845 Sir Charles Lyell commented on the way in 
which slaves, though converted to Christianity, continued to 
dance.

Of dancing and music, the Negroes are passionately fond. On 
the Hopeton plantation violins have been silenced by the Meth- 
odist missionaries ... At the Methodist prayer-meetings, they

DEATH OF THE GODS

67DEATH OF THE GODS

67

are permitted to move round rapidly in a ring, in which 
manoeuvre, I am told, they sometimes contrive to take enough 
exercise to serve as a substitute for the dance, it being, in fact, 
a kind of spiritual boulanger ... 56

The unusual religious behavior of slaves at camp meetings 
aroused the disapproval of some Christian evangelists. In a work 
entitled Methodist Error or Friendly Advice to Those Methodists 
Who Indulge in Extravagant Religious Emotions and Bodily Exer- 
cises (1819), John Watson complained about the style of musical 
behavior of black revivalists in the Philadelphia Conference:

Here ought to be considered too, a most exceptionable error, 
which has the tolerance at least of the rulers of our camp 
meetings. In the blacks' quarter, the coloured people get to- 
gether, and sing for hours together, short scraps of disjointed 
affirmations, pledges, or prayers, lengthened out with long 
repetitious choruses. These are all sung in the merry chorus- 
manner of the southern harvest field, or husking-frolic 
method, of the slave blacks; and also very greatly like the 
Indian dances. With every word so sung, they have a sinking 
of one or other leg of the body alternately; producing an audi- 
ble sound of the feet at every step, and as manifest as the steps 
of actual negro dancing in Virginia &c. If some, in the mean- 
time sit, they strike the sounds alternately on each thigh . . . 
the evil is only occasionally condemned and the example has 
already visibly affected the religious manners of some whites.

From this cause, I have known in some camp meetings from 
50 to 60 people crowd into one tent, after the public devo- 
tions had closed, and there continue the whole night, singing 
tune after tune, . . . scarce one of which were in our hymn 
books. Some of these from their nature, (having very long 
repetition choruses and short scraps of matter) are actually 
composed as sung and are almost endless. 57Besides shedding some light on “the original religious songs of 
blacks — as distinguished from the standard Protestant hymns 
that they sang — ” 58 the account above is significant because it 
tends to support the argument that black patterns of behavior 
influenced white revivalists at the camp meetings.

68

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

Religious dancing and shouting were by no means confined to 
camp meetings. Olmsted remarked on the regular religious wor- 
ship of the slaves on one plantation:

On most of the large rice plantations which I have seen in this 
vicinity, there is a small chapel, which the negroes call their 
prayer-house. The owner of one of these told me that, having 
furnished the prayer-house with seats having a back-rail, his 
negroes petitioned him to remove it, because it did not leave 
them room enough to pray. It was explained to me that it is 
their custom, in social worship, to work themselves up to a 
great pitch of excitement, in which they yell and cry aloud, 
and, finally shriek and leap up, clapping their hands and danc- 
ing, as it is done at heathen festivals. The back-rail they found 
to seriously impede this exercise. 59

The religious dance most frequently described was the ring 
shout of the slaves in the Sea Islands. The ring shout, musicolo- 
gists agree, is a particularly strong example of African-influenced 
dance style in the United States. Frazier and others have relegated 
the ring shout to the Sea Islands, where they admit Africanisms 
were strong, but there is evidence that the ring shout was a 
widespread and deeply ingrained practice among slaves in other 
areas as well. The following passage from A.M.E. Bishop Daniel 
Alexander Payne’s autobiography indicates that he had met with 
the ring shout in many places a little over a decade after slavery:About this time [1878] I attended a “bush meeting” . . . After 
the sermon they formed a ring, and with coats off sung, clapped 
their hands and stamped their feet in a most ridiculous and 
heathenish way. I requested the pastor to go and stop their 
dancing. At his request they stopped their dancing and clap- 
ping of hands, but remained singing and rocking their bodies 
to and fro. This they did for about fifteen minutes. I then went, 
and taking their leader by the arm requested him to desist and 
to sit down and sing in a rational manner. I told him also that it 
was a heathenish way to worship and disgraceful to themselves, 
the race, and the Christian name. In that instance they broke 
up their ring; but would not sit down, and walked sullenly 
away. After the sermon in the afternoon, having another oppor-

DEATH OF THE GODS

69

tunity of speaking alone to this young leader of the singing and 
clapping ring, he said: “Sinners won’t get converted unless 
there is a ring.” Said I: “You might sing till you fell down dead, 
and you would fail to convert a single sinner, because nothing 
but the Spirit of God and the word of God can convert sin- 
ners.” He replied: “The Spirit of God works upon people in 
different ways. At camp-meeting there must be a ring here, a 
ring there, a ring over yonder, or sinners will not get con- 
verted.” This was his idea, and it is also that of many others. 
These “Bands” I have had to encounter in many places ... To 
the most thoughtful ... I usually succeeded in making the 
“Band” disgusting; but by the ignorant masses ... it was re- 
garded as the essence of religion . 60

In the exchange between Payne and the “Band” leader it is 
significant that the latter found the ring shout necessary for con- 
version and for the working of the Spirit.

Payne goes on to describe the “ring” of the “Bands,” also 
known as “Fist and Heel Worshippers.”Payne goes on to describe the “ring” of the “Bands,” also 
known as “Fist and Heel Worshippers.”

He who could sing loudest and longest led the ‘Band,’ having 
his loins girded and a handkerchief in hand with which he 
kept time, while his feet resounded on the floor like the drum- 
sticks of a bass drum. In some cases it was the custom to 
begin these dances after every night service and keep it up till 
midnight, sometimes singing and dancing alternately — a short 
prayer and a long dance. Someone has even called it the 
“Voudoo Dance.” I have remonstrated with a number of pas- 
tors for permitting these practices, which vary somewhat in 
different localities, but have been invariably met with the re- 
sponse that he could not succeed in restraining them, and an 
attempt to compel them to cease would simply drive them 
away from our Church . . . And what is more deplorable, 
some of our most popular and powerful preachers labor system- 
atically to perpetuate this fanaticism. Such preachers never 
rest till they create an excitement that consists in shouting, 
jumping and dancing . 61

It seems, then, from Payne’s account, as well as those of others, 
that dancing was a crucial part of worship for some slaves and 
ex-slaves. The label “Voudoo Dance,” which Payne records, was

70

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

not entirely a misnomer. There are close parallels between the 
style of dancing observed in African and Caribbean cult worship 
and the style of the American “ring shout.” Folklorists John and 
Alan Lomax who recorded a ring shout in Louisiana in 1934 
enumerated the parallels.We have seen “shouts” in Louisiana, in Texas, in Georgia and 
the Bahamas; we have seen vaudou dancing in Haiti; we have 
read accounts of similar rites in works upon Negro life in 
other parts of the Western hemisphere. All share basic simi- 
larities: (1) the song is “danced” with the whole body, with 
hands, feet, belly, and hips; (2) the worship is, basically, a 
dancing-singing phenomenon; (3) the dancers always move 
counter-clockwise around the ring; (4) the song has the 
leader-chorus form, with much repetition, with a focus on 
rhythm rather than on melody, that is, with a form that invites 
and ultimately enforces cooperative group activity; (5) the 
song continues to be repeated from sometimes more than an 
hour, steadily increasing in intensity and gradually accelerat- 
ing, until a sort of mass hypnosis ensues . . . This shout pat- 
tern is demonstrably West African in origin. 62

George E. Simpson has described the dancing of the Revivalist 
cult in Jamaica in terms that bear striking resemblance to the 
American ring shout.

Halfway through the service the leader may begin to circle 
counterclockwise the altar, or a table inside the church, or the 
“seal” in the yard outside the church. The officers and leading 
members of the church, often up to twenty people, fall in 
behind him as all of them “labor in the spirit” . . . This “spirit- 
ual” dancing is believed to increase the religious understand- 
ing of the participants. 63

There are a number of detailed descriptions of the technique of 
the ring shout in which African style dance patterns can be noted. 
W. F. Allen reprinted an account of the shout on the Sea Islands 
from the Nation (May 30, 1867):

. . . the true “shout” takes place on Sundays or on “praise”- 
nights through the week, and either in the praise-house or in

DEATH OF THE GODS

71. . . the true “shout” takes place on Sundays or on “praise”- 
nights through the week, and either in the praise-house or in

DEATH OF THE GODS

71

some cabin in which a regular religious meeting has been 
held. Very likely more than half the population of the planta- 
tion is gathered together . . . But the benches are pushed back 
to the wall when the formal meeting is over, and old and 
young men and women . . . boys . . . young girls barefooted, 
all stand up in the middle of the floor, and when the ‘sperichiP 
is struck, begin first walking and by-and-by shuffling round, 
one after the other, in a ring. The foot is hardly taken from 
the floor, and the progression is mainly due to a jerking, 
hitching motion, which agitates the entire shouter, and soon 
brings out streams of perspiration. Sometimes they dance si- 
lently, sometimes as they shuffle they sing the chorus of the 
spiritual, and sometimes the song itself is also sung by the 
dancers. But most frequently a band, composed of some of the 
best singers and of tired shouters, stand at the side of the 
room to ‘base 1 the others, singing the body of the song and 
clapping their hands together or on the knees. Song and 
dance alike are extremely energetic, and often, when the shout 
lasts into the middle of the night, the monotonous thud, thud, 
thud of the feet prevents sleep within half a mile of the praise- 
house ... It is not unlikely that this remarkable religious cere- 
mony is a relic of some African dance . . . Dancing in the 
usual way is regarded with great horror by the people of Port 
Royal, but they enter with infinite zest into the movements of 
the “shout .” 64As Harold Courlander wrote: “circular movement, shuffling 
steps and stamping, postures and gestures, the manner of stand- 
ing, the way the arms are held out for balance or pressed against 
the sides, the movements of the shoulder, all are African in con- 
ception and derivation.” 85 It has even been suggested by Lorenzo 
Dow Turner that the very word “shout” derives from saut , a term 
used by West African Muslims to denote “dancing or moving 
around the Kaaba.” 66

The ring form of religious dancing occurred on occasions other 
than revivals and praise meetings. Funerals, for example, were 
occasions for dancing and sometimes drumming, at least in the 
Sea Islands. Rachel Anderson, an elderly Georgia coast resident, 
recalled: “Use tuh alluz beat duh drums at fewnuls. Right attuh

72

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

duh pusson die, dey beat um tuh tell duh uddahs bout duh 
fewnul . . . On duh way tuh duh grabe dey beat duh drum as dey 
is mahchin long. Wen duh body is put in duh grabe, ebrybody 
shout roun duh grabe in a succle, singin an prayin .” 67 And 
another old Georgian, Ben Sullivan, stated: “Dey go in a long 
pruhcession tuh duh buryin’ groun. Den dey dance roun in a ring 
an dey motion wid duh hans. Dey sing duh body tuh duh grabe 
and den dey let it down an den dey succle roun in duh dance .” 68In the ring shout and allied patterns of ecstatic behavior, the 
African heritage of dance found expression in the evangelical reli- 
gion of the American slaves. To be sure, there are significant 
differences between the kind of spirit possession found in West 
Africa and in the shouting experience of American revivalism. 
Different theological meanings are expressed and experienced in 
each. But similar patterns of response — rhythmic clapping, ring- 
dancing, styles of singing, all of which result in or from the state- 
of-possession trance — reveal the slaves’ African religious back- 
ground. The shout is a convincing example of Herskovits’ theory 
of reinterpretation of African traditions; for the situation of the 
camp-meeting revival, where enthusiastic and ecstatic religious 
behavior was encouraged, presented a congenial setting for slaves 
to merge African patterns of response with Christian interpreta- 
tions of the experience of spirit possession, an experience shared 
by both blacks and whites. The Protestant revivalist tradition, 
accepted by the slaves and their descendants in the United States, 
proved in this instance to be amenable to the influence of African 
styles of behavior. Despite the prohibition of dancing as heathen- 
ish and sinful, the slaves were able to reinterpret and “sanctify” 
their African tradition of dance in the “shout .” 69 While the North 
American slaves danced under the impulse of the Spirit of a 
“new” God, they danced in ways their fathers in Africa would 
have recognized.

Moreover, the argument, mentioned above, between Bishop 
Payne and the leader of the ring-shout band hints at a deeper level 
of reinterpretation. If, as Payne claims, the “ignorant masses”

DEATH OF THE GODS

73DEATH OF THE GODS

73

(read “less acculturated”) regarded the ring shout “as the essence 
of religion,” and if the shout leader’s contention that “without a 
ring sinners won’t get converted” was representative of general 
belief, the “holy dance” of the shout may very well have been a 
two-way bridge connecting the core of West African religions — 
possession by the gods — to the core of evangelical Protestanism — 
experience of conversion. There are also hints that the process of 
conversion may have been related in the slaves’ minds to the 
African-style period of initiation into the cults of the gods. Slaves 
customarily spoke of the period of seeking conversion as “mourn- 
ing” and thought of it as a time when the sinner should go apart, 
alone, to a quiet place to struggle with his sins. This period and 
place of retirement resemble the novitiate of West African and 
Caribbean cults in two details. Fugitive slave Henry Brown re- 
called that when his sister “became anxious to have her soul con- 
verted” she “shaved the hair from her head, as many of the slaves 
thought they could not be converted without doing this,” a cus- 
tom similar to initiation rites in Brazil, Trinidad and West Africa. 
The other similarity may be noted in Samuel Lawton’s descrip- 
tion of a practice followed in the Sea Islands which resembled the 
use of cloth bands in the “mourning ground” ceremony of Spirit- 
ual Baptists in Trinidad: “Seekers may sometimes be identified by 
a white cloth or string tied around the head. This is a signal that 
they are seekin’ and all others are to ‘leave ’em alon.’ ” 70Ring shouts were also called “running sperichils,” a term which 
suggests a connection with a broader and more inclusive category 
of religious expression, the Afro-American spirituals. There were 
several kinds of spirituals — shouts, anthems, and jubilees — serv- 
ing different occasions and reflecting different moods. Styles 
ranged from the exciting tempo and rhythmic stamp of the shout 
to the slow, drawn-out “sorrow songs” which usually come to 
mind when the spirituals are mentioned. While the lyrics and 
themes of the spirituals were drawn from Biblical verses and 
Christian hymns, and although the music and melodies were 
strongly influenced by the sacred and secular songs of white

74

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

Americans, the style in which the slaves sang the spirituals was 
African.

Frequently, musically literate observers despaired of adequately 
conveying the style and sounds of the spirituals they had heard. 
One who tried was Lucy McKim Garrison, who in 1862 wrote of 
the difficulties involved in her task:

It is difficult to express the entire character of these Negro 
ballads by mere musical notes and signs. The odd turns made 
in the throat, and the curious rhythmic effect produced by 
single voices chiming in at different irregular intervals, seem 
almost as impossible to place on the score as the singing of 
birds or the tones of an AEolian harp . 71

A later compiler of spirituals complained of a similar problem: 
“Tones are frequently employed which we have no musical char- 
acter to represent. Such, for example, is that which I have indi- 
cated as nearly as possible by the fiat seventh . . . ” 72The singing style of the slaves, which was influenced by their 
African heritage, was characterized by a strong emphasis on call 
and response, polyrhythms, syncopation, ornamentation, slides 
from one note to another, and repetition. Other stylistic features 
included body movement, hand-clapping, foot-tapping, and heter- 
ophony. This African style of song performance could not be 
reduced to musical notations, which explains why printed ver- 
sions do not capture the peculiar flavor of the slave songs, which 
were consistently labeled “wild,” “strangely fascinating,” of “pe- 
culiar quality,” and “barbaric” by white observers.

Despite the African style of singing, the spirituals, like the 
“running spirituals” or ring shout, were performed in praise of the 
Christian God. 73 The names and words of the African gods were 
replaced by Biblical figures and Christian imagery. African style 
and European hymnody met and became in the spiritual a new, 
Afro-American song to express the joys and sorrows of the reli- 
gion which the slaves had made their own. 74

Another area of religious behavior in which European tradi- 
tions of slaveholders and African traditions of slaves proved conso-

DEATH OF THE GODS

75

nant with one another was that of folk belief, the realm of magic, 
“hoodoo,” and “conjure.”

Folk Belief: From Vaudou to ConjuringDEATH OF THE GODS

75

nant with one another was that of folk belief, the realm of magic, 
“hoodoo,” and “conjure.”

Folk Belief: From Vaudou to Conjuring

No discussion of Africanisms in the religious life of black Ameri- 
cans could be complete without reference to voodoo. However, 
when speaking of voodoo in the United States, as opposed to 
vaudou in Haiti, an important distinction must be made between 
voodoo as an organized cult and voodoo as a system of magic. 
Voodoo as a cult flourished until the late nineteenth century, 
particularly in New Orleans, though it was not confined to that 
area. From the early days of French Louisiana, the voodoo cult 
was associated with slaves imported from the French West Indies. 
Voodoo originated in the religion of Africans, but the most imme- 
diate catalyst to the growth of the cult in Louisiana was the 
emigration of slaves and free blacks from the island of Saint-Do- 
mingue at the time of the Haitian Revolution.

Initially the cult and the magical system of voodoo formed an 
integral whole, but gradually voodoo as an institutionalized cult of 
ritual worship disintegrated, while its tradition of “root work” 
persisted in folk beliefs widespread among slaves and their de- 
scendants down to the present day. Voodoo priests — and more 
commonly, priestesses — presided over the cult while building a 
large clientele for various charms and gris-gris. New Orleans be- 
came known as the capital of “root work,” and voodoo, or hoodoo, 
came to be a synonym for conjuring and conjurers apart from the 
cultic context of its African-Haitian origins . 75By all accounts, voodoo in New Orleans was centered upon 
worship of a snake god. Drumming, dancing, singing, possession, 
animal sacrifice, eating, and drinking were customary at the cere- 
monies in Louisiana, as in Haiti and West Africa. In Dahomey the 
god Damballa (Da) was envisioned as a snake and as the rainbow, 
principle of fluidity and governor of men’s destinies. Particularly 
in the coastal kingdoms of Arada and Ouidah, conquered by Da-

76

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE76

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

homey in 1724-1727, the cult of the snake god Dangbe was 
strong. The captives from the Dahomean campaigns against 
Arada and Ouidah provided a supply of slaves for the West Indian 
market of the French traders. 76 Louisiana bought her first slaves 
from the islands of Martinique, Guadeloupe, and Saint-Domingue 
as early as 1716, when five hundred were imported, followed by 
three thousand more during the next year. Slaves from the French 
West Indies continued to enter Louisiana until later prohibitions 
hindered importation. A decree of the Spanish governor Galvez in 
1782 forbade further importation of slaves from the island of Mar- 
tinique because “these negroes are too much given to voodooism 
and make the lives of the citizens unsafe.” In 1792 slaves from 
Saint-Domingue were also banned, though some were allowed to 
enter when their masters were granted asylum at the outbreak of 
the Haitian Revolution. In 1803 the United States acquired Loui- 
siana and the ban on West Indian slaves was lifted. The largest 
influx of emigrants from Haiti occurred in 1809, when planters 
who had fled to Cuba to escape the revolution in Saint-Domingue 
were forced to emigrate again by France’s declaration of war 
against Spain. It is estimated that New Orleans at that time re- 
ceived about two thousand slaves and an equal number of free 
people of color. Together with the earlier slave population of 
Arada or of Dahomean origin this group of Haitian refugees con- 
tinued to observe the African tradition of vaudou . 77

The few rather sensational accounts of voodoo services in New 
Orleans give the impression that voodoo was a monolithic snake 
cult, but there are hints that other vodun of the Dahomean pan- 
theon survived besides Damballa, who was known as Damballa 
Wedo or Li Grand Zombi. One of Robert Tallant’s informants, 
Josephine Green, recalled her mother’s account of the time she 
saw the famous voodoo queen Marie Laveau:My ma seen her ... It was back before the war what they had 
her wit’ the Northerners. My ma heard a noise on Frenchman 
Street where she lived at and she start to go outside. Her pa 
say, “Where you goin’? Stay in the house!” She say, “Marie

DEATH OF THE GODS

77

Laveau is coinin’ and I gotta see her.” She went outside and 
here come Marie Laveau wit’ a big crowd of people followin’ 
her . . . All the people wit’ her was hollerin’ and screamin’,

“We is goin’ to see Papa Limba! We is goin’ to see Papa 
Limba!” My grandpa go runnin’ after my ma then, yellin at 
her, “You come on in here Eunice! Don’t you know Papa 
Limba is the devil?” But after that my ma find out Papa 
Limba meant St. Peter, and her pa was jest foolin’ her . 78

Papa Limba is Legba, who in Haiti, as noted above, is frequently 
identified with St. Peter. The role of St. Peter-Legba is revealed 
in part of an old voodoo song remembered by another of Tallant’s 
informants, Mary Ellis. The song went:

St. Peter, St. Peter, open the door,

Pm callin’ you, come to me!

St. Peter, St. Peter, open the door ... 79St. Peter, St. Peter, open the door,

Pm callin’ you, come to me!

St. Peter, St. Peter, open the door ... 79

Mary Ellis also recounted that “Marie Laveau used to call St. 
Peter somethin’ like “Laba.” She called St. Michael “Daniel 
Blanc,” and St. Anthony “Yon Sue.” (Agasu?) 80 In her novel An 
Angel by Brevet (1904), Helen Pitkin described several voodoo 
meetings which, though “written in the form of fiction,” were, she 
claimed, “accurate, being an exact reproduction of what she her- 
self’ saw or heard from her servants. In the service there are songs 
to Liba (St. Peter), Blanc Dani (St. Michael), and Vert Agous- 
sou. 81 (In Dahomey, Agoussou is a god of special significance to 
the royal line.) Moreover, if Courlander is correct, the vodun 
Ogun Feraille “survived until recent times in Louisiana as Joe 
Feraille.” 82 It seems, therefore, that along with Damballa Wedo, 
identified as Blanc Dani, at least Legba, Agoussou, and perhaps 
Ogun Feraille, were remembered and worshiped in New Orleans 
in the nineteenth century. As in Haiti, African gods were syncre- 
tized with Catholic saints and were associated with certain colors. 
It is possible that other gods existed in the voodoo pantheon 
which were not reported by extant sources, and that the outside 
observers who left accounts saw only the tip of the iceberg of 
voodoo belief and practice.

Marie Laveau. Reprinted, by permission, from the Collections of the 
Louisiana State Museum.

DEATH OF THE GODS

79Marie Laveau. Reprinted, by permission, from the Collections of the 
Louisiana State Museum.

DEATH OF THE GODS

79

The voodoo cult in New Orleans came under the sway of a 
succession of strong leaders who traded their powers of magic for 
profit and prestige. By means of charms, amulets, and potions 
they claimed to predict the future and manipulate the present. 
Under the strong leadership of priestesses such as Sanite Dede 
and especially the two Marie Laveaus, mother and daughter, voo- 
doo enjoyed a great deal of influence among the black and white 
citizens of New Orleans throughout most of the nineteenth cen- 
tury. The long reign of the two Maries stretched from 1830 to 
the 1880s and included a system of domestic spies among the 
servant class to keep Marie informed of important secrets. An 
annual voodoo celebration was held (on St. John’s Eve) at Bayou 
St. John or on the banks of Lake Pontchatrain and the press was 
occasionally invited. 83Behind or apart from all these public aspects were the authentic 
and secret rituals of the voodoo cult of which very little in the way 
of description has endured. There are no accounts of New Orleans 
voodoo services in the eighteenth century, only two of voodoo 
worship in the early nineteenth century, and one for the late 
nineteenth century. Apart from newspaper reports which “ex- 
posed” the sensational aspects of public voodoo “shows,” these 
three accounts form the basis for almost all descriptions of voodoo 
worship in New Orleans. 84 Each account mentions the presence 
of a snake representing the god Li Grand Zombi; drumming, 
singing, dancing; possession, which usually begins when the 
priestess comes into contact with the snake god; oracular state- 
ments by the possessed priestess and priest; possession of the 
devotees; the pouring of rum or other liquors as a libation to the 
god; the spewing of liquor from the mouth of the priest as a form 
of blessing; Catholic syncretistic elements such as candles, an al- 
tar, prayers to the Virgin. All of these elements are characteristic 
of the Haitian’s Afro-Catholic synthesis as well.

By the twentieth century, although voodoo as a cult had been 
transformed into something different, it had not, however, van- 
ished totally. In the 1930s Zora Neal Hurston underwent initia-

80

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

tion into a voodoo cult in New Orleans at the hands of a priest 
named Turner who claimed to have received his connaisance from 
Marie Laveau herself . 85 It is apparent, however, that the rich 
pantheon and complex theology of Haitian vaudou did not survive 
in New Orleans voodoo; the panoply of gods was attenuated and 
the rites of worship corrupted.The initial popularity of voodoo as an organized cult in New 
Orleans was in part due to the city’s cosmopolitan and permissive 
atmosphere which lasted even after the American purchase . 86 It 
would be a mistake, however, to think that the voodoo cult ex- 
isted only in New Orleans. Mary Owen stated that voodoo dances 
occurred in Missouri in the late nineteenth century. However, she 
offers no description of voodoo ritual and most of her article is 
concerned with voodoo as magic, or, as it was called, hoodoo . 87

Hoodoo (also known as “conjure” or root work) was a system 
of magic, divination, and herbalism widespread among the slaves. 
Since New Orleans was looked upon as the prestigious center of 
conjuring , 88 the term “voodoo” was extended to conjuring and 
conjurers throughout the United States regardless of the term’s 
original reference to African-Haitian cults. Hoodoo became the 
name for a whole area of folklore, the realm of signs, powers, and 
conjuring . 89 Because magical beliefs and folk superstitions reveal 
close similarities and parallels worldwide, it is difficult to separate 
the folk beliefs and practices of African origin from those of Euro- 
pean origin. This very similarity, however, may have resulted in a 
mutual reinforcement and a common interchange of folk beliefs 
between slave and master. There are, at any rate, a number of 
hoodoo beliefs which are demonstrably African in origin. These 
beliefs can be seen, in some cases, to be vestiges of African beliefs 
removed from their fully intelligible theological and ritual con- 
texts but still remembered. Or, as Herskovits phrased it, “minu- 
tiae can persist after the broader lines of ritual procedure and their 
underlying rationalizations have been lost .” 90

The movement from vaudou to hoodoo can serve perhaps as a 
paradigm of the larger history of African religion in the United

DEATH OF THE GODS

81The movement from vaudou to hoodoo can serve perhaps as a 
paradigm of the larger history of African religion in the United

DEATH OF THE GODS

81

States. The way in which bits of African faith and practice per- 
sisted in folk beliefs and customs, though their original meaning 
had been lost, is evident in the following account from the New 
Orleans Times-Democrat of August 5, 1888. During a thunder- 
storm elderly Tante Dolores anxiously searched the house for 
some object. Not finding it, she ran to the yard. According to the 
article,

Hither and thither she ran in rapid quest, until at last she 
stumbled upon the object of her search, no less a thing than 
an axe for chopping wood ... a bright expression of joy irra- 
diated her face.

Seizing the ax and raising it over her head, “she made pass after 
pass in the very face of the rushing current, as if chopping some 
invisible thing in twain.” When the wind suddenly abated she 
returned to the house in triumph, stating that it never failed her if 
she “jest got there in time enough.” 91

A similar custom among Mississippi black folk was noted by 
Puckett:

. . . foreign to European thought is the Southern Negro cus- 
tom of going out into the yard and chopping up the ground 
with an ax when a storm threatens. This is supposed to “cut 
de storm in two” and so stop it. Others stick a spade in the 
ground to split the cloud, or simply place an ax in the comer 
of the house . 92The use of the ax as an antidote to the storm is significant, since 
the sacred emblem of the West African god of thunder and light- 
ning, Shango, is an ax; but equally significant is the fact that the 
African theological background has disappeared and what re- 
mains is a folk custom. There is perhaps a trace of the thunder- 
stones hurled by Shango in the belief, as told to Puckett by an old 
“conjure doctor” in Mississippi, that “the Indian arrowheads often 
found in the locality were not made by man at all, but were 
fashioned by God out of thunder and lightning.” 93 It was also a 
common saying in New Orleans “that when it thunders, Le Bon 
Dieit is rolling his stones.” 94

82

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

As seen previously, equestrian imagery is commonly used in 
Africa and Latin America to describe the relationship between a 
god and the devotee he mounts and rides in possession. The onset 
of possession in voodoo rituals in New Orleans was called, accord- 
ing to Castellanos, monter voudou . 95 A relic of this imagery can be 
seen in the term used by blacks in Mississippi for conjurers — 
“horses .” 96

In Africa and Latin America the seat of possession is often 
thought to be the head of the devotee. Thus, in Haiti, the loa of a 
deceased person must be removed from the corpse’s head. The 
conjurer in late-nineteenth-century Missouri was said to be one 
that was “strong in the head .” 97 In Africa a charm was regarded 
as having a spirit of its own and as having taboos which its user 
had to observe if it were to work. Mary Owen, speaking of a 
charm owned by Aunt Mymee, remarked that occasionally this 
“luck ball,” worn under the right arm, was given a drink of 
whiskey. Mymee’s charm was called “Lil Mymee,” perhaps 
reflecting a multiple or complex soul concept, similar to the Afri- 
can notion that one’s guardian soul has to be fed to keep it 
strong . 98The use of charms and counter charms, to harm or to ward off 
harm, is an essential trait of conjuring. Materials of great power 
for “fixing” or conjuring someone are hair and nail clippings, a 
piece of clothing or personal object belonging to the victim, dirt 
from a person’s footprint, and, especially, grave dirt. Powders, 
roots, and herbs of various sorts are used to cause or to cure 
illness, since sudden sickness, physical and mental, is often 
viewed as the result of being “fixed” by someone who bears ill- 
will toward the sufferer. This view of misfortune reflects the tradi- 
tional African perception of illness.

A continuation of African belief may lie behind the statement of 
Mississippi black folk that the spirit of a tree can speak to men. 
Indeed, it is not only trees that have spirits; everything does. Ruth 
Bass writes that an old Mississippi conjuror asked her, “What is 
in the jimson-weed that cures asthma if it isn’t the spirit of the

DEATH OF THE GODS

83

weed? What is that in the buckeye that can drive off rheumatism 
unless it’s spirit?” She adds that he assured her that everything 
has spirit. To prove this, he said he could take her to a certain 
spring that was haunted by the ghost of a bucket, and he asked 
her: “Now if that bucket didn’t have a spirit, where did its ghost 
come from ?”® 9

The belief that a person’s spirit wanders while the body sleeps 
was also a part of the lore of African black folk. “Pepul’s sperrits 
wander at night an’ effen dey’s woke too sudden like de sperrit is 
likely tuh be left out walkin ’.” 100 For this reason, it was danger- 
ous to sweep dirt out of the door after sunset lest you sweep out 
someone’s spirit . 101

African belief in the special power of twins, and of the person 
bom next after twins, lasted in the United States. Loudell Snow 
interviewed a present-day voodoo practitioner, who explained to 
her one theory of how she came by her powers.I had two brothers, they twins. And I were bom behind the 
twins. Some people believe that twins have the gift, one of 
’em. Some people say that I have the gift because I were bom 
behind two twins. But I don’t know. I always had the urge 
that I cure anything! I’ve always felt like that . 102

While a fully developed cult of the ancestors did not persist in 
the United States, certain African funerary customs did remain. 
In Mississippi, for example, it was believed that the spirits of the 
dead roam on Halloween — a Western belief — but dinners were 
cooked for these spirits. Ruth Bass reported that “two persons 
must cook the supper, without speaking and without using salt in 
any form . . . This food is served on the table with necessary 
plates and spoons and left all night. Sometime during the night 
the essence or spirit of the food is eaten by the . . . hungry spir- 
its .” 103 Similarly, in the Sea Islands, there were those “sut put a 
dish uh food out on the poach fuh the spirit, but some of em take 
cooked food tuh the grave an leave it theah fuh the spirit .” 104 The 
African custom of decorating a grave with the personal belong- 
ings of the deceased was also common in the rural South. Cups,

African grave decoration, Congo. Reprinted from Century Magazine 41, 
no. 6 (April 1891): 827.

Afro-American grave decoration, South Carolina. Photograph by Doris 
Ulmann. Reprinted by permission from the Doris Ulmann Collection, 
University of Oregon Library.

DEATH OF THE GODS

85Afro-American grave decoration, South Carolina. Photograph by Doris 
Ulmann. Reprinted by permission from the Doris Ulmann Collection, 
University of Oregon Library.

DEATH OF THE GODS

85

saucers, bottles, pipes, and other effects were left for the spirit of 
the deceased; frequently these items were broken or cracked in 
order to free their spirits and thereby enable them to follow the 
deceased . 105 Another reason for placing the personal belongings 
of the deceased on his grave was to “lay the spirit.” Sarah Wa- 
shington, an informant for the Georgia Writers’ Project study, 
Drums and Shadows , speculated: “I dohn guess yuh be bodduh 
much by duh spirits ef yuh gib em a good fewnul an put duh 
tings wut belong tuh em on top uh duh grave,” because the 
spirits don’t have to come back for them. After her former master 
had died, one of the ex-slaves on Frances Butler Leigh’s planta- 
tion placed a basin, water, and several towels on his grave, ex- 
plaining, “If massa’s spirit come, I want him see dat old Nanny 
not forget how he call every morning for water for wash his 
hands ...” Frances Butler Leigh records this incident as a mark 
of respect and affection shown by the former slave for her old 
master. It might be interpreted as well as an attempt to allay the 
ghost of the former master once and for all, so that Nanny need 
not be bothered with him ever again . 106

Among the black folk of the United States, the West Indies, 
and West Africa it is commonly held that the crossroads are places 
of peculiar power for the exercise of evil magic. Another belief 
common to all three areas is the notion that a chicken with frizzy 
feathers can scratch up any harmful charms planted in its owner’s 
yard . 107Belief in the power of witches to leave their bodies at night and 
ride their victims was common among black Americans, West 
Indians, and Africans. It was thought that salt or red pepper 
sprinkled on the skin of the absent witch would prevent her from 
reentering her body . 108

Many Afro-American witchcraft beliefs are European in origin. 
As such, they are a prime example of an area where there is a 
fusion of African and European folklore. The capacity of folk 
beliefs from different peoples to parallel and mutually influence 
one another makes the enterprise of separating one from another

86

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

not only difficult but also artificial and speculative. Here, perhaps, 
is a fitting place to end the search for Africanisms in black reli- 
gion in the United States.

The resolution of the Herskovits-Frazier debate lies in recog- 
nizing the true aspects of both positions. It is not a debate with a 
winner and a loser, for using differing perspectives, both are 
right. Herskovits was right in demolishing the myth of the Negro 
past, in suggesting topics for future research and in demonstrat- 
ing the mutual influence of cultures in the acculturative process. 
His theory of reinterpretation as a factor in cultural contact is an 
advance over the notion that a people’s beliefs, values, and beha- 
vioral patterns simply disappeared in the face of systematic op- 
pression. He did succeed in demonstrating that elements of Afri- 
can culture survived slavery in the United States. It is true that he 
sometimes overstated his case. But it is also true that critics have 
caricatured his position and failed to appreciate some of his sub- 
tler arguments.On the other hand, Frazier was also right. He was right in 
challenging excesses in Herskovits’ argument, in posing the ques- 
tion of African survivals in terms of significance or meaning and 
in keeping sight of the real differences between Afro-American 
cultures in the United States and elsewhere in the hemisphere. If 
he tended to undervalue instances of African survivals in the 
United States, he did maintain that the new situation was impor- 
tant in influencing slaves to develop a new world view and a new 
culture. While it is true that Africa influenced black culture in the 
United States, including black religion, it is also true that African 
theology and African ritual did not endure to the extent that they 
did in Cuba, Haiti, and Brazil. In the United States the gods of 
Africa died.

Why the gods died, why African theology and ritual did not 
survive here as elsewhere in the New World are questions which 
impinge on the developing field of study known as comparative 
slavery, an area which involves ethnography, sociology, econom- 
ics, demography, and history. A great deal of comparative study

DEATH OF THE GODS

87

remains to be done from the perspectives of all these disciplines. 
Until such study is more advanced than it is at the present time, 
only tentative conclusions can be reached about the discrepancy 
between African retentions in Latin America and the United 
States.

Hemispheric Perspectives: Differing ContextsHemispheric Perspectives: Differing Contexts

Why have African gods and rituals been able to survive so vigor- 
ously in several countries but not in the United States? To answer 
this question a number of reasons have been suggested. One ex- 
planation is that Catholicism was more conducive to the survival 
of African religion than was Protestanism. Though this explana- 
tion is only partial, it has some validity. As noted previously, 
certain customs of Catholicism proved to be supportive of some 
practices of African religions among the slaves of the French, 
Spanish, and Portuguese colonies. In Haiti, Cuba, and Brazil, 
Catholic devotion to the Blessed Virgin and to the saints offered a 
rich context for syncretism with the gods of Africa. The use of 
sacramentals (blessed objects), such as statues, pictures, candles, 
incense, holy water, rosaries, vestments, and relics, in Catholic 
ritual was more akin to the spirit of African piety than the sparse- 
ness of Puritan America, which held such objects to be idolatrous. 
Holy days, processions, saints’ feasts, days of fast and abstinence 
were all recognizable to the African who had observed the sacred 
days, festivals, and food taboos of his gods.

Moreover, the Catholic Church, in Brazil and Cuba, presented 
the slaves with an institutional mechanism for the preservation of 
African religion in the organization of religious fraternities. To 
the extent that religious brotherhoods were organized around 
groups of slaves from the same or neighboring geographical 
areas of Africa, they offered an opportunity for regroupment and 
allowed the slaves and freedmen to preserve particular African 
customs and, to a limited degree, languages. They also provided 
a structure for cult organization and a covert setting for syncre-

88

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

tisms of African and Catholic devotions. Herbert S. Klein, inves- 
tigating the brotherhoods in Cuba, reveals their role in preserv- 
ing African customs:88

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

tisms of African and Catholic devotions. Herbert S. Klein, inves- 
tigating the brotherhoods in Cuba, reveals their role in preserv- 
ing African customs:

. . . the African cofradias [confraternities] played a vital role 
in the social life of both slaves and ffeedmen, with their own 
saints and special functions in various holy marches and carni- 
vals. Usually organized along lines of regional African origins, 
with its members coming from the same nation . . . these asso- 
ciations were both of a religious and strongly benevolent na- 
ture ... In the great religious processions the Negro cabildos 
played an increasingly important part. Although outright Af- 
rican fetishes were quickly prohibited from display, the local 
saints and virgins showed so much influence of African my- 
thology and even of African costume that these displays often 
tended to perpetuate pre-New World patterns and beliefs . 109The nature, then, of Catholic piety with its veneration of saints, 
use of sacramentals, and organization of religious fraternities 
among the slaves offered a supportive context for the continuity of 
African religious elements in recognizable form. In contrast, 
American Evangelical Protestantism, with its emphasis on bibli- 
cal preaching, inward conversion, and credible accounts of the 
signs of grace, was not as conducive to syncretism with African 
theology and ritual. The contrast between Catholic America and 
Protestant America as an explanation for African retentions must 
not be pressed too far, for in Jamaica, for example, Cumina, Poco- 
mania, and Revival groups represent clear syntheses of Protestant 
and African religions (with some additions from Catholicism). In 
more subtle form the Spiritual Baptists, or Shouters, of Trinidad 
also prove the ability of Afro-Americans to continue some Afri- 
can-style customs along with a fundamentalistic Protestanism. 
Conversely, Afro-Americans in Louisiana were able to preserve 
only a vestige of the African pantheons and rituals (as far as can 
be determined), despite the presence of Catholicism during the 
periods of French and Spanish rule. Even the attenuated voodoo 
cult in Louisiana owed its strength to the influx of refugees from

DEATH OF THE GODS

89

Saint-Domingue (now Haiti). It appears that factors other than 
religious differences must be taken into account.DEATH OF THE GODS

89

Saint-Domingue (now Haiti). It appears that factors other than 
religious differences must be taken into account.

Demographic factors also determined differences in degrees of 
African retention in Latin and British America. As both Frazier 
and Herskovits observed, the ratio of blacks to whites was much 
greater on the plantations of Latin America than it was on the 
plantations of the United States. In the tropics large plantations 
were worked by huge gangs of slaves, but in the United States 
the large plantation with hundreds of slaves was relatively rare. In 
the American South, where average slave population was compa- 
ratively small, contact between whites and blacks was more fre- 
quent than was usual in French, Spanish, and Portuguese colo- 
nies or, for that matter, in the British West Indies. Herskovits, 
using data from U.B. Phillips, summarized this distinction in the 
following statement:

In the earliest days, the number of slaves in the U.S. in pro- 
portion to their masters was extremely small, and though as 
time went on thousands and tens of thousands of slaves were 
brought to satisfy the demands of the southern plantations, 
nonetheless the Negroes lived in constant association with 
whites to a degree not found anywhere else in the New 
World . 110

As a matter of fact, in the Sea Islands, where the opposite 
conditions prevailed — a large slave population isolated from con- 
tact with white culture — the strongest incidence of African reten- 
tions in the United States were found. In comparison with slaves 
of the Piedmont area, the coastal and Sea Island blacks were far 
less acculturated to white America until fairly recent times. 111In addition, Curtin’s census injects a further demographic fac- 
tor into the discussion of differences between the slave population 
in the United States and tropical America. The distribution of 
Africans imported into New World slavery was not uniform 
throughout the hemisphere. Once again, the United States was 
unique. Of the total number of 9,566,000 African slaves imported 
into America from the beginning of the trade to 1861, only about

90

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

427,000 went to England’s colonies on the North American con- 
tinent and to the United States. (The figure includes 28,000 
imported by French and Spanish Louisiana.) Thus the United 
States and Canada imported only 4 Vz percent of the total number 
of Africans imported into the New World. 112 A clearer picture of 
this inconsistent distribution emerges when importation figures 
are linked with the geographical areas of the importing colonies. 
Using Curtin’s figures, C. Vann Woodward states that:

The islands of the Greater Antilles . . . with an area roughly 
one third that of Texas, imported nearly six times the slaves 
landed in the entire territory of the United States. Of these 
islands, Saint Domingue ... by 1794, had imported 864,000 
or more than twice the total number of the United States. 
Jamaica had taken in 748,000 by the end of the legal trade in 
1808, and Cuba which continued to import Africans for 
another half century or more, received 702,000. In fact, Cuba 
took in more after 1808 than the United States received in 
all. 113Brazil, roughtly comparable in size to the continental United 
States plus Alaska, imported approximately 3,647,000 slaves, 
eight and a half times the number that the United States received. 
Thus, comparatively speaking, “the United States was only a 
marginal recipient of slaves from Africa.” 114 
The amazing and as yet unexplained demographic fact, how- 
ever, is the rate of natural increase of the U.S. slave population. 
By the time of emancipation in 1 865 the number of slaves in the 
United States had grown to above four million, a figure ten times 
the number imported from abroad. In contrast, Saint-Domingue, 
which had imported 864,000 Africans, had by the end of the 
slave trade and of slavery in 1794 a slave population of 480,000. 
In 1834 emancipation freed 781,000 slaves in the British West 
Indies, but 1,665,000 had been imported during the centuries of 
slavery. Jamaica’s freedmen numbered 311,000, though 748,000 
Africans had been brought in as slaves. By the end of slavery in 
the Dutch colonies there was a freed slave population no larger

DEATH OF THE GODS

91

than 20 percent of an estimated half million that had been 
imported.DEATH OF THE GODS

91

than 20 percent of an estimated half million that had been 
imported.

Another method of demonstrating the uniqueness of the 
growth rate of the U.S. slave population is to make a comparison 
of modern racial statistics. Allowing for the problems involved in 
the procedure — such as the difficulty in identifying race — it ap- 
pears that by the mid-twentieth century North America held 31.1 
percent of the New World population of African descent, despite 
the fact that North America accounted for only 4 Vs percent of the 
total figure for Africans imported. In comparison, the Caribbean 
Islands, which had imported 43 percent, accounted for only 20 
percent of the Afro-American population by mid-century; and 
Cuba, with 7-3 percent of the imports held 3 percent of the New 
World Negro population. Brazil, which had imported the largest 
number, comprising 38.1 percent, contained 36.6 percent by 
mid-century. 115

If Afro-Brazilians had increased at the rate of the U.S. Negro 
population, they would have totaled 127,645,000 by the mid- 
twentieth century, twice the number of Afro-Americans estimated 
for the whole Western hemisphere. Instead the figure was

17.529.000. At the U.S. rate of increase, Afro-Cubans would 
have numbered 24,570,000 by mid-century rather than the actual

1.224.000. * 1617.529.000. At the U.S. rate of increase, Afro-Cubans would 
have numbered 24,570,000 by mid-century rather than the actual

1.224.000. * 16

Thus the slave population of the British continental colonies 
and the United States had a rate of natural increase unique in the 
hemisphere. In Brazil and the West Indies the mortality rate of 
slaves for long periods of slavery exceeded the birth rate by wide 
margins. Why was this so? Planters in Brazil and the West Indies 
during some periods of the Atlantic slave trade found it more 
economical to supply their demand for slaves by importation 
rather than by encouraging them to reproduce. The cheapness of 
supply led them to regard slave reproduction with indifference if 
not hostility. According to Woodward, “Brazilian planters took 
no pains to balance the sexes among slaves and imported three or 
four times as many males as females.” 117 In the United States the

92

THE AFRICAN HERITAGE

ratio of female to male slaves was nearer parity. The high mortal- 
ity rate of slaves in Latin America also was due to decimation by 
tropical diseases, which, of course, were less rampant in more 
temperate climes. It must be admitted, however, that the reasons 
so far suggested do not explain adequately the completely atypical 
growth of the slave population in the United States.

Thus the bulk of the slave population in North America was 
native-born. In the United States the influx of Africans and of 
African cultural influence was far less extensive than in the Carib- 
bean and in Brazil. In North America a relatively small number of 
Africans found themselves enslaved amid a rapidly increasing na- 
tive-born population whose memories of the African past grew 
fainter with each passing generation.The character of the religious milieu, the average number of 
slaves on plantations, and the number of Africans in the slave 
population were all factors in the survival or loss of African cul- 
ture. In the United States all these factors tended to inhibit the 
survival of African culture and religion. It was not possible to 
maintain the rites of worship, the priesthood, or the “national” 
identities which were the vehicles and supports for African theol- 
ogy and cult organization. Nevertheless, even as the gods of Af- 
rica gave way to the God of Christianity, the African heritage of 
singing, dancing, spirit possession, and magic continued to 
influence Afro-American spirituals, ring shouts, and folk beliefs. 
That this was so is evidence of the slaves’ ability not only to adapt 
to new contexts but to do so creatively.

The Invisible Institution

This page intentionally left blank

3

Cathechesis and Conversion

Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost . . .

MATTHEW 28:19

ROM THE very beginning of 
the Atlantic slave trade, conversion of the slaves to Christianity 
was viewed by the emerging nations of Western Christendom as a 
justification for enslavement of Africans. When Portuguese cara- 
vels returned from the coast of West Africa with human booty in 
the fifteenth century, Gomes Eannes De Azurara, a chronicler of 
their achievements, observed that “the greater benefit" belonged 
not to the Portuguese adventurers but to the captive Africans, 
“for though their bodies were now brought into some subjection, 
that was a small matter in comparison of their souls, which would 
now possess true freedom for evermore .” 1Pangs of guilt over the cruelty inherent in enslaving fellow 
human beings were assuaged by emphasizing the grace of faith 
made available to Africans, who otherwise would die as pagans. 
Azurara’s pity was aroused by the tragic scene of a shipload of 
captives being divided and parceled out to their owners.

But what heart could be so hard as not to be pierced with 
piteous feeling to see that company? For some kept their 
heads low and their faces bathed in tears, looking one upon 
another; others stood groaning very dolorously, looking up 
to the height of heaven . . . crying out loudly, as if asking 
help of the Father of Nature; others struck their faces with 
the palms of their hands, throwing themselves at full length 
upon the ground; others made their lamentations in the man- 
ner of a dirge, after the custom of their country. And though 
we could not understand the words of their language, the 
sound of it right well accorded with the measure of their 
sadness. But to increase their sufferings . . . those who had 
charge of the division of the captives . . . began to separate 
one from another ... to part fathers from sons, husbands 
from wives, brothers from brothers. No respect was shown 
either to friends or relations, but each fell where his lot took 
him. . . . And you who are so busy in making that division of 
the captives, look with pity upon such misery; and see how 
they cling one to the other, so that you can hardly separate 
them.

96

CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

97

Azurara took solace in the feet that these slaves benefited not 
only spiritually but also materially from contact with Western 
civilization.96

CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

97

Azurara took solace in the feet that these slaves benefited not 
only spiritually but also materially from contact with Western 
civilization.

And so their lot was now quite the contrary of what it had 
been; since before they had lived in perdition of soul and 
body; of their souls, in that they were yet pagans, without the 
clearness and the light of the holy faith; and of their bodies, in 
that they lived like beasts, without any custom of reasonable 
beings — for they had no knowledge of bread or wine, and 
they were without the covering of clothes, or the lodgement of 
houses; and worse than all, they had no understanding of 
good, but only knew how to live in bestial sloth. 2

Azurara’s rationalization, stated in mid-fifteenth century, was to 
be repeated for over four centuries by successive generations of 
Christian apologists for slavery.

Religious Instruction

England, no less than Spain, Portugal, the Netherlands, and 
France, proclaimed missionary zeal as an important motive for 
colonizing the New World. The duty of Christianizing slaves as 
well as Indians was urged upon the Council for Foreign Planta- 
tions by Charles II in 1660. His instructions to the council read in 
part:

And you are to consider how such of the Natives or such as 
are purchased by you from other parts to be servants or slaves 
may best be invited to the Christian Faith, and be made capa- 
ble of being baptized thereunto, it being to the honor of our 
Crowne and of the Protestant Religion that all persons in any 
of our Dominions should be taught the knowledge of God, 
and be made acquainted with the misteries of Salvation. 3

Instructions were sent out from the Crown to colonial governors, 
such as Culpeper of Virginia in 1682 and Dongan of New York 
in 1686, to do all within their power to “facilitate and encourage 
the Conversion of Negroes and Indians” to Christianity. 4 The

98

THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION”98

THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION”

task was all the more important because England feared that 
Catholic Spain and France were outstripping her in missionary 
zeal — a serious weakness in the contest for empire as well as a 
failure of the Protestant cause. 5

Despite the widely held justification of slavery as a means of 
spreading the gospel, and despite proclamations of the duty of 
Christian colonists to evangelize the heathen, the process of slave 
conversion was blocked by major obstacles, not the least of which 
was the antipathy of the colonists themselves. The economic 
profitability of his slaves, not their Christianization, held top pri- 
ority for the colonial planter. Writing in 1682, John Barbot noted 
the indifference of slave owners to their Christian duty:

. . . Christians in America . . . especially the Protestants . . . 
take very little care to have their slaves instructed ... as if it 
were not a positive duty incumbent on them, by the precepts 
of Christianity. . . . There, provided that the slaves can multi- 
ply, and work hard for the benefit of their masters, most men 
are well satisfied without the least thoughts of using their 
authority and endeavors to promote the good of the souls of 
those poor wretches.®

Morgan Godwin, an English divine who spent several years in 
Virginia, decried the priorities of the colonists in a sermon pub- 
lished in 1685 with the accusatory title “Trade preferr’d before 
Religion and Christ made to give place to Mammon.”One of the principal reasons for the refusal of English planters 
to allow their slaves to receive instructions was the fear that bap- 
tism would emancipate their slaves. The notion that if slaves were 
baptized, “they should, according to the laws of the British nation, 
and the canons of its church” be freed was legally vague but 
widely believed. 7 Repeatedly, would-be missionaries to the slaves 
complained that slaveholders refused them permission to catechize 
their slaves because baptism made it necessary to free them. Thus 
it seemed that the Christian commission to preach the gospel to 
all nations ran directly counter to the economic interest of the 
Christian slave owner. This dilemma was solved by colonial legis-

CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

99

lation. In 1664 the lower house of Maryland asked the upper 
house “to draw up an Act obliging negroes to serve durante 
vita ... for the prevencion of the dammage Masters of such Slaves 
must susteyne by such Slaves pretending to be Christ[e]ned [;] 
And soe pleade the lawe of England.” 8 By 1706 at least six colo- 
nial legislatures had passed acts denying that baptism altered the 
condition of a slave “as to his bondage or freedome.” Virginia’s 
was typical of the statutes enacted in expressing the hope “that 
diverse masters, freed from this doubt, may more carefully endea- 
vor the propagation of Christianity,” among their slaves. 9 But 
there still remained other impediments to the religious instruction 
of the slaves which were more difficult to remove.Even after colonial assemblies had declared baptism to be no 
threat to a planter’s legal right to hold Africans in perpetual bond- 
age, the process of religious instruction which had to precede 
baptism was seen by many slaveholders as an economic detriment. 
For a slave to be catechized adequately took time. The plantation 
work schedule gave the slave little leisure for religious instruction. 
Sunday was the only feasible day for instruction. Yet one of the 
constant complaints of missionaries was that slaves had to work 
on the Sabbath either for their masters or, when allotted individ- 
ual plots, for themselves. A letter to the London secretary of the 
Society for the Propagation of the Gospel from the Clergy of 
South Carolina in 1713 complained of “many planters who, to 
free themselves from the trouble of feeding and clothing their 
slaves, allow them one day in the week to clear ground, and plant 
for themselves as much as will clothe and subsist them and their 
families.” 10 The “one day in the week” allowed was usually Sun- 
day. Even when slaves were not forced to work on the Sabbath, 
finding time for religious instruction was problematic, since the 
minister had “work enough from the white folk on his hands.” 11 
Moreover, the slaves frequently used whatever leisure time they 
had for visiting, dancing, and merriment — activities which 
seemed to the missionary to be profanations of the Lord’s day. 
Exhorted by missionaries in America and instructed by officials in

100

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

London, some governors urged colonial legislatures to pass bills 
preventing masters from working slaves on Sunday or otherwise 
blocking their attendance at Sabbath worship. 12 While legislation 
might have modified a planter’s behavior, it did not necessarily 
alter his attitude against the instruction of slaves.Masters also objected to slave conversion because they believed 
that Africans were too “brutish” to be instructed. In part this 
objection was based on the linguistic and cultural barriers be- 
tween African-born (“Guinea”) slaves and English colonials. 
Even missionaries despaired of overcoming the linguistic and cul- 
tural gap and directed their attention primarily to children and to 
American-born slaves, who had some facility in English. Toward 
the end of the seventeenth century Col. Francis Nicholson, gover- 
nor of Virginia, was instructed by London to recommend to the 
Virginia Assembly that it pass laws ensuring the education of 
Indians and Negroes in the Christian faith. The Virginia House of 
Burgesses replied in 1699 to Nicholson that “the negroes bom in 
this country are generally baptised and brought up in the Chris- 
tian religion; but for negroes imported hither, the gross bestiality 
and rudeness of their manners, the variety and strangeness of their 
languages, and the weakness and shallowness of their minds, 
render it in a manner impossible to make any progress in their 
conversion." 13

Some planters went further than the Virginia legislators and 
argued that the Africans were incapable of instruction, not only 
because of cultural differences but because of racial distinctions. 
The eminent philosopher Bishop Berkeley complained in 1731 
about the American colonists that their “ancient antipathy to the 
Indians . . . together with an irrational contempt for the Blacks, as 
creatures of another species, who had no right to be instructed or 
admitted to the sacraments; have proved a main obstacle to the 
conversion of these poor people.” 14 Repeatedly the clergy had to 
remind their charges that black people were equal to whites in the 
sight of God. Francis Le Jau, missionary to Goose Creek, South 
Carolina, reported in 1709 that “Many Masters can’t be per-

CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

101CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

101

suaded that Negroes and Indians are otherwise than Beasts, and 
use them like such,” but “I endeavor to let them know better 
things.” 15 In a letter “To the Masters and Mistresses of Families 
in the English Plantations Abroad,” published in 1727 and dis- 
tributed by the thousands in the colonies, Edmund Gibson, 
bishop of London, exhorted colonial slaveholders “to Encourage 
and Promote the Instruction of their Negroes in the Christian 
Faith” and “to consider Them, not merely as Slaves, and upon the 
same Level with Labouring Beasts, but as Men -Slaves and 
Women -Slaves, who have the same Frame and Faculties with your- 
selves, and have Souls capable of being made eternally happy, and 
Reason and Understanding to receive Instruction in order to it.” 16 
Morgan Godwin argued the humanity of slaves on anthropo- 
logical grounds: “Methinks that the consideration of the shape 
and figure of our Negroes Bodies, their Limbs and Members, 
their Voice and Countenance in all things according with other 
Men’s together with their Risibility and Discourse (man’s pecu- 
liar Faculties) should be sufficient conviction.” 17 Cotton Mather, 
in his tract The Negro Christianized (1706), with Puritan thor- 
oughness ranged scriptural verse and logical argument against 
those who denied the Negro’s humanity. “Show your Selves 
Men,” Mather challenged, “and let Rational Arguments have their 
Force upon you, to make you treat, not as Bruits but as Men, 
those Rational Creatures whom God has made your Servants .” 
Later on in the same tract Mather forcifully argued:

One Table of the Ten Commandments, has this for the Sum 
of it; Thou Shalt Love thy Neighbour as thy Self. Man, Thy 
Negro is thy Neighbour. Twere an Ignorance, unworthy of a 
Man to imagine otherwise. Yea, if thou dost grant That God 
hath made of one Blood , all Nations of men; he is thy Brother , 
too.At this point clerical apologists for the slave’s humanity began to 
converge on what the planter saw as dangerous ground. To urge 
the slave’s humanity was one thing; to declare his “equal Right 
with other Men, to the Exercises and Privileges of Religion ” was

102 “THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION"

another. 18 The danger beneath the arguments for slave conversion 
which many masters feared was the egalitarianism implicit in 
Christianity. The most serious obstacle to the missionary’s access 
to the slaves was the slaveholder’s vague awareness that a Chris- 
tian slave would have some claim to fellowship, a claim that 
threatened the security of the master-slave hierarchy. Even after 
other fears had been removed by legislation or by argument, un- 
ease with the concept of spiritual equality between master and 
slave caused slave owners to reject the idea of Christianizing their 
slaves. Peter Kalm, a Swedish traveler in America from 1748-50, 
perceptively described the masters’ fears that Christianity would 
disrupt their relationship with their slaves:

It is likewise greatly to be pitied, that the masters of these 
negroes in most of the English colonies take little care of their 
spiritual welfare, and let them live on in their Pagan darkness. 
There are even some, who would be very ill pleased at, and 
would by all means hinder their negroes from being in- 
structed in the doctrines of Christianity; to this they are partly 
led by the conceit of its being shameful, to have a spiritual 
brother or sister among so despicable a people; partly by 
thinking that they should not be able to keep their negroes so 
meanly afterwards; and partly through fear of the negroes 
growing too proud, on seeing themselves upon a level with 
their masters in religious matters. 19A continual complaint of masters was that Christianity would 
ruin their slaves by making them “saucy,” since they would begin 
to think themselves equal to white folks. Bishop Thomas Seeker, 
in an anniversary sermon preached before the Society for the 
Propagation of the Gospel (S.P.G.) in 1740 or 1741, diagnosed 
the basic cause of the planters’ opposition: “ . . . some, it may be 
feared, have been averse to their slaves becoming Christians, be- 
cause, after that, no Pretence will remain for not treating them 
like Men.” 20 Two white parishioners of St. James Church in 
Goose Creek, South Carolina, expressed their aversion to Chris- 
tian slaves to Francis Le Jau, their minister. In a letter dated 
1711 Le Jau reported: “A few days ago I heard of some strange

CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

103

reasoning of my Neighbors. [W]hat, s[ai]d a Lady Considerable 
enough in any other respect but in that of sound knowledge; Is it 
Possible that any of my slaves could go to Heaven, & must I see 
them there!;]; a young Gent had s[ai]d sometime before that he is 
resolved never to come to the Holy Table while slaves are 
Rec[eive]d there.” 21

Slaveholders feared that Christianity would make their slaves 
not only proud but ungovernable, and even rebellious. The Rev- 
erend John Bragg of Saint Ann’s Parish in Virginia, for example, 
complained in 1724 that of the many Negro slaves in his parish 
very few had been baptized during his fifteen-year tenure, “nor 
any means used for their Conversion, the owners Generaly not 
approving thereof, being led away by the notion of their being 
and becoming worse slaves when Christians.” 22 In reply, almost 
every apologist for the evangelization of the slaves felt obliged to 
prove that Christianity would actually make better slaves. The 
answer penned by the bishop of London in 1727 was typical:And so far is Christianity from discharging Men from the 
Duties of the Station and Condition in which it found them, 
that it lays them under stronger Obligations to perform those 
Duties with the greatest Diligence and Fidelity; not only from 
the Fear of Men, but from a Sense of Duty to God, and the 
Belief and Expectation of a future Account . 23

Missionaries appealed to the profit motive by pointing out that 
converted slaves “do better for their Masters profit than formerly, 
for they are taught to serve out of Christian Love and Duty.” 24 
The missionaries labored to build a stout wall between spiritual 
and temporal equality and to uphold the doctrine expressed in an 
oft-quoted passage: “The Scripture, far from making any Altera- 
tion in Civil Rights, expressly directs, that every Man abide in the 
Condition wherein he is called , with great Indifference of Mind con- 
cerning outward circumstances.” 25 Thus, as Winthrop Jordan has 
aptly put it, “These clergy men had been forced by the circum- 
stance of racial slavery in America into propagating the Gospel by 
presenting it as an attractive device for slave control.” 26

104

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION”

The opposition of slaveholders was not the only factor impair- 
ing the conversion of slaves; indeed, not all slaveholders opposed 
conversion. In 1724 William Black, who had labored for sixteen 
years as minister in Accomako, Virginia, informed the bishop of 
London that he had baptized about two hundred slaves since his 
arrival and had leave to “instruct them at their Masters’ houses.” 27 
Ebenezer Taylor, missionary to St. Andrew’s Parish in South 
Carolina from 1711 to 1717, praised the efforts of two of his 
parishoners:Mrs. Haige and Mrs. Edwards, who came lately to this Plan- 
tation [Carolina], have taken extra-ordinary pains to instruct a 
considerble number of Negroes, in the principles of the Chris- 
tian Religion, and to reclaim and reform them. The wonderful 
success they met with, in about half a year’s time, encouraged 
me to go and to examine those Negroes, about their 
Knowledge in Christianity; they declared to me their Faith in 
the chief articles of our Religion, which they sufficiently ex- 
plained; they rehearsed by heart, very distinctly, the Creed, 
the Lord’s Prayer, and Ten Commandments; fourteen of them 
give me so great satisfaction, and were so desirous to be bap- 
tized, that I thought it my duty to do it on the last Lord’s 
Day. I doubt not but these Gentlewomen will prepare the rest 
of them for Baptism in a little time; and I hope the good 
example of these two Gentlewomen will provoke at least some 
Masters and Mistresses, to take the same care and pains with 
their poor Negroes . 28

Their efforts were indeed extraordinary when compared with the 
indifference of most masters. Part of the problem was the religious 
milieu itself. In the Southern colonies, which had the largest con- 
centration of slaves, the religious situation for white colonists was 
unsettled. Clergy were in short supply. Even in Virginia, where 
the established Church of England was perhaps on its firmest 
footing, “in 1701 nearly half of the forty to forty-six parishes 
containing 40,000 people, were unsupplied with Clergy.” 
Though the colony of Georgia had been divided into eight par- 
ishes, by 1769 there were only two churches built and they were

CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

105CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

105

a hundred and fifty miles apart. In 1701 “more than one-half of 
the 7,000 colonists” of South Carolina “(to say nothing of the 
negroes and Indians) were themselves living regardless of any 
religion, there being only one Church (at Charleston), no schools 
and few dissenting teachers of any kind.” Samuel Frink, an 
S.P.G. missionary, said of the religious condition of the Georgia 
settlers:

They seem in general to have but very little more knowledge 
of a Saviour than the aboriginal natives. Many hundreds of 
poor people, both parents and children, in the interior of the 
province, have no opportunity of being instructed in the prin- 
ciples of Christianity or even in the being of a God, any 
further than nature dictates . 89

In 1724 Hugh Jones reported that North Carolina needed missi- 
onaries “not only for the Conversion of the Indians and Baptism of 
Negroes there, but for the Christening and Recovery to the Practi- 
cal Profession of the Gospel great Numbers of English, that have 
but the bare name of God and Christ; and that too frequently in 
nothing but vain Swearing, Cursing and imprecations.” 30 While 
ecclesiastical authorities undoubtedly overestimated the danger of 
Christian Englishmen reverting to paganism in the wilds of the 
North American frontier, it is true that the Southern colonists 
were in need of missionaries.Where ministers were present, they found themselves tending 
parishes of vast size. Besides long distances to travel, danger from 
illness and disease, and the unsettled character of colonial life, the 
Anglican clergy were often dependent upon the local vestry, con- 
trolled by the planter class, for their livings and status. The power 
of the vestry can be seen from the frequent complaints of colonial 
clergymen that they were refused induction into their livings. One 
wrote an “Account of the State of the Church in Virginia” for the 
bishop of London in 1724 in which he outlined the situation: “I 
have never been inducted into my living. ... the Parishioners are 
very defective being . . . adverse from . . . committing themselves 
solely to the care of one Shepherd, which may be informed from

106

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

their . . . dislike of Induction; so that Induction is very little prac- 
ticed here. . . . That hereby they would reserve to themselves this 
handle of restraint on the Ministry, of not being bound to a 
Minister . . . lest he should afterwards prove disagreeable to them, 
in which case they might the more easily cast him off for another 
more suitable to their humour. . . . ” 31 Because the closest bishop 
was in London, the established church was in no position to 
execute its policy with regard to slave conversion in the colonial 
South.A contemporary attempt to determine the religious situation in 
the southern colonies, including the extent of instruction among 
slaves, was undertaken by the bishop of London in 1724 by 
means of a series of “Queries to be Answered by every Minister.” 
Among the questions was the following: “Are there any Infidels, 
bond or free, within your Parish; and what means are used for 
their conversion?” Of the written replies extant, thirty clergymen 
from Virginia and nineteen from Maryland attempted to inform 
the bishop about their efforts on behalf of the slaves. While several 
claimed some limited success in instructing slaves and a very few 
reported that slave baptisms were common, the majority of the 
respondents were significantly vague about accomplishments, 
proclaimed intentions of doing better, and offered much more 
information about the problems involved in catechizing slaves 
than about their own effectiveness. It appears from the responses 
to the bishop’s questionnaire that the only means used by the 
majority of the clergy to convert slaves was Sunday preaching, 
coupled with an occasional meeting for catechism lessons and 
appeals to masters to instruct their slaves at home, appeals which 
too often fell on deaf ears. A typical response was penned by 
George Robertson, for thirty years pastor of Bristol Parish, on the 
upper part of the James River in Virginia: “I have several times 
exhorted their Masters to send such of them as could speak En- 
glish to Church to be catechised but they would not. Some 
masters instruct their Slaves at home and so bring them to bap- 
tism, but not many such.” John Brunskill, who in 1724 had

CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

107CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

107

ministered to Wilmington Parish in Virginia for over eight years, 
observed that without legal sanction the ministers’ appeals carried 
little weight: “The Negroes . . . cannot I think, be said to be of 
any Religion for as there is no law of the Colony obliging their 
Masters or Owners to instruct them in the principles of Christian- 
ity and so they are hardly to be persuaded by the Minister to take 
so much pains with them, by which means the poor creatures 
generally live and die without it.” 32

The responses of colonial Maryland and Virginia clergymen to 
the bishop of London’s “Queries” indicate that their commission 
to catechize the heathen, “bond or free,” was severely hampered 
by the planters’ reluctance and outright resistance, by the size of 
their parishes, by the scarcity of clergy, by linguistic and cultural 
difficulties with African-born slaves, by the absence of legal sup- 
port, and by the sheer size of the task. It was clear that something 
more than ordinary preaching and appeals to masters to instruct 
their slaves was necessary if slaves were to be brought to Chris- 
tianity in larger numbers in the colonial South. 33

The difficulty of persuading slaveholding colonists in Virginia 
to take an interest in the conversion of their slaves is reflected in 
an unusual proposal drafted in 1724, a proposal which in effect 
offered to masters a tax break for instructing their slaves and 
bringing them to baptism:

A PROPOSITION for encouraging the Christian Education of 
Indians, Negroes and Mulatto ChildrenA PROPOSITION for encouraging the Christian Education of 
Indians, Negroes and Mulatto Children

It being a duty of Christianity, very much neglected by 
masters and mistresses of this country to endeavour the good 
instruction and Education of their Heathen Slaves, in the 
Christian faith, the said duty being likewise earnestly recom- 
mended by his Majesty’s Instructions for the facilitating 
thereof amongst the young slaves that are born among us (the 
old ones that are imported into the country by reason of their 
not understanding the Language being much more indocile).

It is therefore humbly proposed that every Indian, negro or 
mulatto child that shall be baptized and afterwards brought to 
church and publicly catechised by the minister and in church

108

“THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

before the 14th year of his or her age, shall give a distinct 
account of the Creed, Lord’s Prayer and Ten Commandments 
and whose master or mistress shall receive a Certificate from 
the minister that he or she hath so done, such Indian, negro or 
mulatto child shall be exempted from paying all levies till the 
age of 18 years, but whatsoever Indian, negro or mulatto child 
shall not be baptized nor give such public account of his or 
her faith, nor whose master or mistress receives no such 
certificate as aforesaid shall pay levies at the age of 14 years for 
it is humbly supposed the advantage of 4 years’ difference in 
levies will have great effects to this purpose. 34In Puritan New England, where religious life was more settled 
and where slaves might have come into contact with an environ- 
ment of strong religious nurture, there were comparatively few 
slaves. New Englanders generally shared the attitudes of other 
colonists concerning conversion of their slaves. In Magnolia 
Christi Americana (1702) Cotton Mather found it necessary to 
criticize those Puritan slaveholders who “deride, neglect, and op- 
pose all due means of bringing their poor negroes unto our Lord.” 
New England divines, such as Mather and John Eliot, who was a 
missionary to Indians as well as to Negroes, complained that the 
“English used their Negro’s but as their Horses or their Oxen , and 
that so little care was taken about their immortal Souls.” 35 Even 
though the Christian Directory of the English Puritan theologian 
Richard Baxter directed masters to “Make it your chief end in 
buying and using slaves to win them to Christ and save their souls,” 
many New England colonists seemed to be more Yankee than 
Puritan in carrying out the duties of their calling as slaveholders. 
In 1705 the Athenian Oracle sarcastically remarked: “Talk to a 
Planter of the Soul of a Negro and he’ll be apt to tell ye (or as least 
his actions speak it loudly) that the body of one of them maybe 
worth twenty pounds; but the souls of an hundred of them would 
not yield him one farthing.” 36

Some efforts were made, however. The first recorded instance 
of a slave’s baptism in New England occurred in 1641, when, 
according to John Winthrop, “a Negro woman belonging to Rev.

CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

109CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

109

Stoughton of Dorchester, Massachusetts, being well approved by 
divers years experience for sound knowledge and true godliness 
was received into the Church and baptized.” John Eliot volun- 
teered to instruct slaves once a week if masters would only send 
them to him. Mather organized a Society of Negroes in 1693 
which met, with the permission of each slave’s master, every Sun- 
day evening. Mather drew up a rule of conduct for the society and 
on Sunday evenings the slaves heard a sermon and were taught to 
pray, sing and recite the catechism. 37

A group of “ministers of the Gospel” petitioned the general 
court of Massachusetts in May of 1694 to pass a bill denying that 
baptism bestowed freedom to the slaves, though there is no record 
that the legislature heeded their memorial. The General Assem- 
bly of the Colony of Connecticut was asked to deliberate two 
issues concerning baptism of slaves in 1738: first, “whether the 
infant slaves of Christian masters may be baptized in their 
master’s right, provided they suitably promise and engage to 
bring them up in the ways of religion”; and second, whether the 
masters were duty-bound to “offer such children [for baptism]” 
and make the aforesaid promise. The Assembly answered yes to 
both queries. 38In 1773 Rev. Samuel Hopkins of Newport, Rhode Island, hit 
upon a scheme to evangelize Africa with converted slaves from 
America. Hopkins persuaded Ezra Stiles to participate in his plan 
and they successfully sought funding. Two black members of 
Hopkins’ church — one a slave, named Bristol Yamma, the other a 
freedman, John Quamino — were picked for training under the 
tutelage of President Witherspoon of the College of New Jersey. 
The Revolutionary War and Quamino’s death in 1779 frustrated 
this project. 39 Those New England slaves who, like Phillis Wheat- 
ley, were regarded as members of the family, were included in 
family prayers, Bible reading, and religious instruction. One 
method of instruction consisted in the master or mistress examin- 
ing a slave about the previous Sabbath’s sermon. In New England 
meetinghouses the slaves listened to sermons segregated in gal-

110

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION"

leries, comers, or rear pews. When black Puritans died they were 
still segregated from whites in graveyards. Black church members 
were generally not allowed to participate in church government. 
It is impossible to speak with accuracy about the number of slaves 
converted, but the most detailed history of the Negro in colonial 
New England concludes: “Although relatively larger numbers of 
slaves may have been Christianized in New England than in the 
plantation colonies, it is likely that at the end of the colonial era in 
1776 a large proportion — possibly a majority — of the slaves in 
that section were still heathen.” 40Presbyterian, Baptist and Methodist efforts to convert the 
slaves were primarily part of the revivalist fervor of the Great 
Awakening (which will be discussed later). Quakers, despite ex- 
hortations from George Fox in 1657 and William Edmundson in 
1676 to instruct and educate their slaves, showed no great zeal to 
do so. Fox, in a tract entitled Gospel Family Order , reminded 
slaveholding Quakers that “Christ died for all . . . for the tawnies 
and for the blacks as well as for you that are called whites.” Fox 
concluded not only that slaves should be instructed but that 
masters should “let them go free after a considerable term of 
years,” and with some compensation for their labor. 41 Similarly, 
Edmundson in an open letter to Friends in America made a con- 
nection between spiritual and temporal freedom that most seven- 
teenth-century Christians did not admit:

And it would be acceptable with God, and answer the witness 
in all, if you did consider their condition of perpetual slavery, 
and make their conditions your own, and so fulfill the law of 
Christ. For perpetual slavery is an aggravation, and an oppres- 
sion upon the mind, and hath a ground; and Truth is that 
which works the remedy, and breaks the yoke, and removes 
the ground. So it would do well to consider that they may 
feel, see, and partake of your liberty in the gospel of Christ . . . 
that they may see and know the difference between you and 
other people, and your self-denial may be known to all.

In a postscript Edmundson asked: “And many of you count it

CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

111

unlawful to make slaves of the Indians: and if so, then why the 
Negroes?” 42In a postscript Edmundson asked: “And many of you count it

CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

111

unlawful to make slaves of the Indians: and if so, then why the 
Negroes?” 42

In 1688 a group of Germantown, Pennsylvania, Friends passed 
a formal remonstrance against slavery to the local meeting. “Is 
there,” they asked, “any [among us] that would be done or han- 
dled at this manner? viz., to be sold or made a slave for all the 
time of his life?” 43 From these tentative beginnings the Quaker 
antislavery witness grew to loud and forceful denunciations by 
Friends such as Ralph Sandiford, Benjamin Lay, John Woolman, 
and Anthony Benezet. However, very few American Negroes be- 
came members of the Society of Friends. Part of the explanation 
for this is that the Friends’ antislavery stance denied them access 
to slaves. Because Quakers had a reputation for condemning slav- 
ery, the Virginia Legislature in 1672 forbade Friends to admit 
Negroes to their meetings. Another reason is the failure of 
Friends to proselyte slaves or free blacks. It was reported that 
when it came to religious instruction, Quakers in Delaware left 
their slaves to “the natural light.” The prejudice of some Quakers 
against black candidates for admission caused the Philadelphia 
Yearly Meeting in 1796 to incorporate a rule into the Discipline 
which stated that applications for membership ought henceforth 
to be received “without respect of persons or color.” 44

English bishops challenged the Protestant colonists to live up 
to the example of the Catholic missions in evangelizing the Indi- 
ans and the African slaves. Occasionally a missionary to the Brit- 
ish colonies came across slaves who had been baptized by a 
French, Spanish, or Portuguese missionary. An S.P.G. mission- 
ary to South Carolina reported:

I have in this parish a few negroe slaves and were bom and 
baptized among the Portuguese, but speak very good English.I have in this parish a few negroe slaves and were bom and 
baptized among the Portuguese, but speak very good English.

They came to church and are well instructed so as to express a 
great desire to receive the communion amongst us. I proposed 
to them to declare openly their adjuring the errors of the 
Romish Church without which declaration I could not receive 
them. ... I require of them their renouncing of those particu-

112

THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION”

lar points, the chief of which is praying to the Saints and that 
they must not return to the Popish Worship in case they 
shou’d be sent to Medera again . 45

Slaves in the British colonies of North America were not likely to 
be exposed to the “errors of the Romish Church” unless they lived 
in Maryland, the only colony with a sizable Catholic presence. 
Catholic settlers in Maryland, including Jesuits, owned slaves. 
The first estimate of the number of Catholic slaves was made in 
1785 by John Carroll, superior of the American missions, in his 
report to Rome on the state of the Church in the United States. 
Carroll related that there were 15,800 Catholics in Maryland of 
whom more than three thousand were “slaves of all ages of Afri- 
can origin, called Negroes,” and that in Pennslyvania there were 
about seven thousand Catholics, “very few of whom are negroes.” 
Catholic efforts to convert slaves were debilitated by some of the 
same difficulties, such as the lack of clergy and the attitudes of 
slaveholders, faced by the Protestants. At the time of Carroll’s 
report, nineteen priests in Maryland and five in Pennsylvania 
constituted the entire clergy for the Catholic Church in the 
United States. Of these twenty-four, two were over the age of 
seventy and three more were “very near that age.” Carroll had 
heard that there were Catholics scattered in other states “who are 
utterly deprived of all religious ministry.” The Catholic laity came 
under criticism for failing to instruct their slaves:The abuses which have grown among the Catholics are 
chiefly those which result from unavoidable intercourse with 
non-Catholics, and the example thence derived: namely . . . 
among other things a genera] lack of care in instructing their 
children and especially the Negro slaves in their religion; as 
these people are kept constantly at work, so that they rarely 
hear any instructions from the priest, unless they can spend a 
short time with one; and most of them are consequently very 
dull in faith and depraved in morals. It can scarcely be be- 
lieved how much trouble and care they give the pastor of 
souls . 46

CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

113

Carroll’s complaint, except for the sentence accusing non-Catho- 
lics of bad example, could have been written by any Protestant 
cleric.CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

113

Carroll’s complaint, except for the sentence accusing non-Catho- 
lics of bad example, could have been written by any Protestant 
cleric.

In the Catholic colony of Louisiana, Bienville’s Code Noir of 
1724 required masters to instruct slaves in the doctrines of the 
Church. But there is little evidence that the French planters were 
any more diligent about catechizing slaves than were their En- 
glish counterparts. In 1724, the very year in which the bishop of 
London questioned his American clergy about slave instruction, 
Father Raphael de Luxembourg, superior of the Capuchin mis- 
sions in Louisiana, reported a number of obstacles to missionary 
work among the slaves. His report complained of conditions strik- 
ingly similar to those described by the Anglican clergy of Vir- 
ginia. The Indian and Negro mission had been assigned to the 
Capuchins, but two years after their arrival in Louisiana in 1722 
he still did not have missionaries enough to adequately minister to 
the French, let alone Indians and Negroes. According to Father 
Raphael, the distance of plantations from missionary stations, the 
need for boats in order to travel the waterways to those planta- 
tions where slaves were most numerous, and, worst of all, the 
general impiety of masters, some of whom forced slaves to work 
on Sundays and feast days severely restricted the Capuchin mis- 
sion to the slaves. 47On the other hand, some Louisiana planters did cooperate with 
the missionaries and at least could not object, as did the English 
colonists, that baptism necessitated emancipation. It was by no 
means uncommon for masters and mistresses to stand sponsor for 
slave baptisms, and parish church registers of the colonial period 
indicate that baptisms of Negroes and mulattoes were frequent. In 
the Capuchin missions Holy Saturday and the Vigil of Pentecost 
were annual occasions for the baptism of large groups of slaves 
and free blacks. According to John Gillard, records of the St. 
Louis parish church list as many as seventy-five and a hundred 
blacks baptized in a single day. But baptism was one thing, in- 
struction another. The very method of large-scale group baptism

114

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’114

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

calls into question the thoroughness of instruction, particularly in 
the rural areas remote from churches and priests. In 1789 the 
Spanish government issued orders that planters contribute to sup- 
port chaplains whose duties would include instruction of slaves 
upon the plantations. The planters objected that, as it was, there 
were not enough clergymen to fill the vacancies in the regular 
parishes, that they could not afford to support chaplains, and that 
plantations were too far apart for one person to serve as chaplain 
for several of them. As late as 1823, twenty years after the Ameri- 
can acquisition of Louisiana, Father John Mary Odin, later arch- 
bishop of New Orleans, complained that still “in Lower Louisiana 
the French for the most part, do not wish you to speak of instruct- 
ing their slaves or of giving them the sacraments of matrimony; 
they are often not even permitted to go to church.” It was in the 
urban settlements that religious instruction for slaves became 
more feasible than it would be on the plantations for a long time. 
The stable presence of clergy, even though few in number, the 
existence of churches, and houses of religious afforded more op- 
portunities for the urban slave to encounter formal religious in- 
struction. In New Orleans, the Ursuline nuns, who arrived in the 
city in 1727, supplemented the efforts of the few priests to cate- 
chize the slaves and the free blacks. It appears that under the 
leadership of a succession of sisters the Ursuline Convent served 
as a center for the instruction of black Catholics in New Orleans 
from 1730 to 1824. 48 Generally, however, the instruction of 
slaves on the plantations of Catholic Louisiana was obstructed by 
the same circumstances that hindered the catechesis of slaves on 
the plantations of Protestant Virginia.While there were individual clergymen who reprimanded the 
planters for neglecting the salvation of their servants and who 
attempted to evangelize slaves when possible, it was not until the 
organization of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in 
Foreign Parts that an institutional attempt was made to confront 
the task of slave conversion in English colonial America. The 
society was founded in London in 1701 as a missionary arm of the

CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

115

Church of England to minister to the colonists of America and 
also to instruct the Indians and Negroes. Headed by the bishop of 
London, the society published tracts and sermons, sent out mission- 
aries and catechists, sought funds in England to help support the 
missions in the Americas, and even ran a plantation with over 300 
slaves in Barbados. Hampered by a lack of men and money, the 
S.P.G. missionaries had their hands full ministering to the needs 
of the white settlers. Nevertheless, some missionaries found the 
time and won the permission of slaveholders to catechize slaves, 
usually children, but with small success. 49

Progress in baptizing the slaves was slow, not merely because 
of the slaveholders’ objections but also because of the way in 
which the process of Christianization was carried out by the mission- 
aries. The Church of England stressed religious instruction in its 
efforts to convert the slaves. An example of this catechetical 
method was described by Francis Le Jau in 1710:Since it has pleased Almight God to bless me with health I 
have upon Sundays after our divine service, invited the ne- 
groes and Indian slaves to stay for half an hour ... we begin 
and end our particular assembly with the Collect Prevent us 0 
Lord etc. I teach them the Creed, the Lord’s Prayer, and the 
Commandments. I explain some portion of the catechism. I 
give them an entire liberty to ask questions. 1 endeavor to 
proportion my answers and all my instructions to their want 
and capacity. 50

The carefulness with which the Anglican missionary admitted 
slaves to baptism was exemplified by Le Jau’s practice of continu- 
ing catechumens on trial for two years. Le Jau explained: “I could 
easily multiply the number of slaves proselyted to Christianity but I 
put off their baptism and the receiving some persons to the holy 
table till we have a good testimony and proof of their life and con- 
versation.” 51 The Anglican catechist believed that eventually reli- 
gious instruction should include teaching the slaves to read. One of 
the first S.P.G. missionaries sent to the colonies, Samuel Thomas 
of Goose Creek, South Carolina (Le Jau’s predecessor), automati-

116

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

cally assumed a connection between Christian initiation and slave 
literacy when he reported in 1702 that he had taught twenty slaves 
to read while instructing them in the Christian faith. 52cally assumed a connection between Christian initiation and slave 
literacy when he reported in 1702 that he had taught twenty slaves 
to read while instructing them in the Christian faith. 52

The tendency of the S.P.G. to view the religious instruction of 
slaves as being equivalent to education led it to sponsor (in coop- 
eration with a benevolent society, the Associates of Dr. Bray) 
several Negro schools in the colonies. The schools established in 
Charlestown, South Carolina, and New York City proved to be 
among the more successful. In a letter written in 1740 which 
proposed the possibility of a Negro school, Alexander Garden, the 
bishop of London’s commissary in South Carolina, suggested that 
instruction be conducted “by Negro Schoolmasters, Home-bom, 
& equally Property as other Slaves, but educated for this Service, 
& employed in it during their Lives, as the others are in any other 
Service whatsoever.” 53Following Garden’s advice, the society purchased in 1742 two 
black teenagers, aged fourteen and fifteen, to be trained as 
teachers. Both youths, Harry and Andrew, had been baptized as 
infants. Garden had high praise for one: “He proves of an excel- 
lent Genius, & can now (in the Space of eight Months) read N. 
Testament exceedingly well.” “In six more,” Garden continued, 
“he will be throly qualified for the intended Service; & by that 
time, with God’s Blessing, I shall have a Schoolhouse ready ... & 
everything necessary prepared for his entering upon it here at 
Charlestown. . . . ” 54 Garden’s School for Negroes was opened on 
September 12, 1743, and lasted over twenty years, despite the 
fact that in 1740 the South Carolina Legislature, in reaction to 
the Stono Rebellion of 1739, had adopted a strict law against 
teaching slaves to write. 55 In 1746 Garden informed the society 
that the school had already trained twenty-eight children and was 
at that time instructing fifty-five more children during the day 
and fifteen adults in the evening. 56 The type of education offered 
can be inferred from Garden’s request to the society for the fol- 
lowing books: “100 Spelling Books, 50 Testaments, 50 Bibles, 
and 50 Psalters with Common Prayer.” 57

CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

117

The aim of the Charlestown Negro school was stated clearly by 
Commissary Garden in his letter of 1740:

As among us Religious Instruction usually descends from 
Parents to Children, so among them it must at first ascend 
from Children to Parents, or from young to Old.As among us Religious Instruction usually descends from 
Parents to Children, so among them it must at first ascend 
from Children to Parents, or from young to Old.

They are as ‘twere a Nation within a Nation. In all County 
Settlements, they live in contiguous Houses and often 2, 3, or 
4 Familys of them in one House, Slightly partitioned into so 
many Apartments. They labour together and converse almost 
wholly among themselves, so that if once their children could 
but read the Bible to them, and other Tracts of Instruction of 
Evenings & other spare Times, specially Sundays; would 
bring in at least a Dawning of the blessed Light amongst 
them; and which as a Sett or two of these children grew up to 
Men and Women, would gradually diffuse and increase into 
open Day.

Obviously, this was a scenario that would take a long while to 
develop, yet Garden optimistically predicted that if “this method 
of Instructing the Young Slaves continued, in this or any other 
Colony, but for the Space of Twenty Years, the Knowledge of the 
Gospel ’mong the Slaves of such Colony . . . (excepting those 
newly Imported) would not be much inferior to that of the lower 
sort of white People.” 58 The Charlestown school experiment 
lasted until 1764, when Harry, the teacher, died. Andrew had 
“proved a profligate” and Garden had died in 1756. 59 Even when 
the school was successfully operating, its significance was more an 
example of a valiant effort than a statistically effective way of 
converting a “nation within a nation.” Richard Clarke, Garden’s 
successor as commissary, placed the school in perspective when 
he reported to the society in 1755 that the Negro school was well 
attended but that there was a lamentable negligence on the part of 
white people with regard to Negro education: there was not “so 
much as one Civil Establishment in the Colony for the Christian 
Instruction of 50,000 Negro Slaves.” 60Under the auspices of the S.P.G., Elias Neau, a lay catechist, 
instituted a school in New York City in 1704 for catechizing

118

THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

Negroes. By July of 1707 Neau was able to report over a hun- 
dred pupils and the next year more than two hundred. Neau’s 
methods consisted of going “from house to house, persuading the 
owners to send their slaves every Monday, Wednesday, and Fri- 
day at 4 P.M. to his house where he [taught] them the Lord’s 
Prayer in English, and gradually [led] up to the Creed and Cat- 
echism.” Of the slaves who came, “many who could not read, 
could yet by Memory repeat the History of the Creation of the 
World, the Flood, the giving of the Law, the Birth, Miracles and 
Crucifixion of our Lord, and the chief Articles and Doctrines of 
Christianity.” In 1720 Neau’s school had eighty-four students, 
consisting of thirty-five women and forty-nine men. Four of the 
women were free; the remaining eighty persons were slaves 
owned by fifty-one different slaveholders. Thirty-nine had been 
baptized and six were communicants. 61 The existence of the 
school was threatened in the aftermath of a slave insurrection in 
1712 but managed to survive Neau’s death in 1722 and lasted 
until the War of Independence.

The S.P.G. and the Associates of Dr. Bray also supported a lay 
catechist to instruct Negroes in Georgia after slaves were legally 
admitted to the colony in 1749. The catechist, Joseph Otto- 
lenghe, an Italian-born convert from Judaism, landed at Savannah 
in 1751 and quickly announced a program of instruction. He 
proposed to hold meetings for slaves three times a week, on Sun- 
day, Tuesday, and Thursday evenings after the day’s work was 
done. Reporting to the Associates a few months after his arrival, 
Ottolenghe described his teaching methods:When we meet, I make them go to Prayers with me, having 
composed for that Purpose a few Prayers, suitable (I hope) to 
the Occasion. Having thus recommended our Selves to the 
Protection of Heaven ... I instruct them to read, that they 
may be able in Time to comfort themselves in reading the 
Book of God. After this is done, I make them to repeat the 
Lords Prayer & the Belief, [Creed] & a short portion of the 
Catechism, explaining to them in as easie & Familiar a man-

CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

119

ner as I can the Meaning of what they repeat, & before I part 
with them, I make a Discourse to them on the Being of a 
God, or the Life & Death of our adorable Redeemer, or upon 
some Event or Story, taken out of the Bible, suitable to the 
Discourse in Hand ... 62

Contending with the usual problems — vehement objections 
from some planters who alleged “a Slave is ten times worse when 
a Xn, than in his State of Paganism,” inability to communicate 
with African slaves, irregular attendance — Ottolenghe neverthe- 
less reported “good Success” by the summer of 1752. In 1759 his 
work for the Associates and the S.P.G. was terminated. Whatever 
success Ottolenghe could claim was at best limited. The draw- 
backs of the Associates’ method, namely, founding schools for 
educating Negroes, were all too clear to Rev. Bartholomew Zou- 
berbuhler, the rector of Christ Church in Savannah. Writing to 
the Secretary of the Associates in 1758, Zouberbuhler argued for 
the necessity of itinerant catechists to work among the slaves 
where they were — on widely scattered plantations:I have once proposed the erecting of a Publick School, But 
from the Observations I have since made, particularly on the 
labours of Mr. Ottolenghe, who whilst he acted in the Capac- 
ity of School Master & Catechist discharged his Duty with 
great Care & Diligence, I am now of Opinion that such a 
foundation is not only too limited but also attended with many 
Inconveniences. This Province is as yet but thinly inhabited, 
consequently such a School can only reach a few adjoining 
Neighbours, & there are but few Masters who will spare their 
Negroes capable of any service to be taught in the Day 
Time . . . The best & most effectual Method then of deliver- 
ing these poor Creatures out of their Darkness & to make 
them Pertakers of the Light of the Gospel, is, to attend them 
at their respective Habitations . . . instructing them in the 
Fundamental Truths of Christianity. And if two or three Men 
properly qualified would undertake to be itinerant Catechists 
or Schoolmasters. They might be dispersed 2 or 3 Months in 
One District & the same Time in another & thereby compass 
the whole Colony.” 63

120

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION”

Thus Zouberbuhler recognized, as did the Methodists of a 
slightly later period, the advantages of itinerancy in spreading the 
Gospel in the sparsely settled areas of the various American fron- 
tiers. Not until over seventy years later, when the plantation mis- 
sion was propagated as an ideal, would the concept of carrying 
Christian instruction to the slaves on the plantations win wide- 
spread attention and effective organization.The Church of England was not alone in thinking of conver- 
sion as a process of religious nurture which involved teaching the 
slaves. (In Woodson’s phrase, this was a “Religion with Letters.”) 
Colonial Protestants, whether Anglican, Puritan, Baptist, or 
Quaker, thought the Catholic emphasis on the efficacy of the 
sacraments ex opere operato was mechanistic and magical. The 
Reformed emphasis on an individual’s relationship to God, on 
searching the Scriptures, and on discerning the workings of grace 
within one’s heart tended to de-emphasize the mediative role of 
the sacraments. The importance of the scriptural word — and the 
sermonic words which explicated it — encouraged literacy and reli- 
gious learning. Until the wave of revivals known as the Great 
Awakening reminded American Protestants of the importance of 
the conversion experience , becoming Christian was seen as a pro- 
cess of careful nurture and slow growth . 84

The history of the religious instruction of slaves involved three 
parties: planters, missionaries, and slaves. The slaves’ response to 
evangelization varied, but it was always conditioned by the cir- 
cumstances of slavery. There was something peculiar about the 
way African slaves were evangelized in America. Traditionally, 
“preaching the gospel to all nations” meant that the Christian 
disciple was sent out with the gospel to the pagans. In America 
the reverse was the case: the pagan slave was brought to a Chris- 
tian disciple who was frequently reluctant to instruct him in the 
gospel. The irony of that situation bore practical implications for 
the interrelationships between master, missionary, and slave.

It is clear from the reports of S.P.G. missionaries that they had 
little success with African-born slaves. Sharp distinctions were

CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

121It is clear from the reports of S.P.G. missionaries that they had 
little success with African-born slaves. Sharp distinctions were

CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

121

drawn between imported, or “Guinea,” Negroes and American, 
or “native-born,” slaves. Frequently the former never learned En- 
glish well enough to understand catechesis. The bishop of Lon- 
don lamented this communication gap in a pastoral letter of 1727 
in which he stated that “they are utter strangers to our language 
and we to theirs; and the gift of tongues being now ceased, there is 
no means left of instructing them in the doctrines of the Christian 
religion.” The bishop encouraged his charges not to despair, how- 
ever, for he had been informed that “many of the Negroes who are 
grown persons when they came over, do of themselves attain so 
much of our language as enables them to understand and to be 
understood, in things which concern the ordinary business of 
life.” The bishop failed to understand that the degree of fluency in 
English necessary for an African slave to “get by” in the “ordinary 
business” of plantation life may not have been high enough to 
carry him very far in listening to an explanation of Christian 
doctrine. A catechist in New York had difficulties with slaves 
who were “bashful because, as yet, they pronounced the English 
language very poorly.” 85Not all slaves who could understand religious instruction were 
eager to accept Christianity. William Tibbs, of St. Paul’s Parish, 
Baltimore County, Maryland, reported in 1724 that he had bap- 
tized and taught some slaves but that most refused instruction. 
Some masters revealed to a missionary in Santee, South Carolina, 
that when slaves became Christian “all other slaves do laugh at 
them.” 66 Bishop Seeker suggested to the S.P.G. in a sermon, 
delivered in 1741, two reasons for the aversion of some slaves to 
Christianity — “the Fondness they have for their old Heathenish 
Rites, and the strong Prejudice they must have against Teachers 
from among those, whom they serve so unwillingly.” The bishop 
concluded, “it cannot be wondered, if the Progress made in their 
Conversion prove but slow.” 87

Missionaries in the field complained that the “wicked life of 
Christians” was an obstacle impeding the conversion of the 
infidel. 68 And the slaves themselves were not insensitive to the

122

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION 1

hypocrisy of masters. Rev. Francis Varnod, minister to St. 
George’s Parish in South Carolina, observed in 1724 that the 
slaves were “also sensible that as we are Christians, we do not 
act accordingly, upon which account a negro boy about 14 who 
has never been instructed, being blamed by his mistress (as she 
was going to church) for some things he had done amiss, was 
heard to say, My mistress can curse and go to church. . . . ” 6 ® 
The brutality endemic to slavery gave the slaves much to be 
“scandalized” about. Francis Le Jau objected to “a very severe 
act” passed by the South Carolina Legislature in 1712 which 
threatened runaway slaves with mutilation and, for frequent vio- 
lations, death. 70

One missionary, who took the time to inquire, discovered that a 
pagan slave’s theology bore some resemblance to his own:One missionary, who took the time to inquire, discovered that a 
pagan slave’s theology bore some resemblance to his own:

I find that some of our negro-pagans have a notion of God and 
of a Devil, and dismal apprehensions of apparitions. Of a God 
that disposes absolutely to all things. For asking one day a 
negro-pagan woman how she happened to be made a slave,

[she] replied that God would have it so and she could not help 
it. I heard another saying the same thing on account of the 
death of her husband. And a Devil . . . who leads them to do 
mischief, and betrays them, whereby they are found out by 
their masters and punished . 71

The slaveholders’ charge that religious instruction made slaves 
more intractable was not without foundation. George Ross, minis- 
ter of Emmanuel Church in New Castle, Delaware, explained that 
one reason for the “general indifference” of even churchgoing 
planters to the instruction of their slaves was “the untoward 
haughty behaviour of those Negroes who have been admitted into 
the Fellowship of Christ’s Religion.” Rev. Philip Reading, who 
began his work at Apoquinimick, Pennsylvania, in 1746 wished 
“that the slaves themselves by their rebellious behaviour after 
baptism, had not given too much cause for such prejudices.” Rev. 
James Whetmore, who succeeded Elias Neau as catechist in 
1723, observed that “some [slaves] have under pretence of going

CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

123

to Catechizing, taken opportunity to absent from their Masters 
service many days.” Rev. Charles Martyn, of South Carolina, 
complained that some baptized slaves “became lazy and proud, 
entertaining too high an opinion of themselves, and neglecting 
their daily labour.” 74The hard-to-suppress belief that baptism resulted in manumis- 
sion was not restricted to slave masters. Le Jau found it necessary 
to draw up a declaration which adult slaves had to accept before 
he would baptize them. Candidates for baptism were required to 
assent to the following:

You declare in the presence of God and before this Congrega- 
tion that you do not ask for the holy baptism out of any design 
to free yourself from the Duty and Obedience that you owe to 
your Master while you live, but merely for the good of Your 
Soul and to partake of the Graces and Blessings promised to 
the members of the Church of Jesus Christ . 73

That this was no public relations ploy for the benefit of the 
masters was demonstrated by a slave conspiracy aroused over this 
very issue of baptism and freedom. On June 28, 1729, Rev. 
James Blair, official representative of the bishop of London in 
Virginia, wrote his superior that

I doubt not some of the Negroes are sincere Converts, but the 
far greater part of them little mind the serious part, only are in 
hopes that they will meet with so much the more respect, and 
that some time or other Christianity will help them to their 
freedom.

Two years later Blair announced that his suspicions had been 
confirmed: “ . . . notwithstanding all the precautions which the 
ministers took to assure them that baptism did not alter their 
servitude, the negroes fed themselves with a secret fancy that it 
did, and that the King designed that all Christians should be 
made free. And when they saw that baptism did not change 
their status they grew angry and saucy, and met in the night- 
time in great numbers and talked of rising.” The threat of rebel-

124

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

lion was squelched by patrols, whipping, and the execution of 
four conspirators. 74124

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

lion was squelched by patrols, whipping, and the execution of 
four conspirators. 74

The clerical argument that Christianity made slaves more doc- 
ile was weakened in South Carolina in 1725, when some slaves 
who had embraced Christianity participated in “secret poisonings 
and bloody insurrection.” Rev. Richard Ludlam complained that 
thus they had “returned . . . the greatest of evils for the greatest 
good.” 75 Rev. William Cotes, of St. George’s Parish in Dor- 
chester, South Carolina, interviewed a Christian slave condemned 
to death in 1751 for her part in poisoning slaveholders:

One of Col. Blake’s [slaves], who had been baptized, told me, 
that notwithstanding what was alleged against her, she hoped 
to be saved, because she believed in Christ (a vague phrase 
much in use among our sectaries).

Arguing with her antinomian view of faith, Cotes “endeavored to 
show her the true import and meaning thereof, and at last she 
made some kind of confession, and desired to be remembered in 
our prayers.” 76

The slaves’ response to instruction and to reading was not al- 
ways what the missionaries (and the masters) had hoped. Rev. Le 
Jau described in a letter a disturbing incident:The slaves’ response to instruction and to reading was not al- 
ways what the missionaries (and the masters) had hoped. Rev. Le 
Jau described in a letter a disturbing incident:

The best scholar of all the negroes in my parish and a very 
sober and honest liver, through his learning was like to create 
some confusion among all the negroes in this country. He had 
a book wherein he read some description of the several judge- 
ments that chastise men because of their sins in these latter 
days, that description made an impression upon his spirit, and 
he told his master abruptly there would be a dismal time and 
the moon would be turned into blood, and there would be 
dearth of darkness and went away . . . but when he spoke 
these few words to his master, some negro overheard a part, 
and it was publicly blazed abroad that an angel came and 
spoke to the man. He had seen a hand that gave him a book; 
he had heard voices, seen fires, etc. As I had opportunities I 
took care to undeceive those who asked me about it. . . . 77

CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

125

Le Jau had no way of predicting it, but apocalyptic imagery was 
to have an unsettling effect among Christian slaves for a long time 
to come.CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

125

Le Jau had no way of predicting it, but apocalyptic imagery was 
to have an unsettling effect among Christian slaves for a long time 
to come.

Other converted slaves, however, were found to “behave them- 
selves very well, and do better for their master’s profit than for- 
merly.” Le Jau had baptized some slaves who could be trusted to 
“Instruct one another” since they were “zealous, honest,” and 
“read well.” Significantly, Le Jau added, “and by them I am 
inform’d when there is any disorder among their fellows slaves 
that it may be remedyed.” 78 Even after a slave had been cate- 
chized, baptized, and sometimes married in the Church, there 
remained a peculiar dimension to his Christian life — his slave con- 
dition. The strictures of that state often led to practical problems 
such as those which puzzled Rev. Adam Dickie of Drysdale Par- 
ish, in Virginia. Writing the bishop of London in 1732, Dickie 
inquired whether married slaves belonging to two different 
masters should be considered as separated if one master moved 
away or sold one of the slaves, “they being Effectually Separated 
as by Death, not of Choice but necessity.” Furthermore, should 
slaves be allowed to stand as sponsors at baptisms for each other’s 
children, since few white people were willing to do so? Finally, 
should Christian slaves be allowed all the Christian privileges, 
such as the churching of mothers after childbirth? 79 The last two 
questions reveal the limits which slave staus could place on Chris- 
tian fellowship. The first of Dickie’s questions presented a prob- 
lem which was not to be solved until emancipation, namely, how 
to maintain the permanence of Christian marriage within a social 
system which recognized no such thing for slaves. Thus, the mis- 
sionary could advise the baptized slave that the “Christian Reli- 
gion does not allow plurality of wives, nor any changing of them” 
and demand that “you promise truly to keep the Wife you now 
have til Death does part you.” But frequently neither he nor the 
slave had the final say about keeping or breaking the promise. 80During the first century and a half of slavery in the United 
States, only a small minority of slaves received instruction in the

126

THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION

Christian faith. The objections of slaveholders; the unsettled state 
of religion in the Southern colonies, which held the great majority 
of the slave population; the paucity of missionaries to catechize 
slaves; linguistic and cultural barriers between Africans and Euro- 
peans; the very way in which conversion was generally per- 
ceived — as catechesis, a time-consuming process of religious in- 
struction — all these factors ensured that Christianity touched 
most slaves indirectly if at all. There were, however, a few slaves 
who did accept Christianity and were baptized into the Church 
under Anglican, Puritan, Baptist, Quaker, and Moravian (a very 
few) auspices. Some attained full if not equal communion with 
their white fellow Christians.Whatever the lack of numerical effectiveness, the religious in- 
struction of slaves during the colonial period still had a significant 
impact on the lives of many slaves, missionaries, and masters. 
What was involved in the slave’s acceptance of Christianity, as all 
three parties to the interchange — missionaries, slaveholders, and 
slaves — dimly realized, was the slow process by which “Africans 
became New Negroes.” A generational process, analogous (but 
by no means identical) to that of other immigrant groups, it in- 
volved complex social and psychological adaptation on the part of 
both black slaves and white colonists. Adapting to the foreign 
culture of the Europeans meant for the Africans not the total 
abandonment of their own cosmologies but, rather, a process of 
integrating the new into the old, of interpreting the unfamiliar by 
reference to the familiar. Catechesis moved in two directions. The 
slaves were taught the prayers, doctrines, and rites of Christianity, 
but as the missionaries realized, the slaves had to somehow under- 
stand the meaning of Christian belief and ritual if instruction was 
to become more than mere parroting. And here the whites had 
only limited control. For the slaves brought their cultural past to 
the task of translating and interpreting the doctrinal words and 
ritual gestures of Christianity. Therefore the meaning which the 
missionary wished the slaves to receive and the meaning which 
the slaves actually found (or, better, made) were not the same.

CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION 127

The “inaccuracy” of the slaves’ translation of Christianity would 
be a cause of concern to missionaries for a long time to come.CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION 127

The “inaccuracy” of the slaves’ translation of Christianity would 
be a cause of concern to missionaries for a long time to come.

Because there is only sparse slave testimony from the colonial 
period, historians can only speculate about the ways in which 
slaves during that period interpreted Christianity to fit the world 
views inherited from their African past. It is important to observe 
that on a very general level African religions and Christianity 
(Protestant as well as Catholic) shared some important beliefs. A 
basic Christian doctrine which would not have seemed foreign to 
most Africans was belief in God, the Father, Supreme Creator of 
the world and all within it. The divine sonship of Jesus and the 
divinity of the third person of the Trinity, the Holy Spirit, would 
have also seemed intelligible to many Africans accustomed to a 
plurality of divinities. That there were only three divine persons 
and that Jesus was the only begotten Son of the Father would 
have seemed too limited a pantheon to some Africans. The notion 
of an afterlife where the evil suffer and the good prosper and the 
concept of sin as wrongdoing deserving of divine anger and pun- 
ishment were also held in many African societies, though the 
doctrine of man’s depravity as a result of original sin would have 
been repugnant to most. That adoration and prayer were owed by 
man to a god would have seemed obvious to Africans, for whom 
the essence of piety consisted in propitiating gods and ancestors. 
Most centrally, the absence from Christian ritual of drumming, 
dancing, sacrifice, and possession would have been keenly felt by 
most Africans. The differences between Protestant Christianity 
and African religious belief were, of course, much more numerous 
and much more important than the similarities, but there were 
enough similarities to make it possible for slaves to find some 
common ground between the beliefs of their ancestors and those 
of the white Christians. The theory that African acceptance of 
Christianity required the adoption of a totally alien world view 
needs therefore to be modified . 81Colonial legislation and clerical declaration to the contrary, the

128

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

religious instruction of the slaves had implications beyond the 
spiritual — implications which would be revealed more fully in the 
tumult of revivalist preaching under the impact of the conversion 
experience. But even before that storm of revival broke, a begin- 
ning had been made. As one historian felicitously expressed it: 
“The complete cycle of a sacramental progression from baptism to 
burial, with the special training of each successive step between, 
including the learning of the white man’s language, might not be 
a legal emancipation, but was, nevertheless, a participation in the 
white man’s folk ways amounting to something like tribal adop- 
tion.” 82 Though adoption on both sides was incomplete, the way 
had been opened for a kind of stepbrotherhood which would 
occasionally result in situations of religious reciprocity. The im- 
pact of revivalism and the experience of conversion would, for a 
time at least, increase the visibility of the egalitarian implications 
within Christianity.

Revival and ConversionRevival and Conversion

The Great Awakening represented “the dawning of the new day” 
in the history of the conversion of slaves to Christianity. 83 In what 
might be termed the preliminary “showers of grace” before the 
deluge of the Awakening, Jonathan Edwards noted that the 
Northampton, Massachusetts, revival of 1734-36 was affecting 
black churchgoers as well as whites: “There are several Negroes 
who, from what was seen in them and what is discernable in them 
since, appear to have been truly born again in the late remarkable 
season.” 84 When the full tide of the Great Awakening swept over 
the colonies, beginning in 1740, blacks were among those lifted 
to new heights of religious excitement. Whitefield, Tennent, and 
other revivalists noted with satisfaction the presence of black 
people swelling the crowds who flocked to hear their powerful 
message of salvation. Whitefield recounted an occasion in Phila- 
delphia in 1740 when “near fifty negroes came to give me thanks 
for what God had done to their souls.” 85 In a letter to Whitefield,

CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

129CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

129

Tennent described the result of his preaching in Charlestown, 
Massachusetts: “multitudes were awakened, and several had re- 
ceived great consolation, especially among the young people, chil- 
dren and Negroes.” 86 An Anglican clergyman in Salem, Mas- 
sachusetts, reacted with disdain to the effects of the revival: “So 
great has been the enthusiasm created by Wesley and Whitefield 
and Tennent, that people talk of nothing but, ‘renovating, regen- 
eration, conviction and conversion . . . ’ Even children 8-13 as- 
semble in bodies preaching and praying, nay the very Servants 
and Slaves pretend to extraordinary inspiration, and under the 
veil thereof cherish their idle dispositions and in lieu of dutifully 
minding their respective businesses run rambling about to utter 
enthusiastic nonsense.” 87 Active participation by Negroes, as ex- 
horters, in the fervor of the Awakening was one of the charges 
leveled against the revival by critics like Charles Chauncy: “ . . . 
chiefly indeed young Persons , sometimes Lads, or rather Boys: 
Nay, Women and Girls, yea Negroes, have taken upon them to do 
the Business of Preachers.” 88

In the Southern colonies the revival impulse continued to 
smolder and to flare up sporadically under the preaching of evan- 
gelical ministers. Pro-revival, or New Light, Presbyterians, as 
well as pro-revival, or Separate, Baptists and Methodists contin- 
ued the work of the revival moving west with the frontier into the 
Old Southwest, where the conflagration would begin anew at the 
turn of the century in the camp meeting revivals of Kentucky and 
Tennessee. 89Presbyterian Samuel Davies, a leading New Light and future 
president of the College of New Jersey (Princeton), began his 
ministry to seven congregations in Hanover County, Virginia, in 
1748. Along with his fellow New Light colleagues, John Todd 
and John Wright, Davies experienced considerable success in his 
efforts to evangelize Negroes. Davies reportedly “had the pleasure 
of seeing 40 of them around the table of the Lord, all of whom 
made a credible profession of Christianity, and several of them 
gave unusual evidence of sincerity, and he believed that more than

130

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION”

1,000 Negroes attended on his ministry at the different places 
where he alternately officiated.” In 1757 Davies wrote: “What 
little success I have lately had, has been chiefly among the ex- 
tremes of Gentlemen and Negroes. Indeed, God has been remark- 
ably working among the latter. I have baptized about 150 adults; 
and at the last sacramental solemnity, I had the pleasure of seeing 
the table graced with about 60 black faces. They generally behave 
well as far as I can hear, though there are some instances of 
apostacy among them.” 90 Davies, with the respect for education 
characteristic of Presbyterians, emphasized the need for teaching 
the slaves to read, and had hoped to compose “a book with the 
combined purpose of teaching reading and Christianity” — a pro- 
ject never completed. The evangelical heart of Davies’ message to 
the slaves, however, was not so much instruction as the experi- 
ence of conversion, as can be seen from his advice to prospective 
black converts:

You will say perhaps ‘other negroes are baptized; and why not 
I?’ But, consider some other negroes have been in great 
trouble about their souls; their hearts have been broken for 
sin; they have accepted Christ as their only Saviour; and are 
Christians indeed; and when you are such, it will be time 
enough for you to be baptized . 91Davies’ criteria for baptism demanded more than learning the 
Lord’s Prayer, the Apostles’ Creed and memorizing parts of the 
catechism. He faced little opposition from slaveholders and could 
boast that slaves “are freely allowed to attend upon my ministry, 
and some time my private instructions, even by such masters as 
have no religion at all, or are Bigots to the Established church.” 92 
More than the Presbyterians, the Separate Baptists and the 
Methodists reaped a revival harvest of black and white members 
in the South. By the end of the century these two denominations 
were in the ascendancy in the South. Slaves and free blacks were 
among those swelling the Baptist and Methodist ranks. Method- 
ist itinerants frequently commented on the presence of blacks in 
their congregations. Joseph Pilmore wrote to Wesley in 1770 that

CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

131

“the number of blacks that attend the preaching affects me 
much.” A revival from 1773 to 1776 under Devereux Jarratt, 
which covered fourteen counties of Virginia and two of North 
Carolina, was attended by “hundreds on Negroes . . . with tears 
streaming down their faces.” One evangelist reported that “the 
chapel was full of white and black”; another that “in general the 
white people were within the chapel and the black people with- 
out.” Moved by Freeborn Garretson’s preaching in Maryland, 
“hundreds both white and black expressed their love of Jesus.” 
Thomas Rankin figured that in 1777 Methodists in the colonies 
included “many hundreds of Negroes . . . convinced of sin, and 
many of them happy in the love of God.” 93In 1786, the first year in which Methodists distinguished white 
and black members in their records, there were 1,890 black mem- 
bers out of a total membership of 18,791. By 1790 the number of 
black Methodists had increased to 11,682, and in 1797 the black 
membership stood at 12,215, or almost one-fourth of the total 
Methodist membership. The majority of black Methodists in 
1797 were located in three states: Maryland, with 5,106; Vir- 
ginia, with 2,490; and North Carolina, with 2,071. South Caro- 
lina followed with 890, while Georgia had 148. 94

Unlike the Methodists, Baptists kept sparse records, so it is 
difficult to gauge accurately the extent of their black membership, 
particularly during the early period of their expansion. One esti- 
mate is that in 1793 the black Baptist membership was about 
one-fourth the total membership of 73,471, or between 18,000 
and 19,000. William Warren Sweet stated that there were 17,644 
black Baptists in the South in 1795. According to Charles Col- 
cock Jones, the black membership of the Baptists increased from 
about 18,000 in 1793 to about 40,000 in 18 13. 95 While these 
figures are probably inflated, there is no doubt that the growth in 
black as well as white membership among the Baptists and Meth- 
odists was astounding. The main spur to this growth was the 
religious fervor of revival. For example, Baptists in the Savannah, 
Georgia, area, through “frequent and extensive” revivals, “espe-

132

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

daily among the coloured population,” in 1812 “received by bap- 
tism about fifteen hundred persons.” 96132

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

daily among the coloured population,” in 1812 “received by bap- 
tism about fifteen hundred persons.” 96

The revivalist impulse of the Great Awakening broke out anew 
on the frontier in 1800. The Great Western Revival, inaugurated 
by the Gaspar River and Cane Ridge camp meetings in Ken- 
tucky, embraced blacks, who eagerly participated in the tumultu- 
ous exercises which became characteristic of frontier revivalism. 
The camp meeting proved to be a powerful instrument for accel- 
erating the pace of slave conversions.

The increase in conversions of Negroes under the impact of 
revivalism was due to several factors. The evangelical religion 
spread by the revivalists initiated a religious renaissance in the 
South as a somnolent religious consciousness was awakened by 
revivalist preachers. The revival itself became a means of church 
extension for Presbyterians and, particularly, for Methodists and 
Baptists. The mobility of the Methodist circuit rider and the local 
autonomy of the Baptist preacher were suited to the needs and 
conditions of the rural South. In the heat of religious fervor, 
planters became less indifferent about their own religious involve- 
ment and, potentially, about that of their slaves.

The individualistic emphasis of revivalism, with its intense con- 
centration on inward conversion, fostered an inclusiveness which 
could border on egalitarianism. Evangelicals did not hesitate to 
preach the necessity of conversion to racially mixed congrega- 
tions. Revivalist preachers had little doubt — indeed they were en- 
thusiastic — about the capacity of slaves to share the experience of 
conversion.Stressing the conversion experience instead of the process of 
religious instruction made Christianity more accessible to illiterate 
slaves and slaveholders alike. Evangelicals were as concerned as 
Anglicans about observing the rules of Christian conduct after 
conversion, but it was the experience of conviction, repentance, 
and regeneration which occupied the attention of the former. 
While the Anglican clergyman tended to be didactic and moralis- 
tic, the Methodist or Baptist exhorter visualized and personalized

CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

133

the drama of sin and salvation, of damnation and election. The 
Anglican usually taught the slaves the Ten Commandments, the 
Apostles’ Creed and the Lord’s Prayer; the revivalist preacher 
helped them to feel the weight of sin, to imagine the threats of 
Hell, and to accept Christ as their only Savior. The enthusiasm of 
the camp meeting, as excessive as it seemed to some churchmen, 
was triggered by the personal, emotional appeal of the preacher 
and supported by the common response of members of his con- 
gregation. The revivalists tended, moreover, to minimize complex 
explanations of doctrine. The heightened emphasis on conversion 
left little room for elaborate catechesis. The plain doctrine and 
heavy emotion of revivalist sermons appealed as much to the black 
slave as to the white farmer. The experience of John Thompson, 
bom as a slave in Maryland in 1812, is illustrative:My mistress and her family were all Episcopalians. The near- 
est church was five miles from our plantation, and there was 
no Methodist church nearer than ten miles. So we went to the 
Episcopal church, but always came home as we went, for the 
preaching was above our comprehension, so that we could 
understand but little that was said. But soon the Methodist 
religion was brought among us, and preached in a manner so 
plain that the way faring man, though a fool, could not err 
therein. This new doctrine produced great consternation 
among the slaveholders. It was something which they could 
not understand. It brought glad tidings to the poor bondman; 
it bound up the broken-hearted; it opened the prison doors to 
them that were bound, and let the captive go free. As soon as 
it got among the slaves, it spread from plantation to planta- 
tion, until it reached ours, where there were but few who did 
not experience religion . 97

The Baptists and Methodists did not insist on a well-educated 
clergy. A converted heart and a gifted tongue were more impor- 
tant than the amount of theological training received. If a con- 
verted slave showed talent for exhorting, he exhorted, and not 
only to black audiences. The tendency of evangelical religion to 
level the souls of all men before God became manifest when awak-

1 34 “THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION"1 34 “THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION"

ened blacks preached to unconverted whites. In 1766 an S.P.G. 
missionary named Barnett in Brunswick, Virginia, was disturbed 
because “New light baptists are very numerous in the southern 
parts of this parish — The most illiterate among them are their 
Teachers even Negroes speak in their Meetings.” 98 During the 
1780s a slave named Lewis preached to crowds as large as four 
hundred in Westmoreland County, Virginia, “on the theme of the 
state man was in by nature, urging that his hearers must not 
remain in an unconverted state but come and accept Christ by 
faith. ...” Harry Hosier or “Black Harry” traveled with Method- 
ist ministers Asbury, Coke, Garretson, and Whatcoat and was 
reportedly an excellent preacher. After the resignation in 1792 of 
its pastor, the mixed congregation of the Portsmouth, Virginia, 
Baptist Church “employed Josiah (or Jacob) Bishop, a black man 
of considerable talents to preach for them.” The Portsmouth con- 
gregation thought so much of Bishop that it purchased his free- 
dom and that of his family. 99 In that same year the Roanoke 
(Virginia) Association purchased a slave named Simon and set 
him free to exercise his gifts because they thought “him ordained 
of God to preach the Gospel.” Another black man, William Le- 
mon, pastored a white Baptist church in Gloucester County, Vir- 
ginia, at the turn of the century. A color-conscious Baptist histo- 
rian explained that Lemon, “though not white, as to his natural 
complexion, had been purified and made white, in a better 
sense.” 100In 1798 a free Negro, Joseph Willis, who was a duly licensed 
Baptist preacher, began his work in southwest Mississippi. In 
1804 he moved to Louisiana and in 1812 formed that state’s first 
Baptist church at Bayou Chicot, where he served as pastor. He 
helped to organize several other churches in the area, and in 
1818, when the Louisiana Baptist Association was organized, 
“Father” Willis was its first moderator. 101

In Lexington, Kentucky, a slave named “Old Captain” 
gathered a church in 1801 which eventually included over three 
hundred black members. When he sought ordination the South

CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

135CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

135

Kentucky Association “did not consider it proper to ordain him, 
in form,” though they were willing to give him “the right hand of 
Christian affection and directed him to go on in the name of their 
Common Master.” Captain proceeded without ordination to ex- 
amine and baptize those who came to him. 102 John Chavis, 
another free black, was appointed by the Presbyterian General 
Assembly in 1801 to work in Virginia and North Carolina “as a 
missionary among people of his own color.” Licensed to preach, 
Chavis did not confine his ministry to Negroes. In 1808 he op- 
ened a school in Raleigh, North Carolina, for the instruction of 
white children by day and black children at night. In 1832 Cha- 
vis was barred from preaching by a North Carolina law which 
forbade slaves and free Negroes to exhort or preach in public. 103 
“Uncle” Jack, an African-born slave and a Baptist convert, 
preached in Nottoway County, Virginia, in 1792. Jack impressed 
some white church members enough to make them purchase his 
freedom and settle him on a farm. Jack continued to preach for 
forty years and had the satisfaction of converting his former 
master’s son. 104 Henry Evans, a free man and shoemaker by trade, 
was licensed as a local preacher by the Methodists toward the end 
of the eighteenth century. Evans was responsible for “the planting 
of Methodism” in Fayetteville, North Carolina. Originally preach- 
ing to black people only, he attracted the attention of some promi- 
nent whites, and ironically “the white portion of [his] congrega- 
tion increased till the negroes were crowded out of their seats.” 
Evans was displaced by a white minister but continued as an 
assistant in the church he founded until his death in 1810. 105The occasional preaching of black preachers to white congrega- 
tions is of less significance for slave conversions than the fact that 
black preachers, licensed or not, preached to slaves. Baptist minis- 
ter Edmund Botsford of Welsh Neck, South Carolina, noted with 
pleasure that during a revival in 1790 several black members of 
his congregation did “go to the plantations, and preach to their 
own colour on Lord’s-day evenings, and at other times when we 
have no services in the meeting-house.” 106 More than any other

136

“THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

denomination the Baptists gave leeway to their black members to 
preach. One historian of the Baptists lauded the anonymous but 
effective ministry of black preachers: “ . . . among the African 
Baptists in the Southern states there are a multitude of preachers 
and exhorters whose names do not appear on the minutes of the 
associations. They preach principally on the plantations to those 
of their own color, and their preaching though broken and illiter- 
ate, is in many cases highly useful.” Black ministers were active in 
the cities as well. One outstanding example was the biracial First 
Baptist Church of Richmond, Virginia, “which had a large slave 
membership” and “at one time included five Negro preachers and 
seven black exhorters.” 107

Until several state legislatures passed laws restricting Negroes 
from preaching, the Baptist churches licensed and ordained black 
men who felt the call to preach after they demonstrated their gifts 
and evidenced their faith before a committee of the church. Slave 
preachers were allowed to preach only with permission from their 
owners and normally were restricted to the area of the local par- 
ish. The duties of black preachers included conducting funerals 
and sanctifying marriages for slaves. 108Among the Methodists many black men served as lay preach- 
ers. As such, they could not celebrate the sacraments but were 
allowed to preach and to discipline black members within a re- 
stricted locale. Even when the practice was illegal, the Methodists 
sent out black assistants with their itinerant preachers in a few 
instances. William Capers, of South Carolina, recalled sending out 
eight black preachers to work with the slaves in 1811, though it 
was forbidden by civil and ecclesiastical law. Methodists skirted 
legal restrictions against black preachers by simply licensing them 
as exhorters. Strictly speaking, exhorters were assistants, but 
black exhorters were in fact known to act as pastors of their own 
people. 109 The importance of these early black preachers in the 
conversion of slaves to Christianity has not been sufficiently ap- 
preciated. Emerging in the latter half of the eighteenth and the 
early decades of the nineteenth centuries, they acted as crucial

CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

137

mediators between Christian belief and the experiential world of 
the slaves. In effect they were helping to shape the development of 
a bicultural synthesis, an Afro-American culture,, by nurturing the 
birth of Christian communities among blacks, slave and free. In 
this sense the sociologist Robert Park was right when he com- 
mented that “with the appearance of these men, the Negroes in 
America ceased to be a mission people. At least from this time on, 
the movement went on of its own momentum, more and more 
largely under the direction of Negro leaders. Little Negro congre- 
gations, under the leadership of Negro preachers, sprang up 
wherever they were tolerated. Often they were suppressed, more 
often they were privately encouraged. Not infrequently they met 
in secret.” In at least two towns, Petersburg, Virginia, and Savan- 
nah, Georgia, black Baptists organized churches before white 
Baptists did so. 110The swarming of black converts into Baptist and Methodist 
churches led to mixed, though segregated, congregations. Ne- 
groes usually sat in galleries or in back pews. It was not unusual 
for the black membership in a church to far exceed that of the 
whites. When Negroes became too numerous, separate services 
were held for them, or sometimes, particularly in cities, white 
members withdrew, leaving black members to form a separate 
church. Usually these splits were amicable. Generally, slaves in 
rural areas attended church, if they attended at all, with whites, 
and the church was under white control. Blacks in towns and 
cities enjoyed more frequent “ access to religious privileges .” ni A 
few African Baptist churches sprang up, some before 1800, which 
were independent to the extent that they called their own pastors 
and officers, joined local Baptist associations with white churches, 
and sent black delegates to associational meetings. Much of the 
early autonomy of these separate black churches was short-lived. 
By the 1820s black churches were under the supervision of white 
pastors. The shift in situations was reflected by two decisions, 
made thirty-four years apart, by the same Virginia Baptist orga- 
nization. In 1794 the Portsmouth Association discussed the ques-

138

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’138

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

tion: “Is it agreeable to the Word of God to send a free black man 
a delegate to the Ass’n?” And answered: “We can see nothing 
wrong in this. A church may send any one it chooses.” In 1828 
the Portsmouth Association ruled that “whereas the constitution 
of independent and colored churches, in this state, and their rep- 
resentation in this body, involves a point of great delicacy,” black 
churches must be represented in the association “through white 
men.” 112 There were cases, however, where the control of white 
pastors over black churches was nominal. The white minister in 
charge of the black Baptist Elam Church, in Charles City, Vir- 
ginia, thought his duty fulfilled after he had “sat in the most 
comfortable seat to be had, listened to sermons by some of the 
colored brothers, drew his one dollar for attendance, enjoyed a 
good dinner such as colored people can cook, and quietly 
sauntered back to his . . . home.” 113

Though the separate black church was primarily an urban phe- 
nomenon, it drew upon surrounding rural areas for its member- 
ship, which consisted of both free and slave blacks. Some black 
churches were not created by segregation from previously biracial 
congregations but, rather, arose independently from the start. 
Such a church was the African Baptist Church of Williamsburg, 
Virginia, which flourished despite initial attempts to stamp it out. 
The origins of this early black church were described in 1810:This church is composed almost, if not altogether, of people of 
colour. Moses, a black man, first preached among them and 
was often taken up and whipped, for holding meetings. After- 
wards Gowan, who called himself Gowan Pamphlet, ... be- 
came popular among the blacks, and began to baptize, as well 
as to preach. It seems, the association had advised that no 
person of colour should be allowed to preach, on the pain of 
excommunication; against this regulation, many of the blacks 
were rebellious, and continued still to hold meetings. Some 
were excluded, and among this number was Gowan. . . . Con- 
tinuing still to preach and many professing faith under his 
ministry, not being in connexion with any church himself, he 
formed a kind of church out of some who had been baptized,

CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

139

who, sitting with him, received such as offered themselves; 
Gowan baptized them, and was moreover appointed their pas- 
tor; some of them knowing how to write, a churchbook was 
kept; they increased to a large number; so that in the year 
1791, when the Dover association was holden . . . they peti- 
tioned for admittance into the association, stating their num- 
ber to be about five hundred. The association received them, 
so far, as to appoint persons to visit them and set things in 
order. These, making a favourable report, they were received, 
and have associated ever since. 114The distinction of being the first separate black church in the 
South (and the North), however, belonged to the Baptist church 
founded between 1773 and 1775 in Silver Bluff, South Carolina, 
across the Savannah River from Georgia. The importance of the 
Silver Bluff Church lies not only in its chronological priority but 
in its role as mother church of several far-flung Baptist missions. 
This church owed its beginning to the preaching of a white Bap- 
tist minister named Palmer who preached to the slaves of one 
George Galphin at Silver Bluff. David George, George’s wife, 
Jesse Galphin (or Jesse Peter), and five other slaves were con- 
verted and baptized by Palmer at Galphin’s mill. These eight 
formed the nucleus of the Silver Bluff Church. David George had 
a talent for exhorting and was appointed to the office of elder on 
the recommendation of Palmer. When the American Revolution 
began, white ministers were no longer allowed to attend the 
slaves “lest they should furnish . . . too much knowledge” — about 
Governor Dunmore’s proclamation freeing all slaves who would 
support the British. Due to the lack of a regular minister, David 
George assumed the responsibility and “continued preaching . . . 
till the church . . . encreased to thirty or more, and till the British 
came to the city Savannah and took it.” The British occupation of 
the city in 1778 disrupted the Silver Bluff Church. Galphin, a 
patriot, decided to flee, and his slaves took refuge in Savannah 
behind British lines. When American forces reclaimed the area, 
David George elected to gain his freedom by emigrating to Nova 
Scotia in 1782. There he preached to other black emigres and

140 “THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION"

founded a Baptist church at Shelburne. In 1792 George migrated 
again, this time with a colony of blacks to Sierra Leone, where he 
planted yet another Baptist church. 115founded a Baptist church at Shelburne. In 1792 George migrated 
again, this time with a colony of blacks to Sierra Leone, where he 
planted yet another Baptist church. 115

George Liele, a childhood friend of David George, had been 
converted by the preaching of a white Baptist minister, Matthew 
Moore, around 1773, and he began to preach a few years later in 
the area of Silver Bluff. When the British evacuated their forces 
from Savannah, Liele left the country for Jamaica, where in 1784 
he organized at Kingston the first Baptist church on the island 
with “four brethren from America.” Soon Liele’s “preaching took 
very good effect with the poorer sort, especially the slaves,” and 
by 1791 there were “nigh three hundred and fifty members,” 
including a few white people. In a letter to the editor of the 
English Baptist Annual Register , Liele recounted his endeavors 
with a trace of justifiable pride:

I have deacons and elders, a few; and teachers of small congre- 
gations in the town and country, where convenience suits 
them to come together; and I am pastor. I preach twice on the 
Lord’s Day, in the forenoon and afternoon, and twice in the 
week, and have not been absent six Sabbath days since I 
formed the church in this country. I receive nothing for my 
services; I preach, baptize, administer the Lord’s Supper, and 
travel from one place to another to publish the gospel and to 
settle church affairs, all freely. 118Meanwhile the Silver Bluff Church had reorganized under the 
ministry of Jesse Galphin, one of its eight founders. He also sup- 
plied “three or four other places in the country, where he 
[preached] alternately.” According to a contemporary’s descrip- 
tion: “His countenance is grave, his voice charming, his delivery 
good, nor is he a novice in the mysteries of the kingdom.” The 
membership of the church had grown to around sixty by 1793, 
when it appears that the congregation, having long since out- 
grown Galphin’s mill, moved to Augusta, Georgia, twelve miles 
from Silver Bluff, and formed the First African Baptist Church of 
that city. 117

CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

141CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

141

George Liele, before he sailed for Jamaica in 1782, had con- 
verted a slave named Andrew Bryan (by preaching on John 3:7, 
“Ye must be born again”). After Liele’s departure Bryan began to 
exhort blacks and whites. When he and a few followers started 
gathering in a suburb of Savannah for worship, they were harassed 
by white citizens, “as it was at a time that a number of blacks had 
absconded, and some had been taken away by the British.” An- 
drew Bryan and his brother Sampson were hauled before the city 
magistrates for punishment. “These, with many others, were twice 
imprisoned, and about fifty were severely whipped, particularly 
Andrew , who was cut , and bled abundantly.'" Reportedly, Andrew 
“told his persecutors that he rejoiced not only to be whipped, but 
would freely suffer death for the cause of Jesus Christ .” Finally, the 
parallels to the Acts of the Apostles must have become too embar- 
rassing to local officials, who examined and released them with 
permission to resume their worship, but only between sunrise and 
sunset. Andrew’s master permitted the congregation to use his 
barn at Brampton, three miles outside of town, as a meeting place. 
In 1788 the white Baptist minister, Abraham Marshall, accompa- 
nied by Jesse Galphin, visited the Brampton congregation, exa- 
mined and baptized about forty people, and licensed Andrew 
Bryan to preach. After his master’s death Andrew obtained his 
freedom and eventually owned eight slaves himself, “for whose 
education and happiness” he provided. 118In 1790 Bryan’s church numbered 225 full communicants and 
about 350 converts, “many of whom” did not have their masters’ 
permission to be baptized. By 1800 Bryan was able to inform 
Rippon that his church was no longer persecuted but met “in the 
presence, and with the approbation and encouragement of many 
of the white people.” An occasional white minister served as guest 
preacher in this First African Baptist Church of Savannah. It was 
estimated that “fifty of Andrew’s church” were able to read, “but 
only three can write.” Bryan was assisted by his brother Samp- 
son, who had remained a slave. Andrew Marshall, Bryan’s 
nephew, succeeded him as pastor of the First African Church. In

142

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION”

Andrew Bryan. Reprinted from E. K. Love, History of the First African 
Baptist Church (Savannah, Ga., 1888).

1803 a Second African Church was organized from members of 
the First, and a few years later a Third came into being. Both of 
the new churches were led by black pastors. 119

As mentioned earlier, African Baptist churches also came into 
existence by separating from white congregations. The Gillfield 
Baptist Church of Petersburg, Virginia, was originally part of a 
mixed congregation with a black majority. Located outside of 
Petersburg, the original church moved into town between 1788 
and 1809 and in the process split along racial lines. In 1810 the

CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

143

newly formed Gillfield Church with 270 black members was ad- 
mitted to the Portsmouth Association. 120CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

143

newly formed Gillfield Church with 270 black members was ad- 
mitted to the Portsmouth Association. 120

The independence of black churches and black ministers in the 
South was always threatened by restrictions. It was not only the 
civil authority which curtailed the ministry of black preachers. 
Officers of the Baptist Church in Cedar Spring, South Carolina, 
for example, decided in 1804 to allow brother Titus, “to sing, 
pray and exhort in public, and appoint meetings in the vicinity of 
the church,” with the understanding that “all his acting ... be in 
Subordination to his master, and that his master council him in 
particular cases as his prudence may dictate.” Titus was sus- 
pended a few months later for behavior contrary to the commit- 
tee’s stipulation. The realities of slavery continually circumscribed 
the religious authority of Southern blacks, slave or free. 121Fear of slave rebellions haunted Southern whites and hindered 
attempts to convert the slaves, for the same egalitarian tendencies 
within revivalism which helped to bring the slave to conversion, 
could, if pushed too far, deny him access to religion — as the 
Methodists quickly discovered. The founders and early leaders of 
Methodism— John Wesley, Francis Asbury, and Thomas Coke — 
were opposed to slavery. In 1780 a conference of seventeen Meth- 
odist divines at Baltimore took up the question of slavery, cogni- 
zant of the rapid growth of Methodism in the American South. 
The conference decided that traveling preachers who held slaves 
had to promise to set them free and declared that “slavery is 
contrary to the laws of God, man, and nature — hurtful to society; 
contrary to the dictates of conscience and pure religion, and doing 
that which we would not others should do to us and ours.” These 
declarations proved less than effective, and other conferences in 
1783 and 1784 had to broach the subject again. A definitive 
stand was taken at the Christmas Conference of 1784, when it 
was determined once and for all “to extirpate this abomination 
from among us.” Any member who failed to comply with rules for 
emancipation was given twelve months to either withdraw or be 
excluded from Methodist societies; slaveholders were to be admit-

144

THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’144

THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

ted to membership only after they had signed emancipation 
papers. Brethren in Virginia, however, were given special consid- 
eration due to “their peculiar circumstances,” and were allowed 
two years to comply. Buying and selling slaves for any reason 
except to free them was banned. That these rules were going to 
be very difficult to execute became immediately clear from the 
experience of Thomas Coke in Virginia. When he preached 
against slavery in 1785, Coke was threatened by a mob and was 
served with indictments in two counties. One irate woman offered 
a crowd fifty pounds to give Coke one hundred lashes. Later that 
same year the Baltimore Conference suspended the rules against 
slavery, because, as Coke stated: “We thought it prudent to sus- 
pend the minute concerning slavery, on account of the great op- 
position that has been given it, our work being in too infantile a 
state to push things to extremity.” Though the conference reiter- 
ated its principle, “We do hold in deepest abhorrence the practice 
of slavery; and shall not cease to seek its destruction by all wise 
and prudent means,” in fact it had to admit failure. 122

In 1798 Bishop Francis Asbury complained about slavery to 
his Journal: “. . . my mind is much pained. O! to be dependent on 
slaveholders is in part to be a slave and I was free bom. 1 am 
brought to conclude that slavery will exist in Virginia perhaps for 
ages; there is not a sufficient sense of religion nor of liberty to 
destroy it; Methodists, Baptists, Presbyterians, in the highest 
flights of rapturous piety, still maintain and defend it.” Eleven 
years later he was lamenting the fact that the antislavery reputa- 
tion of the Methodists was keeping them from gaining access to 
the slaves:We are defrauded of great numbers by the pains that are taken 
to keep the blacks from us; their masters are afraid of the 
influence of our principles. Would not an amelioration in the 
condition and treatment of slaves have produced more practi- 
cal good to the poor Africans, than any attempt at their eman- 
cipation? The state of society, unhappily does not admit of

CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

145

this: besides, the blacks are deprived of the means of instruc- 
tion; who will take the pains to lead them into the ways of 
salvation, and watch over them that they may not stray, but 
the Methodists? Well; now their masters will not let them 
come to hear us.

The answer to Asbury’s dilemma of conscience was at hand: Em- 
phasize the results of the slave’s conversion! “Our tabernacle is 
crowded again: the minds of the people are strangely changed; 
and the indignation excited against us is overpast: the people see 
and confess that the slaves are made better by religion; and 
wonder to hear the poor Africans pray and exhort .” 123 There 
were Baptists and Presbyterians who also opposed slavery, but 
because their witness was not institutionally promulgated, as were 
those of the Methodists and the Friends, their denominations did 
not “arouse the ire of slaveholders” to the extent that the latter 
two did . 124The egalitarian trend in evangelicalism which drove some 
Methodists, Baptists, and Presbyterians to condemn slavery 
foundered on the intransigency of that institution in the South. 
Those evangelicals who had condemned slavery found themselves 
defending slave conversion for making slaves “better,” which was 
easily transposed into making “better slaves.” Baptists, Method- 
ists, and Presbyterians appointed black “watchmen” or “over- 
seers” to observe the behavior of slave members and report those 
in need of discipline. Slave members were subject to the discipline 
of the congregation, and sometimes the discipline extended to 
“upholding the institution of slavery itself.” For example, the 
Gillfield Baptist Church of Petersburg, Virginia, a separate black 
church, more than once expelled slave members for running away 
from their masters! The sight of a separate black congregation 
disciplining slaves for breaking the slave code must surely have 
appealed to slaveholders . 125

However, slaveholders were not easily convinced that religion 
always supported slave docility, for there was ample proof that

146

THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION”However, slaveholders were not easily convinced that religion 
always supported slave docility, for there was ample proof that

146

THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION”

Christianity was a two-edged sword. A common form of slave 
rebelliousness was the act of running away. It is clear from adver- 
tisements for runaway slaves that religious conversion did not 
make all slaves “better.” One disgruntled slave owner complained 
in the Virginia Gazette of Williamsburg, March 26, 1767, that his 
escaped slave woman Hannah “pretends much to the religion the 
Negroes of late have practised.” Thomas Jones, advertising for his 
escaped slave Sam in The Maryland Journal and Baltimore Adver- 
tiser of June 14, 1793, warned: “HE WAS RAISED IN A FAMILY OF 
RELIGIOUS PERSONS, COMMONLY CALLED METHODISTS, AND 
HAS LIVED WITH SOME OF THEM FOR YEARS PAST, ON TERMS OF 
PERFECT EQUALITY; the refusal to continue him on these terms, 
the subscriber is instructed, has given him offence, and is the sole 
cause of his absconding. ... HE HAS BEEN IN THE USE OF IN- 
STRUCTING AND EXHORTING HIS FELLOW CREATURES OF ALL

COLORS IN MATTERS OF RELIGIOUS DUTY ” From Jones’s

point of view, his slave had been ruined from imbibing Methodist 
notions of equality; from Sam’s point of view, spiritual freedom 
had carried over to the temporal order. Sam’s case was not an 
isolated one. In The Maryland Gazette , January 4, 1798, James 
Brice advertised for “a negro man named JEM,” twenty-eight 
years old, an artisan who “IS OR PRETENDS TO BE OF THE SOCI- 
ETY OF METHODISTS, HE CONSTANTLY ATTENDED THE MEET- 
INGS, AND AT TIMES EXHORTED HIMSELF ” From the same

paper, September 4, 1800, edition, Thomas Gibbs of Queene 
Anne County advertised for his slave Jacob, thirty-five years of 
age, and revealed “HE PROFESSES TO BE A METHODIST, AND HAS 
BEEN IN THE PRACTICE OF PREACHING OF NIGHTS.” Finally, 
Hugh Drummond, in the same paper, advertised a runaway slave, 
Dick, about forty, “HE IS A METHODIST PREACHER .” 126A different kind of rebellious act took place in King William 
County, Virginia, in 1789. An appeal to the governor from the 
county sheriff stated that Methodists and Baptists had been meet- 
ing after dark several times a week with slaves in attendance. 
When “paterrolers” tried to arrest the slaves at one of these

CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

147

gatherings they were attacked and thrown out of a window. The 
sheriff requested state assistance in restoring law and order. 127CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

147

gatherings they were attacked and thrown out of a window. The 
sheriff requested state assistance in restoring law and order. 127

In 1800 an event occurred which had a widespread effect on 
white fear of slave insurrection and on reaction against slave con- 
version — Gabriel’s Rebellion, a slave insurrection planned against 
Richmond, Virginia. Religion played a role in the attitudes and 
discussions of the rebels. “Preachings,” or religious meetings, 
served as occasions for the recruitment of slaves and for plotting 
and organizing the insurrection. Gabriel’s brother Martin, one of 
the plot’s leaders, was known as a preacher. He used the Bible to 
argue that their plans would succeed even against superior num- 
bers. In one discussion of the rebellion Martin contended that 
“their cause was similar to the Israelites,” and that in the Bible 
God had promised “five of you shall conquer an hundred & a 
hundred a thousand of our enemies.” Significantly, African reli- 
gious beliefs were also referred to in the conspiracy. One orga- 
nizer, George Smith, proposed that he travel to the “pipeing tree” 
to enlist the “Outlandish people” (born outside this country) who 
had the ability “to deal with Witches and Wizards, and thus 
[would be] useful in Armies to tell when any calamity was about 
to befall them.” The testimony of a captured insurrectionist that 
all whites were to be massacred, except Quakers, Methodists, and 
Frenchmen, who “were to be spared on account ... of their being 
friendly to liberty,” hardly helped the cause of Methodism (or 
Quakerism) among Virginia slave holders. 128 Reactionary laws 
were quick to follow news of the plot. South Carolina passed a 
law that same year which forbade Negroes to assemble, even with 
whites present, between sunset and sunrise, “for the purpose of 
mental instruction or religious worship.” Virginia passed a similar 
law two years later. Both laws had to be amended, due to pres- 
sure from “religious societies,” so that nothing in them should 
“prevent masters taking their slaves to places of religious worship 
conducted by a regularly ordained or licensed white minister.” 129Rebellion and docility were not the only alternatives for the 
relationship between master and slave. Evangelical religion sup-

148

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

ported both, but it also fostered a more subtle relationship, that of 
religious reciprocity. When white sinners were awakened by 
black exhorters, when masters were converted by the singing, 
shouting, and praying of their slaves, when white congregations 
were pastored by black preachers, the logical extreme of revivalis- 
tic religion was reached. Certainly these incidents were rare, but 
that they occurred at all indicates the manner in which religious 
reciprocity was able to bend the seemingly inflexible positions of 
master and slave.The revivalism of the Great Awakening, spread over time and 
space by evangelical preachers, created the conditions for large- 
scale conversion of the slaves. By revitalizing the religious piety of 
the South, the Awakening(s) stirred an interest in conversion 
which was turned toward the slaves. By heavily emphasizing the 
inward conversion experience, the Awakening tended to de-em- 
phasize the outward status of men, and to cause black and white 
alike to feel personally that Christ had died for them as individu- 
als. Evangelical religion had a universalistic dimension which en- 
couraged preaching to all men, embracing rich and poor, free and 
slave. The emotionalism and plain doctrine of revivalist preaching 
appealed to the masses, including slaves. Black exhorters and 
ministers were licensed to preach and did preach the gospel of 
spiritual freedom to slaves, who were sometimes gathered into 
their own black churches. Negroes, slave and free, attended revi- 
val meetings or Sabbath services and joined Methodist and Bap- 
tist churches in numbers not seen before. The very fact that there 
were increasing numbers of black Christians undermined the old 
notion among whites that evangelization of the slaves was impos- 
sible or anomalous. Still, there was widespread opposition on the 
part of slaveholders, especially during periods of reaction to acts of 
rebellion by Christian slaves.

Demographic and cultural factors, as well as the revivalist phe- 
nomenon, helped to increase the chances of slave conversion by 
the end of the eighteenth and the beginning of the nineteenth 
centuries. In spite of the fact that between 1780 and 1810 “about

CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

149CATHECHESIS AND CONVERSION

149

as many Africans” were “brought into the United States ... as 
during the previous hundred and sixty years of the U.S. involve- 
ment in the slave trade,” the growth in “countryborn” slaves “was 
by far more significant.” 130 The increasing numbers of second-, 
third-, and even fourth-generation slaves born and raised in 
America meant that the linguistic and cultural barriers of earlier 
days were no longer so overwhelming. Moreover, as noted in the 
last chapter, there were situations which allowed for cultural ad- 
justment and reinterpretation. The powerful emotionalism, ec- 
static behavior, and congregational response of the revival were 
amenable to the African religious heritage of the slaves, and forms 
of African dance and song remained in the shout and spirituals of 
Afro-American converts to evangelical Protestantism. In addition, 
the slaves’ rich heritage of folk belief and folk expression was not 
destroyed but was augmented by conversion.The majority of slaves, however, remained only minimally 
touched by Christianity by the second decade of the nineteenth 
century. Presbyterian minister Charles Colcock Jones, a leading 
advocate of the mission to the slaves and an early historian of the 
religious instruction of Negroes, evaluated efforts to convert slaves 
during the period 1790-1820: “On the whole . . . but a minority 
of the Negroes, and that a small one, attended regularly the house 
of God, and taking them as a class, their religious instruction was 
extensively and most seriously neglected.” Jones gave a clue as to 
the class of slaves most likely to be converted: “Growing up under 
the eyes and in the families of owners, they became more attached 
to them, were identified in their households and accompanied 
them to church.” 131 The slaves who had most opportunity to 
become church members were household servants, slave artisans, 
and urban slaves. Slaves in remote rural areas had less opportu- 
nity to attend church, which did not mean, however, that they 
were totally ignorant of Christianity. Slaves could have heard the 
rudiments of Christianity without regularly attending church. 
Jones’s mention of religious instruction and church membership 
are significant because they suggest the limits of revivalism. The

150

“THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION”150

“THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION”

critics of revivalist enthusiasm had admitted that a “season of 
awakening” produced a large number of converts, but they ques- 
tioned the depth and sincerity of these conversions. When the 
revival ended, many recent converts “backslid.” At issue was the 
perennial alternation in Christianity between revival and “declen- 
sion.” Revivals by their very nature are temporary and sporadic. 
Peak experiences of religious fervor may reoccur, but they are not 
constant. After revival comes church organization; after conver- 
sion comes religious nurture. Conversion experience and religious 
instruction, the experiental and the noetic, are complementary in 
the Christian life. The revivalist impulse helped to bring slaves to 
conversion in large numbers. Jones and others realized that the 
next step was missionary outreach. It was necessary to bring reli- 
gious instruction onto the plantation. Now that the soil was pre- 
pared by the intermittent showers of revival, and the seed planted 
by evangelical preaching, what was most needed to gain a bounti- 
ful harvest was systematic, institutional effort — which was exactly 
what the plantation mission was designed to supply.

4

The Rule of Gospel Order

Servants, be obedient to them that are your masters according to the 
flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness of your heart, as unto Christ; 
Not with eyeservice, as menpleasers; but as the servants of Christ, doing 
the will of God from the heart; With good will doing service, as to the 
Lord, and not to men: Knowing that whatsoever good thing any man 
doeth, the same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free. 
And, ye masters, do the same things unto them, forebearing threatening: 
knowing that your Master also is in heaven; neither is there respect of 
persons with him.

EPHESIANS 6:5-9EPHESIANS 6:5-9

TThE INTENSE emphasis upon 
conversion, which was the primary characteristic of evangelical, 
revivalistic Protestantism, tended to level all men before God as 
sinners in need of salvation. This tendency opened the way for 
black converts to participate actively in the religious culture of the 
new nation as exhorters, preachers, and even founders of churches, 
and created occasions of mutual religious influence across racial 
boundaries whereby blacks converted whites and whites converted 
blacks in the heat of revival fervor. This egalitarian tendency could 
push, as it did in the case of early Methodism, toward the condem- 
nation of slavery as inconsistent with the gospel of Jesus. However, 
very few white Christians in the South were willing to be pushed 
that far. Increasingly, slavery was not only accepted as an economic 
fact of life, but defended as a positive good, sanctioned by Scripture 
and capable of producing a Christian social order based on the 
observance of mutual duty, slave to master and master to slave. It 
was the ideal of the antebellum plantation mission to create such a 
rule of gospel order by convincing slaves and masters that their 
salvation depended upon it.

Plantation Missions

The closing years of the eighteenth and the early decades of the 
nineteenth centuries witnessed an unprecedented spread of Chris- 
tianity among Afro-Americans, slave and free.Plantation Missions

The closing years of the eighteenth and the early decades of the 
nineteenth centuries witnessed an unprecedented spread of Chris- 
tianity among Afro-Americans, slave and free.

Although the numbers of black Christians, particularly among 
the Baptists and Methodists, increased rapidly, and while those 
slaves living in or close to towns and cities had opportunities to 
attend church with their masters, and even in rare instances to 
worship at independent black churches, the great majority of ru- 
ral slaves remained outside the reach of the institutional church. 
In the 1830s and 1840s some Southern churchmen became in- 
creasingly concerned about this neglect and determined to re- 
medy it. In 1834 Charles Colcock Jones, one of the leading pro-

152

THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

153

ponents for the establishment of plantation missions, explained 
why more needed to be done:

It is true they [slaves] have access to the house of God on the 
Sabbath; but it is also true that even where the privilege is 
within their reach, a minority only, (and frequently a very 
small one) embrace it. There are multitudes of districts in the 
South and Southwest, in which the churches cannot contain 
one-tenth of the Negro population; besides others in which 
there are no churches at all. It must be remembered also that 
in many of those churches there is preaching only once a 
fortnight, or once a month, and then perhaps only one ser- 
mon. To say that they fare as well as their masters does not 
settle the point; for great numbers of masters have very few or 
no religious privileges at all. 1The distance of many plantations from churches meant that it was 
not possible to reach numerous plantations through ordinary pas- 
toral care. It was necessary to carry the gospel to slaves at home. 
Planters had generally become accustomed to the idea that slaves 
should be converted, but mere passive permission was not 
enough. An aggressive program of plantation missions was 
needed to bring the slaves under Church care. Missionaries were 
required who could devote at least part-time energy to improving 
religious conditions for slaves. Monetary support for plantation 
missions was to come from denominational missionary societies, 
from local churches, and from slaveholders. It was recommended 
that one church or a single planter associate with others to share 
the expense of paying a missionary and building a mission station 
or chapel . 2

In the antebellum South the plantation mission was widely 
propagated as an ideal whose time had come. Techniques similar 
to those used by Bible, Temperance, Tract, and other reform 
societies were employed to raise Southern Christian consciousness 
about the cause of plantation missions. Addresses before planter 
associations, printed sermons and essays, committee reports and 
resolutions of clerical bodies, meetings of concerned clergy and 
laymen, annual reports of associations, interdenominational cooper-

154

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’154

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

ation, and networks of correspondence were all devoted to spread- 
ing the message. Through the circulation of pamphlets and 
papers, plantation missions were brought to the attention of thou- 
sands. Religious journals such as The Gospel Messenger (Episco- 
pal) of Charleston, The Christian Index (Baptist), and The South- 
ern Christian Advocate (Methodist), to name only three, gave fav- 
orable coverage and editiorial support to missions for slaves. The 
Charleston Observer (Presbyterian) even ran a series in 1834 on 
the “Biographies of Servants mentioned in the Scripture: with 
Questions and Answers,” as a practical aid to the religious in- 
struction of slaves. 3Pamphlets with such titles as “Detail of a Plan for the Moral 
Improvement of Negroes on Plantations,” “Pastoral Letter ... on 
the Duty of Affording Religious Instruction to those in Bondage,” 
and “The Colored Man’s Help, or the Planter’s Catechism” were 
published and distributed widely. A Baptist State Convention 
actually sponsored a contest for the best essay on the topic “Con- 
version of the slaves,” which was won by Holland N. McTyeire 
with a paper entitled “The Duties of Christian Masters to Their 
Servants.” The aim of most of this literature was succinctly de- 
scribed in a pamphlet published in 1823 by an Episcopal clergy- 
man from South Carolina: “to show from the Scriptures of the 
Old and New Testament, that slavery is not forbidden by the 
Divine Law: and at the same time to prove the necessity of giving 
religious instruction to our Negroes.” These attempts to mold 
public opinion in favor of plantation missions were evaluated opti- 
mistically by Jones: “As an evidence of the increase of feeling and 
effort on the subject of the religious instruction of the colored 
population we state, that more has been published and circulated on 
the general subject, within the last two years [1833-34] than in 
ten or twenty years’ preceding . . . .” 4 Various denominational 
bodies frequently urged support for plantation missions in official 
resolutions. Not only churchmen but also laymen spoke out for 
religious instruction of the Negro. The prominent planters 
Charles Cotesworth Pinckney, Edward R. Laurens, and White-

THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

155

marsh B. Seabrook, in 1829, 1832, and 1834, respectively, 
stressed the benefits of a Christian slave population before South 
Carolina agricultural societies. 5THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

155

marsh B. Seabrook, in 1829, 1832, and 1834, respectively, 
stressed the benefits of a Christian slave population before South 
Carolina agricultural societies. 5

Writing pamphlets and making speeches for the plantation mis- 
sions did not exhaust the efforts of proponents of the cause. Mission- 
ary societies and associations were actually founded. In 1830 the 
Missionary Society of the South Carolina Conference was founded 
as an auxiliary branch of the Missionary Society of the Methodist 
Episcopal Church under William Capers, superintendent of missi- 
ons and, later, bishop. In 1830-31 two associations of Georgia 
planters were formed for the religious instruction of slaves. One of 
these, in Liberty County, Georgia, became famous. Formed by 
the Midway Congregational Church, pastored by Robert Quarter- 
man, and the local Baptist church, under Samuel Spry Law, the 
Liberty County Association, with Presbyterian Jones as mission- 
ary, served as a model plantation mission. 6 In the association’s 
twelve annual reports, printed and distributed in pamphlet form 
throughout the slave states, planters and clergy could read of the 
practical programs and experience of a working mission. The 
annual reports served also as a clearinghouse for information 
about the mission activities of Baptists, Methodists, Presbyteri- 
ans, and Episcopalians throughout the South by publishing pro- 
gress reports and letters from as far away as Louisiana, Tennes- 
see, and Arkansas. The geographical center of the plantation mis- 
sion movement was lowland South Carolina and Georgia. Letters 
printed in the Liberty County Association Reports indicate that 
there was growing interest but much less concrete achievement in 
other areas of the South. Methodists seemed the most active, but 
the efforts of smaller churches, such as the Moravians and Ger- 
man Lutherans, were duly noted. It was hoped that example 
would move the inactive to missionary zeal.The conversion of slaves occupied an important place on the 
agendas of denominational meetings and sometimes was the topic 
for whole conferences. In 1839 an assembly of Presbyterians from 
the slave states met to consider religious instruction of slaves. In

THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

157THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

157

1845 a meeting was held at Charleston which was attended by 
some of the most prominent planters and ministers of the state. A 
circular had been sent out in preparation for the meeting asking 
interested parties in all the Southern states what was being done 
in their areas for slave conversion. The Proceedings of the three- 
day meeting as well as answers to the circular were published. 
Aiming to mold public opinion, slaveholders were exhorted in the 
Proceedings to realize that a “moral agency . . . gains strength by 
action. The efforts of masters to afford religious instruction to 
their negroes, will act upon others, and react upon themselves.” 7 
Charles Colcock Jones, the leading theoretician and chief publi- 
cist of the plantation mission, tried to portray the movement as part 
of the national fervor for reform w'hich w as articulated institution- 
ally in the interlocking group of benevolent societies known corpo- 
rately as the United Evangelical Front. In Jones’s view, in the 
interdenominational efforts to make America holy by means of 
home and foreign mission societies, Bible and tract societies, and 
temperance and Sabbath School societies, the urgent need of the 
heathen slaves at home to have the Gospel preached to them should 
not be neglected. But as Jones himself was well aware, the practi- 
cal realities of slave control and the maintenance of the institution 
of slavery against abolitionist attack made it impossible for the 
plantation mission to take its place as simply one more tide in the 
flood of evangelical reform. Jones w r as too much the realist not to 
admit “the very strong objections of Southern States” to the “for- 
mation of associations or societies on an extensive scale embracing 
States, or even the whole United States, with central boards, ap- 
pointing agents for the collection of funds and forming auxiliaries, 
employing and appointing ministers and missionaries, disbursing 
monies, in a U'ord assuming the entire control of the great work.” 
Instead, the plantation mission, if it was to be practical, had to 
proceed by u local associations . . . formed by the people interested, 
on the ground itself which they propose to occupy.” 8 Reform or no 
reform, first and last the plantation mission had to prove that it 
represented no threat to slavery, the South’s peculiar institution.158

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

Looming in the background of antebellum discussions of reli- 
gious instruction of the slaves was the growing abolitionist fervor 
in the North and the growing sectional controversy within the 
churches themselves. The abolitionist movement created ambiva- 
lence in Southern thought about the instruction of slaves. On the 
one hand, the fear that abolitionist literature would incite slave 
rebellions tended to have a chilling effect on any kind of instruc- 
tion for slaves. On the other hand, abolitionist arguments against 
slavery challenged proslavery apologists to push slave evangeliza- 
tion as one of the strongest proofs that slavery was a positive 
good. The detrimental effect of the abolition crusade on the plan- 
tation mission was strongly resented by missionaries like Jones:

. . . the excitement in the free States on the civil condition of 
the Negroes manifested itself in petitions to Congress, in the 
circulation of inflammatory publications, and other measures 
equally and as justly obnoxious to the South; all of which had 
a disastrous influence on the success of the work we were 
attempting to do. The effect of the excitement was to turn off 
the attention of the South from the religious to the civil condi- 
tion of the people in question; and from the salvation of the 
soul, to the defence and presevation of political rights .... A 
tenderness was begotten in the public mind on the whole 
subject, and every movement touching the improvement of 
the Negroes was watched .... The result was, to arrest in 
many places efforts happily begun and successfully prosecuted 
for the religious instruction of the Negroes. It was considered 
best to disband schools and discontinue meetings, at least for a 
season; the formation of societies and the action of ecclesiasti- 
cal bodies, in some degree ceased . 9The distribution in the South of revolutionary manifestos, such 
as David Walker’s Appeal , aroused a distrust of all missionaries 
and colporteurs coming into the South “for the purpose of estab- 
lishing tract, temperance, Bible and all societies of that kind.” 
The Southern Religious Telegraph of Virginia had been running a 
series of articles on Christianizing the slaves, but when the public 
became alarmed about antislavery agitation, the editor announced:

THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

159

“At the suggestion of some of our fellow citizens, who regard the 
discussion of the religious instruction of slaves inexpedient at this 
time, we cheerfully comply with their wishes, and will discon- 
tinue for the present the publication of articles on the subject.” 10 
It was a settled policy for the Liberty County Association that 
non-Southemers were welcome visitors to the mission stations, 
but they were not allowed to address or preach to the slaves. 
Abolitionist attacks gave renewed credence to the notion that 
“religious instruction tends to the dissolution of the relations of 
society as now constituted . . . and . . . will . . . lead to insubordi- 
nation.” The Missionary Society of the Methodist Conference of 
South Carolina in 1841 found it expedient to end a report with 
the following disclaimer: “So to preach this Gospel ... is the 
great object, and, we repeat it, the sole object of our ministrations 
among the blacks. This object attained, we find the terminus of 
our anxieties and toils, of our preaching and prayers.” 11Nevertheless, the impact of abolitionism as a detrimental force 
on the slave missions should not be overstressed. In some areas 
reaction was short-lived, and affected public discussion more per- 
haps than private action. The Presbyterian Synod of South Caro- 
lina and Georgia remarked in 1835 that “the religious instruction 
of our slave population, entirely suspended in some parts of the 
country, through the lamentable interference of abolition fanatics 
has proceded with almost unabated diligence and steadiness of 
purpose through the length and breadth of our synod.” 12

Moreover, the abolitionists’ arguments against slavery served 
as a challenge which leaders of the plantation-mission cause ac- 
cepted. If slavery was to be defended as a positive good, slaves 
must be Christianized and master-slave relations regularized by 
the Gospel. As early as 1829 C. C. Pinckney told South Caro- 
lina planters that it was important to gain the “advantage in 
argument over . . . our Northern Brethren” by improving the 
religious state of the slaves. 13 The Fifth Annual Report of the 
Liberty County Association frankly acknowledged the abolition- 
ists’ challenge:

160

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

One of their repeated charges is, that we do not afford reli- 
gious instruction to the Negroes; nor have they failed to paint 
up our deliquences in the strongest colors, and to pervert our 
publications on the subject, designed to arouse ourselves to 
duty; to the support of their own exaggerated statements. —

To this it may briefly be replied, that they themselves have 
greatly retarded this work . . . . MTo this it may briefly be replied, that they themselves have 
greatly retarded this work . . . . M

Schisms over slavery among the Methodist and Baptist 
churches resulted in the formation of the Methodist Episcopal 
Church, South, in 1844 and the Southern Baptist Convention in 
1845, and created greater urgency among Southern churches to 
convert the slaves. At the debates over slavery in the General 
Conference of the Methodist Church, William Capers had force- 
fully argued that if the Church took action against slavery, South- 
ern ministers would be kept from contact with slaves and they 
would be lost to the Church. Once the Church had split over 
slavery, it became incumbent upon Southern churchmen to live 
up to the ideals for which they had seceded. 15

The schisms relieved some of the anxiety among slaveholders 
that the churches were sympathetic to abolitionism. As Methodist 
bishop John Early reported to the editor of the Southern Christian 
Advocate in 1856, “until the Church was divided between North 
and South,” planters “were opposed to the Methodist ministry” 
among their slaves “because of the constant agitation on the subject 
of slavery.” 18 The pronouncements of Southern clergymen were 
also reassuring. The Baptist State Convention of Alabama, for 
example, adopted a resolution strongly condemning abolitionists:

We regard with feelings of strong disapprobation the proceed- 
ings of such fanatics, believing that their efforts are inconsis- 
tent with the gospel of Christ; are calculated to oppress the 
slave, to arm the assassin to shed the blood of good people in 
our state, and to alienate the people in one state from those in 
another, thereby endangering the peace and permanency of 
our happy republic . 17

A more positive approach was taken by the Liberty County 
Association:

THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

161A more positive approach was taken by the Liberty County 
Association:

THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

161

We should protect ourselves by Law, as far as possible, from 
the Circulation of Incendiary publications, and from the teach- 
ings of incendiary Agents; and then should we look at home, 
and enter upon such a discharge of our Duty to the Negroes, 
as will meet the approbation of God and our consciences, and 
commend ourselves to the consciences of other men. One im- 
portant step towards a discharge of our duty in the most 
effectual manner, we believe to be, a general and judicious 
system of religious instruction . ... No means will so effectu- 
ally counteract evil influences , and open up our way to the pro- 
per improvement of our colored population, as a judicious system 
of religious instruction . 16

No doubt the plantation missions existed before there was aboli- 
tionist pressure and would have continued without it, but the 
criticism leveled at Southern churches by Northern ones made 
them more sensitive about their duty to instruct slaves.The “judicious system of religious instruction,” referred to 
above, was a practical method consisting of several procedures 
deemed prudent and appropriate for Southern circumstances. The 
first step was regular preaching to the slaves on the Sabbath with 
sermons geared to their “level of understanding.” Secondly, a 
lecture was to be held once a week during the evening, or if that 
proved impractical, one or two plantation meetings could be held 
for slaves in connection with regular pastoral visitations of white 
church members. The master and his family were urged to go to 
religious meetings attended by their slaves in order to give a good 
example and to create a sense of Christian community. Thirdly, 
Sabbath schools should be organized for children, youths, and 
adults. Fourthly, instruction was to be by the oral method. Anti- 
literacy laws for slaves ensured that missionaries instructed slaves 
in a “religion without letters,” as Woodson called it. Jones rather 
defensively claimed that “The amount of religious Knowledge 
which may be communicated orally , can be conceived of by those 
only, who have made the experiment.” The oral method required 
that the teacher first pose questions, state the answers, and then 
ask the class to repeat question and answer until both were mem-

162

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION”162

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION”

orized. After that, the teacher would ask each pupil in turn to 
answer a question. Several catechisms had been specially prepared 
for teaching slaves. Two of the most popular were Capers’ A 
Short Catechism for the Use of the Colored Members on Trial of the 
Methodist Episcopal Church in South Carolina ( 1 832) and Jones’s 
A Catechism for Colored Persons (1834), though sometimes regu- 
lar catechisms were employed. (Jones’s Catechism proved so 
popular that it was eventually translated into Armenian and Chi- 
nese for use in the foreign mission field.) 19 The oral method of 
instruction also created a demand for collections of homilies, such 
as that of Episcopalian bishop Meade, Sermons , Dialogues and 
Narratives for Servants , To Be Read to Them in Families (1836). 
Audiovisual aids, such as hymns and Scripture cards — illustra- 
tions of Bible stories with texts, questions, and answers printed 
on the back — were also used.

Fifthly, “stated seasons for gathering together all colored mem- 
bers” of the church were strongly recommended. These gather- 
ings were of prime importance, since, as Jones complained, “what- 
ever pains may be taken to instruct candidates for church mem- 
bership, the almost universal practice is to leave them to them- 
selves after they become members and no further efforts are made 
to advance them in knowledge.” This was a fatal error, since the 
slaves required “as much instruction after admission to the church 
as before ,” according to the missionary. Finally, no plantation 
meeting should ever be held without the knowledge and express 
consent of the owner or manager of the place. 20

According to the plantation missionaries, their judicious meth- 
ods of instruction would improve the morals of the slaves and 
would make them more honest and reliable. Jones’s Catechism 
enjoined slavesto count their Masters ‘worthy of all honour,’ as those whom 
God has placed over them in this world; 'with all fear,’’ they 
are to be ''subject to them ’ and obey them in all things, possible 
and lawful, with good will and endeavour to please them 
well, . . . and let Servants serve their masters as faithfully be-

THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

163

hind their backs as before their faces. God is present to see, if 
their masters are not. 21

As masters were well aware, there was no insurance that slaves 
would take this lesson to heart. The memories of two slave re- 
volts, led by black men who claimed religious validation for their 
cause, made slaveholders wary of missionaries’ assurances about 
the tranquilizing effect of Christianity upon slaves.A majority of the slaves executed for conspiring to revolt in 
Charleston, South Carolina, in 1822 were members of the city’s 
African Methodist Church. Two of the conspirators were class 
leaders, and several witnesses implicated Morris Brown, pastor of 
the church and later assistant bishop to Richard Allen. It was 
alleged that Denmark Vesey, the plot’s leader, used scriptural 
texts to win supporters for the insurrection. One conspirator con- 
fessed that Vesey “read in the Bible where God commanded, that 
all should be cut off, both men, women and children, and said . . . 
it was no sin for us to do so, for the Lord had commanded us to 
do it.” 22 Vesey, an ex-slave, who had purchased his own freedom 
(with the proceeds from a lottery), read his Bible and found in it 
that slavery was wrong. According to a deposition against Vesey, 
“His general conversation was about religion which he would 
apply to slavery, as for instance, he would speak of the creation of 
the world, in which he would say all men had equal rights, blacks 
as well as whites, — all his religious remarks were mingled with 
slavery.” Another leader of the conspiracy was “Gullah” Jack 
Pritchard, frequently referred to by the slave conspirators as “the 
little man who can’t be killed, shot or taken.” Gullah Jack, who 
combined membership in the African Methodist Church with the 
practice of conjure, promised the conspirators that his charms 
would make them invulnerable. Thus, as Vincent Harding has 
observed, the Vesey Conspiracy had the best of both religious 
worlds, the doctrinal sanction of Scripture and the practical pro- 
tection of conjure. 23

In 1831 the bloodiest slave revolt in U.S. history took place in

164

THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’In 1831 the bloodiest slave revolt in U.S. history took place in

164

THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

Southampton, Virginia, under the leadership of Nat Turner, who 
had the reputation of being a seer, a prophet, and a preacher. 
Upon capture Turner was questioned about his motives. He 
answered that in 1826 he had received power to command the 
clouds, that he could cure disease by imposition of his hands, and 
that he had been directed to act by an omen from God. 24

To counteract the damage done to the cause of slave instruction 
in the minds of white Southerners by reports of the Vesey and 
Turner revolts, plantation missionaries maintained that religious 
fanaticism and false teachings were to blame. Slaves who had 
been correctly instructed would never have followed such false 
prophets. As proof of this assertion, Jones offered the example of a 
“truly religious” Negro:

I shall never forget the remark of a venerable colored preacher 
made with reference to the South Hampton tragedy. With his 
eyes filled with tears, and his whole manner indicating the 
deepest emotion, said he, ‘Sir, it is the Gospel that we igno- 
rant and wicked people need. If you will give us the Gospel it 
will do more for the obedience of servants and the peace of the 
community than all your guards, and guns, and bayonets.’

This same Christian minister, on receiving a packet of inflam- 
matory pamphlets through the Post-office . . . immediately 
called upon the Mayor of the City and delivered them into his 
hands . 25

Which image of slave religion was the true one: that of Nat 
Turner, prophet and rebel, or that of Jones’s “good Negro preach- 
er”? The plantation missionaries worked long and hard to ensure 
that it was the latter.Supporters of the missions reiterated their contention that 
Christianity would regularize and pacify relations between slaves 
and masters. To attain this end, plantation missionaries attempted 
to convince masters that they had duties toward their slaves. 
Masters and, particularly, mistresses were urged to take an active 
part in catechizing their slaves by reading sermons to them, in- 
cluding them in family prayers, and teaching them in Sabbath

THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

165

schools. More than instruction was necessary; it was important to 
build a relationship between master and slave consonant with 
Christianity. Religion, it was argued, must influence the owner’s 
whole treatment of his slaves, physical as well as spiritual:

It is the duty of Masters to provide for their Servants, both old 
and young, good houses, comfortable clothing, wholesome 
and abundant food; to take care of them when old, and infirm 
and crippled and useless; nurse them carefully in their sick- 
ness, and in nothing let them suffer, so far as their means will 
bear them out; and keep their families together. It is their duty 
to protect their Servants, from abuse or ill-treatment, and 
have justice done them when they are wronged . 26An ideal for plantation life was preached to slaveholders. Slaves 
were to be allowed opportunities “to make themselves comfort- 
able and to accumulate money.” A plot for gardening or for rais- 
ing livestock would benefit both slave and owner for the “greater 
the interest which they have at stake on the plantation, the greater 
security for their good behavior, and the greater prospect of their 
moral improvement.” Such missionaries as Jones and Capers who 
were slaveholders themselves predicted that “religious instruction 
of the Negroes will promote our own morality and religion ,” for 
when “one class rises, so will the other; the two are so intimately 
associated they are apt to rise or fall together; to benefit servants, 
evangelize the masters; to benefit masters, evangelize the ser- 
vants.” Ideally, the aim of the plantation mission was to create a 
“biracial community” of Christian masters and slaves. Pragmati- 
cally, it was suggested at the Charleston Meeting of 1845 “that 
where every good motive may be wanting, a regard to self-interest 
should lead every planter to give his people instruction. 27

The missionary’s ideal picture of a Christianized master-slave 
relationship contributed to the Southern myth of the benevolent, 
planter-patriarch presiding benignly over his happy black folks. 
In reality it was realized no more frequently than most religious 
ideals. Even economic self-interest was not always enough to bar 
capricious acts of cruelty in a system where one man had auto-

166

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’166

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

cratic control over another. Numerous cases perversely proved 
that “gettin’ religion” made the master treat his slaves more 
strictly and thus, from the slaves’ point of view, worse. Frederick 
Douglass in his Narrative sarcastically portrayed the ill effects of 
religious conversion upon the personality of his master, Thomas 
Auld. And there is a great deal of supporting testimony from less 
famous ex-slaves, who announced their preference for “uncon- 
verted” masters. Former slave Mrs. Joseph Smith explained to 
the American Freedman’s Inquiry Commission in 1863 why she 
thought Christian slaveholders “were the hardest masters.”

Well, it is something like this — the Christians will oppress 
you more. For instance, the biggest dinner must be got on 
Sunday. Now, everybody that has got common sense knows 
that Sunday is a day of rest. And if you do the least thing in 
the world that they don’t like, they will mark it down against 
you, and Monday you have got to take a whipping. Now, the 
card-player and horse-racer won’t be there to trouble you.

They will eat their breakfast in the morning and feed their 
dogs, and then be off, and you won’t see them again till night.

I would rather be with a card-player or sportsman, by half, 
than a Christian . 28

Before the same commission Isaac Throgmorton testified:I would rather be with a card-player or sportsman, by half, 
than a Christian . 28

Before the same commission Isaac Throgmorton testified:

I believe the people that were not religious treated their slaves 
better than those who were religious. A religious man will 
believe whatever the overseer says, and he has the control of 
the hands in the field. Whatever he says is law and gospel. If 
he says ‘John has acted impudent,’ the master will come 
round and say, ‘Chastise him for it,’ and the overseer will give 
him two or three hundred lashes. Then, in the next place, 
they don’t feed nor clothe their slaves as well as the irreligious 
man. There was one Mr. Anderson, a preacher who married a 
girl who had slaves, and after that, he quit preaching pretty 
much, and drove his slaves very hard. He couldn’t see any- 
thing but cotton bales ... If pork was selling at a high price, 
all the slaves would get from the religious man would be three 
pounds a week, while the man that couldn’t be so religious 
would give them four pounds . 29

THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

167

As Throgmorton’s testimony attests, the virtues of thrift and care- 
ful management as exercised by a religious-minded slaveholder 
might very well mean hard times for his slaves.167

As Throgmorton’s testimony attests, the virtues of thrift and care- 
ful management as exercised by a religious-minded slaveholder 
might very well mean hard times for his slaves.

Incidents of Christian slaveholders, including clergymen, bru- 
talizing their slaves abound in the narratives of former slaves. 
Susan Boggs, ex-slave from Virgina, for example, recalled, “the 
man that baptized me had a colored woman tied up in his yard to 
whip when he got home, that very Sunday and her mother be- 
longed to that same church. We had to sit and hear him preach 
and her mother was in church hearing him preach.” She con- 
cluded, “I didn’t see any difference between the slaveholders who 
had religion and those who had not ...” Similar examples of the 
cruelty of pious slave masters could be multiplied indefinitely. 30 
The blatant hypocrisy of white Christians was a fact of life to 
slaves, a fact undoubtedly discussed and deplored in the quarters. 
“I’d say old master treated us slaves bad,” recalled Carey Daven- 
port of Walker County, Texas, “and there was one thing I 
couldn’t understand, ’cause he was ’ligious and every Sunday 
momin’ everybody had to git ready and go for prayer. I never 
could understand his ’ligion, ’cause sometimes he git up off his 
knees and befo’ we git out the house he cuss us out.” 31 The ideal 
of the patriarchal master, his rule tempered by Christian benevo- 
lence, was for many slaves an ironic fiction. An interview with a 
South Carolina freedman, which was reported from Port Royal in 
1863 by a Northern white journalist, Charles Nordhoff, illustrates 
the basis for the slave’s ironic view of their masters’ Christian 
virtue:For a people living under a patriarchal system, they display a 
singular dislike to the patriarchs. I find the testimony univer- 
sal, that the masters were ‘mean.’ All were not cruel, but all 
were hard taskmasters, so their former subjects say. ‘Dey’s all 
mean alike,’ said one man, when closely questioned. Now 
there was one Fripps, a planter on one of the islands, of whom 
the blacks habitually speak as ‘good Mr. Fripps.’ ‘Come now,

S?m,’ said the questioner, ‘there was good Mr. Fripps, he

168

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

could not have been mean.’ ‘Yes, sah, he bad to his people 
same as any of ’em.’ ‘Why do you call him good Mr. Fripps, 
then?’ ‘Oh!’ said Sam, ‘dat no tell he good to we; call him 
good ’cause he good Metodis’ man — he sing and pray loud on 
Sundys .’ 32Whether the master was good or bad, benevolent or cruel, the 
institution of slavery itself frequently made the ideal seem unat- 
tainable. One well-intentioned planter, for example, complained: 
“When I instruct my people they presume upon it, and almost in 
proportion to my attention to them is my trouble with them. If I 
have occasion to correct one of them, immediately he absents 
himself from meeting, and there ends religious instruction with 
him.” In 1829 plantation owners petitioned the South Carolina 
Methodist Conference for special preachers for their slaves on the 
grounds that the “relationship between Master and slave made 
void the best efforts of the most pious owners in Christianizing 
them.” Wary slaveholders warned that “if you gave a nigger an 
inch he would take an ell” and that granting religious privileges 
to slaves was to open a Pandora’s box of troublesome claims. The 
attitude of a good many masters was probably represented by the 
statement of one Mississippi slaveholder to the effect “that there 
was no difference in the market value of sinners and saints.” Fi- 
nally, there were those who were certain that “fiddling and danc- 
ing made the largest crops of cotton, and nigger religion led to 
secret combinations and dangerous insurrections.” 33 
While Jones, Capers, and other spokesmen for the plantation 
mission consistently reiterated the distinction between temporal 
and spiritual equality, there remained among slaveholders, even 
those generally favorable to slave conversion, a lingering suspicion 
that the two could not be as clearly segregated as the missionaries 
claimed. In brief, they objected “that religious instruction tends to 
the dissolution of the relations of society as now constituted; 
and . . . that it will really do the people no good, but lead to 
insubordination.” 34 They felt that Christian fellowship between 
master and slave, unless very carefully regulated, would corrode

THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

169THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

169

the proper social hierarchy — the essential inferiority of blacks and 
superiority of whites— upon which the system rested. Slave con- 
version had to be measured by the rule of slave control, and a 
plantation manager would be dangerously remiss if he allowed 
anyone other than himself to do the measuring. So thought 
Whitemarsh B. Seabrook, a prominent South Carolina planter 
who accepted the value of religious instruction of slaves but who 
also fretted about fuzzy proposals delivered by idealistic mission- 
aries without sufficient regard for the safeguards necessary to pro- 
tect “domestic policy.” In his capacity as president of the Agricul- 
tural Society of St. John’s Colleton, Seabrook delivered an ad- 
dress on the Management of Slaves , published in 1834, in which 
he castigated those missionaries who, “in their behavior and teach- 
ings, apply the same rules to the black as the white man: Thereby 
laying the foundation for opinions inimical to the peace of the 
State, and hence to the cause of Christ itself.” Seabrook detected 
in the missionaries’ activities in regard to the slaves a “levelling 
tendency” which had to be condemned immediately and in no 
uncertain terms. This tendency toward leveling resulted from too 
idealistic a view of slave conversion: “Impelled by the paramount 
injunction to watch over the souls of the destitute,” the mission- 
aries, according to Seabrook, “having that isolated principle in 
view are, at this moment; pursuing a course of conduct in refer- 
ence to our coloured population which may terminate in habits of 
irremediable insubordination.” Challenging the mission ideal, 
Seabrook cynically observed that the “spectacle, of about three 
hundred thousand slaves under ‘the care of the Church’ of South 
Carolina, preparing themselves ‘with prayer and fasting,’ to re- 
ceive the admonitions and precepts of the Saviour, is one of those 
fairy sketches educed from the exuberance of an erratic fancy.” 35 
After vehemently denying that slaves should be “acquainted 
with the whole Bible,” or every doctrine therein, Seabrook 
argued that it was “absolutely necessary” for them to become 
“intimately acquainted” with “the prominent portions of Scripture 
which shew the duties of servants and the rights of masters.”170

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION”

Moreover, any attempt to make the religious knowledge of slaves 
“co-extensive with that of their owners” was sheer lunacy. It was 
entirely sufficient if the slave was “informed on points essential to 
his salvation.” Indeed, many servants had been “irretrievably 
ruined,” he asserted, “by a false conception on the part of the 
owner or teacher of the duties which Christianity enjoins.” Criti- 
cizing two of the more widely accepted programs for the religious 
instruction of the slaves, those drafted by Charles Colcock Jones 
and Thomas S. Clay in 1833, Seabrook attacked the suggestion 
that “the slaveholder and his family should officiate as teachers to 
their own people” as impractical, and predicted that the scene of 
white South Carolinians “reading and explaining the Bible and 
conversing with their servants on the subject of the soul’s immor- 
tality” would surely signal that the “reign of fanaticism and mis- 
rule will have commenced.” 36Even more threatening to a sane “domestic policy” was the 
existence of black preachers, lecturers, and catechists, who “have 
been the instruments of positive evils to society; apparent good 
they might have rendered; of real benefit they never have been to 
any one,” as the precedents of 1822 and 1831 effectively demon- 
strated. Seabrook’s objection to black clergymen and black cat- 
echists followed logically from his distrust of religious leveling: 
“The South are not, and I trust never will be prepared to estab- 
lish among our servants a system of ecclesiastical preferment. 
They cannot allow any slave or free negro to assume an authority 
and influence, in derogation of the right, which, in this commu- 
nity, should be the exclusive property of the whites.” In his en- 
thusiasm to stamp out any suggestion of religious equality be- 
tween blacks and whites, Seabrook totally rejected the seemingly 
innocuous practice of adapting a part of every sermon to the 
“intellectual wants” of the slaves, and even objected to the custom 
of lining out a few verses of the hymns so that the slaves might 
more readily join in the services. Both techniques he judged anath- 
ema as devices of the levelers. 37

Certainly, most plantation missionaries would have considered

THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

171Certainly, most plantation missionaries would have considered

THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

171

Seabrook’s views to be alarmist in the extreme. And yet, over- 
stated as his position may have been, it did point up a very real 
problem: the difficult, if not impossible, task of ensuring that the 
egalitarian tendencies of Christian instruction would remain safely 
within the boundaries of slave management. Labor as they might, 
the missionaries could not yoke together the goals of slave instruc- 
tion and slave control into a stable and permanent union. Inherent 
in the recognition of the slave’s claims to humanity and even more 
in the assertion of his right to Christian instruction was, as Sea- 
brook astutely recognized, an implicit threat, even though muted, 
to the practice of slave control and management. The threat came 
closer to being explicit when some masters admitted that they had 
been converted to a more spiritual view of their slaves. Seabrook’s 
worst fear would have been confirmed, for example, by the slave- 
holder who pledged, “I will never put obstructions between man 
and his God; thinking it a matter of conscience, and every man, 
white or black has a right to pursue a course to suit himself.” 38 
Plantation missionaries asserted that the discipline of the 
church was a useful means of reminding slaves of their duties 
toward their masters. And so it was. But once in a while it 
worked to remind masters of their duties toward their slaves. In 
1820 the Hephzibah Baptist Church in East Feliciana Parish, 
Louisiana, “took up the conduct of Br. Wilm West for whipping 
his black brother; the church considered there was no cause for 
his doing so and he was excluded for the same by the church.” 
The Frederiksburg Baptist Church in Virginia charged one of its 
members “Bro. Wingfield with 111 Treatment of a Servant Girl” 
in July 1846. After a committee had been appointed to investi- 
gate the charge, Wingfield admitted that he had “whipped the 
girl indiscreatly.” Concern for the slaves’ religious state led the 
Dover Baptist Association of Virginia to protest in 1850 against 
the law forbidding slave literacy. The association resolved “to use 
all proper means to procure such a modification of the laws as 
would remove all restraints from the prudent exertion to teach the 
African race to read the Bible and instruct them in those thingsWilliam Capers. Reprinted from William Pope Harrison, The Gospel 
Among the Slaves (Nashville, 1893).

THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

173

which belong to their everlasting weal.” Incidents like these were 
few and far between, but the fact that they occurred at all indi- 
cates that the ideal of reciprocal Christian duties had some power 
to arbitrate if not to ameliorate the relationship of master and 
slave. The suggestion that masters had any duties toward their 
slaves, was, as Eugene Genovese has pointed out, a significant 
admission affecting the theoretical framework of the slave system. 
It was a concession which slaves were quick to grab hold of, insist 
upon, and extend. Similarly, the qualification that Jones added to 
his description of the slaves’ duties toward their masters — that 
slaves ought to “obey them in all things possible and lawful” — was 
important in that it made conditional and relative the absolute 
authority of the master. If a slave was obliged to obey only the 
lawful commands of his master, a door, no matter how small the 
space, had been left ajar for the slave’s own judgment and will to 
be vindicated if they came into conflict with his master’s. 39

The antebellum plantation missionary faced, besides these ideo- 
logical challenges, the usual practical difficulties which hampered 
his predecessors: too few ministers, inadequate facilities, and lack 
of money. Concerning financial difficulties Holland N. McTyeire 
commented bitingly, “It is this necessity of taking poor men’s 
money to preach to rich men’s Negroes that keeps the treasury of 
the Missionary Society low.” A report of the Missionary Society 
of the Methodist Episcopal Church in 1841 described a few other 
difficulties encountered by missionaries, particularly in the low- 
land coastal regions where they were most active:In no portion of our work are our missionaries called to en- 
dure greater privations or make greater sacrifices of health and 
life, than in these missions among the slaves, many of which 
are located in sections of the Southern country which are 
proverbially sickly, and under the fatal influence of a climate 
which few white men are capable of enduring even for a single 
year.

Capers confirmed that a missionary acted as “a servant of slaves 
literally — treated as inferior by the proprietors, as hardly equal to

174

“THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION”

the overseers, half starved sometimes, suffocated with smoke, sick 
with the stench of dirty cabins & as-dirty negroes, sleepless from 
the stings of . . . musquitoes and all in the very centre ... of the 
kingdom of disease,” all for the privilege of being called a “nigger 
preacher .” 40Yet the task inspired some to missionary zeal. “My heart was 
filled with gratitude and thankfulness to God,” exclaimed one 
South Carolina missionary, “for the great privilege of being an 
honored instrument in his hand of carrying the gospel to those 
who had never heard it before although they were in my own 
native land.” Another missionary confessed simply: “I was pleased 
with the idea of preaching the gospel to the poor .” 41 
In all the reports, resolutions, minutes, sermons, and speeches 
devoted to the plantation-mission cause, several kinds of motives 
were expressed by planters and missionaries. The desire to evan- 
gelize the poor, the desire to make slaves docile, the desire to 
create a model plantation, and the desire to defend slavery 
against abolitionist attacks were all reasons for supporting plan- 
tation missions. In addition, it has been suggested, there was 
another reason moving laymen and clergy alike, although this 
reason remained largely unexpressed. Not only was Christianiza- 
tion of the slaves a rationale for slavery, but it was, as it had 
been from the beginning, a balm for the occasional eruptions of 
Christian conscience disturbed by the notion that maybe slavery 
was wrong. Donald G. Mathews has aptly described this uncon- 
scious motivation:

The conversion of his slave would . . . please a Christian 
slaveholder who was concerned with the state of their souls, 
and who might even have had some secret misgivings about 
owning them. If Negroes could not be trusted with the gos- 
pel, Christianity might be “at war” with slavery, but if they 
became true Christians within the structures of Southern so- 
ciety, they would be living proof of God’s favor, and consci- 
ence might be satisfied. After all, the Church had said that 
the master’s first duty was to provide for the salvation of his 
servants . 42

THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

175THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

175

In moments of doubt about his own salvation, the slaveholder 
perhaps found some compensation in zeal for the conversion of his 
slaves. Moreover, as the North Carolina Christian Advocate of 
December 15, 1859, argued, the Southern Christian conscience 
was caught in a bind: “Everybody who believes in religion at all, 
admits that it is the duty of Christians to give religious instruction 
to the slave population of the Southern States. To deny the safety 
and propriety of preaching the Gospel to the negroes, is either to 
abandon Christianity, or to admit that slavery is condemned by 
it.” 43

The effectiveness of the antebellum plantation mission is dif- 
ficult to measure. Undoubtedly, the publicity generated by spon- 
sors of the mission contributed to an increased awareness of their 
cause as a current issue in Southern society. As the century wore 
on into the decade of the 1850s, institutional efforts were in- 
creased. However, the resolutions of some clerical bodies re- 
mained simply that. For example, in 1834 an impressive-sound- 
ing “Kentucky Union for the moral and religious improvement of 
the colored race” was formed as “a union of several denominations 
of Christians in the State.” Five years later, according to the chair- 
man of the Union’s executive committee, the “Union had not 
accomplished much,” despite ten vice presidents and a seven-man 
executive committee. The opposite was true of the Liberty 
County Georgia Association, which was an effective organization 
for catechizing slaves, though its successes were dwarfed by the 
size of the black population in the area where it worked. 44In the field of plantation missions the Southern Methodists 
proved to be the most active, although Baptists, Presbyterians, 
and Episcopalians also increased their efforts toward slave conver- 
sion. From 1846 to 1861 the Methodist Episcopal Church, 
South, is said to have raised its black membership from 118,904 
to 209,836. Methodist contributions to plantation missions grew 
from about $80,000 in 1845 to $236,000 in 1861. However, 
Methodist claims to increased membership due to mission work 
must be viewed with caution. It has been pointed out that “The

1 76 “THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION”1 76 “THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION”

apparent rapid growth of missions, compared to that of the regu- 
lar work, was not as impressive as it appears . . . many city 
churches put their Negroes into missions, thus swelling the mis- 
sion statistics without any actual growth in Church membership.” 
It has been estimated that between the years 1845 and 1860 the 
black membership of the Baptist Church increased from 200,000 
to 400,000. 45 But figures of church membership are not generally 
noted for their accuracy. It should be remembered also that 
church membership is not the only measure of evangelization. 
Undoubtedly, many slaves learned the tenets of Christianity, ac- 
cepted them, and attended church, without actually appearing on 
the official rolls of any church. In 1857 the white Methodist 
minister, John Dixon Long, described the class of slaves most 
likely to be so enrolled, “such as are owned by the less extensive 
slaveholders and farmers . . . have no overseer, live in the kitchen, 
mingle with the master’s family, eat the same kind of food . . . 
Their children are raised with their master’s children, play with 
them, and nurse them ... A strong attachment frequently exists 
between them and their masters and mistresses. From this class 
we derive most of our church members ...” (Significantly Long 
adds: “Notwithstanding the superior physical condition of this 
class of slaves, they are generally more unhappy and restless than 
the more degraded classes. Their superior advantages only serve 
as a lamp to show them their degradation.”) 46

How did slaves respond to plantation missions? For some, the 
novelty of religious instruction exerted an appeal. Other slaves 
met the missionary’s instruction with arguments he did not ex- 
pect. Novice missionaries were forewarned:He who carries the Gospel to them . . . discovers deism, skep- 
ticism, universalism ... all the strong objections against the 
truth of God; objections which he may perhaps have con- 
sidered peculiar only to the cultivated minds ... of critics and 
philosophers ! 47

Some slaves resented the message of docility preached by the 
missionaries and rejected it out of hand as “white man’s religion.”

THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

177

Still another attitude toward religious practice was expressed by 
those slaves who complained that they were too weary to attend 
church, and that it was “hard for them to serve their earthly and 
heavenly master too .” 48 And, of course, there were slaves who 
found meaning in the message spread by plantation missionaries, 
accepted it on faith and tried their best to incorporate it in their 
lives.It is important to realize that slaves learned about Christianity 
not only from whites but from other slaves as well. Some slave 
children received their first instruction in Christianity from par- 
ents, kinfolk, or elder slaves. According to Jones, “The Negroes 
on plantations sometimes appoint one of their number, commonly 
the old woman who minds the children during the day to teach 
them to say their prayers, repeat a little catechism and a few 
hymns, every evening .” 49 Slave preachers, licensed and unli- 
censed, black exhorters, and church-appointed watchmen — or 
“overseers,” as they were also called — instructed their fellow 
slaves in the rudiments of Christianity, nurtured their religious 
development, and brought them to conversion in some cases with- 
out the active involvement of white missionaries or masters. 
Then, too, it was in the nature of Protestant evangelicalism to 
de-emphasize the role of mediators between the person and God. 
As Luther Jackson perceptively observed: “Experimental religion 
by its very nature is an inward, subjective, experience so that the 
slave who was convinced of sin in his own heart might seek 
baptism and church membership without the intervention of any 
white Christians whatsoever .” 50 At the core of this piety was the 
Reformation insight that salvation was based not on external ob- 
servance and personal merit, nor on the intercession of church and 
clergy, but on the relationship of the individual to the sovereign 
will of God. With this view of the religious life the person inevita- 
bly turned inward and searched his or her own heart to discern 
the workings of God’s Spirit there.

Coupled with the notion that ultimate authority rested on 
God’s Word as expressed in the Bible, the stress on inner personal

178

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’Coupled with the notion that ultimate authority rested on 
God’s Word as expressed in the Bible, the stress on inner personal

178

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

experience encouraged individual autonomy in matters of reli- 
gious conscience, an autonomy difficult to control, as the fissipa- 
rous tendencies of Protestantism have frequently shown. Among 
the evangelical churches the Baptists, in particular, institutional- 
ized the spirit of Gospel freedom by insisting upon the autonomy 
of each congregation. Black Protestants, as well as whites, im- 
bibed this spirit of religious freedom, and proved, to the extent 
possible, not at all reluctant about deciding their own religious 
affairs. Baptists, precisely because of their independent church 
polity, offered more opportunity than any other denomination for 
black members to exercise a measure of control over their church 
life. In some mixed churches committees of black members were 
constituted in order to oversee the church order of black mem- 
bers. These committees listened to applicants relate their religious 
experience and heard the replies of those members charged with 
breach of discipline. They were usually restricted to an advisory 
role, as their recommendations had to be approved by the general 
church meeting. Still, committees of “the brethern in black,” 
meeting once a month, conducting business, and reporting their 
recommendations to the general meeting, gave to black church 
members experience in church governance, and so laid a founda- 
tion upon which freedmen would rapdily build their own inde- 
pendent churches after emancipation. 51Long before that day, however, as discussed earlier, both slaves 
and free blacks in some towns of the South had already begun to 
exercise control over religious organizations. The early indepen- 
dence of black churches and preachers had been curtailed in law 
and in fact by the reaction of Southern whites to slave conspira- 
cies and to abolitionist agitation. By 1832 some separate African 
Baptist churches were required to merge with white churches. 
The African Baptist Church at Williamsburg, Virginia, was 
closed, and slave members at Elam Baptist in Charles City were 
transferred by their owners to a church under white control. 52 
Despite harassment and legal restriction, there were black 
churches and black preachers who managed, now and then to

THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

179THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

179

successfully evade limits to their autonomy. Decried as a danger- 
ous anomaly by some Southern whites, black congregations — a 
few led by black pastors — not only survived but even thrived. In 
1845 the Baptist Sunbury Association of Georgia had 4,444 
black members (and 495 whites) served by seven black churches 
with four ordained black ministers and at least one more black 
member licensed to preach. In Virginia several African church 
choirs gave concerts and organized fairs to raise funds for their 
churches. Black churches engaged in benevolent activities as well. 
According to one traveler, “In 1853, fifteen thousand dollars were 
contributed by five thousand slaves in Charleston, to benevolent 
objects.” One benevolent cause which black Christians took up 
was the foreign missions. As early as 1815 the Richmond African 
Baptist Missionary Society was formed, and in 1821 two mem- 
bers of the society, Lott Carey and Colin Teague, were sent as 
missionaries to Liberia. In 1843 the slaves of J. Grimke Drayton 
of South Carolina “planted in their own time, a missionary crop” 
which netted sixteen dollars for “the extension of the gospel.” 
Another benevolent cause sponsored by black churches was self- 
help. The Gillfield Baptist Church, in Petersburg, Virginia, re- 
ceived a “petition of a member from a sister church for funds with 
which to buy her self and her children” — a common request. By 
the time of emancipation there were black churches in the South 
with histories that extended back fifty — and in a few cases, sev- 
enty-five — years. 53For slaves, either in mixed or in separate black churches, to 
participate in the organization, leadership, and governance of 
church structures was perceived as “imprudent,” and attempts 
were made to carefully limit black participation. Surely it was 
inconsistent, argued the more thoroughgoing defenders of slavery, 
to allow blacks such authority. As Charles Cotesworth Pinkney 
declared before the Charleston Agricultural Society in 1829, the 
exercise of religious prerogatives opened to slaves a sphere of 
freedom from white control. “We look upon the habit of Negro 
preaching as a wide-spreading evil; not because a black man can-

180 “THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION”

not be a good one, but . . . because they acquire an influence 
independent of the owner, and not subject to his control; . . . 
when they have possessed this power, they have been known to 
make an improper use of it .” 54 By active if limited participation in 
the institutional life of the church, black preachers and church 
members seized opportunities to publicly express their views and 
to direct themselves. The problem with including slaves in 
church fellowship was that it was difficult to control their efforts 
toward autonomy, particularly when the churches stressed an in- 
ner, personal, experiential approach to religion and thus encour- 
aged individualism. The difficulty was augmented by the partici- 
patory character of church government which did not, among 
evangelical Protestants, depend solely upon the clergy but in- 
volved the voices and votes of individual members of the congre- 
gation in such important matters as “calling” ministers, electing 
representatives to meetings of larger church bodies, disciplining 
fellow members, and admitting new ones. There were, then, two 
conflicting tendencies in the biracial religious context: one en- 
couraged black independence; the other, white control.The Limits of Christian Fellowship 
An essential part of church life for white and black church mem- 
bers was the ordering of personal behavior and social relationships 
according to the moral precepts of the Bible. It was the serious 
responsibility of the congregation as a whole, and of each member 
as well, to keep watchful care over the daily activities of the 
brothers and sisters. Meetings were held regularly, usually quar- 
terly or monthly, to discuss and adjudicate breaches of church 
discipline. At these meetings church members were reported or 
reported themselves for un-Christian conduct; committees were 
appointed to investigate disputes between the brethren; those ac- 
cused were given opportunity to answer charges made against 
them; letters of “dismission” w'ere granted and denied; unrepen- 
tant offenders were suspended or expelled; the repentant were 
readmitted into church fellow ship; and minutes were kept of the

THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

181

proceedings. Sins for which members, white and black, could 
expect to be disciplined ranged from lying and backbiting to 
drunkenness and adultery. It was in the context of this disciplined 
“watch care” that the ideal fellowship of covenanted believers was 
to be built and preserved. It was in this context also that the 
white and black members of mixed churches in the antebellum 
South struggled with the tension between Christian fellowship 
and the system of slavery. Fellowship required that all church 
members be treated alike; slavery demanded that black members, 
even the free, be treated differently. 55One of the more touchy areas of potential conflict between 
fellowship and slavery was the problem of the mistreatment of 
slaves. Did the rule of Gospel order extend to the means used by 
masters to control their slaves? In theory the answer was, of 
course, yes, but in practice it was a difficult issue. When, for 
example, the Baptist Dover Association of Virginia was ques- 
tioned in 1796, “Is there no restriction on believing masters in the 
chastisement of their servants?” its response was: “There is no 
doubt but masters may, and sometimes do exercise an unreason- 
able authority; but as it is very difficult, and perhaps impossible to 
fix a certain rule in these cases, we think the churches should take 
notice of such as they may think improper and deal with the 
transgressor, as they would with offenders in other crimes.” 56 The 
Mississippi Baptist Association, meeting in session in October 
1 808, received a similar query: “What steps would be most advis- 
able to take with members of our society whose treatment to their 
slaves is unscriptural?” Their answer was as general as that of the 
Virginia Dover Association: “We recommend to the several 
churches belonging to our connection to take notice of any improp- 
er treatment of their members toward their slaves and deal with 
them in brotherly love according to the rule of the gospel.” 57 It 
was a problematic issue for a very basic reason: to permit a slave 
to bring an accusation of misconduct against a white member was 
to contradict in the Church the civil order where slave testimony 
against whites was legally unacceptable.

182

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’182

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

Even if a slave owner was accused of abusing a slave by a white 
church brother, it remained a sensitive issue: How was one to 
judge when discipline had become abuse? That such accusations 
occurred at all indicates the way in which church discipline could 
potentially complicate the slave-master relationship and how that 
relationship could in turn complicate church discipline. The peace 
of more than one antebellum congregation was disturbed by 
charges and countercharges about slave disobedience and slave- 
owner brutality. When the Forks of Elkhom Baptist Church in 
Kentucky held its monthly church conference on the second 
Saturday of January 1806, Brother Palmer brought before the 
church a complaint against Brother Stephens and his wife “for not 
dealing with Nancy their Negroe Woman and bringing her before 
the Church and for putting her in Irons.” Brother Stephens was 
acquitted of the charge. A second charge was brought against 
Sister Stephens “for giving their Negroe Woman the lye.” Sister 
Stephens was acquitted of both charges. But Brother Palmer and 
the slave member Nancy didn’t let the matter rest there: on the 
second Saturday of April 1806 Palmer once again “brought a 
complaint against Bro. Stephens and Wife for not leeting [sic] 
Nancy come to see her Child . . . .” This time Sister Stephens 
countered with a complaint against Nancy for falsely reporting 
that “Bro. Stephens said he would give her a hundred stripes and 
every Six stripes dip the Cow hide in Salt and Water — And say- 
ing while she was in Irons she suffered every day for [want of] 
Fire, Victuals and Water — And for saying when ever she and the 
Children fell out they would not hear her, but believe the Chil- 
dren and whip her ... .” Decision on the charges was delayed 
until the next meeting, at which time Brother Stephens and Sister 
Stephens were once more acquitted. Nancy was found guilty and 
excluded from church fellowship. 58 Though she failed, it is inter- 
esting that Nancy attempted to seek recourse for her problems 
with her master and mistress in the church. Evidently she had to 
do so indirectly, through a white spokesman, Brother Palmer, 
who voiced her accusations for her. Even so, she apparently hadTHE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

183

reason to hope that the church would intervene on her behalf or at 
the very least serve as a forum for her complaint. (One can only 
wonder if she succeeded in embarrassing Brother Stephens and 
Sister Stephens, and at what cost.) The church, after all, did take 
up her charge instead of dismissing it out of hand. More research 
into the minute books of antebellum congregations will be neces- 
sary before we can accurately estimate how frequently or infre- 
quently slaves sought redress for maltreatment by appealing to 
church discipline. 59

Another area of conflict between the Gospel and slavery which 
some congregations struggled to solve was the vexing problem of 
slave marriage. How could the church define breaches of the 
marital relation by slaves separated from their husbands and wives 
because of sale? Was it adultery for them to take up with another 
while their former spouses were still alive? In 1805 the Sandy 
Creek Baptist Association of North Carolina received a query 
from the Bear Creek church asking for some guidance in this 
matter: “What do we consider as a valid marriage between black 
people; and if any marriage be valid, is it in our fellowship to part 
them on any occasion?” The association put off an answer until 
1808, when the question was placed before the delegates again. 
They answered that slaves were validly married “When they come 
together in their former and general custom, having no [other] 
companion. Owners of slaves should use all reasonable and lawful 
means to prevent them from being separated. To effect this, they 
should put themselves to some inconvenience, in buying, selling, 
or exchanging, to keep them together. Both moral obligation and 
humanity demand it.” 60The practical problem in judging the marital status of slaves is 
evident in the indecision of the Virginia Portsmouth Baptist As- 
sociation, which took up the issue in 1792 and again in 1793. “Is 
it lawful and agreeable to the Word of God, for a black Man 
servant, (or Slave) who has been Married, and his Wife removed 
from him a great distance, without his or her consent to marry 
another Woman during her Life or not?” After much debate it

184

“THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

was agreed that the question be withdrawn and that a committee 
of three brethren substitute a rephrased query. The amended 
question read: “What ought Churches to do with Members in 
their Communion, who shall either directly, or indirectly separate 
married Slaves, who are come together according to the custom as 
Man and Wife?” After another prolonged debate the question 
“was thought by a Majority to be so difficult, that no answer 
could be given it.” 61On the local level, individual congregations had to come up 
with an answer, difficult though it might be, particularly since the 
charge of adultery was such a serious one. In November 1790 the 
Flat River Primitive Baptist Church of Person County, North 
Carolina, took up the case of “Negro Sam,” who had come “be- 
fore the church, in consequence of a letter sent from Bro. David- 
son concerning his [Sam’s] wife who belonged to said Davidson, 
and was carryed by him to South Carolina, and . . . has got 
another husband.” Sympathetically the church decided “this be- 
ing a trying case where a man and wife is parted by their owners, 
who being in bondage cannot help themselves, as such we have 
come to this conclusion that it shall not brake fellowship with us 
if Sam should git another wife.” 82 When Charles, another of the 
slave members of the Flat River Church, “was accused of taking 
two different women as his wives,” the church meeting in confer- 
ence in September 1792 appointed a committee to inquire into 
the charge. Charles apparently had been moved a distance from 
his old wife and claimed that he took a new one because he was 
“prevented . . . from going after the one he left.” The committee 
found that Charles’s story was contradicted by two white men 
who claimed that they prevented him from going to see his old 
wife after he had taken another one. Upon their testimony the 
church agreed in October to “give Charles up as an heathen man 
or publican.” In November Charles complained that “the report 
upon which he was turn’d out was not right,” and the church 
appointed a different committee to reopen his case. In January 
1793 Charles’s complaint was judged “well founded.” Although

THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

185

vindicated of the charge of adultery, Charles was accused of 
drunkenness and so had to remain under excommunication until 
he gave satisfaction. 63THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

185

vindicated of the charge of adultery, Charles was accused of 
drunkenness and so had to remain under excommunication until 
he gave satisfaction. 63

The same Flat River Church was exercised again in July 1795 
over the issue of slave marriage, but this time the issue involved a 
white member. The request of Brother Henry Lyon for a letter of 
“dismission” “was objected to on account of his being about to 
carry his negro women away from their husbands.” Because the 
circumstances were unclear, “with respect to the lawfulness of 
their coming together” [slave marriages], the case was postponed 
until the next meeting, which was spent almost entirely in debat- 
ing the matter. After a good deal of argument about which the 
record is unfortunately silent, “the church without the concur- 
rence of the minister and one other member” agreed to grant 
Lyon a letter of dismission. Five years later, however, Lyon got 
his comeuppance; after the church received a report from Tennes- 
see that he was leading a disorderly life, keeping a tavern with a 
billiard table and running a dancing school, he was excommuni- 
cated “as a heathen man or publican.” Why these offenses were 
viewed more severely by the church than the parting of two 
women from their husbands is a question not raised in the church 
minute book. 64An appreciation of the turmoil caused by the issue of slave 
marriage in a congregation seriously concerned about Gospel or- 
dinances can be gained by reading the minute books of the Welsh 
Neck Baptist Church of South Carolina. The problem of plural 
marriages among slave members had plagued the church for sev- 
eral years, and in January 1829 it was brought to a head by the 
request for a letter of dismission by a slave called Dicey. The 
church decided to refuse Dicey’s request because she had taken a 
husband in Mississippi when her master removed her there, 
though she already had a husband in South Carolina. During the 
discussion of Dicey’s case “it was ascertained that a number of the 
coloured members were implicated on the subject of Double Mar- 
riages, & some since they had become members of the Church.”

186

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

All told, ten slave members, some of long standing, were in- 
volved. Meeting to consider what action to take, the church “felt 
particularly embarrassed in regard to the old members, who had 
been received & held in fellowship by our Fathers in the Church.” 
The troubled congregation decided to postpone decision. The 
next day, after his sermon, the pastor proposed that the church 
remain after service to consider several resolutions he had drawn 
up to deal with the problem . 65 An honest and poignant statement 
of the difficulty facing a church tom between sympathy for slave 
members and the prohibitions of the Bible, the minister’s resolu- 
tions are worth quoting extensively:It has been found, upon examination, into the state of our 
coloured members, that some of them had long been living 
with a second Companion in the familiar intercourse of hus- 
band or Wife; after having separated from one or more that 
were still living & in the same neighborhood. In some of these 
instances they had a number of Children. The Church feel 
greatly embarrased, on account of this unhappy state of things 
& are still not perfectly satisfied as to what they ought to 
determine in relation to them. However after much Prayerful 
searching of the Holy Scriptures; & seeking to God for direc- 
tion: It is Resolved. 1st that great deference is due to the 
memory of the Fathers of the Church; & we cherish such 
respect for their Opinions & Conduct, that we dare not, with- 
out the most express warrant from the Word of God, reverse 
what they had deliberately done. Therefore since the Church 
was given to us in this condition; & we lived Years together 
with the persons above alluded to in Christian Union; We 
think it now a less evil to retain them in fellowship than to 
disown them for a wrong, that probably was not known by 
the Church at the time of their reception; & not viewed by 
themselves in a Scriptural point of light, as the most of them 
are bound servants; & have not been taught to read the Sacred 
Word. 2nd. But as we know that many of the younger mem- 
bers have been better instructed in the nature & perpetuity of 
the Marriage obligations; while we would neither reverse the 
doings of our Venerable Elijahs, nor dictate to posterity; We 
resolve for ourselves to instruct, reprove, & labour with any,

THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

187THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

187

who have knowingly departed from the Gospel rule; & their 
Covenant engagements & if possible correct the wrong; or 
exclude them from our connection. 3rd. That Servants, sepa- 
rated by their owners, & removed to too great a distance to 
visit each other, may be considered as virtually dead to each 
other; & therefore at liberty to take a second Companion, in 
the life time of the first; as the act of separation was not their 
own voluntary choice; but the will of those, who had legal 
control over them. These resolutions being read & considered 
were Unanimously adopted. In Conformity with the last reso- 
lution a letter of dismission was granted to Dicey . . . . 68

It is significant that a major reason for the congregation’s decision 
to overlook the slave members’ “adulterous” unions was the fact 
that those involved had been living in regular church fellowship 
for a long time, in some cases for as many as twenty years. The 
third resolution, by equating involuntary separation with death, 
presented a solution to the problem which took account of the 
realities of the slave situation. But for all its realism, the solution 
is in effect one more indication of the extent to which the 
churches accommodated the social system rather than attempting 
to change it. It is apparent that the Welsh Neck and other 
churches were sincerely troubled by the issue of slave marriage, 
but what is puzzling about their efforts to solve the problem is the 
failure of the churches to petition for the legal recognition of slave 
marriage. Even though the appeal almost certainly would have 
proved fruitless, the fact that it was not even considered by the 
churches demonstrated the limits of Christian fellowship.Another area of potential conflict between institutional church 
life and the restrictiveness of slavery was the active participation 
of slaves as exhorters, deacons, and preachers. A few, as noted 
above, exercised their ministry in separate black churches, which 
managed to preserve a surprising degree of autonomy even while 
weathering times of proscription. The “pioneer black preachers” 
of the late eighteenth century were succeeded in the 1830s by a 
second generation. The majority of the black preachers and sepa- 
rate black churches were Baptist, which helps to explain why the

188

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

Baptists attracted as many black members as they did. Baptists 
simply offered more opportunity for black participation than any 
other denomination, as noted in 1842 by Charles Colcock Jones: 
“There are more Negro communicants, and more churches regu- 
larly constituted, exclusively of Negroes, with their own regular 
houses of public worship, and with ordained Negro preachers, 
attached to this denomination than to any other in the United 
States. . . . Perhaps in most of the chief towns in the South there 
are [Baptist] houses of public worship erected for the Negroes 
alone . . . ,” 67 The labors of the vast majority of these preachers, 
whether they ministered to their black brethren in racially mixed 
or separate churches, were recorded sparsely, if at all. But now 
and then glimpses of individual black clergymen and black 
churches emerge from the records of churches and associations in 
various areas of the South.Baptist associations, from Virginia and Georgia in the East to 
Kentucky and Louisiana in the West, included black churches, 
sometimes pastored by black men, and listed not infrequently as 
among the largest churches in the association. The black Gillfield 
Baptist Church of Petersburg, Virginia, admitted to the Ports- 
mouth Association in 1810, had grown by 1821 into the largest 
church of the association, with a membership of 441, more than 
twice the number of the next largest. Frequently represented in 
its earlier years in the associational meetings by Israel Decoudry, 
a free black of West Indian origin, and by other free black mem- 
bers, Gillfield was pastored by white ministers and was gradually 
subjected to tighter and tighter restrictions by the Portsmouth 
Association, which attempted in 1829 to make it consolidate with 
the white Market Street Church of Petersburg. The Gillfield con- 
gregation resisted this attempt to disband it, but did accede to the 
association’s decision that it be represented through white dele- 
gates from the Market Street Church. In 1838, however, the 
Gillfield Church tried to persuade the association to allow it to be 
represented once again by delegates from its own congregation, 
but the request was denied. 68 The actions of Gillfield and other

THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

189

black churches indicate that separate black churches resisted to 
the extent possible, given their precarious status, the attempts of 
associations to constrict their sphere of autonomy.189

black churches indicate that separate black churches resisted to 
the extent possible, given their precarious status, the attempts of 
associations to constrict their sphere of autonomy.

An incident in the history of the First African Church of Savan- 
nah, Georgia, is particularly instructive about the limitations 
white-controlled associations placed upon black churches and 
about the ability of black congregations to find ways to protect 
their partial independence. The First African Church, as noted 
above, was formed in the midst of severe persecution by a slave 
named Andrew Bryan and was organized into a church on Janu- 
ary 20, 1788. Bryan pastored the church and lived to see its 
congregation increase to over four hundred members, and two 
daughter churches, the Second African and the Ogeechee, or 
Third African, emerged from it.In 1815 Andrew Marshall, Bryan’s nephew, became pastor of 
the First African Church of Savannah, and by 1830 his congrega- 
tion numbered 2,41 7. 69 A man of exceptional energy and strong 
personality, Marshall was at the center of a controversy which 
threatened the continued existence of his church. Alexander Camp- 
bell, upon visiting Savannah, was permitted by Marshall to preach 
from the pulpit of the First African Church. Upset by Campbell’s 
“new doctrines,” especially after Marshall gave the impression that 
he believed in them, some members of the church, led by Deacon 
Adam Johnson, objected. Contention rapidly escalated to division 
and violence, with Marshall and the majority of the congregation 
breaking away from the church and leaving it in the hands of 
Johnson and his supporters. When the controversy came to the 
attention of the Sunbury Baptist Association in 1832, a committee 
was appointed to investigate, and promptly recommended not only 
that Marshall be silenced for heterodoxy and schism, but also that 
the First African Church “on account of its corrupt state be con- 
sidered as dissolved” and reconstituted as a branch of the white 
Baptist Church. The association went so far as to recommend that 
the Second African and all African churches in the area constitute 
themselves as branches of white Baptist churches and, finally, ap-

190

“THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

pointed a committee to transmit this last resolution to the state 
legislature and the mayor of Savannah “with explanatory remarks.” 
In 1833 the association concluded: “this Association, having un- 
doubted testimony of Andrew Marshall’s holding the sentiments 
avowed by Alexander Campbell, now declares him, and all his 
followers, to have thrown themselves out of the fellowship of the 
Churches of this Association.” 70Ecclesiastically, the association, according to Baptist policy, 
had no juridical power over individual churches. Church govern- 
ment belonged, in theory, to each church. But in actuality the 
slave codes gave white associations a great deal of control over 
black churches. The mechanism of control was described by 
James Simms, in his history of the First African Church of Savan- 
nah: “under the then existing laws of the State of Georgia our 
white brethren were held somewhat responsible for our good con- 
duct, and . . . they came and sat in the conferences or any other 
meetings when they thought it necessary, and the courts of juris- 
diction would not give our colored ministers a license to preach or 
officiate in the ordinances of the Church unless they were en- 
dorsed by two or more white Baptist ministers.” 71 Furthermore, 
the land on which the church stood, purchased in 1797 by An- 
drew Bryan, could legally be held only under a system of perpet- 
ual trusteeship by whites. Fellowship with the white members of 
the association, then, was politically necessary if black churches 
were to survive as separate bodies.

In January 1833 the First African Church responded to the 
resolutions of the Sunbury Association by apparently agreeing to 
place itself under the control of the white Savannah Baptist 
Church. The African Church, however, set down certain condi- 
tions which the white church would have to observe, and the first 
of these conditions affirmed in effect the fundamental autonomy of 
the black church:

We propose to come under the supervision of a committee of 
your own body, provided you will receive us on the terms and

THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

191We propose to come under the supervision of a committee of 
your own body, provided you will receive us on the terms and

THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

191

conditions following: 1st. That we be independent in our 
meetings; that is, that we receive and dismiss our own mem- 
bers, and elect and dismiss our own officers, and finally, man- 
age our own concerns independently; however with this re- 
striction — in case any measure is taken by us which shall 
seem to militate against our good standing as a church of 
Christ we shall submit it to a committee of five members, 
whom we shall choose out of the Baptist Church in Savannah, 
[white] whose counsel we bind ourselves to follow, provided it 
be not contrary to the precepts of the Gospel. 72There followed four more resolutions, none of them seriously re- 
stricting the self-determination ensured in the first. This was ob- 
viously a far cry from the expressed wish of the Sunbury Associa- 
tion that the African church be dissolved and reconstituted as part 
of the white church. Yet the crucial test was the status of Andrew 
Marshall. Late in January 1833 a committee from the white Sa- 
vannah Baptist Church advised the First African Church “that 
Andrew Marshall should not go into the pulpit and preach, nor 
administer the ordinance of baptism, nor the Lord’s supper,” but 
there was no objection to his leading prayers, exhorting, “making 
pastoral visits, marrying, attending funerals and extending the 
right hand of fellowship.” 73 However, one month later, the white 
church was informed that the “officers of the First African Church 
stated that it had called Andrew C. Marshall to be its pastor, and 
that they had thought it best for him to resume his pastoral 
duties ...” The white committee (excepting one member, whose 
support Marshall had gained) refused to countenance this flagrant 
disregard of its instruction that Marshall not be allowed to resume 
his pastoral charge, and it appealed to the white trustees of First 
African and to the city authorities to shut down the African 
Church. 74 Significantly, the committee closed its letter to the 
trustees with the following sentiment: “We appeal to you not only 
as a Christian but as a large property holder to aid us in checking 
false doctrine among our slaves.” In its letter to the mayor of 
Savannah the committee portrayed Marshall as “a designing man, 
seeking only his own aggrandisement and the love of power, even

Andrew Marshall. Reprinted from E. K. Love, History of the First Afri- 
can Baptist Church (Savannah, Ga., 1888).

THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

193Andrew Marshall. Reprinted from E. K. Love, History of the First Afri- 
can Baptist Church (Savannah, Ga., 1888).

THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

193

at the expense of the peace and happiness of his own people.” The 
committee admitted that “the majority of the church appear deter- 
mined to go with Marshall at all hazards,” and explained, “he has 
them so completely under his control that they are ready on all 
occasions to sanction his mandates, w’hether right or wrong.” As 
if that were not a large enough red flag to wave before the eyes of 
the mayor, the committee made sure the implications were clear: 
“The individuals composing the First African Church are in part 
the property of our citizens, and it is for them, if they feel any 
interest in their everlasting or temporal welfare, to interpose and 
save them from the baneful influence of a designing man.” 75 
There is no record that the mayor responded; the civil authori- 
ties did not shut down the church. The trustees did answer, but 
not exactly as the committee had expected. Writing on behalf of 
the trustees of the First African Church, John Williamson at- 
tacked the right of the committee to interfere in the affairs of an 
independent Baptist church, defended Andrew Marshall against 
unproven charges of heresy, and upheld the religious privileges 
“of a large number of our fellow beings . . . which are guaranteed 
to them by the laws of our State, by the word of God, and by 
every principle of kindness which ought to be a prominent feature 
in the behavior of all those who profess the Gospel.” Williamson 
declared, “I consider it incumbent on me, in connection with the 
other Trustees, to see the church kept open in order to afford An- 
drew C. Marshall, and the church of which he is pastor, the 
privilege of worshipping God to the best of their knowledge.” 76 
In 1835 and 1836 the First African Church applied for read- 
mission to the Sunbury Association. It was denied both times. 
Finally in 1837 “Andrew Marshall having made full renunciation 
of holding the peculiar sentiments of Alexander Campbell with 
which he has been charged,” the First African Church was read- 
mitted, with a membership of 1,263. Expelled in 1832 with Mar- 
shall as pastor and delegate, the church returned five years later 
with Marshall still as pastor and delegate. 77 During the five years 
of turmoil, Marshall had survived challenges to his authority from194

THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

deacons within his congregation and from white authorities with- 
out. The First African Church had tactfully but firmly resisted the 
advice and warnings of the Savannah Church committee and had 
kept the pastor the majority of its membership wanted. That 
Marshall and his congregation maneuvered successfully through 
several years of political struggle was due to their determination, 
initiative, and astuteness. That they had any space within which 
to maneuver was due to the Baptist principle that the church is its 
own government.The separate black Baptist churches in New Orleans also 
benefited from their denomination’s tradition of guarding congre- 
gational independence. In 1857 Mayor Waterman of New Or- 
leans revoked “all permission heretofore given for Divine Services 
in Colored Churches.” Members of the African churches immedi- 
ately met in order to make some arrangement with the white 
churches, an arrangement which would, according to the minutes 
of the First African Church, “enable the Colored people to occupy 
their House of Worship again.” After several meetings a plan 
which served the purpose was developed and agreed upon “with 
the white brethren.” The agreement included eight provisions, of 
which the most important was the first: “Each Colored Church is 
constituted a Branch of the [white] Coliseum Place Baptist 
Church. Each, however, will retain its distinct and separate exis- 
tence as ‘First African Baptist Church,’ ‘Second African Baptist 
Church,’ ...” The pastor of the white church was to be the 
pastor of each of the black churches, but he would, “with the 
advice and consent” of a committee of black elders, “nominate the 
preachers who are to occupy the pulpits of the several colored 
churches.” Although the white church’s Committee on Discipline 
was constituted “the directing power over the colored churches,” 
a board of officers chosen by the black churches would “be the 
managing and discipline committee of each colored church,” and 
church and conference meetings would be held as before, once a 
month. It seems clear that what the African churches gave up 
with one hand they mostly took back with the other. While the

THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

195

agreement did create an overarching structure of white supervi- 
sion, within that structure the black congregations still kept con- 
trol of their institutions. The plan worked; the mayor approved it 
and allowed the black churches to continue meeting under the 
new provisions. 78If extended to blacks the principle of religious freedom obvi- 
ously could cause conflict with the practical necessities of slave 
control as formulated most fully in the slave codes. Because of 
their commitment to this principle, a group of white Baptists 
petitioned the Georgia legislature in 1863 to repeal a section of 
the new legal code which prohibited “any church, society or other 
body or any persons to grant any license or other authority to any 
slave or free person of color, to preach, or exhort, or otherwise 
officiate in church matters.” The petition, composed by Rev. H. 
H. Tucker, a former professor at Mercer College in Macon, Geor- 
gia, was an unusual document. Certainly, it went too far in its 
defense of religious liberty for blacks to have been representative 
of general white sentiment on the issue. However, it does articu- 
late one pole of this particular dichotomy in Southern society, a 
dichotomy which black churches and black preachers sometimes 
worked to their advantage. Prohibiting blacks from obtaining li- 
censes to preach was an obnoxious and impious statute, according 
to the Baptist petitioners,

because it trespasses upon the rights of conscience, and is a 
violation of religious liberty. To say nothing of the sacred 
rights of the black to preach, exhort or pray, if God called and 
commanded him to do either. Cases might arise in which we 
might feel it our duty as Baptists to license a man of color to 
preach or otherwise officiate in church matters. To grant such 
license would then be a part of our religion. But the Code of 
Georgia forbids our acting according to the dictates of our 
own consciences . . . Our religion is a matter between us and 
our God, with which no power on earth has a right to inter- 
fere. Soul-liberty is the rightful heritage of all God’s moral 
creatures. Not over the religion of the slave has civil authority 
any power, nor yet has it over that of the citizen.

196

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’196

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

But aside from ... its attempted despotism over the consci- 
ence of men, the most objectionable feature of all in the ob- 
noxious section is its heaven-daring impiety. It trespasses not 
only on the rights of men, but on the rights of God. It dictates 
to the Almighty on what color his preachers shall be. The 
great majority of the human race are of dark complexion. If 
one of these among us is called by the great Head of the 
Church to minister in holy things, the Code of Georgia for- 
bids obedience. It stops the preaching of the everlasting gos- 
pel on the ground of a police regulation .... It allows Jeho- 
vah to have ministers of a certain complexion and no other, 
and so exacting and rigid are these regulations imposed on the 
Almighty, that they not only forbid his having preachers such 
as he may choose, but also prescribe that none shall even 
exhort, or in any way whatever officiate in church matters, 
unless they be approved by this self-exalted and heaven-defy- 
ing tribunal. 7 ®

The impact of this petition on the legislature’s decision is not 
known, but the disputed section of the new code was repealed, 
leaving in effect, however, the old statute which required that a 
court give its permission before a slave could be licensed to 
preach.It is significant that black preachers, some slave and some free, 
continued to be licensed and that separate black churches contin- 
ued to be organized despite periodic harassment by civil and ec- 
clesiastical authorities, because these actions represent an area of 
institutional freedom and self-governance for slaves. To be sure, 
the exercise of this freedom was frequently modified by white 
supervision, but it was nevertheless real. In various sections of the 
antebellum South, black churches over the years kept gathering 
members. Mainly, town churches, they drew slaves from both 
town and country, swelling in size to hundreds and in a few 
instances, thousands of members. In some areas of the South the 
“rise of the black church” was not a post- but a pre-emancipation 
phenomenon. The earliest black Baptist churches, as noted ear- 
lier, were founded in Virginia and Georgia. The Williamsburg 
Church, founded by the black preachers Gowan Pamphlet and

THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

197THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

197

Moses in the 1780s, had grown into one of the largest churches in 
the Dover Association by 1830, only to be closed and disbanded 
in the wake of reaction to the Southampton insurrection in 1831. 
Reorganized before 1843, the congregation numbered 305 in 
1851 and 505 by 1860. By far the largest church in the Dover 
Association, however, was the First African Church of Richmond, 
formed in 1841 from the mixed First Baptist Church, where 
black members had outnumbered whites four to one for many 
years. Pastored by a leading white minister, Robert Ryland, presi- 
dent of Richmond College, the First African of Richmond num- 
bered 2,056 members in 1843 and 3,260 in 1860. By that date 
second, third, and fourth African Baptist churches had been or- 
ganized in Richmond. Not until emmancipation was any of these 
churches pastored by black men. First African received its first 
black pastor in 1866, when Ryland was succeeded by a former 
slave, James Henry Holmes, who had served as a deacon of the 
church since 1855. A Northern visitor to Richmond in 1865 
commented on the ability of the black leadership emerging from 
these African churches: “Never have I attended committee meet- 
ings more dignified and to the point than the many we have 
appointed with the leading men in the colored churches .... I 
saw the first black man in a Richmond pulpit and heard from him 
a sermon that lifted me up to heights my spirit seldom reaches.” 80

The largest church in the Portsmouth Baptist Association of 
Virginia was the First African of Petersburg, which in 1851 re- 
ported a membership of 1,635, followed closely by the black 
Gillfield Church, also of Petersburg, with a membership of 1,361. 
The origins of both churches stretched back into the late eigh- 
teenth century. 81In Georgia the Sunbury Association was unparalleled for the 
number and size of its separate black churches. By the 1850s the 
First African of Savannah was the largest of thirteen black Baptist 
churches located in the Savannah area. Besides Andrew Marshall, 
there were five black pastors — John Cox, Guy McQueen, Garri- 
son Fraser, Moses Golphin, and Kelly Low — and at least seven

198

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION”

additional black preachers. The Savannah African churches, as 
described by one visitor in 1850, were “large, old but very decent 
buildings . . . every Sabbath, as well as some week day evenings, 
well filled with colored people.” The aggregate number of mem- 
bers listed for the First, Second, and Third churches in that year 
was about 2,400. The regular pattern of Sunday worship con- 
sisted of three services, an early-morning prayer meeting, preach- 
ing at 10 A.M. and again at 3 P.M., and commemoration of the 
Lord’s Supper every three months. 82 The First African of Savan- 
nah, under Marshall, become a tourist attraction for visitors to the 
city, and descriptions of services there were sketched by two Eu- 
ropean visitors, Fredrika Bremer and Charles Lyell. Aside from 
its mildly patronizing tone, Lyell’s description is worth quoting 
for the rare glimpse it allows of the inside of an antebellum black 
church:[In 1846] I attended afternoon service in a Baptist church at 
Savannah, in which I found that I was the only white man, 
the congregation consisting of about 600 negroes, of various 
shades, most of them very dark. As soon as 1 entered I was 
shown to a seat reserved for strangers, near the preacher. First 
the congregation all joined, both men and women, very har- 
moniously in a hymn, most of them having evidently good 
ears for music, and good voices. The singing was followed by 
prayers, not read, but delivered without notes by a negro of 
pure African blood, a gray-headed, venerable-looking man, 
with a fine sonorous voice, named Marshall. He, as I learnt 
afterwards, had the reputation of being one of their best preach- 
ers, and he concluded by addressing to them a sermon, also 
without notes, in good style, and for the most part in good 
English; so much so, as to make me doubt whether a few 
ungrammatical phrases in the negro idiom might not have 
been purposely introduced for the sake of bringing the subject 
home to their family thoughts. He got very successfully 
through one flight about the gloom of the valley of the shadow 
of death, and speaking of the probationary state of a pious 
man left for a while to his own guidance, and when in danger 
of failing saved by the grace of God, he compared it to an 
eagle teaching her newly fledged offspring to fly, by carrying

THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

199THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

199

it up high into the air, then dropping it, and, if she sees it 
falling to the earth, darting with the speed of lightning to save 
it before it reaches the ground. Whether any eagles really 
teach their young to fly in this manner, I leave the ornitholo- 
gist to decide; but when described in animated and pictur- 
esque language, yet by no means inflated, the imagery was 
well calculated to keep the attention of his hearers awake. He 
also inculcated some good practical maxims of morality, and 
told them they were to look to a future state of rewards and 
punishments in which God would deal impartially with ‘the 
poor and the rich, the black man and the white .’ 83

“To see a body of African origin, who had joined one of the 
denominations of Christians, and built a church for themselves — 
who had elected a pastor of their own race, and secured him an 
annual salary, from whom they were listening to a good sermon 
scarcely, if at all, below the average standard of the compositions 
of white ministers — to hear the whole service respectably, and the 
singing admirably performed,” made a strong impression upon 
Lyell and caused him to revise his estimate of the “capabilities of 
the negroes” to make progress in “civilization.” From a perspec- 
tive different from Lyell’s, the really important lesson to be drawn 
from the achievements of Marshall and his congregation is not 
that they were capable of assimilating the Christian religion but 
that they were able, “even in a part of a slave state, where they 
outnumber[ed] the whites,” to control their own institution, to 
receive and dismiss their own, to listen to the preaching of one of 
their own. In black churches, like the First African of Savannah, 
one sees the institutional formation and spiritual nurture of an 
“ imperium in imperio," to use the term of a contemporary white 
observer, i.e. a “nation within a nation.” 84Black preachers and separate black churches were not 
confined to the Southeastern seaboard states; they extended into 
western areas of the South as well. In Alabama, black churches 
were listed by some Baptist associations as early as 1820. The 
African Huntsville Church, pastored by William Harris, a free 
black, united with the Flint River Baptist Association in 1821,

200 “THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION”

when its membership stood at seventy-six. By 1840 the same 
church numbered 265 and was the largest Baptist church in the 
state. The African Cottonfort, also a member of the Flint River 
Association after 1830, had about 130 members in 1840 and 
was pastored for years by a slave named Lewis. Before emanci- 
pation, Mobile had three black Baptist churches, all with large 
congregations. Two slave preachers who gained some notoriety 
among Alabama Baptists were Caesar Blackwell and Doc Phil- 
lips. The former was owned by the famous Baptist itinerant 
James McLemore. After Blackwell’s owner died, the Alabama 
Baptist Association bought and freed the slave to preach to his 
people. Phillips was active in the Tuskegee area and participated 
in associational meetings. 85In Mississippi black members outnumbered whites by a five-to- 
one margin in the Union Baptist Association. In 1846 the largest 
church in this association was the Natchez Baptist Church, which 
included 442 members, 62 white and 380 black. In the same 
association Clear Creek Church had 154 members in 1846, of 
whom only 15 were white, and Grand Gulf Church listed 107 
black members out of a total 1 13. In the Central Baptist Associa- 
tion black members constituted more than one-half of the associa- 
tion. In several locales black churches were constituted separately. 
One of the largest was Rose Hill Church at Natchez, which was 
formed by the black members of the mixed Wall Street Church 
and housed in a church built with contributions from both black 
and white members. Though legally still part of the Wall Street 
Church, the black congregation met for worship in their new 
building and were preached to by an unlicensed slave exhorter, 
Randle Pollard. 86

In Louisiana the elderly black preacher Joseph Willis was suc- 
ceeded by his grandson Daniel Willis, who was ordained by the 
Louisiana Baptist Association in 1849 as assistant pastor of Oc- 
cupy Church in Rapides Parish. Another free black preacher, 
Henry Adams, pastored Mount Lebanon, a mixed church in 
Bienville parish, from 1837 to 1839 and then moved to Louis-

THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

201

ville, Kentucky, where he served as pastor of the city’s First Col- 
ored Baptist Church for over thirty years. Licensed to work 
among black people by the Grand Cane Association in 1856, 
John Jones was frequently invited to preach before white congre- 
gations in Shreveport. In New Orleans several African Churches 
were organized and led by black men before emancipation, begin- 
ning in 1826 when the First African Baptist Church was founded 
under the pastoral care of Asa Goldsbury. 87Antebellum black churches arose and prospered especially in 
the border states. The First African Church of Lexington, Ken- 
tucky, gathered by Old Captain in 1801, chose Loudon Ferrill, a 
former slave from Hanover county, Virginia, to succeed the 
founder as pastor in 1824. During FerrilFs thirty-two-year term 
of service the membership of the church grew from 280 to 1,820, 
the largest of any church in Kentucky. The First Colored Church 
of Louisville, with Henry Adams as minister, numbered 644 in 
1845 and was the largest church in the Long Run Baptist Asso- 
ciation. By 1860 Kentucky had seventeen separate black churches 
with an aggregate membership of 5,737. George W. Dupee, who 
was to be a leading figure in the organization of black Baptist 
churches, associations, and a monthly journal, began his ministe- 
rial career while still a slave. Licensed to preach in 1846, he was 
ordained pastor of the black Baptist church in Georgetown in 
1851, though he remained a slave until permitted to purchase his 
freedom after 1856. In Missouri the First African Baptist Church 
of St. Louis grew out of a Sabbath school for Negroes opened in 
1818 and was constituted a separate church in 1822. In 1827 the 
congregation called John Berry Meachum to be its pastor. Mea- 
chum, a carpenter and cooper by trade, had purchased his own 
freedom and that of his wife, children, and twenty more slaves. In 
1835 Meachum was reputedly worth about $25,000. His church 
prospered as well, and grew from a membership of 220 in 1835 
to 648 in 1851. The church included a large Sabbath school and 
a temperance society. A second black Baptist church was formed 
in St. Louis in 1847 and was pastored until 1862 by another

Richard Allen. Reprinted from James A. Handy, Scraps of African Meth- 
odist Episcopal History (Philadelphia, n.d.).

Daniel Coker. Reprinted from James A. Handy, Scraps of African Meth- 
odist Episcopal History (Philadelphia, n.d.).

204

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’Daniel Coker. Reprinted from James A. Handy, Scraps of African Meth- 
odist Episcopal History (Philadelphia, n.d.).

204

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

black preacher, J. R. Anderson, who had been educated and 
taught a trade in the Alton, Illinois, printing shop of Elijah P. 
Lovejoy, the celebrated martyr of the abolitionist cause. In Nash- 
ville, Tennessee, 500 black members withdrew from the First 
Baptist Church in 1847 in order to hold separate services. In 
1849 Nelson G. Merry, the former sexton of the white church, 
was ordained as the first black pastor of the new church. 88

The structure of Baptist organization was more amenable to the 
existence of black churches and black preachers than was the 
system of government of any other denomination. Besides the 
Baptists, the Methodists were the only other denomination to 
license black preachers with any frequency. And among the 
Methodists, also, a very few black churches were founded in the 
antebellum South. African Methodist churches arose in Balti- 
more, Charleston, and New Orleans. In Maryland, with a large 
free black population, Baltimore was one of the centers of the 
separatist movement among black Methodists which led to the 
creation of the African Methodist Episcopal Church. Led by Dan- 
iel Coker, black Methodists from Baltimore joined with delegates 
from Philadelphia under Richard Allen in 1816 to form the con- 
nection. While the location of the A.M.E. church in Maryland 
was urban and its leadership free, the slaves within Baltimore and 
in the rural environs were included in the church’s care. The 
formation of the A.M.E. connection was to prove important to 
slaves further south as well. 89In Charleston, South Carolina, the number of slaves and free 
blacks in the Methodist society totaled about four thousand in 
1815. Up to that year the black members had been allowed their 
own separate quarterly conference, with their own preachers and 
class leaders in charge of financial and disciplinary affairs. Upon 
the discovery of some financial irregularities, the white Preacher 
in Charge ordered the black officers to hand over all collections to 
the stewards and to conduct church trials only in his presence. 
The black leaders resented this intrusion, and when their separate 
quarterly conference was abolished, the black membership began

THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

205

to move in secret to form their own church. Two members of the 
African society, including Morris Brown, were sent to Philadel- 
phia, where they were ordained by Bishop Richard Allen and 
commissioned to return to Charleston to organize an A.M.E. 
church. When the white trustees of the Charleston Bethel Church 
insisted upon erecting a hearse house on the burial lot used by the 
black members, the incident served as the catalyst for open 
schism. “At one fell swoop,” as one contemporary observer de- 
scribed it, “nearly every leader delivered up his class papers, and 
four thousand three hundred and sixty-seven of the members 
withdrew.” The seceders erected a building and formed the Afri- 
can Church of Charleston, with Morris Brown as pastor. In 1822 
the African Church was suppressed by the civil authorities after 
the discovery of the Vesey plot. Even the church building was 
ordered demolished. Morris Brown was spirited North, and sepa- 
rate African Methodism was not revived until A.M.E. mission- 
aries returned to Charleston after the war. 90Four black Methodist churches had been founded in the city 
of New Orleans before 1860. According to one estimate, the 
four had a combined membership of 1,700 and held property 
worth $10,600. Three of these congregations had slave preach- 
ers who served their people under the supervision of white min- 
isters. The fourth congregation decided in 1848 to affiliate with 
the African Methodist Episcopal Church and sent Charles 
Doughty to the Indiana Conference of the A.M.E. Church to 
petition for that privilege. Doughty, already licensed as a local 
preacher by the M.E. Church, South, was ordained a deacon 
and sent back to take charge of the Louisiana Mission, subse- 
quently named St. James A.M.E. Church. Fredrika Bremer vis- 
ited a class meeting in one of the African Methodist Churches of 
New Orleans in 1851 and later published a vivid description of 
the intensity of the exhorters and the ecstatic behavior of the 
members. In St. Louis black Methodists led by two free blacks, 
Jonathan Duncan and George Spears, built a small church for 
“African Methodists” around 1823 or 1824. The pulpit of the

Morris Brown. Reprinted from James A. Handy, Scraps vf African Meth- 
odist Episcopal History (Philadelphia, n.d.).

THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

207

African Church, however, was filled by the pastors of the white 
“Old First” church. 91THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

207

African Church, however, was filled by the pastors of the white 
“Old First” church. 91

While the hierarchical structure of Methodism severely limited 
the possibility of black members organizing their own churches 
under their own black preachers, the Methodist churches before 
and after 1845 included large numbers of black members in the 
regular stations and circuits, as well as in missions, and regularly 
licensed black men as exhorters and local preachers. Just as some 
Baptist associations included black delegates, Methodist quarterly 
conferences admitted black exhorters and preachers. Yet, if John 
Dixon Long, himself a Methodist minister, is right, when their 
licenses came up for renewal annually they had “no voice in vot- 
ing for one another, or for others.” “Thus,” he concluded, “ even 
in the midst of their brethren, they are made to feel that they are 
not one in Christ Jesus.” 92Among other denominations in the antebellum South — Presby- 
terian, Lutheran, Disciples, Episcopalian, Moravian — black minis- 
ters were extremely rare or nonexistent. The Presbyterians did 
license George M. Erskine, a slave, in east Tennessee in 1818. 
Erskine bought his freedom and that of his wife and seven children 
and went to Africa as a missionary. In 1846 Harrison W. Ellis, a 
former slave whose freedom had been purchased by several 
churches in Mississippi and Alabama, was licensed and ordained 
by the Presbytery of Tuscaloosa. The next year he was sent to 
Liberia as a missionary by the Presbyterian Board of Foreign Mis- 
sions. A free black, Hiram Revels, later to win fame as U.S. senator 
from Mississippi, left the A.M.E. Church and organized a black 
Presbyterian congregation of almost a hundred members in St. 
Louis in 1855, but the church did not last. As a recent historian of 
Presbyterians in the South has remarked about black Presbyterian 
ministers: “An exceptional Negro minister here and there only 
proved the rule. The ministry of Presbyterians to the Negroes in 
the South was carried on almost exclusively by whites.” The same 
comment minus the “almost” applies to the Disciples of Christ, the 
Lutherans, Episcopalians, and Moravians. 93

208

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’208

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

Although the instances were rare, in the licensed ministry and 
in black churches, slaves had channels — public, institutional ones 
at that — for autonomous control of religious organizations. Cer- 
tainly these channels were frequently restricted and sometimes 
completely blocked, but black congregations, slave and free, 
struggled to keep them open. Aided by the impulse to respect the 
independence of the individual relationship between man and 
God’s will, and especially by the Baptist articulation of the auton- 
omy of each congregation, black preachers and black churches 
were able to excercise a degree of authority, power, and self-gov- 
ernment denied them in other areas of life by the system of slave 
control. In the middle of the conflict between two social values — 
the practical necessity of slave control and the ideal of religious 
freedom — slaves sometimes discovered that they could take ad- 
vantage of the confusion and act as if the Gospel of Christian 
fellowship included them after all.

In mixed churches, too, there was tension between fellowship 
and slave status. It affected seating patterns, the distribution of 
communion, the application of church ordinances, and participa- 
tion in church meetings, but most important, it affected the experi- 
ence of being Christian. This tension revealed the irreducible gap 
between the slave’s religion and that of his master. The slave knew 
that no matter how sincerely religious his master might be, his 
religion did not countenance the freedom of his slave. This was, 
after all was said and done, the limit to Christian fellowship. The 
division went deep; it extended as far as the interpretation of the 
Bible and the understanding of the Gospel. The dichotomy be- 
tween black and white experiences of Christianity was recognized 
belatedly by a white Methodist minister who had preached in 1862 
to black Methodists as pastor of Bethel Church in Charleston.There were near fourteen hundred colored communicants. . . . 
[Their] service was always thronged — galleries, lower floor, 
chancel, pulpit, steps and all. . . . The preacher could not 
complain of any deadly space between himself and congrega- 
tion. He was positively breast up to his people, with no possi-

THE RULE OF GOSPEL ORDER

209

ble loss of . . . rapport. Though ignorant of it at the time, he 
remembers now the cause of the enthusiasm under his deliver- 
ances [about] the ‘law of liberty’ and ‘freedom from Egyptian 
bondage.’ What was figurative they interpreted literally. He 
thought of but one ending of the war; they quite another. He 
remembers the sixty-eight Psalm as affording numerous texts 
for their delectation, e.g., ‘Let God arise, let his enemies be 
scattered’; His ‘march through the wilderness’; ‘The Chariots 
of God are twenty thousand’; ‘The hill of God is as the hill of 
Basham’; and especially, ‘Though ye have lain among the 
pots, yet shall ye be as the wings of a dove covered with silver, 
and her feathers with yellow gold’ ... It is mortifying now to 
think that his comprehension was not equal to the African 
intellect. All he thought about was relief from the servitude of 
sin, and freedom from the bondage of the devil. . . . But they 
interpreted it literally in the good time coming, which of 
course could not but make their ebony complexion attractive, 
very . 94

What the preacher is describing is the end of a long process, 
spanning almost two hundred and fifty years, by which slaves 
came to accept the Gospel of Christianity and at the same time 
made it their own. It is important to remember that it was a dual 
process. The slaves did not simply become Christians; they cre- 
atively fashioned a Christian tradition to fit their own peculiar 
experience of enslavement in America.Church membership is one index — a rather stringent one — to 
the influence of Christianity upon the life of the slave. Du Bois 
quoted a figure of 468,000 black church members in the South in 
1859. Within forty years after emancipation, however, a black 
population of 8.3 million contained 2.7 million church mem- 
bers. 95 This astounding figure sheds some light on the extent to 
which slaves had adopted Christianity in the antebellum South. 
When missionaries from the free black churches of the North 
came South in the wake of Union armies to minister to the freed- 
men, they found a significant community of Christians among the 
ex-slaves. They found ex-slaves who knew not only the tenets of 
Christianity but also some of the finer points of doctrine and

210

THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

church polity. They encountered freedmen who already had the 
experience of forming their own congregations and of pastoring 
their own people. Most important, they found an extensive reli- 
gious life among the ex-slaves which had never been totally en- 
compassed by the institutional church. This “invisible institution” 
was the folk religion of the slave community.

Religious Life in the Slave 
Community

He have been wid us, Jesus, 
He still wid us, Jesus,

He will be wid us, Jesus 
Be wid us to the end.

SLAVE SPIRITUALReligious Life in the Slave 
Community

He have been wid us, Jesus, 
He still wid us, Jesus,

He will be wid us, Jesus 
Be wid us to the end.

SLAVE SPIRITUAL

By THE EVE of the Civil War, 
Christianity had pervaded the slave community. The vast major- 
ity of slaves were American -born, and the cultural and linguistic 
barriers which had impeded the evangelization of earlier genera- 
tions of African-born slaves were generally no longer a problem. 
The widespread opposition of the planters to the catechizing of 
slaves had been largely dissipated by the efforts of the churches 
and missionaries of the South. Not all slaves were Christian, nor 
were all those who accepted Christianity members of a church, 
but the doctrines, symbols, and vision of life preached by Christi- 
anity were familiar to most. During the closing decades of the 
antebellum period the so-called invisible institution of slave Chris- 
tianity came to maturity. The religious life of slaves in the late 
antebellum period is w'ell documented by sources from the slaves 
themselves.

At first glance it seems strange to refer to the religion of the 
slaves as an invisible institution, for independent black churches 
with slave members did exist in the South before emancipation. 
In racially mixed churches it was not uncommon for slaves to 
outnumber masters in attendance at Sunday services. But the 
religious experience of the slaves was by no means fully contained 
in the visible structures of the institutional church. From the 
abundant testimony of fugitive and freed slaves it is clear that the 
slave community had an extensive religious life of its own, hidden 
from the eyes of the master. In the secrecy of the quarters or the 
seclusion of the brush arbors (“hush harbors”) the slaves made 
Christianity truly their ow-n.The religion of the slaves was both institutional and noninstitu- 
tional, visible and invisible, formally organized and spontaneously 
adapted. Regular Sunday worship in the local church was paral- 
leled by illicit, or at least informal, prayer meetings on weeknights 
in the slave cabins. Preachers licensed by the church and hired by 
the master were supplemented by slave preachers licensed only by 
the spirit. Texts from the Bible which most slaves could not read

212

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

213

were explicated by verses from the spirituals. Slaves forbidden by 
masters to attend church or, in some cases, even to pray risked 
floggings to attend secret gatherings to worship God.

His own experience of the “invisible institution” was recalled 
by former slave Wash Wilson:

When de niggers go round singin’ ‘Steal Away to Jesus,’ dat 
mean dere gwine be a ’ligious meetin’ dat night. De 
masters . . . didn’t like dem ’ligious meetin’s, so us natcherly 
slips off at night, down in de bottoms or somewhere. Some- 
times us sing and pray all night . 1

Into that all-night singing and praying the slaves poured the 
sufferings and needs of their days. Like “Steal Away” and the rest 
of the spirituals, Christianity was fitted by the slave community to 
its own particular experience. At the same time the symbols, 
myths, and values of Judeo-Christian tradition helped form the 
slave community’s image of itself.

“ Steal Away ”

Slaves frequently were moved to hold their own religious meet- 
ings out of disgust for the vitiated Gospel preached by their 
masters’ preachers. Sermons urging slaves to be obedient and 
docile were repeated ad nauseam. The type of sermon to which he 
and other slaves were constantly subjected was paraphrased by 
Frank Roberson:

You slaves will go to heaven if you are good, but don’t ever 
think that you will be close to your mistress and master. No!You slaves will go to heaven if you are good, but don’t ever 
think that you will be close to your mistress and master. No!

No! there will be a wall between you; but there will be holes 
in it that will permit you to look out and see your mistress 
when she passes by. If you want to sit behind this wall, you 
must do the language of the text ‘Obey your masters .’ 2

Another former slave, Charlie Van Dyke, bitterly complained: 
“Church was what they called it but all that preacher talked about 
was for us slaves to obey our masters and not to lie and steal.

214

“THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION'

Nothing about Jesus, was ever said and the overseer stood there 
to see the preacher talked as he wanted him to talk.” Conse- 
quently, even a black preacher “would get up and repeat every- 
thing that the white preacher had said, because he was afraid to 
say anything different .” 3

For more authentic Christian preaching the slaves had to turn 
elsewhere. Lucretia Alexander explained what slaves did when 
they grew tired of the white folks’ preacher:

The preacher came and . . . He’d just say, ‘Serve your 
masters. Don’t steal your master’s turkey. Don’t steal your 
master’s chickens. Don’t steal your master’s hawgs. Don’t 
steal your master’s meat. Do whatsomever your master tells 
you to do.’ Same old thing all the time. My father would have 
church in dwelling houses and they had to whisper. . . . 
Sometimes they would have church at his house. That would 
be when they would want a real meetin’ with some real preach- 
in’. . . . They used to sing their songs in a whisper and pray in 
a whisper. That was a prayer-meeting from house to house 
once or twice — once or twice a week . 4Slaves faced severe punishment if caught attending secret 
prayer meetings. Moses Grandy reported that his brother-in-law 
Isaac, a slave preacher, “was flogged, and his back pickled” for 
preaching at a clandestine service in the woods. His listeners were 
flogged and “forced to tell who else was there.” Grandy claimed 
that slaves were often flogged “if they are found singing or pray- 
ing at home.” Gus Clark reported: “My Boss didn’ ’low us to go 
to church, er to pray er sing. Iffen he ketched us prayin’ er singin’ 
he whupped us. . . . He didn’ care fer nothin’ ’cept farmin.’ ” Ac- 
cording to another ex-slave, “the white folks would come in when 
the colored people would have prayer meeting, and whip every 
one of them. Most of them thought that when colored people 
were praying it was against them. For they would catch them 
praying for God to lift things out of their way and the white folks 
would lift them." Henry Bibb was threatened with five hundred 
lashes on the naked back for attending a prayer meeting con-

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

215

ducted by slaves on a neighboring plantation, because he had no 
permission to do so. The master who threatened Bibb with this 
punishment was, incidentally, a deacon of the local Baptist 
church. Charlotte Martin asserted that “her oldest brother was 
whipped to death for taking part in one of the religious ceremo- 
nies.” Despite the danger, slaves continued to hold their own 
religious gatherings because, as Grandy stated, “they like their 
own meetings better.” There the slaves could pray and sing as 
they desired. They were willing to risk threats of floggings at the 
hands of their earthly masters in order to worship their “Divine 
Master” as they saw fit . 5Slaves devised several techniques to avoid detection of their 
meetings. One practice was to meet in secluded places — woods, 
gullies, ravines, and thickets (aptly called “hush harbors”). Kalvin 
Woods remembered preaching to other slaves and singing and 
praying while huddled behind quilts and rags, which had been 
thoroughly wetted “to keep the sound of their voices from pene- 
trating the air” and then hung up “in the form of a little room,” or 
tabernacle. On one Louisiana plantation, when “the slaves would 
steal away into the woods at night and hold services,” they 
“would form a circle on their knees around the speaker who 
would also be on his knees. He would bend forward and speak 
into or over a vessel of water to drown the sound. If anyone 
became animated and cried out, the others would quickly stop the 
noise by placing their hands over the offender’s mouth.” When 
slaves got “happy an’ shoutfed]” in their cabins, “couldn’t nobody 
hyar ’em,” according to George Young, “’caze dey didn’t make no 
fuss on de dirt flo,” but just in case, “one stan’ in de do’ an’ 
watch.” The most common device for preserving secrecy was an 
iron pot or kettle turned upside down to catch the sound. The pot 
was usually placed in the middle of the cabin floor or at the 
doorstep, then slightly propped up to hold the sound of the pray- 
ing and singing from escaping. A variation was to pray or sing 
softly “with heads together around” the “kettle to deaden the 
sound.” Clara Young recalled, “When dark come, de men folks

216

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’216

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

would hang up a wash pot, bottom upwards, in de little brush 
church house us had, so’s it would catch de noise and de overseer 
wouldn’t hear us singin’ and shoutin’.” According to one account, 
slaves used the overturned pot to cover the sound of more worldly 
amusements too: “They would have dances sometimes and turn a 
pot upside down right in front of the door. They said that would 
keep the sound from going outside .” 8 
Whether the pots were strictly functional or also served some 
symbolic purpose is not clear. The symbolic element is suggested 
by Patsy Hyde, former slave in Tennessee, who claimed that 
slaves “would tek dere ole iron cookin’ pots en turn dem upside 
down on de groun’ neah dere cabins ter keep dere white folks fun 
herein’ w’at dey waz sayin’. Dey claimed dat hit showed dat 
Gawd waz wid dem.” The origin of this custom also remains 
unclear. When asked about the custom, one ex-slave replied, “I 
don’t know where they learned to do that. I kinda think the lord 
put them things in their minds to do for themselves, just like he 
helps us Christians in other ways. Don’t you think so?” One 
theory has been advanced which explains the slaves’ use of the pot 
as a remnant of African custom. Sidney Mintz has offered an 
interesting suggestion: “One is entitled to wonder whether a 
washtub that ‘catches’ sound, rather than producing it, may not 
represent some kind of religious symbolic inversion on the part of 
a religious group — particularly since the suppression of drum- 
ming by the masters was a common feature of Afro-American 
history.” He explains further: this is perhaps “a case in which 
some original symbolic or instrumental commitment has outlived 
its original circumstantial significance. Rather than disappearing 
however, that commitment is somehow transmitted and pre- 
served.” Whatever the origin of this folk custom, the widespread 
belief among slaves was that the pots worked . 7 The need for 
secrecy even dictated that children keep quiet about what went on 
in the slave quarters. “My master used to ask us children,” re- 
called one former slave, “ ‘Do your folks pray at night?’ We said 
‘No’ cause our folks had told us what to say. But the Lord haveRELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY 217

mercy, there was plenty of that going on. They’d pray, ‘Lord, 
deliver us from under bondage.’ ” 8

Looking back at these secret and risky religious gatherings, an 
ex-slave declared, “Meetings back there meant more than they do 
now. Then everybody’s heart was in tune, and when they called 
on God they made heaven ring. It was more than just Sunday 
meeting and then no godliness for a week. They would steal off to 
the fields and in the thickets and there . . . they called on God out 
of heavy hearts.” Truly communal, these meetings, as Hannah 
Lowery noted, needed no preacher because “everyone was so anx- 
ious to have a word to say that a preacher did not have a chance. 
All of them would sing and pray.” 9 A description of a secret 
prayer meeting was recorded by Peter Randolph, who was a slave 
in Prince George County, Virginia, until he was freed in 1847:

Not being allowed to hold meetings on the plantation, the 
slaves assemble in the swamp, out of reach of the patrols.

They have an understanding among themselves as to the time 
and place of getting together. This is often done by the first 
one arriving breaking boughs from the trees, and bending 
them in the direction of the selected spot. Arrangements are 
then made for conducting the exercises. They first ask each 
other how they feel, the state of their minds, etc. The male 
members then select a certain space, in separate groups, for 
the division of the meeting. Preaching ... by the brethren, 
then praying and singing all around, until they generally feel 
quite happy. The speaker usually commences by calling him- 
self unworthy, and talks very slowly, until feeling the spirit, 
he grows excited, and in a short time, there fall to the ground 
twenty or thirty men and women under its influence . . .

Randolph went on to elucidate the importance of these gatherings 
for the life of the slave community:Randolph went on to elucidate the importance of these gatherings 
for the life of the slave community:

The slave forgets all his sufferings, except to remind others of 
the trials during the past week, exclaiming: ‘Thank God, I 
shall not live here always!’ Then they pass from one to 
another, shaking hands, and bidding each other farewell. . . .

As they separate, they sing a parting hymn of praise. 10

218

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

Prayer, preaching, song, communal support, and especially “feel- 
ing the spirit” refreshed the slaves and consoled them in their 
times of distress. By imagining their lives in the context of a 
different future they gained hope in the present.

The contrast between present pain and future relief formed the 
matter of slave prayer and song. From his memory of slavery, 
Anderson Edwards cited a song which starkly combined suffering 
and hope.

We prayed a lot to be free and the Lord done heered us. We 
didn’t have no song books and the Lord done give us our 
songs and when we sing them at night it jus’ whispering so 
nobody hear us. One went like this:

My knee bones am aching,

My body’s rackin’ with pain,

1 ’lieve I’m a chile of God,

And this ain’t my home,

’Cause Heaven’s my aim. 11

Slaves sought consolation in the future, but they also found it in 
the present. Exhausted from a day of work that stretched from 
“day clean” to after sundown, the slaves sometimes found tangible 
relief in prayer, as Richard Caruthers attested: “Us niggers used 
to have a prayin’ ground down in the hollow and sometime we 
come out of the field . . . scorchin’ and burnin’ up with nothin’ to 
eat, and we wants to ask the good Lawd to have mercy. . . . We 
takes a pine torch . . . and goes down in the hollow to pray. Some 
gits so joyous they starts to holler loud and we has to stop up they 
mouth. I see niggers git so full of the Lawd and so happy they 
draps unconscious .” 12Freedom was frequently the object of prayer. According to 
Laura Ambromson, “Some believed they’d git freedom and others 
didn’t. They had places they met and prayed for freedom.” Others 
were certain it would come. “I’ve heard them pray for freedom,” 
declared another former slave. “I thought it was foolishness then, 
but the old time folks always felt they was to be free. It must have

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

219RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

219

been something ’vealed unto ’em.” Mingo White remembered: 
“Somehow or yuther us had a instinct dat we was goin’ to be 
free,” and “when de day’s wuk was done de slaves would be foun’ 
... in dere cabins prayin’ for de Lawd to free dem lack he did 
chillun of Is’ael.” Andrew Moss revealed that his mother would 
retreat to her private praying ground, “a ole twisted thick-rooted 
muscadine bush,” where she prayed for the deliverance of the 
slaves. George Womble, former slave from Georgia, recalled that 
“slaves would go to the woods at night where they sang and 
prayed” and some used to say, “I know that some day we’ll be free 
and if we die before that time our children will live to see it.” The 
father of Jacob Stroyer, before his family went to bed, would pray 
that “the time which he predicted would come, that is, the time of 
freedom when . . . the children would be [their] own masters and 
mistresses.” Forbidden to pray for liberation, slaves stole away at 
night and prayed inside “cane thickets ... for deliverance .” 13 
Secrecy was characteristic of only part of the slave community’s 
religious life. Many slaveholders granted their slaves permission 
to attend church, and some openly encouraged religious meetings 
among the slaves. Baptisms, marriages, and funerals were allowed 
to slaves on some plantations with whites observing and occasion- 
ally participating. Annual revival meetings were social occasions 
for blacks as well as for whites. Masters were known to enjoy the 
singing, praying, and preaching of their slaves. Nevertheless, at 
the core of the slaves’ religion was a private place, represented by 
the cabin room, the overturned pot, the prayin’ ground, and the 
“hush harbor.” This place the slave kept his own. For no matter 
how religious the master might be, the slave knew that the 
master’s religion did not countenance prayers for his slaves’ free- 
dom in this world.

The Seasons of Religious LifeThe Seasons of Religious Life

The religious format varied from plantation to plantation for the 
slaves. Former slave John Brown depicted two extremes:

220

“THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

Sunday was a great day around the plantation. The fields was 
forgotten, the light chores was hurried through, and every- 
body got ready for the church meeting. It was out of the 
doors, in the yard . . . Master John’s wife would start the 
meeting with a prayer and then would come the singing — the 
old timey songs. But the white folks on the next plantation 
would lick their slaves for trying to do like we did. No pray- 
ing there, and no singing . 14

Some masters did not allow their slaves to go to church and 
ridiculed the notion of religion for slaves because they refused to 
believe that Negroes had souls. Others forbade their slaves to 
attend church because, as an ex-slave explained, “White folks 
’fraid the niggers git to thinkin’ they was free, if they had 
churches ’n things.” Refusal to grant a slave permission to partici- 
pate in religious meetings was also a means of punishment or a 
result of capricious malice on the part of the master or overseer. 
On the other hand, many slave owners did permit — some even 
required — their slaves to worship on the Sabbath, either at the 
local church or at meetings conducted on the plantation by white 
ministers or slave preachers. 1 * On those plantations where slaves 
enjoyed religious privileges the slave community was able to open- 
ly celebrate the religious side of its folk culture. The Reverend 
Greene gave a detailed description of religion in the quarters to 
interviewers from Fisk University:At night, especially in the summertime, after everybody had 
eaten supper, it was a common thing for us to sit outside. The 
old folks would get together and talk until bedtime. Some- 
times somebody would start humming an old hymn, and then 
the next-door neighbor would pick it up. In this way it would 
finally get around to every house, and then the music started.

Soon everybody would be gathered together, and such sing- 
ing! It wouldn’t be long before some of the slaves got happy 
and started to shouting. ... 16

A similar picture of evening prayer meetings was rendered by 
Robert Anderson:

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

221

We would gather out in the open on summer nights, gather 
around a big bonfire, to keep the mosquitoes away, and listen 
to our preachers preach sometimes half the night. There 
would be singing and testifying and shouting. Usually when 
we had these meetings there would be people there from other 
plantations, and sometimes there would be white visitors who 
would stand on the outside of the circle and listen to our 
services.

Sunday prayer meetings in the quarters could, if allowed to, last 
all day. The emotional power of these meetings left a deep im- 
pression on Mose Hursey, who many years later vividly recalled 
them:

On Sundays they had meetin’, sometimes at our house, some- 
times at ’nother house. . . . They’d preach and pray and 
sing — shout, too. I heard them git up with a powerful force of 
the spirit, clappin’ they hands and walkin’ round the place. 
They’d shout, ‘I got the glory. I got that old time ’ligion in 
my heart.’ I seen some powerful ’figurations of the spirit in 
them days . 17

Nor were white visitors to the slave meetings immune to their 
emotional impact. Despite her criticism that a prayer she heard 
offered at one meeting was meaningless, Mary Boykin Chesnut 
admitted she was deeply moved nonetheless:Jim Nelson, the driver . . . was asked to lead in prayer. He 
became wildly excited, on his knees, facing us with his eyes 
shut. He clapped his hands at the end of every sentence, and 
his voice rose to the pitch of a shrill shriek, yet was strangely 
clear and musical, occasionally in a plaintive minor key that 
went to your heart. Sometimes it rang out like a trumpet. I 
wept bitterly. . . . The Negroes sobbed and shouted and 
swayed backward and forward, some with aprons to their 
eyes, most of them clapping their hands and responding in 
shrill tones: ‘Yes, God!’ ‘Jesus!’ ‘Savior!’ ‘Bless de Lord, 
amen,’ etc. It was a little too exciting for me I would very 
much have liked to shout, too. Jim Nelson when he rose from 
his knees trembled and shook as one in a palsy, and from his

222

THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION 1

eyes you could see the ecstasy had not left him yet. He could 
not stand at all, and sank back on his bench.

Some whites found the slaves’ ways of worship humorous; many 
others went “to hear the colored ones sing and praise God,” as 
John Thompson observed, “and were often much affected by 
their simple but earnest devotion .” 18

In the evenings, after work, while religious slaves met to pray, 
sing, and shout, other sounds also rang out in the slave cabins. 
Apparently, the traditional conflict between sacred and secular 
music in Afro-American culture was alive even then, as the ante- 
cedents of gospel and blues clashed in the quarters. Harry Smith’s 
recollection could only hint at the riot of sound:

After eating, often preaching and prayer meetings by some of 
the old folks in some of the cabins and in others fiddles would 
ring out. It was a scene never to be forgotten, as the old Chris- 
tians sing and pray until four in the morning, while at the other 
cabins many would be patting, singing and dancing . 19To the religious slaves, fiddling, dancing, and secular music were 
the devil’s work. According to John Thompson, when a master 
on one plantation wished to halt a revival among his slaves he 
shrewdly hired a slave named Martin who was a talented fiddler. 
Thompson reported that the plan succeeded: “what the whip 
failed to accomplish, the fiddle completed, for it is no easy matter 
to drive a soul from God by cruelty, when it may easily be drawn 
away by worldly pleasures.” The backsliding was temporary, 
however, since Martin left with his fiddle when his term of hire 
expired and the revival of Christianity sprang up anew . 20 The 
only form of “dancing” allowed to the converted was the move- 
ment which occurred in prayer meetings under the influence of 
the holy spirit, as in the ring shout.

Morally sanctioned enjoyments were to be found at Sunday 
church service and revival meetings which were occasions for so- 
cializing, news gathering, and picnicking as well as for prayef. 
Robert Anderson acknowledged that “I always liked to go to

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY 223RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY 223

church for I always found some of the colored folks from the other 
plantations that I could visit with for a little while before church 
started.” Another former slave recalled, “The young folks would 
ride in wagons to and from church and have a big time singing 
songs n’ things.” For most field hands Sunday was a holiday when 
they could wear their better clothes to church, “the onliest place off 
the farm we ever went,” recalled one. Olmsted observed a Sabbath 
worship service in which the slaves were more neatly dressed than 
the poor whites present. Some slaveholders took pride in showing 
how well “their people” dressed at Sunday service. Slaves them- 
selves were fond of dressing up on Sunday and, if allowed to earn a 
little money, would add to their Sunday wardrobe. For example, 
Tom Singleton, former slave from Georgia, recalled that as a slave 
he was allowed to hire out his time at night to cut wood and fix 
fences for neighboring whites. “With the money they paid me,” he 
admitted, “I bought Sunday shoes and a Sunday coat, because I 
was a Nigger what always did like to look good on Sunday.” The 
pleasure of dressing up no doubt added to the specialness of the day 
and expressed in small measure the slaves’ sense of proper dignity, 
of that value which they called “being quality folks.” “Looking 
good” at Sabbath and revival services also had a special purpose for 
the younger slaves, since these were potential occasions for court- 
ing. Another opportunity for asserting one’s dignity came when 
the collection plate was passed. It was not unusual for slaves to add 
their contributions from money they had earned selling the pro- 
duce of their own garden patches . 21When slaves from neighboring plantations were allowed to con- 
gregate for worship, visiting and fellowship added an almost fes- 
tive dimension to the service. Julia Francis Daniels, a slave on a 
Georgia plantation remembered: “We’d ask niggers from other 
farms and I used to say, ‘I like meetin’ jus’ as good as I like a 
party.’ ” Camp meetings were also “big times.” “When de crops 
was laid by and most of de hardest wuk of de year done up, den 
was camp meetin’ time, ’long in de last of July and sometimes in 
August,” reminisced Robert Shepherd. “Det was when us had de

224

THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

biggest times of all. Dey had great big long tables and jus’ eveiy- 
thing good feat.” According to Charlie Aarons: “there would be 
camp meetings held and the slaves from all the surrounding plan- 
tations would attend, going ... in these large wagons . . . They 
then would have a jolly time along the way, singing and calling to 
one another, and making friends .” 22Sundays and revival meetings were not the only respites from 
work anticipated by the slaves. Christmas was the most festive 
holiday of all. Generally, the slaves received three to six days off to 
celebrate the Christmas season and were permitted to visit family 
and friends on neighboring plantations. On Christmas day it was 
customary for slaves to greet the master’s family with cries of 
“Christmas gift, Christmas gift,” to which the whites were 
obliged to respond with a small gift, perhaps tobacco for the men, 
ribbons for the women, ginger cakes for the children, and some 
special tokens for favorite slaves. Drams of whiskey, bowls of 
eggnog and other spirits were freely distributed, and a special 
Christmas supper was prepared for the quarters as well as for the 
big house. The slaves dressed in the best clothes they could 
gather in anticipation of the supper and the visiting and merry- 
making which followed. Then, as now, Christmas was more a 
holiday than a holy day. Feasting, drinking, and dancing were the 
order of the day and must have sorely tempted the more religious 
slaves. As Adeline Jackson recalled, “Everything lively at Christ- 
mas time, dances wid fiddlers, pattin’ and stick rattlin’, but when 
I jined de church, I quit dancin’,” She allowed that the fiddlers, 
dancers and patters were “all nothin’ but sinners, I wuz too, but 
we sho’ had a good time.” Christmas season did give the religious 
slave time to hold prayer meetings, to preach and to pray. Yet 
“many of the strict members of the church who did not dance,” 
Jacob Stroyer asserted, “would be forced to do it to please their 
masters.” At any rate, slaves whether religious or not looked for- 
ward to Christmas as an all-too-short break from plantation rou- 
tine. With the arrival of New Year’s the celebration ended, and 
another year of work faced the slaves . 23

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

225RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

225

Of course, many slaves cared not at all about church, revival 
meetings, or prayer services, would not go if they could, and 
resented being forced to attend. Nonreligious slaves spent Sun- 
days in hunting, fishing, marble shooting, storytelling, or simply 
resting when allowed. Not all slaves appreciated the opportunity 
to attend church. “On Sunday after workin’ hard all de week dey 
would lay down to sleep and be so tired; soon ez yo’ sleep, de 
overseer would come an’ wake you up an’ make you go to 
church,” complained Margrett Nickerson. Some reprobate and 
ingenious slaves even rationalized a way to dance on the Sabbath: 
“The cabins were mostly made of logs and there were large cracks 
in them” through which the sunlight filtered, “so on Sunday 
mornings when they were dancing and did not want to stop” they 
filled “up the cracks with old rags. The idea was that it would not 
be Sunday inside if they kept the sun out, and thus they would 
not desecrate the Sabbath.” Sunday also served as market day for 
those slaves who were allotted individual plots to produce vege- 
tables or poultry for their own use .* 4 
The camp meeting had its nonreligious attractions. John Ander- 
son, who courted his wife, Maria, at a camp meeting, remarked: 
“Many slaves who have no religion, go to camp meetings that they 
may be merry, for there is much whiskey sold at these gatherings, 
and the people drink and play at cards while others attend to 
religion.” While some slaves were allowed holidays to attend camp 
meetings, others took advantage of the time to enjoy “dances, 
raffles, cock-fights, foot-races, and other amusements . . .” 25 
Although religious slaves enjoyed the fellowship and excite- 
ment of church services and revival meetings, their enjoyment 
was marred by the shadow of white control. When they attended 
church, slaves often felt inhibited by the presence of whites, so 
they preferred to worship at a separate service by themselves. As 
Sarah Fitzpatrick, a slave in Alabama, explained:“Niggers” commence ta wanna go to church by de’selves, 
even ef dey had ta meet in de white church. So white fo’ks 
have deir service in de momin’ an’ “Niggers” have deirs in de

226

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

evenin’, a’ter dey clean up, wash de dishes, an’ look a’ter 
ever’thing. . . . Ya’ see “Niggers” lack ta shout a whole lot an’ 
wid de white fo’ks al’ round ’em, dey couldn’t shout jes’ lack 
dey want to.Slaves assembled separately at the camp meetings, as one white 
observer explained, so they could enjoy the “freedom in speaking, 
singing, shouting, and praying they could not enjoy in the pres- 
ence of their masters.” This freedom of expression was circum- 
scribed, however, by the attendance of some whites at slave 
church services to ensure that nothing occurred which could be 
contrued as subversive of the system. Moreover, to attend sepa- 
rate services, slaves needed written passes from their masters 
which stated the time when the slave had to return home. A slave 
who stayed too late at meeting risked a beating from the “padde- 
rollers” [patrols] or his master. The slaves’ enjoyment of religious 
“privileges” was diminished by those masters who forced them to 
attend prayer service whether they wanted to or not. Sometimes 
moments of religious celebration were interrupted by the cruel 
realities of slavery. James Smith related one such incident which 
took place at a revival he attended. A slave named Nancy Merrill 
was converted; the next day of the meeting someone came to the 
church door seeking the new convert. It was a “slave trader, who 
had bought her during the day from her mistress! As soon as she 
went to the door, he seized and bound her, and then took her off 
to her cabin home to get her two boys he had bought also.” That 
this was not an isolated incident is suggested by Moses Roper, 
who accompanied his slave-trading master to “many such meet- 
ings,” where there was “a fruitful season for the drover” who 
caried on a profitable traffic with the slave owners attending the 
revival. Roper claimed this was a practice “common to Baptists 
and Methodists .” 26 Nevertheless, Sunday services, Christmas sea- 
sons, annual revival meetings, and especially the slaves’ own even- 
ing prayer meetings in the quarters were times of refreshment and 
renewal amid the routine toil of the slave life.Religion not only added some moments of brightness to the

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

227

day-to-day life of the slave community, but it also provided special 
rituals to mark the important events of life by means of baptisms, 
weddings, and funerals. Baptism, the central Christian symbol of 
spiritual death, rebirth, and initiation was a memorable occasion 
for the slaves. Accompanied by song, shouting, and ecstatic behav- 
ior, baptism — especially for Baptists — was perhaps the most dra- 
matic ritual in the slave’s religious life. “De biggest meetin’ house 
crowds was when dey had baptizin’,” noted a former Georgia 
slave. “Dey dammed up de crick on Sadday so as it would be 
deep enough on Sunday ... At dem baptizin’s dere was all sorts 
of shoutin’, and dey would sing Roll, Jordan , Roll, De Livin' 
Waters, and Lord, I'se Cornin' Home." Dressed in white robes and 
attended by the “brothers and sisters,” the candidates proceeded 
“amidst singing and praises” to the local pond or creek, symbol of 
the river Jordan, where, according to Baptist practice, each was 
“ducked” by the preacher. Sometimes the newly regenerate came 
up from the baptismal waters shouting for joy at being made new 
in the Lord. 27 Presbyterians, Methodists, and Episcopalians did 
not go down to the waters of baptism to be “ducked,” but were 
“sprinkled” instead. Though less dramatically stated, the symbol- 
ism of death and rebirth still pertained: “Except a man be born 
again, he cannot see the kingdom of God” (John 3:3). For the 
newly baptized a major change had occurred, an event which they 
believed transformed them and which they would remember for 
the rest of their lives. Recollecting the baptism of his mother, 
Isaiah Jeffries has left a description which conveys something of 
the excitement and the sense of new beginning which “baptiz- 
ings” brought to many slaves:When I got to be a big boy, my Ma got religion at de Camp 
meeting at El-Bethel. She shouted and sung fer three days, 
going all over de plantation and de neighboring ones, inviting 
her friends to come to see her baptized and shouting and pray- 
ing fer dem. She went around to all de people dat she had done 
wrong and begged dere forgiveness. She sent fer dem dat had 
wronged her, and told dem dat she was bom again and a new

228

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

woman, and dat she would forgive dem. She wanted everybody 
dat was not saved to go up wid her. . . . My Ma took me wid 
her to see her baptized, and I was so happy dat I sung and 
shouted wid her. All de niggers joined in singing . 28

Occasionally, especially after revivals, there would occur mass 
baptisms of large numbers of slaves. The manager of one Florida 
plantation, for example, wrote the owner, “There was forty one 
41 of your Negroes Baptised Last Sunday in the Canall above the 
Bridge . . . the largest Negroe meeting I ever saw ...” The ex- 
citement of “baptizings” attracted slaves from all around. Charlie 
Hudson claimed “if there was a baptizing inside of ten miles 
around from where us lived, us didn’t miss it. Us knowed how to 
walk and went to git the pleasure.” 29The wedding ceremony was meant to solemnize and publicly 
announce the union, in love, of two individuals — and here lay the 
terrible irony — which was to last for life, a union which God had 
made and no man was to break asunder. For slave weddings, no 
matter what form they took, could not escape the threat inherent 
in slavery, a threat which contradicted the very notion of Chris- 
tian marriage: the constant possibility of separation by sale. Unre- 
cognized by law, the most stable slave marriages were all too 
fragile in their dependence upon the will of the slaveholder. As 
Lunsford Lane noted of his own marriage, “In May, 1828, 1 was 
bound as fast in wedlock as a slave can be. God may at any time 
sunder that band in a freeman; either master may do the same at 
pleasure in a slave.” Despite this contingency the unions of slave 
couples were celebrated by wedding ceremonials of some kind on 
many plantations. The most frequent method of marrying two 
slaves was the custom of jumping the broomstick. One of several 
variations of the ritual was described by William Davis: “Dey lays 
de brooms on de floor and de woman put her broom front de man 
and he put he broom front de woman. Dey face one ’nother and 
step ’cross de brooms at de same time to each other and takes hold 
of hands and dat marry dem.” Another variation was to hold the

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

229

broomstick a foot off the ground and then require the bride and 
groom one after the other to jump over it backwards. William 
Wells Brown asserted that “this custom had as binding force with 
negroes, as if they had been joined by a clergyman; the difference 
being the one was not so high-toned as the other. Yet, it must be 
admitted that the blacks always preferred being married by a 
clergyman .” 30Some slave weddings were performed according to Christian 
ritual by ministers, either white or black. Minerva Davis proudly 
stated that when her parents married, their master “had a white 
preacher to read out of a book to them. They didn’t jump over no 
broom ...” There were slaves, particularly favorite or prominent 
ones — cooks, butlers, maids — who were treated to elaborate wed- 
dings by the white folks. A mistress of a Louisiana plantation, 
Priscilla Bond, described a wedding of this type in her diary:

Had a wedding here tonight. Two of the servants got mar- 
ried. . . . The bride looked quite nice dressed in white. I made 
her turban of white swiss pink tarlatan and orange blossoms.

They were married at the gallery. The moon shone beauti- 
fully. They afterwards adjourned to the ‘hospital’ where they 
enjoyed a ‘ball.’ . , i The groom had on a suite of black, white 
gloves and tall beaver. The bride was dressed in white swiss, 
pink trimmings and white gloves. The bridesmaid and 
groom’s man were dressed to correspond.

At the opposite pole, there were slaveholders who merely told 
their slaves they were married without further ado. Occasionally 
the broomstick ceremony was combined with the regular mar- 
riage rite at the slaves’ request so that “they felt more married .” 31 
“The slaves ... in regard to marriage . . . try to make it as near 
lawful as they can,” commented escaped slave John Warren. After 
emancipation some slaves felt the desire to regularize already 
long-standing marriages. Bongy Jackson enjoyed the rare privi- 
lege of attending her parents’ wedding: “During slavery, us nig- 
gers just jumped the broom wit’ the master’s consent. After the 
Cibil War, soon’s they got a little piece of money they got a

230

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’230

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

preacher and had a real weddin’. My ma dressed like a bride an’ 
all, an’ she done already had nine children by my pa. All us kids 
was there an’ we sure had a fine time.” With or without preacher 
or license, some slaves viewed marriage as permanent and formed 
lasting relationships. James Curry and his wife were refused per- 
mission to marry, and even though they dared not risk any cere- 
mony, they knew they were married and that their marriage was 
binding, Curry insisted, because “God married us.” Others, 
“since they had no law to bind them to one woman . . . could have 
as many as they pleased by mutual agreement,” observed Jacob 
Stroyer. The slaves held “different opinions about plurality of 
wives as have the most educated and refined among the whites .” 32Like weddings, funeral services for slaves required permission, 
which was not always given. When Samuel Andrew’s father died, 
his body “was driven in an ox-cart to a hole that had been dug, 
put in it and covered up”; his wife and children were not allowed 
“to stop work to attend the funeral.” On the other hand, Isaam 
Morgan recalled that on his plantation “De slaves had dere own 
special graveyard an’ us’d make de coffins raght on de place dar. 
When someone died, he was taken in a ox cart to de grave, wid all 
de slaves a-walkin’ ’long behine de cart singin’ de spirituals.” 
Frequently slave funerals were held at night, when work stoppage 
was no problem. According to witnesses, these night funerals 
were impressive, solemn, and eerie ceremonies. The procession 
from the quarters to the grave site lit by pine-knot torches, the 
“wild” mournful strains of the hymns, the prayers of the slave 
preacher, the graves marked with posts and, as in Africa, deco- 
rated with the broken belongings of the deceased, all formed a 
dramatic backdrop for the slave community’s farewell to one of its 
members. Mixed with the sadness was consolation. For some the 
deceased had returned home to Guinea, for others to heaven, 
“where bondage is never known.” When permission could be 
obtained, fellows from neighboring farms attended, and when it 
couldn’t they might steal away to pay last respects . 33

It was not unusual for the funeral sermon to be separated from

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

231It was not unusual for the funeral sermon to be separated from

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

231

the burial by several days, weeks, and even months. Sometimes 
several funerals were preached at once. Charles Raymond, a white 
minister, noticed that slave funerals were usually preached on 
Sundays and explained that “there was no immediate chronologi- 
cal connection between the death and the funeral; and no neces- 
sary allusion in the sermon to the life, death, or virtues of the 
departed.” Former slave Paul Smith testified “later on dey had de 
funeral sermon preached in church, maybe six months atter de 
buryin’. De white folkses had all deir funeral sermons preached at 
de time of buryin’.” John Dixon Long, commenting on this time 
lag between burial and funeral observances, noted that “unless the 
funeral is preached,” whether the deceased was sinner or saint, 
“there is no peace of mind to his friends .” 34 It is difficult to say 
whether this practice reflected an African system of multiple fu- 
nerals or was simply a necessity dictated by the uncertainty of 
permission and the lack of time available to the slaves to attend 
such services.Funerals were the last in a cycle of ceremonies during the life of 
a slave. Sunday worship, prayer meetings, revivals, Christmas, 
“baptizing,” weddings, funerals, all came and went, alternating 
like the seasons of the year, from day to day, from week to week, 
from month to month, in the life of the plantation. To the slaves 
these services and celebrations were special times, counteracting 
the monotony of life in slavery. Furthermore, the slaves asserted 
repeatedly in these seasons of celebration that their lives were 
special, their lives had dignity, their lives had meaning beyond 
the definitions set by slavery. In their meetings slaves enjoyed 
fellowship, exchanged mutual consolation, and gave voice to indi- 
vidual concerns. And here, too, some slaves found the place to 
exercise their talents for leadership.

Slave Preachers

Presiding over slave baptisms, funerals, and weddings was the 
slave preacher, leader of the slaves’ religious life and an influential

232

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

figure in the slave community. Usually illiterate, the slave preach- 
er often had native wit and unusual eloquence. Licensed or unli- 
censed, with or without permission, preachers held prayer meet- 
ings, preached and ministered in a very difficult situation. Care- 
fully watched and viewed with suspicion, the preacher had to 
straddle the conflict between the demands of conscience and the 
orders of the masters. As one former slave put it, “Back there they 
were harder on preachers than they were on anybody else. They 
thought preachers were ruining the colored people.” Anderson 
Edwards reflected on the difficulty he experienced as a slave pre- 
acher in Texas:

I been preachin’ the Gospel and farmin’ since slavery time. . . .I been preachin’ the Gospel and farmin’ since slavery time. . . .

When I starts preachin’ I couldn’t read or write and had to 
preach what massa told me and he say tell them niggers iffen 
they obeys the massa they goes to Heaven but I knowed 
there’s something better for them, but daren’t tell them ’cept 
on the sly. That I done lots. I tell ’em iffen they keeps prayin’ 
the Lord will set ’em free . 35

The slave preacher who verged too close on a gospel of equality 
within earshot of whites was in trouble. Sarah Ford told how “one 
day Uncle Lew preachin’ and he say, ‘De Lawd make everyone to 
come in unity and on de level, both white and black.’ When 
Massa Charles hears ’bout it, he don’t like it none, and de next 
momin’ old Uncle Jake git Uncle Lew and put him out in de 
field with de rest.” Henry Clay Bruce retold the story of an old 
preacher named Uncle Tom Ewing, “who was praying on one 
occasion, after the close of his sermon, in the church near Jacob 
Vennable’s place . . . The old fellow got warmed up, and used the 
words ‘Free indeed, free from work, free from the white folks, free 
from everything.’ After the meeting closed, Jacob Vennable, who 
sat in front of the pulpit, took Tom to task and threatened to have 
his license revoked if he ever used such language in public.” 
Bruce concluded: “I heard Uncle Tom preach and pray many 
times after the above described occurrence, but never heard him 
use the words quoted above.” Uncle Lew and Uncle Tom got off

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

233RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

233

light; Rev. R. S. Sorrick, a slave preacher in Washington County, 
Maryland, was placed in prison in 1841 for three months and 
eight days “for preaching the gospel to my colored brethren.” 36 
By comparison with other slaves, some preachers were privi- 
leged characters. One former slave, from Alabama, remarked that 
“Nigger preachers in dem times wuz mighty-nigh free.” Amanda 
McCray declared that the preacher on her plantation, though a 
slave, was exempt from hard manual labor. Conscious of his own 
importance, he went about “all dressed up” in frock coat and 
“store bought shoes.” As long as he didn’t interfere with other 
slaves’ work he was allowed to hold services whenever he wished, 
and frequently he traveled to neighboring places to conduct 
prayer meetings. It was from the preacher, this relatively mobile 
and privileged slave, that the rest “first heard of the Civil War.” 
During the war he offered whispered prayers for the success of 
the Union Army. Another former slave recalled: “I saw a preacher 
in Mississippi carry on a revival and he had persuaded the white 
man’s son to go, and he professed and they would let him have 
meetings any time, ’cause that white man’s son professed under 
him.” 37 James L. Smith reported that he was able to exercise a 
busy ministry while still a slave:

I had a meeting appointed at a freedwoman’s house ... I left 
home about seven o’clock on Saturday evening, and arrived 
there about ten; we immediately commenced the meeting and 
continued it till about daylight . . . After breakfast we went 
two miles further, and held another meeting till late in the 
afternoon, then closed and started for home reaching there 
some time during the night. I was very much fatigued ... so 
much so that I was not able to work the next day . 38Most slave preachers were hampered by illiteracy in a religion 
that placed such importance on the written word of the Bible. 
White folks would sometimes read a biblical verse for the preach- 
er, and he would proceed to preach from it to his fellow slaves. 
William Pease, a fugitive from slavery in Tennessee, complained 
that the minister on his plantation, the slave driver, was “as igno-

234

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

rant as the rest of the slaves . . . knew nothing at all of the book 
and did not know enough to preach.” There were slave preachers, 
however, who learned on the sly the rudiments of reading. After a 
friend had taught him the alphabet, Peter Randolph taught him- 
self to read the Bible while in slavery. London, the head cooper 
on Frances Kemble’s plantation, had secretly “obtained some little 
knowledge of reading, and was able to read “prayers and the 
Bible to his fellow-slaves.” When asked how he learned to read, 
London replied evasively, “Well missis me learn ... me try . . . 
me ’spose Heaven help me.” Sam Johnson, slave preacher on a 
South Carolina plantation, learned to read from his master’s 
young son. The boy’s parents had forbidden him to drink tea or 
coffee which he liked. Sam, who was also the butler, supplied him 
with both in exchange for reading and writing lessons, from 
which he learned enough to be able to read the Bible. 39

Yet illiteracy did not necessarily prevent eloquent preaching. 
As one former slave claimed, “My grandfather was a preacher and 
didn’t know A from B. He could preach.” And Louis Fowler 
remembered that the slave “preacherman” back on the Georgia 
plantation “am not educated, but can he preach a pow’ful sermon. 
O Lawd! He am inspire from de Lawd and he preached from his 
heartfelt.” Clara Young testified about the power of the slave 
preacher:De preacher I liked de best was named Mathew Ewing. He 
was a comely nigger, black as night, and he sure could read 
out of his hand. He never learned no real readin’ and writin’ 
but he sure knowed his Bible and would hold his hand out 
and make like he was readin’ and preach de purtiest preachin’ 
you ever heard. 40

Several observers noted that slaves preferred their own 
preachers. Anthony Dawson exclaimed: “Mostly we had white 
preachers, but when we had a black preacher that was heaven!” A 
white minister remarked in 1863 that “the ‘colored brethren’ are 
so much preferred as preachers. When in the pulpit there is a 
wonderful sympathy between the speaker and his audience. . . .

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY 235

This sympathetic influence seems the result of a . . . peculiar ex- 
perience. None but a negro can so preach as fully to arouse, 
excite, and transport the negro .” 41

Vivid imagery and dramatic delivery were characteristic of the 
slave preacher’s sermons. Speaking of their abilities in general, a 
white traveler observed somewhat critically, “they acquire a re- 
markable memory of words, phrases, and forms; a curious sort of 
poetic talent is developed, and a habit is obtained of rhapsodizing 
and exciting furious emotions ...” David Macrae, another trav- 
eler, who listened to ex-slave preachers shortly after the Civil War, 
acknowledged: “Some of the most vivid reproductions of Scripture 
narrative I have ever listened to were from the lips of such men, 
who might with proper training have been orators .” 42 Missionaries 
to the freedmen were frequently amazed at the wisdom and elo- 
quence of the black preachers recently released from slavery. 
“What wonderful preachers these blacks are!” exclaimed one corre- 
spondent from Georgia to the editor of the American Missionary.

I listened to a remarkable sermon or talk a few evenings since.I listened to a remarkable sermon or talk a few evenings since.

The preacher spoke of the need of atonement for sin. “Bul- 
locks c’dn’t do it, heifers c’dn’t do it, de blood of doves c’dn’t 
do it — but up in heaven, for thousan and thousan of years, the 
Son was saying to the Father, ‘Put up a soul, put up a soul. 
Prepare me a body, an I will go an meet Justice on Calvary’s 
brow!” He was so dramatic. In describing the crucifixion he 
said: “I see the sun when she turned herself black. I see the 
stars a fallin from the sky, and them old Herods comin out of 
their graves and goin about the city, an they knew ’twas the 
Lord of Glory.” 43

George Hepworth, a war correspondent, was similarly impressed 
by a slave he heard preach behind the Union lines:

The moment I looked at him, I saw that he was no common 
man. He had a full forehead, a tall commanding figure. ... I 
remember, too, some of his phrases: they were very beautiful, 
and were epic in grandeur. He spoke of Hhe rugged wood of the 
cross,' whereto the Saviour was nailed; and, after describing

236

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

that scene with as much power as I have ever known an orator 
to exhibit, he reached the climax, when he pictured the earth- 
quake which rent the veil of the temple, with this extremely 
beautiful expression: ‘And, my friends, the earth was unable to 
endure the tremendous sacrilege, and trembled.' He held his 
rude audience with most perfect control; subdued them, ex- 
cited them, and, in feet, did what he pleased with them .” 4,1Attempting to analyze the preaching of Uncle Robert, a slave in 
Beaufort, North Carolina, a white missionary noted, “In his ser- 
mons there is often a clearness of statement, an earnestness of 
address, a sublimity and splendor of imagery, together with a 
deep pathos, which give his public addresses great power.” As a 
result, “many who affect to despise the negro, want to hear Uncle 
Robert when it is announced that he is to preach .” 45 A.M. 
French, writing of the “Colored Ambassadors” at Port Royal, 
touched upon the reasons which the slave preachers themselves 
gave for their authority:

The real spiritual benefit of these poor Colored people, instru- 
mentally, seems to have been mostly derived from a sort of 
local preachers, Colored, and mostly slaves, but of deep spiri- 
tual experience, sound sense, and capacity to state Scripture 
facts, narratives, and doctrines, fer better than most, who feed 
upon commentaries. True, the most of them could not read, 
still, some of them line hymns from memory with great accu- 
racy, and fervor, and repeat Scripture most appropriately, and 
correctly. Their teaching shows clearly that it is God in the 
soul, that makes the religious teacher. One is amazed at their 
correctness and power. They say: “God tell me ‘you go teach 
de people what I tell you; I shall prosper you; I teach you in 
de heart .’” 46

The style of the folk sermon, shared by black and white evan- 
gelicals, was built on a formulaic structure based on phrases, 
verses, and whole passages the preacher knew by heart. Charac- 
terized by repetition, parallelisms, dramatic use of voice and ges- 
ture, and a whole range of oratorical devices, the sermon began 
with normal conversational prose, then built to a rhythmic ca-

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY 237RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY 237

dence, regularly marked by the exclamations of the congregation, 
and climaxed in a tonal chant accompanied by shouting, singing, 
and ecstatic behavior. The preacher, who needed considerable 
skill to master this art, acknowledged not his own craft but, 
rather, the power of the spirit which struck him and “set him on 
fire.” The dynamic pattern of call and response between preacher 
and people was vital to the progression of the sermon, and unless 
the spirit roused the congregation to move and shout, the sermon 
was essentially unsuccessful . 47

A highly visible figure in the community, the preacher occupied 
a position of esteem and authority and undoubtedly developed a 
reputation which could form the basis for folk tales. The prestige of 
the role attracted some characters to the ministry who furnished 
the prototypes of the rascal jackleg preacher. Perhaps the genre of 
black-preacher tales began during slavery. For some the call to 
preach might have been a call to status and privilege, but for the 
majority it was the command of God to spread the Gospel. One 
former slave explained his calling in simple and eloquent words 
which epitomized the ideal of the preacher’s vocation:

Yer see I am a preacher. De Lord call me once when I was 
workin’. ... He call me and told me, in imagination, you 
know, that he wanted me to preach. I told him I didn’t know 
enough — that I was ig’nant, and the folks would laugh at me.But he drew me on and I prayed. I prayed out in the woods, 
and every time I tried to get up from my knees He would 
draw me down again. An’ at last a great light came down 
sudden to me, a light as big as the moon, an’ struck me hard 
on the head and on each shoulder and on the bress, here and 
here and here . . . And den same time warm was in around 
my heart, and I felt that the Book was there. An’ my tongue 
was untied, and I preach ever since and is not afraid. I can’t 
read de Book, but I has it here, I has de text, and de meanin’, 
and I speaks as well as I can, and de congregation takes what 
the Lord gives me. 48

The preacher was not the only figure of religious influence in 
the quarters. The conjurer was the preacher’s chief rival for au-

238

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’The preacher was not the only figure of religious influence in 
the quarters. The conjurer was the preacher’s chief rival for au-

238

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

thority of a supernatural kind. Witches possessed a negative kind 
of power to frighten. Elder slaves, who had earned respect be- 
cause of their wisdom or vision acted as spiritual mentors to their 
fellows. Frederick Douglass, for example, as a boy frequently 
sought the counsel of Uncle Charles Lawson, whom he called his 
spiritual father and “chief instructor in religious matters.” Lawson 
taught Douglass “that the Lord had great work for me to do. . . . 
When I would tell him, ‘I am a slave, and a slave for life, how can 
I do anything?’ he would quietly answer, ‘The Lord can make you 
free ... ’ ” Sinda, an elderly slave woman on Frances Kemble’s 
plantation, exerted considerable religious influence among the 
slaves as a prophetess until she damaged her credibility by pre- 
dicting an imminent end to the world. On the Sea Islands in 1864 
Laura Towne encountered Maum Katie “an old African woman, 
who remembers worshipping her own gods in Africa.” Over a 
century old, she was a “ ‘spiritual mother,’ a fortune-teller or, 
rather, prophetess, and a woman of tremendous influence over her 
spiritual children.” The “watchman” was also an important reli- 
gious leader on the plantation. His duties included advising on 
spiritual matters, opening and leading prayer meetings, counsel- 
ing “mourners,” sinners seeking conversion, and generally setting 
Christian example for the slaves. 49Much discussion has focused on the question, Were the slave 
preachers a force for accommodation to the status quo or a force 
for the exercise of slave autonomy? On the one hand, the slave 
preacher was criticized by former slaves as the “mouthpiece of the 
masters.” On the other hand, some slave preachers preached and 
spoke of freedom in secret. The weight of slave testimony sug- 
gests that the slaves knew and understood the restrictions under 
which the slave preacher labored, and that they accepted his au- 
thority not because it came from the master but because it came 
from God. They respected him because he was the messenger of 
the Gospel, one who preached the word of God with power and 
authority, indeed with a power which sometimes humbled white 
folk and frequently uplifted slaves. For a black man and a slave to

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

239

stand and preach with eloquence, skill, and wisdom was in itself a 
sign of ability and talent which slavery’s restrictiveness could frus- 
trate but never completely stifle.

Bible Christians239

stand and preach with eloquence, skill, and wisdom was in itself a 
sign of ability and talent which slavery’s restrictiveness could frus- 
trate but never completely stifle.

Bible Christians

The sermons of the slave preacher were based upon the Bible. 
Indeed the biblical orientation of slave religion was one of its cen- 
tral characteristics. Stories, characters, and images from both Old 
and New Testaments pervaded the preaching, praying, and sing- 
ing of the slaves. Keenly aware of their inability to read the Scrip- 
tures, many slaves came to view education with a religious awe and 
bitterly resented the slaveholders’ ban on reading. “Dey jus’ beat 
’em up bad when dey cotched ’em studyin’ readin’ and writin’,” 
recalled William McWhorter. “Folks did tell ’bout some of de 
owners dat cut off one finger evvy time dey cotch a slave tryin’ to 
git lamin’. How-some-ever, dere was some Niggers dat wanted 
lamin’ so bad dey would slip out at night and meet in a deep gully 
whar dey would study by de light of light’ood torchers; but one 
thing sho, dey better not let no white folks find out ’bout it, and if 
dey was lucky ’nough ’til dey larned to read de Bible, dey kept it a 
close secret.” The thirst of slaves for religious education led them to 
sneak lessons whenever they found a teacher. W. L. Bost reflected 
upon reading, religion, and revelation:

Us poor niggers never allowed to learn anything. All the 
readin’ they ever hear was when they was carried through the 
big Bible. The massa say that keep the slaves in they places.

They was one nigger boy . . . who was terrible smart. He 
learn to read and write. He take other colored children out in 
the fields and teach ’em about the Bible, but they forget it 
before the next Sunday. . . . The white folks feared for niggers 
to get any religion and education, but I reckin somethin’ in- 
side just told us about God and that there was a better place 
hereafter . 50Slaves were distrustful of the white folks’ interpretation of the 
Scriptures and wanted to be able to search them for themselves.

240

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’Slaves were distrustful of the white folks’ interpretation of the 
Scriptures and wanted to be able to search them for themselves.

240

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

The reverence which they held for the Bible moved many ex- 
slaves to flock to schools set up by missionaries after freedom 
came. Woodson’s statement, “Negroes . . . almost worshiped the 
Bible, and their anxiety to read it was their greatest incentive to 
learn,” is not an exaggeration. One visitor to a night school for 
freedmen in Beaufort, North Carolina, learned from the teacher 
the story of a fugitive slave “who carried a big Bible about with 
her through the woods and swamps.” Though she was unable to 
read, she “had got her old mistress to turn down the leaves at the 
verses she knew by heart, and often she would sit down in the 
woods and open the big Bible at these verses, and repeat them 
aloud, and find strength and consolation.” Another slave, who 
was a nurse for her master’s family, had been taught by one of the 
children to spell the name of Jesus and to recognize it in the text. 
It became her devotion “to take the Bible and search for the 
name,” but since “she had no idea in what parts of the Bible it 
was to be found” she would open the book at random and “travel 
with her finger along line after line, and page after page” until she 
found “Jesus.” Harriet Ware, missionary in Port Royal, noted in 
1862 the freed slaves’ almost superstitious regard for letters. Ob- 
serving a funeral, she noticed: “As we drew near to the grave we 
heard all the children singing their A,B,C, through and through 
again, as they stood waiting round the grave for the rest to as- 
semble . . . Each child has his school-book or picture book ... in 
his hand, — another proof that they consider their lessons as in 
some sort religious exercises.” 51 
There were slaves who did learn to read. Some planters, ignor- 
ing the law or customs prohibiting slave literacy, did not hinder 
their slaves’ efforts to learn. Sir Charles Lyell on his second visit 
to the American South discovered that some of the planters in 
Glynn County, Georgia, “have of late permitted the distribution 
of Bibles among their slaves,” and he noted that “they who were 
unable to read were as anxious to possess them as those who 
could.” Olmsted came across a plantation in northern Mississippi 
where the owner took pride in the fact that his slaves could read:RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

241RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

241

“there ent one of my niggers but what can read; read good too — 
better’n I can at any rate.” “How did they learn?” “Taught them- 
selves. I b’lieve there was one on ’em that I bought, that could 
read, and he taught all the rest.” According to the planter, his 
slaves preferred religious books, which they purchased from ped- 
dlers. A few slaves — Frederick Douglass and Elijah Marrs among 
them — learned to read from friendly whites, especially children. 
John C. Becton, former slave in North Carolina, explained: 
“When the white children studied their lessons I studied with 
them. When they wrote in the sand I wrote in the sand too. The 
white children, and not the marster or mistress, is where I got 
started in learnin’ to read and write.” 52 
Illiteracy proved less of an obstacle to knowledge of the Bible 
than might be thought, for biblical stories became part of the oral 
tradition of the slaves. Oral instructions and Sunday School les- 
sons were committed to memory. As one missionary to the slaves 
reported: “To those who are ignorant of letters, their memory is 
their book . ... In a recent examination of one of the schools, I was 
forcibly struck with their remembrance of passages of Scripture. 
Those questions which turned upon and called for passages of 
Scripture, the scholars answered more readily than any other.” 
William H. Heard, former slave and, later, bishop in the A.M.E. 
Church, recalled: “In . . . Sunday School we were taught the 
Bible and the Catechism, and committed much to memory by 
having the same repeated to us in the Sunday School, and then 
some member of the white family carried this out during the 
week; so that there were those of us who could repeat whole 
Psalms and chapter after chapter in the shorter Catechism.” The 
Reverend S. G. Whiton, missionary to the freedman of Fortress 
Monroe, Virginia, in 1866, was amazed by one of his students, 
Uncle Peter, who was very familiar with the Bible even though 
he read poorly. “His memory,” explained Whiton, “is remarkable, 
and he can repeat a great many chapters entire. This morning, 
among others, he repeated the first chapter of Matthew, hardly 
making a single mistake in that long list of genealogies.” 53242

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’242

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

Because they were unable to read the Bible, some slaves be- 
lieved that God revealed his word to them directly, in their 
hearts. “De Master teaches we poor coloured folk in dat way,” 
claimed one elderly freedwoman, “for we hasn’t edication, and we 
can’t read His bressed word for ourselves.” A missionary to the 
contrabands (fugitive slaves behind Union lines) at Beaufort, 
South Carolina, heard the same belief expressed by another freed- 
woman: “ ‘Oh! I don’t know nothing! I can’t read a word. But, 
oh! I read Jesus in my heart, just as you read him in de book’; and 
drawing her forefingers across the other palm, as if tracing a line: 
‘I read and read him here in my heart just as you read him in de 
Bible. O, . . . my God! I got Him! I hold him here all de time! He 
stay with me!’ ” Several ex-slaves claimed that they recognized 
verses read to them from the Bible because they had heard them 
before in visions they had experienced during slavery. Some 
slaves apparently espoused a doctrine of enthusiasm which 
stressed direct inspiration from God rather than the revelation 
contained in the pages of the Bible. Susan H. Clark noticed this 
emphasis on personal revelation among the freedmen with whom 
she worked at Fortress Monroe. “The Bible being so long a 
sealed book to them, they believed that God revealed everything 
that pertained to their salvation, without reference to the Bible or 
its teaching. They think no one should read the Bible until after 
conversion — that it is then a guide. Some say it is written on their 
hearts, and that is all they want .” 54 
It is not surprising that the uses to which slaveholders had put 
the Bible would lead some slaves to distinguish their own experi- 
ential Christianity from the “Bible Christianity” of their masters. 
As one observer noted of ex-slave church members in Virginia: 
they “were quite alarmed . . . that those who were concerned for 
their soul’s salvation should attempt to look for instruction or 
comfort from the Bible. They wanted to see their children and 
friends get religion as they did. They fell under the mighty power 
of God, and after mourning many days, and then came out shout- 
ing, for an angel, they said, told them their sins were forgiven.RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

243

They said their masters and families were Bible Christians, and 
they did not want to be like them.”

Unable to read the Bible for themselves and skeptical of their 
masters’ interpretation of it, most slaves learned the message of 
the Christian Gospel and translated it into songs in terms of their 
own experience. As John Dixon Long observed, “Many of them 
could state the cardinal doctrines of the Gospel in the language of 
song.” 58 It was in the spirituals, above all, that the characters, 
themes, and lessons of the Bible became dramatically real and 
took on special meaning for the slaves.

Slave Spirituals

Drawing from the Bible, Protestant hymns, sermons, and African 
styles of singing and dancing, the slaves fashioned a religious 
music which expressed their faith in “moving, immediate, collo- 
quial, and, often, magnificently dramatic terms.” 56 The argument 
over the relative importance of European versus African influence 
on the development of the slave spirituals has demonstrated that 
these songs, like all folk songs, are hybrids, born of mutual 
influence and reciprocal borrowing between traditions. As noted 
in Chapter 2, the discussion of African and Anglo-American mu- 
sical contributions to the spirituals has been long and sometimes 
heated, but more important for interpreting the meaning of the 
spirituals is an appreciation of the context, social and religious, in 
which the spirituals were performed, as well as an insight into the 
extraordinary power of these songs to shape the experience and 
the conscious identity of a people.Spirituals are too often seen simply as words and notes printed 
on a page. What must be recognized is that they emerged as 
communal songs, heard, felt, sung and often danced with hand- 
clapping, foot-stamping, head-shaking excitement. It was at the 
prayer or praise meeting that the spiritual was sung in its full 
communal and liturgical setting. Slave preacher James L. Smith 
offered a glimpse of this setting: “The way in which we wor-

244

THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

shipped is almost indescribable. The singing was accompanied by 
a certain ecstasy of motion, clapping of hands, tossing of heads, 
which would continue without cessation about half an hour; one 
would lead off in a kind of recitative style, others joining in the 
chorus. The old house partook of the ecstasy; it rang with their 
jubilant shouts, and shook in all its joints .” 57 Writing after slav- 
ery, but discussing a tradition that stretched back beyond emanci- 
pation, Harris Barrett, of Hampton Institute, also attempted to 
picture the spirituals in their original context:

Those who have never heard these songs in their native set- 
ting can have no conception of the influence they exert upon 
the people. I have sat in a gathering where everything was as 
quiet and placid as a lake on a summer day, where the 
preacher strove in vain to awaken an interest; I have heard a 
brother or a sister start one of these spirituals, slowly and 
monotonously; I have seen the congregation irresistibly drawn 
to take up the refrain; I have seen the entire body gradually 
worked up from one degree of emotion to another until, like a 
turbulent, angry sea, men and women, to the accompaniment 
of the singing, and with shouting, moaning, and clapping of 
hands, surged and swayed to and fro. I have seen men and 
women at these times look and express themselves as if they 
were conversing with their Lord and Master, with their hands 
in His . . . 58In response to a question about the way in which spirituals 
were created, one ex-slave from Kentucky claimed that they were 
formed out of traditional African tunes and songs with which the 
slaves were familiar. Then she went on to describe another part of 
the process by which spirituals came to be — the moments of reli- 
gious excitement when the slaves’ emotions spontaneously broke 
out in moaning, praying, singing and shouting, the ecstatic ex- 
pressions of religious fervor:

Us ole heads use ter make ’em on de spurn of de moment, 
after we wressle wid de Spirit and come thoo. But the tunes 
was brung from Africa by our grandaddies. Dey was jis ’mil- 
iar song . . . dey calls ’em spirituals, case de Holy Spirit done

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

245

revealed ’em to ’em. Some say Moss Jesus taught ’em, and I’s 
seed ’em start in meetin’. We’d all be at the ‘prayer house’ de 
Lord’s Day, and de white preacher he’d splain de word and 
read whar Ezekiel done say —

Dry bones gwine ter lib again.

And, honey, de Lord would come a-shining thoo dem pages 
and revive dis ole nigger’s heart, and I’d jump up dar and den 
and holler and shout and sing and pat, and dey would all 
cotch de words . . . and dey’s all take it up and keep at it, and 
keep a-addin to it and den it would be a spiritual . 59To fully understand these slave songs, then, the reader of spiritu- 
als must try to imagine them as performed. The verses of some 
spirituals take on new meaning when one realizes that spirituals 
were not only sung in the fields or at prayer and worship services 
but were shouted — that is, danced in the ring shout — with the 
result that the lyrics of the songs were acted out or dramatized by 
the band of shouters. The shout would start with a leader calling 
out a verse of a spiritual while the shouters responded by walking 
around in a circle. When the singers who stood outside the ring 
took up the chorus, the shout proper would begin with the ring 
band shuffling rapidly to the beat announced by the hand-clap- 
ping and foot-tapping of the chorus of singers who were said then 
to be “basing” the shouters. Here is an example of the lyrics of a 
spiritual:

(Chorus) O shout, O shout, O shout away,

And don’t you mind,

And glory, glory, glory in my soul!

(Verse) And when ’twas night I thought ’twas day,

I thought I’d pray my soul a-way,

And glory, glory, glory in my soul!

It may contribute significantly to the reader’s appreciation of the 
song if he visualizes it as an all-night shout, literally creating the 
experience it describes: “shouting until the glory in my soul 
turned night into day .” 90

246

THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

In the creation as well as the performance of the spirituals, 
spontaneity, variety, and communal interchange were essential 
characteristics. The interplay between individual and group par- 
ticipation in the formation of the spirituals was illustrated by one 
freedman when asked about the origin of a song:

I’ll tell you; it’s dis way. My master call me up and order me a 
short peck of com and a hundred lash. My friends see it and is 
sorry for me. When dey come to de praise meetin’ dat night 
dey sing about it. Some’s very good singers and know how; 
and dey work it in you know; till dey git it right; and dat’s de 
way . 61The flexible, improvisational structure of the spirituals gave them 
the capacity to fit an individual slave’s specific experience into the 
consciousness of the group. One person’s sorrow or joy became 
everyone’s through song. Singing the spirituals was therefore 
both an intensely personal and vividly communal experience in 
which an individual received consolation for sorrow and gained a 
heightening of joy because his experience was shared. Perhaps in 
the very structure of many spirituals one can see articulated this 
notion of communal support. In the pattern of overlapping call 
and response an individual would extemporize the verses, freely 
interjecting new ones from other spirituals. Frequently, before he 
was finished, everyone else would be repeating a chorus familiar 
to all. This pattern may be seen as a metaphor for the individual 
believer’s relationship to the community. His changing daily ex- 
perience, like the verses improvised by the leader, was “based” by 
the constancy of his Christian community. This symbolism is 
especially powerful in the ring shout w'hen the individual shouter 
stood outside himself, literally in ecstasy, transcending time and 
place as the rhythms of the chorus were repeatedly beat out with 
hands, feet, and body in the constant shuffle of the ring.

To say that the spontaneity and fluidity of the spirituals permit- 
ted the slaves to make reference to individual incidents is not to 
assert — as some have — that the spirituals were coded protest 
songs. Certainly, there were spirituals that were used to announce

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

247RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

247

secret meetings or to warn of the overseer’s approach. But the 
relevance of most spirituals to the situation of slavery was both 
more ambiguous and more profound. Because the spirituals were 
open formally and thematically to change, a spiritual in one situa- 
tion might mean one thing and in another something else, with- 
out negating its earlier meaning. A particular verse might have a 
particular significance for a person at one time and not at another. 
It is a common experience for people to refer to a widely circu- 
lated and well-known song as “our song” because it seems a 
particularly apt comment on some situation in their own lives. In 
the same way, one former slave recalled that although “her” song, 
“I Heard the Voice of Jesus Say,” came from a hymnbook, it was 
her song because “It just suited me when I was praying to the 
Lord to have mercy on me for my sins .” 62 It is not necessary, 
then, to believe that the line “I am bound for the land of Canaan” 
always meant going North to escape from slavery, even though 
that is exactly what the line signified for Frederick Douglass and 
his fellows while they plotted to escape.

A keen observer might have detected in our repeated singing

of

0 Canaan, sweet Canaan,

1 am bound for the land of Canaan,

something more than a hope of reaching heaven. We meant to 
reach the North , and the North was our Canaan.

I thought I heard them say 
There were lions in the way;

I don’t expect to stay 
Much longer here.

Run to Jesus, shun the danger.

I don’t expect to stay 
Much longer here,

was a favorite air, and had a double meaning. On the lips of 
some it meant the expectation of a speedy summons to a world 
of spirits, but on the lips of our company it simply meant a

248

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

speedy pilgrimage to a free state, and deliverance from all the 
evils and dangers of slavery . 63248

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

speedy pilgrimage to a free state, and deliverance from all the 
evils and dangers of slavery . 63

This was clearly a case where a spiritual with a generally accepted 
meaning was applied to a specific situation by Douglass and his 
company in order to bolster their courage and strengthen their 
camaraderie.

Religious images, such as freedom, were ambiguous. To some 
slaves they undoubtedly meant freedom from physical as well as 
spiritual bondage. At certain times one meaning probably had 
more urgency than the other. Whites frightened by the possibility 
of slave insurrection were suspicious of ambiguity in the spiritu- 
als, as slaves in Georgetown, South Carolina, discovered when, at 
the beginning of the Civil War, they were jailed for singing:

We’ll soon be free,

We’ll soon be free,

We’ll soon be free,

When de Lord will call us home.

My brudder, how long,

My brudder, how long,

My brudder, how long,

’Fore we done sufferin’ here?

It won’t be long ( thrice )

’Fore de Lord will call us home. . . .

We’ll soon be free ( thrice )

When Jesus sets me free.

We’ll fight for liberty ( thrice )

When de Lord will call us home.

Thomas Wentworth Higginson, who collected spirituals from 
black troops during the Civil War explained “ ‘De Lord will call 
us home’ was evidently thought to be a symbolical verse; for, as a 
little drummer-boy explained to me, showing all his white teeth 
as he sat in the moonlight by the door of my tent, ‘Day tink de 
Lord mean for say de Yankees. ’ ” Higginson concluded that “suspi- 
cion in this case was unfounded,” but one wonders if he noted the 
ambiguity of the drummer boy’s smile . 64 William Sinclair, whose 
early childhood was spent in slavery in Georgetown, South Caro-

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

249RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

249

lina, claimed that when slave owners forbade the slaves to sing 
“One of these days I shall be free/ When Christ the Lord shall set 
me free,” they “hoodwinked the master class by humming the 
music of this particular song, while the words echoed and re- 
echoed deep down in their hearts with perhaps greater effect than 
if they had been spoken .” 85

By the end of the war once ambiguous references to freedom 
and slavery had become clear. One traveler heard freedmen sing- 
ing these verses, adopted “sometimes during the war”:

Oh! Fader Abraham 
Go down into Dixie’s land 
Tell Jeff Davis 
To let my people go.

Down in de house of bondage 
Dey have watch and waited long,

De oppressor’s heel is heavy,

De oppressor’s arm is strong.

Oh, Fader Abraham . 86

Booker T. Washington, recalling his last days in slavery, made a 
similar point about the ambiguity of the religious imagery in 
spirituals:

As the great day [of emancipation] grew nearer, there was 
more singing in the slave quarters than usual. It was bolder, 
had more ring, and lasted later into the night. Most of the 
verses of the plantation songs had some reference to freedom.

True, they had sung those same verses' before, but they had 
been careful to explain that the “freedom” in these songs re- 
ferred to the next world, and had no connection with life in 
this world. Now they gradually threw off the mask; and were 
not afraid to let it be known that the “freedom” in their songs 
meant freedom of the body in this world . 67

The spirituals, then, were capable of communicating on more 
than one level of meaning. Indeed it would have been strange had 
they not, since much of the verbal art of West Africans and many 
of the folk tales of their American descendants were characterized 
by indirect, veiled social comment and criticism, a technique ap-

250

THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

propriately described as “hitting a straight lick with a crooked 
stick .” 68250

THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

propriately described as “hitting a straight lick with a crooked 
stick .” 68

Important though it is to recognize that the spirituals some- 
times expressed the slaves’ desire for freedom in this world as well 
as in the next, it is at least as important to understand the pro- 
found connection between the other world and this world in the 
religious consciousness of the slaves. Categorizing sacred and 
secular elements is of limited usefulness in discussing the spiritu- 
als because the slaves, following African and biblical tradition, 
believed that the supernatural continually impinged on the nat- 
ural, that divine action constantly took place within the lives of 
men, in the past, present and future. It was precisely at the wor- 
ship and praise services in which the spirituals were so important 
that the contact between God and man became real for the slaves.In the spirituals, as Lawrence Levine has persuasively argued, a 
sense of sacred time operated, in which the present was extended 
backwards so that characters, scenes, and events from the Old and 
New Testaments became dramatically alive and present . 69 As a 
result, the slaves’ identification with the children of Israel took on 
an immediacy and intensity which would be difficult to exagger- 
ate. The slaves’ religious community reached out through space 
and time to include Jacob, Moses, Joshua, Noah, Daniel, the 
heroes whose faith had been tested of old. From the New Testa- 
ment they remembered “weeping Mary,” “sinking Peter,” and 
“doubting Thomas,” again noting the trials of faith through 
which these “true believers” had passed: Mary weeping in the 
garden because she did not know where Jesus’ body had been 
taken, until he appeared to her in his risen glory; Thomas doubt- 
ing that Jesus had risen until Jesus appeared to him and said, 
“Blessed are those who have not seen, yet believed”; Peter sinking 
beneath the waves of the Sea of Galilee because he was weak in 
faith, until Jesus, walking upon the water, reached out to save 
him. These were the models, the analogues, reminding the slaves 
to hold on to their faith despite grief, doubt, and fear.

Identification with the children of Israel was, of course, a

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

251Identification with the children of Israel was, of course, a

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

251

significant theme for white Americans, too. From the beginnings 
of colonization, white Christians had identified the journey across 
the Atlantic to the New World as the exodus of a new Israel from 
the bondage of Europe into the promised land of milk and honey. 
For the black Christian, as Vincent Harding has observed, the 
imagery was reversed: the Middle Passage had brought his people 
to Egypt land, where they suffered bondage under Pharaoh. 
White Christians saw themselves as a new Israel; slaves identified 
themselves as the old. Certainly, a great deal of the imagery and 
even the verses which occur in the slave spirituals occur in the 
white revivalist spirituals also . 70 Particularly, to those poor whites 
who knew suffering, hardship, and oppression these images must 
have meant much the same as they did to slaves. But oppression 
was not slavery. The slaves’ historical identity as a unique people 
was peculiarly their own. In the spirituals the slaves affirmed and 
reaffirmed that identity religiously as they suffered and celebrated 
their journey from slavery to freedom.

Like many Christians before and after, the slaves found in the 
journey an archetypal symbol for the progress of the Christian life. 
It is no surprise to find that numerous texts of the spirituals 
dramatize episodes along the path which begins with conversion 
“down in that lonesome valley” and ends in salvation “across the 
river Jordan, on Canaan’s bright shore.” And since the spirituals 
were songs of praise and worship, they were meant not only to 
narrate the Christians’ pilgrimage but to exhort, instruct, and 
help move them on the way. The first step on the way was for the 
sinner to turn and, convicted of sin, repent. To exhort the sinner, 
and to renew the fervor of the converted as well, the spirituals 
attested to the comforts to be found in religion.O walk Jordan long road,

And religion so sweet,

O religion is good for anything,

And religion so sweet.

Religion make you happy.

Religion gib me patience.

252

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

0 member, get religion

1 long time been a-huntin’

I seekin’ for my fortune.

0 I gwine to meet my Savior.

Gwine to tell him ’bout my trials ... 71

The invitation to “get religion” was sometimes directly personal, 
as in “The Heavenly Road”:

You may talk of my name as much as you please,

And carry my name abroad,

But I really do believe I’m a child of God 
As I walk in de heavenly road.

O, won’t you go wid me? ( Thrice )

For to keep our garments clean.

O Satan is a mighty busy ole man,

And roll rocks in my way;

But Jesus is my bosom friend,

And roll ’em out of de way.

O, won’t you go wid me? ( Thrice )

For to keep our garments clean.

Come, my brudder, if you never did pray,

1 hope you may pray to-night;

For I really believe I’m a child of God

As I walk in de heavenly road.

O, won’t you, etc . 72

The exhortation to repent could also be dramatically urgent:

Turn sinner, turn today, Turn sinner, turn O! ( Twice )

Turn, O sinner, de worl’ da gwine, Turn, sinner, turn O! (Twice) 
Wait not for tomorrow’s sun, Turn sinner, turn O! (Twice) 
Tomorrow’s sun will sure to shine, Turn sinner, turn O! (Twice)

The sun may shine, but on your grave, Turn sinner, turn O!

While de lamp hold out to burn, Turn, sinner, turn O!

De wile’ sinner may return, Turn, sinner, turn O ! 73

In the slave spirituals which have come down to us, references 
to hellfire and damnation are not common, but they did occur.

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

253

One fragment of this threatening approach to sinners was re- 
corded by a traveler shortly after the end of the war:

A negro lad who sang me a weird hymn in which the follow- 
ing verse occurred,

You’d better mind how you fool with Christ 
In a moment you’ll be as cold as ice,A negro lad who sang me a weird hymn in which the follow- 
ing verse occurred,

You’d better mind how you fool with Christ 
In a moment you’ll be as cold as ice,

paused, and said, “I saw six converted on that verse .” 74

“Down in the Valley,” a spiritual collected by Higginson, com- 
bines images of divine mercy and apocalyptic judgment to per- 
suade the sinner to seek conversion, and adds a note of urgency 
by repeating “Who will rise and go with me?”

We’ll run and never tire,

We’l run and never tire,

We’ll run and never tire,

Jesus set poor sinners free.

Way down in de valley,

Who will rise and go with me?

You’ve heern talk of Jesus

Who set poor sinners free.

De lightnin’ and de flashin’

De lightnin’ and de flashin’,

De lightnin’ and de flashin’,

Jesus set poor sinners free.

I can’t stand the fire. (Thrice)

Jesus set poor sinners free,

De green trees a-flamin’ ( Thrice )

Jesus set poor sinners free,

Way down in de valley,

Who will rise and go with me?

You’ve heern talk of Jesus

Who set poor sinners free . 75

“Going down into the lonesome valley” was a difficult passage 
that each sin-laden “mourner” had to experience before “cornin’ 
through” to conversion.

254

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

My sister, you want to get religion?

Go down in de Lonesome Valley,

My brudder, you want to git religion,

Go down in the Lonesome Valley.

( Chorus )

Go down in de Lonesome Valley,

Go down in de Lonesome Valley, my Lord,

Go down in de Lonesome Valley,

To meet my Jesus dere ! 76

The figurative lonesome valley took on literal shape as the trou- 
bled sinner wandered the woods, the marshes, and other deserted 
places, seeking to find release from the burden of sin:

0 where d’ye tink I fin’ ’em?

1 fin’ ’em, Lord, in de grave-yard.

I fin’ ’em in de boggy mire.

It was in the wilderness, as the Bible so often illustrated, that one 
waited for the Lord . 77

Jesus call you. Go in de wilderness,

Go in de wilderness, go in de wilderness,It was in the wilderness, as the Bible so often illustrated, that one 
waited for the Lord . 77

Jesus call you. Go in de wilderness,

Go in de wilderness, go in de wilderness,

Jesus call you. Go in de wilderness 
To wait upon de Lord,

Go wait upon de Lord,

Go wait upon de Lord,

Go wait upon de Lord, my God,

He take away de sins of de world.

Jesus a-waitin’. Go in de wilderness,

Go, etc.

All dem chil’en go in de wilderness 
To wait upon de Lord . 78

From those who had already “come through,” the anxious 
“mourner” could expect encouragement:

Hunt till you find him. Hallelujah,

And a-huntin’ for de Lord

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

255

When I was a mourner jus’ like you,

I want to go to heaven when I die,

I fast and I prayed till I came thro’,

For I want to go to heaven when I die.

0 my soul! O my soul!

1 want to go to heaven when I die . 79

In the Old Testament story of Jacob wrestling all night with an 
angel, the slaves found a striking metaphor for the sinner’s 
struggle with his soul. The scene was vividly recalled by one 
former slave, “Preachers used to get up and preach and call 
moaners up to the moaner’s bench. They would all kneel down 
and sometimes they would lay down on the floor, and the Chris- 
tians would sing:

Rassal Jacob, rassal as you did in the days of old,

Gonna rassal all night til broad day light 
And ask God to bless my soul .” 80

At the revival and prayer meetings, Christian members were 
willing to sing and pray over “mourners” all night long to help 
them come through to the Lord.

(i Chorus ) I hold my brudder wid a tremblin’ han’,

I would not let him go.

Wrastl’ on, Jacob, Jacob, day is a-breaking,

Wrastl’ on, Jacob, Oh Lord I would not let him go.

( Verses ) I will not let you go, my Lord.

Fisherman Peter out at sea

He fish all night and he fish all day

He catch no fish, but he catch some soul.

Jacob hang from a tremblin’ limb . 81( Verses ) I will not let you go, my Lord.

Fisherman Peter out at sea

He fish all night and he fish all day

He catch no fish, but he catch some soul.

Jacob hang from a tremblin’ limb . 81

Once a “mourner” had come through he was baptized into Chris- 
tian fellowhip, among the band of “true believers” and “valiant 
soldiers” of the Lord. But the journey had just begun; there was 
still “Jordan’s long road” to walk, as one spiritual taught:

256

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

De rough, rocky road what Moses done travel,

I’s bound to carry my soul to de Lawd;

It’s a mighty rocky road but I mos’ done travel,

And I’s bound to carry my soul to de Lawd . 82

Yonder’s my old mudder,

Been a-waggin’ at de hill so long 
It’s about time she’ll cross over;

Get home bimeby.

Keep prayin’, I do believe

We’re a long time waggin’ o’er de crossin’.

Keep prayin’, I do believe

We’ll get home to heaven bimeby.

Bendin’ knees a-achin’, Body racked wid pain,

I wish I was a child of God,

I’d git home bimeby.

Keep prayin’, I do believe 
We’re a long time waggin’ o’ de crossin.’

Keep prayin’, I do believe 
We’ll git home to heaven bimebye . 83

The spirituals urged the weary slaves to follow the example set by 
others who had traveled the road before:

All dem Mount Zion member 
dey have many ups and downs;

But cross come or no come, 
for to hold out to the end.

Hold out to the end, 
hold out to the end,

It is my ’termination for to hold out to the end . 84

In the face of temptation to backslide, the Christian slaves ex- 
horted one another to perservere until the end.

O brothers, don’t get weary 
O brothers, don’t get weary 
O brothers, don’t get weary 
We’re waiting for the Lord 
We’ll land on Canaan’s shore,

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

257

We’ll land on Canaan’s shore,

When we land on Canaan’s shore,

We’ll meet forever more . 85

What makes ole Satan follow me so?

Satan got nuttin’ ’t all fur to do wid me.

Tiddy [Sister] Rosa, hold your light!When we land on Canaan’s shore,

We’ll meet forever more . 85

What makes ole Satan follow me so?

Satan got nuttin’ ’t all fur to do wid me.

Tiddy [Sister] Rosa, hold your light!

Brudder Tony, hold you light!

All de member, hold bright light 
On Canaan’s shore. 8 *

Alluding to the New Testament parable of the ten wise and ten 
foolish virgins, these verses advised the members to be vigilant:

Brudder, keep your lamp trimmin’ and a-bumin’,

Keep your lamp trimmin’ and a-bumin’,

Keep your lamp trimmin’ and a-burnin’,

For dis world most done 
So keep your lamp, etc.

Dis world most done . 87

The Christian had to be vigilant against the snares of “Ole Cap- 
pen Satan,” who seems in the slave spirituals to be more a ma- 
levolent trickster than a fearful demon:

Ole Satan toss a ball at me.

Him tink de ball would hit my soul.

De ball for hell and I for heaven.

What make ole Satan hate me so?

Because he got me once and he let me go.

O, Satan is a liar, and he conjure too,

And if you don’t mind, he’ll conjure you.

When I get dar, Cappen Satan was dar

Says, young man, young man, dere’s no use for pray,

For Jesus is dead, and God gone away,

And I made him out a liar, and I went my way.

O Satan is a mighty busy ole man,

And roll rocks in my way;

258

“THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

But Jesus is my bosom friend,

And roll ’em out of de way . 88

In the religious consciousness of the slaves, as revealed by the 
spirituals, the most serious spiritual problem was not the battle 
versus “ole Satan” but the inner turmoil of a “trebbled spirit.”

I am a-trouble in de mind,

0 I am a-trouble in de mind,

1 ask my Lord what shall I do,

I am a-trouble in de mind.

I’m a-trouble in de mind,

What you doubt for:

I’m a-trouble in de mind . 88

One former slave recalled: “I remember seeing my old mother 
spinning with tears running down her cheeks, crying about her 
brother who was sold and carried to Arkansas. She would sing,One former slave recalled: “I remember seeing my old mother 
spinning with tears running down her cheeks, crying about her 
brother who was sold and carried to Arkansas. She would sing,

“Oh my good Lord, go low in the valley to pray,

To ease my troubling mind .” 90

Although the conversion experience had already brought the 
Christian through the lonesome valley, in a wider sense he was 
traveling there still. For all of life was a valley of tears, a road of 
suffering and sorrow, weariness and toil. It is difficult to believe 
that a slave sang of suffering and toil without reference to his life 
in slavery. The spirituals did that and more. They also presented 
the slave’s reflections on the human condition, which masters had 
to endure as well as slaves. In attempting to make sense out of 
their individual lives, the slaves — as numerous commentators on 
the spirituals have noted — found meaning in their religion. The 
meaning was not so much an answer to the problem of suffering 
as the acceptance of the sorrow and the joy inherent in the human 
condition and an affirmation that life in itself was valuable. This 
act of affirmation as expressed in the spirituals sometimes led to 
verses of jarring contrast where suffering and Gospel joy were 
juxtaposed:

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

259

Wish I’d died when I was a baby, 
O lord rock a’ jubilee,

Wish I’d died.

and

Nobody knows de trouble I see 
Nobody knows but Jesus,

Nobody knows de trouble I’ve had 
Glory hallelu!

Perhaps, the spirituals’ most eloquent image of life’s alternation 
between sadness and joy occurs in the verses of “Nobody Knows 
the Trouble I’ve Had.”

One morning I was walking down,

I saw some berries hanging down,

I pick de berry and I suck de juice,

Just as sweet as the honey in de comb.

Sometimes I’m up, sometimes I’m down 
Sometimes I’m almost on de groun ’. 91

In the face of this world’s trials the slaves asserted their trust in 
the providence of God:Sometimes I’m up, sometimes I’m down 
Sometimes I’m almost on de groun ’. 91

In the face of this world’s trials the slaves asserted their trust in 
the providence of God:

Jehoviah, Hallelujah, De Lord is perwide [provide]

Jehoviah, Hallelujah, De Lord is perwide 
De foxes have a hole, an’ de birdies have a nest,

De Son of Man he hanno where to lay de weary head . 92

In their oppression the slaves found it natural to identify with the 
sufferings of Jesus, who was depicted in the spirituals as an ever- 
present and intimate friend:

He have been wid us, Jesus,

He still wid us, Jesus 
He will be wid us, Jesus,

Be wid us to the end.

In de momin’ when I rise,

Tell my Jesus huddy [howdy] oh;

I wash my hands in de momin’ glory,

Tell my Jesus huddy, oh.

260

THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

The closeness of Jesus was felt, according to one former Georgia 
slave, Mary Gladdys, especially at the all-night prayer meetings 
when each member would be touched by the spirit of Jesus “just 
before day.”

Jest befo’ day, I feels ’im. Jest befo’ day, I feels ’im.

My sister, I feels ’im. My sister, I feels 'im.

All night long I’ve been feelin’ ’im.

Jest befo’ day, I feels ’im. Jest befo’ day, I feels ’im.

The sperit, I feels ’im. The sperit, I feels ’im! 83

The slaves took note that, when on earth, Jesus had used his 
power to assist the lowly:

0 Chorus ) Walk (Ride) in, kind Saviour (King Jesus),

No man can hinder me!

Walk in, sweet Jesus,

No man can hinder me!

See what wonder Jesus done,

O no man can hinder me!

(Verses) Jesus make de dumb to speak.

Jesus make de cripple walk.

Jesus give de blind his sight.

Jesus do most anything.

Rise [Raise] poor Lajarush, from de tomb 84

The slaves sang of the power of the Lord to deliver them just as 
he had delivered his people of old.

O my Lord delivered Daniel 
O why not deliver me too? 85The slaves sang of the power of the Lord to deliver them just as 
he had delivered his people of old.

O my Lord delivered Daniel 
O why not deliver me too? 85

But final deliverance from the troubles of the world would only 
come with death. For only then would they be “done wid de 
trouble o’ de world.” One of the most beautiful of all the spirituals 
reflects the desire for peace and tranquillity in the final rest, when 
the body and its cares are laid in the grave.

I know moon-rise, I know star-rise 
Lay dis body down.

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

261

I walk in de moonlight, I walk in de starlight,

To lay dis body down.

I’ll walk in de graveyard, Fll walk through de graveyard,

To lay dis body down

I’ll lie in de grave and stretch out my arms;

Lay dis body down.

I go to de judgement in de evenin’ of de day,

When I lay dis body down;

And my soul and your soul will meet in de day 
When I lay dis body down. 9 *

Death was the passage to freedom where

Dere’s no rain to wet you,

0, yes, I want to go home.

Dere’s no sun to bum you,

O, yes, I want to go home,

O, push along, believers,

O, yes, etc.

Dere’s no whips a-crackin’,

O, yes, etc.

O, push along, my brudder,

O, yes, etc.

Where dere’s no stormy weather,

O, yes, etc.

Dere’s no tribulation,

O, yes, etc. 97

Death, as the slaves knew all too well, was a capricious figure, 
striking at will:

Oh Deat’ he is a little man 
And he goes from do’ to do’

He kill some souls and he wounded some,

And he lef some souls to pray

Therefore, a well-prepared death was a blessing:

I want to die like-a Jesus die,

And he die wid a free good will,

I lay out in de grave and I stretches out ee arms,

Do, Lord, remember me. 98

262

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

Slave’s apron depicting souls enroute to Heaven or Hell. Yalobusha 
County, Mississippi. Photograph by Eudora Welty. Reprinted by per- 
mission of Eudora Welty and Mississippi Department of Archives and 
History.But most frequently Death was, in the spirituals, the River Jor- 
dan, the last river to cross before reaching Canaan, the promised 
home for which the weary travelers had toiled so long.

In Heaven, or the New Jerusalem, parents, relatives, and 
friends would meet again — a devout hope for slaves who had seen 
parents, sisters, brothers, and children sold away with no chance 
of reunion in this world. Jacob Stroyer described the departure of 
a group of slaves sold South and the song w r hich accompanied the 
parting scene:

. . . those who were going did not expect to see their friends 
again. While passing along many of the negroe’s left their 
master’s fields and joined us . . . some were yelling and wring- 
ing their hands, while others were singing little hymns that 
they had been accustomed to for the consolation of those that 
were going away, such as:

When we all meet in heaven, 
There is no parting there;

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

263

When we all meet in heaven,

There is parting no more."

As the community of Christian slaves shuffled around the ring of 
the shout, they literally embodied a vision of heaven and their 
own presence there:

0 walk ’em easy round de heaven 
Walk ’em easy round de heaven 
Dat all de people may join de band 
Walk ’em easy round de heaven. ( Thrice )

O shout glory till ’em join dat band!

Heaven would be a social band where one could walk and talk 
with Jesus, Mary, and the heroes in the Bible whose stories were 
so familiar. Heaven would be a Sabbath without end, one long 
day of everlasting rest . 100Christian slaves delighted in imagining the future happiness of 
heaven. In doing so, they added to their imaginative life symbols 
by which they expanded the horizons of their present. The vision 
of the future had an additional effect on the present because the 
end of time would bring not only glory but Judgment. The es- 
chatological imagery of the book of Revelation had a powerful 
impact upon the imagination of the slaves, as revealed by spiritu- 
als like this one:

( Chorus ) And de moon will turn to blood ( Thrice )

In dat day, O-yoy [a sort of prolonged wail] my soul! 
And de moon will turn to blood in dat day.

(Verses) And you’ll see de stars a-fallin’.

And de world will be on fire.

And you’ll hear de saints a-singin.

And de Lord will say to de sheep.

For to go to Him right hand;

But de goats must go to de left. 101

Even so consoling an image of the afterlife as “Rock o’ my soul in 
de bosom of Abraham” includes this warning of Judgment:

264

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

He toted the young lambs in his bosom ( thrice )

And leave the old sheep alone.

In that “great gettin’ up morning,” “when the stars begin to fall,” 
Jesus, that “mighty man,” will come again on his milk-white 
horse, to judge the living and the dead, “wid a rainbow on his 
shoulder.” No doubt, white was the color of a large number of the 
goats sent to the left and of the “old sheep” abandoned to Hell . 102 
The faithful Christian (“true believer”) need not fear and might 
sing, as did one confident band of slaves:

I meet my soul at de bar of God 
I heerd a mighty lumber 
Hit was my sin fell down to hell 
Jes’ like a clap er thunder.

Run home believer: oh, run home believer!

Run home, believer, run home . 103I meet my soul at de bar of God 
I heerd a mighty lumber 
Hit was my sin fell down to hell 
Jes’ like a clap er thunder.

Run home believer: oh, run home believer!

Run home, believer, run home . 103

Images of the Bible, from Genesis to Revelation filled the 
hymns and spirituals which the slaves sang in church, in the 
fields, and in the quarters. Themes and events from the Old and 
New Testaments were used by the slaves to interpret their own 
experience by measuring it against a wider system of meaning. 
Simultaneously, the biblical symbols were translated in the light 
of the slaves’ own day-to-day experiences. For the vast majority of 
slaves who could not read, hymns and spirituals were their chan- 
nel to the word of God.

The moods of the spirituals were many — sad, triumphant, re- 
signed, expectant, serious, and light. The “sorrow song” aspect of 
the slave spirituals has been so stressed that it is sometimes for- 
gotten that the slaves’ religion embraced a lighter side. Indeed, 
spirituals and shouts were performed for social occasions — on 
holidays, at weddings and celebrations — in effect replacing the 
secular songs and dances which the converted slaves refused to 
perform. For example, freedmen on the Butler plantation in Geor- 
gia found nothing strange about shouting for the construction of a 
new barn, in thanksgiving for a good harvest, and even to cele- 
brate their former mistress’s birthday ! 104

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

265RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

265

Principally, however, the spirituals were the soul of communal 
worship in the quarters. Merging with prayers and sermons, the 
spirituals focused the consciousness of the worshiping community 
upon the common bond of their faith. Frequently the spirituals 
made mention of individual members present, either by name — 
“Sister Tilda, Brother Tony,” etc — or by description — “the 
stranger over there in the corner” — in effect including all in the 
experience of mutual exhortation and support. In the fellowship of 
the meeting, the spirituals articulated the slaves’ vision of “a new 
heaven and a new earth,” and as the spirit started working and 
the shouting broke out, vision became real in ecstasy. And for a 
time, at least, the sorrow and toil of the individual’s life were 
assuaged and given meaning.

In addition to spirituals and hymns, slaves expressed their reli- 
gious feelings in prayers and stories. Shortly after the war, David 
Macrae, a Scottish traveler observed: “The pious negroes delight 
in prayer; and the women, at some of their religious meetings, are 
as free to lead as the men. Their prayers are full of fire, and often 
exceedingly vivid and impressive.” He went on to give several 
examples. “Here was one, offered by Sister Nancy Brooks at a 
camp meeting in Poplar Springs”:Oh Father Almighty, O Sweet Jesus, most gloriful King, will 
you be so pleased as to come dis way and put your eye on dese 
yere mourners? O sweet Jesus, ain’t you de Daniel God? 
Didn’t you deliber de tree chill’un from de firy fumis? Didn’t 
you hear Jonah cry from de belly ob de whale? Oh, if dere be 
one seeking mourner here dis afternoon, if dere be one sinking 
Peter, if dere be one weeping Mary, if dere be one doubtingTho- 
mas, won’t you be so pleased to come and deliber them? Won’t 
you mount your gospel horse an’ ride roun’ de souls of dese yere 
mourners, and say, ‘Go in peace and sin no more’? Won’t you 
be so pleased to come wid de love in one han’ and de fan in de 
odder han’ to fan away doubts? Won’t you be so pleased to 
shake dese yere souls over hell, and not let ’em fall in ? 105

A missionary at Fortress Monroe recorded these prayers in 1866: 
“O, Lord! please to hist the diamond winders of hebben, an’

266

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

shake out dy table-cloth, and let a few crumbs fall among us.” 
“[OJpen de diamond winders, lay back de lovely curtains, an’ take 
a peep into dis world of sin an’ sorrer.” Some other examples have 
a surprising kind of witty aptness: “Lord, when we’se done 
chawin’ all de hard bones, and when we’se done swallerin’ all de 
bitter pills, take us home to thyself.” “We come to Thee like 
empty pitchers ividout any bottom , to ask if it be Thy will to fill 
poor we wid Thy love.” 106

A down-to-earth familiarity and whimsy appear in the treat- 
ment of religious themes in some verses of the spirituals and in 
some of the ex-slaves’ prayers. The same light humor occurs in 
religious tales. For example, Ella Kelly remembered a story told 
her by her father about partridges and the Savior:My pappy allowed de reason pa’tridges couldn’t fly over trees 
was: One day de Savior was a-riding long on a colt to de 
Mount of Olive Trees, and de drove flewed up, make sich a 
fuss they scared de colt and he run away wid him. De marster 
put a cuss on de pa’tridges for dat, and ever since, they can’t 
fly over tree tops . 107

In 1901 W. E. B. Du Bois wrote a classic essay, “Faith of the 
Fathers,” in which he distinguished the three characteristics of the 
slaves’ religion as being the preacher, the music, and the frenzy or 
shouting. He might well have added a fourth characteristic, the 
conversion experience. 108 The experience of conversion was es- 
sential in the religious life of the slaves. For the only path to 
salvation lay through that “lonesome valley” wherein the 
“seekers” underwent conversion, an experience which they trea- 
sured as one of the peak moments in their lives.

The Conversion Experience

The typical conversion experience was preceded by a period of 
anxiety over one’s salvation which lasted for days or even weeks. 
Elijah Marrs grew anxious about the state of his soul when he

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

267

heard his father discussing religion with a preacher. Anthony 
Bums’ conversion was preceded by his agitated reaction to Mil- 
lerite predictions of the end of time and to an epidemic of scarlet 
fever in his neighborhood. Josiah Henson, at the age of eighteen, 
was struck by the words of a sermon he heard, “Jesus Christ, the 
Son of God, tasted death for every man; for the high, for the low, 
for the rich, for the poor, the bond, the free, the negro in his 
chains, the man in gold and diamonds.” Henson recalled, “I stood 
and heard it. It touched my heart and I cried out: ‘I wonder if 
Jesus Christ died for me.’ ” 109The normal context for sinners to become seekers was the 
mourners’ bench, or anxious seat, at prayer meetings and revivals. 
But some were suddenly moved when alone in the woods or 
fields. One former slave remembered: “I went to the mourners’ 
bench, and people was storming and screaming. And you know I 
couldn’t pray in that; so I went back home, and when I was all by 
myself, I prayed ... I found the Lord all by myself.” Feelings of 
sadness or loneliness were sometimes associated with the onset of 
conversion, as in the case of one ex-slave, who recalled: “God 
started on me when I was a little boy. I used to grieve a lot over 
my mother. She had been sold away from me and taken a long 
way off. One evening ... I was walking along thinking about 
Mama and crying. Then a voice spoke to me and said ‘Blessed art 
thou.’ ” Another account of a conversion began “after my husband 
had died ... I felt awfully burdened down”; and still another 
seeker prayed, “Lord I have neither father or mother .” 110

Conversion experiences, by their very nature, are intensely per- 
sonal, inward, and individual events. Yet the social and cultural 
background of the individual does shape the categories and con- 
structs employed in thinking and speaking about the most private 
experiences. While there is variety in the conversion experiences 
recounted by former slaves, there is also a great deal of similarity. 
Between the classically orthodox conversion account of George 
Liele and the more visionary experiences described by the anony- 
mous folk interviewed in God Struck Me Dead there are close

268

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

parallels in structures and patterns of experience. Of his conver- 
sion Liele wrote:268

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

parallels in structures and patterns of experience. Of his conver- 
sion Liele wrote:

. . . the Rev. Mr. Matthew Moore, one Sabbath afternoon, as 
I stood with curiosity to here him . . . unfolded all my dark 
views, opened my best behaviour and good works to me, 
which I thought I was to be saved by, and I was convinced 
that I was not in the way to heaven, but in the way to hell.

This state I laboured under for the space of five or six months.

The more I heard or read, the more I [felt that I] was con- 
demned as a sinner before God; till at length I was brought to 
perceive that my life hung by a slender thread, and if it was 
the will of God to cut me off at that time, I was sure I should 
be found in hell, as sure as God was in heaven. I saw my 
condemnation in my own heart, and I found no way wherein I 
could escape the damnation of hell, only through the merits of 
my dying Lord and Savior Jesus Christ . . .

Abandoning himself to prayer, Liele found relief and “felt such 
love and joy as my tongue was not able to express. After this I 
declared before the congregation of believers the work which God 
had done for my soul, and the same minister, the Rev. Matthew 
Moore, baptized me . . .The basic pattern discernible in Liele’s experience and gener- 
ally in those recounted by others consists of a tripartite move- 
ment — first a feeling of sinfulness, then a vision of damnation, 
and finally an experience of acceptance by God and being reborn 
or made new. The essential dynamic of the conversion is an in- 
ward, experiential realization of the doctrines of human depravity, 
divine sovereignty, and unconditional election made vividly appar- 
ent to the imagination and the emotions. Professed doctrine be- 
comes internally real. The inner self recognizes that “Jesus died 
for me." In the words of a former slave: “Wisdom in the heart is 
unlike wisdom in the mind.” Others speak of the experience as 
“God beginning to work on the main altar of the heart .” 112 
“Nobody can talk about the religion of God unless they’ve had 
a religious experience in it,” claimed one former slave. Some 
slaves’ conversion experiences were accompanied by visions and

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

269

trances. The similarity of images that recur in the visions suggests 
the influence of the Bible — particularly Revelation — the folk ser- 
mons, the lyrics of the spirituals, and a store of tradition created 
by “experience meetings” during which conversion accounts were 
told. According to Charles Raymond, writing in 1863:‘Experience Meetings’ ... are usually held as preparatory to 
the negro’s ‘joining the church’ upon a public profession of 
religion. In attending such meetings in different neighbor- 
hoods, from Louisiana to Virginia, I have always found the 
same prominent features delineated. So invariable has been 
the recurrence of ideas, phrases, and descriptions that one is 
puzzled in accounting for the uniformity. . . . These experi- 
ences when analyzed readily resolve themselves into the differ- 
ent gradations of feeling expressed by the words, awakening, 
conviction, pardon, . . . The great load and pressure, corre- 
sponding to the state known ... as awakening , is always lo- 
cated by a significant gesture as being felt in the region of the 
diaphram. The second stage, that of conviction, is expressed 
by the pit and flame, and the imminent danger of helpless 
destruction. The pardon and deliverance by Christ, under the 
form of a palpable, bodily rescue, succeeded by a state of 
ineffable physical delight.

The tangible, or “sensuous,” nature of the slaves’ conversion expe- 
riences was disconcerting to Raymond. A boy named Julius de- 
scribed his vision: “ . . . den I went to hebben, and dere I see de 
Lord Jesus, a sittin' behind de door an ’ a reading his Bible." When 
asked to describe her feelings upon conversion, Sally declared: “I 
feel, Sah, jus like I had a fiddle in my belly." Another slave claimed 
that in his vision “I could feel the darkness [of Hell] with my 
hands.” 113

As described by the former slaves interviewed in God Struck Me 
Dead, the conversion experience is usually inaugurated by a feel- 
ing of heaviness or sadness, the weight of sinfulness. Sometimes 
the individual feels ill and cannot eat or drink. In this condition 
the sinner hears a voice warning him of his state. His condition 
worsens, he falls into a trance or dream in which he sees himself

270

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’270

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

dead, while another self, an inner or “little” self, cries for mercy. 
The sinner sees a vivid image of Hell and realizes that he is 
destined for eternal damnation. He hangs over the deep pit sus- 
pended by a single thread. Satan may appear and threaten to 
knock him down or to loose hellhounds to pursue him. Suddenly 
a mediator appears in the form of an angel or a mysterious “little 
man.” An emissary from God, the mediator reassures the fright- 
ened sinner and leads him to a vision of heaven, which frequently 
appears as the gleaming New Jerusalem or as a peaceful pasture 
full of grazing sheep. Taken up into the presence of God, the 
person learns that he is not damned but saved and, as one of the 
elect, receives from God a commission to lead a holy life and to 
preach the Gospel. Awakened, the convert is overwhelmed with a 
sudden feeling of being totally renewed. Filled with joy, he cannot 
resist shouting. Struck by the spirit “from head to foot,” he feels a 
“burning in the heart and bones” which drives him to speak. The 
rest of the convert’s life is marked by his conversion experience. 
The date it occurred is almost always noted. One of the elect, he 
now has the responsibility to evangelize others. “Ever since that 
day I have been preaching the gospel and am not a bit tired. I can 
tell anyone about God in the darkest hour of midnight for it is 
written on my heart. Amen.” Not only is the convert renewed, 
but everything around him seems blessed and holy. He is filled 
with compassion and love for every living thing. “I ran to an elm 
tree and tried to put my arms around it. Never had I felt such a 
love before. It just looked like I loved everything and everybody.” 
“The eyes of my mind were open, and I saw things as I never did 
before . . . ” 114It is not possible to judge how common such visionary conver- 
sion experiences were. Certainly, the majority of those slaves who 
believed, like the majority of believers at any time, had less in- 
tense religious experiences. In the words of one former slave:

My religion means as much to me as anyone else, but I have 
not had ... a chance to see any kind of funny forms or any- 
thing like that . . . This is my religion . . . ‘Repent, believe,

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

271

and be baptized, and you shall be saved.’ That is my religion, 
and I believe it will take me to heaven ... I have seen nothing 
nor heard nothing but only felt the spirit in my soul, and I 
believe that will save me when I come to die . 115

Yet at the center of the evangelical Protestant tradition, the tradi- 
tion which slaves increasingly made their own, stood the experi- 
ence of conversion. 116

Not all slaves, however, accepted evangelical Protestantism. As 
noted in Chapter 2, some slaves rejected Christianity and pre- 
served their traditional African beliefs or their belief in Islam. 
Other slaves accepted Christianity of a different type — Catholi- 
cism. Relatively few slaves, mainly concentrated in southern Loui- 
siana and Maryland, were Roman Catholics. According to a gen- 
erous estimate, the number of black Catholics, free and slave, at 
the time of emancipation was one hundred thousand. The situa- 
tion of Catholicism among Louisiana’s black population at the end 
of the Civil War was summarized by Roger Baudier, a historian of 
Catholicism in Louisiana:Some effort had been made in Louisiana for the evangelization 
of the Negroes, particularly by the religious orders of 
women . . . However, the slave state made this work all but 
impossible. . . . Many attempts were made to give instructions 
on the plantations, but this was extremely difficult. Some of the 
parish priests also gave attention to this work. All of this, how- 
ever, was spasmodic and unorganized. There was always pres- 
ent the prejudices of slave owners . . . Negroes were freely ad- 
mitted to Catholic Churches and to the Sacraments; but even in 
this there was some opposition, though the clergy resisted any 
interference with the practice of their religion by the slaves. . . . 
Baptism of slave children was very generally practiced ... in 
some parishes the practice being generally followed of baptiz- 
ing many in a group on Holy Saturday and the Vigil of Pente- 
cost. As a whole, however, the work of evangelization was 
certainly far from what it should have been . 117

It was a fact that Catholicism, “for many Negroes in 
Louisiana . . . meant little more than baptism into a religion in

272

THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’It was a fact that Catholicism, “for many Negroes in 
Louisiana . . . meant little more than baptism into a religion in

272

THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

which they had insufficient instruction.” The Church was more 
successful with the urban “colored Creole” population of French- 
speaking free blacks, whose culture was consciously Catholic and 
distinct from English-speaking “American blacks” who were Prot- 
estant. An important distinction between the religious experience 
of black Protestants and black Catholics was described by Eliza- 
beth Ross Hite: “We was all supposed to be Catholics on our 
place, but lots didn’t like that ’ligion. We used to hide behind 
some bricks and hold church ourselves. You see, the Catholic 
preachers from France wouldn’t let us shout, and the Law done 
said you gotta shout if you want to be saved. That’s in the Bible.” 
An elderly slave from Virginia who had been sold and moved to 
Louisiana forty years previously told the traveler Olmsted that he 
had become Catholic, but remarked wistfully, “Oh Sar, they don’t 
have no meetin’ o’ no kind round here.’” 18Prayer meetings, shouting, and spirituals — the staples of black 
Protestantism — were foreign to the experience of black Catholics. 
On the one hand, Protestantism denied the slaves the ritual use of 
sacred objects and devotion to the saints which were so readily 
adaptable to syncretism with African ritual and theology. On the 
other, the formal structure of the Catholic Mass, with each ges- 
ture and genuflection governed by rubric, did not allow the 
bodily participation and ecstatic behavior so common to Protes- 
tant services and so reminiscent of African patterns of dance and 
possession. Neither the Bible nor the sermon played as important 
a role in Catholic piety as in Protestant worship. The Catholic 
view of the priest as a sacral figure, ordained primarily to officiate 
at the holy sacrifice, differed significantly from the Protestant no- 
tion of the minister as preacher of the Word. The sacral character 
and the necessity of meticulous training in liturgical gesture and 
language — Latin being obligatory — made it impossible for a Cath- 
olic layman to assume the role of priest, in contrast to the relative 
ease with which a Baptist, for example, could become a preacher. 
As a result, the status, authority, and influence of the black Prot- 
estant minister were not duplicated among black Catholics. Au-

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

273

gustus Tolton, bom a slave in Hannibal, Missouri, the first black 
priest to serve in the United States, was ordained in Rome in 
1888. 119 The first black priest to be ordained in the United 
States, Charles Randolph Uncles, S.S.J. (Josephite), was or- 
dained by Cardinal Gibbons in Baltimore, Maryland, in 1891.Contrary to Protestant custom, many Catholic churches did not 
practice segregation in worship. Antebellum visitors to St. Louis 
Cathedral in New Orleans, for example, noted the fact of inte- 
grated congregations. According to Harrison Trexler, in his study 
of slavery in Missouri, it was very common among the French 
settlers of that state “for the white mistress to stand as sponsor for 
the black babe at its baptism, or for the slave mother to act as 
godmother to the master’s child.” 120 The experience of Pierre 
Landry, a Louisiana slave, is illustrative of the power of Catholic 
ritual to remove, at least temporarily, distinctions of race:

My early religious training was in the Roman Catholic 
Church at Donaldsonville. I was prepared for first communion 
in a large class of both white and colored youths. The sacra- 
ment was administered on an Easter Sunday morning, and I 
shall never forget the impressiveness of the services of that 
day. The august presence of the bishop who confirmed the 
class was to me typical of extraordinary grandeur and power, 
and when it came to my turn to kiss the signet ring of His 
Grace, the jewel appeared to me as a blazing torch in which 
were reflected the burning candles of the resplendent altar . 121

However, segregation did occur in Catholic churches, and reli- 
gious orders generally practiced racial exclusion down into the 
twentieth century. During the antebellum period two congrega- 
tions of black nuns were founded: the Oblate Sisters of Provi- 
dence in Baltimore, in 1829, and the Sisters of the Holy Family in 
New Orleans, in 1842. Of the religious orders of men, one excep- 
tion to the custom of racial exclusion was the Josephites, founded 
in England in 1866. They began their mission to American Ne- 
groes in 1871, and began to accept black candidates in 1888. 122 
Paradoxically, the inclusion of black Catholics within the parishSister of the Holy Family, New Orleans, Reprinted from 
Harper's New Monthly Magazine 74 (January 1887): 200.

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

275

structure did not permit the exercise of leadership and control 
enjoyed by some Protestant blacks in their segregated and quasi- 
independent churches.

Nevertheless, there were slaves as well as free blacks who found 
deep meaning in the centuries-old rituals of Catholicism and 
centered their piety upon the Mass, the sacraments and personal 
devotion to the Virgin and the saints. Those slaves who lived in 
cities with a strong Catholic presence, such as Baltimore and New 
Orleans, or who were owned by Catholic religious orders had the 
greatest opportunity to practice their Catholicism. After the Civil 
War, Protestant missionaries to the South were seriously con- 
cerned that Catholicism was making extensive gains among the 
freedmen. Their fears proved groundless, as the Catholic Church 
required most of its manpower and resources to face the renewed 
waves of European Catholic immigration in the late nineteenth 
century. Though interested, the Catholic hierarchy was able to do 
little in the way of missions to the freedmen. Not until the twenti- 
eth century would black people in North America turn to Ca- 
tholicism in significant numbers . 123 The predominant religious 
tradition, then, among slaves and their descendants in the United 
States was evangelical Protestantism. The strongest other reli- 
gious force in the quarters was not Catholicism but conjure, 
which was pervasive throughout all regions of the South and 
influential on most plantations, whether Catholic or Protestant.

ConjureConjure

A rich tradition of folk belief and practice, including conjure, 
herbalism, ghost lore, witchcraft, and fortune-telling, flourished in 
the slave quarters. The power of the supernatural impinged on 
the daily lives of slaves and affected their relationships with one 
another and with the world around them. Like Christianity, con- 
jure was a system of belief, a way of perceiving the world which 
placed people in the context of another world no less “real” than 
the ordinary one. Many slaves, and whites as well, knew the

276 “THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION”

world of conjure to be real because they had experienced its 
power. In part, conjure was a theory which made sense of the 
mysterious and inexplicable occurrences of life. Duncan Gaines, 
former Virginia slave, described this explanatory function of con- 
jure when he recalled that during slave times “there was much 
talk of ‘hoodooism’ and anyone ill for a long time without getting 
relief from herb medicine was thought to be ‘fixed’ or suffering 
from some sin that his father had committed .” 124 The concept of 
suffering for the guilt of the father is biblical; the concept of being 
victimized by a “fix” is conjure. Both attempt to locate the cause 
of irrational suffering. Among Africans and their descendants in 
America illness which did not respond to natural medicines and 
the sudden, unpredictable occurrence of misfortune were the re- 
sult of another’s animosity. Slaves believed adversity was due not 
to blind fate or mere happenstance but to the ill will of someone 
working through a conjurer.Not only was conjure a theory for explaining the mystery of 
evil, but it was also a practice for doing something about it. 
Because the conjure doctor had the power to “fix” and to remove 
“fixes,” to harm and to cure, it was possible to locate the source of 
misfortune and control it. Therefore the conjurer, as a man of 
power — and supernatural power at that — enjoyed a measure of 
authority in the slave community directly proportional to belief in 
his power. Variously known as root doctor, hoodoo doctor, two- 
facer, and wangateur (from oanga- charm), he was respected and 
feared by those blacks and whites who had implicit faith in his 
power. Conjurers cultivated an aura of mystery which lent credi- 
bility to their reputations as men familiar with supernatural lore. 
Distinctive features, such as “red eyes” and “blue gums,” unusual 
dress, and the accoutrements of his trade — a crooked cane, 
charms, and conjure bag — all were outward manifestations of the 
root worker’s special expertise. The ultimate source of the con- 
jurer’s power was either God or the devil. Being born the seventh 
son of a seventh son or being bom with a caul also were seen as

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY 277

sources of power. In addition, it was believed that the lore of 
conjure could be passed on from teacher to pupil . 125RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY 277

sources of power. In addition, it was believed that the lore of 
conjure could be passed on from teacher to pupil . 125

Conjurers were said to be two-faced or two-handed because they 
could do “left-handed work” — “charm” a person — or “right- 
handed” work — counteract a charm. Conjurers employed to do 
left-handed work used both direct and indirect methods. A sub- 
stance, perhaps a root or a toad’s head, could be ground into 
powder and then mixed or dissolved in the food or drink of the 
intended victim. The substance used sometimes was poisonous. It 
would be interesting to know how many cases of slaves poisoning 
their masters involved conjure . 128 The indirect approach was to 
place the charm near the victim where contact or at least proximity 
would transmit the harm intended. A charm, also known as hand, 
trick, toby, mojo, and gris-gris, might lurk anywhere — under the 
doorstep, inside a mattress, out in the yard, or alongside a path the 
victim was sure to take. Tricks placed by the roadside could even 
distinguish their targets from other passersby if hair from the vic- 
tim or dirt from his footprint was wrapped up in the charm . 127

A virtual job summary of conjure was detailed by Rosanha 
Frazier, ex-slave bom in Mississippi, who blamed her loss of sight 
upon a “hoodoo-nigger.”

Dey powder up de rattle often de snake and tie it up in de 
little old rag bag and dey do devilment with it. Dey git old 
scorpion and make bad medicine. Dey git dirt out de grave- 
yard and dat dirt, after dey speak on it, would make you go 
crazy.

When dey wants conjure you, dey sneak round and git de 
hair combin’ or de finger or toenail, or anything natural ’bout 
your body and works de hoodoo on it.

Dey make de straw man or de clay man and dey puts de pin 
in he leg and you leg gwineter git hurt or sore jus’ where dey 
puts de pin. Iffen dey puts de pin through de heart you gwi- 
neter die . . .

278278

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION”

Dey make de charm to wear round de neck or de ankle and 
dey make de love powder too out de love vine, what grow in 
de wood. Dey bites de leaves and powders ’em. Dey sho’ 
works, I done try ’em . 128

Among the materials used by the conjure doctor, goopher dust 
(graveyard dirt) was believed to be partcularly potent. Red flan- 
nel, useful for wrapping charms, bottles, pins, bones, reptiles, 
scorpions, horse hair, roots, and herbs of various sorts made up 
the root doctor’s stock-in-trade. However, it was the spell and the 
ritual invoked by the conjurer which gave the various items 
power. It was believed that each charm had a spirit. Consequently 
charms were moistened with liquor to strengthen their power by 
strengthening their spirits . 129

Even ordinary possessions — a knife, a hat, a shoe — could be 
fixed by the conjurer’s spell, so that the unsuspecting owner 
would be conjured upon contact. One had to be extra careful in 
disposing of worn clothing, nail clippings, cut hair, and washrags 
lest they fall into the hands of an enemy. Their close contact with 
the body made them dangerous instruments for conjure, as one 
old root doctor from Georgia explained: “Duh haiah is one uh 
duh mos powful tings yuh enemy kin git hold ub cuz it grow 
neah duh brain an a han made outuh haiah kin sho affec duh 
brain .” 130The variety of illnesses, injuries, and misfortunes blamed on 
conjure was endless. One especially gruesome and frequently 
mentioned fix reportedly culminated with snakes or spiders roam- 
ing up and down inside the victim’s body. The conjurer suppos- 
edly accomplished this trick by putting the blood of a spider or 
snake within the person and from this blood the spider or snake 
would be spawned. Mental as well as physical illness was ex- 
plained by conjure. “Wennebuh a pusson go crazy, wut is dat but 
conjuh?” asked Fred Jones, an elderly informant for the Georgia 
Writers’ Project. The point of his rhetorical question was sup- 
ported by two early analysts of conjure: “insanity on the planta-

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

279

tion was often laid to ‘conjuration’ and consequently took in the 
patient the form that the belief in conjuration would naturally 
give it .” 131RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

279

tion was often laid to ‘conjuration’ and consequently took in the 
patient the form that the belief in conjuration would naturally 
give it .” 131

A central tenet of conjure was that any spell worked by a 
conjurer could be removed only by a conjurer; a medical doctor 
was useless. Even the conjure doctor could be effective only if he 
was called before the “hand” had done irreversible harm. If called 
in time, the root doctor took several steps to effect a cure. First he 
determined whether the illness was due to conjure or not. A small 
piece of silver was commonly used in diagnosis: if it turned black 
when placed in the patient’s mouth or hand, he had been con- 
jured. Once established that the patient had been conjured, the 
next step was to discover where the trick had been hidden and to 
identify the party who had ordered the conjuring done. Then the 
conjurer cured the patient by destroying or nullifying the power 
of the charm. Since most conjurers were also herbalists, medicinal 
potions, salves, and leaf effusions were usually part of the magical 
ritual. The final step in the cure, if the patient wished it, was to 
get revenge by turning the charm against the one who sent it. It 
was said that if you discovered a trick and burned it, the sender 
would burn, and that if you threw it into water, he would drown. 
At any rate, the sender could be repaid in kind, and any client of a 
conjurer had to take that risk into account and live with the fear 
of retribution . 132

The reasons for which slaves sought the conjurer’s assistance 
were not all so deadly serious. Affairs of the heart, for example, 
supplied the conjurer with a great deal of business. Henry Bibb 
was one of many slaves who turned to conjure to aid romance:One of these conjurers, for a small sum agreed to teach me to 
make any girl love me that I wished. After I had paid him, he 
told me to get a bull frog, and take a certain bone out of the 
frog, dry it, and when I got a chance I must step up to any 
girl whom I wished to make love me, and scratch her some- 
where on her naked skin with this bone, and she would be 
certain to love me, and would follow me in spite of herself; no

280

“THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

matter who she might be engaged to, nor who she might be 
walking with.

Bibb, not surprisingly, failed in his first attempt but decided to 
try again. Seeking out another conjurer, he was advised to get a 
lock of hair from any girl and wear it in his shoes and the girl 
would then love him above anybody else. Unfortunately, the girl 
Bibb asked for a lock of hair refused to cooperate. “Believing that 
my success depended greatly upon this bunch of hair,” Bibb ex- 
plained, “I grasped hold of a lock . . . which caused her to 
screech, but I never let go until I had pulled it out. This of course 
made the girl mad with me, and I accomplished nothing but 
gained her displeasure .” 133

Marital peace was preserved, according to Aunt Irene, a former 
slave from Alabama, by conjurers who sold “hush water in a jug. 
Hush water was jes’ plain water what dey fixed so if you drink it 
you would be quiet an’ patient. De mens would git it to give to 
dey wives to make ’em hush up .” 134 Conjurers also sold 
talismans — good-luck charms to ward off sickness, misfortune, or 
another’s animosity.The ability to tell fortunes was another supernatural skill pos- 
sessed by some slave conjurers (though not all conjurers were 
fortune-tellers or vice versa.) William Wells Brown, although 
skeptical (at least in hindsight), went to an old soothsayer in St. 
Louis named Frank, who predicted the escape from slavery which 
Brown was contemplating: “Whether the old man was a prophet, 
or the son of a prophet, I cannot say; but there is one thing 
certain, many of his predictions were verified. I am no believer in 
soothsaying; yet I am ... at a loss to know how Uncle Frank 
could tell so accurately what would occur in the future. Among 
the many things he told was one which was enough to pay me for 
all the trouble of looking him up. It was that I should be free] He 
further said, that in trying to get my liberty I would meet with 
many severe trials. I thought to myself any fool could tell me 
that !” 135 One can’t help wondering what influence Uncle Frank’s

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

281

prediction had upon Brown’s determination to brave those “se- 
vere trials” in his eventual escape from slavery.

More than a few slaves were skeptical about the power of con- 
jurers, especially after a charm failed to work. But even then a 
quick-witted conjurer might save face by blaming the dissatisfied 
customer for failing to follow instructions. In the story of a trick 
doctor related by Puckett, a slave received a hand which would 
enable him to “cuss out” hs master without being harmed. The 
slave tried it and received a terrible beating for his insolence. 
When he went back to the conjurer to complain, he was informed, 
“I gi’ you a runin’ han’t (a charm which would give the possessor 
swiftness . . . ) Why did’nt yer run ?” 136A failed charm might lead a slave to lose faith in that particular 
charm, or in the conjurer who supplied it, without destroying his 
belief in conjure as such. Doubts were tempered by the preva- 
lence of belief. Jacob Stroyer, for example, confessed: “I held the 
idea that there were such things, for I thought the majority of the 
people believed it, and that they ought to know more than could 
one man .” 137

Trouble might inspire in an unbeliever a willing suspension of 
disbelief. This seems to have been the case with Frederick Doug- 
lass, who prided himself on being above conjure. “I had a positive 
aversion to all pretenders to ‘divination.’ It was beneath one of my 
intelligence to countenance such dealings with the devil as the 
power implied.” But when Douglass was bedeviled by Covey, the 
slave breaker, he accepted a root which Sandy the local conjurer 
told him would prevent Covey or any other white man from 
whipping him . 138 In some individuals, such as Douglass, conjure 
stirred ambivalence — what the intellect denied, the emotions and 
the imagination affirmed, or, as one folklorist astutely observed, 
“Practices are more enduring than theories .” 139

The simple fact is that slave conjurers kept their credibility and 
their authority because their power worked. Whatever explana- 
tion the modern observer offers — outright poisoning, probable co- 
incidence, psychosomatic suggestion, or psychic phenomenon —

282

THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

some became sick and some were cured by conjure. Undoubtedly 
the conjurers’ knowledge of both medicinal and poisonous herbs, 
his astuteness in judging human nature, and the sound practical 
advice he gave accounted for a good deal of his success. Still, the 
magical words he spoke and the esoteric rites he performed, the 
imaginative world of power which he represented and the folk 
traditions he bore, were important to slave culture and should not 
be lightly dismissed . 140Despite skeptics and charlatans, the conjurer’s reputation, on 
some plantatins at least, reached legendary proportions. The tale 
of one remarkable conjurer named Dinkie was told by William 
Wells Brown. Dinkie held everyone on the plantation, white or 
black, in his power. Able to come and go at his pleasure, he never 
worked. “No one interfered with him . . . Dinkie hunted, slept, 
was at the table at meal time, roamed through the woods, went to 
the city, and returned when he pleased. Everybody treated him 
with respect,” even the white ladies who sought him out for love 
potions and forecasts of romance. When a new overseer, unfamil- 
iar with Dinkie’s status, tried to force him to work in the fields, 
Dinkie, by some secret means, set him straight. His power, it was 
rumored, came from his being in league with Satan. Whatever the 
source of his power, it was clear to all that Dinkie was his own 
master . 141

The conjurers’ exploits, like those ascribed to Dinkie, were 
discussed with awe and, one suspects, a good deal of embellish- 
ment and enjoyment in the quarters. According to one former 
slave, the children on his plantation liked to play conjure man in a 
game called hoodoo doctor . 142 A figure to be feared, the conjurer 
became also a folk character, and stories which told of his re- 
sourcefulness, independence, and power were a source of vicari- 
ous pleasure to slaves whose own independence and power were 
so severely restricted.

Nothing challenged the credibility of the conjurer as much as 
his claim that he could conjure white folks. Whether whites were 
susceptible to conjure was problematic, as the testimony of ex-

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY 283RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY 283

slaves reveals. Some ex-slaves argued that only blacks could be 
conjured. One claimed, for instance: “They had in those days a 
Hoodoo nigger, who could hoodoo niggers, but could’nt make ole 
master stop whipping him, with the hoodooism.” A clear-cut ex- 
planation for the immunity of whites was that whites did not 
believe in conjure and you had to believe in it for conjure to 
work. 143 On the other hand, many slaves believed that conjure 
would work against whites; at least, they tried to prove it. Hoo- 
doo doctors frequently were asked “to save the slave from punish- 
ment, to enable him to escape the ‘patrolers,’ or, in the case of a 
runaway, to enable him to return home without suffering from his 
master’s anger.” In order to “soften the master’s heart and sooth 
his anger,” slaves were given roots to chew. Using a jack, fortune- 
tellers predicted whether a slave would receive a whipping or not. 
Powders and charms were placed in or near the big house to 
improve the white folks’ disposition. 144 Eugene Genovese has 
noted several cases of conjured whites in the antebellum South. 
That whites did succumb to conjure is not surprising given the 
similarity of their own folk beliefs and also the probable influence 
of slave folklore upon white children. 143One of the arguments advanced by C. C. Jones for the conver- 
sion of the slaves to Christianity was the danger that “supersti- 
tions brought from Africa” might be used to turn the slaves dan- 
gerously against their masters. “On certain occasions they [slaves] 
have been made to believe that while they carried about their 
persons some charm with which they had been furnished, they 
were invulnerable. . . . They have been known to be so perfectly 
and fearfully under the influence of some leader or conjurer or 
minister, that they have not dared to disobey him in the least 
particular; nor to disclose their own intended or perpetrated 
crimes, in view of inevitable death itself. . . ” 146 The historical 
precedent Jones had in mind was no doubt the Denmark Vesey 
Conspiracy of 1822, in which the conjurer Gullah (or Cooter) 
Jack had great influence over the conspirators, who called him 
the “little man who can’t be shot, killed or taken.” According to a

284

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

witness at his trial, Jack gave his recruits “some dry food, consist- 
ing of parched corn and ground nuts, and said eat that and noth- 
ing else on the morning [the rebellion] breaks out, and when you 
join us as we pass put into your mouth this crab-claw and you 
can’t then be wounded . . . ” 147The countercultural nature of conjure was implied by the belief 
that conjure was African. To be sure, hoodoo combined African 
and European magical lore. It is significant, however, that both 
slaves and whites repeatedly connected conjure with Africa. Over 
and over again hoodoo doctors were described as “African-born” 
or as “pure Africans.” Sandy the conjurer was described by Fred- 
erick Douglass as a “genuine African” whose magical powers 
were inherited from the East. William Wells Brown reported that 
Dinkie was “a full blooded African and reportedly descended 
from a king in his native Africa.” A former Georgia slave, named 
Thomas Smith, cited the ability of Aaron to turn his rod into a 
serpent before Pharaoh as an example of the magical expertise of 
Africa. “Dat happen in Africa de Bible say. Ain’ dat show dat 
Africa wuz a lan uh magic powah since de begginnin uh history? 
Well duh descendants ub Africans hab duh same gif tuh do un- 
natchal ting.” Black folk in coastal Georgia and the Sea Islands 
preserved numerous stories about the miraculous ability of their 
African-born ancestors to fly back to Africa when they were mis- 
treated on the plantations of America. William Adams, ex-slave 
from Texas and himself a conjurer, felt that “De old folks in dem 
days knows more about de signs dat de Lawd uses to reveal His 
laws dan de folks of today. It am also true of de cullud folks in 
Africa; dey native land.” The prevalence of the idea that conjure 
was African in origin and that Africans were especially powerful 
conjurers indicates that slaves thought of hoodoo as their own 
separate tradition. Whites might be susceptible to conjure, but 
almost never were they conjurers . 148

Revenge against overseers and masters was a clear theme in the 
folktales and ghostlore told by slaves to one another and to their 
children. In these tales ghosts, witches, and conjurers redressed

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

285RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY

285

the wrongs which the slaves could not. The following stories from 
Edisto Island, South Carolina, surely must have appealed to the 
slaves’ frustrated sense of justice:

[a slave] wen’ to a witch man. When his master ’mence to 
whip him, eve’y cut he give de man, his [master’s] wife way 
off at home feel de cut. Sen’ wor’ please stop cut lick de man.

When he [master] got home, his wife was wash down wid 
blood.

His master beat him so sevare, so de man went to a witch. De 
witch said, ‘Never min’! you go home. Tomorrow you will see 
me.’ When de man got up in de mornin’, de white man was 
jus’ as happy as happy can be; but de more de sun goes down, 
he commence ter sleep. At de same time he call to his Negro, 
‘Tommorrow you go an’ do such an’ such a tas’. Given’ out 
his orders kyan hardly hoi’ up his head. As soon as de sun was 
down, he down too, he down yet. De witch done dat. He 
[witch] come but he stay in his home an’ done dat . 149

In yet another example, recorded shortly after the Civil War, a 
conjurer and his son take revenge upon an overseer:

dey goes to de overseer’s house, an’ give de sign an’ slip 
t’rough de keyhole. Den dey unbar de door on de inside an’ 
take out de overseer an’ his son, widout deir knowin’ it; an de 
conjeror tetch de overseer wid his switch an’ he turns to a 
bull, an’ tetch de overseer’s son an’ he turns to a bull-yerlin.’

Den de conjeror mounts de bull an’ de boy he mounts de 
bull-yerlin, an’ sets off a long way over de creek to blight a 
man’s wheat what de conjeror had a spite agin .” 150

In these stories — as in the tales of Jack, Brer Rabbit, or High 
John — the slaves could identify with the protagonist and vicari- 
ously enjoy their exercise of power over whites. With their em- 
phasis on revenge, the stories also served as muted protests for the 
slaves who did not dare to complain overtly about the injustice of 
their situation.Then, too, the world of conjure answered deeply felt needs 
within the slaves’ own community, where white control inhibited

286

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

the free outward expression of social conflict. For example, 
masters limited fighting among slaves in order to protect their 
human property from serious damage and to preserve order on 
the plantation. In addition, the common burden of slavery itself 
tended to create group solidarity, as did Christian fellowship, 
which prohibited fighting, backbiting, and animosity between 
“brothers and sisters in Christ.” The very closeness of the 
quarters necessitated a degree of tolerance while at the same time 
exacerbating personal tensions. Given these constrictions, conjure 
served as a perfect vehicle for expressing and alleviating anger, 
jealousy, and sheer ill will among slaves. When unable to settle 
disputes openly, the slaves turned to the secret system of con- 
jure . 151 Primarily, conjure was a method of control: first, the 
control which comes from knowledge — being able to explain cru- 
cial phenomena, such as illness, misfortune and evil; second, the 
control which comes from the capacity to act effectively — it was “a 
force ... by which mankind can (or thinks he can) achieve almost 
every desired end . . . third, a means of control over the future 
through reading the “signs”; fourth, an aid to social control be- 
cause it supplied a system whereby conflict, otherwise stifled, 
could be aired.The pervasiveness of conjure in the quarters suggests a prob- 
lem: What was the relationship of conjure to Christianity, of the 
conjurer to the slave preacher? The practice of conjure was, at 
least in theory, in conflict with Christian beliefs about the provi- 
dence of God, and indeed one way of relating conjure to Christian- 
ity was to make the former the realm of the devil, in effect creat- 
ing a balance of good and evil. Willis Easter recited a song his 
mother had taught him “to keep from bein’ conjure” which illus- 
trates this point:

Keep ’way from me, hoodoo and witch, Lead my path from de 
porehouse gate; I pines for golden harps and sich, Lawd, I’ll 
jes’ set down and wait. Old Satan am a liar and conjurer, 
too — If you don’t watch out, he’ll conjure you.

Another former slave put it this way: “I’m a believer, an’ dis here

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY 287

voodoo an’ hoodoo an’ sper’ts ain’t nothin’ but a lot of folks outten 
Christ .” 152Another former slave put it this way: “I’m a believer, an’ dis here

RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE SLAVE COMMUNITY 287

voodoo an’ hoodoo an’ sper’ts ain’t nothin’ but a lot of folks outten 
Christ .” 152

And yet conjure was not always employed for evil. Puckett 
noted that conjurers in the twentieth century were all very reli- 
gious. Closer to the slavery period, Herron and Bacon observed 
that the source of the conjurers’ power was not well defined. One 
informant stated, “I have always heard that those doctors sold 
themselves to the Devil before they were given the power.” 
Another reported that all the conjure doctors she had heard of 
claimed “a special revelation from God.” Some conjurers saw 
nothing strange in calling upon God to assist their cures. (While 
it is an intriguing possibility, I have found no evidence of conjur- 
ers who were also ministers.) The conflict between Christianity 
and conjure was more theoretical than actual. Even those slaves 
who condemned conjure as evil did not deny its reality. More- 
over, among black folk there was a refusal to dichotomize power 
into good and evil — a refusal which Herskovits and others see as 
African. In the slave community the power to heal and the power 
to harm resided in one person, the conjurer; in Africa these 
powers resided in any one of the gods who had to be propitiated 
in order to avoid misfortune and illness. There is an amoral qual- 
ity to conjure which makes it stray outside norms of good and 
evil. Whether it was good or bad, one had to respect power that 
worked. In a world of practical power, good was power which 
worked for you, bad was power which turned against you. The 
primary categories were not good and evil but security and 
danger. Therefore an unequivocal rejection of conjure was not 
only unnecessary but foolhardy. To be safe, one kept on the right 
side of all spiritual power.Moreover, Christian tradition itself has always been attuned to 
special gifts (charisms) of the Spirit as they are manifested in 
prophecy, healing, and miracles. As a result, Christianity, espe- 
cially on the popular level, has a certain tendency to appropriate 
and baptize magical lore from other traditions. In an important 
sense, conjure and Christianity were not so much antithetical as

288

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

complementary. Discussing the differences between magic and 
religion, M. J. Field gives a succinct statement of this comple- 
mentary relationship in her book on witchcraft in West Africa, 
Search for Security :

Classical anthropology distinguishes between religion and 
magic by saying that religion involves a deity whom man 
implores, magic involves forces which man commands ... It 
may be added, first that religion usually postulates a deity 
who is good and who demands goodness, whereas magic is of 
two kinds, good and bad. Furthermore, a deity generally has 
at his disposal a diversity of blessings and punishments, 
whereas each special magic is directed to one narrowly cir- 
cumscribed end [;]... magics, unlike deities, make no moral 
demands and, above all, will operate automatically and inexo- 
rably. . . . Magic, or, as it is more often called in West Africa, 
‘medicine,’ always involves concrete apparatus . . . and a ritual 
in which the apparatus is handled. There is no activity in life 
which cannot be assisted by medicine.

Conjure could, without contradiction, exist side by side with 
Christianity in the same individual and in the same community 
because, for the slaves, conjure answered purposes which Christi- 
anity did not and Christianity answered purposes which conjure 
did not . 153

6

Religion, Rebellion, and Docility

White folk’s got a heap to answer for the way they’ve done to colored 
folks! So much they won’t never pray it away ! 1

T6

Religion, Rebellion, and Docility

White folk’s got a heap to answer for the way they’ve done to colored 
folks! So much they won’t never pray it away ! 1

T

X HE tendency of Christianity 
to support the established order has long been noted and criti- 
cized by some. It has been alleged that Christianity, with its 
otherworldly, compensatory emphasis, is a religion particularly 
fitted for slaves. And as we have seen, missionaries from the colo- 
nial S.P.G. to the antebellum advocates of plantation missions 
labored long and hard to convince masters that this was so. Yet 
temporal rulers — from provincial governors in the late Roman 
empire, to medieval kings and emperors, down to presidents of 
modern states — have had abundant opportunity to ponder the 
disruptive implications of a religious conscience owing ultimate 
allegiance to a “higher authority” than their own. Clerical and 
civil leaders have appealed for centuries to the sayings of Jesus — 
“My kingdom is not of this world,” “Blessed are the meek,” 
“Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar’s, to God the things 
that are God’s” — to validate obedience to authority. Yet Chris- 
tians individually and in groups have disagreed, sometimes vio- 
lently, with their rulers, ecclesiastical and political, about what 
was legitimately Caesar’s and what God’s. Revolutionary interpre- 
tations of the Bible by such slaves as Vesey and Turner were 
proof to American slaveholders that slave Christianity could be- 
come a double-edged sword.As early as 1774 American slaves were declaring publicly and 
politically that they thought Christianity and slavery were incom- 
patible. In that year the governor of Massachusetts received “The 
Petition of a Grate Number of Blacks of this Province who by 
divine permission are held in a state of slavery within the bowels 
of a free and Christian Country.” The petitioners protested that 
“we have in common with other men a natural right to our free- 
doms without being deprived of them by our fellowman . . . 
There is a great number of us sencear . . . members of the Church 
of Christ . . . Bear ye onenothers Bordens How can the master be 
said to Beare my Borden when he Beares me down with the Have 
[Heavy] chanes of slavery and operson [oppression] against my

290

RELIGION, REBELLION, AND DOCILITY 29 1290

RELIGION, REBELLION, AND DOCILITY 29 1

will . . . how can the slave perform the duties of a husband to a 
wife or parent to his child . . . [?]”* In arguing for their freedom, 
these New England slaves combined the political rhetoric of the 
Revolution with appeals to the claims of Christian fellowship. 
Most slaves had to keep publicly silent about their attitudes, but 
in private they condemned the hypocrisy of Christian slave- 
owners. Frederick Douglass, who himself composed a bitterly 
ironic attack on slaveholding Christianity as an appendix to his 
Narrative, claimed that “Slaves knew enough of the orthodox 
theology of the time to consign all bad slaveholders to hell.” 3 And 
Charles Ball recorded that in his experience, slaves thought that 
heaven would not be heaven unless slaves would be avenged on 
their enemies. “A fortunate and kind master or mistress, may now 
and then be admitted into heaven, but this rather as a matter of 
favour, to the intercession of some slave, than as a matter of strict 
justice to the whites, who will, by no means, be of an equal rank 
with those who shall be raised from the depths of misery in this 
world.” Ball concluded that “The idea of a revolution in the con- 
ditions of the whites and blacks, is the cornerstone of the religion 
of the latter . . .” 4The slaves’ notion of a future reversal of the conditions of 
whites and blacks was also noticed by Emily Burke, a white 
observer commenting on slave life in Georgia, “ . . . they believe, 
and I have myself heard them assert the same, that in the life to 
come there will also be white people and black people; but then 
the white people will be slaves, and they shall have the dominion 
over them. I never saw a negro a Universalist; for they all believe 
in a future retribution for their masters, from the hand of a just 
God.” One former slave implied that slaves had already lived 
through Hell: “in them days it was hell without fires,” but slave- 
holders faced eternal punishment. “This is one reason why I be- 
lieve in a hell. I don’t believe a just God is going to take no such 
man [a sadistic master] as that into his kingdom.” Escaped slave 
John Anderson asserted: “Some folks say slaveholders may be 
good Christians, but I can’t and won’t believe it, nor do I think

292

THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’292

THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

that a slaveholder can get to heaven. He may possibly get there, I 
don’t know; but though I wish to get there myself, I don’t want to 
have anything more to do with slaveholders either here or in 
heaven.” The same view was stated in a more humorous manner 
in a story which, according to Lewis and Milton Clarke, slaves 
delighted in telling one another: “The master called the slave to 
his sick bed. ‘Good-bye Jack; I have a long journey to go; fare- 
well.’ ‘Farewell massa! pleasant journey; you soon be dere, 
massa — all de way down hill !’ ” Another anecdote popular among 
the slaves pointed ol’ massa’s soul in the same direction: A slave 
named George was informed by his master that he was to be 
buried in a good coffin and placed beside his master’s earthly 
remains in the same vault with the white folks. George’s response 
to this news was mixed: “I like to have good coffin when I die,” 
but “I fraid massa, when de debbil come take your body, he make 
mistake, and get mine.” 5

On a more serious plane, the slaves’ confidence in the ultimate 
condemnation of slaveholders was supported by manifestations of 
their masters’ guilt. John Brown recalled his master’s deathbed 
attempt to save his soul:

There was my old master Thomas Stevens. Ever so many 
times before his time was come. But though he . . . recovered 
from his illnesses, in his frights he sent for us all and asked us 
to forgive him. Many a time he would exclaim, that he wished 
‘he’d never seen a nigger.’ I remember his calling old Aunt 
Sally to him and begging and praying of her to get the devil 
away from behind the door, and such like.Brown goes on to generalize: “It is a common belief amongst us 
that all the masters die in an awful fright, for it is usual for the 
slaves to be called up on such occasions to say they forgive them 
for what they have done. So we come to think their minds must 
be dreadfully uneasy about holding slaves . . . All this may seem 
to be trifling, but it is the truth . . . and I only give what I have 
myself experienced.” Brown’s observation is certainly not “tri- 
fling.” For slaves to perceive their master’s guilt-filled dread and

RELIGION, REBELLION, AND DOCILITY 293

to see him begging for their prayers and forgiveness vindicated 
their belief in final retribution and demonstrated not only their 
moral superiority to whites but also a serious measure of psycho- 
logical and emotional control over them . 6

In the slaves’ moral judgement, ministers in particular were 
deserving of condemnation. “The ministers used to tell us not to 
be disorderly on taking the sacrament,” observed James Sumler. 
“I thought he was disorderly himself, for he kept slaves.” Con- 
tempt for ministers was well deserved, according to slave testi- 
mony. William Humbert, fugitive slave from Charleston, South 
Carolina, recalled for example:

I have seen a minister hand the sacrament to the deacons to 
give the slaves, and, before the slaves had time to get home, 
living a great distance from church, have seen one of the same 
deacons, acting as patrol, flog one of the brother members 
within two hours of his administering the sacrament to him, 
because he met the slave . . . without a passport, beyond the 
time allowed him to go home. My opinion of slavery is not a 
bit different now from what it was then: I always hated it from 
childhood. I looked on the conduct of the deacon with a feel- 
ing of revenge. I thought that a man who would administer 
the sacrament to a brother church member and flog him be- 
fore he got home, ought not to live. 7William Wells Brown caustically described a young minister, 
named Sloan, “who had been at the South but a short time, and it 
seemed his whole aim was to please the slaveholders, especially 
my master and mistress. He was intending to make a visit . . . and 
he not only tried to please them, but I think he succeeded admira- 
bly. When they wanted singing, he sung; when they wanted pray- 
ing he prayed; when they wanted a story told, he told a story. 
Instead of his teaching my master theology, my master taught 
theology to him.” Alienation from ministers of this sort made it 
impossible for slaves to find fellowship in church with whites, as 
David West, who had belonged to a mixed Baptist church in 
Virginia before he fled slavery to Canada, sadly recalled. West 
wished the members of his old church well, but, he warned,

294

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’294

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

“there will be a time when all will be judged. ... I have often 
tried to love my minister and brethren in Pokaron church, but 
when I heard them say, ‘Do unto others as ye would that others 
should do unto you,’ and saw what they were doing to their own 
brethren in Christ, I thought . . . ‘Who then can be saved?’ ” One 
freedman revealed the chasm between minister and slave when he 
stated matter-of-factly: “We couldn’t tell NO PREACHER NEBER 
how we suffer all dese long years. He know’d nothin’ ’bout we.” I * * * * * * 8 * 
Slaves distinguished the hypocritical religion of their masters 
from true Christianity and rejected the slaveholder’s gospel of 
obedience to master and mistress. Ex-slave Douglas Dorsey re- 
ported that after the minister on his plantation admonished the 
slaves to honor their masters, whom they could see, as they would 
God, whom they could not see, “the driver’s wife who could read 
and write a little” would say that the minister’s sermon “was all 
lies.” Lunsford Lane recounted an incident when a “kind-hearted 
clergyman . . . who was very popular with the colored people” 
made the mistake of preaching “a sermon to us in which he 
argued from the Bible that it was the will of Heaven from all 
eternity that we should be slaves, and our masters be our owners, 
[and] many of us left him . . . ”* From the other side of the pulpit, 
Charles Colcock Jones recalled a similar reaction to a sermon he 
gave before a slave congregation in 1833:

I was preaching to a large congregation on the Epistle of 
Philemon-, and when I insisted upon fidelity and obedience as

Christian virtues in servants and upon the authority of Paul,

condemned the practice of running away, one half of my audi-

ence deliberately rose up and walked off with themselves, and

those that remained looked any thing but satisfied, either with

the preacher or his doctrine. After dismission, there was noence deliberately rose up and walked off with themselves, and

those that remained looked any thing but satisfied, either with

the preacher or his doctrine. After dismission, there was no

small stir among them; some solemnly declared ‘that there

was no such an Epistle in the Bible’; others, ‘that they did not

care if they ever heard me preach again!’ . . . There were some 
too, who had strong objections against me as a Preacher,

because I was a master, and said, ‘his people have to work as 
well as we.’ 10

RELIGION, REBELLION, AND DOCILITY

295

According to Lewis and Milton Clarke, slaves believed that there 
existed somewhere a real Bible from God, “but they frequently 
say the Bible now used is master’s Bible,” since all that they heard 
from it was “Servants, obey your masters .” 11

Some slaves’ inner rejection of “white folks religion” was ex- 
pressed outwardly by their rejection of their masters’ denomina- 
tion. The slaves of a mean master named Gooch, according to 
Moses Roper, figured that their master was such “a bad sample of 
what a professing Christian ought to be” that they refused to “join 
the connexion [Baptist] he belonged to thinking they must be a 
very bad set of people” and joined instead the Methodist 
Church . 12Nowhere is the slaves’ rejection of the master’s religion clearer 
than in their refusal to obey moral precepts held up to them by 
whites, especially commands against stealing. While white 
preachers repeatedly urged “Don’t steal,” slaves just as persis- 
tently denied that this commandment applied to them, since they 
themselves were stolen property. Josephine Howard demon- 
strated how the structure of white morality could collapse when 
examined from the slaves’ point of view: “Dey alius done tell us it 
am wrong to lie and steal, but why did de white foks steal my 
mammy and her mammy? Dey lives dost to some water, some- 
wheres over in Africy, and de man come in a little boat to de sho’ 
and tell dem he got presents on de big boat . . . and my mammy 
and her mammy gits took out to dat big boat and dey locks dem 
in a black hole what mammy say so black you can’t see nothin’. 
Dat de sinfulles’ stealin’ dey is.” Charles Brown, a fugitive slave 
from Virginia, claimed that he had expressed the same argument 
to his master’s face: “I told my master one day — said I, ‘You white 
folks set the bad example of stealing — you stole us from Africa, 
and not content with that, if any got free here, you stole them 
afterward, and so we are made slaves.’ ” According to George 
Womble, who had been a slave in Georgia, “slaves were taught to 
steal by their masters. Sometimes they were sent to the nearby 
plantations to steal chickens, pigs and other things that could be

296

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

carried away easily. At such times the master would tell them that 
he was not going to mistreat them and that he was not going to 
allow anyone else to mistreat them and that by taking the above 
mentioned things they were helping him to be more able to take 
care of them .” 13The practical justification for stealing was stated succinctly by 
former slave Rachel Fairley, “How could they help but steal when 
they didn’t have nothin’? You didn’t eat if you didn’t steal.” But 
in Henry Bibb’s view, it was not simply need which justified a 
slave in taking his master’s goods — it was a matter of the worker’s 
right to the fruits of his labors: “I did not regard it as stealing 
then, I do not regard it as such now. I hold that a slave has a 
moral right to eat and drink and wear all that he needs, and that it 
would be a sin on his part to suffer and starve in a country where 
there is a plenty to eat and wear within his reach. I consider that I 
had a just right to what I took, because it was the labor of my 
hands.” Other slaves concluded that it was not morally possible 
for one piece of property to steal another, since they both be- 
longed to the same owner. The slaves’ own moral code, however, 
was careful to distinguish between “taking” from the master and 
“stealing” from another slave, which was regarded as a serious 
wrong. “They think it wrong to take from a neighbor but not 
from their masters ... a slave that will steal from a slave is called 
mean as master. This is the lowest comparison slaves know how 
to use: ‘just as mean as white folks.’ ” 14

Lying and deceit, normally considered moral vices, were vir- 
tues to slaves in their dealings with whites. The slaves on his 
plantation, noted William Wells Brown, “were always glad to 
shirk labor and thought that to deceive whites was a religious 
duty.” Addressing “the good people who read this confession,” 
John Brown explained in his narrative to readers who might not 
understand the ethical system by which slaves lived: “In fact, we 
felt we were living under a system of cheating and lying and 
deceit, and . . . did not see the wrong of it, so long as we were not 
acting against one another. I am sure that, as a rule, any one of us

RELIGION, REBELLION, AND DOCILITY

297RELIGION, REBELLION, AND DOCILITY

297

who would have thought nothing of stealing a hog, or a sack of 
corn, from our master, would have allowed himself to be cut to 
pieces rather than betray the confidence of his fellow slave ...” 
The principle “Us against them” — the in-group use of indirection 
and the development of masks to conceal true feelings — was es- 
sential to the slaves’ own moral system. As plantation missionary 
Charles Colcock Jones observed, “the Negroes are scrupulous on 
one point, they make common cause, as servants, in concealing 
their faults from their owners .” 15

“Puttin’ on oF massa” could involve hiding one’s true feelings 
while simulating the opposite: “When the white folks would die 
the slaves would all stand around and ’tend like they was crying 
but they would say ‘They going going on to hell like a damn 
barrel full of nails,’ ” according to a former slave. Jacob Stroyer 
recalled that when his former master’s corpse was carried home, 
“all the slaves were allowed to stop at home that day to see the 
last of him, and to lament with mistress. After all the slaves who 
cared to do so had seen his face, they gathered in groups around 
mistress to comfort her; they shed false tears, saying ‘Never mind, 
missus, massa gone home to heaven.’ While some were saying 
this, others said, ‘Thank God, massa gone home to hell.’ ” Infre- 
quently, the slaves let the mask drop and revealed their true 
feelings about whites. Ex-slave Martha Jackson recalled one ex- 
ample: “dey sarn’t down in de woods and all over de plantation er 
lookin’ fer de niggers to come to de Big House ’cause dey overseer 
was dead. En here dey comes a-shoutin’ and a-clappin’ de han’s 
and a-holl’rin sumpin’ awful:

“Ole John Bell is de’d en gone

I hopes he’s gone to hell!”

‘En dat was the onles’ time I’s ever seen dem niggers happy on 
dat plantation ’tel atter s’render .” 16“Ole John Bell is de’d en gone

I hopes he’s gone to hell!”

‘En dat was the onles’ time I’s ever seen dem niggers happy on 
dat plantation ’tel atter s’render .” 16

White missionaries to slaves and freedmen before and immedi- 
ately after the war observed that the disregard slaves held for the

298

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

morality preached by slaveholding Christians amounted to antino- 
mianism. Bishop William Capers put his finger on the basis of the 
slaves’ antinomian attitude when he ramarked that “the prevalent 
conceit that sin is sin for white men not negroes . . . [held] a fond 
control over them.” Charles Colcock Jones stated matter-of-factly 
that among the slaves “antinomianism is not uncommon, and at 
times, in its worst forms.” Jones went on to explain, echoing the 
same point made by Capers:

Sometimes principles of conduct are adapted by church mem- 
bers at so much variance with the Gospel that the ‘grace of 
God is turned into lasciviousness.’ For example, members of 
the same church are sacredly bound by their religion not to 
reveal each others sins, for that would be backbiting and in- 
juring the brotherhood. And again, that which would be an 
abominable sin, committed by a church member with a 
worldly person, becomes no sin at all if committed with 
another church member. The brethren must ‘bear one 
another’s burdens and so fulfil the law of Christ.’ 17Another plantation missionary, Thomas D. Turpin, stationed 
on the May and New River Mission in coastal South Carolina 
reported that the Christian slaves in his area had developed a 
heterodox system of penance to expiate sin. Sinners were indicted 
by church leaders, and, if found guilty, were punished according 
to the degree of seriousness of their sin. There were three levels of 
punishment. “If the crime was of the first magnitude, the perpe- 
trator had to pick up a quart of benne seed [a small straw-colored 
seed] . . . poured on the ground . . . and if of the second, a quart 
of rice; and if of the third, a quart of com; and . . . they also had 
high seats and low seats ...” To Turpin these slaves held “in- 
correct views relative to those who ought to be punished.” For 
example, “it was also a rule among them never to divulge the 
secret of stealing; and if it should be divulged by any one mem- 
ber, that one had to go on the low seat or pick up the benne 
seed,” that is, endure the punishment appointed for sins of the 
first magnitude. Jones’ and Turpin’s descriptions support Capers’

RELIGION, REBELLION, AND DOCILITY

299

insight that slaves viewed sin differently than did whites: what 
seemed antinomianism to white clergymen was in the slave’s own 
system of moral judgment a primary value — to protect one 
another by not revealing the “sins” of ones fellow slaves. 18

The alienation of black Christians from the moral norms of 
white Christianity was revealed also by missionaries who wrote 
reports, after the war, about the “immoral piety” of the freedmen. 
The experience of Charles Stearns is illustrative. Try as he might, 
Stearns found he could not convince the freedman to accept his 
moral code as essential to Christianity:I have known whole platoons to arise, and leave their seats 
and not return to the place of worship, when stealing was 
touched upon in the mildest manner. And it is a common 
remark among them, ‘we would go and hear Mr. S. [teams] 
preach much oftener, if he would leave off preaching against 
lying and stealing, and preach the gospel.’ . . . They were 
always ready to hear about God, and living with him in 
heaven, but seldom wished to hear of their duties to each 
other. After the close of the meeting, I was waited upon at my 
house by a deputation of the brethren, who gravely informed 
me that my sermon had given great offense, and the people 
were determined to abandon the Sunday school and meeting, 
if I persisted in talking about such worldly matters. When I 
informed them that I could not desist from denouncing the 
sins they were guilty of, one of them persuasively said, ‘Now 
Mr. S., if you must talk about stealing, why not call us to- 
gether on Monday and tell us about it, and let us have a good 
heavenly time on Sunday, in worshipping the God we all love 
so much.’ ... It matters not what sin they may be guilty of, 
their confidence in their acceptance with God is unshaken . . .

I have never seen one yet, professing to be a Christian, who 
was troubled with any doubts upon the subject of his accep- 
tance with God. They said, ‘God is not like man, and he is 
not going to punish us for every little sin .’ 19

The fact which Stearns failed to appreciate was that the freed- 
men’s distaste for moralistic preaching was directly rooted in their 
experience of the dichotomy between Christianity and the practice

300 “THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION”300 “THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION”

of Christian slaveholders. Recently freed blacks were unwilling to 
listen to another white man preach to them about moral duty. 
Moreover, Stearns suggests that the freedmen, at least those 
whom he observed, were less concerned about the sins they com- 
mitted than about God’s acceptance of them as believers, an ac- 
ceptance assured in their experience of conversion. Slaves could 
be stubborn in their assurance of election, as the following story 
retold by Olmsted indicates:

A slave, who was ‘a professor,’ plagued his master very much 
by his persistence in certain immoral practices, and he re- 
quested a clergyman to converse with him and try to reform 
him. The clergyman did so, and endeavored to bring the 
terrors of the law to bear upon his conscience. ‘Look yeah, 
massa,’ said the backslider, ‘don’t de Scriptur say, ‘Dem who 
believes an is baptize shall be save?’ ‘Certainly,’ the clergyman 
answered; and went on to explain and expound the passage: 
but directly the slave interrupted him again. ‘Jus you tell me 
now, massa, don’t de good book say dese word: ‘Dem as 
believes and is baptize, shall be save;’ ’want to know dat.’ ‘Yes 
but — ■’ ‘Dat’s all I want to know, sar; now wat’s de use o’ 
talkin’ to me? You aint a goin to make me bleve wat de 
blessed Lord says, an’t so, not ef you tries forever.’ The 
clergyman again attempted to explain, but the negro would 
not allow him, and as often as he got back to the judgement- 
day, or charging him with sin, and demanding reformation, 
he would interrupt him in the same way. ‘De Scriptur say, if a 
man believe and be baptize he shall — he shall be save. Now, 
massa minister, I done believe and I done baptize, and I shall 
be save suah. — Dere’s no use talkin, sar .’ 20In the area of sexuality, too, slave mores sometimes diverged 
from the norm preached by white Christians, but, as Frances 
Butler Leigh observed, that did not mean they had none. “The 
negroes had their own ideas of morality, and held to them very 
strictly; they did not consider it wrong for a girl to have a child 
before she married, but afterwards were extremely severe upon 
anything like infidelity on her part.” The testimony of several 
freedmen before the American Freedmen’s Inquiry Commission

RELIGION, REBELLION, AND DOCILITY

301

in 1863 supports Mrs. Leigh’s assertion. Robert Smalls, for in- 
stance, reported that “the majority” of young slave women had 
premarital sex but did not regard it as evil. Once they joined the 
church, however, they stopped “promiscuous intercourse with 
men” and “very few lawful married women” engaged in extra- 
marital affairs, according to Smalls. 21

While some slaves rejected the moral system preached by the 
master and his preachers, others devoted themselves to a life of 
virtue, in which they developed both a sense of personal dignity 
and an attitude of moral superiority to their masters — an attitude 
that could simultaneously support compliance to the system of 
slavery and buttress the slave’s own self-esteem. William Grimes’s 
righteousness, for example, led him to take a surprising attitude 
toward his master. When punished for something he had not 
done, Grimes adopted a stance which seems to be a classic case of 
accommodating the status quo:It grieved me very much to be blamed when I was innocent, I 
knew I had been faithful to him, perfectly so. At this time I 
was quite serious, and used constantly to pray to my God. I 
would not lie nor steal. . . . When I considered him accusing 
me of stealing, when I was so innocent, and had endeavored 
to make him satisfied by every means in my power, that I was 
so, but he still persisted in disbelieving me, I then said to 
myself, if this thing is done in a green tree what must be done 
in a dry? I forgave my master in my own heart for all this, and 
prayed to God to forgive him and turn his heart . 22

Grimes is, of course, alluding to the sacrifice of Christ and identi- 
fying himself with Jesus, the archetypal “Suffering Servant,” who 
spoke the words concerning green and dry wood on his way to 
death on Calvary. From this morally superior vantage point 
Grimes is able to forgive his master. Note, however, the element 
of threat in the question: “if this thing is done in a green tree [to 
the innocent] what must be done in a dry [to the guilty]?” Those 
who are guilty, those who persecute the innocent, will be judged 
and punished. The threat of judgment becomes more explicit

302

THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION”

when it is recalled that the full context of the words that Grimes 
quotes is a prophecy of destruction:

Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your- 
selves, and for your children. For behold, the days are coming, 
in which they shall say, Blessed are the barren, and the 
wombs that never bare, and the paps which never gave suck.

Then shall they begin to say to the mountains, Fall on us; and 
to the hills, Cover us. For if they do these things in a green 
tree, what shall be done in the dry? [Luke 23:28-31]Then shall they begin to say to the mountains, Fall on us; and 
to the hills, Cover us. For if they do these things in a green 
tree, what shall be done in the dry? [Luke 23:28-31]

Whether one marvels at Grimes’s attitude as saintly or as neurotic 
depends upon one’s own religious views, but the significant as- 
pect of this incident is Grime’s view of himself — what it meant for 
him, a slave, to feel moral authority over his master, to forgive his 
master, to have the leverage of moral virtue by which to elevate 
his own self-worth. A similar attitude was revealed by Solomon 
Bayley, who belonged to the same Methodist class meeting with 
the man who was attempting to sell Bayley’s wife and infant 
daughter. The slave admitted that it was extremely difficult “to 
keep up true love and unity between him and me, in the sight of 
God: this was a cause of wrestling in my mind; but that scripture 
abode with me, ‘He that loveth father or mother, wife or children, 
more than me, is not worthy of me’; then I saw it became me to 
hate the sin with all my heart, but still the sinner love; but I 
should have fainted, if I had not looked to Jesus, the author of my 
faith ...” The attitude which Bayley strove to achieve is as old in 
the Christian tradition as “Father forgive them for they know not 
what they do” and as recent as Martin Luther King’s articulation 
of “soul force” and “redemptive suffering.” A similar impulse lay 
behind the comment of Mary Younger, a fugitive slave who es- 
caped to Canada: “if those slaveholders were to come here, I 
would treat them well, just to shame them by showing that I had 
humanity.” This assertion of one’s humanity in the very teeth of 
slavery’s dehumanizing power was perhaps involved in Grimes’s 
and other slaves’ adherence to moral virtue — an attitude which 
might otherwise have seemed merely servile . 23

RELIGION, REBELLION, AND DOCILITY

303RELIGION, REBELLION, AND DOCILITY

303

At the same time, it is clear that this superior moral righteous- 
ness did support the slave system, as both William Grimes and 
Josiah Henson attested. Grimes confessed that:

My conscience used sometimes to upbraid me with having 
done wrong, after I had run away from my master and arrived 
in Connecticut; and ... I went up on a high mountain and 
prayed to the Lord to teach me my duty, that I might know 
whether or not I ought to go back to my master. Before I 
came down I felt satisfied, and it did seem to me that the Lord 
heard my prayers, when I was a poor wretched slave, and 
delivered me out of the land of Egypt, and out of the house of 
bondage; and that it was His hand, and not my own artfulness 
and cunning, which had enabled me to escape ... 24

The anomaly of Grimes’s feeling guilt over running away from his 
master pales in comparison with the punctilious devotion to duty 
of another slave, Josiah Henson. As a trusted overseer, Henson 
was commissioned by his master to transport a score of slaves 
from Maryland to Kentucky. On the journey Henson and his 
charges traveled by boat on the Ohio River, and passing along the 
Ohio shore, they “were repeatedly told . . . that [they] were no 
longer slaves but free men, if [they] chose to be so. At Cincinnati 
crowds of coloured people gathered round us, and insisted on our 
remaining with them.” Out of a sense of duty and pride, Henson 
“sternly assumed the captain, and ordered the boat to be pushed 
off into the stream” and back into slavery! Later Henson rebelled, 
fled to Canada, and lived to regret what he came to call his 
“unpardonable sin .” 25Many slaves who remained in bondage contemplated a different 
escape: “I was a member of the First Baptist Church, I heard the 
white minister preach, and I thought within myself, I will seek a 
better world — here I am in bondage, and if there is a better world 
above, where I shall not be pulled and hauled about and tor- 
mented, as I am in this, I will seek it,” recalled Henry Atkinson. 
It would be simplistic, however, to imterpret the consolation that 
Atkinson found in his religion as merely compensatory other-

304

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION”304

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION”

worldliness. When opportunity arose, this same Henry Atkinson 
sought a successful escape from slavery in this world as well. For 
those who saw no chance of escape, “trustin in the Lord” helped 
to stave off despair. “Trustin’ was de only hope of de pore black 
critters in dem days. Us jest prayed for strength to endure it to de 
end. We didn’t ’spect nothin’ but to stay in bondage ’til we died,” 
acknowledged Delia Garlic, who survived slavery in Virginia, 
Georgia, and Louisiana. More pointedly, an anonymous former 
slave, speaking not only for himself but for many, admitted: “As I 
look back over it now, I don’t wonder that I felt as I did. I just 
gave up all earthly hopes and thought all the time about the next 
life.” Accommodationist? No doubt it was that. Certainly, the 
religion of the slaves could support accommodation to the system 
of slavery. The experience of Govan Littlejohn was not unique: 
“My ma teach me to fight nothing in dis world but de devil.” 
Religious symbols which might have been incendiary to some 
slaves were smothered by the skeptical realism of others, such as 
Charles Davenport, who scoffed: “De preachers would exhort us 
dat us was de chillen o’ Israel in de wilderness an’ de Lord done 
sent us to take dis land o’ milk and honey. But how us gwine-a 
take land what’s already been took?” Accommodationist, compen- 
satory, antirevolutionary these views were, but perhaps they need 
to be pondered from the perspective of those who endured the 
experience and lived to tell it. Angered by latter-day critics of 
slave docility, a former slave remarked: “I have heard a heap of 
people say they wouldn’t take the treatment what the slave took, 
but they woulda took it or death. If they had been there they 
woulda took the very same treatment .” 26 
The effect of religion upon the attitudes, motivation, and action 
of slaves was complex. While some sought escape in the world 
beyond, others saw escape on this earth as a religious quest, sanc- 
tioned and directed by divine providence. (Nor were these alter- 
natives always contradictory.) John Atkinson, who successfully 
fled slavery from Norfolk, Virginia, to Canada, likened the deci- 
sion to escape to the experience of conversion. “A man who hasRELIGION, REBELLION, AND DOCILITY 305

been in slavery knows, and no one else can know, the yearnings 
to be free, and the fear of making the attempt. It is like trying to 
get religion, and not seeing the way to escape condemnation.” 
The simile is suggestive of the capacity of religious symbols to 
support slaves in the act of rebellion by flight. The decision to 
escape, like the experience of conversion, might involve a pro- 
longed struggle, an emotional and psychological “wrestling” 
which is suddenly overcome in the experience of “coming 
through.” The threatening visions of Hell and Satan paralleled 
the anticipated perils of flight, pursuit, and possible capture. In 
both experiences the goal was freedom, physical or spiritual, and 
success depended not solely upon one’s own efforts but upon the 
providence of God. Confidence in the providence of God helped 
some slaves to bridge the gap of fear separating the yearnings to 
be free from the attempt to become so. Fugitive slave John 
Thompson described the escape of three friends, “very religious 
persons, one of them being a Methodist preacher,” who were 
certain of success because they “had full confidence in the surety 
of the promises of God.” Thompson also spoke of his own deci- 
sion to escape as a conversion experience. William and Ellen Craft 
preceded their journey to freedom with a prayer and a timely 
reminder of biblical precedent:

When the time had arrived for us to start, we blew out the 
lights, knelt down, and prayed to our Heavenly Father merci- 
fully to assist us, as he did his people of old, to escape from 
cruel bondage; and we shall ever feel that God heard and 
answered our prayer. Had we not been sustained by a kind, 
and I sometimes think special, providence, we could never 
have overcome the mountainous difficulties ... 27Religious faith sometimes sustained the decision of slaves to flee 
or to revolt. Slave rebelliousness should not be thought of exclu- 
sively in terms of acts such as arson, sabotage, flight or revolt, for 
religion itself, in a very real sense, could be an act of 
rebelliousness — an assertion of slave independence, which some- 
times required outright defiance of the master’s command. G.W.

306

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

Offley stated that when slaves in Queen Ann’s County, Maryland, 
experienced religion at a Methodist revival around 1830, “they 
would disobey their ungodly masters and would go to meetings 
nights and Sundays.” Offley also claimed that he learned from his 
mother and father the potentially revolutionary doctrine “that God 
is no respecter of persons, but gave his son to die for all, bond or 
free, black or white, rich or poor,” and that God protects those 
whom he chooses to sanctify for some task. To illustrate this last 
belief, Offley recounted the story of Praying Jacob, a tale which 
applies the lesson “Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar’s, 
render unto God the things that are God’s” to the master-slave 
relationship:[Praying Jacob] was a slave in the state of Maryland. His 
master was very cruel to his slaves. Jacob’s rule was to Pray 
three times a day, at just such an hour of the day; no matter 
what his work was or where he might be, he would stop and 
go and pray. His master has been to him and pointed his gun 
at him, and told him if he did not cease praying he would 
blow out his brains. Jacob would finish his prayer and then 
tell his master to shoot in welcome — your loss will be my 
gain — I have two masters, one on earth and one in heaven — 
master Jesus in heaven, and master Saunders on earth. I have 
a soul and a body; the body belongs to you, master Saunders, 
and the soul to Jesus. Jesus says men ought always to pray, 
but you will not pray, neither do you want to have me 
pray. . . . Sometimes Mr. S. would be in the field about half 
drunk, raging like a madman, whipping the other slaves; and 
when Jacob’s hour would come for prayer, he would . . . 
kneel down and pray, but he [Saunders] could not strike the 
man of God .” 28

Offley’s story of Praying Jacob, no less than William Wells 
Brown’s story of the conjurer Dinkie, extols the independence of a 
slave who stands up to his master and does so with impunity 
because he is protected by supernatural power. In the case of 
Praying Jacob, however, it is not the force of conjure but the 
protective care of God for his elect, which shields the slave from 
the white man’s whip and gun. 29

RELIGION, REBELLION, AND DOCILITY 307RELIGION, REBELLION, AND DOCILITY 307

When the master’s will conflicted with God’s, slaves faced a 
choice which was simultaneously an opportunity to assert their 
own free will and to act virtuously, even heroically, in the context 
of Christianity, in which disobedience to white authority, no mat- 
ter the consequence, could seem morally imperative. When 
Thomas Jones, for example, grew concerned about the state of his 
soul, his master told him to stop moping about, forbade him to 
attend prayer meetings, and ordered him to stop praying. In spite 
of repeated and severe whippings, Jones persisted in attending 
Methodist class meetings and refused to promise that he would 
abandon prayer. Eli Johnson claimed that when he was threatened 
with five hundred lashes for holding prayer meetings, he stood up 
to his master and declared, “In the name of God why is it, that I 
can’t after working hard all the week, have a meeting on Saturday 
evening? I’ll suffer the flesh to be dragged off my bones ... for the 
sake of my blessed Redeemer.” Fugitive slave James Smith, while 
still enslaved in Virginia, joined the Baptist Church and felt a call 
to preach to his fellow slaves. To prevent him from preaching, his 
master kept him tied up all day on Sundays and, when he proved 
intransigent, flogged him as well. Nevertheless, Smith kept up his 
ministry as best he could and later reported that “many were led to 
embrace the Saviour under his preaching.” 30The husband of Candus [Candace?] Richardson, ex-slave from 
Franklin County, Mississippi, stole off to the woods to pray, “but 
he prayed so loud that anybody close around could hear,” and so 
was discovered and punished. The fact which Mrs. Richardson 
proudly stressed was that “beatings didn’t stop my husband from 
praying. He just kept on praying and it was his prayers,” she 
explained to W.P.A. interviewers, and “a whole lot of other slaves 
that cause you young folks to be free today.” Beatings did not 
stop slaves from praying, and these prayers were symbols of resis- 
tance, symbols whose power was not underestimated by the 
planters. A contraband slave interviewed in Columbus, Ken- 
tucky, in 1862 told a white missionary from the North: “When I 
was a slave my master would sometimes whip me awful , specially

308

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

when he knew I was praying. He was determined to whip the 
Spirit out of me, but he could never do it, for de more he whip 
the more the Spirit make me content to be whipt ...” That 
contentment, it may be said, stifled outward political resistance, 
but it may also be argued that it represented a symbolic inward 
resistance, a testing of wills and a victory of the spirit over the 
force of brutality . 31

Prayer was such an effective symbol of resistance because both 
masters and slaves believed in the power of prayer. Hence the 
desperate need of some masters and mistresses for slaves to pray 
for the success of the Confederacy, and hence their anger when 
slaves dissembled or refused outright to do so. As A.M. French 
preceptively observed after listening to scores of slave testimonies 
in South Carolina:The prayers of the poor slaves, are proven to have had great 
value, in the minds of their Master, in scores of ways. They 
argued, and begged, coaxed and threatened, broke up meet- 
ings, punished, to make them pray ‘fo* de confederates.’ It is 
proven to have been so from the fact that so many refer to it, 
as a known fact in so many incidental ways; for instance — 
‘Massah say, we pray for de war, say we shouldn’t, mus’ pray 
for de ’fed’rates. We pray mo’, pray harder. Den dey wouldn’t 
let we hab meetin’s, broke up de meetin’s, but didn’t broke 
our hearts, we pray mo’ and mo’, in de heart, night and day, 
and wait, for de Lord . . . Oh we pray for de Lord to come, to 
hasten his work’ .... A deeply pious ex-slave said ... ‘I pray 
dat God bless you, and gib you success! Massah angry, but 
mus’ pray for de cornin’ ob de Lord, an’ his people.’ Another 
said, ‘I knew God would bless you, an’ give victory, I feel it 
when I pray. Massah angry ’cause I pray for de North, can’t 
help it mus’ pray for the whole worl’. Massah say, ‘No! Pray 
for de ’fed’rates.’ But I knew God would bless de North . 32

W.B. Allen, former slave from Georgia, remembered the time 
when he was a boy and his white folks asked him “to pray to 
God ... to hold the Northern armies back” and he “told them 
flat-footedly that, while I loved them, and would do any reason- 
able praying for them, I could not pray against my conscience:

RELIGION, REBELLION, AND DOCILITY 309

that I not only wanted to be free, but I wanted to see all the 
Negroes freed!” Some of Allen’s outspokenness may have derived 
from his knowledge that the South was losing the war. Neverthe- 
less, he was shouting in public what had been repeated in the 
dead of night in the private place of prayer which the slave 
claimed as his own. Less frank, but just as firm as Allen, was a 
slave woman named Maria from Raleigh, North Carolina, who 
described her mistress’s failure to persuade her to pray for the 
South:On our plantation, when the war was going on, there was a 
great revival, and mistress called the colored people together 
and told them to pray — to pray mightily that the enemy may 
be driven back. So we prayed and prayed all over the planta- 
tion. But ’peared like de more de darkies prayed, de more 
nearer de Yankees come. Then the missus said, ‘stop all this 
praying for the enemies, I won’t have it. I believe they are 
praying for the enemies to come.’ So there was no more pray- 
ing where mistress could hear it . . . One day my mistress 
came out to me. ‘Maria, M’ria . . . what does you pray for?’ ‘I 
prays, missus, that de Lord’s will may be done.’ ‘But you 
mustn’t pray that way. You must pray that our enemies may 
be driven back.’ ‘But, missus, if it’s de Lord’s will to drive ’em 
back, den they will go back .’ 33

In prayer, religious slaves kept in touch with what Paul Radin 
has described as “an inner world” where they could “develop a 
scale of values and fixed points of vantage from which to judge the 
world around them and themselves.” In this inner, religious 
world the primary value and fixed point was the will of God. And 
in opposition to the slaveholder’s belief, the slave believed that 
slavery was surely contrary to the will of God. John Hunter, a 
fugitive from slavery in Maryland, attested to this belief: “I have 
heard poor ignorant slaves, that did not know A from B, say that 
they did not believe the Lord ever intended they should be slaves, 
and that they did not see how it should be so.” Lydia Adams 
asserted, “I’ve been wanting to be free ever since I was a little 
child. I said to them I didn’t believe God ever meant me to be a

310

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’310

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

slave ...” From sermons he heard in a Methodist church, Francis 
Henderson concluded “that God had made all men free and equal, 
and that I ought not to be a slave . . . ” 34 In this view, to trust in 
God’s providence was to believe in the deliverance of the slaves. 
Since slavery was against the will of God, and since God’s will 
could not be frustrated forever, it followed that the slaves would 
be freed, even though the when and the how might remain un- 
known. Was there not precedent in God’s emancipation of Israel 
from Egypt? With this hope slaves consoled themselves in times 
of despair and found enough purpose to endure the enormity of 
their suffering. Polly, a slave of Barbara Leigh Smith Bodichon, 
eloquently expressed to her mistress the meaning she derived 
from religion: “we poor creatures have need to believe in God, for 
if God Almighty will not be good to us some day, why were we 
bom? When I heard of his delivering his people from bondage I 
know it means the poor African.” When Fredrika Bremer ques- 
tioned a slave about enduring the conditions of slavery, she re- 
ceived this answer, “We endeavor to keep ourselves up as well as 
we can . . . what can we do unless we keep up a good heart. If we 
were to let droop, we should die!” A contraband in Beaufort, 
S.C., explained to a missionary why belief was essential to her life:

O missus! I could not hab-libbed had not been for de Lord — 
neber! Work so late, and so early; work so hard, when side 
ache so. Chil’en sold; old man gone. All visitors, and company 
in big house; all cooking and washing all on me, and neber 
done enough. Missus neber satisfied — no hope. Noting, not- 
ing but Jesus, I look up. O Lord! how long? Give me pa- 
tience! patience! O Lord! Only Jesus know how bad I feel; 
darsn’t tell any body, else get flogged. Darsn’t call upon de 
Lord; darsn’t tell when sick. But ... I said Jesus, if it your 
will, I will bear it . 35Clayborn Gantling, bom a slave in Dawson, Georgia, in 1848, 
recalled the sight of slaves “sold in droves like cows . . . white 
men wuz drivin’ ’em like hogs and cows for sale. Mothers and 
fathers were sold and parted from their chillun; they wuz sold to

RELIGION, REBELLION, AND DOCILITY 3 1 1

white people in diffunt states. I tell you chile, it was pitiful, but 
God did not let it last always. I have heard slaves morning and 
night pray for deliverance. Some of ’em would stand up in de 
fields or bend over cotton and corn and pray out loud for God to 
help ’em and in time you see He did.” David Smith, in Baltimore, 
turned to God when he was threatened by his master with sale to 
the Deep South. Smith viewed God’s power to free him from sin 
as a pledge of His power to free him from slavery: “I knew very 
well, if God was able to deliver me from the corrupt influence of 
the world and the power of Satan, that he was able to deliver me 
from this slave-holder. Yet I was like so many others, I did not see 
by what method he would secure my deliverance. Still with child- 
like simplicity I trusted him ...” Smith saw his trust validated 
when he was purchased and manumitted by a kind sister-in-law 
of the master who threatened to sell him. 36Slaves prayed for the future day of deliverance to come, and 
they kept hope alive by incorporating as part of their mythic past 
the Old Testament exodus of Israel out of slavery. The appropria- 
tion of the Exodus story was for the slaves a way of articulating 
their sense of historical identity as a people. That identity was also 
based, of course, upon their common heritage of enslavement. 
The Christian slaves applied the Exodus story, whose end they 
knew, to their own experience of slavery, which had not ended. In 
identifying with the Exodus story, they created meaning and pur- 
pose out of the chaotic and senseless experience of slavery. Exodus 
functioned as an archetypal event for the slaves. The sacred his- 
tory of God’s liberation of his people would be or was being 
repeated in the American South. W. G. Kiphant, a Union Army 
chaplain with the 10th Iowa Veterans who worked among the 
freedmen in Decatur, Alabama, wrote disapprovingly in 1864 of 
the emphasis that Exodus received in the slaves’ religion: “There 
is no part of the Bible with which they are so familiar as the story 
of the deliverance of the children of Israel. Moses is their ideal of 
all that is high, and noble, and perfect, in man. I think they have 
been accustomed to regard Christ not so much in the light of a

312

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

spiritual Deliverer, as that of a second Moses who would eventu- 
ally lead them out of their prison-house of bondage .” 37312

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

spiritual Deliverer, as that of a second Moses who would eventu- 
ally lead them out of their prison-house of bondage .” 37

The story of Israel’s exodus from Egypt helped make it possible 
for the slaves to project a future radically different from their 
present. From other parts of the Bible, especially the prophetic 
and apocalyptic books, the slaves drew descriptions which gave 
form and, thus, assurance to their anticipation of deliverance. The 
troublesome question, according to Aunt Ellen, a freedwoman in 
North Carolina, had not been if the slaves would be free, but 
when: “When we used to think about it, it ’peared like de Judge- 
ment, sure to come, but a powerful step off.” As that “powerful 
step” loomed closer with the beginning and progress of the war, 
slaves turned, as had generations of Christians before them in 
time of crisis, to the biblical promises of God for reassurance. 
Thomas L. Johnson recalled that in Richmond those blacks who 
could read “believed that the eleventh chapter of Daniel referred 
directly to the war.”

We often met together and read this chapter in our own way.

The fifth verse would perplex many of our company and then 
verses 13-15 would be much dwelt upon, for though the 
former verses spoke of the apparent victory of the South, these 
latter verses set forth the ultimate triumph of the North, for 
did it not say: ‘For the King of the North shall return and 
shall set forth a multitude greater than the former. ... so the 
King of the North shall come and cast up a mound and take 
the most fenced cities, and the arms of the South shall not 
withstand.’ Thus we eagerly grasped at any statements which 
our anxiety, hope, and prayer concerning our liberty led us to 
search for, and which might indicate the desirable ending of 
the great War. 38Old Testament prophecies of the destruction of Israel’s enemies 
easily and naturally fit the slaves’ desire that whites suffer just 
retribution for the brutality of slavery. Biblical prophets had 
spoken in images violent enough to suit the most vengeful feel- 
ings. Mary Livermore, a New England governess on a Southern 
plantation, was astonished by the prophetic terms which Aggy,

RELIGION, REBELLION, AND DOCILITY

313

the normally “taciturn” housekeeper, used to express her outrage 
at the beating her master had given her daughter:

Thar’s a day a-comin’! Thar’s a day a-comin’ ... I hear de 
rumblin’ ob de chariots! I see de flashin’ ob de guns! White 
folks’ blood is a-runnin’ on de ground like a riber, an’ de 
dead’s heaped up dat high! . . . Oh, Lor’! hasten de day when 
de blows, an’ de bruises, an’ de aches, an’ de pains, shall come 
to de white folks, an’ de buzzards shall eat ’em as dey’s dead in 
de streets. Oh, Lor’! roll on de chariots, an’ gib de black 
people rest an’ peace. Oh, Lor’! gib me de pleasure ob livin’ 
till dat day, when I shall see white folks shot down like de 
wolves when dey come hongry out o’ de woods ! 38Not all slaves took solace in religion. Some slaves would not 
accept belief in a supposedly just God who could will or permit 
slavery. If God was all-just and all-powerful, why did the inno- 
cent suffer and injustice reign? was a question which devastated 
faith in the minds of some slaves. “I pretended to profess religion 
one time,” recalled one. “I don’t hardly know what to think about 
religion. They say God killed the just and unjust; I don’t under- 
stand that part of it. It looks hard to think that if you ain’t done 
nothing in the world you be punished just like the wicked. Plenty 
folks went crazy trying to get that straightened out.” Nor did all 
slaves distinguish true Christianity from that practiced by their 
masters: for them it remained a white man’s religion. Daniel Alex- 
ander Payne, A.M.E. bishop, discussed the origins of slave unbe- 
lief in a statement written in 1839:

The slaves are sensible of the oppression exercised by their 
masters; and they see these masters on the Lord’s day wor- 
shipping in his holy sanctuary. They hear their masters pro- 
fessing Christianity; they see their masters preaching the gos- 
pel; they hear these masters praying in their families, and they 
know that oppression and slavery are inconsistent with the 
Christian religion; therefore they scoff at religion itself — mock 
their masters, and distrust both the goodness and justice of 
God. Yes, I have known them even to question his existence.

I speak not of what others have told me, but of what / have 
both seen and heard from the slaves themselves . 40

314

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’I speak not of what others have told me, but of what / have 
both seen and heard from the slaves themselves . 40

314

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

The experience of Frederick Douglass may be added to that of 
Payne. Douglass spoke of “the doubts arising . . . partly from the 
sham religion which everywhere prevailed” under slavery, doubts 
which “awakened in my mind a distrust of all religion and the 
conviction that prayers were unavailing and delusive.” Charles C. 
Coffin questioned a freedwoman named Nellie in Savannah in 
1864 about her religious belief. She admitted: “ ... it has been a 
terrible mystery, to know why the good Lord should so long 
afflict my people, and keep them in bondage, — to be abused, and 
trampled down, without any rights of their own, — with no ray of 
light in the future.” Though she had refused to despair, she re- 
ported of others: “Some of my folks said there wasn’t any God, for 
if there was he wouldn’t let white folks do as they have done for 
so many years ...” John Dixon Long maintained that working 
as a minister in the South he met with unbelief among slaves 
“who suspect the Gospel to be a cheat, and believe the preachers 
and the slaveholder to be in a conspiracy against them.” 41 There 
is no way of knowing how many slaves were doubters, agnostics, 
or atheists, but it is clear that some saw Christianity as meaning- 
less, a sham, and a white man’s religion — a fact which should 
temper generalizations about the piety of all slaves.Two poles of behavior, accommodation and rebelliousness, 
have been the foci for discussion about slave personality and slave- 
master relationship. Slave testimony indicates that Christianity 
supported both, influencing some slaves to accept and others to 
rebel against their enslavement. But these were not the only alter- 
natives. Religion, especially the revivalistic, inward, experientially 
oriented religion to which many slaves and masters adhered had 
an egalitarian tendency which occasionally led to moments of 
genuine religious mutuality, whereby blacks and whites preached 
to, prayed for, and converted each other in situations where the 
status of master and slave was, at least for the moment, sus- 
pended. In the fervor of religious worship, master and slave, 
white and black, could be found sharing a common event, profess- 
ing a common faith and experiencing a common ecstasy. “I have

RELIGION, REBELLION, AND DOCILITY 3 1 5

witnessed . . . many a season of refreshing in which master, mis- 
tress, and slave alike participated, and seen them all rejoice to- 
gether,” remarked H. J. Harris, a Methodist missionary to Mis- 
sissippi plantations after 1839. On the Frierson plantation, in 
Sumter County, South Carolina, the front yard of the big house 
was set aside for the slaves’ Sunday worship. Black preachers 
were always invited to conduct these services, according to former 
slave Irving Lowery. A table covered with a white cloth on which 
lay a Bible was set up to serve as a pulpit, and chairs were 
arranged for the slave congregation. Overlooking the yard was the 
piazza, or gallery, of the big house where white families sat and 
watched the services. In Lowery’s words:No white preacher was ever allowed to stand behind that 
table, though some of them very much desired to do so. That 
long piazza was usually filled with devout [white] worshippers 
and the seats below with zealous colored Christians .... 
Sometimes when the old preacher would warm up to his 
subject ... the audience would break forth in shouts of joy 
and praise. While some colored sister would be jumping out 
in the audience some of the white ladies were known to act in 
a similar manner in the piazza. 42

Occasionally religious mutuality between white and black Chris- 
tians included personal recognition and respect. Reverend C. C. 
Jones, for example, felt that he was put to shame by the sincerity 
and eloquence of the prayers said by Dembo, a native African and a 
member of Jones’s Midway Church: “I can never forget the prayers 
of Dembo .... There was a depth of humility, a conviction of 
sinfulness ... an assurance of faith ... a flowing out of love, a 
being swallowed up in God, which I never heard before nor since; 
and often when he closed his prayers, I felt as weak as water, and 
that I ought not to open my mouth in public, and indeed knew not 
what it was to pray.” On the other side of the racial line, William 
Wells Brown acknowledged that he had “the greatest respect” for 
“the Christian zeal” of one planter in his area, Dr. John Gaines, “a 
truly pious and conscientious man, willing at all times to give of his

316

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’316

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

means ... in spreading the Gospel.” Henry Clay Bruce allowed 
that some white ministers “were good men and preached reason- 
able sermons giving good advice, spiritually and morally, and were 
beloved by their colored congregations. I remember one whose 
name was W. G. Cooper, who was so well admired by his colored 
flock that they raised forty-five dollars and presented him a suit of 
clothes, when he went to conference, and sent a petition to have 
him returned to that charge.” When the white pastor of Mount 
Olive Baptist Church in Harris County, Georgia, failed to appear 
for service on one Sunday during the war, he was replaced by 
Uncle Sol Mitchell without “a shadow of an objection to the negro 
slave’s occupying the pulpit,” recalled Parthenia Hague, a white 
Southern woman, who added that all joined in the service and that 
she personally had “never knelt with more humble devotion and 
reverence than on that Sabbath morning .” 43

At the core of the evangelical piety shared by slave and master 
was the conversion experience. Sometimes slaves were instrumen- 
tal in the conversion of whites and vice versa. Elijah Marrs, wor- 
ried over the state of his soul, was cutting corn stalks in a field one 
day with one of his young masters. Many years later Marrs still 
remembered the role played by this young master in his conver- 
sion: “He looked at me, and he saw that I was sin sick. He, being a 
Christian, took me in hand and told me that I was a sinner, and that 
Jesus Christ died to save sinners, and all I had to do was to believe 
that Jesus Christ was able to save. He told me about hell and its 
horrors. From morning to evening he talked. I prayed the best I 
could after I left him.” A week later Marrs “was struck with con- 
viction” and shortly afterward “professed faith in Christ .” 44 
A more dramatic instance of religious reciprocity between slave 
and master was recounted by a former slave named Morte:One day while in the field plowing I heard a voice ... I 
looked but saw no one . . . Everything got dark, and I was 
unable to stand any longer . . . With this I began to cry, 
Mercy! Mercy! Mercy! As I prayed an angel came and 
touched me, and I looked new . . . and there came a soft voice

RELIGION, REBELLION, AND DOCILITY

317

saying, ‘My little one, 1 have loved you with an everlasting 
love. You are a chosen vessel unto the Lord’ ... I must have 
been in this trance more than an hour. I went on to the barn 
and found my master waiting for me ... I began to tell him of 
my experiences . . . My master sat watching and listening to 
me, and then he began to cry. He turned from me and said in 
a broken voice, ‘Morte I believe you are a preacher. From now 
on you can preach to the people here on my place . . . But 
tomorrow morning. Sunday, I want you to preach to my 
family and my neighbors’ . . . The next morning at the time 
appointed I stood up on two planks in front of the porch of 
the big house and, without a Bible or anything, I began to 
preach to my master and the people. My thoughts came so 
fast that I could hardly speak fast enough. My soul caught on 
fire, and soon I had them all in tears ... I told them that they 
must be born again and that their souls must be freed from 
the shackles of hell. 45

Unfortunately, we don’t know what Morte thought about the 
significance of his power, spiritual and momentary though it may 
have been, over his master. Nor do we know what his fellow 
slaves thought when they saw Morte breaking up the rocky 
ground of the white folks’ hearts. However, the spectacle of a 
slave reducing his master and his master’s family and friends to 
tears by preaching to them of their enslavement to sin certainly 
suggests that despite the iron rule of slavery, religion could bend 
human relationships into some interesting shapes.Slave religion has been stereotyped as otherworldly and com- 
pensatory. It was otherworldly in the sense that it held that this 
world and this life were not the end, nor the final measure of 
existence. It was compensatory to the extent that it consoled and 
supported slaves worn out by the unremitting toil and capricious 
cruelty of the “peculiar institution.” To conclude, however, that 
religion distracted slaves from concern with this life and dis- 
suaded them from action in the present is to distort the full story 
and to simplify the complex role of religious motivation in human 
behavior. It does not always follow that belief in a future state of

318

‘THE INVISIBLE INSTITUTION’

happiness leads to acceptance of suffering in this world. It does 
not follow necessarily that a hope in a future when all wrongs will 
be righted leads to acquiescence to injustice in the present. Reli- 
gion had different effects on the motivation and identity of differ- 
ent slaves and even dissimilar effects on the same slave at different 
times and in different circumstances.To describe slave religion as merely otherworldly is inaccurate, 
for the slaves believed that God had acted, was acting, and would 
continue to act within human history and within their own par- 
ticular history as a peculiar people just as long ago he had acted 
on behalf of another chosen people, biblical Israel. Moreover, 
slave religion had a this-worldly impact, not only in leading some 
slaves to acts of external rebellion, but also in helping slaves to 
assert and maintain a sense of personal value — even of ultimate 
worth. The religious meetings in the quarters, groves, and “hush 
harbors” were themselves frequently acts of rebellion against the 
proscriptions of the master. In the context of divine authority, the 
limited authority of any human was placed in perspective. By 
obeying the commands of God, even when they contradicted the 
commands of men, slaves developed and treasured a sense of 
moral superiority and actual moral authority over their masters.

In the role of preacher, exhorter, and minister, slaves experi- 
enced status, achieved respect, and exercised power, often circum- 
scribed but nonetheless real. In the peak experience of conversion, 
slaves felt raised from death to life, from sorrow to joy, from 
damnation to election. The conversion experience equipped the 
slave with a sense of individual value and a personal vocation 
which contradicted the devaluing and dehumanizing forces of 
slavery. In the prayer meetings, the sermons, prayers, and songs, 
when the Spirit started moving the congregation to shout, clap, 
and dance, the slaves enjoyed community and fellowship which 
transformed their individual sorrows. That some slaves main- 
tained their identity as persons, despite a system bent on reducing 
them to a subhuman level, was certainly due in part to their 
religious life. In the midst of slavery, religion was for slaves a 
space of meaning, freedom, and transcendence.

Conclusion: 
Canaan LandConclusion: 
Canaan Land

Shout the glad tidings o’er Egypt’s dark sea 
Jehovah has triumphed, his people are free!

FREEDMEN’S HYMN

T

X HE profound joy with which 
slaves celebrated their long-awaited Day of Jubilee was tempered 
by the memory of past suffering, the awareness of present uncer- 
tainty, and the anticipation of future trouble. Though slavery had 
ended, its legacy of oppression remained, rendering freedom less 
than complete. As contraband slave Brother Thornton warned 
the refugees at Fortress Monroe, Virginia, Canaan Land was still 
off in the distance:

We have been in the furnace of affliction, and are still, but 
God only means to separate the dross, and get us so that like 
the pure metal we may reflect the image of our Purifier, who 
is sitting by to watch the process. I am assured that what God 
begins, he will bring to an end. We have need of faith, pa- 
tience and perseverance, to realize the desired result. There 
must be no looking back to Egypt. Israel passed forty years in 
the wilderness, because of their unbelief. What if we cannot 
see right off the green fields of Canaan, Moses could not. He 
could not even see how to cross the Red Sea. If we would 
have greater freedom of body, we must free ourselves from the 
shackles of sin, and especially the sin of unbelief. We must 
snap the chain of Satan, and educate ourselves and our chil- 
dren . . .*Gazing back at their lives in slavery, former slaves affirmed that 
they had trusted in the Lord and that the Lord had delivered 
them. Like the children of Israel of old, they had lived through 
Egypt and Exodus and the experience had constituted them a 
peculiar, a chosen, people. This identity was to remain — in the 
midst of the chaos, disappointment, and disaster of Reconstruc- 
tion — a bedrock of hope for freed black Christians as it had been 
for them as slaves. As the one institution which freed blacks were 
allowed to control, the church was the center of social, economic, 
educational, and political activity. It was also a source of continu- 
ity and identity for the black community. In their churches, black 
worshipers continued for decades to pray, sing, preach, and shout 
as they or their parents had during slavery.

320

CONCLUSION: CANAAN LAND

321

We are fortunate that the former slaves were not silent about 
their religious faith and that they left their testimony as a legacy 
for their children and for any who wish to understand it. The 
history of slave religion is the story of the faith of a people, a 
people whose lives were marked by their trust in the Lord. This 
quality of trusting faith was summed up simply by a ninety-year- 
old ex-slave interviewed in the 1930s toward the end of her life. 
When asked, “Are all your people dead?” Maria Jenkins replied, 
“De whole nation dead . . . De whole nation dead — Peggy dead — 
Toby dead — all leaning on de Lord.”

This page intentionally left blank

AfterwordThis page intentionally left blank

Afterword

Twenty-five years is a long time. When I wrote Slave Religion, 
revising and expanding the Yale Ph.D. dissertation upon which 
it was based, I had no idea that this text would last, much less 
achieve the status of “classic.” I was then, as I am now, acutely 
aware of its limits. Recognizing that all historical narratives are 
written out of the present, I frequently ask my students, “Why 
did the author write it?” The fact that this book was written at 
all owes a great deal to the personal and professional influence 
of my mentors. American religious historian Sydney Ahlstrom 
made it all possible by helping me gain admission to the Yale 
Graduate Program in Religious Studies in the first place. His 
kaleidoscopic curiosity encouraged me, and a remarkable cadre 
of graduate students, to explore new paths that he could only 
point out in his magisterial synthesis, A Religious History of the 
American People (1972). African-American historian John Blas- 
singame in The Slave Community (1972) and Slave Testimony 
(1977) demonstrated, contrary to the accepted wisdom, that 
slave narratives could serve as valid and valuable sources for ex- 
amining the slaves’ experience of slavery. 1 As a teaching assistant 
in his course on African-American history I learned the rigors 
and joys of historical research and the importance of maintaining 
civility in the heat of interpretative controversy. For me, and 
other black students at Yale, he also offered a salutary example 
of grace under pressure as we coped with life in a predominantly

323

324

AFTERWORD

white elite institution during a time of heightened racial sensi- 
tivity. (Campus protests over the New Haven murder trial of 
Black Panther Party leaders Bobbie Seale and Erica Huggins 
coalesce in my memory with demonstrations against the Vietnam 
War to shut Yale down in the spring of 1970.)It was a heady time to be at Yale, which was at the center of 
the emerging black studies movement, a cultural and social 
movement which set about to recover African-American history 
as a central part of American history. 2 For too many years the 
dominant culture, academic as well as popular, had ignored the 
presence or distorted the role of African Americans in the na- 
tion’s past. Black Americans, if historians discussed them at all, 
figured prominently only in the story of slavery and in the topic 
of race relations. In both cases, they appeared not as actors in 
the national drama but as victims or problems. As an oppressed 
minority, they represented an unfortunate but minor exception 
to the main plot of American history: the gradual expansion of 
democracy to include all citizens. A few countervailing voices 
protested the inaccuracy of this version of the nation’s history, 
but in the main, black people and their culture remained absent 
from courses in American history and American religion down 
to the 1960s. African Americans were, so to speak, invisible. And 
the results of invisibility were devastating. In the absence of 
black history, a myth of the American past developed that denied 
black people any past or agency of significance.

In the late 1960s and the early 1970s, the prevailing myth 
about black history was called into question on campus after 
campus across the land, as cries of civil rights activists for black 
power and black pride roused students, white and black, to de- 
mand courses in African-American history and culture. Recog- 
nizing (often under pressure) the cogency of these demands, ad- 
ministrators and faculty at significant numbers of schools added 
new courses and revised old ones to take into account the black 
experience. African-American studies mushroomed, and various 
ethnic studies and eventually women’s studies programs fol-

AFTERWORD

325AFTERWORD

325

lowed. The recovery of African-American history became a prec- 
edent for the recovery of the pasts of other peoples whose stories 
had also been neglected in American history.

This shift in perspective affected religious as well as secular 
history. As Ahlstrom had predicted, the recovery of African- 
American history served as a paradigm for the recovery of Amer- 
ican religious history. No longer was it responsible for students 
of American religious history to ignore the religious experience 
of black Americans, or that of other people of color, or of women, 
as if they were invisible. If the history of religion in America was 
the subject, then it needed to include the religious life of all the 
peoples who made up America, not just the religion of white 
Protestant males.The inclusion of African Americans and other previously in- 
visible groups in the history books was an extremely important 
development not just for academic study but also for our under- 
standing of ourselves as a nation, for history functions as a form 
of self-definition. In its pages we read ourselves. It tells us who 
we are because it reveals where we come from and where we’ve 
been. The neglect of black history not only distorted American 
history, but also distorted both white and black Americans’ per- 
ceptions of who they were. For a people to “lose” their history, 
to have their story denigrated as insignificant, is a devastating 
blow, an exclusion that in effect denies their full humanity. Con- 
versely, to ignore the history of another people whose fate has 
been intimately bound up with your own is to forgo self- 
understanding. Thus for many of us studying in those “move- 
ment” years, the attempt to research and write about African- 
American history had a personal significance and a political 
impetus. I felt that in the recovery of this history lay the resto- 
ration of my past, my self, and my people. In this context, aca- 
demic and personal, I chose to write about the history of the 
religious life of slaves.

As I sought sources for my work, I became fascinated by the 
voices of former slaves preserved in narrative accounts of their

326

AFTERWORD

lives, not only as historical evidence but also as voices that 
seemed to speak directly to me. These voices were special: they 
rang with the authenticity of those who had endured brutal suf- 
fering and triumphed over it. In my dissertation and in Slave 
Religion I tried to capture those voices, their tenor, their rhythm, 
and especially the wisdom they conveyed.What did they say, these voices of slaves and of former slaves? 
They spoke of slavery as a central religious and moral fact in the 
history of our nation, a fact that could not be excused as an 
exception to the “real” American story. The predominant theme 
of American history has often been presented as the gradual 
spread of democracy to more and more people. And to some 
extent that has been true. But as colonial historian Edmund 
Morgan pointed out, there is another plot line that is just as 
accurate, the continued enslavement and oppression of black 
Americans. The two themes are so intertwined that the story of 
America should be seen as the progression of an ongoing para- 
dox, the paradox of American freedom and American slavery. 3 
Similarly, the interlocking relationship of religion, race, and slav- 
ery, as historian David Wills has argued, is as important a nar- 
rative theme for American religious history as Puritanism or Plu- 
ralism, the two traditionally dominant motifs. 4

Slave Religion appeared in the wake of a revolutionary turn 
in the history of American slavery. In addition to Blassingame’s 
Slave Community, Eugene Genovese’s Roll, Jordan, Roll (1974) 
and Lawrence Levine’s Black Culture and Black Consciousness 
(1977) gave a more detailed and nuanced account of slave culture 
and religion than previously thought possible by taking seriously 
written and oral narratives of ex-slaves as historical evidence. 6 
Not surprisingly, therefore, these texts elucidated the agency of 
the slaves and the distinctiveness of their culture— “the world 
the slaves made.” Slave Religion benefited from the interest 
aroused by these innovative texts. An earlier book by Olli Alho, 
The Religion of the Slaves (1976), did not come to my attention 
until several years later. Using the same sources and reaching

AFTERWORD

327AFTERWORD

327

similar conclusions, Alho’s comprehensive and perceptive ac- 
count was published in Finland as part of a scholarly folklore 
series and failed to receive the wide distribution and general 
attention it deserved. Mechal Sobel’s Trabelin’ On, a careful ex- 
amination of the origin of black Baptists under slavery, appeared 
a year after my book and did receive favorable notice. 6

One of the major issues of slave agency with which all these 
texts had to wrestle was the question of what, if anything, was 
distinctive about the slaves’ culture. The question of cultural 
agency focused initially on the vexed problem of “African sur- 
vivals.” Did slavery effectively strip the slaves of their African 
cultural heritage or was that heritage transmitted, albeit trans- 
formed, to America? Early on I decided to make an intervention 
in the thirty-year-old debate between Melville Herskovits and E. 
Franklin Frazier over the extent of African religious influence on 
slaves in the United States. Herskovits insisted on placing the 
issue in hemispheric perspective, and he had the tools to do so, 
having done anthropological field work in Dahomey, Haiti, Su- 
rinam, Jamaica, and Trinidad. Herskovits was what we would 
call today a scholar of the African diaspora. He viewed African- 
American cultures across a hemispheric spectrum of societies 
from across the Atlantic world. In Slave Religion , I began in 
fumbling fashion to articulate a similar vision, one that would 
gradually become clearer over the years. To put it another way, 
taking the religion of African-American slaves seriously meant 
traveling imaginatively across the Atlantic to Africa and back by 
way of the Caribbean and Latin America to understand what 
developed in the relatively marginal thirteen British North 
American colonies that eventually became the United States.As I taught and continued to research African-American re- 
ligious history, a burgeoning literature on comparative slavery 
refined the issue of what was distinctive about the institution of 
slavery in the United States in relation to other slaveholding 
societies of the Americas. Newer work also challenged me to 
become more sophisticated in my understanding of specific Af-

328

AFTERWORD

rican religions and their transmission to the Americas. The 
Kongo-Angola area would receive more emphasis were I writing 
today. I also realized that Slave Religion conveyed a static, ahis- 
torical narrative of African religions under the vague rubric of 
“African Heritage.” Thanks to editorial work with David Wills 
on a projected multivolume documentary history of African- 
American religion, I came to see with new clarity that the story 
I wanted to tell began in the encounter between Portuguese and 
Senegambian Africans in the 1440s off the coast of present-day 
Mauritania, an initial step in the creation of an Atlantic world 
that would over three and a half centuries bring diverse peoples 
of diverse religions into sustained contact, conflict, and cultural 
exchange. Different European peoples and different African peo- 
ples entered the Atlantic world at different times and different 
places. 7Over the last two and a half decades, scholars have sought to 
become more and more specific in identifying the particular Af- 
rican ethnic groups and nations of the enslaved and to trace out 
their New World destinations and cultural impacts. Some argue 
that in fact the slave trade was much less random than previously 
thought. Several identifiable cultural areas yielded slaves of sim- 
ilar ethnic and national groups into the major slave ports on the 
African coasts; slave ships transported slaves from the same or 
related ethnic groups and nationalities to identifiable colonies in 
the Americas. As a result homogeneous African cultures were 
transmitted to the New World. Countering earlier tendencies to 
privilege West African groups, especially the Yoruba, some of 
the newer studies of the African diaspora emphasized the im- 
portance of people of West Central Africa, especially the Kongo. 8 
Another trend highlighted the presence of Muslim slaves in the 
Americas. Important as these correctives were, other historians 
argue that the complexity of the patterns of slave capture in 
Africa, with networks stretching hundreds of miles inland, and 
the complexity of slave distribution after arrival in the Americas 
cast doubt on the proposition that integral African cultures were

AFTERWORD

329

transplanted across the Atlantic. Moreover, the inaccuracy of the 
ethnic identifications supplied by slave traders and slave masters 
and the anachronistic appellation of modern concepts of ethnicity 
and nationality to pre-colonial Africans made confident identifi- 
cations of specific African slave populations seem implausible. In 
their laudable attempt to identify African origins, recent studies 
sometimes overreached the evidence and slighted the cultural 
innovation that characterized the hybrid cultures forged by 
“charter generations” of diverse Africans on this side of the 
Atlantic. 9The newer literature on slavery correctly insisted on an At- 
lantic world perspective. In a certain sense this is not new. It is, 
after all, an old narrative strategy to begin accounts of American 
religion with a survey of the Protestant and Catholic Reforma- 
tions of Europe and their effects on the American colonies. But 
in narrating the beginnings of African-American religion, the 
Southern Atlantic as a highway of people and culture came into 
fuller view. And Africans played a role in the creation of that 
world right from the start. In fact, before the 1820s two to three 
times more Africans crossed the Atlantic unwillingly to the 
Americas than did Europeans. Speaking of the European settle- 
ment of the New World obscures this reality and its cultural and 
religious importance.

Moreover, studying the encounters of specific people in the 
Atlantic world context and in hemispheric perspective began to 
give some content to the rather empty category of “syncretism.” 
What were the complex processes of religious change and in- 
novation resulting from contact and sustained encounter in sit- 
uations of asymmetric power relations? In an attempt to give 
answers to this question, I’ve taught over the years a course on 
religious encounters in the colonial Atlantic world. The study of 
encounter creates interesting challenges and possibilities. Given 
the disparity of sources, due to European literacy, it requires 
effort to see both parties of the encounter. One needs to read 
beneath the lines of European printed sources to get at the

330

AFTERWORD330

AFTERWORD

“voices” of those encountered. It also requires effort to avoid 
privileging the familiar, the European Christian side of the en- 
counter, over the unfamiliar, the African side. Were I writing 
Slave Religion today, I would attempt more descriptive even- 
handedness— using the same terminology to describe Christian 
ritual, for example, as I would to describe those of Africans or 
Native Americans— in order to “familiarize the alien and to 
alienate the familiar .” 10The variety of religious accommodations, exchanges, and con- 
flicts that emerges in the study of encounter both resists and 
encourages categorization. Terms such as transposition, analogy, 
reinterpretation, resistance, “inbetweeness,” compartmentaliza- 
tion, masking, adaptation, and conversion suggest models of re- 
ligious innovation that are helpful when grounded in the speci- 
ficity of the diverse economic, demographic, and political factors 
that affect each encounter. A more nuanced discussion of the 
processes of encounter would “complicate” my descriptions and 
analyses of the cultural and social practices that formed the re- 
ligious life of slaves. More attention to specific times, places, and 
types of slavery and more attention to the encounter of African 
and Native Americans especially in the Southeast would extend 
and strengthen the book’s paradoxical argument that religious 
innovation does not destroy religious tradition, but is necessary 
to its transmission. Perhaps I could make it clearer to those who 
have misinterpreted me as simply saying African religions dis- 
appeared in the United States that what I was attempting to say 
is that the distinctiveness of the slave’s religious culture lay not 
in their preservation of “Africanisms” but in the African per- 
spectives, habits, preferences, aesthetics, and styles with which 
Africans and their American descendents shaped their religious 
choices in the very diverse situations and circumstances of 
slavery . 11

Just as the vitality and creativity of slave culture, constituted 
a central premise in the discussion of slave agency, so too did 
the assertion of political or “pre-political” agency among the

AFTERWORD

331AFTERWORD

331

slaves. The argument for the cultural agency of the slaves sought 
to demolish “the myth of the Negro past” by demonstrating the 
adaptability and resilience of enslaved Africans, as evidenced in 
their formation of a distinctive culture. The argument over the 
political agency of slaves focused on weighting the role of reli- 
gion in their resistance and/or accommodation to the system of 
slavery. From the perspective of a political definition of agency, 
the question was, “Did religion, particularly Christianity, foster 
or inhibit slave resistance and rebellion?” From Blassingame on 
there has been general agreement among scholars of slavery that 
religion to some degree supported slave agency within the sys- 
tem. Eugene Genovese, for example, famously argued that reli- 
gion supported resistance within accommodation. While slave 
religion did not directly challenge the slave system it helped the 
slaves develop a pre-political solidarity and mitigated the extent 
of the master’s control of slave personality by preserving the 
slave’s moral autonomy . 12In Slave Religion I argued that the political effects of religion 
were complex and contradictory. I also tried to render a plausible 
account of religious life itself as a form of slave agency not en- 
tirely reducible to the political. In other words, a religious read- 
ing of slave agency might escape the categories of rebellion or 
accommodation to include a dimension of reciprocity between 
slave and slave master, as illustrated in the narrative of Morte, 
whose preaching reduced the master and his families to tears. 
Despite the asymmetry of power in the master-slave relation, it 
seemed to me that the conversion experience of evangelical 
Christianity created a symbolic common ground— what my col- 
league Eddie Glaude Jr. has called “a common grammar of be- 
lief” upon which Morte, based on the apparent authenticity of 
his religious experience and the patent power of his preaching, 
exercised religious agency of a very real and powerful sort . 13

Slave Religion has been criticized, with some justice, for re- 
stricting the religious life of slaves to a Christian paradigm. 
Though I did try to give due notice to folk religion and the realm

332

AFTERWORD

of conjure, clearly the great bulk of my discussion deals with 
Christianity. A former student, Yvonne Chireau, has made up for 
this lack in the historiography with her book, Black Magic 
(2003). 14 The issue of Islam is a more vexed one because of the 
paucity of sources. Clearly there were Muslim slaves in the 
United States; their number we don’t know. The few descrip- 
tions of their religious lives are tantalizingly brief. 18 Still Islam 
among American slaves deserves more extensive treatment. 
Moreover, Catholic slaves, few in numbers, except for Louisiana 
and Maryland, deserve more attention than I gave them. 16Another criticism to which I must respond “mea culpa” is my 
failure to deal explicitly with the religious lives of slave women. 
Were I to have revisited the sources with this question in mind, 
I might have perceived and described more fully slave women as 
midwives and healers, as conjurors, and as spiritual mothers in 
the process of seeking, and the social and spiritual importance 
they gave to quilting, to name only a few topics suggested by 
students and colleagues.

The careful reader can find the key to what I intended in 
writing Slave Religion in the three quotations I chose as epi- 
graphs. The first, from Muslim scholar and historian al-Biruni, 
sums up my understanding of the historical task as an act of 
recovery, a humanistic effort to increase knowledge and “to help 
anyone who seeks truth and loves wisdom.” The second, from 
Minnie Fulkes, a former slave, identifies my role as a transmitter 
of the largely oral and unheard tradition of the slaves, intent on 
conveying its poignant authenticity and its liberating capacity. 
The third, from Cistercian monk Thomas Merton, represents my 
attempt to reflect upon the moral and spiritual dimensions of the 
slave experience, out of which arose a tradition that stood in 
profound and prophetic challenge to American Christianity.

The black minister, ecumenist, mystic, and university chap- 
lain Howard Thurman captured the oppositional character of the 
slave’s Christianity when he claimed in his profound meditation 
on the spirituals, Deep River (1945), “By some amazing but

AFTERWORD

333AFTERWORD

333

vastly creative spiritual insight the slave undertook the redemp- 
tion of a religion that the master had profaned in his midst .” 17 
Despite severe persecution and suffering, slave Christians bore 
witness to the Christian gospel, whose truth they perceived and 
maintained in contradiction to the debasement of that very gos- 
pel by those who held power over their bodies and their external 
actions, but not their souls. The suffering witness of slave Chris- 
tians constitutes a major spiritual legacy not only for their de- 
scendants but also for any who would take the time to heed the 
testimony of their words and of their lives. If asked to discuss 
the history of the persecution of Christianity, most of us would 
recall the early centuries of the Common Era, when thousands 
of Christians became confessors or martyrs by suffering or dying 
for their faith at the hands of the Roman authorities, before the 
Emperor Constantine gave official state approval to Christianity 
in the fourth century. And we might mention the modern waves 
of persecution that swept over Christians in the twentieth cen- 
tury under the antireligious regimes of Communist states in 
Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union. Few, I think, would iden- 
tify the suffering of African American slave Christians in similar 
terms as the prime example of the persecution of Christianity 
within our own nation’s history. And yet the extent to which the 
Christianity of American slaves was hindered, proscribed, and 
persecuted justifies applying the title “confessor” and “martyr” 
to those slaves who, like their ancient Christian predecessors, 
bore witness to the Christian gospel despite the threat of pun- 
ishment and even death at the hands not of “pagans,” but of 
fellow Christians. What the slaves affirmed and the slaveholders 
rejected was the belief that slavery and Christianity were incom- 
patible— that a slaveholding Christianity was a contradiction in 
terms, in other words, a heresy. Certainly, as one critic noted (as 
did I), slaves attended services in white churches, sometimes in 
large numbers. But that should not distract us from observing 
the theological import of the slaves’ “hush harbor” prayer meet- 
ings as nineteenth century equivalents of the ancient catacombs.334

AFTERWORD

In Slave Religion I implied that an adequate account of the 
religious reading of the slaves’ agency has to take account of their 
existential responses to suffering. The moral authority of the 
slave’s faith was grounded in their suffering, as James Baldwin 
recognized, “an authority that can only come from suffering .” 15 
It is this religious authority (and authenticity) that gave such 
deep resonance to the voices echoed however imperfectly in my 
narrative. It is the power of their voices that finally explains the 
impact of Slave Religion, and why it has endured. Through its 
pages people who had been through fire and refined like gold 
reveal the capability of the human spirit not only to endure bitter 
suffering but also to resist and even transcend the persistent at- 
tempt of evil to strike it down.

Over the last twenty-five years, the fields of American slave 
history and American religious history have undergone a sea 
change. I am gratified that Slave Religion, despite its shortcom- 
ings, has played a part in that transformation.

Notes

Preface

1. For a discussion of the neglect of black Church history and an enu- 
meration of areas for exploration in the context of general American 
Church history, see Robert T. Handy, “Negro Christianity and 
American Church Historiography,” in Reinterpretations in American 
Church History, edited by Jerald C. Brauer (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1968), pp. 91-112.

2. Daniel J. Boorstin, The Americans: The National Experience (New 
York: Random House, Vintage Books, 1965), pp. 196-97.2. Daniel J. Boorstin, The Americans: The National Experience (New 
York: Random House, Vintage Books, 1965), pp. 196-97.

3. John W. Blassingame, The Slave Community (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1972) and Slave Testimony (Baton Rouge: Louisi- 
ana State University Press, 1977); Eugene D. Genovese, Roll, Jor- 
dan, Roll: The World the Slaves Made (New York: Pantheon, 1974); 
Lawrence W. Levine, Black Culture and Black Consciousness (New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1977); see also C. Vann Woodward, 
“History from Slave Sources, "American Historical Review, Vol. 79, 
No. 2 (April 1974), pp. 470-81; and Sterling Stuckey, “Through 
the Prism of Folklore: The Black Ethos in Slavery,” in Black and 
White in American Culture, edited by Jules Chametzky and Sidney 
Kaplan (New York: Viking Press, 1971), pp. 172-91.

Chapter 1

1. For estimates of the volume of the slave trade see Philip D. Curtin, 
The Atlantic Slave Trade: A Census (Madison: University of Wiscon- 
sin Press, 1969). Curtin’s figures have been challenged as exces- 
sively low by J. E. Inikori, “Measuring the Atlantic Slave Trade,” 
Journal of African History, Vol, 17, No. 2 (1976), pp. 197-223.

2. The classic statement on African cultural influence in the New 
World is still Melville J. Herskovits, The Myth of the Negro Past 
(Boston: Beacon Press, 1958). A handy but too brief overview is 
Roger Bastide, African Civilisations in the New World (New York: 
Harper & Row, Harper Torchbooks, 1971). An important recent

335

336

NOTES TO PAGES 5-7

contribution is Sidney W. Mintz and Richard Price, An Anthropo- 
logical Approach to the Afro-American Past: A Caribbean Perspective 
(Philadelphia: Institute for the Study of Human Issues, ISHI Occa- 
sional Papers in Social Change, No. 2., 1976).3. Gomes Eannes De Azurara, The Chronicle of the Discovery and Con- 
quest of Guinea , translated by Charles R. Beazley and Edgar Pre- 
stage, 2 vols. (London: Hakluyt Society, Series I, Vols. 95 and 100, 
1896-1899). See Vol. 95, pp. 39-85, and Vol. 100, p. 288; also 
Louis B. Wright, Gold, Glory, and the Gospel (New York: Athe- 
neum, 1970), pp. 24-31.

4. Thomas Winterbottom, An Account of the Native Africans in the 
Neighbourhood of Sierra Leone , 2 vols., 1st publ. 1803 (London: 
Frank Cass & Co., 1969), 1: 231. Archibald Dalzel, The History of 
Dahomey , 1st pubi. 1793 (London: Frank Cass & Co., 1967), p. vi. 
C. K. Meek describes a similar adaption in twentieth-century Nige- 
ria: “the Koran is their fetish no less than the village idol, stone, or 
tree; to swear falsely on the Koran would mean certain death; while 
to drink the ink with which the Koran texts are written is a cure for 
every ill” (C. K. Meek, “The Religions of Nigeria,” Africa, Vol. 14, 
July 1943, p. 107). See the description of interesting admixtures of 
Muslim and traditional beliefs among the Wolof in The Wolof of 
Senegambia, by David P. Gamble (London: International African 
Institute, 1957), pp. 64-72. Fortes and Dieterlen comment: 
“Where, as in Northern Nigeria and Ghana, Islam is propagated by 
missionaries, its development may be similar to that of Christianity 
in its early stages in Europe. Traditional beliefs will fuse with mod- 
ern teaching in the tribal setting” (M. Fortes and G. Dieterlen, eds., 
African Systems of Thought [London: Oxford University Press, 
1965], p. 30).

5. John Barbot, A Description of the Coasts of North and South Guinea 
(London, 1732), pp. 80, 104.5. John Barbot, A Description of the Coasts of North and South Guinea 
(London, 1732), pp. 80, 104.

6. Ralph M. Wiltgen, S.V.D., Gold Coast Mission History, 1471-1880 
(Techny, 111.: Divine Word Publications, 1956). Owerri, or Warri, 
is in southern Nigeria, in Ibo country. John Adams described an 
audience with the king of Warre: “On entering the . . . palace, we 
were much surprised to see placed on a rude kind of table, several 
emblems of the catholic religion, consisting of crucifixes, mutilated 
saints and other trumpery. Some of these were ... of brass and 
others of wood. On inquiring how they came into their present 
situation, we were informed, that several black Portuguese mission- 
aries had been at Warre, many years since, endeavouring to convert

NOTES TO PAGES 7-8

337NOTES TO PAGES 7-8

337

the natives into Christians; and the building in which they per- 
formed their mysteries, we found still standing. A large wooden 
cross, which had withstood the tooth of time, was remaining ... in 
one of the angles formed by two roads intersecting each other. We 
could not learn that the Portuguese had been successful in making 
proselytes ...” (John Adams, Sketches Taken During Ten Voyages 
to Africa Between the Years 1786 and 1800 , reprint [New York: 
Johnson Reprint Co., 1970], p. 31). Barbot, pp. 183, 305, 377-78. 
According to Barbot, the island of Fernando Po had two parishes in 
St. Anthony Town, each served by a black priest, one ordained in 
Lisbon, the other in St. Tome. Ibid., p. 400; William Smith, A New 
Voyage to Guinea , 1st publ. 1744 (London: Frank Cass and Co., 
1967), p. 25. See also Barbot, p. 157, on Gold Coast mulatto Chris- 
tians. Nzinga Mbemba was baptized, according to Wiltgen, “on 
May 3, 1491, along with six of his noblemen.” His son, Prince 
Henrique, was sent to Rome, where Pope Leo X nominated him as 
bishop in 1518. See Wiltgen, pp. 11, 14-15. For the story of 
Nzinga Mbemba, Dom Affonso I, see Basil Davidson, The African 
Slave Trade (Boston: Little, Brown & Co., 1961), pp. 117-62; 
Georges Balandier, Daily Life in the Kingdom of the Kongo (New 
York: World Publishing Co., Meridian Books, 1969), pp. 244—63; 
and J. Van Wing, Etudes Bakongo, 2nd ed. (Brussels: Desclee de 
Brouwer, 1959), pp. 19-43. See also Europeans in West Africa, 
1450-1560, edited by John W. Blake, 2 vols. (London: Hakluyt 
Society, 1942), pp. 31-32.7. Some detailed studies of the origins of slaves are Curtin, Atlantic 
Slave Trade ; Melville J. Herskovits, “On the Provenience of New 
World Negroes,” Social Forces, 12 (December 1933): 247-62; 
Walter Rodney, “Upper Guinea and the Significance of the Origins 
of Africans Enslaved in the New World,” Journal of Negro History, 
54 (October 1969): 327-45; W. Robert Higgins, “The Geographi- 
cal Origins of Negro Slaves in Colonial South Carolina,” The South 
Atlantic Quarterly, 70 (Winter 1971): 34—47; Marion D. Kilson, 
“West African Society and the Atlantic Slave Trade, 1441-1865,” 
in Key Issues in the Afro-American Experience, edited by Nathan I. 
Huggins, Martin Kilson, and Daniel M. Fox (New York: Harcourt, 
Brace, Jovanovich, 1971), pp. 39-53; Documents Illustrative of the 
History of the Slave Trade to America, edited by Elizabeth Donnan, 4 
vols. (Washington, D.C.: Carnegie Institution Publication No. 409, 
1930-1935).

8. Problems confront anyone attempting to describe the African reli-

338

NOTES TO PAGE 88. Problems confront anyone attempting to describe the African reli-

338

NOTES TO PAGE 8

gious heritage of American slaves. Among these is the question of 
the historicity of “traditional” African cultures. Can it be assumed 
that African cultures and religions have not changed since the close 
of the Atlantic slave trade a century ago? To simply use current 
ethnological accounts of African religions without taking into ac- 
count the possibility of change is methodologically questionable. 
Due to pressures from without — intensified Muslim and Christian 
missions, European imperialism, Western technology and educa- 
tion — and the growth of African nationalism during the late nine- 
teenth and twentieth centuries, African traditional religions have 
changed and continue to do so. For some cases in point see James 
Boyd Christensen, “The Adaptive Functions of Fanti Priesthood,” in 
Continuity and Change in African Cultures , edited by William R. 
Bascom and Melville J. Herskovits (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1959), pp. 257-78; John C. Messenger, Jr., “Religious Ac- 
culturation Among the Anang Ibibio,” in Continuity and Change in 
African Cultures , pp. 279-99. Besides external pressures to change, 
there are also indigenous processes of change within traditional Afri- 
can societies themselves, changes that scholars of African religions 
have come to recognize. See T. O. Ranger and I. M. Kimambo, 
eds., The Historical Study of African Religion (Berkeley: University 
of California Press, 1973). On the other hand, it might be suspected 
that religion, particularly religious myth and ritual might be among 
the most conservative elements of culture. Further complicating the 
issue is a second but related problem, that of sources for writing the 
history of nonliterate cultures. For investigations of oral sources for 
the history of African peoples, see Jan Vansina, Oral Tradition: A 
Study for Historical Methodology (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 
1965); Daniel F. McCall, Africa in Time Perspective (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1969). Written sources contemporaneous 
with the slave trade are travel accounts compiled by chroniclers, 
explorers, trading-company representatives, missionaries, and tra- 
velers. These European descriptions of “Guinea” are often marred 
by ethnocentric bias, but as a genre they do give a general, if dis- 
torted and fleeting, view of some elements of religious belief and 
practice in West Africa during the centuries of the slave trade. When 
correlated with later anthropological accounts, some of the distortion 
and confusion can be neutralized (though it would be naive to as- 
sume that some modern accounts of African religions do not also 
suffer from bias). Another written source is the slim body of narra- 
tives by enslaved Africans educated in Europe or America. See Af-NOTES TO PAGES 8-10

339

rica Remembered: Narratives by West Africans from the Era of the 
Slave Trade, edited by Philip D. Curtin (Madison: University of 
Wisconsin Press, 1968).

9. Geoffrey Parrinder, West African Religions, 2nd rev. ed. (London: 
Epworth Press, 1961), pp. 13-25; John S. Mbiti, Concepts of God 
in Africa (New York: Praeger, 1970); Edwin W. Smith, ed., Afri- 
can Ideas of God (London: Edinburgh House, 1950), pp. 224-97.

10. William Bosman, A New and Accurate Description of the Coast of 
Guinea (London, 1705), p. 368a. See also Barbot, p. 340. Many 
travel accounts note West African belief in a supreme deity. See 
William Smith, A New Voyage to Guinea, 1st publ. 1744 (London: 
Frank Cass & Co., 1967), pp. 143, 237; John Matthews, A Voyage 
to the River Sierra-Leone, 1st publ. London, 1788 (London: Frank 
Cass & Co., 1966), p. 65; Winterbottom, p. 222.

11. Parrinder, p. 15; R. S. Rattray, Ashanti (London: Oxford University 
Press, 1923), p. 144; T. J. Bowen, Adventures and Missionary La- 
bours in Several Countries in the Interior of Africa from 1849 to 1865 , 
1st publ. 1857 (London: Frank Cass and Co., 1968), pp. 206-7.12. E. Bolaji Idowu, Olodumare, God in Yoruba Relief (London: Long- 
mans, Green & Co., 1962), p. 52; M. J. Field, Religion and Medi- 
cine of the Ga People (London: Oxford University Press, 1937), pp. 
4-6, 10, 40, 61-62; Daryll Forde and G. I. Jones, The Ibo and 
I bibio-S peaking Peoples of South-Eastern Nigeria (London: Oxford 
University Press, 1950), p. 25; P. Amaury Talbot, The Peoples of 
Southern Nigeria, 3 vols. (London: Oxford Unversity Press, 1926), 
2: 40-43; John H. Weeks, Among Congo Cannibals (London: 
Seeley, Service & Co., 1913), pp. 246-48; John H. Weeks, Among' 
the Primitive Bakongo (London: Seeley, Service & Co., 1914), p. 
276; Melville J. Herskovits, Dahomey: An Ancient West African 
Kingdom, 2 vols. (Evanston, 111.: Northwestern University Press, 
1967), 2: 101-5; John M. Jantzen and Wyatt MacGaffey, eds., An 
Anthropology of Kongo Religion (Lawrence, Kans.: University of 
Kansas Publications in Anthropology, No. 5, 1974), pp. 35, 71.

13. Rattray, Ashanti, pp. 87-91; A. B. Ellis, The Tshi-Speaking Peoples, 
1st publ. London, 1887 (Chicago: Benin Press, 1964), pp. 176-95; 
Parrinder, pp. 7-12. Herskovits explains: “a vodu is thought of by 
the Dahomeans as something which is localized, and that a spirit, 
while . . . existing everywhere in space, must also have definite 
places to which it can be summoned, where it can be commanded by 
the proper formulae to aid its worshippers, and from which it can go 
forth to achieve those things desired of it” (Dahomey, 2: 171). See

340

NOTES TO PAGES 10-11340

NOTES TO PAGES 10-11

the “Extrait de queleques textes sur les ((fetiches)),” in Pierre 
Verger, Notes sur le culte des orisa et vodun (Dakar: Memoires de 
l’lnstitut Francais d’Afrique noire, No. 51, 1957), pp. 33-70. The 
Ewe term vodii or vodun is used in Haiti to refer to “the gods” and is 
applied to Afro- Haitian religion in general as “voodoo.” The Yoru- 
ban term orisha is used in Afro-Brazilian candomble and Afro-Cuban 
santeria to refer to “the gods.” See Verger, Notes, pp. 27-32, 
“Definition des orisa et vodun.”

14. Peter Morton-Williams, “An Outline of the Cosmology and Cult 
Organization of the Oyo Yoruba,” in Peoples and Cultures of Africa, 
edited by Elliott P. Skinner (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1973), 
pp. 654—77; Robert Farris Thompson, Black Gods and Kings (Bloom- 
ington: Indiana University Press, 1976), Chap. 2, p. 2.15. Parrinder, pp. 75-94; A. B. Ellis, The Yoruba-S peaking Peoples 
(London, 1894), pp. 93-106; A. B. Ellis, The Ewe-Speaking 
Peoples, 1st publ. London, 1890 (Oosterhout, N. B., Netherlands: 
Anthropological Publications, 1966), pp. 139-52; Ellis, Tshi, pp. 
119-48; Herskovits, Dahomey, 2: 170-200. Herskovits offers a 
brief and useful description of Dahomean cults: “Thus each pan- 
theon has its associated priesthood and its initiated devotees; each 
cult-group subjects its candidates for membership to a period of 
initiation during which cicatrizations are given . . . During their se- 
clusion all novitiates [novices] learn the particular dance steps which 
are distinctive of the cult to which they are vowed; their emergence 
from the cult-houses is marked by special ceremonials; and when 
they emerge, they are resurrected beings, with new names, each 
speaking a language which was not the one spoken when enter- 
ing ...” ( Dahomey , 2: 170). The practice of initiation into a cult 
group of the devotee, who is then prepared for possession by the 
gods upon ritual occasions, is an important element of African reli- 
gious life carried to the New World, where, as we shall see, it has 
endured to the present. For the phenomenon of spirit possession in 
Africa, see M. J. Field, “Spirit Possession in Ghana,” in Spirit Medi- 
umship and Society in Africa, edited by John Beattie and John 
Middleton (London: Routledge & Keagan Paul, 1969), pp. 3-13; 
Pierre Verger, “Trance and Convention in Nago- Yoruba Spirit Me- 
diumship,” in Spirit Mediumship and Society in Africa, pp. 50-66; 
Verger, Notes , pp. 71-73, 95-108; M. J. Field, Religion and Medi- 
cine of the Ga, pp. 100-9; William Bascom, The Yoruba of South- 
western Nigeria (New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1969), p. 
78.

NOTES TO PAGES 11-15

341NOTES TO PAGES 11-15

341

16. Janzen and MacGaffey, pp. 34-38; K. A. Busia, “The Ashanti,” in 
African Worlds, edited by Daryll Forde (New York: Oxford Univer- 
sity Press, 1954), p. 191; Barbot, pp, 309-10; Ellis, Tshi, pp. 34— 
118; Verger, Notes , pp. 522-24; Rattray, Religion and Art in 
Ashanti (London: Oxford University Press, 1927), pp. 5-6.

17. The best general treatment is Benjamin Ray, African Religions (En- 
glewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1976).

18. W. T. Harris and Harry Sawyer, The Springs of the Mende Belief and 
Conduct (Freetown: Sierra Leone University Press, 1968), p. 15.

19. M. J. Field, Religion and Medicine of the Ga, p. 197; Parrinder, pp. 
115-27; Herskovits, Dahomey, 1: 194—238.

20. Ellis, Yoruba, pp. 128-29; Idowu, pp. 194—95; Weeks, Bakongo, p. 
115; Geoffrey Parrinder, West African Psychology (London: Lutter- 
worth Press, 1951), pp. 115-29.

21. Field, Religion and Medicine of the Ga, p. 197.

22. M. Fortes and G. Dieterlen note that “death alone is not a sufficient 
condition for becoming an ancestor entitled to receive worship.” A 
proper burial is “the sine qua non ” ( African Systems of Thought, p. 
16); Parrinder, West African Religion , p. 107; Herskovits, Dahomey, 
1: 352-402; Harris and Sawyer, pp. 30-33; Rattray, Religion and 
Art in Ashanti, pp. 149-66; Ellis, Ewe, pp. 159-60; Weeks, Ba- 
kongo, pp. 266-75; M. J. Field, Search for Security, 1st publ. 1960 
(New York W. W. Norton & Co., 1970), p. 49.

23. Rattray, Ashanti, pp. 92-108; Samuel Johnson, The History of the 
Yorubas (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1921), pp. 29-30; C. 
K. Meek, “The Religions of Nigeria,” Africa, 14 (July 1943), 111; 
Verger, Notes, pp. 507- 10.24. Barbot noted, “The priests . . . are look’d upon as able physicians, 
being well skill’d in the knowledge of herbs and plants, which they 
administer where there is occasion, and are therefore much re- 
spected” (Barbot, p. 135); see Field, Religion and Medicine of the Ga, 
pp. 110-34; T. Adeoye Lambo, African Traditional Beliefs: Con- 
cepts of Health and Medical Practice (Ibadan, Nigeria: Ibadan Uni- 
versity Press, 1963).

25. Travel accounts are replete with incidents of the use of what Euro- 
peans called “ju-jus, gris-gris,” and “fetishes.” See also Ellis, Yoruba, 
pp. 117-18; Ellis, Ewe, pp. 91-95; Ellis, Tshi, pp. 98-109; Wing, 
pp. 324—425; Harris and Sawyer, pp. 66-72; Weeks, Bakongo, pp. 
232-44.

26. Bosman, p. 148.

27. Field, Religion and Medicine of the Ga, pp. 135-60, 200; see the sec-

342

NOTES TO PAGES 15-17

tion on “Witchcraft and Sorcery” in Fortes and Dieterlen, pp. 21 ff. ; 
Parrinder, West African Religion, p. 152; H. Debrunner, Witchcraft in 
Ghana , 2nd ed. (Accra: Presbyterian Book Depot, 1961); Rattray, 
Religion and Art in Ashanti , pp. 167-70; Bosman, pp. 149-51.

28. Idowu, pp. 7-9; 77-80; Parrinder, West African Religion, pp. 137- 
50; William Bascom, Ifa Divination (Bloomington: Indiana Univer- 
sity Press, 1969); Verger, Notes, pp. 568-70. Bosman noted a sim- 
pler form of divination by use of “a sort of wild Nuts; which they 
pretend to take up by guess and let fall again; after which they tell 
them, and form their Predictions from the numbers falling even or 
odd” (Bosman, p. 152).

29. Alfred Metraux, speaking of Dahomean religion in Voodoo in Haiti 
(New York: Schocken Books, 1972), p. 30; John Storm Roberts, 
Black Music of Two Worlds (New York: Praeger, 1972), p. 6; Her- 
skovits, Dahomey, 2: 114-16; Verger, Dieux cPAfrique (Paris: Paul 
Hartmann, 1954), p. 165.

30. Pierre Verger, Dieux tTAfrique, p. 9.30. Pierre Verger, Dieux tTAfrique, p. 9.

31. J. F. Ajayi, Christian Missions in Nigeria, 1841-1891 (Evanston, 
111.: Northwestern University Press, 1965), pp. 4—5.

32. Donald Hogg, “The Convince Cult in Jamaica,” Yale University 
Publications in Anthropology, No. 58, in Papers in Caribbean An- 
thropology, compiled by Sidney W. Mintz (New Haven: Department 
of Anthropology, Yale University, 1960), p. 4. Compare Hogg’s 
statement with that of Herskovits’ describing the place of the wind 
in Paramaribo, Dutch Guiana: “ . . . a winti may at the same time be 
both a good and an evil spirit. The fact is that the logic of the 
Negroes of Paramaribo holds that no spirit is either good or evil in 
the absolute sense. This concept of the absence of a spirit which is 
wholly good or completely evil enters here in a more subtle way. For 
while it generally follows that a spirit is friendly if it is worshipped, 
unfriendly if it is neglected, and evil if it has been sent to do evil, a 
spirit may be temperamentally as inconstant as human beings are 
inconstant” (Melville J. Herskovits, New World Negro, [n.p., Mi- 
nerva Press, Funk and Wagnalls, 1969], p. 288).

33. Hogg, pp. 12-13.

34. George Eaton Simpson, Religious Cults of the Caribbean (Rio Pi- 
edras, Puerto Rico: Institute of Caribbean Studies, University of 
Puerto Rico, 1970), p. 202; Orlando Patterson, The Sociology of 
Slavery: An Analysis of the Origins, Development and Structure of 
Negro Slave Society in Jamaica (Rutherford, N.J.: Fairleigh Dickin- 
son University Press, 1969), pp. 198-202.

NOTES TO PAGES 18-21

343NOTES TO PAGES 18-21

343

35. Arthur Ramos, The Negro in Brazil (Washington, D.C.: Associated 
Publishers, 1939), pp. 1-14, 80-82; Donald Pierson, Negroes in 
Brazil (Carbondale, 111.: Southern Illinois University Press, 1967), 
pp. 6-7. The terms macumba and candomble were originally applied 
to African dances in Brazil and were later extended to Afro-Brazilian 
religious cults and ceremonies, though in southern Brazil, Uruguay, 
and Argentina, candomble still refers to dance. The major studies 
(not yet translated into English) of candomble: Nina Rodrigues, Os 
Africanos no Brasil, 3rd ed. (Rio de Janeiro: Companhia Editora 
Nacional, 1945); Arthur Ramos, 0 Negro Brasileiro Vol. 1, Ethno- 
graphia Religiosa, 2nd rev. ed. (Rio de Janeiro: Companhia Editora 
Nacinal, 1940); Edison Carneiro, Candombles da Bahia (Rio de Ja- 
neiro: Tecnoprint Grafica, 1957); Roger Bastide, Les Religions 
Afro-Bresiliennes (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1960); 
and Verger, Notes.

36. Verger, “Yoruba Influence in Brazil,” ODU, Journal ofYoruba and 
Related Studies, No. 1 (January 1955), p. 4; Bastide, African Civili- 
sations, pp. 105-9, 115-17; for a “geography” of the “nations” of 
candomble, see Bastide, Religions Afro-Bresiliennes, pp. 241-305.37. For a convenient list of the principal Nago-Gege gods, their cult 
objects, foods, days, and colors, see Pierson, pp. 282-83. For a 
description of temples, hierarchy, and cult organization, see Etienne 
Ignance, “Le fetichisme des negres du Bresil,” Anthropos, Band/ 
Tom. 3 (1908): 894—98; Melville J. Herskovits, “The Social Or- 
ganization of the Candomble,” in The New World Negro, pp. 226- 
47; Ramos, pp. 84—86; Edison Carneiro, “The Structure of African 
Cults in Bahia,” Journal of American Folklore, Vol. 53, No. 210 
(1940), pp. 271-78. For praises and songs to the gods, see Verger, 
Notes. Occasionally the pae de santo or mae de santo are called by the 
Yoruban terms babalorisha and iyalorisha. See the detailed descrip- 
tion of “Initiations et Etat de Transe” in Verger, Votes, pp. 71-108; 
also the account of a filhas de santo recorded in Pierson, pp. 263-70; 
and Herskovits, “The Panan, an Afrobahian Religious Rite of Tran- 
sition,” in New World Negro, pp. 217-26.

38. For an extensive description of the gods in Brazil, as well as a 
discussion of myths, praises and songs, and excerpts from earlier 
observers, see Verger, Notes.

39. Simpson, “The Shango Cult in Trinidad,” in Religious Cults of the 
Caribbean, pp. 11-22, 112-13; Melville J. Herskovits and Frances 
S. Herskovits, Trinidad Village (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 
1947), pp. 17-23; William Bascom , Shango in the New World (Aus-

344

NOTES TO PAGES 21-25

tin: University of Texas, Occasional Publications, 1972), pp. 3-4,

10 , 12 .

40. Bascom, Shango, p. 13; Bascom, “Yoruba Acculturation in Cuba,” 
in Les Afro-Americains (Dakar: Memoires de l’lnstitut Francais 
d’Afrique Noire, No. 27, 1952), pp. 166-67. The classic studies of 
Afro-Cuban religious cults are Fernando Ortiz, Hampa Afro-Cu- 
bana: Los Negros Brujos (Madrid: Editorial- America [1906]); Lydia 
Cabrera, El Monte (Havana: Ediciones CR, 1954).41. Bascom, “The Focus of Cuban Santeria,” in Peoples and Cultures of 
the Caribbean, edited by Michael M. Horowitz (Garden City, N.Y.: 
Doubleday, Natural History Press, 1971), pp. 520-27.

42. Bascom, “The Yoruba in Cuba,” Nigeria, Vol. 37, No. 37 (1951), p. 
17; Bascom, “Two Forms of Afro-Cuban Divination,” in Accultura- 
tion in the Americas, Proceedings and Selected Papers of the XXIXth 
International Congress of Americanists, 3 vols., edited by Sol Tax 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1952), 2: 169-79.

43. For tables charting the identification of African gods and Catholic 
saints, see Ignace, pp. 901-2; Pierson, pp. 306-8; Bastide, Religions 
Afro-Bresiliennes, pp. 362-96. See Herskovits, “African Gods and 
Catholic Saints in New World Negro Belief,” in New World Negro, 
pp. 321-29. Herskovits notes “that in Dahomey itself, among those 
natives of the city of Abomey who are members of the Catholic 
Church, this same identification is made between Xevioso and Santa 
Barbara” (Ibid., p. 326). See also Bascom, “Yoruba in Cuba,” pp. 
14-15.

44. Herskovits and Herskovits, Trinidad Village, pp. 329-33; Alfred 
Metraux, Voodoo in Haiti (New York: Schocken Books, 1972), p. 
83; Harold Courlander, The Drum and the Hoe (Berkeley: University 
of California Press, 1960), p. 318; Simpson, Religious Cults of the 
Caribbean, pp. 237-44, 248-49.

45. Simpson, pp. 37-45, 92.

46. Herskovits, New World Negro, p. 226 n\ Octavio Da Costa Eduardo 
comments that “heathen instruments, i.e., unbaptized ones, can 
bring on possession by evil spirits”; Octavio Da Costa Eduardo, The 
Negro in Northern Brazil: A Study in Acculturation, Monographs of 
the American Ethnological Society, Vol. 15 (New York: J.J. Au- 
gustin, 1948), p. 96.

47. Michel Laguerre, “An Ecological Approach to Voodoo ," Freeing the 
Spirit , Vol. 3, No. 1 (1974), p. 11.

48. Quoted by Metraux, pp. 34—35.

NOTES TO PAGES 26-34

34547. Michel Laguerre, “An Ecological Approach to Voodoo ," Freeing the 
Spirit , Vol. 3, No. 1 (1974), p. 11.

48. Quoted by Metraux, pp. 34—35.

NOTES TO PAGES 26-34

345

49. L'Essai sur I'Esclavage et Observations sur FEtat Present des Colonies , 
quoted by Simpson, p. 234.

50. “Introduction” to Metraux, p. 10; Simpson, pp. 235-37.

51. Metraux, pp. 25-57, 86-88; Courlander, pp. 317-31.

52. Courlander, pp. 21-22, 29; Metraux, pp. 120-21; Laguerre, pp. 
11 - 12 .

53. Philip D. Curtin, Two Jamaicas (Cambridge: Harvard University 
Press, 1955), pp. 32-35; Martha Warren Beckwith, Black Road- 
ways: A Study of Jamaican Folk Life (Chapel Hill: University of 
North Carolina Press, 1929), pp. 157-74; Patterson, pp. 210-15; 
Edward Bean Underhill, The West Indies: Their Social and Religious 
Condition (London, 1862), pp. 194-201.

54. Simpson, p. 169.

55. Simpson, pp. 69, 140-52, Herskovits and Herskovits, Trinidad 
Village , pp. 199-209.

56. Metraux, pp. 146-53; Herskovits, Life in a Haitian Valley (New 
York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1937), pp. 199-2 18; Ramos, Negro in Brazil , 
pp. 91-92; Verger, Notes, p. 507; Da Costa Eduardo, p. 122.

57. Herskovits, “The Southernmost Outposts of New World African- 
isms,” in New World Negro, p. 212; Bastide, “L’Axexe,” in Les 
Afro-Americains, pp. 105-10; Da Costa Eduardo, p. 121; Pierson, 
p. 287; Patterson, p. 204; Simpson, p. 202; Beckwith, pp. 70-87.

58. Herskovits, New World Negro, pp. 268-75, 315-19; Silvia W. De- 
Groot, Djuka Society and Social Change (Assen, Netherlands: Ko- 
ninklejhe Van Gorcum & Co., 1969), pp. 27-29; Jean Hurault, 
Africains de Guyane (Paris: Editions Mouton, 1970), pp. 29-33, 
36; Herskovits, “Note sur la divination judiciaire par le cadavre en 
Guyane Hollandaise,” in Les Afro-Americains, pp. 187-92.

59. Charles Leslie, A New History of Jamaica , cited in Patterson, pp. 
196-97.59. Charles Leslie, A New History of Jamaica , cited in Patterson, pp. 
196-97.

60. Parrinder, West African Psychology, pp. 38-40, 52-54, 61-62, 64; 
Bascom, Yoruba of Southwestern Nigeria, pp. 71-72; Parrinder, 
West African Religion, p. 114.

61. Octavio Da Costa Eduardo, pp. 109-10.

62. Akra corresponds to the Akan term 'kra; yorka is a Kalinda Indian 
term. Herskovits, New World Negro, pp. 268-75, 315-19; De 
Groot, pp. 27-29; Hurault, Africaines de Guyane, pp. 29-33.

63. Herskovits, New World Negro, pp. 305-14; De Groot, pp. 23-25.

64. Patterson, pp. 187-92; Curtin, Two Jamaicas, pp. 23-41; Beck- 
with, pp. 85-156.

346

NOTES TO PAGES 35-42

65. Pierson, pp. 254—58; Ignace, pp. 900-1; Simpson, pp. 22-23, 
121-23,169-72,177-78.

66. Herskovits and Herskovits, Trinidad Village, pp. 199-209, 327; 
Simpson, pp. 53-54, 91, 147-52; see also Walter Mischel and 
Frances Mischel, “Psychological Aspects of Spirit Possession,” 
American Anthropologist, 60 (1958): 246-60, a psychological study 
of the importance of drumming to spirit possession in shango-, 
George Eaton Simpson, Cult Music in Trinidad (Folkways Ethnic 
Library Album No. FE 4478, 1961).

67. Morton Marks, “Uncovering Ritual Structure in Afro-American 
Music,” in Religious Movements in Contemporary America , edited by 
Irving I. Zaretsky and Mark P. Leone (Princeton, N.J.; Princeton 
University Press, 1974), pp. 60-116.

68. Simpson, p. 169.

69. Melville J. Herskovits and Frances S. Herskovits, Afro-Bahian Reli- 
gious Songs (Library of Congress Music Division, Recorded Sound 
Section, Album L-13; recorded 1941-42).

70. Bastide, Religions Afro-Bresiliennes , pp. 76-78; Bastid e, African Ci- 
vilisations, pp. 91-93; Da Costa Eduardo, pp. 104—7.70. Bastide, Religions Afro-Bresiliennes , pp. 76-78; Bastid e, African Ci- 
vilisations, pp. 91-93; Da Costa Eduardo, pp. 104—7.

71. Pierson, p. 239. In a footnote to the same page, Pierson states; “It is 
also reported that on at least two occasions representatives of African 
chiefs arrived in Bahia from Ajuda, with which port Bahian officials 
were maintaining direct commercial relations.” Harry Johnston 
notes that “Between 1850 and 1878 about four thousand to six 
thousand Brasilian ‘emancipados’ settled at Lagos and Wydah, and a 
few went to Angola” ( The Negro in the New World , 1st publ. 1910 
[New York: Johnson Reprint, 1969], p. 98«). See also Pierre 
Verger, “Influence du Bresil au Golfe du Benin,” in Les Afro-Ameri- 
cains, pp. 11-104.

72. Bastide, Religions Afro-Bresiliennes, p. 64.

73. Ibid.; Pierre Verger, “Le culte des Vodouns d’Abomey aurait-il ete 
apporte a S. Luiz do Maranhao par la mere du roi Ghezo?,” Les 
Afro-Americains, pp. 157-60.

74. Mintz and Price, p. 29; Bascom, “Yoruba Acculturation in Cuba,” 
pp. 166-67.

75. “Maroon” comes from the Spanish cimarron, a word for runaway 
domestic animals that have become wild. For treatments of maroon 
societies see Bastide, African Civilisations, pp. 46-71; Richard 
Price, ed., Maroon Societies (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, Anchor 
Books, 1973). In 1663 Portuguese Jews who had emigrated to 
Dutch Guiana sent their slaves to hide in the forests when the tax

NOTES TO PAGES 44-48

347

collector came around to levy taxes. The slaves neglected to return. 
(Bastide, African Civilisations , p. SO.)

Chapter 2

1. The Poems of Phillis Wheatley , edited by Julian D. Mason, Jr. (Chap- 
el Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1966), p. 7.

2. Benjamin Bussey Thatcher, Memoir of Phillis Wheatley (Boston, 
1834; New York, 1834), p. 13.2. Benjamin Bussey Thatcher, Memoir of Phillis Wheatley (Boston, 
1834; New York, 1834), p. 13.

3. Charles Ball, Fifty Tears in Chains (New York: Dover Publications, 
1970), p. 265; reprint of Slavery in the United States: A Narrative of 
the Life and Adventures of Charles Ball, A Black Man (New York, 
1837).

4. Ball, Fifty Tears, p. 263.

5. Ibid., p. 219. Ball also describes the native Africans as “revengeful, 
and unforgiving,” as well as feeling “indignant at the servitude that 
is imposed upon them.”

6. Memoir of Mrs. Chloe Spear: A Native of Africa . . . (Boston, 1832), 
P . 17.

7. Fredrika Bremer, The Homes of the New World , 2 vols. (New York, 
1853), 2: 484-85.

8. Leonard L. Haynes, Jr., The Negro Community Within American 
Protestantism, 1619-1844 (Boston: Christopher Publishing House, 
1953), pp. 32-33.

9. Drums and Shadows, Georgia Writers’ Project, Works Projects Ad- 
ministration, reprint (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, Anchor 
Books, 1972), pp. 136-37, 154; Charles Lyell,/1 Second Visit to the 
United States of America , 2 vols. (New York, 1850), 1: 266; “Auto- 
biography of Omar ibn Said, Slave in North Carolina, 1831,” Ameri- 
can Historical Review, Vol. 30, pp. 787-95, especially pp. 793-94; 
for more information on Bilali and Old Tom, see Lydia Parrish, 
Slave Songs of the Georgia Sea Islands (New York: Creative Age 
Press, 1942), pp. 24—27.

10. Charles Colcock Jones, The Religious Instruction of the Negroes in the 
United States (Savannah, Ga., 1842), p. 125; Drums and Shadows, 
p. 134.

11. Octavio Da Costa Eduardo, pp. 46, 123.

12. For Herskovits’ views, see The Myth of the Negro Past (Boston: 
Beacon Press, 1958); for Frazier’s position, see The Negro Church in 
America (New York: Schocken Books, 1964), pp. 1-19, The Negro

348

NOTES TO PAGES 48-54348

NOTES TO PAGES 48-54

Family in the United States (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1966), pp. 3-16, and The Negro in the United States, rev. ed. (New 
York: Macmillan, 1957), pp. 3-13. Other important comments on 
the debate can be found in Afro-American Anthropology: Contempo- 
rary Perspectives , edited by Norman E. Whitten, Jr. and John F. 
Szwed (New York: The Free Press, Macmillan, 1970). Also useful 
is Thomas Richard Frazier, “Analysis of Social Scientific Writing on 
American Negro Religion,” 1967 Columbia University Ph.D. dis- 
sertation. A cogent attack on Herskovits’ methodology is M. G. 
Smith’s article, “The African Heritage in the Caribbean,” in Carib- 
bean Studies: A Symposium, edited by Vera Rubin (Seattle: Univer- 
sity of Washington Press, 1957), pp. 34-46. Smith’s attack is fol- 
lowed by a defense of Herskovits by George E. Simpson and Peter 
B. Hammond on pp. 46-53 of the same volume.

13. Herskovits, Myth, pp. xxviii-xxix, 20-32.

14. Ibid., pp. 6-9, 15-17.

15. Ibid., pp. 53-87, 122.

16. Ibid., pp. 86-105, 293.

17. Ibid., pp. 105-9, 293-94. The queen mother of the Dahomean king 
Glele was sold into slavery in Brazil during Glele’s minority by his 
uncle, the regent. Upon Glele’s accession he tried to find his mother, 
unsuccessfully.

18. Ibid., pp. 77-81, 294-96. Support for Herskovits’ assertion that 
African speech patterns underlay the pidgin English of the slaves is 
presented by J. L. Dillard, Black English: Its History and Usage in 
the United States (New York: Random House, Vintage Books, 
1973), pp. 39-138.

19. Herskovits, Myth, p. 296.

20. Ibid., pp. 141-42, 296-98.19. Herskovits, Myth, p. 296.

20. Ibid., pp. 141-42, 296-98.

21. Ibid., pp. 298-99. I have taken pains to outline Herskovits’ position 
because I agree with Daniel Crowther that it is important “to direct 
attention to what Herskovits actually wrote, rather than to the some- 
times naive, sometimes malicious misinterpretations of his position in 
secondary or tertiary sources” (quoted by Whitten and Szwed, p. 38).

22. Frazier, Negro Family, p. 7.

23. Frazier, Negro Church, pp. 1-16.

24. Ibid., pp. 1-2.

25. Ibid., pp. 2-3.

26. Frazier, Negro Family, pp. 7-8.

27. Frazier, Negro Church, p. 6.

28. Frazier, Negro in the U.S., p. 3.

NOTES TO PAGES 54-62

349

29. Ibid., p. 14.

30. Ibid., p. 21.

31. Herskovits, Myth, p. 207.

32. Arthur Huff Fauset, Black Gods of the Metropolis (Philadelphia: Uni- 
versity of Pennsylvania Press, 1944), pp. 98-106.

33. Herskovits, Myth , p. xxiv.

34. Ibid.

35. The New Testament speaks of the Holy Spirit as a comforter and 
advocate, e.g., John 14:26.

36. Herskovits, Myth, pp. 232-35.

37. Ibid., p. 17.

38. Mark 1:8. 1 will return to the issue of spirit possession below. Here I 
only wish to stress the difference in the theologies reflecting the 
experience of possession by water spirits and baptism by the Holy 
Spirit.

39. See Charles A. Johnson, The Frontier Camp Meeting (Dallas, Texas: 
Southern Methodist University Press, 1955), pp. 56-62, and the 
description by Barton W. Stone of the scene at the Cane Ridge 
Meeting of 1801 quoted by Sidney Ahlstrom in A Religious History 
of the American People (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1972), 
pp. 434-35.

40. Frederick Morgan Davenport, Primitive Traits in Religious Revivals 
(New York: Macmillan, 1917), pp. 92-93, cited by Herskovits, 
Myth , pp. 230-31.

41. Herskovits, Myth, p. 231.

42. Hortense Powderntaker, After Freedom (New York: Atheneum, 
1969), pp. 259-60; Herskovits, Myth, pp. 227-28.41. Herskovits, Myth, p. 231.

42. Hortense Powderntaker, After Freedom (New York: Atheneum, 
1969), pp. 259-60; Herskovits, Myth, pp. 227-28.

43. John D. Long, Pictures of Slavery in Church and State (Philadel- 
phia, 1857), p. 159.

44. Cited by Ulrich Bonnell Phillips, American Negro Slavery (Baton 
Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1966), pp. 316-17.

45. John Leland, The Virginia Chronicle (1790), p. 13, cited by Herbert 
S. Klein, Slavery in the Americas, A Comparative Study of Virginia 
and Cuba (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1967), p. 
120. For an extended description of black participation in a nine- 
teenth-century camp meeting, see Fredrika Bremer, Homes of the 
New World, 1: 306-17.

46. Frederick Law Olmsted, The Cotton Kingdom, 2 vols. (New York, 
1861), 1: 310-11. For a modern analysis of this old tradition of 
preaching style, see Bruce Rosenberg, The Art of the American Folk 
Preacher (New York: Oxford University Press, 1970).

350

NOTES TO PAGES 62-70

47. Olmsted, Cotton Kingdom, 1: 312-13. I am not claiming that this 
style of preaching or ecstatic response was unique to black Chris- 
tians in nineteenth-century America.

48. Erika Bourguignon, “Ritual Dissociation and Possession Belief in 
Caribbean Negro Religion,” in Afro-American Anthropology , edited 
by Whitten and Szwed, p. 88.

49. K. Stewart, cited by I. M. Lewis, Ecstatic Religion (Baltimore, Md.: 
Penguin Books, 1971), p. 65.

50. Bourguignon, pp. 91-92.

51. God Struck Me Dead: Religious Conversion Experiences and Autobiog- 
raphies of Negro Ex-Slaves (Social Science Source Documents No. 2, 
Fisk University Social Science Institute, Nashville, Tenn., 1945, 
mimeographed copy), p. 153.

52. Robert Anderson, From Slavery to Affluence: Memoirs of Robert An- 
derson, Ex-Slave , edited by Daisy Anderson Leonard (Steamboat 
Springs, Colo.: The Steamboat Pilot, 1927), pp. 24—26, 31.52. Robert Anderson, From Slavery to Affluence: Memoirs of Robert An- 
derson, Ex-Slave , edited by Daisy Anderson Leonard (Steamboat 
Springs, Colo.: The Steamboat Pilot, 1927), pp. 24—26, 31.

53. Morgan Godwin, The Negro's and Indian's Advocate (London, 
1680), cited by Dean J. Epstein, “African Music in British and 
French America,” The Musical Quarterly , Vol. 59, No. 1 (1973), pp. 
79-80.

54. John Sharpe, “Proposals for Erecting a School, Library and Chapel 
at New York,” New York Historical Society, Collections (1880), p. 
341, cited by Epstein, p. 80.

55. Alexander Hewatt, An Historical Account of the Rise and Progress of 
the Colonies of South Carolina and Georgia (London, 1779), 2: 100, 
103, cited by Epstein, p. 81.

56. Sir Charles Lyell, A Second Visit to the United States, 1: 269-70.

57. John F. Watson, Methodist Error... (Trenton, N.J., 1819), pp. 
28-31, cited by Eileen Southern, ed., Readings in Black American 
Music (New York: W.W. Norton & Co., 1971), pp. 62-64; see also 
Don Yoder, Pennsylvania Spirituals (Lancaster: Pennslvania Folk- 
lore Society, 1961), pp. 27-28.

58. Southern, Readings, p. 62.

59. Frederick Law Olmsted, A Journey in the Seaboard Slave States 
(New York, 1856), p. 449.

60. Daniel Alexander Payne, Recollections of Seventy Years, 1st publ. 
1886 (New York: Amo Press and the New York Times, 1969), pp. 
253-55.

61. Ibid., pp. 254-56.

62. John A. Lomax and Alan Lomax, Folk Song U.S.A. (New York: 
Duell, Sloan & Pearce, 1947), p. 335.

NOTES TO PAGES 70-72

35161. Ibid., pp. 254-56.

62. John A. Lomax and Alan Lomax, Folk Song U.S.A. (New York: 
Duell, Sloan & Pearce, 1947), p. 335.

NOTES TO PAGES 70-72

351

63. George E. Simpson, cited by Harold Courlander, Negro Folk Music 
U.S.A. (New York: Columbia University Press, 1963), p. 196; see 
Chapter 2, p. 37, for Simpson’s description of “laboring in the 
spirit.” Courlander comments: “The Jamaican revivalists have over- 
laid and disguised the African elements in their worship, and hold 
themselves aloof from the so-called African cults such as the Cumina. 
Nevertheless, they form a bridge between the ring shout in the 
United States and the openly acknowledged African-style cult activi- 
ties of the West Indies and, of course, Africa itself,” pp. 196-97.

64. [William Francis Allen, Charles Pickard Ware, Lucy McKim 
Garrison], eds., Slave Songs of the United States, 1st publ. 1867 
(New York: Peter Smith, 1951), pp. xii-xiv; see also, for more 
detailed descriptions of the ring shout, W. F. Allen, “The Negro 
Dialect,” Nation , 1 (December 14, 1865): 744—45, reprinted in 
Bruce Jackson, ed., The Negro and His Folklore in Nineteenth-Cen- 
tury Periodicals (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1967), p. 79; 
and H. G. Spaulding, “Under the Palmetto,” Continental Monthly , 4 
(August 1863): 188-203, reprinted in Bernard Katz, ed., The So- 
cial Implications of Early Negro Music in the United States (New 
York: Amo Press and The New York Times, 1969), pp. 4-8; and 
Thomas Wentworth Higginson, Army Life in a Black Regiment , 1st 
publ. 1869 (Boston: Beacon Press, 1962), p. 17.

65. Courlander, Negro Folk Music, pp. 195-96; see also Eileen South- 
ern, The Music of Black Americans: A History (New York: W.W. 
Norton & Co., 1971), pp. 161-62.65. Courlander, Negro Folk Music, pp. 195-96; see also Eileen South- 
ern, The Music of Black Americans: A History (New York: W.W. 
Norton & Co., 1971), pp. 161-62.

66. Lorenzo Dow Turner, Africanisms in the Gullah Dialect, reprint 
(New York: Arno Press and The New York Times, 1969), p. 202. 
The Kaaba is “the small stone building at Mecca which is the chief 
object of pilgrimage of Mohamammedans.” Sauwata, derived from 
Arabic, means to run until exhausted.

67. Drums and Shadows, p. 133.

68. Ibid., p. 171. There were also variations of the ring shout called 
Rocking Daniel, Flower Dance and Down to the Mire, used in 
religious settings, described by Davenport, pp. 54-55, and by Cour- 
lander, p. 201.

69. “The shout is a fusion of two seemingly irreconcilable attitudes to- 
ward religious behavior. In most of Africa, dance, like singing and 
drumming, is an integral part of supplication ... In the Euro-Chris- 
tian tradition, however, dancing in church is generally regarded as a 
profane act. The ring-shout in the United States provides a scheme 
which reconciles both principles. The circular movement, shuffling

352

NOTES TO PAGES 73-74

steps, and stamping conform to African traditions of supplication, 
while by definition this activity is not recognized as a ‘dance.’ How- 
ever, if one violates the compromise by going too far, he has commit- 
ted an irreverent act” (Courlander, p. 195). To cross one’s feet is to 
dance and would violate decorum.

70. Charles Stearn, Narrative of Henry Box Brown (Boston, 1849), pp. 
17-18; Samuel Miller Lawton, “The Religious Life of South Caro- 
lina Coastal and Sea Island Negroes,” Ph.D. dissertation, George 
Peabody College for Teachers, 1939, pp. 143-44; Higginson, pp. 
205-206.

71. Letter to Dwight's Journal of Music (November 8, 1862), reprinted 
in Katz, p. 10.

72. Cited by Southern, Music of Black Americans , p. 200.71. Letter to Dwight's Journal of Music (November 8, 1862), reprinted 
in Katz, p. 10.

72. Cited by Southern, Music of Black Americans , p. 200.

73. I will return to the theology of the spirituals and their role in slave 
religion in a subsequent chapter.

74. Ibid., pp. 172-224; Marshall Sterns, The Story of Jazz (New York: 
New American Library, Mentor, 1958), pp. 92-103. The specific 
debate over African vs. European origins for the Negro spirituals 
has used up even more ink and paper than the discussion over 
Africanisms in American culture generally. There is no need to 
review here the huge amount of literature on the spirituals. For a 
recent treatment of this issue, with references to the literature, see 
Part 1 of John Lovell’s Black Song: The Forge and the Flame (New 
York: Macmillan, 1972). On the subject of early collections of 
Negro spirituals, reference has already been made to Katz; Higgin- 
son; and Allen, McKim and Ware. See also Southern’s collection of 
Readings in Black American Music , which reprints accounts of slave 
song, as does Bruce Jackson’s Negro and His Folklore. See also an 
important article by Alan Lomax, “The Homogeneity of African- 
Afro-American Musical Style,” in Afro-American Anthropology, 
edited by Whitten and Szwed, pp. 181-201 in which Lomax ap- 
plies cantometrics (a technique invented by him and Victor Grauer 
for measuring traits of song performance) to compare African and 
Afro-American styles of singing. Disagreeing with those who find 
little African influence in Afro-American spirituals, Lomax says that 
“Cantometric analysis points conclusively in another direction — that 
the main traditions of Afro-American song, especially those of the 
old-time congregational spiritual — are derived from the main African 
song style model. European song style did influence the African 
tradition in America in regard to melodic form and, of course, tex-

NOTES TO PAGES 75-79

353NOTES TO PAGES 75-79

353

tual content. In most other respects. Afro-American song has hewed 
to the main dynamic line of the principal African tradition” (p. 197).

75. The fullest published account of the history of voodoo is Robert 
Tallant’s Voodoo in New Orleans (London: Collier-Macmillan, 
1962), which draws upon most of the earlier sources. I am indebted 
to an unpublished seminar paper done for the Yale History Depart- 
ment by Charles Hegler, who compared voodoo in New Orleans to 
vaudou in Haiti. For an encyclopedic treatment of hoodoo belief and 
practice, see Newbell Niles Puckett, The Magic and Folk Beliefs of 
the Southern Negro, 1st publ. as Folk Beliefs of the Southern Negro 
(Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press 1926; New York: 
Dover, 1969); and Henry M. Hyatt, ed., Hoodoo-Conjuration- 
Witchcraft-Rootwork (Washington, D.C.: American University 
Bookstore, 1970); see also Jackson, especially his appendices, where 
he lists nineteenth-century periodical articles on Negro folklore; and 
the “Ethnology and Folklore” column which appeared frequently in 
issues of the Southern Workman from 1894 to 1900.

76. A. B. Ellis, “On Vodu- Worship,” The Popular Science Monthly, 38 
(November 1890- April 1891): 651-58.

77. Tallant, pp. 19-22; Lyle Saxon, Edward Dreyer, and Robert Tal- 
lant, compilers, Gumbo Ya-Ya (Cambridge, Mass.: Riverside Press, 
1945; New York: Johnson Reprints Corporation, 1969, p. 225).

78. Tallant, p. 67.

79. Tallant, p. 111. In Haiti and Africa, Legba, the messenger between 
man and gods, enables divine-human communication to take place 
and receives the first praise and offerings at the liturgical rites. In 
this sense, he opens the way.

80. Ibid. Puckett notes, “in New Orleans a red ribbon was worn about 
the neck in honor of 'Monsieur Agoussou’ . . . which demon espe- 
cially loved that color” (Puckett, p. 221).80. Ibid. Puckett notes, “in New Orleans a red ribbon was worn about 
the neck in honor of 'Monsieur Agoussou’ . . . which demon espe- 
cially loved that color” (Puckett, p. 221).

81. Helen Pitkin, An Angel by Brevet (Philadelphia, 1904), pp. 6, 182- 
212; cited by Puckett, pp. 192-96.

82. Courlander, The Drum and the Hoe , p. 321.

83. Tallant, pp. 44-105; George W. Cable, “Creole Slave Songs,” The 
Century Magazine, 31 (April 1886): 807-28, reprinted in Katz, pp. 
47-68.

84. Hegler, pp. 13-14; the three accounts are J. W. Bue\, Metropolitan 
Life Unveiled, an anonymous account entitled Souvenirs de 1' America 
and C. D. Warner, Studies in the South and West. Buel and Warner 
are quoted at length by Tallant, as is the anonymous account by

354

NOTES TO PAGES 80-85

Henry Castellanos in New Orleans As It Was (New Orleans, 1895), 
pp. 91-96.

85. Zora Neale Hurston, Mules and Men , 1st publ. 1935 (New York 
and Evanston, 111.: Harper & Row, 1970), pp. 239-60; see also 
Herskovits’ comments on Hurston’s initiation experience in Myth , 
pp. 245-49.

86. The unique ambience of New Orleans is demonstrated by such 
institutions as the Mardi Gras Carnival and the Place Congo, a 
square in the city, where slaves were permitted to gather on Sun- 
day afternoons to dance, sing, and drum. Place Congo was in exis- 
tence until approximately 1843. For a description of Place Congo 
and the dances performed there, see Cable, “The Dance in Place 
Congo,” The Century Magazine, 31 (February 1886): 517-32, re- 
printed in Katz, pp. 32-47.

87. Mary A. Owen, “Among the Voodoos,” Proceedings of the Interna- 
tional Folk-Lore Congress, 1891 (London, 1892), p. 240.

88. It was not uncommon for conjurers throughout the South to adver- 
tise themselves as New Orleans-trained.

89. The role of the conjurer and conjuring during slavery will be dis- 
cussed in a succeeding chapter.

90. Herskovits, Myth, p. 249.

91. Cited in Gumbo Ya-Ya, p. 250.

92. Puckett, p. 320.

93. Ibid., p. 315.90. Herskovits, Myth, p. 249.

91. Cited in Gumbo Ya-Ya, p. 250.

92. Puckett, p. 320.

93. Ibid., p. 315.

94. Gumbo Ya-Ya, p. 557.

95. Castellanos, p. 94.

96. Puckett, p. 201.

97. Mary Owen, p. 230.

98. Cited by Puckett, pp. 232-34.

99. Ruth Bass, “Mojo,” Scribner's Magazine, 87 (1930): 83-90, re- 
printed in Mother Wit from the Laughing Barrel: Readings in the 
Interpretation of Afro-American Folklore, edited by Alan Dundes 
(Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1973), pp. 385-86.

100. Ibid., pp. 386-87.

101. Ibid.; see also Edward L. Pierce, “The Freedmen at Port Royal,” 
Atlantic Monthly, 12 (September 1863): 303.

102. Loudell F. Snow, “I Was Born Just Exactly with the Gift,” Journal 
of American Folklore, 86 ( July-September 1973): 277.

103. Ruth Bass, “Little Man,” in Dundes, p. 394.

104. Drums and Shadows, p. 184.

105. Bass, “Little Man,” p. 395; Puckett, pp. 104—7; Susan Showers,

NOTES TO PAGES 85-97

355

“A Weddin’ and a Buryin’ in the Black Belt,” New England Maga- 
zine, 18 (1898): 478-83.

106. Drums and Shadows, p. 128; Frances Butler Leigh, Ten Years on a 
Georgia Plantation Since the War (London, 1883), p. 77.

107. Puckett, pp. 257, 319, 381; Drums and Shadows, pp. 117, 121, 
178; Herskovits, Myth, p. 237.

108. The victim of a hag or witch “may gain possession of the tormentor’s 
skin and sprinkle it with pepper and salt, so that it cannot be used.” 
The Southern Workman printed a story “of a hag who finds her skin 
on the doorstep thus doctored, and after trying it on several times 
and finding it smarts and burns, she dances wildly about crying ‘O 
Skinny, Skinny, Skinny, don’t you know me?’ ” “Hags and Their 
Ways,” Southern Workman, 23 (February 1894): 27.

109. Klein, p. 101; an analogous New World example of the amenability 
of Catholicism to syncretism with “pagan” beliefs is the Virgin of 
Guadalupe, whose shrine was built on the site of the most impor- 
tant shrine to Tonantzin, Aztec goddess and mother of the gods.110. Herskovits, Myth, p. 120.

111. Guion G. Johnson, A Social History of the Sea Islands, p. 127; see 
Herskovits, Myth, p. 117.

112. Curtin, Atlantic Slave Trade, pp. 88-89; C. Vann Woodward, 
“Southern Slaves in the World of Thomas Malthus,” in his collec- 
tion of essays American Counterpoint (Boston: Little, Brown & Co., 
1971), p. 82.

113. Woodward, pp. 83-84.

114. Curtin, cited by Woodward, p. 82.

115. Woodward, pp. 84-86.

116. Ibid., pp. 87-89. It should also be noted that “the phenomenal rate 
of increase among Afro-Americans in the South” occurred “against 
the background of an unparalleled rate of increase among the white 
population of the United States as a whole ...” (p. 89).

117. Ibid., p. 102.

Chapter 3

1. Gomes Eannes De Azurara, Chronicle, 1: 50-51.

2. Ibid., I, 81-82, 84-85.

3. Cited in Marcus W. Jernegan, “Slavery and Conversion in the 
American Colonies,” American Historical Review, Vol. 21, No. 3 
(April 1916), p. 508.

4. Ibid.

356

NOTES TO PAGES 98-100

5. In 1682 John Barbot unfavorably compared Protestant efforts to 
convert the slaves in America with those of Catholics: “In this par- 
ticular, I must say, the Roman catholicks of the American plantations 
are much more commendable . . . (Barbot, Description of Guinea, 
pp. 270-71). Bishop Berkeley in 1731 stated: “It must be owned 
our reformed planters with respect to the natives and the slaves, 
might learn from the Church of Rome how it is [to] their interest 
and duty to behave. Both French and Spaniards, take care to in- 
struct both them and their Negroes in the Popish religion, to the 
reproach of those who profess a better.” Quoted by Charles Colcock 
Jones, The Religious Instruction of the Negroes in the United States 
(Savannah, Ga., 1842), p. 28. In the North American colonies it 
does not appear that the Catholics were any more proficient than the 
Protestants at converting slaves. See the comments by John Carroll 
quoted on p. 112.

6. Barbot, p. 271.

7. Ibid.6. Barbot, p. 271.

7. Ibid.

8. Helen Tunnicliff Catterall, ed., Judicial Cases Concerning American 
Slavery and the Negro , 4 vols. (Washington, D.C.: The Carnegie 
Institution, 1926), I, 55 n.

9. Jernegan, p. 506. In spite of colonial legislation, some slaveholders 
were still wary that baptism would free their slaves, so in 1729 
several appeals were sent to England on the subject. The Crown-At- 
torney and Solicitor-General ruled in agreement with the colonial 
legislatures (Charles Vernon Bruner, “The Religious Instruction of 
the Slaves in the Ante-bellum South,” Ph.D. dissertation, George 
Peabody College of Teachers, 1933, p. 35).

10. Frank J. Klingberg, An Appraisal of the Negro in Colonial South 
Carolina: A Study in Americanization (Washington, D.C.: The Asso- 
ciated Publishers, 1941), p. 7.

11. Ibid., p. 6.

12. Jernegan, p. 508, 508n. Peter H. Wood, in an excellent study of 
slavery in colonial South Carolina, states that the clergy’s “insistence 
upon the Fourth Commandment . . . conflicted directly with the Ne- 
groes’ brief hours for rest and fraternization on the one hand and 
with their meager chance for self-sufficiency and betterment on the 
other.” Thus, he holds, clergymen were in the position of arguing 
“increasingly for removing . . . these vestiges of black autonomy.” 
See Peter H. Wood, Black Majority: Negroes in Colonial South Caro- 
lina from 1670 through the Stono Rebellion (New York: Alfred A. 
Knopf, 1974), pp. 138-39.

NOTES TO PAGES 100-104

357

13. Quoted by Edgard Legare Pennington, Thomas Bray's Associates 
and Their Work Among the Negroes (Worcester, Mass.: The Ameri- 
can Antiquarian Society, 1939), pp. 38-39.

14. Cited by Jones, Religious Instruction, p. 28.

15. Le Jau to the Sec. of the S.P.G., March 22, 1708/9, printed in The 
Carolina Chronicle of Dr. Francis Le Jau, 1706-1717, edited by 
Frank J. Klingberg (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of Cali- 
fornia, 1956), p. 55.16. [Edmund Gibson], A Letter of the Lord Bishop of London . . . (Lon- 
don, 1727), p. 14. See also the sermon of William Fleetwood, 
Bishop of Asaph, delivered in 1711 before the S.P.G. in London, 
reprinted in Klingberg, Anglican Humanitarianism , pp. 203-4.

17. Morgan Godwin, The Negro's and Indian's Advocate, Suing for Their 
Admission into the Church: Or A Persuasive to the Instructing and 
Baptizing of Negro's and Indians in our Plantations (London, 1680). 
Godwin argued that “Atheism and Irreligion were the true Parents” 
of the notion that slaves are “no Men ” (Godwin, p. 3).

18. Cotton Mather, The Negro Christianized: An Essay to Excite and 
Assist that Good Work, the Instruction of Negro Servants in Christian- 
ity (Boston, 1706), pp. 4-6; Godwin, p. 9.

19. Peter Kalm, Travels Into North America, 2nd ed., reprinted in Vol. 
13 of A General Collection of the Best and Most Interesting Voyages 
and Travels, edited by John Pinkerton (London, 1812), p. 503.

20. Klingberg, Anglican Humanitarianism, p. 217. Seeker’s whole ser- 
mon is reprinted in Klingberg.

21. Le Jau to the Sec. of the S.P.G. September 18, 1711, Carolina 
Chronicle, p. 102.

22. Historical Collections Relating to the American Colonial Church, 
edited by William Stevens Perry, 4 vols. (Hartford, Conn., 1870) 1: 
315.

23. Gibson, Letter, p. 11.

24. Le Jau to the Sec., S.P.G., June 13, 1710, Carolina Chronicle, p. 
76.

25. Thomas Seeker, Sermon before the S.P.G., 1740/1, reprinted in 
Klingberg, Anglican Humanitarianism, p. 223.

26. Winthrop D. Jordan, White Over Black; American Attitudes Toward 
the Negro, 1550-1812 (Baltimore, Md.: Penguin Books, 1969), p. 
191.

27. Perry, 1: 301.

28. Quoted by Frederick Dalcho, An Historical Account of the Protestant 
Episcopal Church in South Carolina (Charleston, 1820), pp. 336-37.

358

NOTES TO PAGES 105-11227. Perry, 1: 301.

28. Quoted by Frederick Dalcho, An Historical Account of the Protestant 
Episcopal Church in South Carolina (Charleston, 1820), pp. 336-37.

358

NOTES TO PAGES 105-112

29. Cited in [Charles Frederick Pascoe], Classified Digest of the Records 
of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts 1 701 - 
1892 (London, 1893), pp. 12, 30, 28.

30. Hugh Jones, The Present State of Virginia (1724), quoted by Pen- 
nington, p. 32.

31. Perry, 1: 325.

32. Perry, 1: 267, 277-78.

33. Perry, 1: 261-327; 4: 190-229, 292, 304-7.

34. Perry, 1: 344. I have found no evidence that the proposal was 
accepted.

35. Cotton Mather, Magnalia Christi (1702), quoted by Jernegan, p. 
513n; Cotton Mather, Life of John Eliot , quoted by Jernegan, p. 
513.

36. Richard Baxter, Christian Directory, quoted by Jones, p. 7; Athenian 
Oracle (1705), quoted by Lorenzo Johnston Greene, The Negro in 
Colonial New England (New York: Atheneum, 1968), pp. 259-60.

37. Greene, p. 257; see also pp. 265-66.

38. Ibid., p. 267.

39. Ibid., pp. 278-79. Hopkins had six or seven black members in his 
church in 1772, while Stiles had seventy blacks in a congregation of 
over five hundred (Greene, p. 269). For the full story of Hopkins’ 
scheme, see Leonard I. Sweet, Black Images of America, 1784-1870 
(New York: Norton, 1976), pp. 23-26.

40. Greene, pp. 280-89.

41. Thomas E. Drake, Quakers and Slavery in America (New Haven: 
Yale University Press, 1950), p. 6.

42. Ibid., pp. 9-10.

43. Ibid., p. 11. The Germantown Quakers’ remonstrance is reprinted 
in H. Shelton Smith, Robert T. Handy, and Lefferts A. Loetscher, 
eds., American Christianity, 2 vols. (New York: Charles Scribner’s 
Sons, 1960), 1: 181-82.44. Jernegan, p. 513; Henry J. Cadbury, “Negro Membership in the 
Society of Friends,” Journal of Negro History, Vol. 21, No. 2 (April 
1936), pp. 172-73; Thomas E. Drake, “Joseph Drinker’s Plea for 
the Admission of Colored People to the Society of Friends, 1795,” 
Journal of Negro History, Vol. 32, No. 1 (January 1947), p. 111.

45. Le Jau to the Sec., S.P.G., Feb. 1, 1709/10, Carolina Chronicle, p. 
69; Le Jau to Sec., June 13, 1710, ibid., p. 77.

46. John Carroll, “Report for the Eminent Cardinal Antonelli Concern- 
ing the State of Religion in the United Stated of America,” in Docu- 
ments of American Catholic History, John Tracy Ellis, ed., 2 vols.

NOTES TO PAGES 113-119

359

(Chicago: Henry Regnery Company, Logos paperback edition, 
1967), 1: 148-49. For my comments on differences between the 
religious experience of black Catholics and black Protestants, see 
Chapter 5.

47. Roger Baudier, The Catholic Church in Louisiana (New Orleans, 
1939), p. 75; John T. Gillard, Colored Catholics in the United States 
(Baltimore, Md.: The Josephite Press, 1941), pp. 64—67.

48. Gillard, pp. 65-67; V. Alton Moody, Slavery on Louisiana Sugar 
Plantations; reprinted from The Louisiana Historical Quarterly (April 
1924), pp. 90-92.48. Gillard, pp. 65-67; V. Alton Moody, Slavery on Louisiana Sugar 
Plantations; reprinted from The Louisiana Historical Quarterly (April 
1924), pp. 90-92.

49. A sense of the difficulties and meager successes of the S.P.G. mission- 
aries may be gained from reading the abstracts of their letters pre- 
pared by the society itself. An abstract of a letter dated June 4, 1737, 
and written by Lewis Jones, missionary to South Carolina, is instruc- 
tive: “That since his last of the 3rd of June 1735, he had baptized 
thirtynine Children, one of whom was a Mulatto, and another a Negro, 
but his Number of Communicants doth not exceed twenty; and once 
in five Weeks he preaches at one place, and once in six Weeks at 
another place in his extensive Parish very remote from the Church; 
that the pious Zeal of the venerable Society, and of his worthy Dioce- 
san for promoting Christian Knowledge among the Negroes meets 
with but a cold Reception from them, but he had himself a Negroe 
Girl of seven Years of Age, that reads very prettily in the New Testa- 
ment, and a Negroe Boy of five Years of Age, that spells well, and is 
apt to learn.” Klingberg, Appraisal of the Negro , p. 68.

50. Carolina Chronicle , p. 76.

51. Klingberg, Appraisal of the Negro, p. 12.

52. Jones Religious Instruction, p. 10.

53. Klingberg, Appraisal of the Negro, p. 105.

54. Pennington, pp. 29-30.

55. Klingberg, Appraisal of the Negro, pp. 69-70.

56. Pennington, pp. 29-30.

57. Klingberg, Appraisal of the Negro, p. 114.

58. Ibid., pp. 106-7.

59. Pennington, p. 31.

60. Klingberg, Appraisal of the Negro , p. 1 19.

61. Pennington, pp. 74-75; Faith Vibert, “The Society for the Propaga- 
tion of the Gospel in Foreign Parts: Its Works for the Negroes in 
North America Before 1783,” Journal of Negro History, Vol. 18, 
No. 2 (April 1933), p. 176.

62. Ottolenghe to the Reverend Mr. Smith, Dec. 4, 1751, quoted in

360

NOTES TO PAGES 119-12762. Ottolenghe to the Reverend Mr. Smith, Dec. 4, 1751, quoted in

360

NOTES TO PAGES 119-127

James B. Lawrence, “Religious Education of the Negro in the Col- 
ony of Georgia,” Georgia Historical Quarterly , Vol. 14, No. 1 
(March 1930), p. 48.

63. Quoted by Lawrence, p. 52.

64. See Jordan, pp. 210-11. James Gignillat, a Huguenot minister in 
Santee, S.C., “said that the Roman Catholic Priests Christened all 
the Negroes that went into their midst” and “that he was willing to 
do the same,” a policy which the S.P.G. did not adopt. See Kling- 
berg, Appraisal of the Negro, p. 24 n; Wood, p. 143.

65. Gibson, Letter, pp. 17-18.

66. Klingberg, Appraisal of the Negro , p. 24n.

67. Klingberg, Anglican Humanitarianism, p. 217.

68. Perry, 1: 327.

69. Klingberg, Appraisal of the Negro , p. 56.

70. Carolina Chronicle, p. 121. In February 1713 Le Jau gave an ac- 
count of a Christian slave who had been so brutally punished for 
losing a load of rice that he committed suicide. Le Jau interpreted 
epidemics and other disasters as God’s punishment for such cruelty. 
See Vibert, p. 178; Klingberg, Appraisal of the Negro, p. 19.

71. Francis Varnod, to the S.P.G., 1724, quoted by Klingberg, Ap- 
praisal of the Negro, p. 56.

72. Perry, 5: 48; Pennington, pp. 64—78; Klingberg, Appraisal of the 
Negro, p. 5 n.

73. Pennington, p. 25.

74. Pennington, pp. 42-43. Apparently about two hundred blacks from 
Norfolk and Princess Anne counties gathered one Sunday during 
church and chose leaders for a plot; when discovered, four of the 
leaders were executed. See Jerome W. Jones, “The Established Vir- 
ginia Church and the Conversion of Negroes and Indians, 1620- 
1760 f Journal of Negro History, Vol. 46, No. 1 (January 1961), pp. 
12-23.

75. Klingberg, Appraisal of the Negro, pp. 46-47.

76. Ibid., p. 89.

77. Ibid., p. 16.

78. Carolina Chronicle , pp. 76-77, 120.

79. Pennington, pp. 44-45.

80. Ibid., p. 25.75. Klingberg, Appraisal of the Negro, pp. 46-47.

76. Ibid., p. 89.

77. Ibid., p. 16.

78. Carolina Chronicle , pp. 76-77, 120.

79. Pennington, pp. 44-45.

80. Ibid., p. 25.

81. For interesting suggestions on the acculturation of slaves, see 
Chapters 2, 3, and 5 in Gerald W. Mullins, Flight and Rebellion: 
Slave Resistance in Eighteenth-Century Virginia (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1972), and Herskovits’ Introduction to Accultura-

NOTES TO PAGES 128-131

361

tion in the Americas, edited by Sol Tax (New York: Cooper Square 
Publishers, Inc., 1967), pp. 55-57; see also Chapter 2 of this book.

82. Klingberg, Anglican Humanitarianism, pp. 122-23. See also Jor- 
dan, p. 212. Christianizing a slave made him less alien and, to a 
degree, more like the white colonist. While slaveholders and Chris- 
tian missionaries, with the exception of the Friends, continually em- 
phasized that this likeness involved no equality on any level but the 
spiritual, the admission of spiritual equality opened the way for reli- 
gious reciprocity, always conditioned by the situation of slavery but 
nonetheless real.

83. “The Dawn of the New Day” is the title of Woodson’s second 
chapter in The History of the Negro Church (Washington, D.C.: As- 
sociated Publishers, 1945).

84. Quoted by Jones, Religious Instruction, p. 34.

85. Cited in Jordan, p. 213.

86. Cited by Edwin Scott Gaustad, The Great Awakening in New En- 
gland (Chicago: Quadrangle Books, 1957), p. 35.

87. Green, p. 276. For a similar reaction, see Perry, 3: 357.

88. Charles Chauncy, Seasonable Thoughts on the State of Religion in 
New England (Boston, 1743), quoted by Jordan, p. 212.

89. For an account of the spread of the revival in the South, see Wesley 
M. Gewhehr, The Great Awakening in Virginia, 1740-1790 (Dur- 
ham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 1930), Chapter X, “The Evan- 
gelicals and Slavery”; see also John B. Boles, The Great Revival, 
1787-1805 (The University Press of Kentucky, 1972).90. Jones, Religious Instruction, pp. 37-38.

91. Cited in George William Pilcher, “Samuel Davies and the Instruc- 
tion of Negroes in Virginia,” The Virginia Magazine of History and 
Biography, Vol. 79, No. 3 (July 1966), p. 300.

92. Gewhehr, p. 237.

93. Edwin Scott Gaustad, Historical Atlas of Religion in America (New 
York: Harper & Row, 1962) pp. 9-13, 74-75; Jones, Religious 
Instruction, pp. 39-40; Joseph B. Earnest, The Religious Develop- 
ment of the Negro in Virginia (Charlottesville, Va.: The Michie Com- 
pany, 1914), p. 48.

94. Jones, Religious Instruction, pp. 40, 53; W.E.B. Du Bois, The Negro 
Church (Atlanta, Ga.: Atlanta University Press, 1903), pp. 19-20.

95. Jones, Religious Instruction , p. 53; William Warren Sweet, Story of 
Religion in America (New York: Harper, 1930), p. 420; William 
Warren Sweet, Religion in the Development of American Culture, 
1765-1840 (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1952), p. 279.

362

NOTES TO PAGES 132-136

96. David Benedict, A General History of the Baptist Denomination in 
America (New York, 1848), p. 739.

97. I am indebted to Susan Solomon for her unpublished seminar 
paper, “Evangelicalism and Moralism in the 18th Century South,” 
Yale University, 1969, in which she describes the different cate- 
chetical attitudes of Anglicans and Evangelicals toward the slaves; 
John Thompson, The Life of John Thompson , A Fugitive Slave 
(Worcester, Mass., 1856), pp. 18-19. For an example of the 
influence of conversion upon a planter’s attitude toward his slaves’ 
religious life, see Louis Morton, Robert Carter of Nomini Hall (Wil- 
liamsburg, Va.: Colonial Williamsburg Inc., 1941), pp. 239-42.

98. Jernegan, p. 515.98. Jernegan, p. 515.

99. Luther P. Jackson, “Religious Development of the Negro in Vir- 
ginia, From 1760 to 1860 "Journal of Negro History , Vol. 16, No. 
2 (April 1931), p. 176; Jernegan, p. 515; Robert B. Semple, A 
History of the Rise and Progress of the Baptists in Virginia (Rich- 
mond, 1810), p. 355; Virginia Writers’ Project, The Negro in Vir- 
ginia (New York: Hastings House, 1940), p. 103; Lemuel Burkitt 
and Jesse Read, A Concise History of the Kehukee Baptist Associa- 
tion (Halifax [N.C.], 1803), pp. 258-59.

100. Semple, p. 128; Garnett Ryland, The Baptists of Virginia, 1 699- 
1926 (Richmond, Va.: Virginia Baptist Board of Missions and 
Education, 1955), p. 155.

101. Walter H. Brooks, “The Evolution of the Negro Baptist Church,” 
Journal of Negro History , Vol. 7, No. 1 (January 1922), p. 103; 
Benedict (1850), p. 779.

102. J. H. Spencer, History of Kentucky Baptists , 2 vols. (n.p., 1886) 2: 
654—55.

103. Acts and Proceedings of the General Assembly of the Presbyterian 
Church in the U.S.A. in the Tear 1801 (Philadelphia, 1801), p. 15; 
Edgar W. Knight, “Notes on John Chavis,” The North Carolina 
Historical Review , Vol. 7, No. 3 (July 1930), pp. 326-45.

104. Woodson, History of the Negro Church, p. 47; Jackson, “Religious 
Development,” pp. 184—85.

105. John Spencer Bassett, Slavery in the State of North Carolina, Johns 
Hopkins Studies in Historical and Political Science, Series XVII, 
No. 7-8 (Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins Press, 1899), pp. 57- 
58.

106. John Rippon, The Baptist Annual Register, 1790- 1793 (n.p., n.d.), 
p. 105.

107. Jones, Religious Instruction, p. 58; W. Harrison Daniel, “Virginia

NOTES TO PAGES 136-145

363

Baptists and the Negro in the Antebellum Era,” Journal of Negro 
History , Vol. 56, No. 1 (January 1971), pp. 2-3.

108. Ibid.

109. Donald G. Mathews, Slavery and Methodism; A Chapter in Ameri- 
can Morality (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1965), 
pp. 64, 64n, 65, 6 Bn.108. Ibid.

109. Donald G. Mathews, Slavery and Methodism; A Chapter in Ameri- 
can Morality (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1965), 
pp. 64, 64n, 65, 6 Bn.

110. Robert E. Park, “The Conflict and Fusion of Cultures with Special 
Reference to the Negro,” Journal of Negro History , Vol. 4, No. 2 
(April 1919), p. 120; Benedict [1850 ed.], p. 664; James M. 
Simms, The First Colored Baptist Church in North America (Phila- 
delphia, 1888), pp. 36-39.

111. Jones, Religious Instruction , pp. 139-40; see also Richard C. 
Wade, Slavery in the Cities (New York: Oxford University Press, 
1964), pp. 160-73.

112. Jackson, “Religious Development,” p. 195n; Daniel, p. 4.

113. Jackson, “Religious Development,” pp. 227 n, 227-31.

114. Semple, pp. 114—15.

1 15. Walter H. Brooks, “The Priority of the Silver Bluff Church and Its 
Promoters,” Journal of Negro History , Vol. 7, No. 2 (April 1922), 
pp. 172-75, 182-83; I.E. Bill, Fifty Years With the Baptist Minis- 
ters and Churches of the Maritime Provinces of Canada (Saint John, 
N.B., 1880), pp. 19-26.

116. Rippon, pp. 332-35.

117. Ibid., p. 545; Brooks, “Priority of Silver Bluff,” pp. 184—90.

118. Rippon, pp. 340-41; Benedict, p. 740.

119. Rippon, pp. 263, 342, 540-41; Benedict, p. 741.

120. For the story of several other African Baptist churches, see Jack- 
son, “Religious Development,” pp. 188-92.

121. Leah Townsend, South Carolina Baptists, 1670-1805 (Florence, 
S.C.: The Florence Printing Company, 1935), p. 258.

122. See Appendix, “Methodist Rules Concerning Slavery,” in Math- 
ews, pp. 293-99; Jackson, “Religious Instruction,” p. 173n; Gew- 
ehr, pp. 244— 48.

123. The Journal and Letters of Francis Asbury , edited by Elmer T. 
Clark, J. Manning Potts, and Jacob S. Payton, 3 vols (Nashville, 
Tenn.: Abingdon Press, 1958), 2: 151, 284, 591.123. The Journal and Letters of Francis Asbury , edited by Elmer T. 
Clark, J. Manning Potts, and Jacob S. Payton, 3 vols (Nashville, 
Tenn.: Abingdon Press, 1958), 2: 151, 284, 591.

124. Earnest, p. 52; among the Presbyterians, David Rice and, among 
the Baptists, John Leland and David Barrow were prominent anti- 
slavery evangelicals. See Gewehr, pp. 238-39. See also Andrew E. 
Murray, Presbyterians and the Negro — A History (Philadelphia: 
Presbyterian Historical Society, 1966); W. Harrison Daniel, “Vir-

364

NOTES TO PAGES 145-154

ginia Baptists and the Negro in the Early Republic,” The Virginia 
Magazine of History and Biography , Vol. 80, No. 1 (January 1972) 
pp. 65-69.

125. Jones, Religious Instruction, p. 48; Jackson, “Religious Develop- 
ment,” p. 196.

126. Ulrich B. Phillips, Plantation and Frontier Documents: 1649-1863, 
2 vols. (Cleveland, Ohio: Arthur H. Clark, 1909) 2: 93; “Eigh- 
teenth Century Slave Advertisements,” Journal of Negro History, 
Vol. 1, No. 2 (April 1916), pp. 202-4. Narratives of fugitive slaves 
frequently spoke of the decision to escape in terms of a religious 
conversion. Perhaps this was more than literary convention.

127. Jackson, “Religious Development,” pp. 172-73.

128. Mullin, pp. 149, 158-60. Mullin argues that Gabriel’s rebellion 
had less religious overtones than did either Vesey’s or Turner’s.

129. Department of Education, Special Report of the Commissioner of 
Education (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1871), 
pp. 307, 383.

130. Robert W. Fogel and Stanley L. Engerman, Time on the Cross 
(Boston: Little, Brown & Company, 1974), pp. 24-25; Philip D. 
Curtin, “The Slave Trade and the Atlantic Basin,” in Key Issues in 
the Afro-American Experience, edited by Nathan I. Huggins, Martin 
Kilson, and Daniel M. Fox, 2 vols. (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 
Jovanovich, 1971), 1: 93.

131. Jones, Religious Instruction , p. 64.

Chapter 4

1. Jones, Religious Instruction, p. 176.131. Jones, Religious Instruction , p. 64.

Chapter 4

1. Jones, Religious Instruction, p. 176.

2. Proceedings of the Meeting in Charleston, S.C., May 13-15, 1845, 
On the Religious Instruction of the Negroes (Charleston, S.C., 1845), 
pp. 6-7-

3. Jones, Religious Instruction, p. 79; Luther P. Jackson, “Religious 
Instruction of Negroes, 1830-1860, With Special Reference to 
South Carolinia,” Journal of Negro History, Vol. 15, No. 1 (January 
1930), p. 84.

4. Lewis M. Purifoy, Jr., “The Methodist Episcopal Church, South 
and Slavery, 1844-1865,” (Ph.D. dissertation, University of North 
Carolina, Chapel Hill, 1965), pp. 127-28; Jones, Religious Instruc- 
tion, p. 69; Second Annual Report of the Missionary to the Negroes in 
Liberty County, Ga. (Charleston, 1835), p. 11.

NOTES TO PAGES 155-164

365

5. Jones, Religious Instruction, pp. 70-72, 77-79.

6. James Stacy, History of Midway Church (Newman, Ga. [1899]), pp. 
168-70.

7. Proceedings of the Charleston Meeting, May 13-15, 1845 (Charles- 
ton, S.C., 1845), pp. 6-7.

8. Jones, Religious Instruction , pp. 221-22.

9. Ibid., pp. 97-99.

10. Quoted by Bruner, pp. 112-13.

11. Jones, Religious Instruction, pp. 86, 192; Third Annual Report, Li- 
berty County Association (1836), pp. 14—15.

12. Jones, Religious Instruction ,p. 80.

13. Mathews, p. 72.

14. Fifth Annual Report, Liberty County Association, p. 23.

15. Purifoy, p. 124.

16. Cited by Charles Deems, Annals of Southern Methodism for 1856 
(Nashville, Tenn., 1857) p. 207.

17. Bruner, p. 110.

18. Third Annual Report, Liberty County Association, p. 20.

19. R. Q. Mallard, Plantation Life Before Emancipation (Richmond, Va., 
1892), p.117.

20. Jones, Religious Instruction, pp. 68, 72, 79-80, 82-83; 230-31; see 
also Thomas S. Clay, Detail of a Plan for the Moral Improvement of 
Negroes on Plantations (n.p., 1833).20. Jones, Religious Instruction, pp. 68, 72, 79-80, 82-83; 230-31; see 
also Thomas S. Clay, Detail of a Plan for the Moral Improvement of 
Negroes on Plantations (n.p., 1833).

21. Jones’s Catechism quoted by Mason Crum, Gullah: Negro Life in the 
Carolina Sea Islands (Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 
1940), pp. 204-5.

22. See ‘A Narrative of the Conspiracy and Intended Insurrection, 
Amongst a Portion of the Negroes in the State of South Carolina in 
the Year 1822,” in The Trial Record of Denmark Vesey, edited by 
John Oliver Killens (Boston: Beacon Press, 1970), pp. 11, 14, 46, 
95-97, 159; Richard C. Wade, in “The Vesey Plot: A Reconsidera- 
tion,” Journal of Southern History, 30 (May 1964): 143-61, has 
argued that the conspiracy existed only in the minds of white citi- 
zens. Even if this were so, which I doubt, reports of the plot had a 
very real effect on white attitudes about slave religion. See Killens, 
pp. xix-xxi.

23. Killens, Trial Record, pp. 13-14, 61, 64, 76-78; Vincent Harding, 
“Religion and Resistance Among Antebellum Negroes, 1800- 
1860,” in The Making of Black America, edited by August Meier and 
Elliott Rudwick, 2 vols. (New York: Atheneum, 1969), 1: 186.

24. “Verbatim Record of the Trials in the Court of Oyer & Terminer of

366

NOTES TO PAGES 164-174

Southampton County, Held Between 31 August and 21 November 
1831 ...” in Henry Irving Tragle, The Southampton Slave Revolt of 
1831: A Compilation of Source Material (New York: Random House, 
Vintage Books, 1973), p. 222. Gray’s “Confession” goes into vivid 
detail about Turner’s visions and religious ideas, but it is difficult to 
say how much is Turner and how much is Gray.

25. Jones, Religious Instruction , pp. 215-16.

26. Quoted by Crum, pp. 204^5.25. Jones, Religious Instruction , pp. 215-16.

26. Quoted by Crum, pp. 204^5.

27. Jones, Religious Instruction , p. 241; Proceedings of the Charleston 
Meeting, pp. 33, 42; Donald G. Mathews, “Charles Colcock Jones 
and the Southern Evangelical Crusade to Form a Biracial Commu- 
nity,” Journal of Southern History , Vol. 41, No. 3 (August 1975).

28. Blassingame, ed., Slave Testimony , p. 411.

29. Ibid, p. 435.

30. Ibid, p. 420; see for example, William Wells Brown, Narrative of 
William W. Brown, A Fugitive Slave (Boston, 1848), pp. 37-38, 80; 
Lunsford Lane, Narrative of Lunsford Lane (Boston, 1848), pp. 12- 
14.

31. George P. Rawick, ed. The American Slave: A Composite Autobiogra- 
phy, 19 Vols. (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood, 1972) Vol. 4, Texas,

pt. 1, p. 281.

32. Charles Nordhoff, “The Freedmen of South-Carolina,” in Papers of 
the Day, edited by Frank Moore (No. 1, 1863), pp. 6-7, written at 
Port Royal, March 20, 1863.

33. Third Annual Report, Liberty County Association, p. 7; Mathews, p. 
68; Charles Sackett Sydnor, Slavery in Mississippi (New York: D. 
Appleton-Century Company, 1933), p. 61, citing Olmsted, The Cot- 
ton Kingdom, 2: 81-82; John Roles, Inside Views of Slavery on 
Southern Plantations (New York, 1864), p. 43.

34. Jones, Religious Instruction, p. 192.

35. Whitemarsh B. Seabrook, An Essay on the Management of Slaves 
(Charleston, 1834), pp. 14, 21.

36. Seabrook, pp. 15, 18, 23.

37. Seabrook, pp. 20, 22.

38. Eighth Annual Report, Liberty County Association (1843), p. 12.

39. Joe Gray Taylor, Negro Slavery in Louisiana (Baton Rouge, La.: 
Louisiana Historical Association, 1963), p. 139; Oscar H. Darter, 
The History of Fredericksburg Baptist Church, Fredericksburg, Vir- 
ginia (Richmond, Va.: Garrett and Massie, 1959), p. 127; Minutes 
of the Dover Baptist Association . . . 1850 (Richmond, 1850), p. 11.

40. Purifoy, p. 161; Jones, Religious Instruction, p. 85; Mathews, p. 75.

NOTES TO PAGES 174-181

367

41. Crum, pp. 210, 229.40. Purifoy, p. 161; Jones, Religious Instruction, p. 85; Mathews, p. 75.

NOTES TO PAGES 174-181

367

41. Crum, pp. 210, 229.

42. Mathews, p. 81; see also Crum, p. 201.

43. Cited by Guion Griffis Johnson, Antebellum North Carolina: A So- 
cial History (Chapel Hill, N.C.: University of North Carolina Press, 
1937), p. 543.

44. Jones, Religious Instruction , pp. 78-79; Liberty County, Ga., in 
1830 had a population of 1,544 whites and 5,729 blacks.

45. Jackson, “Religious Instruction,” pp. 95, 103; Purifoy, pp. 151-52. 
For example, “the Virginia Annual Conference . . . between 1858 
and 1860 showed an increase in the number of missions from four to 
seventeen and an increase in Negro membership in missions of 
1,661, whereas, the net gain in Negro membership for the entire 
Conference was only 648,” because missions “had been established 
to take over . . . Negro membership” (Purifoy, 155n).

46. Long, Pictures of Slavery , pp. 20-21.

47. Proceedings of the Charleston Meeting, p. 56; Jones, Religious Instruc- 
tion, p. 127.

48. Tenth Annual Report, Liberty County Association, (1845) pp. 24-25; 
see also W. G. Hawkins, Lunsford Lane , 1st publ. Boston, 1863 
(Miami, Fla.: Mnemosyne Publishing Company, 1969), p. 65; 
Jones, Religious Instruction, p. 129.

49. Jones, Religious Instruction, p. 114.

50. Jackson, “Religious Development,” p. 217-18.

51. Jones, Religious Instruction, pp. 94—95; Tenth Annual Report, Li- 
berty County Association (1845) p. 10; James B. Sellers, Slavery in 
Alabama (University, Ala.: University of Alabama Press, 1950), pp. 
299-300; Noah Davis, A Narrative of the Life of Rev. Noah Davis 
(Baltimore, Md., 1859), p. 27; Jeremiah Bell Jeter, The Recollec- 
tions of a Long Life (Richmond, Va., 1891), pp. 105, 211.

52. Jackson, “Religious Development,” pp. 203-5.52. Jackson, “Religious Development,” pp. 203-5.

53. Proceedings of the Charleston Meeting, pp. 50, 70; Nehemiah Adams, 
A South-Side View of Slavery, 3rd ed. (Boston, 1855), p. 54; Jack- 
son, “Religious Development,” pp. 200-2, 230, 230n, 232.

54. Quoted by J. Carleton Hayden, “Conversion and Control: Dilemma 
of Episcopalians in Providing for the Religious Instruction of Slaves, 
Charleston, South Carolina, 1845-1860,” Historical Magazine of the 
Protestant Episcopal Church, Vol. 40, No. 2 (June 1971), p. 143.

55. Church minute books and records constitute a genre of evidence not 
yet fully exploited by historians of slavery. See comments by Michael 
Mullin, ed., American Negro Slavery: A Documentary History (New 
York: Harper & Row, 1976), pp. 271-73; see also “Records of the

368

NOTES TO PAGES 181-188

Forks of Elkhorn Baptist Church, Kentucky, 1800-1820,” ex- 
cerpted by William Warren Sweet, ed., Religion on the American 
Frontier, The Baptists , 1783-1830: A Collection of Source Material 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1931); W. Harrison Daniel, 
“Southern Protestantism and the Negro, 1860-1865,” The North 
Carolina Historical Review, Vol. 41, No. 3 (July 1964), pp. 338-59; 
Kenneth K. Bailey, “Protestantism and Afro-Americans in the Old 
South: Another Look,” Journal of Southern History, Vol. 41, No. 4 
(November 1975), pp. 451-72. A valuable source for manuscript 
church minutes is the Historical Commission of the Southern Bap- 
tist Convention located in Nashville, Tenn.

56. Minutes of the Dover Baptist Association . . . October 8, 1796 (Rich- 
mond, Va., 1797).

57. Z. T. Leavell and T. J. Bailey, A Complete History of Mississippi 
Baptists, 1 (Jackson, Miss., 1904): 40.

58. Reprinted in Sweet, Religion on the American Frontier, pp. 320-24.57. Z. T. Leavell and T. J. Bailey, A Complete History of Mississippi 
Baptists, 1 (Jackson, Miss., 1904): 40.

58. Reprinted in Sweet, Religion on the American Frontier, pp. 320-24.

59. See, for example, Wheeler’s (Wheeley’s) Baptist Church Minutes, 
1790-1798, entry for September 1793 and entry for July 1837 in 
Flat River Primitive Baptist Church Records, 1786-1938. Manu- 
scripts in the Southern Historical Collection, UNC Library, Chapel 
Hill, N.C.; Minutes of Black Creek Baptist Church (Virginia), Febru- 
ary 24, June 22, 1792, and Minutes of the South Quay Baptist 
Church (Virginia), August 1780, both cited by W. Harrison Daniel, 
“Virginia Baptists and the Negro in the Early Republic,” Virginia 
Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. 80, No. 1 (January 1972), 
p. 63.

60. George W. Purifoy, A History of the Sandy Creek Baptist Association 
(New York, 1859), pp. 76, 83-84.

61. Minutes of the Virginia Portsmouth Baptist Association... 1793 
(Norfolk, Va., n.d.), p. 4.

62. Flat River Primitive Baptist Church Records, Nov. 1790 entry.

63. Flat River Church Records.

64. Flat River Church Records, July 1795 and Aug. 1800 entries.

65. Welsh Neck Baptist Church Minutes, 1738-1932, typescript, 
South Caroliniana Library, University of South Carolina; excerpted 
in Mullins, ed., American Negro Slavery, pp. 278-80.

66. Ibid.

67. Jones, Religious Instruction, pp. 94—95; Proceedings of the Charleston 
Meeting, 1845, p. 70.

68. Minutes of the Portsmouth Baptist Association, 1794, 1797, 1800, 
1801, 1821-25, 1829, 1838; Luther P. Jackson, A Short History of

NOTES TO PAGES 189-200

369

the Gillfield Baptist Church, Petersburg, Va., (Petersburg, Va.: Vir- 
ginia Printing Co., 1937), pp. 5-15.NOTES TO PAGES 189-200

369

the Gillfield Baptist Church, Petersburg, Va., (Petersburg, Va.: Vir- 
ginia Printing Co., 1937), pp. 5-15.

69. William B. Sprague, Annals of the American Baptist Pulpit (New 
York, 1860), pp. 251-64; Rev. James M. Simms, The First Colored 
Baptist Church in North America (Philadelphia, 1888), p. 46-78, 
Minutes of the Sunbury Baptist Association, 1830 (Savannah, Ga., 
1830), p. 7.

70. Simms, pp. 93-98, 102-3; Rev. E. K. Love, History of the First 
African Baptist Church (Savannah, Ga., 1888), pp. 10-11.

71. Simms, pp. 96, 112-14.

72. Love, pp. 12-13.

73. Love, pp. 14—15.

74. Love, pp. 16-24.

75. Love, pp. 20-21, 23-24.

76. Love, pp. 21-22.

77. Minutes of the Sunbury Baptist Association . . . 1836 (Savannah, Ga., 
1836), p. 9; Minutes of the Sunbury Baptist Association . . . 1837 
(Savannah, Ga., 1837), p. 6; Love, p. 30.

78. Charles Hays Rankin, “The Rise of Negro Baptist Churches in the 
South Through the Reconstruction Period” (Master of Theology 
thesis, New Orleans Baptist Theological Seminary, 1955), pp. 36- 
38.

79. Reprinted in Lewis, G. Jordan, Negro Baptist History, U.S.A., 
1750-1930 (Nashville, Tenn.: The Sunday School Publishing 
Board, National Baptist Convention, n.d.), pp. 103-4.

80. Minutes of the Dover Baptist Association, 1830 . . . 1831 . . . 
1843 . . . 1851 . . . I860-, Benedict, 1850, p. 662; Henry L. Swint, 
ed., Dear Ones at Home: Letters From Contraband Camps (Nashville, 
Tenn.: Vanderbilt University Press, 1966), p. 155.

81. Minutes of the Virginia Portsmouth Baptist Association... 1851 
(Richmond, 1851), p. 19.

82. J. Lansing Burrows, ed., American Baptist Register For 1852 (Phila- 
delphia, 1853) pp. 70-74; Emily P. Burke, Reminiscences of Geor- 
gia, (n.p., 1850), p. 34; Simms, pp. 63-64.

83. Sir Charles Lyell, A Second Visit to the United States of North Amer- 
ica, 2: 14—16.

84. Benedict, 1850 ed., p. 813.83. Sir Charles Lyell, A Second Visit to the United States of North Amer- 
ica, 2: 14—16.

84. Benedict, 1850 ed., p. 813.

85. Hosea Holcombe, A History of the Rise and Progress of the Baptists in 
Alabama (Philadelphia, 1840), pp. 110-11; Sellers, pp. 300-1, 
396-97; Benedict, 1850, p. 756. Offered his freedom by the Ala- 
bama Association, Phillips refused to accept, possibly because the

370

NOTES TO PAGES 200-207

association wanted to send him as missionary to Africa; B. F. Riley, 
History of the Baptists in the Southern States East of the Mississippi 
(Philadelphia, 1898), pp. 318-19.

86. Benedict, 1850, pp. 771-72; Patrick H. Thompson, History of Ne- 
gro Baptists in Mississippi (Jackson, Miss., 1898), pp. 24—28.

87. H. E. Sterkx, The Free Negro in Ante-Bellum Louisiana (Rutherford, 
N.J.: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, 1972), pp. 261-66; 
Charles Hays Rankin, “The Rise of Negro Baptist Churches in the 
South Through the Reconstruction Period” pp. 35-36.

88. Lewis G. Jordan, pp. 106-8; Tennessee Historical Records Survey 
Project, Works Progress Administration, Inventory of Church Ar- 
chives of Tennessee: Tennessee Baptist Convention, Nashville Baptist 
Association (Nashville: Tennessee Historical Records Survey, 1939), 
pp. 19-20; J. H. Spencer, History of Kentucky Baptists, 2 vols. (n.p., 
1886), 2: 653-61; Benedict, 1850, pp. 813-15.

89. David Smith, The Biography of Rev. David Smith (Xenia, Ohio, 
1881), p. 23-33.

90. Deems, Annals of Southern Methodism for 1856, pp. 212-13; James 
A. Handy, Scraps of African Methodist Episcopal History (Philadel- 
phia: A.M.E. Book Concern, n.d.), pp. 70, 78.90. Deems, Annals of Southern Methodism for 1856, pp. 212-13; James 
A. Handy, Scraps of African Methodist Episcopal History (Philadel- 
phia: A.M.E. Book Concern, n.d.), pp. 70, 78.

91. John W. Blassingame, Black New Orleans, 1860-1880 (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1973), pp. 13-14; Joe Gray Taylor, 
Negro Slavery in Louisiana , p. 146; Frank C. Tucker, The Methodist 
Church in Missouri, 1798-1939 (Nashville, Tenn.: Parthenon Press, 
1966), p. 55; J. Beverly F, Shaw, The Negro in the History of Meth- 
odism (Nashville, Tenn.: Parthenon Press, 1954), pp. 42-43; Fred- 
rika Bremer, Homes of the New World, 2: 234—38.

92. E. A. Andrews, Slavery and the Domestic Slave-Trade in the United 
States (Boston, 1836), p. 37; Long, Pictures of Slavery, p. 361; 
Edenton M.E. Church Records, 181 1-, Edenton, N.C., Ms. South- 
ern Historical Collection U.N.C. Minutes of January 1815, April 
1827, April 1828, July 1828, September 1829, February 1830, 
June 1830, and November 1830, when “On motion resolved that 
the col. Brethren be permitted to take seat in the Quarterly Meeting 
Conference but on no case to have a vote”; Methodist Episcopal 
Church, South, Minutes of Quarterly Conference Stokes Circuit, 
Ms. Southern Historical Collection, U.N.C. Minutes for November 
1831. For instances of two black Methodist congregations (one in 
Kentucky, the other in Virginia) worshiping separately from white 
members of the same church, see Catterall, 1: 263, 468.

93. Walter Brownlow Posey, The Presbyterian Church in the Old South-

NOTES TO PAGES 209-213

37193. Walter Brownlow Posey, The Presbyterian Church in the Old South-

NOTES TO PAGES 209-213

371

west, 1778-1838 (Richmond, Va.: John Knox Press, 1952), pp. 
83-84; Ernest Trice Thompson, Presbyterians in the South , 1607- 
1861 (Richmond, Va.: John Knox Press, 1963), 1: 442-43; Win- 
fred Ernest Garrison and Alfred T. De Groot, The Disciples of 
Christ, A History (St. Louis, Mo.: Bethany Press, 1948), pp. 468- 
74; Minnie J. Smith, ed., Records of the Moravians in North Caro- 
lina, 1838-1847 (Raleigh, N.C.: State Department of Archives and 
History, 1964), 9: 4678-80, 4733-36, 4790-92, 4821-25, 4839- 
55, 4876, 4913-15, 4954—56; Kenneth G. Hamilton, ed., Records 
of the Moravians in North Carolina 1848-1851 (Raleigh, N.C.: State 
Department of Archives and History, 1966) 10: 5269-71, 5396- 
98,5510-12,5616-18.

94. A. M. Chreitzberg, Early Methodism in the Carolinas (Nashville, 
Tenn., 1897), p. 158-59.

95. Du Bois, The Negro Church, p. 29; Ahlstrom, A Religious History of 
the American People, p. 698.

Chapter 595. Du Bois, The Negro Church, p. 29; Ahlstrom, A Religious History of 
the American People, p. 698.

Chapter 5

1. Rawick, ed., The American Slave: A Composite Autobiography, Vol. 
5, Texas Narratives, pt. 4, p. 198. The American Slave is the pub- 
lished version of sixteen typescript volumes of interviews with ex- 
slaves prepared by the Federal Writers’ Project in 1936-38. These 
volumes are Vols. 2-17 in Rawick’s edition. Vols. 18 and 19 consist 
of two volumes of interviews done by Fisk University’s Social Sci- 
ence Division in 1929-30, entitled Unwritten History of Slavery and 
God Struck Me Dead, respectively. Vol. 1 of the series is Rawick’s 
own introduction to the set, entitled From Sundown to Sunup: The 
Making of the Black Community. With regard to “steal away,” Doro- 
thy Scarborough reported that she was told by Dr. Boyd, head of 
the Baptist Publication Society (Negro), various incidents in the 
history of old slave songs. “For example, he said of the familiar old 
spiritual, Steal Away, that it was sung in slavery times when the 
Negroes on a few plantations were forbidden to hold religious ser- 
vices. That was because the masters were afraid of gatherings which 
might lead to insurrections ... So the Negroes would gather in a 
cabin and hold their service by stealth” (Dorothy Scarborough, On 
the Trail of Negro Folk-Songs [Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univer- 
sity Press, 1925], pp. 22-23.

2. John B. Cade, “Out of the Mouths of Ex-Slaves,” Journal of Negro

372

NOTES TO PAGES 214-217

History, 20 (July 1935), 329. Another common notion was that 
slaves would occupy the “kitchen” of heaven and would continue 
there to serve their white masters as on earth. See Rawick, 3, South 
Carolina, pt. 3, p. 20, for an example.

3. Rawick, 6, Alabama, p. 398; Cade, p. 329.3. Rawick, 6, Alabama, p. 398; Cade, p. 329.

4. Rawick, 8, Arkansas, pt. 1, p. 35; see also God Struck Me Dead 
(Philadelphia: Pilgrim Press, 1969), pp. 134^35. I have used the 
Pilgrim Press edition of God Struck Me Dead throughout.

5. Moses Grandy, Narrative of the Life of Moses Grandy, 2nd ed. (Bos- 
ton, 1844), pp. 35-36; Rawick, 7, Mississippi, p. 24 Henry Bibb, 
Narrative of the Life and Adventures of Henry Bibb (New York, 
1849), reprinted in Puttin' On Ole Massa, edited by Gilbert Osofsky 
(New York: Harper & Row, 1969), pp. 123-25; Rawick, 17, Flor- 
ida, p. 166; Fisk University, Unwritten History of Slavery: Autobio- 
graphical Accounts of Negro Ex-Slaves (Washington, D.C.: NCR 
Microcard Editions, 1968), p. 60. This edition is used throughout.

6. Cade, pp. 330-31; Rawick 6, Alabama, p. 433; Fisk, Unwritten 
History, p. 150.

7. Rawick, 16, Tennessee, p. 34. Rawick, 1, From Sundown to Sunup, 
pp. 42-45, citing Mintz on pp. 43-44. Rawick argues that the pots 
recall similar vessels used in religious ceremonies in West Africa and 
the Caribbean to hold water and sacred objects. I find his theory 
unconvincing. For other comments on this custom, see Rawick, 16, 
Alabama, p. 40; 8, Arkansas, pt. 1, p. 295; Scarborough, p. 23. I 
would add one more tentative explanation. Perhaps the overturned 
pot is a fragmentary reflection of an emblem for the West African 
god Eshu Elegba. According to E. Bolaji Idowu, one of Eshu’s 
emblems is “an earthenware pot turned upside down, with a hole in 
its middle.” As noted above, in Africa, in Brazil and in the Carib- 
bean it is obligatory to begin worship with an offering to Eshu- 
Elegba in order to ensure that the order and decorum of the service 
is not disturbed. Could it be that the overturned pot among slaves in 
the United States was a customary symbol of the despacho of Eshu 
whose full meaning had been lost? Idowu, p. 85. See also Alan 
Dundes, Preface to Mother-Wit, pp. xiii-xiv.8. B. A. Botkin, ed., Lay My Burden Down: A Folk History of Slavery 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1945), p. 27. Botkin’s is a 
collection of excerpts from the Federal Writers’ Project interviews.

9. God Struck Me Dead, p. 76; Cade, p. 329.

10. Peter Randolph, Sketches of Slave Life or, Illustrations of the Peculiar 
Institution (Boston, 1855), pp. 30-31.

NOTES TO PAGES 218-225

373

11. Rawick, 4, Texas, pt. 2, pp. 6-7.

12. Rawick, 4, Texas, pt. 1, p. 199.

13. Rawick, 8, Arkansas, pt. 1, p. 9; Fisk, Unwritten History , p. 131; 
Rawick, 16, Tennessee, p. 49; Jacob Stroyer, My Life in the South 
(Salem, Mass., 1898), p. 25; Cade, p. 330; Rawick, 6, Alabama, p. 
416; 13, Georgia, pt. 4, p. 192.

14. Norman R. Yetman, ed. Voices from Slavery (New York: Holt, 
Rinehart & Winston, 1970), pp. 45-46. An excellent selection of 
FWP interviews, given (unlike Botkin) in their entirety. The book 
includes an article on the history of the collection of the narratives.

15. Fisk, Unwritten History, pp. 20, 86, 105, 149; Rawick, 8 , Arkansas, 
pt. 2, p. 128; 3, South Carolina, p. 80: Yetman, p. 56.

16. God Struck Me Dead, pp. 87-88.

17. Robert Anderson, From Slavery to Affluence, p. 23; Rawick, 4, 
Texas, pt. 2, p. 170: Yetman, p. 335.

18. Mary Boykin Chesnut, A Diary From Dixie, edited by Ben Ames 
Williams (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1949), pp. 148-49; 
John Thompson, The Life of John Thompson: A Fugitive Slave 
(Worcester, Mass., 1856), p. 43; American Missionary, 6, (June 
1862), 129.

19. Harry Smith, Fifty Tears of Slavery (Grand Rapids, Mich., 1891), 
p. 38; see a similar account in Rawick, 17, Florida, pp. 243-44.

20. Thompson, pp. 18-19.19. Harry Smith, Fifty Tears of Slavery (Grand Rapids, Mich., 1891), 
p. 38; see a similar account in Rawick, 17, Florida, pp. 243-44.

20. Thompson, pp. 18-19.

21. Anderson, p. 22; Fisk, Unwritten History, p. 108; “We got most of 
our outside news Sunday at church,” claimed Adeline Jackson. 
Rawick, 3, South Carolina, pt. 3, p. 3; Robert Falls, in Rawick, 16, 
Tennessee, p. 14; 13, Georgia, pt. 3, pp. 28, 158, 168-69, 266; 
Arthur Singleton, Letters From the South and West (Boston, 1824), 
p. 75; Olmsted, Journey in the Seaboard States (New York, 1859), p. 
454. Susan Dabney Smedes, A Southern Planter (New York, 1890),

p. 106.

22. Rawick, 13, Georgia, pt. 3, p. 252; 6, Alabama, p. 3; 13, Georgia, 
pt. 3, p. 282; 16, Tennessee, p. 45. See also I. E. Lowery, Life on the 
Old Plantation (Columbia, S. C., 1911), pp. 112-14.

23. Northup, pp. 213-21; Lowery, pp. 64-66; Rawick, 3, South Caro- 
lina, p. 3; Frederick Douglass, The Life and Times of Frederick Dou- 
glass (rev. ed., 1892; London: Collier-Macmillan, 1962), pp. 145- 
47; Stroyer, p. 45.

24. Rawick, 17, Florida, p. 252; Stroyer, pp. 46-47; Joseph Holt Ingra- 
ham, The South-West: By A Yankee, 2 vols. (New York, 1835), 2: 
55-56.

374

NOTES TO PAGES 225-233

25. John Anderson, The Story of the Life of John Anderson (London, 
1863; Freeport, N.Y.: Books for Libraries Press, 1971), p. 130; 
W[illia]m Wells Brown, My Southern Home (Boston, 1880; New 
York: Negro Universities Press, 1969), p. 97.

26. Blassingame, ed. Slave Testimony, p. 643; Burke, Reminiscences of 
Georgia, p. 245; Smith, p. 166; Roper, pp. 63-64.

27. Rawick, 13, Georgia, pt. 3, pp. 252-53; 17, Florida, p. 245; 4, 
Texas, pt. 1, p. 228; 3, South Carolina, pt. 3, p. 19; for a detailed 
and interesting account of a baptismal service soon after slavery 
ended, see 3 , South Carolina, pt. 3, pp. 108-10.

28. Rawick, 12, Georgia, pt. 2, p. 227.28. Rawick, 12, Georgia, pt. 2, p. 227.

29. Ulrich Ronnell Phillips and James David Glunt, Florida Plantation 
Records from the Papers of George Noble Jones, (St. Louis; Missouri 
Historical Society, 1927), p. 31; Rawick, 12, Georgia, pt. 2, p. 227.

30. Lunsford Lane, Narrative of Lunsford Lane (Boston, 1842), p. 11.

31. Rawick, 4, Texas, pt. 1, p. 293; Brown, My Southern Home, p. 46; 
Rawick, 8, Arkansas, pt. 2, p. 128; 4, Texas , pt. 1, pp. 206-7; Fisk, 
Unwritten History, p. 107; John Anderson, p. 10; Olmsted, Seaboard 
Slave States, p. 449. Priscilla “Mittie” Munnikhuysen Bond, MS 
Diary, 1858-1865 (Louisiana State University), entry Saturday, 
January 4, 1862; Lowery, pp. 58-63.

32. Benjamin Drew, The Refugee: A North-Side View of Slavery (Bos- 
ton, 1856), p. 131; Gumbo Ta-Ta, p. 239; Blassingame, Slave Testi- 
mony, p. 139-40; Stroyer, p. 16.

33. Rawick, 17 , Florida, pp. 16-17; 6, Alabama, p. 284; Olmsted, Sea- 
board Slave States, p. 449; Frances Anne Kemble, Journal of a 
Residence on a Georgia Plantation in 1838-1839 (London, 1863), 
pp. 139-43; Arthur Singleton, p. 77; Randolph, pp. 13-14; Raw- 
ick, 16, Tennessee, p. 45; see also God Struck Me Dead, p. 78; 
Olmsted, Cotton Kingdom, 1: 43-45; Rawick, 16, Ohio, p. 116; 16, 
Maryland, p. 9; 13, Georgia, pt. 3, pp. 61, 282; 4, Texas, pt. 1, p. 
271; Gumbo Ya-Ta, p. 244; Charles Emery Stevens, Anthony Burns; 
A History (Boston, 1856; New York: Arno Press and The New 
York Times, 1969), p. 167.

34. [Charles Raymond,] “The Religious Life of the Negro Slave,” 
Harper's New Monthly Magazine, 27 (1863), 678; Rawick, 13, Geor- 
gia, pt. 3, p. 330; Long, pp. 19-20.

35. Fisk, Unwritten History, p. 59; Rawick, 4, Texas, pt. 2, p. 9.

36. Rawick, 4, Texas, pt. 2, p. 44; Henry Clay Bruce, The New Man: 
Twenty Nine Years a Slave, Twenty Nine Years a Free Man (York, 
Pa., 1895), p. 73; Drew, p. 83.

NOTES TO PAGES 233-238

37536. Rawick, 4, Texas, pt. 2, p. 44; Henry Clay Bruce, The New Man: 
Twenty Nine Years a Slave, Twenty Nine Years a Free Man (York, 
Pa., 1895), p. 73; Drew, p. 83.

NOTES TO PAGES 233-238

375

37. Blassingame, Slave Testimony p. 643. Rawick, 17, Florida, pp. 214- 
15; Fisk, Unwritten History , p. 132.

38. James L. Smith, Autobiography of James L. Smith (Norwich, Conn., 
1881) reprinted in Five Black Lives (Middletown, Conn.: Wesleyan 
University Press, 1971), p. 165.

39. Rawick, 6, Alabama, p. 390; Fisk, Unwritten History , p. 25; Drew, 
p. 91; Randolph, p. 26; Kemble, pp. 67, 199-200; see also Fisk, 
Unwritten History , pp. 73, 109; Bruce, p. 72; Duncan C. Heyward, 
Seed From Madagascar (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina 
Press, 1937), pp. 198-99; see also Smedes, p. 79.

40. Fisk, Unwritten History , p. 46; Rawick, 4, Texas , pt. 2, p. 51; Yet- 
man, p. 335. Olmsted observed a funeral in Richmond, Va., at 
which the black preacher “held a handkerchief before him as if it 
were a book, and pronounced a short exhortation as if he were 
reading from it.” Cotton Kingdom , 1: 44.

41. Yetman, p. 95; Raymond, pp. 485, 677; see also Rawick, 6,Albama, 
p. 52; Charles Augustus Murray, Travels in North America During 
the Years 1834, 1835, 1836, 2 vols. (New York, 1839), cited in 
Katherine M. Jones, ed., The Plantation South (Indianapolis, Ind.: 
Bobbs-Merrill Company, 1957), pp. 35-36.

42. Olmsted, Seaboard Slave States, pp. 450-51; David Macrae, The 
Americans at Home, 2 vols. (Edinburgh, 1870), 2: 108; see also God 
Struck Me Dead, pp. 74, 84.

43. American Missionary, 12 (February 1868), 29.

44. George H. Hepworth, The Whip, Hoe, and Sword or the Gulf Depart- 
ment in '63 (Boston, 1864), pp. 165-68.

45. American Missionary, 8 (April 1864), 100.

46. A. M. French, Slavery in South Carolina and the Ex-Slaves; or, The 
Port Royal Mission (New York, 1862), p. 131.45. American Missionary, 8 (April 1864), 100.

46. A. M. French, Slavery in South Carolina and the Ex-Slaves; or, The 
Port Royal Mission (New York, 1862), p. 131.

47. Bruce Rosenberg, The Art of the American Folk Preacher (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1970) is the most detailed analysis of this 
tradition; see also William H. Pipes, Say Amen Brother! Old-Time 
Negro Preaching (New York: William-Frederick Press, 1951); 
Whitelaw Reid, After the War: A Tour of the Southern States 1865 - 
1866, edited by C. Vann Woodward (New York: Harper & Row, 
1965), p. 521.

48. Olmsted, Cotton Kingdom, 2: 104; American Missionary, 13 (Febru- 
ary 1869): 28.

49. Douglass, Life and Times, pp. 90-92, 94; Kemble, pp. 102-3; Let- 
ters and Diary of Laura M. Towne, 1862-1884, edited by Rupert 
Sargent Holland (Cambridge, Mass.: Riverside Press, 1912), pp.

376

NOTES TO PAGES 239-243

144—45; C. C. Jones, Jr., Negro Myths from the Georgia Sea Coast 
(Boston, 1888), p. 159; Simms, the First Colored Baptist Church in 
North America, p. 19.

50. Rawick, 13, Georgia, pt. 3, p. 97; Yetman, p. 36; see also 6, Ala- 
bama, p. 433.

51. Carter G. Woodson, Education of the Negro Prior to 1861, p. 221; 
Macrae, 2: 113; [Elizabeth Ware Pierson, ed.,] Letters From Port 
Royal , 1862-1868 (Boston, 1906; New York: Amo Press and the 
New York Times, 1969), p. 65; see also Macrae, 1: 229-30; 2: 108, 
111-16; and American Missionary , 7 (April 1863): 91; (September 
1863), 208; (October 1863), 231; and passim.52. Sir Charles Lyell, A Second Visit to the U.S., 1: 203, 271; Olmsted, 
Cotton Kingdom, 2: 70-71; Frederick Douglass, Narrative of the Life 
of Frederick Douglass (Boston, 1845; Garden City, N.Y.: Dolphin 
Books, Doubleday & Company, 1963), p. 41; Elijah P. Marrs, Life 
and History of the Rev. Elijah P. Marrs (Louisville, Ky., 1885; Mi- 
ami, Fla.: Mnemosyne Publishing Co., 1969), p. 12; Rawick, 14, 
North Carolina, pt. 1, p. 95; see also Grandy, p. 36; American Mission- 
ary, 11 (September, 1867): 194—95.

53. Third Annual Report, Liberty County, Georgia, Association (1836), p. 
4; William H. Heard, From Slavery to the Bishopric (Philadelphia: 
A.M.E. Book Concern, 1924), pp. 31-32; American Missionary, 10 
(September, 1866): 197.

54. Macrae, 2: 95; American Missionary, 6 (June 1862): 138; 11 
(March 1867): 65; 14 (May 1870): 103; 8 (April 1864): 105; 7 
(April 1863): 81.

55. American Missionary, 12 (January 1868): 9; 14 (September- Oc- 
tober 1870): 194, 221; Long, p. 288.

56. Harold Courlander, Negro Folk Music, U.S.A. (New York and Lon- 
don: Columbia University Press, 1963), p. 35. The interpretations 
of the spirituals which I have found most persuasive are those of 
Lawrence Levine, “Slave Songs and Slave Consciousness: An Ex- 
ploration in Nineteenth-Century Social History, edited by Tamara 
K. Hareven (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1971), pp. 99- 
130; H. H. Proctor, “The Theology of the Songs of the Southern 
Slave,” Southern Workman , Vol. 36, Nos. 11, 12 (November- De- 
cember 1907), pp. 584—92, 652-56; John Lovell, Jr., “The Social 
Implications of the Negro Spiritual,” Journal of Negro Education, 8 
(October 1939): 634—43; reprinted in The Social Implications of 
Early Negro Music in the United States, Bernard Katz, ed. (New 
York: Arno Press and The New York Times, 1969), pp. 127-37;

NOTES TO PAGES 244-250

377NOTES TO PAGES 244-250

377

Le Roy Moore, Jr., “The Spiritual: Soul of Black Religion,” Ameri- 
can Quarterly , Vol. 23, No. 5 (December 1971), pp. 658-76.

57. Smith, pp. 162-63.

58. Harris Barrett, “Negro Folk Songs,” The Southern Workman, Vol. 
41, No. 4 (April 1912), pp. 238-45.

59. Jeannette Robinson Murphy, “The Survival of African Music in 
America,” Popular Science Monthly, 55 (New York 1899): 660-72, 
reprinted in Bruce Jackson, ed., The Negro and His Folklore , pp. 
328-29.

60. See “Marcel,” [W. F. Allen] “The Negro Dialect,” Nation 1 (De- 
cember 14, 1865): 744-45, reprinted in Bruce Jackson, ed., The 
Negro and His Folklore, pp. 78-81; Robert Gordon, “Negro ‘Shouts’ 
from Georgia,” The New York Times Magazine, April 24, 1927, 
reprinted in Dundes, ed., Mother Wit, pp. 447-48. Gordon explains: 
“Not all spirituals were shouted. But whenever spirituals were sung 
they demanded a certain rhythmic movement of the body. This 
might be confined on formal occasions to a mere swaying backward 
and forward; it might on other occasions include a tapping of the feet 
or a patting of the hands; if opportunity offered, it might extend to 
real shouting.” See also “The Negro Spiritual,” The Carolina Low- 
Country, Augustine T. Smyth et al. [The Society for the Preserva- 
tion of the Spirituals] (New York: Macmillan Company, 1931), p. 
198; Slave Songs of the United States, pp. xv-xvi.

61. J[ames Miller] McKim, “Negro Songs,” Dwight's Journal of Music, 
19 (August 9, 1862): 148-49, reprinted in Katz, ed., Soria/ Impli- 
cations of Early Negro Music , p. 2.

62. Fisk, Unwritten History, p. 142.

63. Douglass, Life and Times, pp. 159-60.

64. Thomas Wentworth Higginson, Army Life in a Black Regiment 
(Boston, 1869; Boston: Beacon Press, 1962), pp. 217-18.

65. William A. Sinclair, The Aftermath of Slavery (Boston: Small May- 
nard & Company, 1905), p. 15.

66. Macrae, The Americans at Home, 2: 100.65. William A. Sinclair, The Aftermath of Slavery (Boston: Small May- 
nard & Company, 1905), p. 15.

66. Macrae, The Americans at Home, 2: 100.

67. Booker T. Washington, Up From Slavery (New York, 1901), re- 
printed in Three Negro Classics (New York: Avon Books, 1965), p. 
39.

68. .And “Making a way out of no-way,” Zora Neale Hurston, in “High 
John de Conquer,” The American Mercury, 57 (1943): 450-58, 
reprinted in Dundes, ed., Mother-Wit , p. 543.

69. Levine is using Mircea Eliade’s concept of the sacred. See Levine, 
“Slave Songs and Slave Consciousness,” pp. 114—15, and Mircea

378

NOTES TO PAGES 251-260

Eliade, The Sacred and the Profane (New York: Harper & Row, 
1961).

70. Vincent Harding, “The Uses of the Afro-American Past,” The Reli- 
gious Situation, 1969, edited by Donald R. Cutter (Boston: Beacon 
Press, 1969), pp. 829-40. George Pullen Jackson has demonstrated 
the similarity of verses and tunes in a significant number of black 
and white spirituals. See Jackson, White Spirituals in the Southern 
Uplands (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1933), 
pp. 274-302; White and Negro Spirituals (New York: J. J. Augus- 
tin Publisher, 1943), pp. 146-227, 306-25; Spiritual Folk Songs of 
Early America (Locust Valley, N. Y.: J. J. Augustin Publisher, 
1953), pp. 169-240.

71. Slave Songs, p. 13.

72. Higginson, pp. 216-17. He felt that this may have been a “mod- 
ification” of an old camp-meeting hymn.

73. Slave Songs , p. 36.

74. Macrae, 2: 97.

75. Higginson, p. 205.

76. [Charlotte Forten] “Life on the Sea Islands,” Atlantic Monthly, 13 
(May 1864): 589.

77. Marcel [W. F. Allen]“The Negro Dialect,” in Jackson, Negro and 
His Folklore , p. 78.

78. Higginson, p. 212; Slave Songs, pp. 14, 84.

79. Slave Songs, p. 13; Macrae, 2: 102.

80. Fisk, Unwritten History, p. 21.

81. Slave Songs, pp. 4-5; Smith, p. 162.

82. Interview with Lorenzo Ezell in Rawick, 4, Texas, pt. 2, p. 26.79. Slave Songs, p. 13; Macrae, 2: 102.

80. Fisk, Unwritten History, p. 21.

81. Slave Songs, pp. 4-5; Smith, p. 162.

82. Interview with Lorenzo Ezell in Rawick, 4, Texas, pt. 2, p. 26.

83. Eliza Frances Andrews, The War-Time Journal of a Georgia Girl 
(New York: D. Appleton & Company, 1908), p. 90; Slave Songs, p. 
72, Higginson, p. 207.

84. Slave Songs, p. 57.

85. Ibid., p. 95.

86. [Forten] “Life on the Sea Islands,” p. 594.

87. Higginson, p. 203.

88. Slave Songs, pp. 12, 55; Higginson, pp. 206, 212, 216-17.

89. Slave Songs, pp. 30-31.

90. Fisk, Unwritten History, p. 20.

91. Macrae, 2: 102; Slave Songs, p. 55.

92. Slave Songs, p. 2.

93. Higginson, p. 210; Slave Songs, p. 15; J. Ralph Jones, “Portraits of 
Georgia Slaves,” The Georgia Review, Vol. 21, No. 1 (Spring 1967),

p. 128.

NOTES TO PAGES 260-271

379

94. Slave Songs, pp. 10-11

95. Ibid., p. 94.

96. Slave Songs, p. 101; Higginson, p. 209.

97- Higginson, p. 203.

98. Slave Songs, p. 12.

99. Stroyer, pp. 40-41.

100. Higginson, p. 207; Slave Songs, pp. 69, 105.

101. Slave Songs, p. 53; see Revelation, 6:12-13.

102. Slave Songs, pp.. 25, 43, 73.

103. Andrews, War-Time Journal , p. 90.

104. Frances Butler Leigh, Ten Years on a Georgia Plantation Since the 
War (London, 1883), p. 254; Gordon, “Negro Spirituals,” Caro- 
lina Low-Country, p. 201. Leigh, writing in 1867, noted: “A negro 
must dance and sing, and as their religion, which is very strict in 
such matters, forbids secular dancing, they take it out in religious 
exercise, call it ‘shouting,’ and explained to me that the difference 
between the two was, that in their religious dancing they did not 
‘lift the heal’ ( Ten Years, p. 59).

105. Macrae, 2: 105; see also Hepworth, pp. 164-65.

106. American Missionary, 10 (May 1866): 103; Macrae, 2: 105-7.

107. Rawick, 3, South Carolina, pt. 3, p. 81; see also Rawick, 16, Ten- 
nessee, pp. 7, 45-46.106. American Missionary, 10 (May 1866): 103; Macrae, 2: 105-7.

107. Rawick, 3, South Carolina, pt. 3, p. 81; see also Rawick, 16, Ten- 
nessee, pp. 7, 45-46.

108. W. E. Burghardt Du Bois, The Souls of Black Folk (Chicago, 1903; 
New York: Fawcett Publications, 1968), p. 141.

109. Marrs, p. 13; Stevens, Anthony Burns, p. 163; Henson, p. 30; see 
also Leonard Black, The Life and Sufferings of Leonard Black (New 
Bedford, 1847), pp. 20-21; Macrae, 2: 90-97.

110. Fisk, Unwritten History, p. 106; God Struck Me Dead, pp. 19, 45.

111. Letter from Liele is excerpted in Rippon’s Register, pp. 332-33.

112. William R. Ferris, Jr., refers to the classical terminology, “sense of 
sin, purgation, union with God,” in his discussion of “The Negro 
Conversion,” Keystone Folklore Quarterly, 14 (Spring 1970): 35- 
51; God Struck Me Dead, p. 23.

113. Raymond, pp. 680-82; God Struck Me Dead, p. 78; see also Jones, 
Religious Instruction, pp. 125-26; Macrae, 2: 90-97; Fisk, Unwrit- 
ten History, pp. 74, 112; American Missionary, 10 (May 1866): 
113-14.

114. God Struck Me Dead, pp. 18, 45-46; and passim; Randolph, pp. 
25-26; see also American Missionary, 8 (May 1864): 127.

115. Ibid., Epilogue.

116. See Introduction to God Struck Me Dead, pp. xvii-xix.

117. John T. Gillard, Colored Catholics in the United States (Baltimore,

380

NOTES TO PAGES 272-277

Md.: Josephite Press, 1941), p. 95; Roger Baudier, The Catholic 
Church in Louisiana (New Orleans: n.p., 1939), p. 433; for a dif- 
ferent evaluation of the success of Catholic missionaries among Lou- 
isiana slaves, see Taylor, Negro Slavery in Louisiana , pp. 134-35; 
V. Alton Moody, Slavery on Louisiana Sugar Plantations (re- 
printed from The Louisiana Historical Quarterly, April 1924), pp. 
90-93.

118. Gillard, p. 106; Gumbo Ya-Ya, p. 242; Olmsted, Cotton Kingdom, 
2: 35-36.118. Gillard, p. 106; Gumbo Ya-Ya, p. 242; Olmsted, Cotton Kingdom, 
2: 35-36.

119. Some might consider the Healy brothers, James, Alexander, and 
Patrick, to have been the first Negro priests in the United States, 
but as Gillard notes: “While it was generally known that the Healy 
brothers were colored, they were not known as Negro priests in the 
sense that the term is usually taken” — i.e., they did not minister 
among black people (Gillard, p. 185). For another view, see Albert 
S. Foley, Gods Men of Color (New York: Farrar, Straus, 1955).

120. Harriet Martineau, Retrospect of Western Travel, 2 vols (New York, 
1838), 1: 259; Harrison A. Trexler, Slavery in Missouri, 1804- 
1865 (Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins Press, 1914), p. 86; see also 
James M. Phillippo, The United States and Cuba (London, 1857), 
p. 310.

121. Pierre Landry, “From Slavery to Freedom,” unpublished memoirs, 
cited by Charles Bathelemy Rousseve, The Negro in Louisiana 
(New Orleans: Xavier University Press, 1937), p. 39. Landry later 
converted to Methodism, became a minister and, during Recon- 
struction, a state senator.

122. See Foley, pp. 32-51, and Richard, Cardinal Cushing’s Foreword, 
pp. v-vi.

123. American Missionary, 12 (October 1869): 227; 13 (March 1870): 
62; see Gillard, Colored Catholics. A case could be made, of course, 
that in hemispheric perspective the majority of Afro-Americans are 
Catholics. The history of black Catholics in the United States has 
yet to be written.

124. Rawick, 17 , Florida, p. 136.

125. Leonora Herron and Alice M. Bacon, “Conjuring and Conjure- 
Doctors,” Southern Workman, 24 (1895): 117-18, 193-94, 209- 
11, reprinted in Mother Wit from the Laughing Barrel, edited by 
Alan Dundes — see p. 360 for quotation. Herron was a librarian and 
Bacon a teacher at Hampton Institute. In writing this pioneering 
article they used a series of essays about conjure written in 1878 by 
Hampton students. See also Puckett, Magic and Folk Beliefs, pp.NOTES TO PAGES 277-283

381

200-6. Most conjurers were male, but C. C. Jones, Jr., claimed 
that old women had a monopoly on conjuring along the coast of 
Georgia and the Carolinas. Negro Myths from the Georgia Coast 
(Boston and New York, 1888), pp. 151-52. 1 have found no 
confirmation of his contention. However, most witches — in keeping 
with the almost universal custom — were female.

126. A point discussed by Elliott Jacob Gorn in a superb analysis of 
conjure which has heavily influenced my comments. See No 
White Man Could Whip Me’: Folk Beliefs of the Slave Commu- 
nity,” M.A. thesis, Folklore, University of California, Berkeley, 
1975; Herron and Bacon, pp. 362-64.

127. Herron and Bacon, p. 364; Puckett, Magic and Folk Beliefs , pp. 
222-24.

128. Rawick, 4, Texas, pt. 2, pp. 64-65.

129. Puckett, Magic and Folk Beliefs, pp. 233-34.

130. Georgia Writers’ Project, Drums and Shadows, p. 36.

131. Rawick, 13, Georgia, pt. 3, p. 344; Georgia Writers’ Project, 
Drums and Shadows, p. 25; Herron and Bacon, p. 365.

132. Herron and Bacon, p. 367.

133. Bibb, p. 30.

134. Rawick, 6, Alabama, p. 322.

135. Brown, Narrative, pp. 90-92.

136. Puckett, pp. 208-9.

137. Stroyer, p. 54.

138. Douglass, Life and Times, pp. 136-39.

139. Puckett, p. 571.

140. The effectiveness of a love potion offered for sale by one New 
Orleans conjurer was augmented by advice to “gib de ’oman eb- 
bything she laks and lots up hit — nebber cross her en make er 
mad . . . Show her all de time dat she’s de onliest ’oman you 
wants” — Puckett, “Race Pride and Folklore,” Opportunity, Vol. 4, 
No. 39 (1966), pp. 82-84, reprinted in Dundes, Mother Wit, pp. 
6-7.

141. Brown, My Southern Home, pp. 68-81; Blassingame, Slave Com- 
munity, p. 49.

142. Rawick, 6, Indiana, pp. 47-49. Former slave from Tennessee, 
speaking of his own children who imitated his cousin a conjurer.142. Rawick, 6, Indiana, pp. 47-49. Former slave from Tennessee, 
speaking of his own children who imitated his cousin a conjurer.

143. Fisk, Unwritten History, p. 46; Rawick, 13, Georgia, pt. 3, p. 216. 
For examples of the view that whites could be conjured, see Ra- 
wick, 11, Arkansas, pt. 7, pp. 20-21; 6, Alabama, pp. 169, 223; 
Puckett, Magic and Folk Beliefs, p. 275. For denials that whites

382

NOTES TO PAGES 283-288

could be conjured, see Rawick, 7, Oklahoma , p. 204; 11, Missouri , 
pp. 250-51. Many whites, of course, believed in conjuration and 
formed, e.g., in New Orleans, a large part of the conjurers’ clien- 
tele.

144. Herron and Bacon, p. 361; Puckett, p. 276; Bibb, pp. 26-27.

145. Genovese, Roll , Jordan , Roll , pp. 217-18; Blassingame, Slave 
Community, pp. 48-49.

146. Jones, Religious Instruction, p. 128.

147. Trial Record of Denmark Vesey, pp. 77-78; 7; also pp. 15-16, 63. 1 
have noted above the aspects of conjure involved in Gabriel’s Insur- 
rection.

148. Douglass, Life and Times, p. 137; Brown, My Southern Home, pp. 
10-11; Georgia Writers’ Project, Drums and Shadows , pp. 25-26, 
31, 76, 88, 143, 146-48; Genovese, Roll, Jordan, Roll, pp. 217- 
18.

149. Elsie Clews Parson, Folk Lore of the Sea Islands, South Carolina 
(Cambridge, Mass., and New York: American Folklore Society, 
1923) pp. 61-63, reprinted in A Documentary History of Slavery in 
North America, Willie Lee Rose, ed. (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1976) pp. 249-50.

150. Thaddeus Norris, “Negro Superstitions,” Lippincott's Magazine, 6 
(July 1870); 90-95, reprinted in The Negro and His Folklore, 
edited by Bruce Jackson.

151. C. C. Jones, Jr. Negro Myths, pp. 157-58; Herron and Bacon, p. 
360.

152. Rawick, 4, Texas , pt. 2, p. 3; 6, Alabama , pp. 36-37.151. C. C. Jones, Jr. Negro Myths, pp. 157-58; Herron and Bacon, p. 
360.

152. Rawick, 4, Texas , pt. 2, p. 3; 6, Alabama , pp. 36-37.

153. Herron and Bacon, p. 366; Norman E. Whitten, Jr., “Contempo- 
rary Patterns of Malign Occultism Among Negroes in North Caro- 
lina,” Mother Wit, edited by Dundes, p. 414; M. J. Field, Search for 
Security: An Ethno-Psychiatric Study of Rural Ghana. ([Evanston, 
111.:] Northwestern University Press, 1960), p. 40; Puckett, Magic 
and Folk Belief, pp. 565-67, 573-74; Gorn, p. 35. As noted above, 
Denmark Vesey’s conspiracy was one outstanding example of the 
compatibility of Christianity and conjure represented, respectively, 
by the class leaders of the A.M.E. Church of Charleston and Gul- 
lah Jack Pritchard. In the twentieth century, Puckett states that he 
was acquainted with several conjurer-ministers, Magic and Folk 
Beliefs (p. 565). A fascinating story from the late nineteenth cen- 
tury demonstrating the power of conjure over an educated black 
minister and his congregation is told by Jeannette Robinson 
Murphy, a white Southern woman interested in preserving the old

NOTES TO PAGES 289-299

383

spirituals and folklore of former slaves. See “The Survival of Afri- 
can Music in America,” Popular Science Monthly , 55 (New York, 
1899): 1660-672, reprinted in Jackson, pp. 333-34.

Chapter 6

1. Henry L. Swint, ed., Dear Ones at Home: Letters from Contraband 
Camps (Nashville, Tenn.: Vanderbilt University Press, 1966), p. 
124.

2. Petition cited by St. Clair Drake, The Redemption of Africa and 
Black Religion (Chicago: Third World Press, 1970), pp. 23-24

3. Douglass, Life and Times , p. 41.

4. Ball, pp. 221-22; also see Rawick, 4, Texas, pt. 1, p. 281.

5. Burke, Reminiscences of Georgia, p. 47; God Struck Me Dead, p. 161; 
Anderson, p. 129; Lewis and Milton Clarke, Narratives of Lewis 
and Milton Clarke (Boston, 1846), pp. 113-14, 118-19.5. Burke, Reminiscences of Georgia, p. 47; God Struck Me Dead, p. 161; 
Anderson, p. 129; Lewis and Milton Clarke, Narratives of Lewis 
and Milton Clarke (Boston, 1846), pp. 113-14, 118-19.

6. John Brown, Slave Life in Georgia, edited by L. A. Chamerovzow 
(London, 1855), pp. 203-4.

7. Drew, pp. 68, 234—35.

8. William Wells Brown, Narrative, p. 34; Drew, pp. 62-63; A- M. 
French, Slavery in South Carolina and the Ex-Slaves; or, The Port 
Royal Mission (New York, 1862), p. 127.

9. Rawick, 17, Florida, p. 98; Lunsford Lane, pp. 20-21.

10. Tenth Annual Report, Liberty County Association (1845), pp. 24—25.

11. Lewis and Milton Clarke, p. 105.

12. Moses Roper, A Narrative of the Adventures and Escape of Moses 
Roper, 3rd ed. (London, 1839), p. 62.

13. Rawick, 4, Texas, pt. 2, p. 163; Drew, p. 247; Rawick, 13, Georgia, 
pt. 4, p. 185.

14. Rawick, 8, Arkansas, pt. 2, p. 259; Bibb, p. 166; Lewis and Milton 
Clarke, p. 119; see also Stroyer, pp. 57-59; Henson, p. 25; Dou- 
glass, Life and Times, pp. 104—6; Drew, p. 247.

15. William Wells Brown, My Southern Home, p. 52; John Brown, 
Slave Life in Georgia, edited by F. N. Boney (first published 1855; 
reprinted Savannah: The Beehive Press, 1972), pp. 71-72; Jones, 
Religious Instruction, p. 130.

16. Stroyer, p. 29; Rawick, 6, Alabama, p. 223.

17. Capers cited in Mathews, p. 76; Jones, Religious Instruction, p. 126.

18. Thomas Turpin, Christian Advocate and Journal, 8 (January 31, 
1834), cited in Crum, Gullah, pp. 219-20.

384

NOTES TO PAGES 299-310

19. Charles Stearns, The Black Man of the South and the Rebels (New 
York, 1872), pp. 355, 373-74, 381.

20. Olmsted, Seaboard Slave States, pp. 123-24.384

NOTES TO PAGES 299-310

19. Charles Stearns, The Black Man of the South and the Rebels (New 
York, 1872), pp. 355, 373-74, 381.

20. Olmsted, Seaboard Slave States, pp. 123-24.

21. Frances Butler Leigh, Ten Years on a Georgia Plantation Since the 
War (London, 1883), p. 164; Smalls’ testimony is cited by Herbert 
G. Gutman, The Black Family in Slavery and Freedom , 1750-1925 
(New York; Pantheon Books, 1976), p. 63. See Gutman, pp. 61- 
74, for extended comment on sexual mores among slaves before and 
after marriage.

22. William Grimes, Life of William Grimes (New Haven, Conn., 
1855); reprinted in Five Black Lives, pp. 198-99.

23. Solomon Bayley, A Narrative of Some Remarkable Incidents in the 
Life of Solomon Bayley (London, 1825), pp. 25-26; Drew, p. 181; 
see also God Struck Me Dead , p. 40.

24. Grimes, in Five Black Lives, pp. 83-84; see also interview with 
Charity Bowery in The Emancipator, April 5, 1848, reprinted in 
Blassingame, ed. Slave Testimony, pp. 261-67.

25. Henson, pp. 46-48.

26. Drew, p. 55; Rawick, 6, Alabama, p. 131; God Struck Me Dead, p. 
83; Rawick, 3, South Carolina, pt. 3, p. 105; Yetman, p. 75; Fisk, 
Unwritten History , p. 148.

27. Drew, p. 29; John Thompson, pp. 75-78; William and Ellen Craft, 
Running a Thousand Miles for Freedom (London, 1860); reprinted 
in Great Slave Narratives , edited by Arna Bontemps (Boston: Bea- 
con Press, 1969), p. 292.

28. G. W. Offley, A Narrative of the Life and Labors of Rev. G. W. Offley 
(Hartford, Conn., 1860); reprinted in Five Black Lives, 134-35.

29. For the story of Dinkie see Chapter 5, p. 282.

30. Thomas Jones, Narrative of a Refugee Slave: The Experience of Tho- 
mas Jones (Springfield, Mass., 1854), pp. 20-27; Drew, pp. 269- 
70; “The Lost Is Found,” Voice of the Fugitive (January 15, Febru- 
ary 26, March 11, April 22, June 3, 1852); reprinted in Blassin- 
game, ed. Slave Testimony, pp. 276-78.31. Rawick 6, Indiana, pp. 158-59; American Missionary [ser. 2] 7 
(February 1863): 38.

32. A. M. French, pp. 133-34.

33. J. Ralph Jones, “Portraits of Georgia Slaves,” Georgia Review, 21 
(Summer 1967): 272; American Missionary, [ser. 2] 11 (May 1862): 
102.

34. Radin, Foreword, God Struck Me Dead, p. vii; Drew, pp. 80, 111, 
237-38.

NOTES TO PAGES 310-323

385

35. Barbara Leigh Smith Bodichon, An American Diary, 1857-8, edited 
by Joseph W. Reed, Jr. (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1972), 
p. 65, diary entry of 12 December 1857; Bremer, Homes of the New 
World, 1:291; American Missionary [ser. 2] 6 (June 1862): 138.

36. Rawick, 17, Florida, p. 142; David Smith, Biography of Rev. David 
Smith (Xenia, Ohio, 1881), p. 12.

37. W.G. Kiphant, Letter of May 9, 1864, Decatur, Ala., A.M.A. Ar- 
chives, Amistad Research Center, Dillard University, New Orleans.

38. American Missionary [ser. 2] 11 (May 1867): 102; Thomas L. 
Johnson, Twenty-Eight Years a Slave (Bournemouth, England: W. 
Mate & Sons, 1909), pp. 29-30.

39. Mary A. Livermore, My Story of the War (Hartford, Conn., 1889),

pp. 260-61.

40. Fisk, Unwritten History, p. 38; Douglas C. Strange, “Document: 
Bishop Daniel Alexander Payne’s Protestation of American Slav- 
ery,” Journal of Negro History, 52 (January 1967): 63.

41. Douglass, Life and Times, p. 135; Charles Carleton Coffin, The Boys 
of ‘61; or Four Years of Fighting (Boston, 1886), p. 415; Long, p. 
127; for a discussion of Douglass’ religious skepticism see William 
L. Van Deburg, “Frederick Douglass: Maryland Slave to Religious 
Liberal,” Maryland Historical Magazine 69 (Spring 1974): 27-42.

42. W. P. Harrison, The Gospel Among the Slaves (Nashville, Tenn., 
1893), p. 287; Irving E. Lowery, Life on the Old Plantation (Co- 
lumbia, S.C., 1911), pp. 70-71, cited by Crum, p. 190.42. W. P. Harrison, The Gospel Among the Slaves (Nashville, Tenn., 
1893), p. 287; Irving E. Lowery, Life on the Old Plantation (Co- 
lumbia, S.C., 1911), pp. 70-71, cited by Crum, p. 190.

43. Tenth Annual Report, Liberty County Georgia Association (1845), 
p. 32; Brown, My Southern Home, p. 3; Bruce, pp. 71—72; Par- 
thenia Antoinette Hague, A Blockaded Family (Boston, 1889), pp. 
10 - 11 .

44. Elijah P. Marrs, Life and History of Rev. Elijah P. Marrs (Louisville, 
Ky., 1885), p. 14.

45. God Struck Me Dead, pp. 15-18.

Conclusion

1. American Missionary, Vol. 6, No. 2 (February 1862), p. 33.

Afterword

1. Sydney E. Ahlstrom, A Religious History of the American People 
(New Haven: Yale University Press, 1972); John W. Blassingame,

386

NOTES TO PAGES 324-328

The Slave Community: Plantation Life in the Antebellum South 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1972); John W. Blassingame, 
ed., Slave Testimony: Two Centuries of Letters, Speeches, Interviews, 
and Autobiographies (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University 
Press, 1977).

2. Armstead L. Robinson, Craig C. Foster, and Donald H. Ogilvie, 
eds., Black Studies in the University: A Symposium (New Haven: 
Yale University Press, 1969).

3. Edmund S. Morgan, “Slavery and Freedom: The American Para- 
dox,” Journal of American History 59 (1972): 1-29; American Slav- 
ery, American Freedom: The Ordeal of Colonial Virginia (New York: 
W.W. Norton, 1975).

4. David W. Wills, “The Central Themes of American Religious His- 
tory: Pluralism, Puritanism and the Encounter of Black and 
White,” in Timothy E. Fulop and Albert J. Raboteau, eds., African 
American Religion: Interpretive Essays in History and Culture (New 
York: Routledge, 1997), pp. 7—20.5. Eugene D. Genovese, Roll, Jordan, Roll: The World the Slaves Made 
(New York: Random House, 1974); Lawrence W. Levine, Black 
Culture and Black Consciousness: Afro-American Folk Thought from 
Slavery to Freedom (New York: Oxford University Press, 1977). 
Previous histories of slavery, including those of U. B. Phillips, Ken- 
neth Stampp, and Stanley Elkins, had discounted the reliability of 
slave narratives, and Elkins had depicted slaves as demoralized and 
infantilized victims of a totalizing institution.

6. Olli Alho, The Religion of the Slaves: A Study of the Religious Tra- 
dition and Behaviour of Plantation Slaves in the United States 1830- 
1865, FF Communications No. 217 (Helsinki, 1976); Mechal Sobel, 
Trabelin’ On: The Slave Journey to an Afro-Baptist Faith (Westport, 
Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1979). For a more recent synthetic ac- 
count see Sylvia R. Frey and Betty Wood, Come Shouting to Zion: 
African American Protestantism in the American South and British 
Caribbean to 1830 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 
1998).

7. Albert J. Raboteau and David W. Wills, “Editorial Statement 
(Working Draft, December 1999), African-American Religion: A 
Documentary History Project.” See the project website: www 
.amherst.edu/aardoc/Editorial_Statement.

8. John Thornton, Africa and African in the Making of the Atlantic 
World, 1400—1800, 2nd ed. (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1998) is the major statement of this thesis. For treatments of

NOTES TO PAGES 329-330

387

the Atlantic world influence of Central Africa see also Linda M. 
Heywood, ed., Central Africans and Cultural Transformations in the 
American Diaspora (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,387

the Atlantic world influence of Central Africa see also Linda M. 
Heywood, ed., Central Africans and Cultural Transformations in the 
American Diaspora (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,

2002) ; James H. Sweet, Recreating Africa: Culture, Kinship, and 
Religion in the African-Portuguese World, 1441-1770 (Chapel Hill: 
University of North Carolina Press, 2003). Michael A. Gomez has 
made the most ambitious attempt to identify and analyze the Afri- 
can ethnic origins of slave culture in the United States in Exchang- 
ing Our Country Marks: The Transformation of African Identities 
in the Colonial and Antebellum South (Chapel Hill: University of 
North Carolina Press, 1998). A classic statement of the aesthetic 
influences of discrete African societies upon the Americas is Robert 
Farris Thompson, Flash of the Spirit: African and Afro-American 
Art and Philosophy (New York: Random House, 1983).

9. For the strongest criticism of the current trend to identify African 
ethnic groups and nations in the Atlantic slave system see Philip 
D. Morgan, “The Cultural Implications of the Atlantic Slave Trade: 
African Regional Origins, American Destinations and New World 
Developments,” Slavery Abolition: A Journal of Slave and Post- 
Slave Studies 18 (1997): 122-45; reprinted in David Eltis and Da- 
vid Richardson, eds. Routes to Slavery: Direction, Ethnicity and 
Mortality in the Transatlantic Slave Trade (London: Frank Cass, 
1997), 122-45. For an approach that emphasizes the hybridity of 
American slave cultures see Sidney W. Mintz and Richard Price, 
The Birth of African-American Culture: An Anthropological Per- 
spective (Boston: Beacon Press, 1992).

10. For an example of this narrative evenhandedness see David J. We- 
ber, The Spanish Frontier in North America (New Haven: Yale Uni- 
versity Press, 1992).10. For an example of this narrative evenhandedness see David J. We- 
ber, The Spanish Frontier in North America (New Haven: Yale Uni- 
versity Press, 1992).

11. The major exponent of the diversity of American slavery over time 
and space has been Ira Berlin in Many Thousands Gone: The First 
Two Centuries of Slavery in North America (Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press, 1998); and Generations of Captivity: A History of 
African-American Slaves (Cambridge: Harvard University Press,

2003) . Among a variety of regional and local studies of slave reli- 
gion Margaret Washington Creel, “A Peculiar People": Slave Reli- 
gion and Community -Culture Among the Gullahs (New York: New 
York University Press, 1988); and Charles Joyner, Down by the 
Riverside: A South Carolina Slave Community (Urbana: University 
of Illinois Press, 1984) are exceptional. Philip D. Morgan, Slave 
Counterpoint: Black Culture in the Eighteenth-Century Chesapeake

388

NOTES TO PAGES 331-334

and Lowcountry (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 
1998) offers a masterful comparison of the development of slave 
culture in two central locales.

12. Orlando Patterson drew upon a subtle distinction between what he 
describes as conflicting conservative and liberal ethics in Pauline 
theology in an attempt to explain how it was that “Christianity 
became at one and the same time a spiritual and social salvation for 
the slaves as an institutional support for the order of slavery.” See 
Slavery and Social Death: A Comparative Study (Cambridge: Har- 
vard University Press, 1982), pp. 70-76.

13. Eddie Glaude Jr., personal conversation and unpublished response 
to Ira Berlin, Generations of Captivity, April 2004.13. Eddie Glaude Jr., personal conversation and unpublished response 
to Ira Berlin, Generations of Captivity, April 2004.

14. Yvonne P. Chireau, Black Magic: Religion and the African American 
Conjuring Tradition (Berkeley: University of California Press, 
2003); see also Sharia M. Fett, Working Cures: Healing, Health, 
and Power on Southern Slave Plantations (Chapel Hill: University 
of North Carolina Press, 2002); and Albert J. Raboteau, “The 
Afro-American Traditions,” in Ronald L Numbers and Darrel W. 
Amundsen, eds., Caring and Curing: Health and Medicine in the 
Western Religious Traditions (New York: Macmillan, 1986).

15. The pioneering collection of sources is Allan D. Austin, African 
Muslims in Antebellum America: A Sourcebook (New York: Gar- 
land, 1984). See also Gomez, Exchanging Our Country Marks, pp. 
59-87.

16. See Cyprian Davis, The History of Black Catholics in the United 
States (New York: Crossroad, 1990).

17. Howard Thurman, Deep River and the Negro Spiritual Speaks of 
Life and Death (1945, 1955; reprint, Richmond, Ind.: Friends 
United Press, 1975), p. 40.

18. James Baldwin, Go Tell It on the Mountain (1952; reprint, New 
York: Dell, 1985), pp. 200-201; and The Fire Next Time (1963; 
reprint, New York: Random House, 1993), pp. 98-99. For a fuller 
analysis of the religious meaning of slave suffering see Albert J. 
Raboteau, “ ‘The Blood of the Martyrs Is the Seed of Faith,’ Suf- 
fering in the Christianity of American Slaves,” in Quinton Hosford 
Dixie and Cornel West, The Courage to Hope: From Black Suffering 
to Human Redemption ( Boston: Beacon Press, 1999), pp. 22-39.

Index

Abosom, 10 
Abromson, Laura, 218 
Acculturation of slaves, 51-54, 57-59, 
72-73, 86, 126-27 
Adae ceremony, 13 
Adams, Henry, 200-201 
Adams, Lydia, 309 
Adams, William, 284 
Adeline, “Aunt,” 43 
African-American history, 324-25 
Africa, religion in, 5-16, 336-37 n. 6 
African Cottonfort Baptist Church 
(Ala.) 200African diaspora, 327, 328 
African Huntsville (Ala.) Church, 
199-200

African influence: and Baptism by 
immersion, 54, 57-58; in Brazil 
and the Caribbean, 4—42; on danc- 
ing, 15, 17, 19, 28, 35-37, 61-62, 
66-74, on funerals, 13, 30-31, 44— 
45, 66, 71-72, 83-85; on magic, 9,

13- 14, 25, 26, 33-35, 54, 80-83; 
on singing, 15, 35-36, 37-38, 65, 
67, 71, 73-74; and slave distribu- 
tion, 89-92; on spirit possession, 
10-11, 17, 19, 20, 27, 28, 35-36, 
63-65, 72-73; in the U.S., 44-92, 
328-29, 330; on witchcraft belief,

14- 15, 31, 85-86. See also Conjure; 
Ring shout

African Methodist Episcopal Church 
(A.M.E.), 204-6

After Freedom , (Powdermaker), 60 
Agency, cultural, 327, 330-31 
Agoussou, 77

Ahlstrom, Sydney, 323, 325 
Al-Biruni, 332 
Alexander, Lucretia, 214 
Alho, Olli, 326-27 
Allen, Richard, 202, 204 
Allen, W.B., 308-9 
Allen, W.F., 70-71 
American Missionary , 235 
Ancestors, veneration of, 12, 30, 32, 
45

Anderson, Alex, 47 
Anderson, John, 225, 291-92 
Anderson, J. R., 204 
Anderson, Rachel, 47 
Anderson, Robert, 65, 220-21, 222 
Andrews, Samuel, 230 
An Angel by Brevet (Pitkin), 77 
Anglicans, and slave conversion, 99- 
103, 356 n. 5. See also Society for 
the Propagation of the Gospel 
Asbury, Francis, 143-45 
Associates of Dr. Bray, and education 
of slaves, 116, 118 
Athenian Oracle, 108 
Atkinson, Henry, 303 
Atkinson, John, 304—5 
Atlantic world, 328-29 
Auld, Thomas, 166 
Azurara, Gomes Eannes De, 5, 96- 
97

389

390

INDEX389

390

INDEX

Bakongo, 9, 11, 12, 18 
Ball, Charles, 44, 291 
Baptism: as necessitating manumis- 
sion, 98-99, 109, 123-24; among 
slaves, 227-28 
Baptist Annual Register, 140 
Baptists: and black membership 
growth, 131-32, 137, 176; and 
black preachers, 136; church polity 
and black autonomy, 178, 190, 194- 
96, 204; in Jamaica, 23; origins of, 
327; Spiritual (Shouters), 28-29, 
63-64; work among slaves, 57-58, 
130-32. See also Black preachers; 
Black churches 
Barbot, John, 6, 98 
Barrett, Harris, 244 
Bascom, William, 20-21, 41 
Bass, Ruth, 82-83 
Bastide, Roger, 38, 40, 42 
Baudier, Roger, 271 
Baxter, Richard, 108 
Bayley, Solomon, 302 
Becton, John C., 241 
Benezet, Anthony, 111 
Berkeley, Bishop George, 100 
Bibb, Henry, 214, 215, 279-80, 296 
Bible: attitude of slaves towards, 239- 
43; and illiteracy, 239—41; oral tra- 
dition, 241; slaveholders interpreta- 
tion of, 242-43

Biblical Israel, slave identification 
with, 250-51, 311-13, 320 
Bishop, Josiah, 134 
Black, William, 104 
Black churches, in the antebellum 
south, 61-62, 137-43, 178-79, 188- 
208

Black Culture and Black Conscious- 
ness (Levine), 326 
Black Gods and Kings, (Thompson), 
21, 39

Black history, 324-25 
Black Magic (Chireau), 332 
Black preachers, 133—43, 231-39 
Black studies movement, 324 
Black religion, autonomy of, 177- 
208. See also Slave religion 
Blackwell, Caesar, 200 
Blair, Rev. James, 123Blassingame, John, 323, 326, 331 
Bodicon, Barbara Leigh Smith, 310 
Boggs, Susan, 167 
Bond, Priscilla, 229 
Bongo men. See Convince cult 
Bosman, William, 8, 14 
Bost, W. L., 239 
Botsford, Edmund, 135 
Bourguignon, Erika, 62-64 
Bragg, Rev. John, 103 
Bremer, Fredrika, 45, 198, 206, 310 
Brooks, Nancy, 265 
Brown, Charles, 295 
Brown, Henry “Box,” 73 
Brown, John (former slave), 219-20, 
292-93, 296 
Brown, Katie, 46 
Brown, Morris, 163, 205, 206 
Brown, William Wells, 229, 280—81, 
282, 284, 293, 296, 315 
Bruce, Henry Clay, 232, 316 
Brunskill, John, 106-7 
Bryan, Andrew, 1414.2, 189, 190 
Bryan, Sampson, 141 
Burke, Emily, 291 
Burns, Anthony, 267 
Bush Negroes (Surinam), 31-33, 41- 
42

Campbell, Alexander, 189-90 
Camp meeting revivals, 59-61, 67,

69, 129, 131-34, 23-25 
Candomble (Brazil), 16, 18-20, 22- 
25, 28, 34, 36-38, 4041 
Capers, William, 136, 160, 162, 172- 
74, 298

Capuchins, 6, 113 
Carey, Lott, 179 
Carroll, John, 112 
Caruthers, Richard, 218 
Castellanos, Henry, 82 
Catechism for Colored Persons, A 
(Jones), 162-63

Catholicism. See Roman Catholicism 
Charles II, King of England, 97 
Charleston, S.C.: African Church and 
the Vesey plot, 206; African Meth- 
odist Church in, 163; black Meth- 
odists in, 204-6

Charleston, (S.C.) School, 116-17

INDEX

391

Charms (amulets), 9, 14, 33, 75, 82, 
277-78Charleston, (S.C.) School, 116-17

INDEX

391

Charms (amulets), 9, 14, 33, 75, 82, 
277-78

Chauncy, Charles, 129 
Chavis, John, 135 
Chesnut, Mary Boykin, 221 
Chireau, Yvonne, 332 
Christian Directory (Baxter), 108 
Christian Instruction: and rebellion, 
102-3, 122-25; rejection of by 
slaves, 46; of slaves, 99—128; re- 
sponse of slaves to, 120-28; and 
slave control, 103; and slave liter- 
acy, 115-20, 171-72 
Christianity: evangelical, 148, 331; 
ritual, 330; suffering witness to, 
333, 334; See also specific sect 
Christmas, slaves’ celebration of, 224 
Church discipline: and slave treat- 
ments, 171, 181-82; and slave mar- 
riage, 183-87 
Clark, Gus, 214 
Clark, Susan H., 242 
Clarke, Lewis, 292, 295 
Clarke, Milton, 292, 295 
Clarke, Richard, 117 
Clay, Thomas S., 170 
Coffin, Charles C., 314 
Coker, Daniel, 203-4 
Coke, Thomas, 143-44 
Confraternities (cof radius) , 87-88 
Conjure and conjurers, 33, 75, 80-86, 
275-88

Conversion experience, 132-33, 266- 
71, 316-17

Conversion of slaves: cultural barriers 
to, 100, 121; in the eighteenth cen- 
tury, 148-49; as justification of en- 
slavement, 96-98; opposition of 
masters to, 98-103; and rebellion, 
145-47

Convince cult (Jamaica), 16-17 
Cooper, Rev. W.G., 316 
Cotes, Rev. William, 124 
Courlander, Harold, 71 
Cox, John, 197 
Craft, Ellen, 305 
Craft, William, 305 
Cult Initiation: in Africa, 10; in Ja- 
maica, 29; in U.S., 73 
Cumina cult (Jamaica), 17, 36

Curry, James, 230 
Curtin, Philip D., 89-90

Dahomey, 6, 10, 15, 18, 20, 26-27, 
75-77

Damballa-wedo, 23-24, 75, 76, 77,

79

Dance, and African religious influ- 
ence, 15, 17, 19, 28, 35-37, 61-62, 
66-74. See also Ring-shout 
Dangbe, 76Dahomey, 6, 10, 15, 18, 20, 26-27, 
75-77

Damballa-wedo, 23-24, 75, 76, 77,

79

Dance, and African religious influ- 
ence, 15, 17, 19, 28, 35-37, 61-62, 
66-74. See also Ring-shout 
Dangbe, 76

Daniels, Julia Francis, 223 
Davenport, Carey, 167 
Davenport, Charles, 304 
Davenport, Frederick Morgan, 60 
Davies, Samuel, 129-30 
Davis, Minerva, 229 
Davis, William, 228 
Dawson, Anthony, 234 
Decoudry, Israel, 188 
Dede, Sanite, 79 
Deep River (Thurman), 332-33 
Dembo (slave), 315 
Dicey (slave), 185-87 
Dickie, Rev. Adam, 125 
Divination: in Africa, 10-11, 15; in 
Cuba, 20, 22, 23

Djuka, 42. See also Bush Negroes 
Dorsey, Douglas, 294 
Doughty, Charles, 206 
Douglass, Frederick, 166, 238, 241, 
247-48, 281, 284, 291, 314 
Dover Baptist Association (Va.), 171- 
72, 181, 197

Drums and Shadows, 85 
Du Bois, W. E. B., 209, 266 
Duncan, Jonathan, 206 
Dupee, George W., 201

Early, John, 160 
Easter, Willis, 286 
Edmundson, William, 110 
Edwards, Anderson, 218, 232 
Edwards, Jonathan, 128 
Egungun society, 13, 30 
Eliot, John, 108, 109 
Ellis, Harrison W., 207 
Ellis, Mary, 77 
Erskine, George M., 207

392

INDEX

Eshu-Elegba, 19, 20, 23, 24, 37-39, 
77

European literacy, 329-30 
Evangelicalism, 148, 331 
Evans, Henry, 135 
Ewing, Mathew', 234 
Ewing, “Uncle” Tom, 232 
Exodus story, and slaves, 311-12

Fairley, Rachel, 296 
Fauset, Arthur Huff, 56 
Ferrill, Loudon, 201 
Fetish. See Charms 
Field, M. J., 12, 288 
Fitzpatrick, Sarah, 225 
Flat River Primitive Baptist Church, 
Person County, North Carolina, 
184-85

Flint River Baptist Association

(Ala.), black churches within, 199- 
200

Fon people, 10, 12, 15, 18, 32 
Ford, Sarah, 232 
Forks of Elkhorn Baptist Church 
(Ky.), 182-83 
Fowler, Louis, 234 
Fox, George, 110 
Fraser, Garrison, 197 
Frazier, E. Franklin, and debate with 
Herskovits over African influence, 
48, 52-55, 86, 89, 327 
Frazier, Rosanha, 277 
Frederiksburg (Va.) Baptist Church, 
171French, A. M., 236, 308 
Frierson plantation, 315 
Frink, Samuel, 105 
Fulkes, Minnie, 332 
Funerals: in Africa, 13; African influ- 
ence on, 30-31, 44-45, 66, 71-72, 
83-85, 230-31

Gabriel’s Rebellion, and religion, 147 
Gaines, Rev. Dr. John, 315-16 
Galphin, George, 139 
Galphin, Jesse (Jesse Peter), 139, 
140, 141

Gantling, Clayborn, 310 
Ga people, 9, 12 
Garden, Alexander, 116-17

Garlic, Delia, 304 
Garretson, Freeborn, 131 
Garrison, Lucy McKim, 74 
Genovese, Eugene, 172, 326, 331 
George, David, 139-40 
Gibson, Bishop Edmund, 101 
Gillard, John, 113

Gillfield Baptist Church, Petersburg, 
Va., 142-43, 145, 179, 188-89, 197 
Glaude, Eddie, Jr., 331 
God Struck Me Dead, 64, 267, 269 
Godwin, Morgan, 65—66, 98, 101 
Goldsbury, Asa, 201 
Golphin, Moses, 197 
Gospel Family Order (Fox), 110 
Grandy, Moses, 214-15 
Grant, Rosa, 46 
Great Awakening, 128-29 
Green, Josephine, 76 
Grimes, William, 301-2

Hague, Parthenia, 316 
Harding, Vincent, 163, 251 
Harris, H. J., 315 
Harris, William, 199-200 
Haynes, Leonard, 45^46 
Heard, William, 241 
Heaven, slaves’ notion of, 291-93 
Henderson, Francis, 310 
Henson, Josiah, 303 
Hephzibah Baptist Church, East Feli- 
ciana Parish, La., 171 
Hepworth, George, 235 
Herbalists, 10, 14, 33, 35, 82 
Herskovits, Frances, 35 
Herskovits, Melville J., 24, 36, 80, 
287; and debate with Frazier over 
African influence, 48-52, 54-60, 
86, 89, 327 
Hewatt, Alexander, 66 
Hegginson, Thomas Wentworth, 248 
Hite, Elizabeth Ross, 272 
Hogg, Donald, 17 
Holmes, James Henry, 197 
“Hoodoo.” See Conjure 
Hopkins, Samuel, 109 
Hosier, “Black” Harry, 134 
Howard, Josephine, 295 
Hudson, Charlie, 228 
Humbert, William, 293

INDEX

393

Hunter, John, 309 
Hursey, Mose, 221 
Hurston, Zora Neale, 79

Ibeji, 24, 83 
Ibn Said, Omar, 46—17 
Ibo, 9-10, 12, 27 
Ifa (the god), 23

If a (system of divination): in Africa, 
15; in Cuba, 20, 22, 23 
Islam: in Africa, 5-7, 336 n. 4; in 
Brazil, 34; among slaves in the 
U.S., 46-47, 71, 328, 332If a (system of divination): in Africa, 
15; in Cuba, 20, 22, 23 
Islam: in Africa, 5-7, 336 n. 4; in 
Brazil, 34; among slaves in the 
U.S., 46-47, 71, 328, 332

Jackson, Adeline, 224 
Jackson, Bongy, 229 
Jackson, Luther, 177 
Jackson, Martha, 297 
Jack, “Uncle” (slave preacher), 135 
Jarratt, Devereaux, 131 
Jeffries, Isaiah, 227 
Johnson, Adam, 189 
Johnson, Eli, 307 
Johnson, Sam, 234 
Johnson, Thomas L., 312 
Jones, Charles Colcock, 47, 149, 152- 
53, 155, 156-57, 161, 162, 164, 170, 
188, 283, 294, 298, 315 
Jones, Fred, 278 
Jones, Hugh, 105 
Jones, John, 201 
Jones, Thomas, 307 
Jordan, Winthrop, 103 
Josephites, 273

Kalm, Peter, 102 
Kelly, Ella, 266 
Kemble, Frances, 234 
Kiphant, W.G., 311 
Klein, Herbert S., 88 
Kongo-Angola, 328

Labat, Jean-Baptiste, 25 
Laguerre, Michel, 25 
Landry, Pierre, 273 
Lane, Lunsford, 228, 294 
Laurens, Edward R., 154 
Laveau, Marie, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80 
Law, Samuel Spry, 155 
Lawson, “Uncle” Charles, 238

Lawton, Samuel, 73 
Lay, Benjamin, 111 
Lee, Jesse, 61

Leigh, Frances Butler, 85, 300 
Le Jau, Francis, 100-101, 102-3, 115, 
122, 123, 124, 125 
Leland, John, 61 
Lemon, William, 134 
Levine, Lawrence, 250, 326 
Lewis (slave preacher), 134 
Lexington, Ky., First African Church 
of, 201

Liberty County (Ga.) Association, 
and plantation missions, 155, 159, 
160-66, 175

Liele, George, 28, 140-41, 267-68 
Littlejohn, Govan, 304 
Livermore, Mary, 312 
Lomax, Alan, 70 
Lomax, John, 70

Long, John Dixon, 176, 207, 231, 
243, 314

Louisville, Ky., First Colored Church 
of, 201

Low, Kelly, 197

Lowery, Hannah, 217

Lowery, Irving, 315

Ludlam, Rev. Richard, 124

Lyell, Sir Charles, 46, 66, 198, 240

McCray, Amanda, 233 
McLemore, James, 200 
McQueen, Guy, 197 
Macrae, David, 235, 265 
McTyeire, Holland N., 154, 172 
McWhorter, William, 239 
Magic: 25, 26, 33-35; and medicine, 
13-14, 54

Magnalia Christi Americana 
(Mather), 108

Management of Slaves (Seabrook), 
169-70Magnalia Christi Americana 
(Mather), 108

Management of Slaves (Seabrook), 
169-70

Maroons, 16-17, 41-42, 346-47 n. 75 
Marriage among slaves, problem of, 
125, 183, 187, 228-30 
Marrs, Elijah, 216, 241, 266 
Marshall, Abraham, 141 
Marshall, Andrew, 141, 189-94, 197- 
99

Martin, Charlotte, 215

394

INDEX

Martyn, Rev. Charles, 123 
Maryland Gazette, 146 
Maryland Journal and Baltimore Ad- 
viser, 146

Mather, Cotton, 101, 108, 109 
Mathews, Donald G., 174-75 
Maum Katie, 238 
Meachum, John Berry, 201 
Memoir of Phillis Wheatley 
(Thatcher), 44 
Merry, Nelson G., 204 
Merton, Thomas, 332 
Methodist Error (Watson), 67 
Methodists: and antislavery, 143-45; 
black membership in eighteenth 
and nineteenth century in, 131, 175; 
black preachers among, 136, 207; 
work among slaves, 130-32 
Mintz, Sidney, 26, 216 
Missionaries to slaves, colonial pe- 
riod, 98, 103-6, 113, 120. See Plan- 
tation missions 
Mitchell, Sol, 316 
Mmo society, 13 
Moore, Matthew, 268 
Morgan, Edmund, 326 
Morgan, Isaam, 230 
Morte (slave), 316-17, 331 
Moses (black preacher), 138, 197 
Moss, Andrew, 219 
Music, secular vs. sacred, 222. See 
also Slave spirituals 
Muslim slaves. See Islam 
Myalism (Jamaica), 330 
Myth of the Negro Past, 48—52, 55- 
60. See also Herskovits, Melville J.

Nancy (slave), 182-83 
Nation, 70

Native Americans, 330 
Neau, Elias, 117-18 
Negro Christianized, The (Mather), 
101

New England, religious instruction of 
slaves in colonial, 108-10 
New Orleans, La.: black Methodist 
churches within, 206; voodoo in, 
75-80

Nicholson, Col. Francis, 100 
Nickerson, Margrett, 225

Nkisi ( Minkisi , pi.) 9, 11

Nordhoff, Charles, 167

Nzinga Mbemba (Dom Affonso I), 6

Obeah (Jamaica), 34 
Oblate Sisters of Providence, 273 
Odin, John Mary, 114 
Offley, G.W., 305-6 
Ogun, 19, 20, 24, 25, 77 
“Old Captain” (slave preacher), 134- 
35, 201Obeah (Jamaica), 34 
Oblate Sisters of Providence, 273 
Odin, John Mary, 114 
Offley, G.W., 305-6 
Ogun, 19, 20, 24, 25, 77 
“Old Captain” (slave preacher), 134- 
35, 201

Olmstead, Frederick Law, 61-62, 68, 
223, 240-41, 300 
Oral tradition, 241, 332 
Orisha, 10, 19-20, 23 
Orunmila. See Ifa 
Osanyin, 23 
Oshossi, 19, 23 
Oshun, 19, 24 
Ottolenghe, Joseph, 118—19 
Owen, Mary, 80, 82

Pamphlet, Gowan, 138, 196-97 
Park, Robert, 137 
Patterson, Orlando, 33 
Payne, Daniel Alexander, 68-69, 72- 
73, 313

Pease, William, 233 
Petersburg, Va., First African Church 
of, 197

Phillips, Doc, 200 
Phillips, U. B., 89 
Pierson, Donald, 40 
Pilmore, Joseph, 130 
Pinckney, Charles Cotesworth, 154, 
159, 179-80 
Pitkin, Helen, 77

Plantation missions: and abolition, 
158-61; associations for, 155; con- 
ferences on, 155—56; development 
of, 152-56; effectiveness of, 17576; 
and the ideal of Christian planta- 
tions, 164-66; motivation for, 174- 
75; obstacles to, 172, 174; publicity 
for, 153-54; response of slaves to, 
176-77; as system for slave instruc- 
tion, 161-63

Pocomania (Jamaica), 27-28 
Political agency, 330-31 
Pollard, Randle, 200

INDEX

395

Portsmouth (Va.) Baptist Association, 
183-84

Powdermaker, Hortense, 60 
Prayer (“praise”) house, 68, 70-71 
Prayer meetings of slaves, 213-19 
Presbyterians, black preachers 
among, 207

Priests (priestesses), in cults of the 
gods, 10-11, 19, 40, 42 
Pritchard, “Gullah” Jack, 163, 283— 
84

Proceedings of the Charleston Meeting, 
May 13-14, 1845 , 156 
Protestantism, and African religious 
influence, 87-88. See also specific 
sect

Puckett, Newbell Niles, 81, 281, 287 
Puritans, work among slaves, 108-10

Quakers, and instruction of slaves, 
110-11

Quamino, John, 109 
Quartermain, Rev. Robert, 155Puckett, Newbell Niles, 81, 281, 287 
Puritans, work among slaves, 108-10

Quakers, and instruction of slaves, 
110-11

Quamino, John, 109 
Quartermain, Rev. Robert, 155

Radin, Paul, 309 
Randolph, Peter, 217-18, 234 
Rankin, Thomas, 131 
Raymond, Charles, 231, 269 
Reading, Philip, 122 
Religion of the Slaves (Alho), 326-27 
Religious History of the American Peo- 
ple, A (Ahlstrom), 323 
Revels, Hiram, 207 
Revival cults (Jamaica), 27—28 
Revivals, participation of blacks in, 
129, 149-50. See also Campmeet- 
ings

Richardson, Candus, 307 
Richmond, Virginia, First African 
Church of, 197

Ring shout, 66—67, 68-73, 245, 351— 
52 n. 69

Roberson, Frank, 213 
Robertson, George, 106 
Robert, “Uncle” (slave preacher), 236 
Roll, Jordan, Roll (Genovese), 326 
Roman Catholicism: and African reli- 
gious influence, 87-89; among the 
slaves, 11-14, 271-75, 332 
Roper, Moses, 226, 295

Rose Hill Baptist Church, Natchez, 
Miss., 200 
Ross, George, 122 
Ryland, Rev. Robert, 197

Sabbath, slave celebration of, 222-23 
Sacrifice, African religious heritage 
of, 10-12, 17, 19, 22, 32, 38, 42 
St. James A.M.E. Church, New Or- 
leans, 206

St. Louis, Mo.: African Methodists 
in, 206-7; First African Baptist 
Church of, 201 
Sandiford, Ralph, 111 
Sandy Creek Baptist Association 
(N.C.), 183

Santeria (Cuba), 16, 20, 22-23, 41 
Savannah (Ga.) First African Baptist 
Church, 141, 189-94, 197-99 
Seabrook, Whitemarsh B., 154—55; 
169-70

Search for Security (Field), 288 
Seeker, Thomas, 102, 121 
Secular music vs. sacred music, 222 
Shango cult (Trinidad), 16, 20, 22, 
24, 29, 41

Shango (the god), 19, 20-21, 23, 81 
Sharpe, John, 66 
Shepherd, Robert, 223 
Shopona (Sakpata), 19, 24 
Silver Bluff (S.C.) Church, 139-40 
Simms, James, 190 
Simon, (slave preacher), 134 
Simpson, George E., 36, 70 
Sinclair, William, 248-49 
Singleton, Tom, 223 
Sisters of the Holy Family, 273 
Slave Community, The (Blassin- 
game), 323, 326Slave culture, 327; See also Accultur- 
ation of slaves 
Slave narratives, 325-26 
Slave religion: and accommodation, 
303-4; apocalyptic views in, 124- 
5, 312-13; condemnation of mas- 
ters, 166-68, 291-94; and literacy, 
234, 240—41; morality in, 295-301, 
331; nonreligious slaves, 225; and 
reciprocity between whites and 
blacks, 314—17; rejection of slave-

396

INDEX

Slave religion (continued) 
holders’ Christianity, 294-95; 333; 
and resistance, 303—9, 331; revela- 
tion in, 242; as source of consola- 
tion, 310-11. See also African influ- 
ence

Slave spirituals: African influence on, 
65, 67, 71, 73-74; ambiguity in, 
213, 246-50; and Christian life, 
251-65; performance of, 243—46 
Slave Testimony (Blassingame), 323 
Slave trade, 328-29 
Smalls, Robert, 301 
Smith, David, 31 
Smith, Harry, 222 
Smith, James, 226, 307 
Smith, James L., 233, 243 
Smith, Mrs. Joseph, 166 
Smith, Paul, 231 
Smith, Thomas, 284 
Snow, Loudell, 83 
Sobel, Mechal, 327 
Society for the Propagation of the 
Gospel in Foreign Parts (S.P.G),

99, 102, 114-15, 117-18, 347 
n. 49

Sorrick, Rev. R. S., 233 
Soul (Spirit); African concept of, 32- 
33

Southern Religious Telegraph (Va.), 
158

Spear, Chloe, 45 
Spears, George, 206 
Spirit possession, 10-11, 17, 19, 20, 
27, 28, 35-36, 37, 63-73 
Spirituals. See Slave spirituals 
Spiritual Baptists (Shouters), 28-29, 
63-64

Stearns, Charles, 299-300 
Stiles, Ezra, 109

Stroyer, Jacob, 219, 224, 230, 281, 
297

Suffering, Christianity and, 333, 334 
Sullivan, Ben, 72 
Sumler, James, 293 
Sunbury Baptist Association (Ga.), 
179, 189-94, 197-99 
Sweet, William Warren, 131 
Syncretism, 22-25, 28-30, 47, 79, 87- 
89, 329Tallant, Robert, 76 
Taylor, Ebenezer, 104 
Teague, Colin, 179 
Tennent, Gabriel, 128—29 
Thatcher, B.B., 44 
Thomas, Samuel, 115 
Thompson, John, 133, 222, 305 
Thompson, Robert Ferris, 21, 39 
Throgmorton, Isaac, 166 
Thurman, Howard, 332-33 
Tibbs, William, 121 
Times-Democrat (New Orleans), 81 
Tolton, Augustus, 273 
Towne, Laura, 238 
Trabelin’ On (Sobel), 327 
Trexler, Harrison, 273 
Tucker, H.H., 195-96 
Turner, Lorenzo Dow, 71 
Turner Revolt, religion in, 163-64, 
197

Turpin, Thomas D., 298

Unbelief among slaves, 313-14 
Uncles, Charles Randolph, S.S.J.,

273

Ursulines; mission to blacks in New 
Orleans, 114

Van Dyke, Charlie, 213 
Varnod, Rev. Francis, 122 
Vaudou (Haiti), 16, 25-27, 36, 38, 63- 
64, 75-76. See also Voodoo (New 
Orleans)

Verger, Pierre, 16, 40

Vesey Conspiracy, religion in, 163,

283

Virginia Gazette, 146 
Virginia, state of church in colonial, 
104-8

Vodun, 10, 19-20, 23, 327-28 n. 13 
Voodoo: in New Orleans, 75—80; as a 
system of magic. See Conjure

Walker, David, 158 
Ware, Harriet, 240 
Warren, John, 229 
Washington, Booker T., 249 
Washington, Sarah, 85 
Watson, John, 67

INDEX

397

Weddings, slave celebrations of, 228- 
30

Welsh Neck Baptist Church (S.C.), 
185-87

West Africa, 328. See also Yoruba 
West, David, 293-94 
Wheatley, Phyllis, 43, 44, 45, 109 
Whetmore, Rev. James, 122 
White, Mingo, 219 
Whitefield, George, 128 
Williamsburg (Va.) African Baptist 
Church, 138-39, 178, 196-97 
Williamson, John, 192 
Willis, Daniel, 200 
Willis, Joseph, 134, 200 
Wills, David, 326, 328 
Wilson, Wash, 213 
Winthrop, John, 108 
Witchcraft, 14-15, 31, 85-86, 147, 285

Worship, African styles of, 10, 17, 19, 
20, 35-38, 79 
Womble, George, 219, 295 
Women, 332 
Woods, Kalvin, 215 
Woodson, Carter G., 120, 161, 240 
Woodward, C. Vann, 90, 91 
Woolman, John, 111Worship, African styles of, 10, 17, 19, 
20, 35-38, 79 
Womble, George, 219, 295 
Women, 332 
Woods, Kalvin, 215 
Woodson, Carter G., 120, 161, 240 
Woodward, C. Vann, 90, 91 
Woolman, John, 111

Yale Graduate Program in Religious 
Studies, 323-24 
Yamma, Bristol, 109 
Yemanja (Yemoja), 19-20, 24 
Yoruba, 9-10, 15, 18-20, 22-24, 35, 
37-38, 41, 328 
Young, Clara, 215, 234 
Younger, Mary, 302

Zouberbuhler, Batholomew, 119-20