HYMNS  OF  THE  ATHARVA-VEDA


TRANSLATED  ;»

WITH  A POPULAR  COMMENTARY


RALPH  T.  fl.  GRIFFITH


FOEMEIiLY  PRINCIPAL  OF  BENARES  COLLEGE


Benares


E.  J.  LAZARUS  AND  CO,


All  rights  reserved ,


CONTENTS,


Preface,  ...

Hymns,  Translation  and  Commentary
Book  I.


Appendices;


Latin  version  of  hymns  and  stanzas  omitted

in  the  English  translation

Index  of  Hymns  ...  ...  ...

Index  of  Names,  Etc.  ...


Corrigenda  et  Addenda


The  Atharva-veda  is  a comparatively  late  addition
to  the  three  ancient  Vedas,  the  Bik,  Yajus,  and  Sftman — ■
the  Vedas  respectively  of  recited  praise,  sacrifice,  and
song  or  chanted  hymn — which  formed  the  foundation  of
the  early  religious  belief  and  worship  of  the  Hindus.
Unlike  these  three  Vedas,  the  Atharva-veda  derives  the
name  by  which  it  is  generally  known,  not  from  the
nature  of  its  contents  but  from  a personage  of  indefinite-
ly remote  antiquity  named  Atharvan,  who  is  spoken  of
in  the  Rigveda  as  the  first  priest  who  ‘ rubbed  Agni
forth  ’ or  produced  fire  by  attrition,  who  4 first  by
sacrifices  made  the  paths  3 or  established  ways  of  com-
munication between  men  and  Gods,  and  overcame
hostile  demons  by  means  of  the  miraculous  powers
which  lie  had  received  from  heaven.  To  the  descend-
ants of  this  Atharvan,  associated  with  the  Angi rases
and  the  Bhrigus,  members  of  other  ancient  priestly
families  often  mentioned  in  the  Ttigveda,  the  collected
hymns — called  also  the  Atharv&ngirasas  and  the  Bhrig-
vangirasas,  that  is  the  Songs  of  the  Atharvans  and
Angirases  and  the  Songs  of  the  Bhrigus  and  Angirases,
and,  in  the  Gopatha-Brcthmana,  the  Atharvana-veda  and
the  Angirasa-veda — were,-  it  Is  said,  originally  revealed.

Yet  another  name  of  the  collection  of  hymns  is
Brahma-veda,  which  is  variously  explained  as  (1)  the


PBlfAClE,


d;7v  it  ww  • °rchlef  ^fieial  priest  whose

out}  !t  was  to  Superv1Se  and  direct  tho  whole  sacrifice

and  to  remedy  all  faults  of  omission  and  commission^

;3rr^while  *•  other  Vedas  ar°

he  f-otar’  the  Ad  h vary  u,  and  the  UdgMar
1°^ rS^  T f STtantS  and  infc™«  of  the

Z7Z,  i { } ",  Kn0Wledse  of  P^erS

^nediewoD,  imprecation,  spells  and  chann^.
Veda  which  teaches  to  appease  the  Gods  and  secure

Id  2Z  ^ ? t0  WeSS  fH0ndy’  H to  curse

, Y ‘Jlu°7  mman  and  ghostly  enemies,  and  all  noxious
^litres  ; (3)  as  the  Knowledge  or  Doctrine  of

■fie  .Supreme  Self,  Soul,  or  Spirit  with  which  the  sod!
dnian  w finally  redintegrated;  the  followers  of  flfo
/eda  assorting  its  superiority  to  tho  three  more  aneim.r


PREFACE.  V

*

whole,  lay  claim  to  equal  antiquity.  Professor  Whitney
says : ‘ The  greater  portion  of  the  hymns  are  plainly
shown,  both  by  their  language  and  internal  character,
to  ;b:e,:6f  much  later  date  than  the  general  contepts  of
the  other  historic  Veda,  and  even  than  its  tenth  book
with  which  they  stand  nearly  connected  in  import ::  and
origin.  .....  This,  however,  would  not  imply  that
the  main  body  of  the  Atharva  hymts  were  not  already
in  existence  when  the  compilation  of  the  Bik  took  place.
Their  character  would  be  ground  enough  for  their
rejection  and  exclusion  from  the  canon  until  other
hands  were  found  to  undertake  their  separate  gathering
into  an  independent  collection.’  Professor  Weber  also
observes  : ‘ The  origin  of  the  Atharva-Sainhitlf  dates
from  the  period  when  Brahmanism  had  become  domi-
nant. It  is  in  other  respects  perfectly  analogous  to  the
Kik-Sarnhita,  and  contains  the  store  of  song  of'  this
• Brahmanieal  epoch.  Many  of  these  songs  are  to  be
found  also  in  the  last,  that  is  the  least  ancient  book  of
the  Rik-Samhiki  In  the  latter  they  are  the  latest
additions  made  at  the  time  of  its  compilation  ; in  the
A t Liar  van  they  arc  the  proper  and  natural  utterance  of
the  present.  The  spirit  of  the  two  collections  is  indued
'Widely'; .'■different..  In:  the  Itik  there
np;ktpfalefeeli.hg):  a '"warm;  love,  for  nature  ; :vvhile  iiiddief
Atharvan  there  prevails,  on  the  contrary,  only  an
anxious  dread  of  her  evil  spirits  and  their  magical
powers.  In  the  Rik  we  find  the  people  in  a state  of  free
activity  and  independence  ; in  the  Atharvan  we  see  it
bound  in  the  fetters  of  the  hierarchy  and  superstition.


«*■*.  i *'Z24  . ...  ’


fgl§|f§f


"5 05  filrtliet  mfonaathm  see  yon  E jtli’s  Litteratur  and  G,  sc!iio]ice
uos  W edii,  pp.  12,  13,  and  his  Abhandlang  fiber  dois  Atharva-veda ;
Weber’s  Hist0lT  of  Literature  (Tritl.iyn-’s  Oriental  Series'),  w,{

iir,~171  : Wintucy’s  article  ' in  the  Journal  of  the  Awericim  OnVi'btb


PREFACE.


vrt


The  Atharva-veda  Sanhitl  or  Collection  is  divided
into  twenty  Mndas,  Books  or  Sections,  containing  some
seven  hundred  and  sixty  hymns  and  about  six  thousand
verses.  In  Books  I. — VII.  the  hymns  or  pieces  are  ar-
ranged according  to  the  number  of  their  verses,  without
any  reference  to  their  subjects  or  the  nature  of  their
contents.  The  hymns  of  Book  I.  contain  on  an  average
four  verses  each  ; those  of  Book  II.  five  * those  of  III.
six ; those  of  IV.  seven  ; those  of  V.  from  eight  to
eighteen ; those  of  VI.  thr§e  ; those  of  VII.  many
single  verses,  and  upwards  to  eleven.  Books  VIII. — ■
XX.  contain  longer  pieces,  some  of  which  extend  to  fifty,
sixty,  seventy,  and  even  eighty  verses.  In  Books  I. —
XIII.  the  Contents  are  of  the  most  heterogeneous  de-
scription with  no  attempt  at  any  kind  of  systematic
arrangement  of  subjects.  They  consist  principally  of
prayers,  formulas,  and  charms  for  protection  against  evil
spirits  of  all  sorts  and  kinds,  against  sorcerers  and  sor-
ceresses, diseases,  snakes,  and  other  noxious  creatures,
of  benedictions  and  imprecations,  invocations  of  magical
herbs,  prayers  for  children  and  long  life,  for  general  and
special  protection  and  prosperity,  success  in  love,  trade,
and  gambling’,  together  with  formulas  to  be  employed  in
all  kinds  of  domestic  occurrences.  In  Books  XIV. — •
XVIII.  the  subjects  are  systematically  arranged  ; XIV.
treating  of  marriage  ceremonies  ; XV.  of  the  glorifica-
tion of  the  Vr&tya  or  religious  wandering  mendicant ;

Society,  Yol.  IV.  ; Max  Mailer’s  .Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature,  pp.  445 — ■
455:  Muirs  Original  Sanskrit  Texts,  II.  pp.  187 — 191,  and  446 — 450;
and  Ludwig’s  Der  Eigveda,  III.  pp.  28,  29  : or  Chambers’s  Encyclopaedia;
or  the  Encycloi  tedia  Britannica  micieipYeda,


- . PREFACE,  , IX

sorrows  of  the  average  man  invests  it,  I think,  for  the
, European  reader  with  greater  and  more  human  interest
than  is  possessed  by  the  more  ancient  Veda,  Setting
aside  the  rivalries,  Avars,  and  conquests  of  kings  and
princes,  and  the  lofty  claims  and  powers  of  the  hie-  *
rarehy,  we  may  follow  the  course  of  the  middle-class
Aryan’s  life  from  the  cradle  to  the  funeral  pile,  and
even  accompany  him  to  his  final  home  in  the  world  of
the  Departed.  We  hear  the  benedietive  charm  pro-
nounced over  the  expectant  mother  before  her  child  is
born,  the  blessing  on  the  new-born  infant,  and  in  due
time  on  the  darling’s  first  two  teeth.  We  attend  the
solemn  ceremony  in  which  the  youth  is  invested  with
his  tofjict  virilis,  the_  -new  garment  -whose  assumption
signifies  his  recognition  as  an  adult  member  of  the  family
with  new  responsibilities  and  new  duties  to  perform.  As
his  fancy  turns  to  thoughts  of  love,  we  hear  him  mur-  '
muring  the  charm  which  shall  win  him  the  maiden  of
his  choice,  and  the  lullaby  which  shall  seal  every  eye
but  hers  in  his  beloved’s  house  and  enable  him  to  visit
her  without  detection  or  suspicion.  We  follow  him  in  his
formal  and  somewhat  unromantic  'wooing  of  a bride
through  a friend  who  acts  as  match-maker  ; we  see  the
nuptial  procession  and  the  bride’s  introduction  to  her
new  home;  we  hear  her  benediction  on  the  bridegroom,
and  the  epithalamium  pronounced  over  the  wedded  pair.
The  young  husband  is  an  agriculturist,  and  we  see  him
in  his  field  superintending  the  ploughmen  and  praying
to  Indra  and  . Pfishan  and  the  Genii  of  agriculture  to
bless  their  labours.  Anon,  with  propitiatory  prayer,  he


‘ PREFACE;

“ lf\ng  f new  to  bring  the  water  of  the  brook

-°  1°  md  wbwh  13  readJ  for  irrigation  ; or  he  is  pray-
mg  f?r  ram  and  an  abundant  crop;  Again,  when  the
corn  is  ripe  be  is  busy  among  the  men  who  gather  in.

■ the  harvest,  invoking  the  aid  of  the  good-natured  gob-
,mS.  the  counterParts  of  our  Robin  Good  fellows—,  and
leaving- on  the  ground  some  sheaves  to  remunerate  their
01 ' ^ sunset  he  superintends  the  return  of  the

cows  rto  have  been  grazing  under  the  protection  of  the
VV  md-Grod  in  the  breezy  pastures,  and  their  return  un-
er  divine  guidance,  and  the  re-union  of  all  the  members
of  . household  are  celebrated  with  symbolical  mixt
oblation,  with  milk  and  a brew  of  grain.

His  wealth  and  family  increase  in  answer  to  bis  repeat-
ed  prayer  for  children  and  riches,  and  a new  house  roust
be  built  on  a larger  scale.  The  building  is  erected  under
the  careful  eye  of  the  master  and  blessed  and  consecrat-
eu  with  prayers  to  the  Gods  and  to  the  Queen  of  too
Horae..  The  mistress  of  the  house  brings  forth  the  well-
fiiled  pitcher,  all  present  are  regaled  with  4 the  stream  of
molten  butter  blent  with  nectar’— which  seems  to  be  a
euphemistic  name  for  some  sort  of  good  liquor—,  and  the
householder  enters  and  takes  formal  possession  of  *his
new  dwelling  with  fire  and  water,  the  two  most  import-
ant necessaries  of  human  life.  The  house,  moreover— a
wooden  building  with  a thatched  roof-has  been  speei-
a ly  assured  against  fire  by  a prayer  to  Agni  the  God  of

. hat  6 ement  Wlth  additional  security  offered  by  the
immediate  neighbourhood  of  a good  .stream  or  poo?  of
water,  ■ " ^ 1 ' “


PREFACE.


ffAgx*

Such,  or  something  like  this,  was  the  ordinary  life
of  the  average  middle-class  agriculturist.  A devout
believer  in  the  Gods,  he  did  not  spend  his  substance  oil
the  performance  of  costly  sacrifices*  but  Was  content
with  simple  ceremonies  and  such  humble  offerings  as  he
could  well  afford.  His  chief  care  was  for  the  health  and
well-being  of  himself,  his  wife*  children,  and  dependents,
for  plentiful  harvests,  and  for  thriving  and  multiplying
cattle  ; and  these  were  the  blessings  for  which  he  most
frequently  prayed.  His  chief  troubles  were  an  occasional
touch  of  malarial  fever  or  rheumatism,  a late  or  scanty
rain -fall,  a storm  that  lodged  his  ripe  barley,  lightning
that  struck  his  cattle,  and  similar  mischances  caused  by
the  anger  of  the  Gods  or  the  malevolence  of  demons  ;
and  he  was  always  armed  with  prayers  and  spells
against  the  recurrence  of  such  disasters.  He  was  a man
of  importance  in  his  village,  and  when  he  attended  the
Assembly — which  may  have  been  a kind  of  Municipal
Committee  or  Parish  Council — his  great  ambition  was  to
command  respect  and  attention  as  a speaker,  and  with
this  view  he  fortified  himself  with  charm  and  magic  herb
that  inspired  eloquence  and  enabled  him  to  overpower
his  opponents  in  debate..  His  life,  on  the  whole,  was
somewhat  monotonous  and  dull,  but  it  seems  to  have
suited  him  as  he  was  continually  praying  that  it  might
be  extended  to  its  full  natural  duration  of  a hundred,
years.  At  the  end  of  that  time,  with  his  sons  and  his
sons5  children  around  him,  he  was  ready  to  pass  away  to
the  felicity  that  awaited  him  in  the  world  of  the  Fathers.

The  small  merchant  or  trader  lived  a less  settled


m EFACE.


We  and  saw  more  of  the  world  than  the  agriculturist

, V 6 See  him  0Q  tIie  point  of  starting-  0n  a journey  for
business  purposes  with  his  little  stock  of  goods  ' He
first  propitiates  Indra  who  is  a merchant  also,  the  God
who  trades  and  traffics  with  his  worshippers,  requiring
aud  receiving  prayer  and  oblations  in  exchange  for  the
oiessings  which  he  sends,  and  who  will  now  free  the
■iave  ing ^merchant’s  path  from  wild  beasts,  robbers
and  enemies  of  every  kind.  He  prays  also  to  many
omm  amtios  that  he  may  make  rich  profit  and  gain  a
uindrea  treasures,  and  commits  the  care  of  bis  children
and  cattle  in  his  absence  to  Agni  the  God  of  all  Aryan
wen.  His  ritual  is  an  extensive  one  as  he  may  be  about
to  journey  to  all  points  of  the  compass,  ami  ho  must
.accordingly  conciliate  all  the  divine  Warders  of  the
heavenly  regions.  He  has  to  recite  some  ten  hymns  of
Book  VI,  invoking  the  aid  of  all  protecting  cleities  not
forgetting  to  consult  the  Weather-Prophet  and  to  obtain
“? m lnm  tile  promise  of  auspicious  morning:,.,  noons,,  and
nights.  ^ He  bids  an  affectionate  farewell  to  the  houses
01  his  village,  and  departs  on  his  way  encouraged  by  the
hyum  which  ensures  him  a safe  and  successful  journey
In  clue  time  he  returns  having  bartered  his  wares  for  the
treasures  ot  distant  places,  for  bdellium  and  other
fragrant  gums  and  unguents,  for  Kushtha  and  other
foreign  plants  and  drugs  of  healing  virtue,  for  mother-of-

pearl,  ornaments  for  the  women,  and  perhaps  doth  of
finer  wool.

Ihe  merchant's  object  in  life  is  gain,  and  he  is  nor.
always  very  scrupulous  in  his  dealings.  If  he  is  in  debt


PEEfAOl,


:%6^ouI<|.:;:j)pefer:'to;;|®  freed  by  of  a;Gbd,

and  not  by  his  own  exertions;  and  he  is  bold  enough
even  to  pray  for  release  from  debts  which  he  has  incurred
without  intending  to  pay  them.  He  is  probably  the
^gambler  who  prays  for  success  in  play,  and:  for  jpardbfr
a^hen  he  has  been  guilty  of  cheating.

We  naturally  see  much  less  of  the  life  of  women
in  the  Atharva-veda,  but  a fair  proportion  of  the  hymns
is  devoted  to  them  and  their  interests.  Wo  find  inter-
spersed among  them  the  love-charms  of  enamoured  maid-
ens, the  Bride  Oracle  or  ceremony  of  finding  a husband,
the  nuptial  procession,  and  the  bride’s  entry  into  her
husband’s  house  as  its  honoured  mistress,  the  epitha-
lam ian  benediction,  and  many  spells  and  charms  to  ensure
her  safety  and  well-being.  The  mistress  of  the  household
had  her  share  of  duties,  cares,  and  troubles  as  well . as
her  quiet  joys  and  pleasures,  and  she  sometimes  launches
a furious  and  revengeful  imprecation  against  her  un-
faithful husband,  and  with  a solemn  incantation  invokes
death  and  destruction  upon  her  successful  rivals.

The  text  of  the  Atharva-veda,  with  ‘some  amend-
ment of  the  numerous  and  obvious  false  readings  of  the
manuscripts,  and  some  attempts  to  bring  sense  out  of
the  utter  nonsense  which  constitutes  part  of  the  last  two  *
books/  was  published  at  Berlin,  in  1856,  by  Professors
Rudolf  von  Roth  and  W.  D.  Whitney.  The  intention
of  these  distinguished  scholars  was  to  prepare  and  pub-
lish a second  volume  containing  complete  indexes,  notes,
and  translation.  Circumstances  have,  unfortunately,


siv


PREFACE.


prevented  the  full  execution  of  this  project  • but  a most
valuable^  portion  of  the  intended  work,  Professor
Whitneys  Index  Verborum  to  the  Published  Text
appeared  in  1881  as  Vol.  XII.  of  the  Journal  of  the
American  Oriental  Society."  The  Saunaldyi  Ghatura-
dhy4yik&,  or  the  Atharva-veda  Pr4tis4khyaf  text,  trans-
lation, and  notes,  was  published  by  Professor  Whitnev*  !
in  .18 6 2}. .in:  Yol.  YII.  of  the  same  Society.  Of  the
two  existing  ritual  SiUras  of  this  Veda,  an  excellent
edition  of  the  Kausika,  with  extracts  from  the  com-
mentaries of  D4rila  and  EeSava,  has  been  brought  out,
as  Yol.  XI Y.  of  the  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental
Society,  by  Professor  Mautice  Bloomfield ; and  Dr.
Richard  Garbe  has  published  a careful  edition  of  the  text
of  the  Vaitana,  with  critical  notes  and  indexes,  followed
by  a commented  translation  of  the  work.  An  Anukra-
man!  or  Index  to  the  Atharva-veda  is  extant.  I am
indebted  to  Mr.  W.  H.  Wright,  Principal  of  Queen’s
Go  ege,  Benares,  and  to  the  Librarian  of  the  Sanskrit
College,  for  the  loan  of  a copy  of  this  work  borrowed
. .from  a gentleman  of  Benares*

Portions  of  a Commentary  ascribed — but  without
sufficient  authority— to  S4yana,  were  discovered,  some
fourteen  years  ago,  by  R4o  Bahadur  Shankar  Pandurang
Pandit,  of  Bombay,  and  have  been  printed,  but  not

. * ®in°°  th0  ab0Ve  was  written-  W Whitnc v~to  the^roat loss

°\bans:nt or''tv^ !,ia passed - te to tho f i

_not«e  of  ms  hie  and  labours  reprinted  from  the  New  York  NaHm  Zal

* 1 01  ih°  Al'Jiarva-voaa>  'vhlGh  I hope,  soon  be  published.


PREFACE.  ' XV

published,  in  their  incomplete  state.  The  Pandit  is  still
waiting — hopelessly,  I fear— for  the  missing  portions,  of
which  no  trace  has  as  yet  been  found.  I have  not
succeeded  in  obtaining  the  printed  sheets,  but  Professor
Whitney  who  has  seen  "them  says  (Festgruss  an  Rudolf
von  Roth  zmn  Doktor-Jubillium,  1893,  p.  96) : ‘ What
there  is  that  is  valuable  in  the  Atharva-veda  commentary,
apart  from  the  various  readings,  is,  on  the  whole,  only
what  it  derives’and  reports  from  the  auxiliary  literature
to  which  we  also  have  access.  Independently,  and  as  com-
mentary, I have  not  found  that  it  anywhere  makes  import-
ant contribution  to  the  understanding  of  the  text.5  One
Rnihmana,  the  Gopatha  (published  in  the  Bibliotheca
Indica,  1870-72),  belongs  to  the  Atharva-veda,  and  its
U partishads,  many  of  which  are  of  comparatively  recent
date,  are  said  to  number.one  hundred  and  forty-five.

There  is  no  complete  or* nearly  complete  translation
of  the  Atharva-veda  in  any  European  language.  Profes-
sor von  Roth  has  published  versions  of  a few  hymns  in
his  History  and  Literature  of  the  Veda,  and  elsewhere.
Professor  Weber  has  published  in  Indisehe  Studien,
V"ols.  IV.,  XIII,,  and  XVII.,  an  excellent  translation,
with  exhaustive  notes,  of  Books  I— III.,  and  in  Vol.  V.
the  nuptial  formulas,  contained  in  Book  XIV.  with  a
great  variety  of  love-charms  and  similar  formulas  from
other  Books.  Mr.  Muir  has  translated  some  entire
hymns  and  many  fragments  and  detached  verses  and
lines  in  his  Original  Sanskrit  Texts,  especially  in  the  fifth
volume  of  that  excellent  work.  Professor  Ludwig  has
translated— unfortunately  without  a commentary — about


mmmM*


tvro  hundred  and  thirty  of  the  most  important  hymns.
Dr.  Grill  m his  Mundort  Lieder  dee  Atharva-veda  has
translated  and  annotated  one  hundred.  M,  Victor  Henry
has  published  a translation  and  commentary  of  Books
' ll.  and  XIII.  Herr  Floreuz  has  published  a version
of  about  half  of  Book  VI.  Dr.  Lucian  Scheman  has
translated  and  elucidated  thirteen  of  the  philosophical
irymms,  chiefly  from  Books  X.,  XI.,  XIII..  and  XIX
and  Professor  Maurice  Bloomfield  has  thoroughly  dis-
cussed and  partly  translated  seven  hymns  of  Books

I.,  II.,  and  VI.  in  the  American  Journal  of  Philology
Vol.  VII.  4.  *


1 ^ave  not  l)een  able  to  obtain  a copy  of  Herr
~lom'z’s  work’  but  ^ith  this  exception  I have  derived
tho  greatest  possible  benefit  and  assistance  from  ail  the
translations  and  commentaries,  that  I have  mentioned,
and  I readily  and  thankfully  acknowledge  my  general
indebtedness  to  their  authors  independently  of,  and  in
addition  to,  special  references  in  my  notes  and  Index  of
a mes.  Etc.  I need  hardly  say  that  the  "great  St
Petersburg  Lexicon  has  been  constantly  referred  to,  as
well  as  the  dictionaries  of  Sir  M.  Monier-Williams  and
1 rofossor  Macdoneil,  von  Botli’s  edition  of  the  Nirukta,
Th.  Zachanaes  edition  of  the  AnoHrthasamgraha,
Del  bracks  Das  Altindische  Verbum,  and*  the  Vedische
fetudien  of  Professors  Pisehei  and  Geldner.  Tide  Index
'eroovum  edited* by  Professor  Whitney  I have  found  of
the  very  greatest  service.  Professor  Zimmer’s  Altind, ri-
ches Leben  has  also  greatly  assisted  me,  and  much  IDht
has  been  thrown  upon  obscure  passages  by  Professor


- PREFACE.  XVK

’ ; B]c)C>tofid:d’&  ed|tion  of  the  Kaudka-Siitra  and  Dr,  Garbers
Vait^na-Suti’a.  ' tri  hL

My  plan  of  translation  is  that  previously  adopted
in  my  versions  of  the  Hymns  of  the  Itigveda  and  Sarna-
veda.  While  aiming  especially  at  close  fidelity  to  the
letter  and  spirit  of  the  original  I have  endeavoured  to
make  my  translation  as  readable  and  intelligible  as  the
nature  of  subjects  and  other  circumstances  permit.  I
have  also  attempted  to  preserve  something  of  the  external
form  ot  the  original  hymns  by  rendering  them— in
general,  so  far  as  I found  it  possible  or.  expedient —in
syllabieally  commensurate  hemiatichs  and  verses.  The
prevailing  metres  of  the  original,  hymns  are  Gayatri,-
Anushtup,-  Pankti,  Trishtup,  and  Jagati,  consisting,  the
first  three  of  three,  four,  and  five  octosyllabic  Padas  or
divisions,  ana  the  last  two  of  four  hendecasyllabic  and
dodeeasyllabic  Pada-s  respectively.  In  translating  the
first  set  I have  employed  corresponding  numbers  of  the
common  octosyllabic  or  dimeter  iambic  line,  and  in  the
second  of  the  ordinary  hypereataieetie  blank  verse  line  -
and  the  Alexandrine.  I have  not  attempted  to  reproduce
stlm  rhythm- or  tonic  metre  of  the  original:  such  a task,
supposing  its  satisfactory  execution  to  be  possible,  would
iCMaii’o  more  skill  than  I possess,  and  more  time  and
labour  than  I could  spare  for  the  purpose.  Moreover,-
I have  found  it  impossible  to  carry  out  universally  my
general  plan  of  translation.  Parts  of  the  Atharva-veda,

^r_”1Stance  Bo°k  and  the  greater  portion  of

A v x.,  are entirely  m prose,  and  hymns,  verses,  and  parts
of  verses  in  prose  are  found  in  other  Books  also.  ‘It  is


R.  T.  H.  GRIFFITH,


Kotacuri,  Nilgirj  Hills
1st  November,  1894.


THE


HYMNS  OF  THE  ATHABVAVEDA.


BOOK  THE  FIRST.


HYMN  I.

Now  may  V&cbaspati  assign  to  me  the  strength  and
powers  of  Those

Who,  wearing  every  shape  and  form,  the  triple
seven,  are  wandering  round.


The  hymn,  which  is  introductory  to  the  whole  Book,  is  a prayer
addressed  to  Vachaspati  for  divine  help,  favour,  and  illumination.  The
metre  is  Anushtup,  consisting  of  four  equal  octosyllabic  padas,  divisions,
or  quarter- verses.  The  name  means,  perhaps,  ‘ the  ‘ After-step, J be-
cause each  line  was  stamped  regularly  after  the  other,  possibly  by  two
choruses,  each  side  taking  its  turn:1  see  M. 'Muller,  Vedic  Hymns.
Part  1.  p.  xcvi.

1 Ytichaspati : or,  Lord  of  Speech ; the  God  or  Genius  of  human  life
which  lasts  as  long  as  the  power  of  speech  remains  in  the  body.  The
name  occurs  in  the  Rigveda,  X.  1 66. 3 : ‘Press  down  these  men,  Vachaspati,
(or,  0 Lord  of  Speech)  that  they  may  humbly  speak  to  me f and
stanzas  17 — 19  of  Atharva-veda  XIII.  I are  addressed  to  this  God.
In  Bigveda  IX.  26.  4 and  101.  5 the  name  is  applied  to  Soma  as  the
exhilarating  drink  which  makes  men  eloquent  and  inspires  the  song.
Vachaspati  is  classed  in  the  Nirnkta  among  the  deities  of  the  firma-
ment or  middle  sphere  between  heaven  and  earth.  His  name,  being
compounded  with  pdti,  indicates  a more  recent  deification  than  that  of
the  great  Powers  of  Nature  whose  presence  and' superhuman  influence
were  immediately  seen  and  felt.

Those : the  Gods  in  general ; or  the  Maruts  or  Storm-Gods.

- The  triple  seven : trishapttilh  | a fanciful  expression  for  an  indefinite
number.  So  trih  saptd  vishpulingaket , the  three  times  seven  .bright


TUK  HYMNS  OF  [BOON  I.

2 Come  thou  again,  Vdchaspati,  come  with  divine

intelligence.

Vasoshpati,  repose  thou  here.  In  me  be  Knowledge
yea,  in  me.  . * 7

3 Here,  even  here,  spread  sheltering  arms  like  the  two

bow-ends  strained  with  cord.

This  let  Ydchaspati  confirm.  In  me  be  Knowledge
yea,  in  me.  ° ’

4 l&chaspati  hath  been  invoked:  may  he  invite  us

m reply.

MreftWthereofre  t0  Saered  Lore‘  Never  may  I be


sparks  of  fire;  and  trih  sapid  maydrykh,  the  peahens  three  times
seven  (Iv  gveda  1. 191.  12,  14).  In  Atharva-veda  XIII.  1.  3 the  Maruts
who  are  said  to  form  nine  troops  of  seven  each,  are  called  the  triple
seven,  tnskaptdso  marutah,  instead  of  the  thrice-threc  seven  • w
these  powerful  deities  may  be  intended  here  also.  Professor  Weber
v.ould  derive  the  word  from  the  root  sap,  a secondary  form  of  sack  to
c cave  to,  to  follow,  of  which  sapta  would  be  the  past  participle  passive
used  is  the  sense  of  combination,  and  trishaptl'h  might  then  mean
triply  combined,  ‘Gods  of  three  spheres/  the  three  classes  of  deities  whose
S™  ^^--P^-ly  heaven,  atmosphere  or  firman^

t,.:,  " c Peterfbur®  dictionary  translates  tnskaptd'h  in

thib  passage  by  zu  Dutzenden/  in  dozens.

. 2 . FZ0iihpai{;  Lord  of  Treasure,  that  is,  of  wealth  and  food  accord

g \°  D“'8p  tho  Commentator  of  the  Nirukta.  Vasoshpati  is  not
mentioned  elsewhere  in  the  Veda.  “ lt  6

Knmdedrje:  srutam ; that  which  was  heard  (from  the  beginning
the  Veda,  revelation,  or  sacred  knowledge.  According  to  the  St
1 etersburg  Dictionary,  ‘ Gehor/ hearing,  k meant.  The  Nirukta  X S
has  m rdmaya  mdyyeva  tan  dam  mama,  ‘maintain  my  self  within  me  >
keep  my  body  and  soul  together,  that  I may  enjoy  the  p< /.  eeZnl  o’
vuuch  thou,  \ asoshpati,  art  the  controller

""’“"I  fifc“  f h »« iTiB

has  translated  and  annotated  five;  UU  Ulii


HYMN  2.]  THE  ATHARVA-VEPA,  3

HYMN  IX.

W s know  the  father  of  the  shaft,  Parjanya,  liberal
nourisher,

Know  well  his  mother  Prithivi,  Earth  with  her
manifold  designs.

2 Do  thou,  O Bowstring,  bend  thyself  around  us :

make  mv  body  stone.

Firm  in*  thy  strength  drive  far  away  malignities  and
hateful  things.

3 When,  closely  clinging  round  the  wood,  the  bow-

string sings  triumph  to  the  swift  and  whizzing  arrow,
Indra,  ward  oft'  from  us  the  shaft,  the  missile.


This  hymn  is  a charm  against  acute  diarrhoea  or  dysentery.  The
metre  is  Dvipada  Trishtup,  consisting  of  three  padas  or  divisions  of
eleven  syllables  each,  in  stanza  3,  and  Anushtup  in  the  rest.

1  Parjanya  : derived  probably  from  an  original  root parj,  to  sprinkle
or  moisten,  is  the  rain-cloud  and  the  divine  power,  or  God,  that
animates  it,  the  generator  and  nourisher  of  plants  and  animal  life.
Parjanya  has  been  identified  with  the  Lituanian  Perkunas,  the  God  of
thunder : see  Max  Muller,  India,  What  can  it  Teach  us?,  pp.  183  sqq.
See  also  The  Hymns  of  the  Bigveda,  General  Index,  for  hymns  addressed
to  this  deity.  Par j any  a is  called  the  father  of  the  shaft  or  arrow,  which
is  to  be  employed  in  the  charm,  on  account  of  the  rapid  growth,  in  the
rainy  season,  of  the  sard  (Saechamm  Sara),  the  reed  of  which  arrows
were  made,  sard  meaning,  like  the  Latin  arundo,  both  reed  and  arrow.

Prithivi  : for  pritkm,  broad  Earth  personified  as  the  mother  of  all
beings.  With  her  manifold  designs:  with  her  countless  inventions
and  productions.  According  to  others  bhti'rivarpasam  means  4 many-
shaped,5 4 presenting*  many  appearances.’  Cf.  Spenser’s  4 the  dsedale
earth.’

2 Bowstring : which  is  to  be  twisted  round  the  patient’s  body
during  the  recitation  of  the  charm.  Stone  ; sound  and  strong.

3 The  wood : literally,  the  tree,  meaning  the  bow.  Indra:  ad-

dressed as  being  the  God"  of  battle  and  the  chief  tutelary'  deity  of  the
Aryans,  : -


wim  Hundred  powers  : * °

By  this  may  I bring  health  unto  thy  body  : let  the
cbanneIs  Pour  their  burthen  freely  as  of.  old.

4 Hangs:  literally,  stands.  ~~  ’ ~

J Munja  grass  : munja  (Saecharum  Mtrnja)  is  a sort  of  rush  or  ™
ii\ Kieh  glows  to  the  height  of  about  ten  feet.  It  is  used  in  basl-et  & i’"
and  «.«»*««  or  «e  „o„  bj  Brthnaa,  ” 1 ^ i

pip  pts*  wai

coid,  then,  perhaps,  to  be  suspended  from  the  neck  of  the  natient  or
to  be  otherwise  attached  to  his  body.  As  the  discharged  aiTow  Ws
heaven  and  earth,  so  the  grass  is  to  stand  M ihM  gl
ailment  and  asrdvd,  diarrhoea  in  an  acute  form,  or  dysentery  that  k
to  prevent  the  indisposition  from  developing  into  serious  disease  ‘ The
w-d  aM  from  to  flow, -M,  has  been  transIatT


fJMl  3,]  THE  AT  BAR  VA-  VEDA .  2  3 4

2 We  know  the  father  of  the  shaft,  Mitra,  the  Lord  of

hundred  powers :

By  this,  etc.

3 We  know  the  father  of  the  shaft,  V aru^a,  strong

with  hundred  powers  : .

By  this,  etc.

4 We  know  the  father  of  the  shaft,  the  Moon  endowed

with  hundred  powers  :

By  this,  etc,

■ 5 We  know  the  father  of  the  shaft,  the  Sun  endowed
with  hundred  powers  :

By  this  may  I bring  health  unto  thy  body  : let  the
channels  pour  their  burthen  freely  as  of  old.

6 Whate’er  hath  gathered,  as  it  flowed,  in  bowels,

bladder,  or  in  groins,' —

Thus  let  the  conduit,  free  from  check,  pour  all  its
burthen  as  of  old.

7 I lay  the  passage  open  as'  one  cleaves  the  darn  that

bars  the  lake :

Thus  let,  etc.

8 Now  hath  the  portal  been  unclosed  as  of  the  sea  that

holds  the  flood :

Thus  let,  etc.


2 Mitra:  the  Friend,  the  gracious  God,  the  Zend  Mithra.  See
Hyions  of  the  Rigveda,  General  Index.  Mitra  is,  perhaps,  called  the
father  of  the  shaft  because  it  grows  by  day  over  which  that  deity  as  a
form  of  the  Sun  presides.

3 Varum:  the  Coverer  or  Encompasser;  originally  the  visible
starry  heaven.  Taruna’s  connexion  with  the  shaft  or  reed  is  not  very
obvious.  The  growth  of  the  future  arrow  by  night,  over  which  Varuna
presides,  may,  perhaps,  be  the  ground  of  relationship.

4 The  Moon  : the  influence  of  the  Moon  on  the  sap  and  growth  of
plants,  of  which  Soma  (another  name  of  the  Moon)  is  the  King,  is  fre-
quently alluded  to.

8 The  portal : vastibildm : literally,  the  orifice  of  the  bladder.


€ THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  I.


9 Even  as  the  arrow  flies  away  when  loosened  from  the
archer’s  bow,

Thus  let  the  burthen  be  discharged  from  channels
that  are  checked  no  more.

HYMN  IV.

♦Along  their  paths  the  Mothers  go,  sisters  of  priestly
ministrants,

Blending  their  water  with  the  mead.

2 May  yonder  Waters  near  the  Sun,  or  those  where-

with the  Sun  is  joined,

Send  forth  this  sacrifice  of  ours.

3 I call  the  Waters,  Goddesses,  hitherward  where  our

cattle  drink  : .

The  streams  must  share  the  sacrifice.

4 Apar.it  is  in  the  Waters,  in  the  Waters  balm.

Yea,  through  our  praises  of  the  Floods,  O horses,
be  ye  fleet  and  strong,  and,  0 ye  kine,  be  full  of
strength.


9 The  arrow : here,  says  the  Kausika-Sutra,  XXV.  14,  ishum  visri-
jati , 4 he  (the  operator)  discharges  an  arrow/  symbolizing  thereby  the
free  passage  of  the  loosened  contents  of  the  stomach  and  bladder  of  the
patient;  Other  operations  are  to  he  performed,  and  a decoction  of
medicinal  herbs  is  to  be  administered.

■ Staiizas  l- — B and  the  first  line  of  stanza  :4,;:are;  taken:  /from^vRigYeda
L 23.  16 — 19,  attributed  to  the  Eishi  Medhatithn  G > yl

X The  Mothers : the  maternal  ' Waters/-
firmament  regarded  as  divinities  who  give  and  cherish  life.  Sisters  :
closely  connected  with  the  priests  who  officiate  at  sacrifices  as  water  is
mingled  with  the  ingredients  of  the  Soma  libation.  With  the  mead :
mtidhund  ; mddhu  meaning  sweetness  or  any  sweet  or  pleasant  drink*
especially,  as  here,  the  expressed  juice  of  the  Soma  plant.

3 The  streams  : the  divine  Waters  of  the  ocean  of  air,

4 Amrii:  nectar,  the  drink  of  the  Gods  urn  confer  immortality;
or  immortality  itself.


I2YM27  5.]  * THE  ATHARYA-YEDA.  7

HYMN  V.

Ye,  Waters j truly  bring  us  bliss : so  help  ye  us  to
strength  and  power
That  we  may  look  on  great  delight.

2 Here  grant  to  us  a share  of  dew,  that  most  auspici-

ous dew  of  yours,

Like  mothers  in  their  longing  love.

3 For  you  we  fain  would  go  to  him  to  whose  abode  ye

send  us  forth,

And,  Waters,  give  us  proereant  strength.

4 I pray  the  Floods  to  send  us  balm,  those  who  ,bear

rule  o’er  precious  things,

And  have  supreme  control  of  men.


In  the  Iligveda  the  partly-corresponding  stanza  is  in  the  Pura-ushniht
metre,  consisting  of  three  padas,  the  first  of  which  contains  twelve,  and
the  second  and  third  eight  syllables  each.  The  stanza  here  has  an  ad-
ditional octosyllabic  p&da.  For  the  second  line  of  the  stanza,  as  trans-
lated above,  the  reading  of  the  Eigveda  is  : apd'm  utd  prds/tstaye  devd
hkdvata  vcijhmh : Yea,  be  ye  powerful,  ye  Gods,  to  celebrate  the
Waters7  praise.  The  metre  in  stanzas  1 — 3 is  Gayatri,  ;■ consisting  of
three  octosyllabic  padas  or  divisions.

The  hymn  is  taken  from  Eigveda  X.  9.  1 — 3,  5,  ascribed;  to  Sindhu-
dvipa,  son  of  Ambarisha,  or  to  Trisiras,  son  of  Tvashtar.  The  same
stanzas  form  a hymn  of  the  Samaveda  (IT.  ix.  xi.  10).

1 Waters  : see  the  preceding  hymn,  note  on  stanza  1.  Great  delight :
meaning,  according  to  the  Scholiast,  perfect  knowledge  of  Brahma.

2 Dew  : rdseth  ; any  fluid,  here  meaning  water.

.3  The  purport  of  the  stanza  appears  to  be  : — If  yon  direct  ns  and
strengthen  us  for  the  work,  we  are  ready  and  willing  to  visit  any  wor-
shipper of  yours  in  whose  house  we  may  perform  sacrifice  in  your
honour.  Give  us  procreant  strength  : ye  give  us  power  to  generate,
that  is,  to  produce  or  perform  the  sacrifice  which  may  be  regarded  as
the  offspring  of  the  officiating  priests.  Professor  Grassmann  translates
the  pada  by ; — 4 Ihr  Wasser  machet  kraftig  linsff  Ye  waters  make  us
powerful  But  the  force  of  Jan — in  jandyatha , signifying  ye?i~eration,
procreation,  should  be  preserved.  Professor  Weber  translates  the  first
line  differently  We  bear  you  thither  to  the  man  whose  habitation


5 ' THE  HYMNS  OF  • {BOOK  1.

HYMN  YI.

The  Waters  be  to  us  for  drink,  Goddesses,  for  our
aid  and  bliss :

Let  them  stream  health  and  wealth  to  us.

2 Within  the  Waters — Soma  thus  hath  told  me— dwell

all  balms  that  heal,

And  Agni,  he  who  blesseth  all.

3 0 Waters,  teem  with  medicine  to  keep  my  body  safe

from  harm,

So  that  I long  may  see  the  Sun.

4 The  Waters  bless  us,  all  that  rise  in  desert  lands  or

* marshy  pools !

Bless  us  the  Waters  dug  from  earth,  bless  us  the  Waters  ■
brought  in  jars,  bless  us  the  Waters  of  the  Rains  l

ye  befriend.1  Sayana’s  authority  (Commentary  on  Sanaa  veda  II.  ix.  il
10.  3)  supports  this  interpretation  of  gamama  as  causative  = gama-
y&ma  / but  it  is  not  in  accordance  with  Yedic  use.  Benfey  (Die  Hymnen
des  Sama-Veda)  says  in  note  2,  p.  223 : — 4 1 now  take  amm  gam  as
meaning  to  go  adorning,  to  go  in  order  to  adorn,  to  glorify,  and
accordingly  he  translates  stanza  3 of  this  Hymn  in  the  Sama-veda  :~~
i Biesen  euren  erheben  wir,  dessen  Herrschaft  ihr  huldi'eieh  seid,  und
machet  fruchtbar,  Wasser  uns  We  glorify  this  man  of  yours,  the  man
whose  lordship  ye  befriend,  and,  Waters,  make  us  rich  in  fruit.  My
version  of  the  stanza  is  based  on  Ludwig’s  translation  and  Commentary
(Der  Eigveda,  I.  p.  189,  and  IV.  p..  180).

The  first  three  stanzas  of  the  hymn  are  to  be  repeated  by  Brahmans
at  their  morning  ablutions  : see  Golebrooke’s  Essays,  I.  On  the  Hell-
gious  Ceremonies  of  the  Hindus,

Stanzas  1—3  are  taken  from  Bigveda  X.  9.  4,  6,  7,  the  two  latter
being  repeated  from  I.  23,  20,  21,  forming  a continuation  of  Hymn
IY.  of  this  Book.

2 Soma:  the  God ; the  juice  of  the  Soma  plant  personified  and
regarded  as  an  all-powerful  deity.  Agni : the  God  of  fire.  See
Hymns  of  the  Bigveda,  General  Index,  for  both  deities.  The  meaning
is  that  the  poet,  under  the  inspiration  produced  by  draughts  of  Soma
juice,  has  perceived  that  water  possesses  healing  virtue,  and  that  the
waters  of  the  firmament — that  is,  clouds — contain  purifying  and
health-giving  fire  or  Agni  in  the  shape  of  lightning.


HYMN  7/j  THE  A TEA  E YA*  VEDA.  ■ -9

HYMN  VII.

Bring-  the  Kimldm  hither,  bring  the  Y&tudh&na  self-
declared,

For  Agni,  God,  thou,  lauded,  hast  become  the
Dasyu’s  slaughterer.


The  hymn  is  a prayer  to  Agni  and  Indra  for  the  detection  and
destruction  of  evil  spirits.  The  metre  changes  in  stanza  5 from  Anush-
tup  to  Trishtup  which  consists  of  four  padas  of  eleven  syllables  each.
M.  Muller  explains  Aits  name  ‘Three-step’  by  the  fact  that  the  three
last  syllables  ^ — w,  which  form  the  characteristic  feature  of  that
metre,  and  may  be  called  its  real  vritta  or  turn,  were  audibly  stamped
at  the  end  of  each  turn  or  strophe  :’  Vedic  Hymns,  Part  L p.  xcvr.
The  hendecasyllabie  metre  in  which  I render  the  Trishtup  stanza  here
and  wherever  it  occurs  does  not  profess  to  be  moi’e  than  a substitute
for  the  original  metre  : retaining  the  number  of  syllables,  it  does  not
attempt  to  preserve  the  exact  rhythm  of  .the  Trishtup  which,  I think,
is  not  satisfactorily  reproducible  in  English  verse.

1 The  Kimldm:  one  of  a class  of  malignant  spirits.  According  to
the  Nirukta  VI.  11  the  word  originally  means  one  who  goes  about
crying  Kim  iddnhn , Quid  nunc  % What  now  ? or  Kim  id  am*?  What
is  this  ? Literally,  a quidnunc ; a vile  and  treacherous  spy  and  informer.
The  Ydiudhdna : one  of  a class  of  evil  spirits,  demons,  or  sorcerers,
explained  by  Sayana  as  Bakskasas,  but  in  the  Veda  apparently  distinct
from  those  violent  and  voracious  ogres.  In  Bigveda  VII.  104  and  X.  87
there  are  two  long  series  of  imprecations  directed  against  Bakshasas
and  Yatudhanas.  The  Do.syu’s  slaughterer:  Dasyus  is  the  general
name  of  a class  of  powerful  superhuman  beings  hostile  to  Gods  and
men,  comprising  the  malignant  demons  of  the  air,  the  withholders
of  the  seasonable  rain.  Indra  as  the  chief  tutelary  God  of  the  Aryans
is  sometimes  called  —as  Agni  is  here — the  slayer  of  the  Dasyu : —
‘Thou  (Indra)  from  of  old  wast  bom  to  strike  the  Dasyus  dead:’
Bigveda  I.  51.  6.  ‘He...... who  slays  the  Dasyus,  He,  0 men,  is  Indra

Bigveda  II.  12.  10.  The  name  of  Dasyus  was  also  sometimes  given  to
the  wild  indigenous  races  *who  opposed  the  immigration  of  the  Aryans
and,  later,  to  all  people  who  did  not  follow  the  Yedic  ritual  or  observe
the  essential  Brahmanical  ceremonies,  '


0 the  hymns  OF  {book  i.

2 0 Jatavedas,  Lord  Supreme,  controller  of  our  bodies,

taste

The  butter,  Agni,  taste  the  oil : make  thou  the
Y&tudhanas  mourn.

3 Let  Yltudh&nas  mourn,  let  all  greedy  Khnidins

weep  and  wail :

And,  Agni,  Indra,  may  ye  both  accept  this  sacrifice
of  ours.

4 May  Agni  seize  upon  them  first,  may  strong-armed

Indra  drive  them  forth  :

Let  every  wicked  sorcerer  come  hither  and  say,  Here
am  I.

5 Let  us  behold  thy  strength,  0 Jltavedas.  Viewer

of  men,  tell  us  the  Y&tudhanas.

Burnt  by  thy  heat  and  making  declaration  let  all
approach  this  sacrifice  before  thee.

6 0 Jatavedas,  seize  on  them  : for  our  advantage  art

thou  born  :

Agni,  be  thou  our  messenger  and  make  the  YMu-
dh&nas  wail.  § - | BWM

7 0 Agni,  bring  thou  hitherward  the  Yatudh&nas

bound  and  chained,

And  afterward  let  Indra  tear  their  heads  off  with
his  thunderbolt.


2 Jdtavedas:  the  wise,  the  sapient;  a frequently  occurring  designa-
tion of  Agni:  see  Vedische  Studien,  I.  pp.  94,  95.  The  hitter:  djya ;
blitter  melted  or  clarified,  used  for  oblations,  or  for  pouring  into  the
holy  fire  at  the  sacrifice,  or  for  anointing  anything  sacrificed ; some-
times also  oil  and  milk  used  instead . of  clarified  butter  at  a sacrifice.
2 he  oil : taiki ; oil  expressed  from  the  seeds  of  the  tila  or  sesaraum
plant  (Sesamum  Indicum).  This  oil  was  not  usually  offered  in  oblation  ;
out,  besides  this  special  detective  sacrifice,  it  appears  to  have  been
f^®Mtn|i:nsod':m:Saorifices  to  the  'Fathers-bp;:®Aesi?s^’i:AtharVa-
veda  XVIII.  4.  32.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Eigveda,  III.  p.  523.


THE  A THAR  VA~  YE  DA


HYMN  8.]

HYMN  VIII.

This  sacrifice  shall  bring  the  Yatudhanas  as  the  flood
brings  foam  :

Here  let  the  doer  of  this  deed,  woman  or  man,
acknowledge  it

2 This  one  hath  come  confessing  all:  do  ye  receive  him

eagerly.

Master  him  thou,  Brihaspati ; Agni  and  Soma,  pierce
him  through.

3 0 Soma-drinker,  strike  and  bring  the  Y&iudhana’s

progeny : . . '

Make  the  confessing  sinner’s  eyes  fall  from  his  head,
both  right  and  left.


The  hymn  is  a continuation  of  Hymn  VII.  The  sacrifice  has  proved
effectual  (stanza  2),  and  a Yatudhana  or  sorcerer  has  been  forced  to
come  forward  and  confess.  The  metre  changes  in  stanza  4 from
Anush  tup  to  Trishtup.

1 This  deed : some  act  of  sorcery.  Woman  or  man : sorceress  or
sorcerer ; Yatudham  or  Yatudhana.

2 Brihaspati:  or,  0 Lord  of  Prayer.  4 Brihaspati,  alternating  with
Brahmanaspati,  is  the  name  of  a deity  in  whom  the  action  of  the  wor-
shipper upon  the  gods  is  personified.  He  is  the  suppliant,  the  priest
who  intercedes  with  the  gods  for  men,  and  protects  them  against  the
wicked.  Hence  he  appears  as  the  prototype  of  the  priests  and  the
priestly  order,  and  is  also  designated  as  the  Purohita  [High  Priest]  of
the  divine  community.  The  essential  difference  between  the  original
idea  represented  in  this  God  and  those  expressed  in  most  of  the  other
and  older  deities  of  the  Veda  consists  in  the  fact  that  the  latter  are
personifications  of  various  departments  of  nature,  or  of  physical  forces,
while  the  former  is  the  product  of  moral  ideas,  and  an  impersonation
of  the  power  of  devotion/ — Muir,  Original  Sanskrit.  Texts,  V.  p.  272.
For  hymns  addressed  to  Brihaspati  and  Brahmanaspati,  see  Hymns  of
the  lligveda,  General  Index  I.

3 Soma-drinker  : Indra,  who  is  especially  the  Lord  of  Soma  and  the
chief  drinker  of  libations  made  of  its  juice  ‘ Known  as  the  Soma-
drinker,  armed  with  thunder,  who  wields  the  bolt,  He,  O ye  men,
is  Indra  Bigveda  IL  12.  13.  This  appellation  of  India  will  be  found


a pes  Emm  of  [ book  l


4 As  tliou,  0 Agni  Jatavedas,  knowest  the  races  of
, these  secret  greedy  being's,

So  strengthened  by  the  power  of  prayer,  0 Agni,
crushing  them  down  a hundred  times  destroy  them.

HYMN  IX.

May  Indra,  P&shan,  Varuna,  Mitra,  Agni,  benignant
Gods,  maintain  this  man  in  riches.

May  the  Adityas  and  the  Visve  Devas  set  and  sup-
port him  hr  supremest  lustre.  •


in  most  of  the  many  Rigveda  Hymns  addressed  to  this  deity.  Eight  and
left ; pdram  utd  dvaram  ; literally,  upper  and  lower.  Weber  suggests
the  possibility  of  Yatudhanas  being  credited  with  additional  eyes.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  523,


The  occasion  of  the  hymn  is  an  Abhisheka  or  inauguration  by  sprinkl-
ing or  unction  of  a Raja  or  King  who  appears  to  have  been  elected
from  among  the  members  of  a princely  family.  The  metre  is  Trishtup.

1 Pushan  ; a God  who  protects  and  multiplies  cattle  and  human
possessions  generally.  In  character  he  is  a solar  deity,  and  a guide  on
roads  and  journeys.  As  a form  of  the  Sun  he  beholds  the  entire  uni-
verse, The  name  is  derived  from  push,  to  nourish.  For  hymns  to
Pushan  see  Hymns  of  the  Rigveda,  General  Index  L.p,  xxvii.  The
Adityas : literally,  the  sons  of  Aditi,  Infinity  or  Eternity.  4 There  (in
the  highest  heaven)  dwell  and  reign  those  gods  who  bear  in  common
the  name  of  Adityas.  We  must,  however,  if  we  would  discover  their
earliest  character,  abandon  the  conceptions  which  in  a later  age,  and
even  in  that  of  the  heroic  poems,  were  entertained  regarding  these
deities.  According  to  this  conception  they  were  twelve  Sun-gods,
bearing  evident  reference  to  the  twelve  months.  But  for  the  most
ancient  period  we  must  hold  fast  the  primary  signification  of  their
name.  They  are  the  inviolable,  imperishable,  eternal  beings.  Aditi,
eternity  or  the  eternal,  is  the  element  which  sustains  them  and  is  sus-
tained by  them. The  eternal  and-  inviolable  element  in  which  the

Adityas  dwell,  and  which  forms  their  essence,  is  the  celestial  light...
The  Adityas,  the  gods  cf  this  light,  do  not  therefore  by  any  means
coincide  with  any  of  the  forms  in  which  light  is  manifested  in  the


HYMN  10.]  THE  A TEAR  VA-  VEDA.  13

2 May  light,  0 Gods,  be  under  his  dominion,  Agni,

the  Sun,  all  that  is  bright  and  golden.

Prostrate  beneath  our  feet  his  foes  and  rivals.  Up-
lift him  to  the  loftiest  cope  of  heaven.

3 Through  that  most  mighty  prayer,  O data vedas,

wherewith  thou  broughtesfc  milk  to  strengthen  Indra,
Even  therewith  exalt  this  man,  0 Agni,  and  give
him  highest  rank  among  his  kinsmen.

4 I have  assumed  their  sacrifice,  0 Agni,  their  hopes,

their  glory,  and  their  riches’  fulness.

Prostrate  beneath  our  feet  his  foes  and  rivals.  Up-
lift him  to  the  loftiest  cope  of  heaven.

HYMN'  X.

This  Lord  is  the  Gods’  ruler ; for  the  wishes  of
Varuna  the  King  must  be  accomplished.

Therefore,  triumphant  with  the  prayer  I utter,  I
rescue  this  man  from  the  Fierce  One’s  anger.


universe.  They  are  neither  sun,  nor  moon,  nor  stars,  nor  dawn,  hut
the  eternal  sustainers  of  this  luminous  life,  which  exists,  as  it  were,
behind  all  these  phenomena  Roth,  quoted  by  Muir,  Original  Sanskrit
Texts,  V.  p.  56.  For  hymns  addressed  to  these  deities  see  Hymns  of  the
Rig veda,  General  Index  I.  p.  xxvii.  The  Visye  Devas : visye  dev&'k ,
visvedevdh  ; the  All-Gods,  Universal  Gods,  Collective  Gods ; all  the
Gods  together.  See  Hymns  of  the  Rig  veda,  General  Index  I.  p.  xxvii,

2 Loftiest  cope  of  heaven ; highest  pitch  of  earthly  happiness.

3 Thou  hroughiest  milk : the  allusion  is  obscure,  data vedas,  the
sapient  Agni,  appears  to  have  strengthened  Indra  at  some  critical  time
with  milk  or  Soma  juice,  but  the  particulars  appear  to  be  un discoverable.

There  is  a somewhat  similar  benediction  of  a newly  elected  king  in
Rigveda  X.  153.  / /

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Dev  Rigveda,  III.  p.  256,

. After  intercession  with  Varuna,  a priest  absolves  a sinner  who  has
offended  that  deity.  The  metre  is  Trishtup  in  I,  2,  and  Anush  tup  in  3,  4,

I This  Lord  : Varuna  appears  as  the  Asura,  divine  Being  or  Lord
par  excellence , the  Ah ura  Mazda.  1 This  god  is  one  of  the  most
interesting  creations  of  the  Hindu  mind,  because  though  we  can  still
perceive  the  physical  background  from  which  he  rises,  the  vast,  starry.


4 ' , THE  HIMES  OH  [ BOOK  I

2’  Homage  be  paid,  King  Yarunta,  to  tliine  anger ; for
thou,  dread  God,  detectest  every  falsehood.

I send  a thousand  others  forth  together ; let  this
thy  servant  live  a hundred  autumns,

8 Whatever  falsehood  thou  hast  told,  much  evil  spoken
. with  the  tongue,

I liberate  thee  from  the  noose  of  Varuiia  the  right-
eous King.

4 I free  thee  from  Yaisvanara,  from  the  great  surging
flood  of  sin.

Call  thou  thy  brothers,  Awful  One!  and  pay  at-
tention  to  our  prayer.

||  HYMN  XL  "

Yashat  to  thee,  0 Pushan!  At  this'  birth  let  Ary  a*
man  the  Sage  perform  as  Hotar-priest.

As  one  who  bears  in  season  let,  this  dame  be  ready
to  bring  forth  her  child.


brilliant  expanse  above,  his,  features,  more  than  those  of  any  of  the
Yedic  gods,  have  become  completely  transfigured,  and  he  stands
before  us  a god  who  watches  over  the  world,  punishes  the  evil-doer,
and  even  forgives  the  sins  of  those  who  implore  his  pardon M.  Muller,
India,  What  can  it  Teach  us?  p.  195.

2 I send  a thousand  others  forth : I intercede  for  this  man  only.
I resign  to  thee  all  others  to  punish  as  thou  wilt.

3 The  noose : borne  by  Yaruna  as  the  moral  Governor  of  the  world,
to  entangle  and  capture  the  evil-doer.

4 Vaisvdnara : belonging  to,  or  ruling  all  men ; here  meaning
Yaruna.  Call  thou  thy  brothers  : call  the  other  Adityas  that  they  may
Bee  that  thou  hast  pardoned  the  penitent  and  restored  him  to  favour.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Itigvoda,  III.  p.  445.

The  hymn  is  a charm  to  be  used  at  child-birth.  The  details  given
in  stanzas  3 — 6 are  strictly  obstetric  and  not  presentable  in  English :
see  Appendix.  The  text  appears  to  be  mutilated  in  some  places,  and
the  metre  is  irregular.

1 Vdshat : is  a sacrificial  exclamation  uttered  by  the  Hotar  or  chief
priest  at  the  end  of  the  Yajya  or  sacrificial  verse,  whereupon  the


HYMN  12.]  THE  A T II A E V A - V ED  A , 15

2 Four  are  the  regions  of  the  sky,  and  four  the  regions
of  the  earth  :

The  Gods  have  brought  the  babe  ; let  them  prepare
the  woman  for  the  birth.

' HYMN  XII.

Born  from  the  womb,  brought  forth  from  wind  and
from  the  cloud,  the  first  red  bull  comes  onward
thundering  with  the  rain.

Our  bodies  may  he  spare  who,  cleaving,  goes  straight
on  ; he  who,  a single  force,  divides  himself  in  three.


This-  hymn  has  been  discussed  by  Professor  Bloomfield  (American
Journal  of  Philology,  Yol.  YII.  pp.  469—472),  who  entitles  it  a Prayer
to  Lightning,  conceived  as  the  cause  of  fever,  headache,  and  coughs.
It  appears  to  have  been  placed  immediately  after  Hymn  XL  simply
because  it  begins  with  the  word  jar&yuj&h , and  jar&yu  is  the  penulti-
mate word  of  that  hymn.  The  metre  is  Jagati,  consisting  of  four  padas
of  twelve  syllables  each,  in  1—3,  and  Anushtup  in  4.

1 Born  from  the  womb : literally,  from  the  placenta ; that  is,  from
the  womb  of  the  cloud.  Brought  forth  from  wind  and  from  the  cloud :
vdtabhrajds  emended  to  vdtdbhrojds  by  Bloomfield.  The  first  red  bull;
the  lightning.  According  to  Weber,  puerperal  fever  is  meant:— * A
red  bull,  the  first  product  of  the  afterbirth,  comes  on  thundering  with
rain,  with  glowing  breath  of  wind/


6 THE  limns  OF  [BOOK  1,

2 Bending  to  thee  who  cl  ingest  to  each  limb  with  heat,

fain  would  we  worship  thee  with  offered  sacrifice,
Worship  with  sacrifice  the  bends  and  curves  of  thee
who  with  a vigorous  grasp  hast  seized  on  this
one’s  limbs.

3 Do  thou  release  this  man  from  headache,  free  him

from  cough  which  has  entered  into  all  his  limbs  and
joints.

May  he,  the  child  of  cloud,  the  offspring  of  the  wind,
the  whizzing  lightning,  strike  the  mountains  and
the  trees.

4 Well  be  it  with  my  upper  frame,  well  be  it  with  my

lower  parts.

With  my  four  limbs  let  it  be  well.  Let  all  my  body
’ , ; : be  in  health.

HYMN  XIII.

Homage  to  thee,  the  Lightning’s  flash,  homage  to
thee,  the  Thunder’s  roar !

Homage  to  thee,  the  Stone  which  thou  hurlest
against  the  undevout !

2 Homage  to  thee,  Child  of  the  Flood  whence  thou
collectest  fervent  heat !

Be  gracious  to  our  bodies,  give  our  children  happi-
' ness  and  joy.  .


2 Thee : Lightning.

In  the  Aimkramani  the  hymn  is  designated  as  a yaUhmandsanam
sittocmi,  a hymn  which  cures  consumption.  In  the  Kausika-Sfitra  it
is  employed  as  a charm  against  thunderstorms,  and  in  a pert  >nm  nee
which  is  described  by  the  Commentator  D&rila  as  a cure  for  headache.
For  further,  information  see  Professor  Bloomfield’s  remarks  referred  to
above.

Tiie  hymn  is  a prayer  to  Lightning  personified  and  deified.

d O hi  id  of  the  Flood : sprung  from  the  waters  or  watery  clouds  of
the  ocean  of  air.  According  to  others,  Child  of  the  Height,  that  is,
tiie  firmament.  .For  an  exhaustive  discussion  of  the  meaning  of  pmvdt.
sec  Piscliel,  Yedische  Studien,  II.  pp.  63—78.


:J73'JW.U.J


I?


THE  A THAR  VA-VEDA ,

3 Yea,  homage  be  to  thee,  0 Offspring  of  the  Flood!

Homage  we  pay  to  thee,  the  dart  and  fiery  flame  :
For  well  we  know  thy  secret  and  sublimest  home,
where  thou  as  central  point  art  buried  in  the  sea.

4 Thou,  Arrow,  which  the  host  of  Gods  created,  mak-

ing it  strong  and  mighty  for  the  shooting,

Be  gracious,  lauded  thus,  to  our  assembly.  To  thee,
that  Arrow,  be  our  homage,  Goddess  !

§||§lf  hymn  xiv.  ; |||

As  from  the  tree  a wreath,  have  I assumed  her  for-
tune and  her  fame :

Among  her  kinsfolk  long  may  she  dwell,  like  a
mountain  broadly-based.


3 In  the  sea : in  the  ocean  of  air.

4 The  host  of  Gods:  all  the  Gods  together.  Assembly:  congre-
gation for  sacrificial  purposes.

Professor  Bloomfield  has  shown  (American  Journal  of  Philology
Yol.  VII.  pp.  473— 476)  by  quotations  from  the  .Kausika-Sutra  that,
when  that  ritual  was  composed,  this  hymn  was  regarded  and  treated
not  as  a marriage  song,  as  Weber,  Ludwig,  and  Zimmer  have  interpret-
ed it,  but  as  a woman's  incantation  against  a rival.  ‘But/  says
Professor  Bloomfield,  ‘it  seems  to  me  that  traces  of  a more  original
application  are  not  wanting.  The  word  pitrsu,  translated  above  doubt-
ingly  by  ‘ with  her  relatives/  means  naturally  ‘among-  the  fathers  or
manes/  The  third  stanza  of  the  hymn,  considered  independently,
would  be  easily  explained  as  one  uttered  at  the  funeral  of  a maiden,
and  it  seems  possible  that  the  entire  hymn  represents  similar  material
somewhat  worked  over  for  the  occasion.5

1 The  woman  who  employs  the  .incantation  speaks  : — ‘ I have  taken
to  myself  the  fortune  and  fame  of  my  rival  as  one  takes  a wreath
from  a tree  : long  may  she  remain  unmarried,  a fixture  in  her  relatives’
house.5  Weber,  Zimmer,  -and,  apparently,  Ludwig  assign  the  stanza  to
the  bridegroom,  ‘ her  fortune 5 meaning  the  fortune  of  the  bride  and
pitrishu  meaning  ‘my  parents/  or  rather  ‘my  kinsfolk.5


2


18  ' THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  L

2 King  Yama,  let  this  maiden  be  surrendered  as  a wife

to  thee  :

Bound  let  her  be  meanwhile  within  her  mother’s,
brother’s,  father’s  house.

3 Queen  of  thy  race  is  she,  Q King  : to  thee  do  we

deliver  her.

Long  with  her  kinsfolk  may  she  sit,  until  her  hair
be  white  with  age.

4 With  Asita’s  and  Kasyapa’s  and  Gaya’s  incantation,

thus

, As  sisters  pack  within  a chest,  1 bind  and  tie  thy
■ fortune  up.


2 The  woman  devotes  her  rival  hereafter  to  Yama.  King  of  the
Departed.  According  to  Weber,  Zimmer,  and  Ludwig,  the  stanza  is
the  reply  of  the  bride’s  relatives  to  the  bridegroom  who  is  addressed
as  king  and  yama,  that  is,  controller,  the  word  being  derived  from
yam,  to  restrain.  According  to  this  interpretation  ‘ her  mother’s5
would  be  4 thy  mother’s.5

3 The  incantation  is  continued.  Queen  of  thy  race : hmlapd’;  1 guard-
ian of  thy  house:’  Ludwig.  4 Thy  housekeeper:5  Bloomfield.  Her
kinsfolk:  pitrishu ; literally,  fathers,  meaning  the  father  and  his
brothers  or  other  near  relatives.  The  pronoun  not  expressed  in  the
text,  would  be  4 thy 5 according  to  the  interpretation  given  by  Weber,
Ludwig,  and  Zimmer.  Until  her  hair  be  ivhite  with  age : this  is  a
conjectural  rendering,  suggested  in  the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary  and
adopted  doubfcingly  by  Zimmer,  of  the  probably  corrupt  samdpytU
of  the  text.  According  to  Weber  opydt  is  the  preeativc  from  the
verb  vap,  to  sow,  + d,  that  is,  may  she  sow  or  scatter  blessings  from
her  head.  Ludwig  translates  similarly.

4 Asita,  Kasyapa,  and  Gaya  are  ancient  Kish  is,  the  seers  or  authors
of  various  hymns  of  the  Eigveda.  Incantation:  or,  prayer.  The
woman  is  still  the  speaker.  According  to  Weber,  Ludwig,  and
Zimmer,  the  stanza  is  the  bridegroom’s  reply.  Zimmer  adds  that  the:
sisters  are  those  of  the  bride,  who  pack  her  dowry  within  the  chest.

For  details  of  the  ceremony  which,  according  to  the  Kausika-
Butra,  accompanies  the  recitation  of  the  hymn,  see  Bloomfield  as
- quoted  above.  Zimmer’s  translation  is  to  be  found  in  his  A3iindisch.es
Leben,  p.  314:  and  Ludwig’s  in  his  Der  Eigveda,  III.  p.  459,


THE  A TEA  R V A - VEDA


HYMN  XV.

Let  the  streams  flow  together,  let  the  winds  and
birds  assembled  come.

Let  this  my  sacrifice  delight  them  always.  I offer  it
with  duly  mixt  oblation.

2 Come  to  ray  call,  Blent  Offerings,  come  ye  very  nigh.

And,  singers,  do  ye  strengthen  and  increase  this
man.

Hither  come  every  animal : with  this  man  let  all
wealth  abide.

3 All  river  founts  that  blend  their  streams  for  ever

inexhaustible—

With  all  these  confluent  streams  of  mine  we  make
abundant  riches  flow.

4 All  streams  of  melted  butter,  and  all  streams  of

water  and  of  milk—

With  all  these  confluent  streams  of  mine  we  make
abundant  riches  flow.


A sacrifice  is  performed,  and  prayer  is  offered  for  the  prosperity  of  a
patron.  The  metre  is  mixed.  In  stanza  1 the  first  line  is  Anush  tup
and  the  second  Trishtup.  In  2,  line  1 is  Jagati  and  line  2 Anushtup.
Stanzas  3 and  4 are  Anushtup.

1 Them:  the  Gods.  Weber  translates  pradbvas,  always,  by  ‘the
Eternal  Ones7 May  the  Eternal  Ones  accept  my  sacrifice.7  Duly
mixt  oblation : consisting  of  milk,  butter,  and  the  juice  of  corn  (perhaps
a sort  of  beer) : see  II.  26.  4,  5.  Stanzas  i and  2 occur  again  with
variations  in  XIX.  1.  1,  2.

2 This  man  : some  wealthy  householder  who  pays  the  expenses  of
the  sacrifice  and  rewards  the  officiating  priests.  Animal:  domestic
animal ; cow,  horse,  goat,  sheep.

The  Blent  Offerings,  or  Mixt  Oblation,  are  called  sa m srdvands,  from
sam,  together,  and  sr%  to  flow,  and  every  line  but  one  of  the  stanza  con-
tains a word  or  words  of  the  same  derivation.


20


THE  HYMWK  OF


[BOOK  L


HYMN  XVI.

May  potent  Agni  who  ■ destroys*  the  'demons  bless
and  shelter  us  ■ ' .

* , Prom  greedy  fiends  who /rise  in  troops  at  night-time
when  the  moon  is  dark.

2 Yanina's  benison  hath  blessed  the  lead,  and  Agni
strengthens  it.

Indra  hath  given  me  the  lead ; this  verily  repels  the
fiends*

S This  overcomes  Vishkandha,  this  drives  the  voraci-
ous fiends  away  ;

By  means  of  this  have  I o’er  thrown  all  the  Pisaelifs
demon  brood.


The  hymn  is  a prayer  and  oh  arm  against  demons.

1 The  demons  : Yafcus,  evil  spirits,  fiends,  or  sorcerers  who,  like  the
Yatudhanas  (I.  VII.  1),  assume  a variety  of  shapes  and  plague  and
injure  men  an d cattle , Greed g fiends;  atrims;  Husky  fiends:5  M;
Muller.  At  night-time  when  the  moon  is  dark.:,  amdvdsgdm  . 'rdftrinr;'
during  the  night  of  new  moon,  the  first  night  of  the  first  quarter  when
the  moon  is  in v isible,

2 The  lead:  a piece  of  this  metal  employed  as  a charm  against  demons
and  sorcery : see  Book  XXL  2.  1,  19,  20,  53,  ' So  in  England- adiorse-
shoe  was-  in  former  times  generally  regarded  as  a protection  against
witches,  and  is  still  sometimes  nailed  on  or  over  the  door  of  a house
or  stable.  Iron  in  other  forms  also  was  used  as  a charm  for  stables:—

{ Hang  up  hooks,  and  shears  to  scare,  Hence  the  hag  that  rides  the  mare
Till  they  be  all  over  wet  with  the  mire  and  the  sweat.  This  observed,
the  manes  shall  be,  Of  your  horses,  all  knot-freed —Herrick,  Charms
and  Ceremonies,  LX VIIL

3 Vithkcmdha : from  vi,  apart,  and  skandha , shoulder;  drawing  as-
under or  racking  the  shoulders ; apparently  acute  rheumatism  in  th<
shoulders  and  neck.  Vishkandha  is  frequently  mentioned  in  the
Atharva-veda,  but  nowhere  clearly  defined.  The  Commentator  attrb
bates  its  attacks  to  the  malice  of  fiends  raid  evil  spirits.  The  FisdekVs
demon  brood:  Pisachi  is  the  feminine  of  Pisachi  (Rigveda  I.  133.  5),
or  Pisacha,  the  name  of  a class  of  fierce  and  malignant  imps  or  goblins,
Pbach  in  Hindi  and  Pisaelii  in  Tamil  are  still  in  common  use  ms
general  terms  for  goblins  or  fiends.  The  feminine  in  Hindi  is  Fisaclnu


HYMN  17.]


THE  ATHARVA-VEDA.  '


4 If  thou  destroy  a cow  of  ours,  a human  being,  or  a
. steed,

We  pierce  thee  with  this  piece  of  lead  so  that  thou
mayst  not  slay  our  men.

HYMN  XVII.

Those  maidens  there,  the  veins,  who  run  their  course
in  robes  of  ruddy  hue,

Must  now  stand  quiet,  reft  of  power,  like  sisters  who
are  brotherless.

2 Stay  still,  thou  upper  vein,  stay  still,  thou  lower,

stay,  thou  midmost  one,

The  smallest  one  of  all  stands  still  : let  the  great
vessel  e’en  be  still.

3 Among  a thousand  vessels  charged  with  blood,

among  a thousand  veins,

Even  these  the  middlemost  stand  still  and  their
extremities  have  rest,

4 A mighty  rampart  built  of  sand  hath  circled  and

encompassed  you :

Be  still,  and  quietly  take  rest.


The  hymn  has  been  translated  and  annotated  by  Di\  Julius  Grill,
Hundert  Lietler  des  Atharva-veda,  pp.  1 , 75,

The  hymn  is  a charm  to  be  employed  when  venesection  is  performed.

1 Brother  less : unsupported  and  helpless,  when  their  father  is  dead,
and  they  have  no  brother  on  whom  the  duty  of  protecting  and  finding
husbands  for  them  would  naturally  devolve.

3 Vessels  charged  with  blood:  see  Dr.  Wise,  Commentary  on  the
Hindu  System  of  Medicine,  pp.  63,  64,

4 Rampart  built  of  sand : the  bandage  was  probably  filled  with  wet
sand  to  compress  and  cool  the  vein.

See  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder  des  Atharva-veda,  pp.  16,  76,  and  Ludwig,
Der.Eigveda,  III.  p.  503*  . '


[BOOK  I.

HYMN  XVIII.

We  drive  away  the  Spotted  Hag,  Misfortune,  and
Malignity :

All  blessings  to  our  children  then  ! We  chase  Malig-
nity away.

Let  Savitar,  Mitra,  Varuna,  and  Aryaman  drive
away  Stinginess  from  both  the  bands  and  feet:

May  Favour,  granting  us  her  bounties,  drive  her  off.
The  Gods  created  Favour  for  our  happiness.

Each  fearful  sign  upon  thy  body,  in  thyself,  each  in-
auspicious mark  seen  in  thy  hair,  thy  face,

All  this  we  drive  away  and  banish  with  our  speech.
May  Savitar  the  God  graciously  further  thee.

Antelope-foot,  and  Bullock -tooth,  Cow-terrifier,
Vapour-form,

The  Lieker,  and  the  Spotted  Hag,  all  these  we  drive
away  from  us.


TEE  HYMNS  OF


The  hymn  is  a charm  to  avert  evil  spirits  of  misfortune  and  wicked-
ness,  to  remove  ill-omened  personal  marks,  and  to  secure  prosperity.

The  metre  is  Anush  tup  in  stanzas  1 (with  an  irregularity  in  line  2)
and  4,  and  Jagatl  in  stanzas  2 and  3.

1 The  Spotted  Hag : or,  Lal&mL  Misfortune:  or,  Lakshmi ; Fortuna,
Fortune ; the  Goddess  of  good  and  ill  luck,  more  usually  the  former.
Malignity : or  Arati.  To  our  children  : Ludwig  reads  mV,  out,  instead
of  prajdy&i,  to  our  children,  which  mars  the  metre : * Then  let  all
happy  things  be  ours.’

2 Savitar : the  Bun,  especially  the  morning  Sun  whose  light  drives
away  witches  and  evil  spirits.  Stinginess:  Arani.  From  the  hands
and  feet:  on  which  Arani  may  have  impressed  her  ill-omened  signs.
The  charm  was  probably  recited  over  a young  child.  Favour:  Ann-
matt ; divine  Grace,  personified  as  a Goddess  * representing  the  Gods’
favourable  acceptance  of  worship  and  oblations.

3 With  our  speech ; v&ehti*;  with  the  voice ; with  the  spell  which
we  utter.

4 Antelope-foot : Rishyapadi.  Bullock-tooth : or,  Mighty -tooth ;
Trisliadati.  Cow-terrifier:  Goshedha ; probably  from  go  f sedJu%  mlh


HYMN  19.]  THE  A TEA B V A-  VEDA.  23

HYMN  XIX.

Let  not  the  piercers  find  us,  nor  let  those  who  wound
discover  us.

O Indra,  make  the  arrows  fall,  turned,  far  from  us,
to  every  side.

2 Turned  from  us  let  the  arrows  fall,  those  shot  and

those  that  will  be  shot.

Shafts  of  the  Gods' and  shafts  of  men,  strike  and  trans-
fix mine  enemies  !

3 Whoever  treateth  us  as  foes,  be  he  our  own  or  strange

to  us,  a kinsman  or  a foreigner,

May  Rudra  with  his  arrows  pierce  and  slay  these
enemies  of  mine.


meaning  to  drive  away : Cow  tailed,  according  to  vV eber.  Vapour-form:
Vidhama;  the  exact  meaning  of  the  word  here  is  uncertain.  The
Licker:  Viledhi.  All  these  are  names  or  epithets  of  sorceresses,  witches,
or  female  fiends  of  various  forms.

Professor  Geldner  argues  with  great  ingenuity  that  the  subject  of
the  hymn  is  some  semi-domesticated  animal,  in  all  probability  a house
cat,  and  that  the  object  of  the  charm  is  to  banish  its  original  wild  and
fien  dish  nature,  and  to  retain  and  improve  all  its  inherent  good  qualities
an' l m tke  it  a friend  and  a blessing  to  men:  see  Vedische  Studien,
I.  pp.  313 — 315.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  498.

The  hymn  is  a prayer  for  protection  from  arrows  and  for  the  punish-
ment of  enemies  in  general.  The  metre  is  Anush  tup,  with  an  addition-


2,1  THE  HYMNS  OF,  [TOOK  l

'^■  'The-rival  and  ncm-rival,  lie  who  in  his  hatred  curses

2 : ; os—

May  all  the  deities  injure  him ! My  nearest,  closest
mail  is  prayer.

■ ' ' ' HYMN  XX.

. ; May  it  glide  harmless  by  in  this"  our  sacrifice,
O Soma,  God  ! Maruts,  be  gracious  unto  us.

Let  not  disaster,  let  not  malison  find  us  out ; let  not
abominable  guiles  discover  us.

2 Mitra  and  Varuna,  ye  twain,  turn  carefully  away
from  us

The  deadly  dart  that  flies  to-day,  the  missile  of  the
wicked  ones.


thunderstorms  after  long  drought  purify  the  air,  dispel  miasma,  and
bring  health  and  vigour  to  everything  that  has  life.  ‘ Far  be  thy  dart
that  kiileth  men  or  cattle:  thy  bliss  be  with  us,  0 thou  Lord  of  heroes:1
Bigveda  I.  114.  10.  4 Where  is  that  gracious  hand  of  thine,  0 Rudra,

the  hand  that  giveth  health  and  hringeth  comfort,  Remover  of  the
woe  the  Go  is  have  sent  us  ? Look  thou  on  me,  0 mighty,  with  com-
passion:5 Big  vela  IT.  34.  7.  For  hymns  to  Rudra,  spo  Hymns  of  the
Bigveda,  General  Index  I.

4 My  nearest  closest  mail  is  prayer  : these  words  are  the  con  chid
mg  pada  of  Hymn  75,  Book  VI.  of  the  Bigveda,  entitled  Weapons
of  War.  *

The  hymn  is  a prayer,  accompanying  sacrifice,  for  protection  from
enemies.  The  metre  is  Jagati  in  stanza  1,  and  Anush  tup  in  the  rest
of  the  hymn.

1 It : that  is,  the  deadly  dart,  radhds,  of  stanza  2.  Soma  ; sec  1.  VI.  ll
MaruU;  the  sons  of  Rudra,  Gods  of  the  winds  and  tempests,  fre-
quently invoke!  not  only  as  the  senders  of  storm  and  rain  but  as
all-powerful  protecting  deities.  4 We  invoke  with  prayer  the  offspring
of  Rudra,  the  brisk,  the  pure,  the  worshipful,  the  active.  Cling  for
happiness-sake  to  the  strong  company  of  the  Maruts,  the  chasers  of  the
sky,  the  powerful,  impetuous  Bigveda  I.  64.  Id:  see  M.  Mullers
I,  p*  IQT.  HBjl  mk  wmM  M


HYMF  21.]  TEE  A THAR  FA  - VEDA . 25

■ 3 Ward  off  from  this  side  and  from  that,  O Varn-na,
the  deadly  dart :

Give  us  thy  great  protection,  turn  the  lethal  weapon
faraway.

4 A mighty  Ruler  thus  art  thou,  un conquered,  van-
quisher of  foes,

Even  thou  whose  friend  is  never  slain,  whose  friend
is  never  overcome.


HYMN  XXI.

Lonv  of  the  clans,  giver  of  bliss,  fiend-slayer,  mighty
o’er  the  foe,

May  Indra,  Soma-drinker,  go  before  us,  Bull,  who
brings  us  peace.

2 Indra,  subdue  our  enemies,  lay  low  the  men  who
fight  with  us :

Down  into  nether  darkness  send  the  man  who  shows
us  enmity :


4 This  stanza  is  taken  from  Eigveda  X.  152.  1,  a hymn  addressed
to  Indra  and  ascribed  to  a Kishi  Sasa  (Ruler)  of  the  family  of
Bharadvaja.


The  hymn  is  a prayer  to  Indra  for  protection  from  enemies.  It  is
taken,  with  slight  variations,  from  Eigveda  X.  152.  2-— 5,  the  first
stanza  of  which  concludes  the  preceding  hymn  XX.

1 Lord  of  the  clans : vis&'m  pdtis ; or  Lord  of  (Aryan)  men  in
general,  King  = vispdtih.  The  Eigveda.  has  vims  pdtis.  Lord  of  the
clan  or  tribe.  Fiend-slayer : vritrahd' ; slayer  of  fiends  and  foes  in
general,  or  slayer  of  Vritra  the  fiend  and  foe  par  excellence  ^ the  Vedic
personification  of  the  malignant  power  which  takes  possession  of  the
clouds  and  withholds  the  seasonable  rain.  Indra  battles  with  this  chief
demon  of  drought,  shatters  him  and  his  cloud-castles  with  his  thunder-
bolt and  releases  the  imprisoned  waters.  Bull : vrishd ; the  original
meaning  of  the  word  was  male,  masculine,  then  strong,  powerful,  then
especially  bull,  stallion,  hero.  Sayana  explains  vrishd  by  4 showerer
of  benefits/  See  Yedic  Hymns,  Fart  I.  pp.  318  sqq.


26  , TEE  HYMNS  OF  [ BOOK  /.

3 Strike  down  the  fiend,  strike  down  the  foes,  break

thou  asunder  V ritra’s  jaws.

O Indra,  Vritra-slayer,  quell  the  wrath  of  the  assail-
ing foe.

4 Turn  thou  the  foeman’s  thought  away,  his  dart  who

fain  would  conquer  us:

Grant  us  thy  great  protection  ; keep  his  deadly
weapon  far  away.

V.  '■  HYMN  XXII.

As  the  Sun  rises  let  thy  sore  disease  and  yellowness
depart.

We  compass  and  surround  thee  with  the  colour  of
a ruddy  ox.

2 With  ruddy  hues  we  compass  thee  that  thou  mayst
live  a lengthened  life  :

So  that  this  man  be  free.. from  harm,  and  cast  his
yellow  tint  away.


The  hymn  is  a charm  against  Jaundice.

1 As  the  Sun  rises  : so,  in  Rigveda  I.  50.  11,  Surya,  the  'Sun,  is  en-
treated to  remove,  as  he  rises,  the  sore  disease  and  yellow  hue  of  the
affiieted  suppliant.  Sore  disease  : hriddyotds  ; from  hrid,  the  heart,
and  dyu%  to  be  broken;  any  severe  internal  malady.  Yellowness :■
yellowish  white  colour  of  the  skin,  and  yellowness  of  the  eyes,  teeth,
and  nails,  are  the  most  unmistakeable  visible  signs  of  panel u or  jaun-
dice which  must  be  the  disease  intended  here.  Ruddy  : see  stanzas  2
and  3.

2 With  ruddy  hues  : the  patient  is  surrounded  with  red  or  ruddy-
coloured  objects  in  order  to  combat  the  yellow  which  is  symptomatic
of  the  disease : £ should  the  patient  see  every  thing  yellow  he  will  not
soon  get  well  :J  Wise,  Hindu  Sysem  of  Medicine,  p.  248.  Cast  his  yellow
tint  away : dharito  bkuvat ; Weber  divides  dkar  ito  4 his  now  life  may
now  begin.*


iim  • iiigi


HYMN  23.]  THE  A THA RVA-YEDA.  ■ 27

3.  Devaty&s  that  are  red  of  hue,  yea,  and  the  ruddy-
coloured  kine,

Each  several  form,  each  several  age, — with  these  we
compass  thee  about.

4 To  parrots  and  to  starlings  we  transfer  thy  sickly
yellowness :

Now  in  the  yellow-coloured  birds  we  lay  this  yellow-
ness of  thine.

HYMN  XXIII.

O Plant,  thou  sprangest  up  at  night,  dusky,  dark-
coloured,  black  in  hue !

So,  Rajam,  re-colour  thou  these  ashy  spots,  this
leprosy.


3 Devatyds:  the  meaning  is  uncertain.  Weber  translates,  doubt-
ingly,  by  £ Gotterkrafte,’  divine  powers.  The  St.  Petersburg  Dic-
tionary leaves  the  word  unexplained  with  the  remark  that  animals  of
some  kind  must  be  intended,  if  the  reading  is  correct.  The  word  does
not  occur  elsewhere.

4 The  stanza  is  taken  from  Rigveda  I.  50.  12,  and  is  the  second
stanza  of  a tricha  or  triplet,  the  repetition  of  which,  with  due  formalities,
is  considered  to  be  curative  of  disease.  To  parrots  and  to  starlings:
birds  with  more  or  less  greenish  yellow  tints  or  marks.  Similarly
among  the  Romans,  people  with  the  jaundice  were  called  ‘ ieterici '
according  to  Pliny  (H.  N.  XXX.  11),  from  the  fanciful  notion  that
the  disease  was  cured  by  looking  at  the  icterus,  one  of  the  many
varieties  of  the  Sturnidae  or  starling  family.  The  bird  died  instead


8 • THE  HYMNS'  OF  [BOOK  I.

2 Expel  the  leprosy,  remove  from  him  the  spots  and

ashy  hue  :

Let  thine  own  colour  come  to  thee  ; drive  far  away
the  specks  of  white.

3 Dark  is  the  place  of  thy  repose,  dark  is  the  place

thou  dwell est  in  :

Dusky  and  dark,  0 Plant,  art  thou  : remove  from
him  each  speck  and  spot.

4 I with  my  spell  have  chased  away  the  pallid  sign  of

leprosy

Caused  by  infection,  on  the  skin,  sprung  from  the
body,  from  the  bones.

HYMN  XXIV.

First,  before  all,  the  strong-winged  Bird  was  born  ;
thou  wast  the  gall  thereof.

Conquered  in  fight,  the  Asuri  took  then  the  shape
and  form  of  plants.


2 Let  thine  own  colour  come  to  thee : addressed  to  the  patient.
According  to  Dr.  Grill,  the  address  to  the-  Plant  is  continued : 4 Let
the  peculiar  colour  of  the  disease  enter  into  thee,  that  is,  absorb  it,  so
that  the  patient  may  recover.’

4 Caused  by  mfection  : two  varieties  of  the  disease  appear  to  be
meant,  (1)  communicated  by  contact,  breathing  the  same  air,  eating
with,  or  wearing  the  clothes  or  ornaments  of  a leper,  and  (2)  caused
by  the  sufferer’s  own  sins,  irregularities  in  eating  and  fasting,  indi-
gestible food,  mental  agitation,  excessive  fatigue,  etc.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  II L p.  508,
and,  with  annotations,  by  Dr.  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder  des  Atharva-veda,
pp>  19,  77.

The  hymn  is  a charm  against  Leprosy.  See  I.  23.

1 The  first' stanza  is  difficult.  Whatever  the  4 strong-winged  Bird*
maybe,  Sama  the  plant  to  which  the  charm  is  addressed  Sk  said  to  ha  e
been  its  gall,  probably  because  both  the  gall  and  the  Plant  were
regarded  as  remedies  tor  leprosy.  The  A suri,  the  female  per.  a indication
of  the  fiendish  darkness  of  night,  being  conq  uered  by  the  Sun,  took


HYMN  25.1


THE  A Til  A R Y A-  VEDA.


29


2 The  Asuri  made,  first  of  all,  this  medicine  for  leprosy,

this  banisher  of  leprosy.

She  banished  leprosy,  and  gave  one  general  colour  to
the  skin.

3 One-coloured,  is  thy  mother’s  name,  One-coloured  is

thy  father  called :

One-colour-maker,  Plant!  art  thou:  give  thou  one
colour  to  this  man.

4 S&mH  who  gives  one  general  hue  was  formed  and

fashioned  from  the  earth  :

Further  this  work  efficiently.  Restore  the  colours
that  were  his.

HYMN  XXV.

When  Agni  blazed  when  he  had  pierced  the  Waters,
whereat  the  Law-observers  paid  him  homage,
There,  men  assever,  was  thy  loftiest  birthplace  :
0 Fever,  yielding  to  our  prayer  avoid  us.


refuge  in  the  gloom  of  the  forest,  and  assumed  the  form  of  a plant  in
her  offspring,  the  herb  which  is  addressed  : compare,  £ 0 Plant,  thou
sprangest  up  at  night ’ (I.  23.  L).  According  to  Weber  the  ‘strong-
winged  Bird’  is  the  Sun.

2 The  banisher . of  leprosy : this  pada  is  probably  an  explanatory
gloss.  By  omitting  it  and  resolving  pratkatneddm  into  prathamd'  iddni
the  regular  Anushtup  metre  is  restored.

3 One-coloured : contrasting  with  the  patient’s  spotted  skin.

■ S4m&  : the  plant  to  which  this  name  or  epithet  is  given  is  not
identifiable.  As  an  adjective  derived  from  the  verb  sam  the  word
would  mean  ‘curative:’  ‘ heilkraftig : ’ Weber.  ‘Instead  of  sdm.it  the
Paippalada  recension  reads  sydmd  (the  dusky) : with  which  compare
1.  23.  1 ; so  also  Shankar  Pandit  according  to  2 MSS,  Observe  also
sdnidka  = sydmdha  in  Kausika-Sutra  VIII,  11.  sydmd  is  the  name  of
various  plants  (see  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.  v.):J  Grill.

.The  hymn  lias  been,  translated  by  Ludwig;  Dei*  Rigveda,  III,  p.  509,
and,  with  annotations,  by  Dr.  Grill,  Huniert  Lieder,  pp.  19.  20,  77,  78.

The  hymn  is  a charm  against  Fever,  The  metre  is  Trishtup.

1.  The  meaning  of  the  stanza  is  that  fevers  begin  to  be  prevalent'


30  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  l

2 If  thou  be  fiery  glow,  or  inflammation,  or  if  thy

birthplace  call  for  chips  of  fuel,

Rack  is  thy  name,  God  of  the  sickly  yellow !
O Fever,  yielding  to  our  prayer  avoid  us.

3 Re  thou  distress,  or  agonizing  torment,  be  thou  the

son  Ring  Varuna  hath  begotten,

Rack  is  thy  name,  God  of  the  sickly  yellow  I
O Fever,  yielding  to  our  prayer  avoid  us.

at  the  commencement  of  the  annual  Rains,  when  Agni  the  God  of  Fire
descends  in  his  form  of  lightning  from  the  Waters  of  the  firmament
and  falls  with  the  rain  into  the  waters  of  the  earth.  The  Lmv-ohser-
vers : the  Gods  who  observe  and  maintain  the  everlasting  statutes  of
moral  and  natural  order.  The  allusion  is  to  the  flight  of  Agni,  and
his  pursuit  and  discovery  by  the  Gods: — 4 Him  (Agni)  the  unerring
ones  (the  Gods),  observant,  found  in  floods,  couched  like  a lion  in  his
lair:*  Bigveda  III,  9.  4:  compare  Bigveda  1.  45.  1.  0 fever:  takman ,

derived  from  tak , to  fly  at,  to  pounce  upon,  meaning  that  which  sud-
denly seizes,  is  explained  in  the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary  as  a kind
of  disease,  or  probably  a whole  class  of  diseases,  accompanied  by  erup-
tions on  the  skin.  But  a comparison  of  the  passages  of  the  Atfmrva-
veda  in  which  the  word  occurs  is  sufficient  to  prove  that  fever  in  its
many  varieties,  especially  malarial  fever,  is  the  disease  that  is  intended.
The  word  does  not  occur  in  the  Bigveda,  nor — barring  the  Kausika-
Sutra — is  it  foun  i in  works  later  than  the  Atharvft-ve  la.  Fever,  says
Susruta,  is  the  king  of  diseases.  ^ With  fever  man  is  horn,  and  with
fever  he  departs  from  this  world.  For  an  exhaustive  excursus  on
Takman,  see  Grohmann,  Medeeinisches  aus  dem  Atharva-vcda,  Indischc
Studien,  IX.  pp.  3 81 — 423,  and  compare  Wise,  Hindu  System  of
Medicine,  under  Fevers  (Jwara)  pp.  219 — 233.

Takman,  or  Fever,  is  addressed  in  the  hymn  as  a devd,  a superna-
tural being  or  God,  to  whose  influence  the  disease  may  be  attributed.

2 If  thy  birthplace  call  for  chips  of  fuel : if  thou  be  caused  by  an
internal  fire  which  consumes  the  vital  forces,  like  flame  that  requires
fragments  of  wood  to  feed  it.  Rack  is  thy  name:  hr4du>  from  hrttd,  to
draw  or  contract;  cramp  or  spasm  : c Krampf  ist  dein  name:*  Ludwig.

God  of  the  sickly  yellow  : or,  of  the  yellow  colour;  a symptom  of
Paittik  Jwara  or  bilious  fever : see  Wise,  p.  225.

' 3 The  son  King  Varuna  hath  begotten : if  thou  hast  come  from  the
God  Varuna,  sent  by  him,  as  the  moral  Governor  of  the  world,  to
punish  sin.


IPIliillll


HYMN.  26.1  THE  ATHARVA-VEDA.  31

4 I offer  homage  to  the  chilly  Fever,  to  his  fierce  burn
ing  glow  I offer  homage.

Be  adoration  paid  to  Fever  coming  each  other  day
the  third,  or  two  days  running.


HYMN  XXYI.

Let  that  Destructive  Weapon  be  far  distant  from  us,
O ye  Gods ; far  be  the  Stone  ye  wont  to  hurl.

2 Our  friend  be  that  Celestial  Grace,  Indra  and  Bhaga

be  our  friends,  and  Savitar  with  splendid  wealth.

3 Thou,  Offspring  of  the  Waterflood,  ye  Maruts,  with

your  sun-bright  skins,  give  us  protection  reaching  far.

4 Further  us  rightly,  favour  ye  our  bodies  with  your

gracious  love.  Give  thou  our  children  happiness.


4 Chilly  Fever:  coldness  of  the  body  and  shivering  fits  are  among
the  symptoms  mentioned  in  the  Hindu  System  of  Medicine.  The  names
of  the  three  varieties  of  intermittent  fever  mentioned  in  the  second
line  are,  in  the  text,  anyeyus,  triti'yahas  (tertian),  and  ubhayadyus
recurring  on  both,  that  is,  two  successive  days.


The  hymn  is  a prayer  for  protection,  guidance,  and  pi’osperity.

2 Bhaga:  Baga  in  Old  Persian,  Bogu.  in  Old  Slavonic ; Bhaga  is  the
gracious  Lord  and  protector  and  the  bestower  of  wealth.  His  name
is  frequently  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda  with  that  of  Savitar,  and  he
is  invoked  together  with  Pushan  and  the  Adityas,  Mitra,  Varuna,  and
Aryaman.  See  Hymns  of  the  Rigveda,  General  Index  II.

3 Offspring  of  the  W aterfiood : pravato  napdi.  Lightning  is  so  called
in  I.  13.  2.  3:  ‘ Child  of  the  Flood.5  Here  Agni  is  intended,  sprung  in
the  form  of  lightning  from  the  clouds  or  waters  of  the  firmament :
pravdt  te  ague  janimd,  ‘Agni,  thy  birth  is  from  the  flood:5  Rigveda
X.  142.  2.  With  your  sun-bright  shins : ‘0  Maruts,  strong  and  wise*
with  sun-bright  skins:5  Rigveda  VII.  59.  11.

4 Our  bodies:  ourselves,  as  separate  from  our  children.  Thou :
Agni.


. zlz,  :


32  THE  HYMNS  OF  {BOOK  I.

HYMN  XXVII.

There  on  the  bank  those  Vipers  lie,  th rice-seven
having  cast  their  skins  : *

Now  we  with  their  discarded  sloughs  bind  close  and
cover  up  the  eyes  of  the  malicious  highway  thief.

2 Far  let  her  go,  cutting  her  way,  brandishing,  as  it

were,  a club  :

Diverted  be  the  new-born’s  mind : ne’er  are  the
wicked  prosperous.

3 Not  many  have  had  power  enough;  the  feeble  ones

have  not  prevailed,

Like  scattered  fragments  of  a reed : ne’er  are  the
wicked  prosperous.

4 Go  forward,  feet,  press  quickly  on,  bring  to  the  house

of  him  who  pays.

Unconquered  and  unplundered,  let  Indr&ni,  foremost,

, lead  the  way.


A charm  in  which  snakes’  skins  are  employed.

1 \ ipers  : the  Pridaku,  a venomous  snake,  adder  or  viper,  is  fre-
quently mentioned  in  the  Atharva-veda.  Thrice-sewn : trishaptd's  ;
indefinitely  for  a considerable  number.  According  to  Weber,  ‘ thrice-
coiled  see  I.  1.  1,  note.  Bind  dose ; the  sloughs  are  to  make  the
travellers  invisible  to  robbers.  John  Aubrey,  the  English  antiquary,
who  lived  in  the  seventeenth  century,  recommends  the  powder  obtain-
ed from  a snake  which  has  been  caught  at  midnight  of  Midsummer
Eve,  killed,  skinned,  and  dried  in  the  shade,  as  a means  to  procure
invisibility.

L Let  ke-i  go,  meaning  the  mother  snake.  Cutting  her  way:  through,
her  old  skin.  A dub  ; her  head,  raised  for  attack.  The  new-born’s  mind  :
the  attention  of  the  snake  who  has  cast  her  old  skin  and  got  a now  one.

3 Scattered  fragments  of  arced:  vendradgds ; or,  ‘scattered  stalks


EYMN  29.1


TEE  A THAR  YA-YEDA.


HYMN  XXVIII.

God  Agni  hath  come  forth  to  us,  fiend-slayer,  chaser
of  disease,

Burning  the  Yatudh&nas  up,  Kimidins,  and  deceitful
ones.

2 Consume  the  Y&tudMnas,  God!  meet  the  Kimidins

with  thy  flame  :

Burn  up  the  Y&tudMnis  as  they  face  thee,  thou
whose  path  is  black  !

3 She  who  hath  cursed  us  with  a curse,  or  hath  con-

ceived a murderous  sin  ;

Or  seized  our  son  to  take  his  blood,  let  her  devour
the  child  she  bare.

4 Let  her,  the  YMudh&ni  eat  son,  sister,  and  her

daughter’s  child.

Now  let  the  twain  by  turns  destroy  the  wild-haired
Yatudhanis  and  crush  down  Arayis  to  the  earth !

HYMN  XXIX.

With  that  victorious  Amulet  which  strengthened
Indra’s  power  and  might

A prayer  for  the  destruction  of.  demons,

1 Y&tiidh&nas.. . Kimidins  : see  I.  7.  I.

2 Thou  whose  path  is  black : the  same  epithet,  hnshndvartani , is
given  to  Agni  hi  the  Rigveda,  VIII.  23.  19.

4 The  twain : Agni  and  Indra,  or  Agni  and  Soma  ; both  Indra  and
Soma  being  associated  with  Agni  as  allies  in  the  destruction  of  demons.
ArdyU ; Arayi  is  originally  the  personification  as  a female  fiend  of
the  illiberal  impiety  which  refuses  to  give  oblations  to  the  Gods  and
guerdon  to  the  priests.  The  word  was  afterwards  used  as  the  designa-
tion of  a class  of  malevolent  spirits : 4 Arayi,  one-eyed,  limping  hag,
fly,  ever-screeching ! to  the  hill;*  Rigveda  X.  155.  1.

The  hymn,  which  is  a charm  to  secure  the  supremacy  and  success  of
a dethroned  King  on  his  restoration  to  power,  is  an  adaptation  of
Hymn  X.  174  of  the  Rigveda.

1 Amulet ; instead  of  manlnd  the  Rigveda  reading  is  havishd;  ‘With,
that'  victorious  sacrifice, ? an  oblation  which  secures  success  against
one’s  en<  lies  Brahmanmpati : Lord  of  Prayer;  another  name  or
Rrihaspati : see  L 8.  2,  note.


kingly  sway.

2 Subduing  those  who  rival  us,  subduing  all  malignities.
Withstand  the  man  who  menaces,  and  him  who  seeks

to  injure  us.

3 Sooia  and  Savitar  the  God  have  strengthened  and

exalted  thee  :

All  elements  have  aided  thee,  to  make  thee  general
conqueror.

4 Slayer  of  rivals,  vanquisher,  may  that  victorious

Amulet  :

Be  bound  on  me  for  regal  sway  and  conquest  of  mine
enemies.

5 Yon  San  hath  mounted  up  on  high,  and  this  my  word

hath  mounted  up

That  I may  smite  my  foes  and  be  slayer  of  rivals,
rivalless.

6 Destroyer  of  my  rivals,  strong,  victorious,  with  royal

sway.

May  I be  ruler  of  these  men,  and  King  and  sovran
of  the  folk.

HYMN  XXX.

Guard  and  protect  this  man,  all  Gods  and  Yasus.

Over  him  keep  ye  watch  and  ward,  Adityas.

Let  not  death  reach  him  from  the  hands  of  brothers,
from  hands  of  aliens,  or  of  human  beings.


following  stanza  are  addressedto;  the  attioleq^lueli
reminds  one  of  the  old  Teutonic  Siegerstein  or-  Stone  of  Victory,

5 The  first  line  is  taken,  with  one  variation,  from  Rigveck  X.  159.  1.
My  i word : the  Rigveda  reading  is  m&mako  bhdgah.  my  happy  fate,
instead  of  mdmakdm  vac  has.


The  occasion  of  the  hymn  is  the  consecration  of  a King.  Oh  1 9,

1 Yarns : Gods,  frequently  mentioned  with  the  Adityas  and  the
Rudras : personifications  of  the  powers  of  nature,  especially  of  those
that  are  bright  and  celestial,  and  sometimes  almost  synonymous  with
the  Devas.


35


BTMhT  31.]  THE  ATBAB VA-VEDA,

2 Listen,  one-minded,  to  the  word  I utter,  the  sons,

0 Gods,  among  you,  and  the  fathers  1

I trust  this  man  to  ali  of  you  : preserve  him  happily,
and  to  length  of  days  conduct  him.

3 All  Gods  who  dwell  on  earth  or  in  the  heavens,

in  air,  within  the  plants,  the  beasts,  the  waters,
Grant  this  man  life  to  full  old  age,  and  let  him
escape  the  hundred  other  ways  of  dying.

4 You,  claiming  Anuy&jas  or  Prayajas,  sharers,  or  not

consumers,  of  oblation,

You,  to  whom  heaven’s  five  regions  are  apportioned,

1 make  companions  at  his  sacred  sessions.

HYMN  XXXI.

Here  will  we  serve  with  sacrifice  the  great  Con-
trollers of  the  world,

The  four  immortal  Warders  who  protect  the  regions
of  the  sky.


3 Full  old  age  : extending  to  at  least  a hundred  years.  Prayers
for  life  to  last  for  a hundred  winters  or  autumns  are  of  frequent
occurrence  in  the  Rigveda : see  Hymns  of  the  Rigveda,  General  Index
II.,  under  Hundred  winters.  The  hundred  other  ways:  see  II.  28.  1,
and.  Till.  2.  27.

4 Anuy&jas  or  Praydjas ; Prayajas  consist  of  texts  and  oblations
forming  part  of  the  introductory  ceremony  at  a Soma  sacrifice,  and
Anuyajas  are  the  secondary  or  final  offerings:  ‘ Voropfer  and  Naehop-
fer Weber.  Heaven's  jive  regions  : the  regions  of  the  sky  are,  in
the  Teda,  more  usually  said  to  be  four  or  six : see  I.  31.  1,  2.  Companions
at  his  sacred  sessions  : sairasddas  ; feast-companions,  or  assistants  at  the
sattra  or  satra  (from  sad,  to  sit),  a long  sacrifice,  sacrificial  session,
or  Soma  ceremony,  lasting  more  than  twelve  days  and  conducted  by
many  officiating  priests.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  p,  430.

The  hymn  is  a prayer  for  protection  and  general  prosperity.

1 The  four  immortal  Warders  : according  to  a passage  in  the  Shad-
vinsa-Brahmana,  Agni  is  guardian  of  the  east,  Yama  of  the  south.


•Vanina  of  the  west,,  and  Soma  of  the  north.


.. . '"o**-  ui  nunu-proiecrorB  wno  preside  over

the  eight  points,  cardinal  and  intermediate,  of. the  compass  : these  are
Indra,  Agni,  Yama,  Surva,  Vanina,  Pavaua  or  Vayu,  the  God  of  Wind
Kuvera,  the  God  of  Riches,  and  Soma  or  Chandra  the  Moon-God.  The
word  in  the  text,  as&p&l&s,  does  not  occur  again  in  the  hymns  of  the
Veda. ' ' ' • ' • ■ : ■

2 Sirriti:  Decay  or  Destruction  personified;  the  Goddess  of  Mis-
fortune, Death  and  Corruption.

h jftee  f’  Grit  shjfness .not  lame  .*  in  full  possession  of  niy  bodily

powers  and  active  in  thy  service.  Thee  : Agni,  the  .strong  Warder  God
of  the  next  line.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Dor  Rigveda,  III.  p.  372.

The  hymn  is  in  honour  of  Heaven  and  Earth,  the  Universal  Father
and  Mother.  See  Max  Muller,  India,  What  can  it  Teach  us?  m
158—162.  , xi


BYMX  33.1


THE  A THA'RV'A  - VEDA,


2 Their  station,  as  of  those  who  rest  when  weary,  is

in  midmost  air  :

The  base  whereon  this  world  is  built,  the  sages  know
or  know  it  not.

3 What  the  two  trembling  hemispheres  and  ground

produced  and  fashioned  forth,

This  All,  is  ever  fresh  to-day,  even  as  the  currents
of  the  sea.

4 This  All  hath  compassed  round  the  one,  and  on  the

other  lies  at  rest.

To  Earth  and  all-possessing  Heaven  mine  adoration,
have  I paid.

HYMH  XXXIII.

May  they,  the  golden-hued,  the  bright,  the  splendid,
they  wherein  Savitar  was  born  and  Agni,

2 Their  station. . . . . .fs  in  midmost  dir  : the  Plants,  or  medicinal

herbs,  are  said  (Eigveda  X.  97.  1)  to  have  been  produced  c three  ages
earlier  than  the  Gods/  devebhyas  triyugdm  purd}  and  in  stanza  15  of
the  same  hymn  they  are  called  briha spdtiprasdtds,  commissioned  by
Brihaspati,  who  is  a deity  of  the  middle  air  and  as  the  Lord  of  Prayer
presides,  also  over  mantras  or  spells  and  charms.

3 Trembling:  not  yet  firmly  established.  Hemispheres:  rddasi;
a dual  meaning  heaven  and.  earth,  without  the  antarikskd  or  inter-
mediate air.  Ground:  bkumis ; here  the  land  as  a portion  of  the
whole  earth.  Weber  gives  the  word  in  this  place  the  meaning  of  air
or  firmament.  Produced  and  fashioned  forth : nirdtakshatam ; the
construction  of  a dual  verb  with  three  subjects  appears  to  be  somewhat
irregular ; but  bM'mischa  may  perhaps  be  regarded  as  parenthetical*
This  All : Universal  Creation,

4 The  one:  Earth.  The  other  : Heaven.  ■

* ' The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Her  Eigveda,  III,  p.  533,

The  hymn  is  a prayer  to  the  divine  Waters  (of.  I.  4.  1)  for  health
and  happiness.  J:  • " g

1 Savitar , the  Sun,  is  born  in  the  mists  and  vapours  of  the  early
morning ; and  Agni  springs  in  his  form  of  lightning  from  the  clouds
'.■"or  vVaters’  of  the  sea  of  air.  Varuna:  originally  the  same' as;  the;:Greeh'.::
Our aiios,  the  visible  sky,  and  afterwards  the  great  God  beyond  it,  the
moral  Governor  of  the  world.  The  waters  in  which  he  moves  are  the
atmosphere  or  firmament,  " ^


38  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  J.

They  who  took  Agni  as  a germ,  fair-coloured,  the
Waters,  bring  felicity  and  bless  us  !

2 They  in  the  midst  whereof  King  Varuija  moveth,

viewing  men’s  righteous  and  unrighteous  dealing,
j They  who  took  Agni  as  a germ,  fair-coloured,  those
Waters  bring  felicity  and  bless  us !

3 Whom  the  Gods  make  their  beverage  in  heaven,  they

who  wax  manifold  in  air’s  mid-region,

They  who  took  Agni  as  a germ,  fair-coloured, — -those
Waters  bring  felicity  and  bless  us !

4 Ye  Waters,  with  auspicious  eye  behold  me : touch

ye  my  skin  with  your  auspicious  body.

May  they,  the  bright  and  pure,  distilling  fatness,
those  Waters,  bring  felicity  and  bless  us.

HYMN  XXXIV.  ;

From  honey  sprang  this  Plant  to  life : with  honey
now  we  dig  thee  up.

Make  us  as  sweet  as  honey,  for  from  honey  hast
thou  been  produced.

2 My  tongue  hath  honey  at  the  tip,  and  sweetest  honey
at  the  root :

Thou  yieldest  to  my  wish  and  will,  and  shalt  be  mine
and  only  mine.


4 j Distilling  fatness : gkritasokutas ; literally,  dropping  ghrita,  melted
and  clarified  butter  or  oil,  used  figuratively  for  fertility  and  prosperity  :
* When  I washed  my  steps  with  butter,  And  the  rock  poured  me  out
rivers  of  oil:*  Job,  29.  6:  and  { Thou  crownestthe  year  with  thy  good-
ness; And  thy  paths  drop  fatness  :J  Psalm  LXV.  II,

The  hymn  is  a charm  to  win  and  secure  a girl’s  love.

1 This  Plant : sugar-cane ; see  stanza  5.  With  honey : with  the
sweetness  which  thou  containest;  or  perhaps,  as  Dr.  Grill  suggests,
with  a spade  or  mattock  smeared  with  honey,  which  would  make  the
charm  more  effectual


Ill  ME  35.]  THE  ATHARYA-VBBA.  -?»

3 My  coming  in  is  honey-sweet,  and  honey-sweet  my

going  forth  :

My  voice  and  words  are  sweet : I fain  would  be  like
honey  in  my  look.

4 Sweeter  am  I than  honey,  yet  more  full  of  sweets

than  licorice  :

So  mayst  thou  love  me  as  a branch  full  of  all  sweets,
and  only  me.

5 Around  thee  have  I girt  a zone  of  sugar-cane  to

banish  hate,

That  thou  mayst  be  in  love  with  me,  my  darling,
never  to  depart.

HYMN  XXXV.

This  Ornament  of  Gold  which  Daksha’s  children
bound,  with  benevolent  thoughts,  on  Sat4nika,

This  do  I bind  on  thee  for  life,  for  glory,  for  long  life
lasting  through  a hundred  autumns.


3 My  coming  in my  going  forth : all  my  doings;  my  general

conduct

4 Licorice;  madiigha  is  an  unspecified  shrub  or  plant  that  yields  a
sweet  juice:  see  VL  102.  3 for  its  employment  in  combination  with
other  sweet  plants.

5 To  banish  hate;  and,  of  course,  to  inspire  love.  My  darling,
never  to  depart ; more  literally : 4 that  thou  mayst  never  go  away/
er  become  alienated  from  me.  So  in  the  Eddie  H&va-mal,  the  Lay  of
the  High  One,  Woden  says:  4 The  seventeenth  (song  or  charm)  I
know:  That  the  young  maid  shall  never  forsake  me.5

The  second  line  of  the  stanza  recurs  in  similar  love-songs  : see  II.  30*
I,  and  VI.  8,  1—3.

The  hymn  is  one  of  Dr.  GrilFs  Hundert  Lieder.


' The  hymn  is  a charm.'  accompanying  investiture  with  an  amulet  of

gold.

1 Dahshah  children : ddhhdyand’s  ; Daksha  is  in  the  Vedaubreafijvh:
power  ..associated'  /with  Aditi  (Infinity  or  Eternity),  the  mother  iof-thh,


40


THE  ATHARY A-YEDA.


[BOOK  I.


2 This  man  bo  fiends  may  conquer,  no  PIsaehas,  for

this  is  might  of  Gods,  their  primal  offspring.
Whoever  wears  the  Gold  of  Daksha’s  children  hath
a long  lengthened  life  among  the  living.

3 The  light,  the  power,  the  lustre  of  the  Waters,  the

strength  of  Trees,  and  all  their  forceful  vigour,
We  lay  on  him  as  powers  abide  in  Indra  : so  let  him
■ wear  this  Gold  and  show  bis  valour.

4 With  monthly  and  six-monthly  times  and  seasons,

with  the  full  year’s 'sweet  essence  do  we  fill  thee.
May  Indra,  Agni,  and  all  Gods  together,  showing  no
anger,  grant  thee  what  thou  wish est.


Adityas.  In  post-vedic  literature  he  is  generally  regarded  as  the  son
of  Brahma,  and  placed  at  the  head  of  the  Prajapatis  or  Lords  of
Created  Beings.  The  D&kshayanas,  or  descendants  of  Daksha,  are
mentioned  also  in  the  Sa.tapatha-Brahmana.  The  investiture  of  Said-
riika  must  be  an  occurrence  of  ancient  times  of  which  no  particulars
Lave  been  preserved.  A hundred  autumns ; regarded  as  the  natural
duration  of  human  life;  an  expression  frequently  occurring  in  the
Bigveda,  alternating  with  £ a hundred  winters : * CL  Isaiah  LXV.  20 :
There  shall  be  no  more  thence  an  infant  of  days,  nor  an  old  man  that
hath  not  filled  his  days  : for  the  child  shall  die  a hundred  years  old,
2 Pisdchas;  imps  or  goblins : see  I.  16.  3,  note.

/'Professor  'Ludwig  has  translated  this  hymn,  Der  Bigyed^'|II/|iv
4 Six-monthly  times : Samd  meaning  a half-year:  ‘ originally,  pro-
bably, summer  (#f.  Zend  hcma )/ — St.  Petersburg  Dictionary.


BOOK  II


' HYMN  I.

Vena  beholds  That  Highest  which  lies  hidden,
wherein,  this  .All  resumes  one  form  and  fashion*
Thence  Prisni  milked  all  life  that  had  existence  ,:  the-
; ; ho$ts;  that:  know  the  light  with  songs;  extolled,  her.
Knowing  Eternity,  may  the  Gandharva  declare  to  us
that  highest  secret  station.  {

Three  steps  thereof  lie  hidden  in  the  darkness  : he
who  knows  these  shall  be  the  father’s  father.


The  hymn  is  a glorification  of  the  Prime  Cause  of  all  things.

1 Vena:  Vena.  4 the  loving  Sun7  of  Pdgveda  I,  83.  5,  Mntah  or  4 the-
beloved,’is  said  by  the  Scholiast  to  be  madhyastMno  devah,  a God  of
the  middle  region  of  the  air.  He  is,  apparently,  the  Sun  as  he  rises  in
the  mists  of  the  morning:  see  Bigveda  X.  123.  1.  2.  Weber  trans-
lates Vena  by  ‘der  Seller,7  the  Seer,  connecting  the  word  with  the  Zend
root  vaen,  to  see.  That  Highest ; the  Supreme  First  Cause.  Primii :
usually  the  Speckled  Cow,  the  variegated  cloud,  regarded  as  the
mother  of  the  Maruts.  Here  she  appears,  like  the  cow  Audhumbla  of
Scandinavian  mythology,  to  represent  the  creative  power  of  Nature.
All  life  that  had  existence : j$yamdndhr  the  feminine  plural  stands
without  a substantive ; prajd%f  creatures,  may  perhaps  b®  understood}
or,  as  Weber  suggests,  vrdh,  hosts,  from  the  second  pada  of  the  line.
The  hosts : either  the  beings  called  into  life  by  this  act  of  Ppsnx,  or
already  existing  beings  produced  by  an  earlier  act  of  creation.  So
when  the  foundations  of  the  earth  were  laid  : The  morning  shirs  sang
together,  And  all  the  sons  of  God  shouted  for  joy. — Job,  38.  7.

, ’ ;2  The  Gandharva ; Vena,  the  rising  Sun.  According  ; to  We;bcr7:
. i the:;  - sagC.7 : ■ Three  ■ steps  i , ■ according ' to  Mahidhara,  the three;  :pad^nif:
steps,  or  conditions,  are  production,  existence,  and  disappearance  ; or
the  Absolute  (Brahma),  the  Demiurgus  or  Creator,  and  the  individual
soul.  Weber  suggests  that  the  reference  is  to  the  Purusha-Sukta
{Bigveda  X. ,*  90/ -3,  4)-:  :xAll  creatures  are  one-fourth.- of  Bim,
fourths  immortal  life  in  heaven.  With  three-fourths  Punish  a went
-f mirth  of"  him  ab&ih  was  here.7  The  father’s  father : wiser


42  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  II,

3 He  is  our  kinsman,  father,  and  begetter : he  knows

all  beings  and  all  Ordinances.

He  only  gave  the  Gods  their  appellations  : all  crea-
tures go  to  him  to  ask  direction.

4 I have  gone  forth  around  the  earth  and  heaven,  I

have  approached  the  first-born  Son  of  Order.

He,  putting  voice,  as  ’twere,  within  the  speaker,
stands  in  the  world,  he,  verily  is  Agni.

5 I round  the  circumjacent  worlds  have  travelled  to

see  the  far-extended  thread  of  Order,

Wherein  the  Gods,  obtaining  life  eternal,  have  risen
upward  to  one  common  birthplace.

HYMN  II.

Lord  of  the  World,  divine  Gandharva,  only  he
should  be  honoured  in  the  Tribes  and  worshipped.
Past  with  my  spell,  celestial  God,  I hold  thee.  Hom-
age to  thee ! Thy  home  is  in  the  heavens.

3 He:  the  Almighty  Creator.  The  stanza  is  taken,  with  variations,
from  Eigveda  X.  82.  3.  To  ash  direction : or,  for  information ; to  learn
who  is  the  Supreme  God ; or  what  their  several  functions  and  duties  are.

4 Order  (rita)  is  the  eternal  Law  of  the  Universe,  and  the  first-
horn  son  thereof  is  Prajapati,  the  Creator,  who  is  in  this  stanza  identi-
fied with  Agni.

5 Obtaining  life  immortal : Agni  alone,  it  is  said,  was  originally
immortal,  and  the  other  Gods  obtained  immortality  through  him.

3.  4;  VI.  7.  4;  YII.  13.  2.  According  to  other  texts
(Eigveda  IY.  54,  2,  and  IX.  106.  8),  immortality  is  conferred  on  them
by  Savitar  and  by  Soma.  The  whole  of  this  Book  has  been  trans-
lated, with  copious  explanatory  notes,  by  Professor  Weber,  Xndisehe
129 — 216.  Sixteen  of  the  hymns  Have- been,  translated
v;  by  Professor; Ludwig,  in  Der  Eigveda,  II L,  and  ; thirteen'  by' 'Dr;  'Grill,
in  his  Hundert  Lieder  des  Atharva-veda.

The  hymn  is  a charm  to  win  success  in  gambling.

1 Gandharva : called  Visvavasu  or  Lord  of  all  Wealth  in  stanza-  5,  not
tJ:d&BtiEed;;here;  with  the  Sun  as  in  II.  1.  -His^speeia^

the  heavenly  Soma  which  the  Gods  obtain  through  his  permission.
The  glorification  of  which  he  is  the  subject  in  this  gambler's  hymn  is
grossly  exaggerated.  The  Tribes : five  in  number,  which  constitute
the  Aryan  community.


HYMN  3.]  THE  A TEA B YA-  VEDA.  43

2 Sky-reaching,  like  the  Sun  in  brightness,  holy,

he  who  averts  from  us  the  Gods’  displeasure,

Lord  of  the  World,  may  the  Gandharva  bless  us,
the  friendly  God  who  only  must  be  worshipped.

3 1 came,  I met  these  faultless,  blameless  beings:

among  the  Apsarases  was  the  Gandharva.

Their  home  is  in  the  sea — so  men  have  told  me, —
whence  they  come  quickly  hitherward  and  vanish.

4 Thou,  Cloudy ! ye  who  follow  the  Gandharva  Visva-

•••■  vasu,  ye,  Starry  ! Lightning-Flasher!

You,  O ye  Goddesses,  I truly  worship.

5 Haunters  of  darkness,  shrill  in  voice,  dice-lovers,

maddeners  of  the  mind—

To  these  have  I paid  homage,  the  Gandharva’s  wives,
Apsarases.  ■

HYMN  III.

That  little  spring  of  water  which  is  running  down-
ward from  the  hill

I turn  to  healing  balm  for  thee  that  thou  mayst  be
good  medicine.


3 Apsarases : (perhaps  from  ap,  water,  and  sr%  to  go)  celestial
nymphs  who  dwell  among  the  clouds,  the  waters  of  the  sea  of  air,  the
consorts  of  the  Gandharva  or  of  the  class  of  Gandharvas.

4 Tkou}  Cloudy : six  other  names  of  Apsarases  are  given  in  Bigveda
X.  95.  6.

5 Haunters  of  darkness : loving  the  dark  woods  when  they  visit  the
earth.  Dice-lovers : This  is  the  point  of  the  hymn.  The  Gandharva  is
unduly  glorified  because  he  is  the  consort  of  the  Apsarases ; and  they
are  worshipped  as  being  intimately  connected  with  dice  and  able  to
influence  the  gambler's  luck.  See  IV.  38.  1—4;  VI  118. 1;  VII.  109.  2,  3.
Maddeners  of  the  mind : of  the  gambler.

The  hymn  contains  a charm  in  which  water  is  used  to  cure  disease.

",  1 For  thee:  for  the  mixture  which  the  speaker  is • preparing,  and.
which  the  addition  of  fresh  water  from  the.  spring  will' make  complete.
That  thou  mayst  be  good  medicine:  that  the  whole  mixture  thus  prepaid
ed  may  be  thoroughly  effectual.  Ludwig  alters  stibheskayam  to  sti-
hhe$kajo7  4 that  thou  mayst  - have  good , medicine, ? referring  thee
to: the  patient  for  whose.  benefit  the  charm  is  uttered. ;


44


Tim  nnim  of


{BOOK  11,


2 fliM.rs£' Wein  c°-  «>>'  %

MmtbTd°flo“l  °f  a"  art  th°U’  0Ur!ng  diseasa  and

3 “LfSthTouS.  ” earth  *h!s  m!gHy  tW”S

TiawaSythe  ^ f°r  morbid  flow>  this  driveth  malady

4 m^didnA°m  t3ie  water'flo°d  produce  this  heal-
Th!wavtbe  CUre  f°r  morbid  flow>  tbis  driveth  malady

5 Mighty  is  this  wound-healing  balm ; from  out  the

^eartn  was  it  produced.  CilC

T away.the  CUfe  f°r  morbid  flow>  this  d«veth  malady

6 ?flefSTUSithf  Yatef  be  the  Plants  auspicious  1
May  Indras  thunderbolt  drive  off  the  demons.  Far

rom  us  fail  the  shafts  they  shoot  against  usf

l Hu.m..,' Gome  on;  the  water  is  addressed.  Thy

*nge  oi  fc  into  me,  my,  would  make  the  meaning  dearer.  Curing
l^T.T.Tafim:  aMvdm>  Iitera11^  without  dsrdvd  or  diarrhoea^

d6m021S;  they  **  saidt0  taried

««r:  r-sirtr  ™:  r*  °ot  ?Mhy  "■

iTofz\rx" “d,“rs-  ,tL

is  “Tc;d-"*h  **•  ««■**  ««,:

■WHMuHl  BWnf”'  “url

TLto  * c*iM » « *

irgs,4”“-  “ oMn  fo»  - -««■ -

sr#-- m


the  Ammmmm*


HYMEt


HYMN  IV,

For  length  of  life,  for  mighty  joy,  uninjured,  ever
showing  strength  ■ . * ■

We  wear  Vishkandha’s  antidote,  the  Amulet  of
Jangida.

2 Amulet  of  a thousand  powers,  Jangidb,  save  us,

all  around.

From  Jambha,  and  from  Visara,  Vishkandha,  and
tormenting  pain.

3 This  overcomes  Vishkandha,  this  chases  the  greedy

fiends  away :

May  this  our  panacea,  may  Jangida  save  us  from
distress.

4 With  Jangida  that  brings  delight,  Amulet  given  by

the  Gods,

We  in  the  conflict  overcome  Vishkandha  and  all
JMkshasas.


The  hymn  is  a charm  to  win  protection  and  general  prosperity.

1 Vishkandha!  s antidote:  Vishkandha  was  probably  rheumatism,  and
the  name  of  the  fiend  to  whose  malignity  the  disease  was  attributed  :
See  I.  16.  3.  Jangida:  a plant  frequently  mentioned  in  the  Atharva-
veda  as  a charm  against  demons  and  a specific  for  various  diseases.
It  appears  to  have  been  cultivated  (stanza  5),  but  no  description  of  it
has  been  given,  and  it  cannot  now  be  identified.  For  its  divine  effects
see  XIX.  35.  1 — 5.  The  plant  seems  to  have  resembled  4 that  moly
That  Hermes  once  to  wise  Ulysses  gave/  (see  Homer,  Odyssey,  X.  305)
which  according  to  Dierbach  was  the  Mandrake,  and  in  Theophrastus
is  the  name  of  a kind  of  garlic.  See  Lang’s  Custom  and  Myth  (new
edition),  pp.  143  sqq.

2 Jambha  : from  jombh,  to  seize  with  the  mouth;  a disease,  and  the
name  of  the  fiend  that  causes  it.  Weber,  citing  Kausika-Sutra  XXX II.
I,  jambhagrihitdya  stanam  prayackhati , ‘he  offers  the  (mother's)
breast  to  the  (child)  seized  by  Jambha,5  suggests  that  some  infantile
disorder,  perhaps  teething,  is  intended.  Visara : from  vi  and  sri,
to  split  or  break  in  pieces ; the  name  of  another  fien  1 and  the  disease
or  morbid  symptom  attributed  to  him,  racking  pain  or  perhaps  con-
vulsions. Tormenting  pain : or  violent  inflammation,  and  its  originate
Ing  demon.  /

4 RtikJmsas : fierce  nocturnal  fiends  or  ogres*


48


THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  It

5 May  Cannabis  and  Jangida  preserve  me  from  Vish-

kandha, — that

Brought  to  us  from  the  forest,  this  sprung  from  the
saps  of  husbandry.

6 This  Amulet  destroys  the  might  of  magic  and  malign-

ity :

So  may  victorious  Jangida  prolong  the  years  we
have  to  live.

HYMN  Y.

Indra,  be  gracious,  drive  thou  forth,  come,  hero,
with  thy  two  bay  steeds.

Taste  the  libation,  hither,  enjoying  meath  and  the
hymn,  come,  fair,  to  the  banquet.

2 O Indra,  even  as  one  athirst,  fill  thee  with  meath  as
twere  from  heaven.

Sweet-toned,  the  raptures  of  this  juice  have  come  to
thee  as  to  the  light.


J Cannabis : sand  ; hemp  ; Cannabis  Sativa.  T,
the  moisture  of  the  cultivated  and  irrigated  soil,
other  hand,  grows  without  cultivation.

Indra  is  invited  to  come  and  drink  a libation  o:

1 This  stanza  and  the  two  that  immediately
with  variations,  in  ■Samaveda  II.  iii.  i.  22.  The
irregular.  The  stanzas  are  obscure;  and  2 and  3
the  repetition  of  nd,  ‘like/  ‘as’  ‘as  it  were/  whi


HYMN  5.]  THE  ATHARVA-YEDA.  47

3 Swiffc-eonquering  Indra,  Mitra-like,  smote,  as  a Yati,

Vritra  dead.

Like  Bhrigu  he  cleft  Vala  through,  and  quelled  his
foes  in  Soma’s  rapturous  joy.

4 0 Indra,  let  the  juices  enter  thee.  Fill  full  thy  belly,

sate  thee,  mighty  one!  Let  the  hymn  bring  thee.
Hear  thou  my  call,  accept  the  song  I sing,  here,
Indra,  with  thy  friends  enjoy  thyself,  to  height  of
rapture.

5 Now  will  I tell  the  manly  deeds  of  Indra,  the  first

that  he  achieved,  the  thunder-wielder.

He  slew  the  Dragon,  then  disclosed  the  waters,  and
cleft  the  channels  of  the  mountain  torrents.

6 He  slew  the  Dragon  lying  on  the  mountain  : his

heavenly  bolt  of  thunder  Tvashtar  fashioned.

Like  lowing  kine  in  rapid  flow  descending  the  waters
glided  downward  to  the  ocean.


3 As  a Yati : one  of  a mythical  race  of  ascetics  connected  with  the
Bhrigus,  and  said,  according  to  one  legend,  to  have  taken  part  in  the
creation  of  the  world.  The  force  of  the  comparison  is  not  very  obvi-
ous; and  perhaps  it  would  be  better,  as  Ludwig  suggests,  to  give
pdtih  here  the  meaning  of  ‘ wrestler/  Weber  translates  it  by  * Zaubrer/
magician,  enchanter.  Bhrigu:  a Bishi  regarded  as  the  ancestor  of
the  ancient  race  of  Bhrigus  who  are  frequently  mentioned  in  the  Big-
■ veda  in  connexion  with  Agni,  and  who  are  specially  associated  with
the  Atharva-veda  hymns.  Vala : a demon  of  drought  who  steals  the  cows
of  the  Gods  and  hides  them  in  a vala,  enclosure  or  cave,  that  is,  keeps
the  seasonable  rains  imprisoned  in  dark  thick  clouds.

. • 5 Stanzas  5—7  are  taken  from  Bigveda  L 32.  1 — 3,  The  Dragon  :
Ahi,  the  great  serpent,  another  name  of  Vritra,  the  chief  demon  of
drought.

6 The  mountain:  the  great  mountain-like  dpud.  Tvashtar : the
Indian  Hephaestus  or  Yulcamis,  the  celestial  Artificer*


THE  HYMNS  OF


[BOOK  II.

7 Impetuous  as  a bull  he  chose  the  Soma,  and  quaffed
the  juices  in  three  sacred  beakers.

Maghavan  grasped  the  thunder  for  his  weapon,  and
smote  to  death  this  first-born  of  the  dragons.

HYMN  VI.

Half-years  and  seasons  strengthen  thee,  0 A"ni,
the  years,  and  all  the  Verities,  and  Rishis ! °

Flash  forth  with  thy  celestial  effulgence:  illumine
all  four  regions  of  the  heavens;

2 Kindle  thee,  Agni,  and  make  this  man  prosper : rise

up  erect  for  high  and  happy  fortune.

Agni,  be  those  uninjured  who  adore  thee,  and  may
thy  priests  be  glorious  and  no  others.

3 These  Brahmans  have  elected  thee,  O Agni:  be  thou

propitious  in  our  sacred  chamber.

Slayer  of  rivals,  Agni,  quell  our  foemen : watch  in
our  house  with  care  that  never  ceases.

7 three  sacred  leakers:  trikadnkeshw;  Recording  to  Sayana,  at
the  three  sacrifices  called  Jyotis,  Gauh,  and  Ayus,  the  first  three  days
of_  the  Abhiplava  festival:  'and  quaffed  in  threefold  sacrifice  the
juices,  Maghavan : the  Bounteous  One  (Indrah


■HYMAr:7,\  THE  ATHARVA-YEDA.  ^

4 Seize,  Agni,  on  thy  power  and  firmly  hold  it : contend

thou  with  the  Friend  by  way  of  friendship.

Placed  in  the  centre  of  our  fellows,  Agni,  flash  forth
to  be  invoked  by  kings  around  thee.

5 Past  those  who  slay,  past  enemies,  past  thoughtless

men,  past  those  who  hate, —

Yea,  Agni,  hear  us  safe  past  all  distresses  : give  thou
us  opulence  with  men  about  us.

HYMN  VII.

Hated  by  sinners,  sprung  from  Gods,  this  Plant  that
turns  the  curse  away

Hath  washed  from  me  all  curses,  as  water  makes
clean  from  spot  and  stain.

2 xAll  curses  of  a rival,  each  curse  of  a female  relative,
Curse  uttered  by  an  angry  priest,  all  these  we  tread

beneath  our  feet.

3 Spread  on  the  surface  of  the  earth,  downward  from

heaven  thy  root  depends  :

With  this  that  hath  a thousand  joints  keep  thou  us
safe  on  every  side.

4 Guard  on  all  sides  this  woman,  guard  my  children,

us,  and  all  our  wealth !

Let  not  malignity  o’ereome,  nor  adversaries  conquer


4 The  Friend : the  God  Mitra.  By  way  of  friendship  : mitradha.

5 The  first  line  of  the  stanza  is  in  the  Anushtup  metre  : the  rest  of
the  hymn  is  Trisbfcu'p.

The  hymn  is  a counter-charm  against  imprecation  and  malignity.

i This  Plant : Darbha  or  Kusa  grass  (Poa  Cynosuroides),  much  used
in  sacrificial  ceremonies  and  endowed  with  various  sanctifying  qualities.

3 Downward  from  heaven:  referring  to  its  divine  origin:  ‘O  Plant
(Darbha),  thy  root  is  in  the  heavens.’  Atharva-veda  XIX.  32.  3.
A thousand  joints:  Darbha  is  a grass  that  spreads  rapidly  and  con-
tinually re-roots  itself.  The  multiplicity  of  joints  or  roots  indicates
the  far-reaching  power  of  the  plant.


' ' ■ THE  hymns  01

5 Upon  the  cursor  fall  his  curse  l
whose  heart  is  true  !

We  split  the  cruel  villain’s  ril
bewitches  us,

HYMN  VIII

Twin  Stars  of  happy  omen,  nan
gone  up.  May  they

Loose,  of  inherited  disease,  the  ui
bond.  1

2 Vanish  this  Night,  extinct  in  Da
weave  their  spells  depart.

oo  let  the  plague-destroying  Plar
disease.


whose


Bewitches  m : dread  of  the  ev
prevalent  m India,  especially  amonf
from  early  times,  in  Italy— especially
reputation  of  being  a jettatore  or  j
brings  ostracism  and  social  min  upoi
file  hymn  has  been  translated  bl-
and by  Grill,  Huudert  Lieder,  pp.  34


The  hynm  is  a charm  against  hhetriyd,  some
peilmps  pulmonary  Consumption.

I feleasers:  riehriUnt ; the  ancient  name  of
WUl0;1  Mfda.  Of  inherited  disease

Ci  . 0nSmaI,y  of’  0r  belonSiuS  to,  a M

C ’ !Wayentcr  substantive,  a chronic,  con
ditary  disease,  derived  from  the  mother’s  body  re,
five  field.  Weber  takes  the  word  here  to  refer  to  inj
aim,  and  stanzas  .3-5  seem  almost  to  justify  his  i
alternate  version  might  be:  ‘of  the  spell  that  bin

* . . 0 weave  their'  Wits:  witches  arid  fe

'*h';Ul\  m,thlS  ani  following  stanzas  might  be  i
W>ers  interpretation:  ‘If ay  the  plague-steviC
Bx‘ou  tlmt  lies  upon'  our  field  * " * “


hereditary  disease


HYM$  5;]  THE  A Til  A R FA-FEE  J.  SI,

3 With  straw  of  barley  tawny-brown  in  colour  with  its

silvery  ears,  with  stalk  anc!  stem  of  Sesamum —

So  let  the  plague-destroying  Plant  remove  inherited
disease.

4 Let  homage  to  thy  ploughs  be  paid,  our  homage  to

the  pole  and  yokes.

So  let  the  plague-destroying  Plant  remove  inherited
disease.

5 Homage  to  men  with  blinking  eyes,  homage  to  those

who  hear  and  act!  To  the  Field’s  Lord  be  homage
paid.

So  let  the  plague-destroying  Plant  remove  inherited
disease.

HYMN  IX.

Free  this  man,  Dasavriksha ! from  the  demon,  from
Gr&hi  who  hath  seized  his  joints  and  members,

And  raise  him  up  again,  0 Tree,  into  the  world  of
living  men.

2 He  hath  arisen  and  come  once  more,  rejoined  the
band  of  those  who  live.

May  he  become  the  sire  of  sons,  and  of  all  men  most
fortunate.


cannot  keep  their  eyes  open.  Weber  suggests  that  good-natured
Kobold-like  domestic  sprites  may  be  intended.  Perhaps  they  have
worked  all  night ; as  Milton  (L’  Allegro)  speaks  of  ‘the  drudging  goblin’
who  earns  his  bowl  of  cream  by  threshing  more  corn  in  one  night
than  ten  day-labourers  could  finish.  The  Field’s  Lord:  ksheirapati";
the  Genius  Loci,  the  tutelary  deity  of  the  field,  sometimes  said  to  be
Agni,  or  Rudra : see  lligvcda  IV.  57.  1,  2.  The  hymn  has  been  trans-
lated by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  513.

The  hymn  is  a charm  to  cure  dangerous  disease.

1 Dasavriksha:  explained  by  the  Kausika-Sutra  and  D&rila  (XXVII.
5)  as  an'amulet  made  of  ten  kinds  of  holy  wood  which  is  to  be  employ-
ed in  the  process  of  recovering  the  patient.  Or&ht:  a female  fiend
who  seizes  men  and  causes  death  and  disease.

2 He  hath  arisen:  the  effect  of  the  charm  being  regarded  as  certain.
‘The  aorists  are  prophetic  preterits’; — Grill.


52  . THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  11.

3 He  hath  returned  to  consciousness,  rejoined  the

living’s  firm  abodes,

For  hundred  leeches  are  in  this,  yea,  and  a thousand
healing  herbs.

4 The  Gods,  the  Brahman-priests,  and  plants  observed

the  way  to  gather  thee  :

All  deities  descried  the  way  men  gather  thee  upon
the  earth.

5 Let  him  who  made  it  also  heal : he,  truly,  is  the

deftest  leech.

Pure,  with  a leech  he  verily  shall  give  thee  medicines
that  heal.

HYMN  X.

Frou  family  sickness,  kinsmen’s  curse,  Destruction,
from  Druh,  from  Varuna’s  noose  I free  and  save  thee.
With  spell  and  prayer  I make  thee  pure  and  sinless  :
to  thee  be  both,  the  Earth  and  Heaven,  auspicious!


3 Hundred  leeches  are  in  this:  the  amulet  possesses  the  healing
power  of  a hundred  physicians  and  a thousand  medicinal  herbs.

4 Brahman-priests : priests  versed  in  sacred  knowledge  who  super-
vise and  direct  the  sacrifice.

5 Him  who  wade  it:  probably  the  God  to  whom  the  origin  of  the
amulet,  that  is,  the  wood  of  which  it  was  made,  is  attributed.  With  a
leech:  the  amulet  contains  in  itself  (st.  3)  the  powers  of  a hundred'
physicians  and  a thousand  healing  herbs,  so  the  God  when  he  gives  it
supplies  both  leech  and  medicine.  The  instrumental  bkishdjd,'  with  a
leech,  makes  the  line  difficult  and  obscure.  Weber  says  that  it  gives
no  sense,  and  reads  hhishdjdm  instead:  4 As  purest  of  physicians  it
•{tiie  amulet)  indeed  shall  give  thee  (the  patient)  medicines/’


The  hymn  is  an  Absolution  and  a Benediction,  to  be  used,  according
to  later  authorities,  in  the  Birth-ritual  or  ceremony  after  the  birth  of  a
child,  at  the  first  washing  of  the  infant.  But  this  does  not  appear  to
be  the  original  object  of  the  hymn.

1 Family  sickness:  ksheiriyd  / hereditary  disease : see  II.  8.  1.
Hmsmehs  curse : rivalry  and  enmity  between  relatives  by  blood  seem
to  have  been  the  rule:  bhrdtrivya , father’s  brothers  son, ‘’cousin,  means
almost  exclusively  enemy  in  the  Veda ; and  sajdtd  . a 1 sdbandhv  ire-
M ifcl  "G  *7  - airy  is  well  as  consanguinity.  Destruction  ■ Nirritl
the  Goddess  of  Death,  Destruction,  and  Misfortune  in  general  Dr  ah  ;


the  injurer ; a female  fiend  so  named  : ' May  he  catch  the  snares  of
Druh. ? Eigveda  VII.  59.  8.  - Varum' $ noose  : with  which  he  entangles
sinners  to  destroy  them.  Sinless : meaning,  if  a new-born  child  is  the
subject,  free  from  sin  committed  by.  thy  parents : 'Let  us  not  suffer
for  the  sin  of  others : 5 Eigveda  VI.  51,  7 ; 'Loose  us  from  sins  com-
mitted by  our  fathers : ' Eigveda  VII.  86.  5.

2 Plants  : of  which  the  deified  Soma  is  lord  and  king.

3 Wind:  Vayu,  the  God  of  Wind,  a deity  of  the  middle  region  of  air.

*4  Vdta  : another  name  of  Vayu  ; Latin  ventus.

5 Consumption  : yakshma:  very  frequently  mentioned  in  the  Atharva-
veda.  The  cure  of  this  disease  is  the  subject  of  Hymn  CLXL  of  Book
X.  of  the  Eigveda. '

6 Phthisis:  ydkshma , again.  Grdhi : the  grasping  female  fiend  who
seizes  men  and  kills  them : see  XI.  9.  1.

t Joy  hast  thou  found:  the  verbs  in  this  line  are  prophetic  preterits  ;
see  TL  9.  2,  note. -


.'r-.'-f?  i


>4  ZIFAS’  HYMFS  OF  [BOOK  II.

From  family  sickness,  kinsmen’s  curse,  Destruction,
from  Druh,  from  Varuna’s  noose  I thus  release  thee.
8 The  Gods  have  freed  from  sinfulness,  redeeming  the
Sun,  the  Law  from  darkness  and  from  Gr&hi.

From  family  sickness,  kinsmen’s  curse,  Destruction,
from  Druh,  from  Varuna’s  noose  I thus  release  thee.
With  spell  and  prayer  I make  thee  pure  and  sinless:
to  thee  be  both,  the  Earth  and  Heaven, auspicious!

HYMN  XI.  ;

Dart  against  dart,  destroyer  of  destruction,  thou  art
the  missile  sent  to  meet  the  missile.

Beach  thy  superior,  thou;  surpass  thine  equal.

2 Sraktya  art  thou,  an  Amulet  art  thou,  a counter-

charm  of  spells.

Reach  thy  superior,  thou  ; surpass  thine  equal.

3 Use  spells  against  the  man  we  hate,  against  the  man

who  hateih  us.

Beach  thy  superior,  thou  ; surpass  thine  equal.

4 A prince  art  thou,  giver  of  speech,  thou  art  our

bodies’  strong  defence.

Reach  thy  superior,  thou ; surpass  thine  equal.


8 Redeeming  the  Sun,  the  Law : ass  the  Gods  have  rescued  the  Sun
from  eclipse  and  preserved  the  Order  of  the  Universe  from  the  fiend's
attack,  so  they  have  absolved  thee  from  sin.  The  Sun,  and  the  Law,
are  introduced  merely  by  way  of  illustration.

r The  hymn  has  been  thoroughly  discussed  by  Weber,  Indische  Studien,
XIII.  pp.  156 — 163.  It  has  also  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der
Rigveda,  III.  513.  •

The  subject  of  the  hymn  is  an  Amulet  which  is  to  act  as  a counter-
charm  against  the  spells  of  an  enemy.

2 Sraktya : one  of  the  sdnta  or  holy  trees  mentioned  in  a list  given

the  iKatisika-Sutra,  VIII.  15, : and  identified  by  Mrila  with  the ■,
Tilaka  which  is  a tree  bearing  beautiful  flowers.  The  Amulet  that  is
to  ward  off  witchcraft  is  made  of  the  wood  of  this  tree:  see  Bloomfield,
American  Journal  of  Philology,  VII.  477.

i A prince  : sitri  ; an  institutor  of  sacrifice  ; a lord  or  chief.  Giver
of  sjieeck  ; making  thy  wearer  eloquent.


'ffriW-n.)  . THE  ATHAEVA-YEDA . S,>

5 Fulgent  art  thou,  and  splendid,  thou  art  heavenly
lustre,  thou  art  light

Reach  thy  superior,  thou ; surpass  thine  equal
HYMN  XII

The  spacious  Firmament,  and  Earth  and  Heaven,
the  Field’s  Queen,  and  the  wonderful  Wide-Strider,
Yea,  the  broad  middle  air  which  V&ta  guardeth,
may  these  now  burn  with  heat  while  I am  burning,

2 Listen  to  this,  ye  Gods  who  merit  worship.  Hymns

here  are  sung  for  me  by  Bharadvaja,

Bound  in  the'  noose  may  he  be  doomed  to  trouble
whoever  mars  this  that  our  mind  hath  purposed.

3 Hear  this  my  call,  O Ind-ra,  Soma-drinker,  as  with  a

burning  heart  I oft  invoke  thee.

I smite,  as  5 1 were  a tree  felled  with  a hatchet,  the
man  who  marreth  this  my  plan  and  purpose.


The  hymn  is  an  appeal  to  Heaven  and  Earth  and  other  Powers  for
sympathy  and  for  vengeance  on  a malicious  adversary  who  has  reviled
and  obstructed  the  religious  duties  of  the  injured  worshipper.

1 The  Field's  Queen  : the  female  deity  who  is  the  special  guardian
©f  the  cultivated  land.  Wide-Strider : Vishnu,  a God  of  the  upper
region  who  as  a personification  of  the  Sun  traverses  the  world  in  three
strides,  his  rising,  culmination,  and  setting:  see  Rigveda  I.  154,  155,
156,  and  VII.  99,  100.  Fata : or  Vayu,  the  God  of  Wind.  Burn
with  Meat  : sympathize  with  me  in  my  fiery  indignation.  Weber  and
others  see  here  a reference  to  an  ordeal  by  fire  which  the  Rishi
undergoes  or  offers  to  undergo,  and  to  which  the  invoked  Powers  also,
as  his  compurgators,  are  called  upon  to  submit.

The  three  worlds,  Heaven,  Earth,  and  Firmament,  and  their  three
protecting  Powers  are  invoked ; but  instead  of  Vayu  himself  the  Air
or  Firmament  which  he  governs  is  again  mentioned.

2 Bharadvdja  : the  great  Rishi  of  ancient  times,  celebrated  in  the
Rigveda,  is  supposed  to  be  present  and  assisting  the  injured  worshipper.
This  that  our  mind  hath  purposed  ; the  sacrifice  which  we  intend  to
perform.

3 Hatchet:  here  again  Weber  sees  an  allusion  to  the  heated  axe
used  in  the  ordeal  by  fire:  but  nothing  more  than  an  illustration
seems  to  be  intended.


[BOOK  11

4 Together  with  th rice-eight y Sdmia-sirigers,  Angirases,

and  Vasus,  and  Adityas,

May  the  felicity  of  the  Fathers  guard  us*  I seize
that  man  with  fire  that  Gods  have  kindled.

5 0 Heaven  and  Earth,  regard  me  with  your  favour,

and,  all  ye  Gods,  stand  on  my  side  and  help  me.
Angirases,  Fathers  worthy  of  the  Soma!  woe  fell  on
him  who  caused  the  hateful  outrage  !

6 Whoever  either  scorns  us,  O ye  Maruts,  or  blames

devotion  which  we  now  are  paying,

Let  his  own  wicked  deeds  be  fires  to  burn  him.  May
Heaven  consume  the  man  who  hates  devotion.

7 Thy  sevenfold  vital  breath,  thine  eight  marrows

I rend  away  with  prayer.

With  Agni  as  thine  envoy,  go,  prepared,  to  Yama’s


THE  HYMFS  OF


4 Thrice-eighty  Sdma-singers : or  singers  of  hymns.  The  meaning
is  not  clear,  and  Ludwig  reads  somapebkik , Soma-drinkers,  instead  of
sdmagebhih  which,  he  says,  gives  no  sense.  Weber  thinks  that  the
thrice-eighty  singers  of  Samans  are  men,  Adityas,  Vasus,  Angirases,
and  Manes  who  appear  at  the  ordeal  as  compurgators  or  witnesses  to
prove  the  innocence  of  the  accused,  whose  importance  necessitates  the
presence  of  so  large  a number.  The  number  eighty,  Professor  Weber
observes,  frequently  occurs  in  connexion  with  the  Fire-rituai.  Angl
rases;  regarded  as  a higher  race  of  beings  between  Gods  and  men,
the  typical  first  sacrificers,  whose  ritual  is  the  pattern  which  later
priests  must  follow.  Fathers  : Maries  or  Ancestral  Spirits  ; the  deified
spirits  of  the  ancestors  of  the  Kishis,  associated  with  the  Gods  and
exercising  superhuman  powers:  see  Hymns  of  the  Rigveda,  General
Index  II.  The  felicity , isht&purtdm , of  the  Fathers,  is  the  reward
which  they  receive  in  heaven  for  their  sacrifices  and  pious  works  on
earth.  Thallium:  the  adversary.  With  fire  : with  fiery  indignation.

(>  This  stanza  is  taken,  with  variations,  from  Eigveda  VI,  52.  2.  It
was  perhaps  spoken  by  the  priest,

i 1 his  stanza  and  the  next  are  addressed  by  the  complainant  to  his
adversary.

Sevenfold  vital  breath  : drawn  through  eyes,  ears,  nostrils,  and  mouth.


one  in  each  division  of  each  arm


The  Universal  Gods  shall  make  thy  lite  a hundred
autumns  long.


8 The  general  breath : to  the  element  to  which  it  belongs ; like  to  like.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Bigveda,  III.  p.  445,
and  translated  and  thoroughly  discussed  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.
47,  85— 88,  and  by  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  XIII.  pp.  164 — 171.

The  subject  of  the  hymn  is  a youth’s  investiture  with  a new  gar-
ment at  a ceremony  (goddnam)  performed  when  he  attains  the  age  of
sixteen  or  eighteen  years,  and  shortly  before  his  marriage.

1 Winning  lengthened  life : for  the  youth.

2 The  Gods  are  addressed,  as  the  imperatives  in  the  first  line  are
plural.  The  stanza  recurs  in  XIX.  24.  4.

3 Addressed  to  the  youth  who  has  now  become  an  adult  member  of
the  family  with  duties  to  perform.

4 AST hall  become  a stone;  firm  and  strong  to  endure : -of.  L 2.  2 ;
* Make  my  body  stone.’


58  THE  HYMNS  OF  {BOOK  IT.

5 So  may  the  Universal  Gods  protect  thee,  whom  we
divest  of  raiment  worn  aforetime.

So  after  thee,  well-formed  and  growing  stronger,
be  born  a multitude  of  thriving  brothers.

HYMN  XIV.

Forth  from  the  hall  the  bold,  the  sharp,  the  greedy
one,  the  single-voiced,

Sad&nvas,  and  all  progeny  of  Chanda  we  exterminate.

2 We  drive  you  forth  from  cattle-shed,  from  axle,  from
within  the  wain,


5 The  Universal  Gods : the  Visve  Devah,  Visvedevas,  or  Ail-Gods.
Thriving  brothers : the  youth  is  apparently  an  only  son.

The  ceremony,  the  details  of  which  are  given  in  the  Kausika-Sutra,
LUX,  LIV,  reminds  one  of  the  Roman  youth's  assumption  of  the  toga
virilis,  an  occasion  which  was  celebrated  with  great  rejoicings  by  his
friends.  The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,
III.  p.  446.

The  hymn  is  a charm  to  banish  evil  creatures  from  the  house  and
homestead,

1 Forth  from  the  hall:  nissdld’m  ; according  to  Sayana,  the  name  of
a Pisachi  or  female  goblin.  This  word  and  the  two  following  are  ex-
tremely difficult,  and,  as  they  stand  in  the  text,  cannot  be  satisfactorily
explained,  The  bold : dhrishnibn  ; a masculine  form  used  apparently
for  the  feminine.  The  sharp  : dhishcmam  : the  meaning  of  the  word
is  not  clear,  and  the  feminine  form  is  required.  Weber  reads  dliishd-
tulm  accordingly,  deriving  it  from  dhd,  to  hold.  The  greedy  one:
jighatsiiam ; from  ghas,  to  eat.  The  single-toned:  ekavMydm ; some
troublesome  creature  that  utters  one  constantly  repeated  sound.
Weber  suggests  that  the  wood-worm  or  borer,  a most  distractingly  an-
noying plague,  is  meant.  Sad&’nvds : according  to  the  Nirukta,  always
making  a noise  (sadd,  always,  and  mi,  to  cry),  ever-screeching;  or,  as
Weber,  Grassmann,  and  Grill  prefer,  demoniacal,  fiendish,  from
with,  and  ddnu  or  ddnava , a demon.  Chanda  : the  fierce  one ; the
name  of  a chief  goblin  ; perhaps  King  of  the  Rats,  as  conjectured  by
Weber  who  thinks,  with  much  probability,  that  the  evil  creatures  that
are  to  be  banished  are  rats  and  mice  to  whom  the  epithets  used  will
well  apply.


THE  ATHARVA-VEDA


HYMN  15.]

Ye  daughters  of  Magund!,  we  frighten  and  chase
you  from  our  homes.

3 Yonder  let  the  Ar&yis  dwell,  there  where  that  house

is  down  below.

Let  utter  indigence  and  all  the  Y&tudh&nis  settle
there.

4 May  Bhdtapati  drive  away,  and  Indra,  the  Sadanvas

hence.

Let  Indra  with  his  bolt  quell  those  who  sit  upon  our
dwelling’s  floor.

5 Whether  ye  be  of  farm  and  field,  or  whether  ye  be

sent  by  men,

Or  be  ye  sprung  from  Dasyu  race,  vanish,  Sadanvas,
and  begone.

6 I have  gone  round  their  homes  as  runs  a fleet-foot

racer  round  the  post,

And  in  all  races  conquered  you.  Vanish,  Sadanvas,
and  begone.

HYMN  XV.

As  Heaven  and  Earth  are  not  afraid,  and  never  suffer
loss  or  harm,

Even  so,  my  spirit,  fear  not  thou.


2 Magundi : a female  evil  spirit  not  mentioned  elsewhere:  perhaps
the  wife  of  Chanda  and  mother  of  his  progeny.  .

3 Ardyis  : female  fiends  and  night-hags  : see  I.  28.  4.  Down  below  :
in  the  darkness  of  the  nether  world : or,  possibly,  the  house  of  an
enemy  lower  down  the  hill  is  intended.  Ydtudh&nis  : or,  sorceresses,
see  I.  8.  1.

4 Rhutapati : lord  of  creatures,  especially  of  ghosts  and  evil  spirits.
The  name  is  applied  to  Rudra,  Agni,  Bhava,  and  Sarva.

5 By  men  : by  human  sorcerers.  Sprung  from  Dasyu  race  : originat-
ing from,  and  sent  by,  fiends.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  522,
and,  with  annotations,  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  1,  89 — 92.


The  hymn  is  a charm  against  Fear,


60  THE  HYMNS  OF  [ -BOOK  11.

2 As  Day  and  Night  are  not  afraid,  nor  ever  suffer  loss

or  harm,

Even  so,  my  spirit,  fear  not  thou.

3 As  Sun  and  Moon  are  not  afraid,  nor  ever  suffer  loss

or  barm,

Even  so,  my  spirit,  fear  not  thou.

4 As  Br&h  manhood  and  Princely  Power  fear  not,

nor  suffer  loss  or  harm,

. Even  so,  my  spirit,  fear  not  thou.

5 As  Truth  and  Falsehood  have  no  fear,  nor  ever  sufter

loss  or  harm,

Even  so,  my  spirit,  fear  not  thou.

6 As  What  Hath  Been  and  What  Shall  Be  fear  not,

nor  suffer  loss  or  harm,

Even  so,  my  spirit,  fear  not  thou.

HYMN  XVI.

Guard  me  from  death,  Inhaling  and  Exhaling!  All
bliss  to  you !

2 Guard  me  from  overhearing,  Earth  and  Heaven ! All

hail  to  you !

3 Do  thou,  0 Shrya,  with  thine  eye  protect  me  ! All

hail  to  thee !


i Srihmanhood  and  Princely  Power:  brahma  and  kshatrdm;  priests
and  nobles.

5 Truth  and  Falsehood : Weber  reads  ritdm , Order,  instead  of
dnritam , falsehood:  4 Falsehood  cannot  be  suitably  adduced  as  an
example  in  such  a formula.  That  would  indeed  be  a sort  of  sacrilege.’
I take  the  text  as  I find  it,  and  do  not  see  that  it  needs  alteration.

This  non-metrical  formula  is  a prayer  for  general  protection.

1 In  ho  liny  and  Exhaling:  two  of  the  vital  airs,  Inspiration  and
Expiration,  personified.  All  -him:, 'or, ' Allihall;| : An  ;auspipipU8:
word  or  benediction  used  at  the  end  of  invocations,  like  Amen,

3 8 dry  a:  God  of  the  Sim.


HYMN  18.]


THE  A THAR  VA-VEDA.


61


4 Agni  Vaisvanara.  with  all  Gods  preserve  me!  All

hail  to  thee !

5 Preserve  me  with  all  care,  0 All-Sustainer!  All

hail  to  thee !

HYMN  XVII.

Power  art  thou,  give  me  power.  All  hail !

2 Might  art  thou,  give  me  might.  All  hail !

3 Strength  art  thou,  give  me  strength.  All  hail !

4 Life  art  thou,  give  me  life.  All  hail!

5 Ear  art  thou,  give  me  hearing!  Hail!

6 Eye  art  thou,  give  me  eyes.  All  hail !

7 Shield  art  thou,  shield  me  well.  All  hail !

HYMN  XVIII.

Destruction  of  the  foe  art  thou,  give  me  the  scaring
of  my  foes.  All  hail !

2 The  rival’s  miner  art  thou,  give  me  to  drive  my

rivals  off.  All  hail  !

3 Arayis’  miner  art  thou,  give  me  to  drive  A rav is

off.  All  hail !

4 Pi  sac  lias’  miner  art  thou,  give  me  to  drive  Pi. sachas

off.  All  hail !

5 Sadanvas’  miner  art  thou,  give  me  to  drive  Sadanv.ls

off.  All  hail!

4 Vaisvanara : belonging  to  all  ( A ryan)  men ; universal ; a freq uently
occurring  epithet  or  appellation  of  Agni.  With  all  Gods  : or,  with
the  All-Gods,  the  Visvedevas  or  Visve  Devas,

5 All-Sustainer : visvambhqra ; Vishnu.

A lion-metrical  formula  addressed  to  an  Amulet.

A non-metrical  charm  against  enemies,  goblins,  and  other  evil
creatures.

8 Ardi/is  : female  fiends  or  witches  : seel.  28.  4.

4 Pisdchas : goblins:  see  I.  16.  3.

5 Saddnvds : imps,  or  noisy  pests-:  see  II.  14.  1.


[BOOK  II

IlillillSi  HYMN  XIX.

Burn  thou,  0 Agni,  with  that  heat  of  thine  against
the  man  who  hates  us,  whom  we  hate.

2 Flame  thou,  O Agni,  with  that  flame  of  thine  against

the  man  who  hates  us,  whom  we  hate.

3 Shine  out,  0 Agni,  with  that  sheen  of  thine  against

the  man  who  hates  us,  whom  we  hate.

4 Blaze  thou,  O Agni,  with  that  blaze  of  thine  against

the  man  who  hates  us,  whom  we  hate.

5 0 Agni,  with  the  splendour  that  is  thine  darken  the

man  who  hates  us,  whom  we  hate.

HYMN  XXIV.

0 Serabhaka,  Serabha,  back  fall  jour  arts  of
witchery  ! Back,  Kimidins  ! let  your  weapon  fell.
Eat  your  possessor  ; eat  Je  him  who  sent  you  forth  ;
eat  your  own  flesh.

2 Sevvidhaka,  O Sevridha,  back  fall  your  arts  of
witchery ! Back,  Kimidins!  let  your  weapon  fall,  etc.


Mm  iitmks  of


A non-metrical  charm  invoking  Agni’s  aid  against  an  enemy.

Hymns  XX — XX  HI  are  exactly  similar  except  that  other  deities,
Vayu,  Surya,  Chandra  or  the  Moon,  and  the  Waters,  are  addressed,
instead  of  Agni.

A charm  against  the  magic  arts  of  fiends.

1 In  this  and  the  three  following  stanzas  four  Kimidins,  imps,
gohlins,  or  sorcerers  (see  I.  7.  I.)  and.  in  5 — 8 four  Kimidinis,  or  female
fiends  of  the  same  class,  are  addressed.  Serabhaka:  the  derivation
is  unknown.  According  to  the  St.  P.  Dictionary,  a kind  of  snake  is,
meant.  Your  possessor : him  whose  servants  ye  are ; the  superior
fiend  who  commands  you.

2 Sevridhaha  i sevridha,  perhaps  a shortened  form  of  sevavridha ,
means  in  the  five  passages  of  the  Rigveda  in  which  it  occurs,  auspicious,
bliss-increasing.  It  may  perhaps  be  used  euphemistically  here,  as
Robin  Good-fellow  is  the  old  name  of  a £ shrewd  and  knavish  sprite/  ■;


THE  A Til  A R FA-FEE  A.


HY.JIF  2i


m


8 O Mroka,  Anumroka,  back  return  your  arts  of
witchery ! Back,  Kimiclins ! let  your  weapon  fall,  etc,

4 0 Sarpa,  Anusarpa,  back  return  your  arts  of  witchery  1

Back,  Kimiclins  ! let  your  weapon  fall,  etc.

5 Back  fall  your  witcheries,  Jurnl ! back  your  weapon,

ye  Kimidinis,  etc.

6 Back  fall  your  spells,  ITpabdxl  back  your  weapon,

ye  Kimidinis,  etc.

7 Back  fall  your  witchcrafts,  Arjuoi!  your  weapon,

ye  Kimidinis,  -etc.

8 Back,  O Bharuji ! fall  your  charms,  your  weapon,

ye  Kimidinis,

Eat  your  possessor  ; 3at  ye  him  who  sent  you  forth ;
eat  your  own  flesh.


3 Mr  oka  : mentioned  in  V.  31.  9 as  a destructive  Agni  or  fire ; here,
perhaps,  representing  the  burning  heat  of  fever.  Anumrolca : Mroka
with  the  prefix  ami,  with  ; a slight  modification  of  the  name,

4 Sarpa,  Anusarpa : serpent,  and  serpentine.

5 Jiirni : according  to  the  St.  P.  Dictionary,  a snake  that  has  cast
its  skin ; according  to  Weber,  connected  with  jtirni,  glowing  heat,  and
meaning  fever.

6 Upabdi : noise,  rattle,  clatter.  Possibly  referring  to  the  chattering-
of  the  teeth  in  cold  ague  fits.

7 Arjunt : white ; according  to  the  St.  P.  Dictionary,  a (silvery)
snake.  Weber  thinks  that  the  reference  is  to  the  whiteness  of  the
skin  in  leprosy.

8 BharUji  : according  to  the  St.  P.  Dictionary,  some  noxious  animal
is  meant.  Weber  refers  the  word  to  the  roots  bhrij,  bhrajj,  to  fry  or
roast,  and  thinks  that  the  burning  heat  of  fever  is  intended.  Profes-
sor Weber  has  carefully  discussed  all  the  above-mentioned  names  in
Indische  Studien,  XIII.  pp.  182—186.  It  is  as  difficult  to  ascertain  the
exact  meaning  of  the  words  as  of  the  demons3 4 5 6 7 8  names -borrowed  by
Shakespear  from  H&rsnet,  viz,  Smulkin,  Modo,  Malm,  Flibbertigibbet,

■ and  Pur.  ■:


asr  m s


y//j?  wimm.  of


{BOOK  II.

HYMN  XXV.

The i Goddess  Prisniparnl  hatli  blest  us,  and  troubled
jSTirriti.

Pieice  crusher  of  the  Katjvas  she  : her  have  I gained,
the  mughty  one.

2 Victorious  in  the  olden  time  this  Prisniparnl  was
brought  forth : ' ' 1 '

With  her  I cleave,  as  ’twere  a bird’s,  the  head  of  the
JUetestables.

4 The  hateful  fiend  who  drinks  the  blood,  and  him
who  take  away  the  growth,

The  Kan.va  who  devours  the  g
and  destroy.

o Drive  and  imprison  in  a hill  these  Kanvas  harassers
ox  life  ;

FoHow  them  Prisniparnl,  thou  Goddess,  like  fire  con-
suming them.

6 D of  life  afaraWaJ  theS6  Kai?Vas’  drive  the  harassers

Wwho  ted  on  teh.°fdarIt,le8S  g0- 1 Send  018


parni


A charm  against  the  fiends  who  cause  abortion.
1 Prisniparnl;  (having  variegated  leaves)  He;
medicinal  plant,  a decoction  of  which  is  l-eeomm
be  taken  as  a preventive  of  abortion.  The  word
by  Wise  as  Pristapurni.  Nirriti : the  Goddess  t
time  who  rejoices  at  the  destruction  of  an  uuboi
class  of  evil  spirits,  mentioned  in  this  place  only.
Kapvas,  descendants  of 'the  great  Rishi  Kanvs
priestly  family,

6 IP  hither  the  shades  cf  darhiess  go  : probably

the  gloomy  depths  of  the  forest.  Feed  on  lies h:
ba.ht\

The  hymn  is  one  of  Grill’s  Hundert  Licder,  tip.  ;


MY  ME  2-8.]


THE  AT'MAR VA-VEDA*


HYMN  XXVI

Let  them  come  home,  the  cattle  that  have  wandered,
whom  V&vu  hath  delighted  to  attend  on,

Whose  forms  and  figures  are  well  known  to  Tvashtar,
These  cows  let  Savitar  drive  within  this  stable.

2 Let  the  beasts  stream  together  to  this  cow-pen.

Brihaspati  who  knoweth  lead  them  hither !

Let  Sinivali  guide  the  foremost  homeward.  When
they  have  come,  Anumati ! enclose  them.

3 Together  stream  the  cattle!  stream  together  horses

and  the  men !

Hitherward  press  all  growth  of  grain!  I offer  sacrifice
with  mixt  oblation.

4 I pour  together  milk  of  kine,  with  butter  blending

strength  and  juice..

Well  sprinkled  be  our  men,  as  true  to  me  as  cows  are
to  their  herd!

5 Hither  I bring  the  milk  of  cows,  hither  have  brought

the  juice  of  corn.

Hitherward  have  our  men  been  brought,  hitherward
to  this  house  our  wives.

The  hymn  is  a benediction  on  the  cattle  as  they  come  home  from  grazing.

1 Ydyu : the  God  of  the  wind  which  refreshes  the  cattle  in  their
breezy  pastures  and  drives  off  the  flies.  Tvashtar  : the  Artificer  of  the
Gods,  regarded  as  the  giver  of  increase  in  cattle,  his  special  function
in  the  natural  world  being  the  formation  of  the  embryo  : £ Tvashtar  the
Lord  hath  made  all  forms  and  all  the  cattle  of  the  field.’ — Eigveda  I.
188.  9.  Savitar  : here  the  setting  Sun.

• ...  2 Brihaspati:  as  Lord  of  Prayer  including  charms.  Sinivdli  : a per-
sonification of  the  Night  of  New  Moon  : see  Weber,  Indisehe  Studien,
Y.  pp.  230—232.  Anumati:  here  the  Night  of  Full  Moon  personified.

3 This  stanza  and  the  two  following  form  in  reality  a separate  hymn
the  subject  of  which  is  the  samsrdvyani  havis  or  Mixt  Oblation : see
L 15.  1.  The  fourth  pada  of  the  stanza  is  hendecasyllabic  or  Trishtup
instead  of  the  octosyllabic  Anushtup  of  the  rest  of  the  three  stanzas.

; 5 The  juice  of  corn:  a brew  of  grain,  perhaps,  as  Weber  suggests,  a sort
of  beer.  The  mixture  of  ingredients  is  probably  symbolical  of  the  re-union
at  even  ingot*  all  the  members  of  the  household  and  the  return  of  the  cattle.

. .The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Eigveda,  p.  371,  and
by  Grill,  pp.  64,  92.


the  hymns  of


[BOOK  II

HYMN  XXVII.

Let  not  the  enemy  win  the  cause  ! Strong  and  pre-
dominant art  thou.

Refute  mine  adversary’s  speech.  Render  them  dull
and  flat,  0 Plant.

2 The  strong- winged  bird  discovered  thee,  the  boar

unearthed  thee  with  his  snout.

Refute  mine  adversary’s  speech.  Render  them  dull
and  flat,  0 Plant.

3 Yea,  Indra  laid  thee  on  his  arm,  to  cast  the  Asuras

to  the  ground.

Refute  mine  adversary’s  speech.  Render  them  dull
and  flat,  O Plant.

4 Indra  devoured  the  Pat&  plant  that  he  might  lay  the

Asuras  low.

Refute  mine  adversary’s  speech.  Render  them  dull
and  flat,  O Plant.


The  hymn  is  a charm  against  an  opponent  in  debate.

1 The  cause  : prd'sam,  debate,  from  the  root  prackh,  to  question  :
not  food,  from  prds,  to.  eat,  as  Weber  and  Ludwig  have  taken  it  re-
garding the  hymn  as  an  incantation  against  robbers,  pronounced'  in
order  to  protect  granaries  and  store-rooms.  ‘ It  is  rather  a charm  nt-
tered  by  an  intending  disputant  before  entering  upon  a debate  in  the
mbha  orpartskad,  the  assembly  of  the  village,  and  addressed  to  the  pdtd-
plant*,  see  Bloomfield,  American  Journal  of  Philology,  VII.  pp.  479L.
482,  who  has  discussed  the  hymn  and  convincingly  established  this

arguments  based  chiefly  on  the"  Kausika-Sutm,
aaaViIL  17  sqq.  Mme  adversary’s  speech:  the  speech  of  each  ad-
versary, of  all  my  opponents.  1

ITfe  Mgwngedbird:  eagle  or  falcon.  The  magic  Plant  was
difficult  to  discover  reqmnng  the  keen  sight  of  a falcon  and  the  saga-
city and  strength  of  a wild  boar  to  find  and  uproot  it.  Similarlv  the
magical  moly  and  mandragora  or  mandrake  were  ‘hard  to  di®’’  See
A.  Lang’s  Custom  and  Myth,  (New  Edition)  pp.  143  sqq.

3 The  Asuras  : the  demons  who  fought  against  the  Gods,  like  the
Titans  of  Grecian  mythology.  ’ L ™e

• Probably  identical  with  Pathil  (Ciypea  Hemandi-
agaffist  fiendt6  W Hke  St  John  s wort-;  « ^ I >tent


HYMN  28.]  THE  ATHARVA-VEDA.  m

5 With  this  I overcome  my  foes  as  Indra  overcame  the

wolves.

Refute  mine  adversary’s  speech!  Render  them  dull
and  flat,  O Plant.

6 0 Rudra,  Lord  of  Healing  Balms,  dark -crested,

skilful  in  thy  work ! —

Refute  mine  adversary’s  speech.  Render  them  dull
and  flat,  O Plant.

7 Indra,  defeat  the  speech  of  him  who  meets  us  with

hostility.

Comfort  us  with  thy  power  and  might.  Make  me
superior  in  debate.

HYMN  XXVIII.

This  Child,  Old  Age ! shall  grow  to  meet  thee  only  :
none  of  the  hundred  other  deaths  shall  harm  him.


of  the  hundred  other  deaths  shall  harm  him.

From  trouble  caused  by  friends  let  Mitra  guard  him,
as  a kind  mother  guards  the  son  she  nurses.

2 Mitra  or  Varuna  the  foe-destroyer,  accordant,  grant
him  death  in  course  of  nature!

Thus  Agni,  Hotar-priest,  skilled  in  high  statutes,
declareth  all  the  deities’  generations.


plant,  and  wears  a garland  made  -of  seven  of  its  leaves.  Ike  wolves:
sdl&vriMn  ; according  to  Sayana,  wild  dogs.  The  word  seems  to  mean
any  canine  animal  of  prey.  Here  perhaps  fiends  who  had  assumed  the
shapes  of  wolves  or  hyenas  are  meant.

6 Lord  of  Healing  Balms:  seel.  19.  3.  The  verb.  Refute,  in  the
second  line  may  perhaps  refer  to  Rudra.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  461,
and  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  23,  93.

The  hymn  is  a prayer  for  long  and  happy  life  for  a boy.

1 Hundred  other  deaths  : cf  I.  30.  3.  Friends  : cf.  stanza  3.

2 Thus  Agni:  the  benediction  seems  to  have  been  pronounced  at
gome  birth  ceremony  accompanied  with  a sacrifice,  at  which  Agni  as
chief  priest  is  represented  as  summoning  all  the  Gods  to  he  present.


18  THE  HYMNS  'OF  ' [BOOK  It,

3 Thou  art  the  Lord  of  all  terrestrial  cattle,  of  cattle

born  and  to  be  born  hereafter.

Let  not  breath  drawn  or  breath  emitted  fail  him.
Let  not  his  friends,  let  not  his  foemen  slay  him.

4 Let  Heaven  thy  father  and  let  Earth  thy  mother,

accordant,  give  thee  death  in  course  of  nature,

That  thou  mayst  live  on  Aditi’s  bosom,  guarded,
a hundred  winters,  through  thy  respirations.

5 Lead  him  to  life,  O Agni/tuid  to  splendour,  this  dear

child,  Varuna!  and  thou  King  Mitra!

Give  him  protection,  Aditil  as  a mother;  All  Gods,
that  his  be  life  of  long  duration  !

HYMN  XXIX

Gods,-  give  him  all  that  earth  hath  best  with  bodily
strength  and  happy  fate.

Agni  and  Slirya  grant  him  life,  Brihaspati  give  him
eminence!

2 Bestow  thou  life  on  him,  0 J&tavedas.  Store  him

with  future  progeny,  O Tvashtar.

Send  him,  O Savitar,  full  growth  of  riches.  Let  this
thy  servant  live  a hundred  autumns.

3 May  this  our  prayer  bring  strength  and  goodly  offspring.

Give,  both  of  you  one-minded,  strength  and  riches.


3 Thou:  apparently  Agni  of  the  preceding  stanza.  According  to
Weber,  Tvashtar,  Pushan,  or  Rudra  is  intended

4 A hundred  winters : regarded  as  the  natural  duration  of  human
life:  see  L 35,  L

The  hymn  has  been  translated,  with  annotations,  by  Grill,  Hundert
Lieder,  pp.  48,  95.

The  hymn  is  a benediction  pronounced  over  a sick  man,

2 Tvashtar  : whose  function  is  to  provide  for  the  increase  of  the
human  race.  ■

3 May  this  our  prayer  briny : there  is  no  verb  in  the  text,  and
bring,  or  give,  must  be  supplied.  Both  of  you:  it  is  not  clear  which

two  of  the  above-mentioned  Gods  are  intended.  Let  him win : the

verb  is  not  in  the  text,  unless  jdyam  be  altered  to  jdyat^  which  Weber
thinks  is  absolutely  necessary.


HYMN  29.]  THE  ATHARVA-VEDA.  «9

Let  him  "with  might  win  fields  and  victory,  Indra !
setting  beneath  his  feet  the  rest,  his  rivals.

4 As  Indra’s  gift.,  by  Varuna  instructed  the  fierce  one

came  to  us  sent  by  the  Maruts.

Let  him,  O Heaven  and  Earth,  rest  in  your  bosom.
Let  him  not  hunger,  let  him  not  be  thirsty.

5 Ye  twain  endowed  with  vigour,  grant  him  vigour.

Ye  who  are  rich  in  milk,  give  milk  to  feed  him.
These  twain  have  given  him  vigour,  Earth  and
Heaven,  and  all  the  Gods,  the  Maruts,  and  the
Waters.

6 With  health-bestowing  drops  thine  heart  I comfort:

all-bright  again,  and  undiseased,  enjoy  them.

Drest  in  like  robes  let  these  two  drink  the  mixture,
wearing  the  Asvins’  form  as  an  illusion.

7 Erst  Indra,  wounded,  made  this  strengthening  potion,

eternal  food  : thine  is  it,  here  presented.

With  this  live  full  of  vigour  through  the  autumns.
Let  not  thy  strength  be  drained.  Leeches  have
helped  thee.


4 The  fierce  one : apparently  the  strong  warrior  who  is  now  lying  sick.

6 Drops : there  is  no  substantive  in  the  text,  and  waters  or  streams
must  he  supplied.  Let  these  iivo  drink  the  s mixture : this  appears  to
refer  to  a form  of  procedure  like  that  described  in  the  Kausika-Sutra,
XXVII.  8—11.  The  patient  leans  upon  some  healthy  man.  The
mixture  (manthd,  a sort  of  gruel  made  of  milk  and  barley-meal)  is
poured  upon  the  sick_manJs  head,  and  then  offered  to  the  healthy  man
to  whom  the  thirst  of  fever  is  thus  transferred,  and  the  patient  is  re-
lieved. Asvi?is:  the  twin  Gods  of  the  dawn.  They  are  also  physicians
(see  Eigveda  VIII.  18.  8 ; 22.  10;  75.  1 ; X.  39.  3),  and  for  this  reason
probably  their  characters  are  assumed  by  the  sick  man  and  his  friend.

7 Wounded ; in  some  battle  with  the  demons.  The  autumns ; the
.most  unhealthy  season  of  the  Indian  year.  Leeches : physicians  : per-,
Jaaps  with  reference  to  the  assumption  of  the  characters  of  the  Asvins,

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Eigveda,  p,  493,


..70


THE  HYMNS  OF


[BOOK  IL


HYMN  XXX.

.A.S  the  wind  shakes  this  Tuft  of  Grass  hither  and
thither  on  the  ground,

So  do  I stir  and  shake  thy  mind,  that  thou  mayst  be
in  love  with  me,  my  darling,  never  to  depart.

2 Ye,  Asvins,  lead  together,  ye  unite  and  bring  the

loving  pair.  ,

Now  have  the  fortunes  of  you  twain,  now  have  your
vows  and  spirits  met.

3 When  eagles,  calling  out  aloud,  are  screaming  in  the

joy  of  health,  D

Then  to  my  calling  let  her  come,  as  to  the  arrow’s
neck  the  shaft.


A charm  to  win  a girl’s  love.

1 Tuft  of  Grass : here  mentioned  only  by  way  of  illustration.  Ac-

cording to  the  Kausika-Sutra,  XXXV.  21,  the  procedure  to  accompany
the  recitation  of  the  charm  is  as  follows : Between  two  slips  or
cuttings  taken  respectively  from  a tree  (representing  the  lover)  and
.the  creeper  that  clings  round  it  (signifying  the  girl),  place  an  arrow
(symbolical  of  Kama,  the  Indian  Cupid),  some  Sthakara  (probably  a
flagrant  gum  or  powder),  Kushfcba  (Costus  Speciosus,  or  Arabicus),
eyesalve,  Madugha  (probably  licorice),  and  grass  battered  by  a storm
(symbolical  of  the  girl’s  agitated  mind),  mix  all  together  with  sacri-
ficial butter,  and  apply : the  mode  of  application  is  not  mentioned ;
probably  the  two  slips  were  anointed  with  it.  The  second  line  of  the
stanza  is  found  also  in  I.  34.  5,  and  VI.  8.  1 3.

2 Ye,  Asvins:  inRigveda  X.  85,  which  describes  the  wedding  of  SfindL
the  daughter  of  the  Sun,  regarded  as  the  typical  bride,  the  two  Asvins’
Gods  of  the  dawn,  appear  as  the  groomsmen,  the  friends  of  the  bride-
groom, who  had  asked  and  obtained  her  hand  for  Soma  the  Moon-God.

The  stanza  appears  to  be  spoken  by  some  friend  of  the  lover;  the
first  line  being  addressed  to  the  Asvins,  and  the  second  to  the  lover
and  the  girl.  If  you  twain  refers  to  the  Asvins,  the  meaning  can  be
only:  You  have  done  your  duty  and  gained  your  wishes  >y°makhv<-
two  lovers  happy  : but  this  seems  forced  and  unnatural.

3 ,1s  to  the  arrow's  neck  the  shaft : straight  to  her  destined  husband
as  the  shaft  of  the  arrow  is  forced  into  the  nock  or  lower  part  of  the
head  of  the  weapon,  and  fixed  firmly  there.


HYMN  31.]  THE  A TEAR  VA-  VEDA:

4 Let  what  is  inward  turn  outside,  let  what  is  outward

be  within  :

Seize  and  possess,  0 Plant,  the  mind  of  maidens  rich
in  every  charm.

5 Seeking  a husband  she  hath  come!  and  I came  long-

ing for  a wife  :

Even  as  a loudly-neighing  steed  my  fate  and  fortune
have  I met.

HYMN  XXXI.

With  Indra’s  mighty  millstone,  that  which  crushes
worms  of  every  sort,

I bray  and  bruise  the  worms  to  bits  like  vetches  on
the  grinding  stone.

2 The  Seen  and  the  Invisible,  and  the  Kururu  have
I crushed  :

Al&ndus,  and  all  Chhalunas,  we  bruise  to  pieces  with
our  spell.


4 Let  what  is  inward  turn  outside  : let  her  mind  be  thoroughly
upset  by  the  tumultuous  agitation  of  love  ; or  with  Dr.  Grill : let  the
love  that  she  hides  show  itself,  and  let  the  love  that  I show  find  its
way  into  her  heart.  0 Plant : the  Grass  mentioned  in  stanza  1.  Mich
in  every  charm:  visvdrdpdndm  ; or,  of  all  shapes  and  forms.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Eigveda,  III.  pr
517  ; and  by  Grill,  with  annotations,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  52,  97.

The  hymn  is  a charm  against  all  sorts  of  Worms.

1 Indra’s  mighty  millstone:  a figurative  expression  meaning  (1)  the
crashing  power  of  Indra  (cf.  4 Though  the  stones  of  God  grind
slowly,  yet  they  grind  exceeding  small’),  and  (2)  the  priestly  spell  to
which  this  power  has  been  imparted  by  the  God.  In  the  Eigveda  (L
8,  3,  and  40.  8)  sacrifice  employed  against  enemies  is  spoken  of  as  a
thunderbolt,  the  special  weapon  of  Indra  in  his  battles  with  demons,
so,  similarly,  the  incantation  here  is  called  Indra’s  millstone  which
crushes  noxious  creatures  of  other  kinds.

2 The  Seen  and  the  Invisible:  here  the  names  of  two  species  of
worms.  The  Kururu,  Alandu,  and  Ohhaluna  are  also  worms  of  un-
identifiable' kinds.  .


X. !


1 THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  11

I kill  AMndus  with  a mighty  weapon  : burnt  or  not
burnt  they  now  have  lost  their  vigour.

Left  or  not  left,  I with  the  spell  subdue  them:  let
not  a single  worm  remain  uninjured.

The  worm  that  lives  within  the  ribs,  within  the
bowels,  in  the  head,

Avaskava  and  Borer,  these  we  bruise  to  pieces  with
the  spell.

Worms  that  are  found  on  mountains,  in  the  forests,
that  live  in  plants,  in  cattle,  in  the  waters,

Those  that  have  made  their  way  within  our  bodies, — •
these  I destroy,  the  worms’  whole  generation.

HYMN  XXXII.

Uprising  let  the  Sun  destroy,  and  when  he  sinketh,
with  his  beams

The  Worms  that  live  within  the  cow.


3 With  a mighty  weapon  : with  incantation,  which  is  elsewhere  call*
ed  a mjra  or  thunderbolt:  see  VI.  134.  1 sqq.  and  135.  1.  Burnt  or
not  burnt : fire  appears  to  be  used  in  the  procedure  prescribed  in  the
Kausika-Sutra  XXVII.  14—18.

4 Avaskava  and  Borer  : two  other  unidentified  species  of.  worms
which  attack  the  body  of  man.  Of  worms,  external  and  internal,  there
are  said  to  be  twenty  varieties,  each  of  which  has  a particular  name  :
see  Wise,  Hindu  System  of  Medicine,  pp,  348 — 350.

, 5 The  worms  that  infest  the  human  body  having  been  disposed  of,
the  charm  is  directed  against  those  which  attack  trees,  plants,  and  cat*
tie.  Bo,  even  at  the  present  day,  in  the  rural  parishes  near  Quebec
the  priests  utter  incantations  over  the  potato-bugs  and  grasshoppers,
(Harper’s  New  Monthly  Magazine,  June  1893,  p.  106).

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  323,
and,  with  annotations,  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp,  6,  98.


) The  hymn  is  a charm  against  the  Worms  or  Rots  which  infest  cows.

1 According  to  the  Kausika-Sutra,  XXVII.  21  —24,  the  ceremony
which  accompanies  the  incantation  is  to  be  performed  at  sunrise,  noon,
and  sunset.  The  sun  is  considered  as  especially  instrumental  in
destroying  noxious  reptiles  etc.,  and  in  counteract!  ig  the  operation
of  poison:  see  Rigveda  L 191.  8,  9.  The  first  hdniu  in  line  1,  which
mars  the  Anushtup  metre,  is  merely  a gloss  and  should  be  dim  nate  5
from  the  text.


HYMN  32,]


THE  ATHARVA-YEDA.


2 The  four-eyed  worm,  of  every  shape,  the  variegated,

and  the  white-r-

I break  and  crush  the  creature’s  ribs,  and  tear  away
its  head  besides.

3 Like  Atri  I destroy  you,  Worms!  in  Kaijva’s,

Jamadagni’s  way :

I bray  and  bruise  the  creeping  things  to  pieces  with.
Agastya’s  spell.

4 Slain  is  the  sovran  of  these  Worms,  yea,  their  con-

trolling lord  is  slain :

Slain  is  the  Worm,  his  mother  slain,  brother  and
sister  both  are  slain.

5 Slain  are  his  ministers,  and  slain  his  followers  and

retinue :

Yea,  those  that  seemed  the  tiniest  things,  the  Worms
have  all  been  put  to  death.

6 I break  in  pieces  both  thy  horns  wherewith  thou

pushest  here  and  there  :

I cleave  and  rend  the  bag  which  holds  the  venom
which  is  stored  in  thee.


2 Four-eyed:  that  is,  as  Dr.  Grill  explains,  marked  with  a spot
above  each  eye  : ef.  IV.  20.  7.

3 Atri,  Kanva,  Jamadagni,  and  Agastya  are  very  celebrated  Rishis
or  Seers  of  the  Bigveda  and  regarded  as  masters  of  magic  arts.  Hymn
CXCI.  of  Book  I.  of  the  Rigveda,  the  silent  repetition  of  which  is
said  to  counteract  all  venom  in  reptiles,  insects,  scorpions,  roots,  and
artificial  poisons,  is  ascribed  to  Agastya.

4 Controlling  lord:  sthcyodtis ; lord  of  the  district,  governor,  or  chief
official.

5 Ministers:  vesdsas  ; vassals,  according  to  Hillebrandt.

6 This  stanza  appears  to  be  addressed  to  some  conspicuously  aggres-
sive" worm  or  maggot.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  500,
and,  with  annotations,  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  7,  100.

5a


n


THE  HYMNS  OF


[bo  : i u


HYMN  XXXIII.

From  both  thy  nostrils,  from  both  eyes,  from  both
thine  ears,  and  from  thy  chin,

Forth  from  thy  brain  and  tongue  I root  Consumption
seated  in  thy  head.

2 Forth  from  the  neck  and  from  the  nape,  from  dorsal

vertebrae  and  spine,

From  arms  and  shoulder-blades  I root  Consumption
seated  in  thine  arms.

3 Forth  from  thy  heart  and  from  thy  lungs,  from  thy

gall-bladder  and  thy  sides,

From  kidneys,  spleen,  and  liver  thy  Consumption  we
eradicate.

4 From  bowels  and  intestines,  from  the  rectum  and  the

belly,  I

Extirpate  thy  Consumption,  from  flanks,  navel,  and
mesentery.

5 Forth  from  thy  thighs  and  from  thy  knees,  heels  and

the  foreparts  of  thy  feet,

Forth  from  thy  loins  and  hips  I draw  Consumption
settled  in  thy  loins.

6 Forth  from  thy  marrows  and  thy  bones,  forth  from

thy  tendons  and  thy  veins

I banish  thy  Consumption,  from  thy  hands,  thy
fingers,  and  thy  nails.

7 In  every  member,  every  hair,  in  every  joint  wherein

it  lies,  _

We  with  the  exorcising  spell  of  Kasyapa  drive  far
away  Consumption  settled  in  thy  skin.


The  hymn,  which  is  a charm  against  Yakshma,  Phthisis  Pulmonalis
ovConsumption,  is  enlarged,

For  an  account  of  the  disease  and  its  treatment  in  India  in  former
times  see  Wise,  Hindu  System  of  Medicine,  pp.  321 — 324.

Y Kasyapa : a Rishi.  seer  of  some  hymns  of  the  Rig  r la,  and  1 tiher
:pf ;^vWhlitO'Wh.oin  the  original'  hypsh'ilRi^e^av^tl;63yis :hs«adfeecU'g::  e


HYMN  34.]  THE  ATE ABVA-Y EDA.  ■ 75

HYMN  XXXIV.

Mat  this,  of  all  the  beasts  that  Pasupati  rules,  Lord
of  animals,  quadruped  and  biped,

Come,  purchased,  to  the  sacrificial  portion.  May
growth  of  wealth  attend  the  sacrifieer.

2 Loosing  the  seed  of  future-time  existence,  give  good
success,  O Gods,  to  him  who  worships.

May  what  is  present,  duly  brought,  the  victim,  go  to
the  deities’ belovbd  region.


The  hymn  is  a prayer  accompanying  an  animal  sacrifice.

1 This : the  animal  selected  for  sacrifice.  Pasupati : Lord  of  Beasts ;
usually  regarded  as  a name  of  the  later  Eudra.  Quadruped  and  biped:
a frequently  occurring  Vedic  expression  for  the  people  of  a household
and  the  domestic  and  sacrificial  animals  around  them  ; ‘ To  us  and  to
our  cattle  may  Soma  give  salutary  food,  To  biped  and  to  quadruped/
BV.  III.  62.  14.  According  to  the  sacrificial  ritual  there  are  five
pasavah  or  sacrificial  animals,  man,  horse,  ox,  sheep,  and  goat.  Man
is  only  a paste,  though  the  highest,  primus  inter  pares.  c To  thee  (Bhava)
are  these  five  animals  (pasdvah)  allotted,  oxen,  and  sheep,  and  goats,
and  men,  and  horses.5  AY.  XL  2.  9.  See  Zimmer,  Altindisehes  Leben,
pp1.  72,  73.

The  text  of  the  first  line  of  the  stanza  has  apparently  no  sequence  ;
but  the  interpretation  which,  following  Weber,  I have  given,  is  the  only
one  that  will  suit.  According  to  Ludwig  (Der  Bigveda,  III.  p.  433)
the  translation  would  be  : 4 May  Pasupati,  who  is  Lord  and  Master  of
homestead  animals,  quadruped *and  biped,  Purchased,  obtain  his  sacri-
ficial portion  ;5  which  is  grammatical  but  unintelligible.

Purchased : the  animal  selected  for  sacrifice  was  separated  from  the
flock  or  herd  and  driven  away  to  feed  where  it  chose.  When  it  was
to  be  sacrificed  it  was  redeemed  from  the  man  who  had  taken  posses-
sion of  it.  ■

2 Loosing : liberating ; see  stanzas  3 and  4.  The  seed  of  future-time
existence:  the  victim  whose  sacrifice  is  to  secure  future  life  for  the
sacrifieer.  Duly  brought : updkritam ; the  technical  term  used  on
such  occasions,  meaning  prepared  for  the  sacred  rite  and  brought  to
the  place  of  sacrifice.  The  victim : sasamdndm ; a euphemistic  word
for  the  animal  that  is  to  be  slaughtered.  The  victim  thus  offered  to
the  Gods  goes  at  once  to  Svarga  or  heaven,  the  deities'  beloved  region .
So,  at  the  Horse-sacrifice,  the  priest  addresses  the  slaughtered  animal ;

4 No;  here  thou  diest  not,  thou  art  not  injured:  by  easy  paths  unto
the  Gods  thou  goes i/  Bigveda  I.  162.  2L


76  THE  HYMNS  OF  {BOOK  II.

3 Those  who  are  looking,  deep  in  meditation,  on  the

bound  animal  with  eye  and  spirit —

To  them,  the  first,  may  Agni,  God,  give  freedom,
rejoicing  in  his  creatures,  Visvakarman.

4 Tame  animals  of  every  shape,  though  varied  in

colour,  manifold,  alike  in  nature —

To  them,  the  first,  may  V&yu,  God,  give  freedom,
Praj&pati  rejoicing  in  his  creatures.

5 Let  those  who  know  receive  before  all  others  the

vital  breath  proceeding  from  the  body.

Go  to  the  sky.  Stay  there  with  all  thy  members.
By  paths  which  Gods  have  travelled  go  to  S varga.

HYMN  XXXV.

We  who  enjoying  it  have  grown  no  richer,  for  whom
the  sacred  altar-fires  have  Sorrowed,

We  who  compounded  with  deficient  worship, — may
Visvakarman  make  our  service  prosper.


3 Those  who  are  looking : other  animals,  relatives  and  friends  of  the
victim.  Agni,  or  the  Sacrificial  Fire,  is  asked  to  divert  and  free  them
from  their  sad  thoughts.  Visvakarman .*  the  Omnific ; the  Creator  of
All  ; here  probably  an  appellative  of  Agni.

4 Alike  in  nature : all  being  domestic  and  sacrificial  animals.
Prajdpati  ; Lord  of  Creatures;  here  probably  an  appellative  of  Vayu.

5 Those  who  know : tbe  Gods  in  heaven.  Go  to  the  sky : to  S varga
or  heaven : see  note  on  stanza  2.  According  to  the  Kausika-Sutra  XLIV.
15,  the  victim  is  slaughtered — -its  vital  breath  is  stopped — as  this
stanza  is  recited.

A hymn  of  expiation  for  an  imperfectly  performed  sacrifice.

1 We:  priests  and  others  complain  that  through  the  fault  of  the
institutor  of  a Soma  sacrifice  of  which  they  have  been  partakers  they
have  failed  to  obtain  tbe  benefits  which  they  expected.  Altar-fires :
agndyo  dhishnydh ; fires  lighted  on  small  side  altars,  usually  eight  in
number.  Sorrowed : as  having  been  kindled  in  vain.  Compounded
with : took  part  in  the  ill-managed  ceremony  and  so  shared  the  institu-
te's guilt.  Visvakarman  : the  Omnific ; the  Creator  of  the  Universe  ;
the  God  to  whom  the  expiatory  'sacrifice  is  offered.  Our  service:  the
sacrifice  which  we  are  now  performing.


77


HYMN  35-1  THE  ATHARVA-V EDA.

2 Rishis  have  called  the  sacrifice’s  patron  amerced

through  sin,  sorrowing  for  his  offspring.

Those  drops  of  meath  whereof  he  missed  enjoyment,
may  Visvakarman  with  those  drops  unite  us.

3 Regarding  niggard  churls  as  Soma-drinkers,  skilful

in  sacrifice,  weak  at  the  meeting,

Whatever  sin  the  captive  hath  committed,  do  thou
for  weal  release  him,  Visvakarman  1

4 Awful  are  Rishis  : unto  them  be  homage,  and  to

/ their  eye  and  truthfulness  of  spirit !

Loud  homage  to  Brihaspati,  0 mighty!  Homage
to  thee,  O Visvakarman!  Guard  us.

5 The  eye  of  sacrifice,  source,  and  beginning — with

voice,  ear,  spirit  unto  him  I offer. .

To  this  our  sacrifice  wrought  by  Visvakarman  may
the  Gods  come  gracious  and  kindly -hearted.


2 The  sacrifice’s  patron : The  householder  who  instituted  the  previous
sacrifice,  and  whose  mismanagement  has  drawn  upon  him  the  censure
of  the  Rishis  or  sages.  Sorrowing  for  his  offspring  : who  would  suffer
for  the  fault  of  the  head  of  the  family.  Meath ; Soma  juice ; madhavydn
instead  of  the  meaningless  mathavydn  of  the  text.  Unite  us:  may  we
be  benefited  by  the  Soma  libations  of  the  present  sacrifice  in  place
of  those  that  were  wasted  in  the  former  mismanaged  ceremony.

3 Regarding  niggard  churls  as  Soma-drinkers : the  institutor  of  the
former  sacrifice  appears  to  have  admitted  illiberal  and  ungodly  persons
to  the  ceremony  and  allowed  them  to  drink  the  Soma  juice  which  they
were  unworthy  to  touch.  Although  well  versed  in  the  rules  of  such
holy  rites,  he  showed  himself  weak  and  infirm  in  the  sacrificial  assem-
bly. The  captive : the  guilty  institutor  of  the  sacrifice  who  is  brought
in  bonds  ( haddhds ),  like  a church  delinquent  in  penitential  sheet,  to
obtain  absolution  by  the  expiatory  ceremony.

4 Bishis:  referring  particularly  to  those  who  have  censured,  the
culprit : see  stanza  2.

Brihaspati : as  Lord  of  Prayer.

5.  Unto  him : to  Visvakarman  who  is  the  eye  of  sacrifice,  etc.


78


THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  1L

HYMN  XXXVI.

To  please  us  may  the  suitor  come,  O Agni,  seeking
this  maid  and  bringing  us  good  fortune.

Approved  by  wooer's,  lovely  in  assemblies,  may  she
be  soon  made  happy  with  a husband.

2 As  bliss  beloved  by  Soma,  dear  to  Prayer,  and  stored

by  Aryaman,  '

With  the  God  DMtar’s  truthfulness  I work  the
bridal  oracle.  ■ ■

3 0 Agni,  may  this  woman  find  a husband.  Then  veri-

ly King  Soma  makes  her  happy.

May  she  bear  sons,  chief  lady  of  the  household,  bles-
sed and  bearing  rule  beside  her  consort.


The  hymn  is  a cliarm  to  secure  a husband  for  a marriageable  girL

1 The  suitor : the  interceder  or  match-maker  whose  business  is  to
find  a suitable  wife  for  his  friend  or  employer.  0 Agni:  addressed  m
especially  connected  with  marriage,  regulating,  as  the  Sun,  the  proper
season  for  its  celebration,  and,  as  the  sacrificial  fire,  the  consecrator  of
the  rite  : see  Rigveda  I.  66.  4 ; V,  3,  2 ; X*  85.  40.

2 Beloved  by  Soma:  as  Surya,  the  typical  bride,  was  married  to
Soma,  the  young  maid  is  regarded  as  originally  belonging  to  him : see
Eigveda  X.  85.  40.  Bear  to  Prayer:  or,  graced  by  Brahman,  as
Weber  and  Grill  interpret.  Stored  by  Aryaman  : 6 Aryaman  art  thou
(Agni)  as  regardeth  maidens  J (Rigveda  V.  3.  2) ; that  is,  in  connexion
with  marriage ; aryaman  meaning  also  a companion,  especially  a friend
who  asks  a girl  in  marriage  for  another.  The  bliss  or  allotted  fate  is
said  by  Sayana  to  be  the  young  maiden.  The  stanza  is  somewhat
obscure,  and  perhaps  out  of  place.  Dr.  Grill  puts  it  next  after  stanza

: 4.  JDkdtars  truthfulness:  Dhatar  is  the  Establisher  or  Ordainer,  re-
garded as  a separate  God,  and  mentioned  here  as  the  Upholder  of  the
. sacrament  of  marriage.  Bridal  oracle : pative'danam  ; the  charm  that
finds  or  procures  a husband  : ‘ Brautorakel : ? Weber.

3 Chief  lady  of  the  household:  mahisM ; the  technical  term  for  the
first  married  wife  : the  principal  consort  of  a king.  Of.  Bigv  eda  X 85*
26,  27,


HYMN  36.]  THE  A THAR  VA-  VEDA.  79

4 As  this  lair,  Maghavan!  that  is  fair  to  look  on  was

dear  to  wild  things  as  a pleasant  dwelling,

So  may  this  woman  here  be  Bhaga’s  darling,  loved
by  her  lord  and  prizing  his  affection.

5 Mount  up,  embark  on  Bhaga’s  ship,  the  full,  the

inexhaustible,

Thereon  bring  hitherward  to  us  the  lover  whom  thou
fain  wouldst  wed.

6 Call  out  to  him,  0 Lord  of  Wealth  ! Make  thou  the

lover  well-inclined.

Set  each  on  thy  right  hand  who  is  a lover  worthy  of
her  choice.

7 Here  is  the  Bdellium  and  the  gold,  the  Auksha  and

the  bliss  are  here  :

These  bring  thee  to  the  husbands,  so  to  find  the  man
whom  thou  woudst  have.


4 This  lair : the  hole  of  some  wild  animal  or  perhaps  a bird’s  nest
is  indicated  by  way  of  illustration.  Maghavan : the  Bounteous  One,
Indra.  Bhaga : the  Dispenser,  who  brings  wealth  and  happiness,  and
blesses  conjugal  love.  This  God  is  frequently  associated  with  Indra  in
prayers  for  welfare.

5 Addressed  to  the  maiden.  Bhaga’s  ship : or  the  ship  of  Fortune  :
with  reference  probably  to  some  practice  by  means  of  which  girls  en-
deavoured to  discover  who  should  marry  them.  See  Weber,  Indische
Studien*  V.  p,  221,  for  similar  customs  among  the  German  peasant
maidens.

6 Lord  of  Wealth  : Indra,  the  Bounteous  One,  is  probably  intended.
On  thy  right  hand : in  the  place  of  honour.

■ 7 Bdellium  : a costly  fragrant  gum  that  exudes  from  a plant  said  to
be  the  vine  palm  (Borassus  Flabellif oraiis).  The  Sanskrit  name  of  the
gum  is  gilggnlu.  It  may  have  formed  part  of  the  girl’s  dowry,  or  she
may  have  been  anointed  and',  perfumed  with  it.  The  gold : as  dowry
or  personal  ornaments.  The  Auksha : probably  a sweet-scented  unguent,
as  S&yana  explains  it : see  Grill’s  note.  The  bliss ; the  charms  of  the
maidens  those  who  wish  to  m^ry^theq*;'^


Q TEE  ATHARVA-VEDA.  [BOOK  IT.

8 May  Savitar  lead  and  bring  to  thee  the  husband
whom  thy  heart  desires.

0 Plant,  be  this  thy  gift  to  her  1


8 Savitar:  the  Sun ; regarded  as  the  universal  vivifier  -who  will  bless
the  bride : ‘Happy  is  the  bride  whom  the  Sun  shines  on.’  The  second
nayatv,  of  the  second  line  is  evidently  an  interpolation ; and  the  last
superfluous  pada  also  seems  to  be  a later  addition,  as  no  Plant  has  been
mentioned  in  the  preceding  stanzas.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Bigyeda,  III*  p*  476,
and  is  one  of  Grill's  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  55,  102.


BOOK  III


HYMN  I.

Let  the  wise  Agni  go  against  our  foemen,  burning
against  ill-will  and  imprecation.

Let  him  bewilder  our  opponents’  army.  Let  Jata-
vedas  smite  and  make  them  handless.

2 Mighty  are  ye  for  such  a deed,  0 Maruts.  Go  for-

ward, overcome  them  and  destroy  them.

The  Yasus  slew,  and  these  were  left  imploring.  Wise
Agni  as  our  messenger  assail  them !

3 O Maghavan,  0 Indra,  thou  who  slayest  fiends,  and,

Agni,  thou,

Burn,  both  of  you,  against  these  men,  the  foeman’s
host  that  threatens  us.

4 Shot  down  the  slope,  with  thy  two  tawny  coursers,

forth  go  thy  bolt,  destroying  foes,  O Indra!

Slay  those  who  fly,  slay  those  who  stand  and  follow.
On  every  side  fulfil  these  men’s  intention,

5 Indra,  bewilder  thou  the  foemen’s  army.

With  Agni’s,  Vita’s  furious  rush  drive  them  away
to  every  side.


The  hymn  is  a prayer  or  charm  to  secure  the  defeat  and  destruction
of  enemies  in  battle.

2 Maruts : ‘the  terrible  Storm-gods,  literally  the  Smashers,  in  whose
name  the  germs  of  the  Italic  god  of  war,  Mars,  have  been  discovered.—
M.  Muller.  The  Yasus:  the  kind  Gods,  the  Maruts.  These:  the  men
in  whose  behalf  the  hymn  is  recited,  and  for  whose  success  prayer  and
sacrifice  were  offered  to  the  Gods.

4 These  men's  intention : the  hopes  and  wishes  of  our  own  men.

5 The  first  pada  is  hendecasyllabic,  and  padass  2 and  3 are  octosyllabic.


>2  THE  HYMNS  OF  _ [BOOK  III.

6 Let  Indra  daze  their  army.  Let  the  Maruts  slay  it
with  their  might.

Let  Agni  take  their  eyes  away,  and  let  the  conquered
host  retreat,

HYMN  II.  ■

Mat  Agni,  he  who  knows,  our  envoy,  meet  them?

burning  against  ill-will  and  imprecation.

May  he  bewilder  our  opponents’  senses.  May  J&ta-
vedas  smite  and  make  them  handless.

2 This  Agni  hath  bewildered  all  the  senses  that  were

in  your  hearts  :

Now  let  him  blast  you  from  your  home,  blast  you
away  from  every  side.

3 Dazing  their  senses,  Indra,  come  hitherward  with

the  wish  and  will.

With  Agni’s,  V&ta’s  furious  rush  drive  them  to
every  side  away.

4 Vanish,  ye  hopes  and  plans  of  theirs,  be  ye  con-

founded, all  their  thoughts !

Whatever  wish  is  in  their  heart,  do  thou  expel  it
utterly.

5 Bewildering  the  senses  of  our  foemen,  seize  on  their

bodies  and  depart,  0 Apv&  1

6 Let  Inclra  daze  their  army : this  and  the  following  hymn  are
classed  in  the  Kausika-Sdtra  with  mohandni,  magical  charms  for  stupe-
fying and  bewildering  an  enemy.

■ All  the  hymns  of  this  Book  have  been  translated,  with  exhaustive
annotations,  by  Professor  Weber  in  Xndische  Studied,  X'VTI,  pp.  179  —
314;  eleven  (including  this  hymn)  have  been  translated  by  Professor
iLudwig  in  Der  Eigveda,  III.,  and  seven  by  Dr.  Grill  in  Hunderklwleclor,
des  Atharva-veda.  Many  passages  have  been  translated  and  annotated
by  Professor  H.  Zimmer  in  his  Altindisches  Leben,  and  several  by
Dr,  John  Muir  in  Original  Sanskrit  Texts.

The  hymn  is  a rifaccimento  or  another  recension  of  the  preceding,

5 Apvd : according  to  Sayana,  a female  deity  who  presides  over
nm;  according  to  Mahidhara,  sickness  or  fear.  Apparently  Apva  is  a
personification  of  colic  or  dysentery,  likely  to  attack  soldiers  in  the
field.  And  depart:  or,  pass  us  by,  do  not  attack  us.  The  stanza  is
taken,  with  slight  variations,  from  Rigveda  X.  103.  12.


83


MTMN  Z.)  THE  ATHAB  FA-  VEDA.

Go  meet  them,  flame  within  their  hearts  and  burn  them.

Smite  thou  the  foes  with  darkness  and  amazement.
6 That  army  of  our  enemies,  0 Maruts,  that  comes
against  us  with  its  might,  contending —

Meet  ye  and  strike  it  with  unwelcome  darkness  so
that  not  one  of  them  may  know  another.

HYMN  III.

Loudly  he  roared.  Here  let  him  labour  deftly.

Spread,  Agni,  over  spacious  earth  and  heaven.

Let  Maruts  who  possess  all  treasures  yoke  thee.
Bring  him  who  reverently  paid  oblations.

2 Though  he  be  far  away,  let  the  red  horses  bring

Indra,  bring  the  sage  to  us  and  friendship,

Since  with  Sautrimani  Gods  for  him  o’erpower
G&yatri,  Brihati,  and  hymn  of  praises.

3 King  Varuna  call  thee  hither  from  the  waters ! From

hills  and  mountains  Soma  call  thee  hither !


The  hymn  is  a charm  for  the  restoration  of  an  expelled  King.

1 He  roared:  the  crackling  and  roaring  of  Agni  the  Sacrificial  Fire,
is  a good  omen  for  the  success  of  the  ceremony.  Bring  him:  addressed
to  Agni : remember  the  pious  prince  and  bring  him  back  from  exile.

2 The  red  horses : the  dames  of  Agni;  armhasas  here  being  an
appellative.  Indra:  the  King;  Indra  being  the  type  of  regal  power.
Sautrdmani : a special  ceremony  sacred  to  Indra  as  Sutr&nan,  the
Crood  Protector.  Gods : priests;  cf.  Bigveda  X.  122.  7.  Gdyatri : a
verse  or  hymn  in  the  Gayatri  metre,  consisting  of  three  octosyllabic
pMas.  Brihati:  a verse  or  hymn  in  the  Brihati  metre,  consisting  of
thirty-six  ' syllables  (84*8  + 12  + 8)  in  four  padas.^  The  priests  by
performing  the  Sautramani  ceremony  for  the  restoration  of  the  banished
King  overpower  the  hymns  and  prayers  of  those  who  favour  the
enemy  who  expelled  him  and  would  keep  him  in  exile.

3 From  the  waters : Varuna,  the  Encompasser,  representing  at  first
the  all-embracing  heaven  that  broods  over  the  celestial  ocean  of  air,
being  especially  connected  in  later  times  with  the  terrestrial  ocean  and
the  waters  of  the  earth  and  regarded  as  their  presiding  deity:  see
Muir,  Original  Sanskrit  Texts,  V.  pp.  74—76.  From  hills  and  mount -

on  which  the  Soma  plant,  as  yet  unidentified,  is  said  to  have
grown:  see  Hymns  of  the  Bigveda,  L 2.  1,  note.


4 THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  III.

Let  Indra  call  thee  hither  to  these  people.  Fly
hither  to  these  people  as  a falcon.

4 May  the  hawk  bring  the  man  who  must  be  summoned,

from  far  away,  in  alien  land,  an  exile.

May  both  the  Asvins  make  thy  pathway  easy.  Come,
and  unite  yourselves  with  him,  ye  kinsmen.

5 Let  thine  opponents  call  thee  back.  Thy  friends

have  chosen  thee  again.

Indra  and  Agni,  all  the  Gods  have  kept  thy  home
amid  the  tribe.

6 He  who  disputes  our  calling  thee,  be  he  a stranger

or  akin,

Drive  him,  O Indra,  far  away,  and  do  thou  bring
this  man  to  us.

HYMN  IV.

To  thee  hath  come  the  kingship  with  its  splendour  :

On!  shine  as  lord,  sole  ruler  of  the  people.

King!  let  all  regions  of  the  heavens  invite  thee.  Here
let  men  wait  on  thee  and  bow  before  thee.

2 The  tribesmen  shall  elect  thee  for  the  kingship,  these
five  celestial  regions  shall  elect  thee.

Rest  on  the  height  and  top  of  kingly  power : thence
as  a mighty  man  award  us  treasures.


§ Thy  friends  have  chosen  thee  again:  other  passages  also  in  the
Aiharva-veda  show  that  the  kingship  was  sometimes  elective  : see  the
fqUowing  hymn,  stanza  2,  and  Y.  19.  15,  and  VI,  87,  88.  Of.  alsd
Bigveda  X.  173.  1.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Eigveda,  III.  p.  441.


The  hymn  is  a benediction  at  the  election  of  a King.

1 On : I omit  udihi,  rise  up,  which  mars  the  metre.

T Ftye  celestial  regions : the  four  'quarters  :of  the : ‘heavepk  y ith:  tli^
addition  of  the  zenith  or  the  nadir;  the  more  usual  number  K four  or


HYMN  4.1


THE  A THA  R YA-  TEE  A.


8 Kinsmen,  inviting  thee,  shall  go  to  meet  thee,  with
thee  go  Agni  as  an  active  herald.

Let  women  and  their  sons  be  friendly-minded.  Thou,
mighty  one,  shalt  see  abundant  tribute.

4 First  shall  the  Asvins,  Varuna  and  Mitra,  the  Uni-

versal Gods,  and  Maruts  call  thee.

Then  turn  thy  mind  to  giving  gifts  of  treasure,
thence,  mighty  one,  distribute  wealth  among  us.

5 Speed  to  us  hither  from  the  farthest  distanc®.

Propitious  unto  thee  be  Earth  and  Heaven.

Even  so  hath  Varuna  this  King  asserted,  he  wh®
himself  hath  called  thee  : come  thou  hither.

6 Pass  to  the  tribes  of  men  O Indra,  Indra.  Thou

with  the  Varunas  hast  been  found  accordant.

To  his  own  place  this  one  hath  called  thee,  saying,
Let  him  adore  the  Gods  and  guide  the  clansmen.

7 The  Bounteous  Paths  in  sundry  forms  and  places,

all  in  accord,  have  given  thee  room  and  comfort.
Let  all  of  these  in  concert  call  thee  hither.  Live
thy  tenth  decade  here,  a strong  kind  ruler.

6 Indra  : the  newly-elected  king.  The  Varunas : apparently  mean-
ing the  Gods ; according  to  Weber  ‘ the  electors,’  from  vri,  to  choose.
This  one : the  old  king  whom  the  newly-elected  prince  has  succeeded ;
or,  possibly,  as  Zimmer  suggests,  Agni,  present  as  the  Sacrificial  Fire,
may  be  intended.

7 The  Bounteous  Paths  ; ways  to  riches,  personified  as  tbe  deities
of  plenty  and  prosperity:  cf.  Rigveda  V.  51.  14.  Live:  vasa , as
suggested  in  Whitney’s  Index  Yerborum,  should  be  read  instead  of
vasa.  Thy  tenth  decade  : the  last  stage  of  thy  full  natural  life  which
should  extend  to  a hundred  years.  The  people  in  Germany  have  a
similar  division  of  human  life  into  ten  decades,  from  childhood  up  to
* Grace  with  God  :*  see  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  XVII.  p.  193.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Zimmer,  Aitindisehes  Leben,
p.  164,  and  Der  Bigveda,  III.  p.  252*


wmm


1 1


'1
! I’  :


86


THE  HYMNS  OF


[BOOK  III


hymn  v.

This  Parna- Amulet  hath  come,  strong  and  destroy-
ing with  its  strength  my  rivals.

The  power  of  the  Gods,  the  plants’  sweet  essence,
may  it  incite  me  ceaselessly  with  vigour.

2 0 Panja- Amulet,  in  me  set  firmly  might  and  opulence.
Within  the  compass  of  my  rule  may  I be  rooted  and
supreme.  :

8 That  dear  mysterious  Amulet  which  Gods  have  set
within  the  tree,

May  the  Gods  grant  to  me  to  wear  together  with
extended  life.

4 As  Indra’s  gift,  by  Varuija  instructed,  Parna  hath

come,  the  mighty  strength  of  Soma :

This  would  I,  brightly  shining,  love  and  cherish  for
long  life  lasting  through  a hundred  autumns.

5 The  Parija-Charm  hath  come  to  me  for  great  securi-

ty from  ill,

That  I may  be  exalted,  yea,  above  the  wealth  of
Aryaman.  O-pv

The  hymn  is  addressed  by  a newly-elected  King  to  an  Amulet  which
is  to  strengthen  his  position  and  confirm  his  authority.

1 This  Parna- Amulet : Parna  (meaning  originally  ‘feather/  ‘feather-
like  leaf  ’),  in  later  times  generally  called  PaMsa,  is  the  Butea  Frondosa,
a beautiful  sacred  tree  with  large  leaves  and  fine  red  flowers.  The
great  ladle  with  which  clarified  butter  is  poured  into  the  fire,  and
other  sacrificial  utensils,  are  made  of  its  wood  to  which,  in  the  shape  of
amulets,  also  the  greatest  efficacy  was  ascribed.  Professor  Weber
observes  that  parna , feather,  is  etymologically  identical  with  the  Ger-
man Farn,  English  fern  ; cf.  the  Greek  t triple^  the  feathery  plant,  fern.
Fern-seed  was  supposed  to  have  the  power  of  rendering  one  who  earned
it  invisible,  and  the  plant  was  said  to  be  of  celestial  origin,  and  able
to  secure  the  fulfilment  of  every  wash;  see  Simrock,  Handbueh  der
Deutschen  Mythologie,  p.  498.  The  metre  of  the  first  line  is  irregular*
the  first  pada  being  octosyllabic  and  the  second  hendecasy liable,

8 That  dear  mysterious  Amulet ; meaning  the  magi  ;al  virtue  posses-
sed by  the  charm  rather  than  the  charm  itself,  the  wearing  of  which
was  in  the  speaker's  own  power.


SIMM  6,]

6 Sagacious  builders  of  the  ear,  clever  and  skilful  arti-

sans,—

Make  all  the  men  on  every  side,  Panja,  obedient  to
my  will.

7 The  kings  and  makers  of  the  kings,  troop-leaders,

masters  of  the  horse, —

Make  all  the  men  on  every  side,  Panja,  obedient  to
my  will.

■8 Thou,  Pania,  art  my  body’s  guard,  man  kin  by  birth
to  me  a man.

With  splendour  of  the  circling  year  I bind  thee  on
me,  Amulet  I

v HYMN  VL

Masculine  springs  from  masculine,  Asvattha  grows
from  Khadira.  ; . ' ! ■' : ,

May  It  destroy  mine  enemies,  who  hate  me  and
whom  I detest.


TEE  A THAR  FA-VEBA,


5 Hath  come  to  me:  or,  literally,  hath  mounted  me,  that  is,  probably,
been  fastened  round  my  neck.

6 Builders  of  the  car : the  rathaMrah , wheelwright,  carpenter,
chariot-maker,  was  held  in  high  honour  in  the  village  community ; and
as  the  builder  of  his  war-chariots  was  on  terms  of  friendly  intimacy
with  the  king.  He  was  moreover  regarded  as  the  representative  of
the  Ribhus,  those  ancient  artificers  whose  wondrous  skill  obtained  for
them  a place  among  the  Gods : see  Rig  veda  I.  20.

7 Makers  of  the  kings : the  influential  nobles  who  set  the  king  on  his
throne.  Masters  of  the  horse  : stitah;  charioteers.  In  Vedic  times  these
were  royal  officers  of  considerable  importance,  and  in  the  Epic  period
they  were  also  the  heralds  of  the  king.

8 Parna  : Weber  takes  the  word  as  nominative  : — * Thou  art  my
body’s  feathered  guard;’  treats  it  as  trisyllabic,  and  omits  viro,  man,
as  a gloss.  Man : manly,  heroic,  on  account  of  the  magic  power  which
thou  possessest,  and  so  akin  to  me.  With  splendour  : by  binding  thee
on,  I secure  to  myself  all  the  splendour  of  the  year.

The  hymn  is  addressed  to  an  Amulet  of  Asvattha  wood  which  is  to
secure  the  defeat  and  destruction  of  the  wearer’s  enemies,

I Asvattha  ( asvastka , standing-place  for  horses)  is  the  Ficus  Religiosa,
the  Pippal,  Peepal,  or  sacred  fig-tree.  It  is  venerated  by  Hindus,,  and
according  to  Atharva-veda  T.  4.  3 the  Gods  sit  under  its  shade  in  the


8 THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  III

2 Crush  down  my  foes,  Asvattha ! Rend,  0 Burster,

those  who  storm  and  rage,

With  Indra,  slayer  of  the  fiends,  with  Mitra  and
with  Vanina.

3 As  thou  hast  rent  and  torn  apart,  Asvattha!  in  the

mighty  sea,

So  rend  asunder  all  those  men  who  hate  me  and
whom  I detest.

4 Thou  who  like  some  victorious  bull  displayest  thy

surpassing  might, —

With  thee,  with  thee,  Asvattha!  we  would  overcome
our  enemies.

5 Nirriti  bind  them  with  the  bonds  of  Death  which

never  may  be  loosed,

Mine  enemies,  Asvattha ! those  who  hate  me  and
whom  I detest.

6 As  thou,  Asvattha !,  mountesfc  on  the  trees  and  over-

throwest  "them.

So  do  thou  break  my  foeman’s  head  asunder  and
o’erpower  him.

7 Let  them  drift  downward  like  a boat  torn  from  the

rope  that  fastened  it.


third  heaven.  Its  seeds  germinate  in  the  hollows  of  other  trees,  and
the  new  growth,  which  eventually  destroys  its  foster-mother,  is
endowed  with  magical  powers  somewhat  similar  to  those  ascribed  to  the
parasite  mistletoe  in  Europe,  especially  when  it  grows  on  trees,  -such
as  the  oak  and  the  hazel,  which  do  not  usually  bear  it.  The  Asvattha
generally  grows  on  the  Sami  (Prosopis  Spicigera) ; in  the  present
instance  it  springs  from  the  Khadira  (Acacia  Catechu),  and,  what  is
still  more  surprising,  masculine  springs  from,  masculine,  that  is,  the
names  of  both  trees  are  words  of  that  gender.

2 0 Burster : vaibddha  ; so  called  because  it  splits  asunder  tha
’wood,  masonry,  or  stone  in  whose  crevices  its  seed  has  germinated  and
• grown.  With  Indra  : in  alliance  with  him.

s,  .■3‘AS;ihou  hast  rent:  the  Khadira  tree.  In  themighty  sea:  in  tha
topmost  branches  that  waved  in  the  ocean  of  air.

5 Nirriti ; the  Goddess  of  Misfortune,  Death,  and  Destruction.


HYMN  i:


TBB  A TEAR  V A-  YEN  A.


There  is  no  turning  back  for  those  whom  He  who
Cleaves  hath  driven  away.

8 With  mental  power  I drive  them  forth,  drive  them
with  intellect  and  charm.

We  banish  and  expel  them  with  the  branch  of  an
Asvattha  tree.

HYMN  VII.

The  fleet-foot  Roebuck  wears  upon  his  head  a heal-
ing remedy.

Innate  disease  he  drives  away  to  all  directions  with
his  horn.

2 With  his  four  feet  the  vigorous  Buck  hath  bounded

in  pursuit  of  thee.

Unbind  the  chronic  sickness,  Horn  ! deeply  inwoven
in  the  heart.

3 That  which  shines  yonder,  like  a roof  resting  on  four

walls,  down  on  us, —

Therewith  from  out  thy  body  we  drive  all  the
chronic  malady.

7 He  who  Cleaves  : Asvattha,  the  Burster : see  stanza  2.

8 With  the  branch : which  was  probably  waved  during  the  recita-
tion of  the  charm  : see  Weber.

The  hymn  is  a charm  to  drive  away  hereditary  disease.

1 A healing  remedy:  the  horn,  to  be  used  merely  as  a charm
without  reference  to  the  medicinal  virtue  of  the  ammonia  which  it
contains.  Oil  of  Hartshorn,  Volatile  Salt  of  Hartshorn,  and  Spirits  of
Hartshorn,  procured  by  distillation  from  the  antlers  of  the  stag
(Cervus  Eiaphus),  were  formerly  much  used  in  European  medicine.
Innate  disease : kshetriyd  ; perhaps  pulmonary  consumption  : see  II.  8.  L

2 The  vigorous  Buck : the  horn  representing  the  animal  has
attacked  thee,  that  is,  the  patient’s  disease.

3 Like  a roof:  1 The  animal  is  compared  to  a house,  its  legs  are  the
posts,  and  its  horns  the  roof 3 : — Grill.  According  to  Weber,  the  cere-
mony is  performed  at  night  in  the  open  air,  and  the  roof  is  one  of
the  constellations.- ■


so  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  111

4 May  those  twin  stars,  auspicious,  named  Releasers,

up  in  yonder  sky,

Loose  of  the  chronic  malady  the  uppermost  and
lowest  bond.

5 Water,  indeed,  hath  power  to  heal,  Water  drives

malady  away.

May  water — for  it  healeth  all — free  thee  from  perma-
nent disease.

6 Hath  some  prepared  decoction  brought  inveterate

disease  on  thee,

I know  the  balm  that  healeth  it : we  drive  the  malady
away.

7 What  time  the  starlight  disappears,  what  time  the

gleams  of  Dawn  depart,

May  evil  fortune  pass  from  us,  the  chronic  sickness
disappear.

HYMN  VIII.

LET'Mitra  come,  arranging,  with  the  Seasons,  lulling
the  Earth  to  rest  with  gleams  of  splendour.

And  so  let  Agni,  Varuna,  and  V&yu  make  our  domi-
nion tranquil  and  exalted.

2 May  Indra,  Tvashtar  hear  my  word  with  favour,
may  Dh&tar,  R&ti,  Savitar  accept  it.

1 call  the  Goddess  Aditi,  heroes’  mother,  that  I may
be  the  centre  of  my  kinsmen.

4 The  stanza  is  almost  identical  with  II.  8.  1.

5 It  seems  that  the  patient — probably  a child — was  bathed  at  this
stage  of  the  ceremony.  Dr.  Grill  refers  to  Bigveda  X.  137.  6 s ‘The
waters  have  a balm  for  all : let  them  make  medicine  for  thee/

7 The  ceremony  lasts  till  sunrise,  when  the  patient  is  supposed  to
be  cured.  The  Irymn  is  one  of  Dr,  Grill’s  Hundert  Liede >p.  \ 105.

y;\^;;;;:Shb,:liymn  is  a charm  to  secure  the  vo^  ■

kinsmen.

•*  the'  Friend,  whose  &ypy^is-:e^

case.  Lulling  the  Earth : in  his  character  of  the  Bun  and  God  of  Day.

2 Bhdtar : the  Ordainer : see  II.  36.  2.  Edti;  Favour,  a divine
Grace  personified : see  I.  26,  2.  Heroes'  mother ; mother  of  the  Adityas.


HTMF  9.]  THE  ATHAB7A-7EDA.  91

3 Soma  I call,  and  Savitar  with  homage,  and  all  the

Adityas  in  the  time  of  contest.

Long  may  this  fire  send  forth  its  splendour,  lighted
by  kinsmen  uttering  no  word  against  me.

4 Here,  verily,  may  you  stay : go  ye  no  farther.  The

strong  Herd,  Lord  of  Increase,  drive  you  hither !

To  please  this  man  may  all  the  Gods  together  come
unto  you  and  be  as  dames  who  love  him.

5 We  bend  together  all  your  minds,  your  vows  and

purposes  we  bend.

We  bend  together  you  who  stand  apart  with  hopes
opposed  to  ours.

6 I with  my  spirit  seize  and  hold  your  spirits.  Follow

with  thought  and  wish  my  thoughts  and  wishes.

I make  your  hearts  the  thralls  of  my  dominion : on  me
attendant  come  the  way  I guide  you.

HYMN  IX.

Heaven  is  the  sire,  the  mother  Earth,  of  ELarsapha
and  Visapha.

As  ye  have  brought  them  hither,  Gods ! so  do  ye
move  them  hence  away.

3 This  fire:  the  sacrificial  fire  in  which  oblations  to  the  invoked
deities  are  offered.

4 May  you  stay  : the  kinsmen  are  addressed.  The  strong  Herd :
Pushan,  the  guardian  of  flocks  and  herds,  and  giver  of  general
prosperity.  This  man:  the  householder  who  recites  the  preceding
and  the  following  stanzas,  this  stanza  being  spoken  by  one  of  the
officiating  priests.

The  hymn  is  a charm  against  Yishkandha  or  Rheumatism : see  1. 16.  3.

1 Karsapha  and  Visapha,  the  latter  meaning  hoofiess,  or  having
distorted  hoofs,  are  said  in  the  S.  P.  Dictionary  to  denote  two  imps  or
goblins.  According  to  Weber  the  words  are  appellatives,  the  former
from  hris,  to  emaciate,  and  the  latter  from  vis,  to  penetrate,  with  a
suffix  apha  — abha,  used  in  the  formation  of  the  names  of  some  animals
(as  vrishabha , salabha , etc.).  The  translation  would  then  be:  Heaven
is  the  sire,  the  mother  Earth,  of  that  which  thins  and  penetrates  (L  e.
Yishkandha  or  Rheumatism).  As  ye  have  brought  it  hither,  Gods !
so  do  ye  move  it  hence  away.


[BOOK  UL

2 The  bands  hold  fast  without  a knot : this  is  the  way

that  Manu  used.

I make  Yishkandha  impotent  as  one  emasculateth
bulls.

3 Then  to  a tawny-coloured  string  the  wise  and  skil-

ful bind  a brush.

Let  bandages  make  impotent  the  strong  and  active
Kabava.

4 Ye  who  move  active  in  your  strength  like  Gods  with

Asuras’  magic  powers, —

Even  as  the  monkey  scorns  the  dogs,  Bandages ! scorn
the  KL&bava.

5 Yea,  I will  chide  thee  to  thy  shame,  I will  disgrace

the  K&bava.

Under  our  imprecations  ye,  like  rapid  cars,  shall  pass
away.

6 One  and  one  hundred  over  earth  are  the  Vishkandhas

spread  abroad.

Before  these  have  they  fetched  thee  forth,  Vish-
kandha-quelling  Amulet.


TUB  HYMNS  OF


2 The  bands : bandages  round  the  affected  parts.  Manu : the
thinker,  Man  par  excellence,  the  progenitor  of  mankind.

3 A brush : with  which  to  produce  count-er-irritation.  I adopt
Weber’s  interpretation  of  khrigala,  which  in  Rigveda  II.  39.  4 means
apparently  a staff  or  crutch, , which  would  not  suit  this  passage.
K&bava  : one  of  the  demons  of  the  disease.

4 Instead  of  y£n&  a word  of  one  syllable  is  required  by  the  metro  :
y£  should  probably  be  read.  Asuras’ : demons’.  The  monkey ; when
be  is  safe  up  a tree.

6 One  and  one  hundred : a number  frequently  used  of  ill-omened
or  unpleasant  objects ; the  hundred  and  one  ways  of  dying  have  been
mentioned  before:  see  I.  30.  3.  In  AV.  V.  30.  16,  Ta'kman  or  Fever
is  said  to  have  a hundred  racking  pains.  So  in  Bohemia  the  popular
. belief  reckoned  up  a hundred  varieties  of  that  disease : see  Grohinanti,
Indisehe  Studien,  IX.  p.  390.  Before  these : in  front  of,  and  to  oppose,
all  these  rheumatic  pains.


■ .-w:  , 1*  > 1 ."'^v ■:rYN:.:..vy.'L:i


HYMN  10.]


THE  ATHARVA-YEDA.


HYMN  X.

The  First  hath  dawned.  With  Yama  may  it  be  a
cow  to  pour  forth  milk.

May  she  be  rich  in  milk  and  stream  for  us  through
many  a coming  year.

2 May  she  whom  Gods  accept  with  joy,  Night  who

approacheth  as  a cow,

She  who  is  Consort  of  the  Year,  bring  us  abundant
happiness.

3 Thou  whom  with  reverence  we  approach,  0 Night,

as  model  of  the  Year,

Vouchsafe  us  children  long  to  live,  bless  us  with
increase  of  our  wealth.

4 This  same  is  she  whose  light  first  dawned  upon  us :

she  moves  established  in  the  midst  of  others.

Great  powers  and  glories  are  contained  within  her:
a first-born  bride,  she  conquers  and  bears  children.

5 Loud  was  the  wooden  press-gear’s  ring  and  rattle,

as  it  made  annual  oblation  ready.

First  Ashtakd ! may  we  be  lords  of  riches,  with
goodly  children  and  good  men  about  us.

The  hymn  is  a prayer  for  a happy  New  Year.

1 The  First : an  early  day  of  the  New  Year,  regarded  as  indicative
of  the  fortune  of  the  whole  twelvemonth.  With  Yama  : may  this  im-
portant day  not  only  illumine  us,  but  send  its  light  even  to  the  realm
of  Yama,  the  King  of  the  Departed.  A cow  / the  emblem  of  plenty  ;
giver  of  abundant  blessings.  The  second  line  is  taken  from  Rigveda
IY.  57.  7.

2 Gods  : probably  meaning  priests.  Fight : preceding  the  important
day.  Consort  of  the  Year  : see  stanza  8.

3 Model  of  the  Year  : see  stanza  1,  note.

5 Wooden  press-gear  : literally,  wooden  press-stones;  meaning  both
the  stones  and  the  wooden  implements,  the  pestle  and  mortar,  used
. for  extracting  the  Soma  juice  and  grinding  or  pounding  the  grain  re-
quired for  the  sacrifice.  First  AshtaM : an  Ash  taka  is  the  eighth  day
after  full  moon.  The  first  that  occurs  in  the  New  Year  is  the  occasion
which  this  hymn  celebrates.


■ : : v.  . - v:  : ^

■N  r

V.  O :v  : ■


fii  , THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  III.

6 The  shrine  of  Ha  flows  with  oil  and  fatness : accept,

O J&tavedas,  our  oblations.

Tame  animals  of  varied  form  and  colour — may  all
the  seven  abide  with  me  contented.

7 Come  thou  to  nourish  me  and  make  me  prosper.

Night ! may  the  favour  of  the  Gods  attend  us.
Filled  full,  0 Ladle,  fly  thou  forth.  Completely  filled
fly  back  again.

Serving  at  every  sacrifice  bring  to  us  food  and
energy.

8 This  Year  hath  come  to  us,  thy  lord  and  consort,

O Ek&shtaM.

Vouchsafe  us  children  long  to  live,  bless  us  with
increase  of  our  wealth.

9 The  Seasons,  and  the  Seasons’  Lords  I worship,

annual  parts  and  groups,

Half-years,  Years,  Months,  I offer  to  the  Lord  of  all
existing  things.

6 The  shrine  of  lid  : the  place  of  worship  and  libation  personified
as  a Goddess.  Jdtavedas : wise  Agni.  Tame  animals  : representatives
of  these  are  brought  that  they  may  share  the  benediction.  All  the
seven : ox,  horse,  sheep,  goat,  mule,  ass,  and  man ; five  of  which  are
sacrificial  animals;  see  II.  34.  1.

7 Ladle:  with  which  the  clarified  butter  is  poured  into  the  sacrifi-
cial fire.  Completely  filled : bringing  abundant  blessings  to  us  in  re-
turn for  our  oblation  to  the  Gods.

8 Ekdshtakd : or  First  Ashtaka ; the  eighth  day  after  the  first  full
moon  of  the  New  Year,  regarded,  on  account  of  its  superior  importance,
as  the  Consort  of  the  personified  Year.

9 The  Seasons : the  hot  weather,  the  rains,  and  the  cold  weather.
The'JSeasond  Lords : the  genii  who  preside  over  those  divisions  of  the  year.
In  Rigveda  X.  2.  1 Agni  is  invoked  as  Lord  of  Seasons  par  excellence*
The  Lord  of  all  existing  things  : any  one  of  the  great  Gods  who  at  the
time  of  worship  occupies  the  foremost  place  in  the  thoughts  of  the  wor-
shipper.


btme  li.]


TEE  ATEABVA-YEDA.


10  I offer  to  the  Seasons,  to  their  several  groups,

to  Months,  to  Years,

Dh&tar,  Vidh&tar,  Fortune,  to  the  Lord  of  all  exist-
ing things.

11  With  fatness  and  libation  we  sacrifice  and  adore  the

Gods.

Wealthy  in  kine  may  we  retire  to  rest  us  in  our
modest  homes.

12  Ek&shtaM,  burning  with  zealous  fervour,  brought

forth  her  babe  the  great  and  glorious  Indra.

With  him  the  Gods  subdued  their  adversaries  :
the  Lord  of  Might  became  the  Dasyus’  slayer.

13  Indra’s  and  Soma’s  mother!  thou  art  daughter  of

Prajapati.

Satisfy  thou  our  hearts’  desires.  Gladly  accept  our
sacrifice.

HYMN  XI.

For  life  I set  thee  free  by  this  oblation  both  from
unmarked  decline  and  from  consumption  :

10  Dhdtar : the  Ordainer.  Vidhdtar : the  Disposer.  Fortune:  Pros-
perity, personified.

12  With  religious  fervour : tapasd;  according  to  Weber,  * seized  with
the  pangs  of  childbirth.'  Their  adversaries ; the  Asuras  or  demons,
called  also  Dasyus,  who  fought  against  them.

13  Indra’s  and  Soma’s  mother:  the  laudation  of  the  personified
Ek&shtaka  or  First  Ashtaka  here  reaches  its  climax.  ‘In  stanzas  3
and  8 she  was  called  the  Consort  of  the  Year,  and  here  she  becomes
the  mother  of  two  of  the  chief  Gods  and  daughter  of  the  Father  of  the
Gods:' — Weber.  Frajdpati  : Lord  of  Creatures,  Creator;  a Supreme
Being  above  the  Vedrc  Gods  and  sometimes  regarded  as  their  father.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Eigveda,  III.  p.  201.

The  hymn  is  a charm  for  the  recovery  of  a sick  person  in  extreme
danger  of  death.  Stanzas  1 — 4 are  taken,  with  variations  in  3 and  4,
from  Eigveda  X.  161.  1 — 4,  and  appear  again,  without  these  variations
in  AW  XX.  96.  6—9.

I Unmarked  decline : some  insidious  disease  differing  from  Baja-
yakshma  or  pulmonary  consumption.  Perhaps,  as  Prof.  Zimmer  sug-
gests, hypertrophy  may  be  the  complaint  intended  : see  Altindisches
Leben,  p.  377.  The  grasping  demon : grdhi , from  grab , to  seize,  a
female  demon  who  seizes  men  and  kills  them,  . ■


1 ,v


II:


mil


Ill


■

Lit'

v(  I

■ill


* i


, ?•

, i ^


■


m THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  HI.

Or  if  the  grasping  demon  have  possessed  him,  free
him  from  her,  0 Indra,  thou  and  Agni !

2 Be  his  days  ended,  be  he  now  departed,  be  he

brought  very  near  to  death  already,

Out  of  Destruction’s  lap  again  I bring  him,  save  him
for  life  to  last  a hundred  autumns.

3 With  sacrifice  hundred-eyed  and  hundred-powered,

bringing  a hundred  lives,  have  I restored  him,
That  Indra  through  the  autumns  may  conduct  him
safe  to  the  farther  shore  of  all  misfortune.

4 Live,  waxing  in  thy  strength,  a hundred  autumns,

live  through  a hundred  springs,  a hundred  winters !
Indra,  Agni,  Savitar,  Brihaspati  give  thee  a hundred!
With  hundred-lived  oblation  have  I saved  him.

5 Breath,  Respiration,  come  to  him,  as  two  car-oxen

to  their  stall !

Let  all  the  other  deaths,  whereof  men  count  a hun-
dred, pass  away.

-6  Breath,  Respiration,  stay  ye  here.  Go  ye  not  hence
away  from  him.

Bring,  so  that  he  may  reach  old  age,,  body  and  mem-
bers back  again.

7 I give  thee  over  to  old  age,  make  thee  the  subject  of
old  age.  A||15

Let  kindly  old  age  lead  thee  on.  Let  all  the  other
' deaths,  whereof  men  count  a hundred,  pass  away !


2 A hunched  autumns : autumns  representing  here,  as  Prof,  Weber
' remarks,  a middle  stage  between  the  ancient  computation  by  winters

(himds)  and  the  later  reckoning  by  rainy-seasons  (varshani),  correspond-
ing to  the  southward  advance  of  the  Aryan  settlements.

3 Hundred-poivered : the  Rigveda  has  ‘ hundred-autixzaned.1

4 Give  thee  a hundred : autumns  or  years  being  understood.  The
third  pada  is  extravagantly  hypermetrical,  and  cannot  be  reduced  to
the  Trishtup  standard,

h The  other  deaths ; besides  natural  death  through  old  age.


HYMHU.]


THE  ATHARVA-VEDA.


8 Old  age  hath  girt  thee  with  its  bonds  even  as  they
bind  a bull  with  rope.

The  death  that  held  thee  at  thy  birth  bound  with
a firmly-knotted  noose,

Therefrom,  with  both  the  hands  of  Truth,  Brihas-
pati  hath  loosened  thee.

HYMN  XII.

Here,  even  here  I fix  my  firm-set  dwelling : flowing
with  fatness  may  it  stand  in  safety.

May  we  approach  thee,  House ! with  all  our  people,
unharmed  and  goodly  men,  and  dwell  within  thee.

2 Even  here,  O House,  stand  thou  on  firm  foundation,

wealthy  in  horses,  rich  in  kine  and  gladness.
"Wealthy  in  nourishment,  in  milk  and  fatness,  rise  up
for  great  felicity  and  fortune.

3 A spacious  store,  O House,  art  thou,  full  of  clean

corn  and  lofty-roofed.

Let  the  young  calf  and  little  boy  approach  thee,  and
mileh-kine  streaming  homeward  in  the  evening.

4 This  House  may  Savitar  and  V&yu  stablish,  Brihas-

pati  who  knows  the  way,  and  Indra.

May  the  moist  Maruts  sprinkle  it  -with  fatness,  and
may  King  Bhaga  make  our  corn-land  fruitful.

8 At  thy  birth  : Prof.  Weber  is  of  opinion  that  the  occasion  of  the
hymn  is  the  difficult  birth  of  a child  who  comes  into  the  world  in  an
apparently  dying  state.

The  hymn  is  a benediction  on  the  completion  of  a new  house.

1 Dwelling  : saldm.  Fatness : ghritdm : clarified  butter,  the  em-
blem. of  abundance  and  prosperity:  see  I.  33.  4,  note.

3 Full  of  clean  corn : pUUdhdnyd  being  apparently  a corrupt  reading

for  piiiadhdnyd.  ' r'g or;;  ;r  :

4 Sprinkle  it  with  fatness  : that  is,  with  fertilizing  rain.  Make  our
corn-land  fruitful ; ni  lerisUm  tanotu  ; according  to  Weber  4 make  our
. ploughing" fruitful, J that  is,  let  our  ploughing  go  deep  enough  to  pro-
duce a good  harvest ; but  deep  ploughing  is  not  in  favour  with  Indian
cultivators  even  now,  and  cannot  have  been  necessary  or  desirable


98


THE  HYMNS  OF


[BOOK  HI,


5 Queen  of  the  Home ! thou,  sheltering,  kindly  God-

dess, waet  stablished  by  the  Gods  in  the  beginning.
Clad  in  thy  robe  of  grass  be  friendly-minded,  and
give  us  wealth  with  goodly  men  about  us.

6 Thou  Pole,  in  ordered  fashion  mount  the  pillar.

Strong,  shining  forth  afar,  keep  off  our  foernen.
House!  let  not  those  who  dwell  within  thee  suffer.
Live  we,  with  all  our  men,  a hundred  autumns.

7 To  this  the  tender  boy  hath  come,  to  this  the  calf

with  all  the  beasts,

To  this  the  crock  of  foaming  drink,  hither  with  jars
of  curdled  milk.

8 Bring  hitherward,  O dame,  the  well-filled  pitcher,

the  stream  of  molten  butter  blent  with  nectar.
Bedew  these  drinkers  with  a draught  of  Amrit.
May  all  our  hopes’  fulfilment  guard  this  dwelling.


in  Yedic  times  and  comparatively  virgin  soil.  The  general  meaning  is
clear,  but  the  exact  sense  in  -which  nl  tanotu  is  used  is  not  certain.
According  to  the  St.  P.  Dictionary  the  compound  verb  means,  to  pene-
trate, to  cause  to  take  root.

5 Queen  of  the  Home : the  female  deity  who  presides  over  house-
building, and  who  was  originally  commissioned  by  the  Gods  to  ins-
truct men  in  this  art.  Robe  of  grass  : with  reference  to  the  thatch  on
the  roof.

6 Pole : literally,  bamboo;  the  cross-beam.  The  pillar:  probably
made  of  some  more  durable  wood.  Shining  forth : perhaps,  because
it  was  smeared  with  ointment  to  preserve  it  from  the  weather  and
the  attacks  of  white-ants.

7 With  all  ike  beasts : jdgatd  sahd ; jdgat  here  being  used,  as  it
frequently  is,  in  the  special  sense  of  domestic  animals  : see  L 3L  4.

Foaming  drink:  $>arisr4tas  ; a beverage  prepared  from  herbs,  a sort
of  beer,

SO  dame:  the  mistress  of  the  newly  built  house.  Molten  butter
blent  with  nectar:  probably,  as  Weber  observes,  only  euphemistic
names  for  good  liquor  of  some  sort.  All  present  seem  to  have  been
provided  with  refreshment  as  at  an  English  house-warming.  Amrit :
nectar,  or  any  sweet  drink.  Hopes J fulfilment : isht&ptirtdm  ; mean-
ing the  reward  of  our  pious  works.


y"-''  - ■ : . % Lr<‘'Ao  -f  i,  Y!  >\


HYMN  13.]  THE  ATHAEVA-YEDA.  99

9 Water  that  kills  Consumption,  free  from  all  Consump-
tion, here  I bring.

With  Agni,  the  immortal  one,  I enter  and  possess
the  house.

HYMN  XIII.

As  ye,  when  Ahi  had  been  slain,  flowed  forth  toge-
ther with  a roar,

So  are  ye  called  the  Roaring  Ones : this,  O ye
"Rivers,  is  your  name.

2 As  driven  forth  by  Varuna  ye  swiftly  urged  your

rolling  waves,

There  Indra  reached  you  as  you  flowed:  hence  ye
are  still  the  Water -floods.

3 Indra  restrained  you  with  his  might.  Goddesses,

as  ye  glided  on.

Not  in  accordance  with  his  will : hence  have  ye  got
the  name  of  Streams.


9 The  householder  now  enters  and  takes  formal  possession  of  the
house  with  water  and  fire,  the  two  most  important  necessaries  of
human  life.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  p.  463;
by  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  p.  150,  and  by  Grill,  with  annotations,
Huxidert  Lieder,  pp.  59,  108.

A hymn  on  the  occasion  of  cutting  a channel  for  irrigation  or  to
avert  a .flood.

1 The  deified  Rivers  are  addressed.  Ahi:  the  Dragon,  Yritra,  the
chief  demon  who  keeps  the  waters  of  heaven  imprisoned  in  the  dark
cloud.  The  Boaring  Ones  ; nadyas  ; a common  name  of  rivers,  deriv-
ed from  the  root  nodi  to  roar,  which  appears  in  dnadatd,  y®  roared,
offline  L

2 Driven  forth  by  Varuna  : so,  fl  Varuna  dug  the  channels  for  thy
forward  course,  0 Sindhu. ? Rigveda  X.  75.  2.  Reached : dpnot.  Water-
floods : dpas  ; a play  upon  the  two  words  which  have  no  etymological
connexion.

3 Restrained:  dvivarata , from  vrL  Streams:  literally,  water,  vary
another  play  upon  two  words  of  unconnected  origin.


100  TEE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  11!;

4 One  only  God  set  foot  on  you  flowing  according

to  your  will.

The  mighty  ones  breathed  upward  fast : hence  Water
is  the  name  they  bear.

5 Water  is  good,  water  indeed  is  fatness.  Agni  and

Soma,  truly,  both  bring  water.

May  the  strong  rain  of  those  who  scatter  sweetness
come  helpful  unto  me  with  breath  and  vigour.

6 Then  verily,  I see,  yea,  also  hear  them  : their  sound

approaches  me,  their  voice  comes  hither.

Even  then  I think  I am  enjoying  Amrit,  what  time
I drink  my  fill  of  you,  gold  coloured!

7 Here,  0 ye  Waters,  is  your  heart.  Here  is  your

calf,  ye  holy  ones.

Flow  here,  just  here,  O mighty  Streams,  whither
I now  am  leading  you.


4 One  only  God:  Indra.  The  mighty  ones:  the  Elvers.  Breathed
upward;  tiddnishus;  oppressed  by  the  weight  of  the  God.  Water:
udahdm  ; a play  on  the  4d  in  this  word  and  4ddnishus.

5 Water  is  good  : like  Pindar’s  * Apicrrov  julv  vSwp.  Fatness:  in
the  shape  of  fertilizing  rain.  Those  who  scatter  sweetness  : the  Waters.

6 Gold-coloured : gleaming  like  gold  in  the  sunshine.

7 This  stanza  contains  the  practical  part  of  the  ceremony,  the  pre-
ceding stanzas  being  merely  introductory.  ‘The  canal  is  already  cut,
and  the  water  of  the  river  is  to  be  admitted.  Here  is  your  heart :
this  new  channel  which  the  river  is  to  fill  is  now  to  be  dear  to  you.
Your  calf : your  darling ; loved  as  the  calf  is  by  its  mother ; a com-
mon term  of  endearment.  According  to  the  directions  given  in  the
Kausika-Sutra  XL.  3 — 6,  with  the  recitation  of  pada  1 some  gold  is
deposited;  with  pada  2 a frog  with  ru,shdike  streaks,  with  a blue  and  a
red  thread  tied  round  it,  is  placed  upon  the  gold;  with  pada  3 the  frog
is  covered  with  an  aquatic  plant  called  Avaka,  Sevala  or  Sevala
(Vallisneria  Octandra).  The  symbolical  meaning  of  each  act  in  this
procedure  is,  Prof.  Weber  remarks,  sufficiently  intelligible.  All  that
will  be  found  on  the  spot  in  future  is  figuratively  and  proleptically
represented— -the  gold-gleaming  water  with  its  rushes,  its  frogs,  and
its  lotus-flowers  [Sevalas,  or  aquatic  plants].


HYMN  14.]


THE  ATHARYA-VEDA.


HYMN  XIV.

A Pen  wherein  to  dwell  at  ease,  abundance  and  pros-
perity, .

Whate’er  is  called  the  birth  of  day,  all  this  do  we

bestow  on  you.

2 May  Aryaman  pour  gifts  on  you,  and  Pftshan,  and

Brihaspati,

And'  Indra,  winner  of  the  prize.  Make  ye  my  riches
grow  with  me.

3 Moving  together,  free  from  fear,  with  plenteous

droppings  in  this  pen,

Bearing  sweet  milk  like  Soma-juice,  come  hither  free
from  all  disease.

4 Come  hither,  to  this  place,  0 Cows : here  thrive  as

though  ye  were  manured.  . # s-

Even  here  increase  and  multiply  : let  us  be  friendly,
you  and  me.

5 Auspicious  be  this  stall  to  you.  Prosper  like  culti-

vated rice.

Even  here  increase  and  multiply.  Myself  do  we
bestow  on  you.

The  hymn  is  a benediction  of  the  Cattle-pen  in  which  the  cows  are
kept  at  night.

1 The  birth  of  day : horn  or  produced  on  an  auspicious  day ; all
good  fortune.

2 Pour  gifts  on  you:  ‘keep  you  together,’  according  to  Weber.
Of  the  prize  : booty  in  battle.

4 As  though  ye  were  manured : according  to  Weber,  ‘ wie  der  mist,
like  the  cow-dung,  which  increases  rapidly  if  it  be  not  regularly  re-
moved.

■ 5 Like  cultivated  rice  : sdrisdkd  is  difficult  and  perhaps  corrupt.
S Ari  may  be  another  form  of  sdli,  rice,  or,  as  Weber  takes  it,  the  bird
Sari  or  more  commonly  Sarika,  the  Maina  (Graeula  Religiosa),  whose
droppings  are  in  accordance  with  its  voracious  habits.  Myself  do  we
bestow  on  you : that  is,  I devote  myself  to  your  service.  Or,  with
Weber,  We  bind  you  closely  to  myself ; that  is,  by  a bond  of  reciprocal
benefits : I feed  you  well  and  you  are  to  enrich  my  land,


102


THE  HYMNS  OF


[BOOK  111.


6 Follow  me,  Cows,  as  master  of  the  cattle.  Here  may
this  Cow-pen  make  you  grow  and  prosper.

Still  while  we  live  may  we  approach  you  living,  ever
increasing  with  the  growth  of  riches.

HYMN  XV.

I  stir  and  animate  the  merchant  Indra ; may  he
approach  and  be  our  guide  and  leader.

Chasing  ill-will,  wild  beast,  and  highway  robber,
may  he  who  hath  the  power  give  me  riches.

2 The  many  paths  which  Gods  are  wont  to  travel,  the

paths  which  go  between  the  earth  and  heaven,
May  they  rejoice  with  me  in  milk  and  fatness  that  I
may  make  rich  profit  by  my  purchase.

3 With  fuel,  Agni ! and  with  butter,  longing,  mine

offering  I present  for  strength  and  conquest;

With  prayer,  so  far  as  I have  strength,  adoring—-
this  holy  hymn  to  gain  a hundred  treasures.


6 Approach : the  word  upa-sadema  implying  careful  attention  to  the
wants  of  the  cows.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Bigveda,  III.  p.  469*
and,  with  annotations,  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  64,  112*

The  hymn  is  a merchant’s  prayer  to  Indra,  Agni,  and  other  Gods  for
success  in  his  business.

1 The  merchant  Indra : who  deals  and  traffics  with  his  worshippers,
requiring. and  receiving  prayer  and.  oblation  in  exchange  for  .theblepr
lags  which  he  sends, ' Guide  cm  Header ; the  merchant  ^
point  of  starting  on  a journey  for  business  purposes.  Ill-will ; the  ab-
stract for  the'  concrete ; every  enemy.  Wild  beast  and  highway  robber ;

' W’eloer^  e wild' beast  'that  infests  the ; v/;

, % Map  ifwy  rejoice  with  me : I read  me  _

;gests,;';;:;:,The  meaning  .is,  May  the  Gods  who  come  from  heaven  to  our
sacrifices  be  pleased  with  the  oblations

-y'r5'"The:stanm.is  taken  from  Bigveda  ■

governed  by,  I present,  in  the  first  line.


MfMN  15.J-  TBM  ATBAE VA-YEDA.  ***

4 Pardon  this  stubbornness  of  ours,  0 Agni,  the  dis-

tant pathway  which  our  feet  have  trodden.
Propitious  unto  us  be  sale  and  barter,  may  inter-
change of  merchandise  enrich  me.

Accept,  ye  twain,  accordant,  this  libation ! Prosper-
ous be  our  ventures  and  incomings.

5 The  wealth  wherewith  I carry  on  my  traffic,  seeking,

ye  Gods ! wealth  with  the  wealth  I offer,

May  this  grow  more  for  me,  not  less;  O Agni,
through  sacrifice  chase  those  who  hinder  profit  1

6 The  wealth  wherewith  I carry  on  my  traffic,  seeking,

ye  Gods  ! wealth  with  the  wealth  I offer,  ^
Herein  may  Indra,  Savitar,  and  Soma,  Praj&pati,
and  Agni  give  me  splendour.

7 With  reverence  we  sing  thy  praise,  0 Hotar-priest

Vaisvanara.

Over  our  children  keep  thou  watch,  over  our  bodies,
. kine,  and  lives.

8 Still  to  thee  ever  will  we  bring  oblation,  as  to  a

stabled  horse,  O Jiftavedas.

Joying  in  food  and  in  the  growth  of  riches  may  we
thy  servants,  Agni,  never  suffer.


4 The  first  line  of  this  stanza,  borrowed  from  Rigveda  I.  31.  16,  is
superfluous  and  out  of  place  here.  Dr.  Grill  and  Prof.  Zimmer  leave
it  untranslated.  Ye  twain:  Indra  who  is  addressed  in  stanza  1,  and.
Agni  addressed  in  3.  Incomings:  iltthitam  ; explained  by  the  Commen-
tator as  vyavahdrdd  utpannam  l&bhayulctam  dhanam  : see  Grill’s  note.

5 Through  sacrifice  : in  return  for  the  sacrifice  which  I offer.  Those :
the  text  has  devan , Gods,  which  mars  the  metre  and  is  probably  a gloss.

6 Splendour : rtichim  ; or,  favour ; dignity  and  importance.  Accord-
ing to  Weber  the  word  here  means  * understanding.’

7 Vaisvdnara:  dear  to  all  men;  an  appellative  of  Agni.  This
Anushtup  stanza  appears  to  be  an  interpolation.

8 As  to  a stabled  horse : as  we  carry  fodder  to  a horse  that  is  not
turned  out  to  graze.  Jdtavedas : wise  Agni.  Servants : prdthesds  ;
or,  neighbours.


[BOOK  III,

HYMN-  XVI.

Agni  at  dawn,  and  Indra  we  invoke  at  dawn,  and
Varuija  and  Mitra,  and  the  Asvins  twain  :

Bhaga  at  dawn,  Phshan  and  Brahmanaspati,  Soma
at  dawn,  and  Rudra  we  invoke  at  dawn.

2 We  call  strong  Bhaga,  conqueror  in  the  morning,

the  son  of  Aditi,  the  great  Disposer,  ,

Whom  each  who  deems  himself  poor,  strongandmightyy
a king,  addresses  thus,  Grant  thou  my  portion  !

3 Bhaga,  our  guide,  Bhaga  whose  gifts  are  faithful,

favour  this  hymn  and  give  us  wealth,  O Bhaga.
Bhaga,  augment  our  store  of  kine  and  horses.
Bhaga,  may  we  be  rich  in  men  and  heroes.


THE  HYMNS  OF


According  to  the  Kaasika-Sutra  this  hymn  is  the  beginning,  of  £ the
ritual  of  a travelling  merchant  when  about  to  start  on  a trading  expe-
dition.7 He  has  also  to  recite  the  hymns  III.  26  and  27,  YL  1,  3,  4,
5,  6,  7,  59,  93,  107,  128,  and  IV.  28,  with  which'  certain  oblations
are  to  be  made.  See  Bloomfield,  American  Journal  of  Philology,  VII.
p.  487.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  215,
by  Grill,  with  annotations,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  69,  113,  and  by
Zi miner,  Altindisehes  Leben,  p.  258.


The  hymn  is  the  morning  prayer  of  the  great  Eishi  Yasishtha,  taken,
with  slight  variations,  from  Rigveda  VII.  41.

. 1 At  dawn : prayer  and  praise  in  the  early  morning  being  most,
acceptable  to  the  Gods.

2 Bhaga  : see  I.  26.  2.  Conqueror  in  the  morning  : in  his  character  of
-the  early  Sun  overpowering  Ushas  or  Dawn  who  in  Rigveda  I.  123.  5 is
called  his  sister.  Disposer;  or,  Supporter.  Grant  thou  my  portion;
or,  may  I receive  my  share.  Weber  takes  bhakshi  as  the  first  person
singular,  Atmanepacla,  and  the  Commentaries  make  it  second  person
singular,  Parasmaipada,  of  the  aorist  in  each  case.  ' The  meaning  is
that  everyone,  poor  and  weak,  strong  and  mighty,  the  king  himself,
looks  to  Bhaga  as  the  giver  of  his  allotted  fortune.


Si  illiilillliiii  lisllis  SIS


HYMN  16.1


THE  AT  EAR  VA-  VEDA.


4 So  may  felicity  be  ours  at  present,  and  when  the

Sun  advances,  and  at  noontide ;

And  may  we  still,  O Bounteous  One,  at  sunset  be
happy  in  the  Gods’  protecting  favour.

5 May  Bhaga  verily  be  bliss-bestower,  and  through

him,  Gods  ! may  happiness  attend  us.

As  such  with  all  my  might  I call  and  call  thee : as
such  be  thou  our  leader  here,  O Bhaga.

6 To  this  our  sacrifice  may  the  Dawns  incline  them,

and  come  to  the  pure  place  like  Dadhikr&van.

As  strong  steeds  draw  a chariot  may  they  bring  me
hitherward  Bhaga  who  discovers  treasure.

7 May  the  kind  Mornings  dawn  on  us  for  ever  with

wealth  of  kine,  of  horses,  and  of  heroes,
Streaming  with  all  abundance,  pouring  fatness.
Do  ye  preserve  us  evermore  with  blessings !


‘ 'I


5 May  Bhaga  verily  he  bliss-bestower  : bhdgavdn  ; originally,  possess-
ing a happy  lot,  fortunate,  blessed,  adorable ; now  generally  meaning
Almighty  God.

6 The  Dawns  : the  lights  of  morning,  personified.  The  pure  place :
the  chamber  of  sacrifice.  Dadhikrdvan : or  Dadhikras,  or,  in  the
crude  form,  Dadhikra,  is  the  name  of  a mythical  being  often  men-
tioned in  the  Rigveda,  and  the  deified  subject  of  Hymns  IV.  38,  39,

40,  and  VII.  44.  He  is  described  as  a kind  of  divine  horse,  and
probably,  like  Tarksh}ra,  is  a personification  of  the  morning  Sun.
Sometimes  he  is  considered  as  a creation  of  Heaven  and  Earth,  some-
times  of  Mitra  and  Yaruna,  and  is  invoked  in  the  morning  together
with  Agni,  Ushas,  and  the  Asvins.  According  to  Professor  Pischel
(Yedische  Studien,  I.  124),  Dadhikra  van  may  have  been  originally  a
most  distinguished  race-horse,  glorified  and  deified  by  the  exaggerated
praises  of  the  bards  of  a people  who  were  passionately  devoted  to
chariot-racing.  Like  Dadhikrdvan  may  mean,  with  the  swiftness
of  the  famous  mythical  horse,  the  type  and  model  of  racers.  See
Hymns  of  the  Rigveda,  General  Index  II.

7 Do  ye  preserve  m evermore  with  blessings,;  this  address  to  the  Gods  <
in  general  is  the  conclusion  of  many  Rigveda  hymns  attributed  to
the  ■Vasishthas.


106


THE  HYMNS  OF


[BOOH  III.


HYMN  XVI L

Wise  and  devoted  to  the  Gods  the  skilful  men  bind
plough-ropes  fast,

And  lay  the  yokes  on  either  side.

2 Lay  on  the  yokes  and  fasten  well  the  traces  : formed

is  the  furrow,  sow  the  seed  within  it.

Vir&j  vouchsafe  us  hearing  fraught  with  plenty!
Let  the  ripe  grain  come  near  and  near  the  sickle.

3 The  keen-shared  plough  that  bringeth  bliss,  furnished

with  traces  and  with  stilts,

Shear  out  for  me  a cow,  a sheep,  a rapid  drawer  of
the  car,  a blooming  woman,  plump  and  strong!

4 May  Indra  press  the  furrow  clown,  may  Pushau

guard  and  cherish  her.

May  she,  well  stored  with  milk,  yield  milk  for  us
through  each  succeeding  year.

The  hymn  is  a farmer’s  song  and  prayer  to  speed  the  plough.

1 The  stanza  is  taken  from  Rigveda  X.  101.  4.  Devoted : mmnayati
can  hardly  be  the  right  reading.  The  Rigveda  has  sumnaya,  an
instrumental  case  used  adverbially,  devoutly ; or,  through  devotion,
through  fixing  their  hopes  of  happiness  upon  the  Gods.  The  skilful
men : the  ploughmen  who  understand  their  work.

2 Formed  is  the  farrow : of.  Hymns  Ancient  and  Modern,  383:  4 We
plough  the  fields,  and  scatter  The  good  seed  on  the  land,  But  it  is  fed
and  watered  By  God’s  Almighty  Hand/

The  stanza  is  taken,  with  variations,  from  Rigveda  X.  101.  3.
Virdj : meaning,  perhaps,  as  Prof.  Ludwig  suggests,  Yak  the  Goddess
of  Speech.  The  Rigveda  reads  girdcha , 4 Through  song/  or  s by  means
of  our  hymn;’  and  Weber  here  also  translates  a conjectural  reading
gimmcha , £ of  our  prayers  or  songs/

3 Furnished  with  traces  and  with  stilts  : somasdisaru  ; resolved  into
sa-uman  (cf.  uta,  woven  or  spun,  and  umd,  flax),  sa-tsaru,  with  traces,
with  a handle. — Weber.

4 Indra  as  the  God  who  sends  the  necessary  rain  is  prayed  to  bless
th6  work  by  cutting  the  furrow,  and  Pushan  as  the  God  of  Increase
is  prayed  to  protect  it.  tier  : the  furrow  personified.  Milk  : mean-
ing plentiful  nourishment.  The ' stanza  is  takein;  from  Rigveda.  TY.  <87,.
7 : its  second  hemistich,  which  is  a solemn  formula,  occurs  also  in
Atharva-veda  III.  10.  L


HYMN  17.}  THE  ATHAB7A-7EBA.  107

5 Happily  let  the  shares  turn  up  the  ploughland,  the

ploughers  happily  follow  the  oxen.

Pleased  with  our  sacrifice,  Suna  and  Sira!  make  the
plants  bring  this  man  abundant  produce.

6 Happily  work  our  steers  and  men ! May  the  plough

furrow  happily.

Happily  be  the  traces  bound.  Happily  ply  the
driving-goad.

7 Suna  and  Sira,  welcome  ye  this  laud,  and  with  the

milk  that  ye  have  made  in  heaven
Bedew  ye  both  this  earth  of  ours.

8 Auspicious  Sit&,  come  thou  near : we  venerate  and

worship  thee

That  thou  mayst  bless  and  prosper  us  and  bring  us
fruits  abundantly.


108  TEE  HYMFS  OF  [BOOK  TIL

9 Loved  by  the  Visvedevas  and  the  Maruts,  let  SH4
be  bedewed  with  oil  and  honey.

Turn  thou  to  us  with  wealth  of  milk,  O Slt&,  in
vigorous  strength  and  pouring  streams  of  fatness.

HYMN  XVIII.

From  out  the  earth  I dig  this  Plant,  an  herb  of  most
effectual  power,

Wherewith  one  quells  the  rival  wife  and  gains  the
husband  for  one’s  self.

2 Auspicious,  with  expanded  leaves,  sent  by  the  Gods,

victorious  Plant,

■ Drive  thou  the  rival  wife  away,  and;  make  my
husband  only  mine.

3 Indeed  he  hath  not  named  her  name : thou  with  this

husband  dalliest  not.

Par  into  distance  most  remote  we  drive  the  rival
wife  away.

4 Stronger  am  I,  O stronger  one,  yea,  mightier  than

the  mightier ;

Beneath  me  be  my  rival  wife,  down,  lower  than  the
lowest  dames !


9 With  oil  and  honey : some  clarified  butter  with  honey  or  meath
was,  it  seems,  poured  into  the  first  furrow  to  secure  a good  crop.

The  hymn,  which  is  taken,  with  variations,  from  Eigveda  X.  145,  is
a spell  to  rid  a jealous  wife  of  a more  favoured  rival.

1 This  Plant:  said  to  be  the  P&tS,,  probably  identical  with  PIUM

(Clypea  Hernandifolia),  a climbing  plant  possessing  various  medicinal
properties,  and  employed  for  magical  purposes  : see  Atharva-veda  II.
27.4.  ■ ' . ' ' ,

2 Expanded:  or  < erected,’  as  Weber  translates  it.

3 Ee : the  husband.  The  Eigveda  has : ‘ Her  very  name  I utter
not : slic  takes  no  pleasure  with  this  man.’


HYMN  19.]


THE  ATHARYA-YEDA.


5 I am  the  conqueror,  and  thou,  thou  also  art  victori-


As  victory  attends  us  both  we  will  subdue  my  fellow-
wife.

6 I’ve  girt  thee  with  the  conquering  Plant,  beneath
thee  laid  the  mightiest  one.

As  a cow  hastens  to  her  calf,  so  let  thy  spirit  speed
to  me,  hasten  like  water  on  its  way.


HYMN  XIX.

Quickened  is  this  my  priestly  rank,  quickened  is
manly  strength  and  force,

Quickened  be  changeless  power,  whereof  I am  the
conquering  President !

2 I quicken  these  men’s  princely  sway,  the  might,  the

manly  strength  and  force ;

I rend  away  the  foemen’s  arms  with  this  presented
t sacrifice.

3 Down  fall  the  men,  low  let  them  lie,  who  fight

against  our  mighty  prince.

I ruin  foemen  with  my  spell,  and  raise  my  friends  to
high  estate.


6 According  to  Darila,  with  the  recitation  of  the  first  hemistich
leaves  of  the  magical  plant  are  to  be  placed  in  the  bed  of  the  rival,
and  not  in  that  of  the  husband  as  suggested  by  Sayana  in  his  Commen-
tary on  the  Rigveda  where  the  reading  is  somewhat  different.  The
second  hemistich  is  addressed  to  the  husband.


The  hymn  is  a glorification  of  the  office  of  Purohita  or  Household
Priest  and  Counsellor  of  a King.

1 Quickened  : or,  sharpened,  that  is,  intensified.  Manly  strength ; of
the  people,  who  constitute  the  army.  Tower : or,  sway;  the  rule  of  the
second,  princely  or  military  class.

8 Mighty  prince : the  rich,  powerful,  and  liberal  householder  who
institutes  and  pays  the  expenses  of  sacrifice  : ‘ our  mighty  sacrifice! : J
Weber ; 4 our  Suri,  the  Maghavan  ; J Ludwig,


.‘.fi:.,  *K‘*


111


1 1


’ i ■


i


*


vB:

{Mb


i i ,


I

I I


I

# 'ii


TBH  HYMNS  OF


4 Keener  than  is  the  axe’s  edge,  keener  than  Agni’s

self  are  they,

Keener  than  Indra’s  bolt  are  they  whose  Priest  and
President  am  I.

5 The  weapons  of  these  men  I whet  and  sharpen,  with

valiant  heroes  I increase  their  kingdom.

Victorious  be  their  power  and  ever  ageless!  May  all
the  Gods  promote  their  thoughts  and  wishes.

6 Let  their  fierce  powers,  O Maghavan,  be  heightened,

and  upward  go  the  shout  of  conquering  heroes.
Apart  and  clear,  let  shout  and  roar  and  shriek  and
lamentation  rise !

Let  the  Gods  led  by  Indra,  let  the  Marats  with  our
army  go.

7 Advance  and  be  victorious,  men ! Exceeding  mighty

be  your  arms !

Smite  with  sharp-pointed  arrows  those  whose  bows
are  weak.  With  your  strong  arms  and  weapons
smite  the  feeble  foe.

8 Loosed  from  the  bowstring  fly  away,  thou  Arrow,

sharpened  by  our  prayer.

Assail  the  foemen,  vanquish  them,  conquer  each
bravest  man  of  theirs,  and  let  not  one  of  them  escape.

4 .Priest  and  President ; purdhitah  ; literally,  one  set  before  (praeses),
appointed  to  special  functions.

6 0 Maghavan : mighty  or  bounteous  Indra.  Clear:  hetumdntdh ;

according  to  Weber  and  Ludwig  4 with  banners/  Shout  and  roar : of
the  victors.  Shriek  and  lamentation : of  the  vanquished  : cf.  Homer,
Iliad,  IY.  450 : tvOa  $au  olpojyri  re  ml  ireXep  avSputv

oXXvvtojv  re  teal  oWvjaivwv  : 4 And  then  did  tumult  rise  Up  to  her
height ; then  conquerors’  boasts  mixed  with  the  conquered’®  cries  : ’ — •
Chapman.  The  Purohita’s  glorification  of  his  high  office  has  becomd
a war-song  with  which  he  inspirits  the  men  who  are  going  forth  to
battle  under  his  auspicious  benediction.

7 The  first  hemistich  is  composed  of  padas  1 and  3-  of  Rig- veda
X.  103.  13.

■ 8 Our  prayer  ; or,  spell.  The  stanza  is  taken,  with  variations,  from
Blg.veda  VI.  75.  16.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  IIL  p.  234,
and  by  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  I.  p.  283.


HYMN  20.]


THE  A Til  A 11 FA-  VEDA.


in


HYMN  XX.

This  is  thine  ordered  place  of  birth  whence  sprung  to
life  thou  shinest  forth.

Knowing  this,  Agni,  mount  on  high  and  cause  our
ip  riches  to  increase.

I 2 Turn  hither,  Agni,  speak  to  us,  come  to  us  with  a

s friendly  mind.

f Enrich  us,  Sovran  of  the  Tribes ! Thou  art  the  giver

f of  our  wealth.

3 Let  Aryaman  vouchsafe  us  wealth,  and  Bhaga,  and,

Brihaspati,

The  Goddesses  grant  wealth  to  us,  Shnrit&,  Goddess,
give  me  wealth !

4 We  call  King  Soma  to  our  aid,  and  Agni  with  our

songs  and  hymns,

The  Adityas,  Vishnu,  Shrya,  and  the  Brahman-priest
.«  Brihaspati.

5 Do  thou,  0 Agni,  with  thy  fires  strengthen  our

prayer  and  sacrifice.

Incite  thou  us,  O God,  to  give,  and  send  us  riches  to
bestow.


The  hymn  is  a prayer  for  riches  and  general  prosperity.

1 This : the  centre  of  the  northern  altar  or  fire-receptacle  in  the
sacrificial  court  or  hall.  The  first  hemistich  is  taken  from  Kigveda
III.  29.  10,  the  second  hemistieh  of  which  is : ‘ Knowing  this,  Agni,
seat  thyself,  and  prosper  thou  the  songs  we  sing.’

2 Sovran  of  the  Tribes  : visdmpate;  or,  Lord  of  the  people  ; King
of  the  Aryan  settlers.  Stanzas  2 — 7 are  taken,  with  variations,  from
Kigveda  X.  141.  1,  2,  3,  6,  4,  5.

3 The  Goddesses  : the  consorts  of  the  Gods,  Indrani,  Agnayi,  Varu-
nant,  and  other  Gnas  or  celestial  Dames.  SAnritd : Pleasantness,
Gladness,  or  Glory,  personified  as  a Goddess.

4 The  A-ditya : Varuna,  the  Aditya  par  excellence,  primus  inter
pares.  The  Brahman-priest : Brihaspati,  Lord  of  Prayer,  is  the  Purohita
of  the  Gods  and  the  prototype  of  the  priestly  order.


THE  HYMNS  OF  {BOOK  III.

Both  Indra  here  and  Y&yu  we  invoke  with  an  aus-
picious call,

That  in  assembly  all  the  folk  may  be  benevolent  to
us,  and  be  inclined  to  give  us  gifts.

Urge  Aryaman  to  send  us  gifts,  and  Indra,  and
Brihaspati,

VHta,  Vishiju,  Sarasvati,  and  the  strong  courser
Savitar.

Now  have  we  reached  the  ordering  of  power,  and  all
these  worlds  of  life  are  held  within  it.

Let  him  who  knows  urge  e’en  the  churl  to  bounty.
Give  wealth  to  us  with  all  good  men  about  us.

May  heaven’s  five  spacious  regions  pour  their  milk
for  me  with  all  their  might.

May  I obtain  each  wish  and  hope  formed  by  my
spirit  and  my  heart.

May  speech  that  winneth  cows  be  mine.  With
splendour  mount  thou  over  me.

May  V&yu  hedge  me  round  about.  May  Pushan
make  me  prosperous.


6 In  assembly ; or,  when  they  meet  us ; that  is,  in  ordinary  inter-
course.

7 Sarasvati:  a female  divinity  of  the  upper  region,  guardian  of  the
waters,  and  bestower  of  fertility  ; identified  also  with  Yak  the  God-
dess of  Speech.

8 The  first  hemistich  appears  to  be  entirely  out  of  place  here.  J The
verse  in  the  Yaj us-ritual  belongs  to  the  so-named  v&japrasaviyani,-
which  form  the  kernel  of  the  Vajapeya-saerifice,  the  name  of  which,
in  opposition  to  the  explanation  given  in  the  Brahmana  itself,  appears
to  me  to  mean  Protection  of  Power  inasmuch  as  it  is  a ceremony  ap-
pointed for  the  samraj  [lord  paramount,  or  sovereign]/ — Weber.

9 Five  spacious  regions  ; the  four  quarters  of  the  heavens  with  the
zenith  or  the  nadir.  Milk  : blessings.

10  Cows : usually  presented  to  priests  by  princes  and  wealthy  insti-
tutors  of  sacrifice.  With  splendour : or,  with  power ; addressed  to  the
Sun,  the  hymn  being  recited  at  sunrise.


THE  ATHARYA-YEDA.


HYMN  XXL

All  Fires  that  are  in  water  and  in  Vritra,  all  those
that  man  and  stones  contain  within  them,

That  which  hath  entered  herbs  and  trees  and  bushes —
to  all  these  Fires  be  this  oblation  offered.

2 That  which  abides  in  Soma  and  in  cattle,  that  which

lies  deep  in  birds  and  sylvan  creatures,

That  which  hath  entered  quadrupeds  and  bipeds — to
all  these  Fires  be  this  oblation  offered.

3 The  Fire  that  rideth  by  the  side  of  Indra,  the  God

Vaisvanara,  yea,  all-consuming,

Whom,  as  the  victor,  I invoke  in  battles — to  all
these  Fires  be  this  oblation  offered.

4 The  all-devouring  God  whom  men  call  K&ma,

he  whom  they  call  the  Giver  and  Receiver,
Invincible,  pervading,  wise,  and  mighty— to  all  these
Fires  be  this  oblation  offered.

The  hymn,  in  honour  of  all  varieties  of  Fire,  is  especially  a charm  to
appease  Agni  in  his  most  dreaded  form,  and  to  quench  the  flames  of
the  funeral  pile.

1 In  water  and  in  Vritra : existing  in  the  form  of  lightning  in  the
waters  of  the  air  and  in  the  Dragon  or  great  dragonish  cloud  which,
personified  as  the  demon  of  drought,  withholds  the  seasonable  rain.
Man : contains  fire  in  the  shape  of  the  internal  heat  which  is  said  to
effect  the  digestion  of  his  food,  and  as  the  natural  vital  warmth  of  the
body.  Stones:  contain  fire  which  may  be  struck  out  in  sparks.  Herbs
and  trees  and  bushes : Agni  in  the  form  of  lightning  enters  all  plants
with  the  descending  rain.  The  phosphorescence  of  some  species  of
plants  may  also  be  referred  to.

2 In  Soma  : as  the  heating  element  of  the  exhilarating  beverage.
In  cattle : and  the  other  animals,  the  fire  is  the  natural  heat  of  their
bodies  which  maintains  their  strength,  swiftness,  ferocity  and  other
characteristic  qualities.

3 That  rideth  by  the  side  of  Indra:  the  destructive  fire  of  war.
Vaisvdn ara : Agni  as  God  of  all  Aryan  men,  peaceful  fire,  domestic
and  sacrificial.

4 Kdma : God  of  wish  and  desire  in  general,  including  love;  the
inspirer  and  fulfiller  of  the  wish.  See  III.  29.  7.  Here  he  is  identified
with  Agni.  See  Muir,  Original  Sanskrit  Texts,  V.  p.  403.


14  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  III .

5 To  thee,  strength-giver,  glorious,  rich  in  pleasant

strains,  whom  in  their  minds  the  thirteen  creatures
of  the  world,

And  the  five  sons  of  man  regard  as  Hotar-priest — *
to  all  these  Fires  be  this  oblation  offered.

6 To  him  who  feeds  on  ox  and  cow,  sage,  bearing

Soma  on  his  back,

To  all  Vaisvanara’s  followers — to  these  be  this  obla-
tion paid.

7 All  fiery  flames  that  follow  after  lightning,  flashing

o’er  earth,  through  firmament  and  heaven,

All  that  are  in  the  wind  and  skyey  regions— to  all
these  Fires  be  this  oblation  offered.

8 The  golden-handed  Savitar  and  Indra,  Brihaspati,

Varuna,  Mitra,  and  Agni,

The  Angirases  we  call,  the  Visve  Devas : let  them
appease  this  Agni,  Flesh-devourer.


5 Thirteen  creatures  of  the  world  : perhaps  all  creatures  exclusive  of
men,  thirteen  being  used  for  a large  indefinite  .number.  Five  sons  of
man  .-  the  eponymi  of  the  five  great  Aryan  tribes  and  their  descendants;
the  five  races,  tribes,  or  peoples  frequently  mentioned  in  the  Bigveda  ;
probably  the  confederation  of  the  Turvasas,  Yadus,  Anus,  Druhyus,
and  Purus.  See  Hymns  of  the  Bigveda,  General  Index  II.  under  Five
races.

6 Who  feeds  on  ox  and  cow : ukshahndya  vasdhndya : the  first
hemistich  is  taken,  with  variations,  from  Bigveda  VIII.  43.  11,  where
I have  translated  these  words  by  £ fed  like  ox  and  cow/  a possible
rendering  which  I do  not  now  approve.  Sacrifice  of  oxen  and  barren
cows  was  not  unusual  in  old  Vedic  times.  Bearing  Soma  on  Ms  back ;
sprinkled  with  libations  of  Soma  juice.  Vaisv&nara's  followers  : varie-
ties of  fire,  of  which  Vaisvanara  is  chief.

8 According  to  the  Kausika-Sutra,  with  the  recitation  of  this  stanza
the  funeral  fire  is  damped  with  holy  water  and  extinguished.  The
preceding  stanzas  are  merely  introductory  to  the  practical  part.


HYMN  22.]  THE  ATHAEVA-YEDA,  IIS

9 Flesh-eating  Agni  is  appeased,  appeased  is  he  who
hurteth  men.

Now  him  who  burneth  every  thing,  the  Flesh-con-
sumer, have  I stilled.

10  The  mountains  where  the  Soma  grows,  the  waters
lying  calm  and  still,

V&ta,  Parjanya,  Agni’s  self  have  made  the  Flesh-
consumer  rest.

HYMN  XXII.

Famed  be  the  Elephant’s  strength,  the  lofty  glory,
which  out  of  Aditi’s  body  took  existence  !

They  all  have  given  me  this  for  my  possession,  even
all  the  Gods  and  Aditi  accordant.

2 On  this  have  Mitra,  Varuria,  Indra,  and  Rudra  fixed

their  thought.

May  those  all-fostering  deities  anoint  and  balm  me
with  his  strength.

3 The  strength  wherewith  the  Elephant  was  dowered,

that  decks  a Xing  among  the  men,  in  waters,
Wherewith  the  Gods  at  first  attained  to  godhead,
O Agni,  even  with  that  strength  make  thou  me
vigorous  to-day.


10  Agni's  self:  the  fire  having'  done  its  work  and  almost  burnt  itself
out,  Vata  and  Parjanya,  or  wind  and  rain,  having  aided  its  extinction.

The  subject  of  the  hymn  is  the  taming  and  training  of  an  elephant
for  the  King  to  ride.

^ 1 Aditi' s body : Aditi,  who  appears  in  the  Kigveda  as  mother  of  the
Adityas,  is  in  later  times  called  Mother  of  the  Gods  and  Mother  of  the
World.  All  the  Gods : i Without  the  help  of  all  the  Gods  and  the  con-
sent of  Aditi  it  would  be  impossible  to  tame  so  powerful  an  animal.—
Weber.  The  King  is  the  speaker.

2 His  strength : the  might  of  the  elephant,  tamed  with  the  help-  of

the  Gods.  .

3 In  waters : when  he  is  sprinkled  with  the  water  of  consecration.
Attained  to  godhead : Agni  alone  was  originally  immortal,  and  the
other  Gods  obtained  immortality  through  him  or  through  Soma,  See
Bigveda.  V.  3. 4;  VI.  7,  4;  IX.  106.  8.


116  . TEE. HYMNS  OF  [{BOOK  III.

4 The  lofty  strength  which  sacrifice  brings,  J&tavedas !

unto  thee,

What  strength- the  Sun  possesses,  all  strength  of  the
royal  Elephant — such  strength  vouchsafe  to  me
the  pair  of  Asvins  lotus-garlanded  !

5 Far  as  the  heavens’  four  regions  spread,  far  as  the

eye’s  most  distant  ken,

So  wide,  so  vast  let  power  be  mine,  this  vigour  of
the  Elephant.

6 Now  hath  the  Elephant  become  chief  of  all  pleasant

beasts  to  ride.

With  his  high  fortune  and  his  strength  I grace  and
consecrate  myself.

HYMN  XXIII.

From  thee  we  banish  and  expel  the  cause  of  thy
sterility.

This  in  another  place  we  lay  apart  from  thee  and
far  removed.

2 As  arrow  to  the  quiver,  so  let  a male  embryo  enter
thee.

Then  from  thy  side  be  born  a babe,  a ten-month
child,  tby  hero  son.


5 Far  as  the  heavens \ four  regions  spread : let  the  possession  of  so
mighty  an  elephant  make  me  supreme  ruler  over  all  around  me  as  far
as  the  distant  horizon.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  461.

. - The  hymn  is  a charm  to  remove  sterility,  and  to  assure  the  birth  of
male  children.

2 is  arrow  to  the  quiver  „*  according  to  the  Kausika-Sutra  an  arrow
is  to  be  used  in  the  ceremony  which  the  hymn  is  to  accompany.

A ten-month  child : born  in  the  tenth  lunar  month ; cf,  Rigveda  V.
78.  8,9.  So  also:  * Matri  longa  decern  tuierunt  fastidia  menses.’—
Virgil,  Eclogue  IY.  61.  _


HYMN  24.]  THE  A TEA R VA- VEDA.  Ill

3 Bring  forth  a male,  bring  forth,  a son.  Another  male

shall  follow  him.

The  mother  shalt  thou  be  of  sons  born  and  hereafter
to  be  born.

4 With  that  auspicious  genial  flow  .wherewith  steers

propagate  their  kind,

Do  thou  obtain  thyself  a son  : be  thou  a fruitful
mother-cow.

5 I give  thee  power  to  bear  a child  : within  thee  pass

the  germ  of  life  !

Obtain  a son,  0 woman,  who  shall  be  a blessing  unto
thee.  Be  thou  a blessing  unto  him.

6 May  those  celestial  herbs  whose  sire  was  Heaven,

the  Earth  their  mother,  and  their  root  the  ocean,
May  those  celestial  healing  Plants  assist  thee  to
obtain  a son.

. HYMN  XXI Y.  ■

The  plants  of  earth  are  rich  in  milk,  and  rich  in  milk
is  this  my  word.

So  from  the  rich  in  milk  I bring  thousandfold  pro-
fit hitherward.

2 Him  who  is  rich  in  milk  I know,
he  made  our  corn.

The  God  whose  name  is  Gatherer,  him  we  invoke
who  dwelleth  in  his  house  who  sacrifices  not.


Abundant  hath


6 The  ocean : the  sea  of  air.  Celestial  herbs : See  Eigveda  X.  97.  4
son : ‘ Nowhere  in  the  Vedie  hymns  do  we  find  a wish  for  the  birth  of
a daughter.’ — Zimmer.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  her  Eigveda,  p.  477,  and
by  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  p.  319.


The  hymn  is  a song  of  Harvest-Home.

1 Milk : here  used  in  its  figurative  sense  of  beneficial  virtue  or
blessing.  Word : or,  hymn.

2 Him,  who  is  rich  in  milk:  that  is,  in  beneficial  power ; probably  a
good-natured  domestic  sprite,  of  the  class  ‘ called  with  us  hobgoblins  or


118  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  III

3 All  the  five  regions  of  the  heavens,  all  the  five  races

of  mankind, —

As  after  rain  the  stream  brings  drift,  let  them  bring
increase  hitherward.

4 Open  the  well  with  hundred  streams,  exhaustless,

with  a thousand  streams,

So  cause  this  corn  of  ours  to  be  exhaustless,  with  a
thousand  streams.

5 0 Hundred-handed,  gather  up.  O Thousand-hand-

ed, pour  thou  forth.

Bring  hither  increase  of  the  corn  prepared  and  yet
to  be  prepared.

6 Three  sheaves  are  the  Gandharvas’  claim,  the  lady  of

the  house  hath  four.

We  touch  thee  with  the  sheaf  that  is  the  most
abundant  of  them  all.


Robin  Goodfellows,  that  would  in  those  superstitious  times  grind  com
for  a mess  of  milk,  cut  wood,  or  do  any  manner  of  drudgery  work/
(Burton’s  Anatomy  of  Melancholy,  Part  I.  Sec.  2).  Atharva-veda  II.  8.
5.  The  God:  the  superhuman  being,  the  goblin.  So  Du  Cange  explains
the  Low  Latin  gobelinus  by  a ‘daemon  qui  vulgo  Faunus’  who  was  re-
garded as  the  protecting  deity  of  agriculture.  Who  divelhtk : who  is
at  present  in  the  house  of  a godless  illiberal  churl  whom  he  will  be
glad  to  leave.

3 Five  regions  : the  four  quarters  of  the  heavens  with  the  zenith  or
the  nadir.  Five  races  of  mankind : the  five,  that  is,  all,  the  great
Aryan  tribes.  See  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  pp.  120,121.  Ac-
cording to  Prof.  Roth  and  Prof.  Weber,  the  expression  comprehends
all  human  races,  the  Aryans  in  the  centre  and  around  them  all  the
nations  under  the  four  quarters  of  heaven.

4 The  well  : figuratively  or  symbolically ; the  source  of  plenty.

• 5 Hundred-handed  . . , Thousand-handed : two  drudging

goblins  are  addressed.

6 Three  sheaves  of  corn  are  to  be  left  on  the  ground  to  remunerate
the  goblins  who  are  here  euphemistically  called  Gandharvas,  a higher
and  more  spiritual  class  of  celestial  beings  ; four  are  the  special  per-
quisite of  the  mistress ; and  the  best  sheaf  of  all  is  offered  as  a sample
to  the  owner  of  the  field.  I adopt  Weber’s  translation  of  m&ira,
sheaves,  the  word  literally  signifying  measures.  Of  course  the  grain
would  not  be  measured  at  the  beginning  of  harvest.


119


EYME  25.]  TEE  ATRAR  FA-  VEDA.

7 Adding  and  Gathering  are  thy  two  attendants,
O Praj&pati.

May  they  bring  hither  increase,  wealth  abundant,
inexhaustible.

HYMN  XXV.

Let  the  Impeller  goad  thee  on.  Rest  not  in'  peace
upon  thy  bed.

Terrible  is  the  shaft  of  Love : therewith  I pierce
thee  to  the  heart.

2 That  arrow  winged  with  longing  thought,  its  stem

Desire,  its  neck  Resolve,

Let  K4ma,  having  truly  aimed,  shoot  forth  and
pierce  thee  in  the  heart.

3 The  shaft  of  K&ma,  pointed  well,  that  withers  and

consumes  the  spleen,

With  hasty  feathers,  all  aglow,  therewith  I pierce
thee  to  the'  heart.


7 Adding  and  Gathering:  UpoM  and  SamuM,  names  given  to
the  two  industrious  goblins.  Attendants  : or  treasurers ; keepers  and
distributors  of  thy  riches  in  the  shape  of  corn.  0 Prajdpati : the
Protector  of  Life  being  closely  connected  with  the  harvest  which  sup-
ports it.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  p.  268.


The  hymn  is  a charm  to  win  a maiden’s  love.

■ 1 Impeller ; or,  Disturber ; Kama,  the  God  of  Love,  who  is  also

called,  among  other  names,  Madana,  the  Maddener,  and  Manmatha,
Agitator  of  the  Mind.  Weber  and  Zimmer  translate  uttudds  by
4 Unruhe/  ‘ unrest/  * agitation/

2 The  spleen:  regarded,  with  the  liver,  as  the  part  of  the  body  from
which  the  blood  flows,,  and  the  seat  of  the  passions  and  affections.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Muir,  Original  Sanskrit  Texts,
Y.  407 ; by  Ludwig,  Der  Eigveda,  III.  p.  516  ; by  Zimmer,  Altindis-
ehes  Leben,  p.  307 ; and,  with  annotations/ by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,
pp.  53,115.


120  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  lit

4 Pierced  through  with  fiercely-burning  heat,  steal  to

rue  with  thy  parching  lips,

Gentle  and  humble,  all  mine  own,  devoted,  with
sweet  words  of  love.

5 Away  from  mother  and  from  sire  I drive  thee  hither

with  a whip,

That  thou  mayst  be  at  my  command  and  yield  to
every  wish  of  mine.

6 Mitra  and  Yaruna,  expel  all  thought  and  purpose

from  her  heart.

Deprive  her  of  her  own  free-will  and  make  her
subject  unto  me.

HYMN  XXVI.

Ye  Gods  who  dwell  within  this  eastward  region,
entitled  Weapns,  Agni  forms  your  arrows.  *

Be  kind  and  gracious  unto  us  and  bless  us.  To  you
be  reverence,  to  you  be  welcome  !

2 Ye  Gods  who  dwell  within  this  southward  region,

entitled  Eager,  K&ma  forms  your  arrows.

Be  kind,  etc.

3 Ye  Gods  who  dwell  within  this  westward  region,

whose  name  is  Radiant,  Water  forms  your  arrows.
Be  kind,  etc.

4 Ye  Gods  who  dwell  within  this  northward  region,

whose  name  is  Piercers,  VMa  forms  your  arrows.
Be  kind,  etc.

5 Ye  Gods  whose  home  is  in  this  firm-set  region— .

Nilimpas  is  your  name — Plants  are  your  arrows.

Be  kind,  etc.

The  hymn,  which  is  closely  connected  with  hymn  XXVII,  iTa"
charm  to  win  the  favour  of  the  Serpents  of  all  the  regions  under
heaven.

1 Gods:  the  Serpents  are  addressed  as  powerful  superhuman  beings*

W eapons  : or,  HetL  Agm  forms  your  arrows  : or,  jour  arrows  are  fire,

5 This  firm-set  region  : the  point  directly  under  the  feet,  opposite
to  the  zenith.  Isilimpas : perhaps,  smearers,  liekers  (of  themselves).


HYMN  27. J THE  ATHARYA-VEDA.  121

6 Ye  Gods  whose  home  is  in  this  upmost  region,
Yearners  by  name,  Brihaspati  forms  your  arrows.
Be  kind  and  gracious  unto  us  and  bless  us.  To  you
be  reverence,  to  you  be  welcome !

HYMN  XXVII.

Aon i is  regent  of  the  East,  its  warder  is  Asita,  the
Adityas  are  the  arrows.

Worship  to  these  the  regents,  these  the  warders,  and
to  the  arrows,  yea,  to  these  be  worship  !

Within  your  jaws  we  lay  the  man  who  hateth  us  and
whom  we  hate.

2 Indra  is  regent  of  the  South,  its  warder  Tirasehir&ji,

and  the  shafts  the  Fathers.

Worship  to  these  the  regents,  these  the  warders,
and  to  the  arrows,  yea,  to  these  be  worship !
Within  your  jaws  we  lay  the  man  who  hateth  us  and
whom  we  hate.

3 Of  the  West  region  Varuna  is  ruler,  Prid&ku  warder,

Nourishment  the  arrows.

Worship,  etc.


6 Upmost  region : the  highest  point  of  the  heaven  overhead,  the
zenith.


The  Serpents  of  the  six  regions  having  been  conciliated  in  the  pre-
ceding hymn,  the  regents,  warders,  and  arrows  of  those  regions  are
duly  reverenced,  and  the  speaker’s  enemy  is  solemnly  given  over  to
the  Serpents  for  condign  punishment.

1 Asita  : Black  Serpent.

2 Of  the  South  : according  to  Manu  V.  96,  Yama  is  the  regent  of
the  South.  The  distribution’  of  the  regions  is  variously  given  by
different  authorities.  See  Atharva-veda  1.  31.  1,  note.  Tiraschirdji :
the  Serpent  with  transverse  streaks.  The  Fathers : Manes,  or
Ancestral  Spirits.

3 Priddku  : Adder  or  Viper ; frequently  mentioned  in  the  Atharva-
veda,  See  I.  27...  1.


m THE  HYMNS  OF  ' r ; ..  [BOOK  III.

4 Soma  is  ruler  of  the  Western  region,  Svaja  the
•warder,  lightning’s  flash  the  arrows.

Worship,  etc.

5 Vishnu  is  ruler  of  the  firm-set  region,  KalmSshagrlra

warder,  Plants  the  arrows.

W orship,  etc.

6 Brihaspati  controls  the  topmost  region,  Svitra  is

warder,  and  the  Rain  the  arrows.

. Worship  to  these  the  regents,  these  the  warders,
and  to  the  arrows,  yea,  to  these  be  worship  !
Within  your  jaws  we  lay  the  man  who  hateth  us  and
whom  we  hate.

HYMN  XXVIII.

This  cow  was  born  to  bring  forth  offspring  singly,
though  they  created  liine  of  every  colour.

When  she  produces  twins  in  spite  of  Order,  sullen,
with  groan  and  grudge  she  harms  the  cattle.


- 4.  Svaja:  a variety  of  Yiper.  See  Y.  14.  10,  and  VI.  56.  2,

5 Firm-set  region  : the  nadir.  See  III.  26.  5.  Kalmdshagrtva  :
Spotty-neck.

6 Topmost  region  : the  zenith.  Svitra  : White  Serpent;  an  un-
identified species.

Professor  Weber  remarks  that  ho  ritual  procedure  is  prescribed  in
the  Kausika-Sutra  for  this  and  the  preceding  hymn ; and  suggests
that  they  may  have  found  their  way  into  the  text  after  the  composi-
tion of  that  work.

The  hymn  is  a charm  to  change  the  ill-omened  birth  of  twin  calves
into  a blessing.

1 They : the  text  has  blv&takritah  (Rishis  regarded  as  creators  of
beings),  which  is  metrically  superfluous  and  almost  certainly  a gloss.
Cows  were  created  of  many  colours,  but  were  intended  to  produce
only  one  calf  at  a birth.  When  twins  are  bom,  a charm  is  necessary
to  avert  the  ill  omen;  and  the  Kausika-Sutra  prescribes  an  appropriate
ceremony,  ending  with  the  bestowal  of  the  peccant  cow  on  the  priest.
A somewhat  similar  ceremony  is  prescribed  in  the  same  Kitual  when
a woman  presents  her  husband  with  twins.  In  this  case  also,  it  seems ,
the  mother  becomes  the  property  of  the  priest.  The  same  supersti-
tion is  found  at  the  present  time  in  uncivilised  parts  of  Africa.


HYMN  28.]  THE  ATHARYA-YEDA.  123

2 She  brings  destruction  on  tlie  beasts,  turned  to  a

flesh-devouring  worm.

Yea,  give  her  to  the  Brahman  that  she  may  bring
luck  and  happiness.

3 Be  thou  auspicious  to  our  folk,  bring  luck  to  horses

and  to  kine.

Auspicious  unto  all  this  farm,  bring  luck  and  hap-
piness to  us.

4 Let  there  be  rain  and  increase  here,  here  be  thou

most  munificent.

Mother  of  twins,  prosper  our  herd.

5 Where,  having  left  all  sickness  of  their  bodies,  the

pious  lead,  as  friends,  their  lives  of  gladness —
Nigh  to  that  world  approached  the  twin  calves'
mother.  Let  her  not  harm  our  people  and  our
cattle.

6 Where  lies  the  world  of  those  dear  friends,  the  pious,

those  who  have  brought  due  sacrifice  to  Agni — -
Nigh  to  that  world  approached  the  twin  calves1
mother.  Let  her  not  harm  our  people  and  our
cattle.


At  Ltifei,  in  Mashonaland,  ‘if  a woman  gives  birth  to  twins,,  they  are
immediately  destroyed.  This  they  consider  an  unnatural  freak  on  the
part  of  a woman,  and  it  is  supposed  to  indicate  famine  or  some  other:
calamity/  (The  Ruined  Cities  of  Maslionaland,  by  T.  Bent,  p.  276}.,

3 Farm  : hsketr&ya  ; literally,  field.

5 Nigh  to  that  world : the  home  of  the  Departed.  Weber  sees
here  a play  on  the  words  pamini,  the  twin  calves’  mother,,  and  Yama
(understood)  the  King  of  the  Dead.  The  meaning  is  that  the  cow
nearly  died  in  giving  birth  to  her  offspring.  Now,  as  she  has  been
bestowed  upon  the  priest  she  will  be  a blessing  to  us  instead  of  a cause
: ■' calamity.


124


THE  HYMNS  OF


[book  in.


HYMN  XXIX.

When  yonder  kings  who  sit  beside  Yam  a divide
among  themselves  the  sixteenth  part  of  hopes
fulfilled,

A ram  bestowed  as  sacrifice,  white-footed,  frees  us
from  the  tax.

2 He  satisfies  each  hope  and  want,  prevailing,  present

and  prepared.

The  wish-fulfilling  ram,  bestowed,  white-footed,  is
exhaustless  still.

3 He  who  bestows  a white-hooved  ram,  adequate  to

the  place  he  holds,

Ascends  to  the  celestial  height,  the  heaven  where
tribute  is  not  paid  to  one  more  mighty  by  the
weak.

4 He  who  bestows  a white-hooved  ram,  adequate  to

the  place  he  holds,

Offered  with  five  cakes,  lives  on  that,  unwasting,  in
the  Fathers’  world.

5 He  who  bestows  a white-hooved  ram,  adequate  to

the  place  he  holds,

Offered  with  five  cakes,  lives  on  that,  wasteless,
while  Sun  and  Moon  endure.


The  subject  of  the  hymn  is  immunity  from  taxation  in  the  next
world  to  be  purchased  by  the  performance  of  a certain  sacrifice  on
earth.

1 New-comers  into  the  next  world  have  to  pay  one-sixteenth  of  their
hopes  fulfilled,  that  is,  the  reward  of  their  good  works  on  earth,  to  the
assessors  of  Yama  the  King  of  the  Departed ; but,  if  they  choose,  they
can  compound  for  this  tax  before  they  go  thither.

2 Prevailing:  the  ram,  like  the  bull,  is  an  emblem  of  strength,
Indra  himself  is  frequently  called  the  Ram  in  the  Rigveda.  Adequate
to  the  place  he  holds : ‘ equivalent  to  the  place  in  heaven  -which  is  as-
signed to  the  giveiv— Weber.


125


HYMN  30.]  THE  ATHARYA-YEDA.

6 Like  a refreshing  draught,  like  sea,  the  mighty

flood,  he  faileth  not.

Like  the  two  Gods  whose  home  is  one,  the  ram
white-footed,  faileth  not.

7 Whose  gift  was  this,  and  given  to  whom  ? K&ma

to  Kama  gave  the  gift.

Kama  is  giver,  Kama  is  receiver.  Kama  hath  passed
into  the  sea.

Through  Kama  do  I take  thee  to  myself.  0 Kama,
this  is  thine.

8 May  Earth  receive  thee  as  her  own,  and  this  great

interspace  of  air.

Neither  in  breath  and  body  nor  in  progeny  may  this
acceptance  do  me  harm.

HYMN  XXX.

Freedom  from  hate  I bring  to  you,  concord  and
unanimity.

Love  one  another  as  the  cow  loveth  the  calf  that  she
hath  borne.

6 Two  Gods  whose  home  is  one  : the  Asvins.

7 Kdma  to  Kama  gives  the  gift : K&ma,  Desire,  represents  both  the
performer  of  the  sacrifice,  who  desires  a commensurate  return,  and  the
God  who  desires  to  receive  it.  4 The  infinity  of  these  mutual  desires
is  represented  by  the  immensity  of  the  sea  in  the  last  pada.’— Weber.
Through  Kdma:  through,  or  in  consequence  of  the  giver’s  desire  the
priest  accepts  the  victim  for  the  God.

8 This  stanza  is  addressed  to  the  worshipper  by  the  priest  who  hints
at  the  risk  which  he  himself  runs  in  accepting  for  the  God  an  offering
which  may  not  give  satisfaction,  and  at  the  gratitude  which  his  medi-
ation deserves.  See  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  XVII.  pp.  305,  306 ;
and  Muir,  Original  Sanskrit  Texts,  V.  p.  403.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Bigveda,  III.  p.  375;

The  hymn  is  a prayer  or  charm  to  secure  love  and  concord  in  a family.

1 The  cow  : aghnya ; explained  by  the  Commentators  as  £ not  to  be
killed  ) ’ by  the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary  as  £ not,  or  hardly,  to  he
conquered  or  overcome ; ’ but  derived  by  Weber  from  ahan,  day,
* bright-coloured,’  like  usraf  usrd , u$riya>  usriyd,  steer,  cow,  ray,  morn-
ing-light, brightness.  Both  in  the  Veda  and  in  classical  Sanskrit
poetry  the  cowr  is  the  stock  example  of  strong  natural  affection ; vatsat
calf,  meaning  also  ‘ darling  ’ in  general.  .See  III.  13.  7.  ..


126  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  111.

2 One-minded  with  his  mother  let  the  son  be  loyal  to

his  sire.

Let  the  wife,  calm  and  gentle,  speak  words  sweet  as
honey  to  her  lord.

3 No  brother  hate  his  brother,  no  sister  to  sister  be

unkind.

Unanimous,  with  one  intent,  speak  ye  your  speech
in  friendliness.

4 That  spell  through  which  Gods  sever  not,  nor  ever

bear  each  other  hate,

That  spell  we  lay  upon  your  home,  a bond  of  union
for  the  men.

5 Intelligent,  submissive,  rest  united,  friendly  and  kind}

bearing  the  yoke  together.

Come,  speaking  sweetly  each  one  to  the  other.  I
make  you  one-intentioned  and  one-minded.

6 Let  what  you  drink,  your  share  of  food  be  common :

together,  with  one  common  bond  I bind  you.

Serve  Agni,  gathered  round  him  like  the  spokes
about  the  chariot  nave.

7 With  binding  charm  I make  you  all  united,  obeying

one  sole  leader  and  one-minded.

Even  as  the  Gods  who  watch  and  guard  the  Amrit,
at  morn  and  eve  may  ye  be • kindly-hearted.


6 Band  : or,  strap ; the  thong  with  which  the  yoke  is  fastened.

7 The  Amrit : the  precious  nectar;  or,  immortality.  ‘ DasOot-
tliche,*— Weber.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p,  516 ;
and,  with  annotations  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  30,  116.  Muir
has  translated  stanzas  1 — 4 in  0.  S.  Texts,  Y.  439,  and  Zimmer  in
Altindisches  Leben,  p,  316.


HYMN  XXXI.

Mat  Gods  release  from  failing  strength,  thou  Agni,
from  malignity !

I  free  from  every  evil,  from  decline  : I compass
round  with  life.

2 May  Pavam&na  free  from  harm,  and  Sakra  from  un-

righteous deed.

I free  from  every  evil,  from  decline  : I compass
round  with  life.

3 Tame  beasts  have  parted  from  wild  beasts,  water

and  thirst  have  gone  apart.

I free,  etc.

4 Parted  are  heaven  and  earth,  and  paths  turned  to

each  quarter  of  the  sky.

I free,  etc.

5 Tvashtar  prepares  the  bridal  of  his  daughter ; then

all  this  world  of  life  departs  and  leaves  him.

I free,  etc.


The  hymn  is  a charm  for  the  recovery  of  a person  who  is  danger-
ously ill.

1 Decline:  ydkshma;  emaciating  disease,  phthisis,  or  pulmonary
consumption.

2 Pavamdna : the  deified  Soma,  as  it  flows  through  the  purifying  filter.
See  Eigveda  or  Samaveda  Index.  Sakra  : the  Mighty  One ; Indra.

3 In  this  and  the  two  following  stanzas  the  speaker  gives  instances
of  thorough  separation  illustrative  of  the  thorough  removal  of  the  sick
man’s  disease  which  the  charm  is  to  effect.  Tame  animals  have  been
reclaimed  and  thoroughly  separated  from  their  wild  congeners;  heaven
and  earth,  originally  in  close  juxtaposition,  have  been  separated  and
for  ever  propped  apart  (Eigveda  VI.  8.  3 ; VIII.  83.  11);  Tvashtar
and  the  world  of  life  to  which  he  gave  form  have  been  parted  ; and  so
shall  it  be  with  the  sufferer  and  his  disease.

5 The  Eigveda,  X.  17.  1,  has  the  first  hemistich  of  this  stanza  with
an  important  variation,  sdm  eti , £ comes  together,’  instead  of  vi  ydti,
‘ goes  apart/  c departs  and  leaves  him?  Tvashtar,  who  is  often  regarded
as  the  chief  agent  in  natural  phenomena  and  the  creator  of  the  first


■ .

... : ;


123  THE  ATBAEVA-VEDA.  [BOOK  HI.

6 Agnl  combines  the  vital  airs.  The  Moon  is  closely

joined  with  breath.

I free,  etc.

7 The  Gods  have  lifted  up  with  breath  the  Sun  whose

might  is  everywhere.

I free,  etc.

8 Die  not.  Live  with  the  breath  of  those  who  make

and  who  enjoy  long  life.

I free,  etc.

9 Die  not.  Stay  here.  Breathe  with  the  breath  of

those  who  draw  the  vital  air.

I free,  etc.

10  Rise  up  with  life,  conjoined  with  life.  Up,  with  the

sap  of  growing  plants  !

I free,  etc.  ■;./  :■

11  We  as  immortal  beings  have  arisen  with  Parjanya’s

rain.  §:~?

I free  from  every  evil,  from  decline  : I compass
round  with  life.


forms  of  life,  appears  here  to  be  identified  with  Prajapati,  the  Lord  of
Creation,  and  to  have  prepared  to  many  his  own  daughter,  which  pro-
ceeding shocked  and  alienated  the  whole  world.  £ Prajapati,  the  Lord
of  Creation/  says  Kumarila,  4 is  a name  of  the  sun,  and  he  is  called
so  because  he  protects  all  creatures  His  daughter  Ushas  is  the  dawn.
And  when  it  is  said  that  he  was  in  love  with  her,  this  only  means  that
at  sunrise,  the  sun  runs  after  the  dawn,  the  dawn  being  at  the  same
time  called  the  daughter  of  the  sun,  because  she  rises  when  he  ap-
proaches.’ See  M.  Muller’s  History  of  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature,
pp.  529,  530.  The  legend  of  Prajapati  and  his  daughter  is  related  in
Bigveda  X.  61.  5 — 8.  See  Muir,  Original  Sanskrit  Texts,  IV.  pp.
46,  47.  Prof.  Weber  gives,  as  usual,  ample  information,  regarding  the
passage  in  the  text,  in  Indische  Studien  XVII.  pp.  310—313.

6 c As  stanzas  1 — 5 have  separation  from  evil  and  consumption  for
their  subject,  so  stanzas  6 — 10  are  concerned  with  conjunction  with
vital  power  especially  with  the  breath  of  life/ — WTeber,


, >t . A ' “I


BOOK  IV.


HYMN  I.

Eastward  at  first  the  prayer  was  generated:-  Vena
disclosed  bright  flashes  from  the  summit,

Disclosed  his  deepest,  nearest  revelations,  womb  of
the  non-existent  and  existent.

2 Let  this  Queen  come  in  front,  her  Father’s  daughter,
found  in  the  worlds  for  earliest  generation.

For  him  they  set  this  radiant  vault  in  motion.  Let
them  prepare  warm  milk  for  him  who  first  would
drink.

This  introductory  hymn  is  a brahmodyam  or  enunciation  in  design-
edly enigmatical  language  of  cosmogonical  and  mystico-theological
doctrine.

1 Prayer  originated  in  tlie  eastern  heaven  : when  Vena  (see  II.  1.1),
the  early  Sun,  first  rose  in  his  glory  he  poured  forth  the  type  of  hu-
man prayer,  his  morning  song  of  joy  and  praise.  The  Sun  is  first-born
of  Heaven  and  Earth,  and  his  birth  is  the  type  of  all  subsequent  gene-
ration. Non-existent : what  does  not  yet  exist,  but  possesses  the  possi-
bility of  future  existence.

2 This  Queen  : Vak,  Speech  personified,  the  Word,  the  first  creation
and  representative  of  Spirit,  and  the  means  of  communication  between
men  and  Gods : cf.  c I am  the  Queen  : ’ Kigveda  X.  125.  3.  Her  Father’s
daughter : sprung  from  Spirit.  For  earliest  generation : in  Rigveda  X,
125,  7,  8 Vak  is  represented  as  saying  that  she  brings  forth  the  Father,
that  is.  Heaven  the  father  of  all  things,  and  that  she  holds  together  all
existence.  Similarly,  the  Logos,  the  Word  * was  in  the  beginning/  and
fi  all  things  were  made  by  him/ — St.  John,  1. 1.  For  him : for  Heaven,  the
deity  distinct  from  the  material  sky.  They : the  bhtitahritas  or  creators
of  beings:  see  III.  28.  1.  Warm  milk:  the  gharma  or  libation  of  heated
milk,  especially  offered  to  the  Asvins.  Would  drink:  Prof.  Ludwig
derives  dMsyave  here  from  dhd ; i to  him  who  first  wished  to  create/


!


[BOOK  IK

3 He  who  was  born  as  bis  all-knowing  kinsman  de-

elarefch  all  the  deities’  generations.

He  from  the  midst  of  prayer  his  prayer  hath  taken.
On  high,  below,  spread  forth  his  godlike  nature.

4 For  he,  true  to  the  law  of  Earth  and  Heaven,  esta-

blished both  the  mighty  worlds  securely.

Mighty  when  born,  he  propped  apart  the  mighty,
the  sky,  our  earthly  home,  and  air’s  mid-region.

5 He  from  the  depth  hath  been  reborn  for  ever,  Bri-

haspati  the  world’s  sole  Lord  and  Ruler.

From  light  was  born  the  Day  with  all  its  lustre :
through  this  let  sages  live  endowed  with  splendour.

6 The  sage  and  poet  verily  advaneeth  the  statute  of

that  mighty  God  primeval.

He  was  born  here  with  many  more  beside  him  : they
slumbered  when  the  foremost  side  was  opened.


THE  HYMNS  OF


3  His  all-knowing  kinsman:  Jatavcdas,  the  omniscient  Agni,  sprung
like  other  Gods  from  Heaven  and  Earth.  From  the  midst  of  p>rayer ;
Agni,  identified  here  with  Brihaspati,  has  learnt  prayer  or  devotion
from  the  original  prayer  mentioned  in  stanza  1.

4 He  propped  apart  the  mighty : heaven  and  earth  were  originally
in  close  juxtaposition.  Agni  is  here  (as  in  Eigveda  I.  67.  3)  said  to
have  separated  them  and  fixed  them  in  their  present  position.  This
action  is  also  ascribed  to  Indra  (Eigveda  X.  89.  4 ; 113.  5) ; to  Yanina
(VII.  86.);  to  Soma  (IX.  101.  15),  and  to  other  deities  in  other  pas-
sages of  the  Eigveda.  This  old  surviving  nature-myth  of  the  original
union  and  subsequent  forcible  separation  of  Heaven  and  Earth  is  found
in  Greece,  China,  and  New  Zealand,  as  well  as  in  India.  See  Custom
mui  Myth ; — ‘ The  Myth  of  Cronus/

5 From  the  depth : of  the  ocean  of  air,  from  the  womb  of  the  cloud
in  the  shape  of  lightning.  Brihaspati:  identified  with  Agni.

6 They  slumbered;  all  the  rest  fell  asleep,  showed  no  energy,  as
soon  as  they  were  born  : the  sage  (meaning  perhaps  the  Sun)  alone
remained  awake  and  full  of  active  power.


HYMN  2.]  THE  ATHARYA-YEDA.  131

7 The  man  who  seeks  the  friend  of  Gods,  Atharvan  the
father,  and  Brikaspati,  with"  worship,

Crying  to  him,  Be  thou  all  things’  creator  ! the  wise
God,  self-dependent,  never  injures,

HYMN  II.

Giver  of  breath,  giver  of  strength  and  vigour,
he  whose  commandment  all  the  Gods  acknowledge,
He  who  is  Lord  of  this,  of  man  and  cattle  : — What
God  shall  we  adore  with  our  oblation  ?

2 Who  by  his  grandeur  hath  become  sole  ruler  of  all
the  moving  world  that  breathes  and  slumbers,
Whose  shade  is  death,  whose  lustre  makes  immortal : —
What  God  shall  we  adore  with  our  oblation  ?


7 Atharvan  : tlie  ancient  pi'iest  who  is  said  to  have  been  the  first
who  obtained  fire,  now  associated  with  the  Gods  in  heaven.  The  wise
.God:  Agn-i.  Skilled  in  all  lore  is  Agni,  he  whom  erst  Atharvan  brought
to  life  (Rigveda  X.  21.  5).

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Bigyeda,  IIL  p.  393.

The  hymn,  which  is  taken,  with  variations,  from  Rigveda  X.  121,  is
an  address  to  The  Unknown  God.

1 Of  this : world,  or  creation.  What  God : Msmai  devaya  ; eui  deo?
Ea,  kah,  (quis)  Who  ? that  is,  the  Unknown  God,  has  been  applied  by
Indian  Commentators  as  a name  to  Praj&pati  and  to  other  Gods  by  a
forced  interpretation  of  the  interrogative  pronoun  which  recurs  in  the
refrain  of  each  verse  of  the  hymn ; Worship  we  Ka  the  God  with  our
oblation.  A':'  : •;  toar

2 Whose  lustre  makes  immortal:  or,  whose  shade  is  life  eternal.

‘ Whose  shadow  is  immortality,  whose  shadow  is  death/ — M.  Muller.
Chhdya  means  both  ‘shadow’  and  ‘reflected  light/  ‘lustre.’  If  both
senses  of  the  word  are  intended  here  the  meaning  might  be  : Whose
cold  shadow  (his  displeasure,  or  ignorance  of  him)  is  death,  while  the
knowledge  of  his  bright  glory  makes  his  worshipper  immortal.  See  M,
M.  That  breathes  and  slumbers ; that  is,  both  of  Gods  and  men.


132  TEE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  17.

3 To  whom  both  hosts  embattled,  look  with  longing,

and  Heaven  and  Earth  invoke  him  in  their  terror;
Whose  is  this  path  that  measures  out  the  region  : —
What  God  shall  we  adore  with  our  oblation  ?

4 Whose  is  the  mighty  earth  and  spacious  heaven,  and

yonder  ample  firmament  between  them,

Whose  is  yon  Sun  extended  in  his  grandeur: —
What  God  shall  we  adore  with  our  oblation  ?

5 Whose,  through  his  might,  are  all  the  Snowy  Moun-
' tains,  and  whose,  they  say  is  RasH  in  the  ocean,:
The  arms  of  whom  are  these  celestial  quarters: — ■

What  God  shall  we  adore  with  our  oblation?

6 The  deathless  Waters,  born  in  Law,  receiving,  pro-

tected all  the  germ  in  the  beginning, — •

Waters  divine  who  had  the  God  above  them: —
What  God  shall  we  adore  with  our  oblation  ?

7 In  the  beginning  rose  Hiranyagarbha,  even  at  his

birth  sole  Lord  of  all  creation.

He  fixt  and  firmly  stablished  earth  and  heaven :- —
What  God  shall  we  adore  with  our  oblation?


3 The  region  : mid-air.

5 Bcisd  in  the  ocean  : a mythical  river  in  the  sea  of  air  flowing  round

earth  and  atmosphere.  . . / , ,

6 Born  in  Law : produced  in  accordance  with  ritd,  the  fixed  Order
of  the  Universe.  The  reference  is,  not  to  the  waters  of  the  clouds
released  by  Indra,  hut  to  the  unfathomed  depths  of  water  that  preceded
distinct  creation,  when  ‘ the  earth  was  without  form  and  void  ; and
darkness  was  upon  the  face  of  the  deep.  And  the  Spirit  of  God  moved
upon  the  face  of  the  waters.’ — Genesis,  I.  2,  ’3.

7 This  is  stanza  I or  the  Bigveda  hymn.  Hiranyagarbha : literally
* the  gold-germ,’  { the  source  of  golden  light,5  the  Sun-God 3  4 * 6 7 as  the
great  power  of  the  universe,  from  which  all  other  powers  and  exis-
tences, divine  and  earthly,  are  derived,  a conception  which  is  the
nearest  approach  to  the  later  mystical  conception  of  Brahma,  the
creator  of  the  world.’ — -Wallis,  Cosmology  of  the  Veda,  p.  50,


II YMF  3.]


THE  A TIIAR  V A-  VEDA.


133

8 In  the  beginning,  generating  offspring,  the  Waters
brought  an  embryo  into  being  ;

And  even  as  it  sprang  to  life  it  had  a covering  of  gold.

HYMN  III.

Three  have  gone  hence  and  passed  avray,  the  man,
the  tiger,  and  the  wolf.

Down,  verily,  'the  rivers  flow,  down  goeth  the  celes-
tial Tree,  down  let  our  foemen  bend  and  bow.

2 On  distant  pathway,  go  the  wolf,  on  pathway  most
remote  the  thief!

On  a far  road  speed  forth  the  rope  with  teeth,
and  the  malicious  man  !


8 This  stanza  is  not  in  the  Eigveda.  The  embryo  which  had  a cover -
ing  of gold  is  the  Sun.

The  whole  hymn  should  be  compared  with  the  Eigveda  hymn  as
translated  and  thoroughly  discussed  by  Prof.  Max  Muller  in  his  His-
tory of  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature,  p.  569,  and,  later,  in  Vedic  Hymns,
Part  I.  pp.  1 — 13.  The  Eigveda  hymn  has  also  been  translated  and
discussed  by  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  IV.  pp.  16— 18;  by  Mr.  Wallis,  Cos-
mology of  the  Eigveda,  p.  50  sqq.,  and  by  Prof.  Peterson,  Hymns  from
the  Eigveda.  It  is,  of  course,  also  to  be  found  in  all  complete  trans-
lations of  the  Eigveda.

The  hymn  is  a charm  against  tigers,  wolves,  thieves,  and  other
noxious  creatures.

1 Have  gone  lienee:  proleptically ; the  anticipated  result  of  the
charm  being  regarded  as  actually  obtained.  The  man:  my  human
enemy ; the  thief.  The  tiger : frequently  mentioned  in  the  Atharva-
veda,  but  apparently  unknown  to  the  seers  of  the  Eigveda.  Down  goeth
the  celestial  Tree : the  meaning  is  not  clear,  and  the  pada,  which  is
metrically  superfluous,  may  be  an  interpolation.  Perhaps,  as  Prof.
Ludwig  suggests,  the  reference  may  be  to  the  Tree  which  Varuna
1 sustains  erect  in  the  baseless  region  ’ (Eigveda  I.  24.  7),  the  World-
Tree  or  Tree  of  Life  of  the  ancient  myth,  whose  roots  grow  downward
from  heaven.

2 The  rope  with  teeth : the  serpent.  An  Arabic  proverb  says  ; He
who. has  been  bitten  by  a serpent  dreads  a bit  of  rope.


'i>u  |


134


THE  HYMFS  OF


[BOOK  17.


3 We  crush  and  rend  to  pieces  both  thine  eyes,  0 Tiger,

and  thy  jaws,  and  all  thy  twenty  claws  we  break.

4 We  break  and  rend  the  tiger  first  of  creatures  that

are  armed  with  teeth  ;

The  robber  then,  and  then  the  snake,  the  sorcerer,
and  then  the  wolf.

5 The  thief  who  cometh  near  to-day  departeth  bruised

and  crushed  to  bits.

By  .nearest  way  let  him  be  gone.  Let  Indra  slay
him  with  his  bolt.

6 Let  the  beast’s  teeth  be  broken  off,  shivered  and

shattered  be  his  ribs  !

Slack  be  thy  bowstring  : downward  go  the  wild  beast
that  pursues  the  hare  1

7 Open  not  what  thou  hast  compressed,  close  not  what

thou  hast  not  compressed.

Indra’s  and  Soma’s  child,  thou  art  Atharvan’s  tiger-
crushing  charm.

HYMN  IV.

We  dig  thee  from  the  earth,  the  Plant  which  streng-
thens and  exalts  the  nerves,

The  Plant  which  the  Gandharva  dug  for  Varuna
whose  power  was  lost.

6 Slack  be  thy  bowstring : a figurative  expression  for : may  thy
power  of  striking  thy  prey  be  enfeebled.  The  wild  beast : not  the  tigers
but  some  smaller  rapacious  animal.

7 The  first  hemistich  is  addressed  to  the  animal : If  thy  mouth  is
shut,  open  it  not ; if  it  is  open  to  attack  thy  prey  do  not  (bite  and)
close  it.  Cf.  VI.  56.  1, ; X.  4.  8.  The  second  hemistich  is  addressed  to
the  amulet  or  charm  which  is  to  crush  the  tiger.  Indra* s and  Soma's
child : probably  some  poisonous  herb,  deriving  its  growth  from  Soma
the  King  of  Plants  and  its  destructive  power  from  the  mightiest  God
Indra,  The  tiger-crushing  charm  owes  its  origin  to  the  ancient  fire-
pi'iest  Atharvan,  as  other  charms  are  ascribed  to  the  Rishis  Agastya,
Asita,  Gaya,  and  Jamadagni.  See  I.  14.  4 ; II.  32.  3.


The  hymn  is  a charm  to  restore  virile  power.

1 Whose  power  zws  lost : the  legend  referred  to  is  not  traceable.


mmmmBtmrn


TEE  ATHAB VA-YEDA.


BY  ME  5.]

2  Let  Ushas  and  let  Stirya  rise,  let  this  the  speech
I utter  rise.

Let  the  strong  male  PrajUpati  arise  with  manly
energy.

HYMN  V.

The  Bull  who  hath  a thousand  horns,  who  rises  up
from  out  the  sea, —

By  him  the  strong  and  mighty  one  we  lull  the  folk
to  rest  and  sleep.

2 Over  the  surface  of  the  earth  there  breathes  no  wind,

there  looks  no  eye.

Lull  all  the  women,  lull  the  dogs  to  sleep,  with
Indra  as  thy  friend !

3 The  women  sleeping  in  the  court,  lying  without,

or  stretched  on  beds,

The  matrons  with  their  odorous  sweets — these,
one  and  all,  we  lull  to  sleep.

4 Each  moving  thing  have  I secured,  have  held  and

hold  the  eye  and  breath.

Each  limb  and  member  have  I seized  in  the  deep
darkness  of  the  night.


2 Prajdpati : Lord  of  Life ; the  God  who  presides  over  procreation.
For  the  sis  remaining  stanzas  see  Appendix.


The  hymn  is  the  lullaby  or  sleep-charm  of  a lover  who  is  secretly
visiting  his  love.

1 This  stanza,  and  stanzas  3,  5,  6 are  taken  from  JRigveda  VII.  5.  7,
8,  *3,  5.  The  Bull  who  hath  a thousand  horns  : the  sun  with  his  count-
less rays  of  light,  whose  setting  brings  the  time  of  rest  and  sleep  ; or
perhaps  the  starry  heaven,  as  Grassmann  translates,  is  intended;  or,
according  to  Aufrecht,  the  moon.  In  Rigveda  I.  154.  6,  the  ‘many-
horned  and  restless  oxen’  appear  to  be  the  stars  with  their  ever-
twinkling  rays,  which  supports  Grassmann’s  interpretation.

2 With  Indra  as  thy  friend:  the  speaker  addresses  the  soporific  plant
or  other  charm,  strengthened  by  Indra,  which  he  carries  with  him.

3 With  their  odorous  sweets : wearing  garlands  of  fragrant  flowers.


136  TEE  ETMF8  OF  [BOOK  If.

5 The  man  who  sifcs,  the  man  who  walks,  whoever  stands

and  clearly  sees —

Of  these  we  closely  shut  the  eyes,  even  as  we  closely
shut  this  house.

6 Sleep  mother,  let  the  father  sleep,  sleep  dog,

and  master  of  the  home.

Let  all  her  kinsmen  sleep,  sleep  all  the  people  who
are  round  about.

7 With  soporific  charm,  0 Sleep,  lull  thou  to  slumber

all  the  folk.

Let  the  rest  sleep  till  break  of  day,  I will  remain
awake  till  dawn,  like  Indra  free  from  scath  and
harm.

HYMN  VI.

The  Br&hman  first  was  brought  to  life  ten-headed
and  with  faces  ten.  ,

First  drinker  of  the  Soma,  he  made  poison  ineffectual.
2 Far  as  the  heavens  and  earth  are  spread  in  compass,
far  as  the  Seven  Rivers  are  extended,

So  far  my  spell,  the  antidote  of  poison,  have  I spoken
hence.


6 Her : asyai  here  = asyas.  This  pronoun  which  is  the  clue  to  the
purpose  of  the  charm  is  not  found  in  the  corresponding  stanza  of  the
Bigveda  hymn,  the  last  four  verses  (5,  6,  7,  8)  of  which  are,  according
to  Say  ana,  to  he  recited  by  thieves  and  house-breakers  in  pursuit  of
plunder.  '

The  hymn- has  been  translated,  with  notes,  by  Aufreeht  in  Indischo
Studien  IY.  pp,  340  sqq.,  and  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  51,  118*

The  hymn  is  a charm  to  make  a poisoned  arrow  harmless,

1 Brahmans  are  from  their  birth  endowed  with  extraordinary  and
superhuman,  powers  and  privileges,

2 Seven  Rivers:  according  to  Prof.  Max  Muller,  the  Indus,  the  five
rivers  of  the  Panj&b  (Yitasta,  Asikni,  Parushnt,  Yip  as,  Sutndri)  and
the  Saras vatl  Lassen  and  Ludwig  put  the  Kublrn  in  the  place  of  the
last-named.  See  Zimmer,  AItindiseh.es  Leben,  pp,  3 sqcp  So  far:
reaching  so  fan


HYMN  6.]  THE  ATEARVA-YEDA.  13 1

3 The  strong-winged  Bird  Garutm&n  first  of  all,  O

Poison,  fed  on  thee  :

Thou  didst  not  gripe  or  make  him  drunk  : aye,  thou
beeamest  food  for  him.

4 Whoever  with  five  fingers  hath  discharged  thee  from

the  crooked  bow,

I from  the  shaft  have  charmed  away  the  poison  of
the  fastening  band.

5 The  poison  have  I charmed  away  from  shaft,  cement,

and  feathered  end ;

Yea,  from  the  barb,  the  neck,  the  horn,  the  poison
have  I charmed  away.

6 Feeble,  0 Arrow,  is  thy  shaft,  thy  poison,  too,  hath

lost  its  strength.

Made  of  a worthless  tree,  thy  bow,  O feeble  one,
is  impotent.

7 The  men  who  brayed  it,  smeared  it  on,  they  who

discharged  it,  sent  it  forth,

All  these  are  made  emasculate,  emasculate  the  poison-


133  THE  HYMNS  OF  {BOOK  IV.

8 Thy  diggers  are  emasculate,  emasculate,  O Plant,
art  thou.  vAAA'.-

The  rugged  mountain  that  produced  this  poison  is
emasculate.

' ' ■ . HYMN  VII.

So  may  this  water  guard  us  on  the  bank  of  Varaij&vati
Therein  hath  Amrit  been  infused  : with  that  I ward
thy  poison  off.

2 Weak  is  the  poison  of  the  East,  weak  is  the  poison

-of  the  North,

So  too  this  poison  of  the  South'  counts  as  a cake  of
curds  and  meaL

3 When  he  hath  made  of  thee  a cake,  broad,  steaming,

swelling  up  with  fat,

And  even  in  hunger  eaten  thee,  then  gripe  him  not,
thou  hideous  one  1

4 Intoxicater!  like  a shaft  we  make  thy  spirit  fly  away,
Like  a pot  boiling  on  the  fire,  we  with  our  word

remove  thee  hence.


8 0 Plant;  the  name  of  the  plant  from  which  the  poison  was  ex-
tracted is  not  given.  Many  of  the  wild  races  who  inhabit  the  hills
and  forests  of  India  poison  the  arrows  with  which  they  kill  tigers  and
other  beasts  of  prey,  and  they  appear  to  be  acquainted  with  many
jungle  plants  which  serve  their  purpose.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Eigveda,  III,  p,  512,

The  hymn  is  a charm  to  make  a poisonous  plant  innocuous,

1 In  the  first  hemistich  there  is  a play  on  the  words  vdr,  water,
vdraydtai,  ward  off,  or  guard,  and  varanavatydm,  the  locative  case  of
varanavati,  which  appears  to  be  the  name  of  some  river  or  lake  on
whose  banks  the  Varana  (Crataeva  Eoxburghii),  a plant  used  in  medi-
cine and  supposed  to  possess  magical  virtues,  grows  abundantly.  The
poisonous  plant  was,  it  seems,  washed  in  the  water  of  the  river  and
then  boiled.


THE  ATHARVA-YEDA


HYMN  8.]

5 We  set  around  thee  with  the  spell  as  ’twere  a gather-

ed armament.

Stay  quiet  like  a rooted  tree.  Dug'  up  with  mattocks,
gripe  not  thou.

6 For  coverings  men  have  bartered  thee,  for  skins  of

deer  and  woven  cloths.

Thou  art  a thing  of  sale,  0 Plant.  Dug  up  with
mattocks,  gripe  not  thou !

7 None  have  attained  to  those  of  old,  those  who

wrought  holy  acts  for  you.

Let  them  not  harm  our  heroes  here.  Therefore
I set  before  you  this.

HYMN  VIII.

The  Being  lays  the  sap  of  life  in  beings : he  hath
become  the  sovran  Lord  of  creatures.

Death  comes  to  this  man’s  royal  consecration :
let  him  as  Iving  own  and  allow  this  kingdom.

2 Come  forward,  turn  not  back  in  scorn,  strong
guardian,  slayer  of  thy  foes.

Approach,  O gladdener  of  thy  friends.  The  Gods
have  blessed  and  strengthened  thee.


5 A gathered  armament : the  spell  acts  like  a body  of  soldiers  encom-
passing  the  plant  and  preventing  it  from  doing  harm.

6 For  coverings, : pavdstais  ; in  Eigveda  X.  27.  7,  the  word  in  the
dual  means  the  ‘ two  canopies/  heaven  and  earth.

7 This  stanza,  recurring  in  V.  6.  2,  has  no  meaning  here,  and  is
evidently  an  interpolation.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Dor  Eigveda,  III.  p.  201;
and,  with  annotations,  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  28,  121.

The  hymn  is  a benediction  pronounced  at  the  consecration  of  a King/

1 The  Being : the  Divine  Being,  meaning  here  the  Creator.  Royal
consecration  : the  Bajasuya  was  a great  sacrifice  or  religious  ceremony
performed,  at  the  coronation  of  a supreme  sovereign  by  the  King  him-
self and  his  tributary  princes.  Mrityu  or  the  God  of  Death  shows  his
aPProva^  by  attending  the  inauguration  of  the  new  King.

2 The  King  is  addressed.


140


THE  HYMNS  OF


[BOOK  IK


8 All  waited  on  him  as  he  came  to  meet  them.  He
self-resplendent  moves  endued  with  glory.

That  is  the  royal  hero’s  lofty  nature ; he,  manifold,
hath  gained  immortal  powers.

4 Stride  forth  to  heaven’s  broad  regions,  thou,  a tiger

on  a tiger’s  sldn.

Let  all  the  people  long  for  thee.  Let  heavenly
floods  be  rich  in  milk.

5 Heaven’s  waters  joyous  in  their  milk,  the  waters  of

middle  air,  and  those  that  earth  eontaineth —

I with  the  gathered  power  and  might  of  all  these
waters  sprinkle  thee.

6 The  heavenly  waters  rich  in  milk  have  sprinkled  thee

with  power  and  might

To  be  the  gladdener  of  thy  friends.  May  Savitar  so
fashion  thee.

7 These,  compassing  the  tiger,  rouse  the  lion  to  great

joy  and  bliss.

As  strong  floods  purify  the  standing  ocean,  so  men
adorn  the  leopard  in  the  waters.


4 A tiger  : the  type,  in  the  Atharva-veda,  of  heroic  strength  and
courage. , A tiger's  skin : stepping  on  a tiger’s  skin,  symbolical  of
assuming  regal  powers,  was  an  important  part  of  the  ceremony.

5 Milk : the  blessings  which  they  pour  down.

6 Savitar : the  Sun  as  the  great  vivifier  and  promoter  of  all  growth.

7 These ; the  priests  who  conduct  the  ceremony.  The,  tiger  , . . the
lion  ■ . . the  leopard : the  strong  and  valiant  King.  In  the  imters  :
with  which  he  is  sprinkled  in  the  Abhisheka  or  Sprinkling  Ceremony
wherewith  the  King  is  consecrated.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  458;
and  by  Zimmer,  Altiudisches  Lcbon,  p.  213.


I1YMN  9.]


TEE  A THAR  FI-  VEDA.  141

■ HYMN  IX.

Approach  ! th:ou  art  the  mountain’s  eye,  the  living
thing  that  saveth  us  •

A gift  bestowed  by  all  the  Gods,  yea,  the  defence
that  guardeth  life.

2 Thou  art  the  safeguard  of  the  men,  thou  art  the  safe-

guard of  the  kine,

Thou  standest  ready  to  protect  the  horses  that  are
fleet  of  foot.

3 Thou,  also,  Salve  ! art  a defence  that  rends  and

crushes  sorcerers.

Thou  lcnowest,  too,  of  Amrit,  thou  art  the  delight  of
all  who  live,  a jaundice-curing  balm  art  thou.

4 Whomso  thou  ereepest  over,  Salve  ! member  by

member,  joint  by  joint,

From  him,  like  some  strong  arbiter  of  strife,  thou
banishest  decline.

5 No  imprecation  reaches  him,  no  magic,  no  torment-

ing fiend,

O Salve,  Vishkandha  seizes  not  the  man  who  carries
thee  about.

6 From  lying  speech,  from  evil  dream,  from  wicked  act

and  sinfulness,

From  hostile  and  malignant  eye, — from  these,
G Salve,  protect  us  well.

The  hymn  is  a charm,  addressed  to  a precious  Ointment,  for  pro-'
tection  from  all  sorts  of  evil  and  for  the  acquisition  of  wealth.

1 Eye : the  precious  treasure.  Instead  of  dksham  of  the  text,  which
mars  the  metre,  several  MSS.  have  alcshyam  = ahshiam,  ‘ belonging  to
the  eye,’  ‘the  hill’s  eye-salve;’  hut,  as  Dr.  Grill  observes_,  such  a
limitation  is  inconsistent  with  the  powers  attributed  to  the  ointment,
and  it  would  be  better  to  read  ahshctydm  or  akshardm,  ‘ the  imperishable
treasure.’

3 Jaundice-curing  balm:  haritabheshajdm  ; see  I.  22.

4 Decline:  the  emaciating  disease  called  Yakshma  : see  II.  10.  5;  33.

5 Vishkandha : rheumatism;  see  I.  16.  3.

6 Malignant  eye ; see  II.  7.  5.


[BOOK  IV,

7 I,  knowing  this,  O Salve,  will  speak  the  very  truth

and  not  a lie  :

May  I obtain  both  horse  and  os,  may  I obtain  thy
life,  0 man.

8 Three  are  the  slaves  that  serve  the  Salve,  Fever,

Consumption,  and  the  Snake.

Thy  father  is  the  loftiest  of  mountains,  named  the
Triple-peaked.

9 Sprung  from  the  Snowy  Mountain’s  side,  this  Oint-

ment of  the  Three-peaked  hill
Crushes  and  rends  all  sorcerers  dnd  every  witch  and
sorceress,

10  If  thou  art  from  the  Three-peaked  hill  or  hast  thy
name  from  Yamun4,

These  names  are  both  auspicious  : by  these  two  pro-
tect thou  us,  0 Salve  !

HYMN"  X.  . v ■ .■  ■ \
Child  of  the  wind  and  firmament,  sprung  from  the
lightning  and  the  light,

May  this  the  gold-born  Shell  that  bears  the  pearl
preserve  us  from  distress.


THE  IITMNS  OF


7 The  second  hemistich,  which  seems  out  of  place  here,  is  taken,
with  a variation,  from  Bigveda  X.  97.4:  ‘ Steed,  cow,  and  garment
may  I gain,  win  back  thy  vital  breath,  0 man : J that  is,  May  I restore
thee  to  life,  and  receive  a horse,  etc.,  as  my  fee  for  curing  you*

8 Fever  : see  I.  25.  2.  Consumption : baldsah  : apparently  a kind  of
yakshma  ; a wasting  disease  ; consumptive  expectoration  : see  Zimmer,
Altindisches  Leben,  p.  385.  Triple-peaked : trikakdd  ; a high  mountain
in  the  Himalaya  : the  modern  Trikuta ; see  Zimmer  A.  I.  L/p.  30.

10 . Yamund : the  river  Jamuna,  commonly  called  Jumna,  regarded
in  mythology  as  the  twin  sister  of  Yama.  Both  auspicious:  both
mountain  and  river  being  endowed  with  special  sanctity.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Itigvecla,  TIL  p.  507 ;
and  by  Grill,  with  annotations,  Iiundert  Liecler,  pp.  35,  123,

The  hymn  is  a charm  accompanying  investiture  with  a protective
amulet  of  shell.

1 As  is  usual  in  addresses  to  amulets,  the  origin  of  the  shell  is  glori-
fied, It  was  produced  from  the  rain  that  fell  into  the  sea  from  the


HYMN  10.]  THE  ATBARVA-YEDA.  US

2 Shell  that  wast  born  from  out  the  sea,  set  at  the

head  of  things  that  shine  !

With  thee  we  slay  the  R&kshasas  and  overcome
voracious  fiends.

3 We  stay  disease  and  indigence,  and  chase  Sadinvds

with  the  Shell.

May  the  all-healing  Shell  that  bears  the  pearl  pre-
serve us  from  distress.

4 Born  in  the  heaven,  sprung  from  the  sea,  brought  to

us  hither  from  the  flood,

This  gold-born  Shell  shall  be  to  us  an  amulet  to
lengthen  life.  * •

5 From  ocean  sprang  the  Amulet,  from  Vritra  sprang

the  Lord  of  Day  :

May  this  protect  us  round  about  from  shaft  of  God
and  Asura.

6 Peerless  ’mid  golden  ornaments  art  thou  : from  Soma

wast  thou  born.

Thou  gleamest  on  the  quiver,  thou  art  beautiful  upon
the  car  : may  it  prolong  our  days  of  life !

windy  sky,  and  the  iridescent  hues  of  its  lining  came  from  the  bright
flashes  of  the  lightning.  6 old-born : golden,  or  excellent  by  nature.
Somewhat  similar  is  the  belief  mentioned  by  Dioscorides  and  Pliny
that  pearls  are  formed  by  drops  of  rain  falling  into  the  oyster-shells
when  open.  The  Persians  also  say  that  drops  of  spring  rain  falling
into  the  pearl-oyster  turn  into  precious  pearls.

3 Sad&nvck:  troublesome  noisy  pests  : see  II.  14.  I.

4 From  the.  flood:  sindhutds  ; or,  from  Sindh u,  the  Indus.

5 From  Vritra  sprang  the  Lord  of  Day : as  the  Sun  shone  out  when
Vritra,  the  huge  cloud,  was  shattered,  so  the  shell  with  its  bright  trea-
sure sprang  from  the  dai-k  depths  of  the  sea.  Asura  : hostile  demon.

6 From  Soma  wast  thou  born  : indirectly  ; libations^of  Soma  juice
cause  the  rain  to  fall,  and  the  rain  produces  the  shell.  On  the  car :
in  the  Rigveda  the  chariot  of  the  Sun  is  decked  with  pearl  (I.  35.  4) ;
and  horses’  trappings  are  sometimes  adorned  with  it  (VII.  18.  23,  and
X.  68.  11).  May  it  prolong : this  abrupt  change  of  the  personal  pro-
noun is  not  uncommon  in  the  Yeda,


HI


THE  IITMNS  OF


[BOOK  IV.

7 Bone  of  the  Gods  became  the  pearl’s  shell-mother:
endowed  with  soul  it  moveth  in  the  waters.

I  bind  this  on  thee  for  life,  strength,  and  vigour,
for  long  life  lasting  through  a hundred  autumns.
May  the  pearl’s  mother  keep  and  guard  thee  safely  I

HYMN  XL

The  Bull  supports  the  wide-spread  earth  and  heaven.
The  Bull  supports  the  spacious  air  between  them.

The  Bull  supports  the  sky’s  six  spacious  regions  : the
universal  world  hath  he  pervaded.

2 The  Bull  is  Indra : o’er  the  beasts  he  watches.  He,

Sakra,  measures  out  three  several  pathways.

He,  milking  out  the  worlds,  the  past,  the  future,
discharges  all  the  Gods’  eternal  duties.

3 Being  produced  among  mankind  as  Indra,  the  Caldron

works  heated  and  brightly  glowing.

Let  him  not,  with  good  sons,  pass  off  in  vapour  who
hath  not  eaten  of  the  Ox  with  knowledge.

7 Bone  of  the  Goth  : another  fanciful  origin  of  the  shell  containing
the  pearl  or,  rather,  the  mother-of-pearl  or  nacre.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  462 ;
and,  with  annotations,  by  Grill,  H under t Lieder,  pp.  36,  124.

The  hymn  is  a glorification  of  the  Gharma  or  Caldron  in  which  the
libation  of  hot  milk,  offered  especially  to  the  Asvins,  is  prepared.

1 Six  spacious  regions  : the  four  quarters  of  the  heavens  with  the
zenith  and  the  nadir.

2 O'er  the  leasts:  in  the  most  extended  sense  of  the  word,  meaning
perhaps  all  animals.  SaJcra  : or  mighty  ; a common  epithet  or  appel-
lation of  Indra.  Three  several  pathways : to  earth,  firmament,  and
highest  heaven.

B As  Indra  : the  Caldron  is  symbolically  called  Indra  on  account  of
the  extraordinary  efficacy  of  the  libation  which  is  prepared  in  it.  With
good  sons  : suprajas  ; Ludwig  reads  suprayds , 4 an  able  goer/  The  Ox  :
or  Bull  } here  meaning  the  Caldron  or  its  contents.  The  hemistich  is
unintelligible  to  me.


THE  A THAR  7 A-  VEDA.


BYMN:  11.]

4 The  Os  pours  milk  out  in  the  world  of  virtue  : in

earliest  time,  he,  Pavamina,  swells  it,

Parjanya  is  the  stream,  Maruts  his  udder,  sacrifice
is  the  milk,  the  meed  his  milking.

5 That  which  not  sacrifice  nor  saerilicer,  not  giver  nor

receiver  rules  and  governs,

All-winning,  all-supporting,  all-effecting, — which  of
all  quadrupeds,  tell  us  ! is  the  Caldron  ?

6 May  we,  fame  -seekers,  reach  the  world  of  virtue  by

service  of  the  Gharma  and  through  fervour,
Whereby  the  Gods  went  up  to  heaven,  the  centre  of
life  eternal,  having  left  the  body.

7 Prajapati,  supreme  and  sovran  ruler,  Indra  by  form

and  by  his  shoulder  Agni,

Came  to  Visv&nara,  came  to  all  men’s  Bullock  :
he  firmly  fortified  and  held  securely.

8 The  middle  of  the  Bullock’s  neck,  there  where  the

shoulder-bar  is  placed,

Extends  as  far  to  east  of  him  as  that  is  settled  to  the
west.


4 The  Ox : the  Caldron.  Pavamdna  : the  deified  Soma  juice  as  it
gasses  through  the  purifying  filter.  Parjanya : the  deity  of  the  rain-
cloud.  See  I.  2.  1.  The,  meed  : the  honorarium  given  to  the  officiating
priests  by  the  insti tutor  of  a sacrifice.  The  word  ( ddkshind ) means
primarily  a good  cow,  the  original  sacrificial  fee.

5 Of  all  quadrupeds  : the  Caldron  had,  perhaps,  four  short  legs  to
support  it  when  placed  on  the  ground.  The  answer  to  the  question
is,  the  ox.

6 Service  of  the  Gharma  : the  Pravargya  ceremony,  in  which  the
Gharma  or  heated  libation  was  offered  to  the  Gods.  Through  fervour  ;
tapasd  ; through  ardent  religious  devotion.  The  Gods  are  said  in  other
passages  to  have  obtained  their  immortality  through  Agni  or  Soma.
See  Rigrala  Y.  3.  4 ; YI.  7.  4 ; VII.  13.  2 ; IX.  106.  8.

7 Shoulder : his  power  of  bearing  ; Agni  being  the  general  bearer  of
oblations  to  the  Gods.  Visvanara  : the  benefactor  of  all  men.


146


tee  hymns  of


{BOOK  IV.


9 HofWthe‘ ol"  k“°WS  the  SeV“  pourings

“ worId:  the

10  ’ "'ith  i6gS  eltl'aot!“«
Tto"$edt ‘ar3|lMgher  a”d  the  °*  aM>™<*  «»
U AS 8Prfj&paetit:heSe  *WelVe  n«Ms’  they  “■  b°ly

Wsherrioe  onhe  $T  F°Per  W Perfor“s

12  Ate;S  at  l“Uked-  is  «“W  -Ur  -on.,

^eZusMbk,^  °f  milk  “ fl0W  *“»  M»  •»

HYMN  XII.

THbro£nbonefIer’  making  whoIe>  &e-  lleale"  of  the
Make  thou  this  whole,  Arundhati  !

according  to  the  Satapatha-BrSna^  OtWnSff’  *?*  A<?»
pther  authorities.  "•  uther  names  are  gjyen  by

1?  Is  milked:  the  reference  is  to  the  three  daily  sacrifices
. are  purposely  obsenre,  and  cannot  be  intelligibly

ha,V0  been  translated  by  Muir,  0 S Texts  V
pp:  399  and  361,  and  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  HI.  p’  534,'  ' ’ T’

The  hyrnnds  a charm  addressed  to  a Plant,  to  mend  a broken  bone.

sJagsass sass


HYMN-  13.]

2 Whatever  bone  of  thine  within  thy  body  hath  been.

wrenched  or  cracked,

May  DMtar  set  it  properly,  and  join  together  limb
by  limb.

3 With  marrow  be  thy  marrow  joined,  thy  limb  united

with  the  limb.

Let  what  hath  fallen  of  thy  flesh,  and  the  bone  also,
grow  again.

4 Let  marrow  close  with  marrow,  let  skin  grow  united

with  the  skin.

Let  blood  and  bone  grow  strong  in  thee,  flesh  grow
together  with  the  flesh.

5 J oin  thou  together  hair  with  hair,  join  thou  together

skin  with  skin.

Let  blood  and  bone  grow  strong  in  thee.  Unite  the
broken  part,  O Plant.  ■

6 Arise,  advance,  speed  forth : the  car  hath  goodly

fel-lies,  naves,  and  wheels.

Stand  up  erect  upon  thy  feet.

7 If  he  be  torn  and  shattered,  having  fallen  into  a pit,

or  a east  stone  have  struck  him,

Let  the  skilled  leech  join  limb  with  limb,  as  ’twere
the  portions  of  a car.

HYMN  XIII.

Gods,  raise  again  the  man  whom  ye,  0 Gods,  have
humbled  and  brought  low.


THE  ATHARYA-VEDA,


2 Dhdiar : the  God  who  ordains,  establishes,  fixes,  and  preserves,

6 This  and  the  following  stanza  seem  to  be  out  of  place  here.  The
skilled  leech  : rihhtis  ; clever,  expert,  a skilful  workman,  meaning  here
a surgeon.  Or  the  meaning  may  be  * Let  him  (the  God)  join  limb
with  limb  as  joins  a smith  the  portions  of  a car.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Bigveda,  III,  p.  508  ;
and  by  Grill,  with  annotations,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp,  18,  125.


' i


148  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IV.

Ye  Gods,  restore  to  life  again,  him,  Gods  ! who  hath
committed  sin.

2 Here  these  two  winds  are  blowing  far  as  Sindh u.

from  a distant  land.

May  one  breathe  energy  to  thee,  the  other  blow  thy
fault  away.

3 Hither,  0 Wind,  blow  healing  balm,  blow  every

fault  away,  thou  Wind  !

For  thou  who  hast  all  medicine  comest  as  envoy  of
the  Gods.

4 May  the  Gods  keep  and  save  this  man,  the  Maruts’

host  deliver  him.

All  things  that  be  deliver  him  that  he  be  freed  from
his  offence.

5 I am  come  nigh  to  thee  with  balms  to  give  thee  rest

and  keep  thee  safe..

I bring  thee  mighty  strength,  I drive  thy  wasting
malady  away.

6 Felicitous  is  this  my  hand,  yet  more  felicitous  is  this.
This  hand  contains  all  healing  balms,  and  this  makes

whole  with  gentle  touch.

7 The  tongue  that  leads  the  voice  precedes.  Then  with

our  tenfold-branching  hands,

With  these  two  healers  of  disease,  we  stroke  thee
with  a soft  caress.


The  hymn,  taken,  with  the  exception  of  stanza  6,  from  Bigweda  X.
1 $7,  is  a charm  to  restore  a sick  man  to  health.

1 Who  hath  committed  sin  : sickness  being  regarded  as  the  conse-
quence and  punishment  of  sin.

*2  Sindhu  : the  Indus.

4 Offence:  and  consequent  disease.

5 Wasting  malady  : yakshma,  pulmonary  consumption.

6 Taken  from  Rigveda  X.  60.  12.  More  felicitous  is  this:  my  other
hand,  probably  the  right.  With  gmtle  touch  : with  light  friction,  lay-
ing-on of  hands,  or  hypnotizing  passes.

7 The  tongue : the  charm  is  uttered  first,  and  then  the  hands  are
used  to  relieve  the  sufferer  and  to  restore  him  to  health.


HI2IN  14.]

HYMN  SIT.

The  Goat  was  verily  produced  from  A g
sorrow  be  beheld,  at  first,  his  father.

Through  him  at  first  the  Gods  attained  to  godhead,
and,  meet  for  sacrifices,  were  exalted.

2 Bearing  in  hands  seethed  viands,  go  with  Agni  to

the  cope  of  heaven.

Beaching  the  sky  that  touches  heaven,  mix  with  the
company  of  Gods.

3 From  earth’s  high  ridge  to  middle  air  I mounted,

and  from  mid-air  ascended  up  to  heaven.

From  the  high  pitch  of  heaven’s  cope  I came  into  the
world  of  light.

4 Mounting  the  sky  they  look  not  round  ; they  rise  to

heaven  through  both  the  worlds,

Sages  who  paid  the  sacrifice  that  pours  its  streams
on  every  side.

5 First  among  all  the  deities,  come  forward,  thou  who

art  eye  of  Gods  and  men,  O Agni.

Imploring,  and  accordant  with  the  Bhrigus,  to  heaven
in  safety  go  the  sacrifice's !


THE  A T' II ART  A-  JED  A


Through


The  hymn  is  an  accompaniment  to  a sacrifice  of  a he-goat.

1 The  goat  as  a favourite  sacrificial  victim  is  regarded  as  the  off-
spring of  the  fire  that  consumes  him  and  which  therefore  he  looks  up-
on with  sorrow.  In  Rigveda  I.  162.  4 the  goat  is  called  ‘ the  share  of
Pushan,’ that  is,  according  to  S&yana,  of  Agni;  and  in  Eigveda  X.
16.  4 Agni  is  addressed  with  the  words  ‘ Thy  portion  is  the  goat’  (dif-
ferently rendered,  however,  by  Muir  and  other  scholars).  Through  him  :
through  Agni.

2 The  inatitutors  of  sacrifice  are  exhorted  to  win  their  way  to  hea-
ven by  the  performance  of  religious  ceremonies  on  earth.

3 Middle  air:  antdrihsham  ; or,  sky.  Heaven:  divam ; above  the

sky.  Heaven’s  cope:  divo  ncVkas ; a region  still  higher  than  the  heaven.
The  world  of  light : svarjyotis  ; the  highest  realm  of  all;  the  abode
of  the  Sun  ; the  empyrean.  See  M.  Muller,  Yedic  Hymns,  Part  I.  p.  9 •
and  Zimmer,  A.  I.  Lehen,  p.  358.  ’

5 The  Bhrigus:  the  descendants  of  the  Rishi  Bhrigu,  the  seer  of
many  of  the  hymns  of  the  Atharya-veda,  •


150  THE  HYMNS  OF  [. BOOK  17.

6 With  milk  and  butter  I anoint  the  mighty,  celestial

Goat,  strong-winged,  and  full  of  juices.

Through  him  will  we  attain  the  world  of  virtue,
ascending  to  the  loftiest  cope,  to  heaven.

7 Set  the  Goat’s  head  toward  the  eastern  region,  and

turn  his  right  side  to  the  southern  quarter.

His  hinder  part  turn  to  the  western  quarter,  and  set
his  left  side  to  the  northern  region.

8 Set  the  Goat’s  backbone  upmost  in  the  zenith,  and

lay  his  belly  downward  in  the  nadir ; set  his  mid-
portion  in  mid-air  between  them.

9 O’er  the  dressed  Goat  lay  a dressed  skin  to  robe  him

prepared,  in  perfect  form,  with  all  his  members.
Rise  upward  to  the  loftiest  vault  of  heaven : with
thy  four  feet  stand  firmly  in  the  regions.

HYMN  XV.

Let  all  the  misty  regions  fly  together,  let  all  the
rain-clouds,  sped  by  wind,  assemble.

Let  waters  satisfy  the  earth,  the  voices  of  the  great
mist-enveloped  Bull  who  roareth.

2 Let  them  show  forth,  the  strong,  the  bounteous
Maruts : let  plants  and  shrubs  be  hung  with  drops
of  moisture.

Let  floods  of  rain  refresh  the  ground  with  gladness,
and  herbs  spring  various  with  each  form  and  colour.


6 Celestial : regarded  as  divine  as  soon  as  he  is  selected  for  sacrifice.
Strong-winged  : prepared  to  pass  rapidly  to  heaven.

9 In  the  second  hemistich  the  victim  is  addressed,,  The  sacrificed
animal  is  immediately  transported  to  heaven.  Similarly  the  Horse  is
addressed  (Higveda  L 162.  21):  4 No,  here  thou  diest  not,  thou  art
not  injured:  by  easy  paths  unto  the  Gods  thou  geest.*  A detailed
account  of  the  Sacrifice  of  the  Goat  is  given  in  Atharva-veda  IX,  5.


The  hymn  is  a prayer  or  charm  to  hasten  the  coming  of  the
periodical  Rains,

I Bull : Parjanya : the  God  of  the  thunderous  rain-cloud.  See  I.  & L


MYMN  IS.]


I5i


1‘HE  AYHARVA-YEDA.

3 Cause  us  who  sing  to  see  the  gathering  vapours  : out

burst  in  many  a place  the  rush  of'  waters  !

Let  floods  of  rain  refresh  the  ground  with  gladness ;
and  herbs  spring  various  with  each  form  and  colour.

4 Apart,  Farjanya!  let  the  troops  of  Maruts,  roaring,

swell  the  song.

Let  pouring  torrents  of  the  rain  that  raineth  rain
upon  the  earth.

5 Up  from  the  sea  lift  your  dread  might,  ye  Maruts  :

as  light  and  splendour,  send  the  vapour  upward!
Let  waters  satisfy  the  earth,  the  voices  of  the  great
mist-enveloped  Bull  who  roareth.

8 Roar,  thunder,  set  the  sea  in  agitation,  bedew  the
ground  with  thy  sweet  rain,  Parjanya !

Send  plenteous  showers  on  him  who  seeketh  shelter,
' and  let  the  owner  of  lean  kine  go  homeward.

7 Let  the  boon  Maruts,  let  the  springs  and  coiling

serpents  tend  you  well.

Urged  by  the  Maruts  let  the  clouds  pour  down  their
rain  upon  the  earth.

8 Let  lightning  flash  on  every  side:  from  all  the

regions  blow  the  winds!

Urged  by  the  Maruts  let  the  clouds  pour  down  their
rain  upon  the  earth.

9 May  waters,  lightning,  cloud,  and  rain,  boon  springs

and  serpents  tend  you  well.

Urged  by  the  Maruts  let  the  clouds  pour  down  their
rain  upon  the  earth.


4 Of  the  rain  that  raineth  rain  : varshdsya  vdrskato  iidr&hantu.

6 The  owner  of  lean  kine  : who,  as  grass  will  immediately  spring  up,
need  no  longer  search  for  pasture  for  his  cattle.

7 The  springs  : the  fountains  of  heaven.  Coiling  serpents  : ajagaras  :
literally,  ‘ goat-swallowers ; ’ pythons  ; long  fantastic-shaped  masses
of  cloud.


152  , THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  17,

10  May  he  who  hath  become  the  plants*  high  regent,

suiting  our  bodies,  Agni  of  the  W aters,

May  Jatavedas  send  us  rain  from  heaven,  Amrit  and
vital  breath  to  earthly  creatures.

11  Sending  up  waters  from  the  flood  and  ocean  Prajl-

pati  move  the  sea  to  agitation  1
Forth  flow  the  moisture  of  the  vigorous  stallion!
With  this  thy  roar  of  thunder  come  thou  hither,

12  Our  Father,  Lord  divine  pouring  the  torrents.  Let

the  streams  breathe,  O Varuna,  of  the  waters.
Pour  the  floods  down:  along  the  brooks  and  channels
let  frogs  with  speckled  arms  send  out  their  voices.

13  They  who  lay  quiet  for  a year,  the  Brahmans  who
:.:y  j fu  Ifil  their  vows,

The  frogs,  have  lifted  up  their  voice,  the  voice  Par-
janya  hath  inspired.

14  Speak  forth  a welcome,  female  frog!  Do  thou,

O frog,  accost  the  rain.

Stretch  thy  four  feet  apart,  and  swim,  swim  in  the
middle  of  the  lake.


ID  The  plants’  high  regent : * He  (Agni)  ripens  plants  of  every  form
and  nature  ’ (Rigveda  X.  88.  10).  Of  the  Waters : Agni  is  called  apam-
nap&t , Offspring  of  the  Waters,  as  being  born  in  the  shape  of  lightning
from  the  watery  clouds.

II  The  vigorous  stallion  : the  fertilizing  rain-cloud.  Similarly  :

Send  down  for  us  the  rain  of  heaven,  ye  Maruts,  and  let  the  stallion’s
streams  descend  in  torrents ? (Rigveda  V.  83.'  6).  The  last  pad  a of
this  stanza  1 1 and  the  first  pada  of  that  which  follows  make  up  the
second  hemistich  of  the  Rigveda  stanza  referred  to,  Farjanya  being
the  God  addressed.

13  The  stanza  is  taken  from.  Rigveda  VII.  103.  1.  In  that  hymn
the  frogs  rejoicing  in  the  fall  of  the  periodical  Rains  after  the  long
drought  are  represented  as  Brahmans  busily  employed  hi  the  per-
formance of  religious  eerer * i< m i es.


HTME  16  ] • THE  ATHARVA-VEEA.  153

15  Khan  vakha.  ho ! KhaimakM,  ho ! Thou  in  the

middle,  Taduri!

Fathers,  enjoy  the  rain  from  one  who  strives  to  win
the  Maruts’  heart.

16  Lift  up  the  mighty  cask  and  pour  down  water : let

the  wind  blow,  and  lightnings  flash  around  us.

Let  sacrifice  be  paid,  and,  widely  scattered,  let  herbs
and  plants  be  full  of  joy  and  gladness.

HYMN  XVI.

The  mighty  Ruler  of  these  worlds  beholds  as  though
from  close  at  hand

The  man  who  thinks  he  acts  by  stealth  : all  this  the
Gods  perceive  and  know.

2 If  a man  stands  or  walks  or  moves  in  secret,  goes  to

his  lying-down  or  his  uprising,

What  two  men  whisper  as  they  sit  together,  King
Varuna  knows  : he  as  the  third  is  present.

3 This  earth,  too,  is  King  Varuna’s  possession,  and  the

high  heaven  whose  ends  are  far  asunder.

The  loins  of  Varunia  are  both  the  oceans,  and  this
small  drop  of  water,  too,  contains  him.


15  Khanvahhd,  Khaimukltd  (onomatopoetie  words),  and  Taduri  are
names  of  frogs.

16  The  first  pMa  is  taken  from  Rigveda  Y.  83.  8.  Cask:  or,  pail ;
meaning  the  watery  cloud.


The  hymn  celebrates  the  omnipresence  and  omniscience  of  Vanina,
the  moral  Governor  of  the  world ; and  concludes  with  an  imprecation
on  an  enemy.

2 His  lying-down  or  Ms  uprising  : cf.  ‘ Thon  knowest  my  downsit-
ting And  mine  uprising  . . .Thou  compassest  my  path  And  my  lying
down.’ — Psalm  139.  2,  3.

3 Both  the  oceans : the  sea  of  air  and  the  terrestrial  ocean  ; the
waters  above  the  firmament  and  the  waters  under  the  firmament.


m ; ms  HTMtTS  OF  ' [BOOH  It,

4 If  one  should  flee  afar  beyond  the  heaven,  ■ King

Yanina  would  still  be  round  about  him.
Proceeding  hither  from  the  sky  his  envoys  look,
thousand-eyed,  over  the  earth  beneath  them.

5 All  this  the  royal  Yaruna  beholdeth,  all  between

heaven  and  earth  and  all  beyond  them.

The  twinklings  of  men’s  eyelids  hath  he  counted,  As
one  who  plays  throws  dice  he  settles  all  things.

6 Those  fatal  snares  of  thine  which  stand  extended,

threefold,  0 Yaruna,  seven  by  seven,

May  they  all  catch  the  man  who  tells  a falsehood,  and
pass  unharmed  the  man  whose  words  are  truthful.

7 Yaruna,  snare  him  with  a hundred  nooses  ! Man’s

watcher!  let  not  him  who  lies  escape  thee.

There  let  the  villain  sit  with  hanging  belly  and  band-
aged like  a cask  whose  hoops  are  broken.


4 His  envoys  : Yanina* s spies,  messengers,  or  angels  are  perhaps  the
other  Adityas.  See  Eigveda  I.  25.  13,  and  YIL  87.  3.

7 Snare  him:  mine  enemy.  Like  a cash : swollen  with  dropsy  and
bandaged  round  as  a cask  or  chest  is  bound  with  hoops  or  bands.
Dropsy,  or  some  similar  disease  seems  to  have  been  especially  regarded
as  a punishment  sent  by  Yaruna.  So  a sufferer  addresses  Varuna  (Eig-
veda VII.  89.  2) : — c When  ...  1 move  along,  tremulous  like  a wind-
blown skin,  Have  mercy,  spare  me,  mighty  Lord  ! ’ See  Zimmer,  A.  L
Leben,  p.  392.

I borrow  Dr.  Muir’s  translation  of  Professor  Roth’s  remarks  on  this
.hymn:: —

6 There  is  no  hymn  in  the  whole  Yedie  literature  which  expresses
the  divine  omniscience  in  such  forcible  terms  as  this ; and  yet  this
beautiful  description  has  been  degraded  into  an  introduction  to  an  im~
■precation.  But  in  this,  as  in  many  other  passages  of  this  Veda,  it  is
natural  to  conjecture  that  existing  fragments  of  older  hymns  have
been  used  to  deck  out  magical  formulas.  The  first  five  or  even  six
verses  of  this  hymn  might  be  regarded  as  a fragment  of  this  sort.’

The  hymn  has  been  translated,  wholly  or  in  part — stanzas  1 — 6 — ,
by  von  Both,  Abhandlung  fiber  den  Atharva-veda,  p.  29  ; by  Muir,  0.  S.
Texts,  V.  63  ; by  Kaegi,  Der  Eigveda,  89 ; by  Max  Muller,  Chips  from
a German  Workshop,  !.  41;  by  Ludwig,  Der  Eigveda,  III.  p.  388;
and  by  Grill,  with  annotations,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp,  32,  126.


HYMN  17.]

8 Varuna  sends,  and  drives  away,  diseases:  Varuna  is

both  native  and  a stranger,

Varuna  is  celestial  and  is  human.

9 I bind  and  hold  thee  fast  with  all  these  nooses,  thou

son  of  such  a man  and  such  a mother.

All  these  do  I assign  thee  as  thy  portipn,

HYMN  XVII.

We  seize  and  hold  thee,  Conquering  One  ! the  queen
of  medicines  that  heal.

O Plant,  I have  endowed  thee  with  a hundred  powers
for  every  man.

2 Still  conquering,  banishing  the  curse,  mighty,  with

thy  reverted  bloom,

Thee  and  all  Plants  have  I invoked : Hence  let  it
save  us!  was  my  prayer.

3 She  who  hath  cursed  us  with  a curse,  or  hath  con-

ceived a murderous  sin,

Or  seized  our  son  to  take  his  blood,  may  she  devour
the  child  she  bare.

4 What  magic  they  have  wrought  for  thee  in  dish  un-

baked or  burnt  dark-red,

What  they  have  wrought  in  flesh  undressed, — con-
quer the  sorcerers  therewith.

5 111  dream  and  wretchedness  of  life,  Rikshasa,  monster,

stingy  hags,

All  the  she-fiends  of  evil  name  and  voice,  we  drive
away  from  us.


THE  A Til  A It  Y A - V ED  A


The  hymn  is  a charm,  addressed  to  a plant  endowed  with  magical
virtues,  to  secure  immunity  from  various  kinds  of  evil,  and  restoration
of  health.

1 Conquering  One  : the  magical  plant  is  addressed.

2 With  thy  reverted  bloom : see  Stanza  6,  note.

3 The  stanza  is  repeated  from  I.  28.  3.

5 Stingy  hags:  Arayis;  see  I.  28.  4,  note.


58  . THE  HYMN'S  OF  [ BOOK  IV.

6 Death  caused  by  famine,  caused  by  thirst,  failure  of

children,  loss  of  kine,

With  thee,  0 Apamiirga,  all  this  ill  we  cleanse  and
wipe  away.

7 Death  caused  by  thirst,  death  caused  by  stress  of

hunger,  loss  at  play  with  dice,

All  this,  0 Apamarga,  with  thine  aid  we  cleanse  and
wipe  away.

8 The  Ap&mirga  is  alone  the  sovran  of  all  Plants  that

grow.

With  this  we  wipe  away  whate’er  hath  fallen  on
thee  : go  in  health  !

HYMN' XVIII.

The  moonlight  equalleth  the  sun,  night  is  the  rival
of  the  day.

I make  effectual  power  my  help  : let  magic  arts  be
impotent.

2 G-ods  ! if  one  make  and  bring  a spell  on  some  man’s
house  who  knows  it  not,

Close  as  the  calf  that  sucks  the  cow  may  it  revert
and  cling  to  him.


6 Apdmdrga:  (from  mrij,  to  cleanse  or  wipe,  with  apa  + d)  Achy-

Fan  thes  Aspera,  a biennial  plant  frequently  used  in  incantations,  in
medicine,  in  washing  linen,  and  in  sacrifices,  and  still  believed  to  have
the  power  of  making  men  proof  against  the  stings  of  scorpions.  It  is
called  also  pardkp-ushpi,  pratyakpushpi , and  pratyabparni  from  the
reverted  direction  of  the  growth  of  its  leaves,  flowers,  and  fruit.  See
IV.  19.  4,  7;  VI.  129.  3;  and  VII.  65.  1.  ' ■ y

7 We  demise  and  wipe  aivay  : apa  mrijmdke  ; see  note  on  stanza  8.

8 On  thee  ; some  sick  man  is  addressed.  , ■

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Zimmer,  A.  I.  Leben,  p.  60  ; and,
with  annotations,  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  87,  180.

The  hymn  is  a counter-charm  against  the  magical  incantations  of  others.

1 The  meaning  is  : lighted  by  this  full  moon  which  makes  the  night
as  bright  as  day,  I gather  a plant  whose  efficacy  is  undoubted,  which
shall  counteract  the  magical  practices  of  malignant  fiends  and  sorcerers.

2 May  it  revert ; an  allusion  to  the  reverted  leaves  of  the  plant  used
m the  incantation:  see  IT.  17.  6,  note,


HYMN  19.]  THE  ATHARYA-YEDA.  U7

3 When  one  puts  poison  in  a dish  of  unbaked  clay  to

kill  a man,

It  cracks  when  set  upon  the  fire  with  the  sharp
sound  of  many  stones.

4 Endowed  -with  thousand  powers  ! adjure  the  bald

and  those  with  necks  awry.

Back  to  its  author  turn  the  spell  like  a dear  damsel
to  her  friend !

5 I with  this  Plant  have  ruined  all  malignant  powers

of  witchery,

The  spell  which  they  have  laid  upon  thy  field,  thy
cattle,  or  thy  men.

6 No  power  had  he  who  wrought  the  spell:  he  hurt

his  foot,  he  broke  his  toe.

His  act  hath  brought  us  happiness  and  pain  and  sor-
row to  himself.

7 Let  Apamarga  sweep  away  chronic  disease  and  every

curse,

Sweep  sorceresses  clean  away,  and  all  malignant
stingy  hags.

8 Sweep  thou  away  the  sorcerers,  all  stingy  fiendish

hags  away.

All  this,  0 Apamarga,  with  thine  aid  we  wipe  away
from  us.

HYMN  XIX.

Thou  breakest  ties  of  kith  and  kin,  thou  causest,  too,
relationship :


4 Endowed  with  thousand  %)Oioers  //the  plant  is  addressed.  The  bald
mid  those  with  necks  awry:  hairless  goblins  whose  heads  are  twisted  round.

7 Aptimdrga : the  magical  plant  (Achy ranthes  Aspera) : see  IV.  17.  6.
Chrome  disease  ; kshetriyd  ; see  II.  8.  1.

The  hymn  has  been  translated,  with  annotations,  by  Grill,  Hundert
Lieder,  pp.  25,  131.

The  hymn  is  a charm,  like  the  preceding  hymn,  to  counteract  the
incantations  of  enemies,  and  to  secure  general  protection  for  the  speaker.
1 Thou  : the  plant  Apamarga  (see  IV,  17,  6)  is  addressed.  ,


i :■  : ; ■:  : the  htmfs  of  [BOOK  IV.

So  braise  the  sorcerer’s  offspring,  like  a reed  that
groweth  in  the  Rams.

2 Thou  hast  been  blessed  with  blessing  by  the  Br&h-

man,  Kan va  N&rshada.

Thou  fliest  like  a flashing  dart : there  is  no  fear  or
danger,  Plant!  within  the  limit  of  thy  range.

3 Illumining,  as  ’twere,  with  light,  thou  too  vest  at  the

head  of  plants.

The  saviour  of  the  simple  man  art  thou,  and  slayer
of  the  fiends.

4 As  once  when  time  began  the  Gods  with  thee  ex-

pelled the  Asuras,

Even  thenee,  O Plant,  wast  thou  produced  as  one
who  wipes  and  sweeps  away.

5 Thy  father  s name  was  Cleaver.  Thou  with  thousand

branches  cleavest  all.

Do  thou,  turned  backward,  cleave  and  rend  the  man
who  treateth  us  as  foes.

6 The  evil  sprang  from  earth  ; it  mounts  to  heaven  and

spreads  to  vast  extent.

Reverted,  shaking  him  with  might,  thenee  on  its
maker  let  it  fall.


M or  thou  hast  grown  reverted,  and  turned  backward
also  is  thy  fruit.

Remove  all  curses  far  from  me,  keep  most  remote
the  stroke  of  death.

Preserve  roe  with  a hundred,  yea,  protect  me  with  a
thousand  aids.

May  mighty  Indra,  Lord  of  Plants!  give  store  of
strength  and  power  to  thee.

HYMN  XX.

It  sees  in  front,  it  sees  behind,  it  sees  afar  away,
it  sees  J

The  sky,  the  firmament,  and  earth  : ail  this,  O God-
dess, it  behoids.

Through  thee,  0 godlike  Plant,  may  I behold  all
creatures  that  exist,

Three  several  heavens,  three  several  earths,  and
these  six  regions  one  by  one.


.8  Thousand  aids:  with  reference  to  the  thousand  branches  of  the
plant  (stanza  5).

tranSlated’  Witfe  a!iaotafcioi)s-  by  Grill,  Hundert

.,  The 'hymn is  a charm,  addressed  to  a magical  plant,  for  the  acquisi-
tion  of  superhuman  powers  of  sight.  1

1 It  .-the  magical  plant  O Goddess:  the  divine  plant  is  directly
a dressed  and  also  spoken  of  m the  third  person.  The  plant  is  said  by
Danin  to  he  the  sadampushpA  (Semperflorens,  Ever-blooming)  not  yet
identified.  Ite  virtues  resemble  those  attributed  in  England  ^to

, together  with  Rue  and
the  Archangel  Michael  ‘purged  the
)>  and  enabled  him  to


identified.  Its  virtues  i ’ ’

Euphrasy  or  Eyebright,  the  plant  with  which,

three  drops  from  the  well  of  Life  , C_  :

visual  nerve’  of  Adam  (Paradise  Lost,  XL  414  V
look  into  the  distant  future.

2 Three  several  heavens : the  world  is  divide*
heaven  ; and  each  of  these,  again,  is  frequently


THE  IIYMFS  OF


[BOOK  IF,

3 The  pupil,  verily,  art  thou  of  that  celestial  Eagle’s  eye.
On  earth  hast  thou  alighted  as  a weary  woman  seeks

her  couch.

4 The  God  who  hath  a thousand  eyes  give  me  this

Plant  in  my  right  hand  !

I look  on  every  one  therewith,  each  Sudra  and  each
Aryan  man.

5 Make  manifest  the  forms  of  things ; hide  not  their

essences  from  sight.

And,  thou  who  hast  a thousand  eyes,  look  the  Kiixix-
dins  in  the  face.

6 Make  me  see  Y&tudkanas,  make  thou  Ydtudbanis

visible.

Make  me  see  all  Pis&chas.  With  this  prayer,  O Plant,
I hold  thee  fast.

7 Thou  art  the  sight  of  Kasyapa  and  of  the  hound  who

hath  four  eyes.

Make  the  Pis&cha  manifest  as  Stirya  when  he  rides
at  noon.


3 The  celestial  Eagle  is  Garutman,  the  Sun.  Couch : vahydm  (from
■vah,  to  cany) ; originally,  a portable  bed  or  litter.

4 The  God  who  hath  a thousand  eyes:  Indra ; as  he  is  chief  Regent
of  the  atmosphere,  his  countless  eyes  may  be  the  stars.  Sudra  and
Aryan : men  of  the  labouring  class,  and  men  of  the  three  higher
classes,  that  is  Brahmans  (the  priestly  caste),  Rajanyas  or  Kshatriyas
(the  regal  and  military  caste),  and  Vaisyas  (husbandmen  and  trades-
men). The  four  castes  are  mentioned  only  once  in  the  Eigveda
(X.  90.  12).  See  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  1 1.  368  ; Ludwig,  Der  Eigveda,
III.  .212;  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  pp.  117  sqq.,  204,  216,  435.

5 Kimkiins  : see  I,  7.  1.

6 Ydtudhdnas.. . Ydtudhdrds  : see  I.  7,  1 ; 8.  1.  Pisdchas : see  I.  16,  3,

• 7 Kasyapa  : one  of  a class  of  semi-divine  spirits  or  genii  connected

with  or  regulating  the  course  of  the  Sun.  Four  eyes : that  is,  probably,
two  eyes  with  a large  spot  above  each.  Cf.  J And  those  two  dogs  of
thine,  Yama  1 the  watchers,  four-eyed,  who  look  on  men  and  guard
the  pathway3 4 5 6 7  (Eigveda.  X.  14.  11).  The  substantive  in  the  text  is
feminine,  sunyds,  bitch.


161


IIY1IN  21.]  THE  ATIIARVA-VEDA.

8 Iviimdin,  Yatudhana  from  their  hiding-places  have

I  dragged.

I look  on  every  one  with  this,  SMra  and  Aryan  man
alike.

9 Make  that  Pisacha  visible,  the  fiend  who  flies  in

middle  air,

The  fiend  who  glides  across  the  sky,  and  him  who
deems  the  earth  his  help.

HYMN  XXL

The  kine  have  come  and  brought  good  fortune  : let
them  rest  in  the  cow-pen  and  be  happy  near  us.
Here  let  them  stay  prolific,  many-coloured,  and  yield
through  many  morns  their  milk  for  Indra.

2 Indra  aids  him  who  offers  sacrifice  and  praise  he

takes  not  what  is  his,  and  gives  him  more  thereto.
Increasing  ever  more  and  ever  more  his  wealth,
he  makes  the  pious  dwell  within  unbroken  bounds.

3 These  are  ne’er  lost,  no  robber  ever  injures  them  :

no  evil-minded  foe  attempts  to  harass  them.

The  master  of  the  kine  lives  a longlife  with  these,  the
Cows  whereby  he  pours  his  gifts  and  serves  the  Gods.

8 With  this : tenet,  masculine,  meaning,  not  directly  the  plant,  but  the
God  or  divine  power  within  it.

9 Who  flies  in  middle  air : as  witches  in  Europe  were  popularly
believed  to  do.  Deems  the  earth  his  help  : and  is  satisfied  with  holes
and  caverns  as  hiding-places.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Eigyeda,  III,  p.  025  ■

and,  with  annotations,  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp,  2,  133.

The  hymn,  taken  with  slight  variations  from  Eigveda  VL  28.  I~~~?

is  a glorification  and  benediction  addressed  to  Cows.

3 These  are  ne'er  lost : according  to  S&yana,  the  indicative  mood
here  has  an  imperative  force : let  them  not  be  lost,  let  not  the  robber
assail  them.  - -


62  THE  ATEARVA-VEDA,  [BOOK  IT.

4 The  charger  with  his  dusty  brow  o’ertakes  them  not,

and  never  to  the  shambles  do  they  take  their  way.
These  Cows,  the  cattle  of  the  pious  worshipper,  roam
over  wide-spread  pasture  where  no  danger  is.

5 To  me  the  Cows  seem  Bhaga,  they  seem  Indra,

they  seem  a portion  of  the  first-poured  Soma.
These  present  Cows,  they,  O ye  men,  are  Indra.
I long  for  Indra  with  my  heart  and  spirit.

6 0 Cows,  ye  fatten  e’en  the  worn  and  wasted,  and

make  the  unlovely  beautiful  to  look  on.

Prosper  my  home,  ye  with  auspicious  voices ! Your
power  is  magnified  in  our  assemblies.

7 In  goodly  pasturage,  bright-hued,  prolific,  drinking

pure  water  at  fair  drinking-places,

Never  be  thief  or  sinful  man  your  master,  and  may
the  dart  of  Rudra  still  avoid  you  I

HYMN  XXII.

Exalt  and  strengthen  this  my  Prince,  O Indra,
Make  him  sole  lord  and  leader  of  the  people.
Scatter  his  foes,  deliver  all  his  rivals  into  his  hand  in
struggles  for  precedence,

2 Give  him  a share  in  village,  kine,  and  horses,  and
leave  his  enemy  without  a portion,


4 The  charger- . . ? , overtakes  them  not : they  are  not,  or,  according  to
Sayana,  let  them  not  be,  carried  off  in  predatory  incursions.

5 The  owner  of  the  cows  regards  them  as  the  deities  Bhaga  and
Indra,  the  representatives  of  prosperity  and  power.  They  seem  a por-
tion: their  milk  is  as  pleasant  and  efficacious  as  Soma  juice.  They,
0 ye  men , are  Indra : an  imitation  of  the  refrain,  £ Ho,  0 ye  men,
is  Indra’  (Eigveda  II.  13).

7 Rudra : see  note  on  I.  19.  3.


The  hymn  is  a benediction  on  a newly-consecrated  King.

1 Prince : hshatriyam ; ruler,  applied  in  the  Eigveda  to  Vanina,
■Mitra,:, and.  other  Gods ; here  meaning  a Prince  or  King.


HYMN  23.]  THE  ATHABVA-VEDA.  163

Let  him  as  King  be  bead  and  chief  of  Princes.  Give
up  to  him,  0 Indra,  every  foeman.

3 Let  him  be  treasure-lord  of  goodly  treasures,  let  him

as  King  be  master  of  the  people.

Grant  unto  him  great  power  and  might,  0 Indra,
and  strip  his  enemy  of  strength  and  vigour.

4 Like  milch-kine  yielding  milk  for  warm  libations,  pour.

Heaven  and  Earth ! on  him  full  many  a blessing.
May  he  as  King  be  Indra’s  well-belovhd,  the  darling
of  the  kine,  the  plants,  the  cattle.

5 I join  in  league  with  thee  victorious  Indra,  with

whom  men  conquer  and  are  ne’er  defeated.

He  shall  make  thee  the  folk’s  sole  lord  and  leader,
shall  make  thee  highest  of  all  human  rulers.

6 Supreme  art  thou,  beneath  thee  are  thy  rivals,

and  all,  0 King,  who  were  thine  adversaries.

Sole  lord  and  leader  and  allied  with  Indra,  bring,
conqueror,  thy  foemen’s  goods  and  treasures.

7 Consume,  with  lion  aspect,  all  their  hamlets,  with

tiger  aspect,  drive  away  thy  foemen.

Sole  lord  and  leader  and  allied  with  Indra,  seize,  con-
queror, thine  enemies’  possessions.

HYMN  XXIII.

I Fix  my  heart  on  wise  and  ancient  Agni,  the  Five
Tribes’  Lord,  in  many  a place  enkindled.


2 Of  Princes:  members  of  the  same  regal  family.  Cf.  f Give  him
highest  rank  among  his  kinsmen*  (I.  9.  3).

5 In  this  and  the  two  following  stanzas  the  King  is  addressed.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Bigveda,  III.  457  ;
by  Zimmer,  Altindisehes  Leben,  p.  165 ; and,  with  annotations,  by
Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  67,  135.

The  hymn  is  a magnification  of  Agni  and  a prayer  for  his  protection.
The  Five  Tribes ' Lord:  the  special  tutelary  deity  of  the  Five
Aryan  Tribes.  See  II.  2.  1,  note.

But,  for  other  opinions  regarding  the  five  peoples,  races,  or  tribes*
:see  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  II.  pp.  176  sqq.


'164  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  It.

We  seek  him  who  hath  entered  all  our  houses.  May
he  deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble,

; 2 As  thou  conveyest  offerings,  Jifcavedas ! and  fash  ion
esfc  the  sacrifice  with  knowledge,

' So  bear  thou  to  the  Gods  the  prayer  we  utter.  May
he  deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble.

3 I pray  to  Agni  in  each  act  successful,  employed

in  every  sacrifice,  the  strongest,

Fiend-slayer,  served  with  fatness,  strengthening
worship.  May  he  deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble.

4 We  invoke  the  oblation-bearer,  well-born  Agni

■Jatavedas,

Him,  Vaisvanara,  almighty.  May  he  set  us  free  from
. trouble/

5 With  whom  as  friend  the  Rishis  gave  their  power

new  splendour,  with  whom  they  kept  aloof  the
A suras’  devices,

Agni,  with  whom  Indra  subdued  the  Partis.  May  he
deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble.

6 Through  whom  the  Gods  discovered  life  eternal,

through  whom  they  stored  the  plants  with  pleasant
juices,

Through  whom  they  brought  to  men  the  light  of
heaven.  May  he  deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble.

7 I,  suppliant,  praise  and  ever  call  on  Agni,  sole  Lord

of  all  this  world,  of  all  that  shineth,

Of  what  exists  and  shall- exist  hereafter.  May  he
deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble.


5 The  Eishis : ancient  saints  and  sages,  bards  and  seers  of  the  sacred

hymns  of  the  Sigveda.  Pams  : a class  of  demons  of  darkness  who
.steal  the  cows  of  the  Gods  and  shut  them  up  in  caverns,  that  is,  con-
ceal the  rays  of  daylight  in  dark  clouds.  See  Hymns  of  the  Kigveda,
General  Index  II.  ,

6 Discovered  life  eternal were  made  immortal.  See  TI.  1.  5.  Stored
the  plants : Agni  is  said  to  bring  all  plants  to  maturity.


THE  AT II  ARY A-V ED  A.


'UtMN  ,24.]

HYMN  XXIV.

I think  of  Indra,  only  him  for  ever,  fiend-slayer.
May  these  lauds  of  mine  come  near  him.

He  Cometh  to  the  pious  offerer’s  calling.  May  he
deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble.

2 Who  with  strong  arms  o’ereame  his  strong  oppo-
nents, who  broke  and  ‘crushed  the  power  of  the
demons,

Who  won  the  rivers  and  the  kine  in  battle.  May  he
deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble.

8 Ruler  of  men,  finder  of  light,  the  hero  : the  pressing-
stones  declare  his  valour,  master
Of  sweetest  sacrifice  with  seven  Hotars.  May  he
deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble.

4 The  lord  of  barren  cows  and  bulls  and  oxen,  finder

of  light  for  whom  the  posts  are  planted,

For  whom  the  bright  juice  flows  cleansed  by  devo-
tion. May  he  deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble.

5 Whose  favour  those  desire  who  offer  Soma,  whom,

arrow-bearer,  men  invoke  in  battle,

On  whom  the  hymn  depends,  in  whom  is  power.
May  he  deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble.

6 Who  was  born,  first,  for  active  operation,  whose

valour  as  the  first  hath  been  awakened,

Who  raised  his  bolt  when  he  encountered  Ahi.  May
he  deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble.


A hymn  of  praise  and  prayer  to  fndra.

2 The  rivers  and  the  cows : the  imprisoned  waters  of  the  air  and  the
rays  of  daylight  for  which  Indra  fought  with  the  fiend  Vritra  or  Ahi,
that  is,  the  huge  mass  of  cloud  that  obstructed  them,

3 Pressings! ones  : which  extract  the  juice  of  the  Soma  plant,  Tndra’s
favourite  drink.  With  seven  Hotars  : performed  by  the  Hotar  (see  I,
11)  and  six  assistant  priests.

4 The  lord  of : to  whom  are  offered.  The  _pos<s : to  which  sacrificial,
victims  are  i 1 1.

6 Ahi : the  Dragon  or  Serpent,  Vritra.


166


TUN  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  If.

7 Strong  Lord,  who  ieadeth  hosts  to  meet  for  battle,
who  sendeth  riches  both  of  earth  and  heaven,—

I,  suppliant,  praise  and  ever  call  on  Ittdra.  May  he
deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble.

HYMN  XXV.

1  think  on  V&yu’s  and  Savitar’s  holy  rites,  ye  twain
who  penetrate  and  guard  the  living  world  :

Ye  who  have  come  to  be  this  All’s  per vaders,  deliver
us,  ye  two,  from  grief  and  trouble.

2 Ye  who  have  counted  up  the  earth’s  expanses,  and

in  the  sky  smoothed  out  the  air’s  mid-region,
Whose  guing-forth  hath  ne’er  been  reached  by  any,
deliver  us,  ye  two,  from  grief  and  trouble.

3 Beauteously  bright ! men  rest  in  thy  dominion  when

thou  hast  risen  up  and  hastened  onward.

Ye,  V&yu,  SaVitar,  preserve  all  creatures.  Deliver  us,
ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble.

4 Hence,  V&yu,  Savitar,  drive  evil  action,  chase  Simid&

a\yay,  drive  off  the  demons.

Ye  give  us  store  of  energy  and  power.  Deliver  us,
ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble.

5 Of  their  own  selves  let  Savitar  and  V&yu  send

favourable  strength  and  wealth  and  plenty.

Here  give  us  perfect  freedom  from  consumption.
Deliver  us,  ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble.

6 Ye,  Savitar  and  V&yu,  to  assist  us,  enjoy  the  hymn

and  the  delightful  eheerer.

Gome  hither  downward  from  the  stream  of  blessing.
Deliver  us,  ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble.


A hymn  of  praise  and  prayer  to  V&yu  God  of  Wind  and  Savitar  the
Sun-God.

4 Simidd : apparently  a female  demon,  or  a disease  attributed  to  her
malevolence,  4 May  all  the  rivers  keep  us  free  from  Simidi  ’ (Bigveda
VII.  50.  4).  .

6 Cheer er : the  exhilarating  Soma  juice.  The  stream  of  blessing  r
the  firmament  and  heaven  whence  rain  and  other  blessings  flow.


THE  A THAEVA-  VEDA


amw:;  m.}

7 Like  noblest  benisons  they  have  stayed  in  the  God-
loving  mail’s  abode.

I  glorify  bright  Savitar  and  Vayu.  Deliver  us,
ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble.

HYMN  XXVI.

O Heaven  and  Earth,  I think  on  you,  wise,  givers  of
abundant  gifts,  ye  who  through  measureless
expanses  have  spread  forth.

For  ye  are  seats  and  homes  of  goodly  treasures.
Deliver  us,  ye  twain  from  grief  and  trouble.

2 Yea,  seats  and  homes  are  ye  of  goodly  treasures,

grown  strong,  divine,  blessed,  and  far-extending.
To  me,  0 Heaven  and  Earth,  be  ye  auspicious.
Deliver  us,  ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble.

3 I call  on  you  who  warm  and  cause  no  sorrow,  deep,

spacious,  meet  to  be  adored  by  poets.

To  me,  0 Heaven  and  Earth,  be  ye  auspicious.
Deliver  us,  ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble.

4 Ye  who  maintain  Amrit  and  sacrifices,  ye  who  sup-

port rivers  and  human  beings,

To  me,  O Heaven  and  Earth,  be  ye  auspicious.
Deliver  us,  ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble.

5 Ye  hy  whom  cows  and  forest  trees  are  cherished,

within  whose  range  all  creatures  are  included,

To  me,  O Heaven  and  Earth,  be  ye  auspicious.
Deliver  us,  ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble.

6 Ye  who  delight  in  nectar  and  in  fatness,  ye  without

whom  men  have  no  strength  or  power,

To  me,  O Heaven  and  Earth,  be  ye  auspicious.
Deliver  us,  ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble.

7 The  grief  that  pains  me  here,  whoever  caused  it,

not  sent  by  fate,  hath  sprung  from  human  action.
I,  suppliant,  praise  Heaven,  Earth,  and  oft  invoke
them.  Deliver  us,  ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble.

A hymn  of  praise  and  prayer  to  Heaven  and  Earth,  the  Parents  of  all.

4 Amrit:  here  meaning  the  life-giving  rain  on  which  the  perfor-
mance of  sacrifices  depends.


THE  HYMNS  OF


[BOOK  IF,

■ HYMN  XXVII.  ■

I  think  upon  the  Maruts  : may  they  bless  me,  may
, they  assist  me  to  this  wealth  in  battle.  i

I call  them  like  swift  well-trained  steeds  to  help  us.
May  they  deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble.

2 Those  who  surround  the  never-failing  fountain  for

ever,  and  bedew  the  plants  with  moisture,

The  Maruts,  Prisni’s  sons,  I chiefly  honour.  May
they  deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble.

3 Bards,  who  invigorate  the  milk  of  milch-kine,  the

sap  of  growing,  plants,  the  speed  of  coursers —

To  us  may  the  strong  Maruts  be  auspicious.  May
they  deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble.

4 They  -who  raised  water  from  the  sea  to  heaven  and

send  it  from  the  sky  to  earth  in  showers,

The  Maruts  who  move  mighty  with  their  waters,
may  they  deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble.

5 They  who  delight  in  nectar  and  in  fatness,  they

who  bestow  upon  us  health  and  vigour,

The  Maruts  who  rain  mighty  with  their  waters,  may
they  deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble.

6 Whether  with  stormy  might  the  Maruts  stablished

this  All,  or  Gods  with  their  celestial  power,

Ye,  kindly  Gods,  are  able  to  restore  it.  May  they
deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble.

7 Potent  in  battles  is  the  Maruts’  army,  impetuous

train,  well-known,  exceeding  mighty.

I,  suppliant,  praise  and  oft  invoke  the  Maruts.  May
they  deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble.


A hymn  of  praise  and  prayer  to  the  Maruts,  the  terrible  Gods  of  battle,
storm,  and  tempest,  and  the  gracious  senders  of  the  refreshing  rain.

2 Prism's  sons : the  Maruts  are  the  sons  of  Eudra  and  Prism,  the
speckled  cloud.  See  II.  1.1.  The  never-failing  fountain : the  rain-cloud.

3 Sards:  ehantersof  their  thunder-psalm  with  the  mnsleof  the  winds.
6 To  restore  it : with  seasonable  rain.

see  III.  1.  2.


7 Pot  nt  ‘ii  ba  ties


THE  A THAR  7 A-  VEDA,


HYMN  2$>1


I  reverb  toes  you — -mark  this — Bhava.  and  barva,
ye  under  whose  control  is  this  that  shineth,

Lords  of  this  world  both  quadruped  and  biped.
Deliver  us,  ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble.

2 Lords  of  all  near  and  even  of  what  is  distant,  famed

as  the  best  and  skilfuliest  of  archers,

Lords  of  this  world  both  quadruped  and  biped,  deliver
us,  ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble.

3 Thousand-eyed  foe-destroyers,  I invoke,  you,  still

praising  you  the  strong,  of  wide  dominion  :

Lords  of  this  world  both  quadruped  and  biped,  deliver
us,  ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble.

4 Ye  who  of  old  wrought  many  a deed  in  concert,  and

showed  among  mankind  unhappy  omens;

Lords  of  this  world  both  quadruped  and  biped,  deliver
us,  ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble.

5 Ye  from  the  stroke  of  whose  destroying  weapon  not

one  among  the  Gods  or  men  escapeth,

Lords  of  this  world  both  quadruped  and  biped,  deliver
us,  ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble.

6 Hurl  your  bolt,  strong  Gods,  at  the  Y&tudh&na,  him

who  makes  ready  roots  and  deals  in  magic:

Lords  of  this  world  both  quadruped  and  biped,  deliver
us,  ye  twain  from  grief  and  trouble.


A hymn  of  praise  and  prayer  to  Bhava  and  Sarva,  two  deities  gene-
rally mentioned  together  and  more  or  less  connected  with  Rudra.

1 This  that  shineth : all  the  radiant  world.  Bhava  and  Sarva : Bhava
is  sometimes  explained  as  ‘the  existent,’  ‘the  eternal,’,  sometimes  as  e the
producer  of  everything,’  so  that  according  to  the  latter  explanation  he
is  the  exact  opposite  of  Sarva  c the  destroyer  : ’ and  possibly  the  term
(Bhava)  has  been  formed  with  the  view  of  propitiating  the  terrible
god  by  a -favourable  name.  (Abridged  from  Muir’s  translation  of  a
note  by  Weber : see  0.  S.  Texts,  IV.  p.  428).

• , The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  IV.  p.  332.


170


THE  HYMNS  OF


[BOOK  If.


7 Comfort  and  aid  us,  ye  strong  Gods,  in  battles,
at  each  Kimidin  send  your  bolt  of  thunder.

I,  suppliant,  praise  and  ever  call  on  Bhava  and  Sarva.
Set  us  free  from  grief  and  trouble.

HYMN  XXIX.

You  twain,  O Mitra,  Varuna,  I honour,  Law-
strengtheners,  wise,  who  drive  away  oppressors.

Ye  who  protect  the  truthful  in  his  battles,  deliver
us,  ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble.

2 Ye  the  wise  Gods  who  drive  away  oppressors,
ye  who  protect  the  truthful  in  his  battles,

Who  come,  men’s  guards,  to  juice  pressed  forth  by
Babhru,  deliver  us,  ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble.

A hymn  of  praise  and  prayer  to  Mitra- Varuna,  or  Mitra  and  Varuna
as  a dual  deity  ( Mitravtivunau ).

1 The  truthful:  according  to  the  St.  P.  Dictionary,  Satyavan  is  a

man's  name.  '

2 Babhrii;  a king  whom  the  Asvins  assisted  in  his  trouble  (Rigveda
VIII.  22.  10).  Agasti : more  commonly  called  Agastya,  a very  cele-
brated Rishi  and  seer  of  twenty-five  hymns  of  Rook  I.  of  the  Bigveda.
He  is  one  of  those  indefinable  mythic  personages  who  are  found  in  the
ancient  traditions  of  many  nations,  and  in  whom  eosmogonical  or  astro-
nomical notions  are  generally  figured.  Thus  it  is  related  of  Agastya  that
the  Vindhyan  Mountains  prostrated  themselves  before  him;  and  yet
the  same  Agastya  is  believed  to  be  the  regent  of  the  star  Canopus.  In
the  Ramayana  he  appears  as  the  friend  and  counsellor  of  Rama.  Atri  :
one  of  the  great  Seven  Rishis,  frequently  mentioned  in  the  Bigveda
and  said  to  have  been  delivered  from  distress  by  Indra  and  by  the
Asvins  (Rigveda  I.  51.  3,  and  112.  7).  A ngiras : one  of  the  Seven
Rishis  and  the  seer  of  a number  of  the  Rigveda  hymns.  Jamadagni :
a celebrated  ancient  Rishi.  See  II.  32.  3.  Kasyapa  also  is  a well-known
Vedic  sage,  and  Vasishtha  is  especially  famous  as  the  great  adversary
of  Visvamitra.  Of  the  names  which  follow,  Saptavadhri  is  said  (Rig-
veda V.  78.  8)  to  have  been  delivered  from  trouble  by  the  Asvins  ;
Vadkryasva  is  mentioned  (Rigveda  VI.  81.  1)  as  a worshipper  of  Sara-
svati,  and  (X.  69.)  as  a special  worshipper  and  favourite  of  Agni.  The
rest  are  Rishis  and  seers  of  hymns,  of  more  or  less  celebrity,  and  all
are  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda,  none  being,  however,  represented  as
having  been  especially  favoured  by  Mitra  and  Varuna  who  in  this
hymn  are  glorified  as  their  protectors.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  137,


HYMN  30.]  ' THS  ATHARYA-VEDA.  171

3 Mitra  and  Varuna  who  help  Agas.ti,  Atri,  and  Angi-

ras,  and  Jamadagni,

Ye  who  help  Kasyapa,  who  help  Vasishtha,  deliver
us,  ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble.

4 Mitra  and  Varuna,  who  help  Sy&v&sva,  Atri,  and

Purumilha,  and  Vadhryasva,

Ye  who  help  Viniada  and  Saptavadhri,  deliver  us,
ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble.

5 Ye,  Varuna,  Mitra,  who  give  aid  to  Kutsa,  Gavish-

thira,  Bharadvaja,  Visvamitra,

Who  help  Kakshivan  and  give  aid  to  Kanva,  deliver
us,  ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble.

6 Ye,  Mitra,  Varuna,  who  help  Trisoka,  Medhitithi,

and  Usamt  son  of  Kavi,

Ye,  Gotama’s  and  Mudgala’s  protectors,  deliver  us,
ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble.

7 Whose  straight-reined  car  thatkeeps  the  track  of  good-

ness assails  and  ruins  him  who  walks  perversely—
I,  suppliant,  praise  with  constant  invocation  Mitra
and  Varuna.  Save  us  from  affliction.

HYMN  XXX.

I travel  with  the  Rudras  and  the  Vasus,  with  the
Adityas  and  All-Gods  I wander.

I hold  aloft  both  Varuna  and  Mitra,  I hold  aloft
Indra  and  both  the  Asvins.

2 I am  the  Queen,  the  gatherer-up  of  treasures,  most
thoughtful,  first  of  those  who  merit  worship.

The  Gods,  making  me  enter  many  places,  in  divers
spots  have  set  mine  habitation.


The  hymn,  which  is  taken  from  Rigveda  X.  125,  is  a glorification
of  Vitk,  Speech  personified  and  deified,  the  Word,  the  first  creation
and  representation  of  Spirit,  and  the  means  of  communication  between
men  and  Gods.

1 Vith  speaks.  Rudras  : the  Sons  of  Rudra,  the  Marats  or  Storm-
Gods.  The  Yarns:  considered  as  a separate^  class,  eight  deities  fre-
quently mentioned  in  connexion  with  the  Adityas  and  the  Rudras.
All-Gods : the  Fisvedevas,  here  regarded  as  a separate  class.


172  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IV

3 I,  verily,  myself  announce  and  utter  the  word  that

Gods  and  men  alike  shall  welcome.

I make  the  man  I love  exceeding  mighty,  make  him
a sage,  a Ttishi,  and  a Brahman.

4 Through  me  alone  all  eat  the  food  that  feeds  them,  each

man  who  sees,  breathes,  hears  the  word  out-spoken.
They  know  it  not,  but  yet  they  dwell  beside  me.
Hear,  one  and  all,  the  truth  as  I declare  it.

5 I bend  the  bow  for  Rudra  that  his  arrow  may  strike

and  slay  the  hater  of  devotion.

I rouse  and  order  battle  for  the  people,  and  I have
penetrated  Earth  and  Heaven.

6 I cherish  and  sustain  high-swelling  Soma,  and

Tvashtar  I support,  Phshan,  and  Bhaga.

I load  with  wealth  the  zealous  sacrificer  who  pours
the  juice  and  offers  his  oblation.

7 On  the  world’s  summit  I bring  forth  the  Rather:

my  home  is  in  the  waters,  in  the  ocean.

Thence  I extend  o’er  all  existing  creatures,  and
touch  even  yonder  heaven  with  my  forehead.

8 I breathe  a strong  breath  like  the  wind  and  tempest,

the  while  I hold  together  all  existence.

Beyond  this  wide  earth  and  beyond  the  heavens
I have  become  so  mighty  in  my  grandeur.


7 The  Father:  Dyu  or  Dyaus  = Zeus,  Heaven  or  Sky,  produced  from
Yak  identified  with  Paramatina,  the  Supreme  and  Universal  Soul.

Mr.  Wallis  observes : ‘Vac,  ‘Speech’  is  celebrated  alone  in  two
whole  hymns  [of  the  Eigveda],  X.  71  and  X.  125,  of  which  the  former
shows  that  the  primary  application  of  the  name  was  to  the  voice  of
the  hymn,  the  means  of  communication  between  heaven  and  earth  at
the  sacrifice.  The  other  hymn  illustrates  the  constant  assimilation  of
the  varied  phenomena  of  nature  to  the  sacrifice ; all  that  has  a voice
in  nature,  the  thunder  of  the  storm,  the  re-awaking  of  life  at  dawn,
with  songs  of  rejoicing  over  the  new  birth  of  the  world,  are  embodied
in  this  Vac  in  the  same  way  as  it  is  said  of  Brihasp'ati  that  he  em-
braces all  things  that  are.  It  is  thus  another  expression  for  that  idea
of  the  unity  of  the  world,  which  we  have  seen  crowning  the  mystical
speculations  of  all  the  more  abstract  hymns  of  the  collection  ’ (Cosmo-
logy of  the  Rigveda,  p.  85).


HYMN  31.]

HYMN  XXXI.

Borne  on  with  thee,  0 Manyu  girt  by  Maruts,
let  our  brave  men,  impetuous,  bursting  forward,
March  on,  like  flames  of  fire  in  form,  exulting,
with  pointed  arrows,  sharpening  their  weapons.

2 Flashing  like  fire,  be  thou,  O conquering  Manyu,

invoked,  .0  victor,  as  our  army’s  leader.

Slay  thou  our  foes,  distribute  their  possessions  : show
forth  thy  vigour,  scatter  those  who  hate  us.

3 0 Manyu,  overcome  those  who  assail  us.  On !

breaking,  slaying,  crushing  down  the  foemen.
They  have  not  hindered  thine  impetuous  vigour:
mighty  ! sole-born  ! reduce  them  to  subjection.

4 Alone  of  many  thou  art  worshipped,  Manyu  : sharpen

the  spirit  of  each  clan  for  combat.

With  thee  to  aid,  O thou  of  perfect  splendour,
we  raise  the  glorious  battle-shout  for  conquest.

5 Unyielding,  bringing  victory  like  Indra,  O Manyu,

be  thou  here  our  sovran  ruler.

To  thy  dear  name,  O victor,  we  sing  praises:  we
know  the  spring  from  which  thou  art  come  hither.

6 Twin-born  with  power,  destructive  bolt  of  thunder!

the  highest  conquering  might  is  thine,  subduer  1
Be  friendly  to  us  in  thy  spirit,  Manyu!  O much-
invoked,  in  shock  of  mighty  battle  !

7 For  spoil  let  Vanina  and  Manyu  give  us  the  wealth

of  both  sides  gathered  and  collected  ;

And  let  our  enemies  with  stricken  spirits,  over-
whelmed with  terror,  slink  away  defeated.


THE  AT  II  ARY A-V ED  A


The  hymn,  which  is  taken  from  the  Eigveda  (X.  84),  is  a battle-
addressed  to  Manyu,  Wrath  or  Warlike  Ardour  personified  and  de
1 Like  flames  of  fire  in  form:  agnirApah ; Homer’s  Ssfiag  u
alOo/Ltsvoio  (II.  11.  596).

3 Sole-bom : having  none  to  rival  thee  in  thine  own  province,
,5  The  spring : the  divine  transcendental  source.


174


TUB  HYMNS  OF


[BOOK  IV.


HYMN  XXXII.

He  who  hathreverenced  thee,  Man yu, destructive  bolt  !

breeds  for  himself  forthwith  all  conquering  energy.
Arya  and  D&sa  will  we  conquer  with  thine  aid,  with
thee  the  eonqueror,  with  conquest  conquest-sped.

2 Manyu  was  Indra,  yea,  the  God  was  Manyu  ; Manyu

was  Hotar,  Vanina,  Jhfcavedas.

The  tribes  of  human  lineage  worship  Manyu.  Accord-
ant, with  thy  fervour,  Manyu  ! guard  us.  :

3 Come  hither,  Manyu,  mightier  than  the  mighty  :

smite,  with  thy  fervour  for  ally,  our  foemen.

Slayer  of  foes,  of  Vritra,  and  of  Dasyu,  bring  thou
to  us  all  kinds  of  wealth  and  treasure.

4 For  thou  art,  Manyu,  of  surpassing  vigour,  fierce,

queller  of  the  foe,  and  self-existent,

Shared  by  all  men,  victorious,  subduer  : vouchsafe
to  us  superior  strength  in  battles.

5 I have  departed  still  without  a portion,  wise  God  !

according  to  thy  will,  the  mighty.

I,  feeble  man,  was  wroth  with  thee,  O Manyu.  Come
in  thy  proper  form  and  give  us  vigour.

G Come  hither,  I am  all  thine  own  : advancing,  turn
thou  to  me,  victorious,  all-bestowing.

Come  to  me,  Manyu,  wielder  of  the  thunder  : bethink
thee  of  thy  friend,  and  slay  the  Dasyus.


The  hymn,  which  is  almost  identical  with  Rigvcda  X.  83,  is  a battle-song
addressed  to  Manyu,  personified  Wrath,  the  deity  of  the  preceding  hymn.

1 Ddm : a general  name  applied  in  the  Yecla  to  certain  evil  beings
or  demons  hostile  to  Indra  and  to  men.  It  means  also,  a savage,
a barbarian,  as  here,  one  of  the  original  inhabitants  of  the  country
opposed  to  an  Aryan  immigrant.  In  the  second  hemistich  I read
many  urn,  as  in  the  Rigveda,  instead  of  manyur  of  the  text.

2 Fervour:,  t&pas;  originally  Treat,'  £ burning,'  and  secondly  ‘reli-
gious austerity/  4 fervid  abstraction.'

3 Dasyu : fiend,  or  barbarian.

5 Without  a 'portion  : without  a share  in  thy  favours.


THE  ATHARYA-7EDA.


HYMN  33.]

7 Approach,  and  on  our  right  hand  hold  thy  station,
then  let  us  slay  a multitude  of  foemen.

The  best  of  meath  I offer  to  support  thee.:  may  we
be  first  to  drink  thereof  in  quiet.

HYMN  XXXIII.

Chasing  our  pain  with  splendid  light,  O Agni,  shine
thou  wealth  on  us.

His  lustre  flash  our  pain  away  !

2 For  goodly  fields,  for  pleasant  homes,  for  wealth  we

sacrifice  to  thee.

His  lustre  flash  our  pain  away !

3 Best  praiser  of  all  these  be  he,  and  foremost  be  our

noble  chiefs.

His  lustre  flash  our  pain  away  !

4 So  that  thy  worshippers  and  we,  thine,  Agni!  in  our

sons  may  live.

His  lustre  flash  our  pain  away !

5 As  ever-conquering  Agni’s  beams  of  splendour  go  to

every  side,

His  lustre  flash  our  pain  away  !

6 To  every  side  thy  face  is  turned,  thou  art  triumphant

everywhere.

His  lustre  flash  our  pain  away  !

7 0 thou  whose  face  looks  every  way,  bear  off  our  foes

as  in  a ship.

His  lustre  flash  our  pain  away  !

8 As  in  a ship  across  the  flood,  transport  us  to  felicity.
His  lustre  flash  our  pain  away  !


The  hymn,  which  is  almost  identical  with  Rigveda  T.  97,  is  a prayer
to  Agni  for  protection  and  general  pi-osperity."

1 Pain : suffering  inflicted  on  us  by  our  enemies.

3 He : in  the  original  hymn,  meaning  Kutsa  the  Rishi  or  seer  to
whom  the  hymn  is  attributed.  May  he  be  preeminent  among  those
who  celebrate  thy  praises,  and  may  the  chiefs  or  wealthy  householders
who  have  instituted  the  sacrifice  be  distinguished  among  thy  worshippers.

e 8 if  cross  the  flood : or,  over  Sindhu,  or  Indus : As  over  Sindhu  in  a ship.


176


THE  HYMNS  OF


[BOOK  IV.


HYMN  XXXIV.

The  head  of  this  is  prayer,  its  back  the  Brihat,
Odana’s  belly  is  the  V&madevya  ;

Its  face  reality,  its  sides  the  metre,  Vishfc&rf  sacrifice
produced  from  fervour.

2 Boneless,  cleansed,  purified  by  him  who  cleanseth,

they  go  resplendent  to  the  world  of  splendour.
Fire  lburneth  not  their  organ  of  enjoyment : much
pleasure  have  they  in  the  world  of  S varga.

3 Never  doth  want  or  evil  fortune  visit  those  who  pre-

pare oblation  called  Visht&ri.

He  goes  unto  the  Gods,  he  dwells  with  Yama,  he  joys
among  Gandharvas  meet  for  Soma.

4 Yama  robs  not  of  generative  vigour  the  men  who

dress  oblation  called  Vislit&ri.

Borne  on  his  car,  a charioteer,  he  travels  : endowed
with  wings  he  soars  beyond  the  heavens.


The  hymn  is  a glorification  of  a certain  sacrifice  called  Vishtari,
whose  chief  element  is  Odana,  a mess  or  broth  of  mashed  rice  or  other
grain  cooked  with  milk.

1 Of  this : of  the  Odana.  The  Brihat : the  name  of  various  Samans
or  sbngs  of  praise  composed  in  the  Bril mti  metre  which  consists  of
two  padas  of  eight  syllables  each  followed  by  one  pfida  of  twelve  and
one  of  eight  syllables.  Vdnmdevya:  (coming  from  Vamacleva  the
Bishi  or  inspired  seer  of  Book  IV.  .of  the  Rigveda)  the  name  given  to
various  Samans.  Vishtari ; (meaning  ‘extensive5)  the  name  of  the  ob-
lation which  is  the  subject  of  the  hymn.  In  non-sacordotal  language
the  meaning  of  the  stanza  is  : Devotion,  various  songs  of  praise  and
the  metre  in  which  they  are  composed,  results,  and  effectiveness  are  the
essential  accompaniments  of  the  brew  of  rice  and  milk  offered  in  the
Vishtari  sacrifice  which  is  originated  by  a fervid  religious  spirit.

2 By  him  who  cleanseth : by  the  purifying  Wind.  They  : who  offer
the  Vishtari  oblation.  Fire : the  flames  of  the  funeral  pile.  Muir
(0.  3,  Texts,  V.  p.  307)  cites  from  the  Satapatha-Brahmana,  X.  4.  4-.  4 :
‘When  a man,  knowing*  this,  practises  austere  fervour,  lie  retains  in
heaven  all  his  functions,  even  to  that  of  sexual  intercourse/

3 He:  the  offerer  of  the  oblation.  Gandharvas:  genii  who  inhabit
Svarga  or  heaven.


THE  ATHARVA-YEDA


HYMN  35.]

5 Strongest  is  this,  performed,  of  sacrifices  : he  hath

reached  heaven  who  hath  prepared  Visht&rt.

The  oval-fruited  lotus  spreads  his  fibre  : there  bloom
the  nenuphar  and  water-lilies.

Abundant  with  their  overflow  of  sweetness,  these
streams  shall  reach  thee  in  the  world  of  Svarga,
whole  lakes  with  lotus-blossom  shall  approach  thee.

6 Full  lakes  of  butter  with  their  banks  of  honey,  flow-

ing with  wine,  and  milk  and  curds  and  water —
Abundant  with  their  overflow  of  sweetness,  these
streams  shall  reach  thee  in  the  world  of  Svarga,
► whole  lakes  with  lotus-blossom  shall  approach  thee.

7 I give  four  pitchers,  in  four  several  places,  filled  to

the  brim  with  milk  and  curds  and  water.

Abundant  with  their  overflow  of  sweetness,  these
streams  shall  reach  thee  in  the  world  of  Svarga,
whole  lakes  with  lotus-blossom  shall  approach  thee.

8 I part  this  Odana  among  the  Br&hmans,  Visht&ri,

conquering  worlds  and  reaching  heaven.

Let  me  not  lose  it : swelling  by  its  nature,  be  it  my
perfect  Cow  to  grant  all  wishes !

HYMN  XXXY.

Odana.  which  Praj&pati,  the  firstborn  of  Order,  dress-
ed with  fervour  for  the  Brahman,


5 The  oval-fruited : or  dndfkam  may  be  a separate  plant  with  egg-
shaped  fruit  or  bulbs*  Gf.  V.  17.  16.  Lotus:  kihnudani  : either  the
white  esculent  water-lily  or  the  red  lotus  whose  fruit  is  also  edible.
Nenuphar  and  water-lilies  : a substitution  for  the  Saluka,  Saphaka,  and
Mulalin  of  the  text  which  seem  to  be  unidentifiable  aquatic  plants.
Thee:  .the  offerer  of  the  oblation,

As  regards  Svarga  or  heaven  and  the  joys  of  the  departed,  see  a ful-
ler and  more  attractive  account  in  Bigveda  lX.  113.  7 — 11.

8 Cow  to  grant  all  wishes : dhentih  Jcdmadtighd ; the  mytlycal  Cow
of  Plenty,  fulfiller  of  all  desires.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  437.

The  hymn  is  a further  magnification  of  the  Odana,  or  oblation  of
mashed  rice  and  milk  (see  IV.  34).

1 Prajdpati : the  Lord,  of  Life;  the  Creator.  Mrityu:  the  God  of  Death.


78  ; THE  EYMFiS  OF  * * {BOOK  IV,

Which  guards  the  worlds  from  breaking  at  the  cen-
tre,— I with  this  Odana  will  conquer  Mrityu.

2 Whereby  the  World-Creators  vanquished  Mrityu,

that  which  they  found  by  fervour,  toil  and  trouble,
That  which  prayer  first  made  ready  for  the  Brah-
man,— I with  this  Odana  will  conquer  Mrityu.

3 That  which  upholds  the  Earth,  the  all-sustainer,  that

which  hath  filled  air’s  middle  realm  with  moisture,
Which,  raised  on  high  in  grandeur,  stablished
heaven, — I with  this  Odana  will- conquer  Mrityu.

4 From  which  the  months  with  thirty  spokes  -were

moulded,  from  which  the  twelve-spoked  year  was
formed  and  fashioned,

Which  circling  day  and  night  have  ne’er  o’ertakeii,-—
I with  this  Odana  will  conquer  Mrityu.

5 Which  hath  become  breath-giver,  life-bestower,  to

wThich  the  worlds  flow  full  of  oil  and  fatness,

To  whom  belong  all  the  refulgent  regions, — I with
this  Odana  will  conquer  Mrityu.

6 From  which,  matured,  sprang  Amrit  into  being,

which  hath  become  G&yatrfs  lord  and  ruler,

In  which  the  perfect  Vedas  have  been  treasured, —
I with  this  Odana  will  conquer  Mrityu.

7 I drive  away  the  hostile  God-despiser  :•  far  off  be

those  who  are  mine  adversaries.

I dress  Brahmaudana  that  winneth  all  things.  May
the  Gods  hear  me  who  believe  and  trust  them.


2 The  World-Creators:  see  III.  28.  1.

4 TwMve-spofced  pear : cf.  Bigveda  I.  164.  11.

6 G&patri’s  lord:  master  of  the  Gayatri  metre.  Perfect:  or.  omniform.

7 Brahmaudana:  the  Odana  or  mess  of  rice  and  milk  distributed
to  Brahmans,  and  especially  to  priests  at  a sacrifice.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Eigveda,  III,  p.  438/


HYMN  36.]


THE  ATHARVA-VEDA


HYMN  XXXVI


Endowed  with  true  strength,  let  the  Bull,  Agni  Vais-
vanara,  burn  them  up,

Him  who  would  pain  and  injure  us,  him  who  would
treat  us  as  a foe.

2 Him  who,  unharmed,  would  injure  us,  and  him  who,
harmed,  would  do  us  harm

I lay  between  the  doubled  fangs  of  Agni,  of  Vais-
vitnara.

8 Those  who,  what  time  the  moon  is  dark,  hunt  with
loud  cry  and  answering  shout,

Flesh-eaters,  others  who  would  harm, — all  these  I
overcome  with  might.

4 1 conquer  the  Pis&ehas  with  my  power,  and  take

their  wealth  away.

All  who  would  injure  us  I slay.  Let  mine  inten-
tion have  success.

5 With  Gods  who  flee  with  him,  and  match  their  rapid

motion  with  the  Sun,

Ijwith  those  animals  who  dwell  in  rivers  and  on  hills
am  found.


The  hymn  is  a charm  against  fiends,  human  enemies,  and  trouble-
some  pests.

3 With  loud  cry : dgare , which  does  not  occur  elsewhere,  is  a word
of  uncertain  signification.  In  the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary  it  is  sug-
gested that  it  may  stand  for  dgdre,  ‘ in  the  chamber/  and  so  Ludwig

Sayana  explains  it  as  meaning  4 on  the  field  of  battled
Bee  Grill’s  note.  Flesh-eaters  : eaters  of  raw  flesh  ; demons.

4 Fisdchas : goblins,  fiends.  See  I.  16.  3,  note.

5 With  Gods : as  Agni ; £ Yaisvanara  hath  rivalry  with  Surya’  (Rig-
weda  L 98.  1.)  ; Soma  : ‘ This  Pavamana  ....  mounts  up  with  Bury  a
to  the  sky’ (Rig veda  IX.  27.  5).  With  those  animals  : saw.  talh  pasti-
bhih  ; this  is  obscure,  and  the  metre  suffers.  Grill  suggests  that  in-
stead of  pasiibkih  some^such  word  as  pisdckahd'  4 destroyer  of  Pisachas,  ■
should  be  read  : With  those  who  dwell  in  streams  and  hills  I,  slayer  of
the  fiends,  am  found.’  Ludwig,  retaining  panibhih,  translates  4 mit
cliesen  [wie  mit]  vieh  mog  ich  bef unden  werden ; ’ ‘ may  I be  found
with  these  (as  with)  cattle.’


lift


; . ‘ i


}<W^[


180  THE  HYMNS  OF  {BOON  If.

6 I trouble  the  Pis&ehas  as  the  tiger  plagues  men  rich

in  kine.

I They,  even  as  dogs  when  they  have  seen  a lion,  find
no  hiding-place.

7 Naught  with  Pis&chas  can  I do,  with  thieves,  with

roamers  of  the  wood.

Pis4chas  flee  and  vanish  from  each  village  as  I enter  it.

8 Into  whatever  village  this  mine  awful  power  pene-

trates,

Thence  the  Pis&chas  flee  away,  and  plot  no  further
mischief  there.

9 Those  who  enrage  me  with  their  prate,  as  flies  tor-

ment an  elephant,

I deem  unhappy  creatures,  like  small  insects  trouble-
some to  man.

10  Destruction  seize  upon  the  man,  as  with  a cord  they
hold  a horse,

The  fool  who  is  enraged  with  me ! He  is  not  rescued
from  the  noose.

HYMN  XXXVII.

With  thee,  O Plant,  in  olden  time  Atharvans  smote
and  slew  the  fiends.

Kasyapa  smote  with  thee,  with  thee  did  Kanva  and
Agastya  smite.

#£.

7 Thieves  . . . roamers  of  the  wood : the  mischievous  Pis&chas  are
probably  meant.

8 This  mine  awful  power : which  frightens  the  goblins  away.

9 With  their  prate:  I adopt  the  reading  lapitva,  suggested  by  Prof.
Whitney  in  his  Index  Verborum,  instead  of  laniia,  ‘ ehafcterings  ’

10  He  is  not  rescued  from  the  noose  : he  shall  be  caught  in  the  snare
of  Nirriti  the  Goddess  of  Misfortune  and  Destruction.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III,  p.  526,
and,  with  annotations,  by  Grill,  Hmidert  Lieder,  pp.  3,  136.

The  hymn  is  a spell  to  drive  away  Gandharvas  and  Apsarases.

1 Atharvans : the  descendants  of  the  great  Atharvan,  the  first  Fire-
priest.  Kasyapa,  ...  Kanva  ...  Agastya:  see  Index,


ttYMN  37.]  ' TEE  A TEAM  Vi-  VEDA.  181

2 'With,  thee  we  scare  and  drive  away  Gaudharvas  and

Apsarases.

O Ajasringi,  chase  the  fiends.  Cause  all  to  vanish
with  thy  smell.

3 Let  the  Apsarases,  puffed  away,  go  to  the  riyer,

to  the  ford,—

Gruggulfi,  PM,  Naiad!,  Aukshagandhi,  Pramandinl.
Ye  have  become  attentive  since  the  Apsarases  have
past  away.

? 4 Where  great  trees  are,  Asvatthas  and  Nyagroclhas
with  their  leafy  crests,

There  where  your  swings  are  green  and  bright,  and
lutes  and  cymbals  sound  in  tune,

Ye  have  become  attentive  since  the  Apsarases  have
past  away.

:;  S lIither  hath  come  this  one,  the  most  effectual  of  herbs
and  plants.  t '

6 Let  Ajasringi  penetrate,  Arctiaki  with  sharpened  horn.

7 From  the  Gandharva,  dancing  near,  the  lord  of  the

Apsarases,

Wearing  the  tuft  of  hair,  I take  all  manhood  and
virility.


2 Gandkarvas : see  Index,  Apsarases : see  Index,  Ajasringi : the
name  of  the  plant  used  in  the  incantation  ; literally  Goat’s  Horn,  Odina  ;
Pinnata.

3 These  names  are  derived  from  fragrant  plants  or  sweet  scents,
Guggulu  meaning 2 3  4 * 6 Bdellium-scented ; 3 Naladi 4 Smelling  of  Spikenard  ;*
the  plants  connected  with  the  rest  of  the  names  have  not  been  mdenti-
fled.  The  names  of  the  six  Apsarases  mentioned  in  Bigveda  X.  95,  6
refer  to  their  looks  and  habits.  Ye : the  Gandharvas,  The . charm

now  driven  the  nymphs  away.  v.  GG

4 The  Asvattha  (see  III.  6,  1)  is  the  Holy  Fig-tree,  Ficus  Religiosa  ;

the  Hyagrodha  is  the  Indian  Fig-tree.  Ficus  Indica.

6 Ardtaki ; a name  or  epithet  of  Ajasringi  or  Goat’s  Horn,


182  ' TEE  HYMNS  OF  [ BOOK  17.

8 With  those  dread  hundred  iron  spears,  the  darts  of

Indra,  let  it  pierce

The  Blyxa-fed  Gandharvas,  those  who  bring  no  sacri-
ficial gift.

9 liyith  those  dread  hundred  golden  spears,  the  darts

of  Indra,  let  it  pierce

The  Blyxa-fed  Gandharvas,  those  who  bring  no  sacri-
ficial gift.

10  0 Plant,  be  thou  victorious,  crush  the  Pis&chas,

one  and  all,

Blyxa-fed,  shining  in  the  floods,  illumining  the
selfish  ones.

11  Youthful,  completely  decked  with  hair,  one  monkey-

like, one  like  a dog, —

So  the  Gandharva,  putting  on  a lovely  look,  pursues
a dame.  /:VW;

Him  with  an  efficacious  charm  we  scare  and  c^use  to
vanish  hence.

12  Your  wives  are  the  Apsarases,  and  ye,  Gandharvas,

are  their  lords.  ^

Bun  ye,  immortal  ones,  away : forbear  to  interfere
with  men !


8 Iron  spears : the  strong  thorns  or  spines  of  the  plant.  Blyxa-fed  :
.eaters  of  Avaka  (Blyxa  Octandra),  a water-plant,  called  Saivala  in  later
times.

10  Illumining  the  selfish  ones  : jyotaycm&malean ; the  meaning  is

obscure.  '

11  ‘The  Gandharvas,  a class  of  gods,  who  are  described  as  hairy,  like
dogs  and  monkeys,  but  as  assuming  a handsome  appearance  to  seduce
the  affections  of  earthly  females,  are  called  upon  to  desist  from  this  un-
becoming practice,  and  not  to  interfere  with  mortals,  a-  they  i ave  wi  es
of  their  own,  the  Apasarases’  (Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  V.  309).  The  Gau-
dharvas  here  resemble  the  Fauni  and  the  Satyri  of  Italy,  the  latter
being  represented  as  woodland  genii  or  deities,  ape-like  and  goat-footed.


HYMN  38.]


THE  ATHARYA-YEDA.


HYMN  XXXVIII.

Hither  I call  the  Apsaras,  victorious,  who  plays
, with  skill,  ; V '

Her  who  comes  freely  forth  to  view,  who  wins  the
stakes  in  games  of  dice.

2 Hither  I call  that  Apsaras  who  scatters  and  who

gathers  up,

The  Apsaras  who  plays  with  skill  and  takes  her
winnings  in  the  game.

3 Dancing  around  us  with  the  dice,  winning  the  wager

by  her  play,

May  she  obtain  the  stake  for  us  and  gain  the  victory
with  skill.

May  she  approach  us  full  of  strength  : let  them  not
win  this  wealth  of  ours.

4 Hither  I call  that  Apsaras,  the  joyous,  the  delight-

ful one —

Those  nymphs  who  revel  in  the  dice,  who  suffer  grief
and  yield  to  wrath.

5 Who  follow' in  their  course  the  rays  of  Sftrya,  or  as  a

particle  of  light  attend  him.

Whose  leader  from  afar,  with  store  of  riches,  com-
passes quickly  all  the  worlds  and  guards  them.
Pleased,  may  he  come  to  this  our  burnt  oblation,
together  with  the  Air,  enriched  with  treasure.


The  hymn  is  a charm  for  success  in  gambling.

I The  Apsaras  : the  Apsarases  are  intimately  connected  with  gambl-
ing .with  dice.  See  II.  2.  5.

5 Stanzas  5 — 7,  differing  in  metre  and  unconnected  with  the  object
of  the  charm,  are  evidently  a later  addition  to  the  original  hymn.  They
are  employed  in  Xausika-S&tra  XXL  1 1 as  a charm  for  the  protection
of  cattle.  Who  : apparently  the  Apsarases  as  nymphs  of  the  mists  of
' morning.  Leader : perhaps  the  Sum


184


THE  HYMNS  OF


[BOOK  If,


6 Together  with,  the  Air,  0 rich  in  treasure,  guard

here  the  white  cow  and  the  calf,  O mighty !

Here  are  abundant  drops  for  thee,  come  hither ! .
Here  is  thy  white  calf,  let  thy  mind  be  with  us.

7 Together  with  the  Air,  0 rich  in  treasure,  keep  the

white  calf  in  safety  here,  Q mighty  !

* Here  is  the  grass,  here  is  the  stall,  here  do  we  bind
the  calf.  We  are  your  masters,  name  by  name.
All  Hail !

HYMN  XXXIX.

Agni  on  earth  hath  had  mine  homage.  May  he  bless
me.

As  I have  bowed  me  down  to  Agni  on  the  earth,  so
let  the  Favouring  Graces  bow  them  down  to  me.

2 Earth  is  the  Cow,  her  calf  is  Agni.  May  she  with

her  calf  Agni  yield  me  food,  strength,  all  my  wish,
life  first  of  all,  and  offspring,  plenty,  wealth.  All
Hail !

3 V&yu  in  air  hath  had  mine  homage.  May  he  bless  me.
As  I have  bowed  me  down  to  V&yu  in  the  air,  so  let

the  Favouring  Graces  bow  them  down  to  me.

4 Air  is  the  Cow,  her  calf  is  V&yu.  May  she  with  her

calf  V&yu  yield  me  food,  strength,  all  my  wish,
life  first  of  all,  and  offspring,  plenty,  wealth.  All
Hail!

6 0 mighty  ! : vdjin ; according  to  Ludwig,  the  horse  of  the  Gan-

dharva  is  addressed.  *

7 Tour  masters,  name  by  name  : we  have  power  over  you  (Gandhar-
vas  or  Apsarases)  collectively  and  severally.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  11 L p,  454;
and  stanzas  1 — 4,  with  annotations,  bv  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.71, 140,


The  hymn  is  a prayer  to  various  deities  for  health,  wealth,  and
general  prosperity,

1 The  Favouring  Graces  : the  condescending  loving-kindnesses  of  the
Gods,  personified.


T3B  ATS  ART A-f EDA.  , 1SS  ,

5 The  Sun  in  heaven  hath  had  my  homage.  May  he

bless  me.  /'

As  I have  bowed  me  down  unto  the  Sun  in  heaven,
so  let  the  Favouring  Graces  bow  them  down  to  me.

6 Heaven  is  the  Cow,  her  calf  Aditya.  May  she  yield

with  her  calf  the  Sun  food,  strength,  and  all  my
wish,  life  first  of  all,  and  offspring,  plenty,  wealth.
All  Hail!

7 To  Chandra  in  the  quarters  have  I bowed  me.  May

he  bless  me.

As  unto  Chandra  in  the  quarters  I have  bent,  so  let
the  Favouring  Graces  bow  them  down  to  me.

8 The  quarters  are  the  Cows,  their  calf  is  Chandra.

May  they  yield  with  their  calf  the  Moon  food,
strength,  and  all  my  wish,  life  first  of  all,  and  off-
spring, plenty,  wealth.  All  Hail!

9 Agni  moves  having  entered  into  Agni,  the  Itishis’

son,  who  guards  from  ihiprecations.

I offer  unto  thee  with  reverent  worship.  Let  me
not  mar  the  Gods’  appointed  service.

10  Skilled  in  all  ways,  O God,  O JMavedas,  I offer
what  is  cleansed  by  heart  and  spirit
To  all  thy  seven  mouths,  0 Jatavedas.  Do  thou
accept  with  pleasure  my  libation.

HYMN  XL.

|||:lp5:|||^VEi)4S,  eastward  sacrifices,  as  foes  assail  us
from  the  eastern  quarter.

6 Aditya  : meaning  here  the  Sun,  - . - . -

7 Chandra  : the  Moon.

9 Having  entered  into  Agni : the  consecrated  fire  being  taken  from
the  householder’s  perpetual  hre.  The  Rishid  son  ; first  produced  on
earth  by  Eishis,  as  Atharvan,  in  the  olden  time.  Seven  mouths ; the
seven  mouths  (tongues  or  flames)  of  Agni  are  frequently  mentioned  in
the  Eigveda.  ■ ■ ■ . ■ '


The  hymn,  addressed  to  Agni  Jatavedas,  is  a charm  directed  against
rival  worshippers.


186


THE  A THAU  VA-VEDA.


[. BQOK  IT.


May  they,  turned  back,  be  pained  for  harming  Agni.
I drive  them  backward  with  mine  incantation.

2 0 J&tavedas,  southward  sacrifices  as  foes  assail  us
■ from  the  southern  quarter.

May  they,  turned  back,  be  pained  for  harming  Yama.
I smite  them  backward  with  mine  incantation.

3 0 Jatavedas,  westward  sacrificers  as  foes  assail  us

from  the  western  quarter.

For  harming  Varuna  be  they  turned  and  troubled  !
I smite  them  backward  with  mine  incantation.

4 0 J&tavedas,  northward  sacrificers  as  foes  assail  us

from  the  northern  quarter.

For  harming  Soma  be  they  turned  and  troubled  ! I
smite  them  backward  with  mine  incantation.

5 0 J4tavedas,  nether  sacrificers  as  foes  assail  us  from

the  sted  fast  quarter.

For  harming  Earth  let  them  be  turned  and  troubled.
I smite  them  backward  with  mine  incantation.

6 Those  who  pay  sacrifice,  O Jatavedas,  from  air  assail

us  from  the  midway  quarter.

For  harming  Vayu  be  they  turned  and  troubled!  I
smite  them  backward  with  mine  ineantatioh.

7 The  sacrificers  from  above  assail  us,  O J&tavedas,

from  the  lofty  quarter.  *

For  wronging  Surya  be  they  turned  and  troubled  !
I smite  them  backward  with  mine  incantation.

8 Those  from  all  points  assail  us,  Jatavedas,  who

sacrifice  from  intermediate  regions.

For  wronging  Prayer  let  them  be  turned  and  troubled.
I smite  them  backward  with  mine  incantation.

A For  harming  Agni  : as  Regent  of  the  East.  The  rival  and.  heterodox-
worshippers  are  considered  to  insult  and  injure  the  deity  who  presides
over  the  region  of  the  heaven  under  which  they  offer  their  sacrifices.

5 Stedfast  quarter  : or,  region  ; the,  nadir.

8 Midwag  : between  heaven  and  earth.

7 Loft y quarter : or,  region  ; the  zenith*

For  the  Regents  or  presiding  deities  of  the  regions,  see  note  on  L 3 1 * 1.


BOOK  V.


HYMN  I.

He  who  with,  special  plans  and  deathless  spirit,
Y waxing,  well-born,  hath  come  unto  his  birth-place,
As  he  who  shines  upholds  the  days,  thus  Trita,  of
pure  life,  bears  the  Three  as  their  supporter.

2 He  who,  the  first,  approached  the  holy  statutes
makes,,  after,  many  beauteous  forms  and  figures.
Eager  to  drink,  his  birth-place  first  he  entered  who
. understands  the  word  when  yet  unspoken.


Tliis  very  obscure  introductory  hymn  appears  to  be  a glorification
of  Trita  and  Yanina,

1 He  who  shines : Surya,  the  Sun-God.  Trita : a mysterious  ancient
deity  frequently  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda,  principally  in  connexion
with  the  Maruts,  Vayu,  and  Indra.  His  home  is  in  the  remotest  part
of  heaven,  and  he  is  called  Aptya,  the  Watery,  that  is,  sprung  from,
or  dwelling  in,  the  sea  of  cloud  and  vapour.  In  the  Rigveda  he  is
identified  with  the  Sacrificial  Horse  (I.  163.  3);  he  is  said  to  have
* x*ent  Yritra  limb  from  limb3’  (1. 187.  I),  and  to  have  combated  and  con-
quered other  meteoric  demons  ; as  Yayu  or  Wind  he  fans  and  quickens
Agni  in  the  height  of  heaven  (Y.  9.  5) ; he  appears  to  be  the  celestial
purifier  of  the  Soma  for  Indra  (II.  II.  20;  IX.  32.  2 ; 34.  4 ; 37.  4 ;
102.  2) ; and  he  surrounds  the  Maruts  with  the  lightning  flash  and
roar  (Y.  54.  2).  Soma  identifies  Trita  sometimes  with  Y&yu ; some-
times with  Indra  as  the  pervader  of  the  three  worlds  ; and  sometimes
with  Agni  stationed  in  the  three  fire-receptacles.  See  Bergaigne,  La
Beligion  Vedique,  II.  pp.  326 — 330.  In  this  hymn  Trita  appears  as  a
creative  and  protecting  power.  The  Three : the  worlds,  earth,  middle
air,  and  heaven,

2 Eager  to  drink: or,  to  form,  to  create:  * schafFenslustiger/ — Ludwig,


88  TEff  SIMMS  Off  {B00&  t

8 He  who— the  fluid  gold,  with  radiant  kinsmen— to
fervent  glow  delivered  up  thy  body,

On  him  both  set  names  that  shall  live  for  ever;
to  him  the  regions  shall  send  robes  to  clothe  him/

4 As  these  have  gone  to  their  primeval  station,  each

gaining  an  imperishable  dwelling,

May  kissing  mothers  of  the'  bards*  beloved  bring  the
pole-drawing  husband, to  the  sister,

5 By  holy  wisdom  I a sage,  Far-Strider ! offer  to  thee

this  lofty  adoration,

This  worship  both  the  mighty  eddying  rivers,  com-
. , ing  together  to  this  station,  heighten,  ' /

8 Seven  are  the  pathways  which  the  wise  have  fashioned:
to  one  of  these  may  come  the  troubled  mortal;'/:
On  sure  ground  where  the  ways  are  parted  st&ndeth
Life's  Pillar  in  the  dwelling  of  the  Highest,


3 He:  Trita,  that  is,  Agni  as  the  Sun,  the Jtuid gold  whose  kinsmen
are  the  flashes.  Thy  body  : Soma’s,  according  to  Ludwig,  The  mean-
ing of  the  hemistich  is  not  clear.  Both:  the  dual  verb  has  no  express-
ed  subject.  Heaven  and  Earth  are  intended.  Regions:  (disah  instead
of  m&dh)  of  the  heavens.  Robes:  clouds  with  which  the  sun  is  invested,

4 These : Heaven  and  Earth,  Primeval  station : the  position  which
they  have  occupied  from  the  earliest  time  since  their  separation.  See
IV.  1.  4.  Kissing  mothers:  Heaven  and  Earth.  Of  the  bards'  beloved:
havih  susMsya  of  the  text  is  absolutely  unintelligible  and  is  probably
corrupt.  Surya  appears  to  be  meant : £ des  von  den  weisen  besungenen
[Agni-Surya  Ludwig.  Pole-drawing  husband : Day.  Sister : Night.

5 Far-Strider : or,  having  a broad  path  ; Surya,  the  Sun,  Eddying
rivers:  here  apparently,  Heaven  and  Earth:  * fiodha  und  Chakra
[Himmel  und  Erde]/ — Ludwig.

6 The  stanza  is  taken  from  Eigveda  X.  5.  6.  Pathways : maryaddh  ;
long  lines  or  divisions  of  light.  The  wise : the  sages,  the  Fathers,
The  troubled  mortal : the  man  who  is  longing  for  daybreak  may  ap-
proach the  pathway  of  light.  Prof.  M.  Muller  translates  differently
(Yedie  Hymns,  Part-  L p.  253) ; s The  sages  established  the  seven


HYMN  2.]  TEE  ATEABYA-7EDA.  189.

my  'Way  -with  deathless  spirit ; life,
spirit,  bodies  have  gone  gladly  thither.

Aye,  Sakra  also  gives  his  gift  of  treasure  as  when  the
sacrificer  meets  with  power.

8 Yea,  the  son  asks  dominion  of  his  father  : this  they

declared  the  noblest  path  to  welfare.

Varuna,  let  them  see  thy  revelations  : display  the
, wondrous  shapes  of  times  to  follow.

9 Half  with  the  milk,  its  other  half,  thou  minglest,

and  with  that  half,  strong ! unbeguiled  ! inereasest.
Let  us  exalt  the  gracious  friend,  the  mighty,  Varupa
son  of  Aditi,  strength-giver.

We  have  told  him  the  marvels  sung  by  poets.  The
utterance  of  Heaven  ancf  Earth  is  truthful.

HYMN  II.  .

In  all  the  worlds  That  was  the  best  and  highest
whence  sprang  the  Mighty  One  of  splendid  valour.
As  soon  as  born  he  overcomes  his  foemen,  when  those
rejoice  in  him  who  bring  him  succour.

divisions,  but  mischief  befell  one  of  them.'  Where  the  ways  are  parted;
where  ends  the  dark  road  which  the  Sun  travels  by  night,  and  the
bright  path  of  his  daily  course  begins.  Life’s  Pillar: apparently,  Agni.
The  meaning  of  the  whole  stanza  is  uncertain.

7 Sakra : the  mighty  Indra.  Meets  with  power  : obtains  the  expected
reward  of  his  oblations.

9 Half  ....  thou  minglest : preparest  a libation  consisting  of
equal  parts  of  Soma  juice  and  milk.  Gracious:  dvim ; ‘das  schaf,’
e the  sheep.’ — Ludwig.  V ffM;  ■

The  hymn,  like  the  introductory  hymn  of  Book  IV.,  is  a Brahmodyam,
an  enunciation  in  designedly  enigmatical  language  of  cosmogonieal
and  mysto-theological  doctrine.  Translation  and  explanation  can  be
only  conjectural,  and  some  passages  do  not  lend  themselves  to  either.
See  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  391.

The  hymn,  which  is  taken,  with  variations,  from  Rigveda  X.  120,
ascribed  to  the  Rishi  Brihaddiva,  son  of  Atharvan,  is  a glorification  of
Indra.  ,

1 That : meaning,  according  to  Sayana,  Brahma  the  original  cause
of  the  Universe.  The  Mighty  One : Indra.


90  THE  HYMNS  OF  ' [BOON  f,

2 Grown  mighty  in  his  strength,  with  ample  vigour,

he  as  a foe  strikes  fear  into  the  IMsa,  7>;

Eager  to  win  the  breathing  and  the  breathless  : All
sang  thy  praise  at  banquet  and  oblation.

3 All  concentrate  on  thee  their  mental  vigour  what

time  these,  twice  or  thrice,  are  thine  assistants.
Blend  what  is  sweeter  than  the  sweet  with  sweetness :
win  quickly  with  our  meath  that  meath  in  battle.

4 If  verily  in  every  war  the  sages  joy  and  exult  in  thee

who  winnest  treasures,

With  mightier  power,  strong  God,  extend  thy  firmness  :;
let  not  malevolent  Kasokas  harm  thee.

5 Proudly  we  put  our  trust  in  thee  in  battles,  when  we

behold  great  wealth  the  prize  of  combat.

I with  my  words  impel  thy  weapons  onward,  and
sharpen  with  my  prayer  thy  vital  vigour.


2 Ddsa  : the  demon  enemies  of  the  Gods.  Eager  to  win  : Prof.  Lud-
wig makes  sdsni  an  infinitive.  The  correct  reading  is  probably  sdsnis;
as  suggested  by  Prof.  Grassmann.  The  breathing  and  the  breathless :
the  animate  and  the  inanimate  world.

3 Mental  vigour : krdtum; 2 3  4 adoration.’ — Wilson.  These : Soma  j uiees,
Twice  or  thrice : with  reference,  perhaps,  to  the  three  daily  libations.
These  invigorate  Indra  for  the  performance  of  his  mighty  deeds.  What
is  sweeter:  thine  own  celestial  Soma  which  is  sweeter  than  that  of
earth.  Sayana  explains  the  stanza  differently  : — 4 To  thee  all  (wor-
shippers) offer  adoration,  whether  those  propitiators  be  two  or  three.,,
Combine  that  which  is  sweeter  than  the  sweet  with  sweetness,  unite
that  honey  with  honey.5 — Wilson.  The  4 two  or  three5  are  according
to  Sayana,  the  saerificer  and  his  wife  and  child,  and  the  second  halt
of  the  stanza  contains  a reference  to  the  propagation  of  children.

4 Kasokas : a class  of  demons,  according  to  the  St.  P.  Dictionary.
The  Rigveda  has  4 Y&tudh&nas  ; ’ and  Prof.  Ludwig  suggests  that  the
Atharva-wed  t hymn  was  employed  as  a charm  on  some  special  occasion,

and  Kasokas,  meaning  perhaps  people  living  on  the  stream  Kasi,  took
the  place  of  Y&tudh&uas,


HYMN  2.]  ' . THE  AT  HAH  VA-7EDA.  191

6 Thou  in  that  house,  the  highest  or  the  lowest,  which

thy  protection  guards,  bestowest  riches.

Establish  ye  the  ever-wandering  mother,  and  bring
full  many  deeds  to  their  completion.

7 Praise  in  the  height  him  who  hath  many  pathways,

courageous,  strongest,  Aptya  of  the  Aptyas.
Through  strength  he  shows  himself  of  ample  power  :
pattern  of  Prithivl,  he  fights  and  conquers.

8 Brihaddiva,  the  foremost  of  light-winners,  hath  made

these  holy  prayers,  this  strength  for  Indra.

Free  Lord,  he  rules  the  mighty  fold  of  cattle,  win-
ning, aglow,  even  all  the  billowy  waters.

9 Thus  hath  Brihaddiva,  the  great  Atharvan,  spoken

to  Indra  as  himself  in  person.

Two  sisters  free  from  stain,  the  M&tarisvans,  with
power  impel  him  onward  and  exalt  him.'


6 .Establish  ye:  apparently  the  Gods  are  addressed.  The  ever-wan-

*de,ring  mother  : the  earth  before  her  foundations  were  fixed.  The  reading
of  the  Rigveda  differs  : — ‘Thou  stablishest  the  two  much-wandering
mothers’  (heaven  and  earth).  iff- ‘if  .

7 Aptya  of  the  Aptyas:  chief  of  the  class  of  deities  called  Aptya,
dwelling  inthe  waters  of  the  sea  of  air,  and  so  identified  with,  or  likened
to,  Trita  Aptya.  See  Y.  1.  1.  Pattern  of  Prithivl : vast  and  strong
as  the  earth : ‘ Thou  art  the  counterpart  of  earth’  (Rigveda  I.  52.  13).

8 Foremost  of  light-winners : according  to  Sayana,  ‘chief  of  Rishis,
and  enjoyer  of  heaven,  or  servant  of  Aditya,  the  Sun,  Indra.’  He  ;
Indira,  Fold  of  cattle : the  realm  of  the  celestial  cows  or  rays  of  light.
Billowy  waters : of  the  sea  of  air.

9 The  great  Atharvan  : ‘the  great  priest.’ — Grassmann.  As  himself:
the  priest  identifies  himself  with  the  God  whom  he  worships.  Two  sis-
ters : Heaven  and  Earth.  Mdtarisvans : Matarisvan  in  the  Rigveda
is  the  divine  being  who  brought  Agni  down  from  heaven  to  the  Bhri-
gus,  and  is  sometimes  a mystic  name  (perhaps,  Growing  in  the  mother,
the  fire-drill)  of  Agni  himself.  How  the  term  is  applicable  to  Heaven
kiid  JEarth  is  not  clear.  The  dRigyeda  has

ral,  explained  by  Silyana  as  ‘ the  sister  rivers  which  abide  in  the
mother  ( mdtdri ) Earth.’


192  TEE  HYMNS  OF  ■

HYMN  III.  t

Let  strength  he  mine  while  I invoke  thee,  Agni ! g
enkindling  thee  may  we  support  our  bodies.

May  the  four  regions  bend  and  bow  before  me  : with  jj
thee  for  guardian  may  we  win  the  combat.  ,

2 Baffling  the  rage  of  our  opponents,  Agnib'guard’ ' us  :

as  our  protector  round  about  us.  Stiff!

Down  the  steep  slope  go  they  who  hate  us,  backward,  . |
and  let  their  thought  who  watch  at  home  be  ruined.

3 May  all  the  Gods  be  on  my  side  ia  battle,  the  :j

Maruts  led  by  Indra,  Vishnu,  Agni,_  ||

Mine  be  the  middle  air’s  extended  region,  and  may  |J
the  Wind  blow  favouring  these  my  wishes.  :

4 For  me  let  them  present  all  mine  oblations,  and  let  1 j

my  mind’s  intention  be  accomplished.  §

May  I be  guiltless  of  the  least  transgression  : may  |
all  the  Gods  come  hither  and  protect  me.  I

5 May  the  Gods  grant  me  riches;  may  the  blessing  and  f

* invocation  of  the  Gods  assist  me.  I

This  boon  shall  the  celestial  Hotars  win  us  : may  we,  |

unwounded,  have  brave  heroes  round  us.  • . I

6 Ye  six  divine  Expanses,  give  us  freedom.  Her#,  fill  , |

' ye  Gods,  acquit  yourselves  like  heroes.  , h e!

Let  not  calamity  or  curse  o’ertake  us,  nor  deeds  of  m
wickedness  that  merit  hatred.  ' J

The  hymn,  which  is  taken,  with  variations,  from  Rigvuda  X.  128,  ff
ascribed  to  the  Rashi  Vihavya  of  the  family  of  Angiras,  is  a prayer
addressed  by  a King  to  Agni,  Indra,  and  various  other  deities  for  vie-  \
tory  in  ‘battle,  and  general  protection  and  prosperity.

, 1'  The  four, regions  : the  King  is  about  to  undertake  a Digvijayat  |

the  subjugation  of  the  neighbouring  countries  in  all  directions.  j

u . 2 Down  the  Bicep  slope ; that  leads  to  destruction,  ■:

5 Celestial  Hotars  : the  Hotar-priests  of  the  Gods,  According  to  b
Sayana,  1 my  invokers  of  the  Gods/  . J

; 6 -Six  divine  Expanses : the  four  cardinal  points,  and  upper  and  J

lower  spaces  or  zenith  and  nadir*  I


HYMN  4.]


THE  ATIIAR  YA- VEDA.


193


7 Do  ye  three  Goddesses  give  ample  shelter  and  all

success  to  us  ourselves  and  children.

Let  us  not  lose  our  children  or  our  bodies : let  us
not  benefit  the  foe,  King  Soma  !

8 Foodful  and  much-invoked,  at  this  our  calling  may

the  far-reaching  Bull  grant  us  wide  shelter.

Lord  of  bay  coursers,  Indra,  bless  our  children  : harm
us  not,  give  us  not  as  prey  to  others.

9 Lord  of  the  world,  Creator  and  Disposer,  may  the

God  Savitar  who  quells  assailants,

May  the  Adityas,  Rudras,  both  the  Asvins,  Gods,
guard  the  sacrifice!-  from  destruction.

10  Let  those  who  are  our  foemen  stay  afar  from  us :

with  Indra  and  with  Agni  we  will  drive  them  off.
The  Adityas  and  the  Rudras,  over  us  on  high,  have
made  me  strong,  a thinker,  and  a sovran  lord.

11  Yea,  we  call  Indra  hitherward,  the  winner  of  wealth

in  battle  and  of  kine  and  horses.

May  he  mark  this  our  worship  when  we  call  him.
Lord  of  bay  steeds,  thou  art  our  friend  and  comrade.

HYMN  IV.

Thou  who  wast  born  on  mountains,  thou  most  mighty
of  all  plants  that  grow,

Thou  Banisher  of  Fever,  come,  Kushtha ! make
Fever  pass  away.


7 Three  Goddesses : Ija,  Sarasvati,  and  Mahi  or  Bharati,  personifica-
tions of  prayer  and  worship.  They  are  not  mentioned  in  the  fiigveda
hymn.

8 The  far-reaching  Bull:  Indra.  . '

1 1 This  stanza  is  not  taken  from  the  Bigveda  hymn.

The  hymn  is  a charm  against  Fever  and  other  ailments.

I .Fever:  see  1.  25.  Kushtha;:  a medicinal  plant,  Costus  Speciosus
or  Arahicus.  See  VI,  95  ; 102.  3 ; XIX.  39.

13


194  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  F.

2 Brought  from  the  Snowy  Mountain,  born  on  the

high  hill  where  eagles  breed,

Men  seek  to  buy  thee  when  they  hear  : for  Fever’s
Banisher  they  know.

3 In  the  third  heaven  above  us  stands  the  Asvattha

tree,  the  seat  of  Gods.

There  the  Gods  sought  the  Kushtha  Plant,  embodi-
ment of  endless  life.

4 There  moved  through  heaven  a golden  ship,  a ship

with  cordage  wrought  of  gold.

There  the  Gods  won  the  Kushtha  Plant,  the  blossom
of  eternal  life.

5 They  sailed  on  pathways  paved  with  gold,  the  oars

they  plied  were  wrought  of  gold  :

All  golden  were  the  ships  wherein  they  carried  Kush-
tha down  to  earth.

6 0 Kushtha,  bring  thou  hitherward  this  man  of  mine,

restore  his  health,

Yea,  free  him  from  disease  for  me.

7 Thou  art  descended  from  the  Gods,  Soma’s  benig-

nant friend  art  thou.

Befriend  my  breath  and  vital  air,  be  gracious  unto
this  mine  eye.

8 Sprung,  northward,  from  the  Snowy  Hill  thou  art

conveyed  to  eastern  men.

There  they  deal  out  among  themselves  Kushtha’s
most  noble  qualities.

9 Most  excellent,  indeed,  art  thou,  Kushtha  ! most

noble  is  tliy  sire.


3 Asvattha  tree:  Ficus  Keligiosa  or  Holy  Fig-tree;  see  III,  6.  I*
note.  The  virtues  ascribed  to  Kushtha  are  so  manifold  and  mighty
that  the  plant  must  have  a celestial  origin.  ‘ The  Samoans  think  that
their  most  valued  vegetables  were  stolen  from  heaven  by  a Samoan
visitor3 * 5  (Lang's  Custom  and  Myth).

9 Thy  sire ; Kushtha’s  father  is  said  to-  be  Jivala,  Vivifier  (SIX.  39,  3).

The  hymn  has  been  translated  with  notes  by  Grill,  Hundert  Licder,
pp.  9,  141.


HYMN  5.]  : THE  ATI1ARV A-YEDA.  ..195

Make  all  Consumption  pass  away  and  render  Fever
powerless.  ‘ -

10  Malady  that  affects  the  head,  eye-weakness,  bodily
: defect —

All  this  let  Kushtha  heal  and  cure  : aye,  godlike  is
the  vigorous  power.

HYMN  V.

Aryaman  is  thy  grandsire,  Night  thy  mother,  and
the  Cloud  thy  sire.

Thy  name  is  called  Silaehi.  Thou,  thyself,  art  sister
of  the  Gods.

2 Whoever  drinketh  thee  hath  life : thou  savest  and

protectest  man.

As  nursing  mother  of  mankind,  thou  takest  all  upon
thy  lap.

3 Thou  elingest  close  to  every  tree,  as  a fond  damsel

clasps  her  love.

Thy  name  is  called  The  Conqueror,  She  who  Stands
Fast,  The  Rescuer.

4 Whatever  wound  the  arrow,  or  the  staff,  or  violence

inflicts,

Thereof  thou  art  the  remedy : as  such  restore  this
man  to  health.

5 Thou  springest  from  blest  Plaxa,  or  Asvattha,  Dhava,

Khadira,

-Paina,  ^ blest  Nyagrodha,  so  come  thou  to  us,
Arundhati !


196


THE  HYMNS  OF


{BOOK  V.


6 Gold-coloured,  bringing  happy  fate,  most  lovely,

brilliant  as  the  Sun,

Mayst  thou,  O Healing!  come  unto  the  fracture :
Healing  is  thy  name.

7 Gold-coloured,  bringing  happy  fate,  odorous,  hairy-

bodied  one,

The  sister  of  the  Waters  art  thou,  Laksha ! and  thy
soul  is  Wind.


8 Sil&cki  is  thy  name : thy  sire,  O goat-brown ! is  a

damsel’s  son.

Thou  hast  been  sprinkled  by  the  mouth  of  Yama’s
tawny-coloured  horse.

9 Issuing  from  the  horse’s  blood  away  she  glided  to

the  trees.

Become  a winged  water-brook,  and  come  to  us,
Arundhati ! . ' :


' ' . HYMN  YI.

Eastward  at  first  the  prayer  was  generated : Yena
disclosed  bright  flashes  from  the  summit,

Disclosed  his  deepest  nearest  revelations,  womb  of
the  non-existent  and  existent.


8 Thy  sire : the  Cloud.  I have  translated  the  text  as  it  stands;  but
the  meaning  is  not  clear.  Dr.  Grill  says,  4 1 read  kdnina  ajahabhruk*
and  translates  accordingly  : 4 Silachi  is  a damsel's  child  (daughter  of
Night),  thy  father  brown-red  like  the  goat.’  Zimmer,  doubtingly,
translates  similarly.  Hast  been  sprinkled  by  the  mouth:  it  would  be
better,  perhaps,  to  read  cisnd'  4 with  the  blood,5  instead  of  dsnd'  1 by  the
mouth,5  as  suggested  by  Prof.  Whitney,  in  his  Index  Vorborum,  follow-
ed by  Dr.  Grill  who  refers  to  the  ancient  German  custom  of  sprinkling
holy  trees  with  blood.  Yama5s  horse  does  not  appear  to  be  mentioned
elsewhere.

9 Become  a winged  water-brook  j come  swiftly  as  a rapid  stream.


f


The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Zimmer,  A.  I.  Leben,  p.  67 ; and*
.with  notes,  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  10,  142.


The  hymn  is  mainly  a prayer  for  protection  and  prosperity,
1 This  stanza  is  repeated  from  IV.  L I,


HYMN  6.]

2 None  have  attained  to  those  of  old,  those  who

wrought  holy  acts  for  you.

Let  them  not  harm  our  heroes  here.  ‘Therefore  I set
before  you  this.

3 Sweet-tongued,  exhaustless,  they  have  sent  their

voices  down  together  in  heaven’s  vault  that  pours
a thousand  streams.

His  wildly-restless  warders  never  close  an  eye ; in
every  place  the  snarers  stand  to  bind  men  fast.

4 Speed  forward,  conquering  all  foes,  to  win  the  spoil.
Thou  comest  on  thy  haters  with  a surging  sea.  • Thy

name  is  Fragile.  The  thirteenth  month  is  Indra’s
home.

5 Through  this  now  hast  thou  sent  thy  gifts.  All  hail!
With  sharpened  arms  and  missiles,  kind  and  friendly,

be  gracious  unto  us,  Soma  and  Rudra  !

6 Through  this  hast  thou  been  left  in  want.  All  hail !
With  sharpened  arms  and  missiles,  kind  and  friendly,

be  gracious  unto  us,  Soma  and  Rudra!

7 Through  this  hast  thou  committed  faults.  All  hail !
With  sharpened  arms  and  missiles,  kind  and  friendly,

be  gracious  unto  us,  Soma  and  Rudra!


TI1E  A Til  A R YA-VEDA,


2 Repeated  from  IV.  7.  7 .

3 Taken,  with  a slight  variation,  from  Rig veda  IX.  73.  4.  They:
the  beams  of  light  which  radiate  from  the  Soma  juices  as  they  undergo
purification.  His  warders : Soma’s  rays  which  watch  the  actions  of  men,
detecting  and  capturing  the  wicked  like  hunters  with  snares  and  nooses.

4 The  first  line  is  taken  from  Rigveda  IX.  110.  1,  and  is  addressed

to  Soma  Pavamana  (the  Soma  as  it  is  purified)  in  the  original  hymn.
Thou sea  : dvishdstddddkyarnav6neya.se  seems  to  be  a corrup-

tion of  dvishds  tarddhyd  rinaya  na  lyase,  ‘ As  a debt-claimer  thou
speedest  to  quell  thy  foes,’  the  second  hemistich  of  the  same  hymn.
Thy  name  is  Fragile : here  the  chief  subject  of  the  hymn,  the  thirteenth
or  intercalary  month  of  the  Indian  calendar.  Indra’s  home:  the
thirteenth  month  being  created  by  the  Sun  or  Indra.  See  XIII.  3.  8.  ..

5 The  first  line  of  this,  as  of  each  of  the  two  following  stanzas,  is

unintelligible  to  me,  ' ■ -■  )


198


THE  HYMNS  OF


[BOOK  V.


8 1 ree  us  from  trouble,  free  us  from  dishonour,  accept

our  worship,  give  us  life  immortal.

9 O missile  of  the  eye,  missile  of  spirit,  thou  missile  of

devotion  and  of  fervour  !

Thou  art  the  weapon  shot  against  the  weapon.  Let
those  be  weaponless  who  sin  against  us.

10  Make  with  thy  weapon  weaponless,  O Agni,  all

wicked  men  who  deal  with  us  as  foemen  with  eye
with  thought,  with  spirit,  or  intention.

11  Thou  art  the  house  of  Indra.  I betake  me  to  thee

I enter  thee  with  all  my  cattle,

With  all  my  people  and  with  all  my  body,  with  all
my  soul,  with  mine  entire  possessions.

12  Thou  art  the  guard  of  Indra.  I betake  me  to  thee,  etc.

13  Ihou  art  the  shield  of  Indra.  I betake  me  to  thee,  etc,

14  Indi'as  protection  art  thou.  I betake  me  to  thee

I enter  thee  with  all  my  cattle,  5

With  all  my  people  and  with  all  my  body,  with  all
my  with  mine  entire  possessions.


HYMN  VII.

Bring  thou  to  us,  bar  not  the  way,  A rati ! Stay  not
the  guerdon  that  is  being  brought  us

Homage  be  paid  to  Failure,  to  Misfortune,  and
Malignity.  *


b

' I


9 The  remainder  of  the  hymn  is  non-metrical.

.}},  Tlie  h?.us*  °fIndra:  *6  thirteenth  month  is  the  subject  of  many
W1  J fanciful  speculations  in  the  later  Vedic  literature.  Here  the  next
world  appears  to  be  referred  to.


I


The  hymn  is  a charm  to  deprecate  Arati,  or  Malignity  personified.

c2JZ  °n:  thl  daksk^d  0r  honorarium  given  to  the  priests  who

cliT  Wa  uT  I0®' / ® Speaker>  Wh0  belo»gs  to  the  sacerdotal
class,  hopes  that  his  fees  may  not  dimmish.  See  kigveda  X.  107
addressed  to  Dakshi nL  \ 3 .


HYMN  7.]  . THE  AT1IAR YA-VEDA.  ■ ' 193

2 The  man  whom  thou  preferrest,  0 Ar&ti,  he  who

prates  to  us —

: This  man  of  thine,  we  reverence.  Baffle  not  thou  my
heart’s  desire.

3 May  our  desire  which  Gods  have  roused  fulfil  itself

by  day  and  night.

We  seek  to  win  Arati : to  Arati  be  our  homage  paid.

4 We,  suppliant,  call  on  Bhaga,  on  Sarasvati,  Anumati.
Pleasant  words  have  I spoken,  sweet  as  honey  is,

at  invocations  of  the  Gods.

5 The  portion  that  I crave  with  speech  intelligent  and

full  of  power,  _ n

May  faith,  presented  with  the  gift  of  tawny  Soma,
find  to-day.

6 Do  not  thou  make  our  words  or  wishes  fruitless.  Let

the  twain,  Indra  Agni,  bring  us  treasures.

All,  fain  to-day  to  give  us  gifts,  welcome  Arati  with
your  love.  / ■ ■ 1

7 Misfortune  1 go  thou  far  away  : we  turn  thy  harmful

dart  aside.  ■A.:V;

I know  thee  well,  Ar&ti ! as  oppressor,  one  who
penetrates.  ' V'A  i .A  A;  i r.'

8 Oft,  coming  as  a naked  girl  thou  hauntest  people  in

their  sleep,

Baffling  the  thought,  Arati ! and  the  firm  intention
of  a man.

9 To  her  the  mighty,  vast  in  size,  who  penetrates  all

points  of  space,

To  her  mine  homage  have  I paid,  Nirriti  with  her
golden  hair.

4 The  second  hemistich  has  four  hypermetrical  syllables  : tnddku-
mathn,  sweet  as  honey,  may  be  a gloss  that  has  crept  into  the  text.

8 Cf.  Burton’s  account  of  succubae  (Anatomy  of  Melancholy,  Part  3,
Sec.  2).  . ■

A irriti  : the  speaker  gives  Arati  the  name  of  the  far  more  powerful
Goddess  of  Misfortune,  Destruction,  and  Death.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  305,
and,  with  annotations,  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  39,  145.


200


tub  iiymns  of


[BOOK  r.


10  AZligi%  o“-T soMen  hue- piIl0WK!  on  s°Id-

ThaJe  I ^i‘‘  Ckd  r0bes  of  e°W  mine

HYMN  VIII.

^GodsUel  °f  ^ika6kata  bring  molten  butter  to  the

OAgni,  make  them  joyful  here:  let  them  all  come
unto  my  call.

2 0 Tndra,  come  unto  my  call.  This  will  I do.  So  hear

It  tilGU.

Lwishearigehfcerti°nS  f°r  th<3  Sake  of  Indra  Suide  my

Tt°Sgj"avedas’  L°rd  °f  “ «

3 yoiKler' 0 ye  Gods- that  s°di,5ss

Get  not  the  Gods  come  to  his  call,  nor  Agni  bear  his
offering  up.  Come  ye,  come  hither  to  my  call.

“S itfandYay0"3’  farthOT  °"'  ^ Mra>s  OTder

: . As  a wolf  worrieth  a sheep,  so  let  nothirn  escape
. y°u  whl]e  llfe  remains.  Stop  fast  his  breath.

5 Ihe  Grahman  whom  those  yonder  have  appointed
priest,  for  injury,

1®,  berieatb  thy  feet.  I cast  him  to  the
Dod  ot  Death.


prists  hynin  18  a Charm  f°r  thS  discomfiture  and  destruction  of  hostile
* i I}j:a^afa  : a thomy  trfe  (Flacourtia  Sapida)  used  as  fuel  at

eauc^fortmajSe—^^  ^ kdle  CalIed  dM’  and

4 Exertions : the  efforts  made  by  the  priests  to  secure  the  due  perfor-
mance of  the  sacrifice,  personified.  Smite  and  slay : the  hostile  priests.

°^erTeiS  (0\  S‘  Texts’  L 289):  <and  yet  with  all  this  sacred-

the  in  w!tChra0t<3r  the  P.nest  must  be  devoted  to  destruction,  if,  in

rl/T  aBenemJ.  he  is  seeking  by  his  ceremonies  to  effect  the
rum  of  the  worshipper/


HYMN  0..J


THE  A TH A JS  FA-  VEDA.


201


6 If  they  have  issued  forth,  strongholds  of  Gods,  and

made  their  shield  of  prayer,

Gaming  protection  for  their  lives,  protection  round
about,  make  all  their  instigation  powerless.

7 Exertions  which  that  man  hath  made,  Exertions

which  he  yet  will  make —

Turn  them,  O Indra,  back  again,  0 Vritra-slayer,
back  again  on  him  that  they  may  kill  that  man.

8 As  Indra,  having  seized  him,  set  his  foot  upon

Udv&chana,

t Even  so  for  all  the  coming  years  I cast  those  men
beneath  my  feet.

9 Here,  Indra  Vritra-slayer,  in  thy  strength  pierce

thou  their  vital  parts.

Here,  even  here,  attack  them,  O Indra.  Thine  own
dear  friend  am  I.

Indra,  we  closely  cling  to  thee.  May  we  be  in  thy
favouring  grace.

HYMN  IX.

All  hail  to  Heaven  !

2 All  hail  to  Earth  !

3 All  hail  to  Air!

4 All  hail  to  Air!

5 All  hail  to  Heaven !

6 All  hail  to  Earth !


8 Udv&chana : one  who  screams  out ; perhaps  some  demon  con-
quered by  Indra.  According  to  the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary  the
reading  is  probably  incorrect.  ,

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Eigveda,  III.  p.  439.

: The  hymn  is  a prayer  to Heavenand  Earth  for  protectionand  assistance*


THE  HYMNS  OF


[BOOK  V


7 Mine  eye  isSurya  and  my  breath  is  Vat  a,  Air  is  mv

soul  and  Prithivl  my  body.

I  verily  who  never  have  been  conquered  give  up  my
life  to  Heaven  and  Earth  for  keeping.

8 Exalt  my  life,  my  strength,  my  deed  and  action  ;

increase  my  understanding  and  my  vigour.

■Be  ye  my  powerful  keepers,  watch  and  guard  me,
ye  mistresses  of  life  and  life’s  creators!  Dwell
ye  within  me,  and  forbear  to  harm  me.

HYMN  X.

Thoti  art  my  wall  of  stone  against  the  sinner  who
rights  against  me  from  the  eastern  quarter.

May  he  encounter  it !

2 Thou  art  my  wall  of. stone  against  the  sinner  wbo

tights  against  me  from  the  southern  quarter.

May  he  encounter  it !

3 Ttiou  art  my  wall  of  stone  against  the  sinner  who

gnts  against  me  from  the  western  quarter.
lv-ay  he  encounter  it !

4 Thou  art  my  wall  of  sione  against  the  sinner  who

fights  against  me  from  the  northern  quarter.

May  he  encounter  it  1 ^

BSStSf^  f p„tect

it  (tZ'  IZ'  Cra  68  SayS  (PIat0=  EePuWi°>  VI.  18):  ‘I  regard

vjr  0 S T«t  V Zt  oUlike  °f  aH  the  °rgails  of  ~tion  >»

X j*6  s'.  ;Th  , ymPare  also  Funeral  Hymn,  Rigveda

r /.r.  ' rll°  sun  receive  eye,  the  wind  thy  spirit ; g0  as  thv
merit  is,  to  earth  or  heaven ’ J 1 ° °»  as  tJl-v


rrr  T'“  **““ w w w <3)  v™  ) z r


HYMN  11.]  . THE  A THAR  FA-  VEDA,  203

5 Thou  art  my  wall  of  stone  against  the  sinner  who

fights  against  me  from  the  stedfast  region.

May  he  encounter  it !

6 Thou  art  my  wall  of  stone  against  the  sinner  who
- fights  against  me  from  the  lofty  region!

May  he  encounter  it !

7 Thou  art  my  wall  of  stone  against  the  sinner  who

from  points  intermediate  fights  against  me.

May  he  encounter  it !

8 With  Brihat  I invoke  the  mind,  with  Matarisvan

both  the  breaths,

The  eye  from  Surya,  and  the  ear  from  Air,  the  body
from  the  Earth.

We,  with  Sarasvatl  who  suits  the  mind,  call  Speech
to  come  to  us.

HYMN  XI.

How,  terrible  in  might,  hast  thou  here  spoken  to  the
great  God,  how  to  the  gold-hued  Father  ?

Thy  mind  watched,  greedy  Varuna ! to  recover  the
brindled  cow  thou  kadst  bestowed  as  guerdon.


5 Stedfast  region  : the  nadir.

6 Lofty  region  : the  zenith.

8 Brihat : a Saman,  psalm  or  sacred  song  in  the  Brihati  metre.  See
III.  3.  2.  Mdtarisvan : here  apparently  meaning  Yata  or  Wind.  Both
the  breaths  : inspiration  and  expiration.  The  eye  from  Surya  : see  Y.
9.  7.  Air:  as  the  conductor  of  sound.  Earth : see  V.  9.  7.  Who  suits
the  mind  : being  the  wise  Goddess  of  eloquence  and  learning.  Speech  ;
Yak,  speech  personified  and  deified.  See  IY.  1.  2.


This  curious  hymn  contains  a dialogue  between  the  primeval  priest
A tharvan  and  Yaruna  about  the  possession  of  a wonderful  brindled
cow.  The  God  has  bestowed  the  cow  upon  the  priest,  and  now  retracts
his  gift.  Atharvan  remonstrates.

1 Atharvan  speaks.  Spoken  : declared  thy  promise  to  give  me  the
cow.  The  great  God : Heaven.  The  gold-hued  Father ; the  Sun.


20*  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  V.

2 Not  through  desire  do  I revoke  my  present : I bring

this  brindled  cow  to  contemplate  her.

Now  by  what  lore,  by  what  inherent  nature,  knowest
thou  all  things  that  exist,  Atharvan  ?

3 Truly  I am  profound  in  wisdom,  truly  I know  by

nature  all  existing  creatures.

No  Das  a by  his  greatness,  not  an  Arya,  may  violate
the  law  that  I will  stablish.

4 None,  self-dependent  Varuna ! exisfceth  wiser  than

thou  or  sager  by  his  wisdom.

Thou  knowest  well  all  these  created  beings : even
the  man  of  wondrous  powers  fears  thee.

5 0 self-dependent  Varuna,  wise  director,  thou  knowest

verily  all  generations.

What  is,  unerring  one  ! beyond  this  region  ? What
more  remote  than  that  which  is  most  distant  ?

6 One  thing  there  is  beyond  this  air,  and  something

beyond  that  one,  most  hard  to  reach,  remotest.

I,  Varuna,  who  know,  to  thee  declare  it.  Let  churls
be  mighty  in  the  lower  regions.  Let  D&sas  sink
into  the  earth  beneath  them.

7 Many  reproaches,  Varuna,  dost  thou  utter  against

the  misers  who  revoke  their  presents.

Be  not  thou  added  to  that  crowd  of  niggards  : let
not  men  call  thee  an  illiberal  giver.

O


2 Varuna  replies.  To  contemplate  her : or,  to  count  her  with  the
rest  of  the  herd.

3 In  this  and  the  two  following  stanzas  Atharvan  speaks.

, 6 Varuna  replies.  Beyond  the  air  is  heaven,  and  beyond  that  is
infinity.  But  the  question  and  answer  are  obscurely  worded.  Muir  *
translates,  the  question  and  answer  differently:  ‘ What  other  thing  is
beyond  this  atmosphere  ? and  what  is  nearer  than  that  remotest  thing.

U thou  unerring ? There  is  one  thing  beyond  this  atmosphere;  and.
on  this  side  of  that  one  there  is  that  which  is  near  though  inaccessible.*

Ulruf  l the  nominative,  as  required  by  the  context.  The  text  has
Varuna  m the  vocative.

7 Atharvan  speaks.


8 Let  not  men  call  me  an  illiberal  giver*  I give  thee

back  the  brindled  cow,  O singer.  # . .

Attend,  in  every  place  where  men  inhabit,  with  all
thy  powers,  the  hymn  that  tells  my  praises.

9 Let  hymns  of  praise  ascend  to  thee,  uplifted  in  every

place  of  human  habitation.

But  give  me  now  the  gift  thou  hast  not  given.  Thou
art  my  friend  for  ever  firm  and  faithful.

10  One  origin,  Vanina!  one  bond  unites  us:  I know

the  nature  of  that  common  kinship.

I give  thee  now  the  gift  that  I retracted.  I am
thy  friend  for  ever  firm  and  faithful.

11  God,  giving  life  unto  the  god  who  lauds  me,  Sage

strengthener  of  the  sage  who  sings  my  praises.
Thou,  self-dependent  Varuna!  hast  begotten  the
kinsman  of  the  Gods,  our  sire  Atharvan.

On  him  bestow  most  highly-lauded  riches.  Thou
art  our  friend,  high  over  all,  our  kinsman*


8 Varuna  speaks.  Yikshu  should  be  read  instead  of  dilcshu  in  this
and  in  the  following  stanza.

9 Atharvan  speaks  this  stanza  and  the  first  hemistich  of  10.  Ever
firm  and  faithful : saptdpadas  ; literally  ‘having  taken  seven  steps'
by  which  an  alliance  or  a marriage  is  confirmed.

10  One  origin : the  ancient  Bisliis  frequently  assert  their  kinship
with  the  Gods,  as  sons  of  Dyaus  or  Father  Heaven.  Varuna  speaks
the  second  hemistich  and  the  first  of  the  following  stanza.

11  Unto  the  god:  the  priest  Atharvan.  The  second  and  third  lines
are  spoken,  by  the  poet  of  the  hymn.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  I.  396.  See
also  Both,  Abhandlung  liber  den  Atharva  Veda,  p.  9.


This  hymn,  which  is  one  of  the  A pris  or  Propitiatory  Hymns,  consist-
ing of  invocations  of  a scries  of  deified  objects  said  to  be  forms  of  Agni,
is  taken  from  Kigveda  X.  1 10,  ascribed  to  the  Rishi  Jamartagui,  son  of
Blirigu,  or  to  Bhrign’s  son  Kama  who  is  generally  called  Parasuramab


206


THE  HYMNS  OF


[BOOK  V


Observant,  bright  as  Mitra,  bring  them  hither.  Thou
art  a sapient  and  foreknowing  envoy.

2 Tanunapat,  fair-tongued  ! with  sweet  meath  balmino-
the  paths  and  ways  of  Order,  make  them  pleasant,
bear  to  the  Gods  our  sacrifice,  exalting  with  holy
thoughts  our  hymns  of  praise  and  worship.

S Invoked,  deserving  prayer  and  adoration,  O A<mi
come  accordant  with  the  Yasus.  ” ’

Thou  art  O youthful  Lord,  the  Gods’  Invoker,  so,
best  ot  sacrifieers,  bring  them  quickly.

4 By  rule  the  Sacred  Grass  is  scattered  eastward,  a
TOlf,e  clothe  this  earth  when  dawns  are  breaking
Widely  it  spreads  around  and  far  extended,  fair  for

the  Gods  and  bringing  peace  and  freedom.

5 Let  the  expansive  Doors  be  widely  opened,  like

wives  who  deck  their  beauty  for  their  husbands.
Lofty,  celestial,  all-impelling  Portals,  admit  the  Gods
and  give  them  easy  entrance !

G Pouring  sweet  dews  let  holy  Night  and  Morning
each  close  to  each,  be  seated  at  their  station  — °
Lohy,  celestial  Dames  with  gold  to  deck  them
assuming  all  their  fair  and  radiant  beauty.


. 2Tan™«P?t--  or,  Son  of  Thyself;  a frequently  recurring  name  of
Agm,  so  called  because  fire  is  sometimes  self-generated,  as  in  the  li-ht-
r°ducod  bJr  attrition,  and  not  necessarily  derived  from  other
•ic.  Othei  fanciful  derivations  of  the  word  are  given.  Order  ■ saeri
fice  ordained  by  divine  law.  ' Sacri-

3 ram;  Gods.  Youthful : continually  reproduced  by  the  fire-drill.

4 Sacrea  : larhu ; generally  kusa  grass,  strewn  on  the  place
* .7"?“'  especially  on  the  Vcdi  or  altar,  and  forming  a kiron

winch  the  oflenngs  are  placed,  and  a seat  for  the  sacrifieers  and  the

afc  tilc  Here  the  “
calm  ' heaven.  **  rcPrc8ent%  the  portals  of  the


HYMN  12.]  THE  AT  II ARY  A-Y ED  A.  207

7 Come  the  first  two  celestial  sweet-voiced  Hotars,

arranging  sacrifice  for  man  to  worship,

As  singers  who  inspire  us  in  assemblies,  showing  the
eastern,  light  with  their  direction  !

8 Let  Bh&ratt  come  quickly  to  our  worship  and  II &

showing  like  a human  being.

So  let  Sarasvatl  and  both  her  fellows,  deft  Goddesses,
on  this  fair  grass  be  seated.

9 Hotar  more  skilled  in  sacrifice,  bring  hither  with

speed  to-day  God  Tvashtar,  thou  who  knowest,
Even  him  who  formed  these  two,  the  Earth  and
Heaven,  the  Parents,  with  their  forms,  and  every
creature.  ■■ywwA'

10  Bring  thou  to  our  oblations  which  thou  balmest  the

companies  of  Gods  in  ordered  season.

Agni,  Vanaspati,  the  Inimolator  sweeten  our  offered
gifts  with  meath  and  butter  !

11  Agni  as  soon  as  he  was  born  made  ready  the  sacri-

fice and  was  the  Gods’  preceder.

May  the  Gods  eat  our  offering  consecrated  according
to  this  true  Priest’s  voice  and  guidance.


7 1 1 otars : perhaps  Agni  and  Varan  a.  v::;pVd  App'd

8 Bhdratt  (called  also  Mahi),  lldr  and  Sarasvati  are  Goddesses  'who
preside  over  sacred  speech,  prayer  and  praise.

9 If otar  more  skilled;  Agni,  superior  in  sacrificial  knowledge  and
skill  to  all  human  priests.  Tvashtar  : the  divine  artificer.  See  IL  5.  6.

10  Vanaspati:  literally,  Lord  of  the  Wood;  here  meaning  the

sacrificial  post,  which  is  enumerated  among  the  Apn  deities  or  deified
objects,  and  regarded  as  a form  of  Agni.  . .

Other  Apia  hymns,  generally  addressed  to  the  same  deities  or  deified
objects,  are  Rigveda  I.  13,  142,  188  ; IL  3 ; 111.  4;  V,  5 ; VII.  2 ;
IX.  5.


y **“


THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  V.

HYMN  XIII.

Varuna,  Sage  of  heaven,  hath  given  me  the  gift;
witii  spells  of  mighty  power  I draw  thy  poison  out."

Dug  up,  not  dug,  adherent,  I have  seized  it  fast : low
hath  thy  venom  sunk  like  water  in  the  sands.

All  the  non-fluid  portion  of  thy  venom,  I receive  in
these.

I take  thy  middlemost,  thy  highest,  lowest  juice :
may  it  be  spent  and  lost  by  reason  of  thy  fear.

Strong  is  my  cry  like  thunder  with  the  rainy  cloud  :
with  powerful  incantation  let  thy  strength  be
stayed.  °

I,  with  the  men  to  aid,  have  seized  that  mice  of  his  •


1 Thy  poison  : a snake  is  addressed.

2 iii  these : there  is  no  clue  to  the  feminine  subs
some  herbs  are  intended.

3 The  text  of  the  second  pada  of  the  first  hemistic
my  translation  thereof  is  only  a makeshift,

5 Aarcrit : Jcairdta , the  name  of  a variety  of  snak
among  the  Kiratasf  one  of  the  barbarous  tribes  who  i
mountains  and  live  by  hunting  (the  Kirrhadae  of  An

01)0  of  tl?e  most  deadly  of  Indian  Thanatophidia,
jnencl  inhabits : a conjectural  version,  stamdtnam  of


ffY.VF  13]  THE  ATE  ARY A-V ED  A.  209

6 Even  as  the  cord  that  strings  the  bow,  I slacken,  as

it  were,  the  cars

Of  the  All-conquering  serpent’s  wrath,  of  the  fierce
rage  of  Black,  and  Brown,  Taim&ta,  and  Apodaka.

7 And  Aligi  and  Viligi,  their  father  and  the  mother

too, —

What  will  ye  do?  Your  venomed  sap,  we  know,  is
utterly  powerless.

8 Daughter  of  Urugu!&,  she-fiend  whom  the  black-

skinned  mother  bare —

All  female  serpents’  poison  who  crept  swiftly  near  is
impotent.

9 Dwelling  beside  the  mountain’s  slope,  the  quick-

eared porcupine  exclaimed :

Of  all  these  she-snakes  homed  in  earth  the  poison  is
most  powerless.

10  Tibuva  or  not  T&buva,  thou  verily  art  not  T&buva  :
poison  is  killed  by  T&buva.

Tastuva  or  not  Tastuva,  thou  verily  art  not  Tastuva :
poison  is  killed  by  Tastuva.


6 All-conquering  ( s&trdsdhd),  Taimdta , and  Apodaka  (waterless,  non*
aquatic)  are  unidentifiable  varieties  of  snakes.

7 Aligi  and  Viligi:  not  identified.

8 XIrugMd : _ the  meaning  of  the  word,  and  the  snake  indicated  are
hot  known.

9 The  quick-eared  porcupine : whose  quills  moreover  protect  her  from
the  attacks  of  snakes.  Of  : 4 Forth  issuing  from  the  mountain’s  side  the
mungoose  (the  deadly  enemy  of  snakes)  spake  these  words  and  said  :
The  scorpion’s  venom  hath  no  strength  : Scorpion,  thy  venom  is  but
weak’  (Rigveda  I.  19L  16).

10  T&huva  and  Tastuva  are  supposed  antidotes  that  render  snakes5

poison  ineffectual.  Snake-charmers  at  the  present  day  exhibit  stones
which  they  say  have  the  power  of  drawing  the  poison  out  of  a wound,
inflicted  by  a snake.  In  England,  formerly,  Brazil  Wopd  was  held  to
be  a certain  preventive  of  snake-bites.  ,


JIG


TIIE  HYMNS  OF


[BOOK  r..


HYMN  XIV.

An  eagle  found  thee  : with  his  snout  a wild  boar  dug
thee  from  the  earth.

Harm  thou,  0 Plant,  the  mischievous,  and  drive  the
sorcerer  away.

2 Beat  thou  the  Y&tudh&nas  back,  drive  thou  away  the

sorcerer;

And  chase  afar,  0 Plant,  the  man  who  fain  would  do
us  injury.

3 As  ’twere  a strip  cut  round  from  skin  of  a white-

footed antelope,

Bind,  like  a golden  chain,  0 God,  his  witchcraft  on
the  sorcerer.  ...

4 Take  thou  his  sorcery  by  the  hand,  and  to  the  sor-

cerer lead  it  back.

Lay  it  before  him,  face  to  face,  that  it  may-kill  the
sorcerer.  i ^ ‘

5 Back  on  the  wizard  fall  his  craft,  upon  the  cursef

light  his  curse  !

Let  witchcraft,  like  a well-naved  car,  roll  back  upon
the  sorcerer.

6 Whoso,  for  other’s  harm  hath  dealt — woman  or  man-

in  magic  arts,

To  him  we  lead  the  sorcery  back,  even  as  a courser
with  a rope.

7 Now  whether  thou  hast  been  prepared  by  Gods  or

been  prepared  by  men,

We,  with  our  Indra  at  our  side  to  aid  us,  lead  thee
back  again.  :


211


HYMN  15.]  TUB  ATH  ABY A-YEDA,  . 211

8 Agni,  victorious  in  fight,  subdue  the  armies  of  our

foes !

Back  on  the  sorcerer  we  cast  his  sorcery,  and  beat
it  home.

9 Thou  who  hast  piercing  weapons,  pierce  him  who

hath  wrought  it ; conquer  him.

We  do  not  sharpen  thee,  to  slay  the  man  who  hath
not  practised  it.

10  Go  as  a son  goes  to  his  sire  : bite  as  a trampled

viper  bites.

As  one  who  flies  from  bonds,  go  back,  O Witchcraft,
to  the  sorcerer.

11  Even  as  the  timid  antelope  or  hind  from  her  assailant

flees,

So  swiftly  let  the  sorcery  c’ertake  and  reach  the
sorcerer.

12  Straighter  than  any  arrow  let  it  fly  against  him,

Heaven  and  Earth !

So  let  that  witchcraft  seize  again  the  wizard  like  a
beast  of  chase.

13  Let  it  go  contrary  like  flame,  like  water  following

its  course.

Let  witchcraft,  like  a well-naved  car,  roll  back  upon
the  sorcerer.

HYMN  XV.

Plant  ! I have  those  who  shall  avert  the  threatened
danger,  ten  and  one.

O sacred  Plant,  produced  aright!  make  sweetness,
sweet  thyself,  for  me.


10  As  one  toko  flies  from  bonds:  or,  if  bdndkum . the  alteration  sug-
gested in  the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  be  read  instead  of  hand  ham :
As,  to  his  friend,  the  fugitive,  back,  Witchcraft,  to  the  sorcerer!

The  hymn  has  been  translated  and  annotated  by  Grill,  Hundert,
Lieder,  pp.  26,  147,


12  THE  hymns  OF  {BOOK  7

2 Twenty  and  two,  0 Plant,  have  I who  shall  avert
the  threatened  ill.

O sacied  Plant,  produced  aright  I make  sweetness,
sweet  thyself,  for  me.

HYMN  XVI.

Bum,:  if  thou  art  the  single  bull,  beget.  Thou  hast
no  vital  sap.

HYMN  XVII.

These  first,  the  boundless  Sea,  and  Matarisvan,  fierce-
glowing  Eire,  the  Strong,  the  Bliss-bes tower,

And  heavenly  Floods,  first-born  bv  holy  Order


exclaimed  against  the  outrage  on  a Brahman.

2 King  Soma  first  of  all,  without  reluctance,  made  res-
titution of  the  Brahma  ns  consort.

Mitia  and  Varuna  were  the  in viters  : Agni  as  Hotar
took  her  hand  and  led  her.


X ux  wie  iiyimi,  t wmcn  is  a cfcarm  tor  general  prosperity,
are  exactly  the  same  with  the  exception  of  the  numbers  which  increase
y eleven  in  each  stanza  (thirty  and  three,  forty  and  four,  and  so  oil)

StaU2a  10’  sta“za  11  ^eluding  with


The  hymn,  which  is  a charm  for  the  LAwA,
contains  ten  other  similar  lines,  the  only  difference
the  place  of  eJcavriskah,  single  bull,
two  bulls,  trivrishdh , triple  bull,
follow  in  regular  order


increase  and  prosperity  of  cattle,

“A  ~~ being  that  in

dvivriskdb , double  bull,  or,  worth
t - , or>  w°rtb  three  bulls,  and  so  on,

u wLk  'r5U  a;  °rJer,Up  t0  *Md<8«h,  eleven-fold,  in  stanza  11,

' "*nds  “ of  tbe  *—»>  -h*-.  »>

1nThe  a*iect°f  tho  Vmn,  parts  of  which  are  taken  from  Rigveda  X
103,  is  the  abduction  by  a Kshatriya  of  a Brahman’s  wife,  and  her

seven^f  ™t1araf,»  te  her  husband.  The  Rigveda  hymn  contans  only
seven  stanzas,  concluding  with  st  um  1 1 of  the  Atharva-veda  hymn.

1 Se.j  .•  theocean  ofair.  MAtarimm  : probably  Wind.  Fire:  Agni.

‘nltZTf  • ? */iss-bf?™>' ■■  Soma.  Ovtrage  on  « Brahman  ,

Brahma  s ton,  ’ according  to  Styana.  Soe  note  on  stanza  5.

■a2  Mere  the  mviters : acted  as  intereeders,  or  matdh-maker%  at  tlm.
renewed  marriage.  .


HYMN  17.]


THE  ATHARYA-fEDA.


213

3 The  man,  her  pledge,  must  by  the  hand  be  taken

when  he  hath  cried,  She  is  a. Brahman’s  consort.
She  stayed  not  for  a herald  to  conduct  her  : thus  is
the  kingdom  of  a ruler  guarded.

4 She  whom  they  call  the  star  with  loosened  tresses,

descending  as  misfortune  on  the  village,

The  Brahman’s  consort,  she  disturbs  the  kingdom
where  hath  appeared  the  hare  with  fiery  flashing.

5 Active  in  duty  serves  the  BrahmacMri : he  is  a

member  of  the  Gods’  own  body.

Through  him  Brihaspati  obtained  his  consort,  as  the
Gods  gained  the  ladle  brought  by  Soma.

6 Thus  spake  of  her  those  Gods  of  old,  Seven  Bishis,

who  sate  them  down  to  their  austere  devotion  :
Dire  is  a Brahman’s  wife  led  home  by  others  : in  the
supremest  heaven  she  plants  confusion.


3 Her  pledge  : her  sponsor.  Thus  : by  observing  justice  and  causing
the  abducted  wife  to  be  restored.  These  three  stanzas  correspond,  with
slight  variations,  to  stanzas  1 — 3 of  the  Rigveda  hymn.

4 The  real  cause  of  the  misfortune  attributed  to  meteoric  influence
is  some  disrespect  shown  to  a Brahman’s  wife.  Hare  with  fiery  flash-
ing : some  meteoric  phenomenon.

5 Rigveda  X.  109.  S.  Brahma chat A : a youth  in  the  first  stage  of  a
Brahman’s  religious  life  ; a religious  student.  Brihaspati  : that  is,  the
injured  Brahman  ; Brihaspati  representing  the  sacerdotal  class.  The
ladle  : juhum,  which  Prof.  Ludwig  takes  to  be  the  lady’s  n tme  : ‘ J uhu,
0 Gods,  conducted  home  by  Soma.’  The  meaning  is  obtcu  e.  A legend
quoted  by  Sdyana  says  that  Juhu  or  Vak,  the  wife  of  Brihaspati  who
is  identified  with  Brahma,  had  been  deserted  by  her  husband.  The
Gods  then  consulted  together  as  to  the  means  of  expiating  his  sin,  and
restored  her  to  him.  The  legend  has  evidently  grown  out  of  the  mis-
understanding of  the  ancient  hymn.

6 Stanza  4 of  the  Rigveda  hymn.  Seven  Riskis  : celebrated  saints,
sages,  and  inspired  seers  of  ancient  times,  Bharadvaja,  Kasyapa,
(rotama,  Atri,  Vasishiha,  Yisvamitra,  and  Jamadagni.


214  THE  HYMNS  OP  {BOOR  V.

7 When  infants  die,  untimely  born,  when  herds  of  cat-

tle waste  away,

When  heroes  strike  each  other  dead,  the  Brahman’s
wife  destroyeth  them.

8 Even  if  ten  former  husbands — none  a Br&b man— had

espoused  a dame,

And  then  a Brahman  took  her  hand,  he  is  her  hus-
band, only  he.

9 Not  Vaisva,  not  R&janya,  no,  the  Br&hman  is  indeed

her  lord  :

This  Surya  in  his  course  proclaims  to  the  Five  Races
of  mankind.

10  So  then  the  Gods  restored  her,  so  men  gave  the

woman  back  again.

Princes  who  kept  their  promises  restored  the  Brah-
man’s wedded  wife.

11  Having  restored  the  Brahman’s  wife,  and  freed  them,

with  Gods’  aid,  from  sin,

They  shared  the  fulness  of  the  earth  and  won  them-
selves extended  sway.

12  No  lovely  wife  who  brings  her  dower  in  hundreds

rests  upon  his  bed,


8 Rdjanya  : man  of  the  military  and  princely  class  — Kshairiya.

10  Stanza  6 of  the  Rigveda  hymn.

11  Stanza  7 of  the  Rigveda  hymn,

Mr.  Muir  observes  at  the  end  of  his  translation  of  the  non-Bigveda
portion  of  the  hymn  (0.  S.  Texts,  I.  p.  281) ; 4 This  hymn  appears  to
show  that,  however  extravagant  the  pretensions  of  the  Brahmans  were
in  other  respects,  they  had,  even  at  the  comparatively  late  period  when
it  was  composed,  but  little  regard  to  the  purity  of  the  sacerdotal  blood,
as  they  ....  were  in  the  habit  of  forming  unions  with  the  widows
of  Eajanyas  or  Vaisyas,  even  if  they  did  not  even  take  possession  of
the  wives  of  such  men  while  they  were  alive/

The  hymn  has  been  translated  also  by  Zimmer,  Altindiscbes  Leben,
p.  197,  and  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  446.'


HYMN  IS.']


THE  ATHARYA-YEDA.  r


215  ~


Within  whose  kingdom  is  detained,  through  want  of
sense,  a Brahman’s  dame.

13  No  broad-browed  calf  with  wide-set  ears  is  ever  in
v k his  homestead  born,

Within  whose  kingdom  is  detained,  through  want  of
sense,  a Brahman’s  dame.

14  No  steward,  golden-necklaced,  goes  before  the  meat-

trays  of  the  man

Within  whose  kingdom  is  detained,  through  want  of
sense,  a Brahman’s  dame.  .

15  No  black-eared  courser,  white  of  hue,  moves  proudly,

harnessed  to  his  car,

In  whose  dominion  is  detained,  through  want  of
sense,  a Brahman’s  dame.  V

16  No  lily  grows  with  oval  bulbs,  no  lotus-pool  is  in  his

field,

In  whose  dominion  is  detained,  through  senseless
love,  a Brahman’s  dame.

17  The  men  whose  task  it  is  to  milk  drain  not  the  brindled

cow  for  him

In  whose  dominion  is  detained,  through  senseless
love,  a Brahman’s  dame.

18  His  milch-cowT  doth  not  profit  one,  his  draughRox

masters  not  the  yoke

Wherever,  severed  from  his  wife,  a Brahman  spends
the  mournful  night.

.70.:  .7  hymn  xviii.  , ■ , '

The  Gods,  O Prince,  have  not  bestowed  this  cow  on
thee  to  eat  thereof.

Seek  not,  R&janya,  to  devour  the  Brahman’s  cow
which  none  may  eat.


The  hymn  declares  the  ■wickedness  and  ruinous  consequences  of
oppressing  and  robbing  Brahmans.


:16  THE  HYMN'S  OF  [BOOK  V.

2 A base  E&janya,  spoiled  at  dice,  and  ruined  by  him-

self,  may  eat

The  Brahman’s  cow,  and  think,  To-day,  and  not  to-
morrow, let  me  live!

3 The  Brahman’s  cow  is  like  a snake,  charged  with

dire  poison,  clothed  with  skin.

Bajanya ! bitter  to  the  taste  is  she,  and  none  may
eat  of  her.

4 She  takes  away  his  strength,  she  mars  his  splendour,

she  ruins  everything  like  fire  enkindled.

That  man  drinks  poison  of  the  deadly  serpent  who
counts  the  Br&hman  as  mere  food  to  feed  him.

5 Whoever  smites  him,  deeming  him  a weakling — blas-

phemer, coveting  his  wealth  through  folly —

Indra  sets  fire  alight  within  his  bosom.  He  who  acts
thus  is  loathed  by  Earth  and  Heaven.

6 No  Brahman  must  be  injured,  safe  as  fire  from  him

who  loves  himself.

For  Soma  is  akin  to  him  and  Indra  guards  him  from
the  curse.

7 The  fool  who  eats  the  Brahmans’  food  and  thinks  it

pleasant  to  the  taste,

Eats,  but  can  ne’er  digest,  the  cow  that  bristles  with
a hundred  barbs.

8 His  voice  an  arrow’s  neck,  his  tongue  a bowstring,

his  windpipes  fire-enveloped  heads  of  arrows,

With  these  the  Brahman  pierces  through  blasphe-
mers, with  God-sped  bows  that  quell  the  hearts
within  them.

9 Keen  arrows  have  the  Brahmans,  armed  with  missiles :

the  shaft,  when  they  discharge  it,  never  faileth.
Pursuing  him  with  fiery  zeal  and  anger,  they  pierce
the  foeman  even  from  a distance.


4 Deadly  serpent : the  Taim&ta,  mentioned  in  V.  13.  6:


HYMN  18.]  , THE  AT  II  ARY A-V  ED  A.  21?

10  They  who,  themselves  ten  hundred,  were  the  rulers

The  Vaitahavyas,  were  destroyed  for  that  they  ate  a
Brahman’s  cow.

11  The  cow,  indeed,  when  she  was  slain  o’ertbrew  those

Vaitahavyas,  who

Cooked  the  last  she-goat  that  remained  of  Kesara-
pr&bandh&’s  flock.

12  One  and  a hundred  were  the  folk,  those  whom  the

Earth  shook  off  from  her  : /. 'A?;'?;

When  they  had  wronged  the  Brahman  race  they
perished  inconceivably.

18  Among  mankind  the  Gods’  despiser  rnoveth : he
hath  drunk  poison,  naught  but  bone  is  left  him.
"Who  wrongs  the  kinsman  of  the  Gods,  the  Br&hman,
gains  not  the  sphere  to  which  the  Fathers  travelled.

14  Agni,  in  sooth,  is  called  our  guide,  Soma  is  called
our  next  of  kin.

Indra  quells  him  who  curses  us.  Sages  know  well
that  this  is  so.


10  Vaitahavyas : a tribe  or  people  in  the  north.;  literal]}",  descendants
or  people  of  Vitahavya.  A Rishi  of  this  name  appears  to  be  mentioned
in  liigveda  VI.  15,.  a hymn  ascribed  to  him  by  Say&na..  The  Vaitahavyas
are  mentioned  in  the  Anus&saniParva  of  the  Mahabharata,  1952 — 1977,
where  they  are  said  to  have  been  defeated  and  slain  in  battle*

11  Kesaraprd bandhd  : I can  find  no  other  mention  of  this  woman*

12  One  and  a hundred : ‘ an  unlucky  number  (used  with  reference

to  phases  of  disease,  modes  of  death,  and  the  like),  of.  Ilf.  9*  6 ; VII F,
2.  27/ — Grill’s  note  on  VII.  115.  3.  The  Earth  shook  off:  in  horror  at
their  wickedness.  Of.  Job,  38.  12  : ‘Hast  thou  commanded  the  morn-
ing ....  And  caused  the  dayspring  to  know  his  place ; That  it  might
take  hold  of  the  ends  of  the  earth,  That  the  wicked  might  be  shaken
Out  of  ltd  V ■ Tjhsk  ■:  '■ ' ' ■ '

The  hymn  has'  been  translated  by  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  I.  285  (2nd
edition) ; by  Ludwig,  Der  .liigveda,  lit  p..  447  ; with  annotations,-’  by*
Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  41 , 1 48;  and ■ by  Zimmer,  A. I.  Leben,  p.  1$9«


18  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  V.

5 Prince ! like  a poisoned  arrow,  like  a deadly  snake,
O lord  of  kine !

Dire  is  the  Brdhman’s  arrow : he  pierces  his  enemies
therewith.  •

HYMN  XIX.

The  sons  of  Yitahavya,  the  Srinjayas,  waxed  exceed-
ing strong.

They  well-nigh  touched  the  heavens,  but  they
wronged  Bhrigu  and  were  overthrown.

2 When  men  pierced  Brihatsiman  through,  the  Br4h-

man,  son  of  Angiras,

The  ram  with  teeth  in  both  his  jaws,  the  sheep,
devoured  their  progeny.

3 If  men  have  spat  upon,  or  shot  their  rheum  upon  a

Brihman,  they

Sit  in  the  middle  of  a stream  running  with  blood,
devouring  hair.

4 While  yet  the  Brahman’s  cow  which  men  are  dressing

quivers  in  her  throes,

She  mars  the  kingdom’s  splendour:  there  no  vigor-
ous hero  springs  to  life.

5 Terrible  is  her  cutting-up : her  bitter  flesh  is  cast

away,

And  it  is  counted  sin  among  the  Fathers  if  her  milk
is  drunk.


.The  subject  of '.the  hymn  is  the  wickedness  and  the  ruinous  conse-
quences of  oppressing,  robbing,  or  insulting  a Brahman.

1 Vitahavya:  see  V.  18.  L Srinjayas:  a people  in  the  north.  See
Zimmer,  A.  I.  Leben,  p.  132.  Bhrigu : see  II.  5.  3.  The  story  of  the
overthrow  of  the  Vaitahavyas  is  told  in  the  Mahabharata,  Amxsasana
Parva,  1952 — 1977,  but  Bhrigu  is  there,  said  to  have  given  refuge  to
the  King  Yitahavya  after  his  defeat.

2 Brikatsdman  : the  name  of  this  descendant  of  the  ancient  Rishi
Angiras  does  not  recur  in  the  Yeda,  and  his  story  is  not  mentioned
elsewhere.

3 They  sit : after  death,  in  the  infernal  regions.


HYMN  19.]  TEB  ATHARVA-YEDA.  219

6 If  any  King  who  deems  himself  mighty  would  eat  a
V:;>- ' Bi&hman  up,

Kent  and  disrupted  is  that  realm  wherein  a Br&hman
is  oppressed.

7 She  grows  eight-footed,  and  four-eyed,  four-eared*

four-jawed*  two-faced,  two-tongued,

And  shatters  down  the  kingdom  of  the  man  who  doth
the  Br&hman  wrong.

8 As  water  swamps  a leaky  ship  so  ruin  overflows  that

realm.

Misfortune  smites  the  realm  wherein  a Brahman
suffers  scath  and  harm.

9 The  very  trees  repel  the  man,  and  drive  him  from

their  sheltering  shade,

Whoever  claims,  O N&rada,  the  treasure  that  a
Br&hman  owns.

10  That  wealth,  King  Varuna  hath  said,  is  poison  by  the

Gods  prepared.

None  hath  kept  watch  to  guard  his  realm  who  hath
devoured  a Bi  ah  man’s  cow.

11  Those  nine-and-ninety  people  whom  Earth  shook  and

cast  away  from  her,

When  they  had  wronged  the  Br&hman  race  were
ruined  inconceivably.

12  Oppressor  of  the  Brahmans ! thus  the  Gods  have

spoken  and  declared,


7 She:  tire  cow.  ;;  %

9 Ndrada : a devarshi  or  saint  of  the  celestial  class  who  often  comes
down  to  earth  to  report  what  is  going  on  in  heaven  and  return  with  his
account  of  what  is  being  done  on  earth.  His  name  is  introduced  to
make  the  warning  more  solemn  and  impressive.

11  2%ose  nine-and-ninety:  cf.  V.  18.  12,  where  they  are  said  to  have
been  a hundred  and  one.  - : - :


220  THE  Iff  MSS  OF  ■ • [BOOK  f,

The  step-effacing  wisp  they  bind  upon  the  dead  shall
be  thy  couch.

13  Oppressor  of  the  Brahmans  ! tears  wept  by  the  man

who  suffers  wrong, .

These  are  the  share  of  water  which  the  Gods  have
destined  to  be  thine.

14  The  share  of  water  which  the  Gods  have  destined  to

be  thine,  is  that,

Oppressor  of  the  priest ! -wherewith  men  lave  the
corpse  and  wet  the  beard.

15  The  rain  of  Mitra-Varuna  falls  not  on  him  who

wrongs  the  priest.

To  him  no  counsel  brings  success  : he  wins  no  friend
to  do  his  will.

HYMN  XX.

Formed  out  of  wood,  compact  with  straps  of  leather,
loud  is  the  War-drum  as  he  plays  the  hero.
Whetting  thy  voice  and  vanquishing  opponents,  roar
at  them  like  a lion  fain  to  conquer!

2 The  fastened  frame  hath  roared  as  ’twere  a lion,  like
a bull  bellowing  to  meet  the  heifer.


12  The  step-effacing  wisp ; obliterating  the  footsteps  of  the  dead  on
his  journey  to  the  other  world,  so  that  Death  may  not  reach  the
surviving  kinsmen  by  the  same  path.  Muir  translates  fctidiam  (wisp)
by  ‘cloth/  Luiwig,  Zimmer,  and  Hillebrandt  by  ‘ fessel/  £ fetter,*
and  Roth  and  Grill  by  ‘ RiischeP  ‘tuft*  or  ‘wisp/  See  Grill’s  note,
14  The  beard : to  be  shaved  off  before  cremation.

, The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  451;
by  Zimmer,  A.  L L.  p.  201;  by  Grill,  with  annotations,  Hundert  Lieder,
pp.  43,  150;  and  by  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  I.  286,  -who  observes,!  ‘The
attention  of  the  reader  is  directed  to  the  intensity  of  contempt  and
abhorrence  which  is  sought  to  be  conveyed  by  the  coarse  imagery  com
tained  in  verses  3,  and  12 — 14/


■ The' hymn,  addressed  to'  the- War-drum,  is  a charm  to  Secure  victory
in  a coming,  battle,  Compare  Rigveda  YL  47.  29 — 31.


221


HYMN  20.]  THE  A TH AS.  FA-  VEDA,

Thou  art  a bull,  thine  enemies  are  weaklings:  thine
is  the  foe-subduing  strength  of  I ndra.

3 Like  a bull  marked  by  strength  among  the  cattle,

roar  seeking  kiue  and  gathering  up  the  booty.
Pierce  through  our  adversaries’  heart  with  sorrow,
and  let  our  routed  foes  desert  their  hamlets.

4 Victorious  in  the  battle,  loudly  roaring,  seizing  what

may  be  seized,  look  all  around  thee.

Utter,  O Drum,  thy  heavenly  voice  with  triumph.
Bring,  as  a priest,  our  enemies’  possessions.

5 Hearing  the  Drum’s  far-reaching  voice  resounding,

let  the  foe’s  dame,  waked  by  the  roar,  afflicted,
Gjrrasping  her  son,  run  forward  in  her  terror  amid  the
conflict  of  the  deadly  weapons.

6 Thou,  first  of  all,  O Drum,  thy  voice  shalt  utter  :

over  the  ridge  of  earth  speak  forth  exultant.
Crunching  with  might  the  army  of  the  foemen,
declare  thy  message  pleasantly  and  clearly.

7 Loud  be  thy  roar  between  the  earth  and  heaven.

Swift  let  thy  sounds  go  forth  in  all  directions.  '
Neigh  at  them,  thunder,  set  in  opposition,  song-
maker,  good  ally  that  friends  may  conquer.

8 He  shall  send  forth  his  voice  whom  art  hath  fashioned.

Make  thou  the  weapons  of  our  warriors  bristle.
With  I ndra  for  ally  call  out  our  heroes,  and  with  thy
friends  scatter  and  chase  the  foemen.

9 Besonant,  roaring,  with  thy  powerful  weapons,

warning,  and  heard  by  troops  in  many  places,
Knowing  all  rules  and  winning  us  advantage,  deal
fame  to  many  where  two  kings  are  fighting.


4 As  a priest : skilled  in  the  use  of  incantations,
9 All  rules  ; of  warfare,  - ■ -


222  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  K

10  Bent  on  advantage,  mightier,  gaining  treasures,  victor

in  war,  the  spell  hath  made  thee  keener.

As,  in  the  press,  the  stone  to  stalks  of  Soma,  thus,
Drum  ! go  dancing  to  our  foes’  possessions.

11  Foe-conqueror,  victor,  vanquishing  opponents,  seeker

of  booty,  mastering,  destroying,

Speak  out  as  a skilled  speaker  tells  his  counsel,  speak
strength  to  us  that  we  may  win  the  battle.

12  Shaker  of  things  unshaken,  readiest  corner  to  battles ;

conquering  foes,  resistless  leader,

Guarded  by  Indra,  watching  our  assemblies,  go  quickly,
breaker  of  their  hearts  who  hate  us.

HYMN  XXI.

Speak  to  our  enemies,  0 Drum,  discouragement  and
wild  dismay.

We  bring  upon  our  foemen  fear  and  discord  and  dis-
comfiture. Drum!  drive  these  enemies  away.

2 When  sacrificial  butter  hath  been  offered,  let  our

foemen  flee

Through  consternation,  terrified,  trembling  in  mind
and  eye  and  heart.

3 Wrought  out  of  wood,  compact  with  straps  of  leather,

dear  to  all  the  clan.

Bedewed  with  sacrificial  oil,  speak  terror  to  our
enemies.

4 As  the  wild  creatures  of  the  wood  flee  in  their  terror

from  a man,

Evensodothou,  0 Drum,  roar  out  against  our  foes  to
frighten  them,  and  then  bewilder  thou  their  thoughts.


12  Watching  our  assemblies : favourably  regarding  our  gathering*
for  sacrifie:al  purposes.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III,  p.  460,
and,  w.tli  annotations  by  Grill,  Hundert  Licder,  pp.  68,  153.

The  hymn,  addressed  to  the  personified  War-drum  (cf.  V.  20.)  and
various  deities,  is  a charm  to  secure  victory  in  battle.


BY  MM  21.]


THE  AT  tt ARY A-Y ED  A.  ,


228

5 As,  when  the  wolf  approaches,  goats  and  sheep  run

sorely  terrified,

Even  so  do  thou,  O Drum,  roar  out  against  our  foes
to  frighten  them,  and  then  bewilder  thou 'their
thoughts.

6 As  birds  of  air,  day  after  day,  fly  in  wild  terror  from

the  hawk,  as  from  a roaring  lion’s  voice,

Even  so  do  thou,  O Drum,  roar  out  against  our  foes
to  frighten  them,  and  then  bewilder  thou  their
thoughts.

7 May  all  the  deities  whose  might  controls  the  fortune

of  the  fray

Frighten  away  our  enemies  with  Drum  and  skin  of
antelope.

8 Let  those  our  enemies  who  go  yonder  in  their

battalions  shake

In  fear  at  shadows  and  the  sounds  of  feet  which
Indra  sporteth  with.

9 To  all  the  quarters  of  the  sky  let  clang  of  bowstrings

and  our  Drums

Cry  out  to  hosts  of  foes  that  go  discomfited  in  serried
ranks.

10  Aditya,  take  their  sight  away!  Follow  them  close,

ye  motes  of  light.

Let  them  cleave  fast  to  foot-bound  hosts  when
strength  of  arm  hath  past  away.

11  Do  ye,  O mighty  Maruts,  sons  of  Prisni,  crush  down,

with  Indra  for  ally,  our  foeraen.

King  Soma,  Varuna,  great  God  and  sovran,  Indra  too,
aye,  Death, —

12  May  these  embattled  Gods,  brilliant  as  Shrya — All

bail ! — one-minded,  conquer  those  who  hate  us.

10  Aditya : 0 Sun*  Let  them  cleave  fast : I can  get  no  intelligible
meaning  out  of  the  paisavgirdh  of  this  p Ida.  4 Fusz-schlingen  [patsan-
ginif]  sollen  [an  ihnen]  haften/  * let  foot-snares  cling  to  them.*—
Ludwig.

^"^■.Th'eihymn'haB  been;  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  1IL.  p,  374*  '.


224


THE  HYMNS  OF


[BOOK  7.


HYMN'  XXII.

Hence,  filled  with  holy  strength  let  Agni,  Soma,
and  Varuna,  the  Press-stone,  and  the  Altar,

And  Grass,  and  glowing  Fuel  banish  Fever.  Let
hateful  things  stay  at  a distance  yonder.

2 And  thou  thyself  who  makest  all  men  yellow,

consuming  them  with  burning  heat  like  Agni,
Thou,  Fever!  then  be  weak  and  ineffective.  Pass
hence  into  the  realms  below  or  vanish.

3 Endowed  with  universal  power!  send  Fever  down-

ward, far  away,

The  spotty,  like  red-coloured  dust,  sprung  from  a
spotty  ancestor.

4 When  I have  paid  obeisance  to  Fever  I send  him

downward  forth.

So  let  Sakambhara’s  boxer  go  again  to  the  Maha-
' vrishas.

5 His  mansions  are  the  Mujavans,  and  the  Maha, vrishas

his  home.

Thou,  Fever,  ever  since  thy  birth  hast  lived  among
the  Bahlikas.

6 Fever,  snake,  limbless  one,  speak  out!  Keep  thyself

far  away  from  us.

Seek  thou  a wanton  D&si  girl  and  strike  her  with  thy
thunderbolt.


The  hymn  is  a charm  against  Fever.

1 Grass  : the  Sacred  Grass  strewn  in  the  sacrificial  court  or  chamber.
See  V.  12.  4.  Fever:  takm&n  : meaning  especially  malarial  fever.
See.  I.  25.  1.

3 Endowed  ■ with  universal  power:  the  wonderful  plant  Kushtha
(Costus  SpeciosiiSj  or  Arabicus),  is  addressed.

4 Sakambkara's  boxer : Fever.  Sakambhara  (Dung-bringer)  appears
to  be  the  name  of  one  of  the  demons  of  disease.

5 Mujavans  : apparently  a hill  tribe  in  the  north-west  of  India.
Mahdvriskas : a people  in  the  same  region.  Bahlikas:  a Baeirian  race,
the  people  of.Balkh.  See  Muir3  0.  S.  Texts,  II,  351.


12  Herpes : p&mcm.

14-  Gandhdris : the  country  of  Gandhara  is  placed  by  Lassen  to  the
west  of  the  Indus,  and  to  the  south  of  the  Kophen  or  K&bul  riveri
King  Darius  in  a rock-inscription  mentions  the  Ga(n)dara  together
%vith  the  Hi(n)du  as  people  subject  to  him,  and  the  Gandarii,  to-
gether with  the  Parthians,  Khorasmians,  Sogdians,  and  Dadikae,  are'


226


THE  HYMNS  OF


{.book  r.


HYMN  XXIII.

I  have  called  Heaven  and  Earth  to  aid,  have  called
divine  Sarasvati,

Indra  and  Agni  have  I called  : Let  these  destroy  the
worm,  I prayed.

2 0 Indra,  Lord  of  Treasures,  kill  the  worms  that

prey  upon  this  boy.

All  the  malignant  spirits  have  been  smitten  by  my
potent  spell.

3 We  utterly  destroy  the  worm,  the  worm  that  creeps

around  the  eyes,

The  worm  that  crawls  about  the  "hose,  the  worm  that
gets  between  the  teeth.

4 Two  of  like  colour,  two  unlike,  two  coloured  black,

two  coloured  red,

The  tawny  and  the  tawny-eared,  Vulture  and  Wolf,
all  these  are  killed.

5 Worms  that  are  white  about  the  sides,  those  that  are

black  with  blaek-hued  arms,

All  that  show  various  tints  and  hues,  these  worms
we  utterly  destroy.


said  by  Herodotus  to  have  formed  part  of  the  army  of  Xerxes,  The
name  of  the  country  is  preserved  in  the  modern  Kandahar,  See  Muir
TX 'S.  Texts,  IL  342,  and  Zimmer,  Altindi&ches  Leben,  p.  30.  4 The
Atigas  and  Magadhas  are  tribes  living  in  South  Behar,  and  the  country
bordering  it  on  the  west.  We  have  thus  in  this  verse  two  nations
fcSituated  to  the  north-west,  and  two  to  the  south-east,  whom  we  may
suppose,  from  the  maledictions  pronounced  on  them,  to  have  been
hostile  or  alien  tribes,  who  lived  on  the  borders  of  Brahmameal  India,
and  to  have  been  beyond  its- boundaries  at  the  time  this  incantation  was
composed > (Both,.  Lit,  and  Hist,  of  the  Veda,  p.  42,  Quoted  by  Muir,
"Q.  S.  T.,  XL  352).

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  510.
and,  with  annotations,  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  12,  154.


The  hymn,  which  is  very  similar  to  IL  32,  is  a charm  for  the  des-
truction of  parasitic  worms.


HYMN  23. J THE  ATUARVA-VEDA.  ' 227

6 Eastward  the  Sun  is  mounting,  seen  of  all,  destroy-

ing things  unseen,

Crushing  and  killing  all  the  worms  invisible  and
visible.

7 Let  the  Yev&shas,  Kaskasbas,  Ejatkas,  Sipavitnukas,
Let  both  the  worm  .that  we  can  see,  and  that  we  see

not,  be  destroyed.

8 Slain  the  Yevasha  of  the  worms,  slain  too  is  the

Nadaniman.

I have  reduced  them  all  to  dust  like  vetches  with
the  pounding-stone.

9 The  worm  S&ranga,  white  of  hue,  three-headed,  with

a triple  hump, —

I split  and  tear  his  ribs  away,  I wrench  off  every
head  he  has.

10  I kill  you,  worms,  as  Atri,  as  Kariva  and  J amadagni

killed.

I crush  the  worms  to  pieces  with  a spell  that  erst
Agastya  used.

11  The  King  of  worms  hath  been  destroyed,  he  who

was  lord  of  these  is  slain.

Slain  is  the  worm  whose  mother,  whose  brother  and
sister  have  been  slain.

12  Destroyed  are  his  dependants,  those  who  dwell  around

him  are  destroyed,

And  all  the  worms  that  seem  to  be  the  little  ones
are  done  to  death.

13  Of  every  worm  and  insect,  of  the  female  and  the

male  alike,

I crush  the  head  to  pieces  with  a stone  and  burn  the
face  with  fire.

6 A«  adaptation  of  Rigveda  1.  191.  8 : ‘Slayer  of  things  unseen,  the
Sun,  beheld  of  all  mounts,  eastward,  up,  Consuming  all  that  are  not
seen,  and  evil  spirits  of  the  night  (Yatudhanis).’

7 l'evlshas : this  word  and  those  that  follow  are  names  of  varieties
of  vermin  or  noxious  insects  that  cannot  be  identified.

.10  Cf.  ir.  32.  3.

The  hymn  lias  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigvcda,  III.  p.  501.


228


THE  HYMNS  OF


[BOOK  V.


HYMN  XXIV.

Savitar,  Lord  of  furthering  aids,  protect  me,  in  this
rny  prayer,  in  this  mine  act,  in  this  my  sacerdotal
charge,  in  this  performance,  in  this  thought,  in  this
my  plan  and  wish,  in  this  my  calling  on  the  Gods!
All  hail!

2 May  Agni,  Lord  of  forest  trees,  protect  me,  in,  etc.

3 May  Heaven  and  Earth,  the  Queens  of  bounties,

save  me.

4 May  Varuna,  the  Lord  of  waters,  save  me.

o May  Mitra- Varuna,  Lords  of  rain,  preserve  me.

6 Lords  of  the  mountains,  may  the  Maruts  save  me.

7 May  Soma,  Lord  of  plants  and  herbs,  protect  me.

8 May  V&yu,  Lord  of  middle  air,  protect  me.

9 May  Surya,  sovran  Lord  of  eyes,  protect  me.

10  May  the  Moon,  Lord  of  constellations,  save  me.

11  May  Indra  who  is  Lord  of  heaven  protect  me.

12  The  Maruts’  father,  Lord  of  cattle,  save  me.

13  May  Mrityu,  Lord  of  living  creatures,  save  me.

14  May  Yama,  Regent  of  the  Fathers,  save  me.

15  May  the  F orefathers  of  old  time  protect  me.

.The  hymn  is  the  prayer  of  a priest  for  protection  and  effectual  aid
in  the  discharge  of  his  sacerdotal  duties.  The  refrain  of  stanza  1 is
repeated  in  every  stanza.

6 Mountains  : or,  great  clouds ; pdrvata  (knotty,  consisting  of  rugged
masses)  having  both  these  meanings  in  the  Veda.

12  The  Maruts'  father  : Rudra.  See.  I.  19.  3.

13  Mrityu  ; God  of  Death.

14  Yrnna  : King  of  the  Departed,

15 — 17  c When  His  Majesty  [the  Emperor  of  Japan]  promulgated
the  Constitution  he  did  “ humbly  and  solemnly  swear  to  the  Imperial
Founder  of  Our  House  and  to  Our  other  Imperial  Ancestors,”  and  did
“ now  reverently  make  Our  prayer  to  Them  and  to  Our  Illustrious
Father,  and  implore  the  help  of  Their  Sacred  Spirits,”  * — Henry  Herman,
The  Real  Japan,


HYMN  25.]


THE  ATHARVA-YEDA.


■? ; ■


16  May  Fathers  of  succeeding  ages  save  me.

17  Next  may  the  Fathers  of  our  fathers  save  me,  in  this

my  prayer,  in  this  mine  act,  in  this  my  sacerdotal
charge,  in  this  performance,  in  this  thought,  in  this
my  plan  and  wish,  in  this  my  calling  on  the  Gods.
All  hail !

HYMN  XXV.

Let  the  man,  sower  of  the  germ,  lay,  as  a feather  on

Limb  drawn  from  limb,  whate’er  is  culled  from  cloud
and  from  the  womb  of  heaven.

2 Even  as  this  broad  earth  received  the  germ  of  all

the  things  that  be,

Thus  within  thee  I lay  the  germ.  I call  thee,  Earth,
to  strengthen  it.

3 0 Simv&li,  set  the  germ,  set  thou  the  germ,  Saras vati !
In  thee  let  both  the  Asvins,  crowned  with  lotuses,

bestow  the  germ.

4 Let  Mifcra-Yaruna  and  God  Brihaspati  lay  the  germ

Indra  and  Agni  lay  the  germ,  Dh&tar  bestow  the
germ  in  thee.


The  hymn  is  a charm  to  accompany  the  Garbh&dhana  ceremony  to
ensure  or  facilitate  and  bless  conception.

1 From  cloud:  ‘out  of  the  mountain.’ — Ludwig.  In  I.  11.  2,  the
Gods  are  said  to  bring  the  embryo  from  all  the  regions  of  the  sky  and
earth.

3 Siitfvdli : the  Goddess  of  the  day  of  new  moon,  and  also  of  fecun-
dity and  easy  birth,  like  the  Latin  Goddess  Lucina  (lucna,  luna,  the
Moon).  Raka,  the  Goddess  presiding  over  the  actual  day  of  full  moon,
and  Gungu  identified  by  Sayana  with  Kulia,  another  Goddess  presid-
ing over  the  day  of  conjunction  when  the  moon  rises  invisible,  also
appear  to  be  associated  with  childbirth.  So  in  old  Eddie  poetry,,  the  ■
Korns  are  called  the  midwives  of  mankind.  The  stanza  is  taken  from
Rigveda  X-  184.  2,


230


THE  HYMNS  OF


BOOK  r.


5 Let  Vishnu  form  and  mould  the  womb,  let  Tvashtar

duly  shape  the  forms,

Prajapati  infuse  the  stream,  and  Dhatar  lay  for  thee
the  germ.

6 Drink  thou  the  procreative  draught  well-known  to

Varuna  the  King,

Known  to  divine  Sarasvati,  and  Indraslajmr  of  the  foe.

7 Thou  art  the  germ  of  plants  and  herbs,  thou  art  the

germ  of  forest  trees,

The  germ  of  each  existing  thing',  so  here,  O Agni,
lay  the  germ.  ' h Av-

8 Rise  up,  put  forth  thy  manly  strength,  and  lay  the

germ  within  the  womb.

A bull  art  thou  with  vigorous  strength  : for  progeny
we  bring  thee  near.

9 Prepare  thee,  Barhats&ma,  let  the  germ  be  laid

within  thy  side.

The  Soma-drinking  Gods  have  given  a son  to  thee,
thy  son  and  mine.

10  O Dhatar,  thou  Disposer,  lay  within  the  body  of

this  dame

A male  germ  with  the  noblest  form,  for  her,  in  the
tenth  month,  to  bear.

11  Tvashtar,  celestial  artist,  lay  within  the  body  of

this  dame

A male  germ  with  the  noblest  form  for  her  in  the
tenth  month  to  bear.


a\5';  Taken  from  Bigveda  X.  184.  1.  . |!3Slil|

- 7 This  and  the  following  stanza  are  addressed  to  Agni,  who  is
;;i%ar(iedAS'  the  special  giver  of  children.  See  Eigveda  I.

ML  L 23.  '

9 BdrhctUdmd:  (from  Lrihai-mman)  the  name  of  the  woman  who  is-
the  subject  of  the  hymn  ; daughter  of  Brihatsaman.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  and  explained  by  Weber,  Indische:
Trp,; 227*  and  translated  by  Tiidwigpller Eigved^TIhip.AIS^


rmiy  sej  tee  atharya-veda.  m

12  Savitar,  vivifier, 'lay  within  the  body  of  this  dame

A male  germ  with  the  noblest  form  for  her  in  the
tenth  month  to  bear.

13  0 Lord  of  Life,  Praj&pati,  within  this  woman’s  body

. lay

A male  germ  with  the  noblest  form  for  her  in  the
tenth  month  to  bear.

HYMN  XXVI.

In  sacrifice  for  you  may  sapient  Agni — AH  hail!  —
use  Yajus  texts  and  fuel.

2 May  Savitar  the  God— All  hail !— foreknowing,  chief

in  this  sacrifice,  employ  them.

3 In  this  great  rite— All  hail  1—  may  sapient  Indra  use

lauds,  rejoicings,  well-yoked  coursers.

4 Bring  Praishas  in  the  rite — All  hail! — and  Nivids,

learned,  connected,  with  the  Consorts.

5 As  a dame  brings  her  son — All  hail!  — O Maruts,.

connected,  in  the  rite  bring  measures.

6 Here  Aditi  is  come— All  hail !— preparing  the  rite

with  grass  and  iustral  waters.

7 Let  Vishnu  in  this  rite  in  varied  manner — All  hail!

use  well-yoked  steeds,  his  fervours.

The  hymn  is  a bidding  prayer,  inviting  the  Gods’  presence  and  as-
■ distance  at  a sacrifice.

1 Yajus  texts:  sacrificial  formulas,  as  opposed  to  richas , recited
hymns,  and  s'Vmns,  chanted  psalms.

$ Lauds,  rejoicings : joyous  recitations  of  praise.  Welt-yoked  coursers  :
a figurative  expression  for  the  well-adapted  parts  of  the  ceremony  which
the  deity  contributes  and  directs.

4 Praishas  : liturgical  exhortations  or  invitations.  Nivids : in  voca-
tions of  the  Gods,  inserted  in  certain  parts  of  the  liturgy.  The  Consorts :
of  the  Gods.  See  note  on  111.  20.  3.

5 Maruts : addressed  as  singers,  chanters  of  their  thunder-psalm.

Measures : chhdnddnd;  sacred  or  magical  hymns,  differing  from  rich,
adman,  and  yajus,  ..


232  THE  HYMNS  OF  . [BOOK  Y.

8 Let  Tvashtar  in  this  rite  in  varied  manner — Ali
liail! — use  forms,  his  well-yoked  coursers,

& Let  Bhaga  in  this  rite  use  prayers,  foreknowing—
All  hail ! for  this  use  well-yoked  coursers.

10  Let  Soma  in  this  rite  in  varied  manner — All  hail  I — -

use  milk-streams,  well-yoked  coursers.

11  Let  Indra  in  this  rite  in  varied  manner— All  hail ! — •

use  powers,  his  well-yoked  coursers.

12  Hitherward  come  ye  with  the  prayer,  0 Asvins,

exalting  sacrifice  with  cry  of  Vashat!

Brihaspati ! — Ali  hail  !— with  prayer  come  hither.
Here  is  the  rite,  here  heaven  for  him  who  worships.

HYMN  XXVII.

Uplifted  be  this  sacrificer’s  fuel : lofty  and  brilliant
be  the  flames  of  Agni !

Splendidly  bright,  fair-faced,  with  all  his  offspring,
Tanftnapat  the  Asura,  many-handed.

2 God  among  Gods,  the  God  bedews  the  paths  with

fatness  and  with  mead.

3 With  store  of  mead  to  sacrifice  comes  Agni,  comes

Narasansa  Agni,  friendly-minded,  comes  Savitar,
righteous  God  who  brings  all  blessings.

8 Forms ; Tvashtar  being  the  great  artificer,  creator  of  all  forms  of  life,

11  Potvers  : Indra*s  heroic  might

12  Vashat:  the  sacrificial  exclamation,  when  the  oblation  is  east
into  the  fire.  See  I.  11.  1.

Brihaspati:  Lord  of  Prayer.  See  I.  8.  2.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p,  27.

An  Apri  or  Propitiatory  hymn  addressed  to  a series  of  deities  or
deified  objects.

1 With  all  Ms  offspring : other  fires  £ The  other  fires  are  verily  thy
branches/ — -Rigveda  I.  59.  1.  Tanitnapdt : Son  of  Thyself,  self -generated.
See  V.  12.  2,  Asura : Lord  divine.

d NartUahsa : Praise  of  Men;  a name  or  epithet  of  Agni  in  Apri
hymns*  ' ■ \ ' . - y V


THE  ATHARVA-VEDA.


HYMN  27.}

4 Hither  he  comes  with  power  and  fatness  also,  the

luminous,  implored  with  adoration,

5 At  holy  rites  and  offerings  Agni  loveth  the  scoops  :

let  this  man  worship  Agni’s  greatness.

6 He  is  the  furtherer  at  glad  oblations : there  stood

the  Yasus  and  the  treasure-givers.

7 Ever  the  Doors  divine,  and  all  protect  this  wor-

shipper’s holy  work.

8 Far-reaching,  ruling  by  the  Law  of  Agni,

May  Dawn  and  Night,  the  holy,  speeding  near  us,
aid  this  our  sacrificial  ceremony.

9 Celestial  Hotars,  with  the  tongues  of  Agni  praise

and  extol  our  lofty  ceremony,  so  that  our  sacrifice
be  well  conducted !

10  Three  Goddesses  upon  this  grass  be  seated,  Id&,

Saras vatl,  Mahi,  and  BhUrati  adored  with  praise.

11  This  our  nutritious  genial  flow,  God  Tvashtar!  and

growth  of  wealth,  pour  down  on  this  man’s  kindred.

12  Vanaspati,  rejoicing,  of  thyself  send  God-ward  1 Let

Agni,  Immolator,  sweeten  our  libation.


4 The  luminous:  vdknis  : or,  the  priest;  or,  the  furtherer  (of  obla-
tions). See  M.  Muller,  Vedie  Hymns,  Part  I.  pp.  37  sqq.

5 The  scoops : or  ladles,  used  for  pouring  the  butter  on  the  sacrificial
fire.  This  man:  the  institutor  of  the  sacrifice.

6 Vasus  and  the  treasure-givers : the  Gods  who  enrich  the  men  who
worship  them.

7 Doors  divine:  of  the  sacrificial  court  or  chamber.  See  V.  12.  5,
And  all:  there  is  no  substantive.  Devdh , Gods,  is  probably  understood.

8.  Dawn  and  Night : personified  as  Goddesses.

9 Celestial  Hotars:  priests  of  the  Gods.  See  Y.  12.  7.,  where  two
only  are  invoked.

10  Jdd,  Sarasvati,  Mahi:  Goddesses  who  preside  over  prayer  and
praise.  See  Y.  12.  8.  Ida  is  the  same  as  Pa.  Bhirati  is  said  to  foe
another  name  of  Mahi.

12  Vanaspati  : the  sacrificial  post,  regarded  as  a form  of  Agni.  See
Y.  12.  10.  Send  God-ward:  ponyey  op.r  offerings  to  the  Golds  in  heavei^


THE  HYMNS  OF


BOOK  7.


V


234

13  Pay  sacrifice  to  Indra,  Jatavedas  Agui,  with  Hail!
Let  all  the  Gods  accept  the  gifts  we  offer.

yA  HYMN  XXVIII.  ■

For  lengthened  life,  to  last  through  hundred  autumns,
they  equalize  with  nine  the  nine  spirations.

Three  in  gold,  three  in  silver,  three  in  iron  by  heat
are  stablished  in  their  several  places.

2 May  Agni,  Sun,  and  Moon,  and  Earth,  and  Waters,

S-£y,  An,  the  Quarters  and  the  Points  between
them,

And.  Parts  of  Tears  accordant  with  the  Seasons  by
this  three-threaded  Amulet  preserve  me.

3 In  the  three-threaded  Charm  rest  triple  fulness!  Let

Pushan  cover  it  with  milk  and  butter.

Here  rest  abundant  store  of  food  and  people,  may
ample  store  of  cattle  rest  within  it.

4 Eniieh  this  charm,  Adityas,  with  your  treasure;

magnify  this,  when  magnified,  0 Agni.

Endow  it  with  heroic  strength,  O Indra : therein  be
lodged  a triple  power  of  increase.


13  /latl  / : svdhd;  the  sacrificial  exclamation  which  consecrates  the
offering,  regarded  also  as  an  Aprt  deity  and  a form  of  Agiii.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Dor  Eigveda,  III.  p.  434.

Use  hymn  is  a charm,  accompanying  investiture  with  an  Amulet,
to  ensure  general  protection  and  prosperity  for  the  wearer.

1 Avne  spirations : the  vital  airs  (of.  our  vapours,  spirits)  are  usual-
ly enumerated  as  three  or  five:  or,  with  the  other  vital  organs,  six,
seven,  nine  (as  here)  or  ten,  or  thirteen.  The  amulet  consists  of  three
strands  or  threads,  one  of  gold,  one  of  silver,  and  one  of  iron,  each  of
which  contains  three  protective  powers,  that  is,  one  for  each  of.  the
v ital  airs  on  which  the  life  of  the  wearer  depends.  By  heat : through
the  fervour  of  the  priest  who  prepared  the  charm ; or,  "possibly  through
the  fire  that  was  used  m melting  the  metals.


HYMN  23,]  THE  A Til  A 12  FA- YED  A . 235

5 With  gold  let  Earth  protect  thee,  and  with  iron,

accordant,  all-sustaining  A.gni  save  thee!

And  in  accordance  with  the  plants  may  silver,
regarding  thee  with  favour,  grant  thee  vigour.  •

6 This  gold,  born  threefold  at  its  first  production,

grew  the  one  thing  that  Agni  loved  most  dearly:
it  fell  away,  one  part  of  injured  Soma.

One  part  they  call  seed  of  the  sapient  Waters.  This
gold  bring  thee  long  life  when  triply  threaded !

7 Th  ree  lives  of  Jamadagni,  thrice  the  vital  force  of

Kasyapa,

Three  sights  of  immortality,  three  lives  have  I pre-
pared for  thee.  cv.ty  .ytyty

8 When  with  the  three-stringed  charm  came  three

strong  eagles,  sharing  the  Sacred  Syllable  and  mighty,
With  immortality  they  drove  off*  Mrityu,  obscuring
and  concealing  all  distresses.

9 The  golden  guard  thee  from  the  shy,  the  silvern

guard  thee  from  the  air,

The  iron  guard  thee  from  the  earth  1 This  man  hath
reached  the  forts  of  Gods.

10  May  these  three  castles  of  the  Gods  keep  thee  secure

on  every  side.

Endowed  with  strength,  possessing  these,  be  thou
the  master  of  thy  foes.

11  The  God  who  first  bound  on  in  the  beginning  the

deities’  immortal  golden  castle, — •

Him  I salute  with  ten  extended  fingers.  Blest  be  the
three-stringed  charm  I bind  upon  thee.


5 Addressed  to  the  person  who  is  to  wear  the  amulet.

6 One  part  of  inured  Soma  : meaning,  apparently,  that,  originally
it  came  partly  from  the  Moon  (Soma)  when,  eclipsed.

8 Sacred  Syllable  : the  mystical  syllable  Om.  With  immortality  :
or  with  Amrit,  the  drink  of  Gods,  the  Water  of  Life,  which  confers
immortality.  The  meaning  is  not  clear.  The  priest  is  ascribing  a
mysterious  origin  and  supernatural  powers  to  the  amulet.  Mrityu:
1 )oath ; the  God  of  Death.


236  THE  lifMFS  OF  [tiOOF  V,

12  Aryaraari  be  thy  binder -on,  and  Pfishan  and

Brihaspati :

Whatever  name  the  brood  of  day  possess,  therewith
we  fasten  thee.

13  With  Seasons  and  with  Lengths  of  Time,  for  vigour

and  extended  life,

With  all  the  splendour  of  the  Sun  we  fasten  thee
about  the  neck.

14  Brawn  forth  from  butter  and  with  meatb  besprinkled,

. firm  as  the  earth,  unshakable,  triumphant,
Breaking  down  foes  and  casting  them  beneath  me,

be  fastened  on  me  for  exalted  fortune  !

HYMN  XXIX,

Maui  ready  in  the  east  drive  forth,  take  notice  of
what  is  happening  here,  omniscient  Agni!

Thou  bringest  medicine  and  healest  sickness :
through  thee  may  we  win  horses,  kine,  and  people.

2 Accordant  with  all  Gods,  0 J&tavedas  Agni  perform

this  work  as  we  beseech  thee,

That  this  defence  of  his  may  fall,  whoever  hath
caused  us  pain,  whoever  hath  consumed  us.

3 Unanimous,  with  all  the  Gods  together,  so  do  this

thing  0 Agni  Jatavedas,  that  this  defence  of  his
may  fall  and  fail  him.

4 Pierce  both  his  eyes,  pierce  thou  the  heart  within  him,

crush  thou  his  teeth  and  cleave  his  tongue  asunder.
Rend  thou,  most  youthful  Agni,  that  Pisicha  whoso
amid  them  all  of  this  hath  eaten.


12  The  brood  of  day : auspicious  things,  produced  in  the  sunlight
as  opposed  to  ill-omened  creatures  of  night  and  darkness,

14-  Spoken  by  the  recipient  of  the  amulet.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Eigveda,  XIL  p.  387.
See  also  Zimmer,  Altindisehes  Leben,  pp.  53,  56.


The  hymn  is  a charrn  for  the  destruction  of  Pisaclm.

1 In  the  east ; the  region  of  the  heavens  over  which  Agni  presides,


HYMN  29.]  . THE  ATHARVA-VEDA.  237

5 Whatever  of  his  body  hath  been  taken,  plundered,

borne  off,  or  eaten  by  Pisachas,

This,  Agni,  knowing  it,  again  bring  hither . We  give
back  flesh  and  spirit  to  his  body.

6 If  some  PisAeha  in  my  food  raw,  ready,  thoroughly

cooked,  or,  spotty,  hath  deceived  me.

Let  the  Pisachas  with  their  lives  and  offspring  atone
for  this,  and  let  this  man  be  healthy.

7 If  one  hath  cheated  me  in  milk  or  porridge,  in  food

from  grain  or  plants  that  need  no  culture,

Let  the  Pisachas,  etc.

8 If  one,  flesh-eater,  in  a draught  of  water  have  wrong-

ed me  lying  in  the  bed  of  goblins,

Let  the  PisAehas,  ete.

9 If  one,  flesh-eater,  in  the  day  or  night-time  have

wronged  me  lying  in  the  bed  of  goblins,

Let  the  Pisachas,  etc.

10  0 Agni  Jatavedas,  slay  the  bloody  PisAeha,  fiesh-

devourer,  mind-destroyer.

Strong  Indra  strike  him  with  his  bolt  of  thunder,
courageous  Soma  cut  his  head  to  pieces !

11  Thou,  Agni,  ever  slayest  YAtudhAnas,  the  fiends

have  never  conquered  thee  in  battles.

Consume  thou  from  the  root  the  flesh-devourers,
let  none  of  them  escape  thy  heavenly  weapon.

12  Collect,  O Jatavedas,  what  hath  been  removed  and

borne  away.

Let  this  man’s  members  grow,  let  him  swell  like  the
tendril  of  a plant.


5 Of  this : of  the  body  of  this  siek  man,  whose  emaciation  is  attri-
buted to  the  diabolical  arts  of  Pisachas.

8 Lying  on  the  bed  of  goblins : saydnam,  lying,  agrees  with  mA,  me.
Ludwig  suggests  that  sdydnas  should  be  read,  to  agree  with  kravyd'd ,
flesh-eater,  which  would  be  more  intelligible  and  appropriate.

12  What  hath  been,  removed : all  the  flesh  that  the  sick  man  has  lost.


THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  V.

13  Like  as  the  Soma’s  tendril,  thus,  O J&ta  vedas,

let  him  swell.  ’

Let  him  live,  Agni  1 Make  him  fat,  free  from
consumption,  full  of  sap.

14  Here,  Agni,  is  the  fuel,  here  are  logs  that  crush

Pisilehas  down.

0 Jilta vedas,  willingly  accept  them  and  be  pleased
therewith.

15  Accept,  0 Agni,  with  thy  flame  the  billets  of

Tarsht&gha  wood.

Let  the  flesh-eater  who  would  take  the  flesh  of  this
man  lose  his  form.

HYMN  XXX.

From  thy.  vicinity  I call,  from  near,  from  far,  from
nigh  at  hand.

Stay  here:  depart  not:  follow  not  the  Fathers  of
the  olden  time.  I bind  thv  vital  suirit  fast


la  l&rshl&gha  wood : the  word  does  not  occur  again  in  the  hymns
and  the  tree,  probably  called  Trishtagha,  which  supplied  the  fuel,  can
not  be  identified.  Tarshfcagha  fuel  is  mentioned  in  the  Kausika-Sutra
XXV.  27.  Lose  his  form  : and  so  be  annihilated.

This  invocation  of  Agni  to  counteract  and  destroy  the  malevolen
fiends  who  sapped  men’s  strength  and  took  their  lives  is  « fnr  mnvi


HYMN  30.]  THE  ATHARVA~VEDA.  239

2 If  any  man,  a stranger  or  akin,  hath  cast  a spell  on

thee,

I with  my  voice  to  thee  declare  thy  freedom  and
release  therefrom.

3 If  in  thy  folly  thou  hast  lied  or  cursed  a woman  or

a man,

I with  my  voice  declare  to  thee  thy  freedom  and
release  therefrom.

4 If  thou  art  lying  there  because  of  mother’s  or

of  father’s  sin,

I with  my  voice  declare  to  thee  thy  freedom  and
release  therefrom.

5 Accept  the  healing  medicine,  the  balm  thy  mother

and  thy  sire,

Thy  sister  and  thy  brother  bring.  I make  thee  live
through  lengthened  years.

6 0 man,  stay  here  among  us  ; stay  with  all  thy  spirit :

follow  not

Tama’s  two  messengers.  Approach  the  castles  where
the  living  dwell.


4 Because  of  mother's  or  of  father's  sin : so  in  the  Kigveda  : 4 Let

us  not  suffer  for  the  sin  of  others’  (VI.  51.  7 );  and  4 Loose  us  from
sins  committed  by  our  fathers  5 6 (VII.  86.  5).  Compare  also  Taittiriya-
Brahmana  III.  7.  12.  3 cited  by  Muir:  4 May  Agni  free  me  from  any
sin  which  my  mother  or  my  father  committed  when  I was  a babe  un-
born ; 5 and  4 And  his  disciples  asked  him,  saying,  Master,  who  did  sin,
this  man,  or  his  parents,  that  he  was  born  blind?’  (St.  John  IX.  2).
Disease,  if  not  caused  by  some  malevolent  demon,  was  generally  re-
garded as  the  punishment  of  sin  against  Gods  or  men.

6 Yama’s  tivo  messengers : 4 And  those  two  dogs  of  thine,  Yama !
the  watchers,  four-eyed,  who  look  on  men  and  guard  the  pathway
....  Dark-hued,  Insatiate,  with  distended  nostrils,  Yama’s  two
envoys  roam  among  the  people'  (dtigveda  X.  14.  11,  12).  See  also
Atharva-veda  VIII  i.  9;  2.  11  ; 8.  10.  In  England  there  is  a some-
what similar  popular  belief.  4 In  Yorkshire,  the  Kirk-Grim  [Church-
spectre]  is  usually  a huge  black  dog  with  eyes  like  saucers,  and  is
called  a padfoot.  It  generally  frequents  the  church  lanes  ; and  he
who  sees  it  knows  that  he  must  die  within  the  year,5— S.  Baring-Go  uld*
Strange  Survivals,  p.  16*


240  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  V.

7 Come  back  as  thou  art  called  to  come,  knowing  the

outlet  of  the  path,

And  the  approach  and  its  ascent,  the  way  of  every
living  man.

8 Be  not  alarmed  : thou  wilt  not  die.  I give  thee

lengthened  years  of  life.

Forth  from  thy  members  have  I charmed  Decline
that  caused  the  fever  there.

9 Gone  is  the  pain  that  racked  thee,  gone  thy  fever,

gone  thy  heart’s  disease.

Consumption,  conquered  by  my  voice,  hath,  like  a
hawk,  fled  far  away,

10  Two  sages,  Sense  and  Vigilance,  the  sleepless  and

the  watchful  one,

These,  the  protectors  of  thy  life,  shall  be  awake  both
day  and  night.

11  This  Agni  must  be  waited  on.  Here  let  the  Sun

mount  up  for  thee.

Rise  from  deep  death  and  come  away,  yea,  from  black
darkness  rise  thou  up  !

12  Homage  be  paid  to  Yam  a,  and  to  Mrityu,  and  to

the  Fathers,  and  to  those  who  guide  us  !

I honour  first,  for  this  man’s  preservation,  that  Agni
who  well  knoweth  how  to  save  him,

13  Let  breath  and  mind  return  to  him,  let  sight  and

vigour  come  again.

Let  all  his  body  be  restored  and  firmly  stand  upon
its  feet.

14  Provide  this  man  with  breath  and  sight,  O Agni,

and  with  his  body  and  bis  strength  unite  him.
Thou  knowest  Amrit  : let  him  not  go  hence,  nor
dwell  in  house  of  clay.


10  Sense  and  Vigilance  : ‘ Alert  and  Watchful/ — -Muir,

14  Thou  knowest  Amrit;  1 thou  hast  the  knowledge  of  immortal-
ity.5 — Muir,  ;:;A


imLY  31. J ' THE  AfliARYA-VSDA,  , 241

15  Let  not  thine  inward  breathing  fail,  let  not  thine

outward  breath  be  lost.

Let  Surya  who  is  Lord  Supreme  raise  thee  from
death  with  beams  of  light.

16  Tied,  tremulously  moving,  here  the  tongue  is  speaking

’ *m  the  mouth.  ,

With  thee  I charmed  Decline  away  and  levers

hundred  agonies.

if  This  living  world,  unconquered  of  the  Gods,  is  most

beloved  of  all.  „

To  whatsoever  death  thou  wast  destined  when  thou

wast  born,  0 man,  .

This  death  and  we  call  after  thee.  Die  not  before

decrepit  age !

HYMN  XXXI.

The  spell  that  they  have  cast  for  thee  on  unbaked
dish  or  mingled  meal,  •

The  witchcraft  wrought  on  undressed  meat,  this
I strike  back  again  on  them.  ^

2 The  spell  that  they  have  east  for  thee  on  jungle-
cock,  goat,  horned  ram,

16  Fevers  hundred  agonies : so-in  Bohemian  popular  belief  there
were  originally  a hundred  varieties  of  fever.  . See  Grohmann,  Medici-
aisches  aus  dem  Athurva-Veda,  Indische  Studien,  IX.  p.  a9Q.

17  Life  is  sweet;  an!  you  must  not  die  before  your  time,  before
the  natural  termination  of  your  life  in  extreme  old  age.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  V.  440,  and  by
Ludwig,  Der  Iligveda,  III.  494.

The  hymn  is  a counter-charm  to  secure  protection  -from  all  kinds  of
■ spells. and  incantations  of  an  enemy.

2 Homed  ram:  hurtrini ; literally,  (the  animal)  decorated  with
xt.-  i.^„  „ i-inrl  a?  'head-dress  for  women.  According  to  Zimmer,


242  TnK  or  . ' book  r

, The  Witchcraft  wrought  upon  .thy  owe.  this  I strike
back  again  on  them.  ■ f,Ulke

3 The- spell  that  they  have  cast  upon  thy  beast  that

hath  uncloven  hooves,  J u

The  ass  with  teeth  in  both  his  jaw*,  this  I strike
back  again  on  them.  ’ ' 1 u-

4 Tispe]?l'et  SPe”  UP0U  thy  plants  Amm  Nardehi,

UP™. thy  field'  th“  1 “>*.  >~*

5 T!wSl  oui:hked  am  Lm  rast  *»

And  on  thy  sacrificial  hall,  this  I strike  back  acmin
on,  them.  »

6 °ast  °m  % publi0  roo,n-
S|^Krast  upon  % ,iioe’ a,!s  1 strik« «

? T%atafLhaat„d12,shaVe  “St  UP°°

Spell  they  have  east  upon  the  drum,  this  I throw
back  again  on  them.  * . ’ v^V'vvV

8 Charm  they  have  laid  within  thy  well  or  buried  in
the  burning-ground,  ■ “ 1,1

Charm  they  have  laid  within  thy  home,  this  I throw
back  again  on  them.  v

3 ThlSp!l!  haVe  wrou§ht  for  thee  in  flickering


-t  Amnia : the  Methonica  Superba
some  unidentified  plant.

5 n™Mh»ld firs;  Girhapatya  (agni)
tamed  ^by  every  master  of  a house.
Jirohj:  Agni  in  his  mnst


a species  of  lily,  Wardc'M


le  western  sacred  fife  mmi


funeral  pile,


IITMN  .11]


243


TUM  A TtlARVA  fEDA.

TO  He  brought  this  by  no  proper  path,  by  the-  right
path  we  drive  it  back.

The  fool  in  folly  brought  it  to  those  who  observe
established  bounds.

I t No  power  had  he  who  wrought  the  spell  : he  hurt
his  foot,  he  broke  iris  toe.

Unlucky  for  bis  wealthy  lords,  he  hath  wrought
happiness  .for  us.

12  May  Indra  slay  with  mighty  bolt,  may  Agni  with
his  fissile  pierce

The  sorcerer  who.  brings  the  curse,  who  deals  with
roots  and  secret  spells.


10  He:  the  hostile  enchanter,  whose  incantations  have  been  im-
properly conducted,  and  launched  against  honest  men  t who  are  proof
against  them.

11  CL  IV.  18.:  6.  II  is  wealthy  lords  : the  rich  men ‘who  hired  his
services  who  has  cursed  us  in  vain.


BOOK  VI.


HYMN  I.

■ #■■■■  ' . a.:

. Sing,  Atbarvapa,  at  eve,  sing  loudly,  bring  a splendid
present:  byrmi  God  Savitar  with  praises.

2 Yea-,  praise  him  whose  home  is  in  the  river,  Son  of

Truth,  the  youthful,  gracious  friend  whose  word  is
guileless.

3 Savitar  our  God  shall  send  us  many  everlasting  trea-

sures, that  both  paths  may  well  be  travelled.

HYMN  II.  ■ ■

For  Indra,  ministering  priests!  run  ye  and  press  the
Soma  juice,

That  lie  may  hear  his  p raiser’s  word,  and  this  my  call.

2 Thou  into  whom  the  drops  find  way  as  sap  pours  life

into  a tree,

Drive  off  in  thine  abundant  might  our  demon  foes.

3 For  Indra,  thunder-armed,  who  drinks  the  Soma

press  the  Soma  out :

He,  youthful,  conqueror,  and  Lord,  is  prai  ed  by  all.


: A "hymn  of  praise  to  Savitar.

1 Aikarvana : descendant  of  the  great"  Bishi  Atharvan ; Atharva*
priest  The  Adhvarjti  addresses  the  Udgatar  or  Chanting  Priest.

2 River  : the  sea  of  air;  the  heavens.  Youthful:  ever  young  and
strong.  ■

3 Savitar  . . . shall  send:  savita  sdvishat ; a frequently  recurring
play  upon  the  two  words,  both  from  the  rootsd  to  set  inmotion,  vivify,
produce.  That  both  paths  : of  the  rising  and  declining  Sun;  sruti  being
read,  as  surges  ted  in  the  St.  P.  Dictionary,  instead  of  the  manifestly
corrupt  sushtult,  eulogies.

A hymn  in  praise  of  Indra.  : •


W;  : THE  HYMNS  OF  y [BOOK  VI

' HYMN  III.

Guard  us  the  Maruts ! Guard  us  well,  O'  Indra,
Phshan,  Aditi.

Guard  us,  O Waters’  Child,  and  Rivers  Seven.  May
Vishnu  guard  us,  and  the  Sky.

2.  May  Heaven  and^Barth  take  care  of  us  for  victory,
may  T~  -Stone  and  Soma  save  us  from  distress.

Sarajjg^^PfoiV  Sus  Goddess,  guard  us  well : pre-
set  and  his  kind  protecting  powers.

Q-  PreserV  . both  the  Asvins,  Gods  and  Lords  of
Light,  and  let  the  Dawns  and  Night  bring  us
deliverance.  :

The.  Waters’  Child  protect  our  house  from  every  harm.
Do  thou,  God  Tvashtar,  make  us  strong  for  health
and  wealth. '

' HYMN  IV.

May  Tvashtar,  Brahmanaspati,  Parjanya  hear  my
. " holy  prayer.  - •

' May  Aditi  with  all  her  sons,  the  brothers,  guard  us,
invincible,  protecting  power.

2 May  Ansa,  Bhaga,  Varuna,  and  Mitra,  Aryarnan,
Aditi,  and  Maruts  guard  us.

•••  May  we  be  freed  from  that  oppressor’s  hatred.
May  he  keep  off  that  foeman  who  is  near  us.


A.  hymn  to  various  deities  for  protection  and  prosperity.

1 Waters7  Child : a frequently  occurring  appellation  of  Agni,  born
i$,t be  form  of  lightning  from  the  watery  clouds  of  the  firmament.
Illv&'s  Seven : the  Indus,  the  Five  Rivers  of  the  Panjab,  and  either  the
Saras' vati  or  the  Kubha.  See  IV.  6.  2.


A, hymn  to  various  deities  for  protection.

w.i  Parjanya:  God  of  the  rain-cloud.  See  I.  2.  1.  Aditi  with  all  her
sons : see  note  on  I.  9.  1.

2 Ansa : one  of  the  Adityas.  lie:  any  one  or  each  of  the  friendly
Gods,


MY  MX  A]


THE  AFHARVA-  VMDA,


■ 3 May  both  the  As v ins  further  our  devotion.  With
ceaseless  care  deliver  us,  Wide-Ranger!  G Father
Heaven,  keep  from  us  all  misfortunes.  - ' :

fggV  ; I |l||||

Agni,  adored  with  sacred  oil,  lift  up  this  man  to  high
estate.  . ‘ ..  . ■ I.  ;

Endow  him  with  full  store  of  strength  and  make  him
rielr  in  progeny.  . ’ * . -'::-

2 Advance  him,  Indra  ! Let  him  be  ruler  of  all  akin  to
liiui.

Grant  him  sufficiency  of  wealth:  guide  him  .to  life
and  length  of  days.

8 Prosper  this  man,  O.Agni,  in  whose  house. we  offer
sacrifice.  - ^

May  Soma  bless  him,  and  the  God  here  present,
Rrahmanaspati.  ■

HYMN  VI.

The  godless  man  whoever  plots  against  us;  Brah-
rnanaspati,

Thou  shalb  give  up  as  prey  to  me  the  worshipper
who  pour  the  juice.

•2  HI  Soma,  any  spiteful  man  hath  aimed  at  us  whose
thoughts  are  kind,

Smite  with  thy  bolt  upon  his  face  : he,  crushed  to
pieces,,  vanisheth.  : . . , ,'j


■3  Wide- Ranger  ; far-reaching  Heaven.  Father  Heaven:  dymiskpiiar
- Zeu  pater,  Jupiter.

A prayer  to  Agni  and  Indra  for  the  well-being  of  a princely  patron,

3 Here  present:  Brahmanaspati  being  sometimes  identified  with
Agni  who  is  present  as  the  sacrificial  fire.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigvcda.,  Ill,  p,  431/;

A hymn  for  protection  from  wicked  men.

2 With  thy  holt:  more  usually  the  weapon  of  Indra.


48  ' THE  HYMNS  'OF  [ BOOK  ft

8 Soma,  whoever  froubleth  us,  be  he  a stranger  or  akin,

Deprive  him  of  the  strength  he  hath  : slay  Mm  thy-
self like  mighty  Dyaus !

HYMN  VII  i||

. Soma!  what  pathway  Aditi  and  the  three  guileless
Mitras  use,  come  thou  with  help  to  us  thereby.

2 Thereby  thou,  conquering  Soma,  wilt  give  Asuras
to  be  our  prey,  thereby  be  ye  our  advocates.

8 Whereby  ye  Gods  repelled  and  stayed  the  powers  of
the  Asuras,  thereby  give  shelter  unto  us.

. . . HYMN  VIII.

Like  as  the  creeper  throws  her  arms  on  every  side
around  the  tree,

So  hold  thou  me  in  thine  embrace  that  thou  mayst
be  in  love  with  me,  my  darling,  never  to  depart.

2 As,  when  he  mounts,  the  eagle  strikes  his  pinions
downward  on  the  earth,

So  do  I strike  thy  spirit  down  that  thou  mayst  be  in
love  with  me,  my  darling,  never  to  depart.


3 Dyaus:  Heaven : * the  J'.right  sky  itself,  the  old  Dyaus,  wor-
skipped  as  we  know  by  the  Aryas  before  they  broke  up  into  separate
peoples  and  languages,  and  surviving  in  Greece  as  Zeus,  in  Italy  as
Jupiter,  Heaven-father,  an  I among  the  Teutonic  tribes  as  T$r  and
Tin* — M.  Muller,  India,  What  can  it  Teach  us?  p.  194.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  430.

A prayer  to  Soma  and  other  Gods  for  help  and  protection.

1 Three  guileless  Mitras  : Mitra  and  the  two  other  Adityas,  Varuna
and  Aryaman,  who  are  usually  associated  with  him.

A charm  to  win  a maiden's  love.

I Creeper:  Hbujt;  probably,  woodbine.  See  Bigveda  X.  10.  13.
The  refrain  of  the  three  stanzas  occurs  also  in  L 34.  5,  'and  II.  30.  L
The  more  literal  translation  is  : That  thou  mayst  nevermore  depart,  or,
be  estrange:!.

:;d:;Th|lhyiph';  -has  been  translated  and ;eypl£id^iieS::,-:%^' ^ebei^j^lndlschfr'-
Studien,  Y.  261  sqq, ; and  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  54,  153,


THE  A TEAR  FA-  VEDA


BYMN  10.]

3 As  in  bis  rapid  course  the  Sun  encompasses  the
heaven  and  earth,

So  do  I compass  round  thy  mind  that  thou  rnayst  ha
in  love  with  me,  my  darling,  never  to  depart.

Desire  my  body,  love  my  feet,  love  thou  mine  eyes,
and  loveany  legs.  ' _

Let  both  thine  eves  and  hair,  fond  girl!  be’ dried  and
parched  through  love  of  me.

2 I make  thee  hang  upon  mine  arm,  I make  thee  lie

upon  my  heart.

Thou  yieldest  to  my  wish,  that  thou  mayst  be  sub-
missive to  my  will.

3 May  they  whose  kisses  are  a bond,  a love-charm  laid

within  the  heart,

Mothers  of  butter,  may  the  cows  incline  that  maid  to
love  of  me.  ; .

' HYMN  X.

All  hail  for  hearing  to  the  Earth,  to  Trees,  to  Agni,
sovran  Lord !

2 All  hail  for  breath  to  Air,  for  .powers  of  life  to  V&yu,
sovran  Lord  !


The  hymn  is  a charm  to  win  a maiden’s  love.

''  1 Fond  girl  ! i said  proleptically.

2 1 make : the  wish  is  regarded  as  already  obtained.

3 Whose  kisses  are  a bond : whose  caresses  make  their  calves  ■ love
them.  The  cows,  ‘ the  milky  mothers/  the  patterns  of  strong  affection,
are 'to  soften-  the  maiden’s  heart  and  fill  It  with  a portion  of  their  pwn
passionate  love.  See  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  V.  p.  284.


:d;A  thanksgiving  Tor  life,  hearing,  and  sight.  ^ ■■■■yk/kk

• 1 Earth  : perhaps  as  being  a good  conductor  of  sound,  and  so  com

nectei  with  hearing.  Sovran  Lord  : of  trees  and  plants,  the  most  im-
portant productions  of  the  earth.

! /as  -.Q-odl  of  Wind;  and  'the  air


250'


THE  UYMXS  OP


[BOOK  VI.


3 All  hail  for  vision  to  the  Stars,  to  Heaven,  to  Surya,
sovran  Lord ! •

' ' . HYMN  XI..

Asvattha  on  the  Sariil-tree.  There  a male  birth  is
certified.

' There  is  the  finding  of  a son:  this  bring  we  to  the
womeu-folk.

2 The  father  sows  the  genial  seed,  the  woman  tends

and  fosters  it.

This  is  the  finding  of  a son:  thus  hath  Prajapati
declared.

3 Praj&pati,  Anumati,  .Sinivali  have  ordered  it.
Elsewhere  may  he  effect  the  birth  of  maids,  but  here

prepare  a boy.  '

HYMN  XII.

I,  as  the  Sun  goes  round  the  heaven,  have  travelled
round  the  Serpents’  race.

I ward  thy  poison  off,  as  Night  parts  all  else  living
from  the  Sun.


' 3 Stars:  the  eyes  of  heaven.  Surya : as  the  God  of  light.  Cf.  ‘May

Surya,  sovran  Lord  of  eyes,  protect  me5  (V.  24.  9.)

An  epithalamian  charm  to  ensure  the  birth  of  a boy.

1 The  production  of  fire  by  means  of  the  drill,  the  upper  part  of
which  is  made  of  Asvattha,  and  the  lower  part  or  receptacle  of  Sami
wood,  represents  the  union  of  man  and  wife.  Moreover,  the  Asvattha,
which  has  a masculine  name,  springing  from,  and  growing  on,  the
. feminine  Sami-tree,  is  typical  of  the  male  child  in  due  time  to  be*  bom.
See  1IL  6.  1-

- 2 Prajapati : Lord  of  Life,  whose  favouring  aid  is  invoked  on  these
occasions.  See  Rigvcda  X.  184.  1,  and  Atliarva-veda  V.  25.  13.

3 Anumati  and  Sinlvdli  (see  V.  25.  3)  are  deities  * presiding  over
different  pha  ;es  of  the  moon  and  associated  with  conception  and  child-
birth See  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  V.  pp.  228  sqq.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  and  elucidated  by  Weber,  Indische
Studien,  V.  p.  2(54.  See  also  Ludwig,  Der  liigveda,  III/p.  ITT.


A charm  against  venomous  serpents.


THE  ATHAEVA-VEDA.


H YMN  f3.]

:»:2:  With -this,  discovered  in  the  days  of  old  by  Brahmans,

■ JRishis,  Gods,  '

With  this  I ward. thy  poison  off,  thou  Biter!  formed
' and  forming  now.  '

3 With  mead  I mingle  flowing  streams:  the  hills  and
mountains  shall  be  mead,

Parushni  and  Sip&lA  mead.  May  it  be  well  with
mouth  and  heart.

HYMN  XIII.  ' :

Worship  to  weapons  of  the  Gods!  worship  to  weapons
• of  the  Kings  !

Then  worship  to  the  people’s  arms!  worship,  O
Death,  be  paid  to  thee  !

2 Let  worship  be  to  thy  defence  and  to  thine  accusa-

tion paid.

Death  ! be  this  worship  paid  to  thy  good-will  and  thy
. malevolence !

3 Worship  to  thy  physicians,  to  thy  sorcerers  be

worship  paid !

Death ! let  this  rev<y~ence  be  done  unto  thy  Brah-
mans and  thy  roots.  *


2 With  this  : drug  or  charm,  understood.

3 Parushni:  one  of  the  rivers  of  the  Panjab;  now  called  the  Bavt.
Sip&kl:  a stream  full  of  the  aquatic  plant  Sipala,  Saivala,  or  Avaka
(Blyxa  Octandra).


A hymn  of  homage  to  Death.  .

1 Gods : priests,  whose  weapons  are  religious  fervour,  and  the  power
of  blessing  and  cursing.  The  people's:  belonging  to  the  Vaisyas,  " the
men  who  constitute  the  third  class  or  caste  of  the  community,  agricul-
turists and  tradesmen.

2 Defence  and  . . accusation : all  that  is  said  in  thy.-  favour  and

against- thee.  ■ ly.

o Roots  : used  in  incantations  to  destroy  cnemits,


:52  TUB  HYMNS  OF  {BOOK  FI,

* HYMN1  XIV.

Remove  thou  all  Decline  that  lurks  within  the
members  and  the  joints,

The  firmly-settled  heart-disease  that  racks  the  bones
and  rends  the  limbs.

2 From  the  consumptive  man  I pluck  Decline  as’twere
a severed  part.

I cut  the  bond  that  fetters  him,  even  as  a root  of
cucumber.

3.  Begone,  Consumption,  hence  away,  like  a young  foal
that  runs  at  speed.

Then,  not  pernicious  to  our  men,  flee,  yearly  visitant
. . . like  grass  I

HYMN  XV.

Most  excellent  of  all  the  plants  art  thou  : thy  vassals
are  the  trees.

Let  him  be  subject  to  our  power,  the  man  who  seeks
to  injure  us.

.2  Whoever  seeks  to  injure  us,  with  kinsmen  or  no  km
to  aid,

May  I be  uppermost  of  all,  even  as  this  Plant  is
queen  of  trees.  *


A charm  against  Consumption.

1 Decline  : balds* m ; the  gradual  wasting  away  that  frequently
follows  Takman  or  malarial  fever.  See  Zimmer,  A.  I.  Leben,  386,  387.
The  stanza  is  addressed  to  some  medicinal  plant.

2 A s’ tw  ere  a severed  pari ; mushkardm  ydthd  ; sicut  testiculum.

3 Yearly  visitant  like  grass : usually  prevalent  in  the  rainy  season
when  grass  suddenly  springs  up  in  the  greatest  abundance.  .

A charm  for  power  and  preeminence.

2 This  Plant:  the  Talas i of  stanza  35  an  unidentified  shrub  or
tree  ; vetad , ratan,  according  to  Kes  tva.

3 Soma : this  famous  plant  has  remained  unidentified  till  recently
(see''  Max  Miiller,  Biographies  of  Words,  Appendix  ILL,  quoted  in
The  Hymns  of  the  JRigveda;  Vol.  I.  p.  3).  4 Dr,  Aitc-hison  has  lardy
stated  that  Soma  must  be  the  Ephedra  paekydade , which  in  the  Hard
rud  valley  is  said  to  bear  the  name  ox  hum,  hvmat  and  yafomu  This


STUN  16  ] ' • fSS  & THAR  V A - VEDA,

3 A.8  Soma  hath  been  made  the  best  of  al
’mid  the  plants.  ••

So,  as  TaldsA  is  the  queen  of  trees,  may
■ of  all.  y .lip;;*:5

HYMN  XVI,

6 Abaylt,  non  Abayu,  dire  is  thy  juice,


supposition  is  confirmed  by  Dr.  Joseph  Bornmiilier,  a botanist  long  resi-
dent in  Kerman,  who  identifies  the  Soma  plant  with  some  kind  of
Ephedra,  prob'ably  Ephedra  distachya,  but  who  remarks  that  different
varieties  of  Ephedra  are  to 'be  found  from  Siberia  to  the  Iberian  penin-
sula, so  that  we  must  give  up  the  hope  of  determining  the  original
home  of  the  Aryas  by  means  of  the  habitat  of  the  Soma  plant’  (Quar-
terly Review,  No.  354,  October  1894,  p.  455).

Apparently  a medicine!  champ  *

1 Abayu : a non-identified  plant.  It  seems  to  have  been  poisonous
in  its  natural  condition,  but  medicinal  when  cooked  and  properly  pre-
pared. Non- Abayu:  no  longer  retaining  thy  poisonous  properties.

2 Vikalha  and  Maddvait  appear  to  be  unidentified  plants.  Thou
art  not  he  : thou  art  no  longer  the  poisonous  plant  thou  wash

3 Tauvilikd:  some  kind  of  animal  or  plant.  Nir&la;  said  to  be  a
kind  of  fish.

The  fourth  verse,  consisting  of  one  line,  is  untranslatable : Thou
art  Aiasala  in  front,  thou  art  Silanjala,  (a  weed  growing  in  corn) . be-
l;f^U:N3agalas|il, (probably  a weed  of  similar  kind).  ; y ;yK:  '-A.;,


**  * • the  HYMKS  OF  ' [BOOK'  Vi.

HYMN  XVIT.  . ■

Even  as  this  mighty  Earth  conceived  the  o-erra  of  all
the  things  that  be,  °

So  may  the  germ  of  life  be  laid  in  thee  that  thou  mayst
bear  a son.

2 Even  as  this  mighty  Earth  hath  borne  and  bears  the

stately  forest  trees,  * *

So  may  the  germ  of  life  be  borne  in  thee  that  thou
mayst  bear  a son.

3 Even  as  this  mighty  Earth  hath  borne  and  bears  the

mountains  and  the  hills,  . •

So  may  the  germ  of  life  be  borne  in  thee  that  thou
mayst  bear  a son.  . .

Even  as  this  mighty  Earth  supports  the  moving  world
that  dwells  thereon,  :

So  may  the  germ  of  life  be  borne  in  thee  that  thou
mayst  bear  a son.

• ■ HYMN  XVIII.  . ' ;

The  first  approach  of  Jealousy,  and  that  which  fol-
loweth  the  first,  " ,

^le  Pa”b  the  fire  that  burns  within  thy  heart  we'
quench  and  drive  away,

2 Even  as  the  earth  is  dead  to  sense,  yea,  more  un con-
scious than  the  dead,

E\  en  as  a corpse  s spirit  is  the  spirit  of  the  jealous  man.


A charm  to  ensure  conception  and  the  birth  of  a son.

1 Earth  : the  Mother  of  all : Heaven  and  Earth,  Ouranos  and  Gaia
bci unregarded  as  the  Universal  Parents.  So  in  the  Genesis  of  the
New  Zealanders ; 4 The  Heavens  which  are  above  us  anct  the  Earth
which  lies  beneath  us,  are  the  progenitors  of  men,  and  the  origin'  bl
all  things/  Max  Muller,-  India,  What  canut  Teach  us  ? p.  154.

.the  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Bigveda,  III.  p,  477,

A charm  to  banish  Jealousy.

2 Dead  to  sense  ; of.  1 bhita  iellus/  (Horace,  Odes,  T.  ILL  9).


THE  AT II AR 7A-YEDA


,B  Ymr  ,2'a.  J

;>  The  though t that*harhours  in  thy  heart,  the  h utter-
i up’  doubt,  that,  dwells  therein,  •

Yea,”  all  thy  jealousy,  like  heat  born  of  the  dance,
I banish  thence.  ' _

| | |§J  ' HYMN  XIX.

Let  the  Gods  purify  me,  let  men  purify  me  with  a

prayer.  ...  . ' A

Cleanse  me  all  creatures  that  exist!  may  Pav&mana

make  me  pure.

2 May  Pavamana  make  me  pure  for  wisdom  and  for
power  and  life,  and  .unassailed  security.

8 God  Savitar,  by  both  of  these,  filter  and  pressing  out
the  juice,  purify  us  that  we  may  see.

HYMN  XX.

Hk  goes  away  as  ’twere  from  this  fierce  burning  fire,
♦ inebriated  and  lamentfng*he  departs.

Let  him,  the  lawless,  seek  another  and  not  us.
Worship  be  paid  to  Fever  armed  with  fiery  heat.

2 To  Rudra  and  to  Fever  be  our  worship  paid  : worship
be  paid. to  Varuna  the  splendid  King!

Worship  to  Dyaus,  to  Earth,  worship  be  paid  to  Plants!


3 Like  heat  horn  of  the  dance  : or,  if  dr  iter,  as  suggested  in  the  St.
P.  Dictionary  and  adopted  by  Weber,  be  read  instead  of  nrUcr>*x like
breath  from  leathern  bag.5

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III,  p.  514,
by  Weber,  Indische  Studicn,  V.  p.  235,  and  bv  Grill,  Hundert  Liedeiy
pp.  28,  159.

A prayer  for  purification.

I Pavam&na : the  deified  Soma  juice  as  it  is  clarified  by  passing
through  the  filter.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  431,


; A.  charm  against  Fever.

1 lie : Fever  personified.

2 Rudra : as  sender  of  disease  and  death.
:see.;L"25.  1,  Dyaus:  Heaven,


THE  HYMNS  OF


{BOOK  VI,

3 Tkou  w!a(%  aglo\y  with  heat,  makest  all  bodies  green,
to  thee,  red,  brown,  I bow,  the  Fever  of  the  wood,
HYMN  XXL

Of  all  the  three  terrestrial  realms  the  ground  is
•verily  the  best,

I  from  the  skin  that  covers  these  gather  a healing
medicine.

2 Thou  art  the  best  of  medicines,  most  excellent  of

Plants  art  thou,

As  Soma  ’mid  the  wandering  stars,  as  Varuna  among:
the  Gods.

3 Endowed  with  wealth,  denying  not,  give  freely  fain

to  give  your  gifts !

Ye  stay  the  hair  from  falling  oil : ye  strengthen  and
increase  its  growth.

HYM$T  XXII.

Dark  the  descent'  the  strong-winged  birds  are
golden ; they  fly  aloft  to  heaven,  enrobed  in  waters.
They  have  come  hither  from  the  seat  of-  Order,  and
inundated  earth  with  streams  of  fatness.


3 Green : or  yellow.  See  I.  35.  3,  where  Fever  is  called  ‘ God  of  the
.sickly  yellow.’

Of  the  wood  ■:  especially  prevalent  in  densely  wooded  districts.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  511.

A charm  to  strengthen  hair  and  promote  its  growth.

1 Three  terrestrial  realms  : the  world  is  divided  into  heaven,  firma-
ment, and  earth,  and  each  of  these,  again,  is  sometimes  spoken  of  as
threefold.  Cf.  Rigveda  IV.  53.  5,  and  VII.  87.  5.  The  skin  that  covers
these : the  surface  of  the  ground  ; the  skin  on  which  the  plants  grow  as
hair  grows  on  the  skin  of  the  head.

3 Soma  : the  Moon.

3 Ye  stay  the  hair  from  falling  off:  the  plants  endowed  with  these
virtues  are  left-  unnamed.

The  hymn  has  been  translated,  with  notes,  by  Grill,  pp.  50,  1 60,

A hymn  to  the  Marufcs  or  Storm-Gods.  t

' 1 This  stanza,  which  recurs  in  IX.  10.  22,  is  taken  from  Rigveda  I,
SirmgStdfged  birds  t here  r lYtg


TYMN  2S.]  -THE  AYHAKVA-YJaiiA.-  25T

2 Ye  make  floods  rich  in?  milk,  make  plants  propitious,
what  time  ye  stir,  O golden-breasted  Maruts  S
Pour  down  your  showers  of  vigorous  strength  and
favour  there  where  ye  sprinkle  mead,  Q Maruts,
heroes !

g 0 Maruts,  send  ye  down,  streaming;  with  water,  raia
which-,,  may,,  filling  all  the  sloping  valleys,

Leap  like  a bold  girl  in  a man’s  embraces,  or  like  a
matron,  tumbled  by  her  husband.

hymn:  xxiii.

Here  flow  the-  restless^  ones,,  they  flow  unceasing-
through  the  day  and  night.

Most  excellently  wise  I call  the  Goddess  Waters,
hitherwards..

% Let  the  deft  Waters,  summoned,  give  permission  that
we  bear  them  off,

And  quickly  set  us  on  our  way.

8 Let  all  the  people  celebrate  the  rite  of  Savitar  the;


Sweet  unto  us  be  Waters,  Plants  propitious  !


% Golden-breasted : wearing  ornaments  of  gold  on  their  Breasts,  the*
lightning  flashing  from*  the  stormy  clouds.  Oh  Eigreda  IL  34.2  ; Y.-
13?  I 57.  5.

3 This  stanza  contains  two  difficult  words,  and  erun%  in  the-

second,  line.  See  Prof.  Pischel’s  explanation,  Ve&ische  Studiea,  I.  ppi:-


Stanzas- 1 and  2 have  Been  translated-  by  Pud-wig,  Der  Rigveda,  IIP
P 463.  . .

- A hymn  to-tlie  Waters.-

2 Bear  them  off:  fetching' tide  water  required  for  sacrificial  purposes
was  part  of  the  religious  service,  and  accompanied  with  duly  prescribed,
ceremonies  preceded-  by  a-  prayer  to  the  Goddesses  for  their  assent,.


TIIE  HYMNS  0-F


[BOOK  VI,

HYMN  XXIV.

Forth  from  the  Hills  of  Snow  they  stream,  and  meet
m Sindhu  here  or  there.

To  me  the  sacred,  Waters  gave  the  balm  that  heals-
the  heart’s  disease.

2 Whatever  rupture  I have  had  that  injured  eyes  or

heels  or  toes,  ' J

All  this  the  Waters-,,  sldlfullest  physicians,  shall  make-
well  again’.

3 All  Rivers  who  have  Sindhu  for  your  Lady,  Sindhu:

tor  your  Queen,

Give  us  the  balm  that  heals  this  ill:  this  boon  let
us  enjoy  from  you.

HYMN  XXV.

May  all  the  five-and-fifty  which  meet  round  the  ten-
dons of  the  neck

Depart  and  vanish  hence  away  like  plaguing  insects’
buzz  and  hum ! 1 a a

2 Those  seventy-amd-seyen  which  meet  round  the  upper
vertebrae,

Let  them  all  vanish  hence  away  like  plaguing  insects”
buzz  and  hum !.


A Hymn  to  the  Rivers,

1 8'indJm : the  Indus.

2'  8 Id  If  idlest  physicians:  cf.'  I.  6'.  2,  i

3 F or  your  Lady  ; Sindhu  or  - the  dei
feminine  in- the  Yedk.

' The  lwirm*  has'  been  translated,  with
pp.  13,  161.  ■

A charm-  against  Apachitas-,  pustules
Bloomfield,  Kansika-Sutra.  p.  xliv.
Medicine)  says  : 4 When  many  small  tu


MY  MB  2?.]  TEE  2 TH  ARY A-Y  EDA.

■3  Those  nine-and-ninety  which,  combined,  attack  the

shoulder  round  about,  _ . „

Let  them  all  vanish  hence  away  like  plaguing  insects
: , buzz  and  hum!  ■ ■ ::  /

HYMN  XXVI.

Let  me  go  free,  O Misery  '■  do  thou,  the  inighf \
pity  us.

Set  me  uninjured  in  the  world  of  happiness,  O Misery.
2 From  thee,  from,  thee  who  fliest  not  from  us,  0


A liymii  to  Affliction.  . l

1 0 Misery  : p&pman  ; meaning  both,  sin  and  distress.

■'  A charm'  to  avert  threatened  misfortune.  ■

1 The  hymn,  taken  from  Kigveda  X.  165,  is  ascribed  to  the  Bishi
Kapota  (Pigeon  or  ..Dove)  son  of  Nirriti  or  Destruction.  A dove,  re-
garded as  an  ill-omened  bird  and  the  messenger  of  Death,  has  flown
into  the  house,  and  the  Gods1  are  entreated  to  turn  the  inauspicious
visit  to  a blessing.

;:pyvl;h";1|ngland ..'the  "dove  who,  f returning  bore  the  mark o#  b eartltv  nest,
torcd  to  the  long  labouring  ark5  (see  Genesis  8.  11),  is  regarded  as
1 the  very  blessed  spirit,  of  peace  5 and  love.


m ' THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  TL

.8  Let  not  the  arrow  that  hath  wings  distract  us.
Beside  the  fire-place,  on  the  hearth  it  settles.  t
May  it  bring’  welfare  to  our  men  and  cattle  : 'here
let  the  Love,  ye  Gods,  forbear  to  harm  us.

HYMN  XXVIII.

Drive  forth  the  Dove,  chase  it  with  holy  verses::
;b:  ’V-  rejoicing  bring  we  hither  food  and  cattle,

. Obliterating  traces  of  misfortune.  Most  fleet  may  it
fly  forth  and  leave  us  vigour.  •

2 These  men  have  strengthened  Agni’s  might,  these

. men  have  'brought  the  kine  to  us.

They  have  sung  glory  to  the  Gods.  Who  is  the  man
that  con q uers  them  %

3 Be  reverence  paid  to  him  who,  while  exploring  the

path  for  many,  first  approached  the  river,

Lord  of  this  world  of  quadrupeds  and  bipeds : to  hint
be  reverence  paid,  to  Death,  to  Yamal

~ • ' HYMN  XXIX.

On  those  men  yonder  fall  the  wingbd  missile : the
screeching  of  the  Owl  is  ineffective,

* Aud  that  the  Dove  beside  the  fire  hath  settled.


A charm  to  avert  threatened  misfortune.  See  VI.  27.  I,  and  Rigveda
xi©5.E  ’ . ;

2 These  men-:  the  priests.

3 The  river:;  which  separates  the  world  of  life  from  the  home  of
the  dead.  ‘ Yama  first  found  for  . us  the  road  to  travel..*  this  pasture
never  can  he  taken  from  us.  Men  horn  on  earth  tread  their  own
paths  that  lead  them  whither  our  ancient  Fathers  have  departed  I
^fR^veda  X.  14.  2).  Oompa re  Athar va- veda  XV III.

'Texts,  V.  2SS  sqcp

A charm  to  avert  threatened  misfortune.

I Facias  2 and  3 are  taken  from  Rigveda  X.  165.  4.  Ineffective;  on  us.


HHBHnm


m rMN  30.]


TILE  A THAR  YA-  VEDA .


:2  THine  envoys  who  came  hither,  O Destruction,  sent
or  not  sent  by  thee  unto  our  dwelling,  .

The  Dove  and  Owl,  effectless  he  their  visit'!
g (Dft  may  it  fly  to  us  to  save  our  heroes  from  slaughter.,
oft  perch  here  to  bring  fair  offspring.  .

Turn  thee  and  send  thy  voice  afar.:  cry  to  the  region

far  away;  ,,,

'That  I may  see  the <3  in  the  home  of  lama  reft  of  ail
thy  power,  that  I*  may  see  thee  impotent.

11YM-N  XXX.

Over  a magic  stone,  'beside  :Sarasvatl,  the  Gods
ploughed  in  this  barley  that  was  blent  with  mead.

Lord  of  the  plough  was;  Indra,  strong  .with  hundred
powers.:  the  ploughers  were  the  Maruts,  they  who
give  rich  gifts.

2 Thy  joy  iu  bair  that  falleth  or  is  scattered, 'where-
with thou  subjectest  a man  to  laughter  -

To  other  trees,  far  from  thee  will  I drive  it.  Grow
up,  thou  Sami,  with  a hundred  branches.

•g  Auspicious,  bearing  mighty  leaves,  holy  one,  nur-
tured by  the  rain,  .

Even  as  a mother  to  her  sons.,  fee  gracious,  Sami,
to  .our  hair.


WMI


§ Oft  may  it  fly  to  ns:  may  the  ill-omened  bird  become  an  auspi-
cious visitant.  Of  Yama : the"  King  of  the  Departed  who  sent  thee
forth,  •

A charm  to  promote  the  growth  of  hair,.

1 This  barley:  used  in  the  sacrifice.  .

2 Sami:  Prosopis  Spicigera  or  Acacia  Sama,  regarded  as  a holy
tree  as  its  wood  was  used  to  form  part  of  the  drill  by  which  the  sacri-
ficial fire  was  kindle  1.  With  a hundred  branches : and  so  symbolical'
of  an  abundant  crop  of  bain

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  PZgveda,  III.  p.  511..
See  also.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Lehen,  pp.  5.9,  2Ji*


AAilfa


63  ' THE  12 FUNS  OF  [BOOK  VI.

HYMN  XXXI.

’This  spotted  Bull  hath  come  and  sat  before  his
■mother  in  the  east,

Advancing  to  his  father  Heaven.

2 As  expiration  from  his  breath  his  radiance  penetrates

within.  The  Bull  shines  out  through  all  the  sky.

3 He  rules  supreme  through  thirty  realms — One

winged  with  song  hath  made  him  mount —
Throughout  the  days  at  break  of  morn.

HYMN  XXXII.

With  butter,  in  his  hall  where  fire  is  burning,
perform  that  sacrifice  which  quells  the  goblins.
Burn  from  afar  against  the  demons.  Agni  ! Afflict
not  in  thy  fury  us  who  praise  thee.

2 Let  Rudra  break  your  necks,  O ye  Pisa.clias,  and  split
your  ribs  asunder,  Yatudhanas !

Here,  Mitra-Varuna ! may  we  dwell  safely:  with
splendour  drive  the  greedy  demons  backward.

Let  them  not  find  a surety  or  a refuge,  but  torn  away
go  down  to  Death  together.


A hymn  to  Surya  the  Sun- God,  taken  with  variations  from  Rigveda:
X.  189.

1 This  spotted  Bull : the  Skin.  Bis  mother  : Earth,  or  Dawn.

3 Thirty  realms  : all  the  divisions  of  the  world.  One  winged  ivith
song  ; perhaps  Agni,  whose  flames  ascend  amid  the  hymns  of  the  priests.
The  reading  of  the  Rigveda  is  : vak  patahgaya  dhlyate , Song  is
bestowed  upon  the  Bird,  that  is,  on  the  Sun  whose  morning  song  repre-
sents prayer.  See  Ludwig,  Ber  Rigveda,  IV.  p.  159.


A charm  against  fiends  and  goblins.  *

1 Goblins:  Yatudhanas;  see  I.  7.  L Demons : Rakshasas  : fierce
nocturnal  fiends  or  ogres.

! 2 Pisdchas  : malignant  imps ; see  I.  16.  3,  note.  Ultra-  Varuna :
the  two  God  s ad  Iress  1 as  a dual  deity,  mitn  m una'i  reedi  dem  i s
a trims  ; or  4 tuskv  il  mds,’_as  Prof.  Max  Muller  renders  the  word.


MIME  M.]


TEE  A TEAR  VA-YEDA.  2SS

• HYMN  XXXIII.

He  who  controls  this  air  and  men  who  aid  hi©
strength,,  and  wood,  and  heaven,  the  lofty  seat
which  Indra  loves.

2 The  bold  - whose  overpowering  might  the  boldest
never  hath  defied, —

Fortress-like,,  unassailable  is  Indra  s wrath,  and  fame,,
and  force.

g May  he  bestow  on  us  that  wealth,  far-spreading,,
bright  with  yellow  hue.

Indra  is  mightiest  Lord  among  tire  folk

HYMN  XXXIV.

Send  forth  thy  voice  to  Agni,  to  the  manly  hero  of
our  homes,,

So  may  lie  bear  us  past  our  foes.

2 That  Agni  who  with  sharpened  fiame  of  fire  consumes
the  R&k&hasasr

So  may  he  bear  u's  past  our  foes,

% He  who  from  distance  far  remote  shineth  across  the?
tracts  of  land.

May  he  transport  us  past  our  foes.

4 He  who  beholds  all  creatures, . who  observes  them

with  a’eareful  eye.

May  he  transport  us  past  our  foes.

5 That  brilliant  Agni  who  was  born  beyond  this  region

of  the  air,.

May  he  transport  us  past  out  foes  !.


A hymn  to  Indra ' for  the  gift  of  riches.  In-  stanzas  1 and  2 the?
phraseology  is  obscure  and  the  construction  loose,  and’  the  correctness*
of  the  text  is  not  free  from  suspicion*

In  stanza  2,  line  2 I have  adopted  Prof.  Geldner’s  explanation  of
vydthih,  wrath,  fortress*  as  a secondary  form  of  pur.  See

Yeriisehe  Studien,  II.  p.  29.


protection,  from  enemies


64'  TEE  HYMN'S  Of  [BOOK  VI,

HYMN  XXXV.

Forth  from  the  distance  far  away  Vaisvaoara  come
to  succour  us  ! Agni  approach  our  eulogies!

2 Vaisvanara  with  friendly  thoughts  hath  come  to  this

our  sacrifice,  Agni  who  saves  from  woe,  to  lauds.

3 Yaisvanara  hath  formed  the  hymn  and  laud  of  the

Angirases.  To  these  may  he  bring  glorious  light.

HYMN  XXXVI.

Holy  Vaisvanara  we  seek,  the  Lord  of  light  andt
endless  life,  the  burning  One  who  fadeth  not.

2 He  hath  directed  all  things;  he  sends  forth  the’

Seasons’ in  his  might,  furthering,  sacrifice’s  power.

3 Agni  Kama  in  other  homes  shines  forth  the  sole

imperial  Lord  of  all  that  is  grid  is  to  be.

HYMN  XXX  VIL

Hitherward,  having  yoked  liis  steeds,  came  Impre-
cation, thousand-eyed,

Seeking  my  eurser,  as  a wolf  the  home  of  one  who-1
owneth  sheep.


A hymn  to  Agni  Yaisvanara,  the  God  of  all  Aryan  men;

3 Angirases  : descendants  of  the  famous  Rlslii  Angiras,  the  priests-
who  by  using  the  magical  formulas  of  the  Atharva-v-eda  protect  the-
sacrifice  from  the  effects  of  inauspicious  accidents-.  These  : the  officiat-
ing priests  and  the  institutor  of  the  sacrifice..

A hymn  in  honour  of  Agni  Yaisvanara.  •

2 He  hath  directed  all  things : the  deity  who  is  the  object  of  worship*
being  at  the  time  of  adoration  regarded  as  the  supreme  God.  m

3 Agni  Kama  : the  two  Gods  being  identified  here  as  in  II L 21.  41-
See  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  Y.  p.  403,  and  Weber,  Indischc  Sfcu&ien,  Y.  pp;-
225,-226;

A charm  to  divert  Imprecation.

The  hymn  has  been  translated,  with  notes,  by  Grill,  Hun&erfc  Oeckiy
pp.  25, 161.  , ,,  t;


A prayer  for  surpassing  strength  and  energy*

1 The  blest  Goddess : AclitL  ,

3 hi  Warrior : ' in  Rajanya  or  Kshatriya,  one  of  the  military  anti
princely  class.  War-drum : see  Y.  20.  . ■

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Dor  Rigveda,  III.  p*  240.

A priest’s  prayer  for  power  and  glory.

the  sacrifice  is  addressed,  har-eocte?idcd  : yMeah-

iug,  life  of  long  duration,.

' 17a


I a


TEE  HYMNS  OF


[BOOK  VI,


2 We  will  pay  sacrifice  and  serve  with  worship  our
glorious  Indra,  famous  for  his  glories.

Give  thou  us  sway  which  Indra  "hath  promoted,  and
m this  boon  of  thine  may  we  be  famous.

IS  Indra  was  glorious  at  his  birth ; Agni,  Soma  were
born  renowned:.

And  glorious  am  I,  the  most  illustrious  of  all  that  is.
HYMN  XL.

Hbkb  may  we  dwell,  O Heaven  and  Earth,  in  safety..

May  Savitar  and  Soma  send  us  safety.  ‘ . ♦

Our  safety  be  the  wide  air : ours  be  safety  through
the  oblation  of  the  Seven  Itishis,

2 May  the  Four  Quarters  give  this  hamlet  power  ; :

Savitar  favour  us  and  make  us  happy  1
May  Indra  make  us  free  from  foes  and  danger : may  .
wrath  of  Kings  be  turned  to  other  places^

3 Make  thou  us  free  from  enemies  both  from  below

and  from  above.

O Indra,  give  us  perfect  peace,  pgaee  from  behind
and  from  before.

HYMN  XLL

•For  mind, . for  intellect,  for  thought,  for  purpose,
for  intelligence,  1 •

For  sense,  for  hearing,  and  for  sight,  let  us  adore-
with  sacrifice.


3 Glorious  am  /.-  the  prayer  is  regarded  as  already  fulfilled,
lhe  nj ma  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Dor  liigvoda,  III.  p,  240.

A prayer  for  peace  and  security.

I Seven  IJisJm:  see  IV.  II.  9.


A pi  a}  er  for  protection,  long  life,  and  various  blessings.


HYMN  43.3  THE  ATHARVA-VEDA.  . ' m

2 For  expiration,  vital  air,  and  breath,  that  amply

nourishes,

Let  us  with  sacrifice  adore  Sarasvati  whose  reach  is
wide.

3 Let  not  the  Rishis,  the  divine,  forsake  us,  our  own,

our  very  selves,  our  lives’  protectors.

Do  ye,  immortal,  still  attend  us  mortals,  and  give  us
vital  power  to  live  the  longer.

HYMN  XL  1 1.

,1  l'oose  the  anger  from  thy  heart  as  "twere  the
bowstring  from  a bow,  . ' *

-That  we,  one-minded  now,  may  walk  together  as
familiar  friends.

2 Together  let  us  walk  as  friends  : thy  wrathful  feeling

I remove.  *

Beneath  a heavy  stone  we  cast  thy  wrath  away  and
bury  it.

3 I trample  on  thine  anger  thus,  I tread  it  down  with

heel  and  toe

So  dost  thou  yield  thee  to  my  will,  to  speak  no  more
rebelliously.

HYMN  XLIII.

Foe  stranger  and  for  friend  alike  this  Darbha-grass
removeth  wrath.

Soother  of  Anger  is  it  called  because  it  calms  the
angry  man.


- A charm  to  effect  a reconciliation  between  estranged  friends.

2 Beneath  a heavy  stone  : the  symbolical  action  somewhat  resembles
the  Nor th- American  Indians’  custom  of  ‘ burying  the  liateket’  as  a
sign  and  pledge  of  peace.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Eigveda,  III.  p.  515,
and,  with  notes,  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  29,  162.

A charm  to  effect  the  reconciliation  of  estranged  friends.

. I Barhha ; see  II,  7.  1.


268  ' TUB  HYMNS,  OF  [BOOK  VI.

2 This  Plant  that  hath  abundant  roots  spreads  to  the

place  where  waters  meet.

Soother  of  Anger  is  the  name  of  Darbha-grass  that
springs  from  earth.

3 We  draw  thine  obstinacy  forth,  set  in  thy  mouth

and  in  thy  jaw  :

So  dost  thou  yield  thee  to  my  will,  to  speak  no  more
rebeiliousiy.

HYMN  XLIY.

Firm  stood  the  heaven,  firm  stood  the  earth,  firm
stood  this  universal  world.

Firm  stood  the  trees  that  sleep  erect : let  this  thy
malady  be  still.

2 Of  all  thy  hundred  remedies,  a thousand  remedies

combined,

This  is  the  surest  cure  for  flux,  most  excellent  to
heal  disease.

3 Thou  art  the.  stream  that  Rudra  pours,  the  elosetfc

kin  of  Amrita.

Thy  name  is  called  Vishanalut : thou  sprangest  from
the  Fathers’  root,  removing  illness  caused  by  wind.


3 Obstinacy:  the  rebellious  and  provoking  words  that  thou  hast
spoken.

The  hymn  has  been  translated,  with  notes,  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,
pp-  30,  162,

A charm  to  remove  disease,

1 Firm  stood  the  heaven : when  it  had  been  separated  from  the  earth
and  established  in  its  present  place.  See  IY.  1.4.

2 Flux;  dsrdvd;  see1!.  2.  4.

o VisMiiakd : an  unidentified  plant  or  tree.  From  the  Fathers*
root : thou  earnest  originally  from  the  saints  in  heaven.  Removing
illness  caused  by  wind:  vdtikritan&sani ; wind  . meaning  one  of  the
bodily  humours.  The  disease  is  probably  rheumatism,  called  bdt  in
Hindi,  explained  in  Mathura  Prasada  Misra’s  Trilingual  Dictionary  by
v&tarog,  vdyv.rog,  and  other  words  signifying  wind-disease  and  wind,
Zimmer  (Altindisclies  Leben,  p.  389)  explains  differently.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig  -Dor  Kigveda,  III',  p.  509.


'

■ V ■ ■ VlY  ' ■'  A

..  ...  ..  — Su.


HYMN  46.1


THE  A THAN  FA- FED  A.


HYMN  XL V.  '.hi

Sin  of  the  Mind,  avaunt  I begone ! Why  sayest  thou
what  none  should  say  ?

Go  hence  away,  I love  thee  not.  Go  to  the  forests
and  the  trees.  My  heart  is  in  otir  homes  and  cows.

2 Whatever  wrong  we  have  committed,  sleeping  or

waking,  by  ill-wish,  dislike,  or  slander,

All  these  offences,  which  deserve  displeasure,  may
Agni  take  from  us  and  keep  them  distant.

3 Indraand  Brahmanaspati!  whatever  foolish  deed  we

plan,

May  provident  Angirasa  preserve  us  from  the  sin
and  woe.

HYMN  XLYI.

Thou,  neither  quick  nor  dead,  O Sleep,  art  fraught
with  Ainrit  of' the  Gods.

Thy  name  is  Araru : thy  sire  is  Yam  a ; Varunanl
bare  thee.  * :

2 We  know  thy  birth,  O Sleep,  thou  art  son  of  the
sisters  of  the  Gods : the  minister  of  Yama  thou,
thou  art  Antaka,  thou  art  Death.  ; ; f

So  well  \te  know  thee  who  thou  art.  Sleep,  guard
us  from  the  evil  dream.  :

A prayer  for  preservation  from  mental  sin  and  promptings  to  do  wrong.

3 Angirasa  : descended  from  the  ancient  Eishi  Anginas,  a priest  after
the  order  of  Angiras,  especially  a name  of  Brihaspati  or  Brahmanaspati.
According  to  Prof.  Ludwig,  Agni  is  meant.  See  Der  Eigveda,  III.  p.
4-43,  where  the  hymn  is  translated,

, : Stanzas  2 and  3 are  taken,  with  variants,  from  Eigveda  X.  164.  3,  4,

A charm  against  evil  dre&ihShYfiih  ' VY

1 Aram  ; an  enemy,,  as  being  akin  to  Death*  Farundni  : Consort

of  Vanina.  , V


■id


Ankdca  : the  Fini slier.


270  THE  HYMNS  OF  {BOOS  VI.

3 As  men  discharge  a debt,  as  they  pay  up  an  eighth
and  half-an-eighth,

So  the  .whole  evil  dream  do  we  pay  and  assign  unto
our  foe.  • • ’ ,

HYM N XLVIL

Deae,  to  ail  men,  all-prosperer,  all-creating,  may  Agni,
guard  us  at  the  morn’s  libation.

May  he,  the  brightly  pure  one,  give  us  riches:  may
we  have  life,  enjoying  food  together.

2 At  this  our  second  offering  may  Indra,  Maruts,  and

Visve  Dev&s  never  fail  us.

Still  may  the  favour  of  the  Gods  be  with  us,  blest
with  long  life  and  speaking  words  that  please  them.

3 We  pour  this  third  libation  of  the  Sages  who'

fashioned  forth  the  cup  in  proper  order.

Winners  of  heaven,  may  they,  Sudhanvan’s  children,
lead,  our  fair  sacrifice  to  happy  fortune.

8 The  stanza  is  an  imitation  of  Rigveda  VIII.  47.  17  : 4 As  we  collect
(or,  discharge)  ihe  utmost  debt,  even  the  eighth  and*  Sixteenth  part,
So  unto  Aptya  (Trita  Aptya,  a mythical  being  residing  in  the  remotest
part  of  heaven,  to  whom  it  was  customary  to  wish  away  and  consign
any  threatened  calamity)  we  consign  together  all  the  evil  dream/

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  498.

A hymn  to  accompany  the  three  daily  libations.

1 Dear  to  all  men  : or,  Vaisvanara.  *

2 Second  offering  : at  mid-day.

3 The  Sages : the  Ribhus,  the  three  sous  of  Sudhanvan  who  is  said
to  have  been  a descendant  of  Angiras.  They  were  named  severally
Ribbu,  Vibhvan,  and  Vaja,  and  styled  collectively  Ribhus  from  the
name  of  the  eldest.  4 Through  their  assiduous  performance  of  good
works  they  obtained  divinity,  and  became  entitled  to  receive  pi  ise
and  adoration.  They  are  supposed  to  dwell  in  the  solar  q here,  .and
there  is  an  indistinct  identification  of  them  with  the. rays  of  the  sun: .
but,  whether  typical  or  not,  they  prove  the  admission,  at  an  early  date,
or  the  doctrine,  that  men  might  become  divinities/ — ■Wilson,  The
Ribhus  are  said  to  have  made  four  sacrificial  cups  out  of  the  single
chalice  th  t had  been  fabricated  by  Trash  car,  signify  mg,  perhaps,
that  some  innovation  in  sacrificial  procedure  was  attributed  to  them.
See  Rigveda  I 20.  and  16L


HYMN  48.]  FEE  AT II ARY A-Y ENA.

■ HYMN  XL VIII.

Thou  art  the  Hawk,  Gr&yatrl’s  lord  :*  I bold  thee  fast.
Happily  bear  me  to  the  goal  of  this  my  sacrifice.
All  hail  r

2 Thou  art  the  Bibhu,  lord  of  Jagatx : I hold  thee -fast.
Happily  bear  me  to-  the  goal  of  this  my  sacrifice.
All  hail  1

g Thou  art  the  Bull,  the  Trishtup’s  lord  : I hold  thee
fast.  ' Happily  bear  me  to  the  goal  of  this  my
sacrifice.  All  hail  l


A non-metrical  hymn  of  sacrificial  formulas  used  at  the  three  daily

1 The  Jhntrk : this  verse  is*  addressed  at.  tlie  morning  libation  to
Agni  who  from  his  rapid  motion  in  his  form  of  lightning  is-  called  the
Eawk  : cf.  * I have  begotten  this;  new  hymn  for  Agni,  falcon  of  the-

• sky*  (Rigveda  VII.  15.  4).  In  the  myth  of  the  rape  of  the  celestial:
Soma  by  the  falcon— one  of  the  favourite  subjects  of  the  Yedie  poets
(see  Eigveda  L SO.  2;  93.  6;  III.  43.  7 ; IV.  26.  4—7;  27.  3,  4;  IX.
72.  3) — the  falcon  represents  Agni  who  in  the  form  of  lightning,  pene-
trates the  laden  thunder-clouds  and  carries  off  their  heavenly  treasure,
the  ambrosial,  life-giving  rain.  GdyatrVs  lord : Agni  being  identified
with  the^Gayatri  metre  in  which  his  praises  are  sung,  and  which  is  the
prominent-  metre  in  invocations,  addressed  to  him  at  the  morning
■libation,

2 The  Ribhu : the  representative  of  the  three  Ribhus  (see  YI.  47.
3),  to  whom  this  verse  is  addressed  at  the  evening  libation.  Jag  all :
this  being  the  chief  metre  employed  at  the  evening  libation.

3 The  Bull : the  Mighty  One,  Indra,  to  whom  the  verse" is  address-

ed at  the  mid-day  libation.  Cf.  £ Thine*  only  thine*  m.  the  noonday
libation*  (Rigveda  IY.  35.  7).  ' bbbbbb  'b

The  hymn  has  been  thoroughly  discussed  by  Prof.  Bloomfield  in  his
i;/artlc|ehhtxtled^  The  Myth' of  Soma  and  thef  Eagle,  in  flic  Eesigriss-'v
an  Ili.doiph  von  Roth  zam  Doktor-Jubilaum,.  24  August,  1893.


272-


THE  HYMNS  OF


[BOOK  VI.


HYMN  XLIX.

O Agni,  in  tby  body  man  hath  never  found  a wounded
part.

The  Ape  devours  the  arrow’s  shaft  as  a cow  eats  her
afterbirth.

2 Thou  like  a fleece  eontractest  and  espandest  thee

what  time  the  upper  stone  and  that  below  devour.
Closely  compressing  head  with  head  and  breast  with
breast  he  crunches  up  the  tendrils  with  his  yellow
jaws.  . ■ •

3 The  Eagles  have  sent  forth  their  voice  aloud  to

heaven  : in  the  sky’s  vault  the  dark  impetuous
ones  have  danced.

When  they  come  downward  to  repair  the  lower  stone,,
they,  dwellers  with  the  Sun,  have  gained  abundant
seed,  ,

: ' • HYMN  L.  ' ' •

Destroy  the  rat,  the  mole,  the  boring  beetle,,  cut  off
their  heads  and  crush  their  ribs,  O As  virus.


A hymn  in  honour  of  Agni,

1 The  Ape  t kapih  ; ‘der  braune/  the  brown, — Ludwigs  The  arroto7^
shaft : the  reed  of  which  the  arrow  is  made.  There  seems  to  be  a
play  on  the  word  iejanam  which  means  both  inflammation  and  reed.
As  the  monkey  is  not  injured  by  the  reed  or  possible  arrow-shaft
which  he  chews,  so  nimble  fire  only  absorbs,  additional  heat.  According:

' to  an  Indian  lexicographer  kapih  is  a name  of  the  Sun.

2 The  upper  stone : uttaradrd  ( — dru  ? — Whitney’s  Ifidex).  The
reading  appears  to  be  corrupt.

3 The  Eagles:  the  stanza  is  taken,  with  variants,  from  Rigveda  X.
04.  5 where  the  Eagles  are  the  rapidly -moving’ stones,  which  press  out
the  Soma-juice.  The  meaning  here  may  perhaps  be : The  mighty*
roaring  flames  of  Agni  rise  on  high,  dark  clouds  gather  and  are  tossed
about  in  the  upper  air,  and  finally  descend  in  the  shape  of  fertilizing
rain.  The  tower  stone:  perhaps  the  earth.  The  stanza  is  very  obscure.  ’

.The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigv  ~ la,  III.  p,  432*

A charm  for  the  destruction  of  vermin.

1 The  loring  beetle : tarddm  (from  trid,  to  cut  through,  or  bore) ;

5 borer,  getrekle-wurm  ? : Ludwig.  According -to  the  St  Petersburg'
Dictionary  some  bird  (of.  Latin  turdus,  a thrush)  is,  meant.


HYMN:  52.1  ' ' TEE  ATHARVA-VEDA.  273

Bind  fast  their  mouths ; let  them  not  eat  our  barley  :
so  guard,  ye  twain,  our  growing  corn  from  danger.

2 Ho!  boring  beetle,  ho!  thou  worm,  ho!  noxious

grub  and  grasshopper !

As  a priest  leaves  the  unfinished  sacrifice,  go  hence
devouring  not,  injuring  not  this  corn.

3 Hearken  to  me,  lord  of  the  female  borer,  lord  of  the

female  grub!  ye  rough-toothed  vermin!

Whate’er  je  be-,  dwelling  in  woods,  and  piercing,
■vve  crush  and  mangle  all  those  piercing  insects.

■ HYMN  LI.  ■

Cleansed  by  the  filter  of  the  Wind  comes  Soma  past
all  our  enemies,  meet  friend  of  Indra.

2 May  the  maternal  Waters  make  us  ready:  cleanse

us  with  fatness  they  who  cleanse  with  fatness!

The  Goddesses  bear  off  each  blot  and  tarnish  : 1.

come  forth  from  the  waters  cleansed  and  stainless.

3 0 Varuna,  whatever  the  offence  may  be,  the  sin

which  men  commit  against  the  heavenly  folk —
When,  through  our  want  of  thought  we  viojate  thy
laws,  punish  us  not,  0 God,  for  that  iniquity.

HYMN  LI1.

Slating-  the  Rakshasas,  the  Sun  mounts  upward  in
the  front  of  heaven,

Aditya,  from  the  mountains,  seen  of  all,  destroying
things  unseen,  vf'bk-


A prayer  for  purification  and  forgiveness  of  sins.

3 Varuna : addressed  as  the  moral  Governor  of  the  world.  The
stanza  is  taken,  with  a slight  variant,  from  Rigveda  YU.  89.  5.


A charm  against  noxious  reptiles  and  insects.

1 The  stanza  is  made  up  of  fragments  of  Rigveda  I.  191.  8,  9.

■ 18


■*  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  YT.

2 ^ie  ^Ule  settled  in  their  pen,  wild  animals  had

sought  their  lairs  ;

The  wavelets  of  the  brooks  had  passed  away,  and
were  beheld  no  more.

3 I have  brought  Kartva’s  famous  Plant,  life-giving

• and  itself  inspired,  ’ °

The  medicine  that  healeth  all :
hidden  foes.

HYMN  LIII
May  Heaven  and  Earth,  wise  p
grant  me  this  thing  by  reason
May  Agni,  Soma  mark  throng]

'S'  ayu,  Savitar,  and  Bbaga  guard  ns.

2 Again  return  to  us  our  breath  and  spirit,

^ back  to  us  our  life  and  vision !

Vaisv&nara,  unscathed,  our  bodies’  o-uai


may  it  suppress  my


2 The  stanza  is  taken,  with  variations,  from  stanza  4 of  the  same
hymn,  the  Rigveda  reading  being  ketdvo  jdndmhn,  the  lights  of  men,
instead  of  tirnviyo  nadOi&m,  the  wavelets  of  the  brooks.  The  poet
moans  that  he  lias  been  bitten  or  stung  by  some  venomous  creature
since  sunset,  and  that  now  with  the  help  of  the  rising  sun  and  a magi-
cal plant  he  will  destroy  the  unseen  enemies  who  attacked  him.  °

3 Kanva  has  been  mentioned  before  (II.  32.  3),  together  with  Atri,
Agaatya,  and  Jamadagni,  as  a celebrated  Eishi  regarded  as  a master
of  magic  arts.


xx  1UI  I WO  very  ana  preservation  of  health  and  security.

1 Sukra  : the  bright  and  pure ; Soma.  Guerdon  : the  honorarium
given  to  the  officiating  priests,

rl  he  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  50$,


HYMN  55.]


THE  ATHARY  A-VEDA.


275


HYMN  LIV:

I  win  the  love  of  Indra  that  his  friend  may  reach  yet
higher  state.

Increase,  as  rain  the  grass,  this  man’s  dominion  and
his  lofty  fame.

2 Confirm  the  princely  ...power  in  him,  Agni  and  Soma!

grant  him  wealth.

In  all  the  circuit  of  his  rule  make  him  yet  higher  for
your  friend.

3 The  man'  who  shows  us  enmity,  whether  a stranger

or  akin,

Thou  wilt  give  tip  entire  to  me  who  sacrifice  and
press  the  juice.

HYMN  LV.

Of  all  the  many  God-frequented  pathways  that
traverse  realms  between  the  earth  and  heaven,
Consign  me,  all  ye  Gods,  to  that  which  ieadeth  to
perfect  and  inviolable  safety.

2 Maintain  us  in  well-being  Summer,  Winter,  Dew-

time, and  Spring,  Autumn,  and  Rainy  Season.
Give  us  our  share  of  cattle  and  of  children.  May  we
enjoy  your  unassailed  protection.

3 Pay  to  the  Year  your  lofty  adoration,  to  the  first

Year,  the  second,  and  the  present.

May  we  abide  in  the  auspicious  favour  and  gracious
love  of  these  who  claim  our  worship.

A benedict  ion  on  a newly  elected  King.

1 Increase : Indra  is  addressed.

2 For  your  friend : for  Indra’s  sake.


A prayer  for  general  protection  and  prosperity.

2 Dew-time : sisirah  ; the  cool  season  or  first  spring,  comprising  the

months  Magha  and  Phalguna,  from  the  middle  of  January  to  the
middle  of  March.  . ^ ■

3 The  first  Year , the  second , and  the  present:  making  up  the  cycle  of
three  lunar  years  at  the  end  of  which  m Intercalary  month  was
added.  See  Zimmer,  Altindisehes  Leban,  p.  370,

by  Ludwig,  Per  Rigvedja,


this  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VI

HYMN  LYI.

Let  not  the  serpent  slay  us,  O'  Gods,  with  our  child-
ren and  our  folk.

Let  it  not  close  the  opened  mouth  nor  open  that
which  now  is  closed.

2 Be  worship  paid  unto  the  black,  worship  to  that

with  stripes  across !

To  the  brown  viper  reverence,  reverence  to  the  demon
orood ! ■

3 I close  together  fangs  with  fang,  I dose  Wether

jaws  with  jaw.

I  close  together  tongue  with  tongue,  I close  together
mouth  with  mouth.  . ' °

■HYMN  LVII.  .

This  is  a medicine  indeed,  Rudra’s  own  medicine  is  this,
vv  herewith  he  warns  the  arrow",  oft;  one-shafted,
with  a hundred  tips.  j.

2 Besiinnklejt_with  anodyne,  bedew?Vith  relieving

balm:  / ^ndoS  °

Strong,  soothing  is  tl^medioine^  and'f^mwdth
• that  we  may  live.  oil  ^ * v

3 Let  it  be  health  and  joy  t&~#  mer««iV'

injure  us.  ^ Nxiiv

Down  with  the  wound ! 'Let^fT^  4 of  the  vc
whole  be  medicine.  the  lights  of  m9^"-

\ i y''--:'  “ — — - — >rooks.  The  poet  J ::

A charm  agamst  snakes.  enamour  Y

V,\J  •<*£??:  ASlta'  WUh  Stripes  across:  Tiraschil«n  aSee  ITT  4 <>  '

“ “v“‘“  ^ ‘«t

li^  or  (rom  the  ox*  „aj,  , „ t,ik  or  oliogSof  “*

■MESSS  ► *

A charm  for  a wound  or  bruise.

1 Ifudnis  own  medicine:  Rn-p..,  +v„  , ,

lllicrer  of  wounds  and  diseases. " Sec  1^10  ",  :i°aiC1'  aS  U><


EYMN.  59.]


:Tm,  ATHABVA-VEDA.


27.7


. ’ HYMN  LVIII.

, May  Indra  Maghavan  give  me  name  and  glory.
May  Heaven  and  Earth,  this  couple,  make  me
famous.

May  Savitar  the  deity  make  me  honoured.  Here
may  the  man  who  gives  the  guerdon  love  me.

2 Indra  from  Heaven  and  Earth  receiveth  glory,

• among  the  plants  the  Waters  have  their  glory ;

Even  so  may  we  be  glorious  ’mid  all  the  Universal
Gods.

3 Indra  and  Agni  were  renowned,  famous  was  Soma  at

his  birth ;

So  too  am  I illustrious,  most  glorious  of  all  that  is.

HYMN  LIX.

First,  0 Arundhatl,  protect  our  oxen  and  our  milky
kine  :

Protect  each  one  that  is  infirm,  each  quadruped  that
yields  no  milk.

2 Let  the  Plant  give  us  sheltering'  aid,  Arundhatl

allied  with  Gods  ;

Avert  Consumption  from  our  men  and  make  our
cow-pen  rich  in  milk.

3 I welcome  the  auspicious  Plant,  life-giving,  wearing

every  hue.  ■ *

Far  from  our  cattle  may  it  turn  the  deadly  dart
which  ftudra  easts.

A priest’s  prayer  for  power  and  glory.

1 The  man  who  gives  the  guerdon the  ins  ti  tutor  of  the  sacrifice
who  pays  the  expenses  and  rewards  the  priests.

. . 3 This  stanza  is  repeated  from  VI.  39.  3.


A charm  to  protect  cattle  and  men.

a medicinal  climbing  plant,  called  also  Silaehi,

Ah  12.  1 ; V.  5 5

h3 hMy.dra  : see  L 19.  3.  A * h_; A.  Ah  vh  hi' t

^ According  to  the  Kausika-Sutra  L,  13,  the  hymn  is  * part  of  the  run  A
'of  ;a  travelling  merchant  when  about  to  start  on  a trading  expedition/  ■
bee  III  15,  and  Bloomfield,  American  Journal  of  PUiM-o™ , ViL  437.


THE  HYMNS  OF


■ HYMN  LX.

With  forelock  loosened  o’er  his  brow  here  comes  the
wooer  of  the  bride,

Seeking  a husband  for  this  maid,  a wife  for  this
unmarried  man.  *

2 Wooer!  this  girl  hath  toiled  in  vain,  going  to  others’

marriages.

Now  to  her  wedding,  verily,  wooer!  another  maid
shall  come.

3 Dhatar  upholds  the  spacious  earth,  upholds  the  sky,

upholds  the  Sun.

Dh&tar  bestow  upon  this  maid  a husband  suited  to
her  wish  !

HYMN  LXI.

The  Waters  send  me  what  is  sweet  and  pleasant,
Sura  bring  all  I need  for  light  and  vision  !

The  deities,  and  all  of  pious  nature,  and  Savitar  the
God  afford  me  freedom  !

2 I set  the  heaven  and  the  earth  asunder,  I brought
all  seven  seasons  into  being.

My  word  is  truth,  what  I deny  is  falsehood,  above
celestial  V&k,  above  the  nations.


The  subject  of  the  hymn  is  the  Wooing  of  a Bride.

1 The  ivooer  : aryama;  the  interceder  or  match-maker  whose  busi-
ness is  to  find  a suitable  wife  for  his  friend  or  employer.  See  1L  36.  L

3 Dhdtar : here  regarded  as  the  Upholder  of  the  sacrament  of
marriage.  See  II.  36.  2.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  and  annotated  by  TVAber,  Indisehe
Studien,  Y.  pp.  236 — 238,  and  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  56,  164,
Zimmer  also  has  translated  it  in  Altindisehes  Leben,  p 306,


' A prayer  for  prosperity  and  greatness.

1 Freedom, : vydekas  ; literally,  expansion,  amplitude,  ample  room.

2 This  and  the  following  stanza  must  be  taken  to  signify  hyperboli-l
eally  bhe  possession  of  infinite  power.  Seven  seasons : the  six  pairs  of
months  and  the  thirteenth  or  intercalary  month.  Six  seasons  Duly
are  known- by  name  : see  YI.- 55.:  2.


HYMN  63,]  THE  ATI! ARY A-V EDA,

3 I gave  existence  to  the  earth  and  heaven,  I made
the  seasons  and  the  seven  rivers.

My  word  is  truth,  what  I deny  is  falsehood,  I .who
* rejoice  in  Agni’s,  Soma’s  friendship.

HYMN  LXII.

Cleanse  us  Vaisvanara  with  rays  of  splendour  2
With  breath 'and  clouds  let  quickening  Vayu
cleanse  us,

And,  rich  in  milky  rain,  let  Earth  and  Heaven,
worshipful,  holy,  cleanse  us  with  their  water.

2 Lay  hold  on  Sunritil  whose  forms  and  regions  have

fair  smooth  backs,  her  who  is  all  men’s  treasure.
Through  her  may  we,  in  sacrificial  banquets  singing
her  glory,  be  the  lords  of  riches.

3 For  splendour,  seize  on  her  whom  all  men  worship,

becoming  pure  yourselves,  and  bright,  and  brilliant.
Here,  through  our  prayer,  rejoicing  in  the  banquet,
long  may  we  look  upon  the  Sun  ascending.

HYMN  LXII I.

That  collar  round  thy  neck,  not  to  be  loosened,
which  Nirriti  the  Goddess  bound  and  fastened,

I loose  for  thy  long  life  and  strength  and  vigour.
Eat,  liberated,  food  that  brings  no  sorrow.

2 To  thee,  sharp-pointed  Nirriti,  be  homage!  Loose
thou  the  binding  fetters  wrought  of  iron.

To  me,  in  truth,  again  doth  Yama  give  thee.  To  him,
to  Yama,  yea,  to  Death,  be  homage  !


'A  prayer  for  purification  and  riches.

2 Sunritd : Excellence,  Pleasantness,  Gladness,  or  Glory,  personified.
The  etymology  and  the  exact  meaning  _ are  uncertain.  Here,  ia  con-
nexion with  Agni  and  Vayu,  the  meaning  * Dawn  * (see  M,  Muller,
Vedic  Hymns,  I.  p.  446)  would  he  suitable.

The  subject  is  the  symbolical  liberation  of  a victim  from  the  sacri-
ficial stake  representing  the  recovery  of  a sick  man  from  a dangerous
illness.


280


THE  HYMNS  '.  OH


[BOOK-  n.


3 Compassed  by  death  which  comes  in  thousand

manners,  here  art  thou  fastened  to  the  iron  pillar.
Unanimous  with  Yam  a and  the  Fathers,  make  this
man  rise  and  reach  the  loftiest  heaven.

4 Thou,  mighty  Agni,  good  and  true,  gatherest  up  all

precious  things.

Bring  us  all  treasures  as  thou  art  enkindled  at  liba-
tion’s place.

. . • HYMN  LX  IV.

Agree  and  be  united  : let  your  minds  be  all  of  one
accord,  v;

Even  as  the  Gods  of  ancient  days,  unanimous,  await
their  share.  ‘

2 .The  rede  is  common,  common  the  assembly,  common

the  law,  so  be  their  thoughts  united.

I offer  up  your  general  oblation  : together  entertain
one  common  purpose.

3 One  and  the  same  be  your  resolve,  be  all  your  hearts

in  harmony :

One  and  the  same  be  all  your  minds  that  all  may
happily  consent.


3 Loftiest  heaven : the  summit  of  human  felicity.  See  I.  9.  21

4 The  stanza  is  taken  from  Rigveda  X.  191.  L At  libation's  place.:
in  the  sanctuary  -where  libations  are  offered.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.*  433.

A hymn  to  promote  Agreement  or  Unanimity  in  an  assembly.

1 Agree  and  be  united  rt he  Rigveda  has  11  Assemble,  speak  together/

2 Common  the  assembly  r this  sdmi'tu  appears  to  have  been  a general
assembly  of  the  people  on  some  important  occasion,  such  as  the  elec-
tion of  a king.

The  hymn, -.which  is  taken,  with  variants,  from  Rigveda  X.  19L
—4,  has  been  translated,  with  notes,  by  Grill,  Hunderfc  Lieder,  pp
30,  161,  and  by  Ludwig,  Dor  Rigveda,  XXL  p.  373.


MXMK  66.]  THE  A TEA  R FA- VEDA.  281

HYMN  LNY.

, The  angry  spirit  hath  relaxed  : loose  are  the  arms
that  a.ct  with  mind.

Do  thou,  destroyer,  overcome  and  di'ive  these  foemeu  s
might  away,  and  then  bring,  opulence  to  us.

2 The  shaft  for  handless  fiends  which,  Gods  ! ye  cast

against  the  handless  ones, —

With  this,  in  shape  of  sacrifice,  I rend  the  arms  of
enemies.

3 Indra  made  first  for  Asuras  the  shaft  designed  for

handless  foes  :

Victorious  shall  my  heroes  be  with  Indra  as  their
constant  friend.

HYMN  LXVI.  . .

Handless  be  every  foeman  who  assaileth,  they  who
with  missiles  come  to  fight  against  us  !

Dash  them,  together  with  great  slaughter,  Indra!
and  let  their  robber  chief  run  pierced  with  arrows.

2 Ye  who  run  hither  bending  bows,  brandishing  swords
and  casting  darts,

Handless  be  ye,  0 enemies!  Let  Indra  mangle  you
to-day.

-3  Handless  be  these  our  enemies  ! We  enervate  their
‘ languid  limbs.

.So  let  us  part  among  ourselves,  in  hundreds,  Indra !
all  their  wealth.


; A sacrificial  charm  against  enemies.

1 Destroyer:  p&rdsara, ; Indra,  conqueror  and  destroyer  of  Asuras
who  fought  against  the  Gods,  and  of  the  demons  who  harass  mem

2 Handless : who  fight  without  human  hands  and  arms.  The
magical  missile  employed  against  these  demons  is  called  nairkasium,
intended  for  nirhasta,  or  handless,  fiends.  Of.  III.  L 1,  2.  1.

;AbThe  hymn  has'  been  translated,  by  Ludwig,  Der  RigVecfa;,  ill.  pr  8:73V;

A charm  for  the  destruction  and  plunder  of  one  mbs.

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Ligvoda,  III.  p.  372.


282  ; : ' the  hymns  of  ' ■ : . . ' ■ [book  vi.

HYMN  LXVII.

Indra  and  Pushan  have  gone  forth  along  the  ways
on  every  side.  . . J

To-day  those  hosts  of  enemies  must  flee  bewildered
far  away.  ■ '

2 Ye  foes,  come  hitherward  dismayed  like  serpents
■ when  their  heads  are  gone.

Let  Indra  slay  each  bravest  one  of  you  whom  Acni
hath  confused.  ' °

° Gird  thou  a bullock’s  hide  on  these,  make  those  as
timid  as  the  deer.

Let  the  foe  flee  away,  and  let  his  kine  come  hither-
ward to  us.

HYMN  LX VIII.

Savitar  hath  come  hither  with  the  razor:  come
thou,  O V&yu,  with  the  heated  water.

One-minded  let  Adityas,  Rudras,  Vasus  moisten  the
hair:  shave,  ye  who  know  King  Sonia.

2 Let  Aditi  shave  the  beard,  and  let  the  Waters  bathe

it  with  their  strength  :

Prajapaii  restore  his  health  for  sight  and  davs  of
lengthened  life ! J

3 The  razor  used  by  Savitar,  for  shaving,  who  knoweth

Varuna  and  royal  Soma, —

Even  with  this  shave  ye  this  man,  O Brahman.

• Let  him  be  rich  in  horses,  kine,  and  children.  ■

A charm  for  the  destruction  and  plunder  of  enemies.

3 Gird  thou  a bullock’s  hide  on  these : make  our  men  invulnerable,
translated  by  Ludwig.  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  372.

A charm  to  accompany  the  shaving  of  the  beard.

1 The  formal  shaving  may  be  part  of  the  Godina  vidhi,  the  ceremony
of  anointing  part  of  the  head  of  a youth  when  he  has  attained  the  a*4
of  sixteen  or  eighteen  years  (see  II.  13) ; or  it  may  be  connected  with
Tim  Diksha,  the  religious  ceremony  of  initiation  or  Confirmation.  In
this  case  the  operation  appears  to  be  performed  on  a sick  man  (stanza
-2)  to  expedite  his  restoration  to  health.

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  430.


;.,s:


. i

1311


'BY-MI y 70.]  THE  ATHARVA-YEDA.  283

HYMN  LXIX.

Mine  be  the  glory  in  the  hill,  in  vales,  in  cattle,  and
in  gold,

Mine  be  the  sweetness  that  is  found  in  nectar  and  in
flowing  wine!  o *

2 With  your  delicious  honey  balm  me,  Asvins,  Lords

of  splendid  light ! . •.

That  clear  and  resonant  may  be  the  voice  I utter  to
mankind.

3 In  me  be  strength,  in  me  be  fame,  in  me  the  power

of  sacrifice  :

Praj&pati  establish  this  in  me  as  firm  as  light  in
heaven !

HYMN  LXX.

As  wine  associates  with  flesh,  as  dice  attend  the
gaming-board,

As  an  enamoured  man’s  desire  is  firmly  Set  upon  a
dame,  :vdf.  WSi

So  let  thy  heart  and  soul,  O Cow,  be  firmly  set  upon
thy  calf.

2 As  the  male  elephant  pursues  with  eager  step  his

female’s  track,

As  an  enamoured  man’s  desire  is  firmly  set  upon  a
dame,

. So  let  thy  heart  and  soul,  0 Cow,  be  firmly  set  upon
thy  Qalf.  ;»  YYYYY

3 Close  as  the  felly  and  the  spoke,  fixt  as  the  wheel-rim

on  the  nave,

As  an  enamoured  man’s  desire  is  firmly  set  upon  a
dame,

So  let  thy  heart  and  soul,  0 Cow,  be  firmly  set  upon
. thy  calf


A priest’s  prayer  for  power  and  glory.  ?

A benediction  on  cow  and  calf.

Traiislated  and  annotated  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  66,  lOdi


THE  HYMNS  OF


[TOOK  YI.

hymn  lxxi.

What  food  I eat  of  varied  form  and  nature,  food
whether  gold  or  horse,  sheep,  goat,  or  bullock,
Whatever  gift  I have  received,  may  Agnl  the  Hotar
make  it  sacrifice  well-offered,

2 Wlla*ever  sacrificed  or  not,  hath  reached  me,

bestowed  bv  men  and  sanctioned  by  the  Fathers,
whereby  my  heart  seems  to  leap  up,  may  Agui  the
xxotar  make  that  sacrifice  well-offered.

3 What  food  I eat  unjustly,  Gods!  or,  doubtful  between

bestowing' and  refusing,  swallow,

■‘rough  greatness  of  Vaisvfoiara  the  mighty  may
that  same  food  be  sweet  to  me  and  blessed !

HYMN  LXXII.

1 See  Appendix.

Let  Varupa  come  hither,  Soma,  Agci,  Brihaspati
. come  hither  with  the  Vasus ! * ,\

Unanimous,  ye  kinsmen,  come  united,  come  to  the

f glory  of  this  mighty  guardian .

2 The  inclination  which  your  hearts  have  harboured,  ’
. ePurP0£je  which  hath  occupied  your  spirits,
ibis  1 annul. with  sacrifice  and  butter.  In  me  be
your  sweet^esting-place,  O. kinsmen.

8 Stand  even  here:  forsake  me  not.  Before  us  may
1 ushan  make  your  path  unfit  to  travel.  •

V 4stoshpati  incessantly  recall  you ! In  me  be  your
sweet  resting-place,  0 kinsmen  ! ||

A priest’s  benediction  after  eating.  ~

J ££  »“  «•  • Mir  performed

the  fidelity  „f  di«oa,

1 Thh  mighty  guardian  : meaning  himself,

2 The  inclination  ; to  desert  me,

A : Lord  oi  the  Home.  Sometimes  a name  of  Inara.


Jinm  75.]  THE  ATHARVA-YEDA.  285

; ' HYMN  LXXIY.  ‘ ,

'Close  gathered  be  your  bodies  : be  your  minds  and
vows  in  unison  J ,

Here  present  Rrahmanaspati  and  Bhaga  have
assembled  you.  > •

2 Let  there  be  union  of  your  minds,  let  there  be  union

of  your  hearts  :

Ah  that  is  troubled  in  your  lot  with  this  I mend  and
harmonize.

3 As,  free  from  jealousy,  the  strong  Adityas  have  been

the  Vasus’  and  the  Budras’  fellows,

So  free  from  jealousy,  Lord  of  Three  Titles  ! cause
thou  these  people  here  to  „be  one-minded.

HYMN  LXXY.

Forth  from  his  dwelling  drive  that  man,  the  foeman
who  assaileth  us ;

Through  the  Expellent  sacrifice  hath  Indra  rent
and  mangled  him.  .~Y fyj'L j C

2 Indra,.  Foe-Slayer,  drive  him  forth  into  the  distance

most  remote,  *

Whence  never  more  shall  lie  return  in  all  the  years
that  are  to  come.

3 To  the  three  distances,  beyond  mankind’s  Five

Races,  let  him  go,


A charnj  pronounced  by  a King  to  secure  the  unanimity  and  fidelity
of  Ills  people.

2 With  this  : sacrifice,

3 Lord  of  Three  Titles : probably  Agni,  who  is  called  also  Vaisvanara
and  J atavedas.


A charm  to  effect  the  removal  of  an  enemy.

1 Expellent  sacrifice : nairbMhyam  (havih) ; an  oblation  to  secure
expulsion.

* 3 Three  distances  : beyond  earth,  firmament,  and  heaven.  Three
skies  : see  IV,  20.  1.  ' ■

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  373,  and  by  Grill,
Hundort  Liecler,  pp.  22,  165.  ■;


286


THE  IlTMm  .OF


[HOOK  VI.


Beyond  the  three  skies  let  him  go,  whence  he  shall
never  come  again

In  all  the  years  that  are  to  be,  long  as  the  Sun  is  in
the  heaven.

HYMN'  LXXVI.

Those  who  are  sitting  round  this  babe  prepare  him
to  be  looked  upon.

Let  Agni  thoroughly  inflamed  with  all  his  tongues
rise  from  his  heart.

2 For  length  of  life  I use  the  name  of  Agni  the

Consuming  God,

Whose  smoke  the  sage  who  knows  the  truth  beholds'
proceeding  from  his  mouth.

3 The  man  who  knows  his  fuel  laid  in  order  by

the  Kshatriya

Sets  not  his  foot  upon  the  steep  declivity  that
leads  to  Death.

4 Those  who  encompass  slay  him  not:  he  goes  not  near

his  lurking  foes —

The  Kshatriya  who,  knowihg  well,  takes  Agni’s .
name  for  length  of  life.

HYMN  LXXVI I.

Firm  stands  the  heaven,  firm  stands  the  earth,  firm
stands  this  universal  world,

Firm  stand  the  rooted  mountains.  I have  put  the
horses  in  the  stall.


A benediction  pronounced  over  a new-boni  child  of  the  Kshatriya
or  military  and  royal  class.

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  459.


A cbarm  to  bring  the  cattle  home.

1 Have  put : atishtkqmm ; from  stkd,  to  stand  : literally,  have
caused  to  stand.


THE  ATE  ARY A-Y ED  A


2 I call  the  Herdsman,-  him  who  knows  the  way  to

drive  the  cattle  forth,

Who  knows  the  way  to  drive  them  home,  to  drive
them  back  and  drive  them  in.

3 0 Jltavedas,  turn  them  back  : a hundred  homeward

ways  be  thine  !

Tliou  hast  a thousand  avenues  : by  these  restore  our
kine  to  us.  .

HYMN  LXXYIII.  .

Let  this  man  be  again  bedewed  with. this  presented
sacrifice,

And  comfort  with  the  sap  of  life  the  bride  whom
they  have  brought  to  him.

2 With  life’s  sap  let  him  comfort  her,  and  raise  her  high

with  princely  sway.

In  wealth  that  hath  a thousand  powers,  this  pair  be
inexhaustible  !

3 Tvashfcir  formed  her  to  be  thy  dame,  Tvashtir  made

thee  to  be  her  lord.

Long  life  let  TvashUr  give  you  both.  Let  Tvashtar
give  a thousand  lives.  * •


2 The  Herdsman  : Agni.  The  stanza  is  taken,  with  variations,
from  Rigveda  X.  19,  4.

Translated- by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  II L p.  468.


THE  HYMNS, OF  [B<X)E  VI,

HYMN  LXXIX.  '

May  tills  our  Lord  of  Cloudy  Sky,  bedewed  with
liquid  drops,  preserve  unequalled  riches  in  our  homes.

2 Lord  of  the  Cloudy  Sky,  bestow  vigour  and  strength
* on  our  abodes.  Let  wealth  and  treasure  come  to  us.

3 Thou,  God  bedewed  with  drops,  art  Lord  of  infinite

prosperity.

Grant  us  thereof,  give  us  thereof;  may  we  eniov
this  booiqof  thine.  '

■ ^ y:  ' :ILYMN  LXXX.

He  fiieth  in  the  firmament  observing  all  the  things
that  be;

We  with  this  offering  will  adore  the  greatness  of  the
Heavenly  Hound.  ,

2 The  three,  the  Kalakanjas,  set  aloft  in  heaven  as

they  wei'e  Gods —

All  these  I call  to  be  our  help  and  keep  this  man
secure  from  harm.

3 In  waters  is  thy  birth,,  in  heaven  thy  station,  thy

majesty  on  earth  and  in  tile  ocean.

We  with  .this  offering  will  adore  the  greatness  of  the
Heavenly  Hound.  Y'SfS


A prayer  for  prosperity.

1 Lord  of  Cloudy  Sky  : Par j any  a,  God  of  the  rain-cloud,  on  whose
favour  the  growth  of  grass  and  grain  depends.  See  I.  2,  1.

A prayer  for  help  and  protection.'  ,

. I The  Heavenly  Hound : some  conspicuous  star,  perhaps  the  Dog-star,
Sirius,  which  was  called  kviov  by  the  Greeks  and  (Jan is  gr  Canicula  )>y
the  Latins,  both  words  being  closely  connected  with  the  Sanskrit  svdL

2 Mkikdnjas : meaning  originally,  black-spotted ; stars  of  some
unidentifiable  constellation.

.3  Thy  birth:  the  origin  of  the  Heavenly  Hound.  So  .with  the
Greeks  Sirius  was  said  to  have  been  the  dog  of  the  great  hunter  Orion,
and  the  Latin  Canis  or  Canicula  was  the  dog  of  Engone  translated
with  its  mistress  to  the  sky.

Translated  by  Ludwig,  DerRigveda,  III.  p.  373.


BYMX  82.]


Thou  art  a grasper,  holding  last  ooui  muu,  .

drivest  fiends  away.  y .

A holder  both  of  progeny  and  riches  hath  this  King
become.  ' -

2 Prepare  accordantly,  O Bing,  the  mother  for  the
infant’s  birth.  • . ^

On  the  right  way  bring  forth  the  . boy.  Make  him
come  hither.  I am  here.  ^

8 The  Amulet  which  Aditi  wore  when  desirous  of  a son,
Tvashtar  hath  bound  upon  this  dame  and  said.
Be  mother  of  a boy.

hymn  lxxxii.  •

I CALL  the  name  of  him  who  comes,  hath  come,  and
still  draws  nigh  to  us.  ■

Hoe-slaying  Jndra’s  name  I love,  the  Vasus  fiiend
with  hundred  powers.  • ‘ ,;:V

2 Thus  Bhaga  spake  to  me : Let  him  bring  thee
a consort  by  the  path

Whereon  the  Asvins  brpught  the  bride  Sftry&  the
child  of  Savitar,


A charm.  to  facilitate  child-birth.

* 1 Holding  fast  both  hands : the  ring  or  bracelet  was  apparently  placed

first  on  one  hand  or  arm.  and  then  on  the  other;  or  there  were  two
connected  rings,  regarded  as  one  amulet.  See  Kausika-Sutx*a  XXXY.  ] I.

Translated  by  Weber,  Indische  Sindian,  V,  p.  239,  by  Ludwig,  Dor
Rigveda,  III.  p.  477.  .•  ^ f ' v b;;': .V- ; ;

A charm  to  win  a bride.  •

l Of  him  : of  Indra  who  is  always  ready  to  come  and  help  us.

The  Fasus’  friend  : whose  associates  are  the  Yasus,  sometimes  the
i^bdsdhi'generah  sometimes  a'  special  class  of  deities.  See'  L

JLsvinibrou0djtk^  bride  : see  II.  30.  2,' an^::KgYed*t
X.  85,  which  contains  a full  account  of  Surya’s  wedding.


2iP  the  II Y 21  NS  OF  {BOOK  Vf.

o Great,  Indra.  is  that  hook  of  thine,  bestowing
treasure,  wrought  of  gold  : ' * ~

Therewith,  O Lord  of  'Might,  bestow  a wife  on  me
who  long  to  wed,

HYMN  LXXXIII.

Hence,  Sores  and  Pustules,  fly  away  even  as  the
eagle  from  Kis  home.

Let  Surya  bring  a remedy,  the  Moon  shine  forth
and  banish  you.

- One 'bright  with  variegated  tints,  one.  'white,  one
black,  a couple  red  : —

The  names  of  all  have  I declared.  Begone,  and
injure  not  oUr  men.

3 Hence,  childless,  shall  the  Pustule  flee,  grand-
daughter of  the  dusky  one.

The  Boil  shall  fly  away  from  us,  the  morbid  growth''
shall  vanish  hence.  ° ■

Taste, _ happy  in  thy  mind,  thine  own  oblation,  as
I with  Svaha  with  my  heart  present  it.


:j  That  hook:  of.  ‘Long  be  thy  grasping-hook  v, -herewith  thou
S' vest  ample  wealth  to  him  Who  sheds  the  juice  and  worships  thee’

{ Kigvcda  VIII.  17,  10)  ; the  expression  being  borrowed  from  the
employment  of  a hook  to  draw  down  the  high  branches  of  a fruit-tree..

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  111.  470,  and  with  notes,  by
Webef , c Imlische  Studicu,  V..p.  239  -241,  and  Grill,  Huudort  Lieder  *
pm  57,  167,

A charm  against  sores  and  pustuleg,

1.  Hence,  Sores  and  Pustules:  dpackitas ; see  YI.  25.  1.

3 Boil:  glatih;  explained  in  the  St. 'Petersburg  Dictionary  as  a
round  lump,  a wen-like  excrescence  (perhaps  related  to  glubm  and
g/o'nius).  Morbid  growth  :■  galuntdh  ; an  unknown  word,  not  explained
m the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  meaning,  apparently,  a tumour  of
soiuc  Kind.  1 tune  own  obititioii : offered  for  the  ox  press
removing  thee.  Srdkd:  the  exclamation,  All  hail  l
Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  500,


THE  ATRARYA-YEDA


HYMN  85.]

HYMN  LXXXIV.

Thou  in  whose  dread  mouth  I present.  oblation,  that
these  bound  victims  may  obtain  their  freedom,

The  people  deem  that  thou  art  Earth  : I know  thee
thoroughly,  and  I say  thou  art  Destruction.

2 Be  thou  enriched,  O Welfare,  with  oblations,  here,

among  us  is  thine  allotted  portien.  *

• Free — Hail  to  thee  !— from  sin  those  here  and  yonder.

3 Do  thou,  Destruction,  thus,  without  a rival,  release

us  from  the  iron  bonds  that  bind  us.

To  me  doth  Yatna  verily  restore  thee.  To  him,  to
Yama,  yea,  to  Death  be  worship !

4 Thou  hast  been  fastened  to  an  iron  pillar,  here  com-

passed with  a thousand  deaths  around  thee.  .

■In  full  accord  with  Yama  and  the  Fathers,- send  this
man  upward  to  the  loftiest  heaven.

HYMH  LXXXV.

Let  Varana  the  heavenly  tree  here  present  keep
disease  away.

The  Gods  have  driven  off  Decline  that  entered  and
possessed,  this  man..  .


*A  charnt  to  accompany  fche  symbolical  loosing  of  sacrificial  victims.

‘1  Earth:  one  meaning  of  the  word  nirritik , Destruction  or  Death,
being  the  bottom  or  lower  parts  of  the  earth.

2 0 Welfare:  apparently  an  euphemistic  expression  for  Destruction,
as  the  Greek  Eumenides,  Gracious  Goddesses,  was  for  the  Furies.  Prof.
Ludwig  reads  bkilme,  0 Earth,  instead  of  the  bhttte , 0 Welfare,  of  tha
text,

3 The  iron  bonds  of  sin.  Thee  : some  man  who  has  been  danger  ,

ously  ill.  . •

4 This  stanza  is  repeated  from  YI.  63.  3.

\Trana4ated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Eigveda,  III.  p.  444.


A charm  against  Consumption  or  Decline.

...  1 Varana  : the  tree  Crataeva  Rbxbufghii,  found  in  alt  parts  of  India,
used  in  medicine  and  supposed  to.  possess  magical  virtues.  See  X.  3,.  !


292


THE  BY  MM  OF


BOOK  VI.


2 We  with  the  speech  of.Indra  and  of  Mitra  and  of

Yaruna,

We  with  the  speech  of  all  the  Gods  will  drive  Decline
away  from  thee.

3 Even  as  Vritra  checked  and  stayed  these  waters

flowing  everg  way,

With  Agni,  God  of  all  mankind.  I check  and  bahish
, ■ thy.  Decline.  ;

HYMN  LXXXVI.

This  is  the  Lord  of  Indra,  this  the  Lord  of  Heaven,
the  Lord  of  Earth,

The  Lord  of  all  existing  things : the  one  and  only
Lord  he  thou.

2 The  Sea  is  regent  of  the  floods,  Agni  is  ruler  of  'the
land,  ~

The  Moon  is  regent  of  the  stars  : the  one  and  only
Lord  be  thou.  r

5 Thou  art  the  King  of  Asuras,  the  crown  and  summit
of  mankind : ■

Thou  art  the  partner  of  the  .Gods  : the  one  and  only
Lord  be  thou.  Yifi

• HYMN  LXXXVlI.  ‘ | f

Here  art  thou : I have  chosen  thee.  Stand  stedfasl
and  immovable.

- Let  all  the  clans  desire  thee  : let  not  thy  kingdom


A glorification  of  a newly  consecrated  King.

3 Asuras : earthly  lords.

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p,  241.  ‘ *

A benediction  addressed  to  a newly  elected  King.

The  hymn' is  taken,  with  slight  variations,  from  Rigveda  X.  173.
1—3,


HYMN  89.]  THE  A TEA  & 7 A - VEB  A . 29.3

2 Be  even  here : fall  not  Away:  be  like  a mountain
■ : ■ unremoved.

Stand  stedfast  here  like  Indra’s  self,  and  bold  the
kingship  in  thy  grasp.  '

8 This  man  hath  Indra  stablished,  made  secure  by
constant  sacrifice.  :

.Soma,  and  Brahmanaspati  here  °p'resent  bless  and
comfort  him  1

HYMN  LXXXVIIt

Firm  is  the  sky,  firm  is  the  earth,  and  firm  is  all  this
living  world ;

Firm  are  these  mountains  on  their  base,  an4d  stedfast
is  this  King  of  men.

2 Stedfast  may  Varuna  the  King,  stedfast  the  God
Brihaspati,

Stedfast  may  Indra,  stedfast,  too,  may  Agni  keep
"'-i  thy  stedfast  reign.

8 Firm,  never  to  be  shaken,  crush  thy  foemen,  under
thy  feet  lay  those  who  strive  against  thee.

* One-minded,  true  to  thee  be  all  the  regions : faithful
to  thee,  the  firm,  be  this  assembly !

HYMN  LXXXIX.

This  strength  that  Soma  hath  bestowed,  the  head  of
her  who  gladdeneth, —

With  that  which  thence  hath  been  produced  we
make  thy  spirit  sorrowful.


A benediction  addressed  to  a newly  elected  King.  Stanzas  i and  2
are  taken  from  Bigveda  X.  173.  4,  5.

A charm  to  win  a maiden’s  love.  ' A"  'A:  / ;

1 8o7?ia;  as  Lord  of' Plants.  Of  her  who  gladdeneth;  prenydh  is
apparently  the  genitive  case  of  prerfC  the  feminine  of  preni  which  is
(I-  112.  10)  with  the  meaning  of  Uovings*;
* friendly,’  derived  from  ':pri9  to. please  or  gladden.  Preni  then  may
mean  some  plant  that  possesses  the  power  of  awaking  love,  like


. THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  71.

2 We  make  thy  spirit  sorrowful,  we  fill  thy  mind  with

pain  and  grief.

As  smoke  accompanies  the  wind,  so  let  thy  fancy
follow  me.

3 May  Varuna  and  Mitra,  may  Sarasvati  the  Goddess

may  . •

The  centre  of  the  earth,  and  both  her  limits  brino'
thee  close  to  me.  *

HYMN  XC.,

The  shaft  that  Rudra  hath  shot  forth  against  thy
merhbers  and  thy  .heart,  J

Here  do  we  draw  from  thee  to-day,  and  turn  it  hence
to  every  side.

2 From  all  the  hundred  vessels  spread  throughout  the
members  of  thy  frame,  •

F^om  all  those  vessels  and  canals  we  call  the  poison-
ous matter  forth.

•3  Worship  to  thee,  the  archer,  and,  0 Kudra,  to  thy
levelled  shaft ! - '

Yea,  worship  to  thine  arrow  when  it  left  the  bow
and  when  it  fell !


Satynoiv  Vervain,  Basil,  Mallojv,  and  others  in  Europe.  The  head  of
the  Prenf  was  perhaps  dried  and  powdered  and  administered  in  food,
or  in  some  other  way  employed  in  the  incantation.

Translated  by  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  V.  p.  242.

charm  cure  a man  who  has  been  poisoned.

■ v1  ^ ' : the  terrible  God  whose  shafts  bring  death  or  disease  on

men  and  cattle.  In  this  case  the  body  of  the  sufferer  has  been  poisoned.

Z Hundred  vessels : saidm  dkamdnayah  all  the  countless  vessel*
and  nerves  by  means  of  which  the  different  functions  of  the  body  are
performed.  See  Wise,  Hindu  System  of  Medicine,  pp.  63,  64.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  14,  168.


HYMN  92.]  THE  ATHABYA-YEDA,

• HYMN  XCI.

They  made,  this  barley  ready  with  a team  of'  eight,
a team  of  six.  : ■

With  this  I drive  to  westward,  far  away,  thy  bodily
disease.

2 Vata  breathes  downward  from  above,  and  downward

Sdrya  sends  his  heat ;

Downward  is  drawn  the  milch-cow’s  milk  : so  down-
ward, go  thy  malady!

3 The  Waters  verily  bring  health,  the  Waters  drive

disease  away.

The  Waters  cure  all  malady  : may  they  bring  medi-
cine for  thee.

HYMN  XCIL

Be  fleet  as  wind,  Strong  Steed,  when  thou  art  har-
nessed; go  forth  as  swift  as  thought  at  India’s
sending..

Let  the  possessors  of  all  wealth,  the  Maruts,  yoke
thee,  and  Tvashfcar  in  thy  feet  lay  swiftness.

2 That  speed,  that  lies  concealed  in  thee,  O Charger,
speed  granted  to  the  hawk  or  wind  that  wandered,—
Therewith,  Strong  Steed,  saving  in  shock  of  battle,
endowed  with  might  by  might  win  thou  the  contest.


A charm  against  disease.  «

1 They  made  this  barley  ready j prepared  the  -ground  'by  ploughing
for  the  growth  of  the#  grain  used  in  the  incantation.  The  number  of
oxen  employed  has  increased  the  efficacy  of  the  corn.

■3  The  Waters  cure  all  malady : cf.  III.  7.  5*.  So  Pastor  lineipp,
the  famous  Bavarian  water-doctor,  maintains  that  what  cannot  he  cured
by  water  is  altogether  incurable.  Water  is  the  panacea.  Hydropathy
is  the  one  saving  principle  which  can  be  applied  in  every  eas$,

..  Translated  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  14,  168.


A charm  to  strengthen  aM  inspirit  a War-horse.


90  THE  HIMF3*  OF  [BOOK  71:

3 Bearing  thy  body,  Charger,  may  thy  body  run  bless-
ing us  and  winning  thee  protection.  ‘

May  he,  unswerving,  to  uphold  the  mighty,  stablish
his  lustre  as  a God  in  heaven.

HYMN  XCIII.

Yama,  Death  -direly  fatal,  the  Destroyer,  with  his
black  crest,  Sarva  the  tawny  archer,

And  all  the  Gods  - uprisen  with  their  army  , may  these
on  every  side  avoid  our  heroes.

2 With  mind,  burnt-offerings,  butter,  and  libation,

to  royal  Bhava  and  the  archer  Sarva,

To  these  the  worshipful  I pay  my  worship  : may
they  turn  elsewhere  things  with  deadly  venom.

3 Save  us,  All-Gods  and  all-possessing  Maruts,  from

murderous  stroke  and  things  that  slay  with  poison.
Pure  is  the  might  of  Yaruna,  Agni,  Soma.  May
Vita’s  and  Parjanya’s  favour  bless  us.

HYMN  XCIV.

We  bend  your  minds  in  union,  bend  in  harmony  your
hopes  and  plans  :

You  there,  who  turn  to  sundered  ways,  we  bend  and
bow  in  unison.  . .


3 This  stanza  is  taken,  with  variants,  from  Rigveda  X*  56. 2,  a funeral
hymn,  and  is  there  addressed  to  the  spirit  of  the  departed,  YHjiti
(strong,  strong  steed,  charger  or  racer)  being  either  the  dead  man’s
name' or  meaning  4 hero.*  The  second  line  is  obscure,

Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  459.  ,

* , -
A prayer  for  protection  from  poison.

,1  Yama:  the  King  of  the  Departed,  distinguished
Destroyer.  Sarva : a deity,  generally  'mentioned;  togetb#\:vd^

(see  IY.  28.  1).  His  name  does  not  occur  in  the  Rigveda.-

2 Bhava  : a deity  attending  on  Rudra  : in  later  mythology  a name
or  form  el  Siva  whose  consort  is  the  awful  Goddess  Bhavani  *

A charm  to  reconcile  a King’s  discontented  people.

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  XIL  p.  51L


':M YMF  96.]


THM  A TMA M YA-TMPA .


: 2 I ; tfty  spirit  make  your  spirits  captive  : these
with  their  thoughts  follow  my  thought  and  wishes;

I  make  your  hearts  submissive  to  mine  order : close-
ly attending  go.  where  I precede  you.

3 I have  invoked  both  Heaven  and  Earth*  invoked
divine  Sarasvati, . -

Indra  and  Agni  have  I called;  Sarasvati,  so  may  We
thrive  ! - -1

HYMN  XC%  • '

In  the  third  heaven  above  us  stands  the  A^vattha
- tree,  the  seat  of  Gods.

There  the  Gods  gained  the  Kushtka  plant,  embodi-
ment of  jendless  life.

2 There  moved  through  heaven  a golden  ship,  a ship

with  cordage  wrought  of  gold.

There  Gods  obtained  the  Kusbtha  plant,  the  flower
of  immortality.  * O':

3 Thou  art  the  infant  of  the  plants,  the  infant  of  the

Snowy  Hills :

The  germ  of  every  thing  that  is  : free  this  my  friend
from  his  disease.

HYMN  XCYI.

The  many  plants  of  hundred  shapes  and  forms  that
•-  ■ Soma  rules  as  King,  ■ *

Commanded  by  Brihaspati,  deliver  us  from  grief  and
woe ! ' •


A charm  to  remove  disease.  ■ ,

■ l This  and  the  following'  stanza  are  repeated  from  Y.  4.  3,  4.

: ; :«A  prayer  for  deliverance  from  sm^hpsorrow.

,yCof^m(mded;:  or,  commissioned,  or,  engendered.  The  line  is-
taken  from  Bigveda  X.  97*  15,


98  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VI

2 Let  them  release  me  from  the  curse  and  from  the

noose  of  Varuna,  .

Free  me  from  Yarna’s  fetter,  and  from  every  sin
against  the  Gods  !

3 From  every  fault  in  look,  in  word,  m spirit  that  we,

awake  or  sleeping,  have  committed,

May  Soma,  with  his  godlike  nature,  cleanse  us.


HYMN  XCVII.

The  sacrifice  is  victor,  Agni  victor,  victorious  is
Soma,  Indra  conquers  :

So  will  we  bring  oblation  unto  Agni,  this  sacrifice
that  I may  win  all  battles.

2 Praise  to  you,  Mitra-Varuna,  hymn-singers ! Here

swell  with  meath  dominion  blest  with  children.

Far  into  distant  regions  drive  Destruction,  and  even
from  committed  sin  absolve  us.

3 In  this  strong  hero  be  ye  glad  and  joyful : cleave  ye

to  him  even  as  ye  cleave  to  Indra,

Victorious,  kine- winner,  thunder- wielder,  who  quells
a host  and  with  his  might  destroys  it.


2*  Taken,  with  a variant,  from  Eigveda  X.  97.  16.

: Translated  by  Ludwig,  Dor  Eigveda,  III.  p.  506,  and  by  Grill,  Hun
dert  Lieder,  pp.  38,  168,


A prayer  for  the  success  and  prosperity  of  a King.

1 This  stanza  is  spoken  by  the  institutor  of  the  sacrifice  for  success
in  war.

2 This  ana  the  following  stanza  are  spoken  by  the  officiating  priest.
Praise:  svad/ia  ; here  a sacrificial  exclamation,  like  Sv&ha  = All  hail*:

3 Addressed  to  the  King’s  subjects.

Translated  bv  Ludwig,  Der  Eigveda,  III.  p,  460,


HYMN  99.]  TIIE  A TEA  EVA-  TED  A,  ' 293

'HYMN  XCVIII.

Indra* be  victor,  never  to  be  vanquished,  to  reign
among  the  Kings  as  sovran  ruler !

.....  Here  be  thou  meet  for  praise  and  supplication,  to  be
revered  and  waited  on  and  worshipped.

'2  Thou  fain  for  glory,  an  imperial*  ruler,  hast  won
dominion  over  men,  0»lndra.

Of  these  celestial  tribes  be  thou  the  sovran  : long-
lasting  be  thy  sway  and  undecaying !

3 Thou  governest  the  north  and  eastern  regions,  Indra !
fiend-slayer  1 thou  destroyest  foemen.

Thou  hast  won  all,  far  as  the  rivers  wander.  Bull,
called  to  help,  on  our  right  hand  thou  goest.

HYMN  XCIX.

IxDitA,  before  affliction  comes,  I call  thee  from  the
wide  expanse.  „

The  mighty  guardian,  born  alone,  wearer  of  many
names,  I call.

2 Whatever  deadly  missile  launched  to-day  flies  forth
to  slaughter  us,

We  take  both  arms  of  Indra  to  encompass  us  on
every  side.

3.  We  draw  about  us  both  the  arms  of  Indra,  our
deliverer.  May  they  protect  us  thoroughly.

G Savitar,  thou  God,  0 royal  Soma,  make  thou#me
pious-minded  for  my  welfare.


A hymn  of  praise  to  Indra.

2 These  celestial  tribes : the  heavenly  Gods.

3 Bull : or,  Strong.

A hymn  for  protection  in  battle.

I Born  alone:  peerless  from  thy  birth.

3 Make  thou  : each  of  you  separately.

Translated  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  18,  168.


30  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  71.

HYMN  C.  - ' ' '

The  Gods  and  S&rya  gave  the  gift,  the  Earth  and
Heaven  bestowed  the  boon.

The  three  Sarasvatls  in  full  accord  bestowed  the
antidote.

2 That  water,  Upajik&s!  which  Gods  poured  for  yoti
• on  thirsty  land.

With  that  same  water  sent  by  Gods,  drive  ye  away
this  poison  here.

8 The  daughter  of  the  Asuras  art  thou,  and  sister  of
the  Gods.

* Thou  who  hast  sprung  from  heaven  and  earth  hast
robbed  the  poison  of  its  power.

. • HYMN  CT

See  Appendix


A diarm  against  poisori,

1 Three  Sarasvatls : the  multiplication  is  analogous  to  that  of  the
three  heavens  and  three  earths.  See  IY<  20.  &

2 UpajtMs : termites  or  white  ants.  See  note  on  II.  S.  2.  * Whence
do  these  Ants  get  their  moisture  % Our  house  was  built  on  a hard  ferru-
ginous conglomerate,  in  order  to  be  out  of  the  way  of  the  White  Ants,
bi.it  they  came  despite  the  precaution,  and  not  only  were  they  in  this
sultry  weather  able  individually  to  moisten  soil  to  the  consistency  of
mortar  for  the  formation  of  galleries  . . . . but  when  their  inner
chambers  were  laid  open,  these  were  also  surprisingly  humid;  yet
there  was  no  dew,  and  the  house  being  placed  on  a rock  they  could
have  no  subterranean  passage,  to  the  bed  of  the  river,  which  ran  about
three  hundred  yards  below  the  hill  Can  it  be  that  they  have  the
power  of  combining  the  oxygen  and  hydrogen  of  their  vegetable  food
by  vital  force  [so]  as  to  form  water  ? J (Quoted  from  Dr.  Livingstone’s
well-known  work  by  the  Rev.  j.  G.  W ood,  “Strange  Dwellings,”  p*  280.)

3 Addressed  to  some  magical  herb,  probably  Arundhati  or  Silachi
which  is  called  sister  of  ike  Gods  An  V.  5. 1. . Asuras  : divine  beings:  Gods.,

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  51 L


TEE  A TEA.  R FA-  VEDA


HYMN  103.]

HYMN  CII.  p|l

JSven  as  this  ox,  O Alvins,  steps  and  turns  together
with  his  mate,

Bo  let  thy  fancy  turn  itself,  come  nearer,  and  unite
with  rae.

g I,  as  the  shaft-horse  draws  the  mare  beside  him,  draw
thee  to  myself,

•Like  grass  that  storm  and  wind  have  rent,  so  be  thy

' - mind  attached  to  me|

3 Swiftly  from  Bhaga’s  hands  I bear  away  a love-
compelling  charm

Of  ointment  and  of  sugar-cane,  of  Spikenard  and  the
Kushtha  plant,

HYMN  CIII.

BftiHASPATj  and  Savitar  prepare  a rope  to  bind  you
fast !

Let  Bhaga,  Mitra,  Aryaman^  and  both  the  Asvins
make  the  bond.

g I bind  together  all  of  them,  the  first,  the  last,  the
middlemost.

Indra  hath  girded  thfise  with  cord : bind  them
together,  Agni,  thou !


A charrsi  to  win  a maiden’s  love,

| The  Asvins  are  addressed  as  having  been  the  first  teachers  of
ploughing  (Rigveda  I.  117.  21),  and  also  perhaps  as  groomsmen  arid
conductors  of  the  bride  at  Surya’s  wedding  (Rigveda  X.  85.  8,  9).
The  second  line  is  addressed  to  |he  absent  maiden.

2 Grass : trlnam.  (.Whitney's  Index  Verborum)  instead  of  trinrm  of
the  text.  Cf.  IL  30.  1.

3 Bhaga’s  hands:  Bhaga  being  a deity  who  presides  over  love  and
marriage.

Translated  by  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  V,  243,  and  by  Grill,  Him-
dert  Lieder,  pp.  54,  169.


A charm  to  cheek  the  approach  of  a hostile  army,
Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  518,


302


Fee  hymfs  of


MOOt  Yi.


8 Tr°a1Lrrionrg"hei;f?K!ias0li  *°  %1“'  **  *>“
lDtogotC4tiSr’ with  cord : bind  th“‘

hymn  civ.  ■ * .

We  bind  our  foemen  with  a bond  that  binds  them
cI?se  and  holds  them  fast.

Ihesfromhfe!^  r<3Spiration  V dissever,  and  their

2 T1heabt°of  h“lydia,?e“  by  Indra'  1 ^ fo™««  with
Sehia  here.ind  ^ 6nemieSj  0 A§™>  wJio  are  stand-

3 In£  b“t  ttfYS  i them  fest-  S0“  ***

May  Indra , girt  by  Maruts,  make  a bond  to  bind
our  enemies.

HYMN  CV.

^ the  mind  fl*eS  fortl1  conceptions  of-

■Soa“«  the  ^nCy’S  ^ht>'°  Gough,  flee  rapidly

2 Red  point  an  an’0W  flieS  awa^with  keenly-sharpen-

SS^eaWay’  ° CoU?b’  the  region  of  .

3 ^y^way8  the  beams  of  %ht>  the  rays  of  Shrya,
So,  Cough:  fly  rapidly  away  over  the  current  of  the


A charm  to  cliedk  the  approach  of  a hostile  army.
-1  Both  the  Friends : Mitra  and  Varuna.

Translate!  by  Ludwig,  Dei-  Rigveda*.  III.  518


A ehai’ixi  to  cure  Cough.

translated  by  Ludwig,  Dor  Rigve.ia,  III.  p.  510.


HYMN  101]  THE  A THAR  YA-YEDA.  303,

HYMN  CVI.

Let  flowery  Durva  grass  grow  up  about  , thine  exit
' and  approach.

There  let  a spring  ■ of  water  rise,  or  lake  with
blooming  lotuses.

2 This  is  the  ||lace  where  waters  meet,  here  is  the

gathering  of  the  flood . r •

Our  home  is  set  amid  the  lake  : turn  thou  tliy  jaws
away  from  it.

3 0 House,  we  compass  thee  about  with  coolness  to

envelop  thee.  _ m

Cool  as  a lake  be  thou  to  us.  Let  Agni  bring  us
healing  balm  !

HYMN  CVII,

Entrust  me,  Visvajit,  to  Tray  am  an  a.

Guard,  Trayamana,  all  our  men,  guard  all  our  wealth
of  quadrupeds.

2 To  Visvajit  entrust  me,  Trayamana.

O Visvajit,  guard  all  our  men,  etc.

3 To  Visvajit  entrust  me,  0 Kalyapi.

Guard,  O Kalyani,  all  our  men,  etc.

A charm  to  protect  a hojuse  from  fire.

1 D'tirvd  grass ; Panicum  Dactylon ; a creeping  grass  with  4 flower-'
bearing  branches  erect.  By  far  the  most  common  and  useful  grass  in
India.  It  grows  everywhere  abundantly,  and  flowers  all  the  year.5 — *
Roxburgh.  In  Hindustani  it  is  called  dtib.  The  speaker  is  addressing

' / • v - ■ o

2 Thou:  Agui  or. Fire  is  addressed.  The  hymn  may  be  compared
with  Eigveda  X.  142.  6 — . 8,

Translated  by  Grill,  Hundert  Liedor,  pp.  63,  170.

A charm  to  protect  men  and  cattle.  , ’ '

1 Visvajit : All-subduing ; an  epithet  of  Indra  ; also  the  name  of  un
eMha  or  one-day  sacrifice  performed  in  the  course  of  the  gavdmayana  *
a scUtra  (see  I.  30.  4)  or  prolonged  Soma  sacrifice  lasting  a whole  year,
Trdyamdnd:  Protectress  ; the  name  of  a medicinal  plant.

3 Katydid:  Propitious  one;  the  name  of  a leguminous  shrub;

( dyeine  Hebiiis,  " ; •'  ■ ' V


■‘■•UM  HYMNS  OF  '[BOOK  VI

4 To  Sarvavid  entrust  me,  0 Kalyarti

0 Sarvavid,  guard  all  our  men,  guard  all  our  wealth
of  quadrupeds.  • * •

■ hymn-cviii.

Intelligence,  come  first  to  us  wifi  store  of  horses
and  of  kme  f

Thou  with  the  rays  of  Shrya  art'our  worshipful  and
holy  one, ' • :

2 TIieyfip^VOat  InteI]%ence-  lauded  by  sages,  sped

Trusted  by  Brahmachiris,  for  the  favour  of  the  Gods
1 earn  ;; ,

8 ThAsS8Uent  meJlfgence  which  9ibll»s  know,  and

Intelligence  which  sages  know,  we  cause  to  enter
into  me*

4 Bjnttei>HgenC^gni,,make  m wise  this  day  with  that

Which  the  creative  Eishis*  which  the  men  endowed
with  wisdom  knew.  - u

5 Intelhgepce  at  eve,  at  morn,  _ Intelligence  at  noon

With  the  Sun’s  beams,  and  by  our  speech  we  plant
rn  us  Intelligence.  1 1


4 Sarvavid : Omniscient  ; an  epithet  of  Agni,

A prayer  for  wisdom.  ~~~~

2 Brahrnachdris : religious  students.'

I ftnoJh0/ere  ^ °n  aCC0U>l£  0f  tKeir  skill.  Sec-

i.  o,  Oj  Rote,  Asuras : divine  being?.

i Creative  Eishis:  fishayo  hMtakrtiah ; see  III.  28.  1.  and  TV


or  prayer.


■iH'mx  no.]


303


THE  A Til  AS  FA- VEDA .

, HYMN  CIX.  ,

The  Berry  heala  the  missile’s  rent,  it  heals  the
deeply-piercing  wound.

The  Gods  prepared  and  Fashioned  it.  This*  hath
sufficient  power  for  life.  "c* ' c

2 When  From  their  origin  they  came,  the  Berries  spake
- among  themselves  : /'  :

The  man  whom  we  shall  find  alive  shall  never  suffer
injury.

Asuras  buried  thee  in  earth  : the  Gods  again
: uplifted  thee,

Healer  of  sickness  caused  by  wounds  and  healer  of
the  missile’s  rent.

HYMN  CX.

Yea,  ancient,  meet  for  praise  at  sacrifices,  ever  and
now  thou- sittest  down  as  Hotar.

And  now,  O Agui,  make  thy  person  friendly,  and

. win  felicity  for  us  by  worship.  * ■NApAY

2 ’Neath  Jyaishthaghni  and  Yaina’s  Two  ReleaserS  this
child  was  bora  : preserve  him  from  uprooting.

He  shall  conduct  him  safe  past  ail  misfortunes  to
lengthened  life  that  lasts  a hundred  autumns.

- A charm  to  heal  punctured  ■wounds.

1 The  Berry : pippctii ; the  fruit  of  the  Asvattha,  Pippal  or  Peepul,

the  Ficus  Reliriosa,  or  Holy  Fig-tree.  See  III.  6.  1.  ' ’

2 From  their  origin  : from  the  hands  of  their  Creator.  Whom  we
shall  find  alias.:  to  whom  we  are  brought  before  his  life  is  extinct.

3 Aswan : flea  is.  Buried  thee:  to  prevent  thee  from  saving  human

AfA  ft;  It;  3: 3.  . r ■ ' ' ‘

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  509,  and.  by  Zimmer
Alt  sdisches  Leben,  p.  389.  “ ' ’ . ;

MS;  A benediction  oh  a new-born  ebild.

Wi  , it  .

2 JyaisUiugJmi:  or  JyeshfchagUm : the  sixteenth  lunar  .mansion,
^lied'j.ye8hth4  iu  XIX- .7/3.,’  Yamal  $ Two,  Rekmen : two\  ■

releases  from', Death  and  disease;  Yichritau,  See'
a mulabmimndt ; a .play  5

mter-Zm  being  called  also  Mulaharhaui.  lid  AguL


20


i tixMAlti  OF  I BOOK  VI

3 B°nL  °A,  I-®  Tig1er’®  was  he’  a hero,  the

Constellations  child,  born  brave  and  manly.

Let  huii  not  wound,  when  grows  in  strength’  hia

lather,  nor  disregard  his  mother,  her  who  bare  him.

HYMN  CXI.

, Unbind  and  lo$se  for  me  this  man,'  O Aoni  who
oound  and  well  restrained  is  chattering  folly.’  . ■
Afterward  he  will  offer  thee  thy  portion  when  lie
hath  been  delivered1  from  his  madness.

2 Let  Agni  gently  soothe  thy  mind  when  fierce’  excite-

vol exit  troubles  it

Well-skilled  I make  a medicine  that  thou  no  longer
mayst  be  mad.  • ■

3 Insane  through  am  against  the  Gods,  or  maddened'

by  a demon  s power—

Well-skilled  I make  a medicine  to  .free  thee  from

4 ^thee^o  Apsaras€s  release,  Iadra  and  Bhaga  let

May  all  the  Gods  deliver  thee-  that  thou  no  longer  I
mayst  be  mad-  » * ;

lie::  ; hymn'cxii..  * J

■ Let  not  this  one,  O Agni,  wound  the  highest  of  \
these  . preserve  thou  him  from  utter  ruin.  I

• ’ r in  the  Atharvaweda  thei^eorwJoaiir'  '

1 tanslated  by  Ludwig  Der  Rigveda,  Hi.  p„  4SL

A disarm  to.  cure  insanity.  •

d,LlrfZ;Lrfnr5Q?;*s“\of  ****  •«-*»«%  „,d.

fleneis  o the  mind  (H.  2.  5),  may  have  caused  the  insanity.

A health-charm  for  man,  woman,  and  son.

FrUHl '■ af^m>  this,  hie,  stands  without  a substantive  Dr  Grill  *

U Si %VFl  ,this  (she-fi“d),  should  be  read.  The  hi, lit  ■
th.  father,  the  chief  of  the  household.  The  ske-Hend : Gr,lM  Tr  al'  ...


SIMN  113.]  THE  AT II ARY A-Y ED  A.  % ■ 30?

Knowing  the  way  clo  thou  untie  the  nooses  of  the
slie-fiend  : let  all  the  Grods  approve  thee.

2*  Rend  thou  the  bonds  of  these  .asunder,  Agni  ! the
threefold  noose  whereby  the  three  were  fastened.

Knowing  the  way  untie  the  slie-hend’s  nooses  : free
all,  the  son,  the  father,  and  the  mother.

■3  The  elder  brother’s  bonds,  still  left  unwedded,  fetter-
ed in  every  limb  and  bound  securely,  _

Loose  these,  for  they  are  bonds  for  loosing  : Pushan,
turn  woes  away  upon  the  babe-destroyer.'


2 Of  these;  father,  mother,  and  son.  > ff

3 P Cithern as  the  God  who  cherishes  and  multiplies  life,  1 Sale-
destroyer : the  fiend  who  kills  the  unborn  babe.  See  II.  25.  4.

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  IIL  ;p.  469,  and  by  Grill,
Handert  Lieder,  pp.  15,  171.


A charm  to  banish  the  fiend  Gr&hi

1 Trita : the  mysterious  being  to  whom  unpleasant  things  are
consigned.  See  Y.  1.  I,

i^'i'i^tTrita’s  ;repository;ha:ay::;&'  compared  to  Milton’s' . limbo''  .(3Phradijse‘::
^p;SthI4I,:;490)  into  which  follies7' and  vanities  . ‘hipwhirledLaloft/h^Hy^
e'er  the  backside  of  the  world  far  off.5  ■*

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  IIL  p.  44  L and  by  Grill  Hum
4ert  Lieder,  pp.  15,  171.


iUS  , THE  HYMNS  OF

HYMN  CXIY.

YV  hatever  God -provoking  wrong
tlone,'0  Deities,  :

Therefrom  do  ye  deliver  us,  Adi
of  Law.

2 Here  set  us  free,  0 holy  ones,  Ad

ot  Law,

When  striving,  bringing  sacrifice
it  aright,

3 With  ladle  full  of  fatness  we,  woi

noly  oil,

Striving,  have  failed,  0 all  ye  God
to  otter  it.  f Y-  ' ;■

’ HYMN  CXY.

Whatever  wrong  we  wittingly  or
have  done,


BOOK  VI.


ppers,  pouring


against  our  will


'A-Asiwcr  asking  pardon  for  fault*  and  errors  ~

of  sacrifice.  * 1 ™s  111  tlle  performance

j fi  e priests : devdsas  instead  or  d dodsa*  of  +kX
gods.  See  III.  3.  2;  10.  2.  “ * x,eXv>  iitorally,  we

3 do  offer  it:  in  the  proper  manner.

iranekted  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  443,  and  bv  drill  u r


HYMN  117.]  THE  ATHARVA-YEDA.  309

'•  HYMN  GIVI.

^ The  wealth  which  husbandmen  aforetime,  digging,  like
men  who  find  their  food  with  knowledge,  buried,
This  to  the  King,  Vivas  van’s  son,  I offer.  Sweet  be
our  food  and  fit  for  sacrificing !

2 May  lie,  Vaivaswata,  prepare  ouf,  portion.  Maybe

whose  share  is  mead  with  meadjoesprihkle
Our  sin  in  hasty  mood  against  our  mother,  or  guilt
whereby  a sire  is  wronged  and  angered.  , t

3 Whether  this  sin  into  our  heart  hath  entered  regard-

ing mother,  father,  son  or  brother,

Auspicious  be  to  us  the  zeal  and  spirit  .of  ’all.  the
fathers  who  are  here  among  us.

HYMN  OX' VI L

That  which  I eat,  a debt  which  still  is  owing,
the  tribute  due  to  Yama,  which  supports  me,
Thereby  may  I be  free  from  debt,  O Agni.  Thou
knowest.  how  to  rend  all  bonds  asunder,

£ Still  dwelling  here  we  give  again  this  present ;
we  send  it  forth,  the  living  from  the  living.
Throwing  away  the  grain  whence  I have  eaten,
thereby  shall  I be  free  from  debt,  O Agni.

3 May  we  be  free  in  this  world  and  that  yonder,  in  the
third  world  may  we  be  unindebted.

May  we,  debt-free,  abide  in  all  the  pathways,  in  all
the*  worlds  which  Gods  and  Fathers  visit.

A prayer  for  pardon  of  sin  against  mother,  father,  son,  or  brother.

1 Wealth:  in  the  shape  of  seed-corn.  Viva svdti’s  son  : Yama,  King
of  the  Departed,  son 'of  Yivasvan  or  the  Sun.

2 Yaivasmia  : .son  of  Vivasvan.

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  443.

A prayer  for  freedom  from  Debt.

1 Hue  to  Tama  : see  VI.  116.  1.

3 In  the  third  world  : in  heaven.  Unindebted:  free  from  the  tax
which  new-comers  have  to  pay.  See  III.  29.  1.

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Itiyvela,  III  p.  444.


Mind


: - ^


THE  .ATUARVA-YmA.


HYMN  CXX.

. If  we  have  injured  Air,  or  Earth,  or  Heaven,  if  we
have  wronged  our  Mother  o?  owr  Father,

1 May  Agni  G&rhapatya  here  absolve  us,  and  bear  us
A : up  into- the  world  of  virtue.

2 Earth  is  our  Mother,  Aditi  our  birth-place:  our

brother  Air  save  us  from  imprecation-  !;

Dyaus,  Father,  save  us,  from  the  world  of  Fathers!
My  world  not  lost,  may  I approach  my  kindred.

3 There  where  our  virtuous  friends,  who  left  behind

them  their  bodily  infirmities,  are  happy,

Free  from  distortion  of  the  limbs  and  lameness,  may
we  behold,  in  heaven,  our  sons  and  parents.

HYMN  GIXl|yi  ; ::YM

Spreading.  them  out,  untie  the  snares  that  hold  us,.

Yarupa’s  bonds,  the  upper  and  the  lower.

Drive  from  us  evil  dream,  drive  off  misfortune  ; then
let  us  go.  into,  the  world  of  virtue.

2 If  thou  art  bound  with  cord,  or  tied  to  timber,  fixt
in.  the  earth,  or  by  a word  imprisoned.

Our  Agni  Garhapaiya  here  shall  free  thee,  and  lead
. thee  up  into  the  world  of  virtue.


;


A leaver  for  forgiveness  of  sins  and  for  felicity  hereafter.*

1 Agni  Gdrhapatya the  sacred  fire  perpetually  maintained  by  a
householder  {grihapati),  received  from  Ms  father  and  transmitted  to
. his  son.  „

2'  My  world : my  home  in  heaven:.

3 Compare  III.  28.  5..  sqq.

Translated  by  L;udwlg?  Der  Rigveda-,  IIT.  p.  442,  and  by  Grill,  Hunderfc.
: Lieder,  72,  123..  See  also  Muir,  0.  & Texts,.  V.  pp.  41,  299,  306.


■ A prayer  for  felicity  in  the  other  world-
:. ..  ■l  :.Z7b^e  ; addressed  to  Agni  G&rhapatya,  the  deity  ' of  the  house*,
^holder’s  .sacred  fire.,:


»*-  rim  an/j.i  of  r ft oo k vi,

3 The  two  auspicious  stars  whose  name  is  called

Releasers  have  gone  up.

Send  Amrit  hither,  let  it  come  freeing  the  captive
from  his  bonds !

4 Open  thyself,  make  room  : from  bonds  thou  shalt

release  the  prisoner.

Freed,  like  an  ?nfant  newly  born,  dwell  in  all  path-
ways where  thou  wilt.  '

HYMN  CXXII.

This  'portion  I who  understand  deliver  to  Visvakar*
man  'first-born  son  of  Order.  * h :

So  may  we  follow  to  the  end,  unbroken,  beyond  old
age,  the  thread  which  we  have  given.

2 This  long-drawn  thread  some  follow  who  have  offer-
" ed  in  ordered  course  oblation  to  the  Fathers  :

Some,  offering  and  giving  to  the  friendless,  if  they
can  give  : herein  they  find  their  heaven.

3 Stand  on  my  side  and  range  yourselves  in  order,

ye  two!  The  faithful  reach  this  world  of  S varga.
When  your  dressed  food  hath  been  bestowed  on  Agni,
to  guard  it,  wife  and  husband,  -come  together !

4 Dwelling  with  zeal  I mo'unt  in  spirit  after  the  lofty

sacrifice  as  it  departeth.

■ , ■ Ah  <*

3 Rcleo.sers : see  II.  8.  1.  * *

4 In  tbs  first  line  Amrit,  the  Water  of  Life,  is  addressed,  and  itsd-,

the  second  the  person  who  is  to  he  benefited.  ; *

, Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p 442.

. ' A -prayer  for  felicity. in  the  other  world.  _ . ' *■ ' . ■.

1 VisvaKarman : the  Ommfio  ; the  architect  of  the  universe,  a deity
closely  resembling  Prajapati  the  Lord  of  Life  an<f  often  not  distmgmt '
shed  from  him.  The  thread  which  toe  have  given  : the  thread  of  life
which  we  hand  on  to  our  children.  4 Let"  not  my  thread,  while  I
weave  song,  be  severed,  nor  my  work’s  sum,  before  the  timer  .be


' 'BJMN:'.  123,] ' ' ; ■ ' TM E A Til  A B FA- VEDA


Agni,  may  we,  beyond  decay,  invited,  in  the  third
heaven,  feast  and  enjoy  the  banquet.

5 These  women  here,  cleansed,  purified,  and  holy,
I place  at  rest,  singly,  in  hands  of  Brahmans.

May  Indra,  Marut-girt,  grant  me  the  blessing  I long
for  as  I pour  you  this  libation.

HYMN  CXXni.

Ye  who  are  present,  unto  you  I offer  this  treasure
brought  to  us  by  J&tavedas.

Happily  will  the  sacrificer  follow  : do  ye  acknowledge
him  in  highest  heaven.

2 Do  ye  acknowledge  him  in  highest  heaven  : ye  know

the  world  here  present  in  assembly.

In  peace  will  he  who  sacrifices  follow : show  him  the
joy  which  comes  from  pious  actions.

3 Gods  are  the  Bathers,  and  the  Fathers  Gods.  I am

the  very  man  I am.

4 I cook,  I give,  I offer  up  oblation.  From  what

I gave  let  me  not  be  disparted.

5 O King,  take  thou  thy  stand  in  heaven,  there  also

let  that  gift  be  placed.

Eecegnize,  King,  the  gift  "which  we  have  given,  and
be  gracious,  God  !


5 You:  Visvakarman,  Agni,  and  Indra.
Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  432.


A prayer  for  felicity  in  heaven.

.1  Ye  who  are  present:  Gods  who  attend  the  sacrifice.  Follow  : to
.heaven,  and  enjoy  the  reward  of  his  sacrifice  there.  See  YI.  122.  4.

2 The  j&y  which  comes  from  pious  actions  : isht&p&ridm  ; see  II,
12.  4.  note.

5 0 King':  Yama  as  King  of. the  Departed.  •


l:Bpo;K^ri.


* R0M  the  blgh  firmament,  yea,  out  of  heaven  a
water-drop  with  dew  on  me  hath  fallen.

1}  Agni ! share  the  merit  of  the  pious,  with  vigour,
milk,  and  hymns  and  sacrifices.

2 ItjsJ,a  fruit  if  ai)y  tree  hath  dropped  if,  a breath,
if  from  the*sky  it  hath  descended.

Where  it  hath  touched  my  body  or  my  garment,
thence  may  the  Waters  drive  Destruction  backward!

S It  is  a fragrant  ointment,  happy  fortune,  sheen  all  of
go  Id,  yea,  purified  from  blemish.

Spread  oyer  us  are  all  purifications.  Death  and'
Malignity  shall  not  subdue  us,

HYMN  CXXV.

Mayst  thou,  O Tree,  be  firm  indeed  in  body,  our
triend  that  furthers  us,  a goodly  hero.

Put  forth  thy  strength,  compact  with  thongs  of
leather,  and  let  thy  rider  win  all  spoils  of  battle*.

2 Its  mighty  strength  was  borrowed  from  the  heaven

and  earth  : its  conquering  force  was  brought  from
sovrans  of  the  wood.  °

Honour  with  sacrifice  the  Car  like  Indra’s  bolt,  the

Car  gut  round  with  straps,  the  vigour  of  the
floods.  «,

3 Thou  bolt  of  Indra,  vanguard  of  the  Maruts,  close

knit  to  Varursa  and  child  of  Mitra,-—

As  such  accepting  gifts  which  here  we  offer,  receive,

U godlike  Chariot,  these  oblations.

An  Omen. from  tixe  sky.  'SMSm

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  498.

Glorification  of  a War- chariot.

AIle  ^Jlnn  ls  taken  from  Rigveda  VL  47.  •">£_. or  n 7*,..,,
vamspate  ; literally,  lord  of  the  wood  : the  chariot. ' v ‘ '

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  HI.  t>.  459,


Tm'ATtfmmmm.  . , sis,

;.  , m ■ ' :.7

HYMN  CXXVI.
fY'/C  Sens  forth  thy  voice  aloud  through  earth  and  heaven,
and  let  the  world  in  all  its  breadth  regard  thee. .

0 Drum,  accordant  with  the  Gods  and  Indra,  drive
thou  afar,  yea,  very  far,  our  foemen.

.2  Thunder  out  strength  and  fill*  us  full  of  vigour,  yea,
thunder  forth  and  drive  away  misfortunes.

Drive  hence,  O Drum,  drive  thou  away  mischances.
Thou  art  the  fist  of  Indra,  show  thy  firmness.

3 Conquer  those  yonder  and  let  these  be  victors.  Let
the  Drum  speak  aloud  as  battle’s  signal.

Let  ‘our  men,  winged  with  horses,  fly  together.  Let
our  ear-warriors,  Indra  ! be  triumphant.

HYMN  CXXVII.

Op  abscess,  of  decline,  of  inflammation  of  the  eyes,
O Plant,

Of  penetrating  pain,  thou  Herb,  let  not  a particle
remain.

2 Those  nerves  of  thine,  Consumption!  which  stand
closely  hidden  in  thy  groin —

1 know  the  balm  for  that  disease:  the  magic  cure  is

Slpudru.  f f YY’V


Glorification  of  the  War-drum.  t A.-AW '

1 The  hymn  is  taken,,  with  variants,  from  Rigveda  VI.  47,  29  —31.
3 Those ; the  enemy.  These : our  own  men.


1 A charm  to  banish  various  diseases.  * , ; A A ; ;;  -;v7'b  ^ '

I Abscess:  vidradkd  ; probably  the  same  as  bidradhi  ; c internal
abscesses  of,  the- abdomen.1 * * * * * 7 — Wise,  Hindu  System  of  Medicine,  p.  210.

Decline:  balasa;  see  IV.  9.  8.  Inflammation  of  the  eyes:  I6kita<

Penetrating  pain  : visa!  galea,

ivf;,‘2;t:The:,sick  man  is '.addressed,  the  apostrophe  to  ■personified  Consuihpr

tion  being  parenthetical.  Sipudru  ; apparently  some  unknown  tree  ,qv

plant.  The  word  does  not  occur  elsewhere.


THE  HYMNS  OF


[BOOK  VI.


: si!  W!

, If  s W

i jjj  fl

ill


IH


rh  l /J  •&


3 We  draw  from  thee  the  piercing  pain  that  penetrates
and  racks  thy  limbs,

That  pierces  ears,  that  pierces  eyes,  the  abscess,
and  the  heart’s  disease.

Downward  and  far  away  from  thee  we  banish  that
unknown  decline.

HYMN  CXXVIIL

What  time  the  heavenly  bodies  chose  the  Weather
Prophet  as  their  King,

They  brought  him  favouring  weather,  and,  Det  this
be  his  domain,  they  said.

2 May  we  have  weather  fair  at  noon,  may  'We  have

weather  fair  at  eve,

Fair  weather  when  the  morning  breaks,  fair  weather
when  the  night  is  come.

3 Fair  weather  to  the  day  and  night,  and  to  the  stays

and  sun  and  moon,

Give  favourable  weather  thou,  King,  Weather
Prophet,  unto  us,  °

3 Unknown  decline:  ajn&tayakshmd ; see  III.  11.  1.

The  hymn,  with  exception  of  the  last  line  which  appears  to  be  a
later  addition,  has  been  translated,  with  much  information  regarding
the  diseases  mentioned,  in  Altindisches  Leben,  p.  386.  °

A prayer  for  Fair  Weather.

1 The  heavenly  bodies : nakshairdni ; the  stars  and  constellations
regarded  as  the  controllers  of  the  weather.  The  moon  is,  even  now
similarly  regarded  by  some  people.  The  Weather  Prophet : sakadhi
mam;  literally  ‘him  of  the  dung-smoke,’  one  who  foretells  the
weather  by  the  way  in  which  smoko  rises  from  a fire  of  cow-dung.

■?ai'-adhuma  was  an  old  Brahman,  who,  as  supposed  to  have  the
power  or  foretelling  the  weather,  was  naturally  regarded  as  its  c mtroller,

Thc  hyiml  is  PrescribefJ  in  the  Kausika-Sfitra,  XXX,  13,  as  part  of
m.\  ritual  of  a merchant  when  about  to  start  on  an  expedition.  I (■  t;i ,

' boea  transl  ited  and  thoroughly  discussed  by  Prof.  Bloomdold  I in  eri-
°an  Journal  of  Philology,  VII.  pp.  484-488).  See  * Iso  Wt  ber.Oinma
et  lorfcnta,  p.  3t>3,  and  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Lobon,  p,  353,


HYMN  m,]  \ , THE  ATHABVA-VMDA,  317

^0M  . . ' ■% .

4 Be  worship  ever  paid  to  thee,  O Weather  Prophet,
King  of  Stars,

Who  gavest  us  good  weather  in  the  evening  and  by
night  and  day  1

HYMN  CXXXX.

With  fortune  of  the  Sisu  tree — with  Indra  as  my
friend  to  aid —

I  give  myself  a happy  fate.  Fly  and  begone,
' Malignities  1 » *

2 That  splendour  and  felicity  wherewith  thou  hast

excelled  the  trees —

Give  me  therewith  a happy  fate.  Fly  and  begone,
Malignities  !

3 Blind  fortune,  with  reverted  leaves  that  is  deposited

in  trees —

Give  me  therewith  a happy  fate.  Fly  and  begone,
Malignities,

HYMN  CXXX.

This  is  the  Xpsarases’  love-spell,  the  conquering
resistless  ones’.

Send  the  spell  forth,  ye  Deities!  Let  him  consume
with  love  of  me.


A charm  to  obtain  sucpess  and  happiness.

1 Sisu : Dalbergia  Sisu ; commonly  spelt  Sissoo  : a stately  timber
36  common  in  Bengal  and  Northern  India.  For  rapid  growth,
auty,  and  usefulness  few  trees  can  be  compared  with  it.

3 With  reverted  leaves  : referring  to  the  plant  called  Aparnarga.  See


i l He  conquering  resistless  ones’ : rathajkdm  rdlhctjiteyfndm  : the
hardly  explicable.  See  Grill,  who  reads  instead”  artkajUdm
a 1 - translates  c Der  altgewohnb  ausrichfcigeij/

Nl’ranslated  ^yWeber,  Indisehe  Studien,  V.  p.  244,  by  Ludwig,  Mer
P,*"'S.15V  and  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  prx  .‘58, »/


; [book  :yi.


‘ / ‘ THE  HYMN'S.  OF" : /

I pray,  may  he  remember  me,  think  of  me,  loving
and  beloved.

Send  forth  the  spell,  ye  Deities ! Let  him  consume
with  love  of  me.

That  he  may  think  of  me*  that  I may  never,  never
think  of  bin),

Send  forth  the  spell,  ye  Deities  ! Let  him  consume
>vith  love  of  me,

Maddfjp  him,  .Maruts,  madden  him;  Madden  him,
madden  him,  O Air.  •

Madden  him,  Agni,  madden  him.  Let  him  consume
with  loy.e  of  me,

HYMN  CXXXI.  ■

Down  upon  thee,  from  head  to  foot,  I draw  the
pangs  of  longing  love.

Send  forth  the  charm,  ye  Deities  ! Let  him  consume
with  love  of  me.

Assent  to  this,  O ‘Heavenly  Grace ! Celestial  Pur-
pose, guide  it  well !

Send  forth  the  charm,  ye  Deities!  Let  him  consume
with  love  of  me.

If  thou  shouldst  run  three  leagues  away,  five  leagues,
a horse’s  daily  stage,

Thence  thou  shalt  come  to  me  again  and  be  the
father  of  our  sons.


A woman's  love-charm..

2 Heavenly  Grace  : Anumati : Favour  of  the  Gods.  See  I.  IB.  2,  note.
Celestial  Purpose  : Akuti;  Plan  or  Intention,  personified  as  a Goddess,

3 Leagues : the  gdjanam , sometimes  regarded  as  a distance  of  four

mors  correctly  estimated

eight  miles.  ' 14

Translated  by  Weber,  Tndische  Studio  n,  V.  p.  244,  and ‘by  Grill,
Himdert  Lieder,  pp.  58^  175,


; '■  1 ■ 1 '

133.]  ^ THE  ATHARVA-VEDA.  ' 319

HYMN  CXXXIL

The  Philter,  burning  with  the  pangs  of  yearning  love,
which  Gods  have  poured  within  the  bosom  of  the
floods,

That  spell  for  thee  I heat  by  Varutja’s  decree.

2 The  charm  which,  burning  with  the  pangs  of  love,

the  General  Gods  have  poured  within  the  bosom
of  the  floods,

That  spell  for  thee  I heat  by  Varuna’s  decree.

3 The  Philter,  burning  with  the  pangs  of  longing,

which  Endr&ijt  hath  effused  within  the  waters’ depth,
That  spell  for  thee  I heat  by  Varupa’s  decree.

4 The  charm,  aglow  with  longing,  which  Indra  and

Agni  have  effused  within  the  bosom  of  the  floods.
That  spell  for  thee  I heat  by  Varuna’s  decree.

5 The  charm  aglow  with  longing  which  Mitra  and

\ aruna  have  poured  within  the  bosom  of  the  floods,
That  spell  for  thee  I heat  by  Varuna’s  decree.

HYMN  CXXXIII.

By  the  direction  of  that  God  we  journey,  he  will
seek  means  to  save  and  he  will  free  us  ;

The  God  who  hath  engirt  us  with  this  Girdle,  he  who
hath  fastened  it,  and  made  us  ready.

2 Thou,  weapon  of  the  Risbis,  art  adored  and  served
■with  sacrifice,

Th’st  tasting  of  the  votive  milk,  Zone,  be  a hero-
slayer  thou !


A woman’s  love-charm.

2 General  Gods : the  Visve  Devas  or  All-Gods.-
Translated  by  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  V,  p.  245:

The  hymn  is  a glorification  of  the  sacred  Girdle.

1 Journey:  pursue  our  course  through 'life.


FllE  HYMNS  OF


[BOOS' YIk

3 As  I am  now  Death’s  Brahmachari  claiming  out  of

„ the  living  world  a man  for  Yama,  ' : y

So  with  Austerity  and  Prayer  and  Fervour  I bind
this  Girdle  round  the  man  before  me.

4 She  hath  become,  Faith’s  daughter,  sprung  from

Fervour,  the  sister  of  the  world-creating  Rishis;

As  such,  0 Girdle,  give  us  thought  and  wisdom,
give  us  religious  zeal  and  mental  vigour.

5 Thou  whom  primeval  Rishis  girt  about  them,  they

who  made  the  world,

As  such  do  thou  encircle  me,  0 Girdle,  for  long  days
of  life.

HYMN  CXXXIV.

This  Thunderbolt  shall  take  its  fill  of  Order,  scare
life  away  and  overthrow  the  kingdom,

Tear  necks  in  pieces,  rend  the  napes  asunder,  even
as  the  Lord  of  Might  the  neck  of  Vritra.

2 Down,  down  beneath  the  conquerors,  let  him  not

rise,  concealed  in  earth,  but  lie  down-smitten  with
the  bolt.

3 Seek  out  the  fierce  oppressor,  yea,  strike  only  the

oppressor  dead.  1

* Down  on  the  fierce  oppressor’s  head  strike  at  full
length,  0 Thunderbolt !


3 Death's  BrahmacMH  : a religious  student  endowed  with  power  by
Mritviij  the  God  of  Death.

4 She : the  girdle.  World-creating  Rishis:  see  III.  28.  1 ; IV.  I.  2*
Translated  by  Ludwig,,  Der  Krgveda,  III.  p.  432.


A priests  prayer  for  power  to  punish  wrong-doers;

1 This  Thunderbolt:  this  sacrifice,  which  when  employed  against
enemies  is  as  powerful  a weapon  as  the  bolt  of  Indra.  So  Milton
speaks  of  4 sermons,  prayers,  and  fiihnhmtions/  and  George  Herbert
calls  Prayer  * re  versed  thunder/  Lord  of  Might : Indra.

2 Him:  the  wicked  man.

Translated  by  Ludwig*  Der  Rigveda,  IIL  p 448,


EYilN  137.]  THE  A THAR  FA  - VEDA.  * 321

■ . HYMN  CXXXV.

, Whate’erY  eat  I turn  to  strength,  and  thus  I grasp
the  Thunderbolt,  ■

Rending  the  shoulders  of  that  man  as  Indra  shattered
Vritra’s  neck.  ■

2 I drink  together  what  I drink,  even  as  the  sea  that

swallows  ail.

Drinking  the  life-breath  of  that  man,  we  drink  that
man  and  swallow  him.

3 Whate’er  I eat  I swallow  up,  even  as  the  sea  that

swallows  all.

Swallowing  that  man’s  vital  breath,  we  swallow  him
completely  up.

HYMN  CXXXVI.

Born  from  the  bosom  of  wide  Earth  the  Goddess,
godlike  Plant,  art  thou  ;

So  we,  Nitatnt ! dig  thee  up  to  strengthen  and  fix
fast  the  hair.

2 Make  the  old  firm,  make  new  hair  spring,  lengthen

what  has  already  grown.

3 Thy  hair  where  it  is  falling  off,  and  with  the  roots  is

torn  away,

I wet  and  sprinkle  with  the  Plant,  the  remedy  for
all  disease.

HYMN  CXXXVII.

The  Plant  which  J amadagni  dug  to  make  his
daughter's  locks  grow  long,

A priest’s  fulminatlon  against  an  enemy.

A charm  to  promote  the  growth  of  hair.

1 Nitatnt : an  unidentified  plant  with  deep  roots,  and  therefore  sup-
posed to  strengthen  the  roots  of  the  hair.

Translated  by  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  p.  68,  and  by  Grill.
Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  50,  176.  ~ ' ,

A charm  to  promote  the  growth  of  hair.  '

-•"-.Nitatnl ; see  YL  136,  h Jamadagni:  see  .It : 32.  3

cd  as  a magician  as  Virgil  was  in  the  Middle  Ages.  Asita  : see  L U.  4*

21


- ' the  unixs  of

This  same  hath  Yitahavya  brought  to
abode.  , &

2 be  measured  with  a rei
both  extended  arms.

Let  the  black  locks  spr  ing  thick  and  si
like  reeds  upon  thy  head.

3 Strengthen  the  roots,  prolong  the  m

the  middle  part,  0 Plant.  1

Let  the  black  locks  spring  thick  and  si
like  reeds  upon  thy  head.

. HYMN  CXXXVIII.

O Plant,  thy  fame  is  spread  abroad  as
herbs  that  grow.

Unman  for  me  to-day  this  man  thaf  he


“ 11  u 1 n ,ap ec  t n o.u_ the  crest
pressing-stones  deprive  him  of


timer,  Altin-


ppasa


ue  Studion?  V,


IIYMM  140.]  THE  ATIIARVA-VEDA.  323

HYMN  CXXXIX.

; Thoit  hast  grown  up?  a source  of  joy  to  bless  me  with
prosperity.

' A hundred  are  thy  tendrils,  three-and -thirty  thy
descending  shoots.

With  this  that  bears  a thousand  leaves  I dry  thy
heart  and  wither  it.  .

2 Let  thy  heart  wither  for  my  love  and  let  thy  mouth

be  dry  for  me.

Parch  and  dry  up  with  longing,  go  with  lips  that
love  of  me  bath  dried.

3 Drive  us  together,  tawny ! fair!  a go-between  who

wakens  love.

Drive  us  together,  him  and  me,  and  give  us  both  one
heart  and  mind.

4 Even  as  his  mouth  is  parched  who  finds  no  water  for

his  burning  thirst,  y

So  parch  and  burn  with  longing,  go  with  lips  that
love  of  me  hath  dried.

5 Even  as  the  Mungoose  bites  and  rends  and  then

restores  the  wounded  snake,  /

So  do  thou,  mighty  one,  restore  the  fracture  of  our
severed  love.

HYMN  CXL.

Two  tigers  have  grown  up  who  long  to  eat  the
mother  and  the  sire :

A woman's  love-charm.

1 A source  of  joy ; nyastilca  ; the  meaning  of  the  word  is  unknown,  '“r
5 Restores  the  wounded  snake  : the  mungoose  [Yiverra  Ichneumon]  is
popularly  believed  to  protect  itself,  and  cure  its  wounds  received  in
encounters  with  snakes,  by  means  of  a medicinal  plant ; but  it  is  not
now  credited  with  the  chivalrous  generosity  here  ascribed  to  it.

..  Translated  by  Weber,  Inclische  Studien,  V.  p.  247,  and  by  Ludwig,
Der  lligveda,  III.  p.  515.  " ' ■ ' .

. A blessing  on  a child's  first  two  teeth.

Translated  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  49,  176,  and  by  Zimmer  ' :
A.LL,  p.,  321,  ■ vf..-,'-


^ uiMJSs  OF  [BOOK  vi

S°th6s;  and  «“"■  0 J^vcdas,  both

2 barley  be your  food’  «*' *>  beans  and

T’twoSTMthlaH,™0itf  y°“'  *°  y°ur  Port™,  ye
, JUU.  .a  “0t  your  “other  “nd  your  sire

been  £>*  *

_ HYMN  CXLI.

TVashSi^8^  ‘°  “ thel>  s"ste"“oo  bo

; °°mfort  them’  and  En<ta>  &
nponhtheirhears°n  ^ *““*  m,ke  a Pair  by  marls

Ttrreand0iittly.ila'’9  irapressrf:  let  ««

' Ed“  “ G°dS  a"d  AsUraS’  evon  “ “°>-W  men  have
D mlotto  1* ^ » thousands,  J| >■ '


1 the  vessels :
ike  thee  dovv
invite  and  a
th  US)

lyself  up  like
3 the  sea*

Jess  let  thim
adhered  heapf
less  be  thy
at  of  thee.


BOOK  VII


| . HYMN  I.  Vf:

They  who  by  thought  have  guided  all  that  Speech,
hath  best,  or  they  who  with  their  heart  have
littered  words  of  truth,

Made  stronger  by  the  strength  which  the  third
prayer  bestows,  have  by  the  fourth  prayer  learned
the-' "nature  ofdhe  Cow.

2 Well  knows  this  son  his  sire,  he  knows  his  mother
well : he  hath  been  son,  and  he  hath  been  itliberal.

He  hath  encompassed  heaven,  and  air’s  mid-realm,
and  sky  : he  hath  become  this  All  ; he  hath  come
nigh  to  us.


This  introductory  hymn  is  a glorification  of  the  power  of  prayer
and  of  Agni.

1 Or:  hot; .disjunctive  here,  both  clauses  referring  to  the  same  per-
sons. Third  . . . . .fourth  prayer:  £ mystic  formulas  of  heavenly
Ffayer.’ — Victor  Henry.  The  nature  of  the  Cow  : ncima  (name)  mean-
ing  here  mystic  character,  essence,  or  nature.  The  Cow  is  Vak,  Voice,
Speech,  especially  Prayer.  Cf.  * The  Milch-cow’s  earliest  name  they
comprehended5  ( Bigveda  IV.  1.  16).

2 This  son : Agni,  the  offspring  of  Heaven  and  Earth.  Illiberal  ,*
this  is  the  meaning  of  the  word  pun  arm  ay  hah  in  the  only  other  Vedic
hymn  (Atharva-vc&a  V.  11.  2)  in  which  it  occurs,  and  it  may  refer
t<>  Agoi's  flight  from  his  sacrificial  duties  (KV.  L 65.  1 * X.  46.  2.  3)
and  general  reluctate  to  appear,  that  is,  the  difficulty  of  obtaining
fire  by  means  of  tl^vooden  drill.  The  St,  Petersburg  Dictionary  gives
an  opposite  meaning’  to  the  word  in  this  place,  explaining  it,  in  accord-
ance with  an  Indian  commentator,  not  as  1 illiberal/  bur,  as  6 repeated-
ly granting  gifts/  which  is  Agni’s  usual  character.


THE  hymns  of  rB00

HYMN  II.

^scr the

. HYMN  in.

hel£rt5rersl'°r®  forth  hIa  e^oite:

Yeupt  uS:  'Z7J ’T*  fOT  loosing

be  &&£££«  V°«

T hymn  IV.  ■

npw^:i

, ail  thy  three-aad-thirtv  tpim«  & ’ ,
here  loose  these  teom<a  ttP  te^ms  f°r  draw

listen  f am&>  ^ou  who  art  Drnrim


Praise  of  Atharvaft.

1 Atkarvan:  of.  IV.  1.  7.  Atharva,
the  earliest  fire-priest,  is  the  father  of
tified  with  him.  The  youthful:  a free
as  being  continually  reproduced.

Praise  of  Agni  ag  the  San.

1 #*s  stay. -Soma,  is  called  the  most
and  sustainer  of  the  shy ' (Bigveda  D
According  to  the  Ivausika-Sfitra,  XV

P yed  in  a charm  for  victory  in  battle
being  mounted  on  a new  ,J  *


329


'Mtj r ATUAIi VA-VEDA t
HYMN  V.

The:  Gods  adored  the  Sacrifice  with  worship : these
were  the  statutes  of  primeval  ages.

Those  mighty  ones  attained  the  cope  of  heaven*  there
where  the.S&dhyas,  Gods  of  old,  are  dwelling.

2 Sacrifice  was,  was  manifest  among  us : it  sprang  to

life  and  then  in  time  grew  stronger.

Then  it  became  the  deities’  lord  and  ruler : may  it
bestow  on  us  abundant  riches.

3 Where  the  Gods  worshipped  Gods  with  tMter  obla-

tion, worshipped  immortals  with  immortalspirit,
There  in  the  loftiest  heaven  may  we  be  happy,  and
look  upon  that  light  when  Shrya  rises.

4 With  their  oblation,  Purusha,  the  Gods  performed  a

sacrifice.

A sacrifice  more  potent  still  they  paid  with  the
invoking  hymn.

5 With  dog  the  Gods,  perplexed,  have  paid  oblation,

and  with  cow’s  limbs  in  sundry  sacrifices.

Invoke  for  us,  in  many  a place  declare  him  who  "with
his  mind  hath  noticed  this  our  worship.


,v  Tile  hymn  is  a glorification  of  Sacrifice.

1 The  stanza  is  taken,  with  a change  in  the  meaning,  from  Rigveda
I.  164.  60.  It  appears  also  in  IiV.  X.  90.  16.  'Sddhyas  : meaning  pro-
bably, ‘ those  who  are  to  be  propitiated.’  According  to  Yaska  ‘the
Gods  whoso  dwelling-place  is  the  sky.’  In  the  Amnrakos/m  they  are
named  among  the  minor  deities,  but  they  seem  rather  to  be  the  most

ancient  of  the  Gods.

■ ■ " '

4 With  their  oblation , Purusha : see  Eigveda  X.  90,  the  Purwsha-
Sukta  or  hymn  which  describes  the  sacrifice  of  Purusha,  embodied  spirit,
or  Man  personified  and  regarded  as  the  soul  and  original  soyrce  of  the
universe,  the  personal  and  life-giving  principle  in  all  animated  beings  ;
a pantheistic  hymn  which  appears  to  be  an  attempt  to  harmonize  the
two  ideas  of  sacrifice  and  creation,

this;  extraordinary

survived,  Perplexed .*  it  seems  impossible  that  muydk&s  (perplexed*


0m.K  fjl


Aditi  is  the  sky  and  air’s  mid-region',  Aditi  is  the
lather,  son,  and  mother,

Aditi  all  the  Gods  and  the  Five  Nations,  Aditi  what
is  now  and  what  is  future.

2 We  C£*Jl  for  help  the  Queen  of  Law  and  Order,  orcat

mother  of  all  those  whose  ways  are  righteous?

■e  ar-spreacl,  un  wasting,  strong  in  her  dominion,  Aditi
wisely  leading,  well  protecting.

3 ^flf3  mf\Y  we  ascend,  for  weal,  the  vessel,  rowed

good  oars,  divine,  that  never  leaketh,

-barth  our  strong  guard  incomparable  Heaven,
Aditi  wisely  leading,  well  protecting.

4 Let  us  bring  hither  in  pursuit  of  riches,  Aditi  with
ou^  vvorcf  the  mighty  mother,

Her  m whose  lap  the  spacious  air  is  lying:  may  she
afford  ns  J


infatuated)


mfatuated)  can  be  the  right  reading  here.  A substantive  in  tbemstm*
mental  case  is  required  by  the  context.  M.  Victor  Henry  reads  »!?  !.

\vhini  W1  1 ^ 'iGaC^J  t5iat  is’  with  the  horse’s  head  gi  ven  to  Da  Ihvach
gich,  according  to  M.  Bergaigne  (Religion  Vedique  ll  p bs  ttn  ’
bolizos  Agm  or  Soma.  ‘ That  mighty  deed  of  von h for  4 , d L '

“i™”5r40“Uo,S  !!"  1 i"«.  wh”’br’ tG ££&£

ness'  (ibwedal  1J4Ch  kuo,w“  to  ^ou  the  Soma’s  sweet-

arc*

|(jgg|||gf  ’ bUt  tl,e  ™““g  °f  “ «*  'M

A prayer  to  Aditi  for  help  and  protection.

I Aditi : Infinity  personified.  See  I.  9.  1.  note  Tlw  *,

5S**"* 1 “■ m-  “ “■  * ri*“1  A JS22S  tSZ

is  employed  in  the  benediction  of  boats  in  the
1 <x^erh  with  a variant,  from  Ixi&’voda  X A*>  in  * -r


EtMM'8.},


■TEE  ATIURVA-YEEA.


HYMN  VII.

:I  have  : sang  praise  to  Dili's  sons  and  Adiii’s.  those
very  lofty  and  invulnerable  Gods.

For  far  within  the  depths  of  ocean  is  their  home,  and
in  the  worship  paid  them  none  exeelleth  these.

HYMN  VIII.

Go  forward  on  thy  way  from  good  to  better  : Brihas-
pati  precede  thy  steps  and  guide  thee !

Place  this  man  here,  within  this  earth’s  enclosure,
afar  from  foes  with  all  his  men  about  him.


Praise  of  the  Adilyas.  i W&

1 The  poet  gives  two  mothers,  Diti  and  Aditi,  to  the  Adilyas.  The
former  is  a personification,  distinguished  by  no  special  character,  and
unknown  to  the  poets  of  the  Bigveda.  She  is  mentioned  again  in  XL
‘ 3.  4;  XV.  6.  7,  and  18.  4.  The  name  is  evolved  from  Aditi  in  the  same
way  as  Sura,  a God,  is  from  Asura,  a demon.  Those : I omit  to  notice
dv ft  which  in  this  place  is  unintelligible.  M.  Victor  Henry  suggests
nAva,  nine,  although  the  number  of  the  Adityas  is  at  most  eight.  *
Invulnerable : I can  make  nothing  of  the  ananndn&m  of  the  text  which,
read  an-armdndm , would  mean  ‘ free  from  ophthalmia.'  M.  Henry
divides  the  word  a-narmdndm , a word  of  his  own  coinage,  which  might
signify  ‘ who  do  not  sport  and  trifled  I think  one  may  as  well  change
the  word  into  anarvdndm  (unscathed,  unassailed,  invulnerable)  which
is  frequently 'applied  to  the  Gods  in  the  Bigveda.  Ocecm  / the  sea  of  air.
M.  Henry  translates : £ for  their  mysterious  essence  is  that  of  the
colesdal  Ocean.'


y Godspeed  to  a departing  traveller.  -AiHGG
1 Place  ; addressed  to  Brihaspati.

' The  hymn  appears,  with  variations,  in  the  Aitareya-Brahinana,  L 8„
13,  as  an  address  by  the  Hotar  to  the  sacrifice!’,  the  words  Grom.,
good  to  better7  meaning  from  this  world  to  heaven.  By  the  second  line
rhe  Hotar  makes  the  Soma  remain  in  the  sacrificial  court,  and  expels
the  enemy  who  would  injure  the  sacrificer.

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Bigveda,  ILL  p.  13 L


hymn  IX,

Was"j30^n  ta  m°ve  on  distant  pathways  oa
roaas  remote  from  earth,  remote  from  heaven

io  both  most  lovely  places  of  assembly  he  travel*
and  returns  with  perfect  knowledge'

2 Pushan  knows  all  these  realms : may  he  conduct  ns

ar<3  ^ free  from  fear  and  danger.'
Giver  of  blessings,  glowing,  all  heroic,  may  he  the
ai*d  Watchful  go  before  us,  . t * ' p.

3 We  are  thy  praisers  here,  O Pushan : never  let  tta

be  injured  under  thy  protection.

4 Pro5l  6«t  the  distance,  far  and  wide,  may  Phshan

stretch  his  right  hand  forth.  J USJ3ai?

h^isZt  back  0Ur  ,OSt  to  as’  let  with

_ , HYMN  X.

**  ye  choicest.


Faction  recovery  of  lost  property.

: as  tbe  Sun>  all-seeing,  guide  of  travellers,  and
property  in  general.  Both  places  of  assembly:  h
is  1 and  - are  taken  from  Eigveda  X.  17.  6,  5.

I-  ,°r^omjfion-  This  and  the  following  s
ogveda  VI.  54  9,  10.


A prater  tor  the  favour  of  Sarasvatf.
Ex/iaustkss:  sasayiir,  pursuing  the  hare,  is  m
translate  the  reading  sasayd  0f  the  Eigveda

The  stanza,  taken,  with  this  variant,  from
ed  to  soothe  an  mfant  seized  by  Jamblia,  tha
-thing,  t^ce  II.  4.  2,  and  note.


MNNMMi


HYMN  12.]  THE  A THAR VA-VEDA.  <>33

* . HYMN  XL

That  far-spread  thunder,  sent  flUm  thee,  which
eometh  on  all  this  world,  a high  celestial  signal —
Strike  not,  O God,  our  growing  corn  with  lightning,
nor  kill  it  with  the  burning  rays  of  Surya.

HYMN  XII.

In  concord  may  Praj&pati’s  two  daughters,  Gathering
and  Assembly,  both  protect  me.

May  every  man  I meet  respect  and  aid  me.  Fair
be  my  words,  0 Fathers,  at  the  meetings.

2 We  know  thy  name,  0 Conference : thy  name  is

, interchange  of  talk.  ' ■ ; V

Let  all  the  company  who  join  the  Conference  agree
with  me.

3 Of  these  men  seated  here  I make  the  splendour  and

the  lore  mine  own.

Indra,  make  me  conspicuous  in  all  this  gathered
company.

4 Whether  your  thoughts  are  turned  away,  or  bound

and  fastened  here  or  there,

We  draw  them  hitherward  again : let  your  mind
firmly  rest  on  me.


A prayer  to  protect  com  from  lightning  and.  drought,

0 God:  addressed  to  Indra,

Translated  by  Ludwig,  III.  463,  and  by  Grill,  66,  178.

A prayer  or  charm  for  influence  at  deliberative  and  religious  meet-
ings. *

1 Gathering : sabha;  meeting  of  the  people  of  a village.  Assembly :
sdmitis  ; a congregation  for  sacrificial  and  religious  purposes,

2 Conference : or  Gathering,

Translated  by  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  V.  439,  by  Ludwig,  III,  253,  and
by  Grill,  15,  178.  See  also  Zimmer,  Altindisuhes  Leben,  p.  173.


[BOOK  VII,


' of  thl  staT"*'  “KeUl  t0  b‘mself  «>e  brightness
S°one“Srae  the  S'°ry  °f  wome“  “i  men  mine

1 A toyyo“mig  “y  ri™18  ’'’t0  behold  me  08  1 <»me

1 Who  *ieef!0rjr  °f  my  foes  38  tW  S"'b  rising,  theirs

■ hymns  xiy

% da^in  shapelT^Sie. treaSUreS’  abunda^  day


A charm  to  win  superiority  over  foes  and
- Theirs  who  sleep ; the  comparison  or  ill
meaning  is,  probably,  as  M.  Henry  says:  I h
by  taking  their  glory  to  myself  in  the  same  j
.prises  late  sleepers.

^ Ludwig)  111  P-  2«>  and  b

A piayei,  for  prosperity,  to  Savitar  as  the  '

l,aild  2 ai'e  taken  from  SAmaved
••  r .U  the  uua.  Parent;  savltaram.  Of  In

: llter:;”j>  two  bowls  used  in  the  pren  r
‘’Actively,  heaven  and  earth  regarded  ■-
US  \-C-y:  AvA  as  suggested  in  Pro  • IV  ••
most  oc  read  instead  of  the  h;iPat  of  the  text


i choose,  O Savitar,  that  glorious  favour,  with
fruitful  energy  and  every  blessing,

Even  this  one’s  teeming  cow,  erst  milked  by  Kan va,
thousand-streamed,  milked  for  happiness  by  the

mighty.

HYMN  XVI.

Increase  this  man  Brihaspati ! Illume  him,  OSavitar,
for  high  and  happy  fortune.

Sharpen  him  throughly  though  already  sharpened  :
with  glad  acclaim  let  all  the  Gods  receive  him.

HYMN  XVII.

May  the  Ordainer  give  us  wealth,  Lord,  ruler  of  the
world  of  life  : with  full  hand  may  he  give  to  us.

4 The  Wanderer:  the  Sun  who  journeys  round  the  sky.

The  hymn  abounds  in  plays  upon  the  root  su,  from  which  Savitar
and  savtman  (creation)  arc  formed,  and  which  means  ‘ to  press  or  pour
out  (feoma  juice)  as  well  as  ‘to  send.'  Hence  in  the  ritual  oKhe
At  m vans  the  two  stanzas  are  recited,  during  the  purification  of  the
feoma  j uice,  by  a priest  who  holds  gold  in  his  hand  or  wears  a «-old
vfitli  reference  to  the  golden-ha nded  of  the  text.

A charm  for  divine  favour  and  felicity,

I This  one’s : Savitar’s.  Goto:  the  emblem- of  plenty  Kama-  the
famous  itislii  of  the  Eigveda.  1 y -wi'  Uie

A prayer  for  prosperity.

’S.’ra^r  - <**

A prayer  for  wealth  and  children

tJ  • ■ J $ 1 dil  ■'  '■  ' )h  ■ regarded  in  this  hymn  more  iwoiaiw


0  . the  hymns  op  [ book  vii

. 2 Mper£hhaWar  W0Iahi^  henceforth  ina-

Meve^boo““  ^ hV°m  °f  the  G',d  who  ffiveth

3 To  hlm.  ma?  D^tar  grant  al]  kinds  of  blessings  who

craving  cmldren,  serves  him  in  his  dwelling?

+i  a^ythe  podf.  invest  with  life  eternal,  yea  all
the  Gods  and  Aditi  accordant*

4 MPraSnhrr  Fa  PIeTase  ' Savitar,  HAti,  DhAtar,

1  rajapati,  and  Agm  Lord  of  Treasures.

Ma7  Tvashtar,  Vishnu,  blessing  him  with  children
give  store  of  riches  to  the  sacrifices  ' " ?

. , HYMN  XVIII.

' ftSTcS’  Pri'Uvi’ and

Unbtrea8t°o?i?eatvXf0r  th°“  "““‘-’^bottle  of  p

2  Lot  not  the  Sun’s  heat  burn,  nor  cold  destroy  her
Let  Earth  with  all  her  quietening  drops burs/opS
Even  for  her  the  waters  flow,  and  fatness  • whore  :
feoma  ls  even  there  is  bliss  for  ever  ’ h


. . ,4  Rati;  gift;  the  Oblation  personified  as  a Goddess.
A prayer  for  rain,

i meaning  here  not  Earth  personified,  b

f6  midd;°  ^ or  firmament:  dvirtipd  prithivl,  says  Sa
ms  two  forms.  < Thou,  of  a truth,  0 Prithivi,  bearesfc
rends  the  hdls:  Thourich  in  torrents  who  with  mig

Z ' one  V.  84.  1).  The  bottle  o}

*“•’  / Wft0  can  numbGr  the  clouds  in  wisdom*  fh-\


HYMN  20.]


337


TIIE  ATHABYA-YEDA.

j!  HYMN  XIX.

PeajApati  engenders  earthy  creatures : may  the
benevolent  Ordainer  form  them,

Having  one  common  womb,  and  mind,  and  spirit.

He  who  is  Lord  of  Plenty  give  me  plenty  !

HYMN  XX.

Anumati  approve  to-day  our  sacrifice  among  the
, Gods !

May  Agni  bear  mine  offerings  away  for  me  the
worshipper.

2 Do  thou,  Ani&nati  1 approve,  and  grant  us  health

and  happiness.

Accept  the  offered  sacrifice,  and,  Goddess,  give  us
progeny.

3 May  he  approving  in  return  accord  us  wealth  in-

exhaustible with  store  of  children.

Never  may  we  be  subject  to  his  anger,  but  rest  in
his  benevolence  and  mercy.  „

4 Thy  name  is  easy  to  invoke,  good  leader ! approved,

Anumati ! and  rich  in  bounty.

Source  of  all  boons  J fill  up  therewith  our  worship,
and,  Blest  One ! grant  us  wealth  with  goodly
heroes,  .


■ A prayer  for  prosperity.

1 Having  one  common  womb ; or,  One*  common  womb  (or  source)
have  they : the  adjective  s&yonayas  being  in  the  nominative  case,

A prayer  for  prosperity  and  happiness.

' 1 Anumati : Favour,  or  divine  Grace  personified.  See  I.  18.  2,  note.
According  to  the  ritualists  Anumati " is  also  the  ■ personification  : of  ; the
fifteenth  clay  of  the  Moon’s  age,  and  sometimes  the  New  Moon.

,\J!e ; Rudra.  ' •

As  Anumati  is  a deity  connected  with  procreation  the  hymn  Ls  mod
in  eharn  s o re  mi  sterility  in  cows


22


■r


38  [BOOK  YI 1:

5 Anumati  hath  come  to  this  our  worship  well-formed
• to  give  good  lands  and  valiant  heroes  :

For  her  kind  care  hath  blessed  us.  God-protected,
may  she  assist  the  sacrifice  we  offer.

6 Anumati  became  this  All,  whatever’  standeth  or

walketh,  everything  that  moveth.

May  we  enjoy  thy  gracious  love,  0 Goddess.  Regard
us.  0 Anumati,  with  favour.

HYMN  XXI.  ‘

With  prayer  come  t "

.be  is  the  peerless  one,  far-reachim?,


all  together  to  the  Lord  of  Heaven  :

rf  n j i ------  - > guest  of  men.

Jtle,  Grocf  ot  ancient  time,  hath  gained  a recent  thrall  :
to  him  alone  is  turned  the  path  which  all  must  tread.

HYMN  XXII.

Unto  a thousand  sages  he  hath  given  sight : thought,
light  is  he  in  ranging  all.

2 The  Bright  One  hath  sent  forth  the  Dawns,  a closely
gathered  band,

Immaculate,  unanimous,  brightly  refulgent  in  their
homes,

HYMN  XXIII.

The  fearful  dream,  and  indigence,  the  monster,  the
malignant  njigs,

An  female  fiends  of  evil  name  and  wicked  tona'ue
we  drive  afar.  a

A stanza  to  be  recited  at  a funeral.

1 The  Lord  of  heaven  ; here’Yama  must  bo  meant  A.  recent  thrall :
the  man  whose  funeral  rites  are  being  performed.

To  Savitar,  or  to  Tama  invested,  with  some  of  Savitar’*  attributes.

. 1 If>  as  M;  VLtor  Homy  thinks,  Tama  is  the  God  of  the  hymn,
sight  means  life  in  the  world  of  the  departed.  The  hymn  is  “very
difficult,  and  no  sense  can  be  made  of  it  without  alterations  of  the
text.  I have  adopted  those  proposed  by  M.  Henry,  Le  Livro  VJ i do  i!
Atharva-veda,  p,  62.

A charm  to  banish  fiends  and  troubles.


THE  A TIIA  B 7 A - VEDA


HYMN  26.]

HYMN  XXIV.

What  treasure  hath  been  dug  for  us  by  Indra,  by
Agni,  Visvedevas,  tuneful  Maruts,

On  us  may  Savitar  whose  laws  are  faithful,  Prajapatl,
and  Heavenly  Grace  bestow  it.  '

' " . HYMN  XXV.

The  early  morning  prayer  hath  come  to.  Vishnu  and
Varuna,  Lords  through  might,  whom  none  hath
equalled,

Gods  by  whose  power  the  realms  of  air  were  stablished,
strongest  and  most  heroic  in  their  vigour.

2 The  early  prayer  hath  ever  come  to  Vishnu  and
Varuna  by  that  God’s  high  power  and  statute

In  whose  control  is  all  this  world  that  shineth,
all  that  hath  powers  to  see  and  all  that  breatheth.

' HYMN  XXVI.

I will  declare  the  mighty  deeds  of  Vishnu,  of  him
who  measured  out  the  earthly  regions.

Who  propped  the  highest  place  of  congregation,
thrice  setting  down  his  footstep,  widely  striding.

2 Loud  boast  doth  Vishnu  make  of  this  achievement,  like
some  wild  beast,  dread,  prowling,  mountain-roaming.

May  he  approach  us  from  the  farthest  distanpe.


A prayer  for  riches.

Tuneful : alluding  to  the  wild  music  of  the  winds,  the  ‘thunder-
psalm’  of  the  Storm-Gods.

A prayer  of  praise  to  Vishnu  and  Varuna.

2 That  God’s : Surya  the  Sun-God  is  intended.

; Translated  by.  Ludwig,  Def'Rigveda,  III.  p.  429.

f In  praise  of  Vishnu.  iiififtfT,  ' ; r:

1 The  stanza  is  found  in  Ttigveda  I.  154.  1,  The  highest  place  of
congregation ; heaven,  where  the  Gods  are  assembled.  Thrice : at


40  Tins  HYMNS  OF  [ BOOK  VIL

3 Thou  within  whose  three  wide-extended  paces  all

worlds  and  creatures  have  their  habitation,

Drink  oil,  thou  homed  in  oil ! promote  the  saerificer
more  and  more.

4 Through  all  this  world  strode  Vishnu  : thrice  -his

foot  he  planted,  and  the  whole
Was  gathered  in  his  footstep’s  dust.

5 Vishnu  the  guardian,  he  whom  none  deceiveth,  made

three  steps,  thenceforth
Establishing  these  high  decrees.

6 Look  ye  on  Vishnu’s  works,  whereby  the  friend  of

Indra,  close-allied,

Hath  let  his  holy  ways  be  seen.

7 The  princes  evermore  behold  that  loftiest  place  where

Vishnu  is,

Like  an  extended  eye  in  heaven.

8 From  heaven,  O Vishnu,  or  from  earth,  O Vishnu,

or  from  the  great  far-spreading  air’s  mid-region,
Fill  both  thy  hands  full  of  abundant  treasures,
and  from  the  right  and  left  bestow  them  freely.


3 The  first  line  occurs  in  Eigveda  I.  154,  2.  Homed  in  oil ; dwell-
ing in  the  molten  butter  used  in  sacrifice,

4 This  stanza  and  the  three  that  follow  it  are  found  in  Eigveda  I,
22,  17 — 20.  hi  Ids  footstep's  dust ; so  mighty  -was  Vishnu  that  the
dust  raised  by  his  footsteps  enveloped  the  whole  world,  or  the  earth
was  formed  from  the  dust  of  his  strides.

7 The  princes:  Saris,  wealthy  householders  who  institute  s icrifices
and  rem  merate  the  officiating  priests.

See  Muir,  0,  S.  Texts,  IV,  63,  68,  where  stanzas  1—7  are  translated
and  thoroughly  discussed.


Tllti  a THA  B FA-  V ft  Da


Men  29:.]

HYMN  XXVII.

Ma£  Id  ft  with  her  statute  dwell  beside  us,  she  in
whose  place  the  pious  purge  and  cleanse  them.

She,  mighty,  Soma-decked,  whose  foot  drops  fatness,
meet  for  All-Gods,  hath  come  to  aid  our  worship.

HYMN  XXVIII.

Blest  be  the  Broom,  may  the  Mace  bring  a blessing,
and  may  the  Altar  and  the  Hatchet  bless  us.

Worshipful  Gods,  may  they  accept  this  worship,
loyers  of  sacrifice,  and  sacrifieers.

* HYMN  XXIX.

This  is  your  glorious  might,  Agni  and  Vishrra  ! Ye
drink  the  essence  of  the  mystic  butter,

Placing  in  every  home  seven  costly  treasures.  Let
your  tongue  stretch  to  take  the  offered  fatness.

2 Ye  love  the  great  law,  Agni  Vishpu ! joying,  ye  feast
on  mystic  essences  of  butter,

Exalted  in  each  house  with  fair  laudation.  Let  your
tongue  stretch  to  take  the  offered  fatness.


A prayer  to  Ida,  Goddess  of  Devotion.

I Idd:  also  I] a and  Ila,  usually  mentioned  in  connexion  with
Sarasvatf,  and  Bharafci  or  Mahi,  all  being  deities  of  sacred  speech,
prayer,  and  praise.  See  V.  12.  8.  m ■

Her  place  is  the  sanctuary  or  chapel  in  which  libations  and  sacrifices
are  offered.

Translated  by  Ludwig,  III.  p.  433.

In  praise  of  the  sacrificial  utensils.

Broom  : vedds  ; a bunch  of  stiff  grass  tied  up  for  sweeping  the  place
of  sacrifice.  ' , ./y;'. o’;  >'.G' ' ' / '

to  keep  off  improper  visitants,  Gods  : the  sacrificial  imple-
ments, deified.

A hymn  to  Agni  and  Vishnu.

1 Seven : used  indefinitely  for  a great  number.  Four  tongue  ; the
sacrificial  hue  "


tee  hymns  of
HYMN  XXX.

Heaves,  Earth,  and  Mitra  here  have
eyes  to  be  anointed  well,

S“balmedf  ra!™a,’aSpat!  ‘ care  that
HYMN  XXXI.

Rouse  us  to-day  0 Indra,  Maghavan
tby  best  possible  and  varied  succours
May  he  who  hateth  us  fall  low  beneath'


[BOON  VI/,


prayer  for  long  life,  children,  and  riches.


I-mm  37.]  ' THE  AT11ABVA-YEDA .

HYMN  XXXIY.

Agni,  drive  off  my  rivals  bom  and  living,  repel  those
yet  unborn,  0 J&tavedas,

Cast  down  beneath  my  feet  mine  adversaries.  ■ In
Aditi’s  regard  may  we  be  sinless.

HYMN  XXXV.

Subdue  with  conquering  might  his  other  rivals,  those
yet  unborn  repel,  0 J4tavedas.

For  great  felieity  protect  this  kingdom,  and  in  this

* man  let  all  the  Gods  be  joyful.

HYMN  XXXVI.

Sweet  are  the  glances  of  our  eyes,  our  faces  are  as
smooth  as  balm.

Within  thy  bosom  harbour  me ; one  spirit  dwell  ill
both  of  us !

IJS  HYMN  XXXVII.  ' .

With  this  my  robe,  inherited  from  Mann,  I envelop
thee,

So  that  thou  mayst  be  all  mine  own  and  give  no
thought  to  other  dames.


A prayer  for  freedom  from  sin,  and  the  overthrow  of  enemies,  ‘

— *

A prayer  for  the  prosperity  of  a King  and  his  kingdom,  ,
Stanzas  2 and  3 have  a totally  different  object.  See  Appendix.

A charm  to  be  pronounced  by  bride  and  bridegroom.

Smooth  as  balm  ; the  pair  anoint  each  other’s  eyes  as  part  of  the
marriage  ceremony  (Kausika-Sutra  LXXIX.  2).

,,  .Translated  by  Grill,  pp.  55,  179,  ;

y;  'A  nuptial  charm,  spoken  by  the  bride.  "

■■■  From  Mann : the  father  of  mankind,  Man,  the  Old  German  Mannus,

; with, reference ■ to  the  '.great  antiquity . of  ■ the  custom.  See'  MV  'Henry’s'


***  UXMSS  OF  [book  ?IL

HYMN  XXXVIII.

1 DIG  this  Healing  Herb  that  makes  my  lover  look
on  me  and  weep  ; - J

T hl“oC“nS  return  and  kind1^  *~b

2 TwaSmtheS,‘he  ASUrldreW  Indra  d0™‘

With  this  same  Herb  I draw  thee  close  that  Imav
be  most  dear  to  thee.  1

3 ThoTthf Sun  Peer  °f  S°ma’  Jea’  th°U  arfcthe  equal

Ttei”isr Gods  111011 : therefcre « «"

4 1 tVLTuylil6: not  thou : speak  thou
T fenttherlSlr  °“l7  m!n°’  a”d  nCTer

5 Iffromm?n,  &r  ber°“d  ««  rivers,  faraway

^eSvf^1  S?em  *°  bifid  thee  fas‘  a“d  bring

tnee  back  my  prisoner.  °

. HYMN  XXXIX

::  Mt[addpn,Wbw?tVn  °Ur  home  the  master  of  riches,
gladdening  with  ram  m season,

ffif’„f3 4 S * *^ngiWi!8?d'JCeleftiaI’  dr°PP!”K  moisture,
-tsuil  of  the  plants *and  embryo  of  waters.

A maiden’s  love-charm.  ””  ""  ~~~  ------ — — -v

3 Thou:  addressed  to  the  plant.

4 Addressed  to  the  man  she  loves.

if9Weber’  1 S'  V-  249>  hJ  Ludwig,  III.  515,  mid  by

A sacrificial  charm  for  rain  and  prosperity,

or,  w-etuhv  Muter


atMi?  4i.j


We  call  Sarasv4n,  under  whose  protection  all  cattle
wander,  to  preserve  and  aid  us,

Him  in  whose  ordinance  abide  the  waters,  to  whose
Command  the  Lord  of  Plenty  listens.

Abiding  here  let  us  invoke  Sarasv&n,  the  seat  of
riches,  glorious,  wealth-increaser,

Him  who  inclines  and  gives  to  him  who  worships,
the  rich  p ossessor  &nd  tho  Lord  of  FuIugss.

HYMN  XLI.

Observing  men,  and  viewing  home,  the  Falcon  hath
cleft  his  swift  way  over  wastes  and  waters.


nis  nnnrs  of

%/r  i ■ 1%00R  Til

May  he,  with-Indra  for  n r • ,

"itberi^^~^om-

MATTER  and  drive  awsv  qXLI1'  , .

^ the  sioi-
£zztt£T;hr-™-  and  eve“

otfree  Mdbd'r  “d  Eu<H

W stiIJ  dentin omeperSo^mitted’  whioh  ™


f1  Sln  and  sickness.
h variations,  from  Eia'veda  Vr  V

w‘  taken  WeST  j7,

mayours  be  excellent  and  hap
?.  addressed  to  Parjanya.
thunder-cloud.  WW  • +,

S

Parjanya  (E.  V.  VlflO^lf11}

iwi*0Stail2ai«tohex


f.-ag


EYMN  46.]


THE  ATEARYA-YEDA.


Deep  within  this  three  words  are  laid  : among  them
one  hath  flown  off  even  as  the  sound  was  uttered.

HYMN  XLIY.

Ye  twain  have  conquered,  and  have  not  been  van-
quished : not  either  of  the  pair  hath  been  defeated.

Ye,-  Indra  Vishnu,  when  ye  fought  your  battle ;
produced  this  infinite  with  three  divisions.

* - ' HYMN  XLV.

Brought  hitherward  from  Sindhu,  from  a folk  of
every  mingled  race,

Fetched  from  afar,  thou  art  I deem,  a balm  that
cureth  jealousy.

2 As  one  with  water  quencheth  fire,  so  calm  this  lover’s
jealousy,  . •

Like  heat  of  fire  that  burneth  here,  or  flame  that
rageth  through  the  wood.

HYMN  XLVI.

O broad-tressed  Siniv&li,  thou  who  art  the  sister  of
the  Gods,

Accept  the  offered  sacrifice,  and,  Goddess,  grant  us
progeny.


In  praise  of  Indra  and  Vishnu.

This  infinite  with  three  divisions : the  vast  world  with  all  its  crea-
tures ; the  three  divisions  are  heaven,  firmament,  and  earth.

The  stanza,  taken  with  variants  from  B.  V.  VI.  69.  8,  is,  according
to  Kausika-feutra  XLtH.  0,  to  he  used  as  a charm  to  reconcile  two


A charm  against  Jealousy.

1 Sindhu : the  Indus.  From  afar : obtained  with  difficulty,  and
therefore  more  efficacious.

Translated  by  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  V.  p.  250,  by  Ludwig,  III.
514.  and  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  29,  180.


A charm  for  offspring  and  prosperity.

1 Stanzas  1 and  2 are  taken  from  Eigveda  II.  32.  6.  7.  Sirdvdli;
a l*mar  Goddess,  the  day  of  New  Moon  personified,  who  aid,-  the  birth
Of  elpldren  Soe  II.  26.  2.


*


. j I


iili


i:


348


THE  JIT  MRS  OF


[BOoM'tiir

2 Present  the  sacrifice  to  her,  to  Simvall,  Queen  of  men*
Beautiful-fingered,  lovely-armed,  prolific,  bearing

many  a child.

3 Thou  who  as  Queen  of  men  art  Indra’s  equal,  a God-

dess coming  with  a thousand  tresses,

To  thee  our  sacrifices  are  performed,  O Consort  of
Yishiju.:  Goddess,  urge  thy  Lord  to  bounty  !

HYMN  XLVIL  *

Oft  in  this  sacrifice  with  favoured  cry  I call  Kuhfi,
beneficent  Goddess,  skilled  in  all  her  works.

May  she  Vouchsafe  us  wealth  with  every  boon,  and
give  a hero  meet  for  praise  who  gives  a hundred  gifts.
2 Kuhfi,  the  Queen  of  Gods  aiid  immortality,  called  to
assist,  enjoy  this  sacrifice  of  ours  !

Let  her,  desirous  of  our  worship,  hear  to-day  : may
she,  intelligent,  give  increase  of  our  wealth.

■ HYMN  XLVIIL

I call  on  Kaka  with  fair  laud  and  reverent  cry  :

may  she,  auspicious,  hear  us  and  herself  observe.
With  never-breaking  needle  may  she  sew  her  work,
and  send  a glorious  man  who  gives  a hundred  gifts.
2 All  thy  kind  favours,  BAk& ! lovely  in  their  form,
wherewith  thou  grantest  treasures  to.  the  man
who  gives,

With  these  come  thou  to  us  this  day  benevolent,
O blessed  one,  bestowing  wealth  of  thousand  sorts.


A prayer  for  wealth  and  the  birth  of  a son;  .

1 KvM, : the  Goddess  of  the  Waning  Moon,  presiding  over  child-
birth. The  phases  of  the  Moon  represented  by  Kuhu  and  other  lunar
Goddesses  vary  considerably,  as  they  were  not  precisely  determined
till  more  recent  times.

A prayer  for  prosperity  and  the  birth  of  a son.

■ ' 1 The'  hymn  is  taken,  with  variations,  from  Rigveda  II.  3:1. 4h£v
Edkd:  a Goddess  associated  with  childbirth  and  presiding  over  the
actual  day  of  full  moon,  Anumati  (see  II.  26.  2)  being  strictly  the  God-
dess of  the -preceding  day  when  the  moon  rises  one  digit  less  than  full


i


|,,.T , r...,  . i ' | ;


§!


"TE&'ATKAR  VA-VEDA,


HYMN  XLIX,

May  the  Gods’  Consorts  aid  us  of  their  own  free  will,
help  us  to  offspring  and  the  winning  of  the  spoil.

May  Goddesses  who  quickly  listen  shelter  us,  both
those  on  earth  and  they  within  the  waters’  realm.

.2  May  the  Dames,  wives  of  Gods,  enjoy  our  presents.
Eat,  Asvini,  Indrani,  and  Agniyi  ;

May  Rodasi  and  Varunani  hear  us,  and  Goddesses
come  at  the  matrons’  season,

j*  ■ :jY  ; HYMN  L

As  evermore  the  lightning  flash  strikes,  irresistible,
the  tree,

So,  irresistible,  may  I conquer  the  gamblers  with
the  dice.  ...

3 From  every  side,  from  hale  and  sick,  impotent  to
defend  themselves,

May  all  the  fortune  of  the  folk  as  winnings  pass  into
my  hands.

3 I pray  to  Agni,  him  who  guards  his  treasure  : here,
won  by  homage,  may  he  pile  our  winnings.

As ,’twere  with  racing  cars  I bring  my  presents  : duly
with  reverence,  let  me  laud  the  Maruts,

A prayer  for  children  and  booty,

1 Edt : the  name  of  a Goddess,  the  Bright  One,  Clara ; or  the  word

may  he  an  adjective  qualifying  Asvini:  ‘Asvini  the  sovereign:’ .

Henry.  Asvini  is  the  consort  of  the  Asvins,  Ayn&yi  of  Agni,  Modem  of

Rndra.  '-./v

: The  hymn  is  taken  from  Eigveda  V.  46,  7,  8.

. A gambler’s  prayer  for  success  in  gaming.

2 From  hah  mid  sick  : or,  from  quick  and  slow  : from  players  both

and  bad  alike.  *

3 Taken,  with  a.  variant,  from  Eigveda  V.  60.  1 . Duly,  with  rever-

pradakshiiidm  : literally,  turned  rightward  ; making  reverential

salutation  by  eireuniambuktion  from  left  to  right ; the  Gaelic  ueasil.


v 50  hymfs  of  [BOOK  vl

4 Wlfch  thee  to  aid  us  May  we  win.  the  treasure

do  thou  assist  our  side  in  every  battlo.

Give  us  wide  room  and  easy  way,  O Indra  ; brea 1<
d°wn^  O Maghavan,  the  foremen's  valour

5 I have  completely  cleaned  thee  out,  won  from  thee

what  thou  keptest  hack,

As  a wolf  tears  and  rends  a sheep,  so  do  I tear  thy
- stake  away.  J

6 Yea,  by  superior  play  one  gains  advantage : in  time

he  piles  his  spoil  as  doth  a gambler.

He  overwhelms  with  wealth’s  inherent  powers  the
devotee  who  keeps  not  back  his  riches.  1

1 May  we  all,  niuch-inyolred!  repel  with 'cattle  want
that  brings  sin,  hanger  with  store  of  barley

May  we  uninjured,  first  among  the  princes,  obtain
possessions  by  our  own  exertions.

8 Mfott  ?shYto?y  h0ld3  my  Win”%  **>  and  “ M

1 raHha„adgI»irre  ™“r  0f  “tU»

’ ll“‘  Wngrth  fruit  as  We


unite  me  with


11YMN  53.]


THE : A Til  A Ii  FA-  VELA.


351


HYMN  LL

Beiiiaspati  protect  ns  from  the  sinner,  from  rearward,
from  above,  and  from  below  us  !

May  Indra  from  the  front  and  from  the  centre,  as
friend  to  friends,  vouchsafe  us  room  and  freedom.
HYMN  LII.

Hive  us  agreement  with  our  own,  with  strangers  give-
ns unity  : b

Do  ye,  0 Asvins,  in  this  place  join  us  in  sympathy
and  love.  ' ; '■■■  :

2 May  we  agree  in  mind,  agree  in  purpose  : let  us  not
fight  against  the  heavenly  spirit.

Around  us  rise  no  din  of  frequent  slaughter,  nor
Inara’s  arrow  fly,  for  day  is  present !

HYMN  LIII.

As  thou,  Brihaspati,  from  the  curse  hast  saved  us,

’ from  dwelling  yonder  in  the  realm  of  Yama,

The  Asvins*  leeches  of  the  Gods*  O Agni,  have
chased  Death  far  from  us  with  mighty  powers.

2 Move  both  together;  do  not  leave  the  body.  Let-
both  the  breathings  stay  for  thee  united.

-A.  prayer  for  protection.

Ihc  stanza  is  taken,  with  a variant,  from  Rigveda  X,  42,  II,

A prayer  for  peace  and  concord.

2 The  heavenly  spirit : which  inspires  concord.  See  M.  Henryk
w Present:'  We  are  no  longer  ■ exposed  to  danger  from
nocturnal  fiends,  and  can  enjoy  the  safety  and  blessings  of  d 7ylh  ht

djitWir  sirs D" Eisve<K  iil  p- m “d  hy  g"“’ i,m-

f Lord  of  Prayer  including  incantations.  Leeches
l hllth’8(E6.‘  OH?  the  diviHc  pair  of  P^icians,  send

b"**iaS*  inspiration,  aud  expire


352  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VII,

Waxing  in  strength  live  thou  a hundred  autumns.
Thy  noblest  guardian  and  tby  lord  is  Agni.

3 Return,  thy  life  now  vanished  into  distance  ! Return,

the  breath  thou  drawest  and  exhalest !

Agni  hath  snatched  it  from  Destruction’s  bosom;
into  thyself  again  I introduce  it.

4 Let  not  the  yital  breath  he  draws  forsake  him,

let  not  his  expiration  part  and  leave  him.

I give  him  over  to  the  Seven  Rishis  ; let  them  con-
duct him  to  old  age  in  safety.

5 Enter  him,  both  ye  breaths,  like  two  draught-oxen

entering  their  stall.

Let  him,  the  treasure  of  old  age,  still  wax  in  strength,
uninjured,  here.  *

6 I send  thee  back  thy  vital  breath  ; I drive  Consump-

tion far  from  tbee.  ,

May  Agni  here,  most  excellent,  sustain  our  lifeAnj
every  side.  ■ ®

7 From  out  the  depth  of  darkness,  we,  ascending  to  the

highest  heaven,

Have  come  to  the  sublimest  light,  to  Surya,
God  among  the  Gods.

HYMN"  LIV.

We  worship  holy  Verse  and  Song,  by  which  they
carry  out  their  acts.  .

Shining  in  Order’s  seat  these  twain  present  /the
sacrifice  to  Gods,

4 Seven  Eishis : Bharadvaja,  Kasyapa, Gotama,  Atri,  Yasishfcha,  Yisva-
ipitra,  and  Jamadagni,  represented  by  the  seven  stars  of  the  Great  Bear,
Translated  by  Muir,  0,  S.  Texts,  Y.  p.  443,  and  by  Grill,  Hundert
Lieder,  pp.  15,  182,

A charm  to  obtain  knowledge  of  the  Veda,

1 Verse  ; richam  ; recited  verse  or  hymn  of  praise,  contained  in  the  ■
Kigveda.  Song : suma ; sung  or  chanted  hymn,  contained  in  the
Samavcda.  They  carry  out  their  acts:  men  perform  the  rite*  of  divine
worship.  Li  Or  this  seat : in  the  place  of  sacrifice.  The  text  has  only
sddasl,  in  the  scat;  meaning,  specially,  a certain  shed  erected  in  the
sacrificial  enclosure,  9


;S7MNm.}


THE  ATHAEVA-YEDA.


*JI


2 As  I have  asked  about  Verse,  Song,  Sacrifice,
strength,  force,  Yajus-text,

So  never  let  this  lore  that  I have  sought  forsake  me,
Lord  of  Might  !

HYMN  LV.'

Thv  downward  paths  from  heaven,  whereby  thou
hast  raised  all  the  world  to  life,

Give  us  in  gracious  love,  good  Lord  !

HYMN  LVI,

Whether  it  came  from  viper,  from  black  snake  or
. snake  with  transverse  stripes,

Or  Kankaparvan’s  bite,  this  herb  hath  made  the
poison  powerless.

2 Honey -born,  honey-dropping,  rich  in  honey,  honey-
sweet,  this  herb

Is  medicine  that  heals  the  wound  and  kills  the  gnat
that  bites  and  stings.

i 3 Whatever  bit,  or  sucked  thy  blood,  we  summon
thence  away  from  thee

The  ineffectual  poison  of  the  little  sharply-stinging


2 Ashed : my  teacher.  Sacrifice,  strength  : sacrifice  which  is  strength
or  makes  the  sicrificer  powerful.  Yajus-text : sacrificial  formula,  con-
tained in  the  Yajur-Veda,  which  gives  force  to  him  who  employs  it.
Lord  of  Might : saehipate  ■ Lord  of  sichl,  power,  afterwards  personi-
fied as  the  spouse  of  Indra.  Lore:  ve'ddh ; (from  vid,  to  know)  science,
especially  sacred  knowledge,  ritual  and  theological  lore.

A charm  to  ensure  a prosperous  journey.

Thy:  the  stanza  is  addressed  to  the  Sun.  In  the  third pdda  the
tdbhih  of  the  text  is  superfluous.  It  mars  the  metre,  and  appears  to
have  been  inserted  to  correspond  to  yebhir,  whereby,  of  the  second
pdda.


A charm  against  poisonous  bites  and  stings.


fi


1 Eankaparvan : apparently  the  name  of  some  species  of  poisonous

i | snake,  a ' f ' ■

2 The  gnat : mashalca  ; Latin,  musca  ; mosquito  ; Hindi,  mackchhar.

! ' ' 23


. ' l

k r


\lp  / 1 t


54  THE  HYMN'S  OF  {BOOK  Til

4 Thou  here  who  crookest  wicked  jaws,  thou  tortuous,

jointless,  limbless  thing,

These  jaws  thou,  Brahraa^aspati ! shalt  bend  together
like  a reed.

5 This  scorpion  here  that  creeps  along,  low  on  the

ground  and  powerless — -

I have  removed  his  poison  and  then  utterly  demol-
ished him.

6 No  strength  in  thy  two  arms  hast  thou,  nor  in  thy

head,  nor  in  thy  waist :

Then  what  is  that  small  thing  thou  so  viciously
bearest  in  thy  tail  ?

7 The  emmets  make  a meal  of  thee  and  peahens  tear

and  mangle  thee  :

All  ye  are  crying  out,  In  sooth  the  scorpion’s  poison
hath  no  strength.

8 Thou  creature  who  inflictest  wounds  both  with , thy

mouth  and  with  thy  tail,

No  poison  in  thy  mouth  hast  thou:  what  at  thy
tail’s  root  will  there  be  ?

HYMN  LVII.

Whatever  trouble  hath  disturbed  and  shaken  me— I
speak  with  hope,  I move,  imploring,  ’mid  the  folk —
What  harm  my  body  in  myself  hath  suffered,  now-
let  Sarasvati  relieve  with  fatness.


4 Crookest  wicked  jaws  : according  to  M.  Henry*  twistesfc  the  faces
(of  men)  askew.  Brakmanaspati : as  the  God  of  charms  and  prayer.
Shall  bend  together  : according  to  M.  Henry,  to  restore  them  (men^
faces)  to  their  natural,  shape.

7 Peahens  : the  inveterate  enemies  of  snakes.  The  scorpion's  poison
hath  no  strength  : taken  from  Rigveda  I.  191.  16.

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  502,  and  by  ' Grill,
Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  5,  153.

A eharm  for  some  physical  disorder.

1 Trouble:  disorder  of  the  body.  Imploring:  asking  help.  Relieve i
literally,  1111  up,  1


HYMN  59,]  THE  ATHARVA-YEDA.  355

2 Seven  flow  for  him,  the  youth  on  whom  the  Maruts
wait : the  sons  have  taught  the  Father  everlasting
laws.

Both  worlds  are  his  : both  shine  belonging  unto  him.
Both  move  together  : both,  as  his  possession,
thrive.

HYMN  LVIII.

True  to  laws,  Indra  Varuna,  drinkers  of  the  juice,
quaff  this  pressed  Soma  which  shall  give  you
rapturous  joy  S

Let  sacrifice,  your  car,  to  entertain  the  Gods,
approach  its  resting-place  that  they  may  drink
thereof.

2 O Indra  Varuna,  drink  your  fill,  ye  heroes,  of  this
effectual  and  sweetest  Soma.

This  juice  was  shed  by  us  that  ye  might  quaff  it.
On  this  trimmed  grass  be  seated  and  rejoice  you.

HYMN  LIX.

Like  a tree  struck  by  lightning  may  the  man  be
withered  from  the  root,


Who  curseth  us  who  curse  not  him,  or,  when  we
curse  him,  curseth  us.


2 Taken,  with  variants,  from  Eigveda  X.  IS.  5.  Seven  : rivers,  un-
derstood. The  youth : Indra.  The  sons : the  Maruts.  The  Father :
Indra.  Everlasting  laws : which  inculcate  liberality.  The  flow  of  the
full  rivers  symbolizes  generosity,  and  the  Gods  of  storm  and  rain  are
represented  as  having  taught  Indra  the  divine  law  of  liberality,  and
induced  him  to  shatter  the  cloud  and  pour  down  the  treasures  #f  the
sky.  See  M.  Henry’s  note.  -■#

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Eigveda,  III.  p.  446.

An  invitation  addressed  to  Indra  and  Varuna.

1 The  hymn  k taken,  with  variants,  from  Eigveda  VI.  68.  10.  11.
Indra  Varuna:  indrdvarund : a compound  in  the  dual  number  to
signify  the  dual  deity.

. An  imprecation.

CL  VI.  37.  3.  . ■


$$$!: l ; :*f ' : ' TIIM  B v

' HYMN  LX.

I,  prudent,  bringing  power,  a treasure-winner,  with
■ ^ amicable  Gy 6 that  strikes  no  terror,

Come,  praising  and  kind-thougbted,  to  these  houses:
be  not  afraid  of  me,  be  glad  and  joyful.

2 Let  these  delightful  Houses  that  are  rich  in  power

. and  store  of  milk,  ,

Replete  with  wealth  and  standing  firm,  become  aware
or  our  approach.

3 These  Houses  we  invoke,  whereon  the  distant  exile

sets  his  thought,

Wherein  dwells  many  a friendly  heart:  let  them  be
ware  of  our  approach.

4 Thus  greeted,  ye  of  ample  wealth,  friends  who  eniov

delightful  sweets,  3

Jte.  ever  free  from  hunger,  free  from  thirst ! Ye
Houses,  fear  us  not.

5 Kind  greeting  to  the  cattle  here,  kind  greeting

to  the  goats  and  sheep  ! °

Then,  of  the  food  within  our  homes,  kind  greeting
to  the  pleasant  drink ! s °

6 Full  of  refreshment,  full  of  charms,  of  laughter  and

felicity,

Be  ever  free  from  hunger,  free  from  thirst  ! Ye
Houses,  fear  us  not.

7 btay  here,  and  come  not  after  me  : prosper  in  every

Jorm  and  shape.  * J

With  happy  fortune  will  I come.  Grow  more  abun-
dant  still  through  me  ! tlflk


' .


StMM.  04.  j

• ' HYMN  LXI.

Since,  Agni,  with  our  fervent  zeal  we  undergo
austerity,

May  we  be  dear  to  Sacred  Lore,  may  we  be  wise  and
o V live  long  lives.  ■

2 Agni,  we  practise  acts  austere,  we  undergo  austerity.
So  listening  to  Holy  Lore  may  we  grow  wise  and


TIIE  AT  R Alt  FA-  TED  A,


full  of  days.  ,v

HYMN  LXII.

Like  a car-warrior,  Agni  here,  grown  mighty,  Hord
of  the  brave,  Chief  Priest,  hath  conquered  footmen.

Laid  on  earth’s  centre  he  hath  flashed  and  glittered.
Low  may  he  lay  our  enemies  beneath  us.

HYMN  LXIII.  '

We  call  with  lauds  from  his  most  lofty  dwelling
victorious  Agni,  conqueror  in  battles.

May  he  convey  us  over  all  distresses,  may  the  God
Agni  bear  us  past  our  troubles.

HYMN  LX IV.

From  all  that  woe  and  trouble  may  the  Waters  save
and  rescue  me,


verb:  ‘Since,  0 Agni,  thou  hajjfc  warmed  (the  world)  by  (thy)  heat,
(we  also)  we  practise  austerity.’

The  stanza  is  employed  in  the  religious  initiation  ( upanaymmm ) of
a novice,  and  in  the  ceremony  called  goddnam.  (see  II.  13.  1).

A prayer  for  the  overthrow  of  adversaries.

C h i ej  Priest  .*  puvdhitaK  ; usually,  the  domestic  chaplain  and  eoun-
seller  of  a prince.  Earth’s  centre : literally,  on  the  centre,  on  the  earth  ;
meaning  the  fire-receptacle  or  altar.

The  stanza  is  employed  at  the  preparation  of  the  domestic  fire.

A prayer  for  deliverance  from  affliction.

The  stanza


is  employed  at  the  preparation  of  the  domestic  fire.


58  THE  HYMNS  OF  [ BOOK  TIL

Wbate’er  the  Raven,  black  of  hue,  flying  out  hithlr-
ward,  hath  dropped,

2 May  Agni  G&rhapatya  save  and  set  me  free  from  all
this  guilt

Which  the  black  Raven  with  thy  mouth,  O Nirriti,
hath  wiped  away.

HYMN  LXV.

With  retroverted  fruit  hast  thou,  O Ap&m&rga,
sprung  and  grown.

Hence  into  distance  most  remote  drive  every  curse
away  from  me.

2 Whatever  evil  we  have  done,  whatever  vile  or  sinful

act,  :

With  thee.  O Ap&m&rga,  who  lookest  all  ways,
we  wipe  it  off.

3 If  with  the  cripple  we  have  lived,  whose  teeth  are

black  and  lfails  deformed,

With  thee,  O Ap&m&rga,  we  wipe  all  that  ill  away
from  us.  ■ .


A charm  to  avert  an  evil  omen.

1 Raven  : sahmis ; a bird,  especially  a large  carnivorous  bird,
vulture  or  the  like.  The  epithet  4 black  * points  to  the  raven  or  the
carrion  crow.

2 Agni  Gdrhapaiya  : the  sacred  fire  of  the  householder.  See  V.  31.
5.  Thy  mouth,  that  is,  the  raven  himself,  the  evil-boding  herald  of
misfortune.  Hath  wiped  away  : on  himself,  and  so  still  liable  to  fall
upon  the  speaker.  See  M.  Henry’s  not*

Translated  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  41,  186.

' Ait—

A charm  against  imprecations  and  threatened  evils.

1 Apdmdrga  ; the  plant  Achyranthes  Aspera.  See  IV.  17.6.

2 Lookest  all  ways : the  branches  tending  in  one  direction  and  the
fruit  in  another,  the  plant  is  regarded  as  the  symbol  of  vigilant  cii>

"%|hii|)eetfen..;; ' k : k " k ,, : >/lk  krikkp.akiAkA^

3 The  ripple : M.  Henry  observes : 4 This  lame  and  hideous  person-
age, the  incarnation  of  sin  and  disease,  strongly  resembles  our  popular
devil/  We  wipe  away : with  allusion  to  the  derivation  of  Apamarga  •
from  mrij,  to  wipe,  with  the  particles  apa  and  a prefixed.

Tra.nri.ated  by  Grill,  H under*  Lieder,  pp.  38.  186.


HYMN  08.]  THE  ATHARVA-YEDA.  * 359

HYMN  LXVI.

If  it  was  in  the  wind  or  air’s  mid-region,  if  it  was  in
the  trees  or  in  the  bushes,

To  meet  whose  utterance  forth  streamed  the  cattle,
may  that  Celestial  Power  again  approach  us.

' HYMN  LXVI  I.

May  sense  return  to  me  again,  and  spirit,  return  my
Sacred  Power  and  my  possessions  !

Again  let  fires,  aflame  on  lesser  altars,  each  duly
stationed,  here  succeed  and  prosper.

HYMN  LXVI  II.

SarasvatI,  in  thy  decrees,  Goddess,  in  thy  celestial
laws,

Accept  the  offered  sacrifice,  and,  Goddess,  grant  us
progeny.

2 Here  is,  SarasvatI,  thy  fat  libation,  this  sacrifice

passing  to  the  mouth  of  Fathers.

These  most  auspicious  offerings  have  ascended  to
thee  : through  these  may  we  be  full  of  sweetness,

3 Be  kind  and  most  auspicious,  be  gracious  to  us>

SarasvatI.  May  we  be  ever  in  thy  sight.


A prayer  to  VHk.

The  Celestial  Power:  for  whose  return  the  poet  prays  is  the  first
Word,  the  first  emanation  of  the  Eternal,  the  omnifie  Logos,  the  type
of  which  is  Vak  (see  IV.  30.“  7),  in  this  place  the  voice  of  thunder
which  calls  forth  the  cattle,  the  imprisoned  waters  in  the  cloud.  See
M.  Henry’s  note.


A priest’s  prayer  to  the  Agnayo  Dhishnylh,  the  Agnis  or  fires  on
the  side  altars.  Sacred  Power : brd/ma%etm  ; the  sacred  formula.’ —
Henry,  1 ;


A prayer  for  children  and  prosperity.

The  hymn  is  employed,  according  to  the  Vaitilna-Satra.
to  the  Full  Moon  and  to  the  Visve  Devlh,  and.  acco:
Kausika-Sutra,  in  the  funeral  ritual.


. THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VII.

HYMN  LXIX.

Mat  the  wind  kindly  breathe  on  us,  may  the  Sun
warm  us  pleasantly.

May  days  pass  happily  for  us,  may  night  draw  near

delightfully,  may  dawn  break  joyfully  for  us!

_ HYMN  LXX.

Whatever  sacrifice  that  man  perform eth  with  voice
mind,  sacred  formula,  oblation,  7

May,  in  accord  with  Death,  Destruction  ruin  his
offering  beiore  it  gain  fulfilment.

2 For  him  may  sorcerers,  Destruction,  demons  strike

ana  prevent  fulfilment  through  their  falsehood.

Det  (iods  by  Indra  sent,  destroy  his  butter,  and  let
. Ins  sacrifice  be  ineffective*

3 Let  the.  two  Sovrans,  swift  to  come,  like  falcons

swooping  on  their  prey,

Destroy  the  butter  of  the  foe  whoever  plots  to  injure

4 1 seize  thine  arms  and  draw  them  back,  I bind  a

bandage  on  thy  mouth.

1 sacrifice  °f  ^ G°d  Agni  Iiave  kiIied  thJ

5 ba?  1 tie  tbine  arms,  I bind  a bandage

on  tny  mouth  : °

WsacrificeterrifiC  Agni’S  wfath  liave  1 destroyed  thy


prosperity ,


A charm  to  frustrate
3 The  two  Sovrans  :
Translated  by  Ludw
Hundei’t  Lieder.  pp.  46


| and  ruin  the  sacrifice  offered  by  an  enemy.
Beath  and  Destruction,  Mrityu  and  Nirriti,
ri&  Der  ^igvedaj  II L p.  674,  and  by  G:


ItYMK  n-.}  THE  ATHARVA-YEDA.  361

HYMN  LXXI.

'-set. thee  ..■■rpu&d  us  as  a fort,  victorious  Agni !
, : thee  a sage,  gYViggY/g/gV

Bold  in  thy  colour  day  by  day,  destroyer  of  the
treacherous  foe.  ■ '

HYMN  LXXII.

Rise  up  and  look  upon  the  share  of  Indra  fixt  by
ritual  use.

Whether  ye  poured  libation  dressed  or  took  delight
in  it  uncooked.

2 Libation  is  prepared.  Come  to  us,  Indra  : the  Sun

hath  travelled  over  half  his  journey.

Friends  with  their  treasures  sit  around  thee,  waiting
like  heads  of  houses  for  their  wandering  chieftain.

3 Dressed  in  the  udder  and  on  fire,  I fancy  ; well

dressed,  I fancy,  is  this  new  oblation.

Quaff’ thickened  milk  of  noon’s  libation,  Indra,  well
pleased,  O Thunderer,  famed  for  many  an  exploit !

HYMN  LXXII I.

Inflamed  is  Agni,  Heroes!  charioteer  of  heaven.  The
ealdron  boils  : the  meath  is  drained  to  be  vour  food.

g,/'  Y;,(  v"  :.  .f.Yg.v..-  ^ Yv  NY  ;Y,' : /A-W  g


:§  In  praise  of  Agni.  . . ' A- -A.

The  stanza  is  taken,  with  one  variant,  from  Rigveda  X.  87.  22.

The  hymn  is  an  invitation  to  Indra  to  drink  the  mid-day  libation.
I The  whole  hymn  is  a reproduction,  with  variants,  of  Rigveda
X.  179.  Rise  up:  the  Hotar  calls  upon  the  Adhvaryu  priests  (see  L
11.  1)  to  rise  and  milk  the  cow  for  milk  required  for  the  libation.  See
Yaitana-Sutra  XIV.  3.  ' A : : ;x-; -A’  -

3 Dressed:  the  milk  is  twice  dressed  or  cooked ; first  matured  in
the  cow’s  udder  and  then  heated  in  a caldron  on  the  fire.

An  ivitation  to  the  As y ins  to  come  to  the  morning  libation.

1 Heroes : the  many  mighty  acts  of  the  Asvins  are  recounted  m
Rigveda  L 112,  116,  117,  118,  119,  182;  VIL  68;  X.  39,  40.  The

for  the  libation  is  heated,  -MeaM't

the  sweet  fluid  ; milk.

' ' 23a.


362


THE  HYMNS  OP


[BOOK  TIL

For  we,  0 Asvins,  sprung  from  rttany  a house,

invite  you  to  be  present  at  our  banquetings.

2 Asvins,  the  fire  is  ail  aglow  : your  caldron  hath  been

heated  ; come  !

Here,  even  now,  O Heroes,  are  the  milch-kine  milk-
ed. The  priests,  ye  mighty  ones  ! rejoice.

3 Pure  with  the  Gods  is  sacrifice  with  cry  of  Hail ! That

is  the  Asvins’  cup  whence  Gods  are  wont  to  drink.
Yea,  the  Immortal  Ones  accept  it,  one  and  all,  aud
come  to  kiss  that  cup  with  the  Gandharva’s  mouth.

4 Milk,  molten  butter  offered  when  the  mornings  break,
— this  is  your  portion,  Asvins!  Come  ye  hitherward.
Lords  of  the  brave,  baim-lovers,  guards  of  sacrifice,

drink  ye  the  warm  libation  in  the  light^jf  heaven.

5 Let  the  warm  drink  approach  voiu1  >•  4»rts  Hotar-

priest : let  the  Adhvaryu  couiiome;..  with  store
of  milk.

Come,  0 ye  Asvins,  taste  the  meat,  j ,,t  hath  been
drained,  drink  of  the  milk  provided  by  this  radiant
Cow.

6 Come  hither,  quickly  come,  thou  milker  of  the  kine  :

into  the  caldron  pour  milk  of  the  radiant  cow.

Most  precious  Savitar  hath  looked  upon  the  heaven.
After  Dawn’s  going-forth  he  sends  his  light  abroad.

7 I invocate  this  milch-cow  good  for  milking,  so  that

the  milker,  deft  of  hand,  may  milk  her.

May  Savitar  give  goodliest  stimulation.  The  caldron
hath  been  warmed.  Let  him  proclaim  it.


3 With  the  Gandharva’s  mouth : that  is,  by  means  of  Agni,  the
sacrificial  fire  which  bears  oblation  to  the  Gods.

5 With  its  11  otar -priest : whose  duty  it  is  to  present  the  libation.

7 I invocate  this  milch-cow : this  is  recited  by  the  Adhvaryu’  when
the  cow  is  to  be  milked.  The  stanz'a  is  taken,  with  variants,  from
Rigv-eda  I,  1 G 5 . 26.  In  the  original  hymn,  which  from  beginning  to
etui  A a series  of  enigmas,  the  cow  may,  according  to  Sayitrsa,  be  the  rain,
the  milk  being  the  rain  and  the  milker  V styu  the  God  of  Wind  who  causes
it  to  flow,


m


......


HYMN  74.]


TAE'  AiHARVA-VEDA.


8 She,  sovran  of  all  treasures,  is  come  hither  yearning

in  spirit  for  her  calf,  and  lowing.

May  this  cow  yield  her  milk  for  both  the  Asvins,
and  may  she  prosper  to  our  great  advantage.

9 As  dear  house-friend,  guest  welcome  in  the  dwelling,

to  this  our  sacrifice  come  thou  who  knowest.

And,  Agni,  having  scattered  all  assailants,  bring  to
us  the  possessions  of  our  foemen.

10  Show'  thyself  strong  for  mighty  bliss,  O Agni ! Most

excellent  be  thine  effulgent  splendours  !

Make  easy  to  maintain  our  household  lordship,  and
overcome  the  might  of  those  who  hate  us.

11  Fortunate  mayst  thou  be  with  goodly  pasture,  and

may  we  also  be  exceeding  wealthy.

Feed  on  the  grass,  O Cow,  at  every  season,  and,
coming  hither,  drink  the  limpid  water.

HYMN  LXXIV.

[ Black  is  the  mother,  we  have  heard,  from  whom  the
red-hued  Pustules  sprang.

With  the  divine  ascetic’s  root  I pierce  and  penetrate
them  all.

2 I pierce  the  foremost  one  of  these,  I perforate  the
middlemost,

And  here  I cut  the  hindermost  asunder  like  a lock
of  hair.

8 Taken,  with  variants,  from  Rigveda  I.  164.  27.  In  the  original
hymn  the  calf  is  the  world  longing  for  the  rain  to  fall.

9 Taken  from  Rigveda  V.  4.  5.

10  Taken  from  Rigveda  V.  28.  3.  Make  easy  to  maintain  out
household  lordship  : according  to  Sayaria  : Perfect  the  well-knit  bond
of  wife  and  husband.

11  Taken  from  Rigveda  I.  164.  40.

A charm  to  cure  pustules  or  scrofulous  tumours.

\ Pustules : apachitas ; see  YI.  25.  1.  Scrofulous  or  inflammatory
swellings  affecting  the  glands  of  the  neck,  gandam&ld  or  king’s-evil,
appear  to  be  intended.  The  divine  ascetic’s  root : there  is  no  clue  to  the
name  of  the  root  or  of  its  divine  discoverer.


.


04  ,:  ' THE  ^ i Wives'  OF  {BOOK  VII.

3 With  spell  that  Tvashtar  sent  to  us  I have  dispelled

thy  jealousy.

We  mitigate  and  pacify  the  anger  that  thou  feltest,
Lord !

4 Lord  of  religious  rites,  by  law,  anointed,  shine  thou

forth  here  for  .ever  friendly-minded.

So  may  we  all  with  children,  J&ta vedas ! worship
and  humbly  wait  on  thee  enkindled.

HYMN  LX XV.

Let  not  a thief  or  wicked  man  possess  you  : let  not
the  dart  of  Rudra  come  anear  you,

Prolific,  shining  in  the  goodly  pasture,  drinking  at
pleasant  pools  the  limpid  water.

2 Ye  know  the  place  and  rest  content,  close-gathered,
called  by  many  a name.  Come  to  me,  Goddesses,
with  Gods.

Bedew  with  streams  of  fatness  us,  this  cattle-pen,
and  all  this  place.

' ' ■ HYMN  LXXVX  ,

Rapidly  dropping,  quick  to  drop,  more  evil  than  the
evil  ones,

More  sapless  than  a dried-up  bone,  swifter  than  salt
to  melt  away  :


A blessing  on  cows.  yVVVbb V

1 The  stanza  is  taken,  with  variations,  from  Eigveda  VI.  28.  7.
The  dart  of  Rudra  : ‘ Far  be  thy  dart  that  killeth  men  or  cattle  *
(Eigveda  I.  114.  10.)

2 Goddesses : so  in  the  hymn  from  which  stanza  1 is  taken  the  cows
are  addressed  as  deified  beings  : ‘ Prosper  my  house,  ye  with  auspici-
ous voices.  Your  power  is  glorified  in  our  assemblies;’  and  ‘Tome
the  cows  seem  Bhaga,  they  seem  India,  they  seem  a portion  of  the
first-poured  Soma  ’

A charm  to  cure  scrofulous  pustules.

1 Rapid.il/  dropping , quick  to  drop  : a susrdsah  susrdso  ; the  text
appears  to  be  corrupt.  Prof.  Bloomfield  proposes  to  read  a susrdso
susrdsiard,  more:  swift  to  fail  than  what  falls  fast,  which  would  restore


A-1  msitmmmm


' *


HYMN  76.]


THE  AT  II  ARY A-Y ED  A.


4


; . v ■■

Pustules  that  rise' upon  the  neck,  Pustules  upon  the
shoulder  joints,  * ' : ’

Pustules  that,"  falling  of  themselves,  spring  up  .on
; every  twofold  "limb  : .

I have  expelled  and  banished  all  Scrofula  harboured
in  the  head,

And  that  which  bores  the  breast-bone  through,  and
, that  which  settles  in  the  .sole,

^Scrofula  flies  borne  on  by  wings  : it  penetrates  and
holds  the  man.

Here  is  the  cure  of  either  kind,  the  chronic  and  the
1 transient.

We  know  thine  origin,  Scrofula  ! know  whence  thou,
Scrofula,  art  born,

How  hast  thou  then  struck  this  man  here,  him  in
' 1 whose  house  we  sacrifice  ?


the  metre  without,  however,  disposing  of  the  superfluous  a.  M.  Henry
suggests  a causative  verb  asisraso , thou  (the  remedy)  hast  caused  to
fall,  with  which  the  prefix  a might  be  construed,  instead  of  susrdso*
The  drying  and  falling  off  of  the  pustules  is  a sign  that  the  disease  is
yielding  to  the  remedy.  More  sapless  than  a-  dried-up  bone  : sihora-
tas&tard  ; the  text  is  unintelligible  and  probably  corrupt,  sehu  mean-
jug,  mot  bone,  but  some  internal  organ  of  the  body,  although  the  St
Petersburg  Dictionary  give§  the  word  in  this  passage  the  meaning  of
* a certain  dry  material.7  M.  Henry  reads  arasd'd  arasdtard>  drier  than
the  dry,

2 On  every  twofold  limb  : vijdmni  ; on  the  legs  and  arms. 2 3  4 * * Erup-
tion that  appears  upon  the  twofold  joints7  (Bigveda  VII.  50.  2).

3 Scrofula  : ‘ jdydkya  appears  to  be  the  general  scrofulous  habit  of

which  the  apachitas  or  pustules  are  the  external  manifestation.7—
Henry.  I adopt  M.  Henry’s  reading  nir  dsyatn  in  place  of  nirdstam
of  the  text.  V . ■ ,

4 The  chronic  and  the  transient : I read  sUIcshitasya  with  Prof*

Ludwig  instead  of  suhshatasya.  .

if  i:  . Scrofula , art  born:  jdydnya  jdyase  ; a play  on  the  words,  both

from  the  root  jan,  to  generate,


66  THE  HYMNS; [y

6 Boldly  drink  Soma  from  the  beaker,  Indra  ! hero  in
war  for  treasure  ! Vritra-slayer.

Fill  thyself  full  at  the  mid-day  libation  : thyself  pos-
sessing riches  grant  us  riches.

HYMN  LXXVII.

Ye  Maruts,  full  of  fiery  heat,  accept  this  offering
brought  for  you

To  help  us,  ye  who  slay  the  foe.

2 Maruts,  the  man  who  filled  with  rage  against  us  be-

yond our  thoughts  would  harm  us,  O ye  Yasus,
May  he  be  tangled  in  the  toils  of  Mischief : smite  ye
him  down  with  your  most  flaming  weapon.

3 Each  year  come,  friends  to  man,  the  tuneful  Maruts,

dwelling  in  spacious  mansions,  trooped  together.
Exhilarating,  gladdening,  full  of  fiery  heat,  may  they
deliver  us  from  binding  bonds  of  sin.

HYMN  LXXYIII.

I free  thee  from  the  cord,  I loose  the  bond,  I loose
the  fastening.

Even  here,  perpetual,  Agni,  wax  thou  strong.

2 I with  celestial  prayer  appoint  thee,  Agni,  main-
tainer  of  this  man  in  princely  powers.

Here  brightly  shine  for  us  with  wealth  : declare  thou
to  Gods  this  favoured  giver  of  oblations.


HYMN  80.]  THE  AT  II A EVA-  VED  A . 367

HYMN  XXXIX.

Nisht  of  the  New-born  Moon,  whatever  fortune  the
Gods  who  dwell  with  greatness  have  assigned  thee,
Therewith  fulfil  our  sacrifice,  all-bounteous  ! Blessbd
One,  grant  us  wealth  with  manly  offspring.

2 1 am  the  New  Moon’s  Night,  the  good  and  pious  are
> my  inhabitants,  these  dwell  within  me.

In  me  have  Gods  of  both  the  spheres,  and  Sadhyas,
with  Indra  as  their  chief,  ail  met  together.

3 The  Night  hath  come,  the  gatherer  of  treasures,  ^

bestowing  strength,  prosperity,  and  riches. -

To  New  Moon  s Night  let  us  present  oblation  :
pouring  out*  strength,  with  milk  hath  she  come
hither.

4 Night  of  New  Moon  ! ne’er  hath  been  born  another

than  thou  embracing  all  these  forms  and  natures.

May  we  have  what  we  longed  for  when  we  brought
thee  oblations  ; may  we  be  the  lords  of  riches.

hymn  lxxx.

Full  in  the  front,  full  rearward,  from  the  middle  the
Full  Moon’s  Night  hath  conquered  in  the  battle.
Indier  may  we,  dwelling  with  Gods  and  greatness,
reast  in  the  height  of  heaven,  on  strengthening
viands.  0


A hymn  to  the  New  Moon.

1 Night  of  the  New-horn  Moon:  amdvdspd'  (from  vas,  to  dwell,  and
amd,  together,  is  the  night  during  which  the  moon  dwells  together
wrth  or  in  the  same  quarter  as  the  sun  ; Night  of  New  Moon  person!-
ned  as  a Goddess.

2 Sddhyas:  a class  of  ancient  Gods.  See  VII.  5.  1.

4 Cf.  stanza  3 of  Hymn  LXXX.

A hymn  to  the  Full  Moon.

■j»  ■■

1 From  the  middle  : of  *the  lunar  month.


oduotory  stanzas  1 and  2 are  taken,  with
X.  85.  18,  19.  Two  youths:  Surya  and  &oma,  or  bun  abi

i ; of  air,  a ,

f dai/s  - referring  to  the  waning  moon  which  precedes  the

of  Soma:  Soma  the  Moon  identified  with  Soma  the  plant,
-sr  probably  bgiause  the  first  quarter  of  the  moon
favourable  time  for  predatory  excursions.


tllii


HYMN  82.]  THE  ATHARYA-VEDA.  369

4 Thou  art  the  New  Moon,  fair  to  see,  thou  art  com-

plete in  every  part.

May  I be  perfect,  fully  blest  in  every  way  in  steeds
and  kine,  in  children,  cattle,  home,  and  wealth.

5 Inflate  thee  with  his  vital  breath  who  hates  us  and

' whom  we  detest.

May  we  grow  rich  in  steeds  and  kine,  in  children,
cattle,  houses,  wealth,

■ 6 With  that  unwasting  stalk  which  Gods,  unwasting
* Gods,  increase  and  eat,

May  Varuija,  Brihaspati,  and  Indra,  the  Lords  and
Guardians  of  the  world,  increase  us.

* ' • HYMN  LXXXII.

Sing  with  fair  laud  the  combat  for  the  cattle.  Bestow
upon  us  excellent  possessions.

Lead  to  the  Gods  the  sacrifice  we  offer : let  streams
of  oil  flow  pure  and  full  of  sweetness.

2 Agni  I first  appropriate  with  power,  with  splendour,
and  with  might.

I give  myself  children  and  lengthened  life,  with  Hail!
take  Agni  to  myself.


4 New  Moon:  dar&ds . Fair  to  see : darsatds.  Thou  art  complete:
said  euphemistically  and  proleptically.

6 Stalk : the  Soma  plant,  identified  with  the  Moon.  Increase :
dpydydyanti  ; this  verb,  here  in  the  indicative  and  in  the  second
line  in  the  imperative,  is  used  with  a quibbling  reference  to  dpy&yana
(causing  to  swell  or  increase),  a technical  word  for  a part  of  the
procedure  followed  in  preparing  Soma  juice.  See  M.  Henry’s  note.

According  to  the  Kaiis ika-Sutra  XXXV.  IB,  the  hymn  is  to  be  recit-
ed on  return  from  a journey,  ■ . v '■■■

" A hymn  in  praise  of  Agni.  ilfff

1 The  stanza  is  taken,  with  variants,  from  Eigveda  IV.  58.  10.  Sing ;
abhydrckata  ; addressed  to  the  singers.  The  Eigveda  has  abhydrskata,
addressed  to  the  Gods  : 4 Send  to  our  eulogy  a herd  of  cattle/ accord-
ing to  Sayana.  Bestow : addressed  to  the  Gods.  Oil : molten  butter.

2 With  Hail  / ; that  is,  while  I offer  sacrifice  and  utter  the  pres-
cribed exclamation  Sv&hft,  Ave,  or  Hail  i


70  T1IE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  TIL

3 Even  here  do  thou,  0 Agni,  stablish  wealth  : let  not

oppressor's  injure  thee  by  thinking  of  thee  first.
Light  be  thy  task  of  ruling,  Agni,  with  thy  power :
may  he  who  worships  thee  wax  strong,  invincible.

4 Agni  hath  looked  upon  the  spring  of  Mornings,  looked

on  the  days,  the  earliest  Jatavedas.

So,  following  the  gleams  of  Morning,  Surya  hath
entered  heaven  and  earth  as  his  possession.


i


; - As  we  have  cried,  0 Vanina ! have  said,  The  Watei's,
they  are  kiue,  thence  set  us  free,  O Varuna.  ;

3 Loosen  the  bonds,  O Varuna,  that  hold  us,  loosen

the  bond  above,  between,  and  under.

So  before  Aditi  may  we  be  sinless  under  thy  favour-
ing auspices, . Aditya !

4 Varuna,  free  us  from  all  snares  that  bind  us,  Varuoa’s

bonds,  the  upper  and  the  lower.

Drive  from  us  evil  dream,  drive  off  misfortune  : then
let  us  pass  into  the  world  of  virtue.

HYMN  LXXXIV.

Holder  of  sway,  shine  here  refulgent,  Agni.!  invinci-
ble, immortal  Jatavedas.

With  succours  friendly  to  mankind,  auspicious,  driv-
ing away  all  maladies,  guard  our  dwelling.

2 Thou,  Xndra,  lord  and  leader  of  the  people,  wast  born
for  lovely  strength  and  high  dominion.

Thou  dravest  off  the  folk  who  were  unfriendly,  and
madest  for  the  Gods  wide  room  and  freedom.


THE  ATE  ARY A-YEDA


2 Have  cried,  0 Varuna  ! : have  invoked  thy  name.  The  Water st
they  are  Jeine : have  glorified  the  waters  in  which  thou  dwellest  by
likening  them  to  beneficent  and  sacred  cows.

3 The  stanza  is  taken  from  Eigveda  I.  24.  15.

4 Bepeated,  with  variants,  from  A.  V.  Y I,  121.  1.

According  to  the  Kausika-Sutra  CXXYII.  4,  the  hymn  is  to  be  recit-
ed together  with  other  verses  of  the  Atharva-veda  at  a propitiatory
sacrifice  when  a comet  has  darkened  the  constellation  of  the  Seven
Bishis.  or  Ursa,  Major.  See  Weber’s  Omina  und  Portenta,  p.  337.  Parts
of  the . hymn  are  also  to  be  recited  in  incantations  against  dropsy,
a disease  especially  attributed  to  the  displeasure  of  Varuna.  See
Eigveda  VII.  89.  ■

A prayer  for  protection.  ’

1 Succours:  or,  perhaps,  Goddesses,  the  Waters  or  the  Dawns,  The
adjectives  stand,  in  the  feminine  gender,  without  a substantive.

2 This  and  the  following  stanza  are  taken  from  Eigveda  X,  180.  3,  2*
Stanza  2 was  recited  at  the  coronation  of  a King.


THE  HYMNS  OF  ■ [BOOK  VIL

Like  a dread  wild  beast  roaming  on  the  mountain,
may  he  approach  us  from  the  farthest  distance.

Whetting  thy  bolt  and  thy  sharp  blade,  O Indra,
crush  down  our  foes  and  scatter  those  who  hate  us.

HYMN  LXXXV.

This  very  mighty  one  whom  Gods  urge  onward,  the
conqueror  of  cars,  ever  triumphant,

1°  battle,  with  uninjured  fellies,  even
larkshya  i.or  our  weal  will  we  call  hither.

HYMN"  LXXXVI.

Indra  the  rescuer, -Indra  the  helper,  Indra  the  brave
who  hears  each  invocation,

Sakra  I call,  Indra  invoked  of  many.  May  Indra
Maghavan  prosper  and  bless  us.

hymn  lxxxvii.

To  Rudia  in  the  lire,  to  him  who  dwells  in  floods,
to  It  tuba  who  hath  entered  into  herbs  and  plants.

To  him  who  formed  and  fashioned  all  these  worlds,
to  him  this  Rudra,  yea,  to  Agni,  reverence  be


A eh  ami  to  ensure  success  in  battle.

The  stanza  is  taken  from  Rigveda  X,  1 78,
ii cation  of  the  Sun,  usually  described  as  a k:


A prayer  to  ensure-  success  in  battle.
The  stanza  is  taken  from  Eigveda  V


A prayer  to  Rudra,  as  Agni,
Budra ; here,  as  in  other  pi
. floods : as  lightning,  in
ocean  of  air.  Herbs  and  pice,
lightning  descending  with  t


X,  * » J r^'s  . 1 \l  0 V j / j


ItYMN  89.}


■THE  A Till  R VA-  t&DA


HYMN  LXXXYIIL

Depart  ! tJioli  art  a foe,  a foe.  Poison  with  poison
hast  thou  mixt.  Yea,  verily  poison  hast  thou  mixt.

Go  to  the  serpent : .strike  him  dead,  '

' HYMN  LXXXIX.  ' '

The  heavenly  Waters  have  I ranged ; we  have  been
sated  with  their  dew.

Here,  Agni,  bearing  milk,  am  I.  Endow  me  with  the
gift  of  strength.  ; ; ’

2 Endow  me  with  the  gift  of  strength,  with  children,
and  a lengthened  life.  .

May  the  Gods  mark  this  prayer  of  mine,  may  Indra
with  the  Rishis  mark,

8 Ye  Waters,  wash  away  this  stain  and  whatsoever
taint  be  here,

Each  sinful  wrong  that  1 have  done  and  every  harm-
less curse  of  mine.  ■ ■ V

4 Thou  art  the  wood,  may  I succeed  ! fuel,  may  I be
glorified  ! splendour,  give  splendour  unto  me.


A charm  to  cure  a shake-bite.

The  stanza  is  apparently  , addressed  to  the  poison  in
Poison  with  poison  : thou  hast  made  thyself  doubly  sfcron
ing  to  M.  Henry,  who  considers  the  literal  meaning  to  be
and  inapplicable  to  the  procedure  prescribed  in  Kausika-S
6,  the  words  are  addressed  to  the  blade  of  grass,  used  in
which  has  become  impregnated  with  the’ poison -which  b
has  been  extracted  from  the  wound,  M.  Henry  accordingly
4 In  the  poison  thou  hast  filled  thyself  with  poison; 5

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Her  Bigveda,  III;  p.  51L


A prayer  for  purification  and  prosperity.

The  hymn  is  recited  in  the  ceremony  of  purification  with  holy  water*


74  THE  HYMNS  ON  [ BOOK  TIL

HYMN  XC.

Tear  thou  asunder,  as  of  old,  like  tangles  of  a creep-
ing plant.  Demolish  thou  the  D4sa’s  might.

2 May  we  with  Indra’s  help  divide  the  gathered  trea-
sure of  the  foe.

I,  "by  the  law  of  Varuna,  bring  down  thy  pride  and
wantonness.

HYMN  XCI.

Mat  Indr  a with  his  help,  Lord  of  all  treasures,  be
unto  us  a careful  good  protector,

Drive  off  our  foes  and  give  us  peace  and  safety.
May  we  be  lords  of  goodly  store  of  heroes,
HYMN  XCII.

May  this  rich  Indra  as  our  good  protector  keep  even
far  away  the  men  who  hate  us.

May  we  enjoy  his  favour,  his  the  holy  : may  we  en-
joy his  blessed  loving-kindness.

HYMN  XCIII.

With  Indra’s  and  with  Manyu’s  aid  may  we  subdue
our  enemies,  resistlessly  destroying  foes.


A charm  to  prevent  the  success  of  a rival  in  love.

- Stanzas  1 and  2 are  taken,  with  variations,  from  Tligveda  VIII.  40.
6,  and  are  originally  part  of  a prayer  to  Indra  and  Agni  for  victory
over  hostile  natives  of  the  land.  According  to  the  Kausika-Sutra,
XXXYI.  35  sqq.,  the  hymn  is  to  be  used,  with  certain  prescribed  cere-
monies, as  a charm  against  a rival.  For  stanza  3 see  Appendix.

A prayer  for  protection.

The  stanza  .occurs,  with  variants,  in  Rigveda  VI.  47.  12,  and
X.  131.  6,


A prayer  for  protection.

The  stanza  occurs,  with  variants,  in
131.  7.


A prayer  for  success  in  battle,  **

Manyu’s  aid : the  aid  of  warlike  Anger  or  Rage  personified.


a


THE  A TIIARVA-  JED  A.


HYMN  95.]

HYMN  XCIV.  '

We  lead  the  constant  Soma  on  with  constant  saeri-
; ficial  gift,  ' LYYLYwYYL  Lysy-;:

That  Indra  may  make  all  the  tribes  unanimous  and
only  ours.  ‘

HYMM  XCY.  ' '

To  heaven,  as  ’fcwere,  have  soared  • this  man’s  two
vultures,  staggering,  dusky  hued,  . v

Tiie  Parcher  and  the  Drier-up,  the  pair  who  parch
and  dry  his  heart.

2 I verily  have  stirred  them  up  like  oxen  resting  after

' : toil,  . wLL'V

Like  two  loud-snarling  curs,  or  like  two  wolves  who
watch  to  make  their  spring  :

3 Like  two  that  thrust,  like  two  that  pierce,  like  two
; , that  strike  with  mutual  blows.

I bind  the  conduit  of  the  man  or  dame  who  hence
hath  taken  aught.


A charm  to  ensure  the  obedience  of  subjects.

The  stanza  is  taken,  with  variants,  from  Rigveda  X.  173.  6,  the
subject  of  the  original  hymn  being  the  benediction  of  a newly  elected
King.  *


An  incantation  against  an  undiscovered  thief.

1 The  stanza  is  unintelligible.  J SShbc

S Stirred  them  up  : M.  Henry  strikes  out  ltd  which  mars  the  metre,
and  translates : ‘ I have  reduced  them  to  immobility.’

3 Two  that  thrust : perhaps  bulls.

The  procedure  prescribed  in  connexion  with  this  hymn  in  the  Kau-
;SiikaiSut:ra  XliYlII;  40— 43,  which  consists  in  tying  two  threads,  one
black  and  one  red,  to  a striped  frog  and  plunging  the  animal  into  hot
water,  does  not  throw  much  light  on  this  very  obscure  incantation.
See  M.  Henry’s  note.

: , yhe  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III,  p.  517.


LC-  «•


The  kine  are  resting  in  the  stall,  home  to  her  aesl
hath  flown  the  bird,

The  hills  are  firmly  rooted  : I have  fixed  the  kidneys
m their  place.  J

HYMN  XCVII.

As  we  have  here  elected  thee,  skilled  Hotarf  to-day
as  this  our  sacrifice  proceedeth,

Come  to ^ the  firm  place,  mightiest ! yea,  come  firmly.
Knowing  the  sacrifice,  approach  the  Soma.

2 With  kine  connect  us,  and  with  spirit,  Indra  ! Lord

rw°;,  bAeefs:  Wlth  Pences  and  with  favour,

With  the  God-destmed  portion  of  the  Brahmans,
and  the  good-will  of  Gods  who  merit  worship.

3 The  willing  Gods  whom,  God,  thou  hast  brought

lifcher,  send  thou  to  their  own  dwelling-place,

When  ye  have  eaten  and  have  drunk  sweet  juices
endow  this  man  with  precious  wealth,  ye  Vasus.

4 Gods,  we  have  made  your  seats  of  easy  access,  who
_ P*eased  with  me,  have  come  to  my  libation.
Bearing  and  bringing  hitherward  your  treasures.


An  incantation  against  an  undiscovered  thief.

The  stanza  is  a sequel  to  Hymn  XCV.  . *

The  hymn  consists  of  a series  of  sacrificial  formulas.

_ 1 stanza  is  taken,  with  variations,  from  Eigveda  III.  29.  IS.
To  the  firm  place:  the  sanctuary.  Or  the  translation  may  be  : Come
fcrmly,  0 most  mighty  ! yea,  come  firmly.

. 2 Taken,  with  variations,  from  Eigveda  Y.  42.  4.

4 Masy  of  access:  that  is,  ‘ we  have  kindled  Agni  in  order  that  he
may  show  us  the  way  to  heaven.’— Henry.

5 Stanzas  5 — § are  uon-metrical  in  the  original.


OYhhm :f ptO . ■ p- h.  ~z':vt'


1YMN  99.]  , THE  A FllAR  FA-  TEE  A . . * gfl.

6 This  is  thy  sacrifice  with  holy  hymnal/  Lord  of  the

Kite,  Sv&hS, ! and  fraught  with  vigour,

7 Vashat  to  paid  and  yet  unpaid  oblations ! Ye  Gods

who  know  the  way,  find  and  pursue  it !

8 Lord  of  the  Mind,  lay  this  our  sacrifice  in  heaven

among  the  Gods.  Sv&h&in  heaven!  Svahi  on  earth !
Sv4h&  in  air  ! In  wind  have  I paid  offerings.  Hail !

HYMN  XCYIII.-

Balm  fid  is  the  Grass  with  butter  and  libation,  with
Indra  gracious  Lord,  and  with  the  Maruts.

Hail ! let  the  sacrifice  go  forth  anointed  to  Indra
with  the  Gods  and  Visve  Devas.

HYMN  XCIX

Strew  thou  the- Grass,  and  spread  it  on  the  Altar:

rob  not  the  sister  who  is  lying  yonder.

The  Hotar  s seat  is  green  and  golden  : these  are  gold
necklets  in  the  place  of  him  who  worshfns


b fraught  with  vigour:  bringing  us  the  strength  of  heroes.

7 To  paid  and  yet  unpaid  oblations!:  or,  to  those  (God's)  who  have
been  worshipped,  and  to  those  who  have  not  (yet)  been  worshipped,
■with  oblations.

8 Lord  of  the  Mind:  Lord  of  the  mental  powers  and  life  of  men;
here,  AgnL

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p,  420,

Tlie  subject  is  the  anointing  of  the  Sacred  Grass.

1 With  Indra  ; graced  by  the  presence  of  Indra.

The  subject  is  the  preparation  of  the  Altar.

Strew:  on  the  floor  of  the  sacrificial  chamber  for  the  Gods  to  sit  oil
I he  sister : the  altar,  regarded  as  closely  connected  with  the  priest
Green  and  golden : being  strewn  with  fresh  bright  ara&s.  7 w . rtJ


7 , . THE  HYMNS  OF : , ■ {BOOK  NIL.

HYMN  C.

I turn  away  from  evil  dream,  from  dream  of  sin,
from  indigence.

I make  tire  prayer  mine  inmost  friend.  Hence!
torturing  dreamy  phantasies !

HYMN  Cl.

The  food  that  in  a dream  I eat  is  not  perceived
at  early  morn.

May  all  that  food  be  blest  to  me  because  it  is  not
seen  by  day.

HYMN  OIL

When  I have  worshipped  Heaven  and  Earth,  rever-
enced Firmament  and  Heath,

I will  make  water  standing  up.  Let  not  the  Sov-
rans injure  me.

HYMN  CIII.

W^hat  princely  warrior,  seeking  higher  fortune,  will
free  us  from  this  shameful  fiend  of  mischief?

What  friend  of  sacrifice  ? what  guerdon-lover  ? Who
winneth  ’mid  the  Gods  a long  existence?


4, '-"'1 •// / • 44c.'


HYMN  107.]  THE  AT II. ARY  A-V ED  A-  379

HYMN  CIV.

Who  will  prepare  the  dappled  Cow,  good  milker,
ne’er  without  calf,  whom  Yaruna  gave  Atharvan,

And,  joying  in  Brihaspati’s  alliance,  arrange  accord-
ing to  his  will  her  body  ?

HYMN  CY.

Leaving  humanity  behind,  making  the  heavenly
word  thy  choice,

With  all  thy  friends  address  thyself  to  furthering
_ — and  guiding  men.

HYMN  CYI.

Each  thoughtless  ill  that  we  have  done,  O Agni,
all  error  in  our  conduct,  Jltavedas  !

Therefrom  do  thou,  O sapient  God,  preserve  us.
May  we  thy  friends,  for  bliss,  have  life  eternal.

HYMN  CYII.  '

The  seven  bright  beams  of  Sftrya  bring  the  waters
downward  from  the  sky,  ...  > g

The  streams  of  ocean  : these  have  made  the  sting
that  pained  thee  drop  away.


A prayer  for  prosperity.

Who:  what  God.  The  dappled  Cow  : the  symbol  of  Plenty.  Whom
Varuna  gave  Atharvan:  see  V.  11.  " • .

An  initiation  formula.

The  stanza  is  spoken  by  the  Acharya  or  spiritual  teacher  in  the
vpariayana  .ceremony,  when  he  invests  the  religious  student  with  the
sacrificial  thread,  instructs  him  in  the  Veda,  and  gives  him  authority
to  teach.  ;

A prayer  for  pardon.  ' ' ■ . ■ : ■ ...  CVVMVMVC ' C : a - ' "■

Agni  is  entreated  to  preserve  the  priests  from  the  consequences  of
any"  error  in  conducting  divine  worship.

- — * PI-

A charm  against  cough.

The  sunbeams  may  be  said  to  cause  the  waters  to  descend  in-as-
mucli  as  they  have  first  drawn  them  up  in  the  shape  of  vapour.  The,
water  is  to  be  used  in  rinsing  the  mouth  of  the  patient.  The  sting:


TIIE  HYMNS  OF


la


w , . HYMN  CVIII.  , .

V HOSO  by  stealth'  or  openly  would  harm  us,  a friend
, who  knows  us,  or  a stranger,  Agni  1
May  the  strange  she-fiend  armed°with  teeth  attack

0 *bem:  0 AS'tu>  theirs  be  neither  home  nor  children !

2 Whoso  oppressed  us,  O J&tavedte,  asleep  or  waking
standing  still  or  moving,  0

Accordant  with  Vaisv&nara  thy  comrade,  O J4tavedas,
meet  them  and  consume  them.

_ HYMN  CIX.  ’ ■

My  homage  to  tile  strong,  the  brown,  the  sovran
lord  among  the  dice  !

Butter  on  Kali  I bestow:  may  he  be  kind  to  one  like  me.
Bear  butter  to  the  Apsarases,  O Agni,  and  to  the
miT  1Ce*  6ar  c an<^  sand  and  water*

Ihe  Gods  delight  in  both  oblations,  joying  in  saeri-
lieiai  gifts  apportioned  duly.

d The  Apsarases  take  pleasure  in  the  banquet  between
the  k^un  and  the  libation-holder.

With  butter  let  them  fill  my  hands,  and  give  me,
to  be  my  prey,  the  man  who  plays  against  me.

4 -1  vil  be  mine  opponent’s  luck  ! Sprinkle  thou  butter
over  us.  ’ -


A prayer  for  protection.

as  a ''  ^ “ an°ther  charaoter  beiuS  regarded

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Kigveda,  IIL  p.  §17.  i


^ Ppyer  to  ensure  success  in  gambling.  *

(rrU-!h^v°Tu  *e  ?uts  of  the  Vibhfdaka,  or,  later,  Vibliitaka,  tree
(Termmaba  Bellenca)  were  used  as  dice  in  early  times.  See  Eigveda

nmnt  L ) he  d^’  Y Side  of  a die’  whioh  ^ marked  with  one
yoii  t , the  ace  (personified  as  an  evil  genius  in  the  poem  of  Nala).
.Kelli  is  pi  O pi  tinted  with  RA.fyrofir>.i»l  j.  i • * .


tt a,o  oix  uvu  gomus  in  me  poem  of  JN  aia)

“JZ  “to  °“  “““*  «i”o«

uotAt  t7.TYTv  T?irvf  ?,;ni  Tr  a» sr

rhp  trio*  ™ i * V.  v \ .0#  1 — 4 > VI.  118.  L Dust : apparently,

«* fa  “* ->*•


3 Between  the  Sun  and  the  libation-holder : that  is,  in  mid-air.


;,P;:  . ;■  - *"  ■ ■ Ah

SiAghi: A : ■■■■:  a '

A ^ A ■ AAAA  A:A ' ■ ■ . . :■  -AAA  AAa


ounte,  as  a tree  with  lightning  flash,  mine  adversary
m the  game.  J

5 The  God  who  found  for  us  this  wealth  for  gambling,
•to  east  the  dice  and  count  the  winning  number,
May  he  accept  the  sacrifice  we  offer,  and  with  Gan-

dharvas  revel  in  the  banquet.

6 Fellow-inhabitants,  such  is  your  title,  for  Dice  with

looks  of  power  support  dominion.

As^such  with  offerings  may  we  serve  you,  Indus!
May  we  have  riches  in  our  own  possession.

7 As  I invoke  the  Gods  at  need,  as  I have  lived  in

chastity,

May  these  when  I have  grasped  the  Dice,  the  brown,
be  kind  to  one  like  me.

HYMN  CX.

Resistless,  Agni,  Indra,  smite  his  foernen  for'  the
worshipper,

i or  best  foe-slayers  are  ye  both.

2 Agni  I call,  and  Indra,  foe-destroyers,  swift  moving
heroes,  Gods  who  wield  the  thunder,
irou0  i whom  they  won  the  light  in  the  beginning
„ ™.^ef  wao  have  mac!e  all  worlds  their  habitation.*  ’
^Mith?cunspati  hath  W0ll'thy  friendly  favour

^'worshipper.0'  Indra’  6nter  US  for  tIie  juice-pouring


5 Gandharvas  : as  the  husbands  of  the  dice-loving  Apsarases.

kLvJ  Z°'likab£antS:  equivalent,  according  to  M

Lndlriv  ‘ Cr,w«;J  rUSC?'Enman  Dii  Rentes.  According  to  Prof!

led  the  chaste  life  ot  the  BrahmaehSii  or

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  45$  •

g§!  1 — '

A prayer  for  success  in  battle.

2 They  mn  the  light the  Gods  obtained  the  light  of  heaven.


t BOOM  fit.


HYMN  CXI.

Belly  of  Indra  art  thou,  Soma-holder ! the  very  soul
of  Gods  and  human  beings.

Here  be  the  sire  of  offspring,  thine  here  present!
Here  be  they  glad  in  thee  who  now  are  elsewhere.
HYMN  CXII.

Radiant  with  light  are  Heaven  and  Earth,  whose
grace  is  nigh,  whose  sway  is  vast.

Seven  Goddesses  have  flowed  to  us:  may  they  deliver
us  from  woe;

2 Release  me  from  the  curse’s  bond  and  plague  that
comes  from  V arena  ;

Free  me  from  Yarna’s  fetter  and  from  every  sin
against  the  Gods.

HYMN  CXII I.

Rough  Plant,  thou  rough  rude  parasite,  cut  thou
• that  man,  O Rough  and  Rude,

That  thou  mayst  hinder  from  his  act  that  man’  in  all
his  manly  strength.

2 Thou,  rugged  Plant,  art  rude  and  rough,  Yishd,
Yishatahi  art  thou,

A prayer  for  progeny,

. , Soma-holder:  the  reservoir  containing  the  clarified  Soma  juice  is
addressed  as  the  representative  of  the  deity.  Here  present : dir  a , here,
instead  of  dsit,  in  these  females.  The  reading  of  the  text  may  be  traced
to  the  employment  of  the  stanza  at  a vriskotsarga , the  liberation
of  a bull  (according  to  some  authorities,  with  four  heifers)  on  the
occasion  oia  sacrifice  or  as  a religious  observance  generally.  See  M„
Henry’s  note.  Elsewhere  ; in  the  other  world.

A prayer  for  protection  and  freedom  from  sin.

1 Seven  Goddesses  : the  Seven  Rivers.  See  IV,  6.  2.  Apas  ; a gloss
that  mars  the  metre  : should  be  read.  See  M.  Henry’s  note.

2 This  stanza,  taken  from  Rigveda  X.  97.  16,  occurs  also  in  A.  V.
YL  96.  2.

A woman’s  incantation  against  a rival.

1 The  won. an  appears  lo  address  some  at  tl-aphrodisiac  plant

2 Vzshd,  Vishdiald:  some  unknown  herbs:  ( Poison  and  Poison-
draught5  according  to  Pro!  Weber,  The  second  line  is  addngssed
to  the  absent  rival.  A barren  cow ; on  account  of  great  age.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  A eber,  Indische  Studien  V.  p.  252,


"r- ^ ^ ^

::::;;*>v;s  ;:s-;r;''-«:;;i';  ■ .'SS  vyyy,*;  :'S“Vv?.


Jlsk . . ‘ l * ... ;


flTJ/2F  115.]  THE  ATttAR VA-VEDA.  383

That  thou  mayst  be  cast  off' by  him,  as  bv  a bull  a
barren  cow,  J

hymn  cxiv.

I hate  extracted  from  thy  sides,  I have  extracted
irom  thy  heart,

I have  extracted  from  thy  face  the  strength  and
splendour  that  were  thine.

2 Let  pain  and  suffering  pass  away,  let  cares  and  curses
vanish  hence.

Let  Agm  slay  the  fiendish  hags,  Soma  kill  hags  who
trouble  us.  °

hymn  cxv.

Hence,  Evil  Fortune  1 fly  away,  vanish  from  this
place  and  from  that.

Whateth  u«6  With  an  ir0n  hook  UQto  the  man  who

2 Grrhnnnf  ; US  /icheS’  ®avitar  ! golden-handed,  send
rp.  il0U  aw aJ  from  us  to  other  regions

J-hat  fortune  who,  flying,  abominable,  hath,  as  a
cieeper  climbs  a tree,  assailed  me.

3 °r;ia“d| " hUnd+r,ed  Fort-unes  aI1  together  are  at  his

birth  born  with  a mortal’s  body.

hbpf  W<3  /6ild  ^ the  most  ^l«ckv : keep
ones  for  us,  O JAtavedas.  : ”

Conclusion  of  the  incantation  in  Hymn  CXIII  ~~

1 Addressed  to  the  bewitched  rival

hi£  £SJM  ,m3,:  “id  wllh  *o  the  woaum  who  has  boo.,

A charm  against  Misfortune.  ' :: iyv; ]'  v.y L ;v 5 i v v i '■  A ' : \ •

. See1  LllFlHUne:  Lal£Shmf;  more  usualIy  the  Goddess  of  good  luck.

3 One  and  a hundred:  see  V.  18,  12.

1 6—1  Va^hook^is  to^atta1?!'?!01^0'1! in  th°  Kau?iI{a-Siitra,  XVIIT.
(explained  by  Darila  as  a" crow ) ^ * ° a black  bird

^ the  bird  is  to  be  let  fly  a«  ^10e;Cafe  18  to  he  hnnS  on  the  h >oks
m . , ° as  tne  first  stanza  is  recited


Iff'


mmh


i m::

r V


i IJA It  FA-  VEDA,  [BOOK  VII.

4 I have  disparted  these  and  those  like  cows  who  stray
on  common  land.  ■

Here  let  auspicious  Fortunes  stay:  hence  have  I
banished  evil  ones.

HYMN  CXYI.

Homage  to  him  the  burning  one,  shaker,  exciter,  violent!

Homage  to  him  the  cold  who  acts  according  to  his
ancient  will!

2 May  ke^the  lawless  one,  who  comes  alternate  or  two
following  days,  pass  over  and  possess  the  frog.  - -

HYMN  CXVII.  ° '

Come  hither,  Indra,  with  bay  steeds,  joyous,  with
tails  like  peacock,  plumes.

Let  none  impede  thy  way  as  fowlers  stay  the  bird  :

-A.  L ? 1 ji  t .


••  "


f tyPt: v ti

jy.v.'.j: i.,.„.  *i


BOOK  VIII


HYMN  I.

Homage  to  Death  the  Ender!  May  thy  breathings
inward  and  outward,  still  remain  within  thee.  *
Here  stay  this  man  united  with  his  spirit  in.  the
Sun’s  realm,  the  world  of  life  eternal !

2 Bhaga  hath  lifted  up  this  man,  and  Soma  with  his
* filaments,

Indra  and  Agni,  and  the  Gods  the  Maruts,  raised
him  up  to  health.

3 Here  is  thy  spirit,  here  thy  breath,  here  is  thy  life

here  is  thy  soul ; ’

By  a celestial  utterance  we  raise  thee  from  Destruc-
tion’s bonds.

4 Up  from  this  place,  O man,  rise ! sink  not  downward

casting  away  the  bonds  of  Death  that  hold  thee.  ’
Be  not  thou  parted  from  this  world,  from  sieht  of
Agm  and  the  Sun.  *

5 Purely  for  thee  breathe  Wind  and  MAtarisvan,

and  let  the  Waters  rain  on  thee  their  nectar.  *

ThA  SJ?n  shine  with  healing  on  thy  body :

1/eath  shall  have  mercy  on  thee  : do  not  leave  usl

6 Upward  must  be  thy  way,  O man,  not  downward  :

with  hte  and  mental  vigour  I endow  thee.

Ascend  this  car  eternal,  lightly  rolling;  then  full  of
years  shalt  thou  address  the  meeting


incantation  designed  to  recov*
!>  or  eve»  to  recall  the  departed  sp
me  of  Vayu  or  Wind.  See  V.  ] 7.";
'lie  back  to  lice  by  our  mini


25


386  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VI IT,

7 Let  not  thy  soul  go  thither,  nor  be  lost  to  us  : alight

not  the  living,  go  not  where  the  Fathers  are.

Let  all  the  Gods  retain  thee  here  in  safety.

8 Yearn  not  for  the  departed  ones,  for  those  who  lead

faFaw&y.

Rise  up  from  darkness  into  light:  come,  both  thy
hands  we  clasp  in  ours.

9 Let  not  the  black  dog  and  the  brindled  seize  thee,

two  warders  of  the  way  sent  forth  by  Yam  a.

Come  hither;  do  not  hesitate  : with  mind  averted
stay  not  there.

10  Forbear  to  tread  this  path,  for  it  is  awful : that  path

I speak  of  which  thou  hast  not  travelled.

Enter  it  not,  O man  ; this  way  is  darkness : forward
is  danger,  hitherward  is  safety.

11  Thy  guardians  be  the  Fires  within  the  Waters,

thy  guardian  be  the  Fire  which  men  enkindle.

Thy  guardian  be  Vaisv&nara  J&tavedas  : let  not
celestial  Fire  with  lightning  burn  thee.

12  Let  not  the  Flesh-Consumer  plot  against  thee :

depart  thou  far  away  from  the  Destroyer.

Be  Heaven  and  Earth  and  Sun  and  Moon  thy  keepers,
and  from  the  dart  of  Gods  may  Air  protect  thee.

13  May  Vigilance  and  Watchfulness  protect  thee,  Sleep-

less and  Siuinberless  keep  guard  above  thee  !

Let  Guardian  and  let  Wakeful  be  thy  warders.

-14  Let  these  be  thy  preservers,  these  thy  keepers.

All  hail  to  these,  to  these  be  lowly  worship  !

15  May  saving  Savitar,  V&yu,  Indra,  DMtar  restore
thee  to  communion  with  the  living.

Let  not  thy  vigour  or  thy  breath  forsake  thee  ; we
recall  thy  life.


9 Two  warders  : see  Y.  30.  6.

12  The  Ffesk-Gonsutnei  : Tan'1  KravyacL  the  fire  of  the  funeral  pile,
Of.  III.  21,9.  .

Li  f igiiancei  Watchfulness  and  the  others  are  the  Genii  of  living  men


HYMN  1.]


THE  ATHARVA-VEDA.


387


16  Let  not  the  fiend  with  snapping  jaws,  nor  darkness  find

thee:  tongue,  holy  grass : how  shouldst  thou  perish  ?
May  the  Adityas  and  the  Yasus,  Indra  and  Agni
raise  thee  and  to  health  restore  thee.

17  The  Sky  hath  raised  thee,  and  the  Earth,  Prajdpati

: hath  raised  thee  up.

The  Plants  and  Herbs  with  Soma  as  their  King  have
rescued  thee  from  Death.  ° '

18  Here  let  this  man,  O Gods,  remain : let  him  not  go

to  yonder  world.

We  rescue  him  from  Mrityu  with  a charm  that  hath
: a thousand  powers,  • ;V;Ay:  : ,;y

19  I have  delivered  thee  from  Death.  Strength-Divers

smelt  and  fashion  thee  1 °

Let  not  she-fiends  with  wild  loose  locks,  or  fearful
howlers  yelf  at  thee.

20  I have  attained  and  captured  thee  : thou  hast  return-

ed restored  to  youth,

PTi?%iife0dy : 80  have  1 foand  aI!  thy  sight  and

f§  flfe  tath  breathed  on  thee  ; light  hath  come  : dart-
ness  hath  past  away  from  thee.

Par  from  thee  we  hssve  buried  Death,  buried  De-
struction and  Decline.  ' JJe


Mi"’  »*  -nioh.  die

■*£  SsS&E&tfr ‘mw

21  Decline  : ydkshna,  pulmonary  consumption.

«17%* bJ  °- a T“s- y «*-


9 ■ -the  hymns  of

HYMN  ii.'

Seize  to  thyself  this
longevity  which  nwi
i-hy  spirit  and  thy  life

L n n0r  ^ »to  mist  an dTarinll

2 Come  to  the  light  of  living  m

I draw  thee  to  a life  of  hundred
•Loosing  the  bonds  of  Death,
tiiee,  I give  thee  age  of  ver

3 Thy  breath  have  I r

vision  from  the  Sun,

■ Thy  mind  I stablish  and
thy  members,


[moK  mi


trust  of  life  for  ever  ; thine  b(
tng  shortens.

again  I bring  thee  : die  not.

— j. : . 'v  ;

ttien,  come  hither  :
--J  autumns,
the  curse  that  holds
7 long  duration,
eeovered  from  the  Wind,  thy

secure  within  thee  : feel  in
. T . , - use  ^7  tongue,  conversing.

To^'TS’  “ °”  * *w-khdlrf°f  bipcds

I paS  reverence'  ***  ‘°  ^ si®htl an<1  breath  have

5 Let  this  man  live,  let  him  not  die

We  recover  him.

I make  for  him  a healing  balm.  0 I
slay  this  man.

6 Hplantr  S0U“<1  he"Ith  1 “V003te  a

Preserving  queUer  of  disease,  viotorio
i'ai$P0Wer  and  might.  ^

7 S1S  ht  Rf0t’  iut  ^courage  and  elease
' DhaLh  ? *J’  thou§h  Hine,  in  all  his  vie

B 5 j.*nd  ?af™’  P^y  and  protect  him
lull  life  and  drive  awav  miaW.nn«


we  .'.  raise  'iilm,


HYMN  2.]  THE  A THAR  VI- VEDA . -389

8 Comfort  him,  Death,  and  pity  him  : let  him  arise

and  pass  away.

Unharmed,  with  all  his  members,  hearing  well,  with
eld,  may  he  through  hundred  years  • win  profit
with  his  soul.  - I *

9 May  the  Gods’  missile  pass  thee  by.  I bring  thee  safe

from  the  mist:  from  death  have  I preserved  thee.
Far  have  I banished  flesh-consuming  Agni : I place
a rampart  for  thy  life’s  protection.

10  Saving  him  from  that  misty  path  of  thine  which
cannot  be  defied,

From  that  descent  of  thine,  0 Death,  we  make  for
him  a shield  of  prayer!

H i give  thee  both  the  acts  of  breath,  health,  lengthen-
ed life,  and  death  by  age.

All  Yama’s  messengers  who  roam  around,  sent  by
Vaivasvata,  I chase  away.

12  Far  off  we  drive  Malignity,  Destruction,  Pis&ehas

banqueters  on  flesh,  and  Gr&hi.

And  all  the  demon  kind,  the  brood  of  sin,  like  dark-
ness, we  dispel.

13  I win  thy  life  from  Agni,  from  the  living  everlasting

Jatavedas.

Ibis  I procure  for  thee,  that  thou,  undying,  mayst
not  suffer  harm,  that  thou  mayst  be  content,  that
all  bo  well  with  thee.

to  thee  be  Heaven  and  Earth,  bringing  no
grief,  and  drawing  nigh  ! 0


9 Flesh-consuming  Agni  : the  fire  of  the  funeral  pile.  A rampart ;
cf.  ‘Here  I erect  this  rampart  for  the  living’  (Rigveda  X.  18,  4), -a
liu-e  of  demarcation  limiting  the  jurisdiction  of  Death  until  the  natural
time  tor  his  approach*. :

II  Va  ivasvata  : Vi  vas  van’s  son,  Yama.

>■' : 1. ' 1 6V-. Grdki:  If  a 1 V.;,


a uxmns  of  [Foom  flit

■ f tJr for  th“- w“0  Wow

celestial  Waters  full  „f  mi]k  flow  happily  for

15  A“SiS;b'hIl9»Phn<f  ««'  1 have  upraised
Let  the  tZ  i f ¥ ‘hf.  >°»or  to  the  upper  earth:

prot:tthe°e?hre0fACllt!’  ®“  “d  M““-

16  WthygJ^  robe  t0  cover  tbee  or  zone  thou  makest  for

W:nd  foottttul*0  % frame  : may  “ be  S0f*

Smoothing  our  face  steal  not  our  vital  forces.

-1S  A^ici0«stunt0  thee  be  rice  and  bar ley,  causing  no
painful  sickness  or  consumption.

calamity.  6XPei  ConsumPtion’  these  deliver  from

W ^eultivftionf  milk^-Whate  er  ^ ^ corn  Srown  b¥
Faod^eatable,  uneatable,  I make  all  poisonless  for

20  Wint:t*toeb„rr  “ a °harge  *°  D«' and  N«ht-

^flwouU  S*n  hiS°8y  ^ from  who

21  Aages'two,'  three, *four^°USand  *“*  We  ®"e  ‘h<*’
^w.undraii  Agm'  the  Gods,  with  willing  favour


'-Muir  iS  “0t  intfae  Vedas  generally  reckoned  among

shaven  : causest  us  to  shave  as  a sign  of  mourning.
yugas  here  meaning  probably  generations.


6;:K::E;


M:


^Ti


dyrjf#  2.1


riT-i1  4 TH ARVA-VEDA.


22  To  Autumn  we  deliver  thee,  to  Winter,  Spring,  and

Summer’s  care.  ?

We  trust  thee  with  auspicious  years  wherein  the
plants  and  herbs  grow  up.

23  Death  is  the  lord  of  bipeds,  Death  is  sovran  lord  of

• quadrupeds.  A , ’ •

Away  I bear  thee  from  that  Death  the  ruler  : be  not
thou  afraid.

24  Thou,  still  uninjured,  shalt  not  die  : be  not  afraid  ;

thou  shaft  not  die.

Here  where  I am  men  do  not  die  or  go  to  lowest
depths  of  gloom.  :

25  Here  verily  all  creatures  live,  the  cow,  the  horse,  the

man,  the  beast,  $ isfv;; |j  ■ ;Gj ?| g ) : ■ ; ||i

Here  where  this  holy  prayer  is  used,  a rampart  that
protecteth  life.

Let  it  preserve  thee  from  thy  peers,  from  incantation,  •
from  thy  friends.

26  Live  very  long,  be  healthy,  be  immortal  : let  not  the

vital  breath  forsake  thy  body.

27  One  and  a hundred  modes  of  death,  dangers  that  may

be  overcome, —

May  Gods  deliver  thee  from  this  when  Agni,  dear  to
all  men,  bids.

28  Body  of  Agni  prompt  to  save,  slayer  of  fiends  and

foes  art  thou,  :GGG"V  .;  .

Yea,  banisker  of  malady,  the  healing  balm  called
Phtudru.  v ' :•  .


2?  One  and  a hundred  modes  of  death  ; see  note  on  V.  18.  1%

28  Putudru : the  Khadira  (Acacia  Catechu),  or,  according  to  others,
the  Devadaru  (Pinus  Deodar)*  Muir  and  dimmer  write  ‘ Putadni^
which  is  said  to  be  a name  of  the  Palasa  (Butea  Frondosa).

S.  Texts,  V.  p.  447,  and. by  Ludwig,' Dm.

Kigyeda,  IIL  p.  498*


UUJS  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  fill,

hymn  III,

1 Bf!“  mi£hjy  demon-slayer,  to  the  most

idiDoiis  ftiend  1 conic  for  shelter.

Enkindled,  sharpened  by  our  rites,  may  Agni  protect
us  m the  day  and  night  from  evil.  . ■

2 ° armed,w,ith1  teeth  of  iron,  enkindled

■ Wlth  thy  name,  attack4  the  demons.

Seize  with  thy  tongue  the  foolish  gods’  adorers:  rend,
put  within  thy  mouth  the  raw-flesh-eaters.

S Apply  thy  teeth,  the  upper  and  the  lower,  thou  who
-bast  both,  enkindled  and  destroying.

Roam  also  in  the  air,  O King,  around  us,  and  with
; thy  jaws  assail  the  wicked  spirits..'  \

4 Pierce  through  the  Yiitudhdna’s  skin,  O A<mi  •
_ let  the  destroying  dart  with  fire  consume  him  ’

.Rend  his  joints,  Jltavedas!  let  the  eater  of  raw  flesh
seeking  flesh,  tear  and  destroy  him.

5 Where  now  thou  seest,  Agni  J&tavedas!  a Yatudhana,

standing  still  or  roaming,

Or.  °"f  tbat  flieth  through  the  air’s  mid-region.
Kindled  to  fury  as  an  archer  pierce  him,

6 Bern  ding  thy  shafts  through  sacrifices,  Agni ! dipping

thine  arrows  in  the  hymn  to  point  them,

Pierce  to  the  heart  therewith  the  YMudhanas,  and
break  their  arms  uplifted  to  attack  thee.


Hie  hymn  is  a prayer  for  the  destruction  of  demons.

l72la?  taken’  With  transpositions  and  other  variation

toSTtp6';  T3’  ascribcd  t0  the  ?isili  P&ya  etud

to  Agni  Bakshoha,  the  Slayer  of  Kaksha&as.

'JJeT-  <see  L 7-  *)  explained  by  Siiyatia  as  Ra!

^iusas.  jfoomh  gods  adorers:  mtiradev&n ; according  to  Sayoim,

“ destruotion’’  an  epithet  of  a particuh
4 The  eater  of  raw  flesh:  the  wolf  or  other  carnivorous  wild  beast.


1BYMN  3.]  ;

7 Rescue  the  car
Y4tudhW
! Strike  do\frn  t

u Let  spotted

l 8 Here  tell  thi
himself,  or  a
; Grasp  him,  O

I | to  the  Man-'

, 9 With  keen  glai

I Sage,  conduc

Let  not  the  i
burning  agai
10  Look  on  the
rend  thou  his
Demolish  with
Yatudhana’s '
11  Thrice,  Agni,  |
with  his  false
Loud  roaring
him  in  the  pr
" y 12  Agni,  what  cur,
rude  rough  w

7 1 translate  the  fin
| suggestion  (Der  Bigved

I I f/dtudkdndndyn.  The  Ii

* ; Y&tudh&na,  Jafca vedas  f

|j|!  captured.5.  '

■ | 3 To  the  Man- Seer's  t\

j.V|  is  Agnl  himself.

To  the  Fastis;  to
8 ay ana  explains  vcmibhy^
; riches.5 — Wilson,

; 10  His  three  cxtremitii

I | head  and  shoulders,  aeeo
I | Triply : used  vaguely,  t<

1 ^2  The  pair;  the  mai

The  Eishi  prays  that  eve
hy  pious  people  in  their  i
: ,,  :h:


ARVA-FEDA.

>,  Jatavedas
ave  capture-


O Acfni : wh<


hou  triply,
urround  th<
ioly  Order.
]a.  O JMk


me  pair  this  day  may
the  worshippers  have


Ini®


394  ' $Qti  IIYMtfS  OF  [BOOK  fill

Each  arrowy  taunt  sped,  from  the  angry  spirit/ —
pierce  to  the  heart  therewith  the  Y&tudh&nas,

13  With  fervent  heat  exterminate  the  demons  : destroy

the  fiends  with  glow  and  flame,  O Agni.

Destroy  with  fire  the  foolish  gods’  adorers  : destroy
the  insatiate  fiercely-burning  creatures,

14  May  Gods  destroy  to-day  the  evil-doer:  may  uttered

curses  turn  again  and  strike  him.

Let  arrows  pierce  the  liar  in  his  vitals,  and  Visva’s
net  enclose  the  Y&tudh&na.

15  The  fiend  who  smears  himself  with  flesh  of  cattle,

with  flesh  of  horses  and  of  human  bodies,

Who  steals  the  milch-cow’s  milk  away,  O Agni,—
tear  off  the  heads  of  such  with  fiery  fury.

1G  Let  the  fiends  steal  the  poison  of  the  cattle : may
Aditi  cast  off  the  evil-doers.

May  the  God  Savitar.  give  them  up  to  ruin,  and  be
their  share  of  herbs  and  plants  denied  them.

17  The  cow  gives  milk  each  year,  O Man-Beholder :

let  not  the  Y&tudhana  ever  taste  it.

Agni,  If  one  should  glut  him  with  the  biestings,
pierce  with  thy  flame  his  vitals  as  he  meets  thee.

18  Agni,  from  days  of  old  thou  slayest  demons : never

have  Kakshasas  in  fight  o’ercome  thee.

Burn  up  the  foolish  ones,  the,  flesh-devourers  : let
none  of  them  escape  thy  heavenly  arrow.

19  Guard  us,  O Agni,  from  above  and  under,  protect  us

from  behind  and  from  before  us  ;

And  may  thy  flames,  most  fierce  and  never  wasting,
glowing  with  fervent  heat,  consume  the  sinner.


14  Visva’s  net:  the  noose  of  all-pervading  Agni.

10  Steal  ike  poison  of  the  cattle  : if  they  take  the  milk  and  drink  it,
let  it  poison  them.  According  to  Sayana : leu  them  drink  (the  Tkigveda
has  pibantu)  the  poison  of  the  cattle  (which  is  kept  in  the  house),
perhaps  some  poisonous  ointment  used  for  external  application  only.


fSE  AfliA&tA-fEm.


20  From  rear,  from  front,  from  under,  from  above  us,

Agni,  protect  us»as  a sage  with  wisdom.

Guard  to  old  age  thy  friend  as  friend  eternal:
0 Agni,  as  immortal,  guard  us  mortals.

21  Lend  thou  the  worshipper  that  eye,  O Agni,  where-

with thou  lookest  on  the  hoof-armed  demons.

With  light  celestial  in  Atharvan’s  manner  burn  up
the  fool  who  ruins  truth  with  falsehood.

22  We  set  thee  round  us  as  a fort,  victorious.  Agni !

thee,  a sage,

In  conquering  colour  day  by  day,  destroyer  of  the
treacherous  foe.

23  With  deadly  poison  strike  thou  back  the  treacherous

brood  of  R&kshasas,

O Agni,  with  thy  sharpened  glow,  with  rays  that
flash  with  points  of  flame.

24  Agni  shines  far  and  wide  with  lofty  splendour,

and  by  his  greatness  makes  all  things  apparent.

He  conquers  godless  and  malign  enchantments,
and  sharpens  both  his  horns  to  gore  the  ogres.

25  Thy  two  unwasting  horns,  O data vedas,  keen-pointed

weapons,  sharpened  by  devotion—

With  these  transfix  the  wicked-souled  Kimldin,  with
fierce  flame,  data vedas  ! when  he  meets  thee.

26  Bright,  radiant,  meet  to  be  adored,  immortal  with

refulgent  glow,

Agni  drives  R&kshasas  away.


21  Hoof-armed:  striking  with  the  hoof.  According  to  Sayana,
‘having  nails  like  hoofs.’  In,  Atharvan’s  manner  : like  Athar van  the
aneient  priest  who  is  said  to  have  been  the  first  who  obtained  fire  and
offered  burnt  oblations.

22  This  Auushtup  stanza  is  found  also  in  VII,  71.

24  Taken  from  Rigyeda  Y.  2.  9,

25  Kimidin  : see  I.  VII.  1.

26  Taken  from  Rigveda  VII.  15.  10.


i •:!


Hi


. THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  Fill

, HYMN"  IV.

JNBRA^and  Soma,  burn,  destroy  the  demon  foe »
bend  downward,  0 ye  Bulls,  those  who  add  gloom
to  gloom.  ■ '

■Annihilate  the  fools,  slay  them  and  bum  them  up :

chase  them  away  from  us,  pierce  the  voracious
fiends*

2 Let  sin,  Indra  and  Soma  ! round  the  wicked  boil,  like

s^a  caldron  set  amid  the  Haines  of  fire.

Against  the  foe  of  prayer,  eater  of  gory  flesh
the  fearful-eyed  Kimidin,  keep  perpetual  hate.

3 Indra  and  Soma,,  plunge  the  wicked  in  the  depth,

• o cast  them  into  darkness  that  hath  no  support,

So  that  not  one  of  them  may  ever  thence  return  •


.The  hymn  consists  mainly  of  a series  of  imprecations  directed  against
demons  and  evil  spirits,  Rakshasas  and  Yatudhanas.

. 1 whole  hymn  is  taken,  with  unimportant,  variants,  from  Ri<*.
vena  VII.  104,  attributed  to  the  famous  liishi  Vasishtha.  Indra 'and
Tfr™0™A;  addressed  as  a dual  deity.  T he  demon  foe  : Rak-


HYMN'  4.]  THE  ATIlARfA-TEBA,  89?

6 Indra  and  Soma,  let  this  hymn  control  you  both,
even  as  the  girth  encompasses  two  vigorous  steeds —
The  song  of  praise  which  I with  wisdom  offer  you.
Do  ye,  as  Lords  of  men,  animate  these  my  prayers.
;i7  In  your  impetuous  manner  think  ye  both  thereon:
destroy  those  evil  spirits,  kill  the  treacherous  fiends.
Indra  and  Soma,  let  the  wicked  have  no  bliss  whoso
at  any  time  attacks  and  injures  us.

8 Whoso  accuses  me  with  words  of  falsehood  when

I pursue  my  way  with  guileless  spirit,

May  he,  the  speaker  of  untruth,  be,  Indra ! like  water
which  the  hollowed  hand  compresses.

9 Those  who  destroy,  as  is  their  wont,  the  simple,

and  with  their  evil  natures  harm  the  righteous,
May  Soma  give  them  over  to  the  serpent,  or  to  the
lap  of  Nirriti  consign  them.

10,  0 Agni,  whosoever,  seeks  to  injure  the  essence  of  our
food,  kine,  steeds,  or  bodies,

May  he,  the  adversary,  thief,  and  robber,  sink  to
destruction,  both  himself  and  offspring.

H |1  May  he  be  swept  away,  himself  and  children  ; may
all  the  three  earths  press  him  down  beneath  them.
May  his  fair  glory,  0 ye  Gods,  be  blighted,  who  in
i'he  day  or  night  .would  fain  destroy  us.  :

III The  prudent  finds  it  easy  to  distinguish  the  true  and
false:  their  words  oppose  each  other.

,^r?'Of  these  two  that  which  is  the  true  and  honest  Soma
protects,  and  brings  the  false  to  nothing.


THE  HYMNS'  OF


[BOOK  Jill,

13  Never  doth  Soma  aid  and  guide  the  wicked  or  him

who  falsely  claims  the  Warrior’s  title.

He  slays  the  fiend  and  him  who  speaks  untruly  :
both  lie  entangled  iu  the  noose  of  Indra.

14  As  if  I worshipped  deities  of  falsehood,  or  thought

vain  thoughts  about  the  Gods,  O Agni !

Why  art  thou  angry  with  us,  JMavedas?  Destruc-
tion fall,  on  those  who  lie  against  thee  !

15  So  may  I die  this  day  if  I have  harassed  any  man’s

life,  or  if  I be  a demon.

Yea,  may  he  lose  all  his  ten  sons  together  who  with
false  tongue  hath  called  me  Y&tudb&na.

16  May  Indra  slay  him  with  a mighty  weapon,  and  let

the  vilest  of  all  creatures  perish,

The  fiend  who  says  that  he  is  pure,  who  calls  me
a demon  though  devoid  of  demon  nature.

17  She  too  who  wanders  like  an  owl  at  night-time,

hiding  her  body  in  her  guile  and  malice,

May  she  fall  downward  into  endless  caverns.  May
press-stones  with  loud  ring  destroy  the  demons.


13  The  Warrior’s  title:  the  rank  of  a Kshatriya  or  prince  of  the
military  order.  The  first  eleven  verses  1 are  considered  to  be  a male-
diction on  the  Bdkshasas  by  the  Rishi.  To  account  for  the  change  of  tone
[iu  12—10]  Sdyana  gives  an^unusual  version  of  the  legend  told  in  the
Mahdbhdrata  of  king  Kalmashapada  being  transformed  to  a lidkshasa,
and  devouring  the-  100  sons  of  Vasishlha : here  it  is  said  that  a
Rdkshasa,  having  devoured  the  Rishi’ s sons,  assumed  his  shape,  and
said  to  him,  “ I am  Vasishtha,  thou  art  the  Rdkshasa;”  to  which
Vfisishtha  replied  by  repeating  this  verse  [stanza  1 2 j declaratory  of
his  discriminating  between  truth  and  falsehood.’ — Wilson.

‘ The  verses  may,  as  Professor  Max  Muller  supposes,  have  arisen  out
of  Yasishtha’s  contest  with  Yisvamitra,  and  it  may  have  been  the  lat-
ter personage  who  brought  those  charges  of  heresy,  and  of  murderous
and  demoniacal  character  against  his  rival.’ — Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  I.  p.  327.

17  Here  the  malediction  on  evil  spirits  in  general  is  resumed  and
continued  to  the  cud  of  the  hymn.  She  too  lire  Rtikshasi  or  female  fiend.


HYMN  4.]  THE  A Til  A R FA- FED  A,  399

18  Spread  out,  ye  Maruts,  search  among  the  people  :
« seize  ye  and  grind  the  Kakshasas  to  pieces,

Who  fly  abroad,  transformed  to  birds,  at  night-time,
and  sully  and  pollute  our  holy  worship.  *

19  Hurl  down  from  heaven  thy  bolt  of  stone,  O Indra  :

sharpen  it,  Maghavan,  made  keen  by  Soma.
Forward,  behind,  and  from  above  and  under,  smite
clown  the  demons  with  thy  rocky  weapon.

20  They  fly,  the  demon  dogs,  and,  bent  on  mischief,

fain  would  they  harm  indomitable  Indra.

Sakra  makes  sharp  his  weapon  for  the  wicked  :
now  let  him  cast  his  bolt  at  fiendish  wizards.

21  Indra  hath  ever  been  the  fiends’  destroyer  who  spoil

oblations  of  the  Gods’  invokers.

Yea,  Sakra,  like  an  axe  that  splits  the  timber,  assails
and  smashes  them  like  earthen  vessels.

22  Destroy  the  fiend  shaped  like  an  owl  or -owlet,

destroy  him  in  the  form  of  dog  or  cuckoo.

Destroy  him  shaped  as  eagle  or  as  vulture  : as  with
a stone,  O Indra,  crush  the  demon.

23  Let  not  the  fiend  of  witchcraft- workers  reach  us:

^ may  Dawn  drive  off  the  couples  of  Kimidins.

Earth  keep  us  safe  from  earthly  woe  and  trouble  J


[%O0K  VIII


^tobe-invented  being  a Kshatriya

iook.H  the  ?igV6da  Indra  is
tree.  See  I I.  H,  2


8 All  witchcraft  of  Angirases,  all  witchcraft  wrought

by  Asuras,  "

All  witchcraft  self-originate,  and  all  that  others  have
prepared,

May  these  depart  to  both  remotest  spaces,  past
ninety  ample  water-floods.

9 May  the  Gods  bind  the  Charm  on  him  for  aripour,

Indra,  and  Vishnu,  Savitar,  Kudra,  Agni,
Prajapati,  sublimest  Parameslithin,  Vi  raj,  Vaisvanara,
and  all  the  Bishis.  : ’ ■

10  Thou  art  the  chief  of  all  the  plants,  even  as  a bull

among  the,  beasts,

A tiger  of  the  beasts  of  prey.  Him  whom  we  sought
for  have  we  found,  him  lying  near  in  wait  for  us.

11  A tiger  verily  is'he,  he  is  a lion,  and  a bull,

Subduer  of  his  foes  is  he,  the  man  who  wears  this

Amulet.  f "ff  : '■  ■■  V;'

12  Ho  mortal  beings  slay  him,  no  Gandharvas,  no

Apsarases  :

O er  all  the  regions  he  is  king,  the  man  who  wears
this  Amulet.


TEE  ATBARVA-VEDA.


Rwiiis  as  Solomon  was  regarded  by  the  Jewish  Rabbis  as  the  great
master  of  all  arts  of  enchantment.  Both  remotest  spaee$ : places  beyond
tlio  limits  of  heaven  and  earth.  Of.  VI.  75.  3.  Ninety  ample  water-
floods : or,  literally,  navigable  streams,  the  waters  of  the  ocean  of  air.
.‘Far  over  ninety  spacibus  floods  thy  thunderbolts  were  cast  abroad  ’
{R.  V.  I.  SO.  S) : ‘Casting  them  forth  beyond  the  ninety  rivers,  thou
dravest  down  into  the  pit  the  godless’  (E.  V.  I.  121.  13).  In  other
P'iUvs  <Ri  V.  I.  32.  14;  X.  104.  8)  ninety-nine  rivers  of  the  air  are
spoken  of,  both,  numbers  being  used  indefinitely.

pEaramesM^m : standing  iu  the  highest  place,  supreme;  here  an
epithet  of  Prajapati,  the  Lord  of  Life,  the  Creator.  Tiny:  a divine
being,  evolved  by  speculation,  identified  with  Piu-usha,  J’rajV.-td
Agni.  and,  later,  Vishnu.  See  Till.  10.  1,  note.

•iu  Thou ; the  Sralitya  tree  of  whose  wood  the  amulet  is  made.


the  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VM

14  Kasyapa  formed  and  fashioned  thee,  Kasvapa iaile

and  sent  thee  forth.  1

inclra  wore  thee,  and,  wearing  thee,  won  in  tl
wrestling-match  with  man.

Tlie  A“u¥  of  boundless  might  the  Gods  have  mad
a coat  of  mail.

15  \\  hoover  would  destroy  thee  with  Dikshd-ritej

sacrifices,  spells,

M?et  !\im,  “d  s?dte  Inclra  ! with  thy  hundred
knotted  thunderbolt.  J

^ Amulet,  circular,  potent,  conquering
Happy  and  fortunate  defence,  preserve  thy  childrei
y;  ;,  : and  thy  wealth.  .

1 ' ®‘’ave  I.nc|ra>  set  before  us  light,  peace  and  security
trom  below,  ‘ f

Peace  and  security  from  above,  peace  and'  security
from  behind,  * - J

IS  My  coat  of  mail  is  Heaven  and  Earth,  my  boat  o
mail  is  Day  and  Sun  :

A coat  of  mail  may  Indra  and  Agni  and  Dhdtai
grant  to  me.

U ISofc  all  the  Go  as  may  pierce,  all  leagued  together
/be  vast  strong  shield  which  Indra  gives,  and  Asmii
May  that  great  shield  on  all  sides  guard  my’ body
that  to  full  eld  my  life  may  be  extended.  “

■20  Let  the  Gods’  Charm  be  bound  on  me  to 'keen1' me
safe  from  every  ill.

Come  ye  and  outer  all  within  this  pillar,  the  safe-
guara  of  the  body,  thrice-defended.


21  In  tills  let  Indra  lay  a store  of  valour:  approach

ye  Gods,  and  enter  it  together,

For  his  long  life,  to  last  a hundred  autumns,  that  to
full  age  his  days  may  be  extended.

22  Lord  of  the  clan  who  brings  us  bliss,  fiend-slayer,

queller  of  the  foe,

;d::::4ay  he,  the  conqueror,  ne’er  subdued,  may  Indra':
bind  the  Charm  on  thee,

Bull,  Soma-drinker,  he  who  gives  us  peace.

May  he  protect  thee  round  about,  by  night  and  day
on  every  side.  d !-C  G :-

HYMN  VI.

, Let  neither  fiend  of  evil  name,  Alihsa,  Vatsapa,
desire  : ;•  .

Thy  pair  of  husband- wooers  which  thy  mother  cleans-
ed when  thou  wast  born.

. 2 Pal&la,  Atiapaidla,  Sarku,  Koka,  Malimlueha,  Palljaka,
Vavri  visas  and  Asresha,  Rikshagriva  and  Pramilin,

3 Approach  not,  come  not  hitherward  : creep  not  thou
in  between  her  thighs,  1


Tim  atiHrva-yeba.


21  This  pillar : this  protective  amulet.

22  Portions  of  this  stanza  are  taken  from  Rigveda  X.  152.  2.

The  hymn  is  an  incantation  designed  to  exorcise  various  evil  spirits
who  beset  women.  ■ ..  ..."  ■;  \ ■

1 Alinsa : the  meaning  of  this  demon’s  name  is  unknown.  Vatsapa  :
meaning,  probably,  as  Prof.  Welder  suggests,  ‘ drinking, like  a calf,’  the
name  of  a demon  who  robs  the  young  mother  of  her  milk.  Husband-
wooers : the  dainties  which  attract  the  future  husband ; the  breasts.
Cleansed : squeezed  dry.

2 The  meaning  of  some  of  these  demons’  names  is  obscure ; and
where  the  meaning  is  obvious  as  in  the  ease  of  Paldla  (Straw),  Malim-
lucha,  (Robber),  Koka  (Wolf),  Rikshagriva  (Bear-necked),  the  special
suitability  of  the  name  is  not  apparent.  They  stand  in  the  accusatives
ease,  and  must  be  governed  by  some  verb  as  ! I banish,’  understood.


[BOOK  rut

I set,  to  guard  her,  Baja,  that  which  chases  him  of
evil  name.

4 Dura  dm  a and  Suna-md  both  are  eager  to  converse  with

her.  .

We  drive  away  Arayas. : let  Sundma  seek  the  women-
folk. " .

5 The  black  and  hairy  Asura,  and  Stambaja  and
■ Tundika,

Arayas  from  this  girl  we  drive,  from  bosom,  ■waist,
and  parts  below.

6 Sniffer,  and  Feeler,  him  who  eats  raw  flesh,  and  him

who  licks  his  lips,

Ardyas  with  the  tails  of  clogs,  the  yellow  Baja  hath
; destroyed.  ' ° ' : :|§§|f

7 Whoever,  in  thy  brother’s  shape  or  father’s  comes  to

thee  in  sleep, —

Let  Baja  rout  and  chase  them  like  eunuchs  with
woman’s  head-dress  on.

8 Whoever  steals  to  thee  asleep  or  thinks  to  harm  thee

when  awake, —

These  hath  it  banished,  as  the  Sun  travelling  round
drives  shade  away.


TEE  HYMNS  ON


3 Baja  : apparently  some  strong-smelling  herb  (see  stanza  10),  by
whose  scent  the  demon  is  chased  away  as  was  Asrnodeus  by  c the  fishy
lame,  That  drove  him,  though  enamoured,  from  the  spouse  Of  Tobit’s
son*  (Paradise  Lost,  IY.  168),  See  Apocrypha.  Tobit,  YIIL  3.

Y 4 Durndmd  and  Shmdmd:  Jll-named  and  Well-named.  rrhe  latter  is
apparently  a good  genius  who  .protects  women,  whereas  the  former  in-
jures them.  Ardyas ; a class  of  malevolent  spirits,  the  female  fiends
being  called  Arayis.  See  I.  28.  4,

5 St rmb  tja  : growing  in  a clump  or  bush,  or  hi  a pillar.  Twid  >ha :
famished  with  a snout.

6 Him  who  vS*  his  lips : rerihdm  - so  Yilcdhi,  Li  eke  r,  is  the  name

of  a sorceress,  witch,  or  female3 4 5 6 * 8  fiend  in  I.  18.  4.

8 These  hath  it  banished;  the  purpose  of  the  charm  being  regard  d
as  already  effected.


THE  AT II ARY A-Y ED  A


0 Whoever  eauseth.  her  to  lose  her  child  or  bear  un-
timely fruit, —

Destroy  him,  O thou  Plant,  destroy  the  slippery  fiend
who  lusts  for  her,

10  Those  who  at  evening,  with  the  bray  of  asses,  dance

around  the  house,  Jvukshilas,  and  Kusulas,  and
Kakubhas,  Srimas,  Karumas,

These  with  thine  odour,  O thou  Plant,  drive  far  away
to  every  side.

11  Kukundhas  and  Kukurabhas  who  dress  themselves

in  hides  and  skins,  ''wy.  ■

Who  dance  about  like  eunuchs,  who  raise  a wild
clamour  in  the  wood,  all  these  we  banish  far  away,

12  All  those  who  cannot  bear  the  Sun  who  warms  us

yonder  from  the  sky,

A ray  as  with  the  smell  of  goats,  malodorous,  with
bloody  mouths,  the  Makakas  we  drive  afar.

1 3 All  those  who  on  their  shoulders  bear  a head  of

monstrous  magnitude,

Who  pierce  the  women’s  loins  with  pain, — those
demons,  Indra  ! drive  away  !

14  Those,  bearing  horns  upon  their  hands,  who  first  of

all  approach  the  brides  ;

Standing  in  ovens,  laughing  loud,  those  who  in  bushes
flash  forth  light,  all  these  we  banish  hence  away.

1 5 Those  who  have  retroverted  toes,  and  heels  and  faces

in  the  front,


10  Rulcshilas:  big-bellied  fiends.  Kusidas : the  meaning  is  uncertain.
Lahubhas:  humpbacks.  Srimas:  the  meaning  is  unknown.  Karumas ;
dissonant.

:lYYl:,KuIcmdim:^paA  meaning  is  unknown.  Kuhpahhm  ipefliiq®,,
howlers.

3 2 Makakas:  the  meaning  is  unknown.


TEB  HYMNS  OF


{BOOK  Jill.

Khakjas  Sakadhbmajas,  Urundas,  all  the  Matron  $as,
impotent  Kumbhamushkas,  these,

Drive  thou,  0 Brahmapaspati,  far  from  this  girl  with
vigilance.

16  Sightless  and  with  distorted  eyes,  impotent,  womaii-

less  be  they.

Kj  Healing  Plant,  east  each  away  who,  not  her  hus-
band, would  approach  this  woman  wedded  to  her
lord.

17  The  Bristly-haired,  the  Maniac-haired,  the  Biter,  and

the  Groper-fiend,  '

The  Creeper-near,  the  Copper-hued,  the  Snouty,  and
the  S&luda,

With  foot  and  heel  kick  oyer,  as  a hasty  cow  her
milking-pan.

18  If  one  should  touch  thy  coming  babe  or  kid  thine

infant  newly  born,

The  yellow  Plant  with  mighty  bow  shall  pierce  him
even  to  the  heart.

1 9 Those  who  kill  infants  unawares,  and  near  the  new-

made  mothers  lie, — -

Let  Piiiga  chase  the  amorous  Gandharvas  as  wind  '
chases  cloud.

20  Let  it  maintain  the  genial  seed  : let  the  laid  embryo

rest  secure.

Let  both  strong  Healers,  to  be  worn  within  the  girdle.


^ ID  Kruuajas : produced  on  threshing-floors.  SaJcadhfmiajcu : pro-
from  the  smoke  of  cow-dung.  Kumbhammhkas : ureeis  similes
testiculoH  habentes.  The  meaning  of  Umndas  and  Matmcdae  m
■unknowns  that  of  ayasavas  (impotent)  is  uncertain.

Id  Piiiga . yellow;  another  name  of  Baja*  Amorous  Gandhctrvas :
See  IV,  37.  XL  '

20  It:  Baja.  Both  strong  Healers:  Pihga  and  Baja  regarded  as  two
separate  plants.


'MMJ  (>.]  TIIE  AT  EAR  FA- VEDA.  407

21;  Froa  t&e  Kimidih,  for  thy  lord  and  children,  .Piiiga
shield  thee  well,

From  Say  aka,  and  Nagnaka,  Tangalva,  and  Pavinasa.

22  From  the  five-footed,  fingerless,  from  the  four-eyed,

the  double-faced,

From  the  Close-creeper,  from  the  Worm,  from  the
Quick-roller  guard  her  well.

23  Those  who  eat  flesh  uncooked,  and  those  who  eat  the

bleeding  flesh  of  men,

Feeders  on  babes  unborn,  long-haired,  far  from  this
place  we  banish  these.

24  Shy  slickers  from  the  Sun,  as  slinks  a woman  from

her  husband’s  sire,-—

Deep  down  into  the  heart  of  these  let  Baja  and  let
Piiiga  pierce.

,25  Piiiga,  preserve  the  babe  at  birth,  make  not  the  boy
a female  child.

Let  not  Egg-eaters  mar  tire  germs  : drive  the  Kim t-
d ins  far  away.

26  Sterility,  and  infants’  death,  and  weeping  that  an*
nounceth  woe, —

Dear ! lay  them  on  the  fiend  as  thou  wouldst  pluck  a
garland  from  a tree.


iil  Nagnalca : naked.  Pavinasa:  having  a nose  like  a s'
The  meanings  of  Sdyaka  and  Tangalva  are  unknown.

24  As  slinks  a woman  from  her  husband’s  sire  : the  timid
of  a daughter-in-law  for  her  father-in-law  was  prover
Zimmer,  AltinJisehes  Leben,  p.  327.

25  Egg-eaters : fiends  who  devour  the  unborn  babe.  C’f.  II
20  Dear  !:  the.  plant  Baja  is’  addressed.

§§lf| hy-belief'  in  Iitoubi  vvas  eonihion  aththgf  thv  QeWs:;-"  and;- tl

:.Buitou,:;;d;48bi  ibvbipliiy , with  bir
beasts,  mul  if  ail  be  certain  that  is  credibly  reported,  with  ti
<ji  the  air,  and  devils  of  hell  themselves,  vh  > e.v  us  much  e
mse  that  woftl);;hs  ctehiurgs

H stopcs; be.-  true  ltlig§;iirs  wMilriiJtifijhhubiise  athd I \
dl  nymphs,  lascivious  fauna,  satyrs,- and  those  heathen  gods  w


4 6 TllB  nmm  of  [BoOK  ViJL

hymn  vil

T:iS!oured’ a,ul  the  pale' the

T mm"lJS™dand  the  Ha0k’~a11  P1“"‘s  ™ »»-

2 T1,themGoclItak:idtliTer  fr°m  C™™PHon  whieh

Hoa™’ t!,eir  moti-

3 %LW£Z  Con

sumption  caused  by  sin.  y Uou“

4 I speak  to  Healing  Herbs  spreading,  and  bushy  +o

creepers  and  to  those  whose  sheath  is  single
I call  for  thee  the  fibrous  and  the  reed-like  and
branching  Plants,  dear  to  the  Visve  Dligf  ])0ivm-
ful,-  giving  life  to  men.  ' ' ’ i_

5 The  conquering  .strength,  the  power  and  might  which

■victorious  Plants,  possess,

Therewith  dehver  this  man, here  from  this  Consump-
. ~i  t0n’°  >e  Piants  : so  I prepare  the  remedy.  1

Z ay,^'  Piant  that  giveth  m>  that  d^eth  malady


iloviis,  those  lascivious  Tclchines,
fables  ; or  those  familiar
an.,1  devils,  there  is  some
Part  3,  Sect.  2,  Memb.  I


of  whom  the  Platonists  tell  so  many:
meetings  m our  days,  ami  company  of  witches
probability  for  it.’— Anatomy  of  Melancholy,

of  M-in  T>  /r,  „ ■ baos-  I-  Prof.  Weber  refers  to  tho  Incubon-'S

> 33r>'  --

•?•***•  v

ky  L..0wfe  „ iiigvrfa;  nLigbsgb:  ’ “

- «

- l Hi  Ina,:  the  ocean  of  the  air.


HYMN  7,]  THE  A TEA  E YA-YEDA.  * 4-03

Arundhati,  the  rescuer,  strengthening,  rich  in  sweets
I call,  to  free  this  man  from  scath  and  harm.

7 Hitherward  let  the  sapient  come,  the  friendly  sharers

of  my  speech,  ■ - -

That  we  may  give  this  man  relief  and  raise  him  from
his  evil  plight.  . ; :

8 Germ  of  the  Waters,  Agni’s  food,  Plants  ever  grow-

ing fresh  and  new,

Sure,  healing,  bearing  thousand  names,  let  them  be
all  collected  here.

9 Let  Plants  whose  soul  is  water,  girt  with  Avakas,

piercing  with  their  sharp  horns  expel  the  malady.

10  Strong,  antidotes  of  poison,  those  releasers,  free  from

Varuna,  & -

And  those  that  drive  away  Catarrh,  and  those  that
frustrate  magic  arts,  let  all  those  Plants  come
hitherward.

11  Let  purchased  Plants  of  mightier  power,  Plants  that

are  praised  for  excellence,  ; \ , , 7

• Here  in  this  village  safely  keep  cattle  and  horses,
man  and  beast.

MjSl-eet-  is  tbeir  root,  sweet  are  these  Plants’  top
branches,  sweet  also  is  their  intermediate  portion  ;
Sweet  is  their  foliage,  and  sweet  their  blossom,  com-
bined with  sweetness  is  their  taste  of  Amrit : food,
fatness  let  them  yield,  with  kine  preceding.


6 Arundhati : a creeping  plant  used  in  medicine ; called  also  Silachi.

See  IV.  12.  1;  V.  5;  VI.  59.  1.  7/  7 ' ; 7 •'  f

7 The  sapient : the  plants  which  understand  the  cure  of  disease.

a grassy  plant  growing  in  marshy  land  (Blyxa
Octandra).  See  IV.  37.  8.

10  Free  from  Yaruna:  independent  of  his  power,  and  able  to  ward
off  the  diseases  which  he  sends.  Catarrh  : baldsah the  exact  nature


'J  ' rv  ^f  wV,n  r1  tileir  thousand  leaves  free  me  from .
IJeatii  and  misery,

14  May  the  Plants’  Tiger-amulet,  protective,  guardian
from  the  curse,

Beat  off  the  brood  of  demons,  drive  all  maladies  afar
from  us.

io  Before  the  gathered  Plants  they  fly  and  scatter,  as
though  a lion's  roar  or  fire  dismayed  them,
expelled  by  Plants,  let  men's  and  kine’s  Consumption
pass  from  ns  to  the  navigable  rivers.

16  Emancipated  from  the  sway  of  Agni,  of  VaisvAnamy

go,  covering  the  earth,  ye  Plants  whose  ruler  is  J
Vanasjpati.  '

17  May  these  be  pleasant  to  our’ heart,  auspicious,  rich  > I

m store  of  milk,

riiese  Plants  of  the  Angirases  which  grow  on  mourn  *
tains  and  on  plains,.  ' ° ||

18  The  1 hints  I know  myself,  the  plants. that  with  mine  X ;

eye  1 look  upon,  *

Plants  yet  unknown,  and  those  we  know,  wherein  we  1
find  that  power  is  stored,

1;9  Let  all  the  congregated  Plants  attend  and  mark  mine
utterance,

liiat  we  may  rescue  this  man  here  and  save  him  from
severe  distress.  , ' '

20  Asvattha,  Barbha,  King  of  Plants,  is  Soma,  death-
less sacrifice  :

Barley  and  Rice  are  healing  balms,  the  sons  of
Heaven  who  never  die,


TIT  UN  7„]  THE  ATIIARYA-YEBA,  411

;/2L: ;Jjift;:^oiiirseIves;;.up> ye ' Healing  Plants,  loud;  is  the
thunder’s  crash'  and  roar

When  with  full  flow  Parjanya,  ye  Children  of  Prisni  !
blesseth  you.

22  We  give  the  essence  of  that  stream  of  nectar  to  this

man  to  drink :

So  I prepare  a remedy  that  he  may  live  a hundred
years.

23  Well  doth  the  wild  boar  know  a Plant,  the  mungoose

knows  the  Healing  Herb.

I call,  to  aid  this  man,  the  Plants  which  Serpents
and  Gandharvas  know.

24  Plants  of  Angirases  which  hawks,  celestial  Plants

which  eagles  know  ;

Plants  known  to  swans  and  lesser  fowl,  Plants  known
to  all  the  birds  that  fly,  * -

Plants  that  are  known  to  sylvan  beasts, — I call  them
all  to  aid  this  man.

25  The  multitude  of  herbs  whereon  the  Cows  whom  none

may  slaughter  feed,  all  that  are  food  for  goats  and
sheep,

So  many  Plants,  brought  hitherward,  give  shelter
and  defence  to  thee !

26  Hitherward  unto  thee  I bring  the  Plants  that  cure

all  maladies,  v •'

All  Plants  wherein  physicians  have  discovered
health-bestowing  power.  .

27  Let  Plants  with  flower  and  Plants  with  bud,  the

fruitful  and  the  fruitless,  all,

Like  children  of  one  mother,  yield  their  stores  for
this . man’s’  perfect  health.


1 '21  ^prisni -here, meaning  Earth,  the  mother  of  plants.  Farjanyk'i-
the  deity  of  the  rain-cloud.  See  I.  2.  1.

23  W-ild  hoar : of.  IT.  27.  2,  and  V.  14.  1.  Wild  pigs  are  extraordi-
narily quick  at  discovering  and.  unearthing  potatoes’’ and  all  sorts  of
The mmgorm:  of.  \rI.  139.  5,"


412  tee  HTMFS  OF  l BOOK  7111,

28  From  the  Five-arrowed,  from,  the  Ten-arrowed  have
I delivered  thee,

Freed  thee  from  Yama’s  fetter  and  from  all  offence
against  the  Gods.

HYMN  VIII.  . | %

Indra  the  Shaker  shake  them  up,  brave,  hero,  fort-
demohsher,

That  into  thousand  fragments  we  may  strike  the
armies  of  our  foes  1

2 Let  Putirajju  with  her  breath  corrupt  and  putrefy

that  host,"  *

, terror  smite  our  foeraen’s  heart',  when  fire  and

smoke  are  seen  afar.

3 Asvattha,  .rend  those  men ; do  thou  devour  them

quickly,  Khadira !


28  Five-arrowed : this  and  Ten-arrowed  appear  to  be  fanciful  epithets
of  tever  or  other  severe  disease  personified.

With  this  hymn  may  be'  compared  Eigveda  X.  97,  Praise  of  Herbs.
Translated  by  Ludwig,  Her  Eigveda,  III.  p.  504.

, The  hymn  consists  of  a series  of  imprecations  directed  against  a
hostile  army.  v.

2Ttitirajju:  some  unidentifiable  malodorous  plant.  According  to
f rot  Ludwig  a species  of  serpent.

3 Send : the  Asvattha  or  Ficus  Religiosa  is  called  Burster  or  Ren-
«ei  because- it  splits  asunder  the  wood,  masonry,  or  stone  in  whos<
crevices  its  seed  has  germinated  and  grown.  See  III.  6.  2,  3.  Devour
them  . . . Khalira ! : Miada  khadira  ; play  upon  the  words.  The
iinaaiia  is  the  Acacia  Catechu,  a tree  with  solid  hard  wood,

4 Parush&hva : a kind  of  reed  or  rush.  Feeds  : weak  and  fragile  as
reeus  iror.  bwlwlg  translates  difterentfy  diser  rauhen  Made
schiachtruf  maclie  er  heiser.’—  Per  Eigveda,  III,  p.  527,


U7MN  8.]  ‘ THE  ATIIAB,  YA- VEDA.  ' 413

5 Air  was  tlie  net ; the  poles  thereof  were  the  oreat

quarters  of  the  sky  :

Sakra  therewith  enveloped  and  east  on  the  ground
the  Dasyus’  host.

6 Verily  mighty  is  the  net  of  mighty  Sakra  rich  in

wealth  :

Therewith  press  all  the  foernen  down  so  that  not  one
of  them  escape  !

7 Great  is  thy  net,  brave  Indra,  thine  the  mighty,

match  for  a thousand,  Lord  of  Hundred  Powers  !
Holding  them,  with  his  host,  therewith  hath  Indra
■ slaughtered  Dasyus  a hundred,  thousand,  myriad,
hundred  millions.  . 1 .

8 This  world  so  mighty  was  the  net  of  Sakra,  of  the


414  THE  HYMNS  GF  [BOOK  Till

12  Forth  go  the  S&dhyas  in  their  might  bearing  one  net-

pole  raised  aloft,

One  pole  the  Itudras  carry,  one  the  Vastis,  and  the
Adityas  one.  ; 1

13  The  Visve  Devas  from  above  shall  come  depressing  .j

it  with  might,  ■/  '■d

And  in  the  midst  the  Angirases,  skying  the  mighty  |
host,  shall  go.

14  Trees  of  the  forest,  trees  that  bear  flower  and  fruit,

and  herbs  and  plants,  . ;

Quadruped,  biped  send  I forth  that  they  may  strike
this  army  dead.  ..

15  Gandharvas,  and  Apsarases,  Gods,  Serpents,  Fathers,  j

Holy  Men,  ’

Seen  and  unseen,  I send  them  forth  that  they  may
strike  this  army  dead.

1C  Here  spread  are  snares  of  Death  wherefrom  thou,  ,|
once  within  them,  ne’er  art  freed  : if

Full  many  a thousand  of  the  host  yonder  this  horn
shall  smite  and  slay.

.17  The  Gharma  hath  been  warmed  with  fire  : this  Homa
slays  a thousand  men.  _ •

Let  Bhava,  Prisnib&hu,  and  Sarva  destroy  that
armament,  -g

18  Their  portion  be  the  fire  of  Death,  hunger,  exhaus- : i
tion,  slaughter,  fear.


s:  see  VII.  5.  1.

i mseek : AecOrdiaij  to  the  MaliaMi^rkP's  Sa^KapaAgtH;
fspiii  .gFohpa  ofcPitris or  Fathers,  four '

:l  three  bodiless  (asa-nrinaJi,).’ — Muir,  O.  S.  Texts  V


he  symbol  of  power.

: the  libation  of  hot  milk  offered  especially  to  the  Asvins.
ation  poured  into  the  fire  ; a burnt  -ofitfi  ini.  PfiBinUi  ■ n ■
ed  arms ; the  name  of  a mythical  being,  rmt  mentiont  5

ins


J/FJ/JT  ,<?;]


TUB  ATIIAB  VA-  VEDA,


415


V itfe  cybur  ep;aagling  snares  and  nets,  Sarva  and

■ Indra  ! slay  that-host.

19  Fly,  conquered,  in. alarm,  ye  foes,  run  driven  by  the

spell  away  ! d fori

Let  not  one  man  escape  of  those  when  routed  by
ri'riri.-  Brihaspati,

20  Down  fall  their  weapons  on  the  ground  : no  strength

be  theirs  to  point  a shaft  :

TLen  in  their  dreadful  terror  let  their  arrows  wound
their  vital  parts.

21  Let  Heaven  and  Earth  roar  out  in  wrath  against

them,  and  Air  with  all  the  Deities  in  concert;

Let  them  not  find  a surety  or  a refuge,  but  torn
away  go  down,  to  Death  together.

:§ ^rihiules  °f  the  Gods’  ear  are  heaven’s  four  quarters;

. 'r  rig1  their  hooves  are  sacred  cakes,  the  air  its  body.

Its  sides  are  Heaven  and  Earth,  its  reins  the  Seasons,
Voice  is  its  hood,  its  grooms  are  sky’s  mid-regions.

23  Year  is  the  ear.  Full  Year  the  seat  for  driving,  VinVj

the  pole,  the  chariot’s;  front  is  Agoi,  Indra  the  •
|®i|  f|h|I  the  Moon  til  a driver,

24  Hence  conquer,  conquer,  Hail!  be  thou  the  victor!

Let  these  be  conquerors  and  those  be  conquered.

' _l!Uck  to  tIiese>-  i]I  luek  to  those  men 'yonder!
With  the  dark-blue-and-red  our  foes  I cover.


21  The  second  line  occurs  also  in  YI.  32.  2.

A22  Voice:  or  Yak  ; sec  IV.  I.  2.  . : ' ri;

, or  vu-aD  a mystical  being,  evolved 'by  speculation.  See

yitr.  10.  1,  note.

U Wtili  the  dark-olui-aud-red : that  is,  with  two  string  or  threads
Sfita,' XVI mil  ai'°  l°  bC  USeJ  iu  tllG  See  Kuusika-


[BOOK  Fill

HYMN  IX.  '

Whence  were  these  two  produced  ? which  was  that
region  ? From  what  world,  from  which  earth  had
they  their  being  ?

Calves  of  Viraj,  these  two  arose  from  water.  I ask
thee  of  these  twain,  who  was  their  milker.

2 He  who  prepared  a threefold  home,  and  lying  there

made  the  water  bellow  through  his  greatness.

Calf  of  Virftj,  giving’  each  wish  fulfilment,  made
bodies  for  himself  far  off,  in  secret.

3 Which  are  the  three,  the  mighty  three,  whereof  the

fourth  divides  the  voice,

This  may  the  Brahman  know  by  prayer  and  fervour,
whereto  belongs  the  one,  whereto  the'other.

4 Out  of  the  Brihat  as  the  sixth  five  Samans  have  been

fashioned  forth  : / ,

From  Brihati  was  Brihat  formed ; whence  was  the
Brihati  composed  ?


THE  HYMNS  OF


The  hymn,  which  is  a kind  of  Brahmodyam  (see  note  at  the  end  of
Y.  1),  consists  of  a series  of  purposely  enigmatical  questions  and  dark
answers  on  cosmogouical,  ritual,  and  metrical  doctrine.  It  is  obscure
throughout,  and  in  many  parts  I find  it  absolutely  unintelligible.

1 These  boo:  perhaps  the  Sun  and  Lightning.  Yirdj : a m3  ■ tf  rious
Divine  Being  or  Abstraction,  evolved  by  speculation,  endowed  with
creative  and  other  miraculous  powers,  and  the  subject  of  many  fanci-
ful allegories.  See  the  following  hyrrm.

2 Threefold  home:  heaven,  firmament,  and  earth,  wherein  Agni
dwells  as  Sun,  lightning,  and  fire.

. 3 The  mighty  three : or,  the  three  Brihats  : a mystical  power  is  repre-
sented as  residing  ip  the  metres  which  are  regarded  as  divine  beings.

. 4-  Brihat  : the  name  of  various  Samans  or  chanted  songs  in  the
Brihati  metre  which  consists  of  thirty-six  syllables  in  four  PM&s,

8 -t-  8 *f  12  + 8.


' y:‘  WE  ATHARrA-rEl)A,  . ■ . 417

m

5 On  measure  Brihatt  is  based,  and  measure  on  the

measurer : , '

From  magic  might  came  magic  might,  from  magic
might  came  M&tall.  ' : -MMmi

6 Vaisv&nara’s  image  is  the.  sky  above  us,  so  far  as

Agni  forced  both  spheres  asunder.

Thence  from  that  region  as  the  sixth  come  praise-
songs,  and  every  sixth  day  hence  again  go  upward.

7 We,  Kasyapa!  six  present  Rishis,  ask  thee — for  thou

bast  proved  things  tried  and  meet  for  trial —

They  call  Virij  the  father  of  Devotion  : tell  her  to  us
thy  friends  in  all  her  figures.

S She  whom,  advancing,  sacrifices  follow,  and  when
she. takes  her  station  stand  beside  her,

By  whose  control  and  hest  the  spirit  moveth,  she  is
Vir&j,  in  highest  heaven,  0 Rishis.  .

9 Breathless,  -she  moves*by  breath  of  living  creatures.-
Syar&j  precedes,  Vir&j  comes  closely  after.

Some  men  behold  her  not,  and  some  behold  her,
Vir&j  meet-shaped,  who  thinks  of  all  existence.


5'  dtalt : the  name  of  a divine  being  associated  wtih  Yama  and
the  Fathers.  But  the  meaning  here  is  uncertain,  the  name  being,
perhaps,  introduced  with  punning  reference  to  the  md  in  md'trdydh,
measure,  mdtur,  measurer,  in  the  preceding,  and  m&yd',  m&yd'ydh ,
magic  power,  in  the  same  line,  and  intended,  as  Ludwig  suggests,,
to  signify  rndtar,  a measurer.

6 Every  sixth  day : in  ceremonies  performed  on  each  sixth  day  of

the  lunar  fortnight.  ‘ y:;’l % yyyfyyhy/y: v.  \

7 Kasyapa:  the  celebrated  Bishi  of  the  Rigveda.  See  Index  of
Names,  Ete.  Father  ....  her : Viralj,  or  VirUt,  appears  sometimes  as
a male  being,  identified  with  Purusha,  Prajapati,  and  Agni,  sometimes
as  a female,  the  daughter  of  one  of  these  deities.  See  the  following
hymn.

9 Svardj : or  SvarJt,  self-luminous  ;•  the  Supreme  Being.


'418


THE  HYMNS  OF


10  Who . hath  perceived  Viraj’s  duplication,  perceived

her  seasons  and  her  rule  and  practice  ? , r

Who  knows  her  steps,  how  oft,  how  far  extended,
who  knows  her  home  and  number  of  her  dawnings  ?

11  She  here  who  first  of  all  sent  forth  her  lustre  moves  :

„ onward 'resting  on  these  lower  creatures.  ’ I

Exalted  power  and  might  are  stored  within  her  : the
woman  hath  prevailed,  the  new-come  mother.

12  Both  Dawns  on  wings  of  song,  with  rich  adornment,  j

move  on  together  to  their  common  dwelling’.  ’

Surya’s  two  wives,  unwasting,  most  prolific,  knowing  !
their  way,  move,  rich  in  light,  together.

13  The  three  have  passed  along  the  path  of  Order-

three  warm  libations  have  regarded  offspring  —

One  quickens  progeny,  one  strengthens  vigour,  and  ; !
one  protects  the  kingdom  of  the  pious.

14  She  who  was  fourth  was  made  by  Agni,  Soma,  and  :

Itishis  as  they  formed  both  halves  of  worship,
Gfiyatri,  Trishtup,  Jagati,  Anush  tup,  Brihadarki  |
lightening  the  sacrifice!'.  j

15  Five  milkings  answer  to  the  fivefold  dawning,  five  :

seasons  to  the  cow  who  bears  five  titles.

The  five  sky-regions  made  fifteen  in  number,  one
head  have  these  to  one  sole  world  directed.

1.6  Six  Elements  arose,  first-born  of  Order : the  six-day
time  is  carried  by  six  Simians.


12  Both  Dawns  : Morning  and  her  sister  Night.

13  The  three : Dawn,  Sunlight,  and  Night.

14  Brihadarki:  containing  or  forming  the  great  or  best  hymn  of  *
praise.  Lightening  : winning  the  light  of  heaven  for.

15  Five  seasons;  instead  of  the  more  usual  six ; the  Dewy  and  the
Cold  seasons  being  counted  together  as  one.  Made  fifteen : by  the
addition  of  intermediate  spaces,  or  multiplication  by  three.

16  Six  dements:  earth,  air,  fire,  water,  ether,  and  the- subtile
element  B Ah  broad  ones:  heaven  ai  d earth,  each  of  which  is  rc  gar-  led

• as  threefold,


HYMN  9.]  TJIE  'A Till R7A- VEDA . , 419

Six-yoked  the  plough  is,  as  each  trace  is  numbered  :
they  call  both  broad  ones  six;  six,  Earth  and.

: ' Heaven.  ; y",;  V

17  They  call  the  cold  months  six,  and  six  the  hot  ones.

Which,  tell  us,  of  the  seasons  is  redundant  ?

Seven  sages,  eagles,  have  sat  down  together  : se«yen
metres  match  the  seven  Consecrations.

18  Seven  are  the  Homas,  seven  the  logs  for  burning,

seven  are  the  gtreams  of  mead,  and  seven  the
seasons.  ’ .

Into  the  world  have  come  seven  streams -of  butter  :
those  we  have,  heard  of  as  the  Seven  Vultures.

19  Seven  metres,  by  four  syllables  increasing,  each  of

the  seven  founded  upon  another —

How  are  the  hymns  of  praise  on  these  supported,  and
how  are  these  imposed  upon  the  praise-songs  ?

20  How  hath  the  Gayatri  filled  out  three  triads  ? On  the
. fifteen  how  is  the  Trishtup  moulded,

Jagati  fashioned  on  the  three-and-thirty  ? How  is
Anushtup  formed  ? how  Ekavinsa  ?


17  Seven  sages ; the  Seven  Rishis.  See  V.  17.  6.  Seven  metres:  the
seven  generic  metres  of  the  Veda.  Consecrations:  dtkshds ; solemn
initiatory  or  prepaid tory  ceremonies.

18  Ilomas  : oblations  of  clarified  butter  poured  into  the  fire.  Severn
Vultures : this  literal  translation  is  unintelligible.  Professor  Ludwig
suggests  that  the  meaning  is  : as  (men)  eager  after  everything  that  is
sevenfold,  or  wishing  to  turn  all  things  into  sevens.

’20  Triads : or  triplets.  6 The  Saman  consists  of  two  verses  only,  it  is
first  to  be  made  to  consist  of  three  by  repetition  of  some  part  of  the  two
principal  verses  before  it  can  be  used  as  a chant  at  a Soma  sacrifice.
After  a triplet  of  verses  has  been  thus  obtained,  it  is  to  be  chanted  in
three  turns,  eacl^turn  containing  in  three  subdivisions  a certain  number
of  repetitions.’  Hang,  Aitareya  Brahmana,  Translation,  Book  HI,  2.
17,  note.  These  questions  on  the  formation  of  the  metres  are  not
easily . explained  or  answered,  nor  are  they  of  any  general  importance*
Ekavinsa  : a Stoma  or  hymn  consisting  of  twenty -one  parts.


420  THE  HYMN'S  OF  [BOOK  VIII.

21  Eight  Elements  sprang  up,  first  born  of  Order  : the

Priests  divine  are  eight  in  number,  Indra  !

Eight  are  the  wombs  of  Aditi,  eight  her  children:

- for  the  eighth  night  is  the  libation  destined.

22  So  planning  bliss  for  you  have  I come  hither  to  win

your  friendship  : kind  am  I,  and  gracious.

Born  from  one  source,  propitious  is  your  wisdom  :
knowing  full  well'to  all  of  you  it  eometk.

23  To  Indra  eight,  to  Yama  six,  seven  to  the  Rishis,

seven  to  each  : . #

The  number  five  accompanies  waters  and  men  and
healing  herbs.

24  The  Heifer,  all  his  own,  poured  forth  for  Indra  control

and  milk  at  her  first  time  of  milking  ;

-And  he  then  satisfied  the  four  divisions,  the  Gods
and  men  and  Asuras  and  Rishis.

25  Who  is  the  Cow  ? Who  is  the  Single  Rishi  ? What

is  the  law,  what  are  the  benedictions  ?

What  on  the  earth  is  the  one  only  Spirit  ? Which  of
the  number  is  the  Single  Season  ? • •


21  Eight  elements  : apparently  the  sis  of  jstanza  16  with  Intellect
and  Mind  added.  Eight  her  children:  the  Adityasuor  sons  of  Aditi
(see  L 9.  1,  note)  are  in  the  Rigveda  (IX.  114.  3)  said  to  be  seven.
In  the  period  of  the  Br&hmanas  they  were  twelve,  as  representing
the  sun  in  the  twelve  months  of  the  year.  Eighth  night : the  Ash  tarn!
or  eighth  lunar  day  in  each  half-month,

22  I : Viraj  may  bo  meant,

23  . Waters  : with  reference  to  the  five  rivers  of  the  Panjab,  Men  ;
referring  to  the  Five  Nations,  or  Races  of  Aryans.

“24  The  Heifer  : perhaps  the  rain-cloud,  the  milk  being  the  rain,  and
control  the  power  which  Indra  derives  from  the  sacrifices  which  the
.'fertilizing  rain  enables  men  to  offer  to  him.  * ■

25  The  .Single  Rishi ; meaning  the  first  or  chief  sage.  Single  Spirit :
yaksh&m,  here  rendered  by  spirit,  means  a living  sit]  ernatur*  1 ! eing
deserving  worship  Professor  Ludwig  here  and  else  wlien  renders  the
word  by  Fest,  feast  or  festival.  The  Single  Season:  the  intercalary
month.  These  questions  of  the  Rishis  and  Kasyapa’s  replies  are  un-
fu  re  dig  idle  The  h)  um  has  been  translm  : 1 1 v Luihv  ■;  Dor  Eigveda.
III.  p,  439,  . °


MMn  io.j  - TM  atharva-vsra.  in

26  One  is  the  Cow,  one  is  the  Single  Spirit,  one  is  the
law,  single  are  .benedictions.  i

The  Spirit  dwelling  on  the  earth  is  single  ; the  Single
Season  never  is  transcended.

HYMN  X.

VieAj  at  first  was  This.  At  birth  all  feared  her;  the
thought,  She  will  become  this  All,  struck  terror.

2 She  rose,  the  G&rKapatya  fire  she  entered.  He  who

knows  this  becomes  lord  of  a household,  performer
of  domestic  sacrifices.

3 She  mounted  up,  the  Eastward  fire  she  entered.

He  who  knows  this  becomes  the  Gods’  beloved,
and  to  his  call  they  come  when  he  invokes  them.

4 She  mounted  up,  the  Southward  fire  she  entered.

He  who  knows  this  becomes  a fit  performer  of
sacrifice,  meet  for  honour,  shelter-giver.

5 She  mounted  up,  she  entered  the  Assembly.  He

who  knows  this  becomes  polite  and  courtly,  and
people  come  as  guests  to  hisassembly.


The  hymn  is  a glorification  of  the  mystical  abstraction  Vir&j.

1 Vir&j : in  Bigveda  X.  90.  5.  Vir&j  is  said  to  have  been  bom  from
Purusha  (the  Primeval  Male  from  whom  the  universe  was  evolved).
In  A.  V.  IX.  3.  5,  she  is  identified  with  Vstk,  the  Word,  and,  in  IX.  10.
24,'  with  Yak,  Air,  Earth,  Prajitpati  the  Creator,  with  Death,  and  the
Regent  of  the  Sadhyas.  In  XI.  4.  12  she  is  identified  with  Prana  or
Vital  Spirit.  Vir&j  is  also  the  personified  forty-syllable  metre  of  that
name  to  which  miraculous  powers  were  attributed.  In  some  Vedie
passages  virdj  is  an  epithet  (radiant,  splendid)  applied  to  Indra,  Praj&-
pati,  and  Parameshthin  the  Supreme.  See  Muir,  0.  S,  Tests,  V.,
pfS.  369,  370.  This:  the  universe.

2 Tlie  Oarhapatya  fire  she  entered:  here  Vir&j  is  a mysterious
divine  influence  completing  the  sanctity  and  efficacy  of  the*  western
sacred  fire  which  it  is  the  householder’s  privilege  and  duty  to  maintain.

5 The  Assembly:  of  the  people  of  the  village  or  hamlet.'


422  THE  HYMNS  GF  , [BOGS  VIII,

6 She  mounted  up,  she  passed  within  the  meeting.  He

who  knows  this  becomes  fit  for  the  meeting,  and
to  his  hall  of  meeting  come  the  people.

7 She  mounted  up,  she  entered  Consultation.  Whoso

knows  this  is  fit  to  be  consulted,  and  to  his  consul-
* tation  come  the  people.

8 She  mounted  up,  and,  into  four  divided,  she  took

her  station  in  the  air’s  mid-region.

9 Of  her  the  Gods  and  men  said,  This  .she  knowetb.

That  we  may  both  have  life  let  us  invoke  her.

TO  Thus  did  they  cry  to  her  :

11  Come,  Strength  ! come,  Food- ! come,  Charmer!  come,

Free-giver !

12  Her  calf,  her  well-beloved  calf,  was  Indra : Gttyatri

was  her  rope,  the  cloud  her  udder.

13  Two  teats  she  had,  Rathantara  and  Brihat,  two,

YajMyajniya  and  Vdmadevya.

14  With  the  Rathantara  the  Gods  milked  from  her  the

Plants,  and  all  the  wide  expanse  with  Brihat.  ||||


6 The  meeting : of  the  people  of  the  district.  On  sahha,  assembly,
and  sdmiti , meeting  or  congress,  see  Zimmer,  Aitindisches  Leben,
pp.  172 — 175.

11  Food! : svddhe ; * But  svadhA  means  also  food,  lit.  one's  own
portion,  the  sacrificial  portion  due  to  each  god,  and  lastly,  food  in
general.' — Max  Muller,  Vedie  Hymns,  Part  I p.  35.

12  Her  calf : Yiraj,  identified  with  Yak,  is  in  A.  Y.  IX.  2.  5 called
the  Cow,  representing  the  creative  power  of  Nature  like  the  Cow
Audhumbla  in  Teutonic  mythology.  Bee  Simrock,  Handbucb  dcr
Deutschftn  Mythologie,  pp.  18,  215.

■ 13  Bathantarq : the  name  of  various  Samans  or  chanted  Vedic
verses.  Brihat : the  name  of  chanted  verses  in  the  Brihati  metre  'Of
thirty -sis  syllables.  See  IY.  34.-1,  note.

YajMyajniya  : a Saman  so  called  after  the  beginning  (Yajnf-yajila)
of  Bigveda  L 168.  L Ymnadevya : the  name  of  various  Samans.  See
IY,  \34,  I, -note.


HYMN  10.]


THE  AT II ARY A-Y EE  A.


423.


15  They  drew,  the  Waters  forth  with  V&madevya', . with

Yajnayajxxiya  they  milked  out  worship.

16  For  him  who  knoweth  this,  Rathantara  poureth  out

Plants,  and^Brihat  yieldeth  wide  expansion.

17  Waters  from  V&madevya  come,  from  Yajnayajniya

sacrifice.

18  She  rose,  she  came  unto  the  trees : they  killed  her.
A year  went  by  and  she  again  existed.

Hence  in  a year  the  wounds  of  trees  heal  over.  He
who  knows  this  sees  his  loathed  rival  wounded.

19  She  mounted  up,  she  came  unto  the  Fathers  : they

killed  her : in  a month  she  re-existed.

Hence  men  give  monthly  offerings  to  the  Fathers  : who

knows  this,  knows  the  path  which  they  have  trodden.

20  She  rose,  she  came  unto  the  Gods  : they  killed  her;

but  in  a fortnight  she  again  was  living.

Fortnightly,  hence,  men  serve  the  Gods  with  Vashat !
Who  knows  this  knows  the  way  which  Gods  pass  over*

21  She  mounted  up,  she  came'to  men  : they  killed  her

Presently  she  regained  her  life  and  being.

Hence  on  both  days  to  men  they  bring  and  offer

whoso  this— near-seated  in  the  dwelling.

22  She  rose,  approached  the  Asuras  : they  called  her  :

their  cry  was,  Cqpie,  0'*M4y k,  come  thou  hither.


18  Proper  recognition  of  the  power  of  Virlj,  as  renovating  Nature,
o repau  the  injuries  which  trees  may  have  suffered  will  be  rewarded

by  triumph  over  a suffering  enemy.  rewarded

nl9Jf^lK°ftrin?S:  oblations  presented  on  the  day  of  full  moor

21  Both  days : meaning  two  consecutive  days.

22  The  Am  the  fiends  who  fought  against  the  Gods  Mth.A  .

man>  v"i!  ‘ hom  others  can  depend  for  their  livelihood’ ' “ WMUU,Jr


THE  HYMNS  OF


Asuras  depend  for  life  on  May!  He  who  knows
this  becomes  a fit  supporter.  *

23  She  mounted  up,  she  came  unto  the  Fathers.  The

Fathers  called  to  her,  0 Food,  come  hither.

King  Yama  was  her  calf,  her  pail  was  silvern.

An  taka,  Mrityu’s  son,  milked  her,  this  Svadh!

I his  hood  the  Fathers  make  their  lives’  sustained
He  who  knows  this  becomes  a meet  supporter.

24  She  mounted  up,  she  came  to  men.  They  called  her,
* Come  unto  us,  come  hither  thou  Free-siver  !

Earth  was  her  milking-pail,  the  calf® beside  her

Manu  Vaivasvata, Vivas  van’s  offspring.


HYMN  10.]  THE  ATIIAHYA-YEPA.  425

Prithi  the  son  of  Vena  was  her  milker:  he  milked
forth  husbandry  and  grain  for  sowing.

These  men  depend  for  life  on  corn  and  tillage.  He
who  knows  this  becomes  a meet  supporter,  success-
ful in  the  culture  of  his  corn-land.

25  She  rose,  she  came  unto  the  Seven  Rishis,  They

sailed  her,  Come,  Rich  in  Devotion  ! hither.

King  Soma  was  her  calf,  the  Moon  her  milk-pail.

Brihaspati  Angirasa,  her  milker,

Drew  from  her  udder  Prayer  and  Holy  Fervour.

Fervour  and  Prayer  maintain  the  Seven  Rishis.

He  who  knows  this  becomes  a meet  supporter,  a priest
illustrious  for  his  sacred  knowledge.

26  She  rose,  she  came  unto  the  Gods.  They  called  her,

, crying,  O Yigour,  come  to  us,  come  hither  !

God  Savitar  milked  her,  he  milked  forth  Vigour.
The  Gods  depend  for  life  upon  that  Vigour.  He
who  knows  this  becomes  a meet  supporter.

2 7 She  rose,  approached  the  Apsarases  and  Gandharvas.

They  called  her,  Come  to  us,  0 Fragrant-scented !
The  son  of  Shryavarchas,  Chitraratha,  was  her  dear
calf  her  pail  a lotus-petal.

The  son  of  S&ryavarchas,  Vasuruchi,  milked  and
drew  from  her  most  delightful  fragrance.

That  scent  supports  Apsarases  and  Gandharvas.
He  who  knows  this  becomes  a meet  supporter,
and  round  him  ever  breathes  delicious  odour.


25  The  Seven  Rishis : BharadvAja,  Kasyapa,  Gotama,  Atri,  Vasishtha,
"Visv&mitra,  and  Jamadagni.  Angirasa  : closely  connected  with  Angiras
or  his  descendants.

27  Sttryavarchas : Sun-bright.  Chitraratha:  Borne  on  a brilliant
car ; the  King  of  the  Gandharvas.  Yasvruchi : Radiant  as  Ghdp '
one  of  the  chief  Gandharvas.  That  scent  supports : the  names  of
iour  of  tao  Apsarases  mentioned  m IV.  37.  3 arc  derived  from  fragrant
plants  or  sweet  scents,  and  the  word  Gandharva  is  supposed  to  !>e
connected  with  gandha,  scent,  ■ --  d:.’  .o


^ ATEARVA- VEDA.  [BOOK  VIII

28  ShI,n?ted  UP-’  She Ucame  t0  Other  People.  They
tt  , her  crying  Come,  Concealment ! hither  "
Her  dear  calf  was  Vaisravana  Kubera,  a vessel  never

tempered  was  her  milk-pail.

R^atan&hhi  offspring  of  Eiubera,  milked  her,  and
from  her  udder  drew  concealment.  ’•

±ty  that  concealment  live  the  Other  People.  He  who
nows  this  becomes  a meet  supporter,  and*  makes
all  evil  disappear  and  vanish.

29  She  mounted  up  she  came  unto  the  Serpents.  The

Serpents  caHed  her.  Venomous  ! come  hither

“thonlyp?i”nked  her’a"d  fr0m

He  K\”„rtD\Md  SUf>P°rts  lhe  S«rP™ts  :
H "io  knows  this  becomes  a meet  supporter.  \

30  One  would  ward  off,  for  him  who  hath  this  know-
,,  a W?  ’ lf  Wlti  a bottle-g°»ri  he  sprinkled  water.

32  ^repels!011  ****  ^ drives  away>  that  poison  verily
^ T kSu  this  knowIe<%e  pours  its  venom


*Juphemistlc  expression  for  certain  beings  who

Son  ant8.  ?rtSOf  dai^ness-  ■ So  in  England  fairies
leople,  neighbours ; m Germany,  little  folk:  and  in

iFwm  6’  andf  PeoP^e*  Vaisravana  K-ubera : in

5 *“  ?\  ^?raTas»  cEief  of  the  spirits  of  darkness

6 ^*0(1  of  riches  and  treasure*

one  of  the  yrineipal  Nagas  or  Serpents  of  Patala  or
Rhntardshtra  ; a chief  Mga,  called  Ahivata  or  son


Siii'iU


$|$tt


BOOK.  IX.


earth,  from  middle  air,  and  ocean,  and  from  fire
and  * wind.

Ail  living  creatures  ■welcome  it  with  joyful  hearts,
fraught  with  the  store  of  Amrit  it  hath  gathered  up!

2 They  call  thee  earth’s  great  strength  in  every  form,

they  call  thee  too  the  ocean’s  genial  seed.

Whence  comes  the  Honey-whip  bestowing  bounty,
there  vital  Spirit  is,  and  Amrit  treasured-

3 In  sundry  spots,  repeatedly  reflecting,  men  view

yPon  the  earth  her  course  and  action  ;

For  she,  the  first-born  daughter  of  the  Maruts
derives  her  .origin  from  Wind  and  Agni.

4 Daughter  of  Yasus,  _ mother  of  Adityas,  centre  of

Amrit,  breath  of  living  creatures,

The  Honey-whip,  gold-coloured,  dropping  fatness,
moves  as  a mighty  embryo  ’mid  mortals.

5 The  deities  begat  the  Whip  of  Honey  : her  embryo

assumed  all  forms  and  fashions.


428


'MM  tlTMPS  OP


[Moot  M"


, The  mother  nourishes  that  tender  infant  which  at  its
birth  looks  on  all  worlds  and  beings.

6 Who  understandeth  well*  who  hath  perceived  it*

her  heart’s  uninjured  Soma-holding  beaker  ?

Let  the  wise  Brahman  priest  therein  be  joyful.

7 He  understandeth  them,  he  hath  perceived  them,  her

breasts  that  pour  a thousand  streams,  uninjured :
They  tinreluctantly  yield  strength  and  vigour.

8 She  who  with  voice  upraised  in  constant  clamour,

mighty,  life-giving,  goes  unto  her  function,
Bellowing  to  the  heated  three  libations,  suckles  With
streams  of  milk,  and  still  is  lowing.

9 On  whom,  well-fed,  the  Waters  Wait  in  Worship,  and

steers  and  self-refulgent  bulls  attend  her.

Bor  thee,  for  one  like  thee  down  pour  the  Waters,
and  cause  desire  and  strength  to  rain  upon  thee.

10  The  thunder  is  thy  voice,  0 Lord  of  Creatures  :

a Bull,  thou  castest  on  the  earth  thy  vigour.

The  Honey -whip,  the  Maruts’  .first-born  daughter,
derives  her  origin  from  Wind  and  Agni.

11  As  at  the  morning  sacrifice  the  Asvins  twain  love

Soma  well,

Even  so  may  both  the  Asvins  lay  splendour  and
strength  within  my  soul.  ■

12  As  at  the  second  sacrifice  Xndra  and  Agni  love  him

well,

Let  the  pair,  Indra  Agni,  lay  splendour  and  strength
within  my  soul.  .

13  As  at  third  sacrifice  Soma  is  the  Tlibhus’  well-belovbd

one,  , . .

Even  so  may  they,  the  Ilibhus,'  store  splendour  and
strength  within  my  soul.

10  Lord  of  Creatures ; Prajapati.  Thunder  is  Ills  voice  inasmuch  as
it  heralds  the  seasonable  rain  which  sustains  the  life  of  hh  creatures.
Thy  vigour:  thy  generative  power  from  which  living  beings  arc  produced.

13  RibkuH ; the  three  renowned  artists  who  by  thoir  excellent  work
obtained  divinity,  exercised  superhuman  powers,  and  became  entitled


i/n/jF  i.j  tub  a tea e va- veda . 429

U Fain  would  I bring.  forth.sweetness,  fain  would  make
it  mine.  . ■ , 1 ■ £

^°iurSrtot8on'm^r 1 come:  spl<5ndour  and

15  G»d  ]e„egtte^d1ifeSPle"Clid

^Rishis  know  kD°'V  “e  as  1 am>  ma7  Indra  with  the

18  As  honey-bees  collect  and  add  fresh  honey  to  their
honey  store,  J

E?fLSOfryv?°th  the  A?vins  Ia7  splendour  and
strength  within  my  soul.

17  Aierwr„L“es  besmear  tbis  honey  which  t,ie

Asvins  lay.  in  me  splendour  and
1 ■ strength  and  ’power  and  might.

18  SsS  ktt is  found  “ and

A°letoe^  ilZt^  fr°“  *he  cuP’7mayali  that

13  “Sn^om^S.8' Lords of Light’ ba3m'™ with

Tb^ZX^ihe  &lk  «>  «**»*-

20  T,T4?rtier  is  T0ice’  0 Lot<I  »f  Creatures :

To  that  ilW»fa“|t6f  sire”£tt  °“  oarth  «<i  heaven,
that  aH  cattle  look  for  their  existence ; with  this
she  nourishes  their  force  and  vigour.


of  the  three  Wfc .C°1Ieoti7e]y  ^ibhus  from  Ribhu  the  eldest
Tdia  ^ever-il  1 erS’  \°  °thers  bemS  named  separately  Vibhvan  and
, aja.  Seveial  hymns  of  the  Rigveda  are  addressed  to  these  deities.

IS  The  stanza  is  taken  from  Rigveda  I 23.  24.

‘ Ce  stanza  1L'^e:  the  Whip  of  the  Asvins,


4 SO  ■ THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IN.

21  The  Whip  itself  is  Heaven,  Earth  is  the  handle,

the  point  of  juncture  is  the  Air’s  mid-region.

The  lash  is  lightning,  and  the.  tip  is  golden.

22  Whoever  knows  the  Whip’s  seven  kinds  of  honey,

becomes  himself  a man  endowed  with  sweetness.
Br4hman  and  King,  the  draught-ox  and  the  milch-
cow,  barley  and  rice,  and  honey  is  the  seventh.

23  Sweet  is  the  man,  sweet  are  his  goods  and  chattels  :

he  who  knows  this  conquers  the  worlds  of  sweetness.

24  The  thundering  of  Praj4pati  in  heaven  is  verily

manifest  to  living  creatures.

Therefore  I stand  from  right  to  left  invested,  and,
0 Praj4pati,  I cry,  regard  me  !

The  man  who  hath  this  knowledge  is  regarded  by
living  beings  and  the  Lord  of  Creatures.  j;S|g

HYMN  II.

Kama,  the  Bull,  slayer  of  foes,  I worship  with  molten
butter,  sacrifice,  oblation.

Beneath  my  feet  cast  down  mine  adversaries,  with
tlrf  great  manly  power,  when  I have  praised  thee.
2 That  whith  is  hateful  to  mine  eye  and  spirit,  that
harasses  and  robs  me  of  enjoyment,

The.  evil  drearay  I loose  upon  'my  foemen.  • May  I
rend  him  when  I have  lauded  Kitma.

"3  K4ma,  do  thou,  a mighty  Lord  and  Ruler,  let  loose
ill  dream,  misfortune,  want  of  children,


21  The  point  of  juncture:  gdrbhah  (from  grahh  — gra-h^  to  take,
to  conceive) ; tlie  receptacle,  meaning  here  the  place  where  the  thong
is  attached  to  the  whip-stock.

23  Gonq'i  ers  the  worlds  of  sweetness  : gains  admittance  into  heaven.

* 24  From  right  to  left  invested:  prdchinopavttdh ; wearing*  the
sacrificial"  cord  over  the  right  shoulder  .and  passed  under  the  left  arm.

The  hymn  is  a glorification  of  Kama  or  Love,  the  God  of  general
desire  of  all  that  is  good.

1 The  Bull ; or,  the  strong  ; the  hero,-


■MChhI


aniB  2 ]


THE  A THAR  FA- FED  A.


431

. Homelessness  KAma!  utter  destitution,  upon  the
sinner  who  designs,  my  ruin..  *

4 Df  If  thTf  aWayl drive  them  afar>  0 ; indigence

tail  on  those  who  are  my  foemen !

When  they  have  been  cast  down  to  deepest  darkness,
consume  their  dwellings  with  thy  fire,  O Agni.

5 She,  K&ma ! she  is  called  the  Cow,  thy  daughter

she  who  is  named  Vak  and  Vinti  by  sales.  ° 5

y her  drive  thou  my  foemen  to  a distance.  May

cattle,  vital  breath,  and  life  forsake  them  7

6 By  KWs  might  King  Varu„a's  and  Indra’s,  by

ishnn  s strength,  and  Savitar’s  instigation,

I chase  my  foes  with  sacrifice  to  A<mi  as  a rJpft
steersman  dri^s  his  boat  through  wates.

7 MfulIfr^S-  mfUy  °ne’  my  P°tenfc  vvarder>  me

foil  freedom  from  mme  adversaries.  8

: nfoh  to  thiDltieS  be  nyProt^tion,  all  Gods  come
t'0  mine  invocation.

8 Accepting,  this  oblation  rich  with  fatness  be  iovfn!

• .here,  ye  Gods  whose  chfef  is  Kama  ' J * M

Giving  me  freedom  from  mine  adversaries.

, ™;nildr?’  Agi^’  ^ma ! come  together  and  cast
w“me  adversaries  down  beneath  me.

: W faen  they  have  sunk- into  the  deepest
1 _ f gm’ ' Wlt<h  % fire  consume  their  d wellings!  ’

' Keft  W of  “■**  «S2\Ste‘ headIo"«

then!  ijf3!  a 1 of  .strength  and  vigour  i Let
them  not  have  a single  day’s  existence.  ^ .

o The  Cow  ; Umadhul  or  Mmadhenu  ; the  Cow  of  Pleni-v  wJ,„  ■ ,~T
everything  that  is  desired  IV,  I-  ■ n i M”*  ox  x ienty  who  yields

"p”  «•» «


THE  HYMNS  OF


[BOOK  IX.

11  K&ma  bath  slain  those  who  were  mine  opponents,  and

given  me  ample  room  to  grow  and  prosper.

Let  the  fpur  regions  bow  them  down  before  me,
and  let  the  six  expanses  bring  me  fatness.

12  Let  them  drift  downward  like  a boat  torn  from  the

rope  that  held  it  fast.

There  is  no  turning  back  for  those  whom  our  keen
arrows  .have  repelled.

13  Agni^  averts,  India  averts,  and  Soma : ip^hthp

averting  Gods  avert  this  foeman.

14  To  be  avoided  by  his  friends,  detested,  repelled,  with

few  men  round  him,  let  him  wander.

Yea,  on  the  earth  descend  the  lightning-flashes :
may  the  strong  God  destroy  yc^r  adversaries.

15  This  potent  lightning  nourishes  things  shaken,  and

things  unshaken  yet,  and  all  the 'thunders.

May  the  Sun,  rising  with  his  wealth  and  splendour,
drive  in  victorious  might  my  foemen  downward.

16  Thy  firm  and  triply-barred  protection,  K&ma  l thy

spell,  made  weapon-jjroof  extended  armour —

With  that  drive  thou  my  foemen  to  a distance.  May
cattle,  vital  breath,  and  life  forsake  them.

17  Far  from  the  world  wherein  we  live,  O EAma,

drive  thou  my  foemen  with  that  selfsame  weapon
Wherewith  the  Gods  repelled  the  fiends,  and  Indra
cast  down  the  Dasyus  into  deepest  darkness.  y r':

18  As  Gods  repelled  the  Asuras,  and  Indra  down  to  the

lowest  darkness  drove  the  demons,

So,  Lima,  from  this  world,  to  distant  places,  drive
thou  the  men  who  are  mine  adversaries.


11  Six  expanses:  the  four  cardinal  points,  and  the  upper  and  lower
spaces  : or,  according  to  another  account,  Heaven,  Earth,  Day,  Night,
Water,  and  Plants.

12  The  stanza  is  repeated,  with  a variation,  from  III.  6 7.

15  Shaken  ....  unshaken:  perishable  and  imperishable  ; all  natxire.
17  With  that  sel/mme  weapon  ; the  text  has  merely  tena,  with  that.


Wit?


19  First  befo
Fathers,
t ",  Stronger  t
Kama,  t<
I 20  Wide  as  thi

far  as  th<
Stronger  t
Kdaia,  to
, 21  Vast  as  the
between

: celestial  t

I?  Stronger  ti

! , K4ma,  to

l . 22  Many  as  ar

female  ser
? Stronger  ar

I Kama,  to

t 23  Stronger  art
stronger  a;

Stronger  ths
:/  ' K4ma?  to  i


434  ' THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IX.

24  Not  even  Vata  is  the  peer  of  Kama,  not  Agni,

Chandramas  the  Moon,  nor  Shrya.

Stronger  than  these  art  thou,  and  great  for  ever.
Kama,  to  thee,  to  thee  I offer  worship.

25  Thy  lovely  and  auspicious  forms,  O K&ma,  whereby

the  thing  thou  wilt  becometh  real,

With  these  come  thou  and  make  thy  home  among  us,
and  make  malignant  thoughts  inhabit  elsewhere.

HYMN  III.

We  loose  the  ties  and  fastenings  of  the  house  that
: holds  all  precious  things,

The  bands  of  pillars  and  of  stays,  the  ties  of  beams
that  form  the  roof.

2 All-wealthy  House  ! each  knot  and  band,  each  cord

that  is  attached  to  thee

I with  my  spell  untie,  as  erst  Brihaspati  disclosed
the  cave.

3 He  drew  them  close,  he  pressed  them  fast,  he  made

thy  knotted  bands  secure  :


25  The  thing  thou  wilt : or,  choosest.  Kama,  the  God  of  Desire,  is
the  fulfiller,  as  well  asf  the  inspirer,  of  his  worshippers’  wishes.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Muir,  O.  S.  Texts,  V.  404,  and  by
Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  &1 9.


The  occasion  of  the  hymn  is  the  consecration  of  a newly  built  house.

1  We  loose  the  ties : symbolizing  the  removal  by  prayer  of  all  malig-
nant spells  and  charms  by  which  the  various  parts  of  the  house  are
tied  and  bound.  Prof.  Ludwig  understands  the  words  literally  as
signifying  the  actual  dismantling  of  a dwelling-house.  Pillars ; the
corner-posts.  Stays:  the  slanting  poles  which  strengthen  the  pillars.

2 As  erst  Brihaspati : with  prayer,  or  with  my  spell,  as  Brihaspati,
Lord  of  Prayer,  opened  therewith  the  hiding-place  of  the  denion  of
drought.  See  Rigveda  I.  62.  3 ; II.  23. 18  ; 24.  2 ; IV.  50.  5 ; VI,  73.  I .

3 He:  the  hostile  enchanter.  Slaughterer:  the  Immolator,  who
understands  the  important  work  of  deftly  cutting  up  the  victim  wh .«


the  atiiarva-yeda


"'7  7mias  neiP  _ we ' loose  them  as  a skilful
slaughterer  severs  joints.

4 We  loose  the,  bands  of  thy  bamboos,  of  bolts,  of

fastening,  of  thatch,

We  loose  the  ties  of  thy  side-posts,  O House  that
iioldest  all  we  prize.

5 We  loosen  here  the  ties  and  bands  of  straw  in  bundles

and  of  clamps,  ’

°f  aH  that  compasses  and  binds  the  Lady  Genius  of
the  Home.

6 We  W the  loops  which  men  have  bound  within

thee,  loops  to  tie  and  hold.

^th^Honie’t Wllen  erected’  to  our  bodies,  Lady  of

7 Store-house  of  Soma,  Agni’s  hall,  the  ladies’  bower

the  residence,  ’

The  seat  of  Gods  art  thou.  O GoddAee  TTn„^


436  THE  HYMNS  OF  '{BOOK  IX,

10  There  let  her  come  to  meet  this  man.  Firm,  strong-

ly fastened,  and  prepared  °

■ Art  thou  whose  several  limbs  and  joints  we  part  and
loosen  one  by  one.

11  He  who  collected  timber  for  the  work  and  built  thee

up,  O House,

Made  thee  for  coming  progeny,  Praj4pati,  the  Lord
Supreme.

12  Homage  to  him  ! We  worship  too  the  giver  and  the

Mansion’s  lord  :

Homage  to  Agni ! to  the  man  who  serves  at  holy
rites  for  thee.

13  Homage  to  kine  and  steeds  ! to  all  that  shall  be  born

within  the  house !

We  loose  the  bonds  that  fasten  thee,  mother  of  mul-
titudes to  come  !

d4 / Agm  thou  shelterest  within,  and  people  with  domes-
tic beasts.

We  loose  the  bonds  that  fasten  thee,  mother  of
multitudes  to  come  !

15  All  space  that  lies  between  the  earth  and  heaven,

therewith  I take  this  house  for  thy  possession,

And  all  that  measures  out  the  air’s  mid-region  I
make  a hollow  to  contain  thy  treasures.  There-
with I take  the  house  for  his  possession.

16  Rich  in  prosperity,  rich  in  milk,  founded  and  built

upon  the  earth,

Injure  not  thy  receivers,  House  who  boldest  food  of
every  sort  1


10  This  man  ; the  owner  of  the  house.

11  P raj'lpaii ; the  builder  is  a second  Prajapati  or  Lord  of  Life  as
he  built  thee  for  the  sake  of  praja  or  progeny .

..  12  The  giver  : the  institutor  of  the  sacrifice  which  the  hymn  ae-
ompanies.


HYMN  3-]  iEE  ATliABYA-VEDA.  ' 43?

17  Grass-covered,-  clad  with  straw,  the  house,  like

Night,  gives  rest  to  man  and  beast,
thou  standest,  built  upon  the  earth,  like  a she-
elephant,  borne  on  feet.

18  I loosen  and  remove  from  thee  thy  covering  formed

by  mats  of  reed.  -

What  Varuna  hath  firmly  closed  Mitra  shall  ope  at
early  morn.

19  May  Indra,  Agni,  deathless  Gods,  protect  the  house

where  Soma  dwells,

House  that  was  founded  with  the  prayer,  built  and
erected  by  the  wise.

20  Nest  upon  nest  hath  been  imposed,  compartment  on

compartment  laid  :

There  man  shall  propagate  his  kind,  and  there  shall
everything  be  born.

21  Within  the  house  constructed  with  two  side-posts,  or

with  four,  or  sis,

Built  with  eight  side-posts,  or  with  ten,  lies  Agni
like  a babe  unborn.

22  Turned  to  thee,  House  ! I come  to  thee,  innocent,

tui'ned  to  welcome  me  :

For  if  ire  and  Water  are  within,  the  first  chief  door
of  sacrifice.

23  Water  that  kills  Consumption,  free  from  all  Con-

sumption, here  I bring.

With  Agni,  the  immortal  one,  I enter  and  possess
the  house.  v:  v . G V,.


17  Borne  on  feet:  the  four  corner  pillars  representing  the  elephant’s
■■  legs.

18  Varum:  God  of  the  starry  firmament;  the  heaven  at  night,
that  is,  night.  Mitra  : God  of  day ; the  morning  sun.

20  Compartment : it  is  difficult  to  decide  which  of  its  many  mean-
ings kdsah  has  here.  Ludwig  renders  it  by  ‘ korb/  basket,  Zimmer  by
Behalter,’  receptacle,  and  Grill  by  ‘ Faehwerk,’  panelling.

23  This  stanza  is_ repeated  from  III.  12.  9.  ■ , b


43&  THE  HYMNS  OF  [ BOOK  IX.

24  Lay  thou  no  cord  or  noose  on  us:  a weighty  burthen

still  be  light  ! ° J ’

Withersoever  be  our  will,  0 House,  we  bear  thee
like  a bride.

25  Now  from  the  east  side  of  the  house  ho  the  Great

Lower  be  homage  paid  !

Hail  to  the  Gods  whose  due  is  Hail !

26  Now  from  the.  south  side  of  the  house,  etc.

27  Now  from  the  west  side  of  the  house,  etc.

28  Now  from  the  north  side  of  the  house,  etc.

29  So  from  the  mansion’s  every '..side  to  the  Great

Bower  be  homage  paid  !

Hail  to  the  Gods  whose  due  is  Hail  !

HYMN  IV.  .

The  Bui],  fierce,  thousandfold,  filled  full  of  vigour,
bearing  within  his  flanks  all  forms  and  natures,
Brihaspati  s Steer,  hath  stretched  the  thread,  be-
stowing bliss  on  the  worshipper,  the  liberal  giver,

2 He  who  at  first  became  the  Waters’  model,  a match
for  everyone,  like  Earth  the  Goddess;

The  husband  of  the  cows,  the  young  calves’  father,
may  he  secure  us  thousandfold  abundance.


-a*  stanza  appears  to  point  to  the  future  removal  of  the  bouse,
>ui  t entirely  of  timber,  bamboos,  reeds,  and  straw,  to  some  ocher  situ-
ation.  According  to  Grill  the  meaning  is  merely,  We  intend  to  make
the  house  useful  as  a young  married  woman  ought  to  be.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Kigveda,  III.  a 464;

by  Altindisohes  Leben=  P- 151  1 and  by  Grill,  Hundert  Liedeiy

PP*  60,  18b.

The  hymn  is  a glorification  in  mystical  language  of  the  typical
tbacrificial  Bull

. ^ 1 Stroud  the  thread:  a figurative  expression,  frequently  occurring
in  the  v'eda,  for,  commenced  the  uninterrupted  course  of  sacrifice
0lver  ; of  guerdon  or  fees  to  the  officiating  priests*


THE  ATHAEVA-7EDA.  A39

3 Masculine,  pregnant,  stedfast,  full  of  vigour,  the, Bull

sustains  a trunk  of  goodly  treasure.

May  Agni  Jata vedas  bear  him  offered,  on  pathways
traversed  by  the  Gods,  to  India.

4 The  husband  of  the  cows,  the  young'  calves’  father,

father  is  he  of  mighty  water-eddies.

Calf,  after-birth,  new  milk  drawn  hot,  and  biestings/.
curds,  butter,  that  is  his  best  genial  humour.

5 He  is  the  Gods’  allotted  share  and  bundle,  essence

of  waters,  and  of  plants,  and  butter.

Sakra  elected  him,  the  draught  of  Soma.  What  was
his  body  was  a lofty  mountain.

6 A beaker  filled  with  Soma  juice  thou  bearest,  framer

of  forms,  begetter  of  the  cattle.

Kindly  to  us  be  these  thy  wombs  here  present,  and
stay  for  us,  O Axe,  those  that  are  yonder.

7 He  bears  oblation,  and  his  seed  is  butter.  Thousand-

fold plenty  ; sacrifice  they  call  him.

May  he,  the  Bull,  wearing  the  shape  of  Indra,  come
unto  us,  O Gods,  bestowed,  with  blessing.

8 Both  arms  of  Varuna,  and  Indra ’s  vigour,  the

Marais’  hump  is  he,  the  Asvins’  shoulders.

They  who  are  sages,  bards  endowed  with  wisdom,
call  him  Brihaspati  compact  and  heightened.


3 Pregnant : laden  with  blessings.

4 All  that  the  cow  prodaces  originates  from  him.

6 Kindly  to  us : meaning,  apparently  : May  the  sacrificial  axe  of  the
typical  inimolator  of  the  victim  secure  to  us  blessings  both  present
and  future.  VfVyivS'W  •

8 The  Maruts ’ hump : in  Rigveda  VIII.  20.  20  the  Maruts  are
likened  to  ‘ bright-shining  bulls.’  Brihaspati:  that  is,  the  embodi-
ment of  sacerdotal  rank  and  dignity,  Brihaspati  being  the  prototype  of
the  priestly  order.


{BOOK  IX.


Y^hest  t0  the  tribes  of  hea
m , ?i*e,y  Cct  iuc^raJ  thee  they  call  Saras  van.

wi!oC  006  T’  *hat  Bnthman  gives  a thou*
vho  offers  up  the  Bull  as  his  oblation.

10  BviasPat5.  Savitar  gave  thee  vital  vigour  •

breath  was  brought  from  Tvasbtar  and  from  V;
in  tuought  I offer  thee  in  air’s  mid-region.  '
sacrificial  grass  be  Earth  and  Heaven  1

11  LoV thVBdr i°jfUlIj  6St01  tHe  iimbs  and  memt

Who  moved  and  roared  among  the  kine  as  Tm
moves  among  the  Gods.  ° lni

12  The. sides  must  be  A rrarnaii’d  J . M •


ly  Watera  /of  . 7 0i."ue  uPPer  ^ion,  guardian  of  theheaven-
Wwer  of  fertility  16  ot  m«htJ  ^ter-eddies’  in  stanza  4),  and

inanimaI  SaCrifi0SS  carvers  or
0;::p°;°;  0t  the  7canl  are  to  out  the  names  of  the  several  part*

being  assigned  * ;

2,  noto i“H’S:  th°  P°rti0a  °f  JDivins  ^vour  personified.  See  I.  18.


HYMN  4.]  TUN  ATI1ABVA-VMDA.  44!

15  They  made  a jest  of  kindred’s  curse  : a jar  of  Soma

juice  was  set,  nnYYM
What  time  the  deities,  convened,  assigned  the  Bull’s
divided  parts.

16  They  gave  the  hooves  to  tortoises,  to  Saramft  scraps

of  the  feet  :

His  undigested  food  they  gave  to  worms  and  things
that  creep  and  crawl.

17  That  Bull,  the  husband-  of  the  kine,  pierces  the

demons  with  his  horns,  .

Banishes  famine  with  his  eye,  and  hears  good  tidings
with  his  ears.

18  With  hundred  sacrifices  he  worships : the  fires

consume  him  not:

All  Gods  promote  the  Br&hman  who  offers  the  Bull
in  sacrifice.  .

19  He  who  hath  given  away  the  Bull  to  Bnthmans  frees

and  cheers  his  soul.

In  his  own  cattle-pen  he  sees  the  growth  and  increase
of  his  cows.

20  Let  there  be  cattle,  let  there  be  bodily  strength  and

progeny  :

All  this  may  the  Gods  kindly  grant  to  him  who  gives
away  the  Bull.

21  Indra  here  verily  hath  rejoiced:  let  him  bestow

conspicuous  wealth.

May  he  draw  forth  at  will  from  yonder  side  of  heaven
a deft  cow,  good  to  milk,  whose  calf  is  never
wanting.  . N-  NMYYYV'.


15  They  made  a jest:  they  made  light  of  the  angry  imprecations  of
the  Gods  who  were  dissatisfied  with  the  portions  assigned  to  thorn.

16  To  tortoises : that  they  might  renovate  their  shells  with  the
horny  material.  Saramd, : the  hound  of  Indra,  represented  in  Eigveda
X.  14.  10  as  the  mother  of  Yama’s  two  brindled  four-eyed  dogs.  See
"V . 30.  6.  Scraps  of  the  feet : kushthikdh  ; according  to  Sayana,  the
contents  of  the  entrails.  Cf.  IX.  7.  10;  X.  y.  23.


fe.  1 few


-u  Lhis  stanza  is  taken,  with  variations,  from  Eigveda  YL  28.  8,
^The  impregnation  of  the  cows  is  the  object  of  the  wish.

.23  The  stanza  is  addressed  to  the  cows.

_ The  hymn  is  a glorification,  partly  in  mystical  language,  of  the
Sacnfieial  Goat

l Him:  the  victim  ; the  Goat.  Regions  of  the  pious:  the  victim
sacrificed  to  the  Gods  goes  immediately  to  heaven.  So,  of  the  sacri-
ficed Horse  : ! The  Steed  is  come  unto  the  noblest  mansion,  is  come
unto  his  father  and  his  mother  (Heaven  and  Earth).  This  day  shall
he  approach  the  Gods,  most  welcome  : then  he  declares  good  gifts
to  him  who  offers’  (Rigveda  I.  163.  13).  Third  heaven : cf.  A.  V.  XVII L
2.  48  where  three  heavens  are  mentioned,  the  lowest,  the  intermediate
ia.na  the  third  in  which  the  Fathers  dwell.

. 2.  Prmee  •' tlle  Sari  is  the  prince,  noble,  or  wealthy  householder  who
institutes  the  sacrifice  and  rewards  the  officiating  priests ; and  the
goat  when  sacrificed  is  to  be  the  prince  who  brings  a reward  to  the
saormcer  m the  shape  of  blessings  from  the  God  to  whom  the  offering
is  presented,  ' b


HYMN  5


THE  A THAR  FA-  VEDA,


3 Wash  from  his  feet  all  trace  of  evil-doing  : fore-

knowing, with  cleansed  hooves  let  him  go  upward.
Gazing  on  many  a spot,  crossing  the  darkness,  let
the  Goat  mount  to  the  third  heaven  above  us.

4 Cut  up  this  skin  with  the  grey  knife,  Disseetor  1

dividing  joint  from  joint,  and  mangle  nothing.

Do  him  no  injury  : limb  by  limb  arrange  him,  and
send  him  up  to  the  third  cope  of  heaven.

5 With  verse  upon  the  fire  I set  the  caldron:  pour  in

the  water  ; lay  him  down  within  it!

Encompass  him  with  fire,  ye  Immolators.  Cooked,
let  him  reach  the  world  where  dwell  the  righteous.

6 Hence  come  thou  forth,  vexed  by  no  pain  or  torment.

Mount  to  the  third  heaven  from  the  heated  vessel.
As  fire  out  of  the  fire  hast  thou  arisen.  Conquer  and
win  this  lucid  world  of  splendour.  .

7 The  Goat  is  Agni : light  they  call  him,  saying  that

living  man  must  give  him  to  the  Brahman.

Given  in  this  world  by  a devout  believer,  the  Goat
dispels  and  drives  afar  the  darkness.

8 Let  the  Panchaudana  Goat,  about  to  visit  the  three

lights,  pass  away  in  five  divisions.


4 The  carcase  is  to  be  most  carefully  cut  up  and  the  joints  neatly
divided.  ‘Let  not  a greedy  clumsy  Immolator,  missing  the  joints,
mangle  thy  limbs  unduly1  (Rigveda  I.  162.  20).

5 With  verse : reciting  a rick,  a sacred  verse  or  hymn  of  praise,
distinguished  from  the  adman  which  is  sung  or  chanted,  and  from  the
yajus  or  sacrificial  formula.

6 As  fire  out  of  the  fire:  or,  As  Agni  out  of  fire.  See  stanza  6,

7 The  Goat  is  Agni:  somewhat  similar  is  the  old  Scandinavian
belief  that  a victim  offered  to  a god  became  incorporate  in  the  god
and  obtained  a portion  of  his  divine  power.  Brahman:  the  chief
priest  who  directs  the  sacrifice.

8 Panchaudana  : offered  with  a fivefold  mess,  or  five  messes,  of
boiled  rice,  or  grain  mashed  and  cooked  with  milk.  Three  lights  : three
luminous  heavens.  See  stanza  1.  In  five  divisions:  one  for  each  odana
or  mess  of  boiled  rice.  Parted:  referring  to  the  goat,  divided  into  five.


444


j.  iimi  m'M.WS  OF


ysuuA  ix


Go  midst  tile  pious  who  have  paid  their  worship  and
parted,  dwell  on  the  third  cope  of  heaven  P'  *

B Rise  to  that  world,  O Goat,  where  dwell  the  rio-hf

TheT  tT’~f  a ?arabha  V6iled>  a11  difficult  places'

. Brahman- sM

10  ■*

In  the  third  vault,  third  sky,  third  ridge.  One  only
Cow  omniform  art  thou,  that  yields  all  wishes  y

xi  lhat  is  the  third  light  that  is  yours  ye  Rather  TT

gives  the  Goat  Pariehaudana  to  the  B^hmZ

1Tea  1f  PlIS  ^’orid  by  the  devout  believer,  the  Goat
dispels  and  drives  afar  the  darkness.

12  Seeking  the  world  of  good  men  who  have  worshinned

w reS  fe  Goat  Pa^^dana  to  the  b3£  #
Ptm  thou  this  world  as  thy  complete  possesZ
i n _ AusPlcl0«s  unto  us  be  he,  accepted  ! 1

13  Truly  the  Goat  sprang  from  the  glow  of  Ao-m  in

spired  as  sage  with  all  a sage’s  power.  ° ’

kt  the  c\f’  Slhi  Ml ' °ff0red  "’ith  Vashat — this

let  the  Gods  arrange  at  proper  seasons.

Home-woven  raiment  let  him  <frve  an rl  i
• guerdon  to  the  priests.  * ’ d gold  as

SworltW°S  C°mpletely  ‘U  oe,estkI  “d  terrestrial


aa'oifhlteSedmShT"8  “ MrtWtaw

^ ic.„ea  onunal,  a dangerous  enemy  of  the  lion,
xv  one  only  Goto:  the  Cow  of  Plenty.

the  sacrificed  ^ ' **“  hlgkeSt  heaven-  See  note  0il  stanza  1.  He;

i!"'i  *»>.  A,«j,ud:  by  „«  God.


HYMN  5.]


THE  AT1URVA-YEDA.  445

15  Near  to  thee , Goat ! approach  these  streams  of  Soma,
lvine,  distilling  meath,  bedecked  with  butter !
Stay  thou  the  earth  and  sky  and  fix  them  firmly  up
°n  the  seven-rayed  pitch  and  height  of  heaven
.16  Unborn  art  thou  O Goat  : to  heaven  thou  goest-
hi ough  thee  Angirases  knew  that  radiant  region-
00.  may  1 know  that  holy  world.

17  °GKrs2r tut  u «»
yy  piSo^4?res*  "*"* in  th°Dsand3-

18  T1teSnat  PtrChaUdana’  when  e°oked,  transported,

repelling  Nirrifci,  to  the  world  of  S varga.  1

By  him  may  we  win  worlds  which  Sdrya\rightens.

whichPfTgS  °f  ihen  0d?as  attending -the  Goat
^hieh  I have  lodged  with  priest  or  people—

May  ah  tins  know  us  in  the  world  of  virtue,  O Agni
c'  tke  meeting  of  the  pathways.  !;

20  This  Unborn  cleft  apart  in  the  beginning
became  the  earth,  his  back  was  heaven
His  middle  was  the  air,  his  sides  the  regions
Oilows  of  his  belly  formed  both  oceans.°


his  breast


ir.’lu  ttT'rM  a°'\°  m » MH  mys

m • n om  kPult  («y«),  and 'in  saci-ificial  hymns  the

diffiCUlt  t0  diStiDguisk  In  Bl^edaXl
abs?f  *<7  certain  whether  ajdh)  means  'goaf  or  « un

h>™>

tea  by  Uoat  is  rendered  by  1 unborn  ! in  the  St  Peters!  u-mr
tionary.  • See  Muir’s  note,  0.  S.  Texts,  V.  p.  304  1

17  With  that : power  understood.

18  Transported  : removes  the  sacrificer  after  death.

b“”“  “ tfcs  »•  Irian  of  the  ”


lins  broat  Panchaudana  was  indeed  a sacrifice  un
i muted.

22  A boundless  sacrifice  he  performs,  he  wins  himself  j

boundless  world

"Who  gives  the  Goat  Panchaudana  illumined  with  e
priestly  fee.

23  Let  him  not  break  the  victim’s  bones,  let  him  not

suck  the  marrow  out.

Let  the  man,  taking  him  entire,  here,  even  here
deposit  him,

24  Tl^’  ev.en  this,is  his  true  form : the  man  uniteth

him  therewith.

Food,  greatness,  strength  he  bringeth  him  who  giveth
the  Goat  Panchaudana  illumed  with  guerdon.

25  The  five  gold  pieces,  and  the  five  new  garments,  and

the  five  milch-kine  yield  him  all  his  wishes
"WllO  y'ives  the  Goat  Pnfinlirmrla « q llli-ov,!. l


Illumined  : enhanced  in  value.

25  Gold  pieces:  rulenia;  or  gold  necklets,
presents  mentioned  are  the  dahshind  or  honoi
pi  iests  by  the  iustitutor  of  the  sacrifice.

27  A second  husband:  after  the  death  of  th,


I


illMN  , THE  ATIIAltVA-YEBA.  U1

28  0ne  wo/[d  with  the  re-wedded  wife  becomes  the

second  husband  s home

Who  gives  the  Goat  Pauchaudana  illumined  with
the  priestly  fee.

29  They  who  have  given  a cow  who  drops  a calf  each

season,  or  an  ox,

Aof  heaved  r°be' °r  g°ld>  g°  t0  fche  Joftiest  sphere

S0  “he  Ithert  lirf  ^ S°”'  gra"dS°n'  Md

Mother  wife,  her  who  bore  his  babes,  all  the  beloved
ones  I call.

31  The  man  who  knows  the  season  named  the  Scorching
-the  Groat  Pafichaudana  is  this  scorching  season-
tie  lives  himself,  he  verily  burns  up  his  hated  rival’s-


THE  HYMNS  OF


[BOOK  IX,


The  Goat  Pailchaudana  is  this  Swellim
He  lives  himself,  etc.

35  The  man  who  knows  the  season  c s

takes  to  himself  the  rising  fame,  1
rising  fame.

The  Goat  Pailchaudana  is  this  Risin

36  The  man  who  knows  the

takes  to  himself  the  c~
rival’s  conquering  fame.

The  Goat  Pailchaudana  is  1
He  lives  himself,  he  verilv  bur
fame


g season,


g season.

season  called  Surpassing
conquering  fame,  his  hated

this  Conquering  season,
ms  up  his  hated  rival’s

Who  gives  the  Goat  Pailchaudana  illumined  with  a
priestly  fee.

37  He  cooks  the  Goat  and  the  five  boiled  rice  messes.

h£ay  the  united  Quarters,  all  accordant,  and  in-
termediate points,  accept  him  from  thee.

38  May  these  preserve  him  for  thee.  Here  I offer  to

these  the  molten  butter  as  oblation.

HYMN  VI,

Whoso  will  know  Prayer  with  immediate  knowledge,
whose  members  are  the  stuff,  whose  spine  the
verses:


wie  quarters  or  me  skj,  with,  the  intermediate  points.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Bigveda,  HI.  p.  435.

The  hymn  is  a glorification  of  the  hospitable  reception  of  guests,

regarded  as  identical  with  sacrifice  offered  to  the  Gods.  Stanzas  3 62

are  in  .prose,

1 IHth  immediate  Knowledge : pratya'ksham ; literally,  before  the
eyes,  face  to  face  ; meaning  here,  embodied  in  practice.  Cf.  ‘ laborare
est  ox-are.’  The  stuff : the  material  of  which  the  sacred  verses  are
composed.  The  verses:  richas  ; the  holy  verses  of  prayer  and  praise  in
■me  form  in  which  thev  Wvp  t'.Ci  roo  hr\A  '


m OfQ


BIMN  6.]


TEE  A PEA  R FA-  VEDA.


2 Wko.se  hairs  are  psalms,  whose  heart  is  called  the
Yajus,  whose  coverlet  is  -verily  oblation —

3 Verily  when  a host  looks  at  his  guests  he  looks  at
the  place  of  sacrifice  to  the  Gods.  4*  When  he  salu-
tes them  reverently  he  undergoes  preparation  for  a
religions  ceremony : when  he  calls  for  water,  he
solemnly  brings  sacrificial  water.  5 The  water  that
is  solemnly  brought  at  a sacrifice  is  this  same  water.
6 The  libation  which  they  bring,  the  sacrificial  victim
dedicated  to  Agni  and  Soma  which  is  tied  to  the
post  that,  verily,  is  this  man.'  7 When  they  arrange
c vvelhng-i  ooms  they  arrange  the  sacred  chamber  and
the  shed  for  housing  the  Soma  cars.  8 What  they
spread  upon  the  floor  is  just  Sacrificial  Grass.  9 With
tfte  couch  that  the  men  bring,  he  wins  for  himself
the  world  of  S varga.  10  The  pillow-coverings  that
they  bring  are  the  green  sticks  that  surround  the
sacrificial  altar.  11  The  ointment  that  they  brino-
tor  inunction  is  just  clarified  liquid  butter.  12  The
rood  they  bring  before  the  general  distribution
represents  the  two  sacrificial  cakes  of  rice  meal.
13  When  they  call  the  man  who  prepares  food  they
summon  the  preparer  of  oblation.  1 4 The  grains  of
nee  and  barley  that  are  selected  are  just  filaments  of
the  Soma  plant.  ^ 15  The  pestle  and  mortar  are
really  the  stones  of  the  Soma  press.  16  The  win-
nowing-basket  is  the  filter,  the  chaff  the  Soma  dregs,


* Psalms:  Ad m chanted  hymns  or  songs.  The  Yajus:  saeri-
heml  text  or  formula.  Tho  sense  of  the  Wo  stanzas  is  incomplete
should  hear  what  follows,  or  something  similar,  may  be  understood.  ■

3 Y reparation  for  a religious,  ceremony : the  initiatory  or  prepara-
tory me  called  Diksha  or  Consecration.  7 Sacred  chamber : sddas ■■
lterally,  seat  (of  the  Gods) ; a shed  erected  in  the  sacrificial  court  or
enclosure  to  the  east  of  the  Pr:lchmavansa  chamber,  which  has  its
mW°l y~  'mam  tumed  ^vards  the  - east.  Soma  cars  : light  carts  in
winch  the  plants  are  brought  to  be  pressed.  10  Green  sticks  .•which

29


y,:.-


111


/■"A


rmiN  e.]


TEE  ATHAR  VI  - VEDA.


31  Now  that  uian  who  eats  before  the  guest  eats  up
the  sacrifice  and  the  merit  of  the  house.  32  He
devours  the  milk  and  the  sap  : 33  And  the  vigour-

and  prosperity  : 34  And  the  progeny  and  the  cattle  :
35  And  the  fame  and  reputation.  36  The  man  who
• eats  before  the  guest  eats  up  the  glory  and  the  un-
derstanding of  the  house.  37  The  man  should  not
eat  before  the  guest  who  is  a Br&hman  versed  in
lioly  lore.  38  When  the  guest  hath  eaten  he  should
eat.  This  is  the  rule  for  the  animation  of  the  sacri-
fice and  the  preservation  of  its  continuity.  39  Now
the  sweetest  portion,  the  produce  of  the  cow,  milk,
or  flesh,  that  verily  he  should  not  eat.,

40  The  man  who  having  this  knowledge  pours  out
milk  and  offers  it  wins  for  himself  -as  much  thereby
as  he  gains  by  the  performance  of  a very  successful
* Agnishtoma  sacrifice.  41  The  man  who  having  this
knowledge  pours  out  clarified  butter  and  offers  it  wins
for  himself  thereby  as  much  as  he  gains  by  the  per-
formance of  a very  successful  AtirUtra  sacrifice.
42  He  who  pours  out  mead  and  offers  it  wins  for
himself  thereby  as  much  as  he  gains  by  the  perfor-
mance of  a very  successful  Sattrasadya  sacrifice.

, 43  He  who  having  this  knowledge  besprinkles  flesh

and  offers  it  wins  for  himself  thereby  a§  much  as  he
gains  by  the  performance  of  a very  successful  Twelve-
Day  sacrifice:  44  The  man  who  having  this  know-
ledge pours  out  water  and  offers  it  obtains  a resting-
place  for  the  procreation  of  living  beings  and  becomes


31  The  merit : of  good  works  that  will  be  rewarded  in  heaven.

40  Agm$k{oma : (praise  of  Agiii),  a protracted  ceremony,  extending
over  several  days,  and  forming  an  essential  part  of  the  Jyotishtoma
which,  consisting  of  four  or  seven  divisions,  is  considered  as  the  typi-
cal form  of  a whole  class  of  Soma  ceremonies.  41  A tirdtra  : an  optional
part  of  the  Jyotishtoma  sacrifice.  42  $aitram>lya  : a”  long  sacrifice,
sacrificial  session,  or  Soma  ceremony,  conducted  by  many  officiating
priests,  and  lasting,  according  to  some  authorities,  from  thirteen  to  a
hundred  days.  Sue  note  on  1.  JO.  4,


' i >,  j}  .d,  . . a"!

/ti-J  Vi

l I r*L  ^ A


the  muss  or  {B00K  i

■ doir  to  living  beings,  even  the  man  who  haviiw  th
knowledge  pours  out  water  and  offers  it

« For  him  Dawn  murmurs,  and  Savitar  sines  th
prelude;  Brihaspati  chants  with  vigour  and  Tvashts
joins  muvith  increase  ; the  Visve  Derthtake  ^ <J
conclusion.  He  who  bath  this  knowledge  i,P  ft

46  ' Fo?li“e  1°he"’elfare’  of  Pr0geny>  a"d  “f  cattle
or  or  Him  the  rising  Son  murmurs,  and  Earb

Mornmg  sings  the  prelude  ; Noon  chanfe  the  psalm

■ etf  orroryrvn/  t?,e+?.tti,ng  sun  tates  «p  «£  eL

place  of  wffZ  nf1  tlm  kn0W1led^e  is  tlie  hiding

him  ihl  p • i , Prooen7>  and  of  cattle.  47  Foi
m the  Ham-cloud  murmurs  when  present  sino-«  * i,a

?hanUfaethT'enithUn^eri”g’  joi“*  in  »>>on  lightening

SontlTh  7 ,rn  ”g  and  *akes  ”P  the  com
+ usion  when  it  stays  the  downpour.  He  who  hath

is  knowledge  is  the  abiding- place  of  welfare  -W

progeny,  and  of  cattle.  48  He  looks  at  the  Zests

itewr.shae  W?  S°\nd;  he  speaks,  he  si^tS
he  foJ  water,  he  chants  the  psalm  • he

“eenreSldUe  °f  ““  *4  OP  ««

49  When  he  summons  the  door-keeper  he  c-ives  in

- S3  ff°  door-keeper)  pronounced the

51  When  theinJ  a T a”fVer  t0  ^at  he  hears. '

foremost  aid  htf  ? 1 V.essels  in  their  hands,

xoremost  and  hindmost,  come  an,  they  are  iW  fhj

^pnests  who  manage  the  Soma  cups.  52  Not  one  of

a Ch0ir  for  the  Ub*™-1  and  chant
ducing,  or  givirS  iheke.JZ^' TT" ' ' nttf™  a low  ^

a?  Prastotar,  or  proceator  rvXV*  ,;V  tU*  T ,\'-v  Urf  prelude  acts
as  Pratihartar;  or  assistant  of  Hyp  TT  l^8  ^ ?atar*  Jmns  in  • acts
of  the  last  Pad^oU^^e  ^ 1°™  S»  ih*  ^ting

Ihs  divers  stages  and  the  iM*  i 1 ? *0Ii  * f°  l',Iie  ^oaa»  tho  Sun  in


aiMJV  /.]  THE  ATSARVA-YEBA.  ; • 45<

them  is  incompetent  to  sacrifice.  53  Or  if  the  host,

t - 0 j?re  *ooc3  JIS  Suest,  goes  up  to  the  house,

he  virtually  enters  the  .bath  of  purification.  54  When
he  distributes  food  he  distributes  priestly  fees  ; what
he  performs  he  asks  as  favour.  55  He,  having  been
invited  on  earth,  regales,  invited,  in  that  which  wears
all  various  forms  on  earth.  56  He,  having  been  in-
vited in  air,  regales,  invited,  in  that  which  wears  all
various  forms  in  air.;  57  _ He  having  been  invited  in
ie  sky,  regales,  invited,  in  that  which  wears  all  vari-
ous  forms  m the  sky  58  He,  having  been  invited
among  the  Gods,  regales,  invited,  in  that  which  wears
all  vaiious  forms  among  the  Gods.  59  He,  having
~lt6d  Jf,  the.  wor3ds<  regales,  invited,  in  that
h‘ivi'myTearS  ,yarious  forms  in  the  worlds.  60  He,

tiffi  n n6n  V*ed’  h^th  been  invited-  61* He  gains
this  world  and  the  world  yonder.  62  He  who  hath

this  knowledge  wins  the  luminous  spheres.

HYMN  VII.

PkajApati  and  Parameshthin  are  the  two  horns

the  nook  f”e!.ead,  Yama  the  joint

Site? Serna  is  the  .brain,  Sky  ie  the
bj  per  jaw,  Lartli  is  the  lower  jaw.  S Lightning-  is

necl  theUR  the  teetb>  Revatl  isHie

tile  Krittikas  are  the  shonlrl  Arc  ■ a •


leh  is  entirely  prose,  is  a glorification  of  the

Vi  ^Supreme.  In  I.  7.  2,  JAtavedaa  (As.

7vi  /-ev!lI7eu  prajapati.  3 Eevatt
>ns.  Ihe  kritukas : the  Pleiades  (a  Lunar  \
nurses  of  bkanda  or  Kumara  the  Wnr.n^w'


454  * THE  I1.721NS  OF  ' [BOOK  il:

the  shoulder-bar.  4 His  universe  is  W&yu,  Svarga
is  his  world,  Krishnadram  is  the  tendons  and  verte-
brae. 5.  The  Syena  ceremony  is  the  breast,  Air  is
the  region  of  the  belly,  Brihaspati  is  the  hump,
Bfiliati  the  breast-bone  and  cartilages  of  the  ribs,
* 6 The  consorts  of  the-  Gods  are  the  libs,  the  attend-
ants are  ribs*  7 Mitra  and  Varuiia  are  the  shoulder-
blades,  Tvashtar  and  Aryaman  the  fore-arms,  Mah&-
deva  is  the  arms.  8 Indt&ni  is  the  hinder  parts,
V&yu  the  tail,  Pavam&na  tlie  hair.  9 Priestly  rank
and  princely  power  are  the  hips,  and  strength  is  the
thigh.  10  D hi  tar  and  Savitar  are  the  two  knee-
bones,  the  Gandharvas  are  the  legs,  the  Apsarases
are  bits  of  the  feet,  Aditi  is  the  hooves.  11  Thought
is  the  heart,  intelligence  is  the  liver,  law  the  pericar-
dium. 42  Hunger  is  the  belly,  refreshing  drink  is  the
rectum,  mountains  are  the  inward  parts.  13  Wrath
is  the  kidneys,  anger  the  testes,  offspring  the  genera-
tive organ.  14  The  river  is  the  womb,  the  Lords  of
the  Rain  are  the  breasts,  the  thunder  is  the  udder.

15  The  All-embracing  (Aditi)  is  the  hide,  the  herbs
are . her  hair,  and  the  Lunar  Mansions  her  form.

16  The  hosts  of  Gods  are  her  entrails,  men  are  her
bowels,  and  demons  her  abdomen.  17  Rakshasas
are  the  blood,  the  Other  Folk  are  the  contents  of  the
stomach.  18  The  rain-cloud  is  her  fat,  her  resting-
place  her  marrow.  19  Sitting  he  is  Agni,  when  he
hath  stood  up  he  is  the  Asvins.  20  Standing  east-
wards he  is  Indra,  standing  southwards,  Yama.


hence  called  K&rttikeya.  4 Krishnadram  : the  word  is  unintelligible.
5 Syena : a kind  of  Ekvha  or  Soma  sacrifice  lasting  one  day.
7 Mah/ldeva:  Great  God,  an  appellation  usually  given  to  Itudra  or  one
of  the  Gods  connected  with  him.  In  classical  Sanskrit,  and  at  the
present  time,  the  title  is  applied  to  Siva,  Maliadeo.  8 Indrdni : the
Consort  of  Indra.  Pavamdna the  deified  Soma  juice.  10  Dkdfar:
the  Ordaiuer.  14  The  Cow  is  now  the  subject  of  glorification.
17  Other  Folk : a euphemistic  expression  for  certain  beings  considered
to  be  spirits  of  darkness.  Cf.  VIII.  10.  28.  19  The  Bull  is  again  the
subject.  Silting:  Agui  as  Sacrificial  Fire  being  stationary.  20  Indra  :


HYMN  8.]  : THE  ATIIAUYA- VEDA,

21  Standing  westwards  he  is  Dh&tar,  standing
northwards  Savitar.  22  When  he  hath  got  his  grass
he  is  King  Soma.  23  He  is  Mitra  when  he  looks
a i°To  im?  a0{^  W^len  he  hath  turned  round  he  is  joy.

24  V\  hen  he  is  yoking  he  belongs  to  the  All-Gods,
when  yoked  lie  is  Praj&pati,  when  unyoked  he  is  All.

25  -This  verily  is  omnifonn,  wearing  all  forms,  bovine-
formed.  26  Upon  him  wait  omni form  beasts,  wearing

every  shape,  each  one  who  hath  this  knowledge.
HYMN  VIII.

Each  pain  and  ache  that  racks  the  head,  earache,

and  erysipelas,

All  malady  that  wrings  £hy  brow  we  charm  away  with
this  our  spell.

2 From  both  thine  ears,  from  parts  thereof,  thine  ear-

ache, and  the  throbbing  pain,

All  malady  that  wrings  thy  brow  we  charm  away  with
this  our  spell.

3 So  that  Consumption  may  depart  forth  from  thine

ears  and  from  thy  mouth,

All  malady  that  wrings  thy  brow  we  charm  away  with
this-  our  spell.


' ^ ' ■ ■ ■'  ■ ■ ; "

regarded  as  Warder  of  the  East.  23  Mitra ; the  all-surveying  Sun.


1 he  hymn  is  a charm  for  the  cure  of  various  diseases  and  pains
more  or  less  connected,  or  supposed  to  be  connected,  with  Consump-
tion. 1 2

1 Erysipelas : vilolnidh  (dark-red,  or  purple) ; apparently  an  in-
flammatory disease  attacking  the  head;  probably  erysipelas.  See  Wise,
Hindu  System  of  Medicine,  p.  270.

2 From  parts  thereof : kmk&shebhyaK  ; what  these  Mhkmhas  are  is
unknown.  Throbbing  pain : or  the  disease  that  causes  throbbing  or
piercing  pains  in  various  part;,  of  the  body,  called  visdlyaka.  L'L  VI.


THE  HYMNS  OF


[BOOK  IK.

4 The  malady  that  makes  one  deaf,  the  malady  that

makes  one  blind,

All  malady  that  wrings  thy  brow  we  charm  away  with
this  our  spell.

5 The  throbbing  pain  in  all  thy  limbs  that  rends  thy

frame  with  fever-throes,

All  malady  that  wrings  thy  brow  we  charm  away  with
this  our  spell.

6 The  malady  whose  awful  look  makes  a man  quiver

with  alarm,

Feybr  whom  every  Autumn  brings  we  charm  aWay
with  this  our  spell.

7 Disease  that  creeps  about  the  thighs  and,  after,

reaches  .both  the  groin's,

Consumption  from  thine  inward  parts  we  charm  away
with  this  our  spell.

8 If  the  disease  originates  from  love,  from  hatred,  from

the  heart,

Forth  from  the  heart  and  from  the  limbs  we  charm
the  wasting  malady,

9 The  yellow  Jaundice  from  thy  limbs,  and  Colic  from

the  parts  within,

And  Phthisis  from  thine  inward  soul  we  charm  away
with  this  our  spell.

10  Let  wasting  malady  4urn  to  dust,  become  the  water
of  disease.

I have  evoked  the  poison-taint  of  all  Consumptions
: out  of  thee.  . '


4 Deaf:  pramotam^  explained  in  the  St  Petersburg  Dictionary  as
a certain  disease,  must  he  an  adjective  like  andham>  blind,  and  means
probably  either  deaf,  or  dumb.  Bee  Zimmer's  note,  Altindisehes  Leben,

pdsrsr  p ,§  ■4|

0 Whom  evert/  Autumn  brings  ; malarial  lever  begins  to  be  preva-
lent at  the  commencement  of  the  Pains,  end  frequently  becomes
epidemic  when  the  Rains  are  over  and  the  Autumn  sun  begins  to  dry
up  the  deposits  left  by  the  swollen  rivers,  tanks,  and  inundations,,


HYMN  8.]


:TSE:  ATHAR YA-YEDA.


1 1 F orth  from  the  hollow  let  it  run,  and  rumbling  sounds

from  thine  inside.

I have  evoked  the  poison-taint  of  all  Consumptions
out  of  thee.  : ’

12  Forth  from  thy  belly  and  thy  lungs,  forth  from  thy

navel  and  thy  heart

I have  evoked  the  poison  taint  of  all  Consumptions
out  of  thee.

18  The  penetrating  stabs  of  pain  which  rend  asunder
crown  and  head,

Let  them  depart  and  pass  away,  free  from  disease
and  harming  not.

14  The  pangs  that  stab  the  heart  and  reach  the  breast-

bone and  connected  parts,

Let  them  depart  and  pass  away,  free  from  disease
and  harming  not.

15  The  stabs  that  penetrate  the  sides  and  pierce  their
. way  along  the  ribs,

Let  them  depart  and  pass  away,  free  from  disease
and  harming  not.  \ . ^

16  The  penetrating  pangs  that  pierce  thy  stomach  as

they  shoot  aci’oss,

Let  them  depart  and  pass  away,  free  from  disease
and  harming  not.

17  ♦he  pains  that  through  the  bowels  creep,  disorder-

ing the  inward  parts,

Let  them  depart  and  pass  away,  free  from  disease
and  harming  not.

18  Tne  pains  that  suck  the  marrow  out,  and  rend  and

tear  the  bones  apart,

May  they  speed  forth  and  pass  away, ‘free  from
disease  and  harming  not.

19  Consumptions  with  their  Colic  pains  which  make  thy

limbs  insensible —

:.fbU bLhaVe  evoked  the  poison-taint  of  all  Consumptions
out  of  thee.  . .


438  , THE  HYMN'S  OF  [BOOK  IX.

20  Of  piercing  pain,  of  abscesses,  rheumatic  ache,

ophthalmia  —

I have  evoked  the  poison-taint  of  all-  Consumptions
out  of  thee.

21  I have  dispelled  the  piercing  pains  from 'feet,  knees,

hips,  and  hinder  parts,

* And  spine,  and  from  the  neck  and  nape  the  malady
that  racked  the  head.

22  Sound  are  the  skull-bones  of  thy  head  and  thy

heart’s  beat  is  regular.

Thou,  Sun,  arising  with  thy  beams  hast  chased  away
the  head’s' ^disease,  hast  stilled  the  pain  that  racked
the  limbs.

HYMN  IX.

The  second  brother  of  this  lovely  Hotar,  hoary  with
eld,  is  the  voracious  Lightning.

The  third  is  he  whose  back  is  bahned  with  butter.
Here  have  I seen  the  King  with  seven  male
children.


20  Ophthalmia:  ctlaji ; more  precisely,  disease  of  the  eye  attended
with  the  appearance  of  small  red  pimples  at  the  juncture  of  the  cornea
and  sclerotica. . See  Wise,  Hindu  System  of  Medicine,  p.  20.8,

22  Hast  chased  away  the  head's  disease : cf.  4 Surya,  remove  my
heart’s  disease’  (Rigvcda  L 50.  11).  *

The  hynrn  has  been  translated  by  Zimmer,  Altindisehes  Leben,  p.
37-8,  whose  work  may  he  consulted  for  further  information,  reglRiing
the  pains  and  diseases  mentioned  in  the  text.

The  hymn,  which  is  taken  with  variations  and  transpositions,  from
stanzas  ! — 22  of  Rigveda  I.  164 — one  of  the  most  abstruse  and  diffi-
cult of  that  Collection — consists  mainly  of  questions  and  cnigm  itical
inundations  of  doctrine  on  n*y  sticu-theok >gi  ea  1 find  <,  jsmogonical
subjects.

1 This  lovely  Hotar  : or  gracious  and  being  i Pri  is  \g  ii  in  his
celestial  form  as  the  Sun.  Liyktuhig  : the  secondary  form  of  Agni
The  text  has  dsnah , voracious,  that  is,  destructive,  without  a.  substan-
tive expressed.  . The  third : brother,  or  form,  of  Agni  is  the  Garhapu-
tya  or  sacred  fire  maintained  by  each  householder  and  fed  with
oblations  of  clarified  nutter.  The  King  vdik  stem  nude  children  .
Agnvor  Sacrificial  Fire  with  the  atten  land  priest s.


S'fM'k  :S.]  - THE  ATHAR  VA  -VEDA.  .453

2 The  seven  make'  the  one-wheeled  chariot  ready  :

bearing  seven  names  the  single  Courser  draws  it.

The  wheel,  three-naved,  is  sound  and  undecaying:

thereon  these  worlds  of  life  are  all  dependent.

3 The  seven  who  on  this  seven-wheeled  car  are  mounted

have  horses,  seven  in-  tale,  who  draw  them  onward.

Seven  sisters  utter  songs  of  praise  together,  in  whom

the  Cows’  seven  names  are  held  aud  tre'asured.

4 Who  hath  beheld  at  birth  the  Primal  Being,  when

She  who  hath  no  bone  supports  the  bony  ?

Where  is  the  blood  of  earth,  the  life,  the  spirit  ?

Who  may  approach  the  man  who  knows,  to  ask  it  ?

2 The  Seven  :■  priests,  according  to  Prof.  Grassmaiin.  Perhaps  .the
Maruts  are  meant,  who  appear  in  Rigveda  I.  6.  1 to  be  the  harneasers
of  the  bright  red  steed  the.  Sun.  In  Rigveda  VIII.  28.  5,  4 The
Seven*  arc  the  Maruts,  generally  represented  as  seven  times  nine  in
number.  The  one-wheeled  chariot : the  Sum  Seven  names : perhaps
the  seven  rays  of  Agni  or  the  Sun.  Three-naved- : with  reference,
probably,  to  the  three  seasons,  the#hot  weather,  the  Trains,  and  the  cold
weather  ; or  to  morning,  noon,  and  evening.  On  this  wheel  of  the
Sun  all  living  creatures  depend.

3 The  seven  : according  to  Sayana,  the  seven  solar  rays,  or  the
'•  seven  divisions  of  the  year,  solstice,  season,  month,  fortnight,  day,
night,  hour.  The  seven  wheels  of  the  chariot,  and  the  seven  horses
may  , also,  according  to  Sav ana,  be  solar  rays.  According  to  Dr.  Hang,
the  seven-wheeled  car  is  the  Jyotishtoma  sacrifice  with  its  seven  divi-
sions, and  Prof.  Ludwig  thinks  that  the  six  pairs  of  .months  and  the
intercalary  month  are  meant.  Seven  sisters : probably  the  seven
celestial  rivers,  counterparts  of  the  Seven  Rivers  of  earth.  These,  as
emblems  of  fertility,  may  be  said  to  bear  the  names  of  the  seven  cotvs *
that  is,  each  may  be  called  a cow,  symbolizing  the  abund  nee ‘which
they  produce  on  earth.  Sayana  explains  the  seven  sisters  as  the  sol  u:
rays,  or  the  six  seasons  and  the  year,  or  the  six  pairs  of  n onths  wit  b
the  intercalary  month,  and  the  seven  cows  as  the  seven  notes  of  music
as  err  doyed  h * inting  the  praises  of  the  Sun.

4 She  who  hath  no  hone:  the  boneless  female  is  probably  P akriti  or
Nature,  the  original  source  of  the  bony  or  substantial  one,  tha'-  -is,  the
material  and  visible  world,  Or  Earth  aud  Man  may  be  intended^


480  THE  HYMNS  OF  {BOOK  IX.

5 Let  him  who  knoweth  presently  declare  it,  this  lovely

' 1 Bird’s  securely-founded  station.

Forth  from  his  head  the  Cows  draw  milk,  and  wear-
ing his  vesture  with  their  foot  have  drunk  the
•;  water.  v:

6 Unripe  in  mind,  in  spirit  undiscerning,  I ask  of  these

the  Gods’  established  places.  ■

High  up  above  the  yearling  Calf  the  sages,  to  form
a web,  their  own  seven  threads  have  woven.  ,

7 Here,  ignorant,  I ask  the  wise  who  know  it,  as  one

who  knows  not,  for  the  sake  of  knowledge,

.What  is  That  One,  who  in  the  Unborn’s  image  hath
stablished  and  fixed  firm  this  world’s  six  regions.

8 The  Mother  gave  the  Sire  his  share  of  Order.  With

•thought  at  first  she  wedded  him  in  spirit.

She,  coyly  loth,  was  filled  with  dew  prolific.  With
adoration  men  approached  to  praise  her.


5 This  lovely  Bird's  securely-founded  station  ; the,  place  of  the  Sun,
and  how  he  stands  in  heaven  secure  Although  apparently  unsupported
The  Cows  : the  rays  of  the  Sun  which  draw  light  and  vivifying  power
from  his  head  or  crown,  and  reabsorb  from  ear^h  the  water  which  they
send  down  in  rain.

/ 6 The  yearling  Calf:  probably  the  Sun,  in  reference  to  his  yearly
course.  What  the  seven  threads  are  is  uncertain.  Sfiyana  says  they
are  the  seven  forms  or  divisions  of  a Soma  sacrifice  (the  Jyotishtoma),
or  the  seven  metres  of  the  Yeda.  Prof.  Ludwig*  thinks  that  the  genSral
meaning  of  the  stanza  is  : I (the  poet)  content  myself  with  asking  .in-
formation regarding  the  places  or  traces  of  the  Gods  in  our  world  ;
but  the  sages  talk  about  matters  which  are  beyond  my  power  of  com-
prehension. According  to  Prof.  Grassmann,  the  sages  here  are  the  .wise*;
Gods,  and  the  seven  threads  are  the  seven  year-sacrifices  of  a sacrificial
cycle.  ■ ,

7 In  the  Unborn's  image:  in  the  form  of  the  Sun,  the  main  type
and  agent  of  generation,  who  as  being  the  first  of  created  tilings  is
rep  es ented  as  Aja  tin  Unborn,  the  Creator.  Gf.  £iJe  (Agi  i I - e the
Unborn,  holds  the  broad  earth  up,  and  with  effective  utterance  fixed
the  sky*  (Rigveda  I.  67.  3),

8 The  Mother : Earth.  The  Sire : Heaven.  Of  Order : that  is,
in  the  great  work  of  cosmical  production  or  creation,  Dew  irrolific  ;
m the  shape  of  fertilizing  rain.


BYMN  0,]


- THE  ATM  AM  FA-  VEDA.


9  Yoked  was  the  Mother  to  the  boon  Cow's  car-pole;
in  humid  folds  of  cloud  the  infant  rested.

Then  the  Calf  lowed  and  looked  upon  the  Mother*
the  Cow  who  wears  all  shapes  in  three  directions.

10  Bearing  three  mothers  and  three  fathers*  single  he

stood  erect : they  never  made  him  weary.

On  yonder  heaven's  high  ridge  they  speak  together
in  speech  not  known  to  all,  themselves  all-knowing-

11  Upon  the  five-spoked  wheel  revolving  ever*  whereon

all  creatures  rest  and  are  dependent*

The  axle*  heavy-laden,  is  not  heated  : the  nave  from
ancient  time  remains  unheated,

12  They  call  him  in  the  farther  half  of  heaven  .the  Sire

five-footed,  of  twelve  forms*  wealthy  in  watery
store.

These  others,  later  still,  say  that  he  takes  his  stand
upon  a seven- wheeled  car*  six-spoked* whose  sight
is  clear.


9 Yoked  was  the  mother : Earth  undertook  the  functions  of  the  cow
who  supplies  milk  for.  sacrificial  purposes.  The  infant : the  young  Sum
Three  directions ; heaven,  mid-air,  and  earth.

10  Three  mothers  mid  three  fathers  : the  three  earths  and  the  three
heavens.  The  world  is  divided  into  heaven,  sky  or  air,  and  earth,  and
each  of  these,  again,  is  sometimes  spoken  of  as  threefold.  Of.  4 Now
clear  the  triple  region  of  the  air  ’ ' (Marlowe’s  Tam  burl  aine  the-
Great,  Act  I.  Scene  II.  Part  I.)  He:  the  Sun.  They ; the  Gods.  Speak
together  : converse  about  the  Sim,  says  Say  ana.  The  reading  of  the

. Atharva-veda  in  the  last  pada  is  decidedly  better  than  that  of  the
Eigveda,  4 in  speech  all-knowing  but  not  all-impelling.’

11  The  five-spoked  wheel : the  year  with  five  seasons,  elsewhere  said
to  be  six,  or  seven,  in  number.  See  stanza  12.

.12  Fivefooted:  the  five  feet'  of  the  Sire  or  Sun  are  according  to
Say  ana,  the  five  seasons,  the  dewy  and  the  cold  seasons  being  counted
as  one.  The  twelve  forms  are  the  twelve  months.  The  seven  wheels  are
said  to  be  the  solar  rays,  and  the  six  spokes  of  each  wheel  are  the  six
seasons,  Vasanta  or  Spring,  Grishma  or  Summer,  Varshah  or  the  Bains,

. Sarad  or  Autumn,  Hemanta  or  Winter,  and  Sisira  or  the.  Cool  or
I>ewy  Season.  Whos  sight  is  clear  : instead  of  vickalcshmic,  qualifying
ralkt,  the  ear,  the  Eigveda  has  vichafohandm,  reform-/;  to  the  Suu,


462


{BOOK  IX.

Formed  with  twelve  spokes,  too  strong  for  age  to
weaken,  this  wheel  of  during  Order  roils  round
heaven.

Herein  established,  joined  in  pairs  together,  seven
hundred  sons  and  twenty  stand,  O Agni.

The  wheel  revolves,  un wasting,  with  its  felly  : ten
draw  it,  yoked  to  the  far-stretching  car-pole.

Girt  by  the  region  moves  the  eye  of'Surya,  on  whom
dependent  rest  all  living  creatures.

They  told  me  these  were  males,  though  truly  females.
He  who  hath  eyes  sees  this,  the  blind  discerns  not.

The  son  who  is  a sage  hath  comprehended  : who
knows  this  rightly  is  his  father’s  father.

Of  the  eo-born  they  call  the  seventh  single-born  :
the  six  twin  pairs  are  called  the  Itishis,  sons  of
Gods.

Their  good  gifts  sought  of  men  are  ranged  in  order
due,  and,  various,  form  by  form,  move  for  their
guiding  Lord.


THE  HYMNS  OF


unn y 9.3  the  atiiarva-yeda.  , 403

17  Beneath  the  upper  realm,  above  this  lower,  bearing

her  Calf  at  foot,  the  Cow  hath  risen.
Whitherward,  to  what,  place  hath  she  departed  ?
Where  doth  she  calve  ? Not  in  this  herd  of  cattle.

18  Who,  that  the  father  of  this  Calf  discerneth  beneath

the  upper  realm, 'above  the  lower,

Showing  himself  a sage,  may  here  declare  him  ?
Whence  hath  the  godlike  spirit  had  its  rising  ?

19  Those  that  come  hitherward  they  call  departing,

those  that  depart  they  call  directed  hither.
Whatever  ye  have  made,  Indra  and  Soma  ! steeds
draw,  as  ’twere,  yoked  to  the  region’s  car-pole.

20  Two  Birds  with  fair  wings,  knit  with  bonds  of  friend-

ship, in  the  same  sheltering  tree  have  found  a
. refuge.  .

One  of  the  twain  eats  the  sweet  Fig-tree’s  berry  :
the  other,  eating  not,  regardeth  only.

21  The  tree  whereon  the  fine  Birds  eat  the  sweetness,

where  they  all  rest  and  procreate  their  offspring — -
Upon  the  top,  they  say,  the  fruit  is  luscious  : none
gaineth  it  who  knoweth  not  the  Father.


464  THE  HYMNS  OF  [ BOOK  IX.

22  Where  the  fine  birds  hymn  ceaselessly  their'portion
of  life  eternal,  and  the  sacred  synods.

There  is  the  TJ  ni verse’s  Guard  and  Keeper  who,  wise
hath  entered  into  me  the  simple.

HYMN  X.

How  on  the  Gayatrl  the  Gayatrl  was  based  ; how
from  the  Trishtup  they  fashioned  the  Trishtup  forth  ;

How  on  the  Jagati  was  based  the  J agati — they  who
know  this  have  won  themselves  immortal  life.


Fathers  are  represented  as  the  cause  of  the  fruitfulness  of  the  mothers,
Heaven  and  Earth,  who  give  birth  to  Gods  and  men.  None  gainetk  it :
this  enjoyment  in  heaven  is  not  obtained  by  meritorious  actions  only,
but  knowledge  of  the  Father,  the  great  Primal  Cause  of  being,  is  also
necessary.  Sayana  explains  suparnah,  ‘having  beautiful  wings/  ‘fine
birds/  in  this  and  the  following  stanza  as  * smooth-gliding  (rays)/
Their  offspring  is,  he'  says,  the  light,  and  the  Father  is  the  cherishing
and  protecting  Sun.  Prof,  Ludwig  thinks  that  stanzas  23 — 22  are
originally  unconnected  fragments  inserted  together  in  this  hymn
merely  because  the  word  suparnah  (used,  apparently,  in  various  senses)
has  a prominent  place  in  each  verse.  Suparnah  has  been  explained
by  various  ’scholars  as  two  species  of  souls  ; rays  of  light  : metres  ;
Spirits  of  the  Dead  ; priests  ; Day  and  Night ; and  the  tree  on  which
they  rest  is  the  body  ; the  orb  or  region  of  the  Sun  j the  Sacrificial
Post ; the  world  ; the  mythical  World-Tree.  A generally  satisfactory
explanation  of  the  three  stanzds  is  hardly  to  be  hoped  for.

22  The  fine  birds  here  are  perhaps  the  priests,  and  the  Universes
Guard  and  Keeper  may  be  the  deified  Soma,  the  inspirer  of  the  poet.

The  hymn,  which  is  a continuation  of  Hymn  IX.,  is  taken,  with
variations,  transpositions,  omissions,  and  additions,  from  Rigveda  L
16*.  23 — 47.  ’

1 Prof.  Wilson,  following  Sayana,  paraphrases  this  stanza  as  follows:

* They  who  know  the  station  of  Agni  upon  the  earth  ; the  station  of
V ayu  that  was  fabricated  from  the  firmament,  and  that  station  of  the
Sun  which  is  placed  in  heaven,  obtain  immortality/  He  observes  that
the  purport  of  the  phraseology,  borrowed  from  the  several  metres
G&yatri,  Trishtubh,  and  Jagati,  is  not  very  clear,  and  that  it  may  be
merely  an  obscure  and  mystic  reference  to  the* text  of  the- Veda* ■.  a-
knowledge  of  which  is  essential  to  final  felicity.  The  meaning  seems  to
be  that  those  who  are  thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  appropriate  re-
wards that  follow  the  due  employment  of  each  of  the  sacred  metres
named  are  on  the  right  road  to  immortal  life  and  happiness  in  heaven.


. . ■

- . :


HYMN  10.]


THE  ATHABYA-VEBA.


he  measures  out  the  praise-song,
Saman  with  praise-song,  triplet  with  the  Trishtup,
The  triplet  with  the  two  or  four-foot  measure,  and
with  the  syllable  they  form  seven  metres.

3 With  Jagati  the  flood  in  heaven  he  stablished,  and

saw  the  Sun  in  the  Rathantara  Shman.

G&yatri  hath,  they  say,  three  logs  for  burning  : hence
t it  excels  in  majesty  and  vigour.

4 I invocate  this  Milch-cow  good  at  milking,  so  that

the  Milker,  deft  of  hand,  may  milk  her.  ■

May  Savitar  give  goodliest  stimulation.  The  caldron
is  made  hot : he  will  proclaim  it.  . -

5 She,  Lady  of  all  treasures,  hath  come  hither,  yearn-

ing in  spirit  for  her  calf,  and  lowing.

May  this  Cow  yield  her  milk  for  both  the  Asvins,
and  may  she  prosper  to  our  high  advantage.


2 The  G&yatri  metre  consists  of  three  padas  or  divisions,  and  the
Saman  or  chanted  hvmn  is  generally  composed  of  three  richas  or  verses
of  praise-  Triplet  -:  the  word  v&kd  in  the  text  is  said  to  mean  either
two  or  three  connected  stanzas,  that  is,  a short  hymn.  Tivo  or  four-
foot  measure  : consisting  of  two  or  four  padas,  divisions,  or  hemistichs.
The  meaning  is  not  clear.  With  the  syllable:  they  form  the  seven
generic  metres  of  the  Veda  with  the  syllable,  which  is  the  chief  element
of  metre,  the  Gayatri  consisting  of  eight  syllables  in*  a pMa,  the
Trishtup  of  eleven,  and  the  Jagati  of  twelve.

3 With  Jagati  : through  the  power  of  this  metre.  lie : the  Creator ;
Brahma,  according  to  Sayana.  The  flood : the  celestial  ocean ; the
waters  above  the  firmament.  Rathantara  : a name  of  various  Samans.
Three  logs : the  three  padas  or  divisions  of  the  stanza  being  fancifully
likened  to  pieces  of  fuel  used  for  the  sacrificial  fire.

4 The  Milch-cow  in  this  and  the  two  following  stanzas  may  be  the
Cow  who  supplies  milk  for  the  sacrifice.  According  to  Sayana,  the
cow  may  be  the  rain-cloud,  her  milk  being  the  rain,  and  her  milker
V ay u,  the  God  of  Wind,  who  causes  it  to  flow.  The  calf,  Sayana  says,
is  the  world  longing  for  the  rain  to  fall.  The  caldron  : in  which  the
milk  that  is  to  be  offered  as  a libation  is  heated.


5 Lady  of  all  Treasures : as  supplying  the  milk  used  in  the  sacrifice
which  brings  prosperity  to  the  worshipper.  The  Asvins:  who  are
especially  w ershipped  with  the  Gharma  or  libation  of  hot  milk.

30


,ji


I)


:p


lp::


.!  tv  •


m


m


■ V-U

" ww
no

l'

p.<  - ■
ir.V


1


m tub  hymns  of  book  in,

6 The  Cow  hath  lowed  after  her  blinking  youngling  :

she  licks  his*  forehead  as  she  lows,  to  form  it.

His  mouth  she  fondly  calls  to  her  warm  udder,  and
suckles  him  with  milk  while  gently  lowing.

7 He  also  snorts,  by  whom  encompassed  round  the  Cow

lows  as  she  closely  clings  to  him  who  sheds  the  rain.
She  with  her  shrilling  cries  hath  humbled  mortal
men,  and,  turned  to  lightning,  hath  stripped  off  her
covering  robe.

: 8 That  which  hath  breath  and  life  and  speed  and  mo-
tion lies  firmly  stabiished  in  the  midst  of  houses.
The  living  moves  by  powers  of  the  departed  : the
immortal  is  the  brother  of  the  mortal.

& The  old  hath  waked  the  young  Moon  from  his  slum-
ber, who  runs  his  circling  course  with  many  round
him.

Behold  the  God’s  high  wisdom  in  its  greatness  : he
who  died  yesterday  to-day  is  living.

10  He  who  hath  made  him  doth  not  comprehend  him  :
from  him  who  saw  him  surely  he  is  hidden.

. 7 He : probably  Parjanya,  the  God  of  the  rain-clou The  Cow  :
the  cloud.  To  form  it : or,  in  order  to  low  : 4 sie  bruit  ihr  Gebriilb*—
Grassmann.  ShrilUny  cries  : the  whizzing  sound  supposed  to  be  made
by  lightning.  .

8 The  suhjeet,qf  the  first  line  is  apparently  AgnL  By  powers  : or,
after  the  manner.  Brother  of:  or,  sharer  of  one  dwelling  with.  Liv-
ing man  follows  the  steps  of,  or  is  supported  by  those  who  have  gone
before,  and  finally  enjoys  a home  with  them  in  heaven,.  ;Prof.  Wilson,-
following  Say  ana.  translates  the  second  line  differently:  c the  life  of
the  mortal  body,  cognate  with  the  mortal  frame,  endures  immortal,
(sustained)  by  (obsequial)  offerings/  The  stanza  is  very  obscure.

9 This  stanza  is  taken  from  Rigveda  X.  55.  -5.  Sayana  explains  if
differently,  making  Indra,  identified  with  Time,  the  subject.  I follow
Prof.  Ludwig’s  interpretation  which  is  simpler  and  more  rational*
Mtiny  round  him  : stars  of  the  asterisms  through  which  the  Moon

y passes.  .

10  Lightning,  regarded  as  the  immediate  cause  of  rain,  appears  to
be  the  subject  of  the  stanza.  He  springs  from  the  bosom  of  his
“mother,  the  cloud,  with  his  countless  offspring  in  the  shape  of  fertiliz-
ing rain-drops,  appears  for  a moment  and  then  is  lost  to  sight.


HYMN  10.]


He,  yet  enveloped  in  his  mother’s  bosom,  source  of
much  life,  hath  sunk  into  destruction.

11  I saw  the  Herdsman,  him  who  never  stumbles,

approaching  by  his  pathways  and  departing.

He,  clothed  with  gathered  and  diffusive  splendours,
within  the  worlds  continually  travels.

12  Dyaus  is  our  father,  our  begetter  kinship  is  here.

This  great  Earth  is  our  kin  and  mother.

Between  the  wide-spread  world-halves  is  the  birth-
place. The  Father  laid  the  Daughter’s  germ  within  it.

13  I bid  thee  tell  me  earth’s  extremest  limit,  about  the

Stallion’s  genial  flow  I ask  thee;

I ask  about  the  universe’s  centre,  and  touching
highest  heaven  where  Speech  abideth.

14.  Th,e  earth’s  most  distant  limit  is  this  altar ; this
Soma  is  the  Stallion’s  genial  humour  ;

This  sacrifice  the  universe’s  centre  : this  Brahman
highest  heaven  where  Speech  abideth.

15  What  thing  I truly  am  I know  not  clearly  : myste-
rious, fettered  in  my  mind  I wander.

When  the  first-born  of  holy  Law  approached  me,
then  of  this  Speech  I first  obtain  a portion.

11  The  Herdsman  : the  Sun  who  surveys  and  guards  the  world,

12  Di/aus : Heaven.  World-halves : literally  two  bowls  or  vessels

into  which  the  Soma  juice  is  poured,  or  the  upper  and  the  lower  board
of  riie  Soma  press,  and  figuratively  an  expression  for  heaven  and  earth.  ,
The  firmament  or  space  between  these  two  is,  as  the  region  of  the  rain,
the  womb  of  all  beings.  The  Father  is  Dyaus,  and  the  Daughter  is
Earth  whose  fertility  depends  upon  the  germ  of  rain  laid  in  the  firma-
ment., ■■  ■,  ; b;  Tbbb?'  ■ o:, . i

14  This  altar : as  the  place  nearest  to  heaven,  the  place  where  Gods
visit  men.  Soma  : regarded  as  the  principle  of  life  and  fertility.  The
Stallion  is  'Dyaus  or  Father  Heaven  who  impregnates  the  clouds  and  ■
Forth.  Speech  : personified  as  the  Goddess  Yak.

15  The  first-born  of  holy  Law  / according  to  Sayana,  the  first-bom
(perceptions)  of  the  truth.


"468


TEE  ETMES  OF


{BOOK  IX.


16  Back,  forward  goes  he,  grasped  by  power  inherent,

immortal  born  the  brother  of  the  mortal.

Ceaseless  they  move  in  opposite  directions : men
mark  the  one  and  fail  to  mark  the  other.

17  Seven  germs  unripened  yet  are  Heaven’s  prolific

seed  : their  functions  they  maintain  by  Vishnu’s
ordinance.

Endued  with  wisdom  through  intelligence  and  thought,
present  on  every  side  they  compass  ns  about.

18  Upon  what  syllable  of  holy  praise-hymn,  as  ’twere

their  highest  heaven,  the  Gods  repose  them —

Who  knows  not  this,  what  will  he  do  with  praise-
hymn?  But  they  who  know  it  well  sit  here  assembled.

19  They,  ordering  the  verse’s  foot  by  measure,  with  the

half-verse  arranged  each  thing  that  moveth.^
f*  Prayer  was  diffused  in  many  forms  three-fhoteS  f
thereby  the  world’s  four  regions  have  their  being.

20  Fortunate  mayst  thou  be  with  goodly  pasture,  and

may  we  also  he  exceeding  wealthy.

Feed  on  the. grass,  0 Cow,  through  all  the  seasons,
and  coming  hitherward  drink  limpid  water.  ,


16  This  stanza  appears  to  refer  to  the  Sun  in  his  daily  course  from
east  to  west  and  his  nightly  return  to  the  east,  the  former  visible  to
men  and  the  latter  invisible.  They,  in  this  case,  would  mean  the  Sun

by  day  and  the  invisible  Sun  at  night.

17  This  stanza,  as  Prof.  Ludwig  remarks,  is  one  of  the  most  unin-
telligible in  the  whole  Veda.  The  seven,  _ according  to  S&yaiia,  are  the
solar  rays,  and  Vishnu  is  said  to  be  the  Sun.

18  The  syllable  is  probably  the  Prcma, m,  the  mystical  sacred
syllable  Om.  This  syllable  is  set  .forth  in  the  Upanishads  as  the
object  of  profound  religious  meditation,  and  the  highest  spiritual
efficacy  is  attributed  to  it.

' 19  They:  the  bhiitahntas  or  creative  Eisliis.  See  III.  28,  1.  Three-

footed : expressed  in  the  Gavatri  metre  of  three  padas  or  divisions,
Have  their  being';,  the  whole  world  is  supported  and  kept  alive  by
prayer-  Phis  stanza  is  not  taken  from,  tho  Rigveda.

. 20  Addressed  to  the  cow  who  supplies  milk  for  the  libations,,  when
is  iQt  loose.  i ‘


LdWv  4 i h ?*'***"  . ,’.:


£T$'2T16;]


TUB  ATHAHVA-YEDA.


21  Forming  the  water-floods  the  Cow  herself  hath

lowed*,  one-footed  or  two-footed  or  four-footed,  she,
Who  hath  become  eight-footed  or  acquired  nine  feet,
the  universe’s  thousand -syllabled  Pankti.  Prom
her  descend  in  streams  the  seas  of  water.

22  Dark  the  descent:  the  birds  are  golden-coloured.

- Robed  in  the  floods  they  fly  aloft  to  heaven.

Again  from  Order’s  seat  have  they  descended,  and
inundated  all  the  earth  with  fatness.

23  The  footless  Maid  precedeth  footed  creatures.  Who

marketh,  Mitra  Yaruna  ! this  your  doing  ? .

The  Babe  unborn  supporteth  this  world’s,  burthen,
supporteth  Right  and  watcheth  Wrong  and  False-
hood.

24  Viraj  is  Speech,  and  Earth,  and  Air’s  mid-region.

He  is  Prajapati,  and  he  is  Mrifcyu.


21  The  Cow  herself  hath  lowed  : the  great  rain-cloud,  regarded  as
V&k,  Speech  or  Sound,  has  thundered.  Sayana  explains  one-footed  as
sounding  from  the  cloud  ; two  footed,  from  cloud  and  sky  ; four-footed \
from  the  four  cardinal  points ; eight-footed , from  the  four  points  and
the  four  intermediate  points  ; the  nine  feet  being  these  eight  and  the
zenith.  The  Rigveda  has  gaurf  h,  female  buffalo,  instead  of  gmth^  cow,
Pankti:  a fivefold  metre  consisting  of  five  padas  of  eight  syllables
each,  here  representing  the  long  roll  of  the  thunder.

22  Dark  the  descent : the  rays  of  light  descend  into  the  darkness  of
the  earth  when  wrapped  in  night,  and  rise  again  to  heaven  with  the
moisture  which  they  have  absorbed  to  descend  again  in  the  form  of
fertilizing  rain.  See  Ludwig.

23  This  stanza  is  taken,  with  an  unimportant  variant,  from  Rigveda

Xe  152.  3.  The  footless  Maid  : Ushas  or  Dawn,  who  moves  unsupported
m the  sky  : Cf.  ‘ First,  Indra  Agni!  hath  this  Maid  come  footless  unt*>
those  with  feet ’ (Rigveda  VI.  59.  6).  The  Babe  unborn:.,  the  Sun
before  his  appearance  in  heaven.  *

24  Virdj  : see.  A.  V.  VIXL  10.  If  note,  Sddhyas  : said  by  Yaska  to
be  ‘ Gods  whose  dwelling-place  is  the  skyd  They  are  named  among
t le  minor  iivinities  in  the  Amarakosha,  and,  as  Wilson  observes;
it  would  seem  that  in  Sayana  s day  the  purport  of  the  designation  had
become  uncertain.5  See  TIL  5.  1 ; 79.  2;  Till.  8.  12.  The  stanza  Is
not  taken  from  the  Rigveda,


4*0  THE  ATBAB YA-TEDA.  [BOOK  IX,

He  is  the  Lord  Imperial  of  tile  SMhyas.  He  rules
what  is  and  what  shall  be  hereafter.  May  he  make
me  lord  of  what  is  and  shall  be.

25  I saw  from  far  away  the  smoke  of  fuel  with  spires

that  rose  on  high  o’er  that  beneath  it.

The  heroes  cooked  and  dressed  the  spotted  bullock.
These  wefe  the  customs  in  the  days  aforetime.

26  Three  with  long  tresses  show  in  ordered  season.  One

of  them  sheareth  when  the  year  is  ended.

One  with  his  powers  the  universe  regardeth.  Of
one  the  sweep  is  seen,  but  not  the  figure.

27  Speech  hath  been  measured  out  in  four  divisions :

the  Br&hmans  who  have  wisdom  comprehend  them.
Three,  kept  in  close  concealment,  cause  no  motion.
Of  Speech  men  speak  the  fourth  division  only.

28  They  call  him  Indra,  Mitra,  Varuna,  Agni ; and  he

is  heavenly  nobly-winged  Garutm&n.

That  which  is  One,  bards  call  by  many  a title  : they
call  It  Agni,  Yama,  M&tarisvan.


25  The  smoke  of  fuel : arising  from  burning  cow-dung.  The  heroes  :
the  Gods.  This  is,  perhaps,  a figurative  description  of  the  gathering
of  the  rain-clouds.  "

26  The  three  are  Agni  who  burns  up  the  vegetation,  the  all-seeing
Sun,  and  V ay u the  invisible  wind.

2T  Three  might,  apparently,  mean  the  three  Vedas  ; but  these  can-
not be  said  bo  be  kept  in  dose  concealment . The  fourth  division  : ordi-
nary language.  See  Wilson’s  Translation  of  the  Bigveda-Sanhita  for
Say  ana’s  elaborate  explanation  of  the  stanza  as  interpreted  by  the
scholars  of  his  time.

28  trarutmdn  : the  celestial  Bird  ; the  Sun.  All  these  names,  says
the  poet,  are  names  of  one  and  the  same  Divine  Being,  the  One
Supreme  Spirit  under  various  manifestations.

The  original  Eigveda  hymn  contains  five  stanzas  more.  A very  full
commentary — to  which  I am  indebted  for  much  valuable  assistance —
will  be  found  in  VoL  V,  of  Ludwig’s  Der  Eigveda,  pp.  445 — 457.  The
hymn  has  been  discussed  also  by  Dr.  Haug,  Sitz.  ber.  der  phiios.  philoL
Olasse  der  k.  b&yer  Akademie  de^Wiszenschaften,  bd.  IL  heftS.  1875.


Hi!


Y,;-:y:vV' ..  ,

- iij


APPENDICES.


X.  Latin  version  of  Hymns  and  ;Stanzas  ■ omitted  in
the  English  Translation.

II.  Index  op  Hymns.

III.  Index  op  Names,  etc.


1 APPENDIX.

OMITTED  HYMNS  AND  VERSES.

* Book  I.  11.  3—6.

8 Puerpera  (infantem)  detegat : nos  uterum  a peri  mas.
Daxa  teipsam,  puerpera.  Tu,  parturiens  ! emitte
Sum  non  carni,  non  adipi,  non  medullae  adhaerentem.

4  Deseendat  viscosa  placenta,  cani  eomedenda  placenta  ;
decidat  placenta.

^ *.uum:  ur^nae  ductum,  diffindo  vaginam,

dimndo  inguina.  Matrem  natumque  divido,  pue-
rum  a placenta  divido  : decidat  placenta.

6 Sicut  ventus,  sicut  mens,  sicut  alites  volant,  sic,
decern  mensium  puer,  cum  placenta  descende :
deseendat  placenta. .

Book  IV.  4.  3 — 9.

3 Sicut  tui  surgentis  (mernbrum  virile)  tanquam  inflarn-

matum  palpitat,  hoc  illud  tui  ardentius  haee  herba
raeiat.

4 Suraum  ( estote)  herbaru m vires,  taurormn  vigor.  Tu,

Indra,  corporis  potens,  virorum  maseulum  robur
m hoc  homine  depone.

5 Ros  aquarum  primigenitus  atque  arborum,  Somae

e^am  “a^er  es>  vatum  sacrorum  masculus  vigor  es.

6 Hodie,  Agnis  ! hodie  Savitar  ! hodie  dea  Sarasvatfc!

hodie  Brahmanaspatis ! hujus  fascinum  velut  ar-*
cum  extende..

7 Velut  nervum  in  arcu  ego  tuum  iascinum  extend©,

Aggredere  (mulierem)  semper  indefessus  velut”
cervus  damam.

8 Quae  sunt  equi  vires,  muli,  capri,  arietis*,  atque

taun,  mas,  corporis  potens  1 in  hoc  homine  depone.

3 Puerpera  : sAskff=  suskand,  from  the  root  sti,  to  bring  forth  ; one
desiring  to  bring  forth  ; a parturient.

6 Of.  Eigveda  V.  78.  8.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  R.igveda,  III.  p.  478.


APPENDIX.

Book  VI.  72.

1 Sicut  anguis  niger  ad  voluntatem  se  extendit,  Asura-

rum  arte  magica  formas  novas  efficiens,  sic  fasci-
. sum  tuum,  partem  cum  parte,  conjunctum,  hie
hymnus  efficiat.

2 Velut  penis  (tayadarus)  quem  ventus  permagnum

fecit,  quantus  est  onagri  penis,  tantus  penis  tuus
increscat.

3 Quantum  est  onagri  membrum  masculinum,  elephantb

asinique,  quantum  est  fortis  equi,  tantus  penis  tuus
inereseat.  , ' >■

Book  YI  101.  ■ ■ -

1 Tauram  age,  palpita,  incresce  et  teipsum  extende  :

per  totum  membrum  inqrescat  penis  : hoe  tu  caede
feminam.

2 Quo  debilem  stimulant,  quo  aegrum  excitant  (ho-

mines), hoc,  O Brahmanaspatis,  hujus  penem  in
arcus  modum  extende.

3 Yelut  nervum  in  arcu  ego  tuum  fascinum  extend©.

Aggredere  (mulierem)  sefnper  indefessus  velut
cervus  damam.  .

Book  YI.  138.

4 Duas  tuas  venas,  a Diis  factas,  in  quibus  stat  vigor

^ virilis,  paxillo  ligneo  in  testiculis  ob  istam  mulie-
rem tibi  findo.  *

5 Ut  mulieres  mattam  (tegetem)  faeturae  arundinem

japide  findunt,  sic  fascinum  tuum  cum  testiculis
ob  istam  mulierem  findo.  ■


2 Tayadarus : the  meaning  of  the  word  t&yddardm  in  the  text  is
not  discoverable.  Onagri  : pdrasvatah ; the  animal  called  Rarasv&n
^.probably,  as  conjectured  by  von  Roth,  the  wild  ass  or  Onager  found
on  the  banks  of  the  Indus,  and  in  former  times  even  in  Southern  India.
The  animal  is  mentioned  in  Rigveda  X.  86.  18,  and  again  in  Atharva-
veda  XX.  131.  22.

2 Hoe  : that  is,  by  virtue  of  this  charm,  or  with  this  drug.

3 The  stanza  'is-  repeated  from  IV.  4.7.


ppfflpp


APPENDIX.  473

Book  VII.  35.

Hae  quot  tibi  sunt  venae  atque  arteriae  harurn  om-
nium os  tibi  lapide  occlusi.

Uteri  tui  summatn  partem  inferam  facio  : ne  tibi
soboles  neque  filius  eveniat.  Sterilem  et  infeeun-
dam  te  facio  : lapidem  tuum  operimentum  facio.

Book  VII.  90.

Ut  virga  abeat  et  feminis  innocua  fiat,  (virga)  mem-
bri  humidi,  metnbri  quod  verberat  penetratque,  id
quod  tentum  est  laxa,  id  quod  s.ursum  tentum  est
deorsum  tende.


Innocua  : inoffensive.  4 O’est  pour  dnavayas  le  sen!  sens  possible,
indiqu4  par Tesprit  du  morceau,  et  d’aillenrs  la  derivation  par  dva  yd
(P,  W.) . n-explique  pas  la  longue.  Je  conjecture  un  compose,  k coup
sur  recent  et  tres  exeeptionei  (mais  aussi  est-ce  un  airaQ  fait  sur
avdgaii  “ ibdevore,”  cf.  le  rapport  cdtati : achetds  (P  accentuation
importe  peu  pour  une  formation  aussi  hysterogene  et  arbitraire).
L’assimilation  du  membre  viril  a une  bete  feroce  qui  assaille  les  fem-
mes est  de  tons  les  temps  et  de  tous  les  lieux.’— M.  Victor  Henry,
whose  version  of  the  obscure  stanza  I have  put  into  the  Latin  above.  -


INDEX  OF  HYMNS.


BOOK  I

N.

t A Prayer  t0  Vacliaspati  for  divine  illumination  and  help.
2 A charm  against  dysentery

» A charm  against  constipation  and  suppression  of  urine...
: To  the  Waters,  for  the  prosperity  of  cattle  ...

* To  the  Waters,  for  strength  and  power  ...

> To  the  Waters,  for  health  and  wealth

To  Indra  and  Agni,  for  tie  detection  and  destruction  of
evil  spirits  ...

To  Indra,  Brihaspati,  Soma,  and  Agni,  for  the  destruction
of  sorcerers  ...

Benediction  on  a King  at  his  inauguration  ...

ilbsolution  of  a sinner  after  intercession  with  Varuna  ...

A charm  to  be  used  at  child-birth  ...

A prater  to  Lightning,  against  fever,  headache, and  cough.
A prayer  to  Lightning,  for  happiness
A v oman  s incantation  against  a ri  val
A prayer  for  the  prosperity  of  an  institutor  of  sacrifice.
A prayer  and  charm  against  demons
A charip  to  be  used  at  venesection

A charm  to  avert  evil  spirits  of  misfortune  and  to  secure
prosperity  . . .

A grayer  for  protection  from  arrows  and  for  the  punish-
ment  of  enemies

A prayer  to  Soma,  the  Maruts,  Mitra,  and  Varuna,  for
protection  ...

A prayer  to  Indra  for  protection  ...

A charm  against  jaundice...

A charm  against  leprosy  ...

A charm  against  leprosy  ...

A prayer  to  Fever,  as  a charm  against  his  attacks  . ...
Amprayer  for  protection,  guidance,  and  prosperity.

A Gharm  to  obtain  invisibility
A prayer  to  Agni  for  the  destruction  of  evil  spirits
A charm  to  secure  the  supremacy  of  _ a dethroned.  King.


INDEX  OF  HYMNS.


Hymn.  ■ : Page,

30  A benediction  on  a King  at  his  consecration  ...  ...  34

31  A prayer  for  protection  and  general  prosperity  *.*.-35

32  In  praise  of  Heaven  and  Earth  ' ...  ...  ...  36

33  To  jbhe  Waters,  for  health  and  happiness  ...  3*7

34  A young  man’s  lo  v e-charm  ....  ...  ...  38

35  A charm  to  ensure  long  life  and  glory  to  the  wearer  of

an  amulet.  ...  • ...  ...  ....  ...  30

BOOK  II,

1 Glorification  of  the  Prime  Cause  of  all  thing’s.,,  ...  41

2 A charm  to  ensure  success  in  gambling  ...  ...  42

3 A water-cure  charm  ...  ....  ...  ...  48

4 A charm  to  ensure  health  and  prosperity  by  wearing  an

amulet  A-  . p y : a.,/  AA.y

5 Invitation  to,  and  praise  of  Indra  ...  ...  ...  46

6 A prayer  to  Agni  for  protection  ...  ....  ...  48*:

7 A counter-charm  against  imprecation  and  malignity  ,m:  40

8 A charm  against  hereditary  disease  (kxhetriya)  50

9 A charm  to  cure  dangerous  disease  *.**  ...  51

10  Absolution  and  benediction  ....  ...  ...  52

11  Counter-charm,  with  an  amulet,  against  an- enemy’s  spells.  54

12  A prayer  for  vengeance  on  a malicious' rival  worshipper.  55,

13  A youth’s  Investiture  ceremony  (goddnam)  ...  , ...  , 57

14  A charm  to  banish  vermin  and  noxious  creatures  ...  58

15  A charm  against  fear  ...  ■ ...  ...  ...  59

16  A prayer  for  general  protection  ...  ...  * ....  80

17  A prayer  to  an  amulet  for  health  and  strength  ...  61

18  A charm  against  enemies,  goblins,  and  other  evil  creatures.  81

1-9.  A prayer  to  Agni  for  aid. against  an  enemy  ...  ...  82;

20-23  Repetitions  of  19,  but  addressed  to  Vayu,  Surya,

: ' Chandra,  and  the  'Waters  instead  of  Agni  - ' P;y

24  A charm  against  the  magic  arts  of  fiends  ...  62

25  A charm  against  Sends  who  cause  abortion  ...  ...  64

26  A benediction  on  homeward  coming  cattle  ...  ...  65>

27  A charm  against  an  opponent  in  debate  ....  86

28  A prayer  for  a boy’s  long  and  happy  life  ...  fu  67

29  A.  benediction  on  a sick  man  * ....  ...  68

30  A man’s  love-charm  ...  ' ...  ...  ...  70

31  A charm  against  all  sorts  of  worms.  • 71


Bool  111.}


INDEX  OF  HYMNS#


A charm  against  worms  or  hots  In  cows
A charm  against  Consumption  {yahshma)

A prayer  accompanying  an  animal  sacrifice  ...

Expiation  for  an  imperfectly  performed  sacrifice
A charm  to  secure  a husband  for  a marriageable  girl  ...

BOOK  HI.

A prayer  or  charm  for  the  defeat  and  destruction  of
enemies  in  battle.  ...  ...  ...

A rifaccimento  or  recension  of  1
A charm  for  the  restoration  of  an  expelled  King
A benediction  at  the  election  of  a King
Ailing's  address  to  an  amulet  which  is  to  strengthen  his
authority

Address  to  an  amulet  which  is  to  secure  the  defeat  of
the  wearer’s  enemies  ...  ...  *

A charm  with  an  amulet  of  buck-horn  to  drive  away
hereditary  disease

A charm  to  secure  the  submission,  love,  and  fidelity  of
kinsmen  ...  ...  ...  . ... '•  , ' ' ...

A charm  against  rheumatism  (vishkmidka)  ...

A,  New  Tear  prayer  ...  yW ^ |i dfid .
A charm  for  the  recovery  of  a dangerously  sick  man  ...

A benediction  on  a newly  built  house
A benediction  on  a newly  cut  water  channel
A benediction  on  a cattle  pen
A merchant’s  prayer  for  success  in  his  business
A Rishi’s  morning  prayer  ..  ...

A farmer’s  song  and  prayer  to  speed  the  plough
A jealous  wife’s  incantation  against  a rival
A glorification  of  the  office  of  a King’s  household  priest.
A prayer  for  riches  and  general  prosperity  ...

In  honour  of  fire  in  all  shapes,  po  appease  Agni  of  the
funeral  pile  and  to  quench  the  flames  of  cremation.
The  taming  and  training  of  an  elephant  for  a King  to
ride  on  ...  ...  ...  * ...

A charm  to  remove'  a woman’s  sterility,  and  to  assure
the  birth  of  boys  ...  ...  ' ...  ...

A song  of  harvest  ...  ...  ' ...  ' ...


[Book  IK


mmx  op  mum:*


Hymn*  ' Bag®,

25-  A man’s  love-charm  ...  11 9

26  A charm  to  win  the  favour  of  all  serpents  ...  ...  120

27  A charm  consigning  an  enemy  to  the  serpents  for  punish-

. ’ rnent  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  121

. 28  A charm  to  change  the  ill-omened  birth  of  twin  calves

into  a blessing  ...  * ...  ...  ...  122

29  On  the  means  to  obtain  immunity  from  taxation  in  the

next  world  ...  ...  ...  ...  '*.*  124

30  A charm  to  secure  love  and  concord  in  a family  ...  125

31.  A charm  for  the  recovery  of  one  dangerously  ill  ...  127

BOOK.  IV.

1 * Cosmogonical  and  mystieo-theologieal  doctrine  V*  129

,2  To  The  Unknown  God  ...  ...  ...  181

3 A charm  against  tigers,  wolves,  thieves,  and  other

noxious  creatures  ...  ...  ...  • • * 183

4 A charm  to  restore  virile  power  ..  ...  ...  134

5 A lover’s  sleep-charm  ...  ...  ...  135

6 A charm  to  make  a poisoned  arrow  harmless  ...  136

7 A charm  to  make  a poisonous  plant  innocuous  ...  138

8 A benediction  at  the  consecration  of  a King  ....  139

9 A charm  addressed  to  a precious  ointment  for  safety  and

i : ” wealth  ...  ...  . ....  • . 141

10  A charm  accompanying  investiture  with  an  amulet  of  shell.  14-2

11  A glorification  of  the  sacrificial  Gharma  or  milk-ealdroin  144

12  A charm  to  mend  a broken  bone  ...  ...  146

■ 13  A charm  to  restore  a sick  man  to  health  ...  ...  147'

14  Accompanying  the  sacrifice. of  a he-goat  ...  ...  143

15  A charm  to  hasten  the  coming  of  the  Bains  150

16  On  the  omnipresence  ana  omniscience  of  Vanina  ...  153

17  A charm  to  secure  freedom  from  various  evils  ...  155'

18  A counter-charm  against  the  incantations  of  enemies  ...  156

13  A conn  ter- charm  and  charm  to  secure  general  protection,  157
20  A charm  for  the  acquisition  of  superhuman  powers  of

sight

, ; 21  Glorification  and  benediction  of  Gows
, yi$|2  A benediction  on  a newly  consecrated  King
I/IJm  Magnification  of  Agni  and  prayer  for  1
' ^iV  grayer  and  praise  to  Indra


Booh  P.]


IHBBX  OF  HYMN’S.


A hymn  of  prayer  and  praise  to  V&yu  and  Savitar  ...
A hymn  to  Heaven  and  Earth  ...

A hymn  to  the  Maruts  ...

A hymn  to  Bhava  and  Sarva  ...

A hymn  to  Mitra-Varuna  ...  ...  ...

A glorification  of  Yak  or  Speech
A hymn  to  Manyu  or  Wrath
A hymn  to  Manyu  ...  ...

A prayer  to  Agni  for  protection  and  prosperity
Glorification  of  the  Vishtari  sacrifice  ...

Magnification  of  the  Odana  or  oblation  of  milk  and  rice.
A charm  against  fiends,  human  enemies,  and  other  pests.
A charm  against  Gandbarvas  and  Apsarases
A charm  for  success  in  gambling  ...

A prayer  to  various  deities  for  health,  wealth,  and
prosperity  ...  ...  ...  ...

A charm  against  rival  worshippers  ...

BOOK  Y.

A glorification  of  Trita  and  Yanina
A glorification  of  Indra  ...

A prayer  to  Agni,  Indra,  and  other  deities  for  victory
and  prosperity  ...  ...  ...

: A charm  against  fever  and  other  ailments
A charm  to  mend  a broken  bone  ...
i A prayer  for  protection  and  prosperity
A charm  to  deprecate  A rati  or  Malignity  ...

A charm  for  the  discomfiture  and  destruction  of  hostile
. priests

A prayer  to  Heaven  and  Earth  for  protection  and  assistance,
A prayer  to  the  presiding  deities  of  the  four  quarters  for


protection  ...

...  202

11

A dialogue  between  Atharvan  and  Yanina  ...

...  203

12

An  A pri  or  Propitiatory  Hymn  ...

...  205

13

A charm  against  snakes  ...

...  208

14

A charm  against  witchcraft  ...  ....

...  210

15

A charm  for  general  prosperity

....  211

15

A charm  for  the' increase  of  cattle  ...

...  212

17

The  abduction  and  restoration  of  a Brahman's  wife

...  212

31


482


INDEX  OF  HYMNS.


Hymn,  ' :

18  , The  wickedness  of  oppressing  and  robbing  ■ Brahmans

19  . The  wickedness  of  robbing  or  insulting  Brahmam  ...
■■  20  A hymn  to  the  War-drum  to  secure  victory  ...

21  A hymn  to  the  War-drum  and  various  deities  for  victory.

22  A charm  against  fever

23  A charm  against  parasitic


worms  ....  ...  ...  226

24  A priest’s  prayer  for  protection  and  assistance  ‘ 228

25  A charm  to  facilitate  conception  ...  ...  ...  229

26  A hymn  of  invitation  to  the  Gods  ...  ...  231

27  An  Apr!  or  Propitiatory  Hymn  ...  ...  232

28  A charm  to  ensure  general  protection  and  prosperity  ...  234

29  A charm  for  the  destruction  of  malignant  goblins  -v.  236

30  A charm  to  restore  life  and  health  ...  ...  ...  238

31  A counter-charm  against  the  incantations  of  an  enemy  241

BOOK  YL  ' 1

1 In  praise  of  Savitar  ...  ...  ...  ...  245

2 In  praise  of  India  ...  ...  ' ...  ■ _ : ...245

3 A prayer  to  various  deities  for  protection  and  prosperity.  246

4 A 'prayer , to  various  deities  for.  protection  ■ ■,  ... • ' 1 : : 7 . . . ; 246

5 A prayer  to  Agni  and  Indra  for  the  well-being  of  .a

princely  patron  ...  ...  ...  ...  247

6 A prayer  to  Brahmanaspati  for  protection  from  wicked  men.  247

7 A prayer  to  Soma  and  other  Gods  for  help  and  protection.  248

8 A man’s,  love-charm  . ...  , 248

9 A man’s  love-charm  ...  ...  ...  ,249

10  A thanksgiving  for  life,  hearing,  and  sight  ...  ...  249

11  An  epithalamian  charm  to  ensure  the  birth  of  a boy  ....  250

12  A charm  against  venomous  serpents  ...  ...  250

13  .Homage  to  Death : ...  ...  ...  .251

14  A charm  against  Consumption  ...  ...  252

15  A charm  for  power  and  preeminence  ....  ...  252

16  : A medicinal  charm  .....  ...  ...  . ■ 1 • 2 5 3

17  A charm  to  ensure  conception  ...  ...  ...  254

IS  A charm  to  banish  jealousy  . ...  ...  ->«  254

1 9 A prayer  for  purifi cation  ...  ...  ...  205

20  A charm  against  fever  ...  ...  ...  ...  255

21  A charm  to  strengthen  hair  and  promote  its  growth  ...  256

22  To  the  Maruts  or  Storm-Gods  ...  ...  ...  256


...


Jr  AGE.


Hymk,


56  A charm  against  snakes  ...  ...  ...  276

57  A charm  for  a wound  or  bruise  ...  - ...  ...  276

58  A priest's  prayer  for  power  and  glory  ...  ...  277

59  A charm  to  protect  cattle  and  men  ...  ...  277

60  The  wooing  of  a bride  ...  ...  ...  278

61  A pray  ex'  for  prosperity  and  greatness  ...  ...  278

62  A prayer  for  purification  and  riches  ...  ...  279

63  The  symbolical  liberation  of  a sacrificial  victim  ...  279

64  To  promote  unanimity  in  an  assembly  ,,,  280

65  A sacrificial  charm  against  enemies  ...  ...  281

66  A charm  for  the  destruction  and  plunder  of  enemies  ...  281

67  The  same  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  282

88  A charm  to  accompany  the  shaving  of  the  beard  ...  282

69  A priest's  prayer  for  power  and  glory  ...  ...  283

70  A benediction  on  cow  and  calf  ...  ...  ...  283

71  A priest’s  benediction  after  meat  ...  ...  ...  284

72  A charm  to  restore  or  increase  virile  power  (Appendix)  474

73  A King’s  charm  to  conciliate  his  discontented  kinsmen.  284

74  A King’s  charm  to  secure  the  fidelity  of  his  people  ...  285

75  A charm  to  effect  the  removal  of  an  enemy  ...  ...  285

76  A benediction  on  a new-born  Kshatriya  child  ....  280

77  A charm  to  bring  the  cattle  home  ">*  ...  286

78  A nuptial  benediction  ...  ...  ...  287

79  A prayer  for  seasonable  rain  and  prosperity  ...  ...  288

80  A prayer  for  help  and  protection  ...  ...  ...  288

81  A charm  to  facilitate  child-birth  ...  ...  ...  289

82  A charm  to  win  a bride  ...  ; ...  ...  289

83  A charm  against  sores  and  pustules  (apachitas)  ...  -290

84  A charm  to  accompany  the  symbolical  loosing  of  sacrifi-

cial victims  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  291

85  A charm  against  Consumption  ...  ...  ...  891

86  A glorification  of  a newly  consecrated  King  ...  ...  292

87  A benediction  addressed  to  a newly  elected  King  ...  292

88  The  same  ...  ...  ...  A;  ...  298

89  A man’s  love-charm  ...  ...  ...  . 2?3

90  A chann  to  cure  a poisoned  man  ...  ...  ...  294

91  A charm  against  disease  ...  ...  ...  ...  295

92  A charm  to  strengthen  and  inspirit  a war-horse  295


■Book  VL]

Hymn.

93  A prayer  for  protection  from  poison

94  A charm  to  reconcile  a King’s  discontented  j

95  A charm  to  remove  disease  ...

96  A prayer  for  deliverance  from  sin  and  sorrc

97  A prayer  for  the  success  and  prosperity  of  a

98  Praise  of  Indra  ...

99  A prayer  for  protection  in  battle

100  A charm  against  poison  ...  ....

101  A charm  to  promote  virile  vigour  (Appendix)

102  A man’s  love-charm

103  A charm  to  check  the  approach  of  a hostile  a;

104  The  same

105  A charm  to  cure  cough  ...

106  A charm  to  protect  a house  from  fire

107  A charm  to  protect  men  and  cattle

108  A prayer  for  wisdom

109  A charm  to  heal  punctured  wounds

110  A benediction  on  a new-born  child  ...

111  A charm  for  insanity

112  A health-charm  for  man,  woman,  and  son


tm%X  OF  HYMNS,


mmx  OF  HYHK'S,


-Hymist.  I Fagi

b.129,  A charm  for  success  and  happiness,. 317

130  A Woman's  love-charm  ...  ■ ...  ...  317

131  Tlie  same  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  .318

. 132  .The  same  . ...  ...  • ...  ...  819

133  A glorification  of  the  sacred  girdle  ...  ...  319

134  A priest's  prayer  for  power  to  punish  wrong-doers  ...  320

- 135  A pries t/s  fulmination  against  an  enemy  . . , ■ ...  821

136  A charm  to  promote  the  growth  of  hair  ....  ...  321

137  The  same  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  321

138  A woman’s  imprecation  on  her  unfaithful  lover  -...322

139  A woman's  love-charm  ...  . ...  ...  ...  823

140  A blessing  on  a child’s  first  two  teeth  ...  ...  323

141  A blessing  on  cattle  ...  ...  ...  »*  324

, 142  A prayer  for  a plentiful  harvest  ...  ;;  - ...  , ...  324:

. BOOK.  TIL  , 1 :

1 Glorification  of  the  power  of  prayer  and  of  Agni  ...  327

2 Praise  of  Atharvan  ...  ...  ...  ...  328

T,  - 3 Praise  of  Agni  as  the  Sun  . ...  V ...  ■ ...  '328

4 To  Tayu  God  of  the  Wind  ...  ...  328

5 A glorification  of  sacrifice  ..  ...  ...  ..  329'

6 A prayer  to  Aditi  for  help  and  protection  ...  ...  330

■ r-  7 Praise  of  the  Adityas  ...  1 . ...  '/  ...  . • ...  ' 331

8 Godspeed  to  a departing  traveller  ...  ...  ...  831

9 A prayer  to  Pushan  for  protection  and  the  recovery  of

lost  property  ■ ...  , ...  ...  ...  832

10  A prayer  for  the  favour  of  Saras  vati  ...  ...  332

, ;YjLL ; ; A prayer  to  protect.,  corn  from  lightningand-  drought

12  A prayer  for  influence  at  deliberative  and  religious  meetings.-  883
ybJS  ‘ A charm  to  win  superiority  over  foes  and' rivals  ' v.384-

14  A prayer  to  Savitar  for  prosperity  . . . ...  ...  334

\A  charm  to  win  divine: favour  an&;  'felicity^  ; h.: SS5
sbt  10  / A,prayer!for  prosperity.  ...  - 1 it  y hbv,;b/>M3;

1.7  -A  prayer  for  wealth  and  children  ...  - ...  ...  335

18  A prayer  for  rain  ■ ...  ...  ...  ...  336

19  A prayer  for  prosperity  ...  ■ ...  ...  387

20  A prayer  for  prosperity  and  happiness  ...  #;A  837

21  A funeral  stanza  ...  ...  ...  ...  838

■■  22  To  Savitar,  or  Yama  invested  with  Sav  Hat's  attributes,  338


INDEX'  OE  HYMNS.


Hymn,


23  A charm  to  banish  fiends  and  troubles  ...  ...

2 4 A prayer  for  riches  ...  ...  ...

25  Praise  of  Vishnu  and  Varuna  ......

26  Praise  of  Vishnu  ...  ...

27  A prayer  to  Ida,  Goddess  of  Devotion

28  Praise  of  the  sacrificial  utensils  ...  ...

29  To  Agni  and  Vishnu

30  A charm  to  be  used  when  the  eyes  are  anointed

31  A prayer  for  the  overthrow  of  enemies

32  A prayer  to  Agni  for  long  life  ...

33  A prayer  for  long  life,  children,  and  riches  ...

34  A prayer  for  freedom  from  sin  and  the  overthrow  of

enemies  ...  ...  ...  ...

35  A prayer  for  the  prosperity  of  a King  and  his  kingdom.

36  A charm  to  be  pronounced  by  bride  and  bridegroom  ...

37  A nuptial  charm  to  be  spoken  by  the  bride  ...

38  A maiden’s  love-charm  ...  ...

39  A sacrificial  charm  for  rain  and  prosperity  ...

40  A prayer  for  prosperity  ...

41  The  same

42  A prayer  for  delivery  from  sin  and  sickness  ...  ...

43  A charm  against  lightning  ...

44  In  praise  of  Indra  and  Vishnu

45  A charm  against  jealousy...

46  A charm  for  offspring  and  prosperity  ...  ...

47  A prayer  for  wealth  and  the  birth  of  a son  ...

48  A prayer  for  prosperity  and  the  birth  of  a son

49  A prayer  for  children  and  booty  ...  ...

50  ' A gambler’s  prayer  for  success  in  gaming

51  A prayer  for  Brihaspati’s  and  Indra’s  protection

52  A prayer  for  peace  and  concord

53  A charm  to  recover  a sick  man  at  the  point  of  death  ...

54  A charm  to  obtain  knowledge  of  the  Veda

55  A charm  to  ensure


a prosperous  journey

56  A charm  against  poisonous  bites,  and  stings

57  A charm  for  some  physical  disorder

58  . An  invitation  to  Indra  and  Varuna

59  An  imprecation  ...  ...


~ Jj£-  f


INDEX'  OF  HYMNS.


tNBSX  OF  HYMNS,


100  A charm  against  nightmare

101  The  same  ...  •

102  A charm  to  obtain  pardon  for  an  indecent  act

103  The  cry  of  an  unemployed  priest  ...

104  A prayer  for  prosperity  ...

105  An  initiation  formula  ...

106  A prayer  for  pardon  of  sin  ...

107  A charm  against  Cough  ...

108  A prayer  for  protection  ...

109  A prayer  for  success  in  gambling  ...

110  A prayer  for  success  in  battle

111  A prayer  for  offspring

112  A prayer  for  protection  and  freedom  from  sin

113  A woman’s  incantation  against  a rival

114  The  same  ...

115  A charm  against  Misfortune

116  A charm  against  Fever

A charm  to  ensure  prosperity
118  A benediction  on  a warrior


m


[Book  IX


Page.

2 . A glorification  of  K& ma  as  God  of  desire  of  all  that  is  good.  430

3 . On  the  consecration  of  a newly  built  house  ...  ...  434

4 A glorification  of  the  typical  sacrificial  bull  ...  ...  438

5 A glorification  of  a sacrificial  goat  ...  ...  ...  442

8 A glorification  of  hos1  ita  >le  reception  of  guests  ...  448

7 A glorification  of  the  typical  bull  and  cow  ...  ...  453

8 A charm  for  the  cure  of  various  diseases  connected  with

Consumption  , ...  . ...  ...  ...  455

9 Enunciation  of  my stico-theologi cal  and  cosmological

doctrine  ...  ...  ' ...  ...  ...  458

10  Continuation  of  Hymn  9 ...  ...  464


INDEX  OE  NAMES,  ETC.

Agni,  iir,x,xri,  is,  20,  342,  §43,  349,  331,

29,  30  note , 31  note,  352,  357,  360,  361,
33,  35  note,  36  note,  363,  366,  369,  370—
37,38,40,  42  note,  373,  374  note,  376,
47  note,  48,49,  51  379,3*0,  381,  383,

note,  53,  56,  57,  59,  385,  387,  389—395,

note,  61,  62,  67,  68,  397,  398,  400—402,

76,78,  81.  85,  90,  410,415,413,427—

94  note,  96,  100, 102,  429,431—433,  435  -

103,  105  note,  110,  437,  439,443,444,

111,  113  note,  114,  449,  453,  454,  458,

115,  120,  121,  123,  460,  462,  464,  466,

126,  128,  130  note,  469,  470.

131  note,  145  note,  alone  originally

149,  152,  163,  164,  immortal,  42  note.

170  note,  175,  179,  as  lightning,  8 note,

184,  187  note,  188  30  note,  37,  458  note.

note,  189  note,  191  as  the  Sun,  78  note,

note,  192, 193, 19S—  188  note,  328,  370,

200,  202  note,  205  416,  458  note.

note,  206  note,  207,  flight  of,  30  note,

211,212,  224,  226,  327  note.

228,  229,231—238,  three  homes  of,

240,  242  note,  243,  ‘ 416.

246,  247,  249,  259,  kravyad  (Flesh-

260,  262 — 264,  266,  consumer),  3S6  note.

269  note,  270,  271  identified  with

note,  272,  274,  275,  Kama,  113,  264.

277,  279,  '280,  282,  patron  of  marriage,

284,  285  note,  286,  78  note.

287  note,  292,  293,  Lord  of  Seasons,  94

296—298,301—307,  note.

309,  312-314,  318,  Lord  of  the  Five

319,  327  note,  328  Tribes,  163.

note,  330  note,  335  Son  of  the  Kishis,

note,  336,  337,  339,  185.


Abattj,  p.  253.
Abhiplava,  48  note.
Abhisheka,  11, 140  note*.
Absolute,  The,  IV,  36,
41  notes.

Absolution,  52,  77  notes.
Achirya,  379.

Adder,  32.

Adding  (name  of  a
goblin),  119.
Adhvaryu,  IV,  15,  245,
361,  362,  452.

Aditi,  12,  39,  68,  90,
104,  115,  189,  231,
246,  248,  265,  282,
289,  311,  336,  343,
371,  390,  394,  420,
454.

Aditya,  107,  185,  191,

^ 273,  330,  331,  371.
Adityas,  12,  14,  15,  31,
34,  39,  40,  56,  90,
91,  111,  115,  121,
171,  193,  234,  246,
282,  285,  308,  331,
387,  390,  414,  420,
427,  440.

Affliction  (personified),
259.

Agasti,  170,  171.

Agastya,  73,  134,  170,
180,  227,  274.

Aghnyfi.  (cow),  1 25  note.
Aguayi,  111,  349.

Aguayo  Dhishnyah,  76,
359  notes.


'm


mmx  of  names,


Agnishtoma,  451*
Agriculture,  106,

— — genii  of  IX.
Agriculturist,  life  of
. . an,  IX — XL  *


Amarakosha,  469.  Anus  (a  people),  114  note
Amb&risha,  7*  ' Aniisarpa,  63.

Ararit,  Amrita,  6,  98,  Anushtup,  418,  4l9,

100,  126,  1 38,  141,  Aimyajas,  35.  ■

152,  167,  178,  235,  Apachitas,  258,  363
Agriculturists,  251,309.  240,  287*  289,  312,  notes.  See  Pustules.
Ahi,  47,  99,  165.  427*  Apah  (Waters),  6 note .

Ahavanija  Fire,  450.  Amull,  242.  Apimarga,  156,  157,

Ahura  Mazda,  13  note.  Amulet,  33,  34,  39,  317  note,  358.

Air,  55*  201 — 203,234,  51,  53,  81,  86,  92,  Apamnaplt,  152  note.

311,  318,386,415,  . 234,  289,  400—402.  Ape,  2?2.


421,  430,  469,

— triple,  461*.
Airlvata,  426,

Airs,  -vital,  234.
Aitai’eya-Brlhm&pa,

; -331,' 419.

Aitcbison,  Dr*,  252.
Aja,  445  note,  460  note.


Ancestral  Spirits*  56,  Apodaka*  209.

121  notes . Bee  Apollo*  48  note.

Fathers.  Apri  (s),  205,  207,  232,

An  gas*  205,  208,  225.  234  notes.

Anger  (personified).  Apsaras,  183,

See  M anyth-  Apsarases,  43/  180—

Angiras,  56,  ll4,  264,  184,  306,  310,  317,

401,  410,  411,  414.  380,  381,  401,  414,


Ajya,  10  note.  Angirases,  III*  56,  114,  425,  454.

Ajasringi,  181.  ' 264,  401,  410,  411,  Apfcya,  187,  191,  270,

Akuti  (Purpose,  perso-  414,  445.  See  Trita.


nified)*  318.

A] Indus,  71,  72.

Alajt,  458  note.
AU&m,  253.
iligi,  209.

Alinsa,  403.

All,  455.

All-Gods,  13  note,  58


Angirasa,  269,  425.  Aptyas,  191.
Angirasa-veda,  III.  Apvl,  82.

Animal  sacrifice,  75,  Arani,  22.

149.  See  Sacrifice.  Araru,  269.

Animals,  sacrificial,  75,  Arataki,  181.

94  notes.  Arlti,  22,  198—200.

— tame*  94,  98  note,  Arayas,  404,  405.

127.  Ardour  (personified),


note,  61  note,  296,  Ansa,  246.  433  note.  See  Many u.

. 319  note,  341,  455.  Antaka,  269,  424.  Arjuna,  413  note.

All-Sustainer,  6L  Antariksha  (m),  37,149  Arjuni,  83.
■/Al'^ighiyjdreator/  42  notes.  , ■ Armour,  384,  402/432,  :

note.  Antelope-foot,  22.  Arrian,  208.

Almighty  God,  105  note.  Amimati,  1 99,250, 3 1 8,  Arrow  (lightning),  1 7.
Alpdriicken,  408  note.  337,  338,  440.  — ~~  (personified),  1 10.

Altar, 224, 357 , 377,467.  Anumroka,  63.  — (used  in  charms),

northern,  111.  ■ Anupalala,  403*'  48,  118.  - ’


— — (Indra’s),  35 1.  — — (fiend,  fiends),  44,  Anukramant,XlV.

(Mma’s)  119.  66,  92,  95,  158,  164, Br&kmana,’  III,

— (Rudra's)  23,  173,  248,  281,  305,  400,  XV.

294.  ' 401,404,  420,  423,  — -Commentary,  XIV,

-  (the  Brahman's),  ’ 432.  XV.

218.  Asuras  (kings),  292.  Pratisakhya,  VIII,

Arrows  of  Gods,  120 — Asuii  (she-fiend),  28,  r XIV,  •

122.,  29.  ■ Sutras,  XIV.

Artificer  of  the  Gods,  Asvatfcha,  87 — 89,181,  Upanishads,  XV.

47,  65  notes.  194,  195,  250,  297,  Atiritra,  45 L

Arundhatt,  146,  195,  305,  410,  412.  Atri,  73,  146,  170,  171V

196,  277,  300.  Asvins,  69,  70,  84,  85,  213,  227,  274.

Arya(s),  174,  204,  248,  104,  105,  116,  126,  Aubrey,  John,  32,

253.  129,  144,  170,  171,  Audlmmbla,41,432wote«

Aryaman,  14,  15,  22,  193,  229,  232,  246,  Aufreeht,  Professor,

31,  78,  86,101,  111,  247,  272,  283,  289,  135,  136.

112,  195,  236,  246,  301,  324,  351,  361,  Auksha,  79.

248,  301,  454.  363,  414,  427 — 429,  Aukshagandhi,  181.

Aryan,  IX,  25,  42,  439,  454,  465.  Austerity  (religious),

111,  113,  114,  118,  — Whip  of  the,  437,  320.  See  Fervour.

160,  161,  163,  174,  428,  430.  Autumn,  275,  391.  .

264.  Asvini,  344.  — ■ — fever  prevalent  in,

Aryans,  3,  9,  118,  420.  Atharvan,  III,  1 31^  29,  30  notes,  4 56.

Aslpalas,  36  note*  134,  180,  189,  191,  Autumns,  a hundred.

AshtaM,  93,  95.  203—205,  245,  328,  See  Hundred  Au-

Ashfcami,  420.  330,  379,  395.  turn  ns.

Asikni,  136  note . Atharvans,  III,  189,  Avabhrit&a,  4§3.

Asita,  18,  134,  2^6,  335.  . Avaka*  100  182,  251


Asmodeus,  404  note,
Asrgpha,'  403.;


4S4


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  ETC* '


Babhru,  170.
Bactrians,  224  note.
Buga,  31  note.
Bahlikas,  224,  225.
Baja,  404,  407.


BhavS.nl,  296  note.  ' Brahma  (prayer,  charm),  •
Bhrigii,  47,  149,  205,  38,  78,  notes.

218.  ' Brahma  (the  pbenome-

Bhrigns,  III,  47,  149.  nal  Creator),  40,

Bhrigvangirasas,  III,  132,  212,  213,,  465

Balasa,  142,  252,  409  Bhutakritas,  122,  304  notes.

notes.  notes.  Brahmacharl,  213,  304,

Balkh,  224  note.  Bhutapati,  59.  320,  381.

Barhatsama,  230.  Bird,  the  (the  Sun),  28,  Brahma- veda,  III,  IV,  V.
Barhis,  206  note.  137,  282,  480,  470.  Brahman  (priest),  111,

Baring-Gould,  S.,  239,  Birds,  the  two,  483.  123,  200,212 — 218,  •

■ 384,429.  Birth-ritual,  52,  87.  218,  220,  382,410,

Barley,  51,  261,  273,  Biter,  the,  406.  428,  443,  444,  487.

295,  350.  Blent  Offerings.  See  Brahma nas,  VI,  420

— deified,  324,  325.  Mixfc  Oblations.  note.

— — and  rice,  410,430.  Bloomfield,  Prof.,  XIV,  Brahmans  (priests),  52,
Bdellium,  XU,  79,181.  XVI,  4,15,  16 — 18,  172,177,178,  251,  V

Beasts,  Lord  of,  75.  44,  54,  68,  104,  258,  313,  376,  440,  441.

Beer,  98  note.  271,  277,  364.  Br&hman  (s),  4,  8,  138,  •

Bees,  429,  433.  Blyxa,  Oetandra,  182,  152,  160,  177,  178,

Being,  the  Divine,  139.  251  notes.  213,219,  251,  265,

Behar,  226  note.  Boat,  88.  See  Ship.  440,441,  450,451,

Benfey,  Prof.,  8.  Boats,  benediction  of,  470.

Bent,  "T.,  123.  330  note . ‘ Brahmanliood,  60.

Bergaigne,  M.  Abel,  Boar,  66,  210,  411.  Brahmanaspati,  11  note,
1ST,  330.  Body,  parts  of  the,  74,  33,  34,  104,  248,247,

Bfaaga,  31,  79,  97,  104,  455—458,  269,  285,  293,  324,

105,  111,  102,  172,  Bogu,  31  note.  342,  354,  408.

199,  232,  248,  274,  Boneless,  the,  483.  Brahmaudana,  178.

285,  289,  301,  308,  Bony,  the,  483.  Brahmodyam,  129,189,

364,  385,  440.  Bornmiilier,  Dr.  J.,  253.  418  notes.

Bharadvaja 25, 55, 1 48,  Borer,  72.  ' Brazil  wood,  209  note.

: Bounteous'  One,  the,  Breath  (returns' to  th e'

Bliarati,  193,  207,  233,  (Indra),  48,  79.  wind),  388.

■ ' 241.  ' . — (Bhaga),  105,  Breaths,  two,  203.

Bharujt,  83,  Bounteous  Paths,  85.  Bridal  oracle,  78.

• Bhava,  59,  75,  169,  Brahma  (the'  Divine  Bride,  wooing  of  the,  78,
170,  296,  338,  413,  Essence),  7,  4L  78,  278.  '

..  ‘ Bright  One,  the,  349/  "


Brihaddiva,  189,  191.  Bullock  (caldron  called),  Chanda,  58.

Rnhaspati,  11,  33,  37,  145,  ..Chandra  (the  Moon)

57,  65,  68,  77,  96,  Bullock  tooth,  22.  36,  62  notes,  185.

97,  101,  111,  112,  Bulls  (Indra-Soina),  Chandramas (the Moon),
114,121,122,130,  396.  4 34.

131,  172,  213,  229,  Burster,  the,  412  note . Chapman,  George,  110.
232,  236,  269,  284,  Burton,  Robert,  118,  Chariot,  314.

293,  297,  301,  331,  199,  407.  Charioteers,  87.

835,  342,  351,  369,  Chariot-racing,  105 note7

379,  381,  400,  415,  Cakes  (offered  to  the  349.

425,  434,  438 — 440,  spirits  of  the  dead),  Chhalunas,  71 .

452,  454.  424  note . Chhatidami  (hymns),

Brihat,  176,  208,  418,  Cal  dr  On  (personified),  231  note.

422,  423.  , 144,145.  Chief  Priest,  48,  67,

Brihat!,  83,  76,  203,  Ca3f=  darling,  100, 125.  357.

416,  417,  422,  454.  (Agni),  184.  Childbirth  (charm  for),

Brihats&man,  218,  230.  (the  Sun),  185,  14.

Bristly-haired  (a  fiend),  460,  463  Chifcraratha,  425.

406.  » (Yayu),  184.  Clan(s),  Lord  of  the,

Broom  ( veda)9  341.  — (Chandra),  185.  288,

Bull  (Agni),  179.  — - (the  world),  465,  Cleaver,  158.

(Indra),  25,  144,  Canis,  Canicula,  288  Close-creeper  (a  fiend),

193,  271,  299,  403.  note.  406.

— — (Kama),  430.  Cannabis  (henip),  46.  Cloudy  sky,  Lord  of,  ..

- — -(Lord  of  the  Moon),  Canopus,  170  note.  288.

868.  Carpenter,  87  note.  Coborn,  462,

— — (Parjanya),  150,  Car- warrior,  357.  ■ Cold  season,  418  note.  .

151,  345  note.  Caste,  the  third,  251  Colebrooke,  H.  T.,  8.

(Prajapati),  428,  note.  Colic,  456,  457,

429#  Castes,  four,  160  note.  Collective  Gods,  13.

(the  Sum),  262.  Cat,  23  note.  Conference  (personifi-  .

— — (Sun,  Moon,  Hea-  Catarrh,  409.  ed),  333.

ven),  185  note . Cattle  — water’s  in  Confirmation,  282  note.
— —(the  Typical),  453,  clouds,  359.  Consecration.  See  Dfk*  .

455..  Cattle-pen,  101,  102.  sh  L

- — -liberation  of  a,  Celestial  Dames,  111.  Consecration  of  a King,
382-woto.  Chakra,  188.  115,  139,  140,

sacrificial,  438 — Chambers's  Encyclo-  Consort  of  . the  Year,
-.442.  psedia,  YXL  93 — 95.


INDEX  O.F ; NAMES,  ETC.


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  ETC.


Constellations  (in Alien-  283,  44 8 note,  45 3.

cing  weather),  SIS,  first  priestly  fee,  Bakshin&gni,  450.  •

Lord  of  (the  112,  145  notes.  Dames,  Celestial,  1 H,

Moon),  228.  (the  typical),  453,  note,  206,  349.

Consultation  (person!-  454.  Darbha,  49,  267,  268,

tied),  422.  Cows,  101,  102,  112,  410.

Consumption,  16,  49,  161,162,  249.  D&rila,  XIV,  4,  16,  51,

53,  74,  99,  127,  142,  * called  Goddesses,  54,  67,  109,  159,  388,

195,  225,  252,  277,  364.  Darius,  225  note.

291,  315,  352,  408,  - — rays  of  light,  165,  DfUa  (s)  174, 190,  254,
410,  437,  455 — 458.  191,  460.  374.

Copper-hued  (a  fiend),  — — regions  of  the  Dasavriksha,  51.

406.  _ sky,  185.  DM,  224.

Corruption  (personifi-  Cow-terrifier  (a  goblin),  Dasyu  (s),  9,  59,  95,
ed),  36.  - 22.  174,  413,  432.

Cough,  15,  16,  225,  Cramp,  30  note.  Daughter,  birth  of  a,

302.  Creation,  Lord  of,  128,  deprecated.  250,407.

Cousin  s*  enemy,  52  132.  Daughters,  Celestial,

note.  Creative  Kishis,  122,  370.

Cow,  One,  420,  421,  178,  304,  320,  468.  Dawn,  104,  233,  262,

444.  Creator,  the,  41,  42,  279,  36*2,  399,  418,

— Creative  Power  of  76,  95,  132,  139,177,  452,  469.

Nature,  422  193,  401,  460,  465. and  Night,  233.

— Y£lt,  Vir&j,  431.  Creatures,  Lord  of,  95,  Dawns,  the,  105,  246,

— Cloud,  466,  469.  428  -.430  338,  871.

Earth,  185.  Creeper-near  (a  fiend),  Dawns,  two  (night  and

— Dawn,  463.  406.  morning)  413.

— Prayer,, 327.  Cuckoo,  399.  ' : ; Day,  188,' 432,

:=.r^-'Pri'§nv.4L'-  ■ Cupid  (Indian),  TO  wpte.'Bay,-  Lord  of,  1|3.  ^

of  Plenty,  444,  Day  and  Night,  60,

rnte,  Dabhtkba,  105,  note.'  390.  464,

— — Kama's  daughter,  Dadhikras,  145  note.  Day  and  Sun,  4.02.

431.  Dadhikiavau,  105.  Deasil,  349  note.

— emblem  of  plenty,  Dadhyach,  330  note.  Death,  (personified),1^,

93,  177,  335,  879,  Dadikae,  225  note.  52 — 54,  64,  88,  .96,

.'-f—Atharvatfs,  2,03—  Dakaha,  39,  40.  180,  199,  200,.b220r

205*  Daksha’s children,  39, 40.  223,  285,  251,  %5%


280,  202,  265,  289,  Dewy  season,  418.

279,  286,  291,  296,  Dharma,  IV.
.305,314,  320,  351,  Dhatar,  78,  90,  95,
360,  378,  385,  387—  147,  229,  230,  278,

389,  391, 410,  413 — 335,  336,  386,  402,

415,  421,  424.  452,  455.

mes$engersof,4l3.  Dhava,  195.

Debt,  309,  310.  Dhntarashtra,  428.

Decay  (personified), 3 6.  Dice,  43,  154,  216,
Decline,  225,  240,  241,  242,283,  310,  350,

252,  291,  292,  315,  380,  381.

387,  Dierbach,  45.

Delbruek,  Prof.,  XVI.  Digvijaya,  192  note .

Be  min  rg  us,  41  note.'  Dii  Consentes,  ZSlnote.
Demons,  of  darkness,  Diksha,  282,  402,  419,
164  note . 449.

— of  drought,  9,  47  Dioscorides,  143.

notes.  Diseases,  various,  316,

— - — various. See  Asuras,  317,  455 — 458.
Pisachas,  Kimidins,  Dispenser,  the,  79.
Yatudh&nas,  Raksha-  Disposer,  the,  95,  104,
sas.  193.

Desire,  119,  125,  433  Dissector,  443.

note.  Disturber, the,  X19?ao&.

Destroyer,  the,  296,  Diti,  331.

386.  Divine  Being,  the,  470.
Destruction  (person!-  Dog  (sacrificed  by

lied),  36,  52 — 54,  Gods),  329.

84,  88,  98,  180,  199,  Dog-star,  288.

259,  261,  291,  298,  Doors,  divine,  206, 233,
314,  346,  352,  360,  Dove,  259— 261.

387,  389,  397.  Dragon,  the,  47,  48,  99,
113,  165,

Dream  (s),  evil,  141,
269,  371,  378,  430.
Dropsy,  154,  371  note.
Drudging  goblin,  51,
118,  119  notes.

Drub,  52—54,  368.


Devadaru,  391  note.
Devarshi,  219  note.

..  Devas,  34  note .
Bevatyas,  27.  '

Devotion,  417. .
•-—Goddess  of,  341
Dew-time,  275.


Druhyus,  114  note .
Drum,  220 — 223,  315.
Dual  deity,  170,  262,  -
355,  396  notes.

Durga,  2.

Durnama,  404 »

Burvlt,  303.

Dvimurdha  Artvya,
423,  424.

DvipadaTrishtup,  3 note,
Dyaus,  72,  205,  248,
255,  467.

Dyaushpitar,  247  note.
Dysentery,  3, 4, 82  notes.

charm  for,  3,  4.

Dyu,  172,  note.

Eager  (a  class  of  Gods),
120.

Eagle(s),  210,  271,  ■
272,  290,  399.

- — — Celestial  (the  Sun),
160.

Ear,  the  (comes  from
Air),  203.

Earache,  455.

Earth  (personified),  3,
37,  68,  91, 116,  12  5,
184,  188,  191,  201,
203,  217,  219,  229,
234,  235,  249,  254,
255,  262,  291,  311,
321,  336,  342,  387,
399,  411,  421,  430,
432,  438,  453,  469,

* — — mother  of  men,
311,467.  "

— centre  of  (altar),
357.

32


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  ETC.


INDEX  OF  NAMES}  ETC.


Earth,  lower  and  upper,  Erigone,  288,  note.  Father  (the  Sun),  203,
390.  Ends,  433,  464  note.

Earths,  three,  159.  Erysipelas,  4 55.  — —(the  Primal  Cause),

Eastward  fire,  421, 450.  Establishes  the,  7 8 note.  464  note.

Eclipse  of  the  sun,  Eternity,  12,  39  notes , 41. and  Mother  (Hea-

51  note.  Eumenides,  291  note.  ven  and  Earth),  36

Egg-eaters  (fiends),  407.  Euphrasy,  159  note.  note.

Eight  elements,  420.  Evil  eye,  50,  141.  Fathers  (Ancestral
, — - marrows,  56.  Excellence  (persoui-  Spirits),  XI,  10,  56,

_ divine  priests,  420.  tied),  279.  121,124,  188,  217,

Sons  of  Aditi,  420.  Exertions  (personified),  218,  229,  238,  240,

— — India’s  number,  200,  201,  260,  268.  280,  - 284.

420.  Expanses,  six,  192.  291,309,  312,313,

Eight-footed,  469.  Expellent  sacrifice,  285.  333,  346,  359,  386,

Eighth  night,  420.  Eye,  the  (comes  from  414,417,  4 23,424,

Eighty,  56  note.  1 the  sun),  203.  433,  442  note,  463,

Ejatkas,  227.  * -returns  to  the monthly  offerings

Ekaha,  303,  454  notes . sun),  2^2,  388.  to,  423.

Ek  ash  taka,  94,  95.  (precious  tree-  -(cause  of  fruitful-

Ekavihsa,  419.  sure),  141.  less),  464  note.

Elements,  six,  418.  Eyebright,  159  note.  * (embodied  and

— eight,  420.  bodiless),  414.

Elephant,  115,  116,  Failure  (personified),  — — Regent  of  the

235,  283,  437.  198.  (Yama),  228.

taming  of,  115.  Fairies,  euphemistic  Fauni,  Fauuus,  1 18  note .

Emmets,  44,  354.  names  of,  426.  Favour  of  the  Gods,  22,

Empvrean,  the,  149  Faith,  320,  440.  90,  318,  337,440wo£6«

note.  ' Falcon  (Agni),  2 7!.  Fear  (personified),  59.

Encompasser,  the  (Va- (the  Sun),  345,  Feeler  (a  fiend),  404.

rima),  83  note.  346.  Felicity  in  heaven,  56,

Encyclopedia  Britan- (bringer  of  Soma),  3 1 1 — 313.

nica,  YII.  345  note.  Fern,  86  note .

Ender,  the  (Death),  Falsehood,  60, 154, 469.  Fern- seed,  80  note,

385,  424.  F.ar-strider  (the  Sun),  Fervour  (religious),  14 5,

Ephedra, 252-,  253  notes.  188.  174,  320,425.

Fachyclade  (Soma  Father  (Heaven),  129,  Fever,  15,  29,  30,31,

• plant),  252  note.  17  2,  203,  205,  24 7^  92,  142,  193— 195,

Distachya,  253  ' ■ ■ ; 224,  225,  241,  252,

: mm,  Y.  ■ . ■ — — (India),  355.  r ' 255,  256,  384,  456,


IND$DC . OF  NAMES,  ETC.


499


Fever,  hundred  agonies  Five,  Races,  Tribes,  Four-eyed  dog,  160,
of,  241.  Nations,  42,  114,  441  note.

Ficus  Religio.sa,  87,  118,163.  214,-  285,  Four  footed,  469.

104,410,  See  A§va-  330,  420,  Four  regions,  15,  4-8,

ttha.  messes  of  boiled  192,  266,  432.

Field,  Lord  of  the,  51.  rice,  443  note,  448,  Fourth  Veda,  VI.

Queen  of  the,  55. regions,  84,  112,  Fragile  (the  intercalary

Fifteen  regions  of  the  118.  month),  197.

sky,,  418.  rivers,  246.  ‘ Friend,  the,  5,  49,  90.

Finisher,  the  (Death), seasons,  418,  461  Friends,  the  two,  302.

269.  note.  Frog  (used  in  charms),

Fire,  Sacrificial,  48,  83, — - — healing  herbs,  420.  100,  375  notes,  3S4.

85,  91.  sons  of  man,  114  Frogs  (compared  to

: ■ Garhapatya,  358.  — Waters,  420.  Brahmans),  152,  153.

See  Garhapatya.  Five-arrowed,  412.  Fuel,  224.

— — household,  243,  Five  footed  (the  Sun),  Funeral  fire,  242,  386,
357,  421.  461.  3*9.

* — — eastward,  421,  Five-spoked  wheel,  461. — — quenching  of  the,
450,  Flesh-consumer,  the  114.

— — southward,  421,  (Agm),  114,  115,  Furies,  291  mte.

450.  386,  389.  Furrow  (personified),

— — westward,  421  Flood,  Child  of  the,  16,  106,  lu7,

note,  242,  450.  17.

— — ordeal  by,  55  note.  Floods  (Waters)  6,  7,  Gaia,  25  4 note.

of  the  funeral  pile,  212.  Gambling,  XIII,  42, 43,

242,  386,  389.  Fiorenz,  Professor, XVL  183,  306,  310,  349,

— — and  Water,  X*  Footless  Maid  (Dawn),  380,381.

437.  469.  cheating  at,  XIII,

Fire-drill,  191,  206,  Forefathers,  229.  310.

250  notes..  Fort-demolisher(Iudra),  Gambling-board,  242,

Fire-priest,  180,  328  412.  283.

notes.  Fortuna,  22  note,  Gandarii,  225  note.

Fires,  various,  113,  Fortune,  22,  79,  95.  Gandhara,  225  note .

114.  ——  evil,  383.  Gandh&ns,  225.

Firmament  (personifi-  Fortunes,  one  hundred  Gaudharva,  41 — 43,

ed),  55,  378.  and  one,  383.  134,  181,  18.2,  184,

First,  the  (of  the  New  Four  castes,  160  note.  362.

Year),  93.  . - — -divisions  of  speech,  Gandharvas,  43,  118,

First  Ashtaka,  93-95.-  470.  176,  180-182,  184,


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  BTC.


501


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  W&:

Grohmann,  Dr.,  30,  92,  Heaven,  life  in,  149,  Herd,  the  (P4shan),9l,
311,  313.  Herdsman,  the  (Agni),

Groper,  (a  fiend),  406. taxation  in,  1 SU.  2Sf.

Guardian  (a  Genius), highest,  149,  444  (the  Sun),  467.

386.  note.  Herodotus,  226.

Guerdon  to  priests,  277.  Heaven  and  Earth  (per-  Herpes,  225.

See  Dakshiiia.  sonified),  36,  54—  Herrick,  20.

Guests,  hospitality  to,  56,  59,  60,  69,  85,  Heti  (a  class  of  Gods),
448-453.  105,129,130,132,  120.

Guggulu  (bdellium),  79  163,  167,  188,  189,  Highest,  That,  41.

note.  191,  201,  202,  207,  Hillebrandt,  Prof.,  73.

Guggulii  (an  Apsaras),  216,  226,  228,  246,  Himalaya,  142  note.

181.  254,  266,  274,  277,  Himas  (winters),  96

Guugu,  229.  279,  297,  300,  327,  note.

328,  382,  386,  389,  Hiranyagarbha,  132.
Hate,  charm  to  strong-  402,415,  440,  442  Holy  Men,  414.
then,  261,  321.  note,  464.  Homa(s),  414,  419.

Half-years,  94.  separation  of,  1 30,  Home,  Lord  of  the,  284,

Haudless  (fiends),  281.  268,  417.  Lady  of  the,  435.

Hands,  laying  on  of,  14S.  Heavenly  Hound,  the, Queen  of  the,  X,

Harirud,  252  note.  283.  98.

Harit&la,  27  note.  Heavens,  three,  159,  Homer,  45,  110,  173.
Harvest-home,  119.  442—444.  Honey,  38,  39,  126,

Hatchet  (sacrificial),  Heifer,  the,  420.  177,  353,  429,  430.


jtericIj  ir  note,  270,  273,  *275,  277,

cterus,  27  note,  2M , 282,  284  note,

da,  233,  341.  285,  289,  290,  292,

ik,  341.  293,  295,  297—299*

A,  .94,  193,  207,  233,  301,  302,  313— 3i5,

341.  • ' 317,  319,  320  note*

nmol  a tor,  207,  233,  S2l,  322,  324,  339,

430  note , 443.  342,  346— 318,  350,

^mortality,  235.  351,  355,  360,  361,

npeller,  the  (Kama),  364  note,  366,  367,

119.  369,  371“ 372,374— -

npre cation  (personi-  377,  38!,  382,  384 — •

lied),  264,  265.  387,  390,  397-403,

leubi,  407  note . 412,  413,  415,  420,

lcubones,  408  note,  422,  428,  429,  431,

icubus,  407  note . 432,  433  note , 439—

idians,  N.  American,  442,  453,  454,  463,

267.  466,  470*

idra,  3,  9 note,  10, 12,  Indra=*  Kiug,  83,  85*
13,  20,  23,  25,  31,  ludra  (and)  Agni  (as  a
33,  36  note,  40,  44,  dual  deity),  40,  84,

46,  47,  55,  59,  66,  95,  193,  199,  302,

67,  69,  71,  79  note. , 319,  385,  387,  390,

81  — 86,  88,  90,  95,  431.

96,  99,  100  note , Indra-Soma,  396.

101  — 104,  106,  110,  Indra-Vurrma,  3 55.

112 — 115,  121,  124  Indra’s  horses,  46.
note , 127  note,  132  Indra’s  net,  413.
note,  134 — 136,  145,  Indrani,  32,  111  note,
158  note,  159— 166,  319,  349,  454.

167  note , 173,  174,  Indus,  136,  143,  148,
182,  487  note,  189  175,  225,1246,  258,

note , 190  note,  191  347  notes,

note,  197—201,  210,  Indus  (plural  of  indu,
212  note , 216,  217,  a drop),  381.

221  -223,  226,  228.  Infinity,  42,

—232,  234,  237,  Initiation,  282,  357. :

243,  245—247,  281,  notes.

263,  285,  266,  269,  Insanity,  306 ,


— — pains,  92.

Hundred- and-one  (un-
lucky number),  217.

— — modes  of  death,
38,  67,  96,  391.

H n iid red-au tumued,  96
note .

Hundred -eyed,  96.

Hundred -handed,  1 1 S.

Hundred-dived,  96.

Hundred  powered,  98.

Husband  ry  ( i n t re  d uc  e d
by  Frith!) } 425.

Hymns  Ancient  and
Modern,  108.
Hypnotmlygj  148*


Jealousy,  254,  347.
Jivala,  194.


504


o04  mmx  of -names,  etc.

King,  S3,  34,  430.  Kurtra,  241  note,  Asvins),.  246,  283,

• — — election  of  a,  84.  Kururu,  71.  427,429.

consecration  of  a,  Kusa  grass,  49,  206  Lightning  (a  form  of

12,  115,  340,  STL  notes.  Agni),  3),  31,  37,

— — benediction  on  a,  Kushtha,  YIII,  70,  246  notes.

139,  162,  163,  292,  193—195,224,  297, (cause  of  head-

293,298.  301*  ' ache),  15  note,  16.

restoration  of  a,  Kusulas,  405.  * prayer  to,  15,  16,

83,  84.  . Kutsa,  171,  175.  Lion,  140,  180,  220,

King  s evil,  363  note*  Kuvera,  Kubera,  36  223,  401,  410.

Kings,  the  two.  note*  Livingstone,  Dr.,  300.

Kings  ==  Kshatriyas,251,  Logos,  the,  129,  353

266.  Ladle,  94,  213.  notes .

Kiratas,  208  note,  Laksha,  195,  196.  Lokapalas,  36  note.
Kirk-grim,  239  note,  Laksh mi,  22,  383  notes.  Lord  Supreme,  436,
Kirrhadae,  208  note,  Lalami,  22.'  453.

Kites,  393.  Lang,  A.,  45,  66,  130,  Lore,  Holy,  2,  353,  357.

Kneipp,  Pastor,  295.  194.  Lotus,  177  note,  229,

Koka,  403.  Lassen,  Prof.,  136.  225.  303.

Kophen,  225  note.  Law,  42,  54,  132,  308,  Love,  the  God  of,  119,
Kr a v v a d ( Agni ) , 3 8 6 »ote.  330.  430.  See  Kama.

Krisbnadram,  454,  — Queen  of,  830.  Lucina,  229  note.

Krittikas,  453.  Law -observers,  29,  30.  Ludwig,  Prof.,  VII,  XV,

Kshatriya(s),  137,  160,  Lazarus,  Messrs.  E.  J.  et  passim,

162,  212,  214,  265,  & Go.,  XVIII.  Lunar  Mansions,  459.

286,  378,  398,  400.  Lead  (used  as  a charm),  460,  464,

Kshetrapati,  51  note,  20,  21.

Kshetriya,  50,52,  89,  Leopard,  140.  MacDonald,  Dr,  G.,  15.

157  notes.  Leprosy,  27 — 29,  63.  Macdonell,  Prof.,  XVI.

Kubera,  Kuvera,  426.  Licker  (a  fiend),  22.  Mace  (sacrificial),  341.
Kubha,  136,  246  notes.  Licorice,  33.  Madana,  119  note,

Kuhn,  229  note,  348.  Life,  duration  of.  See  Madavati,  253.
Kukshilas, : 4 05.  Hundred  years.  Maddener,  the,  1 1 3 note,

■ Kukundhas,  405.  — Lord  of,  135,  177,  Mad  ugh  a,  39,  70  notes,

Kukurabhas,  405.  250,  401,  436  note . Magadhas,  225,  220

Kurnara,  453.  — Tree  of,  133  note,  note*

Kumarila,  128  note,  — Water  of,  235,  312  Maghavan  (Indra),  48,
Kumbhamuslikas,  406.  notes.  See  Amrit.  79,  81,  110,  277,
Kuutapa,  YHL  Light,  Lords  of  (the  342,  350,  372,  399.


ixmx  OP  ' if  AMES,  ETC.


Maghav&n  (rich  pa-
tron), 109  note,
Magundi',  59.
Mahabharata,  217,

• ■ 218,  398,  413,  414,
Mab acl eo,  454,
Mahadeva,  454,

Mali  a vri  ah  as,  224,  225,
Main,  193,  207,  233,
341.

Mahldhara,  41,  48,  82,
444.

Maina,  101  note,
Makakas,  405.

Male,  the  Primeval,
421  note ,


Manyu,  173,  174,  374,  Might  of  Gods,  423.

433.  Military  class,  109.  See

Marlowe,  461.  Kshatriya.

Marriage  (Upholder  of),  Milton,  51,  159,  307,
335  note.  320,  404.  - *

Mars,  81.  Mind,  420.

Maruts,  1,  3,  23,  31, Agitator  of  the,

41,56,69,  81—83,  119  note.

85,  97, 108, 110, 146, Lord  of  the,  377.


151 — 153,  168,  171,  Mischief  (personified),
173,  187,  192,  223,  366.

228,231,246,  256,  Misery  (personified),  259.
257,  261,  270,  276,  Misfortune,  22,  36,  52,
295,  296,  302,314,  88, 180, 19^199,  3S3.

318,  339,  342,  349,  Misra,  Pandit  Mathura
355,  366,  385,  399,  Prasala,  268.

Mai  ignities (personified),  427,  428,  439,  453,  Mitbra,  5.

317.  459.  Mitra,  5,  12,  15,  22,

Malignity  (personified),  Matali,  417.  24,31,47,  49,  67,

22,  198,  314,  389.  Matarisvan,  191  note,  68,  85,  88,  90,  104,

Maliralucha,  403.  203,212,385,470.

Man  (persouified),  329  Matarisvaus,  191.
note.  Match-maker,  212,  278.

father  of  man-  Matmatas,  406.

kind,  343  note.  M&\a,  423.

• a sacrificial  aai-  Mead,  Meath,  6,  171.

tnal,  75,  94  notes.  Medhatithi,  6.


105,114,  115,120,
162,  170,  171,  206,  .
212,  246,  248,  292,
294,  302,  314,  342,
437,  440,  454,  455,
469,  470.


Mitra-Varana,  170, 220,
Man-beholder,  the,  393.  Meeting,  422.  228,  229,  262,  298,

Man -seer,  the,  393.  Men,  deified,  170,  304  469.

Manavas,  Gone  of  the,  notes.  Mitras,  three,  248,

137.  Merchant  (Indra),  102.  Mist  oblation,  19,  65.

Mandragora,  66  note. travelling,  102.  Moksha,  IV.

Mandrake,  45,  66  notes. life  of  a,  XI-XIII.  Moly,  45,  66  notes.

Manes,  10,  56,  121, prayer  of  a,  102,  Monier-Williams,  Sir

346.  See  Fathers.  104.  M.,  XVI.

Manmatlia,  1 19  note.  Merits,  56,  98,  124,  Monkey(s),  92,  1821.
Mann  as,  343  note.  313,  464.  Month,  the  thirteenth,

Mann,  38,  92,  137,  343,  Metres  (mystic  powers  197,  198  notes,  459,
370,  424.  8 of),  116  note.  462.


32a;


INDEX.  OF  NAMES,


Months,  94,  95,  178.  340,  370,  383,  387,  Night  (personified),  3,

Moon,  5,  36,  62,  70,  390,  391,398,  414,  94,  188,  195,  233,

128,  185,  223,  235,  421,  433,  434,  445,  246,  250,  418,  432.

256,290,  292,316,  Mujavans,  224,  225. of  New  Moon, 367.

390,  415,  4:20,  463,  Mula,  50  note.  — - — of  Full  Moon,  377,

466.  Mulabarhani,  50,  305  — — and  Morning,  206,

— New,  20,  65,  229,  notes.  462.

347,  367 — 369,440  Mulalin,  177  note.  NilagalasAlA,,  253.
note.  M ulesnf  the  Gods,  41 5.  Nilirupas,  120.

Full,  65,  348,  Mtiller,  Prof,  Max,  VI,  Nine  feet,  469.

359,  367,  368.  VII,  1,  3,  9,  14,  24,  Nine  vital  airs,  234.  , :

Waning,  348  note,  36,  81,  128,  131,  Ninety  water-floods,  401.

Morning,  41^,452.  133,  136,  149,  154,  Ninety-nine  ditto,  401.

Mornings,  105,  370.  188,  248,  252,  254,  note.

See  Dawns.  262,  279,  398,  422.  Ninila,  253.

Mosquito,  353.  M ungoose,  209,  224,  Nirriti,  36,  52,  53,  64,

Mother  of  the  Gods,  323,  ill.  5%  180,  199,  259,

115  note.  Mnnja  grass,  4.  279,  358,  360,397,

of  the  world,  115  Mdradevas,  392  note  445.

note.  Nirukta,  1,  2,  9,  58

— — (earth)  460.  Nadaniman,  227.  notes.  '

Mothers,  the  (Waters),  Nadir,  120,  122,  144,  Nitatni,  321.

6-  159,  186,  203  notes.  Nivids,  231.

Mountains  = clouds,  N&gas,  426.  Noon,  452.

228.  ; Nagntika,  407,  Norman,  H.,  228.

Mrityn,  139,  177,  178,  Na!a(poemof),  380  note.  Norns,  229  note.

228,  235,  240,  320,  Naiad!,  181.  Nrishad,  158.

360,387,424,469.  Naraelu,  242.  . Nyagrodha,  181,  195.

Mroka,  63,  242,  243.  Narada,  219.

Mudgala,  171.  Nariisahsa,  232.  Oblation,  (personified),


Omnific,  the,  76,  312,

Omniscient,  the,  3 04.

Onager,  474.

One,  the,  460,  470.

• Spirit,  421.

■ Supreme  Spirit,

470,

law,  421.

- — - Cow,  420,  421,
414.

One  and  a hundred,  92,
217,  383,  391..  See
Hundred  and  one.

One-day  sacrifice,  303
note.

One-footed,  469.

One-Av heeled  chariot
(the  Sun),  459.

Ophthalmia,  4 58.

Ordainer,  the,  78,  95,
$ 35,  337,  454.

Ordeal  by  hre,  55  note.

Order,  42,  54  note,  60,
122,  132,  177,  206,
212,  256,  312,  330,
352,393,  418,420,
460,  462,  469.

Son  of,  42,  312.

Orion,  288  note.

Other  People  (spirits),
426,  454,

Ouranos,  37,  254  note.

Owl,  260,  261,  398,399.

Owlet,  399,

Ox  - Caldron,  145,  146.

• Pa.ipp  ax  Ada,  2.9  note.

Pal  ala,  403.

Balasa,  86  note*


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  ETC.

Palijaka,  403.
Pailchaudana,443 — 448
Pandit,  Shankar  Pandu-
rang,  XIV,  29.

Panis,  164.

Panjab,  136,  246,  251,
420  notes.

Paukti,  XVII,  4,  469.
Panther,  265.

Para  mat  mil,  172  note.
Pciramesthin,  401,  421
note,  453.

Parasuratna,  205  note .
Parasvan,  474.

Parents,  the  (Heaven
and  Earth),  207.

the  Universal

(ditto),  254  note.
Parjanya,  3,  4,  107,115,
128,  145,  1 50 — 152,
246,  265,  288,  296,
345,  346,  411,  466.
Parkin  cakes,  424  note.
Parna,  86,  87,  195.
Parthians,  2 25  note.
Parushahva,  412.
Pamshni,  136,  251.
Passion  (personified).

See  Manyu.

Past  and  Future,  60.
Pasupati,  75.

Fata,  66,  108,  158.
P&tala,  426  note.

Pa  tint,  66,  108  note.
Pavamana,  127,  145,
179,  197,  255,  454.
Parana,  36  note .
Pavinasa,  407.

Payu,  392  note.


507

Peahens,  2 note  354.

L Pearl,  142,  143  note .

Perkunas,  3 note.

Peterson,  Prof.,  133.

Philter,  319.

Phthisis,  53.  See  Con-
sumption.

Physicians  of  the  Gods,
351.

of  Death,  251.

Piercers,  120.

Pi  la,  181.

Pindar,  100.

Pihga,  406,  407.

Pippal,  Peepal,  87,
note.  See  Asvattha.

P.sacha(s)  20,  40,  61,
179,  180,  182,  236—
238,  262,  389.

Pisachi,  20  note.

Pisachi,  20,  58  note.

Pi  sac  hni,  20  note.

Pischel,  Prof.,  XVI,
105,  257.

Planets,  463.

Plants,  36,  37,  44,  53,
257,  387,  390,  408—
411,  432.

King  of  (Soma),

53,  134,  228,  293,
297,  387,  410.

(Indra),  159.

(Agni)  1,  152,

249.

Celestial,  117,

194,  268  note , 408,
411.

— — magical,  difficult
to  obtain,  210  note .


508


INDEX  OP  NAMES,  ETC.


Prisniparnt,  84.

Prithi,  ^24  note,  425.
Prithivi,  3,  191,  202,
336.

Prithu,  424.
Propitiatory  hymns,
205  note.

Prosperity  (personified),
95.

327,  425,  434,  448.  Protection,  303.

Lord  of,  11,  33,  Protectress  (a  plant),

37,65,77,282,351,  303;

434.  Psalms,  38,  153.

— = { reversed  Pura-ushnih,  7.

thunder/  320.  Purohita,  11,  109,  110,
Prayers,  the  Veda  of,  IY.  357.  ■

Preni,  293,  294.  Purifier  (Agni),  310.


Plato,  202,  433.  Pramandirn,  I SI.

Plaxa,  195.  Pramilin,  403.

Pleasantness  (person!-  Prana,  421.

fied),  279.  Pranava,  468.

Pleiades,  the,  453.  Prastotar,  452.

Plenty,  Lord  of,  237,  Pratihartar,  452.

345.  Pravargya,  145  note.

— — cow  of,  431.  Pray aj as,  35.

Pliny,  27,  143.  Prayer,  24,  78,  186,

Plough,  106,  107,  261,

418.

Ploughing,  96,  106,

107,  301  note.

Plough  Monday,  107.  ■

Ploughers  (Maruts)  261.

Plough-money,  107
note .

Plougher  and  ox  — Pressing-stone  (deified), Purumi]ha,  171.

priest  and  caldron,  146.  224,  246.  Purus,  1 1 4 note.

Points,  intermediate,  Pridaku,  32,  121.  Purusha,  41,  329,  401,
234.  . Priest,  Household,  109.  417,  421.

Poison,  of  snakes,  208,  See  Purohita.  Purusha-Sukta,  41,  329

209,  250,  373.  -and  President,  110.  note.

on  arrows,  137.  Priests,  seven,  165.  Pushan,  V,  12,  14,  15,

for  human  enemies, * called  Gods,  83,  31,  68,  91,  101,  104,

426.  : 93,25],  308  note.  108,  112,  172,  234/

Porcupine,  224,  hostile,  200,  360,  236,  24 6,  282,  284,

Praln  a la,  423.  398  note.  807,  332 , 342,  345.

Praisbas,  231.  Priestly  fee.  See  Dak-  Pustules, 290, 363—  365.

Pruj:ip#ti,  42, 7 6, 95, 103,  shin  a.  Putadru,  391.

119,  128,  131,  135,  Primal  Being,  459.  Putirajjn,  412.

145,  146,  177,  230,  Primal  Cause  of  being,  Put u dm,  39 L

.231,  250,  282,  283,  - 464.  Python,  48  non.

312,  833,  336,  337,  Primeval  male,  421.  Pythons  (clouds),  151
339,  368,  387,  401,  Prime  Cause,  41.  note.

417,  421,  428,  430,  Princely  Power,  60.

436,  450,  455,  489.  Prism,  41,  168,  223,  Quarterly  Review, 2 53.
Prajapatis,  40.  - 411.  Quarters  of  the  sky,

Prakrit!,  459.  Prisnilahu,  414.  234,  44S.  SeeEegions.


Queen/

171.

——  of  the  field,

of  rivers,  258.

of  the  home,  98.  42

of  Gods,  348.  Rati,  90.

- - of  men,  348.  Hats,  King  of  the,  58

Quick-roller  (fiend), 407.  note.

Haven,  358.

Facing.  See  Chariot-  Ravi,  251  note.
racing.  Regions  of  the  sky,

Back  (Cramp),  30. four  15,  48,  53,

Radiant  (a  class  of  Gods)  116,  192.

12°-  five,  35,  84,  112,


Bain,  Lords  of  the,  454.
Rain-cloud.  SeeParja-  ■
nya.

Rain-God,  345.

Rains,  the,  8,  30,
150— 152,  158.

Rainy  Season,  275.

Raj  am,  27.

Bajanya(s),  160,  214
— 21 265.  See
Kshatriya.

Rajisuya,  139  note.
Rajatanabhi,  426.

Rika,  229  note,  348.


Rakshasa(s),  9,  45,143,  Rheumatism,  45,  91,
155,  262,  263,  273,  141,  268  notes , 458.

392 — '396,398— 400,  Ribhu,  270  note,  271 ,
454.  1 ,


lUkshasj,  398,
Bakshoha  (Agni),
note.

Ram,  241.

— — (Indra)  124.


392


429  note.

Ribhus,  87,  270  notes,
304,  428,  429,

Rich,  443  note .

Richas,  231,
notes .


62,  64,  65,  69—71,
73—7.5,  78,  82,

85,  90,  92-96,

102,  103-108.  110.


118.

six,  121,  144, 1

460.

— — ten  462.

Warders  or  Re-
gents of  the,  35,  36,
185,186,202.

Regions  of  the  earth,  15.

Releasers  (two  stars),
50,  90,  305,  312.

Render,  the  (Ficus
Religiosa),  412  note.

Resolve,  11 9.

Revatf,  453.


198,  2
213,  214,

227,  229,  23
239,  248,

257,  259,

269,270-
280,  287,

292,  293,  2.96—

301,  303,  312,  315
321,  327—332,  335
336,  339,  340,  342,
345— 351,  354,


389,


— '.sacrifice  of  a,  124.  Riches,  God  of,  36
-•Sima, '170,  205  notes.


i$mx  m MfM  ma.


loo,  2 05,  251,  267,  373,  401,  454,  ■-  implements  deifi-

, 304,  319,320,  370, - Agni,  372.  ed,  341.

373,  401,  417 — 420,  Rudras,  34,  171,  193,  victim  deified,  75,

424,  429,  468.  282,  285,  414.  76,  150,-442,

*  seven,  146,  170,  Rue,  159.  — — animals,  75.

213,  352,  371.  fire,  48,  76,  7>%

celestial,  219.  SachI,  353  note*  83,  85,  91,  247,  450,

■ akin  to  the  Gods,  Saehipati,  353  note,  — - cord,  430,

205.  Sacred  Girdle,  319.  grass,  410.  See

Rishyapadi,  22.  — — Grass,  206,  377,  Grass,  sacred,

Rita,  42,  132.  449.  post,  105,207,342.

Rival  worshippers,  1 85, Knowledge,  2,  3 37, — — waters,  257.

186,  200,  360.  353,  357.  Sadauvas,  58,  59,  61,

Rivers,  99,  100,  258. Syllable,  235.  143.

•  five,  246;  seven,  Sacrifice  (personified),  Sacks,  449.

136,  246,  382.  265,  276.  SRIhyas,  329,  367,  414,

(Goddesses),  — — of  an  animal,  75,  469,  470.

382.  76.  ——Regent  of  the,  421,

River-God,  345  note,  - of  a bull,  345.  470.

See  Sarasv&n.  of  a cow,  329.  Saivala,  182,  251  notes.

River- Goddess.  See  Sa * — of  a dog,  329.  Sakadhuma,  316  note.

rasvatu  of  a goat,  149,  S ikadhiimajas,  406.

Robin  Goodfellow,  V,  150.  Sakambhara,  224.

62,  118  notes.  of  a ram,  124.  Sakra,  127,  144,  18  9?

Bocks!  (Consort  of  Ru- faults  in  perfor-  372,  399,  413,  439.

dm),  349.  mance  of,  308,  379.  Salt,  364.

Roclha,  188  note,  goes  to  heaven,  Saluda,  406.

Roebuck,  89.  3I2~  313.  * Sablka,  177,

Romans,  27,  4*24.  = thunderbolt,  Sama  (half-year),  40,

Roman,  66  note.  71,  320,  321.  48  notes.

Roth,  von,  VI,  XIII, One-clay,  303  note.  Sam 4,  28,  29.

XV,  13,  48, 118, 154,  — — Twelve-clay,  451.  Sama,  Sa  nan,  S a mans,,
205,220,  226.  Sacrificial- bull,  "438—  56,  231,  416,  419,

Rudra,  21,51,  59,67,  442.  42*2,  443  note,  449,

68,75,104, 115, 162,  goat,  442-448.  465.


mmx  o¥  names,  me.


— Rivers,  136,  246,
279,  355,  3*2.

— - sages,  4 1 9.

— sisters  (rivers),


— * soiar  rays,  3 <9,
459;

— steps,  205  note.

— streams  of  butter,
419;  of  mead,  419.

— sweetnesses,  430.

— tame  animals,  94,

— threads,  460.

— wheels,  459..


512


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  ETC.


Seven,  the  Rishis’
number,  420.

- — ~~  the  triple,  I,  2.

■Sevenfold  breath,  56.

Seven-wheeled  car,  459.

Sevrid  ha,Sevridhaka,  6 2

Shad  vinsa-Bra  h mana,
35.

Shak  er,  th  e (I  n dra) , 41 2.

Shakespear,  63.

Shankar  Pan d uning
Pandit,  X[V,  29.  .

Shaving  (sign  of  mourn-
ing), 390.

Shell,  amulet  of,  142  —
144.

Ship,  175,  194,  219.
ofBhaga,  79*

Sickness  sent  to  punish
sin,  30,  148.

Siegerstein,  34  note.

Silachi,  195,  196,  277
note , 300  note,  409
note.

Silanjala,  253.

Silver,  235.

. Simida,  166. , , ' •

Si  ran  el  cakes,  424  note.

Simrock,  Karl,  86,  422.

Sin,  54,  291,  308,  309.
mental,  269.

cause  of  consump-
tion, 408.

— prayer  for  pardon
of,  27  3,

•——prayer  for  freedom
from,  298,  30%  309,
311,  342,  346,  366,
371,  373,  279,  352.


Sindh u,  99,  143,  148,
175,  258,  347.
Sindhudvipa,  7.

Single  Rishi,  420.

— season  (intercala-

. ry  month),  420,  421.

Spirit,  424,  421.

Simvali,  65,  229,  250,
347,  348,  440.
Sinless,  54,  330,  342.
Sins  committed  by
others,  punishment
for,  53.

Sipala,  Sipala,  251.
Sipavitimkas,  227.
Sipudru,  315.

Sira,  107.

Sire,  the  (Heaven),  460.
Si  ring,  288  note .
Sisirah,  275  note,  461.
Sian,  Sissoo,  317.

Sister  of  priest — altar,
377.

Sisters  (Heaven  and
Earth),  191.

(Waters),  6.

Sita  (Furrow  personi-
fied), 107,  108
Siva,  296  note.

Six  elements,  418.

— — expanses,  192,
432,

•—  cold  months,  4 1 9.

heavens  and  earths,

419.

— hot  months,  419.

— regions,  121,  144,
159,  460.

— seasons,  461,


Six  spokes,  461 .

- — - Yama/ s number,
420.

Six-day  time,  418.

Sixth  day,  417.

Skanda,  453.

Sky  (personified),  387*
453.  See  Heaven.

Slaughterer,  435,  440.

Slaves,  superstition
among  the,  384  note.

Sleep,  136,  269.

Sleep-charm,  135.

Sleepless,  386.

Slumberless,  386.

Smashers,  the  (Marais)
SI  note.

Snake-charmers,  209
note.

Snakes,  various  names
of,  208,  209,  276.

skins  of,  used  as

charms,  32.

powder  of,  makes

invisible,  32  note.

Sniffer  (a  fiend),  406.

Suouty  (a  fiend),  406.

Snowy  Hill(s),  194,
297.

Mountain(s),  132,

142,  194,  257,  297,

Socrates,  202  note.

Sogdians,  225  note.

Solomon,  401  note.

Soma  (the  God),  1,  5,

, 6,  8,  11,  24y';33,  3C

' 36,  53,  57,  70,  78,
83,80,  91,  95,  99,

103,  1 11,  118,  mf


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  ETC.


.172,  179,  l'86j  188,  Sovrans  (Death-  and  171,  256.  See  Ma
194,197,202,  212,  Destruction),  360.  Succubae,  1 99  note.
213,  216,  217,  223,  Speech,  203,  3.27,  46-7,  Succubus,  407  note.

224..  228,  232,  235-,  463,  470.  Sudhanvan,  270.

237,  246—248}  266, God  of,  1,  171,  Sudra,  160,  161,  22

273,  274,  277,  278,  172,. 431.  Sugar-cane,  38;  39.

282,  284,  293,  296 — Goddess  of,  106,  Sutra,  274.

299..  302,  328,  330,  112,  129,  203.  Summer,  275,  391.

336,  344,  346,  36.8,  Speckled  Cow,,  the  Sun  (the  God),  5,

369,383,  387,396—  (cloud),  41.  26,  37,  41,  42,

400,  425}  432,  449,  Spikenard,  181  note,  54,  55,  70,  72,
453,455,463.  301.  80,  104,  105,  1

Soma  (the  Moon),  256.  Spirit  (Father  of  Yak  122,  128— 130,  l

identified  with  the  the  Word),  129..  137,  140,  160,  1

plant,  368.  Spotted  Hag,  22.  168,  183,  185,'  1


33


514


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  ETC.


Supreme  First  Cause,  'Svitra,  122.

41.  ' , Swan,  411.

Supreme  Spirit,  463,  Sy&v&sva,  171.

470.  Sellable,  the,  465,  468.

Supreme  God,  42.  Syena,  454.

Supreme  Self,  Soul,  or
Spirit,  17.  Tabuva,  209.

Sura  (the  Sun),  278.  Taduri,  153.

Suri  (iustitutor  of  a Taimara,  209,  216.
sacrifice),  54,  109,  Taittiriya-Brahmana,

340,  442  note.  239.

Surya,  26,  36,  60,  62,  Takman,  30,  92,  252
68,  111,  135,  160,  notes.  See  Fever.

179,  183,  186— 188,  Takshaka,  426.

202,  203,  208,  2.1 4*  Talasa,  252,  253.

223/228,  241,  250,  Tangalva,  407.  - — — Bhava  and  Sarva,

262,  265,  290,  295,  Tandnap&t,  206,  232.  169.

, 300,  3o2,  304,  329,  Tarkshya,105  note  372.  Thread  of  life,  312.

333,  339,  352,  368,  Tarslitagha,  238.  of  sacrifice,  438.

370,  379,  418,  434,  Tastuva,  209,  Three,  the,  418,  187,

445,  462.  Tauvilika,  253.  470.

— — wives  of  (Night  Tax  on  new-comers  to the  mighty,  416.

and  Morning)  418.  heaven,  124,  309  daily  libations,

Surya,  Lord  Supreme,  notes . 146,  190  note,  270,

241.  Telchines,  408  note . 271  note,  418,  428.

3ury&,  70, 78,289, 301,  , Ten  decades  of  life,  85.  — distances,  285.

440.  kinds  of  wood, earths,  159,  256,

Suryavarchas,  425,  amulet  of,  51  note.  397,  461.

Susruta,  27, 30,  && notes. regions  of  space,  — — - fire-receptacles,

Sutraman,  83  note,  462.  187.

Sutudrt,  136  note . Ten-arrowed,  412.  — Goddesses,  193,

Svadha,  424.  Ten-headed,  138.  207,  233.

Svaja,  122,  278  71  ote.  Ten-month  child,  118, heavens,  159,  28 5,

S vali a,  60,  290,  298,  231.  288,  461.

369,376.  Teufelsbuhlschaft,  408  ~ — lights,  443,

Svaraj,  svarat,  417,  note.  , - — - logs,  465.

Sv&rga,  75,  76,  176,  Teutonic  mythology, lunar  years,  275.

; 177,  312,  • 445,  :448?  422*  — — ■ Mitras,  248.

449,450,  454.  Theophrastus,  45.  pathways,  144,


Third  'caste  or  ' class,
251  note.

— — heaven,  194,  297,
313,  442—444.

light,  444. '

world,  309.

Thirteen  creatures,  113,
Thirteenth  month,  462.
'Thirty  realms,  262.
Thousand-eyed  (Impre-
cation), 284.

(Indra),  160.

- — — (Misery),  259.

— —(Yanina’s  envoys).


Trayamana,  303.  T wel  ve-day  sacrifice,

Treasnre(s),  Lord  of,  451.

2 note,  226.  Twelve-spoked  year,  178,

Tree,  the  Celestial,  133.  462.

of  Life,  133  note.  Twin  calves,  birth  of,

Trees,  40,  249  414.  122.

— — Holy,  54  note.  Twins,  birth  of,  122,

Triads,  419.  123  notes.

Tribes,  the  Five,  12  Two-footed,  4 69.

114.  See  Five  Races.  Tyr,  248  note ,

— Sovran  of  the,  111.

Trikadrukas,  48  note . UdgAtar,  IY.  24 5 note,
Trikuta,  142  note . 452.

Triple  air,  461.  Udvllchana,  201.

Triple-peaked  mountain,  Ugrajit,  310.

Ugrampasya,  310.
the,  1,^2,  Ulysses,  45  note .

Unborn,  the,  445,  460.

note,  465 spirit,  445  note.

J38  note.  Universal  Gods,  13,  57,
'll,  9,  271,  58,85,2 77.  See  Yis-
^65.  vedevas.

— Soul,  172  note,
Upabdi,  63.

iss,  191  UpajMs,  44,  300.
note,  2/0,  307.  Upanayana(m)  357,
Truth,  97,  446.  379  notes.

and  Falsehood, 60.  Upanishads,  VIII  XV

Tundika,  404.  408.

Turvasas,  114  note.  Upholder  (of  marriage)

Tv  ash  tar,  7,  47,  65,  68,  278,  335  notes.

90,127,  172,  207,  Upoha,  119  note.

230,  232,  233,  246,  Ursa  Major,  371
270,  274,  287,  295,  UrnguU,  406.

324,  336,  364,  440,  Urundas,  406.
t54.  Usana.  171.

Adityas,  12,  Ushas,  304,  105,  128,

420  ”otes-  135,463,  469.  See

Twelve  mouths,  461.  Dawn.


Thunder,  God  of,  3.  Trishtup,  XI

Thunderbolt  = sacrifice,  418,  419,
320.  Trisiras,  7.

Thunder-storm,  charm  Trisoka,  171

against,  16.  Trita,  187,

Tiger,  13.3,  134,  140,
180,306,401.

Tiger-amulet,  410.

Tigers  day,  306.

Tiger-skin,  140.

Ti laka,  54.  .

Time,  466.

Tiraschiraji,  121,  276.

Titans,  66  note .

Tin,  248  note.

Tobit,  404  note.

Toga  virilis,  IX,  58  wofe.Twelve
Tortoises,  441.

Tradesmen,  251  note .


INDEX  OP  NAMES,  ETC.

Vann.m,  .5,  12—14, : 15  Vasli  at,  14,  232,  377,
note,  20,  22,  24,  25,  423,  444,  404.

30,  31  note,  .36  note,  Vasishtha,  104,  146,
-37  note,  38,  .53,  54,  170,  213,-352, 396—

67  69,  83,  85,  86,  398  notes,  171.

S8,  90,99,  104,  105  Vasishthas,  10 5. note,
note,  111  note,  114,  Vasoshpati,  2.  _ _

115,  120,  421,  130  tfiiiMiii' 1111  r '
■note,  133  note,  134,  Vasu? !lthmon*h’  463-
152—155,  162  note,  Vasus,  34,  56,  81,  171,
170,  171,  173,  174,  206,  233,  282,  284,

186,  1.87  note,  1.89,  285,  289,  366,  376,

202  note,  203  note,  .387,  393,  414,  427.
205  note,  207  note,  Vata,  53,  55,  81,  82,
208,  212,  219,  224,  112,  120,  302,  .203

228,  230,  246,  248  note,  265,  295,  296,

note,  255,  256,  265,  4.34,  440.

269  note,  273,  282,  Vatsapa,  4Q3.

384,  292—294,  296,  Vav.rivasas,  403.

298,  .302,  311,  319,  Vayu,  36,  53,  55,  62
:339,  369—371,  374,  notes,  65,  76,  90,  97,
>379,  382,  409,  431,  1 07  note,  112,  166

437,  43.9,  454,  469,  167,  184,  186,  187

note,  228 , 249,  2.74,

KinS  of  Waters,  279,  282,  324,  32s’

3'0,  362  note,  385  note,

— nooses  or  snares  386,  440,  454  4fi4
of,  53— 54,154, 29.8,  465,470.  ’ ’

311,  370,  371.  V eda  (bunch  of  grass},

omnipresence  of,  341  note.

15.3,  154.  V eda,  2,  9 notes.

sickness  sent  by,  the  Fourth,  YJ.

30,  154,  155,  371  Vedas,  178,  470.

note,  409,  882.  the  three  ancient,

— spies  or  envoys  of,  111,470.

154*  Vedi,  206  note,

arnnaui,  111  note.  Ycins,  21.

arums,  85,  Vena,  41,  129,  196

asauta,  461.  424  note,  425.


VSCHASTATI,  1,  2.

Vadhrynsva,  170,  171.
Yainya,  424.
Vnisravaua,  426.
Yaisvanara  ,-(Ag»i),  6 1.,
103,  113,  114,  164,
179,  264,  270,  274,
279,  284,  285,  310,
380,  386,  401,  410,


■ (Yaruna),  14.

Vm.sya(s),  160  note,

214,  251  note.
Vaitahavyas,  217,  218,
Vaitana-Sfitra,  XIV,
XVII,  335,  342,  359
361,366.

Vaivasyata,  :3Q9,  .389,


Vlja,  270,  42 9. notes,
Vajapeya,  1 12.

Vaj  ap  ras  a v iy  a is  i,  112
note.

Vajin,  296  note.

Vlk,  106,  1 12,  129,
171,  172,  203,  213,
327,  359,  415,  421,
422  notes,  278,431,


Tala,  47.

Varaadeva,  17  6 note.,
Vamadeyya,  176,  422.


Vanaspati,  207, 233, 410,
Varana,  138,  291.
Varanlvati,  138.
Varslilh,  461.

Varshln)  (Raius),  96
. note.


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  ETC.


51,7


>n,  2L  340,  347,  348,  401,  165  note.  17-

he,  4-S..__  431,468.  292,  320

Red),  352. Consort  of,  348.  400.

, Yibhltaka,  Vishtilii,  176,  177.  Vritra-slayer  (;
’l  Visruvas,  426  note.  26,  SOl",  366.

7Q,mnotes.  Visra,  394.  Vulcan,  the  Indi

50, 30 o notes,  Visvajit,  303,  note.

285.  Visvakarman,  76,  77,  Vulture  (name

ls’-m ' 312.313  note.  worm),  226.

240,386.  Visvambhara,  61.  Vultures,  309,  4)

i5-  Visvaraitra,  146,  170,

'*3-  213,  352,  398  notes;  Wakeful,  386.

92  note.  1 71.  Wallis,  H.  W.,

,200.  Visvanara,  145.  133,159,  172.

5,^404  notes.  Visvavasu,  42,  43.  Wanderer,  the

, 344  note.  Visve  Devas,  Visve  Suu)335.

* Devah,  Visve, devas,  Wandering  stars.


■■518-


index  OF  NAMES,,  , ETC.


257,  258,  273,  ■ 277,  'Winter,  271,  391.  Yajns-text,  353*  , ; .

^ 278,  282,  295,  314,  Wise,  Dr.,  21,.  26,  27,  Yajyi/14  'note.

371,  373,  385,  386,  30,  64,  72,  74,  258,  -Yakshma,  53,  74,  .127,-
390,  409,  423,  428,  294,  315,  455,  458.  141,  387  notes.  See
438,  Witchcraft,  157,  210,  Consumption.

— * — before  creation,  211,  238,  241,  242,  Yama,  18,  35,  36,  56,
132  note.  400,401.  93,121,  123,  124,

Offspring  of  (Agni),  Witches,  23,  49,181,  142,  176,  186,202,

152,  246.  238*

Wealth,  Lord  of.  79.  Wizard,  211,  309.  .

Weapons  (a  class  of  Woden,  39  note.

Gods),  120.  Wolf,  200,  223,  226.

Weather-prophet,  XII,  Wood,  Rev.  J.  G.,  300.

316,  317.  Word, the  Creative,  .129,

Weber,  Prof.  A.,  V,VI,  171,  359,  431  notes.  -
World-creators,  178,

320.

World -protector,  36,  -
369,


XV,  et  passim .
Welfare  (personified),
291.

Westward  fire,  421.


228,  239,.  240,  260,  •
261,  269,  280,  291,
296,  298,  305,  313.
320,  338,  351,  386,
389,  412,  417,  420,
424,  453,  454,  470.
— dogs  of,  160,  239,
386,  411  note •

horse  of,  196.

- — messengers  of,


389,  413.

White  ants,  44,  300  World-Tree,  133  note,  Yamui.4,  142.

notes . 484  note.  Yaska,  107,  329,  489.

Whitney,  Prof.,  V,  VI,  Worlds,  the  three,  55  Yati,  47.

XIII*  X1Y,  XVI,  85,  note , 187,  347.  Yanis,  20.  „

180,  196,  272,  301,  Worm  (a  fiend),  407.  Yatudhana(s),  9 — 12,
334.  Worms,  71 — 73,  226,  SO,  53, 180, 161, 1 69,

Wide-strider,  the  (Vish*  227.

no,  the  Sun),  55.  Wrath  (personified),

Widow,  re-marriage  of,  173,  174.

446,  447.  Wright,  Mr.  W.  H„  XIV.

Wild  ass,  474.  Wrong,  489.

Wild  boar,  66, 210, 411.

Wilson,  Prof.  H.  H,,  Xerxes,  226  note .

190,  *270,  393,  398,

462,  464,  466,  469,  Yadus,  1 1 4 note.

470.  Yajfi&yajmya,  422,  423.-

Wind  (personified),  53,  Yajnr-veda,  353  note.

203,  249,  385,  427,  Yajns,  443  note,  449.

428.  Yaj us-rituah  1 12  note.

Wine,  177,  283,  Yajus  (Veda),  IIL


190,210,  237,262,
392-394,  898,  898.

transformations.-  ■

of,  399.

flying,  392.  ' />.:

Yat  udhaid(s),  11,  38,
53,  160,  227.  .

Year,  the;  (personified),
275,415.  ;

* consort  of,  93—95.

- modeL of,  '9.38;


parts  ;;of, ; '2M. :

New,  33,  94,

Yearners,  12L


index  of  names,  etc.

Zenith,  122,  144,  159,
lb6,  203,  469  notes.
Zeus,  172,  247,  248
'•  notes.

Zimmer,  Prof/ H.,  XVI,
4'  l7>  18,  .£$  82,  85,’
95>  103,  fig  n 8;
119,126,  136,  14Q,


Years,  94,  95.

~ — ; three  lunar,  275,
Yevasha(s),  227 .
Yojaoam,  318  note.
Yugas,  390
Yupa,  342  note.


Zachariae,  Dr*  T.,X  VI,


CORRIGENDA  ET  ADDENDA,


1 of  note  read  Pura-ushnih  for  Pura-ushnih

18  from  below  read  Purohita  for  Puroh  ta

3 . read  force  : ■ for  age

14  from  below  read  Medieinisches  for  Medecinisches

7 of  note  : read  eternal  for  immortal  f '■  •

7 read  bear  for  hear

16  from  below  read  biped  for  indistinct  word  after  and

2 from  below  omit  as  yet  unidentified

8 from  below  read  dnadatd  for  dnadatd

9 from  below  after  World,  add  The  legend  says  that  the  elephant

was  produced  from  shavings  of  the  flesh  of  Marttanda  the  mis-
shapen son  of  Aditi.  See  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  IV.  p.  15
7 of  note  insert  is  after  Rigvcda  X.  121

9 of  note  read  deo  ? for  deo

9 read  On  ! for  On

7 from  below  read  identified  for  indentified

7 insert  a full  stop  after  wealth

7 from  below  read  Sayana  for  Soma

3 of  stanza  11  insert  a comma  after  him

4 from  below  read  Foment osa  for  Tormentosa

17  insert  a comma  after  Agni

last  line  of  notes  read  164  for  16

6 read  As  erst,  still  for  Fortress-like,  and  cancel  the  portion  of  note
referring  to  pu  r of

heading  of  second  hymn  read  CXV.  for  CXC.

10  from  below  read  release  for  el  case

after  stanza  5 insert : 6 I have  obscured  the  heaven  and  earth,  yea,
and  the  daylight  and  the  Sun.

So  may  these  Gods  whom  I have  set  before  me  oppose  with  saving
charms  and  banish  witchcraft.

And  alter  accordingly-  the  numbers  of  stanzas  6 — 12

1 insert  a comma  after  Khalajas

IS  read  his  assembly  for  Disassembly

2 f rom^belo  w proud  Behaltcr  /wvBeh&lter
