Headquarters United States Air Force


The Cover

A solarized image taken from a U.S. Air Force motion picture of experiments
conducted for Project HIGH Dive. This image, unsolarized, appears on page 34
(Figure 37).


The Roswell Report


Headquarters United States Air Force


WSTKHUTIOH STATEZsTZFlT a


Approved for public release;
Dr:!i7.bi-'i : '.:i Unlimited


QUALITY inspected 1


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

McAndrew, James, 1963—

The Roswell report : case closed / James McAndrew
p. cm.
Includes index.

1. Unidentified flying objects — Sightings and encounters— New
Mexico — Roswell. I. Title
TL789.5.N6M33 1997

001.942'09789'43— dc21 97-11361

CIP


1/or sale >y"ffie Superintendent of Documents) U.S. GovenyHdnt Priiting Office ^
Washwrgton, D.C/20402 ^


ii


Foreword


The "Roswell Incident" has assumed a central place in American
folklore since the events of the 1940s in a remote area of New Mexico.
Because the Air Force was a major player in those events, we have played a
key role in executing the General Accounting Office's tasking to uncover all
records regarding that incident.

Our objective throughout this inquiry has been simple and
consistent: to find all the facts and bring them to light. If documents were
classified, declassify them; where they were dispersed, bring them into a
single source for public review.

In July 1994, we completed the first step in that effort and later
published The Roswell Report: Fact vs. Fiction in the New Mexico Desert.
This volume represents the necessary follow-on to that first publication and
contains additional material and analysis. I think that with this publication
we have reached our goal of a complete and open explanation of the events
that occurred in the Southwest many years ago.

Beyond that achievement, this inquiry has shed fascinating light
into the Air Force of that era and revitalized our appreciation for the
dedication and accomplishments of the men and women of that time. As
we celebrate the Air Force's 50th Anniversary, it is appropriate to once
again reflect on the sacrifices made by so many to make ours the finest air
and space force in history.


SHEILA E. WIDNALL
Secretary of the Air Force


iii


Guide For Readers


This publication contains the complete report as submitted to
the Secretary of the Air Force. The exceptions are the statements found in
Appendix B. Due to Privacy Act restrictions and by request, the addresses
of the individuals making these statements have been deleted.

This volume is divided into two sections, eight subsections,
eleven sidebar discussions, and three appendices. Section One examines
alleged events at two locations in rural New Mexico. Section Two
examines the alleged activities at the Roswell Army Airfield Hospital.

Appendix A is a table listing the launch and landing locations of
test equipment for U.S. Air Force scientific research projects High Dive
and Excelsior. Appendix B is a collection of signed sworn statements
based on in-person interviews conducted for this report by U.S. Air Force
researchers. The exception is the statement of Lt. Col. William C.
Kaufman, which was not sworn due to equipment failures at the time
of interview.

Appendix C contains transcripts of interviews of alleged
witnesses presented by UFO theorists. The interviews of Gerald Anderson,
Alice Knight, and Vern Maltais were excerpted in their entirety from
unedited interviews used to prepare the video, Recollections of Roswell,
Part II (1993), and appear courtesy of the Fund for UFO Research. The
interview of Mr. W. Glenn Dennis was provided by the interviewer, Karl
T. Pflock. The transcript of the interview of Mr. James Ragsdale was
provided by Kevin Randle, the coauthor of the Truth About the UFO
Crash at Roswell (Avon Books, 1994), in which direct quotes from this
transcript appear.

A selected bibliography of technical reports and how to obtain
them are found on page 221. For additional information on this subject,
see Headquarters United States Air Force, The Roswell Report: Fact vs.
Fiction in the New Mexico Desert (Washington D.C.: U.S. Government
Printing Office, 1995).


The Author


CAPTAIN JAMES McANDREW serves as an Intelligence
Applications Officer assigned to the Secretary of the Air Force
Declassification and Review Team, The Pentagon, Washington, D.C..
Captain McAndrew was the coauthor, with Col. Richard L. Weaver,
of The Roswell Report: Fact vs. Fiction in the New Mexico Desert
(1995), the first Air Force work on the alleged "Roswell Incident." He
participated in the declassification of the Gulf War Air Power Survey
(1993) and has served special tours of duty with the Drug Enforcement
Administration and High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area (HIDTA) Task
Force. He holds a BS degree with honors, from Metropolitan State
College, Denver, Colo, and is a native of Washington, D.C..


vi


Contents

Page

Foreword ™

Guide for Readers v

Introduction i

SECTION ONE

Flying Saucer Crashes

and Alien Bodies 5

1 . 1 The "Crash Sites," Scenarios, and Research Methods 11

1.2 High Altitude Balloon Dummy Drops 23

1.3 High Altitude Balloon Operations 37

1 .4 Comparison of Witnesses Accounts to U.S. Air Force Activities . 55

SECTION TWO

Reports of Bodies at Roswell

Army Air Field Hospital 75

2.1 The "Missing" Nurse and the Pediatrician 81

2.2 Aircraft Accidents 93

2.3 High Altitude Research Projects 101

2.4 Comparison of the Hospital Account to the Balloon Mishap 109

Conclusion 123

Notes

Section One -127

Section Two 139

vii


APPENDIX A

Anthropomorphic Dummy Launch

and Landing Locations 155


APPENDIX B

Witness Statements

Charles E. Clouthier 160

Charles A. Coltman, Jr., Col., USAF, MC (Ret) 162

Dan D. Fulgham, Col., USAF (Ret) 164

Bernard D. Gildenberg, GS-14 (Ret) 166

Ole Jorgeson, MSgt., USAF (Ret) 169

William C. Kaufman, Lt. Col., USAF (Ret) 171

Joseph W. Kittinger, Jr., Col., USAF (Ret) 174

Roland H. Lutz, CMSgt., USAF (Ret) 178

Raymond A. Madson, Lt. Col. USAF (Ret) 180

Frank B. Nordstrom, M.D 182


APPENDIX C

Interviews

Gerald Anderson 187

Glenn Dennis 197

Alice Knight 213

Vern Maltais 214

James Ragsdale 215


Selected Bibliography of

Technical Reports 221


Index 225


Tables

SECTION ONE

1 . 1 Comparison of Testimony to Actual Air Force Equipment
and Procedures Used to Launch and Recover

Anthropomorphic Dummies 69

SECTION TWO

2.1 Persons Described and Periods of Service at

Roswell AAFAValker AFB 91


viii


2.2 Fatal Air Force Aircraft Accidents by Year

in the Vicinity of Walker AFB— 1947-1960 93

2.3 Analysis of Air Force Aircraft Accidents

by Year in the Vicinity of Walker AFB— 1947-1960 94

Figures

SECTION ONE

1. The Roswell Report: Fact vs. Fiction In The New Mexico Desert.

2. The International UFO Museum and Research Center, Roswell, N.M.

3. Drawing of Project Mogul Balloon Train.

4. Maj. Jesse Marcel With "Flying Disc" Debris.

5. ML-307B/AP Radar Target on Ground.

6. ML-307B/AP Radar Target in Flight.

7. "Harassed Rancher Who Located 'Saucer' Sorry He Told About It,"
Roswell Daily Record, July 9, 1947.

8. Announcement from November 4, 1992 Socorro (N.M.) Defensor
Chieftan.

9. B.D. u Duke" Gildenberg.

10. Charles B.Moore.

11. Map Of New Mexico Depicting "Crash Sites" and "Debris Field."

12. Missile Recovery Scene.

13. Drone Recovery Scene.

14. "Sierra Sam" Type Anthropomorphic Dummy.

15. National Transportation Highway Safety Administration Advertisement
Featuring "Vince and Larry."

16. "Dummy Joe" with J. J. Higgins and Guy Ball, McCook Field, Ohio,
1920.

17. Rope and Sandbag Parachute Drop Dummy on Ground.

18. Rope and Sandbag Parachute Drop Dummy Descending at Wright
Field, Ohio.

19. Ted Smith Model Anthropomorphic Dummy in Ejection Seat.

20. Anthropomorphic Dummy "Oscar Eightball" at Muroc AAF, Calif.

21. "Sierra Sam" Anthropomorphic Dummy in Ejection Seat.

22. Alderson Laboratories Anthropomorphic Dummies Hanging in Laboratory.

23. Project High Dive Dummy Launch.


ix


24. Map Of New Mexico Depicting Dummy Landing Locations.

25. Capt. Joseph W. Kittinger, Jr.'s Record Parachute Jump.

26. Article In December 1960 National Geographic Featuring Project
Excelsior.

27. Magazine Covers Depicting U.S. Air Force Aero-Medical
Experiments.

28. M-342 Five-Ton Wrecker.

29. Project High Dive Gondola and "Sierra Sam" Type Anthropomorphic
Dummy.

30. 1st Lts. Raymond A. Madson and Eugene M. Schwartz with "Sierra
Sam" Type Anthropomorphic Dummy.

3 1 . M-35 Two-Ton Cargo Truck.

32. M-37 3/4-Ton Cargo Truck.

33. Lt. Col. John P. Stapp Preparing for Rocket Sled Test.

34. Cover of September 12, 1955 Time Magazine Depicting
Lt. Col. John P. Stapp.

35. Anthropomorphic Dummy with Missing Fingers.

36-38. Anthropomorphic Dummy Falling from Balloon Gondola.

39. Memo from Project High Dive Files.

40. Hanging Anthropomorphic Dummies and Hospital Gurney.

41. Anthropomorphic Dummy in Insulation Bag.

42-43. High Altitude Balloon Dummy Drops Report Covers.

44. Inflation of High Altitude Balloon for Project Viking.

45. Lobby Card from On The Threshold of Space,

46. Promotional Photo From On The Threshold of Space.

47. Promotional Photo From On The Threshold of Space.

48. Relative Sizes of High Altitude Balloon, Airliner, and Hot Air Balloon.

49. Target Balloon Launch Near Holloman AFB, N.M.

50. Discoverer Nosecone Rigged for High Altitude Balloon Flight.

5 1 . Discoverer Capsule Aboard the USS Haiti Victory.

52. Viking Spaceprobe at Martin Marietta Corp., Denver, Colo.

53. Balloon Launch Of Voyager-Mars Spaceprobe.

54. Viking Spaceprobe at Roswell Industrial Airport, Roswell, N.M.

55. Viking Space Probe Awaiting Recovery at White Sands Missile Range.


56. Drawing of Alleged UFO.

57. "Vee" Balloon at Holloman AFB, N.M.

58. Current Members of the Holloman AFB Balloon Branch.

59. B.D. Gildenberg, Capt. Joseph W. Kittinger, Jr., and Lt. Col. David G.
Simons (MC).

60. Ranch Family with Panel from Project Stargazer.

61. Balloon Recovery Personnel and "The Hermit."

62. Mule Borrowed for Balloon Payload Recovery.

63. Bulldozer Used for Balloon Payload Recovery.

64. M-43 Ambulance.

65-66. Unusual Balloon Payloads.

67. U.S. Army Communications Payload.

68. Scientific Balloon Payload Flown for The John Hopkins University.

69. Balloon Payload Flown from Holloman AFB, N.M.

70. Project High Dive Anthropomorphic Dummy Launch.

7 1 . Vehicles Present at High Altitude Balloon Launch and Recovery Sites.

72. Alderson Laboratories Anthropomorphic Dummies.

73. Anthropomorphic Dummies Attached to Rack.

74. Anthropomorphic Dummy with "Bandaged" Head.

75. Anthropomorphic Dummy with Torn Uniform.

76. Promotional Photo From On The Threshold of Space.
11. L-20 Observation Aircraft.

78. C-47 Transport Aircraft.

79. Balloon Crew Preparing Balloon for Launch.

80. Anthropomorphic Dummy Launch Scene.

81. Typical High Altitude Balloon Launch Scene.

82. Map of New Mexico.
SECTION TWO

1. The International UFO Museum and Research Center.

2. Capt. Eileen M. Fanton.

3. "Flying Saucer Swindlers," True Magazine, August 1956.

4. "The Flying Saucers and the Mysterious Little Green Men," True
Magazine, September 1952.


xi


5. Col. Lee F. Ferrell and U.S. Senator Dennis Chavez.

6. Lt. Col. Lucille C. Slattery.

7. KC-97 Aircraft.

8. 4036th USAF Hospital, Walker AFB, N.M., 1956.

9. Ballard Funeral Home, Roswell, N.M.

10. Maj. David G. Simons (MC), Otto C. Winzen, and Capt. Joseph W.
Kittinger, Jr.

1 1 . Capt. Joseph W. Kittinger, Jr. in Man High Capsule.

12. Lt. Col. David G. Simons.

13. Bernard D. "Duke" Gildenberg and 1st Lt. Clifton McClure.

14. Capt. Joseph W. Kittinger, Jr. and the Excelsior High Altitude Balloon
Gondola.

15. Capt. Joseph W. Kittinger, Jr. and William C. White with Stargazer
Gondola.

16. Capt. Grover Schock and Otto C. Winzen.

17. Capt. Dan D. Fulgham and Capt. William C. Kaufman.

18. Thirty-foot Polyethylene Training Balloon.

19. Maj. Joseph W. Kittinger, Jr. in Vietnam.

20. A2C Ole Jorgeson and M-43 Ambulance Converted to a Communications
Vehicle.

21. Stenciled Letters Described as "Hieroglyphics."

22. A2C Ole Jorgeson in Rear of M-43 Ambulance.

23. Polyethylene Balloon on Ground After High Altitude Flight.

24. Hospital Dispensary, Building 317, Walker AFB, N.M., 1954.

25. Main Gate at Walker AFB, N.M., 1954.

26. Capt. Joseph W. Kittinger, Jr. and Dr. J. Allen Hynek.

27. Clinical Record Cover Sheet of Capt. Dan D. Fulgham.

28. Capt. Dan D. Fulgham at Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio.

29. Maj. Dan D. Fulgham, James Lovell, Hilary Ray, and Alan Bean.

30. Maj. Dan D. Fulgham at Ubon AB, Thailand.

3 1 . Memorial Plaque at Holloman AFB, N.M.

32. Nenninger Balloon Launch Facility at Holloman AFB, N.M.

33. Capt. Joseph W. Kittinger, Jr. Following Excelsior I.


xii


Introduction


In July 1994, the Office of the Secretary of the Air Force
concluded an exhaustive search for records in response to a General
Accounting Office (GAO) inquiry of an event popularly known as the
"Roswell Incident." The focus of the GAO probe, initiated at the request
of New Mexico Congressman Steven Schiff, was to determine if the U.S.
Air Force, or any other U.S. government agency, possessed information
on the alleged crash and recovery of an extraterrestrial vehicle and its
alien occupants near Roswell, N.M. in July 1947.

Reports of flying saucers and alien bodies allegedly sighted in
the Roswell area in 1947, have been the subject of intense domestic and
international media attention. This attention has resulted in countless
newspaper and magazine articles, books, a television series, a full-length
motion picture, and even a film purported to be a U.S. government "alien
autopsy."

The July 1994 Air Force report concluded that the predecessor
to the U.S. Air Force, the U.S. Army Air Forces, did indeed recover
material near Roswell in July 1947. This 1,000-page report methodically
explains that what was recovered by the Army Air Forces was not the
remnants of an extraterrestrial spacecraft and its alien crew, but debris
from an Army Air Forces balloon-borne research project code named
Mogul. 1 Records located describing research carried out under the
Mogul project, most of which were never classified (and publicly
available) were collected, provided to GAO, and published in one volume
for ease of access for the general public*

Although Mogul components clearly accounted for the claims
of "flying saucer" debris recovered in 1947, lingering questions remained
concerning anecdotal accounts that included descriptions of "alien"
bodies. The issue of "bodies" was not discussed extensively in the 1994
report because there were not any bodies connected with events that
occurred in 1947. The extensive Secretary of the Air Force-directed
search of Army Air Forces and U.S. Air Force records from 1947 did not
yield information that even suggested the 1947 "Roswell" events were
anything other than the retrieval of the Mogul equipment. 2


* Mogul records which ultimately lead to the identification of the origin of the 1947 claims of "flying saucer'
debris, described balloon research that was never classified. Other Mogul records, describing military
applications of balloon-borne acoustical sensors, were declassified, along with millions of pages of other
unrelated executive branch documents by Executive Order 1 1652, issued on March 6, 1972 by
President Richard M. Nixon.


l


Fig. 1. The Roswell Report-
Fact vs. Fiction in the New
Mexico Desert contains, in its
entirety, the report submitted
to the Secretary of the Air
Force in July 1994. It is
available for sale from the
U.S. Government Printing
Office, Superintendent of
Documents, Washington,
D.C., 20402-9328.
Stock No. 008-070-00697-9,
ISBN 0-16-048023-X.


Subsequent to the 1994 report, Air Force researchers discovered
information that provided a rational explanation for the alleged
observations of alien bodies associated with the "Roswell Incident."
Pursuant to the discovery, research efforts compared documented Air
Force activities to the incredible claims of "flying saucers," "aliens" and
seemingly unusual Air Force involvement. This in-depth examination
revealed that these accounts, in most instances, were of actual Air Force
activities but were seriously flawed in several major areas, most notably:
the Air Force operations that inspired reports of "bodies" (in addition
to being earthly in origin) did not occur in 1947. It appears that UFO
proponents have failed to establish the accurate dates for these "alien"
observations (in some instances by more than a decade) and then
erroneously linked them to the actual Project Mogul debris recovery.

This report discusses the results of this further research and
identifies the likely sources of the claims of "alien" bodies. Contrary
to allegations that the Air Force has engaged in a cover-up and possesses
dark secrets involving the Roswell claims, some of the accounts appear to
be descriptions of unclassified and widely publicized Air Force scientific
achievements. Other descriptions of bodies appear to be descriptions of
actual incidents in which Air Force members were killed or injured in the
line of duty.


The conclusions of the additional research are:

• Air Force activities which occurred over a period of many
years have been consolidated and are now represented to have
occurred in two or three days in July 1947.

• "Aliens" observed in the New Mexico desert were probably
anthropomorphic test dummies that were carried aloft by U.S.
Air Force high altitude balloons for scientific research.

• The "unusual" military activities in the New Mexico desert
were high altitude research balloon launch and recovery
operations. The reports of military units that always seemed to
arrive shortly after the crash of a flying saucer to retrieve the
saucer and "crew" were actually accurate descriptions of Air
Force personnel engaged in anthropomorphic dummy recovery
operations.

• Claims of bodies at the Roswell Army Air Field hospital were
most likely a combination of two separate incidents:

1) a 1956 KC-97 aircraft accident in which 11 Air Force
members lost their lives; and,

2) a 1959 manned balloon mishap in which two Air Force
pilots were injured.

This report is based on thoroughly documented research
supported by official records, technical reports, film footage, photographs,
and interviews with individuals who were involved in these events.


Fig. 2. Roswell, N.M. (pop.
37,000), boasts competing
"museums" focusing on the
Roswell Incident, including
this one, The International
UFO Museum and Research
Center.


3


SECTION ONE


Flying Saucer Crashes
and Alien Bodies


The most puzzling and intriguing element of the complex series
of events now known as the Roswell Incident, are the alleged sightings of
alien bodies. The bodies turned what, for many years, was just another
flying saucer story, into what many UFO proponents claim is the best
case for extraterrestrial visitation of Earth. The importance of bodies and
the assumptions made as to their origin is illustrated in a passage from a
popular Roswell book:

Crashed saucers are one thing, and could well turn out to be
futuristic American or even foreign aircraft or missiles. But alien bodies
are another matter entirely, and hardly subject to misinterpretation?

The 1994 Air Force report determined that project Mogul was
responsible for the 1947 events. Mogul was an experimental attempt
to acoustically detect suspected Soviet nuclear weapon explosions and
ballistic missile launches. 4 Mogul utilized acoustical sensors, radar
reflecting targets and other devices attached to a train of weather balloons
over 600 feet long. Claims that the U.S. Army Air Forces recovered a
"flying disc" in 1947, were based primarily on the lack of identification
of the radar targets, an element of weather equipment used on the long
Mogul balloon train. The oddly constructed radar targets were found by
a New Mexico rancher during the height of the first U.S. flying saucer
wave in 1947. 5 The rancher brought the remnants of the balloons
and radar targets to the local sheriff after he allegedly learned of the
broadcasted reports of flying discs. However, following some initial
confusion at Roswell Army Air Field, the "flying disc" was soon
identified by Army Air Forces officials as a standard radar target. 6

From 1947 until the late 1970s, the Roswell Incident was
essentially a non-story. The reports that existed contain only descriptions
of mundane materials that originated from the Project Mogul balloon
train — "tinfoil, paper, tape, rubber, and sticks." 7 The first claim of
"bodies" appeared in the late 1970s, with additional claims made during
the 1980s and 1990s. These claims were usually based on anecdotal
accounts of second-and third-hand witnesses collected by UFO
proponents as much as 40 years after the alleged incident. The same


5


anecdotal accounts that referred to bodies also described massive field
operations conducted by the U.S. military to recover crash debris from a
supposed extraterrestrial spaceship.

A technique used by some UFO authors to collect anecdotal
corroboration for their theories was to solicit cooperating witnesses through
newspaper announcements. For example, one such solicitation appeared in
the Socorro (N.M.) Defensor Chieftan on November 4, 1992, on behalf of


Fig. 3. An illustration of a
Project Mogul balloon train
similar to one found on a ranch
75 miles northwest of Roswell,
N.M. in June 1947, which
contains all of the "strange"
materials described as part of a
"flying disc." Initial confusion
at Roswell AAF and delayed
identification of this equipment
was the first in a series of
unrelated events now known
as the "Roswell Incident."


6


Fig. 4. (Right) Maj. Jesse
Marcel, an intelligence officer
from Roswell Army Air Field,
with the debris found 75 miles
northwest of Roswell in June
1947. When compared to a
standard radar target used by
project Mogul, it is clear that
they are the same object.
(Courtesy, Special Collections
Division, the University of
Texas at Arlington Libraries,
Arlington, Tex.)


Fig. 5 & 6. (Below, left
and right) Constructed of
aluminized paper glued and
taped to a balsa wood frame,
several ML-307B/AP radar
targets were used on the
Mogul balloon train to make
it visible to radar.
(U.S. Air Force photos)


-;. \ r . - . - ■ ; i ^jSTrj %: : V°,!ftf -4.^' *..jf. I -■ ■■ ■■■■ - ''

: ■ ■ ■ £ -'. r ■■: ■ * ' ^ f:-. „■-".■■ V 4 Mf; < ' H-;^ ;? v > f , "


7


Harassed Rancher who Located
' Saucer* Sorry He Told About It


w. W, Brazel, 48, Lincoln county
rancher living 30 miles south cast
of Corona, today told his story of
finding what the army at first
described as a flying disk, but
the publicity which attended his
find caused him to add that if he
ever found anything else short of
a bomb he sure wasn't going to
say anything about it.

Brazel was brought here late
yesterday by W, E. Whitmore, of
radio station KOFL, had his pic-
ture taken and gave an interview
to the Record and Jason Kellahin,
sent here from the Albuquerque
bureau of the Associated Press to
cover the story. The picture he
posed for was sent out over AP
telephoto wire bending machine
specially set up in the Record
office by R. £>. Adair, AP wire
chief sent here from Albuquerque
for the sole purpose of getting out
his picture and that of sheriff
George Wilcox, to whom Brazel
originally gave tne'-information of
his find.

Brazel related that on June 14
he and an 8-year old son, Vernon
were about 7 or 8 miles from the
ranch house of the J. B. Foster
ranch, which he operates, when


they came upon a large area of
bright wreckage made up on rub-
ber strips, tinfoil, a rather tough
paper and sticks.

At the time Brazel was in a
hurry to get his round made and
he did not pay much attention to
it. But he did remark about what
he had seen and on July 4 he. his
wife. Vernon and a daughter Bet-
ty, age 14, went back to the spot
and gathered up quite a bit of the
debris.

The next day he first heard
about the, flying disks, and he
wondered if what he had found
might be the remnants of one
of these.

Monday he came to town to sell
some wool and* while here he went
to see sheriff George Wilcox and
"whispered k i n d a confidential
like" that he might have found a
flying disk.

Wilcox got in touch with the
Roswell Army Air Field and MaJ.
Jesse A. Marcel and a man in
plain clotUes accompanied, him
home, where they picked up the
rest of the pieces of the "disk"
and went to his home to try to
reconstruct it.

According to Brazel they simply


could not reconstruct it at all.
They tried to make a kite, out of it.
but could not do that and could
not find any way to put it back
together so that it would fit.

Then Major Marcel brought it
to Roswell and that wad the last
he heard of it until the story'
broke that he had found a flying
disk.

Brazel said that he did not see
it fall from the sky and did not
see it before it was torn up, so
lie did not know the slsse or shape
it might have been, but he thought
it might have been about as large
as a table top. The balloon which
held it up, if that was how it
worked, must have be'en about 12
feet long, he felt, measuring, the
distance by the size of the room
in which he sat. The rubber was
smoky gray in color and scattered
over an area about 200 yards in
diameter.

When the debris was gathered
up the tinfoil, paper, tape, and
sticks made a bundle about three
feet. long and 7- or 8 Inches thick,
while the rubber made a bundle
about 18 or 20 inches long and
about 8 Inches thick. In all, he
estimated, the entire lot would


have weighed maybe five pounds.

There was no sfen of any metal
in the area which might have
been used for an engine and no
sign of any propellers of any kind,
although at least one paper fin
had been glued onto some of the
tinfoil.

There were no words to be found
anywhere on the instrument, al-
though there were letters on some
of the parts. Considerable scotch
tape and some tape with flowers
printed upon it had been used in
the construction.

No. strings or wire were to be
found but there were some eye-
lets in the paper to indicate that
some sort of attachment may have
been used.

Brazel said that he had pre-
viously found two weather obser-
vation balloons on the ranch, but
that what he found this time did
not in any way resemble either
of these.

"I am sure what I found was
not any weather observation
balloon." he said. "But If I find
anything else, besides a bomb they
are going to have a hard time
getting me to say anything about
it."


Don Berliner and Stanton T. Friedman the authors of the book Crash at
Corona. This request solicited persons to provide information about the
supposed crashes of alien spacecraft in the Socorro area. 8 *

In response to the newspaper announcement, two scientists
central to the actual explanation of the "Roswell" events, Professor
Charles B. Moore, a former U.S. Army Air Forces contract engineer, and
Bernard D. Gildenberg, retired Holloman AFB Balloon Branch Physical
Science Administrator and Meteorologist, came forward with pertinent
information. 9 According to Moore and Gildenberg, when they met with
the authors their explanations that some of the Air Force projects they
participated in were most likely responsible for the incident, they were
summarily dismissed. The authors even went so far as to suggest that
these distinguished scientists were participants in a multifaceted
government cover-up to conceal the truth about the Roswell Incident.


Fig. 7. This account from the
July 9, 1947 Roswell Daily
Record, described the materials
"tinfoil, paper, rubber, tape,
and sticks" found on the ranch
75 miles northwest of Roswell,
in June 1947.


'Socorro, N.M. is situated at the northwest boundary of White Sands Missile Range, the largest military test
range in the United States. Since the 1940s, White Sands and the surrounding areas of New Mexico have been
the site of a high volume of military test and evaluation activity, including the launch and recovery of
anthropomorphic dummies carried aloft by high altitude balloons.


8


Fig. 8. Announcement from
the November 4, 1992 Socorro
(N.M.) Defensor Chieftan
soliciting witnesses of flying
saucer crashes in New Mexico.
When former Air Force
scientists responded to advise
the authors that Air Force
projects were most probably
responsible for the UFO
accounts, they were summarily
dismissed by the authors who
placed the announcement,
and then were accused of
participating in a cover-up.

Fig. 9. (Left) B.D. "Duke"
Gildenberg served as the civilian
meteorologist, engineer, and
physical science administrator
for the Holloman AFB Balloon
Branch from 1951-1981.
Gildenberg actively participated
in thousands of high altitude
balloon operations, including
the flights that dropped
anthropomorphic dummies at
off-range locations throughout
New Mexico. Gildenberg, the
"father" of Air Force scientific
ballooning, was instrumental in
identifying the many actual Air
Force activities now known as
the "Roswell Incident."

Fig. 10. (Right) Charles B.
Moore, Professor Emeritus of
Atmospheric Physics at the New
Mexico Institute of Mining and
Technology, was the project
engineer for New York University
under contract to the U.S. Army
Air Forces to develop high
altitude balloon technology for
Project Mogul. Moore launched
the balloon train on June 4,
1947, that when combined with
other events, are now known as
the "Roswell Incident."


Authors seek UFO witnesses


Co-authors of a major book on
the 1947 crash of at least one alien
spacecraft in the New Mexico
desert will be at the Golden Manor
Motel in Socorro on Monday, Nov.
16 to seek out additional witnesses
to these events.

Nuclear physicist Stanton T.
Friedman and aviation/science
writer Don Berliner, whose "Crash
at Corona" is now in its second
printing, want to meet with people
having knowledge of the 1947
crashes.

Their book, being published in
August by Paragon House of New
York, is being prepared for a made-
for-TV movie. It is the story of the
discovery, retrieval, shipping and
cover-up of what the authors call
the most important scientific dis-
covery of the past thousand years.

It is based on dozens of inter-
views with first- and second-hand
civilian and ex-military witnesses
to various parts of what is referred
to as a very complex series of
events.


In order to strengthen their case
for government knowledge of what
they call "the truth behind almost
50 years of UFO sightings," the au-
thors are seeking out additional,
reliable witnesses. It remains their
policy to honor requests to keep the
names of witnesses private.

For more information, contact
Don Berliner, 1202 S. Washington
St., Alexandria, VA., 22314 (703-
548-0405); or Stanton T. Friedman,
79 Pembroke Crescent, Frederic-
ton, New Brunswick E3B 2V1,
Canada (506 457-0232).

Witnesses are invited to call ei-
ther author collect or to make ar-
rangements to meet them at any of
their stops in New Mexico, which
include the cities of Santa Fe, Al-
buquerque, Las Cmces, Alamo-
gordo and Roswell.


Since many of the Roswell accounts and allegations were collected by
irregular methods and are not specifically documented, the series of events as
alleged by UFO theorists has become very complex and requires clarification.
Therefore, the following section will briefly examine some of the more confusing
elements of the Roswell stories, specifically, the multiple crash sites and complex
scenarios, in order to facilitate an objective analysis of actual events.


9


1.1


The "Crash Sites," Scenarios,
and Research Methods

The "Crash Sites"


From 1947 until the late 1970s, the Roswell Incident was
confined to one alleged crash site. This site, located on the Foster
Ranch approximately 75 miles northwest of the city of Roswell, was the
actual landing site of a Project Mogul balloon train in June 1947. 10 The
Mogul landing site is referred to in popular Roswell literature as the
"debris field."

In the 1970s, the 1980s and throughout the 1990s, additional
witnesses came forward with claims and descriptions of two other alleged
crash sites. One of these sites was supposedly north of Roswell, the other
site was alleged to have been approximately 175 miles northwest of
Roswell in an area of New Mexico known as the San Agustin Plains. 11
What distinguished the two new crash sites from the original debris field
were accounts of alien bodies.


Fig. 11. Map of New Mexico
depicting the "crash sites" and
"debris field."


11


The Scenarios

UFO enthusiasts have attempted to explain the obvious
contradiction of multiple impact sites involving only one alien craft
through the introduction of complicated scenarios . These scenarios have
become increasingly convoluted since the proponents of each crash site
must make allowances to have "their" flying saucer at the correct time
and place — the actual Mogul balloon train landing site in early July,
1947 — in order to "fit" with the rest of the story. The actual Project
Mogul landing site, 75 miles northwest of Roswell, lends credibility, and
more importantly establishes a timeframe, for the other accounts that
include reports of bodies. Flying saucer enthusiasts use the documented
presence of U.S. Army Air Forces personnel at the Mogul site in July
1947, who were there to retrieve the Mogul balloon train, to provide
the nucleus of unrelated and much later accounts that include reports of
"bodies." It must be emphasized that the claims of "bodies" only became
part of the Roswell Incident after 1978, when they were erroneously
linked to the July 1947 retrieval of Project Mogul components.

In general, "Roswell Incident" scenarios claim that a disabled
alien craft momentarily touched down at the site 75 miles northwest of
Roswell, leaving behind parts of the spaceship (material that has been
subsequently identified as components of a Mogul balloon train) to
create the original "debris field " The scenarios further contend that the
damaged craft again became airborne and flew to its final crash site, at
either the location north of Roswell or 175 miles northwest of Roswell on
the San Agustin Plains.

Regardless of the dispute over the location, an element common
to most scenarios was that, once recovered, the bodies were supposedly
transported to the hospital at Roswell Army Air Field for autopsy. Also
common to these theories is that the bodies were later shipped from
Roswell AAF to another facility, usually Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio
(or a host of other facilities — this is another area of further disagreement
among UFO theorists) for further evaluation and ultimate deep-freeze
storage.

Research Methods

In an attempt to untangle this collection of complicated
assertions and determine if there was any validity to the reports of bodies,
Air Force researchers faced the task of sorting through and examining
anecdotal testimony of hundreds of witnesses. However, a large number
of the accounts were eliminated by applying previously established facts
to the testimonies. The July 1994 report to the Secretary of the Air Force
clearly presented and documented these facts:

a. The U.S. Army Air Forces did not recover an extraterrestrial
vehicle and alien crew. This conclusion was based on extensive
research that included a thorough review of both classified and


"It must be
emphasized that
the claims of
bodies only
became part
of the Roswell
Incident after
1978, when they
were erroneously
linked to the July
1947 retrieval of
Project Mogul
components"


12


unclassified materials at record depositories, archives, libraries and
research facilities throughout the nation. Of the millions of pages
of material reviewed, there was no mention of any activities that
even tangentially suggested such an event. Additionally, former
and retired Air Force members and civilian contract scientists
were located and released from any possible nondisclosure
agreements they may have entered into regarding past classified
activities. This release allowed them to freely discuss with Air
Force researchers, or any other persons, information related to
this issue. These releases were issued at the express written
direction of the Secretary of the Air Force. Interviews with
these persons yielded no information supporting extraterrestrial
claims or any other unusual activities.

b. The reports of bodies were not associated with Project
Mogul. The Mogul balloon train did not, was not designed to,
nor could it carry passengers. Neither did it carry hazardous
materials that would have caused injury, death, or mutilation
to persons who may have come in contact with any of its
components.

c. Actual events, if any, that inspired reports of bodies did not
occur in 1947. Based on extensive examinations of U.S. Army
Air Forces activities in 1947, no evidence was found to support
allegations that the Army Air Forces was involved in any
uncommon operations other than the retrieval of the Mogul
balloon train in the Roswell area in July 1947. Examination

of research and development projects, aircraft crashes, errant
missiles and possible nuclear accidents yielded no information
to support a 1947 claim.

In light of these documented facts, the hundreds of anecdotal
accounts were reduced to a few. Eliminated were accounts that were
likely descriptions of materials known to be part of the Project Mogul
balloon train and accounts describing transportation of these materials.

From the remaining testimony, Air Force researchers developed
the following set of working hypotheses to assist in identifying the actual
events, if any, matching those described by the witnesses.

a. Due to the number and great detail provided in some of the
accounts, it was likely that some event(s) actually did occur.

b. Due to the many similarities of the two crash site descriptions
and the considerable distance between them, it was likely that
more than one event with similar characteristics was the basis
for these accounts.

c. Since the account of bodies at the Roswell Army Air Field
hospital did not contain elements similar to reports of the two


13


crash sites, it was likely that this account was unrelated to the
crash site accounts. (The hospital account will be addressed
separately in Section Two of this report.)

The remaining testimony was examined with regard both to
the facts and to working hypotheses to determine if there were common
threads or links connecting any of the accounts. If similarities were
found, the next step was to determine if they were related to an actual
event. Finally, if there were actual event(s), were they part of U.S. Air
Force or U.S. Government activities?

Common Threads

Careful examination of the testimony revealed that primary
witnesses of the two "crashed saucer" locations contained descriptions
common to both. These areas of commonality contained both general
and detailed characteristics. However, before continuing, the accounts
were carefully examined to determine if the testimony related by
individual witnesses were of their own experiences and not a recitation
of information given by other persons. While many aspects of the
remaining accounts were judged to be similar, other aspects were found
to be significantly different. The accounts on which the analysis is based
were determined, in all likelihood, to have been independently obtained
or observed by the witnesses.

General Similarities. The testimony presented for both crash
sites generally followed the same sequence of events. The witnesses
were in a rural and isolated area of New Mexico. In the course of
their travels in this area, they came upon a crashed aerial vehicle. The
witnesses then proceeded to the area of the crash to investigate and at
some distance they observed strange looking "beings" that appeared to
be crewmembers of the vehicle. Soon thereafter, a convoy of military
vehicles and soldiers arrived at the site. Military personnel allegedly
instructed the civilians to leave the area and forget what they had seen.
As the witnesses left the area, the military personnel commenced with a
recovery operation of the crashed aerial vehicle and "crew."

Detailed Similarities. Along with general similarities in the
testimonies, there also existed a substantial amount of similar detailed
descriptions of the "aliens," and the military vehicles and procedures
allegedly used to recover them.

The first obvious similarity was the descriptions of the aliens.
Mr. Gerald Anderson, an alleged witness of events at the site 175 miles
northwest of Roswell, recalled, "I thought they were plastic dolls." 12 Mr.
James Ragsdale, an alleged witness of the site north of Roswell, stated,
'They were using dummies in those damned things." 13 Another alleged
witness to a "crash" north of Roswell, Frank J. Kaufman, recalled that
there was "talk" that perhaps an "experimental plane with dummies in it"
was the source of the claims. 14


14


Additional similarities were also noted. Mr. Vern Maltais, a
secondhand witness of the site 175 miles northwest of Roswell, described
the hands of the "aliens" as, 'They had four fingers." 15 Anderson
characterized the hands as, "They didn't have a little finger." 16 He also
described the heads of the aliens as "completely bald" 17 while Maltais
described them as "hairless." 18 The uniforms of the aliens were
independently described by Anderson as "one-piece suits.. .a shiny
silverish-gray color" 19 and by Maltais as "one-piece and gray in color." 20
The date of this event was also not precisely known. Maltais recalled that
it may have occurred "around 1950" 21 and another secondhand witness,
Alice Knight stated, "I don't recall the date." 22

Witnesses of different sites also used the terms "wrecker" 23 and
"six-by-six" 24 when they described the military vehicles present at the
different recovery sites. One witness described seeing a "medium sized
Jeep/truck" 25 and another witness described seeing a "weapons carrier" 26
(a weapons carrier is a mid-sized Jeep-type truck).

The Research Profile

When the general and specific similarities were combined, a
profile emerged describing the event or activity that might have been
observed. The profile, which contains elements common to at least two,
and in some cases, all of the accounts, established a set of criteria used
to determine what the witnesses may have observed. The profile is as
follows:

a. An activity that, if viewed from a distance, would appear unusual.

b. An activity of which the exact date is not known.

c. An activity that took place in two rural areas of New Mexico.

d. An activity that involved a type of aerial vehicle with dolls
or dummies that had four fingers, were bald, and wore one-
piece gray suits.

e. An activity that required recovery by numerous military
personnel and an assortment of vehicles that included a wrecker, a
six-by-six, and a weapons carrier.

Based on this profile, research was begun to identify events
or activities with these characteristics. Due to the location of the sites,
attention was focused on Roswell AAF (renamed Walker AFB in 1948),
White Sands Missile Range and Holloman AFB, N.M. The aerial
vehicles assigned or under development at these facilities were aircraft,
missiles, renlotely-piloted drones, and high altitude balloons. The
operational characteristics and areas where these vehicles flew were
researched to determine if they played a role in the events described by
the witnesses.


15


Missiles and Drones. Missiles and drones were determined not
to have been responsible for the accounts.* The areas where the alleged
crashes took place were, in all likelihood, too far from the White Sands
Missile Range. Missiles were equipped with a self-destruct mechanism
that was activated if it strayed off-course or out of the White Sands
Missile Range. There was never a program that required a dummy or
doll to be placed inside a missile or a drone. However, missiles were
launched from White Sands carrying monkeys and other small animals
aloft for scientific research. 27 These projects were well documented, and
none of these missiles landed near either of the two crash sites.

Aircraft. Aircraft seemed just as unlikely as missiles to have
been responsible for the extraterrestrial claims as outlined in the profile.
Although additional research revealed the significant role dummies
played in the test and evaluation of aircraft emergency escape systems,
these dummies were used on board aircraft and on the high-speed test
track at Holloman AFB. However, aircraft test flights demanded strict
adherence to established flight profiles over the instrumented portions
of the White Sands Missile Range, many miles from the alleged crash
sites. Dummies used on the high-speed track remained in the immediate
vicinity of the track facilities at Holloman AFB. This geographical
impossibility ruled out dummies that were ejected from aircraft and those
used on the high-speed track as a cause of alleged alien sightings. (Aircraft
accidents will be discussed extensively in Section Two of this report.)


Figs. 12 & 13. Missiles (left)
and drones ( right) under
development at Holloman
AFB, N.M. were determined
not to have been involved
in the "Roswell Incident "
(U.S. Air Force photos)


'From September 1961 until March 1965 12 Atlas F intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) were
deployed by the 579 th Strategic Missile Squadron in areas surrounding Walker AFB, N.M. These missiles were
determined not to have been involved in the Roswell Incident.


16


High Altitude Research Balloons. The only vehicles not yet
evaluated as a possible source of the accounts were high altitude research
balloons. Previous reviews of early research balloon flight records
revealed that trajectories of high altitude balloons were, at times,
unpredictable and did not usually remain over Holloman AFB or White
Sands Missile Range. 28 Many of the scientific payloads required
recovery so the data collected during flight could be returned to the
laboratory for analysis.

These characteristics seemed to fit at least some of the research
profile. Atmospheric sampling apparatus or weather instruments, the
typical pay load of many high altitude balloons, could hardly have been
mistaken for space aliens. A careful examination of the instruments
carried aloft by the high altitude balloons revealed that one unique
project used a device that very likely could be mistaken for an alien —
an anthropomorphic dummy.

An anthropomorphic dummy is a human substitute equipped
with a variety of instrumentation to measure effects of environments and
situations deemed too hazardous for a human. These abstractly human
dummies were first used in New Mexico in May 1950, and have been
used on a continuous basis since that time. 29

In the 1950s, anthropomorphic dummies were not widely
exposed outside of scientific research circles and easily could have
been mistaken for something they were not. Today, anthropomorphic
dummies, better known as crash test dummies, are easily identifiable and
are even the "stars" of their own automotive safety advertising campaign.
During the 1950s when the U.S. Air Force dropped the odd-looking test
devices from high altitude balloons in its program to study high altitude
human free-fall characteristics, public awareness and stardom were
decades away. It seems likely that someone who unexpectedly observed
these dummies at a distance would believe they had seen something
unusual. In retrospect, when interviewed over 40 years later, they could
accurately report that they had seen something very unusual.

With the introduction of anthropomorphic dummies as a
possible explanation for the reports of bodies, another element of the
research profile appeared to be satisfied. Specific information that
described the locations, methods, and procedures used to employ the
dummies was required before any definitive conclusions could be drawn.
To gather this detailed information, research efforts were concentrated on
high altitude balloon operations and the specific projects that utilized
balloon-borne anthropomorphic dummies.


17


Fig. 14. (Left) Example of
an anthropomorphic dummy
carried aloft by U.S. Air Force
high altitude balloons. These
dummies landed at numerous
locations throughout New
Mexico during the 1950s.
(U.S. Air Force photo)

Fig. 15. (Right) Newspaper
advertisement depicting
anthropomorphic dummies
"Vince and Larry" "stars" of
the successful advertising
campaign by the National
Highway Traffic Safety
Administration to encourage
use of safety belts. (Courtesy
ofNHTSA)


TL1 JUST BRACE
MYSELF WITH THE

STEERING WHEEL"


\\*h i zmwm trymg hih rf? TberrV m way a stwring wheel
can sttf \mi (mm thmmmg mm % tk*hhmt\ <>ri!v a safilv Mi am.
Sbp nrAkm$>t'xaiR«;mt\ ?4;»t budding Wrsnfetvf«!l

BUCKlf YOUR SAFETY BQI

BO"


18


Test Dummies Used by the U.S. Air Force


Since the beginning of manned flight, designers have sought a
substitute for the human body to test hazardous new equipment. Early
devices used by the predecessors of the U.S. Air Force were simply
constructed parachute drop test dummies with little similarity to the human
form. Following World War II, aircraft emergency escape systems became
increasingly sophisticated and engineers required a dummy with more
humanlike characteristics.

Parachute Drop Dummies

During World War I research and development of the first U.S.
military parachute was underway at McCook Field, Ohio. To test the
parachute, engineers experimented with several types of dummies, settling
on a model constructed of three-inch hemp rope and sandbags with the
approximate proportions of a medium-sized man. 30 The new invention was
soon known by the nickname "Dummy Joe." Dummy Joe is said to have
made more than five thousand "jumps" between 1918 and 1924. 31

By 1924, parachutes were required on military aircraft with their
serviceability tested by dummies dropped from aircraft. 32 For this routine
testing, several types of dummies were used. The most common type is
shown in figures 17 and 18. Parachutes were individually drop- tested from
aircraft until the early stages of World War II, when, due both to increased
reliability and large numbers of parachutes in service, this routine practice
was discontinued. Nonetheless, test dummies were still used frequently by
the Parachute Branch of Air Materiel Command (AMC) at Wright Field,
Ohio, to test new parachute designs.


19


Fig. 17. (Left) Early
rope and sandbag dummy
used to test parachutes.
( U.S. Air Force photo)

Fig. 18. (Right) Parachute
drop dummies in use at
Wright Field, Ohio. The
historic Flight Test hangars,
Hangars 1 and 9, can be
seen in the background.
(U.S. Air Force photo)


Anthropomorphic Dummies

The ejection seat had been developed and used successfully by the
German Luftwaffe during the latter stages of World War II. The utility of
this invention was realized when the U.S. Army Air Forces obtained an
ejection seat in 1944. 33 To properly test the ejection seat, the Army Air
Forces required a dummy that had the same center of gravity and weight
distribution as a human, characteristics that parachute drop dummies did not
possess. In 1944, the USAAF Air Materiel Command contracted with the
Ted Smith Company of Upper Darby, Pa. to design and manufacture the first
dummy intended to accurately represent a human. 34 The dummy had the
same basic shape as a human, but with only abstract human features, and
"skin" made of canvas.

In 1949, the U.S. Air Force Aero Medical Laboratory submitted a
proposal for an improved model of the anthropomorphic dummy. 35 This
request was originated by the renowned Air Force scientist and physician
John P. Stapp, now a retired Colonel, who conducted a series of landmark


Figs. 19 & 20. (Left & Right)
These early anthropomorphic
dummies, manufactured by
the Ted Smith Co., of Upper
Darby, Pa., were used by the
Army Air Forces beginning in
1944. They were replaced by
a more realistic dummy in 1949.

(Right) "Oscar Eightball," the
name given to this early model
anthropomorphic dummy by
CoL John P. Stapp, is shown
following a run of the high-
speed track at Muroc AAF (now
Edwards AFB), Calif., in 1947.
(US. Air Force photos)


20


experiments at Muroc (now Edwards) AFB, Calif., to measure the effects of
acceleration and deceleration during high-speed aircraft ejections. 36 Stapp
required a dummy that had the same center of gravity and articulation as a
human, but, unlike the Ted Smith dummy, was more human in appearance.
A more accurate external appearance was required to provide for the proper
fit of helmets, oxygen masks, and other equipment used during the tests.
Stapp requested the Anthropology Branch of the Aero Medical Laboratory
at Wright Field to review anthropological, orthopedic, and engineering
literature to prepare specifications for the new dummy. 37 Plaster casts of
the torso, legs, and arms of an Air Force pilot were also taken to assure
accuracy. 38 The result was a proposed dummy that stood 72 inches tall,
weighed 200 pounds, had provisions for mounting instrumentation, and
could withstand up to 100 times the force of gravity or lOOGs.

In 1949, a contract was awarded to Sierra Engineering Company of
Sierra Madre, Calif., and deliveries began in 1950. 39 This dummy quickly
became known as "Sierra Sam."

In 1952, a contract for anthropomorphic dummies was awarded
to Alderson Research Laboratories, Inc., of New York City. 40 Dummies
constructed by both companies possessed the same basic characteristics: a
skeleton of aluminum or steel, latex or plastic skin, a cast aluminum skull,
and an instrument cavity in the torso and head for the mounting of strain
gauges, accelerometers, transducers, and rate gyros. 41 Models used by the
Air Force were primarily parachute drop and ejection seat versions with
center of gravity tolerances within one quarter inch.

Over the next several years the two companies improved and
redesigned internal structures and instrumentation, but the basic external
appearance of the dummies remained relatively constant from the mid
1950s to the late 1960s. Dummies of these types were most likely the
"aliens" associated with the "Roswell Incident."


Figs. 21& 22. Examples
of a "Sierra Sam" (left)
and Alderson Laboratories
anthropomorphic dummies
(right) of the type dropped
from balloons at off-range
locations throughout New
Mexico during the 1950s.
( U.S. Air Force photos)


21


1.2

High Altitude Balloon
Dummy Drops

From 1953 to 1959, anthropomorphic dummies were used by the U.S. Air
Force Aero Medical Laboratory as part of the high altitude aircraft escape projects High
Dive and Excelsior. 42 The object of these studies was to devise a method to return a
pilot or astronaut to earth by parachute, if forced to escape at extreme altitudes. 43


Fig. 23. Project High Dive
anthropomorphic dummy
launch, White Sands Proving
Ground, N.M., June 11, 1957.

(U.S. Air Force photo)


Anthropomorphic dummies were transported to altitudes up to 98,000
feet by high altitude balloons. The dummies were then released for a period of
free-fall while body movements and escape equipment performance were recorded
by a variety of instruments. Forty-three high altitude balloon flights carrying 67
anthropomorphic dummies were launched and recovered throughout New Mexico
between June 1954 and February 1959. 44 Due to prevailing wind conditions,
operational factors and ruggedness of the terrain, the majority of dummies
impacted outside the confines of military reservations in eastern New Mexico,
near Roswell, and in areas surrounding the Tularosa Valley in south central
New Mexico. 45 Additionally, 30 dummies were dropped by aircraft over White
Sands Proving Ground, N.M. in 1953. In 1959, 150 dummies were dropped by
aircraft over Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio (possibly accounting for alleged alien
"sightings" at that location). 46


23


Anthropomorphic Dummy Launch
and Landing Locations


NEW MEXICO


Santa Fe


Albuquerque


Socorro


"Debris
Field"

*a (APprox. 75 mi.
<£y> c NWofRoswell)


"Crash Site" 2

(Approx. 175 mi.
NW of Roswelf)


White
SandSQn
Proving
'Ground

,0


Clovis,
"Crash Site" 1

(North of Roswell^
"exact location
unknown)


swell HI
'alker AFBg

(formerly Roswell AAF)


Jornada Test Range


>man AFB
"AlamogordoO


m


rSan Agustin Pass

"Las Cruces


-tesia


El Paso


A Anthropomorphic Dummy Launch Locations
□ Anthropomorphic Dummy Landing Locations

Locations approximate; numbers within symbols
correspond to listing of locations found in Appendix A


Source: Test records of U.S. Air Force aeromedical project no. 7218,
task 71719 (HIGH DIVE) and project no. 7222, task 71748 (EXCELSIOR).


24


A number of these launch and recovery locations were in the areas where the
"crashed saucer" and "space aliens" were allegedly observed.

Following the series of dummy tests, a human subject, test
pilot Capt. Joseph W. Kittinger, Jr., now a retired Colonel, made three
parachute jumps from high altitude balloons. Since free-fall tests from
these unprecedented altitudes were extremely hazardous, they could
not be accomplished by a human until a rigorous testing program using
anthropomorphic dummies was completed.


Fig. 25. "Lord, take care of
me now," were Capt. Joseph
W. Kittinger, Jr.'s words as
he exited the Excelsior III
balloon gondola at 102,800
feet on August 16, 1960, over
White Sands Proving Ground,
N.M. Kittinger's courageous
scientific achievement
remains, to this day, the
highest parachute jump
ever accomplished.
(U.S. Air Force photo)


25


A Cover-Up?


Countering claims of a cover-up, Air Force projects that used
anthropomorphic dummies and human subjects were unclassified and
widely publicized in numerous newspaper and magazine stories, books, and
television reports. These included a book written by test pilot Kittinger,
The Long, Lonely Leap, another book, Man High, by Man High Project
Scientist, Lt. Col. David G. Simons (MC), a feature article in National
Geographic, and cover stories in Life, Collier's, Popular Mechanics,
and Time. 41 A characterization of Kittinger's record parachute jump even
appeared in the adolescent magazine, MAD. 48 The intense public interest
in High Dive, Excelsior and other aero medical projects conducted at
Holloman AFB also resulted in a 1956 Twentieth Century Fox full-length
motion picture, On the Threshold of Space (see page 38).


Fig. 26. This photo of Capt.
Joseph W. Kittinger, Jr. taken
by a remotely operated camera
on the Excelsior III gondola,
was featured in the December
1960 National Geographic.


The Long,
Lonely Leap


World's highest jump tests a new type of
parachute for high -altitude flyers and scientists
returning from the threshold of space


By CAPT. JOSEPH W. KITTINGER, JR., USAF


Illustrations by National Geographic
photographer VOLKMA R WESTZEL


OVERHEAD my onion -shaped balloon spread its 200-
i foot diameter against a black daytime sky. More
than 18 Va miles below lay the cloud-hidden New
Mexico desert to which I shortly would parachute.

Sitting in my gondola, which gently twisted with the bal-
loon's slow turnings, I had begun to sweat lightly, though
the temperature read 36° below zero Fahrenheit. Sunlight
burned in on me under the edge of an aluminized antiglare
curtain and through the gondola's open door.

In my earphones crackled the voice of Capt, Marvin Feld-
stein. one of our project's two doctors, from ground control
at Holloman Air Force Base:
"Three minutes till jump, joe."

I was ready to go, for more reasons than one. For about
an hour- as the balloon rose from S 0,000 to 102,800 feet
above sea level — 1 had been exposed to an environment re-
quiring the protection of a pressure suit and helmet, and the
fear of their failure had always been present. If either should
break, unconsciousness would come in KJ or 12 seconds,
and death within two minutes,

In our altitude -chamber flights at the laboratory, I always


"Lord, take ear© of me now," I pray, then take the big
step-off thai begins my return from the edge tif space, a
1 3 -minute 45-iitcond plunpe to an earth wrapped in
chunk The lanyard attached lo my parachute pack is ray
last link with the gondola. It starts a timer on a small
stabilization chute that will ripen li> seconds later and
prevent horizontal spinning. Without stabilization, man
could not survive a jump from these high altitudes.

A National tleograpliie camera mounted above the gon-
dola took this remarkable photograph at 102,800 feet.


26


Fig. 27. Contemporary
magazines that featured
experiments at Holloman
AFB, N.M. Clockwise from
top leftyTime, September 12,
1955; Life, August 29, 1960;
Popular Mechanics Magazine,
(center) January 1951;
Collier's, June 25,1954; and
Life, September 2, 1957.


27


Dummy Drop Procedures

For the majority of the tests, dummies were flown to altitudes
between 30,000 and 98,000 feet attached to a specially designed rack
suspended below a high altitude balloon. 49 On several flights the
dummies were mounted in the door of an experimental high altitude
balloon gondola. 50 Upon reaching the desired altitude, the dummies were
released and free-fell for several minutes before deployment of the main
parachute.

The dummies used for the balloon drops were outfitted with
standard equipment of an Air Force aircrew member. This equipment
consisted of a one-piece flightsuit, olive drab, gray (witnesses had
described seeing aliens in gray one-piece suits) or fuchsia in color,
boots, and a parachute pack. 51 The dummies were also fitted with an


Fig. 28. (Left) Witnesses at
both flying saucer "crash"
sites stated that a "wrecker"
was used in the recovery of
the "alien" craft. This was
a likely reference to the
M-342 five-ton wrecker,
used to launch and recover
anthropomorphic dummies.

Fig. 29. (Right) Three tests
utilized anthropomorphic
dummies mounted in the door
of an experimental Project High
Dive gondola. This launch took
place on October 8, 1957, in
front of curious onlookers at
the public picnic area of White
Sands National Monument, N.M.
(U.S. Air Force photo)


28


Fig, 30. A "Sierra Sam" with
High Dive Project Officers 1st
Lts. Eugene M. Schwartz (left)
and Raymond A. Madson
(right). This dummy is outfitted
in a "sage green" colored
flightsuit (a shade of gray) with
red tape sealing its neck, wrists,
and ankles. (U.S. Air Force)


29


instrumentation kit that contained accelerometers, pressure transducers,
an ocscillograph, and a camera to record movements of the dummy
during free-fall. 52

Recoveries of the test dummies were accomplished by personnel
from the Holloman AFB Balloon Branch. 53 Typically, eight to twelve
civilian and military recovery personnel arrived at the site of an
anthropomorphic dummy landing as soon as possible following impact.
The recovery crews operated a variety of aircraft and vehicles. These
included a wrecker, a six-by-six, a weapons carrier, and L-20 observation
and C-47 transport aircraft — the exact vehicles and aircraft described by
the witnesses as having been present at the crashed saucer locations. 54
On one occasion, just southwest of Roswell, a High Dive project officer,
1st Lt. Raymond A. Madson, even conducted a search for dummies on
horseback 55 (see statement in Appendix B).

To expedite the recoveries, crews were prepositioned with their
vehicles along a paved highway in the area where impact was expected. 56


Fig. 31. An M-35 2 !/ 2 -ton
cargo truck, commonly
referred to as a "six-by-six,"
were used by the Holloman
Balloon Branch to launch
and recover anthropomorphic
dummies and suspension
racks at numerous locations
throughout New Mexico.
(U.S. Air Force photo)


Fig. 32. M-37 3 / 4 -ton utility
trucks, known as "weapons
carriers " were used for high
altitude balloon recoveries by
the Holloman Balloon Branch
during the 1950s. Here,
recovery technicians use an
M-37 to retrieve an Aero
Medical gondola from a location
on Holloman AFB, N.M.
(US. Air Force photo)


30


Fig. 33. The first "space doctor,"
Lt. Col. John P. Stapp (now a
retired Colonel) being strapped
into the rocket sled Sonic Wind
N e 1, on December 10, 1954,
at Holloman AFB, N.M.
Courageously, Stapp was his
own volunteer subject on 29
rocket sled tests and earned
two awards of the Legion of
Merit and the Cheney Award
for valor and self-sacrifice.
(U.S. Air Force photo)


On a typical flight the dummies were separated from the balloon by radio
command and descended by parachute. 57 Prompt recovery of the dummies
and their suspension racks, which usually did not land in the same location
resulting in extensive ground and air searches, was essential for researchers
to evaluate information collected by the instrumentation and cameras. To
assist the recovery personnel, a variety of methods were used to enhance
the visibility of the dummies: smoke grenades, pigment powder, and
brightly colored parachute canopies. 58 Also, recovery notices promising
a $25 reward were taped to an exposed portion of a dummy. 59 Local
newspapers and radio stations were contacted when equipment was lost. 60


America was introduced to Col. John Paul Stapp on December 10,
1954, when he became known as both the "the bravest" and "the fastest"
man on earth. Stapp earned these titles following a rocket sled test that
accelerated him to 632 miles per hour. He reached this speed in just five
seconds — faster than a .45 caliber bullet — and was decelerated to a stop in
1.4 seconds, subjecting his body to more than 42 times the force of gravity!
While this was America's introduction to Col. Stapp, the 1954 rocket sled
test that examined aircraft restraint devices and human responses to
accelerative/decelerative forces and windblast, was just one of many
achievements of this legendary Air Force physician.

Born in Bahia, Brazil to American missionary parents, Stapp sold
pots and pans door to door during the Depression while he earned both
undergraduate and graduate degrees in zoology and chemistry at Baylor
University. He went on to earn a doctorate in biophysics from the University
of Texas, and a doctorate in medicine from the University of Minnesota.

In 1944 Stapp entered the U.S. Army Air Forces and became a flight
surgeon. From 1946 to 1963, due to his unique qualifications in biophysics
and medicine, he conducted a series of acceleration/deceleration experiments
on the high-speed track at Muroc (now Edwards AFB), Calif., 61 and later at
Holloman AFB, N.M. Developments from these and other studies resulted


The Bravest Man


31


in innovations which have saved many lives. These included improved
safety belt restraint systems and design specifications for aircraft and
automobiles, aircraft ejection and emergency escape systems, refinement of
automobile airbag systems, and development of the modern anthropomorphic
test dummy.

As commander of the U.S. Air Force Aeromedical Field Laboratory
at Holloman AFB, N.M. and later the Aero Medical Laboratory at Wright-
Patterson AFB, Ohio, Stapp won support for the Air Force manned high
altitude balloons projects — Man High and Excelsior. As a testament to his
thorough safety preparations, these and other extremely hazardous projects
administered by Stapp, did not result in a single debilitating injury to a test
subject. These projects helped pave the way for future flights of both high
altitude aircraft such as the X-15, and of spacecraft for the Mercury, Gemini,
and Apollo programs. In fact, Stapp's expertise was called upon to assist in
the selection of the initial cadre of astronauts, the "Mercury Seven."

He retired from the Air Force in 1970, but not before amassing a
collection of awards and honors. These included two awards of the Legion
of Merit for rocket sled experiments, the Cheney Award for 1954, and
membership in the National Aviation Hall of Fame.

In association with the Society of Automotive Engineers, Stapp
continues to participate in annual conferences in which industry experts
assemble to discuss vehicle safety issues. The conferences, now in their
40th year bear his name: the Stapp Car Crash Conferences.

In 1991, in recognition of a lifetime of unselfish dedication to
scientific research, Stapp was awarded the National Medal of Technology,
bestowed upon him at the White House by President George Bush.

He is married to the former Lillian Lanese, a former soloist with
the Ballet Theater of New York, and resides in Alamogordo, N.M. At 87
years old he continues to maintain a dizzying pace of travel and lectures.

It is not an exaggeration that virtually every person who has safely
operated, or ridden in, an automobile, aircraft, or spacecraft, has benefited
from the genius of Col. John Paul Stapp, and owes this brave scientist,
physician, and visionary, a great deal of thanks.


Fig. 34. September 12, 1955
edition of Time featuring Col.
John P. Stapp and his rocket
sled experiments at Holloman
AFB, N.M.


32


Despite these efforts, the dummies were not always recovered
immediately; one was not found for nearly three years and several
were not recovered at all. 62 When they were found, the dummies and
instrumentation were often damaged from impact. 63 Damage to the
dummies included loss of heads, arms, legs and fingers. 64 This detail,
dummies with missing fingers, appears to satisfy another element of the
research profile — aliens with only four fingers.


Fig. 35. Rough treatment
and parachute failures during
balloon drops often caused
damage to the hands of the
dummies. This detail, "beings"
with "four fingers," was
related by two witnesses as a
distinguishing feature of the
Roswell aliens.
(U.S. Air Force photo)


33


VCUSS-22
ATTNr Mr.


R.L. Mason


Loss of MR Squipment
VCRDB-4


19 Jan 56

Lt. Nielsen/lbc
Ext. 2-4194/B.33


1. On 17 November 1955 1 an anthropomorphic duiHsy, B-15 jacket and a atop watch
were lost during a high altitude dummy drop from a balloon at Holloman Air Fores Base,
Nov J-fexico.

2. The drop was performed to determine the effectiveness of a two str.ge
personnel parachute in lowering a man- like dummy from 85\ 000 feet. The teat was part
of a continuing task B Eigh Altitude Escape Studies", 7218-71719. The point at which
the dusray reached tha ground was not known to the recovery arews at the time and an ex-
tensive search lasting through the first week of December 1955 failed to discover the
lost items.

3. Lost arei

a* 1 ea. t dunny, anthropomorphic* Sierra Engineering Co. nwdel 120, stack
no. 3500-NL-30010,

b. 1 aa., Jacket, B-15, spec. 3220, siae 36, stock no. 6415.269-0512,

c. 1 ea., stop watch. Fisher Scientific Co. P/H 14-646, stock no. 8TAA
98545,

4* Because of the loss of these items as a result of a test, it is requested
that Lt. Henry ?. Nielsen be relieved of the responsibility for these items.

HAH7ET 2/SAVEXY /
Chief, Biophysics Branch
AeroJ^eCLcal Laboratory
Directorate of Research


Figs. 36-38. Actual
photographs of an Alderson
Laboratories type
anthropomorphic dummy
falling away from its
suspension rack at high
altitude over New Mexico.
Fig. 37 {center) appears on
the cover of this publication.
(U.S. Air Force photos)


Fig. 39. Memo taken from
Project High Dive files
explaining the loss of a
dummy near Roswell, N.M.
in November 1955.


34


What may have contributed to a misunderstanding if the
dummies were viewed by persons unfamiliar with their intended
use, were the methods used by Holloman AFB personnel to transport
them. The dummies were sometimes transported to and from off-
range locations in wooden shipping containers, similar to caskets,
to prevent damage to fragile instruments mounted in and on the
dummy. 65 Also, canvas military stretchers and hospital gurneys were
used (a procedure recommended by a dummy manufacturer) to move
the dummies in the laboratory or retrieve dummies in the field after
a test. 66 The first 10 dummy drops also utilized black or silver
insulation bags, similar to "body bags" in which the dummies were
placed for flight to guard against equipment failure at low ambient
temperatures of the upper atmosphere. 67


X.


Fig. 40. Air Force personnel
used stretchers and gurneys to
pick up 200-pound dummies
in the field and to move them
in the laboratory.
(U.S. Air Force photo)


35


Fig. 41. For the first 10
balloon flights, dummies
were placed in insulation
bags to protect temperature-
sensitive equipment.
These bags may have been
described by at least one
witness as "body bags" used
to recover alien victims from
the crash of a flying saucer.
(U.S. Air Force photo)


On one occasion northwest of Roswell, a local woman
unfamiliar with the test activities arrived at a dummy landing site
prior to the arrival of the recovery personnel. 68 The woman saw
what appeared to be a human embedded head first in a snowbank and
became hysterical. The woman screamed, "He's dead!, he's dead!" 69

It now appeared that anthropomorphic dummies dropped
by high altitude balloons satisfied the requirements of the research
profile. However, the review of high altitude balloon operations
revealed what appeared to be explanations for some other sightings
of odd objects in the deserts and skies of New Mexico.


WADC TECHNICAL REPORT 57-477
PART I.

ASTIA DOCUMENT No. AD 130965


WADC TECHNICAL REPORT 57-477 (II)


HIGH ALTITUDE BALLOON DUMMY DROPS

PART 1. THE UN STABILIZED DUMMY DROPS


HIGH ALTITUDE BALLOON DUMMY DROPS

11: THE STABILIZED DUMMY DROPS

RAYMOND A. MADSOK 1ST/LT, VSAF

LIFE SUPPORT SYSTEMS LABORATORY
AEROSPACE MEDICAL LABORATORY


RAYMOND A. MADSON, 1ST IX, USAF


AERO MEDICAL LABORATORY


august mi


OCTOBER mi


WRIGHT AIR DEVELOPMENT CENTER


AERONAUTICAL SYSTEMS DIVISION
AIR FORCE SYSTEMS COMMAND
UNITED STATES AIR FORCE
WRIGHT-PATTERSON AIR FORCE BASE, OHIO


Figs. 42 & 43. These reports
detailed the methods and
procedures used for the
dummy tests. They may be
obtained from the National
Technical Information Service
(NTIS), Springfield, Va.


36


1.3

High Altitude Balloon Operations

Research has shown that many high altitude balloons launched
from Holloman AFB, N.M., were recovered in locations, and under
circumstances, that strongly resemble those described by UFO proponents
as the recovery of a "flying saucer" and "alien" crew. When these
descriptions were carefully examined, it was clear that they bore more
than just a resemblance to Air Force activities. It appears that some
were actually distorted references to Air Force personnel and equipment
engaged in scientific study through the use of high altitude balloons.

Since 1947, U.S. Air Force research organizations at Holloman
AFB, N.M., have launched and recovered approximately 2,500 high
altitude balloons. The Air Force organization that conducted most of
these activities, the Holloman Balloon Branch, launched a wide range of
sophisticated, and from most perspectives, odd looking equipment into
the stratosphere above New Mexico. In fact, the very first high altitude
data gathering balloon flight launched from Alamogordo Army Airfield
(now Holloman AFB), N.M., on June 4, 1947, was found by the rancher
and was the first of many unrelated events now collectively known as the
"Roswell Incident."


Fig. 44. Inflation of a U.S.
Air Force 626 ft. long, 34.6
million cu. ft. research balloon
on August 13, 1972. This
balloon was launched from
Roswell Industrial Air Center
(formerly Roswell AAF),
Roswell, N.M., to test
components of the NASA
Viking space probe.
(photo by Ole Jorgeson)


37


On the Threshold of Space

In 1956, Twentieth Century Fox released On the Threshold of Space,
a full-length motion picture based on Air Force aero medical projects
conducted at Holloman AFB, N.M. Starring Guy Madison, John Hodiak,
and Dean Jagger, this drama chronicled the high altitude balloon experiments
of projects High Dive/Excelsior and the high-speed track studies conducted
by Col. John P. Stapp. Filmed on location at Holloman AFB, Air Force
personnel, high altitude balloons, aircraft, vehicles, and other equipment,
including the actual anthropomorphic dummies responsible for sightings of
aliens, were used in the making of this film.

In an ironic twist, in 1 990 the television program Unsolved Mysteries,
featured a segment on the Roswell Incident. The program, hosted by actor
Robert Stack, depicted a dramatized version of the claims of "aliens," space
ships and mysterious government recovery crews. Interestingly, a review
of newspapers from 1956 announcing the Hollywood premiere of On the
Threshold of Space, listed Stack among the persons scheduled to attend this
star-studded event. 70


Fig. 45. Lobby card of the
1956 Twentieth Century Fox
release, On the Threshold of
Space starring Guy Madison
(seated) and Martin Milner
(right).


38


Fig. 46. Publicity photograph
from On the Threshold of
Space with (from left) Cameron
Mitchell, Guy Madison and
Dean Jagger. Scenes from the
movie clearly depict the actual
anthropomorphic dummies
described nearly 40 years later
as extraterrestrial "aliens."


Fig. 47. Col. J. P. Stapp's
historic 1954 rocket sled test
was re-created for On the
Threshold of Space (see figure
33, page 31).


39


High Altitude Polyethylene Research Balloons

In 1946, as a result of research conducted for project Mogul,
Charles B. Moore, a New York University graduate student working under
contract for the U.S. Army Air Forces, made a significant technological
discovery: the use of polyethylene for high altitude balloon construction. 71
Polyethylene is a lightweight plastic that can withstand stresses of a high
altitude environment that differed drastically from, and greatly exceeded,
the capabilities of standard rubber weather balloons used previously.
Moore's discovery was a breakthrough in technology. For the first time,
scientists were able to make detailed, sustained studies of the upper
atmosphere. Polyethylene balloons, first produced in 1947 for Project
Mogul, are still widely used today for a host of scientific applications.

High altitude polyethylene balloons and standard rubber
weather balloons differ greatly in size, construction, and utility. The
difference between these two types of balloons historically has been the
subject of misunderstandings in that the term "weather balloon" is often
used to describe both types of balloons.

High altitude polyethylene balloons are used to transport scientific
payloads of several pounds to several tons to altitudes of nearly 200,000 feet.
Polyethylene balloons do not increase in size and burst with increases in
volume as they rise, as do standard rubber weather balloons. They are
launched with excess capacity to accommodate the increase in volume. This
characteristic of polyethylene balloons makes them substantially more stable
than rubber weather balloons and capable of sustained constant level flight, a
requirement for most scientific applications.

The initial polyethylene balloons had diameters of only seven
feet and carried payloads of five pounds or less. 72 As balloon technology
advanced, payload capacities and sizes of balloons increased. Modern
polyethylene balloons, some as long as several football fields when on


Raven Industries 40 million
cubic foot balloon. 450 ft in
diameter at 130,000 feet


DC-9 airliner
104 ft long


Hot -air balloon.
50 ft in diameter


Fig. 48. Relative sizes
of a modern high altitude
poyethelyne research
balloon, an airliner, and a
hot-air balloon. Inaccurate
characterizations of the
giant high altitude research
balloons as "weather balloons"
(which are typically 15 feet
in diameter) has historically
been the source of confusion.
(courtesy of Mike Smith,
Raven Industries)


40


the ground, expand at altitude to volumes large enough to contain many
jet airliners. Polyethylene balloons flown by the U.S. Air Force have
reached altitudes of 170,000 feet and lifted pay loads of 15,000 pounds. 73

During the late 1940's and 1950's, a characteristic associated
with the large, newly invented, polyethylene balloons, was that they were
often misidentified as flying saucers. 74 During this period, polyethylene
balloons launched from Holloman AFB, generated flying saucer reports
on nearly every flight. 75 There were so many reports that police,
broadcast radio, and newspaper accounts of these sightings were used by
Holloman technicians to supplement early balloon tracking techniques. 76
Balloons launched at Holloman AFB generated an especially high number
of reports due to the excellent visibility in the New Mexico region. Also,
the balloons, flown at altitudes of approximately 100,000 feet, were
illuminated before the earth during the periods just after sunset and just
before sunrise. In this instance, receiving sunlight before the earth, the
plastic balloons appeared as large bright objects against a dark sky. Also,
with the refractive and translucent qualities of polyethylene, the balloons
appeared to change color, size, and shape.

The large balloons generated UFO reports based on their
radar tracks. 77 This was due to large metallic payloads that weighed
up to several tons and echoed radar returns not usually associated with
balloons. In later years, balloons were equipped with altitude and
position reporting transponders and strobe lights that greatly diminished
the numbers of both visual and radar UFO sightings.

One classic misidentification of a Holloman balloon that was
mistaken for a UFO, was launched on October 27, 1953. 78 According
to the following account published in a widely distributed 1958 history
of Air Force balloon operations, Contributions of Balloon Operations to
Research and Development at the Air Force Missile Development Center
Holloman Air Force Base, N. Mex. 1947-1958, a suspected Holloman
balloon was tracked both visually and by radar over London, England
on November 3, 1953.

"English accounts of the incident contained such statements
as 'tremendous speed,' 'practically motionless,' 'circular or spherical
and white in color,' 'emitting or reflecting a fierce light.' Altitude was
reported as 61,000 feet — and as no research balloon had recently been
sent up from Britain, there was ample room for local saucer enthusiasts to
claim the 'unidentified flying object' as proof of their theories. A much
likelier explanation, however, is that this was really the balloon launched
from Holloman on 27 October." 79

High Altitude Balloon Payloads

Over the years, payloads transported by high altitude
polyethylene balloons ranged from simple radio transmitters to
anthropomorphic dummies to sophisticated satellite components and
NASA interplanetary space probes. Many of these payloads, some of


41


which weighed many tons, were not what someone would typically
envision as being associated with a balloon. Examples of payloads flown
in New Mexico by Air Force high altitude balloons can be found on pages
52 and 53 at the end of this section.

Research projects of the late 1940's and 1950's conducted at
Holloman AFB which began with the Project Mogul flights in June 1947,
covered a wide spectrum of scientific research. One important experiment
in space biology measured the effects of exposure to cosmic ray particles
on living tissues. 80 Other projects gathered meteorological data and
collected air samples to determine the composition of the atmosphere. 81
The first high altitude photographic reconnaissance project, a forerunner
to today's reconnaissance satellites, Project 119L, also used high altitude
balloons launched at Holloman AFB. 82

As early as May 1948, polyethylene balloons coated or laminated
with aluminum were flown from Holloman AFB and the surrounding
area. 83 Beginning in August 1955, large numbers of these balloons were
flown as targets in the development of radar guided air to air missiles. 84
Various accounts of the "Roswell Incident" often described thin, metal-like
materials that when wadded into a ball, returned to their original shape.
These accounts are consistent with the properties of polyethylene balloons
laminated with aluminum. These balloons were typically launched from
points west of the White Sands Proving Ground, floated over the range
as targets, and descended in the areas northeast of White Sands Proving
Ground where the "strange" materials were allegedly found.

In 1958 the first manned stratospheric balloon flights were
made from Holloman AFB (see page 102). In 1960, balloon tests of
components of the first U. S. reconnaissance satellite were also flown at
Holloman AFB. In the 1960's, 70's, and 80's high altitude balloons were
used in support of Air Force, and other U.S. Government and university
sponsored research projects. Instrument testing of atmospheric entry
vehicles for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
space probes is one prominent example.


laminated with aluminum
to serve as a target for radar
guided missiles over White
Sands Proving Ground, N.M.
(U.S. Air Force photo)


Fig. 49. Holloman Balloon
Branch personnel prepare
a polyethelyne balloon


42


High Altitude Balloons and America's First Satellite

An illustration of the important contributions of the Holloman AFB
Balloon Branch, and the necessity for a rapid recovery of a high altitude
balloon payload, were evaluations of components of the first U.S. satellite-
based reconnaissance system, code named Corona.

The Soviet Union had already beaten the U.S. into space with the
launch and orbit of Sputnik I on October 4, 1957. The next achievement in
the quest for space superiority were the physical recovery of a payload that
had been in orbit. 85 The Discoverer satellite, the sensor used in the Corona
program, was to be propelled into orbit and then eject a capsule containing
an American flag to enable the U.S. to claim this honor. 86

The Discoverer program had been plagued by failure with 10
unsuccessful missions in 1959 and 1960. With the eyes of the nation
watching, and the Soviets testing a similar system, more failures could not
be tolerated. To test the faulty components of the Discoverer, U.S. Air
Force high altitude balloons at Holloman AFB were determined to be the
most expedient method of conducting the evaluations.

In April 1960, Discoverer XI, on the launch pad at Vandenberg AFB,
Calif., was put into a hold pending results of the balloon tests. 87 The first
test at Holloman AFB on April 5th was unsatisfactory due to a parachute
failure. 88 On April 8th, with pressure mounting, the Balloon Branch
launched another balloon with the Discoverer capsule. This test, in which
the capsule was dropped over White Sands Missile Range and recovered
immediately, was a total success. 89 The results were relayed by telephone
from the Balloon Control Center at Holloman AFB to the launch pad at
Vandenberg AFB where the countdown resumed. 90 Despite the successful
balloon drop, Discoverer XI and Discoverer XII were failures. 91 Therefore,
balloon testing continued throughout the summer of 1960.


Fig. 50. (Left). A Holloman
Balloon Branch launch crew
prepares a nosecone of the
Discoverer satellite for a
high altitude balloon flight at
Holloman AFB, N.M. in April
1960. (U.S. Air Force photo)

Fig. 51. (Right). A U.S. Navy
helicopter aboard the USS
Haiti Victory is shown here
with the capsule from the
Discoverer XIII satellite. It
was recovered from the Pacific
Ocean 330 miles northwest of
Hawaii on August 11, 1960.
(U.S. Air Force photo)


43


Finally, on August 11,1960, Discoverer XIII successfully
ejected a capsule and, amid much fanfare, the first recovery of a
manmade object that had orbited the earth was accomplished. 92
This first successful mission of an American satellite, made
possible in part by Holloman AFB high altitude balloons, enabled
the U.S. to beat the Soviets and claim the honor of the first space
recovery by only nine days. 93

cQ^

The Surveyor (Moon), Voyager-Mars (Mars), Viking (Mars),
Pioneer (Venus), and Galileo (Jupiter) spacecraft were tested by Air
Force high altitude balloons before they were launched into space.

Viking and Voyager-Mars Space Probes. Examples of
unusual payloads, not likely to be associated with balloons, were
qualification trials of NASA's Voyager-Mars and Viking space probes.
Both of these spacecraft looked remarkably similar to the classic dome-
shaped "flying saucer."

In 1966-67 and 1972, eight of the UFO lookalikes were
launched by the Balloon Branch from the former Roswell Army Air
Field (now Roswell Industrial Air Center), N.M. 94 The spacecraft were
transported by Air Force balloons to altitudes above 100,000 feet and
released for a period of self-propelled, supersonic, free-flight prior to
landing on the White Sands Missile Range. 95 While the origins of the
"Roswell" scenarios cannot be specifically traced to these vehicles,
their flying saucer-like appearance, and the fact that they were launched
exclusively from the original "Roswell Incident" location, leaves an
impression that perhaps these odd balloon payloads may have played
some role in the unclear and distorted stories of at least some of the
"Roswell" witnesses.


Fig. 52. A NASA Viking
space probe is rolled out of its
assembly building at Martin
Marietta Corporation in
Denver, Colo. (NASA)


44


Fig. 53. (Above Left) The
aeroshell of a NASA Voyager-
Mars space probe just prior to
launch at Walker AFB, N.M.
(formerly Roswell AAF).
(U.S. Air Force photo)

Fig. 54. (Above Right) This
NASA Viking flying saucer-
like space probe was test
flown by U. S. Air Force high
altitude balloons in 1972 at the
former Roswell Army Air
Field. (NASA)

Fig. 55. (Right) Following a
supersonic test flight in 1972,
a Viking space probe awaits
recovery at White Sands
Missile Range, N.M. (NASA)


Tethered Balloons. The Holloman Balloon Branch, in addition
to high altitude research activities, also conducted low altitude tethered
balloon flights. It appears that descriptions of these balloons may have
become part of the "Roswell Incident."

Most standard shaped tethered balloons are readily identified
when near the ground or when the tether is visible. Other experimental


45


tethered balloons are not so easily identified. During the 1960s, Balloon
Branch personnel flew experimentally shaped tethered balloons from
deep canyons of central New Mexico. To a distant observer, from a
vantage point above the canyon rim, where the tether and ground anchors
are not visible, an experimental tethered balloon might lead some persons
to speculate as to the oddly shaped balloon's origin and purpose. One
design of a low altitude tethered balloon may have inspired at least
one account of an "alien" craft. In The Truth About the UFO Crash at
Roswell, the authors published a drawing of a crashed alien spaceship
allegedly based on a drawing given to them by an anonymous witness. 96
When this drawing is compared to a photograph of an experimental
tethered balloon flown at Holloman AFB in March 1965, the similarities
are undeniable. 97 The tethered balloon and the NASA space probes are
just two examples of the uncommon technologies that were flown in New
Mexico by the Holloman Balloon Branch.


Fig. 56. (Left) A drawing
from a popular UFO book, The
Truth About the UFO Crash
at Roswell, depicts an alien
spacecraft allegedly drawn by
an anonymous witness. (The
Truth About the UFO Crash
at Roswell)

Fig. 57. (Right) A tethered
"Vee" balloon shown here
at Holloman AFB, N.M. in
March 1965. This experimental
balloon, is strikingly similar
to the "alien" craft.
(U.S. Air Force photo)


Today, the Air Force maintains a reduced but still highly
capable high altitude balloon program at Holloman AFB. The Space
and Missile Command, Test and Evaluation Unit (SMC/TE, OL-AC)
represents the sole Department of Defense high altitude research balloon
capability. The ability of a U.S. Air Force high altitude balloon to lift
a scientific payload to more than 100,000 feet, above 99 per cent of
the earth's atmosphere, for days at a time, presents a profoundly useful
scientific tool at a fraction of the cost of a space research platform.
Recent tests that utilized Holloman balloons included atmospheric
sampling and gravity measurement experiments, high altitude astronomic
studies, weapons systems evaluations, and gamma ray detection
experiments. While most tests continue to be launched from the permanent


46


balloon launch facility at Holloman AFB, U.S. Air Force balloon crews
have recently launched balloons from numerous field locations in the U.S.
(including two sites in Roswell), as well as Alaska, Panama, and Antarctica.


Fig. 58. Present members
of the Holloman Balloon
Branch in front of the Balloon
Operations Center, Building
850, at Holloman AFB, N.M.,
(from left) TSgt. Roger J.
Welch, Mr. Joseph Fumerola,
Mr. Alvin W. Hodges, Mr.
Joseph Longshore, MSgt.
Ray A. Pitts, Sr. Amn. John
Witkop, and Mr. Harvey L.
Harris. (U.S. Air Force photo)


Balloon and Payload Recoveries

UFO theorists support their claims of an extraordinary
occurrence in the New Mexico desert by describing mysterious U.S.
military personnel, operating a variety of vehicles and aircraft that always
seem to arrive shortly after the crash of a "flying saucer." When carefully
scrutinized, the descriptions of the mystery crews, their equipment,
methods, and the areas where the recoveries allegedly occurred — in
targeted high altitude balloon recovery areas — indicates that Holloman
Balloon Branch activities were most likely responsible for the claims.

To successfully recover high altitude balloons, balloon
recovery technicians regularly ventured far from Holloman AFB. In most
instances the balloons and their scientific payloads were recovered from
predetermined recovery areas. These regularly targeted areas, located in
Arizona, West Texas, and New Mexico, included the area surrounding
Roswell. 98 From 1947 to the present, the Roswell area has been the site
of hundreds of balloon and payload recoveries (including those that
carried anthropomorphic dummies). 99

The regularly targeted areas were the result of the evolution of
high altitude balloon control techniques developed at Holloman AFB. These
techniques were based on meteorological, geographical, and operational
conditions that exist in New Mexico. These factors, combined with ample
amounts of skill and experience of balloon controllers at Holloman AFB,
determined the impact points of Holloman high altitude balloons.


47


Many of the procedures used to position Air Force balloons
are described in General Philosophy and Techniques of Balloon Control
and Meteorological Aspects of Constant-Level Balloon Operations in the
Southwestern United States, both by Bernard D. Gildenberg (see statement
in Appendix B). 100 Gildenberg served as the Holloman Balloon Branch
Meteorologist, Engineer, and Physical Science Administrator from 1951 until
1981. During this period, Gildenberg, a recognized world expert in upper
atmospheric wind patterns, pioneered methods to launch, control, track, and
recover high altitude balloons. Many of these methods are still used today
by the U.S. Air Force and by research organizations throughout the world.

Interaction with Civilians

In several accounts, unsubstantiated allegations have been made
that military personnel who retrieved equipment from rural areas of New
Mexico intimidated and threatened civilians. Contrary to these charges,
Balloon Branch personnel enjoyed good relations with the local community
and often solicited their assistance in the area of a balloon or payload


Fig. 59. Bernard D. "Duke"
Gildenberg (center) Balloon
Branch Meteorologist, is
shown here in May 1957
in front of the Man High I
gondola. With Gildenberg
are Man High I pilot Capt.
Joseph W. Kittinger, Jr.
(left), and Man High project
scientist/pilot, Lt. Col. David
G. Simons (MC). When
Gildenberg attempted to
inform UFO theorists that
high altitude balloon projects
were likely responsible for
some of the UFO claims, his
explanations were rejected,
see also pages 8 & 9.
(U.S. Air Force photo)


48


landing. In the flat, featureless desert areas of southeastern New Mexico
near Roswell, the parachutes, payloads, the balloons themselves, and
circling chase aircraft often drew crowds of curious onlookers from the
local community. In fact, so many civilians were often present at balloon
or payload landing sites, the scene was described by longtime civilian
Balloon Branch recovery supervisor, Robert Blankenship, as being like
the "circus coming to town." 101

Allegations that civilians were threatened or told to "forget what
they saw" are profoundly inaccurate. Threats, intimidation, or other types
of misconduct by Balloon Branch personnel would have served no
purpose since without the cooperation of local persons, many recoveries
would not have been possible. 102

Most balloon recoveries were coordinated in advance with local
law enforcement agencies. 103 If a balloon or payload landed on private
property and the owner could not be located, Balloon Branch operating
instructions dictated that the local sheriff or police must be contacted. 104
In situations where local persons arrived at balloon landing sites before the
recovery crews, they were simply asked to "step back" to allow recovery
personnel to secure the balloon equipment. 105 If these persons inquired as
to the purpose of a balloon flight, they were informed by technicians that it
was a U.S. Air Force scientific study and were given a telephone number at
Holloman AFB if they required additional information. At Holloman AFB,
individuals qualified to answer detailed questions responded to these


Fig. 60. (Right) This ranch
family assisted in the recovery
of a Project Stargazer high
altitude balloon payload and is
shown here with a panel from
the unmanned gondola.
(U.S. Air Force photo)


49


inquiries. There was never a reason to mislead or threaten individuals
who observed balloon operations. Relations with local citizens were
good, and Balloon Branch personnel and equipment were a common sight
to residents in areas with high incidences of balloon operations.

In a few instances, situations arose when persons not familiar with
the procedures and equipment used by the Balloon Branch misunderstood
their activities. Such misunderstandings occurred several times during the
1970s and 1980s when recovery crews not only attracted the attention of
local citizens while coordinating balloon recoveries, but also drew the
attention of federal law enforcement agencies. 106

Checks with the local sheriff revealed that the trucks and circling
aircraft in the desert near Roswell were part of a balloon recovery mission,
and not a drug smuggling operation. Apparently, balloon recoveries
appeared to be something suspicious even to federal agents.


Fig. 61. A typical Holloman
Balloon Branch recovery crew
is shown here with a man
known as "The hermit" who
assisted them in a balloon
recovery northwest of Silver
City, N.M. in the 1960s.
(photo collection of Robert
Blankenship)


Fig. 62. A mule (named Ida)
was borrowed from a local
rancher when a balloon payload
landed in difficult terrain 20
miles north of Wickenburg,
Ariz, in October 1966.
(U.S. Air Force photo)


50


Fig. 63. On occasion, Air
Force balloon recovery crews
rented or borrowed equipment
from local residents. This
bulldozer was rented for one
recovery in the Sacramento
mountains west of Roswell.
(photo collection of Robert
Blankenship )


Fig. 64. Balloon Branch
vehicle at roadside cafe.
This M-43 3/4-ton field
ambulance, converted by the
Holloman Balloon Branch into
a communications vehicle,
was a common sight in the
areas surrounding Roswell
during the 1950s and early
1960s, (photo collection of
Ole Jorgeson)


51


Figs. 65 & 66. Examples of
unusual payloads flown by Air
Force high altitude balloons
at Holloman AFB, N.M.
(U.S. Air Force photos)


52


Fig. 67. (Left) This U.S. Army
communications payload was
flown at Holloman AFB, N.M.
on September 30, 1976.
(U.S. Army photo)

Fig. 68. (Right) Payload
launched by an Air Force
high altitude balloon from
Holloman AFB, N. M. on
March 20, 1965. This payload
was a scientific experiment for
The John Hopkins University
Astrophysics Laboratory.
(U.S. A ir Fo rce photo )


Fig. 69. High altitude balloon
payload launched from Holloman
AFB on September 14, 1976.
( U.S. Air Force photo)


53


1.4

Comparison of Witnesses
Accounts to U.S. Air Force Activities

Were they aliens or dummies? This question can be answered by
comparing witness testimony and the Air Force projects of the 1950s, High
Dive and Excelsior. Both of these projects employed anthropomorphic
dummies flown by high altitude balloons and appeared to satisfy the
requirements of the previously established research profile:

a. An activity that if viewed from a distance would appear
unusual.

b. An activity for which the exact date was not likely to have
been known because many dummies were dropped over a six-
year period (1953-1959).

c. An activity that took place in many areas of rural New Mexico.

d. An activity that involved a type of aerial vehicle with dummies
that had four fingers, were bald and wore one-piece gray suits.

e. An activity that required recovery by numerous military
personnel and an assortment of vehicles that included a wrecker,
a six-by-six, and a weapons carrier.

The testimony used in the following comparison, an undocumented
mixture of firsthand and secondhand re-countings, are the actual statements,
not the interpretations of UFO proponents, that are presented to "prove"
the Earth was visited by extraterrestrial beings and the U.S. Air Force
has covered up this fact since 1947. This comparison is augmented by
references to photographs whenever possible to illustrate the undeniable
similarities between the descriptions provided by the witnesses and the
equipment and methods employed by the Air Force projects.


Fig. 70. Project High Dive
anthropomorphic dummy
launch. (U.S. Air Force photo)


55


"Crash" Site 1


(Allegedly North of Roswell)

This summarized account is the basis for the alleged "flying
saucer" crash site north of Roswell/ The exact location is not known
since the witness, Mr. James Ragsdale, in two separate sworn statements,
has described two different sites, many miles apart. 107 This account
was excerpted from an interview with Mr. Ragsdale by author Donald
Schmitt. A transcript of the complete interview is included in Appendix C.

The Account

James Ragsdale

"They was using dummies in those damned things' 7108

Testimony attributed to Ragsdale, who is deceased, states that he
and a friend were camping one evening and saw something fall from the sky.
The next morning, when they went to investigate, they saw a crash site:

"One part [of the craft] was kind of buried in the ground and
one part of it was sticking our [out] of the ground." "I'm sure that [there]
was bodies... either bodies or dummies." "The federal government could
have been doing something they didn't want anyone to know what this
was. They was using dummies in those damned things... they could use
remote control... but it was either dummies or bodies or something laying
there. They looked like bodies. They were not very long... [not] over four
or five foot long at the most." "We didn't see their faces or nothing like
that... we had just gotten to the site and the Army.. .and all [was] coming
and we got into a damned jeep and took off."

This testimony then describes an assortment of military vehicles
used to recover the "bodies": "It was two or three six-by-six Army trucks a
wrecker and everything. Leading the pack was a '47 Ford car with guys in
it... It was six or eight big trucks besides the pickup, weapons carriers and
stuff like that " Ragsdale also said that before he left the area he observed the
military personnel "gathering stuff up" and "they cleaned everything all up."

Assessment

In his testimony, Ragsdale made numerous references to
equipment, vehicles, and procedures consistent with documented
anthropomorphic dummy recoveries for projects High Dive and
Excelsior. The repeated use of the term "dummy" and the witness'
own admission that "they was using dummies in those damned
things" and "I'm sure that was bodies. ..either bodies or dummies"


* In The Truth About the UFO Crash at Roswell (Avon Books, 1994, p. 131), the authors
provided a corroborating account for this testimony from a 96-year-old man who was in ill
health, whose interview was not tape recorded, and has since died. According to the book, the
man's "wife and daughter said that he was easily confused" and "memories of his life were
jumbled and reordered."


56


leaves little doubt that what he described was an anthropomorphic
dummy recovery.

Based on testimony attributed to this witness, the confusion
could have resulted from the fact that he observed these activities from a
distance. If the witness was even a short distance from the odd looking
anthropomorphic dummies, it would be logical for him to believe, when
interviewed 35 to 40 years after the event, that he "thought they were
dummies or bodies or something." Also, for some of the high altitude
drops, the dummies did not separate from the suspension rack and "rode
the rack" to the ground without deployment of a parachute. 109 If the
parachutes of the dummies or parachutes of the rack assembly did not
deploy (a common occurrence during the early dummy drops), then they
free-fell from up to 98,000 feet. 110 As a result of these malfunctions, the
arms and legs of the dummies were often separated from the body on
impact. 111 This may account for the witness' description of bodies [not]
"over four or five foot" tall.

Another portion of his testimony suggesting that the witness
observed an Air Force high altitude balloon and dummy recovery was the
statement: "The federal government could have been doing something
because they didn't want anyone to know what this was. ..they was
using dummies in those damned things... they could use remote control."
Balloon controllers used remote control to relay commands to the balloon
control package to valve gas and drop ballast. 112 The dummies themselves
were also dropped from the suspension rack by remote control. 113

The witness also described a Balloon Branch procedure that
required the area of a balloon or payload landing to be restored to its
original condition. It was evident in the statements "They cleaned
everything all up" and "They began gathering the stuff up." Thoroughly
cleaning a balloon or dummy landing site and removing any debris


I


Fig. 71. Numerous vehicles
and various types of
equipment, were often present
at high altitude balloon and
anthropomorphic dummy
launch and recovery locations,
(photo collection of Ole
Jorgeson)


57


deposited there was a standard procedure to maintain good community relations
and avoid legal claims that could arise over property damages or livestock losses. 114
Cattle were known to ingest scraps of polyethylene balloon material that sometimes
littered entire fields following a balloon failure or flight termination. 115

The military vehicles described were also consistent with recovery and
communications vehicles used during the 1950s to retrieve anthropomorphic
dummies and suspension racks. 116 The witness stated he saw a "wrecker,"
a "six-by-six," a "weapons carrier," a "'47 Ford car," and a "pickup." The
"wrecker" was most likely a M-342 5-ton wrecker that was assigned to
the Balloon Branch for launch and recovery operations. 117 Other vehicles
described were also the type used to launch and recover anthropomorphic
dummies. The "six-by-six" is a likely reference to a M-35 2 1/2-ton cargo
truck; "weapons carriers" were the common name of a Dodge M-37 3/4-ton
utility truck. References to "the pickup" and a "'47 Ford car" were likely
descriptions of other civilian and military vehicles often present at high
altitude balloon launch and recovery locations.

"Crash" Site 2

(Allegedly 175 miles Northwest of Roswell)

This purported flying saucer "crash" site is allegedly 175 miles
northwest of Roswell in an area of New Mexico known as the San Agustin
Plains. 118 The contention that a flying saucer crashed at this location and
was recovered by the U.S. military is supported by three principal
testimonies, two secondhand and one firsthand.

The Secondhand Accounts

These accounts were related by Mr. Vern Maltais and Ms. Alice
Knight, who were acquainted with the alleged original eyewitness, Mr.
Grady L. Barnett, who is deceased. Unless otherwise noted, the following
statements appeared on footage used to prepare a video, Recollections of
Roswell Part II, by the The Fund for UFO Research (see Appendix C).

Alice Knight

"/ don y t recall the date " ng

"I don't remember whether it was before my husband and I were
married or after, I don't recall the date. But he [the eyewitness] saw a
UFO fall. ..and he got nearly to the site. ..but they got nearly up to the
UFO but it was close enough that you could see some creatures. He
said they didn't look like human beings out there. And along came
government cars and trucks. I guess it was government. You know it was
a long time ago... and they told him to go on back and forget that they ever
saw anything, and that's all I recall."


58


Assessment

This brief testimony suggests that the witness did not know
the date of this event. It also appears that the "creatures" were seen from
a distance, as evidenced by the statement, "They got nearly up to the
UFO but it was close enough that you could see some creatures." The
testimony also seems consistent with a description of anthropomorphic
dummies as the witness stated they "didn't look like human beings "

Vera Maltais

"Their heads were hairless...no eyebrows, no eyelashes, no hair" 120

This secondhand witness alleged that the eyewitness told him
he observed "beings" from a "flying saucer that had burst open" that
were "about three and a half to four feet tall, very slim.. .their heads were hairless,
with no eyebrows, no eyelashes, no hair" with "sort of a pear-shaped head." He
also related that "the beings were.. .not exactly like human beings...similar but
not exactly." He described that the hands of the beings "were not covered"... and
[they] only had "four fingers." He also related that the clothing of the beings
was "one-piece and gray in color" 121 The witness concluded that "As they [the
witnesses] were just starting to look things over really closely, the military moved
in and gave them a briefing to not say anything about it."

Assessment

This description of events also indicates that the eyewitness
apparently did not closely examine the scene and was "just starting to look
things over" when the military arrived. As with the previous testimony, from
a distance the dummies were likely to look, as described by the witness, "not
exactly like humans... similar but not exactly." The description of the flying
saucer that had "burst open" is a likely description of the dummy suspension
rack that was open on the sides (see figures 74, 75, 76). The detailed
descriptions of the "beings" as "about three and a half to four feet tall, very
slim in stature.. .their heads were hairless, with no eyebrows, no eyelashes,


Fig. 72. "Their heads were
hairless.. .no eyebrows, no
eyelashes, no hair," a likely
description of Alderson
Laboratories type
anthropomorphic dummy.
These Alderson dummies,
of the same type used for
Projects High Dive/Excelsior,
were used to test NASAs
Apollo spacecraft three-man
couch at Holloman AFB, N.M.
in 1965. (U.S. Air Force photo)


59


no hair," with "hands that were not covered" and "had only four fingers,"
is a likely description of an Alderson Research Laboratories model
anthropomorphic dummy. The head of the Alderson dummy was "bald"
and the area of the eyebrows protruded but had no "hair" (see figure 72).
Also, a distinguishing feature of the Alderson dummy, unlike the Sierra
dummy, was that it had individual fingers not covered by gloves that were
often damaged during the tests resulting in the loss of fingers (see figures
35, 73, 75).

Due to the secondhand nature of these accounts, even UFO
theorists were not convinced that this "incident" actually occurred.
Corroborating testimony of a firsthand witness was necessary to verify
these claims. The firsthand testimony is examined next.

The Firsthand Account

This testimony became part of the Roswell Incident in 1990
following an episode of the television program Unsolved Mysteries} 12
Following a dramatized re-creation on the program, persons with information
concerning this event were encouraged to call a special toll free telephone
number.

From the outset, some UFO theorists were skeptical of this
testimony due to the amount of detail provided from the witness who
was only five years old in 1947. In fact, UFO organizations sponsored a
conference in February 1992 to evaluate the testimony for authenticity. 123
The witness was asked to take a polygraph examination, which he passed. 124
Many UFO enthusiasts remained skeptical of the claims and denounced this
testimony as "no more than a fabrication." 125

Unless otherwise noted, two sources of testimony attributed to the
witness have been used in this examination; interviews used to prepare the
video Recollections of Roswell Part II by the Fund for UFO Research (see
Appendix C) and Crash at Corona by Don Berliner and Stanton Friedman
(passages from this book were used only when exact quotations of the
witness were indicated).

Gerald Anderson

"/ thought they were plastic dolls. J didn't think they were rear 126

Anderson related that as a five-year-old boy on an outing with his
family in west central New Mexico, they stumbled upon the crash of
some type of aerial vehicle. 127 When he first saw the craft he thought
it was a "blimp." 128 According to Anderson he "didn't really get very
close," 129 but thought he saw four bandaged crewmembers and at first
he "thought they were plastic dolls." 130 He also described attempts by
persons in his party to communicate with one of the "crewmembers " 131
Soon after, other civilians arrived (some wearing pith helmets) followed
by military personnel in an assortment of vehicles and aircraft
commanded by a "redheaded captain." 132 The military personnel, after
"screaming and hollering" at the civilians "this is a military secret,"


60


started a recovery operation of the alien craft and crew. 133 Anderson
also recalled that the military personnel threatened some of the civilians
with imprisonment or death before escorting them out of the area. 134

Assessment

Anderson's choice of the terms "blimp" to describe the crashed
vehicle, and "dolls" to describe the "crew," strongly suggests that a balloon
with an anthropomorphic dummy payload was the foundation for this
testimony. He also provided an abundance of supporting details that accurately
described vehicles, aircraft, equipment, and procedures used by the Holloman
AFB Balloon Branch to launch and recover anthropomorphic dummies.

An aspect of this testimony that is not accurate is the alleged
threats and intimidation of civilians by military personnel. The use of such
heavy-handedness was not a tactic used by the Air Force. A careful review
of official records and interviews with numerous persons who actively
participated in and were responsible for the conduct of Air Force members on
high altitude balloon recovery operations revealed that these allegations are
untrue. 135 Additionally, the witness alleges that the military personnel were
"screaming and hollering" "this is a military secret " 136 This statement might
lead uninitiated persons to believe that the witness observed something
highly classified and that by telling everyone present that it was a "military
secret" would somehow help it to remain so. However, logic dictates that if
something was classified "screaming and hollering" it was "secret," would
compromise it and not serve to protect its classification. This application of
logic, combined with the fact that the launch and recovery of anthropomorphic
dummies was unclassified, widely publicized, and often observed by local
civilians, indicates that the witness' recollections are in error. There was
never a reason to disrespect, "scream," "holler," or forbid any person from
talking about the launch or recovery of anthropomorphic dummies.

The "Crewmembers." The statement "I thought they were
plastic dolls" seems an odd choice of words to describe an extraterrestrial
being and is a likely reference to an anthropomorphic dummy whose skin
was made of plastic. 137 This description is similar to that of the sole witness
of the other crash site, north of Roswell, who described the "aliens" as
"dummies." 138 Other references provided by this witness further indicate that
anthropomorphic dummies were the basis for these descriptions. The heads
of the "crewmembers" were described as "completely bald" with "no visible
ears. ..just a rise.. .and then a hole." 139 This is an accurate description of
Alderson Research Laboratories model dummies that did not have "hair" and
had either plastic "ears" molded to the head or a circular opening where a
"demountable ear" or additional instrumentation was attached (see figure
22). 140 The statement "they didn't have a little finger" 141 a detail very similar
to one provided by another witness, also appears to be a description of
dummies manufactured by Alderson Laboratories that were often damaged
during the balloon tests resulting in the loss of fingers.

The assertion that "they were all wearing one-piece suits...a shiny
silverish-gray color," "trimmed in ...maroon-like cording" 142 is a likely reference


61


to a standard issue, gray, Air Force flightsuit used to outfit the dummies and red
duct-type tape used in the tests that prevented air from filling the flightsuit (see
fig. 30). 143 The recollection that "crewmembers" had "bandages" 144 on their
bodies were likely references to tape and nylon webbing used to prevent flailing


Fig. 73. "Some kind of
container, a metal box," was
described as laying on the
ground near the alleged
aliens. This appears to be a
reference to boxes containing
electrical components of the
remote controlled systems
positioned on the top of the
dummy suspension rack.
(U.S. Air Force photo)


Fig. 74. "They looked
like they had some sort
of bandages on 'em.. .over
his... arm... around his
midsection and partially
over his shoulder" — witness
description of tape and nylon
webbing used to prevent arms
and legs from flailing, and
parachute harness that had
chest and shoulder straps.
Tape was also used to secure
the removable back plate of
the head (also see figs. 29, 30,
73,75). (U.S. Air Force photo)


62


Fig. 75. "It's uniform was
torn in a couple spots... their
uniforms were in pretty sad
shape" — witnesses description
of secondhand flightsuits that
were used repeatedly on tests;
tears and other damage were
common. In this photo, 1st Lt.
Raymond A. Madson "rigs" a
dummy to its suspension rack
for project High Dive at
Holloman AFB, N.M.
(U.S. Air Force photo)


Fig. 76. A witness described
at least one person at a
"crash" site wearing a pith
helmet. In the 1950s, the pith
helmet was part of the Air
Force uniform and was often
worn on balloon launches and
recoveries. In this publicity
photo from On the Threshold
of Space, Air Force members
at Holloman AFB who were
extras in the film can be seen
wearing pith helmets, (also
see figure 49)


of a dummy's arms and legs during tests. 145 A reference to a bandage
"around his [the crewmember's] midsection and partially over his
shoulder" 146 is a likely reference to the standard B-4 or B-5 parachute
with chest and shoulder straps worn by the dummies. 147

The "Craft." In what appears to be a clear reference to a balloon,
was that when he saw the crashed vehicle he "thought it was a blimp." 148
Additional descriptions of cables that "went from one kind of a package
of components to another kind of package" and a "metal box" were likely
references to the balloon control package that was positioned on top of the
dummy suspension rack. 149 A further reference to a balloon payload is the
statement that on a hot New Mexico day the crashed vehicle was "ice cold,
it felt like it just came out of the freezer." 150 This accurately describes a
physical condition known as "cold soaking" common to high altitude
payloads that had recently been exposed to sub-zero temperatures of the
upper atmosphere.

Military Aircraft. The witness also described two aircraft of the
same type used for anthropomorphic dummy recoveries as having been
involved in the activity he witnessed. One aircraft was described as a "C-47"
and another as an "observation aircraft.. .a high-winged aircraft." 151 These
were a C-47 and a L-20 aircraft used extensively by the Balloon Branch
during the mid 1950s for tracking and recovering anthropomorphic dummy


Fig. 77. "An observation
aircraft... a high-winged
aircraft" — a witness's probable
reference to a U.S. Air Force
L-20 aircraft used extensively by
Holloman AFB crews to track
and recover anthropomorphic
dummies. (U.S. Air Force photo)


Fig. 78. Described as present
at a flying saucer "crash" site
was a C-47 aircraft. This is
a probable reference to a U.S.
Air Force C-47 transport
aircraft used to move
equipment to launch sites
distant from Holloman AFB.
These aircraft were also used
for aerial tracking of high
altitude balloon flights
including those that flew
anthropomorphic dummies.
(U.S. Air Force photo)


64


balloon flights. 152 This testimony also described aircraft that were typically
overhead during a recovery and an established procedure of landing on a rural
road or in a field to reach isolated balloon launch or recovery locations. 153

Military Vehicles. Numerous military vehicles, several of which were
described by other witnesses as having been at the other crash site north of Roswell,
were also described. Witnesses at the two different sites described a "wrecked ' and a
"six-by-six," both of the type used for anthropomorphic dummy recoveries. 154 The
account also described two vehicles unique to the Balloon Branch that were used for
the majority of high altitude balloon recoveries during the mid-to late-1950s.

The witness described a "jeep-like truck that had a bunch of radios
in it". . .There was a guy sittin' in there wearin' earphones and he was talking on
the radio." 155 This is a likely description of a Dodge M-37 3/4-ton utility truck,
known as a weapons carrier, that had been specially modified to carry radio
equipment for balloon recovery operations. The Holloman AFB Balloon Branch
modified these vehicles in 1953, ruling out the possibility that the witness
observed them in 1947, when such vehicles were not available to organizations
performing balloon operations. 156 The other vehicle described and used by the
Balloon Branch were "military ambulances." 157 During the mid- 1 950s, the
Balloon Branch modified three M-43 3/4-ton ambulances for use as balloon
recovery and communications vehicles. 158 These vehicles were used for
anthropomorphic dummy launch and recovery missions to relay messages to
circling recovery aircraft and the balloon operations center at Holloman AFB. 159
The witness also described "a trailer with a motor on it, like a generator." 160 This
is a likely description of a 1 1/2-ton cargo trailer with an MB-19 15 Kilowatt
diesel generator. These generators were used primarily on balloon launch sites
during the 1950s and 1960s (see fig. 71).

Balloon Branch Procedures. Descriptions of military personnel
"stretching stuff out on the ground, dragging stuff out of trucks" 161 is a
likely description of a balloon launch procedure that required the fragile


that required the balloon to be
stretched out on a protective
ground cloth prior to inflation.
(U.S. Air Force photo)


Fig. 79. "Stretching stuff out
on the ground, dragging stuff


out of trucks" — a likely witness
reference to high altitude
balloon inflation procedure


65


polyethylene balloon and its protective ground cloth to be removed from
a launch vehicle and laid out on the ground prior to inflation. Another
procedure described by the witness was an apparent reference to a balloon
recovery practice of recording the names of civilians who observed high
altitude balloon recoveries. 162 The witness stated that military personnel
"took everybody's name and everything," 163 which was a procedure to
ensure payment of a $25 dollar reward to persons who assisted in the
recovery. This procedure was also necessary to settle future claims of
property damage caused by the balloon, payload, or recovery vehicles. 164


Fig. 80. Witnesses described
a "tanker," "military
ambulances," a "6x6," and
a "wrecker" — probable
references to (from left) a
helium tank trailer, a M-43
ambulance (converted to a
communications vehicle), a
M-35 cargo truck (partially
obscured), and a M-342
wrecker. These vehicles were
used for off-range launch
and recovery operations of
anthorpomorphic dummies for
Project High Dive/Excelsior.
Shown here is a May 29, 1957
dummy launch near Hatch, N.M.
(also see figs. 23, 28, 64, 71, 81).
(U.S. Air Force photo)


Fig. 81. Scene typical of a
mid- to late 1950s off-range
high altitude balloon launch.
(U.S. Air Force photo)


66


Summary

When the claims offered by UFO theorists to prove that an
extraterrestrial spaceship and crew crashed and were recovered by the U.S.
Air Force are compared to documented Air Force activities, it is reasonable
to conclude, with a high degree of certainty, that the two "crashes" were
actually descriptions of a launch or recovery of a high altitude balloon and
anthropomorphic dummies. This conclusion was based on the remarkable
similarities and independent corroboration between the witnesses who
described both of the "crash sites." Statements such as "they was using
dummies in those damned things" and a characterization of the crashed
vehicle as, "I thought it was a blimp" are two of the many similarities. The
extensive detailed descriptions provided by the witnesses, too numerous to
be coincidental, were of the equipment, vehicles, procedures, and personnel
of the Air Force research organizations who conducted the scientific
experiments High Dive and Excelsior.

Though it is clear anthropomorphic dummies were responsible
for these accounts, the specific locations of the events described was
difficult, if not impossible, to determine since the witnesses were not
specific. A witness to the "crash site" north of Roswell, Mr. James Ragsdale,
was not certain of the actual location as evidenced by a change in his sworn
testimony that moved the site many miles from its original location. 165

However, since Ragsdale reportedly lived or worked in the
Roswell, Artesia, and Carlsbad, N.M. areas during the period when the
dummies were used, it is likely he described one or more of the nine
documented dummy recoveries in areas near there.

Reports of the other crash site, allegedly 175 miles northwest of
Roswell on the San Agustin Plains, is likely based on descriptions of more than
one launch and recovery of anthropomorphic dummies. Since one witness,
Gerald Anderson, described procedures consistent with the launch and
recovery of high altitude balloons, it is likely that he witnessed both of these
activities, with at least one that included an anthropomorphic dummy pay load.

The two secondhand witnesses to this "crash," Vera Maltais and
Alice Knight, could have related descriptions from any of the dummy launch
or landing sites. However, Maltais and Knight repeatedly described the
impact location of the flying saucer as on the San Agustin Plains. One
possible explanation is that the witnesses, in the 30 or more years since they
were told the story by the original eyewitness, Mr. Barney Barnett, a soil
conservation engineer who reportedly traveled extensively throughout New
Mexico, may have confused San Agustin Plains with San Agustin Pass or
San Agustin Peak, an area in the San Agustin Mountains of New Mexico.
These areas are just outside the boundary of the White Sands Missile Range
and the adjacent Jornada Test Range. Numerous anthropomorphic dummy
balloon flights terminated and were recovered in this area. Furthermore, if
the civilians witnessed dummy landings on either the White Sands Missile
Range or the Jornada Test Range, both test areas and restricted U.S.


67


Government reservations, then this explains why they may have been told to leave the
landing site. In the popular Roswell scenarios, witnesses were allegedly instructed
by military personnel to leave the area because they witnessed something of a highly
classified nature. This would be unlikely since the witnesses described projects that
utilized anthropomorphic dummies which were unclassified. It is likely, however,
that if the witnesses ventured onto one of these ranges they were instructed to leave,
not because of classified activities, but for their own safety.

These conclusions are supported by official files, technical reports,
extensive photographic documentation, and the recollections of numerous
former and retired Air Force members and civilian employees who conducted
Projects High Dive and Excelsior. The descriptions examined here, provided
by UFO theorists themselves, were so remarkably— and redundantly— similar
to these Air Force projects that the only reasonable conclusion can be that the
witnesses described these activities. These many similarities are summarized in
Tablel.l.

The next section will examine the accounts of "aliens" at the
hospital at Roswell Army Air Field. As previously stated, due to the lack of
general or detailed similarities with testimony of the two rural "crash sites,"
the hospital account was determined not to be associated with these reports.


Source: Test records of U.S. Air Force aeromedical project no. 7218,
task 71719 (HIGH DIVE) and project no. 7222, task 71748 (EXCELSIOR).


Fig. 82.


68


Table 1.1

Comparison of Testimony to Actual Air Force Equipment, Vehicles, and
Procedures Used to Launch and Recover Anthropomorphic Dummies


Notes:

"Crash Site" 1 - Site North of Roswell

"Crash Site" 2 - Site 175 miles Northwest of Roswell

Shaded areas indicates corroboration between witnesses.

Boxed shaded areas indicates corroboration between witnesses at different "crash" sites.


Witness Description


Air Force
Equipment/Procedure


"Crash Site"


The "Aliens"

1 . "They was using dummies in
those damned things." 166

Ragsdale


2. "I thought they were plastic
dolls" 167

Anderson


Reference to

anthropomorphic dummies
(figs. 11,14,21-22,29,
30-33, 35, 40, 72-75, 45).


Reference to

anthropomorphic dummies
that had plastic skin.


Site 1


Site 2


3. "an experimental plane with
dummies in it" 168

Kaufman


Reference to

anthropomorphic dummies.


Site 1


4. "I'm sure that was bodies...
either bodies or dummies." 169

Ragsdale


Reference to

anthropomorphic dummies.


Site 1


5. "it was either dummies or
bodies or something laying
there." 170

Ragsdale


Reference to

anthropomorphic dummies.


Site 1


6. "his eyes was open, staring
blankly" 171

Anderson


Reference to

anthropomorphic dummy.


Site 2


7. "not exactly like human
beings... similar, but not exactly.'

Maltais


Reference to

anthropomorphic dummies.


Site 2


8. "didn't look like human
beings" 173

Knight


Reference to

anthropomorphic dummies.


Site 2


9. "they didn't have a little Reference to Alderson Site 2

finger" 174 Laboratories dummy that

Anderson were reused many timesand

were often damaged but

remained in service.

(figs. 35,73,75).


69


Witness Description


Air Force
Equipment/Procedure


"Crash Site"


10. "they had four fingers" 175
Maltais


Corroboration of
description # 8. See above.


Site 2


1 1 . [the beings were] "three and
a half to four feet tali" 176

Maltais


12. [the being were] "four foot
tall, four and a half feet tall." 177
Anderson


Likely description of
anthropomorphic dummy
missing legs after fall from
altitude.


Corroboration of
description #11. See above.


Site 2


Site 2


13. "they weren't over four or
five foot long at the most." 178

Ragsdale


Corroboration of
description #11. See above.


Site 1


14. "Their skin coloration... Probable description of a

[was] a bluish tinted milky white" 179 "Sierra Sam" dummy with
Anderson pale white "skin" (fig. 21).


Site 2


15. "their heads were
hairless... no eyebrows,
no eyelashes, no hair" 180


Maltais


Anthropomorphic dummies
did not have "hair" (figs. 21,
22, 36-38, 40).


Site 2


16. "no hair.. .completely bald" 181 Corroboration of

description #15. See above.

Anderson


Site 2


17. "no visible ears... just a rise
there and then a hole" 182

Anderson


Dummies had ears that were
molded to their heads with
openings for placement of
instruments (fig. 22).


Site 2


18. "The hands were not
covered" 183

Maltais


Reference to Alderson dummy
which did not have gloves on
hands (figs. 35, 73-75).


Site 2


19. "they were all wearing one
piece suits... a shiny silverish
gray color" 184

Anderson


Reference to gray flight suits
worn by the dummies for some
of the tests (figs. 14,29, 30).


Site 2


20. "Their clothing seemed to
be one piece and gray in color." 185
Maltais


Corroboration of description
19. See above.


Site 2


70


Witness Description


Air Force
Equipment/Procedure


"Crash Site"


21. "It's uniform was torn in
a couple spots. ..their uniforms
were in pretty sad shape." 186

Anderson


Dummy uniforms were often
secondhand, rips and other
defects were common but
they remained in service (fig. 75).


Site 2


22. "Around the collar it [the
suit] was trimmed in... maroon-
like cording" 187

Anderson


Reference to red duct tape
used to prevent air from
filling the dummy's
flightsuit (figs. 29, 30).


Site 2


23. "They looked like they
had some sort of bandages
on 'em. ..over his [the
crewmember's] arm." 188

Anderson


Reference to tape and nylon
webbing used to prevent
arms and legs of dummy
from flailing. Tape was also
used to secure the removable
back plate of head (figs. 29,
30, 35, 72-75).


Site 2


24. [bandages] "around his
midsection and partially over
his shoulder" 189

Anderson

The "Craft"

25. "It [the crewmember] felt
dead when I touched it, it was
very cold." 190

Anderson


Reference to parachute
harness that had chest and
shoulder straps.


Description of a high altitude
balloon payload that was
cold soaked at sub zero
temperatures of the upper
atmosphere.


Site 2


Site 2


26. "it was a dirigible, a blimp
that had crashed" 191

Anderson


Reference to a partially
inflated or deflated high
altitude balloon (figs. 23, 70).


Site 2


27. "a flying saucer that had
burst open" 192

Maltais


Reference to the dummy
suspension rack that did not
have sides (figs. 35, 73-75).


Site 2


28. "clusters of thread like
material in the form of a
cable" 193

Anderson


Numerous cables and wires
were used in the dummy
instrumentation kits and
balloon control package.


Site 2


29. "others of those [cables]
went from one kind of package
of components to another kind
of package" 194

Anderson


Both balloon control package and
dummy instrumentation kits were
connected by cables (fig. 73).


Site 2


30. "some kind of container,
a metal box" 195

Anderson


Reference to balloon control
package or dummy
instrumentation kit (fig. 73).


Site 2


71


Witness Description


Air Force
Equipment/Procedure


"Crash Site"


31. "it was ice cold, it felt like
it just came out of a freezer" 196

Anderson


Condition of a balloon
payload after it has been
"cold soaked" in the upper
atmosphere at temperatures
far below zero.


Site 2


Vehicles

32. a "jeeplike truck that had
a bunch of radios in it and two
big antennas.... There was a
guy sittin' in there wearin'
earphones and he was talking
on the radio." 197

Anderson


33. "weapons carriers" 198

Ragsdale


34. "six by six Army trucks" 199
Ragsdale


35. "six by [six]... military
truck with canvas... wagon
type... thing over it" 200

Anderson


Reference to a modified
M-37 3/4-ton utility truck,
commonly referred to as a
weapons carrier, unique to
the Balloon Branch. One
of the primary vehicles
used by recovery crews.
Balloons were tracked by
direction finding gear and
required a radio operator to
wear headphones (fig. 32).


Corroboration of description
32. See above.


Reference to M-35 21/2-ton
cargo truck used to transport
dummies and suspension
racks for launch and
recoveries (fig. 31).


Corroboration of description
34. See above.


Site 2


Site 1


Site 1


Site 2


36. "wreckers [with] cranes

"201


on era


37. "a wrecker" 2 '


Anderson


Ragsdale


reference to M-246 wrecker
used to launch and recover
anthropomorphic dummy
payloads (figs. 23, 28, 70).


Corroboration of description
36. See above.


Site 2


Site 1


38. "there was military
ambulances" 203


Anderson


Reference to a converted M-43
ambulances used as balloon
recovery communications
vehicles (figs. 64,71,80).


Site 2


39. "the pick-up" 204 Pick-up trucks were often

Anderson used to recover

anthropomorphic dummies
(figs. 71, 79).


Site 2


72


Witness Description


Air Force
Equipment/Procedure


"Crash Site"


40. "tankers, like, maybe had
fuel or water in 'em" 205

Anderson


reference to M-49 fuel trucks
used to refuel aircraft or
helium trailer used to inflate
balloon (figs. 23,70, 80,81).


Site 2


41. "a military car"


42. "'47 Ford car"


Anderson


Ragsdale


A variety of military and
civilian cars were often used
for balloon recoveries and
launches (Fig. 71).


Corroboration of description
41, See above.


Site 2


Site 1


43. "there was a jeep that was
pulling a trailer with a motor on
it, like a generator." 208

Anderson

Aircraft

44. "observation aircraft... high
winged aircraft" 209

Anderson


Reference to 1-ton trailer and
MB- 19 15 Kilowatt diesel
generator that were used at
balloon launch and recovery
locations (fig. 71).

Reference to an L-20
aircraft, primary "chase"
aircraft used for balloon
recovery in the mid 1950s
(fig. 77).


Site 2


Site 2


45. "C-47 sittin there" [on the
road] 210

Anderson

Procedures

46. "The federal government
could have been doing
something because they didn't
want anyone to know what this
was. ..they was using dummies
in those damned things... they
could use remote control" 211

Ragsdale


C-47 aircraft were often
used on dummy launch and
recovery operations (fig. 78).


Reference to balloon borne
anthropomorphic dummies
that were dropped by remote
control by balloon controllers
at Holloman AFB


Site 2


Site 1


47. "they took everybody's
name and everything" 212

Anderson


Procedure used by balloon
Branch to ensure payment
of $25 reward and to settle
claims of property damage.


Site 2


48. "they cleaned everything all
up. ..I mean they cleaned
everything" 213

Ragsdale


Balloon Branch personnel
were required to remove as
much debris as possible from
balloon and payload landing
areas to avoid complaints and
legal actions.


Site 1


73


Witness Description


Air Force
Equipment/Procedure


"Crash Site"


49. "they had the road
barricaded off' 214


Anderson


Procedure used for aircraft
operations.


Site 2


50. "they had the road
sealed off' 215


Ragsdale


Corroboration of description
49. See above.


Site 1


5 1 . "airplanes sitting there they
had landed on the highway" 216

Anderson


Established procedure to
refuel an aircraft, launch a
balloon from an isolated
location or recover a small
payload near a rural road.


Site 2


52. "there was airplanes in the
sky" [over the crash site]. 217

Anderson


Reference to balloon "chase"
aircraft used to direct ground
recovery crews to balloon
impact site.


Site 2


53. "stretching out cables of
some kind.. .they were stretching
stuff out on the ground,
dragging stuff out of trucks" 218

Anderson


Reference to balloon
inflation procedure that
required the balloon and
ground cloth to be removed
from a vehicle and laid on
the ground (fig. 79).


Site 2


74


SECTION TWO


Reports of Bodies at the
Roswell AAF Hospital

This section examines the remaining portion of the Roswell
Incident claims — the reports of "bodies" at the Roswell AAF hospital.
Examinations of the various "crashed saucer" scenarios revealed
references to the Roswell AAF hospital appeared in virtually all of them.
Most of these were based on the account of one individual, W. Glenn
Dennis. His undocumented and uncorroborated recollections, reportedly
first related in 1989, over 42 years after the alleged Roswell Incident, are
based on activities he allegedly encountered as a mortician providing
contract services to the Roswell AAF hospital. Dennis' recollections
have, in turn, been interpreted by UFO theorists as evidence that the U.S.
Army Air Forces recovered "alien" bodies and autopsied them at the
Roswell AAF hospital in July 1947.

Dennis has been described as the "star witness" and his claims
as the most credible of the Roswell Incident. 1 This, even though his most
sensational assertions were not based on his own experiences but on
information allegedly related to him by unidentified mystery witnesses.


Fig. 1. The International UFO
Museum and Research
Center in Roswell, N.M.


75


The mystery witnesses were allegedly an Army Air Forces nurse
and a pediatrician both assigned to the Roswell AAF hospital in 1947. 2
To casual observers, this account, which contains references to actual
U.S. Army Air Forces and U.S. Air Force personnel and activities,
appears to have a ring of authenticity. However, when examined closely
by Air Force researchers, the dates of events, the events themselves, and
the people described as having participated in them, were found to be
grossly inaccurate and totally unrelated to activities of July 1947.

The Account

The following is a summary of information provided by W.
Glenn Dennis, who claimed he was a 22-year-old mortician at the Ballard
Funeral Home in Roswell in July 1947, when he alleged these events
occurred.*

On July 7, 1947, Dennis alleged he received a series of phone
calls at the Ballard Funeral Home, where he worked, from the Mortuary
Affairs officer at Roswell Army Air Field. He recalled that the mortuary
officer inquired as to the availability of child sized caskets and
procedures for preserving bodies that had been "laying out in the
elements." 3 Later that day he received an emergency ambulance call
(the civilian mortuary for which he worked also provided an ambulance
service) to respond to the site of a minor traffic accident in Roswell. 4
The accident victim was an "airman" stationed at Roswell AAF, and
Dennis transported the airman to the hospital at the base. 5

As Dennis walked into the hospital he noticed three military
box-type ambulances, one or more of which contained what appeared
to be "wreckage." 6 He described the wreckage as being inscribed with
odd markings or symbols and bluish-purplish in color. 7 He recalled that
some of this wreckage was resting against the inside wall of the rear
compartment of the ambulance and two pieces of it "looked kind of like
the bottom of a canoe." 8 He described other wreckage on the floor of the
ambulance as being "all sharp" and as best he could tell "was like broken
glass." 9 He also recalled observing Military Policemen (MPs) standing at
the back of two of these ambulances. 10

When he went inside the hospital, he encountered a military
nurse who was assigned there and with whom he was previously
acquainted. 11 The nurse, who looked upset, was covering her mouth with
a cloth and told him that "you're going to get in a lot of trouble" and that
he should "just get out of here " 12 Dennis also stated that he encountered
a military doctor who was assigned to the hospital, a pediatrician, with
whom he was "pretty good friends" but did not speak with at that time. 13


* Excerpts of interviews contained in this summary were taken from audio or video
recordings made by persons referenced in the appropriate endnote. The sole exception is the
interview conducted by Stanton T. Friedman on August 5, 1989. Quotations from this interview
were taken from a transcript which is reportedly an accurate representation of the interview.
Friedman has not honored repeated requests for an audio recording.


76


Having seen the wreckage in the rear of the ambulance and
believing there had been an accident, he asked another officer in the
hospital if there had been a plane crash. The officer, whom Dennis had
never seen before, asked him: "Who in the hell are you?" When he
responded he was "from the funeral home," the officer summoned two
MPs to escort him from the hospital. 14

However, before Dennis and the two MPs had left the hospital,
he heard someone say, "We're not through with that SOB, bring him back
here." 15 When Dennis turned around, he observed a redheaded captain (in
one version of these events Dennis is quoted as describing this person as a
"big redheaded colonel" 16 ) who said, "You did not see anything. There was
no crash here. You don't go into town making any rumors that you saw
anything or that there was any crash... you could get in a lot of trouble." 17

Angry about being called an SOB, Dennis informed the
redheaded officer that he was a civilian, not under his authority, and that he,
the redheaded officer, "can't do a damn thing to me." 18 The redheaded officer
was alleged to have threatened Dennis by responding "Oh yes we can"...
"Somebody will be picking your bones out of the sand". .."We can do
anything to you..." That we want to." 19 A black sergeant, whom Dennis
recalled had accompanied the redheaded officer, allegedly stated he would
"make real good dog food " 20 Following this exchange, Dennis claimed he
was "picked up... arm and arm" and escorted back to his place of business
by two MPs. 21

The following day, July 8, 1947, Dennis attempted to telephone the
nurse he had seen in the hall at the hospital to find out "what was going on." 22
He stated that he was unable to reach the nurse but did reach another nurse,
a "Captain Wilson," who explained to him that the nurse he was trying to
contact was not on duty, but "Wilson" would give her a message to call him. 23
The nurse called Dennis later that same day at the funeral home where he
worked and agreed to meet with him at the officers' club at Roswell AAF
that afternoon. 24

When the two met, the nurse appeared disturbed and ill. 25 Dennis
asked her to explain what was going on when they met in the hospital the
day before. The nurse explained that, in the course of her normal duties,
she entered an examining room to get some supplies and encountered
two doctors whom she did not recognize that "supposedly were doing a
preliminary autopsy" on "three," "very mangled," "black," "little bodies." 26
The doctors requested the nurse remain in the room because they needed her
assistance. 27 She allegedly explained that there was a terrible odor in the
room that made both her and the doctors ill. 28 Due to this terrible odor and
inadequate ventilation, the nurse allegedly told Dennis that the autopsies
were moved to another facility on the base and then "everything" was taken
to "Wright Field" (now Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio). 29

The nurse described the little bodies in detail and even provided a
diagram. 30 She described "little bodies" three to four feet in length that had
large, "flexible," heads, and concave eyes and noses. 31


77


After this meeting Dennis claimed he never saw the nurse again,
and he was told she had been shipped out the same afternoon (July 8,
1947) or the next day (July 9, 1947). 32 However, some time later Dennis
received a letter from the nurse that indicated she was in London,
England. 33 Dennis stated that he tried to respond to the nurse, but his
letter was returned stamped "return to sender" and "deceased." 34 After
receiving this letter, he inquired at the base about the nurse and was told
by "Captain Wilson" that she didn't know where the nurse was, but there
was a rumor that she and several other nurses had been killed in a plane
crash while on a training mission. 35

Some years later, Dennis stated that he visited the unidentified
military pediatrician he had seen at the hospital. 36 The pediatrician had
since left the military and set up practice in Farmington, N.M. 37 Dennis
said he and the pediatrician discussed the incident of years past but
was stopped short when the pediatrician told him that he was consulted
regarding this incident, but that "it was completely out of [his] field of
medicine " then ended the discussion. 38

Based on this account, UFO theorists have presented the
following assertions:

a. Dennis, the "missing" nurse, and the unidentified pediatri-
cian inadvertently stumbled onto the highly classified autopsies of
alien bodies at Roswell AAF hospital in July 1947.

b. The two mysterious doctors at the hospital were sent to
Roswell AAF from a higher headquarters to conduct the autopsies
after which the bodies were transported to what is now Wright-
Patterson AFB, Ohio.

c. The bluish-purplish wreckage that looked like the bottom
of a canoe in the rear of the ambulance, were "escape pods" from a
flying saucer flown by the aliens that crashed in the Roswell area.

d. Dennis was forcibly removed from the hospital and threat-
ened with death by the redheaded officer because he had witnessed
some of these activities.

e. The nurse was kidnapped, possibly murdered, and all
records that she ever existed were systematically destroyed by
government agents, also because she witnessed these activities.

As in other accounts examined in this report, the episodes
described here became part of the Roswell Incident only because the
witness claimed they occurred at a very specific time, July 7-9, 1947.
These dates coincide with an actual event: the retrieval of experimental
Project Mogul research equipment that was erroneously reported as a
flying disc (see Section One). 39 If the events described here occurred at
any other time — years, months, weeks, or even days before or after July
7-9, 1947 — they might be considered unusual to an uninformed person,
but certainly not part of the Roswell Incident.


78


Air Force research revealed that the witness made serious errors
in his recollections of events. When his account was compared with
official records of the actual events he is believed to have described,
extensive inaccuracies were indicated including a likely error in the date
by as much as 12 years.


79


2.1

The "Missing" Nurse and
the Pediatrician

To illustrate the errors in this account and to identify actual
events, the following section will examine the accounts of the missing
nurse and the unidentified pediatrician. Both of these persons were
allegedly present at the Roswell AAF hospital when the events described
by the witness occurred.

The "Missing" Nurse

Dennis recalled that the nurse was quickly and suspiciously
shipped out either the same day or the day after he met with her in the
Roswell AAF Officers' Club. If this allegation was true, it certainly
seemed unusual — and verifiable. Therefore, the morning reports, the
certified daily personnel accounting records required to be kept by all
Army Air Forces units at that time, were obtained and reviewed. These
reports did not indicate that a nurse or any other person was reassigned on
the days alleged, July 8 or July 9, 1947. 40 The morning reports of the
427th Army Air Forces Base Unit (AAFBU) Squadron "M " the unit that
all the medical personnel at Roswell AAF were assigned in July 1947, did
not indicate a sudden or overseas transfer of a nurse or any other person.
Records indicated that one nurse was reassigned on July 23, 1947, over
two weeks after the purported events described by Dennis. 41 That nurse
was transferred by normal personnel rotation procedures to Ft. Worth
AAF (now Carswell AFB), Texas, where she remained on active duty
until March 1949. 42 In fact, the Squadron "M" morning reports revealed
the strength of the Army Nurse Corps (ANC) at Roswell AAF for July 1947
was only five nurses. Of these five nurses none were transferred overseas
or killed in a plane crash — the "rumored" fate of the missing nurse. 43

This review of the hospital morning reports also indicated that
the name of the missing nurse provided by the witness was inaccurate.
The witness stated in several interviews that he believed the nurse's name
was Naomi Maria Selff. 44 A comprehensive search of morning reports
and rosters from the Roswell AAF Station Hospital indicated that no
person by this name, or a similar name, had ever served there. This
finding was supported by a search of personnel records at the National
Personnel Records Center (NPRC) in St. Louis, Mo., a part of the
National Archives and Record Administration. NPRC is the depository
for all U.S. military personnel records. The search at NPRC also did not
find a record that a person named Naomi Maria Selff had ever served in
any branch of the U.S. Armed Forces.

These findings were consistent with previous efforts of several
pro-UFO researchers who have also attempted to locate this nurse or


81


members of her family. They, likewise, were also unable to confirm
her existence. 45 While some UFO theorists continue to allege that this
absence of records regarding a nurse by this name is part of a conspiracy
to withhold information, the most likely reason for the lack of records is
that this name is inaccurate.*

Even though the name of the nurse is incorrect, it appears that
a nurse assigned to the Roswell AAF Station Hospital in 1947 may have
been the basis for the claims. Eileen Mae Fanton was the only nurse
of the five assigned to Roswell AAF in July 1947, whose personal
circumstances and physical attributes not only resembled those of the
missing nurse, but appeared to be nearly an exact match.

= ^ —

The "Missing Nurse?"

1st Lt. Eileen M. Fanton
was assigned to the Roswell Army
Air Field Station Hospital from
December 26, 1946 until September
4, 1947. 46 Fanton, who is deceased,
was retired from the U.S. Air Force
at the rank of Captain on April 30,
1955, for a physical disability. 47

In this account, the missing
nurse is described as single, "real
cute, like a small Audrey Hepburn,
with short black hair, dark eyes and
olive skin." 48 Lieutenant Fanton was

single in 1947, 5' 1" tall, weighed Fig. 2. Eileen M. Fanton

100 pounds, had black hair, dark (U.S. Air Force photo)

eyes, and was of Italian descent. 49
Dennis also stated that the nurse was of the Catholic faith, and had been
"strictly raised" according to Catholic beliefs. 50 Fanton's personnel record
listed her as Roman Catholic, a graduate of St. Catherine's Academy in
Springfield, Ky. and as having received her nursing certification from St. Mary
Elizabeth's Hospital in Louisville, Ky. 51

The witness also recalled that the "missing nurse" was a lieutenant, was
a general nurse at the hospital, and had sent him correspondence at a later date
which stated she was in London, England with a New York, N. Y APO number
(military overseas mailing address) as the return address. 52 Records revealed
that Fanton was a First Lieutenant (promoted from Second Lieutenant to First
Lieutenant in June 1947), and she was classified as a "nurse, general duty." 53
Records also indicated that of the five nurses assigned to the Roswell AAF
Station Hospital in July 1947, she was the only one that later served a tour of
duty in England. Furthermore, she was assigned to the 7510th USAF Hospital,
APO 240, New York, N.Y., where she served from June 1952 until April 1955. 54


* Interestingly, an article published in the Fall 1995 edition of Omni magazine, a publication that
in the past has published sensational "Roswell" claims, also independently accounted for all five of
the nurses and expressed a decidedly skeptical opinion of the account of the "missing nurse."


82


The 7510th USAF Hospital was located approximately 45 miles north of
London at Wimpole Park, Cambridge, England.

An additional similarity between Fanton and the "missing nurse" is that
her personnel record indicated that she quickly departed Roswell AAF and it is
probable that the hospital staff would not have provided information concerning
her departure. Fanton's unannounced departure from Roswell AAF, on
September 4, 1947 was to be admitted to Brooke General Hospital, Ft. Sam
Houston, Texas, for a medical condition. 55 This condition was first diagnosed in
January 1946 and ultimately led to her medical retirement in 1955. 56 Therefore,
if someone other than a family member contacted the Station Hospital at
Roswell AAF and inquired about Fanton, as Dennis stated he did, the staff was
simply protecting her privacy as a patient. The staff was not participating in a
sinister "cover-up" of information as alleged by UFO theorists.


The Pediatrician

In at least two interviews, the witness stated that a pediatrician
stationed at the hospital was involved in the events he described. 57 When
asked by an interviewer how he knew the pediatrician was involved,
Dennis was quoted as replying, "I know he was involved because I saw
him there." 58 Dennis is also quoted as saying that he and the pediatrician
were "pretty good friends," and after the pediatrician left the military he
[the pediatrician] set up a practice in Farmington, N.M. "I used to go
fishing all the time up north and I visited him several times up there and
he was involved," Dennis said. "I don't remember his name, I think he is
still practicing in Farmington." 59

A review of personnel files and interviews with former members of the
Roswell AAF/Walker AFB hospital staff, revealed that only one physician ever
relocated to Farmington, N.M. following his military service. The former Capt.
Frank B. Nordstrom served at Walker AFB from June 1951 until June 1953. 60
Records also revealed that Nordstrom was indeed a pediatrician and while
at Walker AFB, served as the Chief of Pediatric Services. 61 When Nordstrom,
a resident of the small town of Aztec, N.M., was interviewed for this report,
he stated that he did not recall ever meeting Dennis and could not recall any events
that supported any of his claims (see signed sworn statement in Appendix B). 62

Farmington (population 8,000 in 1954) is located in the
primarily rural Four Corners region of New Mexico approximately 300
miles northwest of Roswell. According to Nordstrom, Farmington did
not have a pediatrician before his arrival in 1954. From 1954 until
approximately 1970, Nordstrom believes he was the only pediatrician
in the area. His recollections were confirmed by a local Farmington
pharmacist, Charles E. Clouthier. 63 Clouthier also served at the Walker
AFB hospital, from 1955 to 1957, and following his military service
returned to Farmington, his hometown, where he had lived since 1934.
Clouthier has been employed by and co-owned a business, Farmington
Drug, since 1957. He is familiar with most, if not all, of the doctors who


83


practice in Farmington and the Four Corners region of New Mexico.
Clouthier's confirmation that Nordstrom was the first pediatrician to
practice in the Farmington area, was based on both his frequent
professional contacts with local physicians and his experiences as a
longtime Farmington resident. 64

Although Nordstrom believed that he was the pediatrician
described, he was at a loss to explain how Dennis gained information
concerning his military and civilian employment history. In a signed sworn
statement, Nordstrom stated that he did not recall ever meeting Dennis and
had certainly never been visited by Dennis as he has claimed. One possible
source of the information is that from approximately 1958 until approximately
1961 Dennis operated a drugstore in Aztec, N.M., a small town near
Farmington where Nordstrom resides (interestingly Aztec is the location of the
original "crashed flying saucer" story, see below). However, Nordstrom also
did not recall any contact with Dennis in his capacity as a drugstore operator.


Behind the Roswell Incident?

The "Roswell Incident" story is hardly original. In 1948, a work of
fiction reportedly appeared in the Aztec (N.M.) Independent Review describing
the crash of a flying saucer with "little men" near Aztec, N.M. In 1950, Frank
Scully, a columnist for the theatrical publication Variety, published a book,
Behind the Flying Saucers, which proclaimed the story to be true. 65 Based on


Mmybc Aw* cww men dWo't know « flying »«n*eit
from ■ hole Ett the ground. Bui (hey u*cd Itoth
to »t«Jwri1ilr vloilm. they w*re aJ«i«l $400^000 *l»e«d
wltcit TRUE'* riK»rier broke (Et« amazing enc «r lite . , .


Flying Saucer
Swindlers


By J. P. CAIIN


§Mt in m2. tlx Septrtni Sum* of txM tan a Wty «f (frit) R"«l M«« wtir rtemm mh! GrSiuw lot

TOlnf ihJ«t YV Snuttn md iS«i jtffuoimu tbntmeii up iJwir jam. but wr cwMn'r prtKt cur ut«-

r X si itt ntoK ot * bwt^Hit bmA iJui <4vw. And what you rjtt't pwirr r«u t^nl ™

- - - t,y $4^1 Hid irbai  «MM. and hoped l«r (fit mi. "Tti»isla »

. ItojKte Tm,^tvs«rt!irr»htp,v« got the titwk«b«t were feopia


th»iattcn in blue win, hut lairfnt no fen*. Itoftt

pretaott by fenh Utt atnthcir toil jmblfchet, toi. ntni riu* w; cat! ftitc }W<

iiB,* vn j tirftinittf hrot, 1 inawbst up fimaf tint thr tlippen- a pak (if mindkrt at

* Vara* faro ™ 4» phany a* * i«B«h#»fwr( " ' ' "*


if «f tit* N>tjut Sjinjs *a


ttntii the ptkr.

it luj>pt*i-rf like tKU'

A« tr? ttitf tinpoM«i. while cMng iht fljiuij lain^r maty
i tsrtfi. KturiiiR and Ocfcitte* wtrt more th™ a couple ol


Fig. 3. Story by J.P. Cahn,
that appeared in the August
1956, True magazine.


84


the Aztec story, Behind the Flying Saucers bears many similarities to the
Roswell Incident, most notably, descriptions of covert "flying saucer" and
"little men" recoveries interspersed with doses of unsubstantiated accusations
directed at the U.S. Air Force. 66

In his book, Scully claimed he had information from two scientists, Silas
M. Newton and a mysterious "Dr. Gee," who he claimed investigated the crash
for the government. 67 In reality, Newton and Gee were con-men who convinced
Scully of the story's authenticity. 68

Intrigued by the sensational claims made in Behind the Flying Saucers,
a reporter for the San Francisco Chronicle, J. P. Cahn, decided to look into
the matter. What resulted from Cahn's research were articles in the September
1952 and August 1956 edition of True magazine which determined that the
story was as "phony as a headwaiters bow and smile." 69

Cahn, with the assistance of a magician, devised a plan to "sting" the
two con-men. 70 To execute the sting, he used sleight of hand switching an
"indestructible" metal disk, claimed to be from a flying saucer, with a slug of
his own manufacture. After the switch, Cahn submitted the disk to a laboratory
for analysis revealing that they were of earthly origin, in particular, a grade of
aluminum used to manufacture pots and pans! 71

Even with the exposure of this obvious fraud, the Aztec story is still
revered by UFO theorists. Elements of this story occasionally reemerge and are
thought to be the catalyst for other crashed flying saucer stories, including the
Roswell Incident.


Sauorr *aj(r>» KfK-hlcr, Xcwi


Had flying saucers maimed by
crews three feet tail actually
landed on Earth? That was the
question. This is how TRUE
and Mr. Cahn found the answer


Fig. 4. September 1952 True
magazine story that exposed
the Aztec, N.M. hoax.


Vcji a*


issijji uric lit. The mijtv
iv to dig «}i if I could wis the weirdest that
any reporter toidd dream of lias-tug handed to
hitii. if I found the Venn si a m, 1 couldn't
interview them, even if I knew Iwvi in speak
their iangaagc. for they were dead, (hose
Strang iittk* being*, from unknown causes—
h;t)f of their number crisped by heat to 3
dark browji entur.

They'd nunc emt of the sky in flying siMJcers.
\fy job was tn tiling their \tory nVwti wealth.

! it- their lull inside sttiry. And though
I tiuhi'l find the dead Venii.iianv f dtv
tuvered Mm\e rather fantastic living- ritfirac-


Un the trtr.it of the wave tiS public excite-
ment about flying satteers In the spring «[
1930 (attic new) irom the Wen that lopped
any of the hundreds of .tauter report* that
had been recorded up to that time. News-
papers everywhere printed arid reprinted the
rumor that, in Denver, several businessmen
ha<t been shown piece* of metal, smalt gear*,
and a coriow little radio set. These thing*, il
Wji said, had been taken from a fatten flying


FLYING
SAUCERS

and the

MYSTERIOUS
LITTLE MEN

by

J.P. CAHN


85


Descriptions of Other Air Force Members

Since official records proved that none of the nurses at Roswell
AAF in July 1947 were missing, and the nurse and pediatrician described
in this account had been identified, major discrepancies between Dennis'
recollections and official records were apparent. In an effort to provide for
the fullest possible accounting of these claims, even though key aspects
had already been proven false, Air Force researchers sought additional
information to determine if there was validity to any portion of the account.
Since the witness has never provided documentation to support his claims,
the only source of additional information was the numerous interviews he
had previously provided to private researchers and the media. His many
statements, which have appeared in newspapers, videos, magazines, movies,
books, lectures, journals and television programs, were reviewed for
information that might further explain his testimony.

Examination of this large body of publicly available information
immediately provided clues that the witness may have recalled incidents
from a period other than July 1947. The first clue was that he repeatedly,
in all of the interviews, referred to the injured military person he allegedly
transported to the Roswell AAF hospital as an airman. The rank of airman
was not in existence in 1947. It was implemented on April 1, 1952. 72 Prior
to that date an airman in the Air Force was referred to by the U.S. Army
equivalent, a private. Another possible indication that he recalled events
from a different time was the description of an alleged "black sergeant" that
accompanied the redheaded officer at the hospital. The pairing of a white
officer with a black NCO seemed unlikely since in 1947 the U.S. Army Air
Forces was racially segregated, as were all branches of the armed forces.
The U.S. Air Force did not begin racial integration until the May 11, 1949
issuance of Air Force Letter 35-3 that formally ended segregation. 73 Though
it was not impossible in 1947 for a black NCO to accompany and seem to be
working with a white officer, it would be unlikely. These two discrepancies
did not provide a firm time frame of actual events, if any occurred at all.

To approximate a time frame for actual events, the specific details of
the information provided were examined. This examination was to determine if
any military members were identified by name or by a combination of any other
distinguishing characteristics such as rank, position, age, or physical attributes. If
the testimony identified a military member as having been present for an event,
then their personnel record could be used to affix an approximate date. Affixing
a date of an event by referencing personnel records was possible since each
military member's personnel file contains a physical description and
chronological listing of duty stations, units of assignment, and work
assignments for his/her entire military career.

This detailed examination revealed several likely references to
specific individuals, which through their personnel files, were documented
as having been assigned to the hospital at Roswell AAF or Walker AFB
(Roswell AAF was renamed Walker AFB in January 1948).


86


The "Big Redheaded Colonel " An indication that Dennis might
have mistaken the date of actual events was that he was quoted in at least one
book as having said that the officer who threatened him in the hospital was
a big redheaded colonel. 74 Research revealed that only one tall colonel
with red hair was known to have been assigned to the Walker AFB hospital.
Colonel Lee F. Ferrell was the hospital commander from October 1954 until
June I960. 75 Ferrell was 6' 1" tall and had red hair. 76


Fig, 5. Col. Lee R Ferrell
(left), was commander of the
Walker AFB hospital from
1954-1960. In this photo
Ferrell escorts U.S. Senator
Dennis Chavez (N.M.) on a
tour of the new Walker AFB
hospital in June 1960, which
was named in honor of the
senator. (U.S. Air Force photo)


"Captain 'Slatts' Wilson." In at least two interviews Dennis
repeatedly made reference to a nurse named "Captain Wilson." 77 He recalled
that "Captain Wilson", who he believed was the head nurse, was another
nurse stationed at the Roswell AAF hospital in July 1947. 78 Dennis claims
he spoke to "Captain Wilson" several times in reference to the alleged
missing nurse. 79

He claims that on the day after he met with the missing nurse at
the Roswell AAF Officers' Club, he attempted to contact her by telephone
at the hospital but was told that she wasn't on duty. 80 Instead, he spoke with
"Captain Wilson." "I called the station I knew she [the missing nurse] always
worked at," Dennis said, "She was a general nurse... I was informed that she
wasn't working that day. [Dennis then telephoned] An old girl by the name
of Wilson, Captain Wilson, and I asked her 'what happened'? She said,
'Glenn, I don't know what happened, she's not on duty.' She said she'd try
to get word to her [the missing nurse] that you [Dennis] want to talk to her." 81
Later in the same interview Dennis further described Wilson. "We called her
'Slatts' Wilson who was a big tall nurse about six foot two or three — big tall
skinny gal — and we called her 'Slatts' — everybody called her 'Slatts.' She's


87


the one who told me she heard there was a plane crash and the nurses went
down on a training mission." 82

The testimony appeared to clearly identify by name, rank, position,
physical attributes and by a distinctive nickname, "Slatts," another nurse present
at the hospital in July 1947. But a review of the morning reports of the Roswell
AAF hospital for July 1947 did not contain the name of a nurse, or anyone else,
named Wilson. 83 The only female captain assigned to the Roswell AAF Hospital
in July 1947 was the Chief Nurse Capt. Joyce Goddard. 84 Goddard, who was
5'6" tall, was transferred from Roswell AAF to Korea on August 21, 1947. 85

Therefore, according to Dennis' recollection of events, this review of
the morning reports indicated that there were two missing nurses, not one —
"Lieutenant Naomi Selff ' and "Captain 'Slatts' Wilson." Further scrutiny of
personnel records of individuals assigned to the Roswell AAF/Walker AFB
hospital indicated that Dennis'recollections of events were apparently inaccurate.

Examination of the August 1947 morning reports did not list a nurse
named Wilson, but they did list a nurse named Slattery. 86 Captain Lucille
C. Slattery, who retired as a Lieutenant Colonel and is now deceased, was
reassigned from Ft. George Wright, Wash, to Roswell AAF on August 7, 1947. 87


X


Fig. 6. Lt. Col. Lucille C.
Slattery, the only Air Force
nurse ever known as "Slatts "
served as a captain at the
Roswell AAF/Walker AFB
hospital from August 1947 to
September 1950. Records
indicate that Slattery did not
arrive at Roswell AAF until
one month after the "Roswell
Incident," in direct
contradiction to statements
made by the sole witness to
this account,
(U.S. Air Force photo)


88


Slattery replaced Goddard as the Chief Nurse and was the only
female captain assigned to the Roswell AAF hospital. Interviews of persons
with longtime professional and personal associations with Slattery, revealed
that she was known by the unusual nickname of Slatts. 88 Additionally, former
associates of Slattery interviewed for this report, recalled that she was
the only Air Force nurse that had ever been known as Slatts. 89 Persons
interviewed were Air Force nurses who retired in the 1960s, each with more
than 20 years of service, including retired Air Force Col Ethel Kovatch-
Scott, who served as Chief Nurse of the Air Force from 1963 to 1965.

Upon review of Slattery's personnel file it was learned that she was
only 5'3" tall and therefore was most likely not the 6'2" or 6'3" "tall skinny"
nurse described. 90 This discrepancy in physical description and the fact that
she did not arrive at Roswell AAF until nearly one month after Dennis claims
he spoke to her, led to the conclusion that perhaps he confused Slattery with
some other tall thin nurse, possibly named Wilson, who was stationed at the
Roswell AAF or Walker AFB hospital at some other time.

Consequently, a comprehensive review of the morning reports
and rosters of the Roswell AAF/Walker AFB hospital revealed that only
one nurse named Wilson had ever served there and she did not arrive until
February 1956. 91 * Capt Idabelle Miller, who became Maj. Idabelle Wilson
in 1958 due to marriage and a promotion, was assigned to the Walker AFB
hospital from February 1956 until May I960. 92

Upon review of Maj. Wilson's personnel file, it was learned that
she was 5 '9" tall and thin. Also, she served as the Head Nurse of the surgical
ward at the Walker AFB hospital. 93 Therefore, Wilson's physical attributes,
tall and thin, and position as Head Nurse matched Dennis' recollections of
"Captain Wilson." When contacted by Air Force researchers, Wilson stated
she had no recollection of Dennis, of ever having conversations with him, any
of the events he described, or of a nurse that was missing. 94 She also made
it abundantly clear that as an Air Force officer and medical professional she
would not spread a rumor of a plane crash, as Dennis alleged "Captain
Wilson" did in conversations with him. 95

Results of Missing Nurse and
Pediatrician Research

Examination of the missing nurse and the pediatrician stories, and
other facts established by research, provide a foundation for further analysis
to determine what actual event(s), if any, were responsible for these claims.
Based on information developed, it appears this witness may be mistaken in


^Records were also searched for names similar to Wilson. Three nurses stationed at Roswell
AAF/Walker AFB were identified; Martha Wasem, Carol Williams, and Chalma Walker. None of
these nurses phyisical descriptions or personal/professional circumstances were similar to the
descriptions of "Captain Wilson" described by the witness.


89


some of his statements, especially regarding the time frame of these events.
The following facts have been established:

a. The only physician who ever relocated to Farmington, N.M.,
following his military service at Roswell AAF/Walker AFB was
the former Chief of Pediatric Services at the Walker AFB hospital,
the former Capt. Frank B. Nordstrom. Further, he did not arrive
at Walker AFB until June 1951, four years after the purported
Roswell Incident, has no recollection of Dennis, the statements
Dennis attributes to him, or of any actual events that explain his
account.

b. The only nurse ever assigned to the Roswell AAF hospital
(subsequently renamed Walker AFB) named Wilson, was Idabelle
Wilson. She served at the Walker AFB hospital from 1956 until
1960 and had no recollection of ever meeting or speaking with
Dennis or any of the activities he described.

c. Captain Lucille C. Slattery, the only Air Force nurse ever
known by the distinctive nickname "Slatts," was stationed at the
Roswell AAF hospital. However, she did not arrive until August 7,
1947. This was one month after the Roswell Incident, making it
improbable that Dennis spoke with her in early July 1947.

d. There is no record that a nurse named Naomi Maria Selff, was
ever assigned to Roswell AAF, Walker AFB, or was ever a member
of the U.S. military.

e. All nurses assigned to the Roswell AAF hospital in July 1947,
have been accounted for, thereby eliminating any possibility that
there was ever a missing nurse.

Since actual Air Force members who served at Roswell AAF/
Walker AFB hospital were described in this account, the next step was
to determine if actual events that occurred at the hospital were possibly
the source of this story. As stated earlier in this report, a thorough
examination of both classified and unclassified records from 1947
revealed no Army Air Forces or U.S. Air Force activities that explained
the alleged events. Therefore records were reviewed from other time
periods, based on personnel records of individuals believed to have been
identified. These persons and the periods when they were assigned to
Roswell AAF/Walker AFB are listed in Table 2.1.


90


Table 2.1

Persons Described and Periods of Service
at Roswell AAF/Walker AFB


Witness Actual Individual Period of Service at

Description Described Roswell AAF/Walker AFB

the "missing" nurse 1st Lt. Eileen M. Fanton Dec. 1946 - Sept. 1947

"Capt. 'Slatts' Wilson" Capt. Lucille C. Slattery Aug. 1947 - Sept. 1950
(composite of two and

individuals) Maj. Idabelle M.Wilson Feb. 1956 - May 1960

"the pediatrician" Capt. Frank B. Nordstrom June 1951 - June 1953

"big redheaded colonel" Col. Lee F. Ferrell Oct. 1954 - June 1960

The Research Profile

With the establishment of a possible time frame, research efforts
paralleled the previous examination in Section One of this report that
determined high altitude balloons with anthropomorphic dummy payloads
were responsible for the reports of aliens at the two rural New Mexico
"crashed saucer" locations. A further review of Air Force activities was
then made to determine if any were significantly similar to the information
provided. Based on the time period established by personnel records and
statements contained in the witness' own account, the following profile of
possible events was established:

An event involving the Walker AFB hospital that took place
between 1947 and 1960;

a. that may have resulted in "very mangled," "black," "little
bodies," that had a strong "odor" being placed in "body bags";

b. that may have resulted in two persons not normally assigned
to the hospital, believed to be doctors, that were "supposedly doing
preliminary autopsies" on the "little bodies";

c. that may have involved a body with a head that was much
larger than normal which was transported to Wright-Patterson
AFB, Ohio;

d. that may have involved a redheaded captain or a big red-
headed colonel;

e. that may have resulted in an ambulance parked in the rear
of the hospital containing wreckage with inscriptions, that were
bluish-purplish which looked kind of like the bottom of a canoe;
and,

f. that may have required a heightened state of security.


91


2.2

Aircraft Accidents

The examination of events that involved the Walker AFB
hospital that may explain reports of bodies was begun by reviewing the
most prominent possible source, which were aircraft accident(s).* A
review of aircraft accidents from 1947 to 1960 revealed eight fatal
accidents that involved Walker AFB.

Table 2.2

Fatal Aircraft Accidents by Year in the Vicinity of Walker AFB

1947-1960


Year


Aircraft
Type


Location of Accident Number of

(distance from Walker AFB, N.M.) Fatalities


1947


None


1948


8/12/48


B-29


1949


5/16/49


C-47


12/15/49


B-29


1950


6/1/50


KB-29


1951


None


1952


None ,


1953


None


1954


None


1955


6/16/55


T-33


10/3/55


B-47


1956


6/26/56


KC-97


1957


None


1958


None


1959


None


1960


2/3/60


KC-135


4 miles South

6 miles Northeast
2 miles Northwest

12 miles East/Southeast


13

6
7


On runway
34 miles West

8.8 miles South


2
2

11


On runway and ramp


13


The following three basic criteria were used to narrow research
efforts to specific accidents for more detailed examinations: were the victims
burned, resulting in possible descriptions of "black" "little bodies"?; were
the victims transported to the Walker AFB hospital?; and, were the victims


* Other possible explanations such as automobile accidents, house fires, etc., were also
examined. However, none of these were determined to be responsible for this account of bodies.


93


autopsied? To facilitate this examination, researchers reviewed official
accident reports, organizational and base histories, individual personnel
records of victims, and contemporary newspaper accounts of the accidents.
Interviews of persons who participated in the aftermath of these accidents
were also conducted. As a result, only one accident met the three criteria, the
June 1956 KC-97 accident.

Table 2.3

Analysis of Air Force Aircraft Accidents
by Year in the Vicinity of Walker AFB
1947-1960

Date of Aircraft Fatalities
Accident Type

Burned? Taken to WAFB Autopsied?
Hospital?


8/12/48


B-29


Yes 96


No 97


No 98


5/16/49


C-47


Yes"


No 100


No 101


12/15/49


B-29


No ]02


Yes' 03


Yes 104


6/1/50


KB-29


No 105


No 106


No 107


6/16/55


T-33


Yes los


No 109


Yes 110


10/3/55


B-47


Yes 111


No 112


No 113


6/26/56


KC-97


Yes 114


Yes 115


Yes 136


2/3/60


KC-135


Yes 117


No ]]S


No 119


Upon detailed review of records of the 1956 accident and interviews
with persons who participated in the recovery and identification of the victims,
extensive similarities to the description the witness provided were apparent.

Fatal KC-97 Aircraft Mishap

In 1956, Walker AFB, N.M. was the home of Strategic Air
Command's 6th and 509th Bombardment Wings. 120 Additionally,
Walker was home of the 509th Aerial Refueling Squadron (509th
ARS) equipped with the KC-97G aircraft.


Fig. 7. A KC-97 similar this
of the 509th Aerial Refueling
Squadron crashed 8.8 miles
south of Walker AFB on June
26, 1956 with the loss of 11
lives. Descriptions of the
aftermath of this tragedy are
believed to be the basis for
some of the reports of "bodies"
at the Walker AFB hospital.
(U.S. Air Force photo)


94


The accident occurred on June 26, 1956, 8.8 statute miles south
of Walker AFB. 121 A KC-97G aircraft with 1 1 crewmen on board, while
on a refueling training mission, experienced a propeller failure four and
one half minutes after takeoff. 122 As a result of the propeller failure,
a propeller blade was believed to have punctured the deck fuel tank of
the fully loaded tanker causing an intense cabin fire. 123 The aircraft
was quickly engulfed in flames, spun out of control, and was completely
destroyed. All 1 1 Air Force members were killed instantly by the fire and
impact explosion. 124 Due to the isolated rural impact location on property
owned by the state of New Mexico, there was minimal collateral damage
and no fatalities or injuries to persons on the ground. 125

The remains of the crewmen were recovered from the crash
site and transported by members of the 4036th USAF Hospital (numerical
designation of the hospital at Walker AFB) to the hospital facility at Walker
AFB for identification. 126

On the day following the crash, an identification specialist from
Wright- Patterson AFB, Ohio arrived at the hospital to assist in identifying the
remains. 127 Part way through the identification process, conducted by both
the identification specialist and Air Force members assigned to the Walker
AFB hospital, the identification activities were moved to a refrigerated
compartment at the Walker AFB commissary. 128 This was due to an
overpowering odor emitted by the burned and fuel-soaked bodies and the lack of
proper storage facilities at the small base hospital. 129 Also on the day following
the crash, June 27, 1956, autopsies of three of the victims were accomplished by
a local Roswell pathologist. 130 These examinations were performed at a local
funeral home. 131 Upon completion of the identification procedures and the post-
mortem examinations, the remains were shipped to the next of kin for burial.


Fig. 8. Main entrance of the
4036th USAF hospital at
Walker AFB, 1956. Initial
identification procedures of
the 1 1 aircrewmen killed in
the June 26, 1956 KC-97
accident were conducted here
before being transferred to
another facility on the base
with refrigeration capability.
(U.S. Air Force photo)


95


Comparison of the Account to the KC-97 Mishap

This series of actual events contains extensive similarities to
the account provided by Dennis. The numerous and extensive similarities
indicate that some elements of this actual event were most probably included
in Dennis' account. This aircraft accident provides an explanation for the
following elements of the research profile — the very mangled, black, little
bodies in body bags, the odor, the two strange doctors, and the report of a
redheaded colonel.


Aircraft Crashes and UFOs

Since the first flying saucer story in June 1947, persons have attempted to
exploit actual military aircraft accidents to support UFO theories and propagate
the flying saucer phenomenon.

One of the first exploitation attempts involved a fatal August 1, 1947
Army Air Forces B-25 accident near Kelso, Wash. Descriptions of this
accident, which UFO theorists contend was caused because the aircraft carried
parts of a flying saucer, were included in a poorly executed hoax. Nonetheless,
it received a considerable amount of attention.

Another incidence was photographs of an "alien," supposedly from a
1948 crash of a flying saucer in Mexico. However, when the photographs were
examined by Air Force officials, they noticed a pair of government issue,
aviator style, sunglasses lying underneath the "alien" body.

Perhaps the most famous attempt to exploit an actual aircraft accident
involved the fatal January 1948 crash of a Kentucky Air National Guard F-51
fighter near Franklin, Ky. Theorists Contend the fighter was shot down by a
UFO. However, it was determined that this aircraft most probably crashed
while observing a newly invented high altitude research balloon thought to be a
UFO. The large balloon, which matched eyewitnesses' descriptions at the time,
was released the previous day, and its ground track placed it precisely in the
area where the unidentified object was sighted the next day. Regardless,
shameless attempts to exploit this event continued as recently as 1995, when
the tabloid TV program, Sightings, aired and published (Sightings, Simon &
Schuster, 1996, 170-176) a distorted interpretation of this tragedy.

=== EQg

The "Black" "Little Bodies." Review of the autopsy protocols of
the victims of this accident revealed extensive similarities to the descriptions
of the bodies allegedly described by the missing nurse. Dennis related in
various interviews that the missing nurse described, "...three; very mangled;
black; little bodies in body bags." 132 Records of this mishap confirmed that
the victims suffered "injuries, extreme, multiple." 133 According to persons
who assisted in the identification of the remains from this crash, and in
compliance with Air Force directives in effect at that time, human remains
pouches, commonly called body bags, were used to recover and transport
victims' bodies. 134


96


Statements made by Dennis described bodies that were "three-and-
a-half to four feet tall " and "black" in color. 135 The autopsy protocols of
two victims described extensive third degree burns and loss of the lower
extremities. 136 Dennis also described a head of one of the bodies that was not
rigid but "flexible" and tissues of a body in "strings" that looked as if they were
"pulled" by predatory animals after the crash. 137 An autopsy protocol of a victim
described "multiple fractures of all bones of the skull" and "partially cooked
strands of bowel... over the abdomen and in the chest." 138 Additional similarities
between the autopsy protocols and Dennis' statements were a detached hand and
descriptions of the fingers and arms of the crash victims. 139

The autopsy protocol of one victim also described remains with
a "face completely missing." 140 This description corresponds with Dennis'
recollections of a body with eyes and nose that were concave. Also, the drawing
of the head of one of the "little bodies" Dennis claims is representative of a
drawing given to him by the missing nurse is a reasonably accurate representation
of a human body with its face completely missing. 141

Another similarity to Dennis' account is that of the 1 1 victims of
this accident, only three were autopsied — the same number of bodies that were
allegedly autopsied in the missing nurse's account. 142 Finally, records revealed
that due to limited facilities at the Walker AFB hospital, the autopsies were
performed at the Ballard Funeral Home in Roswell. 143 This is the same funeral
home where Dennis claimed to be employed in 1947 until 1962. 144 *

The Odor. Transportation of remains to a small base hospital
was unusual since the hospital did not have the necessary facilities — a
preparation room, refrigeration equipment or a morgue, to accommodate
multiple deceased persons. Records of other crashes involving Walker AFB
showed that the remains of crash victims were transported either to another
facility on Walker AFB or directly to a local funeral home. 145


Fig. 9. Three of the 11 Air
Force members killed in the
June 26, 1956 KC-97 accident
were autopsied at the Ballard
Funeral Home in Roswell.
The actual descriptions of
the remains (only three were
autopsied), closely corresponds
with Dennis' descriptions
regarding the "little bodies "
Additionally, this is the same
funeral home where Dennis
claimed to be employed from
1947 until 1962.


* It is unclear when Dennis worked at this funeral home since city and phone directories
listed him as co-owning a different funeral home in Roswell, as vice-president of another funeral
home in Roswell, and as having been employed as a drug store supervisor and oil field worker
during the periods when he claims he worked at the Ballard Funeral Home.


97


In fact, the Air Force manual that prescribed the policies, standards
and procedures relating to the care and disposition of deceased Air Force
personnel in effect in 1956, Air Force Manual 143-1, Mortuary Affairs, did
not direct that remains be brought to a hospital. It encouraged the local
commander to "improvise facilities" and make use of "garages, warehouses,
large tents, or other facilities for processing groups of remains." 146
Nonetheless, records of the June 1956 crash and interviews with the persons
who processed the remains indicated that the victims were brought from
the crash site to the Walker AFB hospital. 147 During the identification
procedures, the odor became too strong and the bodies and the identification
activities were moved to a refrigerated compartment at the base
commissary. 148

Interviewed for this report were the registrar of the hospital, 1st Lt.
Jack Whenry (now a retired Major) and a medical administration specialist
assigned to the registrar, SSgt. John Walter (now a retired Master Sergeant),
both of whom assisted in the processing and identification of the deceased
aircrewmen. Whenry and Walter both recalled the strong odor, that some
persons became ill during the procedures (as did the alleged missing nurse),
and the unusual transfer of the remains to the Walker AFB commissary (the
nurse also allegedly described the transfer of remains to another building on
the base). However, neither recalled that a nurse was missing or any of the
other activities as described by Dennis. 149

The "Big Redheaded Colonel." The big redheaded colonel is a
likely reference to the hospital commander, Col. Lee F. Ferrell, who was 6' 1"
tall and had red hair. Ferrell served at the Walker AFB hospital from 1 954
until I960. 150 It would not be unusual for the hospital commander to be
present at the hospital following a major aircraft accident.

The Two Mysterious "Doctors." The two doctors not assigned
to the Walker AFB hospital who were allegedly observed at the hospital
performing preliminary autopsies have been identified as an Air Force
civilian identification specialist and a local Roswell pathologist.

Identification Specialist In an aircraft mishap involving multiple
fatalities, identification of victims can go beyond the capabilities of a small
Air Force hospital such as the one at Walker AFB. Beginning in July 195 1 ,
the Air Force Memorial Affairs Branch, now called Air Force Mortuary
Services, employed full-time civilian morticians and funeral directors, known
as identification specialists, to assist Air Force installations in the identification
of deceased persons. 151 When requested by the local commander, the
identification specialists, on a 24-hour standby basis, responded from Wright-
Patterson AFB to the location of an incident. 152 Records confirm that Walker AFB
only requested an identification specialist on two occasions, in October 1955
and to identity the victims of the June 1956 crash. 153 For this accident the
identification specialist arrived at Walker AFB on June 27, 1956 and made
positive identifications of the 11 crewmen on June 28, 1956. 154

When contacted for this report, the retired identification specialist
who responded to this accident, Mr. George Schwaderer, did not have any


98


recollections of Dennis, the nurse, the pediatrician, or any of the other
unusual activities as alleged. 155 Schwaderer did recall that on identifications
of group remains such as this, it was typical to wear standard hospital surgical
gowns and masks and that he was often mistaken for a pathologist. 156

Due to restrictions on the release of information concerning the
identification process, uninformed individuals who may, by chance, have
witnessed some portions of the identification, were often the source of a
considerable amount of speculation. The identification procedures employed
by the identification specialists were not classified, but AFM-143-1,
Mortuary Affairs, directed that "no information will be divulged concerning
identification or shipment of any remains until a final determination of
identity has been resolved for all remains." 157

For this accident, identification took approximately two days and
any releases of information were restricted to individuals with an official
requirement. These restrictions extended, not only to the general public, but
also to Air Force members.

A possible reference to the identification specialist is found in one
of Dennis' recitations of the account. Dennis, a mortician who might possess
limited knowledge of Air Force mortuary procedures, stated that he was told
the "doctors" might be pathologists from "Walter Reed Army Hospital." 158
Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington D.C. is a likely location
that an unknown pathologist performing an autopsy on military personnel
might have been based. Co-located at Walter Reed is the Armed Forces
Institute of Pathology (AFIP) and beginning in 1955, AFIP sent pathologists
into the field to examine aircraft accidents. A review of records at AFIP and
interviews with persons involved with the identification procedures at Walker
AFB do not indicate AFIP sent any personnel to assist in this accident. 159

Pathology Consultant. In June 1956, the Walker AFB hospital
did not have a pathologist on staff. 160 All autopsies and examinations of
pathological specimens were conducted by a civilian consultant from
Roswell. 161 The autopsy protocols of the deceased crewmen from the June
1956 crash indicated that Dr. Alfred S. Blauw of Roswell performed the
three autopsies. 162 Obviously, neither the pathologist nor the identification
specialist were normally assigned to the Walker AFB hospital and would
not be expected to be present at the hospital, especially to an observer with
limited knowledge of these activities.

Continuing Research

The focus of research was now shifted to other activities that
might explain the remaining portions of the profile. The unexplained
portions were:

a. the presence of a redheaded captain;

b. the wreckage in the rear of the ambulance outside the Walker
AFB hospital;


99


c. the heightened state of security at the Walker AFB hospital;
and,

d. the shipment of a body with a large head to Wright-
Patterson AFB.

Based on previous research, this effort began by examining records
of the other Air Force aerial vehicle known to have operated extensively in
the Roswell area since the late 1940s— high altitude research balloons.


100


2.3

High Altitude Research Projects

By 1960, hundreds of high altitude research balloons, some that
carried anthropomorphic dummies, descended and were recovered in areas
surrounding Walker AFB and Roswell. But based on the descriptions of the
bodies and the involvement of a hospital and medical personnel, it did not
seem likely that high altitude research balloons with scientific instruments
or anthropomorphic dummies could possibly account for this testimony.
Therefore, the focal point of the research shifted to manned high altitude
balloon flights conducted by the Air Force during the mid to late 1950s and
early 1960s.

Manned Balloon Flights

Two manned balloon projects, Man High and Excelsior, were
conducted within the time period targeted for research: Man High from 1957
to 1958 163 and the manned portion of Excelsior in 1959 and 1960. The only
other manned high altitude balloon project in Air Force history, Stargazer,
did not fly until 1962.

It was discovered that only six manned flights were made for Man
High and Excelsior. These flights were determined unlikely as the source of
the testimony since there were no injuries or deaths, all six flights had been
the subject of intense media coverage, and none were flown in the vicinity
of Roswell. Despite the apparent dead end these flights presented to explain
this account, records were obtained and persons involved in Man High and
Excelsior were contacted and interviewed. These records and interviews
confirmed that there were, in fact, only six USAF manned high altitude


Fig. 10. Maj. David G.
Simons (MC) (left), balloon
designer Otto C. Winzen
(center) and Capt. Joseph
W. Kittinger, Jr., examine a
scale model of a low altitude
balloon gondola used to train
pilots for high altitude missions.
(photo courtesy of Mike Smith,
Raven Industries)


101


balloon flights, none with characteristics similar to the testimony. However,
detailed examinations of the records revealed that, in addition to the six high
altitude balloon flights, there were also numerous low altitude balloon flights
made to train and qualify the high altitude balloon pilots. 164 Records of the
training flights indicated that some of these were conducted at Holloman ARB,
N.M., and several mishaps occurred resulting in injuries to the pilots. 165

Further research revealed that one accident had taken place just
northwest of Roswell. 166 The accident occurred on May 21, 1959, 10 miles
northwest of Walker AFB, on a pilot training mission for the upcoming Project
Excelsior and Stargazer flights scheduled to begin that fall. Analysis of the
accident revealed actual events that closely resembled the remaining portions of
the established profile.

EQ3


U.S. Air Force Manned High Altitude Balloon Projects

In addition to unmanned high altitude balloon research flights, from 1957
to 1962 the U.S. Air Force conducted a series of seven manned high altitude
flights. These forward-looking projects investigated the upper reaches of the
earth's atmosphere and laid the foundation for manned spacefight. Most flights
were conducted before rocket booster technology was available to propel a
spacecraft into earth's orbit. In this interim period, to "bridge the gap" while
awaiting developments in rocket technology, high altitude balloons were the
only vehicles capable of reaching the altitudes required. All three of the US AF
manned high altitude balloon projects, Man High, Excelsior, and Stargazer
utilized Holloman AFB balloons to transport men to the very edge of space,
above approximately 99 per cent of the earth's atmosphere, a region known as
"near space."

Project Man High. In 1955, a combined effort by the U.S. Air Force
Aeromedical Field Laboratory, Winzen Research International, and the
Holloman Balloon Branch resulted in the first Air Force manned balloon
program. Project Man High, officially known as the Biodynamics of Space
Flight, directed by Lt. Col. David Simons (MC), was the first of the three


Fig. 11. (Left) Test pilot Capt.
Joseph W. Kittinger, Jr. just
before launch of Man High I
at New Brighton, Minn, on
June 2, 1957. Kittinger flew
in all three USAF high altitude
balloon projects and has
accumulated more high
altitude balloon flying hours
than anyone else in the world.
( U.S. Air Force photo)

Fig. 12. (Center) Lt.Col.
David G. Simons (MC), a
physician and pilot of the Man
High II high altitude balloon
mission, is shown here
boarding the recovery
helicopter near Frederick, S.D.
following the successful flight
on August 19, 1957. This
flight lasted 33 hours and 10
minutes attaining a peak
altitude of 101,500 feet.
(U.S. Air Force photo)

Fig. 13. (Right) Holloman
AFB Balloon Branch
Meteorologist and Engineer,
Bernard D. Gildenberg,
instructs high altitude balloon
pilot 1st Lt. Clifton McClure,
pilot of Man High III, in the
operation of a low altitude
training balloon on May 12,
1959 at Holloman AFB, N.M.
(U.S. Air Force photo)


102


widely publicized manned high altitude balloon programs. The objective
of Project Man High was to measure the physiological and psychological
capabilities of a human in a space equivalent environment. Many developments
of this successful project were later incorporated into the first phase of the U.S.
Air Force Man in Space Program nicknamed Man in Space Soonest (MISS).
Technology developed for MISS was transferred to NASA in 1959 and became
part of Project Mercury, the initial series of U.S. space missions. 167


Fig. 14. Project officer
and pilot, Capt. Joseph W.
Kittinger, Jr., standing beside
the Excelsior gondola at
Holloman AFB, N.M. On his
third and final high altitude
parachute jump, from 102,800
feet, he established world
records for highest parachute
jump and length of free-fall
which still stand today.
(U.S. Air Force photo)


Project Excelsior. In 1959 and 1960 the U.S. Air Force Aero Medical
Laboratory collaborated with the Holloman Balloon Branch for Project
Excelsior, the second Air Force manned high altitude balloon program.
Excelsior was the dramatic climax of the high altitude free-fall studies that began
as Project High Dive in 1953 using anthropomorphic dummies. As the test director
for Project Excelsior, Capt. Joseph W. Kittinger, Jr. made three parachute jumps
from balloons, Excelsior I, II, and III, from 76,000, 75,000, and a still standing
record altitude of 102,800 feet. Excelsior's scientific objective was to develop a
parachute system and techniques required to return a pilot or astronaut to earth
following an emergency high altitude escape.

Project Stargazer. Project Stargazer was the third Air Force manned high
altitude balloon program. Capt. Joseph W. Kittinger, Jr., the veteran high altitude
balloon pilot of Man High and Excelsior, was both the pilot and project engineer.
On December 13, 1962, Kittinger and U.S. Navy civilian astronomer William C.
White rose to 86,000 feet to make astronomical observations with a gyro-stabilized
telescope. A joint U.S. Air Force, U.S. Navy, Smithsonian Institution, and
Massachusetts Institute of Technology program, Stargazer made only one of
a scheduled four flights due to budget shortfalls and equipment difficulties.


103


Fig. 15. Project Stargazer
pilot and project engineer,
Capt. Joseph W. Kittinger, Jr.
(left), after landing near
Lordsburg, N.M. on December
13, 1962 with U.S. Navy
civilian astronomer William C.
White. Kittinger and White
ascended to 86,000 feet
to make astronomical
observations in the seventh,
and final, U.S. Air Force
manned high altitude balloon
flight. ( U.S. Air Force photo)


Table 2.4

U.S. Air Force Manned High Altitude Balloon Flights


Date


Project/Flight


Altitude (feet)


Pilot


6/2/57


Man High I


96,200


Capt. Joseph W. Kittinger, Jr.


8/19/57


Man High II


101,500


Lt. Col. David G. Simons (MC)


10/8/58


Man High III


99,700


IstLt. Clifton McClure


11/16/59


Excelsior I


76,400


Capt. Joseph W. Kittinger, Jr.


12/11/59


Excelsior II


74,700


Capt. Joseph W. Kittinger, Jr.


8/16/60


Excelsior III


102,800


Capt. Joseph W. Kittinger, Jr.


12/13/62


Stargazer


86,000


Capt. Joseph W. Kittinger, Jr.


With the completion of Project Stargazer and the success of NASA's
Project Mercury space flights, future investigations were accomplished by
space vehicles. This signaled the end of an era of manned high altitude balloon
flight; however, these projects had indeed "bridged the gap," and manned space
flight was now safely possible.


CQ3 —

Low Altitude Balloon Training Missions

Background. In April 1958, Col. John P. Stapp, commander of the
U.S. Air Force Aero Medical Laboratory at Wright-Patterson AFB, appointed
a new project officer for Project Excelsior, Capt. Joseph W. Kittinger, Jr..
Excelsior was part of an ongoing program to examine high altitude aircraft
escape procedures and equipment. 168 Kittinger was an experienced fighter
test pilot who was the pilot of the first Air Force manned high altitude
balloon project, Man High I, in June 1957. 169 In addition to being the


104


Excelsior project officer, Kittinger was the pilot and project engineer of
Stargazer which also utilized high altitude balloons.

By 1959, Kittinger was an integral part of both Excelsior and
Stargazer and one of only three individuals in the Air Force with high altitude
balloon pilot experience. Due to the hazardous nature of these important
projects, Stapp was concerned that an injury to Kittinger might result in the
cancellation of one or both of them. Therefore, Stapp determined there was a
need for backup pilots. Selected as backup pilots were Captains Dan D. Fulgham
and William C. Kaufman. Both men were rated aircraft pilots, parachutists, and
research and development officers assigned to the Aero Medical Laboratory
at Wright-Patterson AFB.

During the third week of May 1959, a series of low altitude manned
balloon flights were flown to train Fulgham and Kaufman. 170 These flights were
launched by the Holloman AFB Balloon Branch. To satisfy safety requirements,
the flights were closely monitored by medical personnel at all times. A helicopter
with medical personnel followed the flights during daylight hours, a C-131
aircraft followed during hours of darkness, and at all times medical personnel
followed in an ambulance. 171 Balloon recovery and communications technicians
also followed the missions on the ground in a communications vehicle and a
balloon recovery vehicle. 172 The safety requirements were a result of several
recent balloon mishaps that resulted in serious injuries to the pilots.

To meet the training schedule, Kittinger, Kaufman and Fulgham were
assigned temporary duty (TDY) from the Aero Medical Laboratory at Wright-
Patterson AFB to the Balloon Branch at Holloman AFB, N.M.


Fig. 16. In 1958 while training
for the upcoming U.S.
Air Force Aero Medical
Laboratory high altitude
Man High III balloon flight,
balloon designer Otto C.
Winzen (right) and space
physiologist Capt. Grover
Schock (left), were seriously
injured in a balloon accident
near Ashland, Wise.
Additionally, two training
flights at Holloman AFB also
resulted in injuries to pilots.
These injuries prompted Air Force
officials to require close medical
supervision during future training
flights, (photo courtesy of Mike
Smith, Raven Industries)


105


The three pilots, Kittinger, Kaufman and Fulgham, flew training
missions together. Kaufman and Fulgham alternately flew the balloon while
Kittinger instructed. The missions were flown at night to take advantage of light
winds and avoid the effects of diurnal heating on the helium (the lifting gas that
filled the balloon). Used for these missions were 30-foot diameter polyethylene
balloons and an aluminum gondola especially designed for low altitude training.

The first training mission scheduled for May 19, 1959 was canceled
due to equipment problems. 173 Problems overcome, the next day at 1:30 a.m. the
mission launched from White Sands Proving Ground. 174 The objective of this
flight was to practice gas valving and ballasting techniques necessary for balloon
control and to practice landings. After a five-hour flight, the balloon landed
without incident just after sunrise northwest of El Paso, Texas. 175

The second training flight, launched at 2:41 a.m. on May 21, 1959,
from behind the Balloon Branch building, Bldg. 850 at Holloman AFB. 176 Near
the end of another successful training mission with the same objectives as the
previous flight, a mishap occurred resulting in injuries to two of the pilots,
Fulgham and Kittinger. 177


Fig. 17. In May 1959, Capt.
Dan D. Fulgham (left) and
Capt. William C. Kaufman,
pilots and Aero Medical
Research officers from
Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio
were assigned temporary duty
to Holloman AFB, N.M. to
train as high altitude balloon
pilots. Fulgham and Kaufman
were trained by Capt. Joseph
W. Kittinger, Jr. (photo
collection of Dan D. Fulgham)

The Mishap. Just after sunrise on May 21, 1959, following a
successful low level training flight east of Holloman AFB over the Sacramento
Mountains, Kittinger, the instructor pilot, determined the balloon should be
landed in a small field approximately 10 miles northwest of Roswell. 178 This was
necessary because of approaching bad weather and the field was the last suitable
landing site before overflying the city of Roswell 179 When the balloon touched
down, a higher than normal forward velocity for landing caused the gondola to


106


overturn. 180 The three pilots, Kittinger, Fulgham, and Kaufman, were spilled
from the gondola pinning Fulgham's head between the edge of the gondola and
the ground. 181 The impact shattered his helmet and he sustained a head injury. 182
When the three pilots climbed out from under the gondola, Fulgham noticed that
his "head seemed to be protruding outward from underneath [his] helmet." 183
Kittinger also received an injury, a minor facial laceration. The crew of the
nearby chase helicopter and personnel in the ground tracking vehicles rushed to
the scene. 184 For medical treatment, the pilots were transported by the helicopter
to nearby Walker AFB. 185

When the helicopter landed at Walker AFB, it was met by armed
security personnel who sought to verify the purpose of the unannounced
arrival. 186 The security personnel escorted the balloon pilots to the hospital. 187
The balloon recovery and communications crew, after retrieving the gondola
and balloon, drove to Walker AFB to check on the injured crew and to inform
the Balloon Branch at Holloman AFB of the accident. 188

At the Walker AFB hospital, Fulgham and Kittinger received
treatment for their injuries and neither required admission. Meanwhile, the
Walker AFB security officials continued to escort the unannounced visitors
while verifying their identities. 189 The pilot's identities and purpose for their
visit were confirmed via phone by Colonel Stapp, Aero Medical Laboratory
commander at Wright-Patterson AFB (the pilots and Project Excelsior were
assigned to this organization). 190

Kittinger, the Excelsior project officer, wanted to leave the
hospital as quickly as possible after he and Fulgham received medical
attention. 191 The quick departure was to avoid unwanted scrutiny by Walker
AFB flying safety officials. 192 When released by the flight surgeon, the
three pilots boarded the chase helicopter and returned to Holloman AFB
approximately 100 miles to the west.


Fig. 18. The balloon
training missions flown from
Holloman AFB, N.M. in May
1959, were made in an open
gondola suspended beneath a
30-foot diameter polyethelyne
balloon. This photo was taken
on May 21, 1959 by Balloon
Branch communications
technician, A2C Ole Jorgeson
just prior to the mishap which
resulted in injuries to two of
the pilots, (photo collection of
Ole Jorgeson)


107


2.4

Comparison of the Hospital Account
to the Balloon Mishap

The balloon mishap near Roswell on May 21,1959 provides the
probable explanation for some of the remaining elements of the incident
profile — the redheaded captain, the unusual security at the hospital, the
wreckage in the rear of an ambulance, and one portion of the accounts of
"aliens" at the Roswell AAF hospital.

The "Redheaded Captain"

It is highly probable that the descriptions of a redheaded captain
are those of Capt. Joseph W. Kittinger, Jr., now a retired Colonel. Kittinger,
who has red hair, was present at the Walker AFB hospital the entire time the
events involving the balloon mishap took place. This is the second Roswell
account that describes a captain with red hair. As related in Section One of
this report (see page 77 and Appendix C, page 194), a redheaded captain
was also allegedly present at the "crashed saucer" site on the San Agustin
Plains. 193 That account was consistent with Kittinger's responsibilities as the
Excelsior and Stargazer pilot and project officer. As project officer of two
research programs that utilized high altitude balloons and as a chase pilot
on many other high altitude balloon missions, Kittinger often accompanied
balloon launch and recovery crews. He was present both on the ground
and in the air at balloon launch and recovery locations throughout
New Mexico and the Southwest United States to launch and retrieve
anthropomorphic dummies used for Project Excelsior and unmanned test
gondolas used for Project Stargazer. 194

Following the accident, when the balloon pilots were transported
to the Walker AFB hospital for medical treatment, Kittinger wanted to leave
as soon as possible. 195 He recalled in a recent interview that his desire to
quickly leave Walker AFB was to avoid the initiation of a formal accident
investigation. He believed that an accident investigation might bring
unwanted scrutiny to Project Excelsior and delay or even cancel the
controversial project. 196 The controversy surrounding Project Excelsior was
due principally to the hazardous nature of the high altitude escape research.
Some senior research and development officials within the Air Force were
reluctant to support a project that required a human subject to parachute from
a balloon gondola at over 100,000 feet. An accident investigation at this
juncture would most likely delay the human high altitude free-fall tests
scheduled for the fall of 1959 and may have resulted in cancellation of
the project. 197

While at the hospital, Kittinger consulted by phone with his
commander, Colonel Stapp. 198 Stapp agreed with Kittinger's assessment that
a quick departure from the Walker AFB hospital, after receiving appropriate
medical attention, was in the best interest of the project. 199


109


The statements attributed to the redheaded captain, "You did not
see anything. There was no crash here. You don't go into town making
any rumors that you saw anything or that there was any crash," 200 were
consistent with Kittinger's desire to avoid an accident investigation.
However, when interviewed for this report, neither Kittinger nor any of
the other persons documented as having been present in the hospital that
day recalled encountering Dennis. 201

What may have led an uninformed person, such as Dennis, to
believe they were witnessing, or were told of, an unusual or classified
event, was that when the injured balloon pilots arrived at the Walker AFB
hospital, even though Project Excelsior was unclassified, Kittinger
sought to limit disclosure of negative information and publicity. 202

By 1959, having been the subject of intense media scrutiny
following his June 1957 Man High I high altitude balloon flight, Kittinger
was aware of both the positive and negative aspects of publicity. In his
1961 book, The Long, Lonely Leap, Kittinger described this self-imposed
secrecy regarding Project Excelsior, "The secrecy imposed upon
Excelsior was of our own choosing. We believed... that any unnecessary
conversation about our activities. ..would simply be premature." 203
When interviewed for this report, Kittinger further explained of Project
Excelsior and the visit to the hospital at Walker AFB: "We didn't want
publicity... about anything we were doing. So it would have appeared to
someone not conversant with the project that we were 'hush-hush,' that
we were secretive... it might look like we were trying to cover up a
classified mission." 204

The allegations that the redheaded captain, an apparent
reference to Kittinger, threatened anyone while he was at the Walker
AFB hospital are untrue. When interviewed for this report and in signed
statements obtained from Kittinger, the two other balloon pilots, the
doctor who treated them, the medic aboard the helicopter, and the Balloon
Branch communications technician who were present at the hospital that
day (see Appendix B), none of them recalled that Kittinger was involved
in an altercation or made threatening remarks to anyone. 205 Involvement
in an altercation with a civilian would have highlighted the presence of
the balloon crew and possibly brought the type of negative publicity
Kittinger sought to avoid. This would not only have violated Kittinger's
policy of maintaining a low profile in regard to Excelsior, but would be
completely out of character for the seasoned test pilot.

Throughout his career, Kittinger was renowned for his ability
to maintain his composure in difficult, often life threatening, situations.
He faced these situations as a test pilot, as a combat pilot and squadron
commander in Southeast Asia, and as a Prisoner of War while subjected
to severe torture at the hands of the North Vietnamese. In The Pre-
Astronauts, which chronicles many of Kittinger's accomplishments in
the field of aeronautics, including Project Excelsior and Stargazer, the
author offered the following description of him:


110


Kittinger was not Buck Rogers, nor was he a daredevil or thrill-
seeker He was a modern day test pilot: intense, focused, usually quiet, and
always polite with firm religious convictions and a powerful sense of loyalty.
If he was often stubborn, uncompromising, and demanding he also dealt
fairly and respectfully with those who came into contact with him. He was a
straight arrow and a straight shooter. 206


Fig. 19. Maj. Joseph W.
Kittinger, Jr. in 1963 as
a member of the 1st Air
Commando Wing, Ben Hoa,
Republic of Vietnam.
(U.S. Air Force photo)


m


Jt :

1 1. ■


mi&k


Colonel Joseph W. Kittinger, Jr., USAF (Ret)

Colonel Joseph W. Kittinger, Jr.'s career in the U.S. Air Force and in aviation
has spanned the spectrum of experiences: test pilot, balloon pilot, test parachutist,
combat fighter pilot, MiG killer, combat squadron commander, and prisoner of war.
He has demonstrated, during a nearly 30-year military career and beyond, that he is
among the very best in the U.S. Air Force and the field of aeronautics.

Kittinger began his career in 1949 as a U.S. Air Force aviation cadet. After
earning his wings at Las Vegas AFB, Nev. in March 1950, he was assigned to
fighter squadrons in Germany and then as a test pilot for NATO. In 1953, Kittinger
received an assignment as a test pilot to Holloman AFB, N.M. While at Holloman,
he began a many year collaboration with the legendary Air Force scientist and
physician, Col. John P. Stapp. In association with Stapp on numerous aero medical
projects, Kittinger became the first pilot to fly zero-gravity experiments, now
commonly used for astronaut training. For project Man High on June 2, 1957,
Kittinger piloted a high altitude balloon to 96,000 feet to examine the physiological
and psychological effects on man in a space equivalent environment. This flight
marked the origins of the manned U.S. space program with the experience gained
from Man High being incorporated in NASA's Project Mercury.


Ill


After Man High, and again in association with Stapp, Kittinger directed
Project Excelsior, a study of human free-fall characteristics following aircraft
escape at extremely high altitudes. After extensive testing with anthropomorphic
dummies, Kittinger made three parachute jumps from high altitude balloons: 76,400
feet on November 16, 1959; 74,700 feet on December 11, 1959; and 102,800 feet
on August 16, 1960. For these courageous scientific achievements Kittinger was
awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross, the Harmon Trophy by President
Eisenhower, the still-standing world records for highest parachute jump and length
of a free-fall — and the distinction of being the only living person to exceed the
speed of sound without an aircraft or spacecraft!

With the completion of Excelsior, Kittinger became the pilot, project officer,
and project engineer for Stargazer, an astronomical observation experiment. This
was the third and final Air Force manned high altitude balloon project, Kittinger had
flown in all three.

In 1963, he was assigned to the Air Commandos (now Special Operations)
and flew two combat tours in Southeast Asia in B-26 and A-26 aircraft. After a
tour in Germany as a liaison officer with the U.S. Army Special Forces, Kittinger
returned to Southeast Asia in 1971, flying F-4 aircraft and commanding the famous
555th 'Triple Nickel" Tactical Fighter Squadron at Udorn AB, Thailand. On March 1,
1972 Kittinger engaged and destroyed a MiG-21 over North Vietnam and is
credited with an aerial victory. On May 11, 1972, after 483 combat missions
and more than 1,000 combat flying hours, Kittinger was shot down over Hanoi
and spent 1 1 months as a POW in the infamous "Hanoi Hilton." When placed
with other POWs following solitary confinement and severe torture, Kittinger was
moved repeatedly by his North Vietnamese captors due to his effectiveness in
motivating other prisoners to maintain strong resistance postures.

Kittinger retired from the Air Force in 1978 and became involved in both
sport aircraft flying and gas ballooning. He operated Rosie O' Grady's Flying
Circus in his hometown of Orlando, Fla., performing skywriting, banner towing,
and hot air and helium balloon demonstrations at nearby Walt Disney World.
He also captured the coveted Gordon Bennett Gas Balloon Championship an
unprecedented four times (three consecutive), entitling him to retire the trophy.

In September 1984, Kittinger made history again, when, in the tradition of
Lindbergh, he became the first person to make a solo crossing of the Atlantic Ocean
by balloon.

Kittinger's military decorations include the Silver Star with one oak leaf
cluster, Legion of Merit with one oak leaf cluster, Distinguished Flying Cross with
five oak leaf clusters, Bronze Star Medal with "V" device and two oak leaf clusters,
Air Medal with 23 oak leaf clusters, Purple Heart with one oak leaf cluster, POW
medal, and the Republic of Vietnam Cross of Gallantry with Palm.

Kittinger's indomitable spirit, personal courage and dedication to duty are
legendary. His ability to achieve seemingly unattainable objectives while earning
the respect and absolute loyalty of those who served with him defines this rare
breed of warrior-leader.

In October 1995, he received yet another honor and was named a recipient of
the prestigious "Elder Statesman of Aviation" award by the National Aeronautics
Association. This honor is bestowed upon an individual who over a period of years,
has made "significant contributions to aeronautics" and for "reflecting credit upon
himself and America." Without a doubt, there are few that exemplify these virtues
more than this truly distinctive American, Joseph W. Kittinger, Jr.


112


The "Wreckage" in the
Rear of the Ambulance


Fig. 20. Balloon Branch
Communications Technician,
A2C Ole Jorgeson, now a
retired Master Sergeant, in the
rear compartment of an M-43
ambulance. Ambulances of
this type were converted
by the Balloon Branch to
communications vehicles in
the late 1950s. It appears the
witness described the two
panels painted Air Force
blue (lower right and left
of ambulance) as "bluish-
purplish" "wreckage" that
looked "kinda like the bottom
of a canoe" and the stenciled
writing above them as
"hieroglyphics"— See figs. 21
and 22 on next page, (photo
collection of Ole Jorgeson )


The various types of wreckage described in the rear of an
ambulance at the Walker AFB hospital also appear to be related to the 1959
balloon accident. Some of this wreckage allegedly had odd inscriptions,
touted by UFO theorists as "alien" hieroglyphics.

A requirement of balloon pilot training missions were that they
be closely monitored by balloon recovery and medical personnel. 207 Ground
crews from Holloman AFB followed the balloon flight from its launch site
there to its landing site 10 miles northwest of Roswell. 208 Two of the
vehicles that followed the balloon were Dodge M-43 3/4-ton field
ambulances and a third was an M-37 3/4-ton utility vehicle or "weapons
carrier." 209 One ambulance was assigned to this mission for its standard
use — a medical response vehicle. The other ambulance had been converted
by the Holloman AFB Balloon Branch and served as a communications
vehicle on balloon recovery missions. 210 The additional communications
equipment, mounted in the rear compartment of the ambulance, drastically
altered what someone expected to see in an ambulance of this type.

Dennis related that he was walking fast when he observed what
he thought was wreckage in the rear of an ambulance. 211 This quick glance
apparently resulted in descriptions of two pieces of wreckage leaning against
the interior of the rear compartment of the ambulance that "was kind of like the
bottom of a canoe... like stainless steel... with kind of a bluish-purplish tinge to
it." 212 UFO theorists have suggested that these objects were alien spaceship
"escape pods" recovered by the Army Air Forces. However, this appears to be a
remarkably accurate description of two steel panels painted Air Force blue on a
converted ambulance used by the Balloon Branch for this mission.


113


Fig. 21. (Above) Enlargement
of stenciled writing from
photograph below. This
lettering was apparently later
described as "hieroglyphics."


Fig. 22. (Below) Steel panels
painted Air Force blue (lower
right and left) described as
"bluish-purplish" "wreckage"
that looked "kinda like the
bottom of a canoe."
(U.S. Air Force photo)


The "inscription or something," 213 the so called "hieroglyphics," were
a probable reference to the lettering painted on the equipment support rack above
the panels. The lettering on the rack would be visible, but probably not readable,
to an observer that quickly walked past the ambulance. Other wreckage "all over
the floor" that was "like broken glass ," 214 was a probable reference to the clear
plastic 30-foot polyethylene balloon that was recovered following the balloon
training mission and placed in the back of the converted ambulance or the
weapons carrier for later disposal.

Dennis also recalled that he parked the vehicle he was driving near
three field ambulances and then walked up the ramp into the hospital. 215 The
description of ambulances near a "ramp" is consistent with the recollections
of the Balloon Branch Communication Technician who drove the converted
ambulance to the Walker AFB hospital following the balloon accident.
While waiting for the injured pilots, A2C Ole Jorgeson, now a retired
Master Sergeant, recalled in a recent interview that he parked the converted
ambulance near a ramp at the hospital. 216 A review of Walker AFB hospital
records revealed that there was only one ramp. The ramp was attached to
the hospital dispensary, Walker AFB Bldg. 317. 217 The other ambulances
described by the witness were either the other ambulance from Holloman


114


AFB that provided medical support of the balloon flight or the two "standby'
ambulances, that in May 1959, were routinely positioned adjacent to the
ramp behind the dispensary at Walker AFB. 218


Fig. 23. "It was all sharp...
like broken glass," a witness'
description of debris in the
rear of an ambulance at Walker
AFB. The debris described
was most probably the
remnants of the polyethylene
balloon, similar to the one
in this photo, recovered by
Balloon Branch personnel
following the mishap in May
1959.

(U.S. Air Force photo)


Additional Security at the
Walker AFB Hospital

The witness described what appeared to be a heightened state of
security at the hospital when he allegedly took the injured airman there for
treatment. UFO theorists contend the heightened security at the hospital was
because alien remains were being autopsied. However, it appears that the
witness described the security measures taken by Walker AFB personnel due
to the unusual circumstances of the arrival of the balloon crew.

In 1959, Walker AFB was a part of the 47th Air Division of
Strategic Air Command (SAC). It was home of the 6th Bombardment Wing
(6th BW), equipped with the nuclear capable B-52 Stratofortress bomber
(the 509th BW was reassigned to Pease AFB, NH on July 1, 1958). 219 The
mission of the 6th BW, to strike the enemy with nuclear weapons anywhere
in the world at a moment's notice, demanded a heightened state of security
at all times. One of the methods instituted during this period to maintain the
high standards of security and effectiveness of SAC units, was unannounced
"surprise" visits of Headquarters SAC inspection teams. A favored method
of transportation for these surprise visits was a helicopter. When a SAC
inspection team landed at a base, often the first evaluation they made was
of the security response to their unannounced arrival. Failure of security
personnel to properly challenge unidentified visitors, regardless of their
method of arrival, was considered a serious breach of security.

When transported to Walker AFB for medical treatment, unexpected
and at an early hour, the balloon crew, not surprisingly, was met by armed


115


security personnel. 220 The security personnel escorted them to the hospital
and remained with them until their identities and purpose of their visit were
verified. Kaufman, one of the balloon pilots, recalled that their presence at
Walker AFB was initially met with skepticism.

"The [helicopter] pilot called the tower and said... having come
from an experimental base, it was nothing unusual for him to have a balloon
accident. 'We've got an injured pilot on board. There's been a balloon
accident and we would like the flight surgeon and an ambulance to meet us
at the tower.' The tower established the fact that yes, we were an Air Force
chopper and that we seemed to have somebody injured and what had we
been doing? We had been shooting touch and go landings in a balloon?.. .We
got clearance to land... right in front of the tower, and we were met by an
ambulance and several MPs with machine guns." 221


Fig. 24. Walker AFB
Building 317, hospital
dispensary with attached
ramp, as it appeared in June
1954. It is in this building
that UFO theorists allege
that "alien autopsies" were
accomplished in July 1947.
However, this was the same
building that Capt. Fulgham
received treatment
following the balloon
accident on May 21, 1959.
Persons apparently observed
him and later related the
unusual circumstances
surrounding the balloon
mishap as part of the
"Roswell Incident."
(U.S. Air Force photo)


Fig. 25. Main gate at Walker
AFB, N.M., formerly Roswell
AAF, as it appeared in 1954.
During the 1950s, the highly
secure base was the home of
the nuclear capable 509th and
6th Bombardment Wings of
Strategic Air Command.
(US. Air Force photo)


116


According to the medical technician who arrived on the helicopter
with the pilots, he had difficulty persuading a flight surgeon to attend to
the injured pilots. SSgt. Roland H. "Hap" Lutz, now a retired Chief
Master Sergeant, recalled when he first contacted the Walker AFB hospital
explaining that he had three persons injured in a "gondola accident," the
flight surgeon told him to "Go home and sleep it off." 222 Fulgham, the injured
pilot, recalled that when they got to the hospital, "there was this controversy
going on in the hospital about who in the hell we were.. .we weren't supposed
to be there and nobody knew anything about Air Force officers flying
balloons... we could have been... [trying] to penetrate the security." 223 Walker
AFB security officials were satisfied of the pilots' identities when they spoke
to Colonel Stapp, commander of the Aero Medical Laboratory at Wright-
Patterson AFB, Ohio.


Fig. 26. Capt. Joseph W.
Kittinger, Jr. (right), is shown
here in 1962 with Dr. J. Allen
Hynek while preparing for
the project Stargazer high
altitude balloon flight.
(U.S. Air Force photo)


The "Red-headed Captain" and Dr. J. Allen Hynek

Captain Kittinger, the Stargazer high altitude balloon pilot and project
engineer, had extensive professional contact with Dr. J. Allen Hynek, an
astronomer and Stargazer project scientist. Additionally, Hynek was also one
of the scientific consultants in the Air Force study of UFOs, Project Bluebook.
Hynek is best known, however, for his apparent endorsement of extraterrestrial
theories concerning UFOs after concluding his associations with the Air Force.

When asked about his recollections of Hynek, Kittinger stated that when
they were associated, from 1958 to 1963, they discussed UFOs at length. 224


117


At that time, Hynek was steadfast in his opinion that most, if not all, UFO
sightings could be resolved by applying known scientific analysis. 225 Kittinger
said he was "flabbergasted" when, years later, Hynek appeared to reverse
his opinion and endorse extraterrestrial explanations. 226 Hynek's reversal
in philosophies led to numerous commercial endeavors, most notably as a
technical advisor for the science-fiction film Close Encounters of the Third Kind

Also, based on his experience with project Stargazer, Hynek was
familiar with balloon operations at Holloman AFB, visiting the Holloman
Balloon Branch several times. 227 Interestingly, there is no record that Hynek,
who died in 1986, ever endorsed what is now presented as the "best evidence"
of UFOs, the so-called Roswell Incident, which was actually a conglomeration
of numerous events, some with origins in Holloman AFB launched balloons.


The Alien at the Hospital

In at least one account of the Roswell Incident, a witness claimed
he observed a "creature" walk under its own power into the hospital. 228
While the specifics of this particular sighting cannot be verified, the injury
that caused Fulgham's head to swell, resembling the classic science-fiction
alien head, makes this account (and some others) that at first appeared to be
the work of over-active imaginations, seem possible.


lOW hrs
A or K: »


;uniCal*hecord covm smrr


_ — _


1 □ m £ m □ «


KfLGHAM Dan D


M | P


16059 UU73UA


Gapt


Sr Pilot


Air Force


ARDC Wright Patterson(a)


See


Joyce Fulgham (W)
$$UO dross Drive
Deytcn Ohio


31 | Cau | 12 yrs 21 Kay 59


. . . From duty


L g Eaaon Cap% VSl\F flC


fa) AFB. Ohio


8715 Hematoma, traunatic, n.e.c. forehead IDiPendlng AF Form M

Alt Approximately 0600 hoars, 21 Kay 1959, North of Roswell,

Haw Mail cd~ $ patient etatee he was taking part In a military
project involving balloon testing. When he and two others
landed in the balloon the "gondola" upaet, and hit him in
the head causing infory.


■aCIEKlIt


(Show <tm


*fc.(fc for


None


J* (Shzr


or tntrti ptotmtdinlt; thow (me
at tlmrlHf*. dl»W —trier.


None


,.. PHYSICAL PROFILE


p


u


L


H


E


S


R


T


O


o


N


3 I. .n.HTun. 1 HMnni IL11WHM qutnTCM ot tttttxmt i-lltrl


Duty


21; May 59


LESLIE E EASON GAPT U3AF HC


ff&jGJfi


CIS CWDTjC3~


osa>


6560TH TTSAF HOSPITAL HOLTXMAK AFB IK


16059


K.ptHM DO 4»t(4 P«rt ut) whlcit mi


Fig. 27. Clinical Record
Cover Sheet from medical
records of Capt. Dan D.
Fulgham describing injuries
he received in the balloon
accident on May 21, 1959.


118


When the balloon gondola struck Fulgham's head, he received,
according to his clinical record from May 21, 1959, an "Extensive
hematoma forehead and ant [anterior] scalp." 229 A hematoma is a
localized blood-filled swelling, that in this instance was on the forehead.
The hematoma resulted in immediate facial swelling, two black eyes and
later caused his skin to turn yellow. 230

The rapid onset of the swelling caused both of Fulgham's eyes to
close. As it progressed, according to Kittinger who accompanied Fulgham
at the hospital, "His whole face had swollen up and his nose barely
protruded." 231 This appearance lead Kittinger to characterize Fulgham's
appearance at the time as "just a big blob" and "grotesque." 232

When interviewed, Fulgham remembered that even though he
didn't feel bad, "I didn't know how bad I looked." There was no attempt to
hide or limit Fulgham's exposure to persons in the hospital that day. In fact,
when he arrived at the hospital Fulgham recalled that he stopped outside the
building to smoke a cigarette. Kaufman also recalled that the injured pilots,
Fulgham and Kittinger, waited for treatment on a bench in the hallway of the
hospital. Kaufman added that a number of military wives were present in the
hospital that day for prenatal care, and there was no effort to keep Fulgham
from their view. 233


Fig 28. Capt. Dan D. Fulgham
at Wright-Patterson AFB,
Ohio several days after the
balloon accident with a
"traumatic hematoma" on his
forehead. This photo shows
Fulgham after blood had been
aspirated from under his scalp
and a substantial amount of
swelling had dissipated.
Concerns that Fulgham's
odd appearance might startle
uninformed persons was why
he was returned to Wright-
Patterson AFB aboard a
specially arranged flight from
Holloman AFB, N.M. (photo
collection of Dan D. Fulgham)


119


"Bodies" with Large Heads
and Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio

UFO theorists contend that the U.S. Army Air Forces secretly
shipped the alien bodies with large heads to Wright-Patterson AFB for
further processing and deep-freeze storage. However, it is likely that, in this
account, this is a reference to Fulgham's return to Wright-Patterson AFB
following the balloon mishap.

Although Fulgham did not require hospitalization at Walker AFB,
upon his return to Holloman AFB he was admitted to the base hospital for
observation. Three days later on May 24, 1959, the balloon pilots were
flown from Holloman to Wright-Patterson AFB on a specially arranged flight
aboard a C-131 hospital aircraft. 234

The return to Wright-Patterson AFB was directed by Stapp and
coordinated by Kittinger. 235 The preliminary arrangements for this flight
were made by Kittinger while at the Walker AFB hospital. 236 Kittinger
recalled that conversations with Stapp regarding their return to Wright-
Patterson AFB were made by phone in busy areas of the hospital and these
conversations could have been overheard by nearly anyone present. 237

Upon their arrival at Wright-Patterson, Fulgham, who Kittinger did
not want to transport on a commercial flight due to his odd appearance, still
could not open his eyes and had to be led down the steps of the aircraft.
Kittinger recalled that Fulgham's wife was waiting at the bottom of the
aircraft steps when they arrived.

"They dropped the ramp and I looked down at the bottom and there
was Dan Fulgham's wife," Kittinger said. "Dan couldn't see.. .so I grabbed
him by the arm... Dan's wife sees me leading this blob down the staircase...
and she looks right at me and says, 'Where's my husband?' I said, 'Ma'am,
this is your husband'. I presented her this blob that I was leading down the
ramp. And she let out this scream you could hear a mile away. He was such
a horrendous looking thing that she had no idea that the thing I was leading
down that ramp was her husband." 238


Fig. 29. As a physiologist for
the space program, Fulgham
(third from left) discusses
Project Gemini emergency
escape systems at the U.S.
Navy Aerospace Recovery
facility at El Centro, Calif, on
January 28, 1965. Shown with
Fulgham (from left) are NASA
astronaut Jim Lovell, NASA
project engineer Hilary Ray,
and NASA astronaut Alan
Bean. (U.S. Navy photo)


120


Fig. 30. A veteran of 100
combat missions during the
Korean conflict, Fulgham flew
133 combat missions in F-4
aircraft (shown here) in 1966-
67 as a member of the 555th
"Triple Nickel" Tactical Fighter
Squadron at Ubon Air Base,
Thailand, (photo collection of
Dan D. Fulgham)

Fulgham recalled that upon his return to work at the Aero Medical
Laboratory he received reactions of "immediate compassionate sympathy"
from persons he encountered, including his secretary, who cried when she
saw him. 239 Within several weeks, Fulgham returned to flying status with
no permanent effects. Fulgham went on to complete a distinguished career
in the Air Force and retired as a colonel in 1978. Fulgham's assignments
included combat tours in fighter aircraft in both Korea and Vietnam, as well
as an assignment as an experimental parachutist and physiologist for the
space program.

Summary

In this section, documented research revealed that the reports of
"bodies" at the Roswell AAF hospital were grossly inaccurate and most
probably had origins in actual Air Force mishaps. Examinations of official
records of the alleged primary witnesses revealed that the "missing nurse"
was never missing, and the pediatrician did not arrive at the Walker AFB
hospital until 1951 — four years after the alleged incident. The many
fundamental errors in the story, combined with the substantial similarities to
the actual mishaps, show that the most credible account associated with the
"Roswell Incident" is certainly not extraterrestrial and is unrelated to any
events that occurred in July 1947.


121


Conclusion


When critically examined, the claims that the U.S. Army Air
Forces recovered a flying saucer and alien crew in 1947, were found to be
a compilation of many verifiable events. For the most part, the descriptions
collected by UFO theorists were of actual operations and tests carried out by
the U.S. Air Force in the 1950s. Despite the usual unsavory accusations by
UFO proponents of cover-up, conspiracy, intimidation, etc., documented
research revealed that many of the activities were actually historic scientific
achievements of which the Air Force is very proud. However, other
descriptions are believed to be distorted references to Air Force members
who were killed or injured in the line of duty. The incomplete and inaccurate
intermingling of these actual events were grounded in just enough fact
to weave a sensational story, but cannot withstand close scrutiny when
compared to official records.

To analyze reports of alien bodies that at first appeared to be so
offbeat as to not be remotely based in fact, it was necessary to evaluate a
wide range of books, interviews, videos, etc., that a less objective review
might have rejected out of hand. Only through an inclusive evaluation of
these sources were Air Force researchers able to understand the interconnectivity
of the widely separated events believed responsible for this "incident." And,
in opposition to critics who believe Air Force research involving this subject
is anything but objective, this research relied almost exclusively on the
descriptions provided by the UFO proponents themselves. When collected
and examined, the actual statements of the witnesses — not the extraterrestrial
interpretations of UFO proponents — indicated that something was very
wrong. When these descriptions were compared to documented Air Force
activities, they were much too similar to be a coincidence. Soon, it became
apparent that the witnesses or the UFO proponents who liberally interpreted
their statements were either 1) confused, or 2) attempting to perpetrate
a hoax, believing that no serious efforts would ever be taken to verify
their stories.

In preparing this report, attempts were made not to only explain what
conclusions were reached, but how they were reached. This undertaking was
to try to de-mystify the research process by outlining the simple and logical
research techniques that identified the underlying actual events. In regard
to statements of witnesses that were clearly descriptions of Air Force activities,
such as those that described anthropomorphic dummies, these could be
generously viewed as situational misunderstandings or even honest mistakes.


123


Fig. 31. Plaque placed at
Holloman AFB honoring three
Balloon Branch members
killed during a high altitude
balloon recovery when their
L-20 balloon chase plane
crashed in the rugged Gila
Mountains near Stafford, Ariz.
(U.S. Air Force photo)


Fig. 32. (Left) The balloon
launch facility at Holloman
AFB, N.M. was named in
honor of Maj. Richard L.
Nenninger who died of
injuries received in an aircraft
crash during a balloon
recovery mission on April 7,
1970 in the Sacramento
Mountains near Ruidoso, N.M.
(US. Air Force photo)

Fig. 33. (Right) A semi-
conscious Capt. Joseph W.
Kittinger, Jr., following the
Excelsior I parachute jump
from 76,000 feet. With his
parachute wrapped around
his neck and body and
hopelessly out of control,
his life was saved by an
ingeniously designed
reserve parachute system
that opened just moments
before contacting the desert
floor; White Sands Proving
Ground, November 16, 1959.
(U.S. Air Force photo)


124


Other descriptions, particularly those believed to be thinly veiled references to
deceased or injured Air Force members, are difficult to view as naive
misunderstandings. Any attempt to misrepresent or capitalize on tragic incidents
in which Air Force members died or were injured in service to their country
significantly alters what would otherwise be viewed as simple
misinterpretations or honest mistakes.

Finally, after reviewing this report, some persons may legitimately
ask why the Air Force expended time and effort to respond to mythical, if not
comedic, allegations of recoveries of "flying saucers" and "space aliens."
The answer to those persons is:

• Initially the Air Force was required to respond to an official
request from the General Accounting Office.

• High altitude balloon research, aircraft escape systems,
and other technologies that were misrepresented as part of the
Roswell Incident, accounted for significant contributions to the
knowledge of the atmosphere, to the quest for space flight, and
to the defense of this nation. The U.S. Air Force is exceedingly
proud of these accomplishments. Distorted and incomplete
descriptions of these activities do not pay tribute to these
important exploits or to the individuals who, often at great
personal risk, boldly carried them out.

• A sobering reality of the mission of the U.S. Air Force, as
evidenced by the aircraft mishaps described in this report, is that
defending this nation is a dangerous profession. On a daily basis,
members of the U.S. Air Force perform hazardous missions in
many locations throughout the world. Unfortunately, these
missions sometimes result in injuries or deaths. It is the right —
and indeed the duty — of the Air Force to challenge those who
attempt to exploit these human tragedies wherever, and whenever,
they are discovered.

• The misrepresentations of Air Force activities as an extraterrestrial
"incident" is misleading to the public and is simply an affront to
the truth.

This comprehensive further examination of the so-called "Roswell
Incident" found no evidence whatsoever of flying saucers, space aliens, or
sinister government cover-ups. But, even if unintentionally, it did serve to
highlight a series of events that embody the proud history of the finest air
force in the world — the U.S. Air Force. The actual events examined here,
rich in human and scientific triumph, tempered by the stark realities of the
dangers of the Air Force mission, are but one small portion of that history.
The many Air Force activities cobbled together in the ever changing collage
that has become the "Roswell Incident," when examined in the clear light of
historical research, revealed a remarkable chapter of the Air Force story. In
the final analysis, this examination simply illustrates once again, that fact is
indeed stranger, and often much more fascinating, than fiction.


125


Notes - Section One


1. Headquarters United States Air Force, The Roswell Report: Fact
vs. Fiction in the New Mexico Desert (Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Government Printing Office, 1995), 20-22.

2. ibid.

3. Don Berliner and Stanton T. Friedman, Crash at Corona
(New York: Paragon House, 1992), 14.

4. Headquarters United States Air Force, The Roswell Report: Fact
vs. Fiction in the New Mexico Desert (Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Government Printing Office, 1995), 20-22.

5. Ted Bloecher, Report of the UFO Wave of 1947 (Washington D.C.:
author, 1967), 1-13-14.

6. Combined History, 509th Bomb Group and Roswell Army Airfield,
1 July-31 July 1947, 39, Air Force Historical Research Agency,
Maxwell AFB, AL.

7. Roswell Daily Record, July 9, 1947, 1.

8. Socorro (N.M.) Defensor Chieftan, November 4, 1992.

9. Don Berliner, A Rebuttal of the Air Force Project Mogul Explanation
for the 1947 Roswell New Mexico, UFO Crash (Mount Ranier, Md.:
The Fund for UFO Research, 1995), 2.

10. Headquarters United States Air Force, The Roswell Report: Fact
vs. Fiction in the New Mexico Desert (Washington D.C.: U.S.
Government Printing Office, 1995), Attachment 32, Synopsis of
Balloon Research Findings, by 1st Lt. James Mc Andrew, 9.

11. Don Berliner and Stanton T. Friedman, Crash at Corona
(New York: Paragon House, 1992), 14.

12. Video, Recollections of Roswell Part H Gerald Anderson interview
(Washington, D.C.: Fund for UFO Research, 1993) (hereafter
Recollections of Roswell Part II).

13. James Ragsdale, transcript of interview with Donald R. Schmitt,
January 26, 1994.

14. Frank J. Kaufman, interview with Kevin Randle and Donald Schmitt,
January 27, 1990.


127


Notes - Section One

15. Recollections of Roswell, Part II Maltais interview.

16. ibid., Anderson interview.

17. ibid.

18. ibid., Maltais interview.

19. Recollections of Roswell, Part II, Anderson interview.

20. Charles Berlitz and William L. Moore, The Roswell Incident
(New York: Berkley, 1980), 61.

21. ibid.

22. Recollections of Roswell, Part II, Alice Knight interview.

23. Ragsdale and Recollections of Roswell, Part II, Anderson interview.

24. ibid.

25. Recollections of Roswell, Part II, Anderson interview.

26. Ragsdale.

27. James M. Grimwood, Project Mercury: A Chronology, Report No.
SP4001 (Wash. D.C.: NASA, 1963) 2-3, and Lloyd Mallan, Men,
Rockets and Space Rats, (New York: Julian Messier Inc., 1955) 84-98.

28. Research Division, College of Engineering, New York University,
Technical Report No. 93.02, Constant Level Balloons, Section 3,
Summary of Flights, July 15, 1949.

29. Capt. Vincent Mazza and Capt. Richard V. Wheeler, High Altitude
Bailouts, MCREXD-695-66M (Wright-Patterson AFB, OH: USAF
Air Materiel Command, September 18, 1950), 10-11.

30. A. M. Jacobs, "The Flier's SOS," St. Nicholas Magazine,
Vol. LII, No. 10 (August 1925), 1034-1039.

31. ibid.

32. Memo, Major H.H. Arnold, Chief Field Service Section, to
Commanding Officer, San Antonio Air Depot, subj: Drop Testing
of Parachutes, November 2, 1929. National Air and Space Museum
Archives, Paul E. Garber Facility, Silver Hill, Md., file no. 452.031,
Parachutes- (Dummies) 1927-1929.

33. J. Allen Neal, History: Development of Methods for Escape from
High Speed Aircraft, Vol. 1, (Wright-Patterson AFB, OH: Air
Research and Development Command, 1958), U.S. Air Force
Museum Archives, Wright-Patterson AFB, OH.


128


Notes - Section One


34. Memo, Ted Smith, to W.A. Daler, subj: Bid for Purchase Request
No. 301200, September 17, 1954, National Archives and Records
Administration, Accession No. 342-67E-2954, box 5/15, file 28.

35. H.T. E. Hertzberg, Anthropology of Anthropomorphic Dummies, Air Force
Medical Research Laboratory, AMRL-TR-69-61, February 1970, 3.

36. Maj. John R Stapp, Human Tolerance to Linear Deceleration, PartL
Preliminary Survey of the Aft Facing Seated Position, Air Force Technical
Report 5915, (Wright Patterson AFB, OH: Wright Air Development
Center, 1949) and Maj. John R Stapp, Part II. The Aft Facing Position and
the Development of a Crash Harness, Air Force Technical Report 5915
(Wright Patterson AFB, OH: Wright Air Development Center, 1951).

37. H.T. E. Hertzberg, Anthropology of Anthropomorphic Dummies, Air Force
Medical Research Laboratory, AMRL-TR-69-61, February 1970, 3.

38. ibid.

39. ltr., H.L. Daulton, Vice President and Secretary-Treasurer, Sierra
Engineering Company, to W.A. Daler, Headquarters Air Materiel
Command, subject: Proposal, Purchase Request No. 301200, September
16, 1954, National Archives and Records Administration, Accession
No. 342-67E-2954, box 5/15, file 28.

40. Joseph Smrcka, Senior Design Engineer, First Technology Safety
Systems, "Dummies - Past and Present," 2 (unpublished manuscript).

41. Sierra Engineering Co., "Sierra Sam," 1955, National Archives and
Records Administration, Accession No. 342-67E-2954, box 5/15, file 28.

42. 1st Lt. Raymond A. Madson, High Altitude Balloon Dummy Drops, Part L
The Unstabilized Dummy Drops, WADC Technical Report 57-477, (Wright
Patterson AFB, OH: Wright Air Development Center, Oct 1957) (hereafter
High Altitude Balloon Dummy Drops Part I), 27, and 1st Lt. Raymond A.
Madson, High Altitude Balloon Dummy Drops, II. The Stabilized Dummy
Drops, WADC Technical Report 57-477 (II) (Wright Patterson AFB, OH:
Aeronautical Systems Division, Air Force Systems Command, August
1961) (hereafter High Altitude Balloon Dummy Drops Part II), 18.

43. High Altitude Balloon Dummy Drops Part I, 1 .

44. High Altitude Balloon Dummy Drops Part I and High Altitude Balloon
Dummy Drops Part II and Holloman Air Development Center, Weekly Test
Status Reports, Project MX-1450B (Manned Balloon), National Archives
and Records Administration, National Personnel Records Center, St. Louis,
MO, Accession No. 342-62A-A-641, box 115/248, folder; R-695-61D,
"High Altitude Escape Studies, Gen B-l, Manned Balloon Flights."


129


Notes - Section One


45. ibid.

46. High Altitude Balloon Dummy Drops Part I, 1 , and High Altitude Balloon
Dummy Drops Part II, 18.

47. Capt. Joseph W. Kittinger, Jr., The Long, Lonely Leap, (New York: E.R
Dutton & Co., Inc., 1961), and Lt. Col. David G. Simons, Man High, (New
York: Doubleday & Company, Inc., 1960), and Capt. Joseph W. Kittinger,
Jr., "The Long, Lonely Leap," National Geographic 1 18, no. 6 (December
1960): 854-873, "Fantastic Catch in the Sky, Record Leap towards Earth,"
Life 49, no. 9 (August 29,1960): 20-25, Popular Mechanics Magazine,
January 1951: 118, Collier's, June 25, 1954, Time, September 12, 1955,
"The Fastest Man on Earth".

48. Don Reffly, 'MAD Salutes an Unsung Hero," MAD, no. 61, (March 1961), 46.

49. High Altitude Balloon Dummy Drops Part I, and High Altitude Balloon
Dummy Drops Part IL

50. High Altitude Balloon Dummy Drops Part II, 11-12.

51. Signed, sworn statement of Raymond A. Madson, Lt. Col., USAF (Ret)
and High Altitude Balloon Dummy Drops, Part I, 16.

52. High Altitude Balloon Dummy Drops, Part /, 5.

53. High Altitude Balloon Dummy Drops, Part I, 17.

54. ibid., and Memorandum, subj: Balloon Tracking and Recovery Equipment, ad.,
National Archives and Records Administration, Accession No. 342-67B-2133,
box 65/249, file 2, "Biophysics Branch-Escape Section, High Altitude Escape
Studies, 7218-71719," and Robert Blankenship, retired Balloon Branch Recovery
Supervisor, telephone interview with 1st Lt. James McAndrew, July 14, 1995.

55. Signed, sworn statement of Raymond A. Madson, Lt. Col, USAF (Ret).

56. Blankenship, and Balloon Tracking and Recovery Equipment, n.d., and
Bernard D. Gildenberg, Meteorological Aspects of Constant-Level Balloon
Operations in the Southwestern United States (hereafter Meteorological
Aspects of Constant-Level Balloon Operations in the Southwestern United
States), AFCRL-66-706 (L.G. Hanscom Field, Bedford, MA: Air Force
Cambridge Research Laboratories, October 1966), 27.

57. Historical Branch, Office of Information Services, Air Force Missile
Development Center, Contributions of Balloon Operations to Research and
Development at the Air Force Missile Development Center Holloman AFB,
N. Mex. 1947-1958 (Holloman AFB, NM: Air Research and Development
Command, 1958) (hereafter Contributions of Balloon Operations to Research
and Development at the Air Force Missile Development Center, 1947-1958), 90.


130


Notes - Section One

58. High Altitude Balloon Dummy Drops, Part I, 16.

59. ibid., 17.

60. High Altitude Balloon Dummy Drops, Part I, 17.

6 1 . Maj . John R Stapp, Human Tolerance to Linear Deceleration, Part I
Preliminary Survey of the Aft Facing Seated Position, Air Force Technical
Report 5915, (Wright Patterson AFB, OH: Wright Air Development
Center, 1949) and Maj . John P. Stapp, Part II The Aft Facing Position and
the Development of a Crash Harness, Air Force Technical Report 5915
(Wright Patterson AFB, OH: Wright Air Development Center, 1951).

62. High Altitude Balloon Dummy Drops, Part II, 6.

63. Signed, sworn statement of Joseph W. Kittinger, Jr., Col., USAF (Ret).

64. ibid.

65. Alderson Research Laboratories, Inc., "Instructions for Operation and
Maintenance, Model F-95 Anthropomorphic Test Dummies," May 3, 1956,
1, and Glenn Richards, retired Balloon Branch Instrumentation Specialist,
telephone interview with Capt. James Mc Andrew, September 5, 1995.

66. Alderson Research Laboratories, Inc., "Instructions for Operation and
Maintenance, Model F-95 Anthropomorphic Test Dummies," May 3, 1956, 1,
and Ronald G. Hansen, Lt. Col. USAR, (Ret), Balloon Recovery Helicopter
Pilot, telephone interview with 1st Lt. James Mc Andrew, May 1, 1995.

67. High Altitude Balloon Dummy Drops, Part I, 7-8.

68. Blankenship.

69. ibid.

70. The Beverly Hills Citizen, March 12, 1956,7.

71. Research Division, College of Engineering, New York University,
Special Report No. 1, Constant Level Balloon, May 1947, 20-22.

72. Research Division, College of Engineering, New York University, Technical
Report No. 93.03, Constant Level Balloons, Operations, March 1, 1951, 105.

73. U.S. Air Force Phillips Laboratory, "Phillips Laboratory Space Experiments
Directorate, Balloon, Rocket, and Satellite Capabilities," n.d., 33.

74. Bernard D. Gildenberg, Balloon Branch Meteorologist and Engineer,
interviewed by 1st Lt. James McAndrew, May 28, 1995, and
Contributions of Balloon Operations 1947-1958, 73.

75. ibid.


131


Notes - Section One

76. ibid.

77. Contributions of Balloon Operations 1947-1958, 73.

78. "Flight Summary, Non-Extensible Balloon Operations, 6580th Test
Squadron (Special), June 1950 to October 1954," 22-24.

79. Contributions of Balloon Operations 1947-1958, 73-14.

80. Lt. Col. David G. Simons (MC), Stratosphere Balloon Techniques for
Exposing Living Specimens to Primary Cosmic Ray Particles, Holloman
Air Development Center TR 54-16, November 1954, 10-11.

8 1 . "Flight Summary Non-Extensible Balloon Operations 6580th Test
Squadron (Special), June 1950 to October 1954," 1-31, and
Contributions of Balloon Operations 1947-1958, 24.

82. "Flight Summary Non-Extensible Balloon Operations 6580th Test
Squadron (Special), June 1950 to October 1954," 4.

83. Research Division, College of Engineering, New York University,
Technical Report No. 93.02, Constant Level Balloons, Section 3, Summary
of Flights, July 15, 1949, 32, in Headquarters United States Air Force, The
Roswell Report: Fact vs. Fiction in the New Mexico Desert (Washington,
D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1995), Appendix 12.

84. Holloman Air Development Center, "Test Report on Radar Target
Balloons", October 31, 1955, Air Force Historical Research Agency,
Maxwell, AFB, AL, Reel # 3181 1, Frame 1 139, and Contributions of
Balloon Operations 1947-1958, 40-45.

85. Kevin C. Ruffner, ed., Corona: America's First Satellite Program
(Washington, D.C.: Center for the Study of Intelligence, Central
Intelligence Agency, 1995), 22.

86. ibid., 21-22.

87. Air Force Missile Development Center, "Chronology of Events,"
Sept. 1, 1957- Aug 10, 1962, Air Force Historical Research Agency,
Maxwell, AFB, AL, Reel # 31731, Frame 561, and Flight Records of
Bernard D. Gildenberg, Meteorologist, Holloman AFB Balloon Branch,
October 12, 1956 - March 14, 1961.

88. Flight Summary, Discoverer Balloon Flights, March 31, 1960-
April 22, 1960, Air Force Historical Research Agency, Maxwell, AFB,
AL, Reel# 31811, frame 569.

89. ibid.

90. ibid.


132


Notes - Section One

9 1 . Kevin C. Ruffner, ed., Corona: America 's First Satellite Program
(Washington, D.C.: Center for the Study of Intelligence, Central
Intelligence Agency, 1995), 21-22.

92. ibid.

93. ibid.

94. Martin Marietta Corporation, "Viking '75, Balloon Launched Decelerator
Test Program Post Flight Report, BLDT Vehicle AV-3," TR 3720293, 1972,
IV-I and Edward J. Kirschner, Aerospace Balloons; From Montgolfiere
to Space (Blue Ridge Summit, Pa.: Aero Publishers, 1985), 64-66.

95. Martin Marietta Corporation, "Viking '75, Balloon Launched
Decelerator Test Program Post Flight Report, BLDT Vehicle AV-3,"
TR 3720293, 1972, IV-I.

96. Kevin D. Randle and Donald R. Schmitt, The Truth About the UFO
Crash at Roswell (New York: Avon Books, 1994), photograph section.

97. Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories, "Report on Research, for the
Period July 1965 - June 1967", AFCRL TR-68-0039, November 1967, 150-151.

98. Gildenberg.

99. Database of high altitude balloon operations on file at SAF/AAZD
compiled from the following sources: Research Division, College of
Engineering, New York University, Technical Report No, 93.02,
Constant Level Balloons, Section 3, Summary of Flights, July 15, 1949;
"Flight Summary Non-Extensible Balloon Operations 6580th Test
Squadron (Special), June 1950 to October 1954," National Archives and
Records Administration, National Personnel Records Center, St. Louis,
Mo., Accession No. 342-62 A- 181, box 14/18; Flight Records of
Bernard D. Gildenberg, Meteorologist, Holloman AFB Balloon Branch.,
October 12, 1956 - March 14, 1961; "Summary of Balloon Flights
Launched from Holloman AFB, N.M., 1962 thru 1987", Space and
Missile Command, Test and Evaluation Unit (SMC/TE, OL-AC) files,
Holloman AFB, N.M. Additional flight data on file (microfilm), U.S. Air
Force Phillips Laboratory, Geophysics Directorate, Hanscom AFB, Mass.

100. Bernard D. Gildenberg, Meteorological Aspects of Constant-Level
Balloon Operations in the Southwestern United States, AFCRL-66-706
(L.G. Hanscom Field, Bedford, MA: Air Force Cambridge Research
Laboratories, October 1966), and Bernard D. Gildenberg, General
Philosophy and Techniques of Balloon Control in Lewis A. Grass, ed.,
Proceedings, Sixth AFCRL Scientific Balloon Symposium,
AFCRL-70-0543, (L.G. Hanscom Field, Bedford, Mass.: Air Force
Cambridge Research Laboratories, October 1970).


133


Notes - Section One

101. Blankenship.

102. ibid.

103. ibid.

104. ibid.

105. ibid.

106. Joseph Longshore, Balloon Branch Supervisor, telephone interview
with Capt. James Mc Andrew, August 16, 1995.

107. Signed sworn statement of James Ragsdale in Ragsdale Productions
Inc., The Jim Ragsdale Story: A Closer Look at the Roswell Incident
(Hall Poorbough Press, Inc., 1996), 10-11, and signed sworn statement
of James Ragsdale in Karl T. Pfloek, Roswell in Perspective
(Washington, D.C.: Fund for UFO Research, 1994), 167.

108. James Ragsdale, interview with Donald R. Schmitt, January 26, 1993.

109. High Altitude Balloon Dummy Drops, Part II, 17.

1 10. High Altitude Balloon Dummy Drops Part I, 27-30 and High Altitude
Balloon Dummy Drops, Part II, 6, 10-12, 17.

111. Joseph W. Kittinger, Jr., Col., USAF (Ret), interview with
1st Lt. James Mc Andrew, June 23, 1995.

112. Contributions of Balloon Operations to Research and Development
at the Air Force Missile Development Center J947 -1958, 90, and
Meteorological Aspects of Constant-Level Balloon Operations in the
Southwestern United States, L

113. High Altitude Balloon Dummy Drops Part I, 24.

1 14. Blankenship and Kittinger.

115. ibid.

1 16. Memorandum, subj: Balloon Tracking and Recovery Equipment, n.d.,
National Archives and Records Administration, National Personnel
Records Center, St. Louis, Mo., Accession No. 342-67B-2133, box
65/249, file 2, "Biophysics Branch-Escape Section, High Altitude
Escape Studies, 7218-71719."

1 17. ibid., and Blankenship.

118. Charles Berlitz and William L. Moore, The Roswell Incident (New
York: Berkley, 1980), 64, and Don Berliner and Stanton Friedman,
Crash at Corona (New York: Paragon House, 1992), 88.

1 19. Recollections of Roswell, Part II, Knight interview.

120. Recollections of Roswell, Part II, Maltais interview.


134


Notes - Section One

121 . Charles Berlitz and William L. Moore, The Roswell Incident (New
York: Berkley, 1980), 64, and Don Berliner and Stanton Friedman,
Crash at Corona (New York: Paragon House, 1992), 88.

122. Berliner and Friedman, 89.

1 23 . Mark Rodeghier and Fred Whiting, The Plains of San Agustin Controversy,
July, 1947: Gerald Anderson, Barney Barnett, and the Archaeologists,
Introduction (Chicago, IL, Washington, D.C.: J. Allen Hynek Center for
UFO Studies and The Fund for UFO Research, June 1992), 2.

124. ibid.

125. Kevin D. Randle, Donald R. Schmitt, and Thomas J. Carey, Gerald
Anderson and the Plains of San Agustin, in The Plains of San Agustin
Controversy, July, 1947: Gerald Anderson, Barney Barnett, and the
Archaeologists (Chicago, IL, Washington, D.C.: J. Allen Hynek Center
for UFO Studies, and The Fund for UFO Research, June 1992), 19.

126. Recollections of Roswell, Part II, Anderson interview.

127. Berliner and Friedman, 90.

128. ibid., 91.

129. Gerald F. Anderson, interview with Kevin D. Randle, February 4,
1990, in The Plains of San Agustin Controversy, July, 1947: Gerald
Anderson, Barney Barnett, and the Archaeologists (Chicago, IL,
Washington, D.C.: J. Allen Hynek Center for UFO Studies and The
Fund for UFO Research, June 1992), 59.

130. Recollections of Roswell, Part II, Anderson interview.

131. ibid.

132. ibid.

133. ibid.

134. ibid.

135. Blankenship and Kittinger.

136. Recollections of Roswell, Part II, Anderson interview.

137. "Sierra Sam: Scientific Whipping Boy," Machine Design, December
22, 1960 and "Dummy Takes a Beating for Science's Sake," Aviation
Week, January 12, 1953.

138. Ragsdale.

139. Recollections of Roswell, Part II, Anderson interview.

140. Alderson Research Laboratories Inc., "Modular Series Anthropomorphic
Test Dummies," Alderson Research Laboratories Inc., June 1955), 5.


135


Notes - Section One

141 . Recollections ofRoswell, Part II, Anderson interview.

142. ibid.

143. Signed, sworn statement of Raymond A. Madson, Lt. Col, USAF (Ret).

144. Recollections ofRoswell, Part II, Anderson interview.

145. High Altitude Balloon Dummy Drops, Part I, 22.

146. Recollections ofRoswell, Part II, Anderson interview.

147. High Altitude Balloon Dummy Drops, Part I, 9, and High Altitude
Balloon Dummy Drops, Part II, 8.

148. Berliner and Friedman, 9 1 .

149. ibid., 92-94.

150. Recollections ofRoswell, Part II, Anderson interview.

151. ibid.

152. Memorandum, subject: Balloon Tracking and Recovery Equipment, ad., National
Archives and Records Administration, National Personnel Records Center, St.
Louis, Mo., Accession No. 342-67B-2133, box 65/249, file 2, "Biophysics Branch-
Escape Section, High Altitude Escape Studies, 7218-71719," and High Altitude
Balloon Dummy Drops, Part I, 17, and 6 Weekly Test Status Report on Project
7218, Manned Balloon Flights, (MX-1450B)", for Week Ending 28 February
1955, National Archives and Records Administration, National Personnel
Records Center, St. Louis, Mo., Accession No. 342-66A-181, Box 14/18.

153. Kittinger and Historical Branch, Office of Information Services,

Air Research and Development Command, History of Flight Support
Holloman Air Development Center 1946-1957 (Holloman AFB, N.M.:
Holloman Air Development Center, 1957), 101.

154. Blankenship.

155. Berliner and Friedman, 106.

156. Bernard D. Gildenberg, Techniques Developed for Heavy Load Non-
Extensible Balloon Flights, Report No. HADC-TN-54-3 (Holloman
AFB, NM: Holloman Air Development Center, March 1954), 7.

157. Recollections ofRoswell, Part II, Anderson interview.

158. Blankenship and Ole Jorgeson, MSgt., USAF, (Ret), Balloon Branch
Communications Supervisor, interview with 1st Lt. James McAndrew,
May 28, 1995.

159. ibid.

160. Berliner and Friedman, 107.

161. ibid.


136


Notes - Section One

162. Blankenship.

163. Berliner and Friedman, 106.

164. Blankenship.

165. Signed sworn statement of James Ragsdale in, Ragsdale Productions
Inc., The Jim Ragsdale Story: A Closer Look at the Roswell Incident
(Hall Poorbough Press, Inc., 1996), 10-11, and signed sworn
statement of James Ragsdale in Karl T. Pflock, Roswell in Perspective
(Washington, D.C.: Fund for UFO Research, 1994), 167.

166. Ragsdale.

167. Frank J. Kaufman, interview with Kevin Rancfle and Donald Schmitt, January 27, 1990.

168. Recollections of Roswell Part II Anderson interview.

169. Ragsdale.

170. ibid.

171. Berliner and Friedman, 92.

172. Recollections of Roswell Part II Maltais interview.

173. ibid., Knight interview.

1 74. ibid. , Anderson interview.

175. ibid., Maltais interview.

176. ibid.

177. ibid., Anderson interview.

178. Ragsdale.

179. Recollections of Roswell Part II Anderson interview.

180. ibid., Maltais interview.

181. ibid., Anderson interview.

182. ibid.

183. ibid., Maltais interview.

184. ibid., Anderson interview.

185. Charles Berlitz and William L. Moore, The Roswell Incident (New
York: Berkley, 1980), 61.

186. Berliner and Friedman, 92.

187. Recollections of Roswell Part II Anderson interview.

1 88. Berliner and Friedman, 9 1 .

189. ibid.


137


Notes - Section One

190. ibid., 92.

191. ibid., 91.

192. Recollections ofRoswell, Part II Maltais interview.

193. Berliner and Friedman, 93.

194. ibid., 93-94.

195. ibid., 92.

196. Recollections ofRoswell, Part II, Anderson interview.

197. Berliner and Friedman, 106.

198. Ragsdale.

199. ibid.

200. Recollections ofRoswell, Part II, Anderson interview.

201. ibid.

202. Ragsdale.

203. Recollections ofRoswell, Part II, Anderson interview.

204. ibid.

205. ibid.

206. Berliner and Friedman, 106.

207. Ragsdale.

208. Berliner and Friedman, 107.

209. Recollections ofRoswell, Part II, Anderson interview.

210. ibid.

211. Ragsdale.

212. Recollections ofRoswell, Part II, Anderson interview.

213. Ragsdale.

214. Recollections ofRoswell, Part II, Anderson interview.

215. Ragsdale.

216. Recollections ofRoswell, Part II, Anderson interview.

217. ibid.

218. Berliner and Friedman, 107.


138


Notes - Section Two


1. Karl T. Pflock, "Star Witness: The Mortician of Roswell Breaks His
Code of Silence," Omni, Fall 1995, 103.

2. Don Berliner and Stanton T. Friedman, Crash at Corona (New York:
Paragon House, 1992), 1 17, 120, and W. Glenn Dennis, interview with
Karl T. Pflock, November 2, 1992, 18-19.

3. Video, Recollections of Roswell, Part II, W. Glenn Dennis interview
(Washington, D.C.: Fund for UFO Research, 1993) (hereafter
Recollections of Roswell, Part II).

4. Recollections of Roswell, Part II, W. Glenn Dennis interview.

5. ibid.

6. ibid.

7. ibid.

8. ibid., and W. Glenn Dennis, interview with Karl T. Pflock, November 2,
1992, and Karl T. Pflock, "Star Witness: The Mortician of Roswell
Breaks His Code of Silence," Omni, Fall 1995, 103.

9. Karl T. Pflock, "Star Witness: The Mortician of Roswell Breaks His
Code of Silence," Omni, Fall 1995, 103.

10. Recollections of Roswell, Part II, W. Glenn Dennis interview.

11. ibid.

12. ibid.

13. Don Berliner and Stanton T. Friedman, Crash at Corona (New York:
Paragon House, 1992), 120, and W. Glenn Dennis, interview with Karl
T. Pflock, November 2, 1992.

14. Karl T. Pflock, "Star Witness: The Mortician of Roswell Breaks His
Code of Silence," Omni, Fall 1995, 103.

15. Recollections of Roswell, Part II, W. Glenn Dennis interview.

16. Don Berliner and Stanton T. Friedman, Crash at Corona
(New York: Paragon House, 1992), 117.

17. Recollections of Roswell, Part II, W. Glenn Dennis interview.

18. ibid.

19. ibid.

20. ibid.


139


Notes - Section Two


21. W. Glenn Dennis, interview with Stanton T. Friedman, August 5, 1989.

22. Recollections ofRoswell, Part II, W. Glenn Dennis interview.

23. W. Glenn Dennis, interview with Karl T. Pflock, November 2, 1992.

24. Recollections ofRoswell, Part II, W. Glenn Dennis interview.

25. W. Glenn Dennis, interview with Karl T. Pflock, November 2, 1992.

26. Recollections ofRoswell, Part II, W. Glenn Dennis interview.

27. ibid.

28. ibid.

29. Don Berliner and Stanton T. Friedman, Crash at Corona (New York:
Paragon House, 1992), 119, and Karl T. Pflock, "Star Witness:

The Mortician ofRoswell Breaks His Code of Silence," Omni,
Fall 1995, 105.

30. Recollections ofRoswell, Part II, W. Glenn Dennis interview.

31. ibid.

32. W. Glenn Dennis, interview with Karl T. Pflock, November 2, 1992.

33. ibid.

34. Karl T. Pflock, "Star Witness: The Mortician of Roswell Breaks His
Code of Silence," Omni, Fall 1995, 105, and W. Glenn Dennis, interview
with Karl T. Pflock, November 2, 1992.

35. Karl T. Pflock, "Star Witness: The Mortician of Roswell Breaks His
Code of Silence," Omni, Fall 1995, 105.

36 W. Glenn Dennis, interview with Stanton T. Friedman, August 5, 1989.

37. ibid.

38. Don Berliner and Stanton T. Friedman, Crash at Corona (New York:
Paragon House, 1992), 119.

39. Headquarters United States Air Force, The Roswell Report: Fact vs.
Fiction in the New Mexico Desert (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government
Printing Office, 1995), Attachment 32, "Synopsis of Balloon Research
Findings by 1st Lt. James McAndrew".

40. 427th AAFBU Sq "M" Morning Reports, July 8-9 1947, National
Archives and Records Administration, National Personnel Records
Center, St. Louis, Mo.

41 . Personnel record of 1st Lt. Angele A. (LaRue) Thessing, National
Archives and Records Administration, National Personnel Records
Center, St. Louis, Mo.


140


Notes - Section Two


42. ibid.

43. Personnel records of Capt. Joyce Goddard, 1st Lt. Rosemary J. Brown,
1st Lt. Eileen M. Fanton, 1st Lt. Angele A. LaRue, 1st Lt. Claudia
Uebele, National Archives and Records Administration, National
Personnel Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.

44. Karl T. Pflock, "Star Witness: The Mortician of Roswell Breaks His
Code of Silence, " Omni, Fall 1995, 132, and W. Glenn Dennis, interview
with Stanton T. Friedman, August 5, 1989.

45. Paul McCarthy, "The Case of the Vanishing Nurses," Omni, Fall 1995,
107-114.

46. WD AGO FORM 66, "Officer's Qualification Record," Personnel
Record of Capt. Eileen M. Fanton, National Archives and Records
Administration, National Personnel Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.

47. DD Form 214, "Armed Forces of the United States Report of Transfer or
Discharge", April 30, 1958, Personnel file of Capt. Eileen M. Fanton,
National Archives and Records Administration, National Personnel
Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.

48. Karl T. Pflock, "Star Witness: The Mortician of Roswell Breaks His
Code of Silence," Omni, Fall 1995, 132.

49. WD AGO FORM 66, "Officer's Qualification Record," and

WD AGO FORM 66-3, "AAF Medical Dep't Officer's Qualification
Record," Personnel Record of Capt. Eileen M. Fanton, National
Archives and Records Administration, National Personnel Records
Center, St. Louis, Mo.

50. W. Glenn Dennis, interview with Karl T. Pflock,
November 2, 1992.

51. WD AGO FORM 66-3, "AAF Medical Dep't Officer's Qualification
Record," Personnel Record of Capt. Eileen M. Fanton, National
Archives and Records Administration, National Personnel Records
Center, St. Louis, Mo.

52. Karl T. Pflock, "Star Witness: The Mortician of Roswell Breaks His
Code of Silence," Omni, Fall 1995, 104 and W. Glenn Dennis, interview
with Karl T. Pflock, November 2, 1992, 11, 15.

53. WD AGO FORM 66, "Officer's Qualification Record," Personnel
Record of Capt. Eileen M. Fanton, National Archives and Records
Administration, National Personnel Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.

54. ibid.


141


Notes - Section Two

55. WD MD FORM 55 A, "Clinical Record Brief," September 5, 1947, and
WD AGO FORM 8-38, " Special Examination or Additional Data,"
September 11, 1947, Personnel Record of Capt. Eileen M. Fanton,
National Archives and Records Administration, National Personnel
Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.

56. ibid, and Physical Examination Board Proceedings, Capt. Eileen M.
Fanton, August 24, 1955, Personnel Record of Capt. Eileen M. Fanton,
National Archives and Records Administration, National Personnel
Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.

57. W. Glenn Dennis, interview with Stanton T. Friedman, August 5, 1989,
and W. Glenn Dennis, interview with Karl T. Pflock, November 2, 1992.

58. W. Glenn Dennis, interview with Stanton T. Friedman, August 5, 1989.

59. ibid.

60. Roster of Officers, 6th Bomb Wing, Walker AFB, N.M., December 30,
1952, "History of the 6th Bomb Wing, December 1952," Air Force
Historical Research Center, Maxwell AFB, AL.

61. ibid.

62. Dr. Frank B. Nordstrom, interview with Capt. James Mc Andrew,
April 25, 1996, and Dr. Frank B. Nordstrom, Signed Sworn Statement,
April 25, 1996.

63. Charles E. Clouthier, Signed Sworn Statement, April 26, 1996.

64. ibid.

65. J.P. Cahn, "Flying Saucers and the Mysterious Little Green Men,"
True 31, No. 184, (September 1952), 19.

66. ibid., 103.

67. ibid., 19.

68. J.P. Cahn, "Flying Saucer Swindlers," True 36, No. 231, (August 1956), 36.

69. ibid., 36.

70. J.P. Cahn, " Flying Saucers and the Mysterious Little Green Men,"
True 31, No. 184, (September 1952), 110.

71. ibid.

72. "4 Rank Titles Change," Air Force Times, March 29, 1952, 1, 22.

73. Alan L. Gropman, The Air Force Integrates, 1945-1964 (Washington,
D.C.: Office of Air Force History, 1985), 243.


142


Notes - Section Two

74. Don Berliner and Stanton T. Friedman, Crash at Corona
(New York: Paragon House, 1992), 117.

75. WD AGO FORM 66, "Officer's Qualification Record," and AF FORM
11, "Officer Military Record," Personnel Record of Col. Lee F. Ferrell,
National Archives and Records Administration, National Personnel
Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.

76. ibid.

77. Karl T. Pflock, "Star Witness: The Mortician of Roswell Breaks His
Code of Silence," Omni, Fall 1995, 105, and W. Glenn Dennis, interview
with Karl T. Pflock, November 2, 1992.

78. Karl T. Pflock, "Star Witness: The Mortician of Roswell Breaks His
Code of Silence," Omni, Fall 1995, 105.

79. Karl T. Pflock, "Star Witness: The Mortician of Roswell Breaks His
Code of Silence," Omni, Fall 1995, 105, and W. Glenn Dennis, interview
with Karl T. Pflock, November 2, 1992.

80. W. Glenn Dennis, interview with Karl T. Pflock, November 2, 1992.

81. ibid.

82. ibid.

83. 427th AAFBU Sq. "M" Morning Reports, July 1-31,1947, National
Archives and Records Administration, National Personnel Records
Center, St. Louis, Mo.

84. WD AGO FORM 1, "Morning Report," 427th AAFBU Sq. "M," April 1,
1947 through October 1, 1947, and WD AGO FORM 66, "Officer's
Qualification Record," Personnel Record of Capt. Joyce Goddard,
National Archives and Records Administration, National Personnel
Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.

85. WD AGO FORM 66, "Officer's Qualification Record," Personnel
Record of Capt. Joyce Goddard, National Archives and Records
Administration, National Personnel Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.

86. WD AGO FORM 1, "Morning Report," 427th AAFBU,
Sq. "M," August 7, 1947, National Archives and Records
Administration, National Personnel Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.

87. ibid., and WD AGO FORM 66, "Officer's Qualification Record,"
Personnel Record of Capt. Lucille C. Slattery, National Archives and
Records Administration, National Personnel Records Center,

St. Louis, Mo.


143


Notes - Section Two


88. Ethel Kovatch-Scott, Col., USAF (Ret), telephone interview with Capt.
James Mc Andrew, May 5, 1995 and July 3, 1996, and Mary Hoadley,
Lt. Col., USAF (Ret), telephone interview with 1st Lt. James McAndrew,
May 5, 1995, and Mary L. Wiggins, Maj., USAF (Ret), telephone
interview with 1st Lt. James McAndrew, May 5, 1995.

89. ibid.

90. WD AGO FORM 66, "Officer's Qualification Record," Personnel
Record of Capt. Lucille C. Slattery, National Archives and Records
Administration, National Personnel Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.

91. WD AGO FORM 1, "Morning Report," 427th AAFBU, Sq. "M," 509th
Station Medical Group, 509th Medical Group, 509th Medical Squadron,
January 1947 through February 1952, National Archives and Records
Administration, National Personnel Records Center, St. Louis, Mo. and
Rosters of Officers, 509th Bomb Wing- February 1952 through July
1958, 6th Bomb Wing- February 1952 through March 1967, and AF
FORM 11, "Officer Military Record," Personnel Record of Maj.
Idabelle M. Wilson, National Archives and Records Administration,
National Personnel Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.

92. AF FORM 11, "Officer Military Record," Personnel Record of Maj.
Idabelle M. Wilson, National Archives and Records Administration,
National Personnel Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.

93. ibid.

94. Idabelle M. Wilson, Maj., USAF, (Ret), telephone interview with
1st Lt. James McAndrew, April 28, 1995.

95. ibid.

96. Memo: Jack A. Comstock, Maj. (MC), Surgeon, 509th Station Medical
Group, to Major Robert W. Schick, Investigating Officer, Headquarters,
USAF, subj: Investigation of B-29 Crash, 18 August 1948, Aircraft
Accident No. 48-8-12, Aircraft #44-86383, Air Force Historical
Research Agency, Maxwell AFB, AL. and WD AGO Form 8-33,
"Clinical Record Brief," 12 August 1948, Personnel records of Air Force
members, service numbers AF 18041408 and AF 16191866, National
Archives and Records Administration, National Personnel Records
Center, St. Louis, Mo.

97. ibid.

98. ibid.

99. WD AGO Form 8-33, "Clinical Record Brief," 16 May 1949, Personnel
records of Air Force members, service numbers AO 827137 and AF
42050093, National Archives and Records Administration, National
Personnel Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.


144


Notes - Section Two

100. WD AGO Form 5-4, "Individual Crash Fire Report,"

20 May 1949, Aircraft Accident No. 49-5-16, Aircraft #43-48401, Air
Force Historical Research Agency, Maxwell AFB, AL.

101. WD AGO Form 8-33, "Clinical Record Brief," 16 May 1949, Personnel
records of Air Force members, service numbers AO 827137 and AF
42050093, National Archives and Records Administration, National
Personnel Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.

102. WD AGO Form 5-4, "Individual Crash Fire Report,"

19 December 1949, Aircraft Accident No. 49-12-15-2, Air Force
Historical Research Agency, Maxwell AFB, AL.

103. WD AGO Form 8-33, "Clinical Record Brief," 19 December 1949, and
"Autopsy Report," Personnel records of Air Force members, service
numbers 17343A, AF 11101085, and 15239923, National Archives and
Records Administration, National Personnel Records Center,

St. Louis, Mo.

104. ibid.

105. WD AGO Form 8-33, "Clinical Record Brief," 1 June 1950, Personnel
records of Air Force members, service numbers AO 685565 and AF
32668639, National Archives and Records Administration, National
Personnel Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.

106. ibid.

107. ibid.

108. Standard form 503, "Autopsy Protocol," June 16, 1955 of

Air Force members, service numbers AO 3006516 and AO 3004607,
Aircraft Accident No. 55-6-16-6, Air Force Historical Research Agency,
Maxwell AFB, AL.

109. DD Form 481-3, "Clinical Record Cover Sheet," June 16, 1955,
Personnel Records of Air Force members, service numbers AO
3006516 and AO 3004607, National Archives and Records
Administration, National Personnel Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.

1 10. Standard form 503, "Autopsy Protocol," June 16, 1955, of

Air Force members, service numbers AO 3006516 and AO 3004607,
Aircraft Accident No. 55-6-16-6, Air Force Historical Research Agency,
Maxwell AFB, AL.

111. Air Force Form 14b, "Medical Report of an Individual Involved in AF
Aircraft Accident," 3 October 1955, Aircraft Accident No. 55-10-3-6,
Air Force Historical Research Agency, Maxwell AFB, AL.

1 12. Official Trip Report Walker AFB, N.M. October 4, thru October 7,
1955, George Schwaderer, Identification Specialist to MCTSG,


145


Notes - Section Two

October 12, 1955, Accession No. 342-65A-6025, Box 25/28, folder
Trip Rpts., Search & Ident: Mar 56 to Dec 56. Trip #198 to 234,
National Archives and Records Administration, National Personnel
Records Center, St. Louis, Mo., and AF Form 715, "Preparation Room
History," 4 October 1955, Personnel Record of Air Force member,
service number 1521B/ 2009467, National Archives and Records
Administration, National Personnel Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.

1 13. Air Force Form 14b, "Medical Report of an Individual Involved in AF
Aircraft Accident," 3 October 1955, Aircraft Accident No. 55-10-3-6,
Air Force Historical Research Agency, Maxwell AFB, AL.

1 14. Standard form 503, "Autopsy Protocol," June 27, 1956, Personnel
Record of Air Force members, service numbers AO 2223861 and AF
37578524, National Archives and Records Administration, National
ersonnel Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.

115. Official Trip Report Walker AFB, N.M. 27 June through 30 June 1956,
George Schwaderer, Identification Specialist to Thomas W. Toy, Chief
Memorial Affairs Branch, Air Force Services Division, Accession
No. 342-65 A-6025, Box 25/28, folder Trip Rpts., Search & Ident:
Mar 56 to Dec 56. Trip #198 to 234, National Archives and Records
Administration, National Personnel Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.

1 16. Standard form 503, "Autopsy Protocol," June 27, 1956, Personnel Record
of Air Force members, service numbers AO 2223861and AF 37578524,
National Archives and Records Administration, National Personnel
Records Center, St. Louis, Mo., and Air Force Form 14b, "Medical
Report of an Individual Involved in AF Aircraft Accident," June 26, 1956,
Headquarters Air Force Safety Agency, Kirtland AFB, N.M.

1 17. AF Form 697, "Identification Findings and Conclusions," 3 Feb 1960,
Personnel Records of Air Force members, service numbers

AO 794152 and 1046844, National Archives and Records
Administration, National Personnel Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.

118. ibid.

119. ibid.

120. Charles A. Ravenstein, Air Force Combat Wings; Lineage and Honors
Histories, 1947-1977 (Washington D.C.: U.S. Government Printing
Office, 1984), 16, 275-276.

121 . Air Force Form 14, "Report of Air Force Aircraft Accident," June 26,
1956, Headquarters Air Force Safety Agency, Kirtland AFB, N.M.

122. ibid.

123. ibid.


146


Notes - Section Two

124. ibid.

125. ibid.

126. Official Trip Report Walker AFB, N.M. 27 June through 30 June 1956,
George Schwaderer, Identification Specialist to Thomas W. Toy, Chief
Memorial Affairs Branch, Air Force Services Division, Accession No.
342-65 A-6025, Box 25/28, folder Trip Rpts., Search & Ident: Mar 56
to Dec 56. Trip #198 to 234, National Archives and Records
Administration, National Personnel Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.

127. ibid.

128. Jack L. Whenry, Maj., USAF, (Ret), telephone interview with 1st Lt.
James McAndrew, January 26, 1995, and John C. Walter, MSgt, USAF
(Ret), telephone interview with Capt. James McAndrew, June 29, 1995
and July 12, 1996.

129. ibid.

130. Official Trip Report Walker AFB, N.M. 27 June through 30 June 1956,
George Schwaderer, Identification Specialist to Thomas W. Toy, Chief
Memorial Affairs Branch, Air Force Services Division, Accession No.
342-65 A-6025, Box 25/28, folder Trip Rpts., Search & Ident: Mar 56
to Dec 56. Trip #198 to 234, National Archives and Records
Administration, National Personnel Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.

131. ibid.

132. Recollections ofRoswell, Part II, W. Glenn Dennis interview, and Karl
T. Pflock, "Star Witness: The Mortician of Roswell Breaks His Code of
Silence," Omni, Fall 1995, 104.

133. DD Form 481-3, "Clinical Record Cover Sheet," June 26, 1956,
Personnel Record of AF 37578524, National Archives and Records
Administration, National Personnel Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.

134. Whenry, Walters, and Air Force Manual 143-1, 1 November 1953,
"Mortuary Affairs," 28, Record Group 341, Entry 36, Box 13, Microfilm
Reel 167, National Archives and Record Administration, College Park, Md.

135. Recollections ofRoswell Part II, W. Glenn Dennis interview.

136. Standard form 503, "Autopsy Protocol," June 27, 1956, Personnel
Record of Air Force members, service numbers AO 2223861and AF
37578524, National Archives and Records Administration, National
Personnel Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.

137. Recollections ofRoswell Part II W. Glenn Dennis interview.

138. Standard form 503, "Autopsy Protocol," June 27, 1956, Personnel
Record of Air Force member, service number AF 37578524, National


147


Notes - Section Two

Archives and Records Administration, National Personnel Records
Center, St. Louis, Mo.

139. ibid.

140. ibid.

141. Recollections ofRoswell, Part II, W. Glenn Dennis interview.

142. Standard form 503, "Autopsy Protocol," June 27, 1956, Personnel
Record of Air Force members, service numbers AO 2223861 and AF
37578524, National Archives and Records Administration, National
Personnel Records Center, St. Louis, Mo., and Air Force Form 14b,
"Medical Report of an Individual Involved in AF Aircraft Accident," June
26, 1956, Headquarters Air Force Safety Agency, Kirtland AFB, N.M.

143. DD Form 481-3, "Clinical Record Cover Sheet," June 26, 1956,
Personnel Record of Air Force members, service numbers

AO 2223861and AF 37578524, National Archives and Records
Administration, National Personnel Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.

144. Karl T. Pflock, "Star Witness: The Mortician of Roswell Breaks His
Code of Silence," Omni, Fall 1995, 108.

145. Official Trip Report Walker AFB, N.M. October 4, thru October 7,
1955, George Schwaderer, Identification Specialist to MCTSG,
October 12, 1955, Accession No. 342-65 A-6025, Box 25/28, folder
Trip Rpts., Search & Ident: Mar 56 to Dec 56. Trip #198 to 234,
National Archives and Records Administration, National Personnel
Records Center, St. Louis, Mo., and AF Form 697, "Identification
Findings and Conclusions," 3 Feb 1960, Personnel Records of Air
Force members, service numbers AO 794152 and 1046844, National
Archives and Records Administration, National Personnel Records
Center, St. Louis, Mo.

146. Air Force Manual 143-1, 1 November 1953, "Mortuary Affairs," 28-29,
Accession No. 341, Entry 36, Box 13, Microfilm Reel 167, National
Archives and Record Administration, College Park, Md.

147. Official Trip Report- Walker AFB, N.M. 27 June through 30 June 1956,
George J. Schwaderer, Identification Specialist, to Thomas W. Toy, Chief
Memorial Affairs Branch, July 5, 1956, Accession No. 342-65A-6025,
Box 25/28, folder Trip Rpts., Search & Ident: Mar 56 to Dec 56. Trip
198 to 234, National Archives and Records Administration, National
Personnel Records Center, St. Louis, Mo., and Jack L. Whenry, Maj.,
USAF, (Ret), telephone interview with 1st Lt. James McAndrew, January
26, 1995, and John C. Walter, MSgt., USAF (Ret), telephone interview
with Capt. James McAndrew, June 29, 1995 and July 12, 1996.

148. Walter and Whenry.


148


Notes - Section Two


149. ibid.

150. WD AGO FORM 66, "Officer's Qualification Record," and AF FORM
11, "Officer Military Record," Personnel Record of Col. Lee F. Ferrell,
National Archives and Records Administration, National Personnel
Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.

151. "Air Force Care of Deceased Personnel (1951-1959), Volume I: Text",
Historical Study No. 236, Call No. K 201-326, Air Force Historical
Research Agency, Maxwell AFB, AL.

152. Air Force Manual 143-1, 1 November 1953, "Mortuary Affairs," 27,
Accession No. 341, Entry 36, Box 13, Microfilm Reel 167, National
Archives and Record Administration, College Park, Md.

153. Official Trip Report Walker AFB, N.M. 27 June through 30 June 1956,
George Schwaderer, Identification Specialist to Thomas W. Toy, Chief
Memorial Affairs Branch, Air Force Services Division, July 5, 1956

and Official Trip Report Walker AFB, N.M. October 4, thru October 7, 1955,
George Schwaderer, Identification Specialist to MCTSG, October 12, 1955,
Accession No. 342-65 A-6025, Box 25/28, folder Trip Rpts., Search & Ident:
Mar 56 to Dec 56. Trip #198 to 234, National Archives and Records
Administration, National Personnel Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.

154. Official Trip Report Walker AFB, N.M. 27 June through

30 June 1956, George Schwaderer, Identification Specialist to Thomas
W. Toy, Chief Memorial Affairs Branch, Air Force Services Division,
July 5, 1956, Accession No. 342-65 A-6025, Box 25/28, folder Trip
Rpts., Search & Ident: Mar 56 to Dec 56. Trip #198 to 234, National
Archives and Records Administration, National Personnel Records
Center, St. Louis, Mo.

155. George J. Schwaderer, telephone interview with Capt. James
Mc Andrew, June 28, 1996.

156. ibid.

157. Air Force Manual 143-1, 1 November 1953, "Mortuary Affairs," 27,
Accession No. 341, Entry 36, Box 13, Microfilm Reel 167, National
Archives and Record Administration, College Park, Md.

158. Karl T. Pflock, "Star Witness: The Mortician of Roswell Breaks His
Code of Silence," Omni, Fall 1995, 104.

159. Memo, Charles J. Stahl, M.D., Armed Forces Medical Examiner, to
Capt. James Mc Andrew, SAF/AAZD, subj: Request for Information on
Aircraft Crash Fatalities, October 13, 1995.

160. Unit history, 4036 USAF Hospital, Walker AFB, N.M., June 1956, 6,
Air Force Historical Research Agency, Maxwell AFB, AL.


149


Notes - Section Two


161. ibid.

162. Standard form 503, "Autopsy Protocol," June 27, 1956, Personnel
Record of of Air Force members, service numbers AO 2223861and AF
37578524, National Archives and Records Administration, National
Personnel Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.

163. Air Force Missile Development Center, Man-High I, MDC-TR-59-24,
1959, and Lt. Col. David G. Simons, Man High II, Air Force Missile
Development Center, Holloman AFB, N.M., AFMDC-TR-59-28, June
1959, 1, and Air Force Missile Development Center, Man High III,
MDC-TR-60-16, 1961.

164. Historical Branch, Office of Information Services, Air Force Missile
Development Center, Air Research and Development Command,
Holloman AFB, N.M., Contributions of Balloon Operations to
Research and Development at the Air Force Missile Development
Center Holloman Air Force Base, N. Mex. 1947-1958 (hereafter
Contributions of Balloon Operations 1947-1958), 11.

1 65 . ibid., and Air Force Missile Development Center FORM 597, Schedule
Request- Project 7222/4.2- "Manned Gondola Flight," May 19, 20, 22, 1959,
Accession No. 342-65B-3185, Box 4/22, National Archives and Records
Administration, National Personnel Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.

166. DD FORM 481-3, "Clinical Record Cover Sheet," May 21, 1959,
Personnel Record of Capt. Dan D. Fulgham, National Archives and
Records Administration, National Personnel Records Center, St. Louis,
Mo., and Air Force Missile Development Center FORM 597, Schedule
Request- Project 7222/4.2- "Manned Gondola Flight," May 20, 1959,
Accession No. 342-65B-3185, Box 4/22, National Archives and Records
Administration, National Personnel Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.

167. DD Form 613, R&D Progress Card, Project 7164, "Physiology
of Flight," Task 71840, "Life Supporting Systems for Advanced
Vehicles," February 24, 1959, 30-31, National Archives and Record
Administration Accession No. 342-75-095, Box 93/100, folder 1, and
Technical "R&D" Record Book, Aeromedical Laboratory, Physiology
Branch, "Life Support System for Orbital Flight," Project 7164, Task
71840, 13-16, National Archives and Record Administration, National
Personnel Records Center, St. Louis, Mo. Accession No. 342-75-095,
Box 93/100, folder 2.

168. Air Force Form 77, "USAF Officer Effectiveness Report, 1 Feb 58 to
31 Jan 59, Personnel Record of Capt. Joseph W. Kittinger, Jr., National
Archives and Records Administration, National Personnel Records
Center, St. Louis, Mo., and Capt. Joseph W. Kittinger, Jr., The Long,
Lonely Leap, (New York: E.P. Dutton & Co., Inc., 1961) 131.


150


Notes - Section Two

169. Air Force Missile Development Center, Man-High I,
MDC-TR-59-24, 1959.

170. Schedule Request- Project 7222/4.2- "Manned Gondola Flight,"
May 19, 20, 22, 1959, Accession No. 342-65B-3185, Box 4/22,
National Archives and Records Administration, National Personnel
Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.

171. ibid.

172. Ole Jorgeson, MSgt., USAF, (Ret), interview with
1st Lt. James Mc Andrew, May 28, 1995.

173. Air Force Missile Development Center FORM 597, Schedule Request-
Project 7222/4.2- "Manned Gondola Flight," May 19, 1959, Accession
No. 342-65B-3185, Box 4/22, National Archives and Records
Administration, National Personnel Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.

174. Air Force Missile Development Center FORM 597, Schedule Request-
Project 7222/4.2- "Manned Gondola Flight," May 20, 1959, Accession
No. 342-65B-3185, Box 4/22.

175. ibid.

176. ibid.

177. ibid., and Joseph W. Kittinger, Jr., Col., USAF (Ret), interview with
1st Lt. James Mc Andrew, June 23, 1995.

178. Kittinger

179. ibid.

180. ibid.

181. Dan D. Fulgham, Col, USAF, (Ret), interview with 1st Lt. James
McAndrew, May 26, 1995.

182. ibid, and Standard Form 539, "Abbreviated Clinical Record,"
May 21,1959, Personnel Record of Col. Dan D. Fulgham, National
Archives and Records Administration, National Personnel Records
Center, St. Louis, Mo.

183. ibid.

184. Jorgeson and Roland H. Lutz, CMSgt., USAF (Ret), interview with
1st Lt. James McAndrew, May 31, 1995.

185. ibid.

186. Fulgham and William C. Kaufman, Lt. Col., USAF, (Ret), interview
with 1st Lt. James McAndrew, May 24, 1995.

187. ibid.


151


Notes - Section Two

188. Jorgeson.

189. Kaufman.

190. Signed, sworn statement of Dan D. Fulgham, Col., USAF, (Ret),
May 25, 1995.

191. Kittinger.

192. ibid.

193. Video, Recollections ofRoswell, Part II, Gerald Anderson interview,
(Washington, D.C.: Fund for UFO Research, 1993).

194. Kittinger and Air Force Form 77, "USAF Officer Effectiveness Report,"
1 Feb 58 to 31 Jan 59, Personnel Record of Col. Joseph W. Kittinger,
Jr., National Archives and Records Administration, National Personnel
Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.

195. Kittinger.

196. ibid., and Kaufman.

197. Kittinger.

198. ibid.

199. ibid.

200. Recollections ofRoswell, Part II, W. Glenn Dennis interview.

201. Signed, sworn statements of Charles A. Coltman, Col. (MC), USAF,
(Ret), Dan D. Fulgham, Col, USAF, (Ret), Joseph W. Kittinger, Jr.,
Col., USAF, (Ret), Roland H. Lutz, CMSgt., USAF, (Ret), Ole
Jorgeson, MSgt., USAF, (Ret), and statement of William C. Kaufman,
Lt. Col, USAF, (Ret).

202. Kittinger.

203. Capt. Joseph W. Kittinger, Jr., The Long, Lonely Leap,
(New York: E.P. Dutton & Co., Inc., 1961) 130.

204. Kittinger.

205. Signed, sworn statements of Charles A. Coltman, Col. (MC), USAF,
(Ret), Dan D. Fulgham, Col, USAF, (Ret), Joseph W. Kittinger, Jr.,
Col, USAF, (Ret), Roland H. Lutz, CMSgt., USAF, (Ret), Ole
Jorgeson, MSgt., USAF, (Ret), and statement of William C. Kaufman,
Lt. Col., USAF, (Ret).

206. Craig D. Ryan, The Pre- Astronauts, (Annapolis: Naval Institute Press,
1995), 200.


152


Notes - Section Two

207. Air Force Missile Development Center FORM 597, Schedule Request-
Project 7222/4.2- "Manned Gondola Flight," May 19, 1959, Accession
No. 342-65B-3185, Box 4/22, National Archives and Records
Administration, National Personnel Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.,
and Memo: Maj. Lawrence M. Bogard, Chief, Balloon Branch, to
MDWXB, subj: Project 7222, 8 May 1959.

208. ibid., and Jorgeson.

209. Jorgeson.

210. ibid.

211. Recollections of Roswell, Part II, W. Glenn Dennis interview.

212. ibid.

213. ibid.

214. Karl T. Pflock, "Star Witness: The Mortician of Roswell Breaks His
Code of Silence," Omni, Fall 1995, 103.

215. Recollections of Roswell, Part II, W. Glenn Dennis interview.

216. Jorgeson.

217. Unit History, 47th Air Division, June 1954, photo section,
Air Force Historical Research Agency, Maxwell AFB, AL.

218. Unit History, 6th Bomb Wing, June 1959, Annex "N," "Base Support
Plan, Medical," June 1, 1959.

219. Charles A. Ravenstein, Air Force Combat Wings; Lineage and Honors
Histories, 1947-1977 (Washington D.C.: U.S. Government Printing
Office, 1984), 16.

220. Kaufman.

221. ibid.

222. Roland H. Lutz, CMSgt., USAF, (Ret), interview with
1st Lt. James Mc Andrew, May 31, 1995.

223. Fulgham.

224. Kittinger.

225. ibid.

226. ibid.

227. ibid., and ltr., Dr. J. Allen Hynek, Director, Dearborn Observatory,
Northwestern University, to Maj. Hector Quintanilla, Chief Aerial
Phenomena Branch, December 6, 1965, National Air Intelligence
Center historical files, Wright-Patterson AFB, OH.


153


Notes - Section Two


228. Kevin D. Randle and Donald R. Schmitt, The Truth About the UFO
Crash at Roswell (New York: Avon Books, 1994), 22.

229. Standard Form 539, "Abbreviated Clinical Record," May 21, 1959,
Personnel Record of Col. Dan D. Fulgham, National Archives and Records
Administration, National Personnel Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.

230. Fulgham.

231. Kittinger.

232. ibid.

233. Kaufman.

234. DD Form 640, "Nursing Notes," May 24, 1959, and DD Form 728,
"Doctor's Orders," May 22, 1959, Personnel Record of Col. Dan D.
Fulgham, National Archives and Records Administration, National
Personnel Records Center, St. Louis, Mo.

235. Kittinger, Kaufman, and DD Form 728 "Doctor's Orders," May 22,
1959, Personnel Record of Col. Dan D. Fulgham, National Archives
and Records Administration, National Personnel Records Center,
St. Louis, Mo.

236. ibid.

237. Kittinger.

238. ibid.

239. Fulgham.


154


Appendix A


155


Anthropormorphic Dummy Launch
and Landing Locations


NEW MEXICO


Santa Fe


Albuquerque


Socorro «


"Crash Site" 2

(Approx. 175 mi.
NW of Roswell)


A;

Jornada Test Range


[Of


White
Sandsp^j
Proving
Ground


"Debris
Field"

(Approx. 75 mi.
^ NW of Roswell)


'Crash Site" 1

^(North of Roswell^
"exact location
unknown)


Holloman A||i
5 landings
29 launch &s .:• „


:>swei


/ell


Jalker AFB0

I (formerly Roswell AAF)


man AFB


ml


1 x-


tesia


Alamogordo^


TSan Agustin Pass

'Las Cruces


El Paso


A Anthropomorphic Dummy Launch Locations
□ Anthropomorphic Dummy Landing Locations

Locations approximate; numbers within symbols
correspond to listing of locations found in Appendix A


Source: Test records of U.S. Air Force aeromedical project no. 7218,
task 71719 (HIGH DIVE) and project no. 7222, task 71748 (EXCELSIOR).


156


High Altitude Balloon Dummy Drops


Number Date Launch Site Landing Site


1


6/23/54


Holloman AFB, N.M.


Holloman AFB, N.M.


2


6/28/54


Holloman AFB, N.M.


Dunkin, N.M.


3


6/30/54


Holloman AFB, N.M.


10 miles Southwest of
Holloman AFB, N.M.


4


12/1/54


Holloman AFB, N.M.


Holloman AFB, N.M.


5


12/2/54


Holloman AFB, N.M.


12 miles South of Artesia, N.M.


6


12/6/54


Holloman AFB, N.M,


Near Twin Buttes, N.M.


7


12/9/54


Holloman AFB, N.M.


3 miles West of Twin
Buttes, N.M.


8


2/23/55


Holloman AFB, N.M.


28 miles East of Roswell, N.M.


9


3/1/55


Holloman AFB, N.M.


25 miles South of Caprock, N.M


10


3/3/55


Holloman AFB, N.M.


25 miles East/Northeast of
Roswell, N.M.


11


6/15/55


Holloman AFB, N.M.


5 miles Northwest of
Dunkin, N.M.


12


6/23/55


Holloman AFB, N.M.


35 miles Southwest of
Holloman AFB, N.M.


13


6/29/55


Holloman AFB, N.M.


25 miles West of Three
Rivers, N.M.


14


7/7/55


Holloman AFB, N.M.


13 miles West of Tularosa
Peak, N.M.


15


7/15/55


Holloman AFB, N.M.


15 miles Northeast of
Hatch, N.M.


16


11/17/55


Holloman AFB, N.M.


8 miles Northwest of
Roswell, N.M.


1 H
1 /


1 l/Zl/J J


Hnllam-m APR MM

xionomdu /vrjj, rN.ivi.


18


1/25/56


Holloman AFB, N.M.


Holloman AFB, N.M.


19


2/8/56


Holloman AFB, N.M.


20 miles South of
Roswell, N.M.


20


2/21/56


Holloman AFB, N.M.


20 miles East of Dunkin, N.M.


21


2/21/56


Holloman AFB, N.M.


Holloman AFB, N.M.


22


5/18/56


Holloman AFB, N.M.


Data Not Available


23


5/22/56


Holloman AFB, N.M.


Data Not Available


157


Number Date Launch Site


Landing Site


24 8/21/56 Holloman AFB, N.M.

25 5/16/57 Truth or Consequences, N.M.

26 5/29/57 Hatch, N.M.

27 6/4/57 Holloman AFB, N.M.

28 6/6/57 Holloman AFB, N.M.

29 6/7/57 Holloman AFB, N.M.

30 6/11/57 Hatch, N.M.

3 1 6/1 3/57 Holloman AFB, N.M.

32 9/27/57 White Sands Natl

MonumentPicnic Area

33 10/8/57 White Sands Proving Ground

34 1/29/58 Data Not Available

35 1/9/59 Holloman AFB, N.M.

36 1/14/59 Las Palomas, N.M.

37 1/30/59 Nutt, N.M.

38 2/4/59 Holloman AFB, N.M.

39 2/6/59 Lake Valley, N.M.

40 2/10/59 Caballo Dam, N.M.

41 2/11/59 Hatch, N.M.

42 2/14/59 Data Not Available

43 2/16/59 Ft. Craig, N.M.


Holloman AFB, N.M.

White Sands Proving
Ground, N.M.

25 miles Northwest of
Las Cruces, N.M.

1 1 miles North of
Las Cruces, N.M.

17 miles South of
Holloman AFB, N.M.

Holloman AFB, N.M.

West of San Agustin Pass, N.M.

Holloman AFB, N.M.


Orogrande, N.M.

10 miles East of Picacho, N.M.

20 miles South of
Alamogordo, N.M.

White Sands Proving
Ground, N.M.

30 miles East/Southeast of
Roswell, N.M.

White Sands Proving
Ground, N.M.

1 mile North of Bent, N.M.

Data Not Available

White Sands Proving
Ground, N.M.

Data Not Available

30 miles West of
Holloman AFB, N.M.

Mescalero Apache Reservation
(N.M.)


158


Appendix B


159


STATEMENT OF WITNESS
Date: 26 April 1996 Place: Farmington, NM


I Charles E. Clouthier, hereby state that James McAndrew, was identified as a Captain,
USAFR on this date at my place of employment do hereby, voluntarily and of my own free
will, make the following statement. This was done without having been subjected to any
coercion, unlawful influence or unlawful inducement.

I was on active duty in the US Air Force and stationed at Walker AFB, Roswell, NM,
from February 1955 until October 1956. During that time I was a pharmacist assigned to
the base hospital. Following my tour of duty with the Air Force, I returned to my
hometown, Farmington, NM ? where I became an employee and eventually a co-owner of
Farmington Drug.

With the exception of the two years in the US Air Force, I have been a resident of
Farmington, NM since 1934. It is my recollection that Dr Frank B. Nordstrom was the
first pediatrician to practice in the Farmington area and he remained the only pediatrician
in Farmington until approximately 1970. I base these recollections on extensive
professional and personal contacts with physicians in the Farmington area and as a father
of two children who were patients of Dr Nordstrom's.

Also based on nearly 40 years of contact with physicians in the Farmington area, I believe
that Dr Nordstrom is the only physician who served a tour of duty at Walker AFB. During
the 1960s, I became aware that Dr Nordstrom had also served at the Walker AFB
hospital. At various times in the ensuing years, Dr Nordstrom and I reminisced about our
service at Walker AFB. During these conversations Dr Nordstrom never mentioned any
activities during his tour of duty I considered unusual or that might explain reports of
bodies or aliens. During the time I was stationed at Walker AFB, I did not witness, nor
did I hear rumors, of anything that involved flying saucers, aliens, or anything else of an
extraterrestrial nature.

I am not part of a conspiracy to withhold information from either the US government or
the American public. There is no classified information that I am withholding related to
this inquiry, and 1 have not been threatened by US government persons concerning not
talking about this matter.


160


SIGNED:


Charles E. Clout hier


WITNESS:


Subscribed and sworn before a
person authorized to administer oaths
this 26th day of April 1996 at
Farmington, NM


James McAndrew, Capt, USAFR


161


STATEMENT OF WITNESS


Pl ace Date: 25 May 95

I, Charles A. Coltman, Jr., Col, USAF, MC (Ret), hereby state that James McAndrew was
identified as a Lieutenant, USAFR, on this date at my place of employment and do hereby,
voluntarily and of my own free will, make the following statement. This was done without
having been subjected to any coercion, unlawful influence or unlawful inducement.

I entered the U.S. Air Force in 1957 as a flight surgeon and was assigned to Walker AFB,
NM, in 1958. Following a residency at Ohio State University from 1959 to 1963, I was
assigned to Wilford Hall USAF Medical Center, Lackland AFB, TX, where I eventually
became the Chairman of the Department of Medicine. I retired from the Air Force in
1977. I am presently a Professor at The University of Texas Health Science Center at San
Antonio, and Chief Executive Officer of the Cancer Therapy and Research Foundation of
South Texas.

I remember a balloon crash that happened north of Roswell, NM, in May, 1959. I
received a phone call from the NCOIC of the Flight Surgeon's office, who informed me of
the crash. The NCOIC, Earl Wormwood, came to my quarters and we drove, in an old
blue Air Force "crackerbox" ambulance, to the crash site. I remember the gondola laying
on its side and the deflated balloon on the ground. The crew members were sitting next to
the gondola. I examined the pilots and determined they were not seriously injured. They
told me they were practicing touch-and-go's and a gust of wind had dumped them on the
ground, and the gondola had struck one of the pilots in the head. Also present were Air
Force technicians in trucks who tracked the balloon. The injured pilots were transported
to the Flight Surgeon's office at the hospital at Walker AFB.

The injury sustained by the crew member was a head abrasion/contusion and a hemotoma.
The hemotoma caused the patient's head to swell; however, it was not serious enough for
him to be admitted. I remember receiving a call from Col (Dr.) John Stapp. He was in
charge of the balloon project and was quite famous. Dr Stapp inquired about the injuries
to the pilots and he wanted them returned to Holloman AFB as quickly as possible.

The hospital was an old World War II cantonment-type building with long corridors and a
capacity of fifty beds. I do not recall a nurse assisting me in the treatment of the patient,
although a nurse may have been on duty and observed the patient. I was the only doctor
in the hospital that morning. There were no visiting doctors from other bases or facilities.
I do not remember any altercations or arguments that day. During my time at Walker, I
do not recall that any autopsies were performed at the hospital, since we did not have a
pathologist on staff I do not recall any remains brought to the hospital in body bags, or
wreckage transported in the back of an ambulance. There may have been remains brought
to the hospital in body bags after a KC-97 crash, but that was before I arrived at Walker.
Dr Ed Bradley was involved in the recovery of the remains


162


At no time was there ever any involvement of the Walker hospital with UFO's or "space
aliens" I know this to be true because the hospital was very small and had a small staff.
If any activity, other than normal hospital functions, had occurred, I would have known
about it

I am not part of any conspiracy to withhold or provide misleading information to the
United States Government or the American public. There is no classified information that
I am withholding related to this inquiry and I have never been threatened by U.S.
Government persons concerning refraining from talking about this matter.

SIGNED: Sworn to and subscribed before me,


an individual authorized to administer
oaths, this 25th day of May. 1995,


WITNESS(s):


163


STATEMENT OF WITNESS


Place Date: 25 May 95

I, Dan D. Fulgham, Col, USAF (Ret), hereby state that James McAndrew was identified
as a Lieutenant, USAFR on this date at my place of employment and do hereby,
voluntarily and of my own free will, make the following statement. This was done
without having been subjected to any coercion, unlawful influence or unlawful
inducement.

I entered the U.S. Air Force in 1952 as an aviation cadet. I flew F-84s on 100 combat
missions during the Korean war. After a tour as a flight instructor I was assigned to the
Aero Medical Laboratory at Wright Patterson. I participated in both the Air Force Man in
Space program and Project Mercury. I also participated in the X-15 and X-20 programs
and worked as a bioastronautics officer with NASA on Gemini. During my Air Force
career, I earned both a Master's and Doctorate degree from Purdue University. I flew a
combat tour in Southeast Asia in F-4s as a member of the 555th Tactical Fighter
Squadron and flew 133 combat missions. I retired from the Air Force in 1978 as the
Commander of the Human Resources Laboratory at Brooks AFB, TX. I am presently the
Director Of Biosciences for a research organization in San Antonio, TX.

In 1 959 I volunteered for training to become a back up pilot for Capt Joe Kittenger in his
high altitude balloon projects. I flew two missions for training purposes with Capt
Kittenger and Capt Bill Kaufman from Holloman AFB, NM in May, 1959. On the
second flight we were practicing touch and go landings north of Roswell, NM when we
"crashed" on one of the landings. The gondola flipped over and my head was pinned to
the ground by the lip of the gondola. We managed to lift the gondola off of my head and
looked it over for damage. Capt Kittenger was bleeding from a cut on his face and I
noticed that my head seemed to be protruding outward from underneath my helmet.
Realizing I was injured, I sat down and feared I might go into shock. I was not in pain
but my entire head was throbbing and began to swell.

I then remember boarding the "chase" helicopter that was following us and flying a shoit
distance to Walker AFB for medical treatment. I recall walking into the hospital and also
stopping on the front step to smoke a cigarette. I remember security personnel escorting
and questioning us to determine who we were. Security was very tight at Strategic Air
Command bases such as Walker. On occasion surprise inspection teams from SAC
headquarters arrived in helicopters just as we did. In addition, a story of three Air Force
officers crashing in a balloon was somewhat far fetched. The security people were
convinced of our identities when they spoke with Col John P. Stapp, the Aero Medical
Laboratory Commander.

While I was at Walker my head had swelled considerably and both eyes were turning
black. Later the skin on my face turned yellow. I remember being seen by one doctor
and I do not believe any other doctors participated in my treatment. I do not recall any


164


nurses attending to me. I also do not recall that a black NCO was present nor do I recall
any civilian men in the hospital. I do not recall that Capt Kittenger was involved in an
altercation of any kind while we were there. After I was treated and released we all flew
back to Holloman on the helicopter.

At Holloman I was admitted to the hospital and had blood aspirated from under my scalp.
I remember my forehead drooping down, I had to use my fingers to open my eyelids, and
I had to sleep sitting up. Several days later I returned to Wright Patterson with Capt
Kittenger and Capt Kaufman. My wife met the airplane and when she saw me, she burst
into tears due to the swelling of my head, the two black eyes, and the yellow color of my
skin. When I returned to my office at Wright Patterson, my secretary also began to cry
when she saw me. After some weeks my head returned to normal size and I was returned
to flying status.

During my Air Force career I was involved in many different scientific research projects
including the space program. I can state with certainty that none of them, including the
incident described here, had anything to do with UFOs or ''space aliens".

I am not part of any conspiracy to withhold or provide misleading information to the
United States Government or the American public. There is no classified information
that I am withholding related to this inquiry and I have never been threatened by U.S.
Government persons concerning refraining from talking about this matter.


SIGNED: Subscribed and sworn before me, an


individual authorized to administer
oaths this 25th day of May 1995


WITNESS(s):


165


STATEMENT OF WITNESS


Place : Date: 28 May 95

L Bernard D. Gildenberg, GS-14, (Ret), hereby state that James McAndrew was identified
as a Lieutenant USAFR on this date at my home and do hereby, voluntarily and of my
own free will, make the following statement. This was done without having been subjected
to any coercion, unlawful influence or unlawful inducement.

I became involved in high altitude balloon development while an undergraduate student at
New York University (NYU). Following graduation I was hired by the Air Force at
Holloman AFB and worked continuously as both a meteorologist and aerospace engineer
at the Balloon Branch from 1951 until my retirement in 1981 . My job responsibilities were
to forecast the weather and fly by remote control, high altitude balloons for many different
scientific projects. During this time, I became internationally recognized as an authority on
high altitude balloon trajectoiy forecasting. I have published numerous technical reports
and articles.

The first project in which 1 was involved, while still an undergraduate student at NYU. was
the acoustical detection of nuclear explosions. The name of the project, Mogul, w as
classified and I didn't know this name until several years ago. Based on my experience with
this project I am certain project Mogul was responsible for some portions of what has
become to be known as the "Roswell Incident* \

Following project Mogul I was involved in perfecting high altitude balloon technology and
made many test flights with large polyethylene balloons from Holloman AFB. I worked
extensively on atmospheric sampling projects and biological flights in which the balloons
lilted smail animals to altitude for cosmic ray experiments, I also worked on the Moby Dick
Project that collected meteorological data and the classified Gopher (119L) reconnaissance
project.

I was relied upon to forecast the weather, conduct climatological studies, predict balloon
trajectories, and to hit with precision, ground targets both on and off the White Sands
Missile Range. Balloon trajectories in New Mexico below the tropopause, are
predominantly towards the east-northeast, when launched from Holloman AFB with the
exception of July and August when balloons remained over the Holloman area. At high
altitude, above the tropopause, trajectories are generally westerly during the summer and
easterly during the spring, fall, and winter. As a result these winds, the Holloman balloon
branch recovered many, probably hundreds, of balloons and scientific payloads from the
Roswell, NM area over the years.

During the time of the year when trajectories were to the east I attempted to drop the
equipment near accessible non mountainous areas and paved roads. The main target area
was the first large north-south road on the other side of the Sacramento Mountains from
Holloman AFB, Highway 285. This road goes north and south through Roswell. The


166


standard procedure was to preposition military recovery crews near the projected point of
payload impact. T he crews consisted primarily of Air Force members in uniform and they
operated military vehicles. I often directed these crews to "standby'* along the shoulder of
Highway 285, both north and south of Roswell until the balloon was in position. The
recovery- crews received detailed instructions from tracking aircraft that led them to the
exact location of the payload. The recovery vehicles included, depending on the mission, a
crane, weapons carriers, communications van, and occasionally tanker tmcks to refuel the
aircraft that would sometimes land on nearby roads.

During the time of the year when balloon trajectories were to the west, I attempted to drop
the payloads in the Rio Grande Valley. I also aimed for another valley, the flat area north
of Truth or Consequences that includes the Plains of San Augustin. In addition, many
remote balloon launch sites were located throughout the Rio Grande Valley west of the
White Sands Proving Grounds. Launch crews were also mostly military and used much of
the same equipment as the recovery crews.

I had extensive involvement with Project 721 8 that later became Project 7222. This
project studied the free-fall characteristics of * anthropomorphic dummies dropped from
balloons from altitudes up to 100,000 feet. The missions usually consisted of two
dummies attached 10 a suspension rack that I directed to be released at altitude. Depending
on the wind conditions and time of year, the dummies, on many occasions, landed in the
Roswell area. I recall some difficulties in the release mechanisms of the dummies that
resulted in some of them free-falling to the ground while they were still attached to the
rack. Someone without a good vantage point or not associated with the project might
mistake these dummies for "aliens" due to their odd flesh tones and abstract human
features.

I also recall an accident involving a manned balloon flight. I remember this event clearly
because I am also a balloon pilot and had an accident approximately two years bef ore. The
accident occurred on a flight that Capt Joe Kittenger was "checking ouf 1 two back up pilots
for his high altitude missions. The balloon was launched around midnight from behind the
Balloon Branch at Holloman AFB. I remember that some of the steel ballast used by the
balloon caused a ^fireworks' display when it contacted some nearby power lines during the
launch. I was operating the control center for this flight and I received notification from
the communications vehicle that was following the balloon that there had been an accident
north of Roswell. I later learned that the gondola had rolled over during a practice touch
and go landing and one of the pilots had been struck in the head and injured. I recall
speaking to Capt Kittinger about the accident and I saw the injured pilot. .Although his
injury was not serious, his head had considerable swelling and he looked very odd.

I also worked with Capt Kittinger on Project Stargazer. I also had met several times the
civilian scientific ad\isor Dr. J. Allen Hynek. Dr Hynek was thoroughly familiar with the
balloon operations at Holloman and visited the Balloon Branch numerous times. This
project experienced some difficulties and only one manned flight was conducted.


167


Another project I was involved with was the Air Force investigations of UFOs. Project
Bluebook. Since I was a meteorologist and amateur astronomer I evaluated, starting in
195 L local sightings of UFOs. New Mexico had alot of sightings because of the good
visibility and the many experimental projects of the White Sands Proving Grounds, During
my time on Project Bluebook there wasn't any sightings that we could not explain.
Nevertheless popular literature still refers to some of these sightings as unexplained.

Another project with which I was involved, was the NASA Voyager and Viking Projects.
These space vehicles were tested by launching them from our balloons at extremely high
altitude to simulate the atmosphere of Venus and Mars. To utilize the instrumentation on
the White Sands Missile Range I elected to launch the balloons and attached space vehicles
from the Roswell Industrial Air Center, formerly the Roswell Army Airfield. The
HoHoman Balloon Branch made approximately eight launches of these two vehicles from
Roswell. In appearance the Viking and Voyager probes could be mistaken tor a flying
saucer. They were both unclassified highly publicized projects and I do not recall getting
any UFO reports for these flights. I believe one of these probes is on display at White
Sands Missile Range and its known as the "Hying saucer".

I am not part of any conspiracy to withhold or provide misleading information to the
United States Government or the American public. There is no classified information that
I am withholding related to this inquiry and I have never been threatened by U.S.
Government persons concerning refraining from talking about this matter.

SIGNED: Subscribed and sworn before me, an


individual authorized to administer
oaths this 28th day of May /1 995


WITNESS(s):


168


STATEMENT OF WITNESS


Place: Date: 28 May 95

I, Ole Jorgeson, MSgt, USAF, (Ret), hereby state that James Mc Andrew was identified as
a Lieutenant, USAFR on this date at my home and do hereby, voluntarily and of my own
free will, make the following statement. This was done without having been subjected to
any coercion, unlawful influence or unlawful inducement.

I enlisted in the U.S. Air Force in 1957 and became a Ground Communications and
Electronic Repairman. I remained in this career field throughout my career. I completed
three tours at the Balloon Branch at Holloman AFB, NM. I retired from the Air Force in
1977 as the NCOIC of the Communication and Instrumentation Section of the Balloon
Branch at Holloman AFB.

I recall an overnight balloon training mission that was conducted in May, 1959, Capt Joe
Kittinger was training back up pilots lor one of his upcoming projects. I was an airman
assigned to coordinate communications and to assist in the recovery of the balloon upon
completion of the mission. I followed the balloon in an old Korean War vintage
"crackerbox" ambulance that had been converted into a communications van. Another
airman and I followed the balloon throughout the night on an easterly trajectory over the
Sacramento Mountains to an area north of Roswell. Also following the balloon were
recovery technicians in a weapons carrier. We stayed in contact with the balloon crew by
radio and also observed flares the crew would light at various intervals so we could visually
track them. Jusr after sunrise I recall the balloon landing north ol Roswell and Capt
Kittinger offered me some coffee and told me he was going to make one more touch and
go landing to complete the mission. I remember that I took some photographs of the
balloon and waited for the last landing. Several minutes later I remember hearing a "bang",
this was the squib that fired to release the gondola from the balloon. We immediately went
to where the gondola landed and saw the gondola laying on its side and saw two of the
pilots standing and one lying down. Lying on the ground was a shattered helmet that was
worn by one of the pilots. Capt Kittinger told me they were attempting to land to avoid
some power lines and a row of trees.

Soon after I arrived at the crash site, a helicopter that was also following the flight landed
and transported the three aircrew members to Walker AFB for medical attention. I recall I
assisted the recovery technicians load the balloon and the gondola on the weapons carrier
and then drove 15 to 20 minutes to the hospital at Walker AFB. When I arrived at Walker,
we parked the converted ambulance near the hospital and either the other airman with me
or the recovery technicians called the balloon control center to notif y them of the accident.
I recall waiting near the hospital for a short period of time and then returning to Holloman
AFB. During the time I was waiting at the hospital I did not observe any arguments or
altercations. I did not observe Capt Kittinger speaking disrespectfully to anyone. I also do
not recall any male civilians or any vehicles that belonged to a mortuary.


169


I participated in many, probably more than 100, balloon recoveries. I often recovered
payloads and balloons from the area surrounding RoswelL NM. It was routine to be
directed by the balloon control center to an area near Roswell to wait to recover a balloon.
We would wait along the side of the road, at small airports, or at the armory in Roswell. It
would not be uncommon for our recovery vehicles to be seen waiting to recover balloons
throughout New Mexico, Arizona, and West Texas. When we recovered the balloons and
payloads sometimes civilians would be in the area and make inquires. We would tell them
what w e were doing and provide them with a telephone number at Holloman AFB if they
wanted to report any damages. We were required to clean up the area and remove all
debris before we left. In addition to the recoveries, I recall making balloon launches from
sites up and down the Rio Grande Valley. I remember that some of these launches were
made from an area west of Soccoro, NM.

Another project I participated in was the testing of the Viking space probe in 1972. These
four launches were all made from the Roswell Industrial Air Center, the former Roswell
Army . Virfield. Approximately twenty Air Force personnel were on temporary duty to
Roswell throughout the summer of 1972 to support this project. NASA personnel
prepared the spacecraft for launch from the old hangers of the former Air Force base. This
project was not classified and was covered by the news media.

I am not part of any conspiracy to withhold or provide misleading information to the
United States Government or the American public. There is no classified information that
I am withholding related to this inquiry and I have never been threatened by U.S.
Government persons concerning refraining from talking about this matter.

SIGNED: Subscribed and sworn before me. an


individual authorized to administer
oaths.this 28th dav of Mav y 1995
at /


WITNESS(s):


170


STATEMENT OF WITNESS


Place: Date: 28 October 1996


I, William C. Kaufman, Lt. Col., USAF (Ret), hereby voluntarily and of
my own free will, make the following statement. This was done
without coercion, unlawful influence or unlawful inducement.

I was drafted into the Army of the United States in 1943, transferred
to the Army Air Forces, and was commissioned as a pilot in 1944.
From 1950 until 1967, with a break for training for a combat tour in
Korea and for educational assignments to AFIT, I was assigned to the
Aero Medical Laboratory at Wright Patterson AFB, OH. During that
time I was a physiological training officer and worked in the
development of early pressure suits. I tested many high altitude
pilots and also the first group of astronauts. later during my Air
Force career, in 1961, I earned a Ph.D. in Physiology and Biophysics.
I was assigned to the Aero Medical Laboratory for three tours and
retired in 1 968 as the Chief of the Biodynamics Branch of the Aero
Medical Field Laboratory at Holloman AFB, NM.

During my third assignment at Wright Patterson, I volunteered, along
with Capt Dan Fulgham, to be a backup pilot for Capt Joe Kittinger for
his high altitude balloon project, Project Excelsior. Capt Kittinger
instructed Capt Fulgham and me in ballooning in May 1959.
At the end of an overnight training flight, on the morning of May 21.
1959, northwest of Roswell, NM, we (Kittinger, Fulgham and I) had
an accident with the balloon. We were practicing touch and go
landings when a severe gust of wind overturned the gondola,
dumping all of us to the ground with the gondola on top of us. The
accident occurred in a small pasture where a pony was grazing next
to a small cottage. For safety, we were followed during hours of
darkness by a C-131 aircraft and during the day by a H-21
helicopter. We were followed the entire time by technicians in a
truck for communications and for the recovery of the balloon and
gondola. Seeing the accident, the crews of the helicopter and the
recovery trucks came to our assistance, much to the dismay of the
farmer who owned the pony, which had run away when the truck
broke down the fence to reach the crash site. I recall that a member
of the helicopter crew attempted to calm the farmer.


171


Capt Fulgham sustained an injury to the forehead when the lip of the
gondola struck him. Capt Fulgham thought he had fractured his skull
but the experimental helmet he was wearing apparently protected
him. Capt Kittinger was bleeding from a cut on the face. I was
beneath Fulgham and Kittinger and unhurt. Fulgham was loaded
into the helicopter and we were taken to the nearest hospital, at
Walker AFB, in Roswell. I recall the helicopter pilot called the air
traffic control tower at Walker and informed them we were inbound
with an injured pilot from a balloon accident. This was quite unusual
and I believe the tower personnel might have thought we were a
surprise Strategic Air Command inspection team that at the direction
of the SAC Commander, Gen. Curtis E. LeMay, sometimes made
unannounced visits by helicopter. We landed in front of the tower
and were met by an ambulance along with a detail of military police
with machine guns. The military police escorted us to the hospital for
treatment and to verify our story of the balloon crash.

While Capt Fulgham and Capt Kittinger were being treated I was
asked to explain to the Walker AFB Base Commander what had
happened. After Capt Kittinger was treated he called Col Stapp from
a phone adjacent to the waiting room were numerous military wives
were waiting for pre-natal care. Capt Kittinger, as the project officer,
was concerned what effect this accident might have on the future of
his program. As we waited for Fulgham, Kittinger paced up and
down the hall concerned about Fulgham and getting out of the
hospital before Walker AFB officials might complicate matters. I do
not recall any male civilians in the hospital, nor do I recall Capt
Kittinger being involved in an altercation of any kind. Capt Kittinger
did not shout or use obscene language, he was simply interested in
getting medical attention for Fulgham and leaving as soon as
possible. I do recall that one or two nurses were present. I do not
recall a black NCO accompanying Kittinger while we were in the
hospital.

When the medical personnel were finished treating Fulgham, all
three of us returned to Holloman AFB by helicopter about noon the
same day. The following day I took my FAA exam and was awarded
a balloon pilot license. Three days later, on Sunday, Kittinger,
Fulgham and I returned to Wright Patterson via a special C-131
flight. Fulgham looked very odd with two black eyes and protruding
forehead; his head was so swollen he could not wear his uniform hat
for some time. I later worked with Capt Kittinger on the Stargazer
project and and occasionally flew aircraft with him.


172


During my entire time at the Aero Medical Laboratory I neither saw
nor heard anything that would lead me to believe that the Air Force
was keeping "aliens" at Wright Patterson. I knew there was a project
on UFOs called Bluebook, at the base, but to my knowledge the Aero
Medical Laboratory was not involved. Many scientific
accomplishments came out of the various laboratories at Wright
Patterson but I am unaware of any that might have involved aliens
or UFOs.

I am not part of any conspiracy to withhold or provide misleading
information to the United States Government or the American public.
There is no classified information that I am withholding related to
this inquiry and 1 have never been threatened by U.S. Government
persons concerning refraining from talking about this matter.


This is as I recollect those events.


SIGNED:

, ,7 // r 4. , . r// ...

William C. Kaufman, LtCol, fy$AF (Ret)

V


^WITNESS(s): r


173


STATEMENT OF WITNESS


Place : Date: 24 June 95

L Joseph W. Kittinget\ Jr.. Col, US AF (Ret), hereby state that James Mc<\ndrew was
identified as a Lieutenant, USAFR on this date at my home and do hereby, voluntarily and
of my own free will, make the following statement. This was done without having been
subjected to any coercion, unlawful influence or unlawful inducement.

I entered the U.S. .Air Force in 1949 as an Aviation Cadet. From 1950 to 1953 I flew
fighters in Europe before being assigned to the Fighter Test Section at Holloman AFB,
NM in July. 1953. During my tour as a test pilot I conducted the first zero gravity tests
and was the balloon pilot of the first Project Man High high altitude research mission. In
1958 I was assigned to the Escape Section of the Aero Medical Laboratory at Wright
Patterson AFB, OH. During this tour I was the Project Officer of Project Excelsior and
made three high altitude parachute jumps, the highest from 102,800 feet, which today
remains a world record. For these jumps I was awarded the Harmon Trophy for 1 960 by
President Eisenhower, Following Excelsior, I was the Project Officer of Stargazer, a
project that made astronomical observations from a high altitude balloon. I fiew two
combat tours in Southeast Asia with the Air Commandos. I later flew a tour in F-4s and
was the Squadron Commander of the 555 Tactical Fighter Squadron. I accumulated over
L000 combat Hying hours and I am credited with one aerial victory. I spent ten months as
a POYV in Hanoi. Upon my return I attended Air W ar College, flew F-4s and retired from
the Air Force in 1978. In 1984 I became the first person to make a solo crossing of the
Atlantic by balloon.

In 1958 I was made the Project Officer of Excelsior by Col John Paul Stapp. the Aero
Medical Laboratory Commander, 1 supervised and was actively involved in the dropping
and recovery of anthropomorphic dummies from high altitude balloons at Holloman AFB.
NM for this project. We also dropped dummies, from aircraft only, at W right-Patterson
AFB, OH. The object of the Holloman tests were to study the free fall characteristics of
dummies dropped from balloons at altitudes of 50,000 to 100,000 feet. Based on this data
we designed a parachute that stabilized the dummies and I later used this parachute on my
three high altitude jumps.

T he balloons carrying the dummies were launched from various locations in New Mexico
and often impacted off of the White Sands Proving Ground depending on the wind
conditions. The dummies were outfitted with clothing and equipment of an Air Force
pilot. The facial features of the dummies were not as pronounced as a human. The ears
and noses did not protrude. I do not recall any dummies with ears or noses. Some of the
dummies were not complete; they sometimes did not have arms or legs. To someone not
associated with the project or who viewed the dummies from a distance, they could appear
to be human or with some imagination a space ''alien. " In fact, I recall one incident at
Wright- Patterson where one of our dummies landed near the backyard of Gen. Raw lings.
Commander of the Air Research and Development Command. Gen. Raw ling's wife was
entertaining officers wives that afternoon when one of our dummy's parachute failed to


174


deploy and impacted the ground in full view of the ladies at Gen. Raw ling's home. I acted
quickly to retrieve the dummy and went to the impact site and recovered it by throwing it in
the back of a pickup truck and quickly driving away. I ,ater that day I received a call from
Col Stapp who informed me that some of the women at the party believed that the dummy
was a human and they were appalled to see the careless nature in which the obviously dead
or injured "parachutist* was hauled away.

At Holloman AFB recov eries of the dummies were handled by the Balloon Branch but
members of my project team, including myself often assisted. The standard procedure was
to track the dummy both from the ground and air to attempt to recover the dummies in a
timely manner. On the ground we used an assortment of Air Force vehicles to track and
recover not only the dummies but also other scientific balloon payloads. We used trucks,
communications vans, converted field ambulances, cranes, and trailers. In the air we used
helicopters, C-47s traasports, and L-19 and L-20 light observation aircraft. On occasion
civilians would observe our recovery operations. We often attracted a crowd due to the odd
appearance of the balloon payloads and dummies and also the aircraft that circled overhead
or landed on nearby roads. We also used many of the same procedures and equipment to
launch from off range locations. During the recoveries weapons were not carried because
there was no classified information or equipment. I do not recall any altercations of any
kind. At no time did I or any of the personnel makes threats against civilians. We always
attempted to maintain good relations with the local civilians and explained the purpose of
the project to them if they asked. We were directed to remove as much of the material
dropped by the balloon as possible. Sometimes this was difficult because the balloon and
payioad would break apart and cover a large area. We collected the debris in these cases by
"fanning our across a field until we had collected even very small portions of the payioad
and balloon. We were particularly carefiil to recover the large plastic balloons because
cattle would ingest the material and the ranchers would file claims against the government.
Additionally, there were reward notices that offered twenty five dollars for the return of the
equipment attached to each of the balloons. I wrote a book. The Long, Lonely Leap (E.P.
Dutton & Co., 1961). that completely describes Project Excelsior and my participation.

; VIso as a part of the high altitude balloon projects, I trained balloon pilots in May 1959 at
the request of Col Stapp. Col Stapp was concerned that I might be injured as a result of
the hazardous nature of the projects and he wanted backup pilots to be trained. T he backup
pilots. Capt Dan Fulgham and Capt Bill Kaufman were volunteers from the Aero Medical
Laboratory and they were sent to Holloman from Wright-Patterson for training on a
temporary duty basis. On our second training flight, Fulgham, Kaufman and I. flew an
overnight mission that was launched at Holloman and ended with a crash northwest of
Roswell. NM. We were followed on this mission by an aircraft at night, a helicopter
during the day, and a ground crew in trucks at all times.

I recall that just after sunrise the weather had deteriorated and I directed Fulgham to land
the balloon in a small field. This was the last suitable field before we would overtly the
City of Roswell. I remember approaching the field just over the trees and I recall our
forward velocity was about 10-12 knots, a little last for landing. When we touched down
Fulgham cut the balloon away and due to the forward velocity the gondola flipped over-
spilling all three of us on the ground. While lying on the ground I realized that Fulgham


175


was injured and Kaufman and I raised the gondola. Fulgham had been struck in the head
by the edge of the gondola and I could see the blood rapidly accumulating under his scalp
in the forehead area. We treated him for shock and soon the recovery vehicles and the
chase helicopter arrived. I decided to transport Fulgham by helicopter to the hospital at
nearby Walker AFB.

When we arrived at Walker I remember that security was tight, as it was at all Strategic Air
Command bases, and we were closely scrutinized by security personnel due to the unusual
circumstances and early hour of our arrival. I had two concerns once we arrived at the
hospital first to get treatment for Fulgham and second to leave as soon as possible. After I
was assured that Fulgham' s injuries were not serious I wanted to quickly leave the base
before the Walker AFB Flying Safety Officer arrived to fill out an accident report. I didn't
want a report filed because an accident investigation would bring unwanted scrutiny to the
project. Even though the project was unclassified I did not want any publicity or
premature releases of information.

Although Fulghanvs injuries were not serious, his head had swollen considerably— both
eyes were black and his face had swollen so much you could barely see his nose. I believe
that if someone saw him while we were at Walker they would have been startled. When his
treatment was completed we all three returned to Holloman on the helicopter. At
Holloman. Fulgham was admitted to the hospital and I made preparations for him to return
to his duty station at Wright-Patterson AFB. Due to his grotesque appearance, I did not
want Fulgham to fly on a commercial airline. I made arrangements for ail of us to fly to
Wright-Patterson on a C-131 a few days later. When we arrived at Wright-Patterson, 1
assisted Fulgham down the steps of the aircraft because his eyes were swollen shut and he
could not see. His wife was waiting at the bottom of the steps of the aircraft and she asked
me where her husband was, 1 replied "this is your husband" and she screamed and began
to cry.

UTtile I was al the Walker AFB hospital I do not recall any contact with a male civilian. I
certainly did not call anyone an "SOB" or speak to anyone in a disrespectful manner, I did
not make any threats or instruct anyone else to make threats. I recall nurses in the hospital
but i am not certain if they participated in the treatment of Capt Fulgham. 1 was not
accompanied by a black NCO at the hospital but there may have been a black NCO on the
balloon recovery team. I recall no body bags in the hospital and 1 am sure there were no
"aliens" at the hospital just Dan Fulgham with a very odd looking head injury.

1 was also inv olved in the joint Air Force, Navy, and Massachusetts Institute of Technology
astronomical observation project. Project Stargazer. The object of this project was to
make observatioas via a stabilized telescope mounted atop of a gondola suspended from a
high altitude balloon. I was the USAF project officer and Dr J. Allen Hynek was the
scientific advisor. I worked very closely with Dr Hynek over a period of five years from
1958 to 1963. Dr Hynek would typically spend a hall day working on Stargazer and then
the rest of the day participating as one of the consultants on the UFO study. Project
Bluebook, that was also conducted at Wright-Patterson AFB. Dr Hynek, as the scientific
advisor to Stargazer. was very familiar with the techniques and capabilities of the Air Force


176


high altitude balloon program. Dr Hynek once approached me and we discussed at length,
the possibility that Air Force high altitude balloons were responsible for many UFO
sightings. We ended the conversation in agreement that the balloons probably accounted
tor many of the UFO sightings. In other conversations Dr Hynek always gave me the
impression that there were very few UFO sightings that could not be explained by good
scientific investigation. At no time did Dr Hynek mention or discuss the alleged "Roswell
Incident". I was therefore "flabbergasted " when Dr Hynek appeared to believe that some
of these sightings were of an extraterrestrial origin.

I am not part of any conspiracy to withhold or provide misleading information to the
United States Government or the American public. There is no classified information that
I am withholding related to this inquiry and I have never been threatened by U.S.
Government persons concerning refraining from talking about this matter.


177


STATEMENT OF WITNESS


Place: Date: 31 May 95

I Roland H. Lutz, CMSgt USAF, (Ret), hereby state that James McAndrew was
identified as a Lieutenant, USAFR on this date at my home and do hereby, voluntarily and
of my own free will, make the following statement. This was done without having been
subjected to any coercion, unlawful influence or unlawful inducement.


I enlisted in the U.S. Navy in 1947 and transferred to the U.S. Air Force in 1958. In June,
1958 I was assigned to the flight surgeon's office at Holloman AFB, NM as an Aero
Medical Technician. I served several tours in Southeast Ada and retired from the Air
Force in 1 974 as an Aero Medical Superintendent.

On May 20-21, 1959 I was assigned to provide medical coverage for a balloon training
mission that took off from Holloman AFB and ended with a crash near Roswell, NM.
Capt Joe Kittinger was training two other pilots, Capt Fulgham and Capt Kaufman. I
followed the balloon in an ambulance duiing the night and at daybreak 1 followed the
balloon in an H-21 helicopter. Just after daybreak 1 saw the balloon crash and the three
pilots were dumped form the gondola. 1 immediately informed the helicopter pilot and we
landed in a field on which cattle were grazing. I recall the rancher was upset because the
helicopter was frightening his cattle and some cattle had gotten out of the field.

I assesed the injuries to the pilots and recommended they be taken immediately to the
closest hospital which was at Walker AFB, apprximately 5 to 10 minutes away by
helicopter. Capt Fulghanfs head was swelling due to a hemotoma he received when the
gondola struck him. Capt Kittinger was cut on the face and was bleeding. Capt Kaufman
was uninjured. At Walker I remember a telephone conversation with a flight surgeon who
told me to u go home and sleep it off \ He apparently did not believe my story of three Air
Force pilots that were victims of a balloon crash. However, I was able to convince him and
he treated Capt Fulgham and Capt Kittinger. While at the hospital Capt Fulgham's head
had swelled enormously and his eyes were beginning to turn black.

I do not recall that anything unusual occurred at the hospital at Walker. I remember the
three pilots sitting on a bench in the hallway waiting to be treated. I do not remember that
Capt Kittinger was involved in an altercation with anyone while at the hospital if he had , I
would have known about it. Capt Kittinger was concerned with getting medical treatment
for his injured crew member, Capt Fulgham, and returning to Holloman. I also do not
recall a black NCO accompanying Capt Kittinger while we were at the hospital. I do not
remember a nurse assisting in the treatment of Capt Fulgham or Capt Kittinger. I also do
not remember a male civilian or any personnel or vehicles from a mortuary, and I do not
recall any remains in body bags in the hospital.


178


I was present the entire time when the events described here took place. I am certain that
this event had nothing to do with "space aliens" or any other irregular activity that would
require a cover up. It was a balloon crash and nothing else.

I am not pail of any conspiracy to withhold or provide misleading information to the
United States Government or the American public. There is no classified information that
I am withholding related to this inquiry and I have never been threatened by U.S.
Government persons concerning refraining from talking about this matter.


SIGNED: Subscribed and sworn before me, an


individual authorized to administer
oaths this 31st dav of Mav 1995


at


Roland H. Lutz, CMSgt, USAF, (Ret)


Jarfies Me Andrew, 1st Lf USAFR


WITNESS(s):


Harry C. Aderholt, Brig. Gen., USAF (Ret)


179


STATEMENT OF WITNESS


Pl acc : Date: 20 June 95

L Raymond A. Madson. I t Col USAF (Ret), hereby state that James Mc Andrew was
identitied as a Lieutenant. US.VFR on this date at my place of * employment and do hereby,
voluntarily and of my own tree will, make the following statement. This was done without
having been subjected to any coercion, unlawful influence or unlawful inducement.

I w as born, raised and presently reside in New Mexico. I graduated from New Mexico
A&M College in 1954. I entered the Air Force in 1 955 and was assigned a short time later
to the Aero Medical Laboratory at Wright Patterson AFB. OH. At the Aero Medical
Laboratory I was assigned to the Escape Section as a project officer and test parachutist.
During this time I also had extensive participation in various aspects of the space program
and w orked on the highly classified U-2 project. I served a tour of duly in .\laska and at
the School of Aerospace Medicine at Brooks AFB. TX. before being reassigned to the
Aero Medical Laboratory at Wright Patterson. I retired in from the Air Force in 1979 and
I am currently and Environmental Specialist for the State of New Mexico.

The tirsi project that I was assigned at Wright Patterson was Project 7218. later changed to
Project 7222. This project w as iirst known by the name High Dive and then w as know n as
Excelsior. The object of this project was to study the free fall characteristics of
anthropomorphic dummies from balloons at altitudes of 50,000 to 100.000 feet. Following
satisfactory dummy drops. Capt Joe Kittinger made a series of high altitude parachute
jumps that culminated with a jump from 102.800 feet.

I assumed the duties of Project Officer for the dummy drops in the spring of 1956. I made
numerous trips to Ilolloman AFB. NM. the site of the drops, from 1956 until the end of
the project in 1959 (dummies were also dropped for this project at Wright Patterson AFB
by personnel from the Parachute Branch). I wrote two technical reports that described the
project in considerable detail. The type of anthropomorphic dummy used primarily was
manufactured by Alderson Laboratories but we also used Siena Manufacturing type
dummies. Both of these dummies are shown in the technical reports. The Alderson
dummy had facial features that were not life-like and ears that were not well defined. The
dummies were outfitted with {light suits of various colors, fuchsia, olive drab, and sage
green (a shade of gray). We chose the Alderson dummy because it w as relatively
inexpensive as compared to the Sierra dummy.

We encountered considerable difficulty dropping the dummies from the balloons. I
designed the rack that suspended the dummies, two at a time, from the balloon. On
numerous occasions the dummies were fouled during the release sequence and the dummy
rode a "streamer" all the way to the ground. Other times malfunctions occurred that
caused the two dummies and the entire rack assembly to descend to the ground as one
package. Both ol these instances are described in the technical reports.


180


I participated in at least two dummy recoveries. The meteorologist from the Balloon
Branch. Duke Gildenberg, would determine the best place to launch the balloons
depending on the prevailing weather conditions. Duke also predicted, with considerable
accuracy, where the dummies would impact. 1 specifically recall a dummy I recovered near
the Jornada test range, between Leasburg and Organ , NM During this recovery I drove
a weapons earner and I was only able to locate one of the dummies, 1 never found out
what happened to the other one. The next recovery I remember was on a ranch just
southwest of Roswell. We were given directions to the area by the balloon branch
personnel who had been contacted by a rancher. The equipment had reward notices taped
to them to aid in recovery. We went to the Smith ranch. I remember the name because I
went to New Mexico A&M with the rancher, I knew him as Smitty. We searched that day
from horseback and could not find the dummies. The following day we resumed our
search from horseback and again could not find the dummies. 1 also recall that Smitty
asked us for some of the parachute material so he could make a shirt. We dropped many
dummies from the balloons and I know many were not immediately recovered, but most
were.

I served lor twenty five years in the Air Force and most of those years were in the aero
medical field. I participated in the space program and the highly classified early stages of
I. -2 program. Never during this time were "aliens'" or "Hying saucers" a pan of any
project. There were, however, countless achievements by the Air Force in aerospace
medicine that were the result of dedicated scientific research. It seems likely to me that
someone could have mistaken our anthropomorphic dummies for something that they were
not.

I am not part of any conspiracy to withhold or provide misleading information to the
United States Government or the .American public. 'There is no classified information that
I am withholding related to this inquiry and 1 have never been threatened by U.S.
Government persons concerning refraining from talking about this matter.


SIGNED: Sworn to and subscribed before me.


an individual authorized to administer
oaths, on this 20 day of June 1995
at 4


Raymond A. Madson. Lt Col. USAF (Ret)


WITNESS(s):


181


STATEMENT OF WITNESS
Date: 25 April 1996 Place: Aztec, NM


I Frank B. Nordstrom, M.D., hereby state that James McAndrew, was identified as a
Captain, USAFR on this date at my home and do hereby, voluntarily and of my own free
will, make the following statement. This was done without having been subjected to any
coercion, unlawful influence or unlawful inducement.

I was on active duty in the US Air Force and stationed at Walker AFB, Roswell, NM from
July 1951 until June 1953. During that time I was a pediatrician assigned to the base
hospital. Following my tour of duty with the Air Force I attended the University of
Colorado as a resident in pediatrics. In July 1954 I relocated to Farmington, NM and
began a private pediatric practice. I retired from private practice in 1987 and became the
Medical Director of the San Juan Regional Medical Center, which is also located in
Farmington, NM. In 1989 I retired from that position and presently reside in Aztec, NM.

I have been shown two transcripts of interviews where an individual named Glenn Dennis
described conversations and visits he claims he had with a pediatrician in the late 1940s or
early 1950s in Farmington, NM. According to these interviews, Mr Dennis also claims that
this pediatrician had previously served at the hospital at Walker AFB/Roswell AAF, Since
I am the only physician in Farmington, NM who previously served at the Walker
AFB/Roswell AAF hospital, I believe I am the person he is referring to in these interviews.
I am confident of this because I know I was the first pediatrician to practice in
Farmington, which when I arrived in 1954, was a small community of approximately 8,000
people. I remained the sole pediatrician there for approximately 20 years and I know
most, if not all, of the physicians in the area.

Even though I believe I am the person Mr Dennis referred to in the interviews, I do not
remember him. I can state with reasonable certainty that I cannot recall any conversations
with him, and he, to my knowledge, never visited me in Farmington, NM, in Colorado, or
anyplace else. I have been told, however, that a person named Glenn Dennis operated a
drugstore in the late 1950s-early 1960s, just outside Farmington, in Aztec, NM. But I do
not recall any contact with him there either.

While I was stationed at Walker AFB, I do not recall any incidents that may explain the
information Mr Dennis provided in the interviews. To my knowledge there was only one
fatal aircraft accident during my tour of duty and that accident involved a Walker AFB
based aircraft in the United Kingdom. I was not involved in any aspect of that accident. I
also do not recall any other incidents such as automobile accidents or house fires that may
be the source of this information. Nor do I recall a nurse named Lt Naiomi Selff or a nurse
named Capt "Slats" Wilson. While at Walker AFB I did not witness or hear rumors of
anything that involved flying saucers, aliens, or anything else of an extraterrestrial nature.

I am not part of a conspiracy to withhold information from either the US government or
the American public, there is no classified information that I am withholding related to


182


this inquiry and I have not been threatened by US government persons concerning not
talking about this matter.


SIGNED:


Frank B Nordstrom, M.D.
WITNESS:


Subscribed and sworn before, a
person authorized to administer oaths
this

25th day of April 1996 at Aztec, NM


183


Appendix C


185


Transcript of Interview with

Gerald Anderson*
Alleged firsthand witness to
"Crash Site" Two
(allegedly 175 miles northwest of Roswell)

A: We drove down to the Plains of San Agustin which is west of
Socorro, New Mexico in the Magdalena, Datil, area. We were down there
looking for banded and moss agate, which according to my uncle Ted and my
cousin Victor was prevalent in the area. My brother being an amateur rock
hound had wanted to get some of this. That was a way of showing us around the
area. They had relatives down in Magdalena that they wanted to introduce us to.

So we had gone down there and we got down in the Horse Springs
area and had driven off onto the plains down an old rutted road for, oh, a mile
or so and it seemed like a long ways. We parked the car, got out of the car
and walked down a hillside.

There's a semi-forest, I guess you could say. It had pinon trees and
scrub oak and stuff like that on it and we walked — well, not scrub oak, but
cedar — and walked down the hillside into an arroyo, a dry wash, and then
walked south down a dry wash toward where the agates were supposed to be at.

As we came around a bend in the arroyo that had pinon and cedar
trees growing, we were able to see farther ahead down the arroyo and on the
next ridge line there was a large silver disc shaped object was embedded in
this side of the ridge line.. .there was debris and wreckage strewn about the
area mainly this thing was intact. I would estimate its size from an adult
perspective to something like 35 feet in diameter. I've heard other people
who were there say they thought it was like 50 feet. But as an adult, I would
say about 35 feet in diameter, quite large. When we got up to it there were
four bodies there... not human, there was two of them that were obviously
dead, one of them was obviously very badly injured, and one of them
apparently suffered no ill effects... or it didn't appear to be injured and was
ambulatory, was mobile. It was just setting there next to the one...

Q: Were they right next to the vehicle?

A: Right next to it. Right under the edge of it. And this craft had
apparently come in from the east and bounced off one ridge line, plowing
through this arroyo area and then crashed into the ridge line and embedded
itself. They were sitting back under the edge, it was kind of tilted up like this
and they were sitting back under the edge here. And I'm assuming that this
one creature that was all right had laid this material on the ground but it
looked like unrolled tinfoil that these other three creatures were laying on.


* Exerpted from raw footage used to prepare the video, Recollections of Roswell Part II,
(Washington, D.C.: Fund for UFO Research, 1993).


187


Like it was trying — like you do a person in shock, you know, a put him on a
blanket, that kind of thing. And apparently it had some boxes there around it
and had apparently been trying to give first aid or help these other creatures
when we first got there.

As we approached, the creature drew back like this, like it was in
fear, like we were going to hurt it. And it wasn't very long, you know, we
were trying to communicate with it, the adults were. It seemed to calm down
and just sat there and kind of looked back and forth, watching them,
apparently trying to figure out what was going on...

Q: What did it look like, a little bit more.

A: These creatures, all of them, were, oh, about four foot tall,
four and a half feet tall. They had very large heads that were shaped larger
on the top and they kind of tapered down, not to a real sharp point but just
tapered down where they were thin. And they had very large, very large,
oval shaped or almond shaped, I guess you could say, black eyes. The head...
They were so shiny, they had almost a bluish tint to them when the light
reflected off of them. Their skin coloration, the best way that I could
describe that is it was kind of a bluish tinted milky-white. It looked like
someone in shock. And the ones that were laying on the ground were
really — really looked more that way, more blue in the light, you know...

Q: How about ears, nose, mouth?

A: No, there were no visible ears on the creatures except like —
if you was just to cover your ear like this to where there was just a rise there
and then a hole without, you know, your ear lobe and the rest of the area...

Q: How about nose?

A: It was — the nose was very, very small, almost imperceptible.
It's like two holes, straight in; and the lips were just a straight line. It was like
a cut and you couldn't see, just the lips like we have, it was just a slit. And...

Q: What hair color? Sound?

A: Pardon?

Q: What hair color?

A: There was no hair. They were completely bald.

Q: And no sounds?

A: I never heard a sound one, not out of any of the creatures
including the one that was...

Q: Did you see fingers?

A: Yes, they had fingers like this. They didn't have a little finger.
They just had the thumb and three extra digits except the center digit was
longer and the other two were about the same size. They were very long and
slender and looked very delicate and I made the statement before and I'll


188


make it again, I think he would have made an excellent violinist because of
the structure of their hands.

They were wearing one piece suits. All of them were dressed
exactly the same. It was sort of a real shiny silverish gray color.

Q: No zippers, buttons?

A: No, I saw no zippers, no buttons.

Q: Insignias?

A: No, no insignias. The only thing that was different, you
know, and they all had this, but the only that was different from the silvery
gray thing, the suit, was that down like a seam line, like there was a seam
on his shoulder and around the collar it was trimmed in what appeared to
be maroon, like cording.

Then the suits were continuous with their footwear. We could see
right this area down, it seemed to be less pliable then it was up here, like
this was a stiffer area, like they were boots or shoes or something. But they
were all dressed exactly the same.

Q: Okay. So you and your family are talking back and forth,
wondering what was going on, what did your family say? I mean...

A: Well...

Q: ...did they say anything?

A: Yes, my brother, one of his first remarks I heard him say him
say, "That's a god damn spaceship." You know there were bodies up there
and, you know, I was told not to go up there, which I didn't. And...

Q: How old was your brother at the time?

A He was in his early twenties, I think, 20, 21, something like that.

Q: He was a lot older that you were?

A: Oh, yes, considerably.

When we got up there I kind of meandered off to one side. This thing
was cocked up and I was standing here, the bodies were here, and everybody else
was kind of down here except my cousin Victor was over here playing and
looking in this gaping hole on the side of this disk. And it was shaped just like a
discus except for a round dome was up on top and there was this big gaping gash
in there. We could see inside and it looked like a double hull.

Q: How big — explain it? The gash.

A: The dome?

Q: No, the gash.

A: Well, it covered the greater majority from the center of the
craft out. It was just like a gaping hole in there. I mean I'm thinking, you
know, it's like about 32, 35 feet in diameter so we're talking about 17 feet


189


maybe. Most of that one side was ripped open like that. You could see
inside and you could see another double hull, like — in there. And there were
just rows of components that was on there.

And there were lights that flashed on and off. Some of them were
steady and some were flashing. There was a lot of debris and stuff hanging
out of the hole. There was evidence that there apparently had been fire. It
looked like it had been burned along the edge there. The gash...

Q: Now this wasn't a gash that could have been caused by the
thing coming in for the ground? It wasn't at the leading edge of the vehicle?

A: No, no. This was in the side like — it almost appeared it was
elliptical. It almost appeared as if something the same shape as the disk we
were looking at had hit that same — you know, like it hit the disk and left
an imprint that pretty closely approximated the outside diameter of the disk
itself. And it appeared to be caved in looking, kind of like it hit them like
this and it just crumpled and caved in and ripped it open.

Q: Okay, so you're there, you take all this in, everybody is
mystified. What were the circumstances outside? Hot, cold?

A: Very, very hot. Incredible to me, being the first time in New
Mexico and coming from back east. I had dry heaves. It was like the inside
of an oven. It was unbelievable to me. You know, the odd part about this
was that the closer you got to it, the cooler it was. And standing under it in
the shade there next to these creatures' bodies, it was like refrigerated air
conditioning. And...

Q: Did you feel air coming out of this thing?

A: No, it was just like it was (inaudible).

And I remember reaching up and putting my hand on the side of it
but I think I was afraid I was going to hit my head because there was enough
room for me as small child, you know, I was approximately the same size as
these creatures, to walk up under there and stand there but I kind of did like
that, put my hand up against this thing.

Q: What did it feel like?

A: It was ice cold. It felt like it just came out of a freezer.
Q: Was it smooth? Was it rough?

A: It was very smooth. It had a very smooth texture to it. It was
obviously made out of metal. It was very solid and it was very cold, ice cold.

And there was a smell in the area. It smelled volatile, acrid, like
acetone. And that seemed to be coming out of that gash, that smell. But the
closer you got to this thing, the cooler it was so, you know, I kind of
remained there.

And I guess that while they were over here, my father and my
uncle Ted and my brother. Uncle Ted was trying to talk to this thing in


190


Spanish and of course it didn't understand a word he said. And dad tried to
talk to it and then they tried, you know, sign language and that didn't work.

And I don't know, for some reason, I just — I reached down and
touched it, this one that was laying next to me. When I touched it I realized
and I jumped back. It scared me. It startled me because I suddenly realized
that these weren't dolls. I thought they were plastic dolls. And I — you know,
it was still in my mind that these were dolls until I touched it and then I
realized, you know, this was a dead thing.

I'd seen dead relatives before and unfortunately made a mistake
one time in touching a relative that was in a casket and I just knew this was a
dead thing and it scared me, and I ran around behind my father and my uncle
and this thing was sitting there on the ground and it kept looking back and
forth. And it just had its hands like this in its lap, and just kept looking back
and forth between the three of them and — like it was trying to understand.

And all of a sudden it just turned and looked right straight at me
between my uncle Ted and myself. And this is when — it was just like an
explosion of things in my head, things... I started, you know, feeling, just
terrible depression and loneliness and fear and just, you know, awful, awful
feelings that just suddenly burst in to my mind there. I don't know if that
meant that it was communicating with me and I was the only one there that
it could communicate with because I was a kid. I don't know.

I turned and ran and I ran across the arroyo and up on the area that
it had bounced off of during the crash. I was just standing there looking
down at this scene, you know, at my family, and off in the distance I could
see cattle grazing. I could see a windmill and could see dust trails out on the
plains out there.

And, oh, I was there for a while and then I came back down. I
guess we were there — Victor was, when I got back down there Victor was up
in the craft and Ted yelled at him to get out of there and Glen went over and
grabbed him by the belt and jerked him around...

Q: That's your brother?

A: Yes.

And jerked him off, says, "Get out because this thing may explode
and kill us all," you know, and then of course he went prowling around in there.

I was kind of standing off to one side looking. That's why I knew
that there was — I can look off these rocks that I was standing on and look
right into this thing. That's why I knew, you know, about the lights and the
components and stuff.

And then I heard other people talking. I turned and there was a
group of people coming up the arroyo from out on the plains from the south.
They had come up there and of course they walked up and was talking.

Q: How many?

A: There was an older man and five younger students.


191


Q: Boys, girls?

A: Three boys and two girls. And they were all, you know,
introducing, talking to my father and my uncle and my brother...

Q; What did the older one look like?

A: He was a very tall man, a very big man. He was wearing a
pith helmet when he first came up, one of those kind of explorer helmets.
And he was bald and I know that because he had taken it off and he had, you
know, wiped it with a handkerchief and put it back on. He was a balding
man. And he had a round face. He was very ruddy completed. A big man,
and he apparently was a doctor because they kept calling him doctor and it
was my understanding that it was an archeological group that was out there
on some kind of summer thing. And they talked and he apparently was able
to speak several foreign languages and he tried to talk to this creature several
times in different languages, again to no avail.

Q: How did they happen to be there? Had he seen the thing...

A: Well, they claim that they saw — they said they saw this thing
come down the night before in flight, you know, and they thought it was a
meteorite and they had talked about well, early in the morning, you know,
we'll go over and see this, where this meteor came down, because that's what
they thought it was.

And when the sun came up the next morning, you know, and they
got about their business, got up and somebody looked over and said, you
know, they saw this shiny metal and stuff across the plains there and they
realized it wasn't a meteorite, it may have been an airplane that had crashed
so they all decided to go over there and see if there was anybody left alive,
you know, that was hurt that needed help.

Q: They had driven over?

A: No, they walked over apparently, the way I understand it.
And it's quite a ways across that plain so it had to take a very long time to do
this or they may have had a vehicle, I don't know. That's an assumption, I
think, on my part, where they walked.

Q: Okay. So they're around...

A: But they came across...

Q: ...with the family...

A: ...the plains. I don't know why I said that. I'm not sure if
they drove or not. I didn't hear any cars.

Q: And then somebody else shows up?

A: Yes, they were down just, oh, 15 maybe 20 minutes tops, you
know. And they were picking up things, some of the students. And this Dr.
Buskirk, that they called him, this one girl went up and said, "Look, doctor,


192


wouldn't this make a beautiful ring?" And she was holding what looked like
a red rod, a red tube that was some kind of silvery-red.

And he kind of snapped at her, you know, "Put that down because
you don't know what that thing is. That thing could hurt you. Don't pick
this stuff up."

And she kind of said, "Well, yes, okay, doctor." And then he went
back to what he was doing and she walked away and put it in her pocket.

And a lot of them were doing this, sort of picking up things and
feeling things. I was picking up things and feeling things. It was all kinds of
material and metal, stuff like that. I heard it, well, we all heard it, the sound
of a motor coming, like a truck. And I went back up the incline area to the
ridge line and I could see out there, there was a truck coming up. It was an
old pick-up truck. It was sort of a beige color, a tan colored van with an
antenna on it. And it stopped and this guy got out and he's wearing brown
clothes. He's got boots on and he's wearing a straw hat, just like the kind
that Harry Truman always wore, and he had wire rimmed glasses. He was a
big man and he looked exactly like Harry Truman to me. You know, I'd seen
him in the Movietone News...

Q: He was president then.

A: Yes, I was well aware who Harry Truman was. Everybody
was. He was kind of a hero, you know, and he just kind of looked like him
except bigger, bigger. You know, I don't think he — and he didn't look as old
either. His hair was kind of light gray.

And he walked over there and they got to talking, you know, with
everybody and he told them that he worked out on the plains out there and
that he made maps and that he had seen the wreckage from out there on the
plains and he saw the people and he thought it was a plane wreck and, you
know, that something was going on and he came over to see.

And he hadn't been there but just a very, very few minutes when
we heard all kinds of motors and engines straining and stuff. And here
comes a military car with a big white star on the side of it followed by a six-
by which is a military truck with a kind of canvas wagon, kind of a canvas
thing over it and it's full of soldiers. They've got guns. And right behind
them is what we call a four-by which is like a medium sized jeep/truck
situation and it had two big high whip antennas, all kinds of radio gear in the
back and a guy back there with ear phones and stuff on and he's, you know,
working these radios. And they all pulled up and stopped.

Q: Which direction did they come from, do you know?

A: They came from the north, from the Horse Springs area, right...

Q: So they could have come off the highway there...

A: Oh, yes. I'm sure that's exactly how they got there. They
come off the highway, the same way we did. Well, in the meantime, when
the stopped, this black soldier, this sergeant, the reason I know he was a


193


sergeant, my brother told me he was, and he got out of this car and then a
guy got out on the other side and he was a, Glen said he was a captain, he
told me later he was a captain and this guy had orange and red hair. So all
the soldiers and them came running over there pointing guns at people,
telling them, "Get away, get away, get away," you know? And when this
creature saw these people, the military, he went nuts. He went into an
absolute panic, worse than what he did when he saw us.

Q: Did he move around or just his eyes or...

A: He just, he just...

Q Oh, okay.

A: ...went crazy. And it was like...
Q: Like he was scared?

A: Yes, like he was looking for a place to run and hide.
Q: But he never got up?

A: He never got up. He never left the beings that were next to him.
And this red headed officer, this guy was a real butt hole. He made
all the threats. He threatened to have people shot.

Q: Everybody?

A: He went, "Get away, get away," you know, "We'll shoot. Get
away from there. This is a military secret ." You know, just screaming and
hollering. He told my uncle and my father that if they didn't want to spend
the rest of their life in prison they would never say anything about what they
saw there, if they ever wanted to see us kids again, they'd take the kids away.
They'd never see the kids, you know, meaning me and Victor. That we'd
better keep our mouths shut because if we did not, this is what was going to
happen. They were threatening people and pushing people...

Q: The students as well and Dr. Buskirk?

A: Oh, yes. They were hustling everybody. And one of the
soldiers pushed my uncle. He had a rifle like this and he shoved him back
like that. Well, that was something you didn't do to my uncle Ted. Ted had a
violent temper. And he grabbed the rifle and reached over top and smacked
this guy and dropped him right there. And Ted would go out and fight, heck,
this guy's a cowboy. He'll hit you in a minute.

And of course when he did that there was bolts opened and I guess
cocking, they were cocking their rifles. They were pointing guns at people
and everybody Buskirk and Glen and dad grabbed him, you know, pulled
him back and got him away. "No, don't, Ted, they're going to shoot. Don't
do that." You know, trying to stop this. And I think we came very close to
having someone shot.

Then they really started threatening, you know, and they...


194


Q: Did the redhead do all the talking, pretty much?

A: Pretty much. Except once in a while the sergeant would, you
know, chime in and make statements like that to other people in response to
the redhead. But mainly it was the redhead...

Q: Was there a name tag?

A: Yes, sir, there was. His name was Armstrong. And I'm not
sure if I know that from having read it or know that from remembering it and
now being able to read it in my memory, or if someone said that to me. But
his name was Armstrong, it was right here on his uniform.

Q: But he chased you guys away pretty quick?

A: Yes, yes, he did.

And they herded us up like cattle and we were just up the arroyo,
back in the direction we came from, over the protest of this Dr. Buskirk who
said, "No, no, we've got to go the other way. We came from over there."

"I don't care where you came from, get your ass up the arroyo."

And they ran us up the arroyo and...

Q: So you get to your car again?
A: Oh, right.

Now they took us up the arroyo and just over the hill we came
down, they broke us off and moved us up the hill.

Now this whole time, no one has ever frisked us down, no one has
ever checked our pockets to see if we picked up any of this material and this
girl, Agnes, still had that stuff in her pocket and some of the other students had
stuff. To my knowledge, up to that point, they had not been searched. Whether
they did so afterward, I don't know. They never searched us, ever. They ran us
back up the hill and when we got to where the car was parked, where dad had
parked the car up there, there's a jeep with a guy sitting in the back and there is
a mounted machine gun in the back of this jeep and all of these soldiers.

The jeep pulls out, we're told to get in the car, we follow the jeep, and the
soldiers go with us all the way back out to the highway. When we get back out to the
highway, they set us right there. They wouldn't let us out of the car. They wouldn't
let us move forward. I don't know whether they were making a decision or what.

When we got out to the highway, this place was absolutely full of
military personnel, military equipment. There was airplanes sitting out there
that they had landed on the highway.

Q: Did you see any airplanes when you were back at the site?

A: Yes, there was airplanes in the sky but nobody thought much
about. You know, I didn't think anything about it. I was used to airplanes being
in the sky, having been raised in Indianapolis, Indiana, the home of the Norden
bombsight, you know, the sky was always full of military aircraft at night.

And when we get back on to the highway, there's observation
aircraft, you know, high winged aircraft, and there's one, of what I know now


195


to be a C-47 setting there. And how we didn't hear that land is beyond me
and how he landed — well, of course, I guess you could land it if you're a
good pilot out there as there were no poles or anything.

And it was — they had torn the fence down on the north side of the
highway and all this equipment was setting back up there. The plane was
up there and they were taking stuff out of the plane. There was military
ambulances and there were trucks with — like wreckers, cranes on them. And
there was tankers, like maybe had fuel or water in them. There was just —
everywhere you looked there was military.

Q: A major recovery operation?

A: Yes, it looked like an invasion force. It really did.

And they were all wearing these light khaki uniforms. They didn't
look like, you know, olive drabs. They were light khaki and they all had the
same patch over their — that kind of blue funny patch with the circles on it,
was on his shoulder.

And a lot...

Q: Do you have a clue as to where they came from? Did your
brother or your uncle?

A: No. I don't know where they came from. No, I don't think
anybody ever ascertained that.

There were a lot of MP patches and some of them were wearing
nightsticks off of these webbed utility belts. They had night sticks and they
had .45's in holsters, you know, the automatics, full holsters. And these were
the people that were giving most of the orders.

They had the road barricaded off out there and we sat there for a
very long time and, you know, we were getting thirsty and everything and we
asked if we could go back to Horse Springs to get some water.

"Oh, no, no. You can't through there."

And right after that, they said, "Now you just turn around and you
head out of here now and you go to Socorro," and this is the redhead again,
"Keep you mouths shut. Just keep going and don't look back."

Well, as we drove away, you know, dad, "The hell with it, we'll go
to Magdalena. We'll get water in Magdalena." You know, because that's
where John Trujillo lived, a relative of Ted's.

And so as we drove away, I was looking out the back window and I
could see Dr. Buskirk and these kids and that guy, the guy in the pick-up was
standing there and this Dr. Buskirk was doing just like this in this redheaded
officer's face and he kept pointing back behind him and I guess that meant,
you know, we've got to go back that way and he was fed up with this guy or
something and he was shaking his finger in his face when they were yelling
at each other and that's pretty much the last I saw of the whole situation. I
don't know what happened after that because we just kept going.

(END)


196


Transcript of Interview with

W. Glenn Dennis*
(Alleged firsthand witness to
events at the Roswell AAF hospital)

Q: You started getting calls from the base mortuary officer is that
right, some time in the afternoon on some day in July [1947].

A; Right after noon, yeah.

Q: Do you recall, was that before the story appeared in the
[Roswell Daily] Record?

A: I don't know. I'm sure it was. I can't honestly say, but I
don't think the paper came out until the next day, I don't think. I'm just
assuming that.

Q: I understand. When things like that happen to me way after
the fact I try to remember, and I wasn't sure if you had any recollection or
not. It was the base mortuary officer who called you, not any of the MDs
out there.

A: No.

Q: He was just, the mortuary officer was just the guy...

A: We used to have a standing joke. What did you do that was so
bad they made you the mortuary officer.

Q: Exactly.

A: He wasn't a doctor or anything, but he was an officer and
he was probably some old boy they was trying to figure out something to
do with.

We used to all have them come in, even the officer himself, say,
"God, I didn't know I screwed up that bad."

Q: Was this a guy you'd worked with before? Somebody you
knew real well?

A: No. Those guys come and go.

Q: I realize that. You don't remember what his name was or
anything like that?

A: No. I'm like Bob [Shirkey]. I think if I would see it or heard
it or something I might. Those guys, they were in and out. The mortuary
officer, usually they would appoint some sergeant or somebody. The only
time the doctors were involved is when you'd have an embalming inspection


* W. Glenn Dennis, interview with Karl T. Pflock, November 2, 1992.


197


or dress inspection where the doctors came in and examined the body to
make sure everything was right. You had another inspection to make sure
their dog tags, make sure all the medals and everything...

They always had two crews of inspectors. The doctors were only
involved in the cause of death or the autopsies or identification process, dental
charts and all that. After they did their work, then a doctor would always come
in and make sure the body was embalmed because [they] know more about it
than the other people. But they were involved before. You know.

Q: The reason they contacted you was because Burt Ballard's
funeral home up here had a contract with the base, right?

A: Yeah.

Q: You worked for Burt for a lot of years, didn't you?

A: Yeah, a long time.

Q: When did you first go to work for him?

A: I went to work for him, I was hanging around the funeral
home when I was like a freshman in high school. I'd want to make some
extra money. 'Til give you 50 cents to wash the hearse." I knew his
daughter real well. We were all in school together. That's where I really
got involved in the funeral home. I just kind of worked my way in it.

Q: He basically taught you the trade and all that.

A: Oh, yeah. My folks weren't in the funeral business.

Q: The reason I was curious about it was because when I went
back... I'm one of these guys that goes to Washington and then gets fed
up and leaves and swears I'm never going to go back, and then I go back
anyway. But the last time I went back and did that, I shared a townhouse
with a guy for awhile who was a mortician from Michigan. But he had to
go through all this formal training and all this rigmarole...

A: No. That started in (inaudible). Maybe you don't want to
hear this, but I was in the 9th grade, and this teacher was going around and
wanted us to write a composition on what we wanted to be when we
graduated from school. What were our future plans. I was kind of a wise
guy, I guess I must have been, but I said undertaker, and I don't even know
why. All the girls squealed, so I got a little attention. Then she said okay,
if that's what you want to do then you've got a week, you bring me your
composition. I want to know why you want to be an undertaker.

So I went to the funeral home. They didn't have any books in those
days or anything, but that's where I went. That's why I got involved in it, started.

Q: How long were you in that business before you... I know you
ran the Wortley Hotel up in Lincoln [N.M.].

A: Oh, that was after I retired.


198


Q: Oh, I see, you retired from the mortuary business...
A: Oh, yeah. I was in the funeral business 33 years.
Q: All the time with Ballard?

A: Oh no, I had my own funeral home over in Las Cruces [N.M.],
and one in Soccoro [N.M.],

Q: Oh, okay.

Speaking of that, do you know Norman Todd or his family?

A: His dad and I took the state board together. He was at Clovis
[N.M.]. Norman's his son isn't it?

Q: Yeah. He's a lawyer over in Las Cruces [N.M.]. His...

A: Wasn't his dad the funeral director in Clovis [N.M.]?

Q: I think so. The reason I know him is because Mike Cook,
who is Steve Schiff 's press secretary, and he have been friends ever since
they were in kindergarten together. It turns out that Iris Todd, I guess his
stepmother, is the niece of Loretta Proctor. So talk about small world.

You got these calls from the mortuary officer who was asking you
all these questions. We don't have to go back through all of this. Then at
some point you decided to go out to the base. What took you to the base?

A: At some point I didn't decide, that's not correct. Somebody
wrote that, but I don't think it's right. The way I ended up out at the base
later, we had the ambulance service. The way I got it, the ambulance service,
I got a call, was an airman that was hurt. I took him to the base. The best I
remember, he wasn't on a stretcher or anything because we walked up the
ramp and he sat up in the front seat with me. So he weren't real bad and
weren't dying. Anyway... This guy walked in, I walked him in. Where I
usually park the ambulance, there was a field ambulance there. I had to go
back up to the front. The airman and I walked up the ramps. That's why I
went to the base.

Q: The hospital in those days was apparently a complex of
buildings, right?

A: Yeah. Kind of like Bob [Shirkey] said, like the officer's club.
They're all wooden barrack types.

Q: So the building that's out there now, the rehab center is a
completely new building and had nothing to do with that.

A2 [Bob Shirkey]: No. Think of a long walkway, like a tunnel,
attached to the front of a series of...

Q; I know just what you're talking about.

A: ...with a little of breezeway between each building, the best I
remember it. Isn't that right, Bob?


199


A2 [Bob Shirkey]: Yeah. Here was the building and you came
out the front door and you went down this walkway, which I just said, like
a tunnel. You could see from one end to the other, but all these separate
buildings which were different wings of the hospital.

Q: This was the infirmary where you took the airman, right?

A: There were some ramps there, I think the old ramp's still
there. It was. Anyway, that's the kind of buildings they were. You don't see
it today, no.

Q: I knew that the building, most of it, was new, but I wasn't sure
if they'd built onto it...

A: That had been worked over two or three times.

Q: When you look at it looks like it's been one of these things
where they've added things to it.

So you pulled around behind the infirmary, basically.

A: It was a pretty tight squeeze in there. You couldn't get very
many cars in there.

Q: How many of those ambulances were back there?

A: There were three old box ambulances. I call them box
ambulance. I guess you call them... I wasn't in the military so I don't know
what all the terms were.


Q

A

Q


Like these old field ambulances.

They've got the old square field ambulances, you know.

The airman walked up that ramp with you. Both of you guys


went into...

A

Q
A


The airman and I both went in.
Did he see that stuff in...

He wasn't paying any attention because he had, I had a
tourniquet and towel over his busted nose, and he went right on in.

Q: Got himself into a little trouble in town, did he?

A: Rode an old motorcycle. The reason I remember it is because
he had an old Indian motorcycle, and I'd just bought one. I paid $40 for one
and he [rode] one, and I didn't have any fenders, and I was thinking of
maybe of...

Q: So you took him in there, and then basically after you got him
taken care of you figured you'd go look up your friend, the nurse.
Let's get that straight.

A: Stan Friedman, I think, somebody thought that I was having a
relationship with this nurse. I was not. This girl wouldn't even think about


200


going with me, and she was going strictly, when she got her time paid back
to the service she was going into an order of the nuns, sisters, and she was
going to be in education and later on she changed to the nursing deal. The
only reason she was in it, because her folks were in debt and she went in the
service to get her education. She got her education and then she was going
to pay back the church what they owed her. Her whole thing in life was,
from the day she was born, her life was planned that she was going to be in
an order.

Q: Did she ever tell you which order that was?
A: It was in St. Paul, Minnesota. That's all I know.
Q: That's where she was from.

A: That's where she was born and raised. She never went out of
the city until she went to... My understanding was she never went anywhere
and she never lived anywhere. She was raised up from the time... Strictly
raised by the church. That was the only life she ever planned. She wouldn't
date a man if her life depended on it. She'd get around and talk and
everything, but there was no way. But everybody said I was going to marry
her and... That's bull shit.

Q: The implication was that she was cute and...

A: She was cute. I could have been interested. If I wouldn't have
played second fiddle to the Catholic church, because that's what she would
have been.

Q: How did you get to know her, just being out there on the base?

A: The ambulance service. You go out there, and you've got
your splints on a guy, you've got first aid, whatever, you can't just throw
them off of your stretcher. You maybe help them... Sometimes you're
out there two hours or three. Then while you're waiting to get your
equipment back you sit in the coat room with the doctors and with the
nurse's quarters. That's where we always had our cokes and stuff.

Q: So you'd just shoot the breeze with whoever's around.

A: You get to know these people. That's the only way. See, she'd
only been there less than three months. Of course, I'm a crazy son of a gun...
Nearly everybody remembered her. She was a good looking little thing, a
beautiful little girl. We thought she was kind of lonely.

Q: As you well, know, there's been a major effort to try to find her.

[Skip in tape]

A; She was out here less than three months.

Q: So you went back there. Tell me what happened.

A; I started back there, and that's when I got in trouble. I saw
this officer standing there, and I saw this debris in the back of the ambulance.


201


Two of them was full of debris. Like Bob [Shirkey] saw a bunch little stuff,
and there was a couple of pretty good sized.

Q: Two of the three ambulances had stuff...

A: One of them's door was closed, but the other two... There was
two MPs standing right out, kind of just leaning up against the back of those.
I remember.

Q: Did they challenge you when you tried to go in?

A: No... Evidently because I drove up with that airman, and they
just figured whatever.

Another thing, when I was there, all the people that was there, that
nurse was the only person I saw that was permanent station. Everybody else
was all new in that whole hospital operation. Even in the coke room, there
wasn't anybody in there that I knew. I started back and got to the door, and I
saw this...

(Pause)

We've been friends for years, but I don't want to talk with him around.

Q: So the stuff you saw, you said it was not aluminum...

A: ...looked like hot stainless steel when it got hot. When you
put flame on stainless, see, I do sculpture work and all that, and I know what
the stuff looks like.

Q: Oh, you're a sculpture? I didn't know that?

A: Yeah, I've been doing it for years. I had my own foundry... I did.
I don't do it any more. I have my stuff done. But anyway, this stuff was a blue
purplish, it looked like hot stainless steel, is what it looked like. Steel that got
hot. It didn't look like aluminum, it wasn't even melted like aluminum. I don't
even think it was melted, just like a bunch of fragments.

Q: But there were some bigger things in there besides the
fragments, right?

A: Yeah. There were was two pieces.
Anyway, do you want to go back to the nurse?

Q: Yes, please.

A: I started back, see, and this captain was standing there, and
naturally, I just thought we had a plane crash. When we had that, we used
to fill up the ambulances and everything else. It would (inaudible) for you
to have a hand here or an arm or a foot or something. You know what I'm
talking about. Then you've got to get in and take all that stuff and separate
it and put those bodies back together with identification. That's what you've
got to do. I thought we had a crash.

I saw this guy, I didn't know him. He was standing there at the door.


202


Q: Just inside?

A: Just kind of standing like in between the door of this room
up there. I was going down the hall. I said, "Sir, it looks like we had a plane
crash. Do I need to go in and get ready for it?"

Q: This was an officer?

A: Yeah, he was a captain. I remember the bars on his [inaudible].
He said, "Who are you?" I told him I was from the funeral home, and he said,
"Wait right there, don't move."

Then he came back, that's when the two MPs came up. When the
nurse came out, we started down the hall and that's when somebody in the back
of us said, "Bring that son of a bitch back " That's when the redheaded captain
asked where the sergeant came in right there. Then they took me on out. As I
was going down the hall, she came out of, like Bob said, out of this room, and
there was two guys in back of her, and they all had towels over their face.

She saw me and she said, "Glenn, what are you doing here? Get
out of here, you're going to get in a lot of trouble. How did you get in here?"
She said that two or three times. She was sick.

Q; This is when you were talking to that first officer?

A: Yeah. He just told the MPs to take me back to the funeral home.

Q: He had just told them that, and then she appeared at that point?

A: He told them to take me to the funeral home, and we started
down the hall, back out the hall, and that's when she came out of another
room with these other two guys. What happened, she told me the next day,
they were all sick because those little bodies were in those sacks, and two of
them were very mangled and the smell was horrible and one was whole and
two of them were very badly mangled.

Q: Did you get a whiff of that stuff yourself?

A: No, evidently not. If I would have, I would have known what
it was. I worked on a hell of a lot of stuff.

Q; In that tape you talked about working on floaters and all that
kind of stuff.

A: You know.

Q: I haven't had professional experience in it, but I've been
involved in it.

A: In New Mexico you've got this hot 100 degree stuff, and
you've got bodies out there two or three days, and (inaudible).

Q: This read headed guy, what was his rank, do you remember?

A; I think he was a captain. It seemed to me like he had on some bars.


203


Q: When he first appeared and started getting, essentially, pretty
rough, was the sergeant around at that time, or did he show up...

A: He was kind of beside of him. I think they were standing
there... Yeah, they were definitely standing there together. I don't know if they
walked in together, because I didn't see them until they turned me around.

Q: Was there a lot of activity at that time? Were there people...

A: People were [fastened] everywhere. And the odd part of it
was, there wasn't anybody, wasn't any of our regular people. These were all
people that I'd never seen before. That's why I got in so much trouble. I'd
never seen these guys.

Q: These were not any of the guys that would ordinarily
recognize you as somebody who would...

A: And they sure as hell didn't want me there, you know that.

Q When he says, "Get him out of there," the redhead, did he
make any threats to you himself? Did he say, "Don't say anything about this,
forget it..."

A: He said, just like that. He says, "Now listen, Mister, you
don't go back into town starting a bunch of damn rumors." This guy swore
as much as I do. Anyway, he said, "Don't start a bunch of damn rumors,
because nothing happened out here. There's no plane crashes. Nothing's
happened. You don't go in and start." Then he told the MPs, "Get the son of
a bitch out of here."

That's when I said, right then, I said, "Look, Mister, I'm a civilian, and
you can't do a damn thing to me, you go to hell." That's when he said, "Listen,
Mister, somebody will be picking your bones out of the sand."

Then the black sergeant said, "Sir, he would make good dog food,"
or something like that. I remember the dog food.

The next morning at 6:00 o'clock the sheriff was out at my dad's
house and told my dad, "Glenn may be in a lot of trouble with the base, and
tell him to keep his mouth shut."

I never told my story to anybody, but my dad came up, I was living
in a room at the funeral home. He came up and got me out of bed and
wanted to know what I'd done. He was a very patriotic old man, and he said,
"If you done anything against our government, I'll take care of it."

Q: When was this?

A: The next morning.

Q: You were saying what the heck? What's going on?

A: Yeah. I said, well hey... He said, George Wilcox — the sheriff
and my dad were real good friends, and he said George tells me you're in
a lot of trouble out there. He wasn't going to leave, and I told my dad the
story. He got all upset because they threatened me and all this kind of stuff.


204


I didn't see the nurse, then, until the next day. After I saw her, then
I kept calling. When I got back to the funeral home I started calling, because
she was in trouble and so was I.

Q: It was the next morning after you'd been hustled out of there
that your dad came by to see you.

A: Yeah, 6:00 o'clock in the morning.

Q: He'd been called by the sheriff...

A; The sheriff went to my mother and dad's house, and at 6:00
o'clock... My dad always got up early, sat and had coffee. He was an old
carpenter and building contractor. He and George were old friends because
he used to go hunting, and dad was making gun stocks, so they were good
friends. They used to play some kind of domino games or 42, whatever you
call it. They were good friends.

Q: So the sheriff went by to see your dad...

A: Dad said he was there at 6:00 o'clock.

Q: The sheriff came by early in the morning and then your dad
immediately came from home and came to see you.

A: After George Wilcox left, my dad came up to the funeral
home and wanted to know what I did.

Q: Did your dad say why the sheriff... Had the sheriff been
contacted by the base, or...

A: No, he just said, he was concerned about what I'd done, how
I'd got in trouble.

Q: Do you remember what he told you about what Wilcox told him?

A: He just said George said I was in trouble at the base, and what

did I do.

Q: Then after having this rude awakening, you then... Did you
call the nurse?

A: Well, yeah, this was in mid-morning. I remember I finally, I
waited until kind of, well, it must have been 9:00 o'clock or so, and I called.
I knew the work station that she always worked at. She was a general nurse.
They didn't specialize. Just orderlies and everybody was on general duty in
those days. I was informed that she wasn't there, she wasn't working. She
wasn't working that day.

Q: It was one of the other nurses that you talked to?

A: Yeah, it was an old girl by the name of Wilson., Captain Wilson. I
asked her, I said what happened? She said, "Glenn, I don't know what happened,
but she's not on duty. I'll try to get the word to her that you want to talk to her."
She was wanting to talk to me, but she was sick. She was in total shock.


205


Q: Did she tell you that later, that she was sick?

A I knew she was sick. She came out with that towel. She said,
she and the two doctors were sick. Then at the Officers' Club, she said I
want to know what happened to you, and I'll tell you what happened to me.
The only way we ever got to the Officers' Club, the old regular group said
you don't go anywhere, you keep your mouth shut, [inaudible] said that.
The old group, they would have known us. It probably wouldn't have
mattered. But these people, hell, these people didn't know us. And of course
I had a pass, and I had an associate membership to the Officers' Club, the
funeral home did, so I could go as I pleased. I had free access to the base.

Q: Did you meet her at the club?

A: She said she'd meet me over there. She was sick. She said
I'll meet you there.

Q: When you got there, she was at the club?

A: She was walking up when I drove up. She walked over. It
wasn't very far from the hospital.

Q: She walked from the hospital or...

A: From the nurse's quarters.

Q: Let me back up to the event with the MPs. They physically
hustled you out of the hospital....

A: Well, they didn't carry me out, they said, "Come on, we're
taking you back," one on each side. They didn't have their hands on me or
forcing me.

Q: I've forgotten which one of the accounts has them lifting you
right off your feet and all that kind of stuff.

A: No. They may have got me by the elbow, but that was that.
They were nice guys. They were doing what they were told to do.

Q: They got you to the ambulance. Did they follow you back to
the funeral home?

A: One followed me in a pickup and the other one sat in the seat

with me.

Q: Oh, I see, he actually rode with you in the ambulance.

A: He rode with me, and the other one drove a pickup and picked
him up. They had a pickup.

Q: Did the guy riding with you say anything about what was going on?

A: He said he didn't know what was going on. That was the first
thing I said, "What in the hell's going on?" You know. He said, "You know
more about it than we do," something similar to that. I don't know the exact
words, but he didn't know anything.


206


Q: Now we're back to the Officers' Club and you met her there.
When you saw her, how did she look?

A: Like a nervous wreck. Her hair wasn't combed or nothing.
She said she'd been sick all night crying and everything else, and she was
still crying. She was hysterical She put her hands over her face and said I
can't believe it. The most horrible thing she'd ever seen. She was really in
bad shape.

Q: You called her and wanted to get in touch with her to talk with
her about what happened.

A; I was curious.

Q: Did she seem reluctant at first to talk to you about it?

A: No, she said I've got to talk to you. I want to know what
happened to you. She said I've got to talk to somebody, and that was it. You
know, I'd see her a lot. I knew all those old girls out there, you know.

Q: Did she give you any indication or any reason to believe that
she had been told to keep her mouth shut about it, or...

A: Well, yeah, because I'll tell you what. She had this drawing
on the back of a prescription pad, these little bodies, it was on the back, a
little small thing on the back of a prescription pad. She said, "I'm going to
show you something, and you have to give me your sacred oath that you
won't tell anybody when you got this and you won't ever mention my name,
because I will get in a lot of trouble." That's what she said. "I will get in a
lot of trouble."

Q: She didn't say specifically that somebody had...

A: No, she just said, "I will get in a lot of trouble." She said,
"Will you do that?" I said, "Sure."

She showed me that. And she had it written on the back like I had
it on the back of that, you have my drawing, where I said note, and all that.
That's what she said.

Q: She let you keep that, she gave it to you?

A: Yeah, she said you look at it and you throw it away. I never
did. I went and took it back and put it in my personal file.

Q: Which subsequently got tossed, apparently.

A: Well, all the files got tossed.

Q: What happened?

A: Well, the funeral home, I hired some guys, the manager up
there now [was there] before I left, and Raymond said that he doesn't
know, because when he was working up there was another manager, and
he said he thought Joe [Lucas] told (inaudible). Of course Joe and I
weren't very good friends and we'd had some problems over the funeral


207


business, and he said Joe found my files. He said I know he went
through everything you had.

He and I had a partnership in a business, and I put up all the money
and it went sour and so we had problems.

Q: You and Stan Friedman actually made an effort to try and find
that, didn't you?

A: We went down there. The old file was right where I said it
was, it was still there. But it was, Stan will tell you, we went down in this
old basement, and I knew exactly... See, I kept files on every case that I was
involved in, murders, anything that I went to court on, that I was a witness
on, I kept all that. I called those my personal files. If I ever had to go back
with the insurance companies or anything, I had it all right there. That's why
I had those.


You found the filing cabinet but there was nothing in it?
No, We went through it. There wasn't a thing in it. Stan and I both.
They'd stripped it out, or was there other stuff in there...
There wasn't anything in there.

After all of that excitement, then what? Did it just kind of


Q

A:

Q

A

Q

evaporate?

A: It just kind of evaporated. Then of course two or three days
later, I was concerned about her because she was sick. I took her back to the
nurse's quarters and let her out. I called back the next day and they said she
wasn't on duty, and I called the next day and they said she wasn't on duty.
Then I went out there, for some reason, I don't recall. I went out there and
I asked about the lieutenant, and they said she'd been transferred out. They
said, "She was transferred out yesterday." Well, that was the day after I saw
her. They got her out the next day.

Who told you she'd been transferred out?

I don't know. Some nurses...


Q

A

Q

A:

Q

A


It wasn't anybody that you remember?
No.

Did they tell you where she'd been shipped to?

They didn't know. They said she had been transferred, and
that's all they knew.

Q: But then you heard from her subsequently.

A: About three or four weeks later. I got a card addressed to
Ballard Funeral Home. It was from her, and inside it just said, just a short
note, she said we will correspond later to see what happened to each other,


208


something similar to those words. She said the only way you can contact me
is through this APO number, and there was an APO number. It was a New
York APO number.

Q: So she'd gone to Europe or some place.

A: Then right on the bottom she says, "I'm in London." That was
it. I wrote a note, just a note, that said if you feel like it and you get time,
then I would love to know and we'll correspond. Mine came back. That was
about three or four weeks later. Mine came back.

Q: That was the one that was marked deceased?

A: Yes. It said return to sender, [addressee] deceased.

Q: Then what did you do?

A; (inaudible)

Q : You didn't try to follow up or see if there was any possible. . .

A No. I asked (inaudible), at the time we called her Slatts
Wilson, a big tall nurse, 6' 2", 6' 3", big tall skinny girl. We called her Slatts.
Everybody called her Slatts. She's the one that told me she'd heard that there
was a plane crash and she was the nurse that went down on a training mission.
She said that's strictly rumor, I don't know anything about it. That's what I...

Q: No one's been able to turn that one up at all.

A: I guess maybe I should never even mention this. I know no
one believes this damn story. Nobody believes this story.

Q: I don't know if that's true.

A; Anyway, it was a hell of a story. I told (inaudible). I said I
told the woman, I don't want to give you her name, because I told the lady
I'd give a sacred oath and I didn't want to get involved. Well, it's been 45
years, almost 40 years, and I haven't heard anything. He said I will do it
confidentially and nobody else will have this name. Well, that's where he
broke his promise after that. I got all over him about it. I called him and
I was madder than hell. He said well, Bob Shirkey was the one that told
everybody, that he was sitting in the back of us. Bob brought Stan [Friedman]
up there when he interviewed me. He said, Bob Shirkey was the one that let
out her name. To this day, Stan Friedman (inaudible) still says he did not
put her name out. I've been on several shows, not several, but two or three
interviews, and I'm not going to mention her name. If somebody says is this
her name? I'm not going to say it is or it isn't. I told Stan... I was madder
than hell about it, because I did give my word.

Q: There's another side to that, too, from the standpoint of
those who are trying to get some answers. By not having her name
around, it makes it easier to cross-check the stories that you get from


209


people. You have... It's a question of honor, and that's very sound. I
applaud you for that. There's not too many people around these days
that are concerned about that kind of thing. And it's also, from an
investigator's point of view, an advantage, too.

A: I've never read this stuff, I've never watched the videos, I've
never read any books, I haven't even read Stan's books, I haven't even read
[Kevin] Randle's only what they say about me. Friedman is a lot more
accurate, but see...

Q: You mean about...

A: About me. I've read that. That's the only thing I've read.
I'm not a UFO guy. I've got another life besides UFOs. But anyway, Stan
Friedman's story is pretty well right. But Randle and them was always
said I got curious. I didn't get curious. I went out there on a call, just
like I told you.

Q: The section of their book that refers to you is really kind of
cryptic, anyway.

A: They said the book was already published. Now they had a
copy... Friedman sent them a copy of my tape. They had the (inaudible).
Hell, they had my tape. They just made that up. Somebody did.

Q; I was puzzled by it when I read their book. That whole
section where they refer to you, and it's all very mysterious, and your name
is not referred to in the table of contents, but you're in the list of people that's
been interviewed, but you're not one of the key people lists...

A: They never did interview me.

Q: They never talk to you at all?

A: Not personally. They didn't interview me until a long time
later, a year or so later. They only had Stan's tape.


Q

A


So when they were actually writing their book...
The book was already published.

When they were doing the writing, they were working from


Q:

Stan's tape.

A: Evidently.

Q: Who was actually the first UFO investigator to get in touch

with you?

A: Stan Friedman. When they had Unsolved Mysteries here
and different ones. There was a lot of people... I'd get different ones. I had
different people come and say we want to talk to you about the UFOs, and I
said I don't have anything to say, I don't want to talk about it, and I never
did. I've talked to very few people since.


210


Q: How did Stan come to find you?

A: One of the guys that I went to school with, high school, and
Captain Harry Blake, he's a general now, (inaudible).

Q; Is he still on active duty?

A: No, he's retired. He was just a general in the military
school, National Guard, I don't know. He never was really a good friend
of mine. We lived across the street from each other when we were kids.

So that's how Stan found you. He was the first guy to talk to you.

A: Bob Shirkey brought him up there to see me.
(Pause)

Q: There's a reference in here to you having some years later,
I think, talked to a pediatrician that you knew? A guy that was stationed...

A: I can't find his picture, and I don't remember his name. I ran
into him when I was fishing up in Colorado and we ran into each other.

Q: This was a guy who was at that time stationed here?

A: He was here, and they called him in. He said that was out
of his field and he didn't want anything to do with it.

Q: They actually called him in and asked him to take a look at
what had been retrieved or...

A: He said they called him in. I don't know. He said, "But I
said that was out of my field and I didn't want anything to do with it."
That's what he told me, now.

Q : Did you get the sense that he knew more than he was telling?

A: I would say so, yeah. I'm sure they did. A lot of those
guys out there did.

Q: You don't remember his name?

A: I don't remember it. But I did run into him. Somewhere
I've got his name.

Q: Have you talked with anyone else? Had you during that
time before you got into all this...

A: No, I wouldn't have even talked to him about it. He
brought it up and wanted to know whatever happened on the UFO
business.

Q: It was at his initiative.

A: I didn't bring it up. I told him I didn't know any more
about it than he did. He said well that was strictly out of my field, and I
didn't want to get involved in it. That was about it. But he brought it up.
I didn't ask him.


211


Q: He was just curious about what happened.
A: Wanted to know whatever happened to it.
Q: That's about all I've got.


(END)


212


Transcript of Interview with Alice Knight*
(Alleged secondhand witness to

"crash site"
175 miles northwest of Roswell)

A: I remember that he saw — one time I went to visit — and I
don't remember whether it was before my husband and I married or after,
I don't recall the date. But he said that he saw a UFO fall. He was out
working in the field and I understood that he was out on the St. Agustin
Plains and he went over that way and it fell and he got nearly to the site
and there was a group of people on a geological — archeological hunt and
they were over there. I don't remember how many people he said.

But they got nearly up to the UFO but it was close enough that
you could see some creatures. He said they didn't look like human
beings out there.

And along came government cars and trucks...

Q: Now, by government you mean....

A: I guess it was government. You know, as I said it was a
long time ago. And someone came along and I understood it, I don't
know whether it was army or what. I think he just termed it government
trucks and they told him to go on back and forget they ever saw anything,
and that's all I recall.


(END)


* Exerpted from raw footage used to prepare the video, Recollections of Roswell Part II,
(Washington, D.C.: Fund for UFO Research, 1993).


213


Transcript of Interview with Vern Maltais*
(Alleged secondhand witness to

"crash site"
175 miles northwest of Roswell)

A: ...he [the eyewitness] had been coming back from one of
his field trips, he'd run onto a flying saucer that had burst open and
there were four beings on the ground and that he was surveying the site,
archeological group from the University of Pennsylvania, telling us that
there were about four or five people with this group.

As they were just starting too look things over really closely, the
military moved in and gave them a briefing not to say anything about it
and keep quiet and it was in the national interest to get out of there.

Q: What was his feeling about what it was that he had
experienced?

A: He had no qualms about what it was. He said it was a
vehicle from outer space . There wasn't any question. The beings on
there were nothing like, not exactly like human beings...

Q: How did you...

A: ...similar but not exactly.

Q: How did he describe them?

A: He described them being about three and a half to four feet
tall, very slim in stature, and with — there heads were hairless, with no
eyebrows, no eyelashes, no hair. Sort of a pear-shaped head with the top
of the head being smaller — larger, I mean.

Q: Any other characteristics about their appearance?

A: Only one thing that he mentioned. The hands were not
covered, they had four fingers.


(END)


* Exerpted from raw footage used to prepare the video, Recollections of Roswell Part II,
(Washington, D.C.: Fund for UFO Research, 1993).


214


Transcript of Interview with

James Ragsdale*
(Alleged firsthand witness to
"crash site" north of Roswell)

RAGSDALE, JAMES EYEWITNESS Transcript
26 JANUARY 1993


DS: So you were actually out there.
JR: Yeah.

DS: Do you remember the name of the ranch it was on?"

JR: It was on... Fisher?

DS: Was it north of here.

JR: Yes... back out here.

DS: Northwest . . .Just take your time.

JR: It was Foster. (Some discussison with his wife about who
owned the ranch) .Let me see what you've got (referring to the
photographs). That's the place right there (identifying the
location from the pictures).

DS: What area?

JR: It seemed to me that that place belonged to... Fisher, but it
sold to somebody else ... somebody else bought that...

That's how come I was out in that
area. And we was out there and she's dead and all the guys I
showed the stuff are all dead. It's amazing what all went on...

Discuss our book and the Museum.

DS: showing one of the pictures ... so you think this looks like
JR: That looks like the place.

DS: As far as the ranches go, driving around at that time, it
could have been most any ranch, right? This would have been in
'47... You were with this woman?

JR: Yeah. We were camped out out there.

DS: You were camping?

JR: Yeah... I would say half of it... I would say that only about
half of it... just half of a... you really couldn't tell what it
was... what you could still see, where it hit... I think it was two
spaceships flying together and one them came down and the other
one picked up what they could and got out of there.


* James Ragsdale, interview with Donald R. Schmitt, January 26, 1993.


215


RAGS DALE - JANUARY 26, 1993 (2)

DS: Is it possible that because it was hit by lightning that it
broke up and part of it went down. .. (discussion of the Mac Brazel
sighting)

JR: ...but it was either dummies or bodies or something laying
there. They looked like bodies. They weren't very long... over
four or five foot long at the most. We didn't see their faces or
nothing like that but we had just got to the site and heard the
army, the sirens, all coming and we got into a damned jeep to
take off. We had to hold a fence up to go onto another ranch to
come out from there.

DS: How far would you say this from town here?

JR: Thirty miles ... forty miles.

DS: In a nortwesterly direction?

JR: Right up here. (Discuss the pictures again.)

DS: Were there any buildings?

JR: No. You couldn't see nothing. You go up on top of the hill.
It was a hill. .. (referring to the pictures) you could see the
stuff right here.

DS: The object the craft. ..what was left of it.. .in these

photos. . .where was the object?

JR: Along this right here... It looked to be about half of around
(?) because around the edges... I had two great big pieces. That's
what they got when they stole the car... you could take that stuff
and wad it up and it would straighten itself out. I never seen
anythig like it. Looked like something between a plastic ... looked
like carbon paper...

DS: That was the color of it?

JR: Yeah. Carbons. That was the color of it. Sure was ... between
plastic and... hell I don't know... let's see how to describe. One
piece we had you could take it and put it in any form you wanted
and it would stay there... you could bend it in any form and it
would stay... it wouldn't straighten back out.

DS: You picked those up from the ground?

JR : Yeah .

DS: You threw them in the jeep. .. stuffed them in your clothes...?

JR: Yeah and then we heard all of them coming...


216


RAGSDALE - JANUARY 26, 1993 (3)

DS: How many vehicles. . .how much commotion did you hear as they
came in?

JR: Oh my God it must have been... it was two or three six by six
army trucks, a wrecker and everything. - .and leading the pack was
a 47' Ford car with guys in it... MPs and stuff in it... we had the
windshield down on the jeep and we stayed in the weeds and
stuff •••and we came on back down to where we was camped at.

DS: So you watched for a while?

JR: Yeah. Sure did.

DS: What was their...

JR: They cleaned everything all up. I mean cleaned it. They raked

the ground and everything* I mean they cleaned everything.

DS: You didn't stay there that long?

JR: No, but they had a truck. I would say it was six or eight big
trucks besides the pick up, weapons carriers and stuff like that.

DS: What kind of guard did they have. Did the surround certain
areas . - .

JR: They had MPs all ...they got way out in the field. They had
people all along this ridge* ••they drove up in here. We was back
over here. This grass here...

DS: So if you were back here, could you see the activity down
here?

JR: You couldn't see too much of what they... you could tell... As
soon as they got there they began gathering the stuff up... we
were hidden in what you call buffalo grass...

DS: Did you see any behavior around the bodies.

JR: Huh-uh

DS: You couldn't see down to that level?

JR: Yeah.

DS: Did you see any activity near the craft?

JR: No.

DS: The angle of the craft.*. was it flat was tipped...

JR: One part was kind of buried in the ground..- and part of it


217


RAGS DALE - JANUARY 26, 1993 (4)

was sticking out of the ground ... about like that (DS: about a 30
degree angle?) Yeah... and I'm sure that was bodies ... either
bodies or dummies . . .

DS: Why do you say dummies?"

JR: The federal government could have been doing something
because they didn't want anyone to know what this was.. -they was
using dummies in those damned things. . .they could use remote
control .

DS: So you thought that it could have been an experimental craft?

JR: After I came to down showed Frank Willis and his son (he's
dead)... the Blue Moon beer joint over on the old Dexter highway.
We was there until two o'clock in the morning ... I had the jeep
behind my car.

DS: Did you still have the scrap in the jeep?

JR: Yeah. I showed it to him. He said I would just keep my mouth
shut... he said hell there is no telling where that come from.

DS: So you didn't think it was from outer space?

JR: No. We didn't even think about outer space back then...

DS: When was the first time that you thought that maybe this was
something more?

JR: It was about three weeks... it came out that a spaceship had
crashed at Roswell ... about three weeks. But it could have been
out longer than that there but see I worked in Carlsbad...

DS: But you first saw there had been a newspaper article about
three weeks after...

JR: Oh hell it was two or three weeks before I caught up on
it... a spaceship. . .what I hear is they guarded that place for a
long time out there .. .because me and another fellow went out
there and you couldn't get.*«they had the roads sealed off... it
was a month or so after...

DS: And they still had it cordoned off.

JR: The MPs and stuff were still on the road. They wouldn't let
nobody go out there . . .

DS: If a person were to drive out there today .going north out
of town... are we talking 285?

JR: No. Highway 48. You go out 48. You go out here to the truck


218


RAGSDALE - JANUARY 26, 1993 (5)


route, hit 48 and*.. and it's about forty some miles out in
there... (And no talks about the car being stolen in 1951 when the
car with the debris was stolen,..) ...I would say 18 inches and
30 inches long . strips off the edge of it. -.it was a heavy
material but it didn't have no ridges... it was put together with
some kind of solder like stuff... no bumps, no nothing in it... it
wasn't... it was about as heavy as duraluminum. . . it wasn't as
brittle .. .you could take a small piece and it was flexible...
(then discuss the stealing of the car with a wrecker and the
material was locked in the trunk of the car. And then discuss the
break in of the house where the last of the pieces were stolen
about eight years ago... 1985).

DS: Was there a storm that night?"

JR: Yeah. There sure was. It was a whale of a storm.

DS: Did you hear anything unusual? Did you hear -between the
cracks of thunder. . .

JR: Well, it lit up the sky when it came down. It lit up the
damned... we thought at first that it was falling star or
something. And electric lightning. . .man it was something.

DS: You heard something and you saw something...

JR: Yeah, sure did. . .because we were laying there in the back of
the pick up... the whole sky lit up... we thought it was a star
falling .

DS: Did you then go to check it out...

JR: Sure did. The next day, sure did. We drove right up on it.
She picked up a piece of it and we had the jeep parked a little
ways away from there and throwed a piece of it up there somewhere
and I have tried and tried to find where she had throwed that
piece... she had a piece but when she saw the army coming she
throwed it out.. .she saw them a coming and she throwed it out... I
doubt that I could even go back to the place it's been so long.
(Now begin to talk about the car wreck that nearly killed him.)

Remainder of the tape is discussion about the car wreck, the
ranchers in the area, and the murder of Mrs. Ragsdale's brother.


(END)


219


Selected Bibliography
of Technical Reports


The technical reports listed below are available for sale by contacting:
National Technical Information Service (NTIS)
5285 Port Royal Rd
Springfield, VA 22161
(703) 487-4650

http://www.orders@ntis.fedworld.gov


Publication

Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories.
"Report on Research, for the Period July
1965-June 1967", AFCRL TR-68-0039, 1968.

Air Force Missile Development Center.

Man High III MDC-TR-60-16, 1960.

. Man-High /, MDC-TR-59-24, 1959.


Air Research and Development Command.
History of Flight Support Holloman Air
Development Center, 1946-1957, 1957.

Bartol, Aileen M M et al.. Advanced Dynamic
Anthropomorphic Manikin (ADAM) Final
Design Report, AAMRL TR-90-023, 1990.

Bushnell, David. Contributions of Balloon

Operations to Research and Development
at the Air Force Missile Development Center
Holloman AFB, N. Mex. 1947-1958, 1958.

. History of Research in Space Biology

and Biodynamics at the Air Force Missile
Development Center, Holloman AFB,
New Mexico, 1946-1958, 1958.

. History of Research in Subgravity and

Zero-G at the Air Force Missile Development
Center, Holloman AFB, New Mexico,
1948-1958, 1958.


NTIS Report Number

AD 666484

AD 259635
ADA 215867

ADA 323526

AD 234761


ADA 323109


ADA 323170


ADA 323144


221


. Major Achievements in Biodynamics:

Escape Physiology at the Air Force Missile
Development Center, Holloman AFB,

New Mexico, 1953-1958, 1958. ADA 323 127

. Origin and Operation of the First

Holloman Track, 1949-1956, 1956. ADA 323573

. Research Accomplishments in Biodynamics:

Deceleration and Impact at the Air Force

Missile Development Center, Holloman AFB,

New Mexico, 1955-1958, 1958. ADA 323097

. The Aeromedical Field Laboratory: Mission,

Organization, and Track Test Programs,

1958-1960, 1960. ADA 323166

. The Beginnings of Research in Space Biology

at the Air Force Missile Development Center,

Holloman AFB, New Mexico, 1946-1952, 1958. ADA 323 167

Cobb, D. B. and Waters, M.H.L. Royal Aircraft
Establishment Farnborough. The Behavior
of Dummy Men During Long Free Falls,

Mechanical Engineering Note 179, 1954. AD 060052

Firestone, James R. and Patterson, Jack H.
Recovery of Parachute-Borne Packages

by Helicopter, TDR 62-6, 1962. AD 276477

Flight Summary, Non-Extensible Balloon

Operations, 6580th Test Squadron (Special),

June 1950 to October 1954. ADA 323108

Gildenberg, Bernard G. "General Philosophy and
Techniques of Balloon Control", in Lewis A.
Grass, ed., Proceedings, Sixth AFCRL Scientific
Balloon Symposium, AFCRL-70-0543, 1970. AD 717149

. Capacity and Fatigue Tests on Three Mil

Polyethylene Balloons, HADC TN-55-4, 1955. AD 066092

. Crane Launch Techniques for Polyethylene

Balloons, HADC TN 57-3, 1957. AD 123732

. Development of Shroud Inflation Techniques

for Plastic Balloons, HADC TN-54-4, 1954. AD 039440

. Investigation of Inflation Techniques for

Nonextensible Balloons, HADC TN 54-7, 1954. AD 067595

. Meteorological Aspects of Constant-Level

Balloon Operations in the Southwestern

United States, AFCRL-66-706, 1966. AD 644895


222


. Summary Report Project Moby Dick: Covered

Wagon Balloon Launcher Development and Test
Results, HDT-21, 1952.

. Techniques Developed for Heavy Load

Non-Extensible Balloon Flights, Report No.
HADC-TN-54-3, 1954.

Greer, R.J., et al. Development of a Balloon-Borne
Manned Vehicle, WADC TR-59-226, 1959.

Hertzberg, H.T.E. The Anthropology of
Anthropomorphic Dummies,
AMRLTR-69-61, 1969.

Hess, Joseph. Determination of Parachute Descent
Times and Impact Locations for High Altitude
Balloon Payloads, AFCRL 63-885, 1963.

Holloman Air Development Center, Weekly Test
Status Reports, Project MX-1450B/7218
(High Dive), June 1954 to January 1956.

Madson, Raymond A., 1st Lt. High Altitude Balloon
Dummy Drops, II. The Stabilized Dummy
Drops, WADC TR 57-477 (II), 1961.

. High Altitude Balloon Dummy Drops,

Part I. The Unstabilized Dummy Drops,
WADC TR 57-477, 1957.

Mazza, Vincent and Wheeler, R.V. High Altitude
Bailouts, MCREXD-695-66M, 1950.

Nolan, George F. Balloon Ascent Trajectory

Dispersion Over the United States at 60,000
and 100,000 ft, AFCRL-66-98, 1966.

Redmond, Kent C. Integration of the Holloman-
White Sands Ranges, 1947-1952, 1957.

Ruffner, Kevin C. (ed). Corona: America's First
Satellite Program, 1995.

Simons, David G., Lt. Col., (MC) Stratosphere
Balloon Techniques for Exposing Living
Specimens to Primary Cosmic Ray Particles,
MDCTR 54-16, 1954.

. Man High II, MDC TR 59-28, 1959.

Stapp, John R, Maj., (MC) Human Tolerance to Linear
Deceleration, Part I. Preliminary Survey of
the Aft Facing Seated Position, Air Force
Technical Report 5915, 1949.


AD 001124

ADA 030902
AD 227244

AD 706411

AD 421021

ADA323823

AD 270880

AD 130965
ADA 323449

AD 631502
ADA 323574
PB 95928007


AD 075812
ADA 230805


PB 100871*


223


. Part II. The Aft Facing Position and the
Development of a Crash Harness, Air Force
Technical Report 5915, 1951.


PB 106572*


*Available from:

Library of Congress
Photoduplicating Service
Washington, D.C. 20540
(202) 707-5640


224


Index


A

accelerometers 21,30

Aero Medical Laboratory, USAF 20-21, 23, 32, 104-105,

107, 117, 121
Aeromedical Field Laboratory, USAF 32
AFM-U3A, Mortuary Affairs 99
agents, federal 50
agents, government 78

Air Force 1-3, 5, 8-10, 13, 21, 26, 28, 31, 35, 37-38,
41-42, 44, 46, 48, 51-53, 55, 57, 61-62, 68, 75-76,
79, 86, 89-91, 95-101, 103, 105, 109, 111-113,
116-117, 121, 123, 125. See also U.S. Air Force
Air Force Letter 35-3 86
Air Force, Secretary of the 1-2, 13
Air Materiel Command (AMC) 19-20
air samples 42
aircraft

A-26 112

B-25 96

B-26 112

B-29 93-94

B-47 93-94

B-52 115

C-131 105, 120

C-47 30, 64, 93-94

F-4 112, 121

F-51 96

KB-29 93-94

KC-97 3, 93-97

KC-135 93-94

L-20 30, 64, 124

T-33 93-94

X-15 32
airman 76, 86

Alamogordo Army Airfield, N.M. 37
Alamogordo, N.M. 32
Alaska 47

Alderson Research Laboratories, Inc. 21, 34, 59-61
alien(s) 1-3, 5, 11-12, 15, 17, 21, 23, 25, 28-29, 33, 36-39,

46-47, 55, 61, 75, 78, 96, 109, 1 13, 1 18, 123, 125
ambulance 76-78, 99, 105, 109, 113-116
Anderson, Gerald 14,60-61,67. See also interview

in Appendix C
Antarctica 47


APO (Air Post Office) 82
Apollo 32, 59
Arizona 47

Armed Forces Institute of Pathology (AFIP) 99
arms 62,97

Army Air Forces 1, 13, 76, 81, 90, 96, 1 13. See also U.S.

Army Air Forces
Army Nurse Corps (ANC) 81
Artesia, N.M. 67
Ashland, Wise. 105
Atlantic Ocean 112
autopsies, preliminary 77,91,98
autopsy, alien 1
autopsy protocol 96-97, 99
autopsy; ies; ied 1,12, 77-78, 94-95, 97, 99
Aztec (N.M.) Independent Review 84
Aztec, N.M. 83-85

B

Ball, Guy 19

Ballard Funeral Home 76, 97
ballast 57

Balloon Branch 30, 37, 43-51, 57-58, 61, 65, 102-103,

105-107, 110, 113-115, 124
balloon control package 57, 64
balloon controllers 47, 57
balloon drops 28
balloon failure 58

balloon, high altitude 3, 9, 15, 17, 19, 23, 25, 28, 32,
36-38, 43, 45-49, 52,-53, 55, 57-58, 61, 64, 66-67,
91,96, 100-104, 109, 117, 125,157

balloon, polyethylene 40-42, 58, 66, 106-107, 114-115

balloon, tethered 45-46

balloon train 5-6, 11-13

balloon, "Vee" 47

balloon, weather 5, 40

balsa wood 6

bandages 62, 64

Barnett, Grady L. "Barney" 58,67

base histories 94

Baylor University 31

Bean, Alan 120

Behind the Flying Saucers 84


225


Berliner, Don 8, 60

Biodynamics of Space Flight 102. See Man High

"black sergeant" 86

Blankenship, Robert 49

Blauw, Alfred S.,M.D. 99

blimp 60-61,64,67

body bags 35-36,91,96

Bravest Man, The. See Stapp, John P., Col. (MC), USAF (Ret)
Britain 41

Brooke General Hospital, Ft. Sam Houston, Tex. 83

Buck Rogers 1 1 1

Bush, George H.W., President 32

c

CahnJ.P. 85
Cambridge, England 83
camera(s) 30-31
canoe 76,78,91, 113, 115
cargo trailer, 1 1/2-ton 65
Carlsbad, N.M. 67
CarswellAFB,Tex. 81
caskets 35, 76

Chavez, Dennis, Sen. (N.M.) 87

Cheney Award 31-32

Close Encounters of the Third Kind 118

Clouthier, Charles E. 83. See also Signed sworn statement

in Appendix B
cold soaking 64
Collier's 26-27

Coltman, Charles A., Jr., Col. (MC), USAF (Ret). See

Signed sworn statement in Appendix B
commissary 95, 98
community relations 58
con-men 85

Contributions of Balloon Operations to Research and
Development at the Air Force Missile Development
Center, Holloman, AFB, N.Mex., 1947-1958 41

cooperating witnesses 6

Corona 43

cosmic ray particles 42

cover-up 8-9, 26, 83, 110, 123, 125

Crash at Corona 8

D

debris 1, 6, 57
debris field 11-12

Dennis, W. Glenn 75-78, 81-86, 88-90, 96-97, 99, 110,

114, 197
Denver, Colo. 44
Department of Defense 46
Discoverer XI 43
Discoverer XII 43


Discoverer XIII 43-44

dispensary 114-116

doctor(s) 76-78, 91, 96, 98-99, 110

dog food 77

doll(s) 16,61

dolls, plastic 14,60-61

"Dr. Gee" 85

drones, remotely-piloted 15
drug smuggling 50
drug store supervisor 97

dummies, anthropomorphic 3, 9, 14, 16-17, 19-21, 23-26,
28, 32, 34-36, 38-39, 41, 47, 55-62, 64-65, 67-68, 91,
101, 103, 109, 112, 123, 156

dummies, crash test 17

dummies, parachute drop 19-20

dummy drop 23, 28, 35, 57, 157

"Dummy Joe" 19

E

ear 61

Earth 5,41,44,46, 102

Edwards AFB, Calif. 21,31

Eisenhower, D wight D., President 112

ejection 32

ejection seat 20, 21

El Centra, Calif. 120

El Paso, Texas 106

Elder Statesman of Aviation 112

England 82

entry vehicles, atmospheric 42
escape pods 78, 113

Excelsior 23, 25-26, 32, 38, 55-56, 59, 67-68, 101-105,

107, 109-110, 112, 124
Executive Order 1 1652 1
eyes 77

F

Fanton, Eileen M., 1st Lt., USAF 82-83, 91
Farmington Drug 83
Farmington, N.M. 78, 83-84, 90
Ferrell, Lee F, Col, USAF 87, 91, 98
finger(s) 15, 33, 55, 59-61, 97
flight surgeon 31, 107, 116
flightsuit 28-29, 63

flying disc 5-6,78. See also flying saucer

flying saucer 1-3, 5, 29, 36-37, 41, 44, 47, 56, 58-59, 64,

67, 78, 85, 96, 123, 125
flying saucer wave [of 1947] 5
Foster Ranch 11
Four Corners [region] 83
Franklin, Ky. 96


226


Frederick, S.D. 102
Friedman, Stanton T. 8, 60, 76
Ft. George Wright, Wash. 88
Ft. Worth AAF, Tex. 81

Fulgham, Dan D„ Col., USAF (Ret) 106-107, 1 16, 121

See also Signed sworn statement in Appendix B
Fund for UFO Research, The 58, 60, 186, 213, 215
funeral home 77, 95, 97. See also Ballard Funeral Home

G

Galileo 44
gamma rays 46

GAO 1. See also General Accounting Office
gauges, strain 21
Gemini 32

General Accounting Office (GAO) 1, 125

General Philosophy and Techniques of Balloon Control 48

generator, MB- 19 65

Gila Mountains 124

Gildenberg, Bernard D. "Duke" 8-9, 48, 102. See also

Signed sworn statement in Appendix B
glass, broken 76, 114
Goddard, Joyce, Capt., USAF 88-89
Gordon Bennett Gas Balloon Championship 1 12
gowns, surgical 99
gurneys, hospital 35
gyros, rate 21

H

hands 15,33,59-60,97
Harmon Trophy 112
Hawaii 43

head(s) 15, 59, 61, 77, 97, 100, 107, 118-120

helicopter 107, 110, 116-117

helmet 107

helmets, pith 60, 63

hematoma 119

Hepburn, Audrey 82

hieroglyphics 113-114

Higgins,JJ. 19

High Dive 23, 26, 29-30, 34, 38, 55-56, 59, 63, 67-68, 103
high-speed track 17, 21, 38
hoax 96, 123
Hodiak, John 38

Holloman AFB, N.M. 8-10, 16-17, 26-27, 30-32, 35, 37-
38, 41, 43-44, 46-47, 49, 52-53, 59, 63-65, 102-103,
105-107, 111, 113-114, 118-120, 124

Hollywood 38

horseback 30

human remains pouches 96. See also body bags
Hynek, J. Allan 117-118


I

identification specialist 95, 98-99
instrumentation kit 30
insulation bags 35-36
intimidation 61
irregular [research] methods 8

J

Jagger, Dean 38-39
jeep 15, 56, 65

John Hopkins University, The 53

Jorgeson, Ole, A2C, USAF 107,113-114. See also Signed

sworn statement in Appendix B
Jornada Test Range 67
Jupiter 44

K

Kaufman, William C, Capt., USAF 105-107, 116, 119.

See also statement in Appendix B
Kelso, Wash. 96
Kentucky Air National Guard 96

Kittinger, Joseph W, Jr., Capt., USAF 25-26, 48, 101-107,
109-112, 117-120, 124. See also Signed sworn
statement in Appendix B

Knight, Alice 15,58,67,213. See also interview in
Appendix C

Korea 88, 121

Kovatch-Scott, Ethel, Col., USAF (Ret) 89
L

Las Vegas AFB, Nev. Ill
legal claims 58
Life magazine 26-27
lights, strobe 41
"little men" 84-85
livestock 58

London, England 41, 78, 82
Long, Lonely Leap, The 26, 110
Lordsburg, N.M. 104
Lovell, Jim 120
Luftwaffe 20

Lutz, Roland H. "Hap", SSgt, USAF 1 17. See also
Signed sworn statement in Appendix B

M

M-342 5-ton wrecker 29, 58. See also wrecker
M-35 2 1/2-ton cargo truck 30, 58. See also six by six
M-37 3/4-ton utility truck 30, 58, 65, 1 13. See also

weapons carrier
M-43 3/4-ton ambulance 65, 113. See also ambulance
MAD [magazine] 26


227


Madison, Guy 38-39

Madson, Raymond A., 1st Lt., US AF 29-30,63. See also
Signed sworn statement in Appendix B

Maltais, Vern 15,58-59,67,214. See also interview
in Appendix C

Man High 26,32,48, 101-104, 110-112

Man in Space Soonest (MISS) 103

Marcel, Jesse, Maj., USAF 6

Mars 44

Martin Marietta Corporation 44
masks, surgical 99

Massachusetts Institute of Technology 103

McClure, Clifton, lstLt, USAF 102, 104

McCook Field, Ohio 19

Mercury 32, 103-104

"Mercury Seven" 32

meteorological data 42

Mexico 96

MiG-21 112

Military Police 76

Milner, Martin 38

Minnesota, University of 31

missile, ballistic 5

missile, intercontinental ballistic (ICBM), Atlas F 17
missiles 5, 13, 16

missing nurse 78, 81-83, 87-90, 96-98, 121. See also

' Fanton, Eileen M., 1st Lt, USAF
Mitchell, Cameron 39
ML-307B/AP. See radar targets
Mogul 1-2, 5-6, 9, 11-13, 40, 42, 78
monkeys 16
Moon 44

Moore, Charles B. 8-9,40
morgue 97

morning reports 81, 88, 89
mortician 76, 98-99
mortuary 76

MPs 77, 116. See also Military Police

Muroc AAF, Calif. 21,31. See also Edwards AFB, Calif.

museum 3, 75

mystery witness 75

N

NASA 37, 41, 44-46, 59, 103, 111, 120

National Highway Traffic Safety Administration 19

National Aeronautics Association 112

National Archives and Record Administration 81

National Aviation Hall of Fame 32

National Geographic 26

National Medal of Technology 32

National Personnel Records Center (NPRC) 81

NATO 111


NCO [Non-Commissioned Officer] 86
Nenninger, Richard L., Maj., USAF 124
New Brighton, Minn. 102

New Mexico 1, 3, 5, 9, 11, 14-15, 17, 19, 23, 30, 34, 36-37,

41-42, 46-48, 55, 58, 60, 64, 67, 84, 91, 95, 109
New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology 9
New York, N.Y. 21,82
New York University 9,40
newspaper accounts 4 1 , 94
newspaper announcements 8
newspapers 31
Newton, Silas M. 85
Nixon, Richard M., President 1
nondisclosure agreements 13

Nordstrom, Frank B., Capt. (MC), USAF 83,89. See also

Signed sworn statement in Appendix B
nosecone 43
nuclear accidents 13
nuclear weapon 5

o

ocscillograph 30
odor 77,91,95-97

officers' club 77. See also Roswell AAF Officers' Club
oil field worker 97. See also Dennis, W. Glenn
Omni magazine 83

On the Threshold of Space 26, 38-39, 63
Orlando, Fla. 112
"Oscar Eightbair 21

P

Panama 47

paper 5, 8

paper, aluminized 6

parachute 19, 23, 25-26, 28, 31, 49, 57, 62, 64, 103, 124
pathologist 95, 98-99

payload 17, 40-44, 46-48, 53, 57, 61, 64, 66-67, 91
Pease AFB, N.H. 115

pediatrician 76, 78, 81, 83-84, 86, 89-91, 99, 121
pharmacist 83
phone directories 97
Pioneer 44
police 49

polyethylene 40. See also balloon, polyethylene

polygraph examination 60

Popular Mechanics Magazine 26-27

POW 112. See also Prisoner of War

Pre- Astronauts, The 110

predatory animals 97

preparation room 97

Prisoner of War 110


228


Project 119L 42
Project Bluebook 117
Project Gemini 120
Project Mercury 1 1 1
Project Mogul. See Mogul
property damage 58, 66

R

radar 6, 41

radar guided missiles 42
radar targets 6
radio stations 31

Ragsdale, James 14,56,67,214. See also interview in

Appendix C
ramp 114, 120
rancher 5, 37
Ray, Hilary 120

Recollections ofRoswell, Part II 58, 60, 186, 213, 215
reconnaissance, photographic 42
redheaded captain 60, 77, 91, 100, 109-110, 117
redheaded colonel 77, 87, 91, 96, 98
redheaded officer 77-78, 86
remote control 56-57
research methodology 1 1
reward 66
rocket sled 32, 39
Rosie O' Grady's Flying Circus 1 12
Roswell AAF 6, 12, 15, 37, 45, 75-78, 81-83, 88-91,
116, 121, 197

Roswell AAF hospital 12-13, 75-78, 81-83, 86-90,
97, 109

Roswell AAF Officers' Club 81, 87

Roswell Army Air Field 3,5, 12-13,45,68. See also

Roswell AAF
Roswell Daily Record 8

Roswell Incident 1, 3, 5-6, 9, 11-12, 16-17, 21, 37-38,
42, 44-45, 60, 75, 78, 84-85, 88, 90, 116, 118,
121, 125

Roswell Industrial Air Center 37, 44

Roswell, N.M. 1, 3, 5-6, 8-13, 15, 23, 30, 33-34, 36-37,

44, 47, 49, 51, 56, 58, 61, 65, 67-68, 76, 78, 83, 95,

97-102, 106, 109, 113, 187,215
Roswell Report: Fact vs. Fiction in the New Mexico Desert 2
rubber 5, 8
Ruidoso,N.M. 124

s

SAC. See Strategic Air Command
Sacramento Mountains 106,124
safety belts 19, 32
San Agustin Mountains 67
San Agustin Pass 67


San Agustin Peak 67
San Agustin Plains 1 1-12, 58, 67, 109
San Francisco Chronicle 85
satellite 41-44

saucer 30. See also flying saucer

Schiff, Steven, Rep. (N.M.) 1

Schmitt, Donald 56, 214

Schock, Grover, Capt, USAF 105

Schwaderer, George 98

Schwartz, Eugene M., 1st Lt., USAF 29

scientists, civilian contract 13

Scully, Frank 84-85

Selff, Naomi Maria 81,88,90

sensors 1

sensors, acoustical 5
sheriff 5, 49-50

Sierra Engineering Company 21, 60
Sierra Madre, Calif. 21
"Sierra Sam" 21,29
Sightings 96
Silver City, N.M. 50

Simons, David G., Lt. Col. (MC), USAF (Ret) 26, 48,
101-102, 104

six-by-six 15, 30, 55-56, 58, 65. See also M-35 2 1/2 ton

cargo truck
Slattery, Lucille C, Capt., USAF 88-89
Smithsonian Institution 103
Society of Automotive Engineers 32
Socorro (N.M.) Defensor Chieftan 6, 9
Socorro, N.M. 8
Sonic Wind N e 1 31
Southeast Asia 110, 112
Soviet 5
Soviet Union 43
space 42-44,46, 102-104, 121

Space and Missile Command, Test and Evaluation Unit 46
space probe 37, 42, 44

Galileo 44

Pioneer 44

Surveyor 44

Viking 37,44

Voyager-Mars 45
spacecraft 44, 47
spaceship 6, 12, 38, 46, 67
Sputnik I 43

St. Catherine's Academy, Springfield, Ky. 82
St. Mary Elizabeth's Hospital, Louisville, Ky. 82
Stack, Robert 38
Stafford, Ariz. 124
Stapp Car Crash Conferences 32
Stapp, John P., Col. (MC), USAF (Ret) 20-21, 31-32,
38-39, 104-105, 107, 109, 111-112, 117, 120


229


star witness 75

Stargazer 49, 101-105, 109-110, 112, 117-118
statement, signed sworn 56, 84
sticks 5, 8

Strategic Air Command (SAC) 94, 1 15-1 16
stretcher, military 35
sunglasses 96
Surveyor 44
symbols 76

T

tanker 95
tape 5, 8, 62

tape, red [duct-type] 29, 62
targets, missile 42
Ted Smith Company 20-21
Texas, University of 31
Texas, West 47
threats 61
Time 26-27, 32
tinfoil 5, 8
transducers 21
transducers, pressure 30
transmitters, radio 41
transponders 41
truck, pickup 56, 58
True magazine 84-85
Tularosa Valley [N.M.] 23
Twentieth Century Fox 26, 38

u

U.S. Air Force 1, 3, 14, 17, 19, 23, 37, 41, 43,45-49, 55,

64, 67, 76, 82, 85-86, 90, 102-105, 111, 123, 125
U.S. Army 53, 86, 112

U.S. Army Air Forces 1, 5, 8-9, 12, 20, 31, 40, 75-76,

86, 120, 123
U.S. Army Special Forces 112
U.S. Government 1, 14, 42, 67
U.S. Government Printing Office 2
U.S. Navy 43, 103-104
U.S. Navy Aerospace Recovery Facility 120
Ubon Air Base, Thailand 121
Udorn Air Base, Thailand 112
UFO 2, 5, 9, 12, 37, 41, 44, 47-48, 58-59, 96, 117-118

UFO Crash atRoswell, The Truth About the 46-47

UFO enthusiasts 60

UFO Museum and Research Center, The International 3, 75
UFO organizations 60
UFO proponents 123
UFO researchers 81

UFO theorists 10, 47-48, 60, 67, 75, 78, 82-83, 85,
96, 113-116, 120, 123


unidentified flying object 41
Units

1st Air Commando Wing 111

6th Bombardment Wing 94, 115-116

47th Air Division 115

427th Army Air Forces Base Unit 81

Squadron "M"81
509th Aerial Refueling Squadron 94
509th Bombardment Wing 94,115-116
555th Tactical Fighter Squadron ('Triple Nickel") 112,

121

579th Strategic Missile Squadron 17

4036th USAF hospital 95

7510th US AF Hospital 82
unrecorded interviews 8
Unsolved Mysteries 38,60
Upper Darby, Pa. 20
USS Haiti Victory 43

V

VandenbergAFB, Calif. 43
Variety 84
Venus 44

Vietnam, Hanoi 112
Vietnam, North 112
Vietnam, Republic of 111, 121
Vietnamese, North 110
Viking 37,45
"Vince and Larry" 19
Voyager-Mars 44

w

Walker AFB, N.M. 15, 17, 45, 83, 86-89, 91, 93-95,

97-102, 107, 109-110, 113-117, 120-121
Walker, Chalma 89
Walt Disney World 112
Walter, John, SSgt, USAF 98
Walter Reed Army Medical Center 99
Wasem, Martha 89
Washington, D.C. 99

weapons carrier 15, 30, 55-56, 58, 65, 1 13-114. See also

M-37 3/4-ton utility truck
weather equipment 5
Whenry, Jack, IstLt., USAF 98
White House, The 32

White Sands Missile Range, N.M. 16,42-43,45,67. See

also White Sands Proving Ground, N.M.
White Sands National Monument, N.M. 29
White Sands Proving Ground, N.M. 23, 25, 42, 106, 124
White, William C. 103-104
Wickenburg, Ariz. 50


230


Williams, Carol 89

Wilson, Capt. 77-78, 87, 89

Wilson, Idabelle M„ Maj., USAF (Ret) 90

Wilson, "Slatts" 77-78,87-91

Wimpole Park, Cambridge, England 83

Winzen, Otto C. 101, 105

Winzen Research International 102

World War I 19

World War II 19-20

wreckage 76-77, 91, 99, 109, 113-114

wreckage, bluish-purplish 76, 78, 91, 113, 115

wrecker 15, 29-30, 55-56, 58, 65. See also M-342

5-ton wrecker
Wright Field, Ohio 19,21,77

Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio 12, 77-78, 91, 95, 98, 100,
104-105, 107, 117, 119-120


231
