G0VERNMEN1\0F INDIA

DEPARTMENT OF ARCHAEOLOGY

CENTRAL ARCHAEOLOGICAL 
LIBRARY

Glass

Gall No

K. 79 .

BUDDHISM IN INDIA, CEYLON 
CHINA AND JAPAN

THE UNIVERSITY OF CHIclt}Oa>RESS 
CHICAGO, ItUNOIS

THE BARER k TAYtOR COMEAMT

mw Yogtc

TOE CAMBRIDGE HNIVERSITY PRESS

wmQit

THE MARU2EN-RABUSHmi«KAISHA

TOKYO, OSAKA, KYOTO, fOKOOKA, SKNDAt

THE COMMERCIAL PRESS, LIMITED 
SBAHOHAI

BUDDHISM

IN INDIA, CEYLON, CHINA 
AND JAPAN

A Reading Quide

By CLARENCE H. HAMILTON, Ph.D.

Professor of Eastern Philosophy in the College of Missions at Hartford 
Seminary Foundation; Prof essor of Philosophy in the Unu 
oersity of Nanking^ China^ Visiting

Lecturer on Oriental Religions at Columbia 
University of the City of New York 
in the Winter of ip2p

o «7

fij i

/ ‘Vj;;

THE UNIVEKSITX: O jJglCAI^ TRESS 
CHICAGO ILLINOIS

copyright 1931 by the imiYERSITY oy CHICAGO 
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED, PUBLISHED FEBRUARY I931

COMWiEB mHTED SrTH« UN^VERSITirOF CIHCAOO FHF88 
CHICAGO, 1LLWOI8, U.S.A,

FOREWORD

The rapid growth of relationships between Orient and Occident to- 
day presses increasingly upon thoughtful persons in each hemisphere 
the task of knowing the cultural memories of each other's groups. To 
aid in this task, especially from the Western side, this brief guide to 
readings in Buddhism has been prepared.Buddhism is a cultural phenomenon of immense importance in the 
experience oh Asia, Its study is significant for many kinds of under- 
standing — ^psycholqaa^, social, and religious. But the literature is 
enormous in scope, reflecting conditions of many different countries in 
diverse periods of historical change. The beginner is not infrequently 
discouraged because he cannot see the wood for the trees, while resort 
to brief treatises too often leaves an impression that is either shallow or 
unintelligible. The effort here has been to present the subject for four 
of the great Buddhist countries in a form compact enough to maintain 
the large outlines of its development and at the same time make clear 
its vast range and depth. As an instrument of study it should enable 
the beginner to find his way forward more rapidly and intelligently.

It is assumed that the reader will want to work some topics more in- 
tensively than others. For this purpose the special references are given. 
The outlines are added simply to afford general orientation in adjacent 
topics. To avoid misunderstanding it should, perhaps, be added that 
there is nothing final about the outlines, and that the Bibliography, 
while reasonably full, does not aim to be exhaustive, A full measure of 
the joys of discovery is left to the reader himself.

For personal encouragement and suggestion the writer is indebted 
to Professors Robert Ernest Hume, of Union Theological Seminary; 
Lewis Hodous, of Hartford Seminary Foundation; Kenneth J. Saun- 
ders, of the Pacific School of Religion; and A. Eustace Haydon, of 
the University of Chicago. For friendly co-operation of the professors 
teaching the religion courses in Columbia University a word of special 
appreciation is due. It was their interest that suggested a work of this 
character, and it was for their use that the original draft of these pages 
was first prepared,

CXARENCE H, HaMTETON

HARTroRD, Conn.

January, 1931

V

CONTENTS

PAST PAGECXARENCE H, HaMTETON

HARTroRD, Conn.

January, 1931

V

CONTENTS

PAST PAGE

I. In India: Emergence and Eeabsorption * . x

I. The Social and Intellectual Background of Early Buddhism i

II. The Life of Buddha 2

III. The Teaching of Buddha 8

IV. The Early Order 13

V. Early Cqnj^^^ces or Councils 16

VI. Asoka, Imperial Patron of World-Buddhism 18

VII, Growth and Transformation of Buddhism in India: Bise of

the Mahayana 21

VIII. Philosophical Development of the Mahayana . , . .25

IX. Later Indian Buddhism as Described by the Chinese Pil- 
grims, 403-^96 A-D 31

X. Decline of Indian Buddhism and Its Submergence in Hindu- 
ism 35

II. In Ceylon: Conservation oe the PIinayana 40

I. The Introduction of Buddhism into Ceylon 40

II. Buddhaghosa, Great Systematizer of the Hinayana . . 45

III. Buddhism in Ceylon at the Present Day 49

III. In China: Mahayana in Its Full Development ... .53

I. The Introduction and General History of Buddhism in

China S3

II. Bodhidharma and Chih-K’ai: The Foundation of the Medi- 
tative and Then-T^ai Schools 59

III. The Flower of the Mahayana; The Pure Land School , . 61

IV. Personalities of the Spiritual World: The Chinese Buddhist

Pantheon .63

V. ' Buddhist Literature in China 70

VI. Monastic Life in China ® . . 74

VII. Present-Day Buddhism in China -79

vxu

CONTENTS

PART PAGE

IV. In Japan: The Topmost Turn 84

L The Introduction of Buddhism Into Japan and the Rise of

the Early Sects 84

11 . Sects of the Great Awakening 89

IIL From the Fourteenth to the Nineteenth Century ... 94 
IV. Present-Day Buddhism in Japan ........ 96

Bibliography 100

PART I

IN INDIA: EMERGENCE AND REABSORPTION

I. The Social and Intellectual Background or Early Bud- 
dhism

a) References

DavidS; T. W. Rhys: Buddhism: Its History and Liter Or- 
ture^ Lectui'e I.

Davids, Rhys: Buddhist India, (A standard ref- 
erence. See chaps, i-vi for political and economic condi- 
tions; and chaps, xii-xiii for the religious conditions.)Davids, Rhys: Buddhist India, (A standard ref- 
erence. See chaps, i-vi for political and economic condi- 
tions; and chaps, xii-xiii for the religious conditions.)

Davids, T. W. Rhys: The Early History of the Buddhists. 
In the Cambridge History of India ^ I, 171-97. (Briefer 
presentation of materials of second reference.)

Davids, Mrs. C. A. F. Rhys: “Economic Conditions ac- 
cording to Early Buddhist Literature/^ Cambridge 
History of India^ I, 198-219, (An analysis of the early 
literature with reference to economic, commercial, so- 
cial, etc., activities.)

Eliot, Sir Charles: Hinduism and Buddhism y I, 87-104. 
(By one of the most comprehensive students of Bud- 
dhism.)

Farquhar, J. N.; An Outline of the Religious Literature of 
Indiay chap. ii. (Illuminating statement of the religious 
problem.)

Smith, V. A. : Oxford Student^ s History of India, chap. iii. 
(Good brief account of early Hindu civilization.)

b) Outline: characteristics of the age in which Buddha lived

1. Simplicity of life in political, economic, and social phases

2. Great intellectual activity, springing in part from

(a) The leisure afforded by the tranquil village life

(&) The native speculative interest of the lEndujnind

3. General acceptance of notions of transmigration and

karma

2

BUDDHISM

4, The presence of wandering, ascetic teachers, claiming to 
have found the way of escape from endless births and 
deaths

5, The currency of many disciplines of deliverance

(a) Brahmanic— salvation through realizing the oneness 
of Brahma and Atman

(b) Lokayatas— salvation through a materialistic philos- 
ophy

(c) Jain — salvation through asceticism and non-injury

(d) ^'Sixty-two heresies,'' listed in the Brahma Jala Sutta

(see Davids, chaf^-iW

(1) On the eternity of the world

(2) Whether souls are eternal or not

(3) Whether the world is finite, infinite, both, or 
neither

(4) On virtue and vice

(5) On the origin of things without a cause

(6) On the future existence of souls(3) Whether the world is finite, infinite, both, or 
neither

(4) On virtue and vice

(5) On the origin of things without a cause

(6) On the future existence of souls

(7) On the destruction of the soul at the end of either 
this, the next, or subsequent lives

(8) On the belief that there is a soul and that it can 
attain to perfect bliss in the present world, or 
wherever it happens to be

Note the social position enjoyed by the ascetic religious 
teacher (sec reference to Eliot above).

II. The Lire oe Buddha 
a) References

Davids, T. W. Rhys; Buddhism: Its History and Literor 
turOf pp. 87 '-xi 7. (A classic sketch by an authority.) 
Davids, T. W. Rhys: Buddhism y Being a Sketch of the Life 
and Teachings of GautamOy the Buddha (iSyy; rev. ed., 
1914)

Eliot, Sir Charles: Hinduism and Buddhism y I, 129-84.

^ Geden, A. S.: Article on Buddha in Encyclopedia of Reli- 
gion and Ethics {ERE)y Vol. II.

Oldenberg, Hermann: Buddha: Sein LebeUy seine LehrCy

IN INDIA

3

seine Gemeinde (i88i). (Still a standard work. English 
translation by Hoey, in 1882.)

Pratt, J, B.: The Pilgrimage of Buddhism^ chap. i. (An 
analysis of Buddha’s personality.)

Saunders, Kenneth J.: Gotama Buddha. (Based on the 
canonical books of the Theravadin. An attractive and 
appreciative treatment by one long acquainted with 
^^southern” Buddhism.)

Thomas, E. J. : The Life of Buddha as Legend and History 
(1927). (The latest critical study, utilising both Pali and 
Sanslgit^ia^rces. )

SOURCE MATERIALS

Ahhinishhramana Sutra. (Elaborately legendary; see be- 
low, p. 5.)

Bigandet, P. : Life or Legend of Gaudama^ the Buddha of the 
Burmese. (A late work, two thousand years after Bud- 
dha.)

Brewster, E. H.: The Life of Gotama the Buddha (1926), 
(Compiled exclusively from the Pali canon. Excellent 
presentation of all the biographical materials in the Pali 
texts.)

Buddha-Carita, ^^Sacred Books of the East,” SBE, VoL 
XLIX, (See below, p. 5.)Buddha-Carita, ^^Sacred Books of the East,” SBE, VoL 
XLIX, (See below, p. 5.)

Fo-sho-hing 4 san-Ung^ ilid.y Vol. XIX. (A Chinese version 
of BuddhonCarita.)

JatakaSy or Stories of the Buddha^ s Former Births. 6 vols. 
Cambridge, 1895-1907.

Krom, N. J.: The Life of Buddha on the Stupa of Bar ahu- 
dur according to the Lalitavistara Text (1926). (Interest- 
ing pictorial reproductions of Javanese conceptions.)

Mahaparinihhana Suttanta. Translated from the Pali by 
Rhys Davids in SBEy Vol. XI; also in his Dialogs of the 
Buddha, Vol. HI. (Events of the last days of Buddha.)

Rockhill, W. W. : Life of the Buddha and the Early History 
of His Order, Derived from Tiletan Works . .

4

BUDDHISM

Vinaya Texts, MaJtavagga, and Cullavagga (SBE), Vols. 
Xm,XVII, and XX.

Warren, H. C.: Buddhism in Translations (1896), pp.

I-IIO,

LITERARY

Arnold, Sir Edwin: The Light of Asia (New York, 1894). 
(A poetical presentation of Buddha and his teachmgs by 
an imaginary Buddhist priest. Based on the Lalitavis- 
tara.)

b) Sources for the life of Buddha

X. The Pali scriptures: the canon Theravada

(tf) The earliest iieriod at which we have evidence of the 
existence of a body of scriptures is 247 b.c., or two 
hundred and thirty-six years after the death of Bud- 
dha

(J) From Chinese translations and fragments of Sanskrit 
works we know that there are other forms of the canon 
in other schools than the Theravada 
(c) Divisions of the Pali canon: the Tripitaka (or “Three 
Baskets”)

(1) Sutta Pitaka: dialogues or discourses on the doc- 
trine

(2) Vinaya Pitaka: disciplinary rules for the monks; 
biographical material here is in the commentaries 
attached

(3) Abhidhamma Pitaka: scholastic elaborations of 
the doctrine

2. The Sanskrit tradition

(a) Collections of legends preserved in the Tibetan scrip- 
tures, translated from the Sanskrit, chiefly from the 
Vinaya2. The Sanskrit tradition

(a) Collections of legends preserved in the Tibetan scrip- 
tures, translated from the Sanskrit, chiefly from the 
Vinaya

(x) The most important of these have been translated 
by Rockhill as Life of Buddha 
{b) The Mahavastu (“The Great Story”)

• • (i) It calls itself the Vinaya of the Lokottara branch

of the Mahasanghika school; a mass of legends

IN INDIA

5

(c) The Lalitavistara: A continuous narrative of the life 
of Buddha from his decision to be born down to his 
first sermon

(d) The Buddha Carita: Aims to fill up the details of the 
story of Buddha until the enlightenment; an epic 
poem by Asvaghosha

(e) The Abhinishkramana-sutra: Exists only in Chinese 
translation. Abridged in English by Beal as The Ro- 
mantic Legend of Sakya Buddha (London, 1875),

3. Sculptured monuments

{a) record mostly legendary accounts (see, for an

example, Krom’s work cited above) 
c) A brief outline of the life of Buddha

1. He was born into one of the wealthy, aristocratic families 
of the Zshatriya tribe known as the Sakyas, which pos- 
sessed a narrow strip of territory in North India lying 
between the Rapti River and the Himalaya Mountains 
(now in the Nepalese Tarai)

{ a ) Date of birth, ca, 563 b.c. (see Thomas, p. 27)

(6) Name of father, Suddhodana; of mother, Maya

2. Names of Buddha

(a) Siddhattha (Pali) or Siddhartha (Sanskrit), his per- 
sonal name, means 'He Who Has Accomplished His 
Aim^’

{b) Gotama, or Gautama, name of his gens or family

(c) Buddha — "The Awakened or Wise One’’; most cele- 
brated title

(d) Sakya-Muni — "The Sage of the Sakyas”

(<?) Bhagava — "Lord”

(/) Tathagata — "He Who Has Come Thus” (or "He 
Who Has Arrived”)

3. Religious and moral atmosphere in which Gotama grew 
up ^

(a) Brahmanic influence present but not dominant in the 
religion

(h) The ideal of the religious mendicant was cornmon

BUDDHISM3. Religious and moral atmosphere in which Gotama grew 
up ^

(a) Brahmanic influence present but not dominant in the 
religion

(h) The ideal of the religious mendicant was cornmon

BUDDHISM

{c) Though surrounded by wealth and comfort, Buddha 
mused on human suffering and felt attracted to the 
religious life

(d) The love of wife and child did not prevail over his 
responsiveness to the religious environment 
4, The Great Renunciation

(a) At the age of twenty-nine Buddha left his family, his 
wife, and infant son to adopt the wandering life and 
seek salvation, deliverance from rebirth (see p» i,

5* Austerities and enlightenment: suTySaS of striving

(а) At Rajagaha he applied to contemporary teachers of 
religion

(1) But Alara Kalama could lead him, no farther 
than to the ^^attainment of the state of nothing- 
ness*^

(2) And Uddaka Ramaputta could lead him no far- 
ther than the ‘^state of neither-consciousness- 
nor-nonconsciousness**

(б) At Uruvela he practiced the severest forms of asceti- 
cism

(1) Five monks joined him, hoping that when he had 
found the truth he would tell it to them

(2) But after he had fallen senseless from the severi- 
ty of his self-mortifi cations he abandoned this 
method, upon which the five monks left him in 
disappointment

(c) Finally after practicing meditation, while seated 
under a Bo-tree, he attained his ^'great enlighten- 
ment**

(i) He understood the nature of error and of suffer- 
ing, the cessation of suffering, and the path that 
leads to the cessation of suffering 
^ 6 . The first preaching

(a) After some hesitation because of the doubt that his 
insight was too profound to impart, Buddha decided 
to teach others

IN INDIA 7

(b) The first disciples were the five monks, companions 
of his austerities

(i) To these he is supposed to have preached the 
^^Sermon at Benares^’ and the “Sermon on the 
Marks of Non-souF^ (see Thomas, pp. 87-89)(i) To these he is supposed to have preached the 
^^Sermon at Benares^’ and the “Sermon on the 
Marks of Non-souF^ (see Thomas, pp. 87-89)

(c) Another early sermon was the so-called “Fire Ser- 
mon’’ (see Warren, pp. 3SI-53, for the text)

7. The first lay persons to become disciples

(a) Yasa, son of a wealthy guildmaster; became a monk 
(J) Yasa’s father, mother, and former wife became lay

(c) Then four friends of Yasa

(d) Then fifty other friends of Yasa

8. When the number of disciples had reached sixty Buddha 
sent them out in different directions to preach the doc- 
trine

(a) The result was a great increase in numbers

(i) Other religious leaders, even, together with their 
disciples joined the growing order

9. Main aspects of Buddha’s forty-five years as a wander- 
ing teacher

(d) Buddha worked out the characteristic features of his 
teaching

(b) He laid down the regulations for the order of monks, 
and of nuns

(c) Monasteries were built and lands givpn by wealthy 
lay adherents for the use of the monks

(d) In Buddha’s old age a schism threatened under the 
leadership of Devadatta, “the Buddhist Judas,” but 
it was averted

10. The last days of Buddha (Mahaparinibbana Sutta)

(a) Buddha seemed aware of his approaching end and

spent much time in discoursing with his disciples on 
all that he considered important *

(b) His final illness was occasioned by eating some pork 
served him by Cunda, a smith who was his host at 
Pava

8

BUDDHISM

(c) He died at Kusinara, at the age of eighty (483 b.c.)

(1) His last words were: ^^Now then, monks, I ad- 
dress you; subject to decay are all compound 
things. Strive with earnestness.^^

(2) The funeral rites were performed by the Mallas 
of Kusinara

(3) The ashes were divided into eight parts as relics 
for eight different groups of claimants(2) The funeral rites were performed by the Mallas 
of Kusinara

(3) The ashes were divided into eight parts as relics 
for eight different groups of claimants

Note.-— For the sake of brevity the foregoing outline 
takes no account of the legendary material which has 
gathered about almost ev|p?' aspect of the life. But this 
material as revealing the attituB^of the ancient Buddhist 
world is significant.

Ill* The Teaching oe Btouha 
a) References

Cave, Sydney Cave: Living Religions of the East, pp. 114- 
28. (A good, clear, brief account.)

Coomaraswamy, Ananda; Btiddha and the Gospel of Bud- 
dhism, pp. 90-151. (Popular in style but suggestive.)

Dasgupta, Surendranath: History of Indian Philosophy, I, 
82-109. (A valuable exposition by an Indian author; 
technical in style but helpful for the discrimination of 
terms.)

Davids, T. W. Rhys: Buddhism: Its History and Liter 
lure, pp, 118-86.

Eliot, Sir Charles: Hinduism and Buddhism, VoL I, Book 
III, chap. X on “The Teaching of Buddha.’^ (Wise ap- 
preciation.)

ERE: Articles on “Karma,” “Nirvana,” “Transmigra- 
tion,” etc,

Farquhar, J. N.: An Outline of the Religious Literature of 
India, pp. 63-65. (Excellent, succinct statement.)

Keith, A. Berriedale: Buddhist Philosophy, Part I, pp. 13- 
• 146 on “Buddhism in the Pali Canon.” (A thorough-

going treatment by a noted Sanskrit scholar; presup- 
poses considerable knowledge of the literature.)

IN INDIA

9

Moore, G. F.: History of Religions j I, 291-98.

Oldenberg, H. : Buddha: Sein Leben^ seine Lehre, seine Ge- 
meinde^ pp. 208-337. (An old presentation, still valu- 
able.)

Oltramare, Paul: La tMosophie bouddhique (1923). (The 
latest comprehensive statement by a French scholar.) 
Radhakrishnan, S.: Indian Philosophy^ I, 362-476. (In- 
teresting treatment by an Indian author who uses freely 
Western parallels and interpretations.)

Saunders: Epochs in Buddhist History (cf. p. 8, bottom of

page-X «Saunders: Epochs in Buddhist History (cf. p. 8, bottom of

page-X «

Thomas, E. J.: Life of Buddha^ pp. 173-210. 
Vallee-Poussin, L. de la: Way to Nirvana. (Presents the 
teaching as a discipline of salvation.)

Warren, H. C.: Buddhism in Translations (abbreviated be- 
low as WBT), pp. 111-39X. 
h) Buddha’s teaching in outline

1. The problem was a therapeutic one

(a) To find the cause and the cure of misery

2. Buddha’s solution: the knowledge and practice of 
(a) The Four Noble Truths

(1) Existence is suffering

(2) The origin of suffering is desire (which leads to 
rebirth)

(3) The cessation of suffering is the cessation of 
desire

(4) The way to the cessation of desire is the eightfold 
path, which is the middle path between indul- 
gence and useless austerities (see [J])

{h) The Noble Eightfold Path (after Digha Nikaya, 
WBT, pp. 368-75)

(1) Right belief — ^knowledge of misery, its cause, its 
cessation, and the path

(2) Right resolve — ^to renounce sensual pleasure, to 
have malice toward none, to harm no living crea- 
tures

BUDDHISM

(3) Right speech — to abstain from falsehood, bach- 
biting, and harsh language

(4) Right behavior — to abstain from destroying life, 
from taking what is not given one, from im- 
morality

(5) Right occupation — to quit a wrong occupation 
and follow a right one

(6) Right effort — ^mental effort to keep the mind 
free of evil mental qualities and to retain good 
ones (see WBT^ p. 373)

(7) Right contemplation ^or mindfulness)-~“to be 
alert with regard to the body sensations, ideas, 
etc, (see ihid*^ p, 374)

(8) Right concentration (or rapture)

(а) The first trance

(1) Produced by isolation

(2) Characterized by joy and happiness

(б) The second trance

(1) An interior tranquillization and intent- 
ness of the thoughts

(2) Produced by concentration 
{c) The third trance

(i) Indifferent, contemplative, with an ex- 
perience of bodily happiness 
{d) The fourth trance(2) Produced by concentration 
{c) The third trance

(i) Indifferent, contemplative, with an ex- 
perience of bodily happiness 
{d) The fourth trance

(1) Gained through the abandonment of 
happiness, the abandonment of misery, 
the disappearance of all antecedent glad- 
ness or grief

(2) A state of neither happiness nor misery,

which is ^^contemplation refined by in- 
difference’^ * ,

Three other important conceptions 
(a) The doctrine of anatta (non-soul or non-ego) (for texts 
see WBTj chap, ii, pp. 111-208)

IN INDIA

II

(1) A seeming contradiction in Buddha’s teaching

about personality

(a) There is no self (attan in Pali, atman in San- 
skrit) in the sense of a permanent, unitary 
entity; what we ordinarily call a self is a com- 
pound of material and mental qualities (called 
khandas in Pali, skandhas in Sanskrit)

( 5 ) There is, however, reward of actions in a 
future existence

(c) How, then, can the individual feel responsible 
f<|: his deeds?

(2) Attempts to explain the contradiction

(a) Warren says that “rebirth is not transmigra- 
tion” (pp. 234-38)

(6) Barth says that the dead Buddhist does not 
revive but another revives in his stead (see 
Poussin, p. 49)

(c) Poussin interprets the Buddhist solution to be 
that the revived person is continuous with the 
old one in the sense that the individual is an 
unbroken series of changing states 
(i) Similes: milk changing to curds, persons 
growing old, fire spreading, the candle 
flame continuously burning, etc.

id) Farquhar, however, thinks that Poussin’s ex- 
planation implies the annihilation of the 
emancipated priest at death (p. 65)

(1) But this is expressly denied {WBT, pp, 
138-46)

(2) He suggests that Buddha, while main- 
taining both the doctrine of no-soul, on 
the one hand, and transmigration and 
deliverance, on the other, did not try to 
reconcile the notions philosophical^

( 5 ) The doctrine of karma (ibid., chap, iii, pp. 209-79)

(i) Not original with Buddhism

BUDDHISM( 5 ) The doctrine of karma (ibid., chap, iii, pp. 209-79)

(i) Not original with Buddhism

BUDDHISM

(а) It appears in the Upanishads, though ap- 
parently as an esoteric doctrine (Eliot, I, 94)

(б) It was also known to the Jains (ibid.^ p, 107, 
and Dasgupta, p. 73)

(c) The Jatilas, ascetics, who joined Buddha^s 
order already believed in karma

(2) The doctrine arises out of a sentiment of justice

It explains inequality in the world {WET, pp. 
214-is)

(3) With Buddha it was a wholly moral conception

(а) Not linked with | metaphysical-soul theory 
as in the Upanishads **

(б) Nor with materialistic conception as in 
Jainism,

(c) It was the ‘daw of the deed/’ an impersonal, 
universal principle of moral cause and effect

(4) Its practical significance

(a) The responsibility for the consequences of 
moral conduct is upon the individual, not 
upon something outside himself

(b) Taken in conjunction with the dynamic con- 
ception of personality, it maintains the possi- 
bility of the remaking of character, and the 
power of the individual to shape his own 
future

(c) Nirvana

(i) In its primary meaning the word is derived from a 
verb which signifies “to go out,” as a lamp goes 
out when the oil is exhausted 
(a) The reference is to the extinction of the desire 
and attachment which leads to rebirth (see 
ibid,y p. 380)

(&) As a state it is one of calm joy and inner peace 
’ (2) Does the saint who has attained Nirvana exist in

some condition other than samsara, the realm of 
rebirth; or is he completely annihilated at death?

IN INDIA

(3) Buddha himself refused to answer the question. 
Both answers have been given by his followers 
(see Saunders, Epochs in Buddhist History^ pp, 
i4~j 8, and Keith, pp, 61-68)

IV. The Eaely Order 
a) References

Cave, S.: Living Religions of theEast, pp, 129-31.

Copleston, Reginald S.; Buddhism ^ Primitive and Present 
in Magadha and Ceylon^ pp. 119-49.IV. The Eaely Order 
a) References

Cave, S.: Living Religions of theEast, pp, 129-31.

Copleston, Reginald S.; Buddhism ^ Primitive and Present 
in Magadha and Ceylon^ pp. 119-49.

Davids, T. W, Rhys : Dialogs of the Buddha ^ Parts I and 11 , 
(Source nfe,teriaL Instances of formation of regulations, 
etc.)

Dutt, Sukumar: Early Buddhist Monachism (1924). Pp. 
197. (The most detailed recent study, showing the order 
as a developing social process.)

Eliot, Sir Charles: Hinduism and Buddhism, (A

good picture of the early monastic life.)

Geden, A. S.: Article in ERE, VIII, 797-802, on ^^Bud- 
dhist Monas ticism.^' (Good comprehensive account.)

Hackmann, H.: Buddhism as a Religion, pp. 27-31.

Hardy, R. Spence: Eastern Monachism (1850). (A stand- 
ard older reference.)

Kern, J. H. C. : Manual of Indian Buddhism (1896), pp. 
73-101. (Also by an older authority.)

Monier-Williams, Monier: Buddhism, pp, 71-92,

Moore, G. F.: History of Religions, I, 298-301* (Conven- 
ient brief account.)

Warren, H, C,: Buddhism in Translations \WJBT], pp.

, 393-486. (Valuable selections from the sources concern- 
ing the order.)

h) Essential points concerning the order

1. The monastic order was not original with Buddha

(a) It was common for religious teachers with many dis- 
ciples to organize them into regulated coriursunities

2. The distinctive features of Buddha's order

(a) It removed all restrictions of class

BUDDHISM

(6) It placed upon all alike the same requirements 
(c) It was probably less prone to extravagances (of the 
ascetic sort) and l>etter organized 
The monks had no fixed abode

(a) They followed the wandering life of the mendicant

(b) Only during the rainy seasons did they remain in a 
definite place or in a permanent building

Restrictions of entrance into the onler 
(fl) Those suffering from mental or bodily defect, the 
vicious, gamblers, debtors, mimsra without the con- 
sent of parents, were not adfiittcd 
There were regulations covering(«) The ceremony of admissitm to the order (see H'BT, 
PP- d0.V 4ox)

(i) 'I'he equipment of (he monk; alms bowl, vestments, 
staff razor, toothpick, water-strainer (to prevent un- 
witting taking of insect life), etc,

(c) The reception of converts from other sects

(d) Activities of the monks

(1) Daily routine, such as

. (o) Recitation and prayers 
(6) Going the rounds for alms

(c) Partaking of the simple noonday meal, with 
rest and meditation following

(d) Evening service and recitations in the temple 
or hall of the monastery

( 2 ) Other activities

(a) Regular instruction to the junior monks (srch 
tnaneras)

(b) Preaching during the rainy season to the lay- 
men

(c) Bimonthly Uposatha days (days of abstinence 
and fasting)

(t) At this time the Pratimoksha, or confes- 
sion of sin, was formally recited 
(a) “The only distinct instance of united de-

IN INDIA

15

vout activity of the whole community” 
(Hackmann, p, 31)

6 . The vows were not irrevocable

{a) The monk was free at any time without blame to dis- 
card his robes and return to the world

7. Provision for the lay Buddhists

(а) Those admitted to the monastery as laborers and ser- 
vants

(i) A less strict discipline than that of the monks

(б) The outside laity who visited the monasteries and 
made offerings at shrines

(1) They were to abstain from taking life, drinking 
intoxicants, lying, stealing, and unchastity

(2) In addition they might win special merit by using 
no garlands or perfumes, sleeping on a mat spread 
on the ground, and not eating after midday

(3) In stories illustrating the right life of the layman

(а) There is emphasis on the social virtues, such 
as pleasant speech, kindness, temperance, 
consideration for others, and affection

(б) There is commendation for almsgiving, reli- 
gious conversation, hearing of the law

{c) Mutual duties are enjoined in relations of

(1) Parents and children

(2) Pupils and teachers

(3) Husband and wife

(4) Friend and friend{c) Mutual duties are enjoined in relations of

(1) Parents and children

(2) Pupils and teachers

(3) Husband and wife

(4) Friend and friend

(5) Masters and servants

(6) Laity and clergy

S* The rules of poverty did not apply to monasteries in their 
corporate capacity

(a) The monasteries were wealthy and influential through

(1) Gifts of land .

(2) Revenues from estates or villages granted in per- 
petuity by wealthy patrons

BUDDHISM

(3) Gifts of money, buildings, etc.

9. The order of nuns

(a) Never very popular or numerous 
(&) The rules for the nuns involved obedience to the order 
of monks in all respects

(1) A nun even of a hundred years' standing was to 
rise and respectfully salute even the youngest 
monk

(2) A nun could not keep Vassa in a district in which 
no monk was resident, etc.

f‘

V. EAitLY Conferences or CouNeii.s 
a) References

Eliot, Sir Charles: Ilifiduism mid Buddhism y I, 254*~"63. 
(On the whole, the most readable account.)

Franke, R. 0 .: “The Buddhist Councils at Rajagaha and 
Vesali,'' Journal of the Pali Text Society^ 1908. (A very 
close examination of the sources on the two first coun- 
cils, with the conclusion that they never happened, at 
least as Buddhists understood them.)

McGovern, W* M.: Introduction to Mahay ana Buddhism ^ 
pp. 185-87.

Moore, George F.: History of Religions y I, 301-4.

Oltramare, Paul: Vhistoire des idies thSosophiques dans 
Unde (1923), VoL II: La thiosophie houddhiquey pp. 64- 
77. (See below.)

Thomas, E. J.: Life of Buddha j pp. 165-72. (Recent ac- 
count.)

. i Vall6e-Poussin, L. de la: “Les conciles bouddhiques/' Mu- 
(1905). Txd.ml2ited in Indian Antiquary {igoi). (A 
thorough study by a master.)

Vallee-Poussin, L. dela: Article on “Councils (Buddhist)'' 
in EREj Vol. IV. (A presentation of practically the pres- 
ent state of our knowledge on the subject.)

Winternitz, M.: Article on “Most Ancient Buddhist Rec- 
ords," in Nariman's Literary History of Sanskrit Bud- 
dhism ^ pp. 207-11.Winternitz, M.: Article on “Most Ancient Buddhist Rec- 
ords," in Nariman's Literary History of Sanskrit Bud- 
dhism ^ pp. 207-11.

IN INDIA

17

ORIGINAL SOURCES

Cullamgga, XI, XII, SBE, VoL XX.

The Dipavamsa.

The Mahammsa, (See below, p. 40.)

Przyluski, Jean: Le concile de RSjagfha: Introduction 
Vhistoire de$ canons et des secies bouddhiques (1926). 
(Contains translations of pertinent Chinese texts.)

b) Interest attaching to the councils

1. They witness to differences of opinion in matters of both

faith and practice and the attempt to come to some agree- 
ment ^ ^

c) But there is considerable uncertainty in our knowledge about 
them

t, The oldest authority dates from a century or two after 
the first council (see Thomas, p. 165)

2. There are discrepancies and improbabilities in the ac- 
counts

(a) This does not, however, preclude their containing a 
kernel of historic truth

d) The traditional councils

1. The first: at Rajagaha

(a) Said to have been held immediately after Buddha’s 
death when five hundred monks spent the rainy sea- 
son together and chanted the suttas and the vinaya, 
tlius fixing their authority

2. The Council of Vesali (one hundred or one hundred and 
ten years after Buddha’s death)

(a) A council to examine (and which condemned) ten 
extra-legal practices of the monks at Vesali

(b) The Dipavamsa says that the condemned monks held 
a rival council of 10,000 members and founded a sepa- 
rate sect

3. The Council at Pataliputra

(a) Held under King Asoka (Sinhalese sources «say two 
hundred and thirty-six years after Buddha)

(b) Apparently a discussion of five controverted ques-

i8

BUDDHISM

tions; these are in the Sinhalese Katthavatthu, which 
is a catalogue of heresies

(c) There is no record of this council in the accounts of 
northern Buddhism

4. The Council at Jalandhara, second century a.d. (time of

Kanishka)(c) There is no record of this council in the accounts of 
northern Buddhism

4. The Council at Jalandhara, second century a.d. (time of

Kanishka)

(a) Northern Buddhism accepts the tradition that the 
addition of Sanskrit commentaries to the canon was 
sanctioned at this time

(b) But the Pali sources are silent about this council

e) Oltramare takes the position thatithe tfadition of councils 
which settled certain doctrinal questions was an invention 
springing out of the needs of limited groups, seeking to give 
authority to their own positions (pp* 64-77)

VL Asoka, Imperial Patron op World-Buddhism

a) References

Davids, T, W. Rhys: Buddhist India^ Index, ^^Asoka/'

Eliot, Sir Charles: Hinduism and Buddhism ^ I, 263-74*

Kennedy: “Buddhist Gnosticism, Journal of the Royal 
Asiatic Society^ 1902, pp. 377-415.

Saunders, Kenneth J.: Epochs in Buddhist History ^ pp*

Smith, Vincent A.: Asoka, the Buddhist Emperor of India, 
(The fullest treatment in English* Gives the history of 
Asoka, descriptions of the monuments, translations of 
the rock and pillar edicts, and the Ceylonese and Indian 
legends.)

Smith, Vincent A.: Article on “Asoka^^ in ERE^ Vol. II, 
(A convenient reference.)

Smith, Vincent A* : Early History of India^ Including Alex- 
ander's Campaigns y chap, vi, pp. 143-83. (A briefer 
treatment.)

^ Thomas, F. W.: “Asoka, the Imperial Patron of Bud- 
dhism,” Cambridge History of India, pp. 49 S-’S^ 3 -

b) Main facts concerning Asoka in connection with Buddhism

IN INDIA.

19

1, Asoka (273-231 B.C.), one of the greatest of Indian emper- 
ors, was a patron and adherent of Buddhism

2, His significance in Buddhist history

(a) He transformed an obscure local sect in the basin of 
the Ganges into a dominant world'-religion

3, His life

(a) He was the grandson of Chandragupta Maurya, the 
first emperor of India, and son of Bindusara3, His life

(a) He was the grandson of Chandragupta Maurya, the 
first emperor of India, and son of Bindusara

(b) Asoka inherited a vast empire (see Smith, Early 
History, p, 150), which he rounded off by the conquest 
of the ki|)igdom of Kalinga, which is on the coast of 
Bengal between the Mahanadi and Godavari rivers

(c) Conscience-stricken at the horrors of this war of con- 
quest, and coming under the influence of Buddhist 
teachers about the same time, he determined to be- 
come a man of peace and devote his energies to 
spreading the Dhamma (really his conception of the 
Buddhist ethical teaching)

{d) His activities in behalf of Buddhism

(1) Enforced respect for the sanctity of animal life 
{ a ) Abolished the royal hunt in 259 b.c.

{b) Stopped the butchery of animals for the 
royal table

{c) In 243 B,c. issued detailed regulations con- 
cerning the slaughter or mutilation of animals

(2) Preached before his subjects in order to give them 
a good example

(3) In 249 B.c, made a solemn pilgrimage to the most 
sacred spots in the Buddhist Holy Land

(4) Caused his ethical preaching (Dhamma) to be 
carved on rocks, bowlders, cave walls, and pillars 
{a) Thirty-five distinct documents preserved to us

(1) Fourteen rock edicts (translated in Smithes 
“Asoka”)> dating from the thirtee^ith and 
fourteenth years of his reign

(2) Seven pillar inscriptions (engraved on

#

20

BUDDfflSM

sandstone monoliths), from the twenty- 
seventh and twenty-eighth years of his 
reign

(3) Other lesser inscriptions 
(J) The primary duties of the Asokan code

(1) Respect for the right of animals to life

(2) Reverence for parents, elders, and pre- 
ceptors

(3) Truthfulness

(5) Promoted the missionary spread of Buddhism 
(see below)

(6) In his life displayed great energy, combining the 
piety of a saint with the practical qualities of an 
able king

(7) In 240 B.c. Asoka was ordained as a monk, though 
without abdicating the throne(7) In 240 B.c. Asoka was ordained as a monk, though 
without abdicating the throne

(e) Asoka died in either 232 or 231 b.c.

4, Asoka’s missionary work

(а) In India

(1) Required officials in government to give moral in- 
struction to those below them

(2) Appointed censors as a special class

(a) To promote piety among people of all sects

(b) To superintend the female establishments of 
members of the royal family

(c) To prevent wrongful imprisonment or cor- 
poral punishment

(d) To function among the bordering tribes and 
nations subject to Asoka’s suzerainty

(б) Outside India

(1) Ceylon

(a) It was evangelized with permanent success by 
a group of missionaries under Asoka^s young- 
er brother, Mahinda

(2) Western countries: Buddhist missionaries were 
sent to

r

IN INDIA.

21

(a) Syria and Western Asia (then under An- 
tiochos Theos)

(J) Egypt (then under Ptolemy Philadelphos)

(c) Cyrene (under Magas)

(d) Epirus (under Alexander)

(e) Macedonia (under Antigonos Gonatas)

(c) Effects of missionary effort

(1) The movement did not succeed in establishing 
branch churches except in Ceylon

(2) But it affected the Gnostic and Manichean sects 
of Christianity (see Kennedy, ^Tuddhist Gnosti-

* cism/^ Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society^ for 
1902, pp. 377-415)

(3) In reflex action on India it helped to develop the 
Mahay ana form of Buddhism

(4) For many centuries made Buddhist institutions a 
prominent feature of Indian life

(5) Led ultimately to the extension of Buddhism to 
Tibet, China, and Japan

5. Asoka’s greatness: ^'As a king he disputes with Akbar the 
right to the highest place of honor among the sovereigns 
of India, and, in the history of Buddhism, his importance 
is second only to that of the founder of the system,” — 
Smith, ERE^ II, 127.

VII. Growth and Transtormation or Buddihsm in India: Rise 
OR the Mahayana 
a) References

Davids, T, W^ Rhys: Buddhism: Its History and Litera- 
ture, pp. 187-212.VII. Growth and Transtormation or Buddihsm in India: Rise 
OR the Mahayana 
a) References

Davids, T, W^ Rhys: Buddhism: Its History and Litera- 
ture, pp. 187-212.

Eliot, Sir Charles: Hinduism and Buddhism, II, 3-6 and 
63-82.

ERE: Article on “Mahayana” by L. de la Vallee-Poussin.

(Good on the doctrinal changes and characteristics.) 
Farquhar, J. N.: Outline of the Religioiis Literature of 
India, pp. 111-12.

22

BUDDHISM

Foucher, A.: The Beginnings of Buddhist ArL (See espe- 
cially Lecture IV on “The Greek Origin of the Image of

Buddha /0

Hackmann, H, : Buddhism as a Religion^ pp, 48-56, (Clear 
and brief,)

Johnston, R, F,: Buddhist Chma, pp, 23-35, (A good 
statement by a special student of the Chinese Maha- 
yana.)

McGovern, William M,: Introduction to Mahayana Bud-> 
dhism^ pp. 1 6 -'20.

Moore, G, F, : History of Religiony^ I, 304-6,

Radhakrishnan, S.: Indian Philosophy^ I, 589-^05. (De- 
scribes the difference between Hinayana and Mahayana 
branches of Buddhism,)

Reischauer, A. K.: Studies in Japanese Buddhism^ pp, $7"- 
70. (Good brief treatment,)

Saunders, K. J, : Epochs in Buddhist History^ pp. 47-69.

Smitli, V. A.: Early History of India, pp. 239-52:, (Espe- 
cially for the life of Kanishka and the council held during 
his reign.)

h) Outline of main points

I, A great change came over Buddhism in North India after

Asoka^s time, especially during the first and second cen- 
turies A.D.

(a) The ideal of the Arhat was replaced by that of the 
Bodhisattva

(1) The Arhat was one who wins Nirvana by a strenu- 
ous discipline at once and who will not again be 
born

(2) The Bodhisattva is one who reaches release by 
means of a devotion to others in a long career 
reaching through endless lives; he foregoes Nir- 
vana for the sake of others.

(J) Buddhas and Bodhisattvas came to be regarded as 
supernatural beings, in time worshiped as deities

(c) Gotama was regarded as simply one earthly manifes-

IN INDIA

23(J) Buddhas and Bodhisattvas came to be regarded as 
supernatural beings, in time worshiped as deities

(c) Gotama was regarded as simply one earthly manifes-

IN INDIA

23

tation of a cosmic Buddha essence that has incarnated 
itself countless times in the past and will do so yet 
countless times in the future; and that reveals itself 
also in heavenly Buddhas who rule paradises in other 
worlds

(d) Emphasis came to be placed on salvation by faith in 
some Bodhisattva

(i) Invocation of the name of Amitabha secures re- 
birth in his paradise, etc.

Causes of the change

(a) Intf rnal,#within India

(1) Continued growth of Indian thought; the interest 
in metaphysics kept developing beyond the limits 
set down by Buddha

(2) The need of the people for a more emotional 
morality and more personal, sympathetic deities

(3) The influence of other Indian religious thought 
and practice. According to Saunders these are 
(<3^) The Sankhya philosophy

(b) Polytheistic Hinduism (as expressed in the 
Bhagavadgita)

(c) The monism of Vedanta

(d) Yoga

(b) External, coming from outside India

(i) Northwest India was invaded by many different 
foreign peoples at different times

(a) Persians, Greeks (whose influence stimulated 
the growth of mythology and imagery; see 
Foucher above), Parthians, Sakas, and Ku- 
shans

(b) The foreign converts naturally brought in

other ideas which mixed with those of 
Buddhism. Smith goes so far as to say (p, 
248).: ^

(i) ‘^Mahayana was largely of foreign origin, 
and its development was the result of the

BUDDHISM

complex interaction of Indian, Zoroastri-- 
an, Gnostic and Hellenic elements/^

3. Kanishka’s council, second century Am. (see p. 18 above). 
(Kanishka was the most famous of the Indo-Scythian 
kings and held sway over the Kushan Empire, possibly 
from 78 to 120 A.D. The dates are much debated.)

(a) Five hundred monks met at Jalandhara in Kashmir(a) Five hundred monks met at Jalandhara in Kashmir

(b) They examined all the theological literature and elab- 
orated commentaries on the three pitakas

(c) The works included the Mahavibhasha, which still

exists in Chinese r

(d) The commentaries thus prepared were copied on 
sheets of copper, which were deposited in a slupa 
built for the purpose by Kanishka

(e) This council seems to have been Hinayanist, but its 
account by Hsuan Chwang bears witness to the pres- 
ence of the new Mahayanist tendencies (see Beal, 
Buddhist Records, I, 153, also Johnston, p. 33)

4. Literary masterpieces of the period (after Saunders)

{a) Milirda Fanha: which, though generally Hinayanist, 
contains the germ of the Mahayana doctrines of salva- 
tion by faith and Bodhisattvas; translated in ^^Sacred 
Books of the EasF^

(6) Lalita-visiara (see Krom, cited on p. 3 above)

(c) Sutralamkara: a collection of Mahayanist legends 
{d) Sukhavati Vyuha Sutras: Descriptions of the western 
paradise of Amitabha (SBE, Vol XLIX)

{e) Saddharma Pundarika (“Lotus of the True Law^O- 
the greatest exposition of the whole Mahayana sys- 
tem {ihU., Vol. XXI)

5. This new, transformed Buddhism called itself the “Ma- 
hayana’^

(а) Mahayana means “The Great Vehicle,’^ that is, the 
great conveyance to salvation

(б) Hinayana means “The Little Vehicle/^ or little con- 
veyance to salvation

IN INDIA

25

(i) It was a term used by the Mahayanists to desig- 
nate the olden, more conservative type of Bud- 
dhism that still persisted

6. Eliotts characterizations of Mahayana and Hinayana

(a) Mahayana was less monastic; more emotional; warm- 
er in charity; more personal in devotion; more ornate 
in art, literature, and ritual; more disposed to evolu- 
tion and development

(b) Hinayana was conservative and rigid; secluded in its 
cloisters; and open to the plausible if unjust accusa- 
tim of silfishness (II, 4)

VIII. Philosophicai Development of the Mahayana 
a) ReferencesVIII. Philosophicai Development of the Mahayana 
a) References

Anesaki, M. : Article on ^^Asanga^’ in ERE, Vol. II. (Con- 
tains a clear brief statement of the idealist [Vijnanavada] 
school.)

Coomaraswamy, Ananda: Buddha and the Gospel of Bud- 
dhism, pp. 226’~52. (More descriptive than analytical)

Dasgupta, Surendranath: History of Indian Philosophy, I, 
X 2 5-5 1. (A thoroughgoing exposition of the Mahayan- 
ist systems; well worth studying.)

Eliot, Sir Charles: Hinduism and Buddhism, 11 , (A

discussion rather than an exposition.)

Farquhar, J, N. : Outline of the Religious Lilerattire of In- 
dia, pp. 112-18,

Keith, A. B.: Buddhist Philosophy in India and Ceylon, 
pp. 216-302. (Painstaking, systematic statement with 
exhaustive utilization of available sources.)

Kern, H.: Manual of Indian Buddhism, pp. 126 ff.

McGovern, William M.: Introduction to Mahayana Bud- 
dhism, pp. 20-24.

Moore, George F. : History of Religions, 1 , 306-iq,

Nariman, G, K. : Literary History of Sanskrit Buddhism, 
chap, viii, pp. 89-109.

BUDDHISM

Pratt, James Bissett: The Pilgrimage of Buddhism (1928), 
pp. 234-70. (Discussed with a philosopher’s insight.)

Radhakrishnan, S.: Indian Philosophy, I, 624-69. (Read- 
able; vivid. Makes free comparisons with Western sys- 
tems of thought.)

Saunders, K. J.: Epochs in Buddhist History, pp. 70-104. 
(Interesting discussion of the philosophical along with 
several other phases of the developed Mahayana.)

Suzuki, I). T.: OiiUines of Mahayana Buddhism^, pp. 21 ff., 
62 ff.

Vallee-Poussin, L. de la: Article on /^Madhyamaka” in

£i?£,VIH, 235-37*

Vallee-Poussin, L. de la: Bouddhisme, pp. 186-204. (Shows 
the logical evolution of the nihilist and idealist systems 
out of their Hinayanist antecedents.)

Pratt, James Bissett: The Pilgrimage of Buddhism (1928), 
pp. 234-70. (Discussed with a philosopher’s insight.)Pratt, James Bissett: The Pilgrimage of Buddhism (1928), 
pp. 234-70. (Discussed with a philosopher’s insight.)

Yamakami, Sogen: Systems of Buddhist Thought, pp. 186- 
251. (An elaborate treatment by a Japanese scholar, Its 
many quotations are suggestive,)

SOURCES AVAILABLE IN WESTERN TRANSLATIONS

Akutobhaya, by Nagarjuna. German translation from the 
Tibetan by Walleser, Die mittlere Lehre des Nagarjuna,

Asvaghosha: Awakening of Faith, English translation by 
Suzuki.

Diamond Sutra (Vajracchedika), .Eng. translation in SBE, 
Vol XLIX.

Life of Vasubandhu, by Paramartha. Eng. translation by 
Takakusu in Toung Pao, V (1904), 269-96,

Modhyamakavatara, French translation from the Tibetan 
by Poussin, Le museon, Vols. VIII and IX.

Mahayana-Sutralamkara, by Asanga, French translation 
by S. Levi,

Prajna-ParamitchHridaya, in SBE, VoL XLIX,

Saddharma Pundarika Sutra, in ibid,, Vol, XXI.

IN INDIA

27

Santideva: Siksha-Samuccaya, English translation by Ben- 
dall and Rouse. (A compendium of Buddhist doctrine 
compiled chiefly from earlier Mahayana sutras,) 
Sutralamkaraj by Asvaghosha. French translation by Hu- 
ber. Paris, 1908.

Vijnaptimatratasiddhij by Vasubandhu. French transla-* 
tion from the Chinese by Poussin (Paris, 1928). 
Vimsakakarikaprakarana. French translation from the Ti- 
betan by Poussin in op, ciU (1912). 
h) Outline of the development of Mahayana philosophy

1. The pigriod i:om 200-550 a.d. was a time when all the 
great religious movements in India (Hindu, Jain, and 
Buddhist) sought to give philosophical expression to their 
ideas

2. This was made possible in part by the peace and pros- 
perity of North India under the Gupta dynasty, which 
lasted from 320 until 647 a . d . (see Farquhar, p, 122)

3. Two main schools came to be differentiated in the Maha- 
yana

{a) Madhyamaka: founded by Nagarjuna (flourished sec- 
ond century a.b.)

(1) Elements in early Buddhism which were the 
germs from which Madhyamaka grew{a) Madhyamaka: founded by Nagarjuna (flourished sec- 
ond century a.b.)

(1) Elements in early Buddhism which were the 
germs from which Madhyamaka grew

(a) Buddha^s doctrine of the middle path 
(J) The doctrine that there is no permanent in- 
dividual

{c) The doctrine that every individual is made up 
of elements (dharmas) which are momentary 
and perishing though real while they last

(2) The Madhyamaka teaching

(a) The dharmas as well as the individual are un- 
real (^'Everything is void^O

(b) Existence is a continuous procession of illu- 
sory, unreal dharmas ^

{c) Our acceptance of them as real is due to ig- 
norance

BUDDHISM

(d) The only knowledge that can arrest the re- 
newal of dharmas is knowledge of their radical 
and fundamental unreality

(e) Madhyamaka interpretations (see Poussin in 
ERE cited above)

(1) Nirvana is the end of the production of 
these phenomena

(2) Impurity is attachment to phenomena 
conceived as pleasant

(3) Purity is complete detachment from 
phenomena -t*

(4) Ignorance is a clinging to the substantial- 
ity of phenomena which induces attach- 
ment

(5) Wisdom is the real truth, knowledge of 
the vacuity of things

(/) Extreme positions

(1) The object described, the description, and 
the person describing are all similarly 
nonexistent

(2) ^'Absolute truth is silence’^

(b) Yogacarya (or Vijnanavada) school

(1) Founded by Asanga and Vasubandhu in the 
fourth century a.b.

(2) Agreements with the Madhyamaka teaching 
(Dasgupta, p. 145)

(а) All the dharmas are but the constructions of 
ignorant minds

(б) There is no movement in the external world, 
for it does not exist

{c) We construct it ourselves and then are de- 
luded that it exists by itself 
id) AU our phenomenal knowledge is without any 
essence or truth and is but a creation of 
maya^ a mirage or a dream

(3) Distinctive conceptions

IN INDIA

29

(a) All phenomena, both material and non-ma-* 
terial, originate in mind(3) Distinctive conceptions

IN INDIA

29

(a) All phenomena, both material and non-ma-* 
terial, originate in mind

(S) Mind according to its action reveals eight 
functions or consciousnesses

(1) Visual consciousness

(2) Oral consciousness

(3) Nasal consciousness

(4) Consciousness of objects of taste

(5) Consciousness of objects of touch

(6) The consciousness which discriminates 
# between the various phenomena of the

universe

(7) The consciousness which distinguishes 
between subject and object (we would 
say ^%elf-consciousness^O

(8) The receptacle consciousness (Alaya Vij- 
nana)

(^) The seeds or possibilities of all phenomena are 
contained in the eighth or receptacle con- 
sciousness

(1) When they grow and unfold there springs 
up the distinction of subject and object 
and the illusory multiplicity of an ob- 
jective world

(2) In consequence of this we are disturbed 
and rove about in search of peace, suffer- 
ing the pain of attachment to this and 
that transient thing

(3) If we once fuUy understand that nothing 
else exists but mind, then the objective 
world ceases to exist for us, and the eight 
confused consciousnesses are turned into 
eight kinds of enlightened wisdom by 
means of which we can unite with the 
ultimate which transcends speech and 
thought

BUDDHISM

(4) The Alaya Vijnana is the ocean; the 
whole phenomenal world is but the waves 
resulting from its operations 
(c) In the awakening of faith (ascribed to Asvaghosha)

there is a special form of the Vijnanavada

(1) This is of special interest, for it has been particu- 
larly influential in China and Japan

(2) Three main conceptions (according to Suzuki)

(а) Suchness (bhutaiathata)

(1) It is a universal soul which is the “one- 
ness of the totality of things,” the ab- 
solute spiritual reality {Awakening of 
Faith [Suzuki’s transj, p. 55)

(2) In its own essence this spiritual absolute 
is pure and at rest(2) In its own essence this spiritual absolute 
is pure and at rest

(3) But aroused by ignorance its activity 
produces the illusory multiplicity of the 
phenomenal world; it is then called “de- 
filed mind”

(4) The recognition that suchness is the only 
true reality is Nirvana

(б) The theory of triple personality

(1) Dharmakaya, or “Body of the Law”; the ■ 
absolute in itself

(2) Nirmanakaya, or “Body of Transforma- 
tion”; the absolute as embodied in earth- 
ly Buddhas

(3) Sambhogakaya, or “Body of Bliss”; the 
absolute as embodied in heavenly Bud- 
dhas

(3) Salvation by faith (i.e., in Amitabha Buddha, in 
whose paradise the believer will then be born) 
(see ibid., p. 146)

Biographical references on the great names connected 
with the Mahayana philosophy

IN INDIA

3 ^

{a) Asvaghosha

Anesaki, M.: Article on “Asvaghosha^^ in ERE^ VoL 
II. Levi, Sylvain; “Asvaghosha le Sutralankara et ses 
sources/' Journal asiatique^ 1908, p. 10; XII, 77 ff. 
(6) Nagarjuna

Anesaki, M,: Article on “Docetism" in ERE, IV, 838. 
Walleser, M.: “The Life of Nagarjuna from Tibetan 
and Chinese Sources/' Ilirth Anniversary Volume, pp. 
421-55. 
ic) Asanga

Aiftsaki,*M. : Article on “Asanga" in ERE, VoL II; 
Paramartha's Life of Vasubandhu, Translated in 
Toung Pao, 1904, pp. 269 fl., by J. Takakusu. Some 
passages refer to Asanga, who was Vasubandhu's 
brother.

{d) Vasubandhu

Takakusu, J. : Paramartha's Life of Vasubandhu (just 
cited). Takakusu, J.: “A Study of Paramartha’s Life 
of Vasubandhu and the Date of Vasubandhu," Journal 
of the Royal Asiatic Society, January, 1905.

Wogihara, U.: Article on “Vasubandhu" in ERE,

. VoL XII.

Peri, N. : “Apropos de la date de Vasubandhu," Bulle- 
tin de rScole Franqaise P Extreme-Orient, XI, 9x1.Wogihara, U.: Article on “Vasubandhu" in ERE,

. VoL XII.

Peri, N. : “Apropos de la date de Vasubandhu," Bulle- 
tin de rScole Franqaise P Extreme-Orient, XI, 9x1.

Note. — For all four of the foregoing names HsUan Chwang’s 
account of his travels contains scattered references that are 
worth noting, for his work is one of the most important sources 
in Buddhist history. See Buddhist Records (Beal’s trans.). Index.

IX. Later Indian Buddhism as Described by the Chinese 
Pilgrims, 405-695 a.d. 
a) References

S. Beal, Buddhist Records of the Western World, ^Trans- 
lated from the Chinese. 2 vols. (Contains accounts of 
their travels and observations by Fa-Hsien, Sung Ytin,

32

BUDDHISM

and Hslian Chwang, who made special journeys to 
India to secure Buddhist books.)

Eliot, Sir Charles: Hinduism and Buddhism^ II, 90-106, 
(A good summary description,)

Hackmann, H.: Buddhism as a Religion^ pp, 57-63, (Very 
brief.)

Hwui-Li: The Life of Hiuen-Tsiang. Translated by S, 
Beal (A biography by a disciple which in many places 
clarifies and supplements the record of the master.)

DTsing: A Record of the Buddhist Religion as Practised in 
India and the Malay Archipelago {AD. dyx-gf). (Con- 
tains a clear description of the sects of the day and an 
especially full account of the regulations and practices 
of the monks.)

Saunders, K. J.: Epochs in Buddhist History^ pp. 73-76. 
(Describes the University of Nalanda as seen by the 
pilgrims.)

Smith, V. A,: Early History of India, pp. 279-84, 315-30. 
(Notes especially the political suggestions in the Chinese 
narratives.)

The Travels of Fa-Hsien (399*^414), or Record of the Bud- 
dhistic Kingdoms. Retrans* by H. A. Giles (1923), (Most 
readable* Map of journey at back.)

Watters, Thomas: On Yuan Chwang^s Travels in India, 
2 vols. (An extensive collection of very valuable notes 
on the life and travels of Hsiian Chwang. A most useful 
reference on specific questions.)For a present-day description of the Central-Asian terri- 
tory through which the pilgrims passed on their way to 
India read the fascinating Ruins of Desert Cathay, by 
M. Aurel Stein, being two large volumes with numerous 
illustrations, color plates, panoramas, and maps. Stein 
refers many times to Hsiian Chwang whom he calls his 
^ “patron saint.”

h) Outline: Indian Buddhism seen by Chinese pilgrims 
I, Fa-Hsien (traveled from 399 to 414 a.d.)

IN INDIA

33

(<i) Found Buddhism strong and prosperous

(1) Monasteries were numerous, both Hinayanist and 
Mahayanist

(a) Especially in places connected with the life 
and legends of Gotanaa, or at least near them 
in cases where old sites had been abandoned

(2) Architecture and decorations of monasteries and 
stupas were often magnificent

(3) Miracles, magic, and legends were an intimate 
part of the beliefs of both monks and laity.

(4^ Relits of Buddha were reverenced. Tooth, skull- 
bone, begging bowl, etc. (see Giles trans., pp. 14-

17)

(s) Subordinate elements of Indian mythology such 
as deva and waga worship were mingled with Bud- 
dhism (see Hackmann, p. 58; Giles trans., p. 27)

(6) Occupations of the monks

(a) Chanting, meditation, ascetic performances

(b) Performance of religious ceremonies and pro- 
cessions

(7) Part played by the laity

(a) They provided for the maintenance of the 
priests and treated them with reverence

(b) In return they expected blessings on their 
houses, families, and future

2. Sung-3din and Hui-Sheng: visited Udyana and Gandhara 
during the time of the Hun domination (518-21 a.d.)

(a) This brief record, apart from the pious legends re- 
counted, does not add greatly to the picture of Indian 
Buddhism of the period, but it testifies to the rude- 
ness of the Barbarian rulers and presages the later un- 
certain political conditions that surrounded Buddhism 
in its decline (see Beal, Records, I, kxxiv-cviii, and 
Eliot, II, 96) ■»3. Hsiian Chwang (his travels lasted from 629 to 645 a.d.)

(a) The general picture is one of decline and decay

34

BUDDHISM

(i) Monasteries, though numerous, were often de- 
serted or tenanted by but few priests (see Beal, I, 
91, gS, 120, 137, etc., for examples)

{2) In Gandhara, most of the people belonged to 
heretical schools {ibid., p. 98)

(3) In Udyana, there were ten dem temples while the 
Buddhist monasteries were desolate {ibid., pp, 
120-21)

(4) In Nepal, Buddhist and dcva temples were closely

joined and Buddhists and heretics intermingled 
{ibid., II, 81) ^

(s) In Magadha, while Buddhism was still profoundly 
respected, unbelievers were numerous {ibid., 
p. 82)

(6) Nalanda University, however, was filled with 
student priests to the number of several thousand 
{ibid., p. 170)

(7) Kosala presented a mixture of Mahayanism and 
deva worship {ibid., pp. 209-10)

(8) Throughout the Records references to relic wor- 
ship, legends, miracles, magic, and exorcism are 
frequent

(9) Statistics of adherents as given by Hsiian

Chwang:'

Hinayanists 96,000

Mahayanists 32 , 000

Mixed S4,S°o

Total 182,500

4. I-Tsing (traveled in 671-95 A.D.)

{a) I-Tsing distinguishes four main schools of Buddhism 
in the India of his day

(i) Aryamahasanghihanikaya (or “Noble School of 
^ the Great Brotherhood”), seven subdivisions

^ See Eliot, II, 100, and Rhys Davids, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1891, 
pp. 418 ff.

IN INDIA 35

(2) AryasthaViranikaya (or “Noble School of the 
Elders”), three subdivisions

(3) Aryamulasarvastivadanikaya (or “Noble Funda- 
mental School Which Affirms the Existence of All 
Things”), four subdivisions

(4) Aryasammitinikaya (or “Noble School of the 
Right Measure”), four subdivisions (see I-Tsing, 
[Takakusu’s trans.], pp. 7-8)

(b) Both Hinayana and Mahayana seemed to be recog- 
nized as alternative forms of religion (Eliot, II, 103) 
(b) I-Tsing ‘siotices a decline in the religion within his 
own day {ibid., p. 103)(b) Both Hinayana and Mahayana seemed to be recog- 
nized as alternative forms of religion (Eliot, II, 103) 
(b) I-Tsing ‘siotices a decline in the religion within his 
own day {ibid., p. 103)

(d) Most of I-Tsing’s narrative is a description of temple 
and monastic life which does not extend tlie picture of 
Buddhism as a whole beyond what Hsiian Chwang tells

X. Decline of Indian Buddhism and Its Submergence in 
Hinduism 
a) References

Barth, Auguste: The Religions of India, pp. 133-39. (^7 
one of the older authorities.)

Beal, S: Buddhisl Records of the Western World

Eliot, Sir Charles: Hinduism and Buddhism, II, 107-31. 
(Probably the best recent treatment in English.)

ERE. Article on “Tantrism,” by De la Vallee-Poussin.

Farquhar, J. N.: An Outline of the Religious LiteraMre of 
India, pp. 209-13, 272-74. (For the literature of Tantrik 
Buddhism.)

Haraprasada, Sastri: “Buddhism in Bengal since the Mu- 
hammadan Conquest,” Journal of the Asiatic Society of 
Bengal, 1896.

Imperial Gazetteer of India, I, 412-13. (Contains a brief 
summary statement.)

Nariman, G. K. : Literary History of Sanshrit Buddhism, 
pp. 110-22. (Good discussion of the literature of late 
Buddhism.)

36

BUDDHISM

Oltramare, Paul: VMstoite des idies tMosofhiqms dans 
Vlnde^ pp. 495-520. (Seeks to show that Buddhism is a 
product of Hinduism and remained Hindu in all stages 
of its career.)

Monier- Williams, Sir Monier: Buddhism ^ pp. 162-71.

Radhakrishnan, S.: Indian Philosophy^ I, 605-10.

Subrahmanya, Aiyar K. V.: ^^Origin and Decline of Bud- 
dhism and Jainism in Southern India,”* Indian Anti- 
quary^ 19XX.

Taranatha: Geschichk des Buddhismus in Indien. A Ger- 
man translation by Anton Schrefner^of a sixteenth-cen- 
tury history of Buddhism. (An important source but not

* to be accepted uncritically. From p, 2 57 on it deals with 
later Buddhism.)

Vall6e-Poussin, L. de la: BotMdhisme, pp. 343-412. (A 
good discussion of every aspect.)* to be accepted uncritically. From p, 2 57 on it deals with 
later Buddhism.)

Vall6e-Poussin, L. de la: BotMdhisme, pp. 343-412. (A 
good discussion of every aspect.)

Waddell, Lawrence Austin: The Buddhism of Tibet or 
LamaisMf pp, 5-17. (Gives a vivid brief account of the 
changes through which Buddhism passed on the way to 
. its late Tantrik phase. By an authority on Tibetan Bud- 
dhism.)

Waddell, Lawrence Austin: ^^The Indian Buddhist Cult of 
Avalokita and His Consort Tara The Saviouress,^ Illus- 
trated from the Remains in Magadha,” Journal of the 
Royal Asiatic Society ^ 1894, pp. 51-89. 
h) Outline of main points 
I. The decay of Buddhism

{a) Had already begun in Hsuan Chwang’s time (see 
above Topic IX)

(i) He mentions incidentally the worship of the god- 
dess Tara at certain Buddhist shrines (Beal, 
Records^ II, 103, 174)

(&) In the eleventh century Buddhism still held power in 
outlying provinces like Kashmir and Orissa, and the 
Pal kings of Bihar remained true to the faith until the 
conquest of the province by Bakhtiyar Khilji in 
1193 A.D.

IN INDIA

37

(c) With the establishment of the Moslim power Bud- 
dhism disappeared from North India (i.e., in its old 
home)

(d) In Western India it survived until the middle of the 
twelfth century when the Saiva revival was directed 
against both Buddhists and Jains

(i) This does not mean violent persecution but rather 
a submergence in a rising tide of Hinduism (see 
Monier-Williams, p. 170, and Eliot, 11 , no)

(g) Buddhism in India at the present time {Imperial 
Gcmeikernof India, I, 413)

(1) About 300,000 Buddhists scattered in small num- 
bers

(a) Along north and northwest frontiers of Ben- 
• gal

(b) In the Punjab districts of Spiti, Lahul, and 
Kanawar

(c) On the lower slope of the Himalayas

{d) In Nepal, though opposed by the Hindu 
ruling dynasty

(2) In all of these the form is corrupt 
2, The character of decadent Buddhism

(a) It became mixed with baser elements from Hinduism{d) In Nepal, though opposed by the Hindu 
ruling dynasty

(2) In all of these the form is corrupt 
2, The character of decadent Buddhism

(a) It became mixed with baser elements from Hinduism

(1) Saktism

(o) The worship of a goddess, or goddesses, as 
divine energy

(1) In Hinduism this is the worship of Siva’s 
consort (Devi, Durga, Kali, etc.)

(2) In Buddhism it is chiefly the worship of 
Tara, the consort of Avalokita

(b) It is essentially an erotic mysticism

(2) Tantrism ,

(a) A system of magical or sacramental ritual 
which professes to attain the highest aims of 
religion by

(i) Spells, diagrams, gestures, and other 
physical exercises (Eliot, II, 274)

38

BUDDHISM

(b) It produced a literature called Tantras^ which prob- 
ably dates from the ninth to the eleventh century 
(see article on ‘^Buddhist Literature^^ in ERE^ Vol. 
VIII)

(1) These are treatises partly concerned with

(a) Ritual (Kriyalantra)

{b) Rules of conduct (Charyakmta)

(c) Yogi esotericism (Yogaiantra)

(1) This starts from the mysticism of the 
Madhyamaka and the Yogacarya schools

(2) Its teachings ajni a mature of mysticism, 
sorcery, and erotics, accompanied by dis- 
gusting rites

(3) In this Buddhism becomes indistinguish- 
able from Saivism

(2) The best-known Buddhist Tantrik work is the 
Taihagata Guhaka (see Farquhar, p. 211)

3. Causes assigned for the disappearance of Buddhism in

India

(a) Buddhism was always extremely tolerant from the 
very beginning

(1) Buddha did not prohibit the laity from practicing 
the customary rites of the general community in 
matters of birth, death, and marriage (Eliot, II, 
120)

(2) While Buddha taught salvation through personal 
effort in accordance with insight into the four 
noble truths and not in dependence upon any god, 
he neither denied the existence of the Hindu gods 
nor sought to prevent their worship(b) Among the monks Buddhism remained distinct and 
pure so long as the strict observances of the Hinayana 
continued (see Barth, cited above, and Poussin, pp. 
410-*! i)

(c) But the Mahayana opened the door to Hindu in- 
fluence even among the monks

IN INDIA

39

(1) By its development of a pantheon of Buddhas and

Bodhisattvas

(2) By its development of a metaphysics of a panthe- 
istic world-soul that approaches the Vedanta 
leaching

(3) By its larger use of the practice of Yoga or ec-

Static meditation

id) Buddhism, arising as a variation out of Hinduism, 
was rcalisorbed by it, as Hinduism was the older, 
stronger current of religious thought and feeling 
(i>,Hinchiism acted by a strong, though slow, assimi- 
lative social influence from the fourth century 
onward (see Eliot, I, xxxiii-xl)

4. Buddhism left its mark, however, upon Hinduism (see 
Radhakrishnan’s remarks on this point [1, 608-10])

PART 11 ^

IN CEYLON: CONSERVATION OF THE HINAYANA 
I. The Introduction of Buddhism into Ceylon 
a) References

Cave, Henry W.: The Book of Ceylon, pp. S 25 ~ 47 - From an 
attractive traveler’s guide. Maps and 756 photographs. 
(The passage cited weaves history and archaeological de- 
scription together instructively.)

Copleslon, R. S. : Buddhism, Primitive and Present, w Maga- 
dha and in Ceylon. (Pp. 177-9S describe the conversion of 
Ceylon and contain also a translation of Mahinda’s first 
discourse to King Tissa.)

Eliot, Sir Charles: Hinduism and Buddhism, III, 11-17, 
(Careful, judicious sifting of the materials for the historic 
facts.)

Hackmann, H.: Buddhism as a Religion, pp. 64-67- (Con- 
densed statement of the essentials.)

Mahavamsa, or the Great Chronicle of Ceylon, pp. 82-141. 
Translated by Geiger in the “Pali Text Society Series.” 
(The most important source. Should be read for the 
quaint charm of the old legendary accounts and its Bud- 
dhistic feeling.)Mitton, G. E.: The Lost Cities of Ceylon. (Chaps, iii and x 
give a description of Anuradhapura and Mihintale as they 
appear today. Maps and illustrations.)

Rhys Davids, T. W.: Article on “Ceylon Buddhism” in 
ERE, Vol. III. (Good, succinct, scholarly statement of 
the whole subject.)

Saunders, Kenneth J.: Epochs in Buddhist History, pp. 
105-7. (A brief but impressive picture.) 
b) Outline

I. The civilization of Ceylon is derived from India

40

IN CEYLON

41

(a) Sinhalese art, religion, and language show the influence 
of both Southern (Tamil) and Northern India, but the 
latter is stronger

(b) The Buddhism of Ceylon is founded upon and has pre- 
served the doctrines and the scriptures current in Ma- 
gadha at the lime of Asoka. The causes for this seem to 
be (Eliot, III, 12)

(1) Lack of theological originality among the Sinhalese 
which would inspire modification of doctrine

(2) The chiefs claimed to have come from North India 
^ind v^TC loyal to the religion of the same origin

(3) Buddhism acquired slahilily because it was main- 
tained as national and patriotic as against the faith 
of the I'amils who were constantly trying to gain a 
foothold on the island

2. Tradition says that North Indian influence began with the 
expedition of Vijaya, who with seven hundred followers 
settled in Ceylon about the time of Buddha’s death 
(a) But there is no clear indication of Buddhism in Ceylon

before Asoka’s time (Copleston, p. 179)

(J) The legends of Buddha’s visits to Ceylon are inventions 
(Eliot says for the purpose of glorifying the island)

3. The books of the Sinhalese tradition (see Eliot, III, 14)

(a) The Dipavamsa, or “Short Chronicle’’; written between

302 and 430 A.D.

( 5 ) The Mahavama, or “Great Chronicle”; written toward 
the end of the fifth century by Mahanama 
(a) The Historical Introduction to the Samaniapasadika by 
Buddhaghosa302 and 430 A.D.

( 5 ) The Mahavama, or “Great Chronicle”; written toward 
the end of the fifth century by Mahanama 
(a) The Historical Introduction to the Samaniapasadika by 
Buddhaghosa

(d) All three of the foregoing are based upon an older 
source, the AUhakatha, now lost (see Geiger’s Introduc- 
tion to his translation of the Mahamma, pp. x-xii)

4. How Buddhism came to Ceylon as recorded in the foregoing

three works '

(a) Tissa’s first mission to King Asoka

(i) When Devanampiya Tissa became king of Ceylon,

42

BUDDHISM

having great admiration for Asoka, lie sent a mis- 
sion bearing many rich gifts for the latter (ca, 
245 B,C.)

(2) Asoka responded with many return presents, tlie 
inft)nnation that he had taken refuge in the law of 
Buddha, and the advice that Tissa do the same 
(&) The inclusion of Ccyltjn in Asoka’s missionary projects

(1) After the Council of Pataliputra (secabove,pp. 
Moggalipufla, who had presided over it, came to 
the conclusion that the time had come to dispatch 
missionaries to convert j 3 ;oroigTV,C()untries (inscrip- 
ti<ms imply that Asoka himself initiated the move- 
ment ; see Smith’s Asoka for the text of Rock Edict 
Xni, pp. 172-75)

(2) Mahinda, near-relative of the king, was selected 
and sent as apostle

(a) “The legend tells how Mahinda and his follow- 
ing alighted on the Mdssaka mountain, whither 
King Devanampiya Tissa had gone in the 
course of a hunt. The monk and the royal cor- 
i^}ge met: Mahinda, after testing the king’s in- 
tellectual capacity [see Mahavamsa^ pp. 92-93] 
by some curious dialectical puzzles, had no 
difficulty in converting him. Next morning he 
proceeded to Anuradhapura and was received 
with all honor and enthusiasm. He preached 
first in the palace and then to enthusiastic 
audiences of the general public, In these dis- 
courses he dwelt chiefly on the terrible punish- 
ment awaiting sinners in future existences” 
(Eliot, III, 16),

(3) The conversion of the capital(3) The conversion of the capital

{a) Tissa then made a gift to the monks of his own 
pleasure garden, the Mahamega. (See pictures 
in Cave, pp,

(J) Then followed the erection of a number of

IN CEYLON

43

religious edifices in the district of Anuradha- 
pura and Mihintale

(i) The greatest of these was the Mahavihara 
or ''Great Monastery/^ the stronghold of 
orthodoxy, conserver of the Pali pitakas as 
we know them

(c) Tissa’s further missions to India

(1) One was to secure relics, over which when obtained 
was built the Thuparama Dagoba (see Cave, pp. 
538-40)

(2) Another was to bring a branch of the Bo-tree

(a) This branch was planted at Anuradhapura and 
the tree is still exhibited in Mahamegha garden 
{ibid., pp, 542-45)

(b) The Mahavamsa says that this mission also 
brought back Mahinda^s sister, a nun, to ordain 
the Ceylonese ladies wishing to become nuns; 
her name was Sanghamitta

(c) Concerning the tree, Eliot remarks that "bot- 
anists consider its long life, though remarkable, 
not impossible since roots of this species throw 
up fresh shoots from the roots near the parent 
stem” (in, 17)

(d) Mahinda and the Pali canon

(1) The Mahavamsa does not mention books brought 
by Mahinda to Ceylon

(2) It says that the sacred literature was committed 
to writing under the reign of Vattagamani, or 
about one hundred and seventy-five years after 
Mahinda^s death {Mahavamsa^ p, 237)

(3) Evidently, then, Mahinda brought the Buddhist 
teachings in his own memory to Ceylon and taught 
them orally to the monks of the Mahavihara

(4) It was what these monks in turn rememberai and 
passed on that was finally committed to writing and 
constitutes our Pali texts as we have them today

44

BUDDHISM

(e) Significance of the introduction of Buddhism into Cey- 
lon

(1) The civilization of Ceylon dates from that period

(a) Architecture, painting, sculpture, all bear the 
marks of Buddhist influence(1) The civilization of Ceylon dates from that period

(a) Architecture, painting, sculpture, all bear the 
marks of Buddhist influence

(b) None of the surviving art relics antedates the 
Buddhist period

(r) Cave calls Buddhism the “eflScient cause of 
all the constructive energy which the Sin- 
halese displayed in the erection of their 
vast cities and m^nume^ts^^ (p, 526)

(2) The Hinayana Buddhism of Asoka^s time was 
brought into an environment suitable to preserve it 
unchanged

5. Chief events in Ceylon Buddhist history between the time 
of Mahinda and that of Buddhaghosa (see Copleston, pp. 
I96-“99, and Eliot, III, 17-28)

(a) In the reign of Dutthagamani, 101-77 b.c., according to 
Geiger

(1) Lohapasada, or the Copper Palace, was built; a 
meeting place for the monks (Cave, pp. 548-50; 
Mahavamsa^ pp. 182-86)

(2) An immense relic shrine, the Ruwanweli Dagoba 
was erected (Cave, pp, 550-61; Mahammsa, pp, 
187-219)

(b) In the reign of Vattagamani Abhaya, 29-17 b.c.

(i) A new monastery and dagoba^ known as the Ab- 
hayagiri, was built

(a) This soon became an enemy of the Mahavi- 
hara, and heterodox

(b) This schism was apparently the cause for com- 
mitting the pitakas to writing {Mahavamsa^ 
pp. 236-37)

o ^ {c) In the reign of Mahasena, 325-52 a.d,

(r) The monks of the Abhayagiri were favored and 
those of the Mahavihara proscribed, while their

IN CEYLON

4 S

buildings were tom down and the materials trans- 
ferred to the Abhayagiri

(2) Mahasena was later persuaded by his ministers to 
restore them (for the whole story see Mahammsa, 
pp. 267-71)

(d) In the early part of the fourth century

(1) The use of an image of Mahinda in the religious 
processions of the Mahavihara began

(2) The Cult of the Sacred Tooth of Buddha arose (see 
Eliot, III, 22-28; Cave, pp, 307-12; and Asia, 
41epte»ber, 1927, for picture of procession of the 
Sacred Tooth)

II. Btodhagkosa, Great Systematizer of the Hinayana 
a) ReferencesII. Btodhagkosa, Great Systematizer of the Hinayana 
a) References

Buddhaghosuppalii. Translated by James Gray (1892). (A 
late legendary life of Buddhaghosa written by a Burmese 
in the sixteenth century a.d. Interesting as showing the 
impression made by the personality of Buddhaghosa.)

Copleston, R. S>: Buddhism, BrimUive and Present in Ma- 
gadha and in Ceylon, pp. 201-18. (Describes the commen- 
tarial work of Buddhaghosa and recounts his life.)

Dhammakitti: A Supplementary Passage in the “ Mahamm- 
sa, Written in the 13th Century A.D, (Not contained in 
Geiger’s translation. See latter part of chap, xxxvii in 
Law’s Buddhaghosa, as listed below, pp. 3-8.)

Eliot, Sir Charles: Hinduism and Buddhism, III, 28-32.

Law,’Bimala Charon: The Life and Works of Buddhaghosa 
(1923). (Probably the fullest compendium of all that is 
now known about the man and his work.)

Rhys Davids, Mrs. C, A. F.: Buddhist Psychology (1914)- 
(Based upon Buddhaghosa’s expositions.)

Rhys Davids, T. W.: Article on “Buddhaghosa” in ERE, 
Vol. II.

Saunders, Kenneth J.: Epochs m Buddhist History, pp. 
108-11.

46

BUDDHISM

Warren, H. C.: Btddhism in Translations. (Contains many 
passages from Buddhaghosa.)

For more extended examples of Buddhaghosa’s work see the 
following translations in the “Pali Text Society Series”: 
Nos. 8 and g: The Expositor (being a translation in two 
volumes of the Atlhasalini, a commentary on one of the 
Abhidhamma works on mental elements or processes); 
No. II : TAe Path of Purity (being a translation of Part I 
on “Virtue [or Morals] of Visuddhimagga,” Buddhagho- 
sa’s monumental summary of Buddhist doctrine). 
h) Outline <* •

1. Sources for the life of Buddhaghosa

(a) Scattered biographical references in his writings

(1) Law utilizes many of these in chap, i of his work 
(i) Dhammakitti’s continuation of the Mahavamsa (see

above)

(c) Buddkaghosuppatti: a Pali work by Mahamangala (see 
above)

2. Essential facts concerning his lifeabove)

(c) Buddkaghosuppatti: a Pali work by Mahamangala (see 
above)

2. Essential facts concerning his life

(o) Born into a Brahman family in India, he first lived the 
life of a wandering disputant

(J) He was converted to Buddhism through the influence of 
a monk named Revata

(c) Showed an interest in Buddhist doctrine by composing 
(r) A treatise entitled Jananodaya (“Uprising of

Elnowledge”)

(2) An essay entitled Atlhasalini (“Full of Meaning”) 
(a) This was probably the groundwork for the com- 
mentary later produced in Ceylon (see Law, 
pp. 69-70)

(d) Revata, seeing that he contemplated writing commen- 
taries on the pitaka, advised him to go to Ceylon where 
the ancient commentaries were still known, the texts

’ alone being extant in India, and to translate the com-

mentaries into Pali

(e) Buddhaghosa arrived in Ceylon in the reign of Maha-

IN CEYLON

47

nama, who ruled from 458 to 480 a.d. according to 
Geiger {Mahav., p. xxxix)

(/) After having studied under Sanghapali at the Mahavi- 
hara he asked permission to translate the commentaries 
(i) The monks wishing proof of his competence for the 
task, he composed the celebrated Visuddhimagga 
(g) Then in the seclusion of the Ganthakara Vihara he 
translated the commentaries into Pali, after which he 
returned to India

The legendary account of the BtddhaghosuppaUi 
(a) An-ornatS' retelling of Bhammakitti’s account with an 
apparent application to Buddhaghosa of stories con- 
cerning other individuals told elsewhere in the Milinda 
Panha Dialog and earlier parts of the Mahavama (see 
Law, pp. 44"47)

The works of Buddhaghosa (after ibid., pp. 68-94)

(a) The Vimldhimagga

(1) An encyclopedic exposition of the whole system of 
Pali Buddhism

(2) For its influence in Ceylon see Saunders, pp. 108-9 
{b) Commentaries on the Tipitaka

(1) On the Vinaya Pitaka(1) An encyclopedic exposition of the whole system of 
Pali Buddhism

(2) For its influence in Ceylon see Saunders, pp. 108-9 
{b) Commentaries on the Tipitaka

(1) On the Vinaya Pitaka

(o) The Samantapasadika: “This work itself,” says 
Law, “supplies us with sufiheient materials with 
which to write a social, political, moral, reli- 
gious and philosophical history of Ancient In- 
dia.”

(b) The Kankhadlarani: a commentary on the Pa- 
timokkha

(2) On the Sutta Pitaka

(c) The SumangalavUasini: gives a “vivid picture 
of sports and pastimes, geographical position of 
countries, effects of the life of a reduse^etc., in 
ancient days.” On Digha-nikaya (long dis- 
courses)

48

BUDDHISM

(b) The Fapancasudani: a commentary on the 
Majjhima Nikaya

{c) The Saratthapakasini: a commentary on the 
Samyutta Nikaya, which itself consists of five 
series of works

{d) The Manor aihapurani: a commentary on the 
Anguttara Nikaya, which is divided into eleven 
parts

{e) The Khuddaka-nikayaUhakatha: commentaries 
on certain books of the Khuddaka-nikaya (or 
short discourses) f t 
(3) On the Abhidhamma Pitaka

{a) The Auhasalini: a commentary on the Dhani- 
masangani (or enumeration of dhammas^ i.e., 
mental elements)

{b) Sammohamnodani: a commentary on the Vi- 
bhanga (another work of psychological analysis)

(c) DhatukaihapakaranaUhakatha: on the Dhatu- 
katha (or ‘‘Discussion of Elements’O

(d) Puggala pannattipakaranaUhakatha: on the 
Puggala Pannatti (or “Description of Individu- 
als/^ i.e,, according to their stages along the 
path)

(e) Kathavatthu atthakatha: on the Kathavatthu 
(or “Points of Controversy”)

if) Y amakapakaranatthakatha: on the Yamaha 
(or “Book of Pairs.” “The subject matter is 
psychology and the analysis is arranged as 
pairs of questions.” — ^Ti-roirAS, Life of Buddha^ 
p. 277)

(g) Patthanapakaranatthakatha: on the Patthana 
(or “Book of Relations.” Treats of causality, 
etc.)(g) Patthanapakaranatthakatha: on the Patthana 
(or “Book of Relations.” Treats of causality, 
etc.)

(c) Certain other works about which little is known or 
about whose authorship there is doubt (see Law, pp. 
85-92)

IN CEYLON

49

Note.— For classification and brief description of each of the 
works in the Pali canon as known to Buddhaghosa the reader will 
find Thomas’ Life of Buddha as Legend and History, pp. 257-77, a 
most convenient reference.

5. Despite his tremendous industry Buddhaghosa did not com- 
plete commentaries on the entire Pali canon

(0) Other lesser but noteworthy scholars finished the task 
(for these see Law, pp. 95-103)

(i) Huddhadalta {4) Moggallana

(3) Dhammapala (s) Cullabuddhaghosa

(3) Malm^iama

6, The value of Buddhaghosa’s contribution

(а) Was not in originality of thought

(б) But in his faithful adherence to the authorities of the 
old Buddhism

(c) And in his ordering of the materials of the Hinayana 
teaching in the form that has been authoritative for 
that branch of Buddhism ever since

(1) He may not improperly be called the St, Thomas of 
Hinayana scholasticism

(d) His efforts crowned the conserving work of the Bud- 
dhists of Ceylon by means of which we are able to make 
our nearest approach to the origin of Buddhism itself

TTT. BtTDDHISM: IN CeVION AT TIIE PRESENT DaY 
a) References

Buddhist Annual of Ceylon. Published in Colombo by W. E. 
Bastian. (Interesting as revealing the activities of certain 
Westerners in promoting Buddhism.)

Copleston: Buddhism, Primitive and Present, in Magadha 
and in Ceylon (ad ed., 1908), pp. 242-87, (The fullest 
. single reference on the topic.)

Dharmapala, Anagarika: "On the Eightfold Path,” .4sia, 
September, 1927. (By a modern Sinhalese Buddhist in- 
fluenced by theosophy.)

Eliot, Sir Charles: Hinduism and Buddhism, III, 4i~44- 
Gogerly, D. J.: Ceylon Buddhism, I, i-i4- (Written in 1865

BUDDHISMEliot, Sir Charles: Hinduism and Buddhism, III, 4i~44- 
Gogerly, D. J.: Ceylon Buddhism, I, i-i4- (Written in 1865

BUDDHISM

by a scholarly observer. Contains some references to cer- 
tain modern practices in contrast to the ancient teach- 
ings.)

Hackmann, H.: Buddhism as a Religion^ pp. 96-126. (Good 
statement of monastic practices and organization.)

Hardy, Spence: Eastern Monachism (1850), pp. 309-30. 
(Describes the priesthood as it appeared to an observer 
nearly a century ago.)

Saunders, Kenneth J.: The Story of Buddhism (1916), pp. 
76-98. (As seen by a sympathetic modern observer.)

Saunders, Kenneth J. : Buddhism r^nd Buddhists in Southern 
Asia (1923), pp. 24-36. (Describes the types of Buddhist 
influence in modern Ceylon, and considers them in rela- 
tion to Christian influence.) 
h) Outline

1. The teaching

(a) The moral system is still that of the sacred books, 
whether taught by the traditional or the reforming 
parties

(5) But the history and cosmogony that have been handed 
down belong to late Buddhist tradition

(1) Jataka tales, many universes, heavens, and hells, 
world-cycles, etc.

(2) This element tends to dissolve in the minds of Sin- 
halese with modern education

2. The monastic life (see Hackmann and Copleston)

(a) Entrance into the order

(1) Children destined for the priesthood go through a 
period of tutelage from, the age of eight to eleven or 
twelve

(a) Each under a particular monk with whom the 
parents make arrangement

(2) From twelve to twenty: the novitiate

{a) Enters by a simple ceremony called “Pabbaja” 
in which the hair is cut and the robes taken 
fb) The novice memorizes certain books, follows

IN CEYLON

51

prescribed rules as to daily living, and waits 
upon Ms tutor (see Copleston, pp. 268-69, and 
Hackmann, pp. 98-99)

(3) At the age of twenty is admitted to full monkhood 
in a ceremony called “Upasampada”(3) At the age of twenty is admitted to full monkhood 
in a ceremony called “Upasampada”

(a) This ceremony, which is held annually, is per- 
formed as a rule only at two monasteries in 
Kandy, Mai watte and Assgiri, which have a 
prominent position

(J) Entrance into moitkhoofi is not binding for lifetime

(c) Life and character of the monks

(1) Daily duties

(а) Certain domestic work

(d) Reading and learning the sacred text

(c) Meditation

(d) Devotion before the images

(e) Begging for food (Copleston, p. 264)

(i) This food is not necessarily eaten by the 
priests

(2) Other activities

(o) Instruction of children

(1) Desultory (see Saunders, Buddhism in 
Southern Asia, p, 28).

(2) Limited in content to the sacred books

(б) Healing of sickness by use of charms and chants 
(Saunders, Siory of Buddhism, pp. 82-84)

(c) Public recitation of sacred texts

(1) This may be at a gathering of village folk 
(Copleston, pp. 257-59; Saunders, Bud- 
dhism in Southern Asia, pp. 26-28)

(2) Or at the temple on poya days (i.e., on the 
four quarters of the moon) (Copleston, pp. 
259-60)

(3) The general level of the intellectual and moral life 
of the priesthood is not high (Hackmann, pp. 116- 
18; Copleston, p. 269)

'/ ^2 '^■5

5 ^

BUDDHISM

3. The Buddhism of the laity

(a) Among the peasants it is mixed with demon worship 
and in some places Hinduism (Eliot, III, 42 ; Copleston, 
pp. 272-75)

(i) The monks recite certain sacred texts in a ceremony 
called ^Tirit’^ to ward off the influences of malig- 
nant spirits (Gogerly, I, 5; Saunders, Story of Bud- 
dhism y p. 83)

(b) Among modern educated Sinhalese, Buddhism appeals 
because (see Buddhism in Southern Asiay pp. 31-32)

(1) It is associated with the g^eatne^s of Ceylon^s past 
and therefore a factor in the spirit of nationalism 
(Dharmapala^s article illustrates this)

(2) Its moral standards, uncovered afresh by modern 
Western scholarship, have value in themselves(2) Its moral standards, uncovered afresh by modern 
Western scholarship, have value in themselves

(3) It has found protagonists among certain Westerners 
who advocate the propagation of Buddhism in the 
West (for example see any number of the Buddhist 
Annual of Ceylony also Dharmapala’s article in 
Asia)

{c) Questions concerning the modern Buddhist revival in 
Ceylon

(1) How far is it a real outgrowth of the old Buddhist 
stock?

(2) How far is it a foreign importation?

PART III

IN CHINA: MAHAYANA IN ITS FULL DEVELOPMENT

I. The Introduction and General History of Buddhism in 
China

a) References

Note. — ^A ny of the writers that deal with Chinese Buddhism treat to 
some extent of this J()pic, but the references which present most accurately 
the present state of our knowledge of the subject are the ones given.

Bose, Phanindranath: The Indian Teachers in Chitia (1923). 
(An excellent compilation and organization of available 
facts concerning the Indian Buddhist missionaries to 
China.)

Eliot, Sir Charles: Hinduism and Buddhism, III, 244-80. 
(Most comprehensive English account.)

Groot, J. J. M, de: Sectarianism and Religious Persecution 
in China (1903). 2 vols. (Based largely on imperial de- 
crees, the texts and translations of which are given. See 
the Index for passages on Buddhism.)

Hodous, Lewis; Buddhism and Bttddhists in China (1924), 
pp. 4-6. (A brief statement of the essentials regarding the 
entrance of Buddhism into China. A suggestive division 
of the periods of Buddhist history in China will be found 
on p. 63.)

Maspero, M. H.: “Le songe et I’ambassade de I’Empereur 
Ming: Critique des sources,” BuUeiin de VEcole Frangaise 
d’ExtrimeOrient,X(,igio),gs-xso. (A basic study of the 
traditional legend concerning the introduction of Bud- 
dhism into China.)

Moore, George Foot: History of Religions, I, 79-92, (Very 
brief treatment of historical along with other phases of 
Chinese Buddhism.)Moore, George Foot: History of Religions, I, 79-92, (Very 
brief treatment of historical along with other phases of 
Chinese Buddhism.)

Reichelt, K, L.; Truth and Tradition in Chinese Buddhism 
S3

S 4

BUDDHISM

(1927), 9.25. (A rather cursory, interpretative account 
by a very sympathetic student of the Mahayana.) 
Wieger, Leon: Bouddhismeohinois^ I (1910), 108-10. (Brief 
historical outhne which accepts the traditional date for 
the entrance of Buddhism into China, by a Jesuit sino- 
logue of note.)

Wieger, Leon: Histoire des croyances religieuses et des opin- 
ions philosophiques en Chine (1917), p. 355. 
h) Outline

1. Traditional story of the introduction of Buddhism into 
China: The Emperor Ming (rule^ 58-75 a.d.) of the east- 
ern Han dynasty, having seen Buddha in a dream, sent 
ambassadors to India to inquire into his doctrine; on their 
return these ambassadors brought the holy books and stat- 
ues as well as two Indian monks, who commenced to trans- 
late the Buddhist writings into Chinese. The embassy re- 
turned about 67 A.D., so the dream would have been a few 
years earlier.

(a) The chief critidsm of the story is that before 73 a.d. 
Central Asia was in rebellion against China and not a 
likely place for such an envoy to travel through, though 
the only route

(&) Eliotts reply to the criticism is^that to send envoys to 
inquire about religion may haye been politically ad- 
vantageous and so not in itself improbable

2. There are evidences, however, of earlier Buddhist contacts

(a) The interpretation of the dream implies prior knowl- 
edge of Buddhism

(b) Documents discovered by Stein on the western frontier 
of Kansu prove that China had communication with 
Central Asia earlier; Buddhism was therefore not likely 
to escape notice

(c) In 121 B.c. the Annals relate that “a golden man” was 
captured from the Hsiung-nu

{d) Still earlier tradition relates that an ambassador of Wu- 
Ti visited Central Asia where he learned something of

IN CHINA{d) Still earlier tradition relates that an ambassador of Wu- 
Ti visited Central Asia where he learned something of

IN CHINA

55

the new religion and brought back an account of Bud- 
dha’s golden statue

(e) The Wei-lUeh states that in the year 2 b.c. an ambas- 
sador of the Emperor Ai to the court of the Ylieh Chih 
was instructed in Buddhism by order of their king 
(/) Later Han Annals intimate that in 65 a.d. the 
Prince of Ch’u was a Buddhist and that there were 
Sramanas and Upasakas in his territory 
(g) The policy of the Chinese governnaent of moving con- 
quered peoples into China proper would naturally 
bring theij religion with them (see Hodous, p, 5)

3. Religious conditions which prepared the way for the spread 
of Buddhism in China

(a) Confucianism had become official and burdensome 
(see Hodous, p. 5, and Reichelt, p. 9)

(b) Taoism had become corrupt in its practice and brought 
about a reaction of the purists who sought to return to 
the earlier Taoist mysticism (Hodous, pp. 9-10) ; these 
latter recognized a kinship between Taoist and Bud- 
dhist aspirations as well as the superiority of Bud- 
dhist forms of worship

4. Buddhism as first introduced by the two monks Kasyapa 
Matanga and Gobharana (after Wieger, Histoire des croy- 
ances religieuses et des opinions philosophiques en Chine, 
P- 355 )

(a) Works produced for the emperor

(1) A r6sum6 of the legends on the birth and infancy of 
Buddha

(2) A summary of his preaching.

(3) A short exposition of Buddhist principles

(a) This was the sutra of 42 sections which alone 
survived of these early works 
( 5 ) It is essentially Hinayanistic

(4) A r6sum6 of the ascetic way to be followed by as- 
pirants after perfection

(b) The teachings of the first two missionaries (according

BUDDHISM

S6

to Chinese annals)

(1) The sanctity of all animal life

(2) Metempsychosis

(3.) Meditation

(4) Asceticism

(5) Karma

5. The fortunes of Buddhism through the dynasties (after 
Eliot)BUDDHISM

S6

to Chinese annals)

(1) The sanctity of all animal life

(2) Metempsychosis

(3.) Meditation

(4) Asceticism

(5) Karma

5. The fortunes of Buddhism through the dynasties (after 
Eliot)

(a) During the later Han dynasty, 25-221 a,d.

(i) Three hundred and fifty works were translated into 
Chinese by twelve diffeijent Indian monks, half of 
whom were from India and half from Central Asia 
( 5 ) During the three kingdoms, 221-65

(1) The translation of the Patimokkha indicates growth 
of monastic life

(2) The presence of five translators at Nanking indi- 
cates the southward spread of the religion

(3) Other translators were at work in Loyang 
(c) Dynasty of western Tsin, 265-316 a.d.

(i) Buddhism begins to become prominent 
{d) Later Chao, ca. 273-375 (in North China)

(1) Under Tartar rule Buddhism was favored

(2) General permission given the populace to enter 
monasteries

(3) By 381 A.n. nine-tenths of the inhabitants of 
Northwestern China were said to be Buddhists

(4) By 372 A.n. Buddhism had been introduced into 
Korea

{$) Former Tsfin, 351-94 A.n.

(i) The connections with western regions were close 
(J) Later Ts'in, 384-417 a.d.

(i) Kumarajiva, the greatest of the Indian translators 
of the early period (see Bose, pp. 51-73)

(a) Patronized by the emperor

Q}) Said to have had three thousand disciples

(c) Fifty extant translations are ascribed to him

IN CHINA

S 7

{g) Eastern Ts^in; at Nanking from 317 to 420 A.n,

(i) Buddhism was favored and the ninth sovereign, 
Hsiao Wu-Ti, was the first Chinese emperor to be- 
come a Buddhist

(h) Liu Sung dynasty, 420-80 a.d. (in the south)

(1) There were indications that Buddhism was 
flourishing

(2) But also the beginnings of restrictive legislation by 
the official class

(a) The emperor was asked to prevent the multi- 
plication of monasteries and expenditures in 
superstitious ceremonies(2) But also the beginnings of restrictive legislation by 
the official class

(a) The emperor was asked to prevent the multi- 
plication of monasteries and expenditures in 
superstitious ceremonies

(3) There were twenty translators, partly native and 
partly foreigners, from Central Asia, India, and 
Ceylon

(4) Twenty-five Chinese started on a pilgrimage to 
India in 420 A.n.

(a) Fa Hsien had traveled from 399 to 414 (see 
above, pp. 32 f.)

(i) Wei dynasty (contemporaneous with Liu Sung)

(1) Buddhism was persecuted by one emperor who de- 
creed that all images and sacred books should be 
destroyed and all priests executed (De Groot, I, 
28-32)

(2) But his successors tolerated and even promoted it

(j) Liang dynasty, 502-57 a.d*

(i) Buddhism prospered greatly under imperial pat- 
ronage and popular approval 
(a) The first edition of the Chinese Tripitaka was 
collected in manuscript in 518 a.d.

(&) In 520 or 525 A.D. Bodhidharma, reputed 
founder of the Meditative School in China, 
arrived from India

{k) From the end of the Liang dynasty to the beginning of 
the Pang, 557-620 a.d.

S8

BUDDHISM

(i) Some persecution of Buddhism along with Taoism, 
but Buddhism prospered on the whole

( l ) T^ang dynasty, 620-907 a.d.

(1) A period of struggle between Confucianism, Bud- 
dhism, and Taoism

(a) The emperors and the Confucian court were 
often hostile to Buddhism though some 
favored it; some emperors persecuted Bud- 
dhists in the early part of their reign and 
promoted it in later life

(2) Hsiian Chuang traveled to India (629-45 A.n.) (see 
above, pp. 33 f,), and was fortunate to return under 
a favorable emperor

(3) Buddhism suffered its greatest persecution under 
Wu Tsung in 845 a.d. who was instigated by 
Taoists (for details see De Groot, I, 59-69)

(m) Sung dynasty, 960-1280 a.d.

(1) A great period of Chinese art largely inspired by 
Buddhism

(2) Literature and philosophy were likewise influenced

(a) Chu Hsi and his masters show this(m) Sung dynasty, 960-1280 a.d.

(1) A great period of Chinese art largely inspired by 
Buddhism

(2) Literature and philosophy were likewise influenced

(a) Chu Hsi and his masters show this

(b) Also Lu Chiu-yiian, who taught knowledge 
through meditation

(n) The Ylian or Mongol dynasty, 1280-1368 a.d.

(1) Buddhism was consistently favored

(2) The form most favored was Lamaism, one of the 
temples of which has been maintained in Peking 
ever since

(0) Ming dynasty, 1368-1644 a.d.

(1) Though Confucianism was in the ascendance 
Buddhism was treated with respect

(2) The early Catholic missionaries found Buddhism 
their chief rival

(p) Manchu dynasty, 1644-1911 a.d.

(i) Considerable attention was paid by the throne to 
representatives of Tibetan Buddhism, possibly for 
reasons more political than religious

IN CHINA

59

(2) The twelfth and last collection of the Tripitaka 
under monarchical rule was made 
(q) Since the revolution of 1911 (see Hodous, pp. 64-69) 
(i) Buddhism shows new signs of revival, propaganda, 
and reform

II. Bobhidharma and Chih-K^ai: The Foundation or the Medi- 
tative AND T'ien-T'ai Schools

a) References

Eliot, Sir Charles: Hinduism and Buddhisvi, pp. 304-12,

Hackmann, Bk: Buddhism as a Religion^ pp. 238-41. (A 
very summary account.)

Johnston, R. F.: Buddhist China^ pp. 82-90. (By an inti- 
mate student of Chinese Buddhism.)

Reichelt, Karl L.: Truth and Tradition in Chinese Bud- 
dhism^ pp. 45-56. (Good statement of the essentials.)

Saunders, Kenneth J. ; Epochs in Buddhist History, pp. 134- 
SO, (An impressive description, with attention to Japa- 
nese interpretations.)

Wieger, Leon: Histoire des croyances religieuses et des opin- 
ions philosophiques en Chine ^ pp. 519-28. (Holds that the 
followers of the ''Meditative^' school are essentially 
Vedantists.)

1 ) Outline

1. Schools of Chinese Buddhism

(a) The names of ten are listed by Hackmann (p. 238)

{b) Distinctions have been long since obliterated, however,1 ) Outline

1. Schools of Chinese Buddhism

(a) The names of ten are listed by Hackmann (p. 238)

{b) Distinctions have been long since obliterated, however,

and the most important for present-day study are

(1) Ch'an (or "Contemplative") school

(2) The T'ien-T'ai school

(3) The "Pure Land" school

2. The Contemplative (or Meditative) school

{a) Founded by Bodhidharma who came to China from

India in 520 (or 526) a.d.

(i) Bodhidharma is accounted the twenty-eighth pa- 
triarch in the line of direct descent from Sakya- 
muni (Reichelt, p. 46)

6 o

BUDDHISM

(2) He appears, however, to be unknown to both In- 
dian and Tibetan writers (Eliot, p, 306)

(3) For personal stories concerning Bodhidharma see 
Saunders, pp, i 3 S -’37

(b) The teaching of Bodhidharma

(1) The only true reality is the Buddha nature in the 
heart of every man

(2) All that man needs to do is to turn his gaze inward 
and see the feuddha in his heart

(a) Prayer, asceticism, good works, are vain

(3) The final vision is an in^ition which comes in a 
mbment

(a) It cannot be taught or learned

(i) Teaching can only prepare the way for it

(c) This teaching resembles certain passages in the Upani- 
shads, and seems almost an anticipation of Sankara's 
monism

(d) Bodhidharma's teaching harmonized with Taoism and 
therefore appealed doubtless to a deep-rooted strain in 
the Chinese character

(e) Successors of Bodhidharma

(1) Seng-ts'an (3) Hui-jen

(2) Tao-hsin (4) Hui-neng (d, 713)

(/) Between the eighth and tenth centuries five sub- 
divisions developed, the most important and dominant 
of which was the Lin Chi 
3. The T'ien-T'ai school

(a) The founder was Chih-K^ai (or Chih-I), who lived in 
the latter half of the sixth century

(i) Originally a follower of Bodhidharma, he came to 
stress the value of study of the scriptures 
{a) He held that the Buddha mind is present in all 
living things, but that instruction is necessary 
to enable them to come to the knowledge and 
use of it(b) The T'ien-T'ai school was many sided and inclusive

IN CHINA

6i

(i) It approved ecstasy, literature, ceremonial, and 
discipline

(i:) Chih-K^ai attempted to harmonize the enormous varie- 
ty of Buddhist literature by the hypothesis that Bud- 
dha set forth progressively different teachings in dif- 
ferent periods of his life

(1) During the first three weeks after enlightenment he 
taught the Hua-yen Ching to heavenly beings

(2) During the next twelve years the Hinayana sutras 
. to his earthly disciples; the Arhat ideal

(3) Duritg the next eight years he taught the pecul- 
iarly Mahayana doctrines; the Bodhisattva ideal

(4) During the next twenty-two years of his life, show- 
ing that there is no contradiction between Hina- 
yana and Mahayana, he taught the Prajnapara- 
mita sutras

(5) Finally, in old age he taught the deepest, most in- 
clusive doctrine of all, that of the Saddharma Bun- 
darika, or “Lotus Scripture,^’ the crown and sum- 
mit of all Buddhism

Note. — ^The arbitrariness of this arrangement has been 
recognized by Japanese scholars (see Saunders, p. 147, 
and Reichelt, pp. 55 f.).

{d) The significance of the T’ien-T'ai school

(1) Its influence spread a remarkable spirit of tolera- 
tion through Buddhist society (Reichelt, p. 53)

(2) It produced numerous scholars {ibid., p, 55; Eliot, 
P- 312)

{e) For an example of Chih-K'ai^s writing see BeaVs 
Catena of Chinese Scriptures, pp. 250-73

III, The Flower oe the Mahayana: The Pure Land School 
a) References

Eliot, Sir Charles: Hinduism and Buddhism, HI, 312-14.

Hackmann, H.: Buddhism as a Religion, p, 243.

Johnston, R, F.: Buddhist China, pp, 92-121. (A good de-

62

BUDDHISMEliot, Sir Charles: Hinduism and Buddhism, HI, 312-14.

Hackmann, H.: Buddhism as a Religion, p, 243.

Johnston, R, F.: Buddhist China, pp, 92-121. (A good de-

62

BUDDHISM

scription of the main characteristics of the Pure Land 
school as the popular religion of the Buddhist layman.) 
Reichelt, K. L.: Truth and Tradition in Chinese Buddhism, 
pp. 127-70. (Valuable for its insight into the religious 
experience as mediated by the Pure Land school.) 
Sukhavati Vyuha Sutras (^^The Scriptures of the Pure 
Land^O, m SBE, Vol XLIX.

Wieger, Leon: Histoire des croyances et des opinions philoso- 
phiques en Chine, pp. 92-121. (Description of the sect 
and translations from some of the literature.) 
h) Outline ^

1. The Pure Land is possibly the oldest of all the Mahayana 
schools

(а) Its idea of deferring one^s own Nirvana for the sake of 
others goes back to the example of Gotama himself (see 
Wieger, p. 561)

(б) Its principles are traceable to Asvaghosha and Nagar- 
juna (Reichelt, p. 127)

2. The great leaders of the Pure Land school

{a) Hui-yiian (333-416), who really established the school 
(i) A converted Taoist who used Taoist language to 
help express the ideas of the school 
{h) T’an-luan (502-49 A.n.)

{c) Tao-ch’o (d. 646 A.n.)

{d) Shan-tao (d. 681 a.d.)

(i) Reichelt thinks he was probably influenced by the 
conceptions and example of Nestorian Christianity 
(p. 132)

3. Much of the religious spirit of the school finds expression in 
the book of common worship, Ch^an-men Jih-sung (for 
description and translations see Reichelt, pp. 134-40)

4. The chief doctrines

{a) Amitabha is the savior of the world

(i) He is supposed to have attained this position be- 
cause of a series of vows made ages ago when he 
was the monk Dharmakara (see Johnston, pp. 
96-99)

IN CHINA 63

(b) Salvation is through the invocation of the name of 
Amitabha with faith

(1) This has given rise to the prayer so common in the 
East

(a) Namo Omito-Fu (in Chinese)IN CHINA 63

(b) Salvation is through the invocation of the name of 
Amitabha with faith

(1) This has given rise to the prayer so common in the 
East

(a) Namo Omito-Fu (in Chinese)

(b) Namo Amida Butsu (in Japanese)

(c) Namo Amida Pul (in Korean)

(2) Pie who constantly utters this prayer with faith 
will be reborn at death into the Pure Land, the 
Western heaven

(c) Other dottrines in common with other schools

(1) Transmigration

(2) Recognition of the historical Buddha as the earthly 
lord and founder of the society

5. Danger of the Pure Land school

(a) Tendency to exaggerated emphasis upon the efficacy of 
the mechanical repetition of a name, apart from moral 
effort

(i) This has led to a reaction in other schools in the 
Hinayanistic direction (Reichelt, p. 150)

6. Values of the Pure Land teaching

(a) It leads to a reliance on faith primarily rather than on 
works, such as self-discipline, study, asceticism, or 
meditation

(i) In this respect it is similar to the psychological 
discovery of Paul, Augustine, and Luther

(b) It provides a religion within the understanding and the 
practice of the common man (see Johnston, pp. 102- 
7; note the picture of the “Ship of Salvation^^ opposite 
p. 104; see also the catechism of the Pure Land in 
Reichelt, pp. 165-70)

IV. Personalities oe the Spiritual World: The Chinese Bud- 
dhist Pantheon

a) References

Eliot, Sir Charles: Hinduism and Buddhism, Vol, II, chap, 
xvii. (Deals especially with Bodhisattvas.)

64

BUDDHISM

Geden, A. S.: Article on “Images and Idols [Buddhist]” in 
ERE^ VoL VII. (Images in China are treated on pp. 
125 f.)

Hackmann, H. : Biiddhism as a Religion ^ pp. 2o6“7 . (A brief 
statement of the essentials.)

Hodous, Lewis: Buddhism and Buddhists in China, Seepp. 
29-33 on “Kwan-Yin” and pp, Si“33 on “Amitabha.”

Johnston, R. F.: Buddhist China. See pp. 170-206 on “TL 
Tsang” and pp. 259-311 on “Kwan-Yin.”Johnston, R. F.: Buddhist China. See pp. 170-206 on “TL 
Tsang” and pp. 259-311 on “Kwan-Yin.”

Monier<*Williams, Monier: Buddhism (1889), pp. 465-92. 
(A description of the chief chaxacteristics of Buddhist 
images, based mostly on those of India and Tibet but 
applicable also to those of China.)

Reichelt, K. L.: Truth and Tradition in Chinese Buddhism^ 
pp. 171-202. (Good systematic presentation, with the 
Chinese characters of the names given.)

Vall6e-Poussin, L. de la: Articles on “Avalokitesvara” and 
“Bodhisattva” in ERE, Vol. II. (Discusses the signifi- 
cance of these beings in the light of Sanskrit Mahayana 
literature.)

Watters, T. : “The Eighteen Lohan of Chinese Buddhism,” 
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society ^ April, 1899. (By a 
careful Chinese scholar. On the arhats as they are figured 
in China.)

For pictorial presentation the reader will find the 
following helpful:

Binyon, Laurence : Painting in the Far Easf Pis. Ill, V, VI, 
XVII.

Fenollosa, E. F.: Epochs of Chinese and Japanese Art, I, 
86, 122, 132, 134, 142.

Getty, A.: Gods of Northern Buddhism. (Good for pictures 
of Buddhist temple images, though the majority are from 
Japan.)

Pelliot, Paul: Les grottes de Touen-Houang. 7 vols, (Splen- 
did photographs of images and wall paintings in the 
Tung-Huang caves in West China.)

IN CHINA

6S

Perzynski, Friedrich: Von Chinas Goitern, (Some excellent 
plates of images and temples in different parts of China.) 
Stein, Mark Aurel: The Thousand Buddhas; Ancient Bud- 
dhist Paintings from the Cave-Temples of Tung-Huang on

the Western Frontier of China (with an introductory

essay by Laurence Binyon), VoL I: text; VoL II: plates. 
(Exquisite colored plates, fully described, of Chinese 
Mahayanist paintings of the T’ang period. Buddhas and 
Bodhisattvas in their heavens.)

Waley, Arthur: Introduction to Chinese Painting, Pis. XV, 
XXI, XXIJ, XXXI, XXXII.Waley, Arthur: Introduction to Chinese Painting, Pis. XV, 
XXI, XXIJ, XXXI, XXXII.

h) Outline: the classification of the beings of the Chinese Bud- 
dhist pantheon (after Reichelt and Hackmann)

I. Buddhas

{a) Shih-chia-mu-ni (the historic Gotama)

(1) Generally represented seated in meditation on a 
lotus blossom, though sometimes he is standing

(2) Sometimes figured as the emaciated ascetic

(3) Sometimes in a reclining position as entering Nir- 
vana

{a) This figure the Chinese call the ‘^sleeping 
Buddha”

(6) The celestial Buddhas

(1) 0 -mi-to-fu (Amitabha)

{a) Often represented with unusually long arms 
hanging down

(&) Sometimes called the “Chieh-yin-fu,” or Bud- 
dha who receives and guides into paradise 
{c) Called by Reichelt ^^the figure of the great 
compassionate All-Father”

(2) Yo-shih-fu (Bhaisajyaguru)

{a) The god of medicine or healing; invoked in 
sickness

(J) . In the Yo-shih Sutra portrayed as the great 
source of light

(3) Pfi-lu-che-na (Vairocana) (see Reichelt, p. 106)

I

BUDDHISM

(a) The incarnation of Buddha’s “law” or doctrine 
{dharma)

(d) Represented with hands folded over the breast 
with the forefinger pointing up 
(c) Was early connected with the T’ien-T’ai school

(4) Lu-she-na (Lochana) (Reichelt, pp. 106 and 178)

(a) The incarnation of the association or “order” 
(sang/^a)

(b) Represented with the right hand resting in the 
lap while the left is raised midway, the tips of 
the thumb and middte finger touching

(5) Jan-teng-fu (Dipankara); in Western China

(a) Regarded as having once been a human Bud- 
dha (see Reichelt, p, 141)

(b) The body is generally covered with lamps 
which are kept constantly burning, 108 in 
number

(6) Countless other Buddhas who fill the whole uni- 
verse(b) The body is generally covered with lamps 
which are kept constantly burning, 108 in 
number

(6) Countless other Buddhas who fill the whole uni- 
verse

(a) Indicated by innumerable little images in a 
special hall called “Hall of the 10,000 Bud- 
dhas” (note picture in Reichelt, opp. p. 143) 
Bodhisattvas (Chinese: fu-ti-sa-to or p^u-sa)^ perfected 
spirits who abstain from participation in eternal blessed- 
ness in order to save others from misery (see Johnston, 
p. 68)

(a) Kuan- Yin (Avalokitesvara), the deity who heeds the

cry of misery and bends down to the suffering

(1) According to the “Lotus Scripture” the superior of 
all other Bodhisattvas, and a savior (see Poussin, 
art. “Avalokitesvara” in ERE)

(2) In earlier Indian forms as Avalokitesvara a male 
figure, but as Kuan-Yin in China and Kwannon in 
Japan generally represented as female

(a) Causes of this change are obscure (see Eliot, 
II, 17 f.)

IN CHINA 67

(b) For a Chinese painting of a male Kuan~Yin 
see Binyon, PI. Ill, facing p. 76

(3) Kuan-Yin is the embodiment of motherly tender- 
ness and womanly grace, the ^^Goddess of Mercy/’ 
the Madonna of the Far East (see Johnston, pp. 
267-74)

(4) For popular legends concerning Kuan-Yin see 
Hodous, pp. 30-31; Reichelt, pp. 182-83; John- 
ston, p. 301

(J) Ta-shih-chih (Mahasthamaprapta)

(1) Witl^Kuan-Yin one of the attendants of Amitabha

(2) In images, Amitabha in the center, Kuan-Yin on 
the left, and Ta-shih-chi on the right are the ^^three 
holy ones of the Western Region” (Hackmann, p. 
211)

(3) His most important attribute is power (Reichelt, 
pp. i8s 1)

(c) Wen-shu (Manjusri)

(1) The Bodhisattva of wisdom (Reichelt, p. 119)

(2) The *Tord of Speech,” the “Prince” (Eliot, II, 
19)

(3) Represented as riding on a lion (Hackmann, p. 
211)

(d) P’u-hsien (Samantabhadra)

(1) The Bodhisattva of grace or mercy (Reichelt, pp, 
202, 292)

(2) The patron saint of Mount Omei in China (Eliot,

11, 23)(d) P’u-hsien (Samantabhadra)

(1) The Bodhisattva of grace or mercy (Reichelt, pp, 
202, 292)

(2) The patron saint of Mount Omei in China (Eliot,

11, 23)

(3) Represented as riding on an elephant (Hackmann, 
p. 211)

(e) Mi-lo-fu (Maitreya), the future Buddha

(1) The Bodhisattva who awaits in heaven his time to 
be born as a Buddha (Eliot, II, 21)

(2) In China as a tutelary god represented by a fat, 
laughing figure at the entrance to temples (Hack- 
mann, p. 209)

BUDDHISM

(3) The Messiah of Buddhism (Reichelt, pp, 186-88)

(4) Supposed to have made special revelations to 
Asanga (see Watters, On Yuan Chwang^ 1 , 355 f.)

(5) For the history of the idea of Maitreya see N. Peri, 
Bulletin de VEcole Frangaise d^Extrtme-Orient^ 
1911, pp: 439-57

(/) Ti-ts^ang (Kshitigarbha)

(1) The meaning of his name is ^^earth-womb” or 
“earth-treasury’’

{a) For explanation see Johnston, pp, 170-73

(2) He is called the “saviSr of the lower world” 
(Reichelt, p. 100)

(a) His function is to rescue suffering spirits from 
hell

(3) Inconspicuous in the Indian Pantheon, he grew in 
esteem in Turkestan and gained great importance 
in the Far East (see Eliot, II, 24, and III, 221)

(4) For his story as told in the Ti-ts’ang sutra see 
Johnston, pp, i7S“”94, and Reichelt, pp. 119-26

3. Saints {arhats or, in Chinese, lohan)

(a) Buddha’s first ten disciples (see Reichelt, p. 189). Of 
these the images are seldom seen in temples; the most 
important are

(i) Ananda and Kasyapa

{a) These two are sometimes represented on each 
side of the Buddha Gautama, Ananda as a 
younger man and Kasyapa as an older one, 
both in reverential attitude with folded hands 
(Hackmann, p. 212)

(b) The eighteen lo-han (Reichelt, p, 191)

(i) Legendary beings with a historical background 
(Hackmann)

(a) For their stories and description see Watters, 
“The Eighteen Lohan of Chinese Buddhism,” 
in reference above

IN CHINA 69(i) Legendary beings with a historical background 
(Hackmann)

(a) For their stories and description see Watters, 
“The Eighteen Lohan of Chinese Buddhism,” 
in reference above

IN CHINA 69

{b) Sylvain Levi and Ed. Chavannes also discuss 
them in Journal asiatique, 1916 
(c) The five hundred lo-han; seen in a few large temples

(1) For pictures of some of these see Reichelt, p. 209. 
For a rather remarkable single lo-han see Per- 
zynski, Pis. 43, 44, 45

(2) Hackmann says that in some instances likenesses 
of K^ang“hsi, Chhen-lung, and even Marco Polo 
have been set among these (p, 212)

{d) Patriarchs

(1) Tamc^ (Bodhidharma) is chief of these

{a) See Topic II on Bodhidharma and Chih-K^ai 
above

(2) His five followers come next in the order of their 
succession

(3) Sometimes certain ones of the Indian patriarchs 
are added among the images in the Hall of the 
Patriarchs (see Reichelt, p. 193)

.(e) Tutelary deities (Chheh-lan); for details concerning 
these see Reichelt, pp. 193-97. Their classes are

(1) Twenty four devas (Chu-then)

(2) Four heavenly kings (Tfien-wang)

(3) Two guardians at the outside temple door (Heng 
Ha erh chiang)

(4) Eight guardian angels (Ching-kang Shen)

(5) Four archangels (Ching-kang p^u-sa)

(f) Trinity groups (Reichelt, pp. 197-202)

(i) These are not new figures but triadic groupings of 
some of the great beings listed above, with various 
symbolical significance; in this way is found sym- 
bolized

(а) The Buddha, the Law, and the Order

(б) The Absolute, its heavenly emanation, and 
earthly reflex

(c) The Universe in Essence, Image (manifesta- 
tion); and Action

70

BUDDHISM

V. Buddhist Literature in China- 
a) References

BagcM, Prabodh Chandra: Le canon houddhique en Chine ^ 
Vol. I: Les traducteurs et les traductions (1927). (An in- 
ventory of the books according to epochs, including titles 
of lost as well as of extant works.)Beal, Samuel: A Catena of Buddhist Scriptures from the 
Chinese (1871). (A series of translations by an older au- 
thority, selected to illustrate different epochs -in the de- 
velopment of Buddhism.) ^

Beal, Samuel: An Abstract of Four Lectures upon Buddhist 
Literature in China (1882). (Further illustrative transla- 
tions.)

Eitel, Ernest J. : Handbook of Chinese Buddhism^ Being a 
Buddhist Sanskrit-Chinese Dictionary, (Useful for brief 
descriptions of principal Buddhist books. These must be 
sought, however, by their Sanskrit names.)

Eliot, Sir Charles: Hinduism and Buddhism ^ III, 281-302. 
(Probably the best systematic account for the .general 
reader.)

Nanjio, Bunyiu: A Catalogue of the Chinese Translation of 
the Buddhist Tripitaka (Oxford, 1883). (A standard ref- 
erence work of fundamental importance. Gives classifica- 
tion, titles in Chinese and Sanskrit, names of translators, 
dates of translations, and sometimes brief description, for 
all the works of the Chinese canon.)

McGovern, William Montgomery: Introduction to Maha- 
yana Buddhism^ pp. 223-27. (Brief classification of the 
Chinese canon, according to the arrangement of the 
Tokyo edition.)

Reichelt, Karl L,: Truth and Tradition in Chinese Bud- 
dhism, pp. 203-27. (Describes general characteristics of 
Buddhist literature, with special attention to certain 
classics in current use.) ,

Reischauer, August Karl: Studies in Japanese Buddhism,

IN CHINA

71

pp. 158-82.* (Discusses the Chinese canon, giving also 
positions of Japanese scholars with regard to it.)

Wieger, Leon: Buddhisme chinoiSy I, 115-32. (Gives an In- 
dex of the authors and translators of Chinese Buddhist 
literature arranged chronologically.) 
h) Outline (after Eliot)

i: General classes of works in the Chinese Tripitakai: General classes of works in the Chinese Tripitaka

{a) Sutras (called ^^Ching^^ in Chinese), 1,081 works : classics 
(i) Mahayana sutras, 541 works in seven classes 
, (2) Hinayana sutras, 240 works 
(3) Mahayana and Hinayana sutras, 300 works 
. {a) These were admitted into the canon under the 
Sung and Yuan dynasties, 960-1368 a.d.

( 5 ) Vinaya-pitaka (or Lii-tsang), 85 works: ritual

(1) Mahayana ritualistic books, among them being 
{a) Fan-wang-ching: the standard manual for the

monastic life since the eighth century (text and 
French translation of this in J. J. M. de Groot’s 
Le code du Mahayana en Chine ^ pp. 14—88)

(2) Hinayana ritualistic books

(^j) “Compromising five substantial recensions of 
the whole code, besides extracts, compendiums 
and manuals^^

'{c) Abhidharma-pitaka (or Lun-tsang), 154 works: philo- 
sophical treatises

(1) Mahayana works

{a) These have no connection with the Pali Abhi- 
dharma but are philosophical treatises as- 
cribed to Asvaghosha, Nagarjuna, Asanga, 
Vasubandhu, and others 
(i) They include three works supposed to have 
' been revealed to Asanga by Maitreya

(2) Hinayana works

{a) These also do not correspond to the Pali but 
are based on Abhidharma works of the Sar- 
vastivadin school

72

BUDDHISM

(3) Mahayana and Hinayana texts admitted into the 
canon after a,d. 960

(d) Miscellaneous works (or Tsa-tsang), 342 works

(1) Translations of Indian miscellaneous works

(2) Works originally composed in Chinese; these in- 
clude

(a) Historical works, such as

(1) General histories of Buddhism

(2) Collections of ecclesiastical biography

(3) Travels of various pilgrims who visited 
India

(&) Critical works; these include

(i) Thirteen catalogues of the Tripitaka at 
different periods, encyclopedic arrange- 
ments of extracts from the Tripitaka, con- 
cordances of numerical categories, a dic- 
tionary of Sanskrit terms, etc.

{c) Literature of several Chinese sects{c) Literature of several Chinese sects

(i) Works of the T’ien-T’ai, Hwa Yen, Lti 
(Vinaya), and Chan (Contemplative) 
schools

(d) Controversial literature

(1) Polemics against Taoism (collected be- 
tween 71 and 730 A.D.

(2) Replies to attacks by Confucian scholars

(3) Refutations of objections raised by skep- 
tics or heretics

(e) Other miscellaneous works such as prefaces 
and laudatory verses, memoirs of remarkable 
monks, etc.

2. There were twelve different collections of the Tripitaka 
made between the years 518 and 1737 a.d. by order of dif- 
ferent emperors (see Nanjio, p. xxvii, and Eliot, III, 289)

(a) The first seven of these were in manuscript only

(b) The last five (from 971 a.d. onward) were printed

3. For the chronological table of the thirteen catalogues still

IN CHINA

73

in existence see Nanjio, pp xiii~xxii, and Eliot, III, 290; 
these date from 520 to 1600 a.d.

(a) The successive catalogues reveal a certain amount of 
shifting, some works being added and some dropped 
out with the passage of time

4. For the different editions of the Tripitaka see Nanjio, p. 
xxviii; Eliot, III, 291; and Wieger, pp. 1 12-14

5. Problems involved in the investigation of the Chinese 
Tripitaka (Eliot, III, 293-99)

(a) The determination of dates and authorship of transla- 
tions •

(i) Chinese scholars are usually safe guides here

(b) The uncertainty of faithfulness in translations, for

(1) A method often followed was for an Indian to ex- 
plain the text to a literary Chinese who recast the 
explanation in his own language

(2) Some translators gave only abstracts

(3) Some either amplified or transposed their material, 
or combined different texts into one

(4) Others made literal, word-for-word renderings 
which are scarcely intelligible

(c) The text used by the translator was often different 
from the Pali or Sanskrit text that we possess

6. For general character of some of the more common Bud- 
dhist literature see Reichelt, pp. 203-276. For general character of some of the more common Bud- 
dhist literature see Reichelt, pp. 203-27

(a) Interesting evidence of the veneration in which Bud- 
dhists hold their scriptures will be found in ibid,, pp. 
213-14

(J) Scriptures most commonly used in China

(1) Hua-yen Ching (Sanskrit: Buddhavatamsaka Su- 
tra), Nanjio, Nos. 87-89

(2) Leng-yen Ching (Sanskrit: Surangama Sutra), 
Nanjio, No. 399 (see Beal, Catena, pp. 284-369)

(3) Pure Land scriptures: Wu-liang-shou Ching, Fu- 
shuo 0 -mi-t’o Ching, Kuan-Wu-liang-shou Ching 
(SEE, Vol. XLIX)

74

BUDDHISM

(4) Miao-fa Lien-hua Ching (Saddharma Pundarika 
Sutra), Nanjio, Nos. 134-39 (see ibid,, Vol. XXI)

(5) Chin-kang Ching (Vajracchedika Sutra) (see ibid,, 
Vol XLIX)

(6) Ch^i Hsin Lun (Mahayana sraddhotpada sastra), 
“The Awakening of Faith^' (see above, pp. 26 
and 30)

VI. Monastic Lite in China 
a) References

Beal, Samuel: Catena of Chinese Scriptures, pp, 204-44. 
(Translations of the Chinese Pratimoksha and the Daily 
Manual of the Shaman [or priest].)

Boerschmann, Ernst: Chinesische Architectur (1925), 2 vols. 
(A thoroughgoing study of temple and other forms; large 
plates, plans, drawings, detail, etc.)

Boerschmann, Ernst: Picturesque China: Architecture and 
Landscape, (Includes many fine temple pictures.)

Eliot, Sir Charles: Hinduism and Buddhism, III, 321-35, 
(Good summary of available scholarly information.)

Groot, J, J. M. de: Le code du Mahayana en Chine, (Trans- 
lations of the ritualistic books in which the monks are 
instructed and full description of the ordination cere- 
monies.)

Hackmann, H.: Buddhism as a Religion, pp. 218-30, 245- 
48. (A description of essentials, and a criticism of the 
character of Chinese monasticism.)

Hackmann, H.: ^^Pai changed inghuei: The Rules of Bud- 
dhist Monastic Life in China, Voung Pao, 1908, pp. 
651-62. (Summarizes the contents of an eighth-century 
monastic manual which is still authoritative.)Johnston, R. F.: Buddhist China, pp, 122-69 on “Pilgrim- 
ages^' and pp, 230-58 on “Monks and Monasteries of 
Chiu-Hwa.^^

Melchers, Bernd: China: Der Tempelbau: Die Lochan von 
Ling-ydn-s’i (Hagen, 1921). (Excellent pictures of temple

IN CHINA

75

buildings, both exterior and interior views, with ground 
plans, elevations, etc.; images of lohans,)

Milne, W. C.: Life in China (1858), pp. I34-4S' 
and nunneries.)

.Reichelt, Karl L.: Truth and Tradition in Chinese Bud- 
dhism^ pp. 228-97 on ‘^Monastic Life” and 'Tilgrim- 
ages”; also pp, 77—126 on ^'Masses for the Dead.” (Writ- 
ten with great insight out of an experience of twenty 
years of life and work among Buddhist priests.)

Wieger, Leon: Bouddhisme chinois, Tome I, (For transla- 
tions of the4iterature of ordination and other monastic 
regulations.) 
h) Outline

I. Where monks come from

{a) Most are given into the monastic life as children by 
families in straitened circumstances (Hackmann, Bud- 
dhisUy p. 218; Reichelt, pp, 229-30)

(i) Each boy is under the tutelage of some monk until 
time of ordination (cf. Ceylonese practice, pp. 50- 
$1 above)

(ft) Some enter as adults from various causes (Reichelt, pp.

231-33)

(1) Sorrow and trouble in the outside world

(2) Desire to seek refuge from consequences of crime

(3) Genuine desire for religious Ught, comfort, and 
peace

(4) Sickness (not infrequently healed)

(s) Old age and loneliness, including desire to prepare 
for death

(c;) The social classes from which monks are derived

(1) The common people furnish the great majority

(2) The upper classes furnish a minority which consti- 
’ tutes material for most of the leadership

(d) Nuns come chiefly from circumstances of domestic 
break-up (Reichelt, p. 234; for details on nuns and 
nunneries see Milne, referred to above)

76

BUDDHISM

2. The course of instruction leading to ordination

(a) Training as novices in the routine of daily worship76

BUDDHISM

2. The course of instruction leading to ordination

(a) Training as novices in the routine of daily worship

(i) Usually a matter of some years, but omitted in the 
case of those entering as adults (Reichelt, p. 236)

(b) Instruction in the law

(1) The commandments of the Hinayana

(a) ' The ten great commandments (Reichelt, pp,

241 and 242; Wieger, I, 153)

(b) The two hundred and fifty commandments of 
the Pratimoksha (Beal, pp. 204-39; ^ descrip- 
tion of the use of thfe in the ceremony of peni- 
tence, or Uposatha, is in De Groot, pp, 172-95)

(2) The fifty-eight commandments of the Fan-wang 
Ching (or sutra of Brahma’s net; not the same as 
Brahmajala suUa of the Pali canon)

{a) For text and translation see De Groot, pp. 
1-88; he gives an analysis of its ideas on pp. 
89-98

(b) For a brief description in English see Eliot, 
III, 322-25

(3) This training, which lasts from sixty to ninety 
days, is severe (for detail see Reichelt, pp. 237-39)

3. The ordination ceremony (For a clear description of the 
essentials of this read ibid.^ pp. 239-47. For a full scholarly 
account, including translations from the text used, read 
De Groot, pp. 207-56, A very brief statement will be found 
in Hackmann, Buddhism y pp. 219-20)

{a) The three stages of ordination (according to De Groot)

(1) That by which the candidate becomes a sramanera 
{shamiy in Chinese), or holy one of the lowest de- 
gree

(a) The main thing here is the acceptance of the 
ten primary vows

(2) That by which the candidate becomes a sraman or 
bhikshu i^pi-cViu in Chinese), the arhat of the 
Hinayana

IN CHINA

77

(a) The acceptance of the vows of the Pratimok- 
sha

(3) That by which the candidate becomes a Bodhisat- 
tva {p^u-sa in Chinese), or full follower of the Ma- 
hayana

{a) The acceptance of the vows of the Fan-wang 
Ching

(J) This terminates with the branding of spots in 
the scalp, three to eighteen according to the 
zeal of the candidate{a) The acceptance of the vows of the Fan-wang 
Ching

(J) This terminates with the branding of spots in 
the scalp, three to eighteen according to the 
zeal of the candidate

These symmetrically arranged spots be- 
token ever after the avowed priest 
(2) On the significance of this practice see 
Eliot, III, 328-30

Note. — The reader will observe that Reichelt 
differs from Be Groot in putting the vows of the 
Pratimoksha into the first stage, the vows of the 
Pan-wang Ching into the second, and giving four 
special vows for the third stage (p. 245), Be 
» Groot’s observations were made in Fukien and

Reichelt^s in Nanking.

4. After ordination a monk is assured of a welcome in any of 
the monasteries throughout China and even in neighboring 
Buddhist countries (Reichelt, pp. 247-48)

5. Monastery buildings: for descriptions of these the follow- 
ing may be consulted

{a) Eliot, III, 325-27 
{h) Hackmann, Buddhism, pp. 201-6 
{c) Reichelt, pp. 247-65 
{d) Johnston, esp. chaps, x, xi, xiii 
{e) For pictures consult Boerschmann and Melchers, listed 
above

6. The organization of a monastery (after Reichelt, pp. 265-

71)

(a) The administrative department

(i) The abbot (Jan-chang) is the nominal head

BUDDHISM

(2) A retired abbot still in the monastery, however, 
may retain a decisive vote

(3) The abbot is assisted by other senior monks

(a) The head is the tu-chien^ or manager

Q}) With him are the fu-ssu^ or assistant managers

(c) These manage funds; property, and purchases 
(6) The guest department

(1) The head here is the main host (chih-k^o)

(a) He is assisted by the seng chih^ or inspector

(2) These manage everything connected with the en- 
tertaining of guests

(c) The department of instruction and worship

(1) The chief here is the instructor (wei-na)

(2) He and his assistants arrange the hours of medita- 
tion, the masses, the insignia of worship, etc,(c) The department of instruction and worship

(1) The chief here is the instructor (wei-na)

(2) He and his assistants arrange the hours of medita- 
tion, the masses, the insignia of worship, etc,

(d) Other minor ofhces connected with the dining-room, 
smaller chapels and halls, sweeping, cleaning, etc.

(e) The east and west parties

(1) This is a division of the monks during worship and 
meal times

(a) The west party consists of the members of the 
administrative and guest departments

(b) The east party consists of members of the de- 
partment of worship

(2) All important guests stand with the west party, 
which is the more honorable

7. Activities of the monks

(a) Services of daily worship (Reichelt, pp. 272-76; Hack-

« Lnn, Bi4ddhismy p. 221; Eliot, III, 331)

tendance at certain special times on religious lec- 
tures (Reichelt, pp. 277-78)

(c) Meditation (Hackmann, Buddhism ^ pp. 222-23; De 
Groot, pp. 169 f.; Reichelt, pp. 278-83)

(d) Performance of rituals connected with festivals and 
special days (Hackmann, Buddhism, pp. 221-22; 
Toung Pao, 1908, p. 661; Eliot, III, 332)

IN CHINA

79

(e) Performance of masses for the dead (Reichelt gives a 
full description and explanation in a highly important 
chapter, pp. 77-126; a brief treatment is given in Hack- 
man, Buddhism^ pp. 229 f.; De Groot, pp. 144-47; and 
Eliot, III, 333-34)

(f) Pilgrimages (Johnston, pp. 122-69; Reichelt, pp. 284- 
97 ; Hackmann, Buddhism^ pp. 252-53)

VII. Present-Day Buddhism: in China 
a) References

Hodous, Lewis: Buddhism and Buddhists in China^ pp. 19- 
71. (Buddlnsm in relation to the peasant, the family, and 
social life; its conception of the future life and its spiritual 
values. Recent tendencies to reform.)

Millican, Frank R. : “T’ai Hsii and Modern Buddhism,'’ 
Chinese Recorder ^ 1923, pp. 326-32. (Describes the work 
of the Buddhist reformer, T'ai Hsii.)Millican, Frank R. : “T’ai Hsii and Modern Buddhism,'’ 
Chinese Recorder ^ 1923, pp. 326-32. (Describes the work 
of the Buddhist reformer, T'ai Hsii.)

Millican, Frank R.: “Buddhism in the Light of Modern 
Thought as Interpreted by the Monk T'ai Hsii," ibid., 
1926, pp. 91-94. (Based on T'ai Hsii's book. The Science 
of the Philosophy of Life)

Pratt, J. B.: The Pilgrimage of Buddhism^ pp. 352-416. 
(Excellent observation by a Western philosopher of the 
Buddhist layman, the Buddhist revival, and Buddhist 
thought as found in China today.)

Reichelt, Karl L.: Truth and Tradition in Chinese Bud- 
dhism ^ pp. 298-311. (Informal observations on certain 
aspects.)

Tsu, Yu Yue: “Present Tendencies in Chinese Buddhism,” 
Journal of Religion^ 1921; pp, 497-512, (Describes the 
various attempts at reform that have arisen in Buddhism 
since the revolution of 1911, especially that of T'ai Hsii.)

Tsu, Yu Yue: “Diary of a Chinese Buddhist Nun, T'ze 
Kuang,” ibid,, 1927, pp. 612-18. (Translated from the 
Buddhist periodical, Hai CWao Yin. A case of contempo- 
rary Buddhist religious experience.)

8o

BUDDHISM

h) Outline

1. The last twenty-five years

(a) Since 1902, partly under the influence of Japanese 
leadership, Chinese Buddhism has participated in the 
growing tendency of Buddhism everywhere to become 
conscious of itself, its past history, and its mission to 
the world (Hodous, pp. 63-64, 70-7:)

2. Events leading up to the revolution of 1911 were immedi- 
’ ately responsible for the earliest reforming movements

(Tsu, “Present Tendencies, etc,,” op. cit., pp. 498-99)

(a) Earliest activities ^

(1) The formation of a number of Buddhist societies, 
the most important of which was the Chinese Na- 
tional Buddhist Society (Chung Hua Fu Chiao 
Tsung Hui) in 1910

(а) The aim was to purify the monastic order of 
the ignorance and mercenary spirit of the 
monks (Md., p. 500)(а) The aim was to purify the monastic order of 
the ignorance and mercenary spirit of the 
monks (Md., p. 500)

(б) It found an added function in the struggle for 
religious liberty in the early days of the repub- 
lic (Reichelt, pp. 304-5)

(c) Magazines were published and fellowship pro- 
moted

(2) This first movement, however, failed for^

(a) It was political rather than religious in charac- 
ter

(b) It encountered hostility from the government

(1) In 1915 was promulgated the “Regulations 
for Government Supervision of Temples 
and Monasteries” (Tsu, “Present Tend- 
encies, etc.,” op. cit.) p. $02', Reichelt,

P-8°5) , ^ ,

(2) When the Buddhists protested through

their National Society the government 
closed the organization

■ (3) General activities, indicative of revival, continued

IN CHINA

8i

(a) These, on to the present, have been

(i) Rehabilitation of monasteries and temples, 
increase of accessions to the religion, in- 
crease of publications, use of popular lec- 
tures, formation of Buddhist societies, and 
attempts to socialize Buddhism (Hodous, 
pp. 65-68)

3. The religious revival began in 1915 under the leadership of 
the monk T^ai Hsu

(a) T’ai Hsii had the spiritual qualifications for such 
leadersh^

(1) For a brief statement of the facts of his early life 
see Millican, ^T'ai Hsii, etc.,^’ op, cit.j p. 327

(2) For an autobiographical sketch revealing the spirit 
of the man see Tsu, ^'Present Tendencies, etc.,’' 
op, cit., pp. 505 ff.

(b) In his work T'ai Hsii has had the co-operation of many 
earnest lay devotees (Reichelt, p. 301)

(c) Weaknesses of Buddhism as seen by T'ai Hsii

(1) Lack of efficient organization for the propagation 
of the religion

(2) Corruption of the monastic order

(d) His plans for reform (Jour, of Relig,, 1921, p. 507, and 
Chinese Recorder, 1923, p. 328)

(1) A national system of Buddhist institutions, reli- 
gious, charitable, and educational(d) His plans for reform (Jour, of Relig,, 1921, p. 507, and 
Chinese Recorder, 1923, p. 328)

(1) A national system of Buddhist institutions, reli- 
gious, charitable, and educational

(2) A national monastery and university at the capital 
of the country with library and a museum for Bud- 
dhist art

{a) He would put all images of this institution into 
the museum, for while he tolerates idolatry for 
the masses he rejects it in his higher teaching

(3) Stricter discipline as well as manual labor for the 
monks

(4) Propaganda work by means of

{a) Publications, including the periodical Hai

82

BUDDHISM

CKao Yin (“Sound of the Tide^Oj which is the 
organ of the reform

{h) The formation of Buddhist societies 
(c) Public lectures

{d) The conduct of orphanages and the visitation 
of jails

(e) Actually much of T^ai Hsti’s activity has been carried 
on at the Wuchang Buddhist Academy and the Bud- 
dhist Lecture Hall in Ruling {Chinese Recorder^ 1923, 
p. 329, and Reichelt, pp. 301-3)

(/) The movement has had its effect in stimulating certain 
kinds of religious experiences (for which see the latter 
part of Tsu^s article, op. ciL, 1921, and all of the article 
in the same periodical for 1927)

(g) For its intellectual influence see the regulations of the 
Hangchow Buddhist Philosophical Club, Chinese Re- 
corder, 1923, p. 329

{h) For an example of T’ai Hsii’s teaching read Millican, 
ibid., 1926, pp, 91-94

{i) The great problem {Jour. Relig., 1921, pp. 511-12)

(i) How can Buddhism adjust itself to modern condi- 
tions without becoming something essentially dif- 
ferent?

4. The intellectual revival

(a) This is promoted at a Buddhist academy at Nanking 
under the leadership of an old Confucian scholar by 
the name of Ou-yang Ching-wu (Reichelt, p. 303)

(1) The aim here is a critical study of texts and the 
understanding of Mahayanist philosophy(1) The aim here is a critical study of texts and the 
understanding of Mahayanist philosophy

(2) Noted contemporary scholars, among them Liang 
Ch’i-ch’ao and Liang Shu-ming, have studied Bud- 
dhism with Ou-yang

{h) The activities of this school result in revised texts, 
compilations, translations, etc,, and the stimulation 
of book study

IN CHINA 83 ■

The tendency to revive the Mi-Tsung (or “School of Mys- 
tery”)

(a) This school, which is of the Tantric variety, appeared 
in China in the eighth centoy but later died out or be- 
came simply an aspect of other schools (Eliot, III, 
316-18)

(J) It became the Shingon sect in Japan from where it is 
now being relearned (Reichelt, pp. 309-10)

(c) In 1926 Mongolian Lamaist representatives of this 
school were invited to perform their services in many 
chief citi*s of Northern and Central China

PART IV

IN JAPAN: THE TOPMOST TURN

I. The Introduction or Buddhism into Japan and the Rise op 
THE Early Sects

a) References

Anesaki, Masaharu: Buddhist Art in Its Relation to Bud- 
dhist Ideals (1915)- ^

Armstrong, Robert Cornell: Buddhism and Buddhists in Ja- 
pan (1927), pp. 4-14 and 50-67. (Excellent introduction 
to Japanese Buddhism; annotated Bibliography.)

Coates, H, H., and Ishizuka, R,: Honen the Buddhist Saint 
(1925), pp. 1-27. (Special attention to the adjustment of 
Shinto to the new religion from the Continent.)

Griffis, W. E.: The Religions of Japan (1895).

Hackmann, H.: Buddhism as a Religion^ pp. 88-92 (on the 
introduction) and 286-92 (on the sects).

Harada, Tasuku: The Faith of Japan ^ pp. 13-20. (Clear and 
brief.)

Knox, G. W. : Development of Religion in Japan, Lecture III, 
pp. 80-113. (Broad interpretative treatment.)

Lloyd, Arthur: “Developments of Japanese Buddhism,” 
Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan, XXII (1894), 
361-405, (A more technical account of the sects.)

Lloyd, Arthur: The Creed of Half Japan (1911), pp. 168-258. 
(Concrete historical account.)Lloyd, Arthur: The Creed of Half Japan (1911), pp. 168-258. 
(Concrete historical account.)

Nanjio, Bunyiu: A Short History of the Twelve Japanese Bud- 
dhist Sects, pp, 1-103, (A valuable summary by a noted 
Japanese scholar of the last generation.)

Okuma, S.: Fifty Years of New Japan (1909), pp. 65-75. 
(Good summary of Japanese Buddhism by J. Takakusu.)

Reischauer, August K, : Studies in Japanese Buddhism, pp. 
79-102. (A clear exposition of the essentials.)

84

IN JAPAN 8S

Saunders, Kenneth J.: Epochs of Buddhist History (1924), 
pp. 1 63-7 2. (A suggestive description.) 
h) Outline

I, Introduction of Buddhism into Japan

{a) Buddhism entered Japan by way of Korea, but the 
exact date of its first entry is unknown

(i) For Japan’s earliest relations with Korea see Lloyd, 
Creedj pp. 168-72

(b) The traditional formal entry was in the sixth century

A.D.

(1) In 552 A.D. the ruler of the Korean state of Kudara, 
in homage of the Japanese emperor, sent to the 
latter

(a) An image of Buddha 
(J) Scriptures and works of art 
(c) A message designed to recommend Buddhism 
to Japan

(2) The outbreak of a pestilence shortly after the ac- 
ceptance of these precipitated a struggle between 
antagonistic court parties over the new religion 
(Reischauer, pp. 81 f., and Lloyd, Greedy pp. 173 f.)

(а) Conservatives opposed Buddhism in the name 
of loyalty to the national Shinto gods

(&) Liberals contended for it as the exponent of the 
higher civilization of the Continent

(3) Buddhism came gradually to prevail because the 
higher quality of its culture appealed to the 
emperors and rulers

{a) The Empress Suiko (593-628 a.d.) became a 
devoted Buddhist

(б) During her reign the crown prince, Shotoku 
Taishi, in actual control of the government, 
sought in every way to promote the new reli- 
gion (Lloyd, Greedy pp. 178-90)

(i) A constitution was established with Bud- 
dhism as its foundation (Armstrong, p. 6)

86

BUDDHISM(i) A constitution was established with Bud- 
dhism as its foundation (Armstrong, p. 6)

86

BUDDHISM

(2) Monasteries and philanthropic institutions 
were set up .(Okuma, p. 66)

(3) Missionaries came from Korea and China, 
while Japanese Buddhists traveled to the 
Continent for study (Reischauer, p, 84)

(4) Art was stimulated as an instrument for 
the promotion of religious ideals (see Ane- 
saki, Buddhist Art, pp. 20-22)

2. Rise of the early sects

(o) Sects of the Nara period (710-94)

(1) Sanron sect (the “Three-sastra” sect)

{a) Introduced from Korea in 62 5 a.d. by Ekwan 
(J) Teaches the Madhyamaka doctrine of Nagar- 
juna (see above, pp. 27 f.)

(c) Its middle path is the doctrine that “the truth 
is nothing but the state where thoughts come 
to an end” (Armstrong, p, 54)

(2) Jojitsu sect (Satya-siddhi-sastra sect)

(tt) Introduced about the same time as the Sanron 
\h) Teaches the emptiness of self and all things 
(see Armstrong, pp. 52-53)

(3) Hosso sect (Dharma-lakshana sect)

(а) Brought from China about the middle of the 
seventh century by Dosho (Reischauer, p. 86)

(б) Teaches the Yoga or Vijnana doctrine (see 
above, pp. 28-30)

(c) The character of the doctrine of this school 
maAf-. possible a special adjustment to Shinto 
(see Lloyd, Creed, pp. 200-201)

(4) Kusha sect (Abhidharma-kosa-sastra sect)

(a) Introduced in 658 a.d. by two Japanese priests 
who Had studied in China (Reischauer, p. 86)

(b) The best representative of orthodox southern 
Buddhism (Armstrong, p. 53)

(5) Kegon sect (Avatainsaka-sutra sect)

(a) Brought to Japan in 736 a.d.

IN JAPAN 87

(b) The first sect of the true Mahayana school in 
Japan (Reischauer, p. 86)

{c) Its chief scripture, the Avatamsaka Sutra, was 
supposed to have been preached by Sakyamuni 
immediately after attaining enlightenment 
(Lloyd, Creedj p. 203)

(d) Its main doctrine is that of the Absolute Law 
Body (or Buddha essence), immanent in all 
' v things (for description and significance see(d) Its main doctrine is that of the Absolute Law 
Body (or Buddha essence), immanent in all 
' v things (for description and significance see

Armstrong, pp, 57-60)

! . (6) Ritsu sect (Vinaya or ritualistic sect)

j (a) Introduced into Japan as a separate organiza-

i tion in 754 Am., though the Vinaya teachings

I , were among the earliest known to the Japanese

i - ( 5 ) It was essentially the Hinayana system of dis-

l cipline as revised by Dharmagupta (for detail

* see Lloyd, Greedy pp. 131-44)

(c) It was eventually absorbed into the Mahayana

I ■ sects (Reischauer, p, 87 ; Lloyd, Creed, p. 165)

I . (6J These sects are to be regarded as schools of thought

\ . within the priesthood rather than as separate institu-

I tions

I (c) For the place of Buddhism in the culture of the Nara

epoch see Reischauer, pp. 87-89

I (d) On the sculpture and architecture of the period see

!’ Anesaki, pp. 22-26, and accompanying plates

i ' {e) Eventually the meddling of the priests in politics caused

•; the emperor to remove his capital to Kyoto (Lloyd,

I Creed, pp. 226-28)

i (/) The Kyoto sects, ninth century A.n.

( (i) Tendai sect

\ (a) Founded by DengyS Daishi (Saich 5 )

I ' (i) A good account of his life is given in Lloyd,

[ Creed, pp. 225-36

f, (J) Following the T^ien-T^ai sect of China (see

i above, pp. 60 f .) , it bases itself on the Saddharma

88

BUDDHISM

Pundarika Sutra (Lloyd gives a brief analysis 
of this in Transactions of the Asiatic Society of 
Japan^ XXII, 374-78)

(i) For a good statement of the inclusive qual- 
ity of this teaching see Armstrong, pp. 
60-66

(c) But to the original T’ien-T'ai the Japanese

Tendai added elements derived from other 
sects, thus making the whole an eclecticism (see 
Reischauer, pp, 92-94, and ASJ^ XXII, 
381-82) ^

(d) For an account of the unifying character of 
Tendai as well as of its weakness see Saunders, 
pp, 168-72

(2) Shingon sect

(а) Founded by Kobo Daishi (774"'835 a.d.)(d) For an account of the unifying character of 
Tendai as well as of its weakness see Saunders, 
pp, 168-72

(2) Shingon sect

(а) Founded by Kobo Daishi (774"'835 a.d.)

(1) For a brief account of his life see Rei- 
schauer, pp, 94~9S

(2) For a more extended account see Lloyd in 
the Trans, Asiat, Soc, Japan, XXII, 382- 
87, and in the Creed of Ealf Japan, pp, 
233-36 and 243-58

(б) The teachings of Shingon give the Japanese 
form of the school of Mantra Buddhism

(1) The emphasis is upon mystical absorption 
in the Infinite, conceived as the center of a 
metaphysical world of ideas behind the 
phenomenal world (Knox, p. 99; Arm- 
strong, pp. 65-67)

(2) For a full exposition see Lloyd, Trans, 
Asiat, Soc, Japan, pp. 382-405

(3) Much use is made of magic and mystery 
(see Reischauer, p. 97)

(a) Shingon priests are skilful users of 
ritual hand-poses {mudras), which are 
symbols of mystic meanings (for pic-

IN JAPAN

89

tures of this sort of thing see Tyra de 
Kleen’s MudraSj which though copied 
from the priests of Bali in Java are yet 
typical)

(b) F or the influence and use of secret sym- 
bolism in art see Anesaki, pp. 31-46

(4) Religious healing is practiced (see Saun- 
ders, pp. 190-91)

(5) By its teaching that all spiritual beings are 
emanations of the eternal Buddha, Vairo-

'» chana, the Shingon sect led in the absorp- 
tion of the Shinto pantheon by Buddhism 
(see Reischauer, pp. 98-99; an extended ac- 
count of this syncretism will be found in 
Griffis, Religions of Japan, pp. 191-223)

(3) The wealth and success of the Buddhism 'of the 
ninth century were accompanied by moral and 
spiritual decline (Reischauer, 100-102; Lloyd, 
Creed, pp. 141-42)

II. Sects oe the Great Awakening 
a) References

Anesaki, Masaharu: Nichiren the Buddhist Prophet (1916). 
(An effective portrayal of the founder of one of the great 
sects.)

Armstrong, R. C. : Buddhism and Buddhists in Japan, pp. 
79-96.Anesaki, Masaharu: Nichiren the Buddhist Prophet (1916). 
(An effective portrayal of the founder of one of the great 
sects.)

Armstrong, R. C. : Buddhism and Buddhists in Japan, pp. 
79-96.

Coates, H. H., and Ishizuka, R.: Honen the Buddhist Saint 
(1925) . (A translation of the authorized life of the founder 
of the Jodo sect, with historical Introduction and notes, 
explanatory and critical. A mine of information on Pure . 
Land Buddhism.)

Griffis, W. E,: Religions of Japan (1895), pp, 251-86.

Haas, Hans: Amida Buddha: Unsere Zuflucht (1910). 
(Translations of important sources for the Jodo sect. Valu- 
able for detailed study.)

90

BUDDHISM

Knox, George W,: DeDclopment of Religion in Japan (1907), 
pp. 114-37. (Good general sketch of the Pure Land and 
Nichiren teachings.)

Lloyd, Arthur: ^'Developments of Japanese Buddhism,^^ 
Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan^ XXII (1894),

405-49*

Lloyd, Arthur: Shinran and His Work (1910). (Deals fully 
with the Shin sect and its teachings. Chap, iii treats of the 
life of Shinran.)

Lloyd, Arthur: Creed of Half Japan (1911), pp. 259-328. 
Nanjio, Bunyiu: A Short History ^vf Twelve Japanese Bud- 
dhist Sects (1886), pp. 104-47, (A. valuable summary by a 
noted Japanese scholar of the last generation.)

Nukariya, Kaiten: The Religion of the Samurai, a Study of 
Zen Philosophy and Discipline in China and Japan (1913) . 
Reischauer, A. K.: Studies in Japanese Buddhism (1917), 
pp. 102-31.

Satomi, Elishio: Japanese Civilization (1924).

Saunders, K. J.: Epochs in Buddhist History (1924), pp. 
172-85.

For expositions of the teachings of the great sects by 
modern Japanese Buddhists the reader should consult the 
many useful articles in the Eastern Buddhist (published bi- 
monthly, Kyoto, May, 1921 ) and the Young East

(monthly, Tokyo, June, 1925 ).

b) Outline(monthly, Tokyo, June, 1925 ).

b) Outline

1. Religious need, reacting to the worldly corruption of the 
Buddhism of the ninth century, brought about the rise of 
great reforming sects in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries 
(Reischauer, p. 102)

2. Jodo sect (first of the Japanese Pure Land sects; cf. above, 
pp. 61-63)

(a) Pure Land practice before the founding of Jodo

(i) The "Dancing Nembutsu’’ of the priest Kuya (903- 
72)

(a) This was an attempt to arouse the people reli-

IN JAPAN

91

giously by going about the country dancing and 
repeating the prayer to Amitabha (in Japanese, 
Namu-Amida-B utsu)

{b) See Lloyd, Creed j pp. 242 and 264-68; Coates 
and Ishizuka, p. 36

(2) The Tendai “Nembutsu^’ (Coates and Ishizuka, 
pp- 37-38)

(a) “Invocation of Amitabha’’ (Nembutsu) for the 
cultivation of meditative ecstasy

(b) Promoted especially by Genshin (942-1017)

See Reischauer, pp. 102-4

(3) The “Yudzu Nembutsu” of Ryonin Shonin (1072- 
1132)

(a) A society for “mutual benefit through Nembut- 
su” (see Coates and Ishizuka, p, 39, and Rei- 
schauer, pp. 104-5)

(b) Honen and the foundation of the j 5 do sect

(1) Conditions against which Honen reacted

(a) Political confusion due to rivalry of ruling 
clans

(b) General illiteracy and moral degeneracy

(c) Ritualism and magic in religion for the sake of 
material goods

(d) Luxury and worldliness of the clergy

(e) Unspiritual doctrinal conceptions

(2) The life of Honen (1133-1212)

(a) Read Coates and Ishizuka for the full transla- 
tion of the Japanese authorized biography 
(i) Brief sketches will be found in Reischauer, pp. 
106-8, and Lloyd, Greedy pp. 272-73

(3) For translations (in German) of certain of HSnen’s 
writings and letters see Haas

(4) Honen’s distinctive contribution (Coates and 
Ishizuka, p. 42)

(a) He rejected meditation and complete compre- 
hension as unnecessary

92

BUDDHISM(4) Honen’s distinctive contribution (Coates and 
Ishizuka, p. 42)

(a) He rejected meditation and complete compre- 
hension as unnecessary

92

BUDDHISM

(b) He insisted on simple faith as the one essential 
accompaniment to the invocation of Buddha’s 
name (see also Armstrong, p. 84, and Reischau- 
er, p. 107)

(c) The Jodo system, a religion of despair rather than of hope

(i) It is salvation not through ethical conformity to an 
ideal but through blind trust in the merits of Ami- 
tabha and the ceaseless repetition of pious formu- 
las (Lloyd, Trans, AsiaL Soc, Japan, XXII, 41 1- 
22)

3. Shin sect (or true sect of the Purp Land)

{a) Founded by Honen’s greatest disciple, Shinran Shonin

(1) For the life of Shinran see Lloyd, Shinran, pp, 15- 
32; Armstrong, pp. 87-89; Reischauer, pp. 108-10

(2) Shinran (1173-1262) carried the doctrine of salva- 
tion by faith to its logical conclusion

{a) FaithinAmitabha is the essential Good works 
and even repetition of Buddha’s name are 
mere accompaniments (Coates and Ishizuka, 
pp- SI-52)

(6) By marrying Shinran demonstrated that celi- 
bacy is unnecessary to salvation and that even 
the dweller in the midst of ordinary life may be 
saved by faith (Griffis, pp. 271-72)

(^;) For the practical consequences see Armstrong, 
pp. 89-91

(3) The teachings of the Shin sect represent a develop- 
ment of Buddhism that contrasts with the original 
religion of Gotama (Knox, pp. 129-35; Rei- 
schauer, pp. 1 10-15)

{a) Salvation in the Western Paradise instead of 
Nirvana

(&) Participation in all human relationships instead 
of flight from the world

(^;) Salvation through faith in another instead of 
one’s own efforts

IN JAPAN

93

{d) Worship of a god, Amitabha (Amida in Jap- 
anese), instead of indifference to such beings 
(e) Continuity and identity of the individual into a 
future life instead of denial of such continuity 
and identity(4) For detailed exposition of the teachings see Lloyd, 
Shinran, pp. 27-153, and in Trans, Asiat, Soc, Jo- 
paUj pp. 413-30; also Haas, pp. 28-37 and 116-66

(5) A brief but vivid picture of the Shin sect will be 
found in Saunders, pp, 176-80

Zen sect: the Japanese ^^Meditative^^ (Dhyana) school; cf. 
above, pp. 59^!.

(a) Zen (or DhyEna) teachings were introduced into Japan 
as early as the seventh century (Nukariya, The Reli- 
gion of the Samuraij p, 28)

(&) As a sect Zen was established in three branches

(1) Rinzai, founded by Eisai in 1191 {ihid.^ pp. 28-30)

(2) So-To, founded by Do-gen in 1236 {ibid,^ pp. 
30-34)

(3) 0 Baku, founded by Yin Yuen in 1654 (ibid., pp. 
48-49)

{c) Characteristics of Zen

(1) The use of paradoxical methods to arouse men from 
religious indifference (Armstrong, p. 8i; Saunders,

pp. 142-45)

(2) The use of scriptures not as authority but as a con- 
venience in the cultivation of intuitive enlighten- 
ment (Nukariya, pp. 52-74)

(3) The practice of sitting in meditation (Zazen) 
(Reischauer, pp. 1 18-22; Armstrong, pp. 81-83; 
Nukariya, pp. 188-97)

(4) Emphasis upon an experience of immediate, in- 
tuitive insight (see Suzuki, ^^The Revelation of a 
New Truth in Zen Buddhism, Eastern Buddhist^ I, 
194-228)

{£) For a present-day exposition of Zen teachings by a Jap-

94

BUDDHISM

anese Buddhist see articles by Daisetz Teitaro Suzuki 
in the Eastern Buddhist and in his Essays in Zen Bud-^ 
dhism (Luzac & Co., 1927)

5. Nichiren sect

{a) The only Japanese sect founded upon a personality 
rather than upon a doctrine (see Reischauer, p. 126)

(i) For life and times of Nichiren (1222-82) see

(1) Anesaki, pp. 1-75 (a brilliantly written apprecia-

tion)

(2) Lloyd, Greedy pp. 287-98

(3) Satomi, Japanese Civilization (1923), pp. 117-87

(c) Characteristics of Nichirenism

(1) Interpretation of national ills as the result of defec- 
tion from true Buddhism (Lloyd, Creed, p. 310)(3) Satomi, Japanese Civilization (1923), pp. 117-87

(c) Characteristics of Nichirenism

(1) Interpretation of national ills as the result of defec- 
tion from true Buddhism (Lloyd, Creed, p. 310)

(2) Attack upon other sects as distorters of the truth 
(Anesaki, pp. 36-37; Lloyd, Creed, pp. 293-95 
313-24; Reischauer, pp. 123-25; Satomi, pp. 55-65)

(3) Acceptance of the “Lotus Scripture'' (Saddharma- 
pundarika Sutra), as interpreted by Nichiren, as 
the basic scripture of Buddhism (an illuminating 
analysis of this scripture in relation to Nichiren's 
understanding of it is given by Anesaki, pp. 16-32; 
see also Satomi, pp. 29-55)

(4) Exaltation of Sakyamuni in his eternal aspect as 
the Supreme Being (Lloyd, Creed, pp. 298-99; 
Satomi, pp. 77-94; Anesaki, pp. 76-87)

(d) Nichiren's pugnacious loyalty to his country's welfare 
makes a strong nationalistic appeal to modern Japanese 
youth (Armstrong, p. 94; Satomi, pp. 228-31 and 155- 
57; also the instructive charts in Appendixes IV-VI of 
Saunders)

III. From the Fourteenth to the Nineteenth Century 
a) References

Brinkley, Captain F.: A History of the Japanese People 
(1915). pp- 485-86, 505-6, 577-78, 583-

IN JAPAN

95

Griffis, W. E.: The Mikado^ s Empire (1890), pp. 229-35. 
Hara, Katsuro: Introduction to the History of Japan (1920), 
pp. 273-81, 351-54, (A Japanese perspective.)

Lloyd, Arthur: Creed of Half Japan (1911), pp. 34i"’So. 
Murdoch, James, and Yamagata, Isoh: A History of Japan 
during the Century of Early Foreign Intercourse (1542- 
1651) (1903), pp. 144-67, 200-202. (Detailed account of 
certain phases.)

Reischauer, A. K.: Studies in Japanese Buddhism (1917), 
PP' I3I-S4' 
h) Outline

1, During this period there was no new development within 
Buddhism itself

2, From 1333 to 1550 temples became armed fortresses and 
monks entered into the political strife of the times while 
religious spirit declined

3, In the Tokugawa period (1550-1868) the power and influ- 
ence of Buddhism waned3, In the Tokugawa period (1550-1868) the power and influ- 
ence of Buddhism waned

(а) Its political power was crushed by Nobunaga Hide- 
yoshi

(1) Nobunaga wiped out the Tendai Monastery in 1571 
(Lloyd, p. 358; Murdoch and Yamagata, pp. 164-

65)

(2) In 1580 he subdued the powerful fortress of the 
Monto branch of the Jodo sect

(3) In 1584 Hideyoshi destroyed the Shingon temple- 
fortress of Negoro (Murdoch and Yamagata, pp. 
200-202)

(б) Its wealth was drained by heavy imposts (Lloyd, p. 362) 
{c) Under leyasu, Buddhism was made subservient to the

interests of the rulers 
(d) Rival spiritual forces appeared

(1) Catholic missions from Europe (Brinkley, pp.

530-55)

(2) Neo-Confucianism (teachings of Chu Hsi and Wang 
Yang-ming) from China (Reischauer, pp. 143-49)

96

BUDDHISM

(3) Neo“Shintoism {ihid,^ pp. 149’-$ 2; Brinkley, 644-

So)

4, In the Meiji era (i868'-i9i2)

{a) Buddhism was finally disestablished as the state reli- 
gion (Reischauer, pp, 152-54)

IV. Present-Day Buddhism in Japan 
a) References

Anesaki, Masaharu; Quelques pagos de Vhistoire religieuse du 
Japan (1921), pp. 143-72. (Interesting as showing one 
phase of the movement of modern religious thought in 
Japan where Buddhist ideas played a r 61 e.)

Armstrong, R. C.: Buddhism and Buddhists in Japan j pp. 
15-49, 63-78.

Armstrong, R. C. : ^Topular Buddhism in Japan,” Christian 
Movement in Japan^ Korea and Formosa^ 1922, pp. 91-103.

Chamberlain, B. H., and Mason, W. B.: A Handbook for 
Travelers in Japan (9th ed.), pp. 39-56. (Convenient con- 
densed account of the temples, gods, and goddesses of 
Japanese Buddhism.)

Erskine, W”. H.: Japanese Customs (1925). (See chap, vii 
for a description of a modern Japanese funeral.)

Getty, Alice: The Gods of Northern Buddhism (1914). (Use- 
ful for the study and identification of images.)

Hackmann, H.: Buddhism as a Religion^ pp. 269-95.Getty, Alice: The Gods of Northern Buddhism (1914). (Use- 
ful for the study and identification of images.)

Hackmann, H.: Buddhism as a Religion^ pp. 269-95.

Noss, C,: ^‘The Religious and Social Activities of Modern 
Japanese Buddhists,” Christian Movement in Japan y 
Korea and Formosay 1925, pp. 253-85. (Good account of 
new Buddhist adjustments to modern conditions.)

Pratt, J. B.: The Pilgrimage of Buddhismy pp. 495-671. 
(Comprehensive description of the present state of Jap- 
anese Buddhism as observed by an American philosopher 
seeking a “synthetic view of Buddhism” as a whole, Es- 
pecially valuable insight into the intellectual phases.)

Reischauer, A, K,: Studies in Japanese Buddhismy pp. 
307-27.

IN JAPAN

97

Reischauer, A. TL,: The Task in Japan (1926), pp. 101-36. 
(A popular presentation from a missionary point of view 
which throws into relief certain aspects of present-day 
Buddhism,)

Seiren (Blue Lotus) : “In Buddhist Temples.” Four articles 
in the Eastern Buddhist^ Vol II. (The temples as seen 
through the eyes and sentiments of a modern Bud- 
dhist.)

Visser, M, W. de: The Arhats in China and Japan (1923), 
pp. 182-96. (Full description of a particular ceremony 
performed i^ honor of the sixteen arhats.)

1. Monastic life in its external features is similar to that of 
China

{a) Temples (for a systematic description see Handbook, of 
the Old Shrines and Temples and Their Treasures in 
Japan^ published in Japan by the Bureau of Religions, 
Department of Education, containing pictures, plans, 
descriptions, etc. For verbal descriptions see Hack- 
mann, pp. 271-77, 282-84; Pratt, pp. 503-18; also 
Seiren as above)

(i^) Divinities (see Getty and De Visser, listed above; for 
brief accounts see Hackmann, pp. 277-82; Pratt, pp. 
495-502; and Chamberlain and Mason, pp. 39-56)

(c) Activities of the monks (Hackmann, pp. 284-86; Arm- 
strong, Christian Movement^ pp. 95-110)

(1) Ritual observances in the temples

(2) Recitation of sacred texts(c) Activities of the monks (Hackmann, pp. 284-86; Arm- 
strong, Christian Movement^ pp. 95-110)

(1) Ritual observances in the temples

(2) Recitation of sacred texts

(3) Meditation (Prhtt, p. 528)

(4) Conduct of funerals (Erskine, chap, vii)

2. In making adjustments to modern conditions Buddhism 
has in recent times tended to develop social ideals and un- 
dertaken various forms of social and philanthropic activity 
(see Noss, listed above; Armstrong, Buddhism y pp. 15-49; 
and Pratt, pp. 529-31 and 567-95)

3. Relation of Buddhism to the people (Armstrong, Buddhism^ 
pp. 15-49)

98

BUDDHISM

(a) Its temples and ceremonials are interwoven with the 
common life

(b) It ministers at funerals, festivals for spirits, and other 
services for the dead

(c) It places a certain emphasis on moral betterment

(1) Through the spring and autumn festivals

(2) In baptismal and dedication ceremonies

4. Modern Buddhist thought in Japan (Pratt, pp. 596-671)

(a) General characteristics

(1) Liberality

(2) Belief in degrees of truth and reality

(3) An idealistic interpretation of the external world

(4) The Anatta doctrine

(b) Philosophical positions of the different sects

(1) These reveal varying interpretations of traditional 
doctrines

(2) The concepts suggest to the Western mind conflicts 
and difficulties similar to those in Western idealism

(3) But in every sect there is a mystic trend which 
makes central the notion of a Buddha nature in all 
things, the realization of which is merely adum- 
brated and suggested by all the varying conceptions 
of the schools

((;) Philosophical Buddhism and modern science

The Japanese are indeed much interested in the science 
of the West; but they are also beginning to realize that the 
philosophy at the basis of all the branches of the Mahayana 
is of a sort that it is quite capable of making room for every- 
thing that science has yet discovered or is likely to discover. 
— ^Pratt, p. 698,5. For a statement of the problems confronting Buddhism in 
its modern environment see Reischauer, Studies^ pp. 314- 
27 ; also his more popular statement in The Task in Japan, 
pp, 101-36

6. A modern revival of interest in Shinran and his teachings is 
noticeable (see articles by Gessho Sasaki, Kogetsu Mino,

IN JAPAN

99

and others in the Eastern Buddhist ^ especially Minors ""^Shin- 
ran Revival of the Last Year/’ iUd,^ 1922, pp. 285-91)

{a) Modern appreciation of Shinranism springs apparently 
from the fact that it is the one form of Buddhism that is 
non-celibate and which stresses the practice of Bud- 
dhism within the relations of secular life 
7. Japanese Buddhism and Christianity

{a) For the most recent viewpoint of Christian missions see 
the report in The Jerusalem Meeting of the International 
Missionary Council^ I, 177-90 and 323-26 
(&) For the view of a detached observer see Pratt, pp, 
723-50

(c) For a penetrating Japanese discussion see Anesaki, 
Religious and Social Proble^ns of the Orient, pp. 17-33 
and 52-73

BIBLIOGRAPHY^

Anesaki, Masaharu. Buddhist Art in Its Relation to Buddhist Ideals, 
Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1915.

. Nichiren the Buddhist Prophet, Cambridge: Harvard University

Press, 1916.

. Quelques pages de Vhistoire religieuse du Japan, Paris: Bernard,

1921.

. The Religious and Social Problems of the Orient, New York: Mac- 
millan, 1923, ^

Armstrong, Robert Cornell, Buddhism and Buddhists in Japan, New 
York, 1927.

Arnold, Sir Edwin, The Light of Asia^ or the Great Renunciation, London, 
1890,

Bagchi, Prabodh Chandra. Le canon houddhique en Chine: Les traducteurs 
etles traductions, “Librairie Orientaliste/^ Paris: Paul Geuthner, 1926.

Barth, Auguste. The Religions of India, London: Paul, Trench, Trtibner, 
4th ed., 1906; reissue, 1914.

Beal, Samuel, Catena of Buddhist Scriptures ^ from the Chinese, London, 
1871.

. The Romantic Legend of Sakya Buddha^ from the Chinese-Sanscrit,

London, 1875.Beal, Samuel, Catena of Buddhist Scriptures ^ from the Chinese, London, 
1871.

. The Romantic Legend of Sakya Buddha^ from the Chinese-Sanscrit,

London, 1875.

. Abstract of Four Lectures on Buddhist Literature in China. London,

1882.

. Buddhism in China. London: Society for Promoting Christian

Knowledge, 1884.

. The Life of Eiuen-Tsiang by the Shaman Ewui-li, London: Paul,

Trench, Triibner, 1911.

Bigandet, Pierre, The Life or Legend of Gcmdama, the Buddha of the Bur- 
mese, London: Paul, Trench, Triibner, 1911-12.

Binyon, Laurence. Painting in the Far East,

Boerschmann, Ernst. Picturesque China: Architecture and Landscape.

. Chinesisch Architectur. 2 vols. 1925.

Bose, Phanindra Nath, The Indian Teachers in China, Madras: GaUesan, 
1923.

* In a very few instances titles that were not utilized in the text have been in- 
cluded for general reference.

100

BIBLIOGRAPHY

lOI

Brewster, Earl H. The Life of Gotama the Buddha (compiled exclusively 
from the Pali canon). London: Paul, Trench, Triibner; New York: Dut- 
ton, 1926.

Brinkley, Captain. A Bistory of the Japanese People, New York: Ency- 
clopaedia Britannica Co., 1915.

Buddhaghosa. The Expositor: A Translation of Atthasalinf the Commen- 
tary on the Dhamma-Sangani, By Maung Tin. ^Tali Text Society Series,’^ 
2 vols. 1920-21.

. Visuddhi-Magga^ or the Path of Purity, Part I. Translated in the

'Tali Text Society Series.*^ 1922,

Cambridge Bistory of India^ Vol. I.

Carxjs, Paul. The Gospel of Buddha according to Old Records^ T old by Paul 
Cams (5th ed.). Chicago: Open Court, 1897.

Cave, Henry W. The Book of Ceylon,

Cave, Sydney. Living Religions of the East,

Christian Movement in Japan, Korea, and Formosa: A Year Book, Published 
annually by the Federation of Christian Missions (Japan).

Coates, Harper Havelock, and Ishizuka, Ryugazu. ^Eonen the Buddhist 
Saint: Bis Life and Teaching, Kyoto: Chionin, 1925.Coates, Harper Havelock, and Ishizuka, Ryugazu. ^Eonen the Buddhist 
Saint: Bis Life and Teaching, Kyoto: Chionin, 1925.

CooMARASWAMY, Ananda Kentish. Buddha and the Gospel of Buddhism. 
New York: Putnam^s, 1916.

CoPLESTON, Reginald Stephen. Buddhism Primitive and Present in Ma- 
gadha and in Ceylon. London, New York, Bombay, and Calcutta: Long- 
mans Green, 1908.

Dasgupta, Surendranath. a History of Indian Philosophy, Vol, I. Cam- 
bridge University Press, 1922.

— . Bindu Mysticism. Chicago: Open Court, 1927.

Davids, Mrs, Caroline Augusta (Foley) Rhys, Buddhism: A Shdy of 
the Buddhist N orm. New York: Holt, 1912.

. Buddhist Psychology: An Inquiry into the Analysis and Theory of

Mind in Pali Literature. London: Bell, 1914.

Davids, T. W. Rhys. Lectures on the Origin and Growth of Religion as Illus- 
trated by Some Points in the Bistory of Indian Buddhism. New York: Put- 
nam’s, 1882.

, Buddhism: Its Bistory amd Literature, New York: Putnam’s, 1896-

— . Buddhist India. New York: Putnam’s, 1903.

. Buddhism: Being a Sketch of the Life and Teachings of Gautama, the

Buddha. Reprint of rev. ed. London: Society for Promoting Christian 
Knowledge, 1912.

102

BUDDHISM

Dore, Henri. Researches into Chinese Superstitions. 7 vols. China: 
Tusewei, 1914-20.

Edkins, Rev. Joseph. Chinese Buddhism. Trubner’s ^^Oriental Series.’’ 
London, 1893.

Eitel, Ernest John. Handbook of Chinese Buddhism. Hongkong: Lane 
Crawford, 1888.

Eeiot, Sir Charles Edgecumbe. Hinduism and Buddhism. 3 vols. London: 
Arnold, 1921.

Erskine, W. H. Japanese Customs, 1925.

Farqhhar, J. N. An Outline of the Religious Literature of India. Oxford 
University Press, 1920.

Fenollosa, E. F. Epochs of Chinese and Japanese Art. London: W. Heine- 
mann, 1921. 2 vols.

Focillon, Henri. Vartbouddhique. Paris: Henri Laurens, 1921,

Fohcher, Alered. Etude sur Viconographie bouddhique de Unde, ddprhs des 
documents nouveaux, Paris: A. Leroux, 1900-1905.Focillon, Henri. Vartbouddhique. Paris: Henri Laurens, 1921,

Fohcher, Alered. Etude sur Viconographie bouddhique de Unde, ddprhs des 
documents nouveaux, Paris: A. Leroux, 1900-1905.

. Hart greco-houddhique du Gandhara: Etude sur les origines de Vin-

fiuence classique dans Vart houddhiqus de Unde et de I Extreme-Orient. 
3 vols. Paris: Leroxix, 1905.

. ‘^The Beginnings of Buddhist Art” and other essays in Indian and

Central-Asian Archaeology. Paris: Geuthner, 1917.

GEimEL, William. The Diamond Sutra (Ching-Kang-Chin) or Prajna-Para- 
mita. Translated from the Chinese with Introduction and notes. Lon- 
don, 1912.

Getty, Alice. Gods of Northern Buddhism. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1914.

Giles, H. A. The Travels of Fa-hsien (jpg-414 A.D.), or Record of the Bud- 
dhistic Kingdoms. Cambridge, 1923.

Gogerly, D. J. Ceylon Buddhism, Ed. Arthur Stanley Bishop. 2 vols, Lon- 
don: Paul, Trench, Triibner, 1908.

Gray, James. Buddhaghosuppatti, or the Historical Romance of the Rise and 
Career of Buddhaghosa. London: Luzac, 1892.

Gripeis, W. E. The Religions of Japan. New York: Scribner’s, 1907.

. The Mikado^ s Empire. New York: Harper, 1890.

Grieeiths, John. The Paintings in the Buddhist Cave-Temples of Ajanta, 
Khandesh, India. 2 vols. London, 1896-97.

Groot, j, j. M. de. Sectarianism and Religious Persecution in China. 2 vols. 
Amsterdam: J. Muller, 1903-4.

Grunwedel, Albert. Buddhist Art in India. Translated from the Hand- 
buch of Professor Albert Griinwedel by Agnes C. Gibson; revised and en- 
larged by James Burgess. London: B. Quaritch, 1901.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

103

Haas, Hans. Amidd Buddha: Unsere Zuflucht^ Urkunden zum Verstandnis 
des japanischen Suhamti-Buddhismus. Gottingen: Vandenhoeck, 1910. 
Hackmann, H. Buddhism as a Religion: Its Historical Development and Its 
Present Conditions. London: Probsthain, 1910.

Hara, Katsuhara. Introduction to the History of Japan. New York: Put- 
nam^s, 1920,

Hardy, R. Spence. Eastern Monachism. London, 1850.Hara, Katsuhara. Introduction to the History of Japan. New York: Put- 
nam^s, 1920,

Hardy, R. Spence. Eastern Monachism. London, 1850.

. Manual of Buddhism, 1880,

Hastings, James. The Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics. New York: 
Scribners, 1908.

Herodd, a. Ferdinand. The Life of Buddha according to the Legends of An- 
cient India. Translated^from the French by Paul C. Blum. New York: 
Boni, 1927.

Hodods, Lewis. Buddhism and Buddhists in China. New York: Macmillan, 
1924.

Hiuen-Tsiang. Buddhist Records of the Western World, Translated from the 
Chinese by Samuel Beal. Boston, 1885.

Hume, Robert Ernest. The WorWs Living Religions. New York, 1925. 
Imperial Gazetteer of India. 25 vols. and atlas. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
i9o8-~9.

I-Tsing. Record of the Buddhist Religion as Practised in India {A.D. 6^1- 
6qs). Translated by J. Takakusu with a letter from F. Max Muller. Ox- 
ford, 1896.

Johnston, Reginald Fleming. Buddhist China. London: J.> Murray, 1913. 
Kjeith, a. Berriedale. Buddhist Philosophy in India and Ceylon. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1923.

Rern, Q.) H. C. Manual of Indian Buddhism. Strasburg, 1896.

Kleen, Tyra de. Mudras: The Ritual Hand-Poses of the Buddha Priests and 
the Shiva Priests of Bali. London: Paul, Trench, Triibner, New York: 
Dutton, 1924.

Knox, George William. The Development of Religion in Japan. New York :

Putnam’s; London: Knickerbocker Press, 1907,

Krom, N. J. The Life of Buddha on the Stupa of Barahudur according to the 
Lditavistara Text. The Hague: Martimis Nijhoff, 1926,

Law, Bimala Charan. The Life and Works of Buddhaghosa. 1923.

Le Coq, Albert von. Chotscho. Berlin: Reimer, 1913.

.Die luddhistische Spdtantike in Mittelasien. 5 vols. Berlin: Reimer,

I922-'26.

Levi, Sylvain. Mahay ana-sutralamkara by Asanga, Sanskrit text and 
French translation. Paris: Librairie Honore Champion, 1907.

104

BUDDHISM

Lloyd, Arthur. Shinran and His Work. Tokyo: Kyo Bun Kwan, 1910.

. The Creed of Half Japan. London, 1911.104

BUDDHISM

Lloyd, Arthur. Shinran and His Work. Tokyo: Kyo Bun Kwan, 1910.

. The Creed of Half Japan. London, 1911.

McGovern, William Montgomery. An Introduction to Mahayana Bud- 
dhism^ with Special Reference to Chinese and Japanese Phases. London, 
1922.

— r — , A Manual of Buddhist Philosophy. New York, 1923.

Mahavamsa. The Great Chronicle of Ceylon. Translated by Geiger in the 
^Tali Text Society Series.’^ (An older translation by Tumour contains 
late additions.)

Meichers, Bernd. China: Der Tempelbau: Die Lochan von Ling-ydn-si. 
Hagen, 1921.

Mitton, G. E, The Lost Cities of Ceylon. ^

Monler-Williams, Monier. Buddhism. London, 1889.

Murdoch, James, and Yamagata, Isoh. A History of Japan during the Cen- 
tury of Early Foreign Intercourse (1^42-16^1). Kobe: Japan Chronicle, 
1903.

Nanjio, Bxjnyiu. a Short History of Twelve Japanese Buddhist Sects. 
Tokyo: Bukkyo-sho-ei-yoku, shupan-sha, 1866.

. A Catalogue of the Chinese Translation of the Buddhist Tripitaka.

Oxford, 1883.

Nariman, G. K. Literary History of Sanscrit Buddhism. Bombay: Tarapo- 
revala, 1920.

Nukariya, Kaiten. The Religion of the Samurai: A Study of Zen Philosophy 
cmd Discipline in China and Japan. London: Luzac, 1913.

Oldenberg, Hermann. Buddha; His Life^ His Doctrine, His Order. Trans- 
lated from the German by William Hoey. London, 1882.

Oltramare, Paul. Hhistoire des idies th6osophiques dans LHnde, Vol. II. 
Paris: Musee Guimet, 1923.

Pelliot, Paul. Les grottes de Touen-Houang. 7 vols. Paris, 1920.

Perzynski, Friedrich. Von Chinas Gottern. Miinchen, 1920.

Pratt, James Bissett. The Pilgrimage of Buddhism. New York: Macmil- 
lan, 1928.

Przyluski, Jean. Le concile de Rdjagrha: Introduction d Vhistoire du canon 
etdes secteshouddhiques. Paris: Geuthner, 1926.

Radhakrishnan, S. Indian Philosophy. 2 vols. London, 1923-27.

Reichelt, Karl L. Truth and Tradition in Chinese Buddhism: A Study of 
Chinese Mahayana Buddhism. Shanghai: Commercial Press, 1927.Radhakrishnan, S. Indian Philosophy. 2 vols. London, 1923-27.

Reichelt, Karl L. Truth and Tradition in Chinese Buddhism: A Study of 
Chinese Mahayana Buddhism. Shanghai: Commercial Press, 1927.

Reischauer, a. K. a Catechism of the Shin Sect. 1912.

. Studies in J apanese Buddhism. New York: ReveU, 1917.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

105

Richard, Timothy. Nm Testament of Higher Biddhism, Edinburgh, 1910.

. The Awakening of Faith in the Mahay ana Doctrine. 2d ed. Shanghai,

1918.

Rosenberg, Dr. Otto. Die ProUeme der huddhistischen Philos ophie.

Heidelberg, 1924.

‘^Sacred Books of the East”:

Sutta NipaiOf Vol. X.

Vinaya Texts, Vols. XIII, XVII, XX.

Saddharma-Pundarika, Vol. XXL 
Buddha-Carita, Vol. XLIX.

Mahayana Texts, Vol. XLIX.

Santi-Deva. Sikshd-samtjjfcaya: A Compendium of Buddhist Doctrine. 
Translated from the Sanskrit by Cecil Bendall and W. H. D. Rouse. Lon- 
don: J. Murray, 1922.

Satomi, Kishio. Japanese Civilization. 1924.

Saunders, EIenneth J, The Story of Buddhism. Oxford, 1916.

. Gotama Buddha: A Biography. (Based on the canonical books of the

Theravadin). New York, 1920.

. Epochs of Buddhist History. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,

1922.

. Buddhism and Buddhists in Southern Asia. New York: Macmillan,

1923.

Shaku, Soyen. Sermons of a Buddhist Abbott. Chicago: Open Court, 1906. 
Smith, Vincent Arthur. Early History of India, Including Alexanders Cam'- 
paigns, Oxford, 1908.

. As oka, the Buddhist Emperor of India. Oxford, 1909.

, A History of Fine Art in India and Ceylon from the Earliest Times to

the Present Day. Oxford, 1911.

r. Oxford Students History of India. 1915.

SoGEN, Yamakami. Systems of Buddhistic Thought. University of Calcutta, 
1912.

Stein, Sir Mark Aurel, Sand-huried Ruins of Khotan: A Personal Narra^ 
live of a Journey of Archaeological Exploration in Chinese Turkestan. Lon- 
don, 1903.

— . Ancient Khotan: Detailed Report of Archaeological Explorations in

Chinese Turkestan. Oxford, 1907.— . Ancient Khotan: Detailed Report of Archaeological Explorations in

Chinese Turkestan. Oxford, 1907.

. Ruins of Desert Cathay: A Personal Narrative of Explorations in Cen-

tral Asia and Westernmost China. Londoiii 
. The Thousand Buddhas, 2 vols. London: B. Quaritch, Ltd., 1921.

io6

BUDDHISM

. Serindia: Detailed Report of Explorations in Central Asia and

Westernmost China. 5 vols. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1921.

Suzuki, Daisetz Teitaro. A 'svaghosa's Awakening of Faith in the Mahayana. 
Chicago: Open Court, 1900.

. Outlines of Mahayana Buddhism. Chicago: Open Court, 1908.

. Essays in Zen Buddhism. London: Luzac, 1927,

Studies in the Lankavatara Sutra. London: Paul, Trench, TrUbner,

1930.

Taranatha. Geschichte des Buddhismus in Indian. Translated from the Ti- 
betan by Anton Schiefnen St. Petersburg, 1S69.

Thomas, Edward J. The Life of Biiddha as Legend and History. New York: 
Knopf, 1927.

Tokiwa, Daijo. Btiddhist Monuments in China', 1926.

Transactions of the Third International Congress for the History of Religion. 
2 vols. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1908.

Vallee-Poussin, Louis de la. Bouddhisme: Opinions sur Phistoire de la 
dogmatique: Leqons faites dVinsiitut. Paris: Beauchesne, 1909.

. The Way to Nirvana. Cambridge: University Press, 1917.

ViSSER, M. W. DE. The Arhats in China and Japan. Berlin: Oesterheld, 
1923.

Waddell, L. Austin. The Buddhism of Tibet. London, 1895,

Walleser, M. “The Life of Nagarjima: From Tibetan and Chinese 
Birth Anniversary Volume. London: Probsthain, 1923.

Warren, Henry Clarke. Buddhism in Translations. Harvard University 
Press, 1922.

Watters, Thomas. On Yuan Chwang^s Travels in India. London: Oriental 
Translation Fund, N.S., 1904-5.

WiEGER, Leon. Bouddhisme chinois: Extraits du Tripitaka^ des commentates^ 
tracts, etc. 2 vols. Ho-kien-fou: Roman Catholic Press, 1910-13.

. Histoire des croyances religieuses et des opinions philosophiques e#. Histoire des croyances religieuses et des opinions philosophiques e#

Chine, depuisVorigineJusqu^d nos jours. Ho-kien-fou, 1917, (Eng. trans., 
1927; same pub.)

periodical articles cited

Buddhist Annual of Ceylon. W. E. Bastian, “Colombo.’’ (General reference.)

Dharmapala, Anagarika. “On the Eightfold Path,” Asia, September, 
1927.

Franke, R. O. “The Buddhist Councils at Rajagaha and Vesali, Journal of 
the Pali Text Society, 1908.

BIBLIOGRAPHY 107

Haraprasada, Sastri. ^^Buddhism in Bengal since the Muhammadan Con- 
quest/^ Jounial of the Asiatic Society of Bengal^ 1886.

Levi, Sylvain. “Asvaghosha le Sutralanlcara et ses sources/’ Journal asia- 
tique, XII (1908), 10, 77 ff.

Lloyd, Arthur. “Developments of Japanese Buddhism,” Transactions of 
Asiatic Society of Japan, XXII (1884), 361-405.

Milligan, Frank R. “T’ai Hsii and Modern Buddhism,” Chinese Recorder, 
1923, pp. 326-32.

. “Buddhism in the Light of Modern Thought as Interpreted by the

Monk T’ai Hsii,” ibid., 1926, pp. 91-94.

Mino, Kogetsu. “Shinran Revival of the Last Year,” Eastern Buddhist, II, 
(1922), 285-91. ^

Peri, N. “Apropos de la date de Vasubandhu,” Bulletin de PEcole Franqaise 
d’Exirime-Orient, Vol. XI (1911).

Seiren (Blue Lotus). “In Buddhist Temples.” Four articles in the Eastern 
Buddhist, Vol. II (1922).

Subrahmanya, Aiyar K. V. “Origin and Decline of Buddhism and Jainism 
in Southern India,” Indian Antiquary, 1911.

Suzuki, Daisetz Teitaro. “The Revelation of New Truth in Zen Bud- 
dhism,” Eastern Buddhist, I (1921), 194-228.

Takakusu, J. Life of Vasubandhu by Paramartha. Translated in T^oung Pao, 
1904, pp. 269 ff.

. “A Study of Paramartha’s Life of Vasubandhu and the Date of

Vasubandhu,” Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, January, 1905.

Tsu, Yu Yue. “Present Tendencies in Chinese Buddhism,” Journal of Reli-

■ gion, 1921, pp. 497-^512.

. “Diary of a Chinese Buddhist Nun, T’ze Kuang,” ibid., October,

1927, pp. 612-18.Tsu, Yu Yue. “Present Tendencies in Chinese Buddhism,” Journal of Reli-

■ gion, 1921, pp. 497-^512.

. “Diary of a Chinese Buddhist Nun, T’ze Kuang,” ibid., October,

1927, pp. 612-18.

Vallee-Poussin, L. be la. “Les counciles bouddhiques,” Museon, 1905.

Watters, T. “The Eighteen Lohan of Chinese Buddhism,” Journal of the 
Royal Asiatic Society, April, 1899.

[ PRINTED If 
.IN U-S'AJ

36 help us to keep the book 
d moving.