CORNELL

IJNIVERSITY

LIBRARY


THE

CHARLES WILLIAM WASON

COLLECTION ON CHINA

AND THE CHINESE


3 1924 093 605 347


DATE DUE


1r^


9Gft.MJl,/


d^^


Cornell University
Library


The original of tliis book is in
tine Cornell University Library.

There are no known copyright restrictions in
the United States on the use of the text.


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924093605347


THE


LIFE AND TEACHINGS


CONFUCIUS.


WITH EXPLANATORY NOTES.


JAMES LEGGE, D.D.


SE&entlj iStiiiian

LONDON -^ ./ . ^"

KEGAN PAUL, TKENCH, TEUBNEE, & CO. L™

PATBKNOSTER HOUSE, CHAEINQ- CROSS B-OAB.,
1895- '' '■'. '1


tiTHf'


^n"-


.^^^^^^^


".'X


I'l


■* "


. ;?^^lfe:E


■St
Oi


/I*


rt'-, *-■■


THE CHINESE CLASSICS


TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH,


PRELIMINARY ESSAYS AND EXPUNATOEY NOTES.


(KEPEODUCED il'OR GENEEAL EEADEES FKOM THE ATJTHOE S WOKK
CONTAINING THE OEIGINAI. TKXT, ETC.)


JAMES LEGGE, D.D.

VOL. I.
THE LIFE AND TEACHINGS OF CONFUCIUS.

Siibznti} CRjition.


LONDON:
KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNEE, & CO. 17^

PATERNOSTEB, HOUS33, CHARING CROSS ROAD.
1895.


PREFACE.


When the author, in 1861, commenced the publication of
the Chinese Classics, with an English translation and such a
critical apparatus as was necessary to the proper appreciation oi"
tlie original Works, he did not contemplate an edition without
the Chinese text and simply adapted for popular reading. It
was soon pressed upon him, however, from various quarters ;
and he had formed the purpose to revise the separate volumes,
when he should have completed the whole of his undertaking,
and to publish the English text, with historical introductions
and brief explanatory notes, which might render it acceptable
for general perusal.

He is sorry that circumstances have arisen to call for such
an issue of his volumes, without waiting for the completion
of the last of the Classics; — principally because it adds another
to the many unavoidable hindrances which have impeded the
onward prosecution of his important task. A Mr Baker, of
Massachusetts, in the United States, having sent forth the
prospectus of a republication of the author's translation, his
publisher in London strongly represented to him the desira-
bleness of his issuing at once a popular edition in his own name,
as a counter-movement to Mr Baker's, and to prevent other
similar acts of piracy : — and the result is the appearance of the
present volume. It will be followed by a second, containing
the Works of Mencius, as soon as the publisher shall feel
himself authorized by public encouragement to go forward with
the undertaking.

The author has seen the first part of Mr Baker's repub-
lication, containing the English text of his first volume, and
the indexes of Subjects and Proper Names, without alteration.
The only other matter in it is an introduction of between
seven and eight pages. Pour of these are occupied with an
account of Confucius, taken from Chambers' Encyclopsedia,


iV PEEFACE.

which Mr Baker says he chooses to copy : — so naturally does it
come to him to avail himself of the labours of other men. " Con-
vey the wise it call. Steal ? Foh ! A fico for the phrase ! "

In the remainder of his Introduction, Mr Baker assumes a
controversial tone, and calls in question some of the judgments
which the author has passed on the Chinese sage and his doc-
trines. He would make it out that Confucius was a most
religious man, and abundantly recognized the truth of a future
life ; that the worship of God was more nearly universal in China
' than iu the Theocracy of Israel ; that the Chinese in general
are not more regardless of truth than Dr Legge's own countrv-
men ; and that Confucius' making no mention of heaven and hel.
is the reason why missionaries object to his system of practising
virtue for virtue's sake ! Mr Baker has made some proficiency
in the art of " adding insult to injury." It is easy to see to
what school of religion he belongs ; but the author would be
sorry to regard his publication as a specimen of the manner in
which the members of it "practise virtue for virtue's sake."

In preparing the present volume for the press, the author
has retained a considerable part of the prolegomena in the larger
work, to prepare the minds of his readers for proceeding with
advantage to the translation, and forming an intelligent judg-
ment on the authority which is to be allowed to the original
Works. . He has made a few additions and corrections which his
increased acquaiatance with the field of Chinus) literature en-
abled him to, do.

He was pleased to find, in revising the translation, that
the alterations which it was worth while to make were very few
and unimportant.

He has retained the headings to the notes on the several
chapters, as they give, for the most part, an adequate summary
of the subjects treated in them. All critical matter, inter^jsting
and useful only to students of the Chinese language, he has
thrown out. In a few instances he has remodelled the notes,
or made such additions to them ap were appropriate to the
popular design of the edition.

Song-Kong, 'l&th October, 1866.


CONTENTS.


I. PRELIMINARY ESSAYS.
CHAPTER I.

OF THE CHINESE CLASSICS GENERALLY.
SECTIOK p^g,

I. BOOKS INCLUDED DNDER THE NAME OF THE CHINESE

CLASSICS . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

II. THE AUTHORITY OF THE CHINESE CLASSICS . . 3


CHAPTER II.

OF THE CONFUCIAN ANALECTTS.

FORMATION OF THE TEXT OF THE ANALECTS BY THE

SCHOLARS or THE HAN DYNASTY . . . . . 12

AT WHAT TIME, AND BY WHOM, THE ANALECTS WEBB

WRITTEN ; THEIR PLAN ; AND AUTHENTICITY . . 15

OF COMMENTARIES UPON THE ANALECTS . , .19


CHAPTER III.

OF THE GREAT LEARNING.

I. HISTORY OF THE TEXT; AND THE DIFFERENT ARBAN6B-

MENTS OF IT WHICH HAVE BEEN PROPOSED . . . 22

II. OF THE AUTHORSHIP, AND DISTINCTION OF THE TEXT

INTO CLASSICAL TEXT AND COMMENTARY . . . . 26

m. ITS SCOPE AND VALUE . . . . 27


VI CONTENTS.

CHAPTER IV.

OF THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN.
BliCTION PAGS

1. ITS PLACE IN THE LE KE, AND ITS PUBLICATION SE-
PARATELY . . . . . . . . 35

II. ITS AUTHOR ; AND SOME ACCOHNT OF HIM . . . . 36

HI. ITS SCOPE AND VALUE . . . . 43

CHAPTER V.

CONPnCIUS ; HIS INFLUENCE AND &OCTEINEB.

I. LIFE OP CONFUCIUS . . . . . , . . .55

II. HIS INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS . . . . . . . 91


ri. THE CliASSICS.


I. CONFUCIAN ANALECTS . . . . . . 116

II. THE GREAT LEARNING . . . . . . . . 264

HI. THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN , . . . . , . . 282


III. INDEXES.

1. SUBJECTS IN THE CONFUCIAN ANALECTS . . . . . 321

II. PROPER NAMES IN THE CONFUOIAN ANALECTS . . . . 330

III. SUBJECTS IN THE GREAT LEARNING . . . . . . !J34

IV. PROPER NAMES IN THE GREAT LEARNING . . . . 335
V. SUBJECTS IN THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN . . . 336

VI. PROPER NAMES IN THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN . 338


PEELIMINAEY ESSAYS.


CHAPTER I.

01 THE CHINESE CLASSICS GENERiiiLY.
SECTION I.

BOOKS INCLUDED UNDEE THE NAME OF THE CHINESE CLASSICS.

1. The Books now recognized as of highest authority in
China are comprehended under the denominations of " The
five King,"' and " The four Shoo." The term Mng is of
textile origin, and signifies the warp threads of a web, and
their adjustment. An ea,sy application of it is to denote
what is regular and insures regularity. As used with refer-
ence to books, it indicates their authority on the subjects of
which they treat. " The five KiTig " are the five canonical
Works, containing the truth upon the highest subjects from
the. sages of China, and which should be received as law by
all generations. The term shoo simply means writings or
hoolcs.

2. The five King are : — the Yih, or, as it has been styled,
■ " The Book of Changes ; " the Shoo, or " The Book of His-
torical Documents ;" the She, or " The Book of Poetry ; "
the Le Ke, or " Record of Eites ; " and the Ch'un Ts'ew, or
" Spring and Autumn," a chronicle of events, extending
from B.C. 721 to 480. The authorship, or compilation rather,
of all these works is loosely attributed to Confucius. But
much of the Le Ke is from later hands. Of the Yih, the
ShoOi and the She, it is only in the first that we find
additions said to be from the philosopher himself, in the
shape of appendixes. The Ch'un Ts'ew is the only one of the

VOL. I. ).


2 THE CHINESE CLASSICS GENERALLY.

five King wliich can, witli an approximation to correctness,
be described as of his own " making."

" The four Books " is an abbreviation for " The Books of
the four Philosophers." The first is the Lun Yu, or "Digested
Conversations," being occupied chiefly with the sayings of
Confucius. He is the philosopher to whom it belongs. P..
appears in this Work under the title of " Confucian Analects."
The second is the Ta Heo, or " Great Learning," now com-
monly attributed to Tsang Sin, a disciple of the sage. He
is the philosopher of it. The third is the Chung Yung, or
" Doctrine of the Mean," ascribed to K'ung Keih, the grand-
son of Confucius. He is the philosopher of it. The fourth
contains the works of Mencius.

3. This arrangement of the Classical Books, which is
commonly supposed to have originated with the scholars of
the Sung dynasty, is defective. The Great Learning and
the Doctrine of the Mean are both found in the Record of
Rites, being the forty-second and thirty-first Books respect-
ively of that compilation, according to the usual arrange-
ment of it.

4. The oldest enumerations of the Classical Books specify
only the five King. The Yo Ke, or " Record of Music," the
remains of which now form one of the Books in the Le Ke,
was sometimes added to those, making with them the six
King. A division was also made into nine King, consisting
of the Yih, the She, the Shoo, the Chow Le, or " Ritual of
Chow," the E Le, or " Ceremonial Usages," the Le Ke, and
the three annotated editions of the Ch'un Ts'ew, by Tso-
k'ew Ming, Kung-yang Kaou, and Kuh-leang Ch'ih. In
the famous compilation of the classical Books, undertaken
by order of T'ae-tsung, the second emperor of the T'ang
dynasty (b.c. 627 — 619), and which appeared in the reign of
his successor, there are thirteen King ; viz., the Yih, the
She, the Shoo, the three editions of the Ch'un Ts'ew, the
Le Ke, the Chow Le, the E Le, the Confucian Analects,
the Urh Ya, a sort of ancient dictionary, the Heaou King,
or " Classic of Filial Piety," and the works of Mencius.

5. A distinction, however, was made, as early as tha
dynasty of the Western Han, in our first century, among
the Woi'ks thus comprehended under the same common name ;
and Mencius, the Lun Yu, the Ta Heo, the Chung Yung,
and the Heaou King were spoken of as, the seaou King, or.


AUTHORITY OP THE CHINESE CLASSICS. 3

" smaller Classics." It thus appears, contrary to the
ordinary opinion on the subject, that the Ta Heo and Chung
Yung had been published as separate treatises long before
the Sung dynasty, and that the Pour Books, as distinguished
from the greater King, had also previously found a place in
the literature of China.^


SECTION II.

THE AUTHOEITY OF THE CHINESE CLASSICS.

1 . This subject will be discussed in connection with each
separate Work, and it is only designed here to exhibit
generally the evidence on which the Chinese Classics claim
to be received as genuine productions of the time to which
they are referred.

2. In the memoirs of the Former Han dynasty (b.c. 201 —
A.D. 24), we have one chapter which we may call the History
of Literature. It commences thus : — " After the death of
Confucius, there was an end of his exquisite words; and
when his seventy disciples had passed away, violence began
to be done to their meaning. It came about that there were
five different editions of the Ch'^un Ts'ew, four of the She,
and several of the Yih. Amid the disorder and collision of
the warring States (b.c. 480 — 221), truth and falsehood were
still more in a state of warfare, and a sad confusion marked
the words of the various scholars. Then came the calamity
inilicted under the Ts'in dynasty (b.c 220 — 206), when the
literary monuments were destroyed by fire, in order to keep
the people in ignorance. But, by and by, there arose the
Han dynasty, which set itself to remedy the evil wrought
by the Ts'in. Great efforts were made to collect slips and
tablets,^ and the way was thrown wide open for the bringing in
of Books. In the time of the emperor Heaou-woo (b.c.139 —
86), portions of Books being wanting and tablets lost, so
that ceremonies and music were suffering great damage, he

' For the statetnents in the two last paragraphs, see the works of Se-ho
on ■' The Text of the. Great Learning," Bk. I,

' Slips and tablets on bamboo, which supplied in those days the place of
paper. ...

!•


* TBE CHINESE CLASSICS GENEEALLT.

was moTed to sorrow, and said, ' I am very sad for this.'
He therefore formed the plan of Repositoriesj in which the
Books might be stored, and appointed oflBcers to transcribe
Books on an extensive scale, embracing the works of the
various scholars, that they might all be placed in the Re-
positories. The Emperor Ch'ing (b.c. 31 — 6), finding that a
portion of the Books still continued dispersed or missing,
commissioned Ch'in Nung, the superintendent of guests, to
search for undiscovered Books throughout the empire, and
by special edict ordered the chief of the Banqueting House,
Lew Heang, to examine the classical Works, along with the
commentaries on them, the writings of the scholars, and all
poetical productions ; the master-controller of infantry, Jin
Hwang, to examine the Books on the art of war ; the grand
historiographer, Yin Heen, to examine the Books treating
of the art of numbers (i. e. divination) ; and the imperial
physician, Le ChS3o-ko, to examine the Books on medicine.
Whenever any Book was done with, Heang forthwith ar-
ranged it, indexed it, and made a digest of it, which was
presented to the emperor. While the undertaking was in
progress, Heang died, and the emperor Gae (b.c. 5— a.d.)
appointed his son, Hin, a master of the imperial carriages,
to complete his father's work. On this, Hin collected all
the Books, and presented a report of them, under seven
divisions."

The first of these divisions seems to have been a general
catalogue, containing perhaps only the titles of the works
included m the other six. The second embraced the class-
ical Works. From the abstract of it, which is preserved in '
the chapter referred to, we find that there were 294 coUec-
tions of the Yih-king, from 13 different individuals or edit-
ors ; 412 collections of the Shoo-king, from nine difi"erent
individuals ; 416 volumes of the She-king, from six different
individuals r of the Book of Rites, 555 collections, from 13
diflferentindividuals; of the Books on Music, 165 collections,
from SIX different editors; 948 collections of History, under

1 How much of the whole Work was contained in each " collection " or
Jt'een,,\t is impossible for us to ascertain. P. Regis savs •_" Pi^„ „" j ,
dum Oallice dicimus ' des pQces d'eloquence, depoede.' "' ' ^''^'^'"^"'O- \

■ The collections of the She-king are mentioned under the nam»„f i^ '

" .sections," '• portions." Had p'een been used, it might have bee^unir!.' ■
of indiridual odes. This change of terms shiws l^lTp'lnVtT^?^^ '
w-mmanos, we are not to understand single blocks or chapters.


AUTHOEITY OF THE CHINESE CLASSICS. 5

the heading of the Ch'un Ts'ew, from 23 different indivi-
duals ; 229 collections of the Lun Yvl, including the Analects
and kindred fragments, from 12 different individuals ; of the
Heaou-king, emhracing also the Urh Ya, and some other
portions of the ancient literature, 59 collections, from 11
different individuals ; and finally of the Lesser Learning,
being works on the form of the characters, 45 collections,
from 1 1 different individuals. The Works of Mencius were
included in the second division, among the Writings of what
were deemed orthodox scholars, of which there were 836
collections, from 53 different individuals.

3. 'i'he above important document is sufficient to show
how the emperors of the Han dynasty, as soon as they had
made good their possession of the empire, turned their at-
tention to recover the ancient literature of the nation, the
Classical Books engaging their first care, and how earnestly
and effectively the scholars of the time responded to the
\vishes of their rulers. In addition to the facts specified in
the preface to it, I may relate that the ordinance of the Ts'in
dynasty against possessing the Classical Books (with the ex-
ception, as will appear in its proper place, of the Yih-king)
was repealed by the second sovereign of the Han, the em-
peror Heaou Hwuy, in the 4th year of his reign, B.C. 190^
and that a large portion of the Shoo-king was recovered in
the time of the third emperor, B.C. 178 — 156, while in the
year B.C. 136, a special Board was constituted, consisting of
literati who were put in charge of the five King.

4. The collections reported on by Lew Hin suffered
damage in the troubles which began a.d. 8, and continued
till the rise of the second or eastern Han dynasty in the year
25. The founder of it {a.Tj. 25— 'j 7/ zealously promoted the
undertaking of his predecessors, and additional repositories
were required for the books which were collected. His
successors, the emperors, Heaou-ming (58 — 75), Heaou-chang
(75 — 88),andHeaou-hwo (89 — 105), took a part themselves
in the studies and discussions of the literary tribunal, and
the emperor Heaou-ling, between the years 172 — 178, had
the text of the five King, as it had been fixed, cut in slabs
of stone, in characters of three different forms.

5. Since the Han, the successive dynasties have considered
the literary monuments of the country to be an object of
their special care. Many of them have issued editions of the


b THE CHINESE CLASSICS GENEEALLT.

classics, embodying the commentaries of preceding gener.
ations. No dynasty has distinguished itself more in this
line than the present Manchow possessors of the Empire.
In fine, the evidence is complete that the Classical Books of
China have come down from at least a century before our
Christian era, substantially the same as we have them at
present.

6. But it still remains to "inquire in what condition we may
suppose the Books were when the scholars of the Han
dynasty commenced their labours upon them. They ac-
knowledge that the tablets — we cannot here speak of manu-
scripts — were mutilated and in disorder. Was the injury
which they had received of such an extent that all the care
and study put forth on the small remains would be of little
use ? This question can be answered satisfactorily only by
an examination of the evidence which is adduced for the text
of each particular Classic ; but it can be made apparent that
there is nothing, in the nature of the case, to interfere with
our believing that the materials were sufficient to enable the
scholars to execute the work intrusted to them.

7. The burning of the ancient Books by order of the
founder of the Ts'in dynasty is always referred to as the
greatest disaster which they sustained, and with this is
coupled the slaughter of many of the literati by the same
monarch.

The account which we have of these transactions in the
Historical Records is the following :^ —

" In his 34th year" (the 34th year, that is, after he had
ascended the throne of Ts'in. It was only the 8th after he
had been acknowledged Sovereign of the empire, coinciding
with B.C. 212) "the emperor, returning from a visit to the
south, which had extended as far as Yue, gave a feast in the
palace of Heen-yang, when the Great Scholars, amounting
to seventy men, appeared and wished him long life.^ The
superintendent of archery. Chow Ts'ing-ch'in, came for-

' I have thouglit it well to endeavour to translate the whole of the passages.
Father de Mailla merely constructs from them a narrative of his own • see
L'Histoire Generate de La Chine, tome II., pp. 399 — 402. The common
histories cm-rent in China avoid the difficulties of the original by giving an
abridgment of it.

2 These were not only " great scholars," but had an official rank. Theru
was what wo may call a college of thom, consisting of seventy members.


AUTHOEITT OF THE CHINESK CLASSICS. 7

ward and praised hinij saying, 'Formerly^ the State of Ts'in.
was only 1000 le in extent, .but Your Majesty, by your
spirit-like efficacy and intelligent wisdom, has tranquillized
and settled the whole empire, and driven away all barbarous
tribes, so that wherever the sun and moon shine, all appear
before you as guests acknowledging subjection. You have
formed the States of the various princes into provinces and
districts, where the people enjoy a happy tranquillity, suf-
fering no more from the calamities of war and contention.
This condition of things will be transmitted for 10,000
generations. Prom the highest antiquity there has been no
one in awful virtue like Your Majesty.''

" The Emperor was pleased with this flattery, when Shun-
yu Yu2, one of the great scholars, a native of Ts'^e, advanced
and said, ' The sovereigns of Yin and Chow, for more than a
thousand years, invested their sons and younger brothers,
and meritorious ministers, with domains and rule, and could
thus depend upon them for support and aid ; — that I have
heard. But now Your Majesty is in possession of aU within
the seas, and your sons and younger brothers are nothing
but private individuals. The issue will be that some one
will arise to play the part of T'een Ch'ang,^ or of the six nobles
of Ts'in, Without the support of your own family, where
will you find the aid which you may require ? That a state
of things not modelled from the lessons of antiquity can long
continue ; — that is what I have not heard. Ts'ing is now
showing himself to be a flatterer, who increases the errors of
Your Majestj"-, and is not a loyal minister.'

" The Emperor requested the opinions of others on this
representation, when the premier, Le Sze, said, ' The five
emperors were not one the double of the other, nor did the
three dynasties accept one another's ways. Bach had a pe-
culiar system of government, not for the sake of the contra-
riety, but as being required by the changed times. ■ Now,
Your Majesty has laid the foundations of imperial sway, so
that it will last for 10,000 generations. This is indeed be-
yond what a stupid scholar can understand. And, moreover,
Yue only talks of things belonging to the Three Dynasties,
which are not fit to be models to you. At other times, when

1 The T'een family grew up in the State of Ts'e, and in the early part of the
4th century B.C. supplanted the ruling House. The dismemberment of
Ts'in was still earlier.


8 THE CHINESE CIASSICS OENEEALLT.

the princes were all striving together, they endeavoured to
gather the wandering scholars about them ; but now, tne
empire is in a stable condition, and laws and ordinances
issue from one supreme authority. Let those of the people
who abide in their homes give their strength to the toils of
husbandry, and those who become scholars should study the
various laws and prohibitions. Instead of doing this, how-
ever, the scholars do not learn what belongs to the present
day, but study antiquity. They go on to condemn the pre-
sent time, leading the masses of the people astray, and to
disorder.

" ' At the risk of my life, I, the prime minister, say, —
Formerly, when the empire was disunited and disturbed,
there was no one who c'ould give unity to it. The princes
therefore stood up together ; constant references were made
to antiquity to the injury of the present state ; baseless
statements were dressed up to confound what was real, and
men made a boast of their own peculiar learning to condemn
what their rulers appointed. And now, when Your Majesty
has consolidated the empire, and, distinguishing black from
white, has constituted it a stable unity, they still honour
their peculiar learning, and combine together ; they teach
men what is contrary to your laws. When they hear that
an ordinance has been issued, every one sets to discussing it
with his learning. In the court, they are dissatisfied in
heart ; out of it, they keep talking in the streets. While
they make a pretence of vaunting their Master, they consider
it fine to have extraordinary views of their own. And so
they lead on the people to be guilty of murmuring and evil
speaking. If these things are not prohibited. Your Majesty's
authority will decline, and parties will be forT)ip.rl As to
the best way to prohibit then*, I pray that all the Eecords in
charge of the Historiographers be burned, excepting those
of Ts'in ,: . that, with the exception of those officers belonging
to the Board of Great Scholars, all througliout the empire
who presume to keep copies of the She-king, or of the Shoc-
king, or of the books of the Hundred Schools, be required
to go with them to the officers in charge of the several dis-
tricts, and burn them ; that all who may dare to speak to-
gether about the She and the Shoo be put to death, and
their bodies exposed in the market-place ; that those who
make mention of the past, so as to blame the present, be put


AtTTHOElTT OF THE CHINESE CLASSICS.; 9

to death along with their relatives ; that oflBcers who shall
know of the violation of these rules and not inform agaiast
the offenders^ be held equally guilty with them ; and that
whoever shall not have burned their books within thirty
days after the issuing of the ordinance^ be branded and sent
to labour on the wall for four years. The only books which
should be spared are those on medicine, divination, and
husbandry. Whoever wants to learn the laws may go to
the magistrates and learn of them.'

" The imperial decision was — ' Approved.' "
The destruction of the scholars is related more briefly.
In the year after the burning of the Books, the resentment
of the Emperor was excited by the remarks and flight of
two scholars who had been favourites with him, and he de-
termined to institute a strict inquiry about all of their class
in Heen-yang, to find out whether they had been making
ominous speeches about him, and disturbing the minds of
the people. The investigation was committed to the Cen-
sors ; and it being discovered that upwards of 460 scholars
had violated the prohibitions, they were all buried alive in
pits, for a warning to the empire, while degradation and
banishment were employed more strictly than before against
all who fell under suspicion. The Emperor's eldest son,
Foo-soo, remonstrated with him, saying that such measures
against those who repeated the words of Confucius, and
sought to imitate him, would alienate all the people from
their infant dynasty, but his interference ofiended his father
so much that he was sent off from court, to be with the
general who was superintending the building of the great '
wall.

8. No attempts have been made by Chinese critics and his-
torians to discredit the record of these events, though some
have questioned the extent of the injury inflicted by them
on the monuments of their ancient literature. It is import-
ant to observe that the edict against the Books did not extend
to the Yih-king, which was exempted as being a work on
divination, nor did it extend to the other classics which were
in charge of the Board of Great Scholars. There ought to
have been no difficulty in finding copies when the Han dy-
nasty superseded that of Ts'in ; and probably there would
have been none but for the sack of the capital, in B.C. 203,
by H-eang Yu, the most formidable opponent of the founder


10 THE CHINESE CLASSICS GENEEALLT

of the House of Han. Then, we are told, the fires blazed^
for three months among the palaces and public buildings, -;
and proved as destructive to the copies of the 'Great
Scholars/ ,as those ordered by the tyrant had done to the
copies of the people.

It is to be noted, moreover, that his hfe lasted only three
years after the promulgation of his edict. He died B.C. 209 ;
and the reign of his second son, who succeeded him, lasted
only other three years. Then the reign of the founder of
the Han dynasty dates from B.C. 201 : — eleven years were
all which intervened between the order for the burning of the
Books and the establishment of that Family which signal-
ized itself by the care which it bestowed for their recovery ;
and from the issue of the edict against private individuals
having copies in their keeping to its express abrogation by
the Emperor Hwuy, there were only 22 years. We may
believe, indeed, that vigorous efforts to carry the edict into
effect would not be continued longer than the life of its
author, — that is, not for more than about three years. The
calamity inflicted on the ancient Books of China by the
House of Ts'in could not have approached to anything like
a complete destruction of them.

9. The idea of forgery by the scholars of the Han dynasty
on a large scale is out of the question. The catalogues of
Lew Hin enumerated more than 13,000 volumes of a larger
or smaller size, the productions of nearly 600 different
writers, and arranged in 38 subdivisions of subjects. In the
third catalogue, the first subdivision contained the orthodox
writers, to the number of 53, with 836 Works or portions of
their Works. Between Mencius and K'ung Keih, the grand-
son of Confucius, eight different authors have place. The
second subdivision contained the Works of the Taouist school,
amounting to 993 collections, from 37 different authors. The
sixth subdivision contained the Mihist writers, to the num-
ber of six, with their productions in 86 collections. I specify
these two subdivisions, because they embraced the Works
of schools or sects antagonist to that of Confucius, and some
of them still hold a place in Chinese literature, and contain
many references to the five Classics, and to Confucius and
his disciples.

10. The inquiry pursued in the above paragraphs conducts
us to the conclusion that the materials from which the


AUTHORITY OF THE CHINESE CLASSICS. 11

Classics, as they liave come down to us, were compiled aud
edited in the two centuries preceding our Christian era, were
genuine remains, going back to a still more remote period.
The injury which they sustained from the dynasty of Ts'in
was, I believe, the same in character as that to which they
were exposed during all the time of " the Warring States "
It may have been more intense in degree, but the constant
warfare which prevailed for some centuries among the dif-
ferent States which composed the empire was eminently
unfavourable to the cultivation of literature. Mencius tells
us how the princes had made away with many of the records
of antiquity, from which their own usurpations and innova-
tions might have been condemned.^ Still the times were not
unfruitful, either in scholars or statesmen, to whom the ways
and monuments of antiquity were dear, and the space from
the rise of the Ts'in dynasty to Confucius was not very great.
It only amounted to 258 years. Between these two periods
Mencius stands as a connecting link. Born probably in the
year B.C. 371, he reached, by the intervention of K'ung Keih,
back to the sage himself, and as his death happened B.C. 288,
we are brought down to within nearly half a century of the
Ts'in dynasty. From all these considerations, we may proceed
with confidence to consider each separate Work, believing
that we have in these Classics and Books what the great
sage of China and his disciples found, or gave to their coun-
try, more than 2000 years ago.

See Menciiis, V. Ft II. ii. 2.


12 THE CONFUCIAN ANALECTS^


CHAPTER II.

OF THE CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.


SECTION I.


FOEMATION OF THE TEXT OP THE ANALECTS BY THE SCHOIA
OF THE HAN DYNASTY.

1. When the work of collecting and editing the rema
of the Classical Books was undertaken by the scholars
HaUj there appeared two different copies of the Aualec
one from Loo, the native State of Confucius, and the- otl
from Ts'e, the State adjoining. Between these there w^
considerable differences. The former consisted of twei
Books or Chapters, the same as those into which the Clas
is now divided. The latter contained two Books in additi^
and in the twenty Books, which they had in common, ■
chapters and sentences were somewhat more numerous tl
in the Loo exemplar.

2. The names of several individuals are given, who devo
themselves to the study of those two copies of the Clasi
Among the patrons of the Loo copy are mentioned
names of Hea-how Shing, grand-tutor of the heir-appare
who died at the age of 90, and in the reign of the Empe
Seuen (b.c. 72 — 48) ; Seaou Wangche, a general oflBcer, ■w
died in the reign of the Emperor Yuen (b.c. 47 — 32) ; "V
Heen, who was premier of the empire from b.c. 70 — 66 ; e
his son Heuen-shing. As patrons of the Ts'e copy, we hi
Wang K'ing, who was a censor in the year b.c. 99 ; Yv
Tan, and Wang Keih, a statesman who died in the beginn;
of the reign of the Emperor Yuen.

3. But a third copy of the Analects was discovered abi
B.C. 150. One of the sons of the Emperor King was i
pointed king of Loo, in the year b.c 153, and some ti
after, wishing to enlarge his palace, he proceeded to r


FOKMAXION OB THE TEXT. 13

down the iLOuse of the K'ung family, known as that where
Confucius himself had lived. While doing so, there were
found in the wall copies of the Shoo-king, the Ch'un Ts'ew,
the Heaou-king, and the Lun Yu or Analects, which had
been deposited there, when the edict for the burning of the
Books was issued. They were all written, however, in the
most ancient form of the Chinese character,^ which had
fallen into disuse ; and the king returned them to the K'ung
family, the head of which, K'ung Gan-kwo, gave himself to
, the study of them, and finally, in obedience to an imperial
order, published a Work called " The Lun Yu, with exjjlana-
tions of the Characters, and Exhibition of the Meaning.'' ^

4. The recovery of this copy will be seen to be a most im-
portant circumstance in the history of the text of the Ana-
lects. It is referred to by Chinese writers, as " The old
Lun Yu." In the historical narrative which we have of the
affair, a circumstance is added which may appear to some
minds to throw suspicion on the whole account. The king
was finally arrested, we are told, in his purpose to destroy
the house, by hearing the sound of bells, musical stones,
lutes, and harpsichords, as he was ascending the steps that
led to the ancestral hall or temple. This incident was con-
trived, we may suppose, by the K'ung family, to preserve
the house, or it may have been devised by the historian
to glorify the sage, but we may not, on account of it, dis-
credit the finding of the ancient copies of the Books. We
have K'img Gan-kwo's own account of their being com-
mitted to him, and of the ways which he took to decipher
them. The work upon the Analects, mentioned above, has
not indeed come down to us, but his labours, on the Shoo-
king still remain..

6. It has been already stated, that the Lun Yu of Ts'e
contained two Books more than that of Loo. In this re-
spect, .the old Lun Yu agreed with the Loo exemplar. Those
two books were wanting in it as welL The last book of the
Loo Lun waa divided in it, however, into two, the chapter

' Called " tadpole oharaoters." . They were, it is said, the original forms
devised by Ts'ang KeS, with large heads and fine tails, like the creature from
which they were named. See the notes to the preface to the Shoo-king in
" The thirteen Classics."

■■• See the preface to the Lun Yu in " The thirteen King." It has been my
principal authority in this Section.


14 THE CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

beginning, " Yaou said/' forming a whole Book by itsi
and the remaining two chapters formed another Book 1
ginning " Tsze-chang." With this trifling difference, i
old and the Loo copies appear to have agreed together.

6. Chang Yu, prince of Gan-ch'ang, who died B.C. 4, af
having sustained several of the highest offices of the e
pire, instituted a comparison between the exemplars of I
and Ts'e, with a view to determine the true text. The :
suit of his labours appeared in twenty -one Books, which i
mentioned in Lew Hin's catalogue. They were known
the Lun of the Prince Chang, and commanded general £
probation. To Chang Yu is commonly ascribed the eje
ing from the Classic of the two additional books which i
Ts'e exemplar contained, but Ma Twan-lin prefers to ri
that circumstance on the authority of the old Lun, wh]
we have seen was without them. If we had the two Bool
we might find sufficient reason from their contents to d
credit them. That may have been sufficient for Chang "!
to condemn them as he did, but we can hardly suppose tl
he did not have before him the old Lun, which had come
light about a century before he published his Work.

7. In the course of the second century, a new edition
the Analects, with a commentary, was published by one
the greatest scholars which China has ever produced, — Ch'i
Heuen, known also as Ch'ing K'ang-shing. He died
the reign of the Emperor Heen (a.d.109 — 220) at the age
74, and the amount of his labours on the ancient classi(
literature is almost incredible. While he adopted the L
Lun as the received text of his time, he compared it minute
with those of Ts'e and the old exemplar. He produced thi
different works on the Analects, which unfortunately do r
subsist. They were current, however, for several centurie
and the name of one of them — " The Meaning of the Lun 1
explained," — appears in the Catalogues of Books in t
T'ang dynasty (a.d. 624—907).

8. On the whole, the above statements will satisfy t
reader of the care with which the text of the Lun Yu w
fixed during the dynasty of Han. '


BY WHOM WEITIEN. ?5


SECTION II.

^T WHAT TIME, AND BY WHOM, THE ANALECTS WEEE WKITTIIN ;
THEIE PLAN ; AND AUTHENTICITY.

1. At the commencement of the notes upon the first Book,
under the heading — " The Title of the Work," I have given
the received account of its authorship, taken from the "History
of Literature " of the western Han dynasty. According to
that, the Analects were compiled by the disciples of Con-
fucius, coming together after his death, and digesting the
memorials of his discourses and conversations which they had
severally preserved. But this cannot be true. We may be- ^
lieve, indeed, that many of the disciples put on record con-
versations which they had had with their master, and notes
about his manners and incidents of his life, and that these
have been incorporated with the Work which we have, but
that Work must have taken its present form at a period some-
what later.

In Book VIII., chapters iii. and iv., we have some notices
of the last days of Tsang Sin, and are told that he was
visited on his death-bed by the officer Mang King. Now
King was the posthumous title of Chung-sun TseS, and we
find him alive (Le Ke, II. Pt. II. ii. 2) after the death of
Duke To of Loo, which took place B.C. 430, about fifty^ars
after the death of Confucius.

Again, Book XIX. is all occupied with the sayings of the
disciples. Confucius personally does not appear in it. Parts
of it, as chapters iii., xii., xviii., and xix., carry us down to
a time when the disciples had schools and followers of their
own, and were accustomed to sustain their teachings by
referring to the lessons which they had heard from the sage.

Thirdly, there is the second chapter of Book XL, the
■second paragraph of which is evidently a note by the com'-
pilers of the work, enumerating ten of the principal disciples,
and classifying them according to their distinguishing char-
acteristics. We can hardly suppose it to have been written
while any of the ten were aUve. But there is among them
the name of Tsze-hea, who lived to the age of about a hun-


16 THE CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

dred. We find him, B.C. 406, three quarters of a cent
after the death of Confucius, at the court of Wei, to
prince of which he is reported to have presented some
the Classical Books.

2. We cannot therefore accept the above account of
origin of the Analects, — that they were compiled by
disciples of Confucius. Much more likely is the view thai

• owe the work to their disciples. In the note on Book I
1, a peculiarity is pointed out in the use of the surname!
Yew Jo and Tsang Sin, which has made some Chinese cri
attribute the compilation to their followers. But this c
elusion does not stand investigation. Others have assig;
different portions to different schools. Thus Book V
given to the disciples of Tsze-kung ; Book XI. to thost
Min Tsze-k'een; Book XIV. to Yuen Heen; and B
XVI. has been supposed to be interpolated from the A
lects of Ts'e. Even if we were to acquiesce in tl
decisions, we should have accounted only for a small ]
of the work. It is better to rest in the general conclus;
that it was compiled by the disciples of the disciples of
sage, making free use of the written memorials concern
him which they had received, and the oral statements wl
they had heard, from their several masters. And we s
not be far wrong, if we determine its date as about

- beginning of the third, or the end of the fourth cent
before Christ.

3. In the critical work on the Classical Books, ca
" Eecord of Remarks in the village of Yung," publishe(
1 743, it is observed, " The Analects, in my opinion, y,
made by the disciples, just like this Record of Rema:
There they were recorded, and afterwards came a first-i
hand, who gave them the beautiful literary finish which
now witness, so that there is not a character which does
have its own indispensable place." We have seen that
first of these statements contains only a small amouni
truth with regard to the materials of the Analects, nor
we receive the second. If one hand or one mind had
gested the materials provided by many, the arrangem
iind style of the work would have been different. We she
not have had the same remark appearing in several Boc
.with little variation, and sometimes with none at all, ]
.can we account on. this supposition for such. fragments


THEIE AUTHENTICITY. 17

the last chapters of the 9th, 10th, and 16th Books, and
many others. No definite plan has been kept in vieW^
throughout. A degree of unity appears to belong to some
Books more than to others, and in general to the first ten
more than to those which follow, but there is no progress of
thought or illustration of subject from Book to Book. And
even in those where the chapters have a common subject,
they are thrown together at random more than on any plan.

4. When the Work was first called the Lun Yu, we cannot
tell.^ The evidence in the preceding section is sufficient to
prove that when the Han scholars were engaged in collecting
the ancient Books, it came before them, not in broken
tablets, but complete, and arranged in Books or Sections,
as we now have it. The old Lun was found deposited in the
wall of the house which Confucius had occupied, and must
have been placed there not later than B.C. 211, distant from
the date which I have assigned to the compilation, not much
more than a century and a half: That copy, written in the
most ancient characters, was, possibly, the autograph, so to
speak, of the compilers.

We have the Writings, or portions of the Writings, of
several authors of the third and fourth centuries before
Christ. Of these, in addition to " The Great Learning,"
" The Doctrine of the Mean," and " The Works of Mencius,"
I have looked over the Works of Seun K'ing of the orthodox
school, of the philosophers Chwang and Le3 of the Taouist
school, and of the heresiarch Mih.

In The Great Learning, Commentary, chapter iv., we have
the words of Ana. XII. xiii. In The Doctrine of the Mean,
ch. iii., we have Ana. VI. xxvii. ; and in ch. xxviii. 5, we
have Ana. III. ix. and xiv. In Mencius, II. Pt. I. ii. 19, we
have Ana. VII. xxxiii., and in vii. 2, Ana. IV. i. ; in III. Pt.
I. iv. 11, Ana. VIII. xviii., xix. ; in IV. Pt. I. xiv. 1, Ana.
XI. xvi. 2 ; V. Pt. II. vii. 9, Ana. X. xiii. 4 ; and in VII.
Pt. II. xxxvii. 1, 2, 8, Ana. V. xxi., XIII. xxi., and XVII.

• In the continuation of the "General Examination of Records and
Scholars," Bk cxcviii. p. 17, it is said, indeed, on the authority Of Wang
Ch'ung, a scholar of the 1st century, that when the Work came out of the
wall it was named a Ch'uen or Record, and that it was when E'ung Gan-kwo
instructed a native of Tsin, named Foo-k'ing, in it, that it first got the name
of Lun Yu. If it were so, it is strange the circumstance is not mentioned in
Ho An's preface.

VOL. I. 2


18 THE CONrnOIAN ANALECTS.

xiii. These quotations, however, are introduced by " '
Master said," or " Confucius said," no mention being m
of any book called " The Lun Yu," or Analects. In
Great Learning, Commentary, x. 15, we have the word!
Ana. IV. iii., and in Mencius, III. Pt. II. vu. 3, thos^
Ana. XVII. i., but without any notice of quotation.

In the Writings of Seun K'ing, Book I. page 2, we i
some words of Ana. XV. xxx. ; p. 6, those of XIV. s
In Book VIII. p. 13, we have some words of Ana. II. x
But in these three instances there is no mark of quotatic

In the Writings of Chwang, I have noted only one j
sage where the words of the Analects are reproduced. A
XVIII. V. is found, but with large additions, and no refere
of quotation, in his treatise on " The state of Men in
world, Intermediate," placed, that is, between Heaven i
Earth. In all these Works, as well as in those of Lee i
Mih, the references to Confucius and his disciples, anc
many circumstances of his life, are numerous.^ The que
tions of sayings of his not found in the Analects are li
wise many, especially in the Doctrine of the Mean, in Mene:
and in the works of Chwang. Those in the latter are mos
burlesques, but those by the orthodox writers have more
less of classical authority. Some of them may be found
the Kea Yu, or " Family Sayings," and in parts of the
Ke, while others are " only known to us by their occurrei
in these Writings. Altogether, they do ' not supply
evidence, for which I am in quest, of the existence of ■
Analects as a distinct Work, bearing the name of the I
Yu, prior to the Ts'in dynasty. . They leave the presumpti
however, in favour of those conclusions, which arises fr
the facts stated in the first section, undisturbed. They ci
firm it rather. They show that there was abundance
materials at hand. to the scholars of Han, to compile
much larger Work with the same title, if they had fel
their duty to do the business of compilation, and not thai
editing.

1 In Mih'.s chapter against the Literati, he mentions some of the cha:
teristics of Confuoius., in the very words of the 10th Book of the Analects


COMMENIA.IUES. 19


SECTION III.

OF COMMENTARIES UPON THE ANALECTS.

1. It would be a vast and unprofitable labour to attempt
to give a list of the Commentaries which, have been pub-
lished on this Work. My object is merely to point out how
zealously the business of interpretation was undertakeuj as
soon as the text had been recovered by the scholars of the
Han dynasty, and with what industry it has been persevered
in down to the present time.

2. Mention has been made, in Section I. 6, of the Lun of
Prince Chang, published in the half century before our era.
Paou Heen, a distinguished scholar and officer, of the reign
of Kwang-woo, the first emperor of the Eastern Han dynasty,
A.D. 25 — 57, and another scholar of the surname Chow, less
known but of the same time, published Works, containing
arrangements of this into chapters and sentences, with ex-
planatory notes. The critical work of K'ung Gan-kwo on
the old Lun Yu has been referred to. That was lost in
consequence of troubles which arose towards the close of
the reign of the Emperor Woo, but in the time of the Em-
peror Shun, A.D. 126 — 144, another scholar, Ma Yung, under-
took the exposition of the characters in the old Lun, giving
at the same time his views of the general meaning. The
labours of Ch'ing Heuen in the second century have been
mentioned. Not long after his death, there ensued a period
of anarchy, when the empire was divided into three govern-
ments, well known from the celebrated historical romance,
called " The Three States." The strongest of them, the
House of Wei, patronized literature, and three of its high
officers and scholars, Ch'in K'eun, Wang Suh, and Chow
Shang-leS, in the first half, and probably the second quarter
of the third century, all gave to the world their notes on the
•Analects.

Very shortly after, five of the chief ministers of the Go- ,
vernment of Wei, Sun Yung, Ch'ing Ch'ung, Tsaou He,
Seun K'ae, and Ho An, united in the production of one


20 THE CONFUCIAH ANALECTS.

great work, entitled, " A Collection of Explanations of the
Lun Yu." It embodied the labours of all the writers which
have been mentioned, and having been frequently reprinted
by succeeding dynasties, it still remains. The preface of
the five compilers, in the form of a memorial to the emperor,
so called, of the House of Wei, is pubhshed with it, and has
been of much assistance to me in writing these sections.
Ho An was the leader among them, and the work is com-
monly quoted as if it were the production of him alone.

3. Prom Ho An downwards, there has not been a dynasty
which has not contributed its labourers to the illustration of
the Analects. In the Leang, which occupied the throne a
good part of the sixth century, there appeared the " Com-
ments of Wang K'an," who to the seven authorities cited
by Ho An added other thirteen, being scholars who had
deserved well of the Classic during the intermediate time.
Passing over other dynasties, we come to the Sung,_A4).
QQJL 12Z9. An edition of the Classics was published by
imperial authority, about the beginning of the 11th century,
with the title of " The Correct Meaning." , The principal
scholar engaged in the undertaking was Hing Ping. The
portion of it on the Analects is commonly reprinted in " The
Thirteen Classics," after Ho An's explanations. But the
names of the Sung dynasty are all thrown into the shade by
that of Choo He, than whom China has not produced a
greater scholar. He composed, in the 12th century, three
Works on the Analects, which still remain : — the first called
"Collected Meanings;" the second, " Collected Comments;"
and the third, " Queries." Nothing could exceed the
grace and clearness of his style, and the influence which
he has exerted on the literature of China has been almost
despotic.

The scholars of the present dynasty, however, seem in-
clined to question the correctness of his views and interpret-
ations of the Classics, and the chief place among them is
due to Maou K'eling, known more commonly as Maou Se-ho.
His writings, under the name of " The Collected Works of
Se-ho," have been published iu 80 volumes, containing be-
tween three and four hundred books or sections. He has
nine treatises on The Pour Books, or parts of them, and
deserves to take rank with Ch'ing Heuen and Choo He at
the head of Chinese scholars, though he is a vehement op-


COMMENTARIES. 21

ponent of the latter. Many of his writings are to be found
also in the great Work called " A Collection of Works on
the Classics, under the Imperial dynasty of Ts'ing/' which
contains 1400 sections, and is a noble contribution by
scholars of the present dynasty to the illustration of its
ancient literature.


22 THEflBEAT LMENING.


CHAPTER HI.

OP THE GEEAT LEARNING.


SECTION I.

HISTORY OF THE TEXT ; AND THE DIFFERENT ARRANGEMENTS OF IT
WHICH HAVE BEEN PROPOSED.

1. It has already been mentioned that " The Great Learn-
ing " forms one of the chapters of the Le Ke^ or " Record of
Rites/^ the formation of the text of which will be treated of
in its proper place. I wiU only say here that the Book, or
Books, of Rites had suffered much more, after the death of
Confucius, than the other ancient Classics. They were in a
more dilapidated condition at the time of the revival of the
ancient literature under the Han dynasty, and were then
published in three collections, only one of which — the Record
of Rites — retains its place among the King.

The Record of Rites consists, according to the current ar-
rangement, of 49 chapters or Books. Lew Heang (see ch.
I. sect. II. 2) took the lead in its formation, and was followed
by the two famous scholars, Tae Tih, and his relative, Tae
Shing. The first of these reduced upwards of 200 chapters,
collected by Heang, to 89, and Shing reduced these again to
46. The three other Books were added in the second
century of our era. The Great Learning being one of them,
by Ma Yung, mentioned in the last chaper, section III. 2.
Since his time, the Work has not received any further ad-
ditions.

2. In his note appended to what he calls the chapter of
" Classical Text," Choo He says that the tablets of the " old
copies " of the rest of The Great Learning were considerably
out of order. By those old copies, he intends the Work of
Ch'ing Heuen, who pubhshed his commentary on the Classic,
soon after it was completed by the additions of Ma Yung ;


mSTOEY 0P:THE TEXT. 23

and it is possible tliat the tablets were iii confusion, and had
not been arranged with sufficient care ; but such a thing does
not appear to have been suspected until the 12th century ;
nor can any authority from ancient monuments be adduced
in its support.

I have related how the ancient Classics were cut on slabs
of stone by imperial order, a.d. 175, the text being that
which the various literati had determined, and which had
been adopted by Ch'ing Heuen. The same work was per-
formed about seventy years later, under the so-called dynasty
of Wei, between the years 240 and 248, and the two sets of
slabs were set up together. The only difference between
them was, that whereas the Classics had been cut in the first
instance in three different forms, called the Seal character,
the Pattern style, and the Imperfect form, there was substi-
tuted for the latter in the slabs of Wei the oldest form of the
characters, similar to that which has been described in con-
nection with the discovery of the old Lun Yu in the wall of
Confucius' house. Amid the changes of dynasties, the slabs
both of Han and Wei had perished before the rise of the
T'ang dynasty, a.d. 624 ; but under one of its emperors, in
the year 836, a copy of the Classics was again cut on stone,
though only in one form of the character. These slabs we can
trace down through the Sung dynasty when they were known
as the tablets of Shen. They were in exact conformity with
the text of the Classics adopted by Ch'ing Henen in his
commentaries.

The Sung dynasty did not accomplish a similar work it-
self, nor has any one of the three which have followed it
thought it necessary to engrave in stone in this way the
ancient classics. About the middle of the 16th century,
however, the literary world in China was startled by a re-
port that' the slabs of Wei which contained The Great Learn-
ing had been discovered. But this was nothing more than
the result of an impudent attempt at an imposition, for which
it is difficult to a foreigner to assign any adequate cause.
The treatise, as printed from these slabs, has some trifling
additions, and many alterations in the order of the text, but
differing from the arrangements proposed by Choo He, and
by other scholars. There seems to be now no difference of
opinion among Chinese critics that the whole affair was a
forgery. The text of The Great Jjearning, as it appears in


24 THE GREAT LEAENING.

the Book of Eites witli the commentary of Ch'^ing Heuen, and
was thrice engraved on stone, in three different dynasties, is,
no doubt, that which was edited in the Han dynasty by Ma
Yung.

3. I have said that it is possible that the tablets contain-
ing the text were not arranged with sufficient care by him,
and, indeed, anyone who studies the treatise attentively will
probably come to the conclusion that the part of it forming
the first six chapters of Commentary in the present Work is
but a fragment. It would not be a difficult task to propose
an arrangement of the text different from any which I have
yet seen ; but such an undertaking would not be interesting
out of China. My object here is simply to mention the
Chinese scholars who have rendered themselves famous or
notorious in their own country, by what they have done
in this way. The first was Ch'ing Haou, a native of Loh-
yang in Ho-nan province, in the 11th century. His designa-
tion was Pih-shun, but since his death he has been known
chiefly by the style of Ming-taou, which we may render the
Wise-in-doctrine. The eulogies heaped on him by Choo He
and others are extravagant, and he is placed immediately
after Mencius in the list of great scholars. Doubtless he
was a man of vast literary acquirements. The greatest
change which he introduced into The Great Learning,
was to read sin for tsHn, at the commencement, making
the second object proposed in the treatise to be the
renovation, of the people, instead of loviyig them. This alter-
ation and his various transpositions of the text are found in
Maou Se-ho's treatise on " The attested text of The Great
Learning."

Hardly less illustrious than Ch'ing Haou was his younger
brother Ch'ing E, known by the style of Ching-shuh, and since
his death by that of E-ch'uen. He followed Haou in the
adoption of the reading " to renovate," instead of " to love."
But he transposed the text differently, more akin to the
arrangement afterwards made by Choo He, suggesting also
that there were some superfluous sentences in the old text
which might conveniently be erased. The Work, as proposed
to be read by him, will be found in the volume of Maou just
referred to.

We come to the name of Choo He who entered into the
labours of the brothers Ch'ing, the younger of whom he


HISTOET OP THE TEXT. 2o

styles his Master, in his introductory note to The Great
Learning. His arrangement of the text is that now current
in all the editions of the Four Books, and it had nearly dis-
placed the ancient text altogether. The sanction of Imperial
approval was given to it during the Yusn and Ming dynasties.
In the editions of the five King published by them, only the
names of the Doctrine of the Mean and The Great Learning
were preserved. No text of these Books was given, and
Se-ho tells us, that in the reign . of Kea-tsing, the most
flourishing period of the Ming dynasty (a.d. 1522 — 1566),
when a Wang Wan-shing published a copy of The Great
Learning, taken from the T'ang edition of the Thirteen if mj/,
all the officers and scholars looked at one another in astonish-
ment, and were inchned to suppose that the Work was a
forgery. Besides adopting the reading of sin for ts'in from
the Ch'ing, and modifying their arrangements of the text.
Choc He made other innovations. He first divided the whole
into one chapter of Classical text, which he assigned to Con-
fucius, and ten chapters of Commentary, which he assigned
to the disciple Tsang. Previous to him, the whole had been
published, indeed, without any specification of chapters and
paragraphs. He undertook, moreover, to supply one whole
chapter, which he supposed, after his master Ch'ing, to be
missing.

Since the time of Choo He, many scholars have exercised
their wit on The Great Learning. The Work of Maou Se-ho
contains four arrangements of the text, proposed respectively
by the scholars Wang Loo-chae, Ke P'ang-san, Kaou King-
yih, and Ko Hoo-chen. The curious student may examine
them there.

Under the present dynasty, the tendency has been to de-
preciate the labours of Choo He. The integrity of the text
of Ch'ing Heuen is zealously maintained, and the simpler
method of interpretation employed by him is advocated in
preference to the more refined and ingenious schemes of the
Sung scholars. I have referred several times in the notes to
a Work published a few years ago, under the title of " The
Old Text of the sacred King, with Commentary and Discus-
sions, by Lo Chung-fan of Nan-hae." I knew the man
seventeen years ago. He was a fine scholar, and had taken
the second degree, or that of Keu-jin. He applied to me in
1843 for Christian, baptism, and ofiended by my hesitancy


26 THE GEEAt LEAENING.'

went and enrolled himself among the disciples of anoth
Missionary. He soon, however^ withdrew into sechision, ai
spent the last years of his life in literary studies. His fami
have published the work on The Great Learning, and o:
or two others. He most vehemently impugns nearly eve:
judgment of Choo He : but in his own exhibitions of t"
meaning he blends many ideas of the Supreme Being and
the condition of human natare, which he had learned fro
the Christian Scriptures.


SECTION II.


OF THE AIJTHOKSHIP, AND DISTINCTION OF THE TEXT INTO CLASSIC.
TEXT AND COMMENTAEY.

1. The authorship of The Great Learning is a very dout
ful point, and one on which it does not appear possible
come to a decided conclusion. Choo He, as I have stats
in the last section, determined that so much of it was hin
or Classic, being the very words of Confucius, and that i
the rest was chuen, or Commentary, being the views of Tsai
Sin upon the sage's words, recorded by Ids disciples. Thi)
he does not expressly attribute the composition of t
Treatise to Tsang, as he is generally supposed to do. Wli
he says, however, as it is destitute of external support,
contrary also to the internal evidence. The 4th chapt
of Commentary commences with " The Master said." Sure]
if there were anythiiig more, directly from Confucius, the
would be an intimation of it in the same way. Or, if i
may allow that short sayings of Confucius might be int«
woven with the Work, as in the 15th paragraph of the 10
chapter, without mention of "The Master," it is too much
ask us to receive the long chapter at the beginning as bei:
from him. With regard to the Work having come from t
disciples of Tsang Sin, recording their master's views, t
paragraph in chapter 6th, commencing with " The discij
Tsang said," seems to be conclusive against that hypothes
So much we may be sure is Tsang's, and no more. Both
Choo He's judgments muat.be set aside. We cannot adn


ITS SCOPE AND TALTJE. 27

either tlie distinction of tlie contents into Classical' text and
Commentary, or that the Work was the production of
Tseng's disciples.

2. Who then was the author ? An ancient tradition attri-
butes it to K'ung Keih, the grandson of Confucius. In a
notice published at the time of their preparation, about the
stone slabs of Wei, the following statement by Kea Kwei, a
noted scholar of the 1st century, is quoted : — " When K'ung
Keih was living, and in straits, in Sung, being afraid lest
the lessons of the former sages should become obscure, and
the principles of the ancient emperors and kings fall to the
ground, he therefore made The Great Learning as the warp
of them, and The Doctrine of the Mean as the woof." This
would seem, therefore, to have been the opinion of that early
time, and I may say the only difficulty ia admitting it is that
no mention is made of it by Ch'ing Heuen. There certainly
is that agreement between the two treatises, which makes
their common authorship not at all unlikely.

3. Though we cannot positively assign the authorship of
The Great Learning, there can be no hesitation in receiving
it as a genuine monument of the Confucian school. There
are not many words in it from the sage himself, but it is a
faithful reflection of his teachings, written by some of his
followers, not far removed from him by lapse of time. It
must synchronize pretty nearly with the Analects, and may
be safely referred to the fourth century before our era.


SECTION IIL

ITS SCOPE AND VALUE.


1 . The worth of The Great Learning has been celebrated
in most extravagant terms by many Chinese writers, and
there have been foreigners who have not yielded to them in
their estimation of it. Pauthier, in the " Argument Philo-
sophique," prefixed to his translation of the Work, says : —
" It is evident that the aim of the Chinese philosopher is to
exhibit the duties of political government as those of the
perfecting of self, and of the practice of virtue by all men.


28 THE GREAT LEARNINQ.

He felt that he liad a higher mission than that with v
the greater part of ancient and modern philosophers
contented themselves ; and his immense love for the h
ness of humanity, which dominated over all his other £
ments, has made of his philosophy a system of s
perfectionating, which, we venture to say, has never
equalled." ^

Very different is the judgment passed upon the treati
a writer in the Chinese Repository : — " The Ta Hed
short politico-moral discourse. Ta Hed, or ' Superior Li
ing,' is at the same time both the name and the subje
the discourse ; it is the summum honum of the Chinese,
opening this Book, compiled by a disciple of Confucius
containing his doctrines, we might expect to find a ^
like Cicero^s Be Officiis ; but we find a very different
duction, consisting of a few commonplace rules for the r
tenance of a good government." ^

My readers will perhaps think, after reading the pre
section, that the truth lies between these two reprei
ations.

2. I believe that the Book should be styled T'ae HeS
not Ta Heo, and that it was so named as setting fortl
higher and more extensive principles of moral science, y\
come into use and manifestation in the conduct of go^
ment. When Choo He endeavours to make the title me
'"The principles of Learning, which were taught in
higher schools of antiquity," and tells us how at the a;
15 all the sons of the emperor, with the legitimate so;
the nobles and high oflScers, down to the more prom:
scions of the common people, all entei-ed these semins
and were taught the difficult lessons here inculcated
pity the ancient youth of China. Such " strong meat
not adapted for the nourishment of youthful minds,
the evidence adduced for the existence of such educat
institutions in ancient times is unsatisfactory, and fron
older interpretation of the title we advance more easi
contemplate the object and method of the Work.

3. The olject is stated definitely enough in the ope
paragraph : — " What The Great Learning teaches, is
illustrate illustrious virtue ; to love the people ; and to

' Le Ta Heo, ou La Grande Etude. Paris, 1837.
* Chinese Ecpository, vol. 111. p. 98.


ITS SCOPE AKD TAITJE. 29

in the highest excellence." The political aim of the writer
is here at once evident. He has before him on one side the
people, the masses of the empire, and over against them are
those whose work and duty, delegated by Heaven, is to
govern them, culminating, as a class, in " the son of Hea-
ven," "the one man," the emperor. From the 4th and
5th paragraphs, we see that if the lessons of the treatise be
learned and carried into practice, the result will be that
"illustrious virtue will be illustrated throughout the em-
pire," which will be brought, through all its length and
breadth, to a condition of happy tranquillity. This object is
certainly both grand and good; and if a reasonable and
likely method to secure it were proposed in the Work, lan-
guage would hardly supply terms adequate to express its
value.

4. But the above account of the object of The Great
Learning leads us to the conclusion that the student of it
should be an emperor. What interest can an ordinary man
have in it ? It is high up in the clouds, far beyond his reach.
This is a serious objection to it, and quite unfits it for a
place in schools, such as Choo He contends it once had. In-
telligent Chinese, whose minds were somewhat quickened
by Christianity, have spoken to me of this defect, and com-
plained of the difl&culty they felt in making the book a
practical directory for their conduct. " It is so vague and
vast," was the observation of one man. The writer, however,
has made some provision for the general application of his
instructions. He tells us, that from the emperor down to the
mass of the people, all must consider the cultivation of the
person to be the root, that is, the first thing to be attended
to. As in his method, moreover, he reaches from the culti-
vation of the person to the tranquillization of the Empire,
through the intermediate steps of the regulation of the
family, and the government of the State, there is room for
setting forth principles that parents and rulers generally
may find adapted for their guidance.

5, The method which is laid down for the attainment of
the great object proposed consists of seven steps : — the in-
vestigation of things j the completion of knowledge ; the
sincerity of the thoughts ; the rectifying of the heart; the
cultivation of the person ; the regulation of the family ; and
the government of the State. These form the steps of a


so THE GREAT LEAESING.

climax, tlie end of which is the etnpire tranquiUized. Pi
thier calls the paragraphs where they occur instances oft
sorites, or abridged syllogism. But they belong to rheto)
and not to logic.

6. In offering some observations on these steps, and i
writer's treatment of them, it will be well to separate thi
into those preceding the cultivation of the person, and the
following it ; and to deal with the latter first. — Let us si:
pose that the cultivation of the person is all attained, eve
discordant mental element having been subdued and remov(
It is assumed that the regulation of the family will nec(
sarily flow from this. TwO short paragraphs are all that i
given to the illustration of the point, and they are vag
genei-alities on the subject of men being led astray
their feelings and affections.

The family being regulated, there will result from it t
government of the State. First, the virtues taught in t
family have their correspondences in the wider sphe:
Filial piety will appear as loyalty. Fraternal submissi
will be seen in respect and obedience to elders and superio:
Kindness is capable of universal application. Second, " Frc
the loving example of one family, a whole State becom
loving, and from its courtesies the whole State becomes coui
ecus." Seven paragraphs suffice to illustrate these stal
ments, and short as they are, the writer goes back to t
topic of self-cultivation, returning from the family to t
individual.

The State being governed, the whole empire will becoi
peaceful and happy. Therfe is even less of connection, ho
ever, in the treatment of this theme, between the prem:
and the conclusion, than in the two previous chapters. K
'thing is said about the relation between the whole empi
and its component States, or any one of them. It is said
once, "What is meant by ' The making the whole emp:
peaceful and happy depends on the government of the Stat
is this :— when the sovereign behaves to his aged, as t
aged should be behaved to, the people become filial ; wh
the sovereign behaves to his elders, as elders should be 1:
haved to, the people learn brotherly submission ; when t
sovereign treats compassionately the young and helple
the people do the same." This is nothing but a repetiti
of the preceding chapter, instead of that chapter's bei


ITS SdOPK ASD VALUE. 31

made a step from whicli to go on to the splendid consumma-
tion of the good government of the whole empire.

The words which I have quoted are followed by a very-
striking enunciation of the golden rule in its negative form,
and under the name of the measuring square, and all the les-
sons of the chapter are connected more or less closely with
that. The application of this principle by a ruler, whose
heart is in the first place in loving sympathy with the people,
will guide him in all the exactions which he lays upon them,
and in the selection of ministers, in such a way that he will
secure the aflTections of his subjects, and his throne will be
established, for "by gaining the people, the kingdom is
gained; and, by losing the people, the kingdom is lost."
There are in this part of the treatise many valuable senti-
ments, and counsels for all in authority over others. The
objection to it is, that, as the last step of the climax, it does
noi rise upon all the others with the accumulated force of
their conclusions, but introduces us to new principles of action
and a new hne of argument. • Cut off the commencement of
the first paragraph which connects it with the preceding
chapters, and it would form a brief but admirable treatise by
itself on the art of government.

This brief review of the writer's treatment of the con-
cluding steps of his method wiU satisfy the reader that the
execution is not equal to the design ; and, moreover, under-
neath all the reasoning, and more especially apparent ia
the 8th and 9th chapters of Commentary (accoring to the
ordinary arrangement of the work), there lies the assumption
that example is all but omnipotent. We find this principle
pervading all the Confucian philosophy. And doubtless it
is a truth, most important in education and government,
that the influence of example is Very great. I believe, and^
will insist upon it hereafter in these prolegomena, that we
have come to overlook this element in our conduct of
administration. It will be well if the study of the Chinese^
Classics should call attention to it. Yet in them the subject
is pushed to -an extreme, and represented in an extravagant
manner. Proceeding from the view of human nature that it
is entirely good, and led astray only by influences from with-
out, the sage of China and his followers attribute to personal
example and to instruction a pdwer which we do not find
that they actually possess. ._ „ '


32 THE GREAT LEAENING.

7. The steps whicli precede the cultivation of the
are more l?riefly dealt with than those which we ha
considered. "The cultivation of the person result
the rectifying the heart or mind." True, hut in Th(
Learning very inadequately set forth.

" The rectifying of the mind is realized when the ti
are made sincere." And the thoughts are sincere w
self-deception is allowed, and we move without ei
what is right and wrong, " as we love what is beauti
as we hate a bad smell." How are we to attain
state ? Here the Chinese moralist fails us. Accor'
Choo He's arrangement of the Treatise, there is o:
sentence from which we can frame a reply to the
question. "Therefore," it is said, "the superior ma
be watchful over himself when he is alone." Pol
Choo's 6th chapter of Commentary, and forming, we m
part of it, we have in the old arrangement of The
Learning all the passages which he has distributed s
form the previous five chapters. But even from the ex
tion of them, we do not obtain the information wh
desire on this momentous inquiry.

8. Indeed, the more I study the Work, the more si
I become, that from the conclusion of what is now cal
chapter of Classical text to the sixth chapter of Comm
we have only a few fragments, which it is of no use
to arrange, so as fairly to exhibit the plan of the i
According to his method, the chapter on the connect;
tween making the thoughts sincere and so rectifyi
mental nature, should be preceded by one on the com
of knowledge as the means of making the thoughts e
and that again by one on the completion of knowlei
the investigation of things, or whatever else the phr
wiih may mean. I am less concerned for the loss and
which this part of the Work has suffered, because tli
ject of the connection between intelligence and virtue
fully exhibited in The Doctrine of the Mean, and wil
under my notice in the review of that Treatise. Th
ner in which Choo He has endeavoured to supply the
about the perfecting of knowledge by the investiga
things is too extravagant. " The Learning for Aduli
says, "at the outset of its lessons, instructs the leai
regard to all things in the world, to proceed from what


ITS SCOPE AND VALUE. 33

ledge he has of tlieir principles, and pursue his investigation
of them, till he reaches the extreme point. After exerting
himself for a long time, he wiU suddenly find himself pos-
sessed of a wide and far-reaching penetration. Then, the
qualities of all things, whether external or internal, the
subtle or the coarse, will be apprehended, and the mind, in
its entire substance and its relation to things, will be perfectly
intelligent. This is called the investigation of things. This
is called the perfection of knowledge." And knowledge
must be thus perfected before we can achieve the sincerity
of our thoughts and the rectifying of our hearts ! Yerily
this would be learning not for adults only, but even Methu-
selahs would not be able to compass it. Yet for centuries
this has been accepted as the orthodox exposition of the
Classic. Lo Chung-fan does not express himself too strongly
when he says that such language is altogether incoherent.
The author would only be "imposing on himself and
others."

9. The orthodox doctrine of China concerning the con-
nection between intelligence and virtue is most seriously
erroneous, but I will not lay to the charge of the author of
The Great Learning the wild representations of the com-
mentator of the twelfth century, nor need I make here any
remarks on what the doctrine really is. After the exhibition
which I have given, my readers will probably conclude that
the Work before us is far from developing, as Pauthier asserts,
" a systeni of social perfectionating which has never been
equalled."

10. The Treatise has undoubtedly great merits, but they
are not to be sought in the severity of its logical processes,
or the large-mindod prosecution of any course of thought.
We shall find them in the announcement of certain seminal
principles, which, if recognized in government and the re-
gulation of conduct, would conduce greatly to the happiness
and virtue of mankind. I will conclude these observations
by specifying four such principles.

First, The writer conceives nobly of the object of govern-
ment, that it is to make its subjects happy and good. This
may not be a sufiicient account of that object, but it is much
to have it so clearly laid down to " all kings and governors,"
that they are to love the people, ruling not for their own
gi-atification, but for the good of those over whom thoy are

VOL. I. 3


34 THE GREAT LEAENING.

exalted by Heaven. Very important also is the statement
that rulers have no divine right but what springs from the
discharge of their duty. " The decree does not always rest
on them. Goodness obtains it, and the want of goodness
loses it."

Second, The insisting on personal excellence in all who
have authority in the family, the State^ and the empire, is a
great moral and social principle. The influence of such' per-
sonal excellence may be overstated, but by the requirement
of its cultivation the writer deserved well of his country.

Third, Still more important than the requirement of such
excellence is the principle that it must be rooted in the state
of the heart, and be the natural outgrowth of internal sin-
cerity. " As a man thinketh in his heart, so is he.'''' This
is the teaching alike of Solomon and the author of The
Great Learning.

Fourth, I mention last the striking exhibition which we
have of the golden rule, though only in its negative form.
" What a man dislikes in his superiors, let him not display
in the treatment of his inferiors ; what he dislikes in inferiors,
let him not display in his service of his superiors ; what he
dislikes in those who are before him, let him not therewith
precede those who are behind him ; what he dislikes in those
who are behind him, let him not therewith follow those who
are before him ; what he dislikes to receive on the right, let
him not bestow on the left ; what he dislikes to receive on
the left, let him not bestow on the right : — this is what is
called the principle with which, as ■with a measuring square,
to regulate one's conduct."

The Work which contains those principles cannot be
thought meanly of. They are " commonplace," as the
writer in the Chinese repository calls them, but they are
at the same time eternal verities.


THE DOCTEINE OP THE MEAN. 35


CHAPTER IV.

THE DOCTRINE OP THE MEAN.


SECTION I.

ITS PLACE IN THE LE KE, AND ITS PUBLICATION SEPAEATELT.

1. The Doctrine of tlie Mean was one of the treatises which
came to light in connection with the labours of Lew Heang^
and its place as the 31st Book in the Le Ke was finally de-
termined by Ma Yung and Ch'ing Heuen.

2. But while it was thus made to form a part of the great
collection of Works on Ceremonies, it maintained a separate
footing of its own. In Lew Hin's catalogue of the Classical
Works, we find " Two p'een of Observations on the GijAjng
Xung." In the Records of the dynasty of Suy (a.d. 589 —
617)", in the chapter on the Histoiy of Literature, there are
mentioned three Works on the Chung Yung ; " — the first
called " The Record of the Chung Yung," in two heuen, at-
tributed to Tae Yung, a scholar who flourished about the
middle of the 5th century ; the second, " A Paraphrase and
Commentary on the Chung Yung," attributed to the Emperor
Woo (a.d. 502 — 549) of the Leang dynasty, in one keuen;
and the third, " A Private Record, determining the Mean-
ing of the Chung Yung," in five Jceuen, the author, or sup-
posed author, of which is not mentioned.

It thus appears, that the Chung Yung had been published
and commented on separately long before the time of the
Sung dynasty. The scholars of that, however, devoted
special attention to it, the way being led by the famous Chow
Leen-k'e. He was followed by the two brothers Ch'ing, but
neither of them published upon it. At last came Choo He,
who produced his Work called "The Chung Yung, in
Chapters and Sentences," which was made the text book of
the Classic at the literary examinations, by the fourth


36 THE DOCTEINE OF THE MEAN.

emperor of the Yuen dynasty (a.d. 1312 — 1320), and fro:
that time the name merely of the Treatise was retained i
editions of the Le Ke. Neither text nor ancient commen
ary was given.

Under the present dynasty it is not so. In the supei
edition of " The Five King," edited by a numerous con
mittee of scholars towards the end of the reign K'ang-hi
the Chung Yung is published in two parts, the ancient con
mentaries from " The Thirteen King " being given side t
side with those of Choo He.


SECTION II.

ITS AUTHOR ; AND SOME ACCOUNT OP HIM.

1. The composition of the Chung Yung is attributed t
K'ung Keih, the grandson of Confucius. Chinese inquirei
and critics are agreed on this point, and apparently on sufE
cient grounds. There is indeed no internal evidence in th
Work to lead us to such a conclusion. Among the man
quotations of Confucius^ words and references to him, w
might have expected to find some indication that the sag
was the grandfather of the author, but nothing of the kin
is given. The external evidence, however, or that from tl
testimony of authorities, is very strong. In Sze-ma Ts'een
Historical Records, published about the beginning of tl
first century B.C., it is expressly said that " Tsze-sze mad
the Chung Yung." And we have a still stronger proof,
century earlier, from Tsze-sze's own descendant, K'ung Po(
whose words are, " Tsze-sze compiled the Chung Yung i
49 p'een."^ Wo may, therefore, accept the received accoui
without hesitation. ,

2. As Keih, spoken of chiefly by his designation of Tszi
sze, thus occupies a distinguished place iii the classic
literature of China, it may not be out of place to bring t<

' This K'ung Foo was that descendant of Confucius, who hid several bool
in the wall of his house, on the Issuing of the imperial edict for their hurnin
He was a writer himself, and his Works are referred to under the title
K'ung Ts'ung-tsze.


ACqOtTNT OP ITS AUTHOR. 37

getter kere a few notices of Miii gathered from reliable
sources.

He was tlie son of Le, whose death took place b.c. 482
four years before that of the sage, his father. I have not
found it recorded in what year he was bom. Sze-ma Ts'een
says he died at the age of 62. But this is evidently wrong,
for we learn from Mencius that he was high in favour with
the Duke Muh of Loo,* whose accession to that principality
dates in B.C. 408, seventy years after the death of Confucius.
In the " Plates and Notices of the Worthies, sacrificed to in
the Sage's Temples," it is supposed that the 62 in the His-
torical Records should be 82.* It is maintained by others
that Tsze-sze's life was protracted beyond 100 years. This
variety of opinions simply shows that the point cannot be
positively determined. To me it seems that the conjecture
in the Sacrificial Canon must be pretty near the truth.'

During the years of his boyhood, then, Tsze-sze must have
beenwithhis grandfather, and received his instructions. It is
related, that one day, when he was alone with the sage, and
heard him sighing, he went up to him, and, bowing twice,
inquired the reason of his grief. " Is it," said he, " because
you think that your descendants, through not cultivating
themselves, will be unworthy of you ? Or is it that, in your
admiration of the ways of Yaou and Shun, you are vexed
that you fall short of them ? " " Child," replied Confucius,
"how is it that you know my thoughts ?" " I have often,"
said Tsze-sze, " heard from you the lesson, that when the
father has gathered and prepared the firewood, if the son can-
not carry the bundle, he is to be pronounced degenerate and
unworthy. The remark comes frequently into my thoughts,
and fills me with great apprehension." The sage was de-

' Mencius, V. Pt. II. vi. 4.

' 82 and 62 may more easily be confounded as written in Chinese than
with the Eoman figures.

3 Le himself was born in Confucius' 21st year, and if Tsze-sze had been born
in Le's 21st year, he must have been 103 at the time of Duke Muh's accession.
But the tradition is that Tsze-sze was a pupil of Tsang Sin, who was born B.C.
504. We must place his birth therefore considerably later, and suppose him
to have been quite young when his father died. I was talking once about the
question with a Chinese friend, who observed : — " Lfe was 50 when he died, and
his wife married again into a family of Wei. Vi'e can hardly think, there-
fore, that she was anything like that age. Le could not have married so
Boon as his father did. Perhaps he was about 40 when Keih was born."


38 THE DOCTEINE OF THE MEAN.

lighted. He smiled and said, " Now, indeed, shall I be wi'
out anxiety ! My undertakings will not come to noug
They will be carried on and flourish." ^

After the death of Confucius, Keih became a pupil, i\
said, of the philosopher TsSng. But he received his
struotions with discrimination, and in one instance which
recorded in the Le Ke, the pupil suddenly took the place
the master. We there read : — " Tsang said to Tsze-s
' Keih, when I was engaged in mourning for my paren
neither congee nor water entered my mouth for seven day
Tsze-sze answered, ' In ordering their rules of propriety,
was the design of the ancient kings that those who would
beyond them should stoop and keep by them, and that the
who could hardly reach them should stand on tiptoe to do
Thus it is that the superior man, in mourning for his paren
when he has been three days without water or congee, tat
a staff to enable himself to rise.' " ^

While he thus condemned the severe discipline of Tsai
Tsze-sze appears in various incidents which are related
him, to have been himself more than sufficiently ascetic. .
he was living in great poverty, a friend supplied him wi
grain, which he readily received. Another friend was ei
boldened by this to send him a bottle of wine, but he d
clined to receive it. " You receive your corn from oth
people," urged the donor, " and why should you decline i
gift, which is of less value ? You can assign no ground
reason for it j and if you wish to show your independen(
you should do so completely." " I am so poor," was t
reply, "as to be in want ; and being afraid lest I should d
and the sacrifices not be offered to my ancestors, I acce
the grain as an alms. But the wine and the dried fle
which you offer to me are the appliances of a feast. Foi
poor man to be feasting is certainly unreasonable. This
the ground of myrofusingyourgift. I have no thought of s
serting my independence."

, To the same effect is the account of Tsze-sze, which i
have from Lew Heang. That scholar relates : — " Wh
Keih was living in Wei, he wore a tattered coat, without a
lining, and in 30 days had only nine meals. T'een Tsze-fai

' For this incident we are indebted to K'ung Foo ; see note 1, p 3fi
2 Le Ke, II. Pt. I. ii. 7.


ACCOUNT OF ITS AUTHOR. 39

having heard of his distress, sent a messenger to him with a
coat of fox-fur, and being afraid that he might not receive
it, he added the message, — ' When 1 borrow from a man, I
forget it ; when I give a thing, I part with it freely as if I
threw it away/ Tsze-sze declined the gift thus offered, and
when Tsze-fang said, ' I have, and you have not ; why will
you not take it ? ' he replied, ' You give away so rashly, as
if you were casting your things into a ditch. Poor as I
am, I cannot think of my body as a ditch, and do not presume
to accept your gift.' "

Tsze-sze's mother married again, after Le's death, into a
family of Wei. But this circumstance, which is not at all
creditable in Chinese estimation, did not alienate his affec-
tions from her. He was in Loo when he heard of her death,
and proceeded to weep in the temple of his family. A dis-
ciple came to him and said, " Your mother married again
into the family of the Shoo, and do you weep for her in the
temple of the K'ung ? " "I am wrong," said Tsze-sze, " ]
am wrong ; " and with these words he went to weep else-
where.^

In his own married relation he does not seem to have been
happy ; and for some cause, which has not been transmitted
to us, he divorced his wife, following in this, it would appear,
the example of Confucius. On her death her son, Tsze-
shang,^ did not undertake any mourning for her. Tsze-sze's
disciples were surprised and questioned him. " Did not youi
father," they asked, " mourn for his mother who had beec
divorced ? " " Yes," was the reply. " Then why do you no*
cause Pih * to mourn for his mother ? " Tsze-sze answered,
" My father failed in nothing to pursue the proper path. His
observances increased or decreased as the case required. Bui
I cannot attain to this. While she was my wife, she was
Pih's mother ; when she ceased to be my wife, she ceased tc
be Pih's mother." The custom of the K'ung family not tc
mourn for a mother who had left it herself, or been divorced,
took its rise from Tsze-sze.*

These few notices of K'ung Keih in his more private re-
lations bring him before us as a man of strong feeling and
strong will, independent, and with a tendency to asceticism
in his habits.

' See the Le Ke, II. Pt. II. iii. 15. * This was the designation of Tsze-sze's son
• This was Tsze-shang's name. * See the Le Ke, IL Pt. L i. 4.


40 THE DOCTEINE 01" THE MEAN'.

As a public cliaracterj we find him at the dacal courts of
Weij Sung, LoOj and Pe, and at each of them held in high es-
teem by the rijlers. To Wei he was carried probably by the
fact of his mother having married into that State. We are
told that the prince of Wei received him with great distinc-
tion and lodged him honourably. On one occasion he said
to him, " An officer of the State of Loo, you have not de-
spised this small and narrow Wei, but have bent your steps
hither to comfort and preserve it ; — vouchsafe to confer
your benefits upon me." Tsze-sze replied, " If I should wish
to requite your princely favour with money and silks, your
treasuries are already full of them, and I am poor. If I
should wish to requite it with good words, I am afraid that
what I should say would not suit your ideas, so that I should
speak-in vain, and not be listened to. The only way in which
I can requite it, is by recommending to your notice men of
worth." The duke said, " Men of worth is exactly what I
desire." " Nay," said Keih, "you are not able to appreciate
them.-" " Nevertheless," was the reply, " I should like to
hear whom you consider deserving that name." Tsze-sze
replied, " Do you wish to select your officers for the name
they may have, or for their reality ? " " For their reality,
certainly," said the duke. His guest then said, " In the
eastern borders of your State, there is one Le Tin, who is a
man of real worth." " What were his grandfather and
father?" asked the duke. " They were husbandmen," was
the reply, on which the duke broke into a loud laugh, saying,
" I do not like husbandry. The son of a husbandman can-
not be fit for me to employ. I do not put into office all the
cadets of those families even in which office is hereditary."
Tsze-sze observed, "I mention Le Yin because of his
abilities ; what has the fact of his forefathers being husband-
men to do with the case ? And. moreover, the duke of Chow
was a great sage, and K'ang-shuh was a great worthy. Yet
if you examine their beginnings, you will find that from the
business of husbandry they came forth to found their States.
I did certainly have my doubts that in the selection of your
officers you did not have regard to their real character and
capacity." With this the conversation ended. The duko
was silent.^

' See the Biographical Dictionary ; Art. K'ung Keih.


ACCOUNT 01' ITS AUTHOK. 41

Tsze-sze was naturally led to Sung, as tlie K'ung family
originally sprang from that principality. One account,
quoted in " The Pour Books, Text and Commentary, with
Proofs and Illustrations," says that he went thither in his
16th year, and having foiled an officer of the State, named
Yo So, in a conversation on the Shoo-king, his opponent
was so irritated at the disgrace put on him by a youth, that
he listened to the advice of evil counsellors, and made an
attack on him to put him to death. The duke of Sung,-
hearing the tumult, hurried to the rescue, and when Keih
found himself in safety, he said, " When King Wan was im-
prisoned in Yew-le, he made the Yih of Chow. My grand-
father made the Ch'un Ts'ew after he had been in danger
in Ch'in and Ts'ae. Shall I not make something when res-
cued from such a risk in Sung ? " Upon this he made the
Chung Yung in 49 p'een.

According to this account, the Chung Yurig was the work
of Tsze-sze's early manhood, and the tradition has obtained a
wonderful prevalence. The notice in "The Sacrificial
Canon " says, on the contrary, that it was the work of his
old age, when he had finally settled in Loo ; which is much
more likely.

Of Tsze-sze in Pe, which could hardly be said to be out of
Loo, we have only one short notice, — in Mencius, V. Pt. II.
iii. 3, where the Duke Hwuy of Pe is introduced as saying,
"I treat Tsze-sze as my master."

We have fuller accounts of him in Loo, where he spent all
the latter years of his life, instructing his disciples to the
number of several hundred,^ and held in great reverence by
the Duke Muh. The duke indeed wanted to raise him to the
highest office, but he declined this, and would only occupy
the position of a " guide, philosopher, and friend." Of the
attention which he demanded, however, instances will be
found in Mencius, II. Pt. II. xi. 3 ; V. Pt. II. vi. 5, and vii. 3.
In his intercourse with the duke he spoke the truth to him
fearlessly. In the " Cyclopaedia of Surnames," I find the
following conversations, but I cannot tell from what source
they are extracted into that work — " One day the duke said
to Tsze-sze, ' The officer Heen told me that you do good
without wishing for any praise from men ; — is it so ? ' Tsze'?

'See the " Sacrificial Canon," on Tsze-sze.


42 THE DOCTEINE OF THE MEAN.

sze replied, ' No, that is not my feeling. When I cultiva
what is good, I wish men to know it, for when they know
and praise me, I feel encouraged to be more zealous in t
cultivation. This is what I desire, and am not able to o
tain. If I cultivate what is good, and men do not know
it is likely that in their ignorance they will speak evil of n
So by my good-doing I only come to be evil spoken of. Tl
is what I do not desire, but am not able to avoid. In the ca
of a man, who gets up at cockcrowing to practise what is goo
and continues sedulous in the endeavour tiU midnight, ai
says at the same time that he does not wish men to know
lest they should praise him, I must say of such a man, ti
if he be not deceitful he is stupid.' "

Another day, the duke asked Tsze-sze saying, " Can i
State be made to flourish ?" " It may," was the rep]
" And how ? " Tsze-sze said, " prince, if you and yo
ministers will only strive to realize the government of t'
dukes of Chow and of Pih-k'in ; practising their transfori
ing principles, sending forth wide the favours of yo
ducal house, and not letting advantages flow in private cha
nels; — if you will thus conciliate the affections of the peop]
and at the same time cultivate friendly relations with neig
bouring States, your kingdom will soon begin to flourish.'

On one occasion, the duke asked whether it had been t]
custom of old for ministers to go into mourning for a prin
whose service and State they had left. Tsze-sze replied
him, " Of old, princes advanced their ministers to office a
cording to propriety, and dismissed them in the same wa
and hence there was that rule. But now-a-days princ
bring their ministers forward as if they were going to tal
them on their knees, and send them away as if they wou
cast them into an abyss. If they do not treat them as the
greatest enemies, it is well. — How can you expect the ancie
practice to be observed in such circumstances ? "^

Those instances may suffice to illustrate the character
Tsze-sze, as it was displayed in his intercourse with t
princes of his time. We see the same independence whi^
he affected in private life, and a dignity not unbecoming t
grandson of Confucius. But we miss the reach of thoug
and capacity for administration which belonged to the Sag

' This conversation is given in tlie Le Ke, II. Pt. II. ii. 1.


ITS SCOPE AND VALUE. 43

It is witl. hinij however, as a thinker and writer that we have
to do, and his rank in that capacity will appear from the exa-
mination of the Chung Tung in the section that follows.
His place in the temples of the Sage has been that of one of
his four a-ssessors, since the year 1267. He ranks with Yen
Hwuy, Tsang Sin, and Mencius, and bears the title of " The
Philosopher Tsze-sze, Transmitter of the Sage."


SECTION ni.

ITS SCOPE AND VALUE.


1. The Doctrine of the Mean is a work not easy to under-
stand. " It first," says the philosopher Ch'ing, " speaks of
one principle ; it next spreads this out and embraces all
things ; finally, it returns and gathers them up under the
one principle. Unroll it, and it fills the universe ; roll it up,
and it retires and lies hid in secrecy." There is this ad-
vantage, however, to the student of it, that, more than most
other Chinese Treatises,, it has a beginning, a middle, and
an end. The first chapter stands to all that follows in the
character of a text, containing several propositions of which
we have the expansion or development. If that develop-
ment were satisfactory, we should be able to bring our own
minds en rapport with that of the author. Unfortunately it
is not so. As a writer he belongs to the intuitional school
more than to the logical. This is well put in the " Contin-
uation of the General Examination of Literary Monuments
and Learned Men : " — " The philosopher TsSng reached his
conclusions by following in the train of things, watching and
examining ; whereas Tsze-sze proceeds directly and reaches
to heavenly virtue. His was a mysterious power of dis-
cernment, approaching to that of Yen Hwuy." "We must
take the Book and the author, however, as we have them, and
get to their meaning, if we can, by assiduous examination
and reflection.

2. " Man has received his nature from. Heaven. Conduct
in accordance with that nature constitutes what is right and
true, — is a pursuing of the proper path. The cultivation or


44 THE DOCTEINE OF THE MEAV.

regulation of that path is what is called instruction." It is
with these axioms that the Treatise commences^ and from
such an introduction we might expect that the writer would
go on to unfold the various principles of duty^ derived from
an analysis of man's moral constitution.

Confining himself, however, to the second axiom, he pro-
ceeds to say that " the path may not for an instant be left,
and that the superior man is cautious and careful in refer-
ence to what he does not see, and fearful and apprehensive
in reference to what he does not hear. There is nothing
more visible than what is secret, and nothing more manifest
than what is minute^ and therefore the superior man is
watchful over his aloneness." This is not all very plain.
Comparing it with the 6th chapter of Commentary in The
Great Learning, it seems to inculcate what is there called
" making the thoughts sincere." The passage contains an
admonition about equivalent to that of Solomon, — " Keep
thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of
life."

The next paragraph seems to speak of the nature and the
path under other names. " While there are no movements
of pleasure, anger, sorrow, or joy, we have what may be
called the state of equilibrium. When those feelings have
been moved, and they all act in the due degree, we have
what may be called the state of harmony. This equilibrium
is the great root of the world, and this harmony is its uni-
versal path." What is here called " the state of equilibrium "
is the same as the nature given by Heaven, considered ab-
solutely in itself, "without deflection or inclination. This
nature acted on from without, and responding with the
various emotions, so as always "to hit " the mark with entire
correctness, produces the state of harmony, and such har-
monious response is the path along which all human ac-
tivities should proceed.

Finally, " Let the states of equilibrium and harmony exist
in perfection, and a happy order will prevail throughout ,
heaven and earth, and all things will be nourished and flour-
ish." Here we pass into the sphere of mystery and mys-
ticism. The language, according to Choo He, " describes
the meritorious achievements and transforming influence of
sage and spiritual men in their highest extent." Prom the
path of duty, where we tread on solid ground, the writer


ITS SCOPE AND VAI.UE. 45

suddenly raises us aloft on wings of air^ and will carry us
we know not wL-ere, and to we know not what.

3. The paragraphs thus presented, and which constitute
Choo He's first chapter, contain the sum of the whole
Work. This is acknowledged by all; — by the critics who
disown Ohoo He's interpretations of it, as freely as by him.
Revolving them in my own mind often and long, I collect
from them the following as the ideas of the author : — 1 st,
Man has received from Heaven a moral nature by which he
is constituted a law to himself; 2nd, Over this nature man
requires to exercise a jealous watchfulness ; and 3rd, As he
possesses it, absolutely and relatively, in perfection, or
attains to such possession of itj he becomes invested with
the highest dignity and power, and may say to himself — " 1
am a (jod ; yea, I sit in the seat of God." I will not say here
that there is blasphemy in the last of these ideas ; but do
we not have in them the same combination which we found
in The Great Learning, — a combination of the ordinary and
the extraordinary, the plain and the vague, which is very
perplexing to the mind, and renders the Book unfit for the
purposes of mental and moral discipline ?

. And here I may inquire whether we do right in calling
the Treatise by any of the names which foreigners have
hitherto used for it ? In the note on the title, I have en-
tered a little into this question. The "Work is not at all
what a reader must expect to find in what he supposes to
be a treatise on " The Golden Medium," " The Invariable
Mean," or "The Doctrine of the Mean." Those names are,
descriptive only of a portion of it. Where the phrase Chung
Yung occurs in the quotations from Confucius, in nearly
every chapter, from the 2nd to the 11th, we do well to trans-
late it by "the course of the Mean," or some similar terms;
but the conception of it in Tsze-sze's mind was of a different
kind, as the preceding analysis of the first chapter sufficiently
shows.

4. I may return to this point of the proper title for the
Work again, but in the mean time we must proceed with the
analysis of it. — The ten chapters from the 2nd to the 11th
constitute the second part, and in them Tsze-sze quotes the
words of Confucius, " for the pui^ose," according to Choo
He, "of illustrating the meaning of the first chapter."
Yet, as I ha,ve just intimated, tjiey do not: to my mind do


46 THE DOCTEINE OP THE MEAN.

this. Confucius bewails the rarity of the practice of the
Mean, and graphically. sets forth the difficulty of it. " The
empire, with its component States and families, may be
ruled ; dignities and emoluments may be declined, naked
weapons may be trampled under foot ; but the course of the
Mean cannot be attained to." * " The knowing go beyond
it, and the stupid do not come up to it." ^ Yet some have
attained to it. Shun did so, humble and ever learning from
people far inferior to himself; * and Yen Hwuy did so, hold-
ing fast whatever good he got hold of, and never letting it
go. * Tszeloo thought the Mean could be taken by storm,
but Confucius taught him better." And in fine, it is only
the sage who can fally exemplify the Mean.®

All these citations do not throw any light on the ideas
presented in the first chapter. On the contrary, they inter-
rupt the train of thought. Instead of showing us how virtue,
or the path of duty, is in accordance with our Heaven-given
nature, they lead us to think of it as a mean between two
extremes. Each extreme may be a violation of the law of
our nature, but that is not made to appear. Confucius'
sayings would be in place in illustrating the doctrine of
the Peripatetics, " which placed all virtue in a medium be-
tween opposite vices." Here in the Chung Yung of Tsze-
sze, I have always felt them to be out of place.

5. In the 12th chapter Tsze-sze speaks again himself, and
we seem at once to know the voice. He begins by saying
that " the way of the superior man reaches far and wide, and
yet is secret," by which he means to tell us that the path of
duty is to be pursued everywhere and at all times, while yet
the secret spring and rule of it is near at hand, in the
Heaven-conferred nature, the individual consciousness, with
which no stranger can intermeddle. Choc He, as will be
seen in the notes, gives a different interpretation of the
utterance. But the view which I have adopted is main-
tained convincingly by Maou Se-ho in the second part of
his " Observations on the Chung Yung." With this chapter
commences the third part of the Work, which embraces also
the eight chapters which follow. " It is designed," says
Choo He, " to illustrate what is said in the first chapter that
the path may not be left." But more than that one sen-

' Oh. ix. » Ch. iv. ' (jji. jv. < ch. vul. » Ch. x « Ch. xi.


ITS SCOPE AND VALUE. 47

tence finds its illastration here. Tsze-sze liad reference in
it also to what he had said — " The superior man does not
wait till he sees things to be cautious, nor till he hears
things to be apprehensive. There is nothing more visible
than what is secret, and nothing more manifest than what is
minute. Therefore, the superior man is watchful over him-
self when he is alone."

It is in this portion of the Chung Yung that we find a
good deal of moral instruction which is really valuable.
Most of it consists of sayings of Confucius, but the senti-
ments of Tsze-sze himself in his own language are inter-
spersed with them. The sage of China has no higher
utterances than those which are given in the 13th chapter : —
" The path is not far from man. "When men try to pursue
a course which is far from the common indications of con-
sciousness, this course cannot be considered the path. In
the Book of Poetry it is said —

' In hewing an axe-handle, in hewing an axe-handle,
The pattern is not far off.'

We grasp one axe-handle to hew the other, and yet if we
look askance from the one to the other, we may consider
them as apart. Therefore, the superior man governs men
according to their nature, with what is proper to them ; and
as soon as they change what is wrong, he stops. When one
cultivates to the utmost the moral principles of his nature, and
exercises them on the principle of reciprocity, he is not far
from the path. What you do not like when done to your-
self, do not do to others.

" In the way of the superior man there are four things, to
none of which have I as yet attained : — To serve my father as
I would require my son to serve me : to this I have not
attained ; to serve my elder brother as I would require my
younger brother to serve me : to this I have not attained ;
to serve my prince as I would require my minister to serve
me : to this I have not attained ; to set the example in be-
having to a friend as I would require him to behave to me :
to this I have not attained. Earnest in practising the ordin-
ary virtues, and careful in speaking about them ; if in his
practice he has anything defective, the superior man dares
not bat exert himself, and if in his words he has any excess,
he dares not allow himself such license. Thus his words


48 THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN.

have respect to his actions, and his actions have respect 1
his words j — is it not just an entire sincerity which marl
the superior man ? "

We have here the golden rule in its negative form e:
pressly propounded : — " What you do not like when doi
to yourself, do not do to others." But in the paragraj
which follows we have the rule virtually in its positive forr
Confucius recognizes the duty of taking the initiative, — <
behaving himself to others in the first instance as he wou]
that they should behave to him. There is a certain narrov
ness, indeed, in that the sphere of its operations seems to 1:
confined to the relations of society, which are spoken (
more at large in the 20th chapter ; but let us not grudge tl:
tribute of our warm approbation to the sentiments.

This chapter is followed by two from Tsze-sze, to tl
effect that the superior man does what is proper in evei
change of his situation, always finding his rule in himself
and that in his practice there is an orderly advance froi
step to step, — from what is near to what is remote. The
follow five chapters from Confucius : — the first, on the open
tion and influence of spiritual beings, to show " the man
festness of what is minute, and the irrepressibleness (
sincerity ; " the second, on the filial piety of Shun, and ho
it was rewarded by Heaven with the empire, with endurin
fame, and with long life ; the third and fourth, on the kinj
Wan and Woo, and the duke of Chow, celebrating them f(
their filial piety and other associate virtues ; and the fiftl
on the subject of government. These chapters are inte
esting enough in themselves, but when I go back fro
them, and examine whether I have from them any betti
understanding of the paragraphs in the first chapter whi(
thoy are said to illustrate, I do not find that I have. Thr(
of them, the 17th, 18th, and 19th, would be more in plai
in the Classic of Filial Piety than here in the Chung Yun
The meaning of the 16th is shadowy and undefined. Aft
all the study which I have directed to it, there are son
points in reference to which I have still doubts and dif
culties.

The 20th chapter, which concludes the third portion of tl
VVork, contains a full exposition of Confucius' views i
government, though professedly descriptive only of that
the kings Wan and Woo. Along with lessons proper foj


ITS SCOPE AND VALUE. 49

ruler there are many also of universal application^ but the
mingling of them perplexes the mind. It tells us of " the
five duties of universal application/' — those between sove-
reign and minister, husband and wife, father and son, elder
and younger brother, and friends ; of " the three virtues by
which those duties are carried into effect," namely, know-
ledge, benevolence, and energy ; and of " the one thing, by
which those virtues are practised," which is singleness or
sincerity. It sets forth in detail the " nine standard rules
for the administration of government," which are " the cul-
tivation by the ruler of his own character; the honouring
men of virtue and talents ; affection to his relatives ; respect
towards the great ministers; kind and considerate treat-
ment of the whole body of officers ; cherishing the mass of
the people as children ; encouraging aU classes of artizans ;
indulgent treatment of men from a distance ; and the kindly
cherishing of the princes of the States." There are these
and other equally interesting topics in this chapter ; but, as
they are in the Work, they distract the mind, instead of
making the author's great object more clear to it, and I will
not say more upon them here.

6. Doubtless it was the mention of "singleness," or
" sincerity," in the 20th chapter, which made Tsze-sze
introduce it into this Treatise, for from those terms he is
able to go on to develope what he intended in saying, that
" if the states of Equilibrium and Harmony exist in perfec-
tion, a happy order will prevail throughout heaven and
earth, and all things will be nourished and flourish." It is
here, that now we are astonished at the audacity of the
writer's assertions, and now lost in vain endeavours to
ascertain his meaning. I have quoted the words of Confucius
that it is " singleness," by which the three virtues of know-
ledge, benevolence, and energy are able to carry into prac-
tice the duties of universal obligation. He says also that it
is this same "singleness" by which "the nine standard
rules of government " can be effectively carried out. This
" singleness " is just a name for " the states of Equilibrium
and Harmony existing in perfection." It denotes a character
absolutely and relatively good, wanting nothing in itself,
and correct in all its outgoings. " Sincerity " is another
term for the same thing, and in speaking about it, Confucius
makes a distinction between sincerity absolute and sincerity

VOL. I. 4


50 THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN.

acquired. The former is boi-n with, some, and practised 1
them without any effort ; the latter is attained by study ai
practised by strong endeavour. The former is " the way
Heaven ; " the latter is " the way of men." " He who pc
sesses sincerity," — absolutely, that is, — " is he who witho
effort hits what is right, and apprehends without the exe
cise of thought ; — he ik the sage who naturally and easi
embodies the right way. He who attains to sincerity is ]
who chooses what is good, and firmly holds it fast. And i
this attainment there are requisite the extensive study
what is good, accurate inquiry about it, careful reflection c
it, the clear discrimination of it, and the earnest practice
it." In these passagos Confucius unhesitatingly enunciat
his belief that there are some men who are absolutely pe
feet, who come into the world as we may conceive the fir
man was, when he was created by God " in His own image
full of knowledge and righteousness, and who grow up :
we know that Christ did, "increasing in wisdom and
stature.^'' He disclaimed being considered to be such i
one himself,^ but the sages of China were such. And, mor
over, others who are not so naturally may make themselv
to become so. Some will have to put forth more effort ai
to contend with greater struggles, but the end will be tl
possession of the knowledge and the achievement of tl
practice.

I need not say that these sentiments are contrary to tl
views of human nature which are presented in the Bibl
The testimony of Eevelation is that " there is not a just ms
upon earth that doeth good and sinneth not." " If we si
that we have no sin," and in writing this term, I am thin]
ing here not of sin against God, but, if we can conceive
it apart from that, of failures in regard to what ought to 1
in our regulation of ourselves, and in our behaviour
others ; — " if we say that we have no sin we deceive ou
selves, and the truth is not in us." This language is appr
priate in the lips of the learned as well as. in those of tl
ignorant, to the highest sage as to the lowest child of tl
soil. Neither the Scriptures of God nor the experience
man know of individuals absolutely perfect. The oth
sentiment that men can make themselves perfect is equal
wide of the truth. Intelligence and goodness by no mea;
' Aaa. Vn. six.


ITS SCOPE AND VALUK. 51

stand to each other in the relation of cause and effect. The
sayings of Ovid, "Video meliora proboque, deteriora sequor,"
"Nitvmur in vetitum semper, cupimusque negata," are a more
correct expression of the facts of human consciousness and
conduct than the high-flown phrases of Confucius.

7. But Tsze-sze adopts the dicta of his grandfather with-
out questioning them^ and gives them forth in his own style
at the commencement of the fourth part of his Treatise.
" When we have intelligence resulting from sincerity, this
condition is to be ascribed to nature ; when we have sin-
cerity resulting from intelligence, this condition is to be
ascribed to instruction. But given the sincerity, and there
shall be the intelligence ; given the intelligence, and there
shall be the sincerity."

Tsze-sze does more than adopt the dicta of Confucius.
He applies them in a way which the sage never did, and
which he would probably have shrunk from doing. The
sincere, or perfect man of Confucius is he who satisfies, com-
pletely all the requirements of duty in the various relations
of society, and in the exercise of government ; but the sin-
cere man of Tsze-sze is a potency in the universe. " Able
to give its full development to his own nature, he can do the
same to the nature of other men. Able to give its full
development to the nature of other men, he can give their
full development to the natures of animals and things. Able
to give their fiiU development to the natures of creatures
and things, he can assist the transforming and nourishing
powers of Heaven and Earth. Able to assist the trans-
forming and nourishing powers of Heaven and Earth, he
may with Heaven and Earth form a ternion." Such are the
results of sincerity natural. The case below this — of sin-
cerity acquired, is as follows, — "The individual cultivates
its shoots. From these he can attain to the possession of
sincerity. This sincerity becomes apparent. From being
apparent, it becomes manifest. From being manifest, it be-
comes brilliant. Brilliant, it affects others. Affecting others,
they are changed by it. Changed by it, they are transformed.
It is only he who is possessed of the most complete sincerity
that can exist under heaven, who can transform.'^ It may
safely be affirmed, that when he thus expressed himself,
Tsze-sze understood neither what he said nor whereof he
affirmed. Maou Se-ho and some other modern writers ex-


52 THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN

plain away many of Ms predicates of sincerity, so that
their hands they become nothing but extravagant hyp(
boles, but the author himself would, I believe, have protest
against such a mode of dealing with his words. Trae, ]
structures are castles in the air, but he had no idea himsi
that they were so.

In the 24th chapter there is a ridiculous descent from t
sublimity of the two preceding. We are told that the pc
sessor of entire sincerity is like a spirit, and can forekno
but the foreknowledge is only a judging by the milfoil ai
tortoise and other auguries ! But the author recovers hii
self, and resumes his theme about sincerity as conducting
self-completion, and the completion of other men and thinj
describing it also as possessing all the qualities which c
be predicated of Heaven and Earth, Gradually the subjf
is made to converge to the person of Confucius, who is t
ideal of the sage, as the sage is the ideal of humanity
large. An old account of the object of Tsze-sze in the Ohm
Yung is that " he wrote it to celebrate the virtue of 1
grandfather." He certainly contrives to do this in t
course of it. The 30th, 31st, and 32nd chapters couta
his eulogium, and never has any other mortal been exalt
in such terms. " He may be compared to Heaven and Ear
in their supporting and containing, their overshadowing ai
curtaining all things ; he may be compared to the four se
sons in their alternating progress, and to the sun and mo
in their successive shining." " Quick in apprehension, cle
in discernment, of far-reaching intelligence, and all-ej
bracing knowledge, he was fitted to exercise rule ; ma
nanimous, generous, benign, and mild, he was fitted
exercise forbearance ; impulsive, energetic, firm, and e
during, he was fitted to maintain a firm hold ; self-adjuste
grave, never swerving from the Mean, and correct, he w
fitted to command reverence ; accomplished, distincti\
concentrative, and searching, he was fitted to exerc;
discrimination." "All-embracing and vast, he was li
heaven; deep and active as a fountain^ he was like t
abyss." "Therefore his fame overspreads the Midc
-Kingdom, and extends to all barbarous tribes. Where\
ships and carriages reach; wherever the strength of m
penetrates ; wherever the heavens overshadow and the eai
sustains ; wherever the sun and moon shine ; wherever froi


ITS SCOPE AND VALUE. S3

and dews fall ; all who have blood and breath unfeignedly
honour and love hira. Hence it is said, — He is the equal of
Heaven ! " " Who can know him but he who is indeed
quick in apprehension, clear in discernment, of far-reaching
intelligence, and all-embracing knowledge, possessing all
heavenly virtue ? "

8. We have arrived at the concluding chapter of the
Work, in which the author, according to Choo He, " having
carried his descriptions to the highest point in the preceding
chapters, turns back and examines the source of his subject ;
and then again from the work of the learner, free from all
selfishness and watchful over himself when he is alone, he
carries out his description, till by easy steps he brings it
to the consummation of the whole empire tranquillized by
simple and sincere reverentialness. He moreover eulogizes
its mysteriousness, till he speaks of it at last as without
sound or smell." Between the first and last chapters there is
a correspondency, and each of them may be considered as a
summary of the whole treatise. The difference between
them is, that in the first a commencement is made with the
mention of Heaven as the conferrer of man's nature, while
in this the progress of man in virtue is traced, step by step,
till at last it is equal to that of High Heaven.

9. I have thus in the preceding paragraphs given a general
and somewhat copious review of this Work. My object has
been to seize, if I could, the train of thought, and to hold it
up to the reader. Minor objections to it, arising from the
confused use of terms and singular applications of passages
from the older Classics, are noticed in the notes subjoined
to the translation. I wished here that its scope should be
seen, and the means be afforded of judging how far it is
worthy of the high character attributed to it. " The relish
of it," says the younger Ch'ing, "is inexhaustible. The
whole of it is solid learning. When 'the skilful reader has
explored it with delight till he has apprehended it, he may
carry it into practice all his life, and will find that it cannot
be exhausted."

My own opinion of it is much less favourable. The names
by which it has been called in translations of it have led to
misconceptions of its character. Were it styled " The states
of Equilibrium and Harmony," we should be prepared to
expect something strange and probably extravagant. As-


54 THE DOCTBINE OF THE MEAN.

sturedly we should expect notliing more strange or extras
gant than what we have. It begins sufficiently wellj but i
author has hardly enunciated his preliminary apophthegn
when he conducts into an obscurity where we can hare
grope our way, and when we emerge from that, it is to
bewildered by his gorgeous but unsubstantial pictures
sagely perfection. He has eminently contributed to nouri
the pride of his countrymen. He . has exalted their sag
above all that is called God or is worshipped, and taug
the masses of the people that with them they have need
nothing from without. In the mean time it is antagonis
to Christianity. By and by, when Christianity has pi
vailed in China, men will refer to it as a striking proof h(
their fathers by their wisdom knew neither God nor thei
selves.


CONFUCIUS AND HIS DOOTEINES. 65


CHAPTER V.

CONFUCIUS J HIS INFLUENCE AND DOCTRINES.


SECTION I.

LIFE OF CONFUCIUS,


1 . " And have you foreigners surnames as well ? " This
question has often been put to me by Chinese. It marks
^ ^ the ignorance which belongs to the people of
all that is external to themselves, and the pride
of antiquity which enters largely as an element into their
character. If such a pride could in any case be justified, we
might allow it to the family of the K'ung, the descendants
of Confucius. In the reign K'ang-he, twenty-one centuries
and a half after the death of the sage, they amounted to
eleven thousand males. But their ancestry is carried back
through a period of equal extent, and genealogical tables
are common, in which the descent of Confucius is traced
down from Hwang- te, the inventor of the cycle, B.C. 2637.^

The more moderate writers, however, content themselves
with exhibiting his ancestry back to the commencement of
the Chow dynasty, B.C. 1121. Among the relatives of the
tyrant Chow, the last emperor of the Yin dynasty, was an
elder brother, by a" concubine, named K'e, who is celebrated
by Confucius, Ana. XVIII. i., under the title of the viscount
of Wei. Foreseeing the impending ruin of their family,
K'^e withdrew from the court ; and subsequently, he was
invested by the Emperor Ch'ing, the second of the house of

' See Memoires concernant les Chinois, Tome XIL p. 447, et sej.
Father Amiot states, p. 501, that he had seen the representative of the family,
who succeeded to the dignity of the " Duke, Gontinuator of the Sage's line,"
in the 9th year of K'een-lung, A.D. 1744. It is hardly necessary that I should
gay here, that the name Confucius is merely the Chinese characters, K'ung
Foo-tsze, " The master, K'ung," latinized.


56 CONPUCItJS AND HIS DOCTEINES.

Cliow, with the principaUty of Sung, which embraced the
eastern portion of the present province of Ho-nan, that he
might there continue the sacrifices to the emperors of Tin.
FC'e was followed as duke of Sung by a younger brother, in
whose line the succession continued. His great-grandson,
the Duke Min, was followed, B.C. 908, by a younger brother,
leaving, however, two sons, Fuh-foo Ho, and Fang-sze.
Fuh Ho resigned his right to the dukedom in favour of
Fang-sze, who put his uncle to death in B.C. 893, and be-
came master of the State. He is known as the DiikaLe, and
to his elder brother belongs the honour of having the sage
among his descendants.

Three descents from Fuh Ho, we find Ching K'au-foo,
who was a distinguished officer under the dukes Tae, Woo,
and Seuen (b.c. 799 — 728). He is still celebrated for his
humility, and for his literary tastes. We have accounts of him
as being in communication with the Grand-historiographer
of the empire, and engaged in researches about its ancient
poetry, thus setting an example of one of the works to
which Confucius gave himself. K'aou gave birth to K'ung.
foo Kea, from whom the surname of K'ung took its rise.
Five generations had now elapsed since the dukedom was
held in the direct line of his ancestry, and it was according to
the rule in such cases that the branch should cease its con-
nection with the ducal stem, and merge among the people
under a new surname. K'ung Kea was Master of the Horse
in Sung, and an officer of well-known loyalty and probity.
Unfortunately for himself, he had a wife of surpassing beauty,
of whom the chief minister of the State, by name Hwa Tub,
happened on one occasion to get a glimpse. Determined to
possess her, he commenced a series of intrigues, which
ended, B.C. 709, in the murder of Kea and the reigning Duke
Shang. At the same time, Tuh secured the person of the
lady, and hastened to his palace with the prize, but on the
way she had strangled herself with her girdle.

An enmity was thus commenced between the two families
of K'ung and Hwa which the lapse of time did not obliter-
ate, and the latter being the more powerful of the two, Kea's
great-grandson withdrew into the State of Loo to avoid
their persecution. There he was appointed commandant of
the city of Fang, and is known in history by the name of
Fang-shuh. Faug-shuh gave birth to Pih-hea^ and from


CONFUCIUS AHD H;iS DOCTRINES. 57

him came Sliuli-leaiig Heih, the father of CoDfacius. Heih
appears in the history of the times as' a soldier of great
prowess and daring bravery. In the year B.C. 562, when
serving at the siege of a place called Peih-yang, a party of
the assailants made their way in at a gate which had
purposely been left open, and no sooner were they inside
than the portcullis was dropped. Heih was just entering,
and catching the massive structure with both his hands, he
gradually by dint of main strength raised it and held it up,
till his friends had made their escape.

Thus much on the ancestry of the sage. Doubtless he
could trace his descent in the way which has been indicated
up to the imperial house of Yin, nor was there one among
his ancestors during the rule of Chow to whom he could
not refer with satisfaction. They had been ministers and
soldiers of Sung and Loo, all men of worth ; and in Ching
K'aou, both for his humility and literary researches,
Confucius might have special complacency.

2. Confucius was the child of Shuh-leang Heih's old age.
The soldier had married in early life, but his wife brought

From his birth to his ^P ^^^^ daughters,— to the number of
first public employment, nine, and no SOU. By a concubine he
had a son, named Mang-p'e, and also
Pih-ne, who proved a cripple, so that, when he was over
seventy years, Heih sought a second wife in the Yen family,
from which came subsequently Yen Hwuy, the favourite
disciple of his son. There were three daughters in the
family, the youngest being named Ching-tsae. Their father
said to them, " Here is the commandant of Tsow. His
father and grandfather were only scholars, but his ancestors
before them were descendants of the sage emperors. He is
a man ten feet high,-' and of extraordinary prowess, and I
am very desirous of his alliance. Though he is old and
austere, you need have no misgivings about him. Which
of you three will be his wife ? " The two elder daughters
were silent, but Ching-tsae said, " Why do you ask us,
father ? It is for you to determine." " Very well," said
her father in reply, " you will do." Ching-tsae, accordingly,
became Heih's wife, and in due time gave birth to Confucius,

' See, on the length of the ancient foot, Ana. VHI. vi., but the point netds
a laore sifting investigation than it has yet received.


58 CONFUCIUS AND HIS DOCTRINES.

who received the name of K'ew, and was subsequently
styled Chung-ne.^ The event happened on the 2 1st day of
the 10th month of the 21st year of the Duke Seang, of Loo,
being the 20th year of the Emperor Ling, B.C. 551.^ The
birth-place was in the district of Tsow, of which Heih was

• The legends say that Ching-tsae, fearing lest she should not have a son,
In consequence of her husband's age, privately ascended the Ne-k'ew hill to
pray for the boon, and that when she had obtained it, she commemorated
the fact in the names — K'ew and Chung-ne. But the cripple, Mang-p'e, had
previously been styled Pih-ne. There was some reason, previous to Confucius'
birth, for using the term ne in the family. As might be expected, the birth
of the sage is surrounded with many prodigious occurrences. One account
is, that the husband and wife prayed together for a son in a dell of mount
Ne. As Ching-tsae went up the hill, the leaves of the trees and plants all
erected themselves, and bent downwards on her return. That night she
dreamt the Black Te appeared, and said to her, " You shall have a son, a
sage, and you must bring him forth in a hollow mulberry tree." One day
during her pregnancy, she fell into a dreamy state, and saw five old men in
the hall, who called themselves the essences of the five planets, and ledan
animal which looked like a small cow with one horn, and was covered with
scales like a dragon. This creature knelt before Ching-tsae, and cast forth from
its mouth a slip of gem, on which was the Inscription, — " The son of the
essence of water shall succeed to the withering Chow, and be a throneless
king." Ching-tsae tied a piece of embroidered ribbon about its horn, and
the vision disappeared. When Heih was told of it, he said, " The creature must
be the K'e-lin." As her time drew near, Ching-tsae asked her husband if
there was any place in the neighbourhood called " The hollow mulberry tree."
He told her there was a dry cave in the south hill, which went by that name.
Then she said, " I will go and be confined there." Her husband was sur-
prised, but when made acquainted with her former dream, he made the
necessary arrangements. On the night when the child was born, two dragons
came and kept watch on the left and right of the hill, and two spirit-ladies
appeared in the air, pouring out fragrant odours, as if to bathe Ching-tsae ;
and as soon as the birth took place, a spring of clear warm water bubbled up
from the floor of the cave, which dried up again when the child had been
washed in it. The child was of an extraordinary appearance ; with a mouth
like the sea, ox lips, a dragon's back, &o., &c. On the top of his head was
a remarkable formation, in consequence of which he was named K'ew, &o.
Sze-ma Ts'een seems to make Confucius to have been illegitimate, saying
that Heih and Miss Yen cohabited in the wilderness. Keang Yung says that
the phrase has reference simply to the disparity of their ages.

2 Sze-ma Ts'een says that Confucius was born in the 22nd year of Duke
Seang, B.C. 550. He is followed by Choo He in the short sketch ol
Confucius' life prefixed to the Lun Yu, and by " The Annals of the Empire,"
published with imperial sanction in the reign Kea-k'ing. (To this work
I have generally referred for my dates.) The year' assigned in the texi
above rests on the authority of Kuh-leang and Kung-yang, the two comment
ators on the Ch'un Ts'ew. With regard to the month, however, the 10th ii
that assigned by Kuh-leang, while Kung-yang names the 11th.


CONFUCItrS AND HIS DOCTEINES. 5£

the governor. It was somewhere within the limits of the
present department of Yen-chow in Shan-tung, bat the
honour of being the exact spot is claimed for two places ir
two different districts of the department.

The notices which we have of Confucius' early years arc
very scanty. When he was in his third year his father died
It is related of hiin, that as a boy he used to play at the
arrangement of sacrificial vessels^ and at postures of cere-
mony. Of his schooling we have no reliable account. There
is a legendj indeed, that at seven he went to school to Gar
P'ing-chung, but it must be rejected, as P'ing-chung be-
longed to the State of Ts'e. He tells us himself that al
fifteen he bent his mind to learning -^ but the condition o1
the family was one of poverty. At a subsequent period, wher
people were astonished at the variety of his knowledge,
he explained it by saying, " When I was young my conditior
was low, and therefore I acquired my ability in many things ,
but they were mean matters." ^

When he was nineteen, he married a lady from the State
of Sung, of the Keen-kwan family ; and in the following
year his son Le was born. On the occasion of this event,
the Duke Oh'aou sent tim a present of a couple of carp. li
was to signify his sense of his prince's favour, that he
called his son Le [The Garp), and afterwards gave him the
designation of V^-ju {Fish Primus). No mention is made
of the birth of any other children, though we know, from
Ana. V. i., that he had at least one daughter. The fact oi
the duke of Loo's sending him a gift on the occasior
of Le's birth shows that he was not unknown, but was
already commanding public attention and the respect ol
the great.

It was about this time, probably in the year after his
marriage, that Confucius took his first public employment,
as keeper of the stores of grain, and in the following yeai
he was put in charge of the public fields and lands. Mencius
adduces these employments in illustration of his doctrine
that the superior man may at times take office on accoun<
of his poverty, but must confine himself in such a case tc
places of small emolument, and aim at nothing but the dis-
charge of their humble duties. According to him, Confucius

' Ana. II. iv. ' Ana. IX. vi.


60 CONFUCIUS AND HIS DOCTRINES.

as keeper of stores, said, " My calculations must all be
right : — that is all I have to care about ; " and when in
charge of the public fields, he said, " The oxen and sheep
must be fat and strong and superior : — that is all I have to
care about." ^ It does-not appear whether these offices
were held by Confucius in the direct employment of the
State, or as a dependent of the Ke family in whose juris-
diction he lived. The present of the carp from the duke
may incline us to suppose the former.

3. In his twenty-second year, Confucius commenced his
labours as a public teacher, and his house became a resort
for young and inquiring spirits, who wished to learn the
doctrines of antiquity. However small the fee his pupils
were able to afford, he never refused his
iabo°r'raT™her°'Thl instructions.' All that he required, was
B'c*6iio— Me""""^"^' ^'^ ardent desire for improvement, and

some degree of capacity. "I do not
open up the truth," he said, "to one who is not eager to
get knowledge, nor help out any one who is not anxious to
explain himself. When I have presented one comer of a
subject to any one, and he cannot from it learn the other
three, I do not repeat my lesson." ^

His mother died in the year B.C. 528, and he resolved that
her body should lie in the same grave with that of his father,
and that their common resting-place should be in Fang, the
first home of the K'ung in Loo. But here a difficulty pre-
sented itself. His father's coffin had been for twenty years,
where it had first been deposited, off the road of The Five
Fathers, in the vicinity of Tsow : — would it be right in him
to move it ? He was relieved from this perplexity by an old
woman of 'the neighbourhood, who told him that the coffin
had only just been put into the ground, as a temporary ar-
rangement, and not regularly buried. On learning this, he
carried his purpose into execution. Both coffins were con-
veyed to Fang, and put in the ground together, with no in-
tervening space between them, as was the custom in some
States. And now came a new perplexity. He said to him-
self, " In old times, they had graves, but raised no tumulus
over them. But I am a man, who belongs equally to the
north and the south, the east and' the west. I must have

' Mer.cius, V. Pt. II. v. 4. '^ Ana. VII. vii. ? Ana. VII. viii.


CONFUCIUS AND HIS DOCTRINES. 61

something' by whicli I can remember the place." Accord-
ingly he raised a moundj four feet high, over the grave, and
returned home, leaving a party of his disciples to see every-
thing properly completed. In the mean time there came on a
heavy storm of rain, and it was a considerable time before
the disciples joined him. " What makes you so late ? " he
asked. " The grave in Fang fell down," they said. He
made no reply, and they repeated their answer three times,
when he burst into tears, and said, " Ah ! they did not make
their graves so in antiquity." *

Confucius mourned for his mother the regular period of
three years, — three years nominally, but in fact only twenty-
seven months. Five days after the mourning was expired,
he played on his lute but could not sing. It required other
five days before he could accompany an instrument with his
voice.^

Some writers have represented Confucius as teaching nis
disciples important lessons' from the manner ia which he
buried his mother, and having a design to correct irregular-
ities in the ordinary funeral ceremonies of the time. These
things are altogether " without book." We simply have a
dutiful son paying the last tribute of affection to a good
parent. In one point he departs from the ancient practice,
raising a mound over the grave, and when the fresh earth
gives way from a sudden rain, he is moved to tears, and
seems to regret his innovation. This sets Confucius vividly
before us, — a man of the past as much as of the present,
whose own natural feelings were liable to be hampered in,
their development, by the traditions of antiquity which he
considered sacred. It is important, however, to observe
the reason which he gave for rearing the mound. He had
in it a presentiment of much of his future course. He
was " a man of the north, the south, the east, and the west."
He might not confine himself to any one State. He would,
travel, and his way might be directed to some " wise
ruler,'" whom his counsels would conduct to a benevolent
swav that would break forth on every side till it trans-
formed the empire.

4. When the mourning for his mother was over, Confucius

' Le Ke, II. Pt. I. i..lO ; Pt. II. iii. 30 ; Pt. I. i. 6. See also the discus-
sion of those passages in Eeang Yung's " Life of Confucius."

« LeKe, II. Pt. I. i. 22. ;


62 CONPUCIUS AND HIS DOCTRINES.

pemained in Loo, but in what special capacity we do not
know. Probably lie continued to en-
co?rVot'choT;"aid"±?„I courage the resort of inquirers to
*°^™ „- whom he communicated instruction,

arid pursued his own researches into
the history, literature, and institutions of the empire. In
the year B.C. 524, the chief of the small state of T'an^ made
his appearance at the court of Loo, and discoursed in a
wonderful manner, at a feast given to him by the duke,
about the names which the most ancient sovereigns, from
Hwang-te downwards, gave to their ministers. The sacri-
fices to the Emperor Shaou-haou, the next in descent from
Hwang-te, were maintained in T'an, so that the chief fancied
that he knew all about the abstruse subject on which he
discoursed. Confucius, hearing about the matter, waited on
the visitor, and learned from him all that he had to com-
municate.^

To the year B.C. 523, when Confucius was twenty-nine
years old, is referred his studying music under a famous
master of the name of Seang. He was approaching his 30th
year when, as^he tells us, " he stood firm," ^ that is, in his
convictions on the subjects of learning to which he had
bent his mind fifteen years before. Five years more, how-
ever, were still to pass by before the anticipation mentioned
in the conclusion of the last paragraph began to receive its
fulfilment,^ though we may conclude from the way in which
it was brought about that he was growing all the time in the
estimation of the thinking minds in his native State.

In the 24th year of Duke Ch'aou, B.C. 5 1 7, one of the
principal ministers of Loo, known by the name of MangHe,
died. Seventeen years before he had painfully felt his ig-

J See the Ch'un Ts'ew, under the 7th year of Duke Ch'aou.

» This rests on the respectable authority of Tso-k'ew Ming's annotations
on the Ch'un Ts'ew, but I must consider it apocryphal. The legend-writers
have fashioned a journey to T'an. The slightest historical intimation be-
comes a text with them, on which they enlarge to the glory of the sage.
Amiot has reproduced and expanded their romancings, and others, such as
Tauthier (Chine, pp. 121—183) and Thornton (History of China, vol. i. pp.
151 — 215) have followed in his wake. 3 Ana. II. iv.

' The journey to Chow is placed by Sze-ma Ts'een before Confucius' hold-
ing of his first official employments, and Choo He and most other writers
follow him. It is a great error, and has arisen from a misunderstanding of
the passages from Tso-K'ew Ming upon the subject.


CONFUCIUS AND HIS DOCTRINES. 63

iiorance of ceremonial observances, and had made it his sub-
sequent business to make himself acquainted with them.
On his deathbed, he addressed his chief officer, saying,
"A knowledge of propriety is the stem of a man. With-
out it he has no means of standing firm. I have heard that
there is one K'ung Kew, who is thoroughly versed in it.
He is a descendant of Sages, and though the line of his
family was extinguished in Sung, among his ancestors there
were Fuh-foo Ho, who resigned the dukedom to his brother,
and Ching K'aou-foo, who was distinguished for his hu-
mility. Tsang Heih has observed that if sage men of in-
telligent virtue do not attain to eminence, distinguished men
are sure to appear among their posterity. His words are
now to be verified, I think, in K'ung K'ew. After my
death, you must tell Ho-ke to go and study proprieties
under him." In consequence of this charge, Ho-ke, Mitng
He's son, who appears in the Analects under the name of
Mang B,-' and a brother, or perhaps only a near relative,
named Nan-kung King-shuh, became disciples of Confucius.
Their wealth and standing in the State giive him a position
which he had not had before, and he told King-shuh of a
wish which he had to visit the court of Chow, and especially
to confer on the subject of ceremonies and music with Laou
Tan. King-shuh represented the matter to the Duke Ch^aou,
who put a carriage and a pair of horses at Confucius' dis-,
posal for the expedition.

At this time the court of Chow was in the city of Lo, in
the present department of Ho-nan of the province of the
same name. The reigning emperor is known by the title of
King, but the sovereignty was little more than nominal.
The state of China was then analogous to that of one of the
European kingdoms, during the prevalence of the feudal
system. At the commencement of the dynasty, the various
States of the empire had been assigned to the relatives and
adherents of the reigning family. There were thirteen
principalities of greater note, and a large number of smaller
dependencies. During the vigorous youth of the dynasty,
the emperor or lord paramount exercised an efiective con-
trol over the various chiefs, but with the lapse of time there
came weakness and decay. The chiefs — corresponding

' Ana. II. T.


64 CONFUCIUS AND HIS DOCTEINES.

somewliat to the Earopean dukes, earls, marquises, barons,
&c., — quarrelled and warred among themselves, and the
stronger among them barely acknowledged their subjection
to the emperor. A similar condition of things prevailed
in each particular State. There were hereditary minis-
terial families, who were continually encroaching on the
authority of their rulers, and the heads of those families
again were frequently hard pressed by their inferior officers.
Such was the state of China in Confucius' time. The reader
must have it clearly before him, if he would understand the
position of the sage, and the reforms which, we shall find, it
was subsequently his object to introduce.

Arrived at Chow, he had no intercourse with the court or
any of the principal ministers. He was there not as a poli-
tician, but an inquirer about the ceremonies and maxims of
the founders of the dynasty. Laou Tan, whom he had
wished to see the acknowledged founder of the Taouists,
or Eationalistic sect, which has maintained its ground in
opposition to the followers of Confucius, was then a trea-
sury-keeper. They met and freely interchanged their views,
but no reliable account of their conversation has been pre-
served. In the 5th Book of the Le Ke, which is headed,
" The philosopher Tsang asked," Confucius refers four
times to the views of Laou-tsze on certain points of funeral
ceremonies, and in the " Family Sayings," Book xsiv., he
tells Ke K'ang what he had heard from him about " The.
Five Te," but we may hope their conversation turned also
on more important subjects. Sze-ma Ts'een, favourable
to Laou-tsze, makes him lecture his visitor in the following
style : — " Those whom you talk about are dead, and their
bones are mouldered to dust; only their words remain.
When the superior man gets his time, he mounts aloft; but
when the time is against him, he moves as if his feet were
entangled. I have heard that a good merchant, though he
has rich treasures deeply stored, appears as if he were poor,
and that the superior man whose virtue is complete, is yet
to outward seeming stupid. Put away your proud air and
many desires, your insinuating habit and wild will. These
are of no advantage to you. This is all which I have to
tell you." On the other hand, Confucius is made to say to
his disciples, " I know how birds can fly, how fishes can
swim, and how animals can run. But the runner may be


LIFE OF CONPTICIUS. 65

snared, tlie swimmer may be hooted, and the flyer may be
shot by the arrow. But there is the dragon. I cannot tell
how he mounts on the wind through the clouds, and rises to
heaven. To-day I have seen Laou-tsze, and can only com-
pare him to the dragon."

While at Lo, Confucius walked over the grounds set
apart for the great sacrifices to Heaven and Earth; in-
spected the pattern of -the Hall of Light, built to give
audience in to the princes of the empire ; and examined all
the arrangements of the ancestral temple and the court.
From the whole he received a profound impression.
" Now," said he with a sigh, " I know the sage wisdom of
the duke of Chow, and how the house of Chow attained to
the imperial sway." On the walls of the Hall of Light
were paintings of the ancient sovereigns from Yaou and
Shun downwards, their characters appearing in the
representatipns of them, and words of praise or warn-
ing being appended. There was also a picture of the
duke of Chow sitting with his infant nephew, the king
Ch'ing, upon his knees, to give audience to all the princes.
Confucius surveyed the scene with silent delight, and then
said to- his followers, " Here you see how Chow became
so great. As we use a glass to examine the forms of
things, so must we study antiquity in order to understand
the present." In the hall of the ancestral temple there was
a metal statue of a man with three clasps upon his mouth,
and his back covered over with an enjoyable homily on the
duty of keeping a watch upon the lips. Confucius turned
to his disciples, and said, " Observe it, my children. These
words are true,! and comniend themselves to our feelings."

About music he made; inquiries of Ch'ang Hwang, to
whom the following remarks are attributed : — " I have ob-
served about Chung-ne many marks of a sage. He has
river eyes and a dragon forehead, — the very characteristics
of Hw.ang-te. His arms are long, his back is like a tor-
toise, "?ind he is nine feet six inches in height, — the very
semblance of T'ang the Successful. When he speaks,
he praiseis ,the ancient kings. He moves along the
path of humility and courtesy. He has heard of every
subg'ect, and retains with a strong, memory. His know-
ledge of things seems inexhaustible. — Have we not in him
the rising of a sage ? " ■:■■■■

VOL. I. fi


68 CONFUCIUS AND HIS DOCTRINES.

I have given these notices of Confucius at the court of
Chow, more as being the only ones I could find, than be-
cause I put much faith in them. He did not remain there ,
long, but returned the same year to Loo, and continued
his -work of teaching. His fame was greatly increased;
disciples came to him from different parts, till their
number amounted to three thousand. Several of those
who have come down to us as the most distinguished
among his followers, however, were yet unborn, and the
statement just given may be considered as an exaggera-
tion. We are not to conceive of the disciples as forming
a cooimunity, and living together. Parties of them may
have done so. We shall find Confucius hereafter always
moving amid a company of admiring pupils ; but the
greater number must have had their proper avocations and
ways of living, and would only resort to the master, when
they wished specially to ask his counsel or to learn of him,

5. In the year succeeding the return to Loo, that State

fell into great confusion. There were three Families in it,

all connected irregularly with the ducal house, which had

long kept the rulers in a condition

He withdraws to Ta*e, and i? n n rrn r

returns to Loo the following 01 dependency, ihey appear ire-
year. B.C. 516. 615. quently in the Analects as the Ke
clan, the Shuh, and the Mang ; and while Confucius freely
spoke of their usurpations,^ he was a sort of dependent of
the Ke family, and appears in frequent commuuioation
with members of all the three. In the year B.C. 516, the
duke Chaou came to open hostilities with them, and
being worsted, fled into Ts'e, the State adjoining Loo on
the north. Thither Confucius also repaired, that he might
avoid the prevailing disorder of his native State. Ts'e
was then under the government of a duke, afterwards
styled King, who " had a thousand teams, each of four
horses, but on the day of his death the people did not
praise him for a single virtue."^ His chief minister, how-
ever, was Gan Ying, a man of considerable ability and
worth. At his court the music of the ancient sage-em-
peror. Shun, originally brought to T'se from the State of
Ch'in, was still preserved.

According to the " Family Sayings," an incident oc-

See Analects, III. i. ii. et al. ' Ana. XVI. xu.


LIFE OF CONFUCIUS. 67

curred on fclie way to Ts'e, which I may transfer to these
pages as a' good specimen of the way in which Confucius
turned occurring matters to account in his intercourse with
his disciples. As he was passing by the side of the T'ae
mountain, there was a woman weeping and wailing by a
grave. Confucius bent forward in his carriage, and after
listening to her for some time, sent Tsze-loo to ask the
cause of her grief. " You weep, as if you had experienced
sorrow upon sorrow," said Tsze-loo. The woman replied,
" It is so. My husband's father was killed here by a
tiger, and my husband also ; and now m.y son has met the
same fate." Confucius asked her why she did not remove
from the place, an^d on her answering, " There is here no
oppressive government," he turned to his disciples, and
said, " My children, remember this. Oppressive govern-
ment is fiercer than a tiger." ^

As soon as he crossed the border from Loo, we are told*"
he discovered from the gait and manners of a boy, whom
he saw carrying a pitcher, the influence of the sage's
music, and told the driver of his carriage to hurry on to
the capital. Arrived there, he heard the strain, and was
so ravished with it, that for three months he did not know
the taste of flesh. " I did not think," he said, " that
music could have been made so excellent as this." ^ The
Duke King was pleased with the conferences which he had
with him,^ and proposed to assign to him the town of
Lin-k'ew, from the revenues of which he might derive a
sufScient support; but Confucius refused the gift, and
said to his disciples, " A superior man will only receive
reward for services which he has done. I have given ad-
vice to the Duke King, but he has not yet obeyed it, and
now he would endow me with this place ! Very far is he
from understanding me."

On one occasion the duke asked about government, and
received the characteristic reply, " There is government

' I have translated, howevfer, from the Le Ke, II. Pt. II. iii. 10, where
the same incident is given, with some variations, and without saying
when or where it occurred. ' Ana. VII. xiii.

' Some of these are related in the Family Sayings ; — about the burn,
ing of the ancestral shrine of the Emperor Le, and a one-footed bird which
appeared hopping and flapping ite wings in Ts'e. They are plainly fabul-
ous, though quoted in proof of Confucius' sage wisdom. This reference to
them is more than enough.

5*


68 CONFUCIUS AND HIS DQCTEINES.

when the prince is priiice, and the minister is minister ;
when the father is father^ and the son is son." ^ I say
that the reply is characteristic. Once^ when Tsze-loo asked
him what he would consider the first thing to be done if
intrusted with the government of a State, Confucius an-
swered, " What is necessary is to rectify names." ^ The
disciple thought the reply wide of the mark, but. it was
substantially the same with what he said to the Duke
King. There is a sufficient foundation in nature for
government in the several relations of society, and if' those
be maintained and developed according to their relative
significancy, it is sure to obtain. This was a first priuciple
in the political ethics of Confucius.

Another day the duke got to a similar inquiry the reply
that the art of government lay in an economical use of the
revenues ; and being pleased, he resumed his purpose of
retaining the philosopher in his State, and proposed to
assign to him the fields of Ne-k'e. His chief minister,
Gfan Ying-, dissuaded him from the purpose, saying, "Those
Scholars are impracticable, and caniiot be imitated. They
are haughty and conceited of their own views, so that they
will not be content in inferior positions. They set a high
value' ' on all funeral ceremonies, give way to their grief,,
and will waste their property on great burials, so that
they would only be injurious to the common manners.
This Mr K'ung has a thousand peculiarities. It woiild
take generations to exhaust all that he knows about the
ceremonies of going up and going down. This is not the
time to examine into his rules of propriety. ' If you,,
prince, wish to employ him to change the customs of Ts.%
you will not be making the people your primary con-
sideration.'' ^- ' ■

1 had rather believe that these were not the words of,
Cran Ying '; but they must represent pretty correctly the
sentiments^of many of' the statesmen of the tirhe about.
Qonfucius. The duke of Ts'e got tired ere long of having
such a monitor about him, and observed, " I cannot treat
him as I would the chief of the Ke family. I will treat
hira in a way between that accorded to the chief of the Ke,


I Ana,;Xn.'xi.. ' Ana. XIII. iit

'■' See ia Sze-ma"a Histor' of Coijfuoius.,


LIFE OP CONFUCIUS. 69

and bhat given to the chief of the Marig family." Finally
he said, " I am pld ; I cannot use his doctrines." ^ These
observations were made directly to Confucius, or came to
his hearing.^ It was not consiste^nt with ^is self-respect
to remain longer in Ts'e, and he returned to Loo.*

6. Returned to Loo, he remained for the long period of
about fifteen years without being engaged in any official
„ , „. ... ,. employment. It was a time, indeed, of

He remains without '^i ■'-,. -, rm -i-. t ^-n

office in Loo, great disorder. JLhe JJuke (Jhaou con-

tinued a refugee in Ts'e, the government
being in the hands of the great Families, up to his death
in B.C. 509, on which event the rightful heir was set aside,
and another member, of the ducal house, known to us by
the title of Ting, substituted in his place. The ruling
authority of the principality became thus still more en-
feebled than it had been before, and, on the other hand,
the chiefs of the , Ke, the Shuh, and the Mang, could
hardly keep their ground against their own officers. Of
those latter the two most conspicuous were Yang Hoo,
called also Yang Ho, and Kung-shan Fuh-jaou. At one
time Ke Hwan, the most powerful of the chiefs, was kept
a prisoner by Yang Hoo, and was obliged to make terms
with him in order to • secure his liberation. Confucius
would give his countenance to none, as he disapproved of
all, and he studiously kept aloof from them. Of how he
comported himself among them we have a specimen in the
incideiit related in the Analects, xvii. i. — "Yang Ho
wished to see Confucius, but. Confucius would not go to
see him. On this, he sent a present of a pig to Confucius,
who, having chosen a time when Ho was not at home,
went to pay his respects for the gift. He met him, how-
ever, on the way. ' Come, let mfe speak with you,' said
the officer. ' Can he be called benevolent, who keeps his
jewel in his bosom, and leaves his country to confusion ? '
Confucius replied, ' No.' ' Can he be called wise, who is
anxious to be engaged in public employment, and yet is

1 Ana. XVIII. iii.

' Sze-ma Ta'eea makes the first observation to have beeu addressed
directly to Confucius.

» According to the above aeeouat ConfuoiuSTvas only oiice, and for a
portion of two years, in Ts'e. For the refutation of contrary accounts,
6oe Ke-tng Yung's Life of the sage.


70 CONFUCIUB AND HIS DOCTRINES.

constantly losing the opportunity of being so?' Con-
fucius again said, ' No.' The other added, ' The days and
months are passing away ; the years do not wait for us.'
Confucius said, ' Eight ; I will go into office.' " Chinese
writers are eloquent in their praise of the sage for the
combination of propriety, complaisance, and firmness,
which they see in his behaviour in this matter. To myself
there seems nothing remarkable in it but a somewhat
questionable dexterity. But it was well for the fame of
Confucius that his time was not occupied during those
years with official services. He turned them to better
account, prosecuting his researches into the poetiy, history,
ceremonies, and music of the empire. Many disciples con.
tinned to resort to him, and the legendary writers tell us
how he employed their services in digesting the results of
his studies. 1 must repeat, however, that several of them,
whose names are most famous, such as Tsang Sin, were
as yet children, and Min Sun was not born till B.C. 500.

To this period we must refer the almost single instance
which we have of the manner of Confucius' intercourse
with his son Le. " Have you heard any lessons from your
father difierent from what we have all heard ? " asked
one of the disciples once of Le. " No," said Le. " He
was standing alone once, when I was passing through the
court below with hasty steps, and said to me, ' Have you
read the Odes ? ' On my replying, ' Not yet,' he added,
' If you do not learn the Odes, you will not be fit to con-
verse with.' Another day, in the same place and the
same way, he said to me, ' Have you read the rules of
Propriety?' On my replying, 'Not yet,' he added, 'If
you do not learn the rules of Propriety, your character
cannot be established.' I have heard only these two
things from him." The disciple was delighted, and ob-
served, " I asked one thing, and I have got three things.
I have heard about the Odes ; I have heard about the
rules of Propriety. I have also heard that the superior
man maintains a distant reserve towards his son." '

I can easily believe that this distant reserve was the
rule which Confucius followed generally in his treatment
of his son. A stern dignity is the quality which a father

' Ana. XVI. xiii.


LIFE OF CONFUCIUS. 71

has to maintain upon his system. It is not to be wittout
the element of kindness, but that must never go beyond
the line of propriety. There is too little room left for the
play and development of natural afifection.

The divorce of his wife mast also have taken place
during these years, if it ever took place at all, which is a
disputed point. The curious reader will find the question
discussed in the notes on the second Book of the Le Ke.
The evidence inclines, I think, against the supposition that
Confucius did put his wife away. When she died, at a
period subsequent to the present, Le kept on weeping aloud
for her after the period for such a demonstration of grief
had expired, when Confucius sent a message to him that
his sorrow must be subdued, and the obedient son dried
his tears.' We are glad to know that on one occasion- — the
death of his favourite disciple. Yen Hwuy — the tears of
Confucius himself would flow over and above the measure
of propriety.^

7. We come to the short period of Confucius' official
He holds office, lifs- In the year B.C. 501, things had come
B.C. 800-496. to a, head between the chiefs of the- three

Families and their ministers, and had resulted in the de-
feat of the latter. In B.C. 500, the resources of Yang Hoo
were exhausted, and he fled into Ts'e, so that the State
was delivered from its greatest troubler, and the way was
made more clear for Confucius to go into office, should an
opportunity occur. It soon presented itself. Towards
the end of that year he was made chief magistrate of the
town of Chung-too.'

Just before he received this appointment, a circum-
stance occurred of which we do not well know what to
make. When Yang-hoo fled into Ts'e, Kung-shan Fuh-
jaou, who had been confederate with him, continued to
maintain an attitude of rebellion, and held the city of Pe
against the Ke family. Thence he sent a message to
Confucius inviting him to join him, and the sage seemed

' See the Le Ke, II. Pt. I. i. 27. = Ana. XI. ix.

' Amiot says this was " la ville meme ou le Souverain tenoit sa Cour"
(Vie de Confucius, p. 147). He is followed of course by Thornton and
Pauthier. My reading has not shown me that such was the case. In the
notes to k'ang-he's edition of the " Five King," Le Ke, IL Pt. L iii. 4, it is
simply said — " Ghung-too,— the name of a town of Loo. It afterwards
belonged to Ts'e, when it was called P'ing-luh."


72 CONFUCIUS AND HIS DOCTEINES.

SO inclined to go that his disciple Tsze-loo remonstrated
with hinij saying, " Indeed you cannot go ! why must you
think of going to see Kung-shan ? " Confucius repliedf,
" Can it be without some reason that he has invited me ?
If any one employ me, may I not make an eastern Chow ? " '
The upshot, however, was that he did not go, and I can-
not suppose that he had ever any serious intention of doing
so. Amid the general gravity of his intercourse with his
followers, there gleam out a few instances of quiet plea-
santry, when he amused himself by playing with their
notions about him. This was probably one of them.

As magistrate of Chung-too he produced a marvellous
reformation of the manners of the people in a short time.
According to the " Family Sayings," he enacted rules for
the nourishing of the living, and all observances to the
dead. Different food was assigned to the old and the
young, and different burdens to the strong and the weak.
Males and females were kept apart from each other in
the streets. A thing dropt on the road was not picked up.
There was no fraudulent carving of vessels. Inner coffins
were made four inches thick, and the outer ones five.
Graves were made on the high grounds, no mounds being
raised over them, and no trees planted about them.
Within twelve months, the princes of the States all about
wished to imitate his style of administration.

The Duke Ting, surprised at what he saw, asked whether
his rules could be employed to govern a whole State, and
Confucius told him that they might be applied to the whole
empire. On this the duke appointed him assistant-super-
intendent of Works,^ in which capacity he surveyed the
lands of the State, and made many improvements in agri-
culture. From this he was quickly made minister of Crime,
and the appointment was enough to put an end to crime.
There was no necessity to put the penaLlaws in execution.
No offenders showed themselves.

These indiscriminating eulogies are of little value. One
incident, related in the annotations of Tso-k'ew on the
Ts'un Ts'ew, commends itself at once to our belief, as in

1 ADa. XVII. V,

* This office, however, was held by the chief of the Mang family. We
must understand that Confucius was only an assistant to him, or
perhaps acted for him.


LIFE OF CONFTJCHJS. ' i'3

harmony witli Confucius' character. The chief of the Ke,
pursuing with his enmity the Duke Chaou, even after his
death, had placed his grave apart from the graves of his
predecessors ; and Confucius surrounded the ducal ceme-
tery with a ditch so as to include the solitary resting-place,
boldly telling the chief that he did it to hide his disloyalty.
But he signalized himself most of all, in B.C. 499, by his
behaviour at an interview between the dukes of Loo and
Ts'e, at a place called Shih-k'e, and KeS-kuh, in the
present -district of Lae-woo, in the department of T'ae-
gan. Confucius was present as master of ceremonies on
the part of Loo, and the meeting was professedly pacific.
The two princes were to form a covenant of alliance. The
principal oflBcer on the part of Ts'e, however, desp'ising
Confucius as " a man of ceremonies, without courage,"
had advised his sovereign to make the duke of Loo a
prisoner, and for this purpose a band of the half-savage
original inhabitants of the place advanced with weapons
to the stage where the two dukes were met. Confucius
understood the scheme, and said to the opposite party,
" Our two princes are met for a pacific object. For you
to bring a band of savage vassals to disturb the meeting
with their weapons, is no^ the way in which Ts'e can
expect to give law to the princes of the empire. These
barbarians have nothing to do with out Great Flowery
land. Such vassals may not interfere with our covenant,
Weapons are out of place at such a meeting. As before
the spirits, such conduct is unpropitious. In point of
virtue, it is contrary to right. As between man and man,
it is not polite." The duke of Ts'e ordered the disturbers
off, but Confucius withdrew, carrying the duke of Loo
with him. The business proceeded, notwithstanding, and
when the words of the alliance were being read on the
part of Ts'e, — " So be it to Loo, if it contribute not 300
chariots of war to the help of Ts'e, when its army goes
across its borders," a messenger from Confucius added,—
" And so it be to us, if we obey your orders, unless you
return to us the fields on the south of the WSn."' At the
conclusion of the ceremonies, the prince of Ts'e wanted to
give a grand entertainment, but Confucius demonstrated
that such a thing would" be contrairy to ihe estabKshed
rules of propriety, his real object being to keep his sove-


74 CONF0CIUB AND HIS DOCTRINES.

reign out of danger. In this way the two parties separated,
they of Ts'e filled with shame at being foiled and dis-
graced by " the man of ceremonies/^ and the result was
that the lands of Loo which had been appropriated by
Ts'e were restored.^

For two years more Confucius held the office of min-
ister of Crime. Some have supposed that he was further
raised to the dignity of chief minister of State, but- that
was not the case. One instance of the manner in which
he executed his functions is worth recording. When any
matter came before him, he took the opinion of different
individuals upon it, and in giving judgment would say,
" I decide according to the view of so and so." There
was an approach to our jury system in the plan, Confucius'
object being to enlist general sympathy, and carry the
public judgment with him in his administration of justice.
A father having brought some charge against his son,
Confucius kept them both in prison for three months, with-
out making any difference in favour of the father, and then
wished to dismiss them both. The head of the Ke was
dissatisfied, and said, " You are playing with me. Sir
minister of Crime. Formerly you told me that in a State
or a family filial duty was the first thing to be insisted on.
What hinders you now from putting to death this unfilial
son as an example to all the people ? ■" Confucius with a
sigh replied, " When superiors fail in their duty, and yet
go to put their inferiors to death, it is not right. This
father has not taught his son to be filial ; — to listen to his
charge would be to slay the guiltless. The manners of
the age have been long in a sad condition ; we cannot
expect the people not to be transgressing the laws."

At this time two of his disciples, Tsze-loo andTsze-yew,
entered the employment of the Ke family, and lent their
influence, the former especially, to forward the plans of
their master. One great cause of disorder in the State
was the fortified cities held by the three chii fs, in which
they could defy the supreme authority, and were in turn
defied themselves by their officers. Those cities were like
the castles of the barons of England in the time of the

' This meeting at Kea-kuh is related in Sze-ma Ts'een, the Family
Eajings, and Kuh-leang, with many exaggerations.


LIFE or CONFUCIUS. d a

Norman kings. Confucius had their destruction very
much at heart, and partly by the influence of persuasion,
and partly by the assisting counsels of Tsze-loo, he ac-
complished his object in regard to Pe, the chief city of the
Ke, and How, the chief city of the Shuh.

It does not appear that he succeeded in the same way
in dismantling Ch'ing, the chief city of the Mang ; ^ but
his authority in the State greatly increased. "He
strengthened the ducal House and weakened the private
Families. He exalted the sovereign, and depressed the
ministers. A transforming government went abroad.
Dishonesty and dissoluteness were ashamed, and hid their
heads. Loyalty and good faith became the characteristics
of the men, and chastity and docility those of the women.
Strangers came in crowds from other States. Confucius
became the idol of the people, and flew in songs through
their mouths.

But this sky of bright promise was soon overcast. As
the fame of the reformations in Loo went abroad, the
neighbouring princes began to be afraid. The duke of
Ts'e said, " With Confucius at the head of its govern-
ment. Loo will become supreme among the States, and
Ts'e which is nearest to it will be the first swallowed up.
Let us propitiate it by a surrender of territory." One of
his ministers proposed they should first try to separate be-
tween the sage and his sovereign, and to efiiect this, they
hit upon the following scheme. Eighty beautiful girls,
with musical and dancing accomplishments, were selected,
and a hundred and twenty of the finest horses that could
be found, and sent as a present to Duke Ting. They were
put up at first outside the city, and Ke Hwan having gone
in disgiiise to see them, forgot the lessons of Confucius,
and took the duke to look at the bait. They were both
captivated. The women were received, and the sage was
neglected. For three days the duke gave no audience to
his ministers. " Master," said Tsze-loo to Confucms, " it

' In connection with these events, the Family Sayings and Sze maTs'een
mention the summary punishment iniiicted by Confucius on an able but
unscrupulous and insidious officer, the Shaou-ching, Maou. His judgment
and death occupy a conspicuous place in the legendary accounts. But
the Analects, Tsze-sze, Mencius, and Tso-k'ew Ming are all silent about it,
and Keang Yung rightly rejects it, as one of the many narratives invented
to exalt the sage.


"76 coNrucins a?id. hjs d0c?eines.

is time for you ta be going." But ConfuciuS was vei^
unwilling to leave. ' TJie time was drawing near when thp
-great sacrifice to Heaven would be offered, and he der
termiued to wait and see whether the solemnity of thajb
would "bring the, duke back to his right mind. No such
result followed. The ceremony was hurried through, and
portions of the offerings were not sent round to the various
ministers, according to the established custom. Confucius
regretfully took his departure, going away slowly and by
easy stages. He would have welcomed a messervger of re-
call. The duke continued in his abandonment, and the
sage went forth to thirteen weary years of homeless
wandering.

8. On leaving Loo, Confucius first bent his steps west^
ward to the >State of Wei, situate about where the present

provinces of Chih-le and Ho-nan ad-
He wanders from state • • -i-r - • 1 • K/iil

to State. jom. lie was now m his 5oth year,

p.e. 4,96-483. and felt depressed and melancholy.

As he went along, he gave expression to his feeling in

verse : —

" Fain would I still look towards Loo,
But this Kwei hill cuts off my view.
With an axej I'd hew the thickets through : —
Vain thought! 'gainst the hill I nought can do ; "

and again, —

" Through the valley howls the blast,
Drizzling rain falls thick and fast.
Homeward goes the youthful bride,
O'er the wild, crowds by her side.
How is it, azure HeaVen,
From, my home I thus am driven,
Through the land my. way to trace,
With no certain dwelling-plaoe ?
Dark, dark, the minds of men !
Worth, in vain comes to their ken.
Hastens on my term of years ;
Old age, desolate, appears."'

A number pf his disciples accompanied him, and his
sadness infected them. When they arrived at the borders
of Wei, at a place called B, the Warden sought an inter-
view, and on coming out from the sage, he tried to com-
fort the disciples, sayingj " My friends, why are you dis-
tressed at your Master's loss of ofEce ? The empire has

' See Keang Tung's Life of Oohfucius.


-urE-oi' eowptfCius.- ' 77

been long wifhout the principles of truth and right ;
Heaven is going to- use your nias<ter as a bell with its
^ooden tongue." ^ Such was the thought of this friendly-
stranger. The bell did indeed sound, but few had ears to
hear.

1 Confucius' fame, however, had gone before him, and he
was in little danger of having to suffer from want. On
arriving at the capital of Wei, he lodged at first with a
worthy oflBcer, named Yen Ch'ow-yew.^ The reigning
duke, known to us by the epithet of Ling, was a worthless,
dissipated man, but he could not neglect a visitor of such
eminence, and sqon assigned to Confucius a revenue of
60,000 measures of grain. Here he remained for ten
months, and then for some reason left it to go to Ch'in.
On the way he had to pass by K'wang, a place probably
in the present department of K'ae-fung in Ho-nan, which
had formerly suffered from Yang-hoo. It so happened
that Confucius resembled Hoo, and the attention of the
people being -called to him by the movements of his car-
riage^driver, they thought it was their old enemy, and
made an attack upon him. His followers were alarmed,
but he was calm-, and tried to assure them by declaring
his belief that he had a divine mission. He said to them,
" After the death of King WSn, was not the cause of truth
lodged here in me ? If Heaven had wished to let this
cause of truth perish, then I, a future mortal, should not
have got such a relation to that cause. While Heaven
does not let the cause of truth' perish, what can the people
€t£ K'wang do to me ? " ' Having escaped from the hands
of his assailants, he does not seem to have carried out his
purpose of going to Ch'in, but returned to Wei.

On the way, he passed a house where he had formerly
been lodged, and finding that the master was dead, and the
funeral ceremonies going on, he went in to condole and
weep. When he came out, he told Ts2e-kung to take one
of the horses from his carriage, and give it as a contribu-
tion to the expenses of the occasion. " You never did
^ueh a thing," Tsze-kung remonstrated, " at, the funeral
of any of your .disciples ; is it not too great a gift on this

' ' Ana. III. xxiv. ' See Menoius, V. Ft. I. viij. 2.

'. Ana.. IX. V. In Ana. XI. xxii. there is another reference to. thistime,
in which Yen Hwuy is made to appear. •


78 CONFUCIUS AND HIS DOCTRINES.

occasion of the death of an old host ? " " When I went
in/' replied Confucius, " my presence brought a burst of
grief from the chief mournerj and I joined him with my
tears. I dislike the thought of my tears not being followed
by anything. Do it, my child." '

On reaching Wei, he' lodged with Keu Pih-yuh, an
officer of whom honourable mention is made in the Ana-
lects.^ But this time he did not remain long in the State.
The duke was married to a lady of the house of
' Sung, known by the name of Nan-tsze, notorious
for her intrigues and wickedness. She sought an inter-
view with the sage, which he was obliged unwillingly to
accord. No doubt he was innocent of thought or act of
evil ; but it gave great dissatisfaction to Tsze-loo that his
master should have been in company with such a woman,
and Confucius, to assure him, swore an oath, saying,
" Wherein I have done improperly, may Heaven reject
me ! May Heaven reject me ! " ^ He could not well
abide, however, about such a court. One day the duke
rode out through the streets of his capital in the same car-
riage with Nan-tsze, and made Confucius follow them in
another. Perhaps he intended to honour the philosopher,
but the people saw the incongruity, and cried out, " Lust
in the front ; virtue behind ! " Confucius was ashamed,
and made the observation, " I have not seen one who
loves virtue as he loves beauty."* Wei was no place for
])im. He left it, and took his way towards Ch'in.

Ch'in, which formed part of the present province of Ho-
nan, lay south from Wei. After passing the small State
of Ts'aou, he approached the borders of Sung, occupying
the present prefecture of Kwei-tih, and had some inten-
tions of entering it, when an incident occurred, which it
is not easy to understand from the meagre style in which
it is related, but which gave occasion to a remarkable say-
ing. Confucius was practising ceremonies with his dis-
ciples, we are told, under the shade of a large tree^ Hwan
T'uy, an ill-minded officer of Sung, heard of it, and sent a
band of mer. to pull down the tree, and kill the philosopher,
if they could get hold of him. The disciples were much
alarmed, but Confucius observed, " Heaven has produced

' See the Le Ke, II. Pt. T. ii, 16. ' Ana. XIV. xxvi. ; XV. vi.

3 Ana. VI. xxvi. « Ana. IX. xviL


HIE OP CONFUCIUS. 79

tlie virtue that is in me ; — what can Hwan T'uy do to
mo ? " * They all made their escape, but seem to have
been diiven westwards to the State of Ch'ing, on arriving
at the gate conducting into which from the east, Confucius
found himself separated from his followers. Tsze-kung
had arrived before him, and was told by a native of Ch'ing
that "there was a man standing by the east gate, with a
forehead like Yaou, a neck like Kaou-yaou, his shoulders
on a level with those of Tsze-ch'an, but wanting, below the
waist, three inches of the height of Yu, and altogether
having the disconsolate appearance of a stray dog."
Tsze-kung knew it was the master, hastened to him, and
repeated to his great amusement the description which the
man had given. " The bodily appearance," said Confucius,
" is but a small matter, but to say I was like a stray dog
— capital ! capital ! " The stay they made at Ch'ing was
short, and by the end of B.C. 495, Confucius was in Ch'in.

All the next year he remained there lodging with the
warder of the city wall, an officer of worth, of the name of
Ching,' and we have no accounts of him which deserve to
be related here.*

In B.C. 493, Ch'in was much disturbed by attacks from
Woo, a large State, the capital of which was in the
present department of Soo-chow, and Confucius de-
termined to retrace his steps to Wei. On the way he was
laid hold of at a place called P'oo, which was held by a
rebellious officer against Wei, and before he could get
away, he was obliged to engage that he would not pro-
ceed thither. Thither, notwithstanding, he continued his
route, and when Tsze-kung asked him whether it was
right to violate the oath he had taken, he replied, " It was
a forced oath. The spirits do not hear such."* The duke
Ling received him with distinction, but paid no more at-
tention to his lessons than before, and Confucius is said
then to have uttered- his complaint, " If there were any of

1 Ana. rX. xxii. " See Mencius, V. Pt. I. vlii. 3.

' Keang Yung digests in this place two foolish stories, — about a large
bone found in the State of Tug, and a bird which appeared in Cb'in and
died, shot through with a remarkable arrow. Confucius knew all about
them.

• This is related by Sze-ma Ts'een, and also in the Family Sayings. I
would fain believe it is not true. The wonder is, that no Chinese critic
should have set about disproving it.


80 CONFTTCinS ASD HI'S D'dCTEINES.

the princes wko would employ tne, in the course of twelve
months I shouM have done something considerable. In
three years the government would be perfected." ^
, A circumstance occurred to direct his attention to the
State of Tsin, which occupied the southern part of the
present Shan-se, and extended over the Yellow river intd>
Ho-nan. An invitation came to ConfuciuSj like that which"
he had formerly received from Kung-shan Fuh-jaou. Peih
Heih, an officer of Tsin, who was holding the town of
Chung-mow against his chiefs invited him to visit himj and
Confucius was inclined to go. Tsze-loo was always the
fe-cntor on such occasions. He said to him^ " Master, I
have heard you say, that when a man in his own person i?
guilty of doing evil, a superior man will not associate with
him. Peih Heih is in rebellion ; if you go to him, what
shall be said ? " Confucius replied, "Yes, I did use those
words. But is it not said that if a thing be really hard, it
may be ground without being made thin ; and if it be
really white, it may be steeped in a dark fluid without
being made black ? Am I a bitter gourd ? Am I to be
hung up out of the way of being eaten ? " ^

These sentiments sound strangely from his lips. After
all, he did not go> to Peih Heih ; and having travelled as
far as the Yellow river that he might see one of the prin-
cipal ministers of Tsin, he heard of the violent death of two
men of worth, and returned to- Wei, lamenting the fate
which prevented him from crossing the stream, and trying
to solace himself with poetry as he had done on leaving
Loo. Again did hC' communicate with the duke, but as
ineffectually, and. disgusted at being questioned by him
about military tactics, he left and went back to Ch'in.

He resided in Ch'in all the next year, B.C. 491, without"-
anything occurring there which is worthy of note. Events!
had transpired in Loo, however, which were to issuein
his return to his native State. The duke Ting had de-
ceased B.C. 494, and Ke Hwan, the chief of the Ke family,
died in this year. On his deathbed, he felt remorse for
his conduct to Confucius, and charged his successor,-
known to us in the Analects as Ke K'ang, to recall the
sage J but the charge was not immediately fulfilled. I^e

'Ana. ill. X. 2 Ana. XVII. vil


LIFE OF coNrucius. 81

K'ang, by tlie advice of one of his officers, sent to Ch'in
for the disciple Yen K'ew instead. Confucius willingly sent
hira off, and would gladly have accompanied him. " Let
me return ! " he said, "Let me return ! "^ But that was -
not to be for several years yet.

In B.C. 490j accompanied, as usual, by several of his dis-
eiples, he went from Ch'in to Ts'ae, a small dependency
of the great fief of Ts'oo, which occupied a large part of
the present provinces of Hoo-nan and Hoo-pih. On
the way, between Ch'in and Ts'ae, their provisions
became exhausted, and they were cut off somehow from
obtaining a fresh supply. The disciples were quite over-
come with want, and Tsze-loo said to the master, " Has
the superior man indeed to endure in this way 1 " Con-
fucius answered him, " The superior man may indeed have
to endure want ; but the mean man, when he is in want,
gives way to unbridled license."^ According to the
"Family Sayings,'- the distress continued seven days,
during which time Confucius retained his equanimity, and
was even cheerful, playing on his lute and singing. He.
retained, however, a strong impression of the perils of
the season, and we find him afterwards recurring to it, and
lamenting that of the friends that were with him in
Ch'in and Ts'ae, there were none remaining to enter his
door. '

Escaped from this strait, he remained in Ts'ae over B.C.
489, and in the following year we find him in She, another
district of Ts'oo, the chief of which had usurped the title
of duke. Puzzled about his visitor, he asked Tsze-loo
what he should think of him, but the disciple did not
V^enture a reply. When Confucius heard of it, he said to
Tsze-loo, "Why did you not say to him, — He is simply a,
man whoin his eager pursuit of knowledge forgets his
foodj who in the joy of its attainment forgets his sorrows,
and who does not perceive that old age is coming on ? " *
Subsequently, the duke, in conversation with Confucius,
asked him about government, and got the reply, dictated
by some circumstances of which we are ignorant, "Good
governmeni; obtains, when those who are near are made
happy, and those who are far off are attracted.'" °

1 Ana. V. xsX. 2 Ana. XV. i. 2, .3. ' Ana. XI. ii.

4 Ana. Vri. xvlii. ■ ' Ana. XIII. xvi.


csasFTCirs as© his docteutes.

After a sliort stay in S1l5, according to Sze-ma Ts'een,
i retamed to Ts'ae, and having to cross a rirer, hs ieni:
sze-loo to inquire for the ford of two nnea who were at
lA in a ndghbouring field. They were recluses, — moi
io had withdrawn from pabfic Kfe in 'lisgtiit at the w^-
iirdness of the times. One of them was called Ch'sag-
:-a, and in^stead of girii^Tsze Joo the iakfrmatioa he
mted, he a^ed him, "Who is it that holds the lenu
the carriage there ? " " It is K'nng Kew." " K'vmg
ew of Loo ':" "Yes," was the reply, and then the man
\mtted, " -He knows the ford,"

Tsze-Ioo applied to the other, who was called KSS-a^b,
It got for answer the qnestioai, "Who »e yon. Sir?"
B replied, " I am Chaag Tew," " CLuii:^ Yew, who is
e disciple of K'ong Kew of Loo ? " " Yes," ^pain re-
ied Tsze-loo, and Kee-heih addressed him, " Disorder,
:e a swelling flood, spreads over the whole empire, and
M> is lie that will change it for you ? Than fellow one
u> merefy withdraws fivm this one and that one, had
-a not better follow ttiose who withdraw from tie
jrld altogether ':" With this Ik feD to coTwing op the
ed, and gav^e no more he^ to the Granger, Tazfe-loo
ait back and reported what they had said, when Con-
cms rindicated his otq course, saying, "It is impos-
tile to associate with birds and beasts as if they were the
oie with ns. If I asso^te not with these people, — with
mkind, — with idiom shall I asso^ate ? If ri^it princi-
es prevafled thtongh the empire, there would be no use
r me to ctAnge its stsrte." *

About the same time he had an encounter with another
ehise, who was known as " Hie madman of Ti'oo." He
sie<i by the carri^e of Cknifocin.% jetngrng oat, "O
rsG, O FciG, how is yonr virtue degen^ated ! As to
epast, reproof kn^^less,bnt the fntorenmy be provided
[ainst. Give up. ^[re op yom* vain pursuit.*' C-aafaaam
■gite»l and wisLed to enter into converaarioii witt liim,
[t the man hastened away. *

Bat now the attentkm oi the m'er of Ts'oo — king, as
r styled himself— was directed to the iflnstrioBS straiger
bo was in his domimtHis, and he met Confncias and o-t^-


LIFE Of CONFUCIUS. 83

ducted him to his capital, which was in the present dis-
trict of E-shing, in the department of Seang-yang, in
Hoo-pih. After a time, he proposed endowing the philo-
sopher with a considerable territory, but was dissuaded by
his prime minister, who said to him, " Has your Majesty
any officer who could discharge the duties of an ambas-
sador like 'i'sze-kung ? or any one so qualified for a
premier as Yen Hwny ? or any one to compare as a
general with Tsze-loo ? The kings Witn and Woo, from
their hereditary dominions of a hundred le, rose to the
sovereignty of the empire. If K'ung K'ew, with such
disciples to be his ministers, get the possession of any
territory, it will not be to the prosperity of Ts'oo ? On,
this remonstrance, the king gave up his purpose, and
when he died in the same year, Confucius left the State,
and went back again to Wei.

The Duke Ling had died four years before, soon after
Confucius had last parted from him,and the reign-
ing duke, known to us by the title of Ch'uh, was " '
his grandson, and was holding the principality against his
own father. The relations between them were- rather
complicated. The father had been driven out in conse-
quence of an attempt which he had instigated on the life
of his mother, the notorious Nan-tsze, and the succession
was given to his son. Subsequently, the father wanted
to reclaim what he deemed his right, and an unseemly
struggle ensued. The Duke CVuh was conscious how
much his cause would be strengthened by the support of
Confucius, and hence when he got to Wei, Tsze-loo could
say to him, " The prince of Wei has been waiting for you,
in order with you to administer the government ; — what
will you consider the first thing to be done?"' The
opinion of the philosopher, however, was against the pro-
priety of the duke's course, and he declined taking office
with him, though he remained in Wei for between five
and six years. During all that time there is a blank in
his history. In the very year of his return, according to
the " Annals of the Empire," his most beloved disciple,

I Ana. Xlir. iii. In the notes on this passage, I have given Choo
He's opinion as to tlio time when Ts'ze-loo made this remark. It seems
more corroot. however, to refer it to Confucius' return to Wei from Ts'oo,
as is done by Eeang Yung.


CONFUGltJS' AND' HIS" UOCTEINES.

u Ilwtry/diedj on wliiclii occasion he exclaimed, " AlasT
iaven is destroying me ! Heaven is destroying me 1 " '
e death of his wife is assigned to B.C. 484, but. nothing
e is related which we can connect with this long period. .
3. His return to Loo was brought about by the disciple
in Yew, who, we have seen, went into the service of Ke
amhisre- E'ang, in B.C. 491. In the year B.C. 483,
?s death" ^^"^ ^^^ t^6 conduct of somo military opera-
483-^78. tions against Ts'e, and being successful, Ee
ang asked him how he had obtained his military
ill j— was it from, natiire, or- by learning ? He rephed
it he had learned it from Confucius, and entered into
flowing eulogy of the philosopher. The chief de-
ired that he would bring Confucius home again to
10. "If you do so," said the disciple, "see that you
not let mean men come between you and him."-
I this K'ang sent three, officers with appropriate presents
Wei, to invite the wanderer home, and he returned
tTi them accordingly.

This event took place in the eleventh year of the Duke
le, who succeeded to Ting, and according to K'ung Foo,
infucius' descendant, the invitation proceeded from him.
e may suppose that while Ke K'ang was the mover and
-ector of the proceeding, it was with the authority aiid '
prova,l of the duke. ' It is represented in the chronicle
Tso-k'ew Ming as having occurred at a very opportune
ae. The philosopher had been consulted a little be-
■e by K'ung Wan, an officer of Wei, about how he should
nduct a feud with another officer, and disgusted at
ing referred to on such a subject, had ordered his car-
ige-and prepared to leave the State, exclaiming, " The
•d chooses its tree. The tree does not chase the bird."
ung Wan endeavoured to excuse himself, and to prevail
Confucius to remain in Wei, and just at this juncture
e messengers from Loo arrived.

Confucius was now in his 69th year. The world had
t dealt kindly with him. In every State which he had-
iited he had met with disappointment and sorrow. Only

Aria. XI. viii. In the notes on Ana. XI. vii., I have adverted to the
onologioal difficulty connected with the dates as.signed respectively to;

deaths of Yen Hwuy- and Confucius' own son, Le, Keang Tung as-
as Hwuy's death to B.c. 481.


, . WPE PP.CJINPDCIUS-. - -; 85

five more years remained tp him, nor were they of a
brighter character than the past. He had, indeed, at-
tained to that state, he tells us, in which " he could follow
what his heart desired without transgressing what was '
right," ^ but other people were not more inclined' tlian
they had been to abide by his counsels. The Duke Gae
and Ke K'ang often conversed with him, but he no longer
had weight in the guidance of State affairs, and wisely
addressed himself to the completion of his literary labours.
He wrote, it is said, a preface to the Shoo-king ; carefully
digested the rites and ceremonies determined by the wis-
dom of the more ancient sages and kings ; collected and
arranged the ancient poetry ; a,nd undertook the reform
of music. He has told us himself, " I returned from Wei
to Loo, and then the music was reformed, and the pieces
in the Imperial Songs and Praise Songs found all their
proper place." ^ To the Yih-king he devoted much study,
and Sze-ma Ts'een says that the leather thongs by which
the tablets of his copy were bound together were thrice
worn out. " If some years were added to my life," he
said, " I would give fifty to the study of the Yih, and then
I might come to be without great faults." ' During this
time also, we may suppose that he supplied Tsang Sin
with the materials of the classic of Filial Piety. The same
year that' he returned, Ke K'ang Sent Yen Yew to ask his
opinion about an additional impost which he wished to
lay upon the people, but Confucius refused to give any
reply, telling the disciple privately his disapproval of the
proposed measure. It was carried out, however, in the
following year, by the agency of Yen, on which occasion,
I suppose, it was that Confucius said to the other disciples,
" He is no disciple" of mine ; my little children, beat the
drum and assail him." * The year B.C. 482 was marked
by the death of his son Le, which he seems to have borne
with more equanimity than he did that of his disciple Yen
,Hwuy, which some writers assign to the following year,
though I have already mentioned it under the year B.C. 488.
In the spi-ing of B.C. 480, a servant of Ke K'ang caught
a k'e-lin on a hunting excursion of the duke in the pre-

' Ana. II. iv. 6. « Ana. IX. xiv.

» Ana. VII. xvi.. ♦ Ana. XX. xvi.


• CONFUCIUS AND HIS DOCTRINES.

nt district of Kea-ts'eang. No person could tell what
range animal it was^ and' Confucius was called to look at
He at once knew it to be a lin, and the legend-writers
y that it bore on one of its horns the piece of ribbon,
lich his mother had attached to the one that appeared

her before his birth. According to the chronicle of
ang-yang, he was profoundly affected. He cried out,
For whom have you come ? For whom have you come ?"
is tears flowed freely, and he added, " The course of my
ictrines is run."

Notwithstanding the appearance of the lin, the life of
)nfucius was still protracted for two years longer, though

took occasion to terminate with that event his history of
e Ch'un Ts'ew. This Work, according to Sze-ma Ts'een,
IS altogether the production of this year, but we need
it suppose that it was so. In it, from the stand-point of
)o, he briefly indicates the principal events occurring
roughout the empire, every term being expressive, it is
id, of the true character of the actors and events de-
ribed. Confucius said himself, "It is the Spring and
itumn which will make men know me, and it is the
)ring and Autumn which will make men condemn me." '
encius makes the composition of it to have been an
hievement as great as Yu's regulation of the waters of
e deluge. — "Confucius completed the Spring and
itumn, and rebellious ministers and villainous sons were
puck with terror." ^

Towards the end of this year, word came to Loo that
e duke of Ts'e had been murdered by one of his oflBcers.
)nfucius was moved with indignation. Such an outrage,
I felt, called for his solemn interference. He bathed,
snt to court, and represented the matter to the duke,
ying, " Ch'in Hang has slain his sovereign, I beg that
u will undertake to punish him." The duke pleaded
3 incapacity, urging that Loo was weak compared with
i'e, but Confucius replied, " One half of the people of
i'e are not consenting to the deed. If you add to the
lople of Loo one' half of the people of Ts'e, you are sure

overcome." But he could not infuse his spirit into the
ike, who told him to go and lay the matter before the

' Mencius, III. Pt. II. ix. 8. a Mencius, III. Pt. II. is. U.


LIFE OF CONEUClUb. 87

chief of the three Families. Sorely against his sense* of
propriety, he did so, but they would not act, and he with-
drew with the remark, " Following in the rear of the great
officers, I did not dare not to represent such a matter." ^

In the year B.C. 479, Confucius had to mourn the death
of another of his disciples, one of those who had been
longest with him, — the well-known Tsze-loo. He stands
out a sort of Peter in the Confucian school, a man of im-
pulse, prompt to speak and prompt to act. He gets many
a check from the master, but there is evidently a strong
sympathy between them. Tsze-loo uses a freedom with
him on which none of the other disciples dares to venture,
and there is not one among them all, for whom, if I may
speak from my own feeling, the foreign student comes to
form such a liking. A pleasant picture is presented to us
in one passage of the Analects. It is said, " The disciple
Min was standing by his side, looking bland and precise;
Tsze-loo (named Yew), looking bold and soldierly ; Yen
Yew and Tsze-kung, with a free and straightforward
manner. The master was pleased, but he observed, ' Yew
there ! — he will not die a natural death.' " ^

This prediction was verified. When Confucius re-
turned to Loo from Wei, he left Tsze-loo and Tsze-kaou
engaged there in official service. Troubles arose. News
came to Loo, B.C. 479, that a revolution was in progress
in Wei, and when Confucius heard it, he said, " Ch'ae
will come here, but Yew will die." So it turned out.
When Tsze-kaou saw that, matters were desperate he
made his escape, but Tsze-loo would not forsake the chief
who had treated him well. He threw himself into the
melee, and was slain. Confucius wept sore for, him, but
his own death was not far off. It took place on the 11th
day of the 4th month in the following year, B.C. 478.

Early one morning, we are told, he got. up, and with his
hands behind his back, dragging his staff, he moved
about by his door, crooning over,. —

" The great mountain must crumble ;
The strong beam must break ;
Aad the wise man wither away like a plant."

After a Jittle, he entered the house and sat down oppo-
site the door. Tsze-kung had heard his words, and said
' Analects, XIV. xiii. ' Ana. XI. xii.


CONFUCIUS AND HIS DOCTRINES.

imself, " If the great mountain crumblej to what shd\
ok up ? If the strong beam break, and the wise nito
ler away, on whom shall I lean ? The master, I fear, is
ig to be ill." With this he hastened into the house,
fucius said to him, " Ts'ze, what makes you so late ?
ording to the statutes of Hea, the corpse was dressed
coffined at the top of the eastern steps, treating the
3. as if he were still the host. Under the Yin, the
smony was performed between the two pillars, as if
dead were both host and guest. The rule of Chow is
lerform it at the top of the western steps, treating the
d as if he were a guest. I am a man of Yin, and last
it I dreamt that I was sitting with offerings before
between the two pillars. No intelligent monarch
es ; there is not one in the empire that will make me
Qa.aster. My time is como to die." So it was. He
it to his couch, and after seven days expired.'
luch is the account which we have of the last hours of
great philosopher of China. His end was not unim-
3sive, but it was melancholy. He sank behind a cloud,
ippointed hopes made his soul bitter. The great ones
ihe empire had not received his teachings. No wife
child was by to do the kindly offices of affection for
. Nor were the expectations of another life present
1 him as he passed though the dark valley. He uttered
prayer, and he betrayed no apprehensions. Deep-
,sured in his own heart may have been the thought
; he had endeavoured to, serve his generation by the
of God, but he gave no sign. " The mountain falling
le to nought, and the rock was removed out of his
ie. So death prevailed against him and he passed;
countenance was changed, and he was sent away."
0. I flsitter myself that the preceding paragraphs con-
L a more correct narrative of the principal incidents in
life of Confucius than has yet been giyen in any Euro-
Q language. They might easily have been expanded
> a volume, but I did not, wish to exhaust the subject,
only to furnish a sketch, which, while it might satisfy
generail reader, would be of special assistance to the
jful student of the classical Books. I had taken many

\ See the Lo Ee, II. Pt. I. ji. 20. :


LIFE OT coNFTJcrus;: ' > 8^

notes of the manifest errors in regard, to chronology and
other matters in the " Family Sayings," and the chapter
of Sze-ma Ts'een on the K'ung family, when the digest of
Keang Yung, to which I have made frequent reference,
attracted my attention. Conclusions to which I had come
were confirmed, and a clue was furnished to difficulties
which I was seeking to disentangle. I take the opportunity
to acknowledge here my obligations to it. With a few
notices of Confucius' habits and manners, I shall conclude
this section.

Very little can be gathered from reliable sources on the
personal appearance of the sage. The height of his father
is stated, as I have noted, to have been ten feet, and
though Confucius came short of this by four inches, he
was often called " the tall man." It is allowed that the
ancient foot or cubit was shorter than the modern, but it
must be reduced more than any scholar I have consulted
has yet done, to bring this. statement within the range of
credibility. The legends assign to his figure "nine-and-
forty remarkable peculiarities," a tenth part of which
would have made him more a monster than a man. Dr
Morrison says that the images of him, which he had seen
in the northern parts of China, represent him as of a dark
swarthy colour.^ It is not so with those common in
the south. He was, no doubt, in size and complexion
much the same as many of his descendants in the present
day.

But if his disciples had nothing to chronicle of his per-
sonal appearance, they have gone very minutely into an
account of many of his habits. The tenth book of the
Analects is all occupied with his deportment, his eating,
and his dress. In public, whether in the village, the
temple, or the court, he was the man of rule and ceremony,
but " at home he was not formal.". Yet if not formal, he
was particular. , In bed even he did not forget himself ;
— " he did not lie hke a, corpse," .and " he did-not speak."
" He required his sleeping dress to be half as long again
as his body." " If he happened to be sick, and the prince
came to visit him, he had his face to the east, made his

' Chinese and English Dictionary, char. K'ung. Sir .Tohn Davis also
mentions seeing a figure of Confucius, in a temple near the Po-yang Lake,
of which the complexion was "quite black." (" The Chinese," vol. II. p. 66.)


CONFUCIUS AND HIS DOCTRINES,

ourt rotes be put over him, and drew his girdle acrosa
hem."

He was nice in his diet, — " not disliking to have his rice
Iressed fine, nor to have his minced meat cut small."
'Anything at all gone he would not touch." " He must
lave his meat cut properly, and to every kind its proper
auce ; but he was not a great eater." " It was only in
vine that he laid down no limit to himself, but he did not
,llow himself to be confused by it." "When the vil-
agers were drinkiug together, on those who carried
taves going out, he went out immediately after." There
nust always be ginger at the table, and " when eating, he
lid not converse." "Although his food might be coarse
ice and poor soup, he would offer a little of it in sacrifice,
vith a grave respectful air."

" On occasion of a sudden clap of thunder, or a violent
vind, he would change countenance. He would do the
lame, and rise up moreover, when he found himself a
juest at a loaded board." "At the sight of a person in
nourning he would also change countenance, and if he hap-
pened to be in his carriage, he would bend forward with

1 respectful salutation." " His general way in his car-
■iage was not to turn his head round, nor talk hastily,
lor point with his hands." He was charitable. "When
my of his friends died, if there were no relations who
;ould be depended on for the necessary oflBces, he would
iay, ' I will bury him.' "

The disciples were so careful to record these and other
;haracteristics of their master, it is said, because every act,
Df movement or of rest, was closely associated with the
^reat principles which it was his object to inculcate. The
Jetail of so many small matters, however, does not impress
I foreigner so favourably. There is a want of freedom
ibout the philosopher. Somehow he is less a sage to me,
ifter I have seen him at his table, in his undress, in his
bed, and in his carriage.


INFLUK»CE AND OPINIONS. 91

SECTION II.

HIS INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS.

1. CoNPrcius died, we have seen, complaining that of
all the princes of the empire there was not one who would
adopt his principles and obey his lessons. Homage ren-
He had hardly passed from the stage of life Sy'th?™:
when his merit began to be acknowledged, pi^™" °^ China.
When the Duke Gae heard of his death, he pronounced
his eulogy in the words, "Heaven has not left to me
the aged man. There is none now to assist me on the
throne. Woe is me ! Alas ! venerable Ne ! " ' Tsze-
Kung complained of the inconsistency of this lament-
ation from one who could not use the master when he
was alive, but the duke was probably sincere in his grief.
He caused a temple to be erected, and ordered that sacri-
fice should be offered to the sage, at the four seasons of
the year.

The emperors of the tottering dynasty of Chow had not
the intelligence, nor were they in a position, to do honour
to the departed philosopher, but the facts detailed in the
first chapter of these prolegomena, in connection with the
attempt of the founder of the Ts'in dynasty to destroy the
monuments of antiquity, show how the authority of Con-
fucius had come by that time to prevail through the empire.
The founder of the Han dynasty, in passing through Loo,
B.C. 194, visited his tomb and offered an ox in sacrifice to
him. Other emperors since then have often made pilgrim-
ages to the spot. The most famous temple in the empire
now rises over the place of the grave. K'ang-he, the
second and greatest of the rulers of the present dynasty, in
the twenty-third year of his reign, there set the example of
kneeling thrice, and each time laying his forehead thrice in
the dust, before the image of the sage.

In the year of our Lord 1, began the practice of conferring
honorary designations on Confucius by imperial authority.
The Emperor P'ing then styled him — " The Duke Ne, all-

' Le Ke, II. Pfc. I. iil. 43. This eulogy is found at greater length in
Tso-E'ew Ming, immediately after the notice of the sage's death.


)2 COXFUCIDS AND HIS nOCTEINES.

;omplete and illustrious." This was changed, in a.d. 492,
;o — " The venerable Ne, the accomplished Sage." Other
iitleshave supplanted this. Shun-cEe, the first of the Man-
show dynasty, adopted, in his second year, a.d. 1645, the
itjle, — " K'ung, the ancient Teacher, accomplished and
llustrious, all-complete, the perfect Sage ; " but twelve
jrears later, a shorter title was introduced, — " K'ung, the
mcient Teacher, the perfect Sage." Since that year no
iurther alteration has been made.

At first the worship of Confucius was confined to the
country of Loo, but in a.d. 57 it was enacted that sacrifices
shouldbe offered to him in the imperial college, and in all the
3olleges of the principal territorial divisions throughout the
smpire. In those sacrifices he was for some centuries associ-
ited with the duke of Chow, the ^legislator to whoni Confu-
3ius made frequent reference; but in a.d. 609 separate
temples were assigned to them, and in 628 our sage dis-
placed the older worthy altogether. About the same time
began the custom, which continues to the present day,
of erecting temples to him, — separate structures, in con-
nection with all the colleges, or examination-halls, of the
country.

The sage is not alone in those temples. In a hall behind
the principal one occupied by himself are the tablets — in
some cases, the images — of several of his ancestors, and
other worthies; while associated with himself are his prin-
cipal disciples, and many who in subsequent times have
signalized themselves .as expounders and exemplifiers of
his doctrines^' On the first day of every month, ofierings
SFfruits and vegetables are set forth, and on the fifteenth
there is a solemn burning of inpense. But twice a year,
in the middle months of spring and autumn, when the
first "ting" day of the month comes round, the worship
of Confucius is performed with peculiar solemnity. At
the imperial' college the emperor himself is required to
attend in state, and is in fact the principal performer.
After all the preliminary arrangements have been made,
and the emperor has twice knelt and six times bowed his
head to the earth, the presence of Confucius' spirit is in-
voked in the words, " Great art thou, perfect sage !
Thy virtue is full ;- thy doctrine is complete. Among
mortiil.paen,. there. has. not-been thine equal. AU kings


•" INFfitTENCE AND OflNIGNS. §3

Jionour thee. T&y statutes and laws have come gloriously-
down. Thou art the pattern in this imperial school. Rever-
ently have the sacrificial vessels been set out. Full of
awe, we sound our drums and bells."
- - The spirit is supposed now. to be present, and the service
proceeds through various offerings^ when the first of which
has, been set forth,, an officer reads the following, which is
the prayer on the 9Ccasion : — " On this. . . .monthof this.-. . .
year, I, A.B., the emperor, offer a sacrificeto the philoso-
pher K'ung, the ancient Teacher, the perfect Sage, and
say, — Teacher, in virtue equal to Heaven and Earth,
whose doctrines embrace the past time and the present, thou
didst digest and^ transmit, the six classics, and didst hand
down lessons for all generations ! Now in this second
month of spring (or autumji), in reverent observance of the
old^tatutes,- with victims, silks, spirits, and fruits, I care-
fully offer sacrifice to thee. With thee are associated the
philosopher Yen,, continuator of thee; the philosopher
Tsangy exhibiter of thy fundamental principles ; the philo-
topher Tsze-sze,- transmitter of thee ; and the philosopher
Mang, second toi thee. May'st thou enjoy the offerings ! "

I need not go on to enlarge on the homage which the-
emperors of China render to Confucius. It could not be
more complete. It is worship and not mere homage. He
was unreasonably neglected when alive. He is now un-
reasonably venerated when dead. The estimation with
which the rulers of China regard their sage leads them t&
sin against God, and this is, a misfortune to the empire.

2. The rulers of China are not singular in this matter,
but in entire sympathy with the mass of their people. It
is the distinction of this empire that education Qgneraiao
has been highly prized in it froin- the earliest predation of
times. It was so before the era of Confucius, and
we may be sure that the system met with his approbation.
One of his remarkable sayings was,-^"To lead an unin-.
structed people to war, is to throw them away." ^ When
he pronounced this judgment, he was- not thinking of
military training, but of education in the duties of life and
citizenship. A people so taught," he thought, would be
Biorally fitted to fight for their governinent. Mencius,.


« Ana. XIII. 30..


94 CONFUCIUS AND HIS DOCTBINES.

when lecturing to. the duke of T'ang on the proper way of
governing a kingdom, told him that he must provide the
means of education for all, the poor as well as the rich.
" Establish," said he, " ts'eang, seu, heu, and heaou, — all
those educational institutions, — for the instruction of the
people."^

At the present day education is widely diffused through-
out China. In no other country is the schoolmaster more
abroad, and in all schools it is Confucius who is taught.
The plan of competitive examinations, and the selection for
civil offices only from those who have been successful can-
didates, — good so far as the competition is concerned, but
injurious from the restricted range of subjects with which
an acquaintance is required, — have obtained for more than
twelve centuries. The classical works are the text books.
It is from them almost exclusively that the themes pj-o-
posed to determine the knowledge and ability of the stu-
dents are chosen. The whole of the magistracy of China
is thus versed in all that is recorded of the sage, and in
the ancient literature which he preserved. His thoughts
are familiar to every man in authority, and his character
is more or less reproduced in him.

The official civilians of China, numerous as they are, are
but a fraction of its students, and the students, or those
who make literature a profession, are again but a fraction
of those who attend school for a shorter or longer period.
Yet so far as the studies have gone, they have been occu-
pied with the Confucian writings. In many school-rooms
there is a tablet or inscription on the wall, sacred to the
sage, and every pupil is required, on coming to school on
the morning of the first and fifteenth of eveiy month, to
bow before it, the first thing, as an act of worship.*' Thus,
all in China who receive the slightest tincture of learning
do so at the fountain of Confucius. They learn of him and do
homage to him at once. I have repeatedly quoted the
statement that during his life-time he had three thousand
disciples. Hundreds of millions are his disciples now. It

' Mencius, III. Pt. I. iii. 10.

2 During the present dynasty, the tablet of the god of literature has to a
considerable extent displaced that of Confucius in schools Yet the worship
of him does not clash with that of the other. He is " the fathor " of com-
position only.


iNrLTTENCE AND OPINIONS. 95

is hardly necessary to make any allowance in this statement
for the followers of Taouism and Buddhism, for, as Sir John
Davis has observed, " whatever the other opinions or faith
of a Chinese may be, he takes good care to treat Con-
fucius with respect.^ For two thousand years he has reigned
supreme, the undisputed teacher of this most populous
land.

3. This position and influence of Confucius are to be
ascribed, I conceive, chiefly to two causes : — his being
the preserver, namely, of the monuments of The causes ot
antiquity, and the exemplifier and expounder hisiniiuenoe. i ^
of the maxims of the golden age of China; and the devo-
tion to him of his immediate disciples and their early fol-
lowers. The national and the personal are thus blended in
him, each in its highest degree of excellence. He was a
Chinese of the Chinese; he is also represented, and all now
believe him to have been, the heau ideal of humanity in its
best and noblest estate.

4. It may be well to bring forward here Confucius' own
estimate of himself and of his doctrines. It will serve to
illustrate the statements just made. The following are
some of his sayings. — "The sage and the man His own es-
of perfect virtue;— how dare I rank myself with *Sfand of to
them ? It may simply be said of me, that doctrines.

I strive to become such without satiety, and teach others
without weariness." " In letters 1 am perhaps equal to
other men; but the character of the superior man, carry-
ing out in his conduct what he professes, is what I have not
yet attained to." " The leaving virtue without proper cul-
tivation ; the not thoroughly discussing what is learned;
not being able to move towards righteousness of which a
knowledge is gained ; and not being able to change what
is not good ; — these are the things which occasion me so-
licitude." " I am not one who was born in the possession
of knowledge ; I am one who is fond of antiquity and earn-
est in seeking it there." " A transmitter and not a maker,
believing in and loving the ancients, I venture to comparo
myself with our old P'ang."^

Confucius cannot be thought to speak of himself in these

' " The Chinese," vol. II. p. 45.

2 All these passages are taken from the Vllth Book of the Analects.
See ch. xxxiii. ; xxxii.; iii. ; xix.; and i.


5 CONFUCIUS AND HIS^KOCTEINES.

eclarations more highly than he ought to do. Rather we
aay recognize in them the expressions of a genuine hu-
iiility. He was conscious that personally he came short
a many things^ but he toiled after the character, which
le saw, or fancied that he saw, in the ancient sages whom
le acknowledged; and the lessons of government and
aorals which he laboured to diffuse were those which had
.Iready been inculcated and exhibited by them. Empha-
ically he" was "a transmitter and not a maker." It is
tot to be understood that he was not fully satisfied of .the
ruth of the principles which he had learned. He l;ield
hem with the full approval and consent of his own under-
tanding. He believed that if they were acted on, they
vould remedy the evils of his time. There was nothing
o prevent rulers like Yaou and Shun and the great Yu
rom again arising, and a condition of happy tranquillity
)eing realized throughout the empire under their sway.

If in anything he thought himself " superior and alone,"
laving attributes .which others could not claim, it was in
lis possessing a Divine commission as the conservator of
tncient truth and rules. He does not speak very definitely
)n this point. It is noted that " the appointments of
leaven was one of the subjects on which he rarely
;ouched." '■ His most remarkable utterance was that
vhich I have already {^ven in the sketch of his Life : —
' When he was put in fear in K'wang, he said, ' After the
leath of King Wan, was not the cause of truth lodged here
n me ? If Heaven had wished to let this cause of truth
jerish, then I, a future mortal, should not have got such a
relation to that cause. While Heaven does not let the
iause of truth perish, what can the people of K'wang do to
me?"'^ Confucius, then, did feel that he was in the
rorld for a special purpose. But it was not to announce
my new truths, or to initiate any new economy^ It was to
Drevent what had previously been known from being lost.
Ele followed in the wake of Yaou and Shun, of T'ang, and
King Wan. Distant from the last by a long interval of
ime, he would have said that he was distant from him also
^.y a great inferiority of character, but still he had learned
the principles on which they all happily governed the em-


Ana. IX. i, a- Ana, IX, iii;


nfPLIIENCE AND OPINIONS. 97

pire, and in tteir name lie would lift up a standard against
the prevailing lawlessness of his age.

■>. The language employed with reference to Confucius
by his disciples and their early followers presents a strik-
ing contrast with his own. I have already, in writing of
the scope and Talue of " The Doctrine of the Estimate of
Mean," called attention to the extravagant oii^es'ami'their
eulogies of his grandson Tsze-sze. He early followers,
only followed the example which had been set by those
among whom the philosopher went in and out. We
have the language of Yen Yuen, his favourite, which
is comparatively moderate, -and simply expresses the
genuine admiration of a devoted pupil. ^ Tsze-kung
on several occasions spoke in a different style. Having
heard that one of the chiefs of Loo had said that he him-
self — Tsze-kung — was superior to Confucius, he observed,
" Let me use the comparison of a house and its encompass-
ing wall. My wall only reaches to the shoulders. One
may peep over it, and see whatever is valuable in the
apartments. The wall of my master is several fathoms
high. If one do not find the door and enter by it, he can-
rot see the rich ancestral temple with its beauties, nor all
the officers in their rich array. But I may assume that
they are few who find the door. The remark of the chief
was only what might have been expected." ^

Another time, the same individual having spoken re-
vilingly of Confucius, Tsze-kung said, " It is of no use
doing so. Chung-ne cannot be reviled. The talents and
virtue of other men are hillocks and mounds which may be
stept over. Chung-ne is the sun or moon, which it is not
possible to step over. Although a man may wish to cut
himself off from the sage, what harm can he do to the sun
and moon? He only shows that he does not know his
own capacity."'

In conversation with a fellow-disciple, Tsze-kung took
a still higher flight. Being charged by Tsze-k'in with
being too modest, for that Confucius was not really
superior to him, he replied, " For one word a man is often
deemed to be wise, and for one word he is often deemed
to be foolish. We ought to be careful indeed in what we

I Ana. IX. X. 2 Ana. XIX. xxiii. 3 Ana. XIX. xxiv.

VOL. r. 7


rg CONFUCIUS AND HIS DOCTEINES.

;;iy. Our master cannot be attained tOj just in the same-
VEy as the heavens cannot be gone up to by the steps of
I stair. Were our master in the position of the prince of
I State, or the chief of a Family, we should find verified
;he description which has been given of a sage's rule : —
Ee would plant the people, and forthwith they would be
jstablished ; he would lead them on, and forthwith they
ivould follow him j he would make them happy, and forth-
(vith multitudes would resort to his dominions ; he would
stiir.ulate them, and forthwith they would be harmonious.
W];ilehe lived, he would be glorious. When he died, he
ivonld be bitterly lamented. How is it possible for him to
oe attained to?"^

From these representations of Tsze-kung, it was not a
iifilcult step for Tsze-sze to make in exalting Confucius
not only to the level of the ancient sages, but as " the
3qnal of Heaven." And Mencius took up the theme.
Being questioned by Kung-sun Ch'ow, one of his disciples, ,
iboiit two acknowledged sages, Pih-e and E Yin, whether
bhey were to be placed in the same rank with Confucius,
be replied, " No. Since there were living men until now,
thei'e never was another Confucius ; " and then he pro-
ceeded to fortify his opinion by the concurring testimony
of Tsae Go, Tsze-kung, and Yew Jo, who all had wisdom,
he thought, sufficient to know their master. Tsae Go's
opinion was, " According to my view of our master, he is
far superior to Yaou and Shun." Tsze-kung said, " By
viewing the ceremonial ordinances of a prince, we know
the character of his government. By hearing his music,
we know the character of his virtue. From the distance
of a hundred ages after, I can arrange, according to their
merits, the kings of a hundred ages ; — not one of them can
escape me. From the birth of mankind till now, there
baa never been another like our master." Yew Jo said,
" Is it only among men that it is so ? There is the k'e-
lin among quadrupeds; the fung-hwang among birds;
the T'ae mountain among mounds and ant-hills; and
rivers and seas among rain-pools. Though different in
degree, they are the same in kind. So the sages among
niaakind are also the same in kind. But they stand Out

1 Ana. XIX. xxv.


INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS. 99

from their fellows, and rise above tlie level ; and from the
birth of mankind till now, there has never been one so
complete as Confucius." ^ I will not indulge in farther
illustration. The judgment of the sage's disciples, uf
Tsze-sze, and of Mencius, has been unchallenged by tho
mass of the scholars of China. Doubtless it pleases theia
to bow down at the shrine of the sage, for their profession
of literature is thereby glorified. A reflection of the
honour done to him falls upon themselves. And the
powers that be, and the multitudes of the people, fall in
with the judgiaent. Confucius is thus, in the empire of
China, the one man by whom all possible personal excel-—!
lence was exemplified, and by whom all possible lessons J
of social virtue and political wisdom are taught.

6. The reader will be prepared by the preceding ac-
count not to expect to find any light thrown by Confucius
on the great problems of the human condition and destiny.
He did not speculate on the creation of things Subjects on

,1 J Vr i.T TT J. J. 1 1 J which Coniuciiis

or the end or them. He was not troubled aid not treat.—
to account for the origin of man, nor did he re'i'^'o^runeipll
seek to know about his hereafter. He med- rf'™^- '■^ "p^^^
died neitheK with physics nor metaphysics;'' insincerity.
The testimony of the Analects about the subjects of -
his teaching is the following : — " His frequent themes
of discourse were the Book of Poetry, the Book of
History, and the maintenance of the rules of Propriety.^
" He taught letters, ethics, devotion of soul, and truthful-
ness." "Extraordinary things; feats of strength; states
of disorder ; and spiritual beings he did not like to talk
about."'

Confucius is not to be blamed for his silence on the
subjects here indicated. His ignorance of them was to a

» Mencius, II. Pt I. ii. 23—28.

2 The contents of the Tih-king, and Confucius' labours upon it, may be
objected in opposition to this statement, and I must be understood to make
it with some reservation. Six years ago, I spent all my leisure time for
twelve months in the study of iiiat Work, and wrote out a translation of it,
but at the close I was only groping my way in darkness to lay hold of its
scope and meaning, and up to this time I have not been able to master it
so as to speak positively about it. It will come in due time, in its place,
in the present publication, and I do not think that what I here say of Con-
fucius will require much, if any, modification.

3 Ana. VII. xvii. ; xxiv. ; xx.


OO CONFUCIUS AND HIS DOCTRINES.

reat extent his misfortune. He h.ad not learned them.
\o report of them had come to. him by the ear ; no vision
f them by the eye. And to his practical mind the toiling
f thought amid uncertainties seemed worse than useless.

The question haSj indeed, been raised, whether he did
ot make changes in the ancient creed of China,' but I
annot believe that he did so consciously and design-
dly. Had his idiosyncrasy been different, we might have
ad expositions of the ancient views on some points, the
Efect of which would have been more beneficial than the
idefiniteness in which they are now left, and it may be
oubted so far, whether Confucius was not unfaithful to
is guides. But that he suppressed or added, in order to
ring in articles of belief originating with himself, is a
liiug not to be charged against him.

I will mention two important subjects in regard to
fhich there is a growing conviction in my mind that he
ame short of the faith of the older sages. The first is the
octrine of God. This name is common in the She-king,
nd Shoo-king. Te or Shang Te appears there as a per-
onal being, ruling in heaven and on earth, the author of
lan's moral nature, the governor among the nations, by
rhom kings reign and princes decree justice, the rewarder
f the good and the punisher of the bad. Confucius pre-
jrred to speak of Heaven. Instances have already been
iven of this. Two others may be cited : — •' He who
fiends against Heaven has none to whom he can pray.'"
Alas ! " said he, " there is no one that knows me."
'sze-kung said, " What do you mean by thus saying that
o one knows you ? " He replied, " I do. not murmur
gainst Heaven. I do not grumble against men. My
tudies lie low, and my penetration rises high. But there
i Heaven ; — that knows me ! " ^ Not once throughout
ie Analects does he use the personal name. I would say
lat he was unreUgious rather than irreligious ; yet by the
oldness of his temperament and intellect in this matter,
is influence is unfavourable to the development of true
sligious feeling among the Chinese people generally, and
e prepared the way for the speculations of the literati of

' See Hardwiok's " Clii-ist and other Masters," Part III. pp. 18. 19 with
is reference in a note to a passage from Meadows' " Tlie Chinese and their
ebellions." a ^q^. III. xiii. ■ a Ana. XIV. xxxvii.


INFLUEKCB AITD OPDHONS. 101

mediaeval and modem times, wluch. have exposed tliem to
the charge of atheism.

Secondly, Along with the worship of God there existed
in China, from the earliest historical times, the worship of
other spiritual beings, — especially, and to every individual,
the worship of departed ancestors. Confucius recognized
this as an institution to be devoutly observed. " He
sacrificed to the dead as if they were present ; he sacri-
ficed to the spirits as if the spirits were present. He said,
' I consider my not being present at the sacrifice as if I
did not sacrifice.'"' The custom must have originated
from a belief of the continued existence of the dead. We
cannot suppose that they who instituted it thought that
with the cessation of this life on earth there was a cess-
ation also of all conscious being. But Confucius never
spoke explicitly on this subject. He tried to evade it.
" Ke Loo asked about serving the spirits of the dead, and
the master said, "■ While you are not able to serve men, how
can you serve their spirits ? ' The disciple added, ' I ven-
ture to ask about death,' and he was answered, 'While
you do not know life, how can you know about death.' " *
Still more striking is a conversation with another disciple,
recorded in the "Family Sayings," Tsze-kung asked
him, "^'Do the dead have knowledge (of our services,
that is), or are they without knowledge ? " The master
replied, "If I were to say that the dead have such
knowledge, I am afraid that filial sons and dutiful grand-
sons would injure their substance in paying the last
offices to the departed ; and if I were to say that the dead
have not such knowledge, I am afraid lest unfiUal sons
should leave their parents unburied. You need not wish,
Ts'ze, to know whether the dead have knowledge or not.
There is no present urgency about the point. Hereafter
you will know it for yourself." Surely this was not the
teaching proper to a sage. He said on one occasion that
he had no concealments from his disciples.* Why did he
not candidly teU his real thoughts on so interesting a sub-
ject ? I incline to think that he doubted more than he
i)elieved. If the case were not so, it would be difficult to
account for the answer which he returned to a question

' Ana. ni. xii. * Ana. XI xi. . * Ana. TIL xxii»


)2 CONFUCIUS AND HIS DOCTRINES.

5 to what constituted wisdom. " To give one's-self earn-
itly," said he, " to the duties due to men, and, while
jspecting spiritual beings, to keep aloof from them, may
e called wisdom." ' At any rate, as bj' his frequent
jferences to Heaven, instead of following the phraseology
f the older sages, he gave occasion to many of his pro-
sssed followers to identify God with a principle of reasoa
ad the course of nature ; so, in the point now in hand,
e has led them to deny, like the Sadducees of old, the
Kistence of any spirit at all, and to tell us that their
icrifices to the dead are but an outward form, the mode
f expression which the principle of filial piety requires
b.em to adopt, when its objects have departed this life.

It will not be supposed that I wish to advocate or defend
h.e practice of sacrificing to the dead. My object has
een to point out how Confucius recognized it, without
cknowledging the faith from which it must have origin-
ted, and how he enforced it as a matter of form or cere-
mony. It thus connects itself with the most serious
harge that can be brought against him, — -the charge of
isincerity. Among the four things which it is said he
aught, "truthfulness" is specified,^ and many sayings
light be quoted from him, in which " sincerity " is cele-
rated as highly and demanded as stringently as ever it
as been by any Christian moralist; yet he was not alto-
;ether the truthful and true man to whom we accord our
ighest approbation. There was the case of Mang Che-
m, who boldly brought up the rear of the defeated troops
f Loo, and attributed his occupying the place of honour
the. backwardness of his horse. The action was gallant,
lut the apology for it was weak and wrong. And yet
Confucius saw nothing in the whole but matter for praise.^
le could excuse himself from seeing an unwelcome visitor
n the ground that he was sick, when there was nothing
he matter with him.* These perhaps were small matters,
lut what shall we say to the incident which I have given
a the sketch of his Life, — his deliberately breaking
he oath which he had sworn, simply on the ground that
t had been forced from him ? I should be glad if I could

1 Ana. VI. XX.

' See above, near the beginning of this paragraph.

3 Ana. TI. xiii. * Ana. XVII. xx.


INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS. 103

find evidence on whicli to deny the truth of that occur-
rence. But it rests on the same authority as most other*
statements about him, and it is accepted as a fact by the>
people and scholars of China. It must have had, and it
must still have, a very injurious influence upon them.
Foreigners charge, and with reason, a habit of deceitful-
ness upon the nation and its government. For every word
of falsehood and every act of insincerity the guilty party
must bear his own burden, but we cannot but regret the
example of Confucius in this particular. It is with the
Chinese and their sage, as it was with the Jews of old and
their teachers. He that leads them has caused them to
err, and destroyed the way of their paths.'

But was not insincerity a natural result of the un-
religion of Confucius ? There are certain virtues which
demand a true piety in order to their flourishing in the
corrupt heart of man. Natural afiection, the feeling of
loyalty, and enlightened policy, may do much to build up
and preserve a family and a State, but it requires more to
maintain the love of truth, and make a lie, spoken or
acted, to be shrunk from with shame. It requires in fact
the living recognition of a God of truth, and all the sanc-
tions of revealed religion. Unfortunately the Chinese
have not had these, and the example of him to whom
they bow down as the best and wisest of men, encourages
them to act, to dissemble, to sin.

7. I go on to a brief discussion of Confucius' views on
government, or what we may call his principles of
political science. It could not be in his long His views on
intercourse with his disciples • but that he Kovemment.
should enunciate many maxims bearing on character and
morals generally, but he never rested in the improvement
of the individual. ',' The empire brought to a state of
happy tranquillity " was the grand object which he de-
lighted to think of; that it might be brought about as
easily as " one can look upon the palm of his hand," was
the dream which it pleased him to indulge in.^ He held
that there was in men an adaptation and readiness to be go-
verned, which only needed to be taken advantage of in the
proper way. ' There must be the right administrators, b\iC

> Isaiah iii. 12. ^ Ana. III. xi., et al.


)4 coNrtJCros and his doctbines.


iven those, and " the growth, of government would be
tpid, just as vegetation is rapid in the earth ; yea, their
Dvernment would display itself like an easily-growing
ish."-' The same sentiment was common from the lips of
[encius. Enforcing it one day, when conversing with one
^ the petty princes of his time, he said in his peculiar style,
Does your Majesty understand the way of the growing
rain ? During the seventh and eighth months, when
rought prevails, the plants become dry. Then the clouds
jllect densely in the heavens, they send down torrents
f rain, and the grain erects itself as if by a shoot. When

does so, who can keep it back ? " ^ Such, he contended,
ould be the response of the mass of the people to any
•ue " shepherd of men." It may be deemed unnecessary
lat I should specify this point, for it is a truth applicable
5 the people of all nations. Speaking generally, govern-
lent is by no device or cunning craftiness ; human nature
emands it. But in no other family of mankind is the
baracteristic so largely developed as in the Chinese,
he love of order and quiet, and a willingness to submit
3 " the powers that be,^' eminently distinguish them,
oreign writers have often taken notice of this, and have
ttributed it to the influence of Confucius' doctrines as
leulcating subordination ; but it existed previous to his
^me. The character of the people moulded his system,
lore than it was moulded by it.

This readiness to be governed arose, according to Con-
icius, from the duties of universal obligation, or those be-
tween sovereign and minister, between father and son,
etween husband and wife, between elder brother and
ounger, and those belongingtothe'intercourse of friends."'
len as they are bom into the world, and grow up in it,
nd themselves existing in those relations. They are the
ppointment of Heaven. And each relation has its repi-
rocal obligations, the recognition of which is proper to the
leaven-conferred nature. It only needs that the sacred-
ess of the relations be maintained, and the duties belong-
ag to them faithfully discharged, and the "happy tran-
[uillity" will prevail all under heaven. As to the institu-

1 Doctrine of the Mean, xx. 3. * Mencius, I. Pt I. vl. 6.

' Doctrine of the Mean, 3,x. 8.


INFLCENSE AND OPINIONS. 105

tions of government, the laws and arrangements by which,
as through a thousand channels, it should go forth to carry
plenty and prosperity through the length and breadth of
the country, it did not belong to Confucius, " the throne-
less king,'' to set them forth minutely. And indeed they
were existing in the records of " the ancient sovereigns."
Nothing new was needed. It was only requisite to pursue
the old paths, and raise up the old standards. " The go-
vernment of Wan and Woo," he said, " is displayed in the
records, — the tablets of wood and bamboo. Let there be
the men, and the government will flourish, but without the
men, the government decays and ceases." ' To the same
effect was the reply which he gave to Yen Hwuy when
asked by him how the government of a State should be
administered. It seems very wide of the mark, until we
read it in the light of the sage's veneration for ancient or-
dinances, and his opinion of their sufficiency. " Follow,"
he said, "the seasons of Hea. Ride in the state-carriages
of Yin. Wear the ceremonial cap of Chow. Let the music
be the Shaou with its pantomimes. Banish the songs of
Ch'ing, and keep far from specious talkers." ^

Confucius' idea then of a happy, well-governed State did
not go beyond the flourishing of the five relations of society
which have been mentioned ; and we have not any con-
densed exhibition from him of their nature, or of the duties
belonging to the several parties in them. Of the two first
he spoke frequently, but all that he has said on the others
would go into small compass. Mencius has said that " be-
tween father and son, there should be affection j between
sovereign and minister, righteousness ; between husband
and wife, attention to their separate functions ; between
old and young, a proper order; and between friends,
fidelity.'" Confucius, I apprehend, would hardly have
accepted this account. It does not bring out sufficiently
the authority which he claimed for the father and the
sovereign, and the obedience which he exacted from the
child and the minister. With regard to the relation of
husband and wife, he was in no respect superior to the
preceding sages who had enunciated their views of "pro-

' Doctrine of the Mean, xx. 2. ' Ana. XV. x,

' Mepoiug, m. Pt I. iv. 8.


16 CONPOCIUS AND HIS DOCTEINES.

■iety" ou the subject. We liave a somewhat detailed
:position of his opinions in the " Family Sayings." —
Man," said he, " is the representative of Heaven, and

supreme over all things. Woman yields obedience to
e instructions of man, and helps to carry out his
'inciples. Ou this account she can determine nothing
' herself, and is subject to the rule of the three obodi-
icos. When young, she must obey her father and
der brother; when married, she must obey her hus-
md; when her husband is dead, she must obey her
in. She may not think of marrying a second time. No
structions or orders must issue from the harem,
'"oman's business is simply the preparation and supply-
g of wine and food. Beyond the threshold of her
)artments she should not be known for evil or for good,
be may not cross the boundaries of the State to ac-
)mpa.ny a funeral. She may take no step on her own
otion, and may come to no conclusion on her own
jliberation. There are five women who are not to be
,ken in marriage: — the daughter of a rebellious house;
le daughter of a disorderly house; the daughter of a
Duse which has produced criminals for more than one
eneration; the daughter of a, leprous house ; and the
iughter who has lost her father and elder brother. A
ife may be divorced for seven reasons, which may be
rerruled by three considerations. The grounds for
ivorce are disobedience to her husband's parents ; not
iving birth to a son; dissolute conduct; jealousy (of her
iisband's attentions, that is, to the other inmates of hia
irem) ; talkativeness ; and thieving. The three con-
derations which may overrule these grounds are — first,
, while she was taken from a home, she has now no
ome to return to ; second, if she have passed with her
asband through the three years' mourning for his
arents; third, if the husband have become rich from
eing poor. All these regulations were adopted by the
iges in harmony with the natures of man and woman,
ad to give importance to the ordinance of marriage."

With these ideas— not very enlarged — of the relations
f society, Confucius dwelt much on the necessity of per-
anal correctness of character on the part of those in
iithority, in order to secure the right fulfilment of the


INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS. lO?

duties implied in them. This is one grand peculiarity
of his teaching. I have adverted to it in the review of
" The Great Learning," but it deserves some further
exhibition, and there are three conversations with the
chief Ke K'ang, in which it is very expressly set forth.
" Ke K'ang asked about government, and Confucius
replied, ' To govern means to rectify. If you lead on the
people with correctness, who will dare not to be correct ?' "
"Ke K'ang, distressed about the number of thieves in
the State, inquired of Confucius about how to do away
with them. Confucius said, ' If you, sir, were not covet-
ous, though you should reward them to do it, they
would not steal.' " " Ke K'ang asked about government,
saying, ' What do you say to killing the unprincipled for
the good of the principled ? ' Confucius replied, ' Sir, in
carrying on your government, why should you use killing at
all ? Let your evinced desires be for what is good, and
the people will be good. The relation between superiors
and inferiors is like that between the wind and the
grass. The grass must bend, when the wind blows
across it.' " '

Example is not so powerful as Confucius in these and
many other passages represented it, but its influence is
very great. Its virtue is recognized in the family, and it
is demanded in the Church of Christ. " A bishop " — and
I quote the term with the simple meaning of overseer —
" must be blameless." It seems to me, however, that in
the progress of society in the West we have come to think
less of the power of example in many departments of State
than we ought to do. It is thought of too little in the
army and the navy. We laugh at the " self-denying ordin-
ance " and the "new model" of 1644, but there lay
beneath them the principle which Confucius so broadly
propounded, — the importance of personal virtue in all who
are in authority. Now that Great Britain is the govern-
ing power over the masses of India, and that we are
coming more and more into contact with tens of thou-
sands of the Chinese, this maxim of our sage is deserv-
ing of serious consideration from all who bear rule, and
especially from those on whom devolves the conduct of

1 Analects, XII. xvii. ; xviii. ; xis.


,08 CONFUCIDS AND HI? DOCTEINES.

iffairs. His words on the Susceptibility of the people tb
je acted on hy those above them, ought not to prove as
vater spilt on the ground.

But to return to Confucius. — As he thus lays it down
;hat the mainspring of the well-being of society is the
Dersonal character of the ruler, we look anxiously for what
iirections he has given for the cultivation of that. But
lere he is very defective. " Self-adjustment and purifi-
3ation/' he said, "with careful regulation of his dress,
md the not making, a movement contra;ry to the rules
jf propriety ; — this is the way for the ruler tp cultivate
liis person." ^ This is laying too much stress on what
s external; but even to attain to this is beyond unas-
sisted human strength. Confucius, however, never recog-
Qized a disturbance of the moral elements in the con-
stitution of man. The people would move, according to
bim, to the virtue of their ruler as the grass bends to
bhe wind, and that virtue would come to the ruler at
tiis call. Many were the lamentations which he uttered
over the degeneracy of his times ; frequent were the con-
fessions which he made of his own shortcomings. It
seems strange that it never came distinctly before him,
that there is a power of evil in the prince and the peasant,
which no efforts of their own and no instructions of sages
are effectual to subdue.

The government which Confucius taught was a despots
ism, but of a modified character. He allowed no "jus di-
vwhum," independent of personal virtue and a benevolent
rule. He has not explicitly stated, indeed, wherein lies
the ground of the great relation of the governor and the
governed, but his views on the subject were, we may as-
sume, in accordance with the language of the Shoo-king : —
" Heaven and Earth are the parents of all things, and of
all things men are the most intelligent. The man among
them most distinguished for intelligence becomes chief
ruler, and ought to prove himself the parent of the people." ^
And again, " Heaven, protecting the inferior people, has
constituted for them rulers and teachers, who should be
able to be assisting to God, extending' favour and produc-
ing tranquillity throughout all parts of the empire." ^ The

' Doctrine of the Mean, xx. 14.
2 See the Shoo-king, V. i. Seot. I. 2, 7.


INFLUENCE ANt) OPDIIONS. 109

moment the ruler ceases to be a minister of God for good,
and does not administer a government that is beneficial to
the people, he forfeits the title by which he holds the throne,
and perseverance in oppression will surely lead to his over-
throw. Mencius inculcated this principle with a frequency
and boldness which are remarkable. It was one of the
things about which Confucius did not like to talk. Still
he held it. It is conspicuous in the last chapter of
" The Great Learning." Its tendency has been to
check the violence of oppression, and to maintain the self-
respect of the people, all along the course of Chinese
history.

I must bring these observations on Confucius' views of
government to a close, and I do so with two remarks.
First, they are adapted to a primitive, unsophisticated state
of society. He is a good counsellor forthe father of a family,
the chief of a clan, and even the head of a small principality.
But his views want the comprehension which would make
them of much service in a great empire. Within three
centuries after his death, the government of China passed
into a new phase. The founder of the Ts'in dynasty con-
ceived the grand idea of abolishing all its feudal Kingdoms,
and centralizing their administration in himself. He ef-
fected the revolution, and succeeding dynasties adopted his
system, and gradually moulded it into the forms and pro-
portions which are now existing. There has been a tend-
ency to advance, and Confucius has all along been trying
to carry the nation back. Principles have been needed,
and not "proprieties." The consequence is that China has
increased beyond its ancient dimensions, while there has
been no corresponding development of thought. Its body
politic has the size of a giant, while it still retains the mind
of a child. Its hoary^ age is but senility.
, Second, Confucius makes no provision for the intercourse
of his country with other and independent nations. He
knew indeed of none suoh. China was to him " The middle
Kiagdom," " The multitude of Great States," " All under
heaven." Beyond it were only rude and barbarous tribes.
He does not speak of them bitterly, as many Chinese have
done since his time. In one place he contrasts them fa-
vourably with the prevailing anarchy of the empire, saying,
"The rude tribes of the east and north huve their princes.


\^yjinj: uKjxuo ji-viu xixo Aj\j^jxat±±\j:joi


and are not like the States of our great land whicli are with- ^
out them/' ^ Another time, disgusted with the want of
appreciation which he experienced, he was expressing his
intention to go and live among the nine wild tribes of the
east. Some one said, " They are rude. How can you do
such a thing ? " His reply was, " If a superior man dwelt
among them, what rudeness would there be ?" ^ But had
he been an emperor-sage, he would not only have influenced
them by his instructions, but brought them to acknowledge
and submit to his sway, as the great Yu did. The only pas-
sage of Confucius' teachings from which any rule can be
gathered for dealing with foreigners, is that in the " Doc-
trine of the Mean," where " indulgent treatment of men
from a distance " is laid down as one of the nine standard;
rules for the government of the empire. But "the men from
a distance " are understood to be pin and leu simply, —
"guests," that is, or oflB.cers of one State seeking employment
in another, or at the imperial court ; and "visitors," or tra-
velhngmerchants. Of independent nations the ancient clas-
sics have not any knowledge, nor has Confucius. So long
as merchants from Europe and other parts of the world could
have been content to appear in China as suppliants, seek-
ing the privilege of trade, so long the government would
have ranked them with the barbarous hordes of antiquity,
and given them the benefit of the maxim about " indulgent
treatment," according to its own understanding of it.
But when their governments interfered, and claimed to
treat with that of China on terms of equality, and that
their subjects should be spoken to and of as being of the
same clay with the Chinese themselves, an outrage was
committed on tradition and prejudice, which it was neces-
sary to resent with vehemence.

I do not charge the contemptuous arrogance of the
Chinese government and people upon Confucius ; what I
deplore is, that he left no principles on record to check
the development of such a spirit. His simple views of
society and government were in a measure sufiBcient for
the people, while they dwelt apart from the rest of man-
kind. His practical lessons were better than if they had
been left, which but for him they probably would have

> Ana. III. y. t Ana. IS. xiii.


iNFLtJENOE AND OPINIONS, 111

bwrij to fall a prey to the influences of Taouism and Budd-
hism ; but they could only subsist while they were left
alone. Of the earth earthy, China was sure to go to pieces
when it came into collision with a Christianly-civilized
power. Its sage had left it no preservative or restorative
elements against such a case.

It is a rude awakening from its complacency of centuries
which China has now received. Its ancient landmarks
are swept away. Opinions will differ as to the justice or
injustice of the grounds on which it has been assailed, and
I do not feel called to judge or to pronounce here concern-
ing them. In the progress of events, it could not be but
that the collision should come ; and when it did come, it
could not be but that China should be broken and scat-
tered. Disorganization will go on to destroy it more and
more, and yet there is hope for the people, with their
veneration of the relations of society, with their devotion
to learning, and with their habits of industry and so-
briety ; — there is hope for them, if they will look away
from all their ancient sages, and turn to Him, who sends
them, along with the dissolution of their ancient state,
the knowledge of Himself, the only living and true God,
and of Jesus Christ whom He hath sent.

8. I have little more to add on the opinions of Con-
fucius. Many of his sayings are pithy, and display much
knowledge of character ; but as they are contained in the
body of the Work, I will not occupy the space here with
a selection of those which have struck myself as most
worthy of notice. The fourth Book of the Analects, which
is on the subject oijin, or perfect virtue, has several utter-
ances which are remarkable.

Thornton observes : — " It may excite surprise, and
probably incredulity, to state that the golden rule of our
Saviour, ' Do unto others as you would that they should
do unto you,' which Mr Locke designates as ' the most
unshaken rule of morality, and foundation of all social
virtue,' had been inculcated by Confucius, almost in the
same words, four centuries before."' I have taken notice
of this fact in reviewing both " The Great Learning," ar.d
"The Doctrine of the Mean," and would be far from

> History of China, vol. i p. 209.


tl2 CONFUCIUS AND HIS DOCTElNES.

grudging a tribute of admiration to Uonfucius for it. The
maxim occurs also twice in the Analects. In Book XV.
xxiii., Tsze-kung asks if there be one word which may
serve as a rule of practice for all one's life, and is an-
swered, " Is not reciprocity such a word ? What you do
not want done to yourself do not do to others." The
same disciple appears in Book V, xi., telling Confucius
that he was practising the lesson. He says, "What
I do not wish men to do to me, I also wish not to do
to men ; " but the master tells him, " Ts'ze, you have
not attained to that." It would appear from this reply,
that he was aware of the difficulty of obeying the
precept ; and it is not found, in its condensed expression
at least, in the older classics. The merit of it is Con-
fucius' own.

When a comparison, however, is drawn between it and
the rule laid down by Christ, it is proper to call attention
to the positive form of the latter, — " All things whatso-
ever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even
so to them." The lesson of the gospel commands men to
do what they feel to be right and good. It requires them
to commence a course of such conduct, without regard to
the conduct of others to themselves. The lesson of Con-
fucius only forbids men to do what they feel to be wrong
and hurtful. So far as the point of priority is concerned,
moreover, Christ adds, " This is the law and the prophets."
Thie maxim was to be found substantially in th.e earlier re-
velations of God.

But the worth of the two maxims depends on the inten-
tion of the enunciators in regard to their application.
Confucius, it seems to me, did not think of the reciprocity
coming into action beyond the circlfe of his five relations of
society. Possibly, he might have required its observance
in dealings even with the rude tribes, which were tlie only
specimens of mankind besides his own countrymen of
which he knew anything, for on one occasion, when asked
about:perfect virtue, he replied, "It is, in retirement, to
be sedately grave ; in the management of business, to be
reverently attentive j in intercourse with others, to be
strictly sincere. Though a man go among the rude un-
cultivated tribes, these qualities may not be neglected.'"''
'■ Analects, Xlll. iix.


INFLUENCE ANT> OFINIONS. 113

Still, Confucius delivered his rule to his countrymen only,
and only for their guidance in their relations of which I
have had so much occasion to speak. The rule of Christ
is for man as men, having to do with other men, all with
himself on the same platform, as the children and subjects
of the one God and Father in heaven.

How far short Confucius came of the standard of Christian
benevolence, may be seen from his remarts when asked
what was to be thought of the principle that injury
should be recompensed with kindness. He replied,
" With what then will you recompense kindness ? Re-
compense injury with justice, and recompense kindness
with kindness.''' ' The same deliverance is given in one
' of the Books of the Le Ke, where he adds that " He who
recompenses injury with kindness is a man who is care-
ful of his person." Ch'ing Heuen, the commentator of
the second century, says that such a course would be
" incorrect in point of propriety.'^ This " propriety "
was a great stumbling-block in the way of Confucius.
His morality was the result of the balancings of his in-
tellect, fettered by the decisions of men of old, and not
the gushings of a loving heart, responsive to the prompt-
ings of Heaven, and in sympathy with erring and feeble
humanity.

This subject leads me on to the last of the opinions of
Confucius which I shall make the subject of remark in this
place. A commentator observes, with reference to the
inquiry about recompensing' injury with kindness, that the
questioner was asking only about trivial matters, which
might be dealt with in the way he mentioned, while groat
offences, such as those against a sovereign or a father, could
not be dealt with by such an inversion of the principles of
justice. In the second Book of the Le Ke there is the
following passage : — " With the slayer of his father, a
man may not live under the same heaven ; against the
slayer of his brother, a man must never have to go home
to fetch a weapon ; with the slayer of his friend, a man
may not live in the same State.^' The lex talionis is here
laid down in its fullest extent. The Chow Le tells us of a
provision made against the evil consequences of the prin-

' Ana.„^SV. xxxvi.
VOL. I. A


114 CONFUCIUS AUD HIS DOCTRINES.

ciple, by the appointment of a minister called " The Eecon-
ciler." The provision is very inferior to the cities of re-
fuge which were set apart by Moses for the manslayer to
flee to from the fury of the avenger. Such as it was,
however^ it existed^ and it is remarkable that Confucius,
when consulted on the subject, took no notice of it, but
affirmed the duty of blood-revenge in the strongest and
most unrestricted terms. His disciple Tsze-hea asked
him, " What course is to be pursued in the case of the
murder of a father or mother ? " He replied, " The son
must sleep upon a matting of grass, with his shield for his
piUow ; he must decline to take office ; he must not hve
under the same heaven with the slayer. When he meets
him in the market-place or the court, he must have his
weapon ready to strike him.'' "And what is the course
on the murder of a brother ? " " The surviving brother
must not take office in the same State with the slayer;
yet if he go on his prince's service to the State where the
slayer is, though he meet him, he must not fight with
him." " And what is the course on the murder of an
uncle or a cousin ? " " In this case the nephew or cousin
is not the principal. If the principal on whom the revenge
devolves can take it, he has only to stand behind with his
weapon in his hand, and support him."

Sir John Davis has rightly called attention to this as
one of the objectionable principles of Confucius.^ The
bad effects of it are evident even in the present day. Ee-
venge is sweet to the Chinese. I have spoken of their
readiness to submit to government, and wish to live in
peace, yet they do not like to resign even to government
the " inquisition for blood." Where the ruling authority is
feeble, as it is at present, individuals and clans take the law
into their own hands, and whole districts are kept in a
state of constant feud and warfare.

But I must now leave the sage. I hope I have not
done him injustice ; but after long study of his character
and opinions, I am unable to regard him as a great man.
He was not before his age, though he was above the mass
of the officers and scholars of his time. He threw no new
light on any of the questions which have a world-wide

' The Chinese, vol. II. p. 41.


miLTJENCE AND OPINIONS. 115

interest. He gave' no impulse to religion. He had no
sympathy with progress. His influence has been wonder-
ful, but it will henceforth wane. My opinion is, that the
faith of the nation in him will speedily and extensively
pass away.


CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.


BOOK I.

Chapter I. 1. The Master said, "Is it not pleasant to
learn with a constant perseverance and application ?

2. "Is it not delightful to have friends coming from
distant quarters ?

3. " Is he not a man of complete virtue, who feels no
discomposure though men may take no note of him ? "

Title of the Work. — Literally, " Discourses and Dialogues ; " that is,
the discourses or discussions of Confucius with his disciples and others on
various topics, and his replies to their inquiries. Many chapters, however,
and one whole book, are the sayings, not of the sage himself, but of some
of his disciples. The characters may also be rendered " Digested Conversa-
tions," and this appears to be the more ancient signification attached to
them, the account being, that, after the death of Confucius, his disciples
collected together and compared the memoranda of his conversations
which they had severally preserved, digesting them into the twenty books
which compose the work. I have styled the work " Confucian Analects,"
as being more descriptive of its character than any other name I could
think of.

Heading and subjects of this book. Tlie two first characters,
literally, "To learn and — " after the introductory — "The Master
said,'' are adopted as its heading. This is similar to the custom of the Jews,
who name many books in the Bible from the first word in them. In some
of the books we find a unity or analogy of subjects, which evidently guided
the compilers in grouping the chapters together. Others seem devoid
of any such principle of combination. The si-^iteen chapters of this book are
occupied, it is said, with the fundamental subjects which ought to engage
the attention of the learner, and the great matters of human practice.
The word "learn" rightly occupies the forefront in the studies of a
nation, of which its educational system has so long been the distinction
and glory.

1. The 'WHOLE woek and achievement or the lkaenee, fiest peb-

FECTING HIS KNOWLEDGE, THEN ATTEAOTINO BY HIS FAME LIKBMINDED

individuals, and FINALLY COMPLETE Df HIMSELF. 1. "The Master"here
is Confucius ; but if we render the original term by " Confucius," as all pre-
ceding translators have done, we miss the indication which it gives of the


CH. II.] CONPUCliN ANALECTS. 117

II. 1 . Yew the philosopher said, " They are few who,
being filial and fraternal, are fond of offending against
their superiors. There have been none, who, not liking
to offend against their superiors, have been fond of stir-
ring up confusion.

2. " The superior man bends his attention to what is
radical. That being established, all right practical courses
naturally grow up. Filial piety and fraternal submis-
sion ! — are they not the root of all benevolent actions ? "

III. The Master said, " Fine words and an insinuating
appearance are seldom associated with true virtue."

IV. Tsang the philosopher said, "I daily examine
myself on three points : — whether, in transacting business
for others, I may have been not faithful ; — whether, in
intercourse with friends, I may have been not sincere ; —
whether I may have not mastered and practised the in-
structions of my teacher."

handiwork of his disciples, and the reverence which it bespeaks for him.
Some years ago, an able Chinese scholar published a collection of moral
sayings by David, Solomon, Paul, Augustine, J[esus, Confucius, &o. To
the sayings of the others he prefixed their names, and to those of Confucius
the phrase of the text, — " The Master said," thus telling his readers
that he was himself a disciple of the sage, and exalting him above
Solomon, and every other name which he introduced, even above Jesus
himself I

2. The " Friends " here are not relatives, nor even old and intimate ac-
quaintances ; but individuals of the same style of mind as the subject of
the paragraph, — students of truth and friends of virtue.

3. The " man of complete virtue " is, iherally, " a princely man." The
phrase is a technical one with Chinese moral writers, for which there is no
exact correspondency in English. We cannot always translate it in the
same way.

2. Filial piety and fraternal submission ark the foundation of
ALL VIRTUOUS PRACTICE. 1. Yew was a native of Loo, and famed
among the other disciples of Confucius for his ..strong memory, and love
for the doctrines of antiquity. In personal appearance he resembled the
sage. See Mencius, III. Pt. II. iv. 13. There is a peculiarity in the
style — -" Yew, the philosopher," the title following the surname, which
has made some Chinese critics assign an important part in the com-
pilation of the Analects to his disciples ; but the matter is too slight to
build such a conclusion on. The tablet to Yew's spirit is in the same
apartment of the sage's temples as that of the sage himself, among the
" wise ones " of his followers.

3. Fair appeahancbs aee suspicious.

4. How THE PHILOSOPHER ThING DAILY EXAMINED HIMSELF, TO
GUARD AGAINST HIS BEING GUILTY OF ANY SELF-DECEPTION. Tsaug

was one of the principal disciples of Confucius. A follower of the sage


118 5 T-' ' CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bE I.

Y. The Master said, " To rule a country of a thousand
cliariotSj there must be reverent attention to business, and
sincerity; economy in expenditure, and love for the
people ; and the employment of them at the proper sea-
sons."

VI. The Master said, " A youth, when at home, should
be filial, and, abroad, respectful to his elders. He should
be earnest and truthful. He should overflow in love to
all, and cultivate the friendship of the good. Wheu he
has time and opportunity, after the performance of these
things, he should employ them in polite studies."

VII. Tsze-hea said, "If a man withdraws his mind
from the love of beauty, and applies it as sincerely to the
love of the virtuous ; if, in serving his parents, he can
exert his utmost strength; if, in serving his prince, he can
devote his life ; if, in his intercourse with his friends, his
words are sincere : — although men say that he has not
learned, I will certainly say that he has."

from his 16th year, though inferior in natural ability to some others, by
his filial piety and other moral qualities he entirely won the Master's
esteem, and by persevering attention mastered his doctrines. Confucius
employed him'in the composition of the Classic of Filial Piety. The au-
thorship of the "Great Learning " is also ascribed to him, though incor-
rectly, as we shall see. Ten books, moreover, of his composition are
preserved in the lie Ke. His spirit tablet, among the sage's four assepsors,
has precedence of that of Mencius. There is the same peculiarity in the
designation of him here, which I have pointed out under the last chapter
in connection with the style — " Yew, the philosopher ; " and a similar con-
clusion has been argued from it.

5. Fundamental principles poe the government op a large
STATE. " A country of a thousand chariots " was one of the largest iiefs
of the empire, — a state which could bring such a force into the field. —
The last principle means that the people should not be called away from
their husbandry at improper seasons to do service on military expeditions
and public works.

G. Dtttt piest and THEN ACCOMPLISHMENTS. " Polite duties " are not
literary studies merely, but all the accomplishments of a gentleman also:
ceremonies, music, archery, horsemanship, writing, and numbers.

7. Tsze-hea' s views op the substance op learning. Tsze-hea
was another of the sage's distinguished disciples, and now placed among
the " wise ones." He was greatly famed for his learning, and his views
on the She-Mng and the Ch'-un Ts'em are said to be preserved in the com-
mentary of Maou, and of Kung-yang Kaou, and Kuh-leang Ch'ih. He wept
himself blind on the death of his son, but lived to a great age, and was
much esteemed by the people and princes of the time. With regard to the
scope of this chapter, there is some truth iu what the commentator Woo


CH. VIII.] CONPrCIAN ANALECTS. 11 9

VIII. 1. The Master said, "If tlie scholar be not
grave, he will not call forth any veneration, and his learn-
ing will not be solid.

2. " Hold faithfulness and sincerity as first principles.

3. " Have no friends not equal to yourself.

4. "When you have faults, do not fear to abandon them."

IX. Tsang the philosopher said, " Let there be a care-
ful attention to perform the funeral rites to parents when
dead, and let them be followed when long gone with the
ceremonies of sacrifice ; — then the virtue of the people will
resume its proper excellence."

X. 1. Tsze-k'in asked Tsze-kung, sayiag, " When our
Master comes to any country, he does not fail to learn all
about its government. Does he ask his information ? or
is it given to him ? "

2. Tsze-kung said, " Our Master is benign, upright,
courteous, temperate, and complaisant, and thus he gets
his information. The Master's mode of asking inform-
ation ! — is it not different from that of other men ? "

XI. The Master said, "While a man's father is alive,
look at the bent of his will; when his father is dead, look
at his conduct. If for three years he does not alter from
the way of his father, he may be called filial."

says, — that Tsze-hea's words may be wrested to depreciate learning, while
those of the Master in the preceding chapter hit exactly the due medium.

8. PmncipI/ES of self-cultivation.

9. The good effect of attention on the part of princes
to the offices to the dead : — an admonition of tsang sin.
This is a counsel to princes and all in authority. The effeot which it is
supposed would follow from their following it is an instance of the influence
of example, of which so much is made by Chinese moralists.

10. Characteristics of Confucius, and their influence on
the princes of the time.

1. Tsze-k'in and Tsze-k'ang are designations of Ch'in K'ang, one of the
minor disciples of Confucius. His tablet is in the outer hall of the tem-
ples. A good story is related of him. On the death of his brother, his
wife and major-domo wished to bury some living persons with him, to
serve him in the regions below. The thini; being referred to Tsze-k'in, he
, proposed that the wife and steward should themselves submit to the im-
molation, which made them stop the matter. Tsze-kung, with the double
surname Twan-muh, and named Ts'ze, occupies a, higher place in the
Confucian ranks, and is now among the " wise ones." He is conspicuous
in this work for his readiness and smartness in reply, and displayed on
several occasions practical and political ability.

11. On filial duty. It is to be understood tliat the way of the


12U CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK I.

XII. 1. Yew the ptiloaopher said, " In practising the
rules of propriety, a natural ease is to be prized. In the
ways prescribed by the ancient kings, this is the excellent
quaHty; and in things small and great we should thug
follow those rules.

2. " Yet it is not to be observed in all cases. If one,
knowing hmv such ease should he prized, manifests it,
without regulating it by the rules of propriety, this like-
wise is not to be done."

XIII. Yew the philosopher said, " When agreements
are made according to what is right, what is spoken can
be made good. When respect is shown according to
what is proper, one keeps far from shame and disgrace.
When the parties upon whom a man leans are proper per-
sons to be intimate with, he can make them his guides
and masters."

XIV. The Master said, " He who aims to be a man of
complete virtue, in his food does not seek to gratify his
appetite, nor in his dwelling-place does he seek the ap-
pliances of ease : he is earnest in what he is doing, and
careful in his speech ; he frequents the company of men of
principle that he may be rectified : — such a person may be
said indeed to love to learn."

XV. 1. Tsze-kung said, "What do you pronounce
concerning the poor man who yet does not flatter, and
the rich man who is not proud ? " The Master replied,
" They will do ; but they are not equal to him, who,
though poor, is yet cheerful, and to him, who, though rich,
loves the rules of propriety."

father had not been very bad. An old interpretation, that the three years
are to be understood of the three years of mourning for the father, is now
rightly rejected.

12. In cbkkmonies a natural ease is to be prized, and tet

TO be subordinate to the end of ceremonies, — THE REVEB-

ENTiAt OBSERVANCE OF PROPRIETY. The term here rendered " rules of
propriety," is not easily rendered in another language. There underlies it
the idea of Tcliat is proper. It is " the fitness of things,' ' what reason
calls for in the performance of duties towards superior beings, and between
man and man. Our term " ceremonies" would come near its meaning here.

13. to save prom future repentance, we must be careful
in oub first steps.

14. With what mind one aiming to be a Keun-tsze pursues

HIS learning.

15. An illustration op the successive steps in sklp-culti-


CH. XVI.] CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 121

2. Tsze-kung replied, " It is said iu tlie Book of Poetry,
'As you cut and then file, as you carve and then polish.'
— The meaning is the same, I apprehend, as that which
you have just expressed."

3. The Master said, " With one like Tsze, I can begin
to talk about the Odes. I told him one point, and he
knew its proper sequence.''

XVI. The Master said, "1 will not be afflicted at
men's not knowing me ; I will be afflicted that I do not
know men."


•BOOK II.

Chapter I. The Master said, " He who exercises go-
vernment by means of his virtue, may be compared to the
north polar star, which keeps its place and all the stars
turn towards it."

II. The Master said, " In the Book of Poetry are
three hundred pieces, but the design of them all may be
embraced in that one sentence — 'Have no depraved
thoughts.' "

VATION. 1. Tsze-kung had been poor, and then did not cringe. Hebe-
came rich, and was not proud. He asked Confucius about the style of
character to which he had attain ad. Confucius allowed its worth, but sent
him to higher attainments. 2. The ode quoted is the first of the songs
of Wei, praising the prince Woo, who had dealt with himself as an ivory-
worker who first cuts the bone, and then files it smooth ; or a lapidary whose
hammer and chisel are followed by all the appliances for smoothing
and polishing. See the She-king, Pt I. Bk v. i. 2.

16. Peesonal attainment should be ottb chief aim.

Heading and subjects op this Book. This second book contains
twenty-four chapters, and is named " The practice of government." That is
the object to which learning, treated of in the last book, should lead ;
and here we have the qualities which constitute, and the character of the
men who administer, good government.

1. The inflttence of vibtue in a euler. Choo He's view of
the comjiarison is that it sets forth the illimitable influence which virtue
in a ruler exercises without his using any eilbrt. This is extravagant.
His opponents say that virtue is the polar star, and the various departments
of government the other stars. This is far-fetched. We must be content
to accept the vague utterance without minutely determining its meaning.

2. The pure design of the Book of Poetry. The number of
compositions in the She-king is rather more than the round number here
given. " Have no depraved thoughts," — see the She-kmg, IV. ii. 1. St. 4.


122 \ CONFUCIAU ANALECTS. [bK II

'"^ III. 1. The Master said, "If the people be led bj
laws, and uniformity sought to be given them by punish-
meutSj they will try to avoid the jpunishment, but have nc
^^^sense of shame.

2. " If they be led by virtue, and uniformity sought tc
be given them by the rules of propriety, they will have
— the sense of shame, and moreover will become good."
rV. 1. The Master said, "At fifteen, I had my mind
bent on learning.

2. "At thirty, I stood firm.

3. "At forty, I had no doubts.

4. "At fifty, I knew the decrees of heaven.

5. "At sixty, my ear was an obedient organ /or the re-
ception of truth.

6. "At seventy, I could follow what my heart desired,
without transgressing what was right."

V. 1. Mang B asked what filial piety was. The Master
said, " It is not being disobedient."

2. Soon after, as Fan Ch'e was driving him, the Master
told him, saying, " Mang-sun asked me what filial piety
was, and I answered him — ' Not being disobedient.' "

The sentence there is indicative, and in praise of one of the dukes of Loo,
who had no depraved thoughts. The sage would seem to have been in-
tending his own design in compiling the She. Individual pieces are
calculated to have a different efffct.

3. how euleks should pebfbil moral appliauces.

4. Confucius' owm" account of his gkadual pbookess and at-
TAINMBNTS. Chinese commentators are perplexed with this chapter.
Holding of Confucius, that " He was born with knowledge, and did what
was right with entire ease," they say that he here conceals his sagehood,
and puts himself on the level of common men, to set before them a stimu-
lating example. We may believe that the compilers of the Analects, tht
sage's immediate disciples, did not think of him so extravagantly as latei
men have done. It is to be wished, however, that he had been more definiti
and diffuse in hisaccount of himself. 1. The " learning," to which, atthi
age of fifteen, Confucius gave himself, is to be understood of tbe subjeob
of the " Superior Learning." See Choo He's preliminary c=say to the Tt
Heo. 2. The " standing firm " probably indicates that he no more needec
to bend his will. 3. The " no doubts " may have been concerning what wai
proper in all circumstances and events. 4. " The decrees of Heaven," tbi
things decreed by Heaven, the constitution of things making what wni
proper to be so. 5. " The ear obedient" is the mind receiving, as by intui
tion, the truth from the ear.

5. Filial piety must be shown accoeding to the bulks oi
PKOPEIETT. 1. Miing E was a great officer of the state of Loo, by nairn
Ho-ke, and the chief of one of the three great families by which in th


en. VI .J CONFUCIAN jlNALECTS. ] 23

3. Fan Ch'e said, " What did you mean ? " Tlie
Master replied, " That parents, when alive, should be
served according to propriety; that when dead, they
should be buried according to propriety; and that they
should be sacrificed to according to propriety."

VI. Mang Woo asked what filial piety was. The
Master said, " Parents ■ are anxious lest their children
should be sick."

VII. Tsze-yew asked what filial piety was. The Master
said, " The filial piety of now-a-days means the support
of one's parents. But dogs and horses likewise are able
to do something in the way of support ; — without rever-
ence, what is there to distinguish the one support given
from the other ? "

VIII. Tsze-hea asked what filial piety was. The Mas-
ter said, "The difficulty is with the countenance. If,
when their elders have any troublesome affairs, the young
take the toil of them, and if, when the young have wine
and food, they set them before their elders, is this to be
considered filial piety ? "

time of Confucius the authority of that state was grasped. Those families
were descended from three brothers, the sons by a concubine of the Duke
Hwan (B.C;7iO — 6S3). E, which means "mild and virtuous," was the
posthumous honorary title given to Ho-ke. Fan Ch'e was a minor dis-
ciple of the sage. Confucius repeated his remark to Fan, that he might
report the explanation of it to his friend Mang E, and thus prevent him
from supposing that all the sage intended was disobedience to parents.

6. The anxiett op pabents about thbib children an argu-
ment FOR FILIAL PIETY. This enigmatical sentence has been interpreted
in two ways. Choo He takes it thus : — " Parents have the sorrow of
thinking anxiously about their — i. e. their children's — being unwell.
Therefore children should take care of their persons." The old commenta-
tors interpreted differently : in the sense of " only." " Let parents have only
the sorrow of their children's illness. Let them have no other occasion
for sorrow. This will be filial piety." Mang Woo (the hon. epithet=
" Bold and of straightforward principle,") was the son of Mang E, of the
last chapter.

7. How THERE MUST BE REVERENCE IN FILIAL DUTY. Tsze-yew waS

the designation of Ten Yen, a native of Woo, and distinguished among the
disciples of Confucius for his knowledge of the rules of propriety, and
for his learning. He is now among the " wise ones." Choo He gives a
different turn to the sentiment. " But dogs and horses likewise manage
to get their support." The other and older interpretation is better.

8. The duties op filial piett must be performed with a
CHEERFUL COUNTENANCE. To the different interrogatories here recorded
about filial duty, the sage, we are told, made answer according to the cha-
racter of the questioner, as each one needed instruction.


124 COSPOCIAN ANALECTS. [bK U

IX. The Master said, " I have talked with Hwuy fo;
a whole day, and he has not made any objection h
anything I said; — as if he were stupid. He has retired
and I have examined his conduct when away from me, and
found him able to illustrate my teachings. Hwuy ! He is
not stupid."

X. 1. The Master said, " See what a man does.

2. " Mark his motives.

3. " Examine in what things he rests.

4. " How can a man conceal his character !

5. " How can a man conceal his character ! "

-^XI. The Master said, " If a man keeps cherishing his
old knowledge so as continually to be acquiring new, he
may be a teacher of others."

XII. The Master said, " The accomplished scholar is
not an utensil."

/XIU. Tsze-kung asked what constituted the superior
man. The Master said, " He acts before he speaks, and
kfterwards speaks according to his actions."

XIV. The Master said, " The superior man is catholic
and no partizan. The mean man is a partizan and not
catholic."

— XV. The Master said, " Learning without thought is
labour lost ; thought without learning is perilous."

7 XVI. The Master said, "The study of strange doc-
trines is injurious indeed ! "

9. The quiet receptivity of the disciple Hwut. Yen Hwuy
was Confucius' favourite disciple, and is now honoured witii the first place
east among his four assessors in his temples, with the title of " The second
sage, the philosopher Yen." At the age of twenty-nine, his hair was entirely
white ; and at thirty-throe, he died, to the excessive grief of the sage.

10. How TO determine the characters of men.

11. To be able to teach others one must from his old

STOKES BE continually DEVELOPING THINGS NEW.

12. The general aptitude of the Superior Man. This is not like
our English saying, that " such a man is a machine," — a blind instrument.
An utensil has its particular use. It answers for that and no other. Not
so with the superior man, who is ad omnia paratus.

13. How WITH THE SUPERIOR MAN WORDS FOLLOW ACTIONS. The

reply is literally : " He first acts his words, and afterwards follows them."

14. The difference between the superior man and the small
MAN. The sentence is this — " With the superior man, it is principles not
men ; with the small man, the reverse."

15. In learning, reading and thought must be combined.

16. Strange doctrines are not to be studied. In Confucius' time


CH. XVII.] C0NFUCIA2J ANJiECTS. 125

'' XVII. The Master said, "'Yew, shall I teach you what
knowledge is ? When you know a thing, to hold that you
know it ; and when you do not know a thing, to allow
that you do not know it ; — this is knowledge."

XVIII. 1. Tsze-chang was learning with a view to
oflBcial emolument.

2. The Master said, " Hear much and put aside the
points of which you stand in doubt, while you speak cau-
tiously at the same time of the others : — then you will
afford few occasions for blame. See much and put aside
the things which seem perilous, while you are cautious at
the same time in carrying the others into practice : — then
you will have few occasions for repentance. When one
gives few occasions for blame in his words, and few occa-
sions for repentance in his conduct, he is in the way to
get emolument." ,.^

XIX. The Duke Gae asked, saying, " What should be
done in order to secure the submission of the people ? "
Confacius replied, " Advance the upright and set aside
the crooked, then the people will submit. Advance the
crooked and set aside the upright, then the people will not
submit." c*"

Buddhism was not in China, and we can hardly suppose him to intend
Taouism. Indeed, we are ignorant to what doctrines he referred, but his
maxim is of general application.

17. Theee should be no pketence in the peofession or know-
ledge, OE THE DENIAL OF iGNORiNCB. Yew, by Surname Chung,
and generally known by his designation of Tsze-loo, was one of the most
famous disciples of Confucius, and now occupies in the temples the fourth
place east in the sage's own hall, among the " wise ones." He was noted for
his courage and forwardness, a man of impulse rather than reflection.
Confucius had foretold that he would come to an untimely end, and so it
happened. He was killed through his own rashness in a revolution in the
state of Wei. The tassel of his cap being cut off when he received his
death-wound, he quoted a saying — " The superior man must not die with-
out his cap," tied on the tassel, adjusted the cap, and expired.

18. The end in leaeuing should be one's own impeovement,
AND NOT EMOLUMENT. Tzse-chang, named Sze, with the double surname
Chuen-sun, a native of Ch'in, was not undistinguished in the Confucian
school. Tsze-kung praised him as a man of merit without boasting, hum-
ble in a high position, and not arrogant to the helpless. From this chapter,
however, it would appear that inferior motives did sometimes rule him. "'

19. How A PEINCB BY THE EIGHT EMPLOYMENT OF HIS OFFICERS
MAY SECUBE THE EEAL SUBMISSION OP HIS SUBJECTS. Gae was the

honorary epithet of Tseang, Duke of Loo (B.C. 491 — 367). Confucius died in
his sixteenth year. According to the laws for posthumous titles, Gae denote?


126 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK [I,

XX. Ke K'ang asked how to cause the people to rever-
ence their ruler, to be faithful to him^ and to urge them-
selves to virtue. The Master said, " Let him preside ovei
them with gravity; — then they will reverence him. Let
him be filial and kind to all ; — then they will be faithful
to him. Let him advance the good and teach the incom-
petent ; — then they will eagerly seek to be virtuous."
~~ XXI. 1. Some one addressed Confuciusj saying, "Sir,
why are you not engaged in the government ? "

2. The Master said, " What does the Shoo-king say of
filial piety ? — ' You are filial, you discharge your brotherly
duties. These qualities are displayed in government.'
This then also constitutes the exercise of government.
Why must there be that to make one be in the govern-
ment ? "

XXII. The Master said, " I do not know how a man
without truthfulness is to get on. How can a large car-
riage be made to go without the cross bar for yoking the
oxen to, or a small carriage without the arrangement for
yoking the horses ? "

XXIII. 1. Tsze-chang asked whether tlie affairs of ten
ages after could be known.

" the respectful and benevolent, early cut off," and Duke Gae, " The to-
be-lamented duke."

20. Example nsr BtrpERiOBS is moeb powerful than fobcb. K'ang,
" easy and pleasant, people-soother," was the honorary epithet of Ke-sun
Fei, the head of one of the three great families of Loo ; see ch. 5. His
idea is seen in " to cause," the power of force ; that of Confucius appears

' in " then," the power of influence.

21. Confucius' explanation of his not being in ant office. 1.
" Confucius " is here " K'ung, the philosopher," the surname indicating
that the questioner was not a disciple. He had his reason for not being in
office at the time, but it was not expedient to tell. He replied, therefore,
as in par. 2. See the Shoo-king, v. xxl. 1. But the text is neither cor-
rectly applied nor exactly quoted. A western may think that the philoso-
pher might have made a happier evasion.

22. The necessity to a man of being truthful and sincebb.

23. The great pbinciples governing society abb unohangb-
able. 1. Confucius made no pretension to supernatural powers, and all
commentators are agreed that the things here asked about were not what
we would call contingent or indifferent events. He merely says that the
great principles of morality and relations of society had continued the same,
and would ever do so. 2. The Hea, Tin, and Chow, are now spoken of
as the "Three dynasties," literally, " The three Changes." The first em-
peror of the Hea was " The great Yu," B.C. 2204 ; of the Yin, T'ang, B.C.
1765 i and of Chow, Woo, B.C. 1121.


CH. XXIV.J COXPtJCIAN ANALECTS. 127

2. Confucitis said, "The Yin dynasty followed the
regulations of the Hea : wherein it took from or added
to them may be known. The Chow dynasty has followed
the regulations of the Yin : wherein it took from or added
to them may be known. Some other may follow the Chow,
but though it should be at the distance of a hundred
ages, its affairs may be known."

XXIV. 1. The Master said, "For a man to sacrifice
to a spirit which does not belong to him is flattery."

2. "To see what is right and not to do it, is want of)
courage."


BOOK III.


Chaptee I. Confucius said of the head of the Ke family,
who had eight rows of pantomimes in his area, " If he can
bear to do this, what may he not bear to do ? "

II. The three families used the tung ode, while the
vessels were being removed, at the conclusion of the sac-

24. Neithek in sacbificb itoe in otheb pkactioe may a man^ do
AXTTHING BUT WHAT IS EIGHT. The Spirits of whioh a man may say
that they are his, are those only of his ancestors, and to them only he may
sacrifice. The ritual of China provides for sacrifices to three classes of ob-
jects — " Spirits of heaven, of the earth, of men." This chapter is not
to be extended to all the three. It has reference only to the manes of
departed men.

Heading and subjects of this book. The last book treated of
the practice of government, and therein no things, according to Chinese
ideas, are more important than ceremonial rites and music. With those
topics, therefore, the twenty-six chapters of this book are occupied, and
" eight rows," the principal words in the first chapter, are adopted as its
heading.

1. Confucius' indignation at the usuepation of impeeial
itlTES. These dancers, or pantomimes rather, kept time in the temple ser-
vices, in the front space before the raised portion in the principal hall,
moving or brandishing feathers, flags, or other articles. In his ancestral
temple, the Emperor had eight rows, each row consisting of eight men ; a
duke or prince had six, and a great officer only four. For the Ke, there-
fore, to use eight rows was a usurpation, for though it may be argued, that to
the ducal family of Loo imperial riiJes were conceded, and that the ofl-
shoots of it might use the same, still great ofBcers were confined to
the ordinances proper to their rank. Confucius' remark may also be
translated, " If this be endured, what may not be endured f "

2. Again against usueped eites. The three families assembled to-
gether as being the descendants of Duke Hwan in one temple. To


128 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS, [bK II

rifice. The Master said, " 'Assisting are tlie princes ;-
the Emperor looks profound and grave : ' — what applies
tion can these words have in the hall of the thre
families ? "

~~" III. The Master said, " If a man be without the vii
tues proper to humanity, what has he to do with the rite
of propriety ? If a man be without the virtues proper t
humanity, what has he to do with music ? "

IV. 1. Lin Fang asked what was the first thing t
be attended to in ceremonies.'

2. The Master said, "A great question indeed ! "

3. " lu. festive ceremonies it is better to be sparing thai
extravagant. In the ceremonies of mourning it is bette
that there be deep sorrow than a minute attention ti
observances."

V. The Master said, " The rude tribes of the east anc
north have their princes, and are not like the States of oui
great land which are without them.'^

VI. The chief of the Ke family was about to sacrific(
to the T'ae mountain. The Master said to Yen Yew
" Can you not save him fronl this ? " He answered, " ]
cannot." Confucius said. " Alas ! will you say that tht
T'ae mountain is not so discerning as Lin Fang ? "

this templo belonged the area in the last chapter, which is called tbe are;
of the Ke, because circumstances had concurred to make the Ke the chief o
the three families. For the Yung ode, see the She-king, V. Bk II. vii. 1
It was properly sung in the imperial temples of the Chow dynasty, at thi
" clearing away " of the sacrificial apparatus, and contains the lines quot«(
by Confucius, which of course were quite inappropriate to the cirourii.
stances of the three families.
■^. Cbkbmonibs anu music vain without virtue.

4. The object op cekemonies should eegulatb them, agaixsi
POEMALISM. Lin Fang was a man of Loo, supposed to have been a dis
ciple of Confucius, and whose tablet is now placed in the outer court o
the temples. He is known only by the question in this chapter.

5. The anarchy of Confucius' time.

6. On the POLLY op usurped sacrifices. The T'ae mountain is thi
first of the " five mountains " which are celebrated in Chinese literature
and have always received religious honours. It was in Loo, or rather ot
the borders between Loo and Ts'e, about two miles north of the preseni
district city of T'ae-gan, in the department of Tse-nan, in Shan-tung
According to the ritual of China, sacrifice could only be offered t(
these mountains by the emperor, and princes in whose States any o:
theni happened to be. For the chief of the Ke family, therefore t<
sacrifice to the T'ae mountain was a great usurpation. Yen Yew


CH. VII,] CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. ■ ] 29

VII. The Master said, " The student of virtue has no
contentions. If it be said he cannot avoid them, shalt"
this be in archery ? But he bows (iomplaisantly to his
competitors ; thus he ascends the platform, descends, and
exacts the forfeit of drinking. In his contention, he is
still the Keun-tsze."

VIII. 1. Tsze-hea asked, saying, "What is the mean-
ing of the passage — ' The loveliness of her artful smile '
The well-defined black and white of her fine eyes ! The
plain ground for the colours' ?"

2. The Master said, " The business of laying on the
colours follows the preparation of the plain ground."

3. "Ceremonies then are a subsequent thing!" The
Master said, " It is Shang who can bring out my mean-
ing ! Now I can begin to talk about the odes with him."

IX. The Master said, " I am able to describe the cere-
monies of the Hea dynasty, but Ke cannot sufficiently at-
test my words. I am able to describe the ceremonies of
the Tin dynasty, but Sung cannot sufficiently attest my
words. They cannot do so because of the insufficiency of
their records and wise men. If those were sufficient, I
could adduce them in support of my words."

was one of the disciples of Confucius, and is now third among the "wise
ones " on the west. He was a man of ability and resources, and on one
occasion proved himself a brave soldier.

7. The supbriok man avoids all contentious stbiving. In Con-
fucius' time there were three principal exercises of archery : — the great
archery, under the eye of the emperor ; the guests' archery, at the visits of
the princes among themselves or at the imperial court ; and the festive
archery. The regulations for the archers were substantially the same in
them all. Every stage of the trial was preceded by " bowings and
yieldings," making the whole an exhibition of courtesies and not of
contention.

. 8. Ceremonies abe secondaby and genamental. The sentences
quoted by Tsze-hea are from an old ode, one of those which Confucius did
not admit into the She-king. The two first lines, however, are found in it,-
I, v. 3. The disciple's inquiry turns on the meaning of the last line, which
he took to be : " The plain ground is to be regarded as the colouring ; ''
but Confucius, in his reply, corrects his error.

9. The decay op the monuments of antiquity. Of Hea and Yin,'
see II. 23. In the small state of Ke (what is now the district of the same
name in K'ae-fung department in Ho-nan), the sacrifices to the emperors of
the Hea dynasty were maintained by their descendants. So with the Yin
dynasty and Sung, also a part of the present Ho-nan. But the "literary
monuments " of those countries, and their " wise men " had become few.
Had Confucius therefore delivered all his knowledge about the tw& dy-

VOL. I. 9


130 CONFDCIASr ANALECTS. [bK III

X. The Master said, "At the great sacrifice, after the
pouring out of the libation, I have no wish to look on."

XI. Some one asked the meaning of the great sacri-
fice. The Master said, " I do not know. He who knew
its meaning would find it as easy to govern the empire as
to look on this;" — pointing to his palm.

XII. 1. He sacrificed to the dead, as if they were pre-
sent. He sacrificed to the spirits, as if the spirits were
present.

2. The Master said, "I consider my not being present
at the sacrifice, as if I did not sacrifice."

XIII. 1. Wang-sun Kea asked, saying, "What is the
meaning of the saying, ' It is better to pay court to the
furnace than to the south-west corner ' t "

2. The Master said, " Not so. He who ofiends against
Heaven has none to whom he can pray."


nasties, he would have exposed his truthfulness to suspicion, which he would
not do. We see from the chapter how in the time of Confucius many
of the records of antiquity had perished.

10. The sage's dissatisfaction at the want op phopeiett of
AND IN CEREMONIES. The " great sacrifice " here spoken of could pro-
perly be celebrated only by the emperor. The individual sacrificed to in
it was the remotest ancestor from whom the founder of the reigning dynasty
traced his descendant. As to who were his assessors in the sacrifice, and
how often it was offered ; — these are disputed points. An imperial rite, its
use in Loo was wrong (see next chapter), but there was something in the
service after the early act of libation inviting the descent of the spirits,
which more particularly moved the anger of Confucius.

11. The profound meaning op the great sacrifice. This chapter
is aliiu to ii. 21. Confucius evades replying to his questioner, it being
contrary to Chinese propriety to speak in a country of the faults of its
government or rulers. If he had entered into an account of the sacrifice,
he must have condemned the use of an imperial rite in Loo.

12. Confucius' own sincerity in sackipicing. By " the dead "
we are to understand Confucius' own forefathers, by " the spirits " other
spirits to whom in his official capacity he had to sacrifice.

13. That there is no resource against the consequences of
violating the eight. 1. Kea was a great officer of Wei, and having the
power of the state in his hands, insinuated to Confucius that it would be for
his advantage to pay court to him. The south-west corner was from the
structure of ancient houses the cosiest nook, and the place of honour.
Choo He explains the proverb by reference to the customs of sacrifice.
The furnace was comparatively a mean place, but when the spirit of the
furnace was sacrificed to, then the rank of the two places waa changed for
the time, and the proverb quoted was in vogue. But there does not seem
much force in this explanation. The door, or rrell, or any other of the


CH. XIV.] CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 131

XrV. The Master said^ " Chow had the advantage of
viewing the two past dynasties. How complete and ele-
gant are its regulations ! I follow Chow."

XV. The Master, when he entered the grand temple,
asked about everything. Some said, " Who will say that
the son of the man of Tsow knows the rules of propriety?
He has entered the grand temple and asks about every-
thing." The Master heard the remark, and said, " This
is a rule of propriety."

XVI. The Master said, " In archery it is not going
through the leather which is the principal thing ; — because
people's strength is not equal. This was the old way."

XVII. 1. Tsze-kung wished to do away with the offer-,
ing of a sheep connected with the inauguration of the
first day of each month.

2. The Master said, " Tsze, you love the sheep ; I love
the ceremony."

five things in the regular sacrifices, might take the place of the furnaci.
2, Confucius' reply was in a high tone. Choo He says, " Heaven
means principle." But why should Heaven mean principle, if there were
not in such a use of the term an instinctive recognition of a supreme
government of intelligence and righteousness ? We find the term explained
by " The lofty one who is on high."

U. The completeness a*'d elegance of the institutions of the
Chow dtnastit.

15. CoNFUCltrs IN THE GKAND TEMPLE. " The grand temple'' was the
temple dedicated to the famous Duke of Chow, and where he was worship-
ped with imperial rites. The thing is supposed to have taken place at the
beginning of Confucius' official service in Loo, when he went into the
temple with other officers to assist at the sacrifice. He had studied all
about ceremonies, and was famed for his knowledge of them, but he
thought it a mark of sincerity and earnestness to make minute inquiries
about them on the occasion spoken of. Tsow was the name of the town in
Loo, of which Confucius' father had been governor, who was known there-
fore as " the man of Tsow." We may suppose that Confucius would be
styled as in the text, only in his early life, or by very ordinary people.

16. How THE ANCIENTS MADE ABOHEEY A DISCIPLINE OF VIRTUE.

17. How CoNi'UCius CLEAVED TO ANCIENT KITES. The emperor in
the last month of the year gave out to the princes a calendar for the first
days of the twelve months of the year ensuing. This was kept in their
ancestral temples, and on the first of every month they offered a sheep and
announced the day, requesting sanction for the duties of the month. The
dukes of Loo neglected now their part of this ceremony, butthe sheep was
still offered : — a meaningless formality, it seemed to Tsze-kung. Con-
fucius, however, thought that while any part of the oeromony was retained,
there was a better chance of restoring the whole.


132 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK III.

XVIII. The Master said, " The full observance of the
rules of propriety in serving one's prince is accounted by

-people to be flattery."

XIX. The Duke Ting asked how a prince should em-
ploy his ministers, and how ministers should serve their
prince. Confucius replied, " A prince should employ his
ministers according to the rules of propriety ; ministers

■ should serve their prince with faithfulness."

XX. The Master said, " The Kwan Ts'cu is expressive
of enjoyment without being licentious, and of grief with-
out being hurtfully excessive."

XXI. 1. The Duke Gae asked Tsae Wo about the altars
of the spirits of the land. Tsae Wo replied, " The Hea
sovereign used the pine tree ; the man of the Yin used
the cypress ; and the man of the Chow used the chestnut
tree, meaning thereby to cause the people to be in awe."

2. When the Master heard it, he said, "Things that
are done, it is needless to speak about ; things that have
had their course, it is needless to remonstrate about;
things that are past, it is needless to blame.'"

XXII. 1. The Master said, " Small indeed was the capa-
city of Kwan Chung ! "

18. How PKINCES SHOULD BE SERVED. AGAINST THE SPIRIT Oi? IHB
TIMES.

19. The guiding principles in the eegulation of pbesce and
MINISTER. Ting, " Greatly anxious, tranquillizer of the people," was the
posthumous epithet of Sung, Prince of Loo, B.C. 508 — 494.

20. The praise or the first of the odes. Kwan Ts'eu is the
name of the first ode in the She-king, and may be translated, — " Kwan
Kwan go the King-duoks."

21. A RASH REPLY OP TSAE WO ABOUT THE ALTARS TO THE SPIRITS
OF THE LAND, AND LAMENT OF CONPUCIUS THEREON. 1. King Gae, See

II xix. Tsae Wo was an eloquent disciple of the sage, a native of Loo.
His place is among the " wise ones." He tells the duke that the founders
of the several dynasties planted such and such trees about the altars. The
reason was that the soil suited such trees ; but as the word for the chest-
nut tree, the tree of the existing dynasty, is used in the sense of " to be
ifraid," he suggested a reason for its planting which might lead the duke
to severe measures against his people to be carried into effect at the altars.
Compare Shoo-king, III. ii. 5, " I will put you to death before the altar to
the spirit of the land." 2. This is all directed against Wo's reply. He
had spoken, and his words could not be recalled.

22. Confucius' OPINION OP Kwan Chung;— against him. l.Kwan
Chung is one of the most famous names in Chinese history. He was cliief
minister to the Duke Hwaa of Ts'e (b.c. 683 — 642), the first and great-,
est of the five _p'» leader^ of the princes of the empire under the Chow


CH. XXIII.] CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 133

2. Some one saidj " Was Kwan Chung parsimonious ? "
" Kwan," was the reply, " had the San Kwei, and his
ofl&cers performed no double duties ; how can he be con-
sidered parsimonious ? "

3. " Then, did Kwan Chui\g know the rules of pro-
priety ? " The Master said, " The princes of States have
a screen intercepting the view at their gates. Kwan had
likewise a screen at his gate. The princes of States on
any friendly meeting between two of them,'had a stand on
which to place their inverted cups. Kwan had also such
a stand. If Kwan knew the rules of propriety, who does
not know them ?" ~

XXIII. The Master instructing the Grand music-master
of Loo said, " How to play music may be known. At the
commencement of the piece, all the parts should sound
together. As it proceeds, they should be in harmony,
while severally distinct and yet flowing without break;
and thus on to the conclusion."

XXIV. The border- warden at B requested to be intro-
duced to the Master, saying, "When men of superior
virtue have come to this, I have never been denied the
privilege of seeing them." The followers of the sage in-
troduced him, and when he came out from the interview,
he said, " My friends, why are you distressed by your
master's loss of office ? The empire has long been with-
out the principles of truth and right ; Heaven is going
to use your master as a bell with its wooden tongue."

XXV. The Master said of the Shaou that it was per-

dynasty. In the times of Confucius and Mencius, people thought more
of Kwan than those sages, no hero-worshippers, would allow. Most
foreign readers, however, in studying the history of Kwan's times, will
hesitate in adopting the sage's judgment about him. He rendered great
services to his State and to China.

23. On the playins op music.

24. A steangeh's view of the vocation of Conpucius. E was a
small town on the borders of Wei, referred to a place in the present district
of Lan-Yang, department K'ae-fung, Honan province. Confucius was retir-
ing from Wei, the prince of which could not employ him. The " wooden-
toiigued bell " was a metal bell with a wooden tongue, shaken to call at-
tention to announcements, or along the ways to call people together.
Heaven, the warden thought, would employ Confucius to proclaim and
call men's attention to the truth and right.

25. The compaeative merits op the music of Shun and Woo.
Shaou was the name of the music made by Shun, perfect in melody and


134 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK IV.

fectly beautiful and also perfectly good. He said of the
Woo that it was perfectly beautiful but not perfectly good.
XXVI. The Master said, " High station filled without
indulgent generosity ; ceremonies performed without re-
verence; mourning conducted without sorrow; — where-
with should I contemplate such ways ? "


BOOK IV.

Chaptbb I. The Master said, " It is virtuous manners
which constitute the excellence of a neighbourhood. If
a man in selecting a residence do not fix on one where
such prevail, how can he be wise ? "

II. The Master said, " Those who are without virtue
cannot abide long either in a condition of poverty and
hardship, or in a condition of enjoyment. The virtuous
rest in virtue : the wise desire virtue."

III. The Master said, " It is only the truly virtuous
man who can love, or who can hate, others."

-^■^^IV. The Master said, "If the will be set on virtue,

there will be no practice of wickedness."

" V. 1. The Master said, "Riches and honours are what
men desire. If it cannot be obtained in the proper way,
they should not be held. Poverty and meanness are what

sentiment. Woo was the music of King Woo, also perfect in melody, but
breathing the martial air, indicative of its author.

26. The disregaed of what is essential vitiates all sebviceb.

Heading and subjects of this Book. — "Virtue in a neighbourhood."
The book is mostly occupied with the subject of jin, which ia generally
translated by " benevolence." That sense, however, will by no means suit
many of the chapters here, and we must render it by " perfect virtue " or
"virtue." See II. i. 2. The embodiment of virtue demands an acquaint-
ance with ceremonies and music, and this is the reason, it is said, why the
one subject immediately follows the other.

i. kules fob the selection of a besidence.

2. Only teue virtue adapts a man foe the vaeied conditions
OF life.

, 3. Only in the good mam are emotions of love and hateed
, eight. This chapter, containing an important truth, is incorporated
I with the Great Learning, coram. X. 15.

4. The virtuous will preserves feom all wickedness. Compare
t)ie apostle's sentiment, 1 John iii. 9, " Whosoever is bora of God doth
iiofcommit sin."

5. The devotion of the Keun-tsze to virtue.


CH. VI, J CONIUCIAN A2JALECTS. 135

men dislike. If it canuot be obtained in the proper wav.
they should not be avoided. ^<-^

2. " If a superior man abandon virtuCj how can he ful- I
fil the requirements of that name ?

3. " The superior man does not, even for the space of a
single meal, act contrary to virtue. In moments of haste, 1
he cleaves to it. In seasons of danger, he cleaves to it." J

VI. ]. The Master said, "I have not seen a person
who loved virtue, or one who hated what was not virtuous.
He who loved virtue would esteem nothing above it. He
who hated what is not virtuous, would practise virtue in
such a way that he would not allow anything that is not
virtuous to approach his person.

2. "Is any one able for one day to apply his strength
to virtue ? I have not seen the case in which his strength-^
would be insufficient.

3. " Should there possibly be any such case, I have
not seen it."

VII. The Master said, "The faults of men are cha-
racteristic of the class to which they belong. By observ-
ing a man's faults, it may be known that he is virtuous.'"

VIII. The Master said, " If a man in the morning hear'
the right way, he may die in the evening without regret."

IX. The Master said, "A scholar, whose mind is set


6. A LAMENT BECAUSE OF THE EABITY OF THE LOVE OP VIRTUE, AKD I
ENCOORAeEMENT TO PRACTISE VIRTUE. '^^

7. A MAN IS NOT TO BE UTTERLY CONDEMNED BECAUSE HE HAS J

FAULTS. Such is the sentiment found in this chapter, in which we may
say, however, that Confucius is liable to the charge brought against Tsze-
hea, I. yii. The faults are the excesses of the general tendencies. Com-
pare Goldsmith's line, " And even his failings leant to virtue's side."

8. The importance of knowing the right way. One is perplexed
to translate the " way," or " right way," here spoken. One calls it " the
path," — i.e. of action — which is in accordance with our nature. Man is
formed for this, and if he die without coming to the knowledge of it, his
death is no better than that of a beast. One would fain recognize in such
sentences as this a vague apprehension of some higher truth or way than
Chinese sages have been able to propound. — Ho An takes a different view
of the whole chapter, and makes it a lament of Confucius that he was
likely to die without hearing of right principles prevailiijg in the world. —
" Could I once hear of the prevalence of right principles, I could die the
same evening."

9. The pursuit of truth should raise a man above BBisa

ashamed of POVERTY.


136 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK IV.

on trufh, and wlio is ashamed of bad clotlies and bad food,
is not fit to be discoursed with."

X. The Master said, " The superior man, in the world,
does not set his mind either for anything, or against any-
thing ; what is right he will follow."

XI. The Master said, "The superior man thinks of
virtue ; the small man thinks of comfort. The supe rior
m a n thinks of th e sanctions of law; the-amailj nan tmnka
oTfavours which hema,]i xecm^eJ^^^

"■■^ir."" ThelEister said, " He who acts with a constant
view to his own advantage will be much murmured
against.''^
/''Xin. The Master said, " Is a prince able to govern

4iis kingdom with the complaisance proper to the rules of
propriety; what difficulty will he have ? If he cannot go-
vern it with that complaisance, what has he to do with
the rules of propriety ? "

XIV. The Master said, "A man should say, I am not
concerned that I have no place, — I am concerned how I
may fit myself for one. I am not concerned that I am not
known, — I seek W be worthy to be known.'^

XV. 1 . The Master said, " Sin, l ay doctrine is that o f
an_all-pervading unity." . Tsang the philosopher replied,
"Yes'."

10. ElGHTEOUSNESS IS THE RULE OF THE KEUN-TSZE'S PRACTICE.
U. The different MINDINaS of the StrPERIOR AND THE SMALL MAN.

12. The consequence of selfish conduct.
£^13. The influence in government of ceremonies observed in
their proper spirit.

14. Advising to self-cultivation. Compare I. xvi.

15. Confucius' doctbinb that of a pervading unity. This
chapter is said to be the most profound in the iMn Y-u. To myself it occurs
to translate " my doctrines have one thing which goes through them,"
but such an exposition has not been approved by any Chinese commenta-
tor. Thjj5eoond_paragj3pb shows us clearly enough what the one thing or
unity intended by Confucius was. " TTwasTIie'heart; ' man' s" natu re, of
which all the" relatio ns "and" d uties of l ife are only the "SeVelo pment a nd
outgo mgsT What I haje_toji_s|a|ed' by ""Being true to lli'e prmciplg of our
na ture^" and "esercisins; those p rinniplB|rj2P.iw7n"fi"rrtl"y,''~"nrB in the
firiginal only two characters both formed from sin, " the heart." The
former is compounded of clmng, "middle," "centre," and sin, and the
latter of joo, "as," and «i». The "centre heart "= I, the e^o, and the
" as heart "=the " I in sympathy " with others. One is duty-doing, on
a consideration, or from the impulse, of one's own self ; the other is duty-
doing, on the principle of reciprocity. The chapter is important, showing


CH. XVI.J CONPTCIAN ANALECTS. ( -^^7

2. The Master went out, and the other disciples asked,
saying, "What do his words mean ? " Tsang said, " Ther^
doctrine of our Master is to be true to the principles of our
nature and the benevolent exercise of them to others, — ^
this and nothing more."

XVI. The Master said, "The mind of the superior
man is conversant with righteousness j the mind of the
mean man is conversant with gain.^'

XVII. The Master said, " When we see men of worth,
we should think of equalling them ; when we see men of
a contrary character, we should turn inwards and examine
ourselves."

XVIII. The Master said, " In serving his parents, a
son may remonstrate with them, but gently ; when he sees
that they do not incline to follow his advice, he shows an
increased degree of reverence, but does not abandon his
purpose ; and should they punish him, he does not allow
himself to murmur."

XIX. The Master said, " While his parents are alive,
the son may not go abroad to a distance. If he does go
abroad, he must have a fixed place to which he goes."

XX. The Master said, " If the son for three years does
not alter from the way of his father, he may be called
filial."

XXL The Master said, " The years of parents may by
no means not be kept in the memory, as an occasion at
once for joy and for fear."

XXII. The Master said, " The reason why the an-
cients did not readily give utterance to their words, was

that Confucius only claimed to unfold and enforce duties indicated by
man's mental constitution. He was simply a moral philosopher.

16. How EIGHTEOTJSNBSS AND SELFISHNESS DISTINGUISH THE BXS-
PEEIOK MAlf AJTD THE SMALL MAN.

17. The lessons to be leabnbd from obseeving men of dif-

FliBENT CHAEAOTEKS.

18. How A SON MAT EEMONSTEATE WITH HIS PARENTS ON THEIR

FAULTS. See the Le Ke, XII. i. 15.

19. A SON OUGHT NOT TO GO TO A DISTANCE WHERE HE WILL NOT
BE ABLE TO PAY THE DUE SERVICES TO HIS PARENTS.

20. A KBPETITION OF PART OF I. xi.

21. What effect the age of the parents should have on

THEIE children.

22. The viettjb of the ■ ancients seen ih their slowness to

BFEAE.


138 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. ' [bK V.

that they feared lest their actions should not come up to
them."

XXIII. The Master said, " The cautious seldom err."

XXIV. The Master said, " The superior man wishes to
he slow in his words and earnest in his conduct."

XXV. The Master said, "Virtue is not left to stand
alone. He who practises it will have neighbours.^'

XXVI. Tsze-yew said, " In serving a prince, frequent
remonstrances lead to disgrace. Between friends, fre-
quent reproofs make the friendship distant."


BOOK V.

Chaptee I. 1. The Master said of Kung-yay Ch'ang
that he might be wived ; although he was put in bonds,
he had not been guilty of any crime. Accordingly, he gave
him his own daughter to wife.

2. Of Nan Tung he said that if the country were well
governed, he would not be out of ofiS.ce, and if it were ill
governed, he would escape punishment and disgrace. He
gave him the daughter of his own elder brother to wife,

23. Advantage of caution. Collie's version, which I have adopted,
is here happy.

2i. RULB OP THE KbUN-TSZE ABOUT HIS WORDS AND ACTIONS.

25. The vietuous abb not left alone ; — an encouragement to

VIRTUE.

26. A LESSON TO COCTNSELLOES AND FRIENDS.

Heauing and subjects op THIS BOOK. — " Kung-yay Ch'ang,"
the surname and name of the first individual spoken of in it, beads this
book, which is chiefly occupied with the judgment of the sage on the
character of several of his disciples and others. As the decision frequently
turns on their being possessed of that jiyi, or^rfeqt jktue, which is so
conspicuous in the last book, this is tire~roasbn, it is said, why the one
immediately follows the other. As Tsze-kung appears in the book several
times, some have fancied that it was compiled by his disciples.

1. Confucius in marriage -making was guided by character, and
NOT BY FORTUNE. Of Kung-yay Ch'ang, though the son-in-law of
Confucius, nothing certain is known, and his tablet is only third on the
west among the oi »ro\Xoi. Silly legends are told of his being put in prison
from his bringing suspicion on himself by his knowledge of the language
of birds. Nan Yung, another of the disciples, is now fourth, east, in
the outer hall. The discussions about who lie was, and whether he is to
be identified with Nan-Eung Kwoh, and several other aliases, are very
perplexing. We cannot tell whether Confucius is giving his impression
of Yung's character, or referring to events that had taken place.


CH. II.] CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 139

II. The Master said, of Tsze-tseen, " Of superior virtue
indeed is sucli a man ! If there were not virtuous men in
Loo, how could this man have acquired this character ? "

III. Tsze-kung asked, "What do you say of me, Ts'ze?"
The Master said, " You are an utensil." " What utensil ?"
"A gemmed sacrificial utensil."

IV. 1. Some one said, "Yung is truly virtuous, but
he is not ready with his tongue."

2. The Master said, " What is the good of being ready
with the tongue ? They who meet men with smartnesses
of speech, for the most part procure themselves hatred.
I know not whether he be truly virtuous, but why should
he show readiness of the tongue ? "

V. The Master was wishing Tseih-teaou K'ae to enter
on official employment. He replied, " I am not yet able
to rest in the assurance of this." The Master was
pleased.

VI. The Master said, " My doctrines make no way.
I will get upon a raft, and float about on the sea. He
that will accompany me will be Yew, I dare to say."

2. The Kettn-tszb poemed by intercouese with othek Keun-
TSZE. Tsze-tseen, by surname Fuh, and named Puh-ts'e, appears to have
been of some note among the disciples of Confucius, both as an adminis-
trator and writer, though his tablet is now only second, west, in the outer
hall. What chiefly distinguished him, as appears here, was his cultivation
of the friendship of men of ability and virtue.

3. Whereto Tsze-ktxng had attained. See I. x. ; II. xii. While
the sage did not grant to Tsze that he was a Xeun-tsze (II. xii.), he made
him " a vessel of honour," valuable and fit for use on high occasions.

4. Op Ten Yung. Readiness with the tongttb no part op viktue.
Yen Yung, styled Chung-Kung, has his tablet the second on the east of
Confucius' own tablet, among the " wise ones." His father was a worth-
less character (see VI. iv.), but he himself was the opposite.

5. Tseih-teaou K'ae's opinion of the qualifications necessary
TO TAKING OFFICE. Tseih-teaou, now sixth on the east, in the outer
hall, was styled Tsze-jo. His name originally was K'e, changed into
Ka'e, on the accession of the Emperor Heaou-King, A.D. 155, whose name
was also K'e. In the chapter about the disciples in the " Family Sayings,"
it is said that K'ae was reading in the Shoo-king, when Confucius spoke
to him about taking office, and he pointed to the book, or some particular
passage in it, saying, " I am not yet able to rest in the assurance of tAis."
It may have been so.

6. Confucius proposing to withdraw prom the world : — a lesson
TO TszB-LOO. Tsze-loo supposed his master really meant to leave the
world, and the idea of floating along the coasts pleased his ardent temper,
while he was delighted with the compliment paid to himself. But Confucius


no CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.- [bK V.

Tsze-loo hearing tliis was glad, upon which the Master
said, " Yew is fonder of daring than I am ; but he does
not exercise his judgment upon matters/'

VII. 1. Mang Woo asked about Tsze-loo, . whether
he was perfectly virtuous. The Master said, " I do not
know."

2. He asked again, when the Master replied, " In a
kingdom of a thousand chariots, Yew might be employed
to manage the military levies, but I do not know whether
he is perfectly virtuous."

3. " And what do you say of K'ew ? " The Master
replied, " In a city of a thousand families, or a House of a
hundred chariots, TS/eW might be employed as governor,
but I do not know whether he is perfectly virtuous."

4. " What do you say of Ch'ih?" The Master replied,
" With his sash girt and standing in a court, Ch'ih might
be employed to converse with the visitors and guests, but
I do not know whether he is perfectly virtuous."

VIII. 1. The Master said to Tsze-kung, "Which do
you consider superior, yourself or Hwuy ? "

2. Tsze-kung replied, "How dare I compare myself
with Hwuy ? Hwuy hears one point and knows all about
a subject ; I hear one point and know a second."

3. The Master said, " You are not eqnhl to him. I
grant you, you are not equal to him."'

IX. 1. Tsae Yu being asleep during the day time, the
Master said, " Rotten wood cannot be carved ; a wall of
dirty earth will not receive the trowel. This Yu ! — what
is the use of my reproving him ? "

2. The Master said, " At first, my way with men was
to hear their words, and give them credit for their con-
only expressed in this way his regret at the baolcwardness of men to
receive his doctrines.

7. Of Tsze-loo, Tszb-ykw, and Tsze-hwa. Mang Woo, see II.
vi. 3. K'ew, see III. vi. "A house of a hundred chariots," in opposition
to " A State of a thousand chariots,' ' was the secondary fief, the territory ap-
propriatetl to the highest nobles or officers in a State, supposed also to
comprehend 1000 families. 4. Ch'ih, surnamed Kung-se, and styled Tsze-
hwa, having now the fourteenth place, west, in the outer hall, was famous
nmong the disciples for his knowledge of rules of ceremony, and those
especially relating to dress and intercourse.

8. SCPKEIOEITT OF YEN HWUT TO TsZE-KUNG.

9. The idleness op Tsab Yu and its kepeoof. Tsae Yu is the
same individual as Tsae-wo in III. xxi.


en. I.] CONPUCIAK ANALECTS. 141

duct. Now my way is to tear their wordsj and look at
their conduct. It is from Yu that I have learned to ^
make this change."

X. The Master said, " I have not seen a firm and un-\
bending man." Some one replied, " There is Shin \
Ch'ang." " Chiang," said the Master, " is under the in-/
fluence of his lusts, how can he be firm and unbending? "
' XI. Tsze-kung said, " WhatI do not wish men to do to
me, I also wish not to do tD men." The Master said,
" Ts'ze, you have not attained to that." -^

XII. Tsze-kung said, " The Master's jjersona? displays] .
of his principles and ordinary descriptions of them may he!
heard. His discourses about man's nature, and the way
of Heaven, cannot be heard."

XIII. When Tsze-loo heard anything, if he had not yet.
carried it into practice, he was only afraid lest he should
hear something else.

XIV. Tsze-kung asked saying, " On what ground did

10. Unbending vibttje cannot co-exist with inditloence oiTA
THE PASSIONS. Shin Ch'ang (there are several' aliases, but they are dis-
puted,) was one of the minor disciples, of whom little or nothing is knowr;.
He was styled Tsze-chow, and his place is thirty-first, east, in the outer
ranges.

11. The DIFFICULTY OF ATTAINING TO THE NOT WISHING TO DO [0
OTHERS AS WE WISH THEM NOT TO DO TO US. It IS said, " This

chapter shows that the ' no I ' (freedom from selfishness) is not easily
reached." In the Doctrine of the Mean, XIII. 3, it is said, " What
you do not like when done to yourself, do not do to others." The differ-
ence between it and the sentence here is said to be that of " reciprocity,"
and " benevolence," or the highest virtue, apparent in the two adverbs
used, the one prohibitive, and the other a simple, unconstrained, negation.
The golden rule of the Gospel is higher than both, — " Do ye unto others
83 ye would that others should do unto you."

12. The GRADUAL WAY IK WHICH CONFUCIUS COMMUNICATED HIS

DOCTRINES. So the lesson of this chapter is summed up ; but there is
hardly another more perplexing to a translator. The commentators make
the subject of the former clause to be the deportment and manners cf
the sage and his ordinary discourses, but the verb "to hear" is an in-
appropriate term with reference to the former. These things, however,
were level to the capacity of the disciples generally, and they had the
benefit of them. As to his views about man's nature, the gift of Heaven,
and the way of Heaven generally; — these he only communicated to
those who were prepared to receive them ; and Tsze-kung Is supposed
to have expressed himself thus, after being on some occasion so privileged.

13. The ARDOUR of TSZE-LOO in practising the MAS'IKR'S IN-
STRUCTIONS.

14. An B.\AiIPLE OP THE PRINCIPLE ON WHICH HONORARY POSTHUiT-


142 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK V.

Kung-wan get that title of wan ? " The Master said,
" He was of an active nature and yet fond of learnings and
he was not ashamed to ask and learn of his inferiors ! —
On these grounds he has been styled wan,"
r~~ XV. The Master said of Tsze-ch'an that he had four

\ of the characteristics of a superior man : — in his conduct
of himself, he was humble ; in serving his superiors, he was
respectful ; in nourishing the people, he was kind ; in or-

jiering the people, he was just.

XVI. The Master said, " Gan P'ing knew well how to
^ maintain friendly intercourse. The acquaintance might be

long, but he showed the same respect as at first."

XVII. The Master said, "Tsang Wan kept a large
tortoise in a house, on the capitals of the pillars of which
he had hills made, with representations of duckweed on
the small pillars above the teams supporting the rafters. —
Of what sort was his wisdom ? "

XVIII. 1. Tsze-ohang asked, saying, " The minister

ous TITLES WBEB coNrEERED. " WSn," corresponding nearly to our
" aooomplished," was the posthumous title given to Tsze-yu, an officer
of the state of Wei, and a contemporary of Confucius. Many of his
actions had been of a doubtful character, which made Tsze-kung stumble
at the application to him of so honourable an epithet. But Confucius
shows that, whatever he might otherwise be, he liad those qualities, which
justified his being so denominated. The rule for posthumous titles in
China has been, and is very much — " De mortuis nil nisi ioiiVM."

15. The excellent qualities of TszE-CH'Alf. Tsze-ch'an, named
Kung-sun K'eaou, was the chief minister of the state of Ching — the
ablest perhaps, and most upright, of all the statesmen among Confucius'
contemporaries. The sage wept when he heard of his death.

16. How TO MAINTAIN PEIENDSHIP. " Familiarity breeds contempt,"
and with contempt friendship ends. It was not so with Gan P'ing,
another of the worthies of Confucius' times. He was a principal minister
of Ts'e, by name Ying. P'ing ("Ruling and averting calamity") was
his posthumous title.

17. The sm'BESTiTioN of Tsang Wan. Tsang Wan (Wan is the
lionorary epithet) had been a great officer in Loo, and left a reputa-
tion for wisdom, which Confucius did not think was deserved. He was
descended from the Duke Heaou (B.C. 794 — 767), whose son was styled
Tsze- Tsang. This Tsang was taken by his descendants as their surname.
This is mentioned to show one of the ways in which surnames were formed
among the Chinese. The old interpreters make the keeping such a tortoise
an act of usurpation on the part of Tsang Wan. Choo He finds the point
of Confucius' words, in the keeping it in such a style, as if to flatter it.

18. The praise of peefect vietue is not to be lightly ac-
COSDED. 1. Tsze-wau, the chief minister of the State of Tsoo, had been


CH. XIX.] CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. ] 43

Tsze-waiij thrice took office, and manifested no joy in his
countenance. Thrice he retired from office, and mani-
fested no displeasure. He made it a point to inform the
new minister of the way in which he had conducted the
government ; — what do you say of him ? " " The Master
repHed, " He was loyal." " Was he perfectly virtuous ? "
" I do not know. How can he be pronounced perfectly
virtuous ? "

2. Tsze-chang proceeded, " When the officer Ts'uy killed
the prince of Ts'e, Oh'in Wan, though he was the owner
of forty horses, abandoned them and left the country.
Coming to another state, he said, ' They are here like our
great officer, Ts'^uy,' and left it. He came to a second
state, and with the same observation left it also ; — what do
you say of him ? " The Master replied, " He was pure.''
" Was he perfectly virtuous ? •" "I do not know.. How
can he be pronounced perfectly virtuous ? "

XIX. Ke Wan thought thrice, and then acted. When
the Master was informed of it, he said, " Twice may do."

XX. The Master said, " When good order prevailed in
his country, Ning Woo acted the part of a wise man.
When his country was in disorder, he acted the part of a
stupid man. Others may equal his wisdom, but they can-
not equal his stupidity."

XXI. When the Master was in Ch'in, he said, " Let
me return ! Let ine return ! The little children of my

noted for the things mentioned by Tsze-chang, but the sage would net
concede that he was therefore perfectly virtuous. 2. Ts'uy was a grc'Jt
officer of Ts'e. Gran P'ing (ch. xvi.), distinguished himself on the occasion
of the murder (B.C. 547) here referred to. Ch'in Wan was likewise an
officer of Ts'e.

19. Prompt decision good. WSn was the posthumous title of Ke
Hing-foo, a faithful and disinterested officer of Loo. Compare Robert
Hall's remark, — " In matters of conscience first thoughts are best."

20. The uncommon but admirable stupidity op NrsfG Woo. Ning
Woo (Woo, hon. ep. See 11. vi.), was an officer of Wei in the times of
Wan (b. o. 635 — 627), the second of the fire p'a (See on III. xxii.). In
the first part of his official life, the State was quiet and prosperous, and he
" wisely " acquitted himself of his duties. Afterwards came confusion.
The prince was driven from the throne, and Ning Woo might, like other
wise men, have retired from the danger. But he "foolishly," as it seemed,
chose to follow the fortunes of his prince, and yet adroitly brought it
about in the end, that the prince was reinstated and order restored.

21. The anxiety op Conpucius about the tbaining of his dis-
CIFLSS. Confucius was thrice in Ch'in, It must have been the third time


144 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK V.

school are ambitious and too hasty. They are accom-
plished and complete so far, but they do not know how
to restrict and shape themselves.^'

XXII. The Master said, " Pih-e and Shuh-ts'e did not
keep the former wickedness of men in mind, and hence
the resentments directed towards them were few."

XXIII. The Master said, "Who says of Wei-shang
Kaou that he is upright ? One begged some vinegar of
him, and he begged it of a neighbour and gave it him."

XXIV. The Master said, "Fine words, an insinuating
appearance, and excessive respect ;^Tso-k'ew Ming was
ashamed of them. 1 also am ashamed of them. To con-
ceal resentment against a person, and appear friendly with
him ; — Tso-k'ew Ming was ashamed of such conduct. I
also am ashamed of it."

XXV. 1. Yen Yuen and Ke Loo being by his side,

when he thus expres.sed himself. He was then over sixty years, and being
convinced that he was not to see for himself the triumph of his priuoipJoTi.
he became the more anxious about their transmission, and the training o(
the disciples in order to that. Such is the common view of the chapter.
Some say, however, that it is not to be understood of all the disciples.
Compare Mencius, VII. Pt II. xxxvii. By an afifeotionate way of speak-
ing of the disciples, he calls them his " little children."

22. The generosity of Pih-b asb Shuh-ts'b, ajtd its effects.
These were ancient worthies of the closing period of the Shang dynasty.
Compare Mencius, II. Pt I. ii. ix., et al. They were brothers, sons of the
king of Koo-chuh, named respectively Yun and Che. E and Ts'e aro
their honourable epithets, and Pih and Shuh only indicate their relation
to each other as elder and younger. Pih-e and Shuh-ts'e, however, are
in effect their names in the mouths and writings of the Chinese. Koo-
chuh was a small state, included in the present department of Tung-
p'ing, in Pih-chih-le. Tlieir father left his kingdom to Shuh-ts'e, who
refused to take the place of his elder brother. Pih-e in turn declined
the throne, so they both abandoned it, and retired into obscurity. When
King Woo was taking his measures against the tyrant Chow, they made
their appearance, and remonstrated against his course. Finally, they died
of hunger, rather than live under , the new dynasty. They were celebrated
for their purity, and aversion to men whom they considered bad, but
Confucius here brings out their generosity.

■ 23. Small MEAiraBssEs inconsistent with upeightness. It is
implied that Kaou gave the vinegar as Irom himself.

24. Pbaibe op sinceeity, and op Tso-k'ew MING. Compare I, iii.,
" excessive respect." The discussions about Tso-k'ew Ming are endless.
It is sufficient for us to rest in the judgment of the commentator, Ch'ing,
that " he was an ancient of reputation." It is not to be received that
he was a disciple of Confucius, or the author of the Tso-ohuen.

2a. The dipi-eeent wishes op Yen Yuen, Tsze-loo, and Con-


CH. XXVI.] CONFtTCIAU ANALECTS. 145

the Master said to thenij " Come, let each of you tell his
wishes."

2. Tsze-loo said, " I should like, having chariots and
horses, and light fur dresses, to share them with my
friends, and though they should spoil them, I would not
be displeased."

3. Yen Yuen said, " I should like not to boast of my
excellence, nor to make a display of my meritorious
deeds."

4. Tsze-loo then said, " I should like, sir, to hear youA
wishes." The Master said, " They are, in regard to the
aged, to give them rest; in regard to friends, to show/
them sincerity; in regard to the young, to treat theni
tenderly."

XXVI. The Master said, "It is all over ! I have not"
yet seen one who could perceive his faults, and inwardly
accuse himself." ^

XXVII. The Master said, " In a hamlet of ten fami-
hes, there may be found one honourable and sincere as I
am, but not so fond of learning."


BOOK VI.

Chapter I. 1. The Master said, "There is Yung! —
He might occupy the place of a prince."

FUCIUS. The Master and the disciples, it is said, agreed in being devoid
of selfishness. Hwuy's, however, was seen in a higher style of mind and
object than Yew's. In the sage, there was an unconsciousness of self, and
without any effort, he proposed acting in regard to his classification of men
just as they ought severally to be acted to.

26. A LAMENT OTEB MEN'S PBKSISTENCK M liBEOB. The remark
affirms a fact, inexplicable on Confucius' view of the nature of man. But
perhaps such an exclamation should not be pressed too closely.

27. The humble claim of Confucius for himself. Confucius
thus did not claim higher. natural and moral qualities than others, but
sought to perfect himself by learning.

Heading and subjects of this book. " There is Yung I "
eommeuees the first chapter, and stands as the title of the book. Its
subjects are much akin to those of the preceding book, and therefore, it is
said, they are in juxtaposition.

1. The chabactebs of Yen Yung and Tsze-sang Pih-tsze, as

BBGABDS THEIE ADAPTATION FOB GOVEBNMENT. 1. " Might OCCUpy the

place of a prince," is literally " Might be employed with his face to the
VOL. I. 10


146 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK VI.

2. Cliung-kuBg asked about Tsze-sang Pih-tsze. The
Master saidj " He may pass. He does not mind small
matters."

3. Chung-kung said, "If a man cherish in himself a
reverential feeling of the necessity of attention to business,
though he may be easy in small matters in his govern-
ment of the people^ that may be allowed. But if he
cherish in himself that easy feeling, and also ca.rry it out
in his practice, is not such an easy mode of procedure ex-
cessive ?"

4. The Master said, " Yung's words are right."

II. The Duke Gae asked which of the disciples loved
to learn. Confucius replied to him, " There was Yen
Hwuy ; HE loved to learn. He did not transfer his anger;
he did not repeat a fault. Unfortunately, his appointed
time was short and he died; and now there is not suck
another. I have not yet heard of any one who loves to
learn as he did."

III. 1. Tsze-hwa being employed on a mission to Ts'e,
the disciple Yen requested grain for his mother. The,
Master said, " Give her a foo." Yen requested more.
" Giveheran yu," said the Master. Yen gave her Gveping.

south.'' In China, the emperor sits facing the south. So did the princes
of the states in their several courts in Confucius' time. An explanation
of the practice is attempted in the Yih-King. " The diagram Le conveys
the idea of brightness, when all things are exhibited to one another. It is
the diagram of the south. The custom of the sages (i. e. monarohs) to sit
with their faces to the south, and listen to the representations of the
empire, governing towards the bright region, was taken from this." 2.
Observe, Chung-kung was the designation of Yen Tung ; see T. iv. 3. Of
Tsze-sang Pih-tsze, we know nothing certain but what is here stated.
Choo He seems to be wrong in approving the identification of him with a
Tsze-sang Hoo. — " To dwell in respect," to have the mind imbued
with it.

2. The rarity of a tkue love to learn. Hwut's supebioeitt
TO THE OTHER DISCIPLES. " He did not transfer his anger," i. e. his
anger was no tumultuary passion in the mind, but was excited by some
specific cause, to which alone it was directed. The idea of " learning,"
with the duke and the sage, was a practical obedience to the lessons
given.

3. Discrimination of Confucius in bewaeding or salabtino of-
ficers. 1. Choo He says the commission was a private one from Con-
fucius, but this is not likely. The old interpretation makes it a public one
from the court of Loo. "Yen, the disciple; " see III. vi. Yen is here
styled "the philosopher," like Tew, in I. ii., but only in narrative, not as
introducing any wise utterance. A foo contained 6 torn and i shing, or


CH. IV.] CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 147

2. The Master said, " When Ch'ih was proceeding to
Ts'e, he had fat horses to his carriage, and wore light furs. ^
I have heard that a superior man helps the distressed, but
does not add to the wealth of- the rich."

3. Yuen Sze being made governor of Ms town by the
Master, he gave him nine hundred measures of grain, but
Sze declined them.

4. The Master said, " Do not decHne them. May you
not give them away in the neighbourhoods, hamlets, towns,
and villages ? "

IV. The Master, speaking of Chung-kung, said, " If
the calf of a brindled cow be red and horned, although
man may not wish to use it, would the spirits of the moun-
tains and rivers refuse it ? "

V. The Master said, " Such was Hwuy that for three
months there would be nothing in his mind contrary to ^
perfect virtue. The others may attain to this once a day
or once a month, but nothing more.'''

VI. Ke K'ang asked, " Is Chung-yew fit to be em-
ployed as an officer of government ? " The Master said,
" Yew is a man of decision ; what difficulty would he find

in being an officer of government ? " K'ang asked, " Is v
Ts'ze fit to be employed as an officer of government ? "

C4 sJdng. The yu contained 160 sJdng, and the ping 16 ho, or 1600«7jj«i7.
A sJdnff of the present day is about one-fourth less than an English pintl
2. Ch'ih, i. e. Tsze-hwa ; see V. vii. 4. 3. Yuen Sze, named Heen, is now the
third, east, in the outer hall of the temples. He was noted for his pur-
suit of truth, and carelessness of worldly advantages. After the death of
Confucius, he withdrew into retirement in Wei. It is related that Tsze-
liung, high in official station, came one day in great style to visit him.
Sze received him in a'tattered coat, and Tsze-kung asking him if he were
ill, he replied, •' I have heard that to have no money is to be poor, and
that to study truth and not be able to find it is to be ill." This answer
Bent Tsze-kung away in confusion. — The 900 measures (whatever they
were) was the proper allowance for an officer of Sze's station.

4. The vices op a father should not discredit a vrRTUotrs son.
" The father of Chung-kung (see T. iv.) was a man of bad character,"
and some would have visited this upon his son, which drew forth Con-
fucius' remark. The rules of the Chow dynasty required that sacrificial
victims should be red, and have good horns. An animal with those
qualities, though it might spring frcm one not possessing them, would
certainly not be unacceptable on that account to the spirits sacrificed to.

5. The superiority of Hwuy to the other disciples.

6. tee qualities of tsze-loo, tsze-kuttg, and tsze-yew, and

THEIR COMPETElJCY TO ASSIST IN GOVERNMENT. The prince is Called

10*


148 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK VI.

and was answered, Ts'ze is a man of intelligence ; what
difficulty would lie find in being an officer of govern-
ment ? " And to the same question about K'ew, the
Master gave the same reply, saying, "K'ew is a man of
various ability."

VII. The chief of the Kc family sent to ask Min Tsze-
k'een to be governor of Pe. Min Tsze-k'een said, " De-
cline the ofl'er for me politely. If any one come again
to me with a second invitation, I shall be obliged to go and
live on the banks of the Wan."

VIII. Pih-new being sick, the Master went to ask for
him. He took hold of his hand through the window, and
said, " It is killing him. It is the appointment of Heaven,
alas ! That such a man should have such a sickness !
That such a man should have such a sickness ! "

IX. The Master said, "Admirable indeed was the
vii'tue of Hwuy ! With a single bamboo dish of rice, a
single gourd dish of drink, and living in his mean narrow

, lane, while others could not have endured the distress, he

\did not allow his joy to be affected by it. Admirable in-
deed was the virtue of Hwuy ! "

" the doer of government ; " his ministers and ofiBcers are styled " the
follorrers (officers) of government."

7. Min Tsze-k-een refuses to serve the Ke family. The tab-
let of Tsze-k'een (his name was Sun) is now the first on the east among
" the wise ones " of the temple. He was among the foremost of the dis-
ciples. Confucius praises his filial piety ; and we see here, how he could
stand firm in his virtue, and refuse the proffers of powerful but unprincipled
families of his time. Pe was a place belonging to the Ke family. Its
name is still preserved in a district of the department of E-chow, in Shan-
tung. The Wan stream divided Ts'e and Loo. Tsze-k'een threatens, if
he should be troubled again, to retreat to Ts'e, where the Ke family could
not reach him.

8. Lament of Confucius over the mortal sickness op Pih-
new. Pih-new, " elder or unoie New," was the denomination of Yen
Kang, who had an honourable place among the disciples of the sage. In
the old interpretation, his sickness is said to have been " an evil disease,"
by which name leprosy is intended. Suffering from such a disease, Pih-
^ew would not see people, and Confucius took his hand through the
window. A different explanation of that circumstance is given by Choo
He. He says that sick persons were usually placed on the north side of
the apartment, but when the prince visited them, in order that he might
appear to them with his face to the south (see ch. I.), they were moved to
tlie south. On this occasion, Pih-new's friends wanted to receive Confucius
alter this royal fashion, which he avoided by not entering the house,

'J. The happiness of Hwuy independent of poverty.


CH. X.] CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. ] 49

X. Yen K'ew said, " It is not tHat I do not delight in
your doctrines, but my strength is insufficient." The
Master said, " Those whose strength is insufficient give
over in the middle of the way, but now you limit your-
self."

XI. The Master said to Tsze-hea, " Do you be a scho-
lar after the style of the superior man, and not after that
of the mean man."

XII. Tsze-yew being governor of Woo-shing, the
Master said to him, " Have you got good men there ? "
He answered, " There is Tan-t'ae MeS-ming, who never
in walking takes a short cut, and never comes to my
office, excepting on public business."

XIII. The Master said, " Mang Che-fan does not
boast of his merit. Being in the rear on an occasion of
flight, when they were about to enter the gate, he whipt
up his horse, saying, 'It is not that I dare to be-last. My
horse would not advance.' "

XIV. The Master said, " Without the specious speech
of the litanist T'o, and the beauty of ths prince Ohaou of
Sung, it is difficult to escape in the present age."

10. A HieH AIM AND PEESEVBRANCE l-ROPEE TO A STUDENT. Cotlfuciug

would not admit K'ew's apology for not attempting more than lie did.
" Give over in the middle of the way," i. e. they go as long and as far as
they can, they are pursuing when they stop ; whereas K'ew was giving up
when he might have gone on.

11. How LEARNING SHOULD BE PURSUED.

12. The character op Tan-t'ae Mee-ming. The chapter shows,
according to Chinese commentators, the advantage to people in authority
of their having good men about them. In this way, after their usual
fashion, they seek for a profound meaning in the remark of Confucius.
Tan-t'ae Mee-ming, who was styled Tsze-yu, has his tablet the second
east outside the hall. The accounts of him are very conflicting. Accord-
ing to one, he was very good-looking, while another says he was so bad-
looking that Confucius at first formed an unfavourable opinion of him,
an error which he afterwards confessed on Me^-ming's becoming eminent.
He travelled southwards with not a few followers, and places near Soo-
chow and elsewhere retain names indicative of his presence.

13. The virtue op Mang Che-pan in concealing his merit. But
where was his virtue in deviating from the truth ? And how could Confu-
cius commend him for doing so ? These questions have never troubled the
commentators. Mang Che-fan was an officer of Loo. The defeat, after
which he thus distinguished himself, was in the 11th year of Duke Gae,
B.C. 483.

14. The degeneracy of the age esteeming glibness op tongue
AND beauty of person. T'o, the officer charged with the prayers in the


15U CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK TI.

XV. The Master said, " Who can go out but by the
door ? How is it that men will not walk according to
these ways ? "

XVI. The Master said, "Where the solid qualities
are in excess of accomplishments, we have rusticity;
where the accomplishments are in excess of the solid
qualities, we have the manners of a clerk. When the
accomplishments and solid qualities are equally blended,
we then have the man of complete virtue."

r" XVII. The Master said, "Man is born for upright-
ness. If a man lose his uprightness, and yet live, his
4^e&cape /Vom deaXh is the effect of mere good fortune."
p.. XVUI. The Master said, " They who know tlie truth
j are not equal to those who love it, and they who love it

I are not equal to those who find delight in it.^'

^ XIX. The Master said, " To those whose talents are
'■^ above mediocrity, the highest subjects may be announced.
To those who are below mediocrity, the highest subjects
may not be announced."

XX. Fan Ch'e asked what constituted wisdom. The

Master said, " To give one''s-self earnestly to the duties

A due to men, and, while respecting spiritual beings, to keep

aloof from them, may be called wisdom." He asked

ancestral temple. I have coined the word litanist, to come as near to the
meaning as possible. He was an officer of the state of Wei, styled Tsze-
yu. Prince Chaou had been guilty of incest with his sister Nan-tsze (see
ch. 26), and afterwards, when she was married to the Duke Ling of Wei,
he served as an officer there, carrying on his wickedness. Ho was cele-
brated for his beauty of person.

16. A LAMENT OVER THE WAYWARDNESS OP MEN'S CONDUCT, " These
ways," — in a moral sense ; — not deep doctrines, but rules of life.

16. The equal blendeng of solid excellence and ornamental
accomplishments in a complete chabactee.

17. lipe without uprightness is not true life, and cannot be
CALCULATED ON. " No more serious warning than this," says one com-
mentator, " was ever addressed to men by Confucius." We long here, as
elsewhere, for more perspicuity and fuller development of view. An
important truth struggles for expression, but only finds it imperfectly.
Without uprightness, the end of man's existence is not fulfilled, but his
preservation in such case is not merely a fortunate accident.

18. Different stages of attainment.

1 9. Teachehs must be guided in communicating knowledge by

THE SUSCEPTIVITY OP THE LEARNEKS.

20. Chief elements in wisdom and virtt):b. We may suppose from
the second clause that Fan Ch'e was striving after what was uncommon


CH. XXI.] CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 151

about perfect virtue. Tlie Master said, "The man of
virtue makes tte difficulty to he overcome his first busi-
ness, and success only a subsequent consideration ; — this
may be called perfect virtue."

XXI. The Master said, "The wise find delight in
water; the virtuous find delight in hills. The wise are
active ; the virtuous are tranquil. The wise are joyful ;
the virtuous are long-lived."

XXII. The Master said, " Ts'e, by one change, w^uld
come to the state of Loo. Loo, by one change, would
come to a state where true principles predominated."

XXIII. The Master said, " A cornered vessel without
corners. — A strange cornered vessel ! A strange cornered
vessel ! "

XXIV. Tsae Wo asked, saying, " A benevolent man,
though it be told him, — 'There is a man in the well,'
will go in after him, I suppose." Confucius said,
"Why should he do so ? A superior man may be made
to go to the well, but he cannot be made to go down
into it. He may be imposed upon, but he cannot be be-
fooled."

and superhuman. The sage's advice therefore is — " attend to what are
plainly human duties, and do not be superstitious."

21. GoNTEASTS OF THE WISE AUD THE VIETUOUS. The wise Or know-
ing are active and restless, like the waters of a stream, ceaselessly flowing
and advancing. The virtuous are tranquil and firm, like the stable
mountains. The pursuit of knowledge brings joy. The life of the virtuous
may be expected to glide calmly on and long. After all, the saying is not
very comprehensible.

22. The condition op the states Ts'e and Loo, Ts'e and Loo
were both within the present Shan-tung, Ts'e lay along the coast on the
north, embracing the present department of Ts'ing Chow and other territory.
Loo was on the south, the larger portion of it being formed by the present
department of Yen-chow. At the rise of the Chow dynasty. King Woo
invested " the great Duke Wang" with the principality of Ts'e ; while his
successor, King Ch'ing, constituted the son of his uncle, the famous duke of
Chow, prince of Loo. In Confucius' time, Ts'e had degenerated more
than Loo.

23. The name without the keality is pollt. This was spoken
with reference to the governments of the time, retaining ancient names
without ancient principles. The vessel spoken of was made with corners,
as appears from the composition of the character, which is formed from
Keo, " a horn," " a sharp corner." In Confucius' time, the form was
changed,while the name was kept.

24. The benevolent exercise theie benevolence with peit-
DENCE. Tsae Wo could see no limitation to acting on the impulses of


] 52 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK TL

XXV. THe Master said, " The superior man, exten-
sively studying all learning, and keeping himself under
the restraint of the rules of propriety, may thus likewise
not overstep what is right."

XXVI. The Master having visited Nan-tsze, Tsze-loo
was displeased, on which the Master swore, saying,
"Wherein I have done improperly, may Heaven reject
me ! may Heaven reject me ! "

XXVII. The Master said, " Perfect is the virtue which
is according to the Constant Mean ! Eare for a long time
has been its practice among the people."

XXVni. 1. Tsze-kung said, "Suppose the case of a
man extensively conferring benefits on the people, and
able to assist all, what would you say of him f Might
he be called perfectly virtuous ? " The Master said,
" Why speak only of virtue in connection with him ?
Must he not have the qualities of a sage ? Even Taou
_and Shun were still solicitous about this.

2. "Now the man of perfect virtue, wishing to be
\ established himself, seeks also to establish others ; wish-
ling to be enlarged himself, he seeks also to enlarge others.
1 3. " To be able to judge of others by what is nigh in
\ourselves ; — ^this may be called the art of virtue."

benevolence. We are not to suppose, with modern commentators, that he
wished to show that benevolence was impracticable.

25. The happy effbct of leaeuing and peopeiett combined.

26. Confucius vindicates himself fob visiting the unwoethy
Nan-tsze. Nan-tsze was the wife of the duke of Wei, and sister of Prince
Chaou, mentioned chapter xiv. Her lewd character was well known,
and hence Tsze-lpo was displeased, thinking an interview with her was
disgraceful to the Master. Great pains are taken to explain the incident.
" Nan-tsze," says one, " sought the interview from the stirrings of her
natural conscience." " It was a rule," says another, "that officers in a
state should visit the prince's wife." "Nan-tsze," argues a third, "had
all influence with her husband, and Confucius wished to get currency by
her means for his doctrine."

27. The defective peactice of the people is Conpucius' times.
See the Doctrine of the Mean, III.

28. The teub natuee and aet of vietue. There are no higher
sayings in the Analects than we have here. 1. Tsze-kung appears to have
thought that great doings were necessary to virtue, and propounds a case
which would transcend the achievements of Yaou and Shun. From such
extravagant views the Master recalls him. 2. This is the description of
" the mind of the perfectly virtuous man " as void of all selfishness. 3.
It is to be wished that the idea intended by " being able to judge of others


CH, I.j CONFUCIAN ANAiECTS. 153


BOOK VII,

Chaptee I. The Master said^ " A transmitter and not
a maker, believing in and loving the ancients, I venture to
compare myself with our old P'ang."

II. The Master said, "The silent treasuring up of
knowledge; learning without satiety; and instructing
others without being wearied : — what one of these things
belongs to me ? "

III. The Master said, ''The leaving virtue without
proper cultivation ; the not thoroughly discussing what is
learned ; not being able to move towards righteousness of
which a knowledge is gained; and not being able to
change what is not good : — these are the things which
occasion me solicitude.''^

IV. When the Master was unoccupied with business,
his manner was easy, and he looked pleased.

by what is nigh in ourselves," had been more clearly expressed. Still we
seem to have here a near approach to a positive enunciation of " the
golden rule."

Heading ash subjects op this book. — " A transmitter, and "

We have in this book much information of a personal character about
Confucius, both from his own lips and from the descriptions of his disci-
ples. The two preceding books treat of the disciples and other worthies,
and here, in contrast with them, we have the sage himself exhibited.

1. Confucius disclaims being as okiginatoe or maker. Com-
mentators say the master's language here is from his extreme humility.
But we must hold that it expresses his true sense of his position and work.
Who the individual called endearingly " our old P'ang " was, can hardly
be ascertained. Choo He adopts the view that he was a worthy officer of
the Shang dynasty. But that individual's history is a mass of fables.
Others make him to be Laou-tsze, the founder of the Taou sect, and others
again make two individuals — one this Laou-tsze, and the other that P'ang.

2. Confucius' humble estimate op himself. " The language,"
says Choo He, "is that of humility upon humility." Some insert, " be-
sides me," in their explanations before •' what," — " Besides these, what is
there in me ? " But this is quite arbitrary. The profession may be in-
consistent with what we find in other passages, but the inconsistency
must stand rather than violence be done to the language.

3. Confucius' anxiety about his self-cultivation: — Another
HUMBLE ESTIMATE OF HIMSELF. Here, again, commentators find only
the expressions of humility, but there can be no reason why we should
not admit that Confucius was anxious lest these things, which are only
put forth as possibilities, should become in his case actual facts.

* The mauner op Confucius when unoccupied.


154 CONrUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK TII.

V. The Master said, "Extreme is my decay. For a
long time I haTe not dreamed, as I was -wont to do, that
I saw the Duke of Chow."

YI. 1. The Master said, " Let the will be set on the
path of duty.

2 "Let every attainment in what is good be firmly
grasped.

3. " Let perfect virtue be accorded with.

4. " Let relaxation and enjoyment be found in the polite
arts."

YII. ITie Master said, " From the man bringing his
bundle of dried flesh /or my teaching upwards, I have never
refused instruction to any one."

5. How THE DISAPPOINTMENT OF CONFUCIUS' HOPES AFFECTED EVEN
HIS DEEAMS. Chow was the name of the seat of the family from which
the dynasty so called sprang, and on the enlargement of this territory,
King Wan divided the original seat between his sons, Tan and Shih. Tan
was " the duke of Chow," in wisdom and politics what his elder brother,
the first emperor, Woo, was in arms. Confucius had longed to bring the
principles and institutions of Chow-kung into practice, and in his earlier
years, while hope animated him, had often dreamt of the former sage.
The original territory of Chow was what is now the district of K'e^shan,
department of Fung-tseang, in Shen-se.

6. KULBS FOR THE FULL ILATUEING OF CHABACTEK. See a note On

"The polite arts," I. vi. A full enumeration makes "six arts," viz.
ceremonies, music, archery, charioteering, the study of characters or lan-
guage, and figures or arithmetic. The ceremonies were ranged in five
classes : lucky or sacrifices, unlucky or the mourning ceremonies, military,
those of host and guest, and festive. Music required the study of the
music of Hwang-te, of Yaou, of Shun, of Yu, of T'ang, and of Woo.
Archery had a five-fold classification. Charioteering had the same. The
study of the characters required the examination of them, to determine
whether there predominated in their formation resemblance to the object,
combination of ideas, indication of properties, a phonetic principle, a
principle of contrariety, or metaphorical accommodation. Figures were
managed according to nine rules, as the object was the measurement of
land, capacity, &c. These six subjects were the business of the highest
and most liberal education ; but we need not suppose that Confucius had
them all in view here.

7. The ebadiness of Confucius to impart instruction. It was
the rule anciently that when one party waited on another, he should carry
some present or offering with him. Pupils did so when they first waited
on their teacher. Of such ofi'erings, one of the lowest was a bundle of
" dried flesh." The wages of a teacher are now called " the money of the
dried flesh." However small the offering brought to the sage, let hmi
only see the indication of a wish to learn, and he imparted his instruc-
tions.


CH. VTII.] CONFCCIAZil ANALECTS. 155

VIII. The Master said, " I do not open up tlie trutli
to one wlio is not eager to get knowledge, nor help out any
one who is not anxious to explain himself. When I have
presented one corner of a subject to any one, and he can-
not from it learn the other three, I do not repeat my
lesson."

IX. 1. When the Master was eating by the side of a
mourner, he never ate to the fuU.

2. He did not sing on the same day in which he had
been weeping.

X. 1. The Master said to Yen Yuen, " When called
to office, to undertake its duties ; when not so called, to
lie retired ; — it is only I and you who have attained to
this."

2. Tsze-loo said, " If you had the conduct of the armies
. of a great State, whom would you have to act with you ?."

3. The Master said, " I would not have him to act with
me, who will unarmed attack a tiger, or cross a river
without a boat, dying without any regret. My associate
must be the man who proceeds to action full of solicitude,
who is fond of adjusting his plans, and then carries them
into execution."

XI. The Master said, " If the search for riches is sure
to be successful, though I should become a servant
with whip in hand to get them, I will do so. As the
search may not be successful, I will follow after that which
I love."

8. Confucius eequikbd a eeal desiee and ability in his dis-
ciples. The last chapter tells of the sage's readiness to teach, which shows
that he did not teach where his teaching was likely to prove of no avail.

9. Confucius' sympatht with mouenees. The weeping is under-
stood to be on occasion of offering his condolences to a mourner.

10. The attainments of Hwut like those of Confucius. The
excessive boldness of Tsze-loo. The words "unarmed to attack a
tiger ; without a boat to cross a river." are from the She King, Pt II., Bk
V. i. 6. Tsze-loo, it would appear, was jealous of the praise conferred on
Hwuy, and pluming himself on his bravery, put in for a share of the
Master's approbation. But he only brought on himself rebuke.

11. The unceetainty and folly of the pursuit of eiches.
It occurs to a student to understand the first clause — " If it be proper to
search for riches," and the third — '• I will do it." But the translation is
according to the modern commentary, and the conclusion agrees better
with it. In explaining the words about " whip in hand," some refer us
to the attendants who cleared the street with their whips when the prince
went abroad, but we need not seek any particular, allusion of the kind.


156 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [BK VII.

XII. The things in reference to wliich the Master
exercised the greatest caution were — fasting, war, and
sickness.

XIII. When the Master was in Ts'e, he heard the
Shaou, and for three months did not know the taste of
flesh. " I did not think," he said, " that music could
have been made so excellent as this."

XIV. 1. Yen Yew said, "Is our Master for the prince
of Wei ? " Tsze-kung said, " Oh ! I will ask him."

2. He went in accordingly, and said, " What sort of men
were Pih-e and Shuh-ts'e ? " " They were ancient wor-
thies," said the Master. " Did they have any repinings
because of their course ? " The Master again replied,
'■ They sought to act virtuously, and they did so ; what

Ap objection to the pursuit of wealth may be made on the ground of
righteousness (as in chapter xir.) or on that of its uncertainty. It is the
latter on which Confucius here rests.

12. What things Confucius was paeticulaklt caebful about.
Tlie word used here for "fasting" denotes the whole religious adjust-
ment, enjoined before the oifering of sacrifice, and extending over the ten
days previous to the great sacrificial seasons. Properly it means "to
equalize," and the effect of those previous exercises was "to adjust what
was not adjusted, to produce a perfect adjustment." Sacrifices presented
in such a state of mind were sure to be acceptable. Other people, it is
said, might be heedless in reference to sacrifices, to war, and to sfcliness,
but not so the sage.

13. The effect of music on Confucius. The sluiou. — see III. 25.
This incident must have happened in the 36th year of Confucius, when he
followed the Duke Ch'aou in his flight from Loo to Ts'e. As related in
the " Historical Records," before the words " three months," we have " he
learned it," which may relieve us from the necessity of extending the
three months over all the time in which he did not know the taate of his
food. In Ho An's compilation, the " did not know " is explained by " he
was careless about and forgot."

14. Confucius did not approve of a son opposing his father.
1. The eldest son of Duke Ling of Wei had planned to kill his mother
(? stepmother), the notorious Nan-tsze (VI. xxvi.). For this he had to
flee the country, and his son, on the death of Ling, became duke, and
subsequently opposed his father's attempts to wrest the sovereignty from
him. This was the matter argued among the disciples, — Was Confucius
for the son, the reigning duke ? 2. In Wei it would not have been ac-
cording to propriety to speak by name, of its ruler, and therefore Tsze-
kung put the case of Pih-e and Shuh-ts'e, see V. xxii. They having given
up a throne, and finally their lives, rather than do what they thought
wrong, and Confucius fully approving of their conduct, it was plain he
could not approve of a son's holding by force what was the rightful in-
heritance of the father.


CH. XV.] CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 157

was there foi tliem to repine about ? " On this, Tsze-
kung went out and said, " Our Master is not for him."

XV. The Master said, " With coarse rice to eat, with
water to drink, and my bended arm for a pillow ; — I
have still joy in the midst of these things. Eiches and
honours acquired by unrighteousness are to me as a float-
ing cloud.^^

XVI. The Master said, " If some years were added to
my life, I would give fifty to the study of the YiH, and
then I might come to be without great faults."

XVII. The Master's frequent themes of discourse were ^^
— the Odes, the Book of History, and the maintenance of j
the Rules of propriety. On all these he frequently dis- ^
coursed.

XVIII. 1 . The duke of She asked Tsze-loo about Con-
fucius, and Tsze-loo did not answer him.

2. The Master said, " Why did you not say to him, —
He is simply a man, who in his eager pursuit of know-
ledge forgets his food, who in the joy of its attcdnmeni
forgets his sorrows, and who does not perceive that old
age is coming on ? "

XIX. The Master said, " I am not one who was born in

13. The joy of Confucius independent of outward circum-
stances, HOWEVER STRAITENED.

16. The value which Confucius set upon the study of the Yih.
Choo He supposes that this was spoken when Confucius was about seventy,
as he was iu his 68th year when he ceased his wanderings, and settled in
Loo to the adjustment and compilation of the Yih and other Jting. If the
remark be referred to that time, an error may well be found in the number
fifty, for he would hardly be speaking at seventy of having fifty years
added to his life. Choo also mentions the report of a certain individual
that he had seen a copy of the Lun Yu, whichmade the passage read : —
"If I had some more years to finish the study of the Yih," &c. Ho An
interprets the chapter quite differently. Eeferring to the saying, II. iv. 4,
" At fifty, I knew the decrees of heaven," he supposes this to have been
spoken when Confucius was forty-seven, and explains — " In a few years
more I will be fifty, and have finished the Yih, when I may be without
great faults."— ^One thing remains upon both views : — Confucius never
claimed what his followers do for him, to be a perfect man.

17. Confucius' most common topics.

18. Confucius' DESCRIPTION of his character as being simply a
MOST earnest learner. She was a district of Ts'oo, the governor or
prefect of which had usurped the title of duke. Its name is still preserved
in a district of the department of Nan-yung, in the south of Ho-nan.

19. Confucius' knowledge not connate, but the result of his


158 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK VIL

the possession of knowledge ; I am one wlio is fond of

antiquity, and earnest in seeking it there."
r XX. The subjects on which the Master did not talk,
\were, — prodigious things, feats of strength, disorder, and

spiritual beings.

XXI. The Master said, " When I walk along with two
others, they may serve me as my teachers. I will select
their good qualities and follow them, their bad qjialities
and avoid them."

XXII. The Master said, " Heaven produced the virtue
that is in me. Hwan T'uy — what can he do to me ? "

XXIII. The Master said, " Do you think, my disciples,
that I have any concealments ? I. conceal nothing from
you. There is nothing which I do that is not shown to
you, my disciples ; — that is my way."

^^XXIV. There were four things which the Master

vtaught, — letters, ethics, devotion of soul, and truthfalness.

XXV. 1. The Master said, "A sage it is not mine to

STUDY OP ABTTIQUITT. Here again, according to commentators, is a won-
derful insfjanoe of the sage's humility disclaiming what he really had.
The comment of Tun Ho-tsing, subjoined to Ohoo He's own, is to the
effect that the knowledge born with a man is only " righteousness " and
" reason," while ceremonies, music, names of things, history, &o,, must
be learned. This would make what we may call connate or innate know-
ledge the moral sense, and those intuitive principles of reason, on and by
which all knowledge is built up. But Confucius could not mean to deny
his being possessed of these.

20. StTBJECTS AVOIDED BY CONPTJCIUS IN CONVBESATION . By "dis-
order " are meant rebellious disorder, parricide, regicide, and such crimes.
For an instance of Confucius avoiding the subject of spiritual beings,
seeXr. xi.

21. How A MAN MAY FIND INSTEUCTORS FOR HIMSELF.

22. COISFUCIUS CALM IN DANGER, THROUGH THE ASSURANCE OF
HAYING A DIVINE MISSION. According to the historical accounts, Con-
fucius was passing through Sung on his way from Wei to Ch'in, and was
practising ceremonies with his disciples under a large tree, when they were
set upon by emissaries of Hwan T'uy, a high officer of Sung, These
pulled down the tree, and wanted to kill the sage. His disciples urged
him to make haste and escape, when he calmed their fears by these words.
At the same time, he disguised himself till he had got past Sung. This
story may be apocryphal, but the saying remains, — a remarkable one.

23. Confucius practised no concealment with his disciples.
24:. The common subjects of Confucius' teaching. I confess to

apprehend but vaguely the two latter subjects as distinguished from the
second.

25. The paucity of true men in, and the pretentiousness of
Confucius' time. We have in the chapter a climax of character : —


CH. XXn.] CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 15'9

see ; could I see a man of real talent and virtue, that would
satisfy me."

2. The Master said, " A good man it is not mine to see ;
could I see a man possessed of constancy, that would sat-
isfy me.

3. " Having not and yet affecting to have, empty and
yet affecting to be full, straitened and yet affecting to be
at ease : — it is difficult with such characteristics to have
constancy."

XXVI. The Master angled, — but did not use a net. He
shot, — ^but not at birds perching.

XXVII. The Master said, " There may be those who
act without knowing why. I do not do so. Hearing
much and selecting what is good and followiag it, seeing
much and keeping it in memory : — this is the second style
of knowledge."

XXVIII. 1. It was difficult to talk with the people of
Hoo-heang, and a lad of that place having had an inter-
view with the Master, the disciples doubted.

2. The Master said, " I admit people^s approach to me
without committing myself as to what they may do when
they have retired. Why must one be so severe ? If a
man purify himself to wait upon me, I receive him so puri-
fied, without guaranteeing his past conduct."

XXIX. The Master said, " Is virtue a thing remote "'
I wish to be virtuous, and lo ! virtue is at hand."

XXX. 1. The Minister of crime of Ch'in asked whether

the man of constancy, or the single-hearted, steadfast man ; the good
man, who on his single-heartedness has built up his virtue ; the keim-ts: e,
the man of virtue in large proportions, and intellectually able besides ;
and the sage, or highest style of man. Compare Mencius, VII. Ft II. >xv.

26. The humaottt of CoifFUCltJS. Confucius would only destroy
what life was necessary for his use, and in taking that he would not take
advantage of the inferior creatures. This chapter is said to be descriptive
of him in his early life.

27. Against acting heedlessly. Paou Heen, in Ho An, says that
this was spoken with reference to heedless compilers of records ; but this is
unnecessary. The paraphrasts make the latter part descriptive of Con-
fucius — " I hear much," &c. This is not necessary, and the translation
had better be as indefinite as the original.

28. The keadojess of Confitcius to meet approaches to him
though made by the ttwt.tttf.t.y.

29. Virtue is not far to seek . _/

ao. How Confucius acknowledged his error. 1. Ch'in, one of


160 CONFUCIAN AITALECTS. [bK VII.

the Duke Ch^aou knew propriety, and Confucius said,
" He knew propriety."

2. Confucius having retired, the minister bowed to
Woo-ma K'e to come forward, and said, " 1 have heard
that the superior man is not a partisan. May the superior
man be a partisan also ? The prince married a daughter
of the home of Woo, of the same surname with himself,
and called her,—' The elder lady Tsze of Woo.-" If the
prince knew propriety, who does not know it ? "

3. Woo-ma K'e reported these remarks, and the Mas-
ter said, " I am fortunate ! If I have any errors, people
are sure to know them."

XXXI. When the Master was in, company with a per-
son who was singing, if he sang well, he would make
him repeat the song, while he accompanied it with his
own voice.

XXXII. The Master said, " In letters I am perhaps
equal to other men, but the character of the superior man,
carrying out in his conduct what he professes, is what I
have not yet attained to."

XXXIII. The Master said, " The sage and the man of
perfect virtue ; — ^how dare I rank myself with them ? It
may simply be said of me, that I strive to become such
without satiety, and teach others without weariness."
Kung-se Hwa said, " This is just what we, the disciples,
cannot imitate you in."

the States of China in Confucius' time, is to be referred probably to the
present department of Ch'iu-chow in Ho-nan province. Ch'aou was the
honorary epithet of Chow, dulie of Loo, B.C. 541 — 509. He had a reputa-
tion for the linowledge and observance of ceremonies, and Confucius
answered the minister's question accordingly, the more readily that he
was speaking to the officer of another State, and was bound, therefore, to
hide any failings that his own sovereign might have had. 2, With all
his knowledge of proprieties, the Duke Ch'aou had violated an important
rule, — that which forbids the intermarriage of parties of the same sur-
name. The ruling houses of Loo and Woo were branches of the imperial
house of Chow, and consequently had the same surname, Xe. To conceal
his violation of the rule, Ch'aou called his wife by the surname Tsze, as if
slie had belonged to the ducal house of Sung. Woo-ma K'e was one of
the minor disciples of Confucius. 3. Confucius takes the criticism of his
questioner very lightlj'.

31. The good fellowship op Confucius.

32. acknowledombnt of con'fucius in esteuating himself.

33. What Confucius declined to be considered, and what he

CLAIMED,


CH. XXXIV.J CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 161

XXXIV. The Master being very sick, Tsze-loo asked
leave to pray for him. He said, " May such a thing be
done ? " Tsze-loo replied, " It may. In the Prayers it
is said, ' Prayer has been made to you, the spirits of the
upper and lower worlds.' " The Master said, " My pray-
ing has been for a long time."

XXXV. The Master said, " Extravagance leads to in-
subordination, and parsimony to meanness. It is better^
to be mean than to be insubordinate."

XXXVT. The Master said, " The superior man is
satisfied and composed ; the mean man is always full of
distress."

XXXVII. The Master was mild, and yet dignified;
majestic, and yet not fierce ; respectful, and yet easy.


BOOK VIII.


Ohaptee I. The Master said, " T'ae-pih may be said
to have reached the highest point of virtuous action.

34. Confucius declines to be psayed pob. The word here ren-
dered " prayers " means " to write a eulogy, and confer the posthumous
honorary title ;" also " to eulogize in prayer," i.e. to recite one's excellencies
as the ground of supplication. Tsze-loo must have been referring to some
well-known collection of such prayers. Choo He says, " Prayer is the
expression of repentance and promise of amendment, to supplicate the
help of the spirits. If there be not those things, then there is no need for
praying. In the case of the sage, he had committed no errors, and ad-
mitted of no amendment. In all his conduct he had been in harmony
with the spiritual intelligences, and therefore he said, — ' my praying lias
teen for a long time.' " We may demur to some of these expressions, but
the declining to be prayed for, and concluding remark, do indicate the
satisfaction of Confucius with himself. Here, as in other places, we wish
that our information about him were not so stinted and fragmentary.

35. Meanness not so bad as insubordination.

36. Contrast in theik feelings between the Keun-tsze and
the mean man.

37. how vabious elements modified one anothek in the
character of confucius.

Heading and subjects of this book. — "T'ae-pih." As in other
cases, the first words of the book give name to it. The subjects of the
book are miscellaneous, but It begins and ends with the character and
deeds of ancient sages and worthies ; and on this account it follows the
seventh book, where we have Confucius himself described.

1. The exceeding virtue of T'ae-pih. T'ae-pih was the eldest sen
of King T'ae, the grandfather of Wan, the founder of the Chow dynastyi

VOL. I. 11


J 62 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK VIII,

Thrice lie declined tlie empire, and tlie people in ignorar^se
of his motives could not express tlieir approbation of his
conduct."

IT. 1. The Master said, " Eespectfulness, without the
rules of propriety, becomes laborious bustle ; carefulness,
without the rules of propriety, becomes timidity ; bold-
ness, without the rules of propriety, becomes insubordin-
ation; straightforwardness, without the rules of pro-
priety, becomes rudeness.

2. " When those who are in high stations perform well
all their duties to their relations, the people are aroused
to virtue. When old ministers and friends are not neg-
lected by them, the people are preserved from meanness."

III. Tsang the philosopher being sick, he called to
him the disciples of his school, and said, " Uncover my
feet, uncover my hands. It is said in the Book of Poetry,

T'ae had formed the intention of upsetting the Yin dynasty, of which
T'ae-pih disapproved. T'ae, moreover, because of the sage virtues of his
grandson Ch'ang, who afterwards became King Wan, wished to hand
down his principality to his third son, Ch'ang's father. T'ae-pih observ-
ing tiiis, and to escape opposing his father's purpose, retired with his
second brother among the barbarous tribes of the south, and left their
youngest brother in possession of the state. The motives of his conduct
T'ae-pih kept to himself, so that the people " could not find how to praise
him." There is a difSculty in making out the refusal of the empire tJiree
times, there being different accounts of the times and ways in which he
did so. Choo He cuts the knot, by making " thrice " = " firmly," in
which solution we may acquiesce. There is as great difficulty to find out
a declining of the empire in T'ae-pih's withdrawing from the pettystate of
Chow. It may be added that King Woo, tbe first emperor of the Chow
dynasty, subsequently conferred on T'ae-pih the posthumous title of Chief
of Woo, the country to which he had withdrawn, and whose rude in-
habitants gathered round him. His second brother succeeded him in the
government of them, and lience the ruling house of Woo had the same
surname as the imperial house of Chow, that namely of Tsze. See
VII. XXX.

2. The value of the kules of propriety ; ajid of example in
THOSE LN HIGH STATIONS. . I. We must bear in mind that the Ceremonies,
or rules of propriety, spoken of in these books, are not mere convention-
alities, but the ordinations of man's moral and intelligent nature in the
line of what is proper. 2. There does not seem any connection between
the former paragraph and this, and hence this is by many considered to
je a new chapter, and assigned to the philosopher Tsang.

3. The philosopher TsIng's filial piety seen in his care op
HIS PERSON. We get our bodies perfect from our parents, and should so
preserve them to the last. This is a great branch of filial piety with the
Chinese, and this chapter is said to illustrate how TsS,ng-tsze had made this


CH. IV. J CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 163

' We should be apprehensive and cautious, as if on the
brink of a deep gulf, as if treading on thin ice/ and so
have I been. Now and hereafter, I know my esape from
all injury to my person, ye, my little children."

IV. 1. Tsang the philosopher being sick, Mang King
went to ask how he was.

2. Tsiing said to him, " When a bird is about to die,
its notes are mournful ; when a man is about to diie, his
words are good.

3. "There are three principles of conduct which the
man of high rank should consider specially important : —
that in his deportment and manner he keep from violence
and heedlessness; that in regulating his countenance he
keep near to sincerity ; and that in his words and tones
he keep far from lowness and impropriety. As to such
matters as attending to the sacrificial vessels, there are
the proper officers for them."

V. Tsang the philosopher said, " Gifted with ability,
and yet putting questions to those who were not so j pos-
sessed of much, and yet putting questions to those pos-
sessed of little J having, as though he had not ; full, and
yet counting himself as empty ; ofi"ended against, and yet
entering into no altercation : — formerly I had a friend who
pursued this style of conduct.-"

VI. Tsang the philosopher said, " Suppose that there
is an individual who can be entrusted with the charge
of a young orphan prince, and can be commissioned with
authority over a State of a hundred le, and whom no
emergency however great can drive from his principles : —
is such a man a superior man ? He is a superior man
indeed." .

his life-long study. He- made the disciples uncover his hands and feet, to
show them in what preservation those members were. The passage
quoted from the poetry is in Pt 11. Bk V. i. 8.

■ 4. The philosopher TsIng's dying counsels to a man of high
RANK. King was the honorary epithet of Chung-sun Tsee, a great officer
of Loo, and son of Mang-woo, II. vi. From the conclusion of this chapter,
we may suppose that he descended to small matters below his rank.

5. The admieable simplicity and freedom from egotism of a
FRIEND OF THE PHILOSOPHER TsaNG. This friend is supposed to have
been Yen Yuen.

. 6. A COMBINATION OF TALENTS AND VIRTUE CONSTITUTING A KeIJN-
TSZE,

11 *


] 04 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK VIII.

VII. 1. Tsang the philosopher saidj "The scholar
may not be without breadth of mind and vigorous endur-
ance. His burden is heavy and his course is long.

2. " Perfect virtue is the burden which he considers it is
his to sustain ; is it not heavy ? Only with death does
his course stop ; — is it not long ?''

Till. 1. The Master said, "It is by the Odes that
the mind is aroused.

2. " It is by the Eulos of propriety that the character
is established.

3. " It is from Music that the finish is received."
""^•••■IX. The Master said, "The people maybe made tol

Y follow a path of action, but they may not be made to un^/
\ (i erstand it."

X. The Master said, "The man who is fond of daring
and is dissatisfied with poverty, will proceed to insub-
ordination. So will the man who is not virtuous, when
you carry your dislike of him to an extreme."

XI. The Master said, " Though a man have abilities
as admirable as those of the duke of Chow, yet if he be
proud and niggardly, those other things are really not
worth being looked at."

P^XII. The Master said, " It is not easy to find a man
I who has learned for three years withoutcoming tobegood."

7. The iiECEssiTY to the scholar of compass and vigottb of
MIND. The designation " scholar " here might also be translated " officer."
Boholar is the primary meaning ; but in all ages learning has been the
qualiiioation for, and passport to, official employment in China, hence it is
also a general designation for "an officer."

8. The effects op poetry, proprieties, akd music.

0. What may, and what may not, be attained to with the
people. This chapter has a very doubtful merit ; and the sentiment is
much too broadly expressed. Some commentators say, however, that
all which is meant is that a knowledge of the reasons and principles of
what they are called to do need not be required from the people.

10. Different causes of insubordination — a lesson to rulers.

11. The worthlessness of talent without virtue.

12. How quickly learning leads to good. I have translated here
according to the old interpretation of K'ung Gan-kwo. Choo He takes
tlie term for " good " in the sense of " emolument," wMch it also has, and
would change the character for " coming to," into another of the same
sound and tone, meaning " setting the mind on," thus making the whole
a lamentation over the rarity of the disinterested pursuit of learning.
But we are not at liberty to admit alterations of the text, unless, as
received, it be absolutely unintelligible.


CH. XIII.] CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 1(55

XIII. 1. The Master said, "Witli sincere faith he
unites the love of learning; holding firm to death, he is
perfecting the excellence of his course.

2. " Such an one will not enter a tottering state, nor
dwell in a disorganized one. When right principles of (/
government prevail in the empire, he will show himself;
when they are prostrated, he will keep concealed.

3. "When a country is well governed, poverty and a
mean condition are things to be ashamed of. When a
country is ill governed, riches and honour are things to
be ashamed of."

XIV. The Master said, " He who is not in any parti^^,
cular office, has nothing to do with plans for the adminis-J|
tration of its duties."

XV. The Master said, " When the music-master, Che,
first entered on his office, the finish with the Kwan Ts'eu
was magnificent ; — how it filled the ears 1 "

XVI. The Master said, " Ardent and yet not upright ;
stupid and yet not attentive ; simple and yet not sincere :
— such persons I do not understand."

XVII. The Master said, " Learn as if you could not
reach your object, and were always fearing also lest you
should lose it."

XVIII. The Master said, " How majestic was the man-

13. The qualifications of an officer, who will always act
EIGHT IN ACCEPTING AND DECLINING OFFICE. 1. This paragraph is to
be taken as descriptive of character, the effects of whose presence we have
in the next, and of its absence in the last. — The whole chapter seems to
want the warmth of generous principle and feeling. In fact, I doubt
whether its parts bear the relation and connection which they are sup-
posed to have.

li. EvEBY MAN SHOULD MIND HIS OWN BUSINESS. So the sentiment I
of this chapter is generalized by the paraphrasts, and perhaps correctly. !
Its letter, however, has doubtless operated to prevent the spread of rights
notions about political liberty in China.

15. The pkaise op the mosic-masteb Che.

16. a lamentation ovee moeal eekoe added to natural de-
FECT. " I do not understand them," that is, say commentators, natural
defects of endowment are generally associated with certain redeeming
ijualities, as hastiness with straightforwardness, &c. In the parties Con-
fucius had in view, those redeeming qualities were absent. He did not
understand them, and could do nothing for them.

17. With what earnkstness and coNriNuousNEss lbaenino

BHOULD BE PUESUED.

18. The lofty ch.*kactee of Shun and Yu. Shun received the


1G6 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bE VIII.

ner in which Shun and Yu held possession of the empire,
as if it were nothing to them ! "

XIX. 1. The Master said, " Great indeed was Yaou as
a sovereign ! How majestic was he ! It is only Heaven
that is grand, and only Yaou corresponded to it. How vast
was Ms virtue ! The people could find no name for it.

2. " How majestic was he in the works which he accom-
plished ! How glorious in the elegant regulations which
he instituted ! "

XX. 1. Shun had five ministers, and the empire was
well governed.

2. King Woo said, " I have ten able ministers."

3. Confucius said, " Is not tlie sayin-g that talents are
difficult to find, true ? Only when the dynasties of T'^ang
and Yu met, were they more abundant than in this of
Ohow ; yet there was a woman among its able ministers.
There were no more than nine men."

4. '' King Wan possessed two of the three parts of the
empire, and with those he served the dynasty of Yin. The
virtue of the house of Chow may be said to have reached
the highest point indeed."

empire from Yaou, B.C. 2254, and Yu received it from Shun, B.C. 2204.
The throne came to them not by inheritance. They were called to it by
their talents and virtue. And yet the possession of empire did not seem
to affect them at all.

19. The peaise of Yaou. 1. No doubt Yaou, as he appears in
Chinese annals, is a fit object of admiration, but if Confucius had had a
right knowledge of, and reverence for. Heaven, he could not have spoken
as he does here. Grant that it is only the visible heaven overspreading
all, to which he compares Yaou, even that is sulficlently absurd.

20. The scakcity of men of talent, aud praise of the
HOUSE OF Chow. 1. Shun's five ministers were Yu, superintendent of
works, Tseih, superintendent of agriculture. See, minister of instruction,
Haou-yaou, minister of justice, and Pih-yih, warden of woods and marshes.
Those five, as being eminent above all their compeers, are mentioned.
2. See the Shoo-king, V. Bk I. ii. 6. Of the ten ministers, the most
distinguished of course was the duke of Chow. One of them, it is said in
the next paragraph, was a woman, but whether she was the mother of King
Wan, or his wife, is much disputed. S. Instead of the usual " The
Master said," we have here " K'ung the philosopher said." This is ac-
counted for on the ground that the words of king Woo having been quoted
immediately before, it would not have done to crown the sage with his
usual title of " the Ifaster." The style of the whole chapter, however, is
different from that of any previous one, and we may suspect that it 's
Corrupted. " The dynasties of T'ang andYu" were those of Yaou and
Shun. Yaou is called T'ang, having ascended the throne from the mar-


CH. XXI.] CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 167

XXI. The Master said, " I can find no flaw in tlie clia-
racter of Yu. He used himself coarse food and drink, but
displayed the utmost filial piety towards the spirits, ffis
ordinary garments were poor, but he displayed the ut-
most elegance in his sacrificial cap and apron. He lived
in a low mean house, but expended all his strength on the
ditches and water-channels. I can find nothing like a
flaw in Yu."


BOOK IX.

Chapter I. The subjects of which the Master seldom .
spoke were — profitableness, and also the appointments of
Heaven, and perfect virtue.

II. 1 . A man of the village of Tii-heang said, " Great
indeed is the philosopher K'ung 1 His learning is exten-
sive, and yet he does not render his name famous by any
pa/rticular thing."

2. The Master heard the observation, and said to his
disciples, "What shall I practise ? Shall I practise cha-
rioteering, or shall I practise archery ? I will practise
charioteering."

III. 1. The Master said, " The linen cap is that pre™

quisate of that name, and Yu became the accepted surname or style of
Shiin.

21. Thb peaise of Yu.

Heading and subjects of this book. " The Master seldom." The
thirty chapters of this book are much akin to those of the seventh. They
are mostly occupied, with the doctrine, character, and ways of Confucius
himself.

1. Subjects seldom spoken op by Confucius. " Profitableness" is
taken here in a good sense ; — not as selfish gain, but as it is defined under
ihe first of the diagrams in the Yih-king, " the harmoniousness of all that
is righteous ;" that is, how what is right is really what ie truly pro-
fitable. Compare Mencius, I. Pt I. i. Yet even in this sense Confucius
seldom spoke of it, as he would not have the consideration of the pro-
fitable introduced into conduct at all. With his not speaking of "perfect
virtue," there is a difficulty which I know not how to solve. The IVth
book is nearly all occupied with it, and it was a prominent topic in Con-
fucius' teachings.

2. Amusement of Confucius at the remark of an ignorant
MAN ABOUT HIM. Commentators, old and new, say that the chapter
shows the exceeding humility of the sage, educed by his being praised,
but his observation on the man's remark was evidently ironical.

3. Some common practices indifferent asd others not. 1. iha


168 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK IX.

scribed by tlie rules of ceremony, but now a silk one
is worn. It is economical, and I follow the common
practice.

2. " THe rules of ceremony prescribe the bowing
below tlie hall, but now the practice is to bow only after
ascending it. That is arrogant. I continue to bow below
the hall, though I oppose the common practice."

IV. There were four things from which the Master
was entirely free. He had no foregone conclusions, no
arbitrary predeterminationSj no obstinacy, and no egoism.

V. 1. The Master was put in fear in K'wang.

2. He said, " After the death of king "Wan, was not
the cause of truth lodged here in me ?

3. " If Heaven had wished to let this cause of truth
perish, then I, a future mortal, should not have got such
a relation to that cause. While Heaven does not let the
cause of truth perish, what can the people of K'wang do
to me ? "

cap here spoken of was that prescribed to be worn in the ancestral
temple, and made of very fine linen dyed of a deep darli colour. It had
fallen into disuse, and was superseded by a simpler one of silk. Kather
than he singular, Confucius gave in to a practice, which involved no
principle of right, and was economical. 2. " In the ceremonial inter-
course between ministers and their prince, it was proper for them to bow
below the raised hall. This the pi-ince declined, on which they ascended
and completed the homage." The prevailing disregard of the first part
of the ceremony Confucius considered inconsistent with the proper distance
to be observed between prince and minister, and therefore he would be
singular in adhering to the rule.

4. Fbailties from which Confucius was feee.

5. Confucius assured in a time of danger by his conviction op
A divine mission. Compare VII. xxii., but the adventure to which this
chapter refers is placed in the sage's history before the other, and seems
to have occurred in his fifty-seventh year, not long after he had resigned
office, and left Loo. There are different opinions as to what state
K'wang belonged to. The most likely is that it was a border town of
Ch'ing, and its site is now to be found in the department of K'ae-fung in
Ho-nan. The account is that K'wang had suffered from Yang Foo, an
officer of Loo, to whom Confucius bore a resemblance. As he passed by
the place, moreover, u disciple who had been associated with Yang
Foo in his operations against K'wang, was driving him. These cir-
cumstances made the people think that Confucius was tlieir old enemy,
so they attacked him, and kept him prisoner for five days. The accounts
of his escape vary, some of them being evidently fabulous. The disciples
were in fear. The text would indicate that Confucius himself was so but
this is denied. He here identifies himself with the line of the great sases
to whom Heaven has intrusted the instructioii of men. In all the six


CE. Vl.J CONF0CIAN ANALECTS. 169

VI. 1. A. high officer asked Tsze-kung saying, " May
we not say that your Master is a sage ? How various is
his ability ! "

2. Tsze-kung said, " Certainly, Heaven has endowed
him unlimitedly ; — he is about a sage. And, moreover,
his ability is various."

3. The Master heard of the conversation and said,
" Does the high officer know me ? When I was young,
my condition was low, and therefore I acquired my ability
in many things, but they were mean matters. Must the
superior man have such variety of ability ? He does not
need variety of ability .^^

4. Laou said, "'The Master said, ' Having no official
employment, I acquired many arts.' "

VII. The Master said, " Am I indeed possessed of
knowledge ? I am not knowing. But if a mean person,
who appears quite empty-like, ask anything of me, I set
it forth from one end to the other, and exhaust it."

VIII. The Master said, " The pdkg bird does not
come ; the river sends forth no map : — it is all over
with me."

eenturi es between himself and King Wan, he does not admit of such
.another.

6. On the vAKiotrs ability op Confucius : — his sagehood not
THEREIN. The officer had found the sagehood of Confucius in his
various ability. Tsze-kung, positively, and yet with some appearance
of hesitancy, affirms the sagehood, and makes that ability only an additional
circumstance. Confucius explains his possession of various ability, and
repudiates its being essential to the sage, or even to the Tieim-tsze. 4.
Laou was a disciple, by surname K'in, and styled Tsze-k'ae, or Tsze-
ohang. It is supposed that when these conversations were being digested
into their present form, some one remembered that Laou had been in the
habit of mentioning the remark given, and accordingly it was appended
to the chapter.

7. Confucius disclaims the knowledge attkibuted to him,
AND DECLARES HIS EARNESTNESS IN TEACHING. The first sentence here
was probably an exclamation with reference to some remark upon liim-
eelf as having extraordinary knowledge.

8. For want of auspicious omens, Confucius gives up the hope
OF the triumph of his doctrines. Thefung is the male of a fabulous
bird, which has been called the Chinese phoenix, said to appear when a
sage ascends the throne, or when right principles are going to triumph
through the empire. The female is called hmang. In the days of Shun,
they gambolled in his hall, and were heard singing on mount K'e, in the
time of King WSn. The river and the map carry us farther back still, —
to the time of Fuh-he, to whom a mons'sar with the head of a dragon, and


170 CONrUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK IX,

IX. "vVlieii the Master saw a person in a mourning
dress, or any one with the cap and upper and lower gar-
ments of full dress, or a blind person, on observing them
approaching, though they were younger than himself, he
would rise up, and if he had to pass by them, he would do
so hastily.

X. 1. Yen Yuen, in admiration oftlie Master's doctrines,
sighed and said, " I looked up to them, and they seemed
to become more high ; I tried to penetrate them, and they
seemed to become more firm ; I looked at them before me,
and suddenly they seemed to he behind.

2. "The Master, by orderly method, skilfully leads
men on. He enlarged my mind with learning, and taught
me the restraints of propriety.

3. "When I wish to give over the study of his doctrines,
I cannot do so, and having exerted all my ability, there
seems something to stand right up before me ; but though
I wish to follow and lay hold of it, I really find no way to
do so."

XI. 1. The Master being very ill, Tsze-loo wished the
disciples to act as ministers to him.

2. During a remission of his illness, he said, " Long has
the conduct of Yew been deceitful ! By pretending to
have ministers when I have them not, whom should I
impose upon ? Should I impose upon Heaven ?

3. " Moreover, than that I should die in the hands of
ministers, is it not better that I should die in the hands
of you, my disciples ? And though I may not get a groat
burial, shall I die upon the road ? "

XII. Tsze-kung said, " There is a beautiful gem here.
Should I lay it up in a case and keep it ? or should I seek

the body of a horse, rose from the water, being so marked on the back as
to give that first of the sages the idea of his diagrams. Confucius
endorses these fables.

9. Confucius' sympathy with sorrow, respect for rank, and
pity for misfortune.

10. Yen Yuen's admiration of his master's doctrines, and his
OWN progress in them.

11. Confucius' dislike op pretension, and contentment with
his condition. Confucius had been a great officer, and liad enjoyed the
services of ministers, as in a petty court. Tsze-loo would have sur-
rounded him in his great sickness with the illusions of his former state,
and brought on himself this rebuke.

12. How the desire for office should be qualified by self-


CH. Xlil.] CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 1 71

for a good price and sell it ? " The Master said, " Sell it !
Sell it ! But I would wait till tlie price was offered."

XIII. 1. Tte Master was wishing to go and live
among the nine wild tribes of the east.

2. Some one said, "They are rude. How can you do
such a thing ? " The Master said, " If a superior man
dwelt among them, what rudeness would there be ? "

XIV. The Master said, " I returned from Wei to Loo,
and then the music was reformed, and the pieces in the
Correct Odes and Praise Songs found all their proper
place."

XV. The Master said, "Abroad, to serve the high
ministers and officers ; at home, to serve one's father and
elder brother ; in all duties to the dead, not to dare not
to exert one's-self ; and not to be overcome of wine : — ■
what one of these things do I attain to ? "

XVI. The Master standing by a stream, said, " It
passes on just like this, not ceasing day or night ! " —

XVII. The Master said, " I have not seen one who
loves virtue as he loves beauty."

KESPECT. The disciple wanted to elicit from Confucius why he declined
office BO much, and insinuated the subject in this way.

13. How BAEBAEIANS CAN BE CIVILIZED. This chapter is to be
understood, it is said, like V. vi., not as if Confucius really wished to go
among the E (barbarians), but that he thus expressed his regret that his
doctrine did not find acceptance in China.

14. Confucius' services in coeeecting the music of his native
STATE AND ADJUSTING THE BOOK OF PoETEY. Confucius returned from
Wei to Loo in his sixty-ninth year, and died five years after. The
" Correct Odes " and " Praise Songs " are the names of two, or rather
three, of the divisions of the She-king, the former being the "ele-
gant" or "correct" odes, to be used with music mostly at imperial
festivals, and the latter, celebrating principally the virtues of the
founders of different dynasties, to be used in the services of the ancestral
temple.

15. Confucius' veet humble estimate of himself. Compare VII.
ii. ; but the things which Confucius here disclaims are of a still lower
character than those there mentioned. Very remarkable is the last, as
from the sage.

16. How Confucius was affected by a running steeam. What
does the it in the translation refer to ? The construction of the sentence
indicates something in the sage's mind, suggested by the ceaseless move-
ment of the water. Choc He makes it "our course of nature." Others
say "events," "the things of time." Probably Choo He is correct.
Compare Mencius, TV. Pt II. xviii.

17. The EAEiTY OP A sincere love of virtue.


1 72 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK IX.

XVIII. The Master said, " The prosecution of learning
may be compared to what may happen in raising a mound.
If there want but one basket of earth to complete the work,
and I stop, the stopping is my own work. It may be com-
pared to throwing down the earth on the level ground.
Though hut one basketful is thrown at a time, the advanc-
ing with it is my own going forward."

XIX. The Master said, " Never flagging when I set
forth anything to him ; — ah ! that is Hwuy."

XX. The Master said of Yen Yuen, " Alas ! I saw his
constant advance. I never saw him stop in his progress."

XXI. The Master said, " There are cases in which the
blade springs, but the plant does not go on to flower !
There are cases where it flowers, but no fruit is subse-
quently produced ! "

XXII. The Master said, "A youth is to be regarded ,
with respect. How do we know that his future will not
be equal to our present ? If he reach the age of forty or
fifty, and has not made himself heard of, then indeed he
will not be worth being regarded with respect."

XXIII. The Master said, " Can men refuse to assent
to the words of strict admonition ? But it is reforming
the conduct because of them which is valuable. Can men


18. That leabnebs should not cease noe inteemit theib
LABOtnas. This is a fragment, like many other chapters, of some conversa-
tion, and the subject thus illustrated must be supplied, after the modern
commentators, as in the translation ; or, after the old, by " the following of
virtue." See the Shoo-king, Pt V. Bk V. ix., where the subject is vir-
tuous consistency. The lesson of the chapter is — that repeated acquisi-
tions individually small will ultimately amount to much, and that the
learner is never to give over.

19. hwdt the eabnest student.

20. Confucius' pond ebcollection op Hwuy as a model

STUDENT.

21. It is the END WHICH CEOWNS THE WOBK.

22. How AND WHY A YOUTH SHOULD BE BEGAEDED WITH RESPECT.
The same person is spoken of throughout the chapter. With Confucias'
remark compare that of John Treboniu's, Luther's schoolmaster at
Eisenach, who used to raise his cap to his pupils on entering the school-
room, and gave as the reason — " There are among these boys men of whom
God will one day make burgomasters, chancellors, doctors, and magis-
trates. Although you do not yet see them with the badges of their dignity,
it is right that you should treat them with respect."

23. I'HB HOPELESSNESS OP THE CASE OP THOSE WHO ASSENT AND
APPKOVE WITHOUT EEPOEMATION OE SEBIOUS THOUGHT.


en. XXIV.] CONFtrCIiN ANALECTS. 173

refuse to be pleased with words of gentle advice ? But
it is unfolding their aim which is valuable. If a maa be
pleased with these words, but does not unfold their aim,
and assents to those, but does not reform his conduct, I
can really do nothing with him."

XXIV. The Master said, " Hold faithfulness and sin-
cerity as first principles. Have no friends not equal to
yourself. When you have faults, do not fear to abandon
them." «-

XXV. The Master said, " The commander of the forces
of a large State may be carried off, but the will of even a
common man cannot be taken from him."

XXVI. 1 . The Master said, " Dressed himself in a tat-
tered robe quilted with hemp, yet standing by the side of
men dressed in furs, and not ashamed; — ah ! it is Yew
who> is equal to this.

2. "'He dislikes none, he covets nothing ! — what does
he do which is not good ? ' "

3. Tsze-loo kept continually repeating these words of
Ihe ode, when the Master said, " Those ways are by no
means sufficient to constitute perfect excellence."

XXVII. The Master said, " When the year becomes
cold, then we know how the pine and the cypress are the
last to lose their loaves."

XXVIII. The Master said, "The wise are free from
perplexities; the virtuous from anxiety; and the bold
from fear."

XXIX. The Master said, " There are some with whom
we may study in common, but we shall find them unable
to go along with us to principles. Perhaps we may go on
with them to principles, but we shall find them unable to

24. This is a repetition of part of I. viii.

25. The will uitsubduable.

26. tsze-loo's bkavb contentment in poveety, but failubb to
SEEK THE HIGHEST AIMS. 2. See the She-king, Pt I. Bk III. viii. 4.
Taze-loo was a man of impulse, with many fine points, but not sufficiently
reflective.

27. Men ahb known in times of adveksity. " The last to lose
tlieir leaves," may be regarded as a meiosis for their being evergreens.

28. Sequences of wisdom, vietue, and beaveey.

29. how diffeebnt individuals stop at dipfeeent stages op
PEOQEESS. More literally rendered, this chapter would be — " It may be
possible with some parties together to study, but it may not yet be pos-
sible with them to go ou to principles," &c.


174 CONFUCIAH ANALECTS. [bK X.

get establisted in those along witt us. Or if we may get
so established along with them, we shall find them unable
to weigh occurring events along with ns."

XXX. 1. How the flowers ofthe aspen-plum flutter and
turn ! Do I not think of you ? But your house is
distant.

2. The Master said, " It is the want of thought about
it. How is it distant ? "


BOOK X.


Chapter I. 1. Confucius, in his village, looked simple
and sincere, and as if he were one who was not able to
speak.

2. When he was in the prince's ancestorial temple, or
in the court, he spoke minutely on every point, but cau-
tiously.

II. 1. When he was waiting at court, in speaking with
the of&cers of the lower grade, he spake freely, but in a

30. The necessity op reflection. 1. This is from one of the
pieces of poetry which were not admitted into the She-king, and no
more of it being preserved than what we have here, it is not altogether
intelligible. 2. With this paragraph Choo He compares VII. 30. — The
whole chapter is like the 20th of the last book, and suggests the thought
of its being an addition by another hand to the original compilation.

Heading aud subjects op this book. " The village." This book
is different in its character from all the others In the work. It contains
hardly any sayings of Confucius, but is descriptive of his ways and de-
meanour in a variety of places and circumstances. It is not uninteresting,
but, as a whole, it does not heighten our veneration for the sage. We
seem to know him better from it, and to Western minds, after being
viewed in his bed-chamber, his undress, and at his meals, he becomes
divested of a good deal of his dignity and reputation. There is some-
thing remarkable about the style. Only in one passage is Confucius
styled " T/ie Master." He appears either as " K'ung the philosopher,"
or as "The superior man." A suspicion Is thus raised that the chronicler
had not the same relation to him as the compilers of the other books.
Anciently, the book formed only one chapter, but it is now arranged
under seventeen divisions. Those divisions, for convenience in the
translation, I continue to denominate chapters, which is done also in
some native editions.

1. Demeanoub op Confucius in his village, in the ancesteal

TEMPLE, and in THE COUKT.

2. Demeanoub of conpucius at court with other officers, and
BEFORE THE PRINCE. It was the custom for all the officers to repair aj


CH. III.] CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 175

straiglitforward manner ; in speaking with the officers of
the higher grade, he did so blandly, but precisely.

2. When the prince was present, his manner displayed
respectful uneasiness ; it was grave, but self-possessed.

III. I. When the prince called him to employ him in
tlie reception of a visitor, his countenance appeared to
change, and his legs to bend beneath him.

2. He inclined himself to the other officers among whom
he stood, moving his left or right arm, as their position re-
quired, but keeping the skirts of his robe before and be-
hind evenly adjusted.

3. He hastened forward, with his arms like the wings of
a bird.

4. When the guest had retired, he would report to the
prince, " The vi'sitor is not turning round any more."

daybreak to the court, and wait for the prince to give them audience.
" Great officer " was a general name, applicable to all the higher ministers
in a court. At the imperial court they were divided into three classes, —
"highest," "middle," and "lowest," but the various princes had only the
first and third. Of the first order there were properly three, the
Jt'iiig or nobles of the state, who were in Loo the chiefs of the " three
families." Confucius belonged himself to the lower grade.

3. Dembauour op Confucius at the official ebception op a
VISITOE. 1. The visitor is supposed to be the prince of another state.
On the occasion of two princes meeting there was much ceremony. The
visitor having arrived, remained outside the front gate, and the ho: t
inside his reception-room, which was in the ancestral temple. Messages
passed between them by means of a number of officers called keai, on the
side of the visitor, and pin, on the side of the host, who formed a zigzag
line of communication from the one to the other, and passed their question
and answers along, till an understanding about the visit was thus officially
effected. 2. This shows Confucius' manner when engaged in the trans-
mission of the messages between the prince and his visitor. He must
have occupied an intermediate place in the row of his prince's ^t«, bowing
to them on the right or the left, as he transmitted the messages to and
from the prince. 3. The host having come out to receive his visitor,
proceeded in with him, it is said, followed by all their internuncios in a
line, and to his manner in this movement this paragraph is generally
referred. But the duty of seeing the guest off, the subject of the next
paragraph, belonged to the pin who had been nearest to the prince, and
was of higher rank than Confucius sustained. Hence arises a difficulty.
Either it is true that Confucius was at one time raised to the rank of the
highest dignitaries of the state, or he was temporarily employed, for his
knowledge of ceremonies, after the first act in the reception of visitors, to
discharge the duties of one. Assuming this, the " hastening forward " is
to be explained of some of his movements in the reception-room. How
could ne hurry forward when walking in file with the other intern'jucioo I


176 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK X".

IV. ] . When he entered the palace gate, he seemed to
bend his body, as if it were not sufficient to admit him.

2. When he was standing, he did not occupy the middle
of the gate-way; when he passed in or out, he did not
tread upon the threshold.

3. When he was passing the vacant place of the prince,
his countenance appeared to change, and his legs to bend
under him, and his words came like those of one who
hardly had breath to utter them.

4. He ascended the dais, holding up his robe with both
his hands, and his body bent ; holding in his breath also,
as if he dared not breathe.

5. When he came out /, om the audience, as soon as he
had descended one step, he began to relax his countenance,
and had a satisfied look. When he had got to the bottom
of the steps, he advanced rapidly to his place, with his
arms like wings, and on occupying it, his manner still
showed respectful uneasiness.

V. 1 . When he was carrying the sceptre of his prince,
he seemed to bend his body, as if he were not able to
bear its weight. He did not hold it higher than the posi-
tion of the hands in making a bow, nor lower than their

The ways of China, it appears, were much the same anciently as now. A
guest turns round and bows repeatedly in leaving, and the host can't
return to his place till these salutations are ended.

4. DEMEAUOTJR OF CONPUCItJS IN THE COURT AT AN AUDIENCE. 1.

The imperial court consisted of five divisions, each having Its peculiar
gate. That of a prince of a State consisted only of three, whose gates
were named foo, die, and loo. The " gate " in the text is any one of these.
The bending his body when passing through, high as the gate was, is
supposed to indicate the great reverence which Confucius felt. 2. Each
gate had a post in the centre, by which it was divided into two halves,
appropriated to ingress and egress. The prince only could stand in the
centre of either of them, and he only could tread on the threshold or sill.
3. At the early formal audience at daybreak, when the prince came out
of the inner apartment, and received the homage of the officers, he occu-
pied a particular spot. This is the " place," now empty, which Confucius
passes in his way to the audience in the inner apartment. 4. He is now
ascending the steps to the " dais " or raised platform in the inner apart-
ment, where the prince held his council, or gave entertainments, and from
which the family rooms of the palace branched off. 5. The audience is
now over, and Confucius is returning to his usual place at the formal
audience.

5. Demeanour op Confucius when employed on a friendly
E.V1BASSY. 1. " Sceptre" here is In the sense simply of " a badge ot


CH. Tl.] CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 177

position in giving anything to another. His countenance
seemed to change, and look apprehensive, and he dragged
his feet along as if they were held by something to the
ground.

2. In presenting the presents with which he was chwrged,
he wore a placid appearance.

3. At his private audience, he looked highly pleased.
VI. 1. The superior man did not use a deep purple,

or a puce colour, in the ornaments of his dress.

2. Even in his undress, he did not wear anything of a
red or reddish colour.

3. In warm weather, he had a single garment either of
coarse or fine texture, but he wore it displayed over an
inner garment.

4. Over lamb's fur he wore a garment of black ; over
fawn's fur one of white ; and over fox's fur one of yellow.

5. The fur robe of his undress was long, with the right
sleeve short.

authority." It was a precious stone, conferred by the emperor on the
princes, and differed in size and shape, according to their V3.uk. They
took it with them when they attended the imperial court, and, according
to Choc He, and the old interpretation, it was carried also by their re-
presentatives, as their voucher, on occasions of embassies among them-
selves. 2. The preceding paragraph describes Confucius' manner in the
friendly court, at his first interview, showing his credentials, and deliver-
ing his message. That done, he had to deliver the various presents with
which he was charged. After all the public presents were delivered, the
ambassador had others of his own to give, and his interview for that
purpose is here spoken of. — Choo He remarks that there is no record of
Confucius ever having been employed on such a mission, and supposes
that this chapter and the preceding are simply summaries of the manner
in which he used to say duties referred to in them ought to be discharged.

6. EuLES OF Confucius in rbgaed to his dress. 1. The title of
" Superior Man," used here to denote Confucius, can hardly have come
from the hand of a disciple. " The ornaments," i.e. the collar and sleeves.
The first colour, it is said, by Choo He, after K'ung Gan-kwo, was worn
in fasting, and the other in mourning, on which account Confucius would
not use them. 2. There are five colours which go by the name of
"correct," viz., "azure, yellow, carnation, white, and black ;" others,
among which are red, and red-drop, go by the name " intermediate."
Confucius would use only the correct colours ; and moreover, Choo He
adds, red and reddish-blue are liked by women and girls. 3. This
Single garment was made from the fibres of a creeping plant, the
dolichoi. See the She-king, Pt I. Bk I. ii. 4. The lamb's fur belonged to
the court dress, the fawn's was worn on embassies,, the fox's on occasions
of sacrifice, &c. The fur and the tliin garment over it were of the same
colour. This was winter wear. 5. Confucius knew how to blend comfort

TOL. I. 12


178 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK X.

6. He required his sleeping dress to be half as long
again as his body.

7. When staying at homOj he used thick furs of the fox
or the badger.

8. When he put oS" mourning, he wore all the append-
ages of the girdle.

9. His under garment, except when it was required to
be of the curtain shape, was made of silk cut narrow
above and wide below.

10. He did not wear lamb's fur, or a black cap, on a
visit of condolence.

11. On the first day of the monjih, he put on his court
robes, and presented himself at court.

VII. 1. When fasting, he thought it necessary to have
his clothes brightly clean, and made of linen cloth.

2. When fasting, he thought it necessary to change his
food, and also to change the place where he commonly
sat in the apartment.

VIII. 1. He did not dislike to have his rice finely
cleaned, nor to have his minced meat cut quite small.

2. He did not eat rice which had been injured by heat
or damp and turned sour, nor fish or flesh which was gone.
He did not eat what was discoloured ; nor what was of a
bad flavour ; nor anything which was badly cooked j nor
that which was not in season.

and convenience. 6. This paragraph, it is supposed, belongs to the next
chapter,. in which case it is not the usual sleeping garment of Confucius
that is spoken of, but the one he used in fasting. 7. These are the furs
of paragraph 5. 8. The appendages of the girdle were — the handlierohief,
a small knife, a spike for opening knots, &e. Being ornamental, they
were laid aside in mourning. 9. The lower garment reached below the
knees like a kilt or petticoat. For court and sacrificial dress, it was
made curtain-like, as wide at top as at bottom. In that worn on other
occasions, Confucius saved the cloth in the way described. So, at least,
says K'ung Gan-kwo. 10. Lamb's fur was worn black (paragraph 4),
but white is the colour of mourning in China, and Confucius would not
visit mourners but in a sympathizing colour. 11. This was Confucius'
practice, after he had ceased to be in office.

7. Rules observed by Confucius when fasting. 1. The sixth
paragraph of last chapter should come in as the second here. 2. The
fasting was not from all food, but only from wine or spirits, and from
strong-flavoured vegetables.

8. Rules of Confucius about his pood. 1. The " minced meat,"
according to the commentators, was made of beef, mutton, or fish, unooohed.
One hundred shing of paddy were reduced to thirty, to bring it to the state


CH. IX.] CONFUCIAN ANALECTS: 179

3. He did not eat meat whicli was not cut properly, nor
what was served without its proper sauce.

4. Though there might be a large quantity of meat, he
would not allow what he took to exceed the due proportion
for the rice. It was only in wine that he laid down no
limit for himself, but he did not allow himself to be con-
fused by it.

5. He did not partake of wine and dried meat bought
in the market.

6. He was never without ginger when he ate.

7. He did not eat much.

8. When he had been assisting at the ducal sacrifice, he
did not keep the flesh wJiich he received over night. The
flesh of his family sacrifice he did not keep over three
days. If kept over three days, people could not eat it.

9. When eating, he did not converse. When in bed,
he did not speak.

10. Although his food might be coarse rice and veget-
able soup, he would ofier a little of it in sacrifice with a
grave respectful air.

IX. If his mat was not straight, he did not sit on it.

X. 1. When the villagers were drinking together, on
those who carried staves going out, he went out imme-
diately after.

2. When the villagers were going through their cere-

of finely-cleaned rice. 4. It is said, that in other things he had a limit, hut
the use of wine being to make glad, he could not beforehand set a limit
to the quantity of it. 8. The prince, anciently (and it is still a custom),
distributed among the assisting ministers the flesh of his sacrifices. Each
would only get a little, and so it could be used at once. 10. The " sacri-
ficing " refers to a custom something like our saying grace. The Master
took a few grains of rice, or part of the other provisions, and placed them
on the ground, among the sacrificial vessels, a tribute to the worthy or
worthies who first taught the art of cooking. The Buddhist priests in
their monasteries have a custom of this kind ; and on public occasions, as
when K'e-ying gave an entertainment in Hongkong in 1845, something
like it is sometimes observed, but any such ceremony is unknown among
the common habits of the people. However poor might be his fare, Con-
fucius always observed it.

9. EUI^B or OONFUCIUS ABOUT HIS MAT.

10. Other ways of Confucius in his village. 1. At sixty, people
carried staves. Confucius here showed his respect for age. He would
not go out before the " fathers." 2. There were three of these
ceremonies every year, but that in the text was called " the great
no," being observed in the winter season, when the ofScers led all the

12*


180 CONPUCIAN ANALECTS. [BK X.

monies to drive away pestilential influences, he put on his
court robes and stood on the eastern steps.

XI. 1. When he was sending complimentary inquiries
to any one in another state, he bowed twice as he escorted
the messenger away.

2. Ke K'ang having sent him a present of physic, he
bowed and received it, saying, " I do not know it. I dare
not taste it."

XII. The stable being burned down, when he was at
court, on his return he said, " Has any man been hurt ? "
He did not ask about the horses.

XIII. 1. When the prince sent him a gift of coofe(^ meat,
he would adjust his mat, first taste it, and then give it away
to others. When the prince sent him a gift of undressed
meat, he would have it cooked, and offer it to the spirits
of his ancestors. When the prince sent him a gift of a
living animal, ho would keep it alive.

2. WTien he was in attendance on the prince and join-
ing in the entertainment, the prince only sacrificed j but
he first tasted everything.

3. When he was sick and the prince came to visit him,
he had his head to the east, made his court robes be spread
over him, and drew his girdle across them.

people of a village about, searching every house to expel demonsr and
drive away pestilence. It was conducted with great uproar, and little
better than a play, but Confucius saw a good old idea in it, and when
the mob was in his house, he stood on the eastern steps (the place of a
host receiving guests) in full dress. Some make the steps those of his
ancestral temple, and his standing there to be to assure the spirits of
his shrine.

11. Traits OF Confucius' INTEKCODESE with others. 1. The two
bows, it is said, were not to the messenger, but intended for the distant
friend to whom he was being sent. 2. K'ang was Ke K'ang-tszo
of II. XX. et al. Confucius accepted the gift, but thought it necessary
to let the donor know he could not, for the present at least, avail himself
of it.

12. How Confucius VALUED human life. A " stable " was fitted
to accommodate 216 horses. The term may be used indeed for a private
stable, but it is more natural to take it here for the State Iteiv. This is
t!ie view in the Family Sayings.

13. DEMBANOUfe OF CONFUCITJS IN RELATION TO HIS PEINCB. 1.
lie would not offer the cooked mer.t to the spirits of his ancestors, not
knowing but it might previously have been offered by the prince to the
spirits of his. But he reverently tasted it, as if he had been in the prince's
presence. He "honoured" the gift of cooked food, "glorified" the


CH. XIV.j CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 181

- 4. When the prince's order called liim, without waiting
for his carriage to be yoked, he went at once.

XrV. When he entered the ancestral temple of the
state, he asked about everything.

XV. 1 . When any of his friends died, if he had no re-
lations who could be depended on for the necessary offices,
he would say, " I will bury him."

2. When a friend sent him a present, though it might
be a carriage and horses, he did not bow. The only
present for which he bowed was that of the .flesh of sacri-
fice.

XVI. 1. In bed, he did noli lie like a corpse. At home,
he did not put on any formal deportment.

2. When he saw any one in a mourning dress, though
it might be an acquaintance, he would change counten-
ance ; when he saw any one wearing the cap of full dress,
or a blind person, though he might be in his undress, he
would salute them in a ceremonious manner.

3. To any person in mourning he bowed forward to the
crossbar of his carriage ; he bowed in the same way to
any one bearing the tables of population.

4. When he was at an entertainment where there was

undressed, and " was kind" to the living animal. 2. The sacrifice here
is that in chapter viii. 10. Among parties of equal rank all performed
the ceremony, but Confucius, with his prince, held that the prince sacri-
ficed for all. He tasted everything, as if he had been a cook, it being
the cook's duty to taste every dish before the prince partook of it. 3. The
head to the east was the proper position for a person in bed ; a, sick man
might for comfort be lying differently, but Confucius would not see the
prince but in the correct position, and also in the court dress, so far as he
could accomplish it. 4. He would not wait a moment, but let his car-
riage follow him.

14. A repetition of part of III. xv. Compare also chapter ii. These
two passages make the explanation, given at III. xv., of the questioning
being on his first entrance on office very doubtful.

15. Tbaits op Confucius in the eelation of a PBreND. 2. Be-
tween friends there should be a community of goods. " The flesh of
sacrifice," however, was that which had been offered by his friend to the
spirits of his parents or ancestors. That demanded acknowledgment.

16. Confucius in bed, at home, hearing thundbe, &c. 2. Com-
pare IX. ix., which is here repeated, with heightening circumstances.
3. The carriage of Confucius's time was hardly more than what we call a
cart. In saluting when riding, parties bowed forward to the front bar.
i. He showed these signs, with reference to the generosity of the pro-
vider.


182 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK XI.

an abundance of provisions set before bim, be would cbange
countenance and rise up.

5. On a sudden clap of tbunder, or a violent windj be
would cbange countenance.

XVII. 1 . Wben be was about to mount bis carriage, be
would stand straigbt, bolding tbe cord.

2. Wben be was in tbe carriage, be did not turn bis
bead quite round, be did not talk bastily, be did not point
witb bis bands.

XVIII. I. Seeing tbe countenance, it instantly rises.
It flies round, and by-and-by settles.

2. The Master said, " Tbere is tbe ben-pbeasant on tbe
bill bridge. At its season ! At its season ! " Tsze-loo
made a motion to it. Tbriceit smelt bim and tben rose.


-y-


BOOK XL


Chaptee I. 1. Tbe Master said, "Tbe men of former
times, in tbe matters of ceremonies and music, were rus-
tics, it is said, wbile tbe men of these latter times, in
ceremonies and music, are accomplisbed gentlemen.

2. "If I bave occasion to use tbese tbings, I follow tbe
men of former times."

II. 1. Tbe Master said, " Of tbose wbo were witb me

17. Confucius at and in his carriage. 1. The strap or cord was
attached to the carriage to assist in mounting It.

18. A fragment, which seemingly has no connection with the rest of
the booli. Various corrections of characters are proposed, and various
views of the meaning given. Ho An's view of the conclusion is this.
" Tsze-loo took it and served it up. The Master thrice smelt it and
rose."

Heading and subjects of this Book.—" The former men— No.
XI." With this Book there commences the second part of the Analects,
commonly called the J9"ea Zun. There is, however, no classical authority
for this division. It contains twenty-five chapters, treating mostly of
various disciples of the Master, and deciding the point of their worthiness.
Min Tsze-K'een appears in it four times, and on this account some attribute
the compilation of it to his disciples. There are indications in the style of
a peculiar hand.

1. Confucius' reference op tue simpler ways of former
times.

2. Confucius' regretful memory of his disciples' fidelity.
Characteristics OF ten of the disciples. 1. This utterance must
have been made towards the close of Confucius' life, when many of hia


CH. III.J CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 183

in Cli'ia and Ts'ae, there are none to be found to enter
my door."

2. Distinguished for their virtuous principles and
practice, there were Yen Yuen, Min Tsze-k'een, Yen Pih-
new, and Chung-kung ; for their ability in speech, Tsae
Wo and Tsze-kung ; for their administrative talents, Yen
Yew and Ke Loo ; for their literary acquirements, Tsze-
yew and Tsze-hea.

III. The Master said, " Hwuy gives me no assistance.
There is nothing that I say in which he does not delight."

IV. The Master said, "Filial indeed is Min Tsze-
k'een ! Other people say nothing of him different from
the report of his parents a.nd brothers."

V. Nan Yung was frequently repeating the lines about
a white sceptre-stone. Confucius gave him the daughter
of his elder brother to wife.

VI. Ke K'ang asked which of the disciples loved to
learn. Confucius replied to him, " There was Yen Hwuy ;
he loved to learn. Unfortunately his appointed time was
short, and he died. Now there is no one who loves to learn,
as lie did:"

disciples had been removed by death, oi- separated from him by other
causes. In his sixty-second year or thereabouts, as the accounts go, he
was passing, in his wanderings from Ch'in to Ts'ae, when the officers of
Ch'in, afraid that he would go on into Tsoo, endeavoured to stop his
course, and for several days he and the disciples with him were cut off
from food. Both Ch'iij and Ts'ae were in the present province of Ho-nan,
and are referred to the departments of Gh'in-Chow and Joo-ning. 2. This
paragraph is to be taken as a note by the compilers of the book, enumer-
ating the principal followers of Confucius on the occasion referred to, with
their distinguishing qualities. They are arranged in four classes, and,
amounting to ten, are known as the ten wise ones. The " four classes " and
" ten wise ones " are often mentioned in connection with the sage's school.

3. HWUV'S SILENT RECEPTION OF THE MASTBE'S TEACHINGS. A

teacher is sometimes Iwlped by the doubts and questions of learners, which
lead him to explain himself more fully. Compare III. viii. 3.

4. The filial piety of Min Tsze-k'een.

5. Confucius' appeobation of Nan Tuno. Nan Yung, see V. i.
For the lines, see the She-king, Pt III. Bk III. ii. 5. They are — "A
flaw in a, white sceptre-stone may be ground away ; but for a flaw in
speech, nothing can be done." In his repeating of these lines, we have,
perhaps, the ground-virtue of the character for which Tung is commended
iu V. i.

6. How Hwuy loved to leaen. See VI. ii., where the same question
is put by the Duke Gae, and the same answer is returned, only in a more
extended form.


184 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [BK XI.

VII. 1. When Yen Yuen died. Yen Loo begged the
carriage of the Master to get an outer shell for his son's
coffin.

2. The Master said, "Every one calls his son his son,
whether he has talents or has not talents. There was
Le ; when he died, he had a coffin, but no outer shell. I
would not walk on foot to get a shell for him, because,
following after the great officers, it was not proper that
I should walk on foot."

VIII. When Yen Yuen died, the Master said, "Alas 1
Heaven is destroying me ! Heaven is destroying me ! "

IX. 1. When Yen Yuen died, the Master bewailed
him exceedingly, and the disciples who were with him
said, " Sir, your grief is excessive ? "

2. " Is it excessive ? " said he.

3. " If I am not to mourn bitterly for this man, for
whom should I mourn ? "

X. 1. When Yen Yuen died, the disciples wished to
give him a great funeral, and the Master said, " You may
not do so."

2. The disciples did bury him in great style.

3. The Master said, "Hwuy behaved towards me as
his father. I have not been able to treat him as my

7. How COKPTJCIUS WOULD NOT SELL HIS CAKRIAGE TO BUT A SHELL

FOR Ten Yuen. 1. In the Family Sayings and in the History of Records,
Hvvuy's death is represented as taking place before the death of Le. It is
difficult to understand how such a view could ever have been adopted, if
the authors were acquainted with this chapter. 2. " I follow in rear of
the great officers." This is said to be an expression of humility. Confu-
cius, retired from ofSce, might still present himself at court, in the robes
of his former dignity, and would still be consulted on emergencies. He
would no doubt have a foremost place on such occasions.

8. CONPUCIUS EBLT HWUY'S DEATH AS IF IT HAD BEEN HIS OWN.
The old interpreters make this simply the exclamation of bitter sorrow.
The modem, perhaps correctly, make the chief ingredient to be grief that
the man was gone to whom he looked most for the transmission of his
doctrines.

9. Confucius vindicates his great grief foe the death of
Hwuy.

10. Confucius' dissatisfaction with the grand way in which
Hwuy was buried. The old interpreters take the disciples here as
being the disciples of Ten Yuen. This is not natural, and yet we can
hardly understand how the disciples of Confucius would act so directly
contrary to his express wishes. Confucius objected to a grand funeral as
inconsistent with the poverty of the family (see chapter viL).


CH. XI.] CONFUCIAN AHALECTS. ] 85

son. The fault is not mine ; it belongs to you, disci-
ples."

XI. Ke Loo asked about serving the spirits of the\,
dead. The Master said, " While you are not able to serve "■
men, how can you serve their spirits ? " Ee Loo added, " I
venture to ask about death ? " He was answered, " While /
you do not know life, how can you know about death ? " ''^

XTI. 1. The disciple Min was standing by his side,
looking bland and precise; Tsze-loo, looking bold and sol-
dierly; Yen Yew and Tsze-kung, with a free and straight-
forward manner. The Master was pleased.

2. He said, "Yew there ! — he will not die a natural
death."

XIII. 1. Some parties in Loo were going to take
down and rebuild tho Long treasury.

2. Min Tsze-k'een said, " Suppose it were to be re-
paired after its old style ; — ^why must it be altered, and
made anew ? "

3. The Master said, " This man seldom speaks ; when
he does, he is sure to hit the point."

XIV. 1. The Master said, " What has the harpsichord
of Yew to do in my door ? "

2. The other disciples began not to respect Tsze-loo.
The Master said, " Yew has ascended to the hall, though
he has not yet passed into the inner apartments."

n. Confucius avoids answeking questions about sebvino
SPIEITS, and about DEATH. Two vlewB Of the replies here are found in
commentators. The older ones say — " Confucius put off Ke Loo, and gave
him no answer, because spirits and death are obscure, and unprofitable
subjects to talk about." With this some modern -writers agree, but others,
and the majority, say — " Confucius answered the disciple profoundly, and
showed him how he should prosecute his inquiries in the proper order.
The service of the dead must be in the same spirit as the service of the
living. Obedience and sacrifice are equally the expression of the filial
heart. Death is only the natural termination of life. We are born with
certain gifts and principles, which carry us on to the end of our course."
This is ingenious refining ; but, after all, Confucius avoids answering the
impoi-tant questions proposed to him.

12. Confucius happt with his disciples about him. He wakns
Tsze-loo.

13. Wise advice op Min Sun against useless expenditure.

14. Confucius' admonition AND DEFENCE op Tsze-loo. 1. The form
of the harpsichord seems to come nearer to that of the shi7i than any other
of our instruments. The shih is a kindred instrument with the k'in,
commonly called " the scholar's lute." See the Chinese Kepository, vol.


186 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK II.

/ XV. 1. Tsze-kung asked which of the two, Sze or
'■' Shang, was the superior. The Master said, " Sze goes

beyond the due Mean, and Shang does not come up to it."
2. " Then/' said Tsze-kung, " the superiority is with

Sze, I suppose."
1 3. The Master said, " To go bijyond is as wrong as to
Vail short."

XVI. I. The head of the Ke family was richer than
the duke of Chow had been, and yet K'^ew collected his
imposts for him, and increased his wealth.

2. The Master said, " He is no disciple of mine. My
little children, beat the drum and assail him."

XVII. 1. Ch'aeis simple.

2. Sin is dull.

3. Sze is specious.

4. Yew is coarse.

XVIII. 1. The Master said, " There is Hwuy ! He
has nearly attained to perfect virtue. He is often in
want."

2. " Tsze does not acquiesce in the appointments of
Heaven, and his goods are increased by him. Yet his
judgments are often correct."

VIII. p. 38. The music made by Tew was more martial in its air than
befitted the peaoe-ifiouloating school of the sage. 2. This contains a
defence of Tew, and an illustration of his real attainments.

15. COMPABISON OF SZE AND SHANG. EXCESS AND DEFECT EQUALLY
WRONG.

16. CONPtrCITJS' INDIGNATION AT THE StJPPOBT OF TJSTTEPATION AND
EXTOETION BY ONE OF HIS DISCIPLES. " Beat the drum and assail him :"
this refers to the practice of executing criminals in the market-place, and
by beat of drum collecting the people to hear their crimes. Comment-
ators, however, say that the Master only required the disciples here to tell
K'ew of his faults and recover him.

17. OHARACTEES of the FOUR DISCIPLES — Ch'AE, SIN, SzB, AND

Tew. It is supposed " The Master said," is missing from the beginning
of this chapter. Admitting this, the sentences are to be translated in the
present tense, and not in the past, which would be required, if the chapter
were simply the record of the compilers. Gh'ae, by surname Kaou,
and styled Tsze-Kaou, has his tablet now the fifth, west, in the outer
court of the temples. He was small and ugly, but distinguished for his
sincerity, filial piety, and justice. Such was the conviction of his im-
partial justice, that in a time of peril he was saved by a man whom he
had formerly punished with cutting off his feet.

18. Hwuy and Tsze contrasted. Hwuy's being brought often to
this state is mnntioned merely as an additional circumstance about him,


CH. XIX. J CONFUCIAN ANiXECTS. 187

XIX. Tsze-chang asked what were the characteristics
of the GOOD man. The Master saidj " He does not tread
in the footsteps of others, but, moreover, he does not enter
the chamber of the sage."

XX. The Master said, "If, because a man's discourse
appears solid and sincere, we allow him to be a good man,
is he really a superior man ? or is his gravity only in ap-
pearance ? "

XXI. 1. Tsze-loo asked whether he should immediately
carry into practice what he heard. The Master said,
" There are your father and elder brothers to be consulted ;
— why should you act on that principle of immediately
carrying into practice what you hear ? " Yen Yew asked
the same, whether he should immediately carry into
practice what he heard, and the Master answered, " Im-
mediately carry iuto practice what you hear." Kung-se
Hwa said, " Yew asked whether he should carry imme-
diately into practice what he heard, and you said, ' There
are your father and elder brothers to be consulted.' K'ew
asked whether he should immediately carry into practice
what he heard, and you said, 'Carry it immediately
into practice.' I, Ch'ih, am perplexed, and venture to
ask you for an explanation." The Master said, " K'ew
is retiring and slow ; therefore I urged him forward. Yew
has more than his own share of energy ; therefore I kept
him back."

XXII. The Master was put in fear in K'wang and
Yen Yuen fell behind. The Master, on his rejoining him,

intended to show that he was happy in his deep poverty. Ho An pre-
serves the comment of some one, which is worth giving here, and accord-
ing to which, " empty-hearted," free from all vanities and ambitions, was
the formative element of Hwuy's character.

19. The good man. Compare Til. xxv. By a "good man" Choo
He understands " one of fine natural capacity, but who has not learned."
Such a man will in many things be a law to himself, and needs not to
follow in the wake of others, \)ut after all his progress will be limited.
The text is rather enigmatical.

20. "We may not hastilt judge a man to be good from his
discoubse.

21. An instance in Tsze-loo and Yen Yew op how Confucius
dealt with hib disciples accobding to theie chaeactebs.

22. Yen Yuen's attachjient to Cokfucius, and confidence in
his mission. See IX. v. If Hwuy's answer was anything more than
pleasantry, we must pronounce it foolish. The commentators, howevei;


188 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK XI.

said, " I thouglit you had died." Ewuy replied, " WBile
you were alive, how should I presume to die ? "

XXIII. 1. Ke Tsze-jen asked whether Ohung-yew
and Ten K'ew could be called great ministers.

2. The Master said, "1 thought you would ask ahout
some extraordinary individuals, and you only ask about
Yew and K'ew !

3. " What is called a great minister, is one who serves
his prince according to what is right, and when he finds
he cannot do so, retires."

4. " Now, as to Yew and K'ew, they may be called or-
dinary ministers."

5. Tsze-jen said, " Then they will always follow their
chief;— will they?"

6. The Master said, "In an act of parricide or regicide,
they would not follow him."

XXIV. 1. Tsze-loo got Tsze-kaou appointed governor
of Pe.

2. The Master said, " You are injuring a man's son."

3. Tsze-loo said, " There are (there) common people
and officers ; there are the altars of the spirits of the land
and grain. Why must one read books before he can be
considered to have learned ? "

expand it thus : — " I knew that you would not perish in this danger, and
therefore I would not rashly expose my own life, but preserved it rather,
that I might continue to enjoy the benefit of your instructions." If we
inquire «how Hwuy knew that Confupius would not perish, we are in-
formed that he shared his master's assurance that he had a divine mis-
sion. See VII. xxii., IX. v.

23. A GEEAT MINISTER. CHUNG-TEW AND YEN K'KW ONLY
OEDINAEY MINISTBBS. The paraphrasts sum up the contents thus :-;-
" Confucius represses the boasting of Ke Tsze-jen, and indicates an
aoquainfa.nce with his traitorous purposes." This Ke Tsze-jen was a
younger brother of Ke Hwan, who was the head of the Ke family spoken
of in III. 1. Having an ambitious purpose on the dukedom of Loo, he
was increasing his officers, and having got the two disciples to enter his
service, he boastingly speaks to Confucius about them.

24. How PKELIMINAKY STUDY IS NECESSAKY TO THE EXERCISE OP
GOVERNMENT : — A EEPEOOP OF TszE-LOO. 1. Pe, — See VI. vii. This
commandantship is probably what Min Sun there refused. Tsze-loo had
entered into the service of the Ke family (see last chapter), and recom-
mended Tsze-kaou as likely to keep the turbulent Pe in order, thereby
withdrawing him from his studies with the Master. 2. By denominating
Tsze-kaou " a man's Son," Confucius intimates, I suppose, that the father
was injured as well. His son ought not to be so dealt with. 3. The
absurd defence of Tsze loo. It is to this effect; — " The whole duty of


CH. XXV. J eONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 189

4. The Master saidj " It is on this account that I hate
your glib-tongued people."

XXV. 1. Tsze-loo, Tsang Sih, Yen Tew, and Kung-se
Hwa, were sitting by the Master.

2. He said to them, though I am a day or so older than
you, don't think of that.

3. " From day to day you are saying, ' We are not
known.' If some prince were to know you, what would
you do ? "

4. Tsze-loo hastily and lightly replied, " Suppose the
case of a state of ten thousand chariots ; let it be straitened
between other large states ; let it be suffering from invad-
ing armies ; and to this let there be added a famine in
corn and in all vegetables ; — if I were intrusted with the
government of it, in three years' time I could make the
people to be bold, and to recognize the rules of righteous
conduct." The Master smiled at him.

5. Turning to Yen Yew, he said, " K'ew, what are your
wishes?" K'ew replied, "Suppose a state of sixty or
seventy le square, or one of fifty or sixty, and let me have
the government of it ; — in three years' time I could make
plenty to abound among the people. As to teaching them
the principles of propriety and music, I must wait for the
rise of a superior man to do that."

6. " What are your wishes, Ch'ih, said the Master next
to Kung-se Hwa. Oh'ih replied, I do not say that my
ability extends to these things, but I should wish to learn
them. At the services of the ancestral temple, and at
the audiences of the princes -with the emperor, I should
like, dressed in the dark square-made robe and the black
linen cap, to act as a small assistant."

7. Last of all, the Master ashed T'sang Sih, " Teen, what
are your wishes ?" Teen, pausing as he was playing on-
his harpsichord, while it was yet twanging, laid the in-

man is in treating other men right, and rendering what is due to
spiritual beings, and it may be learned practically without the study you
require." " On this account," — with reference to Tsze-loo's reply.

26. The aims of Tsze-loo, Tsang Sih, Yen Tew, and Kung-se
Hwa ; AND Confucius' eemarks about them. Compare V. vii. and
XXV. 1. The disciples mentioned nere are all familiar to us excepting
Ts^ng Sih. He was the father of the more celebrated Tsang Sin. and
himself by name Teen. The four are mentioned in the order of their age,
and Teen would have answered immediately after Tsze-loo, but that-Con-


190 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK XXI.

strument aside, and rose. " My wishes," lie said, " ai-e
different from the cherislied purposes of these three gentle-
men." " What harm is there in that ?" said the Mas-
ter ; " do you also, as well as they, speak out your wishes."
Taen then said, " In this, the last month of spring, with
the dress of the season all complete^ along with five or six
young men who have assumed the cap, and six or seven
boys, I would wash in the E, enjoy the breeze among the
rain-altars, and return home singing." The Master heaved
a sigh and said, "■ I give my approval to Teen."

8. The three others having gone out, Tsang Sih re-
mained behind, and said, " What do you think of the
words of these three friends ? " The Master replied,
" They simply told each one his wishes."

9. Teen pursued, " Master, why did you smile at Yew ? "

10. He was answered, " The management of a state de-
mands the rules of propriety. His words were not humble;
therefore I smiled at him."

11. Teen again said, " But was it not a state which
K'ew proposed for himself ? " The reply was, " Yes ; did
you ever see a territory of sixty or seventy le, or one of
Jifiy or sixty, which was not a state ? "

12. Once more Teen inqvired, "And was it not a state
which Oh'ih proposed for himself ? " The Master again
replied, " Yes ; who but princes have to do with ancestral
temples, and audiences with the emperor ? If Ch'ih were
to be a small assistant in these services, who could be a
great one ? "


BOOK XII.


Chapter I. 1. Ten Yuen asked about perfect virtue.
The Master said, " To subdue one's self and return to

fucius passed him by, as he was occupied with his harpsichord. It does
not appear whether Teen, even at the last, understood why Confucius had
laughed at Tsze-loo, and not at the others. " It was not," say the com-
mentators, " because Tsze-loo was extravagant in his aims. They were
all thinking of great things, yet not greater than they were able for.
Tsze-loo's fault was in the levity with which he had proclaimed his
wishes. That was his oifence a^aXust propriety."

Headikg and subjects of this book. "Yen Yuen." It contains
twenty-four chapters, conveying lessons on perfect virtue, government


en. II.J CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. ] 9l

propriety, is periect virtue. If a man can for one <lay
subdue timself and return to propriety, all under heaven
will ascribe perfect virtue to Mm. Is the practice of per-
fect virtue from a man himself, or is it from others ? "

2. Yen Yuen said, " I beg to ask the steps of that pro-
cess." The Master replied, " Look not at what is con-
trary to propriety ; listen not to what is contrary to pro-
priety ; speak not what is contrary to propriety ; make no
movement which is contrary to propriety." Yen Yuen
then said, "Though I am deficient in intelligence and
vigour, I will make it my business to practise this lesson."

II. Chuug-kung asked about perfect virtue. The Mas-
ter said, " It is, when you go abroad, to behave to every one

and other questions of morality and policy, addressed in conversation by
Confucius chiefly to his disciples. The different answers, given ahout the
name subject to different questioners, show well how the sage suited his
instructions to the characters and capacities of the parties with whom he
had to do.

1. How TO ATTAIN TO PERFECT VIETUE : — A CONVERSATION WITH

Yes Yuen. 1. In Ho An, " to subdue one's self " is explained by " to
restrain the body." ChooHe defines the "subdue " by " to overcome," and
the " self " by ■' the selfish desires of the body." In one commentary it
is said "self here is not exactly selfishness, but selfishness is what abides
by being attached to the body, and hence it is said that selfishness is
self." And again, " To subdue one's self is not subduing and putting
away the self, but subduing and putting away the selfish desires in the
self." This " selfishness in the self " is of a three-fold character : — first,
what is said by Morrison to be " a person's natural constitution and dis-
position of mind; " it is, I think, very much the \jjvx"''>Q uv9fiu)7rog, or
"animal man ; " second, "the desires of the ears, the ej'es, the mouth
the nose, i.e., the dominating influences of the senses ; and thin"
"Thou and I," i.e., the lust of superiority. More concisely, the self is
said to be " the mind of man " in opposition to the " mind of reason." See
the Shoo-king II. Bk II. xv. This refractory " mind of man," it is said,
is "innate," or perhaps "connate." In all these statements, there is an
acknowledgment of the fact — the morally abnormal condition of human
nature — which underlies the Christian doctrine of original sin. With
reference to the above three-fold classification of selfish desires, the second
paragraph shows that it was the second order of them — the influence of
the senses, which Confucius specially intended. We turn to propriety,
see note on VIII. ii. The thing is not here ceremonies. Choo He defines
it " the specific divisions and graces of heavenly principle or reason."
This is continually being departed from, on the impulse of selfishness, but
there is an ideal of it as proper to man, which is to be sought — " re-
turned to" — bjfc overcoming that.

2. WHEHBIN perfect VIRTUE IS REALIZED : — ^A CONVERSATION WITH

Chung-kung. From this chapter, it appears that reverence and reci-
procity, on the largest scale, are perfect virtue. " Ordering the people" is


192 CONPTJCIAN ANALECTS. [bK XII.

as if you were receiving a great guest ; to employ tke
people as if you were assisting at a great sacrifice ; not to
do to others as you would not wisli done to yourself; to
hare no murmuring against you in tlie country^ and none
in the family." Chung-kung said, " Though I am defi-
cient in intelligence and vigour, I will make it my business
to practise this lesson."

III. 1. Sze-ma New asked about perfect virtue.

2. The Master said, " The man of perfect virtue is cau-
tious and slow in his speech."

3. " Cautious and slow in his speech ! " said New ;— "is
this what is meant by perfect virtue ? " The Master said,
" When a man feels the difficulty of doing, can he be other
than cautious and slow in speaking ? "

IV. 1. Sze-ma New asked about the superior man. The
Master said, " The superior man has neither anxiety nor
fear."

2. " Being without anxiety or fear ! " said New ; — " does
this constitute what we call the superior man ? "

3. The Master said, " ^Vlien internal examination dis-
covers nothing wrong, what is there to be anxious about,
what is there to fear ? "

Y. 1. Sze-ma New, full of anxiety, said, " Other men
all have their brothers, I only have not."

apt to be done with haughtiness. This part of the answer may be compared
with the apostle's precept — " Honour all men," only the " all men " is
much more comprehensive there. — The answer, the same as that of Hwuy
in last chapter, seems to betray the hand of the compiler.

3. Caution is speaking a chakactebistic of pbepbct virtue : —
A CONVEESATION WITH TszE-NEW., Tsze-new was the designation of Sze-
ma Kang, whose tablet is now the seventh, east, in the outer range of the
temples. He belonged to Sung, and was a brother of Hwan T'uy, VII.
xxii. Their ordinary surname was Heang, but that of Hwan could also be
used by them, as they were descended from the duke so called. The office
of " Master of the horse " had long been in the family, and that title
appears here as if it were New's surname.

4. How THE KeTJN-TSZE HAS NEITHER ANXIETY NOR FEAE, CON-
scious kectitude freeing from these.

5. Consolation offered by Tszb-hea to Tszb-new anxious
ABOUT the peril OF HIS BROTHER. 1. Tsze-new's anxiety was occa-
sioned by the conduct of his eldest brother, Hwan T'uy, who, he knew, was
contemplating rebellion, which would probably lead to his death. " All
have their brothers," — i.e., all can rest quietly without anxiety in their
relation. 2. It is naturally supposed that the author of the observation
waa Confucius. 4. One writer says that the expression : — " all within the


en. VI.] CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 193

2. Tsze-tea said to him, " There is the following say-
ing which I have heard : —

3. " * Death and life have their determined appoint-
ment ; riches and honours depend upon Heaven.'

4. " Let the superior man never fail reverentially to
order his own conduct, and let him be respectful to others
and observant of propriety : — then all within the four seas
will be his brothers. What has the superior man to do
with being distressed because he has no brothers ? "

VI. Tsze-chang asked what constituted intelligence.
The Maater said, " He with whom neither slander that
gradually soaks into the mind, nor statements that startle
like a wound in the flesh, are successful, may be called
intelligent indeed. Yea, he with whom neither soaking >
slander, nor startling statements, are successful, may be
called far-seeing."

VII. 1. Tsze-kung asked about government. The-^^
Master said, " TAe requisites of goveiymient are that there ■■p
be sufficiency of food, sufficiency of military equipment, "
and the confidence of the people in their ruler."

2. Tsze-kung said, " If it cannot be helped, and one of

four seas are brothers," " does not mean that all under heaven have the
same genealogical register." Choo He's interpretation is that, when a mau
so acts, other men will love and respect him as a brother. This, no doubt,
is the extent of the saying. I have found no satisfactory gloss on the
phrase — " the four seas." It is found in the Shoo-king, the She-king,
and the Le-ke. In the Urh Ya, a sort of Lexicon, very ancient, which
was once reckoned among the king, it is explained as a territorial desig-
nation, the name of the dwelling-place of all the barbarous tribes. But
the great Yu is represented as having made the four seas as four ditches,
to which he drained the waters umndating "the middle kingdom."
Plainly, the ancient conception was of their own country as the great
habitable tract, north, south, east, and west of which were four seas or
oceans, between whose shores and their own borders the intervening space
was not very great, and occupied by wild hordes of inferior races. Com-
mentators consider Tsze-hea's attempt at consolation altogether wide of
the mark.

6. What constitutes iNTBLLiGBafCE : — addbessed to Tsze-chang.
Tsze-chang, it is said, was always seeking to be wise about things lofty
and distant, and therefore Confucius brings him back to things near at
hand, which it was more necessary for him to attend to.

7. KEQUISITES in government: — A CONVERaiTION WITH TSZE-CHANG.

3. The difiSoulty here is with the concluding clause which is literally.
" No faith, not stand." Transferring the meaning of faith or confidence
from paragraph 1, we naturally render as in the translation, " the state
will not stand." This is the view, moreover, of the old interpreters;
vox., r. 13


194 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK Xir,

these must be dispensed witlij whicli of the three st juld
be foregone first ? " " The military equipment/' said
the Master.

3. Tsze-kung again asked, " If it cannot be helped, and
one of the remaining two must be dispensed with, which
of them should be foregone ? " The Master answered,
" Part with the food. From of old, death has been the
lot of all men ; but if the people have no faith in their
■tillers, there is no standing /or the State."

VIJI. 1.. Kih Tsze-shing said, " In a superior man it is
only the substantial qualities which are wanted; — why
should we seek for ornamental accomplishments ? "

2. Tsze-kung said, " Alas ! Your words, sir, show
you to be a superior man, but four horses cannot over-
take the tongue.

" Ornament is as substance ; substance is as orna-
ment. The hide of a tiger or leopard stript of its hair is
like the hide of a dog or goat stript of its hair."

IX. 1. The Duke Gae inquired of Yew Jo, sajing,
" The year is one of scarcity, and ike returns for expendi-
ture are not sufficient ; — what is to done ? "

2. Yew Jo replied to him, " Why not simply tithe the
people."

Choo He and his followers, however, seek to make much more of
"faith." On the first paragraph he comments, — "The granaries
being full, and the military preparation complete, then let the influence of
instruction proceed. So shall the people have faith in their ruler, and will
not leave him or rebel." On the third paragraph he says, — "If the
people be without food, they must die, but death is the inevitable lot of
men. If they are without faith, though they live, they have not where-
with to establish themselves. It is better for them in such case to die.
Therefore it is better for the ruler to die, not losing faith to his people, so
that the people^ wi J prefer death rather than lose faith to him.' '

8. Substantial qualities and accomplishments m the KEtw-
TSZE. 1. Tsze-shing was an officer of the state of Wei, and, distressed by
the pursuit in the times of what was merely external, made this not suffi-
ciently well-considered remark, to which Tsze-kung replied, in, according
to Choo He, an equally one-sided manner. 3. The modern commentators
seem hypercritical in condemning Tsze-kung's language here. He shows
the desirableness of the ornamental accomplishments, but does not neces-
sarily put them on the same level with the substantial qualities.

9. Light taxation the best wat to beocre the government

KEOM EMBAEKASSMENT FOE WANT OP FUNDS. 2. By the statutes of the

Chow dynasty, the ground was divided into allotments cultivated in
common by the families located upon them, and the produce was divided


CH. X.] CONFUCIiN ANALECTS. 195

3. "With two tenths," said the duke, " I find them
not enough; — how could I do with that system of one
tenth ? "

4. Yew Jo answered, " If the people have plenty, their
prince will not be left to want alone. If the people are
in want, their prince cannot enjoy plenty alone."

X. 1. Tsze-chang having asked how virtue was to be
exalted, and delusions to be discovered, the Master said,
" Hold faithfulness and sincerity as first principles, and
be moving continually to what is right; — this is the way
to exalt one's virtue.

2. ''You love a man and wish him to live; you hate
him and wish him to die. Having wished him to live,
you also wish him to die. This is a case of delusion.

3. " ' It may not be on account of his being rich, yet
you come to make a difierence.' "

XI.^ 1. The Duke King, of Ts'e, asked Confucius aboiiT
governteeiit.

2. Confucius replied, " There is government, when the

equally, nine tenths being given to the farmers, and one tenth being
reserved as a contribution to the state. 3. A former duke of Loo, Seuen
(B.C. 601 — 590), had imposed an additional tax of another tenth from each
family's portion. 4. The meaning of this paragraph is given in the
translation. Literally rendered it is, — " The people having plenty, the
prince — with whom not plenty? The people not having plenty, with whom
can the prince have plenty ?" Tew J& wished to impress on the duke,
that a sympathy and common condition' should unite him and his people.
If he lightened his taxation to the regular tithe, then they would culti-
vate their allotments with so much vigour, that his receipts would be
abundant. They would be able, moreover, to help their kind ruler in
any emergency.

10. How TO EXAIrT VIBTUB AND DISCOVER DELUSIONS. 2. The

Master says nothing about the "discriminating," or " discovering," of
delusions, but gives an instance of a twofold delusion. Life and death,
it is said, are independent of our wishes. To desire for a man either the
one or the other, therefore, is one delusion. And on the change of our
feelings to change our wishes Id reference to the same person, is another.
But in this Confucius hardly appears to be the sage. 3. See the She-
king, Pt II. Bk IT. iv. 3. I have translated according to the meaning in
the She-king. The quotation may be twisted Into some sort of accord-
ance with the preceding paragsaph, as a case of delusion, but the com-
mentator Ch'ing IS- probably correct in supposing that it should be trans-
ferred to XVI. xii.

U. Good goveenment obtains only when all the belative
DUTIES AEE MAINTAINED, 1. Confucius went to Ts'e in his thirty-sixth
year, and finding the reigning duke— styled King after his death— over-
shadswedhy his ministers, and thinking-of setting aside his eldest son

13*


196 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK XII.

prince is prince, and the minister is minister ; when the
father is father, and the son is son."

3. " Good ! " said the duke ; " if, indeed, the prince
be not prince, the minister not minister, the father not
father, and the son not son, although I have my revenue,
-can I enjoy it ? "

XII. 1. The Master said, "Ah ! it is Tew, who could
with half a word settle litigations ! "

2. Tsze-loo never slept over a promise.

XIII. The Master said, " In hearing litigations, I am
like any other body. What is necessary, is to cause ilie
people to have no litigations.'^

XIV. Tsze-chang asked about government. The Mas-
ter said, " The ai t of governing is to keep its affairs before
the mind without weariness, and to practise them with
undeviating consistency."

XV. The Master said, " By extensively studying all
learning, and keeping himself under the restraint of the
rules of propriety, one may thus likewise not err from
what is right."

XVI. The Master said, " The superior man seelcs to per-
feet the admirable qualities of men, and does not seek to
perfect their bad qualities. The mean man does the
opposite of this."

XVII. Ke K'ang asked Confucius about government.
Confucius replied, " To govern means to rectify. If you
lead on the people with correctness, who will dare not to
be correct ? "

from the succession, he shaped his answer to the question about govern-
ment accordingly.

12. With what ease Tsze-loo could settle litioations. 1. We
translate here — " could," and not — " can," because Confucius is not
referring to facts, but simply praising the disciple's character. 2. This
paragraph is a note by the compilers, stating a fact about Tsze-loo, to
illustrate what the Master said of him.
1 13. To PREVENT better THAN TO DETEBinNE LITIGATIONS. See

the Great Learning, Commentary, IV. Little stress is to be laid on the
M." The meaning simply :=" One man is as good as another." Much
stress is to be laid on " to cause " as^" to influence to."

14. The akt op goveening.

1 5. HABDLY different from VL XXV.

1 6. Opposite influence upon others of the superior man abb
the mean man.

^^T. Government moral hi its end, aud srFiciENi by example.


en. XVlil.] CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 197

XVIIT. Ke K'ang distressed about the number of
thieves in the State, inquired of Confucius about how to do
away with them. Confucius said, " If you, sir, were not
covetous, although you should reward them to do it, they
would not steal.

^^IX. Ke K'ang asked Confucius about government,"
saying, " What do you say to killing the unprincipled for
the good of the principled ? " Confucius replied, " Sir,
in carrying on your government, why should you use kill-
ing at all ? Let your evinced desires be for what is good,
and the people will be good. The relation between
superiors and inferiors is like that between the wind and
the grass. The grass must bend when the wind blows
across it." ^

" XX. 1. Tsze-chang asked, "What must the ofiioer be,
who may be said to be distinguished ? "

2. The Master said, "What is it you call being dis-
tinguished ? "

3. Tsze-chang replied, "It is to be heard of through
the State, to be heard of through the Family."

4. The Master said, " That is notoriety, not distinction.

6. " Now, the man of distinction is solid and straight-
forward, and loves righteousness. He examines people's
words, and Jooks at their countenances. He is anxious to
humble himself to others. Such a man will be dis-
tinguished in the country ; he will be distinguished in the
Family.

6. " As to the man of notoriety, he assumes the appear-
ance of virtue, but his actions are opposed to it, and he
rests in this character without any doubts about himself.
Such a man will be heard of in the country ; he will be
heard of in the Family."

XXI. 1. Fan-ch'e rambling with the Master under

18. The people aee made thieve8 by the example of theik
RULERS. This is a good instance of Confucius' boldness in reproving men
in power. Ke K'ang had confirmed himself as head of the Ke family, and
entered into all its usurpations, by taking off the infant nephew, who
should have been its rightful chief.

19. Killing not to be talked op by rulers ; the effect op
thsie example.

20. The man of true distinction, and the man op notoriety.

21. How to exalt VIKTUB, correct vice, and discover DELUSIONa

Compare chapter x. Here, as there, under the last point of the inquiry.


198 CONrUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK XII.

the trees about the rain-altars, said, " I venture to ask hovv
to exalt virtue, to correct cherislied evil, and to discover
delusions."

2. The Master said, " Truly a good question !

3. " If doing what is tojie done be made the first b usi-
ness, and 'success a^concbry £onsiderationj;:^ia_aQt_this
tEeway*io^ exalt virtue ? To assail one's own wickedness
iIHd"nof assail that of others ; — is not this the way to cor-
i-ect cherished evil ? For a morning's anger, to disregard
one's own life, and involve that of one's parents ; — is not
this a case of delusion ? "

XXII. 1. Fan Oh'e asked about benevolence. The
Master said, "It is to love all men." He asked about
knowledge. The Master said, " It is to know all men."

2. FanCh'edid notimmediatelyunderstandi^esecwiswers.

3. The Master said, " Employ the upright and put aside
all the crooked ; — in this way, the crooked can be made to
be upright."

4. Fan Ch'e retired, and seeing Tsze-hea, he said to
him, " A little ago, I had an interview with our Master,
and asked him about knowledge. He said, ' Employ the
upright, and put aside all the crooked; — in this way,
the crooked cau be made to be upright.' What did he
mean ? "

5. Tsze-hea said, " Truly rich is his saying !

6. " Shun, being in possession of the empire, selected
from among all the people, and employed Kaou-yaou, on
which all who were devoid of virtue disappeared. T'ang
being in possession of the empire, selected from among all
the people, and employed E-Yin, and all who were devoid
of virtue disappeared."

XXIII. Tsze-kung asked about friendship. The Master

Confucius simply indicates a case of delusion, and perhaps this is the best
way to teach how to discover delusions generally.

22. About benevole.nce and wisdom;— how knowledge sub-
SBKVBS BENEVOLENCE. Fan Ch'e might well deem the Master's replies
enigmatical, and, with the help of Tsze-hea's explanations, the student still
iinds it difficult to understand the chapter. — Shun and T'ang showed their
wisdom — their knowledge of men — in the selection of those ministers.
That was their employment of the upright, and therefore all devoid of
virtue disappeared. That was their making the crooked upright ; — and
60 their love reached to all.

23. Prudence in peiendship.


CH. XXIV. J CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 199

said, " Faithfally admonish your friend, and kindly try to
lead him. If you find him impracticable, stop. Do not
disgrace yourself."

XXIV. The philosopher Tsang said, "The superior
man on literary grounds meets with his friends, and by
their friendship helps his virtue."


BOOK XIII.


Chapter I. 1. Tsze-loo asked about government. The
Master said, " Go before the people with your examphj
and be laborious in their affairs."

2. He requested further instruction, and was answered,
" be not weary in the^e things."

II. 1. Chung-kung, being chief minister to the head of
the Ke family, asked about government. The Master
said, " Employ first the services of your various oflicers,
pardon small faults, and raise to office men of virtue and
talents."

2. Chung-hung said, " How shall I know the men of
virtue and talent, so that I may raise them to office ? "

24. The friendship of the KEtrtr-TSZB. " On literary grounds,"
— literally, "by means of letters," i.e., common literary studies and
pursuits.

Heading and subjects op this book. — " Tsze-loo." Here, as in the
last book, we have a number of subjects touched upon, all bearing more or
less directly on the government of tine state, and the cultivation of the
person. The book extends to thirty chapters.

1. The secret of success in governing is the unwearied
EXAMPLE OP THE RULBBS : — A LESSON TO TszE-LOO. 1. To what Under-
stood antecedents do the C/ie refer ? For the first, we may suppose to
" people ; " " precede the people," or " lead the people," that is, do
so by the example of your personal conduct. But we cannot in the
second clause bring Che in the same way under the regimen of laow,
" to be laborious for them ; " that is, to set them the example of diligence
in agricultyre, &c. It is better, however, according to the idiom I
have several''times pointed out, to take Che as giving a sort of neuter
and general force to the preceding words, so that the expressions are=
" example and laboriousness." — K'ung Gan-kwo understands the meaning
difiFerently:^"set the people an example, and then you may make them
labour." But this is not so good.

2. The duties chibflv to be attended to bt a head minister :
— A LESSON TO YEN YuNG. 1. Compare VIII. iv. 3. A head min-
ister should assign to his various officers their duties, and not be inter-


200 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK XIII.

He was answered, " Raise to office those whom you know.
As to those whom yon do not know, will others neglect
them ? "
y\Yl. 1. Tsze-loo said, "The prince of Wei has been
waiting for you, in order with you to administer the
government. What will you consider the first thing to
be done ? "

2. The Master replied, " What is necessary is to rectify
names."

3. " So, indeed ! " said Tsze-loo. " You are wide of
the mark. Why must there be such rectification ? "

4. The Master said, " How uncultivated you are. Tew !
A superior man, in regard to what he does not, know,
shows a cautious reserve."

5. " If names be not correct, language is not in accord-
ance with the truth of things. If language be not in ac-
cordance with the truth of things, affairs cannot be carried
on to success.

6. " When aSairs cannot be carried on to success, pro-
prieties and music will not flourish. When proprieties and
lausic do not flourish, punishments will not be properly


fering ia them himself. Hia business is to examine into the manner in
which they discharge them. And in doing so, he should overlook small
faults. 2. Confucius' meaning is, that Chung-kung need not trouble him-
self about all men of worth. Let him advance those he knew. There was
no fear that the others would be neglected. Compare what is said on
" knowing men," in XII. xxii.

3. The supreme impohtauce of names beikg corkect. 1. This
conversation is assigned by Choo He to the eleventh year of the Duke Gae
of Loo, when Confucius was sixty-nine, and he returned from his wander-
ings to his native state. Tsze-loo had then been some time in the service
of the Duke Ch'uh of Wei, who it would appear had been wishing to get
the services of the sage himself, and the disciple did not think that his
Master would refuse to accept ofiSce, as he had not objected to Ids doing
BO. 2. " Names " must have here a special reference, which Tsze-loo did
not apprehend. Nor did the old interpreter, for Ma Yung explains the
counsel " to rectify the names of all things." On this view, the reply
would indeed be " wide of the mark." The answer is substantially the
same as the reply to Duke King of Ts'e about government in XII. xi., that
it obtains when the prince is prince, the father father, &c. ; that is, when
each man in his relations is what the luime of his relation would require.
Now, the Duke Ch'uh held the rule of Wei against his father ; see VII.
xiv. Confucius, from the necessity of the case and peculiarity of the cir-
cumstances, allowed his disciples, notwithstanding that, to take office in
Wei; but at the time of this conversation, Ch'uh had been duke for


CH. rV,] COHFUCIAIf .UTALECTS. 201

, awarded. When punislimeiits are not properly awarded,
the people do not know how to move hand or foot.

7. "Therefore, a superior man considers it necessary
that the names he uses may be spoken appropriately, and
also that what he speaks may be carried out appropriately .
What the superior man requires, is just that in his words

Jhere may be nothing incorrect."

IV. 1. Fan Ch'e requested to be taught husbandry.
The Master said, "I am not so good for that as an old
husbandman." He requested also to be taught garden-
ing, and was answered, " I am not so good for that as an
old gardener."

2. Pan Ch'e having gone out, the Master said, "A
small man, indeed, is Pan Sen ! " ^,^

3. " If a superior man love propriety, the people will
not dare not to be reverent. If he love righteousness, the
people will not dare not to submit to his example. If he
love good faith, the people will not dare not to be sincere.
Now, when these things obtain, the people from all
quarters will come to him, bearing their children on^
their backs. What need has he of a knowledge of hus-
bandry ?"

V. The Master said, " Though a man may be able to
recite the three hundred odes, yet if, when intrusted with
a governmental charge, he knows not how to act, or if,
when sent to any quarter on a mission, he cannot give his
replies unassisted, notwithstanding the extent of his learn-
ing, of what practical use is it ? "

nine years, and ought to have been so established that he could have taken
the course of a filial son without subjecting the state to any risks. On this
account, Confucius said he would begin with rectifying the name of the
duke, that is, with requiring him to resign the dukedom to his father, and
be what his name of son required him to be. This view enables us to
understand better the climax that follows, though its successive steps are
still not without difficulty.

i. A BULEK HAS NOT TO OCCUPT HIMSELF WITH WHAT IS PEOPEELY

THE BUSINESS OP THE PEOPLE. It is to be Supposed that Fan Ch'e was at
this time in office somewhere, and thinking of the Master, as the villager
and high oflScer did, IX. ii. and vi., that his knowledge embraced almost
every subject, he imagined that he might get lessons from him on the two
subjects he specifies, which he might use for the benefit of the people. The
last paragraph shows what people in office should learn. Confucius intended
that it should be repeated to Fan Ch'e.

0. LiTEKABY ACQUIEEMENTS USELESS WITHOUT PEACTICAL ABILITY.


202 CONFUCIAN AHALICTS. [bK XIII.

VI. The Master said, " "WTien a prince's personal con-
duct is correct, his government is effective without the
issuing of orders. If his personal conduct is not correct,

-he may issue orders, but they will not be followed."

VII. The Master said, " The governments of Loo and
Wei are brothers."

VIII. The Master said of King, a scion of the ducal
family of Wei, that he knew the economy of a family, well.
When he began to have means, he said, " Ha ! here is a
collection ! " when they were a little increased, he said,
" Ha ! this is complete ! " when he had become rich, he
said, " Ha ! this is admirable ! "

IX. 1 . When the Master went to Wei, Yen Yew acted
as driver of his carriage.

2. The Master observed, " How numerous are the
people ! "

3. Yew said, " Since they are thus numerous, what
more shall be done for them ? " " Enrich them," was the
reply.

4. ''And when they have been enriched, what more shall
be done ? " The Master said, " Teach them."

X. The Master said, " If there were any of the princes
who would employ me, in the course of twelve months, I
should have done something considerable. In three years,
-the government would be perfected."

XI. The Master said, " ' If good men were to govern a
country in succession for a hundred years, they would be

6. HrS PERSONAL CONDTJCT ALL IN ALL TO A RULEB.

7. The similar condition of the states of Loo and Wei. Com-
pare VI. xxii. Loo's state had been so from the influence of Chow-kung, and
Wei was the fief of his brother Fung, commonly Ivnown as K'ang-shuh.
They had, similarly, maintained an equal and brotherly course in their
progress, or, as it was in Confucius' time, in their degeneracy. That por-
tion of the present Ho-nan, which runs up and' lies between Shan-se and
Plh-chih-le, was the bulk of Wei.

8. The contentment op the officer King, and his indifference
IN getting rich. The commentators say that it is not to be understood
that King really made these utterances, but that Confuc'us thus vividly
represents how he felt.

9. A people numerous, well-off, and educated, IS the great
achievement op government.

10. Confucius' estimate of what he could do, if employed to
administer the government of a state.

11. What a hundred te.vrs op good government could effect.
Confucius quotes here a saying of his time, and approves of it.


CH. Xll.]" CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. ; . / 203

able to transform the violently bad, aud/dispense witH
capital punishments.' True indeed is this saying ! " ^

XII. The Master said, " If a truly royal ruler were to
arise, it would still require a generation, and then virtue
would prevail." _

XIII. The Master said, " If a minister make his own
conduct correct, what difficulty will he have in assisting
in government ? If he cannot r ectif y himself, what has
he to do with rectifying others ? " /

XIV. The disciple Yen returning from the court, the
Master said to him, " How are you so late ? " He re-
plied, " We had government business." The Master said,
" It must have been Family affairs. If there had been
government business, though I am not now in office, I
should have been consulted about it."

XV. 1. The Duke Ting asked whether there was a
single sentence which could make a country prosperous.
Confucius replied, "Such an effect cannot be expected
from one sentence.

2. " There is a saying, however, which people have —
' To be a prince is difficult ; to be a minister is not easy.'

12. In what time a kotal kulbe could teansfokm the empire.
The character denoting " a king," " a royal ruler," is formed by three
straight lines representing the three powers of Heaven, Earth, and Man,
and a perpendicular line going through and uniting thorn, and thus con-
veys the highest idea of power and influence. Here it means the highest
wisdom and virtue in the highest place. — To save Confucius from the
charge of vanity in what he says, in chapter x., that he could accomplish
in three years, it is said that the perfection which he predicates there
would only be the foundation for the virtue here realized.

13. That he be peesonallt coerect essential to an officer op
government.

14. AN lEONICAL ADMONITION TO TEN YEW ON THE USURPING

tendencies OF THE Ke FAMILY. The point of the chapter turns on the
opposition of the phrases " government business," and " family affairs; "
— at the court of the Ke family, that is, they had really been discussing
matters of government, affecting the State, and proper only for the prince's
court. Confucius affects not to believe it, and says that at the chiefs
court they could only have been discussing the affairs of his house.
Superannuated officers might go to court on occasions of emergency, and
might also be consulted on such, though the general rule was to allow them
to retire at seventy. See the Le Ke, I. i. 28.

15. How THE PEOSPEEITY AND EUIN OF A COUNTRY MAY DEPEND ON
THE EULER'S VIEW OF HIS POSITION, HIS FEELING ITS DIFFICULTY,
OR ONLY CHERISHING A HEADSTRONG WILL. 1. I should SUppOse that these


204 CONPtrCIAN ANALECTS. [eK XllJ.

"If a ruler knows thiSj — the difficulty of being a
prince^ — may there not be expected from this one sen-
tence the prosperity of his country ? "

4. The dulce then said, " Is there a single sentence which
can ruin a country ? " Confucius replied, " Such an
effect as that cannot be expected from one sentence.
There is, however, the saying which people have — ' I have
no pleasure in being a prince, only in that no one offer
any opposition to what I say ! ' \ i

6. " If a ruler's words be good, is it not also good that"^
no one oppose them ? But if they are not good, and no L
one opposes them, may there not be expected from this ^
one sentence the ruin of his country ? "
-^VI. 1. The duke of She asked about government.
\ 2. The Master said, " Oood gmemment obtains, when
\ those who are near are made happy, and those who are
) far off are attracted."

' — 'XVII. Tsze-hea, being governor of Keu-foo, asked
about government. The Master said, " Do not be desirous
to have things done quickly ; do not look at small advan-
tages. Desire to have things done quickly prevents their
being done thoroughly. Looking at small advantages
prevents great affairs from being accomplished."

XVIII. 1. The duke of She informed Confucius, say-
ing, " Among us here there are those who may be styled
upright in their conduct. If their father have stolen a
sheep, they will bear witness to the fact."

2. Confucius said, " Among us, in our part of the coun-
try, those who are upright are different from this. The

were commentators' sayings, about which the duke asks, in a way to inti-
mate his disbelief of them.

16. Good GOVERNMENT SEEN FROM ITS EFFECTS. 1. She; — See VII.

xviii. 2. Confucius is supposed to have in view the oppressive and ag
gressive government of Tsoo, to which ShS belonged.

17. Haste and small advantages not to be desired in govern-
ing. Keu-foo was a small city in the western borders of Loo.

18. Natural duty and uprightness in collision. 1. We cannot
say whether the duke is referring to one or more actual cases, or giving his
opinion of what his people would do. Confucius' reply would incline us
to the latter view. Accounts are quoted of such cases, but they are
jivobably founded on this chapter. CMng seems to convey here the
i loa of accusation, as well as of witnessing. 2. The concluding ex-
pression does not absolutely affirm that this is upright, but that in this
there is a better principle than in the other conduct. — Anybody but a


eu. XIX. CONF0CIAK ANALECTS. 205

father conceals the misconduct of the son, and the sort
conceals the misconduct of the father. Uprightness is to
be found in this,"

XIX. Fan Ch'e asked about perfect virtue. The Mas-
ter said, " It is, in retirement, to be sedately grave ; in
the management of business, to be reverently attentive ;
in intercourse with others, to be strictly sincere. Though
a man go among rude uncultivated tribes, these qualities
may not be neglected."

XX. 1. Tsze-kung asked, saying, "What qualities
must a man possess to entitle him to be called an officer ? "
The Master said, " He who in his conduct of himself main-
tains a sense of shame, and when sent to any quarter will
not disgrace his prince's commission, deserves to be called
an officer."

2. Tsze-hung pursued, "I venture to ask who maybe
placed in the next lower rank ? " and he was told, " He
whom the circle of his relatives pronounce to be filial,
whom his fellow- villagers and neighbours pronounce to be
fraternal."

3. Again tJie disciple asked, "I venture to ask about
the class still next in order." The Master said, "They
are determined to be sincere in what they say, and to carry
out what they do.. They are obstinate little men. Yet
perhaps they may make the next class."

4. Tsze-kung jmally inquired, " Of what sort are those
of the present day, who engage in government ? " The
Master said, " Pooh ! they are so many pecks and hampers,
not woi-th being taken into account."

XXI. The Master said, " Since I cannot get men pur-
suing the due medium, to whom I might communicate my
instructions, I must find the ardent and the cautiously-
decided. The ardent will advance and lay hold of truth ;

Chinese will say that both the duke's view of the subject and the sage's
were incomplete.

19. Chaeacteeistics of pkefect vietue, even when associating

inm BAEBAEIANS.

20. DiFFEEENT CLASSES OP MEN WHO IN THEIE BEVEBAL DBGEEES
MAT BE STYLED OPFICBES, AND THE INFEEIOBITY OF THE MASS OF THE
OFPICBES OF CONPrCItrS' TIME.

21. Confucius obliged to content himself with the aedent
AND CAtJTIous AS DISCIPLES. Compare V. xxi., and Mencius, VII. Bk IL
xxxvii.


206 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK XIII.

the cautiously-decided will keep themselves from what is
wrong."

XXII. 1. The Master said, " The people of the south
have a saying — 'A man without constancy cannot be
either a wizard or a doctor.^ Good !

2. " Inconstant in his virtue, he will be visited with
disgrace."

3. The Master said, " This arises simply from not prog-
nosticating."

XXIII. The Master said, " The superior man is affable,
but not adulatory ; the mean is adulatory, but not affable."

XXIV. Tsze-kung asked saying, " What do you say of
a man who is loved by all the people of his village ? " The
Master replied, " We may not for that accord our ap-
proval of him." " And what do you say of him who is
hated by all the people of his village ? " The Master said,
" We may not for that conclude that he is bad. It is bet-
ter than either of these cases that the good in the village
love him, and the bad hate him."

XXV. The Master said, " The superior man is easy to
serve and difficult to please. If you tiy to please him in
any way which is not accordant with right, he will not be

22. The importance op fi-titt aud constancy op mind. ]. I
translate the word " wizard," for want of a better term. In the Chow Le,
Bk XXVI., the woo appear sustaining a sort of ofBcial status, regularly
called in to bring down spiritual beings, obtain showers, &c. They are
distinguished as men and women, though the term is often feminine, " a
witoh," as opposed to another, signifying " a wizard." Confucius' use of
the saying, according to Choo He, is this : — " Since such small people
must have constancy, how much more ought others to have it ! " The
ranking of the doctors and wizards together sufBoiently shows what was
the position of the healing art in those days. — Ghing K'ang-shing inter-
prets this paragraph quite inadmissibly :—" wizards and doctors cannot
manage people who have no constancy." 2. This is a quotation from the
Yih-king, diagram xxxii. 3. This is inexplicable to Choo He. Some
bring out from it the meaning in the translation. — Ch'ing K'ang-shing
says : — " By the Yih we prognosticate good and evil, but in it there is no
prognostication of people without constancy."

23. The dippbeent manners op the superior and the mean
MAN. Compare II. xiv. ; hut here the parties are contrasted in their more
private intercourse with others.

24. how to judge op a man prom the likings and dislikings
op others, we must know the characters op those others.

25. Difference between the superiob and the mean man in
their relation to those employed by them,


en. XXVI. J CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 20?.

pleased. But in his employment of men, he uses them ac-
cording to their capacity. The mean man is difficult to
serve, and easy to please. If you try to please him, though
it be in a way which is not accordant with right, he may
be pleased. But in his employment of men, he wishes them
to be equal to everything."

XXVI. The Master said, " The superior man has a dig-
nified ease without pride. The mean man has pride with-
out a dignified ease."

XXVII. The Master said, " The firm, the enduring, the
simple, and the modest, are near to virtue."

XXVIII. Tsze-loo asked saying, " What qualities must
a man possess to entitle him to be called a scholar ? " The
Master said, " He must be thus, — earnest, urgent, an 1
bland : — among his friends, earnest and urgent ; among
his brethren, bland."

•"""XXIK. The Master said, " Let a good man teach the
people seven years, and they may then likewise be em-.

--ployed in war." ' "

■^ XXX. The Master said, " To lead an uninstructed peo-
ple to war is to throw them away."

26. The different air and beabing op the scpebior and the

MEAN MAN.

27. Natural qualities which are favourable to virtue.

28. Qualities that mark the scholar in social rNiERoouRSE.
This is the same question as ia chapter xx. 1, but the subject is here " the
scholar," the gentleman of education, without reference to his being in
office or not.

29. How the government op a good ruler will prepare the
PEOPLE FOR WAR. " A good man,"-^— spokeu with reference to him as a
ruler. The teaching is not to be understood of military training, but of
the duties of life and citizenship ; a people so taught are moraljy fitted to
tight for their government. What military training may be included in
the teaching, would merely be the hunting and drilling during the people's
repose from the toils of agriculture.

30. That people must be taught, to prepare them for war.
Compare the last chapter. The language is very strong, and the instruc-
tion being understood as in that chapter, shows bow Confucius valued
educaCiOii for all classes.


208 CONFUCIAN ANAIECTS. [jJK XIV.


BOOK xrv.

Ohaptee I. Heen asked wliat might be considered
shameful. The Master said, "When good government
prevails in a State, to be thinking only of his salary ; and,
when bad government prevails, to be thinking in the same
way, only of his salary ; — this is shameful.'''

II. 1. "When the love of superiority, boasting, resent-
ments, and covetousness are repressed, may this be deemed
perfect virtue ? "

2. The Master said, " This may be regarded as the
achievement of what is difficult. But I do not know that
it is to be deemed perfect virtue."

III. The Master said, " The scholar who cherishes the
love of comfort, is not fit to be deemed a scholar."

"^ IV. The Master said, " When good government pre-
I vails in a State, language may be lofty and bold, and ac-
tions the same. When bad government prevails, the ac-
tions may be lofty and bold, but the language may be with
some reserve."

HEADIN& AND SUBJECTS OF THIS BOOK. — The glossarist Hing Ping
Bays, " In this Book we have the characters of the Three Kings, and Tmo
Chiefs, the courses proper for princes and great ofSoers, the practice of
virtue, the knowledge of what is shameful, personal cultivation, and the
tranquillizing of the people ; — all subjects of great importance in govern-
ment. They are therefore collected together, and arranged after the last
chapter which commences with an inquiry about government." Some
writers are of opinion that the whole book was compiled bv Heen or Yuen
Sze, who appears in the first chapter.

1. It IS SHAMEFUL IN AS OFFICER TO BE CAHING ONLY ABOUT HIS

EMOLUMENT. Heen is the Yuen Sze of VI. iii. ; and if we suppose Con-
fucius' answer designed to have a practical application to Heen himself, it
is not easily reconcileable with what appears of his character in that oUier
place.

2. The PRAISE OP perfect VIHTUE IS NOT TO BE ALLOWED FOR THE

nEPBESaiON OF BAi) FEELINGS. la Hc An, this chapter is joined to the
preceding, and Choo He also takes the first paragr^xph to hn r question of
Yuen Heen.

3. A SCHOLAR MUST BE AIMINO AT WHAT IS HIGHER THAN COMFOBT

I — «B PLEASURE. Compare IV. xi.

\ 4. What one does must always be right ; what one feeia

'—need not always be spoken : — a lesson of prudence.


CH. V.J CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 209

V. The Master said, " The virtuous will be sure to
speak correctly, but those whose speech is good may
act always be virtuous. Men of principle are sure to be
bold, but those who are bold may not always be men of
principle."

VI. Nan-kung Kwoh, submitting an inquiry to Con-
fucius, said, " E was skilful at archery, and Ngaou could
move a boat along upon the land, but neither of them
died a natural death. Yu and Tseih personally wrought
at the toils of husbandry, and they became possessors
of the empire." The Master made no reply, but when
Nan-kung Kwoh went out, he said, " A superior man in-
deed is this ! An esteemer of virtue indeed is this ! "

VII. The Master said, " Superior men, and yet not
always virtuous, there have been, alas ! But there never
has been a mean man, and, at the same time, virtuous."

VIII. The Master said, " Can there be love which
does not lead to strictness with its object ? Can there
be loyalty which does not lead to the instruction of its
object ? "

5. We may PEBDICATB the external from the rNTEENAL, BTTT

not vice vbhsa.

6. Eminent prowess conducting to ruin, eminent virtue
liEADiNO TO empire. Thb MODESTY OF CONFUcius. Nan-kung Kwoh
is said by Choo He to have been the same as Nan Yung in V. i. ; but this
IS doubtful. See on Nan Yung there. Kwoh, it is said, insinuated in
his remark an inquiry, whether Confucius was not like Yu or Tseih, and
the great men of the time so many Es and Ngaous, and the sage was
modestly silent upon the subject. B and Ngaou carry us back to the
twenty-second centurj' before Christ. The first belonged to a family of
prinoelets, famous, from the time of the Emperor Kuh (B.C. 2432), for
their archery, and dethroned the Emperor How Seang, B.C. 2145. E was
afterwards slain by his minister, Han Tsuh, who then married his wife,
and one of their sons was the individual here named Ngaou, who was
subsequently destroyed by the Emperor Shaou-k'ang, the posthumous son
of How-seang. Tseih was the son of the Emperor Kuh, of whose birth
many prodigies are narrated, and appears in the Shoo-king as the
minister of agriculture to Yaou and Shun, by name K'e. The Chow
family traced their descent lineally from him, so that though the empire
only came to his descendants more than a thousand years after his time,
Nah-kiingKwoh speaks as if he had got it himself, as Yu did.

7. The highest virtue not bascly attained to, and INCOMPATI.1
BLB WITH MEANNESS. Compare IV. iv. We must supply the " always,"
to bring out the meaning.

8. A LESSON FOE PARENTS AUD MINISTERS, THAT THEY MUST BE
SI3ICT AND DECIDED.

VOL. I. li


210 coNrrciAN analects. [bk xiv.-.

IX. The Master said, "In preparing the govern-
mental notifications, P'e Shin first made the rough
draught ; She-shuh examined and discussed its contents ;
Tsze-yu, the manager of Foreign intercourse, then im-

. proved and polished it ; and, finally, Tsze-ch'an of Tung-
le gave it the proper softness and finish."

X. 1. Some one asked about Tsze-ch'an. The Master
said, " He was a kind man."

2. He asked about Tsze-se. The Master said, " That
man ! That man ! "

3. He asked about Kwan Chung. "For him," said
the Master, " the city of Peen, with three hundred families,
was taken from the chief of the Pih family, who did not
utter a murmuring word, though, till he was toothless, he
had only coarse rice to eat."

XI. The Master said, " To be poor without murmur-
ing is difficult. To be rich without being proud is easy."

XII. The Master said, " Mang Kung-ch'o is more
than fit to be chief officer in the Families of Chaou

9. The excellence op the officlal notifications of Ch'ing,

OWING TO THE ABILITY OF FOTIK OF ITS OFFICERS. The State of Ch'irig,
small and surroupded by powerful neighbours, was yet fortunate ia having,
able ministers, through whose mode of conducting its government it enjoyed
considerable prosperity. Tsze-ch'an (see V. xv.) was the chief minister
of the State, and in preparing such documents first used the services of
P'e Shin, who was noted for his wise planning of matters. " She-shuh "
shows the relation of the ofiioer indicated to the ruling family. His name
was Yew-keih.

10. The jtjdgmbst op Confucius concerning Tsze-ch'an, Tsze-se,
AND Kwan Chung. 1. See V. xv. 2. Tsze-se was the chief minister of
T'soo. He had refused to accept the nomination to the sovereignty of
the State in preference to the rightful heir, but did not oppose the
usurping tendencies of the rulers of T'soo. He had moreover opposed the
wish of King Gh'aou to employ the sage. 3. Kwan Chung, — see III.
xxii. To reward his merits, the Duke Hwan conferred on him the
domain of the officer mentioned in the text, who had been guilty of some
offence. His submitting, as he did, to his changed fortunes was the best
tribute to Kwan's excellence.

11. It IS HARDER TO BEAK POVERTY ARIGHT THAN TO C.\RRY RICHES.

This sentiment may be controverted.

12. The capacity of Mang Kung-ch'o. Kung-ch'6 was the head of
the M^ng, or Chung-sun family, and according to the " Historical Re-
cords," was valued by Confucius more than any other great man of tha
times in Loo. His estimate of him, however, as appears here, was not
very high. In the sage's time, the government of the State of Tsin was
in the hands of the three Families, Chaou, Wei, and Han, which after-


CH. XTII.] CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 211.

and Wei, but he is not fit to be ministei' to either of the
States T'ang or See."

XIII. 1. Tsze-Ioo asked wha.t constituted a complete
man. The Master said, " Suppose a man with the know-
ledge of Tsang Woo-chung, the freedom from covetousness
of Kung-ch'o, the bravery of Chwang of Peen, and the varied
talents of Yen K'ew ; add to these the accomplishments
of the rules of propriety and music : — such an one might
be reckoned a complete man."

2. He then added, " But what iS . the necessity for a
complete man of the present day to have all these things ?
The man, who in the view of gain thinks of righteousness ;
who in the view of danger is prepared to give up his life;
and who does not forget an old agreement, however far
back it extends : — such a man may be reckoned a com-
plete man."

XIV. 1. The Master asked Kung-ming Kea about
Kung-shuh Wan, saying, " Is it true that your master
speaks not, laughs not, and takes not ? "

2. Kung-ming Kea replied, " This has arisen from the
reporters going beyond the truth. — My master speaks
when it is the time to speak, and so men do not get tired
of his speaking. He laughs when there is occasion to be
joyful, and so men do not get tired of his laughing. He
takes when it is consistent with righteousness to do so,

wards divided the territory among themselves, and became, as we shall
see, in the times of Menoius, three independent principalities. T'ang
was a small state, the place of which is seen in the district of the same
name in the department of Yen-chow, Slian-tung. ScS was another small
state adjacent to it.

13. Of the complete man : — a conversation with Tsze-loo. 1.
Tsang Woo-ohung had been an officer of Loo in the reign anterior to that
in which- Confucius was born. So great was his reputation for wisdom
that the people gave him the title of " sage." Woo was his honorary
epithet, and Chung denotes his family place, among his brothers. Chwang,
it is said, by Choo He, after Chow, one of the oldest commentators, whose
surname only has come down to us, was " great officer of the city of
Peen." In the " Great Collection of Surnames," a secondary branch of
a family of the state of T'saou having settled in Loo, and being gifted
with Peen, its members took their surname thence.

14. The chabacteb op Kung-shuh WiN, who was said neither
TO BPBAK, NOB LAUGH, NOK TAKE. 1. Wan was the honorary epithet
of the individual in question, by name Che, or, as some say. Fa, an
officer of the state of Wei. He was descended from the Duke Heen, and
was himself the founder of the Kung-shuh family, being so designated, I


2fl2 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [BK XlV.)

and so men do not get tired of his taking." The Master
said, " So ! But is it so with him ? "

XV. The Master said, " Tsang Woo-chung, keeping
possession of Fang, asked of the duke of Loo to appoint a
successor to him in his Family. Although it may be said
that-he was not using force with his sovereign, I believe
he was."

XVI. The Master said, " The Duke Wan of Tsin was
crafty and not upright. The Duke Hwan of Ts''e was tip-
right and not crafty."

XVII. 1. Tsze-loo said, " The Duke Hwan caused his
brother Kew to be killed, when Shaou Hwiih died with
hiK master, but Kwan Chung did not do so. May not I
Say that he was wanting in virtue ? ■"

2. The Master said, "The Duke Hwan assembled all
the princes together, and that not with weapons of war


suppose, because of his relation to the reigning duke. Of Kung-ming
Kea nothing seems to be known.

15. CONDEMNAMON OF TSAHO WOO-CHUNG FOR FOBCING A FAVOUK

FSOil HIS PRINCE. Woo-chung (see chapter xiii.) was obliged to fly from
Loo, by the animosity of the Maug family, and took refuge in Choo. As
the head of the Tsang family, it devolved on him to offer the sacrifices in
the ancestral temple, and he wished one of his half-brothers to be mada
the head of the family, in his room, that those might not be neglected.
To strengthen the application for this, which he contrived to get made, he
returned himself to the city of Fang, which belonged to his family, and
thence sent a message'to the court, which was tantamount to a threat "that
if the application were not granted, he would hold possession of the place.
This was what Confucius condemned, — in a matter whicli should have
been left to the duke's grace.

16. The different characters of the dukes Wan of Tsin and,
Hwan of Ts'e. Hwan and Wan were the two first of the five leaders of
the princes of the empire, who play an important part in Chinese history,
during the period of the Chow dynasty known as the Ch'un Ts'ew. Hwan
ruled in Ts'e, B.C. 68,B— 640, and Wan in Tsin B.C. 635—627. Of Duke
Hwan,. see the next chapter. The attributes mentioned by Confucius are
not to be taken absolutely, but as respectively predominating in the two
chiefs.

17. The merit of Kwan Chung:— a conversation with Tsze-loo.
1. "The duke's son Kew," but, to avoid the awkwardness of that render-
ing, I say — " his brother." Hwan and Kew had both been refugees in
different States, the latter having been carried into Loo, away from .the
troubles and dangers of Ts'e, hy, the ministers Kwan Chung and Shaou
Hwuh. On the death of the prince of Ts'e, Hwan anticipated Kew, got to
Ts'e, and took possession, of the State. Soon after, he required the duke
of Loo to put his brother to death, and to deliver up the two niinisters,


,0'i. XVni-] C0NFUCI4N AJTALECTS, .213

and cliariots : — ^it was all through the influetice of Kwan
Chung. Whose beneficence was like his ? Whose bene- ■
ficence was like his ? "

XVIII. 1. Tsze-kiing said, " Kwan Chun^, I appre-
hend, was wanting in \drtue. ' When the Duke Hwan
caused his brother Kew to be killed, Kwan Chung was
not able to die with him. Moreover, he became prime
minister to Hwan."

2. The Master said, " Kwan Chung acted as prime
minister to the Duke Hwan, made him leader of all the
princes, and united and rectified the whole empire. Down
to the present day, the people enjoy the gifts which he
conferred. But for Kwan Chung, we should now be wear-
ing our hair dishevelled, and the lappets of our coats but-
toning on the left side.

3. " Will you require from him the small fidelity of
common men and common women, who would commit
suicide in a stream or ditch, no one knowing anything
about them ? "

when Shaou Hwuh chose to dash his brains out, and die with his master,
while Kwan Chung returned gladly to Ts'e, took service with Hwan,
became his prime minister, and made him supreme arbiter among the
various chiefs of the empire. Such conduct was condemned by Tsze-loo.

2. Confucius defends Kwan Chung, on the ground of the services which he
rendered.

18. The merit op Kwan Chung: — a coNVEnSATioif with Tsze-
Kima. 1. Tsze-loo's doubts about Kwan Chung arose from his not
dying with the Prince Kew ; Tsze-kung's turned principally on his subse-
quently becoming premier to Hwan. 2. Anciently the right was the posi-
tion of honour, and the right hand, moreover, is the more convenient for
use, but the practiV^ of the barbarians was contrary to that of China in
both points. The sentence of Confucius is, that but for Kwan Chung, his
countrymen would have sunk to the state of the rude tribes about them.

3. By "small fidelity " is intended the faithfulness of a married couple of
the common people, where the husband takes no concubine in addition to
his wife. The argument is this : — " Do you think Kwan Chung should
have considered himself bound to Kew, as a common man considers himself
bound to his wife ? And woald you have had him commit suicide, as
common people will do on any slight occasion 1 " Commentators pay that
there is underlying the vindication this fact: — that Kwang Chung's and
Shaou Hwuh's adherence to Kew was wrong in the first place, Kew being
the younger brother. Chung's conduct therefore was not to be judged as
if Kew had been the senior. There is nothing of this, however, in Con-
fucius' words. He vindicates Chung simply on the ground of his subse-
qnent services, and his reference to " the small fidelity" of husband and
wife among the common people is very unhappy.


214 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK XIV

XIX. 1. The officer. Seen, who had been/amiZi/-niiiiis-
ter to Kung-shuh Wan, ascended to the prince's court in
company with Wan.

2. The Master having heard of it, said, " He deserves
to be considered wAn."

XX. 1. The Master was speaking about the unprin-
cipled course of the Duke Ling of Wei, when Ke K'ang
said, " Since he is of such a character, how is it he does
not lose his throne t"

2. Confucius said, "The Chung-shuh, Yu, has the su-
perintendence of his guests and of strangers; the litanist,
T'^o, has the management of his ancestral temple ; and
Wang-sun Kea has the direction of the army and forces :
— with such officers as these, how should he lose his
throne ? "

XXI. The Master said, " He who speaks without mo-
desty will find it difficult to make his words good.''

XXII. 1. Ch'in Ch'ing murdered the Duke Keen of
Ts'e.

2. Confucius bathed, went to court, and informed the
Duke Gae, saying, " Ch'in Hang has slain his sovereign.
I beg that you will undertake to punish him."

19. The merit of Kung-shuh WXn m becommending to orpicE
A MAJf OF WOKTH. Kung-shuh W^n, see chapter xiv. The paragraph is
to be understood as intimating that Kung-shuh, seeing the worth and
capacity of his minister, had recommended him to his sovereign, and after-
wards was not ashamed to appear in the same rank with him at court.

20. The IMPOETAKCE OF GOOD AlifD ABLE MINISTEBS: — SEEN IN THE

STATE OP Wei. 1. Zing was the honorary epithet of Yuen, duke of
Wei, B.C. 533—492. He was the husband of Nan-tsze, VI. xxvi. 2. The
Chung-shuh, Yu, is the K'ung Wan of V. xiv. Chung-shuh expresses his
family position, according to the degrees of kindred. " The litanist, T'o,"
— see VX. xiv. Wang-sun Kea,— see III. xiii.

21. EXTEAVAGANT SPEECH HAKD TO BE MADE GOOD. Compare IV.
xxii.

22. How Confucius wished to avenge the mukdeb of the duke
OP Ts'e :— his riohteous and public spieit. 1. Men,—" indolent in
not a single virtue," and "tranquil, not speaking unadvisedly," are the
meanings attached to this as an honorary epithet ; while Ck'-vng indi-
cates " tranquillizer of the people, and establisher of government." The
murder of the Duke Keen by his officer, Gh'ia Hang, took place B.C. 480,
barely two years before Confucius' death. 2. " Bathing " implies all the
fasting and other solemn preparation, as for a sacrifice or other great occa-
sion. According to the account of this matter in the Tso Ch'uen, Confucius
meant that the Duke Gae should himself, with the forces of Loo, under-
take the punishment of the regicide. Some modern commentators cry


CH. SXIII.J COITFUCIAH ANALECTS. 215

3. The duke said, " Inform the chiefs of the three fami-
lies of it."

4. Confucius retired, and said, " Following, as I do, in
the rear of the great officers, I did not dare not to repre-
sent such a matter, and my prince says, ' Inform the chiefs
of the three families of it.' "

5. He went to the chiefs, and informed them, but they
would not act. Confucius tlien said, " Following in the
rear of the great officers, I did not dare not to represent
such a matter."

XXIII. Tsze-loo asked how a sovereign should be
served. The Master said, " Do not impose on him, and,
moreover, withstand him to his face."

XXIV. The Master said, " The progress of the supe-
rior man is upwards ; the progress of the mean man is
downwards."

XXV. The Master said, "In ancient times, men
learned with a view to their own improvement. Ifow-a-
days, men learn with a view to the approbation of others."

XXVI. 1. Keu Pih-yuh sent a messenger with friend-
ly inquiiies to Confucius.

2. Confucius sat with him, and questioned him.
" What," said he, " is your master engaged in ? " The
messenger replied, " My master is anxious to make his
faults few, but he has not yet succeeded." He then went
out, and the Master said, " A messenger indeed ! A
messenger indeed ! "

out against this. The sage's advice, they say, would have been that the
duke should report the thing to the emperor, and with his authority asso-
ciate other princes with himself to do justice on the ofifender. 3. This is
taken as the remark of Confucius, or his colloquy with himself, when he had
gone out from the duke. The last observation was spoken to the chiefs,
to reprove them for their disregard of a crime, which concerned every
public man.

23. How THE MINISTER OF A PEINCE MUST BE SINCERE AND BOLDLY
OT'EIRHT.

2i. The different progressive tksdencies of the superior man
and the mean man.

25. The different motives of learners in old times, and in

THE TIMES of CONFUCIUS.

26. An ADMIRABLE MESSENOEE. Pih-yuh was the designation of Keu
Yuen, an officer of the state of Wei, and a disciple of the sage. ' His place
is now first, east, in the outer court of the temples. Confucius had lodged
with him when in Wei, and it was after his return to Loo that Pih-yuh
sent to inr^uire fo: him.


21G CONFUCIAN ANALECTS'. [bK XiV.

XXVII. The Master said, " He who is not in any par-
ticular office has nothing to do with plans for the admiil-
istration of its duties."

XXVIII. 1 . The philosopher Tsang said, " The supe-
rior man, in his thoughts, does not go out of his place."

XXIX. The Master said, " The superior man is modest
in his speech, but exceeds in his actions."

- XXX( 1. The Master said, "The way of the superior
man is threefold, but I am not equal to it. Virtuous, he is
free from anxieties ; wise, he is free from perplexities ;
bold, he is free from fear."

2. Tsze-kung said, " Master, that is what you yourself
say."

XXXI. Tsze-kung was in the habit of comparing men
together. The Master said, " Ts'ze must have reached a
high pitch of excellence ! Now, I have not leisure fdr
this."
,-— XXXII. The Master said, " I will not be concerned at
men's not knowing me ; I will be concerned at my own
want of ability."

XXXIII. The Master said, "He who does not anti-
cipate attempts to deceive him, nor think beforehand of

27. A repetition of VIII. xiv.

28. The thoughts of a supeeiok man in hakmont with h:3
POSITION. Tsang here quotes from the illustration of the fifty-second
diagram of the Yih-king, but he leaves out a character, and thereby alters
the meaning somewhat. What is said in the Yih, is—" The superior man
is thoughtful, and so does not go out of his place." — The chapter, it is
said, is inserted here, from its analogy with the preceding.

29. The supbbior man more in deeds than in wobds.

30. confuoius' humble estimate of himself, which tsze-kunq

DENIES.

31. One's wokk is with one"s self : — against making compaei-

SONS.

32. Concern should be about our personal attainment, and
NOT ABOUT THE ESTIMATION OF OTHERS. See I. xvi., et ol. A critical
".anon is laid down here by Choo He : — " All passages, the same in mean-
ing and in words, are to be understood as having been spoken only once,
and their recurrence is the vrork of the compilers. Where the meaning is
the same and the language a little different, they are to be taken as having
been repeated by Confucius himself, with the variations." According to
this rule, the sentiment in this chapter was repeated by the master in four
different utterances. •

i;:i. Quick discrxmls'aticn ^vithout suspiciousness is highly

MERiTOalOUS.


,CH. XXXIT.] CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. "217

tis not being believed, and yet apprehends these things
readily when they occur ;— ^is he not a man of superior
worth ? "

XXXrV. 1. Wei-shang Mow said to Confucius, "K'ew,
how is it that you keep roosting about ? Is it not that
you are an insinuating talker ? "

2, Confucius said, "I do not dare to play the part of
such a talker, but I hate obstinacy."

XXXV. The Master said, " A horse is called a k'e,
not because of its strength, but because of its other good
qualities."

XXXVI. 1. Some one said, "What do you say con-
cerning the principle that injury should be recompensed
with kindness ? "

2. The Master said, ''With what then will you recom-
pense kindness ?

3. " Recompense injury with justice, and recompense
kindness with kindness."

XXXVII. 1. The Master said, " Alas ! there is no one
that knows me."

34. CONPTJCIUS NOT SBLF-WILLBD, AND YET NO GLIB-TONGUED
TALKER : — DEFENCE OF HIMSELF FEOM THE CHARGE OF AN AGED

.EBPEOVEE. From Wei-shang's addressing Confucius by his name, it ia
.presumed that he was an old man. Such a liberty in a young man would
have been impudence. It is presumed, also, that he was one of those men
who kept themselves retired from the world in disgust. " Eooster-er," as
a bird, is used contemptuously with reference to Confucius going about
among the princes, and wishing to be called to office.

35. ViETUE, AND NOT STEENGTH. THE PIT SUBJECT OP PRAISE. £?e

was the name of a famous horse of antiquity who could run 1000 le in one
day. See the dictionary m«oc. It is here used generally for " a good horse."

36. Good is not to be ebturnbd poe evil ; evil is to be met
eiMPLY WITH justice. 1. The phrase " Eeoompense injury with kind-
ness " is found in Laou-tsze ; but it is likely that Confucius' questioner
simply consulted him about it as a saying which he had heard and was
inclined to approve himself. 2. How far the ethics of Confucius fall below
the Christian standard is evident from this chapter. The same expressions
are attributed to Confucius in the Le-ke, XXXII. 11, and it is there
added, — " He who returns good for evil is a man who is careful of his
person," i. e., will try to avert danger from himself by such a course.
One author says, that the injuries intended by the questioner were only
trivial matters, which perhaps might be dealt with in the way he men-
tioned, but great offences, is those against a sovereign, a father, may not
be dealt with by such an inversion of the principles of justice. The Master
himself, however, does not fence his deliverance in any way.

37. Confucius, lamenting that men did not know him, rests


'218 CONFUCUH ANAllCTS. [bK XIV.

2. Tsze-kung said, " What do you mean by tlius say-
ing — that no one knows you ? " The Master replied, " I
do not murmur against Heaven. I do not grumhle against
men. My studies lie low, and my penetration rises high.
But there is Heaven j — that knows me ! "

XXXVni. 1. The Kung-pih, Leaou, having slandered
Tsze-loo to Ke-sun, Tsze-fuh King-pih informed Con-
fucius of it, saying, " Our Master is certainly being led
astray by the Kung-pih, Leaou, but I have still power
enough left to cut Leaou off, and expose his corpse in the
market and in the court."

2. The Master said, " If my principles are to advance,
it is so ordered. If they are to fall to the ground, it is so
ordered. What can the Kung-pih, Leaou, do, where such
ordering is concerned ? "

XXXIX. I. The Master said, " Some men of worth re-
tire from the world.

2. " Some retire from particular countries.

3. " Some retire because of disrespectful looks.

4. " Some retire because of contradictory language.'*


IN THE THOUGHT THAT Hbaven KNEW HIM. Confttcius referred in his
complaint, commentators say, to the way in which he pursued his course,
simply, out of his own conviction of duty, and for his own improvement,
without regard to success, or the opinions of others. 2. " My studies iio
low, and my penetration rises high " is literally — " beneath I learn, above
I penetrate ; "^the meaning appears to be that he contented himself with
the study of men and things, common matters as more ambitious spirits
would deem them, but from those he rose to understand the high princi-
l>Ies involved in them, — " the appointments of Heaven," according to one
commentator.

38. How CoNPucnrs bested, as to the pboobess op his

DOCTRINES, ON THE OEDEEING OF HEAVEN : — ON OCCASION OP TSZB-

Loo's BEING SLANDEBED. Leaou, called Kung-pih (literally, duke's
uncle), probably from an affinity with the ducal house, is said by some to
have been a disciple of the sage, but that is not likely, as we find him here
slandering Tsze-loo, that he might not be able, in his official connection
with the Ke family, to carry the Master's lessons into practice. Tsze-
fuh King-pih was an officer of Loo. Exposing the bodies of criminals was
a sequel of their execution. The bodies of " great officers " were so
exposed in the court, and those of meaner criminals iu the market-place.
" The market-place and the court " came to be employed together, though
the exposure could take place only in one place.

39. DiPPEBENT CAUSES WHY MEN OP WORTH WITHDRAW FEOM
PUBLIC LIFE, AND DIPPEBENT EXTENTS TO WHICH THEY SO WITHDRAW
IHEMSELVES,


CH. XL.]~ CONFCCIAN ANALECTS. 219

XL. The Master said, " Those who have done this are
seven men."

XLI. Tsze-loo happening to pass the night in Shih-
mun, the gate-keeper said to him, " Whom do you come
from?" Tsze-loo said, " From Mr K'ung." "It is he,
■ — -is it not ? " — said the other, " who knows the im-
practicable nature of the times, and yet will be doinff in
them."

XLII. 1. The Master was playing, owe cZ«f-2/, on a musical
stone in Wei, when a man, carrying a straw basket, passed
the door of the house where Confucius was, and said,
"His heart is full who so beats the musical stone."

2. A little while after he added, " How contemptible
is the one-idea obstinacy those sounds display ! When
one is taken no notice of, he has simply at once to give over
his wish for public employment. ' Deep water must be
crossed with the clothes on ; shallow water may be waded
through with the clothes rolled up.' "

3. The Master said, " How determined is he in his pur-
pose ! But this is not difficult." •

XLIII. 1. Tsze-chang said, " What is meant when the
SHOO says that Kaou-tsung, while observing the usual im-
perial mourning, was for three years without speaking ?"

2. The Master said, "Why must Kaou-tsung be refer-
red to as an example of this ? The ancients all did so.
When the sovereign died, the officers all attended to their

40. The number op men of worth who had withdrawn from
PUBLIC LIFE IN CoNFUCius' TIME. This chapter is understood, both by
Choo He and the old commentators, in oonnection with the preceding, as
appears in the translation. Some also give the names of the seven men,
which, according to Ghoo, is " chiselling," i. e., forcing out an illustration
of the te;it.

41. Condemnation op Confucius' course in seeking to be
employed, by one who had withdrawn from public life. the
site of Shih-mnn is referred to the district of Ch'ang-ts'ing, department of
Ts'e-nan, in Shan-tung. The keeper was probably one of the seven worthies,
spoken of in the preceding chapter. We might translate Shih-mun by
" Stony-gate." It seems to have been one of the frontier passes between
Ts'e and Loo.

42. The judgment of a retired worthy on Confucius' course,
and remark of confuoius thereon.

43. how govellnmbnt was carried on during the three years
OP SILENT MOURNING BY THE EMPEROR. See the Shoo-king, IV. viii. 1,
but the passage there is not exactly as in the text. It is there said that


230 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK XIVj

several dutieSj takinff instructions from tlie prime minister
for three years."

XLIV. The Master said, " When rulers love to observe
the rules of propriety, the people respond readily to the
calls on them for service."

..'"XLV. Tsze-loo asked what constituted the superior
man. The Master said, " The cultivation of himself in
reverential carefulness." "And is this all?" said TszB'
loo. " He cultivates himself so as to give rest to .others,"
was the reply. "And is this all ? " again asked Tsze-hio.
The Master said, "He cultivates himself so as to give rest
to all the people. He cultivates himself so as to give rest
to all the people : — even Yaou and Shun were still solicit-
ous about this."

XLVI. Yuen Jang was squatting on his heels, and so
waited the approach q/'the Master, who said to him: "In
youth, not humble as befits a junior ; in manhood, doing
nothing worthy of being handed down ; and living on to
old age : — this is to be a pest." With this he hit him on
the shank with his staff.

Kaou-tsung, after the three years' mourning, still did not speak. Kaou-
tsung was the honorary epithet of the Emperor Woo-ting, B.C. 1323 — 1263.
• — Tsze-ohang was perplexed to know how government could be carried on
during so long a period of silence.

44. How A LOVE OF THE RULES OF PEOPEIETY IN EULBES FACILI-
TATES GOVEENMENT.

45. KEVEEENT SELF-CULTIVATION THE DISTINGUISHING CHAEACTER-
ISTIC OP THE KEtnr-TSZE. " All the people " is literally, " the hundred
surnames," which, as a designation for the mass of the people, occurs as
early as in the first Book of the Shoo. It is = " the surname.? of the
hundred families," into which number the families of the people wei-e per-
haps divided at a very early time. The surnames of the Chinese now
amount to . several hundreds. A small work, made in the Sung dynasty,
contains nearly 450. We find a ridiculou.s reason given for the surnames
being a hundred, to the effect that the ancient sages gave a surname for
each of the five notes of the scale in music, and of the five groat relations
of life and of the four seas ; consequently, 5 X 5 X 4=100." It is to be
observed, that in the Shoo-king, we find "a hundred surnames," inter-
changed with "ten thousand surnames," and it would seem needless,
therefore, to seek to attach a definite explanation to the number. On the
concluding remark, — see VI. xxviii.

46. Confucius' conduct to au unmannbely old man of hm
ACQUAUITANCB. Yuen Jang was an old acquaintance of Confucius, but
had adopted the principles of Laou-tsze, and gave himself extraordinary
licen,je in his behaviour. — See an instance in the I.e-ke, II. Pt II. lii. 24.
-The address of Confucius might be translated in the second person, but it


Ch". XLVII.] CONFUCIAN ANAlECtS. S21

XLVII. 1. A lad of tlie village of K'eueh was em-
pleyed by Gonfudus to carry the messages between him
and his visitors. Some one aslsed about him, saying, " I
suppose he has made great progress."

2. The Master said, " I observe that he is fond of oc-
cupying the seat of a full-grovm man; I observe that he
Walks shoulder to shoulder with his elders. He is not one
who is seeking to make progress in learning. He wishes
quickly to become a man."


BOOK XV.


Chaptee I. 1. The Duke Ling of Wei asked Confucius
about tactics. Confucius replied, " I have heard all about
sacrificial vessels, but I have not learned military matters."
On this, he took his departure the next day.

2. When he was in Ch'in, their provisions were ex-
hausted, and his followers became so ill that they were
unable to rise.

3. Tsze-loo, with evldout dissatisfaction, said, "Has
the superior man likewise to endure in this way ?" The

is perhaps better to keep to the third, leaving the application to be under-
Btood.

47. Confucius' employment of a fohward youth. 1. There is a
tradition that Confucius lived and taught in the village of K'eueh ; but it
is much disputed. The inquirer supposed that Confucius' employment of
the lad was to distinguish him for the progress which he had made. 2.
Aotioi'ding to the rules of ceremony, a youth must sit in the corner, the
bo"dy.Gf the rooto being reserved for full-grown men. See the Le-ke, II. Pt
I. i. 17. In walking with an ^Ider, a youth was required to keep a little
behind him. See the Le-ke, III. v. 15. Confucius' employment of the
lad, therefore, was to feaoh him the courtesies required by his years, as he -
would not dare to give himself his usual airs with the sage's visitors.

Heading and subjects of this book. "The duke. Ling, of Wei."'
The contents of the Book, -contained in" forty chapters, are as miscellaneous
as those of the former. Rather they are more so, some- chapters bearing
oa the public administration of government, several being occupied with
the superior man, and others containing lessons of praotieal wisdom. " AV
the subjects," says Hing Ping, "illustrate the feeling ofthe sense of shame ^
aind consequent pursuit of the correct course, and therefdre the Book
immediately follows the pireceding one."

■1. OONPUeiUS BEFUSES TO TALK. ON MILITARY AFFAIRS. IN THE
MIDST or DISTRESS, HE SHOWS THE DISCIPLES HOW THE SUPERIOR MAN

IS ABOVE DISTRESS. 1. " Abbut sacrificialvessels "is literally, "about


222 OONTOCIAN ANALECTS. " [bK XV,

Master said, " The superior man may indeed have to en-
dure want, but the mean man, when he is in want, gives
way to unbridled license."

II. 1. The Master said, " Ts'ze, you think, I suppose,
that I am one who learns many things and keeps them in
memory ? "

2. Tsze-kung replied, "Yes, — ^but perhaps it is not
so?"

3. "No," was the answer; "I seek a unity all-per-
vading."

III. The Master said, "Yew, those who know virtue
are few."

/^V. The Master said, " May not Shun be instanced as
having governed efficiently without exertion ? What did
he do ? He did nothing but gravely and reverently oc-
cupy his imperial seat."

'^ Y. 1. Tsze-chang asked how a man might conduct
himself, so as to he everywhere appreciated.

the 'clio' and 'tow,'" vessels with which Confucius, when a boy, was fond
of playing. He wished, by his reply and departure, to teach the duke that
the rules of propriety, and not war, were essential to the government of a
St^te. 2. From Wei, Confucius proceeded to Ch'in, and there met with
the distress here mentioned. It is probably the same which is referred to
in XI. ii; 1, though there is some chronological difficulty about the
subject.

2. How Confucius aimed at the knowledge op ah all peevad-
INO UiriTT. This chapter is to be compared with IV. xv. ; only, says
Choo He, " that is spoken with reference to practice, and this with refer-
ence to knowledge." But the design of Confucius was probably the same
in them both ; and I understand the first paragraph here as meaning —
" Ts'ze, do you think that I am aiming, by the exercise of memory, to
acquire a varied and extensive knowledge ? " Then the third paragraph
is equivalent to : — " I am not doing this. My aim is to know myself, —
the mind which embraces all knowledge, and regulates all practice."

3. Few really know virtue. This is understood as spoken with
reference to the dissatisfaction manifested by Tsze-Ioo in chapter I. If he
had possessed » right knowledge of virtue, he would not have been so
affected by distress.

4. How Shun was able to govekn without personal effort.
" Made himself reverent " and " He gravely and reverently occupied his
imperial seat" is literally, " ho correctly adjusted his southward face; " see

" VI. i. Shun succeeding Yaou, there were many ministers of great virtue
and ability, to occupy all the offices of the government. All that Shun
did, was by his grave and sage example. This is the lesson — the influence

■~*f a ruler's personal character.

6. Conduct that will be appreciated in all parts of thk


CH. TI.] CONFrCiAN ANALECTS. 223

2. Tlie Master said, "Let his words be sincere and
trutlifulj and liis actions honourable and careful; — such
conduct may be practised among tbe rude tribes of the
South or the North. If his words be not sincere and
truthful, and his actions not honourable and careful, will
he, with such conduct, be appreciated, even in his neigh-
bourhood ?

3. "When he is standing, ]et him see those two things,
as it were fronting him. When he is in a carriage, let
him see them attached to the yoke. Then may he subse-
quently carry them into practice."

4. Tsze-chang wrote these counsels on the end of his
sash.

VI. 1. The Master said, " Truly straightforward was
the historiographer Yu. When good government pre-
vailed in his state, he was like an arrow. When bad
government prevailed, he was like an arrow.

2. "A superior man indeed is Keu Pih-yuh ! When
good government prevails in his state, he is to be found
in office. When bad government prevails, he can roll
his principles up, and keep them in his breast."

VII. The Master said, " When a man may be spoken
with, not to speak to him is to err in reference to the
man. When a man may not be spoken with, to speak to
him is to err in reference to our words. The wise err
neither in regard to their man nor to their words."

VIII. The Master said, " The determined scholar and
the man of virtue will not seek to live at the expense of

WOELD. I . We must supply a good deal to bring out the meaning here.
Choc He compares the question with that other of Tsze-chang about the
scholar who may be called " distinguished ;" see XII. xx.

6. The admikablb chaiiactees of Tsze-ttj and Keu Pih-yuh. 1 .
Tsze-yu was the historiographer of Wei. On his death-bed, he left a mes-
sage for his prince, and gave orders that his body should be laid out in a
place and manner liliely to attract his attention when he paid the visit of
condolence. It was so, and the message then delivered had the desired
effect. Perhaps it was on hearing this that Confucius made this remark.
2. Keu Pih-yuh, — see XIV. xxvi. Commentators say that Tsze-yu's uni-
form straightforwardness was not equal to Pih-yuh's rightly adapting him-
self to circumstances.

7. Theke ake men with whom to speak, and men with whom to
keep silence. the wise know them.

8. High natures value virtue mobe than life. " They will
sacrifice their lives " may be translated — " Xhey will kill themselves." No


224 CONFUCIAN: ANALECTS. [bK: X7.

injuring tHeir' virtue. They will even sacrifice their
lives to preserve their virtue complete."

IX. Tsze-kung asked about the practice of virtue. The
Master said, " The mechanic, yfho wishes to do his work
well, must first sharpen his tools. "When you are living
in any state, take service with the most worthy among its
great ofiicers, and make friends of the most virtuous
among its schoMrs."

X. 1. Yen Yuen asked ho\v the government of a
country should be administered.

2. The Master said, "Follow the seasons of Hea.

3. "Ride in the state carriage of Yin.

4. " Wear the ceremonial cap of Chow.

5. " Let the music be the Shaou with its pantomimes.

6. " Banish the songs of Ch'ing, and keep far from
specious talkqrs. The songs of Ch'ing are licentious;
specious talkers are dangerous."

doubt suicide is included in the expression (see the amplification of Ho
An's commentary), and Confucius here justifies that act, as in certain cases
expressive of high virtue.

9. How INTERCOHESE WITH THE GOOD AIDS THE PEACTICB OP

VIBTUE. Compare Pro%'erbs xxvii. 17, "Iron sharpenetli iron ; so a man
sharpeneth the countenance of his friend."

10. Ceetain kules, exemplified in the ancient dyuasties, to
be pollowed in governing: — a reply to yen yuen. 1. the
disciple modestly put his question with reference to the government of a
State, but.the Master answers it according to the diseiple's lability, as if it
had been aboiit the ruling of the empire. 2. The thi-^ great ancient
dynasties began the year at difl'erent times. Aooordiog to ah ancient
tradition, " Heaven wa^ opened at the time tsze ; EartH appeared at the
time cA'oTi) ; and Man was born at the time yin. ,Tsze commences in
our December, at the winter Solstice; ch'om a month later; .and yin a
month after cTi'om. The Chow dynasty began its year with tsze ; the
Shang with oVom ; and the Hea with yin,.j As human life then com-
menced, the year In reference to human latrours, naturally proceeds from
the spring, and Confucius approved the rifle of the Hea dynasty. His
decision has been the law of all dynasties since the Ts'in. See the " Bis-
oours PrMimiiiaire, Chapter I.," in Gaubll's Shoo King. 3. The state
carriage of the Yin dynasty was plain and substantial, which Confuciua
preferred to the more ornamented ones of Chow. 4. Yet he does not
object to the more elegant cap of that dynasty, " the cap," says Choo He,-
".being a small thing, and placed over all the body." 5. The shaou was
the miisio of Shwn ; see III. xxv. ; the " dancers," or " pantomimes," kept
time to the music; See the Shoo-king II. Bk II. 21. 6. " The sounds of
Ch'ing," meaning both the songs of Ch'ing and the appropriate music to.
which they were -sung. Those songs form the seventh book of the first
division of the She-kin^ and aj-e here characterized justly. :;


3H. XI.] CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 225

XI. The Master said, " If a man take no tliouglit about
wtat is distant, he will find sorrow near at hand."

XII. The Master said, " It is all over ! I have not seen
one who loves virtue as he loves beauty.^'

XIII. The Master said, " Was not Tsang Wan like one
who had stolen his situation ? He knew the virtue and
the talents of Hwuy of Lew-hea, and yet did not procure
that he sliould stand with him in court."

XIV. The Master said, " He who requires much from
himself and little from others, will keep himself from being
the object of resentment."

XV. The Master said, " When a man is not in the habit
of saying—' What shall I think of this ? What shall I
think of this ? ' I can indeed do nothing with him ! "

XVI. The Master said, " When a number of people are
together, for a whole day, without their conversation
turning on righteousness, and when they are fond of car-
rying out the suggestions of a small shrewdness ; — theirs is
indeed a hard case."

XVII. The Master said, " The superior man in every-
thing considers righteousness to be essential. He per-
forms it according to the rules of propriety. He brings
it forth in humility. He completes it with sincerity. This
is indeed a superior man."

11. The necessity of forethought and peecaution.

12. The baeitt op a TBtrB love op virtue. " It Is all over," — see
V. xxvi. ; the rest is a repetition of EX. xvii., said to have been spoken by
Confucius when he was in Wei, and saw the duke riding out openly in the
same carriage with Kau-tsze.

13. Against jealousy op others' talents ; — the case op Tsang
Wan, and Hwdt op Lew-hea. Tsang Wan-chung, — see V. xvii. Tsang
Wan would not recommend Hwuy, because he was an abler and better mart
than himself. Hwuy is a famous name in China. He was an ofSoer of
Loo, styled Hwuy after death, and derived his revenue from a town called
Lew-hea, though some say that it was a Um or willow tree, overhanging
his house, which made him to be known as Lew-hea Hwuy — " Hwuy
that lived under the willow tree." See Meneius II. Bk. I. ix.

H. The WAY TO WARD off resentments.

15. Nothing can be made op people who take things easily,
NOT giving themselves the trouble to think. Compare VII. viii.

J 6. Against frivolous talkers and superficial speculators.
" A hard case," i. e., they will make nothing out, and nothing can be
made of them.

17. The conduct of the superior man is righteous, courteous,

HUMBLE, AND sincere.

VOL, I. ia


226 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK XY.

XVIII. The Master said, " The superior man is dis-
tressed by his want of ability. He is not distressed by-
men's not knowing him."

XIX. The Master said, " The superior man dislikes the
thought of his name not being mentioned after his death."

XX. The Master said, " What the superior man seeks,
is in himself. What the mean man seeks, is in others."

XXI. The Master said, " The superior man is dignified,
but does not wrangle. He is sociable, but not a parti-
zan."

XXII. The Master said, " The superior man does not
promote a man simply on account of his words, nor does
he put aside good words because of the man.'''

> XXIII. Tsze-kung asked, saying, " Is there one word
which may serve as a rule of practice for all one's life ? "
The Master said, " Is not eecipeocity such a word ? What
you do not want done to yourself, do not do to others."
_, XXIV. 1. The Master said, "In my writing or speak-
ing of men, whose evil do I blame, whose goodness do I
praise, beyond what is proper ? If I do sometimes ex-
ceed in praise, there must be ground for it in my examina-,
tion of the individual.

18. OCK OWN INCOMPETENCY, AND NOT OUB REPUTATION, THE
PROPER BUSINESS OF CONCERN TO US. See XIV. xxxii., et al.

19. The superior man wishes to be had in remembrance. Not,
say the commentators, that the superior man cares about fame, but fame
is the invariable concomitant of merit. He can't have been the superior
man, if he be not remembered.

20. His OWN APPROBATION IS THE SUPERIOR MAN'S RULE. THE
APPROBATION OF OTHERS IS THE MEAN MAN'S. Compare XIV. XXV.

21. The SUPERIOR MAN is DIGNIFIED AND AFFABLE, WITHOUT THE

FAULTS TO WHICH THOSE QUALITIES OFTEN LEAD. Compare I£. xiv.. and
VII. XXX.

22. The SUPERIOR MAN IS DISCRIMINATING IN HIS EMPLOYMENT OF

men and judging of statements.

23. The great principle of reciprocity is the rule of life.
Compare V. xi. It js singular that Tsze-kung professes tliere to act on the
principle here recommended to him,

24. Confucius showeii his respect for men by strict truth-
fulness IN AWARDING PRAISE OB CENSURE. The meaning of this chap-
ter seems to be this : — First, Confucius was very careful in according praise
or blame. If he ever seemed to go beyond the truth, it was on the side of
praise ; and even then he saw something in the individual which made
him believe that his praise of him would in the future be justified. Second,
In this matter, Confucius acted as the founders of the three great dynasties


CH. XXV.J CONFUCIAN ANALECTS'. 227

2. "^This people supplied the ground why the founder n
of thn three dynasties pursued the path, of straightforward-
ness."

XXV. The Master said, " Even in my early days, a
historiographer would leave a blank in his text, and he
who had a horse would lend him to another to ride. Now,
alas ! there are no such things."

XXVI. The Master said, " Specious words confound
virtue. Want of forbearance in small matters confounds
great plans."

XXVII. The Master said, "When the multitude hate
a man, it is necessary to examine into the case. When
the multitude like a man, it is necessary to examine into
the case." .

XXVIII. The Master said, " A man can enlarge the
principles ivMch he follows ; those principles do not en-
large the man."

had done. Third, Those founders and himself were equally influenced by a
regard to the truth-approving nature of man. This was the rule for the
former in their institutions, and for him in his judgments.

25. Instances of. the degeneeacy of Confucius' times. The
appointment of the historiographer is referred to Hwang-te or " The
Yellow emperor,' ' the inventor of the cycle. The statutes of Chow mention
no fewer than five classes of such officers. They were attached also to
the feudal courts, and what Confucius says, is, that, in his early days, a
historiographer, on any point about which he was not sure, would leave a
blank ; so careful were they to record only the truth. This second sen-
tence is explained in Ho An. — " If any one had a horse which he could not
tame, he would lend it to another to ride and exfircise it I " — The comment-
ator Hoo says well that the meaning of the chapter must be left in uncer-
tainty.

26. The danger op specious words and of imp.4.tience. The
subject of the second sentence is not "a little impatience," but impatience
in little things; " the hastiness," it is said, " of women and small people."'

27. In judging of a man we must not be guided by his beino
genehallt likf,d or disliked. Compare XIII. xxiv.

28. PlllNCIPLES OF DUTY AN INSTRUMENT IN THE HAND OF MAN.'

Tills sentence is quite mystical in its sententiousness. One writer says —
" The subject here is the path of duty, which all men, in their various
relations, have to pursue, and man has the three virtues of knowledge,
benevolence, and fortitude, wherewith to pursue that path, and so he
enlarges it. That virtue, remote, occupying an empty place, cannot enlarge
man, needs not to be said." That writer's account of the subject here js
probably correct, and "duty unapprehended," "in an empty place," can
have no effect on any man ; but this is a mere truism. Duty apprehended
is constantly enlarging, elevating, and energizing multitudes who hadpre-

15 •


228 CONFUCIAN ANA1.ECTS. [bK XT.

XXIX. The Master said, " To have faults and not to
reform them, — ^thisj indeed, should be pronounced having
faults."

XXX. The Master said, " I have been the whole day
without eating, and the whole night without sleeping : —
occupied with thinking. It was of no use. The better
plan is to learn."

XXXI. The Master said, " The object of the. superior
man is truth. Food is not his object. There is plough-
ing ; — even in that there is sometimes want. So with
learning ; — emolument may be found in it. The superior
man is anxious lest he should not get truth ; he is not
anxious lest poverty should come upon him."

XXXII. 1. The Master said, " When a man's know-
ledge is suflBcient to attain, and his virtue is not sufficient
to enable him to hold, whatever he may have gained, he
will lose again.

2. "When his knowledge is sufficient to attain, and he
has virtue enough to hold fast, if he cannot govern with
dignity, the people will not respect him.

viously been unoognizant of it. The first clause of the chapter may be
granted ; but the second is not in accordance with truth.

29. Thk culpability of not eefobming knowu taults. Compare

I. viii. Choo He's commentary appears to make the meaning somewhat
different. He says: — -"If one having faults can change them, he comes
back to the condition of having no faults. But if he do not change
them, then they go on to their completion, and will never come to be
changed."

30. The fkuitlessness of thinking without keading. Compare

II. XV., where the dependence of acquisition and reflection on each other
is set forth. — Many commentators say that Confucius merely transfers the
things which he here mentions to himself for the sake of others, not that
it ever was really thus with himself.

31. The supekiob man should not be mercenaky, but have
teuth fob his object. " Want may be in the midst of ploughing,"—
i. e., husbandry is the way to plenty, and yet despite the labours of the
husbandman, a famine or scarcity sometimes occurs. The application of
this to the case of learning, however, is not very apt. Is the emolument
that sometimes comes with learning a calamity like famine? — Ch'ing
E'ang-shing's view is :— " Although a man may plough, yet, not learn-
ing, he will come to hunger. If he learn, he will get emolument, and
though he do not plough, he will not be in want. This is advising men
to learn ! "

32. How KNOWLEDGE WITHOUT ^^KTUB IB NOT LASTING, AND TO
KNOWLEDGE AND VIRTUE A BULEK SHOULD ADD DIGNITY AND THE
RULES OF PROPRIETY.


CH. XXXIU.] CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 229

3. ''When his knowledge is sufficient to attain, and
he has virtue enough to hold fast; when he governs
also with dignity, yet if he try to move the people con-
trary to the rules of propriety : — full excellence is not
reached."

XXXIII. The Master said, " The superior man cannot
be known in little matters ; but he may be intrusted with
great concerns. The small man may not be intrusted
with great concerns, but he may be known in little
matters."

XXXIV. The Master said, "Virtue is more to man
than either water or fire. I have seen men die from
treading on water and fire, but I have never seen a man
die from treading the course of virtue."

XXXV. The Master said, "Let every man consider
virtue as what devolves on himself. He may not yield
the performance of it even to his teacher."

XXXVI. The Master said, " The superior man is corj
rectly firm, and not firm merely." —

XXXVII. The Master said, "A minister, in serving
his prince, reverently discharges his duties, and makes
his emolument a secondary consideration."

33. How TO KNOW THE STJPEBIOH MAN XSD THE MEAN MAN ; AND

THEIK CAPACITIES. Choo He says, " The knowing here is our knowing
the individuals." The " little matters " are ingenious but trifling arts and
accomplishments, in which a really great man. may sometimes be deficient
while a small man will be familiar with them. The " knowing " is not,
that the parties are heun-tsze and small men, but what attainments they
have, and for what they are fit. The difficulty, on this view, is with the
conclusion. Ho An gives the view of Wang Shuh : — " The way of the
keun-tsze is profound and far-reaching. He may not let his knowledge be
small, and he may receive what is great. The way of the seaoujin is
shallow and near. He may let his knowledge be small, and he may not
receive what is grpat."

34. ViETUE MOBB TO MAN THAN WATEE OE FIEB, AND NEVEE HUKT-

PUL TO HIM. " The people's relation to, or dependence on, virtue." The
case is easily conceivable of men's suffering death on account of their
virtue. There have been martyrs for their loyalty and other virtues, as
well as for their religious faith. Choo He provides for this difference in
his remarks : — " The want of fire and watej is hurtful only to man's
body, but to be without virtue is to lose one's mind {the higher nature),
and so it is more to him than water or fire." See on IV. viii.
85. Virtue personal and obligatoey on eveet man.

36. The supbeioe man's firmness is based on eight.

37. The faithful minister.


230 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK XVI.

XXXVIII. The Master said, " There being instruc-
tion, there will bo no distinction of classes."

XXXTX . The Master said, " Those whose courses are
different cannot lay plans for one another."

XL. The Master said, " In language it is simply re-
quired that it convey the meaning."

XLI. 1. The Music-master, Meen, having called upon
him, when they came to the steps, the Master said, " Here
are the steps." When they came to the mat for the guest
to sit upon, he said, " Here is the mat." When all were
seated, the Master informed him, saying, " So and so is
here ; so and so is here."

2. The Music-master, Meen, having gone out, Tsze-
chang asked, saying, " Is it the rule to tell those things to
the Music-masters ? "

3. The Master said, " Yes. This is certainly the rule
for those who lead the blind."


BOOK XVI.


'\ Chaptbe I. 1. The head of the Ke family was going
\to attack Chuen-vu.

38. The EFFECT OF TEACHING. Choo He says On this : — " The nature
of all men is good, but we find among them the different classes of good
and bad. This is the effect of physical constitution and of practice. The
superior man, in consequence, employs his teaching, and all may be
brought back to the state of good, and there is no necessity of speaking
any more of the badness of some." This isvery extravagant. Teaching
is not so omnipotent. — The old interpretation is simply that in teaching
there should be no distinction of classes.

39. Agkeement in principle nbcessaky to concoed in plans.

40. PBKSPICUITY the chief virtue op LANGrAGB.

41. G0NSEDEBA.TION OF CONFUCIUS FOB THE BLIND. Anciently, the
blind were employed in the offices of music, partly because their sense of
hearing was more than ordinarily acute, and partly that they might be
made of some use in the world. Meen had come to Confucius' house,
under the care of a guide, but the sage met him, and undertook the care
of him himself.

Heading akd subjects of this book. " The chief of the Ke."
Throughout this book, Confucius is spoken of as " K'ung. the philosopher,"
and never by the designation, " The Master. " Then, the style of
several of the chapters (IV. — XI.) is not like the utterances of Confucius
lo which we have been accustomed. From these circumstances, one com-
mentator, Hung Kwoh, supposed that it belonged to the Ts'e recoisus of


I


■CH. I.J .CONI0CIAN AlfALECTS. 231

2. Yen Yew and Ke Loo had an interview with Con-
fucius, and said, " Our chief, Ke, is going to commence
operations against Chuen-yu."

3. Confucius said, " K'ew, is it not you who are in fault
here ?

4. " Now, in regard to Chuen-yu, long ago, a former
king appointed it to preside over the sacrifices to the east-

I ern Mung ; moreover, it is in the midst of the territory of
our State ; and its ruler is a minister in direct connection

I with the emperor : — ^What has your chief to do with attack-
ing it ? "

5. Yen Yew said, " Our master wishes the thing ;
neither of us two ministers wishes it."

6. Confucius said, " K'ew, there are the words of Chow
Jin, — 'When he can put forth his ability, he takes his
place in the ranks of office ; when he finds himself unable
to do so, he retires from it. How can he be used as a
guide to a blind man, who does not support him when
tottering, nor raise, him up whea fallen ? '


these analects ; the other books belonging to the I.00 recensus. This sup-
position, however, is not otherwise supported.
1. Confucius exposes the presumptuous aud impolitic conduct

OF THE CHIEF OP THE Kb FAMTLT IN PBOPOSING TO ATTACK A MINOV.

State, and bebubxs Yen Yew and Tsze-loo fob abetting the
DESI&N. 1. Chuen-yu was a small territory in Loo, whose ruler was of
■ the fourth order of nobility. It was one of the States called " attached,"
whose chiefs could not appear in the presence of the emperor, excepting
in the train of the prince within whose jurisdiction they were embraced.
Their existence was not from a practice like the sub-infeudation, which
belonged to the feudal system of Europe. They held of the lord para-
mount or emperor, but with the restriction which has been mentioned,
and with a certain subservience also to their immediate superior. Its par-
ticular position is fixed by its proximity to Pe, and to the Mung hill. The
word "to attack " is not merely " to attack," but "to attack and punish,"
— an exercise of judicial authority, which could emanate only from the
emperor. The terra is used here, to show the nefarious and presumptuous
character of the contemplated operations. 2. There is some difficulty here,
as, according to the " Historical Eecords," the two disciples were not in
the service of the Ke family at the same time. We may suppose, how-
ever, that Tsze-loo, returning with the sage from Wei on the invitation of
Duke Gae, took service a second time, and for a short period, with the
Ke family, of which the chief was then Ke K'ang. This brings the time
of the transaction to B.C. 483, or 482. 3. Confucius addresses himself
only to K'ew, as he had been a considerable time, and very active, in the
Ke service. 4. It was the prerogative of the princes to sacrifice to the
hills and rivers within their jurisdictions;— here was the chief of Chuen-


232 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK XVI.

7. " And furtherj ^ou speak wrongly. When a tiger
or wild bull escapes from his cage ; when a tortoise or
gem is injured in its repository : — whose is the fault ? "

8. Yen Yew said, " But at present, Chuen-yu is strong
and near to Pe; if our chief do not now take it, it will
hereafter be a sorrow to his descendants."

9. Confucius said, " K'ew, the superior man hates that
declining to say — ' I want such and such a thing/ and
framing explanations /or the conduct.

10. " I have heard that rulers of states and chiefs of
families are not troubled lest their people should be few,
but are troubled lest they should not keep their
several places ; that they are not troubled with fears of
poverty, but are troubled with fears of a want of contented
repose among the people in their several places. For when
the people keep their several places, there wUl be no
poverty ; when harmony prevails, there will be no scarcity
of people; and when there is such a contented repose,
there will be no rebellious upsettings.

^ 11. "So it is. Therefore, if remoter people are not
submissive, all the influences of civil culture and virtue are
to be cultivated to attract them to be so ; and when they
'have been so attracted, they must be made contented and
tranquil. ^-

yu, imperially appointed (the " former king " is probably Cli'ing, the
second emperor of the Chow dynasty) to be the lord of the Mung moun-
tain, that is, to preside over the sacrifices offered to it. This raised him
high above any mere ministers or officers of Loo. The mountain Mung
is in the present district of Pe, in the department of E-ohow. It was
called eastern, to distinguish it from another of the same name in Shen-se,
which was the western Mung. " It is in the midst of the territory of our
State," — this is mentioned, to show that Chuen-yu was so situated as to
give Loo no occasion for apprehension. " Its ruler is a minister in direct
connection with the emperor " is, literally, " a minister of the altars to the
spirits of the land and grain." To those spirits only, the prince had the
prerogative of sacrificing. The chief of Chuen-yu having this, how dared
an officer o/ Loo to think of attacking him? The term "minister" is
used of his relation to the emperor. Choo He makes the phrase == " a
minister of the ducal house," saying that the three families had usurped
all the dominions proper of Loo, leaving only the chiefs of the " attached "
States to appear in the ducal court. I prefer the former interpretation.
6, Chow Jin is by Choo He simply called — " a good historiographer pf
ancient times." Some trace him back to the Shang dynasty, and others
only to the early times of the Chow. There are other weighty utterances
of his in vogue, besides that in the text. From this point, Confucius


^CH. II.] CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 233

12. "Now, iere are you. Yew and K'ew, assisting
your chief. Eemoter people are not submissive, and, even
with your help, he cannot attract them to him. In his
own territory there are divisions and downfalls, leav-
ings and separations, and, with your help, he cannot
preserve it.

13. "And yet he is planning these hostile movements
within our State. — I am afraid that the sorrow of the
Ke-sun family will not be on account of Chuen-yu, bat
will be found within the screen of their own court."

II. 1. Confucius said, "When good government pre-
vails in the empire, ceremonies, music, and punitive mili-
tary expeditions, proceed from the emperor. When bad
government prevails in the empire, ceremonies, music,
and punitive military expeditions proceed from the princes.
When these things proceed from the princes, as a rule,
the cases will be few in which they do not lose their power
in ten generations. When they proceed from the great
officers of tlie princes, as a rule, the cases will be few in
which they do not lose their power in five generations.
When the subsidiary ministers of the great officers hold in
their grasp the orders of the kingdom, as a rule, the cases
will be few in which they do not lose their power in three
generations.

2. "When right principles prevail in the empire, go-
vernment will not be in the hands of the great officers.

3. " When right principles prevail in the empire, there
will be no discussions among the common people."

speaks of the general disorganization of Loo under the management of the
three families, and especially of the Ke. 12. All this is to be understood
of the head of the Ke family, as controlling the government of Loo, and
as leing assisted by the two disdpXes. so that the reproof falls heavily on
them. 13. "Within the screen of their own court " is, literally, " in the
inside of the wall of reverence." " Officers, on reaching the screen, which
they had only to pass, to find themselves in the presence of their head,
were supposed to become more reverential ; " and hence the expression in
the text — "among his own immediate officers."

2. The supreme authoeitt ought evbk to maintain its power.
The violation of this eule always leads to kuin, which is
SPEEDIER AS THE BANK OF THE VIOLATOR IS LOWER. In these Utter-
ance?, Confucius had reference to the disorganized state of the empire,
when "the son of Heaven " was fast becoming an empty name, the princes
of States were in bondage to their great officers, and those again at the
mercy of their family ministers.


.234 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK XVI.

III. Confucius saidj " The revenue of the State has left
the ducal house, now for five generations. The govern-
ment has been in the hands of the great officers for four
generations. On this account, the descendants of the
three Hwan are much reduced."

lY. Confucius said, " There are three , friendships
which are advantageous, and three which are injurious.
Friendship with the upright ; friendship with the sincere ;
and friendship with the man of much observation : — these
are advantageous. Friendship with the man of specious
airs ; friendship with the insinuatingly soft ; and friend-
ship with the glib-tongued : — these are injurious."

V. Confucius said, " There are three things men find
enjoyment in which are advantageous, and three things
.they find enjoyment in which are injurious. To find en-
joyment in the discriminating study of ceremonies and
music ; to find enjoyment in speaking of the goodness
of others ; to find enjoyment in having many worthy
friends : — these are advantageous, -i To find enjoyment in
.extravagant pleasures ; to find enjoyment in idleness and
sauntering ; to find enjoyment in the pleasures of feast-
ing : — these are injurious."

VI. Confucius said, " There are three errors to which
they who stand in the presence of a man of virtue and
station are liable. They may speak when it does not
come to them to speak ; — this is called rashness. They

3. Illustkation of the peinciplbs of the last chaptee. In the
year B.C. 608, at the death of Duke Wan, his rightful heir was killed, and
the son of a concubine raised to the dukedom. He is in the annals as
Duke Seuen, and after him came Shing, Seang, Ch'aou, and Ting, in
whose time this must have been spoken. These dukes were but shadows,
pensionaries of their great officers, so that it might be said the revenue
had gone from them. " The three Hwan " are the three families, as
being all descended from Duke Hwan ; see on II. v. Choo He appears to
have fallen into a mistake in enumerating the four heads of the Ke family
who had administered the government of Loo as Woo, Taou, P'ing, and
Hwan, as Taou died before his father, and would not be said therefore to
liave the government in his hands. The right enumeration is Wan, Woo,
P'ing, and Hwan.

4. THEEE FEIENDSHlrS ADVANTAGEOUS, AND THREE INJUBIOITS.

5. THEEE SOTJECBS OF ENJOYMENT ADVANTAGEOUS, AND THEEE

injueioits.

6. Three erboes in ebgaed to &peech to be avoided in the
PRESENCE OF THE GREAT. " Without looking at the countenance,"— i.e.,


CS. VII.] CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 235

may not speak when it comes to tliem to speak ; —
this is called concealment. They may speak without
looking at the countenance of their superior ; — this is
called blindness."

VII. Confucius said, " There are three things which
the superior man guards against. In youth, when the
physical powers are not yet settled, he guards against
lust. When he is strong, and the physical powers are
full of vigour, he guards against quarrelsomeness. When
he is old, and the animal powers are decayed, he guards
against -covetousness."

VIII. 1. Confucius said, "There are three things of
which the superior man stands in awe. He stands in awe
of the ordinances of Heaven. He stands ia awe of great
men. He stands in awe of the words of sages.

2. " The mean man does not know the ordinances of
Heaven, and consequently does not stand in awe of them.
He is disrespectful to great men. He makes sport of the
words of sages."
-^ IX. Confucius said, " Those who are born with the'
possession of knowledge are the highest class of men.
Those who learn, and so, readily, get possession of know-
to see wTiether he is paying attention or not. — The general pri-noiple is
that there is a time to speak. Let that be observed, and these three
errors will be avoided.

7. The vices which youth, majjhood, and age have to guard
AGAINST. As to what causal relation Confucius may have supposed to
exist between the state of the physical powers and the several vices indi-
cated, that is not developed. Hing Ping explains the first caution thus : —
" Youth embraces all the period below 29. Then, the physical powers are
still weak, and the sinews and bones have not reached their vigour, and
indulgence in lust will injure the body."

8. CONTBAST OF THE SUPERIOR AND THE MEAN MAN IN KEGAED TO
THE THREE THINGS OF WHICH THE FOEMEE STANDS IN AWB. " The

ordinances of Heaven," according to Choo He, means the moral nature of
man, conferred by Heaven. High above the nature of other creatures, it
lays him under great responsibility to cherish and cultivate himself. The
old interpreters take the phrase to indicate Heaven's moral administra-
tion by rewards and punishments. The " great men " are men high in
position and great in wisdom and virtue, the royal instructors, who have
been raised up by Heaven for the training and ruling of mankind. So,
the commentators; but the verb employed suggests at once a more
general and a lower view of the phrase.

9. Four classes op men in kelation to knowledge. On the first
clause, see on VII. xbc., where Confucius disclaims for himself being


236 CONFTJCIAN ANALECTS. [^K XVI,.


U


ledge, are the next. Those who are dull and stupid, and
yet compass the learning, are another class next to these.
As to those who are dull and stupid and yet do not learn ;
— they are the lowest of the people."

X. Confucius said, " The superior man has nine things
which are subjects with him of thoughtful consideration.
In regard to the use of his eyes, he is anxious to see
clearly. In regard to the use of his ears, he is anxious to
hear distinctly. In regard to his countenance, he is anx-
ious that it should be benign. In regard to his demean-
our, he is anxious that it should be respectful. In regard
to his speech, he is anxious that it should be sincere. In
regard to his doing of business, he is anxious that it
should be reverently careful. In regard to what he doubts
about, he is anxious to question others. When he is
angry, he thinks of the difficulties his anger may involve
him in. When he sees gain to be got, he thinks of right-
eousness."

XI. 1. Confucius said, " Contemplating good, and pior-
suing it, as if they could not reach it ; contemplating evil,
and shrinking from it, as they would from thrusting the
hand into boiling water: — I have seen such men, as I
have heard such words.

2. "^ Living in retirement to study their aims, and
practising righteousness to carry out their principles : — I
have heard these words, but I have not seen such men."

ranked in the first of the classes here mentioned. In the concluding
words, "They are the lowest of the people," I suppose "the people "=
men. The term is elsewhere so used.

10. Nine subjects of thought to the supeeios maic; — various

ISfSTAIfCES OF THE WAT IN WHICH HE REGULATES HIMSELF. The con-
ciseness of the text contrasts here with the verbosity of the translation,
and yet the many words of the latter seem necessary.

11. The contemporaries of Confucius could eschew evil, and
follow after good, but no one of the highest capacity had ap-
PEARED AMONG THEM. 1. The two first clauses here, and in the next
paragraph also, are quotations of old sayings, current in Confucius' time.
Such men were several of the sage's own disciples. 2. " To study their
aims " is, literally, " seeking for their aims ; " i.e., meditating on them,
studying them, fixing them, to be prepared to carry them out, as in the
next clause. Such men among the ancients were the great ministers
E-Yin and T'ao-kung. Such might the disciple Yen Hwuy have been,
but an early death snatched him away before he could have an oppor-
tunity of showing what was in him.


CH. Xll.j CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 237

XII. 1. The Duke King of Ts'e had a thousand teams,
each of four horses, but on the day of his death, the people
did not praise him for a single virtue. P'ih-e and Shuh-ts'e
died of hunger at the foot of the Show-yang mountain,
and the people, down to the present time, praise them.

2. " Is not that' saying illustrated by this ? "

Xin. 1. Ch'in K'ang asked Pih-yu, saying, "Have
you heard any lessons /rom your fathei- diSerent from what
we have all heard ? "

... 2. Pih-yu replied, " No. He was standing alone nnce,
when I passed below the hall with hasty steps, and said
to me, ' Have you learned the Odes ? ' On my replying
' Not yet,' 7ie added, ' If you do not learn the Odes, you
will not be fit, to converse with.' I retired and studied
the Odes.

3. "Another day, he was in the same way standing
alone, when I passed by below the hall with hasty steps,
and he said to me, 'Have you learned the rules of Pro-
priety ? ' On my replying ' Not yet,' he added, ' If you
do not learn the rules of Propriety, your character cannot
be estabhshed.' I then retired, and studied the rules of
Propriety.

4. " I have heard only these two things from him."

5. Ch'in K'ang retired, and, quite delighted, said, " I
asked one thing, and I have got three things. I have
heard about the Odes. I have heard about the rules of
Propriety. I have also heard that the superior man
maintains a distant reserve towards his son."

12. Wealth without virttjb and virtue without wealth : —
THEIH DIPFEEBNT APPKECFATIONS. This chapter is plainly a fragment.
As it stands, it would appear to oome from the compilers and not from
Confucius. Then the sefcond paragraph implies a reference to something
which has been lost. Under XII. x., I- have referred to the proposal to
transfer to this place the last paragraph of that chapter, which might be
explained so as to harmonize with the sentiment of this.— The Duke
King of Ts'e, — see XII. xi. Fih-e and Shuh-ts'e, — see VI. xxii. The
mountain Show-yang is to be found probably in the department of P'oo-
chow in Shan-se.

13. Confucius' instruction of his son not different from his

INSTRUOriON OF HIS DISCIPLES GENERALLY. Ch'in K'ang is the Tsze-
k'in of I. X. When Confucius' eldest son was born, the duke of Loo sent
the philosopher a present of a carp, on which account he named the child'
he (the carp), and afterwards gave him the designation of Pih-yu (Fish,
the elder).


238 CONFUCIAlf ANALECTS. LBK XVII,

XIV. The wife of the prince of a State is called by hiui
Foo-JIN. She calls herself seaou t'ong. The people of the
State call her keun poo-jin, and, to the people of other
States, they call her k'wa seaou kedn. The people of
other States also call her eeun foo-jin.


BOOK XVII.

Chapter I. 1. Tang Ho wished to see Confucius, but
Confucius would not go to see him. On this, he sent a
present of a pig to Confucius, who, having chosen a time
when Ho was not at home, went to pay his respects for
the gift. He met him, however, on the way.

2. Ho said to Confucius, " Come, let me speak with
you." He then asked, " Can he be called benevolent
who keeps his jewel in his bosom, and leaves his country
to confusion ? " Oonfucius replied, " No." " Can he be

14. Appellations foe the wife of a pmncb. This chapter may
have been spoken by Confucius to rectify some disorder of the times, but
there is no intimation to that effect. The different appellations may be thus
explained : — "Wife" is "she who is her husband's equal," The designa-
tion /oo-^'i/t is equivalent to " help-meet." The wife modestly calls herself
Seaov^t'ung, " the little girl." The old interpreters take — most naturally
— kewnfoo-jin as = " our prince's help-meet," but the modern commentators
take luiuii to be a verb, with reference to the office of the wife to " preside
over the internal economy of the palace." On this view Iteun foo-jin is
" the domestic help-meet.'.' The ambassador of a prince spolce of him by
the style of k'wa-keun, "my prince of small virtue." After that ex-
ample of modesty, his wife was styled to the people of other States, " our
small prince of small virtue. " The people of other States had no reason
to imitate her subjects in that, and so they styled her — " your prince's
help-meet," or " the domestic help-meet."

Heading and subjects of this book. " Tang Ho." As the
last book commenced with the presumption of the head of the Ke family^
who kept his prince in subjection, this begins with an account of an officer,
who did for the head of the Ke what he did for the duke of Loo. For
this reason — some similarity in the subject matter of the first chapters —
this book, it is said, is placed after the former. It contains twenty-six
chapters.

1. Confucius' polite but dignified treatment op a powerful,
BUT USURPING AND UNWORTHY, OFFICER. Yang Ho, known also as
Yang Hoo, was nominally the principal minister of the Ke family ; but
lis chief was entirely in his hands, and he was scheming to arrogate the
>yhole authority of the slate of Loo to himself. He first appears in
the Chronicles of Loo about the year B.C. ol't, acting against .the exikd;


CH. II. J CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 239

called wise wlio is anxious to be engaged in public em-
ployment, and yet is constantly losing the opportunity of
being so ? " Confucius again said, " No." " The days
and months are passing away ; the years do not wait for
us." Confucius said, " Right ; I will go into oflEice.''^

, II. The Master said, " By nature, men are nearly

alike ; by practice, they get to be wide apart."

III. The Master said, " There are only the wise of the
highest class, and the stupid of the lowest class, who can-
not be changed."

IV. 1 . The Master having come to Woo-shing, heard
there the sound of stringed instruments and singing. ,

2. Well-pleased and smiling, he said, " Why use an ox-
knife to kill a fowl ? "

3. Tsze-yew replied, "Formerly, Master, I heard you

Duke Ch'aou ; in B.C. 504, we find him keeping his own chief, Ke Hwan,
a prisoner, and, in B.C. 501, he is driven out, on the failure of his projects,
a fugitive into Ts'e. At the time when the incidents in this chapter oc-
curred. Tang Ho was anxious to get, or appear to get, the support of a
man of Confucius' reputation, and finding that the sage would not call on
him, he adopted the expedient of sending him a pig, at the time when
Confucius was not at home, the rules of ceremony requiring that when a
great officer sent a present to a scholar, and the latter was not in his house
on its arrival, he had to go to the officer's house to acknowledge it. See
the Le-ke, XIII. iii. 20. Confucius, however, was not to be entrapped.
He also timed Hoo's being away from home, and went to call on him.

2. The dipfebbncks in the chaeactebs op men asb chiepliT
OWING TO HABIT. " Nature," it is contended, is here not the moral consti-
tution of man, absolutely considered, but his complex, actual nature, with,
its elements of the material, the animal, and the intellectual, by association,
with which the perfectly good moral nature is continually being led.
astray. The mor al nature is the p a,m e in , .f^JJ^nnd^Jjiniriffh thft material
organism "Utld disposition do differ in different indmduals, ^hej^e, at
nrst, more nearly alike than tticy saD3equen£Iy"Become;" ' No doubt, it is
true tl'Pit Hifl,i!i5'-^perEaps"'maii'i:^-^0f t'lrB-d'HTBrences' among ffien are o'wing

tU llAOtfT""*"

O: ' QsTjY two classes whom practice cannot change. This is a

sequel to the last chapter, with which it is incorporated in Ho An's edition.
The case of th e " stupid of the 1 nwRsjtf.ln,.qs " would seem to be.jnnnnsktgnt

Witn tne aoetrme °t„ ffi£,Egi'fc{it i^99'^ « Siii'iiSiite i i i°^°''^^ nature of all men .
Modern coriirnenlarorsrto^elover ffle dimoulty, gay'tuat they '^fCEe
" self violators," " self abandoners," of Mencius, IV. Bk I. x.

4. HOWEVEB SMALL THE SPHERE OP GOVERNMENT, THE HIGHEST
INFLUENCES OF PBOPRIETIES AND MUSIC SHOULD BE EMPLOYED. Woo-

shing was in the district of Pe. Tsze-yew appears as the commandant of •
it, in VI. xii. We read, " The town was named Woo, from its position,
p'lstipitous and favourable to militarj' operations, but Tsze-yew had been


^40 CONPHCIiX ANALECTS. [bK XVII.

say, — " When- the man of liigh station is well instructed,
he loves men ; when the man of low station is well in-
structed, he is easily ruled.' "

4. The Master said, " My disciples. Yen's words are
right. What I said was only in sport."

V. 1. Kung-shan Fuh-jaou, when he was holding Pe,
.nnd in an attitude of rebellion, invited the Master to visit
Him, who was rather inclined to go.

2. Tsze-loo was displeased, and said, "Indeed you can-
not go ! Why must you think of going to see Kung-
shan ? " ,

3. The Master said, " Can it be without some reason
that he has invited me ? If any one employ me, may I
not make an eastern Chow ? "

VI. 1. Tsze-chang asked Confucius about perfect vir-
tue. Confucius said,[2' To be able to practise five things
everywhere under heaven constitutes perfect virtue." He
begged to ask what they were, and was told, " Gravity,
generosity of soul, sincerity, earnestness, and kindnes§J
If you are grave, you will not be treated with disrespect.
If you are generous, you will win all. [jf you are sincere,
people will repose trust in you. If you are earnest, you
will accomplish mucETl If you are kind, this wiU. enable
you to employ the services of others."

VII. 1 . Peih Heih inviting him to visit him, the Mas-
ter was inclined to go.

able, by his course, to transform the people, and make them change their
mail and helmets for stringed instruments and singing. This was what
made the Master glad."

o. The lengths to which Conpucjus was inclined to go, to get
HIS PRINCIPLES CAKBIED INTO PEACTICE. Kung-shan Fuh-jaou was a
confederate of Yang Ho (chapter I.), and, according to K'uug Gan-kwo, it
was after the imprisonment by them, in common, of Ke Hwan, that Fuh-
jaou sent this invitation to Confucius. Others make the invitation subse-
quent t6 Ho's discomfiture and flight to Ts'e. We must conclude, with
Tsze-loo, that Confucius ought not to have thought of accepting the in-
vitation of such a man. The original seat of the Chow dynasty lay west
from Loo, and the revival of the principles and government of Wan and
Woo in Loo, or even in Pe, which was but a part of it, might make an
eastern Chow; so that Confucius would perform the part of King Wan. —
After all, the sage did not go to Pe.

6. Five things the peacticb op which constitutes peepect

VIETUB.

7. Confucius, inclined to eespond to the advances op aji ttn-
woethy man, protests against his conduct being judged li?-


CH. VIII.] CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 241

■ 2. Tsze-loo said, " Master, formerly I have heard you
, say, ' When a man in his own person is guilty of doing
eyil, a superior man will not associate with him.' Peih
Heih is in rebellion, holding possession of Chung-mow ;
if you go to him, what shall be said ? "

3. The Master said, " Yes, I did use these words. But
is it not said, that, if a thing be really hard, it may be
ground without being made thin ? Is it not said, that, if
a thing be really white, it may be steeped in a dark fluid
without-being made black ?

4. " Am I a bitter gourd ! How can I be hung up out
of the way of being eaten ? "

VII r. 1. The Master said, " Yew, have you heard the
six words to which are attached sis becloudings ? " Yew
replied, " I have not."

2. " Sit down, and I will tell them to you.

3. " There is the love of being benevolent without the
love of learning ; — the beclouding here leads to a foolish
simplicity. There is the love of knowing without the love
of learning ; — the beclouding here leads to dissipation of
mind. There is the love of being sincere without the love
of learning; — the beclouding here leads to an injurious
disregard of consequences. There is the love of straight-

ORDINAET RULES. Compare chapter V. ; but the invitation of Peih
Heih was subsequent to that of Kung-shan Fuh-jaou, and after Confucius
had given up office in Loo. 1. Peih Heih was commandant of Chung-
mow, for the chief of the Chaou family, in the State of Tsin. 2. There
were two places of the name of Chung-mow, one belonging to the State of
Ch'ing, and the other to the State of Tsin, which is that intended here, and
is referred to the present district of T'ang-yin, department of Chang-tih, in
iHo-nan province. 3. The application of the proverbial sayings is to
Confucius himself, as, from his superiority, incapable of being affected by
evil communications.

8. Knowledgb, acquired by learning, is necessary to the
completion op virtue, by pheserving the mind from bbfng be-
CLOUDED. 1. "The six words" are the benevolence, knowledge, sincerity,
straight-forwardness, boldness, and firmness, mentioned below, all virtues,
but yet each, when pursued without discrimination, tending to becloud the
mind. 2. " Sit down." — Tsze-loo had risen, according to the rules of
propriety, to give his answer ; see the Le-ke, I. Pt I. iii. 21 ; and Con-
fucius tells him to resume his seat. 3. I give here the paraphrase of the
" Daily Less6n," on the first virtue and its beclouding, which may illus-
trate the manner in which the whole paragraph is deve'oped: — "In all
matters, there is a perfect right and unchangeable principle, which men
ought carefully to study, till they have thoroughly examined and appre-
TOL. I. IG


242 COKPDCIiN AXALECTS. [bK XVITi

forwardness without tlie love of learning ; — the beclouding
here leads to rudeness. There is the love of boldaess with-
out the love of learning ; — the beclouding here leads to
insubordination. There is the love of firmness without
the love of learning j — the beclouding here leads to ex-
travagant conduct.-"

IX. 1. The Master said, "My children, why do you
not study the Book of Poetry ?

2. " The Odes serve to stimulate the mind.

3. " They may be used for purposes of self-contem-
plation.

4. " They teach the art of sociability.

5. " They show how to regulate feelings of resentment.

6. " From them you learn the more immediate duty of
serving one's father, and the remoter one of serving one's,
prince.

7. " From them we become largely acquainted with. the
names of birds, beasts, and plants."

X. The Master said to Pih-yu, " Do you give yourself
to the Chow-nan, and the Shaou-nan. The man, who has
not studied the Ohow-nan and the Shaou-nan, is like one
who stands with his face right against a wall. Is he not
so ? "

XI. The Master said, " ' It is according to the rules
of propriety,' they say.- — 'It is according to the rules of
propriety,' they say. Are gems and silk all that is meant

hended it. Then their actions will be without error, and their virtue may
be perfected. For instance, loving is what rules in benevolence. It is
certainly a beautiful virtue, but if you only set yourself to love men, and
do not care to study to understand the principle of benevolence, then
your mind will be beclouded by that loving, and you will be following a
man into a well to save him, so that both he and you will perish. Will
not this be foolish simplicity ? "

9. Benefits dekivbd pkom studying the Book of Poetry.

10. The iMroRTAucE of studying tub Chow-nan and Shaou-nan.
Chow-nan and Shaou-nan are the titles of the first two books in the
National Songs, or first part of the She-king. For the meaning of the
titles, see the She-king, Pt I. Bk I., and Pt I. Bk II. They are supposed
to inculcate important lessons about personal virtue and family govern-
ment. A man " with his face against a wall " cannot advance a step, nor
see anything. This chapter in the old editions is incorporated with the
preceding one.

11. It IS NOT THE external appurtenances which constitute
propriety, nor the sound of instruments which constiiutks

MUSIC.


CH. XII.] CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 213

by propriety? 'It is Jvmsic/ they say. 'Tfc is Music,'
tliey say. Are bells and drums all that is meant by
Music?"

XII. The Master said, ''He who puts on an appear .^
ance of stern firmness, while inwardly he is weak, is like
one of the small, mean people ; — yea, is he not like the
thief who breaks through or climbs over a wall ? "

XIII. The Master said, " Your good careful people of
the villages are the thieves of virtue."

XIV. The Master said, " To tell, as we go along, what
we have heard on, the way, is to cast away our virtue."

XV. l.The Master said, "There are those mean
creatures ! How impossible it is along with them to
serve one's prince 1

2. "While they have not got their aims, their anxiety
is how to get them. When they have got them, their
anxiety is lest they should lose them.

3. " When they are anxious lest they should be lost,
there is nothing to which they will not proceed."

XVI.' 1. The Master said, " Anciently, men had three
failings, which now perhaps are not to be found.

2. " The high-mindedness of antiquity showed itself in
a disregard of small things; the high-mindedness of the
present day shows itself in wild license. The stern dig-
nity of antiquity showed itself in grave reserve; the stern
dignity of the present day shows itself in quarrelsome
perverseness. The stupidity of antiquity showed itself in
straightforwardness ; the stupidity of the present day
shows itself in sheer deceit."

12. The meanness of presumption and pusillanimity conjoined.
The last clause shows emphatically to whom, among the low, mean
people, the individual spoken of is like, — a thief, namely, who is in con-
stant fear of being detected.

13. Contentment with vulgak ways and views injurious to
VIRTUE. See the sentiment of this chapter explained and expanded by
Mcnoius, VII. Pt II. xxxvii., 7, 8.

U. Swiftness to speak mcoMPATiBLE with TdB cultivation op
VIRTUE. It is to be understood that what has been heard contains some
good lesson. At once to be talking of it without revolving it, and striving
to practise it, shows an indifference to our own iraproveiuent.

15. The case op mercenary officers, and how it is impossible
to serve one's prince along with them.

16. The DEFECTS OP FORIIEH TIMES BECOME VICES IN THE tlME OP

Confucius.

16*


21.1 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK XVIf.

XVII. The Master said, " Fine words and an insinu-
atinof appearance are seldom associated with virtue.

XVIII. The Master said, " I hate the manner in which
purple takes away the lufifre of vermilion. I hate the way
in which the songs of Ch'ing confound the music of the
Ya. I hate those who with thoir sharp mouths overthrow
kingdoms and families."

XIX. 1. The Master said, " I would prefer not speak-
ing."

2. Tsze-kung said, " If you. Master, do not speak, what
shall we, your disciples, have to record ? "

'6. The Master said, " Does Heaven speak ? The four
seasons pursue their courses, and all things are continualhj
being produced, hut does Heaven say anything ? "

XX. Joo Pei wished to see Confucius, but Confucius
declined, on the ground of being sick, to see hira. When
the bearer of this message went out at the door, he took
his harpsichord, and sang to it, in order that Pei might
hear him.

XXI. 1. Tsae Wo asked about the three years' mourn-
ing /b7'j9areH is, saying that one year was long enough.

17. A repetition of I. iii.

18. Confucius' indignation at tke way in which the wrono
OVEKCAMB THE BIGHT. On the first clause, — see X. vi. 2. '■ The songs
or sounds of Ch'ing," — see XV. x. " The Ya," — see on IX. xiv.

19. The actions or Confucius wekb lessons and laws, aud not
HIS WOKDS MERELY. Such is the scope of this chapter, according to Choo
He and his school. The older commentators say that it is a caution to
men to pay attention to their conduct rather than to their words. This
interpretation is far-fetched, but on the other hand, it is not easy to de-
fend Confucius from the charge of presumption in comparing himself
to Heaven.

20. How Confucius could be not at home, and yet give inti-
JIATION to the visitor OF HIS PRESENCE. Of Joo Pei little is known.
He was a man of Loo, and had at one time been in attendance on Con-
fucius to receive his instructions. There must have been some reason —
6ome fault in him— why Confucius would not see him on the occasion in
the text, and that he might understand that it was on that account, and
not that he was really sick, that ho declined his visit, the sage acted as
we are told. But what was the necessity for sending a false message in
the first place? In the notes to the E-le. III. 1, it is said that Joo Pei's
fault was in trying to see the master without using the services of an in-
ternuncius.

21. The period of tukee years' moi-rnino for parents; it mat
HOT on ant account )ie shouten-bd; the reason of it. 1. On the
three years' mourning, see the 3Ist book of the Le-ke. Nominally ex-


CH. XXII.] C0\3?UCIAN AKALECTS. 24h

2. " If the superior man/' said he, " abstains for throe
years from the observances of propriety, those observances
will be quite lost. If for three years he abstains from
music, music will be ruined.

3. " Within a year, the old grain is exhausted, and the
new grain has sprung up, and, in procuring fire by friction,
we go through all the changes of wood for that purpose.
After a complete year the mourning may stop."

4. The Master said, " If you were, after a year, to eat
good rice, and wear embroidered clothes, would you feel
at ease ? " "I should," replied Wo.

5. The Master said, " If you can feel at ease, do it.
But a superior man, during the whole period of mourning,
does not enjoy pleasant food which he may eat, nor derive
pleasure from music which he may hear. He also does
not feel at ease, if he is comfortably lodged. Therefore
he does not do what you pro-pose. But now you feel at
ease and may do it."

6. Tsae Wo then went out, and the Master said, " This
shows Yu's want of virtue. It is not till a child is three
years old that it is allowed to leave the arms of its parents.
And the three years' mourning is universally observed
throughout the empire. Did Yu enjoy the three years'
affection for his parents ? "

XXII. The Master said, " Hard is the case of him,
who will stuff himself with food the whole day, without

teading to three years, that period comprehended properly but twenty-five
months, and at most twenty-seven months. 2. Tsae Wo finds here a
reason for his view in the necessity of " human aflfairs. " .S. He finds here
a reason for his v'ew in " the seasons of heaven." Certain woods were
assigned to the several seasons, to be employed for getting fire by
friction, the elm and willow, for instance, to spring, the date and almond
trees to summer, &c., so that Wo says, " In boring to get fire, we have
changed from wood to wood through the ones appropriate to the four
seasons." 4. Coarse food and coarse clothing were appropriate, though
in varying degree, to all the period of mourning. Tsae Wo is strangely
insensible to the home-put argument of the Master. 7. " This shows
Vu's want of virtue" responds to all that has gone before, and forms a
sort of apodous. Confucius added, it is said, the remarks in this paragraph,
that they might be reported to Tsae Wo, lest lie should " feel at ease " to
go and do as he said he could. Still the reason which the Master finds
Jbr the statute-period of mourning for parents must be pronounced
puerile.
22. The hopeless case of gluttony and idleness. " Gamesters


246 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK XVII.

applying liis miud to anything goo4 ! Are there not
gamesters and chess-players ? To be one of these would
still be better than doing nothing at all."

XXIII. Tsze-loo said, " Does the superior man esteem
valour?" The Master said, "The superior man holds
righteousness to be of highest importance. A man in a
superior situation, having valour without righteousness,
will be guilty of insubordination ; one of the lower
people, having valour without righteousness, will commit
robbery."

XXIV. I. Tsze-kung said, "Has the superior man his
hatreds also ? " The Master said, " He has his hatreds.
He hates those who proclaim the evil of others. He
hates the man who, being in low station, slanders his
superiors. He hates those who have valour merely, and
are unobservant of propriety. He hates those who are
forward and determined, and, at the same time, of con-
tracted understanding."

2. The Master then inquired, " Ts'ze, have you also your
hatreds ? " Tsze-lcung replied, " 1 hate those who pry out
matters, and ascribe the knowledge to their wisdom. I

and chess-players;" — Of the game of chess, the Chinese have two kinJs.
There is what is called the "surrounding chess," which is played with
361 pieces, and is referred to the Emperor Yaou as its inventor. This is
still not uncommon, though I have never seen it played myself. There is
also what is called the " elephant chess," played with 32 pieces, and
having a great analogy to our game, which indeed was borrowed from
the East. '■ The elephant" is the piece corresponding to our "bishop,"
though his movement is moi-e like that of a double knight. The invention
of this is ascribed to the first emperor of the Chow dynasty (b.c. 1122),
though some date it a few hundred years later. " Gamesters " in the text
are different from the chess-players. The game specially intended was
one played with twelve dice, the invention of which is ascribed to the time
of one or other of the tyrants, with whom the dynasties of Hea and Shang
terminated. I have also seen it referred to a much later date, and said to
have been imported from India. If it were so, then we do not know what
game Confucius had in his mind. Commentators are much concerned to
defend him from the suspicion of giving in this chapter any sanction to
gambling. He certainly expresses his detestation of the idle glutton very
strongly.

23. Valoue to be valued only in subordination to righteous-
ness ; ITS consequences apart prom that.

24. Characters disliked by Confucius and Tsze-kung. Tsze-
kung is understood to have intended Confucius himself by •' the superior
man."


GH. XXV.J COXFUCIAN AIIALECTS, 247

Late those wlio are only not moclest, and think that they
are valorous. I hate those who make known secrets, and
think that they are straightforward."

XXV. The Master said, "Of all people, girls and
servants are the most difficult to behave to. If you aro
familiar with them, they lose their humility. If you main-
tain a reserve towards them, they are discontented."

XXVI. The Master said, " When a man at forty is the
object of dislike, he will always continue what he is."


BOOK XVIII.

Chapter I. 1. The viscount of Wei withdrew /rom the
court. The viscount of Ke became a slave to Chow. Pe-
kan remonstrated with him, and died.

25. The DirFicuLTY how to treat concubines and servants.
The text does not speak here of nvmen generally, as Collie has translated,
hut of girls, i.e., concubines. The commentators find in the chapter a
lesson for the great in the ordering of their harems ; but there is nothing
in the language to make us restrict the ftieaning in any wny.

26. The difficulty op impbovkment in advanueu years. Ac-
cording to Chinese views, at forty a man is at his best in every way. —
Youth is doubtless the season for improvement, but the sentiment of the
chapter is too broadly stated.

Heading and contents op this book. — "The viscount of Wei."
This book, consisting of only eleven chapters, treats of various individuals
famous in Chinese history, as eminent for the way in which they dis-
charged their duties to their sovereign, or for their retirement from
public service. It commemorates also some of the worthies of Confucius'
days, who lived in retirement rather than be in oftice in so degenerate
times. The object of the whole is to illustrate and vindicate the course of
Confucius himself.

1. The viscounts of Wat and Kb, and Pe-kan :— three worthies
OF THE Yin dynasty. ]. Wei-t-sze and Ke-tsze are continually rei)eated
by Chinese, as if they were proper names. But Wei and Ke were the
names of two small States, presided over by chiefs of the Tsze, or fourth,
degree of nobility, called viscounts, for want of a more exact term. They
both appear to have been witliin the limits of the present Shan-se, Wei
being referred to the district of Loo-ch'ing, department Loo-gan, and Ke
to Yu-shay, department Leaou-chow. The chief of Wei was an elder
brother (by a concubine) of the tyrant Chow, the last emperor of the
Yin dynasty, B.C. 1153 — 1122. The chief of Ke, and Pe-kan, were both,
probably, uncles of the tyrant. The first, seeing that remonstrances
availed nothing, withdrew from court, wishing to preserve the sacrifices
of their family, amid the ruin which he saw was impending. The second


248 CONF0JIAK ANALECTS. [uS XVIII.

2. Confucius said, " The Yin dynasty possessed these
three men of virtue."

II. Hwuy of Lew-hea being chief criminal judge, was
thrice dismissed from his office. Some one said to him,
"Is it not yet time for you. Sir, to leave this ? " He
replied, " Serving men in an upright way, where shall I go
to, and not experience such a thrice-repeated dismissal ?
If I choose to serve men in a crooked way, what ne-
cessity is there for me to leave the country of my
parents ? "

III. The Duke King of Ts'e, with reference to the
manner in vihicli he should treat Confucius, said, " 1 can-
not treat him as I would the chief of the Kc family. I
will treat him in a manner between that accorded to the
chief of the Ke, and that given to the chief of the Mang
family." He also said, " I am old ; I cannot use his doc-
trines." Confucius took his departure.

IV. The people of Ts'e sent to Loo a present of female

was thrown into prison, and, to escape death, feigned madness. He was
used by Chow as a buffoon. Pe-lian, persisting in his remonstrances,
was put barbarously to death, the tyrant having his heart torn out, that
he might see, he said, a sage's heart.

2. How Hwuy OF Lbvv-hba, though often dismissed feom office,
STILL CLAVE TO HIS COUNTRY. Lew-hea Hwuy, — see XV. xiii. The
office which Hwuy held is described in the Chow-le, XXXIV. iii. He was
under the minister of Crime, but with many subordinate magistrates under
him. — Some remarks akin to that in the text are ascribed to Hwuy's wife.
It is observed by the commentator Hoo, that there ought to be another
paragraph, giving Confucius' judgment upon Hwuy's conduct, but it has
been lost.

3. How Confucius left Ts'e, when the duke could not appke-
CIATE AND EMPLOY HIM. It was in the year B.C. 516, that Confucius
ivent to Ts'e. The remarks about how he should be treated, &c., are to
be understood as having taken place in consultation between the duke
and his ministers, and being afterwards reported to the sage. The Mang
family (see II. v.) was, in the time of Confucius, much weaker than the
Ke. The chief of it was only the lowest noble of Loo, while the Ke was
the highest. Yet for the duke of Ts'e to treat Confucius better than
the duke of Loo treated the chief of the Mang family, was not dishon-
ouring the sage. We must suppose that Confucius left Ts'e, because of
the duke's concluding remarks.

i. How Confucius gave up official sebvice in Loo. In the four-
teenth year of the Duke Ting, Confucius reached the highest point of his
official service. He was minister of Crime, and also, according to the gen-
eral opinion, acting premier. He effected in a few months a wonderful
renovation of the State, and the neighbouring countries began to fear that


CH. T.] CONFUCIAN ANALECTS, 2fl)

musicians, wliicli Ke Hwan received, and for tliree"dayB
no court was held. Confucius took his departure.

V. 1. The madman of Ts'^oo, Tsee-yu, passed by Con-
fucius, singing and saying, "Oh Fung ! Oh Fung ! How is
your virtue degenerated ! As to the past, reproof is useless ;
but the future may be provided against. Give up ymor vain
■pursuit. Give up your vain pursuit. Peril awaits those
who now ettgage in affairs of government."

2. Confucius alighted and wished to converse with hi in,
but Tsep--yu hastened away, so that he could not talk with
him.

VI. 1. Ch^ang-tseu and K&3-neih were at work in the
field together, when Confucius passed by them, and sent
Tsze-loo to inquire for the ford.

2. Ch'ang-tseu said, "Who is he that holds the reins
in the carriage there ? " Tsze-loo told him, " It is K'ung
K'ew." " Is it not K'ung K'ew of Loo ? " asked he.
" Yes," was the reply, to which the other rejoined, " He
knows the ford."

3. Tsze-loo then inquired of Ke3-neih, who said to him,
" Who are you. Sir ? " He answered, " I am Chung
Yew." " Are you not the disciple of K'ung K'ew of
Loo ? " asked the other. " I am," replied he ; and then
Kee-neih said to him, " Disorder, like a swelling flood,
spreads over the whole empire, and who is he that will
change it (for you ?\ Than follow one who merely with-

under his administration, Loo would overtop and sulidne them all. To
prevent this, the duke of Ts'e sent a present to Loo of fine horses and of
eighty highly accomplished beauties. The duke of Loo was induced to re-
ceive these by the advice of the head of the Ke family, Ke Sze or Ke
Hwan. The sage was forgotten ; government was neglected. Confucius,
indignant and sorrowful, withdrew from office, and for a time, from the
country too.

a. OONFCrClUS AND THE MADMAN OF Ts'OO, WHO BLAMES HtS NOT
HBTIEING TEOM THE WORLD. 1. Ts'ee-yu was the designation of one
Luh T'ung, a native of Ts'oo, who feigned himself mad, to escape beinf?
importuned to engage in public service. It must have been about the
year B.C. 489, that the incident in the text occurred. By the fuvg or
phoenix, his satirizer or adviser intended Confucius; see IX. viii.

6. Confucius and the two recluses. Ch'ang-tseu aud Kb^-neih ;

AVHY HE WOULD NOT WITHDRAW FROM THE WORLD. 1. The surnames

and names of these worthies are not known. It is supposed that they
belonged to Ts'oo, like the hero of the last chapter, and that the interview
with them occurred about the same time. The designations in the text


■25U CONFUCIJJ!.' ANALECTS. [bK XVIII.

draws from this one and that one, had you not better fol-
low those who have withdrawn from the world altogether?"
With this he fell to covering up the seed, and proceethd
with his work, without stopping.

4. Tsze-loo went and reported their remarks, when his
master observed with a sigh, " It is impossible to associate
with birds and beasts, ^.s^-if-theynrcre-fe o mmp wi th iik )
If I associate not with these people, — with mankind, —
with Whom shall I associate ? If right principles prevailed
through the empire, there would be no use for me to
change its state." '

VII. 1. Tsze-loo, following the Master, happened to
fall behind, when he met an old man, carrying, across his
shoulder on a staff, a basket for weeds. Tsze-loo said to
him, " Have you seen my master, Sir ! " The old man
replied, " Your four limbs are unaccustomed to toil ; you
cannot distinguish the five kinds of grain : — who is your
master ? " With this, he planted his staff in the ground,
and proceeded to weed.

2. Tsze-loo joined his hands across his breast, and stood
before him.

3. The old man kept Tsze-loo to pass the night in his
house, killed a fowl, prepared miUet, and feasted him.
He also introduced to him his two sons.

4. Next day, Tsze-loo went on his way, and reported
his adventure. The Master said, " He is a recluse," and
sent Tsze-loo back to see him again, but when he got to
the place, the old man was gone.

are descriptive of theiv character, and=" the long Rester," and " the firm
Recluse." What kind of field labour is here denoted cannot be deter-
mined. 2. The original of " he knows the ford," indicates that "he" is
emphatio,=he, going about everywhere, and seeking to be employed, ought
to know the ford. The use of " his Master " in the last paragraph is
remarkable. It must mean "his Master" and not "the Master." ^ The
compiler of this chapter can hardly have been a disciple of the sage.

7. TSZE-LOO'S RENCONTRE WITH AN OLD MAN", A RECLUSE : HIS VIN-
DICATION OF HIS MASTER'S COURSE. The incident in this chapter was
probably nearly contemporaneous with those which occupy the two pre-
vious ones. Some say that the old man belonged to Sh^, which was a
part of Ts'oo. "The Ave grains" are "rice, millet, sacrifioial millet,
wheat, and pulse." But they are souietimes otherwise enumerated.
We have also " the six kinds," " the eight kinds," " the nine kinds," and
perhaps other classifications. 2. Tsze-loo, standing with his arms across
his breast, iudioated his respect, and won upon the old man. 5,


en. VIII.X CONFUCIAN jVNALECTS: 251

5. Tsze-loo then said to the family, " iSot to take office
is not righteous. If the relations between old and young
may not be neglected, how is it that he sets aside the
duties that should be observed between sovereign and
minister ? Wishing to maintain his personal purity, ho
allows that great relation to come to confusion. A su-
peiior man takes office, and performs the righteous duties
belonging to it. As to the failure of right principles to
make progress, he is aware of that."

VIII. 1. The men who have retired to privacy from
the world have been Pih-e, Shuh-ts'e, Yu-chung, E-yih,
Choo-chang, Hwuy of Lew-hea, and Shaou-leen.

2. The Master said, "Refusing to surrender their wills,
or to submit to any taint in their persons ; — such, I think,
were Pih-e and Shuh-ts'e.

3. " It may be said of Hwuy of Lew-hea, and of Shaou-
le3n, that they surrendered their wills, and submitted to
taint in their persons, but their words corresponded with
reason, and their actions were such as men are anxious to
see. This is all that is to be remarked in them.

4. " It may be said of Yu-chung and E-yih, that, while
they hid themselves in their seclusion, they gave a license
to their words, but in their persons they succeeded in
preserving their purity, and in their retirement they
acted according to the exigency of the times.

Tsze-loo is to be understood as here speaking tlie sentiments of the
Master, and vindicating his course. By " the relations between old and
young," he refers to the manner in which the old man had intro-
duced his sons to him the evening before, and to all the orderly inter-
course between old and young, which he had probably seen in the
family.

8. COKFUCIUS' JUDCMENT OP POEMEK WOi^THIES WHO HAD KEPT
PEOM THE WORLD. HiS OWN GUIDING PRINCIPLE. 1. On the word

" retired " with which this chapter commences, it is said : — " Ketiremeut
here is not that of seclusion, but is characteristic of men of large souls,
who cannot be measured by ordinary rules. They may display their
character by retiring from the world. They may display it also in the
manner of their discharge of office." The phrase is guarded in this way,
I suppose, because of its application to Hwuy of Lew-hea, who did not
obstinately withdraw from the world. Pih-e, and Shuh-ts'e,^ see V. xxii.
Yu-chung should probably beWoo-ohung. He was the brother of T'ae-pih,-
called Chung-yung, and is mentioned in the note on Till. i. He retired
with T'ae-pih among the barbarous tribes, then occupying the country of
Woo, and succeeded to the chieftaincy of them on his brother's death.-


2-^2 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS; - [bK XVIII.

5. " I am differeiit from all these. I have no course
for vvhlcli I am predetermined^ and no coni'se against which
1 am predetermined."

IX. 1. The grand music-master, Che, went to Ts'e.

2. Kan, the m.asterofthe band at the second meal, went
to Ts'oo. Leaou, the band-master at the third meal, went
to Ts'ae, Keu3h, the band-master at the fourth meal,
went to Ts'in.

3. Fang-shuh, the drum-master, withdrew to the no th
of the river.

4. Woo, the master of the hand-drum, withdrew to the
Han.

5. Yang, the assistant music-master, and Seang, mas-
ter of the musical stone, withdrew to an island in the sea.

X. The duke of Chow addressed his son, the duke of
Loo, saying, " The virtuous prince does not neglect his
relations. He does not cause the great ministers to re-
pine at his not employing them. Without some great

'■ E-yih and Choo-chang,'' .says Choo He, " are not found in the classics
and histories. From a passage in the Le-]je, XXI. i. 14, it appears thnt
Shaou-leen belonged to one of the barbarous tribes on the east, but was
well acquainted with, and observant of, the rules of propriety, particularly
those relating to mourning. 4. " Living in retirement, they gave a license
to their words." — this is intended to show that in this respect they were
inferior to Hwuy and Shaou-leen. 5. Confucius's openness to act accord-
ing to circumstances is to be understood as being always in subordination
to right and propriety.

9. The dispeksion of the musicia^ts op Loo. The dispersion here
narrated is supposed to have taken place in the time of Dulie Gae. When
once Confucius had rectified the music of Loo (IX. xiv ), the musicians
would no longer be assisting in the prostitution of their art, and so, as
the disorganization and decay proceeded, the chief among them withdrew
to other countries, or from society altogether. 1. "The music-master,
Che," — see VIII. xv. 2. The princes of Gliina, it would appear, had
music at their meals, and a, separate band performed at each meal, or
possibly, the band might be the same, but under the superintendence of
a separate officer at each meal. The emperor had four meals a day, and
the princes of' States only three, but it was the prerogative of the dulce of
Loo to use the ceremonies of the imperial household. Nothing is said
here of the band-uiaster at the first meal, perhaps because he did not leave
Loo, or nothing may have been known of him. 3. " The river " is of
course " the Yellow Eiver." 5. It was from Beaug that Confucius learned
to play on the lute.

10. Instructions op Chow-kunq to his son about government ;
a gbneeous consideration op others to be cherished. see vi. v.
It would seem that the duke of Uhow was himself appointed to the


CH. XI. J CO^•FUCIAN ANALECTS. 253

cause, he does not dismiss from their offices the members
of old families. He does not seek in one man talents for
every employment."

XI. To Chow belonged the eight officers, Pih-ta, Pih-
kwoh, Chung-tuh, Chung-hwuh, Shuh-yay, Shuh-hea,
Ke-suy, and Ke-kwa.


BOOK XIX.


Chapter I. Tsze-chang said, " The scholar, trained
for public duty, seeing threatening danger, is prepared to
sacrifice his life. When the opportunity of gain is pre-
sented to him, bethinks of righteousness. In sacrificing,
his thoughts are reverential. In mourning, his thoughts
are about the grief which he should feel. Such a man
commands our approbation indeed."

II. Tsze-chang said, " When a man holds fast virtue,
but without seeking to enlarge it, and believes right prin-

principality of Loo, but being detained at court by his duties to the young
Emperor Ch'ing, he sent his son, here called " the duke of Loo," to that
State as his representative.

11. The fkuitfulness of the early time op the Chow dynasty
IN ABLE OFFICERS. The eight individuals mentioned here are said to
have been brothers, four pairs of twins by the same mother. This is
intimated in their names, the two first being j»,)'mi, the next pair secimdi,
the third tertii, and the last two ulHiid. One motlier, bearing twins four
times in succession, and all proving distinguished men, showed the vigour
of the early days of the dynasty in all that was good. — It is disputed to
what reign these brothers belonged, nor is their surname ascertained.

Heading and contents of this book. " Tsze-chang— Ko. XIX."
Confucius does not appear personally in this book at all. Choo He
says : — " This book records the words of the disciples, Tsze-hea being the
most frequent speaker, and Tsze-kung next to him. For in the Con-
fucian school, after Yen Yuen there was no one of such discriminating
understanding as Tsise-kung, and, after Tsang Sin no one of such firm
sincerity as Tsze-hea." The disciples deliver their sentiments very much
after the manner of their master, and yet we can discern a falling off
from him.

1, Tszb-chano's opinion op the chiep attkibutes of the tewb
scholar.

2. Tsze-chang on narrow-mindedness and a hesitatino paith.
King Ping interprets this chapter in the following way : — '■ If a man
grasp hold of his virtue, and is not widened and enlarged by it, although
be may believe good principles, he cannot be sincere and generous." - But


254 CP>ir0CIAN ANALECTS;. [BK XIX.

ciples, but wittout firm sincerity, wljat account can be
made of his existence or non-existence ? "

III. The disciples of Tsze-hea asked Tsze-chang about
the principles of intercourse. Tsze-chang asked, " What
does Tsze-hea say on the subject? " They replied, "Tsze-
hea says: — 'Associate with those .who can advantage
you. Put away from you those who cannot do so." Tsze-
chang observed, " This is different from what I have
learned. The superior man honours the talented and
virtuous, and bears with all. He praises the good, and
pities the incompetent. Am I possessed of great talents
and virtue ? — who is there among men whom I will not
bear with? Am I devoid of talents and virtue? — men-
will put me away from them. What have we to do with
the putting away of others ? "

IV. Tsze-hea said, " Even in inferior studies and em-
ployments there is something worth being looked at, but
if it be attempted to carry them out to what is remote,
there is a danger of their proving inapplicable. There-
fore, the superior man does not practise them.^^

V. Tsze-hea said, " He, who from day to day recog-
nizes what he has not yet, and from month to month does
not forget what he has attained to, may be said indeed to.
love to learn. "

it is better to take the clauses as coordinate, and not dependent on each
other.

3. The different opinions of Tsze-hea and Tsze-chang on the
peincipiies which should beoulate ouk intbkcouese with
OTHERS. It is strange to me that the disciples of Tsze-hea should begin
their answer to Tsze-chang with the designation Tsze-hea, instead of
saying " our Master." IKng Ping expounds Tsze-hea's rule thus : — " If
the man be wortjiy, fit for you to have intercourse with, then have it, but
if he be not worthj," &o. On the other hand, we find:— "If the man
will advantage you, he is a fit person ; then maintain intercourse with
liim," &o. This seems to be merely carrying out Confucius' rule, I. viii. 3.
Choo He, however, approves of Tszechang's censure of it, while he

thinks also that Tsze-ohang's own view is defective. — Paou Heen says :

" Our intercourse with friends should be according to Tsze-hea's rule ;
general intercourse according to Tsze-chang' s."

4. TSZB-HBA'S OPINION OP THE INAPPLICABILITY OF SMALL PURSUITS
TO GREAT OBJECTS. Gardening, husbandry, divining, and the healing ■
art, are all mentioned by Choo He as instances of the '• small ways," here
Intended, having their own truth in them, but not available for higher
purposes, or what is beyond themselves.

5 The INDICATIONS OF A REAL LOVE OP LEARNBIG : — BY TSZE HEA


CH. VI,] CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 255

VI. Tsze-hea said, "There are learning extensively,
and' having a firm and sincere aim; inquiring with earnest-
ness, and reflecting with self-application: — virtue is in
such a course."

VII. Tsze-hea said, "Mechanics have their shops to
dwell in, in order to accomplish their works. The su-
perior man learns, in order to reach to the utmost of his
principles."

VIII. Tsze-hea said, " The mean man is sure to gloss
his faults."

IX. Tsze-hea said, " The superior man undergoes
three changes. Looked at from a distance, he appears
stern ; when approached, he is mild ; when he is heard to
speak, his language is firm and decided."

X. Tsze-hea said, "The superior man, having obtained
their confidence, may then impose labours on his people.
If he have not gained their confidence, they will think
that he is oppressing them. Having obtained the con-
fidence of his prince, he may then remonstrate with him.
If he have not gained his confidence, the prince will think
that he is vilifying him."

XL Tsze-hea said, " When a person does not trans-

6. how lbaening shottld he pcllsued to lead to virtue : — by
Tsze-hea

7. LBARNIXG is THE STUDENT'S WOBKBHOP : — BY TSZE-HEA. A Cer-
tain quarter was assigned anciently in Chinese towns and cities for
mechanics, and all of one art were required to have their shops together.-
A son must follow his father's profession, and, seeing nothing but the
exercise of that around him, it was supposed that he would not be led to'
tliink of anything else, and would so become very proficient in it.

8. Glossing his faults the phoop op the mean taas : — by Tsze-
hea. Literally, "The faults of the mean man, must gloss," i.e. lie is
sure to gloss.

9. Changing appeakancf.s of the supeeior man to others : —
BY Tsze-hea. Tsze-hea probably intended Confucius by the Kiimi-tsze,
but there is a general applicability in his language and sentiments. — The
description is about equivalent to our "foHiter in re, siiaiiiier in modo."

10. The importance of enjoying confidence to the right

SERVING of superiors AND ORDERING OF INFERIORS : — BY TSZE-HEA.

11. The great virtues demand the chief attention, and the
small ones mat be somewhat violated : — by tszb-hba. the sen-
timent here is very questionable. A different turn, however, is given to
the chapter in the older interpreters. Hing Ping, expanding K'ung Gan-
kwo says : — " Men of great virtue never go beyond the houndaiy-line : it
is enough for those who are virtuous in a less degree to keep near to it,


256 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK XIX.

gress the boundary-line in the great virtues, he may pass
and repass it in the small virtues."

XII. 1. Tsze-yew said, "The disciples and followers
of Tsze-hea, in sprinkling and sweeping the ground, in
answering and replying, in advancing and receding, are
Eufl&ciently accomplished. But these are only the branches
of lemming, and they are left ignorant of what is essential.
— How can they be acknowledged as sufficiently taught V

2. Tsze-hea heard of the remark and said, " Alas !
Yen Yew is wrong. According to the way of the superior
man in teaching, what departments are there which he
considers of prime importance, and therefore _^Asi delivers?
what are there which he considers of secondary import-
ance, and so allows himself to be idle about ? But as in
the case of plants, which are assorted according to their
classes, so he deals with his disciples. How can the way'xif
a superior man be such as to make fools of any of them ?
Is it not the sage alone, who can unite in one the begin-
ning and the consummation of learning ? "

XIII. Tsze-hea said, " The officer, having discharged
all his duties, should devote his leisure to learning. The
student, having completed his learning, should apply him-
self to be an officer.'^

XIV. Tsze-hea said, " Mourning, having been carried
to the utmost degree of grief, should stop with that.^'

going beyond and coming back." We adopt the more natural interpreta-
tion of Choo He.

12. TSZE-HEA'b defence op his own GKABtTATED METHOD OP

TEACHING: — AGAINST TszE-YBW. 1. The Sprinkling, &0., are the
things boys were supposed anciently to be taught, the rudiments of learn-
ing, from which they advanced to all that is inculcated in the " Great
Learning." But as Tsze-hea's pupils were not boys, but men, we should
understand, I suppose, these specifications as but a contemptuous refer-
ence to his instructions, as embracing merely what was external. The
general scope of Tsze-hea's reply is sufiSoiently plain, but the old inter-
preters and new differ in explaining the several sentences. After dwelling
long on it, I have agreed generally with the new school, and followed Choo
He in the translation. Tsze-hea did not teach what he taught as being
in itself more important than what he for the time left untouched. He
communicated knowledge as his disciples were able to bear it.

13. The ofpicer and the stddknt should attend each to his
pbopke work in the pikst instance : — by tsze-yew.

14. The trappings of mourning may be dispensed with :— by
Tsze-yew. The sentiment here is perhaps the same as that of Confucius
ia III. iv., but the sage guards and explains his, utterance. — K'ung Gaa.-


gS. xv.] conpOcian analects. 257

XV. Tsze-liea said, " My friend Chang can do things
whidi are hard to be done, but yet he is not perfectly
virtuous."

XVI. TsSng the philosopher said, " How imposing is
the manner of Chang ! It is difficult along with him to
practise virtue."

XVII. Tsang the philosopher said, " I have heard this
from our Master : — ' Men may not have shown what is in
them to the full extent, and yet they will be found to do
so, on occasion of mourning for their parents.' "

XVIII. ' Ts3,ng the philosopher said, " I have heard
this from our Master: — 'The filial piety of MSng Chwang,
in other matters, was what other men are competent to,
but, as seen in his not changing the ministers of
his father, nor his father's mode of government, it is
difficult to be attained to.' "

XIX. The chief of the Mang family having appointed
Tang Foo to be chief criminal judge, the latter consulted
the philosopher Tsang. Tsang said, "The rulers have
failed in their duties, and the people have consequently
been disorganized, for a long time. "When you have found

kw6, following an expression in the " Classic of Filial Piety," makes the
meaning to be that the mourner may not endanger his health or life by
excessive grief and abstinence.

15. tszb-yew's opinion op tsze-chakg, as mindin& too much
high things.

16. The philosophek Tsang's opinion of Tsze-chang, as too
high-pitched fob friendship.

17. how gkief fob the loss of parents beings out the heal
nature of man :— by tsang sln.

18. The filial piety of Mang Chwang : — by Tsang Sin. Chwang
was the honorary epithet of Suh, the head of the Mang family, not long
anterior to Confucius. His father, according to Choo He, had been a
man of great merit, nor was Chwang inferior to him, but his virtue espe-
cially appeared in what the text mentions. — Ho An gives the comment of
Ma Yung, that though there were bad men among his father's ministers,
a^d defects in his government, yet Chwang made no change in the one or
the other, during the three years of mourning, and that it was this which
constituted his excellence.

19. How A criminal judge should cherish compassion in his
administration of justice :— by Tsang Sin. Seven disciples of Tsang
Sin are more particularly mentioned, one of them being this Yang Foo.
" Disorganized," literally " scattered," is to bo understood of the moral
state of the people, and not, physically, of their being scattered from their
dwellings,

VOL. I. 17


258 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK XIX.

out the truth of any accusation, be grieved for and pity
them, and do not feel joy at your own ability."

XX. Tsze-kung said, " Chow^s wickedness was not so
great as thai name implies. Therefore, the superior man
hates to dwell in a low-lying situation, where all the
evil of the world will flow in upon him."

XXI. Tsze-kung said, "The faults of the superior
man are like the eclipses of the sun and moon. He has
his faults, and all men see them ; he changes again, and
all men look up to him."

XXII. 1. Kung-sun Ch'aou of Wei asked Tsze-kung,
saying, " From whom did Chung-ne get his learning ? "

2. Tsze-kung replied, "The doctrines of Wan and Woo
have not yet fallen to the earth. They are to be found
among men. Men of talents and virtue remember the
great principles of them, and others, not possessing such
talents and virtue, remember the smaller. Thus, all
possess the doctrines of Wan and Woo. From whom did
our Master not learn them ? And yet what necessity was
there for his having a regular master ? ■"

XXIII. 1. Shuh-sun Woo-shuh observed to the great
officers in the court, saying, ^' Tsze-kung is superior to
Chung-ne."

20. The dangeb op a bad name :— by Tsze-kung. " Not so bad
as the name implies," is, literally, " not so very bad as this ; " — the this is
understood by Hing Ping as referring to the epithet Chow, which cannot
be called honorary in this instance. According to the laws for such
terms, it means " cruel and unmerciful, injurious to righteousness." If
the this does not in this way refer to the name, the remark would seem
to have occurred in a conversation about the wickedness of Chow.

21. The superior man does not conceal his errors, nor persist
IN THEM : — BY TszE-KUNG. Such is the lesson of this chapter, as ex-
panded in the " Daily Lessons." The sun and the moon being here
spoken of together, the term must be confined to " eclipses," but it is also
applied to the ordinary waning of the moon.

22. Confucius' sources of knowledge were the recollections
and traditions op the principles on Wan and Woo : — by Tsze-
kung. 1. Of the questioner here we have no other memorial. His sur-
name indicates that he was a descendant of some of the dukes of Wei.
Observe how he calls Confucius by his designation of Chung-ne or "Ne
seewndus." (There was an elder brother, a concubine'si son, who was called
Pih-ne.) The last clause is taken by modern commentators, as asserting
Confucius' connate knowledge, but Gan-kwo finds in it only a repetition
of the statement that the sage found teachers everywhere.

23. TSZE-K UNO repudiates BEING THOUGHT SUPERIOR TO CONFUCIUS,
AND, BY THE COMPARISON OP A HOUSE AND WALL, SHOWS HOW ORDIN-


:H. XXIV.] CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 259

2. Tsze-fuh King-pih reported the observation to Tsze-
kung, wlio said, " Lee me use the comparison of a house
md its encompassing wall. My wall only reaches to the
shoulders. One may peep ovor it, and see whatever is
valuable in the apartments.

3. "The wall of my master is several fathoms high.
If one do not find the door and enter by it, he cannot see
the ancestral temple with its beauties, nor all the officers
in their rich array.

4. " But I may assume that they are few who find the
door. Was not the observation of the chief only what
might have been expected ? "

XXIV. Shuh-sun Woo-shuh having spoken revilingly
of Chung-ne, Tsze-kung said, " It is of no use doing so.
Chung-ne cannot be reviled. The talents and virtue of
other men are hillocks and mounds, which may be stept
over. Chung-ne is the sun or moon, which it is not possible
to step over. Although a man may wish to cut himself
oS from the sage, what harm can he do to the sun or
moon ? He only shows that he does not know his own
capacity."

XXV. 1. Tsze-k'in addressing Tsze-kung, said, "Yon
are too modest. How can Chiing-ne be said to be superior
to you ? "

2. Tsze-kung said to him, " For one word a man is


ABY PEOPLE COULD NOT UNDERSTAND THE MASTEB. 1. "WoO".wasthe

honorary epithet of Chow Kew, one of the chiefs of the Shuh-sun family.
From a mention of him in the " Family Sayings," we may conclude that
he was given to envy and detraction. The term rendered " house" is now
the common word for a " palace," but here it is to be taken generally for a
house or building. It is a poor house, as representing the disciple, and a
ducal mansion, as representing his master. Many commentators make
the wall to be the sole object in the comparison ; but it is better to take
both the house and the wall as members of the comparison. The wall
is not a part of the house, but one inclosing it.

24. Confucius is like the sun ob moon, high above the beach
OP depkeciation : — by Tsze-kusg.

25. Confucius can no more be equalled than the heavens can
«E climbed : — by Tsze-kung. We find it difficult to conceive of the
ettge's disciples speaking to one another, as Tsze-k'in does here to Tsze-
kung ; and Hing Ping says that this was not the disciple Tsze-k'in, but
another man of the same surname and designation. But this is inadmis-
sible, especially as we find the same parties, in I. x., talking about the
character of their master. I think it likely the conversation took place

i7»


260 .CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK Xrj

often deemed to be wise, and for one word he is often
deemed to be foolish. We ought to be careful indeed in
what we say.

3. " Our Master cannot be attained to, just in the same
way as the heavens cannot be gone up to by the steps of
a stair.

4. " Were our Master in the position of the prince of
a State or the chief of a Family, we should find verified
the description which has heen given of a sage's rule : — he
would plant the people, and forthwith they would be
established j he would lead them on, and forthwith they
would follow him J he would make them happy, and forthwith
multitudes would resort to his dominions ; he would stimu-
late them, and forthwith they would be harmonious. While
he lived, he would be glorious. When he died, he would be
bitterly lamented. How is it possible for him to be
attained to ? "


BOOK XX.


Chaptee I. 1. Yaou said, " Oh ! you. Shun, the
Heaven- determined order of succession now rests in your
person. Sincerely hold fast the due Mean. If there shall
be distress and want within the four seas, your Heavenly
revenue will come to a perpetual end."

2. Shun also used the same language in giving charge
to Yu.

after the sage's death, in which case the tenses In the translation -would
in several cases have to be altered. Unfortunately the Chinese language
has no inflexions of any kind, and in concise composition such as that
of these Analects the adjunctive indications of mood and tense seldom
occur.

Heading and contents op this book. — " Yaou said." Hing Ping
says:— "This records the words of the two emperors, the three kings,
and Confucius, throwing light on the excellence of the ordinances of
Heaven, and the transforming power of government. Its doctrines are
all those of sages, worthy of being transmitted to posterity. On this
account, it brings; u? the rear of all the other books, without any par-
ticular relation to the one immediately preceding." '

1. Peinou'les and ways of Yaou, Shun, Yu, T'ano, and Woo.
The first live paragraphs here are mostly compiled from diflerent parts
of the Shoo-king. But there are many variations of language. The
compiler may have thought it sufficient, if he gave the substance of the
original in. his quotations, without seeking to observe a verbal accuracy


E. I.J' CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 261

3. T'mig said, " I, the child Le, presume to use a dark-
oloured victim, and presume to announce to Thee,
lost great and sovereign God, that the sinner I dare not
lardon, and thy ministers, God, I do not keep in ob-
curity. The examination of them is by thy mind, O
rod. If, in my person, I commit offences, they are not
be attributed to you, the people of the myriad regions,
f you in the myriad regions commit offences, these offences
nust rest on my person."

4. Chow conferred great gifts, and the good were
snriched.

5. "Although he has his near relatives, they are not
;qual to my virtuous men. The people are throwing
jlame upon me, the one man."

6. He carefully attended to the weights and measures,
jxamined the body of the laws, restored the discarded
officers, and the good government of the empire took its
course.

7. , He revived States that had been extinguished, re-
stored families whoso line of succession had been broken,
sind called to office those who had retired into obscurity,
so that throughout the empire the hearts of the people
turned towards him.

or, possibly, ths Shoo-king, as it was in his daj-s, may have contained the
passages as he gives them, and the variations be owing to the burning
of most of the classical books by the founder of the Ta'in dynasty, and
their recovery and restoration in a mutilated state. 1. We do not find
this address of Yaou to Shun in the Shoo-king, Pt I., but the different
sentences may be gathered from Pt II. Bk II. 14, 15, 17, where we
have the charge of Shun to Yu. Yaou's reign commenced B.C. 2356,
and after reigning 73 years, he resigned the administration to Shun.
He died, B.C. 2256, and, two years after, Shun occupied the throne, in
obedience to the will of the people. " The Heaven-determined order
of succession " is, literally, "the represented and calculated numbers
of heaven," i.e., the divisions of the year, its terms, months, and days,
all described in a calendar, as they succeed one another with deter-
mined regularity. Here, ancient and modern interpreters agree in giving
to the expression the meaning which appears in the translation. I may
observe here, that Choo He differs often from the old inter])reters in ex-
plaining these passages of the Shoo-king, but I have followed him, leaving
the correctness or incorrectness of his views to be considered in the annot-
ations on the Shoo-king. 3. At the commencement of this paragraph
we must understand Tang, the founder of the Shang dynasty. The sen-
tences here may in substance be collected in a measure from the Shoo-
king, P^ TV. Bk III. 4, 8. The sinner is Kee, the tyrant, and last emperor


2(52 CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. [bK XX.

8. What lie attached chief importance to, were the food
of the people, the duties of monming, and sacrifices.

9. By his generosity-j he won all. By his sincerity, he
made the people repose trust in him. By his earnest
activity, his achievements were great. By his justice, all
were delighted.

r~~ II. 1. Tsze-chang asked Confucius, saying, " In what

I way should a person in authority act, in order that he may

■ conduct government properly ? " The Master replied,

i " Let him honour the five excellent, and banish away the

I four bad, things ; — then may he conduct government pro-

) perly." Tsze-chang said, " What are meant by the five

I excellent things ? " The Master said, " When the person

in authority is beneficent without great expenditure ;

when he lays tasks on the people without their repining ;

when he piirsues what he desires without being covetous ;

when he maintains a dignified ease without being proud ;

xwhen he is majestic without being fierce."

2. Tsze-chang said, " What is meant by being bene-
ficent without great expenditure ? " The Master replied,
" When the person in authority makes more beneficial to
the people the things from which they naturally derive
benefit ; is not this being beneficent without great ex-
penditure ? When he chooses the labours which are
proper, and makes them labour on them, who will repine?
When his desires are set on benevolent government, and
he realizes it, who will accuse him of covetousness ?
AVhether he has to do with many people or few, or with
things great or small, he does not dare to indicate any
disrespect j — is not this to maintain a dignified ease with-

of the Hea dynasty. " The ministers of Grod " are the able and virtuous
men,- whom T'ang had called, or would call, to office. 4. In the Shoo-
kiug, Pt V. Bk III. 9, we find King Woo saying, " He distributed great
rewards through the empire, and all the people were pleased and sub-
mitted." 5. See the Shoo-king, Pt V. Bk I. sect, ii, 6, 7. The subject is
Chow, the tyrant of the Yin dynasty. The people found fault with King
Woo, because he did not come to save them from their suflferings, by
destroying their oppressor. The remaining paragraphs are descriptive of
the policy of King Woo, but cannot, excepting the eighth one, be traced
in the present Shoo-king.

2. How GOVBKNMENT MAY BE CONDUCTED WITH EPPICIENCT, BY
HONOURING FIVE EXCELLENT THINGS, AND PUTTING AWAY POUK BAD

THINGS : — A CONVERSATION WITH TszE-CHANQ. It is Understood that


CH. III.J CONFUCIAN ANALECTS. 266

out any pride ? He adjusts his clothes and cap, and
throws a dignity into his looks, so that, thus dignified, he
is looked at with awe ; is not this to be majestic without
being fierce ? " _-

3. Tsze-chang then asked, " What are meant by the
four bad things ? " The Master said, " To put the people
to_deaih_Y3dthauJb.JiaYing instructed them ; — this is called
crue ltyj_Jo require from them, suddenly, the full tale of
worET^ithout having given them warning ; — this is called
oppression. To issue orders as if without urgency, at first,
and, when the time comes, to insist on them with severity ;
— this is called injury. And, generally speaking, to give
fay or rewards to men, and yet to do it in a stingy way ;
— this is called acting the part of a mere official." ^

III. 1. The Master said, "Without recognizing the
ordinances of Heaven, it is impossible to be a superior
man.

2. "Without an acquaintance with the rules of Pro-
priety, it is impossible for the character to be established.

3. " Without knowing the force 0/ words, it is impossible
to know men."

this chapter, and the next, give the ideas of Confucius on government, aa
a sequel to those of the ancient sages and emperors, whose principles are
set forth in the last chapter, to show how Confucius was their proper
successor.

3. The ordinances of Heaven, the bules of Peopkiety, and thk
fobce of woeds, all necessaey to be known.


THE GEEAT LEAENOG.


My master, the philosopher Ch'ing, says : — " The Great
Liarning is a booh left by Confucius, and forms the
gate by which first learners enter into virtiie. That we
can now perceice the order in which the ancients pur-
sued their 'learning, is solely oiving to the preservation
of this worh, the Analects and Mencius coming after it.
Learners must commence their course with this, and then
it may be hoped they will be hejptfrom error."

THE TEXT OF CONETJCIUS.

1. What the Great Learning teaches, is — to illustrate
illustrious virtue; to renovate the people; and to rest in
the highest excellence.

Title of the Wokk. — " The Great Learning." I have pointed out, In
the prolegomena, the great differences which are found among Chinese
commentators on this Work, on almost every point connected with the
criticism and interpretation of it. We encounter them here on the very
threshold. The name itself is simply the adoption of the two commencing
characters of the treatise, according to the custom noticed at the begin-
ning of the Analects; but in explaining those two characters, the old and
new schools differ widely. I have contented myself with the title — " The
Great Learning," which is a literal translation of the characters.

The introductory note. — I have thought it well to translate this,
and all the other notes and supplements appended by Choo He to the
original text, because they appear in nearly all the editions of the work
which fall into the hands of students, and his view of the classics is what
must be regarded as the orthodox one. The translation, which is here
given, is also, for the most part, according to his views, though my own
differing opinion will be found freely expressed in the notes. Another
version, following the order of the text, before it was transposed by him
and his masters, the Ch-ing, and without reference to its interpretations,
will be found in the translation of the Le-ke. The Ch'ing here is the


THE GKEAT LEAfiNING. 2()5

2. The point where to rest being known^ the object of
pursuit is then determined ; and, that being determined,
a calm unperturbedness may be attained. To that calm^
ness there will succeed a tranquil repose. In that repose
there may be careful deliberation, and that deliberation
will be followed by the attainment of the desired end.

3. Things have their root and their completion. Affairs
have their end and their beginning. To know what is
first and what is last will lead near to what is taught in
the Oreat Learning.

second of the two brothers, to whom reference is made in the prolegomena.
But how can we say that "The Great Learning" is a work left by Con-
fucius ? Even Choo He ascribes only a small portion of it to the Master,
and makes the rest to be the production of the disciple Tsing, and before
his time, the whole work was attributed generally to the sage's grandson.

Chapter I. The text of Confucius. Such Choo He, as will be
seen from his concluding note, determines this chapter to be, and it has
been divided into two sections, th^ iirst containing three paragraphs,
occupied with the heads of " the Great Learning," and the second contain-
ing four paragraphs, occupied with ihe particulars of those.

Par. 1. Tlie lieads of the Great Learning. — " To illustrate illustrious
virtue," =the illustrious virtue is the virtuous nature which man derives
from Heaven. This is perverted as man grows up, through defects of the
physical constitution, through inward lusts, and through outward seduc-
tions ; and the great business of life should be, to bring the nature back
to its original purity. — " To renovate the people," — this object of " the
Great Learning" is made out, by changing the character in the text, which
means " to love," into another signifying " to renovate." The Oh-ing first
proposed the alteration, and Choo He approved of it. When a man has
entirely illustrated his own illustrious nature, he has to proceed to bring
about the same result in every other man, till "under heaven" there be
not an individual, who is not in the same condition as himself. — " The
highest excellence " is understood of the two previous matters. It is not
a third and diiferent object of pursuit, but indicates a perseverance in the
two others, till they are perfectly accomplished. — According to these ex-
planations, the objects contemplated in "the Great Learning," are not three,
but two. Suppose them realized, and we should have the whole world of
mankind perfectly good, every individual what he ought to be I

Against the above interpretation, we have to consider the older and
simpler. " Virtue " is there not the nature, but simply virtue, or virtuous
conduct, and the first object in " the Great Learning " is the making of one's
self more and more illustrious in virtue, or in the practice of benevolence,
reverence, filial piety, kindness, and sincerity. There is nothing, of course,
of the renovating of the people, in this interpretation. The second object
of " the Great Learning " is " to love the people."— The third object is said
by Ying-ta to be " in resting in conduct which is perfectly good," and here,
also, there would seem to be only two objects, for what essential distinction
can we make between the- first .ind third / " To love the people " is,


2C6 .THE GKEAT LEAENING;

4. The ancients who wished to illustrate illustrious
virtue throughout the empirej first ordered well their own
States. Wishing to order well their States, they first
regulated their families. Wishing to regulate their fami-
lies, they first cultivated their persons. Wishing to culti-
vate their persons,they first rectified their hearts. Wishing
to rectify their hearts, they first sought to be sincere in
their thoughts. Wishing to be sincere in their thoughts,
they first extended to the utmost their knowledge. Such
extension of knowledge lay in the investigation of things.

5. Things being investigated, knowledge became com-
.plete. Their knowledge being complete, their thoughts
were sincere. Their thoughts being sincere, their hearts
were then rectified. Their hearts being rectified, their
persons were cultivated. Their persons being cultivated,
their families were regulated. Their families being regu-
lated, their States were rightly governed. Their States
being rightly governed, the whole empire was made tran-
quil and happy.

doubtless, the second thing taught by " the Great Learning." — Having the
heads of " the Great Learning " now before us, according to both interpreta-
tions of it, we feel that the student of it should bo an emperor, and not an
ordinary man.

Pa/i: 2. The mental process by wliiolt the point of rest may he attained.
I confess that I do not well understand this paragraph, in the relation of
its parts in itself, nor in relation to the rest of the chapter. Perhaps it
just Intimates that the objects of "the Great Learning" being so great, a
calm, serious thoughtfulness is required in proceeding to seek their at-
tainment.

Par. 3. The order of things and methods in the two preeeding para-
graphs. So, according to Ghoo He, does this paragraph wind up the two
preceding. " The illustration of virtue," he says, " is the root, and the
renovation of the people is the Bompletion, (literally, the branches).
Knowing where to rest is the beginning, and being able to attain is the
end. The root and beginning are mluit is first. The completion and
end are mhat is last." — The adherents of the old commentators say, on
the contrary, that this paragraph is introductory to the succeeding ones.
They contend that the illustration of virtue and renovation of the people
are doings, and not things. According to them the things are the person,
heart, thoughts, &o , mentioned below, which are ■' the root," and the
family, kingdom, and empire, which are " the branches." The affairs are
the various processes put forth on those things. — This, it seems to me, is
the correct interpretation.

Par. i. T/ie different steps by mhioh the illustration of illustrious vir-
tue througlwut the empire may he brought about. Of the sevei-al steps
.jlescribed, the central one is " the cultivation of the person," which, in-


THE GEi:AT LEARNING. "267

6. From the emperor down to the mass of the people,
all must consider the cultivation of the person the root of
everything besides.

7. It cannot be, when the root is neglected, that what
should spring from it will be well ordei-ed. It never has

. been the case that what was of great importance has been
slightly cared for, and, at the same time, that what was
of slight importance has been greatly cared for.

The preceding chapter of classical text is in the words of
Confucius, handed down by the philosopher Tsanq.
The ten chapters of explanation which follow contain the
views of Tsang, and were recorded by his disciples. In
the old copies of the work, there appeared considerable
confusion in these, from the disarrangement of the
tablets. But now, acailing myself of the decisions of
tlie philosopher Gh'ing, and having examined anew the
classical text, I have arranged it in order, as follows : —

deed, is called "the root." in paragraph 6. This requires "the lieart to
be correct," and that again " that the thoughts be sincere." " The heart "
is the metaphysical part of our nature, all that we comprehend under the
terms of mind or soul, heart, and spirit. This is conceived of as quies-
cent, and when its activity is aroused, then we have thoughts and pur-
poses relative to what affsots it. The " being sincere " is explained by
" real." The sincerity of the thoughts is to be obtained by "carrying our
knowledge to its utmost ext«nt, with the desire that there may be nothing
which it shall not embrace." This knowledge finally is realized, through
" exhausting by examination the principles of things and affairs, with the
desire that their uppermost point may be reached." — We feel that this ex-
planation cannot be correct, or that, if it be correct, the teaching of the
Chinese sage is far beyond and above the condition and capacity of men.
How can we suppose that, in order to secure sincerity of thought and our
self-cultivation, there is necessarily the study of all the phenomena of
physics and metaphysics, and of the events of history ?

Par. 5. Tlie synthesis of the preceding processes.

Par. 6. Tlie cultivation of the person is the prime, radical tiling re-
quired from all. I have said above that " the Great Learning " is adapted
only to an emperor, but it is intimated here that the people also may take
part in it in their degree.

Par. 7. Reiteration of the importance of attending to tlie root.

Concluding- note. It has been shown in the prolegomena that there
is no ground for the distinction made here between so much oracular
teaching attributed to Confucius, and so much commentary ascribed
to his disciple Tsang. The invention of paper is ascribed to Ts'ae Lun,
an officer of the Han dynasty, in the time of the Emperor Ho, a.d. 89 —
104. Before that time, and long after also, slips of wood and of bamboo
were used to write and engrave upon. We can easily conceive how a


'268 THE GREAT LEAENINO.

COMMENTAET 01" THE PHILOSOPHEE TgANG.

Chapter I. 1. In the Announcement to K'ang it is
Said, " He was able to make his virtue illustrious.-"

2. In the T'ae Kea, it is said, " He contemplated and
studied the illustrious decrees of Heaven."

3. In the Canon of the Emperor Yaou, it is said, " He
was able to make illustrious his lofty virtue."

4. These passages all show how those sovereigns made
themselves illustrious.

The above first chapter of commentary explains the illus-
tration of illustrious virtue.

II. 1. On the bathing- tub of T'ang, the following
words were engraved : — " If you can one day renovate
yourself, do so from day to day. Yea, kt there be daily
renovation.^^

• 2. In the Announcement to K'^ang, it is said, " To stir
up the new people."

3. In the Book of Poetry, it is said, " Although Chow

collection of them might get disarranged, ^ut whether those containing
" the Great Learning" did do so is a question vehemently disputed.
Commentary op the philosopher Tsaug.

1. The illustration of illustrious virtue. 1. See the Shoo-king,
Pt V. Bk. ix. 3. The words are part of the address of King Woo to his
brother Fung, called also K'ang-shuh, on appointing him to the mar-
quisate of Wei. The subject is King Wan, to whose example K'ang-shub
Is referred. 2. See the Shoo-king, Pt IV. Bk V. i. 2. The sentence it-
part of the address of the premier, E Yin, to T'ae-kea, the second emperor
of the Shang dynasty, B.C. 1752 — 1718. The subject of " contemplated "
is T'ae-kea's grandfather, the great T'ang. 3. See the Shoo-king, Pt I. 2.
It is of the Emperor Yaou that this is said.

2. The renovation of the people. Here the character " new," " to
renovate," occurs five times, and it was to find something corresponding
to it at the commencement of the work, which made the Ch'ing change
the old text. But the terms here have nothing to do with the renovation
of the people. This is self-evident in the first and third paragraphs. The
heading of the chapter, as above, is a misnomer. 1. This fact about
X'ang's bathing-tub had come down by tradition. At least, we do not
now find the mention of it anywhere but here. It was customary among
the ancients, as it is in China at the present day, to engrave, all about
them, on the articles of their furniture, such moral aphorisms and lessons.
2. See the Book quoted, p. 7, where K'ang-shuh is exhorted to assist
the emperor " to settle the decree of Heaven, and to make the bad
people of Yin into good people, or to stir up" the new people," i.e., new,
as recently subjected to Chow. 3. See the She-king, Pt III. Bk I. i. 1.
The subject of the ode is the praJse of King Wan, whose virtue led to tho


THE GREAT LEARNING. 269

was an anoieut State, the ordinance wliich lighted on it
was new."

4. Therefore, the superior man in ijverything uses his
utmost endeavours.

The above second chapter of commentary explains the reno-
vating of the people.

III. 1. In the Book of Poetry, it is said, " The imperial
domain of a thousand le is where the people rest. "

2. In the Book of Poetry, it is said, "The twitter-
ing yellow bird rests on a corner of the mound." The
Master said, " When it rests, it knows where to rest. Is
it possible that a man should not be equal to this bird ? "

3. In the Book of Poetry, it is said, " Profound was
Kiug Wan. With how bright and unceasing a feeling of
reverence did he regard his resting-places ! " As a sove-
reign, he rested in benevolence. As a minister, he rested
in reverence. As a son, he rested in filial piety. As a
father, he rested in kindness. In communication with his
subjects, he rested in good faith.

4. In the Book of Poetry, it is said, " Look at that
winding course of the K'e, with the green bamboos so
luxuriant ! Here is our elegant and accomplished prince !

possession of the empire by his liouse, more than a thousand years after
its first rise. 3. The " superior man " is here the man of rank and office
probably, as well as the man of virtue ; but I do not, for my own part, see
the particular relation of this to the preceding paragraphs, nor the work
which it does in relation to the whole chapter.

3. On resting in the highest excellence. 1. See the She-king,
Pt IV Bk III. iii. 4. The ode celebrates the rise and establishment of
the Sbang or Yin dynasty. A thousand le around the capital constituted
the imperial demesne. The quotation shows, according to ChOo He, that
" everything has the place where it ought to rest." But that surely is a
very sweeping conclusion from the words. 2. See the She-king, Pt II.
Bk VIII. vi. 2, where we have the complaint of a down-trodden man,
contrasting liis position with that of a bird. " The yellow bird " is known
by a variety of names. It seems to be a species of oriole. The " Master
said," is worthy of observation. If the iirst chapter of the classical
text, as Choo He calls it, really contains the words of Confucius, we
might have expected it to be headed by these characters. 3. See the
She-king, Pt III. Bk I. i. 4. 4. See the She-king, Pt I. Bk V. i. 1. The
ode celebrates the virtue of the Duke Woo of "Wei, in his laborious en-
deavours to cultivate his person. The transposition of this paragraph by
Choo He to this place does seem unhappy. It ought evidently to come in
uonneotion with the work of the seventh chapter. 5. See the She-king, Pt


270 THE GBEAT LEARNING.

As we cut and then file j as we chisel and then grind : so
has he cultivated himself. How grave is he and dignified !
How majestic and distinguished ! Our elegant and ac-
complished prince never can be forgotten." That expres-
sion — " as we cut and then file," indicates the work of
learning. " As we chisel and then grind," indicates that
of self-culture. " How grave is he and dignified ! " in-
dicates the feeling of cautious reverence. " How com-
manding and distinguished," indicates an awe-inspiring
deportment. " Our elegant and accomplished prince
never can be forgotten," indicates how, when virtue is'
complete and excellence extreme, the people cannot for-
get .them.

5. In the Book of Poetry, it is said, " Ai ! the former
kings are not forgotten." Future princes deem worthy
what they deemed worthy, and love what they loved. The
common people delight in. what they delighted, and are
benefited by their beneficial arrangements. It is on this
account that the former kings, after they have quitted
the world, are not forgotten.

The above third chapter of eo^nmentary explains resting
in the highest excellence.

TV. The Master said, " In hearing litigations, I am
like any other body. "What is necessary is to cause the
people to have no litigations ? '■" So, those who are de-
void of principle find it impossible to carry out their
speeches, and a great awe would be struck into men's
minds : — this is called knowing the root.

Tlie above fourth chapter of commentary explains the root
and the issue.

II. Bk I. Sect. I. iv. 3. The former kings are Wan and Woo, the founders
of the Chow dynasty. According to Ying-ta, "this paragraph illustrates
the business of having the thoughts sincere." According to Choo He, it
tells that how the former kings renovated the people, was by their resting
in perfect excellence, so as to be able, throughout the empire and to future
ages, to effect that there should not be a single thing but got its proper
place.

4. Explanation op the boot and the branches. See the Ana-
lects, XII. xiii., from which we understand that the words of Confucius ter-
minate at " no litigations," and that what follows is from the compiler.
According to the old commentators, this is the conclusion of the chapter
on having the thoughts made sincere, and that this is the root. Eut


THE GREAT LEARNING. 271

V. 1. This is called knowing tlie root.

2. This is called tlie perfecting of knowledge.

The above fifth ^ chapter of commentary explained the
meaning of " investigating things and carrying hnov)-
ledge to the utmost extent," but it is now lost. I have
ventwred to take the views of the scholar Ch'ing to sup-
ply it, as follows : — TJie meaning of the expression,
"The perfecting of hiouiledye depends on the investiga-
tion of things," is this : — If we wish to carry our know-
ledge to the utmost, we must investigate tlie principles
of all things we come into contact with, for the intelli-
gent mind of man is certainly formed to know, and
tliereis not a single thing in which its principles do not
inhere. But so long as all principles are not investi-
gated, man's knowledge is incomplete. Oh this account,
the Learning for Adults, at the outset of its lessons,
instructs tJoe learner, in regard to all things in the
world, to proceed from ivhat knowledge he has of their

■ principles, and pursue his investigation of them, till he
reaches the extreme point. After exerting Ibimself in
this way for a long time, he will suddenly find himself
possessed of awide and far-reaching penetration. Then,
the qualities of all things, whether external or intei-nal,
the subtle or the coarse, will all be apprehended, and
the mind, in its entire substance and its relations to
things, will be perfectly intelligent. This is called the
investigation of things. This is called the perfection
of knowledge.

YT. 1. What is meant by "making the thoughts sin-
according to Choc He, it is the Illustration of illustrious' virtue which is
the root, while the renovation of the people is the result therefrom. Looli-
ing at the words of Confucius, we must conclude that sinoerity was the
Subject in his mind.

5. On the investigation of things, and caeeting knowledge
TO THE UTMOST EXTENT. 1. This is Said by one of the Ch'ing to be
" superfluous text." 2. Choo He considers this to be the conclusion of a
chapter which is now lost. But we have seen that the two sentences come
in, as the work stands in the Le-ke, at the conclusion of what is deemed
the classical text. It is not necessary to add anything here to what has
been said there, and in the prolegomena, on the new dispositions of the
work from the time of the Sung scholars, and the manner in which Choo
He has supplied this supposed missing chapter.
, 6. On having the thoughts sincere. 1. Tlie lineerity of tlie


272 THE GkEAT LEARNING.

cere/' is the allowing no self-deception, as when we hate a
bad smell,. and as when we love what is beautiful. This is
called self-enjoyment. Therefore, the superior man must
be watchful over himself when he is alone.

2. There is no evil to which the mean man, dwelling
retired, will not proceed, but when he sees a superior
man, he instantly tries to disguise himself, concealing
his evil, and displaying what is good. The other beholds
him, as if he saw hia heart and reins ;■ — of what use is his
disguise? This is an instance of the saying — ''What
truly is within will be manifested without.'' Therefore,
the superior man must be watchful over himself when he
is alone.

3. Tsang the philosopher said, " What ten eyes behold,
what ten hands point to, is to be regarded with rever-
ence ! "

4. Eiches adorn a house, and virtue adorns the person.
The mind is expanded, and the body is at ease. There-
fore, the superior man must make his thoughts sincere.

The above sixth chapter of commentary explains making
the thoughts sincere.

thovglits oitains, mJien iliey move mitlwut effort to mliat is right and
wrong ; and, in order to this, a man must be specially on his guard in his
solitary moments. 2. An enforcement of the concluding clause in the last
paragraph. " His heart and reins " is, literally, " the lungs and liver," but
with the meaning which we attach to the expression substituted for it.
The Chinese make the lungs the seat of righteousness, and the liver the seat
of benevolence. 3. The use of " Ts&ng' the philosopher " at the beginning
of this paragraph (and extending, perhaps, over to the next) should suffice
to show that the whole work is not his, as assumed by Choo He. }' Ten"
is a round number, put for many. The recent commentator, Lo Chung-
fan, refers Tsang's expressions to the multitude of spiritual beings, serv-
ants of Heaven or God, who dwell in the regions of the air, and are
continually beholding men's conduct. But they are probably only an
emphatic way of exhibiting what is said in the preceding paragraph.
4. This paragraph is commonly referred to TsSng Sin, but whether cor-
rectly so or not cannot be positively affirmed. It is of the same pur-
port as the two preceding, showing that hypocrisy is of no use. Com-
pare Mencius, VII. Pt. I. xxi. 4. It is only the first of these paragraphs
from which we can in any way ascertain the views of the writer on making
the thoughts sincere. The other paragraphs contain only illustration or
enforcement. Now, the gist of the first paragraph seems to be in " allow-
Ing no self-deception." After knowledge has been carried to the utmost,
this remains to be done, and it is not true that, when knowledge has been
completed, the thoughts become sincere. This fact overthrows Choo He's
interpretation of the vexed passages in what he calls the text of Confucius.


THE GREAT LEAENISG. 273

VII. 1. What is meant by "The cultivation of the
person depends on rectifying the mindj" may be thus illus-
trated : — If a man be under the influence of passion, he
will be incorrect in his conduct. He will be the same, if
he is under the influence of terror, or under the influence
of fond regard, or under that of sorrow and distress.

2. When the mind is not present, we look and do not
see ; we hear and do not understand ; we eat and do not
know the taste of what we eat.

3. This is what is meant by saying that the cultivation
of the person depends on the rectifying of the mind.

The above seventh chapter of commentary explains recti-
fying the mind and cultivating the person.

VIII. 1. What is meant by " The regulation of one's
family depends on the cultivation of his person," is this :
— Men are partial where they feel affection and love;
partial where they despise and dislike ; partial where they
stand in awe and reverence ; partial where they feel sor-
row and compassion ; partial where they are arrogant and
rude. Thus it is that there are few men in the world who
love, and at the same time know the bad qualities of the
object of their love, or who hate, and yet know the excel-
lences of the object of their hatred.

2. Hence it is said, in the common adage, " A man does
not know the wickedness of his son; he does not know
the richness of his growing com.''

3. This is what is meant by saying that if the person
be not cultivated, a man cannot regulate his family.

The above eighth chapter of commentary explains cultivating
the person and regulating the family.

IX. 1. What is meant by " In order rightly to govern

Let the student examine his note appended to this chapter, and he wiU
see that Choo was not unconscious of this pinch of the difficulty.

7. On personal cultivation as dependent on the rectification

OP THE mind.

8. The necessity or cultivating the person, in oedkr to the
regulation op the family. The lesson here is evidently, that men
are continually falling into error, in consequence of the partiality of their
feelings and affections. How this error affects their personal cultivation,
and interferes with the regulating of their families, is not specially indi-
cated.

9. On regulating the family as the means to the well-oedbe-'

VOL. 1. 18


274 THE GEEAT LEAENINQ.

his State^ it is necessary first to regulate his family/ is
this : — It is not possible for one to teach others^ while he
cannot teach his own family. Therefore, the ruler, without
going beyond his family, completes the lessons for the
State. There is fiUal piety: — therewith the sovereign
should be served. There is fraternal submission : — there-
with elders and superiors should be served. There is
kindness : — therewith the multitude should be treated.

2. In the Announcement to K'ang, it is said, "Act as
if you were watching over an infant." If a mother is
really anxious about it, though she may not hit exactly the
wants of her infant, she will not be far from doing so.
There never has been a girl who learned to bring up a
child, that she might afterwards marry.

3. From the loving exa.mple of one family, a whole
State becomes loving, and from its courtesies, the whole
State becomes courteous, while, from the ambition and
perverseness of the one man, the whole State may be led
to rebellious disorder ; — such is the nature of the influ-
ence. This verifies the saying, " Affairs may be ruined
by a single sentence ; a kingdom may be settled by its one
man."

4. Yaou and Shun led on the empire with benevolence,,
and the people followed them. Ke6 and Chow led on
the empire with violence, and the people followed them.
The orders which these issued were contrary to the prac-
tices which they loved, and so the people did not foUow
them. On this account, the ruler must himself be pos-
sessed of the good qualities, and then he may require them

IKG OF THE STATE. 1. There is here implied the necessity of self-culti-
vation to the rule, ioth of the family and of the State ; and that ieing
supposed to exist, it is slmwn hom the virtues that secure tJie regulatwn
of the family have their corresponding virtues in tJie wider spliere of the
State. 2. See the Shoo-king, Pt V. Bk IX. 9. Both in the Shoo-king and
here, some verb, like act, must be supplied. This paragraph seems de-
signed to show that tlie ruler must he carried on to his object by an in-
mard, unconstrained feeling, like that of the matlier for her infant. Lo
Chung-fan insists on this as harmonizing with " to love the people," as
the second object proposed in the Great Learning. 3. Horv certainly and
rapidly the influence ofthefmnily extends to the State. The " one man "
is the ruler. " I, the one man," is a way in which the emperor speaks
of himself ; see Analects XX. i. 5. i. An illustration of the last part of the
last paragraph. But from the examples cited, the sphere of influence is
extended from the State to the empire, and the family, moreover, does not


THE GREAT LEARNING. 275^

in the people. He must not have the had qualities in
liimselfj and then he may require that they shall not be
in the people. Never has there been a man, who, not
having reference to his own character and wishes in deal-
ing with others, was able effectually to instruct them.

5. Thus we see how the government of the State de-
pends on the regulation of the family.

6. In the Book of Poetry, it is said, " That peach tree,
so delicate and elegant ! How luxuriant is its foliage !
This girl is going to her husband's house. She will
rightly order her household.'^ Let the household be
rightly ordered, and then the people of the State may
be taught.

7. In the Book of Poetry, it is said, " They can dis-
charge their duties to their elder brothers. They can
discharge their duties to their younger brothers." Let
the ruler discharge his duties to his elder and younger
brothers, and then he may teach the people of the State.

8. In the Book of Poetry, it is said, " In his deportment
there is nothing wrong ; he rectifiea all the people of the
State." Yes; when the ruler, as a father, a son, and a
brother, is a model, then the people imitate him.

9. This is what is meant by saying, " The government
of his kingdom depends on his regulation of the family."

The above ninth cha/pter of commentary explains regulat-
ing the family, and governing the kingdom.

X, L What is meant by " The making the whole em-
pire peaceful and happy depends on the goverament of

intervene between the empire and the ruler. 6. See the She-king, Pt I.
Bk I. vi. 3. The ode celebrates the wife of King Wan, and the happy
influence of their family government. 7. See the She-king, Pt II. Bk 11.
ix. 3. The ode was sung at entertainments, when the emperor feasted the
princes. It celebrates their virtues. 8. See the She-king, Pt I. Bk XIV.
iii. 3. It celebrates, according to Choo He, the praises of some Tteun-tsze,
or ruler.

10. On the WEIiL-ORDEKlNS OF THE STATE, AND MAKING THE

WHOLE EMPIRE PEACEFUL AND HAPPY. The key to this chapter is in
the phrase " a measuring square," the principle of reciprocity, the doing
to others as we would that they should do to us, though here, as elsewhere,
it is put forth negatively. It is implied in the fifth paragraph of the last
chapter, but it is here discussed at length, and shown in its highest ap-
plication. The following analysis of the chapter is translated freely from
6 native work : — " This chapter explains the well-ordering of the State, and


275 THE GREAT LEAENING.

his State/' is this : — "When the sovereign behaves to his
aged, as the aged should be behaved to, the people become
filial ; when the sovereign behaves to his elders, as elders
should be behaved to, the people learn brotherly submis-
sion ; when the sovereign treats compassionately the young
and helpless, the people do the same. Thus the ruler
has a principle with which, as with a measuring square,
he may regulate his conduct.

the tranquillization of the empire. The greatest stress is to be laid on the
plirase — tlie measuring square. That, and the expression in the general
oonamentary — loving and hating m/iat tlie people lone and hate, and not
thinking only of tlie profit, exhaust the teaching of the chapter. It is di-
vided into live parts. Thefinft, embracing the two first paragraphs, teaches,
that the way to make the empire tranquil and happy is in the principle
of the measuring square. The second part embraces three paragraphs, and
teaches that the application of the measuring square is seen in loving,
and hating, in common sympathy with the people. The consequences ot
losiffig and gaining are mentioned for the first time in the fourth paragraph
to wind up the chapter so far, showing that the decree of Heaven goes or
remains, according as the people's hearts are lost or gained. The third
part embraces eight paragraphs, and teaches that the most important
result of loving and hating in common with the people is seen in making
the root the primary subject, and the branch only secondary. Here, in
paragraph eleven, mention is again made o{ gaining and losing, illustrating
the meaning of the quotation in it, and showing that to the collection or
dissipation of the people the decree of Heaven is attached. The/ourth
part consists of five paragraphs, and exhibits the extreme results of loving
and hating, as shared with the people, or on one's own private feeling,
and it has special reference to the sovereign's employment of ministers,
because there is nothing in the principle more important than that. The
nineteenth paragraph speaks of gaining and losing, for the third time,
showing that from the fourth paragraph downwards, in reference both to
the hearts of the people and the decree of Heaven, the application or non-
application of the principle of the measuring sgnare depends on the mind
of the sovereign. The^ifApart embraces the other paragraphs. Because
Ihe root of the evil of a sovereign's not applying that principle, lies in his
not knowing how wealth is produced, and employs mean men for that
object, the distinction between righteousness and profit is here much in-
sisted on, the former bringing with it all advantages, and the latter leading
to all evil consequences. Thus the sovereign is admonished, and it is
seen how to be careful of his virtue is the root of the principle of the
measuring square ; and his loving and hating, in common sympathy with
the people, is its reality."

1. There is here no progress of thought, but a repetition of what has been
insisted on in the two last chapters. But it having been seen that the ,
ruler's example is so influential, it follows that the minds of all men are
the same in. sympathy and tendency. He has then only to take his own
B^iud, and measure therewith the minds of others. If he act accordingly,


THE GEEAT LEARNING. 277

• 2. What a man dislikes in his superiors, let him not dis-
play in the treatment of his inferiors ; what he dislikes in
inferiors, let him not display in the service of his superiors ;
what he hates in those who are before him, let him not
therewith precede those who are behind him; what he
hates in those who are behind him, let him not therewith
follow those who are before him ; what he hates to receive
on the right, let him not bestow on the left ; what he hates
to receive on the left, let him not bestow on the right : —
this is what is called " The principle, with which, as with
a measuring square, to regulate one's conduct."

3. In the Book of Poetry, it is said, "How much to be
rejoiced in are these princes, the parents of the people ! "
When a prince loves what the people love, and hates, what
the people hate, then is he what is called the parent of the
people.

4. In the Book of Poetry, it is said, "Lofty is that
southern hill, with its rugged masses of rocks ! Full of
majesty are you, grand-tea^cher Yin, the people all look
up to you." Rulers of kingdoms may not neglect to be
careful. If they deviate to a mean selfishness, they will be
a disgrace in the empire.

. 5. In the Book of Poetry, it is said, "Before the. sove-
reigns of the Yin dynasty had lost the hearts of the people,
they were the mates of God. Take warning from the
hoiise of Yin. The great decree is not easily preserved."
This shows that, by gaining the people, the kingdom is
gained, and, by losing the people, the kingdom is lost.

6. On this account, the ruler will first take pains about
his own virtue. Possessing virtue will give him the people.
Possessing the people will give him the territory. Pos-

the grand result — the empire tranquil and happy — will ensue. 2. A
lengtltened description of tlie principle of reciprocity. 3. See the She-
king, Pt II. Bk II. V. 3. The ode is one that was sung at festivals, and
celebrates the virtues of the princes present. 4. See the She-king, Pt II.
Bk rv. vii. 1. The ode complains of the Emperor Yew, for his employing
unworthy ministers. 5. See the She-king, Pt III. Bk I. i. 6. The
ode is supposed to be addressed to King Ch'ing, to stimulate him to
imitate the virtues of his grandfather Wan. " Yin,"=" the sovereigns of
the Yin dynasty." The capital of the Shang dynasty was changed to
Yin by P'wan-kang, B.C. 1400, after which the dynasty was so denominated.
C. " Virtue " here, according to Choo He, is the " illustrious virtue " at
the beginning of the book. His opponents say that it is the exhibition of
■nitue ; that is, of filial piety, brotherly submission, &c. This is more in


278 THE GREAT LEAENINS.

sessing the territory will give him its wealth. Possessing
the wealth, he will have resources for expenditure.

7. Virtue is the root ; wealth is the result.

8. If he make the root his secondary object^ and the
result his primary, he will only wrangle with his people,
and teach them rapine.

9. Hence, the accumulation of wealth is the way to
scatter the people ; and the letting it be scattered among
them is the way to collect the people.

10. And hence, the ruler's words going forth contrary
to right, will come back to him in the same way, and
wealth, gotten by improper ways, will take its departure
by the same.

11. In the Announcement to K'ang, it is said, "The
decree indeed may not always rest on us j " that is, good-
ness obtains the decree, and the want of goodness loses it.

12. In the Book of Ts'oo, it is said, "The kingdom of
Ts'oo does not consider that to be valuable. It values,
instead, its good men."

13. Buke Wall's uncle. Fan, said, "Our fugitive does
not account that to be precious. What he considers
precious, is the affection due to his parent."

14. In the Declaration of the duke of Ts'^in, it is said,
"Let me have but one minister, plain and sincere, not
pretending to other abilities, but with a simple, upright
mind ; and possessed of generosity, regarding the talents


harmony with the first paragraph of the chapter. 10. The " words " are
to be understood of governmental orders and enactments. Our proverb —
" Goods ill-gotten go ill-spent" might be translated by the characters .in
the text. 11. See the Book quoted, p. 23. 12. The Book of Ts'oo is
found in the " Narratives of the States," a collection purporting to be
of the Chow dynasty, and, in relation to the other States, what Confucius'
" Spring and Autumn " is to Loo. The exact words of the text do not
occur, but they could easily be constructed from the narrative. An officer
of Ts'oo being sent on an embassy to Tsin, the minister who received
him asked about a famous girdle of Ts'oo, how much it was worth. The
officer replied that his country did not look on such things as its treasures,
but on its able and virtuous ministers. l.S. " Uncle Fan ; " that is, uncle
to Wan, the duke of Ts'in. See Analects XIV. xvi. Wan is the " fugitive."
In the early part of his life he was a fugitive, and suffered many vicissi-
tudes of fortune. Once, the duke of Ts'in having offered to help him, when
he was in mourning for his father who had expelled him, to recover Tsin,
his uncle Fan gave the reply in the text. The that in the translation
refers to " getting the kingdom." 14. " The declaration of the duke of


THE GREAT LEAENIKG. 279

of others as tKough lie Mmself possessed them^ and, where
he finds accomplished and perspicacious men, loving them
in his heart more than his mouth expresses, and really
showing himself able to bear and employ them : — such a
minister will be able to preserve my sons and grandsons,
and black-haired people, and benefits likewise to the
kingdom may well be looked for from him. But if it be
his character, when he finds men of ability, to be jealous
and hate them ; and, when he finds accomplished and per-
spicacious men, to oppose them and not allow their ad-
vancement, showing himself really not able to bear them :
— such a minister will not be able to protect my sons and
grandsons, and black-haired people ; and may he not also
be pronounced dangerous to the State ? "

15. It is only the truly virtuous man who can send away
such a man and banish him, driving him out among the
barbarous tribes around, determined not to dwell along
with him in the Middle kingdom. This is in accordance
with the saying, " It is only the truly virtuous man who
can love or who can hate others."

16. To see men of worth and not be able to raise them
to office J to raise them to office, but not to do so quickly :
— this is disrespectful. To see bad men and not be able
to remove them; to remove them, but not to do so to
a distance : — This is weakness.

17. To love those whom men hate, and to hate those
whom men love ; this is to outrage the natural feeling of
men. Calamities cannot fail to come down on him who
does so.

18. Thus we see that the sovereign has a great course
to pursue. He must show entire self-devotion and sin.

Ts'in is the last book in the Shoo-king. It was made by one of the dukes
of Ts'in to his officers, after he had sustained a great disaster, in conse-
quence of neglecting the advice of his most faithful minister. Between
the text here, and that which we iind in the Shoo-king, there are some
differences, but they are unimportant. 17. This is spoken of the ruler not
having respect to the common feelings of the people in his employment of
ministers, and the consequences thereof to himself. 18. This paragraph
speaks generally of the primal cause of gaining and losing, and shoKS horn
the principle oftlte measuring square must liave its root in the ruler's mind.
The great course is explained by Choo He as — " the art of occupying the
throne, and therein cultivating himself and governing others." Ying-tS
Bays it ia — " the course by which he practises filial piety, fraternal duty


280 THE GEEAT LEARNING.'

eerity to attain it, and by pride and extravagance lie will
fail of it. .

19. There is a great course also for the production of
wealth. Let the producers be many and the consumers
fevy. Let there be activity in the production, and eco-
nomy in the expenditure. Then the wealth will always be
sufficient.

20. The virtuous ruler, by means of his wealth, makes
himself more distinguished. The vicious ruler accumu-
lates wealth, at the expense of his life.

21. Never has there been a case of the sovereign loving
benevolence, and the people not loving righteousness.
Never has there been a case where the people have loved
righteousness, and the affairs of the sovereign have not
been carried to completion. And never has there been a
case where the wealth in such a State, collected in the
treasuries and arsenals, did not continue in the sovereign's
possession.

22. The officer Mang Heen said, "He who keeps horses
and a carriage does not look after fowls and pigs. The
family which keeps its stores of ice does not rear cattle or
sheep. So, the house which possesses a hundred chariots
should not keep a minister to look out for imposts that he
may lay them on the people. Than to have such a minister,
it were better for that house to have one who should rob
it of its revenues." This is in accordance with the saying :
— " In a State, pecuniary gain is not to be considered to
be prosperity, but its prosperity will be found in right-
eousness."

benevolence, and righteousness." 19. This is understood by £'ang-shing
as requiring the promotion of agriculture- ; and that is included, but doea
not exhaust the meaning. The consumers are the salaried officers of the
government. The sentiment of the whole is good ;— where there is cheer-
ful industry in the people, and an economical administration of the
government, the finances will be flourishing. 20. The sentiment here is sub-
stantially the same as in paragraphs seven and eight. The old interpreta-
tion is different : — " The virtuous man uses his wealth so as to make his
person distinguished. He who is not virtuous, toils with his body to
increase his wealth." 21. This shows how the people respond to the influ-
ence of the ruler, and that benevolence, even to the scattering of his wealth
on the part of the latter, its tuu way to permanent prosperity and wealth.
22. Heen was the honorary epithet of Chung-sun Meg, a worthy minister
of Loo, under the two dukes, who ruled before the birth of Confucius. His
sayings, quoted here, were preserved by tradition or recorded in some


THE GREAT LEAENING. 281

23. When lie wlio presides over a State or a family-
makes his revenues his chief business, he must be under
the influence of some small, mean man. He may consider
this man to be good ; but when such a person is employed
in the administration of a State or family, calamities froy^
Heaven, 'aid injuries /rom men, will befall it together, and,
though a good man may take his place, he will not be able
to remedy the evil. This illustrates again the saying, " In
a State, gain is not to be considered prosperity, but its
prosperity will be found in righteousness.'''

Tlie above tenth chapter of commentary explains the govern-
ment of the State, and the making the empire peaceful
and happy.

There are thus, in all, ten chapters of comm,entary ,' the
first four of which discuss, in a general manner, the
scope of the 'principal topic of the Work ; while the other
six go particularly into an exhibition of the work re-
quired in its subordinate branches. The fifth chapter
contains the important subject of comprehending true
excellence, and the sixth, what is the foundation of the
attainment of true sincerity. Those tioo chapters de-
mand the especial attention of the learner. Let not the
reader despise them because of their simplicity.

work which is now lost. On a scholar's being first called to office, he
was gifted by his prince with a carriage and four horses. He was then
supposed to withdraw from petty ways of getting wealth. The high
ofRcers of a State kept ice for use in their funeral rites and sacrifices.


THE DOCTKINE OF THE MEAN.


My master, tJie philosopher Gh'ing, says, " Being without
inclination to either side is called chtog; admitting of
no change is called tung." Sy chuug is denoted the
correct course to be pursued by all under heaven; by
TUNG is denoted the foeed principle regulating all unde^-
heaven. This work contains the law of the mind, which
was handed down from one to another, in the Confucian
school, till Tsze-sze, fearing lest in the course of time
errors should a/rise about it, committed it to writing,
and delivered it to Mencius. The book first speaks of
one principle ; it next spreads this out, and embraces
all things ; finally, it returns and gathers them all up
under the one principle. Unroll it, and it fills the uni-
verse ; roll it up, and it retires and lies hid in mysten-
ousness. The relish of it is inexhaustible. The whole
of it is solid learning. When the skilful reader has ex-
plored if with delight till he has apprehended it, he may
carry it into practice all his life, and will find that it
cannot be exhausted.

The title of the woek. — Chung Tung, " The Doctrine of the Mean.''
It is hardly possible amid the conflicting views of native scholars, and the
various meanings of which the terms are capable, to decide categorically
on the exact force of the terms in the title. The Work treats of the
human mind : — in its state of cimng, absolutely correct, as it is in itself ;
and in its state of harmony, acting ad extra, according to its correct nature.
— In the version of the Work, given in the collection of " Memoires concern-
ant VMstoire, les sciences, Sjc, des Chinois," vol. I., it is styled — " Juste
Milieu." Eemusat calls it " X'invariaile Milieu," after Ch'ing E. In-
torcetta, and his coadjutors, call it — " Medium constansvel sempitermim."
The book treats, they say, " De medio sempiteeno, sii'C de aurea medi-


THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN. 28S

Chaptee I. 1. What Heaven lias conferred is called
THE NATURE ; an accordance with, this nature is called the
PATH of duty ; the regalation of this path is called in-

STEUCTION.

2. The path may not be left for an instant. If it could
be leftj it would not be the path. On this account, tho
superior man does not wait till he sees things, to be
cautiouSj nor till he hears things, to be apprehensive.

3. There is nothing more visible than what is secret,
and nothing more manifest than what is minute. There-
fore, the superior man is watchful over himself, when he is
alone.

4. While there are no stirrings of pleasure, anger, sor-
row, or joy, the mind may be said to be in the state of
EQUILIBRIUM. When those feelings have been stirred, and
they act in their due degree, there ensues what may be

ocritate ilia, qvce est, ztt ait Cicero, inter nimivm, etpardum, eonstanter et
omnibus in relus tenenda." Morrison says, "Chung Tung, the constant
(golden) medium." Collie calls it — " The golden medium." The objection
which I have to all these names is, that from them it would appear as
if the first term were a noun, and the other a qualifying adjective, whereas
they are co-ordinate terms.

1. It has been stated, in the prolegomena, that the current division of
the Chung Yung into chapters was made by Choo He, as well as their
subdivision into paragraphs. The thirty-three chapters, which embrace
the work, are again arranged by him in five divisions, as will be seen
from his supplementary notes. The first and last chapters are complete in
themselves, as the introduction and conclusion of the treatise. The second
part contains ten chapters ; the third, nine ; and the fourth, twelve,

Par. 1. Tlie principles of duty have their root in the evidenced mill of
Seaven, and their full exhibition in tlie teaching of sages. What is
taught seems to be this : — To man belongs a moral nature, conferred on
him by Heaven or God, by which he is constituted a law to himself. But
as he is prone to deviate from the path in which, according to his nature,
he should go, wise and good men — sages — have appeared, to explain and
regulate this, helping all by their instructions to walk in it.

Par. 2. , The path indicated by the nature may never be left, wrA t\e
mperior nian^he mho mould embody all principles of right and duty —
exercises a most sedulous care that he may attain thereto.

Par. 3. It seems to me that the secrecy here must be in the recesses of
one's own heart, and the minute things, the springs of thought and stir-
rings of purpose there. The full development of what is intended here is
probably to be found in all the subsequent passages about " sincerity."

Par. 4. "This," says Choo He, "speaks of the virtue of the nature
and passions, to illustrate the meaning of the statement that the path
may not be left." It is difficult to translate the paragraph, because it is
difficult to understand it.


284 THE UOCTEINE OP THE MEAIT.

called tlie state of haemont. This equilibeium is tlie great
root from which grow all the -human actings in tlie world,
and this haemony is the universal path which they all should
pursue.

5. Let the states of equilibrium and harmony exist in
perfection, and a happy order will prevail throughout
heaven and earth, and all things will be nourished and
flourish.

In the first chapter which is given above, Tsze-sze states
the diews which had been handed down to him, as the
basis of his discourse. First, it shows clearly how the
path of duty is to be traced to its origin in Heaven, and
is unchangeable, while the substance of it is provided in
ourselves, and may not be departed from. Next, it
speaks of the importance of preserving and nouHshing
this, and of exercising a watchful self-scrutiny with re-
ference to it. Finally, it s^jeahs of the meritorious
achievements and transform,ing influence of sage and
spiritual men in f.lieir highest extent. The wish of Tsze-
sze was that hereby the learner should direct his thoughts
inwards, and by searching in himself, tliere find these
truths, so that he might put aside all outward tempta-

Par. 5. On this Intoroetta and bis colleagues observe : — ■" Quia non videt
fio dwmtaaiat collvmasse philosophwm, ut Itominis natiiram, qiiam ab ori-
ffine siia reetam, sed delude lapsam et dejpravatam passim Sinenses docent,
ad primievmn, innocentitB statiim, reducere ? Atqve ita relipias res
creatas, homini jami rebelles, et in ^nsdem ridnam armatas, ad pristinum
obsequitun veluti revocaret. Hoc f. I. s. I. libri Ta He6, Ivoo item hie
et alibi non semel indicat. Etsi aiitem nesciret philosophns nos a prima
felicitate propter peccatvm prvmi parentis excidisse, tauten et tot rerum
qute adversantur et infestce simt homini, et ipsiws nature Immance ad
deteriora tarn pronie, Ungo vsu et contemplatione didicisse videttir, non
posse hoc vmiverswm, quod Iwmo vitiatus qiwdam modo vitiarat, conna-
tii/rali stUB integritati et ordini restitui, nisi prius ipse Iwmo per victoriam
mi ipsivs, earn, qtmm amiiserat, integritatem et ordinem recvperaret." I
fancied something of the same kind, before reading their note. According
to Choo He, the paragraph describes the Work and influence of sage and
spiritual men in the highest issues. The subject is developed in the fourth
part of the Work, in very extravagant and mystical language. The study
of it will modify very much our assent to the views in the above passage.
There is in this whole chapter a mixture of sense and mysticism, — of what
may be grasped, and what tantalizes and eludes the mind.

Concluding note. The writer Tang, quoted here, was a distinguished
Bcholar and author in the reign of Ying-Tsung, A.D. 1064 — 1085. He was
a disciple of Ch'ing Haou, and a friend both of him and his brother, E.


THE DOCTRINE OP THE MEAN. 285

tions appealing to Ms selfishness, and fill up the measure
of the goodness which is natural to him. This chapter
is what the writer Yang called it, — " The sum of the
whole work." In the ten chapters which follow, Tsze-
sze quotes the words of the Master to complete the mean-
ing of this.

II. 1. Chung-ne said, "The superior man erntocZies the
coufse of the Mean; the mean man acts contrary to the
course of the Mean.

2. " The superior man's embodying the course of the
Mean is because he is a superior man, and so always main-
tains the Mean. The mean man's acting contrary to the
course of the Mean is because he is a mean man, and has
no caution."

III. The Master said, " Perfect is the virtue which is
according to the Mean ! Rare have they long been among
the people, who could practise it ! "

IV. I. The Master said, " I know how it is that the
path of the Mean is not walked in :^The knowing go be-
yond it, and the stupid do not come up to it. I know how-
it is that the path of the Mean is not understood : — The
men of talents and virtue go beyond it, and the worthless
do not come up to it.

2. " There is no body but eats and drinks. But they
are few who can distinguish flavours."

2. Only the supehior man can follow the Mean; the mean
MAN IS ALWAYS VIOLATINO IT. 1. Why Confucius sliould here be
quoted by his designation, or marriage name, is a moot-point. It is said
by some that disciples might in this way refer to their teacher, and a
grandson to his grandfather, but such a rule is constituted probable on
the strength of this instance, and that in chapter xxx. Others say that it
is the honorary designation of the sage, and = the " Father ne," which
Duke Gae used in reference to Confucius, in eulogiiing him after his death.
See the Le-ke, II. Pt I. ili. 43. This, and the ten chapters which follow,
all quote the words of Confucius with reference to the Chvmg-yung, to
explain the meaning of the first chapter, and " though there is no con-
nection of composition between them," says Choo He, " they are all
related 6y their meaning."

3. The kaeiiy, long existing in Confucius' time, op the prac-
tice OP THE MEAN. See the Analects VI. xxvii. K'ang-shing and Ying-ta
take the last clause as=" few can practise it long." But the view in the
translation is better.

4. .How it was that few .were able to pbactisb the Mean.
2. We have here not a comx>arisoD, but an illustration which may help


286 THE DOCTRINE 01 THE MEAN.

V. The Master said, "Alas ! How is the path of the
Mean untrodden ! "

VI. The Master said, " There was Shun : — He indeed
was greatly wise ! Shun loved to question others, and to
study their words, though they might be shallow. He
concealed what was bad in them, and displg-yed what was
good. He took hold of their two extremes, determined
the Mean, and employed it in his government of the people.
It was by this that he was Shun ! "

VII. The Master said, " Men all say, ' We are wise j '
but being driven forward and taken in a net, a trap, or a
pitfall, they know not how to escape. Men all say, 'We
are wise ; ' but happening to choose the course of the
Mean, they are not able to keep it for a round month."

VIII. The Master said, "This was the manner of

to an understanding of the former paragraph, though it does not seem
very apt. People don't know the true flavour of what they eat and
drink, but they need not go beyond that to learn it. So, the. Mean
belongs to all the actions of ordinary life, and might be discerned and
practised in them, without looking for it in extraordinary things.

5. Choo He says : — " From not being understood, therefore it is not
practised." According to K'ang-shing, the remark is a lament that there
was no intelligent sovereign to teach the path. But the two views are
reconcileable.

6. How Shun puesued the couese op the Mean. This example
of Shun, it seems to me, is adduced in opposition to the knowing of
chapter iv. Shun, though a sage, invited the opinions of all men, and
found truth of the highest value in their simplest sayings, and was able to
determine from them the course of the Mean. " The two extremes " are
understood by K'ang-shing of the two errors of exceeding and coming
short of the Mean. Choo He makes them — " the widest differences in
the opinions which he received." I conceive the meaning to be that he
examined the answers which he got, in their entirety, from beginning to
end. Compare Analects IX. vii. His concealing what was bad, and dis-
playing what was good, was alike to encourage people to speak freely to
him. K'ang-shing makes the last sentence to turn on the meaning of Shun
when applied as an honorary epithet of the dead, .= " Full, all-accom-
plished ; " but Shun was so named when he was alive.

7. Their contraet conduct shows men's ignorance of the
COURSE AND NATURE OP THE MEAN. The first " We are wise " is to be
understood with a general reference, — " We are wise," i.e., we can very
well take care of ourselves. Yet the presumption of such a profession is
seen in men's not being able to take care of themselves. The application
of this illustration is then made to the subject in hand, the second " We
are wise," being to be specially understood, with reference to the subject
of the Mean. The conclusion in both parts is left to be drawn by the
reader for himself.


Uwuy : — lie made choice of tte Mean, and whenever he
got hold of what was good, he clasped it firmly, as if
wearing it on his breast, and did not lose it."

IX. The Master said, " The empire, its States, and its
families may be perfectly ruled; dignities and emolu-
ments may be declined ; naked weapons may be trampled
under the feet ; but the course of the Mean cannot be
attained to."

X. 1. Tsze-loo asked about forcefulness.

2. The Master said, " Do you mean the forcefulness of
the South, the forcefulness of the North, or the forceful-
ness which you should cultivate yourself?

3. " To show forbearance and gentleness in teaching
others ; and not to revenge unreasonable conduct : — this
is the forcefulness of Southei'n regions, and the good man
makes it his study.

4. " To lie under arms ; and meet death without regret :
— this is the forcefulness of Northern regions, and the
forceful make it their study.

8. How HWUT HELD PAST THE COUESE OF THE MEAN. Here the

example of Hwuy is likewise adduced in opposition to those mentioned in
chapter iv.

9. The dipeicuitt of attainino to the couebe of the Meak.
"The empire ; " we should say — " empires," but the Chinese know only of
one empire, and hence this name, " all under heaven," for it. The empire
is made up of States, and each State, of Families. See the Analects V,
Tii. j XII. XX.

10. On pokcefulness in its relation to the Mean. In the Ana-
lects we find Tsze-loo, on various occasions, putting forward the subject of
his valour, and claiming, on the ground of it, such praise as the Master
awarded to Hwuy. We may suppose, with the old interpreters, that hear-
ing Hwuy commended, as in chapter viii., he wanted to know whether
Confucius would not allow that he also could, with his forceful character,
seize and hold fast the Mean. 1. I have ventured to coin the term " force-
fulness." Choo He defines the original term correctly — " the name of
strength, sufficient to overcome others." 3. That climate and situation
have an influence on character is not to be denied, and the Chinese
notions on the subject may be seen in the amplification of the ninth of
K'ang-he's celebrated maxims. But to speak of their effects, as Confucius
here does, is extravagant. The barbarism of the south, according to the
interpretation mentioned above, could not have been described by him in
these terras. ■ The forcefulness of mildness and forbearance, thus described,
is held to come short of the Mean ; and therefore " the good man " is
taken with a low and light meaning, far short of what it has in paragraph
five. i. This forcefulness of the north, it is said, is in excess of the
Mean, and the " therefore," at the beginning of paragraph five, »


288 THE DOCTRIKE OF THE MEAK.

5. " Therefore, the superior man cultivates a friendlv.
harmony, ■without being weak. How firm is he in his
forcefulness ! He stands erect in the middle, without
inclining to either side. — How firm is he in his forceful-
ness ! When good principles prevail in the government
of his country, he does not change from what he was in
retirement. — How firm is he in his forcefulness ! '■* When
bad principles prevail in the country, he maintains his
course to death without changing. — How firm is he in
his forcefulness ! "

XI. 1. The Master said, "To live in obscurity, and
yet practise wonders, in order to be mentioned with
honour in future ages ; — this is what I do not do.

2. " The good man tries to proceed according to the
right path, but when he has gone half-way, he abandons
it; — I am not able so to stop.

3. " The superior man accords with the course of the
Mean. Though he may be all unknown, unregarded by
the world, he feels no regret.— It is only the sage who is
able for this."


" these two kinds of forcefulness being thus respectively in defect Emd
excess." This illustrates the forcefulness which la In exact accord with
the Mean, in the individual's treatment of others, in his regulation of
himself, and in relation to public affairs.

11. OXLT THE SAGE CAN OOME UP TO THE REQUtREMBNTS OF THE

Mean. 3. The name Kenn-tsae has here its very highest signification,
and = the " sage," in the last clause. It will be observed how Confucius
declines saying that he had himself attained to this highest style. —
" With this chapter," says Choo He, " the quotations by Tsze-gze of the
Master's words, to explain the meaning of the first chapter, stop. The
great object of the work is to set forth wisdom, benevolent virtue,
and valour, as the three grand virtues whereby entrance is effected into
the path of the Mean, and therefore, at its commencement, they are
illustrated by reference to Shun, Yen Yuen, and Tsze-loo, Shun possessing
the wisdom, Yen Yuen the benevolence, and Tsze-loo the valour. If
one of these virtues be absent, there is no way of advancing to the path,
and perfecting the virtue. This Will be found fully treated of in the
twentieth chapter." So, Choo He. The student forming a judgment
for himself, however, will not see very distinctly any reference to these
cardinal virtues. The utterances of the sage Illustrate the phrase
Chung-Timg, showing that the course of the Mean had fallen out of
observance, some overshooting it, and others coming short of it. When
we want some precise directions how to attain to it, we come finally to
the conclusion that only the sage is capable of doing so. We greatly
wantrteaohing more pr$ictical and precise.


THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN. 289

XII. I. Tie way whicli the superior man pursues,
reaches wide and far, and yet is secret.

2. Common men and women, however ignorant, may
intermeddle with the knowledge of it j yet in its utmost
reaches, there is that which even the sage does not know.
Common men and women, however much below the or-
dinary standard of character, can carry it into practice ;
yet in its utmost reaches, there is that which even the sage
is not able to carry into practice. Great as heaven and
earth are, men still find some things in them with which
to be dissatisfied. Thus it is, that were the superior man
to speak of his way in all its greatness, nothing in the
world would be found able to embrace it; and were he
to speak of it in its minuteness, nothing in the world
would be found able to split it.

3. It is said in the Book of Poetry, " The hawk flies up
to heaven; the fishes leap in the deep." This expresses
how this way is seen abov0»and below.

4. The way of the superior man may be found, in its
simple elements, in the intercourse of common men and
women J but in its utmost reaches, it shines brightly
through heaven and earth.

The twelfth chapter above contains the words of Tsze-sze,
and is designed to illustrate what is said in tlie first

■ 12. The coubse of the Mean reaches fab and wide, but tet is
SBCKET. With this chapter the third part of the work commences, and
the first sentence may be regarded as its text. Mysteries have been found
in the terms of it; but I believe that the author simply intended to say,
that the way of the superior man reaching everywhere, — embracing all
duties, — yet had its secret spring and seat in the Heaven-gifted nature,
the individual consciousness of duty in every man. 2. I confess to be all at
sea in the study of this paragraph. Choo He quotes from the scholar
How, that wbat the superior man fails to know, was exemplified in Confu-
cius having to ask about ceremonies, and about offices ; and what he fails
to practise, was exemplified in Confucius not being on the throne, and in
Yaou and Shun's being dissatisfied that they could not make every indi-
vidual enjoy the benefits of their rule. He adds his own opinion, that
wherein men complained of Heaven and Earth, was the partiality of their
operations iu overshadowing and supporting, producing and completing,
the heat of summer, the cold of winter, &e. If such things were intended
Ijy the writer, we can only regret the vagueness of his language, and the
want of coherence in his argument. See the She-king, Pt III. Bk I. v. 3.
The ode is in praise of the virtue of King Wan. The application of tha
Mrords.of the ode does appear strange.


290 THE DOCTEISE OT THE MEAN.

chapter, that " The path may not he left." In tht
eight chapters which follow, he quotes, in a miscellaneous
way, the vjords of Confucius to illustrate it.

XIII. 1. The Master said, " The path is not far from
man. When men try to pursue a course, which is far
from the common indications of consciousness, this course
cannot be considered the path.

2. "In the Book of Poetry, it is said, 'In hewing an
axe-handle, in hewing an axe-handle, the pattern is not
far off.' We grasp one axe-handle to hew the other,
and yet, if we look askance from the one to the other, we
may consider them as apart. Therefore, the superior man
governs men, according to their nature, with what is
proper to them, and as soon as they change what is vjrong,
he stops.

3. "When one cultivates to the utmost the principles
of his nature, and exercises them on the principle of re-
ciprocity, he is not far from the path. What you do not
like, when done to yourself, dc not do to others.

4. "In the way of the superior man there are four
things, to not one of which have I as yet attained. — To
serve my father as I would require my son to serve me :
to this I have not attained ; to serve my prince as I would
require my minister to serve me : to this I have not
attained; to serve my elder brother as I would require
my younger brother to serve me : to this I have not at-
tained; to set the example in behaving to a friend as I
would require him to behave to me : to this I have not
attained. Earnest in practising the ordinary virtues,
and careful in speaking about them, if, in his practice, he

13. The path of the Mean is not fas to seek. Each man has
the law or it in himself, and it is to be pubsued with eabnkst
BINCEKITT. 1. Literally we should read, — "When men practise a course,
and misli to he far from men." The meaning is as in the translation. 2.
See the She-king, Pt I. Bk XV. v. 2. The object of the paragraph seems
to he to show that the rule for dealing with men, according to the princi^
pies of the Mean, is nearer to us than the axe in the hand is to the one
which is to be cut down with, and fashioned after, it. The branch is hewn,
and its form altered from its natural one. Not so with man. The change
in him only brings him to his proper state. 3. Compare Analects, IV. xv. 4.
Compare Analects, VIL i., ii., xix., et al. The admissions made by Confucius
here are important to those who find it necessary, in their intercourse with
the Chinese, to insist on his having been, like other men, compassed with


THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN. 291

has anything defective, the superior man dares not but
exert himself; and if, in his words, he has any excess, he
dares not allow himself such license. Thus his words
have respect to his actions, and his actions have respect
to his words ; is it not just an entire sincerity which
marks the superior man ? "

XIV. 1. The superior man does what is proper to the
station in which he is : he does not desire to go beyond
this.

2. In a position of wealth and honour, he does what is
proper to a position of wealth and honour. In a poor and
low position, he does what is proper to a poor and low
position. Situated among barbarous tribes, he does what
is proper to a situation among barbarous tribes. In a
position of sorrow and difficulty, he does what is proper
to a position of sorrow and difficulty. The superior man
can find himself in no situation in which he is not him-
self.

3. In a high situation, he does not treat with contempt
his inferiors. In a low situation, he does not court the
favour of his superiors. He rectifies himself, and seeks
for nothing from others, so that he haano dissatisfactions.
He does not murmur against heaven, nor grumble against
men.

4. Thus it is that the superior man is quiet and calm,
waiting for the appointments of Heaven, while the mean
man walks in dangerous paths, looking for lucky occur-
rences.

5. The Master said, " In archery we have something
like the way of the superior man. When the archer misses
the centre of the target, he turns round and seeks for the
cause of his failure in himself."

XV. 1. The way of the superior man may be compared

infirmity. It must be allowed, however, that the cases, as put by him, are
in a measure hypothetical, his father having died when he was a child.
In the course of the paragraph, he passes from speaking of himself by his
name, to speak of the heun-tsze, and the change is most naturally made
after the last " I have not attained."

14. How THE SUPERIOR MAN, IN EVEEY VARYING SITUATION, PUR-
SUES THE Mean, doing what is eight, and finding his rule in

HIMSELF.

15. In the practice of the Mean there is an orderly advance
FBOM STEP TO STEP. 2. See the She-king, Pt II. Bk I. iv. 7, 8. The ode


292 THE DOCTEINE OF THE MEAN.

to what takes place in travelling, when to go to a dis-
tance we must first traverse the space that is near, and in
ascending a height, when we must begin from the lower
ground.

2. It is said in the Boak of Poetry, " Happy union with
wife and children is like the music of lutes and harps.
When there is concord among brethren, the harmony is
delightful and enduring. Thus may you regulate your
family, and enjoy the pleasure of your wife and children."

3. The Master said, " In such a state of things, parents
have entire complacence ! "

XVI. 1. The Master said, "How abundantly do spi-
ritual beings display the powers that belong to them !

2. " We look for them, but do not see them ; we listen
to, but do not hear themj yet they enter into all things,
and there is nothing without them.

celebrates, in a regretful tone, the dependence of brethren on one another,
and the beauty of brotherly harmony. Maou says : — " Although there may
be the happy union of wife and children, like the music of lutes and harps,
yet there must also be the hairmoBious concord of brethren, with its ex-
ceeding delight, and then may wife and children be regulated and enjoyed.
Brothers are near to us, while wife and children are more remote. Thus
it is, that from what is near we proceed to what is remote." He adds
that anciently the relationship of husband and wife was not among the
five relationships of society, because the union of brotliers is from heaven,
and that of husband and wife is from man [ 3. This is understood to be
a remark of Co'ifucius on the ode. From wife, and children, and brothers,
parents at last are reached, illustrating bow from what is low we ascend
to what is higJi. — But all this is far-fetched and obscure.

U). An ILI USTEATION, from the OPEEATION and rNFLUENCE OF
StlEITUAL BlilNGS, OF THE WAT OF THE MEAN. What is said of the

Imei-shhi, or " ghosts and spirits " == spiritual beings, in this chapter, is
only by way of illustration. There is no design on the part of the sage
'lO develope his views on those beings or agencies. The key of it is to be
found in the last paragraph, where the language evidently refers to that
of paragraph 3, in chapter i. This paragraph, therefore,' should be
separated from the others, and not interpreted specially of the kwei-shin.
I' think that Dr Medhurst, in rendering it (Theology of the Chinese, p. 22)
-7-" How great then is tlie manifestation of their abstruseness I Whilst
displaying their sincerity, they are not to be concealed," was wrong, not-
withstanding that he may be defended by the example of many Chinese
commentators. The second clause of paragraph 5 appears altogether
synonymous with the "what truly is within will bp manifested with-
out," in the Commentary of the Great Learning, chapter vi. 2, to which
chapter we have seen that the whole of chapter i. pp. 2, 3, has a remarkable
similarity. However we may be driven to find a recondite, mystical
meaniuu for " sincerity, " in the, fourth part of this work, there is no no-


THE DOCTEINE OF THE MEAN. 293

3. " They cause all the people in the empire to fast and
purify themselves, and array themselves in their richest
dresses, in order to attend at their sacrifices. Then, like
overflowing water, they seem to be over the heads, and
on the right and left of their worshippers.

4. " It is said in the Book of Poetry, ' The approaches
of the spirits, you cannot surmise ; — and can you treat
them with indifference ? '

5. " Such is the manifestness of what is minute 1 Such
is the impossibility of repressing the outgoings of sin-
cerity ! "

cessity to do so here. With regard to what is said of the Javei-shin, it is
only the first two paragraphs which occasion difficulty. In the third par-
agraph the sage speaks of the spiritual beings that are sacrificed to. The
same is the suljject of the fourth paragraph ; or rather, spiritual beings
generally, whether sacrificed to or not, invisible themselves and yet able to
behold our conduct. . See the She-king, Pt III. Bk IV. ii. 7. The ode is
said to have been composed by one of the dukes of Wei, and was repeated
daily in his hearing for his admonition. In the context of the quota-
tion, he is warned to be careful of his conduct, when alone as when
in company. For in truth we are never alone. " Millions of spiritual
beings walk the earth," and can take note of us. What now are the
i/irei-iJdu in the first two paragraphs ? Are we to understand by them,
something different from what they aTre in the third paragraph, to which
they run on from the first as the nominative or subject of the verb " t«
cause " ? I think not. The precise meaning of what is said of " their
entering into all things," and " there being nothing without them," cannot
be determined. The old interpreters say that the meaning of the whole
is — " that of all things there is not a single thing which is not produced by
the breath (or energy) of the ktvei-shin," This is all that we learn from
them. The Sung school explain the terms with reference to their physi-
cal theory of the universe, derived, as they think, from the Yih-kiug.
Choc He's master, Ch'ing, explains : — " The kmei-sldn are the energetic
operations of Heaven and Earth, and the traces of production and trans-
formation." The scholar Chang says; — "The kweishlii are the easily
acting powers of the two breaths of nature." Choo He's own account is :
" If we speak of two breaths, then by heel is denoted the efficaciousness of
the secondary or inferior one, and by skin, that of the superior one. If
we speak of one breath, then by sldn is denoted its advancing and de-
veloping, and by Imiei, its returning and reverting. They are really only
one thing." It is difficult— not to say impossible — to conceive to one's-
self what is meant by such descriptions. And nowhere else in the Four
Books is there an approach to this meaning of the phrase.

Eemusat translates the first paragraph : — " (^e les vertus des esprits
sont mblimes ! " His Latin version is : — " spiritvum geniorti/mque est
virtus: eacapaa:!" Intorcetta renders: — " spiritibus inett operativa
fArtus et eficacitas, et luee o qttam, prtsstans est! quam midtiplex/ ^vrnn
tuhlimAjt f " Tn a noffi. he and his friends sav that the diffnitarv of t.he


294 THE DOCTEINE OF THE MEAN.

XVII. ] . The Master said, " How greatly filial was
Shun ! His virtue was that of a sage ; his dignity was
the imperial throne ; his riches were all within the four
seas. He offered his sacrifices in his ancestral temple,
and his descendants preserved the sacrifices to himself.

2. " Therefore having such great virtue, it could not
but be that he should obtain the throne, that he should
obtain those riches, that he should obtain his fame, that he
should attain to his long life.

3. " Thus it is that Heaven, in the production of things,
is surely bountiful to them, according to their qualities.
Hence the tree that is fiourishing, it nourishes, while that
which is ready to fall, it overthrows.

4. " In the Book of Poetry, it is said, ' The admirable,
amiable, prince. Displayed conspicuously his excelling
virtue. Adjusting his people, and Adjusting his ofiicers.
Therefore, he received from Heaven the emoluments of
dignity. It protected him, assisted him, decreed him
the throne; 8ending from heaven these favours, as it
were repeatedly.'

empire who assisted them, rejecting other interpretations, understood by
hmei-sMn here — " those spirits for the veneration of whom and imploring
their help, sacrifices were instituted." Shin signifies " spirits," " a spirit,'
" spirit ; " and li/wei " a ghost," or " demon." The former is used for the
ani/mMS, or intelligent soul separated from the body, and the latter for the
anima, or animal, grosser, soul, so separated. In the t«xt, however, they
hlend together, and are not to be separately translated. They are together
equivalent to sMn alone in paragraph four, " spirits," or " spiritual
beings."

17. The virtue of filial piety, exempijfibd in Shun as carried

TO THE HIGHEST POINT, AND REWARDED BY HEAVEN. 1. One does not
readily see the connection between Shun's great filial piety, and all the
other predicates of him that follow. The paraphrasts, however, try to
trace it in this way: — "A son without virtue is insufBeient to distinguish
his parents. But Shun was born with all knowledge, and acted without
any effort ; — in virtue, a sage. How great was the distinction which he
thus conferred on his parents 1 " And so with regard to the other predi-
cate. 2. The whole of this is to be understood with reference to Shun.
He died at the age of one hundred years. The word " virtue " takes here
the place of "filial piety," in the last paragraph, according to Maou, be-
cause that is the root, the first and chief, of all virtues. 4. See the
She-king. Pt III. Bk II. v. 1. The prince spoken of is king Wan,
who is thus brought forward to confirm the lesson taken from Shun.
That lesson, however, is stated much too broadly in the last para-
agraph. It is well to say that only virtue is a solid title to eminence •
but to hold forth the certain attainment of wealth and position as uu


THE DOCTEINE OP THE MEAN. 295

5. " We may say therefore that lie who is greatly vir-
tuous will be sure to receive the appointment of Heaven."

XVIII. 1. The Master said, "It is only king Wan
of whom it can be said that he had no cause for grief!
His father was king Ke, and his son was king "Woo. His
father laid the foundations of his dignity, and his son
transmitted it.

2. " King Woo continued the enterprise of king T'ae,
king Ke, and king Wan. He only once buckled on his
armour, and got possession of the empire. He did not
lose the distinguished personal reputation which he had
throughout the empire. His dignity was the imperial
throne. His riches were the possession of all within the
four seas. He offered his sacrifices in his ancestral
temple, and his descendants maintained the sacrifices to
himself.

3. " It was in his old age that king Woo received the
appointment to the throne, and the duke of Chow com-
pleted the virtuous course of Wan and Woo. He carried
up the title of king to T'ae and Ke, and sacrificed to all
the former dukes above them with the imperial cere-
monies. And this rule he extended to the princes of the
empire, the great oflScers, the scholars, and the common
people. Was the father a great ofiicer, and the son a
scholar, then the burial was that due to a great officer,

inducement to virtue is not favourable to morality. The case of Con-
fucius himself, who attained neither to power nor to long life, may he
adduced as inconsistent with these teachings.

18. On Kikg Wan, King Woo, and the duke of Chow. 1. Shun's
father was had, and the fathers of Yaou and Yu were undistinguished.
Yaou and Shun's sons were both bad, and Yu's not remarkable. But to
Wan neither father nor son gave occasion but for satisfaction and happi-
ness. King Ke was the Duke Ke-leih, the most distinguished by his
virtues and prowess of all the princes of his time. He prepared the way
for the elevation of his family. 2. King T'ae — this was the Duke T'an-
foo, the father of Ke-leih, a prince of great eminence, and who, in the
decline of the Yin dynasty, drew to his family the thoughts of the
people. " He did :iot lose his distinguished reputation ; " that is, though
he proceeded against his rightful sovereign, the people did not change
their opinion of his virtue. 3. " When old ;"— Woo was eighty-seven when
he became emperor, and he only reigned seven years. His brother Tan,
the duke of Chow (see Analects, VI. xxii., VII. v.). acted as his chief minis-
ter. The house of Chow traced their lineage up to the Emperor Kuh, B.C.
2432 ; but in various passages of the Shoo-king, king T'ae and king K-o
are spoken of, as if the conference of those titles had been by king Woo.


296 THE POCTEINE OF THE MEAN.

and the sacrifice ttat due to a scholar. Was the father
a scholar, and the son a great officer, then the burial was
that due to a scholar, and the sacrifice that due to a great
officer. The one year'is mourning was made to extend
only to the great officers, but the three years^ mourning
extended to the emperor. In the mourning for a father
or mother, he allowed no difference between the noble
and the mean."

XIX. 1. The Master said, " How far extending was
the filial piety of king Woo and the duke of Chow !

2. " Now filial piety is seen in the skilful carrying out
of the wishes of our forefathers, and the skilful carrying
forward of their undertakings.

3. "In spring and autumn, they repaired and beauti-
fied the temple-halls of their fathers, set forth their an-

On this there are very long discussions. The truth seems to he, that
Chow-kung, carrying out his brother's wishes by laws of state, confirmed
the titles, and made the general rule about burials and sacrifices which is
described. From " this rule," &c., to the end, we are at first inclined to
translate in the present tense, but the past with a reference to Chow-kung
is more correct. The " year's mourning " is that principally for uncles
and cousins, and it does not extend beyond the great officers, because their
uncles, &c., being the subjects of the princes and of the emperor, feelings
of kindred must not be allowed to come into collision with the relation
of governor and governed. On the " three years' mourning," see Analects
XVn. xxi.

19. The tak-eb aching filial piety of King Woo, and of the
DUKE OF Chow. 2. This definition of " filial piety " is worthy of notice.
Its operation ceases not with the lives of parents and parents' parents. 3.
In spring and autumn ; the emperors of China sacrificed, as they still do,
to their ancestors every season. Though spring and autumn only are
mentioned in the text, we are to understand that what is said of the
sacrifices in those seasons applies to all the othera. 4. It was an old in-
terpretation that the sacrifices and accompanying services, spoken of here,
were not the seasonal services of every year, which are the subject of the
preceding paragraph, but the still greater sacrifices (see one of them spoken
of in Analects, III. x., xi.) ; and to that view I would give in my adhesion.
The emperor had seven shrines, or apartments, in the hall of the ancestral
temple. One belonged to the remote ancestor to whom the dynasty traced
its origin. At the great sacrifices, his spirit-tablet was placed fronting the
east, and on each side were ranged, three in a row, the tablets belonging
to the six others, those of them which fronted the south being, in the
genealogical line, the fathers of those who fronted the north. As fronting
the south, the region of brilliancy, the former were called chaou, the
latter, from the north, the somire region, were called m-uli. As tht
dynasty was prolonged, and successive emperors died, the old tablets were
removed, and ti'ansferred to what was called the " apartments of displaced


THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN". 297

cestral vessels, displayed their various robes, and pre-
sented the offerings of the several seasons.

4. " By means of the ceremonies of the ancestral tem-
ple, they distinguished the imperial kindred according to
their order of descent. By ordering the parties present
according to their rank, they distinguished the more
noble and the less. By the arrangement of the services,
they made a distinction of talents and worth. In the
ceremony of general pledging, the inferiors presented the
cup to their superiors, and thus something was given
the lowest to do. At the concluding feast, places were
given aocordmg to the hair, and thus was made the dis-
tinction of years.

5. "They occupied the places of their forefathers,
practised their ceremonies, and performed their music.
They reverenced those whom they honoured, and loved
those whom they regarded with affection. Thus they
served the dead as they would have served them alive ;
they served the departed as they would have served them
had they been continued among them.

shrineB," yet so as that one in the hrigJit line displaced the topmost of the
row, and bo with the sombre tablets. At the sacrifices, the imperial
kindred arranged themselves as they were descended from a "bright " em-
peror, on the left, and from a "sombre "one, on the right, and thus a
genealogical correctness of place was maintained among them. The cere-
mony of "general pledging " occurred towards the end of the sacrifice.
To have anything to do at those services was accounted honourable, and
after the emperor had commenced the ceremony by taking " a cup of
blessing," all the juniors presented a similar cup to the seniors, and thus
were called into employment. 6. " They occupied their places," ac-
cording to K'ang-shing, is — " ascended their thrones ; " according to Choo
He it is " trod on — i.e., occupied — their places in the ancestral temple."
On either v'ew, the statement must be taken with allowance. The an-
cestors of kmg Woo had not been emperors, amd their place in the
temples had only been those of princes. The same may be said of the four
particulars which follow. By " those whom they "— i.e., their progenitors
— ''honoured" are intended their ancestors, and by " those whom they
loved," their descendants, and indeed all the people of their government.
The two concluding sentences are important, as the Jesuits mainly based on
them the defence of their practice in permitting their converts to continue
the sacrifices to their ancestors. We read in " Confucius Sinarum philo-
sophus" — the work of Intorcetta and others, to which I have made fre-
quent reference : — Ex plurimls et clarissimAs temtibus Sinicis proiari
potest, legitirmim prcedictl axiomatis senmm esse, guod eadem intentiane
etformali motive Sinenses jiaturdlem pletatem et politicwm, obseqmwm
trga defimctos exerceant, Heuti erga eosdem adhuc svperstites exerceicmt.


298 THE DOCTRINE OP THE MEAN.

6. " By the ceremonies of the sacrifices to Heaven
and Earth they served God^ and by the ceremonies of the
ancestral temple they sacrificed to their ancestors. He
who understands the ceremonies of the sacrifices to Hea-
ven and Barthj and the meaning of the several sacrifices
to ancestors, would find the government of a kingdom as
easy as to look into his palm ! "

XX. 1. The duke Gae asked about government.

2. The Master said, " The government of Wan and
Woo is displayed in tlw records, — the tablets of wood and
bamboo. Let there be the men, and the government will
flourish; but without the men, the government decays
and ceases.

eo! quibus et ex infra dicendis prudens lecTor facile deducet, hos ritus
circa defwnctos fuisse mere cimles, institutes dvmtaxat in honorem et oi-
lequiwm parentv/m, etiam post mortem non intermittendum ; nam, si quid
ilUc divinum agnovissent, cur diceret Confucius — Pi-iscos servire solitos
defunotis, uti iisdem serviebant viventibus." This is ingenious reasoning,
but it does not meet the fact that sacriiioe is an entirely new element in-
troduced into the service of the dead. 6. I do not understand how it is
that their sacriiices to God are adduced here as an illustration of the filial
piety of king Wan and king Woo. What is said about them, however,
is important, in reference to the views which we should form about the
ancient religion of China. Both the old interpreters of the Han dynasty
and the more eminent among those of the Sung, understand the two sacri-
fices iirst spoken of to be those to Heaven and Earth, — the former offered
at the winter solstice, in the southern suburb of the imperial city, and the
latter offered in the northern suburb, at the summer solstice. They think,
however, that for the sake of brevity, the words for " and the sovereign
earth," are omitted after " God," literally, " supreme ruler." Some
modern interpreters understand that besides the sacrifices to Heaven and
Earth, those to tutelary deities of the soil are spoken of. But these
various opinions do not affect the judgment of the sage himself, that the
service of one being — even of God — was designed by all those ceremonies.
See my "Notions of the Chinese concerning God and Spirits," pp. 50 — 52.
20. On government ; showing principally how it depends on
the chaeactbr of the officers administering it, and how that

DEPENDS ON THE OHARACTEB OF THE SOVEREIGN HIMSELF. We have
here one of the fullest expositions of Confucius' views on this subject,
though he unfolds them only as a description of the government of the
kings W3n and Woo. In the chapter there is the remarkable intermin-
gling, which we have seen in " The Great Learning," of what is peculiar to
a ruler, and what is of universal application. From the concluding para-
graphs, the transition is easy to the next and most diffioult part of the
Work. This chapter is found also in the " Family Sayings," but with
considerable additions.

1. Duke Gae. The old commentators took what I have called an
'■ easily-growing rush " as the name ol an insect (so it is defined in the


THE DOCTRINE OP THE MEAN. 299

3. " Witli the right men the growth of government is
rapid, just as vegetation is rapid in the earth ; and more-
over their government might be called an easily-growing
rush.

4. "Therefore the administration of government lies
in getting proper men. Such men are to be got by means
of the ruler's own character. That character is to be
cultivated by his treading in the ways of duty. And the
treading those ways of duty is to be cultivated by the
cherishing of benevolence.

5. "Benevolence is the characteristic element of hnman-
ity, and the great exercise of it is in loving relatives.
Righteousness is the accordance ofactimis with what is right,
and the great exercise of it is in honouring the worthy.
The decreasing measures of the love due to relatives, and
the steps in the honour due to the worthy, are produced
by the principle of propriety.

6. " When those in inferior situations do not possess
the confidence of their superiors, they cannot retain the
government of the people.

7. " Hence the sovereign may not neglect the cultiva-
tion of, his own character. Wishing to cultivate his
character, he may not neglect to serve his parents. In
order to serve his parents, he may not neglect to acquire
a knowledge of men. In order to know men, he may not
dispense with a knowledge of Heaven.

Urh Ya), a kind of bee, said to take the young of the mulberry cater-
pillar, and keep them in its hole, where they are transformed into bees.
So, they said, does government transform the people. This is in accord-
ance with the paragraph, as we find it in the "Family Sayings." But we
cannot hesitate in preferring Choo He's, as in the translation. The other
is too absurd. 5. '• Benevolence is man." We lind the same language in
Menoius, and in the Le-ke, XXXII.' 15. This virtue is called man,
" because loving, feeling, and the forbearing nature belong to man, as he
is born. They are that whereby man is man." 6. This has crept into
the text here by mistake. It belongs to paragraph 17, below. We do
not find it here in the " Family Sayings." 7. I fail in trying to trace the
connection between the different parts of this paragraph. " He may not
be without knowing men."— Why ? " Because," we are told, " it is by
honouring and being courteous to the worthy, and securing them as
friends, that a man perfects his virtue, and is able to serve his relatives."
"He may not be without knowing Heaven."— Why ? "Because," it is
said, "the gradations in the love of relatives and the honourmg the
worthy, are all heavenly arrangements, and a heavenly order, natural,
necessary principles." But in this explanation, " Knowing men " has a


300 THE DOCTEINK OF THE MEAN:

8. "The duties of aniversal obligation are five^ and the
virtues wherewith they are practised are three. The
duties are those between sovereign and minister, between
father and son, between husband and wife, between elder
brother and younger, and those belonging to the inter-
course of friends. Those five are the duties of universal
obligation. Knowledge, magnanimity, and energy, these
three, are the virtues universally binding. And the
means by which they carry the duties into practice is
singleness.

9. " Some are bom with the knowledge of those duties ;
some know them by study ; and some acquire the know-
ledge after a painful feeling of their ignorance. But the
knowledge being possessed, it comes to the same thing.
Some practise them with a natural ease; some from a
desire for their advantages ; and some by strenuous effort.
But the achievement being made, it comes to the same
thing.-"

10. The Master said, " To be fond of learning is to be

Tery different meaning from wliat It has In tlie previous clause. 8. From
this down to paragraph 11, there is brought before us the character of the
" mien" mentioned in paragraph 2, on whom depends the flourishing of
"government," which government is exhibited in paragraphs 12 — 15. " The
duties of universal obligation " is, literally, " the jiaths proper to be trodden
by all under heaven "= the path of the Mean. Of the three virtues, the
first is the Tinomledge necessary to choose the detailed course of duty ; the
second, is " benevolence," " the unselfishness of the heart " = magnanim-
iti/ (so I style it for want of a better term), to pursue it ; the third is the
valiant energy, which maintains the permanence of the choice and the
practice. The last clause is, literally, " Whereby tliey are practised is one,"
and this, according to Ting-ta, means—" From the various kings down-
wards, in the practising these five duties, and three virtues, there has been
but one method. There has been no change in modern times and ancient."
This, however, is not satisfactory. We want a substantive meaning for
" one." This Choo He gives us. He says : — " The one is simply sin-
cerity ; " the sincerity, that is, on which the rest of the work dwells with
such strange predication. I translate, therefore, the term here by single-
ness. There seems a reference in the term to the being alone in ch. i. j).
3. The singleness is that of the soul in the apprehension and practice of
the duties of the Mean, which is attained to by watchfulness over one's
self, when alone. 9. Compare Analects, XVI. ix. But is there the three-
fold difference in the hnoniledge of the duties spoken of ? And who are
they who can practise them with entire ease ? 10. Choo He observes
that " The Master said " is here superfluous. In the " Family Sayings,"
however, we find the last paragraph followed by — " The duke said. Tour
words are beautiful and perfect, but I am stupid, and unable to accom-


■JrilJfi LKJt,"rJiII*j!i OF THE MEAN. OVl

iear to knowledge. To practise with vigour is to be near
X) magnanimity. To possess the feeling of shame is to
be near to energy.

11. " He who knows these three things knows how to
3altivate his own character. Knowing how to cultivate
bis own character, he knows how to govern other men.
Knowing how to govern other men, he knows how to
govern the empire with all its States and famiiies.

12. " All who have the government of the empire with
its States and families have nine standard rules to follow ;
— viz. the cultivation of their own characters ; the honour-
ing of men of virtue and talents ; affection towards their
relatives ; respect towards the great ministers ; kind and
considerate treatment of the whole body of officers ; deal-
ing with the mass of the people as children ; encouraging
the resort of all classes of artisans ; indulgent treatment
of men from a distance; and the kindly cherishing of
the princes of the States.

13. "By the ruler^s cultivation of his own character, the

plish this." Then comes this paragraph — " Confucius said," &o. The
words in question, therefore, prove that Tsze-sze tool?, this chapter from
acme existing document, that which we have in the " Family Sayings,"
or some other. Confucius' words were intended to encourage and
stimulate the duke, telling him that the three grand virtues might be
nearly, if not absolutely, attained to. 11. " These three things " are the
three things in the last paragraph, which make an approximation at least
to the three virtues which connect with the discharge of duty attain-
able by every one. What connects the various steps of the climax is
the unlimited confidence in the power of the example of the ruler, which
we have had occasion to point out so frequently in " The Great Learn-
ing." 12. These nine standard rules, it is to be borne in mind, constitute
the government of Wan and Woo, referred to in paragraph 2. Comment-
ators arrange the fourth and fifth rules under the second; and the
sixth, seventh, eighth, and ninth, under the third, so that after " the
cultivation of the person," we have here an expansion of paragraph 5.
By " the men of talents and virtue " are intended the " tliree Kung "
and "three Koo," who composed the "Inner Coimcil" of the Chow
emperors ; and by the " great ministers," the heads of the six departments
of their government :— of all of whom there is an account in. the Shoo-King,
Pt V. Bk XX. 5—13. The emperors of China, have always assumed to be
the "fathers of the people," and to deal with them as their children.
The eighth rule did not, probably, in Confucius' mind, embrace any but
travelling merchants coming into the imperial domains from the other
States of the empire ; but in modern times it has been construed as the
rule for the treatment of foreigners by the government of China, — which,
Kforeovert would affirm that it has observed it. . 13. .Thid paragraph describes


302 I'HE DOCTRINE OP THE MEAN.

duties of universal obligation are set up. By honouring
men of virtue and talents, lie is preserved from errors of
judgment. By showing affection to his relatives, there is
no grumbling nor resentment among his uncles and
brethren. By respecting the great ministers, he is kept
from errors in the practice of government. By kind and
considerate treatment of the whole body of officers, they
are led to make the most grateful return for his courtesies.
By dealing with the mass of the people as his children,
they are led to exhort one another to what is good. By
encouraging the resort of all classes of artisans, his re-
sources for expenditure are rendered ample. By indul-
gent treatment of men from a distance, they are brought
to resort to him from all quarters. And by kindly cher-
ishing the princes of the States, the whole empire is
brought to revere him.

14. " Self-adjustment and purification, with careful re-
gulation of his dress, and the not making a movement
contrary to the rules of propriety : — this is the way for
the ruler to cultivate his person. Discarding slanderers,
and keeping himself from tJie seductions of beauty; mak-
ing light of riches, and giving honour to virtue : — this is
the way for him to encourage men of worth and talents.
Giving them places of honour and emolument, and sharing
with them in their likes and dislikes : this is the way for
him to encourage his relatives to love him. Giving them
numerous officers to discharge their orders and commis-


the happy effects of observing the above nine rules. We read in the " Daily
Lessons : " " About these nine rules, the only trouble is, that sovereigns
are not able to practise them strenuously. Let the ruler be really able to
cultivate his person, then will the universal duties and universal virtues
be all-complete, so that he shall be an example to the whole empire, with
its States and families. Those duties will be set up, and men will know
what to imitate." On " the resources of expenditure being ample," Choo
He says : — " The resort of all classes of artisans being encouraged, there is
an intercommunication of the productions of labour, and an interchange
of men's services, and the husbandman and the trafficker are aiding to
one another. Hence the resources fpr expenditure are sufficient." I
suppose that Choo He felt a want of some mention c^ agrinulture in connec-
tion with these rules, and thought to find a place for ic here. 14. After
"The whole empire is brought to revere him," we have In the "Family
Sayings," "The duke said, Horn are tltese rules to be practised ?" and
then follows this paragraph, preceded by " Confucius said." The blend-
ing together, in the first clause, as equally important, attention to inward


THE DOCTEINE OF THE MEAN. 303

sions : — tMs is tlie way for him to encourage the great
ministers. According to them a generous confidence,
and making their emoluments large : — this is the way to
encourage the body of officers. Employing them only at
the proper times, and making the imposts light : — this is
the way to encourage the people. By daily examinations
and monthly trials, and by making their rations in accord-
ance with their labours : — this is the way to encourage
the classes of artisans. To escort them on their depart-
ure and meet them on their coming ; to commend the
good among them, and show compassion to the incom-
petent : — this is the way to treat indulgently men from a
distance. To restore families whose line of succession
has been broken, and to revive States that have been
extinguished ; to reduce to order States that are in con-
fusion, and support those which are in peril; to have
fixed times for their own reception at court, and the re-
ception of their envoys ; to send them away after liberal
treatment, and welcome their coming with small contri-
butions : — this is the way to cherish the princes of the


15. "All who have the government of the empire with
its States and families have the above nine standard rules.
And the means by which they are carried into practice is
singleness.

16. "In all things success depends on previous pre-
paration, and without such previous preparation there is
sure to be failure. If what is to be spoken be previously
determined, there will be no stumbling. If affairs be pre-
viously determined, there will be no difficulty with them.
If one's actions have been previously determined, there
wiU be no sorrow in connection with them. If principles

purity and to drees, seems strange enough to a western reader. The trials
and examinations, with the rations spoken of in the seventh clause, show
that the artisans are not to he understood of such dispersed among the peo-
ple, but as collected under the superintendence of the government. Am-
bassadors from foreign countries have been received up to the present
century, according to the rules in the eighth clause, and the two last regu-
lations are quite in harmony with the moral and political superiority that
China claims over the countries which they may represent. But in the
case of travellers, and travelling merchants, passing from one State to
another, there were anciently regulations, which may be adduced to illus-
trate all the expressions here. 16. The " all things " is to be understood


304 THE DOCTEIITE OF THE MEAN.

of conduct have been previously Jetermined, tlie practjce
of them will be inexhaustible.

1 7. " When those in inferior situations do not obtain
the confidence of the sovereigri, thej cannot succeed in
governing the people. There is a -way] to obtain the con-
fidence of the sovereign; — if one is not trusted by his
friends, he will not get the confidence of his sovereign.
There is a way to being trusted by one''s friends ; — if one
is not obedient to his parents, he will not be true to
friends. There is a way to being obedient to one's pa-
rents ; — if one, on turning his thoughts in upon himself,
finds a want of sincerity, he will not be obedient to his
parents. There is a way to the attainment of sincerity in
one's-self ; — if a man do not understand what is good, he
will not attain sincerity in himself.

18. " Sincerity is the way of Heaven. The attainment
of sincerity is the way of men. He who possesses sin-
cerity, is he who, without an effort, hits what is right,
and apprehends, without the exercise of thought; — ^he
is the sage who naturally and easily embodies the riffht
way. He who attains to sincerity, is he who chooses what
is good, and firmly holds it fast.

19. " To this attainment there are requisite the exten-
sive study of what is good, accurate inquiry about it,
careful reflection on it, the clear discrimination of it, and
the earnest practice of it.

20. "The superior man, while there is anything he
has not studied, or while in what he has studied there is
anything he cannot understand, will not intermit his
labour. While there is anything he has not inquired

with reference to the universal duties, the universal virtues, and the nine
standard rules. 17". The object of this paragraph seems to be to show
that the singleness, or sincerity, lies at the basis of that previous prepara-
tion, which is essential to success in any and every thing. The' steps of
the climax conduct us to it as the mental state necessary to all virtues,
and this sincerity is again made dependent on the understanding of what
is good, upon which point see the next chapter. 19. There are here de-
scribed the different processes which lead to the attainment of sincerity.
20. Here we have the determination which is necessary in the prosecu-
tion of the above processes, and paragraph 21 states the result of it,
Choo He makes a pause at the end of the first clause in each part of the
paragraph, and interprets thus; — "If he do not study, welU But if he ■
do, he will not give over till he understands what he studies," and so on.
But it seems more: natural to carry thQ supposition over the whole of. every


THE DOCTEINE OP THE MEAI,\ 305

about, or anything in what he has inquired about which
he does not know, he will not intermit his labour. While
there is anything which he has not reflected on, or any-
thing in what he has reflected on which he does not ap-
prehend, he will not intermit his labour. While there is
anything which he has not discriminated, or while his dis-
crimination is not clear, he will not intermit his labour.
If there be anything which he has not practised, or if his
practice fails in earnestness, he will not intermit his
labour. If another man succeed by one efibrt, he will use
a hundred efibrts. If another man succeed by ten efforts,
he will use a thousand.

21. " Let a man proceed in this way, and, though dull,
he will surely become intelligent ; though weak, he will
surely become strong."

XXI. When we have intelligence resulting from sin-
cerity, this condition is to be ascribed to nature ; when
we have sincerity resulting from intelligence, this condi-
tion is to be ascribed to instruction. But given the
sincerity, and there shall be the intelligence , given the
intelligence, and there shall be the sincerity.

The above is the twenty-first chapter. Tsze-sze tahes up
in it, and discourses from, tlie subjects of " the way of

part, as in the translation, which moreover substantially agrees with
Ying-ta's interpretation. Here terminates the third part of the Work.
It was to illustrate, as Choo He told us, how " the path of the Mean
cannot be left." The author seems to have kept this point before him in
chapters xiii. — xvi., but the next three are devoted to the one subject of
filial piety, and the twentieth, to the general subject of government. • Some
things are said worthy of being remembered, and others which require a
careful sifting ; but, on the whole, we do not find ourselves advanced in
an understanding of the argument of the Work.

21. The bbcipeocal connection of sincerity and intelligence.
With this chapter commences the fourth part of the Work, which, as Choo
observes in his concluding note, is an expansion of the eighteenth paragraph
of the preceding chapter. It is, in a great measure, a glorification of the
sage, finally resting in the person of Confucius ; but the high character of
the sage, it is maintained, is not unattainable by others. He realizes the
ideal of humanity, but by his example and lessons, the same ideal is
brought within the reach of many, perhaps of all. The ideal of human-
ity, — the perfect character belonging to the sage, which ranks him on a
level with Heaven, — is indicated by a single character, and we have no
single term in English which can be considered as the complete equivalent
of it. The Chinese themselves had great difficulty in arriving at that
definition of it which is now generally acquiesced in. We are told that

VOL. I. 20


306 THE DOCTRINE OF THK MEAN.

Heaven " and " the way of men," mentioned in the
preceding chapter. TJie twelve chapters that follow
are all from, Tsze-sze, repeating and illustrating the
'meaning of this one.

XXII. It is only he who is possessed of the most com-
plete sincerity that can exist under heaven, who can give
its full development to his nature. Able to give its full
development to his own nature, he can do the same to
the nature of other men. Able to give its full develop-
ment to the nature of other men, he can give their full

" the Han scholars were all ignorant of its meaning. Under the Sunfe-
dynasty, first cane Le Pang-Chih, who defined it hj freedom from all de-
eeption. After him, Sen Chung-Keu said that it meant eeaselessness.
Then one of the Ch'ing called it freedom, from all moral error ; and finally,
Choo He added to this the positive element of truth and reality, on which
the definition of the term was complete." Eemusat calls it— te^ej/ec-j
tion, and " la perfection morale." Intorcetta and his friends call it —
vera solldaque perfectio. Simplicity or singleness of soul seems to be
what is chiefly intended by the term ; the disposition to and capacity of
what is good, without any deteriorating element, with no defect of intelli-
gence, or intromission of selfish thoughts. This belongs to Heaven, to
Heaven and Earth, and to the sage. Men, not naturally sages, may, by
cultivating the intelligence of what is good, raise themselves to this
elevation.

Here, at the outset, I may observe that, in this portion of the Work,
there are specially the three following dogmas, which are moi-e than ques-
tionable: — 1st, That there are some men — sages — naturally in a state of
moral perfection ; 2nd, That the same moral perfection is attainable by
others, in whom its development is impeded by their material organiza-
tion, and the influence of external things ; and 3rd, That the understand-
ing of what is good will certainly lead to such moral perfection.

22. The kbsults of sincebitt; jlnd how the possessor of it
POBMS A TBRNION WITH HEAVEN AND Eaeth. What I have called
"giving full development to the nature," is, literally, "exhausting the
nature ; " but, by what processes and in what way, the character tells
us nothing. The "giving full development to his nature," however,
may be understood with Maou, as=" pursuing the path in accordance
with his nature, so that what Heaven has conferred on him is displayed
without shortcoming or let." The " giving its development to the nature
of other men " indicates the sage's helping them, by his examples and
lessons, to perfect themselves. " His exhausting the nature of things," i. e.,
of all other beings, animate and inanimate, is, according to Choo He,
" knowing them completely, and dealing with them correctly," " so," add
the paraphrasts, " that he secures their prosperous increase and develop-
ment according to their nature." Here, however, a Buddhist idea appears
in Choo He's commentary. He says: — "The nature of other men and
things (= animals) .is the same with my nature," which, it is observed in


development to the natures of animals and tHncs. Able
to give their full development to the natures of creatures
and things, he can assist the transforming and nourishing
powers of Heaven and Earth. Able to assist the trans-
forming and nourishing powers of Heaven and Earth, he
may with Heaven and Earth form a ternion.

XXin. Next to the above is ho who cultivates to the
utmost the shoots of goodness in him. From those he
can attain to the possession of sincerity. This sincerity
becomes apparenL, From being apparent, it becomes
manifest. From being manifest, it becomes brilliant.
Brilliant, it affects others. Affecting others, they are
changed by it. " ' Changed by it, they are transformed. It
is only he who is possessed of the most complete sincer-
ity that can exist under heaven, who can transform.

Maou's work, is the same with the Buddhist sentiment, that " a dog has
the nature of Buddha," and with that of the philosopher Kaou, that " a
dog's nature is the same as a man's." Maou himself illustrates the
" exhausting the nature of things," by reference to the Shoo-king, IV. Bk
IV. 2, where we are told that under the first sovereigns of the Hea
dynasty, " the mountains and rivers all enjoyed tranquillity, and the birds
and beasts, the fishes and tortoises, all realized the happiness of their
nature. It is thus that the sage " assists Heaven and Earth." K'ang-
shing, indeed, explains this by saying : — " The sage, receiving Heaven's ap-
fiointment to the imperial throne, extends everywhere a happy tranquillity."
Evidently there is a reference in the language to the mystical paragraph
at the end of the first chapter. " Heaven and Earth " talve the place here
of the single term — " Heaven,'' in chapter xx., paragraph 18. On this
Ting-ta observes : — "It is said above, sincerity is tltemay of Seaven, and
here mention is made also of Earth. The reason is, that the reference
above, was to the principle of sincerity in its spiritual and mysterious
origin, and thence the expression simple, — The way of Seaven ; but here
we have the transformation and nourishing seen in the production of
things, and hence Earth is associated with Heaven." This is not very
intelligible, hut it is to bring out the idea of a ternion, that the great,
siinreme, ruling Power is thus dualized. The original terra means " a
file of three," and I employ " ternion " to express the idea, just as we use
' quarternion " for a file of four. What is It but blasphemy, thus to file
man with the supreme Power ?

23. The way op man ; — the development of pebfect sincerity
ix THOSE NOT NATUHALLT POSSESSED OF IT. There is some difficulty
lere about the term virhioh I have translated slwott. It properly means
' crooked," and, with a bad application, often signifies " deflection from
vhat is straight and right." Yet it cannot have a bad meaning here, for
f it have, the use of it will be, in the connection, unintelligible. One
■Titer uses this comparison : — " Put a stone on a bamboo shoot, or
'here the shoot would show itself, and it will travel round the stone, and

20*


308 THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN.

XXIV. It is characteristic of the most entire sincerity
to be able to foreknow. When a nation or family is
about to flourishj there are sure to be happy omens ; and
when it is about to perish,, there are sure to be unlucky
omens. Such events are seen in the milfoil and tortoise,
and affect the movements of the four limbs. When
calamity or happiness is about to come^ the good shall
certainly be foreknown by him, and the evil also. There-
fore the individual possessed of the most complete sin-
cerity is like a spirit.

XXV. 1. Sincerity is that whereby self-completion is
effected, and its way is that by which man must direct
himself.

2. Sincerity is the end and beginning of things; with-
out sincerity there would be nothing. On this account,
the superior man regards the attainment of sincerity as
the most excellent thing.

3. The possessor of sincerity does not merely accom-
plish the self-completion of himself. With this quality

come out creoiedly at its side." So it is with the good nature, whoso
free development is repressed. It shows itself in shoots, but if ihey be
cultivated and improved, a moral condition and influence may be at-
tained, equal to that of the sage.

' 24. That entire sincerity can foreknow. "Lucky omens;"
— these are intimated by two terms, denoting respectively unusual ap-
pearances of things existing in a countiy, and appearances of things new.
'.' Unlucky omens " are in the same way indicated by two terms, the
former being spoken of "prodigies of plants, and of strangely dressed boys
singing ballads," and the latter of prodigious animals. For the milfoil
and tortoise, see the Yih-king, Appendix I. xi. ; and the notes ou the
Shoo-king, T. Bk. IV. 20—30. The " four limbs " are by K'ang-shing
interpreted of the feet of the tortoise, each foot being peculiarly appropri-
ate to divination in a particular season. Choo He interprets them of the
four limbs of the human body. " Like a spirit " must be left as indefinite
in the translation as it is in the text. — The whole chapter is eminently
absurd, and gives a character of ridiculousness to all the magniloquent
teaching about " entire' sincerity." The foreknowledge attributed to the
sage, — the mate of Heaven, — is only a guessing by means of augury,
sorcery, and other follies.

25. How FROM sincerity COMES SELF-COMPIiETION, AND THE COM-
PLETION OF OTHERS AND OF THINGS. I have had difficulty in translating
this chapter, because it is difficult to understand it. We wish that we had
the writer before us to question him ; but if we had, it is not likely that
he would be able to afford us much satisfaction. Persuaded that what ha
denominates sinc»Hty is a figment, we may not wonder at the extrava-
gance of its prediea.te3. 2. I translate the expansion of this in the "Daily


THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN. 309

he completes o'.her men and things also. The completing
himself sJiows his perfect virtue. The completing other
men and things shows his knowledge. Both these are
virtues belonging to the nature, and this is the way by
which a union is effected of the external and internal.
Therefore, whenever he — the entirely sincere man — employs
them, — that is, tJiese vii tues, — their action will be right.

XXVI. 1. Hence to entire sincerity there belongs
ceaselessness.

2. Not ceasing, it continues long. Continuing long, it
evidences itself.

3. Evidencing itself, it reaches far. Eeaching far, it
becomes large and substantial. Large and substantial, it
becomes high and brilliant.

4. Large and substantial ; — this is how it contains all
things. High and brilliant ; — thi's is how it overspreads
all things. Reaching far and continuing long ; — this is
how it perfects all things.

5. So large and substantial, th^ individual possessing it
is the co-equal of Earth. So high and brilliant, it makes

Lesson : " — " All that fill up the space between heaven and earth are things.
They end and they begin again ; they begin and proceed to an end ; every
change being accomplished by sincerity, and every phenomenon having
sincerity unceasingly in it. So far as the mind of man is concerned, if
there be not sincerity, then every movement of it is vain and false. How
can an unreal mind accomplish real things ? Although it may do some-
thing, that is simply equivalent to nothing. Therefore, the superior man
searches out the source of sincerity, and examines the evil of insincerity,
chooses what is good, and firmly holds it fast, so seeliing to arrive at the
place of truth and reality." Maou's explanation is: — " Now, since the
reason why the sincerity of spiritual beings is so incapable of being re-
pressed, and why they foreltnow, is because they enter into things, and
there is nothing without them : — shall there be anything which is without
the entirely sincere man, who is as a spirit ? " I have given these speci-
mens of commentary, that the reader may, if he can, by means of them,
gather some apprehensible meaning from the text.

26. A PARALLEL BETWEEN THE SAGE POSSESSED OP ENTIKB SINCEKITY,

AND Heaven and Earth, showing that the same qualities belong
TO THEM. The first six paragraphs show the way of the sage ; the next
three show the way of Heaven and Earth ; and the last brings the two
ways together, in their essential nature, in a passage from the She-king.
The doctrine of the chapter is liable to the criticisms which have been
made on the twenty-second chapter. And, moreover, there is in it a sad
confusion of the visible heavens and earth with the immaterial power and
reason which govern them; in a word, with God. 1. Choo He is con-
demned by recent writers for making a new chapter to commence here.


31U THE DOCTEINB 01 THE MEAIT.

liim the co-equal of Heaven. So far-reaching and long-
continuing, it makes liim infinite.

6. Such being its nature, without any display, it be-
comes manifested; without any movement, it produces
changes; and without any effort, it accomplishp.s its
ends.

7. The way of Heaven and Earth may be completely
declared in one sentence. — They are without any double-
ness, and so they produce things in a manner that is
unfathomable.

8. .The way of Heaven and Earth is large and sub-
stantial, high and brilliant, far-reaching and long-en-
during.

9. The heaven now before us is only this bright shining
spot ; but when viewed in its inexhaustible extent, the
sun, moon, stars, and constellations of the zodiac are
suspended in it, and all things are overspread by it. The
earth before us is but a handful of soil; but when re-
garded in its breadth and thickness, it sustains mountains
like the Hwa and the Yoh, without feeling their weight,
and contains the rivers and seas, without their leaking
away. The mountain now before us appears only a stone ;
but when contemplated in all the vastness of its size, we
see how the grass and trees are produced on it, and
birds and beasts dwell on it, and precious things which
men treasure up are found on it. The water now before
us appears but a ladleful ; yet extending our view to its
unfathomable depths, the largest tortoises, iguanas, iguan-
adons, dragons, fishes, and turtles, are produced in them;
articles of value and sources of wealth abound in them.

Yet the matter is sufficiently distinct from that of the preceding one.
Where the " Hence " takes hold of the text above, however, it is not easy to
discover. One interpreter says that it indicates a conclusion from all the
preceding predicates about sincerity. "Entire sincerity " is to be under-
stood, now in the abstract, now in the concrete. But the fifth paragraph
seems to be the place to bring out the personal idea, as I have done. The
last predicate is, literally, "without bounds," = our infinite. Surely it is
strange— passing strange— to apply that term in the description of any cre-
ated being. 7. What I said was the prime idea in "sincerity," viz., "sim-
plicity," " singleness of soul," is very conspicuous here. It surprises us,
however, to find Heaven and Earth called " things" at the same time
that they are represented as by their entire sincerity producing all things.
9. This paragraph is said to illustrate the unfathomableness of Heaven
and Earth in producing things, showing how it springs from their sin-


.THE DOCTRINE OP THE MEAN. 31 J

10. It is said in the Book of Poetry, " The ordinances
of Heaven, how profound are they and unceasing ! " The
meaning is, that it is thus that Heaven is Heaven. And
again, "How illustrious was it, the singleness of the
virtue of King Wan ! " indicating that it was thus that
King Wan was what he was. Singleness likewise is
unceasing.

XXVn. 1. How great is the path proper to the

2. Like overflowing water, it sends forth and nourishes
all things, and rises up to the height of heaven.

3. All complete is its greatness ! It embraces the
three hundred rules of ceremony, and the three thousand
rules of demeanour.

4. It waits for the proper man, and then it is trodden.

5. Hence it is said, " Only by perfect virtue can the
perfect path, in all its courses, be made a fact."

6. Therefore, the superior man honours his virtuous
nature, and maintains constant inquiry and study, seeking
to carry it out to its breadth and greatness, so as to omit
none of the more exquisite and minute points which it
embraces, and to raise it to its greatest height and bril-
liancy, so as to pursue the course of the Mean. He
cherishes his old knowledge, and is continually acquiring
new. He exerts an honest, generous earnestness, in the
esteem and practice of all propriety.

cerity, or freedom from doubleness. I have already observed how it is
only the material heavens and earth vphich are presented to us. And not
only so ; — we have mountains, seas, and rivers, set forth as acting with
the same unfathomableness as those entire bodies and powers. The
" Complete Digest " says on this : — " The hills and waters are what Heaven
and Earth produce, and that they should yet be able themselves to produce
atJier things, shows still more how Heaven and Earth, in the producing
of things, are unfathomable." The confusion and error in such representa-
tions are very lamentable.

27. The glorious path of the sage ; and how the supeeioe
MAN ENDEAV0UH8 TO ATTAIN TO IT. The chapter thus divides it-
self into two parts, one containing five paragraphs, descriptive of the
SAGE, and the other two, descriptive of the inperior man, which two
appellations are to be here distinguished. 1. " This paragraph," says
Choo He, "embraces the two that follow." They are, indeed, to be
taken as exegetical of it. 3. By the "rules of ceremony," we are to
understand the greater and more general principles of propriety, " such
as capping, marriage, mourning, and sacrifice;" and by those of "de-
meanour " are intended all the minuter observances of those. 300 and


812 THE DOCTEINE OF THE MEAIT.

7. Thus, when occupying a high situationj he is not
proudj and in a low situation, he is not insubordinate.
When the kingdom is well-governed, he is sure by his
words to rise ; and when it is ill-governed, he is sure by
his silence to command forbearance to himself. Is not
this what we find in the Book of Poetry, — " Intelligent
is he and prudent, and so preserves his person ? "

XXVIII. 1. The Master said, "Let a man who is
ignorant be fond of using his own judgment ; let a man
without rank be fond of assuming a directing power to
himself; let a man who is living in the present age go
back to the ways of antiquity ; — on the persons of all who
act thus calamities will be sure to come.'^

2. To no one but the emperor does it belong to order
ceremonies, to fix the measures, and to determine the
characters.

3. Now, over the empire, carriages have all wheels of
the same size; all writing is with the same characters;
and for conduct there are the same rules.

3000 are round numbers. Eeferenoe is made to these rules and their
minutise, to show how, in everyone of themfaswMjDoeefllng from the sage,
there is a principle, to be referred to the Heaven-gwejn nature, i. Com-
pare chapter xx. 2. In " Confucius Sinarwm PliUosoAhris," it is suggested
that there may be here a prophecy of the Saviour, and 'Jthgt the writer may
have been " under the influence of that spirit, by whosel moving the Sibyls
formerly prophesied of Christ!" There is nothiiK JR the text to justify
such a thought. ^^||(sk

28. An illustration of the sentence in the last chapteb — 1
"In a low situation he is not insubobdinate." There does seem
to be a connection of the kind thus indicated between this chapter and
the last, but the principal object of what is said here is to prepare the
way for the eulogium of Confucius below, — the eulogium of him, ausage
without the throne. 1. The different clauses here may be understood
generally, but they have a special reference to the general scope of the
chapter. Three things are required to gve law to the empire : virtue (in-
cluding intelligence) ; ranii ; and the right time. The " ignorant man " is
he w ho wants the virtue ; the next is he who wants the rank; and the
last clause describes the absence of the right time. — In this last clause,
there would seem to he a sentiment which should have given course in
China to the doctrine of Progress. 2. This and the two next paragraphs
are understood to be the words of Tsze-sze, illustrating the preceding de-
clarations of Confucius. We have here the imperial prerogatives, which
might not be usurped. " Ceremonies " are the rules regulating religion
and society ; " the measures " are the prescribed forms and dimensions of
buildings, carriages, clothes, &c. The term translated " characters " is
said by Choo He, after E'ang-shing, to be " the names of the written


THE DOCTKINE OF THE MEAN. 31?

4. One may occupy the throne^ but if he have not the
proper virtue, he may not dare to mako ceremonies or
music. One may have the virtue, but if he do not occupy
the throne, he may not presume to make ceremonies
or music.

5. The Master said, " I may describe the ceremonies
of the Hea dynasty, but Ke cannot sufficiently attest my
words. I have learned the ceremonies of the Yin dynasty^
and in Sung they still continue. I have learned the
ceremonies of Chow, which are now used, and I follow
Chow."

XXIX. 1. He who attains to the sovereignty of the
empire, having those three important things, shall be able
to effect that there shall be few errors under his govern-
ment.

2. However excellent may have been the regulations of
those of former times, they cannot be attested. Not
being attested, they cannot command credence, and not
being credited, the people would not follow them. How-
ever excellent might be the regulations made by one in
an inferior situation, he is not in a position to be honoured.
Unhonoured, he cannot command credence, and not being
credited, the people would not follow his rules.

'Cfiaraoters." But it is properly the form of the character, representing, in
tlie original characters of the language, the figure of the object denoted ;
and in the text must denote both the form and sound of the character.
There is a long and eulogistic note here, in " Confucius Sina/rum Plii-
losophu8" on the admirable unifoiTuity secured by these prerogatives
throughout the Chinese empire. It was natural for Bomau Catholic
writers to regard Chinese uniformity with sympathy. But the value, or,
rather, no value, of such a system in its formative influence on the
characters and institutions of men may be judged, both in the empire of
China and In the Church of Rome. 3. " Now " is said with reference to
the time of Tsze-sze. The paragraph is intended to account for Confucius'
not giving law to the empire. It was not the time. 4. " Ceremonies or
music;" — but we must understand also " themeasui-es " and "characters,"
in paragraph 2. The paragraph would seem to reduce most emperors to
the condition ot rois fainiants. 5. See the Analects, III. ix., xiv., which
chapters are quoted here ; but in regard to what is said of Sung, with an
important variation. This paragraph illustrates how Confucius himself
" occupied a low station, without being insubordinate."

29. An illustration of the sentbncb in the xxviith chapteb—
" When he occupies a higsh situation, he is not proud : " or
itatheb, the sage and his institutions seen in their effect and
IBSUK 1. Different opinions have obtained as to what is intended by the


314 THE DOCTEINE OF THE MEAN.

3. Therefore, the institutions of the Ruler are rooted in
his own character and conduct, and suflB.cient attestation
of them is given by the masses of the people. He ex-
amines them hy comparison with those of the three kings,
and finds them without mistake. He sets them up be-
fore heaven and earth, and finds nothing in them con-
trary to their mode of operation. He presents himself
with them before spiritual beings, and no doubts about
them arise. He is prepared to wait for the rise of a sage,
a hundred ages after, and has no misgivings.

4. His presenting himself with his institutions before
spiritual beings, without any doubts about them arising,
shows that he knows Heaven. His being prepared, with-
out any misgivings, to wait for the rise of a sage, a hun-
dred ages after, shows that he knows men.

5. Such being the case, the movements of such a ruler,
illustrating his institutions, constitute an example to the
empire for ages. His acts are for ages a law to the em-
pire. His words are for ages a lesson to the empire.
Those who are far from him, look longingly for him ; and
those who are near him, are never wearied with him.

6. It is said in the Book of Poetry, — "Not disliked


" three important things.^' K'ang-shing says they are " the ceremonies
of the three kings," i.e. the founders of the three dynasties, Hea, Yin,
and Chow. This view we may safely reject. Choo He makes them to be
the imperial prerogatives, mentioned in the last chapter, paragraph 2.
This vievf may, possibly, be correct. But I incline to the view of the
commentator Luh, of the T'ang dynasty, that they refer to the virtue,
station, and time, which we have seen, in the notes on the last chapter,
to be necessary to one who would give law to the empire. Maou men-
tions this view, indicating his own approval of it. 3. By " the Euler" is
intended the emperor sage of paragraph 1. " Attestation of his institu-
tions is given by the masses of the people ; " i.e. the people believe in
such a ruler, and follow his regulations, thus attesting their adaptation to
the general requirements of humanity. " The three kings," as mentioned
above, are the founders of the three dynasties, viz. the great Tu, T'ang,
the Successful, and Wan and Woo, who are so often joined together, and
spoken of as one. I hardly know what to make of " He sets them up be.
fore Heaven and Earth." Choo He saj's : — " Heaven and Earth here simply
mean right reason. The meaning is — I set up my institutions here, and
there is nothing in them contradictory to right reason." This, of course;
is explaining the text away. But who can do anything better with it ?
I interpret " He presents himself with them before spiritual beings " with
reference to sacrificial institutions, or the general trial of a sovereign's
institutions by the efficacy of his sacrifice, in being responded to by the


THE DOCTRINE OP THE MEAN". '610

"therej not tired of tere^ from day to day and night to
night, will they perpetuate their praise/' Never has
there been a ruler, who did not realize this description,
that obtained an early renown throughout the empire.

XXX. 1. Chung-ne handed down the doctrines of
Yaou and Shun, as if they had been his ancestors, and
elegantly displayed the regulations of Wan and Woo,
taking them as his model. Above, he harmonized with
the times of heaven, and below, he was conformed to the
water and land.

2. He may be compared to heaven and earth, in their
supporting and containing, their overshadowing and cur-
taining, all things. He may be compared to the' four sea-
sofcci in their alternating progress, and to the sun and
moon in their successive shining.

3. All things are nourished together without their injur-
ing one another. The courses of the seasons, and of the
sun and moon, are pursued without any collision among
them. The smaller energies are like river currents ; the
greater energies are seen in mighty transformations. It
is this which makes heaven and earth so great.

XXXI. 1. It is only he, possessed of all sagely quali-

various spirits whom he ■worships. This is the view of Ho Ke-chen, and
is preferable to auy other I have met with. 6. See the She-lting, Pt IV.
Bk I. Sect. II. iii. 2. It is a great descent to quote that ode here, how-
ever, for it is only praising the feudal princes of Chow. " There " means
their own States ; and " here " is the imperial court.

30. The eulogium of Cohtucitjs, as the beau-ideal op the pek-

FECTLT SINCEKB MAH, THE SAGE, MAKING A TEENION WITH HeAVEN

AND Eakth. 1. Chung-ne — See chapter ii. The various predicates here
are explained by K'ang-shing, and Ting-ta, with reference to the " Spring
and Autuinn," making them descriptive of it, but such a view will not
stand examination. Chinese writers observe that in what he handed
down, Confucius began with Yaou and Shun, because the times of Fuh-he
and Shin-nung were veiy remote. Was not the true reason this, that he
knew of nothing in China more remote than Taou and Shun ? By " the
times of heaven " are denoted the ceaseless -regular movement, which
appears to belong to the heavens; and by the "water and the land," we
are to understand the earth, in contradistinction from heaven, supposed
to be fixed and immovable. The scope of the paragraph is, that the
qualities of former sages, of Heaven, and of Earth, were all concentrated
in Confucius. 2. " This describes," says Choo He, " the virtue of the
sage." 3. The wonderful and mysterious course of nature, or — as the
Chinese conceive — of the operations of Heaven and Earth, are described
to illustrate the previous comparison of Confucius.

31. The eulogium of Confucius coktinued. Choo He says that


316 THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN.

ties, that can exist under heaven, who shows himself
quick in apprehension, clear in discernment, of far-reach-
ing intelligence and all-embracing knowledge, fitted to
exercise rule ; magnanimous, generous, benign, and mild,
fitted to exercise forbearance ; impulsive, energetic, fiim,
and enduring, fitted to maintain a firm hold ; self-ad-
justed, grave, never swerving from the Mean, and correct,
fitted to command reverence; accomplished, distinctive,
concentrative, and searching, fitted to exercise discrim-
ination.

2'. All-embracing is he and vast, deep and active as a
fountain, sending forth in their due seasons his virtues.

3. All-embracing and vast, he is like heaven. Deep
and active as a fountain, he is like the abyss. He is seen,
and the people all reverence him; he speaks, and the
people all believe him; he acts, and the people are all
pleased with him.

4. Therefore, his fame overspreads the Middle kingdom,
and extends to all barbarous tribes. Wherever ships and
carriages reach ; wherever the strength of man pene-
trates ; wherever the heavens overshadow and the earth

this chapter is an expansion of the clause in the last paragraph of the
preceding, — '■ The smaller energies are lilie river currents," Even if it
be BO, it will still have reference to Confucius, the subject of the preceding
chapter. K'ang-shing's account of the first paragraph is : — " It describes
how no one, who has not virtue such as this, can rule the empire, being a
lamentation over the fact that while Confucius had the virtue, he did not
have the appointment," that is, of Heaven, to occupy the throne. Maou's
account of the whole chapter is ; — •' Had it been that Chung-ne pos-
sessed the empire, then Chung-ne was a perfect sage. Being a perfect
sage, he would certainly have been able to put forth the greater energies,
and the smaller energies of his virtue, so as to rule the world, and show
himself the coequal of Heaven and Earth, in the manner here described."
Considering the whole chapter to be thus descriptive of Confucius, I was
inclined to translate in the past tense, — ." It n-as only he, who could," &c.
Still the author has expressed himself so indefinitely, that I have preferred
translating the whole, that it may read as the description of the ideal
man, who found, or might have found, his realization in Confucius. 1.
The sage here takes the place of the man possessed of entire sincerity.
Collie translates : — " It is only the most HOLY man." Eeniusat : — " II n'y
u, dans Vvnivers ([u'un SAINT, qui. . . So the Jesuits: "fi'ic commemorat
et commendat summe SAUCTI virtutes." But lioliness and sanctity are
terms which indicate the humble and pious conformity of human character
and life to the mind and will of God. The Chinese idea of the " sage
man" is far enough from this. 3. "He is seen;" — with reference, it
is said, to "the robes and cap," the visibilities of the ruler. "He


THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN. 31/

sustains ; wherever the sun and moon shine ; wherever .
frosts and dews fall : — all who have blood and breath un-
feignedly honour and love him. Hence it is said, — " He
is the equal of Heaven."

XXXII. 1. It is only the individual possessed of thd
most entire sincerity that can exist under heaven, who
can adjust the great invariable relations of mankind,
establish the great fundamental virtues of humanity, and
know the transforming and nurturing operations of Hea-
ven and Earth ; — shall this individual have any beiug or
anything beyond himself on which he depends ?

2. Call him man in his ideal, how earnest is he ! Call
him an abyss, how deep is he ! Call him Heaven, how
vast is he !

3. Who can know him, but he who is indeed quick in

speaks;" — with reference to his "instructions, declarations, orders."
" He acts ; '' — with reference to his " ceremonies, music, punishments, and
acts of government." i. This paragraph is the glowing expression of
grand conceptions.

32. The eulogium of CoNPTJCitrs concluded. "The chapter,"
says Choo He, " expands the clause in the last paragraph of chapter xxix.,
that the greater energies are seen in mighty transformations." The sage
is here not merely equal to Heaven : — he is another Heaven, an inde-
pendent being, a God. 1. King and Zvn are processes in the manipu-
lation of silk, the former denoting the first separating of the threads,
and the latter the subsequent bringing of them together, according
to their kinds. — " The great invariabilities of the world." I translate
the expansion of the last clause which is given in '• Confucius Sin-
armn PJdlosopJms : " " The perfectly holy man of this kind, therefore,
since he is such and so great, bow can it in any way be, that there is any-
thing in the whole universe on which he leans, or in which he inheres, or
on which he behoves to depend, or to be assisted by it in the first place,
that he may afterwards operate 1 " 2. The three clauses refer severally
to the three in the preceding paragraph. The first it speaks of is mrt-uous
hwmanity in all its dimensions and capacities, existing perfectly in the
sage. Of the sage being " a deep," I do not know what to say. The old
commentators interpret the second and third clauses, as if there were an
" as " before " deep " and " heaven," against which Choo He reclaims,
and justly. In one work we read : — " Heaven and man are not originally
two, and man is separate from Heaven only by his having this -body; Of
their seeing and hearing, their thinking and revolving, their moving and
acting, men all say — It is from me. Every one thus brings out his self, ■
and his- smallness becomes known. But let the body be taken away, and'
all would be Heaven. How can the body be taken away? Simply by
subduing and removing that self-having of the ego. This is the taking
it away. That being done, so wide and great as Heaven is, my mind is-
also so wide and great, and production and transformation cannot ba-


5518 THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN.

appreliension, clear in discernmentj of far-reaching intelli-
gence, and all-embracing knowledgCj possessing all hea-
venly virtue ?

XXXIII. 1. It is said in the Book of Poetry, "Over
her embroidered robe she puts a plain, single garment,"
intimating a dislike to the display of the elegance of the
former. Just so, it is the way of the superior man to
prefer the concealment of his virtue, while it daily be-
comes more illustrious, and it is the way of the mean man
to seek notoriety, while he daily goes more and more to
ruin. It is characteristic of the superior man, appearing
insipid, yet never to produce satiety; while showing a
simple negligence, yet to have his accomplishments re-
cognized; while seemingly plain, yet to be discriminating.
He knows how what is distant lies in what is near. He
knows where the wind proceeds from. He knows how
what is minute becomes manifested. Such an one, we
may be sure, will enter into virtue.

2. It is said in the Book of Poetry, " Although the fish
sinks and lies at the bottom, it is still quite clearly seen."

separated from me. Hence it is said — Sum vast is his Heaven." Into
such wandering mazes of mysterious speculation are Chinese thinkers
conducted by the text: — only to be lost in them. As it is said, in para-
graph 3, that only the sage can know the sage, we may be glad to leave
him.

33. The commencement aud the completion as a vietuous
COURSE. The chapter is understood to contain a summary of the whole
Work, and to have a special relation to the first chapter. There, a com-
mencement is made with Heaven, as the origin of our nature, in which are
grounded the laws of virtuous conduct." This ends with Heaven, and ex-
hibits the progress of virtue, advancing step by step in man, till it is
equal to that of High Heaven. There are eight citations from the Book
of Poetry, but to make the passages suit his purpose, the author allegorizes
them, or alters their meaning, at his pleasure. Origen took no more
license with the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament than Tsze-sze
and even Confucius himself do with the Book of Poetry. 1. The first
requisite in tJie pursuit of virtue is, that the learner think of his own
improvement, and do not act from a regard to otliers. See the She-king,
Pt I. Bk V. iii. 1. The ode is understood to express the condolence of the
people with the wife of the duke of Wei, worthy of, but denied, the affec-
tion of her husUiod. 'Z. Tlie superior man going onto vlrtve, is watchful
overhimself when he is alone. See the She-king, Pt II. Bk IV. viii. 11. The
ode appears to have been writien by some officer who was bewailing the dis-
order and misgovernment of his day. This is one of the comparisons which
he uses; — the people are like fish in a shallow pond, unable to save them-
selves by diving to the bottom. The application of this to the superior


Therefore^ the superior man examines his heart, that there
may be nothing wrong there, and that he may have no
caase for dissatisfaction -with himself. That wherein the
superior man cannot be equalled is simply this, — ^his worh
which other men cannot see.

3. It is said in the Book of Poetry, " Looked at in
your apartment, be there free from shame, where you are
exposed to the light of heaven." Therefore, the superior
man, even when he is not moving, has a feeling 0/ rever-
ence, and while he speaks not, he has the feeling o/" truth-
fulness.

4. It is said in the Book of Poetry, " In silence is the
offering presented, and the spirit approached to ; there is
not the slightest contention." Therefore, the superior
man does not use rewards, and the people are stimulated
to virtue. He does not show anger, and the people are
awed more than by hatchets and battle-axes.

5. It is said in the Book of Poetry, " What needs no
display is virtue. All the princes imitate it. Therefore,
the superior man being sincere and reverential, »the whole
world is conducted to a state of happy tranquillity.

man, dealing with himself, in the bottom of his soul, so to speak, and
' thereby realizing what is good and right, is very far-fetched. 3. We
have here substantially the same subject as in the last paragraph. The
ode is the same which is quoted in chapter xvi. 4, and the citation is from
the same stanza of it. We might translate it :

" When looked at in your chamber.
Are you there as free from shame in the house's leak ?"

"The house's leak," according to Choo He, was the north-west corner of
ancient apartments, the spot most secret and retired. But the single
panes, in the roofs of Chinese houses, go now by the name, the light of
heaven leaking in through them. Looking at the whole stanza of the
ode, we must conclude that there is reference to the light of heaven, and
the inspection of spiritual beings, as specially connected with the spot
intended. 4. The result of the processes described in tlie tmo preceding
paragraphs. See the She-king, Pt IV. Bk III. ii. 2. The ode describes
the imperial Worship of T'ang, the founder of the Shang dynasty. The
first clause belongs to the emperor's act and demeanour ; the second to the
effect of these on his assistants in the service. They were awed to rever-
ence, and had no striving among themselves. The " hatchet and battle-axe"
were anciently given by the emperor to a prince, as symbolic of his in-
vestiture with a plenipotent authority to punish the rebellious and refrac-
tory. The second instrument is described as a large-handled axe, eight
catties in weight. I call it a battle-axe, because it was with one that king
Woo despatched the tyrant Chow. o. TA* same subject continued. See


320 THE DOCTRINE OP THE MEAN.

6. It is said in the Book of Poptry, " I regard with
pleasure your brilliant virtue^ making no great display oi
itself in sounds and appearances." The Master said,
" Among the appliances to transform the people, sounds
and appearances are but trivial influences. It is said ia
another ode, 'Virtue is light as a hair.' Still, a'hair will
admit of comparison as to its size. ' The doings of the
supreme Heaven have neither sound nor smell.' — That is
perfect virtue."

The above is the thirty-third chapter. Tsze-sze having
carried his descriptions to the extremest point in the
preceding chapters, turns back in this, and examines
the source of his subject; and then again from the
ivork of the learner, free from all selfishness, and
watchful over himself when he is alone, he carries out
his description, till by easy steps he brings it to the
consummation of the whole empire tranquillized by
simple and sincere reverentialness. He farther eulo-
gizes its mysteriousness, till he speaks of it at last as
without sound or smell. He here takes up the sum of
his- whole Work, and speaks of it irp a compendious
manner. Most deep and earnest was he in thus going
again over his ground, admonishing and instructing
men : — shall the learner not do his utmost in the study
of the Work ?

the She-king, Pt IV. Bk I. Sect. I. iv. 3. But in the She-king we must
translate, — " There is nothing more illustrious than the virtue of the sove-
reign, all the princes will follow it." Tsze-sze puts another meaning on
the words, and makes them introductory to the next paragraph. The
" superior man " must here be " he who has attained to the sovereignty
of the empire," the subject of chapter xxix. Thus it is that a constant
shuffle of terms seems to be going on, and the subject before us is all at
once raised to a higher and inaccessible platform. 6. Virtue in its
highest degree and influence. See the She-king, Pt III. Bk I. viii. 7.
The " I" is God, who announces to king Wan the reasons why he had
called him to execute his judgments. Wan's virtue, not sounded nor em-
blazoned, might come near to the being without display of the last parar
graph, but Confucius fixes on the word " great " to show its shortcoming.
It had some, though not large exhibition. He therefore quotes again
from Pt III. Bk III. vi. 6, though away from the original intention of the
woi-ds. But it does not satisfy him that virtue should be likened even to
a Iiair. He therefore finally quotes Pt III. Bk I. i. 7, where the imper-
ceptible working of Heaven, in producing the overthrow of the Yin
dynasty, is set forth as without sound or smell. That is his highest con-
ception of the nature.and power of virtue.


INDEXES.


INDEX I.


OF SlIBJECTS IN THE CONFDCIAN ANALECTS,


Ability, various of Confucius, IX. vi.
Able officers, eight, of Chow, XVIII.

xi.
Abroad, when a son may go, IV. xix.
Accomplishments come after duty, I.

vi. ; blended with solid excellence,

VI. XTi.
Achievement of government, the great,

XIII. ix.
Acknowledgment of Confucius in es-
timating himself, VII. xxxii.
Acting heedlessly, against, VII. xxvii.
Actions should always be right, XIV.

iv. ; of Confucius were lessons and

laws, XVII. xix.
Adaptation for government of Yen

Yung, &c., VI. i. ; of Tsze-loo, &c.,

VI. vi.
Admiration, Yen Yuen's, of Confucius'

doctrines, IX. x.
Admonition of Confucius to Tsze-loo,

XI. xiv.
Advanced years, improvement difHcult

in, XVII. xxvi.
Adversity, men arc known in times of,

IX. xxvii.
Advice against nseless expenditure,

XI. xiii.
Age, the vice to be guarded against in,

XVI. vii.
Aim, the chief, I. xvi.
Aims, of Tsze-loo, Ts&ng-aih, &c., XI.

XXV.

An all-pervading unity, the knowledge

of, Confucius' aim, XV. ii.
Anarchy of Confucius' time. III. v.
Aqcient rites, how Confucius cleaved

to, III. xvii.
Ancients, their slowness to speak, IV.

xxii.


Antiquity, Confucius' fondness for
VII. xix. ; decay of the monuments
of. III. ix.

Anxiety of parents, II. vi. ; of Con-
fucius about the training of his dis-
ciples, V. ii.

Appearances, fair, are suspicious, 1.
iii., and XVII. xvii.

Appellations for the wife of a prince,
XVI. xiv.

Appreciation, what conduct will in-
sure, XV. V.

Approaches of the unlikely, readily
met by Confucius, VII. xxviii.

Approbation, Confucius' , of Nan Yung,
XI. V.

Aptitude of the Keun-tsze, II. xii.

Archery, contention in, III. vii. ; a
disciplihe of virtue, III. xvi.

Ardent and cautious disciples, Con- .
fucius obliged to be content with,
XIII. xxi.

Ardour of Tsze-loo, V. vi.

Art of governing, XII. xiv.

Assent without reformation, a hopeless
case, IX. xxiii.

Attachment to Confucius of Yen Y uen,
XI. xxiii.

Attainment, different stages of, VI.
xviii.

Attainments of Hwuy, like those of
Confucius, VII. x.

Attributes of the true scholar, XIX. i.

Auspicious omens, Confucius gives up
hope for want of, IX. viii.

Avenge murder, howConfucius wished
to, XIV. xxii.

Bad name, the danger of a, XIX. xx,'
Barbarians, how to civilize, XX. xiiL


SUBJECTS IN THE ANALECTS.


INDEX I.


Becloudlngs of the mind, XVII. -viii.
Bed, manner of Confucius in, X. x-vi.
Benefits derived from studying the

Odes, XVII. ix.
Benevolence, to be exercised with pru-
dence, VI. xxiv. ; and wisdom, XII.

xxii.
Blind, consideration of Confucius for

the, XV. xli.
Boldness, excessive, of Tsze-loo, VII.

X. ■
Burial, Confucius' dissatisfaction with

Hwuy*s, XI. X.
Business, every man should mind his

own, VIII. xiv., and XIV. xxvii.

Calmness of Confucius in danger, VII.

xxii.
Capacity of Mang Kung-ch'o, XIV.

xii.
Capacities of the superior and inferior

man, XV. xxxiii.
Careful, nbout what things Confucius

was, VII. xii.
Carriage, Confucius at and in his, X.

xvii. ; Confucius refuses to sell his,

to assist a needless expenditure, XI.

vii.
Caution, advantages of, IV. xxiii. ;

repentance avoided by, I. xiii. ;

in speaking, XII, iii., and XV.

vii.
Ceremonies and music, XI. i. ; end of,

I. xii. ; impropriety in, III. x. ; in-
fluence of in government, IV. xiii. ;
regulated according to their object,
III. iv. ; secondary and ornamental,

III. viii. ; vain without virtue, III.
iii.

Character (s), admirable, of Tsze-yu,
&c., XV. vi. ; differences in, owing
to habit, XVII. ii. ; different, of
two dukes, XIV. xvi. ; disliked by
Confucius, and Tsze-kung, XVII.
xxiv. ; how Confucius dealt with dif-
ferent, XI. xxi. ; how to determine,

II. X. ; lofty, of Shun and Yu, VIII.
xviii. ; of four disciples, XI. xvii. ;
of Kung-shuh Wan, XIV. xiv.; of
Tan-t'ae Meen-ming, VI. xii. ; vari-
ous elements of in Confucius, VII.
xxxvii, ; what may be learnt from,

IV. xvii.

Chai-acteristics, of perfect virtue, XIII.
xix. ; often disciples, XI. ii.

Claimed, what Confucius, VII. xxxiii.

Classes of men, in relation to know-
ledge, four, XVI. ix. ; only two
whom practice cannolchange, XVII.
iii.

Climbing the heavens, equalling Con-
fucius like, XIX. xxT.


Common practices, some indifferent

and others not, IX. iii.
Communications to be proportioned to

susceptibility, VI. xix.
Comparison of Sze and Shang, XI. XV.
Comparisons, against making, XIV

xxxi.
Compass and vigour of mind necessary

to a scholar, VIII. vii.
Compassion, how a criminal-judge

should cherish, XVIII. xix.
Complete man, of the, XIV. xiii. ;

virtue, I. XIV., and VI. xvi.
Concealment, not practised by Con-
fucius with his disciples, VII. xxiii.
Concubines, difficult to treat, XVII.

XXV.

Condemnation of Tsang Woo-Chung,
XIV. XV. ; of Confucius for seeking
employment, XIV. xli.

Condition, only virtue adapts a man
to his, IV. ii'.

Conduct that will be everywhere ap-
preciated, XV. V.

Confidence, enjoying, necessary to serv-
ing and to ruling, XIX. x.

Connate, Confucius* knowledge not,
VII. xix.

Consideration, of Confucius for the
blind, XV. xli. ; a generous, of
others, recommended, XVIII. x.

Consolation to Tsze-new, when anxi-
ous about his brother, XII. v.

Constancy of mind, importance of,
XIII. xxii.

Constant Mean, the, VI. xxvii.

Contemporaries of Confucius described,
XVI. xi.

Contention, the superior man avoids,
III. vii.

Contentment in poverty of Tsze-loo,
IX. xxvi. ; of Confucius with hia
conditionj IX. xi. ; of the officer
King, XIII. viii.

Contrast of Hwuyand Tsze, XI. xviii.

Conversation, with Chung-kung, XII.
ii. ; with Tsze-chang, XII. vi., vii.;
XX. ii.; with Tsase-kung, XIV. xviii.;
with Tsze-loo, XIV. xiii., xvii. ;
with Tsze-new, XII. iii. ; with Yen
Yuen, XII. i.

Countenance, the, in filial piety, I.
viii.

Courage, not doing right from Avant of,
II. xxiv.

Criminal jndge, should cherish com-
passion, XIX. xix.

Culpability of not reforming known
faults, XV. xxix.

Danger, Confucius assured in time of
IX. V.


INDIiX I.


SUBJECTS pi THE ANALECTS.


323


Dead, offices to the, I. ix.

Death, Confucius evades a question
about, XI. xi. ; how Confucius felt
Hwuy's, XI. viii., ix. ; without re-
gret, IV. viii.

Declined, what Confucius, to be reck-
oned, VII. xxxiii.

Defects of former times become modern
vices, XVII. xvi.

Defence, of himself by Confucius, XIV.
xxxvi. ; of his own method of teach-
ing, by Tsze-hea, XIX. xii. ; of
Tsze-loo, by Confucius, XI. xiv.

Degeneracy, of Confucius' age, VI.
xiv. ; instance of, XV. xxv.

Delusions, how to discover, XII. x ,
xxi.

Demeanour of Confucius, X. i. to v.,
xiii.

Departure of Confucius, from Loo,
XVIII. iv. ; from Ts'e, XVIll.
ill.

Depreciation , Confucius above the reach
of, XIX. xxiv.

Description of himself as a learner, by
Confucius, VII. xviii.

Desire and aoility, required in disciples,
VII. viii.

Development of knowledge, II. xi.

Differences of character, owing to
habit, XVII. ii.

Dignity, necessary in a ruler, XV.
xxxii.

Disciples, anxiety about training, V.
xxi.

Discrimination of Confucius in reward-
ing otBccrs, VI. iii. ; without sus-
piciousness, the merit of, XIV,
xxxiii.

Dispersion of the musicians of Loo,
XVIII. xi.

Distinction, notoriety not, XII. xx.

Distress, the superior man above, XV. i.

Divine mission, Confucius' assurance
ofa,VII. xxii., IX. v.

Doctrine of Confucius, admiration of,
IX. X.

Dreams of Confucius affected by dis-
appointments, VII. v.

Dress, rules of Confucius in regard to
his, X, vi.

Dying counsels to a man in high sta-
. tion, VIII. Iv.

Dynasties, Yin, Hea, and Chow, VIII.
iv.. III. XX. ; Yin and Hea, HI. ix. ;
Chow, &c.. III. xiv. ; certain rules
exemplified in the ancient; eight
able officers of the Chow, XVIII.
xi. ; three worthies of the Yin,
XVIII. i. ; the three. XV. xxiv.

Earnest student, Hwuy the, IX.xix.


Earnestness in teaching of Confucius,
IX. vii.

Egotism, instance of freedom from,
VIII. V.

Eight able officers of the Chow dynasty,
XVIU. xi.

Emolument, learning for, IT. xviii. ,
shameful to care only for, XIV. i.

End, the, crowns the work, IX. xxi.

Enjoyment, advantageous and injuri-
ous sources of, XVI. v.

Eqi.iaUed, Confucius cannot be, XIX.
xxv.

Error, how acknowledged by Confu-
cius, VII. XXX.

Essential, what is, in different services,
III. xxvi.

Estimate, Confucius* bumble, of him^
self, VII. ii., iii., IX. xv., XIV.
xxx. ; of what he could do if em-
ployed, XIII. X.

Estimation of others, not a man's con-
cern, XIV. xxxii.

Example, better than force, II. xx. ;
government efficient by, &c . Xll.
xvii., xviii., xix. ; the secret of
rulers' success, XIII. i. ; value of,
in those in high stations, VIII. ii.

Excess and defect equally wrong, XI.

XV.

Expenditure, against useless, XI. xiii.
External, the, may be pi-edicated from

the internal, XIV. v.
Extravagant speech, hard to be made

good, XIV. xxi.

Fair appearances are suspicious, I. iii.-,
and XVII. xvii.

Fasting, rules observed by Confucius
when, X. vii.

Father's vices, no discredit to a virtu
ous son, VI. iv.

Faults of men, characteristic of their
class, IV. vii.

Feelings, need not always be spoken,
XIV. iv.

Fidelity of his disciples, Confucius'
memory of, XI. ii.

Filial piety, I. xi., IV. xix., xx., xxi. ;
argument fur, II. vi. ; cheerfulness
in, II. viii. ; the foundation of vir-
tuous practice, I. ii. ; of Meen Tsze-
keen, XI. iv. ; of MSng Chwang,

XIX. xviii. ; reverence in, II. vii. ;
seen in care of the person, VIII. iii.

Firmness of superior man, based on

right, XV. xxxvi.
Five excellent things to be honoured,

XX. ii. ; things which constitute
perfect virtue, XVII. vi.

Flattery of sacrificing to others' an-
cestors, II. xxiv. '


324


SUBJECTS IN THE ANALECTS.


INDEX I.


i'ood, rules of Confucius about his, X.
viii.

Foreknowledge, how far possible, II.
Xxiii.

Forethought, necessity of, XV. xi.

Formalism, against, III. it.

Former times, Confucius' preference
for, XI. i.

Forward youth, Confucius' employ-
ment of a, XIV. xlvii.

Foundation of virtue, I. ii.

Four bad things, to be put away, XX.
ii. ; classes of men iu relation to
knowledge, XVI. ix.

Frailties from which Confucius was
free, IX. i v.

Fraternal submission, I. ii.

Friends, rules for choosing, I. viii., and
XX. xxiv. : trait of Confucius in re-
lation to, X. XV.

Friendship, bow to maintain, V. xvi. ;
Tsze-chang's virtue too high for,
XIX. xvi.

Friendships, what, advantageous and
injurious, XVI. iv.

Frivolous talkers, against, XV. xvi.

Funeral rites, Confucius' dissatisfac-
tion with Hwuy's, XI. x. ; to pa-
rents, I. ix.

Furnace, the, and the S. W. Comer, of
a house, III. xiii.

Gain, the mean man's concern, IV.
■ xvi.

Generosity of Pih-e and Shuh-ts'e,
V. xxii.

Glib-tongued, Confucius not, XIV.
xxxiv.

Glibness of tongue and beauty, es-
teemed by the age, VI. xiv.

Glossing faults, a proof of the mean
man, XIX. viii.

Oluttony and idleness, case of, hope-
less, XVII. xxii.

God, address to, XX. i.

Golden rule, expressed with negatives,
V. xi., XV. xxiii.

Good fellowship of Confucius, VII.
xxxi.

Good, learning leads to, VIII. xii.

Good man, the, XI. xix. ; we must
not judge a man to be, from his dis-
course, XI. XX.

Governing, the art of, XII. xiv. ; with-
out personal effort, XV. iv.

G ovcrnnient, good, seen from its effects,
XIII. xvi. ; good, how only obtained,
XII. xi. ; may be conducted effi
ciently, how, XX. ii. j moral in. its
end, XII. xvii. ; principles of, I. v. ;
requisites of, XII. vii.

Gradual progress of Cuufuciua. II. iv. :


communication of his doctrine, V.

xii.
Grief, Confucius vindicates his, for

Hwuy, XI. ix.
Guiding principle of Confucius, XVIII.

viii.

Happiness of Confucius among his
disciples, XI. xii. ; of Hwuy in
poverty, VI. ix.

Haste, not to be desired in government,
XIII. xvii.

Heaven, Confucius rested in the order-
ing of, XIV. xxxviii. ; knew him,
Confucius thought that, XIV.
xxxvii. : no remedy for sin against,
III. xiii.

Hesitating faith, Tsze-chang on, XIX.
ii.

High aim proper to a student, VI. x. ;
things, too much minding of, XIX.

XV.

Home, Confucius at, X. xvi.; how
Confucius could benot at, XVII. xx.

Hope, Confucius gives up, for want of
auspicious omens, IX. viii.

Hopeless case, of gluttony and idleness,
XVII. xxii. ; of those who assent
to advice without reforming, IX.
xxiii. ; of those who will not think,
XV. XV.

House and wall, the comparison of a,
XIX. xxiii.

Humble claim of Confucius for himself,
V. xxvii. : estimate of himself, VII.
ii., iii., IX. XV., XIV. xxx.

Humility of Confucius, VII. xxvi.

Hundred years, what good govern-
ment could effect iu a, XIII. xi.

Idleness of Tsae Yu, V. ix. ; case of,
hopeless, XVII. xxii.

Ignorant man's remark about Con-
fucius, IX. ii.

Impatience, danger of, XV. xxvi.

Imperial rites, usurpation of, III. i.,
ii., vi.

Improvement, self, II. xviii. ; difficult
in advanced years, XVII. xxvi.

Incompetency, our own, a fit cause of
concern, XV- xviii.

Inditfeience of the officer King to
riches, XIII. viii.

Indignation of Confucius at the usurp-
ation of imperial rites. III. i., ii. ; at
the support of usurpation and extor-
tion by a disciple, XI. xvi. ; at the
wrong overcoming the right, XVIL
xviii.

Inferior pursuits, inapplicable to great
okiects, XlX.iv.


INDEX 1.


SUBJECTS Ilf THE ANALECTS.


325


Instruction, how a man may find
Vil. xxi. '

Instructions to a son about sovern-
ment,XVm. X.

Insubordination, worse than meanness,

VII. xxxT. ; ditterent causes of.

VIII. X.

Intelligence, what constitutes, XII. vi
Intercourse, character formed by, V.

ii. ; of Confucius with others, traits

of, X. xi. ; with others, different

opinions on, XIX. iii.
Internal, the, not predicable from the

external, XIV. v.
Ironical admonition, XIII. xiv.

Jealousy of others' talents, against,
XV. X., iii.

Joy of Confucius independent of out-
ward circumstances, VII. xv.

Judi^ment of Confucius concerning
Tsze-ch'an, &c., XIV. x. ; of retired
worthy, on Confucius, XIV. xlii.

Keun-teze. See Superior man.
Killing, not to be talked of by rulei-s,

XII. xix.
Knowing and not knowing, II. xvii.
Knowledge, disclaimed by Confucius,

IX. vii. ; four classes of men in re-
lation to, XVI. ix, , not lasting with-
out Tirtue, XV. xxxii. ; of Confucius
not connate, VIII. xix.; sources of
Confucius', XIX. xxii. ; subserves
benevolence, II. xxii.

Lament over moral error added to
natural defect, VIII. xvi. ; sickne.^s
of Pih-new, VI. viii. ; persistence
in error, V. xxvi. ; rarity of the love
of virtue, IV. vi. ; the rash reply of
Tsae Go, III. xxi. ; the wayward-
ness of men, VI. xiv. ; of Confucius,
that men did not know him, XIV.
xxxvii.

Language, the chief virtue of, XV. xl.

Learner, the, I. i., xiv. ; Confucius
de.%ribes him.selfasa, VII. xviii.

Leai'ning and propriety combined, VI.
XXV. and .Xll. xv.; Confucius' fond-
ness for, V. xxvii..; different motives
for, XIV. XXV. ; end of, II. xviii. ;
how to be pursued, VI. xi. and
VIII. xvii.; in order to virtue,
XIX. vi. ; necesiiity of, to complete
virtue, XVII. viii. ; quickly leads
to good, VIII. xii. ; should not
cease or be intermitted, IX. xviii.;
substance of, I. vii. ; the indications
of a real love of, XIX. v. ; the stu-
dent's workshop, XIX. vii.

Lesson, of prudence, XIV. ix. ; to


parents and ministers, XIV. viii.;
to rulers, VIII. x.; to Tsze-loo,

xm. i.

Lessons and laws, Confucius' actions

were, XVII. xix.
Libation, pouring out of, in sacrifice,

IIL X.
Life, human, valued by Confucius, X.

xii. ; without uprightness, not truu,

VI- xvii.
Likings and dislikings of others, in

determining a man's character,

XIII. xxiv. and XV. xxvii.
Literary acquirements, useless without

practical ability, XIII. v.
Litigation, how Tsze-loo could settle,

XII. xii.; it is better to prevent,
, XII. xiii.
Love of virtue rare, IV. vi. and IX.

xvii.
Love to learn, of Confucius, V. xxvii. ;

of Hwuy, XI. vi. ; rarity of, Vi,

ii.
Loving and hating aright, IV. iii.

.Madman, the, of Ts'oo, XVIII. v.
Man, in relation to principles of duty,

XV. xxviii.
Manhood, the vice to be guarded

against in, XVI. vii.
Manner of Confucius when unoccupied,

VII. iv.
Marriage-making, Confucius in, V. i.
Mat, rule of Confucius about his,

X. i.x.
Maturing of character, rules for,

VII. vi.
Mean man, glosses his facts, XIX.

viii. See Superior man.
Meanness of Wei-shang, V. xxiii. ;

not so bad as insubordination, VII

XXXV.

M ercenary ofiicers, impossible to serve

along with, XVII. xv.
Merit of Kung-shuh WSn, XIV. xix.;

of Kwan Chung, XIV. xvii., xviii. ;

virtue of concealing, VI. xiii.
Messenger, an admirable, XIV. xxvi.
Military affairs, Confucius refuses to

talk of, XV. i.
Minding tov much high things, XIX.

XV.

Minister, the faithful, XV. xxxvii.
Ministers, great and ordinary, XI.
xxiii. ; importance of good and able,

XIV. XX. ; must be sincere and up-
right, XIV. xxiii. ; should be strict
and decided, XIV. viii.

Mission of Confucius, Yen Yuen's

confidence in, XI. xxii.
Model student, fond recollections of a,

IX XX.


326


SUBJECTS IN THE ANALECTS.


INDEX I.


Moral appliances to be preferred in
government, II. iii.

Mourners, Confucius' sympathy with,
VII. ix., and X. xvi.

Mourning, three years for parents,
XVII. xxi. ; government, how car-
lied on in time of, XIV. xliii. ; the
trappings of, mav be dispensed with,
XIX. xiv. i

Murder of the duko of Ts'e, XIV.
xxii.

Music, and ceremonies, vain witliout
virtue. III. iii. ; effect of, VIII.
viii. ; effect of, on Confucius, VII.
xii. ; influence of, in government,
XVII. iv. ; of Shun and Woo com-
pared, III. XXV. ; on the playing of,
III. xxiii. ; service rendered to, by
Confucius, IX. xiv. ; the sound of
instruments does not constitute,

XVII. xi.

Musicians of Loo, the, dispersion of,

XVIII. ix.

Music-master, praise of a, VIII. xv.

Name, Qanger of a bad, XIX. xx. ;

without reality, VI. xxiii.
Names, importance of being correct,

XIII. iii.
Narrow-mindedness, Tsze-chang on,

XIX. ii.

Natural duty and uprightness in col-
lision, XIII. xviii. ; ease in cere-
monies to be prized, I. xii. ; qualities
which are favourable to virtue, XIII.
xxvii.

Nature of a man, grief brings out the
real, XIX. xvii.

Neighbourhood, what constitutes the
excellence of a, IV. i.

Nine subjects of thought to the supe-
rior man, XVI. x.

Notoriety, not true distinction, XII.

XX.

Ode (s), the Chow-nan and Shaou-
nan, XVII. x. ; the Kwan-ts'eu,
III. XX. ; the Yung, III. ii. ; Pih-
kwei, X. V. ; of Ch'ing, XV. x. ; the
Nga, IX. xiv. ; XVII. xviii.

Odes, the study of the Book of, XVI.
xiii. and XVII. ix., x. ; quotations
from the, I. xv.. III. xviii., IX.
xxvi., XII. X. ; the pure de.sigu of
the, II. ii.

Oiiice, declined by Tsze-k'een, VI. vii. ;
desire for, qualified by self-respect,
IX, xii. ; Confucius, why not in, II.
xxi.; when to be accepted, and when
to be declined, VIII. xiii.

Officers, classes of men who may be
styled, XIII. xx. ; mercenary, im-


possible to serve with, XVII. xv. ;

personal correctness essential to,

XIII. xiii. ; should first attend to

their proper work, XIX. xiii.
Official notifications of Ch'ing, why

excellent, XIV. ix.
Old knowledge, to be combined with

new acquisitions, II. xi.
Old man, encounter -ivith an, XVIII.

vii.
Opposing a father, disapproved of,

VII. xiv.
Ordinances of Heaven necessary to be

known, XX. iii.
Ordinary people could not understand

Confucius, XIX. xxiii. ; ordinary

rules, Confucius not to be judged by,

XVII. vii.
Originator, Confucius not an, VII. i.

Parents, grief for, brings out the real
nature of a man, XIX. xvii. ; how a
son may remonstrate with, IV, xviii.;
should be strict and decided, XIV.
viii. ; three years' mourning for,
XVII. xxi. ; theiryears to be remem-
bered, IV. xxi.

People, what may and what may not
be attained to with the, VIII. ix.

Perfect virtue, caution in speaking,
characteristic of, XII. iii. ; charac-
teristics of, XIII. xix. ; estimation
of, V. xviii. and VI. xx. ; five
things which constitute, XVII. vi.;
how to attain to, XII. i. ; not easily
attained, XIV. vii.; wherein real-
ized, XII. ii.

Persistence in error, lament over, V.
xxvi.

Perseverance proper toastudient, VI. x.

Personal attainment, a man's chief
concern, 1. xvi. and XIV. xxxii. ;
conduct, all in all to a ruler, XIII,
xvi. ; correctness, essential to au
officer, XIII. xiii.

Perspicuity the chief virtue of lan-
guage, XV. xl.

Pervading unity, Confucius* doctrine a,
IV. XV. ; how Confucius aimed at,
XV. viii.

Phoenix, the, IX. viii. and XVIII. t.

Piety, see Filial.

Pity of Confucius for misfortune, IX.
ix.

Plans, what is necessary to concord
in, XV, xxxix.

Poetry, benefits of the study of the
Book of, VIII. viii., and XVII. ix.,
X. ; and music, service rendered to
by Confucius, IX. xiv.

Posthumous titles, on what principle
conferred, V. xiv.


SUBJECTS IN THE ANALECTS.


d27


Poverty, happiness in, VI. ix. ; harder
to bear aright than riches, XIV. xi.;
no disgrace to a scholar, IV. ix.

Practical ability, importance of, XIII.

V.

Practice, Confucius' zeal to carry his

principles into, XVII. v.
Praise of the house of Chow, VIII.

XX. ; of the music-master Ch'e, VIII

XV. ; of Yaou, VIII. xix.: of Yu,
VIII. xxi.

Praising and blaming, Confucius' cor-
rectness in, XV. xxiv.

Prayer, sin against Heaven precludes,
III. xiji. ; Confucius declines, for
himself, VII. xxxiv.

Precaution, necessity of, XV. xi.

Preliminary study, necessity of, to
governing, XI. xxiv.

Presumption, &c., of the chief of the
K.e family, XVI. i. ; and pusillan-
imity conjoined, XVII. xii.

Pretence, against, II. xvii. ; Confucius'
dislike of, IX. xi.

Pretentiousness of Confucius' time,
yil.xxv.

Prince, and minister, relation of. III.
xix.; Confucius* demeanour before a,
X. ii. ; Confucius' demeanour in re-
lation to, X. xiii.

Princes, Confucius' influence on, I. x. ;
how to be served. 111. xviii.

Principles, agreement in, necessary to
concord in plans, XV. xxxix. ; and
ways of Yaou, Shun, &o., XX. i. ;
of duty, an instrument in the hand
of man, XV. xxviii.

Prompt decision good, V. xix.

Propriety, and music, influence of,
XVII. iv. ; combined with learning,
VI. XXV. and XII. xv. j efl'ect of,
VIII. viii. ; love of, facilitates go-
vernment, XIV. xliv. ; necessary to
a ruler, XV. xxxii. ; not in external
appurtenances, XVII. xi. ; rules of,
1. xii.. III. XV. ; rules of, necessary
to be known, X X. iii. ; value of the
rules of, VIII. ii.

Prosperity and ruin of a country, on
what dependent, XIII. xv. and

XVI. ii.

Prowess conducting to ruin, XIV. vi.
Prudence, a lesson of, XIV. iv. .

Pursuit of riches, against, VII. xi.
Pusillanimity and presump*,ion, XVII.
xii.

Qualifications of an oflicer, VIII.

xiii.
Qualities that are favourable to virtue,

XIII. xxvii. ; that mark the scholar,

XIII. xxviii.


Rash words cannot he recalled, III.
xxi.

Readiness of Confucius to impart in-
struction, VII. vii. ; of speech, V.
iv. and XVII. xiv.

Reading and thought, should be com-
bined, II. XV. and XV. xxx.

Rebuke to Yen Yew, &c., XVI. i.

Receptivity of liwuy, II. ix. and
XI. iii.

Reciprocity the rule of life, XV. xxiii.

R&cluse, Tsze-loo's encounter with a,
XVUI. vii.

Recluses, Confucius and the two,
XVIII. vi.

RecoUectionofHwuy, Confucius' fond,
XI. XX.

Reflection, the necessity of, IX. xxx.

Regretful memory of disciples' fidelity,
XI. ii.

Relative duties, necessity of maintain-
ing, XII. xi.

Remark of an ignorant man about
Confucius, IX. ii.

Remonstrance with parents, IV. xviii.

Repentance escaped by timely care,
I. xiii.

Reproof to Tsze-loo, XI. xxiv.

Reproofs, frequent, warning against
the use of, I V. xxvi.

Reputation not a man's concern, XV.
xviii.

Resentments, how to ward off, XV.
xiv.

Residence, rule for selecting a, IV. i.

Respect, a youth should be regarded
with, IX. xxii. ; of Confucius for
men, XV. xxiv. ; of Confucius for
rank, IX. ix.

Retired worthy's judgment on Confu-
cius, XIV. xlii.

Reverence for parents, II. vii.

Riches, pursuit of, uncertain of success,
VII. xi.

Right way, importance of knowing the,
IV. viii.

Righteous and public spirit of Con-
fucius, XIV. xxii.

Righteousness the Keun-tsze's concern,
IV. xvi. ; is his rule of practice,
IV. x.

Root of benevolence, filial and fraternal
duty is the, I. ii.

Royal ruler, a, could, in what time,
transform the empire, XIII. xii.

Ruin and prosperity dependent on w hat,
XIII. XV. and XVI. ii.

Rule of life, reciprocity the, XV. xxiii.

Ruler, virtue in a, II. i.

Rulers, a lesson to, VIII. x. ; personal
conduct all in all to, XIII. xvi ;
should not be occupied with what is


828


SUBJECTS IN THE ANALECTS.


INDEX I.


the proper business of the people,

XIII. iv.

Ruling, best means of, II. iii.
Running stream, a, Confucius how af-
fected by, IX. xvi.

Sacrifice, Confucius' sincerity in. III.

xii. ; the great. III. x., xi. ; wrong

subjects of, II. xxiv.
Sagehood, not in various ability, IX.

vi.
Scholar, attributes of the true, XIX. i. ;

his aim must be higher than comfort,

XIV. iii.

Self-cultivation, I. viii. and IX. xxiv. ;

a man's concern, IV. xiv. ; a charac-
teristic of the Keun-tsze^ XIV. xlv. ;

Confucius' anxiety about, VII. iii. ;

steps in, I. xv.
Self-examination, I. iv.
Selfish conduct causes murmuring, IV.

xii.
Self-respect should qualify desire for

oflice, IX. xii.
Self-willed, Confucius not, XIV. xxxiv.
Sequences of wisdom, virtue, and

bravery, IX. xxviii.
Servants, difficult to treat, XVII. xxv.
Sbameof caring only for salary, XIV. i.
Shaou, a name of certain music, III.

xxv.
Sheep, the monthly offering of a. III.

xvii.
Shoo-king, quotation from, II. xxi.,

XIV.2tliii. ; compilation from, XX. i.
Silent mourning, three years of, XIV.

xliii.
Simplicity, instance of, VIII. v.
Sincerity, cultivation of, I. iv. ; ne-
cessity of, II. xxii. ; praise of, V.

xxiv.
Slandering of Tsze-loo, XIV. xxxviii.
Slowness to speak, of the ancients, IV.

xxii. ; of the Keun-tsze, IV. xxiv.
Small advantages not to be desired in

government, XIII. xvii.
Social intercourse, qualities of the

scholar in, XIII. xxiii.
Solid excellence blended with orna-
ment, VI. xvi.
Son, a, opposing his father, against,

VII. xiv. : Confucius* instruction of

his own, XVI. xiii.
Sources of Confucius' knowledge, XIX.

xxii.
Specious words, danger of, XV. xxvi.
Speech, discretion in, XV. vii.
Spirit of the times, against, III. xviii.
Spirits, Confucius evades a question

about serving, XI. xi. ; of the land,

altars of. 111. xxi.
Stages of attainment, VI. xviii. ; of


progress, different persons stop at
different, IX. xxix.

States of Ts'e and Loo, VI. xxii.

Strange doctrines, II. xvi.

Strength, not a fit subject of prai.sc,
XIV. xxxv.

Student's proper work, XIX. xiii.

Stupidity of Ning Woo, V. xx.

Subjects, avoided by Confucius, VII.
XX. ; of Confucius' teaching, VII.
xxiv. See Topics.

Submission of subjects, how secured,
II. xix.

Substantial qualities, and .iccomplish-
ments, in the Keun-tsze^ XII. viii.

Sun and moon, Confucius like the,
XIX. xxiv.

Superficial speculations, against, XV.
xvi.

Superior and mean man, II. xii., xiii.,
xiv., IV. xi., xvi., VI. xi., VII.
xxxvi., XVI. viii. ; different air and
bearing of, XIII. xxvi. ; different in
their relation to those employed by
them, XIII. xxv.; different manners
of, XIII. xxiii. ; different tendencies
of, XIV. xxiv. ; how to know, XV.
xxxiii. ; opposite influence of, XII.
xvi.

Superior man, above distress, XV. i. ;
changing appearances of, to others,
XIX. ix. ; cleaves to virtue, IV. v. ;
does not conceal, but changes, bis
errors, XIX. xxi. ; firmness of, based
on right, XV. xxxvi. ; four charac-
teristics of, V. XV. ; is righteous,
courteous, humble, and sincere, XV.
xvii. ; more in deeds than in words,

XIV. xxix.; nine subjects of thought
to, XVI. X. ; rule about his words
and actions, IV. xxiv. ; self-cultiva-
tion, characteristic of, XIV. xlv. ;
talents and virtues of, VIII. vi. ;
thoughts of in harmony with his
position, XIV. xxviii. ; truth the ob-
ject of, XV. xxxi. ; various charac-
teristics of, XV. XX., xxii., xxiii. ;
wishes to be had in remembrance,

XV. xix.

Superiority of Hwuy, VI. ii., v.
Superstition of Tsang WSn, V. xvii.
Supreme authority ought to maintain

its power, XVI. ii.
Snsceptivity of learners, teachers to

be guided by, VI. xix.
Swiftness to speak, incompatible with

virtue, XVII. xiv.
Sympathy of Confucius with mourners,

VII. Ix. ; with sorrow, IX. ix.

Talents, men of, scarce, VIII. xx. ;
worthless without virtue, VIII. xi.


INDEX I.


SUBJECTS IN THE ANALECTS.


329


Taxation, light, advantages of, XII.

ix.
Teacher, qualification of a, II. xi.
Teaching, effect of, XV. xxxviii.; Con-
fucius' earnestness in, IX, vii. ;

Confucius' subjects of, VII. xxiv. ;

graduated method of, XIX. xii. ;

necessary to prepare the people for

war, XI tl. xxix., xxx.
Temple, Confucius in the grand, XIII.

XV. and X. xiv.
Thieves made by the example of rulers,

XII. xviii.
Think, those who will not, the case of,

hopeless, XV. xv.
Thinking without reading, fruitless,

XV. xxx.
Thought and learning, to be combined,

II. XV.

Three, errors of speech, in the presence
of the great, XVI. vi. ; families, of
Loo, III. n. ; friendships advantage-
ous, and three injurious, XVI. iv. ;
sources of enjoyment, id. id., XVI.
V. ; things of which the superior man
stands in awe, XVI. viii, ; years'
mourning, XIV. xliii., XVII. xxi. ;
worthies of the Yin dynasty, XVI II. i.

Thimder, Confucius howaffeoted by, X.
xvi.

Topics, avoidedby Confucius, VII. XX.;
most common of Confucius, VII.
xvii. ; seldom spoken on by Con-
fucius, IX. i.

Traditions of the principles of WSn
and Woo, XIX. xxii.

Training of the young, I. vi.

Transmitter, Confucius a, VII. i.

Trappings of mourning may be dis-
pensed with, XIX. xiv.

Treatment of a powerful but unworthy
officer by Confucius, XVll. i.

True men, paucity of, in Confucius'
time, VII. XXV.

Truthfulness, necessity of, I. xxii.

Two classes only whom practice cannot
change, XVII. iii. ; recluses, Con-
fucius and the, XVIII. vi.

Unbending virtue, V. x.

Unchangeableness of great principles,
II. xxiii.

Unity of Confucius' doctrine, IV. xv.
and XV. ii.

Unmannerly old man, Confucius' con-
duct to an, XIV. xlvi.

Unoccupied, Confucius' manner when,
VII. iv.

Unworthy man, Confucius responds to
the advances of an, XVII. vii.

Uprightness, and natural duty in col-
lision, Xlil- xviii. ; meanness incon-


sistent with, V. xxiii. ; necessary to
true virtue, VI. xvii.

Usurped rites, against. III. i., ii.,vi.

Usurping tendencies of the Ke family,
XIII. xiv.

Utensil, Tsze-kung an, V. iii. ; the ac-
complished scholar not an, II. xii.

Valour subordinate to righteousness,

XVII. xxiii.

Various ability of Confucius, IX. vi.
Vice, how to correct, XII. xxi.
Vices, of a father, no discredit to a

good son, VI. iv. ; which youth,

manhood, and age have to guard

against, XVI. vii.
Village, Confucius' demeanour in his,

X. i., x.
Vindication, Confucius', of himself,

VI. xxvi. ; of Confucius by Tsze-loo,

XVIII. vii.

Virtue, alone adapts a man for his con-
dition, IV. ii, : and not strength, a fit
subject of praise, XIV. xxxv. ; cere-
monies and music vain without. III.
iii. ; complete, I. i. ; contentment
with what is vulgar injures, XVII.
xiii. ; devotion of the Keun-tsze to,
IV. v.; exceeding, of T'ae-pih, VIII.
i. ; few really know, XV, iii. ; how
to exalt, XII. X., xxi ; in conceal-
ing one's merit, VI. xiii. ; influence
of, II. i. ; knowledge not lasting
without, XV. xxxii. ; leading to em-
pire, XIV. vi. ; learning necessary
to the completion of, XVII. viii. ;
learning leading to, XIX. vi. ; love
of, rare, IV. vi., IX. xvii., XV. xii. ;
natural qualities which favour, XIII.
xxvii. ; not far to seek, VII. xxix. ;
the bighest,*not easily attained, and
incompatible with meanness, XIV.
vii. ; the practice of, aided by inter-
course with the good, XV. ix. ; to be
valued more than life, XV. viii. ; true
nature and art of, VI. xxviii. ; with-
out wealth, &c., XVI. xii.

Virtues, the great, dcmaud the chief
attention, XIX. xi.

Virtuous men, not left alone, IV. xxv. ;
only can love or hate others, IV.
iii.

Vocation of Confucius, a stranger's view
of. III. xxiv.

Vulgar ways and views, against con-
tentment with, XVII. xiii.

"War, how a good ruler prepares the

people for, XIII. xxix., xxx.
Warning to Tsze-loo, XI. xii.
Waywardness, lament over, VI. xv.
Wealth without virtue, &c., XVI. xii.


830


PEOPEE NAMES IN THE ANALECTS.


INDEX II.


Wickedness, the virtuous will preserves
from, IV. iv.

"Wife of a prince, appellations for, XVI. I
xiv.

Will, the virtuous, preserves from
wickedness, IV. iv. ; is unsubduable,
IX. XXV.

Wisdom and virtue, chief elements of,
VI. x.-c. ; contrasts of, VI. xxi., IX.
xxviii.

Wishes, different, of Yen Yuen, &o.,
V. XXV. ; of Tsze-loo, &c., XI. xxv.

Withdrawing from public life, differ-
ent causes of, XIV. xxxix. ; of Con-
fucius, XVIII. v., vi.; of seven men,


XIV. xl.
Withdrawing from the woild, Coii-

fucius proposes, V. vi. ; Confucius'

judgment on, XVIII. viii.
Words, the force of, necessary to be

known, XX. iii.
Work, a man's, is with himself, XIV.

XXX.

Workshop, the student's, XIX. vii.

Young, duty of the, I. vi. ; should be
regarded with respect, IX. xxii.

Youth, the vice to be guarded against
in, XVI. vii.


INDEX II.


OF PROPEll NAMES IN THE CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.

Names in Italics will be found in their own places in this Index, with additional
references.


Ch'ae, surnamed Kaoti, and styled
Tsze-lcaou, a disciple of Confucius, 'XI.

xvii.
Chang, Tsze-chang, XIX. xv., xvi.
Ch'ang-tseu, a worthy of. Ts'oo, XVIII.

vi.
Chaou, a prince celebrated for his

beauty of .person, VI. xiv.
Chaou, one of the three families which

governed the state of Tsin, XIV.

xii.
Ch'aou, thehonourable epithetof Chow,

duke of Loo, B. 0. 540—609, VII.

XXX.

Che, the Music-master of Loo, VIII.

XV., XVni. ix.
Ch'ih, surnamed Kung-se^ and styled

Tsze-hwa^ a disciple of Confucius, V.

vii., VI. iii., XI. xxv.
Ch'in, the state of, V. xxi., VII. xxx.,

XI. ii., XV.i.
Ch'in K'ang, Tsze-k^in, a. disciple of

Confucius, XVI. xiii.
Ch'in Shing, or Ch'in Hang, an officer

of Keen, duke of Tsze, XIV. xxii.
Chin WSn, an officer of Ts'e, V. xxii.
Ch'ing, the State of, XV. x.
Choo-chang, a person who retired from

the world, XVIII. viii.


Chow dynasty, II. xxiii. III. xiv.,

xxi., VIII. XX., XV. X., XVI. v.,

XVIII. xi., XX. i.
Chow, the last emperor of the Yin

dynasty, XVIII. i., XIX. xx.
Chow Jin, an ancient historiographer,

XVI. i.
Chow-kung, or the duke of Chow, VII.

v., VIII. xi., XI. xvi., XVIU.

X.

Chuen-yu, a small territory in Loo,

XVI. i.
Chung-hwuh, an officer of Chow,

XVIIL xi.
Chung-kung, the designation of Yen

Yung, a disciple of Confucius, VI. i.,

iv., XI. ii., XII. ii., Xlll.ii.
Chung-mow, a place in the state of

Tsin, XVII. vii.
Chung-ne, Confucius, XIX . xxii. — xxv.
Chung-shuh Yu, the name as K^uiiy

Wan, XIV. jcx.
Chung YeUf styled Tsze-loo, a disciple

of Confucius, VI. vi., Al. xxiii..

XVIII. vi.
Chwang of Peen, XIV. xiii.

E, a small town on the borders of the
State of Wei, III. xxiv.


INDEX II. PROPER NAMES IN THE ANALECTS.


331


E, H famous archer, B.C. about 2150.

XIV. -vi.
E-yih, a person who retired from the

world, XVIIl. viii.
E Yin, the minister of T'ang, XII.

xxii.

Fan Ch'e, byname Seu, and designated
Tsze-ch'e, adisciple of Confucius, 11.
v., VI. XX., XII. xxi., xxii., XIII.
iv., xix.

Fan Seu.the same as Fa)tCA'e,XIII.iv.

i'ang, a city in Loo, XIV. xv.

Fang-shuh, a musician of Loo, XVIII.


Gae, the honourable title of Tseang,
duke of Loo, B.C. 493—467, II. xix.,
HI. xxi., VLii., XII. ix.

Gan P'ing, posthumous title of Gan
Ying, principal minister of Ts'e, V.


Han, the river, XVIII. ix.

Ilea dynasty, II. xxiii.. III. ix., xxi.,

XV. X.

Heen, the name of Yuen Sze, a disciple
of Confucius, XVI. i.

Hwan, the three great families of Loo,
being descended from the Duke
Hwan, are called the descendants
of the three Hwan, II, t. note,

XVI. iii.

Hwan, the dukeofT'se, B.C. 683—642,

.XIV. xvi., xviii.
Hwan T'uy, a high officer of Sung,

VII. xxii.
Hwuy, Yen Hwuy, styled Tsze-yuen,

a disciple of Confucius, II. ix., V.

■viii., VI. v., ix., IX. xix., XI. iii., x.,

xviii., xxii.
Hwuy of Lew-Hea, posthumous title

of Chen Hwo, an officer of Loo, XV.

xiii., XVIII. ii., viii.

Joo Pei, a man of Loo, XVII. xx.

Kan, the Master of the band at Loo,
XVIIL ix.

Kaou-tsung, the honourable epithet of
the Emperor Woo-ting, B.C. 1323 —
1263, XIV. xliii.

Kaou-yaou, a minister of Shun, XII.
xxii.

Ke, a small state in which sacrifices to
the emperors of the Hea dynasty
were maintained by their descend-
ants, III. ix.

Ke, a small state in Sban-se. XVIII. i.

Ke family, the family oiKe K'ang of
Loo, III. i., vi., VI. vii., XI. xvi.,
XVI. i., XVIII. iii.


Ke-Hwan, or Ke Sze, the head of the

Ke family in the latter days of Con-
fucius, XVIII. iv.
Ke K'ang, the honourable epithet of

Ke-sun Fei, the head of one of the

three great families of Loo, II. xx.,

VI. vi.^XI. vi., XIII. xvii., xviii.,

xix., XIV. XX.
Ke-kwa, an officer of Chow, XVIII.

xi.
lie Loo, the same as Tsze-loo, V. xxv.,

XI.il., xi., XIII. xiv., XVI. i.
Ke-sun, the same as Ke K'ang, XIV.

xxxviii., XVI. i.
Ke-suy, anofficerof Chow, XVIII. xi.
Ke Tsze-jen, a younger brother of the

Ke family, XI. xxiii.
Ke W^n, posthumous title of Ke Hang-

foo, an officer of Loo, V, xix.
Keu-neih, a worthy of Ts'oo, XVIII.

vi.
Keen, a duke of Ts'e, XIV. xxii.
Keu-foo, a small city on the western

borders of Loo, XIII. xvii.
Keu Pih-yuh, the designation of Kcu

Yuen, an officer of the State of Wei,

XIV. xxvi., XV. vi.
K'euth, a name of a village, XIV.

xlvii.
Kcuch, a musician of Loo, XVIII. iv.
Kew, brother of the l)uke Hwan of

T'se, XIV. xvii., xviii.
K'ew, Confucius' name, XIV. xxxiv.,

XVlU.vi.
K'ew, the name of Yen Yew^ a disciple

of Confucius, V. vii., VI. vi., XI.

xvi., xxi., xxiii., xxv., XVI. i.
Kih Tsze-shing, an officer of the State

of Wei, XII. viii.
King, a duke of Ts'e, XII. xi., XVI.

xii., XVIII. iii.
King, a scion of the ducal family of

Wei, XIII. viii.
K'ung, Confucius, IX. ii., XIV. xii.,

XVIII.ji.
Kung-Ch'o, Mi-ng Kung-chu, XIV.

xiii.
Kung-ming Kea, XIV. xiv.
Kung-pih Lcaou, a relative of the duke

of Loo, XIV. xxxviii.
Kung-se Hwa, Tsze-hwa, a disciple of

Confucius, VII. xxxiii., XI, xxi.,

xxv.
Kung-shan Fiih-jaou, a confederate of

Yang Ho, XVII. v.
Kung-shuh WSn, an officer of the State

of Wei, XIV. xiv., xix.
Xung-sun Ch'aou, of Wei, XIX. xxii.
K'ung WSn, posthumous title of Tszu-

yu, an officer of Wei, V. xiy.
Kung-yay Ch'ang, the son-in-law of

Confucius, V. i.


332


PROPER NAMES IN THE ANALECTS.


INDEX n.


Kwan Chung, by name E Woo, chief
minister to the Duke Hwan of Ts'e,
B.C. 683—640, III. xxii., XIV. x.,
xvii., xviii.

K'wang, the name of a town, IX. v.,
XI. xxii.

Laou, surnamed K'in, and styled Tsze-

k'ae or Tsze-chang, a di.sciple of

Confucius, IX. vi.
Le, the name of T'ang, founder of the

Shang dynasty, XX. i.
Le, a son of Confucius, who died early,

XI. vii.
Leaou, a musician of Loo, XVIII.

ix.
Lin Fang, styled Tsze-k'ew, a man of

Loo, supposed to have been a disciple

of Confucius, III. iv., vi.
Ling, a duke of Wei, XIV. xx., XV.i.
Loo, the native State of Confucius, II.

V. note, III. xxiii., V. ii., VI. xxii.,

IX. xiv., XI. xiii., XIII. vii., XIV.

XV., XVIH. iv., vi., X.

Mang Che-fan, named Ts"h, an officer

of Loo, VI. xiii.
MSng Chwang, the head of the Mrng

family, anterior to Confuciu.s' timt',

XIX. xviii.
MftngE, the posthumous title oiMong-

sun, the head of the M^ng family,

II. T.

Mang family, one of the three great

families of Loo, XVllI. iii., XIX.

xix.
Wang King, honorary title of Chung-
sun Ts'ei;, son of MSng Woo, VIII.

iv.
MSng Kung-ch'o, the head of the Mc nff

or Chung-sun family, in the time of

Confucius, XIV. xii.
Mang-sun, named Ho-ke, the same as

Mang £,11. v.
WSng Woo, honorary title of Che, the

son of Mang E, II. vi., V. vii.
Min, the music-master of Loo, XV. xli.
Min, Min Tsze-k'een, XI. xii.
Min, Tsze-k'een, named Sun, a disciple

of Confucius, VI. vii., XI. ii., iv.,

xiii.
Mung, the eastern, the name of a

mountain, XVI. i.

Nan-kung K'woh, supposed to be the

same as A^on Yung, XIV. vi.
Nan-tsze, the wife of the duke of Wei,

and sister of Prince Chaou, VI. xxvi.
Kan-yung, a disciple of Confucius, V.

1., XI. V.
Kgaou, the son of Han Tsuh (B.C.

21U0), MV. vi.


Ning Woo, honorary epithet of Ning
Yu, an officer of Wei, V. xx.

P'Sng, an ancient worthy, VII. i.
Pe, a place in the state of Loo, VI. vii.

Xl.xxiv., XVI. i., XVII. v.
Pe-kan, an uncle of the tyrant Chow,

XVIII. i.
P'e Shin, a minister of the State of

Ch'ing, XIV. ix.
Peen, the name of a city, XIV. jl.
Peen, a city In Loo, XIV. xiii.
Peih Heih, commandant of Chung

Mow, in the State of Tsin, XVII.

Pih family, XIV. x.

Pih-e, honorary epithet of a worthy

of the Shang dynasty, V. xxii., VII.

xiv., XVI. xii., XVIII. viii.
Pih-kwuh, an officer of Chow, XVIII.

xi.
Pih-new, the denomination of Tsae

Kang, surnamed Yen, a disciple of

Confucius, VI. viii., XI. ii.
Pih-ta, an officer of Chow, XVIII. xi.
Pih-yu, the eldest son of Confucius,

XVI. xiii., XVII. X.

Seang, a musician of Loo, XVIII. ix.

Sije, the State of, XIV. xii.

Seen, an officer under Kung-shiih Wan,

XIV. xix.
Shang, name of Tsze-hea, a disciple of

Confucius, III. viii., XI. xv.
Shaon, the music of Shun, III. xxv.,

VII. xiii.
Shaou Hwuh, minister of Duke Hwan's

brother, Kew, XIV. xvii.
Shaou-leen, a person belonging to one

of the barbarous tribes of the East,

who retired from the world, XVlll.

viii.
She, a district in the State of Ts'oo, VI I.

xviii., XIII. xvi.
She-shuh, named Yew-keih, an officer

of Ch'ing, XIV. ix.
Shih-mun, one of the frontier passes

between Ts'e and Loo, XIV. xli.
Shin Ch'ang, styled Tszo-chow, a dis-
ciple of Confucius, V. x.
Show-yang mountain, in Shan-se,XVI.

xii.
Shiih-hea, an officer of Chow, XVIII.

xi.
Shuh-sun, one of the three great fami-
lies of Loo, II. v., note.
ShSh-sun, Woo-shuh, a chief of the

Shiih-sun family, XIX. xxiii., xxiv.
Shuh-ts'e, honorary epithet of a

worthy of the Shang dynasty, V.

xxii., VU. xiv., XVI. xii., XVIII.


tNDEX II. PROPER NAMES IN THE ANALECTS.


333


Sliuh-yay, an officer of Chow, XVIII.

xi.
Shun, the emperor, VI. xxviii VIII.

xviii., XX., XI 1. xxii., XIV. xlv.,

xy. iv., XX. i.

Sin, Tsang-sin, a disciple of Confucius,
IV. XV., XI. xvii.

Sung, a State in which sacrifices to the
emperors of the Hea dynasty were
maintained by their descendants,
111. ix., VI. xiv.

S/e, the name of Taze-chang, a disciple
of Confucius, XI. xv., xvii.

Szc-ma New, named Kang, a brother
of Hwan T'uy, and a disciple of Con-
fucius, XII, iii., iv., V.

r^-heang, the name of a village, IX. ii.

I'ae mountain, on the border between
Loo and Ts'e, III. vi.

I'ae pih, the eldest son of King T'ae,
and grandfather of WSn the fouudtr
of the Chow dynasty, VIII. i.

I'an-fae Meu-ming, styled Tsze-yu, a
disciple of Confucius, VI. xii.

r'ang, the .dynastic name of the em-
peror Yaou, VIII. XX.

fang, the founder of the Shang dy-
nasty, XII. xxii., XX. i.

I'ang, the State of, XIV. xii.

I'een, the name of Tsang Sih, father
of Ts^ng Sin, and a disciple of Con-
fucius, XI. XXV.

L'ing, the posthumous epithet of Sung,
prince of Loo, III. xix., XIII. xv.

L"'o, an officer of the State of Wei,
styled Tsze-yu, VI. xiv., XIV. xx.

Tsae Go, by name Yu, and styled Tsze-
go, a disciple of Confucius, III.
xxi., VI. xxiv., XI. ii., XVII. xxi.

fsae Yu, a disciple of Confucius, who
slept in the day time, the same as
"the preceding, V. ix.

Ts-ae, the State of, XI. ii,, XVIII. ix.

L's^ng Sih, named Teen, the father of
Ts^ng Sin, andadisciple of Con-
fucius, XI. XXV.

fsSng Sin, styled Tsze-j|u, a disciple
of Confucius, I. iv., ix., IV. xv.,
VIII. iii.— vii., XII. xxiv., XIV.
xxviii., XIX. xvi.— xix.

?sang WSn, the honorary title of Tsang-
sun Shin, a great officer of Loo, V.
xvii., XV. xiii.

Tsang Woo»chung, an officer of Loo,
XIV. xiii., XV.

?s'e, the Stale of, V. xviii., VI. iii.,
xxii.,VlI. xiii., XlV.xxii., XVI. iii.,
XVIII. iii., iv., ix.

'see-yu, the designation of one Luh
T'ung, of Ts'oo, who feigned himself
mad to escape public service, XVlII.v.


Tseih, How-tseih, the minister of agri-
culture to Yaou and Shun, XIV. vi.

Tseih-teaou K'ae, styled Tsze-jo, a dis-
ciple of Confucius, V. v.

Ts'in, the State of, XIV. xvi., XVIII,
ix.

Tso-k'ew Ming, an ancient man of re-
putation, V. xxiv.

Ts'oo, the State of, XVIII. v., ix.

Ts'uy, a great officer of Ts'e, V. xviii.

Ts'ze, the name of Taze-kung, a dis-
ciple of Confucius, I. xv.. 111. xvii.,

V. viii., ix., VI. vi., XIV. xxxi.,
XV. ii., XVII. xxiv.

Tsze-ch'an, named Kung-sun K'eaou,
the chief minister of the State of
Ch'ing, V. XV., XlV.ix., X.

Tsze-chang, the designation of Chuen-
sun Sue, a disciple of Confucius, U.
xviii., TLxii., V. xviii., XI. xix., XII.
vi., xiv., XX., XIV. xliii., XV. v.,
xli., XVII. vi., XIX. i, ii., iii.,
X.X. ii.

Tsze-fuh King-pih, an officer of Loo,

XIV. xxxviii., XIX. xxiii.
Tsze-hca, the designation of Puh Shang,

a disciple of Confucius, I. vii., II.
vii.. Ill, viii., VI. xi., XI. ii., Xll.
v., xxii., XIII. xxvii., xxviii., XIX.
iii. — XV.
Tsze-hwa, the designation of Kung-se,
named Ch'ih, a disciple of Confucius,

VI. iii.

Tsze-kaou, the designation of Ch'ae, a
disciple of Confucius, XI. xxiv.

Tsze-kung, the designation of Twan-
muh Ta'ze, a disciple of Confucius,
1. X., XV., II. xiii.. III. xvii., V. iii.,
viii., xi., xii., xiv., VI. xxviii., VII.
xiv., IX. vi., xii., XI. ii., xii., xv.,
XII. vii., viii,, x., xxiii., XIII. xx.,
xxiv., XIV. xviii., xxx., xxxi.,
xxxvii., XV. ii., v., xxiii., XVII.
xix,, xxiv,, XIX. XX. — xxv.

Tsze-loo, the designation of Chung-
yew, often named simply Yew, a
disciple of Confucius, II. xvii., V.
vi., vii., xiii., xxv., VI. xxvi., VII.
X., xxxiv., IX. XI., xxvi., X. xviii.,
XI. xii., xiv., xxi., xxiv., xxv., XII,
xii,,- XIII, i., iii., xxviii,, XIV,
xiii., xvii., xxiii., xxviii., xli., xlv.,

XV. i., XVII, v., vii., xxiii., XVIU.
vi., vii.

Tsze-sang Pih-tsze, VI. i., VII. xviii,
Tsze-se, the chief minister of Ts'oo,

XIV. X.
Tsze-ts'een,the designation of PeihPuh-

ts'e, a disciple of Confucius, V^ ii.
Tsze-wSn, surnamed Tow, and named

Kuh-y n-t'oo, chief minister of Ts'oO;

V. xviii.


334


SUBJECTS IN THE GREAT LEAENING. IXDEX III.


Tsze-yew, or Yen Few, the designation
of Yen Yen, a disciple of Confucius,
II. vii., VI. xii., XI. ii., XVII. iv.,
XIX. XU.!,

Tsze-yu, a minister of the State of
Ch'ing, XIV. ix.

Tung-le, XIV. ix.

Wan, the king, VIII. xx., IX. v.,

XIX. xxii.
Wan, a duke of Tsin, XIV. xvi.
Wan, a river dividing the States . of

Ts'e and Loo, VI. vii.
Wang-sun Kea, a great officer of Wei,

Hi. xiii., XIV. XX.
We-shang Mow, XIV. xxxiv.
Wei, the State of, VII. xiv., IX. xiv.,

XIII. iii., vii., viii., ix., XIV. xx.,

xlii., XV. i.,XIX. xxii.
Wei, one of the three families which

governed the State of Tsin, XIV.

xii.
Wei-shang Kaou, V. xxiii.
Wei, a small State in Shan-se, XVIII. i.
Woo, the State of, VII. xxx.
Woo, the founder of the Chow dy-

nosty, VIII. XX., XIX. xxii.
Woo, the music of King Woo, III.

XXV.

Woo, a musician of Loo, XVIII. ix.
Woo-ma K'e, VII. xxx.
Woo-shing, the name of a city in Pe,
VI. xii., XVII. iv.

Yang, a musician of Loo, XVIII.

ix.
Yang Foo, a disciple of Xsang-sin,

XIX. xix.
Yang Ho, or Yang Hoo, the principal

minister of the Ke family, XVII. i.
Yaou, the emperor, VI. xxviii., VIII.

xix., XIV. xiv., XX. i.
Yellow river, XVlIl. ix.


Yen, Yen Yew,VJ. iii., XVII. iv.

Yen Hiouy, styled Tsze-yuen,' a dis-
ciple of Confucius, VI. ii., XI. vi.

Yen K'eid, Yeti Yew, VI. x., XI.
xxiii., XIV. xiii.

Yen-loo_, the father of Hwuy, XI. vii.

Yen Pih-new, named Tsze Kang, a
disciple of Confucius, XI. ii.

Yen Yew, named K'ew, and designated
Tsze-yew,^ a disciple of Confucius,
111. vi., V. vii., VI. iii., VII. xiv.,
XL ii., xii., xxi., xxv., Xlll. ix.,
xiv., XVl.i., XIX. xii.

Yen Yuen, named Himty^ and styled
Tsze-yuen, a disciple of Confucius,
V. XXV., VII. X., IX. x., XX., XI. ii.,
vii., viii., xix., xxii., XII. i., XV. x.

Yew, Chung YeWj styled Tsze-loo^ a
disciple of Confucius, II. xvii., V.
vi., vii,, VI. vi., IX. xi., xxvi,, XI.,
xii., xiv., xvii., xx., xxi., xxiii., XII.
xii., XIII. ui,, XV. iu., XVI. i.,
XVI. viii.

Yew Jo, styled Tsze-jo, and Tsze-
yew, a disciple of Confucius, I. ii.,
xii., xiii., XII. ix.

Yin dynasty, II. xxiii., IIL ix., xxi.,
VIII. XX,. XV. X., XVIII. i.

Yu, the emperor, VIII. xviii., xxi.,
XIV. Ti., XX. i.

Yu, the dynastic name of the Emperor
Shun, VIII. XX.

Yu. the historiographer of Wei, XV.
vi.

Yu, Tsae Go, XVII. xxi.

Yu-chung, orWoo-chung, VIII. i. note,
XVIII. viii.

Yuen Jang, a follower of Laou-tsze,
XIV. xlvi.

Yuen Sze, named Been, a disciple of
Confucius, VI. iii.

Yun-yen Yung, styled Chung-kung, n
disciple of Confucius, V. iv., VI. J.


INDEX III.

OF SUBJECTS IN THE GREAT LEARNING.


Ability and worth, importance of a
Kulerappreciating and using, comm.,
X. 14, 16.

A.nalects, quotations from the, comm.,
iv., X. 15.


Ancients, the, illustrated illustrioui
virtue how, text, 4.

Empire, the, rendered peaceful and
1 happy, text, 5, comm., x.


-»Ai sj.^Ej vjjij!ja.± LiHiji-ssia Lisyi,


Vamily, regulating the, text, 4, 5,
eomm , viii., ix.

Heart, the rectification of the, text, 4,
S, coTrem., Tii.

Illustration of illustrious virtue, feici, 1,
4, comm., i.

Kings, why the former are remem-
bered, comm., iii. 4, 5.

Knowledge, perfecting of, iexi, 4, 5,
comm., T.

Litigations, it is best to prevent, comm.,
iv.

Master, the words of the, quoted, comm.,

iii. 2, iv.
Measuring square, principle of the,

comm., X.
Middle kingdom, the, comm., x. 15.
Mind, rectifying the, text, 4, 5, comm.,

vii.

Odes, quotations from the, comm., ii,

3, iii., ix. 6, 7, 8, x. 3, 4, 5.
Order of steps in illustrating virtue,

text, 3, 4, S.

Partiality of the affections, comm., viii.
Passion, influence of, comm., vii.
Teople, renovation of the, text, I,
comm., ii.


Perfecting of knowledge, the, text, 4,

5, comm., v.
Person, the cultivation of the, text, 4,

5, 6, comm., vii., viii.

Eenovation of the people, the, text, 1,

comm., ii.
nesting in the highest excellence, text,

1, 2, comm,., iii.
Root, the, and branches, text, 3, comm.,

iv. ; cultivation of the person the,

text, 6 ; virtue the, comm., x. 6, 7, 8.

Secret watchfulness over himself, cha-
racteristic of the superior man,
comm., vi. 1.

Shoo-kine, the, quotations from, comm.,
i. 1, 2, 3, ii. 2, ix. 2, x. H, 14.

Sincerity of the thoughts, text, i, 5,
comm., vi.

State, the government of the, text, 4, 5,
comm., ix., x.

Steps by which virtue may be illus-
trated, text, 4, 5.

Superior man, character of the, comm.,
ii. 4.

Superior, and mean man, comm., vi.

Virtue, illustrious, text, comm., ii. ; the
root, comm., x. 6, 7, 8.

Wealth a secondary object with a
ruler, comm., x. 7, &c.


INDEX IV.


OF PROPER NAMES IN THE GREAT LEARNING.


Ch'ing, the philosopher, Introductory

note, comm., v. note.
Chow, the State of, comm., ii, 3.
Chow, the tyrant, comm., ix. 4.
Confucius, conc^uf^m^ note to text.

Fan, the uncle of Duke W^n, comm.,
X. 13.

K'ang, honorary epithet of Fung,
brother of King 'Woo, comm., i. 1, ii.
2, ix. 2, X. 11.

K 'e, the name of a river, comm., iii. 4.

Kee, the tyrant, comm. ix. 4,


Mang Hf en, honorary epithet of Chung-
sun Mee, a worthy minister of Loo,
comm., X. 22.

M(.ncius, concluding note to text.

Shun, the emperor, crjmm., ix. 4.

T'ae Ke%, the second emperor of the
Shang dynasty, comm., i. 2.

T'ang, the emperor, comm,, ii. 1.

Xs%ng,the philosopher, cmichidinynote
to text, comm., vi. 3.

Ts'in, the State of, comtn., x. 14.

Ts'oo, the State of, comm., x, 12.


83fi SUBJECTS IN THE DOCTBIXE OF THE MEAN. DsDEX V-


Win the king, comm., iii. 3.

Vaou, the emperor, comm.^ i. 3, ix. 4.


Yin dynasty, comm., x. 5.
Yin, an ancient officer mentioned in
the She-king, comm., x. 4.


INDEX V.


OF SUBJECTS IK THE DOCTRINE OF THE ME-tN-


Analects, q^uotations fiom the, iii.,

xxviii. 5.
Ancestors, worship of, xviii. 2, 3, xix.
Antiquity, the regulations of, cannot

be attested, xxviii. 5, xxix. 2.
Archery, illustrative of the way of the

superior man, xiv. 5.

Benevolence, to be cherished in tread-
ing the path of duty, xx. 4, d.
Burial and mourning, xviii. 3.

Ceremonies, music, &c., can be ordered

only by the emperor, xxviii. 2, 3, 4.
Common men and women may carry

into practice the Mean in its simple

elements, xii. 2, 4.
Completion of everything effected by

sincerity, xxv.

Emperor, certain exclusive prerogatives

of the, xxviii. 2, 3, 4.
Emperor-sage, the, described, xxix.
Equilibrium, the mind in a state of,

i. 4, 5.
Eulogium of Confucius, xxx., xxxi.,

xxxii.

Eame of Confucius universal, xxxi. 4.

Filial piety, of Shun, xvii. ; of King
Woo, and the duke of Chow, xix.

Five duties of universal obligation,
XX. 8.

Forcefulness, in its relation to the prac-
tice of the Mean, x.

Four things to which Confucius had
not attained, xiii. 4.

Government, easy to him who under-
stands sacrificial ceremonies, xix. 6 ;
dependent on the character of the
othcers, and ultimately on that of the
sovereign, xx.

Harmony, the mind in a state of, i. 4,


5 ; combined with firmness, in the
superior man, x. 5.

Heaven, rewarding filial piety in the
case of Shun, and virtue in the case
of Wan, xvii. ; Confucius the equal
ofj xxxi. 3.

Heaven and Earth, order of, dependent
on the equilibrium and harmony oi
the human mind, i. 5 ; the perfectly
sincere man forms a tei-nion with,
xxii. ; Confucius compai'ed to, xxx.
2.

Instruction, definition of, i. 1.
Insubordination, the evil of, xxviii.
Intelligence, how connected with sin-
cerity, xxi.

Knowledge of duties come by in three
different ways, xx. 9.

Lamentation that the path of the Mean

was untrodden, v.
Law to himself, man a, xiii,

Man has the law of the Mean in him-
self, xiii.

Mean, only the superior man can fol-
low the, li. 1 ; the rarity of the prac-
tice of the, iii. ; how it was that few
were able to practise the, iv. ; how
Shun practised the, vi. ; men's ig-
norance of the, shown in their con-
duct, vii. ; how Hwuy held fast the
course of the, viii. ; the difficulty of
attaining to the, ix.; on forcefulness
in its relation to the, x. ; only the
sage can come up to the requirements
of the, xi. 3; the course of the,
reaches far and wide, but yet is secret,
xii. ; common men and women may
practise the, xii. 2 ; orderly advance
in the practice of the, xv. ; Con-
fucius never swerved from the, xxxi.
1.


INDEX V. SUBJECTS IN THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN. 337


Middle kingdom, Confucius' fame over-
spreads the, xxxi. 4.

Nature, definition of, i. I.

Nine standard rules to be followed in

the goTernment of the empire, xx.

12, 13, 14, 15.

Odes, quotations from the, xii. 3, xiii.
2, XT. 2, xvi. 4, xvii. 4, xxvi., xxvii.
7, xxix. 6, xxxiii. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

Passions, harmony of the, i. 4.

Path of duty, dei^nition of, i. 1 ; may

not be left for an instant, i. 2 ; is not

far to seek, xiii.
Praise of Win and Woo, and the duke

of Chow, xviii., xix.
Preparation necessary to success, xx.

16.
Principles of duty, haye their root in

the evidenced will of Heaven, i. 1 ;

to be found in the nature of man,

xii.
Progress in the practice of the Mean,

XV.

Propriety, the principle of, in relation
to the path of duty, xx. 5.

Reciprocity, the law of, xiii. 3, 4.
Eighteousness, chiefly exercised in
honouring the worthy, xx. 5.

Sacrifices, to spiritual beings, xvi. 3 ;
instituted by Woo and the duke of
Chow, xviii. 2, 3; to Heaven and
Earth, xix. 6 ; to ancestors, xviii. ,
xix.

Sage, a, only can come up to the re-
quirements of the mean, xi. 3 ; natur-
ally and easily embodies the right
way, XX. 18 ; the glorious path of,
xxvii. ; Confucius a perfect, xxxi. 1 .

Seasons, Confucius compared to the
four, XXX. 2, 3.

Secret watchfulness over himself cha-
racteristic of the superior man, i. 3.

Self-examination practised by the su-
perior man, xxxiii. 2.

Sincerity, the outgoing of, cannot be
repressed, xvi. 5; the way of Heaven,
XX. 17, 18 ; how to be attained, xx.
19 ; how connected with intelligence.


I xxi. ; the most complete, necessary
; to the full development of the nature,
xxii. ; development of, in those not
naturally possessed of it, xxiii. ; when
entire, can foreknow, xxiv. ; the
completion of everything efi'ected by
xxv. ; the possessor of entire, is the
co-equal of Heaven and Earth, and
is an infinite and an independent
being — a God, xxvi., xxxii. 1.

Singleness, necessary to the practice of
the relative duties, xx. 8; necessary
to the practice of government, xx.
16, 17 i of King Wan's virtue, xxvi.
10.

Sovereign, a, must not neglect personal
and relative duties, xx. 7.

Spirit, the perfectly sincere man is like
a, xxiv.

Spiritual beings, the operation and in-
fluence of, xvi. : the emperor-sage
presents himself before, without any
doubts, xxix. 3, 4.

Steps in the practice of the Mean, xv.

Superior man is cautious, and watchful
over himself, i. 2, 5 ; only can follow
the Mean, ii. 2 ; combines harmony
with firmness, x. 5 ; the way of, is
far-reaching and yet secret, xii. ;
distinguished by entire sincerity, xiii.
4 ; in every variety of situation pur-
sues the Mean, and finds his rule
in himself, xiv. ; pursues his course
with determination, xx. 2U, 21 ; en-
deavours to attain to the glorious
path of the sage, xxvii. 6, 7 ; prefers
concealment of his virtue, while the
mean man seeks notoriety, xxxiii. 1.

Three kings, the founders of the three

dynasties, xxix. 3.
Three virtues, wherewith the relative

duties are practised, xx. 8.
Three things important to a sovereign,

xxix. i.
Three hundred rules of ceremony, and

three thousand rules of demeanour,

xxvii. 3.

Virtue in its highest degree and iufiu-

ence, xxxiii. 4, 5, 6.
Virtuous course, the commencement

and completion of a, xxxiii.


22


338


INDEX VI.


OF PROPER NAMES IN THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN.


Ch'ing, the philosopher, Introdtictory

note.
Chow dynasty, xxviii. 5.
Chow, die duke of, xviii. 3, six.
Chung-ne, designation of Confucius, ii.

1, XXX. 1.

Confucian school, Introdtuitory note.

Gae, the duke of Loo, xx. 1.

Hea dynasty, xxviii. 5.

Hwa, the name of a mountain, xxvi. 9.

Hwuy, a disciple of Confucius, viii.

Ke, a small State in which sacrifices
were maintained to the emperors of
the Hea dynasty, xxviii. 6.

Ke-leih, the duke, who received from
Woo the title of king, xviii. 2, 3.

Mencius, Introductory note.

Shun, the emperor, vi., xvii. 1, xxx. 1.


Sung, a State in which sacrifices were
maintained to the emperors of the
Yin dynasty, xxviii. 5.

T'ae, the duke, T'an-foo, who received
from Woo the title of king, xviii,
2, 3.

Tsze 100, a disciple of Confucius, x. 1.

Tsze-sze, Introductory note; concbuding
Tiotes to chapters i , xii., xxi., xxxiii.

WSn, the king, xvii. 4, xviii., xx. 2,

xxvi. 10, xxx. 1.
Woo, the king, xviii., xix., xx. 2,

xxx. 1.

Yaou, the emperor, xxx. 1.

Yin dynasty, xxviii. 5.

Yoh, the name of a mountain, xxvi. 9.

Yung, a o^tinguished scholar, A.D.
1064 — 1085, concluding note to chap-
ter i.


END OP VOL. I.


Printed ,&y BAllantvne, Hanson & Co
Edinburgh and London
