|5tbrarg


FOLK  BELIEFS  OF  THE  SOUTHERN  NEGRO


FOLK  BELIEFS  OF  THE
SOUTHERN  NEGRO


BY

XEW'BELL  XILES  ?L"CKETT.  Ph.D.


-  CHAPEL  HILL

THE  UNTVXRSITY  OF  NORTH  CAROLES'A  PRES?

LOXEX^X:  HTMPHREY  MILFORD

1*55


pg


Copyright/  1926,y  By
The  University  of  North  Carolina  Press


Peesses  of

Edwards  &  Broughton  Company
RALEIGH


TO

MY  WIFE


^^62f


PREFACE

Overwhelmed  by  the  frenzy  of  a  "holy  dance"  a
Negro  minister  of  my  acquaintance  panted:  "You
sees  me  dancin',  folks,  but  de  skip's  on  de  inside!"
After  twenty  years  or  more  of  close  association  with
the  Negro,  an  honorary  membership  in  "de  Mount
Zion  Missionary  Baptist  Church,"  and  several  years'
experience  as  an  amateur  "hoodoo-doctor,"  I  am
convinced  that  "de  signs  an'  wonders"  disclosed  here
are  but  outward  manifestations  of  a  well-nigh  inscrut-
able Negro  soul.  My  peep  behind  the  curtains  has
destroyed  for  me  the  fable  that  "the  Southern  white
man  thoroughly  understands  the  Negro,"  and  has
opened  my  eyes  to  the  importance  of  objective  study
as  a  means  of  establishing  more  cordial  relationships.

In  a  general  sort  of  way  the  Southerner  does  under-
stand the  Negro,  but  this  understanding  is  limited
almost  completely  to  the  practical  affairs  of  life,  and
consists  chiefly  in  knowing  how  to  make  the  Negro
work.  Regarding  the  feelings,  emotions,  and  the
spiritual  life  of  the  Negro  the  average  white  man  knows
little.  Should  some  weird,  archaic,  Negro  doctrine
be  brought  to  his  attention  he  almost  invariably
considers  it  a  "relic  of  African  heathenism,"  though
in  four  cases  out  of  five  it  is  a  European  dogma  from
which  only  centuries  of  patient  education  could  wean
even  his  own  ancestors.  This  confusion  of  African
and  European  lore  only  intensifies  cultural  differences,
and  for  this  reason  I  have  modified  this  volume,
originally  a   dissertation   presented   for   the  degree  of


Vlll


Preface


Doctor  of  Philosophy  in  Yale  University,  into  its
present  form.  In  essence  a  study  of  acculturation,
it  centers  chiefly  around  folk-lore  and  superstition,
because  in  almost  all  other  affairs  of  Negro  life  the
African  element  has  been  entirely  supplanted  by  the
European.  Its  aim  is  to  present  these  Negro  folk-
beliefs,  to  show  their  origin  whenever  possible,  and  to
indicate  some  of  the  general  principles  governing  the
transmission  and  content  of  folk-lore  in  general.  My
personal  work  among  the  older  rural  Negroes  has
shown  me  the  necessity  of  haste  in  collecting  this  fast-
disappearing  lore.  Several  of  my  best  informants
during  the  year  have  passed  on  to  the  Great  Beyond,
and  daily  many  pages  of  irretrievable  folk-knowledge
are  being  erased  in  a  similar  manner.

While  the  lore  presented  here  is  but  a  smattering  of
the  material  existent,  yet  considerable  pains  have  been
taken  to  make  it  as  representative  as  possible.  Close
personal  field  work  has  been  supplemented  by  question-
naires sent  out  to  all  the  Negro  colleges  of  the  South.
In  this  way  some  ten  thousand  beliefs  were  gathered,
most  of  them  coming  from  Mississippi,  Alabama,  and
Georgia — the  heart  of  the  "Black  Belt" — though
material  was  obtained  from  every  state  of  the  South,
giving  an  index  to  the  spread  of  each  particular  belief.
About  two-thirds  of  these  ten  thousand  beliefs  were
duplications,  and  of  the  thirty-five  hundred  or  so
retained,  almost  a  third  were  collected  personally.
A  careful  survey  of  the  available  published  material
indicates  that  almost  twenty-four  hundred  of  these
beliefs  have  never  before  been  published.  This  col-
lection, including  many  citations  from  published
sources,  constitutes  the  basis  of  the  present  discussion.


Preface  ix

I  am  under  obligations  to  Professor  A.  G.  Keller
and  M.  R.  Davie  of  Yale  University,  whose  courses
iirst  opened  my  eyes  to  the  possibility  of  a  scientific
study  of  societal  relations.  Again  I  am  indebted  to
Professor  J.  E.  Cutler,  who  has  read  the  manuscript
and  offered  many  valuable  suggestions,  and  to
Mr.  W.  G.  Thayer,  Librarian  of  the  John  G.  White
Collection  of  Folk-lore  at  the  Cleveland  Public
Library,  whose  assistance  in  regard  to  source  material
has  been  of  inestimable  value.  Without  the  co-
operation of  the  Negro  colleges  and  the  assistance
of  my  four  hundred  informants  listed  at  the  end  of  the
text  my  efforts  would  have  availed  little.  To  Hattie
Harris,  Ed  Murphy,  and  especially  to  Frank  Dick-
erson,  who  now  can  speak  only  through  these  printed
pages,  I  owe  particular  gratitude,  not  to  mention
Mrs.  Allen  B.  Puckett,  Robert  Bryant,  Professor  L.  G.
Painter  and  many  others  whose  names  appear  fre-
quently throughout  this  volume.

My  greatest  thanks,  however,  are  due  to  my  wife
and  to  my  mother,  whose  inspiration  and  assistance,
not  only  in  the  preparation  of  the  manuscript  but  also
in  the  collection  of  lore,  have  enabled  me  to  present
this  work  in  its  present  form.

•^Columbus,  Mississippi,  iN  .    JN  .    r  .

August,  1925


CONTENTS


I.  Practical  and  Emotional  Backgrounds 1

Antiques.  Mental  Heirlooms.  Source  of  American  Slaves.  Physique
and  Folk-lore.  The  African  Potpourri.  Laziness,  Humor,  and  Sex-
uality. Other  Traits.  Vocational  Characteristics.  Language  a  Uni-
fying Force.  Mutilated  English.  True  Linguistic  Survivals.  The
Conservatism  of  Verse.  Other  Possible  Survivals.  Slave  English.
Language  and  Lore.  African  Marriage  Customs.  American  Survivals
Few.  Law  and  Government.  Fewer  Restrictions  upon  Self-gratifi-
cation. Grandiloquent  Speech.  Courtship  Formulas.  Animal  Folk-
tales. Fossilized  Customs.  African  Characters.  The  Dog.  African
Origins.  Devil-tales  and  Others.  The  Tar-baby  Story.  Erroneous
Nature-beliefs.  Snakes.  Miscellaneous  Beliefs.  Negro  Jokes.  Laugh-
ing at  the  White  Man.  Typical  Riddles.  Proverbs.  Games.  Survi-
vals of  African  Music.  Slave  Dancing.  "Holy  Dances."  Songs  from  the
Soul.  "Jump-up  Song."  African  Singing.  Negro  Song  Structure.
Sovereignty  of  Religious  Songs.  Rag-time  and  Jazz.  Education  by
Song.     Rhythmic  Lore.     Funeral  Fun.     Conclusion..

II.  Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches 79

The  Concept  of  Death.  European  Acculturation.  Dying  in  Ease.
Prophylactic  Measures.  Dying  Whispers.  Preparation  for  Burial.
Stygian  Sign-posts.  Wakes.  The  Funeral  Procession.  Negro  Mourn-
ing Customs.  Significance  in  Africa.  Clothes  and  Crepe.  Multiple
Funerals.  Grave-lore.  Graveyard  Omens.  Dead  Detectives.  Trouble-
some Spirits.  Ghost-dodging.  Gifts  to  the  Dead.  Grave  Decorations.
"Layin'  de  Sperrit."  The  African  Soul-concept.  Survivals  of  the
"Dream-soul."  The  Srahman  and  other  Souls.  Ghost-land.  Poly-
theism in  the  South.  Negro  "Ha'nts."  Brawny  Specters.  Ecto-
plasmic  Manifestations.  Serious  Business.  Cadaverous  Avengers.
Ghastly  Associates.  Mutilated  Specters.  The  Mark  of  the  Beast.
Spookish  Humor.  English  Phantoms.  The  Jack-o'-my-Lantern.  The
Origin  of  Jack.  Flying  Horses  and  Mermaids.  "Double-sighted"
Folks.  How  to  See  Ghosts.  "Fightin'  de  Ghosses."  Summary  of
Ghost-lore.  The  Absence  of  Fairies.  Witches.  Metamorphosis.
Ridden  by  Witches.  Vampires  and  Ghouls.  Driving  Off  and  Capturing
Witches.  Brooms  and  Silver  Bullets.  Hags  and  Horses.  Sharp  Points
and  Salt.    Skin,  Body,  and  Spirit.     The  Counting  Instinct.     Conclusion.

III.  VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION 167

Contributory  Factors.  Reality  of  the  Belief.  The  Fetishistic  Foun-
dation. Spirit  and  Object.  Homes  for  Spirits.  Witchcraft  and  Re-
ligion, The  Fetish-dance.  Origin  of  the  Voodoo  Cult.  African  Sur-
vivals. Marie  Laveau.  Louisiana  Voodoo  Rites.  Diabolic  Festivals.
Rites  in  Other  Localities.  The  "Judas  Eye."  Initiations.  New
Orleans  Today.     Modern  Voodoo   Seances.     In   Other  Localities.     The


xil  Contents

African  Witch-doctor.  The  Man-fetish.  Professional  Obligations.
The  Southern  Hoodoo-doctor.  Other  Pecularities.  Visions  and  Meta-
morphosis. A  Self-made  Hoodoo-doctor.  Professional  Duties.  Satis-
fied Patients.  Common  Sense  Treatment.  Evasive  Instructions.  In
Africa.  Out-hoodooing  the  Hoodoos.  Credulity  of  the  Hoodoo-doctors.
Conjurers  by  Accident.  Symptoms  of  Conjuration.  African  Charms.
Survivals  in  America.  The  Fetish  Color.  Pre-conjural  Preparations.
"Layin'  de  Trick."  New  Orleans  Charms.  Tapers,  Feathers,  and
Coffins.  Other  Charms.  General  Characteristics.  Conjure-balls,  Bot-
tles, and  Bags.  "Tricken-bags"  and  "Luck-balls."  Typical  Negro
"Hands."  Other  Ingredients.  Conjurers  Made  to  Order.  A  European
Case.

IV.  VooDOOisM   AND   CoNJUEATiON — Continued 242

Images.  Photographs.  Roots.  Graveyard  Dirt.  Reptiles  in  the
Body.  Reptilian  Complications.  "Lockin'  de  Bowels."  The  "Black
Cat  Bone."  Practical  African  Witchcraft.  Where  Ghosts  are  Real.
Negro  Love-charms.  Winning  and  Holding.  "Shamin'  yo'  Fairer."
Home-breaking.  "Good-Bye,  Enemy."  Running  Water,  Running  Men.
Calling  the  Absent.  Insanity  Charms.  "Dustin'  Hats."  Softening
Hearts.  Job  Getters.  Dodging  the  Law.  Talismanic  Watch-dogs.
Circean  Detectives.  Gambling,  Debt-getting,  and  Other  Charms.  Dis-
cipline and  Train-stopping.  Other  Practical  Applications.  Preven-
tives of  Conjuration.  Red  Flannel  and  Silver.  Pepper,  Salt,  and
Frizzly  Chickens.  Horseshoes  and  Candles.  Miscellaneous  Preven-
tives. Diagnosing  Conjuration.  Finding  the  "Hand."  "Turnin'  de
Trick."  Curing  the  Conjured.  The  Power  of  Faith.  Reptiles  Re-
moved. Hoodoing  for  Science.  Headaches,  Bites,  and  Hoodoo.  Fooled
to  Life.

V.  Positive  Control-Signs:  Minor  Charms  and  Cures 311

Distinction  Between  Signs  and  Hoodoo.  Positive  and  Negative
Control-Signs.  Prophetic  Signs.  Charms  and  Amulets.  Animal-
Taming.  The  Feminine  Touch.  The  Cross  Symbol.  Controlling  the
Rain.  Snakes.  Poultry  and  Agriculture.  Lost  Things,  Clothes,  and
Wind-making.  Aids  to  the  Love-lorn.  Your  Future  Mate.  Wedding
Days  and  Colors.  Contraceptives.  Pre-natal  Influences.  Child-birth.
Confinement  and  After.  To  the  Manner  Born.  Food  and  Clothing.
Nails,  Hair,  and  Associates.  Babies  and  Brooms.  Birthmarks  and
Thrush.  Fretfulness.  Stuttering.  Other  Ills.  For  Future  Greatness.
Mirrors  and  Hats.  Tooth-cutters.  New  and  Old  Teeth.  Harnessing
the  Moon.  New  Year's  Day.  The  Watery  Grave.  General  Good  Luck.
Wishing.  Fishing  and  Hunting.  The  Future.  Practicality  of  Signs.
Folk-remedies.  Germs  and  Ghosts.  Rheumatism.  Backache.  Chills
and  Fever.  Sore  Throat.  "Fallen  Palate."  Colds  and  Other  Res-
piratory Diseases.  Whooping  Cough.  Hiccoughs.  Toothache.
"Shingles."  Wens  and  Goiters.  Earache.  Sprains  and  Cramps.  Nose-
Bleed.  Wounds.  Snake-bite.  Boils  and  Headache.  Ringworm  and
Warts.  Eye-trouble.  Fits  and  Scrofula.  Venereal  Diseases.  "Female-
•complaint."    Miscellaneous   Ills.     Panaceas     Prevention  of  Disease.


Contents  xili

VI.  Negative  Control-Signs:   Taboos 393

Negro  Taboos.  Etiquette  With  a  Vengeance.  Feminine  Lore.
Sweeping.  Hair  and  Nails.  Ominous  Friday.  Unlucky  Thirteen.
The  Perils  of  Sewing.  Wash-day.  The  Imp  of  the  Kitchen.  House-
hold-lore. Chairs,  Lamps,  and  Clocks.  Edged-tools  and  Other  Things.
The  Trail  to  a  Whipping.  Coffee-drinking  and  Mirrors.  Peanuts  and
Policemen.  Dangerous  Carpentry.  The  Rules  of  Sleep.  Signs  at
Sunrise.  Miscellaneous  Domestic  Beliefs.  Vesta's  Creed.  Tree-plant-
ing. Marriage.  Turning  Back.  Hands  Behind  Head.  Walking  Back-
wards. Teeth-sucking.  Shoe-lore.  The  Elusive  Fish.  "Dont's"
for  the  Farmer.  The  Borrowed  Hat.  Money  and  Trade.  Friendship
Hints.  Personal  Etiquette.  The  "Spring-keeper."  Animal  Taboos.
The  Power  of  the  Petticoat.     Conclusion.

VII.  Prophetic   Signs   or   Omens 439

Nature  of  Prophetic  Signs.  The  Swish  of  Skirts.  Salt-spilling.
The  Flame  of  Fate.  General  Household  Omens.  Shoes  and  Clothing.
Eyes  that  See  Ahead.  Follow  Your  Nose.  Ears  that  Talk.  Feet,
Arms,  and  Face.  Sneezing-signs.  Hair.  Features  and  Fate.  Love  and
Wedding  Omens.  Cross-eyed  Folks.  The  Deadly  Female.  Other
Human  Omens.  The  Wise  Old  Moon.  The  Voice  of  the  Elements.
Animal  Harbingers.  Cats.  Brer  Rabbit.  The  Rabbit  Foot.  Horses.
Horseshoes.  Dog-language.  Miscellaneous  Animal  Omens.  The  Feath-
ered Prophet.  Shutting  the  Owl's  Mouth.  Poultry.  Wild  Birds.  The
Buzzard.  The  Friendly  Redbird.  Insects.  Plants.  Pins.  Things
Found.  Dream-signs.  Snake-dreams.  Visions  of  Death  and  Burial.
Dreams  of  Meat.  Eggs.  Other  Common  Dream-signs.  Representative
Specimens.  Weather-lore.  Four-footed  Forecasters.  Aches  and  In-
sects. Birds  and  Weather.  Wild  Birds.  Vegetable  Weather-prophets.
Reliable  Weather-signs.  Moon  and  Stars.  The  Sky.  Sunshine  and
Rain.    Conclusion.

VIII.  Christianity  and  Superstition  :  Conclusion 520

Supplements  to  Christianity.  Negro  Religion  Uniform.  Polythe-
istic African  Religion.  Survivals  in  America.  African  Concept  of
Sin.  Slave  Religion.  Negro  Church  a  Social  Center.  Emotional
Religion.  "Praise  Houses."  The  Emotion-expert.  The  Sermon.  "A
Slipperance  uv  de  Tongue."  "Comin'  Thru."  Resemblance  to  Africa.
White  Examples.  Negro  Visions.  "Mrs.  God."  The  "Foot-wash"
and  "Holy  Dances."  Christianity  and  Culture.  Christianity  in
Africa.  The  Devil  in  Africa  and  America.  Negro  Devil-forms.  The
Faust  Legend.  Minor  Devil-beliefs.  Christ  and  Other  Sacred  Char-
acters. Holy  Herbs.  God  and  the  Lizard.  Fetishistic  Christianity.
Christianized    Voodooism.      The    Lucky    Saint   Joseph.      Religion    and


xiv  Contents

Conjure.  Bibliomancy.  Superstitious  Conversion.  Dreams  and  Re-
ligion. Aleatory  Self-maintenance.  Primitive  and  Civilized  Religion.
"Religion  in  Overalls."  Meaning  of  Superstition.  Eliminating  Super-
stition. Literary  Education  Ineffective.  Suggested  Training.  Race
Pride.     Conclusion.

IX.  References   Cited - 583

X.  List  of  Informants 599


ILLUSTRATIONS


A    Negro    Conjure-Doctor Frontispiece.

Songsters  of  Note Facing  page    63

Negro  Graves  in  Mississippi "                106

Mississippi     Hoodoo-Doctors "        "       201

Making  a  "Hand" "        "283

Nutmeg,  Red  Flannel,  and  Silver    ...  "        "314

Some  of  My  Informants "                385

Two  Volumes  OF  Folk-Lore ''                438

Possession  by  the  Spirit "         '       539


FOLK  BELIEFS  OF  THE  SOUTHERN  NEGRO


CHAPTER  I

PRACTICAL  AND  EMOTIONAL  BACKGROUND

Antiques.  No  one  appreciates  the  musty  byways
and  corners  of  life  more  than  the  collector  of  antiques.
The  new  chases  the  old  from  parlor  to  bedroom,  to
kitchen,  to  attic  or  woodshed,  until  finally  the  time-
honored  relic  is  either  converted  into  kindling-wood
or  else  is  pounced  upon  by  some  antiquist  and  restored
to  its  original  place  of  honor.  This  dust-sifting  is  of
double  interest  in  the  South  since  the  cycle  of  degen-
eration is  twice  repeated.  Grandfather's  chair,  pos-
sibly a  splendid  old  Colonial  piece,  passes  from  the
attic  of  the  white  planter  to  the  "bes'  room"  of  his
Negro  servant,  from  which  it  continues  its  usual
route  to  the  kitchen  and  woodshed  as  the  Negro
pride  develops  a  longing  for  "new  style  stuff."  Thus
the  Negro  has  very  often  become  the  custodian  of
many  things  which  contributed  much  to  the  glory  of
the  Old  South,  and  the  desire  for  a  four-poster  support
for  a  veneered  genealogy  has  sent  even  the  most
supercilious  whites  scrambling  beneath  the  social  bars
into  the  dust  of  many  a  humble  smokehouse  and  barn.
In  this  pay-dirt  are  found  many  nuggets  of  mahogany,
walnut  or  rosewood — spindle-beds  and  chairs,  delicate
tete-a-tetes,  old  clocks,  spinning-wheels,  what-nots,
gate-leg  tables,  quaint  old  chests  and  dressers  in
various  stages  of  dilapidation — battered,  whitewashed,
weather-beaten,  smeared  with  enamel  from  the  ten-
cent  store,  patched  up  with  rawhide  or  hickory,  or
hammered  together  with  mutilated  fragments  of  other


2         Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

masterpieces  Into  the  most  mongrel  mishmash  Imagin-
able. And  yet,  In  spite  of  paint,  pounding,  and
patching,  the  master-touch  of  Chippendale,  Sheraton,
and  others,  and  the  French  Influence  from  New
Orleans  and  elsewhere  are  clearly  discernible.

Mental  Heirlooms.  Of  no  less  Interest  are  the
mental  heirlooms  of  the  Old  South.  Here  again
choice  Items  of  folk-lore  were  handed  down  from  the
white  master  to  the  better  class  of  slaves  with  whom
he  had  more  friendly  contact.  These  European  beliefs
were  later  forgotten  by  the  white  man  and  relegated
by  the  more  advanced  Negro  to  the  garret  of  mental
life;  but  in  the  more  Illiterate  Negro  sections,  and
especially  In  the  rural  sections — the  very  woodshed
of  Negro  life — may  be  found  many  fragments  of  early
European  thought.  Mutilated  and  half-forgotten,
smeared  with  the  veneer  of  culture,  and  hammered
together  with  Items  of  "book-larnin',''  health  prop-
aganda, Scripture,  and  what  not,  this  miscellany
nevertheless  shows  the  Negro  to  be,  at  least  In  part,
the  custodian  of  former  beliefs  of  the  white.  But  the
task  of  ascertaining  the  component  elements  is  very
much  more  difficult  with  antique  lore  than  with
antique  furniture.  The  Influences  creating  Negro
furniture  were  definitely  European  or  American,  but
with  Negro  folk-knowledge  the  African  ^  past  enters
In  and  must  be  considered  before  any  accurate  analysis
of  these  beliefs  can  be  attempted.  Ignorance  creates
an  air  of  mystery,  and  Africa  Is  too  often  regarded  as

1  While  there  are  a  few  isolated  cases  of  traits  acquired  from  the  American
Indians,  in  the  main  the  plantation  Negroes  were  isolated  so  effectively  from
these  savage  folk,  who  spoke  an  entirely  different  language,  that  little  im-
portant contact  occurred.  By  the  time  the  importation  of  slaves  for  the
cotton  plantations  was  in  full  sway  the  Indian  was  a  negligible  element  in
the  environment.


Practical  and  Emotional  Background  3

a  sort  of  Cimmerian  jumbo,  responsible  for  all  the
"devilment"  of  the  Negro  ^  regardless  of  the  insa-
lubriousness  of  his  particular  American  environment.

Sources  of  American  Slaves.  Roughly  speaking,
the  six  to  twelve  million  ^  Negro  slaves  brought  to
America  came  from  that  portion  of  the  West  Coast  of
Africa  between  the  Senegal  and  the  Congo  rivers.
True  enough  these  West  Coast  slave  markets  did  in
turn  obtain  some  slaves  from  far  in  the  interior  of  the
continent,  ^  but  the  principal  markets  were  about  the
mouths  of  the  Senegal,  Gambia,  Niger,  and  Congo,
and  the  majority  of  blacks  were  obtained  from  this
West  Coast  region.  *  Here  was  the  locality  closest  to
America,  the  one  with  the  densest  population  (more
than  half  the  total  population  of  Africa  was  located
in  this  western  equatorial  zone),  *  with  the  inhab-
itants consisting  largely  of  the  more  passive  inland
people  driven  to  the  coast  by  inland  tribes  expanding
towards  the  sea.  ^  This  mild  and  pacific  disposition
was  enhanced   by  the  tropical  climate  and  excessive

1  With  the  exception  of  direct  quotations  the  term  Negro  will  be  used  to
mean  Afro-American,  while  the  term  African  will  be  employed  for  African
Negroes.

2  See  Work,  M.  N.,     Negro  Year  Book,  (1918-1919),  p.  151.

^  For  some  idea  of  the  extent  of  this  contributing  area,  see  Krehbiel,  H.  E.,
Afro-American  Folksongs,  pp.  56-57.  Conrad,  Georgia  B.,  Reminiscences
of  a  Southern  Woman,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  30  (1901),  p.  252.  Park,  R.  E.,
Journal  Negro  History,  vol.  4  (1919),  p.  117.  Work,  M.  N.,  Negro  Year  Book
(1918-1919),  p.  151.  Cable,  G.  W.,  The  Dance  in  Place  Congo,  Century
Magazine,  vol.  31  (1886),  p.  522.

*  Weatherford,  W.  D.,  The  Negro  from  Africa  to  America,  pp.  29-30.
Brawley,  B.  G.,  Social  History  of  the  American  Negro,  p.  17.  Brawley,  B.  G.,
Short  History  of  the  American  Negro,  pp.  1-2.  Burton,  R.  F.,  Wit  and
Wisdom  from  West  Africa,  p.  387.  Aimes,  H.  H.  S.,  African  Institutions  in
America,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  18  (1905),  p.  15.

6  Simpson,  B.  L.,     The  Conflict  of  Colour,  pp.  236-37.

^  See  Tillinghast,  J.  A.,  The  Negro  in  Africa  and  America,  p.  21.  Keane,
A.  N.,  Man;  Past  and  Present,  p.  54.  Wilberforce,  W.,  The  Abolition  of
the  Slave  Trade,  pp.  86-87.  Hutchinson,  H.  N.,  The  Living  Races  of  Man-
kind, p.  332.


4         Folk  Beliefs  of  the   Southern  Negro

humidity  of  the  coast.  ^  The  lack  of  beasts  of  burden  ^
forced  pastoral  tribes  into  agriculture,  and  native
slavery  (sometimes  cruel,  ^  but  generally  milder  than
the  American  form) "  grew  up  as  a  natural  concom-
itant. Thus  we  have  in  this  section  of  Africa  a  people,
for  the  most  part,  with  an  easy-going  disposition ;  located
in  great  numbers  in  that  section  of  Africa  closest  to
the  New  World;  accustomed  to  agriculture  and  to
human  slavery;  and  a  people  of  good  physique — a
quality  further  enhanced  by  the  selective  activity  of
the  slave  trade  itself.  ^  It  is  small  wonder  that,
except  for  a  few  slaves  taken  from  the  Zambezi  and
Mozambique,  the  great  majority  of  American  slaves
trace  back  their  origin  to  this  western  seaboard.

Physique  and  Folk-Lore.  A  detailed  anthropological
discussion  of  these  West  African  tribes  is  aside  from
our  present  objective.  It  is  true  that  the  physical
characteristics  of  a  people  affect  their  folk-beliefs,  but
only  in  a  general  sort  of  way.  Thus  the  fetish  figures
in  the  African  Collection  at  the  U.  S.  National  Museum
reflect  accurately  the  flat  noses  and  kinky  hair  of  the
makers  who  modeled  their  gods  in  the  image  of  African
man.  A  folk  predisposed  to  rheumatism  would  be
naturally  expected  to  stress  cures  for  that  disease  in
their  folk-medicines,  and  a  people  with  a  high  infant
mortality  to  hunt  about  for  teething  aids.  Nature
made  Africans  black,  and  ethnocentrism,  based  upon
this  natural  feature,  always  declares  in  the  African
story  that  all  men  were  at  first  made  black,  but  that

1  Tillinghast,  J.  A.,     The  Negro  in  Africa  and  America,  p.  10.

2  Ratzel,  F.,     History  of  Mankind,  vol.  3,  p.  115.
'  See  Race  Problems  of  the  South,  p.  142.

*  For  a  more  detailed  discussion,  see  Ellis,  A.  B.,  Tshi-speaking  Peoples,
pp.  289-94.  Nassau,  R.  H.,  Fetichism  in  West  Africa,  p.  15.  Chatelain,  H.,
African  Folk-Life,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  10  (1897),  p.  'S2.

^  Tillinghast,  J.  A.,     The  Negro  in  Africa  and  America,  p.  106  ff.


Practical  and  Emotional  Background  5

when  Cain  killed  Abel  he  turned  white  from  fear;  ^
and  in  Maryland  ^  and  Mississippi,  ^  at  least,  pre-
cisely the  same  belief  still  survives.  Notwithstanding
the  recognition  of  the  inevitable  character  of  the
color  code  in  the  South,  race  pride  hangs  pictures  of
heaven,  dusky  with  black  angels,  in  many  lowly  Negro
cabins,  and  buys  Bibles  containing  pictures  of  these
same  black  angels,  at  enormous  profits  to  the  pub-
lisher. ^  Man  notices  that  which  affects  him  most,
and  interprets  the  world  in  terms  of  himself — thus
physical  qualities  are  at  least  to  be  kept  constantly
in  mind  in  any  discussion  of  superstitions.

The  African  Potpourri.  A  Mississippi  Negro,  after
ineffectually  trying  to  dispatch  his  "techous"  wife  with
an  axe  and  an  unloaded  shotgun,  came  to  "de  second-
han'  sto',''  to  purchase  a  revolver  with  which  to
finish  his  ghastly  errand.  To  his  surprise  the  im-
pecunious trader  produced  two  splendid  firearms.
"Lawd,  Mistah,  Cindy  ain'  wurth  no  twenty-dollah
killin',''  he  exclaimed.  Then,  looking  at  the  weapons
again,  "Here  I  wus  thinkin'  you  didn't  hab  nuthin'
much,  an'  dere  you  Is  wid  dose  two  fine  guns.  De
Scripture  sho  wus  rite  when  hit  sed,  'Bettah  treat
ebbybody  rite  'caze  you  nebbah  kin  tell  what  dey's
got.'  "  ^  In  the  case  of  the  Southern  Negro  it  is  always
more  than  difficult  to  tell  "what  dey's  got"  from  the
viewpoint    of    tribal    origin.     Roughly    speaking,    the

1  Kingsley,  M.  H.,  West  African  Studies,  pp.  384-85.  Burton,  R.  F.,
Wit  and  Wisdom  from  West  Africa,  p.  124.

2  Bergen,  F.  D.,  Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7  (1899),
p.  80.

'  141.  The.se  numerals  refer  to  the  informants  listed  at  the  close  of  the
text.  Thus  informant  141  will  be  found  to  be  Hattie  Harris,  Columbus,
Mississippi.

*  For  an  example  of  this  latter  form  of  exploitation,  see  Bok,  E.  W.,  The
Americanization  of  Edivard  Bok  (21st  ed.,  Scribners,  1922),  p.  141.

Ml.


6         Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

native  peoples  of  Africa  on  the  West  Coast  between
the  twentieth  degrees  of  latitude  north  and  south,  may
be  divided  into  two  classes,  the  Bantus  and  the  Su-
danese or  Negritians.  ^  The  Bantus,  occupying  all  of
Southern  Africa  below  the  fourth  degree  of  north
latitude,  "have  a  uniformity  of  language,  tribal  or-
ganization, family  customs,  judicial  rules  and  regu-
lations, funeral  rites,  and  religious  beliefs  and  prac-
tice." 2  The  so-called  Sudanese,  on  the  other  hand,
are  not  at  all  a  homogeneous  people.  From  the  Niger
to  the  Senegal  there  is  a  regular  patchwork  of  in-
dividual, independent  tribes  having  little  in  common
as  regards  race,  custom,  or  religion.  ^  In  this  African
hodge-podge  the  precise  ancestry  of  particular  Negro
groups  Is  almost  irretrievably  lost.  We  know  that
such  tribes  as  the  Mpongive  ^  and  the  Iboes  ^  furnished
many  of  the  American  slaves,  at  times  leaving
survivals  of  their  language  and  customs  in  the  New
World.  There  are  many  indications  that  the  same  is
true  of  the  Yorubans  ^  and  Kroomen  ^  and  other
tribes,  but  we  have  no  guide  as  to  the  quota  of  slaves
furnished  by  each.  An  analysis  of  the  individual
culture  of  each  of  these  heterogeneous  tribes  is  too
broad  a  subject  to  be  attempted  in  the  present  writing
even  If  the  data  were  complete.  Furthermore  such
an  analysis  is  by  no  means  necessary.  It  Is  of  interest
to  know  that  the  cannibalistic  Fans  did  not  reach  the
coast  until  about   1850,  ^  that  the  tribes   of  Ashanti


1  Dowd,  Jerome.,     The  Negro  Races,  vol.  1,  p.  xi  and  78  ff.

2  Nassau,  R.  H.,     Felichism  in  West  Africa,  p.  L

3  Kingsley,  M.  H.,     West  African  Studies,  pp.  38-39.

*  Milligan,  R.  H.,     The  Fetish  Folk  of  West  Africa,  p.  43.
^  Basden,  G.  T.,     Among  the  Iboes  of  Nigeria,  p.  104.
8  Ellis,  A.  B.,     Yoruba-speaking  Peoples,  p.  109.

^  Griffith,  T.  R.,     On  the  Races  Inhabiting  Sierra  Leone,  J.  A.  /.,  vol.  xvi
(1887),  pp.  300-304.

8  Plutchinson,  H.  N.,     Living  Races  of  Mankind,  p.  347.


Practical  and  Emotional  Background  7

and  Dahomey  were  very  militant,  ^  that  the  Woloffs
were  very  quarrelsome,  ^  and  that  subjugation  of  the
Congo  tribes  was  almost  impossible  owing  to  the
protective  environment,  ^  because  these  facts  in-
dicate that  their  contributions  to  the  slave  population
were  relatively  slight.  On  the  other  hand  the  clever-
ness of  the  Yorubans  ^  and  the  more  open  environ-
ment of  the  Tshis  ^  seem  to  point  to  the  fact  that
they  may  have  contributed  a  special  share  to  Negro
superstitions  without  giving  the  least  clue  as  to  what
this  contribution  may  havfe  been.

For  this  reason  we  shall  merely  indicate  some  of  the
more  universal  African  characteristics,  putting  especial
stress  upon  those  which  seem  to  have  survived  under
American  contact.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  European
lore  had  a  decided  advantage  due  to  its  universality
in  America,  and  hence  its  greater  chance  of  perpet-
uation. Purely  local  African  lore  would  be  apt  to
die  out  since  its  devotees  in  America  were  too  few  in
number  and  too  scattered  to  provide  the  constant
repetition  necessary  for  remembrance.  Before  the  in-
vention of  writing,  man  had  to  be  constantly  reminded
of  his  beliefs,  else  he  forgot  them.  Even  with  the
reduction  of  the  manifold  African  languages  to  a
common  denominator  through  the  adoption  of  English
speech,  only  African  beliefs  of  an  universal  nature
would  be  likely  to  survive  unless,  perchance,  many
slaves  from  the  same  African  locality  were  grouped
together  on  a  single  plantation.  Let  us  now  consider
a  few  of  these  broad  African  traits.

^  Kingsley,  M.  H.,     West  African  Studies,  p.  480.
"^  Peschel,  O.,     Races  of  Man,  pp.  464-65.

»  Phillips,  R.  C,     The  Lower  Congo,  J.  A.  I.,  xvii  (1888),  pp.  215-16.
*  Frobenius,  L.,     The  Voice  of  Africa,  vol.  i,  p.  148.     Ellis,  A.  B.,      Yoruha-
speaking  Peoples,  p.  32.

'  Ellis,  A.  B.,     Ewe-speaking  peoples,  pp.  8-9.


8         Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Laziness,  Humor,  and  Sexuality.  Laziness  is  found
both  in  Africa  ^  and  in  America;  in  Africa  being  en-
hanced by  the  enervating  tropical  environment.  The
high  degree  of  energy  and  perseverance  developed  by
some  educated  members  of  the  Negro  race  in  the  South
would  seem  to  particularize  this  trait  as  that  of  any
primitive  folk  not  yet  fully  disciplined  in  foresight  in-
stead of  a  deep-rooted,  inborn  racial  characteristic.  The
slavery-time  environment  of  the  Negro  was  not  cal-
culated to  leave  a  traditional  background  making  for
habits  of  energy  and  foresight.  Impulsiveness  is
another  African  -  trait  which  is  gradually  being  laid
aside  in  favor  of  greater  self-restraint.  A  lively  sense
of  humor  characterizes  both  African  ^  and  Negro,
possibly  having  survival-value  in  that  it  prevents
pining  away  under  adversity.  ^  Examples  will  be
cited  in  connection  with  Negro  jokes,  but  a  splendid
illustration  of  its  balsamic  utility  was  recently  brought
to  my  attention  by  the  following  reel:

W'ite  fo'ks  lib  in  a  fine  brick  house,
Lawd,  de  yalluh  gal  do's  de  same;
De  ole  nigger  lib  in  de  Columbus  jail,
But  hit's  a  brick  house  jes'  de  same.  ^

While  a  well  regulated  sex  life  is  in  part  a  result  of
cultural  background,  yet  the  sexual  indulgence  of  the
Negro,  so  open  in  Africa  and  in  many  parts  of  the
rural  South,  may  conceivably  be  a  racial  characteristic
developed  by  natural  selection  in  West  Africa  as  a
result  of  the  frightful  mortality.  ^

1  Cruickshank,  B.,  Eighteen  Years  on  the  Gold  Coast  of  Africa,  vol.  2,  pp.
252-54.

2  Phillips,  R.  C,     The  Lower  Congo,  J.  A.  I.,  vol.  18  (1888),  p.  218.
^  Johnston,  H.  H.,     The  Negro  in  the  New  World,  p.  viii.

*  Talley,  T.  W.,     Negro  Folk  Rhymes,  pp.  244-45.
6  143.

*  Tillinghast,  J.  A.,     The  Negro  in  Africa  and  America,  pp.  64-65.


Practical  and  Emotional  Background         9

Other  Traits.  Despotism  In  West  Africa  seems  to
win  loyalty,  pride,  and  popularity,  ^  possibly  because
a  strong-minded  master  has  spirit  enough  to  resent
aggression  and  self-reliance  enough  to  protect  his
followers  from  outside  annoyance.  -  The  surprise  of
strangers  at  the  respect  commanded  from  the  illiterate
Negroes  by  a  despotic  "boss-man"  ^  and  the  occasional
employment  of  whipping  as  an  effective  means  of
control  ^  indicate  that  remnants  of  this  feeling  may
yet  persist  in  parts  of  the  South.  Shortsightedness,
indifference,  and  disregard  of  the  future  are  traits
common  not  only  to  Africans  ^  and  many  Negroes,  but
to  almost  all  undisciplined  primitive  peoples.  ^  With
the  Ewe-speaking  peoples  "where  any  improvement
in  conditions  is  only  likely  to  arouse  the  cupidity  of  an
irresponsible  chief  (or  the  Southern  slaveholder  of
later  times),  why  seek  to  improve  it.^  Hence  we  find
a  great  indifference  to  the  future.  .  .  .  The  chiefs
are  arrogant  and  tyrannical  and  the  people  servile.
The  latter  rarely  go  straight  towards  the  end  they
wish  to  obtain,  but  seek  to  compass  it  by  subterfuges
and  devious  methods.  Concealment  of  design  is  the
first  element  of  safety,  and  as  this  axiom  has  been
consistently  carried  out  for  generations,  the  national
character  is  strongl}^  marked  by  duplicity.  The  Negro
lies  habitually;  and  even  in  matters  of  little  moment,
or  of  absolute  indifference,  it  is  rare  for  him  to  speak
the  truth."  ^     May  not  the  organized  hypocrisy  of  the

1  Ihid. ,  p.  69.

2  Phillips,  R.  C,     The  Lower  Congo,  J.  A.  I.,  vol.  18  (1888),  p.  218.

'  See  also,  Bruce,  P.  A.,     The  Plantation  Negro  as  a  Freedman,  p.  35.

^  Tillinghast,  .J.  A.,     The  Negro  in  Africa  and  America,  p.  180.

'  Bosnian,  W.,  Description  of  the  Coast  of  Guinea,  p.  1Q;1.  Kingsley,  M.  H.,
Travels  in  West  Africa,  p.  598.  McDonald,  G.,  The  Gold  Coast,  Past  a?id
Present,  p.  81.

*  See  Lippert,  J^     Kulturgeschichte  der  Mei^schheit,  p.  37  ff.

^  Ellis,  A.  B.,     Eu'e-speaking  Peoples,  p.  11.


10       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Southern  Negro  also  be  an  adaptation  forced  upon  him
by  conditions  of  Hfe?  Sometimes  this  African  pre-
varication approaches  closely  that  of  the  white  Amer-
icans. When  the  natives  of  Gabun  are  asked  some-
thing they  do  not  want  to  tell  they  say  "wz  amie^''
(I  don't  know).  Nassau  says,  "I  have  long  ago  learned
that,  mi  amie,  though  only  sometimes  true,  is  not
always  a  lie.  It  is  equivalent  to  our  conventional
'Not  at  home,'  or  a  polite  version  of  'Ask  me  no
questions  and  I'll  tell  you  no  lies'  .  .  .  it  is  a
kind  of  notification  that  the  conversation  had  better
be  changed,"  ^

Vocational  Characteristics.  There  is  no  particular
point  in  going  into  elaborate  details  concerning  the
industrial  organization  of  the  West  Africans,  since  it
was  practically  all  speedily  displaced  in  America  by
European  methods  of  livelihood.  A  thorough  test
was  possible  in  this  field  ^  and  this  test  showed  American
methods  the  superior  adaptation  to  the  new  environ-
ment into  which  the  slave  had  come.  Besides,  the
Africans  were  brought  over  to  be  industrially  exploited,
and  the  white  master  was  careful  to  see  that  American
farming  practice  was  followed  by  the  slave.  He
cared  less  about  the  amusements  and  religion  of  the
Negro  so  long  as  they  did  not  affect  his  working  ability.
But  the  American  Negro  remained  still  an  agri-
culturist in  a  rural  environment,  a  fact  which  both  In
environment  and  occupation  might  be  expected  to  tend
to  a  closer  preservation  of  African  agricultural  folk-
beliefs.  Even  today  almost  three-fourths  of  the  South-
ern Negroes  live  in  a  rural  ^  environment,  and  in  this

1  Nassau,  R.  H.,     Fetichism  in  West  Africa,  pp.  IIO-IL

2  Keller,  A.  G.,     Societal  Evolution,  pp.  128-168.
«  Negro  Year  Book  (1921-1922),  p.  391.


Practical  and  Emotional  Background        11

relative  isolation  the  more  primitive  type  of  super-
stitions are  generally  preserved  more  easily  than  in
an  environment  where  outside  contact  is  greater.
That  this  is  not  always  true  is  shown  by  the  apparently
greater  prevalence  of  superstition  with  the  New
Orleans  city  Negro  as  compared  with  many  of  his
rural  kinsmen — a  fact  probably  accounted  for  by  the
voodoo  traditions  of  that  city  and  the  more  frequent
interchange  of  such  ideas  through  a  multitude  of
people  all  clinging  to  the  same  old  beliefs.

Briefly,  the  West  Africans  are  mostly  in  a  confused
state  of  transition  from  the  stage  of  purely  nomadic
savagery  to  that  of  settled  agriculture.  ^  They  have
no  domestic  draught  animals  and  are  ignorant  of  the
plow,  -  their  chief  agricultural  implement  being  a
heavy  knife  or  cutlass  to  cut  down  trees  and  dig  holes.
The  women  go  around  among  the  burned  logs  and  tree
roots  and  stick  in  their  roots  and  shrubs  whenever
they  can  find  space;  and  nature  does  the  rest.  ^  The
chief  form  of  division  of  labor  with  the  Africans  was
according  to  sex,  the  woman  doing  the  steady,  monot-
onous household  work,  and  carrying  on  most  of  the
agriculture,  while  the  men  turned  to  the  more  stren-
uous and  exciting  occupations  of  hunting  and  warfare,
also  taking  for  the  main  part,  a  predominant  place  in  the
work  of  building  houses,  caring  for  the  cattle,  black-
smithing  and  tailoring.  *  Beyond  this  there  is  little
separation   into  difi^erent  trades,   except  in   a  general

1  Tillinghast,  J.  A.,     The  Negro  in  Africa  and  America,  pp.  25-26.

2  Waitz,  T.,  Anlhropologie  der  Naturvolker,  bk.  ii,  p.  80.  Cruickshank,  B.,
Eighteen  Years  on  the  Gold  Coast  of  Africa,  vol  ii,  p.  272.

^  Chaillu,  P.  B.  du,  Explorations  and  Adventures  in  Equatorial  Africa,  p.  125.
See  also,  Cruickshank,  B.,  Eighteen  Years  on  the  Gold  Coast  of  Africa,  vol.  ii,
p.  272.     Tillinghast,  J.  A.,     The  Negro  in  Africa  and  America,  pp.  17  ff.

^  See  Winterbottom,  T.,  Account  of  the  Native  Africans  in  the  Neighbor-
hood of  Sierra  Leone,  p.  89.  Johnston,  Sir  H.  H.,  The  Negro  in  the  New
World,  pp.  23-24  and  318.


12       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

sort  of  way,  that  of  blacksmiths,  weavers,  shoemakers,
and  musicians,  in  some  tribes,  ^  with  the  addition  of
carpenters,  dyers,  and  potters  in  others.  ^  American
slavery  tended  to  destroy  to  some  extent  the  sex
division  of  labor,  men  and  women  alike  being  field
hands,  though  the  women  still  occupied  the  pre-
dominant place  as  household  servants.  More  in-
dividual specialization  was  made  possible,  though
trade  and  commerce,  the  industry  liked  best  by  the
Africans,  ^  was  almost  entirely  supplanted  by  agri-
culture. Most  of  the  West  Africans  have  private
property  in  women,  slaves  and  movables,  but  not  in
land;  the  idea  of  group  or  family  responsibility  giving
rise  to  communal  ownership  as  regards  this  pos-
session. '*  In  general  the  succession  of  property  is
through  the  female  line,  ^  though  among  the  Yorubans,
who  show  a  tendency  towards  individual  ownership
of  property,  the  tie  between  father  and  child  has  been
recognized  and  inheritance  through  the  male  line  is
common.  ^  In  America  when  the  Negro  was  freed,
private  property  was  substituted  for  family  property,
and  inheritance  was  shifted  to  the  male  line,  but  in
most  cases  under  slavery,  the  doling  out  of  weekly
rations  to  the  family  rather  than  to  the  individual
kept  the  group  idea  still  in  the  Negro's  mind.

^  Mollieu,  G.,  Travels  in  the  Interior  of  Africa  to  the  Sources  of  the  Senegal
and  Gambia,  p.  59.

2  See  Johnston,  Sir  H.  H.,  The  Negro  in  the  New  World,  p.  318.  Til-
linghast,  J.  A.,  The  Negro  in  Africa  and  America,  p.  37.  Ratzel,  F.,  History
of  Mankind,  vol.  3,  pp.  121-22.      Waitz,    T.,     Anthropologic,   vol.  2,    p.  96.

'  Ratzel,  F.,     History  of  Mankind,  vol.  3,  p.  117

^Kingsley,  M.  H.,  West  African  Studies,  p.  436.  Waitz,  T.,  An-
thropologic der  Naturvolker,  bk.  ii,  p.  80.  Nassau,  R.  H.,  Fetichism  in  West
Africa,  pp.  22,  156  and  167.     Ellis,  A.  B.,     Ewe-speaking  Peoples,  p.  217.

^Nassau,  R.H.,  Fetichis7ninWestAfrica,p.l3.  Chatelain,  H.,  Folk-Tales
of  Angola,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  i  (1894), p.  8.  Kingsley,  M.  H.,  West  African
Studies,  p.  428.     Kingsley,  M.  H.,     Travels  in  West  Africa,  pp.  484-85.

« Ellis,  A.  B.,     Yoruba-speaking  Peoples,  pp.  174-77,  217,  and  302-03.


Practical  and  Emotional  Background        13

Language  a  Unifying  Force.  Even  more  important
than  the  substitution  of  raccoon  and  opossum  for
elephant  and  gorilla,  or  cotton  and  persimmon  for
palm  and  plantain  in  myth-making  material,  was  the
adoption  of  the  English  language  in  the  place  of  the
many  heterogeneous  tribal  languages  and  dialects  of
Africa.  Language  is  the  vehicle  in  which  social
traditions  ride  on  from  one  generation  to  another,  and
the  possession  of  a  common  language  at  least  enabled
a  universality  of  lore  impossible  to  unconsolidated
Africa.  While  the  African  tongue  seldom  speaks  in
the  industrial  life  of  the  Negro  today,  yet  in  the  more
spiritual  relations  of  play  and  religion,  where  the
pruning-knife  of  the  white  man  has  been  less  severe,
may  be  heard  occasionally  half-incoherent  mutters
reminiscent  of  jungle  days.

Mutilated  English.  The  separation  of  this  African
element  from  the  language  of  the  Southern  States  is
difficult  because  of  the  barbaric  mangling  of  healthy
English  words  by  the  tongue  of  the  would-be  Negro
savant.  The  Negro  meets  with  the  "Christian  and
Deviled  Egg  Society"  (Christian  Endeavor  and  Aid
Society)  ^  and  dwells  upon  "dem  curious  Cadillacs
(Catholics)  what  woan'  eat  no  meat  on  Friday,"  ^
He  "resists"  to  "assist,"  "decopious"  is  "beautiful,"
a  "refressiator"  is  a  "refrigerator,"  ^  and  he  even  runs
at  times  into  such  impossibilities  as  "brown  cheatom"
(bronchitis)  and  "gumelastin"  (gum  elastic),  leaving
the  puzzled  folklorist  at  a  "conclusive  standstill,"  as
the  Negro  would  say,  as  to  whether  to  run  for  an
African  dictionary  or  a  Negro  interpreter.     Words  like

1262.

2  278.
'279.


14       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

"allerkerchle"  (apparently  meaning  "anvil  dust")  and
"ponton"  (a  blue-gummed  Negro,  who  is  really  a  cross
between  a  horse  and  a  man)  ^  are  unclaimed  virgins —
mutilated  figurines  of  fair  England  or  dusky  Africa,
or  perhaps  inchoate  dream  images  of  the  Negro  slave
himself.  In  the  song,  "Round  the  Corn,  Sally,"  2  the
expression  "iggle-quarter"  may  mean  "eagle-quarter,"
and  "ginny  bank,"  "Virginia  bank,"  but  the  term
"count-aquils"  is  certainly  enigmatical.  I  have  often
heard  the  Negroes  speak  of  "ring-lights"  and  "fellom-
city"  in  connection  with  their  religious  services.  ^  One
author  speaks  of  the  terms  as  unintelligible,  *  but  an
old  conjure-doctor  tells  me  that  they  represent  in-
scriptions from  "Misapop"  contained  In  the  Union
History  of  Christ,  a  book  I  have  never  been  able  to
locate.  (Among  other  things  these  Inscriptions,  found
on  a  stone  which  could  only  be  overturned  by  a  nine-
year-old  child,  taught  that  woman  could  go  to  heaven
without  being  converted — a  fact  known  to  all  who  read
"Physiology.")  According  to  him  the  term  "ring-
lights"  means  "blessings"  while  "fellom-city"  means
"peace."  ^  Another  better  educated  Negro  tells  me
that  the  old  slaves  used  the  term  "fellom-city"  to
mean  "heaven"  and  "ring-lights"  to  mean  the  brightest
lights  there, «  definitions  which  fit  In  well  with  the
context  as  I  have  heard  these  terms  used.

True  Linguistic  Survivals.  Nevertheless  there  are
distinct  African  contributions  to  English  speech,
although  often  merely  In  the  form  of  dialect,  as  where

191.

2  Allen,  W.  F.,     Slave  Songs  of  the  United  States,  p.  68.

''141.

*  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  210.

^91.

^57.


Practical  and  Emotional  Background        15

the  nasality  of  the  eastern  coast  Negro  of  America
shows  a  close  relation  to  the  extremely  nasal  native
language  of  the  Guinea  Coast  region.  ^  The  term
"voodoo" — or  "hoodoo"  as  it  is  popularly  called —
seems  to  be  derived  from  the  vodu  of  the  Ewes,  a
term  used  along  with  edro  for  gods  and  superhuman  or
supernatural  agencies  of  all  kinds.  ^'Fodu  appears  to
be  derived  from  vo  (to  be  afraid),  or  from  vo  (harm-
ful)." -  The  term  "goober"  (peanut)  is  manifestly
derived  from  gooba  ^  or  guha  ^  by  which  this  ground-
nut {arachis  hypongea)  is  known  all  over  Africa.  It
is  to  be  noted  that  this  ground-nut  is  linked  up  with
witchcraft.  Among  the  Susu-speaking  peoples  of  Sierra
Leone  it  is  a  constituent  of  a  charm  designed  to  produce
bad  crops,  ^  while  with  the  Southern  Negroes,  Gullah
Jack,  one  of  the  leaders  in  Denmark  Vesey's  In-
surrection of  1822  and  a  sorcerer  of  note,  advised  his
followers  to  eat  only  parched  corn  and  ground-nuts
before  the  battle,  and  to  put  a  crab's  claw  in  their
mouths  to  prevent  being  wounded.  ^  Today  the
Negroes  say  it  is  unlucky  to  eat  peanuts  when  you
are  going  away  to  play  a  game  of  any  sort,  ^  and  peanut
hulls  scattered  about  the  door  mean  that  you  will  go
to  jail,  s  The  African  term  Makara  or  Mbakara,  in
the  sense  of  white  man,  is  closely  related  to  the  Negro
"buckra     man"     (poor    white).  ^     "Pickaninny"     also

*  Johnson,  Sir  H.  H.,     The  Negro  in  the  New  World,  p.  396.

^  Ellis,  A.  B.,  Ewe-speaking  Peoples,  pp.  29-30.  See  also,  Dana,  M.,
Voodoo,  Metropolitan  Magazine,  vol.  28  (1908),  p.  537.  Kennedy,  L.,  Vodu
and  Vodun,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  3  (1890),  p.  241.

'  Bacon,  A.  M.,  Proposal  for  Folk-Lore  Research  at  Hampton,  Va.,  J.A.F.  L.,
vol.  6  (1893),  p.  307.

■*  Owen,  M.  A.,     Voodoo  Tales,  p.  39  (note  2).

*  Thomas,  N.  W.,     Anthrop.  Kept,  of  Sierra  Leone,  pt.  1,  p.  50.

*  Brawley,  B.,     Social  History  of  the  American  Negro,  pp.  135-37.
'  401  and  182.

8  141.

'  Burton,  R.  F.,     Wit  and  Wisdom  from  West  Africa,  p.  329.


16       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

"appears  to  have  been  an  African  word  used  by  the
early  American  slaves  for  the  word  "baby."  ^  The
term  "Gullah"  is  thought  to  be  a  corruption  of
"Angola."  2  In  Louisiana  the  terms  Counjai  or
Koundjo  (a  sort  of  Negro  dance),  ^  and  grigri  (noun
signifies  "charm" — verb  means  "to  bewitch"),  seem
to  be  of  African  origin,  the  term  gris-gris  being  employed
in  the  Senegal  as  a  general  name  for  amulets.  *

Conservation  of  Verse.  Many  of  these  African
survivals  are  found  in  rhymes,  especially  in  voodoo
songs,  the  rhythm  being  an  aid  to  memory  and  clinging
to  the  old  words  long  after  the  original  meaning  has
been  forgotten.  Both  verse  and  religion  are  con-
servative, and  such  unknown  words  by  their  very
mystery  occasion  a  sort  of  reverence  on  the  part  of  the
singer,  similar  to  that  evoked  by  the  use  of  Latin
in  church  services.     One  such  survival  is:

Tig,  tig,  malaboin

La  Chelema  che  tango.

Redjoum.

In  1878  Lafcadio  Hearn  asked  his  black  nurse  in
New  Orleans  the  meaning  of  this  refrain:  "She  only
laughed  and  shook  her  head:  'Mais  c'est  Voudoo  ca;
je  n'en  sais  rien.'  "  ^  Other  such  examples  are  the
so-called  Guinea  or  Ebo  Rhymes,  the  former  tongue
showing  a  mixture  of  African  and  English,  while  the
latter  shows  an  addition  of  some  foreign  language,  as

1  Talley,  T.  W.,     Negro  Folk  Rhymes,  p.  186  (note).

2  Gonzales,  A.  E.,     The  Black  Border,  p.  9.

'  Krehbiel,  H.  E.,     Afro- American  Folksongs,  p.  116.

^  Newell,  N.  W.,  Reports  of  Voodoo  Worship  in  Hayli  and  Louisiana,
J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  2  (1899),  p.  44.

^  Krehbiel,  H.  E.,     Afro-American  Folksongs,  p.  37.


Practical  and  Emotional  Background        17

evidenced  by  the  word,  la  used  for  "the."  ^  Talley
cites  two  such  cases:

Frog  in  a  Mill  ^

Once  dere  wus  er  frog  dat  lived  in  er  mill
He  had  er  raker  don  la  bottom  o'-la  kimebo
Kimebo,  nayro,*dilldo,  kiro
Stimstam,  formididdle,  all-a-board-la  rake
Wid  er  raker  don  la  bottom  o'-la  kimebo.

Tree  Frogs  ^

Shool!Shool!Shool!

I  rule!
Shool!Shool!Shool!

I  rule!
Shool!  Shacker-rack!
I  shool  bubba  cool.

Seller!  Beller  eel!

Fust  to  ma  tree'l

Just  came  er  bubba.

Buska!  Buska-reel!

A  Mississippi  informant  mentions  the  phrase  lacka
shoola,  though  she  does  not  know  the  meaning.  *
In  one  of  the  Creole  songs,  the  refrain  Ouende,  ouende,
macaya  is  used  after  each  line,  and,  in  the  Congo,
ouende  has  the  meaning  "to  go,"  "to  continue  to,"
"to  go  on,"  while  the  Creoles  of  Martinique  use  the
term  macaya  to  mean  "to  eat  excessively" — giving
the  refrain  the  sense  of  "Go  on!  go  on!  Eat  enor-
mously!" ^  Other  survivals  in  New  Orleans  are  quimbe
(Creole   tchombe   or    chombo)    (to    take)    and    ouarasiy

1  Talley,  T.  W.,     Negro  Folk  Rhymes,  p.  247.

2  Jhid.,  p.  167.

3  Ibid.,  p.  168.
«175.

^  Krehbiel,  H.  E.,     Afro-American  Folksongs,  p.  39  ff.

2


18       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

ourasal  used  as  a  refrain  to  a  song,  although  the
meaning  is  not  precisely  clear.  ^  Other  apparently
meaningless  song  lines  with  the  Southern  Negro  are
lee  cum,  lee  cum,  genikebukobuk,  lee  ki,  used  as  a
song  in  one  of  their  animal  folk  tales  ^  and  the  refrain,
Toko  onaman,  toko,  used  as  a  refrain  to  one  of  the
corn-shucking  songs  on  an  antebellum  plantation  in
Alabama.  ^  Onaman  seems  to  be  derived  from  oona
or  ona,  which  was  used  by  the  early  slaves  in  both  the
singular  and  plural  to  mean  "you"  when  speaking  of
friends  as  "Ona  build  a  house  in  Paradise,"  ^  but  of
toho  I  could  find  no  equivalent.  The  voodoos  of
Missouri  know  of  the  existence  of  a  being  called
Samunga,  who  is  called  upon  as  follows  when  go-
ing for  mud  of  which  to  make  "tricks"  (charms  or
conjures) :

Minnie,  no,  no  Samunga
Sangse  see  sa  soh  Samunga.

Miss  Owen  thinks  this  may  perhaps  be  the  Gounja  of
the  Hottentots.  ^  Colonel  Higginson  says,  "In  my
regiment  there  was  a  phrase,  'Lulla  nigger  talk,'
referring  doubtless  to  Angola,  and  there  was  a  word
my'o  for  the  river  of  death  in  one  of  their  hymns,
which  was  probably  African,"  ^  since  in  the  Cameroon
dialect  mawa  signifies  "to  die."  ^  Again  in  one  of
the  Creole  songs  there  is  the  line,  "Mo  na  me  ouanga
pour  li"   (I  will  make  an  ouanga  for  him),   the  term

1  Ream,  L.,     Gombo  Zh(bes,  p.  38  (note  1).

2  Harvey,  E.  H.,    A  Brer  Rabbit  Story,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  32  (1919),  pp.  443-44.

3  407.

*  Allen,  W.  F.,     Slave  Songs  of  the  United  States,  Preface  p.  xxv.
6  Owen,  M.  A.,     Among  the  Voodoos,  I.  F.  L.  C.  (1891),  pp.  241-42.
8  Higginson,  Col.  T.  W.,     Letter  in  Southern  Workman.,  vol.  23  (1894),
p.  180.

^  Allen,  W.  F.,     Slave  Songs  of  the  United  States,  p.  38  (note).


Practical  and  Emotional  Background        19

ouanga  being  of  African  origin  and  applied  to  all
things  connected  with  the  voodooism  of  the  Negroes.  ^
This  term  wongah  {ouanga)  in  Louisiana,  means  a
voodoo  charm;  ("wangateurs"  are  conjurers)  ^  and  is
probably  derived  from  the  Ga  term  wong,  "a
charm."  In  a  voodoo  song  mentioned  by  Mr.  Cable  '
the  words  tigui  li  seem  to  be  the  African  tigewala,
*'a  maker  of  charms,"  or  "medicine-man;"  and  the
concluding  sentence.  Do  se  dan  go-do,  to  be.  Do  dsi
dank  godo,  "Oh,  curved  snake,  may  you  be  fat,"
i.e.,  "have  a  good  meal."  *  The  close  association  of
these  African  terms  with  Negro  voodooism  even  in
advance  would  lead  us  to  suspect  that  the  voodoo
practices  are  also  African  in  origin.

Other  Possible  Survivals.  In  a  few  other  fields
African  expressions  were  remembered  for  a  time  after
English  was  learned.  A  very  old  acquaintance  of
mine  tells  of  Uncle  Dennis,  an  African  slave,  who
could  count  to  five  in  his  native  language,  ^'^bosa,  boha,
bio,  banyon,  buckanana.^^  ^  Many  other  strange  terms
have  come  to  have  an  American  Negro  meaning,  but
were,  I  suspect,  used  once  in  Africa  in  the  same  or
in  a  difi'erent  sense.  The  term  mojo  is  often  used
by  the  Mississippi  Negroes  ^  to  mean  "charms,  amulets,
or  tricks,"  as  "to  work  mojo"  on  a  person  or  "to  carry
a  mojo."  In  New  Orleans  the  term  iobe  or  toby
is  used  in  the  same  sense.  ^  In  Virginia  "Gombre-
work"   means  the  work  of  conjuring   or   conjuration,

1  Hearn,  L.,     Gombo  Zhebes,  p.  16  (note  3).

'277.

^  Cable,  G.  W.,  Creole  Slave  Songs,  Century  Magazine,  vol.  9  (1886),
p.  820  (note).

*  Ellis,  A.  B.,  On  Vodu  Worship,  Popular  Science  Monthly,  vol.  38
(1891),  pp.  662-63.

6  245.

«1()3.

^54.


20       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

ingany  or  tingany  means  flour,  and  harberdidie
means  turkey  buzzard.  ^  Coonjine  as  used  by  the
Mississippi  River  Negroes,  refers  to  a  peculiar  motion
of  the  body  used  apparently  to  lighten  or  hasten  the
labor  of  unloading;  and  hully-gully  {hull  da  gull)  or
{oil  ola)  is  the  expression  for  "how  many"  in  the
children's  game  of  guessing  how  many  nuts  a  person
holds  in  his  hand.  ^  Aw,  a  kind  of  expletive  equiv-
alent to  "to  be  sure"  (as  "Cold  aw,"  in  response  to  a
statement  regarding  the  chilly  weather),  ckurray  (spill
or  throw  away),  and  tote  (to  carry),  reflect  a  possible
African  origin,  as  do  also  such  proper  names  as  Cuffy,
Quash,  and  perhaps  Cudjo.  ^  At  times,  African  words
remain  with  an  altered  meaning,  as  where  the  Negro
word  bonki  (bone),  meaning  he-goat,  is  the  same
term  used  by  the  Woloffs  for  hyena.  *

Slave  English.  Apart  from  such  isolated  cases  as
these  the  African  impress  upon  the  English  language
was  negligible.  Everywhere  English  became  the  ac-
cepted method  of  communication  and  English  folk-
beliefs  and  superstitions  were  given  an  enormous  ad-
vantage over  the  African  forms.  Possibly  one  reason
for  the  fragmentary  character  of  Negro  folk-songs  is
the  fact  that  the  slave  was  not  fully  in  possession  of  the
English  language  when  these  songs  were  composed.  ^
This  difficulty  is  expressed  well  in  one  of  the  early
slave  prayers:


1  Southern  Workman,  vol.  24  (1895),  p.  78.

2  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  26.

"  Allen,  W.  F.,     Slave  Songs  of  the  United  States,  Preface,  p.  xxv.
^  Greber,  A.,     Uncle  Remus  Traced  to  the  Old  World,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  6
(1893),  p.  247.

^  Park,  R.  E.,     Journal  of  Negro  History,  vol.  iv  (1919) ,  p.  125.


Practical  and  Emotional  Background       21

Make  he  good,  like  he  say,
Make  he  say,  like  he  good,
Make  he  say,  like  he  good,  like  he  God,

which  may  be  thus  interpreted:  "Make  him  good  as
his  doctrine,  make  his  doctrine  as  pure  as  his  life,  and
may  both  be  in  the  likeness  of  his  God."  ^  Such
expressions  as  "de  nineteen  wile  in  his  han' "  (the
anointing  oil  in  his  hand)  ^  and  "silly  yan"  (sweet
lamb)  3  occurring  frequently  in  slave  songs  show  how
often  the  Negro  approximated  the  English  sound
without  In  the  least  getting  the  meaning.

Language  and  Lore.  While  the  lore  of  the  whites
and  the  blacks  are  by  no  means  entirely  distinct,  the
Importance  of  a  mastery  of  English  Is  shown  by  the
fact  that,  roughly  speaking  the  greater  the  departure
of  the  Negro  from  the  standard  English  In  dialect,
the  less  the  lore  of  the  Negro  Is  like  that  of  the  white.  *
Where  the  slaves  were  herded  together  In  large  groups,
and  rarely  came  Into  contact  with  any  whites  save  their
owner  and  overseer,  they  were  observed  to  profit
little  by  the  Imitative  faculty  and  to  make  little
progress  In  mastering  English.  ^  Thus  the  smaller
the  plantation  the  greater  the  contact  between  whites
and  Negroes  and  the  greater  the  chance  for  English
folk-beliefs  to  enter  the  Negro  mind.  Also  the  planters
who  owned  but  few  slaves  were  more  likely  to  be
uneducated  and  more  superstitious — thus  Increasing
the  possibility  of  transmission  of  English  super-
stitions.    Always  there  Is  a  strain  towards  consistency

^  Lyell,  Sir  C,     A  Second  Visit  to  the  United  States  of  North  America,  vol.  ii,
pp.  15-16.

*  Krehbiel,  H.  E.,     Afro-American  Folksongs,  p.  218.
»394.

*  Davis,  H.  C,  Negro  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina  J.A.F.  L.,  vol.  27  (1914),
p.  241  ff.

^  Lyell,  Sir  C,  A  Second  Visit  to  the  United  States  of  North  America,  vol  ii,
pp.  268-69.


22       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

in  the  mores  ^ — when  the  Negro  acquired  in  part  the
language  and  outward  culture  of  the  white  man  there
would  be  a  tendency  to  acquire  his  folk-beliefs  as  well.
For  these  and  other  reasons  to  be  brought  out  later,  we
must  not  be  surprised  to  find  a  good  part  of  the  Negro
folk-beliefs  to  be  of  English  or  European  origin.  In
1780  there  were  1,500,000  whites  and  43,000  slaves
in  New  England,  New  Jersey,  and  Pennsylvania.  A
greater  chance  for  the  interchange  of  folk-beliefs  was
thus  afforded  where  the  number  of  slaves  was  small,
and  when,  not  long  after  the  Revolution,  the  Negroes
were  largely  removed  to  the  South  ^  these  New  England
folk-beliefs  were  doubtless  carried  with  them  and
mingled  with  those  of  the  South.

African  Marriage  Customs.  While  the  slave  owner
was  not  quite  so  concerned  with  the  Negro's  marriage
customs  as  he  was  with  his  working  customs,  yet  in
the  main  a  partial  approximation  of  the  white  man's
standards  was  attained.  Generally  throughout  West
Africa  polygamy  is  the  established  form  of  marriage,  ^
romantic  love  and  kissing  are  unknown,  *  and  wives
are  purchased  in  a  purely  business  fashion  with  little
display  of  feeling.  ^  The  dominant  aifection  in  the
home  is  the  intense  devotion  of  the  African  for  his
mother,  ^  "more  fights  being  occasioned  among  boys

'  See  Sumner,  W.  G.,     Folkways,  p.  5  ff.

^Aimes,  H.  H.  S.,  African  Institutions  in  America,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  18
(1905),  pp.  15-18.

2  TilHnghast,  J.  A.,  The  Negro  in  Africa  and  America,  pp.  60-61.  Kingsley,
M.  H.,  Travels  in  West  Africa,  pp.  212  and  662.  Kingsley,  M.  H.,  West
African  Studies,  pp.  377-78.  Talbot,  D.  A.,  Woman's  Mysteries  of  a
Primitive  People,  p.  96.  Bosnian,  W.,  Description  of  the  Coast  of  Guinea,
p.  169.

*  Ellis,  A.  B.,  Tshi-speaking  Peoples,  pp.  285-88.  Kingsley,  M.  H.,
Travels  in  West  Africa,  p.  212.

*  Ellis,  A.  B.,  Tshi-speaking  Peoples,  p.  280.  Ellis,  A.  B.,  Ewe-speaking
Peoples,  p.  199.  For  the  betrothal  customs,  see  Ellis,  A.  B.,  Tshi-speaking
Peoples,  pp.  235-36.  ElUs,  A.  B.,  Yoruba-speaking  Peoples,  pp.  182-83.
Ellis,  A.  B.,     Ewe-speaking  Peoples,  p.  201.

*  Wilson,  L.     Western  Africa,  p.  116.


Practical   and  Emotional  Background       23

by  hearing  something  said  in  disparagement  of  their
mothers  than  by  all  other  causes  put  together."  ^  In
much  of  Africa  kinship  is  reckoned  through  the
females.  ^

American  Survivals  F ew.  In  the  case  of  the  South-
ern Negroes  there  was  some  tendency  to  cling  to  this
same  regard  for  the  mother,  since  in  slavery  times
when  a  husband  and  wife  were  located  on  separate
plantations,  the  children  always  belonged  to  the
owner  of  the  mother.  Thus  the  influence  of  the
mother  was  greater,  a  fact  which  has  some  importance
in  regard  to  the  handing  down  of  folk-beliefs.  It  is
also  rather  noticeable  that  in  the  Negro  folk-songs,
mother  and  child  are  frequently  sung  of,  but  seldom
father  ^ — possibly  pointing  back  to  the  African  love
for  the  mother  and  the  uncertainty  and  slight  con-
sideration of  fatherhood.  A  possible  African  survival
lies  in  the  practice  of  calling  all  old  people  "Uncle"
and  "Aunty"  whether  they  are  actually  relatives  or
not.  This  may  well  point  back  to  African  conditions
where  an  offspring  stood  closer  to  his  maternal  uncle
than  to  his  actual  father.  Though  women  are  bought
and  sold  as  property  in  Africa,  the  girl  has  a  certain
element  of  choice,  ■*  and  sometimes  manages  in  the
African  folk-tale,  by  a  proper  display  of  wit,  to  get
the  man  she  desires.  ^  The  intense  desire  for  children
reflects  the  high  rate  of  infant  mortality.  Many
charms  are  used  to  promote  fecundity,  and  a  common
wedding  salutation  is,   "Mayst  thou  beget   (or  bear)

1  Kingsley,  M.  H.,     West  African  Studies,  pp.  373-74.

'^  Bosman,  W.,    Descriptions  of  the  Coast  of  Guinea,p.  165.     Winterbottom,  T.,
Account  of  the  Native  Africans  in  the  Neighborhood  of  Sierra  Leone,  p.  151.
3  DuBois,  W.  E.  B.,     Souls  of  Black  Folk,  p.  259.

*  Ellis,  A.  B.,  Tshi-speaking  Peoples,  p.  285.  Ellis,  A.  B.,  Yoruba-
sp caking  Peoples,  p.  185.

*  Koelle,  Rev.  S.  M.,     African  Native  Literature  (Kanuri  Proverbs),  p.-151  ff.


24       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

twelve  children  with  her  (or  him)."  ^  Since  women
are  regarded  as  property,  adultery  is  simply  a  violation
of  a  property  right,  punished  much  the  same  as  theft.
It  may  be  defined  as  "intercourse  with  a  married
woman  without  the  consent  of  the  husband;  for  men
can  and  do  lend  their  wives,  and  the  latter  do  not
seem  to  have  the  right  to  refuse  compliance."  ^

Due  in  part  to  the  negligence  of  the  master  in  edu-
cating the  slave  in  the  English  concept  of  matrimony,  ^
in  part  to  the  frequent  breaking  up  of  the  slave  family
through  the  sale  of  one  or  more  of  its  members,  and  in
part,  perhaps,  to  the  natural  sexuality  of  the  Negro,
many  less  advanced  members  of  that  race  today  are,
to  say  the  least,  careless  in  their  sexual  life.  But,  in
the  main,  English  matrimonial  customs  gained  the
ascendancy.  Kinship  came  to  be  reckoned  through
the  male  line  instead  of  the  female,  and  wife  purchase
was  done  away  with,  although  there  is  occasionally
in  verse  ^  a  reference  to  buying  a  wife,  which,  however,
may  have  been  suggested  by  the  fact  that  American
Negro  slaves  were  always  bought  and  sold,  causing
them  to  consider  themselves  as  articles  of  merchan-
dise. One  old  Negress  tells  me  of  a  slave  who  married
a  girl  from  a  group  of  native  Africans  just  received  on
the  plantation.  According  to  her  statement,  the
young  man  was  forced  to  obtain  the  consent  of  every
member  of  the  girl's  group  before  he  was  allowed  to

1  Burton,  R.  F.,     Wit  and  Wisdom  in  West  Africa,  p.  167.

2  Ellis,  A.  B.,  Ewe-speaking  Peoples,  p.  202.  See  also,  Kingsley,  M.  H.,
West  African  Studies,  pp.  434-35.  Ellis,  A.  B.,  Yoruba-speaking  Peoples,
pp.  183-84.  Ellis,  A.  B.,  Tshi-speaking  Peoples,  pp.  282  and  286.  Chatelain,
H.,  Folk-Tales  of  Angola,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.  (1894),  vol.  1,  p.  272.  For  divorce
customs,  see  Nassau,  R.  H.,  Felichism  in  West  Africa,  p.  10,  and  Ellis,  A.  B.,
Tshi-speaking  Peoples,  pp.  297-98.  For  the  training  of  children,  see  Fro-
benius,  L.,  The  Voice  of  Africa,  vol.  1,  pp.  156-58,  and  Ploss,  H.,  Das
Kind  in  Brauche  u.  Sitte  der  Volker,  vol.  2,  p.  343.

^  See  Lyell,  C,  Travels  in  North  America  in  the  Years  1841-42,  vol.  i,
p.  146.

<  See  Talley,  T.  W.,     Negro  Folk  Rhymes,  p.  145  and  510.


Practical' AND  Emotional  Background       25

marry  her,  ^  a  requirement  which  on  the  surface  appears
to  point  back  to  a  very  primitive  condition  of  group-
responsibility  if  not  of  group-marriage.

Law  and  Government.  Briefly  noting  the  matter  of
African  government,  we  find  that  practically  the
ground  plan  of  African  law  is  "the  simple  plan  that
they  should  take  who  have  the  power,  and  they  should
keep  who  can."  ^  With  some  few  exceptions  ^  the  gov-
ernment is  of  a  despotic  type  with  most  of  the  power
residing  in  the  chief  of  the  tribe.  *  While  having
somewhat  the  nature  of  a  cult  bond,  ^  the  West  African
secret  societies,  such  as  the  Egbo  or  Ogbondi,  not  only
aid  in  preserving  order  and  discipline,  but  even  at
times  correspond  to  our  mutual  benefit  societies  or
lodges.  ^  In  the  case  of  law  and  government  with  the
Negro  slaves  the  despotism  of  the  chief  was  sup-
planted by  that  of  the  master,  and  the  right  of  blood
revenge  was  forbidden  them.  Under  the  cut-and-
dried  status  of  the  slave  we  find  almost  no  survival
in  this  field,  unless  it  be  the  so-called  Negro  "governor"

'342.

^  For  more  details,  see  Kingsley,  M.  H.,  Travels  in  West  Africa,  p.  536.
Thomas,  N.  W.,  Anthrop.  Rept.  of  Sierra  Leone,  pt.  i,  p.  70.  Ellis,  A.  B.,
Tshi-speaking  Peoples,  p.  273.  Ellis,  A.  B.,  Ewe-speaking  Peoples,  pp.  161-62.
Ellis,  A.  B.,     Yoruba-speaking  Peoples,  pp.  164-65.

'  See  especially,  Bosman,  J.,  Description  of  the  Coast  of  Guinea  (Pinker-
ton),  p.  405.

*  Kingsley,  M.  H.,     Travels  in  West  Africa,  p.  484.

*  Livingstone,  D. ,     Missionary  Travels  and  Researches  in  So  uth  Africa,  p.  446 .
^  For  a  more  detailed  discussion,  see  Gatschet,  A.  S.,     African  Masks  and

Secret  Societies,  J.A.F.  L.,  vol.  12  (1899),  pp.  209-10.  Ellis,  A.  B.,  Yoruba-
speaking  Peoples,  pp.  107-11.  Nassau,  R.  H.,  Fetichism  in  West  Africa,
pp.  12,  139,  145,  and  147-48.  Marriott,  H.  P.  F.,  The  Secret  Societies  of
West  Africa,  J.  A.  I.,  vol.  29  (1899),  pp.  21-25.  Chatelain,  H.,  Angolan  Customs,
J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  9  (1896),  p.  17.  Beatty,  K.  J.,  Human  Leopards,  p.  25.
Kingsley,  M.  H.,  Travels  in  West  Africa,  p.  531.  Basden,  G.  T.,  Among
the  Ibos  of  Nigeria,  p.  263.  Marriott,  H.  P.  F.,  Secret  Society  of  West  Africa.,
J.  A.  I.,  vol.29  (1899),  p.  23.  Ageebi,  M.,  The  West  African  Problem,  in
Spiller,  G.,  Inter-racial  Problems,  p.  345.  For  a  description  of  the  opera-
tion of  African  law  in  practical  affairs,  see  Tillinghast,  J.  A.,  The  Negro
in  Africa  and  America,  p.  89.  ElMs,  A.  B.,  Ewe-speaking  Peoples,  p.  223.
Ellis,  A.    B.,     Tshi-speaking  Peoples,   pp.  303-04.


.A


26       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

who  played  a  prominent  role  in  New  England  slave
festivals,  more  freedom  being  allowed  them  in  that
section.  This  "governor"  was  decorated  with  some
of  the  emblems  of  royalty  and  the  customs  at  this
time  were  of  apparent  African  type.  ^  The  Negro,
however,  does  retain  his  intense  passion  for  joining
lodges  and  secret  societies,  most  of  which  in  America
have  the  nature  of  mutual  benefit  organizations.

Fewer  Restrictions  upon  Self-gratification.  The  fet-
ters of  the  white  man  have  shackled  but  loosely  the
amusements  and  ostentations  of  the  slave,  except
where  these  interfered  with  his  working  ability.  Folk-
beliefs  and  customs  of  purest  African  ancestry  sport
in  this  sphere,  whereas  in  the  domain  of  industry,
marriage,  and  government  they  have  been  manacled
even  unto  death.  One  will-o'-the-wisp  flaunts  itself
at  the  very  beginning  as  a  sort  of  warning  to  the  folk-
lorist — the  tendency  of  some  Negroes,  in  common  with
certain  whites,  to  attain  pompousness  by  claiming
relationship  with  nobility.  I  have  run  across  far  too
many  cases  of  old  slaves  claiming  direct  descent  from
African  rulers  to  be  willing  to  accept  all  such  as-
sertions at  their  face  value.  One  has  to  be  careful
about  such  genealogies  and  also  about  the  so-called
African  family  traditions  offered  in  support  of  them.

Clothing  and  Ornamentation.  The  meager  ^  clothing
of  the  West  African  is  used  much  more  for  ornamen-
tation and  the  exaltation  of  personality  than  for
protection  or  from  a  sense  of  shame.  ^     The  same  is

1  Aimes,  H.  S.,  African  Institutions  in  America,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  18
(1905),  pp.  15-20.

2  See  Tillinghast,  J.  A.,     The  Negro  in  Africa  and  America,  p.  44.

3  See  Lippert,  J.,  KuUurgeschichte  der  Menschheit,  vol.  1,  p.  365  ff.
Le  Cornpte,  C.  N.  de  Cardi,  Ju-Ju  Laws  and  Customs  in  the  Niger  Delta,
J.  A.  I.,  xxix  (1899),  p.  60.


Practical  and  Emotional  Background       27

also  true  of  the  stereotyped  bodily  scarification  prac-
ticed by  many  tribes.  These  scars  served  as  a  kind
of  tribal  mark  or  coat-of-arms,  and  in  some  cases  it
was  possible  through  these  marks  to  trace  back
American  slaves  to  their  original  African  clans  and
tribes.  ^  Much  the  same  purpose  was  served  by  the
little  brass  figures  worn  on  the  arms  by  members  of
the  Ogbondi  leagues.  ^

In  America  the  slave  owner  dictated  the  style  of
clothing  given  the  slave,  and,  from  his  viewpoint,
protection  of  the  body  rather  than  the  gratification
of  vanity,  was  the  deciding  principle.  Thus  the
native  fashion  was  ruthlessly  annihilated,  and  scar-
ification was  likewise  tabooed,  since  the  slave  owner
did  not  want  his  property  to  depreciate  in  value.
In  Africa,  decoration  of  the  hair  reaches  a  high  point,
often  consisting  in  mixing  some  plastic  material  with
the  hair  and  shaping  the  whole  into  a  highly  fantastic
coiffure.  ^  With  the  Negro  woman  of  the  South  the
hair  is  still  a  prime  object  of  decoration  as  evidenced
by  the  many  elaborate  coiffures  and  by  the  "Hair
Dresser"  signs  on  many  a  lowly  Negro  cabin;  although
there  is  a  decided  tendency  to  remove  the  kink,  by
odoriferous  unguents  of  all  kinds  in  imitation  of  the
straight  hair  of  the  whites.  Whether  the  source  of
vanity  be  copper  or  iron  ornaments  or  houses  ^  the
West  African  cares  more  for  quantity  than  for  quality.
This  matter  of  quantity  applies  even  to  such  things  as
bustles.  "The  size  of  this  extraordinary  appendage
(the    bustle    worn    behind    by    Gold    Coast    women)

^  Lippert,  J.,     KuUurgeschichte  der  Menschheit,  vol.  i,  p.  396.
^  Frobenius,  L.,     The  Voice  of  Africa,  vol.  i,  p.  176.
^  Lippert,  J.,     KuUurgeschichte  der  Menschheit,  vol.  i,  p.  381.
*  Chaillu,  P.  B.  du,     Explorations  and  Adventures  in  Equatorial  Africa,
p.  88.


28       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

varies  according  to  the  consequence  of  the  wearer,
always  increasing  in  proportion  to  her  dignity."  ^
The  Joloffs  prefer  EngHsh  copper  coins  to  silver  ones.
"Because  it  requires  a  larger  number,  and  a  greater
weight,  to  represent  the  same  value  in  piasters,  they
imagine  themselves  so  much  the  richer"  ^ — much  as  a
small  boy  prefers  two  nickels  to  a  dime.  Precisely
this  same  sort  of  things  holds  true  with  the  rural
Southern  Negro;  huge  gold  plated  ornaments  are
preferable  to  smaller  ones  of  solid  gold,  and  heavy
round  silver  dollars  are  always  more  desirable  than
greenbacks.  It  is  the  size  and  showiness  in  jewelry
rather  than  the  fineness  of  design  or  quality  which
always   attracts   them.

Grandiloquent  Speech.  Both  in  Africa  ^  and  in
American  the  Negro  seems  to  find  a  decided  pleasure
in  altiloquent  speech.  Perhaps  this  bombast  is  partly
due  to  the  fact  that  the  long  and  unusual  word  has  a
sort  of  awe-inspiring,  almost  fetishistic  significance  to
the  uneducated  person,  and  with  the  Negro,  at  least,
it  indicated  a  desire  to  approximate  the  white  man  in
outward  signs  of  learning.  As  it  is,  the  Negro  is
constantly  being  lost  in  a  labyrinth  of  jaw-breaking
words  full  of  sound  and  fury  but  signifying  nothing.
A  loquacious  old  slave  in  my  locality  always  comes
forth  with,  "Underneath  de  ole  foundations  whar
imputations  rivals  no  gittin'  'long,"  *  when  he  es-
pecially desires  to  impress  his  audience.  Another
Mississippi  Negro,  singing  of  the  life  of  Moses,  exhibits

1  Cruickshank,  B.,     Eighteen  Years  on  the  Gold  Coast  of  Africa,  vol.  2,  p.  283.

2  MoUieu,  G.,  Travels  in  the  {interior  of  Africa  to  the  Source  of  the  Sengeal
and  Gambia,  p.  60.

3  See  Kingsley,  M.  H.,     Travels  in  West  Africa,  p.  434.
*48.


Practical  and  Emotional  Background       29

the  following  rare  display  of  English  grammar  recorded
exactly  as  sung:

When  Moses  had  grewed  to  a  manhood
To  a  Gypsun  once  he  had  slun.  ^

I  will  admit  however,  that  the  vitalization  of  English
displayed  by  a  few  earlier  lines  more  than  made  up  for
any   later   desecrations.     Thus:

We  kin  almos'  see  de  baby  (Moses)
Hide-an-seeking'  'roun'  de  throne.

And  in  truth  "we  kin  almos'  "  see  the  child.  A
secretary  of  a  Negro  church  in  a  letter  to  a  friend
of  mine,  thanking  her  for  an  organ  she  presented  to
the  congregation,  regrets  "to  note  that  your  affection-
ating  act  found  me  in  a  unequipped  attitude  to  ex-
press to  you  our  gratitude."  Nevertheless  he  takes
"this  probability"  to  thank  her,  saying,  "if  my  letter
was  made  to  elongate  a  mile  in  distance"  it  could
contain  but  a  small  portion  of  his  "countless  grat-
itude." 2  But  not  always  is  the  work  a  mutilation.
At  times  the  creative  impulse  comes  in  and  the  "Spot-
er-Wrinkle"  Methodist  Church  of  Hazlehurst,  Miss.,
results,  with  true  Biblical  backing,  ^  as  does  also  the
small  town,  "Balance  Due,"  which  derived  its  name
from  the  "balance  due"  slips  sent  out  monthly  to  the
Negroes  in  their  cooperative  effort  to  buy  land.  ^

Courtship  Formulas.  In  courtship  the  suitor  with
a  retinue  of  grandiose  words  had  a  decided  advantage,
and  many  plantations  had  an  old  slave  experienced  in

1 394.

2  358.

'See  Ephesians,  5:27.

^279.


30       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

the  words  and  ways  of  courtship  to  instruct  "young
gallants  in  the  way  in  which  they  should  go  in  the
delicate  matter  of  winning  the  girl  of  their  choice."  ^
In  one  difficult  courtship  the  suitor  went  to  sea  and
acquired  long  nautical  terms  in  order  effectively  to
''split  dick"  (talk  dictionary)  with  the  obdurate  father
who  wished  his  daughter  to  have  an  educated  husband.  ^
An  example  of  such  wordy  courtships  from  South
Carolina  is:  "Miss  Letty,  I  come  fo'  to  cou't  you,
but  I  'fraid  fo'  to  ventu,'  pervidin'  if  you  have  any
dejection  ma'am.  I  come  wid  a  few  current  tickles
an'  a  few  current  tags  to  mix  my  seed  wid  your
generation,  pervidin'  if  you  have  any  dejection  ma'-
am.?" 3  Another  such  formula  found  in  Mississippi
and  other  parts  South  is,  "Kin'  lady,  went  upon  high
gum  an'  came  down  on  little  Pe  de,  where  many  goes
but  few  knows."  If  such  figurative  speech  is  beyond
the  understanding  of  the  fair  one  she  may  escape
gracefully  by  saying,  "Sir,  you  are  a  huckleberry
beyond  my  persimmon."  ^  Again  if  the  tremulous
suitor  is  in  doubt  as  to  the  exact  relation  to  the  h}^-
meneal  altar  of  his  prospective  lady-love  he  may  solicit
this  information  In  a  euphemistic  fashion  by  asking,
"Deah  lady,  ef  dere  wuz  three  glasses  a-settin'  on  de
table,  one  full,  one  half-full,  and  de  odder  empty,
which  one  wud  you  choose?"  If  she  replies,  "de  full
one,"  he  will  know  she  Is  already  married;  "de  half-full
one,"  then  she  Is  engaged  to  another;  while  "de  empty
one"  tells  him  that  her  life  Is  empty  of  all  others,  ^

1  Banks,  F.  D.,     Plantation  Courtship,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  7  (1894),  p.  146  ff.

^Southern  Workman,  vol.  25  (1896),  p.  226.

3  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  16
(1923),  p.  135  (note  2).

*  141.  Also  cited  with  other  examples  in  Southern  Workman,  vol.  24  (1895),
p.  15.

M06.


Practical  and  Emotional  Background       31

Animal  Folk-tales.  The  most  unaffected  creatures
of  African  thought,  however,  inhabit  the  realm  of
Negro  animal  folk-tales.  Here  was  a  line  of  slave-
thought  not  merely  unrestrained  but  even  encouraged
by  the  whites,  since  these  stories  were  often  clam-
orously demanded  by  white  children  and  stood  the
Negro  nurse  in  good  stead.  In  the  rural  environ-
ment these  animal  stories  still  retained  the  same  force
and  meaning  they  possessed  in  their  rural  African
environment.  Thus  we  have  a  great  mass  of  such
folk-tales  coming  directly  from  their  African  home.
Perhaps  originally  in  Africa  these  stories  had  a  deeper
purpose  than  merely  providing  amusement.  Almost
always  the  weaker  animal  by  his  superior  wit  wins
out  in  the  contest  with  more  ferocious  animals  of
superior  strength.  In  a  symbolic  way  this  may  have
been  originally  a  form  of  prayer  or  incantation  whereby
protection  against  these  powerful  denizens  of  the
jungle  was  secured.  This  seems  all  the  more  likely
since  in  Africa,  as  illustrated  by  the  Benga  tribe,  the
lower  animals  were  believed  in  prehistoric  times  to
have  human  speech  and  to  associate  with  man  even
in  marriage.  ^  Some  West  Africans,  ^  along  with
other  savages,  ^  seriously  believe  that  apes  can  speak,
but  judiciously  hold  their  tongues  lest  they  should  be
made  to  work.  On  the  Gold  Coast  "no  one  says  he
will  kill  his  dog  tomorrow  if  the  dog  is  within  hearing,
lest  it  should  run  away.  On  the  occasion  of  the
Peace  celebration  the  Government  presented  the  people
with  a  number  of  sheep,  and  by  way  of  amusing  their
herd  I  told  the  sheep  they  had  only  one  day  to  live.

^  Nassau,   R.  H.,     Where  Animals  Talk,  p.   165.     The  title  is  sufficient
indication  of  the  native  belief  regarding  power  of  speech  with  animals.
2  Taylor,  E.  B.,     Primitive  Culture,  vol.  1,  p.  379.
^  Klaatsch,  A.  A.,     Evolution,  and  Progress  of  Mankind,  p.  89.


32       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

The  shepherd  was  quite  indignant,  as  he  was  respon-
sible for  their  safe  keeping  and  told  me  the  sheep  would
try  to  escape.  One  did.  The  shepherd  explained  it
was  really  my  fault."  ^  Obviously  animals  with  such
powers  of  understanding  might  also  be  supposed  to  be
afraid  and  to  slink  away  when  hearing  stories  relating
to  their  downfall,  though  in  Africa  any  such  possible
supernatural  motive  has  at  present  been  largely  sub-
ordinated to  that  of  self-gratification.  "The  telling
of  folk-lore  tales  amounts,  with  the  African  Negro,
almost  to  a  passion.  By  day,  both  men  and  women
have  their  manual  occupations,  or  even  if  idling,  pass
the  time  in  sleep  or  gossip;  but  at  night,  particularly
with  moonlight,  if  there  be  on  hand  no  dances,  either
of  fetish-worship  or  of  mere  amusement,  some  story-
teller is  asked  to  recite.     This  is  true  all  over  Africa."  ^

Fossilized  Customs.  With  the  older  Southern  Ne-
groes much  the  same  idea  regarding  the  human  powers
and  actions  of  the  animals  in  "olden  times"  is  in  vogue.
"Dey  sho  could  talk  in  dem  days,  w'ite  folks,  an'  dey
carried  on  dey's  business  an'  dey's  devilment  jes'  lak
folkses"  3 — an  expression  which  with  these  Negroes
is  not  a  mere  saying  or  superstition  but  a  belief,  as
firm  as  that  in  "Norah's  Ark,"  for  instance.  These
animals,  regarded  by  the  old  slaves  as  being  much
larger  in  old  times,  ^  are  probably  the  half-forgotten
shadows  of  uncouth  jungle-beasts.  "De  creeturs  wuz
mos'ly  farmers  in  dem  (olden)  days;"  ^  folks  had  to
get  things  by  "swappin'  and  traffickin'  "  on  account  of

1  Cardinal,  A.  W.,  The  Natives  of  the  Northern  Territories  of  the  Gold
Coast,  p.  37.

''  Nassau,  R.  H.,     Fetichism  in  West  Africa,  p.  330.

'305,  307  and  9L  See  also,  Harris,  J.  C,  Uncle  Remus,  pp.  20-21,  and
Told  by  Uncle  Remus,  pp.  76  and  267  ff.

<  Harris,  J.  C,     Told  by  Uncle  Remus,  pp.  31-40.

*76zd.,  p.  .51.


Practical  and  Emotional  Background       33

the  lack  of  money;  ^  they  "didn't  hab  no  matches
den  .  .  .  an'  folkes  hatter  tote  coals  kivered  wid
ashes  fur  miles  an'  miles,  if  dey  let  de  fire  go  out;"  ^
all  of  these  statements  possibly  refer  to  customs  of
African  days.  Elephants,  lions,  tigers,  and  other
ferocious  beasts  stalk  through  these  Negro  folk-tales
as  they  stalked  through  the  African  jungles  in  which
the  tales  originated.  "Old  King  Sun  wuz  mo'  neigh-
borly" in  the  olden  days  than  now,  ^  possibly  because
he  was  regarded  as  a  deity  taking  a  hand  in  the  des-
tinies of  man.  ^  Rather  common,  ^  though  not  of
animal  association,  is  the  story  of  the  old  woman  who
sought  to  obtain  the  young  man  whom  she  desired  by
fulfilling  his  requirement  of  sleeping  out  on  the  house-
top all  night  between  two  wet  sheets.  She  froze  to
death  about  three  a.m.  and  did  not  get  her  man  after
all.  One  informant  adds  that  "always  in  de  olden
days  when  a  pore  pusson  wuz  fixin'  ter  marry  a  rich
pusson  de  pore  one  had  ter  spend  de  nite  on  de  roof,"  ^
and  we  immediately  suspect  a  possible  survival  of
some  old  African   marriage-test  or  exposure  custom.

African  Characters.  With  the  Ewe  people  in  Africa
these  folk-tales  are  merely  stories  of  the  adventures  of
beasts  and  birds  to  whom  the  natives  ascribe  the  power
of  speech,  and  we  have  nothing  of  the  nature  of  met-
aphor or  moral  such  as  the  fables  of  ^sop.  "This  form
of  myth  is  probably  primary,  the  allegory  and  moral
lesson  being  'added  when  a  more  advanced  stage  of
civilization  is  reached."  ^     The  leading  topic  of  most

1  Ihid.,  p.  77.

2  Boyle,  Mrs.  V.  F.,     Devil  Tales,  p.  161.

'  Harris,  J.  C,     Told  by  Uncle  Remus,  p.  177.

*See  Ellis,  A.  B.,     Ewe-speaking  Peoples,  pp.  31-71.

^  141,  and  91.  See  also.  Parsons,  E.  C.,  Tales  from  Guilford  County,
N.  C,  J.A.F.  L.,  vol  30  (1917),  p.  194.

"307.

'  Ellis,  A.  B.,     Ewe-speaking  Peoples,  p.  268.
3


34       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

animal  tales  is  the  victory  of  cunning  and  craft  over
stupidity  or  brute  force,  and  in  the  Negro  folk-tales
not  only  the  plots  of  the  majority  of  the  stories  but
even  the  principal  actors  are  of  African  origin.  Gen-
erally in  Africa,  it  is  the  jackal  or  fox,  hare  or  tortoise,
who  is  pitted  against  the  lion,  wolf,  or  hyena.  ^  Only
the  spider,  a  great  favorite  in  African  folk-lore,  ^  has
been  almost  entirely  dropped  from  the  folk-tales  of
the  Negro,  and  this  may  perhaps  be  due  to  a  falling
away  of  African  religious  beliefs,  since  on  the  Gold
Coast  the  spider  is  regarded  as  the  Creator  of  all  men,
and  is  supposed  to  speak  through  the  nose  as  the
local  demons  are  said  to  do.  ^  It  also  may  be  that
the  spiders  of  the  South,  being  smaller  and  less  terrify-
ing than  the  African  type,  have  caused  that  creature  to
lose  its  prestige.  "Cunnle  Rabbit""  (so-called  by  the
African  natives)  is  in  reality  not  a  rabbit  at  all,  but  the
water  deerlet  or  chevrotain,  noted  for  its  nimbleness  and
cunning.  It  is  about  eighteen  inches  long,  slender  and
graceful  in  form,  with  a  soft  fawn-colored  skin,  and  the
daintest  of  legs  and  feet.  This  little  creature  is  very
difficult  to  capture  and  its  shyness,  fleetness  and
cunning  have  led  the  natives  to  invest  It  with  a  sort
of  veneration.  It  may  be  that  the  similarity  of  proper
names  have  led  the  slave  to  Invest  the  American  hare
with  the  qualities  of  their  Cunning  Rabbit,  since
"it  certainly  requires  a  very  friendly  eye  to  see  in  the
hare  all  the  mental  acumen  accredited  by  the  Negroes
to  Brer  Rabbit."  ^


iQreber,  A.,  Uncle  Remus  Traced  to  the  Old  World,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  6
(1893),  p.  247.

^  Ellis,  A.  B.,     Yoruba-speaking  Peoples,  p.  258.

^  Burton,  R.  F.,     Wit  and  Wisdom  from  West  Africa,  pp.,. 133-34.

*  Cronise  and  Ward,  Cunnie  Rabbit,  Mr.  Spider  and  the  Other  Beef,  pp.
15-18.


Practical  and  Emotional  Background       35

The  Dog.  Of  all  the  animals  standing  low  In  the
estimation  of  the  African  the  dog  Is  the  most  des-
picable. 1  While  the  dog  fares  better  In  American
Negro  folk-lore,  he  Is  usually  given  a  subordinate  place
and  the  fact  that  the  worst  possible  form  of  cursing
with  the  Southern  Negro  Is  to  declare  a  man  to  be
related  to  a  bitch  seems  to  show  traces  of  the  former
African  disgust  for  this  animal.

African  Origins.  In  general  the  simpler  stories  are
the  more  likely  to  have  had  a  separate  origin,  a  case
of  parallelism,  while  the  odd  and  complex  stories  are
likely  to  have  been  disseminated  from  a  common
source.  In  the  case  of  odd  Negro  folk-tales  this  center
of  origin  must  have  been  In  the  Old  World,  since  the
tide  of  migration  has  steadily  been  westward.  ^  Harris
himself  says,  "One  thing  Is  certain,  the  animal  stories
told  by  the  Negroes  In  our  Southern  States  and  In
Brazil  were  brought  by  them  from  Africa.  Whether
they  originated  there  or  with  the  Arabs  or  Egyptians
or  yet  more  ancient  nations  must  still  be  an  open
question."  ^  Ruby  A.  Moore  testifies  directly  to  the
fact  that  such  was  the  case.  "Most  of  them  (Negro
stories  as  told  by  Uncle  Remus)  are  fables  told  me  by
my  grandfather's  sometime  slaves  when  I  was  a  child.
Many  of  these  Negroes  had  been  brought  over  In  1858
from  the  Galla  district  in  the  Congo  Country  of  Africa,
and  as  soon  as  they  could  make  themselves  understood
by  a  gibberish  that  was  a  mixture  of  our  language  and
theirs,  their  stories,  fables,  traditions,  etc.,  began  to
be  circulated  among  the  other  darkles."  *

1  Chatelain,  H.,     Folk-Tales  of  Angola.,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  i  (1894),  p.  300.
^Greber,  A.,     Uncle  Remus  Traced  to  the  Old  World,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  6
(1893),  p.  245  ff.

'  Harris,  J.  C,     Uncle  Remus,  Introduction,  p.  xii.

*  Moore,  R.  A.,     Siiperstitions  from  Ga.,  J.  A.  F.  L..  vol.  7  (1894),  p.  306.


36       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Coming  now  to  some  examples  of  African  tales
brought  to  America  we  see,  first  of  all,  the  doubtful
case  of  the  fox  who  fooled  the  bear  into  using  his
long  bushy  tail  for  a  fishing  line.  Something  in  the
water  caught  it  and  bit  it  off,  leaving  the  bear  for-
evermore  with  a  short  tail.  So  runs  the  Yoruban
version,  ^  and  the  common  American  version  is  like  it
except  that  the  rabbit's  tail  is  supposed  to  have  frozen
up  in  the  ice  and  snapped  off,  ^  But  this  latter  version
is  common  in  the  tales  of  Reinhart  Fuchs  in  Europe,
except  that  the  wolf  is  substituted  for  the  rabbit,
while  with  the  Northern  Countries  the  bear  main-
tains this  position.  ^  One  of  my  informants  gives  a
version  closer  to  the  African  one  in  that  the  fox  fools
the  rabbit  into  getting  his  tail  frozen  in  the  stream;
then  the  owl  tries  to  pull  him  out  by  his  ears,  stretching
them  to  their  present-day  immoderate  length;  and
finally  gets  him  out  by  biting  the  rabbit's  tail  off  close
to  the  ice,  leaving  him  with  his  little  bob-tail.  *  In
spite  of  the  close  similarity  of  these  stories,  the  natural
absence  of  ice  in  the  African  version  and  its  presence
in  the  American  and  European  ones  would  lead  us  to
doubt  its  African  origin;  Many  European  tales  were
absorbed  by  the  Southern  Negroes,  and  in  these  days
of  an  education  for  Negroes,  Cinderella  and  Daedalus
and  Icarus  hobnob  with  Brer  Rabbit  and  Brer  Fox.

Devil  Tales  and  Others.  Mrs.  Virginia  Frazer  Boyle
records  some  very  interesting  old  slave  stories  related
by  an  old  nurse,  in  her  book.  Devil  Tales.  Concerning
these  she  writes  me  that  Dr.  Paul  Carus  located  all  of


1  Lomax,  J.  A.,     Stories  of  an  African  Prince,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  26  (1913),  p.  6.

2  Harris,  J.  C,     Uncle  Remus,  pp.  120-24.     Also  informant  91.

•''  Jacobs,    J.,      Reynard    the   Fox,   Introduction,    pp.  xvii-xviii  and    xxix.
Campbell,  J.  F.,     Popular  Tales  of  the  West  Highlands,  vol.  1,  pp.  280-81.
♦7.


Practical  and  Emotional  Background       37

their  origins  on  the  West  Coast  of  Africa  with  the
exception  of  the  story  about  "The  Devil's  Little  Fly"
(found  among  Negroes  in  Georgia,  Tennessee,  Mis-
sissippi and  Alabama),  which  appears  to  be  of  As-
syrian origin.  ^  There  is  an  African  story  of  the  devil
in  disguise  marrying  a  proud  girl  who  disdained  all
other  suitors,  ^  which  shows  many  points  in  common
with  the  Southern  Negro  version,  although  the  mode  of
escape  is  different.  In  the  Sea  Island  version  ^  the
devil  is  represented  as  having  to  undress  in  order  to
eat — a  possible  remnant  of  some  African  ceremonial
food  custom.  The  familiar  story  of  Brer  Rabbit
telling  the  girls  he  was  going  to  make  a  riding  horse  of
Brer  Fox,  then  actually  so  doing  through  pretense  of
sickness,  *  has  its  counterpart  in  the  African  story
of  Mr.  Turtle  making  a  riding  horse  of  Mr.  Leopard.  ^
Again  Brer  Rabbit  asks  God  (or  an  old  witch)  for  more
sense.  God  tells  him  to  bring  Him  some  snake's
front  teeth  (or  squirrels,  or  blackbirds  in  a  bag,  or
some  alligator  teeth).  Brer  Rabbit  does  this  in  his
usual  sly  manner,  whereupon  God  tells  him  that  he
already  has  enough  sense  (or  else  knocks  him  in  the
head  so  that  his  eyes  pop  out,  or  lets  a  hound  dog  bite
his  long  tail  off).  ^  This  story  has  an  almost  precise
agreement  with  the  Woloff  story  where  the  Creator
tells  the  hare  to  catch  some  sparrows  in  a  calabash.  "^

2  Cronise  and  Ward.,  Cunnie  Rabbit,  Mr.  Spider  and  the  Other  Beef,  pp.
178-87.

'Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk- Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.
16  (1923),  pp.  45-46.

'  21,  74,  and  362.

^  Cronise  and  Ward,  Cunnie  Rabbit,  Mr.  Spider  and  the  Other  Beef,  pp.
70-76.

«330.

^  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  6
(1893),  p.  249.  See  also,  Cronise  and  Ward.,  Cunnie  Rabbit,  Mr.  Spider
and  the  Other  Beef,  pp.  40-49.  Barker,  W.  H.,  and  Sinclair,  C,  West  African
Folk-Tales,    (London.    1917),   pp.   29-31.


38       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

With  the  Southern  Negro,  according  to  a  South  Caro-
Hna  version,  ^  the  rabbit  and  the  wolf  are  working  in
the  field  together,  Brer  Rabbit  slips  away  three  times
to  eat  the  cheese  they  are  saving  for  dinner,  explaining
his   absence   each   time  by   saying  that  his   wife   had
presented  him  with  a  child,  the  first  one  being  named
Startun,    the    next,    Halfun,    and    the   third,    Doneun
(the  cheese  all  eaten).     With   the  Africans   it  is   the
rabbit  and  the  antelope  digging  a  well,  but  the  rabbit
slips  off  to  eat  the  food  as  before  and  his  three  hy-
pothetical children  are  called  Uncompleted-one,  Half-
completed     one,     and     Completed-one.  ^     With     the
African,  the  story  then  turns  to  the  "tar-baby  episode"
(figure  smeared  with  bird-lime),  while  the  Negro  story
goes    on   to   tell   about  the   "tell-tale  grease,"   which,
however,     also    has    an    African    origin.  ^     With    the
Negro,  Brer  Rabbit  tells  the  elephant  (ruler  of  earth)
that  he  has  a  cow  that  he  wants  pulled  out  of  a  mud-
hole.     Then   he  tells  the  whale   (ruler  of  water)   the
same    thing  and   has   them  pull   against  one  another
until  both  are  dead.  Brer  Rabbit  then  becoming  ruler
of    everything.  ^     The  Ibos   have  the  tortoise  fooling
the   buffalo  and  the  elephant  into  such  a  struggle,  ^
while  others  have  the  spider  enticing  the  elephant  and
hippopotamus,  "  and  still  others,  the  tortoise  against  the
rhinoceros  and  hippopotamus,  ^  but  the  plot    pattern
with  all  Is  essentially  alike.     Brer  Guinea  (or  Rooster)
sits  up  with  his  head  tucked  under  his  wing  and  his  legs
tucked  under  his  feathers  and  tells  Brer  Rabbit  that  his


U25.

2  Dennet,  R.  E.,     Notes  on  the  Folklore  of  the  Fjort,  pp.  90-93.
'  Parsons,  E.  C,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  16
(1923),  pp    12-14.

*  305,  and  326.

*  Basden,  G.  T.,     Among  the  Ibos  of  Nigeria,  p.  277.

*  Cronise  and  Ward,     Cunnie  Rabbit,  Mr.  Spider  and  the  other  Beef,  pp.
117-23.

7  Milligan,  R.  H.,     Fetish  Folk  of  West  Africa,  pp.  214-15.


Practical  and  Emotional  Background       39

head  and  legs  were  so  cold  that  he  had  his  wife  chop
them  off  for  him.  Brer  Rabbit  goes  home  and  meets  his
death  by  having  his  wife  do  the  same  for  him.  ^  In
Africa  exactly  the  same  episode  takes  place  between
the  rooster  and  the  rabbit.  ^  The  South  Carolina
Negro  has  the  hedgehog  beat  the  rabbit  In  a  race  by
hiding  Mrs.  Hedgehog,  who  could  not  be  distinguished
from  him,  at  the  finish  line,  ^  while  In  Africa  the  snail  *
or  frog  ^  beats  the  deer,  or  the  chameleon  the  ele-
phant, "  or  the  turtle  the  antelope,  ^  by  the  same
strategy.  The  American  alligator  acquired  his  scaly
skin  by  being  trapped  In  a  fire  by  Brer  Rabbit,  *
which  Is  a  literal  outline  of  the  Rhodeslan  story,
except  that  the  African  version  mixes  people  In  with
the  plot.  9

The  Tar-baby  Story.  Possibly  one  of  the  best  known
Importations  is  the  familiar  tar-baby  story,  where
Brer  Rabbit  Is  trapped  by  slapping  an-  Image  smeared
with  tar.  In  Africa,  with  the  Ewes  he  Is  then  thor-
oughly beaten  for  muddying  up  a  spring  which  he
would  not  help  dig;  ^ "  or,  as  the  Yoruban  version  goes,
Is  caught  by  slapping  a  trap  and  fools  the  other  animals
Into  throwing  him  scot  free  Into  an  open  field  where  he
has   told   them   he   would   be   devoured   by    beasts   of

^307.  For  variants,  see  Parsons,  E.  C,  Tales  from  Guilford  County,
N.  C,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  30  (1917),  p.  190  ff.  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Tales  Col-
lected at  Miami,  Fla.,  Ibid.,  p.  226.  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Tales  from  Students
in  Tuskeegee  Institute,  Ala.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol  32  (1919),  p.  401.

^  Boas,  F.  and  Sinango,  C.  K.,  Tales  and  Proverbs  of  the  Vandau  of  Portu-
guese South  Africa,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  35  (1922),  p.  180.

394.

*  Ellis,  G.  E.,     Negro  Culture  in  West  Africa,  p.  199.

*  Basden,  G.  T.,     Among  the  Ibos  of  Nigeria,  p.  274.

6  Milligan,  R.  H.,     Fetish  Folk  of  West  Africa,  pp.  214-15.
^  Schwab,  G.,    Bulu  Folk-Tales,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  27  (1914),  p.  277.    Nassau,
R.  H.,     Where  Animals  Talk,  pp.   95-98.

8341.     See  also,  Harris,  J.  C,     Told  by  Uncle  Remus,  pp.  258-59.
9  FuUer,  Dr.  C.  C.,     In  Talley,  T.  W.,     Negro  Folk  Rhymes,  pp.  309-10.
10  Ellis,  A.  B.,     Ewe-speaking  Peoples,  pp.  275-77.


40       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

prey.  ^  Commonly  in  America  he  is  trapped  by  the
tar  image  for  muddying  a  spring  and  fools  the  captors
into  throwing  him  into  the  briar-patch  where  he  was
"bred  and  born,"  ^  although  in  one  interesting  Ar-
kansas variant  he  is  trapped  while  fishing  in  Brer
Fox's  fishing  house  and  escapes  when  Brer  Fox  tries
to  melt  the  tar  off"  him  in  order  to  eat  him. '  In
another  African  case  it  is  Mr.  Spider  who  gets  caught
on  an  image  smeared  over  with  sticky  gum  from  a  tree.  *
Variants  of  the  story  appear  in  widely  separate  coun-
tries. In  the  Bahama  Islands  an  elephant  devises  the
tar-baby;  in  Canada  a  Frenchman;  in  Brazil  an  old
woman  or  man  catches  a  monkey  on  a  wax  baby;
in  Mauritis  and  in  one  South  African  version  the
tortoise  puts  glue  on  its  back  and  catches  the  hare  or
jackal,  while  in  another  South  African  version  the
jackal  is  caught  in  lime  which  a  man  put  on  a  fence.
If  Mr.  Jacob  be  correct  there  is  also  a  similarity  in  the
story  in  India  of  the  Jataka,  of  Buddha  and  the
demon  with  the  matted  hair  ^ — all  of  which  shows  the
story  pattern  to  be  one  of  tremendous  antiquity.
Perhaps  Espinosa  and  Boas  are  right  in  considering
Spain  and  Portugal  as  the  center  of  origin,  from  which
latter  country  these  stories  were  carried  to  the  Guinea
Coast  of  Africa  as  early  as  1480,  and  from  thence
brought    over    into    Negro    America    by    the    slaves.  ^

1  Lomax,  J.  A.,     Stories  of  an  African  Prince,  J.A.F.  L.,  vol.  26  (1913),  p.  5.
2 114,  31,  305,  and  89.    See  Harris,  J.  C,     Uncle  Remus,  pp.  7-11  and  16-19.

2  27.  For  other  variants,  see  Bacon,  A.  M.,  and  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-
Songsfrom  Elizabeth  City  County,  Va.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  35  (1923),  pp.  256-60.

*  Cronise  and  Ward.,  Cunnie  Rabbit,  Mr.  Spider  and  the  Other  Beef,  pp.
101-11.

^Graber,  A.,  Uncle  Remus  Traced  to  the  Old  World,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  6
(1893),  p.  251.

« Espinosa,  A.  M.,  A  Folk-Lore  Expedition  to  Spain,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  34
(1921),  pp.  127-42.  Boas,  F.,  Mylholoy  and  Folk-Tales  of  the  North  American
Indians,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  27,  pp.  374-410.  Tozzer,  A.  M.,  Social  Origins
and  Social  Continuities,  pp.  20-21.


Practical  and  Emotional  Background       41

At  any  rate  the  African  source  seems  to  prevail  over
the  Indian  in  the  case  of  the  tar-baby  story,  since
neither  the  story  nor  tlie  motif  has  a  marked  place  in
Hindu  fiction;  since  it  is  not  widespread  there  and  has
not  been  passed  on  to  neighboring  peoples  like  other
Hindu  stories;  and  since  it  is  found  more  in  Africa
(22  cases)  than  elsewhere,  though  the  field  has  been
less  explored  than  India.  ^

While  I  have  no  cases  of  the  tar-baby  being  used  by
the  Africans  to  catch  evil  spirits,  yet  the  Mississippi
Negroes  say  that  such  an  image  would  be  bound  to
bring  good  luck,  since  the  tar-baby  was  the  only
thing  sharp  enough  to  stop  Brer  Rabbit,  ^  and  there
is  the  statement  by  an  old  Negro  man  that  in  1861
such  a  tar-baby  was  painted  above  the  door  of  a
blacksmith  shop  near  Sumpter,  S.  C,  to  guard  the
shop  against  ill  luck.  ^  In  certain  localities  in  Georgia
the  tar-baby  was  regarded  as  a  monstrous  living
creature  composed  of  tar,  who  haunted  lonely
places  about  the  plantation,  insulting  people  beyond
endurance  so  that  they  would  strike  him  and  give
themselves  into  his  sticky  embrace.  *

Erroneous  Nature-beliefs.  These  cases  represent
typical  migrations  of  African  animal  folk-tales  into
America.  Doubtless  there  are  many  more  which  will
be  identified  when  additional  study  of  African  sources
are  made,  since  there  are  other  Negro  tales  with  an
African  swagger  to  them  which  apparently  show  no
counterparts  in  the  folk-lore  of  other  peoples.     Many

1  Brown,  Dr.  W.  N.,  The  Tar-baby  Story  at  Hoyne,  Scientific  Monthly,
vol.  15  (1922),  p.  230  ff.

"91.

*  Davis,  H.  C,  Negro  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  27
(1914),  p.  245.

^  Pendleton,  L.,  Notes  on  Negro  Folk-Lore  and  Witchcraft  in  the  South,
J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  3  (1890),  pp.  291-92.


42       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

tales  have  to  do  with  the  physical  peculiarities  of  the
various  animals.  For  example,  a  stingy  old  woman
wearing  a  red  bonnet,  a  black  blouse,  and  a  white
apron,  was  changed  instantly  into  the  familiar  wood-
pecker because  she  was  too  selfish  to  give  a  poor  old
man  a  piece  of  the  cake  she  was  baking.  ^  Originally
the  frog  had  a  tail  but  no  eyes,  and  the  mole  eyes  but
no  tail.  They  traded  and  both  assumed  their  present
day  form.  ^  Gradually  this  form  of  lore  shades  off
into  erroneous  beliefs  concerning  animals  and  natural
phenomena  in  general.  These  mistaken  ideas  of  the
Negroes  (and  many  whites)  regarding  objects  of  nature
and  natural  history  are  not  arranged  in  story  form  and
are  not  related  for  amusement,  but  simply  constitute
items  of  everyday  folk-knowledge.  Taken  as  a  whole
they  are  believed  in  more  literally  than  are  the  folk-
tales and  show  much  more  of  the  European  influence
in  their  making.  Most  of  these  erroneous  nature-
concepts  cluster  around  snakes  or  other  reptiles,
possibly  showing  a  distant  relationship  to  the  fetish
snakes  of  African  voodooism.

Snakes.  The  "coach-whip"  snake  (sometimes  called
the  "hoop-snake")  usually  runs  in  pairs.  One  of
them  binds  the  victim  in  his  coils  while  his  mate  whips
that  unfortunate  person  to  death.  These  snakes  have
a  tail  plaited  in  four  strands  like  a  whip  (in  reality  the
scale  arrangement  does  look  like  a  plait).  It  is  of  no
use  to  pretend  to  be  dead  when  caught  by  one  of  these
snakes — the  reptile  sticks  the  tip  of  his  tail  into  his
captive's  nose  and  can  tell  whether  he  is  breathing
or  not.     If  the  person  is  alive  he  is  speedily  beaten  to

1141.

^Southern  Workman,  vol.  24  (1895),  p.  78.


Practical  and  Emotional  Background       43

death.  ^  Others  say  that  this  snake  seizes  his  tail  in
his  mouth  and  rolls  over  and  over  like  a  hoop  until  he
overtakes  his  victim.  If  the  poor  unfortunate  feigns
death  the  serpent  thrusts  the  pointed  end  of  his  tail
into  the  person's  ear  and  pierces  the  ear-drum,  forcing
him  to  cry  out  from  the  pain.  ^  These  snakes  will
stand  up  on  the  tip  of  their  tail  and  whistle  like  a  man.
If  you  whistle  back  they  will  answer,  leading  you  on
to  your  inevitable  fate  of  being  whipped  to  death.
When  you  want  to  run  away  from  such  a  snake,  never
run  straight.  The  snake  can  not  turn  without  "quirl-
ing"  (coiling)  and  that  gives  you  time  to  get  away. '
An  old  conjure-doctor  told  me  very  convincingly  of
the  "horn-snake,"  which  has  a  hard  horn  running  off
at  right  angles  to  the  body  close  to  the  end  of  the  tail.
This  snake  also  rolls  over  and  over  after  a  person  like  a
hoop,  then  suddenly  straightens  out  and  hooks  him
with  the  horn.  The  venom  is  kept  in  this  horn  and  so
strong  is  this  poison  that  on  one  occasion  when  he  was
hooked  at  by  such  a  snake  whose  poisonous  horn
scarcely  missed  him  and  stuck  into  a  green  tree,  the
tree  immediately  died.  ^  "Milk-snakes"  (or  black-
snakes  as  some  say)  will  charm  children  and  suck
cows  dry.  You  can  always  tell  when  this  has  been
done  for  the  cows  will  then  give  bloody  milk,  poisonous
to  human  beings.  The  cows  will  low  for  these  snakes
and  the  latter  will  wait  for  them  in  a  certain  part  of
the  field.  One  cow  died  of  grief  after  her  "milk-snake"
was  killed.  ^      In  rare  cases  these  "milk-snakes"  even


»  205.

2  Davis,  Henry  C,  Negro  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  27
(1914),  p.  245.

'Smiley,  P.,  Folk-Lore  from  Va.,  S.  C,  Ga.,  Ala.,  and  Fla.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  32  (1919),  p.  381.

*91.

^141.  and  57.  Bergen,  F.  D.,  Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,
vol.  7   (1899),  pp.  86-87.


44       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

nurse  sleeping  women.  Other  peculiar  snakes  are
"spreading  adders,"  which  spread  out  as  flat  and  as
thin  as  a  carpet  when  you  approach,  and  look  like  the
earth  itself,  and  "king-snakes,"  which  have  a  very
powerful  spine  and  can  kill  any  other  snake  by  wrap-
ping themselves  around  that  reptile  and  crushing
every  bone  in  his  body.  ^  All  snakes  except  black-
snakes  can  whistle,  and  moccasins  can  blow.  ^  Some
Europeans  ^  say  that  a  snake  will  not  entirely  die
before  sundown.  The  Negro  has  this  same  idea,  *
but  extends  it  to  wasps  and  hornets  as  well.  ^  A
lizard  or  garter-snake  will  shed  its  tail  to  escape  from
your  hand.  Later  it  comes  back  and  gets  the  tail,
or  runs  off  with  that  member  in  its  mouth,  puts  it
back  on,  and  is  just  as  complete  as  ever.  If  you  kill
a  "pilot-snake"  look  out  for  the  rattler  which  soon
will  follow.  ^

A  wavy  snake  track  in  the  dust  of  the  road  indicates
that  a  poisonous  snake  has  passed.  Harmless  snakes
leave  an  absolutely  straight  track  with  no  curves  at  all.  ^
The  smell  of  watermelon  also  tells  one  of  a  snake
somewhere  close  by.  ^  The  eel  is  the  male  catfish  ^  and
has  several  amazing  peculiarities.  If  you  fry  an  eel
thoroughly  and  then  allow  the  meat  to  become  cold
it  will  become  raw  and  bloody  again.  ^ "  When  a  snake
or  eel  is  put  into  a  frying-pan  the  feet  will  "come  out"

1  Smiley,  P.,      Folk-Lore  from  Va.,  S.  C,  Ga.,  Ala.,  and  Fla.,  J.  A.  F.  L.
vol.  32  (1919),  p.  381.

2  91,  and  141.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  25  (1896),  p.  16.

'  Fogel,  E.   M.,     Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,
p.  220.

^297.

^  Davis,  H.  C,     Negro  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  27
(1914),  p.  245.

^Ibid.,  and  91,  and  141.

^342.

8  45,  and  112.     Wiltsie,  H.  M.,     In  the  Fields  of  Southern  Folk-Lore,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  14  (1901),  p.  206.

*  Davis,  H.  C,     Negro  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  27
(1914),  p.  245.

"  91,  and  292.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  25  (1896),  p.  16.


Practical  and  Emotional  Background       45

(appear).  ^  The  "snake-doctor"  or  mosquito  hawk  is
thought  to  be  able  to  bring  a  dead  snake  back  to  life
again,  and  in  some  places  it  is  believed  that  the  presence
of  this  insect  indicates  that  a  snake  is  lurking  near  by.  ^

Miscellaneous  Beliefs.  Besides  these  snake-beliefs
there  are  many  others  of  a  miscellaneous  nature.  For
instance,  when  a  terrapin  (cooter)  or  crawfish,  grabs
you  he  will  never  let  go  until  it  thunders.  ^  You
should  never  kill  a  turtle;  he  will  come  back  and  haunt
you,  ^  while  if  you  kill  a  lizard  his  mate  will  come  to
count  your  teeth  and  you  will  surely  die.  ^  If  a  bat
alights  on  your  head  he  will  stay  there  until  it  thun-
ders. ^  The  bite  of  the  spring  lizard  is  sure  death,
and  the  sting  of  the  big  "cow-ant"  {Sphaerophthalma
occidentalis)  is  likewise  deadly  poison.  ^  Frogs  are
dangerous — they  eat  buckshot  and  coals  of  fire.  ^  All
the  crabs  are  poor  on  a  moonlight  night,  and  all  the
"varmints"  come  ashore  on  the  spring-tide  (the  highest
of  all  tides).  ^  If  fire  from  a  "lightning-bug"  gets
into  your  eye  it  will  put  it  out.  ^ »  Apparently  of  English
origin  ^  ^  is  the  belief  that  if  insects  bite  you  in  "dog
days"  the  bites  are  worse  and  will  take  longer  to  heal.  ^  ^
When  a  mule  is  dying  the  other  mules  in  the  lot  with

'  45,  and  Bergen,  F.  D.,  Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7
(1899),  p.  88.

2 141.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  25  (1896),  p.  16.

3  292,  and  Davis,  H.  C,  Negro  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  27  (1914),  p.  245.

^404.

*  Hardy,  Sarah  M.,  Negro  Superstitions,  Lippincotts  Monthly  Magazine,
vol.  xlviii  (1891),  p.  738.

« Price,  Sadie,  F.,     Kentucky  Folk-Lore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  14  (1901),  p.  33.

^  141.  Davis,  H.  C,  Negro  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.F.  L.,  vol.
27  (1914),  p.  246.

8  91.

« Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.
16  (1923),  p.  209.

10  286.  Bergen,  F.  D.,  Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7
(1899),  91.

1 '  Lean 's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  242.

J  2  257.


46       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

him  will  neigh  until  the  dead  mule  is  carried  away.  ^
You  can  pick  out  a  good  mule,  however,  by  turning
the  animal  loose  and  letting  him  wallow.  If  he  can
roll  all  the  way  over  he  is  a  strong,  healthy  mule  and
worth  a  lot  of  money.  ^  A  colt  born  in  May  will
always  lie  down  while  being  driven  through  water. '
Plant  lice  come  from  the  dew  on  cotton.  ^  A  rabbit
when  chased  by  dogs  will  return  to  its  starting  point,
lick  its  four  paws,  make  a  jump  and  the  dogs  can  no
longer  trace  it.  ^  A  woman  with  child  will  expect  the
young  one  a  day  or  so  before  or  after  the  new  moon  ^ —
a  belief  also  found  in  Herefordshire.  ^

Some  Negroes  have  a  very  peculiar  belief  about  the
so-called  "dog-finger."  This  finger  is  the  first,  or
middle  finger  (opinions  difi^er)  of  the  right  hand  (one
conjurer  claims  it  is  the  index  finger,  ^  while  another
informant  says  the  second  finger  of  the  left  hand).  ^
But  at  any  rate  this  "dog  finger"  should  never  be  al-
lowed to  touch  a  wound  for  fear  of  causing  evil  re-
sults. 10  "De  lef  ban's  de  debbil's  han'  an'  de  dawg-
finger's  de  conjure-finger."  ^  ^  In  Europe  the  fore-
finger is  esteemed  poisonous,  and  therefore  never
used  to  apply  anything  to  a  wound  or  bruise,  though
stroking  a  wound  with  the  ring  finger  will  quickly
heal  it.  ^  ^     Other  Negroes  believe  that  the  earth  is  a


1  289.

^  286,  and  Richardson,  C,     Some  Slave  Superstitions,  Southern  Workman,
vol.  41  (1912),  p.  247.

'  297,  and  Thomas  and  Thomas.,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  213.

*  Davis,  H.  C,     Negro  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  27
(1914),  p.  246.

5 394,  and  Bergen,  F.  D.,     Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7
(1899),  p.  83.

6  288.

'Leather,  E.  M.,     Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  15.

8  258.

» 304.
' » 286,  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  66.
1148.
^^  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  403.


Practical  and  Emotional  Background       47

huge  mass  of  dirt  with  great  hollow  cavities  just  below
the  surface.  If  the  top  soil  gets  softened  by  repeated
rains  or  other  causes  it  will  fall  downward  for  a  mile
or  two  revolving  as  it  falls.  This  so-called  "earth-
quake-hole" is  then  filled  in  with  melted  rock  and  the
individual  going  down  with  the  original  top  soil  is
buried  under  a  mile  or  so  of  volcanic  matter.  ^  When
the  sun  is  eclipsed  have  a  basin  of  water  arranged  so
that  the  sun  is  reflected  from  the  water  to  a  mirror  to
your  eyes.  You  will  see  the  moon  chasing  itself
around  and  around  the  sun.  For  an  eclipse  of  the
moon  simply  look  at  that  body  through  a  piece  of
silk.  You  will  see  a  star  running  "roun'  and  roun'
hit."  -  Go  to  the  chicken-coop  any  night  at  three
o'clock  and  you  will  hear  the  chickens  sneeze.  ^  If
you  hold  your  breath  while  a  mosquito  is  biting  you
he  will  be  unable  to  withdraw  his  bill  and  you  can
kill  him.  *  Wild  geese  flying  south  make  the  initials
of  each  state  over  which  they  pass.  ^  Many  Negroes
believe  that  the  male  opossum  with  his  forked  sex
organ  copulates  into  the  nose  of  the  female  who  then
blows  the  spermatic  fluid  into  her  pouch — a  belief
showing  some  degree  of  natural  observation  since  it  is
true  that  the  copulatory  organ  of  the  male  is  bifurcate
and  that  the  female  licks  her  pouch  just  before  par-
turition to  prepare  it  for  the  young,  though,  of  course,
intercourse  and  birth  occur  the  same  as  with  other
mammals.  ^


'105.

2  141.

3  Bergen,  F.  D.,     Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7  (1899),
p.  84.

^91.

*  Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  267.
^  74,  and  326.     Hartman,    C,     Traditional   Beliefs   Concerning  the   Gen-
eration of  the  Opossum,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  34  (1921),  pp.  321-22.


48       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

In  this  same  class  of  mistaken  nature-beliefs  is  the
idea,  of  European  origin,  ^  that  no  matter  how  hard
it  may  rain  the  sun  is  bound  to  shine  for  a  moment  at
least,  every  Saturday.  ^  A  dog  coming  into  a  house
during  a  storm  will  "draw  lightning,"  ^  while  it  is
dangerous  to  be  around  a  wet  horse  during  an  elec-
trical storm  for  the  same  reason.  *  Bats  flying  into
the  house  are  sure  to  bring  bed-bugs  with  them;  you
can  see  such  vermin  under  the  bat's  wings.  ^  When
eggs  are  set  under  a  hen  they  are  usually  marked  to
distinguish  them  from  eggs  which  might  be  laid  later
in  the  nest.  The  Negroes  say  the  marks  put  on  the
shell  will  be  reproduced  on  the  chicks.  ^  The  eggs
will  hatch  in  exactly  the  same  rotation  in  which  you
put  them  into  the  nest — if  you  want  all  the  chicks  to
hatch  at  once  put  all  of  the  eggs  in  at  once,  not  one  at
a  time.  ^  I  have  often  observed  the  Mississippi
Negroes  taking  the  eggs  from  a  guinea-hen's  nest  with
a  spoon,  under  the  European  ^  misconception  that  the
guinea  would  abandon  the  nest  if  you  touch  it  with
your  fingers.  There  is  also  the  European  ^  belief
that  on  Christmas  Eve  at  twelve  o'clock  (or  on  Christ-
mas morning  just  before  day)  ^  °  the  cattle  all  kneel  in
prayer.  ^  ^  The  Negroes  also  add  that  if  any  one  is  so
foolhardy  as   to  get  up  and   see  the   cows  pray  that

'  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  1,  p.  350.

2  83.

3  199.
*  297.
6  342.

6  Bergen,  F.  D.,    Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7  (1899),  p.  84.

7  57.

^  Fogel,  E.  M.,     Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,
p.  180.

'  Hunt,  R.,     Popular  Romances  of  the  West  of  England,  p.  389.
1"  286,  and  Work,  M.  H.,     Som£  Geechee  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.
35  (1905),  p.  635.

11141.     Pendleton,    L.,     Notes   on   Negro  Folk-Lore  and  Witchcraft  in  the
South,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  3  (1890),  p.  202.


Practical  and  Emotional  Background       49

person  will  die.  ^  Possibly  the  belief  that  if  you  sit
out  under  a  pine  tree  on  Christmas  Eve  you  will  hear
the  angels  sing  and  will  die  shortly  afterwards,  -  is
a  degeneration  of  the  former  belief.  Other  Negroes
set  New  Year's  Eve  as  the  time  when  the  stock  unite
in  prayer.  ^

Negro  Jokes.  Returning  to  another  phase  of  pure
self-gratification,  we  find  Negro  laughter  feeding  and
flourishing  upon  simple  jokes  containing  scarcely
enough  substance  to  nourish  a  commonplace  grin  on
the  face  of  unimaginative  white  listeners.  A  Negro
barber  "wuz  so  hard-up  (penniless)  dat  he  run  out  an'
gib  Brer  Rabbit  a  shave  an'  a  hair-cut  an'  collect
fifteen  cents  'fo'  Brer  Rabbit  could  budge  a  step."  ^
The  heavy-footed  humor  of  the  white  man  would  be
able  to  chase  no  more  than  a  stale  smile  from  such  a
story,  but  the  Negro  will  tell  and  retell  the  narrative
for  fifteen  minutes  or  so,  arousing  many  an  uproarious
peal  of  laughter  from  the  situation  where  one  of  their
own  race  outwits  the  sly  Brer  Rabbit.  In  another
case  a  goat  butts  a  man  in  the  head.  The  man's
brains  are  taken  out  by  the  doctor  to  be  fixed,  but  he
carelessly  leaves  them  lying  around  and  they  are
stolen  and  eaten  by  a  prowling  cat.  The  physician,
in  a  quandary,  gets  some  dog's  brains  and  sews  them
back  in  the  place  of  the  brains  that  were  stolen.  Later,
when  the  man  is  asked  how  he  is  feeling,  he  replies;
"Pse  all  right,  'ceptin'  dat  when  I  sees  a  rabbit  I
des  can't  keep  frum  barkin'."  ^  Brer  Buzzard  oflFers
to  teach  Brer  Rabbit  how  to  fly.     He  takes  him  up

136.

2175.

3  18,  and  401.

*  307.

5 129.

4


50        Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

in  the  air  and,  telling  him  to  let  go,  shakes  him  off
his  back.  Brer  Rabbit  hits  the  ground  with  a  whack
and  the  other  animals  all  laugh  at  him  and  taunt  him
at  his  attempt  to  fly.  "Er  course  I  kin  fly.  Didn't
you  all  see  me?  De  trubbl'  wuz  Brer  Buzzard  for-
got ter  tell  me  how  ter  Ian'."  ^

Laughing  at  the  White  Man.  If  the  value  of  humor
lies  in  the  indirect  satisfaction  of  repressed  desires,
those  who  seek  a  sex  basis  for  such  expression  should
find  much  of  interest  in  Negro  jokes,  but,  unfortunately,
the  majority  of  such  anecdotes  will  not  bear  retelling
here.  Accounts  of  the  tricks  used  by  unfaithful  wives
to  deceive  their  husbands  figure  largely.  But  the
Negro  does  love  to  laugh  at  the  mishaps  of  his  white
master,  as  evidenced  by  such  stories  as  that  of  the
new  field  hand  who  did  not  understand  the  meaning  of
the  dinner  bell.  His  master  found  him  in  the  field
still  working  after  the  bell  had  rung,  and  angrily
commanded  him  "to  drop  whatever  he  had  in  his
hands"  and  run  for  the  table  whenever  he  heard  it
ring.  Next  day  at  noon  he  was  carrying  his  master,
taken  sick  in  the  fields,  across  a  foot-log  over  the  creek
when  the  bell  rang.  He  "dropped"  the  white  man  in
the  water  and  nothing  was  done  to  him  for  he  had
only  done  what  his  master  had  commanded.  ^  Pos-
sibly the  opportunity  of  poking  fun  at  the  white  race
in  an  Indirect  way  Is  the  basis  of  the  many  Irishman
jokes,  so  widespread  among  the  Southern  Negro,  such
as  that  one  about  the  Irishman  who  couldn't  tell  a
watch  from  a  terrapin,  and  in  consequence  was  laughed
at  for  stamping  a  good  watch  to  pieces  under  the
impression   that   it   was   a   terrapin,    later   having   his

1288.
2 .307.


Practical  and  Emotional  Background       51

heart  gnawed  out  by  a  terrapin  which  he  put  into  his
pocket  thinking  it  another  watch.  ^  Men  wise  in  the
world  but  ignorant  of  the  country  are  always  objects
of  ridicule,  like  the  city  sport  who  refused  to  shoot  the
deer  he  saw  because  he  thought  it  was  running  so
recklessly  that  if  let  alone  it  would  kill  its  own  self.  ^
Escape  from  an  embarrassing  predicament  is  another
favorite  theme,  illustrated  by  the  escape  of  "de  widder-
wom.an  frum  de  Hairy  Man.  De  Hairy  Man  had
cotched  her  in  de  woods  an'  wuz  fixin'  ter  kill  her,"
but  she  asks  for  a  few  moments  in  which  to  pray.  The
"Hairy  Man"  didn't  know  what  prayer  was,  so  the
woman  took  advantage  of  this  spiritual  ignorance
to  call  her  dogs,  who  ate  up  her  monstrous  assailant,  ^
In  another  case  a  hunter  who  had  only  one  shell  was
suddenly  confronted  with  a  drove  of  ducks  and  a
dangerous  rattlesnake  at  his  feet.  While  he  was
debating,  his  gun  went  off  and  killed  "five  thousand"
ducks,  his  ramrod  went  down  the  snake's  throat  and
choked  him  to  death,  and  the  unexpected  enters  in
when  the  gun  kicks  the  hunter  into  the  river  and
he  walks  out  with  his  boots  full  of  fish.  ^  But  this
story  is  too  complicated  and  has  a  white  man's  turn;
1  suspect  the  remarks  I  overheard  from  an  old  Negro
while  he  was  preparing  his  friend's  body  for  burial
are  more  typical,  and  certainly  they  appealed  to  the
Negro  sense  of  humor  since  a  hearty  laugh  resulted.
A  former  enemy  of  the  dead  man  entered  the  room
where  the  corpse  was  being  washed,  and  Tony,  looking
up  from  his  work,  said  maliciously,   "Ef  I  wuz  you,

»305.
=  307.
U90.
*165.


52       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Will,  I'd  she'  slap  ole  Henry's  face  good  an'  plenty
now  ter  make  up  fer  dat  time  he  whipped  you  up  so
bad."  In  another  case  I  heard  a  group  of  Negroes
laugh  at  a  tailless  cow.  "Dat  dere  damned  ole  cow,"
chuckled  the  Negro  farmer,  "jes'  kept  on  a-chawin'
up  my  cawn.  Didn't  seem  ter  do  no  good  ter  beat
her  up  so  I  tuk  an'  throwed  an  axe  at  'er.  Hit  would
a  missed  dat  fool  cow  but  she  stuck  out  her  tail  ter
run  an'  'fo'  Gawd,  de  axe  cut  hit  slap  off!"  ^

Typical  Riddles.  Riddles  are  also  favorites  with  the
Negroes,  expecially  around  the  country  firesides  on
winter  evenings,  and,  while  I  have  located  no  direct
African  survivals,  there  are  some  built  according  to
the  very  common  African  plan  of  guessing  the  simile
used,  while  others  approach  the  form,  apparently  more
common  to  European  peoples,  of  deciphering  the
partial  description.  I  cite  a  few  which  I  obtained
from  South  Carolina  as  representative,  listing  those
which  seem  to  have  more  of  an  African  turn  first:

Black  hen  set  on  the  red  hen's  nest?  Ans.  A  black  pot
sitting  on  the  fire.  -

The  horse  in  the  stable  and  the  bridle  outside?  Ans.  A
potato  in  the  bank  and  the  vines  outside.  ^

I  went  way  down  the  road  and  I  saw  a  rabbit.  I  pulled  its
neck  off  and  drank  the  blood.  What  was  that?  Ans.  A
bottle  of  whiskey.  ^

1  Over  one  hundred  and  fifty  typical  Negro  jokes  are  related  in  the  fol-
lowing selections:  Bacon,  A.  M.,  and  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Lore  from  Eliza-
beth City  County,  Va.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  35,  pp.  291-311.  Parsons,  E.  C,
Folk-Lore  from  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  16  (1923),  pp.  65-150.

2  120.
3337.
^381.


Practical  and  Emotional  Background       53

White  sends  white  to  drive  white  out  of  white?  Ans.  A
white  man  sends  a  white  boy  to  drive  a  white  cow  out  of  a  white
cotton  patch.  ^

I  run  out  my  Wicky  Wicky  Wackom,
I  meet  Tom  Tackom

I  send  Tom  Tackom  to  run  broom-smackom  out  of  my  Wicky
Wackom.

Ans.     A  dog  to  run  a  cow  out  of  the  cotton  field.  -

Got  an  ear  but  does  not  hear.^     A7is.     An  ear  of  corn.  ^

Round  as  a  biscuit,  busy  as  a  bee,

You  can  guess  every  riddle  but  you  can't  guess  me.

Ans.     A  watch.  ^

A  riddle,  a  riddle,  as  I  suppose,
A  hundred  eyes  and  never  a  nose.
Ans.     A  sifter  (sieve).  ^

Chip  cherry  up,  chip  cherry  down,

No  man  can  climb  chip  cherry  up  chip  cherry  down.

Ans.     Smoke.  ^

What  goes   through  the  woods  and  never  touches  anything.''
Ans.     Your  echo.  ''

Humpty  Dumpty  sat  on  the  wall,

Humpty  Dumpty  had  a  great  fall.

All  the  king's  horses  and  all  the  king's  men

Couldn't  put  Humpty  Dumpty  together  again.

Ans.     An  egg.  ^


1.309.
251.
3  383.
4321.
6  163.
6  50.
7343.

U20.     See  Parsons,  E.  C,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.
L.  S.,  vol.  16  (1923),  pp.  151-75  for  187  representative  Negro  riddles.


54       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Why    does     a    chimney     smoke?     Ans.     Because    it     cannot
chew.  ^


Proverbs.  Both  Negroes  and  Africans  have  proverb-
making  as  a  part  of  their  culture.  Typical  Woloff
proverbs   are:

"Before  heahng  others,  heal  thyself."

"He  who  covers  himself  with  cotton  should  not  approach  the
fire."

"What  goes  in  at  one  ear  goes  out  by  the  other."  ^

On  the  lower  Niger  they  say,  "Where  there's  smoke
there's  fire"  ^—a.  saying  I  have  often  heard  with  the
Mississippi  Negroes,  but  since  the  English  are  also
proverb-making  peoples  one  cannot  be  too  sure  as  to
origins.     Other  illustrative  Negro  sayings  are:

"Don't  measure  my  quart  by  yo'  ha'f  bushel."  ^
"A  mile  'roun'  de  road  shorter  dan  a  ha'f-mile  'cross  de  field."  ^
"A  gruntin'  woman  and  a  screechin'  do'  neber  wears  out."  ®
"Lewellyn   (hunger)   kin  only  be  beaten  out  er  de  house   by
chunkin'  him  wid  braid."  ^

"Neber  cross  a  bridge  'fo'  you  gits  to  hit."  ^

"Neber  'spise  a  bridge  dat  carries  you  safely  ober."  ^

"Ef  you  wants  ter  keep  yo'  milk  sweet  leab  hit  in  de  cow."  ^  "

Games.  Most  of  the  games  played  by  Negro  children
are  probably  of  English  origin,  since  they  are  largely
the  same  as  those  played   by  white  children  of   the

»130.

*  Burton,  R.  F.,     Wit  and  Wisdom  from  West  Africa,  p.  1  ff.
'  Leonard,  A.  G.,     The  Lower  Niger  and  Its  Tribes,  p.  75.

*  141,  and  Showers,  Susan,  Alabama  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  \o\.
29  (1900),  p.  179.

M07.
«288.

'  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  210.
»298.
» 150.
i«35.


Practical  and  Emotional  Background       55

South  and  North.  Games  Hke  hide-and-seek,  hide
the-switch,  etc.,  are  common;  others,  like  "King
WiUiam  was  King  George's  son,"  ^  show  plainly  their
English  origin.  The  custom  of  having  colored  Easter
eggs  and  of  "nicking"  them  (knocking  two  of  them
together,  the  cracked  egg  going  to  the  lad  with  the
harder  egg)  is  common  not  only  with  the  Negroes,  *
but  with  the  whites  in  England  and  in  other  much
more  remote  parts  of  the  world,  such  as  Egypt  or
Persia.  ^  "The  Easter  egg  with  its  red  or  yellow  color —
all  sorts  of  colors  are  now  common — is  the  emblem  of
life,  or  as  Wuttke  puts  it,  'Das  sinnbild  des  neu
beginnenden  naturlebens.'  The  rabbit,  which  is  sup-
posed to  lay  these  eggs,  is  the  symbol  of  fertility  and  as
such  is  sacred  both  to  Ostara,  the  goddess  of  spring,
and  to  Hulda  or  Harke."  *  It  is  evident  that  the
Christian  Easter  was  early  intermingled  with  pagan
spring  festivities,  and  that  we  have  a  reflection  of  this
in  the  Easter  customs  of  the  Southern  Negro  and  the
whites  as  well.  There  are  other  games  played  by  the
Negroes  (and  whites),  which  are  undoubtedly  of
English  origin,  as  "In  and  out  the  windows,"  the
words  of  which  resemble  closely  the  English  game  song,
"Round  and  round  the  village."  ^  Again  the  boyish
practice  of  arranging  the  fingers  so  as  to  leave  a
space  (called  a  "crow's  nest")  between  them  with  the
thumbnail  waiting  underneath,  ready  to  jab  into  the
finger  of  the  first  impetuous  youth  who  accepts  the
dare  and  puts  his  finger  into  the  hole,  is  plainly  allied

^141.     For  a  description,  see  Davis,  D.  W.,     Echoes  from  a  Plantation
Party,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  28  (1899),  p.  57.

2  141.

'  Brand,  J.,     Popular  Antiquities  of  Great  Britain,  vol.  i.,  pp.  168-69.
*  Fogel,  E.  M.,    Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,  p.  16.
^  See  Gomme,  Alice  B.,     Dictionary  of  British  Folk-Lore,  Ft.  i.     Traditional
Games,  vol.  ii,  pp.  122-43.


56       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

with  the  "corbie  hole"  of  the  Scotch  lads.  ^  Other
games  I  have  observed,  like  whip-lash  (or  pop-the-
cracker)  where  a  human  whip,  formed  by  holding
hands  is  sharply  swung,  throwing  the  end  ones  into
a  wild  rush;  or  "King  George's  Army,"  where  the
party  is  divided  on  the  basis  of  their  choice  of  some
animal,  or  plant,  or  what  not,  into  two  sections  and
pitted  in  a  pulling  contest  one  against  the  other,  are
similar  to  games  played  in  Africa  to  test  strength,  ^
although  the  reference  to  "King  George's  Army"  in
the  chorus  of  the  latter  game  seems  to  point  to  an
English  origin.  Doubtless  we  have  here  cases  of
independent  origins,  since  the  plays  are  designed  to
make  a  sort  of  universal  appeal.  In  the  game  "What
time  old  witch  .^"  or  "Chick-a-ma,  chick-a-ma,  craina
crow"  we  have  a  possible  survival  not  only  of  belief
in  witches  but  also  apparently  of  cannibalism,  since
the  "old  witch"  steals  the  children  (chickens)  from  the
leader  and  pretends  to  cook  and  eat  them.  ^

Survivals  of  African  Music.  Though  outwardly
yielding  to  the  despotism  of  the  master  the  real  Negro
rulership  was  vested  in  that  great  triumvirate,  in-
strumental music,  dancing,  and  song.  Even  among
the  educated  Negroes  at  Hampton  and  Tuskeegee
today,  music  is  the  main  disciplinary  force  employed.  *
McMaster  in  describing  the  slaves  of  the  early  eight-
eenth century,  says:  "Of  music  and  the  dance  they  are
passionately  fond.  With  fragments  of  a  sheep's  rib,
with  a  cow's  jaw,  or  a  piece  of  iron,  with  an  old  kettle


1  Chambers,  R.,     Popular  Rhymes  of  Scotland,  pp.  115-16.
-Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  85.

3  281,  aiidSouthern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  86.     Smiley,  P.,     Folk-Lore
from  Va.,  S.  C,  Ga.  Ala.,  and  Fla.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  32  (1919),  p.  376.
^Johnston,  Sir  H.  H.,     The  Negro  in  the  New  World,  p.  390.


Practical  and  Emotional  Background        57

or  a  piece  of  wood,  with  a  hollow  gourd  and  a  few
horse  hairs,  they  would  fabricate  instruments  of
music  and  play  the  most  plaintive  airs."  ^  In  Lou-
isiana the  jawbone  and  key  were  merely  counterparts
of  that  common  African  instrument  of  rhythm — a
stick  with  one  edge  notched  like  a  saw,  over  which
another  stick  was  rubbed.  ^  "The  instruments  com-
monly in  use  on  the  Gold  Coast  are  drums,  horns
made  from  elephant's  tusks,  the  duduben,  a  long
wooden  instrument  played  like  a  clarionet,  and  the
sehnku,  a  species  of  guitar.  Calabashes  filled  with
shells  are  used  as  rattles  to  mark  the  time.  Drums
are  made  of  the  hollowed  sections  of  trunks  of  trees,
with  a  goat's  or  sheep's  skin  stretched  over  one  end.
They  are  from  one  foot  to  four  feet  high,  and  vary  in
diameter  from  about  six  to  fourteen  inches.  Two
or  three  drums  are  usually  used  together,  each  drum
producing  a  different  note,  and  they  are  played  either
with  the  fingers  or  with  two  sticks.  The  lookers-on
generally  beat  time  by  clapping  their  hands."  ^  Among
the  Cameroons  "the  drum  is  at  once  the  primary  and
principal  instrument,  and  serves  the  chiefs  for  signaling.
Besides  wooden  trumpets  there  are  others  covered
with  hide.  Stringed  instruments  are  found  here,  both
of  the  harp  and  lyre  kind.  .  .  .  Among  wind
instruments  we  have  pipes  carved  from  wood,  others
made  from  a  round  fruit,  buffalo-horns,  which  carry
their  sound  a  long  way,  and  above  all  the  well  known
hollow  elephant's  tooth,  with  a  mouthpiece  at  the
side,  near  the  tip."  '*     "It  would  be  easy  to  fill  pages


1  Haynes,  G.  E.,     The  Trend  of  the  Races,  p.  73.

2  Krehbiel,  H.  E.,     Afro-American  Folksongs,  p.  13.
'  Ellis,  A.  B.,     Tshi-speaking  Peoples,  p.  326.

*  Ratzel,  F.,     History  of  Mankind,  vol.  3,  pp.  111-18.


58       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

with  traveler's  notes  on  the  drum  playing  and  dancing
of  the  African  tribes  to  illustrate  their  marvelous
command  of  rhythm.  .  .  .  African  drums  are  of
many  varieties,  from  the  enormous  war  drums,  for
which  trunks  of  large  trees  provide  the  body  and  wild
beasts  the  membranes  which  are  belabored  with
clubs,  down  to  the  small  vase-shaped  instruments
played  with  the  fingers.  The  Ashantees  used  their
large  drums  to  make  a  horrific  din  to  accompany
human  sacrifices,  and  large  drums,  too,  are  used  for
signaling  at  great  distances.  The  most  refined  eiforts
of  the  modern  tympanist  seem  to  be  put  in  the  shade
by  the  devices  used  by  African  drummers  in  varying
the  sounds  of  their  instruments  so  as  to  make  them
convey  meanings,  not  by  conventional  time-formulas
but  by  actual  imitations  of  words."  ^  Thus  it  appears
that  the  drum  is  the  most  common  African  musical
instrument,  a  fact  which  may  account  for  the  patting
of  the  foot  and  the  use  of  the  banjo  with  its  rattling
distinct  notes  in  the  case  of  the  American  Negro.  ^

Slave  Dancing.  Early  slave  amusements  consisted
largely  of  the  dances  that  the  Negroes  had  brought
over  from  Africa,  ^  and  of  these  dances  it  would  seem
that  the  Calinda  dance  was  originally  a  war  dance  of
some  kind,  since  Lafcardio  Hearn  saw  it  danced  in  the
West  Indies  by  men  only,  all  stripped  to  the  waist  and
twirling  heavy  sticks  in  a  mock  fight.  *  In  the  Voudou,
Congo,  and  Calinda  dances  the  orchestra  consisted
of  the  empty  wooden  box  or  barrel  drum.  ^     In  fact.


1  Krehbiel,  H.  E.,     Afro-American  Folksongs,  p.  65.

2  See  Talley,  T.  W.,     Negro  Folk  Rhymes,  pp.  234,  and  239.

*  Brawley,  B.,     Social  History  of  the  American  Negro,  pp.  31-32.

*  Krehbiel,  H.  E.,     Afro-American  Folksongs,  p.  12L
» Ibid.,  p.  67.


Practical  and  Emotional  Background       59

apart  from  the  jawbone  of  the  mule  which  was  used  as
a  sort  of  fiddle  by  rattling  a  stick  across  Its  teeth,  the
barrel  drum  with  an  oxhide  stretched  across  one  end
was  a  favorite  slave  musical  Instrument,  as  exem-
plified by  the  Negroes  of  Louisiana,  A  man  would  sit
astride  the  barrel  and  beat  upon  the  hide  with  his
hands,  feet,  and  even  his  head  in  times  of  special
excitement,  while  another  slave  beat  upon  the  wooden
sides  with  sticks.  ^  The  love  of  the  dance  is  common
to  both  Negro  and  African,  but  many  of  the  dances,
like  the  Calinda  mentioned  above,  are  more  distinctly
African  than  others.  "Near  Calhoun,  Ala.,  there  are
Africans  who  came  to  this  country  after  the  Civil
War.  The  leader  in  their  'shout'  will  hold  his  right
hand  to  his  face,  his  head  bent  to  the  right,  and  call
out,  'Higha!'  the  circle  rejoining:

Leader:     Higha!
Circle:     Malagalujasay!
Leader:     Higha!
Circle:     Lajasaychumbo!

Um!  Urn! Urn!
Leader:     Higha!
Circle:     Haykeekeedayo,  ho!

The  women  move  slowly  around  the  circle,  the  left
foot  somewhat  in  advance  of  the  right,  the  right
drawn  up  to  the  left  as  It  Is  moved  on  a  few  Inches  at
a  time  and  in  rhythm.  The  body  is  slightly  bent,
with  the  buttocks  protruding.  The  men  stand  erect."  ^
The  Congo  dance,  formerly  held  by  the  slaves  of  New
Orleans,  showed,  in  its  choice  of  a  king,  who  wore  a

'  Fortier,  Alcee,  Customs  and  Superstitions  in  Louisiana,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.   1  (1888),  pp.  136-37.

2  Smiley,  P.,  Folk-Lore  from  Va.,  S.  C,  Ga.,  Ala.,  and  Fla.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  32  (1919),  p.  378.


60       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

huge    pyramidal    crown   of    gilt     paper   boxes,  ^   some
possible  vestiges  of  former  African  customs.

Holy  Dances.  In  African  music  the  dance  served
to  stimulate  religious  feeling,  military  fervor,  and
sexual  passion,  ^  In  America,  with  the  slave,  the
military  element  was  dropped,  but  the  "Flower
Dance,"  found  near  Appotomax,  the  "Roper  Dance,"
in  country  districts  of  Alabama,  and  the  "Rocking
Daniel  Dance,"  observed  at  Yamassee,  Florida,  ^  (and
common  among  the  Negroes  in  many  parts  of  the
South  ^)testify  to  the  use  of  the  dance  in  creating
religious  frenzy.  In  many  of  the  Negro  churches  of
the  South  and  in  some  of  the  more  primitive  ones  of
the  North,  dancing  is  one  of  the  most  important
elements  in  the  worship.  While  some  of  these  church
dances  are  decidedly  lascivious  and  are  used  to  appeal
to  sex  under  the  guise  of  religion,  there  are  others
more  distinctly  used  for  secular  purposes.  These  and
the  songs  accompanying  them  are  called  "reels"  and
are  distinctly  tabooed  to  good  church  members,
although  in  general  in  the  black  South  it  is  considered
perfectly  proper  to  dance  provided  you  do  not  cross
your  feet  in  so  doing.  "Hit  aint  railly  dancin'  'less
de  feets   is   crossed."  ^

Songs  From  the  Soul.  The  white  man  most  of  the
time  sings  from  the  song  book,  but  the  Illiterate  Negro
sings  from  the  soul.  In  a  fashionable  Negro  church
choir  here  in  Columbus,  Mississippi,  there  is  one  old-
time  Negro  who  formerly  could  not  refrain  from  pat-

1  Flint,  Rev.  J.,     Flines  Letters,  p.  140.

2  Ellis,  A.  B.,     Tshi-speaking  Peoples,  p.  326.

^  Davenport,  F.  M.,     Primitive  Traits  in  Religious  Revivals,  pp.  54-55.

M4L

U41.


Practical  and  Emotional  Background       61

.ting  his  foot  and  swaying  his  body  as  he  "bassed  fo'th
de  glory-songs,"  though  the  other  more  cultured  singers
held  their  frozen  pose  of  stilted  propriety.  Lately
this  old  Negro  has  been  acquiring  some  rudiments  of
an  education,  and  it  has  been  pathetic  in  a  way  to  see
how  the  training  of  the  head  has  drawn  the  melody
from  the  foot,  until  now  nothing  is  left  except  a  few
shame-faced  quivers  when  he  half-forgets  himself
in  song.  Perhaps  his  efficiency  has  been  increased,  but
"de  worrisome  look"  on  his  face  bespeaks  a  barren
soul  whose  bulwark  of  melody  erected  against  the
cares  of  life  has  been  torn  down.  Much  of  the  hap-
piness of  the  uneducated  Negro  is  based  upon  his
unrestrained  surrender  to  this  spirit  of  song.

Jump-up  Songs.  Today  "note-singing"  and  "book-
singing"  1  are  rapidly  forcing  the  old-time
"jump-up  songs"  into  the  land  of  forgotten  things.
Lovers  of  folk-songs  have  to  push  farther  and  farther
into  the  rural  districts  to  find  anything  more  than
lingering  echoes  of  those  incomparable  slave  melodies.
Individual  Negro  composers  pass  out  printed  copies
of  their  songs  (the  Mississippi  Negroes  call  them
"ballads")  which  are  learned  and  sung  even  by  rural
congregations  until  today  it  is  almost  impossible  to
separate  the  old  from  the  new.  Even  here  the  creative
impulse  of  the  "songster"  is  not  ended — the  "ballads"
usually  come  without  music  and  frequently  a  tune
must  be  improvised,  the  lines  often  being  altered  to
fit  in  with  the  new  melody.  Thus  a  Negro  choir-
leader   of   my   acquaintance    was    asked    to    "chune-

1  It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  development  of  the  Negro  in  this  respect  is  an
exact  duplication  of  that  of  the  white  churches  in  the  South.


62       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

up"  a  "ballad"  which  a  member  of  the  congregation
had  received  from  St.  Louis.  The  chorus  of  the
original  ran:

Let  us  run  to  Jesus,  every  one,
Let  mother  teach  her  daughter,
Let  father  teach  his  son,
To  run  to  Jesus,  every  one.

To  make  a  ht  associate  for  the  new  "chune"  the  chorus
was  altered  to:

Let  us  run  to  Jesus,  ev-ery  one.
Let  us  run  to  Jesus,  ev-ery  one.
Let  us  run  to  Jesus,  ev-ery  one.

Let  mothers  teach  their  daughters.

Let  fathers  teach  their  sons,

To  run,  run  to  Jesus,  ev-ery  one.  ^

In  spite  of  the  modern  tendency  to  enjoy  vacantly
the  thought-products  of  other  minds,  many  illiterate
Negroes  still  shift  for  themselves  in  things  musical.
As  a  matter  of  fact  the  ordinary  Negro  prayer  is  really,
in  a  sense,  a  spontaneous  song,  since  it  is  often  sung
as  a  sort  of  chant,  and  in  moments  of  earnestness
stilted  phrases  are  laid  aside  and  particular  individuals
are  prayed  for  by  name  after  humming  over  their
particular  besetting  sins.  Sorrow  is  expressed  in  the
same  fashion;  in  fact  there  are  a  large  group  of  regular
Negro  church  songs  known  as  "mourns"  because
they  are  tuned  in  the  sing-song  fashion  of  prayer  or
grief.  2  I  was  once  present  at  the  occasion  of  the
burning  down  of  a  Negro  home.     The  little  daughter

1294.

i^Sei,  and  296.


SONGSTERS  OF  NOTE


Practical  and  Emotional  Background       63

of  the  house  was  sorrowfully  watching  the  flames
consume  the  family  possessions,  all  the  while  wailing
the  most  doleful  dirge:

Oh  Lawd,  Papa  had  some  matches,

Took  an'  lef  'em  in  de  closet,  Lawd,

Rats  chawed  de  matches,  Lawd,

Cotch'd  all  de  clothes  on  fiah,  Lawd.

Us  throwed  on  watah,  Lawd,

Couldn't  put  hit  out,  Lawd,  couldn't  put  hit  out!

An'  all  Papa's  things  done  hurned\

Again  and  again  she  chanted,  giving  various  details  of
the  catastrophe,  but  always  ending  up  with  the  tear-
ful refrain,  "^w'  all  Papas  things  done  burnedT^  Even
in  this  case,  however,  the  general  scheme  of  the  chant
is  much  like  that  of  a  deacon's  prayer,  or  the
"mourn"  of  the  convert  who  has  just  "come  through"
and  chants  over  his  trip  to  hell  and  heaven  and  his
various  experiences  with  the  supernatural.  Even  the
Negro  minister  in  his  moment  of  frenzy  resorts  to  this
same  form  of  expression.  In  general,  this  sponta-
neous expression  of  ideas  in  rhythm  comes  during  times
of  stress  and  excitement,  although  I  have  heard  one
Negro,  at  least,  working  alone  and  singing,

Ah'm  gona  git  shot  all  to  pieces
About  de  gal  ah  loves!

a  piece  which  he  claims  to  be  original.  Be  it  original
or  not  it  shows  where  his  mind  was  and  after  all,  who
knows  but  what  it  might  have  been  a  time  of  stress
with  him.     Another  Negro  friend  of  mine  was  singing:

Ef  yer  wants  ter  hear  er  preacher  sing,
Jes'  cut  up  er  chicken  an'  gib  him  er  wing.


64       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Suddenly  he  paused,  seemed  to  be  in  deep  meditation
for  a  moment  or  so,  then  came  out  with:

Ef  yer  wants  ter  hear  er  preacher  pray
Jes'  cut  up  er  chicken  an'  gib  him  er  laig.  ^

True,  the  versification  is  poor  enough,  but  the  creation
was  his  own  and  the  Negroes  seem  to  be  very  proud
of  these  rude  compositions.  In  one  case  I  heard  a
Mississippi  Negro  interrupted  while  singing:

Nigger  is  you  singin'  dat  song  rite?

Look-a-heah,  man,  dis    yere    viah   song,   en    I'll    sing   it
howsoevah  I  pleases.

Widespread  are  the  cases  of  such  spontaneous  song.
A  slave  Negress  sings  to  her  baby  an  improvised  song
warning  her  runaway  husband,  hiding  outside  the
window,  to  get  away  from  the  cabin  where  men  were
waiting  to  capture  him;  ^  and  to  the  tune  of  "Pharaoh's
Army"  is  recorded  by  the  South  Carolina  Negroes  the
nefarious  attempt  of  one  Reuben  Bright  to  burn
Sidney  Park  Church:

Rheuben  Bright  he  had  a  scheme

To  burn  Sidney  Park  with  the  kerosene,  etc.  ^

Negro  folk-song-making  still  goes  on  as  evidenced  by
the  many  verses  relating  to  the  sinking  of  the  Titanic,
such  as  the  following  from  an  old  Mississippi  Negro:

It  was  sad  when  dat  great   ship  went  down — ship  went

down,
It  was  sad  when  dat  great  ship  went   down — ship   went

down.


1143.

2  Talley,  T.  W.,     Negro  Folk  Rhymes,  pp.  88-89.

3  Davis,  H.  C,     Negro  Folk- Lore  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  27
(1914),  p.  252.


Practical  and  Emotional  Background       65

Women,   wives   and    little  chillun   los'   their   lives — los'

their  lives
It  was  sad  when  dat  great  ship  went  down.  ^

Other  historical  events  impressive  to  the  Negro  were
couched  in  rhyme,  as:

Grant  ate  the  watermelon,
Greeley  ate  de  rind:
Grant  he  got  elected,
Lef  ole  Greely  way  behind.  ^

African  Singing.  Both  in  spontaneity  and  in  the
method  of  singing  the  verses  the  Negroes  resemble
the  Africans.  Miss  Kingsley  tells  of  a  Negro  woman
who  was  expelled  from  a  tribe  in  the  Niger  Delta  for
the  unpardonable  sin  of  bearing  twins.  "She  would
sit  for  hours  singing  or  rather  mourning  out  a  kind  of
dirge  over  herself,  'Yesterday  I  was  a  woman,  now  I
am  a  horror,  a  thing  all  people  run  from.  Yesterday
they  would  talk  to  me  with  a  sweet  mouth,  now  they
greet  me  with  curses  and  execrations.  They  have
smashed  my  basin,  they  have  torn  my  clothes!'  and
so  on."  ^  "The  Tshi  songs  consist  of  a  recitative  with
a  short  chorus.  The  recitative  is  often  improvised,
one  taking  up  the  song  where  another  is  tired.  Fre-
quently the  words  have  reference  to  current  events,
and  it  is  not  uncommon  for  singers  to  note  the  pecu-
liarities of  persons  who  may  pass  and  improvise  at
their  expense.     This  is  particularly  the  case  when  the

^  210.  For  other  cases  of  improvised  singing,  see  Odum,  H.  W.,  and
Johnson,  G.  B.,  The  Negro  and  His  Songs,  pp.  2-3,  and  35  fif.  Brawley,
B.,  Social  History  of  the  American  Negro,  pp.  214-15.  Allen,  W.  F.,  Slave
Songs  of  the  United  States,  Preface,  pp.  xvii-xviii.  Perkins,  A.  E.,  Negro
SpirituMs  from  the  Far  South,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  35  (1922),  p.  223.

232.

3  Kingsley,  M.  H.,     Travels  in  West  Africa,  pp.  476-77.


66       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro  ;

strangers  are  Europeans,  as  the  latter  do  not  as  a  rule
understand  Tshi,  and  the  singers  can  allow  themselves
greater  latitude  than  would  be  the  case  if  their  remarks
were  understood."  ^  "The  leader  of  a  chorus  is
accorded  much  the  same  honor  amongst  the  Ibos  as
that  granted  the  minstrel  in  the  ancient  days  in
England.  He  must  possess  not  only  the  musical  gift
but  the  poetic  instinct  also.  He  creates  his  theme  as
the  song  proceeds,  and  great  ingenuity  is  displayed
in  fitting  words  to  time  and  tune  on  the  spur  of  the
moment.  Any  unusual  incident  is  seized  upon  and
utilized  as  material  by  the  leader,  and .  when  this
fails  he  has  recourse  to  the  retelling  in  song  the  ex-
ploits of  old.  .  .  .  Couplets  appear  to  be  most  in
favor  with  the  Ibos,  the  leader  chanting  two  lines  as  a
solo  and  the  full  company  joining  in  with  a  double-
lined  chorus.  Occasionally  one  hears  a  four-lined  song
without  solo  or  chorus,  and  there  are  a  number  of
songs  intended  to  be  sung  as  solos."  ^  Almost  without
alteration  these  descriptions  might  be  applied  also  to
the  Southern  Negro.

Negro  Song  Structure.  "Imaginary  measures  either
of  two  or  four  beats,  with  a  given  number  of  words  to
a  beat,  a  number  that  can  be  varied  limitedly  at  will,
seems  to  be  the  philosophy  underlying  all  Negro
slave  verse  construction."  ^  The  Negro  is  peculiar  in
that  he  habitually  begins  his  song  with  the  chorus
instead  of  the  verse,  *  and  in  that  he  alone  of  all  in-
strumental   music   composers    has   ever   had   the   per-


1  Ellis,  A.  B.,  Tshi-speaking  Peoples,  p.  328.  For  another  example  of
spontaneous  singing,  see  Mungo  Park,  Travels,  pp.  197-98.

"Basden,  G.  T.,  Among  the  Ibos  of  Nigeria,  pp.  190-9L  See  also,
Cruickshank,  B.,     Eighteen  Years  on  the  Gold  Coast  of  Africa,  vol.  2,  pp.  265-67.

3  Talley,  T.  W.,     Negro  Folk  Rhymes,  p.  231.

*  Ibid.,  p.  326.


Practical  and  Emotional   Background       61

formers  sing  a  few  of  the  opening  measures  of  his
composition  while  the  string  division  of  the  orchestra
played  its  opening  chords — a  method  which  assists
the  hearers  to  a  closer  musical  understanding  and
heightens  the  general  artistic  finish.  ^  Many  of  their
songs  are  built  on  the  basis  of  "calls"  and  "sponses"
(answers),  the  leader  singing  one  part  and  the  audience
coming  in  on  the  refrain  as:^

Leader  (call):     Oh  where  you  runnin'  sinnah?
Audience  (sponse):     You  can't  hide,  ^  etc.

Some  ^  describe  this  arrangement  as  possibly  originat-
ing from  the  meaningless  "field  calls"  and  "responses"
of  the  slave  Negro,  which  in  turn  go  back  to  similar
calls  and  responses  in  Africa,  where  they  are  used  in
calling  for  help  when  lost,  or  in  indicating  the  approach
of  enemies,  for  instance.  ^  In  spite  of  frequent  rep-
etitions, the  little  variations  in  the  words  and  tunes
and  in  the  arrangement  of  the  verses  with  the  Southern
Negroes  prevent  monotony,  the  same  song  seldom
following  the  same  order  of  verses  and  refrain  when
heard  at  difi"erent  times.  ^  In  a  great  many  cases  the
Negro  will  repeat  the  same  verse  with  the  alteration
of  only  one  word,  as,  in  the  song:

Doan'  you  let  no  gambler  turn  you  'round,
Turn  you  'round,  turn  you  'round,
Doan'  you  let  no  gambler  turn  you  'round,
Keep  on  to  Galilee.  "^


1  Ihid..  p.  237-38.

2  See  Ihid.,  p.  267  ff.

3  104.

*  Talley,  T.  W.,     Negro  Folk  Rhymes,  p.  275  ff.

^Sheppard,  W.  H.,  In  Talley,  T.  W.,     Negro  Folk  Rhymes,  pp.  277-78.
®  Odum,  Anna  K.,     Some  Negro  Folk-Songs  from  Tennessee,  J.  A.   F.  L.,
vol.  27  (1914),  p.  255.
7  72.


68       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Here  each  verse  is  like  the  preceding  except  that  the
terms,  "sistah,  bruddah,  liah,  hypocrite,  etc.,"  are
substituted  for  "gambler."  This  construction  was
probably  due  to  the  inability  of  the  slave  Negroes  to
read  or  write  and  serves  frequently  as  a  useful  earmark
of  the  older  songs.  Such  repeated  verses  were  easily
remembered  and  the  dull  repetition  itself  had  a  sort
of  tom-tom  effect  in  bringing  on  the  "sperrit"  upon
the  half-pagan  Christians.  While  the  Creole  songs
originated  chiefly  in  the  masculine  mind  instead  of
with  the  woman,  ^  cradle  songs  and  lullabies,  on  the
other  hand,  are  more  likely  to  be  of  feminine  origin.

Sovereignty  of  Religious  Songs.  It  is  a  rather
noticeable  thing  that,  contrary  to  the  case  with  most
native  peoples,  it  is  the  religious  songs  of  the  Negroes
which  have  challenged  the  admiration  of  the  world,
while  little  or  no  secular  music  of  special  value  is
found  among  them.  2  This  is  a  bit  hard  to  understand
as  is  also  the  aversion  of  the  church-going  Negro  to
singing  secular  songs  (reels)  even  for  the  innocent
collector  of  folk-songs.  It  is  a  sin  to  sing  such  songs,
and  only  the  "onconverted"  or  the  "backslider"
will  readily  supply  them.  Talley  attributes  this  in
part  to  the  emotionality  of  the  Negro,  ^  and  in  part  to
the  fact  that  the  Negro  centered  his  secular  rhymes
around  his  African  religion,  as  evidenced  by  the  large
amount  of  animal  lore  in  Negro  rhyme,  just  as  he
centered  his  Jubilee  Song  words  around  his  American
Christian    religion.  ^     However,    this    would    fail    to

1  Cable,  G.  W.,     Creole  Slave  Songs,  Cent.  Mag.,  vol.  xxxi  (1886),  p.  813.

2  Talley,  T.  W.,  Negro  Folk  Rhymes,  p.  235.  Some  other  good  collections
of  Negro  songs  not  cited  here  are:  Curtis-BurUn,  N.,  Negro  Folk-Songs.
HoUowell,  E.,  Calhoun  Plantation  Songs.  Religious  Folk  Songs  of  the
Negro.  (Hampton,  Va.).  Johnson,  J.  W.,  The  Book  of  American  Negro
Spirituals.  Scarborough,  Dorothy,  On  the  Trail  of  Negro  Folk-Songs.
Kennedy,  R.  E.,     Black  Cameos  and  Mellows.

^  Talley,  T.  W.,     Negro  Folk  Rhymes,  p.  235.
*  Ibid.,  pp.  316-17.


Practical  and  Emotional  Background       69

account  for  the  present  Negro  taboo  against  all  sec-
ular songs,  whether  they  deal  with  animal  or  fet-
ishistic  topics  or  not,  leading  us  rather  to  the  con-
clusion that  the  Negro's  attitude  is  merely  a  survival
of  the  attitude  of  the  early  white  churches  from  which
he  derived  his  first  training.  The  rural  Negro  is  less
exposed  to  contact  with  modern  civilization  and  his
beliefs  consequently  change  more  slowly  and  give  us
an  index  of  attitudes  of  the  past.  This  seems  all  the
more  likely,  since  the  Negro  church-code  also  forbids
such  frivolities  as  checker-playing,  baseball,  and
dancing,  amusements  formerly  forbidden  to  white
Christians.  If  former  African  objects  of  worship
form  the  basis  for  the  taboo  it  is  strange  that  Negro
folk-tales,  dealing  with  animals,  are  not  also  tabooed.

Rag-time  and  Ja7/L.  There  seems  to  be  a  general
agreement  that  modern  rag-time  is  a  debased  off-
spring of  Negro  music.  The  rhythmical  propulsion
coming  from  the  initial  syncopation  common  to  the
bulk  of  Negro  songs,  and  the  frequent  use  of  the  five-
tone  or  pentatonic  scale  seem  to  be  the  two  most
obvious  elements  which  have  been  copied  by  com-
posers and  dance-makers  who  have  wished  to  imitate
them.  ^  The  word  "jazz"  has  been  variously  associated
with  the  Negro — by  some  regarded  as  African  in  origin.
It  is  stated  to  be  common  "on  the  Gold  Coast  and  in
the  hinterland  of  Cape  Coast  Castle.  In  his  studies  of
the  Creole  patois  and  idioms  in  New  Orleans,  Lafcadio
Hearn  reported  that  the  word  jazz,  meaning  to  speed
things  up,  to  make  excitement,  was  common  among
the  blacks  of  the  South,  and  had  been  adopted  by  the
Creoles  as  a  term  to  be  applied  to  music  of  a  rudi-

^  Krehbiel,  H.  E.,     Afro-American  Folksongs,  Preface,  p.  v.


70       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

mentary  syncopated  type."  ^  Others  consider  the  term
derived  from  "Charles"  (nicknamed  "Chaz"),  a  Negro
drummer  in  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  ^  while  Comm.  Sousa
thinks  it  derived  from  the  old-fashioned  minstrel
show  where  the  performers  "cut  loose"  and  improvised
or  "jazzboed"  the  tune.  ^  The  term  jazzbo  would
simply  mean  a  command  to  the  "bo"  (a  "buddy"
or  associate)  to  jazz,  unless  indeed  the  term  be  a
corruption  of  jaw-bone — a  favorite  instrument  among
the  early  slaves.  The  vulgar  word  "jazz"  was  in
general  currency  in  low  dance  resorts  ("Honky-
tonks")  thirty  or  more  years  ago,  which  would  lead
us  to  suspect  a  different  origin,  *  although  the  prev-
alence of  animal  names  associated  with  jazz — such  as
turkey-trot,  elephant-glide,  camel-walk,  fox-trot  and
bunny-hug — would  seem  to  indicate  a  relation  to
Negro  folk-songs.  However,  Mr.  Lopez  thinks  these
animal  names  are  due  to  the  fact  that  there  is  something
"animal-like"  in  the  emotional  effects  of  jazz.  ^  It  is
hard  to  make  a  definite  assertion  in  the  face  of  such
statements — none  of  the  old  Mississippi  ex-slaves
whom  I  questioned  remembered  the  term  having  been
used  in  slavery  times.  At  least,  however,  Negro  music
shows  the  characteristic  jazz  elements,  and  Negroes
have  been  prominent  in  both  the  composing  and
playing  of  this  type  of  music,  while  in  the  purchase  of
phonograph  records  they  show  a  decided  penchant
towards  jazz  tunes — which,  however,  may  also  be  said
of  the  present  day  whites  as  well.     Some  of  the  Negro


^  Quotation  from  the  New  York  Sun.     Finck,  H.  T.,     Jazz,  Lowbrow  and
Highrow,  Elude,  vol.  xlii,  No.  8  (Aug.  1924),  p.  527.

2  Lopez,  v.,     Elude,  vol.  xlii,  No.  8  (Aug.  1924),  p.  520.

*  Whitman,  P.,     What  is  Jazz  Doing  lo  American  Music,  Elude,  vol.  xliii.
No.  8  (Aug.  1924),  p.  523.

*  Smith,  Clay,     Etude,  vol.  xlii,  No.  9  (Sept.  1924),  p.  595.

*  Lopez,  v.     Etude,  vol.  xlii.  No.  8  (Aug.  1924),  p.  520.


Practical  and  Emotional  Background  71

spirituals  have  found  their  way  into  white  vaudeville,
as  was  the  case  of  "Ain't  it  a  shame  to  steal  on  Sun-
day?" which,  picked  up  from  Jubilee  Singers  in  St.
Louis,  appeared  in  "Shuffle  Along"  in  New  York  in
1922.  ^  The  same  is  true  of  a  recent  popular  song
"It  ain't  a-gonna  rain  no  more,"  ^  and  I  have  heard
the  orchestra  at  a  fashionable  (white)  wedding  re-
ception play  "Nobody  knows  de  trubbl'  I've  seen,"
an  exquisite  bit  of  melody  ^  which  possibly  would  not
have  been  considered  so  opportune  had  the  guests
been  acquainted  with  the  Negro  original.

Education  by  Song.  As  we  said  before,  rhymed
knowledge  is  remembered  knowledge,  a  fact  which
makes  the  rhyme  of  use  to  parents  in  instructing  chil-
ren.  Many  a  white  man  runs  through  "thirty  days
has  September"  to  find  out  the  length  of  a  particular
month,  and  many  a  Negro  lad  washes  his  feet  at  night
because  of  the  rhyme  about  one  lad  who  got  a  whip-
ping for  failing  to  observe  this  rite.  ^  Unable  to  read
the  Bible,  the  illiterate  slave  sang  the  Bible,  reducing
to  rhythm  the  exploits  of  Noah,  Samson,  David,
Solomon,  and  other  Biblical  characters.  I  cannot
resist  the  temptation  of  setting  down  word  for  word
one  characteristic  Mississippi  stanza  relating  to  the
plagues  sent  upon  Pharaoh:

McDumas  came  'fo'  de  desert,
Playin'  a  host  uv  a  game  uv  bluff,
Had  frawgs  up-on  de  kitchen,
An'  in  de  dinin'  room  wuz  not  enuf.


1  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  35  (July-Sept.  1923),  p.  331.

2  For  the  original  Negro  version,  see  Talley,  T.  W.,     Negro  Folk  Rhymes,
p.  269.

'  For  words  and  music,  see  Krehbiel,  H.  E.,     Afro-American  Folksongs,  p.  75.
*  TaUey,  T.  W.,     Negro  Folk  Rhymes,  p.  171.


72       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Dere  wuz  frawgs  upon  de  mirror,
Till  dey  wuz  rushin'  upon  de  leaves,
Dey  wuz  comin'  out  er  de  people's  pants-laigs,
Dey  wuz  rushin'  out  er  de  people's  sleeves;
No  doubt  dey  had  frawgs  fer  dinnuh,
Frawgs  fer  breakfas'  an'  frawgs  fer  tea,
Dere  wuz  frawgs  all  a  bondage
Ober  Ian'  an'  in  de  sea.  ^

A  graded  Sunday  School  lesson  might  excel  in  accuracy
of  detail,  but  never  could  it  approach  this  expository
trip-hammer  in  relentlessly  pounding  the  frog-episode
past  the  forgetting  point.  When  tempted  to  Indulge,
the  rhyme:

Whiskey  nor  brandy,  ain'  no  friend  to  my  kind —
Dey  kilt  my  po'  daddy  an'  dey  trubbl'd  my  mind,  ^

warned  him  of  the  consequences,  and  If  he  was  in-
clined to  fish  on  Sunday,  the  rhymed  story  of  "Fishing
Simon"  3  and  the  talking  iish  caught  on  that  day
reminded  his  superstitious  soul  of  the  awful  dangers
awaiting  him.  Respect,  obedience,  and  caution  are
summed  up:

Spik  w'en  yo  spoke  unter,
Come  w'en  yo'  call.
Ef  yo'  jump  'fo'  I  show  yo',
Yo'  git  er  bad  fall.  *

There  were  "arithmetic  rhymes"  which  mingled  the
multlphcatlon  table  with  admonitions  to  "tend  to  yo'
business"^  and  "alphabet  rhymes":


1394.

257.

3  See  Talley,  T.  W.,  Negro  Folk  Rhymes,  p.  177.
^  57,  and  Owen,  Mary  A.,  Voodoo  Tales,  p.  226.
s  57,  and  Talley,  T.  W.,     Negro  Folk  Rhymes,  p.  12L


Practical  and  Emotional  Background       73

A,  B,  C,

Double  down  D

Lazy  chilluns  gits  hick'ry  tea  (a  whipping),  ^  .

teaching  both  letters-  and  energy.  "The  Alabama
Way"  2  warned  the  recalcitrant  slave  that  there  were
worse  places  where  he  could  be  sold,  while  the
following  rhyme  emphasized  the  importance  of
arithmetic:

Naught's  a  naught
Five's  a  figger.
Five  fer  de  white  man,
Naught  fer  de  Nigger.

Ten's  a  ten.

Hit's  mighty  funny;

Ef  you  cain't  count  good

You  don't  git  no  money.  ^

Rhythmic  Lore.  Many  other  purposes  are  served
by  these  rhymes.  The  familiar  spiritual,  "Steal  away
to  Jesus"  was  first  sung  as  a  notice  to  the  other  slaves
on  the  plantation  that  a  secret  religious  meeting  would
be  held  that  night,  ^  and  wakeful  pickaninnies  at
bedtime  were  scared  into  quietness  by:

Doan'  talk — go  ter  sleep!
Eyes  shet  an'  doan'  you  peep!
Keep  still,  or  he  jes'  moans,
"Raw  Head  an'  Bloody  Bones!"  ^


1  llyi^^     p.    154.

2  Talle'v,  T.  W.,     Negro  Folk  Rhymes,  pp.  164,  and  239.
» 57,  aiid  297.

« Talley,  T.  W.,     Negro  Folk  Rhymes,  pp.  SOO-OL
5  57,  and  Ibid.,  p.  174.


74       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

the  last  line  being  a  familiar  expression  used  in  England
for  the  same  purpose.  ^  Another  rhyme  used  in  scaring
children  to  sleep  is:

Baa,  baa,  black  sheep,  where's  yo'  lamb?
Way  down  yon'er  in  de  valley,
De  butterflies  an'  buzzards  pick  his  eyes  out
An'  de  po'  little  sheepie  cries,  "Mammy,"

the  idea  being  that  the  child  must  close  his  eyes  to
keep  them  from  being  likewise  "picked  out."  ^  g^.
perstitions  were  often  put  into  verse  form, — a  fact
which  shows  their  importance  to  the  Negro  people.
Connections  were  made  between  features  and  conduct:

Blue  gums  an'  black  eyes:
Run  'roun  an'  tell  lies.
Liddle  head,  liddle  wit;
Big  long  head,  not  a  bit.  ^

Many  superstitions,  such  as  hanging  up  a  snake  or
turning  his  belly  upwards  to  make  rain,  *  and  the
hooting  of  the  owl  as  a  bad  omen,  ^  were  arranged  in
such  a  form.  Many  of  them,  however,  were  of  English
origin  and  show  clearly  the  conservatism  of  Negro
verse  and  the  value  of  his  folk-lore  in  reflecting  Con-
tinental beliefs.     Thus  the  Negro  rhyme:

De  whis'lin'  woman,  and  de  crowin'  hen,
Nevah  comes  to  no  good  en',  ^

is  evidently  derived  from  the  Northamptonshire  proverb :

^  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  8.

2  298.

3  57,  and  Talley,  T.  W.,     Negro  Folk  Rhymes,  p.  100.
*b7,  and  Ibid.,  p.  lOL

'"57,  and/6iVi.,  p.  149.
•298,  a.nd  Ibid.,  p.  170.


Practical  and  Emotional  Background       75

A  whistling  woman  and  crowing  hen,
Are  neither  fit  for  God  nor  men.  ^

The  Northumberland   chant:

Rain,  rain,  go  away;

Come  again  another  day     .     .     .  ^

is  Still  used  by  the  Mississippi  Negro,  as  is  also  the
Somersetshire  rhyme:

Matthew,  Mark,  Luke,  and  John,  ^
Bless  the  bed  that  I  lay  on.

Similarly  the  Negroes  sing:

Rye  baby  buntin'
Daddy's  gone  a-huntin'
Ter  fetch  a  littl'  rabbit  skin
Ter  wrap  de  baby  buntin'  in.  ■*

a  version  almost  identical  with  the  Scottish.  ^  Some
of  these  have  a  remarkable  antiquity.  The  Negro
sings  of  the  frog  who  "a-co'tin'  "  rides,  with  a  "sword
an'  pistol"  by  his  side.  ^  A  1630  Scottish  version  has
it:

Ye  frog  wald  a-wowing  ryd.

Sword  and  buckler  by  his  syd,

although  the  song  actually  seems  to  date  back  as  far
as  1580.  ^


'  Henderson,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  28.

^  Chambers,  R.,     Popular  Rhymes  of  Scotland,  p.  182.

3  Ibid.,  pp.  149-50.

*298.

^57,  and  Chambers,  R.,     Popular  Rhymes  of  Scotland,  p.  13.

« Talley,  T.  W.,     Negro  Folk  Rhymes,  pp.  203,  and  57.

'Chambers,  R.,  Popular  Rhymes  of  Scotland,  pp.  55-60.  For  this  and
other  survivals  of  European  ballads  in  Negro  folk-songs,  see  'Scarborough  ^
Dorothy,     On  the  Trail  of  Negro  Folk-Songs,  pp.  33-64.


76       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Besides  Biblical  themes  secular  stories  are  told  in
verse :

Bill  Dillix  says  to  dat  woodpecker  bird;
"Wat  makes  yo'  topknot  red?"
Says  he,  "I'se  picked  in  de  red-hot  sun,
Till  it's  done  burnt  my  head."  ^

The  origin  of  the  snake  is  explained  in  verse  -  as  is
also  the  split  lip  of  the  sheep  (due  to  laughing  too  hard
at  the  goat  when  the  latter  fell  down),  a  verse  also
having  a  moral  turn  to  it.  ^  Humorous  stories  are
also  related,  such  as  that  one  about  the  Negro  who
mistook  a  bear  for  a  big  louse*  or  the  short  letter:

She  writ  me  a  letter

As  long  as  my  eye,

An'  she  say  in  dat  letter

"My  Honey!     Good-bye!"  ^

Humor  by  exaggeration  is  common,  as  Illustrated  by
the  verses  below:

Her  face  look  lak  a  coffee-pot
Her  nose  look  lak  de  spout.
Her  mouf  look  lak  a  fiah-place
Wid  de  ashes  taken  out.  ^

Old  Man  Samson  wuz  a  good  ole  man.
Washed  his  face  in  a  fryin'-pan.
Combed  his  hair  wid  a  sorghum-wheel,
Died  wid  de  toothache  in  his  heel.  ''


1  Talley,  T.  W.,     Negro  Folk  Rhymes,  p.  203.

^  Ibid.,  p.  165.     Including  also  the  superstition  that  the  snake's  tail  wiU
not  die  before  night.

^  57.     See  also,  Ibid.,  p.  17.

*  Ibid.,  and  Talley,  T.  W.,     Negro  Folk  Rhymes,  p.  43.

6  57,  and  Talley,  T.  W.,     Negro  Folk  Rhymes,  p.  113.

"375.

^235.


Practical  and  Emotional  Background       11

Even  courtships  were  carried  on  in  verse  as  the  fol-
lowing sample  indicates:

He:     Is  you  a  flyin'  lark  or  a  settin'  dove?
She:     I'se  a  flyin'  lark,  my  honey-love.

A  "settin'  dove"  is  one  who  has  already  found  her
soul-mate  and  has  settled  down,  while  a  "flyin'  lark  is
a  gal  dat  ain't  made  no  'ttachments,  but  is  flyin'
'bout  lookin'  fer  a  place  ter  res'  her  wary  (weary)
haid."  ^  Some  of  these  verses  are  so  well  preserved
as  to  tell  us  of  the  "long  white  stockin's"  worn  by
the  masters  in  Colonial  days.  ^

Funeral  Fun.  Here  ends  our  discussion  of  self-
gratification.  We  might  go  on  to  take  up  such  factors
as  intoxicants,  condiments,  art,  and  similar  matters,
but  so  little  of  this  shows  any  trace  of  African  sources
that  it  is  scarcely  worth  our  while.  The  mores  of  self-
gratification  are  not  clear-cut  nor  individualistic  in
type,  but  adhere  closely  to  the  other  societal  divisions.
Wherever  pleasure  is  found  or  vanity  satisfied  there  is
self-gratification.  For  instance  "the  chief  recreations
of  the  natives  of  Angola  are  marriages  and  funerals."  '
The  African  is  intensely  social  and  occasions  of  this
sort  as  well  as  palavers,  secret  societies  and  other
meetings  oflFer  a  chance  for  gathering  together  in
crowds  and  making  an  inconceivable  hubbub,  which
to  them  is  as  much  self-gratification  as  self-perpetuation
or  any  other  basic  societal  activity.  Precisely  the
same  thing  holds  true  with  the  rural  Southern  Negro,
as  with  other  isolated  folk,  who  have  but  little  social
intercourse.


'406.

2  Talley,  T.  W.,     'Negro  Folk  Rhymes,  p.  40.

^  See  Lippert,  J.,     KxdUirgeschichte  der  Menschheit,  vol.  ii,  p.  353  ff.


78       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Conclusion.  From  these  preliminary  cases  it  will
be  seen  that  the  tendency  is  for  the  Negro  to  take
over  English  practices  in  regard  to  the  direct  main-
tenance and  perpetuation  of  life,  while  in  things  relating
to  pleasure,  his  customs  seemingly  have  more  of  an
African  turn.  Perhaps  the  safest  generalization  we
can  make  at  present  is  that  the  greater  the  contact
with  the  whites  in  any  given  field,  the  more  the  effects
of  European  influence,  while  in  other  fields  where
white  supervision  was  less  stringent,  the  greater  the
African  survivals  in  Negro  lore  and  custom.  In
either  case  there  are  beliefs  which  seem  to  have  no
direct  European  or  African  parallels,  and  which  may
represent  independent  Afro-American  developments,
though  we  would  hesitate  about  dogmatically  classing
them  as  such  until  more  information  regarding  both
European  and  African  sources  is  forthcoming.  For
the  remainder  of  this  discussion  our  attention  will  be
directed  to  those  folk-beliefs  and  superstitions  more
or    less    directly    connected    with    the    supernatural.


CHAPTER  II

BURIAL  CUSTOMS,  GHOSTS,  AND  WITCHES

The  Concept  of  Death.  In  general,  the  West  African
does  not  believe  in  natural  death.  The  great  number
of  deaths  by  violence  and  the  lack  of  traditions  telling
him  that  all  men  must  die  leads  to  the  common  prim-
itive idea  that  death  is  not  the  inevitable  fate  of  man,
but  that  it  is  due  to  the  evil  interposition  of  some
outside  agency.  Among  both  Bantu  and  Negro  races
in  Africa  the  rule  is  that  death  is  regarded  as  a  direct
consequence  of  the  witchcraft  of  some  malevolent
human  being,  acting  by  means  of  spirits  over  which  he
has  by  some  means  or  other  obtained  control.  ^

The  Southern  Negro  thoroughly  believes  in  natural
death,  but  in  many  cases  under  my  observation  sudden
deaths,  especially  deaths  with  attendant  delirium,
are  attributed  to  witchcraft.  -     They  sing:

Oh  Deat'  he  is  a  little  man,

And  he  goes  from  do'  to  do'     .     .     :^

showing  their  idea  of  death  as  a  spirit.  There  is  also
the  idea  that  if  two  in  the  house  are  sick  and  one  dies
the  other  will  immediately  improve  in  health  ^ — prob-
ably meaning  that  the  disease  spirit  has  been  satisfied.

1  For  details  and  exceptions,  see  Kingsley,  M.  H.,  Travels  in  West  Africa
I  pp.  459,  and  461.     Winterbottom,  T.,     AccouJit  of  the  Native  Africans  in  the

I  Neighborhood  of  Sierra  Leone,  vol.  i.,  p.  235.     Burton,  R.,  E.     Wit  and  Wisdom

I  from  West  Africa,  p.  394.     Nassau,  R.  H.,     Fetichism in  West  Africa,  pp.239,

I  and  242.     Nassau,  R.  H.,     Where  Animals  Talk,  p.  235.

I  2  See  also,  Bruce,  P.  A.,     The  Plantation  Negro  as  a  Freeman,  p.  121.

\  M12.     See  also,  Allen,  W.  F.,     Slave  Songs  of  the  United  States,  p.  12.

^See  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  South  Carolina,  M.  A.
F.  L.  S.,  vol.  16,  p.  213.     Also  141.


80       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Whatever  the  mode  of  death,  In  both  Africa  and
America,  it  is  generally  believed  to  be  accompanied  by
the  departure  of  the  soul  from  the  body;  though  in
Africa,  the  dead  man's  mouth  is  propped  open,  he  is
loudly  called  upon  to  come  back  to  his  body,  and  other
practices  are  resorted  to  in  an  attempt  to  keep  the
spirit  from  leaving.  ^

European  Acculturation.  Returning  to  the  American
Negroes,  we  must  not  be  surprised  to  find  a  great
many  of  their  funeral  observances  to  be  of  European
origin.  One  touch  of  Nature  makes  the  world  akin,
and  at  the  death  of  either  slave  or  master  the  social
barriers  on  the  better  plantations  were  temporarily
relaxed  under  the  common  grief,  and  the  Negro  allowed
to  come  into  contact  with  the  white  man's  beliefs.
This  was  also  possible  with  esteemed  household  serv-
ants who  were  often  allowed  to  come  into  contact
with  the  sick  even  until  death  occurred;  In  fact  even
being  ordered  to  carry  out  certain  European  observ-
ances such  as  covering  mirrors  or  stopping  clocks.
White  supervision  ceased  at  Interment,  however,  so
that  In  a  general  sort  of  way  those  practices  up  to
actual  burial  are  European,  while  grave  decoration
and  avoidance  of  the  spirit  are  more  African  in  type.
I  had  a  good  chance  for  first-hand  observation  of  these
burial  practices  a  short  time  ago  when  one  of  the
Negro  servants  on  the  place  died,  being  around  from
almost  the  moment  of  death  until  the  body  was  safely
interred.  In  fact,  owing  to  lack  of  adequate  trans-
portation facilities  I  even  drove  a  car  full  of  mourners
in  the  funeral  procession,  absorbing  superstitions  all
the  way  along.

1  See  Kingsley,  M.  H.,  Travels  in  West  Africa,  p.  471.  Ellis,  A.  B.,  Ewe-
speaking  Peoples,  p.  157.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches        81

Dying  in  Ease.  If  a  person  dies  hard  it  is  a  bad  sign;
he  will  haunt  the  survivors.  Thus  the  first  efforts
are  made  to  enable  the  dying  man  to  leave  this  world
with  as  little  suffering  as  possible.  The  bed  should
never  be  placed  "crossways  uv  de  world"  (north  and
south),  but  east  and  west,  with  the  head  towards  the
west.  ^  This  should  make  the  departure  less  pro-
longed, but  if  not,  the  pillow  should  be  taken  from
under  the  head  of  the  dying  person.  -  A  person  can-
not die  on  a  bed  containing  feathers  of  a  wild  fowl;
thus,  when  an  individual  is  dying  hard  it  is  sometimes
better  to  carry  him  to  another  mattress  so  that  he  will
not  suffer  so  much,  ^  a  belief  decidedly  of  European
origin.  •*

Prophylactic  Measures.  As  soon  as  death  occurs  the
mirrors  and  pictures  in  the  room  are  carefully  covered
up  or  turned  towards  the  wall,  some  say  because  the
mirrors  will  tarnish  and  never  be  clear  again,  ^  others,
because  it  is  bad  luck  (generally  death)  ^  to  get  the
reflection  of  the  corpse  in  the  mirror  or  even  to  see
yourself  in  it  before  the  body  is  taken  out.  ^  Other
informants  say  a  reflection  of  the  corpse  might  per-
manently hold  in  either  the  pictures  or  mirrors.  *
I  have  in  my  possession  an  old  mirror  with  two  de-
fects in  the  silvering  which  an  imaginative  person  may
conceive  of  as  resembling  human  eyes.     The  original

145,  and  61.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  26  (1897),  p.   18.

2  341.

3  112.

*  Brand,  J.,  Popular  Antiquities  of  Great  Britain,  vol.  2,  p.  230.  Lean's
Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  574.

5  339,  148,  342,  47,  289,  341,  253,  160,  142,  328,  and  190.

« Smiley,  P.,  Folk-Lore  from  Va.,  S.  C,  Ga.,  Ala.,  and  Fla.,  J.A.F.L.,
vol.  32  (1919),  p.  382.

'  99,  and  357,  and  320.

*237,  61,  and  152.  A  possible  remnant  of  the  primitive  idea  of  the  soul
being  located  in  the  reflection.


82       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

owner  says,  "Us  didn't  klvver  hit  up  when  May  (his
first  wife)  died,  an'  in  jes'  a  day  or  so  afterwards  her
eyes  popped  out  on  hit."  ^  Another  informant  says
the  ghost  will  run  you  unless  the  glasses  are  covered.  ^
The  English  version  is  that  if  you  looked  into  the  mirror
at  this  time  you  would  see  the  corpse  looking  over
your  shoulder.  ^  The  clock  is  also  stopped  lest  it
"run  down  to  nothing"  and  can  never  be  fixed  so  as
to  keep  good  time  again.  *  Another  informant  says
it  will  strike  thirteen  times  if  not  stopped,  meaning,
of  course,  bad  luck.  ^  The  English  version  is  that  the
clock  is  stopped  to  show  that  with  that  particular
man  "time  is  over."  ^  Distinctly  European '  also  is
the  Negro  idea  that  when  the  head  of  the  house  dies
some  one  must  go  out  to  whisper  his  death  to  the  bees;
unless  this  precaution  is  taken  they  will  all  leave  or
die.  ^  The  bees  (makers  of  the  sacred  mead)  were  the
messengers  of  the  gods  and  were  to  take  the  news  of
the  death  to  them.  ^  Both  Negro  ^ "  and  European  ^  ^
also  notify  the  fruit  trees  when  the  owner  of  the
orchard  dies,  lest  all  decay.

Dying  Whispers.  Various  omens  are  observed  at
the  time  of  death.  If  the  body  remains  limp  for  some
time  after  death  it  is  a  sign  that  some  member  of  the

1377.
230.

'Henderson,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  39
and  4L     Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  590.
*41,  141,  67,  357,  387,  346,  and  341.
^83.

*  Henderson,  W.,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  39.
Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  590.

'  Henderson,  W.,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  266.
Leather,  E.  M.,  Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  Y).  2%.  Gomme,  G.  L.,  Folk-Lore
as  an  Historical  Science,  p.  162.

*  141,  and  Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  271.
^  Gomme,  G.  L.,     Ethnology  in  Folklore,  p.  127.

10 188.

' '  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  583.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches       83

family  will  soon  follow,  ^  while  the  last  person  whose
name  is  called  by  the  dying  will  be  the  next  to  follow,  ^
both  beliefs  being  of  English  origin.  ^  If  a  dying  person
hits  you,  you  will  surely  die.  To  keep  from  dying,
if  such  a  person  does  hit  or  bite  you,  you  must  hit  or
bite  him  back  in  the  same  place.  *  The  Missouri
Negroes  say  that  if  a  person  dies  on  Easter  Sunday,
for  seven  consecutive  weeks  there  will  occur  seven
deaths.  *  If  an  old  person  be  the  first  to  die  in  a
community  in  the  year  it  is  a  sign  of  a  lot  of  old  people's
deaths;  if  a  young  person,  many  young  people  will
die.  *  When  a  person  is  dying,  if  there  is  a  dog  on  the
place  the  animal  will  always  howl.  "^  Some  say  all
dogs  must  be  kept  out  because  they  "wall  their  eyes"
at  this  time.  *

Preparation  for  Burial.  As  soon  as  the  person  is
dead  and  arrayed  in  his  grave  clothes,  a  dish  of
salt  is  put  on  his  breast  to  prevent  the  body  from
"purging"  or  from  "swelling."  *  In  England  the
same  practice  is  in  vogue  to  keep  evil  spirits  off,  since
salt  is  Christ's  savour  of  the  earth,  ^ "  or  to  prevent
swelling  or  putrefaction.  ^  ^  None  of  the  kinsmen  of
the  dead  should  assist  in  preparing  the  body  for  burial.  *  "^

1  378,  46,  and  346.     Also  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  16.
"^Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  16.

'Gregor,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northeast   of  Scotland,  p.  211.     Lean's
Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  571.
«231.
'99.

6  92.

7  289.
»237.
9  341.

1 "  Gregor,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northeast  of  Scotland,  p.  207.

^ '  Simpson,  Eva  B.,  Folk-Lore  in  Lowland  Scotland,  p.  206.  Henderson,
W.,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  pp.  39-40.  Brand,  J.,
Popular  Antiquities  of  Great  Britain,  vol.  ii,  p.  234.

12  141.


84       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

The  reasons  for  this  are  unknown  to  the  Negro,  but
probably  at  first  lay  In  the  fear  of  leading  the  dangerous
dead  man  to  think  they  were  pleased  at  his  demise  and
were  trying  to  hustle  him  oif.  "Hit's  wrong  fer  us
ter  holp  wid  Daddy's  funeral,"  the  children  told  me,
and  even  refused  to  take  into  the  house  the  funeral
wreaths  we  brought,  sending  one  of  the  visitors  out
for  them.  It  is  also  thought  to  be  bad  for  any  one  to
work  around  a  dead  person  until  he  is  tired,  ^  i.e.  in  a
weakened  condition  where  spiritual  harm  might  result.
Money  should  be  placed  upon  the  dead  man's  eyes  to
keep  them  from  coming  open,  ^  but  he  should  be
buried  without  shoes,  ^  and  with  the  hair  combed  out
and  left  loose — never  plaited.  Some  say  that  if  the
hair  is  more  elaborately  dressed  the  devil  would  send
his  blackbirds  to  unplait  it  ,  and  that  these  birds  can
be  heard  at  their  work  inside  the  coffin  even  after  it  has
been  buried.  ■*  The  water  in  which  the  corpse  is
washed  should  not  be  carried  out  until  morning,  ^  or,
in  the  case  I  observed,  not  until  the  body  has  been
removed — a  usage  directly  contrary  to  that  regarding
other  dirty  water,  none  of  which  can  be  allowed  to
remain  in  the  house  overnight  without  bringing  mis-
fortune. ^  If  the  bed  clothes  are  taken  out  of  the
house  before  the  corpse  goes  out,  you  are  "taking  out
another  member  of  the  family."  ^  You  should  never
sweep  out  the  house  before  the  corpse  is  removed  for
you    would    be    the    next    to    follow.  ^     The    possible

1  Southern  Workman,  vol.  26  (1897),  p.  18.

2  286,  and  150.
3341.

^  Southern  Workman,  vol.  26  (1897),  p.  18.
M5.

^Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  16.
7396.

« 109,  148,  141,  and  155.     Parsons,  E.  C,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,
S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  16  (1923),  pp.  213-14.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches        85

origin  of  this  taboo  is  shown  by  the  Congo  custom  of  not
sweeping  a  house  for  a  whole  year  after  a  death  lest
the  dust  should  injure  the  delicate  substance  of  the
ghost.  1

Stygian  Sign-posts.  There  are  various  sign-posts
pointing  to  the  direction  taken  by  the  soul  of  the
dead.  If  it  rains  while  a  man  is  dying,  ^  or  if  the
lightning  strikes  near  his  house,  the  devil  has  come  for
his  soul.  ^  Possibly  this  is  the  belief  referred  to  in
the  old  spiritual:

I  doan'  want  ter  die  in  a  storm,  good  Lawd,
I  doan'  want  ter  die  in  a  storm.

If  a  person  die  with  the  mouth  and  eyes  open  he  will
go  to  the  "bad  place,"  ^  this  no  doubt  being  one  reason
for  carefully  tying  up  the  dead  man's  mouth  and  press-
ing his  eyes  shut  almost  before  death  has  occurred.
The  European  version  is  that  if  the  eyes  of  the  corpse
remain  open  he  is  "looking  after  a  follower"  and
another  death  will  soon  occur.  ^  If  you  dream  of  a
dead  person  moving  in  a  hurry,  that  person  has  gone
to  hell;  but  if  you  see  him  in  a  pleasant  state  it  is  a
sign  he  is  in  heaven.  ^  While  rain  during  death  is  a
bad  sign,  rain  soon  after  a  person  is  buried  is  a  good
sign,  indicating  that  that  person  has  found  eternal
rest.  '■  Perhaps  this  belief  throws  light  upon  the  song
Mr.  Allen  has  trouble  explaining  in  his  "Slave  Songs":

1  Tylor,  E.  B.,     Primitive  Culture,  vol.  i,  p.  454.

2 141,  47,  and  341.

'45,  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  16.

<341,  and  180.

^Leather,  E.  M.,  Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  119.  Lean's  Collectanea,
vol.  2,  p.  571.  Meyer,  E.  H.,  Deutsche  Volkskunde,  p.  270.  Hunt,  R.,
Popular  Romances  of  the  West  of  England,  p.  433.

6  131.

'  166,  188,  and  189.


86       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Rain  fall  and  wet  Becca  Lawton     .

Rain  fall  and  wet  Becca  Lawton     .     .     .  ^

This  was  probably  a  plea  for  rain  to  indicate  that  the
dead  Becca  Lawton  had  gone  on  to  glory — a  fact  all
the  more  probable  since  there  is  some  vague  tradition
connected  with  the  song,  of  grass  not  growing  over
the  grave  of  a  sinner.  However,  the  Negroes  are  not
all  agreed  about  the  belief;  some  say  a  rain  just  after
burial  Is  a  sign  the  person  has  gone  to  hell,  ^  while
sunshine  after  a  person's  death  denotes  eternal  rest,
but  the  English  version  associates  rain  with  heaven.  ^

Wakes.  Some  say  that  "ha'nts"  won't  bother  you
until  the  body  Is  burled — the  man  Is  "not  rallly  dald
ontil  den" — that  Is,  the  soul  Is  supposed  to  stay  in  the
body  until  that  time.  *  In  the  case  of  wicked  men,
however,  the  spirit  Is  supposed  always  to  be  lingering
around  on  earth.  ^  The  most  common  view,  never-
theless. Is  that  the  spirit  of  a  man  stays  around  the
house  (or  visiting  loved  places  and  friends)  ^  for  three
days  after  the  man's  death  and  then  stays  around  the
grave  for  three  days  more.  After  this  It  goes  wander-
ing. ^  This  three-day  Idea  was  probably  derived  from
the  Christian  story  of  the  resurrection,  but  during  the
three  days  (sometimes  less)  elapsing  between  death
and  burial,  the  body  should  never  be  left  alone.  Neigh-
bors come  and  "set  up"  with  the  body — food  Is  served
and  melodies  sung — the  spontaneous  expression  of
grief  in  rhythmic  form  at  this  time  probably  being  the

1  Allen,  W.  F.,     Slave  Songs  of  the  United  States,  pp.  21-22.

2  324,405,  67,  61,  and  219.

*  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  591.
<  306.
6  354.

6  141.

^91.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches       87

beginning  of  many  spirituals.  ^  The  older  Negroes
complain:  "Wakes  ain'  what  dey  ustah  be.  We
ustah  sing  an'  pray  all  de  nite  long,  but  now  de  young
folks  dat  'tends  'em  jes'  tells  annidotes  all  nite."  ^
In  other  localities  the  body  is  placed  on  a  "coolin'-
board"  and  covered  with  an  arrangement  of  sheets,
the  one  over  the  face  being  raised  when  the  mourners
address  the  corpse.  "Mourners  may  talk  to  the  body
to  this  effect: 'Mandy,  you  gone  an' lef  me.  ...  I
may  be  nex'  .  .  .  Po'  Mandy!  .  .  .  Po'  John!
.'  A  plateful  of  salt  and  ashes  is  placed  under
the  coolin'-board  .  .  .  whatever  disease  the  body
has  goes  into  the  ashes  and  salt.  'Ashes  takes  up  from
de  body  de  disease.'  These  ashes  are  carried  to  the
grave;  and  at  the  words,  'Ashes  to  ashes  and  dust  to
dust,'  they  are  thrown  into  the  grave."  ^  No  one
would  think  of  leaving  a  "settin'-up"  alone  and  the  last
one  to  leave  such  a  meeting  will  be  the  first  one  to  die.  *
This  idea  of  a  wake  may  be  either  European  ^  or
African  in  origin.

Tke  Funeral  Procession.  The  African  has  an  in-
tense passion  for  burials — even  pawning  himself  and  his
children  into  slavery  if  need  be  to  give  his  relations
a  proper  funeral.  «  The  Southern  Negro  has  much  the
same  notion,  paying  dues  to  a  lodge  all  his  life  or
going  head  over  heels  into  debt  to  see  that  he  or  his
relations  are  laid  away  in  style.  No  matter  what  the
press  of  work  may  be,  a  funeral  is  always  more  im-

^  Southern  Workman,  vol.  26  (1897),  pp.  18-19.

2  407.

3  Smiley,  P.,  Folk-Lore  from  Va.,  S.  C,  Ga.,  Ala.,  and  Fla.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  32  (1919),  pp.  382-83.

^  57.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  26  (1897),  pp.  18-19.

^  For  a  description,  see  Brand,  Popular  Antiquities  of  Great  Britain,  vol.
II,  p.  227  ff.

^  Kingsley,  M.  H.,     Travels  in  West  Africa,  p.  491.


88        Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

portant.  A  funeral  is  a  great  occasion  with  uneducated
Negroes — a  time  for  social  gathering,  and  above  all,
the  Negro  loves  a  crowd.  When  the  time  comes  for
burial  the  corpse  should  be  taken  from  the  house  feet
first,  else  it  would  be  looking  back  and  beckoning  to  a
member  of  the  family  to  follow  ^ — a  belief  European
in  origin,  -  as  is  also  ^  the  common  Negro  belief  that  If
you  put  your  hand  on  the  corpse  the  ghost  will  not
harm  you  ^  (or  you  will  be  afraid  of  no  more  dead
people).  ^  This  may  be  the  remnant  of  an  old  ordeal,
since  the  wounds  are  supposed  to  bleed  if  the  murderer
touches  the  corpse.  It  is  extremely  bad  luck  to  carry
a  corpse  to  the  cemetery  In  his  own  vehicle — a  hearse
should  always  be  hired.  ^  The  corpse  should  not  be
allowed  to  stop  between  the  house  and  cemetery
(with  the  exception  of  the  church) — all  gates  being
opened  beforehand.  "^  If  the  procession  should  stop
another  death  will  soon  follow,  ^  a  mishap  on  the  way
probably  Indicating  that  the  corpse  Is  dissatisfied  and
regrets  having  to  leave  this  world.  A  person  who
counts  the  carriages  in  the  funeral  procession  does  no
more  than  count  the  days  before  his  own  death,  ^  a
belief  of  European  origin.  ^  "^  While  it  Is  extremely
bad  luck  to  walk  ahead  of  the  corpse  ^  Mt  is  even  worse
luck  to  meet  a  funeral  procession  face  to  face.     Per-


1346.

2  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  589.

^  Ibid.,  p.  583,  and  Leather,  E.  M.,     Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  120.
Henderson,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  40.

M5,  and  Moore,   R.  A.,     Superstitions  from  Georgia,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  7
(1894),  p.  305.

^61.

«306.

^346.

«360.

"67.
1 "  Fogel,  E.  M.,     Beliefs  and   Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,

p.  129.

' '  99,  and  188.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches        89

sons  should  always  turn  squarely  about  on  seeing
such  a  procession  and  face  the  direction  in  which  the
hearse  is  going.  ^  In  the  funeral  procession  in  which
I  drove,  I  noticed  that  even  Negroes  meeting  us  in
cars  would  stop  their  cars  and  turn  squarely  about  in
their  seats  until  the  procession  had  passed.  The
belief  is  of  European  -  inception  as  might  be  gathered
from  its  wide  circulation.  No  sensible  person  would
be  so  foolhardy  as  to  pass  (get  ahead  of)  a  funeral
procession,  ^  and  a  person  crossing  in  front  of  such  a
line  or  going  between  the  cars  is  simply  "crossing  his
own  grave,"  *  If  a  bird  flies  into  a  church  or  a  house
during  the  procession  it  is  a  sign  of  seven  consecutive
deaths.  ^  Even  to  see  a  funeral  "signifies  an  unhappy
marriage";  ^  the  first  one  to  drive  a  hearse  will  be  the
next  to  die;  ^  a  person  following  just  behind  the  hearse
should  never  drive  white  horses  for  the  same  reason;  ^
and  a  baby  carried  in  a  funeral  procession  before  it  is
a  year  old  will  die.  ^

Negro  Mourning  Customs.  The  mourning  begins  in
a  perfunctory  sort  of  way  immediately  after  death
occurs,  gradually  increasing  in  intensity  until  the
body  is  finally  laid  away.  There  is  always  excessive
flattery.     Death   claimed   a   husband   whose   relations

1  141,  286,  341,  397,  251,  140,  149,  225,  359,  and  374.  Southern  Workman,
vol.  25  (1894),  p.  16.  Lee,  C,  Some  Negro  Lore  from  Baltimore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  5  (1892),  p.  112.  Bergen,  F.  D.,  Current  Superstitions,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,
vol.  4  (1896),  p.  133.

2  Henderson,  W.,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  27.
Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  592.

3  341.

4  99.

'  Ibid.
«85.

''Southern  Workman,  vol.  28  (1899),  p.  450.

*  Lee,  C,  Some  Negro  Lore  from  Baltimore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5  (1892),
p.  112.

"  141,  and  Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Stiperstitions,  p.  14.


90       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

with  his  wife  were  just  about  to  be  severed  by  a  divorce
court.  From  the  wails  of  the  widow  one  would  have
\  postulated  a  turtle-dove  married-life  instead  of  the
actual  cat-and-dog  affair.  The  testimony  at  the
funeral  and  that  at  the  divorce  court  were  as  wide
apart  as  east  from  west.  Mourning  is  an  essential,
and  to  be  done  well  it  must  be  spontaneously  given
in  a  sort  of  chant — really  another  case  of  spontaneous
song.  At  a  funeral  I  observed  recently,  one  of  the
dead  man's  young  daughters,  sitting  on  the  front  seat
of  the  church  with  the  other  members  of  the  family,
did  not  seem  to  be  doing  her  full  lachrymal  duty.
She  was  taken  out  by  one  of  the  good  church  members
and  roundly  scolded,  after  which  she  contributed  her
full  quota  of  noise  and  tears.  The  chant  usually  ends
with  a  kind  of  refrain  such  as,  "All  dat  I  got  done
gone!"  droned  over  and  over  again  with  eerie  monot-
ony. Sometimes  there  are  convulsions,  sometimes  a
weaving  of  the  body  to  and  fro  in  a  serpentine  dance,
but  always  it  is  the  women  and  not  the  men  who  are
the  mourners.  The  men  usually  sit  dry-eyed  and
awed,  content  to  let  the  women  fare  the  departed  on
his  way.

Significance  in  Africa.  One  has  only  to  read  the
accounts  of  African  explorers  ^  to  realize  the  high
degree  of  similarity  as  regards  not  only  direct  mourn-
ing practice,  but  excessive  flattery  and  the  more  pro-
found display  on  the  part  of  the  women  as  well.  The
position  of  the  African  ghost  in  the  other  world  de-
pends largely  upon  the  style  in  which  the  dead  man

1  See  Nassau,  R.  H.,  Feiichism  in  West  Africa,  p.  216.  Ellis,  A.  B.,
Yoruba-speaJdng  Peoples,  p.  157.  Cardinal,  A.  W.,  The  Natives  of  the
Northern  Territories  of  the  Gold  Coast,  p.  108.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches       91

departs  this  world;  thus  great  personal  sacrifices  are
made  in  order  to  have  an  expensive  funeral,  ^  the
length  of  the  wake  varying  with  the  wealth  and  rank
of  the  deceased.  ^  Without  a  proper  burial  the  ghost
could  not  go  to  its  final  destination  ^  but  would  linger
around  and  wreak  fitting  vengeance  on  the  survivors.  ^
In  Loanda,  much  of  the  deafening  noise  at  funerals
is  for  the  purpose  of  driving  away  these  evil  spirits,  ^
which  are  also  appeased  by  sacrifices  and  abstinences
of  all  kinds.  ^  Among  the  Ibos  a  real  burial  and  a
later  mock-burial  are  necessary  to  enable  the  dead
man  to  rest  in  peace,  ^  and  in  other  localities,  in  case
the  person  has  died  away  from  home,  the  rites  will  be
held  over  a  small  fragment  of  his  corpse  or  over  some
earth,  water,  or  other  substance  from  the  locality  in
which  his^  death  occurred.  *

Clothes  and  Crepe.  The  Southern  Negroes  consider
it  proper  for  the  relatives  always  to  wear  black  to  the
funeral — the  material  to  be  borrowed  if  possible  in-
stead of  being  bought.  Although  an  Arkansas  in-
formant says  that  black  worn  after  the  funeral  will
cause  some  one  else  to  die,  ^  the  common  Mississippi
custom  is  for  the  widow  to  stay  in  mourning  for  about
six  months,  wearing  either  black  or  white  (generally

^Kingsley,  M.  H.,  Travels  in  West  Africa,  p.  491.  Burton,  R.  H.,  Wit
and  Wisdom  from  West  Africa,  p.  220.  Chatelain,  H.,  African  Folk-Life,
J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  10  (1897),  p.  33.

2  Ellis,  G.  E.,  Negro  Culture  in  West  Africa,  p.  69  ff.  Ellis,  A.  B.,  Tshi-
speaking  Peoples,  p.  239.

^  Leonard,  A.  G.,     The  Lower  Niger  and  its  Tribes,  p.  142.

*  Basden,  G.  T.,     Among  the  Ibos  of  Nigeria,  p.  119  ff.

5  Chatelain,  H.,     Angolan  Customs,  J.  A.  F.  L.  (1896),  vol.   9,  pp.  16-17.

*See  Ibid.,  and  Thomas,  N.  W.,  Anthrop.  Rept.  on  Sierra  Leone,  pt.  1,
pp.  71-72.     Lippert,  J.,     Kulturgeschichte,  der  Menschheit,  vol.  ii,  p.  236  ff.

'  Leonard,  A.  G.,     The  Loiver  Niger  and  its  Tribes,  p.  154.

8  Burton,  R.  F.,  Wit  and  Wisdom  from  West  Africa,  p.  211.  EUis,  A.  B.,
Tshi-speaking  Peoples,  p.  233.  Basden,  G.  T.,  Among  the  Ibos  of  Nigeria,
pp.  115-16.

9  341.


92        Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

the  former),  and  then  changing  to  "second  mourning"
which  consists  of  lavender  trimmed  with  black.  ^  In
some  cases  the  original  primitive  idea  of  mourning
being  a  sort  of  disguise  used  for  the  purpose  of  avoiding
the  ghost,  is  quite  evident.  One  informant  directly
says,  "de  wearin'  uv  black  is  'tended  ter  keep  de  ghos'
frum  boddering  you."  ^  Crepe  is  generally  placed
upon  the  door,  but  in  certain  Georgia  communities
where  there  are  an  unusual  number  of  deaths  in  the
family  a  piece  of  black  ribbon  is  tied  to  every  living
thing  that  comes  in  the  house  after  the  body  has  been
taken  out — even  to  dogs  and  chickens.  ^  This  is
interesting  in  that  it  seems  to  be  an  attempt  to  pacify
an  avenging  spirit  which  was  the  cause  of  the  deaths.
Somewhat  similar  to  this  is  the  belief  that  one  of  your
family  will  die  if  you  wear  anything  new  (especially
new  shoes)  *  to  a  funeral.  ^  Here  the  danger  would
seem  to  be  that  of  exciting  the  envy  of  the  dead  man —
somewhat  analagous  to  one  of  the  reasons  for  wearing
sack-cloth  and  ashes  in  former  times.  Others  say  the
new  clothes  will  wear  out  quickly  if  worn  for  the  first
time  to  a  funeral.  ^

Multiple  Funerals.  Very  common  is  the  custom  of
holding  several  funerals  for  a  person,  although  this
does  not  seem  to  be  at  all  analagous  to  the  Ibo  custom
of  second  burials.  In  general  a  person  has  a  separate
funeral  for  each  lodge  or  association  to  which  he  be-
longs. ^     In   the   case   of  the   last   funeral   I    attended

1112.

2  198.  In  Africa,  strips  of  cloth  or  an  article  of  clothing  belonging  to  the
deceased  are  sometimes  hung  up  to  indicate  the  death  of  the  owner.  See
Basden,  G.  T.,     Among  the  Ibos  of  Nigeria,  p.  117.

3  231.
^318.

"  109,  and  203.

"  172.

'  155,  288,  and  345


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches       93

there  were  two  services  In  the  same  afternoon — one
preached  by  the  Odd  Fellows  and  the  other  by  the
Home  Aid  Society  of  the  Church.  A  big  preacher
has  his  funeral  preached  (even  after  burial)  in  each  of
the  churches  under  his  pastorate,  ^  and  sometimes  one
for  several  anniversaries  after  his  death.  ^  At  times
the  Negro  will  be  buried  the  day  after  he  dies  and  the
funeral  preached  several  months  afterwards,  ^  no  doubt
a  result  of  part-time  pastorates  where  a  minister  was
not  always  available  immediately  after  a  death.  In
other  cases  there  appears  to  be  one  funeral  at  the
cemetery  to  which  flowers  are  taken  but  no  mourning
worn,  and  another  held  some  time  later  at  the  church
at  which  the  female  relatives  wear  black.  This
second  service  is  called  "stirring  up  the  dead."  *  Mr.
Brannon  thinks  that  the  reason  for  this  is  that  the
rural  Negroes  cannot  always  get  together  on  short
notice  for  the  funeral.  Thus  a  modest  burial  is  held
and  from  six  to  nine  months  later  a  day  is  set,  all  the
countryside  assembles  with  dinner  on  the  grounds,  a
preacher  is  called  in  who  is  a  good  eulogizer  (whether
he  knew  the  dead  man  or  not),  and  a  general  funeral
service  is  held.  The  widow  is  the  chief  mourner — if
she  has  married  in  the  meanwhile  her  new  husband
chimes  in  with  her.  No  monuments  are  placed  on  the
grave  until  after  this  funeral  sermon  is  preached.  ^
In  certain  cases  at  the  first  funeral  the  dead  man  in
his  casket  at  the  church  receives  the  greetings  and
farewells  of  his  friends  just  as  if  he  were  capable  of

1  112,  and  47.

2  306.
3320.
^279.

*  Brannon,    P.    A.,     Central   Alabama    Negro   Superstitions,    Birmingham
(Ala.)  Netvs,  Jan.  18,  1925,  p.  15.


94       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

comprehending,  ^  but  in  those  cases  falHng  under  my
personal  observation  the  Hd  of  the  coffin  was  simply
removed  at  the  close  of  the  sermon  and  the  congrega-
tion silently  filed  around,  gave  a  coin  to  the  usher  at  the
foot  of  the  coffin  (the  money  to  be  given  to  the  widow
and  children),  and  then  took  one  final  look  at  the  face
of  the  departed.  They  call  this  ceremony  the  "last
respects,"  and  apparently  the  money  gift  has  some-
thing of  the  nature  of  a  sacrifice.  I  might  add  that
the  funeral  sermons  I  have  heard  had  some  flattery,
of  course,  but  were  jocular  to  an  extreme,  showing
very  little  of  the  pharisalcal  hypochondria  of  the
whites,  the  mourning  and  solemn  faces  being  restricted
mainly  to  the  direct  relatives  of  the  dead  man.  The
others  came  for  a  good  time.

Grave  Lore.  The  graves  are  dug  east  and  west  and
the  head  of  the  man  laid  towards  the  west.  An  old
Mississippi  grave  digger  informs  me  that  this  is  always
the  case.  -  A  person  should  not  sleep  or  be  buried
"crossways  uv  de  world"  and  the  head  is  towards  the
west,  3  ("so  de  dald  won't  hab  ter  tu'n  'roun'  when
Gabr'l  blows  de  risin'  trumpet  in  de  east"),  although
one  collector  cites  cases  of  burials  with  the  head  to
the  east  so  that  the  dead  will  rise,  attributing  it  to
the  star  In  the  east  at  the  Saviour's  birth.  •*  The
grave  should  never  be  left  open  overnight  lest  it  cause
another  death,  but  should  be  dug  and  closed  on  the
day  of  burial.  ^     The  tools  used  in  digging  a  grave  are

1  Kane,  H.  P.,     Reception  by  the  Dead,  J.  A.  F.  L..  vol.  5  (1892),  p.  148.

'  2S6.     The  same  is  true  in  England.     See  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  589.

»38,  and  342.  SoiUhern  Workynan,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  16.  Parsons,  E.  C,
Folk-Lore  of  theSea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  16  (1923),  pp.  214-15.

^Smilev,  P.,  Folk-Lore  from  Va.,  S.  C,  Ga.,  Ala.,  and  Fla.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  32  (1919),  pp.  382-83.

*  141,  286,  and  189.  Thomas  and  Thomas,  Kentucky  Superstitions,
p.  75.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  26  (1897),  p.  19.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches       95

left  on  the  site  for  a  day  or  so  after  burial,  ^  the  spades
being,  in  certain  localities,  laid  across  the  grave.  ^
The  Negroes  say  it  is  bad  luck  (or  death  ^)  to  move
them,  *  the  idea  no  doubt  originally  being  that  the
ghost  of  the  dead  remained  in  that  locality  for  a
definite  period  of  time.

Graveyard  Omens.  Various  omens  are  observed  at
the  cemetery.  If  a  horse  neighs  ^  or  lies  down  ^  there
during  the  service,  or  if  the  casket  slips  while  being
lowered  into  the  grave,  it  is  a  sure  sign  that  some  one
else  will  soon  follow.  To  leave  a  grave  before  it  is
filled,  or  to  be  the  first  one  to  leave  the  cemetery,  is
another  pointed  invitation  to  death;  ^  the  European
version  being  that  the  sex  of  the  first  person  to  leave
the  cemetery  after  the  funeral  forebodes  the  sex  of
the  next  person  to  die.  *  At  the  close  of  the  service
every  one  throws  in  a  handful  of  dirt  upon  the  box  in
a  sort  of  exorcistic  fashion  as  a  tribute  of  respect  to
the  dead,  ^  although  none  of  them  seems  to  be  able
to  give  an  exact  reason  for  so  doing.  If  the  earth
sinks  in  more  rapidly  than  usual  on  a  new-made  grave
it  is  a  sign  that  another  of  the  family  will  soon  die,  ^ "  a
belief  common  in  Herefordshire.  ^  ^  A  person  should
never  point  at  a  grave  for  fear  his  finger  (or  his  mother's

>  112.
2  346.

^  Hardy,  Sarah  M.,  Negro  Supei-stitions.  Lippincotl's  Monthly  Mag-
azine, vol.  xlviii  (1891),  pp.  738-39.

*  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  209.
"322.

•151.

^  57,  and  397.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  26  (1897),  pp.  18-19.

*  P^ogel,  E.  M.,  Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,
p.  126.

"346,  32,  54,  and  341.  Smilev,P.,  Folk-LorefromVa.,S.C.,Ga.,Ala.,  and
Fla.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  32  (1919),  pp.  382-83.  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23
(1894),  p.  209.

^°81,  and  286.  Richardson,  C,  Some  Slave  Superstitions.  Southern,
Workman,  vol.  41  (1912),  p.  247.

' '  Leather,  E.  M.,     Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  119.


96       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

teat)  ^  will  rot  off,  ^  and  it  brings  bad  luck  to  step  over
a  grave.  ^  Only  the  latter  idea  seems  to  be  of  European
association.  *  In  regard  to  the  former,  the  Negroes
say  the  finger  will  remain  unharmed  if  you  put  it  in
water  or  into  the  ground.  ^  Others  tell  me  that
pointing  at  a  grave  will  cause  you  to  die  unless  you
spit  on  your  fingers,  ^  others  claim  a  ghost  will  run
you, '  or  that  you  will  get  your  finger  cut  off,  but  they
all  agree  that  it  is  a  risky  business.

Dead  Detectives.  The  living  may  be  conquered  or
deceived,  but  the  might  of  the  dead-hand  is  well-
nigh  resistless.  For  instance  if  a  person  has  been
slain  by  an  unknown  murderer,  bury  the  murdered
man  face  downwards,  and  the  murderer  will  not  be
able  to  leave  the  locality  until  the  body  is  turned
over.  ^  Others  say  bury  the  body  in  a  standing
position,  ^  or  else  bury  the  liver  of  the  murdered  man
separately  from  the  rest  of  the  body.  The  murderer
will  be  caught  near  the  spot  where  the  liver  is  buried.  ^  °
In  other  ways  the  grave  is  made  to  yield  its  secrets.
"Ef  de  murderer  tech  de  daid  body,"  so  an  old  slave,
who  claims  to  have  actually  witnessed  the  performance,
says,  "de  blood  will  sho  rise  in  de  cawpse  to  de  place
whar  he  teched."  ^  ^  (The  European  idea  is  that
blood    will    flow    from    the    wound.)  ^  ^     Others    claim


1 190  .

2  206,  and  141.

3  286,  224,  and  405.

*  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  191.

6  Parsons,  E.  C,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  16
(1923),  p.  211.

6  250,  and  274.

7  61,  and  108.

8  279,  342,  135,  and  189.
9339.

i»91.
1 1  286.

'2  Henderson,   W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  pp.
40-41.     Klaatsch,  A.  A.,     The  Evolution  and  Progress  of  Mankind,  p.  209.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches       97

blood  will  flow  from  the  bones  of  the  murdered  man
when  touched  by  the  murderer,  no  matter  how  old
and  bleached  these  bones  may  be  ^ — while  still  others
claim  the  bones  will  bend  upon  such  a  touching.  ^
The  intestines  of  the  dead  man  will  make  a  grumbling
noise  when  the  body  is  touched  by  the  murderer,  ^
and  the  blood  shed  on  the  floor  will  rise  up  again  upon
the  touch  of  the  murderer's  foot  no  matter  how  much
these  stains  have  been  scoured.  *

Troublesome  Spirits.  On  the  Gold  Coast  of  Africa
"it  is  a  common  practice  to  bring  dirt  from  a  man's
burial  place  if  he  died  far  away  from  home,  or  better,
to  bring  a  piece  of  his  clothes.  Thus  the  returning
spirit  will  find  he  has  not  been  neglected  by  his  family,
and  will  therefore  be  disinclined  to  trouble  them  with
sickness  and  misfortune."  ^  Formerly  in  South  Caro-
lina, the  Negro  funerals  were  held  at  night  with  a
funeral  feast  afterwards.  "Every  one  was  expected
to  bring  from  the  graveyard  and  lay  before  the  door  a
clod  of  earth,  as  proof  that  he  had  really  been  to  the
burial,  on  pain  of  being  haunted  by  the  'sperrit'  of
the  deceased.  At  one  time  the  Negroes  would  burn
no  wood  that  had  fenced  in  graves  or  burial-grounds
."  ^  These  cases  indicate  that  the  ghost
of  the  dead  man  is  to  be  feared  and  that  due  steps
should  be  taken  to  avoid,  propitiate,  or  drive  ofl^  the
evil  spirit.  Many  of  these  customs  reflect  at  least  the
African  theory  if  not  the  actual  practice,  though  others

191,  and  397.

2 141,  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  24  (1895),  p.  49.

3397.

^91.

^  Cardinal  A.  W.,     Natives  of  the  Northern  Territories  of  the  Gold  Coast,
p.  105.

8  Waring,   Mary  A.,     Mortuary  Customs  and  Beliefs  of  South  Carolina
Negroes,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  7  (1894),  p.  318.
7


98       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

are  doubtless  of  European  origin,  since  there  is  after
all,  a  general  similarity  in  such  practices  all  over  the
world.

Ghost-dodging.  Taking  first  the  cases  of  avoidance,
we  find  both  In  Africa  and  In  America  many  such
practices.  The  cult  is  inconsistent  In  that  the  ghost
which  Is  considered  all-powerful,  is  yet  very  easily
fooled.  In  parts  of  South  Carolina,  all  cups,  pans,  and
buckets  are  emptied  after  a  funeral  because  the  spirit
will  remain  on  the  premises  If  encouraged  by  free
access  to  food  and  water.  ^  The  same  practice  Is
found  in  Mississippi  with  the  additional  precaution
that  the  food  be  thrown  to  the  west,  ^  possibly  so  that
the  spirit  will  leave  with  the  setting  sun.  Many  are
the  means  of  steering  clear  of  these  snooping  manes.
It  is  bad  luck  to  call  a  coffin  pretty  ^ — you  will  soon  be
put  in  one  like  It;  ^  a  pregnant  woman  should  not  look
into  a  grave  or  she  will  never  "feel  the  baby"  ^  (In
England  It  Is  said  that  the  child  will  be  pale).  ®  A  sick
person  who  looks  upon  a  dead  body  will  surely  die;  ^
and  in  South  Carolina,  ^  Georgia,  ^  Alabama,  ^  ^  Ar-
kansas, ^  ^  Louisiana  ^  ^  and  Mississippi,  at  least,
the  belief  is  prevalent  that  a  person  should  not  wear
clothes  belonging  to  the  dead.  In  Mississippi  the
reasons  given  are  that  the  dead  person  will  come  back

1  Hawkins,  J.,    An  Old  Mauma's  Folk-Lore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  9  (1896),  p.
13L     See  also,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  26  (1897),  p.  19.

2  141.
"148.

*  310,  and  188.

6  141.

^Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  110.

^  102,  and  341.

« 141,  and  381.

9  264.
1 0  397.
'1341.
»2  18.


vY


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches       99

for  the  clothes — one  informant  tells  of  a  ghost  pulling
at  one  of  its  old  dresses  a  friend  was  wearing  ^ — or
else,  as  one  old  slave  puts  it,  "de  clothes  uv  de  daid
rots  away  ez  de  body  rots  away/'^f  Precisely  this
same  idea  prevails  in  England,  ^  as  might  be  guessecN
from  its  wide  spread  in  the  Negro  South.  It  is  par-\.o'«
ticularly  stringent  in  the  case  of  babies.  When  a  Kj
baby  dies  its  clothes  should  never  be  put  on  the  next
baby,  nor  should  the  next  baby  be  allowed  to  sleep  in
the  dead  baby's  cradle,  lest  it  also  die.  *  A  Negro
believes  that  the  departed  has  the  power  to  haunt  all
objects  which  his  body  has  touched — this  belief
making  him  afraid  of  temporary  coffins  used  by
undertakers.  ^  A  person  should  not  be  so  foolhardy  as
to  name  a  child  for  one  who  is  dead — if  he  does  so  the
child  will  die.  ^'\  In  the  Sea  Islands  a  dead  mother  will
haunt  the  baby  and  keep  him  awake  at  night  unless
the  baby  is  handed  across  the  casket  or  across  the
mother's  grave.  ^  In  another  case  in  South  Carolina
the  children  march  around  the  father's  casket  singing
a  hymn,  after  which  the  youngest  is  passed  first  over
and  then  under  the  casket  and  the  casket  is  taken  out
on  the  run  upon  the  shoulders  of  two  men.  ^  In
Norfolk,  Virginia,  after  a  death  in  the  house,  the
position   of  the   door-knobs   is   changed  ^   so   that   the

1306.

2  286.

'  Leather,  E.  M.,  Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  89.  Lean's  Collectanea,
vol.  2,  p.  585.

U50.

6  105.

»112.     See  Southern  Workman,  vol.  24  (1895),  p.  49.

^  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.A.F.L.  S.,  vol.  16
(1923).  p.  213.

8  Allen,  W.  F.,     Slave  Songs  of  the  United  States,  p.  101  (note).

9  Bergen,  F.  D.,     Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.A.F.L.  S.,  vol.  7  (1899),  p.  15.


100    Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

ghost  may  not  find  its  way  In.  In  other  localities
a  new  addition  Is  made  to  the  house  to  keep  the  ghost
away  (fool  the  ghost),  expecially  if  the  dead  man  has
been  very  wicked.  ^  Among  the  Ibos  of  Africa,  when
several  children  in  one  family  have  died  one  after
another  on  reaching  about  eight  to  ten  years,  the
next  child  to  expire  at  this  age  Is  buried  face  down-
wards, "so  that  he  may  not  see  the  way  to  be  born
again.  It  is  thought  that  his  spirit  is  one  of  those
mischievous  sprites  who  only  reincarnate  to  bring
grief  to  parents."  ^  The  Southern  Negro  in  such  a
case,  although  he  does  not  directly  believe  in  rein-
carnation, will  also  bury  on  its  face  the  last  child
to  die  that  those  coming  after  will  live.  ^  The  Geechee
Negroes  of  Georgia  also  have  this  same  usage,  or  else
they  sell  the  new-born  child  to  some  one  for  ten  or
twenty-five  cents,  and  the  child  will  then  live  * —
without  doubt  a  case  of  deceiving  the  spirits.

In  the  case  of  the  West  Africans  "nobody  wars
with  ghosts"  5  but  every  one  strives  in  every  way  to
keep  out  of  their  path  or  at  least  to  keep  them  well
disposed.  Many  are  their  practices  of  avoidance.
Mourning  involves  both  disguise  and  propitiation;
sometimes  a  whole  African  neighborhood  goes  into
mourning,  since  failure  to  do  so  would  be  regarded  as
Indicative  of  a  guilty  connection  with  the  man's
death.  ^     It  Is  considered  dangerous  for  the  young  to

1 274.  ;

2  Talbot,  D.  A.,     Woman's  Mysteries  of  a  Primitive  People,  p.  22L

3  14L

*  Work,  M.  H.,  Some  Geechee  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  35
(1905),  p.  634.

^  Burton,  R.  F.,     Wit  and  Wisdom  from  West  Africa,  p.  173.

*  Nassau,  R.  H.,  Where  Animals  Talk,  p.  27.  For  customs  regarding
mourning,  expecially  with  widows,  see  Cardinal,  A.  W.,  Natives  of  the
Northern  Territories  of  the  Gold  Coast,  p.  108.  Kingsley,  M.  H.,  Travels  in
West  Africa,  p.  112,  487-88.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches     101

go  near  the  graves  of  the  old,  ^  and  In  certain  cases
the  house  is  entirely  or  partially  deserted  after  a
death.  ^  The  Mississippi  Negro  generally  contents
himself  with  an  alteration  in  the  house,  but  in  one  case
I  observed  during  the  past  year  the  fear  of  the  former
habitation  was  so  great  that  it  was  necessary  to  put
up  an  entirely  new  cabin  in  another  locality  in  order
to  persuade  the  tenants  to  remain.  Often  in  Africa
the  name  of  a  survivor  will  be  changed  after  a  death
to  deceive  the  evil  spirits  ^  and  great  care  is  taken  to
cover  up  prosperity  of  any  kind  lest  their  envy  be
excited.  *

Gifts  to  the  Dead.  "A  man's  ghos'  looks  an'  do's
jes'  lak  de  man  hisse'f !"  ^  Because  of  these  human
likes  and  dislikes  the  lingering  "ha'nt"  may  be  pro-
pitiated and  won  over  by  gifts  or  flattery.  A  wide-
spread practice  of  this  sort  in  Georgia  is  that  of  placing
bread  and  coffee  under  the  house  of  the  deceased  to
prevent  his  ghost  from  returning  and  haunting  the
living.  6  The  funeral  is  a  propitiation  in  a  sense,  and
if  these  rites  are  postponed  too  long  or  forgotten
altogether  the  neglected  dead  may  return  and  demand
a  funeral.  ^  In  the  case  of  one  Negro  hoodoo  at  least,
bitter  herbs  and  the  hoodoo's  drinking-cup  were
thrown  in  before  the  grave  was  filled  in  order  to  "lay
the  spirit."  ^     When  a  person  is  murdered  the  clothes

1  Thomas,  N.  W.,     Anthrop.  Rept.  on  Sierra  Leone,  pt.  1,  p.  71.

2  Lippert,  J.,  Kulturgeschichte  der  Menschheit,  vol.  ii,  pp.  245-46.  Bastian,
A.,     Der  Mensch,  vol.  ii,  p.  323.     Ellis,  A.  B.,     Ewe-speaking  Peoples,  p.  158.

^  Cardinal  A.  W.,  The  Natives  of  the  Northern  Territories  of  the  Gold
Coast,  p.  72.

*  Basden,  G.  T.,  Among  the  Ibos  of  Nigeria,  p.  271.  Chatelain,  H.,
Some  Causes  of  the  Retardation  of  Negro  Progress,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  8  (1895),
p.  183.

5  48.

6  172.

''Southern  Workman,  vol.  26  (1897),  p.  19.
8  Boyle,  Mrs.  V.  F.,     Devil  Tales,  p.  109.


102     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

in  which  he  was  murdered  should  be  buried  in  the
coffin  with  him.  ^  The  old  Sea  Island  "stick-lick"
at  funerals,  where  slaves  fought  with  sticks  across  the
grave,  every  lucky  blow  bringing  a  half-pint  of  rum
to  the  successful  one,  -  may  be  a  survival  of  some  ancient
African  funeral  game.  The  Boston  Herald  of  May  7,
1887,  cites  a  case  of  the  Negroes  on  the  Lower  Mis-
sissippi keeping  up  fires  and  queer  dances  around  the
grave  of  a  dead  pastor,  trying  to  bring  him  back  to
life  by  the  same  conjuring  methods  employed  in  the
interior  of  Africa.  ^  It  is  also  rather  noticeable  that
the  Negroes  accuse  the  Jews  of  putting  food  and  money
in  the  coffin  with  the  dead  so  that  he  can  eat  and  buy
things  when  he  gets  to  heaven  ^ — possibly  a  trans-
ference of  their  former  practices  to  a  people  with  whom
they  are  not  very  familiar.  The  Negroes  talk  of
placing  molasses  at  the  foot  of  the  grave  and  a  pone  of
bread  at  the  head  so  that  the  dead  person  can  "sop
his  way  to  the  promised  land."  ^  True  enough  this
is  partly  humor,  but  with  all  people  much  humor
consists  of  treating  lightly  topics  which  in  reality  are
either  half  or  wholly  accepted.  Others  wittily  suggest
planting  watermelon  seed  on  the  head  of  the  grave  so
the  juice  from  the  melons  will  run  down  into  the
mouth  of  the  dead  person.  ®  An  old  Vicksburg  Negress
tells  me  of  cooking  a  supper  for  the  dead.  Two  people
should  cook  it  together,  neither  saying  a  word  during
the  process.  Get  some  dirt  from  the  dead  person's
grave  and  set  it  in  a  saucer  in  the  middle  of  the  table.


»2S6.

2  Parsons,  E.  C,     Folk-Lore  of  (he  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.F.L.  S.,  vol.  16
(1923),  pp.  149-50.

^  Negro  Dances  in  Arkansas,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  i  (1888),  p.  83.

*286.

»  306, 294, 291,  and  341.    See  also,  Talley,  T.  W.,    Negro  Folk  Rhymes,  p.  26.

•341.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches     103

Cook  something,  such  as  turnip  greens,  that  the  dead
person  Hked  to  eat,  set  the  table  for  three  and  put  up
three  chairs.  Then  bless  the  food  without  speaking
to  one  another  and  start  in  silently  to  eat.  Watch
the  third  plate.  Unseen  hands  will  manipulate  the
knife  and  fork,  greens  will  be  taken  from  the  dish  all
the  time,  but  the  chair  will  remain  vacant.  All  will
be  well,  but  should  you  speak  while  your  invisible
guest  is  with  you  the  wind  will  blow,  the  dogs  bark,
the  chickens  cackle,  and  thunder  and  lightning  appear
to  frighten  you.  ^

An  Alabama  Negro  says,  "Unless  you  bury  a  person's
things  with  him  he  will  come  back  after  them."  ^  It
is  remarkable  how  closely  this  approaches  the  African
custom.  "In  all  the  Vai  towns,  once  or  twice  every
year  after  the  dead  have  been  buried  the  remaining
relatives  visit  the  grave  and  carry  with  them  rice,  rum,
palm  butter,  and  so  forth,  which  are  placed  near  the
grave.  They  then  go  through  a  kind  of  ceremony  in
which  they  chant  Vai  songs  in  honor  of  the  dead.  They
believe  that  where  the  dead  are  it  is  necessary  for  them
to  have  food  to  eat.  They  think  that  the  dead  also
need  clothes  or  something  to  wear,  and  so  they  carry
to  the  grave  white  cloth.  All  these  articles  are  left  at
the  grave  and  it  is  thought  that  the  spirit  of  the  de-
ceased will  come  for  them.  In  thus  providing  for  the
dead  they  have  the  idea  that  if  they  do  not  so  provide
the  spirits  will  be  displeased  and  punish  them  for
their  neglect.  .  .  .  The  object,  therefore,  of  making
sacrifices  to  the  dead  is  to  keep  in  the  favor  of  the

149.

2  286.


104     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

imaginary  spirits  thereof  and  thus  prosper  in  life."  ^
So  great  is  this  belief  in  the  actuality  of  spirits  of  the
dead  and  their  malevolent  tendencies,  unless  properly
propitiated,  that  the  Timne-speaking  peoples  offer  rice
on  the  graves  to  keep  the  dead  men  from  catching
their  hoes  or  spoiling  the  rice  crop,  ^  while  "in  some
districts  on  the  Lower  Congo,  for  several  weeks  after
interment,  palm  wine  is  periodically  poured  down
to  the  deceased  through  a  small  hole  leading  from  the
surface  of  the  grave  to  the  body.  ^  The  Louisiana
Negroes  on  All  Saints'  Night,  so  I  am  told,  cook  food
especially  for  the  dead,  but  such  food  must  be  un-
salted.  God  allows  all  spirits  to  return  to  earth  on
this  night  and  they  are  supposed  to  eat  the  essence
of  the  food.     This  food  is  left  all  night  on  the  table.  ^

Grave  Decorations.  One  Mississippi  Negress  tells  me
that  to  keep  the  deceased  from  coming  back  again,  the
cup  and  saucer  used  in  the  last  illness  should  be  placed
on  the  grave.  The  medicine  bottles  are  placed  there
also — turned  upside  down  with  the  corks  loosened  so
that  the  medicine  may  soak  into  the  grave.  ^  Pre-
cisely the  same  thing  is  found  in  South  Carolina,  ^  and

1  Ellis,  G.  E.,  Negro  Culture  in\W est  Africa,  p.  87.  For  the  sacrifice  of
human  beings,  furniture,  implements,  etc.,  see  Lippert,  J.,  Kulturgeschichte
der  Menschheit,  vol.  ii,  p.  279  ff.  Kingsley,  M.  H.,  West  African  Studies,
pp.  175,  and  452.  Elhs,  A.  B.,  Ewe-speaking  People,  p.  117.  Ellis,  A.  B.,
Tshi-speaking  Peoples,  pp.  157-58.  Tillinghast,  J.  A.,  The  Negro  in
Africa  and  America,  pp.  50,  and  53.  Cronise  and  Ward,  Cunnie  Rabbit,  Mr.
Spider  and  the  Other  Beef,  pp.  25,  and  148.  Thomas,  N.  W.,  Anthrop.  Rept.
on  Sierra  Leone,  pt.  1,  pp.  78-79.  Burton,  R.  F.,  Wit  and  Wisdom  from
West  Africa,  pp.  220,  and  379  ff.

2  Thomas,  N.  W.,     Anthrop.  Rept.  on  Sierra  Leone,  pt.  1,  p.  31.

3  Glave,  E.  J.,  Fetishism  in  Congo  Land.  Century  Magazine,  vol.  19
(1891),  p.  835.

4  18.

*45,  and  Brannon,  P.  S.,  Central  Alabama  Negro  Superstitions.  Birming-
ham (Ala.)  News,  Jan.  18,  1925,  p.  15.

6  Parsons,  E.  C,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.
16  (1923),  p.  214.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches      105

here,  as  all  through  the  Black  Belt,  ^  broken  crockery
is  used  as  the  chief  decoration  for  Negro  graves.  This
seems  to  be  a  direct  African  survival,  though  Mr.
Brannon  seems  to  think  it  may  have  originated  from
somewhat  similar  American  Indian  practices.  ^

In  parts  of  the  Congo  "the  natives  mark  the  final
resting-place  of  their  friends  by  ornamenting  their
graves  with  crockery,  empty  bottles,  old  cooking-pots,
etc.,  all  of  which  articles  are  rendered  useless  by  being
cracked  or  perforated  with  holes.  Were  this  pre-
caution not  taken,  the  grotesque  decoration  would
be  stolen."  ^  Broken  crockery,  along  with  other
articles,  is  used  also  in  Angola.  "*  I  have  observed  this
sort  of  decoration  all  through  the  South.  In  South
Carolina,  bleached  sea-shells,  broken  crockery  and
glassware,  broken  pitchers,  soap-dishes,  lamp  chimneys,
tureens,  coffee-cups,  syrup  jugs,  all  sorts  of  ornamental
vases,  cigar  boxes,  gun  locks,  tomato  cans,  teapots,
flower  pots,  bits  of  stucco,  plaster  images,  pieces  of
carved  stone-work  from  one  of  the  public  buildings
during  the  war,  glass  lamps  and  tumblers  in  great
number,  and  forty  other  kitchen  articles  are  used.  On
the  children's  graves  were  dolls'  heads,  little  china
wash-bowls  and  pitchers,  toy  images  of  animals,  china
vases,  pewter  dishes  and  other  things  which  would
interest  a  child.  ^  In  Mississippi,  so  far  as  I  have  been
able  to  observe,  china  and  glassware  have  been  the

143.

^  Ibid. ,  Central  Alabama  Negro  Superstitions,  Birmingham  (Ala.)  News,
Jan.  18,  1925,  p.  15.

'  Glave,  E.  J.,  Fetishism  in  Congo  Land,  Century  Magazine,  vol.  19  (1891),
p.  825.  Compare  the  picture  of  a  Congo  grave  given  on  p.  827  of  this  article
with  those  of  Southern  Negro  graves  elsewhere  in  this  volume.

*  Chatelain,  H.,     Angolan  Customs,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  9  (1896),  p.  17.

^IngersoU,  E.,  Decoration  of  Negro  Graves,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5  (1S92).  pp.
68-69.  Bolton,  H.  C,  Decoration  of  Graves  of  Negroes  in  South  Carolina,
J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  4  (1891),  p.  214.  See  also,  Brannon,  P.  A.,  Central  Alabama
Negro  Superstitions,  Birmingham  (.^la.)  N'ews.  Jan.  18,  1925,  p.  15.


106     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

chief  decorations — no  distinction  being  made  between
the  graves  of  children  and  adults.  Lamps  are  very
frequently  used  for  decoration.  In  Lee  County,
Alabama,  in  one  small  cemetery,  over  twenty-three
were  found,  some  with  oil  and  chimneys,  used  to  give
light  at  the  time  of  death.  A  Gullah  Negro  says  they
are  used  because  they  are  pretty;  Alabama  Negroes
say  they  "make  light,"  or  "lead  the  deceased  on  into
glory."  They  are  most  often  used  with  persons  who
died  at  night,  those  dying  in  the  daytime  often  not
being  so  honored.  ^  In  general,  however,  the  glass  Is
broken — the  Negroes  say  to  keep  it  from  being  stolen,  ^
or  to  indicate  that  some  member  of  the  family  "has
been  broken,"  ^  although  probably  the  original  remote
African  Idea  was  to  free  the  spirit  from  the  article
and  let  it  go  on  to  the  next  world  to  serve  the  dead
owner.  The  Negroes  mostly  say  that  the  practice  is
simply  an  old-time  custom,  the  meaning  of  which  they
do  not  know,  although  one  old  slave  advanced  the
idea  that  glass  and  china,  since  they  will  not  rot,  are
used  to  indicate  the  graves  where  a  tombstone  Is
lacking,  as  is  the  case  with  many  Negro  graves.  *
However,  this  does  not  seem  to  be  the  case  in  practice,
since  some  of  the  graves  (see  illustration)  are  fenced  In
and  have  a  tombstone  as  well,  but  nevertheless  have  the
customary  adornment  of  broken  china.  It  may  be
barely  possible  that  the  custom  might  have  once
served  to  keep  the  spirit  within  the  grave,  although
the  sacrifice  motive  seems  the  more  probable  one.
This  former  Idea  is  indicated  by  some  Negroes  them-

1  Brannon,  P.  A.,    Central  Alabama  Negro  Superstitions.   Birmingham  (Ala.)
News,  Jan.  18,  (1925),  p.  15.
2.32.
"226.
<65.


NEGRO  GRAVES  IN  MISSISSIPPI


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches     107

selves,  who  say  that  china  placed  on  the  grave  will
keep  evil  spirits  away,  ^  keep  the  man's  spirit  away,  ^
or  keep  the  ghost  off  until  you  kill  hogs,  whereupon  he
will  return  for  some  fresh  meat.  ^  The  latter  state-
ment indicates  that  the  wants  of  the  ghost  are  the
same  as  those  of  human  beings.

^''Layin'  de  Sperrit.^''  While  positive  methods  of
exorcism  and  coercion  will  be  taken  up  at  greater
length  in  dealing  with  conjuration  and  with  ghosts
in  general,  yet  to  a  certain  extent  the  Southern  Negro
believes  that  by  steps  taken  at  burial  the  restless  dead
may  be  prevented  from  haunting  the  living.  The
corpse  may  be  turned  in  the  ground  so  that  it  will
lie  face  downwards;*  or  a  grapevine^  or  rattan®
stake  (with  a  horseshoe  beside  it,  so  some  say)  may
be  driven  into  the  breast  of  the  grave;  or  the  toes  of
the  dead  may  be  pinned  together;^  or  silver  screws
may  be  used  in  the  cofhn.  ^  In  another  case  the
Alabama  Negroes  take  a  lock  of  hair,  a  garment,  and
some  personal  possession  of  the  dead  person,  place
these  in  a  hole  bored  in  a  tree  and  plug  up  the  hole
tightly.  Thus  the  spirit  of  that  person  is  secured  and
is  prevented  from  returning  to  earth  to  "ha'nt."  ^
Burial  itself  is,  in  a  sense,  the  putting  of  the  body
beneath  the  earth  where  it  will  be  less  easy  for  the  ghost
to  return  and  work  harm.  Thus,  one  Negro  says,
"Bury  de  daid   man   deep,   'caze  den  his  ghos'   can't


1  150.

M05.

'311.

M41.

6  258.

"141.

'341.

8  Moore,  R.  A.,     Superstitions  from  Georgia,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  7  (1894),  p.  305.

"407.


108     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

git  back  ter  ha'nt  yer."  ^  Much  the  same  sort  of
thing  is  true  with  the  Africans.  Sometimes  in  West
Africa  the  ground  above  the  grave  is  pounded  down
hard,  ^  thus  making  it  more  difficult  for  the  spirit  to
get  out.  Unusual  people  or  people  dying  unusual
deaths  are  often  given  peculiar  burials.  Thus  with
the  Timne  people,  "a  person  burnt  to  death  must
be  buried  in  the  road  or  the  town  will  burn;  a  person
who  dies  of  snake-bite  is  buried  at  the  entrance  to
the  town,  or  the  snake  will  come  in;  if  a  leopard  kills
any  one  he  must  be  buried  across  a  river  or  the  leopard
will  come  into  the  town."  ^  Sometimes  a  body  thought
to  contain  a  "dangerous  soul"  will  be  cut  up  or  de-
stroyed by  burning.  *

The  African  Soul-concept.  Obviously  such  cases
indicate  that  all  is  not  ended  with  death.  Even  in
Africa  a  man  has  a  soul  or  spirit  which  survives  after
death,  or,  as  is  often  the  case,  leaves  the  body  even
during  life.  Remembering  that  African  religion  differs
so  much  in  character  from  one  district  to  another  that
an  absolute  generalization  is  impossible,  ^  let  us  con-
sider some  aspects  of  this  native  belief  in  a  soul,  or
rather  in  souls,  since  the  African,  in  his  endeavor
more  readily  to  explain  certain  phenomena,  very  often


1198.

*  Burton,  R.  F.,  Wit  and  Wisdom  from  West  Africa,  p.  396.  Ellis,  A.  B.,
Ewe-speaking  Peoples,  p.   L58.

*  Thomas,  N.  W.,  Anthrop.  Rept.  on  Sierra  Leone,  pt.  1,  p.  125.  For
other  such  cases,  see  Ibid.,  p.  49,  and  124,  and  Cronise  and  Ward,  Cunnie
Rabbit,  Mr.  Spider  and  the  Other  Beef,  p.  300  (note).  Glave,  K.  J.,  Fet-
ishism in  Congo  Land,  Gentury  Magazine,  vol.  19  (1891),  p.  835.  Ellis,  A.  B.,
Tshi-speaking  Peoples,  p.  299.  For  general  burial  customs,  see  Kingsley
M.  H.,  Travels  in  West  Africa,  p.  479.  Ellis,  A.  B.,  Ewe-speaking  Peoples,
p.  158.  Basden,  G.  T.,  Among  the  Ibos  of  Nigeria,  p.  113.  Thomas,
N.  W.,     Anthrop.  Rept.  on  Sierra  Leone,  pt.  1,  p.  129.

*  Kinp;.sley,  M.  H.,     Travels  in  West  Africa,  i)p.  479-80.

^  Kingsley,  M.  H.,     West  African  Studies,  pp.  130-37,  and  442.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches     109

assigns  more  than  one  soul  to  every  individual.  ^  Such
a  consideration  is  more  important.  In  that  light  Is
thereby  thrown  upon  certain  beliefs  of  the  Southern
Negroes  regarding  ghosts  and  spirits  in  general.

Survivals  of  the  ''^Dream-soul.''''  It  is  generally
thought  that  the  primitive  concept  of  a  soul  arose
largely  through  sleep,  dreams,  or  allied  phenomena,  ^
and  It  is  certain  that  the  dream-soul  plays  an  Im-
portant role  in  the  African  spirit  realm.  The  Ewe
people  believe  that  every  man  "has  a  second  In-
dividuality, an  indwelling  spirit  {krd)  residing  in  his
body.  .  .  .  This  kra  existed  before  the  birth  of  a
man,  probably  as  the  successive  kra  of  a  long  series
of  men,  and  after  his  death  it  will  equally  continue
its  independent  career,  either  by  entering  a  new-born
human  body,  or  by  wandering  about  the  world  as  a
sisa^  i.e.  a  kra  without  a  tenement.  .  .  .  The  oc-
currences in  dreams  are  believed  to  be  the  adventures  of
the  kra  during  its  absence."  ^  A  man  must  be  awak-
ened quietly  to  give  this  dream-soul  time  to  come
back;  otherwise  he  will  become  very  ill  and  will  have
to  go  to  the  native  doctor  to  obtain  another  kra.
When  a  man  wakes  up  in  the  morning  with  "that
tired  feeling"  he  says  that  his  dream-soul  has  been
out  fighting  and  has  bruised  itself.  ^  "A  native  goes
to  sleep  and  dreams  some  fearful  dream,  awakes,
and  feels  himself  spellbound.  Up  he  gets  and  fires  off
a  gun  to  frighten  away  the  evil  spirits."  ^  A  dying
Gaboon  Negro  related  how  his  dream-soul  was  stabbed

1  Ellis,  A.  B.,  Tshi-s-peaking  Peoples,  p.  125  ff.  Kingsley,  M.  H.,  West
African  Studies,  p.  200  ff.

2  Tylor,  E.  B.,     Primitive  Culture,  vol.  i,  pp.  440^5.

3  Ellis,  A.  B.,     Tshi-speaking  Peoples,  pp.  1.5-16.

*  Kingsley,  M.  H.,     West  African  Studies,  p.  200  ff.

^  Dennett,  R.  E.,     Notes  on  the  Folklore  of  the  Fjort,  p.  17.


110     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

in  the  side  by  the  dream-soul  of  his  enemy,  causing
him  his  fatal  sickness.  ^  To  a  certain  extent  the
Southern  Negro's  concept  of  the  soul  approaches  that
of  his  African  forebear.  There  is  in  some  cases  ap-
parently a  definite  belief  in  a  kra  or  dream-soul.  One
Alabama  informant  tells  me,  "A  dream  is  regarded  as
a  real  experience  in  which  the  soul  of  the  sleeper  goes
to  another  world.  So  you  must  never  awaken  a
sleeping  person  lest  his  soul  fail  to  find  its  way  back
to  the  body."  ^  Pointing  to  the  same  idea  is  the
widespread  belief  that  if  you  go  to  bed  thirsty  at
night  your  soul  will  wander  about  and  drink  from
all  sorts  of  foul  mud  puddles,  ^  or  fall  into  the  well
and  be  drowned.  *  Some  go  so  far  as  to  say  that  a
bucket  of  water  should  be  left  in  the  room  so  that
one's  spirit  may  drink,  or  else  it  may  wander  so  far
away  in  search  of  water  that  it  can't  get  back  and  the
sleeper,  as  a  result,  will  never  wake  up.  ^  Here  we
have  reflected,  not  only  the  dream-soul  idea,  but  also
the  typical  primitive  notion  that  death  is  due  to  the
permanent  absence  of  the  soul  from  the  body.  An
old  Negro  from  Georgia,  by  virtue  of  the  fact  that  he
was  born  with  a  double  caul,  claims  to  possess  two
spirits — one  that  prowls  around  and  one  that  stays
in  the  body.  Unless  his  mind  was  evil  these  spirits
could  keep  him  from  harm.  ^  The  Sea  Island
Negroes  have  this  same  idea  of  an  indwelling  soul
which  conditions  the  bodily  feelings — at  least  in  the

1  Milligan,  R.  H.,  The  Fetish  Folk  of  West  Africa,  p.  38.  Ellis,  A.  B.,
Tshi-speaking  Peoples,  pp.  148-56.

M88.

'  141,  and  286.     Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  142.

M88,  and  341.

5  231.

*  Steiner,  R.,  Braziel  Robinson  Possessed  of  Two  Spirits,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  13  (1900),  p.  226.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches      111

case  of  infants.  When  a  baby  is  taken  any  distance
from  home,  they  notify  the  spirit  by  calling  "Come
baby!"  or,  "Come,  Spirit!"  The  Spirit  is  also  called
at  every  crossroad.  Otherwise  the  child  would  be
fretful  and  cry  all  the  time.  ^  This  idea  applies  in  a
less  degree  to  grown  people.  Some  of  the  old  women
refuse  to  close  their  cabin  door  even  in  cold  weather
for  fear  of  shutting  their  spirit  out  and  causing  mis-
fortune. Mischievousness  in  the  case  of  one  of  the
boys  was  thought  to  be  due  to  the  fact  that  his  spirit
was  shut  up  somewhere.  ^

The  Srahman  and  Other  Souls.  In  addition  to  this
dream-soul,  there  is  also  in  West  Africa  the  soul  that
is  immortal — the  one  that  lives  on  in  the  ghost  world.
This  soul,  with  the  Ewe  peoples,  differs  from  the  kra
in  that  no  immediate  diiference  in  the  body  is  evi-
denced when  the  kra  leaves,  but  if  the  immortal  soul
leaves,  the  body  falls  into  a  condition  of  suspended
animation  such  as  a  swoon  or  trance,  or,  if  the  soul
remains  permanently  away,  into  the  state  of  death.  '
After  death  this  soul  becomes  a  srahman,  or  ghost  of
the  dead  man,  "The  srahman,  or  ghost-man,  only
commences  his  career  when  the  corporeal  man  dies,
and  he  simply  continues  to  exist  in  the  ghost-world  or
land  of  dead  men."  ^  In  addition  there  is  the  shadow-
soul  which  may  be  injured  by  driving  a  nail  in  a  person's

1  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  16
(1923),  p.  198.  Towne,  L.  H.,  Pioneer  Work  on  the  Sea  Islands,  Southern
Workman,  vol.  30  (1901),  pp.  400-01.  Hawkins,  J.,  An  Old  Mauma's
Folk-Lore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  9  (1896),  p.  130.

^  House,  G.  B.,  The  Little  Foe  of  all  the  World,  Southern  Workman,
vol.  35   (1906),  pp.  598-99.

*  Ellis,  A.  B.,     Ewe-speaking  Peoples,  p.   106.

*  Ibid.,  pp.  15-16.  For  other  characteristics  of  this  soul,  see  ElUs,  A.  B.,
Tshi-speaking  Peoples,  p.  125  ff.  Kingsley,  M.  H.,  West  African  Studies,
p.  200  ff.     Ellis,  A.  B.,     Yoruba-speaking  Peoples,  p.  127.


112     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

shadow;  ^  and  the  ukpon  or  "bush-soul" — the  soul
that  lives  In  an  animal  that  Is  away  wild  in  the  bush.  ^
Often  a  man  Is  made  very  ill  by  his  bush-soul  being
trapped  and  Injured  by  some  unscrupulous  wizard. '
With  many  of  these  West  Africans  the  souls  of  the
dead  are  thought  to  be  later  reincarnated  in  some
human  *  or  animal  form.  While  there  seems  to  be  no
definite  belief  In  reincarnation  with  the  Southern
Negroes,  yet  some  of  them  say  that  there  is  a  birth
for  every  death;  when  some  one  dies  a  baby  will  be
born  In  the  world  to  take  his  place  ^ — an  idea  probably
ultimately  derived  from  reincarnation.  Others  reverse
the  arrangement  and  say  that  every  time  a  girl  baby
Is  born  an  old  man  will  die,  and  whenever  a  boy  baby
comes  Into  the  world  an  old  woman  will  depart.  ^  In
one  case  a  Negro  preacher  was  using  as  a  text  the
passage  of  Scripture  telling  how  the  child,  whom  the
prophet  Elisha  ralsedj  from  the  dead,  sneezed  seven
times.  ■^  "Ebber  since  den,"  he  thundered,  "when
ennybody  sneezes  seven  times,  hits  er  sign  dey's  a
ha'nt  riz  up  frum  de  daid."  ^  This  looks  somewhat
like  reincarnation,  and  such  is  certainly  the  case  with


iKingsley,  M.  H. ,  West  African  Studies,  p.  200  ff.  Burton,  R.  F.,  Wit
and  Wisdom  from  West  Africa,  pp.  389-90.

2  Kingsley,  M.  H.,  West  African  Studies,  p.  200  ff.  Ibid.,  Travels  in
West  Africa,  p.  360-

3  Malcolm,  L.  W.  G.,  Short  Notes  on  Soul  Trapping  in  Southern  Nigeria,
J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  35,  (1922)  p.  219.

■^  See  Basden,  G.  T.,  Among  the  Ibos  of  Nigeria,  p.  119.  Chatelain,  H.,
Folk-Lore  in  an  African's  Life,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  25  (1896),  p.  165.
Wilson,  J.  L.,  Western  Africa,  p.  210.  Talbot,  D.  A.,  Woman's  Mysteries
of  a  Primitive  People,  p.  38.  Cardinal,  A.  W.,  The  Natives  of  the  Northern
Territories  of  the  Gold  Coast,  pp.  66-67.  Tylor,  E.  B.,  Primitive  Culture,
vol.  ii,  pp.  8-9.     Burton,  R.  F.,     Wit  and  Wisdom  from  West  Africa,  p.  376.

fi  141,  and  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,
vol.  16  (1923),  p.  197.

6  405.

7 II  Kings  4:35.

8  384.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches      113

the  idea  prevalent  in  parts  of  the  South,  that  the
spirit  of  the  dead  man  will  come  back  to  earth  in  the
form  of  some  animal,  ^

Ghost-land.  With  the  African,  however,  not  all
souls  are  born  again;  there  are  always  plenty  left  over
or  temporarily  out  of  a  habitat  to  people  a  realm  of
ghosts.  "The  general  consensus  of  opinion  is  that  the
world  of  spirits  is  peopled  by  the  souls  of  dead  human
beings.  .  .  .  The  locality  of  these  spirits  is  not  only
vaguely  in  the  surrounding  air;  they  are  also  localized
in  prominent  natural  objects — caves,  enormous  rocks,
hollow  trees,  dark  forests."  ^  The  Yorubas  believe
that  "animals  also  possess  souls  which,  like  the  souls
of  men,  go  to  Dead-land."  ^  This  concept  of  another
world  is  also  derived  from  sleep  and  dreams,  and  this
shadow-world  does  not  differ  in  kind  from  the  earthly
world,  as  shown  by  the  following  statement  of  an
Ibo  native:  "We  Ibo  look  forward  to  the  next  world
being  much  the  same  as  this,  the  only  great  difference
being  that  we  will  not  have  our  fleshy  bodies,  and  that
it  will  be  one  of  perpetual  gloom,  for  there  will  be  no
day  there.  This  we  know  from  dreams,  in  which
it  seems  to  us  that,  while  we  on  this  earth  are  in  light,
the  spirits  with  whom  we  converse  are  always  in  dark-
ness. In  all  other  ways,  however,  we  picture  life  there
to  be  exactly  as  it  is  in  this  world."  ^  Strictly  pol-
ytheistic, the  African  in  his  effort  to  explain  natural
phenomena  by  animism,  locates  a  soul  in  practically

2  Nassau,  R.  H.,     Fetichism  in  West  Africa,  p.  52  ff.

^  Ellis,  A.  B.,     Yoruba-speaking  Peoples,  p.  133.

*  Leonard,  A.  G.,  The  Lower  Niger  and  Its  Tribes,  pp.  185-86.  For  varia-
tions and  other  details,  see  Ellis,  A.  B.,  Tshi-speaking  Peoples,  pp.  157-58,
and  Ellis,  A.  B.,  Ewe-speaking  Peoples,  pp.  15-16,  and  108.  Kingsley,
M.  H.,  Travels  in  West  Africa,  p.  488  and  587.  Bosnian,  W.,  Description
of  the  Coast  of  Guinea,  p.  131.

8


114     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

everything.  "The  Tshi-speaking  Negro  does  not  limit
the  possession  of  a  ghost,  or  soul,  to  man,  but  extends
It  to  all  objects  inanimate  as  well  as  animate."  ^  Thus,
non-human  ghosts  and  spirits  play  their  part  in  the
great  African  spirit  environment.  Miss  Kingsley  says:
"Once  I  had  to  sit  waiting  a  long  time  at  an  apparently
clear  bush  path,  because  In  front  of  us  a  spear's  ghost
used  to  fly  across  the  path  about  that  time  In  the
afternoon,  and  if  any  one  was  struck  by  it  he  died.
A  certain  spring  I  know  of  is  haunted  by  the  ghost  of
a  pitcher."  ^  But  let  us  consider  now  the  American
Negro.

Polytheism  in  the  South.  While  the  Southern  Negro
today  is  not  professedly  polytheistic,  yet  the  Intensity
of  his  beliefs  in  devils  and  angels  and  In  secondary
spirits  of  all  kinds  really  gives  him  a  sort  of  polytheistic
Christianity.  Jesus  is  an  anthropomorphic  spirit  who
comes  riding  along  "wid  er  rainbo'  'cross  his  shoulder,"  ^
as  one  of  their  songs  states.  When  a  mule  balks  a
ghost  Is  stopping  him  •* — a  belief  which  also  exists  in  at
least  some  portions  of  Northumberland.  ^  Spirits
rustle  the  leaves  on  the  trees  « — in  fact,  one  of  their


1  Ellis,  A.  B.,  Ewe-speaking  Peoples,  p.  17.  For  the  location  of  spirits  in
rivers,  lakes,  trees,  hills,  portions  of  the  sea-shore,  and  elsewhere,  see  Ellis,
A.  B.,,  Yoruha-speaking  Peoples,  pp.  34-106,  275-301.  Ellig,  A.  B.,  Tshi-
speaking  Peoples,  p.  13,  34  ff,  and  39  ff.  Ihid.,  Ewe-speaking  Peoples,  pp.  31-77.
Cardinal,  A.  W.,  The  Natives  of  the  Northern  Territories  of  the  Gold  Coast,
pp.  34-35.  Koelle,  Rev.  S.  M.,  African  Native  Literature  (Kanuri  Proverbs),
p.  373.  Burton,  R.  F.,  Wit  and  Wisdom  from  West  Africa,  p.  59.  For  a
general  classification,  see  Nassau,  R.  H.,  Fetichism  in  West  Africa,  pp.  66-70.
Ellis,  A.  B.,  Tshi-speaking  Peoples,  pp.  17-18.  For  an  explanation  of  this
form  of  animism,  see  Tylor,  E.  B.,  Primitive  Culture,  vol.  i,  pp.  474-96,
and  vol.  ii,  pp.  204-29.

2  Kingsley,  M.  H.,     Travels  in  West  Africa,  p.  522.

^141.     See  also,  Perkins,   A.   E.,     Negro  Spirituals  from  the  Far  South,
J.  A.F.L.,  vol.  35,  p.  224.
"306.

*  Henderson,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  231.
«319.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches      115

verses  refers  to  a  "Mulberry  witch"  laughing;  ^  the
witch  apparently  being  a  sort  of  tree  spirit.  It  is
nothing  peculiar  to  African  religious  thought,  which
puts  a  soul  in  everything,  that  an  African  pot  should
be  able  to  run,  2  but  when  the  American  Negro,  pro-
fessedly Christian,  tells  of  a  pot  or  an  ax  running
away  ^,  or  of  a  swamp  going  to  sleep  and  having
bad  dreams,  *  we  evidently  have  a  good  example
of  ideas  closely  approximating  former  African  doctrines.
But  only  occasionally  with  the  Negro  does  a  ghost
take  an  inanimate  form,  though  I  have  heard  of  them
even  changing  to  logs.  ^  In  one  case  a  ha'nt  took  the
form  of  a  wash-pot,  jumped  up  the  hill  into  a  wagon
and  scared  the  driver  to  death.  "Ha'nts  kin  te'k
enny  fo'm,  w'ite  folks,  even  a  brickbat,  clock,  chair,
er  ennything."  ^  Another  ghost  was  accustomed  to
appear  as  a  bundle,  ^  while  in  another  case  a  group  was
going  across  the  fields  at  noonday  when  they  suddenly
saw  a  whole  house  coming  after  them.  It  passed  so
close  by  that  it  knocked  their  hats  off,  and  neither
house  nor  hats  were  ever  seen  again.  *  On  another
occasion  a  group  of  railroad  Negroes  heard  the  whistle
and  the  sharp  grinding  of  a  locomotive  almost  upon
them.  They  leaped  for  their  lives — but  the  ghost-
locomotive  never  appeared,  though  it  was  distinctly
heard  by  all.  ^  But  whatever  the  theory,  the  actual
ghost  is  seldom  seen  in  this  form.     A  haunted  house

1  Talley,  T.  W.,     Negro  Folk  Rhymes,  p.  153.

'^  Cronise  and  Ward,     Cunnie  Rabbit,  Mr.  Spider  and  the  Other  Beef,  p.  156.
»  Harris,  J.  C,     Told  by  Uncle  Remus,  p.  290,  and  292  ff.
*Ibid.,  p.  130.
6  8.
6  305.

^  Babcock,  W.  H.,     Folk-Lore  Jottings  from  Rockhaven,  D.  C,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  14  (1891),  p.  172.
8  288.
« 253.


116     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

is  merely  the  location  of  a  dead  man's  spirit,  while
haunted  trees  are  generally  feared,  not  for  themselves,
but  for  the  spirit  that  lurks  around  them.  Even  dogs
are  reported  to  avoid  trees  upon  which  men  have  been
hung;  ^  while  a  certain  tree  in  South  Carolina  is  feared
because  a  ghost  appears  near  it  in  the  shape  of  a  small
animal,  perhaps  a  dog,  then  increases  in  size  to  the
size  of  a  sheep,  and  afterwards  becomes  successively
metamorphosed  into  a  calf,  and  an  ox.  ^  Ghosts  as
white  spots,  vapor,  or  balls  of  fire  are  more  common.
One  girl  woke  up  screaming  in  the  night,  saying  that
a  ball  of  fire  had  struck  her  arm.  She  was  unable
to  use  that  member  for  two  or  three  weeks.  ^  Such
cases,  however,  are  not  strictly  representative  of  Negro
ghost  beliefs,  which,  in  the  main,  are  more  closely
centered  about  definite  dead  folks.  Let  us  consider
in  greater  detail  this  more  numerous  class  to  which  is
assigned  characteristics  both  African  and  European  in
nature.

Negro  ''''Ha'ntsr  In  all  the  squalid  lore  of  mankind
there  is  nothing  more  ghastly  than  those  unearthly
beings,  who,  for  the  most  part,  were  at  one  time  men.
In  Negro  ghost-lore  this  hideousness  is  all  the  more
patent,  since  the  lovable  fairy  or  brownie  is  completely
subordinated  to  the  goblin,  incubus,  or  ogre,  who  seeks
only  the  harm  of  mankind.  These  Negro  ghosts
gather  together  nightly  in  the  graveyard,  *  though
deserted  houses,  streams  of  water,  garrets  and  even
churches  are  often  polluted  by  their  presence,  ^  which
is  made  known  by  lights  in  the  church,  which,  however,

1  342.

2  Waring,    Mary   A.,     Mortuary   Customs   and   Beliefs   of  South  Carolina
Negroes,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  7  (1894),  p.  319.

8  76.
*64.
U50,


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches     117

are  extinguished  upon  the  entry  of  a  human.  On
dark,  rainy  nights  especially,  they  like  to  prowl  in  the
shape  of  persons.  Catholic  sisters,  cows,  clouds,  dogs,
etc.,  but  most  of  the  time  having  eyes  like  coals  of
fire.  1  Although  more  active  on  Friday  nights,  ^  on
the  last  quarter  of  the  moon,  ^  and  at  midnight,  *
they  do  not  hesitate  to  appear  at  twelve  o'clock  noon
at  times.  Although  almost  invariably  loathsome  in
appearance  these  specters  are  not  always  evil  in  their
actions;  sometimes  when  properly  approached  with
courage  they  point  out  the  location  of  concealed
treasures.  ^  The  air  is  full  of  these  uncouth  monsters —
one  must  be  very  careful  not  to  brush  against  them.
In  case  you  are  not  one  of  those  lucky  (or  unlucky)  few
who  can  see  ghosts,  you  must  look  out  for  signs  of
their  nearness.  A  rabbit  (or  black  cat)  ^  running
across  your  path  in  the  moonlight,  ^  or  better  still,  a
warm  current  of  air  (at  night)  ^  is  a  sure  sign  of  their
presence  3  (it  is  their  breath  blowing  on  your  back).  i°
Other  ghost-minded  folk  claim  that  a  cool  wind  on
your  back  gives  notice  of  a  spirit  behind  you.  ^  ^  The
soft  murmur  of  the  forest  trees  when  the  wind  is
not  blowing  is  the  whispering  of  these  comfortless
creatures.  ^  -     If  the  shade  is  one  of  your  former  ac-


1341.

2  17.

3  141.

*  306.
6  395.

*  Hunter,  Rosa,     Southern  Workman,  vol.  27  (1898),  p.  57.

'  Pendleton,  L.,     Notes  on  Negro  Folk-Lore  and  Witchcraft  in  the  South,
J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  3  (1890),  p.  206.

8  Steiner,  R.,     Superstitions  and  Belief s  from  Central  Georgia,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.   12  (1899),  p.  47.

9  141,  238,  and  341.

1 0  268.  ,      .

1183.

12 141,  and  Pendleton,  L.,     Notes  on  Negro  Folk-Lore  and  Witchcraft  in  the
South,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  3  (1890),  p.  206.


118     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

quaintances,  he  will  mention  your  name  to  his  dingy
comrades  and  break  a  stick  to  attract  your  attention;
thus,  whenever  you  hear  a  stick  break  in  the  thicket
at  night  you  may  know  it  is  a  ghost  trying  to  get  your
attention.  ^  In  fact,  these  uncanny  bogies  often  let
themselves  be  known  only  by  the  sounds  they  make;
one  Missouri  family  was  forced  to  relinquish  a  haunted
house,  offered  free  to  them,  because  inexplicable
sounds  of  breaking  dishes  and  tramping  cattle  on  the
floors  below  gave  them  no  opportunity  to  slumber.  ^
Never  answer  a  strange  voice  in  the  night;  a  spirit  (of
some  relative)  ^  is  calling  you,  and  to  answer  it
means  death.  *

Brawny  Specters.  If  any  one  should  be  so  foolhardy
as  to  mock  a  strange  noise  at  night,  the  insulted  goblin
would  snatch  him  out  of  bed.  ^  Perhaps  muscular
strength  may  seem  incompatible  with  such  volatile
construction,  but  one  Vicksburg  Negro  learned  to  his
sorrow  that  strength  of  arm  does  not  depart  with
death.  This  suitor  was  forcing  unwanted  attentions
upon  a  girl  when  suddenly  the  shadowy  hand  of  the
girl's  dead  father  dealt  the  impetuous  youth  a  mighty
wallop  on  the  jaw.  Even  today  this  tactless  swain's
mouth  is  lopsided.  ^  A  person  should  never  turn  his
head  when  he  feels  a  spirit  slapping  him;  he  would
never  be  able  to  turn  it  back  to  its  proper  position.  ^


157.
2351.

3  Smiley,  P.,  Folk-Lore  from  Va.,  S.  C,  Ga.,  Ala.,  and  Fla.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  32  (1919),  p.  382.

*  200,  and  306.

661.

*  368.  The  Yoruba  people  of  Africa  have  a  proverb:  "If  a  ghost  shakes
thy  hand,  thine  arm  shrinks."  See  Burton,  R.  F.,  Wit  and  Wisdom  from
West  Africa,  p.  143.

754.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches      119

This  fear  of  the  departed  is  one  reason  why  it  is  con-
sidered a  bit  unwise  to  marry  a  widow  too  soon  after
her  husband  has  become  an  unwilling  "ha'nt."  One
impatient  suitor  in  Arkansas  called  upon  such  a  recent
widow.  As  he  entered  her  house  his  shoe  flew  off,
a  few  more  steps  and  off  came  his  coat.  Suddenly  a
ghost  appeared,  sitting  in  the  woman's  lap,  and  the
suitor's  ardor  speedily  cooled.  ^  A  fresh  smell,  like
steaming  coffee,  indicates  a  lurking  "ha'nt";  ^  and  such
"smells"  are  unduly  attracted  by  sleeping  with  your
feet  towards  the  window,  ^  or  by  having  half  a  pumpkin
in  the  kitchen.  ^  Perchance  this  latter  notion  is  a
modification  of  our  Hallowe'en  pumpkin  usages.

Ectoplasmic  Manifestations.  Some  ghosts  look  like
thin  vapor  or  headless  men  and  women  draped  in  white.
When  they  walk  there  is  an  eerie  sound  like  rustling
silk  or  gently  beating  wings.  They  most  often  mourn
in  a  stifled  sort  of  way  like  the  wind  in  the  treetops,
but  occasionally  there  is  the  husky  sobbing  of  a  child
and  rarely  a  sinister  scream.  Muffled  sounds,  the
suggestive  rattle  of  a  shutter,  a  board  creaking,  a
chair  rocking,  or  soft  footsteps  in  an  empty  house —
all  such  signs  are  indications  of  a  sombre  visitor  from
beyond  the  grave.  ^  A  man  is  not  really  dead  until
the  body  is  buried.  His  soul  stays  in  the  body  (all
are  not  agreed  on  this)  until  this  rite  is  performed  and
the  dead  man's  haunt  will  not  molest  you  until  then.
But  should  the  dead  man  be  an  enemy  of  yours  his
avenging  spook  will  soon  be  on  your  trail.  ^     The  ghosts

1341.
2112.

=•33.

*  Waring,  Mary  A.,     Negro  Superstitions  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.F.  L.,  vol.
8  (1895),  p.  252.
M50.
•306.


120     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

of  wicked  persons  are  red  ^  or  black,  while  good  spirits
are  white.  Bad  spirits  sometimes  take  the  form  of  a
black  man  without  a  head,  or  a  black  cat,  dog,  hog,  or
cow — the  cow  at  times  having  only  one  horn  standing
out  between  her  eyes  (perhaps  a  Negro  version  of  the
fabled  unicorn).  Good  spirits,  on  the  other  hand,
appear  as  white  doves,  men  and  children  (at  times
with  wings),  or  else  look  like  mist  or  clouds.  The  air
from  these  good  spirits  will  cure  sickness.  They  are
able  to  fly  high,  but  the  evil  spirits  remain  close  to  the
ground  and  lead  men  into  ditches  or  briar-patches.  ^
There  are  ghost  forms  of  all  sizes — from  that  of  a
gnat  to  a  horse.  The  forms  often  seen  are  those  of
dogs,  lambs,  bears,  and  other  animals,  ^  although
again  they  appear  in  human  form  but  not  able  to
walk  upright,  jumping  after  people  on  their  hands  and
knees  like  rabbits,  with  their  faces  tied  up  in  black
cloths.  *  Arkansas  Negroes  tell  various  stories  of  these
diabolical  marplots.  One  Negro  was  chased  by  some-
thing with  a  huge  head  and  two  tiny  legs;  another  on
horseback  suddenly  found  an  unbidden  companion
seated  behind  him.  Every  time  the  terrified  rider  would
hit  the  horse  the  ghost  would  also  hit  the  animal  and
the  driver  as  well.  Still  another  was  tactless  enough
to  throw  at  a  small  white  spot  he  saw  by  the  road  one
night.  The  spot  increased  so  rapidly  in  size  that  it
soon  reached  across  the  road  and  the  field  as  well.
In  running  around   the  church  trying  to  escape  the

^Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  210.

^Steiner,  R.,  Braziel  Robinson  Possessed  of  Two  Spirits,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  13  (1900),  p.  227.

3  150.

^Waring,  Mary  A.,  Mortuary  Customs  and  Beliefs  of  South  Carolina
Negroes,  J.  A.  F.  L.  (1894),  p.  318.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches      121

white  horror  the  unlucky  man  fell  down  and  broke  his
arm.  ^

Serious  Business.  Would  that  my  pen  could  give
some  small  idea  of  the  deadly  seriousness  and  sin-
cerity with  which  these  personal  happenings  are  re-
lated by  the  rural  Negroes.  Many  times  I  have  found
myself  wondering  whether,  after  all,  these  less  cultured
folk  were  not  in  touch  with  influences  to  which  the
whites  are  impervious,  so  great  is  the  earnestness  of
Negroes,  whom  I  know  to  be  trustworthy  in  other
affairs,  in  picturing  the  chill  horror  of  these  nocturnal
meetings.  One  old  Negro  woman  lived  in  a  house
near  the  edge  of  the  graveyard.  One  morning  she
looked  out  towards  the  well  in  the  yard.  Beads  of
cold  perspiration  appeared  on  her  forehead.  The  well
crank  was  turning  and  a  bucket  of  water  coming  up
though  no  human  being  was  to  be  seen.  An  invisible
hand  seized  the  dipper  and  lifted  it  to  about  the
position  where  a  mouth  would  normally  be.  A  ghastly
whirring  noise  through  the  treetops — and  all  was  as  it
had  been.  ^  Another  Negro  driving  by  the  graveyard
on  a  pitch-dark  night  was  filled  with  nameless  dread
when  his  horse  balked.  He  could  see  no  one  but  was
aware  of  a  bulky  form  getting  into  the  buggy  with
him — he  could  hear  the  springs  creak  and  feel  them
settle  under  the  weight.  The  horse  moved  on  very
slowly;  nothing  could  persuade  him  to  go  faster.  The
unhappy  man  tried  to  sing,  but  could  think  of  no
other  song  than  "Hark  from  the  tomb  a  doleful  sound."
His    unseen    companion    mocked    him,    "Hark!   Hark!

1.341.

2  288.


122     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Hark!"  He  could  feel  the  mouldy  breath  of  the
visitor  on  his  shoulder.  When  the  man  and  his
ghoulish  companion  neared  a  store  the  horse  stopped
and  the  unseen  visitor  left  him  without  a  word  of
thanks.  ^  Still  another  Negro  met  an  old  woman  on
three  successive  corners  while  walking  straight  along
at  night.  The  last  time  when  he  tipped  his  hat  to  her
he  became  apprehensive  and  looked  back  after  he
had  passed.  Not  a  soul  was  to  be  seen.  A  loitering
gait  was  quickly  metamorphosed  into  a  break-neck
gallop.  2  Another  Negro  was  startled  out  of  his  wits
when  a  bunch  of  chains  suddenly  fell  out  of  a  tree  near
him  on  a  lonely  night. ^  Continental  ghosts  wear
chains,  but  the  English  ghost,  dead  or  alive,  is  free  of
them,  *  though  the  clanking  of  chains  is  sometimes
heard  with  English  animal-ghosts.  ^  The  Negro,  bred
in  slavery,  often  invested  his  dead  with  the  same
accouterments  worn  by  the  living.

Cadaverous  Avengers.  "De  ha'nts  '11  sho'  git  you  ef
you  dances  er  do's  wrong.  Law'!  Marse  Newbell,
dey  kin  even  set  yo'  house  a-fiah."  ^  This  indicates
the  way  in  which  the  imaginary  environment  is  drawn
upon  to  facilitate  better  discipline  in  the  real  environ-
ment. The  fear  of  an  avenging  "ha'nt"  is  often  as
powerful  a  deterrent  with  the  would-be  thief  or  mur-
derer as  the  fear  of  the  avenging  noose.  One  man  in  a
fit  of  anger  killed  his  wife.  To  his  horror  he  found
that  the  print  of  her  face  where  she  struck  the  floor
could    not   be   erased.     Her   spirit   would   come   back,


^Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  210.

2  153.

M36.

^  Brand,  J.,     Popular  Antiquities  oj  Great  Britain,  vol.  3,  p.  69.

*  Henderson,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  238.

6  306.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches     123

knock  on  the  door,  blow  the  light  out,  or  flutter  at
the  window.  Often  in  the  night,  even  until  his  death,
he  could  hear  the  dull  thud  of  her  murdered  body
again  falling  to  the  floor.  ^  Some  grave-robbers  dug
up  the  body  of  a  wealthy  woman  and  stole  her  jewels.
As  they  attempted  to  remove  a  diamond  ring,  to  their
consternation,  the  loathsome  hands  of  the  corpse
closed  upon  them.  They  broke  away  and  ran  in
terror,  but  the  baneful  specter  stalked  to  her  former
house  and  pointed  out  these  servants  who  had  robbed
her.  Other  mercenary  bigots  stole  the  two  silver
dollars  holding  down  a  dead  man's  eyes.  That  night
the  dead  man  came  and  asked  for  his  money,  which
was  thrown  to  him  with  due  perturbation.  ^  An  old
Negro  slave  tells  me  of  his  white  master  who  shot  a
neighbor  in  a  dastardly  fashion.  While  waiting  at
the  doorstep  for  this  master  one  night,  this  old  Negro
heard  two  shots  in  the  direction  of  the  graveyard  in
which  the  murdered  man  was  buried,  and  then  the
sound  of  galloping  hoofs.  His  master's  horse  came
running  in  with  his  owner  lying  limp  across  his  back.
The  slave  put  the  white  man  to  bed;  next  morning  he
was  sent  to  the  cemetery  to  see  if  he  could  find  any-
thing dead  there.  A  ghostly  form  had  seized  his
master's  bridle  as  he  passed  the  cemetery,  twice  the
rider  had  fired  at  it  with  silver  bullets,  but  the  ghost
merely  croaked,  "You  shot  me  once;  I  can't  be  shot
again!"  The  slave  looked  near  the  scene  of  the
shooting  but  found  only  a  revolver  with  two  cartridges
discharged.  ^  The  same  informant  tells  of  even  the
rain   having  pity   and   turning  to  blood   when   it  fell

188.

2341.

3  286.     See  also,  Backus,  E.  M.,     Negro  Ghost  Stories,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  9
(1896),  pp.  228-30.


124     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

upon  the  roof  of  a  lonely  house  on  the  roadside  in
which  a  poor  old  man  was  murdered.  Another  in-
formant tells  me  of  a  man  who  asked  to  be  buried  in
his  own  back  yard.  Two,  four,  then  six  horses  were
hitched  to  the  hearse  but  they  couldn't  budge  it
towards  the  cemetery.  Then  two  horses  were  hitched
to  the  rear  and  easily  pulled  it  to  the  back  yard  where
the  man  was  buried.  ^  An  economical  housewife  picked
up  a  bone  in  the  graveyard  and  took  it  home  to  make
soup  with  it.  That  night  a  thin  voice  wailed  over  her
bed,  "I  want  my  bone!  I  want  my  bone!"  She  paid
no  attention  at  first,  but  the  voice  gradually  increased
in  volume  until  the  whole  house  shook  with,  'T  WANT
MY  BONE!  I  WANT  MY  BONE!"  "Take  it,"
the  frightened  woman  cried.  All  was  then  silent^
and  next  morning  the  bone  was  gone.  ^

An  ill-bred  little  boy  cursed  and  swore  at  an  old
hired  lady  on  the  place  because  she  was  smoking  his
father's  pipe.  Shortly  afterwards  the  old  lady  died.
All  went  well  until  about  three  weeks  later  when  the
lad  awoke  one  night  shrieking  that  the  old  lady  was
after  him.  His  parents  went  to  the  rescue  but  could
see  no  one,  though  the  sheets,  quilts,  and  window
curtains  in  the  room  were  tearing  themselves,  a  strip
at  a  time,  and  tying  themselves  about  the  boy's  neck,
arms  and  legs,  almost  choking  him  to  death.  All  they
could  do  was  to  cut  the  strips  as  fast  as  they  were  tied
until  the  invisible  Something  left  for  the  night.  Next
morning  at  breakfast  this  same  invisible  misanthrope
spit  in  every  dish  on  the  table  so  that  the  family  were
compelled  to  go  without  their  meal.  This  happened
many    times    afterwards,    so    that    the    family    would


'306.

2337.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches     125

often  eat  away  from  the  house.  The  woman  continued
to  worry  the  lad  until  he  became  very  ill.  She  would
often  appear  in  the  form  of  a  cat  and  would  even  tie
him  to  the  top  of  the  house  unless  the  cords  were  cut
as  fast  as  she  tied  them.  People  came  from  far  and
near  to  see  the  strange  spectacle,  and  one  circus  owner
offered  to  buy  the  lad  to  display  in  his  show.  Collard
seed  were  strewn  about  the  door  with  no  effect.  One
man  brought  a  pistol  loaded  with  golden  bullets.  He
was  very  boastful  about  what  he  was  going  to  do,
but  when  the  "ha'nt"  slapped  him  and  nailed  his  hat
on  the  top  of  the  house  he  left  on  the  run,  leaving  his
pistol  behind.  The  boy  kept  the  pistol  and  finally
succeeded  in  wounding  the  evil  shade  so  that  she
never  came  back.  He  then  recovered  from  his  illness
but  his  mind  was  forever  affected  by  that  gruesome
experience.  ^

Ghastly  Associates.  Whether  the  "ha'nt"  be  re-
venging some  direct  wrong  or  not,  there  are  many
cases  of  the  infliction  of  personal  injury  or  death  upon
people  who  approach  "ha'nts"  too  closely.  Some
boys  in  a  buggy  were  driving  along  one  Sunday  after-
noon when  they  saw  a  man  out  in  the  field  hoeing
cotton.  They  remonstrated  with  him  about  violating
the  Sabbath;  the  man  stopped  their  buggy,  whipped
them  all  soundly,  then  quickly  and  utterly  vanished
into  thin  air.  ^  Another  time  a  little  boy  and  girl  saw
a  large  rat  run  under  the  corn  crib.  They  set  the
crib  on  fire  and  a  voice  came,  "Don't  do  that!  Don't
do  that!"  That  night  they  lay  in  bed  asleep.  About
twelve    o'clock    there    was    a    dreary    mutter:    "Come

1  195.

2  306.


126     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

here,  brother!  Come  here,  sister!"  A  ghostly  hand
tore  the  shingles  off  the  roof,  an  uncouth  form  hopped
into  bed  with  the  two  children  and  killed  them  both,  i
Dora  May  of  Mobile,  on  a  dare,  went  to  a  tomb  at  mid-
night and  thrust  her  hand  into  a  hole  in  the  grave.
Something  seized  her  arm  with  a  cold,  clammy  grasp.
She  shrieked  and  strained  but  could  not  get  away.
Others  tried  to  help  her  but  could  not  pull  her  arm
out.  Terror  finally  overcame  them  and  they  all  ran
away,  leaving  poor  Dora  May  alone  in  the  graveyard
all  night.  Next  morning  she  was  dead,  and  her  arm
had  to  be  amputated  to  secure  her  release.  A  fanci-
ful story,  perhaps,  but  it  is  remarkable  what  a  hold
it  has  upon  the  Negroes  of  Mobile.  ^  Ghosts  have
also  been  known  to  carry  men  up  into  the  air  until
they  disappeared  entirely  and  forever  from  sight.  ^
A  dead  father  returned  and  broke  up  the  dishes
because  his  daughter  was  not  obedient  to  her  mother.  *
Even  white  people  may  appear.  One  authoress  in
Mobile,  after  her  death  was  often  "seed  a-settin'  on
de  bench  in  de  garden  wid  er  w'ite  dress  on.  Alius
she  gits  dimmer  an'  dimmer,  an'  finally  goes  away."  ^
Women  picking  cotton,  weird  misshapen  forms  "dat
je'k  folkses  outer  dey's  baids  at  nite,"  ^  white  shadows
in  the  midst  of  a  whirlwind:  these  are  some  of  the
forms  in  which  these  ghastly  denizens  of  the  other
world  appear  to  appall  those  who  believe  in  them.
They  are  often  guardians  of  buried  treasure;  one
favorite  theme  is  that  of  a  haunted  house,  generally
with  treasure  buried  below  it.     People  are  offered  a


1  263.

2  320.

8  Southern  Worktna?i,  vol.  26  (1897),  pp.  122-23.

*341.

6  320.

«104.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches     127

huge  reward  to  spend  the  night  there,  but  extremely
few  are  able  to  do  so.  ^  Generally  a  person  who  has
died  an  untimely  death  leaves  a  dangerous,  dissatisfied
ghost.  So  great  is  the  fear  of  some  Mississippi  Ne-
groes for  a  certain  haunted  tree  where  a  man  was  hung
that  they  will  go  five  or  six  miles  out  of  their  way
at  night  to  avoid  passing  that  spot.  ^

Mutilated  Specters.  In  America,  as  in  Africa,  ^
these  ghosts  often  take  a  mutilated  form,  probably
representing  those  poor  dissatisfied  souls  who  are
forced  to  lead  a  painful  existence  in  the  other  world
with  some  of  their  parts  missing.  Many  are  the
apparently  sincere  stories  I  have  heard  related  about
meetings  with  these  headless  prowlers  of  the  night.
One  reputable  Negro  nurse  tells  me  of  driving  down  the
road  at  night  when  suddenly  the  horses  shied  at  the
figure  of  a  man  dimly  outlined  in  the  gloom  (horses
generally  show  a  great  sensitivity  to  spirits).  On
looking  closely  she  saw  that  this  silent  figure  had  no
head.  ^  In  another  case  a  murderer  chopped  a  man's
head  off;  to  his  everlasting  horror  the  head  began  to
talk  to  him.  Another  man  was  decapitated  in  a
railroad  wreck.  His  headless  body  walked  up  and
down  the  track  asking  if  any  one  was  hurt.  ^  A
wife  died,  making  her  husband  promise  not  to  sell  any
of  the  household  furniture.  A  short  time  afterwards
the  unfaithful  husband  sold  a  pair  of  bedsprings  and  a
mattress  to  a  Negress,  who,  of  course,  was  unaware

1341.

2.319,  and  406.

'See,  Lomax,  J.  A.,  Stories  of  an  African  Prince,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  26
(1913),  pp.  7-8.  Cronise  and  Ward,  Cunnie  Rabbit,  Mr.  Spider  and  the
Other  Beef,  pp.  21-22.

^342.

^244.


128     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

of  the  promise  he  had  made.  That  night  she  and  her
sister  went  to  bed,  first  jamming  the  ax  under  the
door  so  that  it  could  not  be  opened.  In  the  middle  of
the  night  they  woke  up  to  see  the  ax  mysteriously
creeping  from  under  the  door.  A  woman  clad  in  red
flannel  (the  fetish  color)  walked  in.  She  had  a  great
long  neck  but  no  head.  There  she  stood  "a-turnin'
dat  long  neck  'bout  de  room  tryin'  ter  look  at  us.  Us
hollered  fur  us's  brudder,  he  come  runnin'  in,  an'  dat
ha'nt  wuz  gone!"^  Another  Vicksburg  Negro  saw  a
little  man  walking  across  the  fields  with  no  legs,  ^
while  in  other  cases  ^  headless  men,  armless  men,  and
dismembered  limbs,  falling  down  the  chimney  one  by
one,  and  acting  as  if  they  had  some  real  unison,  are
featured.  Ghosts  in  the  shape  of  "natchel  men,"
unnatural  men  twenty  feet  high,  *  a  person's  relatives,
vanishing  sheets,  men  in  black;  ^  in  these  and  many
other  forms  the  specters   appear.

The  Mark  of  the  Beast.  Some  say  that  spirits  may
come  in  any  shape,  as  men,  cows,  cats,  dogs,  or  other
animals,  but  that  they  are  always  black.  If  a  man
leaves  an  unknown  treasure  buried,  his  ghost  will
come  back  colored  red.  ^  A  man  has  two  ghosts,  an
evil  ghost,  derived  from  the  body  and  a  "Holy  Ghost"
derived  "frum  de  insides."  "All  ha'nts  come  frum
daid  people,  'caze  dere  mus'  be  a  soul  ter  be  a  ghos',
an'  animals  hain't  got  no  souls.  Sometimes  ghosses
look  lak  dawgs  er  cats,  but  dey's  nutthin'  but  folkses

1288.

2  25.

'Bacon,  A.  M.,  and  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Lore  from  Elizabeth  City  County,
Va.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  35,  p.  290.

«8.

6  244.

*  141,  and  Steiner,  R.,  Observations  on  the  Practice  of  Conjuring  in  Georgia,
J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  14  (1901),  p.  178.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches      129

in  dat  shape."  ^  I  would  not  credit  most  Negroes
with  such  close  reasoning  on  the  subject,  but  it  is  true
that  many  goblins  do  appear  in  animal  form.  Dogs
are  the  most  common  shapes  taken;  generally  big  dogs
(big  as  a  calf)  ^  with  big  red  eyes. '  There  is  one  Negro
verse:

Ole  Joe's  dead  an'  gone,  but  his  ha'nt  blows  de  ho'n;
An'  his  hound  howls  still  from  de  top  o'dat  hill,  *

which  shows  that  ghost  hounds  are  not  always  as-
sociated with  metamorphosed  human  bodies  but  may
represent  the  spirits  of  deceased  dogs  as  well.  One
Mississippi  slave  tells  me  of  seeing  a  little  white  pug
dog  that  became  bigger  and  bigger,  until  it  was  as
large  as  a  calf.  ^  The  specter  hound  or  dog  is  a  very
common  sprite  in  Lancashire,  in  one  part  being  sup-
posed to  be  a  black  dog  without  a  head,  ^  a  form  also
common  with  the  Mississippi  Negroes.  ^  Sometimes
these  dogs  carry  lanterns  on  their  heads,  ^  or  else  have
big  red  eyes  glowing  like  chunks  of  fire.  Horses
which  have  killed  men  during  their  lifetime,  in  some
localities  appear  in  a  headless  form  after  death.  *
Ghosts  also  appear  as  cats,  ^ "  which  sometimes  change
into   sheeted   figures;  ^^   donkeys   "wid   eyes  ez  big  ez

2  244.

*  Talley,  T.  W.,     Negro  Folk  Rhymes,  p.  59.

^  32.     See  also,  Babcock,  W.  H.,     Folk-Lore  Jottings  from  Rockhaven,  D.  C,
J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  4  (1891),  p.  172.

'  Hardwick,  C,     Traditions,  Superstitions,  and  Folklore,  p.  172.
^306.

8  Bacon,    A.    M^  and   Parsons,    E.    C,      Folk-Lore  from  Elizabeth   City
County,  Va.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  35,  p.  289.

9  Bergen,  F.  D.,     Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7  (1899),
pp.  130-31.

lo  Smiley,  P.,     Folk-Lore  from  Va.,  S.  C,  Ga.,  Ala.,  and  Fla..  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  32   (1919),  pp.  367-68.

1 1 325.
9


130     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

buckets  an'  ears  lak  a  man's  coat";  ^  disappearing
cows;  2  invulnerable  turkeys;  ^  and  even  insects.  One
Negro  boy  earnestly  tells  of  a  huge  grasshopper  ghost
as  big  as  a  horse.  This  dreadful  creature  was  clad  in
human  clothes  even  down  to  shoes  and  hat,  and  went
away  whistling,  jumping  over  cows  and  fences.  *  Mrs.
Boyle  assures  me  of  the  authenticity  of  her  story
where  the  half-insane  plantation  "maumer"  conceives
of  the  soul  of  a  dead  baby  appearing  in  the  form  of  a
butterfly,  ^  though  in  Ireland  it  is  also  thought  that
the  soul  sometimes  appears  in  the  form  of  this  same
insect.  ^  Perhaps  these  animal  ghosts  may  show
some  relation  to  the  African  "bush-soul"  as  well.
The  Gullah  Negroes,  especially  on  the  Georgetown
Coast,  believe  in  "plat-eye,"  an  antebellum  ha'n
associated  with  the  new  moon  and  the  form  of  an
animal,  usually  a  dog.  Generally  the  shape  taken
was  that  of  a  small  dog  (with  fiery  eyes),  which  grew
larger  and  larger  every  minute.  In  one  case,  hoof-
beats  were  heard  and  a  great  horse  passed  by.  Then
only  a  little  dog  was  to  be  seen.  ^  At  other  times
these  "plat-eyes"  may  float  like  wraiths  along  the
marshes  or  unfrequented  paths,  or  stoop  like  low  hung
clouds  and  envelop  the  victim.  »  In  another  case  a
murdered  husband's  ghost  hopped  out  of  the  coffin  in
the  form  of  a  frog,  changing  to  his  own  form,  and
going  back  into  the  cofiin  again.  ^

161.
2  36.

8  141.

M04.

'  Boyle,  Mrs.  V.  P.,     Devil  Tales,  p.  184  ff.

*  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  558.

7  Davis,  H.  C,     Negro  Folk-Lore  in  S.  C,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  27  (1914),  p.  248.

« Gonzales,  A.  E.,     The  Black  Border,  p.  183.

»306.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches      131

Spookish  Humor.  Negro  humor,  with  Its  tendency
to  "laugh  off"  the  fearful,  often  clusters  around  these
spirit  visitants,  generally  taking  the  form  of  reflections
upon  white  men,  the  picturization  of  the  abject  terror
of  meeting  ghosts,  or  the  skill  of  the  Negro  in  avoiding
them.  One  story  told  me  by  an  Arkansas  informant
is  that  of  a  slave-owner  who  used  to  put  a  sheet  over
his  head  and  go  out  to  scare  his  slaves.  This  man
owned  a  monkey  who  was  very  imitative.  One  night
the  monkey  watched  him  put  the  sheet  over  his  head
and  slip  out  to  scare  people,  whereupon  the  monkey
slipped  a  sheet  over  his  own  head  and,  unobserved,
followed  his  white  master.  The  man  hid  behind  a
tree  and  when  a  Negro  passed  he  jumped  out  to  scare
him.  The  Negro  ran ;  then  the  sheeted  monkey  jumped
out  from  behind  the  white  man,  and  the  white  man
ran  with  the  monkey  after  him,  calling,  "Run  big  Jim;
little  Jim  ketch  you!"^  With  a  few  alterations  this
same  theme  is  found  at  least  in  Alabama,  ^  North
Carolina  and  Florida.  ^  Another  man  was  running
from  a  ghost.  After  running  for  a  long  time  he  said
to  himself:

"I  sho'  hab  been  runnin'  some"
"Ain'  we  been  runnin'  though?"  replied  the  ghost.
"fFeV    replied    the    man,   "Hit    won't   be  we  in   a  few
minutes."  *

Another  man  ran  from  a  haunted  house  with  a  ghost
at  his  heels.  "So  tired!  So  tired!"  panted  the  man,
and  the  ghost  at  his  heels  said  the  same  thing.  ^     Much

1341.
2397.

'  Parsons,  E.  C,     Tales  from  Guilford  County,  N.  C,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  30
(1917),  p.  17/?,  and  Folk-Tales  Collected  at  Miami,  Fla.,     Ibid.,  p.  227.
*357.
6  341.


132     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

of  the  humor  here  is  lost  since  it  depends  upon  the
realistic  descriptions  and  vivid  gesticulations  of  the
story  teller.  Another  man  volunteered  to  spend  the
night  in  a  haunted  house.  He  sat  down  by  the  fire
and  made  himself  comfortable.  Pretty  soon  an  or-
dinary cat  appeared,  looked  at  the  man,  and  said,
''Well,  I  can't  do  nuthin'  'til  Martin  comes."  The
cat  then  disappeared  but  presently  a  much  larger  cat
came,  repeated  the  same  words,  and  vanished.  Then
a  huge  cat,  as  large  as  a  tiger  stalked  in:  "Well,  I
can't  do  nuthin'  'til  Martin  comes."  "Well  you  kin
tell  Martin  when  he  do  come  dat  I  done  been  here  but
I'se  sho'  gone!"  quavered  the  scared  man  as  he  left
through  the  window.  ^  Much  humor  is  also  derived
from  tales  of  frightened  Negroes  who  had  mistaken
opossums,  billy-goats,  dogs,  donkeys,  ^  cows, '  and
other  harmless  animals  for  ghosts.  Sometimes  prowl-
ing Negroes  bent  on  some  rascality  will  disguise  them-
selves as  ghosts  in  order  to  scare  off  any  possible
investigators.  ^  Perhaps  this  may  account  in  part  for
the  fact  that  so  many  of  the  ghost  stories  have  such  a
realistic  turn  to  them.

English  Phantoms.  Most  of  the  ghosts  described
here,  with  the  possible  exception  of  cows  and  horses,
are  to  be  found  in  Africa  as  well  as  in  America,  but
one  is  by  no  means  to  suppose  that  they  are  neces-
sarily of  African  origin.  In  England,  from  eighty  to
one  hundred  years  ago,  "the  whole  world  was  so  over-
run with  ghosts,  boggles,  bloody-bones,  spirits,  demons,
ignis  fatuiy    fairies,    brownies,    bug-bears,    black-dogs,

1  175,  and  219.

2  341.
2  403.

*  Waring,  Mary  A.,  Mortuary  Customs  and  Beliefs  of  South  Carolina
Negroes,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  7  (1894),  pp.  318-19.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches      133

specters,  spelly-coats  (Scotch  boggles,  wearing  gar-
ments of  shells  which  made  a  horrid  rattling  when  they
appeared  abroad),  scare-crows,  witches,  wizards,  bar-
guests,  Robin-good-fellows,  hags,  night-bats,  scrags,
break-necks,  fantasms,  hob-goblins,  hoboulards,  bog-
gy-boes,  dobbys,  hobthrusts,  fetches,  kelpies,  war-
locks, mock-beggars,  mumpokers,  jimmy-burties,  and
apparitions,  that  there  was  not  a  village  in  England
that  had  not  its  peculiar  ghost!  Nay,  every  lone
tenement  or  mansion  which  could  boast  of  any  an-
tiquity had  its  boggle  or  specter.  The  churchyards
were  all  haunted.  Every  green  lane  had  its  boulder-
stone,  on  which  an  apparition  kept  watch  by  night;
every  common  had  a  circle  of  fairies  belonging  to  it;
and  there  was  scarce  a  shepherd  to  be  met  with  who
had  not  seen  a  spirit."  ^  Out  of  this  array,  at  least
some  British  spooks  must  have  retained  their  spectral
association  with  the  American  colonists.

The  J ack-o'' -my- Lantern.  This  is  especially  true  of
the  ig7iis  fatuus,  sometimes  known  as  Jack-of-the-
lantern,  will-o'-wisp,  Peg-a-lantern,  Kitty-candlestick,
Jacket-a-wad,  and  similar  terms.  The  basic  idea  in
European  lore  is  that  these  wandering  flames  belong
to  the  souls  of  persons  well  known  and  recently  dead,
and  the  Negro  concept  is  not  essentially  diiferent.  ^
The  Scotch  also  believe  in  the  will-o'-the-wisp,  and  in
Ayrshire  there  is  a  child's  rhyme:


^  Denham,  M.  A.,  A  Collection  of  Proverbs  and  Popular  Sayings,  Percy
Society,  vol.   20,   p.  63    (note).

^  Newell,  W.  W.,  The  Ignis  Fatuus.  Its  Character  and  Legendary  Origin,
J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  17  (1904),  pp.  36-90.


134     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Spunky,  Spunky,  ye're  a  jumpin'  light,
Ye  ne'er  tak  hame  the  school  weans  right;
But  through  the  rough  moss,  and  owre  the  hag.
Ye  drown  the  ill  anes  in  your  watery  den!  ^

In  other  localities  in  the  west  of  England,  it  is  those
mischievous  and  unsociable  sprites,  the  Pigseys,
which  appear  like  men,  carrying  lanterns  at  times,  and
leading  people  into  bogs.  Their  power,  however,  may
be  broken  by  wearing  one's  coat  inside-out.  ^  The
Southern  Negroes  are  very  familiar  .with  this  apparition
which  they  call  Jack-o'-lantern,  or  Jack-o'-my-lantern,
though  the  whites  of  the  locality  pay  little  or  no
attention  to  such  beliefs,  thus  making  this  a  bit  of
English  lore  preserved  almost  exclusively  by  Negroes.
These  Jack-o'-lanterns  carry  lights  and  would  cer-
tainly fool  you  into  the  swamp  or  river,  ^  unless  you
turn  your  pockets  wrongside  out,  *  doubtless  to  show
the  avaricious  spirit  that  you  have  nothing  in  them.
Some  of  the  Missouri  Negroes  speak  of  these  goblins  as
"Waller-wups"  and  say  that  they  resemble  old  women
carrying  a  lantern.  You  are  filled  with  an  ir-
resistible impulse  to  follow  this  light,  which  impulse
is  overcome  only  by  flinging  yourself  down,  shutting
your  eyes,  holding  your  breath,  and  plugging  up  your
ears.  ^  Others  consider  this  curiosity  as  a  torch  borne
by  the  spirit  of  an  old  man  ^  and  say  that  any  one
foolhardy  enough  to  desire  a  closer  acquaintance  may
compel  its  approach  by  sticking  a  knife-blade  into  the

1  Chambers,  R.,     Popular  Rhymes  of  Scotland,  p.  184.     See  also,  Brand,  J.,
Popular  Antiquities  of  Great  Britain,  vol.  3,  pp.  395-411.

2  Hunt,  R.,     Popular  Romances  of  the  West  of  England,  p.  82.

3  Harris,  J.  C,     Uncle  Remus,  p.  157.

*  300,  and  115.     See  also,  Lee,  C.,     Some  Negro  Lore  from  Baltimore,  J.  A.
F.L.,  vol.  5  (1892),  p.  110.

^  Owen,  Mary  A.,     Voodoo  Tales,  pp.  274-75.
«57.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches      135

ground,  ^  a  belief  similar  to  that  of  the  Scotch  High-
landers with  reference  to  the  "death-light."  ^  Again
one  may  dodge  this  ignis  fatuus,  by  turning  his  back
upon  it  and  running  for  his  life.  It  represents  a  demon
"hot  from  hell";  one  horseman  who  attempted  to
investigate  closer  paid  the  penalty  of  having  himself
and  his  horse  consumed  in  flames.  '  Some  of  the
views  of  the  Jack-o'-lantern  are  still  more  grotesque.
In  some  of  the  Southern  seaboard  states  it  is  regarded
as  "a  hideous  creature,  five  feet  in  height,  with  goggle-
eyes  and  huge  mouth,  its  body  covered  with  long  hair,
which  goes  leaping  and  bounding  through  the  air
like  a  gigantic  grasshopper.  This  frightful  apparition,
stronger  than  any  man  and  swifter  than  any  horse,
compels  its  victims  to  follow  it  into  the  swamp  where
it  leaves  them  to  die."  ^  Again  one  old  conjurer  tells
me  that  the  Jack-o'-lantern  is  nothing  but  a  sort  of
firefly  flapping  around  in  an  envelope  of  jelly  which
serves  as  wings.  When  the  wings  fly  open  you  can
see  the  light,  when  the  wings  are  closed  the  light  is
invisible.  ^  In  addition  to  avoidance  by  turning  the
pockets  wrong-side  out  the  Jack-o'-lantern  may  also
be  driven  off  by  carrying  a  new  knife  that  has  never
cut  wood.  ^

The  Origin  of  Jack.  Various  legends  are  in  vogue
among  the  Negroes  to  account  for  the  origin  of  this
creature.  One  illustrating  the  common  theme,  was
told    me   by    a    root-doctor   last    summer.     Jack    sold

1  Hawkins,  H.,    An  Old  Mauma's  Folk-Lore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  9  (1896),  p.  131.
'^  Campbell,    J.   G.,     Witchcraft  and  Second  Sight  in  the  Highlands  and
Islands  of  Scotland,  p.  170.

*  Pendleton,  L.,     Notes  on  Negro  Folk-Lore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  3  (1890),  p.  206.

*  Sykes,  W.,     British  Goblins,  p.  18.
'258.

«57,  and  Davis,  H.  C,      Negro  Folk-Lore  in  S.  C,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  27
(1914),  p.  248.


136     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

himself  to  the  devil  at  the  crossroads  one  night  at
twelve  o'clock.  For  seven  years  all  power  was  given
to  him  to  do  as  he  pleased,  but  at  the  end  of  that
period  his  soul  belonged  to  the  devil.  Old  Satan
called  for  him,  but  Jack  was  ready.  He  had  tacked
a  piece  of  old  shoe  sole  up  above  the  door,  and  asked
the  devil  to  get  it  for  him.  The  devil  stood  in  a  chair
and  reached  for  it.  Jack  then  took  a  hammer  and
nailed  the  devil's  hand  fast,  slipping  the  chair  out
from  under  him.  Upon  a  promise  of  his  freedom
Jack  then  released  old  Satan.  Finally  Jack  died.  He
went  up  to  heaven,  but  those  in  charge  would  not  let
him  in.  He  went  down  to  hell,  but  the  devil  threw  a
chunk  of  fire  at  him  and  told  him  he  was  too  smart
for  hell.  Jack,  deprived  of  a  dwelling,  was  forced  to
pick  up  the  chunk  of  fire  and  to  spend  all  his  time
wandering  about  the  earth  luring  people  into  swamps
and  mudholes  at  night.  ^  The  other  versions  ^
differ  as  to  details,  but  agree  in  that  Jack  was  forced
out  of  hell  and  compelled  to  roam  the  earth.

Flying  Horses  and  Mermaids.  We  have  thus  far
described  the  main  varieties  of  Negro  ghosts.  Pos-
sibly the  flying  horses  might  well  be  added  to  this
list.  Men  who  have  seen  them  say  that  they  look  like
brown  horses  but  have  wings  and  fly.  Most  of  the
time  these  "air-mares"  are  leading  the  wind  and  storm.
They  live  mostly  in  cliffs,  like  eagles,  along  the  water-
courses. ^  If  a  horse  is  dying  and  hears  the  neighing
of  these  flying  horses  before  the  end  comes,   he  will


1141.

2  Newell,  W.  W.,  The  Ignis  Faluus,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  17  (1904),  pp.  39-41.
Jamison,  Mrs.  C.  v.,  Ala.  Legend  Concerning  the  Will-o'-the-Wis-p,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  18  (1905),  pp.  250-51.

"306,  and  91.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches      137

arise  and  be  cured  immediately.  ^  The  mermaids  are,
of  course,  common  in  England,  -  but  in  only  very  few
cases  have  I  found  a  belief  in  them  among  the  Negroes.
One  of  these  mermaids  was  supposed  to  haunt  a
certain  creek  near  my  home,  where  she  sallied  forth  at
night  to  hop  upon  the  radiators  of  passing  cars.  '
The  association  with  automobiles  led  me  to  suspect
a  recent  origin,  and  further  investigation  showed  that
the  belief  was  brought  over  by  a  member  of  the
American  Expeditionary  Force  who  had  just  returned
from  his  trip  over  the  seas.  The  old  slave  Negroes  of
my  acquaintance  seem  to  have  little  knowledge  of
such  creatures,  though  perhaps  the  belief  may  be
stronger  among  the  coast  Negroes.

"Double-sighted^^  Folks.  Not  all  people  are  able  to
see  ghosts;  sometimes  it  happens  that  one  of  two
people  walking  together  can  see  shadowy  forms  while
his  comrade  cannot.  One  such  case  was  related  by  a
Mississippi  Negro.  A  man  and  his  sweetheart  were
walking  together;  in  the  road  ahead  the  man  kept
seeing  the  figure  of  a  woman,  but  the  girl  could  see
nothing.  Nevertheless,  she  refused  to  go  out  again
with  a  man  who  had  this  power.  *  Some  say  that  only
a  person  born  with  a  caul  can  see  ghosts  ^ — a  belief  of
English  extraction.  ^  On  the  Sea  Islands  such  a
"double-sighted"  person  may  be  prevented  from  seeing
ghosts  by  dipping  his  fingers  in  tar,  or  by  carefully
keeping  the  caul.     Should   the   caul  be  lost,   another

1104.

*  See  Hunt,  R.,     Popular  Romances  of  the  West  of  England,  p.  148  ff.
3  306.

*289.

*  17,  59,  65,  and  189.  Also  Pendleton,  L.,  Notes  on  Negro  Folk-Lore  and
Witchcraft  in  the  South,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  3  (1890),  p.  206.

*  Henderson,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  13.


138      Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

could  be  obtained  from  the  "doctor  shop"  since  the
midwives  often  steal  the  cauls  and  sell  them  there.  ^
The  Louisiana  Negroes  say  that  when  this  "veil"  is
lost  the  individual  can  still  see  spirits  but  not  talk
to  them.  Should  the  caul  become  torn,  the  owner
dies.  When  the  owner  is  ill  the  caul  becomes  limp;
when  well,  the  caul  is  firm.  Even  deaf  people  with
cauls  can  hear  the  spirits  talk.  ^  The  seventh  son,
in  the  Sea  Islands,  is  regarded  as  distinguished,  ^  though
in  other  localities  seventh  sons  are  said  to  be  able  to
see  ghosts  or  spirits  *  or  to  make  good  doctors.  ^
People  born  like  horses  or  dogs  with  "putty  in  their
eyes"  can  also  see  spirits,  ^  the  same  applying  to  a
person  whose  eyebrows  meet,  ^  though  another  in-
formant says  that  people  with  long  eyebrows  must
cut  them  off  to  be  able  to  see  ghosts.  *  Again  there  is
the  idea  that  a  person  born  on  Christmas  day  can  see
spirits  ^ — a  reversal  of  the  common  English  belief
which  denied  such  persons  this  power.  ^  ^  All  ani-
mals, ^  ^  and  especially  cats,  ^  ^  can  see  ghosts.  For
an  ordinary  person  to  see  "ha'nts"  he  should  look
through  the  eye  of  a  needle,  ^  ^  or  over  the  left  shoul-


1  Parsons,  E.  C,    Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  16
(1923),  p.  197  ff.

2  17.

3  Parsons,  E.  C,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.A.F.  L.  S.,  vol.  16
(1923),  pp.  197-98.

*  Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  286.

6  141.

*91,  and  Hawkins,  J.,     An  Old  Mauma's  Folk-Lore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  9
(1896),  p.  131.

7  240.

8  216.
3  69.

i"Denham,  M.  A.,  A  Collection  of  Proverbs  and  Popular  Sayings.  Percy
Society,  vol.  20,  p.  63  (note).

11141,  and  Steiner,  R.,'  Superstitions  and  Beliefs  from  Central  Georgia,
J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  12  (1899),  p.  261.

12  93.

13  399.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches      139

der,  1  or  under  the  upraised  right  arm  -  of  a  person
who  does  possess  this  ablHty.  Ghosts  may  also  be
seen  by  looking  very  steadily  past  the  edge  of  a  door-
casing  or  anything  of  that  sort,  holding  your  head  so
that  you  can  just  see  past  the  edge.  ^  A  person  who
can  see  spirits  Is  also  able  to  give  you  that  ability  by
rubbing  his  right  hand  over  your  face.  *

How  to  See  Ghosts.  Perhaps  the  simplest  way  for
an  ordinary  person  to  see  ghosts  is  to  look  back  over
his  own  left  shoulder,  ^  though  the  same  result  may  be
accomplished  by  looking  through  a  mule's  ear;  ^  by
punching  a  small  hole  in  your  own  ear;  ^  by  looking
Into  a  mirror  with  another  person;^  by  breaking  a
rain-crow's  ^gg  Into  some  water  and  washing  your
face  in  It;  ^  or  by  breaking  a  stick  In  two.  ^ "  Some  say
that  if  you  go  to  the  graveyard  at  twelve  o'clock  in
the  day  and  call  the  name  of  any  one  you  know,  his
spirit  will  answer  you,  ^  ^  though  generally  the  pro-
cedure Is  more  complicated.  One  of  my  conjure  friends
says  to  go  to  a  graveyard  at  twelve  o'clock  noon  or
midnight  and  take  with  you  a  piece  of  mirror  and  a
pair  of  new  steel  scissors.  At  exactly  twelve  o'clock
hold  up  the  mirror  before  your  eyes  and  drop  the
scissors  on  the  ground.     Call  upon  that  person  with

1  45,  and  102.

2  141.

'Bergen,  F.  D.,  Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7  (1899),
p.  130.

M36.

*  108,  341,  339,  405,  141,  and  198.

«222.

'302.

8  141.

^  Steiner,  R.,     Ohservalions  on  the  Practice  of  Conjuring  in  Georgia,  J.  A.
F.L.,  vol.  14  (1901),  p.  178.
»«141.

I'Work,  M.  H.,  So7ne  Geechee  Folk-Lore.  Southern  Workman,  vol.  34
(1905),  p.  634.


140      Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

whom  you  desire  to  talk.  You  will  see  his  reflection
in  the  mirror  and  can  ask  him  what  you  please.  The
blades  of  the  scissors  of  their  own  accord  will  begin
to  work,  cutting  away  any  doubt  or  fear  that  might
arise  in  your  mind.  ^  Another  method  used  is  to
put  half  a  dozen  pure  white  dinner  plates  around  the
table  at  home,  and  then  go  to  the  graveyard  at  twelve,
noon,  and  call  the  name  of  some  dead  acquaintance.
His  spirit  will  answer  you  at  once.  ^  Or  else  wipe  oif
a  rusty  nail  and  put  it  in  your  mouth.  The  spirits
will  crowd  about  you.  ^  If  you  eat  a  little  fat  meat  or
grease  at  night  you  will  be  able  to  see  witches,  ghosts,
and  all  sorts  of  half-visible  occupants  of  the  atmos-
phere. ^  Whenever  you  talk  to  such  ghosts,  however,
you  must  say  all  you  have  to  say  in  one  breath.  If
you  so  much  as  gasp,  or  make  the  least  indrawing
through  the  lips,  your  slippery  companion  is  gone
forever.  ^

^''Fightin''  de  Ghosses^  So  absolute  is  the  Negro's
belief  in  these  malign  agencies  that  a  great  deal  of  his
eifort  is  devoted  to  warding  off  or  avoiding  them.  One
most  common  way  of  getting  out  of  the  clutches  of
these  evil  calibans  is  to  ask  them,  "What  in  the  name
of  the  Lord  do  you  want?"  ^  They  will  then  go  away
and  leave  you,  or,  as  others  say,  carry  you  to  a  place
and  tell  you  to  dig  until  you  find  a  pot  of  money.  ^
In   Herefordshire   the   phrase   used   in   speaking   to   a

191.

2  141.

"306.

^  Babcock,  W.  H.,  Folk-Lore  Jottings  from  Rockhaven,  D.  C,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  4  (1891),  p.  172.

8339,  341,  150,  406,  and  189.  Richardson,  C,  Some  Slave  Superstitions,
Southern  Workman,  vol.  41  (1912),  p.  246.

M66.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches      141

ghost  is,  "In  the  name  of  God,  who  art  thou?"  where-
upon the  ghost  will  lead  you  to  some  hidden  treasure.  ^
Apparently  the  Negro  ghost,  like  the  African  one,  is
not  without  his  human  attributes.  One  informant
says,  "If  a  ha'nt  bodder  you,  ax  him  fer  some  money
an'  he'll  sho'  leab."  ^  Religion  is  an  excellent  antidote
against  the  wiles  of  these  ghosts,  as  evidenced  by
mentioning  the  name  of  the  Lord.  One  old  man
got  lost  in  the  woods.  Dusk  came  and  with  it
the  ha'nts.  The  man  preached,  quoted  scripture,  and
prayed,  but  the  persistent  ha'nts  still  remained.
Finally  in  desperation  he  reached  for  his  hat  to  take
up  a  collection.  At  once  the  ha'nts  fled.  ^  In  reality,
however,  the  Bible  is  used  to  ward  off  ghosts.  Get
some  one  to  read  a  verse  from  the  Bible  backwards
to  you  (many  Negroes  cannot  read).  Fold  the  page^
place  a  knife  and  fork  within  it,  and  put  it  under  your
pillow.  No  ha'nt  will  enter  your  house.  "*  Reading
the  Bible  backwards  is  supposed  to  prevent  ghosts
from  entering;  reading  it  forward,  to  keep  them  from
harming  one  if  they  are  already  in  the  house.  ^  It  is
worthy  of  note  that  in  Europe  witches  are  supposed  to
say  their  prayers  backwards;  the  Lord's  Prayer  is
said  backwards  to  raise  the  devil;  ^  and  with  the
Gascon  peasants  the  Mass  of  Saint  Secaire  is  said
backwards  at  midnight  to  cause  a  person  to  wither
away  and  die.  ^

1  Leather,  E.  M.,     Folk-L ore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  33.     Hunt,  R.,      Popular
Romances  of  the  West  of  England,  pp.  243-49.
=^340.
3  150.
^93.

6  Bergen,  F.  D.,     On  the  Eastern  Shore,  J.A.F.L.,  vol.  2  (1899),  pp.  298-99.
'  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  430.

7  Frazer,  J.  G.,     The  Golden  Bough,  pp.  53-54.


142     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Demons  link  arms  with  human  beings  In  their
distaste  for  evil  smells.  Burn  some  old  shoes  and
sulphur,  and  spiritual  visitants  will  be  effectually
driven  off.  ^  While  whiskey  on  the  person  always
attracts  ghosts,  ^  It  is  also  a  very  useful  thing  to  have
when  you  are  being  chased  by  ghosts.  Pour  a  little
on  the  ground  and  the  spirits  will  stop  and  drink  it,
giving  you  time  to  get  away.  ^  The  Yoruban  of
Africa  pours  out  palm  oil  on  the  ground  when  he
prepares  to  cut  down  an  Asorin  tree,  so  that  he  may
escape  while  the  tree  spirit  Is  licking  It  up.  *  Sweet
milk  with  the  Southern  Negro  Is  also  said  to  have  the
same  power.  ^  Ha'nts  will  not  go  where  there  is  new
lumber,  ^  therefore  new  steps, '  a  new  floor,  or  any
changes,  such  as  a  new  mantel  or  a  changed  doorknob,  ^
will  keep  ghosts  away.  Some  Negroes  paste  news-
paper on  the  wall  for  this  same  purpose,  ^  though  here
the  potency  may  be  that  ghosts,  like  witches,  have  to
count  every  letter  before  working  harm,  rather  than
that  paper  represents  new  material.  A  horseshoe  put
up  over  the  door  (or  in  the  fire)  ^ "  Is  also  an  infallible
armor  against  these  Impish  visitors,  ^  ^  while  others  on
passing  a  graveyard  keep  their  fingers  tightly  crossed.  ^  ^
Ghosts  may  be  killed  only  by  silver  or  brass  bullets.  ^  ^

^  141,  and  Waring,    Mary  A.,     Negro  Superstitions  in  South  Carolina,
J.  A.F.L.,  vol.  8  (1895),  p.  252.
2  168.
»306,  81,  and  150.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  46.

*  Burton,  R.  F.,     Wit  and  Wisdom  from  West  Africa,  p.  243.

*  93.
"139.

^  Richardson,  C,     Some  Slave  Superstitions.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  41
(1912),  p.  246.

8  141.
8  191.

1081.

"131,  168,  and  112.

1^69.

i«236.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches     143

Near  Aiken,  S.  C,  there  Is  an  old  Revolutionary
battlefield.  Whenever  the  Negroes  pass  there  at
night,  so  I  am  informed,  they  shoot  off  silver  bullets
in  their  pistols  to  frighten  away  the  lurking  ghosts,  ^
In  a  Mississippi  locality  an  old  man  was  found  dead
by  the  roadside  with  a  cat  preying  upon  his  body.
Sixteen  dogs  were  sent  in  to  whip  the  cat,  but  he
whipped  them  all  and  kept  on  with  his  ghoulish  meal.
Finally  a  silver  bullet  was  fired  at  the  animal  and  he
was  killed.  ^  Turning  the  coat,  trousers,  hat,  ^  or
pockets,  **  wrongside  out.  Is  also  a  very  effective  means
of  keeping  out  of  the  clutches  of  these  goblins,  being  a
method  used  in  Europe  with  reference  to  fairies.  ^
Salt  sprinkled  thoroughly  about  the  house  ^  and
especially  In  the  fireplace;^  black  pepper  or  a  knife
about  the  person  ;8  or  matches  worn  in  the  hair,  ^
all  bring  dire  perturbation  to  these  umbrageous
visitors.  Precisely  the  same  Is  true  of  a  rabbit's  foot
carried  in  the  pocket,  ^ "  or  of  a  black  cat's  tail  hung  in
front  of  your  house.  ^  ^  When  an  unusually  inde-
fatigable spook  is  on  your  trail  you  may,  as  a  last
resort,  overcome  him  by  throwing  some  hair  from  a
black  cat  over  your  left  shoulder,  saying:  "Skit,
scat,   turn   to   a   bat."     Your   nocturnal   admirer  will


1  187.

2  285.

'  Richardson,  C,     Some  Slave  Superstitions,     Southern  Workman,  vol.  41
(1912),  p.  246.

*  306,  and  Williamson,  G.,     Superstitions  from  Loidsiana,  J.   A.    F.   L.,
vol.  18  (190.5),  p.  229.

*  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  188.

*  Derrickson,  Mrs.  S.  D.,     Various  Superstitions,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5  (1892),
p.  243.

'152.

«341.

^  141,  and  Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  287.
1 « 274.
1133.


144     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

then  turn  Into  a  bat  and  leave  you  alone.  ^  Have
your  feet  perfectly  comfortable  when  passing  through
a  graveyard  and  the  dead  will  not  talk  to  you.  ^  Some-
times a  good  hunting  dog  will  "run  sperrlts"  at  night
but  this  may  be  absolutely  prevented  by  tying  a  glass
button  about  his  neck.  ^  Ha'nts,  like  witches,  may
also  be  kept  away  by  planting  mustard  seed  under
your  doorstep,  ■*  or  by  keeping  a  sifter  under  your  head
while  asleep.  ^  Some  say  that  ghosts  will  not  budge
from  a  foot  with  fern  seed  In  the  hollow,  *  though  one
Informant  recommends  fern  seed  or  sulphur  to  keep
spirits  away.  ^  Again  a  haunted  place  is  safely  passed
by  throwing  your  hat  behind  you,  walking  around  to
the  right,  picking  It  up  and  hurrying  by  the  place  so  as
not  to  aggravate  the  haunts  to  follow.  ^  The  most
peculiar  method  told  me  of  driving  ghosts  from  one's
house  Is  as  follows:  "Ef  you  Is  boddered  by  ha'nts,
go  out  whar  de  billy-goats  sleep  an'  git  some  uv  their
dung  in  a  sack.  Take  disyere  In  yo'  house,  an'  at  ten
o'clock  dat  night  hab  yo'  husband  or  er  fr'en'  stand
'cross  de  room  frum  you.  Turn  yo'  backs  ter  each
odder  an'  throw  de  dung  ober  your  halds  towards  dat
pusson  behinst  you.  DIs  will  sho'  drive  dem  ghosses
away  fer  good,  fer  what's  got  a  harder  haid  than  a
billy-goat  .f"' 9  Whatever  a  person  do,  he  should
never  be  so  foolish  as  to  shoot  at  a  ghost  (except  with


1311.

2  260.

^  Steiner,  R.,  Observations  on  the  Practice  of  Conjuring  in  Georgia,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  14  (1901),  p.  178.

*93.

6  81.

« Boyle,  Mrs.  V.  F.,     Devil  Tales,  p.  178.

791.

*  Steiner,  R.,  Observations  on  the  Practice  of  Conjuring  in  Georgia,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  14  (1901),  p.  178.

9 141.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches      145

silver  bullets).  If  he  does  this  the  ghost  will  "slap  his
haid  around"  and  give  him  a  crooked  neck,  ^  or  else
great  balls  of  fire  will  appear.  ^

Summary  of  Ghost-lore.  From  this  sketch  it  is
evident  that  the  Negro  has  not  entirely  succeeded  in
localizing  the  cult  of  the  dead  In  a  well  established  hell
or  heaven.  True  enough,  the  white  man  has  not
entirely  done  so  either,  but  ghosts  are  less  terrifying
to  him  and  less  attention  is  paid  by  him  to  keeping
out  of  their  clutches.  In  Africa,  beings  animate  and
inanimate  possess  spirits;  the  English  tendency  is
to  restrict  ghosts  to  animate  forms,  thus  leading  us  to
look  upon  the  few  inanimate  Negro  ghosts  as  of  African
complexion  if  not  of  African  origin.  But  there  is  now
a  tendency  towards  purely  human  ghosts  with  the
inanimate  ghosts  almost  entirely  eliminated  and  with
the  animal  ghosts  linked  up,  for  the  main  part,  with
human  souls.  With  the  English,  these  human  souls
have  become  more  abstract  and  ethereallzed — they
have  ceased  to  be  eldola  and  have  become  daimons —
but  with  the  Negro  this  etherealizing  process  has  not
by  any  means  gone  on  to  its  full  completion.  Ghosts
to  him  are,  for  the  most  part,  the  souls  of  definite  dead
folks,  and  even  In  the  case  of  the  abstract  Jack-o'-
lantern  there  is  the  effort  to  link  him  up  with  a
hypothetical  Jack.

The  Abse7ice  of  Fairies.  One  striking  thing  about
Negro  lore  Is  the  fact  that  the  familiar  English  fairies,
elves,  brownies,  and  other  good  spirits  are  conspicuous
by  their  absence,  except  In  the  case  of  well  educated
Negroes  who  know  about  them  from  books  but  who  do

^61,  and  341.
2  61.
10


146     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

not  seriously  believe  In  them.  Possibly  the  fairy  Is  a
form  too  abstract  to  appeal  to  the  Negro  mind,  which
tends  more  towards  the  avoidance  of  the  malevolent
than  the  cultivation  of  the  helpful.  Furthermore,
the  slave  owner  used  fear  of  the  supernatural  as  a
means  of  discipline,  naturally  stressing  the  horrible
rather  than  the  happy.  Undoubtedly  this  accounts
In  part  for  the  preponderance  of  the  evil  over  the  good,
though  the  tendency  among  primitive  peoples  Is
almost  always  to  remember  the  wicked  and  to  forget
the  good.

But  In  regard  to  fairies  again.  It  seems  to  me  that
the  chief  reason  why  they  are  lacking  among  the
Negroes  Is  that  they  did  not  to  any  extent  flourish
among  the  white  colonists.  The  belief  In  them,  so
far  as  I  have  been  able  to  discover  Is  almost  entirely
lacking  among  the  whites  of  the  South.  ^  Fairies,  elves,
brownies,  and  such  beings,  are  dependent  largely
upon  hoary  traditions  clustering  around  certain  locali-
ties; when  the  locality  has  been  changed  the  fairies
have  been  abandoned,  and  America  is  much  too  young
for  new  beliefs  of  that  sort  to  have  arisen.  Gomme
says,  "Witchcraft  has  been  explained  as  the  survival  of
aboriginal  beliefs  from  aboriginal  sources.  Fairycraft
has  been  explained  as  the  survival  of  beliefs  about
the  aborigines  from  Aryan  sources."  ^  The  white
contact  with  the  Indians  was  too  short  for  any  beliefs
of  such  a  nature  to  arise  in  America,  and  the  association
with  the  Negroes  was  too  intimate  and  free  from
mystery  as  to  origins  to  allow  the  formation  of  such
beliefs  about  them.  Thus  it  has  happened  that  few
fairy  beliefs  have  developed  in  America,  while  those

1  Though  traces  of  them  still  linger  in  isolated  mountainous  sections,  so  I
am  in  formed.

^  Gomme,  G.  L.,     Ethnology  in  Folklore,  p.  63.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches      147

possible  ones  brought  from  England  were  discarded
from  the  lore  handed  down  to  the  Negroes  in  favor
of  more  nocuous  spirits.

Witches.  But  witches — ah,  they  are  diabolical  en-
tities and  flock  both  from  England  and  Africa  in  great
hoards.  Most  whites  of  the  South  have  practically
given  up  such  beliefs,  but  the  Negroes  portray  in  a
modified  form  the  England  of  three  centuries  or  so  ago,
in  so  far  as  such  ogresses  are  concerned.  Sometimes
these  Negro  hags  take  the  conventional  form  of  "a
real  old  woman  dressed  in  rags,"  ^  the  female  witch
being  supposed  in  some  localities  to  have  breasts
located  under  her  arms,  and  the  skin  around  her  neck,
resembling  a  collar;  while  the  male  witch  always
hates  to  look  a  person  in  the  face.  ^  These  witches,
of  course,  can  enter  the  house  through  any  opening,
large  or  small;  ^  one  Virginia  witch  on  being  married,
asked  her  husband  to  unstop  certain  auger  holes  in
the  floor,  doubtless  wishing  to  use  the  apertures  for
exits.  ^  In  other  localities  the  witch  is  supposed  to
be  able  to  enter  only  through  the  keyhole,  oozing  her
semi-fluid  body  through  with  a  sort  of  whistling
sound,  ^  In  England  of  the  seventeenth  century,  "in
every  place  and  parish  every  old  woman  with  a  wrinkled
face,  a  furred  brow,  a  hairy  lip,  a  gobber  tooth,  a
squint  eye,  a  squeaking  voice,  a  scolding  tongue,
having  a  rugged  coate  on  her  back,  a  skull-cap  on  her
head,  a  spindle  in  her  hand,  a  dog  or  cat  by  her  side,

1341.

2  Cross,  T.  P.,      Folk-Lore  from  the  Southern  States,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  22
(1909),  p.  251.

3  141.

*  Cross,  T.  p.,     Folk-Lore  from  the  Southern  States,   J.  A.  F.  L.,   vol.  22
(1909),  p.  252.

5  Southern  Workrnan,  vol.  23  (1894),  pp.  26-27.


148     Folk  Bei^iefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

was  not  only  suspected  but  pronounced  a  witch."  *
In  the  case  of  the  West  Africans  "witches  and  vampires
are  still  in  fashion  among  them,  and  belong  to  the
good  old-fashioned  variety  which  come  into  your
bedroom  in  the  dead  of  night,  sit  on  your  chest  and
suck  your  blood.  It  is  not  unusual  to  hear  even  the
more  or  less  educated  native  complain  that  he  has
passed  a  most  unpleasant"  night  because  'witches
visited  him'."  -  With  the  Susu-speaking  peoples
"witches  are  born,  not  initiated;  they  put  inside  a
man's  house  'medicine'  in  a  pot,  consisting  of  rice,
groundnut,  sesame  and  fundi,  which  is  buried  inside
the  door  and  causes  him  to  get  bad  crops.  A  witch  can
live  in  a  crocodile  or  leopard  and  seize  people;  four
or  five  go  into  one  animal  and  if  the  animal  is  shot,
they  die  too."  ^  In  the  Timne  country  "the  witch  is
also  believed  to  eat  human  beings,  who  go  on  living  and
breathing  till  the  heart  is  reached;  then  they  die.
This  killing  is  said  to  be  done  with  the  eyes  only."  *
The  Yoruba  witch  destroys  people  when  asleep  by
sucking  their  blood,  and  the  owl  is  the  bird  into  which
the  witch  passes  when  wishing  to  work  evil.  ^  With
the  Yoruba  people  "a  belief  in  metamorphosis  is
universal,  and  it  is  not  limited  to  a  change  to  an
animal  form,  since  men  and  women  are  sometimes
transformed  into  trees,  shrubs,  rocks  or  natural
features."  "  This  is  especially  true  all  over  West
Africa   in    the  case  of  witches  and  wizards;  leopards,


*  Brand,  J.,  }\>piilar  Anliquitics  of  Great  Britarn,  vol.  3,  p.  2.  For  other
charact(M-istics  of  the  MiigUsli  witt'li,  see  (^aini)boll,  J.  G.,  Witchcraft  and
Second  Siqht  in  the  lli(ihlamh  and  Islandtt  of  Scotland,  pp.  1-53.  Hueffer,
O.  M.,     The  Book  of  W'itches,  pp.  SS-12(i.

-  Beatty,   K.   J.,     Human   Leopards,  ]).   110.

'  Tlioiuas,  N.  W.,     Anthrop.  Kept,  on  Sierra  Leone,  pt.  1,  p.  50.

*  Ibid.,  J).  4(5.

*  liurton,  l^  v.,     Wit  and  Wisdoin  fro7n  West  Africa,  pp.  204-05  (note).
"  Elhs,  A.  B.,      Yorvba-speakin(j  Peoples,  pp.  122-23.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches      149

hyenas,  lions,  and  serpents  being  common  forms
taken.  ^  Apparently  the  English  witch  most  commonly
takes  the  form  of  a  cat  (particularly  a  black  cat)  ^  or
hare,  though  she  occasionally  appears  as  a  sheep,  red
deer,  rat,  gull,  cormorant,  or  even  as  a  whale.  ^

Metamorphosis.  Precisely  this  age-old  belief  in  met-
amorphosis is  found  with  the  Southern  Negroes,
though  the  whites  of  the  South  have  very  largely  given
it  up.  Many  are  the  tales  of  witches  who  were  in-
jured when  certain  animals  were  harmed.  One  old
witch  took  the  form  of  a  cat  and  tried  to  steal  money
from  a  man's  pocket.  The  man  chopped  off  the  cat's
paw  with  a  hatchet.  The  next  morning  he  found  the  paw  •
changed  to  a  human  hand  and  the  wedding  ring  upon
it  showed  the  hand  to  belong  to  the  wife  of  a  certain
man.  Investigation  led  to  the  fact  that  her  hand  was
missing  and  her  husband  left  her.  *  This  story  exists
in  various  versions  throughout  the  South,  ^  and  il-
lustrates clearly  the  belief  in  lycanthropy.  In  one
case  the  witch  fastens  tin  plates  to  her  side  and  turns
to  a  bird,  but  the  plates  fall  off  and  she  breaks  into
pieces  on  the  ground — ^the  pieces  turning  into  moles.  ^
In  another  case  the  witch  takes  the  form  of  a  cat  and
does  good  to  all  who  treat  the  cat  well — some  Negroes
paying  particular  attention  to  stray  cats  because  they

1  See  Ihid.,  p.  134,  and  Nassau,  R.  H.,  Fetichism  in  West  Africa,  p.  71,  and
202.  %Brinton,  D.  G.,  Iconographic  Encyclopedia  of  the  Arts  and  Sciences,
vol.  i,  p.  321.  Cardinal.  A.  W.,  The  Natives  of  the  Northern  Territories
of  the  Gold  Coast,  p.  37.  Coudenhove,  H.,  African  Folk,  Atlantic  Monthly,
Aug.  1921,  p.  16.5.     Ellis,  A.  B.,     Ewe-speaking  Peoples,  p.  103.

^Eichler,  Lillian,  The  Customs  of  Mankind,  pp.  642-43.  Hueffer,  O.  M.,
The  Book  of  Witches,  pp.  19-24.

'  Gomme,  G.  L.  Ethnology  in  Folklore,  pp.  49-50.  Campbell,  J.  G.,
Witchcraft  and  Second  Sight  in  the  Highlands  and  Islands  of  Scotland,  pp.  30-45.

^306,  and  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.
L.  S.,  vol.  16  (1923),  pp.  24-25.

^  P'or  other  versions,  see  Bacon,  A.  M.,  and  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Lore
from  Elizabeth  City  County,  Va.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  35  pp.  283-84.

6  Ibid.,  p.  284.  ■


150     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

may  be  human  beings  In  disguise.  ^  One  Georgia  In-
formant says,  "Witches  Hve  In  stumps,  In  hollow  logs,
caves,  and  such  places.  They  change  their  appearance
to  all  forms,  from  gnats  to  horses,  but  especially  prefer
the  shape  of  large  birds  such  as  the  buzzard.  Their
color  Is  dusty  like  old  cobwebs."  2  The  cat  Is  the
natural  companion  of  old  people  who  spend  a  great
deal  of  time  at  home  and  make  friends  with  these  pets,
therefore,  to  my  way  of  thinking,  the  cat  Is  the  animal
associated  most  closely  with  witches.  In  fact,  a  black
cat  Is  said  to  be  a  witch,  ^  according  to  the  Negroes,
though  others  so  regard  all  cats  and  add  that  the  color
of  the  cat  Indicates  the  color  of  the  witch.  ^  In
Europe  the  chariot  of  the  goddess  Freya  was  drawn  by
cats.  Cats  and  witches  are  constantly  associated
together  In  the  folk-lore  of  the  northern  countries  of
Europe,  and  witches  often  take  the  form  of  a  cat —
especially  a  black  cat,  ^  as  I  have  Indicated  before.
Literally,  with  the  Negro,  a  witch  may  take  any  form.  ^
After  a  witch  has  been  "riding"  you  she  usually  crawls
Into  your  grate.  Look  there  and  If  you  see  anything,
a  frog,  large  beetle,  or  any  other  creature,  "dat's  de
witch  In  dat  ah  fawm.  Jam  a  fawk  In  de  frawg  an'
you  jams  a  fawk  In  de  witch  herse'f.  Sometimes  do'
de  witch  looks  jes'  lak  a  shadder."  ^     You  may  catch


1  Smiley,  P.,  Folk-L ore  from  Va.,  S.  C,  Ga.,  Ala.,  and  Fla.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  32  (1919),  pp.  364-65.  See  also,  Bergen,  F.  D.,  Two  Negro  Witch
Stories,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  12  (1899),  p.  145.

2  150.

3  Steiner,  R.,  Superstitions  and  Beliefs  from  Central  Georgia,  J.  A.F.L.,  vol.
12  (1889),  p.  286.

*  141,  and  Bacon,  A.  M.,  and  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Lore  from  Elizabeth  City
County,  Va.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  35  (1922),  p.  284-85.

8  Henderson,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  170  ff.

« But  especially  owls,  bats,  black  cats,  black  dogs,  or  buzzards,  see  Harris,
J.  C,  Uncle  Remus,  p.  153  ff.  Cross,  T.  P.,  Folk-Lore  from  the  Southern
States,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  22  (1909),  p.  251.

U41.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches      151

a  witch  by  putting  a  sifter  face  down  before  the  door.
Look  there  in  the  morning  and  you  will  see  the  witch
in  the  shape  of  a  ball  of  white  smoke.  ^

Ridden  by  Witches.  The  chief  activity  of  the
witch  is  riding  folks,  though  occasionally  there  is
that  evil  succubus  who  steals  wives.  ^  One  informant
regards  witches  as  identical  with  conjurers:  "Dey's
sho'  hoodoos,  Marse  Newbell,  dey  sho'  is.  Dey's
done  sold  deir  soul  ter  de  debbil,  (the  old  European
view)  ^  an'  ole  Satan  gi'  dem  de  pow'r  ter  change  ter
anything  dey  wants.  Mos'  gen'ally  dey  rides  you  in
de  shape  uv  a  black  cat,  an'  rides  you  in  de  daytime
too,  well  ez  de  night."  ^  You  can  always  tell  when
such  witches  have  been  riding  you;  you  feel  "down  and
out"  the  next  morning  and  the  bit  these  evil  fiends
put  in  your  mouth  leaves  a  mark  in  each  corner.  ^
When  you  feel  smothered  and  can  not  get  up,  *'  ("jes'
lak  somebody  holdin'  you  down")  ^  right  then  and
there  the  old  witch  is  taking  her  midnight  gallop.
You  try  to  call  out,  but  it  is  no  use;  your  tongue  is
mute,  ^  your  hair  crawls  out  of  its  braids  and  your
hands  and  feet  tingle.  ^  My  old  mammy  was  very  sick
one  time.  Something  heavy  was  pressing  upon  her
chest.  A  good  woman  touched  her,  the  load  was
lifted,  and  a  dark  form  floated  out  through  the  window.
"Hit  mus'  'er  been  a  witch."  ^  ^     When  you  find  your


147.

2  Cross,  T.  P.,     Folk-Lore  from  the  Southern  States,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  22
(1909),  p.  251.

3  See  Hueffer,  O.  M.,     The  Book  of  Witches,  p.  69,  and  107-11.
"141.

6  65.

« 104,  and  306.

'30.

8  341.

9  155.
10  112.


152     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

hair  plaited  into  little  stirrups  In  the  morning  ^  or
when  It  is  all  tangled  up  and  your  face  scratched  -
you  may  be  sure  that  the  witches  have  been  bothering
you  that  night.  In  Virginia  "the  hag  turns  the
victim  on  his  or  her  back.  A  bit  (made  by  the  witch)
Is  then  Inserted  In  the  mouth  of  the  sleeper  and  he
or  she  is  turned  on  all-fours  and  ridden  like  a  horse.
Next  morning  the  person  is  tired  out,  and  finds  dirt
between  the  fingers  and  toes."  One  man  who  was
about  to  be  ridden  by  a  witch  seized  the  bridle  and
forced  It  into  the  hag's  mouth.  She  began  to  shift
her  shape  rapidly  but  was  severely  bitten  by  her
would-be  victim.  ^  In  England  the  belief  is  that  the
witch  enters  the  bedroom,  puts  a  magic  bridle  on  a
person  and  changes  him  into  a  horse.  She  rides  him
all  night  and  he  returns  all  tired  out  in  the  morning.
If  a  bridle  be  slipped  over  the  witch  she  will  be  turned
Into  a  horse.  *  There  is  one  Negro  song  about  an
old  woman  who  saddles,  bridles,  boots,  and  spurs  a
person,  and  rides  him  fox-hunting  and  down  the
hillsides,  ^  but  in  general,  the  Negroes  deny  that  the
person  ridden  is  actually  changed  into  a  horse.  «  But,
horse  or  not,  when  a  person  talks  or  cries  out  In  his
sleep  a  witch  Is  surely  after  him.  ^  Horses  as  well
as  humans  are  ridden;  you  can  tell  when  the  witches
have  been  bothering  them  by  finding  "witches'  stir-
rups"   (two  strands  of  hair  twisted  together)   In   the

1  345.

^  Harris,  J.  C,     Uncle  Remus,  p.  155.

3  Cross,  T.  P.,  Folk-Lore  in  the  Southern  States,  J.A.F.  L.,  vol.  22  (1909),
p.  252.

*  Henderson,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  pp.  155-56.

^57.  For  complete  song,  see  Meikleham,  R.,  A  Negro  Ballad,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  6  (1893),  p.  300.

«141.

'200.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches     153

horses'  mane.  ^  A  person  who  plaits  a  horse's  mane
and  leaves  It  that  way  is  simply  Inviting  the  witches
to  ride,  2  though  they  will  seldom  bother  the  horses
except  on  very  dark  nights,  and  even  then  have  a
decided  preference  for  dark  colored  horses.  ^  In  Eng-
land *  and  Scotland,  ^  such  "fairy  stirrups"  are  at-
tributed to  the  pigsles  (piskles)  riding  the  animals.

Vampires  and  Ghouls.  The  activities  of  the  hags
are  not,  however,  restricted  by  the  Negroes  wholly  to
riding  people.  Vampires  are  not  common,  but  one
Negro  tells  of  a  young  girl  constantly  declining  while
an  old  woman  got  better  and  better.  This  was  be-
cause the  harridan  sucked  young  folks'  blood  while
they  slept.  "De  chlUun  dies,  an'  she  keeps  on  a-
llvln'."  ^  Another  Missouri  "witcher-ooman  has  blood
sucking  children."  ^  Ghouls  are  also  occasionally
found.  In  one  story  a  man  married  a  king's  daughter
who  was  a  witch.  She  would  not  eat  food  like  other
people,  but  would  crumble  up  bread  with  a  quill  and
eat  It  like  a  sparrow.  Often  at  night  she  would  dress
herself  and  go  out  to  the  graveyard.  Her  husband
followed  her  on  one  occasion  and  hid  behind  a  bush
In  the  cemetery.  "She  would  dig  up  that  body  an'
cut  off  slashes  of  'em  jus'  like  meat,  an'  eat  'em."  ^
Doubtless  the  story  represents  a  survival  of  ancient
cannibalism,   and   the  fact  that   a   king  Is   spoken  of

1  32,  and  306.     Harris,  J.  C,     Uncle  Rerrms,  pp.  151-52.

2  398.
"35.

*  Hunt,  R.,     Popular  Romances  of  the  West  of  England,  p.  87.
^  Campbell,  J.  F.,     Tales  of  the  West  Highlands,  vol.  2,  p.  82.

^  Mrs.  S.  P.  M.,  Voodooism  in  Tennessee,  Atlantic  Monthly,  vol.  64
(1899),  p.  377.

'Owen,  Mary  A.,     Voodoo  Tales,  pp.  210-11.

*  Parsons,  E.  C,  Tales  from  Guiljord  County,  N.  C,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  30
(1917),  p.  187.


154     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Indicates  its  foreign  origin.  One  old  conjurer  tells
me  that  these  grave-robbing  hags  are  called  "ze-
braws,"  ^  but  the  term  is  entirely  enigmatical  and
may  represent  an  African  expression  or  a  mutilated
English  term.  The  divining  rod  is  sometimes  spoken
of  as  the  "witches'  stick,"  ^  showing  that  finding
treasure  Is  also  one  hag  activity.  Witches  are  also
supposed  to  afflict  people  with  diseases  and  to  transfer
diseases  from  one  person  to  another.  ^

Driving  off  and  Capturing  Witches.  Coming  from
two  sources,  the  witch  beliefs  are  too  firmly  accepted
to  occasion  much  disputation.  The  greatest  variance
among  the  Negroes  is  to  be  found  In  the  great  number
of  methods  used  in  avoiding  or  driving  off  witches.
The  most  common  legend  in  this  regard  is  that  of  an
old  witch  who  took  off  her  skin,  hung  It  on  the  wall
and  went  out  to  ride  some  one.  While  she  was  gone,
a  man  slipped  In  and  sprinkled  red  pepper  In  the  skin.
The  witch  came  back  and  tried  to  slip  it  back  on.
"What  de  mattah,  skin.f"  Skinny,  doan'  you  know  me.?
Doan'  you  know  me,  skinny!  Doan'  you  know  me!"
she  cried  in  agony,  hopping  up  and  down  until  she  was
finally  discovered  and  killed.  "  In  various  forms  this
same  plot  exists  all  through  the  South — in  Georgia,  ^
Missouri,  ^  Virginia,  ^  Louisiana,  ^  North  Carolina  and
the   Sea  Islands,   as   well   as   In   the    Bahamas.  ^     The


191.
2341.

338.

«104.

M51,  and  Harris,  J.  C,     Uncle  Remus,  pp.  150-56.

6  351.

^  Bacon,  A.  M.,  and  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Lore  from  Elizabeth  City  County,
Va.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  35,  p.  285.

854.

'For  complete  bibliography  see  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea
Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  16  (1923),  pp.  63-64.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches      155

belief  is  too  widespread  to  be  an  Independent  develop-
ment; to  the  best  of  my  knowledge  It  Is  not  found  In
Europe;  but  In  West  Africa  there  Is  the  widespread
Idea  that  the  witch  leaves  her  skin  behind  on  going
out,  1  and  among  the  Vals  It  Is  thought  that  salt  and
pepper  sprinkled  In  the  room  will  prevent  her  from
getting  back  Into  her  hide.  ^  Slippery  Indeed  are  these
bat-like  demons  of  the  night.  By  drinking  a  certain
liquid  from  an  old  greasy  gourd  and  repeating  a
certain  formula,  some  Negro  witches  were  able  to  enter  a
locked  store  or  even  to  rise  In  the  air  until  they  entirely
disappeared  from  sight.  ^  In  avoiding  or  hindering
such  jinns  as  these,  a  person  must  keep  several  things
In  mind.  In  the  first  place  he  should  never  eat  crickets
or  grasshoppers  else  he  will  himself  turn  into  the  very
creature  he  is  trying  to  avoid.  ^  Again  a  person  should
never  lie  on  his  back  while  asleep  ^  or  eat  too  much
grease  ^ — such  action  invariably  leading  to  the  visits
of  these  nocturnal  monsters.  Doubtless  the  con-
nection between  eating  too  much  grease  and  seeing
ghosts  or  witches  has  a  real  physiological  basis;  a
heavy  diet  such  as  this  is  most  conducive  to  night-
mares. Finally,  a  person  should  remember  to  crush
the  egg-shells  after  the  egg  has  been  removed  lest  the
witches  use  them  for  boats  in  which  to  sink  ships.  ^
Almost   precisely   the   same   belief  is   found   In   many

1  Dayrell,  E.,     Folk-Stories  fro7n  Southern  Nigeria,  West  Africa,  pp.  11-19.
Milligan,  R.  H.,     The  Fetish  Folk  of  West  Africa,  p.  240.

2  Ellis,  G.  E.,     Negro  Culture  in  West  Africa,  p.  63.

*  Bacon,  A.  M.,  and  Parsons,  E.  C,     Folk-L  ore  from  Elizabeth  City  County,
Va.,  J.A.F.L.,  vol.  35,  pp.  286-87.
*168.
6  233.
6  365.
^  Lee,  C,     Some  Negro  Lore  from  Baltimore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5  (1892),  p.  112.


156     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

parts  of  Europe.  ^  Conjurers  can  tell  a  witch  upon
sight,  but  ordinary  folks  have  to  rely  to  some  extent
upon  screech  owls  and  dogs,  which  creatures  always
make  a  noise  when  a  witch  is  approaching.  ^  If  you
suspect  a  certain  neighbor  of  being  a  witch,  invite  her
to  see  you,  give  her  a  seat,  and  when  she  is  not  looking,
stick  a  fork  into  the  floor  beneath  her  chair.  If  she
is  a  hag  her  hag-spirit  will  be  pinned  to  the  floor  and
she  will  not  be  able  to  withdraw  her  bodily  presence
until  the  fork  is  removed.  By  such  a  method  one  old
lady  who  came  to  stay  for  a  few  minutes  was  forced
to  stay  all  day.  ^  In  Herefordshire,  it  was  said  that
a  witch  could  be  detected  by  hammering  a  tenpenny
nail  into  her  footprint.  If  really  a  witch,  the  woman
would  be  obliged  to  retrace  her  steps  and  draw  out  the
nail.  *  Any  one  who  refuses  to  step  over  a  broom,  the
darkies  assert,  is  also  a  witch.  ^

Brooms  and  Silver  Bullets.  This  brings  us  to  the
methods  of  exorcising  witches.  Since  a  witch  will
not  step  over  a  broom,  one  sure  way  of  keeping  a
witch  from  riding  you  (in  Europe  also)  ^  is  to  place  a
broom  across  the  door.  ^  This  is  especially  true  of  an
old-fashioned  sedge-broom,  the  efficacy  here  seeming
to  be  that  the  hag  must  count  every  straw  before  she
can  enter.  ^     Others  maintain,  at  least  in  their  stories,


1  Simpson,  Eva  B.,  Folk-Lore  in  Lowland  Scotland,  p.  193.  Fogel,  E.  M.,
Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,  p.  185.  Lean's  Collect-
anea, vol.  2,  p.  148.

2  Harris,  J.  C,     Uncle  Remus,  pp.  152-53.
^Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  47.

■•  Leather,  E.  M.,     Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  53.

^112,  and  Williamson,  G.,  Superstitions  from  Louisiana,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  18  (1905),  p.  230.

*  Leather,  E.  M.,  Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  53.  Fogel,  E.  M.,  Beliefs
and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,  p.  13S.  Hardiwick,  C,  Tradi-
tions, Superstitions  and  Folk-Lore,  p.  116  ff.

M02.

8  Cross,  T.  P.,  Folk-Lore  from  the  Southern  States,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  22
(1909),  p.  252.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches      157

that  a  broom  across  the  door  will  prevent  the  witch
from  budging  once  she  is  in  the  room.  ^  In  European
lore  the  broom  was  sacred  to  Donar  (Thor)  and  Woden
because  of  its  relation  to  lightning,  ^  and  the  witch
generally  rode  upon  it  on  her  nocturnal  travels.  ^
Witches  will  always  be  offended  and  slap  you  if  you
empty  the  bucket  of  drinking  water  (most  Negroes  as
a  matter  of  course  have  no  plumbing  system)  before
retiring.  *  Thus,  at  times,  pails  of  water  are  placed
about  the  kitchen  for  the  witches,  this  keeping  them
satisfied  and  preventing  them  from  riding  some  member
of  the  family  at  night.  ^  Again  it  is  said  that  if  a
person  who  has  just  been  ridden  by  a  witch  gets  up
quickly  and  pours  some  water  into  a  flask  before  the
witch  has  time  to  leave,  the  old  woman  who  is  the
witch  will  come  around  the  next  day  and  reveal  her
identity.  ^  Should  you  desire  actually  to  kill  the
witch  you  may  do  so  by  shooting  her  ^  or  the  animal
form  she  takes.  ^  There  are  also  cases  in  Yorkshire
where  a  witch  has  taken  the  form  of  a  hare  (the  most
common  disguise  of  a  witch  in  all  the  northern  countries
of  Europe)  and  has  been  killed  when  the  hare  was  shot
with  silver  bullets.  ^  A  Negro  witch  may  also  be
injured  by  shooting  at  an  image  or  silhouette  of  board
representing  the  one  to  be  punished,  ^ "  and  silver  is

1  Bacon,  A.  M.,  and  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Lore  from  Elizabeth  City  County,
Va.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  35,  pp.  248-85.

2  Fogel,  E.  M.,    Belief s  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,  p.  11.

3  Heuffer,  O.  M.,     The  Book  of  Witches,  pp.  25-30.
^233.

^  Bergen,  F.  D.,  Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7  (1899),
p.  15.

6  38.

'  150.

*  Pendleton,  L.,  Notes  on  Negro  Folk-Lore  and  Witchcraft  in  the  South,
J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  3  (1890),  p.  202.

^  Henderson,  W.,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  pp.  165-66.
^''Cro.ss,  T.  P.,  Folk-Lore  from  the  Southern  States,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  22
(1909),  p.  253.


158     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

again  effectively  used  in  catching  witches  by  going
out  at  night  and  putting  a  half  dollar  over  the  stable
door.  ^

Hags  and  Horses.  This  connection  between  horses
and  witches  is  further  shown  by  the  statement  that
witches  are  synonymous  with  nightmares  and  may
be  prevented  from  riding  you  by  placing  a  fork  under
your  pillow.  ^  This  connection  with  the  horse  is  all
the  more  strange  since  horseshoes  hung  over  the  doors,
windows,  beds  and  in  other  parts  of  the  house,  are
supposed  to  be  a  sure  way  of  keeping  these  unwelcome
visitants  away.  ^  The  Maryland  Negroes  say,  "de
witch  got  to  travel  all  over  de  road  dat  the  horseshoe
been  'fo'  she  can  git  in  de  house,  and  time  she  git  back
it  would  be  day."  ^  A  horse  bridle  put  over  the  churn
will  free  the  butter  from  a  witch's  control.  ^  In
England  also  this  connection  between  witches  and
horses  is  well  marked,  and  may  possibly  reflect  an
ancient  strife  between  men  of  Paleolithic  times  and
new  arrivals  from  the  East  in  Neolithic  times,  who  had
domesticated  the  horse  instead  of  using  it  simply  for
food.  In  many  parts  of  England  the  horseshoe  over
the  door  is  used  to  keep  out  witches.  ^  The  term
"witch"  seems  to  be  derived  "from  the  Dutch  'witch-
elen,'  which  signifies  whinnying  and  neighing  like  a
horse;  in  a  secondary  sense,  also,  to  foretell  and  proph-
esy;  because   the   Germans,    as    Tacitus    informs     us,

1  L54.

2  102.

3  341,  344,  and  288.     Also  Owen,  Mary  A.,     Voodoo  Tales,  Yi.  U.

^  Minor,  Mary  W.,  How  to  Keep  off  Witches,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  11  (1898),
p.  76.

^  141,  and  Thomas  and  Thonaas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  279.

*  Hunt,  R.,  Popular  Romances  of  the  West  of  England,  p.  432.  Brand,  J.,
Popular  Antiquities  of  Great  Britain,  vol.  3,  p.  2.  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,
p.  446.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches      159

used  to  divine  and  foretell  things  to  come  by  the
whinnying  and  neighing  of  the  horses."  ^  Without
doubt  the  fact  that  the  horse  has  been  used  in  the
past  as  a  fetish  animal  for  auguries  has  led  to  its
present-day  association  with  witches,  and  also,  pos-
sibly to  the  fact  that  in  New  Orleans  and  in  parts  of
Mississippi,  at  least,  a  hoodoo-doctor  is  spoken  of  as
a  "horse."  -  While  the  African  does  not  use  the
horseshoe,  he  does  employ  charms  of  various  kinds
against  witches.  For  instance,  among  the  Vais,
"people  often  go  to  the  beri-mo  (medicine-man)  and
get  medicine  which  is  put  in  a  horn  and  placed  on  the
outside  of  the  door  of  the  suspected  witch;  that  is  suf-
ficient to  keep  the  witch  from  entering  the  house  and
getting  into  his  skin,  which  may  be  seen  in  the  bed.
They  say  the  horn  will  fight  the  witch  at  the  door
until  daylight,  when  they  can  catch  the  witch.  The
person  suspected  is  actually  in  the  house  in  bed,  but
they  say  that  is  only  his  skin,  and  cite  instances  when
by  this  method  they  have  caught  witches."  ^

Sharp  Points  and  Salt.  In  the  first  part  of  the
preceding  paragraph  it  was  stated  that  nightmares
may  be  prevented  from  riding  you  by  placing  a  fork
under  your  pillow.  One  North  Carolina  version  is
that  the  fork  should  be  placed  back  of  your  pillow  with
the  tines  upward.  When  the  hag  aims  to  throw  her
bridle-reins  over  your  head  they  will  catch  on  the
tines  of  the  fork;  then  you  must  throw  the  reins  over
her  head.  "The  hag  then  immediately  turns  to  a
horse.  You  must  lose  no  time  in  jumping  upon  her
back  and  riding  off  to  the  nearest  blacksmith,  call  him

'  Brand,  J.,     Popular  Antiquities  of  Great  Britain,  vol.  3,  p.  2  (note).

"Seep.  201.

'  Ellis,  G.  E.,     Negro  Culture  in  West  Africa,  p.  63.


160     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

up  and  have  her  shod;  after  this  has  been  done  you  may
take  her  home  and  put  her  in  the  stable  or  tie  her  up
anywhere.  In  the  morning  she  will  return  to  her  true
shape,  but  the  shoes  will  remain  on  her  hands  and  feet
and  she  will  be  in  your  power  until  you  have  them
taken  off."  ^  This  represents  one  interpretation,  but
the  most  usual  version  is  that  sharp  things,  such  as
forks,  knives,  scissors,  or  needles,  placed  around  the
bed  serve  to  catch  the  witch's  skin  and  prevent  her
from  getting  into  it  when  she  leaves.  ^  One  woman  in
Maryland  stopped  this  witch-riding  business  by  put-
ting pins  in  a  chair  near  the  bed.  "Witches  have  to
set  down  befo'  dey  can  git  out  de  skin;  dey  can't
ride  you  long  as  dey  is  in  dey  skin."  This  witch  sat
down  on  the  pins,  stuck  fast,  and  was  unable  to
remove  her  epidermis.  She  could  not  get  up,  nor  was
she  allowed  to  leave  until  she  had  promised  never
to  come  again.  ^  Salt  and  pepper  are  wonderful
defenses  apart  from  their  ability  to  make  a  witch's
skin  untenable.  These  condiments,  and  especially  salt,
sprinkled  under  your  pillow,  ^  about  your  bed,  ^  in  all
of  the  doors  and  windows,  and  on  your  back,  ^  will
surely  save  you  from  being  ridden  by  these  equine
hags.  Also  rubbing  your  livestock  with  red  pepper
and  salt  will  keep  these  same  visitors  from  them. '
One  man  in  Maryland,  unknowingly  married  a  snake,
which  appeared  to  him  as  a  woman.  He  would  not
believe  what  his  friends  told  him  until  he  found  that


^Southern  Workman,  vol.  24  (1895),  p.  49.
2  J55   g^j^(j  341.

» Mmor,  Mary  W.,     How  to  Keep  Off  Witches,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  11   (1898),
p.  76.
<67.
6  112.
«141.
'  150.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches      161

in  baking  bread  for  her  own  use,  she  always  left  out
the  salt.  Unknown  to  her  he  slipped  a  pinch  of  salt
into  the  bread  she  was  eating;  immediately  she  turned
into  a  snake  and  ran  up  the  chimney  where  she  was
killed.  1

Skin,  Body,  and  Spirit.  Thus  far  two  hag  theories
have  been  indicated.  The  first  is  the  theory  of  the
skinless  body;  and  harm  may  be  wrought  to  the  body
by  properly  treating  the  skin.  The  other  is  the  hag
spirit,  quite  apart  from  the  body,  and  capable  of  pro-
jection, at  the  will  of  the  owner,  to  a  considerable
distance  from  the  body,  but  essential  to  the  life  of  the
body.  This  spirit,  if  caught  or  trapped,  can  be  used
to  bring  the  hag  to  repentance;  2  this  attribute  prob-
ably being  the  factor  which  allows  certain  witches  to
appear  in  two  places  at  the  same  time.  ^  A  hag  may
be  caught  in  a  properly  conjured  bottle  and  if  this
bottle  is  then  hidden  in  the  ashes  under  the  .fire,  she
will  die  in  agony.  *  Some  say  that  the  bottle  should
be  simply  put  down  on  its  side  with  the  mouth  open.
Whatever  you  find  within  the  bottle  in  the  morning —
roach,  cricket,  spider,  gnat,  or  other  insect  or  animal —
represents  the  witch,  and  whatever  is  done  to  the  thing
captured  will  be  done  to  the  witch  as  well.  Another
way  to  capture  these  hideous  creatures  is  to  grease  a
gourd  inside  and  outside  and  set  it  down  by  your  bed.
The  witch  rides  you  without  her  skin  and  the  gourd
is  so  slippery  that  she  slides  right  in,  and  you  will  find
her  there  in  the  morning.  ^     A  still  clearer  illustration


1  Bergen,  F.  D.,     Two  Witch  Stories,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  12  (1899),  pp.  68-69.

^Southern  Workman,  vol.  23   (1894),  p.  47.

3  Owen,  Mary  A.,     Voodoo  Tales,  p.  11.

*  Davis,  H.  C.,     Negro  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  27
(1914),  p.  247  ff.

6  141.
11


162     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

of  this  double  spirit  is  shown  by  one  method  used,
reminding  us  somewhat  of  African  soul-trapping.
"Take  a  bottle  half  full  of  water  and  hang  it  on  the
outer  post  of  the  bed,  close  to  the  head-board.  Get
a  new  cork,  stick  into  it  nine  new  needles  and  hang  it
over  the  bottle  about  an  inch  above  its  mouth.  Having
made  these  preparations  you  may  go  to  sleep  pre-
pared to  wake  and  do  your  part  when  the  hag  puts  in
an  appearance.  When  your  mysterious  visitor  ar-
rives, you  must  bear  her  riding  patiently,  knowing
that  this  ride  will  be  her  last.  The  decisive  moment
for  you  is  when  she  at  last  leaves  her  seat  upon  your
chest  to  make  her  escape  before  the  morning  dawns.
One  of  the  limitations  placed  upon  this  uncanny  being
is  that  after  her  night's  fun  Is  over  she  must  depart
over  the  head-board  of  the  bed  close  to  the  outer
post.  As  her  semi-fluid  corporeal  substance  glides
over  she  finds  the  cork  hanging  in  which  the  nine  new
needles  are  set.  Her  fatal  instinct  for  counting
seizes  her;  she  stops.  Now  is  your  time.  Rouse
yourself,  reach  quickly  up  over  your  head,  and  cork
the  bottle  by  so  swift  a  movement  that  the  hag  can-
not escape.  She  cannot  with  all  her  supernatural
powers,  work  her  way  through  the  glass  or  through  the
new  cork,  defended  by  the  nine  needles.  You  will
not  be  troubled  with  that  hag  again.  But  some  day
soon  some  old  woman,  faint  and  weak  and  nearly  dead,
will  crawl  into  your  house  and  entreat  you  to  let  her
spirit  out  of  the  bottle  or  she  must  die.  And  if  you
are  obdurate  and  continue  to  keep  the  bottle  corked,
the  poor  old  thing  will  gradually  waste  away  and  die."  ^


Southern  Workman,  vol.  23   (1894),  pp.   46-47.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches     163

The  Counting  Instinct.  The  fatal  counting  In-
stinct mentioned  above  is  the  basis  for  many  other
modes  of  exorcising  these  denizens  of  the  air.  Ap-
parently the  witch  is  forced  to  stop  and  count  what-
ever comes  before  her;  even  in  the  case  of  the  broom
across  the  door,  part  of  the  efficacy  lies  in  the  fact
that  all  of  the  straws  must  be  counted.  The  most
common  advantage  that  is  taken  of  this  counting
impulse,  in  so  far  as  the  Negroes  are  concerned,  is
through  the  use  of  the  sieve  hung  over  the  keyhole,  ^
or  put  under  the  pillow.  -  The  idea  is  that  the  witch
must  count  all  the  holes  in  the  sifter  before  she  can  go
away.  One  Negro  tried  this  and  next  morning  found
an  old  white  woman  holding  on  to  his  sifter.  She  had
not  finished  counting  when  day  broke  and  could  not
get  away.  ^  Another  woman  found  a  pile  of  jelly,
representing  the  witch,  within  the  sifter.  ^  Others
say  that  a  witch  can  count  but  five.  When  she
reaches  that  number  she  jumps  through  the  hole  in  the
sifter  and  is  gone.  ^  Perhaps  this  Maryland  belief  is  a
survival  of  African  times  where  counting  was  done  on
the  fingers  and  five  was  in  actuality  the  extent  of
counting  ability.  Some  place  the  sieve  over  their
face  with  a  three-prong  fork  under  it  to  catch  the
witches  if  they  try  to  get  through  the  holes.  ^  In
Europe  the  witch  is  connected  with  the  sieve  but  not
in  the  same  manner  as  among  the  Negroes.  The  sieve
was  used  by  the  witches  as  a  boat,  though  at  first  the

1  324,  and  370.

2  240.

3  286.
^250.

6  Minor,  Mary  W.,  How  to  Keep  Off  Witches,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  II  (1898),
p.  76.

^  Lee,  C,  Some  Negro  Lore  from  Baltimore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5  (1892),
p.  110.


164     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

witch-sailing  was  probably  done  In  the  air,  since  the
sieve,  among  the  Aryans,  was  a  cloud  emblem;  the
Implement  by  means  of  which  water  was  filtered  into
raindrops.  ^  Equally  important  in  keeping  witches
away  is  the  Negro  practice  of  scattering  mustard  (or
turnip)  seed  about  the  house.  The  witch  has  to
count  2  or  pick  up  ^  all  these  seeds  before  she  can  ride
you.  Generally  she  can  be  caught  before  this  has
been  accomplished.  One  old  slave  tells  me  that  she
must  pick  the  mustard  seed  up  because  they  burn
her.  This  will  wake  the  house  up  and  the  family
can  catch  the  witch  or  at  least  find  the  skin  she  has
shed  4.  In  North  Carolina  It  is  said  that  a  witch  carry-
ing silver  and  gold  with  her  does  not  have  to  stop  to
pick  up  the  seed;  ^  some  say  that  witches  have  to  carry
money  and  lodestone  with  them  in  order  to  work  a
charm  at  all.  «  In  South  Carolina  this  small  grain  Is
scattered  In  the  form  of  a  cross,  and  the  witch  Is
supposed  to  devour  every  grain  before  going  about
her  mongrel  affairs.  ^  Sand  is  also  used  Instead  of
grain; »  In  parts  of  Alabama  sand  is  sprinkled  on  the
floor  during  illness.  The  monster  causing  the  disease
spends  so  much  time  counting  the  grains  that  the
person  is   relieved  by  natural  treatment.  ^


^  Hardiwick,  C,     Traditions,  Superstitions  and  Folk-Lore,  p.  108.

^  135,  and  Owen,  Mary  A.,     Voodoo  Tales,  p.  11.

^  141,  and  Williamson,  G.,  Superstitions  from  Louisiana,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  18  (1905),  p.  230.  Lee,  C,  Some  Negro  Lore  from  Baltimore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  5  (1892),  p.  111.

^'32.

^  Parsons,  E.  C,  Tales  from  Guilford  County,  N.  C,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  30
(1917),  p.  189.

6  155.

^  Dana.  M.,     Voodoo.     Metropolitan  Magazine,  vol.  28  (1908),  p.  535.

8  264.

'  Brannon,  P.  A.,  Central  Alabama  Negro  Superstitions,  Birmingham
(Ala.)  News,  Jan.  18,  1925,  p.  15.


Burial  Customs,  Ghosts,  and  Witches     165

Similar  to  the  use  of  the  cross  Is  the  open  Bible
placed  beneath  the  pillow,  i  While  the  sacredness  of
the  Bible  adds  extra  power  to  the  charm,  the  value
lies  In  the  fact  that  the  witch  must  count  every  letter
In  the  book  before  taking  her  midnight  gallop.  Some
Negroes  use  any  ordinary  book,  or  simply  throw  a
newspaper  on  the  floor  under  the  Impression  that
they  win  awake  and  find  any  attempted  marauder
counting  the  letters.  2  This  counting  motif  also  ap-
plies to  a  hair-brush,  put  at  the  door,  ^  to  checkered
cloth  put  on  a  chair  near  the  bed  ("Dem  dere
witches  hab  ter  count  evvy  square  an'  day'll  be  done
broke  'fo'  dey  finishes"),  *  and  possibly  to  alligator
teeth  worn  around  the  neck.  Other  unrelated  methods
of  avoiding  witches  consist  of  wearing  a  bit  of  as-
afcetlda  around  the  neck,  ^  or  a  hoodoo  bag  on  the  top
of  the  head;  6  and  in  turning  your  coat  inside  out.  ^
If  a  witch  is  riding  you  and  you  call  for  a  knife,  the
witch  will  leave  at  once.  ^

Conclusion.  The  beliefs  relating  to  burial,  ghosts,
and  witches  show  certain  broad  similarities  both  In
Europe  and  Africa,  and  the  Afro-American  beliefs
resulting  from  the  contact  of  these  two  cultures
seems  to  indicate  a  very  slight  predominance  of  Eng-
lish influence.  Recalling  the  sweeping  changes  In  self-
maintenance    and     self-perpetuation     and     the    great

^216,  and  141.  Hawkins,  J.,  An  Old  Mauma's  Folk-Lore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  9  (1895),  pp.  129-30.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  27.

2  181.

»273.

M41.

^  Ibid.,  and  Hawkins,  J.,  An  Old  Mauma's  Folk-Lore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  9
(1896),  pp.  129-30.

6  341.

'  Steiner,  R.,  Superstitions  and  Belief s  from  Central  Georgia,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  12  (1899),  p.  261.

8311.


166     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

number  of  African  survivals  in  self-gratification,  it
would  seem  that  greatly  dissimilar  customs  are  either
completely  changed  or  else  scarcely  altered  at  all;
while  customs  showing  a  general  similarity  are  blended
so  as  to  exhibit  certain  characteristics  of  both  groups.
In  other  words,  those  folk-beliefs  and  customs  found  in
Africa  alone  either  appear  to  be  almost  entirely  re-
placed by  European  beliefs  or  else  to  remain  almost
intact  in  their  pure  African  form.  On  the  other  hand,
those  found  in  Africa  and  Europe,  which  are  suf-
ficiently alike  to  indicate  either  a  remote  common
origin  or  else  a  case  of  parallelism.  In  their  Afro-
American  form,  exhibit  the  characteristics  of  both
of  the  above  countries.  Like  beliefs  combine  into  a
new  mongrel  form;  extremely  unlike  beliefs  refuse  to
mix,  remaining  almost  entirely  unchanged  or  being
supplanted  in  their  entirety.

A  study  of  Kentucky  superstitions  seems  to  show
that  "the  only  class  of  original  contributions  made  by
the  Negroes  to  our  stock  of  superstitions  is  that  of
the  voodoo  or  hoodoo  signs,  which  were  brought  from
Africa  by  the  ancestors  of  the  present  colored  people.
These  have  taken  only  slight  root  in  the  Caucasian
mind."  ^  Thus  the  author  shows  -  that  only  the
"hoodoo"  beliefs  are  common  to  the  Negroes  alone,
while  other  (European)  superstitions  are  held  more
nearly  by  whites  and  blacks  alike.  This  state  of
affairs  is  not  entirely  true  of  the  South  as  a  whole,
though  voodoo  signs,  aside  from  a  few  slight  traces  of
European  lore,  seem  in  general  a  Negro  contribution.
We  will  now  consider  these  beliefs  with  the  ultimate
view  of  determining  why  the  Negro  should  retain
them  after  many  other  African  beliefs  had  been  more
or  less  altered  or  completely  dropped.


^  Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  4.
2  Ibid.,  pp.  283-85.


CHAPTER  III

VOODOOISM  AND  CONJURATION

Contributory  Factors.  Though  the  spirit  of  the  slave
was  too  often  left  fallow  to  the  weeds  and  thistles,
his  flesh  was  cultivated  to  the  state  of  highest  pro-
ductivity. The  slave  was  property  and  yielded  rich
returns  only  when  physically  fit.  For  this  reason  the
Negroes  generally  had  proper  medical  attention,  the
doctor  usually  being  paid  a  certain  stipend  a  year  and
called  whenever  needed.  ^  While  this  in  itself  would
tend  towards  the  substitution  of  rational  cures  for
disease  in  the  place  of  the  magic  and  conjuration  of
the  African  medicine-man,  yet  the  same  master  who
protected  his  investment  against  disease  germs  also
protected  it  against  undue  physical  violence,  and  thus
forbade  a  slave  from  inflicting  bodily  injury  upon  a
fellow  slave.  This  would  lead  invariably  to  indirect
revenge  or  revenge  by  witchcraft.  Lacking  overt  and
natural  means  of  obtaining  justice,  the  slave  turned
to  his  conjure-bag  and  after  the  Civil  War,  when  the
treatment  of  disease  was  taken  out  of  the  hands  of
the  master  and  given  again  to  the  Negroes,  their  desire
to  avoid  expensive  medical  attention  focussed  their
attention  again  on  the  all-powerful  "root-doctor"  or
"hoodoo-man,"  as  the  healer  of  diseases.  The  Sea
Island  Negroes  have  their  medicine-men  or  "guffer-
doctors,"  -  and,  in  the  tobacco  belt  of  Virginia,  pro-
fessional "trick-doctors"  exist  who  make  their  living

1  Tillinghast.  J.,  The  Negro  in  Africa  and  America,  p.  133.  Con-
rad, G.  B.,  Reminiscences  of  a  Southern  Woman,  Southern  Workman,
vol.  30  (1901),  p.  169.  dsift

-Johnston,  Sir  H.  H.,     The  Negro  in  the  New  World,  pp.  470-71.


168     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

solely  from  witchcraft.  ^  From  personal  experience
I  can  testify  the  same  as  holding  true  of  Mississippi,
Alabama,  and  Louisiana,  and  informants  from  other
states  indicate  the  condition  as  existing  in  all  parts
of  the   rural   South.

Reality    oj   the    Belief.     The    Negro    indicates    this
belief  in  conjuration  even  in  his  songs:

Keep  way  f'om  me  hoodoo  an'  witch,
Lead  mah  paf  frum  de  po'house  gate;
Ah  pines  fer  de  gold'n  harps  an'  sich,
Oh  Lawd,  Ah'll  jes'  set  an'  wait.  ^


Ole  Satan  am  a  hah  an'  a  conjurer  too:
Ef  you  don't  mind  out  he'll  conjure  you.


Miss  Owen  mentions  pneumonia  as  a  disease  that
is  attributed,  by  the  Missouri  Negroes,  to  conjur-
ation. "  I  have  seen  insanity,  boils,  ill  luck  in  hunting
or  courting,  death,  constipation,  and  what  not  laid  at
its  door.  In  fact,  I  think  one  might  safely  say  that
any  inexplicable  or  unexpected  calamity,  both  in
Africa  ^  and  in  many  parts  of  Negro  America,  is  often
blamed  on  witchcraft.  In  a  rural  Negro  church  near
Columbus,  Miss.,  there  was  a  constant  change  of
ministers  because  of  the  reliance  of  the  congregation
upon  "jacks"  (charms  wrapped  up  in  red  flannel).
A  new  minister  was  more  quick-witted.  He  wrapped
a  large  hunk  of  coal  in  red  flannel,  planked  it  on  the
pulpit  one  night  and  said:  "Folks,  dis  yere  de
daddy-jack  I'se  got.     Bring  yo'   baby-jacks  on  up."

1  Bruce,  P.  A.,     The  Plantation  Negro  as  a  Freedman,  p.  115.

2  279.

3  141,  112,  and  342.  Allen,  W.  F.,  Slave  Songs  of  the  United  States,
p.  108.     Odum,  H.  W.,     Negro  Hymns,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  26  (1913),  p.  376.

■»  Owen,    Mary    A.,     Voodoo    Tales,    p.    209.

6  Milligan,  R.  H.,     The  Fetish  Folk  of  West  Africa,  p    122.


VOODOOISM    AND    CONJURATION  169

The  members  of  the  congregation  were  afraid  not  to
do  this.  Thus  the  minister  found  out  who  had  "jacks,"
destroyed  their  charms,  and  was  able  to  hold  his  position
without  further  trouble.  ^

The  Fetishistic  Foundation.  I  recently  attended  an
"all-day  meetin'  wid  dinnuh  on  de  groun',''  at  which  a
Negro  church  laid  their  corner  stone  some  ten  or
fifteen  years  after  the  church  had  been  completed.
This  was  praiseworthy  in  that,  in  their  poverty,  they
did  not  allow  an  expensive  corner  stone  to  postpone
the  active  work  of  the  church,  but  in  our  case  it  is
advisable  first  to  consider  that  corner  stone  of  fet-
ishism upon  which  much  of  the  witchcraft  of  the
Southern  Negro  depends.  I  have  spoken  before  of
the  great  West  African  imaginary  environment  thronged
with  ghosts  and  spirits.  All  of  these  ghosts  and
spirits  are  not  of  human  origin,  for  a  man  may  at-
tribute a  soul  or  double  to  an  animal,  tree,  or  rock  by
the  same  method  by  which  he  attributes  one  to  man,
i.e.  by  dreaming  of  it.  These  spirits  are  not  auto-
matically shunted  off  to  a  far-away  heaven  when
death  occurs,  but  they  linger  close  enough  to  man  to
meddle  ceaselessly  in  his  affairs.  By  appropriate
rites  and  ceremonies  these  spirits  may  be  centered  in
almost  any  object,  and  there  are  endless  ways,  apart
from  the  customary  cult,  whereby  they  may  be  used
to  serve  more  advantageously  the  needs  of  man.  If
the  natives  of  the  Gold  Coast  be  typical,  the  African
pays  little  attention  to  the  periodic  movements  of  the
heavenly  bodies.  "All  of  the  deities  are  of  the  earth,
and  their  worship  is  born  of  fear  of  some  possible
ill,  or  of  a  desire  for  some  possible  good."  ^  "  .  .  .  The

1124.

2  Ellis,   A.   B.,     Tshi-s peaking  Peoples,   p.   21.


170     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

souls  of  those  who  perished  are  called  upon  to  appear
in  wooden  images  and  to  be  consulted  as  oracles;
their  spirits  must  be  made  serviceable;  parts  of  their
bodies  are  carried  around  to  serve  as  amulets."  ^
This  intensely  utilitarian  use  of  religion  is  at  the  basis
of  what  Is  known  as  fetishism;  there  is  no  religion  of
fetishism,  but  fetishism  is  a  stage  through  which  pos-
sibly every  religion  has  passed  during  the  course  of
its  development.  ^

Spirit  and  Object.  The  term  "fetish"  is  an  English
word  of  Portuguese  origin.  It  is  derived  from,  feitico —
"made,"  "artificial,"  and  this  term,  used  of  charms
and  amulets  worn  in  the  Roman  Catholic  religion  of
the  period  was  applied  by  the  Portuguese  sailors  of  the
eighteenth  century  to  the  deities  they  saw  worshiped
by  the  Negroes  of  the  West  Coast  of  Africa.  ^  Ul-
timately It  is  derived  from  the  Latin,  factitus,  In  the
sense  of  "magically  artful."  ^  Charms  or  amulets  in
West  Africa  are  vocal  (cabalistic  .words  or  phrases),
ritual  (rites  or  ceremonies),  and  material,  but  the
charms  that  are  most  common  are  material,  the  fetish.
^^A  fetish,  strictly  speaking,  is  little  else  than  a  charm
or  amulet,  worn  about  the  person,  or  set  up  at  some
convenient  place,  for  the  purpose  of  guarding  against
some  apprehended  evil,  or  securing  some  coveted
good."  ^  While,  theoretically,  there  are  two  parts  to
a  fetish,  the  object  itself  and  the  indwelling  spirit,
yet  the  African   "most  usually  combines  the  two  as


•  Gatschet,    A.    S.,     African  Masks  and  Secret    Societies,    J.   A.    F.    L.,
vol.  12  (1899),  p.  208.

2  Lippert,  J.,     Kullurgcschichle  der  Menschheit,  vol.  2,  p.  364.
^  Nassau,   R.   H.,     Felichism  in   West  Africa,  p.   80.
^  Tylor,  E.   B.,     Primitive  Culture,    vol.    ii,    p.    143.      Kingsley,    M.    H.,
West  Ajrican  Studies,  p.  114.     Ellis,  A.  B.,     Tshi-Speaking  Peoples,  p.  176  ff.

*  Nas.sau,  R.  H.,     Fetichism  in  West  Africa,  p.  78  ff.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  171

forming  a  whole,  and  this  whole  is  (as  the  Europeans
call  it)  the  'fetish,'  the  object  of  his  religious  worship."  ^
Although  at  first  there  is  always  the  notion  of  this
spirit  dwelling  within  the  object,  in  some  cases,  owing
to  the  institution  of  a  new  religion  or  the  suppression
of  the  priesthood,  there  is,  in  the  course  of  time,  "no
one  to  simulate  possession"  and  the  idea  of  an  in-
dwelling god  is  lost,  leading  to  a  worship  of  the  object
per  se.  ^  But  cases  like  this  are  rare;  on  almost  every
occasion  among  the  West  Africans,  it  is  clearly  the
spirit  and  not  the  object  itself  which  receives  the  wor-
ship. According  to  a  Gold  Coast  native,  the  fetishes
are  regarded  as  "spiritual,  intelligent  beings  who  make
the  remarkable  objects  of  nature  their  residence  or
enter  occasionally  into  images  and  other  artificial
representations  which  have  been  duly  consecrated  by
certain  ceremonies."  ^  Here  is  set  forth  the  common
African  view,  which  regards  the  spirit  as  the  essential
part  of  the  fetish,  while  the  object  is  merely  the  habita-
tion in  which  it,  temporarily  at  least,  dwells.  "A
fetish  is  not  necessarily  always  occupying  the  abode,
natural  or  artificial,  which  it  is  supposed  to  favor  as
its  habitation.  ...  It  only  comes  and  enters  that  abode
when  called  by  the  priest  by  the  tinkling  of  bells  and
by  his  dance.  When  thus  summoned  it  will  tempo-
rarily occupy  the  body  prepared  and  made  acceptable
for  it.  It  may  even  come  and  rest  there  of  its  own
accord,  but  for  all  intents  and  purposes,  a  fetish  image,
or  rock,  or  tree,  is  nothing  but  an  image,  rock  or  tree,
till  the  priest  who  is  en  rapport  with  the  power  or  spirit
which  is  known  to  have  adopted  one  of  these  places  as
its  abode,  calls  on  it  to  come  and  enter  it.     Thus  a

1  Waitz,   T.,     Anthropologie,  vol.   ii,   p.   174.

2  Ellis,    A.    B.,     Tshi-speaking   Peoples,    p.    193.
'  Kingsley,  M.  H.,     West  African  Studies,  p.  171.


172     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

'fetish'  cannot  be  stolen  or  die.  An  odum  tree  may
fall  down  which  was  sacred  as  the  known  abode  of
this  power.  When  that  happens  all  it  means  is  that
the  spirit  or  power  will  go  elsewhere.  So,  in  war,  if  a
fetish  body  (abode)  is  captured,  that  does  not  mean
that  the  fetish  is  captured.  It  is  temporarily  lost,  no
doubt,  but  its  own  priests  may  be  able  to  make  an
acceptable  home  for  it  once  more."  ^  In  accordance
with  this  same  idea,  the  Ibos  say,  "When  the  spirit
withdraws,  or  is  driven  out  of  a  ju-ju  (fetish),  the
material  and  visible  parts  are  no  more  valuable,  or
worthy  of  honor  than  the  shell  of  a  nut  after  the  kernel
has  been  extracted."  ^  Cases  such  as  these  show  that
the  native  is  not  foolish  enough  to  worship  blindly
sticks  and  stones,  but  that  it  is  the  spirit  dwelling
within  these  objects  which   receives   his   reverence.

Homes  for  Spirits.  "Over  the  wide  range  of  many
articles  used  in  which  to  confine  spirits,  common  and
favorite  things  are  the  skins  and  generally  the  tails  of
bush-cats,  horns  of  antelopes,  nut-shells,  snail-shells,
bones  of  any  animal,  but  especially  human  bones;
and  among  the  bones  are  especially  regarded  portions
of  skulls  of  human  beings  and  teeth  and  claws  of
leopards.  But,  literally,  anything  may  be  chosen —
any  stick,  any  stone,  any  rag  of  cloth."  ^  In  general,
however,  those  things  are  fetishes  which  either  have
been  closely  associated  with  the  dead — closely  enough
to  receive  the  spirit  of  the  departed;  or  those  things
which  have  some  decided  peculiarity  in  themselves,
which  peculiarity  is  best  explained  by  the  natives  by

>  Rattray,  R.  S.,  Ashanli  Proverbs,  p.  29.  Nassau,  R.  H.,  Fetichism
in  West  Africa,  p.  62.

2  Basden,  G.  T.,  Among  the  Ibos  of  Nigeria,  p.  215.  Nassau,  R.  H.,
Fetichism  in  West  Africa,  p.  63.

*  Nassau,  R.  H.,     Fetichism  in  West  Africa,  p.  76.


VoODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  173

assuming  that  the  object  In  question  is  inhabited  by  an
indwelling  spirit.  In  the  former  class  are  relics  of  the
dead,  ^  graves  or  caverns  ^  (the  latter  probably  in  the
beginning  being  used  for  graves),  ^  dangerous  objects
and  localities,  ^  carrion  animals  such  as  the  vulture,  ^
snakes  •  (probably  mistaken  for  worms,  or  else  fetish
because  living  in  caves  or  holes  near  graves),  ^  and
similar  animals  or  objects.  *  Some  peculiar  objects
which  have  been  regarded  as  fetishes  by  the  West
Africans  are  trees  that  rub  together  in  the  wind  and
make  a  squeaking  sound,  ^  the  owl  with  his  nocturnal
habits,  1 0  and  poisons  of  all  kinds.  ^  ^  To  the  Bulu
natives  an  organ  introduced  by  a  missionary  was  "a
fetish  and  full  of  talking  spirits,"  while  glasses  worn  by
a  certain  missionary  were  regarded  as  a  powerful
fetish  capable  of  turning  natives  into  monkeys,  ^  ^
Among  other  things  regarded  in  a  more  or  less  fet-
ishistic  way  are  the  whiskers  from  leopards,  ^  ^  certain
frogs,  1  ■*  and  the  Ehoro  (a  hare  or  rabbit);  ^^  but  the
type  which  most  closely  approaches  that  of  the  South-
ern Negro  seems  to  be  the  suhman,  or  individual  deity,
from  the  possession  of  which  that  individual  gains
prestige  and  from  which  he  derives  many  charms  or
talismans.  ^  ^


1  See  Ihid.,  p.  159  ff.     Milligan,  R.  H.,     The  Fetish  Folk  of  West  Africa,
p.  30.     Ellis  G.   E.,     Negro  Culture  in  West  Africa,  p.  52.

2  Nassau,  R.  H.,  Fetichism  in  West  Africa,  p.  58  ff.

3  See  Lippert,  J.,     Kulturgeschichte  der  Menschheit,  vol.  2,  p.  367  ff.
^  Ellis,  A.  B.,     Tshi-speaking  Peoples,  p.  34  ff.,  and  62.

^  Burton,  R.  F.,     Wit  and  Wisdom  from  West  Africa,  p.  85,  and  326.

*  Kingsley,  M.  H.,     West  African  Studies,  p.  483.

^  See  Lippert,  J.,     Kulturgeschichte  der  Menschheit,  vol.  2,  p.  403  ff.

8  See  Ellis,  A.  B.,     Ewe-speaking  Peoples,  p.  178,  and  180.    Bundv,  R.  C,
Folk-Tales  from  Liberia,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  32  (1919),  pp.  406-07.

^  Nassau,  R.  H.,     Fetichism  in  West  Africa,  p.  179.
1"  Ellis,  A.  B.,     Ewe-speaking  Peoples,  p.  51.
^^  Nassau,  R.  H.,     Fetichism  in  West  Africa,  p.  263.
1 2  Milligan,  R.  H.,     The  Fetish  Folk  of  West  Africa,  p.  75,  and  122-24.
1 '  Kingsley,  M.  H.,     Travels  in  West  Africa,  pp.  130^31.
1^  Burton,  R.  F.,  Wit  and  Wisdom  from  West  Africa,  p.  229.
^'  Ibid.,  p.  2.55.

'"  For  a  complete   description   of   this   suhman,  see     Ellis,  A.    B.,     Tshi-
speaking  Peoples,  pp.  98-104.


174     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Witchcraft  and  Religion.  This  class  of  individual
deities  approaches  very  closely  what  we  would  call
witchcraft.  But  "witchcraft  and  religious  rites  in
West  Africa  are  originally  indistinguishable."  ^  Miss
Kingsley  agrees  with  this  statement,  and  says,  "there
was  no  witchcraft  whatever  in  West  Africa,  nothing
having  a  true  distinction  in  the  native  mind  from
religion."  ^  In  another  place,  speaking  of  the  crowd
of  spirits  with  which  the  African  universe  is  peopled,
she  says,  "as  they  are  the  people  who  must  be  at-
tended to,  he  (the  native)  develops  a  cult  whereby
they  may  be  managed,  used  and  understood.  This
cult  is  what  we  call  witchcraft,"  ^  All  of  these  spirits
"are  capable  of  being  influenced,  and  made  subservient
to  human  wishes  by  proper  incantations,"  ^  So  prac-
tical are  the  ends  attained  through  the  use  of  the  various
fetishes,  and  oftentimes  so  evil  are  the  results  sought
that  we  call  it  witchcraft";  to  the  native  it  is  not  to  be
sharply  distinguished  from  his  everyday  religion.  "As
the  spirits  can  influence  both  natural  elements  and
men,  either  for  or  against  man,  and  as  they  can  be
propitiated  by  gifts  and  enlisted  one  against  another,
it  is  to  these  inferior  spirits  the  African  looks  for
preservation  from  harm  and  for  success  in  his  under-
takings, that  is,  for  happiness.  .  .  .  These  (human)
media  are  generally  called  in  English,  fetish-men,
medicine-men,  doctors,  or  priests.  Though  forming  a
sort  of  secret  society  and  wielding  great  power  in-
dividually, they  have  no  hierarchic  organization,  and
exert,  as  a  rule,  no  combined  efforts  as  a  class.     The

1  See  article  in  Edinhurg  Review,  vol.  186  (1897),  p.  221.
^  Kingsley,  M.  H.,     West  African  Studies,  pp.  157-58.
3  Ibid.,     Travels  in  West  Africa,  pp.  442-43.
^  Ibid.,  p.  445.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  175

fetish-man  or  medium  is  not  a  witch.  Consulting  and!
enlisting  spirits  in  self-defense  or  for  blessings  is
considered  a  duty,  not  a  crime.  But  the  misuse  of  a
spiritual  influence  for  bringing  harm,  especially  sick-
ness and  death,  on  one's  fellow-creatures  is  the  most
heinous  crime.  It  is  almost  invariably  punished  by
death  or  banishment  in  slavery."  ^

From  this  it  would  seem  that  witchcraft  Is  to  a
large  extent  simply  spirit-power  turned  to  evil  uses,
but  the  principle  is  the  same  as  that  of  religion.  We
must  remember  that  the  African  gods  are  not  con-  /
cerned  with  moral  practices.  ~  With  them  the  same
spirit  can  be  persuaded  to  work  Indifferently  good  or  I
evil,  while,  with  our  more  moral  religion.  It  Is  impossible  j
to  conceive  of  God  being  called  upon  deliberately  to
take  a  direct  hand  In  dastardly  enterprises.  With  the
African  a  distinction  may  be  made  between  white  and
black  art,  but  it  Is  simply  a  case  of  the  same  power  being
turned  to  different  ends,  just  as  fire  may  be  used  for
warmth  and  protection  or  for  burning  a  neighbor's
barn.  "So  long  as  these  fetishes  are  used  simply  for
protection  the  owner  Is  a  practicer  of  white  art,  but,
when  they  are  used  to  Injure  others  or  force  others  to  do
certain  things  pleasing  to  the  owner  of  the  fetish,  their
possessor  is  said  to  practice  black  art.  It  is  thia
latter  that  keeps  the  African  native  in  constant  fearj
At  any  hour  his  enemy  may  by  witchcraft  destroy  his
property,  rob  him  of  his  friends,  or  take  his  life.  All  that
an  enemy  has  to  do  Is  to  get  some  of  his  victim's  hair,
his  nails,  or  water  In  which  he  has  bathed,  and  have  a
witch  doctor  make  a  concoction  which,  buried  In  front


^  Chatelain,  H.,     Some  Causes  of  ^the  Retardation  of  African  Progress,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  8  (1895),  p.  182.

2  Kingsley,  M.  H.,     West  African  Studies,  p.  159.


176     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

of  the  victim's  door  or  secretly  hung  in  his  room,  will
bring  sure  death.  If  the  man  dies,  this  black  art  has
worked;  if  he  fails  to  die  then  he  himself  has  a  fetish
stronger  than  the  spirit  that  was  trying  to  induce  his
death.  In  this  murderous  superstition,  the  natives
have  an  absolute  confidence."  ^  Besides  witchcraft  be-
ing a  kind  of  perverted  religion  it  is  also  to  a  certain
extent  a  hovering  about  of  an  old  religion  which  the
priesthood  of  the  more  modern  religion  is  anxious  to
stamp  out,  causing  these  latter,  to  a  certain  extent,
to  look  upon  those  who  employ  it  as  quacks  or  rival
practitioners.  ^  There  is  always  a  conservatism  about
religion,  a  clinging  to  the  old — as  shownby  the  Yoruban
proverb,  "Never  did  our  fathers  honor  an  orisha  of
this  kind,"  ^  meaning  that  people  should  be  careful
about  innovations.  But  gradually  the  older  religious
forms  are  almost  forgotten  and  their  use  by  a  very  few
people  is  looked  upon  to  a  certain  extent  as  witch-
craft, mainly  because  it  is  odd  and  mystic.  "Witch-
craft acts  in  two  ways,  namely,  witching  something
out  of  a  man  or  witching  something  into  him.  The
former  method  is  used  by  both  Negroes  and  Bantu,
but  is  decidedly  more  common  among  the  Negroes
."  4  Besides  the  supplications  to  the  spirit
of  the  new  moon  and  other  higher  spirits,  and  the
various  cabalistic  words  and  phrases,  ^  even  such  an
intangible  thing  as  the  dance  has  a  fetishistic  nature,
since  the  stimulation  resulting  from  it,  as  from  other
more   material   intoxicants,    is   best   explained   by   re-


^  Weatherford,  W.  D.,     Negro   Life   in   the   South,    pp.    123-24.    See  also,
Nassau,  R.  H.,     Fetichism  in  West  Africa,  pp.  268-69.

2  Kingsley,  M.  H.,     West  African  Studies,  p.  162.     See  also,  Lehman,  A.,
Aberglaube  unci  Zauberei,  pp.  2-7.

3  Ellis,  A.  B.,     Yoruba-speaking  Peoples,  p.  223.

^  Kingsley,  M.  H.,     Travels  in  West  Africa,  p.  461.
« Ibid.,  p.  452.


\^OODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  177

ferring  it  to  the  influence  of  spirits.  ^  Moreover  at
times,  the  dance  has  the  nature  of  a  visual  prayer.  ^
For  example,  "when  the  Gold  Coast  Negroes  have
gone  out  to  war  their  wives  at  home  dance  a  fetish-
dance  in  imitation  of  battle,  to  give  their  absent
husbands  strength  and  courage."  ^  The  old-time  gods
might  not  understand  the  new-fangled  language,  but
acting  out  victory  shows  them  unmistakably  that
victory  is  what  is  wanted.  But,  reserving  a  more
detailed  discussion  of  these  African  charms  for  a  later
connection,  let  us  now  consider  the  matter  of  con-
juration with  the  Southern  Negroes  of  America.

Origin  of  the  Voodoo  Cult.  Most  of  the  Negroes  speak
of  conjuration  as  "hoodoo" — the  Negro  version  of  the
familiar  "voodoo"  or  "voudou."  Some  writers  would
derive  the  term  from  the  followers  of  Peter  Valdo,  the
Waldenses,  or  Vaudois  {vaudois,  a  witch)  of  France — a
sect  later  spreading  into  Hayti;^  yet  the  prevailing
opinion  today  is  that  the  term  is  of  African  origin,
being  derived  from  the  vo  (to  inspire  fear)  of  the
Ewe-speaking  peoples  and  signifying  a  god — one  who
inspires  fear.  ^  Fodu  is  not  the  name  of  an  especial
deity,  but  is  applied  by  the  natives  to  any  god.  "In
the  southeastern  portions  of  the  Ewe  territory,  how-
ever, the  python  deity  is  worshiped,  and  this  vodu
cult,  with  its  adoration  of  the  snake  god  was  carried  to

^  See  Lippert,  J.,     Kulturgeschichte  der  Menschheit,  vol.  i,  pp.  613-14.

^  Keller,  A.  G.,     Unpublished  Lectures.

'  Tylor,  E.  B.,  Anthropology,  p.  298.  Frazer,  J.  G.,  The  Golden  Bough,
p.  26.

*  See  Newell,  W.  M.,  Myths  of  Voodoo  Worship  and  Child  Sacrifice  in
Hayti,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  1  (1888),  pp.  16-30.

'  The  Picayune's  Guide  to  New  Orleans  (1896),  p.  64.  Ellis,  A.  B.,  Ewe-
speaking  Peoples,  pp.  29-30.  Ibid.,  On  Vddu  Worship,  Popular  Science
Monthly,  vol.  38  (1891),  p.  65.  Cable,  G.  W.,  Creole  Slave  Songs,  Century
Magazine,  vol.  31  (Apr.  1886),  p.  815.  Kennedy,  L.,  Voodoo  and  Vodun,
J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.6  (1893),  p.  307.

12


178     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Hayti  by  slaves  from  Ardra  and  Whydah,  where  the
faith  still  remains  today.  In  1724  the  Dahomies
invaded  Ardra  and  subjugated  it;  three  years  later
Whydah  was  conquered  by  the  same  foe.  This  period
is  (beyond  question  ^that  in  which  Hayti  first  received
the  vodu  of  the  Africans.  Thousands  of  Negroes
from  these  serpent-worshiping  tribes  were  at  that
time  sold  into  slavery,  and  were  carried  across  the
Atlantic  to  the  western  island.  They  bore  with  them
their  cult  of  the  snake.  At  the  same  period,  Ewe-
speaking  slaves  were  taken  to  Louisiana."  In  1809,
because  of  war  between  France  and  Spain,  some  of
these  Haytian  planters  with  their  slaves  fled  from
Cuba,  where  they  had  sought  refuge  during  the
Haytian  revolution,  to  New  Orleans  and  made  their
residence  there.  These  Africans,  too,  were  faithful
adorers  of  the  serpent.  Such  were  the  principal
sources  of  the  voodoo  religion  in  the  United  States.  ^

African  Survivals.  In  Africa  Danh-gbi,  the  deity
of  the  python,  is  esteemed  as  omniscient.  He
has  a  great  order  of  priests  and  many  wives,  the  kosio,
who  devote  their  lives  to  licentious  dancing,  and
debauchery — a  sort  of  religious  prostitution.  No  hu-
man sacrifice  or  cannibalism  is  found  in  this  African  cult.
The  indwelling  spirit  of  the  python  enters  the  body  of
the  priest  and  speaks  through  his  mouth  in  a  strange,
unnatural  voice.  ^  Formerly  in  New  Orleans,  the  two
ministers  of  the  serpent  god — the  king  and  queen,  or
master  and  mistress,  or  papa  and  mama — com-
municated   the    will    of    the    sacred    serpent.     These

1  Ellis,  A.  B.,  On  Vodu-Worship,  Popular  Science  Monthly,  vol.  38
(1891),  p.  651  ff.

^  Ibid.,  p.  655.  Nott,  G.  W.,  Marie  Laveau,  Times  Picayune,  New
Orleans,  Nov.  19,  1922,  Magazine,  Section,  p.  2.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  179

ministers  held  office  for  life,  and  to  disobey  or  resist
them  was  an  offense  against  the  deity  himself.  ^  In
New  Orleans  voodooism  "was,  in  fact,  a  system  of
fetish  idolatry.  Its  main  feature  consisted  of  the
worship  of  the  serpent,  and  'Li  Grand  Zombi'  was  the
mysterious  power  which  guarded  and  overshadowed
the  faithful  Voudou'  and  was  held  sacred.  The
serpent  was  kept  by  the  priestess  or  queen  of  the
voodoos  in  an  exquisitely  carved  box  on  a  table  in
her  own  bed  chamber.  Candles  were  kept  continually
burning  around  it  and  two  voodoos  were  specially
delegated  to  watch  these  lights  night  and  day."  2
Cable  mentions,  besides  "Zombi,"  the  additional  even
more  solemn  name,  "Magnam,"  as  associated  with  voo-
doo. "Even  in  the  midst  of  the  Calinda  dance  .
was  sometimes  heard,  at  the  height  of  its  frenzy,  the
invocation —

Aie!     Aie!
Voodoo  Magnam!

The  worshipers  were  not  merely  a  sect,  but,  in  some
rude,  savage  way,  also  an  order.  The  king  and  queen
were  the  oracles  of  the  serpent  deity,  and,  of  the  two,
the  queen  was  by  far  the  more  important.  She  held
her  office  for  life,  obtaining  it  not  by  inheritance  but
by  election  or  its  barbarous  equivalent.  ^

Marie  Laveau.  Marie  Laveau  was  the  last  voodoo
queen,  and  in  my  investigation  of  voodooism  in
New  Orleans  recently,  I  found  many  conflicting  views
regarding  her.     A   member  of  the  Historical   Society

1  Castellanos,  H.  C,     New  Orleans  as  It  Was,  p.  91.
^  The  Picayune's  Guide  to  New  Orleans  (Nicholson  &  Co.,  1896),  p.  64.
^  Cable,  G.  W.,     Creole  Slave  Songs,  Century  Magazine,  vol.  xxxi  (1886),
pp.  815-16.


180       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

distinctly  remembers  her  funeral,  which  was  attended
by  large  numbers  of  superstitious  Negroes,  all  expecting
supernatural  occurrences.  Some  of  these  Negroes
stated  that  Marie  Laveau  had  a  live  snake  which  she
kept  under  her  bed  and  fed  like  a  baby.  When  its
mistress  died  the  snake  departed  and  the  Negroes
said  it  was  the  devil  gone  to  claim  her  soul.  An
old  Frenchman,  a  personal  friend  of  Marie  Laveau's
states  that  a  great  deal  at  present  said  about  her  is
pure  fancy  and  fiction.  She  was  simply  a  "griife,"  *
so  he  says,  a  "procuress"  and  a  hair-dresser,  visiting
the  homes  of  her  clients  and  using  her  intimate  knowl-
edge gathered  there  in  dealing  with  related  white
customers.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  Marie  Laveau,  so  he
states  from  personal  knowledge  of  her  house,  was
afraid  of  snakes,  but  kept  a  small  jointed  wooden  snake
on  her  mantel  along  with  other  bric-a-brac  to  fool  the
superstitious.  So  great  has  been  the  web  of  fancy
woven  around  this  unique  character  that  an  original
painting  of  her,  which  this  antique  dealer  could  not
sell  for  ^2  just  after  her  death,  is  now  worth  over
3250. 2

Miss  Mary  A.  Owen,  who  has  undoubtedly  a  more
intimate  knowledge  of  the  Missouri  voodoos  than
any  other  white  person,  mentions  the  power  of  the
serpent  in  one  of  the  charms  used.  ,  To  bring  a  person
to  you,  take  several  hairs  from  your  head,  name  them
for  that  person,  and  place  them  in  a  bottle  of  rain-
water near  the  front  door  of  your  house.  Within
three  or  four  days  the  hairs  will  swell  and  turn  to
snakes  and  the  person  named  will  start  for  that  spot — -

^  Explained  as  the  offspring  of  a  Negro  and  a  mulattress  with  sometimes  a
little  Indian  blood.
2  269.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  181

"for  nothing  can  withstand  the  power  of  snakes."  ^
At  present,  however,  the  serpent  seems  to  be  used
mainly  as  an  ingredient  of  charms  with  no  thought  of
actual  worship — its  presence  in  the  modern  voodoo
performances  in  New  Orleans  being,  I  gather,  mainly
for  effect.

Louisiana  Voodoo  Rites.  The  secret  meetings  of
the  voodoo  society  were  held  at  night.  Castellanos
tells  of  the  members  divesting  themselves  of  their
usual  raiment  and  putting  on  sandals,  girding  their
loins  with  red  ^  handkerchiefs,  of  which  the  king
wears  a  greater  number  and  those  of  finer  quality
than  the  ordinary  member.  He  also  has  a  blue
cord  about  his  waist  and  his  head  draped  with  some
crimson  stuff.  The  queen  is  dressed  more  simply,
with  red  garments  and  a  red  sash.

The  ceremony  begins  with  the  adoration  of  the
snake,  placed  in  a  barred  cage  upon  an  altar  in  front
of  the  king  and  queen,  and  a  renewal  of  the  oath  of
secrecy.  The  king  and  queen  extol  future  happiness
and  exhort  their  subjects  always  to  seek  their  advice.
Then  individually  the  members  come  up  to  implore
the  voodoo  god — to  invoke  blessings  upon  friends  and
curses  upon  enemies.  The  king  patiently  listens.
Then  the  spirit  moves  him.  He  places  the  queen
bodily  upon  the  box  containing  the  deity.  She  is
seized  with  convulsions  and  the  oracle  talks  through
her  Inspired  lips.  ^  She  bestows  flattery  and  promises
of  success;  then  lays  down  irrevocable  laws  in  the  name
of  the  serpent.     Questions  are  asked  and  an  offering

1  Owen,  Mary  A.,     Among  the  Voodoos,  I.  F.  L.  C.  (1891),  p.  244.

2  Note  the  fetish  color.

^  Note  the  implication  that  the  woman  is  more  susceptible  to  hypnotic
influences.


182     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

taken;  new  work  is  proposed  and  the  oath  of  secrecy
again  taken,  sometimes  sealed  by  the  warm  blood  of
a  kid.

After  this  the  voodoo  dance  begins.  The  initiation
of  new  candidates  forms  the  first  part  of  this  ceremony.
The  voodoo  king  traces  a  large  circle  in  the  center  of
the  room  with  a  piece  of  charcoal  and  places  within  it
the  sable  neophyte.  He  now  thrusts  into  his  hand
a  package  of  herbs,  horse  hair,  rancid  tallow,  waxen
effigies,  broken  bits  of  horn,  and  other  substances
equally  nauseating.  Then  lightly  striking  him  on
the  head  with  a  small  wooden  paddle,  he  launches  forth
into  the  following  African  chant:

Eh!     eh!     Bomba,  hen,  hen!
Canga  bafio  te,
Canga  moune  de  le,
Canga  do  ki  la
Canga  li.

At  this  the  candidate  begins  to  squirm  and  dance —
an  action  called  ^''monter  voudouy  If  he  steps  out  of
the  ring  in  his  frenzy,  the  king  and  queen  turn  their
backs  to  neutralize  the  bad  omen.  Again  the  candidate
enters  the  ring,  again  he  becomes  convulsed;  drinking
some  stimulant,  he  relapses  into  an  hysterical  fit.  To
stop  this  the  king  sometimes  hits  him  with  a  wooden
paddle  or  with  a  cowhide.  Then  the  initiate  is  led
to  the  altar  to  take  the  oath,  and  from  that  moment
becomes  a  full-fledged  member  of  the  order.

The  king  then  places  his  foot  upon  the  box  contain-
ing the  snake.  He  seems  to  get  a  sort  of  shock  which
is  transmitted  to  his  queen,  and  through  her  to  every
one  In  the  circle.     Violent  convulsions  take  place,  the


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  183

queen  being  the  most  violently  affected.  From  time
to  time  the  serpent  is  again  touched  to  get  more
magnetic  power.  The  box  is  shaken,  and  tinkling
bells  on  the  side  increase  the  general  delirium  already
under  way,  aggravated  by  much  drinking  of  spirituous
liquors.  "Then  is  pandemonium  let  loose.  Fainting
fits  and  choking  spells  succeed  one  another.  A  nervous
tremor  possesses  everybody.  No  one  escapes  its
power.  They  spin  with  incredible  velocity,  whilst
some,  in  the  midst  of  these  bacchanalian  orgies,  tear
their  vestments  and  even  lacerate  their  flesh  with
their  gnashing  teeth.  Others,  entirely  deprived  of
reason,  fall  down  to  the  ground  from  sheer  lassitude,
and  are  carried,  still  panting  and  gyrating  into  the
open  air."  ^

Diabolic  Festivals.  A  reporter  of  the  New  Orleans
Times-Democrat  for  June  24,  1896,  writes  in  essence
as  follows,  concerning  a  voodoo  festival  held  on  St.
John's  Eve  on  Bayou  St.  John,  near  New  Orleans:
"The  rites  consisted  in  building  a  large  fire,  in  a  dance
on  the  part  of  a  central  personage,  the  destruction  of  a
black  cat  and  its  devouring  raw.  The  scene  concluded
with  an  orgie,  in  which  the  savage  actors  ended  by
tearing  off  their  garments."  Such  is  the  theatrical
description  given  with  various  adornments,  and  with
the  words  of  a  song  said  to  be  chanted  on  the  occasion:

Au  joli  cocodri — ■

Vini  gro  cocodri —

Mo  pas  cour  cocodri  zombi!

Yo!     Ya!     Columbo!^


1  Castellanos,  H.  C,     New  Orleans  as  It  Was,  pp.  92-95.     See  also,  Dana,
M.,     Voodoo,  Metropolitan  Magazine,  vol.  29  (190fe),  p.  536.

2  Quoted  in  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  10  (1892),  p.  76.


184       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

An  intelligent  quadroon  of  Augusta,  Georgia,  tells  of
"a  class  of  persons  who  can  cast  spells  and  make  people
sick.  They  all  know  each  other.  In  New  Orleans  they
hold  meetings,  at  which  spells  are  cast.  These  meet-
ings are  called  together  by  the  head  man,  on  complaint
of  one  of  the  band.  They  all  dance  or  walk  around  a
pot  which  is  placed  in  the  center  of  the  room.  As
they  dance,  the  imprecation  is  uttered  against  the
person  who  is  to  be  injured.  Fire  is  placed  in  or  under
the  pot."  1  Other  New  Orleans  Negroes  add  that  at
these  gatherings  the  dancers  alternately  shrink  to
about  a  foot  in  height  and  then  expand  to  gigantic
size.  When  the  fire  goes  out  they  fall  like  dead  people
to  the  ground.  ^

White  men  attended  some  of  these  meetings,  as  was
the  case  with  one  held  on  St.  John's  Eve  between
Spanish  Fort  and  Milneburg,  near  New  Orleans.
Coffee  and  gumbo  were  served,  and  the  men  had  to
remove  their  coats  so  as  not  to  break  the  charm.  A
small  tablecloth  in  the  center  of  the  room  contained,
In  addition  to  cakes,  beans,  and  corn,  several  bunches
of  feathers,  candles,  small  piles  of  bones,  and  shallow
Indian  baskets  filled  with  herbs.  Dancing,  gradually
working  into  a  frenzy,  took  place  to  the  notes  of  a
tomtom.  Alcohol  was  spit  upon  the  candles  to  make
a  flame  and  to  fool  the  superstitious,  but  there  were
no  snakes  nor  nakedness.  ^  In  1806  a  voodoo  danCe
was  held  in  Algiers  on  St.  John's  Eve  to  invoke  the
powers  to  hold  back  a  white  girl's  lover,  preventing
him  from  leaving  for  Baltimore  as  was  his  intention.


1  Culin,  S.,     Reports  Concerning  Voodooism,  J.  A.  F.   L.,    vol.    2    (1889),
p.  233.

2  Pitkin,  Helen,     An  Angel  by  Brevet,  pp.  181-82.

'  Historical  Sketch  Book  and  Guide  to  New  Orleans  (N.  Y.   1884),  p.  229  ff.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  185

The  white  girl's  father  discovered  her,  clad  in  her
night  clothes  with  bare  feet  and  streaming  hair,
waving  a  wand  while  the  voodoos,  all  the  while
chanting  in  an  unknown  tongue,  danced  wildly  about
a  cauldron  containing  serpents  and  frogs.  One  of
the  women  was  sprinkling  a  powder  in  the  flames,
which  diffused  a  deathly  sickening  odor.  ^  The  mother
of  one  of  my  informants  tells  of  an  old  Negro  "auntie"
tying  a  string  about  her  neck  and  left  wrist  to  prevent
witchcraft  when  the  voodoo  queen  passed  them  on  the
streets  of  New  Orleans.  "The  Negroes  of  New
Orleans  used  to  have  meetings  presided  over  by  this
woman.  These  meetings  were  held  out  in  the  swamps
along  the  river  edge  and  always  at  night,  and  it  is  said
that  frightful,  savage  dances  and  other  barbarous
incantations  took  place  at  these  gatherings."  ^  p.  La-
rousse,  in  his  Dictionaire  Universal  du  XIX  Steele,
tells  of  one  of  these  meetings  in  a  large  hall  where  the
police  found  about  fifty  naked  women.  Two  of  the
band  were  white  and  well  known  in  the  city.  They
were  executing  with  frenzy  the  dance  of  the  voodoo,
while  the  high  priestess  devoted  herself  to  incantations.
"In  the  center  of  the  room  was  a  large  vase  containing
a  fetid  mixture,  and  round  about  this,  on  three  dishes
of  silver,  many  snakes  calmly  reared  their  heads.  The
scene  was  made  brilliant  by  the  light  from  hundreds  of
candles.  In  the  four  quarters  of  the  hall  stimulating
perfumes  burned  on  hearths."  ^  Castellanos  men-
tions a  police  raid  of  about  1860  or  earlier  where  a
group   of  women   clad   only   in   white   camisoles   were

1  Seymour,    W.    H.,     A    Voudou    Story,    Times    Picayune,    New    Orleans,
July  3,  1892,  p.  14.

2  376.

'  Quoted  in  Dana,  M . ,     Voodoo,  Metropolitan  Magazine,  vol.  28  (1908),  p.  530.


186       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

found  dancing  this  voodoo  dance.  Many  white  women
of  the  highest  walks  of  society  were  found  among  them.
"These  facts  are  beyond  controversy,  and  the  scandal,
attested  by  thousands,  was  made  the  subject  of  town
gossip  for  many  a  year."  ^

One  of  the  voodoo  songs  stated  that  the  queen,
Marie  Laveau,  knew  all  kinds  of  gri-gri  or  charms;
that  she  had  gone  to  school  with  the  crocodiles  and
alligators;  that  she  had  a  speaking  acquaintance
with  the  Grand  Zombi,  and  that  when  the  sun  went
down  every  evening  in  a  little  corner  of  the  wild
woods  he  would  come  out  of  the  bayou  to  teach
Marie    Laveau    all    voudou    mysteries.     Still    another


ran


'L'  Appe  vini,  li  Grand  Zombi,
'L'  Appe  vini  pour  fe  grI-gri!  ^

One  of  my  informants,  a  white  man  of  New  Orleans,
witnessed  personally  one  of  these  voudou  dances  held
between  Spanish  Fort  and  Milneburg,  on  St.  John's
Eve  in  1877  or  1878.  An  iron  pot  was  swinging  on  a
tripod  with  gumbo  cooking  in  It.  Claret  mixed  with
cinnamon  and  aromatic  herbs  was  warmed  and  served
with  the  gumbo,  but  neither  in  the  food  nor  In  any
attendant  worship  was  any  snake  to  be  seen.  All
participants  were  naked  and  Marie  Laveau  beat  time
while  the  men — all  of  them  white — and  "pretty
yellow  girls"  danced  around.  Much  immorality  was
in  evidence  around  the  deserted  place.  ^  A  later
account  tells  of  a  meeting  of  mixed  whites  and  colored

1  Castellanos,  H.  C,     New  Orleans  as  It  Was,  pp.  99-100.

2  The  Picayune's  Guide  to  New  Orleans   (1896),  p.   66.     See  also,   Pitkin,
Helen,     An  Angel  by  Brevet,  p.  61.

a  269.


VOODOOISM   AND    CoNJURATION  187

on  the  shores  of  Lake  Pontchartrain  for  voodoo  pur-
poses. Dr.  Alexander,  a  colored  voodoo  doctor,  the
successor  of  Marie  Laveau,  presided,  and  here  again
a  large  number  of  white  women  of  respectable  middle-
class  families  were  found  almost  completely  disrobed,  ^

Rites  in  Other  Localities.  The  Missouri  voodoos
prepare  for  their  snake  dance  by  first  rendering  a
rattlesnake  torpid  by  feeding  him  a  young  rat,  bird,
or  toad  just  before  the  dance  begins.  "The  partici-
pants, who  are  not  all  Voodoos  by  any  means,  have
been  on  short  rations  or  none  for  nine  days;  they  are
full  of  tobacco-smoke  or  whiskey,  and  their  nerves
are  still  further  excited  by  fear  of  the  snake  and  the
god  or  devil  he  represents.  They  howl  In  any  key,
without  words  or  rhythmic  sounds,  the  same  as  they
do  at  a  religious  revival  or  camp-meeting.  Sometimes
they  circle  wildly  about,  with  their  hands  clasping
those  of  the  persons  next  to  them;  sometimes  they
jump  up  and  down  In  one  spot,  while  they  make  In-
decent gestures  or  twine  their  arms  about  their  own
naked  bodies.  They  keep  this  up  until  the  greater
number  of  them  fall  exhausted,  when  they  have  a
rest,  followed  by  a  feast  of  black  dog,  and  .  .  .  kid."
This  snake  dance  Is  supposed  to  give  strength  to  the
body.  2  Mrs.  Boyle  describes  a  voodoo  dance  where
the  chief  figure  used  a  cluster  of  rude  shell  castanets
swung  by  a  leather  thong.  At  each  revolution,
accompanied  by  a  high  note  In  the  wall,  the  rough
edges  of  the  shells  cut  deeply  Into  the  steaming  flesh,
r  Finally  after  three-quarters  of  an  hour  the  leader  fell
exhausted,  with  blood  trickling  from  her  breast  and
shoulders.  ^


1  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  3  (1890),  p.  67.

2  Owen,  Mary  A.,     Among  the  Voodoos,  I.  F.L.  C,  1891,  p.  237.

3  Boyle,  Mrs.  V.  F.,     Devil  Tales,  pp.  97-98.


188     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

The  ^^ Judas  Eye^  Besides  the  making  of  charms
and  the  employment  of  sinister  drugs,  those  passing
beyond  the  first  rank  in  the  society  are  able,  It  Is
reported,  to  exercise  "that  concentration  of  mind
and  will  which  gives  hypnotic  mastery  over  the  person-
ality of  others."  The  neophyte  retires  to  long  soli-
tude and  tortures  himself  In  order  to  gain  complete
control.  He  must  first  dominate  his  own  mind —
and  he  makes  his  own  will  the  great  fetish  power  by
which  to  control  his  fellows.  ^  Personally  I  have  often
noticed  the  penetrating,  unwavering  eyes  of  the
various  conjure-doctors.  ^  These  hoodoos  tell  me  that
you  should  never  take  your  eye  off  a  person.  Look
him  squarely  In  the  eyes  and  ask  what  you  deeply
want.  You  will  get  It.  ^  Another  backs  up  this
statement  and  suggests  the  wearing  of  an  amulet  of
some  sort  on  your  watch  chain  to  intercept  evil  glances
and  to  divert  a  person's  gaze  while  you  meet  his  eyes
squarely,  thus  giving  you  a  decided  advantage.  ^
Somewhat  general  among  the  Southern  Negroes  Is
the  belief  In  the  evil  of  "Judas  eye,"  whereby  a  person
Is  able  to  harm  you  simply  by  looking  at  you.  ^  Traces
of  this  evil  eye  belief  are  found  both  in  Africa  «  and  In
Scotland.  ^

Initiations.  There  are  four  degrees  of  voodoo,  of
which  little  Is  known  beyond  the  first.  In  thi's  the
budding  magician  is  taught  the  lore  of  dreams,  the
making  of  various  charms  and  fetishes  and  the  use  of


1  Dana,  M.,     Voodoo,  Metropolitan  Magazine,  vol.  28  (1908),  p.  532.

2  See  frontispiece.
354.

*  258.

S45.     See  also,  Boyle,  Mrs.  V.  F.,     Devil  Tales,  p.  107.

*  Burton,  R.  F.,     Wit  and  Wisdom  from  West  Africa,  p.  205  (note).

^  Campbell,   J.   G.,     Witchcraft  and  Second  Sight  in  the   Highlands  and
Islands  of  Scotland,  p.  59  ff.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  189

poisons,  together  with  the  remedies  to  be  employed  in
counteracting  them.  ^  "  'To  be  strong  in  de  haid' —
that  is,  of  great  strength  of  will — is  the  most  important
characteristic  of  a  'cunjerer'  or  'voodoo.'  Never  mind
what  you  mix — blood,  bones,  feathers,  grave-dust?
herbs,  saliva,  or  hair — it  will  be  powerful  or  feeble  in
proportion  to  the  dauntless  spirit  infused  by  you,  the
priest  or  priestess,  at  the  time  you  represent  the  god
or  'Old  Master'."  2  Miss  Owen  says  of  voodooism:
"Unlike  the  Aryan  and  Red  Indian  magic,  based  on
fasting,  contemplation  and  'prayer,'  it  relies  on  daring
that  which  is  horrible  and  repulsive,  and,  above  all,
in  a  perfectly  subjective  iron  zvill.  It  also  acts  greatly
by  the  terror  or  influence  inspired  by  the  conjurer
himself.  And  its  cures  and  means  are  fouler  and  far
more  revolting  than  those  of  Indian  'medicine.' "  ^
The  initiation  used  by  the  Missouri  voodoos  to  get
this  "strength  uv  haid"  involves,  first,  the  drinking
of  a  pint  of  whiskey,  into  which  has  been  put  some
bark  (steeped  in  rainwater),  gathered  from  two  small
saplings  which  rub  together  in  the  wind  ^  (the  higher
you  climb  for  this  bark  the  higher  will  be  your  rank  in
voodoo  craft).  After  this  the  initiate  remains  alone
in  meditation  and  fasting  for  nine  days.  The  novice's
dreams  are  all  very  prophetic  at  this  time,  and  in  them
he  will  be  made  aware  of  some  objects  which  are  his
particular  fetish  or  medicine.  After  these  nine  days
he  presents  himself  to  his  "teacher,"  who  is  always  a
person    of    the    opposite    sex.  ^     A    second    initiation

^  Dana,  M.,     Voodoo,  Metropolitan  Magazine,  vol.  28  (1908),  p.  530.
2  Owen,  Mary  A.,     Among  the  Voodoos,  I.  F.  L.  C.   (1891),  p.  230  ff.
'  Owen,  Mary  A.,  Voodoo  Tales,  Introduction,  p.  vi.    For  one  of  their  repulsive
incantations,  see  Dana,  M.,    Voodoo,  Metropolitan  Magazine,  vol.  28  (1908),  p.  533.
*  Compare  Nassau,  R.  II.,     Fetichism  in  West  Africa,  p.  179.
'  Owen,  Mary  A.,     Among  the  Voodoos,  I.  F.  L'.C.   (1891),  p.  230   ff.


190      Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

features  the  leaves  from  a  weed  pulled  up  at  random  at
midnight  (the  more  leaves  on  the  weed  the  more
exalted  your  place).  These  leaves  are  worn  under  the
right  arm  for  nine  days,  during  which  period  the  dreams
of  the  wearer  are  very  carefully  observed.  ^  The
preparation  for  full  membership  in  "The  Circle"
"consists  in  learning  the  'Luck  Numbers'  (not  lucky
numbers),  a  simple  feat,  for  seven  is  a  lucky  number  to
conjure  or  hoodoo  by,  but  nine  is  better;  three  is  a
good  number,  but  five  is  better.  Four  times  four  is
the  Great  Number.  Neither  the  devil  nor  his  still
greater  wife  can  refuse  to  assist  in  the  working  of  a
charm  with  that  number  'quoted  in'  .  .  .  Ten  is  the
unlucky  number.  At  the  first  lesson  the  student
receives  a  secret  name  by  which  he  must  call  himself
when  he  is  working  spells."  -  Perhaps  this  secret
name  is  for  the  purpose  of  concealing  his  real  identity
from  the  devil  whose  aid  he  is  invoking.

New  Orleans  Today.  Dana  speaks  of  Voodoo  as
devil  worship — an  African  fetishism  of  the  basest
sort.  He  thinks  the  voodoos  are  still  banded  into  a  so-
ciety and  that  the  cult  is  not  declining  but  making  head-
way. 3  My  investigations  in  New  Orleans  this  summer,
in  which  I  posed  as  a  real  conjure-doctor  and  prescribed
as  well  as  received  charms,  cause  me  to  think  that
such  is  not  the  case,  and  my  many  years  of  close  ac-
quaintance with  the  Negroes  of  Mississippi  point  to
the  same  conclusion.  Remnants  of  voodooism,  in
the  form  of  spells,  "tricks,"  conjuration  and  witch-
craft of  all  kinds  still  persist,  but  the  closest  search
fails  to  reveal  any  underlying  organization;  and   real


1  Ibid.,  p.  231  ff.

2  Ibid.,  p.  232  ff.     Voodoo  Tales,  p.  174.

2  Dana,  M.,     Voodoo,  Metropolitan  Magazine,  vol.  28  (1908),  p.  529,  and  535.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  191

"hoodoo-men,"  who  inspire  the  fear  and  patronage  of
countless  superstitious  clients,  have  confided  to  me
that  they  have  long  wished  to  join  the  voodoo  society,
but  years  of  residence  in  New  Orleans  have  failed  to
bring  to  light  the  existence  of  any  such.  With  the
death  of  Marie  Laveau  "Voudouism  all  but  disappeared
from  New  Orleans.  The  little  that  is  practiced  today
assumes  a  harmless  form;  a  few  chicken  bones  placed
on  a  doorstep,  a  black  cross-mark  on  the  front  board,
a  bright  red  powder  sprinkled  on  the  banquette;  these
are  the  last  vestiges  of  the  once-dreaded  'gris-gris.'  "  ^
So  great  was  the  number  of  voodoo  imposters  prac-
ticing their  profession  among  the  Negroes  of  New
Orleans  that  in  July,  1886,  the  Board  of  Health  was
compelled  to  interfere  with  a  view  to  their  suppression.  ^
Many  are  still  there  today,  but  they  are  'ess  open  in
their  methods.  I  located  several  during  my  stay  there
the  past  summer,  and  several  Negroes  have  testified
to  spending  often  as  high  as  3500  for  their  services  in
the  treatment  of  ills — physical,  mental,  family  or
otherwise.  Personally  I  was  offered  $2S  for  a  cure  I
suggested  for  a  weak  back,  although  I  eventually
collected  my  reward  in  information  rather  than  in
money.  One  intelligent  Negro  cook  who  took  me  to
one  of  the  doctors,  who,  however,  steadily  refused  to
give  up  his  information,  told  me  of  his  extreme  success
in  using  charms  to  cure  her  brother  of  a  "wandering
mind."  Castellanos,  writing  in  1895,  says,  "The
prince  of  the  occult  science,  styling  himself  Don  Pedro,
is  now  the  recognized  head  of  the  sect,  and  his  adepts,
as  I  am  told,  are  legion.     The  police  have,  however,

*  Nott,  G.  W.,     Marie  Laveau,  Times  Picayune,  New   Orleans,   Nov.    19,
1922,  Magazine  Section,  p.  2.

2  Bruce,  P.  A.,     The  Plantation  Negro  as  a  Freedman,  p.  125  (note).


192      Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

nearly  broken  up  his  business,  having  compelled  him
to  go  Into  hiding.  He  Is  heard  of  sometimes  through
the  medium  of  the  press,  as  he  advertises  occasionally
as  a  healing  medium.  The  organization  of  the  Vou-
dous,  as  an  organization,  has  been  suppressed  in  a
great  measure  by  the  efforts  of  our  municipal  author-
ities." ^  Even  In  1894,  Fortier  mentions  much  the
same  condition  as  prevails  today:  "Although  this
sect  (Voudoux)  Is  nearly  extinct,  the  Negroes  are  still
very  much  afraid  of  their  witchcraft."  ^  Many  people
both  black  and  white,  today,  still  believe  in  the  power
of  the  "voodoo-doctor,"  but,  so  far  as  I  could  find  out,
their  methods  today  are  no  different  from  the  conjure
methods  of  the  ordinary  "root-doctor"  of  the  rural
South,  except  that  there  Is  a  greater  mixture  of  Cath-
olicism with  conjuration  in  New  Orleans  proper.
That  this  belief  In  voodooism  still  survives  is  shown
by  an  advertisement  of  a  New  Orleans  clairvoyant:

A  wish  obtained  without  voudouism;  please  call  on  Mme.
Genevieve,  etc.  ^

Modern  Voodoo  Seances.  In  her  Angel  by  Brevet,
Mrs.  Helen  Pitkin  (Schertz),  gives  two  very  interesting
accounts  of  these  modern  voodoo  seances.  Although
written  In  the  form  of  fiction  she  assures  me,  personally,
that  they  are  scientifically  accurate,  being  an  exact
reproduction  of  what  she  herself  has  seen  or  obtained
from  her  servants  and  absolutely  free  from  imagina-
tion.    This  past  summer  I  was  absolutely  unable  to


1  Castellanos,  H.  C,     New  Orleans  as  It  Was,   p.    99.     See  also,  Pitkin,
Helen,     An  Angel  by  Brevet,  Introduction,  p.  6.

2  Fortier,  Alcee.,     Louisiana  Customs,  p.  130.

^  Holton,  H.  C,     Fortune  Telling  in  America  Today,   J.  A.  F.   L.,  vol.  8
(1895),  p.  303.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  193

gain  admission  to  such  a  performance,  and  Mrs.
Pitkin  tells  me  that  with  the  exception  of  Sothern  and
Marlowe  she  has  also  been  unable,  in  spite  of  her  per-
sonal acquaintance  with  these  Wangateurs,  to  gain
an   audience  for   her  friends.

In  the  first  seance  she  tells  of  a  white  girl  calling
upon  a  Negro  voodoo-woman  to  obtain  help  in  winning
the  man  she  loves.  At  the  meeting,  the  girl  is  allowed
to  wear  nothing  black,  and  is  forced  to  remove  the
hairpins  from  her  hair,  lest  some  of  them  be  accidentally
crossed,  thus  spoiling  the  charm.  In  the  room  were
paintings  of  the  various  Catholic  saints  and  an  altar
before  which  was  a  saucer  containing  white  sand,
quicksilver,  and  molasses,  apexed  with  a  blue  candle
burning  for  Saint  Joseph  {Veriquite).  All  the  way
through,  there  is  this  strange  mixture  of  Catholicism
and  voodooism.  The  "Madam"  kneels  at  the  girl's
feet  and  intones  the  "Hail  Mary"  of  the  Church,  there
is  a  song  to  Liba  (voodoo  term  for  St.  Peter)  and
another  to  Blanc  Dani  (St.  Michael).  The  money
collected  for  the  seance  is  put  in  front  of  the  altar  with
the  sign  of  the  cross.

After  the  "obi-woman"  spewed  wine  upon  all  present,
she  sang  and  danced  until  the  frenzy  (spirit)  came
upon  her.  The  white  girl  was  asked  to  make  her  wish.
She  wished  for  the  obstacles  to  her  love  to  be  removed.
Gumbo  and  rice  were  served  from  the  pot — which
also  contained  snakes.  Then  the  girl  wrote  her  own
name,  her  rival's  name,  and  her  lover's  name  on
separate  slips  of  paper.  The  slip  containing  her
rival's  name  was  put  to  soak  in  a  dish  of  vinegar,
salt,  and  pepper,  while  her  name  and  her  lover's
name  were  dropped  into  a  dish  of  burning  whiskey.

13


194      Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

A  candle  with  seven  notches  in  it  was  handed  to  the
girl  with  the  instruction  to  burn  a  notch  each  night
for  seven  nights,  repeating  three  "Hail  Mary's"  each
time.  She  was  given  a  pinch  of  the  ^''poiv''  guine^^
from  the  saucer  and  told  to  put  five  grains  in  her  mouth
whenever  her  lover  came  near  her,  in  order  to  soften
him  towards  her.  Also,  when  he  first  entered  the  house
she  was  to  make  a  glass  of  sugared  water  with  bas-
ilique  and  throw  it  into  the  yard  with  her  back  towards
the  street.  Again  she  was  to  put  ^^poiv''  guine''^  and
clove  in  her  mouth  to  get  what  she  wanted  from  him;
she  must  put  a  piece  of  his  hair  where  the  cistern
water  could  splash  on  it;  and  she  was  to  keep  a  piece
of  lodestone  about  her  when  he  was  near  "to  ambition
him."

Three  knocks  broke  the  silence  of  the  room.  '''Grand
ZombiV  was  the  shout.  An  orgy  seized  the  Negro
spectators;  they  whooped  and  danced  and  shouted.
The  "Madam"  fell  dazed  and  awoke  as  from  a  deep
sleep.  All  knelt  before  the  shrine  and  began  the
litany  of  the  Blessed  Virgin.  The  girl  parted  with
five  dollars  more  for  the  sake  of  a  special  nineteen-day
intercession  with  St.  Michael,  and  was  ordered  to  go
to  St.  Rock  the  following  Friday  to  make  a  wish.  On
the  same  day  (Friday)  ^  she  was  to  cut  and  sew  some-
thing belonging  to  her  rival,  who  would  then  never
live  to  wear  it.  She  was  also  given  some  dust  from  a
murderer's  grave  with  the  instruction  to  rub  her
rival's  picture  with  it  and  to  carry  the  picture  upside
down  in  her  pocket,   thus  producing  death.     In  case


1  There  is  a  widespread  Negro  belief  that  if  a  garment  is  cut  out  for  a  person
on  Friday  that  person  will  never  live  to  wear  it.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  195

of  failure  of  these,  the  "Madam"  assured  the  girl  that
she  herself  had  laid  wanga  against  her  rival  and
that  she  must  die.  ^

In  the  other  case,  the  girl  applied  to  a  W angateur
to  break  a  spell  laid  against  her  house  and  to  cure  a
friend  of  fever.  Here  again  were  sacred  pictures  and
colored  candles  provided  by  the  "holy  store";  green,
white,  and  red  being  used  ordinarily,  but  black  being
best  to  "put  a  cross  on  somebody."  In  the  center
of  the  room  was  a  huge  black  candle,  bristling  with
countless  needles  and  pins,  all  threaded  with  black
cotton.  Now  and  then  steel  splinters  would  fall  as
the  burning  candle  released  them.  An  invocation
to  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit,  a  song,  ''''Vert
Agoussou^''  and  the  meeting  was  on.  The  girl  was
given  a  candle  blessed  by  the  voodoo  and  told  to  burn
it  and  make  a  cross  ''''au  nom  du  Pere''''  every  time  the
church  bell  rang.

Then  came  food — gumbo  with  lizards  in  it,  a  snake
in  a  platter  of  oil  (for  voodoos  only),  congri  beans  and
drink.  A  drum,  made  of  a  cured  cat-skin,  sounded.
The  doctor  worked  himself  into  convulsions  and
"CA<2r/o"  spoke  through  him  like  a  child.  The  doctor
then  advised  a  root  tea  for  the  sick  girl,  and  promised
to  let  loose  six  white  pigeons  for  the  crippled  lad — the
lad  being  cured  as  soon  as  they  all  crossed  water.
To  dispose  of  the  one  who  set  the  charm  against  her,
the  girl  was  advised  to  let  a  calf-tongue  dry  in  the  sun,
stick  it  full  of  pins  and  needles  threaded  with  black
thread,  and  hang  it  in  the  chimney  until  absolutely
dry.  Thus  her  enemy  would  not  be  able  to  speak
again;  her  tongue  would  dry  as  the  calf-tongue  dries.


1  Pitkin,  Helen,     An  Angel  by  Brevet,  pp.  182-212.


196      Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

A  magnet  was  given  the  girl  "to  draw  luck."  The
blackened  pins  falling  from  the  candle  were  also  given
her  with  the  instruction  to  put  them  in  the  cemetery
with  a  dollar  and  fifteen  cents,  thus  causing  her  enemy
to  die.

Graveyard  dirt  was  thrown  upon  the  company,  a
screech  owl  hooted  outside,  the  doctor  went  off  again
into  convulsions,  seized  a  black  cat  which  slunk  through
the  room,  choked  it  to  death,  tore  the  flesh  open  and
sucked  the  warm  life-blood  (Mrs.  Pitkin  again  as-
sures me  of  the  truth  of  this  statement)  and  the
meeting  was  over.  ^

In  Other  Localities.  Such  beliefs  are  by  no  means
confined  to  New  Orleans,  although  there  the  Catholic
element  is  more  in  evidence.  In  1885  it  was  estimated
that  in  Atlanta,  perhaps  a  hundred  old  men  and
women  practiced  voodooism  as  a  profession,  telling
fortunes,  locating  lost  and  stolen  goods,  furnishing
love  philters,  and  casting  spells  upon  people  and  cat-
tle. 2  Such  incantatory  beliefs  are  found  in  the
Northern  states  as  well,  even  in  cities  such  as  Phil-
adelphia 3  and  Pittsburg.  ^  "The  Obeah  men  of  the
West  Indies  have  many  clients  in  the  United  States,
and  a  recent  issue  of  the  New  York  Age  announced
that  the  Negro  quarter  around  135th  Street,  New
York,  was  overrun  with  fortune  tellers  and  witch
doctors,  many  or  most  of  them  from  the  West  In-
dies." ^     But  these  practices  are  simply  remnants  of


'  Pitkin,  Helen,     An  Angel  by  Brevet,  pp.  258-88.

^Concerning  Negro  Sorcery  in  the  United  States,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  3  (1890),
p.  28L

^  Culin,  S.,  Reports  Concerning  Voodooism,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  2  (1889),
p.  223.

*  Cleveland  News,  Cleveland,  Ohio,  vol.  82,  No.  284  (Nov.  11,  1923).

*  Park,  R.  E.,  Magic,  Mentality  and  City  Life,  Pub.  Amer.  Soc.  Society,
vol.  xviii  (1924),  p.  114.  My  own  observations  in  Harlem  lead  to  similar
conclusions.


VoODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  197

what  was  once  voodoo  or  its  African  equivalent,  and
known  better  to  the  Negroes  as  "hoodoo,"  "goofer,"
"tricking,"  "witching,"  "conjuring,"  or  "handicap-
ping," We  now  turn  to  a  consideration  of  the  nature
of  this  modern  Negro  magic.

The  African  Witch-doctor.  One  of  the  highest  fac-
tors In  successful  conjuration  Is  the  conjure-doctor,  ^
and  in  the  case  of  the  Southern  Negro  this  Individual
shows  many  traits  In  common  with  his  African  pro-
totype. In  Africa  the  native  witch-doctor  or  medicine-
man Is  simply  another  kind  of  fetish,  the  man-fetish;
and  it  is  the  spirit  within  the  man  and  not  the  man
himself,  which  is  revered.  Probably  In  the  greater
number  of  cases  the  medicine-man  holds  his  office
because  of  some  peculiarity  which  is  best  explained  by
the  hypothesis  of  an  Indwelling  spirit.

The  Man-fetish.  In  the  Congo  region  a  young  man
attracts  attention  because  of  his  unusual  success  In
fishing,  hunting,  warfare,  or  other  activities.  This
success  is  accounted  for  by  attributing  It  to  some
supernatural  agency  or  to  some  charm  possessed  by
the  young  man,  who  exploits  this  belief  and  imparts
his  power  to  others — for  a  consideration.  Gradually
he  builds  up  his  reputation.  By  a  judicious  use  of
charms  procured  from  well-known  fetish-men  and  by
the  use  of  his  imagination,  he  gradually  accumulates
many  charms — different  herbs,  stones,  pieces  of  wood
antelope  horns  and  skins,  and  feathers,  tied  in  artistic
bundles.  Finally  he  becomes  a  fetish-man  himself.
Almost  invariably  this  Is  the  way  the  thing  starts.  -

^  For  a  general  discussion  of  medicine-men,  see  Maddox,  J.  L.,  The  Medi-
cine  Man,   pp.   22-71,    91-131.

^  Glave,  E.  J.,  Fetishism  in  Congo  Land,  Century  Magazine,  vol.  19  (1891),
p.  829.


198      Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

"The  order  of  Fetish-men  is  further  augmented  by
persons  who  declare  that  the  fetish  has  suddenly
seized  on  them.  A  series  of  convulsions  and  un-
natural distortions  establish  their  claim."  ^  "Great
endurance  in  dancing,  and  falling  into  convulsions
are  chief  qualifications  in  the  Gold  Coast  Fetishman."  2
"Among  the  Gallas,  when  a  woman  grows  tired  of  the
cares  of  housekeeping  she  begins  to  talk  incoherently
and  to  demean  herself  extravagantly.  This  is  a  sign
of  the  descent  of  the  holy  spirit,  Callo,  upon  her.
Immediately  her  husband  prostrates  himself  and
adores  her;  she  ceases  to  bear  the  humble  title  of  wife
and  is  called,  'Lord';  domestic  duties  have  no  further
claim  on  her,  and  her  will  is  divine  law."  ^  The  high
priest  of  the  Ibos  induces  this  "possession"  by  starving
for  several  days,  by  drinking  nothing  but  water,  by
enforced  constipation,  and  by  immersing  himself  in
the  river  from  four  to  seven  days  at  a  stretch.  He  is
then  consulted  regarding  the  future  of  the  country.  ^
I  fancy  any  of  us  could  prophesy  under  similar
treatment.

In  other  ways  the  priests  or  sorcerers  try  to  create
an  atmosphere  of  "queerness"  to  be  explained  by
spirit  possession.  Some  will  wear  a  black  cat's  skin
around  their  neck,  ^  others  will  study  ventriloquism,
sleight-of-hand,  the  medical  properties  of  herbs,  or
spend  their  time  unearthing  family  secrets  with  which
to  astonish  their  clients.  ^     One  Congo  medicine-man


1  Kingsley,  M.  H.,     West  African  Studies,  p.  17L

^  Cruickshank,  B.,     Eighteen    Years  on  the   Gold  Coast   of  Africa,   vol.   ii,
p.  142.

3  Frazer,  J.  G.,     The  Golden  Bough,  p.  98.

*  Ibid.,  p.  23L

'  Cardinal  A.  W.,     The  Natives  of  the  Northern  Territories  of  the  Gold  Coast,
p.  30.

*  Ellis,  A.  B.,      T shi-speaking  Peoples,  pp.  127-28.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  199

had  a  charm  which  he  said  would  whistle  if  it  could
cure  the  person  applying  for  help.  To  the  observer's
surprise  the  medicine-horn  apparently  did  emit  a
wheezy  whistle  when  held  out  at  arm's  length  by  the
fetish-man.  However,  when  pressed  for  further  in-
formation (and  paid  for  it),  the  medicine-man  secretly
showed  the  observer  that  he  had  made  the  sound  by
means  of  a  perforated  bean,  which  he  had  concealed  in
his  nostril.  ^  However,  the  indwelling  spirit  is  not
always  induced  by  acquired  peculiarities.  In  many
cases  a  person  is  "born  different,"  and  to  explain  this
difference  or  queerness  the  same  old  indwelling-spirit-
explanation  is  brought  forward.  Thus  in  many  tribes
albinos  ^  and  even  insane  persons,  ^  are  regarded  with
special  reverence.

Professional  Obligations.  Among  the  Orimbunda,
as  in  nearly  all  parts  of  Africa,  the  witch-doctor  is  an
important  personage.  "He  is  feared  by  all  classes,
and  often  has  more  influence  and  power  than  the
chief  himself.  Whenever  anything  is  lost  or  stolen,
they  apply  to  the  witch-doctor  to  find  out  where  the
object  is,  or  who  is  the  thief.  As  no  one  is  supposed
to  die  a  natural  death,  the  doctor  is  called  in  to  discover
the  witch  who  caused  the  death.  To  him  they  go
for  all  kinds  of  charms  to  protect  themselves  against
all  evils,  or  to  cast  a  spell  on  some  one  whom  they  wish
to  injure;  to  him  they  also  go  for  help  in  cases  of
sickness.  He  is  also  a  diviner,  reading  both  the  past
and   future.     At   all   spirit  feasts,   at   the   installation

^  Glave,  E.  J.,  Fetishism  in  Congo  Land,  Century  Magazine,  vol.  19  (1891),
p.  836.

*  Koelle,  Rev.  S.  M.,  African  Native  Literature  (Kanuri  Proverbs),  p.  401.
Ellis,  A.  B.,  Tshi-speaking  Peoples,  pp.  48-49.  Kingsley,  M.  H.,  Travels
in  West  Africa,  p.  513.

^  Nassau,  R.  H.,     Fetichism  in  West  Africa,  p.  118  and  272.


200      Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

of  a  new  chief,  in  preparation  for  war,  and  on  almost
every  occasion,  the  witch-doctor  plays  a  prominent
part.  He  bears  an  influential  position  among  his
people,  and  his  art  is  the  source  of  a  considerable  in-
come, for  always  before  he  begins  operations,  the  pay
must  be  brought  and  laid  down  before  him.  Thus
it  Is  that  he  is  loath  to  part  with  even  a  few  of  his
charms,  much  less  a  full  set."  ^  Much  the  same  thing
is  true  of  the  witch-doctor  in  Sierra  Leone.  In  their
case  "the  practice  of  this  profession  is  usually  confined
to  certain  families,  the  secrets  of  the  profession  being
handed  down  from  father  to  son.  Only  one  member  of
the  family  practices  at  the  same  time,  although  he
may  have  a  number  of  assistants  who  are  commonly
members  of  the  family.  Some  of  these  witch-doctors
profess  to  be  able  to  name  and  trace  their  ancestors
back  to  a  remote  period."  -  These  West  African
priests  are  applied  to  in  almost  every  concern  of  life,
from  naming  children  Ho  exposing  thieves,  adulteresses,
and  slanderers,  not  to  mention  the  thousand  and  one
bits  of  oblism  for  averting  misfortune  and  procuring
good  luck.  ■*  In  spite  of  the  prestige  of  the  witch-
doctor, his  occupation  is  not  without  its  dangers.
Miss  KIngsley  says,  "It  is  risky  work  for  them,  for
spirits  are  a  risky  set  to  deal  with."  ^  With  this
word  of  appreciation  we  again  turn  to  a  consideration
of  the  Afro-American  witch-doctor.

The  Southern  Hoodoo-doctor.  On  the  Sea  Islands  this
personage  is  known  as  the  "root-doctor,"  "wood-
doctor,"  "nigger-doctor,"  "fortune-teller,"  "witchcraft-


1  Dorsey,  G.  A.,     The   Odnibanda,  or    Witch-doctor    of    the    Orimhunda    of
Portuquese  Southwest  Africa,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  12  (1899),  pp.  183-84.

2  Beatty,  K.  J.,     Human  Leopards,  p.  24.

2  t'llis,  A.  B.,     Ewe-speaking  Peoples,  p.  154.

*  Ibid.,     Tshi-speaking  Peoples,  p.  124.

*  Kingsley,  M.  H.,     West  African  Studies,  pp.  178-79.


;

^

^-^

?«r

i

'^^Bm"

MISSISSIPPI  HOODO-DOCTORS


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  201

woman,"  or  infrequently  as  the  "goofer-doctor."  i
The  term  "root-doctor"  is  common  through  the  South,
as  is  also  "hoodoo-doctor."  One  Mississippi  Negro
mentioned  the  term  "two-facer"  as  applied  to  con-
jurers, 2  and  with  the  prairie  Negroes  near  Columbus,
Miss.,  the  term  "horse"  ^  is  used  for  them  just  as  it  was
used  in  old  New  Orleans  to  mean  a  voodoo  priestess,  *
thus  showing  how  elements  of  African  culture  may
spread  from  one  locality  to  another.  The  term
"Wangateur"  is  also  often  used  in  New  Orleans.  ^
In  Africa  the  witch-doctor  is  usually  selected  because
of  some  physical  or  mental  peculiarity  which  shows
him  to  be  possessed  of  a  spirit.  I  have  noticed  that
the  American  witch-doctor  is  also  possessed  of  unusual
mentality  and  often  shows  physical  peculiarities  as
well.  Miss  Owen  mentions  a  "Witcheh-man"  as
having  a  whopple-jaw,  a  hare-lip,  a  lop-side,  a  crooked
leg,  one  eye  like  fire  and  the  other  eye  dead.  ^  Ed
Murphy,  a  Mississippi  conjure-doctor,  who  is  held  in
awe  by  many  of  the  Negroes  of  the  locality,  and  to
whom  I  am  greatly  indebted  for  voodoo-lore,  has
three  birthmarks  on  his  left  arm  (representing  the
Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost),  a  "luck  mole"  on  his
right  arm,  he  is  "chicken-breasted"  (which  means  that
he  can  never  have  consumption),  was  born  with  a  caul
on  his  face,  and  has  (so  he  says)  kinky  hair  on  the  sides
of  his  head  and  straight  hair  on  top.  His  face  (see
frontispiece)  shows  considerable  personality,  and  these
traits,  coupled  with  his  habit  of  living  off  by  himself

1  Parsons,  E.  C,     Folk-Lore  of  (he  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.F.L.  S.,  vol.  16
(1923),  pp.  211-12.

2  153.

3  348.

*  Cable,  G.  W.,     The  Grandissimes,  p.  68.

6  277.

6  Owen,  Mary  A.,     Voodoo  Tales,  pp.  218-19.


202      Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

and  attending  to  his  own  business,  give  him  a  tre-
mendous influence  with  the  Negroes  of  that  locality.
Another  informant  describes  the  "hoodoo"  as  always
having  a  wizened  face  and  red  eyes.  ^  Old  folks
(with  their  peculiar  ways)  are  particularly  liable  to
be  hoodoos,  ~  while  one  Louisiana  conjurer  was  afflicted
with  a  skin  disease  whereby  he  first  became  spotted
and  then  changed  in  color  to  a  sort  of  pinkish-white.  ^
Often,  besides  extreme  redness  of  eyes,  the  conjure-
doctor  is  tall  and  dark.  He  is  always  in  a  deep  study,
looking  at  some  distant  object,  and,  so  one  informant
says,  in  contradiction  to  my  own  observations,  never
looking  a  person  straight  in  the  eyes.  They  sleep  like
a  cat,  waking  up  at  the  slightest  noise  or  pain,  and
telling  their  own  fortunes  to  see  if  any  one  is  trying  to
injure  them.  "One  conjure-doctor  is  pictured  as
having  the  remarkable  gift  of  turning  as  green  as
grass  most,  and  when  he  was  just  as  black  as  a  man
could  well  be;  and  his  hair  covered  his  neck  and
around  his  neck  he  had  a  string,  and  he  had  lizards
tied  on  it.  He  carried  a  crooked  cane  (so  does  Ed  Mur-
phy). He'd  throw  it  down  and  he  would  pick  it  up
and  say  something,  and  throw  it  down,  and  it  would
wiggle  like  a  snake,  and  he  would  pick  it  up  and  it
would  be  as  stiff  as  any  other  cane."  Often  they  go
around  with  a  very  sanctified  air  with  leathern  bags
on  their  arms.  *

Other  Peculiarities.  In  one  Gullah  district,  Sabey,
whom  the  Negroes  feared  because  of  his  ability  to
throw    spells,   was   "a    queer,    misshapen    mulatto,    al-

1 15L  Smiley  P.,  Folk-Lore  from  Va.,  S.  C,  Ga.,  Ala.,  and  Fla.,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  32  (1919),  p.   379.

2  305.

3  18.

*  Southern  Workman,  vol.  24  (1895),  p.  118.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  203

most  an  albino,  with  green  eyes  and  yellow  wool
lighting  and  thatching  a  shrewd  and  twisted,  though
good-natured  monkey  face,"  ^  "Pig-Tail  Charley,"
the  grandson  of  a  witch,  was  "a  po',  peakedy,  no-
'count  HI'  young  'un,  wid  a  whopple  (awry)  jaw,  a
blin'  eye,  an'  a  shriveled  laig,"  but  he  played  the
Pied  Piper  in  that  the  pigs  listened  to  his  whistle-call
and  followed  him  into  a  bluff  which  closed  in  after
them.  2  Other  Negroes,  possibly  because  of  seeing  a
side-show  magician,  or  because  of  a  confusion  of
"hoodoo"  with  "Hindu,"  describe  the  hoodoo-man
as  follows:  "The  hoodoo-man  usually  wears  a  turban
on  his  head,  wears  a  Turkish  dress  with  bloomer  pants.
He  never  walks  any  place  but  always  rides  in  a  buggy.
He  is  a  very  short,  heavy-set  man,  and  usually  weighs
about  three  hundred  pounds.  He  always  wears  a
moustache  so  that  you  cannot  see  his  mouth,  and  has
a  very  dark  complexion."  ^  Others  say  that  hoodoo-
men,  who  always  have  long  hair  and  beards,  always
carry  a  loaded  cane  with  which  they  tell  whether  you
are  honest  or  not.  ■*  Dr.  H.  Roger  Williams  of  Mobile,
Alabama,  who  has  had  many  experiences  with  all
types  of  conjurers,  writes  me  as  follows  about  the
hoodoo-doctor:  "He  usually  wears  a  long  Prince
Albert  coat,  that  shows  signs  of  having  been  in  service
many  years.  His  hair  is  seldom,  if  ever,  combed,  his
shoes,  in  many  instances,  are  tied  on  his  feet  with
white  strings,  eyes  typical  of  sensuality,  and  his  boast,
the  fact  that  he  has  never  been  to  school  a  day  in  his
life — knowing    nothing   but   what    he    has    learned    of


1  Gonzales,  A.  E.,     The  Black  Border,  p.  107.

2  Owen,  Mary  A.,     Pig-Tail  Charley,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  16  (1903),  p.  59.

3  341.
*345.


204      Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

God.  His  credentials  show  him  to  be  an  ordained
minister,  and  he  invariably  introduces  himself  as
Reverend  Doctor.  With  absolute  assurance  in  his
tone  of  voice,  he  makes  no  effort  to  give  a  reason  for
anything,  but  dogmatically  asserts  his  God-given
power  to  heal  all  manner  of  diseases.  'Chile,  her
sickness  ain't  nat'ul,  and  edicated  doctor's  medicine
is  pintedly  ag'in  it!'  is  a  common  expression  met  with
in  the  sick  room  as  soon  as  a  physician  has  left  the
room  of  a  patient  in  a  neighborhood  where  a  hoodoo-
doctor  has  once  been,  and  often  his  skill  is  baffled  by
doubt."  ^  Conjuration  on  the  part  of  a  blue-gummed
Negro  or  a  Negro  with  one  eye  black  and  the  other
blue  is  unduly  effective  and  death  usually  results.  ^
"A  blue-gummed  Nigger,"  so  one  old  conjure-doctor
says,  "is  a  'Ponton,'  a  cross  'twixt  a  horse  and  a  man,
and  ef  he  bites  you  hit's  shore  death."  ^  This  idea
of  a  bite  from  a  blue-gummed  Negro  being  fatal  has
considerable  spread  throughout  the  South,  ^  In  the
animal  world  the  woodpecker  is  looked  upon  as  being
always  a  conjurer,  ^  possibly  accounting  for  the  fact
that  the  constant  tapping  of  this  bird  upon  the  roof
of  the  house  is  regarded  as  an  omen  of  death.  ^

Visions  and  Metamorphosis.  Nat  Turner,  who  led
the  insurrection  in  Virginia  in  1831,  was  mentally
precocious  and  had  marks  on  his  head  and  breast
which  were  interpreted  by  the  Negroes  who  knew  him
as  marking  him  for  some  high  calling.     As  he  worked  in


1397.

2 141.  Steiner,  R.,  Observations  on  the  Practice  of  Conjuring  in  Georgia,
J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  14  (1901),  p.  177.

391.

4  345.  Davis,  H.  C,  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,  J.A.F.  L.,  vol.  27  (1914),
p.  248.

6 141.     Owen,  Mary  A.,     Voodoo  Tales,  p.  54.

8  141.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  205

the  fields  he  saw  drops  of  blood  on  the  corn,  and  he
also  saw  white  spirits  and  black  spirits  contending
in  the  skies.  An  eclipse  of  the  sun  in  February  1831,
was  interpreted  as  the  sign  for  him  to  go  forward.  ^
This  matter  of  vision  is  not  uncommon.  Ed  Murphy
lies  down  on  his  back  at  night,  folds  his  arms,  and  a
whole  troop  of  visions  swing  into  sight.  He  can  see
his  enemies  coming;  can  see  the  future.  He  lives  by
himself  a  lot  and  meditates;  does  not  like  to  be  bothered
by  other  folks.  By  looking  through  a  clear  pebble
dipped  in  water  he  claims  to  be  able  to  induce  these
visions — in  much  the  same  manner  as  crystal  gazing
with  more  advanced  people.  This  "beauty  rock,"
by  the  way,  is  the  same  sort  of  stone  that  David  used
to  kill  Goliath,  thus  bringing  in  a  reign  of  peace.
Carry  one  in  your  pocket  and  you,  too,  will  have
peace.  ^  Ed  Murphy  is  very  religious — intensely  so,  as
are  most  of  the  other  conjure-doctors  of  my  acquaint-
ance— and  is  the  "main-exhorter"  at  revival  meeting
time,  his  impressive  personality  scaring  timid  souls
into  the  Kingdom  as  well  as  into  the  insane
asylum.  Mrs.  V.  F.  Boyle  informs  me  that  this  sort
of  thing  is  common,  there  being  good  and  bad  hoodoos,
the  good  hoodoo  often  being  part  hoodoo  and  part
preacher.  ^  Often  a  hoodoo-doctor  is  supposed  to  have
the  ability  of  changing  into  animal  forms.  A  scared
Negro  told  me  of  seeing  Ed  Murphy  change  himself
into  a  cow  and  then  into  a  cat.  *  Ed  does  not  deny
doing  it — such  stories  increase  his  prestige.     Shadrach,

'  Brawley,  B.,     Social  History  of  the  American  Negro,  p.  141.

2  258.

»42.

M04.


206      Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

a  hoodoo,  had  the  power  of  getting  out  of  his  skin  and
taking  an  animal  form,  such  as  a  screech  owl.  Often-
times he  lent  his  skin  to  the  devil  to  go  about  in.  ^

A  Self-made  Hoodoo-doctor.  Such  are  the  chief
characteristics  which  Negro  public  opinion  sets  down
as  being  those  of  the  conjuring  profession.  Suffice  it  to
observe  that  in  almost  all  cases  the  conjure-doctor  is  a
peculiar  individual,  set  aside  because  of  his  very-
peculiarity  for  dealings  with  the  supernatural.  Not
always  are  the  conjure-doctors  Negroes;  sometimes
white  women  assume  the  role  for  the  sake  of  the  rewards
to  be  gained  by  successful  imposture.  ^  After  being
asked  to  pay  320  for  some  trifling  information  by
Negroes,  whom  I  had  good  reason  to  believe,  were
hoodoos,  I  finally  adopted  the  role  of  conjure-doctor
myself,  in  order  to  be  able  to  discuss  the  tricks  of  the
trade  as  hoodoo  to  hoodoo  without  having  to  live  the
rest  of  my  life  on  "half-rations."  Even  conjurers
are  not  without  their  professional  spirit,  and  I  found
them  quite  willing  to  swap  clinical  knowledge  and  even
materia  medica  with  one,  once  they  believed  him  to
be  a  "rale  trick-doctor."  No,  I  have  no  whopple-jaw
nor  blue  gums,  but  I  do  have  a  startling  collection  of
red  flannel  rags,  rabbit's  feet,  lodestone  and  steel  filings,
an  Egyptian  idol,  a  "jack,"  graveyard  dirt,  voodoo
charms  from  New  Orleans,  and  some  knowledge  of
Negro  conjuration  practices  along  with  imagination
enough  to  conjure  up  missing  details  when  necessary.
By  a  promiscuous  display  of  this  equipment  I  soon
had  patients  seeking  my  aid,  and  my  truly  spectacular
"tricks"  soon  convinced  even  the  hard-shelled  hoodoos
that  I  was  one  of  the  gang.

1  Boyle,  Mrs.  V.  F.,     Devil  Tales,  p.  81  ff.
^Southern  Workman,  vol.  26  (1897),  p.  37.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  207

Professional  Duties.  One  of  the  first  things  we
conjure-doctors  have  to  do  is  to  diagnose  the  case,  tell
the  person  whether  he  is  conjured  or  not  (he  usually
is  if  some  of  the  less  ethical  members  of  the  profession
get  hold  of  him)  and  to  find  out  who  "layed  de  trick."
The  "trick"  (charm)  must  be  found  and  destroyed  and
the  patient  cured.  If  the  patient  wishes  we  must  also
be  able  to  turn  the  trick  back  upon  the  one  who  set
it.  Besides  this,  a  conjurer  truly  up  in  his  profession
must  be  able  to  lay  haunts,  and  to  locate  buried  treasure
or  a  vein  of  water.  The  treasure  trove  may  be  found
by  taking  a  divining  rod  (a  small  branch  with  two  side
limbs  running  off  in  the  shape  of  a  "V"),  driving  a  nail
in  the  end  of  each  branching  twig  and  in  the  spot  where
they  converge,  holding  these  twig  ends  in  the  hands,
and  marching  boldly  over  the  suspected  landscape.
When  you  pass  over  the  buried  treasure  the  free  end
will  be  pulled  suddenly  towards  the  ground.  Or,
simpler  still,  you  may  put  three  pieces  of  brass  in  your
right  hand,  keeping  them  well  separated.  Sniff  oc-
casionally and  when  you  pass  over  the  buried  treasure
you  will  find  that  the  brass  will  automatically  begin
to  smell.  Water  may  be  located  by  a  similar  rod  with-
out the  nails;  or  if  you  observe  a  tree  in  the  locality
with  the  limbs  longer  on  one  side  than  on  the  other,
the  tree  bending  somewhat  in  that  direction,  you  may
be  reasonably  sure  that  a  vein  of  water  is  located  be-
neath the  surface  of  the  earth  on  that  side.  ^  The
divining  rod  idea  is,  of  course,  European.  ~

Satisfied  Patients.  A  notable  thing  about  the  con-
jure-doctor   is    the   fact   that   he   usually   satisfies    his

^  141.     Compare  Steiner,   R.,     Superstitious  Beliefs  from    Central  Georgia,
J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  12  (1889),  p.  271.
2  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  346.


208      Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

patients.  I  tested  this  out  on  my  own  clients.  When
I  made  a  "trick"  I  would  charge  25  cents  down,  let
the  Negro  keep  the  charm  for  a  week,  and  if  it  satisfied
him  he  was  then  to  pay  me  32  more.  While  I  always
excused  myself  from  the  $2  on  the  basis  of  special
friendship,  in  very  few  cases  was  my  client  unwilling
to  pay  the  money.  True  there  is  often  trickery.  In
one  case  an  old  Negro  woman  was  taken  sick.  A
scheming  conjure-doctor  at  once  buried  a  bottle
containing  human  hair,  graveyard  dirt,  and  two
small  sticks  in  the  path  leading  to  her  spring.  He  told
her  she  was  conjured  and  offered  to  find  the  conjure
for  310.  Roaming  over  the  location  with  a  little  iron
rod  he  located  the  charm  he  had  buried,  broke  the
bottle  and  buried  it  in  the  middle  of  the  public  road,
giving  the  old  woman  some  roots  to  chew.  The  woman
gladly  paid  the  310  and,  strange  to  say,  recovered —
illustrating  the  power  of  mind  over  body.  Although
the  trick  was  exposed  she  still  believes  that  she  was
conjured  and  that  she  was  cured  by  the  doctor.  ^  In
another  case,  a  man  had  "a  rising"  on  his  arm.  The
conjure-doctor  slipped  a  lizard  into  a  poultice  which  he
bound  on  the  sore;  and  later,  taking  the  poultice  off,
told  the  man  he  was  conjured  and  had  lizards  in  his
arm.  Although  the  hoodoo-doctor  collected  consider-
able money  in  an  attempt  to  cure  the  trouble,  the
patient  finally  died,  thinking  to  the  last  that  he  had
reptiles  in  his  arm.  ^

Like  all  other  medicine-men,  the  conjure-doctor
often  uses  his  ready  wit  to  keep  his  patient  satisfied
in    case    the   charm   does    not   work.     A    slavery-time


'  Steiner,    R.,     Observations  on  the  Practice  of  Conjuring  in  Georgia,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  voL  14  (1901),  pp.  175-76.
2342.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  209

"trick-doctor"  gave  one  of  the  slaves  a  "hand"  (charm)
that  was  supposed  to  enable  him  to  "cuss  out"  the
master  without  being  harmed.  He  tried  this  and  was
given  a  terrific  whipping.  On  complaining  to  the
trick  doctor  he  was  told,  "I  gl'  you  a  runnin'  han!  (a
charm  which  would  give  the  possessor  swiftness  of
foot).     Why  didn't  yer  run.?"  ^

Common  Sense  Treatment.  A  little  common  sense
mixed  with  the  charm  will  often  bring  the  desired
result  whether  the  charm  itself  works  or  not.  A
New  Orleans  "hoodoo-man"  sold  a  suitor  some  "French
Love  Powder"  (sugar  of  milk  in  this  case)  for  $S.  He
was  to  sprinkle  this  upon  whatever  he  gave  to  the
woman,  but  he  was  always  to  take  her  something  she
liked  and  lots  of  it;  he  was  never  to  cross  the  woman
nor  make  her  mad  no  matter  how  much  she  annoyed
him  or  flirted  with  other  men;  he  was  to  show  her  on
every  occasion  that  he  was  interested  in  her  alone.
A  few  months  later  the  man  came  back  singing  the
praise  of  the  conjurer,  and  introduced  to  him  the
woman,  who,  by  his  wonderful  love-powder  was
induced  to  become  his  wife.  ^  A  "conjure-woman"  in
Algiers,  La.,  was  given  $S  for  a  bottle  of  medicine
(lemonade)  to  break  a  husband  of  quarreling.  Her
directions  were  for  the  unhappy  wife  to  fill  her  mouth
with  the  medicine  whenever  her  good  man  began  to
quarrel  and  not  to  swallow  it  until  he  had  ceased.
Then  she  was  to  swallow  the  medicine  and  kiss  him.
So  successful  was  this  treatment  that  several  wives
came  to  the  doctor  upon  recommendation  for  the  same
prescription.  ^

1  Smiley,  P.,  Folk-Lore  from  Va.,  S.  C,  Ga.,  Ala.,  and  Fla.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  32  (19191,  p.  365.

2  397.
^  lUd.

14


210       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Evasive  Instructions.  In  case  the  "trick"  fails  to
work,  there  are  always  the  mystifying  instructions  to
aid  the  conjurers  in  evasion.  For  one  love-charm  the
following  was  prescribed:  Take  nine  "u"  nails,  a  piece
of  graveyard  dirt,  one  quart  of  vinegar,  one  quart  of
"May  water"  (water  caught  from  the  first  rain  in  May),
mix  them  together  and  boil  them  down  to  one-half
quantity.  Take  it  off  the  fire,  let  it  cool  and  stand  for
nine  days,  then  fill  the  vessel  to  its  original  quantity,
using  equal  parts  of  vinegar  and  "May  water."  Let
this  stand  for  nine  more  days,  then  put  into  a  jug  and
cork  up  tightly.  For  nine  nights  after  sundown,  go
to  the  woman's  house  and  sprinkle  some  of  this  around
in  her  yard  where  she  will  walk  over  it.  On  the  tenth
night  propose  to  her  and  she  will  accept  you  without
fail  (note  that  28  days  are  allowed  for  events  to  take
their  natural  course).  The  charm  failed  but  the
"joker"  lay  in  the  order  for  nine  "u"  nails.  The  poor
suitor  had  used  nine  "new"  nails — while  the  conjurer
had  advised  nine  "used"  nails.  If  the  "used  nails  had
been  employed  the  conjurer  could  still  escape  by  claim-
ing to  have  advised  nine  "new"  nails.  At  any  rate  the
suitor  paid  five  more  dollars  for  a  box  of  "French  Love
Powder"  that  had  been  "smuggled  over  from  France,"
and  went  on  his  quest  still  hopeful.  ^  One  conjure-
woman  in  Algiers,  La.,  claims  to  collect  from  fifty
to  two  hundred  and  fifty  dollars  per  week  when  business
is  good,  often,  giving  as  many  as  twenty-five  Negroes
"hands"  to  win  in  the  same  gambling  game.  She  says,
"It  is  amusing  to  see  how  easily  satisfied  they  are  with
an  explanation  if  they  come  back  claiming  to  have
failed,  invariably  paying  a  larger  sum  to  get  a  better
hand."  2


1397.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  211

In  Africa.  Precisely  the  same  sort  of  thing  is  found
with  the  African  witch-doctor.  "The  hunter  going
out,  certain  of  success,  returns  empty-handed;  the
warrior  bearing  on  his  breast  a  fetish  panoply,  which
he  is  confident  will  turn  aside  a  bullet,  comes  back
wounded;  every  one  is  some  day  foiled  in  his  cherished
plan.  Do  they  lose  their  faith  .f"  No,  not  in  the
system— their  fetishism — but  in  the  special  material
object  of  their  faith — their  fetish — they  do.  Going
to  the  oganga  whom  they  paid  for  concocting  that  now
disappointing  amulet,  they  tell  him  of  its  failure.  He
readily  replies:  'Yes,  I  know.  You  have  an  enemy
who  possesses  a  fetish  containing  a  spirit  more  power-
ful than  yours,  which  made  your  bullet  miss  its  mark,
which  caused  your  opponent's  spear  to  wound  you.
Yours  is  no  longer  of  use;  it  is  dead.  Come,  pay  me,
and  I  will  make  you  a  charm  containing  a  spirit  still
more  powerful.'  "  ^

Out-hoodooing  the  Hoodoos.  But  this  sort  of  decep-
tion is  not  deliberate  with  all  Negro  conjure-doctors.
Most  of  them  I  have  seen,  believe  very  firmly  in  the
materials  they  prescribe  and  are  willing  to  use  charms
prescribed  for  them.  I  shall  never  forget  the  time  I
had  to  imagine  a  special  "trick"  for  backache  for  a
conjure-doctor  of  New  Orleans,  who,  in  spite  of  his
skill  in  treating  others  was  not  able  to  cure  himself.
In  order  to  obtain  important  information  regarding
his  methods  it  was  necessary  that  I  quickly  produce  an
unusual  charm  to  cure  his  ailing  back — my  remedy  was
an  amazing  mixture  of  voodoo,  thin  air.  Scripture,  and
scientific  fact.  In  brief,  I  told  him  that  man  was  made
of  clay  and  that  it  would  take  clay  to  patch  him  up.

^  Nassau,  R.  H.,     Fetichism  in  West  Africa,  pp.  85-86.


212     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

The  earthworms  are  the  spirit  of  clay  (this  from  an
old  Negro  slave)  and  lively  earthworms  must  be  fried
in  fresh  lard  (the  hog  is  a  dirty  animal).  Mix  some
asafoetida  or  strong  perfume  (strong  smell)  with
this,  since  strength  is  the  thing  you  are  striving  for.
Get  some  hair  from  a  strong  man  (Sampson's  strength
lay  in  his  hair),  burn  it  and  mix  it  with  the  ointment,
stirring  it  always  UP  and  repeating,  "Sam-son!  Sam-
son!" with  each  stroke.  Be  earnest  and  concentrate
on  strength  and  power.  Then  get  some  bark  from  the
north  side  (strong  side)  of  a  big  oak  tree  (I  helped  him
gather  this  myself),  powder  it  and  mix  in  the  same
way,  saying,  "Sam-son!  Sam-son!"  with  each  stroke.
Finally,  get  a  small  strand  of  steel  cable  (strength  and
flexibility)  and  boil  it  in  vinegar  (strong  taste).  Keep
all  these  ingredients  separate  until  the  new  moon,  then
mix  them,  pounding  an  upturned  dish-pan  with  a
stick  in  the  left  hand  (strong  sound)  while  stirring  it
up  with  the  right  hand,  saying,  "Sam-son!"  with  every
stroke.  Let  the  mixture  stand  until  the  moon  is  full
(thus  getting  the  full  strength  of  the  moon  in  it),
then  stop  it  up  tightly  in  a  jar  which  is  to  be  kept
tightly  wrapped  in  red  flannel  (strong  color).  Rub
this  on  with  a  red  flannel  cloth,  rubbing  always  from
below,  up,  saying,  "Sam-son!"  as  you  rub  it  on.
Every  morning  and  night  face  the  north  with  arms
outstretched  and  feet  well  apart  and  concentrating  on
strength  and  Samson.  Then  I  added  a  few  worth-
while items — dress  as  well  as  you  can,  hold  your  head
up,  save  at  least  32  each  week,  work  hard  and  earnestly,
bathe  at  least  every  other  day,  do  a  bit  of  kindness
each  day,  be  cheerful  even  if  you  have  to  force  your-
self to  smile,  and  if  you  are  not  bettered,  consult  a
first    rate    medical    doctor    and    not    a    hoodoo.     The


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  213

"Negro-doctor"  took  these  down  literally  (he  could
read  and  write)  and  then  transcribed  them  in  a  number
code,  so  that  he  could  use  them  without  fear  of  de-
tection. I  had  a  hard  time  getting  rid  of  him.  He
told  me  his  whole  store  of  information  and  insisted  on
quitting  his  work  and  following  me  wherever  I  went
about  the  city,  declaring  that  already  he  felt  better
and  feeling  sure  that  the  continued  treatment  would
do  him  much  good.  I  actually  believe  it  will,  and  am
sorry  that  I  could  not  remain  longer  in  New  Orleans
to  check  up  on  the  case.  He  showed  his  gratitude  by
offering  me  325  for  the  cure — my  improvised  charm
was  sufficiently  complex  to  win  his  entire  attention.
Without  doubt  many  of  the  conjuration  practices
originated  in  the  brain  of  some  quick-thinking  hoodoo-
doctor — in  fact  I  have  often  seen  this  improvising
going  on  myself,  and  apparently  these  products  have
the   same  efficiency   as   those   hallowed   by   antiquity.

Credulity  of  the  Hoodoo-doctors.  So  great  is  the
credulity  of  these  Negroes,  even  the  conjure-doctors
themselves,  that  there  is  no  excuse  for  failure.  I
tested  this  out  in  the  case  just  mentioned.  I  had  just
purchased  two  small  notebooks,  both  exactly  alike.
We  were  sitting  on  the  levee  at  Algiers,  just  across
from  New  Orleans,  and  for  a  time  I  busied  myself
jotting  down  the  experiences  and  remedies  of  this
conjure-doctor  for  whose  backache  I  had  just  oifered
a  cure.  When  the  conversation  lulled,  unknown
to  him  I  changed  the  notebook  upon  which  I  had  been
writing,  for  the  unused  one  which  I  had  concealed
in  my  inner  coat  pocket.  Then  I  told  him  I  possessed
the  power  of  keeping  him  from  seeing  things  I  did  not
want  him  to  see.     "You  have  seen  me  writing  in  this


214     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

book,"  I  said,  "now  read  what  I  have  written."
Making  a  pass  at  the  Negro,  I  handed  him  the  unused
book.  He  opened  it  and  saw  only  the  blank  pages.
His  jaw  dropped,  his  eyes  nearly  popped  out  of  his
head — in  fact  I  thought  he  was  going  to  fall  backward
into  the  "Father  of  Waters."  "My  Gawd,  white  man,
you's  wonderful!"  Later  on  when  he  was  not  looking
I  again  brought  out  the  book  upon  which  I  had  been
writing,  snapped  my  fingers  at  him  and  again  restored
to  him  his  ability  to  read.  Perhaps  such  practices
are  not  exactly  ethical,  but  I  won  my  man's  respect  and
obtained  information,  besides  testing  out  the  extreme
credulity  of  even  the  conjure-doctors  themselves.

Conjurers  by  Accident.  So  great  is  the  fear  of  these
conjure-doctors  that  it  is  extremely  hard  to  get  a
Negro  to  testify  against  one  in  court,  no  matter  how
much  the  Negro  has  been  swindled  by  him.  ^  They  are
afraid  not  to  keep  the  charm  given  them  by  the
hoodoo-doctor  on  their  person,  for  the  idea  prevails
that  the  conjure-men  will  find  it  out  in  some  way  or
other,  and  that  they  will  "haint  yo'  till  yo'  leabe  dis
yere  earth."  ^  Steiner  cites,  in  detail,  cases  where  it
was  necessary  for  him  to  discharge  good  workmen
simply  because  of  their  supposed  conjuring  and  their
demoralizing  effect  upon  the  other  superstitious  Ne-
groes. In  some  cases  accidental  happenings  almost
force  a  man  to  become  a  conjurer.  One  Georgia  Negro
picked  up  a  hat  which  had  blown  from  another  Negro's
head  and  handed  it  back  to  him.  Within  a  short  time
the  owner  of  the  hat  died.  The  Negro  who  picked
up  the  hat  drank  from  a  bucket  at  the  well.     Another

1  397.

2349.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  215

Negro  followed  him  and  shortly  after  died.  Both
these  deaths  were  attributed  to  the  innocent  Negro —
men  would  not  work  around  him,  he  had  to  be  dis-
charged. He  had  accidentally  earned  the  reputation
of  being  a  conjurer.  He  could  not  get  a  place  to  stay
or  cook,  and  was  eventually  forced  to  live  far  off  from
his  fellows  and,  in  actuality,  to  follow  conjuring.  ^

Symptoms  of  Conjuration.  We  turn  now  from  a
consideration  of  the  "hoodoo-doctor"  to  a  general
consideration  of  conjuration  itself — known  variously
as  "hoodooing,"  "goofering,"  -  "handicapping,"  ^  or
"tricking."  ■*  The  principles  of  thought  upon  which
this  form  of  magic  is  based  are  well  set  forth  in  Frazer's
Law  of  Similarity  and  Law  of  Contact  or  Contagion.
According  to  the  former,  like  produces  like,  or  an  effect
resembles  its  cause;  the  latter  states  that  things  which
have  once  been  in  contact  with  each  other  continue  to
act  on  each  other  at  a  distance  after  the  physical
contact  has  been  severed.  ^  While  we  shall  not  follow
this  classification  it  could  be  conveniently  applied  to
practically  the  whole  of  conjuration.  Some  hoodoos
burn  a  kind  of  powder  called  "goopher  dust,"  which
represents  the  person  being  hoodooed,  who  is  perhaps
miles  away  at  the  time.  This  causes  the  conjured
individual  to  lose  his  personality  and  to  become  sick
or  insane.  One  must  have  power  to  be  able  to  make
up  a  protecting  "hand"  or  charm.  Another  conjurer
or  hoodoo  outside  the  vicinity  can  work  a  cure  for
one  so  afflicted.  ^     A  person  can  tell  when  he  is  hoo-

^Steiner, R.,     Observations  on  the  Practice  of  Conjuring  in  Georgia,  J.  A.
F.L.,  pp.  173-79  (1901),  vol.  14.

n4i.
354.

*306.

^  Frazer,  J.  G.,     The  Golden  Bough,  p.  11.

« 152.


216     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

dooed  by  the  suddenness  of  the  attack — sharp  pains
follow  directly  upon  handling,  stepping  over,  or  swallow-
ing the  charm.  The  regular  physician  does  no  good;  a
conjure-doctor  had  better  be  called  In  at  once.  There
are  signs  of  lizards  and  snakes  In  the  body — the
regular  food  eaten  does  no  good.  The  person  makes
strange  noises;  goes  like  a  dog,  cock,  fox,  cat,  or  other
animal,  and  finally  becomes  Insane  unless  relieved.  ^
One  old  Negro,  whose  sister  was  killed  by  a  process
of  this  kind  and  who  had  been  conjured  himself,  says:
"You  kin  tell  'caze  you  feels  so  diffe'ntly.  Fer  a
while  you  eats  a  lot  mo'  dan  you  ustah  eat,  den  you
gits  so  you  doan'  want  no  vlttles  no  time.  After
dis  you  pines  away  an'  dies."  -  Some  say  mosquitoes
fly  out  of  a  conjured  person's  head.  ^

No  trouble  in  the  world  exhibits  such  fiendish  and
unearthly  symptoms  as  does  conjuration.  A  Mis-
sissippi informant  tells  me  of  one  old  man  who  could
conjure  folks  by  taking  a  looking-glass  and  turning
their  mouths  wrongside  out,  making  their  eyes  as  big
as  dollars.  Folks  so  aflfected  would  "bark  lak  dawgs
an'  go  walkin'  'long  on  dey's  heels  an'  de  backs  er  dey's
hands  wid  deir  bellies  up  towards  de  sky."  ^  In
another  case  a  girl  set  a  hoodoo  for  a  suitor  who  had
stopped  coming  to  see  her.  Within  a  short  time  this
desultory  suitor  suddenly  dropped  dead  while  working  in
the  field.  His  flesh  became  "ridged  up  lak  cotton-
rows"  and  the  other  Negroes  knew  he  had  been  tricked.  ^
When  you  are  conjured  you  feel  like  you  have  never


^  Bacon,  A.  M.,     Conjuring  and  Conjure-Doctors,  Southern  Workman,  vol .
24  (1895),  pp.  209-10.

2  65.

3  150.
*  305.
6  288.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  217

felt  before  In  all  your  life.  Uncouth  thoughts  take
possession  of  your  mind.  If  a  rabbit  has  been  used
in  working  the  hoodoo,  you  will  become  timid,  and
afraid  of  every  one,  just  as  the  rabbit  is  timid.  If
you  are  in  doubt  as  to  your  condition  you  can  verify
your  misgivings  by  telling  your  fortune  with  cards.  ^
When  people  "jes'  aint  actin'  natch'l"  their  misconduct
is  explained  by  conjure.  A  devoted  husband  was
trailing  after  another  woman;  "Solon's  er  good  man,
fur  he's  des  hoodooed  an'  hain't  'sponsible."  2  When
a  sweetheart  has  been  getting  along  with  you  all  right
and  then  suddenly,  with  no  real  cause,  "breaks  off,"
you  may  know  that  she  is  not  responsible  for  what
she  is  doing.  She  has  been  "handicapped,"  and  in
order  to  win  her  back  it  is  necessary  for  you  to  consult
a  "root-doctor"  and  have  the  spell  removed,  unless
you  know  how  to  take  it  off  yourself.  ^

African  Charms.  In  Africa  many  articles  are  used
in  charm-making.  Charms  of  lions'  claws,  teeth,  lips,
and  whiskers  are  the  best  protectives  against  lions;
an  elephant  hunter  carries  about  with  him  the  point
of  an  elephant's  trunk;  the  spine  bones  of  serpents  are
strung  into  a  girdle  to  cure  backache  *  (probably  be-
cause of  their  flexibility).  Like  produces  like.  With
the  Timne-speaking  peoples  small  things,  such  as  rice
husks  and  other  rubbish,  are  put  in  a  fish  trap  and
hung  high  up,  that  the  rice  may  stand  high;  a  pot  will
be  broken  so  that  bad  people  may  be  "broken"  in  the
same  way;  a  blacksmith  makes  a  straight  knife  for  a
sacrifice,    that    work    and    all    other    things    may    be

1141.

2  Boyle,  Mrs.  V.  F.,     Devil  Tales,  p.  11.

»54.

''Nassau,  R.  H.,     Fetichism  in  West  Africa,  pp.  84-85.


218     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

"straight";  and  a  broom  will  be  hung  over  the  door
that  the  house  may  be  "clean"  and  no  bad  sickness
come  in.  ^  The  Calabar  natives  will  bury  the  placenta
beside  a  palm  tree  planted  at  the  birth  of  a  child  so
that  the  tree  will  grow  with  the  child.  ^  The  Gold
Coast  sorcerer  is  generally  distinguished  by  his  goat-
skin medicine-bag.  "Inside  the  bag  are  all  kinds  of
apparent  rubbish,  some  old  bones,  dirty  little  rags
containing  'medicine,'  weird-shaped  stones,  bits  of
iron,  broken  pottery,  feathers,  bits  of  skin,  horn — a
regular  rag-and-bone  merchant's  collection.  But  the
principal  items  are  two  or  more  smoothly-rounded
stones  little  larger  than  a  golf-ball,  and  a  stick."  ^
Great  is  the  variety  of  these  charms.  In  some  cases
water  drawn  with  the  back  toward  the  river  is  used.  *
"Various  articles  are  used  in  their  composition,  such  as
oil,  leaves,  beads,  hair,  finger-nails,  toe-nails,  etc.
Most  of  the  charms  the  women  put  on  in  Africa  are
merely  small  bits  of  paper  with  Mohammedan  writing,
wrapped  in  a  piece  of  soft  leather.  The  'hoodoos'  and
'fetishes'  are  of  more  importance  than  the  ordinary
charms,  and  their  composition  is  more  complex,  con-
sisting of  leaves,  barks,  roots,  horns,  and  bones,  either  of
man  or  beast,  or  of  both,  all  carefully  placed  in  a  country-
pot  made  of  clay,  and  kept  from  every  eye  save  that
of  the  owner's  and,  perhaps,  the  near  relatives.  What
is  called  'gree-gree'  is  a  fetish  that  is  employed  by  its
owner  to  revenge  any  wrong  received  by  him."  ^


1  Thomas,  N.  H.,     Anthrop.  Rept.  on  Sierra  Leone,  pt.  1,  p.  53.

^  Burton,  R.  F.,     Wit  and  Wisdom  from  West  Africa,  p.  411,

'  Cardinal,  A.  W. ,     The  Natives  of  the  Northern  Territories  of  the  Gold  Coast,
p.  130.

■*  Burton,  R.  ¥..,     Wit  and  Wisdom  from  West  Africa,  p.  344.

*  Cronise  and  Ward,  Cunnie  Rabbit,  Mr.  Spider  and  the  Other  Beef,  pp.  26-
27.  For  other  representative  African  charms,  see  Beatty,  K.  J.,  Human
Leopards,  pp.  23-24.  ElUs,  A.  B.,  Ewe-speaking  Peoples,  p.  94.  Leonard,
A.  G.,  The  Lower  Niger  and  Its  Tribes,  pp.  499-500.  Kingsley,  M.  H.,
Travels  in  West  Africa,  p.  462.  Elhs,  A.  B.,  Tshi-speaking  Peoples,  pp.  103-
104.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  219

Survivals  in  America.  But  let  us  consider  again
the  American  Negro.  Cable  writes  of  the  New
Orleans  Negro:  "To  find  under  his  mattress  an  acorn
hollowed  out,  stuffed  with  the  hair  of  some  dead
person,  pierced  with  four  holes  on  four  sides,  and  two
small  chicken  feathers  drawn  through  them  so  as  to
cross  inside  the  acorn;  or  to  discover  on  his  doorsill,
at  daybreak,  a  little  box  containing  a  dough  or  waxen
heart  stuck  full  of  pins;  or  to  hear  that  his  avowed
rival  or  foe  has  been  pouring  cheap  champagne  in  the
four  corners  of  Congo  Square  at  midnight  when  there
was  no  moon— will  strike  more  abject  fear  into  the
heart  of  many  a  stalwart  Negro  or  melancholy  quad-
roon than  to  face  a  leveled  revolver."  ^  "The  hollowed
out  acorn  mentioned  by  Mr.  Cable  seems  a  copy  of
the  cutch-nut  charms  of  the  Gold  Coast  whose  chief
use  there,  however,  is  to  restrain  the  slanderous  tongue
.  and  the  pouring  out  of  champagne  on  a
moonless  night  at  the  four  corners  of  the  court,  the
form  of  incantation  to  Shugudu,  a  malignant  god,  who
will  lend  his  aid  to  any  one  who  on  a  dark  night  will
pour  a  libation  of  rum  into  a  hole  dug  in  the  ground,
or  bury  a  fowl  alive."  ^  In  his  Grandissimes  Mr.  Cable
mentions  again  the  pouring  of  oblations  of  champagne
on  the  ground  and  the  casting  upon  the  floor  of  a  little
of  whatever  a  person  was  eating  or  drinking  to  pro-
pitate  M.  Assouquer  (the  voodoo  imp  of  good  for-
tune). ^  "An  Ashanti  never  drinks  without  pouring
a  few  drops  of  the  wine  on  the  ground  for  the  denizens
of  the  spirit  world  who  may  happen  to  be  about
(also  some  for  'fetishes').     Food  is  constantly  placed

*  Cable,  G.  W.,  CreoleSlave  Songs,  Century  Magazine,  April  1886,  pp.  286-87.
='  Ellis,  A.  B.,  On  Vddvr-worship,  Popular  Science  Monthly,  vol.  38  (1891 ),  p.  662.
3  Cable,  G.  W.,     The  Grandissimes,  pp.  125,  177,  and  296.


220     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

aside  for  them."  ^  In  the  West  Indies  "the  favorite
decoctions  in  use  among  witch  doctors  consist  of
bones,  ashes,  grave-dirt,  human  nail  parings,  mixed,
perhaps,  with  asafoetida  or  any  other  substance  having
a  pungent  odor."  ^  On  the  Gold  Coast  it  is  beHeved
that  a  man  may  be  harmed  by  a  "medicine"  made
from  the  dust  picked  up  from  his  foot-tracks,  ^  and
in  Sierra  Leone  "many  persons,  even  educated  persons
in  Freetown,  have  a  superstition  about  their  hair
being  left  about,  and  take  precautions  to  have  it
disposed  of  in  such  a  way  that  nobody  can  get  pos-
session of  it.  Strong  'medicines'  are  supposed  to  be
made  with  human  hair,  and  with  this  'medicine,'
injury  can  be  inflicted  on  the  person  from  whom  the
hair  was  obtained."  *  Other  tribes  have  these  same
regulations;  nails  and  blood  falling  into  the  same
category.  ^  The  almost  precise  agreement  with  South-
ern Negro  practices  need  scarcely  be  mentioned.

The  Fetish  Color.  "Bosman  (A.D.  1795)  says  that
red  was  the  royal  color  at  Ardra  (one  home  of  the
Vodu-worship),  which  is  the  probable  reason  for  its
being  the  favorite  vodu  color  in  Hayti."  «  Red
flannel  is  almost  always  used  by  the  American  Negro
in  making  his  "tricks,"  but  we  cannot  be  too  certain
of  its  African  origin.  The  Ibos  say  that  "if  a  man
sees  red  cloth  in  a  dream,  it  means  that  one,  either  of
his  own  immediate  household,  or  near  connection  will


1  Rattray,  R.  S.,     Ashanti  Proverbs,  p.  37.

2  Park,  R.  E.,  Magic,  Mentality  and  City  Life,  Publication  American
Social  Society,  vol.  8  (1924),  p.  111.

*  Cardinal  A.  W.,  The  Natives  of  the  Northern  Territories  of  the  Gold
Coast,  p.  48.

^  Beatty,  K.  J.,     Human  Leopards,  pp.  56-57.

6  Milligan,  R.  H.,  The  Fetish  Folk  of  West  Africa,  p.  39.  Kingsley,  M.  H.,
Travels  in  West  Africa,  p.  447.

•Ellis,  A.  B.,  On  Vodu-worship,  Popular  Science  Monthly,  vol.  38  (1891),
p.  659.


VOODOOISM   AND    CoNJURATION  221

shortly  die."  ^  But  in  Europe,  "red  objects,  such  as
the  houseleek,  the  mountain  ash,  rowan-berries,  the
oak  with  its  red  bark,  animals  having  a  red  color,  even
red  objects,  such  as  stockings,  bands,  garters,  coats,
wax  tapers,  and  other  things,  were  sacred  to  him  (Thor
orDonar).  .  .  .  It  is  probable  for  the  same  reason
that  red  flannel  underwear  is  worn  to  prevent  rheu-
matism (by  the  Negroes  as  well).  Since  Donar  was  the
god  of  marriage  and  since  everything  red  was  sacred
to  him,  the  tying  of  a  piece  of  red  flannel  around  the
leg  to  stop  puerperal  hemorrhage  is  a  direct  survival
of  the  old  paganism."  ~  In  Scotland  there  is  also
the  saying:

Rowan,  ash  and  red  thread
Keep  the  devils  frae  their  speed.  ^

Cable  mentions  the  fact  that  in  New  Orleans  a  red
ribbon  was  worn  about  the  neck  in  honor  of  "Monsieur
Agoussou,"  the  demon  upon  whom  the  voodoos  called
in  matters  of  love,  which  demon  especially  loved
that  color.  ^  Thus,  while  it  seems  more  probable  that
the  use  of  red  is  of  African  origin  in  the  case  of  Negroes,
since  the  Negro  practices  the  voodoo  rites  associated  in
Africa  with  this  color,  we  cannot  be  absolutely  sure
that  there  has  been  no  European  infiltration.  In  both
Europe  and  Africa  it  may  well  be  that  the  red  color
represents  what  was  formerly  sacrificial  blood  offered
to  the  fetish  in  question.

1  Leonard,  A.  G.,     The  Lower  Niger  and  Its  Tribes,  p.  146.

2  Fogel,  E.  M.,     Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,  p.  8.

*  Dyer,  T.  F.  T.,     English  Folk-Lore,  p.  10.     See  also,  Lean's  Collectanea,
vol.  2,  p.  270.

*  Cable,  G.  W.,     The  Grandissimes,  pp.  91-92.


222     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Pre-conjural  Preparations.  For  skill  in  conjuring,  a
person  should  eat  the  brains  of  a  snake  or  rat  ^  or  else
devour  a  live  frog.  ^  An  Alabama  informant  says,
"If  you  want  to  be  a  conjurer  go  out  with  an  old
conjurer  and  he  will  call  all  the  snakes,  lizards,  frogs,
scorpions,  snails,  worms,  and  rats.  You  will  have  to
lie  down  and  let  all  these  things  crawl  over  you  while
you  are  looking  at  them.  If  you  don't  jump  up  you
can  be  a  conjurer."  ^  If  a  person  seeks  roots  in  his
work,  he  should  get  them  whenever  possible  oif  of
high  ground — the  high  always  prevails  over  the  low —
and  he  should  always  get  them  in  pairs,  male  and
female.  They  work  better  that  way,  but  a  person
should  pick  the  proper  time  so  that  everything  will  be
receptive  for  his  work.  Don't  try  any  tricks  on  a
bright  cloudless  day — the  earth  is  all  closed  up  then
and  nothing  much  can  be  accomplished.  Wait  until
you  see  some  thunderclouds  coming  up.  The  earth
will  begin  to  crack  open — opening  her  mouth  to
receive  the  rain.  The  ants  will  be  hurrying  to  and  fro,
looking  for  shelter.  Then  set  your  charm;  everything
is  receptive  and  your  success  is  assured.  *

^^Layin''  de  Trick.''''  Most  often,  perhaps,  the
"charm"  ("trick,"  "hand,"  "mojo,"  ^  "toby,"  «  "gri-
gri,"  ^  "hoodoo,"  or  "wanga,"  »  as  it  is  variously  called),
is  put  in  the  path  or  on  the  ground  where  the  person
will  come  into  contact  with  it  or  at  least  will  step  over


^91,  and  Owen,  Mary  A.,  Voodoo  Tales,  p.  250.  In  parts  of  the  French
Congo,  only  witches  will  eat  snakes  or  lizards.  See  Dennet,  R.  C,  Notes
on  the  Folklore  oj  the  Fjort,  p.  10.

2  240.

*  258.

6 103,  and  189.

6  54.

^269.

« 277.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  223

it.  Such  a  conjure  is  most  advantageously  put  down
on  a  young  moon  so  that  it  will  rise  up  and  grow  as
the  moon  grows.  In  other  cases  the  conjure  is  rolled
up  in  a  ball  and  hung  from  the  limb  of  a  tree  where  the
person  to  be  conjured  will  unknowingly  brush  up
against  it.  i  "One  of  the  most  effective  ways  in  which
conjuring  is  supposed  to  be  done  is  to  take  a  bunch  of
hair  or  wool,  a  rabbit's  paw,  and  a  chicken  gizzard,
tie  them  up  in  a  cotton  rag,  and  fasten  the  bundle  to
some  implement  which  the  man  to  be  conjured  is  in
the  habit  of  using.  As  soon  as  he  catches  sight  of  it,
all  of  his  spirit  leaves  him,  his  eyes  nearly  bulge  out  of
their  sockets  and  a  cold  sweat  breaks  out  all  over  him.
Sometimes  the  trick  or  spell  will  last  so  long  that  he
will  grow  weak  and  fall  away  to  a  mere  shadow;  of
course  he  is  then  utterly  unfit  for  work,  and  unless  he
is  removed  from  the  scene  of  his  troubles,  and  his
mind  freed  from  the  belief  that  he  is  conjured,  he  will
soon  die  of  pure  fright."  ^

Conjure  material  is  sometimes  put  into  a  person's
shoes.  "One  instance  is  of  a  girl  who  detects  her
father-in-law  putting  something  into  her  shoes  after
she  is  supposed  to  have  gone  to  sleep.  She  burns  the
shoes  and  so  avoids  the  trick;  the  shoes  in  burning
make  a  noise  like  a  bunch  of  fireworks."  Conjures
may  be  set  in  sweet  potatoes  in  the  field,  among  chips
in  the  woodshed,  in  perfume  (a  bottle  of  cologne
presented  to  a  girl  by  her  unsuccessful  rival  puts  her
eyes  out  when  she  smells  of  it),  or  even  on  a  carving
knife,  the  first  one  to  use  it  being  the  one  to  receive

1  141.  See  also,  Steiner,  R.,  Braziel  Robinso7i  Possessed  of  Two  Spirits,
J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  13  (1900),  p.  228.

2  Hall,  J.  A.,     Negro  Conjuring  and  Tricking,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  10  (1897),
p.  242.


224     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

the  harm.  ^  A  girl  was  given  a  bunch  of  roses  on  her
wedding  day  and  her  attention  was  called  to  their
sweet  fragrance.  That  girl  fell  dead  when  going  into
the  church.  ^  A  common  method  of  conjure  is  by
means  of  things  put  in  a  person's  hat.  "To  conjure
by  means  of  a  hat,  take  a  toad,  dry  and  powder,  and
put  the  powder  in  the  hat,  or  the  dried  toad  may  be
put  up  all  over  the  door  or  under  the  steps.  Toads,
frogs,  lizards,  etc.,  must  be  all  procured  at  night  on
the  waste  of  the  moon,  as  that  will  insure  a  wasting
away  of  the  body."  ^  Even  the  wind  may  be  the
innocent  bearer  of  "devilment."  Find  out  the  direc-
tion of  the  wind  and  stand  so  that  it  will  blow  from  you
towards  your  enemy.  Having  dusted  your  hands  with
powdered  devil's  shoe  string  and  devil's  snuff,  hold
them  up  so  that  the  wind  will  blow  from  them  towards
the  man  coming  towards  you.  The  dust  will  be  carried
into  his  eyes  and  your  opponent  will  be  at  least  tem-
porarily blinded.  My  hoodoo  friend  uses  this
on  white  men  with  whom  he  is  afraid  to  deal  more
roughly.  *

These  ways  all  indicate  means  of  introducing  the
conjure  dust  without  actually  getting  it  into  a  person's
vitals.  There  are  myriads  of  such  ways — putting  it
into  a  person's  bed  or  pillow,  or  sifting  it  through  the
roof,  but  after  all  the  most  effective  way  is  to  introduce
it  directly  into  his  food  or  drink.  No  doubt  a  great
deal  of  sickness  due  to  such  methods  was  the  result
of  actual  poisoning  and  not  of  conjuration  at  all,  but
to  the  rural  Negro,  as  to  the  African,  the  two  are  iden-


*  Bacon,  A.  M.,  Conjuring  and  Conjure-Doctors,  Southern  Workman,
vol.  25  (1895),  pp.  193-94.

2  Pitkin,  Helen,     An  Angel  by  Brevet,  pp.  71-72.

'  Steiner,  R.,  Observations  on  the  Practice  of  Conjuring  in  Georgia,  J.  A.
F.L.,  vol.  14  (1901),  p.  179.

*258.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  225

tical.  Often  a  conjure-doctor  will  put  something  in
the  spring  or  well  from  which  the  victim  drinks,  and
it  is  believed  that  so  long  as  the  tricked  one  drinks
from  that  spring  he  will  be  slowly  but  surely  poisoned
to  death.  ^  More  will  be  said  of  these  and  other
methods,  but  now  we  turn  to  the  construction  of  the
charms  themselves,  beginning  first  with  those  used
by  the  New  Orleans  voodoos.

New  Orleans  Charms.  Marie  Laveau  used  to  make
a  "gris-gris"  consisting  of  some  saffron,  salt,  gunpowder,
and  pulverized  dried  dog  manure,  all  wrapped  in  a
piece  of  black  paper,  so  my  informant  says.  This  she
would  slip  into  a  person's  parlor,  bedroom,  chair,  or
piano  during  her  work  in  the  house  as  hair-dresser.
This  charm  contained  nothing  harmful  in  itself,  but
the  superstitious  people  (white  and  black)  would
immediately  rush  to  Marie  Laveau  to  get  a  counter-
charm  for  the  one  she  had  set  herself.  ^  An  old  voodoo
servant  in  New  Orleans  had  a  charm  made  of  very  fine
silken  moss  or  horsehair  arranged  in  the  shape  of  a
nest  and  held  together  by  two  crossed  herbs  (note  the
use  of  the  cross  symbol).  It  was  kept  sewed  in  the
pocket  of  her  dress  and  was  supposed  to  ward  off  ill
luck.  Other  charms  she  carried  were  a  rabbit's  foot,
some  gold  ore,  and  a  magnet.  ^  Other  voodoos
would  sprinkle  salt  on  a  person's  doorstep  according
to  a  regular  pattern  or  design.  The  damp  salt  would
eat  some  of  the  varnish  off  the  step  and  leave  a  per-
manent mark  which  would  scare  the  gullible  people
out  of  their  wits.  *     Another  more  complicated  charm

*  Hall,  J.  A.,     Negro  Conjuring  and  Tricking,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  10  (1897),
p.  241.

2  269.
3333.

*  269.

15


226     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

is  made  as  follows:  "Take  a  dried  one-eyed  toad,  a
dried  lizard,  the  little  finger  of  a  person  who  com-
mitted suicide,  the  wings  of  a  bat,  the  eyes  of  a  cat,
the  liver  of  an  owl,  and  reduce  all  to  a  powder.  Then
cut  up  into  fine  pieces  a  lock  of  hair  from  a  dead
(natural)  child,  and  mix  it  with  the  powder.  Make  a
bag  of  a  piece  of  sheet  that  has  been  used  as  a  shroud,
put  all  the  material  into  it  and  put  it  into  the  pillow
of  the  intended  victim  when  nobody  is  aware  of  your
action.  He  will  pine  away  and  die.  A  few  feathers
run  through  the  bag  will  expedite  matters."  ^  Notice
here  the  use  of  relics  of  the  dead  and  animals  as-
sociated with  death  and  darkness — objects  also  treas-
ured by  the  Africans  as  fetishes.  Mr.  Pelletier,
Mrs.  Cozad,  and  other  people  in  New  Orleans  have
told  me  that  there  was  nothing  mysterious  about  the
"gris-gris"  of  the  voodoos,  the  harm  wrought  being
due  to  the  power  of  suggestion  on  ignorant  minds  and
to  the  introduction  of  actual  poison,  such  as  bella-
donna, into  the  human  system.  This  latter  practice
gradually  became  so  widespread  that  the  health
authorities  had  to  intervene  and  finally  bring  about  the
break-up  of  the  organization.  Dana  mentions  the
use  of  sipher-wood  and  ground  ivory-root  from  Liberia,
the  latter  being  able  to  exercise  its  evil  efi"ects  by
touch  alone  and  causing  mental  as  well  as  physical
breakdown;  button-root;  cresses  from  Angola;  and
Jamestown-weed  (Jimson  weed  or  stramonium),
which  is  pounded  up  along  with  the  dried  head  of  a
snake  and  the  mixture  used  to  produce  a  mysterious
and   baffling  blindness.  -      Of  these  I   am   acquainted

1  Wiltse,  H.  M.,     A  Hoodoo  Charm,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  13  (1900),  p.  212.
^  Dana,  M.,     Voodoo,  Metropolitan  Magazine,  vol.  28,  pp.  531-32.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  227

only  with  the  use  of  the  Jimson  weed,  which  generally,
however,  is  pounded  up  and  used  externally  as  a
poultice.

Tapers,  Feathers,  and  Coffins.  Another  less  fearful
New  Orleans  spell  is  worked  by  four  nickels  arranged
In  the  form  of  a  cross  with  a  candle  at  the  head  and
foot.  ^  The  lighted  candle  so  often  used  by  the  New
Orleans  voodoos,  to  my  mind,  is  simply  a  copy  of  the
tapers  burned  by  the  Catholic  population  to  their
saints.  Such  lights  seem  to  be  used  but  little  In  other
parts  of  the  South.  In  this  same  city  "perhaps  the
most  peculiar  of  the  many  methods  adopted  to  work
upon  the  superstitious  Negroes  was  the  Insertion  by
apparently  supernatural  means,  of  balls  of  feathers
Into  pillows  and  beds.  I  have  myself  examined  these
creations  and  marveled  at  the  skill  displayed  In  their
manufacture.  The  closest  scrutiny  failed  to  reveal
rip  or  newly  sewed  seam  in  bed  or  pillow  tick,  and  yet
the  balls  were  found  buried  in  the  mattresses  and  among
the  soft  feathers  of  pillows.  They  were  made  of  soft,
highly  colored  feathers,  brilliant  and  gaudy,  scarlet
and  gold,  bright  blue  and  vivid  green,  and  were  about
the  size  and  shape  of  an  orange."  ^  One  New  Orleans
Negress  found  some  chicken  feathers  In  her  pillow
very  carefully  shaped  up  with  fine  twine  to  resemble  a
rooster.  She  had  a  constant  headache  until  the
charm  was  removed.  ^  Very  common  also  was  the
practice  of  putting  small  black  caskets,  often  with
skull  and  crossbones  upon  the  cover,  in  front  of  a
person's    door.     Sometimes    these    would    contain    a


^  Fortier,  Alcee,     Customs  and  Superstitions  in  Louisiana,  J.  A.  F.    L.,
vol.  1  (1888),  pp.  138-39.

^Superstitions  of  Negroes  in  New  Orleans,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5  (1892),  p.  331.
»  Pitkin,  Helen,     An  Angel  by  Brevet,  pp.  227-28.


228     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

small  doll  with  pins  run  through  the  heart  and  with  a
burned-out  candle  at  the  head  and  another  at  the
foot,  ^  doubtless  a  case  of  sympathetic  magic,  indicating
a  desire  that  the  person  be  "laid  out"  according  to  the
Catholic  rites.

Other  Charms.  Cable  mentions  several  voodoo
charms  including  a  bag  containing  a  quantity  of  dog's
and  cat's  hair,  cut  fine  and  mixed  with  salt  and  pepper,
the  true  use  of  which  required  them  to  be  scattered  in
some  person's  path;  a  piece  of  cornstalk  scooped  out  in
the  middle  and  filled  with  parings  from  a  nail  near  the
knee  of  a  horse,  but  with  the  pith  left  intact  at  each
end;  2  and  other  apparatus  consisting  for  the  most
part  of  a  little  pound-cake,  some  lighted  candles'
ends,  and  a  little  syrup  of  sugar-cane,  pins,  knitting-
needles,  and  a  trifle  of  anisette.  ^  Another  New
Orleans  good  luck  charm,  which  was  supposed  to  be
wet  with  rum  every  Friday  (except  Good  Friday)
after  which  the  owner  was  to  make  the  sign  of  the
cross,  contained  about  fifty  black  pepper  seeds,  spice,
some  glistening  mineral  like  polished  lead,  but  brittle  as
coal,  flakes  of  dried  herbs,  crumbs  of  mouldy  bread,
a  wisp  of  hair,  the  half  of  a  white  bean,  and  a  tarnished
brass  medal  of  St.  Benedict.  The  whole  was  wrapped
in  rose-colored  flannel  and  was  about  an  inch  long  and
not  so  wide.  ^

General  Characteristics.  Passing  now  to  other  locali-
ties, we  find  in  Missouri  four  degrees  of  voodoo  charms,
as  explained  by  Miss  Owen:


1  269,  and  333.  Cable,  G.  W.,  The  Grandissimes,  p.  408.  Pitkia,  Helen,
An  Angel  by  Brevet,  p.  62.  For  further  variations  and  the  use  of  a  charmed
loaf  of  bread,  see  Ibid.,  pp.  60-62  and  94-95.

*  Cable,  G.  W.,     The  Grandissimes,  pp.  405-06.

'  Cable,  G.  W.,     Creole  Slave  Songs,  Century  Magazine,  vol.  9  (1886),  p.  820.

*  Pitkin,  Helen,     An  Angel  by  Brevet,  pp.  357-560.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  229

Good  Tricks.  These  are  the  hardest  of  all  to  make,  and  in-
clude such  things  as  "luck  balls,"  "jacks,"  and  similar  combina-
tions. The  formulas  here  all  begin  with,  "The  God  before  me,
God  behind  me,  God  be  with  me,"  and  close  with,  "I  ask  it
in  the  name  of  the  Lord  or  God."

Bad  Tricks.  These  are  all  made  in  the  name  of  the  devil,  and
consist  mainly  of  such  things  as  woolen  or  fur  bags  or  glass
bottles  filled  with  harmful  material.

All  That  Pertains  to  the  Body.  This  class  includes  the  use  of
nails,  hair,  teeth,  or  other  parts  of  the  body  used  in  conjuring.

Commanded  Things.  This  class  is  comprised  of  such  things  as
sand,  or  wax  from  a  new  beehive — things  neither  lucky  nor  un-
lucky in  themselves,  but  made  so  by  commands.  ^

In  the  case  of  the  Mississippi  Negroes  my  objection
to  this  classification  is  that  the  parts  are  not  mutually
exclusive,  the  good  and  bad  tricks  covering  the  whole
field.  Little  distinction  is  made  between  practices
addressed  to  God  or  the  devil,  the  main  contrasts
being  inherent  in  the  ends  served  by  the  particular
trick.  From  the  viewpoint  of  materials  used,  those
charms  made  of  things  connected  with  the  body  are
probably  the  most  numerous.  In  Missouri  all  that
pertains  to  the  body  may  be  used  in  conjuration  and  in
the  making  of  charms  for  good  or  ill,  not  always  alone,
but  in  connection  with  other  things — such  parts  of  the
body  as  "nails,  teeth,  hair,  saliva,  tears,  perspiration,
dandruff,  scabs  of  sores  even,  and  garments  worn  next
to  the  person"  being  the  most  frequently  employed.
A  person  may  be  saved  or  ruined  by  even  so  much  as
"one  eye-winker  or  the  peeling  of  one  freckle."  -

1  Owen,  Mary  A.,     Aviong  the  Voodoos,  I.  F.  L.  C.  (1891),  p.  232  ff.

2  Ibid.,  p.  235.


230     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Conjure-halls,  Bottles,  and  Bags.  Conjure-balls,
snakes,  and  all  kinds  of  reptiles  are  often  found  In  the
beds  of  those  who  have  been  conjured.  A  charm  in  the
shape  of  a  small  rubber  ball  may  be  buried  in  the
chimney  corner,  or  poison  may  be  put  in  a  bottle  and
buried  in  the  path  (in  some  cases  upside  down).
Poisonous  balls  of  various  kinds,  filled  with  roots,
herbs,  and  other  mixtures  are  placed  in  the  road.
These  charms  have  been  made  personal  by  the  use  of
the  hair  or  tracks  of  the  intended  victim  and  have  no
sffect  on  any  one  else.  It  is  better  to  put  the  charm  in
the  room,  hand,  bed,  or  path; but  if  the  charm  is  potent
enough,  the  yard  or  doorstep  will  do.  "A  black
bottle  containing  a  liquid  mixture  and  nine  pins  and
nine  needles  is  a  favorite  charm.  Sometimes  the  charm
is  a  bundle  containing  salt,  pepper  and  a  silver  five-
cent  piece;  sometimes  needles,  pins,  hairs  and  snake-
heads.  Again  it  is  salt,  red  pepper,  anvil-dust,  and  a
kind  of  root  that  conjure-doctors  always  carry  in  their
pockets.  In  the  latter  case,  one  informant  tells  us
that  'when  putting  this  down  they  have  a  ceremony
and  request  the  devil  to  cause  this  to  have  the  desired
effect,'  specifying  in  the  request  the  part  of  the  body
of  the  victim  which  it  is  desired  to  injure.
Jelly-fish  taken  out  of  the  water,  dried,  powdered,  and
put  into  small  bags,  are  used  for  conjuring.  In  one
case  where  search  was  made  for  the  charm,  there  was
found  in  the  ground  a  tin  cup,  seven  inches  deep  and
three  in  diameter,  called  'a  conjure  cup,'  It  contained
little  balls,  some  like  lumps  of  tar,  and  some  like
sulphur  and  other  different  colors.  When  burned,
these  balls  gave  'beautiful  blazes'.  .  .  .  Bottles
full  of  snakes  were  buried  by  the  doorstep."  In  other


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  231

cases  a  preserve  jar  was  found  In  the  garden  containing
a  snake  and  several  insects  in  addition  to  something
else  wrapped  up  in  a  cloth.  "In  one  case  where  there
was  reason  to  suspect  conjuring,  a  bottle  filled  with
roots,  stones,  and  reddish  powder  was  found  under
the  doorstep,  and  in  the  yard  more  bottles  with  beans,
nails  and  the  same  powder.  The  man  burned  them
up  and  got  well."  Again  a  package  in  the  shape  of  a
brick  was  found  Inside  a  tin  trunk.  "Some  of  the
simplest  things  are  salt,  pepper,  pins,  needles,  black
bottles  and  all  kinds  of  roots."  ^  "Have  a  vial,  put
into  it  nails,  red  flannel,  and  whiskey.  Put  a  cork  in
it,  then  stick  nine  pins  in  the  cork.  Bury  this  where
the  one  you  want  to  trick  walks."  ^  One  sort  of  conjure
used  in  Alabama  "Is  a  large  snuff-bottle,  containing
vinegar  and  some  other  liquid  ingredients,  and  another,
a  bag  filled  with  coarse  white  sand  and  large  red  ants."  ^
In  Missouri  the  people  sometimes  conjure  a  person  by
placing  keys,  nails,  or  some  kind  of  liquid  In  a  vial
beneath  the  steps  of  the  door.  *  In  some  of  the
states  a  spell  may  be  put  upon  a  man  by  burying  a
"hair-ball"  (one  of  the  compact  balls  of  hair  often
found  by  butchers  in  the  stomachs  of  cows  or  oxen)
under  his  doorstep.  This  object  (powerful,  because
peculiar)  may  also  be  carried  about  as  an  amulet  to
protect  one  from  spells.  ^

Tricken-bags  and  Luck-balls.  "Goofering  Is  walk-
ing over  a    root-bag   or  goofer-bag.      On   the   outside

1  Bacon,  A.  M.,  Conjuring  and  Conjure-Dodors,  Southern  Workman,  vol.
24  (1895),  p.  209.

^  How  to  Conjure,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  28  (1899),  p.  112.

3  Bergen,  F.  D.,  Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7  (1899),
p.  14.

^203.

^141.  Bergen,  F.  D.,  Concerning  Negro  Sorcery  in  the  United  Stales,
J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  3  (1890),  p.  286.


232     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

is  goofer-root,  then  cloth,  then  more  root,  then  another
layer  of  cloth,  and  Inside  it  is  the  goofer — strands  from
your  hair,  broken  needles  and  graveyard  dirt."  One
goofer-doctor  dug  up  such  a  bag  under  a  woman's
step.  He  told  the  woman  that  her  hair  had  been
goofered  and  that  she  should  always  burn  it.  He
sprinkled  red  pepper  and  salt  on  the  goofer-bag  and
got  rid  of  the  person  who  set  the  trick  by  throwing  it
in  a  running  stream.  As  the  bag  was  carried  away  by
the  current  so  also  was  the  one  who  set  the  trick
carried  away.  As  a  matter  of  fact  a  woman  did  leave
town.  ^  Another  "tricken-bag,"  according  to  Miss
Owen,  is  prepared  as  follows:  "Take  the  wing  of  a
jaybird,  the  jaw  of  a  squirrel,  and  the  fang  of  a  rattle-
snake and  burn  them  to  ashes  on  any  red-hot  metal.
Mix  the  ashes  with  a  pinch  of  grave-dust — the  grave
of  the  old  and  wicked  has  most  potency  in  its  earth  ^ —
moisten  with  the  blood  of  a  pig-eating  sow;  make  into
a  cake  and  stick  into  the  cake  three  feathers  of  a
crowing  hen  wrapped  with  hair  from  the  head  of  one
who  wishes  an  enemy  tricked.  Put  the  cake  into  a
little  bag  of  new  linen  or  cat-skin.  Cat-skin  is  better
than  linen,  but  it  must  be  tied  with  the  ravelings  from
a  shroud,  named  for  the  enemy,  and  then  hidden  under
his  house.  It  will  then  bring  upon  him  disease,  dis-
grace and  sorrow.  If  a  whipporwill's  wing  is  used
instead  of  a  jay's  it  will  bring  death."  ^  The  same
author  speaks  of  Aunt  Mymee's  "luck  ball,"  called
"Lil  Mymee"  (probably  representing  her  soul  or
double),    which    contained    a    chicken's    breastbone,

1  Smiley,  P.,     Folk-Lore  from  Va,,  S.  C,  Ga.,  Ala.,  and  Fla.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  32  (1919),  p.  380.

2  A  wicked  man  in  Africa  would  leave  a  wicked  and  dangerous  ghost.

3  Owen,  Mary  A.,     Voodoo  Tales,  p.  174.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATlON  233

ashes,  and  rags.  The  bag  was  slung  under  her  right
armpit  with  no  clothes  between  it  and  the  body  to
absorb  its  strength.  Every  once  in  a  while  the  ball
was  given  a  drink,  i.e.  moistened  with  whiskey — a
custom  still  practiced  on  the  Guinea  Coast  of  Africa.  ^
A  more  complicated  "luck  ball"  was  one  made  for
Charley  Leland.  This  contained  briefly,  four  lengths  of
white  yarn  doubled  four  times  (four  is  a  "luck  number"),
four  lengths  of  white  sewing  silk  folded  in  the  same
way  (to  tie  your  friends  to  you,  while  the  yarn  ties  down
the  devils),  and  with  four  knots  tied  in  the  whole.  Four
such  knotted  strands  were  used,  giving  sixteen  knots
in  all.  These  skeins  were  made  up  into  a  nest,  whiskey
spit  upon  them  to  keep  the  devils  from  getting  through
the  knots,  and  into  it  was  put  tinfoil  (representing
the  brightness  of  the  little  spirit  who  was  going  to  be
in  the  ball),  red  clover  (representing  the  hair  of  the
owner),  and  dust  (to  blind  the  eyes  of  his  enemies).
The  whole  was  then  wrapped  in  white  yarn,  whiskey
being  spit  on  it  all  the  while.  Then  the  conjurer  who
was  making  the  charm  named  it  "Charley  Leland,"
and  talked  to  it,  having  it  answer  him  back  by  ven-
triloquism. The  directions  were  that  the  ball  should
be  wrapped  in  tinfoil  and  a  little  silk  rag,  and  then  be
slung  under  the  right  armpit  in  a  linen  bag.  It  must
be  taken  out  once  a  week  and  bathed  in  whiskey  to
keep  its  strength  from  dying.  At  any  time  "/i^"
could  be  taken  out  and  consulted  or  be  confided  in,
and  his  approval  or  disapproval  could  be  felt  by  the
owner.  ^  Such  cases  as  these  show  clearly  that  the
African  idea  of  the  fetish  has  persisted  to  some  extent,
at  least,  in  America,  the  ball  being  supposed  to  have

'  Ibid.,  p.  169  ff.
»  Ibid.,  pp.  174-79.


234     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

an  Indwelling  spirit  which  needed  constant  sacrifices
in  the  shape  of  whiskey.  While  the  indwelling  spirit
idea  is  not  so  clear-cut  in  all  parts  of  the  South  as  it  is
with  the  Missouri  Negroes,  yet  without  exception  the
hoodoo-doctors  of  my  acquaintance  recommend  that
the  "tricks"  be  soused  well  with  whiskey  to  bring  them
to  their  full  power.

Typical  Negro  ^^Hands.^'  I  have  in  my  possession  a
"hand"  made  for  me  by  Ed  Murphy  in  teaching  me
some  of  the  lore  of  conjuration.  In  this  he  placed  a
small  sand-burr,  which  he  called  "seed  of  the  earth,"
a  piece  of  "Sampson's  snakeroot"  {Psoralea  pedun-
culata),  and  a  piece  of  "devils  shoe  string"  (Coronilla
varia)— the  three  pieces  representing  the  Father,  Son,
and  Holy  Ghost.  These  were  wrapped  first  in  a  piece
of  black  cloth  (Father),  folded  always  toward  the
maker  ("Hit  brings  things  to  yer  dat-ahway"),  sewed
with  white  thread  (Son),  and  finally  encased  in  a  bag
of  red  flannel  (Holy  Ghost).  The  whole  should  be
thoroughly  wet  with  whiskey  or  camphor  at  regular
intervals  and  should  be  always  carried  with  you.  It
brings  things  to  you — the  twine-like  roots  of  "devil's
shoe  string"  ties  them  close,  and  the  folding  of  the
cover  towards  you  insures  you  good  luck  in  gambling.  ^
One  "mojo"  worn  for  good  luck  by  an  old  Negro  cook
in  the  Mississippi  Delta,  included  among  other  things
such  ingredients  as  a  lizard's  tail,  a  rabbit's  foot,  a
fish  eye,  snake  skins,  a  beetle,  and  a  dime  with  a  hole
in  it.  2  Other  Negroes  use  a  piece  of  moss  wrapped
in  red  flannel  ^  or  a  rusty  nail  wrapped  in  the  same

1258.
2  404.
"213.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  235

flaming  material.  ^  Alex  Johnson  of  Georgia  was
conjured  in  May,  1898.  He  says:  "I  felt  the  first
pain,  hoeing  in  the  field;  it  struck  me  in  the  right  foot
and  then  in  the  left,  but  most  in  the  right  foot,  then
ran  over  my  whole  body,  and  rested  in  my  head;  I
went  home,  and  knew  I  was  conjured.  I  looked  for
the  cunjer,  found  a  little  bag  under  my  front  doorstep,
containing  graveyard  dirt,  some  nightshade  (Jimson
weed)  roots,  and  some  devil's  snuff;  took  the  bag,  and
dug  a  hole  in  the  middle  of  the  public  road  where
people  walked,  and  buried  the  bag,  and  sprinkled  red
pepper  and  sulphur  in  my  house.  I  have  used  fresh
urine,  pepper  and  salt  to  rub  with;  am  going  to  get
fresh  pokeberry  root  on  the  next  new  moon,  make  a
tea,  and  rub  with  it.  My  foot  feels  hot,  the  cunjer
put  a  fire  in  them;  am  going  to  find  a  new  root-doctor,
and  find  out  who  worked  on  me,  have  the  spell  tuk  off
of  me,  and  put  on  the  person  who  spelled  me."

Other  Ingredients.  Other  conjurers  produce  suf-
fering and  pain,  but  not  death,  by  using  a  conjure-bag
made  of  snakeroot,  needles,  and  pins,  tied  up  with
pieces  of  hair  of  the  person  to  be  conjured  and  enclosed
in  a  bag  of  red  flannel.  ^  Other  conjure-bags  contain
such  things  as  lodestone,  red-pepper,  devil's  snuff,
graveyard  dirt,  and  similar  substances,  all  wrapped  in
red  flannel.  Sometimes  it  is  sprinkled  in  the  path  in-
stead of  being  put  in  a  bag.  My  old  Negro  mammy
complained  that  she  saw  a  jealous  fellow-servant
sprinkling  some  sort  of  stuff  in  her  path.     She  took  her

^  Tillinghast,  J.  A.,  The  Negro  in  Africa  and  America,  p.  156.  For  a
very  complicated  Arkansas  charm,  see  Dana,  M.,  Voodoo,  Metropolitan
Magazine,  vol.  28  (1908),  p.  530.

^  Steiner,  R.,  Observations  on  the  Practice  of  Conjuring  in  Georgia,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  14  (1901),  pp.  177,  and  179.


236     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

broom  and  swept  It  up  before  her,  taking  care  not  to
step  over  it.  Thus  she  was  not  harmed,  but  the  other
servant  died  that  same  year.  ^  Mrs.  V.  F.  Boyle
writes  me  of  a  hoodoo-bag  she  obtained  from  a  Negro
criminal  who  had  been  sentenced  for  life:  "We  opened
it  in  the  Century  office.  It  was  made  of  red  flannel
and  had  in  it  a  lock  of  hair,  a  pinch  of  dirt  (graveyard,
or  course),  the  parings,  evidently,  of  a  great  toe  nail,
a  rusty  coffin  nail,  and  something  which  we  decided
must  have  been  the  end  of  a  baby's  finger.  There
was  also  a  tiny  bunch  of  some  kind  of  feathers,  around
which  the  hair  was  wrapped."  She  states  that  such
bags  were  often  used  by  the  Memphis  jockeys  and
roustabouts — the  jockeys  thinking  that  their  horse
could  not  possibly  win  if  the  bag  was  stolen.  ^  Gon-
zales tells  of  a  GuUah  woman  who  believed  "in  the
potency  of  the  dried  frog,  the  blacksnake  skin  and  the
kerosene-soaked  red  flannel  rag,  as  charms  to  pull  a
bashful  wooer  up  to  the  scratch,  to  put  a  'spell,'
resulting  in  sickness  or  death,  upon  an  enemy,  or  for
any  other  purpose  suggested  by  the  mind  of  the  one
preparing  the  charm."  ^  A  chief  of  police  in  a  small
Mississippi  town,  who  has  had  much  experience  with
Negro  conjurers,  tells  me  that  the  bags  sold  are  often
for  the  express  purpose  of  driving  out  all  evil  spirits.
Generally  the  conjure-bag  is  about  the  size  of  an  English
walnut,  4  containing  various  things  but  generally  hair,
a  mutilated  coin  of  foreign  (peculiar)  make,  and  a
piece  of  ore.     It  is  nearly  always  wrapped  in  two  or

»112.

242.

*  Gonzales,  A.  E.,     The  Black  Border,  p.  91.

*  Generally  in  Mississippi  a  pear-shaped  bag  from  one  to  two  inches  long
and  half  an  inch  thick.  In  central  Kentucky  they  range  from  four  to  six
inches  in  length.     See  Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  284.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  237

three  different  colored  goods,  always  has  red  flannel
with  the  goods,  and  the  outer  covering  is  sometimes  of
leather.  Frequently  these  bags  are  highly  scented
with  cheap  perfume  and  are  hung  on  a  string  from  two
to  four  inches  long,  i

So  great  is  the  amount  of  materials  used  in  con-
juring that  druggists  throughout  the  black  South
report  a  large  sale  of  such  things  as  snakeroot,  sas-
safras, lodestone,  brimstone,  asafoetida,  resin,  and  blue-
stone,  to  the  colored  people  for  the  purpose  of  hoodoo-
ing. Anvil  dust  is  also  greatly  valued  as  conjure-
material.  One  educated  blacksmith  of  Columbus,
Miss.,  tells  me  that  people  are  constantly  coming  into
his  shop  to  get  the  black  flakes  that  fall  from  the  hot
iron  when  it  is  pounded,  although  they  always  look
ashamed  and  give  a  fictitious  reason  as  to  why  they
want  it.  2  "Great  power  is  attributed  also  to  a
chicken's  breast-bone.  It  is  commonly  believed  among
Negroes  that  if  one  be  hidden  beneath  a  doorstep  with
appropriate  ceremonies,  the  dweller  in  the  house  will
die."  ^  Hair,  hairpins,  and  powder  put  in  front  of  a
person's  doorsteps  will  cause  sores  to  break  out  on
him.  *  A  most  usual  method,  however,  is  to  get  some
of  a  person's  hair,  nails  and  tracks  and  sprinkle  them
in  the  path  where  he  will  be  sure  to  step  over  them.  ^
I  saw  one  Mississippi  Negro  boy  who  was  forced  to
run  around  and  around  in  a  circle  because  some  one
had  hoodooed  him  by  means  of  his  tracks.  His  aunt,
he  says,  died  from  a  similar  treatment.  ^     Scrape  some

1255.

257.

'Dana,  M.,     Voodoo,  Metropolitan  Magazine,  vol.  28  (1908),  p.  531.

*267.

'65.

•353.


238     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

"gumelastin"  (gum  elastic)  from  a  piece  of  old  rubber
belting,  mix  these  scrapings  with  some  Jimson  weed
seeds,  and  slip  it  into  a  man's  food.  It  will  kill  him
before  night  ^  (Jimson  weed  is  poisonous).  Red  paint
(perchance  a  survival  of  former  blood  sacrifice)  put
on  the  doorsteps  will  cause  sickness.  One  Negro
woman  got  a  terrible  beating  when  discovered  in  an
act  of  this  sort.  ^  One  old  plantation  Negro  in  Mis-
sissippi put  some  red  paint  on  the  side  of  the  barn  and
the  hands  refused  to  enter  to  care  for  the  stock,
thinking  it  was  some  sort  of  "angel  paint"  that  would
trick  them.  ^  Ravelings  from  a  hangman's  rope  are  a
choice  ingredient  for  a  hoodoo-bag,  *  but  this  is  hardly
of  African  origin,  since  the  Africans  are  not  much
given  to  this  form  of  punishment,  and  since  we  find
parts  of  the  rope  by  which  a  man  was  hanged  valued
as  a  prosperity-charm  in  Scotland.  ^  In  Arkansas
there  are  cases  of  conjuration  by  putting  a  lighted
candle  under  a  person's  house,  or  even  by  the  use  of
such  an  intangible  substance  as  smoke,  «  while  in
various  parts  of  the  South  a  person  may  be  harmed  by
securing  a  piece  of  his  garment  and  "burying  hit
'g'inst  dem."  ^  Salt  is  also  very  widely  used  in  con-
jure. Thrown  into  a  person's  tracks  it  will  keep  him
from  returning;  8  tied  into  your  skirt  it  will  make  a
gossip's  teeth  ache  if  she  talks  evil  of  you;^  a  shoe
filled  with  salt  and  burned  will  "call  luck"  to  you  every


19L

2353.

»137.
<42.

^  Gregor,  M.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northeast  of  Scotland,  p.  214.
•341.

^  141,  and  Bergen,  F.  D.,  Concerning  Negro  Sorcery  in  the  United  States,
J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  3  (1890),  pp.  285-86.

*81,  and  Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  149.
«Lee,  C,     Negro  Lore  from  Baltimore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol  5  (1892),  p.  111.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  239

time.  ^  If  you  want  to  go  somewhere  and  your  folks
won't  let  you,  put  salt  in  their  shoes.  The  witches
will  keep  them  asleep  and  you  can  do  as  you  please.  ^
These  salt  beliefs  seem  to  be  mainly  of  European  ^
origin,  especially  the  association  of  ill  luck  with  the
spilling  of  salt.  One  Negro  hoodoo  valued  the  mineral
because,  when  put  upon  a  snail  (slug),  it  performed  the
magical  feat  of  turning  him  to  water.  ^

Conjures  Made  to  Order.  It  is  difficult  to  generalize
upon  the  matter  of  hoodooing,  since  the  charms  are
seldom  made  twice  in  the  same  manner;  the  materials
used  and  the  way  of  putting  them  together  depending
almost  entirely  upon  the  momentary  whim  of  the
individual  conjurer.  Thus  a  female  conjure-doctor
from  Algiers,  La.,  says:  "Anything  that  will  arouse  the
curiosity  of  an  ignorant  superstitionist  can  be  used  as  a
'hand'  or  'conjure-bag.'  Sometimes  I  take  a  small
piece  of  lodestone,  or  at  other  times  a  little  dirt  corked
up  in  a  bottle,  explained  to  be  'graveyard  dirt,'  at
other  times  the  foot  of  a  rabbit,  at  times  a  wishbone
of  a  chicken,  or,  if  I  have  time,  I  just  make  up  a  package,
sewed  neatly  in  a  red  flannel  covering,  which  they
buy  and  pay  for  with  enthusiasm."  ^  I  have  tested
out  this  improvised  diablerie  by  suddenly  picking  out
random  objects,  such  as  corn-root  or  a  bit  of  mock-
orange  {Madura  aurantiaca)  wood  (things  which  I
knew  were  not  generally  used  in  conjuration),  and
asking  the  conjurer  their  value.  Immediately  comes
the  reply:   "Cawn-root,   hits   used    fer    to   draw    folks

^  Pitkin,  Helen,     An  Angel  by  Brevet,  p.  83.

«341.

'  See  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  135.

*91.

5397.


240     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

to  yer,  'caze  dey  all  laks  cawn,"  ^  or  "Dat  dere  mawk-
o'ange  sho'  breaks  folks  up,  'count  er  hit  bein'  so  hard.
Slap  a  han'  uv  it  un'er  some  married-folks'  po'ch  an'
'fo'  Gawd  hit'll  sho'  harden  dey's  hearts  'g'inst  one
'nuther!"  ^  Literally  anything  which  in  the  imagina-
tion of  the  conjurer  may  symbolize  peace,  happiness,
solidarity,  strife,  or  any  other  virtue  or  vice,  or  which
may  be  used  to  attract  or  drive  away  the  powers
making  for  good  or  evil,  may  be  logically  used  in  the
fabrication  of  these  charms.  Some  common  ma-
terials in  addition  to  those  previously  mentioned,  are
fur  from  a  graveyard  rabbit's  back,  red  pepper,'
asafoetida,  copperas  or  bluestone,  pine  resin,  gum
arable,^  the  lining  of  a  chicken's  gizzard,  powdered
blue  glass,  ^  a  chicken's  spur,  ashes,  ^  camel's  hair
(obtained  from  the  animal  by  the  possessor  of  the
bag),  7  coon- root  {Hepatica  triloba),  tobacco,^  rusty
nails,  briar  root,  a  toad's  foot,  a  snail  shell,  a  rabbit's
tail  ^  or  foot;  white  meal  or  flour  sprinkled  in  a  path;  ^  °
sulphur,  alum,  mayapple,  clover,  ^  ^  lizards,  toads,
ground-dogs,  scorpions  or  snakes,  either  slipped  alive
into  a  person's  food,  or  else  put  there  in  a  powdered
form  (sometimes  only  the  heads  are  used);  a  cloth
containing   pins   and   needles;   the   victim's   own   hair


1394.

2  258.

3  150.
*43.

6  15.

*  Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  284.
^  Davis,  H.  C,     Negro  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  27
(1914),  p.  247.

«J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  3  (1890),  pp.  282-83.

9  Jones,   C.  C,     Negro  Myths,  p.   152.     (Cited   in  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  3
(1890),  p.  285.  )

»"Hall,  J.  A.,     Negro  Conjuring  and  Tricking,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  10  (1897),
p.  241.

1 '  Dana,  M.,     Voodoo,  Metropolitan  Magazine,  vol.  28  (1908),  p.  531.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  241

baked  into  a  cake  and  fed  to  him;  ^  a  splinter  and  a
hoodoo-bag  knotted  with  a  red  rag  to  the  right  hind
leg  of  a  live  frog;  ^  devil's  snuff;  an  old  pipe  of  a  conjure-
doctor;  ^  and  a  hen's  egg  with  gunpowder  stirred  into
the  contents.  *  Even  this  formidable  list  is  only
partial;  other  examples  will  be  given  in  a  later
connection.

j4  European  Case.  Most  of  these  charms  seem  to
savor  of  Africa,  but  not  necessarily  so  in  all  cases.
"It  is  said  in  Devonshire  that  you  may  give  it  (the
ague)  to  your  neighbor  by  burying  under  his  threshold
a  bag  containing  the  parings  of  a  dead  man's  nails,
and  some  of  the  hair  of  his  head;  your  neighbor  will  be
afflicted  with  the  ague  till  the  bag  is  removed."^
This  indicates  the  occurrence  of  similar  practices  in
Europe,  but  the  cases  are  few  and  it  is  probable  that
most  of  the  hoodoo  charms  are  African  in  origin,
since  they  are  seldom  accepted  by  the  illiterate  whites
of  the  South  as  are  most  beliefs  of  English  origin.


1  Bacon,  A.  M.,  Conjuring  and  Conjure-Doctors,  Southern  Workman,
vol.  24  (1895),  p.  193  ff.

^  Pendleton,  L.,  Notes  on  Negro  Folk-Lore  and  Witchcraft  in  the  South,
J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  3  (1890),  pp.  205-06.

*  Steiner,  R.,  Observations  onl  the  Practice  of  Conjuring  in  Georgia,  J.  A.
F.L.,  vol.  14  (1901),  p.  177.

*  Bergen,  Fanny  D.,  Concerning  Negro  Sorcery  in  the  United  States,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  3  (1890),  p.  285  ff.

*  Henderson,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  118.
16


CHAPTER  IV

VOODOOISM  AND  CONJURATION— Continued

Images.  Though  the  individual  conjurers  are  usually
psychic  nomads  when  it  comes  to  their  particular
method  of  making  and  laying  a  trick,  yet  there  are
certain  broad  fundamentals  upon  which  they  are  all
agreed.  For  instance,  all  of  them  would  probably
acknowledge  the  fact  that  images  may  be  effectively
used  in  hoodoo  work,  though  this  is  by  no  means
saying  that  they  would  all  prepare  their  images  of
the  same  material  or  use  them  in  precisely  the  same
or  similar  ways.  "A  colored  man  got  angry  with  a
woman  and  tricked  her  by  the  following  complicated
charm:  He  took  some  blue  cloth  and  cut  out  several
chickens,  and  sewed  them  up  after  filling  them  with
some  kind  of  dust  and  a  lot  of  needles  and  pins.  He
covered  these  with  feathers  so  that  they  looked  pre-
cisely like  real  chickens,  and  then  sewed  them  up  in  his
victim's  bed."  ^  Most  generally  a  human  image  is
used.  A  good  piece  of  sympathetic  magic  is  the
following  Mississippi  method  of  disposing  of  a  person
even  when  he  is  absent:  On  the  change  of  the  moon
take  a  newspaper  and  cut  it  out  in  the  shape  of  a
person,  naming  the  image  after  the  man  you  wish  to
kill.  Stick  a  brass  pin  in  this  image  working  it  down
from  head  to  foot  (so  as  to  "bear  him  down").
Then  get  a  small  box  "sech  ez  thread  comes  in"  and

'  Bacon,  A.  M.,  Conjuring  and  Conjure-Doctors,  Southern  Workman,
vol.  24,  p.  194.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  243

lay  the  man  out  in  It  like  a  man  in  a  coffin.  Just  as  the
sun  is  going  down,  dig  a  hole  in  the  cemetery  and  bury
the  box.  Your  enemy  will  surely  die — "goes  down
wid  de  sun."  Or  else  you  may  dispose  of  him  by
getting  some  of  his  old  dirty  clothes  and  corking  them
up  tightly  in  a  brown  jug.  Bury  this  jug  in  the  grave-
yard on  the  breast  of  the  grave.  In  nine  days  your
enemy  will  be  dead,  but  the  process  may  be  hastened
somewhat  by  burying  in  the  back  yard  a  new  half-
gallon  bucket  filled  with  ashes  from  his  grate.  ^  In
rural  districts  of  Georgia  reputed  witches  may  lay
a  spell  by  baking  an  image  of  dough  representing  a
person,  and  sticking  pins  into  it,  thus  causing  the
victim  to  suffer  pain.  Such  a  witch  may  be  disarmed
"by  making  her  image  in  dough,  tying  a  string  around
its  neck  and  leaving  it  to  rise.  When  it  is  baked  she
is  strangled  so  that  she  can  do  no  more  mischief  for
a  year,  at  the  end  of  which  time  another  bread  doll
may  be  made  to  continue  the  influence."  ^  Mrs.
Boyle  tells  me  of  Ellen,  her  old  nurse,  who  sought
revenge  for  some  reproaches  of  Mrs.  Boyle's  mother
by  making  a  rag  image  of  her  and  sticking  pins  in  it,
"calling  over  and  over  again  my  mothers'  name."
There  were  two  other  such  images  which  she  had  seen.
"One  was  of  myself,  dressed  in  scraps  of  one  of  my
own  dresses,  and  stuck  full  of  needles.  This  I  was
warned  of  by  another  servant,  who  said  that  she  was
afraid  to  touch  it,  but  that  I  would  find  it  between  my
mattresses  where  it  was  manipulated  every  morning
when  the  mattresses  were  turned   and  that  I   would


1141.

2  Moore,  Ruby  A.,     Superstitions  of  Georgia,  J .  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  9  (1896),
p.  227.


244     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

never  get  well  until  it  was  destroyed.  It  was."  ^  Not
infrequently  the  voodoos  would  "make  a  rude  image
of  the  one  on  whom  the  hoodoo  is  to  be  cast,  modeling
it  of  wax  or  of  mud  from  the  mouth  of  a  crayfish's
hole.  This  is  pierced  again  and  again  with  a  pin  or
with  a  thorn  of  honey-locust,  while  the  wizard
repeats  his  incantations."  2  Other  Negroes  use  images
of  butter  as  well  as  wax  or  clay.  ^  The  use  of  such
images,  however,  is  as  likely  to  be  of  European  as  of
African  origin.  "In  Devonshire  witches  and  malev-
olent people  still  make  clay  images  of  those  whom  they
intend  to  hurt,  baptize  the  image  with  the  name  of
the  person  whom  it  is  meant  to  represent,  and  then
stick  it  full  of  pins  and  burn  it.  In  the  former  case
the  person  is  racked  with  rheumatism  in  all  his  limbs;
in  the  second  he  is  smitten  with  raging  fever."  *  In
Lowland  Scotland  sorcerers  harmed  their  enemies  by
making  waxen  images  of  them  and  piercing  these
images  with  pins  till  their  human  representatives
dwindled  and  died.  ^

Photographs.  The  use  of  photographs  resembles
somewhat  the  use  of  images  and  is  probably  of
European  origin,  photography  itself  being,  of  course,
unknown  in  Africa.  To  call  your  inconstant  sweet-
heart back,  turn  his  photograph  upside  down  for  nine
days.  ^  Most  common,  however,  is  the  idea  that  a
photograph  hung  upside  down  will  cause  headache,  '

142.

2  Dana,  M.,     Voodoo,  Metropolitan  Magazine,  vol.  28  (1908),  pp.  532-33.

3  38.

*  Henderson,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  192.

*  Simpson,  Eva  B.,     Folk-Lore  in  Lowland  Scotland,  p.  192.     For  other
cases,  see  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  pp.  411-12.

6  82,  141,  and  76.

'  57,  and  Smiley,  P.,     Folk-Lore  from  Va.,  S.  C,  Ga.,  Ala.,  and  Fla.,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  32  (1919),  pp.  380-81.


VOODOOISM    AND    CONJURATION  245

death,  ^  or  insanity.  -  Insanity  may  also  be  produced
by  putting  a  person's  picture  under  a  leak  in  the
roof  where  the  water  can  drip  on  it,  ^  and  death  by
nailing  a  person's  picture  on  a  green  tree  and  shooting
it  for  nine  mornings,  *  or  by  burying  the  photograph
in   the   graveyard  ^ — when   it  fades  the  person    dies.  ^

Roots.  All  conjurers  would  agree  that  roots  and
herbs  constitute  worthy  materia  medica,  but  a  complete
list  of  those  used  by  the  profession  as  a  whole  would
form  a  pharmacopoeia  in  itself.  I  will  simply  list  a
few  of  them  shown  me  by  different  conjurers  ^  in
our  rambles  through  the  woods:

Cruel  Man  of  the  Woods  (Poltandra  alba) — Wrap  roots  in
red  flannel.     Will  harm  your  enemies  if  they  try  to  harm  you.

Angel's  Turnip  {Apocymum  androscemifolium) — Wrap  in  red
flannel — brings  good  luck.

Devil's  Shoe  String  {Coronila  varia) — Cut  root  into  small
pieces,  put  camphor  or  whiskey  on  it  and  rub  on  your  hands —
will  give  you  control  over  any  woman.  "Dress"  inside  of  hands
with  it  and  back  of  hands  with  devil's  snuff",  grab  your  enemy
by  the  arm  when  he  comes  for  you  and  he  will  be  blinded.  Carry
a  bit  in  your  pocket,  no  snake  will  bite  you;  lay  a  piece  in  a  man's
path,  he  will  never  have  any  more  money  (he  tried  it  on  a  white
man);  use  it  for  a  gambling  "hand."

Plant  of  Peace  {AriscEma  triphyllum) — Take  the  leaves,
rub  on  hands — will  blind  enemies.  Use  to  make  "hands"  to
bring  security  and  peace — to  protect  you  from  enemies.


1 141,  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  16.  Thomas  and  Thomas,
Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  170.
271.  ■
»161.
*335.
'^275.
«267.
^258,  91,   141,  54,  and  48.


246      Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

King  of  the  Woods  {Aralia  racemosa) — (Three  leaves  repre-
senting the  Trinity) — Fine  for  making  any  sort  of  conquering
"hands."  Mix  with  sarsaparilla  and  coon-root  and  steep  into  a
tea.     Will  cure  almost  anything.

Samson  Snakeroot  (Psoralea  pedunculata) — Chew  to  soften
hearts.  Use  in  any  hand  or  trick.  Steep  into  a  tea  for  "cramp-
ing, lame  back,  or  lost  manhood."

Toadstool  {Mushroom) — Cut  off  the  top,  dry  it,  and  wet  with
camphor  or  whiskey.  Rub  on  limbs  to  cure  sprains  and  rheu-
matism and  to  protect  from  conjuration.

Grapevine — Hit  a  man  with  a  piece  of  grapevine  and  he  will
lose  the  use  of  his  limbs.

Ten    Fingers — Get    a    leaf    from    this  plant  and    measure  the

middle  finger  on  your  left  hand  with  it.  Then  tear  the  leaf  off,

wrap  it  up,  and  keep  it  in  your  pocket.  It  will  give  you  control
over  any  one.

Blood  of  Christ — Mix  roots  with  sugar,  spice,  and  blue-
stone.  Wrap  (towards  yourself)  in  red  flannel.  Brings  peace
and  safety.

Other  familiar  roots  in  my  "medicine-case"  are
"Adam,"  "Eve,"  "queen  of  the  valley,"  "purpose
of  the  earth,"  "bowels  of  Christ,"  "shame-weed,"
sarsaparilla,  "JImson  weed,"  "black  haw,"  "coon-
root,"  sumac,  "red  shanks,"  and  "smart-weed."
These  may  be  put  together  to  form  Innumerable
variations.  It  Is  futile  to  try  to  list  them,  but  I  will
try  to  give  some  representive  types  In  connection  with
other  topics.

Graveyard  Dirt.  Graveyard  dirt  Is  another  "specific"
of  the  hoodoo-man.  To  be  most  effective  It  must  be
procured  from  the  very  coffin  of  the  dead  person  on
the  waste  of  the  moon,  at  midnight,  ^  and  a  silver  coin


'91,  and  258.     Steiner  R.,    Observations  on  the  Practice  oj  Conjuring  in
Georgia,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  14  (1901),  p.  178.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  247

should  be  left  on  the  grave  to  keep  the  spirit  from
bothering  you  ^ — a  practice  also  common  in  the  Ba-
hamas. Some  say  that  such  dirt  should  be  obtained
the  day  after  burial,  but,  whether  this  be  true  or  not,
the  stuff  is  certainly  effectively  used  as  conjure-
mixture.  Rub  it  on  your  hands  and  you  can  conjure
a  person  by  shaking  hands  with  him;  sprinkle  it  under
his  house  or  about  his  yard  and  that  person  becomes
sleepy  and  sluggish  and  gradually  wastes  away,  or
else  he  will  immediately  run  away  and  leave  town.  ^
If  he  stays,  the  dirt  will  harm  him  for  a  long  time,  for  it
gradually  sinks  down  to  its  former  level  (that's
why  it  is  taken  from  the  top  of  the  coffin)  making  a
hole  in  the  ground  and  working  on  the  person  all  the
way  down.  ^  Sprinkled  into  a  person's  food  it  causes
heavy  sickness,  ^  but  bound  on  a  dog-bite  it  cures  the
bite  and  rots  every  tooth  in  the  dog's  head.  ^  A  clod
of  such  dirt  heaved  at  any  enemy  is  more  effective  than
the  Irishman's  brick.  «  It  is  a  powerful  mixture  and,
like  fire  or  money,  is  used  for  good  or  evil.  When  in
pain  get  some  of  this  graveyard  dirt  from  the  breast
of  the  corpse,  cook  it  with  lard,  and  make  into  a  sort  of
pancake.  Sprinkle  this  with  turpentine  and  bind
like  a  mustard  plaster  to  the  place  that  pains  you.  You
will  surely  be  cured.  ^  This  may  be  true — earth  holds
heat  and  makes  a  good  poultice,  while  turpentine  has  a
known    curative   property.     On  the    other    hand,  you

1 141,  and  91.  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.
F.  L.  S.,  vol.  16  (1923),  p.  211.

2 141,  and  91.  Steiner,  R.,  Observations  on  the  Practice  of  Conjuring  in
Georgia,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  14  (1901),  p.  18Q.

3  141,  and  91.  Steiner,  R.,  Braziel  Robinson  Possessed  of  Two  Spirits,
J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  13  (1901),  p.  228.

*  258.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  28  (1899),  p.  112.

^Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  66.     Also  infoimant  91.

«203.

'258.


248     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

may  harm  your  enemy  beyond  repair  by  getting  a
rabbit's  tail,  scorching  it,  mixing  with  red  pepper  and
graveyard  dirt,  and  putting  it  where  he  will  come  into
contact  with  it.  ^  Even  as  far  north  as  Philadelphia
it  is  believed  that  graveyard  dirt  may  be  used  in  the
cellar  to  make  a  house -haunted.  ^  The  Mississippi
slave  Negroes  would  pull  up  the  grave-board  from  the
head  of  the  tomb  and  whittle  a  few  shavings  from  it,
letting  them  fall  on  the  grave  itself.  These  shavings
were  then  picked  up,  together  with  a  little  of  the  grave-
dirt,  boiled  in  water,  and  strained.  This  decoction
mixed  with  whiskey  and  given  to  an  enemy  was  sure  to
cause  his  early  death  by  consumption.  ^  A  very
widespread  belief  is  that  if  you  put  graveyard  dirt  on
your  feet  or  into  your  shoes  when  the  dogs  are  after
you  they  will  not  be  able  to  follow  your  track — a  belief
especially  held  by  the  slave  Negroes  at  a  time  when
bloodhounds  were  used  to  trace  down  fugitives.  *
A  New  Orleans  Negro  tells  me  of  what  he  claims  to
be  an  actual  experience.  He  had  escaped  from  jail
and  the  bloodhounds  on  his  track  had  chased  him
through  the  woods  until  he  was  almost  tired  out.
Suddenly  he  came  upon  a  little  graveyard.  An  old
slave  had  told  him  of  the  use  of  the  dirt  in  this  way.
Digging  in  the  left  hand  side  of  the  grave  he  got  some
dirt.  Walking  backwards  he  sprinkled  this  in  his
tracks  then  turned  around  and  threw  the  last  bit  over
his  left  shoulder.  To  his  amazement  "dem  dere
dawgs  stopped  daid  at  de  graveyard.  Didn'  bay  no
more.     Turned   'bout  an'   went  on   home."  ^


114L

2  N.  Y.  World,  Oct.  11,  1884.     Quoted  in  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  3  (1890),  p.  184.

3  141.

^273,  286,  394,  and  378.    Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  46,  vol.  33
(1904),  p.  52.
S54.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  249

Another  informant  recommends  a  more  complicated
mixture.  Take  some  cow  manure,  dry  it,  and  mix
with  snuff.  Add  to  this  two  bottles  of  turpentine
and  some  hairs  from  the  end  of  a  dog's  tail.  "Dress"
your  feet  with  this  compound  and  the  dogs  will  never
follow  you.  1  The  Negroes  generally  go  barefooted  and
the  turpentine  might  after  all  be  sufficient  to  throw  the
dogs  off  the  scent.  A  dog  may  also  be  prevented  from
chasing  you  by  putting  red  pepper  in  your  shoes,  ^
and  graveyard  dirt  on  your  person  will  absolutely  keep
dogs  from  biting  you.  ^  While  this  use  of  graveyard
dirt  may  be  of  African  origin,  I  am  inclined  to  look  to
European  sources  because  of  the  fact  that  it  is  wide-
spread— though  it  is  not  particularly  believed  in  by  the
whites.  I  have  found  no  African  cases,  possibly
because  of  incomplete  records,  but  in  Scotland,  grave-
mould  was  thrown  in  the  mill-race  to  stop  the  mill-
wheel,  and  in  Ireland,  clay  or  mould  from  the  graves
of  priests  boiled  with  milk  was  used  in  the  cure  of
disease — the  dirt,  of  course,  being  a  substitution  for
the  corpse  itself.  ■*

Reptiles  in  the  Body.  The  New  Orleans  voodoos
today,  so  I  am  told,  use  the  snake  in  the  main,  only
to  work  harm — to  put  people  out  of  this  world.  To
do  this  they  get  a  poisonous  snake  and  kill  him  when
he  is  straighened  out  (if  you  kill  him  when  coiled  he
will  bite  himself  as  you  strike  him  and  the  poison  will
be  discharged).  Cut  off  his  head  with  the  poison  still
in  the  fangs,  hang  the  head  up  in  the  chimney  until  it


1141.

2  208.

'  141.     Work,  M.  H.,     Some  Geechee  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  35
(1905),  p.  635.

*  Gomme,  G.  L.,     Ethnology  in  Folklore,  p.  113  ff.


250     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

is  perfectly  dry,  powder  very  finely,  and  slip  into  a
person's  food  or  drink.  The  powder  inside  the  person
will  finally  develop  into  full-grown  snakes,  which  will
destroy  him  unless  removed.  ^  There  are  European
cases  of  reptiles  within  a  person,  ^  and  while  the  belief
is  very  little  found  among  the  white  people  of  the  South,
it  is  so  frequent  among  the  Negroes  that  it  seems  more
than  possible  that  it  is  mainly  of  European  origin.  Such
may  easily  be  the  case — the  white  belief  in  witches  has
declined  amazingly  while  the  Negroes  still  hold  to  the
idea — and  such  may  also  be  the  case  with  internal
reptiles.  In  spite  of  the  fact  that  several  doctors  have
given  the  opinion  that  it  would  be  impossible  for  reptiles
to  live  in  the  human  stomach,  yet  several  reputable
white  people  have  told  me  of  unfortunate  people  made
ghastly  sick  for  months  at  a  time  because  of  accidentally
swallowing  a  small  snake  or  lizard  while  drinking  from
a  spring  or  stream,  and  of  their  continued  illness  until
the  reptile  was  finally  removed,  in  most  cases,  alive.  ^
Possibly  the  presence  of  tapeworms  and  other  intes-
tinal parasites  in  the  South,  along  with  the  use  of  the
open  woods  or  privy  has  something  to  do  with  the  idea
of  snakes  in  the  body,  but  at  any  rate  the  notion  is  most
widespread.  On  the  other  hand  the  idea  may  have
first  arisen  through  the  resemblance  of  the  intestines
to  snakes.

The  central  theme  is  that  snake-dust  (the  dust  made
by  pulverizing  a  dried  snake,  lizard,  frog,  or  spider)  put
into  a  person's  food  or  drink  will  grow  to  full  sized


154.

"^  Campbell,  J.  F.,    Popular  Tales  of  the  West  Highlands,  vol.  ii,  pp.  382-84.
Lean's  Collectanea,   vol.   2,  p.    179.

3  41,  and  266.     See  also,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  25  (1896),  p.  16.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoN JURATION  251

reptiles  within  that  person.  ^  Variations  from  this
theme  consist  in  using  only  the  powdered  fangs  ^  or  fat '
of  the  snake;  in  shaking  the  dust  upon  the  person
through  cracks  in  the  ceiling  or  putting  it  in  his  shoes;  *
and  by  the  use  of  snake's  blood  (in  sweet  milk)  instead
of  snake-dust.  ^  The  current  Negro  belief  (probably
of  European  origin)  «  is  that  horsehair  placed  in  water
will  soon  turn  to  snakes.  An  extension  of  the  idea  is
that  snakes  may  be  put  into  a  person  by  getting  some
hair  from  a  male  horse,  chopping  it  up  finely,  and  giving
it  to  the  person  in  milk.  ^  In  another  case  the  feat  was
accomplished  by  cooking  a  "ground-puppy"  and
feeding  it  to  the  enemy.  ^  In  Chestertown,  Md.,  as
many  "ground-puppies"  or  "ground-dogs"  (some  com-
mon species  of  salamander)  as  possible  are  put  into  a
wide-mouthed  bottle  and  buried  under  the  threshold
of  the  person  to  be  conjured,  at  the  same  time  making
crosses  with  four  fingers  on  the  earth  above  the
buried  bottle.  "After  a  time  the  'ground-puppies'
will  burst  the  containing  bottle,  and  then  they  will
find  their  way  into  the  stomach  of  the  person  against
whom  the  spell  is  directed,  and  kill  him."  ^  Others
think  the  conjurer  simply  works  a  spell  upon  his  victim
and  turns  his  intestines  into  snakes  or  lizards  or  what-


1  112,  15,  220,  Steiner,  R.,  Observations  on  the  Practice  of  Conjuring  in
Georgia,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  14  (1901),  p.  180.  Steiner,  R.,  Braziel  Robinson
Possessed  of  Two  Spirits,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  13  (1900),  p.  228.  Bergen,  F.  D.,
Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7  (1899),  p.  14.

2  141.

M68.

*  91,  and  286.  Thomas  and  Thomas,  Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  274-75,
283-84.     Pitkin,  Helen,     An  Angel  by  Brevet,  pp.  216-17.

6  141.

*  Since  it  is  found  among  the  rural  whites  of  Illinois.  86.
M36.

^Pitkin,  Helen,  An  Angel  by  Brevet,  pp.  345-46.  Bergen,  F.  D.,  Animal
and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7  (1899),  p.  14.

*  Bergen  F.  D.,  Concerning  Negro  Sorcery  in  the  United  Stales,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  3  (1890),  p.  286.


252     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

ever  the  conjurer  wishes.  ^  Another  conjurer  tells  me
that  anvil-dust  (he  calls  it  "Allerkerchie")  is  mixed
with  a  person's  food  or  put  in  his  hatband.  That,  in
his  food,  will  "rot  his  guts  and  make  snakes  inside  of
him,"  while  that,  on  his  hatband,  will  make  him  go
entirely  blind.  ^  The  reptile-dust  is  the  common
mode,  however;  and  kept  in  a  little  vial  in  my  conjure
collection  always  won  respect  and  opened  wary
mouths.  An  educated  former  slave  of  Mississippi  tells
me  of  a  certain  man  who,  desiring  another  man's  wife,
baked  a  spider,  beat  it  into  a  powder,  and  slipped  it  Into
the  husband's  food.  The  man  went  absolutely  crazy
and  was  sent  to  the  insane  asylum,  where  they  said
that  some  old  "antediluvian  stuff  "  had  been  used
against  him  and  he  could  not  be  helped.  Another
friend  of  his  was  tricked  by  an  enemy  who  gave  him  a
powder,  made  from  maggots,  crickets,  and  roaches,  in
a  glass  of  whiskey.  He  held  the  glass  in  his  right  hand
and  in  a  short  time  that  hand  began  to  swell.  The
regular  doctor  could  not  help  him,  so  one  night  he
decided  to  investigate  the  matter  himself.  Great  was
his  astonishment,  on  slitting  open  the  palm  of  his  hand
with  a  small  knife,  to  find  that  the  inside  of  his  hand
"was  alive  with  small  black-headed  worms."  He  rushed
to  the  conjure-doctor,  who  told  him  not  to  worry
about  this  common  occurence,  and  gave  him  a  syrup
to  take.  On  taking  this  "the  worms  came  jumping
out  of  his  flesh  like  'skippers'  from  a  piece  of  rotten
ham."  3     In  a  Georgia  case  a  person  was  conjured  by

U52.

291.

3  84.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  253

drinking  some  whiskey.  She  went  immediately  to  a
hoodoo-doctor  and  this  doctor  took  a  frog  and  a  lizard
out  of  her.  ^

Reptilian  Complications.  "In  many  cases  snakes
and  lizards  are  seen  running  up  and  down  under  the
flesh,  or  are  even  known  to  show  their  heads  from  the
sufferer's  mouth.  One  example  is  given  of  a  woman
possessed  by  a  lizard  that  would  run  up  and  down  her
throat  and  holler  when  she  would  be  a-talking."
Another  case  is  of  a  man  whose  food  did  him  no  good.
The  conjure-doctor  told  him  that  he  had  been  conjured,
and  that  inside  of  him  were  a  number  of  small  snakes
which  ate  up  the  food  as  fast  as  he  consumed  it.  Another
woman,  who  had  lizards  crawling  in  her  body,  was  obliged
to  eat  very  often  to  keep  the  lizards  from  eating  her.

This  possession  by  reptiles  of  various  kinds  seems
to  be  a  part  in  almost  every  evil  wrought  by  the  con-
jurer. Sometimes  when  direct  evidence  of  these
reptiles  fails  to  appear  during  the  life  of  the  patient,
a  post-mortem  brings  them  to  light  and  establishes  the
truth  of  the  doctor's  diagnosis.  ^  Often  the  snake  or
lizard  shows  its  presence  by  running  up  and  down  the
back  or  arm;  ^  a  nervous  twitching  in  the  arm  of  one
Negro  was  attributed  to  a  snake  in  that  member;  *  and
several  reputable  Negroes  have  testified  to  me  that
they  have  seen  snakes  come  crawling  out  of  the  nose,
mouth,  or  ears  of  dying  men.  ^  A  Mississippi  chief  of
police  tells  me,  "I  recently  had  a  negro  woman  in  the
city  jail  who  believed  that  she  had  been  hoodooed  by

167

^  Bacon,    A.    M.,     Conjuring   and    Conjure-Doctors,    Southern    Workman,
vol.  28  (1895),  p.  210.
U5
4  353.

«  8,  153,  and  286.


254     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

a  conjure-bag  artist.  She  was  screaming  and  hollering,
and  had  worked  herself  into  such  a  high  nervous  tension
that  it  was  necessary  for  me  to  call  a  doctor  to  quiet
her.  She  imagined  that  she  had  lizards  and  various
other  things  creeping  under  her  skin  and  flesh.  She
would  get  down  and  crawl  over  the  floor  and  apparently
was  suffering  great  agony."  ^  Another  informant  tells
of  a  case  of  a  woman  who  was  saved  by  taking  a  live
lizard  from  her  mouth,  2  and  an  educated  ex-slave
testifies  that  he  actually  saw  such  a  performance.  A
boarder  of  his  was  taken  sick  suddenly  with  a  terrible
"griping"  in  the  stomach.  Getting  the  regular  doctor
did  her  no  good,  but  the  conjure-doctor  said  she  had  a
snake  in  her  stomach.  Taking  a  little  fresh  sweet  milk
in  a  pan,  he  had  the  woman  lie  down  flat  on  her  stomach
with  her  mouth  over  the  pan  of  milk.  Very  soon  a
small  snake  about  the  size  of  a  pencil  came  creeping  out
of  her  mouth  and  crawled  into  the  milk  (snakes  like
milk — some  of  them  suck  cows).  The  doctor  (a
woman)  caught  it  and  slipped  it  into  a  small  vial.  She
would  not  let  any  one  else  handle  it,  but  there  was  no
chance  for  deception;  although  my  informant  thinks  it
may  have  been  a  large  "stomach-worm"  instead  of  a
snake.  At  any  rate  the  sick  person  was  immediately
cured.  ^  Tea  made  from  snakeroot  and  silk-root  will
drive  out  the  snakes  from  the  body  so  conjurers  say;  ^
as  will  also  a  tincture  made  by  soaking  May-apple  root,
or  snakeroot,  in  whiskey;  ^  or  else  a  tea  made  of  "red
shanks"    {Ceanothus  Americanus)    roots.  «     It   is   true

1  255.
2 153.

3  84.

4  65.

^  Bergen,   F.   D.,     Concerning  Negro  Sorcery  in  the   United  States,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  3,  p.  286.
"258.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  255

that  an  excess  of  gastric  juice  in  the  stomach  will
produce  a  gnawing  and  scratching  irritation  similar  to
that  which  a  lizard  would  create,  ^  and  it  may  be  this
which  leads  the  snake-fearing  Negro  to  imagine  reptiles
within  him.  But  once  he  gets  this  notion  into  his  head
often  nothing  will  cure  him  but  the  pretended
removal  of  the  "varmint"  gnawing  at  his  vitals.  There
are  many  cases  of  almost  miraculous  cures  of  this  sort,
some  of  which  I  will  cite  in  a  later  connection.

^'Lockin^  de  Bowels.''''  Another  common  bit  of
Negro  conjuration  is  the  "locking  of  the  bowels"  by
plugging  some  of  a  person's  excreta  into  a  tree.  Bore
a  hole  in  a  large  tree,  insert  some  of  your  enemy's
excreta  into  the  hole  and  plug  it  up  tightly.  Within
a  short  time  that  person  will  be  dead  from  constipation
unless  the  plug  is  removed.  ^  One  skeptic  tried  this
out  on  his  dog  and  reports,  "I  sho'  done  los'  a  line
houn'."  3  Some  say  the  hole  should  be  bored  on  the
west  side  of  the  tree  so  that  the  person  will  grow
weaker  and  weaker  each  time  the  sun  goes  down;-*
others  claim  that  the  feces  should  be  taken  up  in  a
snail's  shell  and  inserted  in  a  hole  on  the  north  side
of  the  tree  where  all  the  cold  winds  and  frost  will
cause  intense  pain  and  cramping  to  the  victim.  ^
Still  others  cook  the  excreta  first  in  an  old  skillet
(thus  causing  fever),  put  it  into  a  tin  snuif-box,  force
the  box  into  the  hole  in  the  tree  so  that  a  cow  or  other
animal  will  not  accidentally  knock  it  out.  Treated
in  this  way  the  victim  dies  an  unusually  hard  and
painful    death.  "     Another    conjurer    puts    vinegar    in

^  Cabot,  R.  C,     Social  Service  and  the  Art  of  Healing,  pp.  162-67.

M04.

3  326.

*54.

»258.

«141.


256     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

with  the  dejecta  and  drives  a  rusty  nail  in  the  bung.
"Ez  de  vinegah  wu'ks  so  will  his  guts  wu'k,  and
de  nail  will  burn  lak  hot  fier."  ^  In  most  cases
relief  can  be  obtained  only  by  removing  the  plug —
the  Georgia  Negroes  say  the  tree  must  be  burned
as  well.  2  Often,  however,  the  tree  cannot  be
located,  and  a  more  eflPective  remedy  is  as  follows:
Get  some  seed  from  a  green  gourd,  steep  into  a  tea
and  give  the  patient  a  spoonful  of  this  three  times
a  day  in  a  silver  spoon.  Within  a  short  time  the
plug  in  the  tree  will  pop  out  under  this  treatment  and
the  man  will  recover.  ^  Even  animals,  as  we  have  indi-
cated, may  be  thus  acted  upon.  One  Negro  minister
admits  ignorance  of  conjuration  with  the  exception  of
one  item  learned  as  a  child.  When  you  see  a  dog  begin-
ning to  defecate,  hook  your  two  forefingers  together
and  pull  hard.  The  dog  will  be  absolutely  unable  to
relieve  his  natural  wants  so  long  as  you  keep  pulling.  *

The  ''''Black  Cat  Bone.''''  A  final  very  common  belief
is  that  wonders  in  conjuration  may  be  worked  by
the  use  of  a  so-called  "black  cat  bone."  Here  we
have  a  good  example  of  the  fact  that  the  very  wide-
spread beliefs  are  almost  all  of  European  origin.
The  black  cat  is,  of  course,  a  European  fetish  animal,
though  his  antiquity  apparently  dates  back  to  Egyp-
tian civilization,  mummified  cats  being  found  in
many    of   the    tombs.  ^     The    superstition    about    the


19L

*  Steiner,  R.,    Observations  on  the  Practice  of  Conjuring  in  Georgia,  J.  A.  F.L.,
vol.  14  (1901),  p.  179.

8  141.

M03.

^  Eichler,  Lillian,     Customs  of  Mankind,  p.  643,  and  596.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  257

bone  also  is  found  among  the  Germans  of  Canada
where  contact  with  the  Negroes  has  not  taken  place,
thus  pointing  plainly  to  an  European  source.  ^  In
New  Orleans  this  bone  is  obtained  by  boiling  a  black
"boar"  (tom)  cat  until  the  meat  has  completely  left
the  bones.  When  this  has  been  done,  take  the  bones
together  with  a  small  mirror  and  go  to  some  cross-
roads in  the  woods  wbere  no  one  will  see  you.  Stand
directly  between  the  forks  with  your  back  to  the  straight
road  holding  the  mirror  up  before  you  so  that  the  road
behind  is  reflected.  Then  hold  your  mouth  open
and  pass  the  bones,  one  by  one,  through  it,  looking
into  the  mirror  all  the  time.  When  you  get  to  the
right  bone  the  mirror  will  become  dark — you  cannot
see  a  thing  in  it.  Don't  be  afraid;  hang  on  to  that
bone — it  is  the  "black  cat  bone"  and  by  putting  it
into  your  mouth  you  can  make  yourself  invisible  at
will.  But  the  trouble  is  that  a  man  who  does  this
automatically  "signs  up  wid  de  debbil.  He  kin  hoodoo
an'  do  ennything  he  wants  in  disyere  world,  but  he
sho'  done  tuk  his  part  outer  de  Kingdom."  2  On  the
Sea  Islands  the  same  procedure  is  used  except  that
here  the  bones  are  simply  held  up  one  by  one  before
the  mirror  and  the  one  that  does  not  show  a  reflection
of  itself  is  the  proper  one.  Here  it  is  used  to  bring
a  person  money,  ^  as  is  also  often  the  case  with  the
Mississippi  Negroes,  ^  In  still  other  cases  all  the
bones    are   thrown    into   running   water   and   the   one

1  Wintemburg,  W.  J.,     Items  of  German-Canadian  Folk-Lore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  12  (1899),  p.  49.

2  54,  and  66.

3  Parsons,  E.G.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  16
(1923),  p.  209.

*306.


17


258     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

that  refuses  to  sink  is  the  chosen  one.  ^  Others  say
the  cat  should  be  cooked  in  a  graveyard  and  the
bones  thrown  into  running  water.  The  one  that
will  go  upstream  is  the  proper  one.  ^  In  other  cases
the  cat  is  simply  put  in  the  oven  and  cooked  until
the  flesh  and  bones  are  all  consumed.  The  only
bone  left  will  be  jumping  about  in  the  spider,  and
this  is  the  bone  that  will  ward'off  evil.  ^  In  another
case  it  is  said  that,  after  boiling  the  flesh  from  the
bones,  if  you  pick  them  up  one  at  a  time,  when  you
get  to  the  right  one  the  cat  will  holler.  *  The  Geechee
witch  5  gets  her  power  by  carrying  a  bone  procured  in
this  manner,  and  "I  will  use  my  black-cat  bone"
is  said  to  be  a  common  expression  of  a  jealous  lover
to  his  rival.  ^  While  the  chief  power  of  such  a  bone
is  that  of  making  a  person  invisible,  ^  it  will  also
enable  you  to  marry  your  choice,  ^  will  bring  you
good  luck  all  your  life,  ^  and,  in  fact,  some  say,  will
fix  you  so  that  you  can  do  anything  whatsoever.  ^ "
My  brother  tells  me  of  watching  some  Negroes  "pinch
down"  a  heavily  loaded  box-car.  While  the  laborers
were  straining  away,  one  of  the  men  was  telling  them
how  much  a  black  cat  bone  would  expedite  matters —
the  car  could  then  be  moved  with  one  finger.  ^  ^     This

iQL

2  36,  360,  and  208.

'  141.     Davis,  H.  C,     Negro  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.
27  (1914),  p.  247  ff.

4  61.

^  The  English  witch  was  supposed   not  to   sink  when  thrown  in   water.

*  Work,  M.  H.,     Some  Geechee  Folk-Lore,   Southern   Workman.,  vol.  35
(1905),  pp.  634-35.

^  312,  and  342.

8  311,  and  391.

»341.
i»168.
1 1 267.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  259

case  approaches  pointedly  the  specific  practical  ends
of  conjuration,  and  we  turn  now  to  a  consideration  of
these  definite  purposes,  some  of  which  have  already
been  indicated  in  our  discussion  of  the  methods  of
conjuration.

Practical  African  Witchcraft.  Before  considering  the
uses  of  conjure  with  the  American  Negro,  It  Is  well
to  know  something  of  the  extent  to  which  African
religion,  especially  that  section  which  we  would  call
witchcraft,  permeates  and  affects  the  affairs  of  daily
life.  Perhaps  the  most  concise  way  of  showing  this  Is
simply  to  list  some  representative  practical  applications
of  fetishism.  Among  other  things  the  West  African
makes  use  of  the  supernatural  as  follows:

To  detect  witches  and  wizards.  ^

To  prevent  and  cure  disease.  ^

To  ward  off  witchcraft.

To  cause  or  to  prevent  rain.

To  protect  a  house  from  fire.

To  protect  a  person  from  evil  spirits.  ^

To  protect  property  against  theft.  *


1  Winterbottom,  T.,  Account  of  the  Natives  in  the  Neighborhood  of  Sierra
Leone,  vol.  i,  p.  235.  For  the  nature  of  these  witchcraft  ordeals  and  the
power  given  to  the  witch-doctor  in  consequence,  see  Kingsley,  M.  H.,
West  African  Studies,  pp.  490-91.  Kingsley,  M.  H.,  Travels  in  West
Africa,  pp.  464,  and  466.  Burton,  R.  F.,  Wit  and  Wisdom  from  West  Africa,
p.  400.

^  Disease  is  thought  to  be  due  to  an  evil  spirit  in  the  body.  Prevention  is
simply  keeping  this  spirit  away,  while  cures  by  ill-tasting  substances,  noise,
evil  odors,  poultices,  heat,  suction,  massage,  and  such  Uke,  are  all  designed
to  make  the  body  an  uncomfortable  habitation  for  the  spirit.  See  Leonard,
A.  G.,  The  Lower  Niger  and  Its  Tribes,  p.  263.  Kingsley,  M.  H.,  West
African  Studies,  pp.  180-86.  Beatty,  H.  J.,  Human  Leopards,  pp.  24-25.
Milligan,  R.  H.,  Fetish  Folk  of  West  Africa,  p.  223.  Tylor,  E.  B.,  Primitive
Culture,  vol.  2,  p.  148.

^  Leonard,  A.  G.,     The  Lower  Niger  and  Its  Tribes,  p.  265.

*  Cronise  and  Ward,  Cunnie  Rabbit,  Mr.  Spider  and  the  Other  Beef,  p.  166.
Ellis,  A.  B.,  Ewe-speaking  Peoples,  p.  92.  Basden,  G.  T.,  Among  the  Ibos
of  Nigeria,  p.  38.  Ellis,  G.  E.,  Negro  Culture  in  West  Africa,  pp.  93-94.
Ellis,   A.   B.,     Tshi-speaking  Peoples,  pp.    103-04.


260     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

To  protect  an  individual  or  village  against  violence  or

poison.  ^
To  prevent  people  talking  scandal  about  one.  ^
To  gain  riches  and  honor.  ^
To  gain  entry  into  locked  dwellings.
To  cause  insanity  or  blindness.  ■*
To  cause  sickness  or  death.  ^
To  collect  debts.  ^
To  discover  thieves  or  murderers.  "^
To  punish  unknown  criminals.  ^
To  give  strength  to  athletes.  ^
To  weaken  enemies.  ^  "
To  give  protection  in  warfare.  ^  ^
To  give  aid  and  protection  in  hunting.  ^  ^
To  assist  in  fishing,  journeying,  and  trading.  ^  ^
To  reserve  a  place  for  fishing,  feasting,  or  getting  water.  ^  *
To  stop  a  drunkard  from  drinking.  ^  ^
To  enforce  food  taboos.  ^  ^


^Dennett,  R.  E.,  Notes  on  the  Folklore  of  the  Fjort,  pp.  17-18.  Basden,
G.  T.,  Among  the  Ibos  of  Nigeria,  p.  220.  Glave,  E.  J.,  Fetishism  in  Congo-
land,  Century  Magazine,  vol.  19  (1891),  p.  825.

2  Ellis,  A.  B.,     Tshi-speaking  Peoples,  pp.  103-04.

^  Beatty,  K.  J.,     Human  Leopards,  pp.  23-24.

*  Ellis,  A.  B.,     Ewe-speaking  Peoples,  p.  94.

'  Leonard,  A.  G.,  The  Lower  Niger  and  Its  Tribes,  pp.  499-500.  Kingsley,
M.  H.,     Travels  in  West  Africa,  p.  462.

*  Thomas,  N.  W.,     Anthrop.  Kept,  on  Sierra  Leone,  pt.  1,  p.  81.

^  Le  Compte,  C.  N.  de  Cardi,  Ju-Ju  Laws  and  Customs  in  the  Niger
Delta,  J.  A.  L,  vol.  29  (1899),  pp.  51-52.  Burton,  R.  F.,  Wit  and  Wisdom
from  West  Africa,  p.   153.

8  Chatelain,  H.,  Folk-Tales  of  Angola,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  i  (1894),  p.  260
(note  97).

'  Basden,  G.  T.,     Among  the  Ihos  of  Nigeria,  pp.  129-30.

i<*Koelle,  S.  M.,     African  Native  Literature    (Kanuri  Proverbs),  p.  172.

^ '  Basden,  G.  T.,     Among  the  Ibos  of  Nigeria,  pp.  203-04.

^^  Leonard,  A.  G.,  The  Lower  Niger  and  Its  Tribes,  pp.  267-68.  Koelle,
S.  M.,  African  Native  Literature  (Kanuri  Proverbs),  p.  178.  Frazer,  J.  G.,
The  Golden  Bough,  p.  45.

^*  Nassau,  R.  H.,  Fetichism  in  West  Africa,  p.  173  ff.  Kingsley,  M.  H.,
West  African  Studies,  pp.   135-55.

1^  Dennett,  R.  E.,     Notes  on  the  Folklore  of  the  Fjort,  p.  118.

^*  Phillips,  R.  C.,  The  Lower  Congo,  A  Sociological  Study,  J.  A.  I.,  vol.  17
(1888),  pp.  228-29.

1 «  Milligan,  R.  H.,  The  Fetish  Folk  of  West  Africa,  p.  118.  Bell,  W.  C.,
Umbundu  Tales,  Angola,  Southwest  Africa,  J.A.F.  L.,  vol.  35  (1922), pp.  127-28.
Kingsley,  M.  H.,  West  African  Studies,  p.  108,  and  174.  Schwab,  Bulu
Folk-Tales,  J.  A.F.  L.,  vol.  27  (1914),  pp.  270-71.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  261

To  protect  women  from  violation.  ^

To  detect  unfaithful  wives.  ^

To  promote  fecundity.  ^

To  produce  sterility  in  an  enemy.  *

To  cause  a  woman  to  bear  twins.  ^

To  aid  in  childbirth.  ^

To  keep  children  healthy.  ^

To  win  a  person's  love.  ^

To  create  or  dissolve  brotherhood. '

To  bind  oaths  or  covenants.  ^^

To  break  such  oaths.  ^  ^

These  cases  bear  out  Miss  Kingsiey's  statement
that  with  the  West  African,  "charms  are  made  for
every  occupation  and  desire  in  life — loving,  hating,
buying,  selling,  fishing,  planting,  traveling,  hunting,
etc.,  and  although  they  are  usually  in  the  form  of
things  filled  with  a  mixture  in  which  the  spirit  nestles,
yet  there  are  other  kinds;  for  example,  a  great  love
charm  is  made  of  the  water  in  which  the  lover  has
washed,  and  this,  mingled  with  the  drink  of  the  loved
one,  is  held  to  soften  the  hardest  heart.  Human  eye-
balls, particularly  of  white  men,  are  a  great  charm"  ^  -
(possibly  because  they  are  often  regarded  as  the  site  of


^  Ellis,  G.,  E.,     Negro  Culture  in  West  Africa,  p.  37.
^  Ibid.,  p.  122,  and  Beatty,  K.  J.,     Human  Leopards,  p.  25.
3  Chatelain,  H.,     African  Folk-Life,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.   10  (1897),  p.  24.
^Talbot,  D.  A.,     Woman's  Mysteries  of  a  Primitive  People,  p.  173.     Car-
dinal, A.  W.,     The  Natives  of  the  Northern  Territories  of  the  Gold  Coast,  p.  48.

*  Le  Compte,  C.  N.  de  Cardi,  Ju-Ju  Laws  and  Customs  in  the  Niger
Delta,  J.  A.  /.,  vol.  29  (1899),  p.  56  ff.  (In  the  Niger  Delta  both  mother
and  twins  are  put  to  death).

6  Ellis,  A.  B.,     Tshi-speaking  Peoples,  pp.  222-23.

^  Kingsley,  M.  H.,  West  African  Studies,  p.  113,  and  Ellis,  A.  B.,  Yor-
uba-speaking  Peoples,  p.  113.

*  Kingsley,  M.  H.,     Travels  in  West  Africa,  pp.  448-49.

^  Burton,  R.  F.,     Wit  and  Wisdom  from  West  Africa,  p.  360,  and  399.
^"Nassau,  R.  H.,     Where  Animals  Talk,  p.  242.     Beatty,  K.  J.,     Human
Leopards,  pp.  25-26,  and  Ellis,  A.  B.,     Tshi-speaking  Peoples,  p.  197.
^^  Beatty,  K.  J.,     Human  Leopards,  p.  25.
1 2  Kingsley,  M.  H.,     Travels  in  West  Africa,  pp.  448-49.     (Italics  my  own).


262     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

the  soul  and  can  look  out  for  dangers).  In  the  Niger
Delta  medicines  are  prepared  to  cause  or  to  prevent
rain,  to  protect  a  house  or  person  from  fire,  to  prevent
a  dying  man  from  losing  his  speech  in  the  case  of  sudden
and  unexpected  death,  to  prevent  the  spells  of  witch-
craft, to  prevent  women  from  becoming  barren  and  to
protect  those  who  are  pregnant,  and  to  protect  a  person
from  evil  spirits  or  spirits  of  the  dead.  ^  " .  .  .
For  the  needs  of  life,  day  by  day,  with  its  routine  of
occupations,  whose  outgoings  and  incomings  are  known
and  expected,  the  Bantu  fetish  worshiper  depends  on
his  regular  fetish  charms."  He  "keeps  these  amulets
and  mixed  medicines  hanging  on  the  wall  of  his  room
or  hidden  in  one  of  his  boxes.  But  he  gives  them  no
regular  reverence  or  worship,  no  sacrifice  or  prayer,
until  such  times  as  their  services  are  needed.  He
knows  that  the  utilized  actual  spirits  (or  at  least  their
influence),  each  in  its  specific  material  object,  is  safely
ensconced  and  is  only  waiting  the  needs  of  its  owner  to
be  called  into  action."  2

Where  Ghosts  Are  Real.  In  the  case  of  these  West
African  folk,  "religion  is  not  with  them  as  with  civilized
peoples,  a  matter  outside  one's  daily  life;  it  is  a  subject
which  affects  and  influences  in  some  degree  almost  every
action  of  their  daily  life,  and  which  is  closely  inter-
woven with  all  of  their  habits,  customs,  and  modes  of
thought."  3  It  is  hard  for  us  to  conceive  of  the  actu-
ality of  this  spirit  environment  to  the  native.  An
African,  talking  around  a  bush  fire  or  in  a  village
palaver  house,  will  often  turn  around  and  say,  "  'You

1  Leonard,  A.  G.,     The,  Lower  Niger  and  Its  Tribes,  p.  265.

2  Nassau,  R.  H.,     Fetichism  in  West  Africa,  p.  173  ff.
*  Ellis,  A.  B.,     Tshi-speaking  Peoples,  p.  9.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  263

remember  that,  mother!'  to  the  ghost  that  to  him  was
there."  ^  In  the  gold-producing  districts,  as  for
instance,  at  Essaman  in  Warsaw,  the  gold  is  believed
to  be  brought  up  from  the  bowels  of  the  earth  by  a
local  deity,  who  thus  rewards  his  people  for  their
worship  and  for  the  offerings  made  to  him.  Owing  to
the  crude  methods  of  mining  it  is  not  infrequent  that
people  are  buried  alive  by  the  falling  earth.  In  such
cases  no  attempt  is  made  to  rescue  the  buried  men,  for
it  is  thought  that  the  deity  is  claiming  them  to  help
bring  up  gold  from  the  depths  below.  Gold-digging
is  limited  to  three  months  in  the  year  to  give  the  god
plenty  of  time  to  bring  up  more  gold.  Should  the
supply  prove  scanty,  two  or  three  slaves  are  sacrificed
to  the  god  to  propitiate  him  and  to  provide  him  with
assistants.  ^  "To  the  African  there  is  perhaps  no  gap
between  the  conception  of  spirit  and  matter,  animate  or
inanimate.  It  is  all  an  affair  of  grade — not  of  essential
difference  in  essence.  .  .  .  You  will  see  him
before  starting  out  to  hunt  or  fight,  rubbing  medicine
into  his  weapons  to  strengthen  the  spirits  within  them,
talking  to  them  all  the  while.''''  ^  In  Sierra  Leone  bread
is  rubbed  on  a  cutlass  before  farming,  so  that  the
children  may  not  wound  themselves.  ^  Because  of
sickness  and  deaths,  the  natives  will  change  the  location
of  their  villages,  running  away"  from  the  malevolent
spirits  ^  just  as  they  would  run  from  actual  enemies,  and
in  one  of  their  folk-tales  we  have  a  case  of  a  man  flogging
a  shot  to  make  it  go  and  kill  a  deer.  ^     One  traveler  in  the

1  Kingsley,  M.  H.,  West  African  Studies,  p.  63.
"^  Ellis,  A.  B.,  Tshi-speaking  Peoples,  pp.  69-70.
3  Kingsley,  M.  H.,     West  African  Studies,  pp.  129-30.

*  Thomas,  N.  W.,     Anthrop.  Rept.  on  Sierra  Leone,  pt.  1,  p.  52.

*  Nassau,  R.  H.,     Where  Animals  Talk,  p.  192.

« Ellis,  G.  E.,     Negro  Culture  in  West  Africa,  p.  189.


264     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Congo  had  little  success  in  shooting  for  a  day  or  so.
The  natives  wanted  him  to  stick  the  gun  barrel  in  the
fire  to  drive  out  the  Moloki  (evil  spirit)  which  was
keeping  the  gun  from  performing  Its  usual  duty.  ^
Cases  such  as  these  ^  show  an  acceptance  of  a  real
spirit  environment  amazing  to  more  civilized  peoples.
Since  this  imaginary  environment  extends  everywhere
it  plays  a  part  In  all  aifairs  of  life.  Holding  this  in
mind,  let  us  now  consider  the  practical  uses  of  con-
juration with  the  American  Negroes.

Negro  Love  Charms.  One  of  the  great  ends  sought  In
the  case  of  these  Southern  Negroes  Is  to  win  the  fickle
heart  of  man  or  woman  and  to  hold  It  once  It  is  won.
A  reputable  Negro  physician  Informs  me  that  very
frequently  he  Is  urged  to  extend  his  medical  practice
and  to  make  a  "hand"  to  bring  back  a  wandering  wife
or  to  soften  a  flinty  heart.  •''  On  the  counter  of  one  drug
store,  operated  by  white  people,  but  located  In  the
heart  of  the  Negro  district  of  New  Orleans,  I  saw  a
big  can  labeled  LOVE  POWDERS.  The  owner
was  suspicious  and  could  not  be  prevailed  upon  to  tell
me  what  It  contained,  but  from  the  talk  of  the  Negroes
in  the  locality,  I  gathered  that  courtship,  after  all,  was
not  purely  a  matter  of  pretty  words  and  flowers.  In
fact,  very  often  the  unwilling  object  of  the  heart's
desire  may  be  won  over  by  these  "good  love  powders"
obtained   from   the   drug   store  ^   or    provided    by    the


^  Glave,  E.  J.,  Fetishism  in  Congo  Land,  Ceinury  Magazine,  vol.  19  {1S91),
p.  834.

2  See  also,  Jones,  T.  J.,  Education  in  Africa,  p.  124.  Leonard,  A.  G.,
The  Lower  Niger  and  Its  Tribes,  pp.  255-56.  Bosman,  W.,  Description  of
the  Coast  of  Guinea,  p.  135.  Marshall,  Sir  J.,  On  the  Natives  of  the  Gold
Coast,  J.  A.  /.,  vol.  16  (1887),  p.  182.

3  167.

*  15,  and  35.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  265

lioodoo-doctor.  ^  Mrs.  Pitkin  mentions  such  powder
as  being  made  into  a  cake,  though  its  power  wears
off  after  ten  years.  Vinmoin  (a  root  obtained  at
the  drug  store)  rubbed  on  any  part  of  the  persons'
body  will  also  win  his  love.  -  She  also  tells  me  of  her
husband,  who  owns  a  chain  of  drug  stores  in  New
Orleans,  having  daily  requests  for  love  powder,  male
(pink)  and  female  (white)  to  be  used  to  make  such  cakes.
On  her  trip  to  Africa  she  noticed  much  vervein  (lemon
verbena)  growing  around  the  doorstones,  particularly
in  the  streets  of  the  Dancing  Women  in  Biskara.  There
it  is  used  to  attract  lovers  just  as  the  New  Orleans
Negroes  make  a  tisane  of  this  basilique  to  sprinkle  their
sidewalks  for  the  same  purpose.  In  the  New  Orleans
voodoo  performances,  if  love  be  the  text  of  the  cere-
monies, blue  candles,  a  bride  doll,  and  apples  are  the
chief  things  used.  ^  Love  powders  were  mentioned  in
the  old  English  chap-books,  indicating  a  European
origin.  ^  A  bit  more  complex  is  the  frog  charm.  Kill
a  frog,  dry  him  thoroughly  in  the  sun  (or  put  him  in  an
ant's  bed)  until  the  flesh  is  all  removed  from  the  bones.
Among  the  bones  you  will  find  one  that  looks  like  a
fish-hook,  another  like  a  fish  scale.  To  win  the  desired
person,  hook  the  bone  looking  like  a  fish-hook  in  her
garments  when  the  girl  (or  man)  is  not  looking.  She  will
immediately  develop  a  strong  liking  for  you.  In  case
her  extreme  devotion  proves  too  irksome,  flip  the  bone
looking  like  a  fish  scale  at  her  as  she  walks  away.  Her
love   for   you   will   immediately   disappear.  ^     A   New

1171.

2  Pitkin,  Helen,     An  Angel  by  Brevet,  pp.  218-22.

3  277.

*  Ashton,  J.,     Chap-Books  of  the  Eighteenth  Century,  p.  83.
^  170.     See  also,   Smiley,   P.,  Folk-Lore  from  Va.,  S.   C,   Ga.,  Ala.,  and
Fla.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  32  (1919),  p.  380.


266     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Orleans  conjurer  suggests  getting  some  hair  from  the
"mole"  of  the  woman's  head  and  some  from  her  private
parts.  When  you  are  sleeping  with  her,  slip  out  of  bed
and,  unobserved,  place  the  hair  in  a  crack  in  the  wall
or  floor  near  the  bed.  As  long  as  it  remains  there  your
wife  will  never  leave  you.  ^  Ed  Murphy  suggests  the
chewing  of  "heart's  root"  to  soften  a  person's  heart,
either  in  making  trades  or  in  courting,  ^  while  Frank
Dickerson  thinks  "shame-weed"  (the  sensitive  plant
— a  species  of  vetch)  root  Is  better.  Chew  this  latter,
spit  it  on  your  hands  and  shake  hands  with  the  person
whom  you  want  to  win.  ^  Or  prick  your  finger  (the
third  finger  on  your  left  hand)  *  with  a  pin,  take  some
of  the  blood  and  write  your  name  and  your  sweet-
heart's name  on  a  piece  of  paper.  Draw  a  heart  around
the  names  and  bury  the  paper  under  your  doorstep.
Your  absent  lover  will  return  to  you  at  once.  ^  Else,
simply  rub  lizard  dust  on  your  lover's  head.  ^  Or,  if
you  like,  you  may  win  a  person's  affections  by  giving
him  wine  in  which  your  nail  trimmings  have  been
soaked. ^

Winning  and  Holding.  Hair  and  tracks  are  often
used.  Get  as  many  hairs  from  the  girl's  head  as  she  is
years  old,  and  carry  them  in  the  upper  left  vest  pocket;
or  pick  up  some  dirt  from  her  foot  track,  mix  it  with  the
dirt  from  your  own,  tie  in  a  piece  of  red  flannel,  and
wet  with  the  juice  from  a  red  onion.  Carry  this  in
your  left  vest  pocket,  and  she  will  surely  be  yours.  »

1  54.

2  258.

3  9L
*9.
*79.

*  Pitkin,  Helen,     An  Angel  by  Brevet,  p.  84.

'38.

« 141,  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  24  (1895),  p.  78.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  267

Simpler  still  is  to  take  up  the  girl's  tracks,  put  them  in
your  sock,  and  bury  it  under  your  doorstep;^  or  you
may  wear  a  little  of  her  hair  in  your  shoe  for  a  day  or  so
and  then  take  it  and  bury  it  in  the  same  manner,  ^  or
simply  bury  six  strands  of  your  lover's  hair  beneath
your  door,  ^  To  bring  a  man  and  woman  together,
get  some  hair  from  the  head  of  each,  take  this  into  the
woods  and  look  for  a  young  sapling  that  grows  up  in  a
fork.  Take  your  axe,  split  the  tree  a  little  at  the  fork,
and  put  the  hair  into  the  split  place.  When  the  wood
grows  back  over  the  hairs  the  two  will  be  eternally
united.  *  Girls  sometimes  win  an  indisposed  lover  by
putting  his  tracks  under  their  bed,  and  make  things
hot  for  an  undesirable  suitor  by  putting  his  tracks  in
an  ant-bed.  ^  Again  you  may  put  some  of  your  blood
on  candy  and  give  it  to  the  girl  to  eat.  «  In  Charleston,
S.  C,  the  girl  wears  a  piece  of  beef  under  her  arm  for
two  days,  then  squeezes  the  juice  out  of  it  into  a  bottle
of  alcohol  which  Is  sprinkled  upon  the  man's  coat. '
If  you  feel  that  your  wife  (or  woman)  is  about  to  leave
you,  get  one  of  her  old  menstrual  bandages  and  wear
it  for  a  "toby"  (hand)  for  a  long  time.  Then  sew  it
into  the  waistband  of  your  trousers  and  wear  those
trousers  often.  She  cannot  leave  you  if  you  do  this.  »
Other  items  used  in  making  love  charms  are  the  skin
of  a  "copper-belly"  moccasin  wrapped  around  a  smoke-
dried  toad  to  which  two  rusty  horseshoe   nails   have


136.

235.

3  192.
<54.
«168.
•  170.

^Smiley,  P.,     Folk-Lore  from  Va.,  S.  C,  Ala.,  Ga.,  and  Fla.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  32  (1919),  p.  380.
854.


268     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

been  added;  ^  a  cake  made  of  amaranthe  seeds  and
pounded  new  wheat;  and  a  white  dove's  heart  swal-
lowed raw  with  the  point  downward.  ^

''^Shaming  Yo^  Fairer.^''  "Shame-weed,"  besides
being  "chawed"  to  soften  hearts,  is  used  in  other  ways
to  shame  a  recalcitrant  "fairer."  ^  The  roots  dried,
powdered,  and  sprinkled  in  the  woman's  path  will  make
her  ashamed  of  what  she  is  doing.  Better  than  plain
powdered  root,  however,  is  the  root  mixed  with  "snail-
dust"  (dried  and  powdered  snail)  and  "snail-water"
(the  secretion  from  a  snail  when  sprinkled  with  salt).
When  a  man  approaches  her  she  "closes  up"  like  a
sensitive  plant  or  leaves  him  like  a  snail  going  into  its
shell.  *  Pound  together  a  silver  dime,  some  steel  dust
-and  graveyard  dirt.  Let  the  mixture  sit  for  three  days,
then  tie  it  up  in  a  red  flannel  bag  and  carry  it  in  your
pocket.  Put  three  small  files  under  your  "woman's"
porch  or  walk — and  then  be  absolutely  unconcerned
with  her.  Go  out  a  lot  at  night — ignore  her.  No
matter  how  much  she  has  been  "runnin'  'round"  she
will  be  ashamed  of  herself  and  come  back  to  you.  Your
■charm  has  tied  her  to  the  house  and  gives  her  new
interest  in  you.  ^  A  scared  Negro  at  home  told  me  of
how  he  saw  Ed  Murphy  stop  a  man  on  the  street  and
tell  him  that  he  was  downcast  because  his  wife  would
not  talk  to  him  nor  take  money.  The  man  admitted
that  this  was  true.  Ed  Murphy  took  a  five-dollar
bill  from  the  man,  handed  it  back  to  him,  and  told  him


1  Gonzales,  A.  E.,     The  Black  Border,  p.  93.

2  Bergen,  F.  D.,  Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7  (1899),
pp.  77-78.  Seealso,  Dana,  M.,  Voodoo,  MetropolitanMagazine,\ol.2S  (1908),
p.  534.

'  This  term  is  used  along  with  "rider"  in  the  sense  of  "woman"  or  sweet-
iieart  and  is  doubtless  a  corruption  of  the  English  "fairest."
*9L
•54.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  269

to  offer  it  to  his  wife.  She  took  it,  began  to  talk,  and
they  were  reconciled.  ^  "Devil's  shoe  string"  mixed
with  "snail-water,"  tracks  from  a  woman's  right  foot,
gunpowder,  and  brimstone,  and  "planted"  around  the
house  will  keep  any  woman  at  home.  ^

Home-breaking.  Sometimes  it  happens  that  a  person
of  evil  intentions  desires  to  break  up  a  man  and  his
wife.  To  do  this  he  should  get  some  tracks  of  the  man
and  wife,  taking  them  up  while  the  ground  is  damp.
Roll  this  damp  earth  up  in  a  brown  paper  sack,  putting
some  whiskers  from  a  cat  and  dog  along  with  it.  Then
tie  up  the  sack  and  let  it  stand  until  the  earth  is  dry.
Throw  the  whole  into  the  fire  and  the  couple  can  no
more  get  along  together  than  cats  and  dogs.  ^  In
another  country  district  in  Mississippi  the  same  effect
was  produced  by  simply  putting  dog's  hair  in  the  tracks
of  the  man  and  cat's  hair  in  the  tracks  of  the  woman.
In  this  case  a  cure  was  secured  by  digging  up  the  tracks
and  hair  and  burning  the  latter.  "The  spell  of  'picked-
up  tracks'  can  be  destroyed  only  by  fire."  *  Another
hoodoo-doctor  of  Mississippi  states  the  case  to  me  a
little  more  elaborately.  You  should  take  up  the
woman's  tracks  on  a  piece  of  paper.  Sprinkle  dog
bristles  on  it,  telling  the  dog  to  bite  it;  cat  bristles,
telling  the  cat  to  scratch  it;  gunpowder,  telling  the
powder  to  flash  it;  sulphur,  telling  it  to  smoke  it;  and
lodestone,  telling  it  to  carry  it.  Fold  it  from  sunrise
to  sunset  (east  to  west)  and  throw  it  over  your  right
shoulder  into  running  water,  telling  them  to  go.     This

»  153.

291.

"141.

*  Moore,  Ruby  A.,  Superstitions  of  Georgia,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  9  (1896)>
pp.  227-28.


270     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

will  surely  break  up  any  union,  no  matter  of  how  long
standing.  ^  The  same  effect  may  be  produced  more
simply  by  burying  a  file  under  the  step,  2  or  by  throwing
dried  toads'  feet  in  behind  the  couple  when  they  walk
off  from  you.  ^  Other  Negroes  wish  to  be  able  to  slip
off  from  their  wives  at  night  without  being  detected
and  go  to  Ed  Murphy  for  "hands"  whereby  this  feat
may  be  accomplished.  *

'^Good-by,  Enemy.''''  Although  this  "sneak-away-
conjure"  is  not  so  common,  the  tricks  whereby  an
enemy  may  be  driven  off  are  very  widespread.  One
unique  way  of  doing  this  is  to  take  a  dried  snail  shell
("a  great  mystery")  and  scoop  up  some  dirt  from  a
man's  tracks,  scooping  from  heel  to  toe.  Then  plug  up
the  mouth  of  the  shell  containing  the  dirt  with  cotton,
and  wet  the  edges  with  whiskey.  To  make  him  leave
and  to  cause  him  ill  luck  in  all  he  undertakes,  bury  the
shell  on  the  bank  of  a  running  stream,  with  the  mouth
of  the  shell  pointing  down-stream.  If,  on  the  other
hand,  you  wish  him  to  follow  you,  scoop  up  his  track
from  toe  to  heel,  plug  it  up  in  the  same  fashion  with
cotton,  and  carry  it  with  you  always.  You  will  have
to  be  careful  though — if  the  man  appears  to  sicken
(you  have  his  spirit  penned  up  in  the  shell)  loosen  the
cotton  a  little  at  the  edges  so  that  he  can  get  air.  ^
Still  a  simpler  method  of  making  him  follow  you  is  to
tie  up  some  of  his  tracks,  hair,  or  nails,  in  a  red  flannel
bag  and  carry  them  with  you.  ^

A  more  common  method  of  driving  off  an  enemy  is
to  twist  some  of  his  hair  (or  a  rabbit's  tail  in  case  you

iliL

^  How  to  Conjure,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  28  (1899),  p.  112.

U41.

*  306.

5  258.

•65.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  271

cannot  get  hair)  ^  around  a  ten-penny  nail  and  start
it  into  a  tree.  Every  morning  tap  the  nail  a  little
further  into  the  tree  until  by  the  ninth  morning  it  is
driven  all  of  the  way  in.  By  this  time  the  enemy  will
have  departed.  ^  Some  say  this  procedure  will  run  a
person  crazy,  ^  as  will  also  putting  a  strand  of  his  hair
in  a  bottle  of  whiskey,  *  or  wearing  his  hair  in  your
shoes.  ^  You  may  paralyze  your  enemy  and  keep  him
from  walking  if  you  wish,  by  tying  up  his  tracks  in  a
cloth  and  putting  it  over  your  door.  ^

Running  Water,  Running  Men.  Most  common  of
all  is  the  use  of  running  water  to  make  running  men.
Some  simply  suggest  throwing  a  person's  tracks  into
running  water,  ^  (first  putting  them  in  a  burnt  cow's
horn),  8  but  most  of  the  charms  are  more  complicated.
One  conjurer  tells  me  to  get  one  of  the  man's  old  shoes
and  to  tack  a  piece  of  new  board  on  the  bottom  of  the
sole.  Cut  off  the  lower  quill  of  two  buzzard  feathers,
telescope  these  quills  together,  shove  them  inside  the
shoe,  down  to  the  toe  and  pack  in  thoroughly  with  cotton.
Throw  this  shoe  into  running  water,  coming  away  with-
out looking  at  it.  Your  enemy  will  leave.  ^  Many  are
the  charms  of  a  similar  sort  where  running  water  is
used  to  drive  people  oif  or  to  run  them  crazy.  I  was
crossing  over  on  the  ferry  from  New  Orleans  to  Algiers
this  summer  with  a  hoodoo-doctor,  when  he  showed  me
a  small  photograph  of  a  Negro  man,  crumpled  it  up,  and

1141.

2  91.

3  275.
*  267.
^79.

6  111.

'135,  238,  and  341.

8  335.

»141.


272      Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

threw  it  into  the  current.  He  said  that  man  was  his
enemy,  but  that  he  was  safe  now — the  enemy  would
have  to  keep  moving  away  so  long  as  his  picture  was  car-
ried down  stream  by  the  current.  Some  put  the  person's
hair  in  the  gill  of  a  fish  which  is  then  returned  to  the
stream.  As  the  fish  swims,  the  person  wanders.  ^
Others  simply  spit  in  the  river  if  the  current  is  running
opposite  to  the  direction  in  which  the  enemy  lives.  ^  A
further  twentieth  century  application  of  the  moving
motif  consists  of  impelling  a  person  to  move  by  tying
one  of  his  stockings  to  a  freight  train.  ^  Track-taking
is  possibly  the  most  common — one  lady  whose  tracks
had  been  thrown  in  running  water  walked  until
she  died.  *  A  neat  modification  is  to  take  dust  only
from  the  heel  of  the  track,  leaving  the  rest  undisturbed.
The  person  so  treated  will  walk  with  a  staggering  gait
as  if  his  heel  was  actually  injured.  ^

Many  are  the  devices  for  getting  rid  of  a  person —
either  by  making  him  move  or  by  shoving  him  off  into
the  Great  Beyond.  If  you  never  wish  to  see  a  person
again,  sprinkle  red  pepper  in  his  tracks,  ^  or  sweep  the
room  immediately  after  that  person  has  gone,  ^  or  throw
salt  after  the  person.  *  To  make  a  person  leave,  put
black  pepper  on  your  stove;  ^  to  make  him  die,  bury
some  of  his  dirty  clothes,  ^ "  or  put  some  of  his  hair  in  a
hollow  tree.  ^  ^


1247.

2  405.

3  252.
*6l.
*175.
«405.
M75.

*  Pitkin,  Helen,     An  Angel  by  Brevet,  p.  180.

"265.
'•'34L
"364.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  273

Calling  the  Absent.  Conjure  Is  a  "bringer"  as  well
as  a  "sender."  To  bring  your  wife  home,  get  some
dried  "devil's  shoe  string,"  some  dust  from  her  right
foot  track,  and  a  piece  cut  from  the  hollow  of  her  right
stocking.  Mix  these  together  and  "plant"  them  near
your  house.  She  will  surely  come  home  no  matter  who
is  "tricking  her  away."  ^  A  New  Orleans  "doctor"
says  to  get  a  strip  of  red  flannel  about  a  foot  long  and
three  inches  wide  together  with  nine  ^  new  needles.
Name  the  flannel  after  the  absent  person — you  must
he  very  deeply  in  earnest.  Fold  the  flannel  three  times
towards  yourself,  so  that  half  of  it  is  folded,  saying  with
each  fold,  "Come  (fold)  on  (fold)  home  (fold)"  (or  words
to  similar  effect).  Then  turn  the  other  end  toward  your-
self and  make  three  more  folds :  "Papa  (fold)  wants  (fold)
you  (fold)."  Then  stick  the  nine  needles  in  the  cloth
in  the  shape  of  a  cross,  working  each  one  towards  your-
self and  sticking  each  three  times  through  the  fabric,  say-
ing with  each  shove  such  phrases  as:  "Ma  (stick)  ry
(stick)  Smith  (stick).  Won't  (stick)  you  (stick)  come?
(stick)  etc."  After  you  have  done  this  get  some  "Fast-
luck"  and  "Jockey  Club"  from  the  drug  store  and
sprinkle  on  the  flannel  every  morning  for  nine  mornings,
thinking  earnestly  of  that  person's  return  all  the  while.
We  know  but  little  about  the  efl^ects  of  mental  telepathy,
but  the  hoodoo-man  swears  that  by  that  time  she  will
have  returned.  ^  Ed  Murphy  also  says  this  will  work,
but  suggests  as  a  simpler  method  that  a  person  urinate
on  a  piece  of  red  flannel,  rub  it  thoroughly  on  his  hands
and  sit  down  immediately  and  write  the  absent  one  to
come  home.     "She  is  sho'  bound  ter  come."  *


191.

*  Note  the  frequent  occurrence  of  "nine"  as  a  conjure  number.
»54.

«258.

18


274     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Insanity  Charms.  Insanity  is  closely  connected  with
conjuration,  the  queerness  of  the  symptoms  giving
rise  to  the  belief  that  some  one  has  "fixed"  the  per-
son. One  way  of  producing  this  Insanity  is  by  the
use  of  running  water.  Take  up  a  person's  track,
put  It  on  a  piece  of  paper  with  cat's  and  dog's  hair
on  one  side  and  nine  grains  of  pepper  on  the  other.
Sprinkle  gunpowder  and  brimstone  on  this  and
wrap  It  up  from  east  to  west.  Put  it  in  a  gourd,  cork
tightly  and  throw  into  running  water.  Your  enemy
will  surely  go  crazy  at  sunrise.  ^  Hattie  Harris  says  to
put  the  tracks  into  the  gourd  with  two  buzzard  feathers
and  to  throw  it  Into  running  water  at  midnight.  ^  Some
say  "  hair  combings"  nailed  to  a  tree  will  give  you  a
headache,  ^  but  a  hair  slipped  Into  a  slit  In  a  tree  and  the
bark  allowed  to  grow  over  It  will  run  a  person  crazy
forever,  *  as  will  also  a  hair  from  the  mole  of  the  head
tied  around  a  new  ten-penny  nail  which  is  to  be  burled
head  down,  point  up,  under  the  doorstep.  ^  I  cannot
give  the  principles  In  this  case,  but  a  white  man,  so  the
Negro  hoodoo  tells  me,  hired  him  to  get  rid  of  an  enemy,
another  white  man.  The  conjure-doctor  put  three  new
nails  and  some  quicksilver  In  the  path  where  the  victim
would  pass,  and  plugged  up  in  a  tree  some  of  the  wet
dirt  where  that  person  had  urinated.  The  conjurer
also  rubbed  "AUerkerchle"  «  on  his  hands,  so  that  any

191.

2  141.

'Cross,  Tom  P.,  Folk-Lore from  the  Southern  Slates,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  22
(19Q9),  p.  253.

4 141.     Owen,  Mary  A.,     Among  the  Voodoos,  I.  F.  L.  C.  (1891),  p.  244.

*Steiner,  R.,  Observations  on  the  Practice  of  Conjuring  in  Georgia,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  14  (1901),  p.  180.

'  None  of  the  druggists  had  ever  heard  of  this  term,  but  from  the  descrip-
tion I  think  it  was  ether  or  chloroform.  Frank  Dickerson  says  it  is  anvil-
dust.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  275

personal  enemies  would  be  blinded  if  they  came  for  him
and  he  would  be  able  to  escape  them.  I  do  know  in
this  case  that  the  white  man  against  whom  the  conjure
was  set  did  become  insane  and  is  now  in  the  asylum.
This  should  be  sufficient  answer  to  those  who  say  white
people  cannot  be  conjured.  ^  I  know  of  other  cases —
there  are  plenty  of  them  in  New  Orleans,  as  I  discov-
ered 2 — where  white  people  have  sought  the  aid  of  con-
jure-doctors.  Even  the  Negroes  say  that  any  one  who
believes  in  conjuring  can  be  conjured — a  truly  enlight-
ened Negro  is  as  immune  as  an  educated  white  man,
while  the  illiterate  white  is  as  susceptible  if  he  believes
in  it,  but  at  an  advantage  inasmuch  as  conjuration  does
not  fall  so  often  in  the  class  of  white  superstitions.
Perhaps  the  best  explanation  of  the  immunity  of  the
whites  is  that  given  me  by  a  Negro  "jokester"  not  long
ago  when  he  facetiously  remarked:  "Some  folks  sez
a  white  man  caint  be  cunjered  'caze  he's  got  a  spechul
blue  vein  in  his  arm,  but  I  thinks  hit's  'caze  he's  got  a
blue-steel  spechul  in  his  hip  pocket."

'^Dustin'  Hats.'''  Another  common  end  of  con-
juration is  to  produce  blindness.  This  is  usually
accomplished  by  "dusting  hats,"  i.e.,  putting  a  special
powder  on  a  man's  hatband  so  that  it  will  run  down
into  his  eyes  when  he  perspires.  Possibly  the  pre-
caution of  blowing  this  powder  away  has  led  to  the
Georgia  belief  that  if  you  put  on  your  hat  and  don't
blow  in  it  you  will  have  the  headache.  ^  Dust  from  a
powdered  rattlesnake  or  old  rattlesnake  "shed"  (skin),
sometimes  mixed  with  dirt  from  the  head  of  the  grave;  *


^Hall,  J.  A.,     Negro  Conjuring  and  Tricking,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  10  (1897),
p.  243.

2  See  here,     Pitkin,   Helen,     An  Angel  by  Brevet,     Cable,  G.  W.,     The
Grandissimes.

3  274,  and  312.
«141.


276     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

"devil's  snuff;"  ^  and  similar  substances  are  used,
and  blindness,  insanity,  or  sickness,  ^  results.  Robert
Carr  of  Columbus,  Mississippi,  is  blind  in  one  eye.
The  white  doctors  can  do  nothing  to  help  him,  but  he
knows  it  is  due  to  the  deviltry  of  an  old  man  whom  he
caught  sifting  powder  on  his  hatband  just  before  the
blindness  occurred,  Hattie  Harris  suggests  that  the
afflicted  person  may  be  immediately  cured  by  an  eye-
wash made  of  alum,  wild  honey,  and  fresh  sweet-
milk.  ^  Her  method  of  producing  blindness  is  to  use
frog-dust  and  salt  in  the  hat.  ^  In  another  case  a
dried  and  crumbled  snake  skin  is  put  between  the
leaves  of  a  book  so  that  when  the  book  is  opened  it
will  fly  up  into  the  reader's  eyes  and  blind  him.  ^

Softening  Hearts.  Root-chewing  for  various  pur-
poses is  widespread;  the  central  theme  being  to  soften
a  person's  heart  and  make  him  susceptible  to  your
pleading.  In  slavery  times  the  master's  angry  passions
were  soothed  and  the  slave  escaped  a  whipping  in
this  manner.  ^  One  Negro  tells  me  of  a  horse  trader
being  approached  by  chewing  a  root  and  spitting  a
circle  around  him,  ^  and  another  got  a  raise  of  pay
from  his  employer  by  the  same  method  and  the  help
of  another  root  placed  in  his  shoe.  ^  The  house  of  an
old  conjurer  of  my  acquaintance  was  about  to  be  sold
for  taxes.     This   Negro   plugged   up   his   mouth   with


1258.

2  306.

3  141.

*  Steiner,  R.,  Observations  on  the  Practice  of  Conjuring  in  Georgia,  J.  A-
F.  L.,  vol.  14  (1901),  p.  177.     Also  informant  141.

'35.

'  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  46.  For  a  somewhat  similar  prac-
tice in  Africa,  see  Ellis,  A.  B.,     Tshi-speaking  Peoples,  pp.  103-04.

'397.

"54.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  277

some  sort  of  root  (often  Samson  snakeroot  is  used)  ^
and  went  to  a  white  man  to  get  help.  At  first  the
white  man  refused,  but  the  old  Negro  kept  spitting  at
his  feet  until  he  finally  relented  and  paid  his  taxes  for
him.  2  Some  recommend  chewing  gum  whenever  you
are  trading  in  order  to  secure  a  bargain.  ^

Job-getters.  Such  roots  are  often  used  along  with
"job-getting  hands,"  though  often  the  "hand"  alone
Is  sufficient.  One  Negro  saw  a  conjurer  make  such  a
"hand"  by  sewing  up  anvil-dust  and  needles  in  red
flannel.  The  Negro,  who  had  lost  his  job,  was  also
given  a  root  to  chew  and  was  charged  31-50.  ^  This
is  about  the  usual  fee,  for  a  hand  of  this  kind,  although
I  have  known  fees  to  be  as  low  as  fifty  cents  and  have
heard  of  them  being  as  high  as  ^100.  Another  hand
used  in  getting  jobs  is  made  of  steel  filings  sprinkled
upon  lodestone  (to  draw  the  person  to  you)  and  tied
up  in  the  customary  red  flannel.  Wear  this  over
your  heart,  look  your  man  straight  in  the  eye,  ask  him
for  a  job,  and  concentrate  upon  getting  it.  He  may
ignore  you  at  first  but  you  are  sure  to  win  out  in  the
end.  °

Dodging  the  Law.  The  conjure-bag  is  often  "de  po'
man's  lawyah"  though  often  the  client  does  not  save
much,  since  the  fees  of  these  talismanic  attorneys
are  generally  high,  one  conjurer  claiming  to  have
secured  ^40  from  a  white  man  for  obtaining  the  release
of  his  brother.  ^  Sometimes  such  releases  are  secured
even  after  the  person  has  been  convicted  and  is  in  the

1  Ibid.

2  153.

3331.

*57.

654.

«91.


278     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

"calaboose."  ^  An  old  Negro  woman,  who  was  teach-
ing me  something  of  root-lore,  had  me  dig  out  some
splinters  from  the  north  side  of  a  large  pine  tree  which
had  been  struck  by  lightning.  "When  enny  of  yo'
folks  has  trubbr  wid  de  law,  Marse  Newbell,  jes'
you  heat  up  dese  splintahs  in  er  skillet.  When  dey
gits  good  an'  hot  tech  a  lighted  match  to  'em  and
burn  'em  to  ashes.  Put  does  ashes  in  a  brown  papah
sack.  De  night  'fo'  de  trial  comes  off  go  outside  at
twelve  o'clock  and  look  up  at  de  moon,  but  doan'  say
nuthin'.  Get  up  early  next  mawnin',  go  down  to  de
cotehouse  'fo'  ennybody  gits  dere  an'  sprinkle  dem
ashes  in  de  doorway.  All  dat  comes  in  will  come  yo'
way  an'  dat-ah  law-suit  will  be  torn  jes'  lak  de  light-
nin'  tore  de  tree."  ^  Ed  Murphy  suggests  roots  of  the
"peace  plant"  parched  and  pounded  into  a  fine  powder.
"Dress"  yourself  with  some  of  this,  mix  some  with  a
little  quicksilver,  and  scatter  before  the  courthouse
door.     You  are  bound  to  "come  free."  ^

Talismanic  Watchdogs.  In  Africa  charms  are  widely
used  to  protect  property,  and  the  same  is  true  in  the
South.  "Any  house  or  plantation  known  to  have  a
charm  of  the  proper  kind  in  charge  of  it,  is  seldom
molested  by  thieves  or  petty  marauders."  "  If  a
Negro  steals  watermelons,  a  snake  made  of  indigo  and
placed  at  the  place  where  he  enters  the  patch  will
conjure  them  for  him  and  he  will  not  return.  ^  Powder
or  graveyard  dirt  sprinkled   along  the  fence-rail  will

^306.  See  also,  Dana,  M.,  Voodoo,  Metropolitan  Magazine,  vol.  28
(1908),  pp.  534-35.

2  141.

3  258.  Much  the  same  thing  is  true  in  Africa.  See,  Beatty,  K.  J.,
Human  Leopards,  pp.  "Z^-^^l.

"  Tillinghast,  J.  A.,     The  Negro  in  Africa  and  America,  p.  55.
6  213.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  279

accomplish  the  same  thing.  ^  "If  a  Negro  finds  a  coat
or  article  of  dress  lying  nicely  folded  with  a  stick
lying  on  it,  he  will  not  touch  it  for  fear  of  cunjer."
On  one  occasion  Mr.  Steiner  could  not  get  the  Negroes
to  touch  some  cotton  left  in  the  field  and  thought
to  be  conjured,  until  he  had  touched  it  himself.  2
True,  the  reverse  is  sometimes  the  case — the  conjure-
demon  is  as  often  a  thief  as  a  policeman.  In  my
home  town  in  Mississippi  two  Negroes  were  selling
hoodoo-bags,  and  in  so  doing  getting  personal  in-
formation regarding  their  customers — particularly  in-
formation concerning  the  size  and  location  of  their  bank
accounts.  At  the  end  of  the  interview  the  customer
was  asked  to  sign  his  name  in  order  to  make  the  charm
more  effective,  the  signature  was  then  applied  to  a
bogus  check,  and  the  superstitious  darkeys  lost  a
large  percentage  of  their  bank   deposits.  '

Circean  Detectives.  Again  the  surreptitious  conjure
or  "jack"  will  turn  detective  and  go  on  the  trail  of
thieves  or  murderers.  While  the  term  "jack"  is
commonly  used  by  the  Negroes  to  mean  trick  or  hand,
strictly  speaking,  it  is  a  piece  of  loaded  cane  or  some
object  of  a  similar  sort  which  is  used  for  divination.  I
have  never  been  able  to  obtain  one  from  other  members
of  the  profession,  but  they  all  seem  to  recognize  and
respect  a  "jack."  I  improvised  one  out  of  an  old  alumi-
num salt-cellar  with  lead  in  the  bottom,  arranged  so  as
to  right  itself  automatically  when  overturned.  The
whole  was  wrapped  in  newspaper  and  tied  in  red  flannel


1141.  steiner,  R.,  Superstitions  and  Beliefs  from  Central  Georgia,
J.A.F.L.,  vol.  12  (1899),  p.  262.

^  Steiner,  R.,  Observations  on  the  Practice  of  Conjuring  in  Georgia,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  14  (1901),  p  178.

'255.


280     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

to  resemble  an  egg.  When  thrown  on  the  ground  it  was
supposed  to  point  in  the  direction  of  stolen  goods  or
towards  the  guilty  person  himself.  The  hoodoos  all
said  it  would  work,  (they  did  not  know  the  insides)
and  it  gave  me  quite  a  bit  of  prestige.  I  also  fabri-
cated some  "walking-jacks" — a  buckshot  placed  in  a
small  capsule  encased  in  red  flannel — which  would
"walk"  when  put  on  an  inclined  surface.  I  suppose
the  power  of  these  comes  from  the  fact  that  to  the
ignorant  Negro  they  seem  to  be  alive.  One  root-
doctor  told  me  very  gravely  that  I  should  put  them
on  top  of  a  cup  of  mercury  in  order  to  make  them
truer  in  their  predictions.  ^  Another  "jack"  consists  of
a  piece  of  red  cloth  in  the  shape  of  a  finger,  filled  with
black  dirt  and  coal  with  a  dime  in  the  center.  It  is
supposed  to  guide  a  person  when  he  is  lost,  ^  and,  hung
on  a  string,  is  supposed  to  revolve  around  and  around
if  the  answer  to  the  question  put  to  it  is  favorable.  '
Gne  Mississippi  slave-owner  used  a  loaded  cane  to
detect  thieves.  This  "jack"  was  supposed  to  rise  up
and  work  harm  when  the  guilty  man  appeared,  in
case  the  slave  did  not  confess  of  his  own  accord.
Usually  the  threat  was  sufficient  and  the  guilty  slave
confessed.  *  "In  slavery  times  the  'fortune  teller'  had  a
phial  for  a  jack,  filled  with  roots  and  water,  also  sul-
phur. Had  a  string  tied  around  the  neck  of  the
phial.  You  want  to  tell  if  you  are  going  to  get  a
whipping.  You  go  to  him.  He  gets  his  jack,  catches
the  string  between  his  thumb  and  forefinger  and  uses
words  like  this:


1258.

2  66.

3  100.
«345.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  281

By  some  Peter,
By  some  Paul,

And  by  the  God  that  made  us  all.

Swearing  his  jack,  then  he  says  to  him,  'jack,  don't
tell  me  no  lie,  if  massa  gwine  whip  John  or  Jane,
now  tell  me,  jack.'  If  jack  turns  to  the  right,  massa
was'n'  gwine  whip  John  or  Jane,  if  he  turns  to  the  left
■'You  sure  whipped.'  If  massa'  hadn'  gwine  made  up
his  mind  what  he  would  do,  jack  would  stand  and
quiver.  If  the  fortune  teller  got  angry  with  jack  and
cursed  him,  jack  would  jump  up  and  down,  then  he
would  tell  them  to  come  back  in  the  morning  and  jack
would  tell  all  about  it."  ^  I  have  in  my  possession  a
gray  cocoon,  containing  a  live  worm  (apparently  a
sort  of  caddis  worm  encased  in  a  cocoon  of  pine  needles),
which  Ed  Murphy  gave  me  as  a  choice  possession.
He  says  it  is  a  live  piece  of  trash  and  is  worth  a  for-
tune. The  cocoon  is  placed  on  a  sheet  of  paper.
Soon  the  worm  crawls  away  taking  the  husk  with  him —
the  direction  he  takes  indicates  the  direction  of  stolen
goods  or  of  a  suspected  thief.  If  he  crawls  toward
the  west,  ordinarily  it  is  a  sign  of  rain  or  storm,  to-
wards the  east,  fair  weather.  ^  Another  way  of  locating
a  thief  is  to  put  a  rooster  under  a  pot  and  let  all  suspects
touch  the  pot.  When  the  thief  touches  it  the  rooster
will  crow.  ^  There  is  a  Negro  story  of  a  clever  slave-
owner who  tried  this  out  on  his  slaves,  after  some
chickens  had  been  stolen,  telling  them  in  advance
that  the  rooster  would  crow  when  the  thief  touched
the  upturned  pot.     He  ordered  them  all  to  touch  the


^Southern  Workman,  vol.  23   (1894),  p.  46.
2  258.

'  91.     Lee,  C,     Some  Negro  Lore  from  Baltimore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5  (1892),
p.  110.


282     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

pot,  but  the  rooster  did  not  crow.  Then  he  made
them  all  show  their  hands — all  had  their  fingers  black-
ened with  soot,  with  the  exception  of  one  man.  That
one  was  the  thief  who  was  afraid  to  touch  the  pot,  ^
In  another  case  two  chairs  are  placed  back  to  back  in
such  wise  that  a  sifter  resting  between  them,  edge  on
edge,  is  balanced  so  lightly  that  a  breath  will  serve  to
disturb  its  equilibrium.  The  diviner  (not  necessarily
a  hoodoo)  stands  some  distance  away  from  the  chair
and  sifter  and  with  lifted  hands  chants  slowly:

By  Saint  Peter,  by  Saint  Paul,
By  the  Lord  who  made  us  all,
If  John  Doe  did  thus  and  so,
Turn,  sifter,  turn  and  fall.

If  the  person  is  innocent  the  sifter  remains  motion-
less; if  an  accomplice,  it  merely  trembles;  if  guilty
it  turns  and  drops.  Negroes  have  great  faith  in  such
tests  and  often  confess  rather  than  submit.  "Sub-
stitute a  rawhide  shield  on  two  upright  spears,  and  a
Voodoo  incantation  for  the  Christianized  chant  and
you  have  the  rite  as  it  is  practiced  today  on  the  Guinea
Coast."  2  To  tell  when  an  absent  person  is  coming
home,  heat  a  shovel  red  hot  and  lay  upon  it  three
smooth  pebbles  ("beauty  rocks")  in  a  row.  If  the
one  closest  to  you  cracks  first,  the  person  is  coming
home  the  next  day,  if  the  middle  one  is  the  first  to  pop,
it  will  be  a  little  longer  before  he  comes,  while  if  the
farthest  from  you  bursts  first,  it  will  be  a  long  time
before  he  arrives.  ^


1288.

2  Hardy,    Sarah    M.,     Negro   Superstitions,    Lippincott's    Monthly    Mag-
azine, vol.  xlviii  (1891),  p.  738.

3  141.


MAKING  A   HAND


Voodoo  ISM  and  Conjuration  283

Gambling,  Debt-getting,  and  Other  Charms.  Many
and  varied  are  the  practical  services  of  conjuration.
I  have  spoken  before  of  the  "gambHng  hand"  made  by
Ed  Murphy.  Another  one  consists  of  the  heart
taken  from  a  Hve  leather-wing  chinch  bat  and  tied  to
your  right  (card-shuffling  hand)  wrist  where  it  cannot
be  seen.  ^  "Hands"  to  drive  off  witches  are  common  ^ —
being  sought  from  voodoo-doctors  even  by  well  edu-
cated Negroes  of  Philadelphia.  ^  Almost  every  prac-
tical exigency  of  life  is  met  by  these  charms  or  spells.
A  conjure  friend  of  mine  helped  out  a  white  man  who
was  in  love  with  a  girl  at  a  certain  woman's  college.
The  man  wanted  the  girl  to  leave  the  dormitory  in
order  to  have  an  engagement  with  him.  The  con-
jurer put  down  nine  eight-penny  nails  in  the  shape  of
a  cofhn  at  the  college  gate  and  in  a  few  minutes  the
girl  joined  her  lover.  Within  a  short  time  they  were
married.  ^  Forgetful  debtors  may  be  spurred  into
payment  by  means  of  these  tricks.  ^  Dust  some  nails
thoroughly  with  some  powdered  "shame-weed"  (make
debtor  ashamed  of  not  paying),  dried  wasp  stingers
("sting  his  mind  to  moving"),  and  dirt-dauber's  nests
(make  him  "itching  to  see  you"),  and  drive  them  into  a
locust  tree  in  the  shape  of  a  cross  (the  cross  "draws
from  all  directions").  Within  a  very  short  time  your
debtor  will  come  up  and  pay  you  in  full.  «  Another
conjurer  simply  drives  five  eight-penny  and  four  ten-
penny  nails  in  the  form  of  a  cross  into  a  tree  in  front

1170.

2  306.

^  Dana,  M.,     Voodoo,  Metropolitan  Magazine,  vol.  28  (1908),  p.  535.

^258.

6  306.

•91.


284     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

of  the  debtor's  house.  ^  One  white  collector  frightened
a  Negro  woman  into  paying  a  debt  long  past  due  by
making  a  double  crossmark  in  her  yard  with  his  um-
brella and  spitting  into  this  cross.  The  woman  quickly
paid  him  in  order  to  get  him  to  "spoil  out  the  conjure"
which  he  did  by  simply  erasing  it  with  the  toe  of  his
shoe.  2  In  the  past,  whipped  slaves  could  bewitch
their  master  so  that  his  wife  would  feel  every  cut
given  to  them,  so  that  the  master  would  grow  weaker
and  weaker  and  finally  die,  and  so  that  when  he  tried
to  whip  his  slaves  none  of  the  blows  would  touch  them.  ^
"GuUah  Jack  (one  of  the  leaders  in  Denmark  Vesey's
Insurrection  in  South  Carolina  in  1882)  was  regarded
as  a  sorcerer,  and  as  such,  feared  by  the  natives  of
Africa,  who  believed  in  witchcraft.  He  was  not  only
considered  invulnerable,  but  that  he  could  make  others
so  by  his  charms  (consisting  chiefly  of  a  crab's  claw  to
be  placed  in  the  mouth) ;  and  that  he  could  and  certainly
would  provide  all  his  followers  with  arms."  *

Discipline  and  Train-stopping.  One  voodoo  serv-
ant in  New  Orleans,  so  her  mistress  informs  me,
maintained  an  absolute  discipline  over  the  under
servants  by  means  of  her  charms  and  spells.  Now
that  she  is  dead  the  fear  is  gone  and  it  is  much  harder
to  keep  the  same  servants  to  their  former  efficiency.  ^
"One  voodoo  doctor  in  Chicago  was  a  notorious
•doctor  of  the  cult.  He  was  known  as  'Old  Man.'
He  had  under  his  absolute   control   a   number  of  ne-


1258.

2  Brannon,    P.    A.,     Central  Alabama   Superstitions,    Birmingham    (Ala.)
News,  Jan.  18,  1925,  p.  15.

3  Parsons,  E.  C,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.
16  (1923),  pp.  61-62.

*  Brawley  B.,     Social  History  of  the  American  Negro,  pp.  135-37.
6  128.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  285

grasses.  These,  by  his  directions,  infested  a  certain
street  as  footpads  and  were  the  source  of  much  trouble
to  the  police,  for  their  belief  in  voodoo  rendered  them
wholly  fearless."  ^  Last  summer  a  young  Negro  was
telling  me  of  a  suitor  who  called  to  see  the  daughter  of
a  hoodoo-woman.  She  lived  about  a  mile  from  the
station  and  the  boy  had  to  catch  the  eight  o'clock
train  back  to  town.  At  eight  o'clock  he  had  forgotten
about  leaving  until  the  train  blew  for  the  station.
"You  wants  ter  ketch  dat  train,  doan'  you.?"  the  old
woman  said.  "Well  doan'  bother  none,  I'll  hoi'  it
back  twenty  minutes."  She  cast  a  charm  of  some
sort,  and  sure  enough  the  train  pulled  In  twenty  min-
'  utes  late,  although  it  had  already  blown  for  the  station.  ^
A  somewhat  similar  case  is  afforded  by  that  old  slave,
"Old  Jule,"  who  resisted  every  eifort  to  send  her
away  by  using  her  power  to  make  the  steamboat  turn
around  or  run  backwards  all  night.  ^  A  planter
found  a  voodoo  charm  or  ouanga  (wongah)  containing
three  cow-peas  and  some  breast  feathers  of  a  barn-yard
fowl,  all  folded  in  cotton  cloth  and  wrapped  tightly
with  thread.  He  proposed  to  take  it  to  New  Orleans,
but  his  slaves  said,  "Marse  Ed,  ef  ye  go  on  d'boat
wid  dat-ah  de  boat'll  sink  wl'  yer.  'Fore  d'lord  It
will.'  "  ^

Other  Practical  Applications.  A  cherry  tree  that
had  never  even  blossomed  before,  had  to  be  propped
up  to  keep  it  from  breaking  with  fruit  the  spring
after  a  hoodoo  drove  five  rusty  nails  into  Its  heart,

^Dana,  M.,     Voodoo,  Metropolitan  Magazine,  vol.  28  (19Q8),  p.  534.

2  153.

^Southern  Workman,  vol.  26   (1891),  p.  37.

*  Cable,  G.  W.,     Creole  Slave  Songs,  Century  Magazine,  vol.  31  (1886),  p.  820.


286     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

and  buried  something  tied  up  in  a  rag  at  its  roots.  ^
The  power  of  snake  charming  also  seems  to  be  quite
generally  attributed  to  conjure-doctors.  "One  is  told
of  who  claimed  that  he  could  turn  a  horse  to  a  cow,
and  kill  a  man  or  woman  and  bring  them  to  life  again
by  shaking  up  his  little  boxes.  He  could  also  whistle
in  the  keyhole  after  the  doors  were  locked  and  make
them  fly  open."  ^  In  Louisa  County,  Va.,  a  Negro
was  employed  to  fire  a  sawmill  engine,  but  in  spite  of
his  best  efforts  something  went  wrong  with  the  boiler.
He  urged  his  employer  to  lend  him  three  dollars  to  go
to  Spottsylvania  County  and  get  a  "conjur"  doctor  to
give  him  professional  advice  as  to  the  trouble.  The
doctor  assured  him  that  the  engine  was  certainly  •
tricked  and  nothing  could  be  done  until  the  boiler  was
thoroughly  cleaned,  and  a  mysterious  powder  inserted
before  the  fresh  water  was  poured  in.  Naturally  the
mill  ran  well  at  first,  after  the  boiler  was  thoroughly
cleaned,  and  great  was  the  joy  of  the  fireman,  but  his
elation  was  very  short-lived,  since  the  mineral  deposits
in  the  water  caused  the  same  complication  as  formerly.
Of  course  the  Negro  did  not  lose  faith  in  the  doctor.
He  blamed  other  things.  ^  A  white  man  of  my  own
acquaintance  took  advantage  of  superstition  to  get
rid  of  some  undesirable  Negro  tenants  living  too  close
to  his  residence.  Wrapping  up  some  chicken  bones
and  sticks  in  a  bit  of  red  flannel  he  laid  the  charm  on
their  doorstep.  Before  he  even  arose  the  next  morning
the  Negroes  were  packing  up  their  things  to  depart.  ■*

1  Boyle,  Mrs.  V.  F.,     Devil  Tales,  p.  169.
''Southern  Workman,  vol.  24  (1895),  p.  118.

3  Earnest,  J.  B.,  Jr.,     The  Religious  Development  of  the  Negro  in  Virginia,
p. 136.
*70.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  287

One  hoodoo  set  a  trick  and  caused  a  Negro's  cow  to
"lose  her  cud."  A  new  cud  was  made  to  the  cow's
great  rehef,  by  taking  "a  Httle  roun'  bone — one  what
fits  in  a  jint  ef  I  kin  fin'  one — nex'  I  gets  a  piece  of  ole
greasy  dishrag  an'  kivers  hit  wid  dat,  tyin'  hit  good  wid
a  string."  ^

Preventives  of  Conjuration.  It  is  a  long  lane  from
heart-winning  to  "cow  cuds,"  but  in  almost  every
practical  episode  of  life  along  the  way  conjure  is
operative.  Evidently  we  have  here  a  force,  second  in
utility  only  to  West  African  religion  itself,  by  which
mankind  can  (or  thinks  he  can)  achieve  almost  every
desired  end — a  force  which  is  closely  interwoven  with
his  daily  life  and  one  which  deserves  his  earnest  at-
tention. But  this  power,  like  African  religion,  is  not
moral,  but  is  capable  of  indifferently  working  harm  as
well  as  benefit.  Thus  it  behooves  its  troopers  to  look
to  their  armor  as  well  as  their  arms,  and  we  turn  now
to  a  consideration  of  the  preventives  and  cures  of
conjuration.  Fortunately  this  matter  of  armament  is
simplified  in  that  for  the  most  part  one  and  the  same
substance  serves  alike  for  shield  and  sword.

Red  Flannel  and  Silver.  Red  flannel  is  used  for  and
against  conjuration  and  is  an  almost  universal  cure
for  "rheumatiz"  (rheumatism  with  the  Negroes  in-
cludes almost  every  strange  ache  or  pain,  many  of
which  are  laid  at  the  door  of  conjure).  A  voodoo-
woman  of  New  Orleans  -  and  an  old  Negress  of  Charles-
ton, S.  C,  ^  wore  red  flannel  underwear  winter  and
summer  to  prevent  any  ill  luck  from  conjure  or  rheu-


1171.
2  128.
»187.


288     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

matism,  while  red  flannel  bands  about  the  wrist  are
very  much  in  evidence  throughout  the  Negro  South.
Perhaps  silver,  however,  is  the  most  universal  pre-
ventive of  conjuration.  A  silver  d"me  worn  about
the  ankle  or  neck  or  placed  in  the  shoe  will  prevent
any  trick  from  exerting  its  influence  against  you  ^ —
this  being  one  of  the  common  charms  given  by  Marie
Laveau.  ^  Some  Negroes  openly  say  that  such  a  coin
keeps  off  evil  spirits,  ^  showing  the  close  association  of
conjuration  with  former  fetishism.  Frank  Dicker-
son  says  only  a  silver  ball  will  do  the  work  (he  carries
one  himself),  ^  while  others  suggest  a  copper  coin  in
the  shoe,  ^  a  silver  ring  about  the  finger,  or  a  goose-
quill  filled  with  quicksilver  worn  below  the  knee.  ^
In  New  Orleans,  a  voodoo-doctor  advised  an  old
Negro  woman  who  had  been  poisoned  to  file  half  of  a
silver  dime  away  and  take  the  filings  in  her  food.
The  other  half  was  to  be  held  under  her  tongue  when
she  took  food  with  her  friends  for  fear  they  would
poison  her.  ^  An  old  Negro  cook  of  ours  in  Mississippi
had  much  the  same  treatment,  which  is  also  common  in
Georgia.  ^  Swallow  a  dime  and  you  will  never  be
conjured.  ^  One  Negro  estimates  that  about  half  the
Negroes  in  Columbus,  Miss.,  use  silver  coins  for
counter-charms,  either  tied  to  their  ankles  or  put  in


1  81,  155,  and  288.     Thomas  and  Thomas,   Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  284

2  269.
375.
*91.

'Smiley,  P.,  Folk-Lore  from  Va.,  S.  C,  Ga.,  Ala.,  and  Fla.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  32  (1919),  p.  380.

« Bacon,  A.  M.,  Conjuring  and  Conjure-Dociors,  Southern  Workman,
vol.   24    (1895),   p.   211.

7333.

«Steiner,  R.,  Observations  on  the  Practice  of  Conjuring  in  Georgia,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  14  (1901),  p.  179.

•267.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  289

their  shoes.  ^  Such  a  dime  will  stay  bright  as  long
as  all  Is  well,  but  if  any  one  is  trying  to  set  a  trick
against  you,  -  or  if  any  of  your  friends  are  not  true
to  you,  3  the  silver  will  at  once  turn  black.

Silver  seems  to  play  a  considerable  part  in  Negro
folk-lore.  Ghosts  may  be  killed  only  with  silver
bullets,  4  and  the  spirit  may  be  kept  in  the  grave  by
screwing  the  cofhn  lid  down  with  silver  screws.  ^  In
one  Sea  Island  folk-tale,  where  a  woman  had  unknow-
ingly married  the  devil  and  gone  with  him  to  hell,  she
sees  her  mother  rise  from  the  grave  and  turn  to  a  silver
knife  and  her  father  to  a  silver  dish.  ^  In  one  old
spiritual,  "Lean  on  the  Lord's  Side,"  there  is,  in  reference
to  Daniel,  one  line,  "De  silver  spade  to  dig  his  grave,"  ^
all  of  which  cases  show  silver  as  a  fetish  metal,  an
association  which  seems,  oflFhand,  to  be  more  European
than  African.  No  doubt  the  unusual  shiny  appearance
of  the  metal  is  the  peculiarity  which  first  gave  it
this  fetish  quality.

Pepper,  Salt,  and  Frizzly  Chickens.  Red  pepper  is
another  effective  and  widespread  charm  for  making
and  breaking  hoodoo,  combining  sharpness  of  taste
with  the  fetish  color.  Red  pepper  in  the  shoes,  «
(some  say  put  in  the  heel  of  the  shoe)  ^  or  hung  over
the  door  ^ "  is  a  sure  counter-charm.     In  one  case  an


1141.

»13,  65,  and  400.

3  289.

^306.

M05.

«  Parsons,  E.  C,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  16
(1923),  p.  46.

M41.     Allen,  W.  F.,     Slave  Songs  of  the  United  States,  p.  100.

*112,  and  141.     Steiner,  R.,     Observations  on  the  Practice  of  Conjuring  in
Georgia,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  14  (1901),  p.  179.

*  Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  284.
loSl.

19


290     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

epidemic  of  sneezing  at  a  Negro  ball  was  traced  to
red  pepper  In  one  of  the  dancer's  shoes.  ^  Possibly  it
Is  also  this  fear  of  conjure  which  is  at  the  basis  of  the
notion  that  red  pepper  put  Into  new  shoes  will  keep
them  from  hurting  the  feet.  ^  A  red  onion  carried  in
the  left  hand  Is  also  used  at  times  to  prevent  con-
juration and  diseases.  ^  Salt  scattered  about  the
house  is  also  good.  ^  This  mineral  should  be  the
first  thing  taken  Into  a  new  house;  the  salt  box  should
be  set  on  the  kitchen  table  (poison  most  likely  to  be  set
there),  and  salt  should  be  sprinkled  all  over  the  entire
house.  ^  The  New  Orleans  Negroes  scrub  their  steps
with  powdered  brick-dust  to  remove  a  conjure  set
there.  ^  Sucking  a  ball  of  alum,  ^  rubbing  your  limbs
with  graveyard  dirt,  ^  or  "planting"  graveyard  dirt,  ^
sweeping  your  house  ^ " — all  these  are  equally  effective
in  keeping  off  harm  from  conjuration.  A  "frizzly
chicken"  is  a  veritable  hoodoo  watchdog,  for  with  one
of  these  on  the  premises  a  person  can  rest  in  peace;
it  will  scratch  up  every  trick  laid  down  against  its
owner,  ^  ^  but  if  you  find  one  scratching  about  your
house  It  Is  a  sure  sign  you  have  been  conjured.  ^  -  Some
suggest  black  cats  for  this  purpose  as  well  as   frizzly

1  Mrs.  S.  P.  M.,     Voodooism  in  Tennessee,  Atlantic  Monthly,  vol.  64  (1899),
pp.  377-78.

252.

'  141.     Richardson,  A.  C,     Some  Slave  Superstitions,  Southern  Workman,
vol.  41  (1912),  p.  248.

4  81,  112,  and  288.

6  141.

^  Pitkin,  Helen,    An  Angel  by  Brevet,  pp.  59-60.

M.S.

8  67.

9 150.
i''6.

1^171,    141,  and  339.     Thomas    and    Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,
p.  284.     Cable,  G.  W.,     Creole  Slave  Songs,  Century  Magazine,  vol.  31  (1886),
p.  821.     Richardson,  C,     Some  Slave  Superstitions,  Southern  Workman,  vol.
41  (1912),  p.  248.     See  also,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  24  (1895),  p.  78.
12355.


VdODOOISM   AND    CoNJURATION  291

chickens.  ^  In  Africa  among  the  Vais  if  a  frizzly
chicken  Hves  in  a  town,  the  town  cannot  burn;  and  it  is
considered  good  luck  to  eat  such  a  chicken.  ~  The
Southern  Negro  says  that  such  a  chicken  comes  out
of  the  egg  backwards,  ^  and  is  the  devil's  own — some
Negroes  refuse  to  kill  them  at  all.  *

Horseshoes  and  Candles.  A  horseshoe  always  brings
good  luck.  It  keeps  off  ghosts,  witches,  or  hoodoos.
A  hawk  cannot  catch  a  chicken  if  he  sees  a  horseshoe —
his  legs  will  cross  and  he  cannot  pick  the  chicken  up
in  his  claws.  ^  More  will  be  said  about  the  horseshoe
later,  but  it  is  often  used  to  protect  against  conjura-
tion. ^  The  horse  itself  seems  to  have  a  keen  sense
for  detecting  hoodoo  bags.  "A  small  red  flannel  bag
filled  with  pins,  small  tacks,  and  other  things,  and
buried  under  a  gate-sill  made  a  horse  refuse  to  enter
the  gate.  After  working  over  the  horse  for  an  hour,
the  driver  looked  under  the  sill,  found  the  charm  and
removed  it,  and  the  horse  walked  quietly  in  at  the
gate."  ^  Candles,  too,  are  regarded  as  a  protection
against  spells.  "Many  a  fire  has  been  started  by  a
superstitious  Negro  who  has  set  a  lighted  candle
underneath  his  bed."  ^

Miscellaneous  Preventatives.  Cleaning  house  breaks
up  conjure,  ^  as  does  also  a  change  of  home  or  room.  ^ "


1112.

2  Ellis,  G.  E.,     Negro  Culture  in  West  Africa,  p.  167.

3  298.

*  Davis,  H.  C,     Negro  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  27
(1914),  p.  245.

5 171.

*  Bacon,  Miss  A.  M.,    Conjuring  and  Conjure-Doctors,  Southern  Workman,
vol.  24  (1895),  p.  211.

^  Ibid.,  p.  209.

'Dana,  M.,     Voodoo,  Metropolitan  Magazine,  vol.  28  (1908),  p.  531.
'  Steiner,  R.,     Superstitions  and  Beliefs  from  Central  Georgia,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  12  (1899),  p.  263.

* "  Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  284.


292     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Another  Informant  suggests  a  smooth  stone  worn  in
the  shoe  as  a  counter-charm  ^ — an  object  employed
in  other  locaHties  as  well.  ^  An  old  slave  means  of
avoiding  conjuring  in  the  foot  was  to  make  a  plus  sign
(the  cross  again)  on  the  inner  sole  of  the  shoe  every
morning  before  leaving  the  house.  ^  Others  suggest
that  a  spell  be  broken  by  giving  up  your  sweetheart  or
lover,  or  by  smoke-drying  a  scorpion,  pounding  it  up,
and  drinking  the  powder  with  whiskey.  ^  A  human
bone  procured  from  a  grave  by  the  person  himself  is  a
sure  preventive  of  hoodoo,  ^  and,  "in  excavating  an
Indian  mound  on  the  Savannah  River,  Georgia,  the
Negroes  working,  took  each  a  metacarpal  bone  to
protect  them  against  cunjer."  ^

Gradually  the  preventives  became  more  complicated.
Wear  your  underclothes  wrongside  out — perhaps  a
survival  of  the  time  when  the  single  garment  worn
was  turned  wrongside  out  to  deceive  the  spirits.  Put
saltpeter  in  the  soles  of  your  shoes  or  take  two  needles
and  make  a  cross  with  them  in  the  crown  of  your  hat. '
A  little  piece  of  root  from  the  "peace  plant"  kept  in
your  pocket  or  worn  in  the  shoe  is  good,  ®  as  is  also  the
root  from  "Betsy  bug's  heart,"  when  it  is  kept  in
your  pocket  with  some  silver  money.  An  old  conjurer
showed  me  some  of  this — the  silver  had  turned  black
as  if  it  had  been  scorched,  but  it  is  said  to  keep  off


1141.

2  Bacon,  A.  M.,  Conjuring  and  Conjure-Doctors,  Southern  Workman,
vol.  24  (1895),  p.  211.

2  Richardson,  C,  Some  Slave  Superstitions,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  41
(1912),  p.  248.

*  Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  284.

691.

*Steiner,  R.,     Observations  on  the  Practice  of  Conjuring  in  Georgia,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  14  (1901),  p.  178.
754.

8  141.


VOODOOISM    AND    CONJURATION  293

every  trick  in  tlie  country.  ^  Salt,  red  pepper,  and
saltpeter,  mixed  together  and  sewed  up  in  red  flannel,
make  a  good  counter-charm  against  handicapping.  ^
*'A  bag,  made  of  red  flannel,  filled  with  nails,  lodestone,
and  hair  will  ward  off  the  devil"  ^ — that  is  to  say,
one  great  purpose  of  "hands"  is  to  protect  against
other  "hands."  One  Negro  servant  took  some  hair
from  the  children  of  the  household  and  wrapped  it
about  the  prongs  of  a  forked  stick.  She  would  spit
on  this  and  twirl  it  about  a  couple  of  times  to  ward  off
possible  harm.  *  In  conclusion,  I  cite  a  few  random
practices  told  me  by  a  Mississippi  informant,  showing
the  bizarre  methods  sometimes  used.  Sprinkle  pepper
on  some  fresh  rabbit  brains  and  eat  them  raw.  You
will  then  be  as  lucky  as  Brer  Rabbit  and  will  be  able
to  step  over  every  trick  just  as  he  does.  Or  mix  some
mutton  suet  with  powdered  bluestone  and  quinine.
Rub  this  salve  on  the  bottom  of  your  feet  every  morn-
ing before  you  go  out  and  no  one  can  ever  harm  you
"because  "de  lamb  am  so  innocent."  Else  dry  out  a
piece  of  fresh  beef  gall  in  the  kitchen.  On  the  first  of
each  month  cut  off  a  piece  about  the  size  of  a  pea,  roll
it  in  flour,  and  swallow.  No  one  can  conjure  you
for  that  month  (possibly  because  the  bitter  gall  drives
off  spirits).  If  you  want  to  put  things  in  your  shoes,
cut  a  piece  of  newspaper  exactly  to  fit  the  sole  of  your
shoe  and  slip  it  into  place.  Sprinkle  nine  grains  of
red  pepper  on  top  of  it.  No  hoodoo  can  ever  harm
you,  because  he  would  first  have  to  count  every  letter
on  the  paper  and  by  that  time  you  would  be  gone.  *


191.

254.

3  405.

^404.

^41.

294     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern'  Negro

Diagnosing  Conjuration.  Conjuration,  naturally,  is
susceptible  to  diagnosis  and  treatment.  Some  of  the
symptoms  have  already  been  considered.  These,  of
course,  are  observed,  but  often  a  person  is  warned  of
attempted  hoodooing  in  a  dream.  If  you  dream  about
a  rattlesnake,  the  conjure-doctor  has  put  something
down  for  you;  if  the  snake  tries  to  bite  you,  but  does
not  succeed,  you  have  escaped  the  trick  laid  down;
a  rattlesnake  indicates  dangerous  conjure,  a  little
chicken  snake  in  a  dream,  only  slight  sickness.  If  the
snake  is  curled  up  ready  to  strike,  the  conjure-doctor  is
very  angry  with  you,  but  if  the  snake  is  lying  down
quietly,  the  conjure-doctor  is  just  thinking  of  you.  '
This  identification  of  the  snake  with  the  hoodoo-
doctor  (or  with  an  enemy,  as  is  most  generally  the  case)
may  be  of  significance,  since  there  is  at  least  the  pos-
sibility that  while  the  snake  has  been  dropped  from
actual  voodoo  worship,  yet  he  still  remains  as  a  dream
symbol  of  danger.  Besides  these  dream  warnings
"some  Negroes  are  said  to  be  able  to  find  'hoodoo
tracks'  in  ashes  of  the  fire,  which  show  that  some  kind
of  disaster  is  coming  to  the  house."  ^

Finding  the  "^Hand.^^  The  actual  diagnosis  is  made
by  observation  of  the  symptoms  or  by  putting  a  piece
of  silver  into  the  hand  or  mouth  of  the  sufferer.  If  the
silver  turns  black  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  person
has  been  conjured.  ^  Since  the  livelihood  of  the
"doctor"  depends  upon  giving  treatments,  at  least
an  attempt  is  made  to  convince  every  patient  that  he
is   tricked   and   needs   special   treatment.     Sometimes


1  Southern  Workman,  vol.  27  (1898),  p.  37.

2  Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  285.

3  Bacon,    A.    M.,     Conjuring    and    Conjure-Doctors,    Southern    Workman,
vol.  24  (1895),  p.  210.


VOODOOISM    AND    CONJURATION  295

the  conjure-bag  is  located  and  destroyed  as  a  method
of  treatment — a  feat  not  so  difficult  since  it  is  often
the  conjurer  who  has  himself  buried  the  bag.  "An
old  man  once  was  ill  with  palsy,  as  they  thought,  and
after  spending  much  money  employing  medical  doctors
and  getting  no  relief,  he  was  advised  to  change  treat-
ment. He  employed  a  conjurer,  who  came  with  his
'walking  boy'  (a  bottle  with  a  string  tied  to  its  neck,
deeply  colored,  that  you  may  not  see  what  the  doctor
puts  in  it — something  alive,  you  may  know,  which
enables  it  to  move  or  even  flutter  briskly,  and  this
makes  you  certain  of  whatever  fact  the  doctor  is  trying
to  impress)  in  hand,  ordered  a  man  to  bring  a  hoe  and
dig  where  he  would  order  him  to,  that  he  might  earth
up  the  thing  that  caused  the  man's  illness.  After  he
had  walked  over  and  around  the  yard  several  times
with  the  'boy'  suspended,  it  was  thought  by  many  that
he  would  not  be  able  to  find  the  buried  poison,  but  as
they  were  about  to  give  up  their  pursuit,  the  'boy'
fluttered  and  kicked  as  though  he  would  come  out  of
the  bottle.  Then  the  doctor  ordered  the  man  to  dig
quickly,  for  the  'trick-bag'  was  there.  On  the  order
being  obeyed  the  poison  was  found.  It  was  rusty
nails,  finger  and  toe  nails,  hair  and  pins  sewed  up  in  a
piece  of  red  flannel."  Strange  to  say,  the  patient
soon  recovered.  ^  "The  blood  of  a  fat  chicken  is
supposed  to  be  the  best  possible  locator  of  tricks,
though  a  duck,  or  even  a  turkey  at  the  season  would
not  be  despised.  The  fact  that  the  fowl  afterwards
serves  as  a  savory  meal  for  the  impecunious  'doctor'
may,  to  some  extent  influence  the  choice.  The  chicken
is  duly  killed  and  some  of  the  blood  sprinkled  in  the


^  Cures  by  Conjure-Doclors,  Southern  Workmari,  vol.  28  (1899),  p.  315.


296     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

palm  of  the  left  hand  of  the  doctor.  With  the  fore-
finger of  the  other  hand  he  strikes  the  blood,  and  the
direction  in  which  the  blood  spurts  is  supposed  to
locate  the  'trick.'  "  ^  At  other  times  cards  are  cut  to
locate  the  conjure-bottle,  and  in  one  case  after  the
roots  were  found  the  conju re-doctor  took  a  flat-iron  and
drew  on  a  piece  of  brown  paper  the  image  of  the  person
who  put  the  roots  there.  ^  In  still  another  case  an
old  man  was  able  to  tell  a  woman  exactly  the  spot  in
her  yard  where  the  trick  was  buried  without  even
visiting  the  place,  which  was  twelve  miles  away.  ^

'^Turnin''  de  Trick. ''^  If  the  person  desires,  the  trick
may  now  be  turned  against  the  person  who  planted  it.
Ed  Murphy  did  this  by  laying  the  trick  he  had  dis-
covered in  a  piece  of  paper,  sprinkling  quicksilver
over  it,  and  setting  the  paper  on  fire.  The  trick
exploded  and  made  a  hole  in  the  ground  a  foot  deep
as  it  burned  up — his  enemy  soon  died.  *  "It  is  said
that  if  any  one  tricks  you  and  you  discover  the  trick
and  put  that  into  the  fire,  you  burn  your  enemy,  or  if
you  throw  it  into  the  running  water  you  drown  him."  ^
One  Negro  tells  me  of  how  his  father  left  the  house
because  needles  and  red  flannel  had  been  buried  be-
neath it.  "He  should  have  thrown  sulphur  about  the
house,  or,  to  turn  the  trick  against  the  one  who  set
it,    have    thrown    it    into    running    water."  ^     Hattie


1  Davis,  D.  W.,     Conjuration,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  27  (1898),  p.  252.

2  Bacon,  A.  M.,  Conjuring  and  Conjure- Doctors,  Southern  Workman,
vol.  24,  p.  211,  and  225-26.

3  Ihid.,  pp.  210-11.
<  258.

*  Bacon,  A.  M.,  Conjuring  and  Conjure-Doctors,  Souther?i  Workman,
vol.  24  (1895),  p.  211.     (Giving  several  illustrative  cases.)

6  57.  See  also,  Owen,  M.  A.,  Among  the  Voodoos,  I.  F.  L.  C.  (1891),
p.  244.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  297

Harris,  with  her  seemingly  Inexhaustible  lore,  cites
several  means  by  which  a  trick  may  be  turned  against
a  person,  or  whereby  the  original  conjurer  may  be
discovered.  Sweep  off  a  clean  place  in  the  back  yard
and  on  that  clear  spot  leave  a  rooster  and  two  hens
under  a  clothes  basket  all  night.  Next  morning
collect  their  droppings  and  put  them  into  a  bott  e  of
water,  leaving  it  in  a  "careful  place"  for  three  days.
Then  go  at  night  and  make  three  crossmarks  on  the
door  of  the  person  whom  you  know  has  tricked  you.
The  trick  will  be  turned  against  him  In  less  than  three
days.  If  the  conjurer  Is  a  woman,  a  simpler  way  of
turning  the  trick  on  her  Is  to  get  some  of  her  fresh
menstrual  bandages  and  bury  them  in  the  cemetery
on  the  breast  of  a  grave.  To  discover  who  has
tricked  you  get  some  clay  from  the  outside  of  one  of
those  old-fashioned  stick-clay  chimneys  on  the  north
side  of  a  cabin,  and  beat  this  clay  up  with  bluestone.
Every  morning  for  nine  mornings  take  a  pinch  of
this  mixture  and  throw  It  towards  the  east.  The
person  who  set  the  trick  will  come  and  tell  you  that
some  one  else  had  set  It,  but  you  will  know  that  person
to  be  guilty.  To  drive  the  conjurer  out  of  town,  make
up  a  hickory  fire  and  let  It  burn  down  to  coals.  Take
up  two  live  coals  on  a  shovel  and  lay  one  dead  coal
aside  by  Itself.  "When  de  roostah  crows  for  mid-
night (dat  is  de  end  uv  day)  chunk  one  piece  uv  de
live  coal  (dat  is  yo'self)  towards  de  souf  (towards
de  warm  country);  throw  de  odder  live  coal  to  de  east
(nutthin'  kin  git  obber  fiah);  an'  throw  de  daid  coal
(dat's  yo'  enemy)  towards  de  norf  (dat's  de  col'
country).  'Fo  de  week  be  out  he'll  be  a-leavin'  dese
parts."     In  case  it  is  not  known  who  set  the  trick,  the


298     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

guilty  one  may  be  forced  to  confess  by  the  same
procedure  except  that  the  coals  are  to  be  thrown  at
ten  o'clock  instead  of  midnight — the  dead  ember  to
the  north  and  all  the  others  to  the  south.  "You  turns
de  trick  on  him  dis-a-way  an'  you's  sho  boun'  ter  hear
f'um  him."  ^

Curing  the  Conjured.  "Hoodooed  persons  sometimes
can  be  cured  by  a  medicine  the  doctor  gives  them,
or  by  doing  some  kind  of  queer  things  that  he  tells
them  to  do."  -  A  tea,  so  one  informant  says,  made  of
the  lining  of  the  gizzard  of  a  frizzly  chicken  pounded
up  with  "prince's  feathers"  {Amarantus  hypochon-
driacus,  I  think)  will  relieve  a  trick  every  time.  ^  If
you  can  whip  the  person  who  hoodooed  you  with  a
piece  of  grapevine  (Hattie  Harris  says  bring  the  blood
with  a  rattan  stick)  you'll  break  the  spell.  Mrs.  Boyle
writes:  "We  had  a  cook  who  had  a  lizard  in  her  arm
and  kept  a  piece  of  grapevine  all  summer  behind  the
door  in  the  kitchen,  'Layin'  for  de  'oman  who  'dooded
her.'  "  ■*  Others  say  you  must  knock  the  blood  out  of
a  hoodoo  to  prevent  him  from  harming  you  ^ — the  same
belief  is  found  in  Lancashire  with  reference  to  witches.  «
"If  the  pain  is  in  your  limbs  make  a  tea  or  bath  of  red
pepper  into  which  put  salt  and  silver  money.  Rub
freely  and  the  pain  will  leave  you.  If  sick  otherwise,
you  will  have  to  get  a  root-doctor,  and  he  will  boil
roots,  the  names  of  which  he  knows,  and  silver  to-
gether, and  the  patient  must  drink  freely  of  this,  and

1141.

2341.  For  illustrative  cures,  see  Bacon,  A.  M.,  Conjuring  and  Conjure-
Doctors,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  24  (1895),  p.  210.

3  141.

M2.
6  61.
*  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  444.


VOODOOISM    AND    CONJURATION  299

he  or  she  will  get  well.  The  king  root  of  the  forest  is
called  'High  John,  the  Conqueror.'  All  believers  in
conjurers  quake  when  they  see  a  bit  of  it  in  the  hands
of  any  one,"  ^  Fish-bone  is  also  good  for  cunjer  when
swelling  has  occurred.  -  A  cure,  which  my  informant
tells  me  was  derived  from  the  Indians,  consists  of  clay
from  around  the  mouth  of  a  crawfish  hole,  mixed  with
dirt  from  a  red  ant's  hole  and  thoroughly  wet  with
whiskey  or  camphor.  To  this  add  water  in  which
angle-worms  have  been  boiled.  Rub  the  conjured
person  with  this  and  his  trouble  will  soon  vanish.  ^
"May-butter"  *  (made  on  the  first  day  of  May),  mixed
with  saltpeter  and  the  yolk  of  an  egg,  and  rolled  into
small  pills,  will  cure  any  case  of  poisoning  (conjuring).
Its  power  lies  in  the  fact  that  "de  cow  bites  off  de  top
an'  bottom  uv  ebby  herb  dat  grows  in  de  woods  an'
in  May-butter  you  gets  de  bes'  uv  ebby  plant."  ^
In  England  it  was  used  as  a  salve  to  cure  various
grievances.  ^

Another  informant  says  to  get  nine  needles,  nine
brass  pins,  and  nine  hairs  from  your  own  head.  Cork
these  up  in  a  bottle  with  some  of  your  urine  and  set
the  bottle  in  the  back  of  your  fireplace.  "Den  earnes'ly
ax  de  Lawd  ter  help  yer  obbercome  dat  trick  what's
sot  agin'  you."  When  the  bottle  bursts,  all  your
ailments  will  leave  you.  "^  Water  in  which  silver  has
been  boiled  is  effective  in  most  cases.  ^     In  another


1  Remedies  to  Cure  Conjuration,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  28  (1899),  p.  112.

2  Steiner,  R.,     Observations  on  the  Practice  of  Conjuring  in  Georgia,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  14  (1901),  p.  179.

3  141.

M55.

6  91.

*  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  1,  p.  362.

M41.

8 150.


300     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

case  my  informant  claims  the  hoodoo-doctor  gave  a
conjured  woman  a  little  bundle  of  sticks  (roots)  with
the  instruction  to  wet  them  every  morning  and  pray
to  the  sun,  asking  the  Lord  to  take  away  the  spell.  ^
Cases  like  this  are  rare  and  may  indicate  the  last  rem-
nants of  a  former  African  sun-worship.  ^  Again  the
conjure  can  be  relieved  only  by  catching  the  cat  from
which  the  conjurer  obtained  the  hairs  used  in  setting
the  trick;  3  while  the  New  Orleans  Negroes  some-
times dispose  of  the  little  voodoo  coffins  by  throwing
them,  together  with  fifteen  cents,  in  the  middle  of  the
river  and  calling  upon  "grand  Zombi."  *

The  Power  of  Faith.  It  is  hard  to  convey  to  the
modern  materialist  the  intense  reality  of  voodoo
beliefs  to  the  average  illiterate  Negro.  The  astonishing
thing  to  those  who  are  not  acquainted  with  the  almost
unbelievable  actuality  of  the  spirit  environment  to
primitive  people  is  the  fact  that  voodoo  so  often  works.
Reputable  physicians  everywhere  recognize  the  power
of  faith  in  human  affairs,  and  it  is  due  to  this  over-
powering belief  in  conjuration  that  the  hoodoo-doctor
so  often  accomplishes  what  he  sets  out  to  do,  whether
it  be  witching  things  into,  or  witching  things  out  of  a
person.  Dr.  William  S.  Sadler,  Sr.,  attending  surgeon
in  one  of  Chicago's  larger  hospitals,  writes:  "I  have
come  to  look  upon  a  sincere  religious  faith  as  a  natural
cure  for  nerves.  So  far  as  this  curative  role  is  con-
cerned, the  creed,  faith,  or  religion  is  not  as  important
as  it  is  that  the  patient  should  wholly  and  sincerely

1  405.

2  Ellis,  A.  B.,     Ewe-speaking  Peoples,  pp.  31-71.

^Atlanta  Constitution,  Nov.  1885.     Quoted  in  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  3   (1890),
pp.  281-82.

*  Pitkin,  Helen,     An  Angel  by  Brevet,  pp.  181-82.


VOODOOISAI    AND    CoNjURATION  301

believe  in  it.  It  is  the  patient's  faith  that  cures,  not
the  shade  of  doctrine  to  which  he  has  given  his  spiritual
allegiance."  ^  And,  in  another  place,  "there  is  only
one  method  by  which  any  outsider  can  work  a  cure,
and  that  is  through  the  mind  of  the  (neurotic)  patient.
If  he  can  make  the  sufferer  have  faith  that  he  is  going
to  be  cured  he  will  be  cured;  and  it  won't  make  any
difference  whether  it  is  done  by  sugar  pills,  a  surgical
operation,  baths,  massage,  or  standing  the  patient
on  his  head  in  the  corner!  It  is  the  patient's  faith  in
the  method,  not  the  method  itself  that  will  heal
him.  ...  I  have  achieved  many  cures  in  this
fashion  myself."  ^  While  we  do  not  fully  understand
the  psychological  processes  involved  in  such  cures,
yet  the  power  of  faith  is  recognized  by  the  medical
profession,  and  with  the  Negroes  I  am  convinced  that
in  a  great  many  cases  such  cures  do  actually  occur.
From  this  viewpoint  voodoo  would  seem  a  sort  of
primitive  faith-healing  or  faith-harming,  admirably
adapted  to  the  needs  and  temperament  of  the  illiterate
Negro.  The  Negroes  themselves  recognize  this  fact.
Many  of  them  have  told  me,  "W'ite  folks,  hoodoo
cain't  tech  you  ef  you  doan'  believe  in  hit,  but  hit
sho'  lam's  de  gizzud  out  uv  you  ef  you  does  believe."
Faith  in  the  remedy  actually  hastens  the  cure — whether
the  remedy  be  a  scriptural  promise  or  a  hoodoo  charm —
and  faith  in  the  harmful  produces,  to  a  certain  extent,
the  harmful,  as  when  a  person,  believing  in  the  power
of  snake-dust  put  into  his  food,  begins  to  feel  actual
symptoms  of  snakes  growing  within  him.     In  my  own

1  Sadler,  Dr.  William  S.,     Ways  to  Work  Out  Your  Own  Mind  Cure,  Amer
can  Magazine,  vol.  xcviii  (1924),  p.  129.
2 /bid.,  p;  41.


302     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

conjuring  experience  I  have  seen  one  old  Negress
definitely  helped  by  a  "hand"  I  gave  her  to  cure
chills  and  fevers;  another  relieved  (so  she  testifies)
of  rheumatism;  and  a  third,  a  bashful  swain,  given  more
courage  in  courtship.  In  the  case  of  this  love  charm,
given  to  the  retiring  "Simp,"  there  was  a  rather  in-
teresting sequel.  My  brother  writes  that  "Simp"  had
a  quarrel  with  one  of  the  Negro  workmen  who  "cussed
him."  Whereupon  "Simp"  drew  out  his  red  flannel
love  charm  and  made  a  crossmark  upon  his  opponent's
arm,  telling  him  that  he  was  "marked  for  life."  His
enemy  had  faith  in  the  power  of  "sech  doin's"  and
left  the  place  running.  He  has  not  yet  returned.  ^
Again,  the  principal  of  a  Mississippi  Negro  school
writes  me:  "Some  years  ago  a  young  woman  on  the
place,  I  presume  she  was  twenty-one,  came  in  great
agony  and  wanted  us  to  release  her  from  a  spell  she
supposed  her  grandfather  had  thrown  over  her  to
make  her  do  what  he  wanted  her  to  do.  I  argued
with  her,  telling  her  that  he  could  have  no  power
over  her  except  as  she  allowed  him  to  have.  That  it
was  all  in  her  own  mind.  But  she  would  not  be
convinced  and  went  away  in  great  agony."  *  Such
examples  illustrate  clearly  the  power  of  faith  in  hoodoo,
and  I  will  now  cite  some  typical  cases  obtained  from
my  own  informants,  showing  the  potency  of  the
healing   touch    of   this    great   physician.

Reptiles  Removed.  One  of  the  plantation  Negroes
near  Columbus,  Mississippi,  had  a  terrific  backache.
The  "horse"  told  him  that  he  had  a  snake  in  his  back.
Laying  the  man  on  his  stomach  (so  that  he  could  not

1287.
220L


VOODOOISM    AND    CONJURATION  303

see  him)  he  made  some  cuts  on  his  back  and  pretended
to  extract  a  small  green  snake.  To  this  day  the  Negro
believes  that  the  snake  was  taken  from  him — but,
best  of  all,  he  immediately  recovered  and  went  back
to  work.  ^  In  West  Africa,  in  one  case  of  illness,  the
fetish-doctor  made  several  incisions  on  the  breast  of
the  patient,  and  after  a  series  of  howls  and  incan-
tations, applied  his  lips  to  the  incision  and  sucked  out
of  the  body  of  the  patient  those  objects  which  had  been
witched  into  him.  When  such  objects  as  goat's  horns,
roots,  pebbles,  broken  pottery — all  entirely  out  of
place  in  a  human  anatomy — had  been  removed  the
patient  was  left  in  a  fair  way  to  recover.  ~  A  New
Orleans  Negro  "ate,  ate,  ate,"  all  of  the  time.  He  had
reptiles  in  him — could  see  them  running  up  and  down
under  his  skin.  He  had  to  eat  a  lot  to  keep  the  snakes
from  eating  him,  but  with  all  his  eating  he  dwindled
down  to  skin  and  bones.  The  conjure-doctor  had
him  hold  out  his  hand  and  on  the  back  of  it  he  stuck
a  little  "picture-stamp"  face  downward.  Although
the  boy  had  been  able  to  sleep  but  little  before,  he  now
fell  into  a  deep  slumber.  When  he  awoke  he  began  to
eat  heartily.  The  doctor  came  and  pulled  the  "stamp"
off  the  back  of  his  hand,  rubbed  him  a  little,  and  made
the  sign  of  the  cross  on  his  breast.  The  boy  vomited
up  several  snakes  and  from  that  time  on  was
perfectly  well.  ^

A  colored  minister  tells  me  of  a  woman  who  thought
she  had  lizards  running  up  and  down  under  her  skin.
"Dar  hit  goes!  Dar  hit  goes!"  she  would  cry  and  go
into  a  frenzy  tearing  at  her  arm  or  leg.     A   Negro

1348.

2  Milligan,  R.  H.,     Fetish  Folk  of  West  Africa,  p.  223.

3  54.


304     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

hoodoo-woman  was  called  in.  This  woman  already
had  a  lizard  hidden  in  her  sleeve,  and,  waiting  for  the
frenzy  to  come  upon  the  patient,  she  gently  massaged
her  arm,  pretending  to  work  the  lizard  down  the
patient's  arm  to  the  finger-tips.  Then  she  gave  a
sudden  fling  and  "slung  de  lizzud  outer  her  sleeve
out  on  de  flo.'  "  "Dar  hit  goes!  Dar  hit  goes!"  the
curious  onlookers  cried,  and  fled.  The  woman  was
from  that  moment  cured.  ^  A  young  Alabama  doctor
was  treating  a  woman  who  thought  she  had  "something
alive"  in  her  stomach.  He  met  with  no  success  and
finally  turned  the  matter  over  to  an  older  doctor  who
understood  better  the  beliefs  and  prejudices  of  the
Negro.  This  canny  doctor  gave  the  patient  a  large
dose  of  powdered  ipecac  and  when  she  began  to  vomit,
let  fall  a  live  frog.  'Tt  fell  with  the  vomitus,  hopping
out  of  the  receptacle  and  as  she  saw  it,  she  began  to
shout,  'Thank  God,  thank  God!  I  knew  it  was  down
there!'  and  heedless  of  the  fact  that  she  was  soiling  her
floor,  vomiting  as  she  scampered  around,  she  did
not  stop  until  she  had  caught  the  frog,  which  she
preserves  to  this  day  to  show  her  friends  what  came
out  of  her."  She  was  at  once  cured.  ^  When  the
Negroes  of  one  Mississippi  slave-owner  were  conjured
and  their  limbs  swelled  he  advised  them  to  hold  their
limbs  in  smoke  made  by  burning  wool  from  a  black
sheep.  In  almost  every  case  they  speedily  recovered.  ^
"Uncle  Poosa"  of  Alabama — a  slave  brought  directly
over  from  Africa — conjured  the  other  Negroes  with
pieces  of  snake   skins,  bits  of  kinky,  wooly  hair  and

1103.

"^  397.     For  a  similar  case    in  Virginia,    see   Earnest,  J.    B.,   Jr.,      The

Religious  Development  of  the  Negro  in  Virginia,  p.  137.
"345.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  305

Other  things.  While  such  practices  by  a  native
African  point  directly  towards  an  African  origin  for
hoodoo,  yet  in  almost  every  case  the  would-be  evil
was  checkmated  by  "bread  pills"  handed  out  by  the
owner  of  the  slaves.  ^

Hoodooing  for  Science.  Dr.  H.  Roger  Williams
of  Mobile,  Alabama,  tells  me  of  an  interesting  ex-
perience of  his  in  this  connection:  "Not  many  miles
from  Mobile  I  was  called  to  treat  a  man  who  was  suf-
fering from  an  abscess  of  the  knee,  resulting  from  an
injury  of  long  standing.  Seeing  that  there  was  nothing
to  do  but  hasten  suppuration  and  apply  the  lance,
I  administered  to  the  patient,  giving  instruction  as  to
what  must  be  done  in  the  interval  of  my  coming  back
on  the  morrow.  When  I  returned  the  following  morn-
ing, I  found  the  house  crowded  with  eager,  anxious
watchers.  I  redressed  the  limb,  noticed  the  solemn  head-
shaking  of  doubt  expressed  by  many  of  those  gathered,
and  as  I  emerged  from  the  house,  saw  one  reverend-
looking  gentleman  standing  at  the  corner  of  the
house,  whom  I  knew  to  be  none  other  than  a  hoodoo-
doctor,  especially  invited  to  come  and  examine  the
patient  by  sympathizing  friends.  I  made  no  comment,
but  knew  that  it  would  take  at  least  three  or  four
days  for  me  to  prove  that  scientific  treatment  would
cure  the  patient,  and  the  question  confronting  me
was,  would  not  that  hoodoo-doctor  step  in  at  the
psychological  moment,  and,  opening  the  abscess  by
pressure,  substantiate  his  claim  that  the  patient's
Illness   was   unnatural.

1407.


20


306     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Something  must  be  done  to  offset  the  hoodoo-
doctor.  I  set  my  brow  to  thinking,  and  a  solution
was  made  that  afternoon.  I  had  a  patient  whose
brother  had  been  given  as  a  Christmas  present  a
game  called  'Tumlin,'  consisting  of  a  board  through
which  was  a  number  of  holes,  together  with  two
aluminum  capsules  in  each  of  which  was  a  lead  marble.
Slanting  the  board  and  allowing  the  capsules  to  be
placed  at  the  top,  the  weight  of  the  lead  marble  would
roll  to  the  lower  end  of  the  capsule,  causing  it  to  roll
over  continuously  until  it  either  rolled  off  the  board
or  into  one  of  the  holes.  I  gave  the  boy  the  full
price  of  his  whole  toy,  just  for  one  of  the  capsules  and
its  contained  marble.  With  the  lead  marble  In  the
capsule  I  saturated  a  piece  of  flannel  cloth  with  some
oil  of  mustard,  beat  up  some  garlic  into  a  pulp,  wrapped
the  garlic  in  the  flannel  cloth  around  the  capsule,
rolled  the  wet  cover  In  powdered  red  pepper,  and
securely  sewed  all  In  another  flannel  cover  of  red.

When  I  went  to  see  my  country  patient  the  next
day  as  usual,  the  crowd  watching  entered  the  sick  room
as  soon  as  I  did.  Walking  straight  to  the  bed  of  the
sick  man,  I  threw  the  'jack,'  for  such  they  are  called,
into  the  bed.  With  the  momentum  from  my  hand,
together  with  the  constant  motion  of  the  excited
patient,  the  jack  kept  jumping  first  in  one  direction,
then  In  another,  to  the  consternation  of  all  present.
By  the  time  I  could  sit  down  by  the  bed  and  get  my
jack,  excitement  had  reached  a  high  pitch.  Without
a  smile,  I  said  to  the  sick  man,  'This  is  the  only  living
jack  in  this  section  of  the  country.  It  has  more  power
and  more  life  than  any  jack  to  be  found.  Keep  it
under  your  pillow.     Three  times  a  day,  take  it  thus.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  307

and  rub  it  between  your  hands.'  Here  I,  pressing  the
jack  between  his  hands  that  the  odor  of  the  things  be-
neath its  coverings  could  ooze  through,  ordered  him  to
rub  his  hand  across  his  breast  and  near  the  portion  of  his
leg  where  I  had  the  poultice.  As  a  matter  of  course
this  gave  him  a  smarting  sensation  everywhere  his
hand  touched,  and  all  the  crowd  stood  awed  at  what
they  beheld.  'Now!  said  I,'  talking  to  him  in  confiden-
tial tones,  just  loud  enough  to  be  heard,  'there  are  a
great  many  people  who  are  going  around  the  country
trying  to  sell  jacks,  but  if  any  of  them  come  here  and
touch  your  bed,  I  will  know  it  when  I  return  tomorrow,
for  they  will  neither  be  able  to  tell  it  or  see  what
happened  to  them!'  So  saying,  I  dressed  the  knee  and
took  my  departure.  From  that  day,  I  am  told,  that
hoodoo-doctor  had  never  been  seen  in  that  neighbor-
hood. Thus  I,  having  run  him  off  by  outdoing  him
with  his  own  tricks,  was  left  free  to  draw  the  abscess
to  a  head,  lance  it  and  get  the  patient  well.  After
the  patient  had  thoroughly  recovered,  I  cut  the
covering  from  the  jack,  exposed  my  little  trick  that
had  so  baffled  the  'God-given  wisdom'  of  the  hoodoo-
doctor,  and  from  that  day  to  this,  that  community
has  no  belief  in  the  foolishness  of  hoodooism."

Headaches,  Bites,  and  Hoodoo.  Ed  Murphy,  so
another  Negro  told  me,  was  passing  a  house  one  day
when  a  Negro  woman  called  him  in  to  give  her  some-
thing for  her  headache;  Ed  simply  put  his  two  hands
on  her  head  and  her  headache  immediately  vanished.  ^
I  asked  Ed  about  this.  He  replied  that  it  was  ab-
solutely true.  It  seems  that  there  are  two  parallel
seams  (sutures)  running  broadways  of  the  top  of  the

1 153.


308     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

head — one  near  the  front  and  one  near  the  back — and
one  seam  running  lengthwise  along  the  middle  of  the
head.  Headache  Is  caused  by  these  seams  getting
too  wide.  To  cure  it,  simply  take  the  hands  and  press
the  seams  back  together,  pressing  first  from  front  to
back  and  then  from  side  to  side.  This  is  how  he
cured  that  woman.  ^  A  reliable  Negro  servant  at
home  tells  me  of  how  her  child  was  bitten  by  a  blue-
gummed  Negro,  a  bite  which  is  generally  considered
fatal.  She  went  into  the  hen  house  and  got  some
fresh,  green  chicken  manure  which  she  rubbed  on  the
place  where  her  child  was  bitten.  The  child  was  not
harmed,  but  every  tooth  in  the  blue-gummed  Negro's
head  rotted  out.  ^  In  another  Mississippi  town  a
Negro  girl  employed  by  a  reputable  white  family  was
hoodooed  by  a  jealous  rival.  She  lay  sick  in  bed  and
her  employer  sent  a  white  doctor  to  see  her.  The
doctor  reported  that  he  could  not  do  a  thing  for  her
because  she  had  made  herself  believe  that  she  was
going  to  die,  and  unless  she  got  the  notion  out  of  her
head  she  would  die.  A  Negro  workman  advised  her
employer  to  consult  a  hoodoo-doctor  in  the  locality,
who,  he  said,  could  take  off  any  sickness  for  five  dollars.
On  coming  to  the  home,  this  conjure-doctor  looked
at  the  girl,  lay  down  in  the  path  and  rolled  over  and
over  on  the  ground  towards  the  steps,  muttering  to
himself.  Then  he  called  for  a  shovel,  saying  that  the
hoodoo  was  by  the  steps.  Digging  In  the  earth  he
located  a  bottle  filled  with  horsehair,  old  teeth,  and
rags.  He  took  the  charm  and  told  the  girl  she  was
safe  and  would  get  her  lover  back.     Next  morning  the


1258.

2342.


VOODOOISM    AND    CoNJURATION  309

sick  girl  called  for  a  hearty  breakfast  and  was  soon  at
work  again.  ^  In  another  case,  so  I  am  told,  a  woman
was  sick  with  fits.  The  regular  doctor  did  her  ab-
solutely no  good.  A  conjure-doctor  came  and  gave
her  some  medicine,,  saying  that  she  would  soon  ask  for
the  very  food  that  had  poisoned  her.  She  woke  up
next  morning  and  asked  for  turnip  greens  and  corn
bread.  After  giving  her  some  more  medicine  she  got
completely  well.  ^

Fooled  to  Life.  Finally,  there  is  one  remarkable
case  told  me  by  a  white  plantation  owner  near  Colum-
bus, Miss.,  a  case  which  illustrates  clearly  the  results
of  faith  in  the  conjure-bag,  and  which  shows  that  it  is
the  faith,  and  not  the  materials  making  up  the  conjure-
bag,  which  is  the  important  factor.  A  Negro  woman
on  his  plantation  thought  she  had  been  tricked.  For
a  long  time  she  had  lain  in  bed  without  showing  any
improvement,  and  it  seemed  that  she  was  about  to
die.  As  a  last  resort  the  planter  got  some  skin  from  a
turkey's  knee  (a  scaly  covering  looking  like  a  snake
skin)  and  tied  it  up  in  a  red  flannel  bag  along  with
some  hair  and  lodestone.  He  visited  the  sick  woman
and,  without  being  seen,  slipped  it  into  a  chink  above
her  door.  Then  he  suggested  to  one  of  her  friends
that  the  conjure-bag  might  be  hidden  about  the  room.
A  thorough  search  brought  the  bag  to  light.  Great
was  the  anger  against  the  supposed  conjurer  and  great
the  rejoicing  that  the  bag  had  been  found.  The  bag
(along  with  $S)  was  taken  to  a  "horse"  to  have  the
spell  removed.  Within  three  days  the  woman  was
up  and  about,  and  great  was  her  amazement  when  the

1171.
U57.


310     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

subterfuge  was  revealed  to  her  about  a  year  later.  ^
These  cases,  which  could  be  multiplied  almost  in-
definitely, -  show  clearly  the  grip  of  superstition  upon
the  Southern  Negroes.  Conjuration  is  constantly
having  a  hand  in  the  practical  affairs  of  life.  Re-
serving further  analysis  for  a  later  connection,  we
merely  call  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  African
influence  greatly  predominates  over  the  European,  a
fact  quite  in  keeping  with  our  earlier  conclusion  that
dissimilar  beliefs  either  remain  intact  or  are  entirely
eliminated.


1348.

2  See,  for  instance,  Smiley,  P.,  Folk-Lorefrom  Va.,  S.  C,  Ga.,  Ala.,  and  Fla.,
J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  32,  p.  379.  Bacon,  A.  M.,  Conjuring  and  Conjure-Dociors,
Southern  Workman,  vol.  24  (1895),  p.  210.  Packwood,  Mrs.  T.  H.  C,  Cure
for  an  Aching  Tooth,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  13  (1900),  pp.  66-67.  Bergen,  F.  D.,
Concerning  Negro  Sorcery  in  the  United  States,  vol.  3  (1890),  p.  282.
Mrs.  S.  P.  M.,  Voodooism  in  Tennessee,  Atlantic  Monthly,  vol.  64  (1899),
p.  375  ff.     McCullough,  J.  E.,     The  Human  Way,  p.  59.


CHAPTER  V

POSITIVE  CONTROL-SIGNS
MINOR  CHARMS  AND  CURES

Distinction  Between  Signs  and  Hoodoo.  The  length
of  the  past  two  chapters  on  conjuration  should  not
be  taken  as  an  index  of  its  relative  importance,  since
it  was  only  by  dint  of  patient  investigation  that  the
facts  presented  were  scraped  together.  While  hoodoo
is  possibly  the  most  picturesque  form  of  Negro  oc-
cultism, yet  an  exact  knowledge  of  its  usages  is  re-
stricted to  a  relatively  small  number  of  persons,
chiefly  men,  although  women  are  not  entirely  ex-
cluded. "Signs,"  on  the  other  hand,  constitute  the
largest  body  of  Negro  magical  beliefs  and  number
among  their  devotees  mainly  women,  although  men
are  by  no  means  counted  out.  "Signs"  are  generally
what  a  person  is  thinking  of  when  he  speaks  of  Negro
superstitions,  although  the  term  as  used  by  the  Negro
is  somewhat  more  inclusive  than  the  English  term
"omens,"  taking  in  not  only  omens  but  various  small
magical  practices  and  taboos  as  well.  The  distinction
between  hoodoo  and  "signs"  is  not  clear-cut  even  to  a
Negro.  Perhaps  it  lies  more  in  the  number  of  ad-
herents than  in  any  inherent  quality  (hoodoo  being
more  exclusive),  though  as  a  general  rule  the  hoodoo
charm  is  more  complex.  Again,  few  of  the  conjura-
tion spells  seem  to  have  exact  European  parallels,
while  many  or  most  of  the  signs  seem  to  be  of  European
origin.  This    is    quite    to   be    expected,    although    not


312     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

generally  recognized  by  those  whites  who  poke  fun  at
the  Negro  because  of  his  so-called  "African  super-
stitions," since  the  Negro  women,  who  are  the  chief
bearers  of  these  European  beliefs,  were  the  ones  most
closely  associated  with  the  household  life  of  the  Southern
planter.  Naturally  the  Negro  mother  would  hand
down  these  beliefs  to  her  children,  and  mainly  to  her
girls,  who  were  more  closely  connected  with  her  in  the
home  and  to  whom  the  beliefs,  dealing  largely  with
things  connected  with  household  work,  were  more
appealing,  I  once  heard  a  Negro  preacher  remark:
"Some  folks  sez  er  'oman  haint  got  no  place  In  de
secret  society;  but,  Lawd,  de  'oman's  laundry's  on  de
outside  er  dat  man  in  dere  an'  her  cookin's  sho  In  his
insides."  He  might  have  added  also  that  the  woman's
superstitions  were  in  the  head  of  that  man  in  the
lodge.

Positive  and  Negative  Control-signs.  In  spite  of  these
distinctions,  however,  signs  and  hoodoos  agree  in  that
both,  for  the  most  part,  are  beliefs  in  causal  relation-
ships which  modern  science  shows  to  be  incorrect.
Some  of  these  signs  which  allow  of  human  control  are
positive  In  nature;  that  is,  they  indicate  methods  by
which  an  individual  may  obtain  desired  results.
Thus,  "If  you  bite  a  butterfly's  head  oflf  you  will  get  a
new  dress."  Other  directed  or  domesticated  signs  are
negative  In  type.  They  Indicate  unhappy  results
which  are  to  be  avoided,  constituting  in  reality  a  set
of  taboos.  1  An  example  of  this  class  is:  "If  you  point
at  a  grave  your  finger  will  rot  off" — a  statement  which
Is  really  a  warning  not  to  point  at  graves.     Many  of


1  Compare  with  Frazer's  "negative  magic."     See  The  Golden  Bough,  p.  19.


Positive  Control-Signs  and  Cures  313

the  former  type  are  classed  simply  as  good  luck  signs,
while  those  of  the  latter  are  often  indicated  as  bad
luck.  The  formula  I  have  derived  for  all  of  these
^'control-signs"  is:  "If  you  (or  some  one  else)  behave
in  such  and  such  a  manner,  so  and  so  will  happen" —
a  formula  applying  to  conjuration  as  well.

Prophetic  Signs.  Further  removed  from  conjuration
and  for  all  purposes  identical  with  our  English  signs
or  omens,  are  those  undomesticated  causal  relation-
ships in  which  the  human  individual  has  no  free  play.
Thus  "if  a  dead  tree  falls  when  the  wind  is  not  blowing,
it  is  a  sign  of  death."  Here  man  has  no  control  and
submits  helplessly  to  the  decrees  of  nature.  This
large  class  of  "prophetic  signs"  includes,  mainly,
omens  of  good  and  bad  luck,  weather  signs  and  dream
signs,  and  the  general  formula  is,  "If  something
(outside  of  your  control)  behaves  in  such  and  such  a
manner,  so  and  so  will  result."  In  the  present  chapter
those  causal  relationships  will  be  considered  which  are
positive  in  type,  subject  to  human  direction,  and  which
result  in  good  luck,  although  I  shall  from  time  to  time
break  the  classification  for  the  sake  of  assembling
together  all  the  beliefs  clustering  around  certain  specific
objects.

Charms  and  A?nulets.  Prominent  among  these  pos-
itive beliefs  is  the  idea  that  the  wearing  of  certain
charms  or  amulets  about  the  person  will  produce
desirable  results  of  all  kinds.  Of  course  the  "hand"
or  "trick"  falls  in  this  class,  but,  as  I  have  said  before,
its  use  is  restricted  to  few  persons  relatively,  while
those  other  amulets  have  a  widespread  distribution.
A  leather  strap  worn  about  the  wrist,  ankle,  or  waist


314     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

will  give  a  person  strength;^  relieve  rheumatism  or  a
sprained  wrist;  ^  or,  worn  about  the  neck,  prevent
whooping  cough.  ^  In  Africa,  the  mother  ties  a  string
around  the  waist  of  her  child  as  a  fetish  for  health.  *
A  buckeye  carried  in  the  pocket  will  surely  bring  one
good  luck,  ^  as  will  also  mole-paws  worn  around  the
neck.  ^  The  silver  coin,  so  effective  in  warding  off
conjuration,  is  equally  effective  in  bringing  good  luck
when  tied  around  the  leg  ^  or  worn  in  a  necklace  about
the  neck.  ^  A  silver  ring  is  also  efficient,  as  is  also  a
ring  made  of  a  horseshoe  nail  or  a  ring  with  Chinese
writing  on  it  ^ — all  of  which  I  have  seen  worn  by
Mississippi  Negroes  for  this  purpose.  The  red  foot
of  a  jay  bird  kept  on  the  person  is  said  to  achieve  the
same  result.  ^  °  Nutmeg  worn  about  the  neck  is  said
to  be  very  lucky.  ^  ^

Sometimes  the  globular  head  of  the  femur  of  a  pig
will  be  kept  for  good  luck;  ^  ^  at  other  times  the  little
ball  growing  on  "he-garlic"  is  carried  with  the  ad-
ditional   admonition    to   eat   as    much   garlic    as    pos-


1174.

2.57,  and  141.

3  Bergen,  F.  D.,     On  the  Eastern  Shore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  2  (1899),  p.  296.

^  Milligan,  R.  H.,     The  Fetish  Folk  of  West  Africa,  p.  220.

*  274,  and  288.  Southern  Workman,  vol.  35  (1905),  p.  635.  (Ohio  Whites).
From  time  to  time  we  will  indicate  where  Negro  beliefs,  not  definitely
known  to  be  of  Enghsh  origin,  are  found  among  the  whites  of  Northern  Ohio.
The  settlers  in  this  section  of  Ohio  are  mainly  of  New  England  extraction  and
have  had  relatively  Httle  contact  with  the  Negroes,  thus  giving  a  strong
presumption  in  favor  of  an  European  origin,  for  that  particular  belief.  The
informant  in  all  cases  is  Mrs.  N.  N.  Puckett,  Willoughby,  Ohio.

6  153.  Bergen,  F.  D.,  A7ii7nal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7
(1899),  p.  12.

7  357.

*  141.  Pendleton,  L.,  Notes  on  Negro  Folk-Lore  and  Witchcraft  in  the
South,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  3  (1890),  p.  203.

9  341.
1 « Ibid.
1 1 189.

»2  141.     Bergen,  F.  D.,     Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7
(1899),  p.  12.


NUTMEG,  RED  FLANNEL,  AND  SILVER


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures  315

sible.  *  Whoever  carries  the  right  eye  of  a  wolf  fas-
tened inside  his  right  sleeve  remains  free  from  all
injuries,  ^  and  an  Irish  potato  in  the  pocket  keeps  off
harm  ^  as  well  as  cures  many  diseases.  At  times  the
peculiar  nature  of  the  charm  is  so  evident  that  one
almost  senses  the  primitive  idea  of  an  indwelling
spirit,  although  this  idea  in  most  cases  is  not  clearly
acknowledged  by  the  Southern  Negro.  Thus  a  black
stone  with  natural  lettering  on  it  is  very  lucky,  ^  as  is
also  the  "swimming  bone"  (that  bone  which  will
float  when  dropped  into  water)  of  a  frog.  ^  An  antique
dealer  in  New  Orleans  showed  me  an  old  Egyptian
lamp  with  which  he  has  much  amusement  with  the
Negroes.  He  would  tell  them  that  if  they  prayed  to
it  they  could  get  what  they  wanted.  The  Negroes
believed  him  absolutely  and  considered  it  a  very
valuable  relic.  ^  One  old  conjure-doctor  in  Mis-
sissippi told  me  that  the  Indian  arrowheads  often
found  in  the  locality  were  not  made  by  man  at  all,
but  were  fashioned  by  God  out  of  thunder  and  light-
ning. To  use  one  for  good  luck,  strike  a  spark  from
it  with  your  knife  (if  the  sparks  fly  readily  you  will
know  that  you  have  a  good  knife)  and  let  the  spark
fall  upon  a  piece  of  powdered  punk.  Let  the  punk
smoulder  into  ashes,  which  are  to  be  wrapped  in  a
piece  of  newspaper  and  carried  with  you  always  for
good  luck.  ^  Of  the  rabbit's  foot  and  horseshoe  charms
I  shall  have  more  to  say  later,  but  they  are  often  used


154.

2  241.

3341.

^  Owen,  Mary  A.,     Voodoo  Tales,  p.  68.

6  Owen,  Mary  A.,     Among  the  Voodoos,  I.  F.L.  C.  (1891),  p.  234.

6  269.

'  258.


316     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

in  composite  charms  as  where  a  rabbit's  tail,  a  piece
of  red  pepper,  and  a  mole  foot  are  worn  about  the
neck  for  long  life  and  health;  ^  or  where  the  left  hind
foot  of  a  graveyard  rabbit,  a  buckeye,  a  horse  chest-
nut, and  a  luck  bone  from  a  pig  ham  are  put  together
for  good  luck  ^ — this  class,  of  course,  approaching  more
nearly  conjuration,  but  of  possibly  too  widespread
acceptance  to  be  classed  under  that  head.  Negroes
actually  use  these  charms  a  great  deal.  Continued
use  dulls  the  idea  that  there  is  anything  mystical  or
magical  about  them  and  they  are  not  generally  regarded
as  part  of  the  dreaded  hoodoo.  In  fact,  hoodoo  be-
liefs derive  much  of  their  power  from  the  fact  that
they  represent  the  unusual;  something  not  clearly
understood  and  used  by  every  one.  Perhaps  many
"signs"  are  products  of  the  conjurer's  imagination
standardized  by  group  usage.

Animal  Taming.  The  common  way  of  keeping
the  dog  or  cat  at  home  is  to  cut  the  tip  of  his  tail  off
and  bury  it  under  the  doorstep.  ^  Others  say  that
hair  cut  from  the  tail  and  buried  is  sufficient,  ^  while
others  suggest  putting  the  hair  between  two  sticks
before  burying  it.  ^  Hair  from  the  top  of  the  head
and  the  end  of  the  tail,  buried  at  the  door  facing  the
east,  will  make  the  animal  return  even  if  he  has  been
stolen.  ^  Others  suggest  wearing  a  meat  skin  in  the
bottom  of  your  shoe  for  two  days  and  then  feeding  it

1240.
2 150.

3 155,  288,  and  340.
<9.

^  141.     Davis,  H.  C,    Negro  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.
27  (1914),  p.  247.
6  204.


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures  317

to  the  cat;  ^  dipping  all  four  paws  of  the  animal  to-
gether into  a  tub  of  water  and  then  throwing  him  on
the  bed;  ^  or  buttering  the  paws  of  the  cat,  which  animal
will  then  remain  to  lick  the  butter  off.  ^  The  latter
usage  seems  to  be  of  European  ^  origin.  Again  the
Negroes  will  put  sugar  in  the  animal's  food  to  achieve
this  result,  ^  while  urine  ("chamber-lye")  put  in  food
or  drink  and  given  to  a  wild  animal  will  immediately
tame  it;  or,  given  to  a  person  of  the  opposite  sex,  will
at  once  win  his  love.  ^  Somewhat  diiferent  is  the
Negro  idea  of  scratching  the  back  of  the  chimney  with
the  cat's  front  feet  and  then  throwing  the  animal  over
the  head  of  the  bed,  or,  in  the  case  of  a  dog,  measuring
the  dog's  tail  with  a  stick  and  then  burying  the  stick
under  the  doorsteps.  Unwanted  guests  such  as  flies
and  fleas,  on  the  other  hand,  may  be  driven  off  by
using  china-berry  leaves.  ^

The  Feminine  Touch.  It  is  to  be  noticed  also
that  many  of  these  signs  are  closely  connected  with  the
household  and  are  of  feminine  affiliation,  though  this
relationship  is  not  so  pronounced  as  with  the  negative
"control-signs."  Nevertheless  some  positive  beliefs
are  of  particularly  feminine  Import.  Thus  If  your
pot  (or  rice)  ^  boils  over,  rub  your  stomach  ^  or  back  ^ "
or  scratch  on  the  wall  ^  ^  and  It  will  stop.     To  make  a


»102.

2  141.

^  Ibid.,  See  also,  Davis,  H.  C,     Negro  Folk-Lore  in  S.  (!.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  27  (1914),  p.  247.

^Leather,  E.  M.,     Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  24.

M4.

« 224.

^331.

8  339.

9  286,  and  390.
1 0  357.

'  >  222.


318     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

guest  leave,  place  a  broom  upside  down  behind  the
door;i  tie  a  string  around  your  dog's  neck  and  he
won't  eat  much;  -  feed  him  gunpowder  and  he  will  be
"sharp"  3  or  strong;^  while  cutting  off  his  tail  will
make  him  smart.  ^  If  you  want  to  keep  a  chicken
from  flopping  all  about  when  you  have  wrung  its  neck,
lay  the  fowl  on  the  ground  and  draw  a  circle  about  it
with  your  finger.  It  will  not  be  able  to  flop  outside  of
this  circle.  ^  Not  all  beliefs  are -so  connected  with  the
household,  however.  Thus,  if  a  watermelon  thief
has  left  the  stem  of  the  melon  behind  him,  throw  it
into  the  creek  and  the  thief  will  die;'  to  make  your
hair  grow,  cut  some  of  it  off,  wrap  around  a  piece  of
grapevine  and  plant — if  the  vines  take  root  and  grow
your  hair  will  grow  with  them  ^ — and,  to  kill  a  dog
that  bites  you,  put  some  of  the  blood  from  the  bite
on  a  piece  of  red  flannel  and  burn.  ^  To  avoid  a  whip-
ping, walk  backwards  and  throw  dirt  over  your  left
shoulder.  ^ "  Finally,  tie  a  string  around  your  little
finger  when  you  go  to  town  and  you  will  receive  a
gift  you  are  not  expecting;  ^  ^  spit  in  your  hands  when
you  are  trading  and  you  will  always  get  the  best  of
the  bargain;  12  and  whenever  you  come  to  a  place
where  a  horse  has  wallowed,  make  a  cross  in  the  wallow
and  spit  in  the  cross  to  bring  yourself  good  luck.  ^  ^

163.

n22.

^297.
M45.
6  112.
6  322

^  Parsons,  E.  C,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  16
(1923),  p.  209.

^Southern  Workman,  vol.  24  (1895),  p.  78.
9  264.
1 » 402.

1 1  267.

12  100.

1^75.


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures  319

The  Cross  Symbol.  This  use  of  the  cross  symbol
is  closely  akin  to  conjuration.  If  you  want  to  stop  a
path  across  your  field,  make  crossmarks  In  It — the
crossmark  will  "cross  de  one  what  steps  over  hit."  ^
Negroes  may  step  around  the  "X"  marks,  but  they
won't  step  over  them.  -  "Goofer"  (In  this  case,  bad
luck)  may  be  Invoked  against  an  opponent  (In  a  game
of  marbles,  for  Instance),  simply  by  pronouncing  the
word,  or  by  adding  a  mark  or  crossmark  on  the  ground
and  spitting  In  or  near  It.  ^  Primitive  people  use  the
sign  of  the  cross  far  too  often  to  allow  us  to  assume  a
Christian  origin,  but  It  Is  often  used  by  the  Negro  to
ward  off  bad  luck,  Its  original  effectiveness  probably
being  attributed  to  the  fact  that  It  pointed  towards
all  four  cardinal  points;  hence  allowing  nothing  to
get  by  It.  The  spirit  was  supposed  to  get  Into  the
angle  of  the  cross  and,  not  having  the  Intelligence  of  a
human  being,  have  difficulty  In  extricating  himself.  *
The  crossroad  also  figures  considerably  In  Negro
and  European  lore.  For  Instance,  when  animals  are
dying  oif  rapidly  from  some  disease,  a  well  one  sacri-
ficed alive  at  the  forks  of  a  road  will  cure  the  rest.  ^
A  North  Carolina  Negro  was  caught  sacrificing  a
chicken  this  way,  and  he  tried  to  get  his  employer  to
burn  a  live  mule  at  the  forks  of  the  road  to  stop  a
livestock  epidemic.  ^  In  Cornwall,  England,  a  healthy
calf   Is    sometimes    sacrificed    to   break   up   the   cattle

1  141.

^Steiner,R.,  Superstitions  and  Beliefs  from  Central  Georgia,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  12  (1899),  p.  262.

'  Davis,  H.  C.,  Negro  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  27
(1914),  p.  247.

*  Work,  M.  H.,  Some  Geechee  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  34
(1905),  p.  696  (note).

^91.

^Haskell,  J.  A.,  Sacrificial  Offerings  among  North  Carolina  Negroes,
J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  4  (1891),  pp.  267-69.


320     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

plague;^  but,  owing  to  the  prevalence  of  sacrifice  in
Africa,  ^  we  would  be  inclined  to  suspect  at  least  some
influence  from  that  source.  Bats  are  sometimes  used
by  the  Yorubas  for  sacrifice  and,  with  them,  sacrifices
to  avert  impending  evil  are  always  exposed  in  a  place
where  several  roads  meet,  giving  rise  to  a  native
proverb,  "The  junction  of  the  road  does  not  dread
sacrifices."  ^  Possibly  this  custom  of  sacrificing  at
the  crossroads  is  due  to  the  idea  that  spirits,  like  men,
travel  the  highways  and  would  be  more  likely  to  hit
upon  the  offering  at  the  crossroads  than  elsewhere.
Even  more  foreign  to  European  thought  is  the  Southern
Negro  custom  of  going  out  into  the  yard  and  chopping
up  the  ground  with  an  ax  when  a  storm  threatens.
This  is  supposed  to  "cut  de  storm  in  two"  and  so  stop
it.  ^  Others  stick  a  spade  in  the  ground  to  split  the
cloud,  ^  or  simply  place  an  ax  in  the  corner  of  the
house.  ^  In  Africa  the  Northern  Gold  Coast  natives
consider  rain  to  be  in  the  possession  of  a  man  of  the
tribe,  who,  if  the  rain  is  too  abundant,  mounts  his
roof  and  threatens  the  rain  with  a  knife  or  other
implements.  ^

Controlling  the  Rain.     Rain-making  charms  are  com-
mon in  the  Negro  South  as  they  are  in  other  illiterate


1  Hunt,  R.,     Popular  Romances  of  the  West  of  England,  p.  213.

^  See  Tillinghast,  J.  A.,  The  Negro  in  Africa  and  America,  p.  53.  Kingsley,
M.  H.,  West  African  Studies,  p.  489,  and  50L  Beatty,  K.  J.,  Human
Leopards,  Preface  p.  v,  and  pp.  6-7.  Ellis,  G.  E.,  Negro  Culture  in  West
Africa,  p.  87.  Nassau,  R.  H.,  Fetichism  in  West  Africa,  p.  91.  Thomas^
N.  W.,  Anthrop.  Rept.  on  Sierra  Leone,  pt.  1,  p.  58.  Burton,  R.  F.,  Wit
and  Wisdom  from  West  Africa,  p.  297.  Ellis,  A.  B.,  Tshi-speaking  Peoples,
p.  82.     Rattray,  R.  S.,     Ashanti  Proverbs,  p.  37.

^  Burton,  R.  F.,     Wit  and  Wisdom  from  West  Africa,  p.  287.

*  141,  and  404.

B341.

6  13.

^  Cardinal,  A.  W.,  Natives  of  the  Northern  Territories  of  the  Gold  Coast,
pp.  26-27.


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures         321

agricultural  sections  where  rain  is  essential  for  a  liveli-
hood. Rain  may  be  produced  by  crossing  two  matches
and  sprinkling  salt  on  them;^  by  sweeping  down  the
cobwebs  in  the  house;  ^  or  by  building  a  fire  in  a  stump
on  a  cloudy  day.  ^  Possibly  the  most  widespread
practice,  however,  is  that  of  hanging  up  on  a  fence
or  bush  a  snake  that  has  been  killed.  *  This  is  sure  to
produce  rain  within  twenty-four  hours,  ^  or  else  rain
may  be  produced  by  simply  turning  the  snake  on  his
back,  belly  up  ^ — the  same  applying  among  the  low-
country  Gullah  Negroes  to  a  dead  frog  as  well.  ^  To
stop  rain,  kill  a  snake  and  do  not  turn  it  over;^  or,
in  New  Orleans,  put  one  or  more  umbrellas  out  in  the
rain.  The  longer  these  are  left  the  better.  ^  Fair
weather  may  always  be  secured  by  sleeping  with  a
flower  under  your  pillow.  ^  °

Snakes.  In  considering  the  use  of  snakes  to  pro-
duce rain,  it  is  worthy  of  note  that  such  reptiles  play  a
large  role  in  Negro  signs,  and  possibly  represent  a
remnant  of  former  voodoo  snake  worship.  If  you
rub  a  snake  "shed"  (skin)  in  your  hand,  you  will  not
drop  and  break  any  dishes;  ^  ^  if  you  swallow  the  heart
of  a  blacksnake,  it  will  make  you  ill-natured,  long-
winded  ^  ^  or  valiant,   so  the  Maryland   darkeys   say;

1333.

2  91.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  25  (1894),  p.  15.

3  6.

*  155,  288,  113,  and   189.     Davis,   H.   C,     Negro  Folk-Lore  in  S.   C,
J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  27  (1914),  p.  246.
6  341.
6  324.

'  Gonzales,  A.  E.,     The  Black  Border,  pp.  91-92.
8  155.

«  Bergen,  F.  D.,     Current  Superstitions,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  4   (1899),
p.  114.
1033.
1 1 285.

12  Bergen,  F.  D.,  Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7  (1899),
p.  87.

21


322     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

while  its  blood  taken  warm  with  whiskey  will  enable
you  to  do  more  work  than  any  one  else;  ^  the  skin  of  a
blacksnake  worn  about  the  waist,  leg,  or  body,  will
make  you  strong  and  supple,  -  while  tying  the  hair
up  with  eelskin  will  make  it  grow,  ^  although  the  skin
itself  will  "breed  lice."  "*  If  you  catch  a  rattlesnake
and  rub  the  rattles  on  your  eyes  you  can  always  see  a
rattlesnake  before  he  sees  you.  ^  You  may  kill  a
blacksnake  which  crosses  the  road  ahead  of  you  by
simply  making  a  crossmark,  in  which  case  some  one
else  will  kill  him;  ^  or  else  you,  yourself,  may  break  his
back  by  making  a  crossmark  across  his  trail  in  the  dust
and  spitting  in  it.  ^  When  you  kill  a  snake  around
your  house,  burn  him  and  you  will  be  bothered  no
more.  ^  It  is  especially  desirable  to  kill  the  first  snake
you  see  in  the  spring,  since  you  will  thereby  prevail
over  your  enemies  all  the  year.  ^  Dreams  of  snakes
are  a  sign  of  enemies,  as  I  shall  show  later,  while
catching  a  snake  on  the  end  of  your  fishing  line  is
indicative  of  enemies  trying  to  entrap  and  kill  you.  ^ "
The  widespread  idea  of  killing  the  first  snake  to  kill
your  principal  enemy  seems  to  be  European  in  origin.  ^  ^

Poultry  and  AgriculUire.  In  setting  eggs  if  you
desire  all  the  chicks  to  be  hens,  let  a  woman  carry  the
eggs  to  the  nest  in  her  lap;  if  you  desire  roosters,  carry

'Ibid.,  p.  L59.

2  141  and  Ibid.,  p.  76.

'  Ibid.

M41.

5  Southern  Workman,  vol.  27  (1898),  p.  37.

6 135.

'310.

»17.

9 141,  112,  189,  224,  and  341.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  pp.  15-16.
10  Bergen,  F.  D.,     Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7  (1899),
p.  37.

1 '  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  32.


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures         323

them  to  the  nest  in  a  man's  hat.  ^  Others  say  to  set
the  hen  in  the  morning  for  roosters,  and  in  the  afternoon
for  pullets.  2  In  parts  of  Georgia  they  say  that  if
you  set  a  hen  on  thirteen  eggs  all  will  hatch  but  one, '
while  in  the  northern  counties  of  England  it  is  con-
sidered lucky  to  set  a  hen  on  an  odd  number  of  eggs.  *
To  stop  a  hen  from  setting,  douse  her  in  a  tub  of  cold
water.  ^  Hawks  may  be  kept  from  catching  your  chick-
ens by  sticking  a  poker  in  the  fire;  ^  by  threading  egg-
shells, from  which  chickens  have  recently  hatched,  on  a
piece  of  straw  (or  putting  them  in  a  covered  tin  bucket)  ^
and  hanging  them  in  the  chimney. »  Others  use  a  stone,
known  as  a  "hawk  stone"  which  is  placed  in  the
fireplace.  ^

Other  positive  signs  have  to  do  with  agriculture.
One  old  Negro  mammy  told  me  that  she  purposely
made  her  step-daughter  as  angry  as  possible  and
then  put  her  at  once  to  planting  peppers,  the  idea
being  that  peppers,  to  grow,  must  be  planted  by
an  angry  person.  ^ »  Others  say  a  red-headed  or  a
high-tempered  person  should  plant  them.  ^  ^  For  large
vegetables  let  children  plant  them,  the  vegetables
growing  with  the  children;  ^  -  or  plant  them  in  a  squat-
ting position  and  get  up  and  walk  away  without
looking  back.  ^  ^     It  is  good   luck   to  plant  on  Good

1  188,  and  341.

2304.

3357.

*  Henderson,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  Engla?}d,  p.  84.

5  102,  and  246.

6  2.

''Southern  Workman,  vol.  33  (1904),  p.  51.

8  141.

9  Showers,  Susie  B.,     Alabama   Folk-Lore,  Southern   Workman,  vol.   29
(1900),  p.  180.

1 0  342

"Price,  Sadie  E.,     Kentucky  Folk-Lore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  14  (1901),  p.  33.

12  112.

13  141,  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  209.


324     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Friday  ^  (beans,  as  some  say) ;  ^  and  watermelons
should  be  planted  May  1st,  before  day,  by  poking  the
seed  in  the  ground  with  your  fingers.  ^  If  you  are
setting  out  a  tree  and  name  it  after  a  large  person  it
will  grow  to  be  a  large  tree.  ^  These  signs  extend
to  other  farm  products,  such  as  cattle.  If  a  cow  kicks
a  great  deal,  rub  her  side  with  milk,  ^  or  a  young  cow
may  be  "gentled"  by  pouring  milk  on  her  back,  ®  or
milking  the  first  stream  of  milk  on  her  right  foot,  ^
but  none  should  be  allowed  to  fall  on  the  ground  for
that  would  make  her  milk  dry  up.  *

Lost  Things,  Clothes,  and  Wind-making.  Apparently
of  European  »  origin  is  the  belief  that  a  lost  article  may
be  located  by  spitting  in  the  palm  of  the  hand,  hitting
the  spittle  with  the  finger  (thumb  or  fore-finger  some
say)  ^ "  and  noting  the  direction  in  which  the  largest
amount  of  spittle  goes.  ^  ^  Sometimes  the  following
rhyme  is  used  when  striking  the  spittle  in  the  left
hand:

Spit,  Spit,  I've  lost  my  pin,

Tell  me  what  corner  I'll  find  it  in.  ^  ^


1  100,  218,  and  224.

2342,  and  Thanet,  Octave,     Folk-Lore  in  Arkansas,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5
(1892),  p.  124.

3 141.     Davis,  H.  C,     Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  27
(1914),  p.  245.

*  141.     Work,  Monroe,  H.,     Some  Geechee  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,
vol.  35  (1905),  p.  635.

6  396.

6  112,  342,  and  286.

^267.

*Lee,  C,     Some  Negro  Folk-Lore  from  Baltimore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5
(1892),  p.  111.

^  Fogel,E.  M.,     BeliefsandSuperstitionsofthePennsylvaniaGermnnSjip. S71.
1 0  396.

11141.     Davis,  H.  C,     Negro  Folk-Lore  in  S.  C,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  27
(1914),  p.  247.

12  Bergen,  F.  D.,     Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7  (1899),
p.  18.


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures         325

Equally  widespread  is  the  idea  that  if  you  bite  a
butterfly's  head  off  you  will  get  a  new  dress  ^  (or
suit)  2  just  like  the  butterfly.  ^  Others  add  that  the
butterfly's  head  must  be  thrown  backwards  over  the
left  shoulder  in  order  to  fulfill  the  necessary  con-
ditions, 4  Again  the  Sea  Island  Negroes  will  "scratch
the  boat's  mast  and  whistle  for  wind,"  ^  the  idea  of
whistling  for  wind  at  sea  being  distinctly  European.  ^

Aids  to  the  Lovelorn.  Love  charms  are  particularly
common  and  seem  to  be  mainly  small  bits  of  con-
juration practice  which  have  come  into  popular  use.
Hair  from  your  lover's  head  placed  under  the  band  of
your  hat,  ^  worn  in  your  purse,  ^  or  in  your  pocket
nearest  your  heart,  ^  buried  under  your  lover's  door-
step, ^ "  or  nailed  to  a  tree  or  post,  ^  ^  will  make  that
person  love  you;  but,  inserted  in  a  green  tree,  it  will
run  the  owner  crazy.  ^  ^  Xhe  bow  from  your  sweet-
heart's hat  is  equally  effective  ^  ^  in  love  affairs,  worn
in  your  shoe  ^  "*  or  in  your  stocking  (if  you  lose  it  he
will  beat  you  to  death),  ^  ^  tied  around  your  leg,  ^  ^  or
thrown  into  running  water  (if  thrown  into  stagnant
water  he  will  go  crazy) .  ^  ^  Else  you  may  write  a  note  and

1  112,  and  141.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  16.

2  398.

3  J25.

*  189",  and  341.

6  Davis,  H.  C,     Negro Folk-LoreinS.C,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  271(1914),  p.  246.
^  Leari's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  163.

7  341,  and  224.

8  247.

9  168.

0  240.

1  238.

2  224.

3  169.

*  181,  and  224.
6  238.
6  341.
M88.


326     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

slip  it  in  the  hat  band  of  the  desired  person,  ^  or  pick  up
that  person's  track  and  lay  it  over  the  door.  ^  Others
suggest  the  boy  kissing  his  elbow  in  order  to  win  a
girl,  3  or  putting  a  letter  from  his  lady  love  in  a  can
and  throwing  it  into  running  water.  ^  If  a  boy  can
contrive  to  have  his  eyes  meet  those  of  his  girl  and  rub
bluestone  in  his  hands  at  the  same  time  she  is  his
forever.  ^  If  you  pass  between  two  persons  of  the
opposite  sex  you  will  marry  both  of  them.  «

Your  Future  Mate.  Many  are  the  love  divinations
employed,  possibly  one  of  the  most  common  of  which
is  the  old  Enghsh  ^  charm  of  placing  a  green  pea  pod
which  has  nine  peas  in  it  over  the  kitchen  door  under
the  impression  that  the  first  person  of  the  opposite
sex  who  enters »  (within  nine  days)  ^  will  be  your
future  mate.  Others  hold  that  the  coming  in  of  an
unmarried  person  of  the  opposite  sex  is  simply  indica-
tive of  your  marriage  that  year.  ^ «  One  woman  tells
me  of  taking  off  her  right  shoe  in  the  spring  upon
hearing  the  first  dove  of  the  year  and  finding  a  strand
of  the  man's  hair  she  was  to  marry,  ^  ^  and  others  seem
to  find  this  charm  equally  eflPective.  ^  ^  In  England  ^  ^
and  Scotland,  ^ "  it  is  the  cuckoo  instead  of  the  dove,


1111.
2357.

3  252.
M31.
1*36.
6  397.

^  Leather,  E.  M.,    Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  61.    Brand,  J.,    Popular
Antiquities  of  Great  Britain,  vol.  ii,  p.  99.     Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  382 .

8  91.

"188.
10  12.
11141.

1^2  204.     Lee,  C,     Some  Negro  Lore  from  Baltimore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5
(1892),  p.  110.

1 3  Dyer,  T.  F.  T.,     English  Folk-Lore,  pp.  57-58.

1  ^  Gregor,  Rev.  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northeast  of  Scotland,  p.  83.


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures         327

but  the  general  pattern  of  the  beHef  Is  about  the  same.
Some  Negroes  vary  this  by  saying  that  if  you  get  up
early  in  the  morning  and  walk  nine  steps  backward
before  breakfast,  you  will  find  some  of  your  lover's,
hair;^  though  a  Texas  Informant  says  that  you  must
look  under  the  heel  track  of  your  last  step  to  find  the
hair,  adding  that  married  people  who  fail  to  find  hair
will  not  marry  again.  ^

Throw  a  piece  of  "love  vine"  (or  "love  tangle" —
possibly  dodder)  over  your  left  shoulder  (towards
your  lover's  house)  ^  without  looking  back.  If  it
grows,  that  person  will  marry  you.  *  Or  take  a  new
shirt  or  dress  and  shake  it  at  the  new  moon,  looking
closely  at  the  moon  and  walking  backwards.  You
will  see  your  future  husband  or  wife  there.  ^  A
Georgia  informant  says  to  show  the  new  moon  a  half
dollar  and  say,  "New  Moon,  true  Moon"  and  you  will
see  your  future  husband.  ^  In  Scotland  "the  young
women  in  Galloway,  when  they  first  see  the  new  moon,
sally  out  of  doors  and  pull  a  handful  of  grass,  saying:

New  mune,  true  mune,  tell  me  if  you  can,

Gif  I  hae  here  a  hair  like  the  hair  o'  my  guidman.

The  grass  is  then  brought  Into  the  house,  where  It  is
carefully  searched,  and  if  a  hair  be  found  amongst  it,
which  Is  generally  the  case,  the  color  of  it  determines
that  of  the  future  husband."  "^  A  Negro  version  is
that  a  girl  on  seeing  the  new  moon  should  repeat:

1267.

2  224.

3  61.

^  i41,  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  24  (1895),  p.  78.

•■Ml.

•357.

'  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  373.


328     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

New  moon,  pray  tell  me,

Who  my  husband  is  to  be;

The  color  of  his  hair.

The  clothes  he  is  to  wear,

And  the  happy  day  he'll  wed  me.

The  man  she  dreams  of  that  night  is  to  be  her  husband.  ^
Other  Negroes  say  that  if  you  look  in  a  well  (through
a  mirror)  ^  on  the  first  day  of  May  you  will  see  your
future  mate;  ^  or,  as  others  put  it,  you  will  see  anything
else  that  is  going  to  happen  before  the  year  is  out,  *
or  simply  your  coffin,  ^  A  departure  consists  of  re-
flecting the  sun's  rays  Into  the  well  with  a  mirror,
whereupon  you  will  see  your  future  mate  in  the  re-
flected rays.  ^  Others  suggest  putting  your  handker-
chief over  growing  wheat  on  May  1,  In  order  to  see
your  husband's  name;^  while  again  It  is  suggested
that  you  throw  a  snail  over  your  shoulder  on  that
day  to  be  lucky  all  the  year.  Such  a  snail  placed  on
a  slate  will  trace  out  your  future  partner's  name.  ^
While  I  have  thus  far  located  no  exact  European
parallel  to  these  beliefs,  yet  "In  the  entire  heathen
calendar  no  day  was  more  sacred  than  May  1,  for  it
was  dedicated  to  Donar  (Thor),"  ^  and  there  Is  a
duplication  of  the  Negro  ^ "  Idea  of  washing  your  face
In  the  dew  collected  on  May  1,  to  make  yourself
beautiful.  ^  ^


1380.

2  85.

3  188.

n38,  and  141.

6  339,  and  341.

6  380.

7 176.

8  23.

^  Fogel,  E.  M.,     Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,
p.  10.
10141.
11  Brand,    J.,      Popular   Antiquities   of  Great    Britain,    vol.    i,    p.    218.

Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  396.


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures         329

Put  the  "pully  bone"  (breastbone)  of  a  chicken
(pulled  with  some  one  under  the  table  with  your
eyes  closed)  ^  up  over  your  door.  The  first  gentleman
to  enter  will  be  your  future  husband.  ^  My  old
mammy  has  also  told  me  of  the  familiar  English  ^
belief  that  whoever,  in  pulling  a  wishbone  apart,
gets  the  largest  half,  may  have  anything  he  wishes.  ■*
At  least  partially  European  is  the  idea  of  going  around
the  house  at  nine  o'clock  on  Hallowe'en  with  a  hand-
ful of  salt,  whereupon  some  one  will  call  the  name  of
your  future  husband  or  wife;^  and  possibly  the  idea
of  looking  into  a  tank  of  water  to  see  the  one  you  are
going  to  marry  ^  is  a  modification  of  looking  into  the
well  on  May  1.  More  nearly  like  conjuration,  how-
ever, is  the  custom  of  placing  a  wooden  chip  into  a
glass  of  water  and  placing  it  under  your  bed.  During
the  night  you  will  dream  of  crossing  a  stream,  and  the
one  that  assists  you  will  be  your  future  husband.  ^
If  it  rains  while  the  sun  is  shining  go  outdoors  and
look  under  a  brick  to  find  a  strand  of  your  future
husband's  hair.  *  A  final  complicated  charm  ^  was
told  me  by  a  Negro  of  Columbus,  Miss.  "To  see  your
future  wife,  pull  off  all  your  clothes  at  night  and  turn
them  wrongside  out,  hanging  them  on  the  foot  of  the
bed.     Then   kneel   and   say   your  prayers   backwards

1127.

2  302,  and  352.

3  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  332.
«246.

6  222.

6  341.

7  339.

8  12.

^  For  other  complicated  love  divinations,  see  Bullock,  Mrs.  Waller  R.,
The  Collection  of  Maryland  Folk-Lore,  J.A.F.  L.,  vol.  11  (1898), p.  9.  Bergen,
F.  D.,  On  the  Eastern  Shore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  2  (1899), p.  300.  Bergen,  F.D.,
'Current  Superstitions,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  iv  (1896),  p.  46.


330     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

and  get  in  bed  backwards,  entirely  naked.  You  will
see  your  future   husband  or  wife  before   morning."*

Wedding  Days  and  Colors.     The  days  of  the  week
have  the  following  significance  as  relates  to  weddings:  ^

Monday — a  bad  day.

Tuesday — a  good  day.     You  will  have  a  good  husband
and   (he)  will  live  long.

Wednesday — a  grand  day.     You  will  have  a  good  hus-
band and  will  live  happily,  but  will  have  some  trouble.

Thursday — a  bad  day.

Friday— a  bad  day.

Saturday — no  luck  at  all.

Sunday— no  luck  at  all.

May  brides  will  die  ^  while  June  brides  will  get  rich.  ■*
Colors  are  significant  as  follows:  ^

Marry  in  green,  your  husband  will  be  mean,
Marry  in  red,  you  wish  yourself  (soon  will  be)  dead,
Marry  in  brown,  you  will  live  (far  from)  in  town,
Marry  in  blue,  your  husband  will  be  true  (or  you  will

live  true).
Marry  in  black,  you  will  wish    yourself  back  (foretells

bad   luck),
Marry  in  gray,  you  will  stray  away  (will  live  far  away),
Marry  in  pink,  your  love  will  sink,
Marry  in  white,  you  have  chosen  all  right.

A  bride  is  also  supposed  to  wear  "something  old  and
something  new;  something  borrowed  and  something
blue,"  in  order  to  have  sure  happiness  in  her  married  life.  ®

1170.

2  Combined  data  from  95,  and  141.     See  also,  Bergen  F.,     Current  Super-
stitions, M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  iv  (1896),  p.  61.

3  67.
^208.

*  Combined  data  from  186,  209,  95,  158,  and  224.
6  380,  and  Ohio  Whites.


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures        331

These  marriage  beliefs,  of  course,  pertain  more
specifically  to  the  women  than  the  men,  and  lead  us
again  to  the  opinion  that  perhaps  the  former's  share
in  the  transmission  of  control-beliefs  has  been  greater
than  the  latter's.  For  further  light  on  this  subject  of
feminine  influence  I  shall  for  a  time  break  the  clas-
sification in  order  to  bring  together  those  folk-beliefs
relating  to  childbirth  and  to  children,  although,  in
the  main,  these  causal  relationships  will  be  found  to  be
harnessed  and  subject  to  human  control,  though  not
all  of  a  positive  nature.

Contraceptives.  Contraceptives  form  an  interesting
part  of  Negro  medical  lore,  more  expecially  since  the
root-doctor  is  the  one  who  most  often  provides  them.
Drink  a  mixture  of  gunpowder  mixed  with  sweet
milk,  or  swallow  nine  bird-shot — these  are  sure  to
prevent  conception.  If  you  lie  perfectly  motion-
less during  coitus  or  turn  on  your  left  side  immediately
after  the  act,  the  same  results  will  be  obtained.  Else
you  may  hold  a  brass  pin  ^  or  a  copper  coin  ^  under
your  tongue  during  the  same  period.  If  you  desire
never  to  have  a  child,  go  and  get  some  "black  haw"
roots,  digging  them  from  the  north  and  south  sides  of
the  plant  (crosswise  of  the  world).  Brew  this  into  a
tea,  dropping  in  a  small  piece  of  bluestone  while  it  is
boiling,  and  strain  carefully  before  you  bottle  it.
In  another  bottle  put  some  tea  prepared  from  "Red
Shanks"  roots  {Ceanothus  americanus)  mixed  with
red  pepper  and  a  teaspoon  of  gunpowder.  Every  time
the  moon  changes  take  a  little  from  each  bottle  and
you  will  forever  remain  childless.  ^     Or  you  may  make


1397.
254.

M41.


332     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

a  tea  of  dogwood  root  which  Is  to  be  taken  and  followed
by  chewing  some  dog-fennel  root  and  swallowing  the
juice.  This  will  not  only  prevent  conception  but
will  also  produce  abortion  if  conception  has  already
occured.  ^  Other  suggestions  for  abortions  are  a  yarn
string  saturated  with  turpentine  worn  around  the
waist  for  nine  days,  or  else  a  teaspoon  of  turpentine
each  morning  for  nine  mornings.  ^  Somewhat  more
complicated  is  the  vaginal  douche  made  of  tea  from
cocklebur  roots  mixed  with  bluestone.  This  will
produce  menstruation  and  wash  the  foetus  out  of  the
womb,  but  the  user  must  be  careful  lest  she  harm  her-
self. To  prevent  taking  cold  afterwards  she  should
rub  herself  from  head  to  foot  with  vaseline  mixed  with
quinine  and  sew  herself  into  her  undergarments  until
she   is   wholly   cured.  ^

Pre-natal  Influences.  The  customary  beliefs  about
pre-natal  influence  are  found.  One  pregnant  woman
hit  a  dog  on  the  foot — her  son  had  one  hand  shaped  like
a  dog's  paw.  ^  Another  put  her  hand  on  her  neck
just  after  her  pet  dog  had  bitten  some  one.  The
baby's  neck  was  marked  with  a  little  dog.  The  notion
exists  that  eating  twin  apples  or  any  kind  of  twin
fruit  will  cause  you  to  bear  twins,  ^  an  idea  found
also  among  the  Ibos  of  Africa.  ^

Childbirth.  In  order  to  make  the  delivery  of  the
child  easier,  as  soon  as  the  mother  begins  to  show
signs  of  pregnancy  she  should  grease  her  hips  and
stomach  with  "dish-washing  grease,"  keeping  this  up

2397.

3  141.

*IUd.

5  36.

®  Talbot,  D.  A.,     Woman's  Mysteries  of  a  Primitive  People,  pp.  20-23.


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures        333

until  the  child  is  born.  Tea  made  from  the  clay  of
dirt-dauber's  nests,  ^  or  from  ashes,  will  also  relieve
and  hasten  labor,  as  will  also  the  striking  of  the  woman
upon  the  buttocks.  If  the  after-birth  is  retarded,  let
the  patient  flow  into  a  bottle,  ^  or  let  her  stand  over  a
bucket  of  hot  coals,  upon  which  feathers  have  been
put,  until  she  has  been  thoroughly  smoked.  ^  The
after-birth  (placenta)  must  be  burned — otherwise  the
woman  is  liable  to  bleed  to  death  ^  or  at  least  will
not  recover  so  rapidly.  ^  In  the  Sea  Islands,  dark
cloth  is  always  used  for  vulva  dressings,  the  idea  being
that  white  makes  it  flow  too  much.  One  way  of  stop-
ping the  hemorrhage,  however,  is  to  apply  cobwebs
and  soot.  ^  Or  else  heat  a  piece  of  alum  and  mix  it
with  sugar,  sprinkling  the  mixture  on  absorbent
cotton.  Push  this  in  the  vulva  to  the  womb  with  the
third  finger  of  your  right  hand.  This  will  stop  the
flow  in  two  hours,  but  to  hasten  the  process  give  the
patient  cold  tea  made  from  bark  taken  from  the  north
side  of  a  cherry-tree.  ^  Sugar,  by  the  way,  is  generally
applied  by  the  Negro  midwives  to  the  vulva  dressings
under  the  impression  that  it  hastens  the  curative
process,  and  they  usually  anoint  their  hands  with
lard,  before  attempting  to  deliver  the  child.  ^  In
the  Sea  Islands  burned  cotton  or  lard  is  used  to  dress


1141.

2  Parsons,  E.  C,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.A.F. L.  S.,  vol.  16
(1923),  p.  197.

3  141.

*397.
6  167.

6  Parsons,  E.  C,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  16
(1923),  p.  197.
M41.
8  167.


334     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

the  navel  cord,  ^  and  almost  everywhere  the  linen
bandage  used  must  be  scorched  before  applying,  a
practice   having   some   distinct  sanitary  advantages.  ^

Confinement  and  After.  When  a  mother  is  confined,
the  ashes  are  not  taken  up  until  some  time  after  the
birth  of  the  child.  ^  "You  must  not  sweep  under  the
bed,  nor  turn  over  the  quilts  or  pillows  In  the  bed
where  the  child  was  born,  nor  must  you  take  up  the
ashes  in  the  fireplace  for  a  whole  month,  or  the  mother
will  take  a  cold  from  which  she  will  never  recover.
Her  hair  must  not  be  combed  for  a  month,  or  all  of  it
will  drop  out  and  never  grow  again."  ^  The  ashes
are  simply  piled  up  by  the  side  of  the  grate  during  this
period,  which  varied  from  a  month  to  the  day  a  mother
steps  out  of  the  door  ^  (or  until  the  child  Is  nine  days
old).  ^  It  is  noticeable  that  on  the  Sea  Islands  the
child  Is  named  on  the  ninth  day,  ^  a  fact  which  might
seem  to  indicate  that  the  spirit  of  the  child  is  not
entirely  localized  in  the  body  until  the  child  is  named,
and  hence  this  spirit  is  liable  to  be  injured  by  sweeping.
The  setting  of  a  definite  day  for  naming  the  child  is
hardly  widespread  enough,  however,  to  justify  such  a
belief  with  any  degree  of  certainty.  An  old  Mis-
sissippi slave  says  that  the  child  will  die  if  you  name
him  before  he  Is  a  month  old  ^ — seeming  to  indicate  the


1  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  16
(1923),  p.  197.

2397.

*  167,  and  342.  Richardson,  C,  Some  Slave  Superstitions,  Southern
Workman,  vol.  41  (1912),  p.  247.

*345.

6345.

«397.

^  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.
16  (1923),  p.  198.

»  286.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  210.


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures         335

fact  that  the  spirit  should  have  a  chance  to  famiUarize
itself  with  the  locality  before  it  is  definitely  pegged
down.  This  conjecture  is  strengthened  by  the  fact
that  when  the  child  is  a  month  old  he  is  taken  all  around
the  house  and  back  in  the  front  door,  then  given  a
thimbleful  of  water.  ^  The  meaning  of  the  practice
has  been  forgotten  although  one  informant  claims  the
thimbleful  of  water  is  to  keep  the  baby  from  slob-
bering. 2  •  On  the  Sea  Islands,  where  the  Negroes
are  more  primitive,  the  child  is  carried  around  on  the
ninth  day,  the  day  he  is  named,  ^  and  the  thimbleful
of  water  is  omitted.  Since  the  Sea  Island  Negroes
have  had  less  European  contact  we  would  be  inclined
to  regard  the  belief  as  African,  although  in  parts  of
Europe  it  is  considered  ill  luck  "to  turn  the  bed  on
which  a  child  has  been  born,  within  a  month  of  the
birth."  ^  We  must  nevertheless  recall  again  the  Sea
Island  practice  of  calling  the  spirit  of  the  child  when
taking  the  child  from  home,  lest  he  be  fretful,  ^  a  usage
which  shows  at  least  the  idea  of  a  child's  soul  not  yet
thoroughly  attached  to  the  body.  Another  point
in  naming  is  the  Negro  belief  that  a  child  will  become
very  wealthy  if  the  initials  of  his  full  name  spell  a
word.  ^  In  parts  of  England  baptismal  names  of
children  are  sometimes  deliberately  chosen  with  regard
to  this  point.  ^

To  the  Manner  Born.  The  incidents  connected  with
the  birth  of  a  child  are  to  a  certain  degree  prognostic
of  his   future.     A   child   born   with   the  face  down   is


147.
2342.

'  Parsons,  E.  C,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.
16  (1923),  pp.  198-99.

*  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  121.

6  See  p.  110.

« 141,  293,  370,  and  393.

^  Leather,  Ella  M.,     Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  113.


336     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

born  to  be  drowned,  so  the  Charleston,  S.  C,  Negroes
say.  ^  One  born  "foot  fo'mos'  "  cannot  be  kept  in
bonds  or  In  jail — "the  sperit"  will  loose  him.  The
same  is  true  of  twins,  although  In  this  case  It  is  the
other  twin  Instead  of  the  spirit  who  looses  the  one  in
trouble.  ^  One  Mississippi  informant  adds  the  require-
ment that  a  boy  twin,  to  have  such  power  must  favor
(resemble)  his  mother,  and  a  girl  twin,  her  father.  ^
A  child  born  with  a  "veil"  (caul)  over  his  face  will
have  good  luck,  will  be  able  to  communicate  with
ghosts,  and  tell  fortunes,  ^  a  belief  prevalent  in  Eng-
land. ^  It  is  claimed  that  in  the  Carolinas  and  in
Virginia,  the  Negroes  .believe  that  a  child  born  with  his
fists  tightly  clenched  is  bound  to  be  a  thief;  ^  and  in
Alabama,  if  a  child  is  born  with  teeth,  it  is  the  sign  of
ill  luck  in  his  life.  ^  A  child  born  on  the  26th  of  any
month  will  become  very  rich;  ^  a  child  born  on  Friday
will  be  hanged;  ^  a  March  baby  will  be  very  fickle;  ^  °
and  a  baby  born  on  the  gray-quarter  of  the  moon  will
"sho'  be  in  de  calaboose  a'fore  he  gits  one  an'  twenty."  ^  ^
If  a  child  is  pretty  when  it  is  little,  it  will  be  ugly  when
it  is  grown,  while  an  ugly  baby  will  be  a  pretty  adult.  ^  ^


1  Smiley,  P.,     Folk-Lore  from  Va.,  S.  C,  Ga.,  Ala.,  and  Fla.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  32  (1919),  p.  382.

2  Parsons,  E.  C,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.
16  (1923),  p.  197.

3  141.

4  397.

*  Leather,  Ella  M.,     Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  112.

6  Chandler,  J.,     The  Ninth  Coleman.     The  Designer,  vol.  61  (1924  ),p.  14.

7  364.

8  184.

9  189.
i''61.

1 1  33

12  61,  and  Ohio  Whites.


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures         337

A  bright  child  is  not  expected  to  live  long,  ^  a  belief
apparently  European,  ^  as  is  also  the  Negro  ^  idea  that
the  seventh  child  will  be  the  wisest.  ^

Food  and  Clothing.  During  the  nursing  period
peas,  ^  or  tea  made  from  green  hanging  moss  will
increase  the  flow  of  milk.  Camphor  may  be  rubbed
on  the  breasts  to  dry  up  the  milk  after  weaning,  or
some  old,  rusty  nails  may  be  hung  about  the  neck,
dangling  down  between  the  breasts.  Throw  these
nails  in  the  fire  or  in  an  old  ants'  nest,  and  when  the
ants  go  down  the  milk  will  dry  up.  ^  Else  mistletoe
worn  around  the  neck  and  dangling  between  the
breasts  will  produce  the  same  result,  ^  remembering
that  mistletoe  has  a  semi-sacred  character  throughout
many  parts  of  Europe.  ^  Twelve  new  needles  hanging
between  the  breasts  on  a  strand  of  white  thread  will  dry
up  the  milk  if  you  take  the  precaution  of  throwing
some  mint  leaves  under  your  bed.  ^  The  mother's
milk  not  appearing  until  three  days  after  the  birth
of  the  child,  the  Negroes  insist  on  the  child  having
food  at  once,  and  slip  a  piece  of  fat,  greasy,  bacon  in
the  child's  mouth  soon  after  birth  "ter  clean  out  his
system."  ^  ^  There  is  also  the  idea  that  the  infant's
clothes  should  be  put  on  over  his  feet  for  a  month,  ^  ^

163.

^  Fogel,  E.  M.,    Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,
pp.  56-57.
3  246.

*  Fogel,  E.  M.,  Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,
p.  56.     Henderson,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  Englond,  p.  2&2.

M41.

*  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk- Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.
16  (1923),  p.  198.

'91.

*  Frazer,  J.  G.,     The  Golden  Bough,  p.  702.

9  141.

1 » 297,  and  298.

1 1  Richardson,  C,    Some  Slave  Superstitions,  Southern   Workman,  vol.  14
(1912),  p.  247.
22


338     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

and,  while  one  old  mammy  assured  me:  "Dat-ah  ain'
no  sign — hit's  jes'  de  handiest  way  ter  put  de  clothes
on,"  ^  the  idea  of  bad  luck  is  probably  involved,
however,  since  in  parts  of  Europe  it  is  considered  ill
luck  to  put  an  infant's  clothes  on  the  first  time  over  the
head.  They  should  be  drawn  over  the  feet.  ^  In
Mississippi  the  Negroes  will  not  wrap  a  newborn,  baby
in  new  clothes.  This  would  make  him  die  (excite
the  envy  of  the  spirits)  while  old  clothes  will  surely
bring  him  good  luck,  ^  a  view,  English  *  in  origin.

Nails,  Hair,  and  Associates.  Widespread,  however,
is  the  idea  that  cutting  off  a  baby's  nails  before  he  is  a
year  old  will  make  him  roguish  or  a  thief.  ^  The  nails
should  be  bitten  or  torn  off.  ^  Others  say  that  cutting
the  nails  will  deform  the  baby  or  cause  him  to  have
fits,  ^  but  the  most  widespread  view  is  the  old  English  ^
one  that  he  will  be  a  thief.  Cutting  his  toe-nails  will
make  him  pigeon-toed.  ^  If  you  cut  the  baby's  hair
before  he  is  a  year  old  he  will  be  tongue-tied,  ^  "^  or
before  he  begins  to  talk  he  will  never  talk.  ^  ^  The
English  version  is  that  he  will  be  a  thief.  ^  ^  Equally
European  ^  ^  is  the  common  Negro  idea  that  a  child

1342.

2  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  116.

3 15,  141,  and  200.

^  Leather,  E.  M.,     Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  111.

5  16,  81,  112,  155,  and  397.

633,  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  15.

^  141.     Moore,  R.  A.,      Superstitions  from  Georgia,  J.  A.  F.  L.,   vol.  7

(1894),  p.  305.

8  Henderson,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  9.
Gregor,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northeast  of  Scotland,  p.  9.

9  235.

10  150.

1 1  204.

12  Leather,  E.  M.,     Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  113.

1 '  Henderson,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  13.


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures        339

stepped  over  won't  grow  or  thrive.  ^     You  must  step
backwards  over  him  to  avoid  any  trouble.  ^

Not  so  patently  European  is  the  idea  that  an  infant
will  have  a  disposition  similar  to  the  one  who  first
takes  him  out  of  doors.  ^  European,  *  however,  is
the  belief  that  rocking  an  empty  cradle  will  make  the
baby  die  ^  (or  cross).  ^  Rocking  an  empty  chair  will
also  make  the  baby  die  ^  or  be  mean.  ^  Never  measure
an  infant  or  he  will  die  ^ —  another  superstition  having
an  European  ^  ^  parallel — while  a  child  on  the  day  that
it  is  two  years  old  is  exactly  half  as  tall  as  it  will  ever
be.  1 1

Babies  and  Brooms.  The  broom  has  various  con-
nections with  children,  possibly  with  the  idea  of
sweeping  away  evil  spirits,  although  its  European
association  with  witches  may  be  the  element  causing
it  in  some  cases  to  have  opposite  results,  as  where  it
is  said  that  sweeping  under  a  baby's  feet  will  cause  him
to  become  lazy  and  run  away.  ^  ^  Sweep  the  baby  (or
the  baby's  feet)  ^  ^  with  a  broom  every  morning  and  he
will  grow  faster.  ^  ^     Sweeping  him  with  a  broomsedge

1320,  and  141.  Bergen,  F.  D.,  Current  Superstitions,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,
vol.  iv  (1896),  p.  23.

2  285,  and  317.  Davis,  H.  C,  Negro  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  27  (1914),  p.  246.

^  91,  139,  and  397.  Moore,  R.  A.,  Superstitions  from  Georgia,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  7  (1894),  p.  305.

*  Henderson,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  pp.  10-11.

*91,  288,  and  391.  Williamson,  G.,  Superstitions  from  Louisiana,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  7  (1894),  p.  229.

6  73.

7  391.
«370.

'  141.  Moore,  R.  A.,  Superstitions  from  Georgia,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  7
(1894),  p.  305.

^"Fogel,  E.  M.,  Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,
p.  55.

1 1  Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  14.

12  342.

1 3  335".
1*341.


340     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

(the  old  style)  broom  will  remedy  bow-legs.  ^  If  you
want  the  baby  to  learn  to  walk  more  quickly  put  him
on  the  floor  and  sweep  dirt  around  him,  2  or,  as  others
say,  set  the  baby  behind  the  door  for  nine  mornings
and  sweep  all  the  dust  off  the  floor  into  the  baby's
lap.  3  Or  else  you  may  wash  his  limbs  in  "pot-
liquor."  ^  In  the  Sea  Islands  and  in  Mississippi,
according  to  one  informant,  ^  when  a  child  is  slow  to
walk  you  should  bury  him  naked  in  the  earth  to  his
waist,  first  tying  a  string  around  his  ankle.  ^  The
same  informants  also  speak  of  carrying  a  child  to  the
doctor  to  have  his  tongue  clipped  when  he  is  slow  to
talk.  While  sweeping  is  sometimes  used  beneficially,
one  should  never  sweep  the  room  while  the  child  is
asleep.  The  idea  is  that  you  will  sweep  him  away,  ^
and  this  seems  to  be  possibly  a  half-remembered
notion  of  the  African  "dream-soul"  which  leaves  the
body  during  sleep.

Birthmarks  and  Thrush.  Strictly  English  ^  is  the
idea  that  a  birthmark  may  be  removed  by  licking  it
for  nine  successive  mornings,  although  the  Negro
addenda  of  fasting  and  being  silent  during  the  licking
seems  a  new  development.  ^  Another  informant  ^  °  told
me  of  two  other  decidedly  unique  cures.  One  is  to
rub  the  birthmark  with  a  fresh  hen's  &gg  every  morning

1112.

2  288.

392.

M57.

891.

«  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.
16  (1923),  p.  199.

M83.

*  Leather,  E.  M.,     Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  78.

•57.     Bergen,  F.  D.,     Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7
(1899),  p.  74.
lOHl.


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures        341

just  before  sunrise  for  nine  mornings,  and  then  to  bury
the  egg  under  the  doorstep.  Stranger  still  Is  the  Idea
that  the  birthmark  may  be  removed  by  rubbing  It
with  the  thing  It  most  resembles.  If  the  mark  re-
sembles an  apple,  for  Instance,  rub  apple  on  the  mark
every  day  and  feed  the  marked  person  apples  until  he
Is  surfeited  with  them.  The  birthmark  will  then
disappear.  "Thrash"  (thrush)  may  be  cured  by  sus-
pending nine  live  wood-lice  from  the  neck  of  the
afflicted  child.  ^  Catnip  Is  good  for  the  same  affliction,  ^
but  possibly  even  more  common  Is  the  old  English  *
Idea  that  the  disease  may  be  cured  by  a  person  who
has  never  seen  his  father,  blowing  Into  (or  kissing)  *
the  baby's   mouth.  ^

Fretfulness.  A  fretful  child  may  be  quieted  by
holding  him  (or  his  face)  out  In  the  rain  for  a  few  min-
utes ^ — a  possible  remnant  of  child  exposure.  Or  else
you  may  blow  smoke  on  the  mole  of  his  head  (the
fontanel).  The  smoke  will  go  right  through,  get  the
child  drunk,  and  put  him  to  sleep.  Milk  drawn  from
the  mother,  smoked,  and  given  to  the  child  will  have
the  same  effect.  ^  On  the  Sea  Islands  the  Inner  bark
of  a  white  root  called  "quiet  root,"  boiled  In  with  the
child's  food,  is  used  for  a  crying  child,  *  while  in  parts
of  Alabama  the  baby  Is  put  down  In  the  doorway  of


1  112.  Hawkins,  J.,  An  Old  Mauma's  Folk-Lore,  J.A.F.  L.,  vol.  9  (1896) ,
p.  130.

2  288.

^  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  515.

M31.

5 16,  208,  and  342.  Also  Work,  M.  H.,  Some  Geechee  Folk-Lore,  Southern
Workman,  vol.  34,  p.  634.

6  141,  and  91.  Hawkins,  J.,  An  Old  Mauma's  Folk-Lore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  9  (1896),  p.  130.  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands.  S.  C,
M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  16  (1923),  p.  198.

M41,  and  Parsons,  E.  C,     Ibid.

» Ibid.


342     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

the  house  and  all  the  dirt  swept  up  from  the  various
rooms  is  quickly  swept  over  him.  ^  Tea  made  from
the  inside  of  a  chicken  gizzard  is  good  for  sick  babies,  2
while  stomach  trouble  (colic)  may  be  cured  by  hanging
a  string  of  burdock  around  the  child's  neck.  ^

Stuttering.  Frightening  the  child  makes  him  knock-
kneed,  ^  while  tickling  him  (under  his  feet)  ^  causes
him  to  stutter,  ^  this  latter  belief  being  found  in  Europe
also. '  This  stuttering  may  be  cured,  however,  by
giving  the  baby  a  drink  out  of  a  bell  or  by  breaking  a
gall  in  the  child's  mouth.  ^  It  would  seem  that  this
latter  remedy  might  have  some  actual  value  in  leading
the  child  at  an  early  age  to  form  an  association  between
stuttering  and  bitterness  which  might  cause  him  ac-
tually to  improve  his  style  of  speech,  although  the
original  purpose  was,  no  doubt,  to  use  the  ill-tasting
substance  to  drive  out  the  evil  spirit  which  caused
the  stuttering.

Other  Ills.  Again  there  is  the  European  ^  belief
that  if  the  baby  never  falls  out  of  bed  it  will  be  a  fool;  ^  °
and  if  you  make  a  baby  a  cap  before  it  is  born  it  will
never  live  to  wear  it  ^  ^ — this  latter  apparently  being
due  to  fear  of  attracting  the  attention  of  disease-
spirits  and  linking  up  with  the  dressing  of  the  child
first  in  old  garments.     It  will  give  the  young  child

i"6L

2  155.

3  16.

4  341,  and  Ohio  Whites.

6  61.

^  139,  and  141.  Moore,  R.  A.,  Superstitions  from  Georgia,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  7  (1894),  p.  305.

^  Fogel,  E.  M.,     Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,
p.  42.
8  341.

^  Eichler,  LiUian,     Customs  of  Mankind,  p.  667.
1 0 16,  and  397.
'  1  288.


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures        343

colic  to  allow  any  one  to  kiss  him  in  the  mouth,  so  my
old  mammy  says,  ^  and  a  child  should  not  be  allowed
to  look  an  old  person  directly  in  the  face  for  fear  of
having  bad  luck.  -  Feed  the  child  out  of  the  pot  or
skillet  and  he  will  never  run  away  from  home,  ^  an
Idea  which  may  be  a  survival  of  days  when  the  common
pot  represented  the  kitchen-ware  and  table-ware
combined,  and  supping  from  it  the  sign  of  family
unity.  If  you  make  fun  of  a  little  baby  (or  of  any
afflicted  person)  *  you  will  yourself  have  the  thing  that
you  ridicule  in  him.  ^  If  you  wash  the  inside  of  a
baby's  hand  you  will  wash  his  luck  away,  ^  a  super-
stition having  its  exact  European  counterpart.  ^  Never
hand  a  young  baby  to  a  person  over  a  fence — it  is
extremely  bad  luck,  ^  as  is  also  the  bad  practice  of
setting  the  baby's  shoes  up  higher  than  himself.  ^
If  the  mother  eats  turnip  greens  while  the  baby  is
young  the  baby  will  die,  ^ "  possibly  due  to  some  sup-
posed connection  between  turnip  greens  and  mother's
milk.  If  you  allow  the  child  to  learn  to  crawl  back-
wards he  will  rule  his  father,  ^  ^  and  you  should  never
chew  the  baby's  food  and  put  It  Into  his  mouth  for
fear  of  giving  him  colic.  ^  ^

For  Future  Greatness.  All  through  the  Negro  South
is  found  the  old  English  ^  ^  belief  that  a  baby  must  be

1112.

2  141.

3  342,  and  373.
^9,  and  112.

^  Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  10.
« 141.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  28  (1899),  p.  449.
'  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  114.

8  57,  and  288.

9  81.

1 0  47,  and  133.

^1141.  Richardson,  C,  Some  Slave  Superstitions,  Southern  Workman,
vol.  41  (1912),  p.  247.

12  341.

1  ^  Henderson,  W.,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  10.
Dyer,  T.  F.  T.,     Domestic  Folk-Lore.  p.  8.     Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  101.


344     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

taken  upstairs  before  downstairs  in  order  that  he  may
rise  in  the  world.  ^  If  he  is  already  on  the  highest
story,  his  head  must  be  held  just  inside  the  loft,  as  a
substitution  for  the  upward  journey.  ^  Some  say  the
child  will  not  grow  unless  this  is  done,  ^  and  the  same
bad  luck  applies  to  taking  the  child  downhill  on  his
first  journey  from  home.  ^

Mirrors  and  Hats.  A  baby  should  never  be  allowed
to  look  into  a  mirror  (before  he  Is  a  year  old)  ^  or  he
will  have  trouble  in  teething; «  will  be  cross-eyed^
(especially  if  he  sees  his  father  for  the  first  time  in  a
mirror);*  or  ugly;^  or,  if  you  stand  him  before  the
mirror  before  he  is  old  enough  to  talk,  he  will  "talk
tongue-tied"  or  not  at  all.  ^ «  The  English  version  is  that
the  child  should  not  be  allowed  to  look  Into  a  mirror
(before  he  is  a  year  old)  ^  ^  for  fear  of  bad  luck.  ^  ^  How-
ever, the  Negroes  say  that  crossed  eyes  may  be  brought
back  into  line  by  sprinkling  blood  from  a  black  chicken
on  the  back  of  the  child's  neck.  ^  ^

If  a  baby  puts  on  a  hat  that  Is  too  large  for  him,  ^  *
or   a    man's    hat  ^  ^    (belonging    to    a    father   or   elder


1  16,  342,  385,  189,  and  397.

2  Waring,  Mary  A.,  Negro  Superslilions  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  8  (1895),  p.  252.

3  118.

*  91.  Hawkins,  J.,  An  Old  Mauma's  Folk-Lore,  J.A.F.  L.,  vol.  9  (1896),
p.  130.

5  Bergen,  F.  D.,  Current  Superstitions,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  iv  (1896),
p.  24.

« 153,  200,  16,  and  155.

^  141,  56,  and  354.  Owen,  Mary  A.,  Voodoo  Tales,  p.  67.  Williamson,
G.,     Superstitions  from  Louisiana,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  18  (1905),  p.  229.

8  240.

9  206.
i»36.

1 1  Henderson,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  13.

12  Leather,  E.  M.,     Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  113.

1 3  244.
1M6.

1 6  206.


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures         345

brother),  ^  or  a  yarn  cap  before  he  Is  a  month  old,  -  or
any  hat  before  he  teethes,  ^  he  will  likewise  have
trouble  in  teething.  Kissing  a  young  baby  in  the
mouth  *  or  holding  a  baby  out  of  a  window  ^  will
produce  the  same  result.

Tooth-cutters.  It  is  reflective  of  the  high  rate  of
infant  mortality  with  the  Negroes  that  a  great  mass  of
their  folk-medicine  centers  around  this  matter  of
teething.  The  fact  that  many  of  these  superstitions
having  to  do  with  children  are  of  English  origin  is  also
suggestive  of  the  fact  that  the  Negro  women  engaged
in  household  work,  particularly  in  nursing  children,
represent  perhaps  the  greatest  point  of  personal  con-
tact between  whites  and  blacks  so  far  as  the  trans-
mission of  superstition  from  one  race  to  the  other  is
concerned.

Some  years  ago,  while  digging  for  gravel  in  Missis-
sippi, we  turned  up  a  mole.  One  of  the  hands  grabbed
the  animal  instantly,  saying  that  he  needed  his  paws
to  help  his  baby  boy  cut  his  teeth.  This  idea  of  a
necklace  of  mole  feet  (or  the  right  fore-foot)  ^  hung
around  the  baby's  neck  to  aid  teething  is  one  of  the
very  widespread  beliefs.  ^  In  England  it  is  a  little
bag  with  mole's  feet  in  it  to  cure  toothache  ^  and  a
moleskin  about  the  neck  to  assist  teething.  ^  The
association  between  moles  and  trouble  with  the  teeth


196.

2  81.

S287.
U74.
6  Hawkins,  J.,     An  Old  Mauma's  Folk-Lore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  9  (1896),  p.  130,

6  141.

^  32,  189,  199,  75,  1,  397,  and  289.  Moore,  R.  A.,  Superstitions  of  Georgia,
J.  A.  F.L.,  vol  9  {189Q),  p.  22Q.     Owen,  Mary  A.,     Voodoo  Tales,  pp.  6Q-Q7.

8  Dyer,  T.  F.  T.,  English  Folk-Lore,  pp.  156-57.  Leather,  E.  M.,  Folk-
Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  82.

*  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  514.


346     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

is  close  enough  to  assume  a  probable  European  origin
for  the  belief.  Another  common  charm  for  teething
is  fresh  rabbit's  brains  rubbed  on  the  child's  gums,  ^  or
dried  and  worn  around  the  neck  in  a  black  silk  bag,  ^
or  a  rabbit's  ear  rubbed  on  the  gums,  ^  or  the  skin
from  a  rabbit's  belly,  tied  around  the  child's  neck.  ■*
This  idea  of  a  rabbit's  brain  rubbed  on  the  gums  to
aid  teething  ^  or  a  brain  of  a  hare  given  to  quiet  a
fretful  child  ^  is  found  in  Europe  as  well.  Besides
rabbit's  brains,  the  Negro  uses  a  necklace  of  rattle-
snake rattles,  ^  or  hog  teeth,  ^  or  alligator  teeth,  ^  or  a
necklace  of  spices,  ^ "  or  "tread-saft"  (horse  nettle —
Solanum  carolinense — strung  on  a  thread  and  left  on
until  they  wear  out),  ^  ^  or  china  berries,  or  calamus
root,  ^  2  or  beads  of  elderberries,  ^ »  or  a  necklace  of  elder
twigs,  ^  ^  or  six  plain  buttons  strung  around  the  baby's
neck,  ^  5  or  a  penny  about  the  neck,  ^  ^  or  a  leather
string,  ^  ^  a  frog,  ^ »  or  a  nutmeg  ^  ^  around  the  neck,  or

1 132,  16,  112,  and  406.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  66.

2  Owen,  Mary  A.,     Voodoo  Tales,  pp.  66-67.

3  Hawkins,  J.,  An  Old  Mauma's  Folk-Lore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  9  (1896),
p.  130

*  57.  Lee,  C,  Some  Negro  Lore  from  Baltimore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5  (1892),
p.  111.  Bergen,  F.  D.,  Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7  (1894),
p.  70.

^  Lammert,  G.,  Volksmedizin  und  Medizinischer  Aherglauhe  in  Bay  em
p.  126.

^  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  211.

">  57,  and  200.  Bergen,  F.  D.,  Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,
vol.7  (1899),  p.  13.

8  61,  and  157.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  66.
"Hawkins,  J.,     An  Old  Mauma's  Folk-Lore,  J    A.  F.  L.,  (1896),  vol.  9,
p.  130.
1 » 288.

1 1 141.     Davis,  H.  C,     Negro  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.
27  (1914),  p.  246.
1 2 150.
1 3  364.

1*  141.     Owen,  Mary  A.,     Voodoo  Tales,  pp.  66-67.
i'*341.
1 6 106.
1 ' 278.

18  Smiley,  P.,  Folk-Lore  from  Va.,  S.  C,  Ga.,  Ala.,  and  Fla.,  J.  A.F.L  ,
vol.  32  (1919),  p.  379.

19  189,  and  341.


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures         347

a  grasshopper's  nest,  ^  or  a  "sawyer-bug"  (Monoham-
mus  confusor)  tied  around  the  neck  (when  the  bug  dies
the  tooth  comes  out),  ^  or  some  buzzard  feathers,  ^  or
some  dog  teeth  In  a  Httle  bag.  *  Mrs.  Parsons  also
cites  the  Sea  Islands  case  of  washing  the  gums  with
milk  from  a  dog  or  tea  made  from  rabbit  droppings.
"Rabbit  Is  quick,  dawg  too,  bof  quick."  ^  A  final
remedy  is  that  of  cutting  a  sprig  of  some  green  bush,
naming  It  after  the  baby,  and  hanging  it  upside  down
in  the  corner  of  the  room.  When  the  baby  frets  from
teething  just  point  at  the  bush  and  his  pains  will
cease  at  once.  ^

New  and  Old  Teeth.  To  "call  de  new  teet'  back"
the  teeth  shed  were  put  Into  a  corncob  and  flung  over
the  house.  ^  Others  say  the  shed  teeth  should  be  care-
fully put  way,  for  if  a  dog  should  tread  on  one  the
child  would  have  a  dog's  tooth  In  Its  place.  ^  The
English  version   requires  the  dog  to  eat  the  tooth.  ^

In  conclusion  of  baby-lore,  although  scattered  beliefs
concerning  children  will  be  given  in  other  connections,
there  Is  that  caution  to  mothers  not  to  put  their  babies
on  the  bed  of  a  young  married  couple  unless  they
desire  that  couple  to  have  a  child  of  their  own  within  a
very  short  time.  ^ "     This  great  mass  of  beliefs  relating

1141.

2  Lee,  C,  Some  Negro  Lore  from  Baltimore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5  (1892),
p.  111.

3  76,  and  100.

*  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  voL
16  (1923),  pp.  198-99.

fi  lUd.

«397.

^  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Lore  oj  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.
16  (1923),  pp.  198-99.

8 141,  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  66.

8  Frazer,  J.  G.,  The  Golden  Bough,  p.  39.  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,
p.  162.

1"  312,  and  397.     Ohio  Whites.


348     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

to  infants  illustrates  very  clearly  the  importance  of
the  woman  as  a  carrier  of  folk-beliefs.  We  now  turn
our  attention  to  a  few  of  the  control-beliefs  concerned
with  moon-lore.

Harnessing  the  Moon.  Very  general  is  the  belief
that  if  you  show  money  (new  money  ^  or  greenbacks  2)
to  the  new  moon  you  will  have  money  all  the  month.  ^
Others  *  repeat  the  English  ^  formula  of  turning  the
money  in  their  pockets  on  first  seeing  the  new  moon,
for  the  same  purpose.  Others  show  money  to  the
moon,  throw  five  kisses  to  that  planet  and  make  five
wishes.  The  wishes  will  "come  true"  before  the  month
is  over.  ^  Others  add  that  one  should  pray  to  the
moon  for  good  luck  when  so  doing.  ^  Still  others
make  a  low  curtesy  to  the  new  moon  and  say  three
times,  "Howdy,  Mos'  Moon,"  in  the  hope  of  plenty  ^ —
three  curtseys  are  made  to  it  in  wishing  in  Europe.  ^
"De  moon  is  sho'  er  great  accumulatah."  ^ "  "Show
hit  ennything  you  got  an'  you'll  hab  lots  er  dat  thing
'fo'  de  month  is  out,  'caze  whatebber  dat  is  hit'll  grow
wid  de  moon."  ^  ^  "Ef  you  wants  something  you  aint
got,  borry  hit  f'um  a  fren'  an'  show  hit  ter  de  new  moon.
You'll  sho'  hab  dat  thing  fo'  de  end  of  de  month."  ^  ^
Whatever  you  are  doing  when  you  see  the  new  moon


1341.

2  141.

341.
4397.

^  Leather,  E.  M.,     Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.   16.     Henderson,  W.,
Folk-Lore  of  the   Northern    Counties   of  England,   p.  86.      Dyer,  T.  F.    T.,
English  Folk-Lore,  p.  36.
«310.
MOO.

» 112.    Hawkins,  J.,   An  Old  Mauma's  Folk-Lore,  J.A.F.  L.,  vol.  9  (1896),
p.  131.

^  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  182.
10  141.
11106.
12 141.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  33  (1904),  p.  51.


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures         349

you  will  be  doing  all  the  month,  ^  but  if  you  point  at
the  moon  it  is  a  sign  of  death.  -  To  bleach  your  hair
in  the  sun  or  moon  means  that  you  will  have  better
health.  ^  Wishes  alone  may  be  made  to  the  new  moon
and  will  come  true,  *  provided  you  do  not  tell  them,  ^
and,  still  others  say,  provided  you  kiss  the  person
nearest  you.  ^  This  latter,  with  the  Negroes,  ^  as  well
as  with  the  Scotch,  *  is  a  good  omen.

The  idea  of  things  in  general  increasing  or  de-
creasing with  the  moon  seems  to  hold  wide  sway.
In  Africa  on  the  Gold  Coast,  "at  the  new  moon,
people  sometimes  take  ash,  and  putting  it  into  their
palms,  blow  it  towards  the  crescent  saying,  T  saw  you
before  you  saw  me.'  Otherwise  they  say  that  the
increase  of  the  moon  would  bring  about  their  own
decrease  in  strength."  ^  Conjures,  as  we  said,  in
the  case  of  the  Southern  Negro,  are  set  oftentimes  with
the  dark  or  light  of  the  moon  to  cause  things  to  waste
away  or  to  grow.  Shingles  laid  on  during  the  increase
of  the  moon  will  swell  or  curl  up,  ^ "  and  all  tonics
should  be  given  at  the  full  moon.  ^  ^  The  same  prin-
ciple holds  with  planting.  Some  suggest  planting  all
seed  on  the  increase  of  the  moon,  ^  ^  but  the  general
Negro  rule  seems  to  be  to  plant  root  crops,  such  as

1 122,  and  123.

2  113.

3  Speers,  Mary  W.  F.,     J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  26  (1913),  p.  191.

*  176,  and  339.
''340.

6  370.
M59.

*  Gregor,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northeast  of  Scotland,  p.  151.
^Cardinal,  A.  W.,     The  Natives  of  the  Northern  Territories  of  the  Gold

Coast,  p.  23.

1  °  141.  Davis,  H.  C,  Negro  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.
27  (1914),  p.  245.

1 '  141.  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.A.F.  L.  S.,
vol.  16  (1923),  p.  213.

12  Moore,  R.  A.,  Superstitions  from  Georgia,  J.  A.  F.  L..  vol.  7  (1894),
p.  305.


350     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

potatoes  on  the  dark  (or  dull)  of  the  moon,  while
plants  such  as  corn,  peas,  or  beans,  growing  on  top  of
the  soil,  should  be  planted  on  the  light  of  the  moon  to
flourish  properly.  ^  On  the  Sea  Islands  peas  or  peanuts
should  be  planted  at  full  moon,  or  the  pods  will  not
fill  up,  corn  and  cotton  should  be  planted  at  the  same
time  since  they  bear  up  on  top,  and  potatoes,  bearing
fruit  in  the  ground,  on  dark  nights.  Here,  too,  the
tide  is  also  taken  into  consideration.  Watermelons
and  potatoes  are  planted  at  the  flood-tide,  and  churn-
ing is  done  on  the  flood-tide  to  make  the  butter  come
quickly,  "wid  de  tide."  ^

Soap  should  be  made  ^  and  hogs  killed  when  the  moon
is  large.  Meat  killed  on  the  dark  of  the  moon  will
draw  up  when  cooked,  or  be  tough,  ^  or  not  give  any
lard,  ^  while  meat  killed  when  the  moon  is  large  will
swell.  ^  This  idea  of  meat  swelling  or  decreasing  with
the  moon  was  common  in  England  ^  and  Scotland  ^
even  as  early  as  1664.  ^  The  Negro  refuses  to  castrate
his  hogs  until  the  almanac  says  the  signs  are
favorable.  ^  ^

New  Yearns  Day.  Passing  now  to  some  Afro-
American  lore  regarding  New  Year's  Day,  we  find
again  a  great  prevalence  of  European  beliefs.  The
Negroes  consider  it  lucky  to  eat  black-eyed  peas  and

1 141,  and  289.  Speers,  Mary  W.  F.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  26  (1913),  p.  190-
Davis,  H.  C,  Negro  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  27
(1914),  p.  245.

2  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.
16  (1923),  p.  209.

3  Moore,  R.  A.,   Superstitions  from  Georgia,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  7  (1894),  p.  305.

n55.

6  289.

8 159.  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,
vol.  16  (1923),  p.  209.

''Leather,  E.  M.,     Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  15.
^  Gregor,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northeast  of  Scotland,  p.  151.
^  Brand,  J.,     Popular  Antiquities  of  Great  Britain,  vol.  iii,  p.   142.
i»144.


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures        351

hog's  head  on  New  Year's  Day,  ^  some  saying  that
you  will  have  plenty  to  eat  all  the  year,  ^  or  that  you
will  have  as  many  dollars  as  you  have  peas  to  eat.  ^
In  fact  there  is  a  Negro  folk-rhyme,

Dose  black-eyed  peas  is  lucky,
When  e't  on  New  Year's  Day,
You  alius  has  sweet  'taters,
An'  'possum  come  yore  way,"  *

showing  clearly  the  strength  of  this  belief.

In  a  sense.  New  Year's  Day  is  prognostic  of  the
whole  year.  In  both  England  ^  and  Afro-America  ^
the  idea  prevails  that  empty  pockets  on  New  Year's
Day  means  a  year  of  poverty,  while  even  a  handful  of
something  means  plenty  throughout  the  year.  If  you
do  something  on  New  Year's  Day  you  will  do  that
thing  throughout  the  year.  ^  A  whipping  on  New
Year's  Day  and  you  will  be  whipped  all  the  year;  ^
go  off  on  New  Year's  Day  and  you  will  be  going  all
the  year;^  work  that  day  and  you  will  work  all  the
year.  ^  °  Much  the  same  idea  prevails  in  England,
where  it  is  considered  unlucky  to  sell  whiskey  on
credit  on  that  day,  ^  ^  or  to  allow  anything  to  be  taken
from  your  house  before  something  has  been  brought

1 141,  152,  189,  and  341.
2 12,  and  224.

3  357,

4  57. "  Talley,  T.  W.,     Negro  Folk  Rhymes,  p.  201.

^  Henderson,  W.,      Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  55.
Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  235.

6  141.

'  106,  and  341.

8  61.

9  206.

1 "  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol
16  (1923),  p.  209.

"•  1  Hardiwick,  C,     Traditions,  Superstitions  and  Folk-Lore,  p.  63.


352     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

in.  1  In  the  Negro  South  if  you  stumble  on  the  first
day  of  the  year  it  is  bad  luck;  ^  if  you  leave  the  house
before  seven  that  morning  you  will  hear  of  somebody's
death;  3  while  the  first  twelve  days  of  January  are
considered  as  representing  the  twelve  months  of  the
year.  *  If  it  rains  on  New  Year's  Day  it  will  surely
be  a  rainy  year.  ^

The  Watery  Grave.  Another  branch  of  Negro  lore
partially  English  in  origin  is  that  of  locating  drowned
bodies.  Commonly,  fodder  (set  on  fire)  ^  is  thrown  into
the  stream  and  is  supposed  to  come  to  a  stop  over  the
spot  where  the  body  rests.  ^  Or  else  some  of  the  old
clothes  of  the  drowned  man  may  be  thrown  into  the
current  with  the  same  result.  ^  The  body  of  the  drowned
will  float  on  the  ninth  day  or  may  be  brought  to  the
surface  sooner  by  firing  guns  over  the  place  where
the  body  lies.  A  loaf  filled  with  quicksilver,  floated
down-stream,  will  stop  over  the  location  of  the  body.  *
These  three  latter  beliefs  are  English  in  origin.  ^ "

General  Good  Luck.  Signs  and  the  practical  needs
of  life  are  as  closely  associated  in  the  affairs  of  the
Negro  as  are  "cawn  braid  an'  'lasses"  in  his  cupboard.
True,  there  are  definite  acts  which  give  certain  set  and
specific  results,  but  often  there  are  lazy  individuals
who  do  not  care  "ter  monkey  wid   no  littl'  foolish-

1  Ihid.,  p.  62.

2  57,  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  15.

3  360.
*341.

U19,  andOl.

"286.  Parsons,  K  C,  Folk-Lore  oj  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.
L.  S.,  vol.  16  (1923),  p.  213.

7  91.

8  91,  and    41.
»91.

'"Henderson,  W.,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  pp.
43-44.     Leather,  E.  M.,     Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  10.


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures        353

ness"  for  each  and  every  separate  activity,  but  prefer
instead  a  sort  of  "shotgun-sign"  bringing  good  luck  in
general.  One  easy  way  is  to  set  the  good  luck  genius
to  work  while  you  sleep  by  putting  your  shoes  with
the  toes  pointing  to  the  bed,^  though  all  Negroes  are  not
agreed  on  this,  since  another  informant  says,  "Always
place  your  shoes,  when  you  retire,  under  the  side  of
your  bed,  set  right  and  left  as  you  wore  them,  with  the
toes  pointing  out,  not  under  the  bed,  if  you  want  to  get
up  well  and  happy  in  the  morning."  ^  More  zealous
suitors  of  Dame  Fortune  move  on  Sunday,  ^  or  push
an  ordinary  straight  pin  back  into  their  garments  when
it  is  about  to  fall  out,  ^  while  to  those  with  even  greater
assiduity,  seven  years  of  good  luck  result  from  finding
out  the  number  of  bounces  in  a  rubber  ball.  ^  In
this  Eden  of  general  good  luck  even  the  Negro  "song-
ster" warbles  his  melodies.  The  following  old  rhyme,
referring  to  the  fact  that  it  is  good  luck  to  catch  a
bat  in  your  hat,  providing  you  don't  get  bedbugs
by  so  doing,  is  typical:

Bat!     Bat!     Come  un'er  my  hat,
An'  I'll  give  you  a  slish  o'  bacon,
But  don't  bring  none  yo'  ole  bedbugs,
If  you  don'  want  to  git  fersaken.  ^

"Horse-dotting"  or  "stamping"  is  a  gainful  occupation
with  the  Negroes,  and  consists  of  touching  the  index
finger  of  the  right  hand  to  the  tongue  when  seeing  a
white  horse,  transferring  the  spittle  to  the  palm  of  the

242.
3341.

*  141.

*  396.

6  Talley,  T.  W.,     Negro  Folk  Rhymes,  p.  202.

23


354     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

left  hand  where  It  Is  "pounded  In"  with  the  right  fist.
In  Mississippi  a  hundred  "dots"  results  In  the  finding
of  money — a  white  mule  counting  for  ten  "dots"
while  a  white  horse  counts  only  one.  In  Georgia  the
Idea  Is  that  "stampin'  er  mule"  gives  you  good  luck,  ^
while  the  Baltimore  Negroes  say  that  If  you  count  one
hundred  red  horses  and  begin  with  a  red  mule  the
first  person  with  whom  you  shake  hands  will  be  your
future  mate.  ^  In  Leeds  a  gray  horse  Is  considered
good  luck,  3  and  In  Herefordshire  a  person  who  crosses
his  thumbs  and  wishes  on  seeing  a  white  horse  will
surely  obtain  his  wish.  ^  More  will  be  said  regarding
the  sacred  nature  of  the  horse  In  connection  with
horseshoe  lore,  and  white,  being  the  unusual  color,
is  generally  looked  upon  with  especial  reverence.

Wishing.  The  elusive  wish  Is  "treed"  by  turning
over  three  times  In  bed  on  hearing  the  first  whlppoor-
wlll  of  the  year,  ^  or,  as  the  more  meticulous  say,  by
going  outdoors  and  rolling  over  three  times  In  the
direction  of  the  call.  ^  Some  substitute  the  mourning
dove  for  the  whippoorwill, ''  while  the  lazy  man  simply
"makes  his  wish"  on  the  first  whippoorwill,  without
the  attendant  gymnastics.  ^  Wishes  made  the  first
night  spent  in   a   strange   house   always   come  true.  ^

Fishing  and  Hunting.  In  old  England  "to  cast  auld
schone  after  an  individual  or  after  a  company  was  an

1312.

2  Lee,  C,  Some  Negro  Lore  from  Baltimore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5  (1892),
p.  IIL

'  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  1,  p.  444.

■^  Leather,  E.  M.,     Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  23.

*  Showers,  Susan  B.,  Alabama  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  29
(1900),  p.  180.

8  141.

7 155.
» 378.
9 141,  and  Ohio  Whites.


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures        355

ancient  superstitious  mode  of  expressing  a  wish  for  the
safety  or  prosperity  of  the  person  or  party  leaving  the
house."  1  Doubtless  this  same  idea  is  operative  when
a  member  of  the  household  slyly  whacks  the  departing
Negro  fisherman  in  the  back  with  an  old  shoe  as  he
leaves  the  house.  In  order  to  be  thoroughly  effective,
however,  in  bringing  luck  on  the  fishing  trip,  the
thrower  of  the  shoe  must  return  to  the  house  without
looking  back  and  without  a  word  of  explanation.  ^
Again  the  fisherman  himself  will  throw  a  shoe  back-
wards towards  the  house  on  leaving,  ^  or  will  carry
money  on  a  fishing  trip  for  good  luck.  ^  The  Negro  ^
custom  of  spitting  on  the  bait  to  attract  the  fish  is
common  in  many  parts  of  the  world.  ^  A  good  hunter
out-thinks  his  prey  by  eating  the  brains  of  the  game  he
slays  7  ("ef  you  eats  rabbit  you  will  sho  be  sly  an'
cunnin'  ") ;  ^  while  a  person  desiring  to  learn  to  swim
will  find  the  swim-bladder  of  a  fish  swallowed  raw
much  more  effective  than  any  amount  of  instruction.  ^

The  Future.  The  sable  fortune-teller  extracts  the
last  iota  of  material  satisfaction  from  his  cup  of  coffee,
then  waves  the  cup  three  times  over  his  head  and
turns  it  upside  down  in  his  saucer  to  find  the  coffee-
grounds  big  with  predictions  of  the  future.  ^ "  One
wife  found  a  cross  (trouble)  pointing  towards  a  clear

1  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  13.

2  141.

*  57.  Work,  M.  H.,  Some  Geechee  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.
341  (1905),  p.  697.

*30.

6  141.

6  Bergen,  Fanny  D.,  Some  Saliva  Charms,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  3  (1890),
p.  57.

^  45,  and  197.

8  339.

9 141,  and  204.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  66.
10  381.


356     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

space  (water)  on  the  north  (the  direction  of  a  neigh-
bor's plantation  to  which  her  husband  had  gone).
Across  the  clear  space  was  another  cross  (trouble
again)  with  an  eagle  (luck)  on  the  other  side.  But
between  the  cross  and  the  eagle  was  a  woman;  the  whole
indicating  that  a  woman  on  the  neighboring  plantation
would  come  between  her  and  her  husband,  but  that  the
wife  would  win  out  in  the  end.  ^  Others  prefer  hy-
dromancy,  and  look  into  the  well  on  Hallowe'en  Day
at  eleven  o'clock  to  know  their  future,  ^  or  else  peer
over  the  well-curb  through  a  smoked  glass  when  the
moon  is  in  an  eclipse  to  see  their  corpse.  ^  To  those
who  "know  de  signs"  nothing  is  unknown.  The  wise
hunter  whose  smoky,  black  powder  load  prevents  him
from  perceiving  whether  or  not  his  shot  reached  their
rightful  destination  will  look  into  his  gun  barrel.  If
he  sees  blood  there  he  knows  the  game  was  hit.  ^

Practicality  of  ^'Signs.^^  Every  possible  contingency
is  brought  under  the  supposed  control  of  man.  Beauty
comes  from  eating  chicken  gizzards,  ^  or  drinking  pot-
liquor;^  long  life  from  eating  uncooked  bread;  ^  and
happiness  from  wearing  a  smiling  face  each  day  until
ten  o'clock,  ^  or  from  kissing  some  person  on  Sunday.  ^
An  unwelcome  visitor  is  best  kept  from  returning  by
sweeping  behind  him  as  he  leaves  the  house  ^ "  or  by
putting  red  pepper  in  his  tracks,  ^  ^  while  a  congenial

1  Boyle,  Mrs.  V.  F.,     Devil  Tales,  pp.  5-6.

2  252.
=•177.
M02.

"  45,  and  218.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  66.

«157.

MIO.

8  341.

9  235.
1061.
1175.


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures        357

crony  may  be  immediately  summoned  without  tele-
phone by  spitting  on  a  piece  of  wood  which  happens
to  fall  from  the  fireplace  and  naming  it  after  that
person.  ^  Should  you  desire  an  immediate  reply  to  a
letter  no  "R.  S.  V.  P."  is  necessary.  Simply  place
your  stamp  on  the  letter  upside  down.  ^  The  pen  of
the  tiresome  scribe,  on  the  other  hand,  may  be  entirely
stayed  by  burning  off  each  end  of  a  letter  received  from
him  and  returning  the  scorched  fragments  to  the  un-
lucky admirer.  ^  A  scarcity  of  hog  feed  is  best  made
up  for  by  cuttin,g  off  the  hog's  tail,  *  the  nourishment
formerly  required  by  that  appendage  apparently  going
to  the  rest  of  the  body,  and  keeping  the  pig  up  to  his
standard  fatness.  No  snake-bite  will  kill  a  dog  whose
*'dew-claws"  have  been  cut,  ^  and  he  who  has  self-
control  enough  to  keep  his  tongue  out  of  the  cavity  left
by  an  extracted  tooth  will  in  time  find  a  beautiful
gold  tooth  adorning  that  gap  ^ — a  superstition  purely
European  in  origin.  ^  A  person  desiring  long,  straight
hair  should  use  a  tonic  of  "May-water"  ^  or  wrap  strings
around  his  wisps  of  hair  from  root  to  end  ^ —  the  latter
being  the  customary  way  of  dressing  pickaninnies'
hair  almost  throughout  the  South.  A  girl  who  desires
to  become  a  boy  has  merely  to  kiss  her  elbow,  ^  °  the
same  rule  applying  to  a  boy  who  desires  to  become  a
girl.  ^  1     Few   provinces,   either  here  or  hereafter,  are

1341.
2395.
3402.

*  340.

*  91,  and  Moore,  R.  A.,     Superstitions  from  Georgia,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  7
(1894),  p.  305.

6  298.

^  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  126.

«235.

"286.
10  148,  and  341.
11112.


358     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

left  untouched  by  these  "signs."  Fear  of  thunder  Is
overcome  by  catching  some  rain-water  before  it  hits
the  ground,  ^  and  even  the  devil  himself  may  be
brought  into  view  by  throwing  a  red-hot  iron  into  the
middle  of  a  whirlwind.  ^

Folk  Remedies.  We  turn  now  to  that  mixture  of
herbs  and  hoodoo  constituting  Afro-American  medicine.
True  it  is  that  some  of  these  remedies  are  of  real
medicinal  value,  but  such  are  not  clearly  distinguished
by  the  rural  Negroes  from  the  quite  useless  charms
which  are  used,  and,  as  often  as  not,  the  charms  are
mingled  in  with  the  curative  herb  itself,  "jes'  ter  make
sho'  "  of  the  desired  result.  Often  quite  as  much
attention  is  paid  to  the  mode  of  administration  as  to
the  drug  itself,  which  reminds  one  of  the  African
treatment  of  disease,  where  no  distinction  is  made
between  the  therapeutic  action  of  the  drug  and  the
mode  of  its  administration.  In  fact,  the  administration
is  judged  by  the  Africans  to  be  the  most  important
part,  "both  mode  of  administration  and  the  drug
itself  deriving  all  their  efficiency  from  a  spirit  claimed
by  the  magician  to  be  under  his  control,  which  is  in
some  way  pleased  to  be  associated  with  the  particular
drug  and  those  special  ceremonies."  ^  This  idea  of
the  curative  effect  of  medicine  being  due  to  an  indwell-
ing spirit  is  clearly  illustrated  when  the  natives  refer
to  a  medicine  which  does  a  person  no  good,  as  a  med-
icine which  refuses  "to  hear"  rather  than  one  which
refuses  "to  cure."  ^     One  Congo  medicine-man  showed


^Southern  Workman,  vol.  24  (1895),  p.  49.

2  141.

3  Nassau,  R.  H.,     Fetichism  in  West  Africa,  p.  106.

*  Schwab,  G.,     Bulu  Folk-Tales,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  27  (1914),  p.  274.     Koelle  ,
S.  M.,     African  Native  Literature  (Kanuri  Proverbs),  p.  187,  (note  2).


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures         359

great  skill  in  massaging  some  imbedded  gunshot
bullets  out  of  a  wounded  native,  but  the  spectators
were  more  impressed  by  the  irrelevant  and  absurd
rites  than  by  the  knowledge  and  dexterity  of  the
operator.  Even  where  herbs  of  known  medicinal
value  are  employed,  the  fetish-man,  in  order  to  main-
tain his  reputation,  invests  the  treatment  with  such
elaborate  magical  surroundings  as  to  make  the  herbal-
mixture  subservient  to  the  charm  of  fetish   agencies.  ^

Germs  and  Ghosts.  In  several  cases  the  Southern
Negro  approaches  closely  this  African  idea  of  disease
being  caused  by  evil  spirits  and  being  cured  by  driving
oif  these  spirits.  Various  means  are  employed  to
dodge  or  drive  away  these  mephitic  banshees.  For
instance,  a  person  who  feels  a  chill  coming  on  will  run
as  fast  as  he  can  to  keep  the  chill  from  catching  him.  ^
My  elderly  aunts  tell  me  of  an  old  Negro  of  their
acquaintance  who  used  to  wear  two  cow  horns  on
a  band  around  his  head  to  cure  the  roaring  in  his  h'ead
and  to  keep  oif  ghosts.  When  he  became  too  warm
and  put  off  the  contrivance  the  evil  spirits  would
come  upon  him  at  once.  ^  One  Negro  hoodoo-doctor
relieved  a  person  by  burning  a  compound  in  the  room,
sprinkling  vile-smelling  powders  on  the  bed,  and
opening  the  window  "to  let  the  devil  out."  Small
balls  of  feathers  found  in  the  sick  man's  pillow  were
wet  with  kerosene,  burned,  and  the  ashes  buried.  ^
In  general,  however,  the  idea  of  disease  being  due  to  an

1  Glave,  E.  J.,  Fetishism  in  Congo  Land,  Century  Magazine,  vol.  19
(1891),  p.  835.

2  91.     See  also,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  66.

3  242,  and  281.

*  Hardy,  Sarah  M.  Negro  Superstitions,  Lippincott's  Monthly  Magazine,
vol.  xlviii  (1891),  p.  736.


360     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

indwelling  spirit  has  been  forgotten  by  the  Negro,
although  the  practices  formerly  designed  to  remove
this  indwelling  spirit  still  exist,  indicating  that  practices
often  outlive  the  theory  with  which  their  origin  is  asso-
ciated. For  that  matter,  both  the  Negro  and  primitive
man  in  general,  for  the  most  part,  look  at  magic  only  on
its  practical  side — with  them  magic  is  always  an  art,
never  a  science.  ^  Certain  actions  produce  certain
results:  A  Georgia  woman  cures  pain  by  drawing  a
mystic  symbol  on  the  ground,. ^  another  woman  might
use  a  hot  poultice.  The  latter  we  would  say  has  real
medicinal  value,  but  to  the  Negro  the  two  are  not  in
essence  distinguished,  since  only  the  practical  ends
and  not  the  theory  are  considered.

Rheumatism.  With  the  possible  exception  of  trouble
in  teething,  which  we  have  already  discussed,  the  great
Negro  ailment  seems  to  be  rheumatism.  Another
reason,  however,  for  the  multitudinous  cures  concocted
for  this  latter  disease  probably  lies  in  the  fact  that
"rheumatism"  is  a  very  inclusive  term  with  the  Ne-
groes, taking  in  almost  every  unfamiliar  ache  from  a
crick  in  the  neck  to  tertiary  syphillis.  A  buckeye
{JEsculus  glabra)  carried  in  the  (left)  pocket  ^  is  generally
supposed  to  work  a  cure  for  rheumatism  as  well  as  for
piles,  *  a  belief  apparently  English.  ^  A  raw  potato
carried  in  the  pocket  will  have  the  same  effect,  ^  the
potato  petrifying  as  the  malady  is  drawn   from   the

1  Frazer,  J.  G.,     The  Golden  Bough,  pp.  11-12.

2  Moore,  Ruby  A.,     Superstitions  in  Georgia,  J.  A.F.  L.,  vol.  5  (1892),  pp.
230-31.

*  156,  289,  288,  and  345.     Also,  McCullough,  J.  E.,     The  Human  Way,
pp.  58-59.

^  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  50©.
6 1,  156,  and  341.


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures         361

body.  1  This  cure-all  is  also  English  in  origin.  ^
Brass  and  copper  are  great  enemies  of  rheumatism,
often  worn  as  earrings  or  finger  rings,  ^  but  generally,
as  I  have  often  observed  with  the  Mississippi  Negroes,
as  bracelets  of  brass  or  copper  wire,  worn  about  the
wrist  or  ankle.  *  A  snake  skin  (claimed  in  Europe  also
to  be  medicinal),  ^  especially  the  skin  of  a  rattlesnake,
dried  and  tied  around  the  wrist  or  leg  is  good  for
rheumatism.  ^  Worn  around  the  waist  it  will  pro-
long life,  ^  sometimes  being  mixed  with  grease  from  a
cow's  hoof,  s  It  may  be  that  the  flexibility  of  the
snake  was  the  quality  which  first  suggested  its  use  to
cure  stiffness.  Grease  stewed  from  a  black  dog  is
also  helpful,  ^  though  some  say  it  should  be  put  on
in  the  dark  of  the  moon  to  be  most  efi'ective.  ^  °  The
black  dog  is  the  animal  of  unusual  color  and  hence
fetishistic;  the  buzzard  is  a  carrion  bird  and  fetish
because  of  his  association  with  the  dead.  Oftentimes
a  buzzard  will  be  stewed  down  and  the  grease  used  for
rheumatism  or  stiff  joints.  ^  ^  Some  folks  say  that
the  limbs  should  be  wrapped  in  red  flannel  after  the
grease    has    been    applied  ^  ^    — red    flannel    being    in

1278.

2  Dyer,  T.  F.  T.,  English  Folk-Lore,  p.  21.  Leather,  E.  M.,  Folk-Lore
of  Herefordshire,  p.  80.     Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  509.

5  13,  and  141.  Bergen,  F.  D.,  Current  Superstitions,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,
vol.  4   (1896),  p.  96  ff.

*  150,  and  312.

^  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  397.

8  91.  Smiley,  P.,  Folk-Lore  from  Va.,  S.  C,  Ga.,  Ala.,  and  Fla.,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  32  (1919),  p.  379.     Owen,  Mary  A.,     Voodoo  Tales,  p.  227.

^37.  Bergen,  F.  D.,  Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7
<1899),  p.  13.

8  91,  and  133.

9  341.

1 0  Owen,  Mary  A.,     Voodoo  Tales,  p.  250.
11214,  341,  and  280.
1 2  345,  and  406.


362     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

itself  both  a  cure  and  preventive  of  rheumatism,  ^
and  being  at  times  worn  in  a  simple  strip  around  the
wrist.  2  Perhaps  after  all  there  may  be  something  in
the  invisible  light  rays  screened  off  or  attracted  by
red  flannel  which  may  be  of  some  value  in  curing
the  trouble.  For  rheumatism,  asthma,  and  "jerking
fits"  (epilepsy)  two  wing  feathers  of  the  buzzard  are
effective  if  burned  under  the  nose  and  the  smoke  in-
haled. ^  A  coin,  especially  a  (silver)  dime,  worn  about
the  neck  *  or  ankle  will  surely  stop  rheumatism.  ^
The  use  of  the  same  charm  to  prevent  conjuration
would  seem  to  indicate  that  both  conjure  and  rheu-
matism are  in  the  same  category,  possibly  causally
related.  Some  Negroes  wear  a  penny  in  the  toe  of
each    shoe   to    cure   the   disease.  ^

Many  other  rheumatism  specifics  are  to  be  found
in  Negro  leechcraft.  A  ball  of  asafoetida  worn  around
the  neck;^  a  mole  squeezed  to  death  in  your  hand;*
a  churchyard  snail  soaked  in  vinegar  for  seven  days,
rolled  in  meal,  and  worn  about  the  neck;^  collard
leaves  and  vinegar,  ^ "  or  vinegar  and  clay  ^  ^ — all  these
are  equally  palliative.  This  reference  to  clay  reminds
me  of  a  story  told  me  as  a  child  by  an  old  slave  conjure-
doctor  who  is  now  dead.  One  winter  night  when  he
was  racked  with   rheumatism,   an  angel   appeared  to


^  Davis,  H.  C,     Negro  Folk-Lorein  South  Carolina,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  27
(1914),  p.  246.

2  232.

3  141.     Parsons,  E.  C,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.
L.  S.,  vol.  16  (1923),  p.  213.

^341.

^  150,  320,  364,  and  406.

6 189.

^289.

8  280.

"33.
1 0  179.
1167.


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures         363

him  in  a  vision  informing  him  that  man  was  made  of
dust  and  that  it  would  take  dust  to  patch  him  up  when
he  was  aihng.  Earthworms  are  the  Hfe  of  dust,
therefore  fry  the  earthworms  in  lard  and  use  the
mixture  as  a  salve.  He  did  so  and,  according  to  his
story,  was  immediately  healed.  ^  After  that  he  used
the  salve  for  every  complaint  from  headache  to  bunions
and  in  consequence  lived  to  about  the  age  of  ninety.
There  is  no  flaw  in  the  logic  of  his  argument,  but  I
have  since  come  to  doubt  his  vision  because  fried
earthworms  seem  generally  to  be  a  favorite  ingredient
of  rheumatism  cures,  possibly  because  of  their  snake-
like appearance.  Some  cook  clay,  lard,  and  angle-
worms together  for  this  purpose;  ^  others  put  the
earthworms  into  a  bottle  with  clay,  and  cook  it.  By
this  process  the  worms  are  said  to  be  converted  into
lard  which  is  to  be  used  as  a  salve.  Or  else  frog  lard
mixed  with  salt,  pepper,  and  turpentine,  is  very
effective,  or  even  fish  grease  will  help  out.  ^

Backache.  For  backache  (generally  called  rheu-
matism) let  a  child  who  has  never  seen  his  father  walk
across  your  back,  ^  or,  as  others  say,  the  seventh
daughter  of  any  one.  ^  Rolling  over  twice  towards
the  first  dove  (or  whippoorwill)  ^  you  hear  during  the
year  will  likewise  stop  and  prevent  such  pain. ''  Rub-
bing the  part  with  an  eelskin  is   effective,  ^   while   in

1107.

2  141.  Bergen,  F.  D.,  Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7
(1899),  p.  75.

391.

« 286.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  33  (1904),  p.  52.

s  McCuUough,  J.  E.,     The  Human  Way,  pp.  58-59.

6  286.

'  Southern  Workman,  vol.  30  (1904),  p.  58.

*141.  Davis,  H.  C,  Negro  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.27  (1914),  p.  246.


364     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Europe  (Freiburg)  a  dried  eelskin  is  tied  around
a  joint  for  the  same  purpose.  ^  With  the  Negro  a
live  toad-frog  will  bring  a  cure  ^ — in  Devonshire  the
toad  is  burned  and  the  ashes  carried  about  the  neck
in  a  silk  bag.  ^  Gall  from  animals  rubbed  on  the
body  will  also  relieve  rheumatism.  ^  Probably  the
original  idea  was  that  its  bitterness  would  drive  the
disease  spirit  from  the  affected  parts.  A  bath  in  white
sassafras  root  tea  is  good,^  as  is  also  red  oak  bark
tea,  ^  or  tea  made  of  mullein  flowers, ''  or  a  tea  made
of  poke  root,  alum,  and  salt,  boiled  together  and  used
as  a  linament. «  Some  say  Epsom  salts  dissolved  in
water  also  makes  a  good  linament.  ^  A  poultice  of
Jamestown-weed  will  cure  both  rheumatism  and
headache.  ^ "

Chills  and  Fever.  Next  to  remedies  for  rheumatism,
cures  for  chills  and  fever  seem  to  occupy  the  largest
place  in  Negro  folk-medicine.  Cut  a  notch  in  a  piece
of  wood  for  every  chill  you  have  had,  blow  on  it,  and
throw  it  into  a  running  stream  where  you  never  expect
to  pass  again.  Go  on  home  without  looking  back
and  you  will  have  no  more  chills.  Or  bore  a  hole
deep  into  the  sunny  (south)  side  of  an  oak  tree,  blow
your  breath  into  the  hole,  and  plug  up  the  aperture
tightly.      The  tree  will  die  but  your  chills  will  be  cured.  ^  ^

1  Fogel,  E.  M . ,  Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,  p.  328.

2  152.

'Henderson,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  170.
4  341.
6 141.

6  91.     Parsons,  E.  C,      Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.
L.  S.,  vol.  16  (1923),  p.  212.
^288.

8  324.

9  188.

i"  Davis,  H.  C,  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  27  (1914),
p.  246.

"Speers,  Mary  W.  F.,     J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  26  (1913),  p.  191.


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures        365

Hattie  Harris  prescribes  a  knot  in  a  piece  of  string
for  every  chill  you  have  had,  the  string  to  be  worn
about  the  waist;  ^  others  say  (walking  backwards)  ^
the  string  should  be  tied  to  a  persimmon  tree.  ^  If
you  wish,  you  may  cut  out  as  many  knots  (eyes)  from
a  potato  as  you  have  had  chills  and  give  it  to  a  hog
who  "will  eat  up  the  chills"  with  the  potato.  "  Or
cut  off  your  toe-nails,  put  them  in  a  sack  and  tie  the
sack  to  the  hind  leg  of  a  frog.  »  Somewhat  less  pleasant
is  the  tying  of  a  live  frog  to  the  patient's  big  toe,  the
chill  then  going  out  of  the  patient  into  the  frog.  «
This  transferrence  of  disease  in  general  to  an  animal  or
to  some  other  person  is  found  also  in  Africa.  In
some  cases  there  the  sick  man's  ailment  is  simply
transferred  to  a  live  fowl,  "which  is  set  free  with  it,
and  if  any  one  catches  the  fowl,  the  disease  goes  to
him."  ^  Or,  in  Calabar,  if  you  are  about  to  die,  the
medicine-man  can  give  you  the  soul  "of  one  who  is
likely  to  live  long,  bestowing  yours  in  its  place,  so
that  you  live  and  he  dies."  ^

However,  so  numerous  are  the  various  remedies  that
the  Negro  seldom  has  to  resort  to  the  seedy  practice
of  inflicting  harmless  animals  with  his  chills  and  fevers.
Red  pepper  or  salt  in  the  shoes  will  prevent  and  cure
chills  as  well  as  conjuration,  and  briars  strung  around
the  neck  will  cure  chills  and  fever  ^ — the  latter  being
hard  to  explain  unless  in  the  beginning  there  was  an

1141.

2341.

391.     Steiner,  R.,     Sol.  Lockhart's  Call,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  13  (1900),  p.  67.

*204.

6  341.

^Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  66.

^  Tylor,  E.  B.,     Primitive  Culture,  vol.  ii,  p.  48.

*  Burton,  R.  F.,     Wit  and  Wisdom  from  West  Africa,  p.  362.

^Southern  Workman,  vol.  24  (1895),  p.  49.


366     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

actual  disease  spirit  to  be  kept  off.  Red  pepper
rubbed  up  and  down  the  back  "warms  up  de  system,"  ^
as  does  also  a  new  domestic  sack  half  full  of  salt  into
which  nine  grains  of  red  pepper  and  four  buckeyes
have  been  put.  Wear  this  around  your  waist  and  you
will  never  again  be  bothered  with  chills.  ^  Else  you
may  take  bitter-weed  tea  ^  or  wash  in  water  that  was
heated  in  the  sun.  •*  In  Mississippi  ^  and  Alabama  ^
it  is  believed  that  if  one  carries  buckeyes  in  the  pocket
he  will  have  no  chills  through  the  year.  Take  a  live
bedbug,  ^  or  a  grasshopper  from  which  all  the  legs
have  been  pulled,  wrap  him  up  in  a  piece  of  dough  and
swallow  alive.  This  is  a  sure  cure.  ^  An  old  con-
jurer tells  me  of  his  original  "chill  cure,"  which  con-
sists of  snatching  up  three  different  kinds  of  weeds,
any  sort  that  happen  to  be  handy,  pinching  off  the
middle  root  of  each,  tying  them  together  and  leaving
them  to  dry.  When  they  are  thoroughly  dry  the  chill
will  have  gone.  This  old  Negro  chill-specialist  also
recommends  a  tea  made  from  willow  roots  and  sprigs
into  which  has  been  put  nine  drops  of  turpentine  and
nine  of  camphor.  Sweeten  with  sugar  and  take.  ^
Tea  made  from  red  or  black  snakeroot  is  a  fine  general
tonic  for  chills,  fever,  and  malaria.  The  roots  should
be  obtained  in  the  spring  when  the  sap  is  high.  ^ "  Or
bathe  the  patient  in  a  tea  made  from  red  oak  bark.


iQL

2  157,  and  14L

3  267.
<331.
5  297.

«  Bergen,  F.  D.,     Some  Bits  of  Plant  Lore,  J.A.F.  L.,  vol.  5  (1892),  p.  20.
7  91,  and  141.

^Southern  Workman,  vol.  23   (1894),  p.  209.     Possibly  an  attempt  to
please  the  gods  by  reverting  to  an  old  type  of  food.
991.
1 0  54.


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures        367

eight  drops  of  turpentine,  and  a  handful  of  salt.  If
the  person  has  fever,  wrap  him  completely  (or  his
forehead)  ^  in  leaves  from  the  "Palm  of  Christian,"  ^
This  "Palm  of  Christian"  is  the  palma  Christi  (Ricinus
communis),  or  castor  oil  plant,  the  term  literally
meaning  the  hand  of  Christ,  possibly  so-called  because
of  its   connection  with   the   healing  castor  oil.

Other  good  febrifuges  consist  of  smartweed  (a
species  of  Polygonum)  tea,  ^  or  tea  from  mullein
leaves,  life-everlasting,  *  dog-fennel,  ^  Jerusalem-oak,  ^
bitter  weed  ^  (probably  Ambrosia  artemesicsfolid),  or
hog's  hoof.  ^  Typhoid  fever  may  be  cured  by  taking
a  bath  in  steeped  peach  leaves,  while  a  young  black
chicken  split  open  and  applied  bloody  and  hot  to  the
chest  also  cures  fever.  ^

Sore  Throat.  Of  European  ^  °  origin  is  the  idea
that  sore  throat  may  be  best  "doctored"  by  tying  the
sock  that  you  have  worn  all  day  around  your  throat
with  the  sole  of  the  sock  turned  towards  your  skin.
Lose  it  accidentally  in  the  night  to  avoid  taking  more
cold.  ^  ^  Others  say  salt  ^  ^  or  warm  ashes  ^  ^  should
be  put  into  the  stocking,  and  some  insist  upon  using  a

1341.

2 141.  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,
vol.  16  (1923),  p.  212.

'91,  341,  and  258.

^  91.  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.A.F.  L.  S.,
vol.  16  (1923),  p.  212.

^67.

6 150.

^208.

8 161,  and  208.

9 150.

1"  Leather,  E.  M.,  Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  81,  Lean's  Collectanea,
vol.  2,  p.  512.

» 1  141.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  66.

1 2  400.

139.


368     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

dark  stocking.  ^  The  patient  is  given  the  alternatives
of  eating  salt  and  gargling  with  salt  and  pepper,  ^
or  of  using  a  tea  of  black  pepper  and  vinegar  in  the
same  manner.  ^  Otherwise  he  may  suck  a  kerosene
lamp-wick,  ^  or  rub  his  neck  on  a  stump  where  a  hog
has  rubbed.  ^  I  am  unable  to  see  the  original  sig-
nificance of  licking  the  fire  tongs  or  pot  hooks  the  full
length  from  back  to  point,  or  of  licking  an  ordinary-
table  fork  in  the  same  manner  after  having  first  made
a  crossmark  on  it,  but  one  of  my  hoodoo  friends  informs
me  that  this  is  a  remarkable  panacea  for  sore  throat.  ^
A  simpler  remedy  is  to  hold  your  throat  tight  and
swallow  three  times.  '

^^Fallen-Palate.''''  Many  of  the  Negroes  think  that
sore  throat,  and  fever  as  well,  is  caused  by  the  falling
of  the  palate,  ^  and  this  complication  is  always  giving
them  concern.  There  is  supposed  to  be  a  hair  on  the
crown  (and  sides  as  well)  ^  of  the  head  which  supports
the  palate,  and  the  usual  remedy  when  the  "palate
draps"  is  to  pull  this  "palate-lock"  up  quickly,  twist
the  wisp  of  hair  up  tightly  and  tie  with  a  string  ^  °  (or
piece  of  cloth).  ^  ^  At  my  father's  manufacturing  plant
in  Mississippi  the  Negro  hands  frequently  have  to
"lay  oflF"  a  day  or  so  to  cure  "fallen-palate."     An  old

1208.

2  9L

3  188.
M62.
6  239.

6  91.

'267.

*  141.     Bergen,  F.  D.,     Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7
(1899),  p.  78.
"141.

i»232,  and  397.  Davis,  H.  C,  Negro  Folk-Lore  in  S.  C,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  27  (1914),  p.  246.

1 1  Brannon,  P.  A.,  Central  Alabama  Negro  Superstitions,  Birmingham
(Ala.)  News,  Jan.  18,  1925,  p.  15.


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures         369

Negro  woman  In  the  quarters  is  a  regular  "fallen-
palate"  expert  and  effects  a  cure  by  giving  the  hair  on
the  top  of  the  patient's  head  a  sudden  yank,  at  the
same  time  striking  him  sharply  in  the  back  of  the  neck.
The  flagging  palate  snaps  back  into  place.  ^  If  one
does  not  like  the  hair  pulling  business  he  may  be  cured
by  touching  a  spoonful  of  pepper  and  salt  to  the  tip
of  his  morose  member.  It  hops  back  to  Its  accustomed
place  and  there  remains.  -  This  latter  remedy  seems
to  be  of  European  origin  since  it  is  found  among  the
rural  whites  of  Illinois.  •''

Colds  and  Other  Respiratory  Diseases.  Colds  are
somewhat  akin  to  sore  throat  and  the  Negro,  some-
what out  of  his  ethnic  habitat,  is  peculiarly  sus-
ceptible to  respiratory  disorders  of  all  sorts.  Before
going  out  with  a  low-neck  dress  in  the  winter  time,  a
girl  should  put  a  little  cold  water  on  her  chest  just
before  leaving  the  house,  to  avoid  catching  cold.  ^
If  the  cold-demon  has  already  fastened  his  insidious
talons  upon  you,  you  may  drive  him  away  (or  even
cure  pneumonia)  ^  by  taking  hog's  hoof  tea,  "  or  pine-
top  sweetened  with  honey;  ^  although  a  tea  made
from  sweet-gum  {Liquidambar  styraciflua)  balls  is
equally  good.  ^  Mullein  leaves  made  into  tea »  or
put  into  the  shoe,  ^  °  pinestraw  tea,  ^  ^  dollar  leaf  {Pyrola

1287.

"-Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  66.

3  86.

M88.

6  397.

«341.

'400.

8  341.

9  267.

10  13,  and  331.
»  1  208.


24


370     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

rotundifolia)  tea,  ^  or  a  drink  of  ice-water  or  hot  lemonade
just  before  going  to  bed  -  are  also  common  treatments
used.

If  you  prefer,  you  may  burn  some  old  cotton  rags
(with  sugar  ^)  and  sniff  the  smoke,  ■*  or,  for  catarrh?
burn  and  sniff  some  wool  rags,  immediately  there-
after inserting  a  teaspoonful  of  sweet  milk  with  one
grain  of  salt  in  it,  into  the  nostrils.  ^  For  those  of  a
more  unctuous  nature  the  familiar  goose-grease  may
be  rubbed  on  the  chest.  ^  A  necklace  of  small  mashed
onions  about  the  neck  will  cure  diptheria  ^ — doubtless
at  first  by  stinking  out  the  disease  spirit.  Asthma,
croup,  and  colic  are  relieved  by  twisting  some  of  a
person's  hair  about  a  nail,  driving  the  nail  part  way
into  a  tree,  cutting  the  lock  of  hair  from  the  head,  and
then  driving  both  nail  and  hair  deeply  into  the  tree.
Within  eighteen  days  the  patient  will  be  cured.  »
Others  simply  place  the  hair  in  a  hole  in  the  tree  to
cure  asthma,  or  else  dry  some  Jimson  weed  leaves,
burn  them,  and  inhale  the  smoke.  ^  Consumption
("brown  cheatom,"  or  bronchitis)  may  be  cured  by
drinking  hot  blood  from  the  heart  of  a  young  heifer;  ^  "^
by  swallowing  a  rattlesnake  heart  live  and  hot;  ^  ^
by  gravy  stewed  from  a  black  cat;  ^  ^  grease  from  a
black  dog,  ^  ^  taken  three    times  a   day   with  a    little


166.

2  35,  and  Ohio  Whites.

3  14L

'^Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (189.5),  p.  66,  and  Ohio  Whites.

5  141.

6  26.

^  Davis,  H.  C,     Negro  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  27
(1914),  p.  246.

8  387.

9  363.
i«91.

11  Owen,  Mary  A.,     Voodoo  Tales,  p.  250.

1 2 180.

13  Owen,  Mary  A.,     Voodoo  Tales,  p.  250.


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures         371

honey;  ^  the  hind  leg  of  a  fat  dog  eaten;  ^  or  grease  from
a  buzzard  smeared  on  the  chest.  ^

Whooping  Cough.  Whooping  cough  may  be  con-
veniently classed  as  a  child's  disease,  and  It  Is  Interest-
ing to  note  that  we  have  here  again  an  English  turn
to  the  cures,  although  the  parallel  Is  not  entirely
exact.  This  lies  In  the  association  of  the  horse  with
the  cure  of  the  disease.  With  the  Negro,  mare's
milk  (drawn  from  the  left  side)  ^  Is  widely  used;^
horse  manure  Is  put  on  the  chest,  or  the  child  allowed
to  play  all  day  In  the  stable  to  Inhale  the  odor;^  or
the  child  Is  taken  to  drink  water  out  of  a  vessel  just
used  by  a  white  horse.  ^  In  England  three  spoonfuls
of  milk  drawn  from  the  teats  of  the  she-ass  and  mixed
with  hairs  from  her  back  and  belly.  Is  allowed  to  stand
for  three  hours  and  then  given  to  the  child  in  three
doses,  the  ceremony  being  repeated  for  three  mornings.
Or  else  the  child  is  taken  Into  a  stable  where  there  Is  a
tainted  atmosphere,  or  Is  allowed  to  inhale  the  breath
of  a  piebald  horse.  ^  In  addition  to  these  equine
cures  the  Negroes  also  use  oil  from  the  hog's  hoof;^
a  black  velvet  band  around  the  neck  as  a  preventive;  ^ "
or  a  tea  made  from  white  ants,  i  ^  A  child  who  has
not  seen  his  father  is  allowed  to  breathe  into  the
afflicted  person's  mouth  in  hopes  of  a  cure.  ^  -     One

1141.

2  91.     Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  100.

3341.

<91.

6  341.

«Smilev,  P.,  Folk-Lore  from  Va.,  S.  C,  Ga.,  Ala.,  and  Fla.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  32  (1919),  p.  379.

7  67.

*  Leather,  E.  M.,  Fokl-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  82.  Lean^s  Collectanea,
vol.  2,  pp.  500-02.

^Southern  Workman,  vol.  23   (1894),  p.  66.     Informants  57,  and  141.
1"  Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  131.
''Ibid.,  and  91.
12341.


372     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

informant  suggests  that  the  child's  head  be  held  over
a  "commode"  (toilet)  to  stop  the  cough.  ^

Hiccoughs.  I  rather  suspect  a  European  parallel
to  the  beliefs  found  among  the  Negroes  and  common
to  the  whites  of  both  North  ^  and  South,  ^  that  hic-
coughs may  be  cured  by  holding  your  breath  and  taking
nine  swallows  of  water.  ^  Nine  grains  of  pepper  for
nine  mornings,  ^  or  nine  shot  held  in  the  mouth  are
equally  serviceable.  Some  put  a  straw  in  the  top  of
their  hair;  ^  others  recommend  thinking  of  one's
lover.  ^

Toothache.  Toothache  is  a  universal  ailment,  es-
pecially among  the  Negroes,  who  seldom  see  a  dentist
and  who  live  largely  on  a  sugar  (molasses)  diet.  The
fabled  white  teeth  of  the  Negro,  so  dentists  of  the
South  tell  me,  are  more  idealistic  than  actual,  par-
ticularly as  regards  the  older  Negroes  with  their
snaggled,  discolored,  uncared-for  tusks.  Perhaps  it  is
the  contrast  with  a  black  skin  that  causes  us  to  accord
them  a  snowiness  greater  than  they  possess.  The
Negro  likes  gold  crowns,  and  I  have  often  seen  them
with  gold  shells  fitted  over  perfectly  sound  teeth
simply  for  the  glitter  offered.

The  root-doctress  who  advised  splinters  from  the
north  side  of  a  pine  tree  that  had  been  struck  by
lightning,  to  get  a  person  out  of  jail,  also  claims  that
if  one  picks  an  aching  tooth  with  one  of  these  splinters
and  throws  the  sliver  into  running  water,  his  toothache

198.

2  295.

3  292.

*  152,  and  157.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  66.

6.341.

«  150,  and  172.

'341.


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures         373

will  immediately  be  carried  away.  ^  Generally  it  is
considered  unnecessary  to  throw  the  splinter  into
water — pick  your  teeth  with  it  and  your  toothache
goes.  2  This  is  true  of  both  Negroes  and  Europeans,  ^
and  reflects  "the  Donar  (Thor)  cult,  just  as  do  the
teeth  of  the  boar  and  the  mouse,  for  they  are  the
symbols  of  the  lightning  flash."  ^  There  are  also
those  toothache  cures  afforded  by  picking  the  teeth
with  a  bone  from  the  backbone  of  a  rattlesnake,  or  by
putting  the  finger  of  a  dead  person  in  your  mouth  ^ —
in  Staffordshire  the  tooth  of  a  dead  person  is  carried
in  the  pocket  for  this  purpose.  ^  One  old  Negro  had  a
toothache  that  refused  to  be  cured.  The  root-doctor
took  some  cotton,  put  half  of  it  into  the  patient's
tooth  and  half,  including  some  of  the  patient's  hair,
into  a  hole  drilled  into  a  oak  tree.  The  patient,
according  to  the  testimony  of  a  white  acquaintance,
soon  recovered.  ^  Simpler  still,  and  just  as  effective,
is  the  plan  of  drinking  water  after  a  horse;  ^  of
anointing  the  jaw  with  oil  from  a  hog's  jowl — the
latter  being  good  for  mumps  as  well;^  of  taking  tea
made  from  red  oak  bark  taken  from  the  right  side  of
the  tree;^"  or  of  smoking  life-everlasting  leaves  dried
and  crumbled.  ^  ^  Others  put  chicken  manure  on  the
afflicted  tooth.  ^  2


1  141.

2  156.

'  Fogel,  E.  M .,    Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,  p.  309.

<  Ibid.,  p.  10.

^Showers,  S.  B.,  Alabama  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  29
(1900),  p.  443.

6  Dyer,  T.  F.  T.,     English  Folk-Lore,  p.  156.

''  128.  For  an  even  more  peculiar  Alabama  cure,  see  Bergen,  F.  D.,
JSome  Bits  of  Plant  Lore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5  (1892),  pp.  20-21.

8  381.

^  57,  and  141.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  66.

1 0  208.

1 1  267.
i  2 172.


374     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Shingles.  "Shingles"  {Herpes  zoster)  is  another
disease  in  which  European  parallels  appear.  The
cure  is  blood  from  a  black  cat  rubbed  upon  the  af-
flicted part.  1  Others  say  that  the  blood  should  be
put  on  a  lump  of  sugar  and  swallowed,  ^  while  others
suggest  that  the  tail  of  the  cat  be  cut  completely  off
and  rubbed  around  the  body  of  the  patient.  ^  In
England  the  version  is  that  blood  from  the  tail  of  a
black  cat  should  be  used,  and  the  disease  is  attributed
to  a  snake  coiling  about  the  body.  If  it  should  en-
circle the  body,  should  the  head  and  tail  meet,  the
patient  will  die  ^ — a  fear  I  have  often  heard  expressed
by  an  old  childhood  Negro  nurse.

Wens  and  Goiters.  The  touch  of  a  dead  man's
hand,  so  the  English  ^  say,  will  cure  a  wen,  and  I  have
seen  one  Negro  woman  testify  at  length  how  a  wen
on  her  arm  was  removed  by  this  same  method.  ^  In
Kentucky  a  wen  on  the  neck  is  cured  by  placing  a
string  around  the  neck  of  a  deceased  friend  and  then
wearing  it  about  your  own  neck. ''  A  goiter  may  be
removed  by  rubbing  an  Qg%  on  the  neck  of  one  so
afflicted  and  then  burying  the  G^g^',^  or  by  wearing  a
horsehair  or  a  live  frog  ^  about  the  neck.  ^ "


1  57.     Bergen,  F.  D.,     Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7
(1899),  p.  68.

2 141,  and  341.

3 155,  and  288.

^Dyer,  T.  F.  T.,     English  Folk-Lore,  p.  147.     Tylor,  E.  B.,     Primitive
Culture,  vol.  i,  p.  307.

*  Henderson,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  122.
Leather,  E.  M.,     Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  84.

«141.

'  Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  131.

»1.

» 156.
»«162.


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures         375

Earache.  Earache  may  be  cured  by  putting  the
blood  from  a  Betsy  bug  into  the  ear,  ^  or  by  taking  the
head  off  a  wood  beetle,  called  "Old  Granny  Bess,"
and  dropping  the  one  drop  of  blood  that  comes  out,
into  the  aching  ear.  "-  Possibly  the  two  bugs  are  the
same  with  different  terminologies.  Or  get  some  hair
from  a  young  girl  and  place  it  in  your  ear  for  similar
results.  3  An  abscessed  ear  may  be  cured  for  life  by
taking  off  the  head  of  a  cockroach,  splitting  it  in  half
and  pressing  the  juice  into  the  ear,  after  which  the
liquid  is  held  in  place  with  a  little  cotton.  ^  A  good
salve  for  earache  is  obtained  from  the  familiar  stewed
earthworms,  ^

Sprains  and  Cramps.  An  eelskin  worn  about  the
wrist  gives  sure  relief  from  pain  there  ^ — in  Europe
they  are  worn  to  prevent  a  sprain  of  the  wrist,  ^
although  their  more  common  use,  when  worn  about
the  leg,  is  to  prevent  cramps  while  in  swimming.  *
One  old  conjure-doctor  of  my  acquaintance  con-
stantly wears  a  plaited  red  flannel  string  about  his
wrist  to  cure  sprains,  ^  while  an  Arkansas  informant
recommends  clay  from  a  dirt-dauber's  nest.  ^ "  For
cramps,  a  brass  ring;  ^  ^  tea  from  red  coon-root  ^  ^  {^He-
patica  triloba) ;  or  a   dime  about  the  ankle  ^  *  are   all

1  112,  and  320.

'^Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  66.

'387.

"Smiley,  P.,  Folk-Lore  from  Va.,  S.  C,  Ala.,  Ga.,  and  Fla.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  32  (1919),  p.  379.

*  Davis,  H.  C.,  Negro  Folk-Lore  in  Sauth  Carolina,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  27
(1914),  p.  246.

8  381.

'  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  512.

8  Dyer,  T.  F.  T.,  English  Folk-Lore,  p.  164.  Henderson,  W.,  Folk-Lore
of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  123.

9  65.
i«341.
'1381.
'  2  258.
»»67.


376     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

equally  effective.  Persons  subject  to  cramps  should
turn  their  shoes  bottom  upward  under  the  bed  at
night  or  wash  their  feet  in  salt  water.  ^

Nosebleed.  Nosebleed  may  be  cured  by  putting  a
bunch  of  keys  (or  a  nutmeg)  ^  down  the  back  ^  or  by
placing  a  little  piece  of  plain  white  paper  between  the
upper  lip  and  the  upper  gums.  ^  This  latter,  in  pressing
upon  the  small  capillaries  near  the  nose,  may  be  of
actual  value  in  stopping  the  flow  of  blood,  but  at  any
rate,  both  beliefs  are  of  European  origin.  ^  Nose-
bleed, with  the  Negroes,  may  also  be  stopped  by  making
a  cross  of  two  matches  in  the  hair  of  the  head,  ^  and
sprinkling  salt  over  them.  ^  A  minie-ball  beaten
flat  and  shaped  into  a  heart,  if  perforated  and  worn
around  the  neck  will  also  effectively  charm  against
nosebleed.  *

Wounds.  The  best  traumatic  for  a  nail  stuck  in
the  foot  consists  of  a  piece  of  fat  meat  and  a  penny
bound  upon  the  place  where  the  nail  went  in.  The
penny  is  used  to  prevent  blood  poisoning.  ^  Sugar
and  turpentine  are  also  good,  ^  °  or  the  rusty  nail
which  was  stuck  in  the  foot  may  be  greased  and  set
away,  whereupon  it  will  draw  out  the  poison  from  the
wound.  ^  1  This  latter  is  apparently  derived  from  the
European  practice  of  oiling  and  polishing  the  weapon

1387.

2  387,  and  341.

3  292,  387,  397,  and  398.
^  152,  and  156.

'"  Fogel,  E.  M.,     Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,
pp.  300-01.
« 387.
7  397.

^Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  66.
MOO.

i''392,  and  297.

1 1  286,  and  297.     Showers,  S.  H.,     Alabama  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Work'
man,  vol.  29  (1900),  p.  443.


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures         377

which  caused  the  wound,  based  on  the  Idea  that  the
wound  will  thereby  heal  more  quickly.  ^  Other
Negroes  suggest  driving  the  nail  into  the  (north)  ^
side  of  a  .tree,  ^  or  applying  some  mashed  Jimson
weed  leaves  or  snake  oil  to  the  wound;  *  while  holding
the  nail  wound  over  the  smoke  from  burning  wool
scraps,  ^  or  cedar  mixed  with  shoe  soles,  ^  will  smoke
the  soreness  out.  The  tarry  drippings  from  a  burning
piece  of  "fat  (heart)  pine"  dropped  on  scorched  wool
and  applied  also  have  curative  power.  "^  The  Negro
generally  goes  about  bare-footed,  which  of  course
makes  nail  wounds  in  the  foot  of  very  frequent
occurrence.

For  ordinary  wounds,  calf  liver  tied  over  the  injury
is  sufficient,  ^  but  sweet  milk  is  sometimes  used.  If
the  cut  is  made  on  the  growth  of  the  moon  it  will
leave  a  big  scar,  while  a  cut  made  on  the  wane  of  the
moon  will  heal  up  and  leave  almost  no  scar  at  all.  ^
Cobwebs  and  soot  are  used  to  stop  bleeding,  ^  °  the
former  being  a  favorite  remedy  in  Scotland  ^  ^  and
Heidelberg.  ^  ^  Another  common  Negro  ^  ^  belief,  found
also  in  Scotland,  '  *  is  that  a  sore  may  be  cured  by
letting  a  dog  lick  it.  A  fever  blister  (cold  blister)
may  be  cured  by  kissing  a  dog.  ^  ^


1  Henderson,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.   125.
Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  406.     Frazer,  J.  G.,     The  Golden  Bough,  p.  42.

2  112.

3  189.
^41.
6  288.
«91.

'  155.

8  Ibid.

8  54.

» 150,  and  397.

*  Gregor,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northeast  of  Scotland,  p.  147.

2  Fogel,  E.  M.,    Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,  p.  292 .

3  341.     Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.     15.
''  Gregor,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northeast  of  Scotland,  p.  127.

^6  45,  and  342.     Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  104.


378     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Snake  bite.  Again  the  practice  of  going  barefooted
makes  the  rural  Negro  pecuHarly  liable  to  snake  bites.
One  European  ^  remedy  used  is  a  chicken  split  open
and  bound  warm  to  the  bitten  place.  If  ijie  flesh  of
the  fowl  turns  dark  the  virus  has  been  drawn  from  the
bite;  if  it  does  not  turn  color  the  poison  has  been
absorbed  by  the  bitten  person.  The  Negro  remedy
is  the  same  except  that  a  black  hen  is  usually  spec-
ified. 2  Somewhat  more  rational  is  the  application
of  soda  and  old-fashioned  lye  soap  to  the  bite,  or  the
sucking  of  the  bitten  place.  This  sucking,  however,
should  be  done  only  by  a  person  with  red  gums  (the
bite  of  a  blue  gummed  Negro  is  considered  almost  as
poisonous  as  the  snake  bite  itself)  who  must  chew  a
bit  of  tobacco  before  he  starts  sucking.  ^  Others  say
to  kill  the  snake  and  tie  it  around  your  foot,  *  or  to
dig  a  hole  in  the  earth  and  bury  the  bitten  foot.  ^
Mud,  snuff,  or  tobacco  applied  to  a  bee  or  wasp  sting
will  speedily  remove  the  smarting.  ®

Boils  and  Headaches.  Boils  or  risings  are  best
relieved  by  the  application  of  a  poultice  of  mashed
elderberry  {Sambucus  canadensis)  leaves  ^  or  of  mashed
Jimson  weed.  *  If  you  object  to  poultices,  bury  a
dish-rag  under  the  doorstep  and  your  rising  will
vanish.  ^  One  who  squeezes  a  mole  to  death  in  his
hand  has  the  power  to  scatter  a  rising  by  simply  rub-


1  Dyer,  T.  F.  T.,     English  Folk-Lore,   p.  137.     Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2
p.  486.

2  288,  341,  and  382.     Smiley,  P.,     Folk-Lore  from  Va.,  S.  C,  Ga.,  Ala.,
and  Fla.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  32  (1919),  p.  379.

3  141.

^267.

6  219.

«  76,  208,  and  Ohio  Whites.

7  258.

8  141.

»341.


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures         379

bing  the  affected  parts,  ^  a  belief  of  European  origin.  ^
Horse-radish  ^  or  Jimson  weed  will  also  cure  headache
if  bound  on  the  aching  part.  Or  else  one  may  burn
an  old  shoe  and  sniff  the  smoke;  ^  or  tie  a  nutmeg
about  his  neck;  ^  or  wear  a  string  tied  around  the
head  with  a  knot  in  front  in  the  middle,  "to  draw  de
pain."  ^  An  eelskin  around  the  head  is  worn  in
North  Lincolnshire  for  this  purpose.  "^  Peach  leaves
around  the  head,  ^  or  urine  applied  to  the  mole  of
the  head  will  also  effect  a  cure.  The  urine  soaks  right
on  through  and  relieves  the  pain.  ^  Salt  on  the  mole
of  the  head  will  bring  about  a  cure  as  will  squeezing
the  head  from  front  to  back.  ^ "  Parched  collard
leaves  tied  around  your  head,  ^  ^  or  dried  peach  leaves,  ^  ^
are  also  good.

Ringworm  and  Warts.  Ringworm  {Tinea  tonsurans)
may  be  cured  by  washing  in  calf  slobber,  ^  ^  or  by  the
touch  of  a  posthumous  son.  ^  ^  Wart  cures  are  large
in  number  and  resemble  in  some  respects  the  English
variety.  Cross  pins  over  a  wart  and  hide  the  pins
where  no  one  can  find  them;  stick  a  needle  through
the  wart  and  hide  the  needle;  find  a  bone,  turn  it  over


M5,  and  141.  Lee,  C,  Some  Negro  Lore  from  Baltimore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  5  (1892),  p.   111.

^  Gregor,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northeast  of  Scotland,  p.  123.

^  141.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  66.

*  Ibid.

^156.

'Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,
vol.  16  (1923),  p.  212.

'  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  498.

8  150.

9  141.

10  184.

1 »  82,  and  75.
12  66.
1^341.

1*286,  and  Hawkins,  J.,     A?i  Old  Mauma's  Folk-Lore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  9
(1896),  p.  130.


380     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

and  throw  it  away,  walking  off  without  looking  back
— in  all  of  these  cases  the  wart  on  the  body  will  surely
come  off.  ^  Or  pick  the  wart  with  a  needle  until  it
bleeds,  put  some  of  the  blood  on  a  bean  leaf,  and  hide
it  under  a  stone  where  no  one  will  step  over  it.  Walk
away  backwards  and  the  wart  will  soon  go  away.  ^
Else  deposit  the  blood  from  the  wart  in  a  grain  of  corn
from  which  you  have  picked  the  soft  part  of  the
kernel.  Do  up  the  corn  in  a  bundle  and  place  it  in  the
fork  of  the  road.  Whoever  picks  up  the  bundle  will
get  the  wart.  ^  Tie  as  many  knots  in  a  bit  of  string  as
there  are  warts,  and  bury  it  where  water  from  the  eaves
of  the  house  will  drip  upon  it;  rub  each  wart  with  a  pea
and  bury  the  peas,  unobserved,  in  the  garden;  rub  the
warts  with  grains  of  corn,  wrap  the  corn  up  in  a  package
and  drop  in  the  road.  Whoever  finds  the  package
will  get  the  warts.  *  If  the  wart  is  a  seed  wart,  pull
out  the  seed,  tie  it  up  in  a  piece  of  paper  and  drop  it
in  the  street.  ^  Or  steal  a  dish-cloth  and  hide  it  to
make  the  wart  disappear.  ^  Decidely  English  ^  is  the
Negro  belief  that  the  wart  may  be  removed  by  rub-
bing it  with  a  piece  of  fat  meat  which  is  then  to  be
buried.  When  the  meat  decays  the  wart  will  leave.  ^
Other  English  authors  mention  this  cure  as  well  as
that  of  tying  a  knot  in  the  string  for  each  wart  and
burying  the  string  ^  and  that  of  rubbing  the  wart  with
some  object,  generally  a  pebble  or  a  cinder,  and  then


1289.

2  128.

3  141,  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  66.

^Hawkins,  J.,  An  Old  Mauma's  Folk-Lore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  9  (1896),
pp.  130-31.

^Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  66.

6  150.

'  Gregor,  W.,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Northeast  oj  Scotland,  p.  49.  Leather,  E.  M.,
Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  84.

« 156.

*  Hunt,  R.,     Popular  Romances  of  the  West  of  England,  pp.  411-12.


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures         381

throwing  the  object  away  in  a  bag,  the  one  finding  the
bag  getting  the  warts.  Here  again  the  crossroads
are  the  favorite  places  for  depositing  the  bag,  and
there  is  also  the  crossing  of  the  wart  with  pins  which
are  to  be  buried  or  thrown  over  the  left  shoulder.  ^
The  Negroes  also  say  that  warts  may  be  removed
when  you  see  the  new  moon  by  rubbing  some  sand  on
them,  turning  your  back  to  the  moon,  throwing  the
sand  over  your  right  shoulder  and  going  away  without
looking  at  the  moon.  ^  "Stump  water"  (water  in  a
hollow  stump  concentrated  by  evaporation  in  the
sunlight)  will  also  cure  if  it  is  rubbed  three  times  on
the  wart.  ^  The  breath  of  a  child  who  has  never  seen
his  father  is  also  effective.  *  The  European  ^  belief
that  touching  a  frog  or  getting  toad  urine  on  your
hands  causes  warts  is  also  quite  common  in  Missis-
sippi at  least.  A  "kernel"  anywhere  about  the  body
may  be  cured  by  making  a  crossmark  on  the  place
with  soot,^  while  corns  may  be  removed  by  using
laundry  soap  ^  or  lemon  juice,  ^  by  applying  a  pearl
button  which  has  been  dissolved  in  lemon  juice,  *
or  by  rubbing  a  grain  of  corn  on  the  callous  and  feeding
it  to  the  oldest  fowl  in  the  yard.  ^ "


1  Ibid.  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  517.  Henderson,  W.,  Folk-Lore
of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  pp.  108-09.

2  Work,  M.  H.,  Some  Geechee  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.34
(1905),  p.  634.

'  Brannon,  P.  A.,  Central  Alabama  Negro  Superstitions,  Birmingham
(Ala.)  News,  Jan.  18,  1925,  p.  15.

^342.

^  Fogel,  E.  M.,  Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,  p.  S25.
The  West  Africans  say  that  touching  a  toad  will  make  your  hand  bitter.
See  Koelle,  Rev.  S.  M.,     African  Native  Literature  (Kanuri  Proverbs),  p.  6.

6  75.

'331.

8  267.

9  155.

10  286.     Hawkins,  J.,     An    Old   Mauma's  Folk-Lore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  9
(1896),  p.  130.


382     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Eye  Trouble.  While  eye  trouble  may  not  be  so
common  among  people  who  do  but  little  reading,  the
sty  is  often  found  and  may  be  cured  by  stealing  a
dish-rag  from  some  one's  kitchen,  rubbing  it  on  the
sty,  and  throwing  it  over  your  left  shoulder.  ^  There
is  a  common  little  couplet  often  used:

Sty,  sty,  leave  my  eye,

Go  to  (or  catch)  the  next  one  passing  by.

To  be  effective,  this  must  be  said  in  the  fork  of  the
road,  2  at  midnight,  ^  or  at  a  crossroad  after  you  have
thrown  a  stick  over  your  left  shoulder,  *  or  on  a  bridge.  ^
Else  you  may  go  to  a  fork  in  the  road  early  in  the
morning  before  any  one  has  made  a  fresh  track  and  rub
your  eye  with  some  of  the  dust  from  the  road,  ^  or  call
some  one  a  liar  when  he  tells  you  there  is  a  sty  on  your
eye  ^  (perhaps  in  the  beginning  to  confuse  the  disease
spirit  whose  presence  was  causing  the  sty);  or  pass  a
solid  gold  band  ring  over  the  sty  a  few  times,  *  the
latter  being  of  European  ^  origin.  In  England  the
boring  of  the  ear  lobes  is  supposed  to  strengthen  weak
eyes,  ^  *'  while  others  cut  their  finger  nails  on  the  full
of  the  moon  to  effect  a  cure,  and  some  Negroes  rec-
ommend wearing  (brass)  ^  ^  earrings  for  the  same
purpose.  1 2     While  March  is  an  unlucky  month,  the


1141.

2 160,  and  190.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  66.

335.

M50.

5 156.

8 175.

^208,  and  331.

8  76.

^  Fogel,  E.  M.,    Belief  sand  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,  p.  297.
1 "  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  402.
11192.
12  239.


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures        383

first  snow  that  falls  during  that  period  Is  good  for
sore  eyes  If  taken  before  the  sun  has  shone  upon  It.  '
One  old  Negress  I  know  of  In  Mississippi  has  a  bottle
of  this  which  she  greatly  values,  since  March  snows
are  not  so  frequent  In  her  latitude.  ^  In  Heidelberg
It  Is  the  water  from  the  first  snow  In  winter  that  Is
used, '  though  In  other  localities,  rain  water  col-
lected In  the  month  of  June  or  on  Holy  Thursday  Is
employed  to  cure  the  same  malady.  *  •  The  older
Negroes  save  May  rain  water  as  a  sort  of  general  cure-
all,  several  Negroes  telling  of  running  bareheaded  In  a
May  shower  to  secure  this  sanatory  eflfect.  ^  My
most  famous  conjure-doctor  says  any  running  water
will  do,  since  water  "purifies  Itself  every  five  yards."
Hold  a  clean  bottle  with  the  mouth  upstream  until
It  fills  up.  When  things  get  "troublesome"  wet  your
hands  with  this  water  and  "dress"  yourself.  It  Is
especially  good  for  sore  eyes.  ^  A  tea  made  from
white  sassafras  root  will  cure  blindness,  ^  and  an
object,  both  in  Europe  ^  and  in  Afro-America,  ^  may
be  removed  from  one  eye  by  rubbing  the  other  one.
Salt  water,  ^ "  or  soda  and  molasses  ^  ^  are  used  to  cure
sore  eyes,  while  the  left  eye  should  be  moistened  with
water  In  case  it  jumps.  ^  -  Weak  eyes  may  be  cured  by
bathing  them  with  the  afflicted  person's  own  urine;  ^^


1336,  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  15.

2  141.

^  Fogel,E.  M.,    Belief s  and  Superstitions  of  the  PennsylvaniaGermans ,  p. 270.

*  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  495.
^  267,  and  286.

«258.

'  Davis,  H.  C,     Negro  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  27
(1914),  p.  246.

*  Fogel,  E.  M.,  Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  PennsylvaniaGermans,  p. 273.
9  246.

1 »  208.
11331.
12  175.
1 3 172.


384     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

while  the  smarting  resulting  from  getting  onion  juice
in  the  eyes  may  be  stopped  by  standing  in  the  hen-
house for  a  moment.  ^

Fits  and  Scrofula.  Fits  of  all  kinds  may  be  cured  by
making  a  pone  of  corn  bread  with  water  in  which  the
patient  has  washed,  mixing  in  it  the  paring  of  finger
and  toe  nails  and  a  lock  of  the  patient's  hair.  Wrap
it  in  some  of  the  patient's  soiled  clothing  and  throw  it
into  a  river  at  midnight  in  the  dark  of  the  moon.  ^
Or  else  the  first  time  that  the  child  or  person  has  a
fit,  tear  oflF  the  shirt  of  the  patient  and  burn  it  up.
No  more  fits  will  return.  ^  Hysterics  (and  colds)
may  be  cured  by  running  your  finger  in  between  all
of  your  toes  when  you  first  pull  off  your  stockings  and
smelling  of  it,  ^  a  belief  probably  of  European  origin,
since  it  is  found  among  the  Pennsylvania  Germans.  ^
Scrofula  is  perhaps  best  treated  by  tying  a  live  frog
about  your  neck,  ^  although  a  more  complicated  cure
is  prepared  as  follows:  Get  some  roots  from  the  China-
berry  tree  and  some  poke  root  {Phytolacca  decandra).
Boil  these  together,  putting  in  a  piece  of  bluestone
and  carefully  straining.  Salve  the  sores  with  this
mixture  and  then  anoint  them  with  a  feather  dipped
into  pure  hog  lard.  This  brings  the  sore  to  a  head;
press  out  the  core  and  you  are  cured.  ^

126L

2  Bergen,  F.  D.,  Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7  (1899)^
p.  72.

^  141.  Bergen,  F.  D.,  Current  Superstitions,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  4
(1896),  p.  96.

^241.

*  Fogel,  E.  M.,    Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  f  ennsylvania  Germans,  p.  268.

8  341.

M41.


SOME  OP  MY  INFORMANTS

(Note  the  "mojo"  around  the  neck  of  the  lower  center  figui'e)


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures        385

Venereal  Diseases.  Gonorrhea,  or  "clap,"  seems  to
be  the  venereal  disease  most  clearly  recognized  by  the
rural  Negro,  syphilis  apparently  being  classed  as  a
*'rising"  or  as  "rheumatism,"  according  to  the  symp-
toms displayed.  Strange  to  say,  gonorrhea  is  perhaps
more  often  attributed  to  straining  or  to  lifting  some
heavy  load  ^  than  to  sexual  irregularities;  possibly
the  undue  strain  might  be  sufficient  to  hasten  the  appear-
ance of  the  outward  symptoms  of  the  disease.  Teas
made  from  "red  shanks"  root,  from  sarsaparilla,
and  from  sumac  are  possibly  most  frequently  used.
One  root-doctor  directs  that  the  "red  shanks"  tea  be
divided  into  two  bottles.  Into  one  is  put  a  small
piece  of  alum  and  the  patient  takes  it  internally;
into  the  other  is  put  a  small  piece  of  bluestone  and  the
mixture  is  used  to  bathe  the  affected  part.  ^  Blue-
stone  is  often  used  along  with  an  ointment,  of  which
lard  is  the  base,  in  connection  with  "red  shanks"  tea, '
and  it  may  be  that  the  astringent  action  does  actually
stop  the  discharge  and  work  an  apparent  cure.

Female-complaint.  While  disease  in  general  Is  not
confined  to  womankind  alone,  yet,  with  the  Negroes,  the
great  mass  of  folk-medicine  is  in  their  hands  rather
than  in  the  hands  of  the  men.  The  women  are  the
great  practitioners,  the  folk-doctors — the  old  Granny
with  her  "yarbs  an'  intmints"  does  much  to  keep
alive  these  folk-cures  and  to  make  these  beliefs  in
general  much  more  a  feminine  possession  than  the
context  would  seem  to  indicate.  Nevertheless,  some
of  the  cures  are  designed  for  more  definitely  feminine
ills.


1  55,  and  167.

2  258.
391.


25


386     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Some  of  these  remedies  I  mentioned  in  the  section
dealing  with  childbirth  and  children.  Remedies  to
ease  menstrual  pains  are  also  very  common.  I  cite
here  some  Illustrative  types  collected  indirectly  from
a  reputable  Negro  root-doctor.  ^  Boil  some  peach
leaves  In  a  vessel  with  a  handful  of  salt.  When  they
reach  about  the  consistency  of  turnip-greens,  pour
them  into  a  small  tub  and  put  In  a  tablespoonful  of  coal-
oil  and  eight  drops  of  turpentine.  Bathe  the  af-
fected parts  with  this  and  relief  will  be  obtained  at
once.  Or  take  some  "rabbit-tobacco"  (white  plantain)
leaves  and  steep,  mixing  In  some  corn  meal  which  has
been  thoroughly  browned.  Strain  the  mixture  and
bathe  with  It.  It  will  quickly  stop  "flooding."  Or
else  bathe  the  stomach  with  kerosene  oil  or  take  in-
ternally a  tea  made  of  "ground-pine"  {Lycopodium
dendroideum)  roots.  Tea  from  red  oak  bark  used
internally  and  as  a  douche  Is  also  good;  while  tea
from  bark  from  the  cherry  tree,  If  taken  while  cold,
will  stop  the  flow  almost  at  once.

Miscellaneous  Ills.  If  your  foot  has  "gone  to  sleep"
wet  your  second  finger  with  spittle  and  make  a  cross
on  it  to  wake  It  up  - — a  remedy  formerly  used  in  Eng-
lish hospitals.  ^  For  chicken-pox,  go  Into  the  chicken-
house  and  let  the  chickens  fly  over  you,  *  or  simply
push  the  patient  backwards  Into  the  henhouse.  ^
Fried  mice  given  to  children  will  keep  them  from
wetting  the  bed,  ^   "but   de   mice   mus'   be   parboiled


114L

2  157,  and  267.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  66.

'  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  58.

M31.

5  Hawkins,  J.,  An  Old  Mauma's  Folk-Lore,  J.A.F.  L.,  vol.  9  (1896),  p.  130.

6  Bergen,  F.  D.,     Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7  (1899),
p.  78.


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures         387

fust,"  says  one  informant.  ^  In  Europe,  three  roasted
mice  are  used.  -  Piles  may  be  cured  by  tea  from  the
bark  of  the  red  oak  tree  or  by  devil's  snuff  mixed  with
fresh  lard,  the  latter  being  good  for  bed-sores  as  well. '
For  night-sweats  put  a  pail  of  water  (with  sliced  onions
in  it)  ^  under  the  bed.  ^

After  you  have  extracted  a  splinter  from  your  flesh,
there  will  be  no  pain  if  you  put  the  splinter  in  your
hair,  ^  or,  if  you  eat  the  splinter  after  it  has  been  ex-
tracted you  will  never  get  another  one  in.  ^  Every-
where on  the  Gold  Coast  of  Africa  there  is  a  some-
what similar  custom  of  biting  the  thorn  that  has
entered  one's  flesh."  ^  Holly  leaf  tea,  ^  corn  shuck
tea,  1 "  or  simply  warm  water,  ^  ^  will  cure  measles.  For
mumps,  the  standard  remedy  is  fresh  marrow  from  a
hog's  jowl  rubbed  on  the  jaw.  ^  ^  Yov  burns,  a  piece
of  fat  meat  is  applied  to  the  burned  place  ^  ^  or  elder
blooms  and  bark  are  made  into  a  salve.  ^  *  Cancer  is
probably  not  differentiated  from  other  sores.  I  have
located  only  one  cure.  Boil  some  green  plantain  weed
{Plantago  major)  and  mix  with  lard  into  a  salve.  Then
get  some  bark  from  seven  different  kinds  of  trees
(the  kind  does  not  matter  so  long  as  they  are  all
different)   and  boil  into  a  tea.     Wash  the  sore   with


1141.

^  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  503.
U41.

M.

*286,  and  Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  115.
'341.

*  Cardinal,  A.  W.,      The  Natives  of  the  Northern  Territories  of  the  Gold
Coast,  p.  47.
'288.
i''331,341,  and387.

1 1  235.

12  26,  and  341.

13  293.
1  *  155.


388     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

this  tea  and  smear  the  ointment  on  with  a  feather.
This  will  cure  your  cancer  every  time.  ^  For  a
swelling  of  any  sort  use  mullein  tea  or  a  mixture  of
cream  of  tartar,  vinegar,  and  rusty  nails  applied  as  a
lotion.  2

Indigestion  may  be  cured  by  drinking  hot  water;  ^
by  taking  ten  drops  of  turpentine  in  a  glass  of  water;  *
by  taking  Samson  snakeroot  tea;^  by  wearing  a
penny  about  the  neck;*'  or  by  taking  a  bath  in  hot
water.  ^  Vomiting  may  be  stopped  by  turning  up-
side down  under  the  bed  the  glass  from  which  you
take  your  medicine.  ^  Frostbitten  heels  are  best
ministered  to  by  smoking  them  with  pine-top,  ^  or
by  rubbing  the  heel  with  a  roasted  turnip;  i°  while  a
black  eye  may  be  eased  by  the  application  of  a  poultice
of  raw  Irish  potatoes.  ^  ^  Heart  trouble  is  best  dealt
with  by  wearing  a  brass  finger-ring  ^  ^  or  a  silver  ring
about  the  neck,  ^  ^  while  moles  may  be  removed  by
having  some  one  give  them  to  the  new  moon.  ^  ^

Elderberry  flowers  stewed  in  lard  make  a  good  salve
for  red  bug  {Tetranychid  or  harvest  tick)  bites.  ^  ^  For
scarlet  fever,  a  tea  made  of  steeped  sheep  (or  chicken)  ^  ^

1141.

MOO.

3  321,  and  387.

M88.

6  175.
ei92.

7  381.

8  321.
»184.

1 » 208.

11167.

1 2  239.

1  3 100.

1^341.

1*  Davis,  H.  C,  Negro  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,  M.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  27
(1914),  p.  246.

i«  Smiley,  P.,  Folk-Lore  from  Va.,  S.  C,  Ga.,  Ala.,  and  Fla.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  32  (1919),  p.  379.


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures        389

manure  is  best.  ^  Buzzard's  grease  is  said  to  cure
smallpox.  2  To  break  your  husband  of  drinking,
skin  a  live  eel,  put  the  skin  in  some  liquor  and  give  it
to  him.  He  will  never  drink  again.  ^  To  cure
your  chickens  of  cholera  make  a  tea  of  dog  fennel  and
alum  and  give  it  to  them.  *  A  nutmeg  worn  around
the  neck  will  cure  neuralgia  ^  (see  illustration,  p.  314);
wash  your  face  in  dew  every  morning  for  nine  mornings
to  cure  tetter;  ^  dollar-leaf  tea  is  good  for  bad  breath^
and  peach  leaf  tea  for  worms.  ^  Besides  these  teas,
horehound  and  sage  are  also  used  by  the  Negroes,  ®
and  in  one  of  the  Negro  secular  songs,  "The  Sick
Wife,"  the  following  lines  occur:

She  squall  out:  "Sam  bring  me  some  mint."
Make  catnip  up  an'  sage  tea.  ^  °

We  have  something  of  the  idea  in  Negro  folk-medicine
that  it  takes  like  to  cure  like,  or,  as  the  Negro  puts  it,
"Hit  take  dawg  ter  cure  dawg."  Thus  an  old  Negro
granny  would  force  even  more  whiskey  down  the
throat  of  her  tipsy  son  in  hopes  of  permanently  curing
him.  1  ^  This  is  observed  in  other  treatments.  For
dyspepsia,  the  inside  lining  of  a  chicken  gizzard  is
efficacious;  for  a  cut  made  by  an  oyster  shell,  bind  an
oyster  on  the  wound;  for  a  dog  bite,  bind  on  some  of

1141.
2  341.

^Southern  Workman,  vol.  24  (1895),  p.  49.
M41.

6  267,  141,  and  326.
6  208.
^66.
»331.

^  Davis,  H.  C,     Negro  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  27
(1914),  p.  246.

i"Talley,  T.  W.,     Negro  Folk  Rhymes,  p.  55.
11157.


390     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

the  hair  of  the  dog  that  bit  you.  ^  In  Devonshire
there  is  apparently  a  somewhat  similar  behef  since
they  beheve  that  if  any  one  is  bitten  by  a  viper  the
best  cure  is  to  kill  the  viper  and  to  apply  his  fat  to
the  bitten  place.  ^

Panaceas.  A  few  general  or  more  or  less  universal
cures  might  be  mentioned.  If  you  are  sick  and  having
hard  pains,  place  an  ax  in  bed  with  you.  It  will  cut
the  pains.  ^  Undoubtedly,  treatment  by  whipping  or
striking  the  afflicted  person  was  originally  for  the
purpose  of  driving  out  the  disease  spirits.  In  one
case  an  old  woman  doctor  whipped  a  girl's  lap  with
pawpaw  switches  to  drive  out  the  bad  blood  ("black
blood")  from  her  muscles.  •*  An  old  conjure-doctor
told  me  that  if  a  disease  cannot  easily  be  cured  it  is
sometimes  better  to  wait  until  the  sick  man  speaks  and
then  to  smack  him  in  the  mouth  with  a  piece  of  beef
"melt"  (spleen).  ^  Red  sassafras  tea  is  good  to  purify
the  blood  and  will  help  out  in  almost  every  ailment.  ®
"Barb-iron,"  a  sort  of  short  moss  growing  mainly  at
the  foot  of  oak  trees,  can  be  used  for  cures.  Set  the
plant  in  a  shallow  vessel  of  water;  it  will  grow  there,
and  whenever  you  have  any  kind  of  trouble,  bathe
yourself  with  this  water  to  drive  it  away.  The  water
in  which  cross-vine  {Bingonia  crucigerd)  has  been  soaked
has  the  same  healing  power.  The.  same  informant
suggests  Samspn  snakeroot  and  red  coonroot  mixed
with  camphor  or  whiskey  as  the  best  universal  lini-
ment. "^     Pepper  grass  (probably  Lepidium  virginicum)


'  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  66.

2  Henderson,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  128.

3 180.

*  Snyder,  H.,     Paradise  Negro  School,  Yale  Review,  vol.  ii  (1921),  p.  166.

'-91.

6  141.

'258.


Positive  Control-Signs,  and  Cures        391

or  poke-berry  {Phytolacca  decandra)  makes  a  good
laxative.  ^  Jimson  weed  boiled  into  a  pulp  makes  a
good  general  salve,  ^  while  a  poultice  of  cow  manure
will  cure  all  serious  pains.  ^  Pure,  fresh  clay  mixed
with  clean  water  and  applied  will  draw  all  the  aches
and  pains  from  you  as  it  dries.  ^  Water  poured  on  the
head  of  a  sick  person  will  help  his  cure,  ^  while  the
Arkansas  Negroes  say  a  rabbit's  stomach  dried,  pow-
dered, and  eaten,  will  cure  most  diseases — especially
the  "conjure-sickness."  ^  The  water  in  which  a  new-
born baby  has  been  washed  makes  a  good  lotion  for
almost  any  complaint,  ^  or  a  woolen  string,  greased
with  tallow  and  worn  around  any  part  of  the  body,
will  stop  the  pains  in  that  part.  ^  Ordinary  lime  water
makes  a  general  tonic;  ^  a  silver  coin  tied  around  the
ankle  falls  into  the  same  category;  i"  and,  finally,
there  is  that  old  English  ^  ^  practice  of  kissing  the
hurt  place,  this  being  particularly  applied  to  children.  ^  ^

Prevention  of  Disease.  The  Negro  theory  of  pre-
vention of  disease  is  closely  allied  to  the  African  or
early  European  one  of  using  odoriferous  substances,
which  at  first,  no  doubt,  were  intended  to  keep  the
disease  spirit  away.  Asafoetida  is  eaten,  ^  ^  or,  as  is
more  frequently  the  case,  is  worn  in  a  little  bag  about

'288.

2  26.

3  155.
^258.
*382.

« Bergen,  F.  D.,     Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7  (1899),
p.  70.
'  155.

8  397.

9  235.

1 »  54.  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,
vol.  16  (1923),  p.  212.

1 '  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  487.

12  112.

13  341.


392     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

the  neck.  ^  In  parts  of  Europe  asafoetida  is  sometimes
carried  in  the  pocket  as  a  preventive  of  smallpox.  ^
Sulphur  wrapped  in  a  bit  of  cloth  and  worn  about  the
neck  is  also  good,  ^  while  a  red  onion  carried  in  the
left  pocket  will  ward  off  diseases  of  any  kind.  ^  In
Europe  a  sliced  onion  was  put  in  a  sick  room  where
infection  was  feared,  under  the  belief  that  it  "acts
as  an  absorbent."  ^


1  171,  189,  342,  and  387.     Also  Davis,  H.  C,     Folk-Lorein  South  Carolina,
J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  27  (1914),  p.  246.

^  Fogel,  E.  M.,    Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,  p.  270.
3320.

*  100,    and    141.     Richardson,    C,     Some   Slave   Superstitions,   Southern
Workman,  vol.  41  (1912),  p.  248.

*  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  640.


CHAPTER  VI

NEGATIVE  CONTROL-SIGNS
—TABOOS

Negro  Taboos.  Thus  far  our  "signs"  into  which
human  control  enters  have  arranged  themselves  about
the  formula,  "If  you  (or  some  one  else)  behave  in  such
and  such  a  manner,  so  and  so  will  happen."  These
signs  have  been  mainly  positive  in  nature;  that  is,  they
have  indicated  means  of  obtaining  ends  desirable  to
the  operator.  We  now  turn  to  the  negative  signs  or
taboos — a  class  of  control-signs  adhering  to  the  same
formula  but  resulting  in  ill  luck  or  undesirable  con-
sequences which  are  to  be  avoided.  The  Negro  does
not  in  general  distinguish  these  from  the  uncontrolled
or  prophetic  signs  which  would  compare  with  our
English  omens.

Etiquette  With  a  Vengeance.  Many  of  these  taboos
have  to  do  with  matters  of  etiquette  and  seem  to  be
in  reality  a  linking  of  unpleasant  results  with  un-
couth manners  in  an  attempt  to  frighten  the  young
into  a  quicker  acquisition  of  American  good-breeding.
Naturally  such  an  association  stimulates  the  memory
and  tends  towards  a  negation  of  the  ill-mannered  prac-
tices, lest  unhappy  results  follow.  If  you  eat  too  fast,
you  will  marry  too  young;  ^  it  is  bad  luck  to  sing  while
eating,  ^  for  you  will  be  disappointed  ^  (however,  at
first  this   may   have  been   due   to   fear  of  attracting

1365.

2  52,  and  186.

395.


394     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

envious  spirits);  and  if  you  take  the  last  piece  of  bread
on  the  plate,  you  will  not  get  a  wife.  ^  This  latter  idea
is  illustrative  of  the  fact  that  many  of  our  apparently
meaningless  social  usages  once  had  a  very  real  purpose
behind  them.  The  English  version  was  that  you  will
not  be  married  that  year  if  you  take  the  last  portion  of
food  from  a  dish,  but  the  underlying  idea  was  that
always  the  last  portion  was  to  be  left  for  the  fairies.  2
Thus  it  was  not  mere  ill-breeding  to  break  the  con-
vention, but  actually  dangerous,  since  the  fairies  would
be  offended.  It  Is  not  so  clear  why  the  Negro  should
call  It  bad  luck  to  sit  in  the  house  with  his  hat  on;^
or  to  lick  his  plate,  though  in  the  latter  case  the  fear
is  that  "Santa  Claus  will  cut  your  tongue  off" — a
threat  apparently  made  by  mothers  to  discipline  their
children.  If  one  eats  with  his  hat  on  he  will  not  get
enough,  *  and  It  is  considered  bad  luck  to  whistle  in
the  house,  or  to  "sass"  the  old  folks.  ^  This  latter
idea  may  have  at  one  time  had  a  real  meaning,  since
the  old  folks  were  "almost  ghosts,"  and  hence  worthy
of  good  treatment  lest  their  spirits  avenge  the  dis-
respect and  actually  cause  bad  luck  to  the  offender.
The  fact  that  such  beliefs  are  used  for  the  purpose  of
discipline  is  indicated  by  the  testimony  of  Negro
mothers  and  by  such  statements  as  the  following
from  a  South  Carolina  informant:  "I  dreamed  that  a
girl  was  throwing  water  on  me.  It  was  because  I
would  not  help  cook  supper."  ^  There  is  also  a  vague
Idea  of  bad  luck  implied  in  the  school-taught  taboo:


1311.

'^Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  151.

3  177.

^373.

*372.

«77.


Negative  Control-Signs — Taboos  395

"If  you  don't  see  a  dentist  don't  show  your  teeth,"
as  interpreted  by  a  Georgia  informant.  ^  Again  there
is  the  beHef  that  it  is  bad  luck  to  offer  your  left  hand
to  a  person  in  shaking  hands,  -  or  bad  luck  for  two
people  to  eat  out  of  the  same  plate.  ^  Uncouth  to  us,
but  refined  enough  from  the  rural  Negro  point  of  view,
is  the  admonition:  "Don't  spit  anywhere  except  under
the  benches  when  at  church;  if  you  do  your  teeth  will
loosen."  ^

Feminine  Lore.  Sweeping.  More  women  observe
these  taboos  than  men,  and  they  center  largely  around
feminine  occupations.  To  illustrate  this  let  us  consider
first  some  of  those  beliefs  having  to  do  with  house-
hold activities,  or  with  articles  feminine  in  association.
One  must  always  be  careful  how  he  handles  a  broom.
A  few  strokes  after  dark  and  "you'll  sho'  sweep  out  some
member  uv  de  fam'ly."  ^  Others  say  that  such
indiscretion  will  sweep  you  out  of  a  home,  ^  though
perhaps  the  greater  percentage  have  forgotten  the
exact  significance  of  this  unseemly  act  and  simply
say  "bad  luck."  ^  This  would  seem  to  indicate  that
where  "bad  luck"  alone  is  expressed  as  the  resultant
of  certain  actions  the  belief  in  question  is  beginning
to  be  forgotten  and  is  in  process  of  decay.  If  an
assiduous  housewife  "jes'  mus'  "  sweep  the  house  at
this  time  the  dirt  should  be  piled  in  the  corner  and
not  be  carried  out  before  morning.  *     The  same  taboo


1373.

2 175.

3  208.

n75.

^  141,   and   189.     Williamson,  G.,     Superstitions  from   Louisiana,    J.   A.
L.,  vol.  18  (1905),  p.  229.

«246,  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  28  (1899),  p.  449.
^  81,  106,  341,  and  244.

8  246.     Smiley,  P.,     Folk-Lore  from  Va.,  S.  C,  Ga.,  Ala.,  and  Fla.,  J.  A.
,  L.,  vol.  32  (1919),  pp.  381-82.


396     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

applies  to  sweeping  the  hearth  or  carrying  out  ashes
after  dark  ^ — the  hearth  being  originally  the  center
of  the  household  and  the  danger,  no  doubt,  being  that
of  disturbing  the  ancestral  spirits  who  would  likely  be
hanging  around  after  dark.  The  evil  may,  however,
be  averted  in  the  latter  case  by  sprinkling  salt  before
you  as  you  walk.  -  It  is  a  sign  of  death  to  shake  a
table  cloth  out  of  doors  after  sunset,  ^  and  bad  luck  to
throw  scraps  or  waste  food  out  doors  after  dark.  *
This  latter  belief  was  probably  due  to  the  fear  of
attracting  those  dangerous  vagabond  spirits  which
especially  liked  the  darkness.  The  European  version
is  that  you  should  never  sweep  the  kitchen  after
sunset  or  you  will  sweep  out  your  luck.  ^  It  is  es-
pecially bad  luck  to  sweep  out  your  house  on  Friday
night,  ^  or  on  New  Year's  morning.  The  Negroes  say
that  the  latter  will  cause  some  one  in  the  family  to  die
before  the  year  is  out,  ^  the  English  version  was  that
you  sweep  your  luck  away.  ^  The  Missouri  Negroes
say  that  the  sweepings  every  morning  should  be
burned  instead  of  being  thrown  out;^  the  English
swept  the  dust  inward  from  the  front  door  and  carried
It  out  in  a  basket  or  shovel  to  prevent  bad  luck.  ^  °
If  you  leave  the  dirt  in  the  middle  of  the  floor  it  is  a
sign,  so  the  Negroes  say,  of  some  one  coming.  ^  ^

1 141,  159,  and  246.     Southern  Workrnan,  vol.  24  (1895),  p.  78.

2  6.

^  57,  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  24  (1895),  p.  155.

«332.

^  Fogel,  E.  M.,     Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,
p.  109.

®   91.     Lee,  C,     Some  Negro  Lore  from  Baltimore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5
(18^j2),  p.  110.

^73.

8  Lean^s  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  176,  and  236.

9  159.

1"  Henderson,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  87.
Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  76.
1 1  288.


Negative  Control-Signs — ^Taboos         397

Carelessness  with  fire  is  foolhardy,  but  carelessness
with  a  broom  is  rank  danger.  Even  a  slight  stroke  on  a
person's  foot  will  soon  send  him  away  from  home,  ^
the  same  wanderlust  developing  from  sweeping  under
his  feet  ^  or  under  the  chair  in  which  he  is  seated.  ^
Perchance  the  original  notion  was  that  part  of  an
individual's  spirit-substance  or  personality  was  disas-
sociated from  his  body  in  this  way.  Even  if  a  person
brush  his  own  shoes  off  with  a  broom  he  will  run  away,  *
although  some  say  sweeping  under  a  person's  feet
prevents  marriage  ^  and  sends  a  person  to  jail «  rather
than  simply  making  him  run  away  from  home.  Touch-
ing or  striking  a  person  with  a  broom  will  make  him
lazy,  ^  land  him  in  jail  ^  (unless  he  spits  on  the
broom),  ^  or  get  him  into  trouble,  or  ^ "  into  an  un-
favorable controversy.  ^  ^  If  a  man  whips  his  wife
with  a  broom  she  will  surely  leave  home,  ^  ^  or  if  a
person  is  hit  with  an  umbrella  he  will  surely  go  to
jail.  ^  ^  Of  course  such  actions  are  used  at  times  with
deliberate  intent,  as  where  a  person  wishing  to  travel
will  sweep  his  feet  nine  times,  ^  ^  but  the  customary
viewpoint  is  that  of  avoidance  rather  than  use  for
desirable  purposes.     Stepping  over  a  broom  (or  mop)  ^  ^

1  97,  and  189.
2327.
3  216.
^320.

6  364,  and  320.
679.

7  286,  111,  and  150.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  28  (1899),  p.  450.

8  188,  and  357.

9  63,  and  164.

1 « 224,  and  396.

11159.

1 2  388.

1379.

1M3.

16  189.


398     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

brings  bad  luck,  ^  non-marriage,  ^  or  a  trip  to  jail. '
Never  sweep  under  a  sick  man's  bed  unless  you  just
want  him  to  die.  •*  Possibly  it  was  originally  thought
that  the  sick  man's  soul,  for  the  time,  at  least,  was
absent  from  the  body  and  in  danger  of  being  injured.
It  is  bad  luck  to  move  a  broom  from  one  house  to
another;  ^  those  frugal  individuals  who  insist  on  taking
their  old  brooms  with  them  in  moving  are  always
dissatisfied  with  their  new  home.  He  who  desires
luck  will  never  sweep  a  house  just  before  he  moves  out
of  it,  ^  though  other  luck-chasers  take  just  the  op-
posite view.  ^  It  is  bad  luck  to  sweep  the  yard  with
the  house-broom;*  sweep  the  chimney  back  and  you
will  make  your  mother  cross;  ^  sweep  off  a  table  with  a
broom  and  you'll  surely  have  a  quarrelsome  home.  ^P
Finally  it  is  extremely  bad  luck  for  two  people  to  sweep
in  the  same  room  at  the  same  time.  ^  ^  Other  broom-
superstitions  have  been  mentioned  in  connection  with
witches — perhaps  this  European  association  has  much
to  do  with  the  superstitious  character  of  this  feminine
article.

Hair  and  Nails.  Turning  now  to  other  beliefs,
mainly,  if  not  entirely,  of  feminine  association,  we
take  up  the  question  of  prohibitions  relating  to  hair
and   nails.     You   should   never  count  the  teeth   in   a


181,   141,  341,  and  224.     Also    Parsons,    E.  C,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea
Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  16  (1923),  p.  210.

2  110.

3  229,  and  106.

*  224,  183,  and  238.
6 152,  and  Ohio  Whites.

6  141.

noo.

»385.

"373.
loiTT.
1196.


Negative  Control-Signs — ^Taboos         399

comb,  they  will  all  break  out.  ^  If  you  drop  a  hair-
pin and  do  not  pick  it  up,  you  will  lose  a  friend.  ^
Some  (old)  people  try  to  save  every  strand  of  hair  and
every  finger  and  toe  nail,  because  they  say  that  when
they  die  they  will  have  to  show  them  before  they  can
get  into  heaven.  ^  These  hair  combings  are  some-
times kept  in  a  paper  sack  and  the  teeth  and  nails  in  a
small  box,  both  of  which  are  buried  with  the  individual
when  he  dies.  ^

In  the  main,  however,  the  hair  combings  and  nail
trimmings  are  totally  destroyed  because  of  the  harm
which  could  be  wrought  should  they  fall  into  the  hands
of  an  enemy.  Some  say,  "Hair  combings  must  not
be  thrown  away,  else  the  hair  will  not  grow;  nor  should
these  combings  be  kept,  else  they  will  'come  to  worms'
and  the  hair  will  not  grow  again.  Therefore  you  should
be  sure  to  burn  all  the  combings.  ^  It  is  bad  luck  to
throw  hair  combings  out  of  a  window  ^ — the  bad  luck
feared  generally  being  hoodoo;^  for,  as  we  have  said
before,  if  you  place  a  lock  of  your  enemy's  hair  in
running  water  he  will  lose  his  mind,  or  if  you  place
some  of  a  person's  hair  under  your  doorstep  he  will
never  be  able  to  keep  away  from  you.  *  Another
widespread  notion  of  this  type  is  that  if  hair  combings
are  picked  up  by  a  bird  and  used  in  constructing  a
nest  the  owner  of  the  hair  will  have  headache,  ^  or  a


1  286,  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  28  (1899),  p.  450.

2  155.

»311.  Bergen,  F.  D.,  Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7
(1899),  p.  65.

*  141.

5  57.  Bergen,  F.  D.,  Animal  arid  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7
(1899),  p.  651.

^91.  Moore,  R.  A.,  Superstitions  from  Georgia,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  7
(1894),  p.  305.

7  341.

*  112,  and  Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  82.
9  63.


400     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

"wandering  mind" — at  least  while  the  bird  is  sitting
on  the  nest.  ^  In  Scotland  ^  and  England  ^  the  belief
is  that  a  headache  will  result  from  such  action.  Other
Negroes  think  that  the  person  will  lose  her  hair  ^
if  such  happens,  or  else  go  crazy.  ^  Some  even  sug-
gest rheumatism  as  an  alternative.  ^  '

If  a  kinky-haired  Negro  touches  a  straight-haired
Negro's  head  the  hair  of  one  of  them  will  come  out. ''
Again,  if  two  persons  are  fixing  a  third  person's  hair,
the  younger  of  the  two  will  die*  (first),  ^  and  one
informant  says  that  in  addition  to  this  the  older  will
fall  into  the  well.  ^  ^  Gratitude  is  not  always  to  be
expressed,  for  thanking  a  person  for  combing  your
hair  is  sure  to  bring  bad  luck,  ^  ^  generally  the  calamity
of  having  all  your  hair  come  out.  ^^  A  chronic  "worrier"
will  soon  find  his  hair  turning  gray,  ^  ^  but  she  who  looks
into  the  mirror  while  combing  her  hair  will  soon
obtain  the  much  desired  straight  locks.  ^  ^  Quite  com-
mon is  the  European  ^  ^  idea  that  combing  your  hair  at
night   will   make   you   forgetful.  ^  ^     Sometimes  this  is


^  141,  and  189.    Williamson,  G.,    Superstitions  from  Louisiana,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  18  (1905),  p.  229.     Speers,  M.  W.  F.,     J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  26  (1913),  p.  190.

2  Gregor,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northeast  of  Scotland,  p.  26.

'  Leather,  E.  M.,     Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  88.

*329.

^  141,  and  Bergen,  F.  D.,     Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7
(1899),  p.  65.

«93.

^  Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  82.

8 119,  67,  and  364.

9  224,  and  370.
10  63.

11 112,  and  356.  Moore,  R.  A.,  Superstitions  from  Georgia,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  7  (1894),  p.  305.

12  61,  188,  and  310.

1 3  364.
1  *  235.

i^Fogel,  E.  M.,1  Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,
p.  341.

i«342,  112,  141,  12,  159,  and  123.  Lee,  C,  Some  Negro  Lore  from
Baltimore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5  (1892),  p.  110.


Negative  Control-Signs — Taboos         401

used,  like  a  toddy,  for  the  deliberate  purpose  of  for-
getting troubles.  ^

Some  say  that  it  is  good  luck  to  cut  the  hair  and
nails  during  the  waning  of  the  moon  ^ — a  common
belief  in  Devonshire;^  others  claim  that  the  hair  will
be  slow  to  grow  if  cut  at  this  time,  but  that  it  should
be  cut  on  the  new  moon  so  as  to  grow  with  the  moon,  *
a  belief  having  also  in  Worcestershire  ^  an  English
parallel.  The  day  on  which  your  hair  or  nails  are
trimmed  has  a  significance  for  good  or  evil.  It  is
very  bad  luck,  for  instance,  to  trim  your  hair  on  the
first  day  of  March.  ^  The  signs  of  the  various  days
of  the  week  so  far  as  nail  cutting  is  concerned  are  as
follows:

Monday.     Cut  them  for  news — or  sickness — or  money  before

the  week  is  out.
Tuesday.     Pair  of  new   shoes.
Wednesday.     Travel  soon.
Thursday.     Pair  of  new  shoes — or  sickness.
Friday.     Get  some  money — or  have  toothache.
Saturday.     See  your  lover  on   Sunday.
Sunday.     The  devil  will  have  you  all  the  rest  of  the  week.  ''

There  is  considerable  variation  besides  that  indicated
in  the  verse  above.  Thus,  apart  from  the  idea  of  the
devil  having  you  all  the  week  (or  all  Monday)  «  as  a
penalty   for   cutting   your   nails   on    Sunday,    Sunday

1  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  46.     Also  141.

2  112.

3  Dyer,  T.  F.  T.,  English  Folk-Lore,  p.  48.  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2.
p.  246.

*  141,  218,  and  35.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  24  (1895),  p.  155.
^  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  248.

^Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  15,  and  informant  57.
'  Arranged  from  data  obtained  from  78,  208,  6,  239,  29,  267,  364,  235,
and  395.

8  61.

26


402     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

nail  trimming  is  supposed  to  result  in  bad  luck,  ^  a
fight,  2  somebody  making  you  ashamed  ^  (that  same
day),  *  or  the  losing  of  a  pint  of  blood  by  some  ac-
cident during  the  next  week  ^  (or  "yo^  will  sho'  see
blood  'fo'  Monday").  «  All  through  England  such
action  was  considered  ill  luck  ^  as  expressed  by  the
rhyme:

He  that  on  the  Sabbath  morn

Cutteth  either  hair  or  horn

Will  rue  the  day  that  he  was  born.  ^

The  complete  English  versions  approximate  closely
those  of  the  Negroes  showing  how  persistent  a  belief
may  be  when  expressed  in  verse  form:

Cut  your  nails  on  a  Monday,  cut  them  for  news  (or  health),
Cut  your  nails  on  a  Tuesday,  a  pair  of  new  shoes  (or  wealth),
Cut  your  nails  on  a  Wednesday,  cut  them  for  health  (or  news).
Cut  your  nails  on  a  Thursday,  cut  them  for  wealth  (or  a  pair  of

new  shoes).

Cut  your  nails  on  a  Friday,  cut  them  for  woes  (or  sorrow),
Cut  your  nails  on  a  Saturday,  a  journey  to  go  (or  see  your

sweetheart  tomorrow).

Cut  your  nails  on  a  Sunday,  you  cut  them  for  evil.
For  all  the  week  long  you'll  be  ruled  by  the  devil.  ^

Some  Negroes  say,  "The  finger  nails  should  never  be
cleaned   after  dark.     It   is   believed   that   if   the    dirt


18L

2 189.

3  183.

n34.

5352.

6  364.

^  Henderson,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  10.

8  Leather,  E.  M.,     Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  88.

9  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  267.  The  versions  in  parenthesis  are
taken  from  Denham,  A.  M.,  A  Collection  of  Proverbs  and  Popular  Sayings,
Percy  Society,  vol.  20,  pp.  12-13.


Negative  Control-Signs — ^Taboos         403

accumulated  under  the  nails  were  removed  then  all
which  the  crop  had  produced  during  the  day  or  all
which  the  party  had  accumulated  by  trade  or
otherwise  during  the  daylight  hours  would  be  lost,
the  theory  being  that  the  accumulation  of  dirt  has  a
connection  with  the  accumulation  of  property.  It  is
perfectly  all  right  to  wash  the  hands  and  manicure  the
nails,  but  it  must  be  done  before  sundown,  or  at
least  before  the  'dusk'  comes."  ^  If  you  cut  your
finger  nails  while  sick  in  bed  you  will  remain  in  bed
until  they  grow  out  again.  ^  Differing  radically  from
the  accepted  view,  some  of  the  Negroes  say  that  it
is  bad  luck  to  trim  the  nails  on  any  day  but  Friday,
except  it  be  the  first  day  of  the  year  or  month.  ^  It
is  rather  hard  to  see  why  Friday  should  be  considered
a  lucky  day  to  trim  nails  since  it  is  otherwise  regarded
as  unlucky  and  since  the  European  ■*  version  regards  it
as  an  unlucky  day  for  nail  trimming.

Ominous  Friday.  Breaking  for  the  moment  the
feminine  classification,  let  us  consider  some  of  the
Negro  beliefs  relating  to  this  most  unnatural  day.
To  begin  with,  it  is  considered  ill  luck  to  start  on  a
journey  on  that  day;  in  fact,  to  make  any  sort  of  move
on  Friday,  ^  (or  Wednesday)  «  will  surely  result  in
dire  consequences.  Accidents  are  the  direct  resultant
of  willfulness  in  the  matter  of  beginning  work  on
Friday.  ^     You  must  finish  whatever  you  start  on  that

1  Brannon,  P.  A.,  Central  Alabama]  Negro  Superstitions,  Birmingham
(Ala.)  News,  Jan.  18,  1925,  p.  15.

2  13.

3 112.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  15.

*  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  262.

^  113,224,  and  356.  Williamson,  G.,  Superstitions  from  Louisiana,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  18  (1905),  p.  229.

«331.

^  112,  and  Davis,  H.  C,  Negro  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.
F.  L.,vol.  27     (1914),  p.  246.


404     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

day  or  you  will  never  finish  it.  ^  So  real  are  these
beliefs  that  one  Negro  overseer,  when  ordered  to  com-
mence a  certain  bit  of  plowing  on  Friday,  would  go
out  in  the  evening  before  and  run  one  or  two  furrows
so  as  not  to  begin  the  work  on  the  unlucky  day.  ^
All  through  England  ^  and  Scotland,  *  as  well  as  on  the
Continent,  ^  Friday  was  held  to  be  an  unlucky  day
to  begin  any  new  work.  "Friday  was  a  day  on  which
the  fairies  seemed  to  hold  revel  above  ground,  raid
houses  in  open  daylight,  and  investigate  the  very
dishes  preparing  for  dinner."  ^  The  Negroes  claim
it  bad  luck  to  plant  on  Friday — your  seed  will  never
come  up.  ^  The  Creoles  had  a  proverb,  ^'Cila  qui
rit  vendredi  va  pleure  dimanche'"  ("He  who  laughs  on
Friday  will  cry  on  Sunday").  ^  If  you  wash  clothes
on  the  last  Friday  of  the  year  you  will  wash  away  one
of  your  family  ^  (or  bring  bad  luck).  ^ "  The  same  holds
true  of  washing  on  the  first  Friday  of  the  New  Year  ^  ^
or  the  last  Friday  before  Christmas.  ^  ^  The  English
have  the  same  penalty,  but  Good  Friday  is  the  un-
lucky day. 1 3

Unlucky    Thirteen.     With    the    Negroes,    Friday    is
always  an  unlucky  day,  ^  ^  especially  Friday  the  13th.  ^  ^


1 151,  171,  189,  and  362.

2  Haskell,  J.  A.,      Sacrificial    Offerings  among  North  Carolina  Negroes,
J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  4  (1891),  pp.  267-68.

^  Denham,  M.  A.,     A  Collection  of  Proverbs  and  Popular  Sayings,  Percy
Society,  vol.  29,  p.  11  (note).     Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  262.

^Gregor,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northeast  of  Scotland,  p.  149.

^  Fogel,  E.  M.,     Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,  pp.
260-61.

*  Simpson,  Eva  B.,     Folk-Lore  in  Lowland  Scotland,  p.  101.

^289.

*Heam,  L.,     Gombo  Zhibes,  p.  15.

"364.
1 « 202.
1 '  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  15.

12  141.

"  *  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  564.
1  *  392.
1 » 401.


Negative  Control-Signs — Taboos         405

Thirteen  seems  to  have  its  usual  unluckiness.  ^  "If
a  person  is  born  on  the  13th,  marries  on  the  13th,  and
dies  on  the  13th  it  is  going  to  be  hot  for  him."  ^  If
thirteen  (or  eleven)  ^  eat  at  a  table,  one  of  that
number  will  die  * — an  English  belief,  probably  a
remembrance  of  the  thirteen  at  the  Paschal  Supper
and  the  fate  of  Judas.  ^  The  thirteenth  of  the  month
is  always  considered  unlucky  with  the  Negroes  whether
it  be  Friday  or  not.  ^

The  Perils  of  Sewing.  Returning  again  to  the  folk-
beliefs  relating  to  more  specifically  feminine  affairs,
we  find,  in  the  case  of  sewing,  one  widespread  notion
that  you  should  never  sew  a  dress  while  it  is  on  you
without  holding  a  small  stick  in  your  mouth.  Failure
to  have  this  stick  in  your  mouth  will  result  in  death,  ^
bad  luck, «  or  some  one  talking  about  you  or  telling
lies  on  you  ^ — one  lie  for  every  stitch  taken.  ^ "  In
West  Africa  "one  dare  not  sew  his  cloth  while  it  is  on
his  body  lest  his  relative  die."  ^  ^  In  England  the
version  is  that  you  will  be  ill  spoken  of.  ^  ^  Here  we
have  a  case  of  remarkably  similar  superstitions  in
countries  as  widely  separated  as  England  and  Africa,
and,    as    illustrated    in    other    cases,    both    influences


1288.

2  314.

3  304.
*63.

^  Henderson,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  33.

6  80.

M88.

8  58.

9  73,   152,    214,  and  234.     Also  Work,  M.  H.,     Some  Geechee  Folk-Lore,
Southern  Workman,  vol.  34  (1905)  pp.  696-97.

1 "  Richardson,  C,  Some  Slave  Superstitions,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  41
(1912),  p.  248.

1 1  Cronise  and  Ward,  Cunnie  Rabbit,  Mr.  Spider  and  the  Other  Beef,
p.  25.

i^Gurdon,  Lady  E.  C,  County  Folk-Lore  of  Suffolk,  vol.  i,  p.  128.  Dyer,
T.  F.  T.,     Domestic  Folk-Lore,  p.  82.     Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  58.


406     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

persist  side  by  side  in  the  Afro-American  beliefs.  The
prevention  of  evil  by  putting  a  small  splinter  of  wood
in  the  mouth  seems  to  have  been  an  independent
American  development.

Other  superstitions  thread  themselves  into  the
sewing  basket.  If  rats  cut  your  clothes  do  not  allow
any  one  who  is  kin  to  you  to  mend  them.  ^  If  you  mend
them  yourself  you  will  die  ^  or  at  least  have  bad  luck.
Always  get  some  one  outside  the  family  to  do  the
repairing  for  you.  ^  Never  make  a  new  garment  for
a  sick  person  lest  he  die;  ■*  nor  should  you  press  or  sew
after  hearing  of  a  death  for  fear  of  bad  luck.  ^  It  is
likewise  bad  luck  to  sew  new  pieces  on  an  old  garment.  ^
You  should  never  sew,  wash,  or  iron  on  New  Year's
day  for  fear  of  causing  some  member  of  your  family
to  die.  ■'  If  you  sew  up  a  torn  or  ripped  mattress  some
member  of  your  family  will  die,  ^  and  the  penalty  is  the
same  for  putting  on  a  person's  new  clothes  before
he  puts  them  on  himself.  ®  A  dropped  pair  of  scissors
should  be  closed  before  picking  them  up  ^  ° — an
English  belief  ^  ^ — though  other  Negroes  claim  that  it
it  unusually  bad  luck  to  leave  the  scissors  uncrossed
(closed),  the  remedy  for  such  an  oversight  being
three  stitches  taken  on  green  cloth.  ^  ^  This  latter
idea   is  probably  due  to  the  fact  that  open   scissors

^  141,  and  189.     Lee,  C,     Some  Negro  Lore  from  Baltimore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  5  (1892),  p.  110.

2  274.

3  286,  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  33  (1904),  p.  52.

*  144,  and  364.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  28  (1899),  p.  450.
5  267.

^  Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  166.
'  151.

8  352.

9  148.
i"141.

1 1  Leather,  E.  M.,     Folk-Lore  of  Herejordshire,  p.  87.
1233.


Negative  Control-Signs — Taboos         407

represent  the  all-powerful  cross.  Never  Iron  the  hem
(or  tail)  1  of  a  man's  shirt  unless  you  want  him  to  be
quarrelsome.  ^  One  should  never  cut  out  a  garment
on  Friday  or  he  will  never  finish  it.  ^  But  if  the
garment  is  cut  out  on  that  day  you  must  be  sure  to
finish  it  the  same  day  under  penalty  of  never  finishing
it,  or  of  its  owner  never  living  to  wear  it  out.  *

Wash-day.  Washing  clothes  is  another  feminine
occupation  around  which  many  taboos  cluster.  It  is
bad  luck  to  leave  rags  or  clothes  hanging  on  your
fence  or  clothes  line  on  New  Year's  eve,  ^  and  there  is
also  the  English  ^  belief  that  if  you  wash  clothes  that
day  you  "will  wash  one  out  of  your  family."  ^  Wet
clothes  should  never  be  carried  through  a  house*  or
from  one  house  to  another.  ^  If  you  let  your  dress  get
wet  in  front  while  you  are  washing,  it  is  a  sign  that  you
will  marry  a  drunkard.  ^  °  Not  necessarily  feminine
is  the  belief  that  if  you  wash  even  your  finger  tips  in
water  used  by  another  you  are  sure  to  have  a  quarrel
with  that  person.  ^  ^  The  same  belief  is  found  in
Europe  ^  ^  even  to  the  Negro  practice  of  preventing
the  misfortune  by  making  a  crossmark  and  spitting
over    it.  ^  ^     Others    reverse    the    formula    by    saying,

1310.

2  331,

3 188^  and  189.     Ohio  Whites.

^  320,  and  Ohio  Whites.

MOl.

^  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  1,  p.  373.

no6.

8  401.

1 0  238,  and  310.

^^141,  and  352.  Richardson,  C,  Some  Slave  Superstitions,  South-
ern Workman,  vol.  41   (1912),  p.  248.

1 2  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  157.  Henderson,  W.,  Folk-Lore  of  the
Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  84.  Leather,  E.  M.,  Folk-Lore  of  Here-
fordshire, p.  87.

^^57.  Lee,  C,  Some  Negro  Lore  from  Baltimore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5
(1892),  p.  111.


408     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

"wash  together,  friends  forever,"  but  claiming  that  if
two  friends  use  the  same  towel  at  once  their  friendship
will  be  broken.  ^

The  Imp  of  the  Kitchen.  Signs  and  seasonings  sit
side  by  side  in  the  unwritten  Negro  cook  book.  The
proper  technique  demands  that  jellies,  butter,  sauce,
soap,  and  similar  preparations  always  be  stirred  to  the
right.  Otherwise  they  will  not  "make."  ^  The
better-advised  gastronome  insists  that  all  food,  and
especially  cake,  must  be  stirred  clockwise  if  you  want
it  to  turn  out  well.  ^  The  Scottish  version  is  that
the  food  must  be  stirred  in  this  way  to  prevent  "bowel
complaints."  *  Any  tough  old  cock  of  the  roost  may
be  reduced  to  exquisite  tenderness  by  sticking  a  nail
into  him  before  he  is  cooked.  ^  Sopping  out  the
frying  pan  is  a  sign  that  you  are  going  to  run  away,  ^
while  burning  egg-shells  brings  sorrow.  ^  It  is  bad
luck  to  break  bread  in  another  person's  hand  ^ — you
will  "fall  out"  (quarrel)  ^  or  the  younger  person  will
die  first.  ^  °  It  is  also  bad  luck  to  eat  out  of  another
person's  hand.  ^  ^  If  you  let  the  bread  fall  in  taking  it
from  the  stove  it  is  a  sign  of  death,  *  ^  while  turning
a  loaf  of  bread  upside  down  at  any  time  will  bring  bad


1  Williamson,  G.,  Superstitions  from  Louisiana,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  18
(1905),  p.  229.

2  Moore,  R.  A.,  Superstitions  from  Georgia,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  7  (1894),
p.  229.

^  141,  and  112.  Davis,  H.  C,  Negro  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  27  (1914),  p.  246.

*  Gregor,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northeast  of  Scotland,  p.  30.

6  349.

«206.

'  91.  Superstitions  of  Negroes  in  New  Orleans,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5  (1892),
p.  330.

8  273.

9  286,  and  Work,  M.  H.,  Some  Geechee  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,
vol.  34  (1905),  p.  697.

i«315.
1 1 273.
>  2 188.


Negative  Control-Signs — Taboos         409

luck  1  or  cause  ships  to  sink,  ^  the  latter  behef  being
English  in  origin.  ^  She  who  spills  dishwater  will
lose  her  sweetheart, "  while  a  life  of  singleness  awaits
those  careless  ones  who  let  their  liishwater  boil  ^
(you  are  boiling  your  friends  away).  ^  The  eco-
nomical housewife  never  leaves  the  skillet  on  the  fire
after  the  bread  is  done  lest  the  act  should  make  bread
scarce  ^ — though  the  usual  interpretation  is  that  such
procedure  will  burn  up  the  skillet. »  One  should
never  lend  or  borrow  salt  or  pepper  for  fear  of  breaking
friendship;  ^  but  if  a  person  has  already  borrowed  salt,
it  is  extremely  bad  luck  to  return  it.  ^ "  This  belief
is  also  found  in  England.  ^  ^  Hard  times  result  from
sweeping  corn  into  the  fire,  ^  -  and  bad  luck  from
throwing  in  salt  or  bread  ^  ^ — some  say  it  is  a  sin  to
throw  food  of  any  kind  into  the  fire,  ^ "  though  burning
onion  peels  will  bring  good  luck  ^  ^  (drive  off  spirits).

Household  Lore.  The  imp  of  misfortune  flits  from
kitchen  to  bedroom,  to  parlor,  to  porch,  laying  his
fretful  hands  upon  all  who  dare  violate  his  household
decrees.     Sitting  on   a    table   brings    disappointment,


195.

2  Lee,  C,  Some  Negro  Lore  from  Baltimore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5  (1892),
p.  112.

'  Henderson,  W.,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  89.
Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  151.

*  141.  Williamson,  G.,  Superstitions  from  Louisiana,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.   18   (1905),  p.  229.

5 188.

6  331,

^  Southern  Workman,  vol.  28  (1899),  p.  449.

8  286.

^Southern  Workmaji,  vol.  28  (1899),  p.  450.
1 » 286.

1 1  Henderson,    W.,     Folk-Lore    of    the    Northern    Counties    of    England,
p.  89.     Leather,  E.  M.,     Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  86.
1231.
i='75.

'■'91.     Davis,  H.  C,     Negro  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  27  (1914),  p.  248.
16  196.


410     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

some  say,  ^  though  most  Negroes  Insist  that  it  is  a  sign
that  you  want  to  marry  ^  and  cannot  ^ — indicating
that  you  will  be  an  old  maid.  ^  Others  stoutly  main-
tain that  such  behavior  will  make  you  lean,  ^  but  the
English  version  is  that  you  want  to  be  married.  ^
It  is  also  bad  luck  to  sit  on  a  trunk  ^ — "it  brings
disappointment  and  will  draw  all  your  luck  away."  *
Putting  your  hat  on  the  bed  is  an  almost  universal
Negro  sign  of  bad  luck  ^ — "sad  disappointment"  ^  ° —
unless  it  is  placed  with  the  bottom  side  up,  which  re-
moves any  misfortune.  ^  ^  Putting  the  hat  on  a  trunk  ^  ^
or  table  ^  ^  also  brings  bad  luck  or  disappointment  as
does  hanging  your  hat  on  a  chair,  ^  *  or  placing  a  mir-
ror, 1  ^  shoe  or  umbrella  ^  ^  on  the  bed,  or  a  lamp  on
the  foot  of  the  bed.  ^ '  If  a  friend  place  her  umbrella
on  your  bed  you  will  soon  be  enemies.  ^  ^  Some  of
these  signs  may  have  developed  as  disciplinary  factors
making  for  greater  household  orderliness.

Chairs,  Lamps,  and  Clocks.     It  is  bad  luck  to  turn  a
chair   around   on   one   leg;^^   such    action   will   cause


1 141,  and  Parsons,  E.  C,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.
L.  S.,  vol.  16  (1923),  p.  210.
2  280.
3371.
*  61,  and  288.

6  364.

^  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  305.

7  81,  336,  and  356.

8  141.      .

9 179,  288,  and  249.
"112,  and  396.

364,  189,  61,  and  100.
2 189,  and  229.

321.

183.
^6,  335,  and  401.
^  Pitkin,  Helen,     An  Angel  by  Brevet,  p.  70.

386.
8  91.     Superstitions  of  Negroes  in  New  Orleans,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5  (1892),
p.  330.
1  s  139.


Negative  Control-Signs — Taboos         411

some  one  to  die,  ^  turn  some  one  out,  -  cause  all  the
cows  to  go  dry,  ^  or  create  a  fuss  ^ —  the  latter  being
the  European  version.  ^  With  the  Negroes  the  evil
may  be  prevented  by  turning  the  chair  back  the  other
way.  ^  Rocking  an  empty  chair  will  surely  cause
bad  luck,  ^  or  the  death  of  a  member  of  the  family  ^
("you  is  sho'  rockin'  somebody  outer  de  fam'ly").  ^
It  is  bad  luck  to  burn  two  lamps  in  one  room,  ^ "  or  to
have  two  lights  on  one  table.  ^  ^  In  Europe  it  is  having
three  candles  burning  in  the  room  or  on  the  table
which  is  considered  unlucky.  ^  ^  It  is  bad  luck  to  keep
a  clock  in  your  house  if  it  is  not  running,  ^  ^  or  to  keep
two  clocks  running  in  one  room.  ^  *

Edged  Tools  and  Other  Things.  Bring  an  ax  or  hoe
through  the  house  ^  ^  on  your  shoulder,  ^  ^  and  great
calamity  will  befall  the  inmates.  Some  Negroes  will
never  put  a  hoe  or  ax  on  their  shoulder  for  fear  of  bad
luck.  1  ^  Some  say  that  if  you  carry  a  hoe  or  spade
through  the  house  you  will  dig  a  grave  soon.^^  To
avoid  such   bad   luck,   walk  out  backwards  with  the


^63.     Davis,  H.  C,     Negro  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,   J.   A.  F.   L.,
vol.  27  (1914),  p.  246.

2  222.

3  62.

^  141.

^Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  158.     Fogel,  E.  M.,     Beliefs  and  Super-
stitions of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,  p.  89.

6  261.

7 189,  and  243.

8  152.

"341.

i»113,  and  203.
1 1  332.

^^  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  144.
1 3 169.
1*148.

16  32,  358,  and  171.
16  259,  and  81.

I'Steiner,  R.,     Superstitions   and    Beliefs  from    Central   Georgia,    J.   A.
F.  L.,  vol.    12   (1899),   p.   262.
1 8 189,  and  320.


412     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

implement.  ^  It  Is  also  hazardous  to  carry  a  spade
out  of  your  home  by  the  front  door.  ^  The  English
version  is  "terribly  bad  luck"  to  enter  a  house  with  a
shovel  or  any  edged  tool  on  the  shoulder.  ^  Even
the  Shropshire  ^  belief  that  it  is  ill  luck  to  carry  any-
thing on  your  shoulder  in  the  house  is  repeated  by  the
Negroes.  ^  It  is  ill  luck  to  carry  a  bucket  of  water
into  the  house  on  your  head;^  you  should  always
unload  your  head  before  entering.  ^  No  water  must
be  taken  out  of  the  pail  during  the  time  it  is  on  the
head  of  the  person  carrying  it,  this  being  extremely
bad  luck.  ^  It  is  also  ominous  to  raise  a  parasol  in-
doors. ^  The  Heidelberg  version  is,  "Es  gibt  strelt,"  ^ "
but  one  Alabama  Negro  declares  It  is  a  sign  that  a
coffin  Is  soon  to  be  brought  in  for  one  of  the  family.  ^  ^
The  evil  genius  declares  it  ill-starred  to  carry  water
back  to  the  well  In  a  bucket,  ^  ^  and  bad  luck  to  leave  an
ironing  board  up  or  a  trunk  open  at  night.  ^  ^  For
various  other  slips  this  calamitous  basilisk  impartially
deals  his  penalties.  For  whistling  in  the  house,  bad
luck;  ^  *  for  lying  across  two  chairs,  "you  sho'  measurin'


^  141.  Lee,  C,  Some  Negro  Lore  from  Baltimore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5
(1892),  p.  111.

2  173.

3  Leather,  E.  M.,  Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  119.  Fogel,  E.  M.,
Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,  p.  98.  Lean's  Col-
lectanea, vol.  2,  p.  148.

*  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  177.

6  169.

^286,  and  Williamson,  G.,  Superstitions  from  Louisiana,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  18  (1905),  p.  229.

''Alabama  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  33  (1904),  p.  52.  (Ohio
whites.)

8  Brannon,  P.  A.,  Central  Alabama  Negro  Superstitions,  Birmingham
(Ala.)  News,  Jan.  18,  1925,  p.  15.

9  24,  81,  62,  186,  110,  141,  334,  and  224.  Davis,  H.  C,  Negro  Folk-Lore
in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  27  (1914),  p.  246.

^"  Fogel,  E.  M.,     Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,
p.  104.

1 1  229.

12  17.

1^91.
1*391.


Negative  Control-Signs — Taboos         413

yo'  grabe;"  ^  for  sitting  on  an  ironing  board,  failure  to
secure  a  mate,  the  same  penalty  being  imposed  for
turning  over  the  chair  in  which  you  are  sitting;  ^
for  sitting  back  to  back  with  another  person,  the  death
of  the  younger;  for  eating  while  lying  down,  ^  or
for  singing  in  the  bed,  ^  bad  luck;  and  for  putting  eggs
in  your  father's  and  mother's  bed,  "dey  will  quarrel."  ^
To  avoid  broken  fortune  one  should  always  leave  the
house  by  the  same  door  by  which  he  entered  ^ —
possibly  a  half-memory  of  the  time  when  houses  had
only  one  door.  The  superstition,  however,  is  appar-
ently of  European  origin,  ^  as  its  rather  widespread
prevalence  would  lead  us  to  suspect.

The  Trail  to  a  Whipping.  It  is  a  sign  of  trouble  to
mark  on  the  back  of  a  chimney.  ^  Some  say  that
your  back  will  be  marked  in  the  same  way  by  whip-
ping; ^  one  old  slave  Negro  says  this  applies  to  marking
on  any  parts  of  the  house  and  adds  that  "in  slavery
times"  (in  a  tone  of  reproach  as  regards  the  modern
generation)  the  mothers  would  in  actuality  whip  their
children  for  doing  anything  of  that  sort.  ^ "  Another
informant  adds  that  if  you  write  on  the  back  of  a
dish  some  one  in  your  family  will  die.  ^  ^

1243.

2357.

^Southern  Workman,  vol.  24  (1895),  p.  78,  and  155.     Informant  141.

«243.

'^341.

*45,  81,  189,  141,  and  341.  Also  Hawkins,  J.,  An  Old  Mauma's
Folk-Lore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  9  (1896),  p.  131.  Richardson,  C,  Some  Slave
Superstitions,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  41  (1912),  p.  247.

'  Fogel,  E.  M.,  Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,
p.  364.     Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  93.

*  184.     Alabama  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  33  (1904),  p.  52.

937.
i«286
1163.


414     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Coffee-drinking  and  Mirrors.  The  inexorable  code
of  spirit-etiquette  decrees  that  he  who  drinks  all  the
coflfee  from  his  cup  will  cry  later.  ^  Perhaps  this  may
be  analagous  to  the  English  practice  of  leaving  the
last  bit  of  food  for  the  fairies,  though  another  inform-
ant claims  that  if  you  leave  water  in  a  cup  after
drinking,  another  person  can  look  into  the  cup  and  read
all  of  your  secrets.  ^  Fortune  smiles  upon  the  wise
person  who  puts  the  sugar  in  the  cup  before  he  pours
the  coffee  or  tea,  but  frowns  upon  those  who  ignore
this  decree.  ^  Such  ruinous  action  will  drown  some
one,  or,  as  some  say,  "drown  the  miller."  ^  It  is  bad
luck  for  two  or  more  persons  to  look  into  a  mirror  at  the
same  time;  ^  one  (the  youngest)  ^  will  die,  ^  or  they  will
see  a  ghost.  ^  The  European  version  is  that  one  will
be  disappointed.  ^  A  sick  person  should  never  look
into  a  mirror  1  °  lest  he  die;  ^  ^  and  there  is  also  the
English  ^  2  idea  that  it  is  unlucky  to  place  a  mirror  in
water.  ^  ^  The  Negroes  also  count  it  unlucky  to  look
into  a  mirror  after  sundown.  ^  ^

Peanuts  and  Policemen.  Relating  to  the  household,
and,  hence,  in  the  main  of  feminine  concern,  is  the
idea  that  peanut  hulls  should  not  be  thrown  around  the


1  91,  and  Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  152.

2  286,  and  Work,  M.  H.,     Some  Geechee  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,
vol.  35  (1905),  p.  634.

3  141.

*  Southern  Workman,  vol.  28  (1899),  p.  450.

^286,  and  Work,  M.  H.,     Some  Geechee  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,
vol.  34  (1905),  p.  96.
6  138.
^  91,  and  Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  172.

8  91.

^  Fogel,E.  M.,    Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,  p.  S5.

10  341.

1 1  267.

12  Leather,  E.  M.,     Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  87.
1^91.

i<331.


Negative  Control-Signs — Taboos         415

doorstep  for  fear  of  bad  luck  ^  in  the  shape  of  a  fuss  ^
or  a  call  from  the  policeman.  ^  Necessarily  modern
and  of  American  origin  is  the  application  of  the  belief
in  a  new  setting,  i.e.,  peanuts  dropped  on  the  floor  of
an  automobile  while  you  are  riding  will  cause  it  to
break  down.  *  It  is  also  considered  a  bad  omen  for
one  to  come  indoors  eating  peanuts.  ^

Dangerous  Carpentry.  If  a  new  window  is  cut  in  an
old  house  some  member  of  the  family  will  die  ^  or,
as  one  informant  suggests,  you  will  soon  move  out  ^
(the  European  version  is  death).  ^  This  is  especially
true  if  you  saw  out  the  new  window  and  let  the  sawed
boards  fall  inside  the  house,  ^  although  the  bad  luck
may  be  turned  aside  by  throwing  your  apron  through
the  window  and  jumping  out  after  it.  ^  ^  This  same
idea  of  death  also  applies  to  cutting  a  new  door  in  the
house,  1 1  especially  if  the  old  doorway  is  closed  up.  ^  ^
In  fact,  adding  any  new  part  to  an  old  house  ^  ^  (or
garden)  ^  *  will  cause  death,  it  being  considered  "a
sin"  to  use  new  lumber  on  old  dwellings.  ^  ^  If  you
move  into  an  unfinished  house,  some  one  of  the  family
will  become  ill  or  die  before  the  year  is  out.  ^  ^     Pos-


129.

279,  and  341.

'  141,  and  Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  223.

^341.

5  224.

6  112,'  148,  and  189.     Southern  Workynan,  vol.  24  (1895),  p.  78.

7  341.

^  Fogel,  E.  M.,   Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,  p.  117.
"61.

10  341.

1 1  288.

12  122.

13  381.
1^331.

1^91.     Davis,  H.  C,     Negro  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.  F.   L.,
vol.  27  (1914),  p.  248.
16  100,  and  331.


416     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

sibly  the  original  thought  behind  these  behefs  was  that
the  wandering  soul  of  one  of  the  inmates  might  become
confused  by  the  alterations  and  fail  to  find  its  way  back
to  the  body,  thus  causing  death.

The  Rules  of  Sleep.  Again,  this  ubiquitous  house-
hold spirit  prescribes  an  elaborate  bedroom  code.
One  should  never  sleep  with  his  head  to  the  foot  of  the
bed  unless  he  wants  shortly  to  be  carried  from  the
house  feet  foremost,  ^  Only  the  foolish  sleep  "cross-
wise of  the  world"  (north  and  south),  since  bad  luck  is
the  inevitable  result  of  such  action,  ^  a  belief  directly
opposed  to  the  European  idea  that  such  is  lucky. '
You  should  never  get  out  of  bed  backwards  lest  you
shorten  your  days,  *  and  a  person  who  is  unduly  cross
is  liable  to  be  greeted  with,  "You  sho'  done  got  up  on
de  wrong  side  er  baid  dis  mawnin',''  ^  a  saying  of
European  origin.  ^  With  the  Negro,  the  left  side  Is
the  "wrong  side;"  get  up  from  the  right  side  for  good
luck.  ^  If  you  sleep  in  the  moonlight  you  will  go
crazy  ^ — another  belief  from  Scotland;  ^  while  if  you  go
to  bgd  hungry  you  sin.  ^  °  Cut  flowers  should  never
be  kept  in  a  bedroom  at  night;  they  will  cause  sickness
and  death,  ^  ^  and  a  sick  person  whose  bed  is  moved,  ^  ^
or  who  is  moved  from  one  house  to  another,  ^  ^  will


1  9L     Williamson,  G.,    Superstitions  Jrom  Louisiana,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  18
(1905),  p.  229.

2  267,  and  286.

^  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  21.
*  280.

6  112.

'Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  21.

7  66,  and  175.

8  33.

^  Gregor,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northeast  of  Scotland,  p.  152.
K'341.

11276.     (Ohio  whites).

1 2 150.     (Possibly  because  he  is  separated  from  his  spirit).
1361.


Negative  Control-Signs — Taboos         417

die  soon.  One  should  never  get  up  late  on  Monday
morning,  under  penalty  of  being  late   all   the   week.  ^

Signs  at  Sunrise.  In  some  cases  special  attention  is
paid  to  actions  upon  rising,  especially  those  before
breakfast  or  sunrise.  If  you  drink  water  before
breakfast  you  will  have  a  chill  ^  and  if  you  sing  before
breakfast  you  will  cry  before  supper,  ^  as  indicated
by  the  following  Negro  folk-rhyme:

Doan'  sing  befo'  breakfast,
Doan'  sing  'fore  you  eat,
Or  you'll  cry  befo'  midnight,
You'll  cry  'fore  you  sleep.  ^

This  is  the  characteristic  English  version,  ^  and  the
Negro  idea  that  he  who  gets  up  merry  in  the  morning
will  soon  be  angry  ^  is  at  least  partially  reproduced  in
the  European  saying,  "Laugh  before  breakfast,  you'll
cry  before  supper."  ^  Other  Negroes  claim  that  singing
before  sunrise  means  a  whipping  before  night, »  or
that  such  indiscretions  will  surely  cause  the  hawks
to  catch  your  chickens.  ^

Miscellaneous  Domestic  Beliefs.  Still  clustering
around  the  household  is  the  idea  that  it  is  bad  luck  to
pass  a  person  on  the  steps,  ^ "  a  view  decidedly  English  in

1219.

2  168.

3  42,  141,  and  189.  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,
M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  16  (1923),  p.  210.

*57.     Talley,  T.  W.,     Negro  Folk  Rhymes,  p.  186.
'  Henderson,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  85.
«246.

''Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  1,  p.  491.
8 183.
957.
1093,  and  141.


27


418     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

origin.  ^  Walking  under  a  ladder  is  bad  luck,  ^  re-
sulting in  sickness  in  the  family  ^ — the  English  penalty
being  non-marriage.  ^  The  Negro,  however,  averts
this  bad  luck  by  burying  a  penny  beneath  the  ladder  *
—a  possible  remnant  of  former  sacrifice  to  the  ill-luck
spirit.  If  you  shake  hands  with  some  one  through  a
window  you  will  never  see  him  again,  ^  or  across  a
fence,  bad  luck,  ^  or  death.  ^  Sitting  in  a  window
or  spitting  out  of  the  window  always  brings  trouble.  ^
One  should  never  stand  a  h(^e  by  the  house  he  is  living
In  ^ "  lest  It  cause  a  death  in  the  family,  ^  ^  and  If  a
person  leaves  a  hoe  standing  up  in  the  field,  when  he
stops  hoeing  In  the  evening,  he  will  not  sleep  a  wink
that  night.  ^  ^  Step  across  a  person's  feet  and  he  will  not
grow  any  more  unless  you  step  back,  ^  ^  though  some
extremists  go  so  far  as  to  say  that  stepping  over  a
person's  leg  will  cause  that  member  to  turn  to  a  stick
of  wood.  ^  ^  Shaving  at  night  is  unlucky,  since  they
shave  you  at  night  when  you  die,  ^  ^  while  a  family
reunion  means  the  death  of  some  one  in  the  family.  ^  ^


1  Leather,  E.  M.,  Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  S7.  Hunt,  R.,  Popular
Romances  of  the  West  of  England,  p.  432.     Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  169.

2  19L
'17L

*  Brand,  J.,  Popular  Antiquities  of  Great  Britain,  vol.  2,  p.  167.  Lean's
Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  162.

*33.

6  341.

^  141.  Work,  M.  H.,  So7ne  Geechee  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.
34  (1905),  p.  697.

8  341.

9  66.

1 » 250.
1 1 274.
12 102.

i»  155,  189,  288,  357,  and  341.

i<  141,  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  28  (1899),  p.  449.
iB^Qj-k,   M.  H.,     Some  Geechee  Folk-Lore,  Southern    Workman,  vol.   31
(1905),  p.  696.
1 « 63.


Negative  Control-Signs — Taboos         419

Death  in  the  family  also  results  from  keeping  a  tomb-
stone in  the  house,  ^  and  a  whipping,  from  bringing  a
switch  home.  -

Cattle  and  Poultry.  Milking  is  another  item  generally
connected  with  the  mistress  of  the  house  so  far  as  the
Negroes  are  concerned.  A  cow  milked  on  the  ground
will  soon  go  dry,  ^  the  same  misfortune  resulting  when
milk  is  thrown  into  the  fire,  *  when  a  fork  is  placed  in
milk  ^  (some  say  this  will  make  the  cow  kick)  ^  or  but-
ter, ^  or  when  a  knife  is  put  in  milk.  *  Again  it  is
the  housewife  who  most  commonly  looks  out  for  the
poultry.  If  one  sets  a  hen  in  May  all  the  little  chickens
will  die;  ^  the  Scottish  expression  is,  "May  chickens
are  aye  cheepin',''  the  taboo  being  the  same.  ^ "  The
Negroes  also  claim  that  eggs  should  never  be  taken
from  the  nest  at  night.  '  '

Festa^s  Creed.  Fire-tending  has  always  been  the
work  of  woman  with  the  partial  exception  of  those
favored  communities  where  the  grate  has  been  sup-
planted by  the  furnace.  Needless  to  say,  with  the
majority  of  the  Negroes  a  dusky  Vesta  still  presides

4  372.

^  298,  and  373.

^286.  Williamson,  G.,  Superstitions  from  Louisiana,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.
18  (1905),  p.  229.

'Hawkins,  J.,  An  Old  Mauma's  Folk-Lore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  9  (1896),
p.  131.

8 102,  and  318.

9339.

10  127,  233,  239,  and  331.

11  286,  and  Soiithern  Workman,  vol.  33  (1904),  p.  52.

1 2  288.

^ '  Gregor,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northeast  of  Scotland,  p.  142.
1*53.


420     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

over  this  source  of  light  and  heat,  and  warms  to  life
many  hazy  memories  in  this  most  conservative  of  all
the  household  spots.  The  ignorant  one  turns  a  stick
of  wood  around  in  a  fireplace  after  it  has  started  burn-
ing and  suffers  bad  luck.  ^  The  wise  person,  on  the
other  hand,  averts  this  mishap  by  spitting  on  the  end
of  the  stick  of  wood  ^  or  by  throwing  salt  upon  it.  ^
All  informed  people  know  that  it  is  bad  luck  for
children  to  play  in  the  fire,  ^  there  being  the  old  Eu-
ropean ^  result  of  wetting  the  bed,  ^  and  only  the  most
foolish  mother  will  whip  a  child  who  burns  another,
lest  the  burnt  child  die.  ^  It  is  bad  luck  to  carry  fire
to  fire,  and  if  one  is  forced  to  carry  fire  from  one  room
to  another  he  should  be  sure  to  spit  upon  the  fire.  »
In  Herefordshire  it  is  also  considered  unlucky  to  carry
fire  from  room  to  room.  ^  Sitting  on  a  log  that  is
burning  will  give  your  mother  a  weak  back,  ^  °  while
sitting  with  your  back  to  the  fire  will  result  in  your
own  demise.  ^  ^  A  person  must  exercise  discretion  as
to  the  kind  of  wood  he  uses  in  his  fireplace.  As  a
general  rule  wood  that  pops  or  crackles  loudly  in
burning  should  not  be  used.  Sassafras  wood  pops  and
sputters,  and  burning  it  in  the  house  will  surely  cause
the   death   of   some   one   present.  ^  -     One   informant,


1  73,  81,  and  40L

2 102.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  24  (1895),  p.  78.

3  141.

^334.

*  Fogel,  E.  M.,     Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,
p.  359.

«112.

^  141,  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  28  (1899),  p.  450.

*  112.     Lee,  C,     Some  Negro  Lore  from  Baltimore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5
(1892),  p.  110.

^  Leather,  E.  M.,     Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  86.
1 « 280.
1 '  267.

12  112,  148,  and  342.     Thanet,  Octave,      Folk-Lore  in  Arkansas,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  5  (1894),  p.  124.


Negative  Control-Signs — Taboos         421

however,  urges  that  this  taboo  is  due  only  to  fear  of
the  sparks  popping  out  on  the  floor  and  burning  the
house.  The  same  taboo  appHes  to  persimmon  wood
(if  you  throw  it  in  a  man's  fireplace  he  will  soon  move
away),  ^  dogwood  (strife),  sweet-gum,  poplar  ("jes'
ez  de  wood  pops  so  will  ole  Marster  pop  his  whip  on
yo'  back"),  2  or  ash.  ^  Some  Negroes  will  not  burn
the  wood  of  a  tree  that  has  been  struck  by  lightning.  *
On  the  Gold  Coast  of  Africa  no  one  would  think  of
putting  out  a  fire  started  by  lightning  or  of  helping  a
victim  struck  by  it.  ^  A  passing  acquaintance  in
Asheville  recently  informed  me  that  the  North
Carolina  Negroes  also  consider  it  unlucky  to  burn
apple  wood.

Tree  Planting.  There  are  certain  other  wood-taboos,
not  so  closely  connected  with  the  household  and  hence
not  so  specifically  feminine  in  association,  which
center  mainly  around  tree  planting.  If  you  plant  a
cedar  tree,  for  instance,  and  it  lives,  you  (or  some  one
in  the  family)  ^  will  die  ^  (when  the  tree  is  large  enough
to  shade  a  grave,  ^  or,  if  planted  on  a  grave,  when  it  is
large  enough  to  shade  you).  ^  It  is  even  considered
bad   luck  to  bring  cedar  into  the  house;  ^  °  the  cedar

1141.

^  91.     Work,  M.  H.,     Some  Geechee  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  35
<1905),  p.  635.
3  390.

*  141.  See  also,  Price,  S.  F.,  Kentucky  Folk-Lore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  14
(1901),  p.  33.  Work,  M.  H.,  Some  Geechee  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workmmi,
vol.  35  (1905),  p.  635.

^  Cardinal,  A.  W.,  Natives  of  the  Northern  Territories  of  the  Gold  Coast,
pp.  26-27.

«286.  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  €.,  M.  A.  F.
L.  S.,  vol.  16  (1923),  p.  210.

^288.

*  141.  Williamson,  G.,  Superstitions  from  Louisiana,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.
18  (1905),  p.  229.

»341.


422     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

probably  deriving  its  fetishistic  atmosphere  from  the
fact  that  everywhere  in  the  South  it  is  used  as  a
favorite  tree  for  graveyards,  possibly  because  it  is  an
evergreen  and  hence  symbolic  of  immortality.  On
the  Sea  Islands  it  is  believed  that  if  you  plant  an  orange
tree  you  will  die  the  first  year  that  it  bears,  ^  the  same
applying  in  other  localities  to  a  walnut  tree,  ^  to  a
willow  planted  before  your  door,  ^  or  to  fruit  trees  in
general.  ■»

Marriage.  Besides  these  various  superstitions  more
or  less  closely  connected  with  the  house  and  household
duties,  there  are  other  hoary  memories  which  compan-
ion the  woman  of  the  house.  One  of  the  first  to  strike
our  attention  is  the  English  or  Scottish  ^  belief  that
if  you  serve  as  a  bridesmaid  three  times  you  will  never
marry.  ^  If  you  cry  when  some  one  in  your  family
marries  it  is  bad  luck.  ^  It  is  bad  luck  to  postpone
a  wedding  **  or  for  a  newly  married  couple  to  ride  on  a
train  which  carries  a  corpse.  ^  If  you  let  any  one
take  oif  your  ring  you  will  break  friendship;^"  in
Scotland  it  is  considered  ominous  ever  to  part  with  the
wedding  ring.  ^  ^  The  Negroes  claim  that  if  you  wear
any  one's  wedding  ring  you  will  never  marry,  ^  ^  while
wearing  a  ring  on  your  middle  finger  will  cause  some


1  Parsons,  E.  C,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.
16  (1923),  p.  210.

2  100.

3  112,  and  141.     Work,  M.  H.,     Some  Geechee  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Work-
man, vol.  35  (1905),  p.  635.

n08.

^  Gregor,   W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northeast   of   Scotland,    p.   92.     Lean's
Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  81.

«95.

'  356.

«189.

9  386.
1 «  188.

'  1  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  185.
'  2  396.


Negative  Control-Signs — Taboos         423

one  to  make  you  ashamed  before  your  wedding  is
over.  1  If  you  kiss  a  boy  before  you  marry,  you  will
never  care  very  much  for  him,  ^  while  if  you  make  a
mistake  and  kiss  a  boy  on  the  nose  it  is  a  sign  that  he
will  never  be  your  husband.  ^  A  boy  should  never
give  a  girl  a  letter  in  her  left  hand;  it  will  break  their
friendship.  "  If  you  burn  up  your  letters  you  will
never  marry  the  writer  ^ — you  will  break  up  friendship
and  "burn  up  yo'  love,"  "  though  one  informant  recom-
mends this  process  as  a  way  of  "gettin'  an  old  lover
off  yo'  min'."  ^  It  is  also  said  in  marrying,  "Change
the  name  and  not  the  letter,  you  marry  for  worse
and  not  for  better,"  ^  undoubtedly  a  European  belief
since  it  is  found  among  the  whites  of  Ohio  ^  and
Illinois.  10

Special  Feminine  Taboos.  During  certain  physiolog-
ical periods  there  are  special  taboos  applying  to
women.  Should  a  woman  step  over  melon  vines
during  menstruation  they  will  bear  no  fruit,  ^  ^  The
Negro  women  of  Pulaski  County,  Va.,  refuse  to
handle  food  at  this  time,  under  the  assumption  that
they  would  spoil  the  cooking.  If  they  assisted  in
making  cucumber  pickle  the  pickles  would  get  soft;
likewise  cake-filling  would  refuse  to  harden.  Wine
would  never  become  clear  if  handled  at  this  time,  no
matter  how  often  it  was  "wracked  off."     Cider  would


1402.

291.     Alabama  Folk-Lore,   Southern   Workman,  vol.  33    (1904),   p.  52.

3371.

MOO.
6  95

« 189,  and  341.

« 63,  405,  and  Ohio  Whites.

"295.
i"86.

1'  141,  and  Davis,  H.  C,     Negro  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.  F.  L.
vol.  27  (1914),  p.  246.


424     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

not  change  into  vinegar  because  the  "mother  of  vine-
gar" is  killed.  ^  The  same  general  idea  is  found  in
Europe,  ^  although  among  the  TImne  people  of  Africa
a  menstruous  woman  is  forced  to  observe  certain
taboos,  among  which  are  cooking  for  her  husband  or
planting  anything.  ^

Turning  Back.  The  large  number  of  typically  fem-
inine beliefs  thus  far  cited  show  clearly  the  influence
of  the  woman  In  the  passing  on  of  current  super-
stitions. For  the  balance  of  the  discussion  I  shall  not
make  the  masculine-feminine  distinction  so  absolute,
but  merely  Indicate  the  general  trend  as  we  go  along.
Whether  these  remaining  superstitions  pertain  spe-
cifically to  womanly  aifairs  or  not,  it  has  been  my
observation  as  a  collector  that  the  women  believe  in
them  and  observe  them  far  more  assiduously  than  do
the  men.  One  very  common  assumption  Is  that  it  is
bad  luck  to  turn  back  (at  the  crossroads)  *  after  you
have  started  anywhere,  without  first  making  a  cross-
mark  in  the  road  ^  and  spitting  In  it  ^  (moving  back-
wards all  the  way).  ^  Others  evade  the  bad  luck  by
turning  back  three  times  ;^  or  by  going  back  into  the
house  and  saying  something,  ^  or  by  sitting  down  for  a
time  before  going  out  again.  '  o     One  European  mode  is


1  59.

^  Fogel,  E.  M.,  Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,
PP.350-5L

'  Thomas,  N.  W.,     Anthrop.  Rept.  on  Sierra  Leone,  pt.  1,  p.  76.
4  331,

5 106,"  and  224.

6  141,  306,  234,  and  259.  Bergen,  F.  D.,  Current  Superstitions,  M.  A.
F.  L.  S.,  vol.  iv  (1896),  p.  134.  Work,  M.  H.,  Some  Geechee  Folk-lore,
Southern  Workman,  vol.  34  (1905),  p.  69.5.

'  Smiley,  P.,  Folk -Lore  from  Va.,  S.  C,  Ga.,  Ala.,  and  Fla.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  32  (1919),  p.  381.

»  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  \F.  L.  S.,  vol.
16  (1923),  p.  210.

9  188.
'"362.


Negative  Control-Signs — Taboos         425

to  return  through  another  door  if  you  must  come
back  into  the  house  again.  ^  Never  look  back  when
you  are  starting  anywhere  "  'less  you  jes'  lookin'  fer
trubbr."  2

Hands  Behind  Head.  Some  of  these  taboos  are
apparently  meaningless,  and  doubtless  their  origin
dates  back  to  some  similar  African  beliefs  which  have
thus  far  not  come  to  my  attention.  Too  widespread
to  be  a  mere  matter  of  chance,  and  apparently  lacking
a  European  parallel,  is  the  idea  that  locking  your
hands  back  of  your  head  (or  walking  with  them  clasped
behind  your  back)  ^  has  drastic  consequences — failure
to  marry,  4  bad  luck  ^  (to  your  parents),^  death,  ^
or  "piling  up  trouble."  ^  "At  Charleston,  S.  C,  old
people  would  say  to  a  child  who  clasped  his  hands  be-
behind  his  neck,  'You  mournin'  your  mother  away!'
or  'yer  mammy  is  goin'  to  die'."  ^  Other  informants
take  the  view  that  you  are  praying  for  your  mother
to  die  ^ "  or  cursing  your  parents.  ^  ^

Walking  Backwards.  Somewhat  akin  to  this  belief,
and  perhaps  even  more  prevalent,  is  the  notion  that  if
you  walk  backwards  you  are  cursing  your  parents  ^  ^
(or  your  mother,  ^  ^  or  grandmother).  ^  *     So  strong  was


1  Fogel,  E.  M.,     Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,
p.  364.

2  229.
^83.

*  Ibid.

5 173,  286,  and  320.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  28  (1899),  p.  450.

6  110.

7  372.

*  Hardv,  Sarah  M.,     Negro  Superstitions,  Lippincott's  Monthly  Magazine,
vol.  xlviii  (1891),  p.  739.

9  Smilev,  P.,     Folk-Lore  from.  Va.,  S.  C,  Ga.  Ala.,  and  Fla.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  32  (1919),  p.  378.
1 » 352.

1 1  308.

1 2  67,  54,  32,  233,  148,  and  341.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  33  (1904),  p.  52.
» 3  324,  and  396.     Smilev,  P.,     Folk-Lore  from  Va.,  S.  C,  Ga.,  Ala.,  and  Fla.,

J.  A.  F.L.,  vol.  32  (1919),  pp.  378-79.
1*331.


426      Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

this  belief  in  slavery  times  that  one  old  slave  tells  me
how  the  mothers  would  snatch  up  their  children  and
whip  them  for  walking  backwards.  ^  Others  "have
forgotten  the  sign"  but  taboo  the  act  as  bringing  bad
luck,  -  while  still  others  regard  it  as  a  sign  of  death  ^
("you  are  measuring  the  length  of  your  grave").  *
One  old  conjure-doctor,  with  the  usual  religiosity  of  his
class,  offers  as  his  explanation  the  fact  that  Christ
commanded  all  people  to  go  forward,  hence  making  it
wrong  to  go  backwards,  ^  but  the  unusual  spread  of
the  belief  and  the  special  variants  applying  to  the
mother,  the  parent  especially  loved  by  the  African
child,  makes  an  African  origin  appear  more  likely.
It  is   also  considered   bad   luck    to    ride    backwards.  ^

Teeth-sucking.  Closely  tied  up  with  these  two  be-
liefs is  the  conviction  that  sucking  your  teeth  at  a
person  (the  upper  teeth  brought  against  the  lower
lip  and  sucked)  is  a  sign  of  disrespect,  ^  and  this  too  is
an  act  for  which  the  old  slaves  used  to  whip  their
children.  ^  They  say  in  South  Carolina  that  it  is
wrong  because  the  devil  sucks  his  teeth  ^  whenever  he
loses  a  soul,  and  would  follow  you  to  heaven's  gate.  ^ "
In  this  case,  however,  the  African  origin  is  not  so
conjectural,  for  the  Timne-speaking  people  regard
sucking  the  teeth  at  a  person  as  an  insult  which  no


1  84.

2 173,  and  216.

3  102.

*  352.

*91.

ei3.

'84,  and  91.

8  141.

9  Parsons,  E.  C,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.
16  (1923),  p.  57.

1"  Smiley,  P.,     Folk-Lore  from  Va.,  S.  C,  Ga.,  Ala.,  and  Fla.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  32  (f919),  pp.  378-79.


Negative  Control-Signs — Taboos  427

lad  should  allow  to  go  unpunished.  ^  Probably  in
time  the  African  origin  of  clasping  the  hands  behind
the  head  and  walking  backwards  will  be  noted  as  well.

Shoe-lore.  Putting  the  left  shoe  (or  stocking)  -
on  before  the  right  will  bring  bad  luck,  ^  a  dogma
which  has  its  exact  English  parallel,  *  and  which  applies
among  the  Negroes  to  taking  off  the  shoes  as  well.  ^
One  should  never  put  his  shoes  higher  than  his  head;  ^
it  keeps  his  luck  away,  ^  or  means  that  he  will
never  wear  them  again.  ^  One  old  slave  disagrees,
and  claims  good  luck  for  elevated  shoes.  ^  However,
putting  your  shoes  under  your  bed  will  cause  them  to
hurt  your  feet  ^ "  or  will  give  you  bad  luck  in  general.  *  ^
The  unnatural  practice  of  walking  around  with  one
shoe  off  means  bad  luck,  ^  ^  a  hard  time  in  life,  ^  ^
sickness,  ^  *  a  whipping,  ^  *  or  the  measuring  of  your
mother's  grave.  ^  ^  Of  apparent  European  origin  is
the  belief  that  if  a  young  man  gives  his  sweetheart  a
pair  of  shoes  she  will  walk  away  from  him,  ^  ^  though

'  Cronise  and  Ward,     Cunnie  Rabbit,    Mr.  Spider   and  the   Other  Beef,
pp.  222-23,  294.

2  141.

*91,  and  392.     Waring,  M.  A.,      Negro  Superstitions  in  South  Carolina,
J.A.F.  L.,  vol.  8  (1895),  p.  252.

*  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  168.     Gregor,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  North-
east of  Scotland,  p.  31.

^62.

*  Lee,  C,     Some  Negro  Lore  from  Baltimore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5  (1892),
p.  110.

M41.

8  349  .

9  286.
1 » 356.
11141,  and  152.

1 2  286.

13  Work,  M.  H.,  Some  Geechee  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  34
(1905),  p.  696.

1M84,  and  331.

1^148.

1  *  57,  and  Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  168.

1 '  Ibid.,  and  p.  54.

i


428      Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

in  Europe  the  girl  is  supposed  to  be  the  giver.  ^  If  you
wear  unmatched  shoes  you  will  walk  in  trouble,  ^
while  if  you  tie  one  shoe  before  you  get  the  other  one
on,  your  feet  will  get  sore.  ^  Some  say  that  when  you
once  lace  one  shoe  before  putting  the  other  on  "you
lacin'    de   debbil    in    hit." "

The  Elusive  Fish.  Various  fishing  taboos  are  In
evidence,  and  under  present  day  conditions  it  is  the
women  fully  as  often  as  the  men  who  are  the  anglers.
One  well  rooted  notion  is  that  stepping  over  a  fishing-
pole  destroys  luck,  ^  a  belief  having  a  Scottish  parallel,  ^
though  the  Negro  goes  a  step  further  and  prevents  the
bad  luck  by  stepping  backwards  over  the  pole.  ^
Perhaps  it  is  the  European  idea  that  if  you  swear  you
will  catch  no  fish  ^  which  is  at  the  basis  of  the  Negro
verse:

Wen  you  don't  speak  sof

Yo'  baits  comes  off;

An'  de  fish  jes  swim  away,

reflecting  an  old  antebellum  superstition.  ^

Donfs  for  the  Farmer.  Besides  the  beliefs  re-
lating to  planting  in  the  light  or  dark  of  the  moon,
there  are  other  opinions  having  to  do  with  planting
and  with  plants  in  general.  It  is  bad  luck  to  plant
only  half  a  row  or  to  skip  a  row,  ^ "  the  usual  penalty

1  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  80.

2  373.

=>  175,'  and  267.
M89.
6  384.

^Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  143.

^  286,  and  Davis,  H.  C,  Negro  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  27  (1914),  p.  246.

*  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  138.
8  Talley,  T.  W.,     Negro  Folk  Rhymes,  p.  214.
1 « 288.


Negative  Control-Signs — Taboos  429

being  the  English  ^  one  of  a  death  of  a  member  of  the
family,  ^  which  may  be  prevented,  however,  by  going
back  and  finishing  the  row.  ^  "If  peas,  watermelons,
or  cucumbers  are  planted  on  'bloom  day,'  the  plant
will  have  all  blooms  and  no  fruit." "  The  Negro
belief  that  transplanting  parsley  will  cause  a  death  in
the  family  ^  (or  the  death  of  one's  children)  ^  is  of
European  origin;^  the  Greeks  strewed  parsley  on  the
graves  of  the  dead,  and,  in  Devonshire,  transplanting
parsley  is  a  serious  offense  against  the  guardian  genius
who  presides  over  parsley-beds. «  Pointing  your  finger
at  growing  fruit  will  cause  it  to  drop  from  the  bough, »
while  burning  up  the  cobs  from  which  you  shell  your
seed  corn  will  cause  the  sun  to  burn  up  the  growing
corn.  Seed  corn  is  always  shelled  in  the  field  and  the
cobs  left  on  the  ground  or  buried.  ^  °  Somewhat
analagous  is  the  butter  bean  belief.  Butter  bean  hulls
are  always  thrown  in  the  road.  "These  Negro  people
nearly  always  have  a  garden,  and  on  the  fence  of  the
garden  always  raise  butter  beans.  The  hulls  of  the
shelled  beans  (lima  beans)  are  never  burned  because  if
such  were  the  case  the  crop  of  the  Negro  would  not
be  fruitful.  They  are  never  fed  to  the  cows  or  the
hogs  who  would  eat  them  with  rare  relish,  because  if
this  is  done  while  the  next  year's  plants  are  growing
the  stock  will  get  into  the  garden  and  eat  up  the  vines
while  still  bearing.     They  are  never  thrown  into  the

^  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  570.

2  224,  and  286.     Alabama  Folk-Lore,  Southern   Workman,  vol.  33  (1904),
p.  52.

3  102.
*  Ibid.
M05.

« Williamson,  G.,     Superstitions  from  Louisiana,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  18  (1905),
p.  230.

'  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  1,  p.  496.
8  Dyer,  T.  F.  T.,     English  Folk-Lore,  p.  3.
9 112,  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  16.
1 0  213,  and  358.


430     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

garbage  because  they  must  be  thrown  into  the  road  In
order  that  next  year's  vines  will  produce.  In  some
localities  this  idea  of  reproduction  extends  to  the
field  crop,  in  others  to  cattle,  and  in  still  others,  even
more  closely  personal,  to  the  family  of  the  persons
themselves,  many  believing  that  the  wife  would  not
bear   children   if  this   were   not   done."  ^

The  Borrowed  Hat.  We  have  already  mentioned  the
fact  that  putting  on  another  person's  hat  will  give  one
the  headache  -  unless  he  first  blows  into  the  hat.  ^
Doubtless  we  here  have  a  reflection  of  the  fear  that
harm  may  result  from  powder  put  on  the  hatband.
If  a  person  borrows  a  hat  from  a  diseased  person  and
sweats  around  the  hatband  when  he  Is  wearing  it,  he
will  take  that  disease.  *  Putting  two  hats  on  your
head  at  once  will  bring  you  a  whipping  ^  (or  a  "double
whipping").  ^  It  is  also  bad  luck  to  wear  your  hat
wrongside  out  or  to  put  your  coat  over  your  head.  ^

Money  and  Trade.  Negroes  think  that  pennies  and
two-dollar  bills  are  unlucky,  ^  though  with  the  latter
the  bad  luck  may  be  averted  by  tearing  off  one  corner
of  the  bill.  3  Some  Negroes,  however,  disagree  with
this,  saying  that  a  two-dollar  bill  carried  in  the  pocket-
book  will  always  bring  good  luck.  ^  °  Somewhat  akin
to   the   London    "handsel"    (where   trades-people   kiss


^  Brannon,    P.    A.,     Central   Alabama   Negro    Superstitions,   Birmingham
(Ala.)  News,  Jan.  18,  1925,  p.  15.
2  357  _

3 188^  and  208.

*91,   and  Steiner,    R.,     Superstitions   and  Beliefs  from   Central  Georgia,
J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  12  (1899),  p.  267.
6  148,  and  317.

®  141,  and  Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  166.
-<  273.

8  315,  and  373.
"207.
*»141,  ixnd  Alabama  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  33  (1904),  p.  52.


Negative  Control-Signs — Taboos  431

and  spit  upon  the  first  money  they  receive  in  a  morning,
putting  it  aside  in  a  pocket  by  itself)  ^  is  the  refusal
of  some  Negro  merchants  to  open  a  charge  account  for
the  first  customer  Monday  morning,  the  idea  being
that  people  would  be  asking  for  credit  all  the  week.  ^
There  is  also  the  notion  that  it  brings  good  luck  to
receive  a  nickel  early  Monday  morning,  ^  and  thrift
is  encouraged  by  the  saying,  "Ef  you  sees  a  penny  an'
does  not  save  hit  you'll  sho'  want  fer  hit  sometime."  *

Friendship  Hints.  For  two  persons  walking  to-
gether to  go  on  opposite  sides  of  the  same  tree  ("split
a  tree")  is  bad  luck;^  it  cuts  their  mother's  grave  or
divides  their  friendship.  "^  Two  Negroes  walking
together  also  think  that  their  friendship  will  be  cut  in
two  ^  or  bad  luck  will  result  ^  if  a  person  cuts  in
between  them.  You  should  never  present  your  sweet-
heart with  a  gift  that  has  a  point  or  cutting  edge,
such  as  a  pencil,  pen,  knife,  or  stick  pin,  or  there  will  be
a  severing  of  affections  between  you.  ^  The  folk-
belief  is  of  European  origin  ^  ^  and  is  probably  at  the
basis  of  the  Kentucky  Negro's  idea  that  bad  luck
follows  a  man  giving  a  woman  an  umbrella,  ^  ^  though
it  is  hard  to  see  why  some  Georgia  Negroes  think  the
giving  of  handkerchiefs  also  causes  a  loss  of  affection.  ^  -

^  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  47.
290.

^  112,  and  Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  209.
*341.

5  264,  and  369.  (Ohio  whites).

*  141,  and  Work,   M.  H.,     Some  Geechee  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,
vol.  34  (1905),  p.  695.
'  251.
«189.

9  141,  152,  240,  and  341.
1 "  Henderson,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  88.
Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  159.

^ '  Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  143.
1 2  276.


432     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

If  you  have  your  fingers  covered  with  rings  you  will
never  catch  a  sweetheart.  ^  If  you  cry  after  one  when
he  leaves  you  it  is  a  sign  that  you  will  never  see  him
alive  again,  ^  and  there  is  also  the  old  Scottish  ^  belief
that  it  i«  dangerous  to  watch  people  out  of  sight,  the
possibility  being  that  you  will  never  see  those  persons
again.  ^  Never  tell  a  sick  person  good-bye,  lest  he
become  worse  and  die.  ^  If  you  mistreat  your  best
friend  you  will  marry  a  widow,  ^  and  if  you  are  going
"a  piece  o'  de  way"  with  a  person  and  come  to  a  ditch
of  water  you  must  cross  it  with  him  or  you  will  have
bad  luck.  ^

Personal  Etiquette.  There  are  many  other  items  of
bad  form  connected  with  the  association  of  human
beings.  For  instance,  one  should  never  pass  things
over  a  person's  back  lest  he  give  that  person  the  back-
ache;* while  telling  your  signs  to  white  people  will
bring  on  bad  luck,  ^  though  in  general  this  belief  is
not  much  observed.  Taking  white  flowers  to  a  sick
person  is  bad  luck,  ^ "  while  shutting  a  gate  which
some  one  has  opened  is  said  by  a  few  to  result  in
disappointment.  ^  ^  Once,  while  'possum  hunting  with
a  group  of  Negroes  I  sat  down  to  rest  while  all  the
others  were  standing.  One  old  Negro  remonstrated,
saying  that  to  do  so  was  very  bad  luck.  ^  ^     It  is  an

166.
2  127.

'  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  156.
*  Cable,  G.  W.,     The  Grandissimes,  p.  86.
6  224.
6  373.
7 135.

8  286,  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  28  (1899),  p.  450.
9320.
lOHl.

1 1  182.  ,

12  221.


Negative  Coxtrol-Signs — Taboos         433

insult  to  write  to  any  one  with  red  ink,  ^  while  if  any
one  marks  on  you  with  a  pencil  you  will  receive  the
same  number  of  "licks"  on  your  back.  ^  When  one
pickaninny  hits  another  across  the  back  with  a  switch
the  one  receiving  the  blow  begs  the  other  to  hit  him
again  in  the  same  place  to  take  off  the  "cross."  Un-
less this  is  done  he  will  surely  get  a  whipping  before
night.  3  Walking  over  a  crack  will  break  your  mother's
back,  ■*  while  stepping  in  another  person's  tracks  will
give  you  bad  luck,  ^  headache  ^  (if  you  walk  in  your
mother's  tracks),  ^  or  the  backache.  ^  Again  you
should  never  let  a  very  old  person  point  his  finger  at
you  unless  you  are  simply  courting  trouble.  ^  Other
items  are  more  distinctly  personal.  Thus,  walling
your  eyes  will  let  people  know  you  are  jealous,
while  having  your  wisdom  teeth  extracted  will  result
in  death.  ^  °  One  should  never  look  into  a  well  at
noon  lest  bad  luck  befall  him  ^  ^ — one  woman  did  so
and  saw  a  funeral  procession.  Within  three  days  there
was  a  death  in  her  family.  ^  ^  It  is  bad  luck  to  burn
up  a  deck  of  cards  ^  ^  or  to  wear  an  opal  or  moonstone
if  the  gem  is  not  your  birthstone.  ^  *  Never  point
your  finger  at  a  grave  or  at  the  moon  lest  that  mem-

^.

2  367.

'Hardy,  Sarah  M.,     Negro  Superstitions,   Lippincott's  Monthly  Maga-
zine, vol.  xlviii  (1891),  p.  379.
*  158,  and  Ohio  Whites.
<>  206.

« 315,  and  373.
'  207.

8 141,  and  Alabama  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  33  (1904),  p.  52.
9  308.
loei.

1 1  57.

12  Work,  M.   H.,     Some  Geechee  Folk-Lore,   Southern   Workman,  vol.   34
(1905),  p.  696.

I'Sl.

1  *  63,  405,  and  Ohio  Whites.

28


434     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

bef  rot  off.  ^  If  you  see  a  star  fall  and  tell  some  one,
you  will  have  bad  luck;^  you  should  never  speak  of'
or  point  at  a  shooting  star,  *  though  one  Informant
reverses  this  and  claims  that  It  brings  good  luck.  ^
Counting  the  stars  brings  bad  luck  ^ — some  say  a
sty  on  the  eye.  ^  In  Yorkshire  it  is  thought  sinful  to
try  to  count  the  stars  or  to  point  at  them;  ^  the  Negroes
say  that  they  will  fall  if  you  do.  *  If  you  carry  your
books  on  your  head  you  will  forget  your  lesson.  ^ "
It  is  bad  luck  to  lean  up  against  a  brick  wall  while  it  is
lightning,  ^  ^  and  sitting  on  a  rock  at  any  time  will
make  your  head  hard.  ^  ^  It  Is  a  sign  of  misfortune  to
look  over  your  left  shoulder,  ^  ^  while  measuring  your-
self will  cause  your  death.  ^  *  If  you  brag  about  any-
thing, or,  as  one  Informant  picturesquely  puts  it,
"if  you  indulge  your  self-congratulation  because  of
some  achievement,"  you  must  knock  on  wood  or  your
luck  will  turn.  ^  ^

The  ^^Spring-keeper.''''  In  South  Carolina  they  say
that  If  you  drink  out  of  the  spring  at  night  you  will
surely  go  blind;  ^«  while  In  Mississippi  and  elsewhere
there  Is  the  Idea  that  you  may  drink  up  the  "spring-
keeper"  (described  as  much  like  a  crawfish  or  a  water-


1400.

2  243.
"9.
^91.

5  14L

6  405.
^357.

*  Henderson,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  88.

»219.

''122.

1386.

2373.

3  276.
*286.

5  6,  58,  and  Ohio  Whites.

^Southern  Workman,  vol.  34  (1894),  p.  209.


Negative  Control-Signs — Taboos         435

lizard — my  Mississippi  friends  speak  of  it  as  a  "spring-
lizard")  and  cause  the  spring  to  go  dry.  ^  This  seems
to  be  a  survival  of  the  idea  that  every  spring  had  its
guardian  spirit  or  keeper,  possibly  in  an  animal  form,
an  idea  strengthened  by  the  Negro  belief  that  killing
a  bullfrog  near  the  spring  will  also  make  it  go  dry.  ^
One  old  slave  suggests  drinking  through  a  strainer  at
night  lest  you  drink  up  the  "spring-lizard"  and  become
very  sick,  ^  while  others  report  cases  of  people  getting
live  spring-lizards  in  their  insides  in  this  way.  *

Animal  Taboos.  There  is,  in  fact,  a  whole  group  of
taboos  centering  around  animals,  ^  some  of  which  will
be  discussed  in  a  later  connection.  Besides  the  con-
sequence of  killing  a  bullfrog  near  a  spring  the  killing
of  any  ordinary  frog  will  cause  you  to  stump  your  toe;  ®
will  cause  you  to  die  in  rags  (the  same  applying  to
killing  cats  or  dogs);  ^  or  will  make  your  cows  go  dry.  *
In  England  it  is  bad  luck  to  kill  the  Daddy-long-legs
or  harvestmen;  ^  the  Negroes  say  this  will  make  your
cows  die,  ^ "  or  that  it  will  give  you  bad  luck  even  to
step  over  this  insect.  ^  ^     It  is  also  bad  luck  to  kill  a

1  112,  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  25  (1896),  p.  15.

2 102.

3  286.

<  41,  and  298.

^  Some  of  these  may  be  derived  from  the  African  taboos  on  totem  animals.
See  Frobenius,  L.,  the  Voice  of  Africa,  vol.  i.,  p.  154,  and  196-97.  Ellis,
A.  B.,  Ewe-speaking  Peoples,  p.  100.  Ellis,  A.  B.,  Tshi-speaking  Peoples,
pp.  166-67,  206-12.  Dennett,  R.  C,  Notes  on  the  Folklore  of  the  Fjort,
p.  10.  Brinton,  D.  G.,  Iconographic  Encyclopedia  of  the  Arts  and  Sciences,
vol.  i,  p.  321.

6 13,  141,  186,  and  268.

M5,  112,  157,  and  342.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  28  (1899),  p.  450.

*62,  91,  and  189.  Moore,  R.  A.,  Superstitiojis  from  Georgia,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  7  (1894),  p.  306.

*  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  204.

^"91.     Moore,    R.   A.,     Superstitions  from   Georgia,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  7
(1894),  p.  306.
1141.


436     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

dove,  ^  a  "snake-doctor"  (a  kind  of  dragon  fly),  ^
or  a  "lady-bug"  (one  of  the  genus  Epilachna) .  ^  If
you  kill  a  lizard  you  will  become  ragged  ;*  if  you
kill  a  turtle  he  will  come  back  and  haunt  you;  ^  while
killing  a  wren  will  cause  your  limbs  to  get  broken.  ^
If  you  talk  to  a  buzzard  when  it  is  flying  over  you  it
will  vomit  on  you,  ^  while  crossing  the  road  where  a
snake  has  crossed  will  give  you  the  backache  unless
you  turn  around  and  walk  backwards  over  the  spot.  ^
Never  whistle  in  the  woods  for  fear  of  attracting
snakes.  ^  If  you  let  a  chicken  die  in  your  hand  it  will
give  you  the  "trembles"  or  "quivers"  (paralysis),  ^  °
while  walking  over  ground  where  a  horse  has  recently
wallowed  will  bring  death  to  the  family.  ^  ^  Mocking
an  owl  will  cause  a  member  of  your  family  to  die,  ^  ^
while  mocking  a  whippoorwill  is  a  sure  sign  of  a  whip-
ping, 1  ^  or  of  your  house  burning  down.  ^  *

The  Power  oj  the  Petticoat.  Conclusion.  This  com-
pletes the  discussion  of  those  "signs"  subject  to  human
control  and  ending  in  either  good  or  ill  luck.  The
part  woman  plays  in  the  passing  on  of  these  beliefs  has
been  graphically  illustrated,  especially  as  regards  those
beliefs  of  a  negative  variety,  the  "don'ts"  rather  than

1141,  and  173.  Davis,  H.  C,  Negro  Folk-Lore  in  S.  C,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  27  (1914),  p.  247.

2  91,  and  Davis,     loc.  cit.,  p.  245.

3  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,
vol.  16  (1923),  p.  210.

^332.

6  404.

« 141,  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  28  (1899),  p.  450.

^341.

*  141,  and  Alabama  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  33  (1904),  p.  52.

9  219.
' » 342.
11194.
1 2  239.

1^141,  and  Alabama  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  33  (1904),  p.  51.
1  *  199,  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  210.


Negative  Control-Signs— Taboos         437

the  "do's."  This  fact  would  seem  to  Indicate  that
woman  is  the  passive  agent,  intent  on  avoiding  bad
luck,  rather  than  the  active  agent  deliberately  seeking
to  bring  her  desires  into  realization.  This  is  all  the  more
evident  when  we  take  conjuration  into  consideration.
Most  of  the  conjurers,  though  not  all  of  them,  are
men.  In  conjuration  we  have  a  more  active  exhibition
of  original  creative  thought.  There  Is  more  variation
in  the  formulas  from  locality  to  locality  because  the
conjurer  often  deliberately  manufactures  charms  on
the  spur  of  the  moment.  I  have  personally  made
weird  charms  of  red  flannel,  curiously  carved  peach
kernels,  a  rabbit's  foot  wrapped  In  a  hoodoo-bag,  and
similar  combinations,  all  strung  together  on  a  copper
wire,  and  had  conjurers  tell  me  what  a  perfect
Trinity  arrangement  it  represented  and  specifically
how  It  could  be  used  for  certain  results.  I  have  already
mentioned  other  chance  Ingredients  to  which  conjure-
doctors  on  the  spur  of  the  moment  have  attributed
phenomenal  qualities,  the  whole  indicating  a  high
degree  of  Inventive  genius.

The  minor  "signs,"  on  the  other  hand,  show  much
more  agreement  from  locality  to  locality,  and  are
mainly  in  the  hands  of  women.  Here  again  we  have
man  indicated  as  the  variable  element  and  woman  as
the  conservative  element.  Conjuration  represents
mainly  an  African  survival,  while  "signs"  are,  in  large
part,  of  European  origin  and  passed  on  to  the  Negro
women  by  the  white  women  who  have  conserved  them,
thus  making  them  both  widespread  and  uniform.
Doubtless  the  number  of  these  beliefs  of  European
origin  is  even  greater  than  indicated  by  direct  reference;


438     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

since  many  Northern  whites  hold  to  such  beliefs  and
since  our  survey  of  English  folk-lore  has  been  by  no
means  exhaustive.     The  point  of  contact  apparently
has    been    chiefly    through    the    household    servants,
since  a  large  percentage  of  the  beliefs  center  around
domestic    service    and    around    children.     All   of   this
indicates   that   the   men   have   held   more   to   the  old
African  beliefs  but  produced   more  variations  within
the  culture-pattern;  while  the  women  take  over  more
readily  the  new  lore,  due  to  their  more  constant  con-
tact with   European   culture,   but  follow  the  pattern
carefully  with  but  little   individual  variation.     As   a
general  rule  the  most  widespread  beliefs  in  America
seem  to  be  those  which  formerly  had  a  wide  distribution
either  in  Europe  or  in  Africa.     Doubtless  the  clinging
of  the  male  to  the  old  African  forms  is  due  to  the
greater  fear  and   respect   these   forms   command,   his
desire  to  be  more  spectacular,  and  his  relative  lack  of
contact   with   the   new   English   lore,     Negro   women
were  brought  into  contact  with  Anglo-Saxon  women
and  the  belief  was  spread  from  the  susceptible  to  the
susceptible;  while  the  Negro  man  was  associated  more
with  the  white  man  where  neither  pupil  nor  teacher,
as  my  experience  in  collecting  lore  has  shown  me,  is
as    much    given    to    the    expression    of    superstitious
thought.     Thus  it  is  that  the  Negro  woman  in  her
constant    association    with    children    has    become  the
main  keeper  and  sower  of  the  seed  of  false  generali-
zation.    Educate  the  Negro  women  to  a  true  under-
standing of   scientific   laws,    and    superstition   will  be
well   on   its  way   to   extinction,   conjuration,   with   its
limited   number  of  followers,  dying  a  natural  death.


TWO  VOLUMES  OF  FOLK-LORE


CHAPTER  VII
PROPHETIC  SIGNS  OR  OMENS

Nature  of  Prophetic  Signs.  In  this  class  of  "signs"
we  approach  more  nearly  the  familiar  English  signs
or  omens.  The  expression  is  still  that  of  causal
relationship,  but  the  action  is  accidental  or  outside  of
personal  control  and  is  indicative  of  results  soon  to
occur.  Chance,  or  some  other  individual,  sets  in
motion  the  causes  and  you  suffer  the  consequences.
The  general  formula  is:  "If  something  (outside  of
your  control)  behaves  in  such  and  such  a  manner,
so  and  so  will  result."  Here  again  the  classification
is  not  absolutely  clear  cut;  some  of  the  omens  may  be
counteracted  by  proper  behavior  on  the  part  of  the
individual  upon  whom  they  act,  while  in  other  cases
the  classification  will  be  enlarged  to  take  in  "control-
signs,"  for  the  sake  of  getting  together  in  one  place
all  of  the  material  relating  to  certain  particular  objects.

The  Swish  of  Skirts.  Many  of  these  signs  cluster
around  things  feminine  in  association,  though  not  to
the  same  extent  as  in  the  former  class  of  beliefs.  Yet
the  women  are,  after  all,  the  chief  observers  of  these
signs  whether  they  relate  directly  to  things  feminine
or  not.  One  widespread  feminine  belief  is  that  if  you
accidentally  drop  a  dishrag,  some  one  is  coming  to
visit   you,  ^  or,   in   its   more   general   form,   some   one

'141,  and  341.     Moore,  R.  A.,     Superstitions  from  Georgia,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  7  (1894),  p.  306.


440     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

hungry  is  coming.  ^  Even  In  this  case,  however,  the
omen  may  be  averted;  If  you  do  not  want  the  In-
dividual to  come,  put  the  dropped  dish-rag  In  molas-
ses. 2  A  dropped  spoon  or  piece  of  silver  vies  with  the
doorbell  as  an  announcer  of  company,  ^  and  just
as  the  shrewd  housewife  can  tell  the  sex  of  the  visitor
by  the  sound  of  the  door  knocker,  so  too  does  the
omen-expert  know  that  a  fork  dropped  means  a  male
visitor  while  a  dropped  knife  means  a  woman  coming.  *
Still  others  limit  the  sign  to  the  dropping  of  a  knife
only  and  to  a  bumblebee  coming  In  through  the
window,  ^  a  belief  found  In  Herefordshire  as  well,  ^
while  In  other  parts  of  England  a  dropped  fork  Is
considered  ominous  of  visitors  provided  It  sticks  up
In  the  floor.  ^  A  dropped  spoon  with  the  Negroes  is  a
bad  omen  (disappointment)  ^  If  you  pick  It  up,  but
the  luck  may  be  changed  by  having  some  one  else
pick  It  up  for  you.  ^  If  the  comb  is  dropped  while
you  are  combing  your  hair  a  visitor  Is  coming;  ^  °  while
a  piece  of  meat  dropped  from  your  mouth  at  the  table
is  a  sign  of  death.  ^  ^  Two  forks  Inadvertently  set  at
one  place  mean  two  husbands  ^  ^  (or  a  wedding  before
Christmas).  ^  ^^     This  also  applies  to  two  teaspoons  in


1  133,  246,  288,  336,  and  370.  Williamson,  G.,  Superstitions  from
Louisiana,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  18  (1905),  p.  230.  Lee,  C,  Some  Negro  Lore
from  Baltimore,  J.  A.  F.L.,  vol.  5  (1892),  p.  110.

233.

3  173.

*  152,  233,  and  288.

5  141.

8  Leather,  E.  M.,     Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  85.
^  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  318.

89.

9  159.

10  61.

11  112,  and  Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  149.

12  152,  and  371.
i!'264.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  441

one  saucer,  ^  this  latter  being  the  characteristic
English  version.  ^  If  a  Negro,  without  thinking,
takes  another  helping  of  bread  when  he  already  has  a
piece  of  bread  on  his  plate  a  hungry  visitor  will  soon
be  arriving  ^ — another  belief  of  European  ^  origin.
If  a  picture  falls  off  the  wall  the  house  is  haunted,  ^
or,  more  generally,  a  sign  of  death  ^ — this  latter  belief
being  European.  ^  Others  restrict  the  sign  to  a
family  portrait,  ^  while  still  other  Negroes  say  that  it
must  be  a  picture  of  some  one  already  dead  and  the
picture  must  fall  on  its  face.  ^  Connected  also  with
household  equipment  is  the  widespread  Idea  that  if
you  accidentally  trip  a  chair  over  In  getting  up  you
will  never  marry  i " — at  least  not  within  a  year.  ^  ^  This
latter  has  its  European  ^  -  parallel,  as  have  most  of  the
more  general  Negro  beliefs  connected  with  the  house-
hold.

The  Fatal  Mirror.  This  same  principle  is  Illustrated
by  the  very  prevalent  notion  that  the  breaking  of  a
mirror  leads  to  seven  years  of  trouble.  ^  ^  Others  say
that  the  number  of  pieces  will  indicate  the  number
of  years  of  bad  luck  you  will  have,  ^ "  but  the  English

1141.

2  Leather,  E.  M.,  Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  114.  Lean's  Collectanea
vol.  2,  p.  327.

3  164.

*  Fogel,  E.  M.,     Belief  sand  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,  p.  84.
^  Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  285.
6 141,  189,  341,  and  379.
^  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  555.
8  358.
991.

1 "  108,  168,  and  288.
1162.

^^  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  321.

13  141,  336,  341,  and  397.  Also  Lee,  C,  Some  Negro  Lore  from  Balti-
more, J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5  (1892),  p.  111.  Williamson,  G.,  Superstitions  from
Louisiana,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  18  (1905),  p.  229.  The  belief  may  be  a  survival
of  the  piimitive  idea  of  the  soul  being  connected  with  the  reflection,  the  sou!
being  injured  when  the  mirror  is  broken.

1^  91,  and  Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  pp.  171-72.


442     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

version  is  that  seven  3^ears  of  bad  luck  will  result,
also  adding  that  it  is  unlucky  to  place  a  mirror  in
water.  ^  The  Negroes  not  only  disregard  this  belief
regarding  ill  luck  coming  from  placing  a  mirror  in
water,  but  even  go  so  far  as  to  prescribe  the  placing
of  the  fragments  of  the  broken  mirror  in  running
water  as  a  means  of  avoiding  the  ill  luck  (the  trouble
will  pass  away  in  seven  hours),  ^  the  running  water
being  supposed  to  "wash  de  trubbl'  away."  ^  Other  de-
fenses against  this  ill-luck  demon  consist  of  burying  the
broken  fragments  at  the  foot  of  a  green  tree,  ^  of
taking  a  drink  from  a  lake,  ^  or  of  simply  burying  the
broken  pieces — this  latter  applying  especially  to  a
mirror  broken  on   Sunday.  ^

Salt-spilling.  Possibly  because  of  the  use  of  salt
as  a  means  of  preserving  a  dead  body,  this  mineral  is
regarded  as  being  more  or  less  fetishistic  in  nature.
There  Is  also  the  possibility,  it  seems  to  me,  that  salt,
being  one  of  the  earliest  articles  of  trade  and  often
Imported,  might  have  acquired  during  this  period  a
certain  quality  of  mystery  lacking  in  ordinary  domestic
products.  At  any  rate,  spilling  salt  is  bad  luck —
anger  ^  or  a  quarrel  ^ — one  should  throw  some  over  his
left  shoulder  ^  or  into  the  fire,  ^ "  or  taste  a  little  of  It


1  Leather,  E.  M.,     Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  87.     See  also,  Knowlson,
T.  S.,,     The  Origins  of  Popular  Superstitions,  pp".  163-64.

2  189.

3 159,  362;  and  396.

n41.

*33.

«334.

^  141.     Moore,  R.   A.,     Superstitions  from  Georgia,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  7
(1894),  p.  306.

*341,  and  336.     Williamson,  G.,     Superstitions  from  Louisiana,  J.   A.
F.  L.,  vol.    18    (1905),   p.   230.

9  176,  and  404.
i»3g7.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  443

before  he  speaks  ^  to  avert  this  bad  luck.  Like  most
other  salt  beliefs,  these  seem  to  be  of  European  origin,
both  as  regards  a  quarrel  following  the  spilling  of  salt
and  the  throwing  of  salt  over  the  left  shoulder  to  avert
ill  luck.  2  On  the  other  hand  the  spilling  of  rice  or
sugar  is  regarded  by  the  Negroes  as  an  omen  of  good
luck. ^

The  Flame  of  Fate.  In  the  embers  of  the  hearth
smoulder  other  beliefs  of  feminine  association.  If  a
log  falls  off  the  fire  it  is  a  sure  sign  of  company  coming;  *
others  go  further  and  say  that  when  a  stick  burns
through  into  a  long  and  a  short  piece,  the  piece  that
falls  out  on  the  floor  indicates  whether  it  is  a  long  or  a
short  person  who  is  coming.  ^  This  belief  in  general
seems  to  be  European  in  origin.  ^  Some  Negroes
say  this  falling  log  is  a  sign  of  bad  luck,  but  that  the
bad  luck  may  be  avoided  by  putting  the  log  back  in
the  same  position  that  it  occupied  before  falling. '
Others  say  that  the  popping  of  the  fire  indicates  a
quarrel  in  the  family,  ^  this  belief  possibly  having
something  to  do  with  the  taboo  against  burning  certain
woods  that  pop  a  great  deal,  although  the  belief  is
widespread  that  sparks  popping  out  ^  (into  your
lap)  1  ^  are  a  sign  of  money  coming.     Other  informants

1213.

2  Fogel,  E.  M.,  Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,
p.  363.  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  154.  Knowlson,  T.  S.,  The  Origins
of  Popular  Superstitions,   pp.    167-68.

3  336.

*  141,  246,  316,  206,  and  332.
'  146.

^Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  317.

^  91,  and  Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  132.
« 141,  and  44.

^  57,  and  Superstitions  of  Negroes  in  New  Orleans,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5  (1892),
p.  330.
10141.


444     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

claim  that  a  letter  ^  is  coming  and  add  that  the  "whiz-
zing of  the  fire"  indicates  a  funeral  in  the  immediate
family.  ^  Once  in  a  while  you  will  also  find  the  old
English  ^  belief  that  a  flake  of  soot  hanging  from  the
grate  bar  indicates  the  visit  of  a  stranger.  *

General  Household  Omens.  The  clock  is  another
household  utensil  that  ticks  off  signs  as  well  as  hours.
If  a  broken  clock  suddenly  strikes,  ^  or  if  a  clock  strikes
between  the  hours  or  suddenly  stops  (these  two  latter
beliefs  are  English)  Mt  is  a  sure  sign  of  death,  ^  es-
pecially if  there  is  any  one  in  the  house  seriously  ill.  ^
Also  there  is  the  European  ^  belief  that  if  the  clock
strikes  thirteen  times  it  is  a  sign  of  death.  ^ "  If  a
very  young  child,  without  being  told,  picks  up  a  broom
and  starts  sweeping  the  house,  you  might  as  well
prepare  for  a  visitor,  ^  ^  the  idea  apparently  being  that
an  innocent  child  can  see  things  in  the  future  that
grown-ups  cannot,  and  knows  that  the  house  must  be
tidied  up  for  the  company.  The  sudden  cracking  of
a  skillet  on  the  fire  is  an  omen  of  good  ^  ^  or  bad  ^  ^
luck — the  Negroes  differ  as  to  which.  If  your  drinking
glass  breaks  the  person  nearest  you  will  die;  ^^  if  the
furniture  ^  ^  or  looking-glass  ^  ^  suddenly  cracks,  or  if  a


1  336.

2  336,  and  304.

*  Brand,  J.,     Popular  Antiquities  of  Great  Britain,  vol.  3,  p.  183.     Lean's
Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  318.

491.

6  53,  and  189.

^  Leather,  E.  M.,     Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  118.

M41.

8  Southern  Workman,  vol.  26  (1897),  p.  18.

*  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  551.
«63.

61,81,  and  123.
141.

3  Boyle,  Mrs.  V.  F.,     Devil  Tales,  p.  6.
341.
63.

^Southern  Workman,  vol.  26  (1897),  p.  18.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  445

dish  suddenly  breaks  in  your  hand  ^  it  is  Hkewise  a
sign  of  death.  If  a  lamp  goes  out  when  full  of  oil  it  is
a  sure  sign  of  bad  luck,  -  and  the  wise  man  will
hastily  grab  such  a  failing  lamp  and  blow  it  out  so
that  it  will  not  become  extinguished  of  itself  ^ — the
same  idea  applying  in  European  lore.  *  A  person  who
stumbles  at  the  steps  in  going  to  some  one's  home  will
know  that  he  is  not  wanted  there,  ^  while  he  who  falls
while  going  upstairs  will  not  be  married  within  a
year  ^ — the  European  version  being  the  direct  op-
posite; he  will  be  married  that  same  year.  '^  If  a  sick
person  falls  down  a  step,  ^  or  if  any  one  falls  out  of
doors,  ^  it  is  an  omen  of  death.  Three  chairs  ac-
cidentally placed  in  a  row  indicate  callers;^"  ivy
running  over  a  dwelling-house  is  bad  luck;^^  while
letting  your  biscuits  burn  is  a  sign  of  anger.  ^  ^

Shoes  and  Clothing.  Happenings  to  the  apparel
are  indicative  of  various  things — the  apparel  mentioned
is  perhaps  more  often  female  than  male,  and  the  women
are  again  the  fondest  believers  in  such  lore.  The
Negroes  say  that  losing  your  apron  (or  belt)  ^  ^  is  losing
your  best  friend;  ^^  the  European  idea  is  that  your
lover  is  thinking  of  you.  ^  ^     Shoe  throwing  at  wed-

1 196.

2  81.

'177.

*  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  144.

^395.

6  22.

^  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  321.

8  341.

9  22.
i»126.

11  141,  and  Work,  M.  H.,  Some  Geechee  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,
vol.  35  (1905),  p.  635

1 2  264.

1 3  246.

1^79,  13,  and  335.

1  *  Leather,  E.  M.J  Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  IH.  Gregor,  W.,  Folk-
Lore  of  the  Northeast  of  Scotland,  p.  87.     Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  328.


446     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

dings  is  common  mainly  among  the  more  educated
Negroes,  possibly  because,  to  the  slavery-time  Negro,
weddings  were  not  matters  of  much  ado,  and  also
because  of  the  fact  that  shoes  are  not  worn  any  too
often  by  the  rural  population.  Besides  this,  old
shoes  are  too  often  begged  to  be  cast  away  in  any  such
silly  fashion.  But  even  though  the  Negro  wedding-
bells  are  not  accompanied  by  the  barbarous  patter  of
shoes,  yet  these  articles  of  dress  talk  in  more  ways  than
that  demanded  by  the  rural  Negro  who  brought  his
new  shoes  back  to  "de  dry-goods  sto'  "  because  their
squeak  was  too  muffled  to  attract  the  attention  of  the
congregation  as  he  paraded  them  down  the  aisle  of  the
church.  "Dese  heah  shoes  doan'  talk  loud  'nuif,
w'ite  folks.  Ah  la'ks  'em  all  right,  but  de  folks
ska'cely  know'd  I  had  er  new  pair.  Hain't  you  got
no  louder  kind. ^"— all  of  which  goes  to  show  the
triumph  of  vanity  over  utility  in  the  clothing  line.
Sometimes  the  Negroes  say  that  if  your  shoe  strings
come  untied  your  sweetheart  is  thinking  of  you;^
but,  generally  the  interpretation  is  that  when  your
right  shoe  comes  untied,  some  one  is  "talking  good"
of  you,  but  if  it  be  your  left  shoe,  then  some  one  is
speaking  evil  of  you.  ^  In  this  and  other  things  the
Negro  almost  invariably  regards  the  right  side  as
being  the  lucky  side,  while  the  left  side  is  the  unlucky
one.  If  your  shoes  wear  out  in  the  toes  before  the
heels  wear  out  you  will  be  poor,  ^  but  if  the  heel  wears
out  first  you  will  steal.  *     It  is  small  wonder  so  many

^  141.     Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  55.     Lee,  C.
Some  Negro  Lore  from  Baltimore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5  (1892),  p.  110.
2 13,  106,  173,  and  246.
3  207.
*371.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  447

Negroes  go  barefooted  when  shoes  force  one  Into  the
sorry  alternative  of  poor-house  or  jail.  It  is  good
luck  accidentally  to  put  on  a  garment  wrongside  out,  ^
but  you  must  wear  it  that  way  until  twelve  o'clock.  -
Doubtless  the  original  idea  was  that  of  deceiving  the
bad  luck  spirits,  but  the  belief  itself  is  plainly  of
European  nativity.  ^  If  the  hem  of  a  woman's  skirt
turn  up  and  she  spits  on  it  (or  kisses  it)  *  she  will
surely  get  a  new  dress.  ^  If  a  button  on  the  front  of
your  clothes  flies  off,  trouble;  ^  if  you  tear  a  dress  the
first  time  that  you  wear  it,  some  one  will  lie  about  you
before  night;  ^  while  if  you  break  your  necklace  while
dressing  for  a  party,  it  is  a  bad  omen  and  you  should
not  go.  ^  If  you  find  a  hairpin,  you  have  found  a
friend;^  if  the  points  of  this  hairpin  are  towards  you,
you  will  catch  a  beau,  ^  '^  or  if  you  will  hang  the  hairpin
on  a  nail,  you  will  receive  a  letter.  ^  ^  A  hairpin  sud-
denly dropping  out  of  your  hair  lets  you  know  that
your  lover  is   thinking  of  you.  ^  -

Eyes  Thai  See  Ahead.  There  is  a  group  of  widely
diffused  signs  having  to  do  with  various  parts  of  the
body  in  which  the  "right  and  left"  motif  plays  a
commanding  role,  the  right,  here  again  being  con-
nected mainly  with  good  and  the  left  with  evil.     It  is

1  62,  173,  110,  and  228.  Williamson,  G.,  Superstilions  from  Louisiana,
J.   A.  F.  L.,  vol.  18  (1905),  p.  229.  (Ohio  whites).

2341.

3  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  28.  Fogel,  E.  M.,  Beliefs  and  Super-
stilions of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,  j).  100.

^340.

5  111,  341,  and  357.

6  335_

'  112,  and  342.  Alabama  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  33  (1904),
p.  52.

8  230.

9  35,  and  Ohio  Whites.
•»127.

'  I  370.

12  112.


448     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Nero

worthy  of  note  that  this  idea  occurs  also  In  West
Africa,  the  Duallas  of  the  Cameroons  speaking  of  the
left  hand  as  the  "female"  hand  because  it  is  the
"inferior  hand."  ^  In  Calabar  there  is  a  proverb:
"The  dust  of  the  grave  touches  me,  or  causes  a  flut-
tering sensation  in  the  neck  or  back  of  the  shoulders
when  one  feels  wearied  when  digging  a  grave."  This
is  "supposed  to  forewarn  a  man  of  his  death.  This
spasmodic  and  fluttering  sensation  in  any  part  of  the
body,  or  knocking  the  foot  against  anything,  is  a
warning  that  something  is  about  to  happen.  The
first  sensation  does  not  always  presage  evil;  some-
times a  fluttering  of  the  vein  or  skin  is  deemed  a  token
of  good;  when  the  uduri-uden,  a  part  of  the  leg  on
which  the  paddle  rests,  gives  the  sign,  it  shows  the
paddler  that  he  must  go  into  his  canoe."  ^  In  the
South  the  Negroes  say  that  If  your  left  eye  twitches
(or  itches)  it  Is  a  sign  of  bad  luck,  while  the  jumping  of
the  right  eye  is  a  good  omen.  ^  Other  indications  are
that  an  itching  of  the  right  eye  means  that  you  will
see  something  pleasant,  while  the  left  foreshadows  an
unpleasant  sight;*  the  right  eye,  happiness,  and  the
left  eye,  sorrow  ^  (or  anger) ;  ^  the  right  eye,  you  will
see  a  gentleman,  the  left  eye,  a  lady,  ^  while  still
others  say  that  it  is  indicative  of  the  fact  that  your
creditors  are  after  you.  ^     Still  others  attribute  a  fuss

^  Burton,  R.  F.,     Wit  and  Wisdotn  from  West  Africa,  p.  455.

2  Ibid.,  p.  348.

2  13,  81,  246,  and  189.  Also  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,
S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  16  (1923),  p.  210.  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23
(1894),  p.  16.     Speers,  Mary  W.  F„     J.  ^.  i^.  L.,  vol.  26  (1913),  p.  191.

^23,  and  141.  Lee,  C,  Some  Negro  Lore  from  Baltimore^  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  5  (1892),  p.  111.

*  125,  288,  336,  and  341.
«106.

'  101.

*  Richardson,  C,     Some  Slave  Superstitions,  vol.  41  (1912),  p.  248.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  449

in  the  family  to  the  itching  of  the  left  eye.  '  Some
make  the  matter  more  involved  by  saying,  "If  your
left  eye  jump,  if  your  mother's  first  child  was  a  boy,
it  is  bad  luck;  if  a  girl,  good  luck.  If  your  right  eye
jump,  if  your  mother's  first  child  was  a  boy,  it  is  good
luck;  if  a  girl,  bad  luck."  ^  Others  alter  the  whole
proposition:  "When  yo'  right  eye  quivvahs  dat  sho'
means  bad  trubbl',  but  if  yo'  lef  eye  quivvahs  on
New  Year's  Day,  den  you  sho'  gwine  lose  one  uv  yo'
fambly  in  less  dan  two  months  time."  ^  In  slavery
times  an  itching  of  the  left  eye  meant  a  whipping
within  twenty-four  hours.  *  In  European  lore  the
itching  of  the  right  eye  was  associated  with  things
pleasant,  and  the  left  with  seeing  something  evil,  *
though  in  parts  of  Scotland  an  itching  of  either  eye
signified  tears  and  sorrow.  ^

Follow  Your  Nose.  An  itching  of  the  nose  (at  the
end)  ^  signifies  company  coming  ^  (the  characteristic
English  version),  ^  though  some  Negroes  go  still
further  and  interpret  the  itching  of  the  right  nostril
to  designate  a  man  and  the  left  a  woman  coming  to
see  you,  ^  °  while  others  reverse  it  and  attribute  the
left  to  the  man  and  the  right  to  the  woman  *  ^ — a
view  found  also  in  Devonshire.  ^  ^  In  either  case  the
company  may  be  prevented  from  coming  by  an  up-

^36.

*  Smiley,  P.,  Folk-Lore  from  Va.,  S.  C,  Ala.,  Ca.,  and  Fla.,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  32  (1919),  pp.  381-82.

=•141.

*  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  46.

'  Fogel,  E.  M.,     Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,  p.  97.
8  Gregor,  Rev.  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northeast  of  Scotland,  p.  27.

8  61J292,  321,  and  341.

'  Brand,  J.,     Popular  Antiquities  of  Great  Britain,  p.  174,  vol.  3.
1 0  335,

» 1 131,' and  246.

^^  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  28;'5.
29


450     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

ward  rubbing  of  the  nose.  ^  Others  say  that  an
itching  left  nostril  means  a  woman  talking  about  you,
and  the  right,  a  man,  ^  though  here  again  the  sex  is  at
times  reversed  by  some.  ^  Others  attribute  trouble,
sorrow,  *  quarrels,  ^  or  the  receiving  of  a  letter,  ^  to  the
itching  of  the  nose — in  the  Northern  counties  of
England  "it  is  a  sign  that  you  will  be  crossed,  or  vexed,
or  kissed  by  a  fool,"  ^  while  in  other  parts  of  Europe
it  is  the  sign  of  receiving  a  letter.  ^

Ears  That  Talk.  If  the  ear  burns,  some  one  is
talking  about  you;^  the  right  ear,  some  one  is  saying
good  things  about  you ;  the  left  ear,  some  one  is  speaking
evil  of  you  ^  ^ — this  being  the  most  general  European
version.  ^  ^  The  Negro,  however,  "goes  the  English-
man one  better."  To  make  the  "back-biter"  bite  her
tongue,  in  case  the  left  ear  is  itching,  he  will  spit  on
his  finger  and  make  a  crossmark  on  that  ear,  ^  ^  or
else  a  woman  whose  ear  is  itching  may  tie  a  knot  in  the
corner  of  her  apron  to  make  the  gossip's  teeth  ache
until  the  knot  is  untied.  ^  ^

The  Itching  Palm.  If  your  right  hand  itches  you
will  get   some   money,   if  your  left   hand,   a   letter.  ^  *


161.

2  Richardson,  C,     Sovie  Slave  Superstitions,  Southern  Workman^  vol.  41
(1912),  p.  248.
3321.
<23.
5  150.
«69.

'  Hendersoii,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  pp.  84-85.
^  Fogel,  E.  M.,     Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,
p.  82.

^341.     Davis,  H.  C,     Negro  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  27  (1914),  p.  248.

1"  13,  132,  and  159.     Parsons,  E.  C,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,
M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  16  (1923),  p.  248.

11  Henderson,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  85.
1^141.     Lee,  C,     Some  Negro  Lore  from  Baltimore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.5
(1892),  p.  111.
1^13.
' "  13,  106,  125,  159,  288,  and  341.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  451

In  most  cases,  however,  it  is  necessary  to  spit  on  your
itching  right  hand  and  thrust  it  into  your  pocket,  ^
or  scratch  on  wood  ^  in  order  to  make  the  desired
wealth  come,  while  others  add  that  you  must  be
careful  not  to  tell  any  one.  ^  By  still  others  the  itching
of  the  left  hand  is  interpreted  to  mean  the  receiving  of
money;  the  right  hand,  shaking  hands  with  a  stranger  *
(or  your  best  friend).  ^  Elsewhere  the  itching  of  the
right  hand  means  receiving  money,  the  left  hand,
paying  out  money.  ^  This  seems  to  be  the  general
English  version,  ^  although  in  Germany  the  hands
seem  to  be  reversed.  ^

Feet,  Arms,  and  Face.  If  your  foot  itches  it  is  a  sign
that  you  are  going  to  walk  on  strange  land  ^  (provided
your  foot  is  clean).!"  Others  hold  that  such  itching
indicates  a  speedy  call  to  the  cemetery,  ^  ^  though
another  version  is  that  the  itching  of  the  right  foot  on  a
journey  indicates  that  you  are  going  where  you  are  wel-
come, the  left  foot,  where  you  are  unwelcome.  ^  ^  One
informant  says  that  an  itching  right  foot  signifies  that
you  are  standing  over  a  grave.  '  ^     The  English  version

'  Cable,  G.  W.,  The  Grandissimes,  p.  86.  Richardson,  G.,  So7ne  Slave
Superstitions,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  41  (1912),  p.  248.

2  189.

»364.

^52.

^  Lee,  C.,     Some  Negro  Lore  from  Baltimore,  J .  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5  (1892),
p.  110.

« 189,  and  397.

'  Henderson,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  85.
Brand,  J.,     Popular  Antiquities  of  Great  Britain,  vol.  3,  p.  177.

*  Fogel,  E.  M.,     Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,
p.  86.

9 159,  and  246.     Also  Parsons,  E.  C,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,
M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  16  (1923),  p.  210.
1 « 260.

1117,  141,  336,  382,  and  395.  Work,  M.  H.,  Some  Geechee  Folk-Lore,
Southern  Work77iaH,  vol.  35  (1905),  p    634.

12  78.

13  189.


452     r\)LK  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

is  tluit  such  itcliing  points  to  a  walking  over  strange
ground.  '  Accidentally  stumping  the  right  foot  pre-
dicts gcH^l  luck,  but  if  the  left  foot  is  stumped  you  are
sure  to  ha\c  bad  luck.  -  Bad  luck  upon  stumping  the
left  foot  may  be  averted  by  turning  around  ^  (twice  *
or  seven  times).  '»  This  must  have  been  to  deceive
the  ill  luck  spirit,  since  the  Negroes  say  this  "cuts  de
bad  luck  o^."'  Retracing  one's  steps  on  stumping
the  left  ti>c  will  avoid  the  ill  luck  (throw  the  spirits
off  your  track)  but  one  should  never  do  this  when  the
right  toe  is  stumped.  •■'  Others  say  that  the  stumping
of  the  left  toe  on  a  visit  is  a  sign  that  you  are  not  wanted
at  that  place'  If  you  should  happen  to  strike
your  left  elbow  while  leaving  the  room  on  an  under-
taking of  any  kind,  go  back.  Bad  luck  will  surely
overtake  you,  **  though  good  luck  comes  from  kissing
the  bumped  arm.  ■'  An  itching  of  the  lips  indicates
that  some  one  is  talking  disrespectfully  of  you;'"  if
the  right  side  of  your  face  burns  it  is  a  sign  of  bad
luck; '  '  and  if  the  crown  of  your  head  itches  you  may
expect  to  be  advanced  to  a  more  honc^rable  position
in  life.  '  "  When  youv  ilcsh  jumps  (c^uivers)  it  is  a
sign  of  death,  '  •*  especially  if  it  be  the  flesh  of  your
left  arm.  '  *


*  Lam's  Collcdanea,  vol.  2,  p.  287.  Also  Iloiulorson,  W.,  Folk-Lore  of
the  Northern  Counties  of  Encjlaiid,  p.  85.  Loathor,  I'L  INI.,  Folk-Lore  of
Herefontshire,  p.  88.

M41,  2U),  :V2;\,  ami  IVM.     Parsons,  E.  C,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,
S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  1(>  (1923),  p.  210.
»  22,  216,  and  2C8.
M02.
»6(>.
•191.

'224.  •,VM\,  'MV\,  and  37(>.
'57,  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  16.

•  224.

1 0  23.

' » 236.

1 1  23.

' » .301 .
'  *  246.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  453

Sneezing  Signs.  Sncc/ing  superstitions  arc  wide-
spread in  Afro-America  as  well  as  in  almost  all  other
parts  of  the  world,  primitive  or  civilized.  Sneezing
is  regarded  as  a  bad  omen  by  the  T'.we  tribes  of  Africa
because  it  indicates  that  the  indwelling  spirit  is  about
to  quit  the  body,  affording  an  opportunity  for  a  home-
less spirit  to  enter  in  and  cause  illness.  '  A  similar
belief  leads  the  Calabar  natives  to  exclaim,  "Far
from  you!"  when  a  person  sneezes,  with  an  appropriate
gesture  as  if  throwing  off  some  evil.  '^  The  Southern
Negro  says  that  if  you  sneeze  with  food  in  your  mouth
it  is  a  sure  sign  of  death.  ^  There  seems  to  be  no
European  parallel  to  this  belief  and  1  rather  suspect
an  African  origin;  the  dangerous  spirits,  attracted  by
the  food,  being  more  likely  to  approach  the  person  and
to  enter  the  body  while  a  person  is  eating.  'I'his  seems
all  the  more  likely  since  the  Negroes  say  that  the
death  may  be  avoided  by  spitting  out  the  food  and
rinsing  the  mouth  thoroughly  with  water,  "  while
If  the  food  Is  swallowed,  death  Is  certain  ** — all  the  more
so  if  it  is  molasses  (sweet  food  and  hence  attractive  to
spirits)  one  is  eating.  «  It  Is  also  considered  bad  luck
to  yawn  at  the  table.  ^  A  very  common  English
sneezing  rhyme  is:

Sneeze  on  Monday,  you  sneeze  for  danger,
Sneeze  on  Tuesday,  kiss  a  stranger,
Sneeze  on  a  Wednesday,  sneeze  for  a  letter,


'  Burton,  R.  F.,     Wil  and  W iadom  from  West  Africa,  j)  .  .'iTIi.

^  Mills,  A.  B.,     Ewe-Npeaking  I'dopien,  j).  90.

"SI,  57,  282,  148,  :}4I,  :i4<),  iiiid  :«0.  Lee,  C,  HomK  Negro  Lore,  from
Ballimore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  fj  (1892),  p.  HI.  Souihern  Workman,  vol.  2  4
(1895),  p.  155.

M41.

M).

•404.

'  189.


454     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Soltherx  Xegro

Sneeze  on  a  Thursday,  something  better,

Sneeze  on  a  Friday,  sneeze  for  sorrow.

Sneeze  on  a  Saturday,  see  your  sweetheart  tomorrow.  *

W  ord  for  word  the  same  rhyme  is  found  with  the
^lississippi  Negroes  -  thus  showing  the  tenacity  of
|X)pular  behefs  expressed  in  verse  form.  Other  in-
formants add  a  final  two  lines:

Sneeze  on  Sunday,  if  its  meek.

The  devil  will  have  you  the  rest  of  the  week.  '

The  Xegro  South  is  a  fossil  bed  of  European  folk-
lore— perhaps  further  investigations  will  bring  to
light  these  last  two  lines  in  England,  though  there  is
always  the  possibility  of  a  native  American  develop-
ment. This  latter  line  is  apparently  important;  all
that  one  Georgia  informant  is  able  to  remember  of
this  verse  is,  "If  you  sneeze  on  Sunday,  you'll  catch
the  devil  on  a  ^Monday."  ^  Sneezing  early  in  the
morning  indicates  that  you  will  see  your  lover  that
day,  '"  or,  as  others  say,  simply  that  company  is  coming.  *
If  you  sneeze  seven  (or  nine)  '  times  in  succession  you
will  die.  *

Hair.  Strictly  European  ^  is  the  idea  that  a  person's
longevity  may  be  tested  by  throwing  his  hair
combings    into    the    fire.      If    they     flame    up     and


^■^  Lenrts  CoUectarvea,  vol.  1,  p.  S48.     See  also,  Henderson,  W.,     Folk-Lore
of  the  Xortfiem  CourUies  of  England,  p.  92.
*278.

»  6,  and  3.39.
*233.
*.36.

*  141.  Williamson,  G.,  Superstitiong  from  Louisiana,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  18  (19a5;,  p.  2.30.

'311.

*  110.

*  Henderson,  W.,  Folk-Lore  of  the  S'orthern  Counties  of  England,  p.  84.
Leather,  E.  M.,  Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  88.  Lean's  CoUeclanea,  voL
2,  p.  .330.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  455

burn  quickly  that  person  will  live  for  a  long  time,
while  if  they  smoulder  away  slowly  he  will  soon  die,  ^
though  some  Negroes  reverse  the  usual  readings.  ^
If  a  person  be  smoking  and  his  pipe  suddenly  blazes
up  it  is  likewise  a  sign  of  death;  ^  while  if  a  person
accidentally  spits  on  himself,  some  one  Is  lying  about
him.  ^  If  the  hair  comes  out  in  unusually  large
quantities  when  combed  it  is  the  sign  of  sickness,  ^
but  gray  hairs  at  an  early  age  are  indicative  of  future
riches  ^    or    of    old    ideas.  ^

Features  and  Fate.  These  signs  connected  with  the
human  body  gradually  lead  over  into  the  judging  of
character  by  physical  peculiarities.  Perhaps  the  clas-
sification here  is  not  as  exact  as  it  might  be,  but  these
expressions  of  character  seem  to  be  more  closely  re-
lated to  causal  relationships  aloof  from  human  control
than  to  the  mistakes  in  natural  science  which  have
already  been  considered.  Thus  a  wide  space  between
the  front  teeth  indicates  a  liar,  ^  a  person  who  cannot
keep  a  secret,  ^  a  nagging  person,  ^  '^  or  a  person  that  is
to  live  far  away  from  the  home  folks.  ^  ^  The  European
idea  is  that  such  a  person  will  be  wealthy  and  will
travel.  ^  "^     A  person  whose  eyebrows  meet  is  a  "close

1 112,  and  141.     Lee,  C,     Some  Negro  Lore  from  Baltimore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  5  (1892),  p.  110.
2397.

3  100.

M89.
o  23.

« lib,  and  189.

'  159.

«152.

3  385.
»"91.
1136.
^^  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  126.


456     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

preserver"  (a  miser)  ^  or  a  deceitful  individual,  ^
beliefs  slightly  akin  to  the  European  ones  of  being  a
fortunate  fellow  or  one  who  will  be  hanged,  though
in  the  Icelandic  sagas  such  a  person  was  considered  as
a  hamrammer  or  a  werewolf.  ^  Small  ears  denote
roguishness  or  stinginess,*  large  ones  generosity;^
this  latter  idea  being  found  in  Europe,  ^  as  is  also  ^
the  idea  of  "cold  hands,  warm  heart,"  ^  Coarse  hair
designates  a  good-natured  individual,  fine  hair  a
quick  tempered  one,  ^  while  a  hairy  chest  means
riches.  ^  "^  To  the  follower  of  anthroposcopy,  even  the
color  of  the  eyes  has  a  meaning;  a  Negro  baby  with
gray  eyes  can  see  visions;  ^  ^  and  there  is  a  Gullah  verse:

Blue  gum,  yalluh  eye,
Black  nigguh,  berry  sly;
Yalluh  eye,  blue  gum,
Black  nigguh,  lub  rum.  ^  ^

^'Twin  toes"  (toes  joined  by  a  web)  are  considered
good  luck  both  in  the  South  ^  ^  and  in  England  and
Scotland.  ^  *     Long  fingers  indicate  musical  capacity.  ^  *


1  91,  and  14.

2  297.

^  Henderson,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  84.
Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  125.

^342.

M26.

®  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  307.

^  Fogel,  E.  M.,    Belief s  and  Siiperstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,  p.  363.

8  188,  and  290.

M26.
*"141,    and  Davis,   H.    C,     Negro   Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,   J.   A.
F.  L.,  vol.  27  (1914),  p.  248.
1 1  364.

'  2  Gonzales,  A.  E.,     The  Black  Border,  p.  136.
1 3  289.

'  *  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  301.     Gregor,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  North-
east of  Scotland,  p.  26.
1U4  and  218.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  457

A  perspiring  nose  denotes  meanness,  ^  while  a  woman
whose  dress-front  is  always  wet  with  perspiration  is
sure  to  be  a  tattler,  -  A  sloe-footed  woman  is  always
hard  to  get  along  with,  ^  and  a  left-handed  person  owes
the  devil  a  half  day  of  work.  ^  A  mole  on  the  left  side
of  the  face  is  a  sign  of  poverty,  ^  while  a  Negro  with
dark,  pink  finger  nails  is  sure  to  be  deceitful.  ®  Tiny
white  specks  appearing  under  the  finger  nails  are  called
"gifts"  and  signify  the  coming  of  a  present  of  some
kind  both  in  the  South  ^  and  in  England.  *  The
English  version  of  the  significance  of  the  particular
fingers  on  which  the  white  spots  appear  is:

Thumb — a  gift.

Fore — a  friend.

Middle — a  foe.

Ring — a  letter  (or  sweetheart)  to  come.

Little — a  journey  to  go.  ^

One  Mississippi  Negro  version  is:

Thumb — loss.

First  finger — cross.

Second  finger — gain.

Third  finger — gift.

Little  finger — "sweetum"  (sweetheart).  ^  "

Other  Negroes  say  that  the  number  of  white  spots
under  your  finger  nails  betokens  the  number  of  friends

1370.
291.

"322.
<36.
*371.
«61.
M41.

^  Brand,  J.,     Popular  Antiquities  of  Great  Britain,  vol.  3,  p.  178.     Gregor,
W.,      Folk-Lore  of  the  Northeast  of  Scotland,  p.  126.
*  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  292.
i«278.


458     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

you  have.  ^  In  England  yellow  spots  on  the  nails  of
fingers  indicate  coming  death.  '  There  they  are  some-
times called  "death-mould;"  the  Negro  calls  them
"death-moles"  or  "death-mules,"  and  sometimes  says
they  are  blue  spots  instead  of  yellow  ones,  ^  but  always
the  sign  is  death.  *  A  bump  on  the  tongue  (called  a
"pip")  is  a  "lie  bump"  and  indicates  untruthfulness;^
the  same  belief  being  prevalent  in  Europe  and  other
places  even  as  early  as  270  B.C.  "  A  fever  blister  or
cold  sore  on  the  lip  (on  a  Monday  or  Thursday)  "^
indicates  that  that  person  has  been  courting  too  much.  ^
A  tooth  falling  from  a  person's  mouth  gives  notice  of
death;  ^  as  does  also  the  swallowing  of  a  tooth.  ^  °  When
a  man's  sound  teeth  ache  his  wife  is  pregnant.  ^  ^  If
a  girl  resembles  her  mother  "she  sho'  is  bawn  fer  bad
luck."  '  '  Even  mental  states  may  be  superstitious
semaphores.  One  Georgia  Negro  very  characteris-
tically says:  "Should  you  be  the  subject  of  a  deep
depression  of  spirit,  contrary  to  your  usual  con-
stitutional buoyancy  and  liveliness,  it  is  a  sign  that
you  are  about  to  receive  some  agreeable  intelligence."
Preferences,  as  well,  are  earmarks  of  the  future;  if
a  young  girl  likes  to  cook  with  green  wood  she  will
marry  a  young  man,  but  if  she  prefers  dry  wood  she
will  be  wedded  to  an  old  one.  ^  ^


1246.

^  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  555.

3  286.

^81,  112,  and  141.

M81.

^Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  296.     See  also,  Fogel,  E.  M.,     Beliefs  and
Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,  p.  89.

'  240,  and  Ohio  Whites.

8  290.

» 405.
' « 136.
1114.
1 2  272.
1 3 108.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  459

Love  and  Wedding  Ofnens.  This  brings  us  to  va-
rious love  and  wedding  omens.  The  tactless  swain
who  writes  you  with  a  pencil  lets  you  know  that  his
love  for  you  is  getting  cold.  ^  A  flock  of  birds  flying
over  the  church  at  the  time  of  a  wedding  forecasts  a
happy  future  for  the  married  couple.  ^  If  it  rains
on  your  wedding  night  you  will  shed  as  many  tears  as
there  are  drops  of  rain,  while  rain  on  the  day  after
marriage  marks  many  sorrows  for  the  bride.  ^  Others
say  that  a  rain  on  the  wedding  day  means  an  untrue
mate,  *  while  still  others  interpret  rain  on  the  wedding
day  to  mean  death  for  the  man  first,  while  rain  on  the
following  day  indicates  that  the  bride  will  die  first.  ^
Bright  sunshine  on  the  wedding  morn  is  good  luck;
cloudy  (or  rainy)  ^  weather,  bad  luck;  ^  while  a  "muddy
(rainy)  wedding"  means  a  slovenly  wife.  ^  In  Europe
"happy  is  the  bride  that  the  sun  shines  on;"^  a  rain
while  returning  from  church  signifies  a  life  of  bickering
and  unhappiness;  while  a  rain  in  the  morning  points
to  the  groom  burying  the  bride — a  rain  in  the  afternoon
indicating  the  opposite.  ^  o  With  the  Negroes  the  first
newly-wed  to  sit  down  ^  ^  or  the  first  one  to  "step  off"
after  they  are  married  ^  -  will  be  the  first  to  die.  It  is
also  considered  extremely  bad  luck  to  drop  the  wed-


113.

*91,  and  141.     Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  66.
<93.

5  22,  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  46.

6  63.
'57.

8 13,  and  342.

^  Chambers,     Popular  Rhymes  of  Scotland,  p.  343.
1 "  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  88,  and  Informant  69.
1 1  22.
12 141,  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  46.


460     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

ding  ring  during  the  ceremony,  ^  and  if  a  baby  cries
at  a  wedding  the  couple  will  not  be  happy.  ^

Cross-eyed  Folks.  Other  omens  are  centered  around
human  beings  and  their  activities.  It  is  bad  luck  to
meet  a  cross-eyed  woman,  ^  especially  the  first  thing
in  the  morning,  ^  or  worse  yet,  on  Monday  morning,
since  this  signifies  bad  luck  all  the  week.  ^  Others
say  that  a  cross-eyed  person  can  bring  harm  only  to
those  of  the  same  sex  as  themselves,  ^  but  almost  all
Negroes  shy  at  meeting  cross-eyed  persons  and  es-
pecially at  looking  them  in  the  eye,  "^  this  latter
apparently  being  a  remnant  of  the  evil-eye  super-
stition. If  you  sit  in  church  beside  a  cross-eyed
lady  your  beau  will  not  escort  you  home,  but  the  ill
luck  from  meeting  such  a  person  may  be  averted  by
crossing  your  fingers  ^  or  legs,  by  turning  around  three
times,  by  spitting  in  your  hat,  ^  by  spitting  on  the
ground  and  grinding  the  spittle  into  the  earth  with
your  heel,  ^  "^  or  by  looking  at  your  nails.  ^  ^  In  Europe
it  is  also  considered  ill  luck  to  meet  a  squinting  woman,
but  the  misfortune   is  averted  by  speaking  to  her.  ^  ^

The  Deadly  Female.  With  the  Negroes  men  are  also
given    the    preference    on    New    Year's    day.     For    a


163.

2  189.

3  90,251,  and  327.
4 152,  and  224.

6  320,  189,  and  61.
6  63.

^  141,  286,  and  288.     Smiley,  P.,     Folk-Lore  from  Va.,  S.  C,  Ga.,  Ala.,
and  Fla.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  32  (1919),  pp.  381-82.     Work,  M.  H.,     Some
Geechee  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  34  (1905),  p.  696.
8  176,  and  189.

8  91.     Bullock,  Mrs.  W.  R.,     The  Collection  of  Maryland  Folk-Lore,  J.  A.
F.L.,  vol.  11  (1898),  p.  8.
i°404.
11189.
1 2  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  193,  and  201.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  461

dark  man  to  be  the  first  to  enter  your  house  on  that
day  Is  a  sign  of  good  luck,  ^  but  for  a  woman  to  be  the
first  to  enter  bodes  bad  luck,  especially  with  your
chickens.  ^  In  Lancashire  and  elsewhere  a  dark  man
is  preferred  to  a  light  one  as  the  first  visitor  on  New
Year's  day,  a  possible  remnant  of  long  past  strife
between  the  dark  haired  Celtic  tribes  and  the  blond
Teutons  ^ — and  almost  everywhere  the  coming  of  a
woman  first  is  considered  most  unlucky.  *  In  some
cases  the  Negroes  considered  it  unlucky  to  meet  a
(black)  ^  woman  the  first  thing  Monday  morning
under  pain  of  bad  luck  all  the  week  ^  or  under  pain
of  having  men  company  all  the  week.  ^  "If  you  meet
a  woman  first  when  going  to  business,  turn  back  ten
steps  and  then  go  on  to  keep  from  being  disap-
pointed." ^  If  you  meet  a  red-headed  woman  a  gray
mule  is  on  behind,  ^  while  meeting  a  one-legged  person
is  always  an  ill  omen.  ^  ^

Other  Human  Omens.  If  two  persons  happen  to  say
the  same  thing  at  the  same  time,  the  first  one  to  make
a  wish  will  get  it.  ^  ^  Others  say  that  you  must  kiss
your  hand  five  times  and  make  a  useful  wish  for  each
kiss,  ^  2  while  still  others  claim  one  of  the  two  will  get  a

1106.

2  183.

'  Hardiwick,   C,     Tradition,   Superstition  and   Folk-Lore,   p.   63.

^300.  Brand,  J.,  Popular  Antiquities  of  Great  Britain,  vol.  1,  p.  20.
Henderson,  W.,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  pp.  55-56.
Fogel,  E.  M.,  Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,  p.  98.
Leather,  E.  M.,     Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  90.

6 141,  and  224.

6  79,  189,  and  141.  Smiley,  P.,  Folk-Lore  from  Va.,  S.  C,  Ga.,  Ala.,  and
Fla.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  32  (1919),  p.  381.

'79.

8  189.

9  327.
1 « 206.

1 1  339,  and  Ohio  Whites.
12310.


462     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

letter,  ^  provided  her  companion  pinches  her.  ^  If  you
hear  a  person  talk  and  do  not  see  the  person,  you  will
go  on  a  long  journey,  ^  and  if  a  person  appears  on  the
scene  when  you  are  talking  about  him,  that  person
will  live  for  a  long  time;  ^  but  should  that  person  put
his  hands  upon  you  while  you  are  talking  about  him
you  will  die.  ^  The  idea  of  long  life  for  a  person  who
appears  when  talked  of  is  found  in  European  lore  as
well.  ^  It  Is  good  luck  to  meet  the  same  person  on  the
way  both  to  and  from  any  place.  '^  If  some  one  steps
on  your  heel  that  person  is  going  to  take  your  sweet-
heart away  from  you.  ^  If  you  blot  your  paper  while
writing  to  a  person,  that  person  is  thinking  of  you;^
if  you  drop  your  money  while  going  to  the  store,  the
thing  you  desire  to  purchase  is  not  there;  and  if  you
fall  out  of  bed,  it  is  a  sign  that  your  mother  will  run
you  out.  1 "  If  sudden  cold  chills  run  up  and  down
your  back,  it  is  a  sign  that  a  rabbit  (or  squirrel)  ^  ^  is
running  over  your  grave.  ^  -  The  English  version  is
that  a  person  is  walking  over  your  future  grave.  ^  ^
A  bell  apparently  ringing  In  your  ear  points  to  death  ^  ^
in  the  direction  from  which  the  sound  seems  to  come.  ^  ^


1  100,  and  336.

2  6.

3  207.

*41,  and  233.

^  Moore,  R.  A.,  Superstitions  from  Georgia,  J.A.F.  L.,  vol.  7  (1894),  p.  306.

^  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  563.

'  141,  and  Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  229.

8  288.

3  399.
i"373.
1 1  402.

1^131,  and  141.     Also  Work,  M.  H.,     Some  Geechee  Folk-Lore,  Southern
Workman,  vol.  35  (1905),  p.  634.

1' Henderson,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  85.
Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  304.
1 «  164,  and  188.
1^99.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  463

If  some  one  calls  you  three  times  In  your  sleep  you  will
surely  die,  ^  the  same  being  the  penalty  for  answering  a
mysterious  voice  of  any  kind.  -  In  England  it  is  said
that  a  call  in  the  voice  of  some  absent  person  signifies
death.  ^  The  sediment  of  the  sugar  in  the  form  of
froth  rising  to  the  top  of  a  cup  of  coffee  indicates
money  coming  ^ — another  belief  of  European  extrac-
tion. ^  If  you  drop  your  book  you  will  miss  your  lesson
for  that  day,  no  matter  how  hard  you  have  studied.  «
Such  a  mishap  may  be  averted,  however,  by  stamping
the  book  before  you  pick  it  up,  '^  or  by  getting  some  one
else  to  pick  it  up  for  you.  ^  If  a  match  in  your  hand
burns  entirely  up  without  breaking,  it  is  a  sign  that
your  sweetheart  loves  you.  ^  I  have  already  men-
tioned the  matter  of  lucky  numbers;  I  might  add,  how-
ever, that,  as  a  general  rule,  even  numbers  are  considered
lucky  1  ^  and  odd   numbers  unlucky.  '  ^

The  Wise  Old  Moon.  Moon-lore  is  important,
not  only  in  agriculture  but  in  other  matters  as  well.
It  is  always  considered  bad  luck  to  see  the  new  moon
through  the  tree-tops  ^  - — many  "entanglements"  will
follow  1  ^  in  the  shape  of  whippings,  ^ "  sickness,  ^  ^  or
death  in  the  family.  ^  ^     If  the  disc  is  seen  free  from  all

1  133.

''306.     Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,   p.   288.

'  Henderson,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  30.

^57.

^  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  j).  318.

6  87,  and  123.

^  141,  and  Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Supersiitions,  p.   15.

8  215.

8  164^  179,  and  Ohio  Whites.

10  141.

11  11.

1M3,  106,  217,  224,  234,  and  297.

1^404.

1 ' 364.

1  *  122.

16  36.


464     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

obstructions,  however,  it  is  good  luck.  ^  Informants
vary  as  to  the  lucky  shoulder  over  which  to  look  at  the
moon.  Some  insist  that  joy  or  good  luck  results  from
first  seeing  it,  clear,  over  the  right  shoulder,  ^  while
anger  and  disappointment  (lasting  until  the  change  of
the  moon)  ^  come  from  seeing  it  over  the  left  shoul-
der. *  Others,  however,  are  equally  Insistent  that
seeing  the  new  moon  over  the  left  shoulder  means  that
you  will  have  good  luck,  ^  or  that  you  will  see  your
sweetheart  within  twenty-four  hours.  ^  The  Eu-
ropean version  agrees  that  It  Is  bad  luck  to  see  the
new  moon  through  branches,  but  Insists  that  the  left,
and  not  the  right  shoulder  is  the  unlucky  one.  ^  If  you
see  the  new  moon  through  the  crack  of  a  house  you
will  see  somebody  next  day  you  did  not  see  that  day.  »
The  number  of  stars  within  a  lunar  halo  indicates  the
number  of  one's  friends  who  are  going  to  die  soon;^
while  a  shooting  star  stands  for  a  soul  that  has  just
gone  on  ^ "  (the  European  says,  "a  death  warning").  ^  ^
If  a  comet  appears  it  is  a  sign  of  war  ^  ^  and  famine,  the
same  being  also  the  case  when  the  "elements  are  red";  ^  ^
the  former   belief  being  found  likewise  in   Europe.  ^  *

The    Voice  of  the   Elements.     One   Negress   informs
me  that  while  In  Birmingham,  Ala.,  she  saw  a  small


1141.

2 141,  and  162.

3  159.

*  Moore,  R.  A.,     SuperstitionsfroniGeorgia,  J .  A .  F . L .,  vol.  7  (1894),  p.  205.

*404.

"278.

">  Dyer,  T.  F.  T.,  English  Folk-Lore,  p.  37.  Fogel,  E.  M.,  Beliefs  and
Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,  p.  131.  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,
p.  182.

8  285.

9  Hawkins,  J.,     An  Old  Mauma's  Folk-Lore,  J.A.F.  L.,  vol. 9  (1896), p.  131.
109.

1  ^  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  556.

1271,  and  179.

»»67.

1  *  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  325.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  465

whirlwind  which  ended  up  in  front  of  a  certain  house.
The  next  week  some  people  were  arrested  in  that
house  for  stealing.  Thus,  she  states  as  a  certain  and
original  "sign,"  that  the  direction  taken  by  a  whirl-
wind indicates  the  direction  of  a  thief.  ^  Thus  far  I
have  not  been  able  to  locate  this  superstition  else-
where; perhaps  many  signs  have  arisen  from  such
hasty  generalizations,  as,  for  instance,  the  belief  that
the  location  of  a  whirlwind  indicates  the  spot  where  a
quarrel  will  soon  occur.  -  A  little  rain  with  large
drops  is  said  to  be  a  "death-rain,"  ^  that  is,  a  sign  of
death;*  it  is  also  a  sign  of  death  when  the  rain  falls
crosswise  instead  of  straight  down.  ^  After  a  hard
rain  you  will  find  money  if  you  look  closely  enough.  ®
If  a  thunderstorm  comes  when  a  person  is  critically
ill  that  person  will  surely  die.  ^  In  many  parts  of
Europe  it  is  said  that  a  green,  hot,  or  black  Christmas
makes  a  fat  churchyard.  ^  The  Negroes  have  much
the  same  idea;  a  warm  Christmas,  many  deaths,  ^
while  others  pay  attention  to  the  brightness  or  the
cloudiness  of  the  day.  One  Negro  servant  was  given
Christmas  Eve  and  Christmas  day  as  holidays.  She
came  to  work  Christmas  morning  (it  was  raining)  and
when  questioned  by  her  mistress  she  replied:  "Why  yo'
see,  hit's  lak  dis':  When  us  haves  a  brite  Chrismus
hit's  de  sign  white  folks  is  gwineter  die,  an'  heaps  uv
'em,  an'  when  us  haves  a  dark  Chrismus  hit's  de  sign


1141.

2  61.

»61.

«399.

MOO.

6192.

'189.

^Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  1,  p.  367,  371,  and  383.

9  67.


30


466     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

niggers  is  sho'  gwineter  die.  Us  allers  haves  a  meetin'
(after  a  rainy  Christmas)  ter  pray  fer  de  niggers  de
Lawd  is  gwineter  call  durin'  de  yeah,  an'  I  knowed
I'd  hab  ter  hab  termorrow  so  I  jes'  cum  ter  work
terday."  ^  The  following  beliefs  are  more  miscellaneous
in  type.  Three  rocks  in  a  row  indicate  a  buried
treasure  near  by;  ^  if  most  of  the  cotton  blossoms  are
white  in  the  morning  you  will  have  a  good  crop,  if
red,  a  poor  one;^  if  you  see  the  shadow  of  an  animal
before  you  see  the  animal  himself  you  will  see  some-
body you  do  not  want  to  see;  ^  while  letting  the  first
fish  of  the  day  fall  back  into  the  water  means  that
few  fish  will  fall  to  your  lot  that  day.  ^

Animal  Harbingers.  This  brings  us  to  the  matter
of  animal  signs,  which  serve  right  and  left  as  omens
of  good  or  of  bad  luck.  Exactly  the  same  thing  is
true  in  Africa,  Certain  notes  from  the  prophet-
bird  at  the  beginning  of  a  journey  are  sufficient  to
reverse  the  best  laid  plans,  while  other  notes  send  the
travelers  on  with  every  assurance  of  success.  ^  Similar
is  the  great  king-fisher  (Usari),  whose  cry  on  the  right
of  the  hearer  indicates  good,  but  on  the  left,  evil.  ^
When  animals  behave  contrary  to  their  usual  nature
it  is  often  considered  as  an  omen — probably  because
it  is  peculiar,  hence  fetish.  "The  crowing  of  a  cock
in  the  middle  of  the  night  is  considered  by  West
Africans    a   bad    omen,    and    the   animal   is    forthwith


1349.
233.

3  141.

*352.
6 150.

^  Croriise  and  Ward,     Cunnie  Rabbit,   Mr.   Spider  and  the  Other   Beef,
p.  175  (note).

^  Burton,  R.  F.,     Wit  and  Wisdom  from  West  Africa,  p.  381.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  467

killed."  1  "...  A  hen  crowing  like  a  cock  in
the  morning  means  the  death  of  a  woman;  some
people  kill  the  hen.  If  a  hen  crows  several  times,  the
owner  offers  it  anything  it  will  eat  and  gives  it  away
after  praying;  then  only  one  person  will  die."  ^  All
of  these  animal  actions  are  carefully  observed.  "The
rat  Benda,  running  across  your  path  from  left  to  right
is  good;  from  right  to  left  fairly  good;  should  it  appear
from  the  left  and  run  ahead  in  the  direction  that
you  are  going,  'Oh!  that  is  very  good!'  but  should  it
run  towards  you,  well,  the  best  thing  for  you  to  do  is
to  go  back,  for  you  are  sure  to  meet  with  bad  luck!"  ^
The  voice  of  the  Obin-ugua,  a  large  white  bird  whose
note  resembles  the  canoe  chant,  can  turn  the  tide,  so
the  natives  of  old  Calabar  believe,  *  and  the  Yorubas
say  that  "when  the  Ogboya  (an  animal  about  the  size
of  a  cat)  strikes  its  tail  thrice  on  the  ground  in  any
town,  that  town  will  be  deserted."  ^  This  behavior
of  animals  is  even  associated  with  natural  phenomena,
since  the  Vey  people  say  that  when  it  rains  while  the
sun  is  shining  it  is  a  sign  that  a  leopardess  has  just
given  birth  to  young.  «

Cats.  Perhaps  the  most  common  animal  omens
among  both  whites  and  colored  of  the  South  are  those
relating  to  cats,  and  especially  to  black  cats.  Aunt
Vinie,  an  old  Negress,  claims  black  cats  to  be  man-
kind's greatest  enemies.  She  claims  that  they  are
the  cause  of  most  of  the  unhappiness,  failures,  sick-

1  Ibid.,  p.  105.

2  Thomas,  N.  W.,     Anlhrop.  Rept.  on  Sierra  Leone,  pt.  1,  p.  90.
'  Nassau,  R.  H.,     Fetichism  in  West  Africa,  p.  195.

''  Burton,  R.  F.,     Wit  and  Wisdom  from  West  Africa,  p.  377.
^  Ibid.,  p.  300.

« Bergen,  F.  D.,     Current  Superstitions,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  iv  (1895),
p.  156.


468     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

nesses,  and  deaths  in  the  world,  and  that  careful
precautions  must  be  taken  to  throw  off  their  hoodoos.  ^
As  one  might  suspect  from  the  wide  prevalence  of
these  beliefs  and  from  their  uniformity,  in  contrast
to  the  decided  variations  of  conjuration  beliefs,  they
are  mostly  of  European  origin.  Frigg  was  the  Ger-
manic Venus,  and  as  the  wife  of  Wodan,  drives  in  a
chariot  drawn  by  cats,  the  cat  being  sacred  to  her.  ^
Besides,  the  cat,  like  the  boar,  was  an  Aryan  person-
ification of  storm  and  tempest,  and  hence  associated
with  witches  who  were  mainly  wind  makers.  ^  Ac-
cording to  a  common  English  ^  (and  Negro)  ^  ex-
pression, a  black  cat  is  said  to  be  a  witch.  Many  of
the  Negro  cat  beliefs  are  found  in  England.  A  person
should  never  take  a  cat  with  him  when  moving  to
another  house,  ^  and  it  is  ill  luck  to  meet  a  black  cat,  ^
though  the  misfortune  may  be  averted  by  throwing
an  old  iron  nail  at  the  animal.  ^

In  considering  the  Negro  beliefs  concerning  cats,
we  shall  not  restrict  ourselves  entirely  to  omens,  but
include  some  of  the  directed  cat-signs  as  well.  Most
common  of  all  is  the  English  belief,  mentioned  above,
that  it  is  extremely  unlucky  for  a  black  cat  to  cross
your  path  ahead  of  you  ^ — some  say  that  this  is  be-
cause a  black  cat  is  a  haunt  and  can  put  a  spell  on


1116.

2  Fogel,  E.  M.,      Belief  sand  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,  p.  12.

'  Hardiwick,  C,     Traditions,  Superstitions  and  Folk-Lore,  p.  164.

^Newell,  William  W.,  Negro  Superstitions .  of  European  Origin,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  12  (1899),  pp.  294-95.

'Steiner,  R.,  Superstitions  and  Beliefs  from  Central  Georgia,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  12  (1899),  p.  268.

*  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  199.

7  Ibid.,  p.  193.

*  Gregor,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northeast  of  Scotland,  p.  124.

8  5, 102,224,379,246,41,189, 106, 173,  and  336.  Bergen,  F.  D.,  Animal
and  Plant  Lore,  M.A.F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7  (1899),  p.  25.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  469

you.  1  Others  claim  bad  luck  only  if  the  cat  crosses
from  right  to  left,  good  luck  if  from  left  to  right,  ^
although  by  others  the  positions  are  reversed.  ^  Still
others  say  that  if  the  cat  merely  goes  across  the  road
in  front  of  you  it  is  sickness,  but  if  he  should  cross
then  turn  and  go  back  again  to  where  he  started,  it
is  death.  The  evil  in  either  case  is  averted  by  spitting
on  the  ground  and  making  a  crossmark  with  the,
fingers.  ^  Others  say  that  a  simple  crossmark  is
sufficient,  provided  you  turn  back.  ^  One  Negro  from
Kentucky,  while  riding  in  an  automobile  down  the
main  business  street  of  Cleveland,  Ohio,  made  a
crossmark  and  drove  all  the  way  around  the  block
to  avoid  meeting  a  black  cat  ahead,  ^  Other  ways
of  avoiding  the  misfortune  are  to  turn  around  and
walk  backwards  over  the  spot  where  the  cat  crossed
the  road;^  step  off  the  sidewalk  and  walk  on  the  side
until  you  pass  the  spot  where  the  cat  crossed;^  or
raise  your  umbrella.  ^  If  a  (black)  ^  ^  cat,  however,
follows  you  home  ^  ^  or  "takes  up"  at  your  house  it  is  a
sure  sign  of  good  luck  ^  ^ — the  same  belief  obtaining
in  England.  ^  ^     In  old  Ireland   such  a   cat  was  con-

1384.

2  133.

3  182.

me.

^32,  and  Smiley,  P.,     Folk-Lore  from  Va.,  S.  C,  Ga.,  Ala.,  and  Fla.,
J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  32  (1919),  pp.  381-82.
«90.
^  37,  288,  310,  and  397.

8  41.

9 155_

10  288^  and  341.

11104,  and  206.  See  also,  Lee,  C,  Some  Negro  Lore  from  Baltimore,
J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5  (1892),  p.  112.

12  341,  173,  112,  and  141.  Work,  M.  H.,  Some  Geechee  Folk-Lore,
Southern  Workman,  vol.  35  (1905),  p.  635.  Smiley,  P.,  Folk-Lore  from
Va.,  S.  C,  Ga.,  Ala.,  and  Fla.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  32  (1919),  pp.  381^82.

1  *  Leather,  E.  M.,  Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  24.  Lean's  Collectanea,
vol.  2,  p.  15.


470     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

sidered  a  good  spirit.  ^  Other  Negroes,  however,
regard  a  black  cat  following  you  as  a  sign  of  trouble,  ^
especially  if  the  cat  appears  on  your  back  doorsteps
at  meal  time.  An  individual  seeing  such  a  cat  will
leave  the  table,  saying:

Cat,  cat,  go  thy  way,

I'll  eat  no  dinner  on  this  day,

thus  preventing  possible  illness.  ^  No  doubt  at  first
this  was  a  renunciation  sacrifice  (fasting)  to  the  spirit
represented  by  the  black  (peculiar  color,  hence  fetish)
cat.

One  old  slave  tells  of  seeing  children  die  because  the
cat  sucked  their  breath;^  the  idea  is  widespread^  and
of  English  ^  origin,  as  is  also '  the  Negro  ^  belief  that  a
cat  allowed  in  the  same  room  with  a  corpse  will  prey
upon  the  dead  body.  Some  Negroes  reverse  the
former  idea  and  say  it  is  good  luck  to  sleep  with  a
cat.  ^  Black  cats  are  often  regarded  as  "han'ts"
raised  from  the  dead;^*^  they  have  nine  lives  (an  Eu-
ropean belief)  ^  ^  and  if  one  of  those  lives  is  taken
the     cat     will     forever    haunt     you  ^  ^     or     at     least


^  Fogel,  E.  M . ,    Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,  p.  69 .

2341.

3  116.

^286.

6311.  Smiley,  P.,  Folk-Lore  from  Va.,  S.  C,  Ga.,  Ala.,  and  Fla.,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  32  (1919),  p.  383.

«Dyer,  T.  F.  T.,  English  Folk-Lore,  p.  107.  Gregor,  W.,  Folk-Lore
of  the  Northeast  of  Scotland,  p.  123.     Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  113.

'  Brand,  J.,     Popular  Antiquities  of  Great  Britain,  vol.  2,  pp.  232-33.

8  112,  and  406.

9  141.

1 0  384.

^^  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  1,  p.  433,  and  Dyer,  T.  F.  T.,  English  Folk-
Lore,  p.  104.

1^64,  and  354.  Thanet,  Octave,  Folk-Lore  in  Arkansas,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  5  (1892),  pp.  123-24.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  471

bring  you  bad  luck.  ^  In  Scotland  it  is  believed  to
be  bad  luck  to  shoot  a  cat,  ^  but  some  Negroes  go
further  and  call  it  bad  luck  to  touch  a  dead  cat,  '
or  to  move  a  live  one  from  place  to  place.  *  If  you
kick  a  cat  you  will  have  rheumatism,  ^  while  the
devil  will  get  you  if  you  drown  a  cat.  ^  Doubtless
the  idea  that  the  cat  has  nine  lives  is  due  to  his  tena-
cious grip  on  life.  One  Negro  tells  of  cutting  a  black
cat  in  two  with  a  new  axe.  The  man  then  left  to  work
in  the  field  all  day  long,  but  when  he  came  back  in  the
evening,  the  head  part  of  the  cat  came  walking  out  on
two  legs  to  meet  him  and  had  to  be  killed  again.  ^
Mrs.  Boyle  tells  of  "ole  Cinder  Cat"  who  could  be  put
in  a  tar  barrel  and  burned  without  even  so  much  as
scorching  her  tail.  **  If  the  house  cat  follows  you
out  every  time  you  leave  the  house  you  will  forever
remain  single,  ^  while  if  a  cat  "washes  his  face"  and
looks  around,  the  one  he  looks  at  will  have  trouble  ^ "
or  will  marry.  ^  ^  I  have  already  mentioned  the  use  of
the  black  cat  in  curing  certain  diseases — a  white
man  from  Alexander,  La.,  claims  to  have  cured  his
chronic  rheumatism  by  wearing  a  black  cat  hide,
dried  in  the  autumn  sun,  around  his  waist  as  a  belt.  ^  ^


1  173,  260,  and  398.

"  Gregor,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northeast  of  Scotland,  p.  123.

^  141,  and  Bergen,  F.  D.,  Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7
(1899),  p.  24.

^Steiner,  R.,  Superstitions  and  Beliefs  from  Central  Georgia,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  12  (1899),  p.  268.  Williamson,  G.,  Superstitions  from  Louisiana,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  18  (1905),  p.  229.

*308.

«235.

^91.

8  Boyle,  Mrs.  V.  F.,     Devil  Tales,  p.  10.

Mil.

11  3i5_

12  Cross,  T.  P.,  Folk-Lore  from  the  Southern  States,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  22
(1909),  p.  255.


472     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Brer  Rabbit.  Caesar  ^  mentions  the  fact  that  certain
peoples  in  Britain  were  forbidden  to  eat  the  flesh  of
the  hare,  a  taboo  apparently  of  great  antiquity,  since
the  bones  of  this  animal  are  conspicuous  by  their
absence  among  the  debris  of  the  ancient  Swiss  lake
dwellings,  and  the  kjokkenmodings,  or  shell  mounds,
of  Denmark.  One  of  the  Saxon  forms  of  the  goddess
Freyja  had  hares  for  train-bearers,  and  another  walked
at  night  in  the  fields  of  Aargan,  accompanied  by  a
hare  of  silver-gray  color.  Boadicea,  queen  of  the
Iceni,  used  a  hare  as  an  augury  before  fighting  and
defeating  the  Roman  soldiers.  The  expression  "as
mad  as  a  March  hare"  doubtless  is  due  to  the  habits
of  this  animal  during  the  vernal  equinox,  ^  and  rather
widespread  in  European  lore  is  the  idea  that  it  is  an
omen  of  bad  luck  for  the  hare  to  cross  the  road  ahead
of  you,  ^  though  it  is  good  luck  if  he  runs  along  ahead
of  you.  ^  As  if  this  were  not  enough  proof  of  the
fetishistic  nature  of  the  rabbit,  in  various  parts  of
Europe  a  hare's  foot  (or  parts  of  the  foot)  is  carried
for  cramps  ^  or  rheumatism.  ^  All  of  this  leads  us  to
believe  that  there  was  at  least  a  substantial  European
contribution  to  Negro  rabbit-lore,  though  the  African
element  cannot  be  entirely  denied,  at  least  in  so  far
as  folk-tales  are  concerned.

If  Brer  Rabbit  crosses  the  road  ahead,  going  to  the
left,  the  Negroes  look  out  for  bad  luck;  to  the  right.


1  Gomne,  G.  L.,     Folklore  as  an  Historical  Science,  p.  286.

^  Hardiwick,    C,     Traditions,    Superstitions    and  Folk-Lore,  pp.  113-14.

^  Ibid.,  and  Brand,  J.,  Popular  Antiquities  of  Great  Britain,  vol.  3,
p.  201.  Leather,  E.  M.,  Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  23.  Lean's  Collect-
anea, vol.  2,  p.  195.

*  Fogel,  E.  M.,  Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,^.  108.

^  Dyer,  T.  F.  T.,  English  Folk-Lore,  p.  164.  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,
p.  492.

« Ibid.,  p.  509.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  473

good  luck.  ^  Some  say  that  a  rabbit  crossing  the  road
from  either  direction  in  front  of  you  is  a  bad  sign — while
crossing  behind  you  is  good  luck — "you  have  passed
the  trouble."  ^  The  bad  luck  may  be  avoided  by  turn-
ing around  and  walking  backwards  over  the  spot  where
he  crossed  the  road  ahead  of  you,  ^  this  being  at  first
doubtless  a  method  of  fooling  the  spirits  by  reversing
the  foot-tracks  so  that  they  could  not  follow.  Others
say  that  nine  steps  backward  are  efficacious  only
when  the  rabbit  is  going  slowly;  if  he  is  running  fast
the  only  thing  to  do  is  to  turn  around  and  make  for
home.  "*  On  the  other  hand,  you  may  take  nine  steps
backward  and  whirl  around ;  ^  or  else  s  imply  turn  around
three  times.  ^  Or  you  may  make  a  crossmark  on  the
ground  and  spit  in  it,  (turning  your  hat  upside  down  for
a  time),  ^  or  make  your  cross  and  put  your  hat  on  the
left  side  of  your  head.  ^  Others  prescribe  that  you
simply  put  your  hat  on  backwards.  ^  These  are
probably  methods  of  disguise,  while  the  Alabama
custom  of  taking  off  the  hat  and  saying,  "Good  morn-
ing, Mr.  Rabbit,"  1  °. has  more  of  the  nature  of  pro-
pitiation or  flattery.  This  may  be  also  the  case  with
pulling  a  thread  from  your  coat  and  dropping  it  in  the
road   when   the  rabbit  crosses,  ^  ^  while  spitting  over

1  217,  234,  250,  224,  and  101.

2  Steiner,    R.,     Superstitions    and  Beliefs  from    Central   Georgia,   J.   A.
F.  L.,  vol.  12  (1899),  p.  262.

3  Ibid.,  and  91,  141,  and  234.     Speers,  M.  W.,     J.A.F.  L.,  vol.  26  (1913),
p.  190.

4  37.
6  61.

6  274.

7  42.

^Alabama  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  33  (1904),  p.  52.
9  33,  and  102.
loBrannon,  P.    A.,      Central   Alabama  Negro   Superstitions,  Birmingham
(Ala.)  News,  Jan.  18,  1925,  p.  15.

11  57,  and  Parsons,  E.  C,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.
L.  S.,  vol.  16  (1923),  p.  210.


474     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

your  left  shoulder  to  avoid  bad  luck  ^  is  no  doubt
exorcistic.  A  rabbit  crossing  your  path  on  Saturday
morning  is  a  good  luck  sign,  ^  but  ill  luck  from  such  an
occurence  at  other  times  may  be  effectively  avoided
by  keeping  a  rabbit's  foot  in  your  pocket.  ^

The  Rabbit's  Foot.  Europeans  until  quite  recently
valued  a  rabbit's  foot  and  carried  it  about  the  person
as  a  charm.  ^  This  is  true  of  the  Negroes  (and  many
whites)  as  well,  and  they  have  a  little  story  about
Brer  Rabbit  disposing  of  the  last  witch  in  the  world
by  putting  pepper  in  her  vacated  skin.  Thus  Brer
Rabbit  is  just  "bawn  ter  luck"  and  his  left  foot  will
surely  bring  luck  to  you.  ^  Some  Negroes  claim  that
the  right  hind  foot  of  a  rabbit  is  the  proper  one  to
carry  ^  and  have  the  following  rhyme  to  back  up  their
statements :

•Ole  Molly  Cottontail,
Won't  you  be  shore  not  to  fail,
To  give  me  yo'  right  hin'  foot?
My  luck,  it  won't  be  fer  sale.  "^

Among  most  Negroes,  however,  it  is  the  left  hind  foot
of  a  graveyard  rabbit,  ^  killed  in  the  dark  of  the  moon,  ^
though  the  left  hind  foot  of  an  ordinary  rabbit  is  by
no  means   despised.     Others   add   that  such   a  grave-

1  334.

2301.

3  278.

^  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  439.

*  Backus,  E.  M.,     Tales  of  Ihe  Rabbit  from  Georgia  Negroes,  J.  A.  F.  L. ,
vol.  12  (1899),  pp.  109-12.
6  341,  and  386.

'  57,  and  Talley,  T.  W.,     Negro  Folk  Rhymes,  pp..  8-9.
«  McCulIough,  J.  E.,     The  Human  Way,  pp.  58-59.
9  Owen,  Mary  A.,     Among  the  Voodoos,  I.  F.  L.  C.  (1891),  p.  234.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  475

yard  rabbit  must  be  killed  by  a  cross-eyed  person.  ^
In  New  Orleans  these  rabbit-foot  charms,  mounted
in  silver  or  gold,  are  conspicuously  displayed  in  the
windows  of  prominent  jewelry  shops  up  and  down
Canal  Street.  The  managers  of  these  stores  assure
me  that  the  sales  are  enormous.  The  one  I  purchased
had  with  it  a  printed  slip  containing  a  graphic  il-
lustration of  the  rabbit  in  the  act  of  being  shot  and  the
following  inscription:  "This  little  luckie  is  the  left
hind  foot  of  a  graveyard  rabbit  killed  in  the  full  of  the
moon  by  a  red-headed,  cross-eyed  nigger  at  12  o'clock
at  night,  riding  a  white  mule."  The  peace  of  many  a
rustic  graveyard  must  have  been  broken  by  the
midnight  roar  of  artillery  to  supply  the  huge  numbers
of  rabbit's  feet  these  New  Orleans  jewelers  have.
A  large  rabbit  is  more  effective  than  a  small  one.  ^
The  phenomenal  success  of  General  Fitzhugh  Lee  of
Virginia,  in  his  gubernatorial  race,  was  attributed  by
the  Negroes  to  the  fact  that  he  carried  a  rabbit's  foot
and  a  bottle  of  stump  water;  ^  and  Grover  Cleveland
in  his  race  for  President  was  given  the  foot  from  a
rabbit  killed  on  the  grave  of  Jesse  James,  the  famous
outlaw,  ■*  the  idea  being  that  the  more  wicked  the
person  who  is  dead  the  more  elfective  the  charms
associated  with  his  remains.  Some  insist  that  the
rabbit's  foot  be  carried  in  the  right  hand  pocket  to
bring  the  best  luck.  ^     Others  say  that  you  must  have


142.

2  Brannon,  P.  A.,  Central  Alabama  Negro  Superstitions,  Birmingham
(Ala.)  News,  Jan.  18,  1925,  p.  15.

3  Bergen,  F.  D.,  Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7  (1899),
p.  125.

*  Concerning  Negro  Sorcery  in  the  United  States,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  3
(1890),  p.  283.

6  Bergen,  F.  D.,  Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7  (1899),
p.  12.


476     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

a  foot  "fixed"  by  the  conjure-doctor,  ^  and  it  is  deemed
wise  to  pour  whiskey  on  your  rabbit's  foot  once  in  a
while  to  keep  it  in  good  working  order.  -  Some  also
•claim  good  luck  from  carrying  a  squirrel's  tail,  ^  and
good  luck  from  a  squirrel  crossing  your  path  *  (the
European  version),  ^  though  others  consider  it  ill
luck  for  a  squirrel  to  cross  your  path.  ^  If  a  flying
squirrel  gets  into  your  house  you  will  lose  some  member
of  the  family  before  the  month  is  out.  ^

Horses.  Horse-lore  is  of  some  importance  to  the
Negro,  especially  in  reference  to  horseshoes  and
witches,  and  is  apparently  of  European  origin,  or
possibly  in  part  a  native  American  development,
since  the  horse  is  scarcely  known  in  West  Africa.  If
a  horse  neighs  twice  after  midnight  when  his  master
is  sick  the  master  will  die.  ^  If  you  see  a  gray  mare  it
is  a  sign  of  death,  ^  while  the  next  woman  you  see,
after  seeing  a  white  horse,  will  have  red  hair.  ^ "  Finding
a  horseshoe  is  a  sign  of  good  luck,  ^  ^  provided  you  throw
it  over  your  left  shoulder  and  then  take  it  home  and
nail  it  up  over  the  door.  ^  -  Others  say  that  you  should
spit  on  it,  throw  it  backwards  over  your  shoulder  and
make  a  wish;  ^  ^  this  being  the  European  version,  with
the  added  caution  that  you  keep  the  wish  a  secret.  ^  *


1306.

2  26.

3339.

MIL

*  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  196.

6  217.

M02.

8  314.

M21.
1 " 152.

11191,  and  370.
12  152.
13341.
1*  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  281.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  477

It  Is  especially  good  luck  to  find  the  horseshoe  with
the  open  end  towards  you,  and  the  number  of  nails
in  the  shoe  indicates  the  number  of  years  that  you  will
have  good  luck.  ^  If  you  find  a  quarter  in  a  horseshoe
you  will  find  a  large  sum  of  money,  -  but  finding  a
broken  horseshoe  brings  ill  luck  which  may  only  be
averted  by  throwing  the  fragment  over  your  left
shoulder  and  spitting,  ^  A  horseshoe  nailed  up  over
your  door  will  keep  "evil  spirits"  away;^  my  old
mammy  had  two  of  them  wrapped  in  "silver  paper"
(tinfoil).  One  she  kept  over  her  door  and  the  other
under  the  steps  to  keep  witches  out  of  the  house,  the
silver  making  them  even  more  effective.  ^  A  horse-
shoe hung  in  an  apple  tree  will  make  it  hold  its  fruit
well.  ^  One  conjure-doctor  of  my  acquaintance
carried  a  horseshoe  magnet  all  the  time,  claiming  it
"picks  up  all  de  trubb'ls  an'  keeps  'em  out  yo'  way."  ^

Horseshoes.  In  Europe  the  horse  and  the  horse's
head  were  sacred  to  Wodan.  ^  Horses  seem  also  to
have  been  feared  (as  with  American  Indians),  or
worshiped  or  prized  by  the  Celts,  for  places  are  named
after  them.  Penmarch  in  Brittany,  means  horse-
head  or  hill.  Ardincaple  in  Scotland,  means  the
mare's  height,  and  there  are  many  other  places  with
similar  names.  In  Gaelic  tales,  horses  are  frequently
mentioned,  and  more  magical  properties  are  attributed
to    them    than    elsewhere    in    popular    lore.  ^     Again,

1173.
2  192.
»33.
*61.

8  112.

•122.
'91.

*  Fogel,  E.  M.,  Beliefs  mid  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,
pp.  9-11.

*  Campbell,  J.  F.,  Popular  Tales  of  the  West  Highlands,  vol.  i,  Intro,
p.  Ixxix.


478     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

however,  the  magic  of  iron  is  observed  as  being  most
effective  against  the  fairies  who  shoot  stone  arrows,
and  its  use  is  thought  possibly  to  represent  a  dim
memory  of  ancient  strife  between  men  of  the  stone  and
iron  ages.  ^  Others  think  the  horseshoe  charm  pos-
sibly derived  from  the  crescent  of  the  moon,  -  though
the  natives  of  North  Africa  and  elsewhere  use  phallic
charms  shaped  much  like  the  horseshoe  to  ward  off
the  evil  eye.  ^  However,  one  must  not  too  quickly
assume  an  exclusive  European  origin  for  horseshoe-
lore.  The  smith  in  Africa,  ^  as  in  many  other  parts  of
the  world,  is  regarded,  because  of  his  skill  and  various
idiosyncrasies,  as  a  mystical  character;^  and  it  is
noticeable  that  the  Negro  rather  shrinks  from  the
craft  of  blacksmithing.  ^

Dog  language.  Passing  now  to  dog-lore,  which  also
has  a  more  or  less  univ^ersal  character,  we  find  again
many  European  survivals.  In  England  the  howling
of  the  dog  is  an  omen  of  death,  ^  though  the  dog  may
be  hushed  by  pulling  off  your  left  shoe  and  turning
it  about,  or  by  turning  the  shoe  upside  down  at  the
bedside.  '^  In  other  parts  of  England  the  same  pro-
cedure is  observed  except  that  the  sole  of  the  shoe  is
spat  upon  and  the  foot  placed  in  the  place  where  you
sat.  ^     The  Negro  also  regards  the  howling  of  the  dog


1  Ibid.,  pp.  Ixviii  and  Ixix.

-  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  182.  For  a  good  general  survey  of  horse-
shoe-lore over  the  world,  see  Lawrence,  R.  M.,  The  Folk-Lore  of  the  Horse-
shoe, J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  9  (1896),  pp.  282-92.

3  Eichler,  William,     Customs  of  Mankind,  pp.  634-35.

*  Weeks,  J.  M.,     Ainong  the  Congo  Cannibals,  p.  122.

'  Lippert,  J.,     Kulturgeschichte  der  Menschheit,  vol.  ii,  p.  215  ff.

*  Bruce,  P.  A.,  The  Plantation  Negro  as  a  Freedvian,  pp.  232-33.
Chamberlain,  A.  F.,     Fear  of  Fire,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  17  (1904),  p.  77.

^  Leather,  E.  M.,     Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  24.

^Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  401.

» Dyer,  T.  F.  T.,     English  Folk-Lore,  pp.  101-02.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  479

as  an  omen  of  death,  ^  especially  if  he  barks  continually
without  cause,  ^  or  howls  in  the  back  yard,  ^  or  Is
restless  and  noisy  during  the  night.  *  The  dog,  with
his  keenness  of  scent  and  his  widespread  domestication,
is  especially  picked  out  everywhere  as  a  creature
sensitive  to  lurking  spirits,  especially  the  spirit  of
death.

If  a  dog  (or  cat)  ^  wallows  on  his  back  (in  front  of
your  door)  ^  you  should  stop  him  at  once.  He  is
''measuring  for  somebody's  grave"  ^  and  unless  he  is
stopped  somebody  will  soon  die.  **  Some  say  that  if
he  lies  on  his  back  in  the  house  with  his  feet  up  some
one  in  that  house  will  die,  while  if  he  lies  in  this  manner
in  the  yard  the  neighbor  who  lives  in  the  direction
towards  which  his  head  is  turned  will  die.  "  If  a  dog
crawls  along  on  the  ground  on  his  stomach  he  is  also
"measuring  for  somebody's  grave"  and  had  better  be
stopped.  1 0  A  dog  digging  a  large,  long  hole  in  the
ground  is  also  indicating  a  death  in  the  neighborhood,  '  '
and  when  he  lies  with  his  head  in  the  house  and  his
rear  outside  the  door  it  means  a  death  in  the  family,
though  the  reverse  position  merely  indicates  company.  ^  ^
If  a  dog  jumps  over  a  cradle  when  the  baby  is  there

1125,  and  141.  Diivis,  H.  C,  Negro  Folk-Lore  of  S.  C,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  27  (1914),  pp.  246-47.

2  228.

'341.

^23.

'  320.

« 236.

^  112,  141,  and  224.  .See  also,  Lee,  C,  Some  Negro  Lore  from  lialti-
more,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5  (1892),  p.  111.

*  35,  32,  151,  and  183.  Alabama  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  33
(1904),  p.  51.

^57,  and  Smiley,  P.,  Folk-Lore  from  Va.,  S.C.,  Ga.,  Ala.,  and  Fla.,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  32  (1919),  p.  382.

'"  Richardson,  C,     Some  Slave  Supersiilions,  Southern    Workman,  vol.  41
(1912),  p.  247.

1 1  141,  and  Bergen,  F.  D.,     Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7
(1899),  p.  27.

^^  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  210.


480     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

the  child  will  have  bad  luck.  ^  If  a  dog  sniffs  at  one's
trouser  leg  and  urinates  on  it,  it  is  a  sure  sign  of  good
luck,  -  but  if  a  dog  jumps  in  one  window,  passes
straight  through  the  house  and  out  the  other  window,
it  means  death.  ^  You  should  always  keep  a  strange
dog  that  follows  you  home;^  in  Europe  they  say
that  such  is  an  omen  of  wealth.  ^  It  is  bad  luck  to
kick  ^  or  kill  a  dog,  ^  and  any  time  a  dog  on  his  own
initiative  jumps  a  rabbit  you  may  know  that  he  will
be  sure  to  catch  him  before  sundown.  ^

Miscellaneous  Animal  Omens.  The  lowing  of  a
cow  is  a  sign  of  death,  ^  especially  when  it  occurs
continually,  ^ "  or  in  front  of  your  house,  ^  ^  or,  as  is  most
commonly  said,  late  in  the  night.  '  ^  When  rodents
cut  any  of  your  clothes  it  is  a  sign  of  death  ^  ^  or  moving
— most  of  the  Negroes  taking  the  latter  view,  ^  *  es-
pecially if  it  is  quilts  that  the  mice  have  cut.  ^  ^  If
a  rat  climbs  in  your  chair  at  night  it  is  a  sign  that  you
are  going  to  marry,  ^  ^  while  a  rat  running  across  the
hearth  means  a  "bad  enemy."  ^  ^     When  the  "ground-

^Ihid.

2  258.

3  346.

*  141,  and  341.  Smilev,  P.,  Folk-Lore  from  Va.,  S.  C,  Ga.,  Ala.,  and
Fla.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  32  (1919),  pp.  381-82.

*  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  15.
6  313.

^  61.     The  Africans  consider  it  bad  luck  to  kill  an  Ajako,  a  dog-like
animal.     Burton,  R.  F.,     Wit  and  Wisdom  from  West  Africa,  p.  229.
8  355.
'133.

1 0  288.

1 1  308.

1^26,  32,  and  113.     Also  Alabama  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  33
(1904),  p.  52.
1 3  J25.

^*  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  16,  and  vol.  33  (1904),  p.  52.
1U41,  and  274.
16  314.
^''Superstitions  of  Negroes  in  New  Orleans,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5  (1892),  p.  330.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  481

puppies"  ("puppy-dogs,"  "water-dogs,"  or  coral-colored
lizards)  bark  after  you  it  is  a  sure  sign  of  death.  ^
If  a  rattlesnake  runs  from  you  it  is  also  a  sign  of  death
in  the  family.  ^  A  mole  burrowing  around  your
house  is  likewise  a  death  omen,  but  you  can  drive  the
mole  away  by  mixing  some  bluestone,  new  salt,  and
hot  ashes,  and  putting  them  at  the  entrance  to  his
burrow,  telling  the  mole  to  go  away.  ^  In  Europe
a  mole  burrowing  near  the  foundation  of  a  dwelling
means  moving  within  a  short  time,  but  if  the  mole
burrows  entirely  around  the  house  it  is  death.  ^  A
toad  found  in  the  house  means  death  with  the  Ne-
groes ;5  if  found  in  the  water,  marriage.^  When
bats  come  into  the  house  you  are  going  to  move  out.  ^

The  Feathered  Prophet.  Bird-lore  is  second  only  to
animal-lore  in  popularity  among  the  Negroes.  Taking
first  the  owl  as  the  bird  around  which  most  of  these
bird-beliefs  cluster,  we  find  a  little  more  variance
from  locality  to  locality  and  from  the  English  beliefs,
inasmuch  as  the  owl,  unlike  the  cat,  horse,  or  dog,  is
not  a  domestic  animal  associated  with  the  household
where  the  diffusion  of  English  beliefs  occured.  How-
ever, many  of  the  characteristics  of  Hel  were  trans-
ferred to  the  Germanic  Frigg,  and,  as  such,  the  owl  is
her  messenger,  and  the  hooting  of  an  owl  prognostic

^280,  381,  and  341.      Davis,  H.  C,      Negro  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,
J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  27  (1914),  p.  246.
2 123,  125,  127,  9,  and  310.

3  141.

*  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  567.

*  91.     Alabama  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  33  (1904),  p.  41.

« Bergen,  F.  D.,     Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7  (1899),
p.  38.

''Southern  Workman,  vol.  33  (1904),  p.  51.


31


482     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

of  death.  ^  In  Europe  ^  and  In  Africa  ^  the  hooting  of
an  owl  near  a  house  is  Indicative  of  the  death  of  one
of  the  inmates.  This  almost  universal  superstition  is
doubtless  due  to  the  nocturnal  habits  of  the  bird  and
his  strange  half-human  cry,  and  possibly  represents  a
remnant  of  the  belief  of  the  late  Middle  Ages  that
such  birds  were  evil  spirits  coming  to  devour  the  souls
of  the  dying.  ^  Thus  coming  from  a  double  source,
it  is  no  small  wonder  that  the  hooting  of  the  owl  is
regarded  by  the  Negro  as  a  death  omen.  ^  Some  say
that  the  omen  holds  only  when  the  owl  hoots  in  the
daytime;^  others  apply  it  only  to  the  house  of  a  sick
person;  ^  while  still  others  claim  the  hoot  of  an  old  owl
denotes  the  death  of  an  old  man  and  that  of  a  young
owl,  the  death  of  a  child.  ^

Shutting  the  OwV s  Mouth.  To  avoid  the  ill  luck  or
to  make  the  owl  hush  up,  stick  a  knife  in  wood;^
squeeze  your  wrist  (this  will  choke  the  owl  to  death) ;  ^  °
turn  your  pockets  wrongside  out '  ^ — possibly  at  first
a  disguise  or  a  sacrifice  of  what  was  in  the  pockets,
though  the  Negroes  say  that  it  puts  sand  in  his  eyes;  ^  ^
turn  some  shoes  upside  down  under  the  bed  ^  ^  so  that

^Fogel,  E.  M.,  Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,
p.  12.

2  Leather,  E.  M.,  Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  25.  Knowlson,  T.  S.,
Origins  of  Popular  Superstitions,  p.  17L

3  Ellis,  A.  B.,  Tshi-speaking  Peoples,  p.  203.  Ellis,  A.  B.,  Ewe-speaking
Peoples,  p.  5L

*  Lippert,  J.,     Kulturgeschichte  der  Menschheit,  vol.  ii,  p.  403.
5.341,  336,  and  224.

«  112,  and  141.  Alabama  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  33  (1904),
p.  51.

^  189.     WilUamson,  G.,     Superstitions  from  Louisiana,  J.  A.  P.  L.,  vol.
18  (1905),  p.  229.
8  108.

9 155,  and  288.
i»171,  and  289.

1^112,  and  224.     Alabama  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  33  (1904),
p.  51.
1 2  233.

i»342,'  320,  358,  404,  and  407.  Also  Smilev,  P.,  Folk-Lore  from  Va.,
S.  C,  Ga.,  Ala.,  and  Fla.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  32  (1919),  p.  383.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  483

his  claws  cannot  grasp  the  limb;i  put  salt  ^  or  a
shovel  ^  (or  a  horseshoe)  *  in  the  fire  to  burn  his
tongue  5  (or  strangle  hlm);^  or  tie  a  hard  knot  in  the
(right-hand)  ^  corner  of  your  bed  sheet,  ^  handker-
chief, or  apron,  to  choke  him  to  death.  ^  These
represent  the  main  ways  of  stopping  the  hooting  of
the  owl,  but  there  are  almost  countless  variations.
Lock  your  little  fingers  together  and  pull  hard;  ^ "  put
a  hairpin  over  the  lamp  chimney  ^  ^  (possibly  a  variant
of  the  iron  thrust  into  the  fire) ;  turn  your  socks  ^  ^  or
clothes  ^  ^  inside  out;  put  one  shoe  with  the  toe  pointing
under  the  bed  and  the  other  shoe  with  the  toe  pointing
out;  1  *  lay  a  broom  (an  old-fashioned  sedge  broom)  ^  ^
across  the  door;i^  cross  two  sticks  and  put  them  in
back  of  the  chimney  to  break  the  owl's  neck;  ^  ^  point
your  finger  at  the  owl;  ^  ^  turn  a  chair  down  at  the  foot
of  the  bed;i^  open  your  pocket  knife;-"  turn  the
skillet  bottom  side  up;^!  or  name  the  tree  in  which

1  57,  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  46.

2  91,  141,  and  150.     Smilev,  P.,      Folk-Lore  from  Va.,  S.  C,  Ga.,  Ala.,
and  Fla.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  32  (1919),  p.  382.

3  32,  and  407.     Harris,  J.  C.,     tfncle  Remus,  p.  155,  and  177.     Lee,  C,
Some  Negro  Lore  from  Baltimore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  15  (1892),  p.  110.

*42,   112,   and   141.     Alabama   Folk-Lore,   Southern   Workman,    vol.    33
(1904),  p.  51.
6  57.

6  233.

7  141.

8  75,  189,  and  171.

9  233.
"150.

1  150,  and  199.
275.

3  Smiley,  P.,     Folk-Lore  from  Va.,  S.  C,  Ga.,  Ala.,  and  Fla.,  J.  A.  F.  L  ,
vol.  32  (1919),  p.  382.
76.
342.
«219.
'  108.
■  373.
'61.
2  0 332.
21407


484     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

the  owl  is  resting.  ^  Almost  always  the  uniformity  of  a
belief  over  a  wide  area  designate;S  a  European  origin;
here  we  find  wide  diversity  and  apparently  no  Eu-
ropean parallels  (though  the  hill  whites  of  Georgia
put  the  poker  in  the  fire).  While  I  have  no  evidence
from  African  sources  for  this  opinion,  this  seems  to
indicate  a  general  African  belief  which  varies  from
tribe  to  tribe,  or  else  it  may  represent  individual
attempts  on  the  part  of  particular  conjurers  to  deal
with  this  oracular  bird.  It  is  rather  remarkable  that
the  Negro,  probably  because  of  his  stronger  faith  in
the  omen,  tries  to  fight  against  fate  while  the  European
helplessly  accepts  the  owl's  verdict  as  final.  This  Is
true  of  the  Negro  with  reference  to  almost  all  omens.
He  opposes  the  bad  luck  by  counter-acts  and  charms,
and  attempts  to  avoid  the  inevitable.  The  theory
of  an  African  origin  for  these  exorcistic  owl-beliefs  is
strengthened  by  the  fact  that  these  beliefs  only  in
rare  cases  are  shared  by  the  Southern  whites;  probably
they  represent  old  conjure  practices  of  an  African
turn  which  have  gained  a  wide  foothold  by  meeting  a
common  need.

In  some  localities  It  is  said  that  if  an  owl  hoots  when
you  are  leaving  the  house  on  some  errand,  you  must  go
on  back  home  or  bad  luck  will  befall  you;^  If  you
hear  an  owl  when  coming  home,  prepare  some  extra
food — a  stranger  is  surely  coming.  ^  Others  say  that
an  owl  hooting  on  your  right  side  is  good  luck,  *  but
if  he  hoots  on  your  left  side,  bad  luck.  ^     In  this  latter


196.

2 141.     Williamson,    G.,     Superstitions  from   Louisiana,    J.    A.    F.    L.,
vol.  18  (1905),  p.  229.
3  141.

^  76,  and  310.
U89.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  485

case  you  must  turn  your  right  side  toward  him  and
walk  backwards  to  avoid  the  ill  luck.  ^  It  is  bad  luck
to  mock  an  owl;  -  if  you  do  so  you  will  get  a  whipping  ^
or  your  house  will  burn  down,  ^  Owls  are  said  to  be
"old  people"  and  must  not  be  molested  in  any  way;  ^
if  you  kill  one  you  will  become  ragged.  ^

Poultry.  Another  almost  universal  object  of  super-
stition is  the  cock,  possibly  because  of  his  nocturnal
crowing.  In  parts  of  Scotland  the  cock  was  believed
to  have  the  power  of  seeing  evil  spirits,  and  often  in
the  night  he  would  descend  from  his  roost  in  that  part
of  the  kitchen  where  the  peat  was  kept  and  drive  off
some  foe,  invisible  to  man.  ^  One  very  widespread
Negro  cock  superstition  is  that  if  the  rooster  crows  in
the  front  door  (or  in  the  house)  ^  it  is  a  sign  of  com-
pany (the  preacher  »  or  a  stranger)  ^ "  coming.  ^  ^  The
direction  in  which  the  rooster  looks  after  crowing,
indicates  the  direction  from  which  that  person  will
come.  ^2  If  a  rooster  simply  stands  with  his  head  in
the  house  a  stranger  is  coming;  ^^  but  if  he  comes  en-
tirely in  the  house  somebody  is  coming  from  a  journey.  ^  *
If  he  crows  while  in  the  house  it  is  an  omen  of  death.  ^  ^


iWork,   M.  H.,     Some  Geechee   Folk-Lore,  Southern   Workman,  vol.  35
(1905),  p.  635.

2  169.

3  141.

*227.

M12,  141,  and  376.     Alabama   Folk-Lore,   Southern   Workman,  vol.   33
(1904),  p.  51.

6  91.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  24  (1895),  p.  78.

^  Gregor,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northeast  of  Scotland,  p.  140.

8  101.

3  334.
10 112.     Parsons,  E.  C,     Folk-Lore  from  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.
L.  S.,  vol.  16  (1923),  p.  210.

1 1  148,  341,  and  381.

12  36.

1 3  246.

1^141.     Lee,  C,     Some  Negro  Lore  from  Baltimore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5
(1892),  p.  110.
1 5 148,  and  306.


486     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

In  European  lore  a  cock  crowing  on  the  threshold  or
with  his  face  to  the  door,  indicates  the  coming  of  a
stranger.  ^  In  Arkansas  if  a  rooster  comes  to  the
back  door  and  turns  his  back  to  the  door  it  is  a  sign
of  trouble.  -

In  other  ways  the  crowing  of  the  cock  is  considered
ominous.  If  a  rooster  crows  after  sundown  you  will
have  trouble  ^  or  "hasty  news."  ^  Others  say  hasty
news  comes  from  a  rooster  crowing  at  noon,  ^  while
still  others  maintain  that  the  crowing  of  a  rooster  at
any  time  has  this  indication.  ^  Again  it  is  said  that
the  crowing  of  a  cock  before  midnight  indicates  a
"hasty  death,"  ^  though  others  derive  the  death  omen
only  from  a  rooster  crowing  between  sunset  and  dark.
If  he  crows  twice  at  this  time  a  death  will  occur  in  two
days;  three  times,  a  death  in  three  days.  ^  One
Georgia  informant  says  that  if  the  rooster  crows  three
times  at  night  and  does  not  get  a  reply  it  is  a  sign  of
death.  ^  The  English  version  is  that  death  is  in-
dicated by  his  crowing  at  the  dead  of  night  ^  "^  (the
West  African  also  considers  this  a  bad  omen)  ^  ^  or
before  midnight;  his  crowing  in  the  afternoon  merely
announcing  the  arrival  of  a  visitor.  ^  -  The  sneezing
of  a  rooster  is  a  sure  sign  of  death  with  the  Negroes,  ^  ^


^Henderson,  W.,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  92.
Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.   2,  p.   318.

2  34L

^  246,  and  Work,  M.  H.,  Some  Geechee  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,
vol.  35  (1905),  p.  635.

4  159,  243,  and  341.

^  112,  and  Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  265.

«2,  and  288.

'99.

8  320.

9  356.

^ "  Henderson,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  33.
^  1  Burton,  R.  F.,     Wit  and  Wisdom  from  West  Africa,  p.  105.
'  2  Leather,  E.  M.,     Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  25.
13  91.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  487

and  his  crowing  on  the  fence  a  sign  of  a  quarrel  with
your  neighbor.  '  If  he  crows  about  eleven  o'clock
it  is  a  sign  that  the  devil  is  laughing  ;2  if  on  Sunday,
you  will  kill  him  on  Monday,  ^  The  crowing  of  a  hen
at  any  hour  is  a  sign  of  bad  luck  *  or  death,  ^  especially
if  it  be  a  black  hen,  ^  "You'd  bettah  jes'  twis'  her
haid  off  right  now  'er  somethin'  bad'll  sho'  happen."  ^
The  Negroes  also  quote  the  old  English  rhyme:  ^

A  whistling  woman  and  a  crowing  hen
Never  come  to  any  good  end.  ^

In  Herefordshire,  as  in  Mississippi  and  Africa,  ^ "  a
crowing  hen  is  regarded  as  being  very  unlucky  and
must  be  killed  at  once,  '  ^  Other  fowl-omens  current
among  the  Negroes  are:  if  two  roosters  fight  after
sundown,  a  death,  if  two  hens,  a  visitor;  ^  ^  if  two
hens  fight  (at  other  times)  a  sign  of  two  women  fight-
ing; 1  ^  and  if  you  hear  the  chickens  early  in  the  morning,
a  quarrel  will  result.  ^  ^

Wild  Birds.  Bird-lore  in  general  forms  no  incon-
siderable part  of  the  Negro  folk-beliefs.  A  woodpecker
drilling  on  your  house  is  a  sure  prophecy  of  death  ^  ^ —
"a  sign  of  the  screws  being  bored  in  the  coffin  of  one

»341.

2  154.

3  35.5.
M81.

6  81,  and  159.
•=  125.

'  62,  and  224.
8  42.

9 141,  298,  and  220.
^ "  Thomas  N.  W.,    Anthrop.  Rept.  on  Sierra  Leone,  pt.  1,  p.  90.

1 1  Leather,  E.  M.,     Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  26.

12  194.
>  3  238.
1 4  J22.

i^57,''ll2,  22,  189,  .341,  and  .346.


488     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

of  the  Inmates  of  that  house."  ^  Others  say  that  It  Is
simply  a  sign  of  moving.  -  If  a  mourning  dove
(turtle  dove)  mourns  around  your  house  there  will  be
a  death  In  the  family  within  a  few  days  ^unless  you  tie
a  knot  In  each  corner  of  your  apron  to  drive  the  dove
away.  ^  If  two  persons  are  walking  together  and  hear
a  mourning  dove  It  Is  an  ominatlon  that  one  of  them
win  soon  die;  If  the  first  dove  heard  In  the  New  Year  Is
behind  you,  you  will  die  that  year.  ^  If  you  are  going
up  hill  when  you  hear  the  first  dove  in  the  spring  you
will  get  something;  if  downhill,  you  will  lose  something.  ^
Another  Informant  takes  the  view  that  a  mourning  dove
about  the  place  means  that  you  will  soon  move,  and  the
direction  in  which  you  hear  the  first  dove  of  the  year
indicates  the  direction  in  which  you  will  soon  be
traveling.  ^  If  you  are  walking  when  you  hear  the
iirst  dove  of  the  year  you  will  be  healthy;  if  lying
down  you  will  be  sick  ^ —  though  others  substitute  the
first  whippoorwill  for  the  first  dove.  ^  In  Europe  If
you  hear  the  first  cuckoo  of  the  year  while  in  bed  it
means  illness  or  death.  ^  °  The  Negroes  also  claim  the
wailing  of  the  whippoorwill  (around  your  house  at
night)  11  is  an  omen  of  death.  ^  -     If  a  wild  bird  flies

193.

2  141.

3  260.

''ST,  and  Smiley,  P.,     Folk- Lore  from  Va.,S.  C.,Ga.,  Ala.,  and  Fla.,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  32  (1919),  p.  382.

s  Work,  M.  H.,     Some  Geechee  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,   vol.  35
(1905),  p.  635.

691.     Lee,     Some  Negro  Lore  from  Baltimore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5  (1892),
p.  110
M41.
8  204.

»91,  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  xxiii  (1894),  p.  15.
1 "  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  546.
1135.

i^Davis,  H.  C,     Negro  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.
27  (1914),  pp.  246-47.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  489

into  the  window  it  is  a  death  omen  ^  (one  informant
says  good  luck)  -  while  a  bird  building  a  nest  in  the
house  indicates  the  death  of  a  friend  before  the  eggs
hatch.  3  The  former  sort  of  death  sign  is  all  the  more
certain  if  the  room  contain  a  sick  person,  ^  while  if  a
bird  flies  through  an  open  hallway  the  direction  he
takes  indicates  the  course  which  will  soon  be  taken  by
pall-bearers  carrying  a  coffin  from  that  house.  ^  In
either  case  the  death  may  be  avoided,  so  the  Missouri
Negroes  say,  by  spitting  on  the  floor,  drawing  a  circle
around  the  saliva,  walking  around  the  circle  with  your
back  to  it,  and  then  spitting  a  second  time.  ^  Others
maintain  that  the  bird  must  fly  through  the  house  to
bring  death,  ^  this  being  the  common  English  ver-
sion. ^  The  Negroes  add  that  if  a  bird  alights  on  your
head  or  shoulders  ^  or  If  a  bird  sits  on  your  window  sill,  ^  °
it  Is  an  omen  of  death.  If  a  bird  flies  across  your  path
from  right  to  left  It  is  also  a  bad  sign.  ^  ^

The  Buzzard.  If  a  buzzard  alights  on  your  house  it
indicates  that  you  are  a  thief.  This  is  true  because
"de  buzzud  am  a  subtractor  uv  de  air  an'  kin  smell
enny  stolen  meat  you  hab  hid  in  de  house."  ^  ^  This
was  a  real  fact  in  slavery  times — the  remains  of  the


1  93,  189,  357,  and  Oliio  Whites.     Lee,  C,     Some  Negro  Lore  from  Balti-
more, J.A.F.  L.,  vol.  5  (1892),  p.  112.    Boyle,  Mrs.  V.  F.,    Devil  Tales,  pp.  6-7.

2  141.

3  100.
M52.
5  346.

8  Bergen,  F.  D.,     Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7  (1899),
p.  17.

'283,  and  381.

8  Cowan,  J.  L.,     Welsh  Superstitions,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  15  (1902),  p.  152.

Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  557.

975.

1 » 204.

1 1  125.

1291.


490     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

purloined  pig  or  lamb  would  be  concealed  in  the  loft
by  the  slave  and  the  putrefaction  brought  on  in  the
warm  climate  would  soon  make  that  fact  known  to
Brer  Buzzard.  ^  Others  say  that  a  buzzard  alighting
on  the  house  is  a  sign  of  the  death  of  one  of  the  in-
mates. 2  If  you  see  a  buzzard's  shadow  before  you  see
the  buzzard  you  will  see  some  one  you  are  not  ex-
pecting. ^  A  flock  of  crows  about  a  house  is  a  bad
sign  * — a  raven  flying  over  and  then  returning,  in-
dicates death.  ^  In  Europe  the  crow  was  regarded  as
a  bird  of  ill-omen,  even  as  far  back  as  Virgil's  time,  ^
and  the  flight  of  a  crow  over  the  house  ^  or  a  crow
alighting  on  the  house  ^  was  an  omen  of  death.  Others
claimed  that  one  crow  denoted  a  funeral,  two,  a
wedding.  ^  "Wodan  had  a  raven  which  he  sent  out
each  day  to  gather  news  for  him,  and  the  same  bird
was  the  messenger  which  summoned  his  heroes  to
Walhalla,  therefore  when  a  crow  crosses  one's  path  it
is  an  omen  of  bad  luck  or  death."  ^ "

The  Friendly  Redbird.  Crows  and  buzzards  are  not
only  carrion  birds,  but  also  birds  of  peculiar  black
markings — hence  fetish.  The  redbird  is  also  a  pecul-
iarly marked  bird,  and  it  is  to  his  lore  that  we  now
turn.  Strange  to  say,  many  of  these  beliefs  have  to
do  with  love  and  kisses.     Should  a  girl  see  a  redbird


1  Richardson,  C,     Some  Slave  Superstitions,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  41
(1912),  p.  247.

2  188.

3  267.

^  141,  and  Bergen,  F.  D.,     Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7
(1899),  p.  32.

^  Richardson,  C,      Some  Slave  Superstitions,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  41
(1912),  p.  247.

6  Dyer,  T.  F.  T.,     English  Folk-Lore,  p.  80.

'  Leather,  E.  M.,     Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  25.

*  Gregor,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northeast  of  Scotland,  p.  136.

"  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  335.

i^Fogel,  E.  M.,     Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,
p.  11.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  491

and  name  it  after  her  sweetheart  she  will  see  him
before  sunset,  ^  or  should  she  throw  a  kiss  (or  nine
kisses)  2  at  the  bird,  she  will  see  her  sweetheart  at  that
same  time  the  next  day.  ^  Watch  the  direction  in
which  the  redbird  flies;  your  lover  is  surely  in  that
direction.  If  the  bird  flies  in  your  front  yard  your
lover  is  coming  to  see  you  that  same  night,  *  (or  there
is  going  to  be  a  fuss).  ^  "Wishing  on  the  redbird"  is
done  sometimes  simply  upon  seeing  him,  ^  but  generally
it  is  necessary  to  throw  a  kiss  (or  nine  kisses,  ^  or
"five  kisses  each  containing  six  wishes")  ^  for  your
wish  to  come  true.  ^  If  you  throw  (three)  ^ "  kisses
at  the  bird,  so  others  say,  you  will  get  a  letter  "f  um
yo'  bes'  gal  or  fellah,"  ^  ^  or  you  will  see  a  stranger  ^  ^
(some  say  simply  seeing  a  redbird  is  a  sign  of  a
stranger  ^  ^  or  relative  ^  ^  coming).  A  bluebird  coming
to  your  house  also  indicates  the  coming  of  a  stranger  or
the  return  of  a  long  absent  friend,  ^  ^  while  a  robin
alighting  on  your  house  is  a  sign  that  your  beau  is
near.  ^  ^

Insects.  Insects,  while  unimportant  as  to  size,  are
of  considerable  importance  in  their  augural  powers.
A  spider  found  on  your  person  is  good  luck;  ^  ^  the  same

1151.

2  17.

3  139.
M41.
"67.

6  33,  and  91.

M7.

8  310.

961.

0  67.
1352.
2  175.
3354.
M89.
U41.
6  402.
'  301.


492     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

being  true  of  a  spider  spinning  down  before  your  face.
This  latter  indicates  the  coming  of  a  letter,  and,  if  you
will  wrap  up  the  spider  in  a  piece  of  paper  and  carry
It  in  your  purse,  it  will  bring  a  sum  of  money.  ^  In
England,  a  spider  on  the  clothes  ^  or  swinging  from  the
roof  3  is  a  sign  that  you  will  receive  money.  Perhaps
the  most  widespread  Negro  spider-omen,  however,
Is  that  if  a  spider  "webs  downwards"  a  visitor  Is
coming  * — the  color  of  the  spider  indicating  the  color
of  the  visitor.,^  If  the  spider  continues  to  web  down-
wards the  visitor  will  surely  come;  If  It  goes  up,  the
visitor  has  been  prevented  from  coming  ^  (or  a  death
will  occur  in  the  family).  ^  If  a  lightning  bug  flies  in
the  house  It  Is  good  luck  ^— a  stranger,  ^  or  a  friend  ^ "
will  come  soon.  If  a  yellow  bee  sings  to  you  It  Is  good
news;  a  black  bee,  bad  news.  ^  ^  Crickets  in  the  house
indicate  good  luck  ^  ^ — never  drive  them  away  from  the
fireplace.  ^  ^  They  are  also  regarded  as  lucky  in
Dumfriesshire.  ^  *  A  row  of  ants  crawling  in  your
house,  1  ^  especially  In  your  fireplace,  ^  ^  indicates  that
you  will  soon  move  out,  while  a  swarm  of  green  flies


1159.

2  Dyer,  T.  F.  T.,     English  Folk-Lore,    p.   132.     Also  Lean's  Collectanea,
vol.  2,  p.  52.

'  Henderson,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  83.

*  133,  141,  151,  208,  and  288.

*  254.

8 141.     Bergen,  F.  D.,     Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7
(1899),  p.  39.

'  175.

»341.

9  102,  and  141.
1 » 192.

1 1  267,  and  332.

12 141,  and  Parsons,  E.  C,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.
L.  S.,  vol.  16  (1923),  p.  210.

^^ Southern  Workman,  vol.  24  (1895),  p.  78.

1 ''  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  14.

1 6  92.

16  91,  and  Southern  Workm,an,  vol.  24  (1895),  p.  78.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  493

coming  in  is  also  a  bad  sign.  ^  If  a  single  green  fly
comes  in  and  buzzes  all  over  your  house  some  prying
individual  will  soon  be  nosing  over  your  possessions,  ^
but  if  a  single  large  fly  comes  into  the  room  and  then
flies  out  it  is  an  omen  of  good  news.  ^  A  white  span-
worm  on  your  body  is  measuring  for  your  shroud;
a  green  span-worm  for  your  bridal  robe,  foretelling
both  long  life  and  happiness.  ^  The  ticking  of  the
"death  watch"  (the  ticking  noise  made  by  a  small
wood-boring  beetle — Anobiuvi  domesticum — in  the  wood-
work) is  an  omen  of  death  both  in  the  South  ^  and  in
England  ^  and  Scotland.  ^  One  Missouri  informant
says,  "dem  dere  de'f  watches  is  hear'd  mos'  when  a
pusson  is  low  sick."  When  the  ticking  stops  the
person  will  die.  ^

Plants.  Plant  omens  are  not  so  common,  but  some
have  been  reported.  If  collards  go  to  seed  the  year
that  you  plant  them  it  is  a  sign  of  death  in  your
family.  ^  There  is  also  the  European  ^  °  belief  that  the
blooming  of  a  tree  twice  in  the  same  year  is  an  omen
of  death.  One  informant  claims  to  have  seen  this
work  out,  but  says  that  it  can  be  prevented  by  picking
off  the  second  blossoms  and  carrying  them  away.  ^  ^
Flowers  blooming  out  of  season  are  also  a  bad  sign.  ^  ^

1246.
2 148.

344.

*  57,  and  Bergen,  F.  D.,  Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7
(1899),  p.  42.

6 141,  and  Davis,  H.  C,  Negro  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  27  (1914),  pp.  246-47.

^  Henderson,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  30.

'  Gregor,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northeast  of  Scotland,  p.  203.

8  346.

9  Work,  M.  H.,  So7ne  Geechee  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  35
(1905),  p.  635.

1 "  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  558.

11141.

1 2  400.


494     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

An  evergreen  tree  dying  in  the  yard  is  a  sign  of  death  ^
— a  behef  apparently  of  European  origin.  ^  If  a  tree
falls  without  any  one's  cutting  it,  it  is  a  death-omen,  ^
especially  if  it  be  a  green  tree  and  falls  in  the  summer
when  the  wind  is  not  blowing.  *

Pins.  Found  things  often  have  their  meanings,
especially  in  the  case  of  pins  which,  of  course,  represent
domestic  articles  associated  chiefly  with  women.  Here
again  we  have  a  strong  European  background —
almost  always  this  is  the  case  with  articles  of  this
sort.  "If  you  see  a  pin  and  pick  it  up,  all  the  day
you'll  have  good  luck."  ^  In  England  there  is  the
same  identical  rhyme  with  the  addition:

See  a  pin  and  let  it  be  (lie),
All  the  day  you'll  have  to  cry.  ^

The  Negro  thinks  it  is  especially  good  luck  to  find  a
pin  with  the  point  towards  you  (sharp  luck),  while  it
is  bad  luck  (blunt  luck)  to  find  one  with  the  head
towards  you.  ^  Neither  kind  of  luck  operates,  how-
ever, unless  you  pick  the  pin  up.  *  If  the  pin  is  lying
crosswise  to  you  (with  the  side  towards  you)  some-
thing will  cross  your  path  before  the  day  is  over.  *

1  Work,  M.  H.,  Some  Geechee  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  35
(1905),  p.  635.

2  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  558.

3  282.

*  17,  and  45,  and  Hawkins,  J.,  An  Old  Mauma's  Folk-Lore,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  9  (1896),  p.  131.

^  341,  and  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.
L.  S.,  vol.  16  (1923),  p.  210.

6  Dyer,  T.  F.  T.,     English  Folk-Lore,  p.  270.

^  141,  288,  and  289.  Steiner,  R.,  Superstitions  and  Belief s  from  Central
Georgia,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  12  (1899),  p.  263.  Williamson,  G.,  Super-
stitions from  Louisiana,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  18  (1905),  p.  299.

8 132.

"392.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  495

It  is  also  unlucky  for  another  person  to  hand  you  a
pin  with  the  point  towards  you.  ^  In  Europe,  also,
a  pin  on  the  floor  with  the  head  towards  you  means
bad  luck.  ^  It  is  bad  luck,  so  the  Negroes  say,  for
another  person  to  take  a  pin  from  your  dress.  ^

Things  Found.  The  Mississippi  Negroes  will  care-
fully keep  a  piece  of  found  money  as  a  "luck  piece"  *
— finding  a  penny  means  that  you  will  find  more.  ^
To  find  a  glove  and  pick  it  up,  bad  luck; «  to  find  a
handkerchief  and  pick  it  up,  you  will  cry.  "^  If  you
find  a  button  on  Monday,  ^  or  find  three  buttons  at
any  time,  ^  it  is  good  luck.  If  you  find  a  brown
chicken  feather,  stick  it  in  your  hair  and  you  will  have
money,  finding  a  red  string  is  danger,  but  untying
your  shoes  will  avoid  it;  finding  a  black  string  indicates
that  somebody  is  going  into  mourning;  while  an  old
shoe  found  in  the  yard  means  visitors.  Put  the  shoe
on  for  luck.  ^ "  The  finding  of  the  four-leaf  clover  is,
with  the  Negroes,  ^  ^  as  with  the  Europeans,  good  luck.

In  all  of  these  cases  the  Negro's  chief  European
acquisitions  are  connected  with  those  varieties  of
animals,  insects  and  plants  associated  with  the  house-
hold, and  mainly  those  with  which  the  whites  and
blacks  were  in  contact  together.  Thus  the  horse,  dog,
and  cat  beliefs  are  largely  European,  while  the  cow,

163.

2  Fogel,  E.  M.,      Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the   Pennsylvania  Germans
p.  109.

'  Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  161.
*  141,  and  287.
6  33.

6  81.

^92.

8  81.

9  254.
1 0  33

11100,  141,  173,  and  341.


496     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

left  almost  entirely  to  the  Negro's  care,  has  less  dis-
tinctly European  lore  associated  with  it.  Clearly
the  spread  of  superstitions  from  European  to  Negro
took  place  more  in  the  household  than  on  the  outside.

Dream-signs.  There  are  several  beliefs  connected
with  dreaming  in  general,  which  might  well  be  related
before  we  take  up  specific  dream-omens.  If  you  tell
your  dream  before  sun-up  ^  or  before  breakfast  ^
(this  latter  being  the  European  version)  ^  it  will  come
true.  Others  say  that  singing  before  breakfast  will
make  your  dreams,  good  or  bad,  come  true.  *  Friday
night  dreams  (told  Saturday  after  sunrise)  ^  will  come
true.  ^  Some  take  an  opposite  view  and  say  that
telling  any  dream  before  sunrise  will  prevent  it  from
coming  true  ^  or  will  give  you  bad  luck.  ^  If  you  sleep
with  an  apron  under  your  head  on  Friday  night  you
will  dream  of  the  one  you  will  marry,  ^  while  washing
your  face  and  hands  before  going  to  bed  and  leaving
them  undried,  ^ "  or  putting  a  finger  ring  under  your
pillow,  ^  ^  will  give  you  the  same  information.  You
may  also  dream  about  your  future  mate  by  sticking
nine  pins  into  the  blade  bone  of  a  rabbit  on  a  dark
night,  and  sleeping  with  it  under  your  pillow  for  nine
nights.  ^  2     If  you  dream  while  sleeping  under  a  new

1  13,  and  188.

2 141,  and  Williamson,  G.,  Superstitions  from  Louisiana,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  18  (1905),  p.  229.

3  Fogel,  E.  M.,  Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,
p.  74.

*  404.

6  208.

«13.

'341.

8  208.

9  67.
i»341.

11111,  and  370.
12  204.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  497

quilt,  that  dream  will  come  true.  ^  Name  each
corner  of  the  room  after  a  lover  the  first  night  you  sleep
in  a  new  house;  the  person  that  you  dream  about  will
be  your  future  mate.  ^  In  Europe  also,  your  dream
the  first  night  in  a  new  house  is  supposed  to  come  true.  *
The  Negroes  say  that  a  dream  when  the  east  wind  is
blowing  will  come  true,  ^  or  you  can  make  any  dream
come  true  by  sleeping  with  your  pillow  in  a  vertical
position,  ^  but  should  you  dream  of  evil  things  which
you  do  not  wish  to  happen,  throw  a  little  salt  in  the
fire.  ®  If  you  turn  over  (on  your  left  side)  ^  when  you
are  dreaming  you  will  forget  your  dream,  ^  and  if  you
go  to  bed  with  something  on  your  mind  you  will
dream  about  that  thing.  ^  If  a  man  dreams  about  his
sweetheart  on  Monday  night  and  eats  onions  on
Wednesday  evening,  his  sweetheart  will  stop  loving
him.  ^ "  If  you  dream  about  somebody  and  wake  up
crying  you  are  going  to  be  glad.  ^  ^

Snake-dreams.  Without  doubt  the  most  widespread
dream-sign  is  that  a  vision  of  snakes  indicates  the
presence  of  an  enemy,  ^  ^  a  fact  which  might  have  some
significance  to  that  school  of  psychology  which  in-
terprets dreams  largely  as  sex  symbols.  If  you  fail
to  kill  the  dream-snake  your  enemies  are  very  powerful,

1  155.

2  168.

^  Fogel,  E.  M.,  Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,
p.  76.

*  Bergen,  F.  D.,  Current  Superstitions,  M.  A.  L.  F.  S.^  vol.  iv  (1896),
p.  74.

'^373.

6  252.

'121.

« 122,  and  Ohio  Whites.

9  341.
» 0  240.

11189,  and  341.
1 2  39,  and  130.

32


498     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

but  if  you  kill  the  serpent  you  will  conquer.  ^  The
color  of  the  snake,  indicates  the  color  of  your  enemy,  ^
though  some  say  that  a  black  snake  always  represents
the  devil.  ^  In  England  a  nightmare  of  fighting  with
and  conquering  serpents  denotes  victory  over  your
enemies,  •*  but  among  the  Ibos  of  Africa  a  dream  of
snakes  also  indicates  enemies.  ^  Here  it  may  be  a
survival  of  lycanthropy.  The  dream  is  regarded  as
being  the  real  adventures  of  the  dream-soul,  and  in
Mashona-land  a  person  is  thought  to  be  able  to  change
himself  into  a  serpent  to  avenge  himself  on  some
enemy,  ^  thus  making  a  dream  of  serpents  a  dream  of
real  enemies.  While  it  is  well-nigh  impossible  to
explain  why  serpents  should  so  universally  be  the
symbol  for  enemies,  yet  this  belief  coming  from  two
distinct  sources  might  well  be  expected  to  persist  in
the  Negro  South.

Visions  of  Death  and  Burial.  The  signs  relating  to
dreams  of  the  dead  have  a  similar  distribution.  In
this  case  the  chief  interpretation  among  the  Negroes
is  that  a  dream  of  the  dead  is  a  sign  of  rain,  ^  a  belief  of
distinctly  English  origin.  ^  The  Negroes  add  that  a
dream  of  ghosts  falling  in  the  well  means  approaching
death,  ^  while  others  claim  that  a  dream  of  the  dead
means  that  you  will  hear  from  the  living.  ^  °     Again  a


1  106,   141,  260,  341,   and  361.     See  also,  Smiley,   P.,     Folk-Lore  from
Va.,  S.  C,  Ga.,  Ala.,  and  Fla.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  32  (1919),  p.  381.

2  238,  and  386.

3  354.

^  Ash  ton,  J.,    Chap-Books  of  the  Eighteenth  Century,  p.  81.    Brand,    J.,
Popular  Antiquities  of  Great  Britain,  vol.  3,  p.  133.

*  Leonard,  A.  G.,     The  Lower  Niger  and  Its  Tribes,  p.  147.
^  Nassau,  R.  H.,     Fetichism  in  West  Africa,  p.  71.
^  61,  106,  109,  152,  183,  327,  341,  and  381.

8  Leather,    E.    M.,     Folk-Lore   of    Herefordshire,    p.    244.     Gregor,    W.,
Folk-Lore  of  the  Northeast  of  Scotland,  p.  29.

9  61.

10  63.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  499

vision  of  a  lady's  death  points  to  the  death  of  a  man,
and  vice  versa.  ^  A  dream  of  a  new-made  grave  is  a
sign  of  your  suffering  for  the  wrongdoings  of  others,  ^
while  looking  into  an  empty  grave  signifies  unpleasant
tidings.  3  A  dream  of  fresh  dirt  indicates  trouble  *
or  sickness,  ^  while  seeing  some  one  covered  with  mud
betokens  a  speedy  meeting  with  a  lover,  though  a
dream  of  walking  in  mud  points  to  a  loss  of  confidence
in  a  trusted  friend.  ^  To  dream  of  a  casket  is  a  sign
of  death  ^  (or  marriage) ;  ^  to  see  yourself  dead,
long  life  ^  and  good  luck.  ^ "  Some  say  a  dream  of
talking  with  the  dead  marks  a  boldness  of  courage  and
a  clear  conscience.  ^  ^  Others  say  that  if  the  dead  ask
you  for  anything  in  your  dreams  and  you  give  It  to
them  they  will  soon  call  for  you  ^  - — or  if  you  dream  of
giving  away  anything  "you  have  given  away  a  person
in  your  house."  It  is  an  omen  of  death.  ^  ^  While  a
dream  of  the  dead  generally  means  rain,  it  is  a  wide-
spread belief  that  a  dream  of  dying  or  a  funeral  In-
dicates a  wedding,  and  a  dream  of  a  wedding,  a  fu-
neral. 1  ^  In  England  a  dream  of  marriage  also  indicates
death.  ^  ^     One  old  slave  Negro  says  this  is  true  because

1 133,  and  243
2  85.
=•76.
*79.
5397.
8  76.
n33.
»228.
9313.
1 " 334.

1 1  350.

12  130.

135

1*141,  132,  81,  224,  39,  130,  331,  155,  and  341.  See  also,  Smiley,  P.,
Folk-LorefromVa.,S.C.,Ga.,Ala.,andFla.,J.A.F.L.,  vol.  32  (1919),  p.  381.

1^  Leather,  E.  M.,  Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  118.  Henderson,  W.,
Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  84.  Ashton,  J.,  Chap-Books
of  the  Eighteenth  Century,  p.  82.  Brand,  J.,  Popular  Antiquities  of  Great
Britain,  vol.  3,  p.  132.


500     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

"ez  de  man  an'  'oman  is  united  ez  one  in  marriage  so
will  dis  body  leab  de  earth  ter  be  ez  one  wid  Gawd."  ^
Other  Negroes  claim  that  a  vision  of  your  own  marriage
indicates  happy  times;  the  marriage  of  some  one  else,
sickness.  ^

Dreams  of  Meat.  A  dream  of  fresh  meat  signalizes
death.  ^  This  is  especially  true  if  it  is  pork  that  you
dream  of;  ^  a  dream  of  killing  hogs  indicates  a  death.
"When  you  dresses  de  hawg  dat's  de  body  you's
fixin'  fer  burial."  ^  Another  Negro  says  that  he
knows  this  sign  is  true  for  he  dreamed  of  "lots  an'
lots  un  fresh  po'k  one  night,  an'  de  nex'  mawnin'  I
hear'd  er  de  death  uv  a  fr'en'  uv  my  father's."  ^  Others
say  that  a  dream  of  salted  "side  meat"  means  the  death
of  an  old  person,  of  pork,  the  death  of  a  child. '  A
dream  of  beef  is  interpreted  by  some  to  mean  the  death
of  a  white  person,  ^  by  others  the  death  of  a  Negro,  ®
while  still  others  say  that  a  dream  of  meat  of  any
kind  means  discouragement  instead  of  death.  ^  °

Eggs.  A  dream  of  eggs  is  variously  interpreted  as
good  luck,  ^  ^  success,  ^  ^  gain,  ^  ^  confusion,  ^  *  a  wed-
ding, ^  ^  or  as  a  sign  that  you  love  children.  ^  ®     If  the

1200.

2  76.

3  334,  364,  and  381.
*  46,  and  264.
'200.

e  147.

n4i.

8  346.

*91.     See  also,  Work,  M.  H.,     Some  Geechee  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Work-
man, vol.  34  (1905),  p.  696.
0  35.
1130.
•334.
'  378
'■«  321,' 336,  and  224.

219.
«341.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  501

eggs  you  dream  of  are  unbroken  there  will  surely  be
a  fuss,  but  if  any  of  them  are  broken  "den  de  fuss
done  broke."  ^  Other  informants  interpret  a  dream
of  broken  eggs  as  meaning  a  (lover's)  ^  quarrel.  ^
Others  say  that  a  dream  of  unbroken  eggs  means
wealth,  but  of  broken  eggs,  sorrow;  ^  while  again,
unbroken  eggs  mean  trouble  and  broken  eggs,  peace.  ^
In  any  case  the  fuss  or  ill  luck  may  be  averted  by  throw-
ing salt  in  the  fire  ^  or  by  breaking  an  egg  before  you
speak  to  any  one.  ^  To  dream  of  eggs  in  your  lap  with
none  falling  out  is  a  sign  of  wealth.  ^  In  Europe  a
dream  of  eggs  indicates  a  quarrel.  ^  In  Herefordshire
a  dream  of  spoiled  eggs  indicates  a  death  in  the  family.  ^ "

Other  Common  Dream-signs.  Dream-signs  on  the
whole  have  little  agreement  from  locality  to  locality,
though  there  are  some  exceptions  to  this  rule  and  some
signs  of  apparent  European  origin.  Such  is  the  old
European  ^  ^  belief  lingering  with  the  Negroes  that  to
dream  of  muddy  water  betokens  death.  ^  ^  Again  a
dream  of  fish  indicates  an  increase  in  the  family,  ^  ^
though  some  limit  this  sign  to  fish  seen  in  clear  water,  ^ "
or  to  catfish  seen  in  muddy  water.  ^  ^     In  Scotland  a

1  91,  and  141.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  209.

2  13.

3 189.

<264.

5  241,  and  200.  Moore,  R.  A.,  Superstitions' from  Georgia,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  7  (1894),  p.  305.

8 141,  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  209.

^81.

8  341.

^  Fogel,  E.  M.,     Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,
p.  75.     Gregor,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northeast  of  Scotland,  p.  2Q.
1 0  Leather,  E.  M.,     Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  257.
1  ^  Fogel,  E.  M.,    Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,  p.  75 .
1291,  141,  189,  407,  33,  224,  106,  and  397.     See  also.  Showers,  Susan   B.,
Alabama  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  29  (1900),  p.  180.
1 '  141,  and  297.
1  *  132.
1^61.


502     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

dream  of  fresh  fish  means  the  arrival  of  children  into
the  world.  ^  Other  Negroes  interpret  the  dreaming
of  fish  to  mean  bad  luck,  ^  sickness,  ^  or  death.  *
A  dream  of  money  means  trouble  ^  or  death  ^ — some
claim  a  vision  of  small  change  indicates  good  luck  and
a  dream  of  large  money,  bad  luck,  ^  though  others
take  exactly  the  reverse  position.  ^  Of  European  ^
and  also  African  ^  °  incidence,  and  hence  widely  dis-
tributed, is  the  idea  that  a  dream  of  losing  a  tooth
(or  having  a  toothache)  ^  ^  indicates  coming  death.  ^  ^
One  informant  says  that  the  loss  of  a  jaw  tooth  in  a
dream  indicates  the  death  of  a  brother  or  sister,  while
the  loss  of  a  front  tooth  is  no  sign  at  all.  ^  ^  Likewise
of  English  ^  ^  origin  is  the  belief  that  "a  dream  of  fruit
out  of  season  means  trouble  (or  a  quarrel)  ^  ^  out  of
reason."  ^  ^

Representative  Specimens,  Although  I  have  collected
several  hundred  additional  dream-signs,  they  differ
so  widely  from  locality  to  locality  and  each  belief  has


1  Gregor,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northeast  of  Scotland,  p.  29.

2  133.
»150.
^75.

5 188,  224,  and  391.
«63.

7  81,  141,  and  313.

8  200,  189,  130,  and  Work,  M.  H.,  Some  Geechee  Folk-Lore,  Southern
Workman,  vol.  34  (1905),  p.  696.

®  Ash  ton,  J.,  Chap-Books  of  the  Eighteenth  Century,  p.  81.  Brand,  J.,
Popular  Antiquities  of  Great  Britain,  vol.  3,  p.  132.  Henderson,  W.,  Folk-Lore
of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,  p.  84.  Fogel,  E.  M.,  Beliefs  and  Super-
stitions of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,  p.  76.     Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  299.

1 "  Thomas,  N.  W.,     Anthrop.  Rept.  on  Sierra  Leone,  pt.  1,  pp.  86-87.

11341.

1 2  81,  341,  152,  61,  63,  336,  189,  and  78.  See  also.  Smiley,  P.,  Folk-Lore
from  Va.,  S.  C,  Ga.,  Ala.,  and  Fla.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  32  (1919),  p.  381.

13  141.

1^  Gregor,  W.,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Northeast  of  Scotland,  p.  29.  Lean's
Collectanea,  vol.  1,  p.  487.

1*91,  and  Work,  M.  H.,  Some  Geechee  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,
vol.  34  (1905),  p.  696.

1 « 334.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  503

such  a  limited  following  that  I  see  no  special  point
in  discussing  them  here.  Instead  I  am  merely  listing
a   few   at  random   as   representative.  ^

DREAM  SIGN

Absent  person that  person  will  soon  return. (46)

Abused quarrel    with    business    associate.

(397)

Accident unexpected  meeting. (397  and  35)

Activity  (great) losses   in   business. (46)

Ax danger  and  death. (397)

Baking  (woman  baking  bread)-good  crops. (46)

Ball  (dancing  at  a) will  receive  money. (46)

Bank be  deceived. (46)

Barn  (putting  grain  into) gain  a  law  suit. (46)

Basin (full)  money,  (empty)  debts. (46)

Beans quarrel.  (46)

Bear (fighting)  persecutions,    (running)

happiness. (46)

Bees (In  a  swarm)  death,  (stinglngyou)

betrayal,  (making  honey)  honor,
(killing  a  bee)  great  losses.  (267)

Bell  (ringing  of  a) misfortune. (46)

Bitten death.(155)

Chicks quarrel.  (247)

Chickens    (roosters    and    hens

fighting) man    and    woman    visit    you. (37)

Church success  in  life. (184)

Cooking good  dinner  next  day. (391)

Cotton  (field  of) death. (184)

Dagger you  will  be  killed. (33)

Eagle  (on  head  of  bed) death. (341)

Flowers receive  money .  (1 75)

Heaven good  luck  and  honor.(334)

Hell bad  luck. (334)

Hill  (climbing  one) success  In  life. (141)

1  For  convenience  the  informant's  number  will  be  cited  after  the  belief
rather  than  in  the  footnotes.


504      Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

DREAM  SIGN

Insanity  (your  own) friends  are  false. (184)

Journey  (a  long  one) inherit   money    (100)    or   will   not

travel. (121)

Judgment good  health. (1 1 1)

Killing friendship  (364)  or  death.(382)

Ladder  (descending  a) good  luck. (286)

Lantern death. (100)

Moon your  father's  death. (85)

Nails  (cutting  your  finger  nails)  disappointment. (87)
Newspapers you  will  gossip  about  your  neigh-
bors.(207)

Onions trouble  with  servants. (334)

Party anger     (289)     or    long    life     and

health.(391)

Piano death. (243)

Pins go  crazy. (243)

Procession  (a  large  one) death. (20)

Sun mother's  death. (85)

Rabbit  (running  one) good  luck. (312)

Roses somebody  loves  you. (341)

Running good  luck. (385)

Shoes  (lost) death. (130)

Shooting death. (5  and  282)

Stealing bad  health. (334)

Talking sickness  of  relatives. (85)

Tar a  travel  by  water.(207)

Vegetables well-behaved  children. (1 75)

War lose  your  job. (33)

Washing death. (209)

Worms lose  your  mind. (33)

I  suspect  that  this  wide  variation  is  due  to  the  fact
that  even  a  stupid  person  may  be  original  In  his
dreams.  Some  happening  will  follow  an  unusually
vivid  dream  and  the  dreamer  will  establish  a  causal
relationship  between  the  two.  Thus  one  Negro  tells
me:  "I  dreamed  about  my  father  got  killed  that  night;


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  505

on  that  morning  my  cousin  was  killed,  just  like  I  saw
my  father  got  killed."  ^  With  him  at  least  a  dream  of
killing  has  become  an  omen  of  death,  and  without
doubt  numerous  other  dream-signs  have  arisen  in
the  same  fashion.

Weather-lore.  Passing  now  to  weather-lore,  we  find
various  animals  and  birds  prominent  on  the  staif  of
the  folk  weather  bureau.  When  animals — dogs  or
cats,  2  old  folks,  ^  horses,  cows  or  stock  in  general  ^ —
play  or  run  and  make  unnecessary  racket  they  are
simply  posting  a  forecast  of  bad  weather.  Precisely
the  same  thing  is  true  in  England,  except  that  old
folks  and  house  animals  are  mainly  omitted;  the
actions  of  stock  are  carefully  noted,  especially  those  of
pigs.  When  hogs  are  crying,  and  running  up  and  down
with  hay  or  litter  in  their  mouths,  a  storm  is  surely  at
hand.  ^  This  idea  of  hogs  running  and  "hollering,"
carrying  branches  in  their  mouths,  or  "piling  trash"  as  a
sign  of  rain  or  cold  weather,  is  a  very  widespread  Ne-
gro belief.  ^  Both  in  Scotland  ^  and  among  the  Negroes
this  is  coupled  with  the  belief  that  hogs  can  see  the
wind  (in  the  form  of  flames  of  fire).  ^  If  a  person
wishes  to  see  the  wind,  so  the  Negroes  say,  he  must
drink  some  sow's  milk;^  or  put  a  little  of  the  water


1382.

2  23.

3  6,  36,  and  166.

n02,  35,  173,  313,  and  382.  Evans,  J.  H.,  Weather-Lore.,  Southern
Workman,  vol.  25  (1895),  p.  16.

5  Brand,  J.,    Popular  Antiquities  of  Great  Britain,  vol.  5  (1895),  p.  16.

6  84,  57,  123,  233,  278,  and  316.  Also  Alabama  Folk-Lore,  Southern
Workman,  vol.   3  (1904),  p.  51.     Ibid.,  vol.  24  (1894),  p.  155.

^  Gregor,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northeast  of  Scotland,  p.  130.

8  141.  Waring,  Mary  A.,  Negro  Superstitions  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.   8    (1895),   p.    252.

957,  141,  and  102.  Bergen,  F.  D.,  Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.
L.  S.,  vol.  7  (1899),  p.  137.  Backus,  E.  M.,  Animal  Tales  from  North
Carolina,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  11  (1898),  p.  291.


506     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

that  runs  out  of  the  corner  of  the  pig's  eye  into  his  own
eye;^  or  drink  goat's  milk;  2  or  cut  his  eyelashes.  ^
Cows  ^  and  mules  can  also  see  the  wind,  for  often-
times when  one  is  driving  a  mule  towards  the  wind  the
animal  will  balk,  turn  around,  and  go  back.  A  poisoned
or  hoodooed  person  can  also  see  the  wind.  One
well-educated  old  slave  tells  me  that  a  friend  of  his
who  was  so  hoodooed  reports  that  the  wind  has  the
appearance  of  blue  smoke.  '"  Not  only  were  pigs,
according  to  English  lore,  supposed  to  see  the  wind,
but  they  were  also  sacred  among  the  Gauls,  eating  the
acorns  in  the  sacred  oak  groves  of  the  Druids.  Even
now  among  the  Scotch  Highlanders  there  is  a  strong
prejudice  against  eating  pig's  flesh.  ^  The  boar's
head  continues  to  be  a  prominent  object  among  the
traditionary  dishes  of  Christmas  festivities.  In  the
Aryan  mythology  the  wild  boar  represented  the
ravages  of  the  whirlwind  that  tore  up  the  earth;  in  all
Indo-European  mythologies  this  animal  is  connected
with  storm  and  lightning.  Small  wonder  that  in
Lancashire  ^  and  among  the  Negroes  he  is  supposed  to
be  able  to  see  the  wind.

Four-footed  Forecasters.  In  other  ways  the  animals
play  their  part  In  mantology.  When  you  hear  a  cow
cough  it  is  a  sure  prediction  of  rain,  ^  and  when  the
cows  hold  their  heads  up  and  "scent"  towards  the  north


114L

2  240.

'  141,  and  Thomas  and  Thomas,     Kentucky  Superstitions,  p.  79.

^  Bergen,  F.  D.,  Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7  (1899),
p.  137.

6  84.

^  Campbell,  J.  F.,  Popular  Tales  of  the  West  Highlands,  vol.  i,  Intro,
p.  Ixxxvi.

^  Hardiwick,   C,     Tradition,  Superstition  and  Folk-Lore,  p.  69.

«322.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  507

it  means  cold  weather  ^  (in  Scotland  this  sniffing
pointed  to  rain  2).  If  a  mule  shakes  himself  with  his
harness  on,  it  will  rain  in  less  than  twenty-four  hours.  ^
The  cat  is  a  household  animal,  and  again  we  find  many
weather-beliefs  of  European  origin  centering  about
him.  One  such  belief  is  that  if  a  cat  "washes  his
face"  it  is  a  sign  of  rain  ^ — a  belief  found  in  many
parts  of  England  ^  and  Scotland.  ^  The  Negroes  say
that  if  a  cat  washes  his  face  sitting  towards  the  fire  it
will  snow.  ^  If  this  animal  sits  with  his  back  to  the
fire,  beware  of  cold  weather;^  while  if  he  lies  with
his  back  to  the  fire,  bad  weather.  ^  In  both  Eng-
land ^  °  and  Afro-America  ^  ^  when  a  cat  sneezes  it  is  a
sign  of  rain.  The  croaking  of  the  frogs  is  likewise  a
sign  of  rain — a  belief  somewhat  widely  spread  among
the  Negroes,  ^  ^  especially  in  regard  to  the  croaking  of
tree-frogs  ^  ^ — and  the  West  Africans  of  old  Calabar  have
a  proverb:  "The  frog  calls  for  rain,  rain  comes."  ^  ^
The  low  country  Gullah  Negroes  have  this  same  idea
with  reference  to  the  roaring  of  the  alligator.  ^  ^  When
the  squirrels  begin  to  store  their  nuts  early  in  the  fall,  ^  ^

1278.

2  Gregor,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northeast  of  Scotland,  p.  133.

3  176.

*  141,  and  151.     See  also,  Parsons,  E.  C,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,
S.  C,  vol.  16  (1923),  pp.  210-12.

*  Leather,  E.  M.,     Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  p.  24.     Brand,  J.,     Popular
Antiquities  of  Great  Britain,  vol.  3,  p.  187.

8  Gregor,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northeast  of  Scotland,  p.  125.

7  52.

« 274,  and  341.

"148.
1 "  Dyer,  T.  F.  T.,     English  Folk-Lore,  p.  106.
11141.

1237,219,  and  298.
13  17,  and  341.

1  *  Burton,  R.  F.,     Wit  and  Wisdo7n  from  West  Africa,  p.  407.
1  s  Gonzales,  A.  E.,     The  Black  Border,  p.  118.
i«159.


508     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro     ,

or  when  the  opossums  have  unusually  thick  fur  ^  there
will  be  an  "extra  cold"  winter.

Aches  and  Insects.  Even  human  beings,  as  animals,
are  not  without  their  personal  warnings.  We  have
noted  the  fact  that  the  playing  of  old  folks  indicates
a  storm  or  change  of  weather,  but  more  widespread
than  this  belief  is  the  old  English  ^  adage  that  the  aching
of  a  corn,  ^  toe,  ^  or  limb,  ^  is  a  sign  of  rain.  When  the
feet  burn  ^  or  the  left  foot  itches  ^  it  is  also  a  rain-,
sign,  while  if  your  "flesh  jumps"  it  is  an  indication  of
general  bad  weather.  ^  Even  insects  serve  as  bar-
ometers— when  flies  are  especially  bad  it  is  a  sure  sign
of  rain,  ^  while  finding  spider  webs  spread  on  the
ground  or  finding  ant  holes  with  the  doors  open  in-
dicates fair  weather  ^  ° — beliefs  also  found  among  the
whites  of  Illinois.  ^  ^  When  the  locusts  sing,  bad  weather
is  coming;  ^2  ^nd  if  the  "dirt-daubers"  build  close  to
the  ground  there  will  be  a  dry  year,  but  if  they  build
high  up  look  out  for  lots  of  rain.  ^  ^

Birds  and  Weather.  No  form  of  ornithomancy  is
more  interesting  than  that  having  to  do  with  the
relation  of  birds  to  weather.  Chickens,  the  most
domesticated  of  such  birds,  have  the  greatest  amount
of  lore  clustering  to  them.     If  the  cock  crows  while  it

^.

2  Brand,  J.,     Popular  Antiquities  of  Great  Britain,  vol.  3,  p.  242.
3 152,  294,  and  334.
^207.
6 192.

6  150.

7  66.

8 112,  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  46.
9  322,  and  331,  and  Ohio  Whites.

^"288,  and  Evans,   J.    H.,     Weather-Lore,    Southern  Workman,    vol.   25
<1896),  p.  16.
1186.
1 2 1.50.
1  =>  290.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  509

is  raining,  good  weather,  ^  but  if  he  crows  before  mid-
night you  may  expect  a  change  of  weather.  One  old
Negress  even  went  so  far  as  to  gather  in  her  clothes
from  the  line  on  a  bright  moonlight  night  upon  the
crowing  of  the  cock,  but,  sure  enough,  it  did  rain  before
morning.  ^  This  sign  is  especially  true  if  the  cock
crows  when  first  getting  on  the  roost  after  sundown, '
and  in  England  there  is  the  old  rhyme:

If  the  cock  crows  on  going  to  bed,
He's  sure  to  rise  with  a  watery  head.  ■*

If  the  cock  flies  upon  the  fence  and  picks  his  feathers
during  a  rainstorm  it  will  soon  "fair  off,"  ^  as  is  also
the  case,  in  general,  when  chickens  pick  their  feathers
after  a  rain, «  though  in  England  such  preening  at  any
time  indicates  foul  weather. '  If  chickens  dust  them-
selves 8  or  huddle  all  together  in  a  bunch, « the  Negroes
say  that  it  indicates  rain.  The  same  is  also  true  if
chickens  lie  on  their  sides  in  the  sun,  but  if  they  run
for  shelter  when  it  first  starts  to  rain  it  will  not  rain
long,  though  if  they  stay  out  it  will  be  a  lengthy  rain.  ^ »
The  latter  part  of  this  belief  is  of  European  origin.  ^  ^

Wild  Birds.     Wild  birds  are  not,  however,  without
their  lore.     To  see  a  "rain-crow"  (cardinal  grosbeak),  ^  ^


1 223.

2349.

3 141,  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  46.

«Dyer,  T.  F.  T.,  English  Folk-Lore,  p.  92.  Denham,  M.  A.,  A
Collection  of  Proverbs  and  Popular  Sayings,  Percy  Society,  vol.  20,  p.  18.

'105.

e  339.

'Dyer,  T.  F.  T.,  English  Folk-Lore,  p.  93.  See  also,  Gregor,  W.,
Folk-Lore  of  the  Northeast  of  Scotland,  p.  142.

8  141.

991.

10  162.

1 1  Fogel,  E.  M.,   Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,  pp.
225-26.

1 2  Showers,  Susan  B.,     Alabama  Folk-Lore,    Southern   Workman,   vol.  29
(1900),  p.  180.


510     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

or,  especially,  to  hear  one  call,  ^  is  a  sure  sign  of  rain.
In  Europe  the  "horse-crow"  tells  of  rain,  2  though
some  Negroes  attribute  this  power  to  the  caw  of  the
ordinary  crow;^  seven  crows  flying  South  is  an  in-
dication of  cold  weather,  *  while  a  large  flock  of  wild
geese  or  ducks  flying  north  indicates  the  coming  of
spring;  flying  south,  winter;  ^  flying  west,  a  storm.  ®
Sea  birds  seen  flying  early  towards  the  sea  indicate
moderate  winds  and  fair  weather.  "^  A  kildeer  (plover)
crying  in  the  morning  or  evening  indicates  cold
weather.  ^  His  cry  is  supposed  to  call  up  the  wind,  and
to  kill  him  would  awaken  a  violent  storm,  so  the
Negroes  of  the  Maryland  coast  say.  ^  Swallows
flying  low  in  the  summer  time  indicate  rainy  weather  ^  °
— a  belief  apparently  of  English  origin.  ^  ^  Very  wide-
spread is  the  belief  among  the  Negroes  that  when  the
buzzard  flies  very  high  it  Is  a  sure  sign  of  rain  ^  ^  or
storm,  ^3  as  indicated  In  the  old  rhyme:

Oh,  Mr.  Buzzard,  don't  yo'  fly  so  high,
Yo'  can't  get  yo'  livin'  flyin'  in  de  sky.  ^  *

The  mourning  of  the  dove  Is  a  sign  of  rain,  ^  ^  and  the
direction  from  which  you  hear  the  first  dove  call  in  the

1  45,  157,  and  342.

*  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  1,  p.  429.

2  61.
^30.

s  35,  and  37.

«336.

^  Evans,  J.  H.,     Weather-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  25  (1896),  p.  16.

*  141,  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  24  (1894),  p.  155.

^  Babcock,  W.  H.,  Folk-Lore  Jottings  from  Rockhaven,  D.  C,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  4  (1891),  p.  171.

i»23.

^  ^  Brand,  J.,     Popular  Antiquities  of  Great  Britain,  vol.  3,  p.  194.

^2 112,  and  141,  Evans,  J.  H.,  Weather-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  25
(1896),  p.  16.

13  150.

1^  Bergen,  F.  D.,  Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7  (1899),
p.  47.

16  173.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  511

year  Indicates  the  direction  from  which  most  of  the
rain  for  that  year  will  come.  ^  A  flock  of  blackbirds
flying  south  ^  or  domesticated  ducks  or  geese  flying
about  the  barnyard  ^  indicates  rain,  while  geese
cackling  at  night  In  the  winter  tell  you  of  cold
weather.  *  When  domesticated  pigeons  make  un-
necessary cooing  in  going  in  and  out  of  their  cote  they
are  telling  you  of  a  change  In  the  weather.  ^  When  a
peafowl  calls  It  is  a  sign  of  rain,  ^  and  when  a  peacock
crows  and  struts  around  in  the  morning  you  have  the
same  sign.  ^  If  turkeys  go  to  roost  with  their  heads
all  turned  In  the  same  direction  you  will  have  stormy
weather,  ^  while  if  they  roost  high  In  a  tree,  rain.  To
hear  a  small  owl  hooting  Indicates  cold  weather;  ^
likewise  the  chirping  of  a  flock  of  jay  birds;  ^'^  while
to  hear  a  woodpecker  on  January  the  third  points  to  a
very  mild  winter.  ^  ^

Months  and  Days.  This  last  belief  indicates  that
the  characteristics  of  certain  months  are  of  value  in
predicting  future  weather  conditions.  In  England  a
dry  March  makes  the  clay  lands  bear  an  abundant
crop  of  corn — thus  the  saying,  "A  dry  March  never
begs  its  bread."  ^  ^  It  Is  rather  remarkable  that  pre-
cisely the  same  saying  Is  found  among  the  Negroes,  ^ '

1 112,  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  33  (1904),  p.  51.

244.

»189.

*44.

6  23.

«233.

M73.

8  57.

^  Evans,  J.  H.,     Weather-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  25  (1896),  p.  16.
10  83.
11141.

i^Denham,  M.  A.,     A  Collection  of  Proverbs  and  Popular  Sayings,  Percy
Society,  vol.  20,  p.  31.     Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  1,  p.  358.
i'81.


512     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

though  environmental  conditions,  of  course,  are  dif-
ferent. If  it  snows  in  March  after  the  trees  have
budded,  the  next  winter  will  be  an  extremely  hard
one — in  fact  the  weather-signs  in  March,  June,  and
August  should  always  be  carefully  watched,  since  they
indicate  the  weather  for  the  rest  of  the  year.  ^  The
eighth  day  of  June  gives  the  key  to  the  next  forty  days.
If  it  rains  on  that  day,  forty  days  of  rain;  if  the  sun
shines,  forty  bright  days.  ^  When  the  first  snow
of  winter  comes  you  should  count  the  time  since  the
last  new  moon;  the  number  of  days  indicates  the
number  of  snows  you  will  have  that  year.  ^  An
English  ^  belief  is  that  if  the  sun  shines  through  the
apple  trees  on  Christmas  day  there  will  be  plenty  of
fruit.  5  On  the  tenth  of  March  if  you  hear  the
"flying  horses"  in  the  air  it  is  an  indication  of  good
crops.  ^

Vegetable  Weather-prophets.  Botanomancy  as  ap-
plied to  weather  is  not  without  its  importance.  If  a
tree  falls,  you  are  sure  to  have  bad  weather,  ^  and
when  the  trees  begin  to  shed  their  .leaves  early  you
may  be  sure  that  an  early  and  hard  autumn  is  com-
ing. 8  If  the  bark  of  the  trees  is  very  tight  in  the  fall
there  will  be  a  long  and  cold  winter,  but  if  the  bark  is
loose  the  winter  will  be  "open  and  fair."  ^  When
nuts  are  plentiful  and  coons  fat  a  cold  winter  is  on  its

1141.

2  152.

3  81.

■•  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  218.

*81.

*91,  and  Alabama  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  33  (1904),  p.  51.

^246.

8  67.

9 159.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  513

way,  1  the  same  also  being  indicated  by  heavy  shucks
on  the  corn.  ^  If  the  fire  snaps  and  sparkles  slowly
and  continuously  ("treads  snow")  ^  it  is  a  sign  of
cold  weather  or  snow,  •*  this  being  the  only  evidence  of
pryomancy  in  weather-lore  I  have  been  able  to  locate.

Reliable  Weather  Signs.  Some  of  these  weather  signs,
though  developed  in  superstition,  have  scientific
value.  This  is  especially  true  of  those  having  to  do
with  conditions  of  excessive  humidity.  Thus  the
Negroes  very  widely  believe  that  if  the  smoke  falls
towards  the  ground  instead  of  rising  upward,  ^  or  if
the  soot  falls  into  the  fireplace  or  on  the  roof,  ^  it  is  a
sign  of  rain.  This  is  true,  since  it  is  the  excessive
humidity  of  the  atmosphere  that  causes  the  phe-
nomena. ^  The  same  condition  ^  is  the  scientific
basis  for  the  Negro  belief  that  moisture  collecting  on
the  outside  of  a  cold  glass  of  water  ^  or  an  iron  ves-
sel ' "  is  a  sign  of  rain.  This  same  principle  might
possibly  apply  to  the  case  of  a  Negro  who  had  a  long
hair  in  his  eyebrow.  Whenever  this  hair  fell  down
over  his  eyes  he  predicted  rain,  ^  ^  and  it  may  well  be
that  the  excessive  humidity  is  what  caused  the  hair  to
become  limp  and  fall.  ^  ^     The  same  explanation  ^  ^  ap-

M5.  Lee,  C,  Some  Negro  Lore  from  Baltimore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5
(1892),  p.  111.

233.

2 141,  and  Evans,  J.  H.,  Weather-Lore,  SouthernWorkman,vol. 25  (1896),
p.  16.

*  341.  Compare  Brand,  J.,  Popular  Antiquities  of  Great  Britain,  vol.
3,  p.  183.

i*  23,  268,  358,  and  341.

6 192,  401,  and  405.

'  Humphreys,  W.  J.,  Some  Useful  Weather  Proverbs,  Year  Book,  U.  S.
Department  of  Agriculture,  1912,  p.  381.

» Ibid.

9  246,  and  336.
1"  Evans,  J.  H.,     Weather-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  25  (1896),  p.  16.
1 1 405.

12  Humphreys,  W.  J.,     Weather  Proverbs  and  Paradoxes,  p.  76.

1 3  Ibid.
33


514     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

plies  to  a  rope  becoming  tight  ^  and  possibly  to  shoes
suddenly  becoming  squeaky,  ^  both  of  which  are  re-
garded as  omens  of  rain.  There  is  also  the  old  Eu-
ropean •■'  belief  that  a  fog  lying  close  to  the  ground  in
the  morning  indicates  fair  weather  (as  is  also  the  case
with  a  heavy  dew),  *  while  if  the  fog  lifts  early  it  will
soon  rain,  ^  all  of  these  beliefs  having  some  scientific
value.  ^  Less  scientific  is  the  basis  for  some  of  the
other  beliefs.  For  example,  two  (or  three)  ^  big
frosts  are  followed  by  a  rain  ^  or  storm.  ^  In  aus-
tromancy  we  find  the  idea  that  a  hard  wind  all
evening  from  the  northwest  indicates  frost,  while  a
heavy  wind  from  the  southeast,  changing  suddenly
to  northwest,  is  a  sure  sign  of  snow.  The  same  in-
formant told  me  that  a  wind  blowing  the  waves  on  a
pond  from  south  to  north  indicated  rain,  from  north
to  south,  fair  weather.  ^  °  If  a  whirlwind  goes  towards
a  pond  or  any  other  water  it  is  an  indication  of  rain.  ^  ^
To  see  the  sun  "drawing  water"  as  it  sets  is  also  an
indication  of  rain.  ^  -  If  it  rains  before  seven  it  will
stop  before  eleven  ^  ^  (the  English  version),  ^  ^  though
other  Negroes  say,  "thunder  before  seven,  rain  before
eleven,"  ^  ^  or  "thunder  before  the  seventh,  rain  before


1126.

2  252.

'  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  1,  p.  352.

^  Evans,  J.  H.,     Weather-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  25  (1895),  p.  16.

*398.

^Humphreys,  W.  J.,     Weather  Proverbs  and  Paradoxes,  pp.  47-49,  and
56-59.

^  332.

8  288.

^  Evans,  J.  H.,     Weather-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  25  (1896),  p.  16.
i«141.
1161,  and  57.     Southern  Workman,  vol.  24  (1894),  p.  155.

1 2  83,  173,  341,  379,  and  Ohio  Whites.

13  341.

i^Gregor,   W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northeast   of  Scotland,  p.    154.     Lean's
Collectanea,  vol.  1,  p.  394.
1 5  233.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  515

the  eleventh."  ^  One  Informant  told  me  that  if  It
rains  before  twelve  It  will  cease  at  once  or  get  worse.  ^
Thunder  In  the  morning  ushers  In  stormy  weather, '
while  thunder  In  mid-winter  Indicates  extreme  cold
coming''  (with  Illinois  whites  as  well),  ^  the  latter
belief  having  some  scientific  basis.  ^  A  rainbow  seen
in  the  morning  points  to  a  storm  on  its  way,  while  one
seen  in  the  evening  points  to  good  weather  the  next
day,  7  both  beliefs  being  true  to  facts.  ^  Other  Negroes
take  the  modified  Biblical  view  that  a  rainbow  seen
after  a  rain  Indicates  that  there  will  be  no  more  rain
for  a  long  time,  ^  while  two  rainbows  seen  at  once
vaticinate  dry  weather,  ^  o  though  one  Informant
says  that  a  rainbow  indicates  rain  the  next  day.  ^  ^
Lightning  in  the  north  Is  monitory  of  rain  within
twenty-four  hours,  ^  ^  while  lightning  in  the  west  is  a
sign  of  a  drouth.  '  ^

Moon  and  Stars.  The  heavenly  bodies,  especially
the  moon,  give  us  many  warnings  of  the  kind  of  weather
to  expect.  The  horny  moon  seems  to  be  thought  of
as  a  sort  of  bowl  holding  water.  If  it  Is  "on  Its  back"
(the  points  straight  upward)  dry  weather  will  result,
but  If  the  point  Is  down   ("Is  on  Its  point")   it  is


1223.

2310.

3  141,  and  Evans,    J.    H.,     Weather-Lore,    Southern   Workman,   vol.    25
(1896),  p.  16.

n59.

5  86.

^  Humphreys,  W.  J.,     Weather  Proverbs  and  Paradoxes,  p.  66  ff.

'  Evans,  J.  H.,     Weather-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  25  (1896),  p.  16.

^  Humphreys,  W.  J.,     Weather  Proverbs  and  Paradoxes,  p.  33  ff.

9379.
10341.
11336.

1 2  336,  40,  and  398.

13  13.


516     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

"spilling  water"  and  rain  will  surely  come.  ^  One
informant  says  that  the  new  moon  on  its  back  tells  of
rain  or  snow.  ^  Both  the  former  ^  and  the  latter  *
interpretations  are  found  in  England.  The  Negroes
say  that  a  ring  around  the  moon  indicates  bad
weather  ^  and  that  the  rain  is  just  as  many  days  away
as  there  are  stars  in  the  ring  ^  (or  that  there  will  be
that  many  days  before  clear  weather).  ^  While,  of
course,  the  number  of  stars  within  the  halo  does  not
Indicate  the  exact  number  of  days  before  a  rain,  yet
in  a  general  sort  of  way  there  is  some  scientific  truth
in  the  proposition.  The  rings  referred  to  are  the
lunar  coronas,  those  small  colored  halos  encircling
a  body  when  seen  through  a  mist.  The  larger  the
water  droplets,  the  smaller  the  corona  (the  fewer  the
stars  within  it)  and  the  nearer  the  rain.  A  large
corona  indicates  smaller  droplets  and  a  rain  further
removed.  ^  The  belief  itself  is  of  European  origin.  ^
A  circle  around  the  moon  containing  more  than  five
stars  is  said  by  the  Negroes  to  indicate  cold  weather;
less  than  five  stars,  warm  weather.  '  °  When  the  moon
changes  and  seems  to  lie  in  the  south  it  is  a  sign  of
warm  weather;   in   the   north,   cold   weather.     If  the


1 155,  286,  and  345.  Southern  Workman,  vol.  33  (1904),  p.  51.  Evans,
J.  H.,     Weather-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  25  (1896),  p.  16.

3  Dyer,  T.  F.  T.,     English  Folk-Lore,  p.  39.

*  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  1,  p.  383.
M59.

8 122.  Evans,  J.  H.,  Weather-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  25
(1896),  p.  16.

^  141.  Davis,  H.  C,  Negro  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  27  (1924),  p.  245.

*  Humphreys,  W.  J.,  Some  Useful  Weather  Proverbs,  Year  Book,  U.  S.
Department  of  Agriculture,  1912,  p.  377-78,  and  380.

*Fogel,  E.  M.,  Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans,
p.  241.  Gregor,  W.,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Northeast  of  Scotland,  p.  152.  Dyer,
T.  F.  T.,  English  Folk-Lore,  p.  38.

'"57.  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  24  (1894),  p.  155.


Prophetic  Signs  or  Omens  517

pointer  of  the  seven  stars,  or  the  large  end  of  the
milky  way  points  to  the  south  there  will  be  warm
weather;    to   the    north,    cold    weather.  ^

The  Sky.  Another  belief  with  a  scientific  basis  Is
that  a  red  sky  at  sunset  Indicates  fair  weather,  ^  while
a  gray  sky  Indicates  rain.  ^  The  red  tint  at  evening,
or,  better  still,  yellow  or  green,  shows  less  condensation
and  hence  fair  weather,  while  the  gray  sky  Is,  of  course,
due  to  the  presence  of  water  vapor,  and.  In  reality.
Indicates  the  possibility  of  rain.  ■*  Other  Negroes
say  that  a  red  sky  at  sunrise  Indicates  stormy  weather,
while  a  gray  sky  heralds  fair  weather,  ^  thus  completing
the  European  rhyme:

Evening  red,  and  morning  gray
Helps  the  traveller  on  his  way;
Evening  gray  and  morning  red,
Brings  down  rain  upon  his  head.  ^

Again  the  Negro  says  that  If  the  sun  rises  glittering  It
Is  the  sign  of  a  hot  day.  ^  A  ruddy  sky  In  the  north
at  evening  is  predictive  of  stormy  and  boisterous
weather,  ^  while  a  red  streak  extending  from  east  to
west  overhead  at  sunset  denotes  cold,  windy  weather.  ^
Others  say  that  a  red  sky  at  sunset  in  the  winter  is  a
sign  of  frost  on  the  coming  day.  ^  °     If  clouds  cross  the

1  Evans,  J.  H.,     Weather-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  25  (1895),  p.  16.

237,  220,  and  141.     Evans,  J.  H.,     Ibid.

3  122,243,  and  301.

*  Humphreys,  W.  J.,  Some  Useful  Weather  Proverbs,  Year  Book,  U.  S.
De-partment  0/  Agriculture,  1912,  pp.  376-77.

5  91,  and  Evans,  J.  H.,  Weather-Lore,  Southern  Tforfcmon ,  vol .  25  (1896),
p.  16.

^Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  1,  p.  353.

M23.

8  23.

9  Evans,  J.  H.,     Weather-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  25  (1896),  p.  16.
in23.


518     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

sun  going  towards  the  west  It  is  the  sign  of  rain,  ^
while  if  they  are  going  towards  the  east,  fair  weather.  ^
Dark  clouds  in  the  south  indicate  rain,  ^  but  if  there
is  enough  blue  sky  in  the  west  to  make  an  old  woman's
apron  it  will  "fair  off"  * — a  belief  similar  to  that
found  with  the  Illinois  whites.  ^  If  it  is  raining  and
the  sun  sets  fair  in  the  evening  It  will  be  fair  in  the
morning,  ^  but  if  it  is  clear  at  sunrise  and  afterwards
becomes  cloudy  It  will  surely  rain.  ^  If  It  clears  off
at  night  It  will  rain  soon.  *  "Sun-dogs"  In  the  sky
foretell  rain  the  next  day.  ^

Sunshine  and  Rain.  Various  signs  are  derived  from
the  phenomena  of  rain  falling  while  the  sun  Is  shining.
Some  say  that  It  will  rain  (the  same  time)  ^ "  the  next
day;  ^  ^  but  possibly  the  most  grotesque  Interpretation
Is  that  the  devil  Is  whipping  his  wife  ^  ^  around  the
stump  ^  ^  with  a  frying  pan.  ^  ^  Some  say  that  you  must
stick  a  pin  In  the  ground  and  place  your  ear  close  to
the  pin  to  hear  this  whipping  going  on;  ^  ^  or  else  kneel
down  and  stick  a  needle  in  the  wall,  then  get  up  and
pull  the  needle  out  with  your  mouth.  You  can  then
hear  the  devil's  wife  "hollering."  ^  ^     Or,  simpler  still,

»17.

2  61.

3  67.

.      ^  126,  and  312.

6  86.

8  265.

'173.

8  288.

8 173.     See  also,  Evans,  J.  H.,     Weather-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  25
(1895),  p.  16.     Gregor,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northeast  of  Scotland,  p.  152.
1 0  17,  and  288.

i^llO,  and  173.  This  belief  has  scientific  value.  See  Humphreys,
W.  J.,     Weather  Proverbs  and  Paradoxes,  p.  557.

1 2  379.

1 3  298.
1  ^ 135.

1 5  392.

1 6  274.


Ppophetic  Signs  or  Omens  519

you  can  simply  cross  a  knife  and  fork  and  go  behind
the  door,  to  see  this  dastardly  deed  being  done.  ^
The  European  version  is  that  when  it  rains  when  the
sun  is  shining  it  will  rain  about  the  same  time  the
next  day,  or  else  the  devil  is  beating  his  wife  behind
the  door  with  a  shoulder  of  mutton.  ^

Conclusion.  It  will  be  noticed  that  the  European
influence  is  most  evident  in  the  case  of  those  omens
centering  about  the  household.  In  the  case  of  weather-
lore,  however,  we  have  a  class  of  beliefs  observed  by  the
men  about  as  much  as,  or  perhaps  more  than,  the
women.  This  would  seem  to  be  due  largely  to  the
fact  that  such  bits  of  occupational-lore  were  handed
down  to  the  Negro  agriculturists  (male  and  female)
as  a  real  part  of  farm  training.  To  the  early  slave-
holders, and  especially  to  the  ignorant  overseers,  the
lore  connected  with  agriculture  was  almost  as  im-
portant as  the  farming  methods  themselves;  they  were
deemed  so  essential  to  self-maintenance  that  both  lore
and  methods  were  handed  down  alike  in  the  training
of  the  field  hands,  while  other  folk-beliefs  were  not
considered  so  important.


1  141.

2  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol .  1,  p.  396.


CHAPTER  VIII

CHRISTIANITY  AND  SUPERSTITION
CONCLUSION

Supplements  to  Christianity .  Thus  far  have  we
come  in  our  study  of  acculturation  from  African
origins  to  Afro-Anxerican  present  day  reahties.  Apart
from  a  few  Hnguistic  contributions  here  and  there,
these  Africans  have  contributed  httle  to  the  whites,
by  far  the  greater  amount  of  material  passing  from
whites  to  blacks,  which  seems  to  indicate  that  when  an
advanced  and  a  backward  people  come  into  contact,
the  culture  of  the  backward  people  is  the  most  af-
fected. This  is  to  be  expected  under  the  more  or  less
rigid  caste  system  which  has  governed  the  association
of  the  two  races;  the  blacks  were  looked  down  upon  as
cultural  inferiors  and  all  things  negroid  were  tabooed
to  the  socially  ambitious  whites.  On  the  other  hand,
to  the  Negro,  the  white  man  stood  as  a  model  to  be
emulated  in  all  things,  from  superstitions  to  straight
hair.  In  short,  the  socially  inferior  predominately
imitates  the  socially  superior.  Nevertheless,  in  this
would-be  European  conservatory,  certain  exotic  Afri-
can growths  continued  to  bloom.  These  survivals
consist  almost  entirely  of  matters  relating  to  self-
gratification  and  to  the  supernatural.  These  are,  of
course,  the  spheres  where  the  Negro,  to  a  certain
extent,  at  least,  has  been  left  to  his  own  devices.
But  any  survivals  of  African  religion  have  become,  to
the  whites,  superstition;  showing  that  the   difference


Christianity  and  Superstition  521

between  superstition  and  religion  is  something  purely
in  the  mores — the  same  belief  being  religion  to  one
folk  and  superstition  to  another.  ^  Religion  among
the  Southern  Negroes  is  so  full  of  what  the  whites
call  superstition  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  dis-
entangle the  two  did  we  not  have  our  present  concept
of  Christianity  as  a  standard.  But  these  superstitious
supplements  that  the  Negroes  have  made  to  Chris-
tianity give  us  an  index  of  the  meaning  of  superstition
itself,  and  it  is  of  value  to  note  the  exact  nature  of  this
intermingling  of  African  beliefs,  European  folk-lore
and  American  Christianity,  together  with  some  unique
interpretations  which  the  Negroes  themselves  have
developed  in  America.

Negro  Religion  Uniform.  Except  in  the  matter  of
sects  there  is  but  little  variance  in  the  religious  beliefs
of  the  Negro — all  the  differences  in  religion  in  Africa
from  tribe  to  tribe  have  been  merged  into  the  unity
of  Christianity.  But  these  sectarian  differences  are
not  to  be  ignored.  The  Negro  sings  of  being  a  Baptist
or  Methodist,  even  after  he's  "daid  an'  gone,"  ^  and
even  when  the  slaves  were  war  contrabands  the  common
sorrows  were  not  sufficient  to  break  down  sectarianism
enough  for  the  Baptist  contrabands  to  assist  in  singing
a  hymn  started  by  a  Methodist.  ^  Differences  of
opinion  along  minor  matters  are  often  sufficient  to
cause  a  split  in  the  Negro  church.  But,  taking  things
as  a  whole,  the  general,  local,  town,  family,  and  in-
dividual deities  of  the  Africans  *  have  been  replaced,
in   the   main,   by  the  general   Christian  Deity  of  the

1  See  here,  Lehman,  A.,     Aberglaube  und  Zauberei,  pp.  7-9.

2  Hollowell,  E.,     Calhoun  Plantation  Songs,  p.  19.

3  Livermore,  Mary  A.,     My  Story  of  the  War,  p.  267.
*  Ellis,  A.  B.,     Tshi-speaking  Peoples,  pp.  17-18.


522     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

American  Negroes.  It  is  true  that  the  individual  still
clings  to  certain  personal  charms  or  luck-pieces  and
that  certain  families  or  communities  fear  certain  col-
loquial ghosts,  but,  taking  the  group  as  a  whole,  so
far  as  actual  worship  is  concerned,  the  Christian  God
receives  the  mass  of  attention.  This  merging  of  the
many  tribal  religions  of  Africa  into  one  general  religion
in  America  would,  of  course,  give  the  Negro  a  certain
group  unity  here,  which,  assisted  by  similarity  of
language,  blood,  and  culture,  traits  lacking  in  Africa,
would  also  tend  towards  a  more  rapid  amalgamation
and  exchange  of  superstitions.

Polytheistic  African  Religion.  Nevertheless,  in  spite
of  this  outward  acceptance  of  Christianity,  the  South-
ern Negro  often  displays  traits  strangely  like  those  in
Africa.  The  West  African  has  nothing  analagous  to
our  Christ,  a  God-man  connecting  man  with  the
great  over-God,  and  this  idea  appeals  to  him  when
presented  by  Christianity,  or  Islam.  ^  Unlike  our-
selves, the  African  is  not  monotheistic.  ^  There  are
many  spirits  and  "they  are  all  to  a  certain  extent
limited  in  the  nature  of  their  power;  there  is  no  one
spirit  that  can  do  all  things;  their  efficiency  only  runs
in  certain  lines  of  action."  ^  That  certain  tribes  do
believe  in  a  Great  God,  a  Maker  or  Creator,  is  attested
by  many  observers,  but  they  all  agree  that  little
attention  is  paid  to  Him.  "Under  the  slightly  varying
forms  of  Anyambe,  Anyambic,  Njambi,  Nzambi,
Anzam,  Nyam,  or,  in  other  parts,  Ukuku,  Suku,  and


1  Kinglsey,  M.  H.,  West  African  Studies,  p.  127.

2  Tillinghast,  J.  A.,     The  Negro  in  Africa  and  America,  p.  150.
^  Kingsley,  M.  H.,     Travels  in  West  Africa,  p.  445.


Christianity  and  Superstition  523

so  forth,  they  know  of  a  Being  superior  to  themselves,
of  whom  they  themselves  inform  me  that  He  is  the
Maker  and  Father.  .  .  .  While  this  is  all  true,
their  knowledge  of  God  is  almost  simply  a  theory.
It  is  an  accepted  belief,  but  it  does  not  often  influence
their  life.  ...  In  practice  they  give  Him  no
worship."  ^  With  all  Bantu  coast  tribes  this  god  is  a
non-interfering  and  therefore  a  negligible  quantity.
Having  made  all  men,  animals,  and  plants.  He  takes
no  further  interest  in  them,  and  the  attention  of  the
folk  is  turned  rather  to  that  great  host  of  malevolent
spirits  with  which  the  universe  is  peopled.  -  With  the
Ibos,  Eka  Abassi,  a  female  deity,  is  the  mother  of
their  highest  god,  the  Thunder  God,  and  of  all  created
things.  All  babies  are  sent  by  her  and  when  one  dies
a  non-violent  death  she  has  taken  him  back.  ^

Survivals  in  America.  While  the  Southern  Negro
believes  much  more  firmly  in  a  single  deity  than  does
the  native  African,  yet  his  intense  recognition  of
ghosts,  witches,  angels,  devils,  and  other  secondary
supernatural  beings,  gives  his  religion  a  decidedly  poly-
theistic turn.  Very  often  the  Negroes  will  temporarily
lay  aside  their  religion  and  attain  ends  by  means
strongly  suggestive  of  African  fetishism.  Nassau,
in  telling  some  American  Negroes  of  the  African
fetishism,  found  to  his  surprise  that  they  admitted  the
same  thing  in  their  locality.  *  Things  associated  with
the  dead  are  often  used.  The  hand  of  a  dead  friend  will
bring  prosperity;  his  big  toe  will  keep  away  disease.

1  Nassau,  R.  H.,     Fetichism  in  West  Africa,  p.  36-38.

2  Kingsley,  M.  H.,     Travels  in  West  Africa,  pp.  442-43.

^  Talbot,  W.  A.,     Woman's  Mysteries  of  a  Primitive  People,  pp.  8-11.
*  Nassau,  R.  H.,     Fetichism  in  West  Africa,  p.  275.


524     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

The  toe  of  an  enemy  can  be  used  as  a  charm  for  con-
juring enemies.

Wid  dis  bony  toe,  I'll  bring  de  woe
'Fo'  daylight  in  the  mornin'.  ^

Mrs.  Virginia  Frazer  Boyle  writes  me  of  a  human
finger  found  in  a  Negro  conjure-bag,  ^  and  in  New
Orleans  the  Creole  Negroes  on  November  1,  gather
graveyard  dirt  from  various  cemeteries  under  certain
-conditions  (mainly  silence)  under  the  impression  that
the  wish  made  while  getting  the  dirt  will  surely  come
true.  ^  The  vulture  is  a  fetish  bird  in  parts  of  Africa  *
and  the  Georgia  Negroes  say  that  if  you  throw  a  kiss
at  a  buzzard  and  wish  for  something  you  will  surely
get  it.  ^  The  GuUah  Negroes  of  South  Carolina  use
the  term  "Bline  Gawd,"  (Blind  God)  to  signify  a
"personal  idol  or  fetish  of  African  suggestiveness  whose
aid  is  invoked  to  further  the  desires  of  its  owner,"  ^
while  a  Princeton  family  found  their  Negro  cook  with  a
•chicken's  breastbone,  some  hair,  and  a  piece  of  coal
wrapped  in  a  small  velvet  bag — a  combination  reported
to  be  an  "ages-old  fetish  in  Guinea."  ^  The  Negro
Christian  Deity  is  like  the  African  gods  in  that  he  is
distinctly  anthropomorphic.  ^

African  Concept  of  Sin.  The  concept  of  sin  is
another  point  of  difference  between  the  West  Africans

1  Bergen,  F.  D.,  Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7  (1899),
p.  22.

2  42.

^  Superstitions  of  Negroes  in  New  Orleans,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5  (1892),  pp.  331-
32.

*  Burton,  R.  F.,     Wit  and  Wisdom  from  West  Africa,  p.  85.

6 106.

6  Gonzales,  A.  E.,     The  Black  Border,  pp.  290,  and  133.

^  Dana,  M.,     Voodoo,  Metropolitan  Magazine,  vol.  28  (1908),  p.  531.

^  See  for  instance,  Perkins,  A.  E.,  Negro  Spirituals  from  the  Far  Soiith  ,
J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  35  (1923),  p.  224.


Christianity  and  Superstition  525

and  the  white  Americans.  "With  people  in  the  con-
dition in  which  the  natives  of  the  Gold  Coast  now  are,
religion  is  not  in  any  way  allied  with  moral  ideas,
whose  source  is  indeed  essentially  distinct,  although
the  two  become  associated  when  man  attains  a  higher
degree  of  civilization.  Sin,  I  use  the  word  in  the  sense
of  an  offense  committed  against  a  god,  is  amongst  the
natives  of  the  Gold  Coast  limited  to — first,  insults
offered  to  the  gods;  secondly,  neglect  of  the  gods.
Murder,  theft,  and  all  offenses  against  the  person  or
against  property  are  matters  in  which  they  take  no
interest,  except  in  the  case,  when,  bribed  by  a  valuable
offering,  they  take  up  the  quarrel  in  the  interest  of
some  faithful  worshiper."  ^  Thus  the  African  con-
cept differs:  "Sin  to  him  not  being  what  it  is  to  us,
a  vile  treason  against  a  loving  Father,  but  a  very  ill-
advised  act  against  powerful,  nasty-tempered  spirits."  ^
In  still  another  respect  there  is  a  difference.  The
Bantus  have  a  proverb,  "  'Swedo  a  Yalakendi  na
moto  umbaka'  (death  begins  by  one  person).  This
meant  that  they  should  all  be  watchful,  lest  danger
come  to  them  all  by  indiscretion  of  a  few."  ^  This  is
the  idea  of  a  frenzied  spirit,  offended  by  the  deeds  of  a
single  person,  lashing  out  blindly  in  his  rage  with  an
earthquake,  or  famine,  or  some  other  calamity,  and
bringing  disaster  to  the  whole  community.  In  ac-
cordance with  such  a  belief  every  person  is  forced
to  be  his  brother's  keeper,  or  else  suffer  for  sins  that  he
has  not  committed,  for  on  the  Gold  Coast,  *  as  in  almost


^  Ellis,  A.  B.,     Tshi-speaking  Peoples,  pp.  10-11.

2  Kingsley,  M.  H.,     West  African  Studies,  p.  159.

3  Nassau,  R.  H.,     Where  Animals  Talk,  pp.  127-28.
*  Ellis,  A.  B.,     Tshi-speaking  Peoples,  p.  112.


526     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

all  of  West  Africa,  the  majority  of  spirits  are  malignant,
and  every  misfortune  is  ascribed  to  their  action.
Even  a  slight  offense  is  likely  to  break  the  bounds  of
their  fury  and  a  person  cannot  be  too  careful  in  seeing
that  these  deities,  which  are  so  unconcerned  about  the
relation  of  man  to  his  fellow-man,  should  not  become
offended  through  the  stupid  omission  of  some  rite  or
ceremony  connected  with  themselves.  In  all  things
the  West  African  gods  are  not  at  all  concerned  with  the
relation  of  man  to  man,  but  only  with  the  relation  of
man  to  god.

Religion  and  Morality.  Like  the  West  Africans,  the
Christianity  of  the  Southern  Negro  is  not  closely
connected  with  morality.  An  Arkansas  Negro  con-
sidered it  all  right  to  conjure  inasmuch  as  he  had
"  'surrance  er  salvation,"  ^  and  most  of  the  conjure-
doctors  with  whom  I  have  come  In  contact  are
unusually  religious  and  ostentatious  In  their  church
obligations — some  of  them  even  being  ministers.  An
old  Negro  testified  In  meeting  that  he  cursed  some,
had  stolen  some,  had  drunk  whiskey  some,  and  had
done  other  things  some,  but  could  thank  God  that  he
had  never  lost  his  religion — this  attitude  is  fairly
typical  of  many  of  the  lower  churches  of  the  South.  ^
Many  petty  amusements,  ^  such  as  dancing,  fiddling,
baseball,  picnics,  and  even  checker  playing,  are
tabooed  by  the  church,  while  other  more  serious
moral  breaches,  such  as  unchastlty,  theft,  and  lying,
are  more  or  less  overlooked.     This  repressive  attitude

1 /.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  1  (1888),  p.  83.

2  Earnest,  J.  B.  Jr.,     The  Religious  Development  of  the  Negro  in  Virginia,  pp.

'  For  a  list,  see  Morals  and  Manners  among  Negro  Americans,  Atlanta
University  Pub.  No.  18  (1914),  p.  90  ff.


Christianity  and  Superstition  527

may  be  a  remnant  of  the  African  fear  of  exciting  the
envy  of  dangerous  spirits  by  too  much  frivolity  and
pleasure.  Or  else,  In  part,  It  may  be  due  to  the  fact
that  the  developing  Negro  church  unconsciously  re-
cognized the  futility  of  attempting  to  repress  the  more
deep-seated  natural  tendencies,  and  so  began  its
disciplinary  career  by  controlling  the  less  essential
first.  Besides  It  has  not  been  so  long  since  the  more
conservative  Southern  churches  reversed  their  con-
demnation of  amusements  now  highly  esteemed — and
the  Negro  to  a  certain  degree  merely  clings  to  the
precepts  of  his  first  teacher.

Slave  Religion.  There  are  some  who  say  that  in
Negro  Christianity  we  find,  not  African  tradition,  but
the  African  temperament  giving  rise  to  a  new  and
original  form  of  Christianity.  ^  "In  the  past,  with
rapidity,  the  Negro  has  adopted  the  religions  of  the
Caucasians — sacred  animals  and  tribal  totems,  demi-
gods, and  nature-spirits,  the  phallism,  fetishism,  and
magic  of  the  earlier  Mediterranean  faiths,  conveyed  to
Negro  Africa  by  the  Libyan,  Hamite,  and  HIma;
then  later,  Mohammedanism;  Christianity;  free-
masonry; faith-healing."  -  We  may  indeed  question,
however,  the  "rapidity"  of  this  process,  and  observe
that  Christianity  Is  not  the  same  with  all  people,  but
that  it  is  modified  and  reshaped  to  fit  in  with  their
secular  mores.  While  the  salvation  of  many  be-
nighted African  souls  was  one  argument  used  to
justify  early  Portuguese  slave  trade,  ^  yet  this  soul-
saving  passion  did  not  always  prevail  In  the  days  of


1  Park,  R.  E.,     Journal  of  Negro  Hisionj,  vol.  iv  (1919),  p.  122.

2  Johnston,  Sir  H.  H.,     The  Negro  in  the  New  World,  p.  24.

'  Earnest,  J.  B.,  Jr.,     The  Religious  Development  of  the  Negro  in  Virginia,
p.  21.


528     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

early  American  slavery.  Down  to  the  latter  part  of
the  seventeenth  century  the  belief  was  prevalent  in
America  that  the  Negro  was  merely  a  beast,  ^  and
even  as  late  as  1902,  from  a  Bible  House  in  St.  Louis
was  published  The  Negro  a  Beast,  or  In  the  Image  of
God — a  book  which  had  an  enormous  circulation
among  the  poorer  whites  of  the  South.  ^  Burnaby,
writing  in  1759,  mentions  the  fact  that  the  Virginians
scarcely  considered  the  Negro  as  being  of  the  human
species,  ^  and  Evans,  while  visiting  in  North  Carolina,
was  startled  to  be  asked  concerning  the  supposed  pres-
ence of  a  tail  and  absence  of  a  soul  with  the  African
Negroes.  ^  While  I  have  heard  similar  queries  ad-
vanced regarding  the  human  qualities  of  the  Southern
Negro,  they  are,  of  course,  passing  into  decay.  In  the
earlier  days,  however,  they  doubtless  exerted  a  consid-
erable influence  in  inhibiting  the  soul-saving  efforts
of  the  whites  where  they  thought  no  soul  existed.

Some  of  the  slaves  were  Mohammedans,  even  down
to  relatively  recent  times,  and  it  is  worthy  of  note
that  in  most  cases  they  are  described  as  being  superior
to  the  other  Negroes  ^ — possibly  because  of  their
strangeness  which  would  lead  them  to  have  a  sort  of
fetishistic  control.  In  other  cases,  however,  the  Negro
slaves  looked  upon  the  new  African  arrivals  with  much
the  same  contempt  with  which  the  whites  regarded
Negroes  in  general  ^ — a  fact  which  would  tend  to  make
the  Negro  arrivals  take  on  the  outward  signs  of  white


1  Ibid.,  p.  13.

"^  Brawley,  B.,     Social  History  of  the  American  Negro,  p.  325.

^  Quoted  in  Journal  of  Negro  History,  vol.  i  (1916),  p.  399.

*  Evans,  M.S.,     Black  and  White  in  the  Southern  States,  pp.  60-61.

*  Lyell,  Sir  Chas.,  A  Second  Visit  to  the  United  States  of  North  America,
vol.  i,  p.  266.  Conrad,  Georgia  B.,  Reminiscences  of  a  Southern  Woman,
Southern  Workman,  vol.  30  (1901),  p.  252.

8  Lyell,  Sir  Chas.,     Ibid.,  p.  267.


Christianity  and  Superstition  529

//
culture  as  soon  as  possibles    In  many  cases,  however,

no  deliberate  effort  was  made  to  give  the  Negro  slaves

religious    training.   ''On    some    plantations    they   were

allowed   to   have   their  own   meeting   places,   but  my

informant  remarks  that  it  was  hard  to  see  how  her

father's    slaves    learned    anything    about   Christianity

since  few  of  them  could  read  and  write  and  there  was

no  one  to  teach  them.  ^  *  In  another  case  an  old  slave

tells  of  having  no  churches  but  meeting  for  worship

and    prayer    in    the    fence    corners.     He    tells    of   the

master  whipping  one  old  slave,  who  prayed   for  the

master  all  the  time  he  was  being  whipped.     His  master

was  touched  and  allowed  him  to  preach  to  the  men

on  the  plantation  with  the  result  that  hundreds  were

converted.  ^

Negro  Church  a  Social  Center.  The  first  Negro
church  in  America  was  a  Baptist  Church  at  Silver
Bluff,  South  Carolina,  founded  some  time  between
1773  and  1775.  ^  Since  that  time  there  has  been  a
remarkable  development  along  these  lines.  The  Negro,
with  his  sociable  nature,  is  always  ready  to  "jine"
anything,  and  the  church  offers  him  a  field — pos-
sibly the  only  field — in  which  he  is  independent  of  the
white  man's  control,  ^  and  free  to  develop  an  insti-
tution for  Negro  needs.  Not  only  did  the  church
serve  social  ends,  many  entertainments,  concerts,
suppers,  socials,  fairs,  literary  and  debating  exercises,
cantatas,  plays,  excursions,  picnics,  surprise  parties,
and  other  social  gatherings,  being  held  by  the  members;  *

1  145.

2  286.

'  Brawley,  B.,     Social  History  oj  the  American  Negro,  p.  66.

■*  Evans,  M.  S.,     Black  and  White  in  the  Southern  States,  p.  117.

*  Du  Bois,  W.  E.  B.,  The  Philadelphia  Negro,  pp.  203-^5.  For  a  more  de-
tailed discussion  of  the  Negro  Church,  see  Puckett,  N.  N..  The  Negro  Church
in  the  United  States,  Social  Forces,  vol.  4  (1926),  p.  581  ff.

34


530     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

but  it  was  the  center  about  which  scattered  Negro
rural  communities  grew  up,  ^  and  served  as-  a  nucleus
around  which  social  ideas  and  policies  might  be
developed  towards  a  definite  objective.  ^  Since  the
church  has  been  very  largely  the  great  focal-point  of
Negro  social  life,  the  societal  development  of  the  Negro
has  largely  centered'around  this  organization,  although
in  time  it  may  be  that  the  school  will  supplant  it.
With  them,  as  with  the  Africans,  religion  is  closely
connected  with  the  activities  of  daily  life.

Emotional  Religion.  Religion  was  the  societal  or-
ganization through  which  the  native  emotionality
of  the  Negro,  repressed  by  the  monotonous  toil  of
slavery,  could  find  expression.  Here  his  personality
found  relief  and  outlet,  and  through  his  emotional
ecstasy  and  his  faith  in  the  hereafter  he  found  for-
bearance and  endurance.  ^  Brawley  recognizes  the
fact,  common  in  most  rural  sections  of  the  South,  that
the  appeal  is  primarily  sensuous  and  that  the  Negro
is  thrilled  not  so  much  by  the  moral  as  by  the  artistic
and  pictorial  elements.  ^  The  Negro  himself  testifies
to  this  emotional  appeal  in  his  songs:

Of  all  de  folks  I  like  de  bes'
I  love  de  shouting  Methodist,

while  the  old  folks  regret  the  "powerful  coldness"  of
the  more  modern  Negro  church  with  its  lessened
emotionality.  ^


1  Washington,  B.  T.,     The   Rural   Negro   Community,   Annals   American
Academy  Political  and  Social  Science,  vol.  xl  (1912),  p.  83.

2  Stone,  A.  H.,     Studies  in  the  American  Race  Problem,  pp.  330-31.
'  Haynes,  G.  E.,     The  Trend  of  the  Races,  p.  77  ff.

■•  Brawley,  B.,     Social  History  of  the  American  Negro,  p.  381.
*  Barton,  W.  C,     Old  Plantation  Hymns,  p.  19.


Christianity  and  Superstition  531

Before  the  revival  service  "an  air  of  intense  excite-
ment prevails;  the  Negroes  are  expecting  strange  and
occult  happenings."  ^  Several  years  of  experience
with  Negro  labor  in  Mississippi  has  taught  me  to  expect
a  serious  "laying  off"  of  "hands"  during  this  revival
period,  and  Earnest  mentions  the  fact  that  the  Ameri-
can Tobacco  Company  had  to  "lay  off  its  hands"  be-
cause of  the  religious  frenzy  of  the  great  revival  in
Norfolk  in  1911.2

Praise-houses.  Everywhere  before  the  service  there
is  a  long  period  of  singing,  tapping  of  feet  on  the
floor,  and  rhythmic  swaying  of  the  body.  This  seems
in  itself  to  produce  a  sort  of  hypnotic  eifect,  leading
to  a  breakdown  of  rational  inhibitions  and  to  a  free
display  of  emotions — the  Negroes  themselves  say  that
the  spirit  will  not  descend  without  song.  ^  On  the
Sea  Islands,  especially,  where  many  of  the  Negroes
had  never  seen  a  white  face  and  where  clothing  was
absent  or  at  a  minimum  in  the  case  of  the  young,
superstitions  reigned  almost  supreme,  *  and  here  we
find  perhaps  the  richest  survivals  of  the  slavery  time
"shout."  This  generally  takes  place  in  the  "praise-
houses" — most  of  the  Negroes  becoming  converted
here  rather  than  in  the  church  itself.  ^  Even  as  late
as  1912,  Weatherford  reports  on  St.  Helena  Island,
S.  C,  seven  churches  and  nearly  a  hundred  praise-
houses  scattered  over  the  island,  in  which  services
were   held  every  Tuesday,   Thursday,    Saturday,   and

1  Snyder,  H.,     A  Plantation  Revival  Service,  Yale  Review,  Oct.  1920,  p.  169.

2  Earnest,  J.  B.,  Jr.,  The  Religious  Development  of  the  Negro  in  Virginia
p.  167.

^  Snyder,  H.,     A  Plantation  Revival  Service,  Yale  Review,  Oct.  (1920),  p.  172.

*  Southern  Workman,  vol.  30  (1901),  pp.  185-86,  and  vol.  29  (1900),
p.  388.  Towne,  Laura  M.,  Pioneer  Work  on  the  Sea  Islands,  Ibid.,  vol.  30
(1901),  p.  399.

5  Park,  R.  E.,     Journal  of  Negro  History,  vol.  4  (1919),  pp.  122-23.


532     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Sunday  night.  ^  The  slavery  time  "shout"  consisted
of  moving  about  in  a  ring,  shuffling  the  feet  along  inch
by  inch,  sometimes  dancing  silently,  but  more  fre-
quently singing  spirituals.  "The  foot  is  hardly  taken
from  the  floor,  and  the  progression  is  mainly  due  to  a
jerking,  hitching  motion,  which  agitates  the  entire
shouter,  and  soon  brings  out  streams  of  perspiration."
It  is  possible  that  the  whole  ceremony  is  a  relic  of
some  native  African  dance.  ^  Mrs.  Parsons  reports
much  the  same  sort  of  things  going  on  today  on  the
outskirts  of  Beaufort.  ^

The  Emotion-expert.  In  this  emotional  religion  per-
haps the  chief  personage,  the  emotion-expert  as  it
were,  is  the  preacher.  He  it  is  who  with  one  hand
exalts  his  tense  audience  to  the  very  Glory  of  Glories
and  with  the  other  wallows  them  in  the  swamp-mud
of  despond,  playing  upon  the  whole  gamut  of  their
feelings  until  the  real  is  overwhelmed  and  forgotten
in  the  unspeakable  bliss  or  pain  of  the  imaginary.
Like  the  fetish-man  of  Africa,  his  authority  depends
partly  upon  his  supernatural  call  to  preach.  Sol
Lockhart  was  taken  up  in  a  fiery  west  wind  while
ploughing;  he  saw  a  ladder  reaching  into  heaven  and
a  church  with  Sol  Lockhart  behind  the  pulpit.  Later
on,  his  mule  started  talking  to  him;  he  saw  an  empty
red  coffin,  the  spirit  of  God  in  the  shape  of  a  bird,  a
man  in  a  long  white  robe;  buildings  of  white  stone  in
heaven,  and  a  dead  head  all  torn  up  with  rotten  teeth.  *

'  Weatherford,  W.  D.,     Present  Forces  in  Negro  Progress,  p.  30.
^  Allen,  W.  F.,     Slave  Songs  of  the  United  States,  Preface  pp.  xii-xv.
» Parsons,  E.  C,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,
vol.  16  (1923),  pp.  205-06.

^Steiner,  R.,     Sol  Lockhart' s  Call,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  13  (1900),  pp.  67-70.


Christianity  and  Superstition  533

"Aunt  Cindy"  had  a  somewhat  more  materialistic
foundation  for  her  divine  power.  She  was  a  "preacher-
woman"  who  could  do  miracles,  her  chief  one  being
to  walk  on  the  water — or  rather  upon  a  staging  ar-
ranged beneath  the  slimy  green  water  of  the  bayou.
All  went  well  until  some  mischievous  boys  sawed  a
part  of  her  staging  away.  She  went  through  into
the  bosom  of  the  pond,  but  even  then  her  power  was
not  irrevocably  lost — the  Negroes  merely  thought
that  her  faith  had  failed  her  in  the  middle  of  the  water.  '■
Booker  T.  Washington  noticed  that  the  call  to  preach
generally  came  just  when  a  person  was  beginning  to
learn  to  read,  and  that  these  convulsive  spirit  voices
have  stilled  somewhat  with  the  opening  up  of  more
industrial  occupations.  ^

The  Sermon.  Mighty  is  the  power  of  the  word  in
the  hands  of  an  illiterate  vendor  of  emotions.  The  text
was,  "Who  is  worthy  to  drink  the  cup .?"  The  following
is  an  extract  from  the  sermon:  "Now  I  want  you  to  get
the  bird  called  the  Curiosity  that  can  fly  sixty-seven
hundred  thousand  miles  in  a  minute,  and  he  carried
him  in  the  valley  and  he  said  that  the  cup  foamed  so
wrathy  and  the  wrath  looked  so  bitter  and  won't
drink  it  up,  0-o-oh,  no-o  (groans)." »  During  the
heat  of  the  sermon  every  pause  is  punctuated  by  a
long  drawn  out  "Ah-h-h"  which  not  only  gives  the
preacher  time  to  think  up  something  to  -say  next,
but  also,  through  Its  dull  repetition,  has  a  sort  of
tom-tom  eifect  upon  the  nervous  system — even  upon
that  of  an  educated  white  observer  trained  In  emotional


1404.

2  Washington,  B.  T.,     Up  from  Slavery,  p.  82.

'  Southern  Workma7i,  vol.  24  (1895),  p.  61.


534     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

control.  One  minister  of  my  acquaintance  introduced
an  effective  variation  this  summer,  as  follows:  "Wal'
brethern — oh  mah  Lawd — look  et  ole  Norah — oh  mah
Lawd — buildin'  on  de  Ark — oh  mah  Lawd— folkes  a-
laughin'  at  him — oh  mah  Lawd— 'fo'  long  de  rain
came — oh  mah  Lawd— didn't  have  no  shelter — oh
mah  Lawd — no  place  ter  sot  a  fiah — oh  mah  Lawd —
etc."  Borne  on  the  wings  of  the  frenzy  the  preacher
rhythmically  propels  his  audience  to  the  dizzy  threshold
of  heaven,  swooping  suddenly  for  a  whiif  of  the  brim-
stone in  order  that  they  may  appreciate  more  poignantly
the  heights  he  has  reached.  If  the  speaker  is  slow
but  willing,  the  leader  may  ask  the  audience  to  "mourn
him,  up,  chillun!"  Beginning  with  a  soft  rhythm  the
chant  increases  in  intensity  and  "amens"  until  the
minister  finds  images  with  astounding  rapidity,  speaks
in  rhythm,  gives  full  movement  to  head,  arms,  feet,
eyes  and  face,  and  loses  his  self-consciousness  in
ecstasy.  ^  In  this  way  the  crowd  can  make  or  break
a  preacher — sweep  him  along  on  a  thundering  crest  of
eloquence  or  chili  him  into  stammering  silence.  The
preacher  must  give  the  crowd  what  it  wants,  which
leads  me  to  believe  that  efforts  to  lift  Negro  religion
out  of  the  grasp  of  sensuous  emotion  must  ultimately
lie,  not  primarily  in  the  education  of  the  ministry,
but  in  the  education  of  the  congregation.

"y^  Sli-pperance  uv  de  Tongue.^''  It  matters  not  what
the  illiteracy  of  the  minister  so  long  as  he  can  play
upon  the  feelings  and  think  with  the  tongue.  One
old  Negro  preacher  could  not  read.  "De  Scripture
sez,"  he  quoted,  "ebby  tub  mus'  stan'  on  hit's  own


^  For  an  example,  see  Davenport,  P\    M.,     Primitive   Traits  in  Religious
Revivals,  pp.  50-5 L


Christianity  axd  Superstition  535

bottom."     If  caught  drinking,  "De  Scripture  sez  hit
ain't  no  harm  ter  drink  a  leetle  perviding  ef  you  goes
off    by    yo'se'f    an'    doan'    bodder    nobody."     When
caught  in   a   misquotation    (the  Negroes   called   it  "a
lie")  he  would  reply,  "De  Scripture  sez  a  slipperance
uv  de  tongue  ain'  no  strain  on  de  backbone."  ^     Another
Negro  announced  his  text  from  "de  two-eyed  chapter
of  de  one-eyed  John,"  meaning  the  second  chapter  of
first  John.     He   had    mistaken    the   Roman  numerals
"I"   for  the  capital   letter  "I"— hence  "I"   would  be
one   "i",   "11",   two   "i's"   and   so  on.  -     I   heard   one
sermon  preached  on  Mark  5:1-13,  where  Christ  sent
the  devils  from  a  man  into  a  herd  of  swine,  the  man's
name  being  "Legion"  on  account  of  the  large  number
of   demons   within    him.     This    sermon   was    a   tirade
against  the  terrible  sin  of  saying  you  had   "  'ligion"
(confused  with  "legion")  when  you  meant  "religion."
When  you  say  you  have  "  'ligion"  you  mean  you  have
the  thousand  demons  in  you,  but  "re"  means  "again"
and  "re-ligion"  means  you  are  born  again  or  saved.
Almost  always  in  my  observation  the  Negro  preacher
prefers  to  deal  with  narrative  events  of  Biblical  heroes,
and    Snyder,    also   noting  this   preference   for   mytho-
logical texts,  especially  parts  of  the  Old  Testament,
states  that  the  plantation  Negro's  mind  seems  to  be
in  the  myth-making  stage.  ^     This  tendency  towards
the  mystical  is  shown  by  the  addresses  recently  given
in   a  Mississippi  Negro   tent-meeting.     Among   them
were  "The  Mark  of  the  Beast  and  the  Mystic  Number
666  of  Rev.   13:18."   "The   Sealing  of  the   144,000,"

141.
2  384.

^  Snyder,  H.,      A   Plantation  Revival   Service,    Yale    Review,    Oct.    1920,
p.  172.


536     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

"What  is  the   Seal"?   "When   Hell   Burns   Out  What
Follows"?  and  similar  subjects.

^'Comin  Thru^  Du  Bois  says  that  the  preacher,
the  music,  and  the  frenzy  are  the  three  things  char-
acterizing slave  religion.  ^  The  frenzy  would  seem  to
be  an  outgrowth  of  the  other  two,  and  indeed  it  could
scarcely  be  otherwise.  After  the  minister,  more  or
less  immoral,  perhaps,  but  with  great  personal  mag-
netism, has  seared  his  audience  with  a  hell  as  red  and
fiendish  as  the  cover  of  a  conjure-bag,  the  troubled
members  of  the  church  silently  surround  the  filled
"mo'nahs'  bench" — a  series  of  benches  in  front,  gen-
erally arranged  in  the  shape  of  a  square  with  the  side
towards  the  pulpit  open.  Some  one  prays — a  fervent
personal  prayer,  aimed  at  individual  mourners,  throw-
ing the  pitiless  light  of  truth  on  their  sins:  "Oh  Lawd
(pray,  Sistah,  pray) — dere's  ole  High-Pocket  Tony
(Lawd,  Lawd,  he'p  him) — shootin'  craps  all  de  time
(hab  mussy,  Lawd) — playin'  baseball  when  he  oughter
be  hearin'  Thy  Word  (hab  mussy,  Lawd) — lyin'  an'
cussin'  (pray  on,  sistah) — bring  him  to  us,  Lawd,
pleeze  we  ax  Thee,  Lawd,  bring  him  to  us  (amen,
Lawd,   amen,),  etc."  ^     Then  a  song  perhaps:

Oh  whar  you  runnin',  sinnah,  you  cain't  hide!
Oh  whar  you  runnin',  sinnah,  you  cain't  hide!
Oh  whar  you  runnin',  sinnah,  you  cain't  hide!
You  cain't  hide,  sinnah, — you  caint  hide!
You  is  bound  fer  de  judgment — you  cain't  hide,  etc.
De  rocks  will  be  melted— yoM  cain't  hide,  etc.


1  Du  Bois,  W.  E.  B.,     The  Souls  of  Black  Folk,  pp.  190-9L

2  Negro  prayers  are  usually  extremely  personal,  practical,  and  full  of
flattery,  very  much  like  the  African  variety.  For  examples  of  African  prayers,
see  Ellis,  A.  B.,  Ewe-speaking  Peoples,  pp.  72-73.  Nassau,  R.  H.,  Fet-
ichism  in  West  Africa,  pp.  97-98.  Tvlor,  E.  B.,  Primitive  Culture,  vol.  ii,
pp.  367-68.


Christianity  and  Superstition  537

The  mourner  is  already  weakened  by  days  and  nights
of  fasting  and  praying.  The  thundering  refrain,  "l^o^
cain't  hide,  sinnahV  accompanied  by  a  pounding  and
stamping  of  feet  ("Ef  you  doan'  stamp  in  de  'Hgion
hit  woan'  git  no  further  dan  de  ceiHn'"),  ^  pierces  his
weary  heart.  The  "exhorters,"  including  the  powerful
preacher  and  various  and  sundry  awesome  conjure-
doctors,  lay  hands  upon  the  kneeling  "mo'nahs"
and  urge  them  to  "take  de  Lawd."  Prayers  and
songs  follow  one  another  until  way  into  the  night  in
endless  succession.  The  sinner  is  reminded  that
"Ebbybody  got  ter  lay  down  an'  die."  His  sins  are
pointed  out:  "Doan'  let  Him  ketch  you  on  de  ballroom
floor";  a  way  is  shown:  "So  glad — done  got  ovah!";
and  he  is  warned  "Doan'  you  let  no  liah  turn  you
'roun',  etc."  -  The  power  of  mass  suggestion  is  too
great — I  am  almost  convicted  myself,  even  though
only  on  the  outskirts  of  the  crowd — the  "mo'nah,"
often  only  a  child,  untutored  in  the  repression  of
emotions,  and  wearied  by  days  of  fasting  and  prayer —
often  in  the  graveyard — "comes  thru,"  leaps  from  his
seat  and  rushes  wildly  into  the  night  shouting  his
gladness  to  the  stars.  Later  on  he  will  tell  of  his
vision  and  be  baptized — he  may  forget  the  excitement
of  that  moment  and  revert  to  his  old  sin — no  matter,
he  is  safe  in  the  folds  of  the  church.  ^  On  the  Sea
Islands   much  the  same  program  is  followed,  except

1404.

2  The  songs  quoted  here  are  some  I  collected  from  the  Negroes  of  Lowndes
County,  Miss.  They  have  countless  other  revival  songs  rich  with  threats
and  promises  among  which,  "Jesus  gona  make  up  my  dyin'-baid,"  "Gawd
gimme  a  light — gwinter  let  hit  shine,"  "Wonder  where's  dat  gamblin'  man?"
and  "Go  to  de  wilderness,"  stand  out  most  prominently  in  my  mind.

^  The  materials  for  this  description  were  taken  from  various  Negro  rural
churches  near  Columbus,  Miss.


538     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

that  here  dream-signs  are  probably  a  Httle  more
closely  observed,  and  the  "candidate"  has  a  little  white
cloth  or  string  tied  around  his  head  to  mark  him  off
from  the  rest.  ^  During  the  intense  heat  of  the
revival  service  members  of  the  congregation,  whether
already  in  the  church  or  not,  frequently  go  off  into
convulsions,  stagger  upright  in  their  seats,  shrieking,
and  hurl  themselves  struggling  into  the  arms  of  those
behind  them,  or  go  spinning  down  the  aisles  with
eyes  closed  and  arms  outstretched.  My  experience
has  been  that  the  women  are  much  more  superstitious
and  much  more  subject  to  these  trances  than  men,  a
fact  which  other  observers  have  likewise  noticed.  ^

Resemblance  to  Africa.  In  Africa,  ordinary  people
who  are  naturally  shy,  under  stress  of  religious  excite-
ment dance  boldly  in  public,  speak  incoherently,  and
are  thought  by  the  Ibo  people  to  be  possessed  by  a
spirit,  ^  just  as  the  American  Negro  convert  claims
possession  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  Ellis  gives  us  a  de-
scription of  the  testing-out  ceremony  for  new  priests
among  the  Ewes,  differing  only  in  degree  from  those  I
have  seen  applied  to  Negro  "converts"  in  America.
"Drums  struck  up.  .  .  .  After  a  time  one  of
the  new  priests  who  was  sitting  down,  began  to  tremble
and  roll  his  eyes.  A  god  was  beginning  to  take  pos-
session of  him.  .  .  .  the  trembling  increa  J,
and  soon  the  priest  was  shuddering  as  if  in  an  ague  fit.
Every  portion  of  his  body  seemed  to  shake,  the  head,
arms,  legs,  abdomen,  and  pectoral  muscles,  all  quiver-

1  Parsons,  E.  C,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  16
(1923),  pp.  204-05.

^Barton,   W.   E.,     Old   Plantation   Hymns,   p.   41.     Bruce,    P.    A.,
Plantation  Negro  as  a  Freedman,  p.  27.

^  Leonard,  A.  G.,     The  Lower  Niger  and  Its  Tribes,  pp.  227-28.


»\'Y


POSSESSION   BY   THE   SPIRIT
(A  Mississippi  baptismal  service)


Christianity  and  Superstition  539

ing  violently.  .  .  .  Next,  with  open  mouth  and
protruding  tongue,  and  with  eyes  wildly  rolling,  he
worked  himself,  still  seated  and  quivering  violently,
into  the  middle  of  the  arena.  There  he  suddenly
leaped  into  the  air,  extending  his  arms  over  his  head,
and  the  quivering  ceased.  His  eyes  were  closed,  his
tongue  hung  from  his  mouth,  and  with  the  slow,
uncertain  gait  of  a  drunken  man,  he  walked  backwards
and  forwards."  ^  Here  again  it  was  the  old  people,
and  particularly  the  old  women,  who  were  the  most
impressed  and  who  had  the  most  faith  in  the  genuine-
ness of  the  whole  proceeding.  -

White  Examples.  This  emotional  phenomena,  in-
cluding visions,  is  not  restricted  by  any  means,  to
Negro  races.  In  the  Scotch-Irish  Kentucky  revival
of  1800  the  "singing  ecstasy";  "falling  exercise";  the
"jerks";  the  "barking  exercise,"  wherein  all  the
votaries  gathered  on  all  fours,  growling  and  snap-
ping at  the  foot  of  a  tree  as  the  minister  preached
— a  practice  which  they  designated  as  "treeing  the
devil";  "strains  of  heaven"  (visions);  and  the  "holy
laugh,"  on  the  part  of  the  whites,  ^  show  the  experiences
to  be  common  to  all  individuals  with  whom  the  artificial
discipline  of  culture  is  but  little  developed.  Even  the
Puritans  had  similar  visions,  and  "the  Greek  Rhap-
sodists,  according  to  Plato,  could  not  recite  Homer
without  almost  falling  into  convulsions."  *  So  great
is  this  hypnotic  religious  power  that  in  one  case  in
Tennessee  a  Negro  church   member  who  had   stolen

^  Ellis,  A.  B.,     Tshi-speaking  Peoples,  p.  131  ff.

^  Ibid.,  p.  137.

'  Davenport,  F.  M.,     Primitive  Traits  in  Religious  Revivals,  pp.  60-86.

*  Faduma,  O.,     The  Defects  of  the  Negro  Church,  p.  16.


540     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

and  sold  a  donation  gathered  for  a  minister,  Including
also  a  pair  of  steers  and  cart  owned  by  an  old  woman,
by  means  of  preaching  and  singing,  persuaded  the
congregation,  even  down  to  the  old  woman  herself,
to  forgive  him  for  the  theft.  ^

Negro  Visions.  Many  and  varied  are  the  visions
related  by  these  converts  when  "confessing"  or  "testi-
fying" before  the  congregations.  In  some  cases  a
little  white  man  chops  open  the  breast  with  an  ax,
takes  out  the  heart,  pours  out  the  black  blood,  washes
It  pure  In  the  purple  stream,  and  closes  In  the  opening.  ^
In  other  cases  the  person  tests  out  his  religion  by  asking
that  a  speck  of  cloud  be  removed  suddenly  from  the  sky
or  that  a  cloud  be  created.  Others  ask  that  simple
things  like  crickets  or  stars  (In  the  daytime)  be  made
suddenly  to  appear,  or  that  the  Lord  let  them  hear
some  one  moan.  If  these  requests  are  Immediately
granted  the  person  Is  sure  that  salvation  has  been
granted  him.  Other  visions  are  more  complicated —
such  as  seeing  the  devil  and  the  fiery  furnace,  or,  In
another  case,  the  Lord  telling  a  woman  that  He
"would  be  her  teddy  'till  the  big  bear  came."  ^  In
other  cases  the  Negroes  are  told  to  go  to  the  graveyard
and  pray  and  look  for  signs  during  the  whole  night  * —
a  process  which,  by  adding  terror  to  the  strain  of  wake-
fulness and  hunger,  would  tend  more  rapidly  to  weaken
the  nervous  system  to  the  "vision  point."  An  Ala-
bama witness  tells  of  a  woman  convert's  vision:  "Ah


1  Davenport,  F.  M.,     Primitive  Traits  in  Religious  Revivals,  pp.  52-53.

2  Ibid.,  p.  15.

'341.  The  term  "teddy"  is  used  by  the  Negroes  to  indicate  a  suitor
of  second  choice — the  "big  bear"  is  the  preferred  suitor.

<  117,  and  308.  Smiley,  P.,  Folk-Lore  from  Va.,  S.  C,  Ga.,  Ala.,  and
Fla.,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  32  (1919),  p.  369.


Christianity  and  Superstition  541

wuz  tu'k  by  a  strand  uv  my  hair  and  shuck  over  hell,
and  all  de  hair  broke  and  Ah  wuz  about  to  fall  in  hell.
Ah  looked  down  and  there  Ah  see'd  a  black  man,  and  Ah
know'd  dat  wuz  de  debul,  and  Ah  sed,  'Lawd,  hab
mussy!'  And  jes'  as  dat-ah  black  man  wuz  tryin'  ter
ketch  me  on  his  pitch-fork,  Ah  see'd  a  littl'  w'ite  man
and  Ah  know'd  dat  wuz  Jesus,  and  Ah  sed,  'Sabe  me,
Lawd!'  And  dat  littl'  w'ite  man  tu'k  and  kicked  dat
black  man  in  de  haid  and  he  fell  back  in  hell,  and  dat
w'ite  man  tu'k  me  in  His  arms,  and  Ah  know  Ah's  got
de  'ligion,  caze  Ah  felt  lak  Ah  nebber  felt  befo'I''^
One  Louisiana  woman  says  in  describing  her  "speri-
ence":  "I  had  a  long  road  ter  trabbl.'  I  see'd  myse'f
hangin'  obber  ole  hell  by  de  strands  uv  mah  hair.
I  sho'  thought  I  wuz  gone  fer  good,  but  den  a  littl'
ole  w'ite  man  came  in  ole  hell  an'  lif  me  out  wid  his
lily-w'ite  ban's.  I  had  six  wings  hitched  on  ter  me  an'
I  sho'  flew  'way  f'um  dat-ah  place.  'Nudder  time  I
see'd  myse'f  laid  out  on  a  table.  Dat  same  littl'
w'ite  man  wid  de  lily-w'ite  hands  cut  me  plum'  open,
tu'k  mah  heart  out,  an'  rinsed  hit  in  drippin'  blood
ontil  hit  wuz  w'ite  ez  snow."  ^  A  Georgia  convert
told  of  God  being  a  little  white  man  about  two  feet
high  with  pretty  hair,  ending  her  testimony  by  mourn-
ing and  singing  "Ain'  dat  pretty  hair.?  Ain'  dat
pretty  hair.'*"  Another  told  of  the  devil  chasing  him
over  the  cotton  rows.  ^  A  Mississippi  woman  was
taken  up  into  heaven  on  a  milk-white  horse  and
girdled  with  a  golden  girdle.  Another  man  was  told
by  the  Lord  to  get  lower  and  lower.  He  kept  on
"humblin'  hisse'f"  until  finally  he  got  under  the  very

1397.

=  185.

3  111.


542     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

feet  of  Jesus — then  "ligion*"  came.  ^  In  parts  of
Georgia  they  say  that  if  a  person  has  not  hung  over  hell
on  a  spider  web  that  that  person  has  not  been  con-
verted. 2  One  Negro  was  picked  up  into  heaven  in  a
white  cloud,  where  the  Lord  spoke  to  him  in  the  form
of  a  flaming  circle.  ^  Still  another  was  accompanied
by  an  old  woman  without  a  head,  in  her  quest  for
religion.  ^  Charity  Sherrod,  an  old  Mississippi  slave,
was  called  by  voices  in  the  night.  The  devil  often
appeared  to  her  in  the  form  of  a  dog,  and  while  working
in  the  "new  ground"  a  whole  pack  of  spirit-hounds
("hell-hounds")  chased  her.  Her  dead  grandmother,
whom  she  had  never  seen,  appeared  and  told  her  her
name,  a  fact  which  she  later  verified  by  her  father.
A  white  lamb  appeared  at  her  side.  She  traveled  to  a
river,  began  to  sink  while  crossing,  the  devil  almost
grabbed  her,  but  the  Lord  asked  for  her  ticket  and
took  her  on  to  heaven.  '"

'"''Mrs.  God.''  One  Negress  went  to  heaven  and
^^saw  Jesus's  wife,'"'  and  found  Jesus  plowing  with  a
golden  plow.  She  saw  Jesus's  bed,  and  also  had  dinner
with  them.  They  had  turnip-greens  for  dinner.  When
she  passed  the  plow  it  said,  "booh!"  ^  Another  old
woman  went  up  to  heaven  and  asked  for  "Mr.  God."
"Mrs.  God  was  sitting  behind  the  door  patching  Mr.
God's  pants."  "  Cases  such  as  these  show  us  that  the
golden  streets  of  the  Negro  have  at  least  a  small
sprinkling  of  common  earth,  and  that  their  heaven  is

1345.

2  240.
»118.
*341.
5324.
e341.
'276.


Christianity  and  Superstition  543

at  least  somewhat  related  to  the  African  other-world,
which  is  built  entirely  in  terms  of  this  world.  ^  Wives,
turnip-greens,  plows,  and  pants  may  seem  to  us  out  of
harmony  with  pearly  gates,  golden  harps,  and  thinly
draped  angels,  but  the  more  primitive  man  can  under-
stand the  hereafter  only  in  relation  to  the  here.  It
is  to  be  noticed,  however,  that  these  visions  apply
only  to  the  more  illiterate  Negroes  (and  whites).
The  educated  ones  rapidly  give  up  the  idea  and  adopt
a  type  of  religion  more  like  that  of  the  educated
whites.  -  In  fact,  one  may  find  all  types  of  Negro
churches,  varying  in  emotionality  from  the  ecstatic
rural  church  to  the  colder  educated  congregation,
with  all  stages  in  between.

The  ^''Foot-wash'''  and  "//o/y  Dances''  The  Negro
is  inclined  to  take  the  Bible  literally,  and  many  are  the
practices  resulting  from  this  interpretation,  or  from
doctrinal  points  laid  down  by  various  ministers  who
thereby  cater  more  effectively  to  the  emotional  de-
mands of  their  congregations.  In  many  parts  of  the
South  the  "foot-wash"  is  still  observed,  ^  in  which
service  the  members  show  their  humility  by  washing
one  another's  feet.  In  the  many  cases  the  service
is  followed  by  the  "shout,"  including,  of  course,  danc-
ing without  crossing  the  feet.  The  Negroes  sing  of  the
"Rocking  Daniel"  dance;  "Takes  a  little  bit  of  man  to
rock  Dan,"  ^  and  one  of  my  informants  tells  me  that
this  type  of  dance  is  sometimes  of  a   sensual  nature

^  See,  for  instance:     Kingsley,    M.   H.^     Travels  in  West  Africa,  p.  587.
Milligan,    R.    H.,     Fetish    Folk   of   West   Africa,   p.    241.      Ellis,    A.    B.,
Ewe-speaking  Peoples,  p.  108.
^193,  and  my  own  observations.

'  141,  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  25  (1896),  p.  82,  and  101-02.
*57.


544     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

where  men  and  women  dance  together.  She  has
heard  of  the  "Flower  Dance,"  but  has  never  seen  one
going  on.  ^  The  Sanctified  people  have  a  good  deal
of  apparent  jig  dancing  going  on  in  their  services,  as
well  as  the  "Holy  Kiss."  The  "Holy  Rollers,"  of
course,  also  have  their  peculiar  form  of  worship,
involving,  I  am  informed,  some  gross  immorality  at
times.  In  his  religious  affairs  the  Negro  often  shows
the  African  tendency  to  make  no  absolute  distinction
between  man  and  beasts.  This  is  shown  by  the
Alabama  "sheep-calling"  Baptists  when  the  members
hide  in  the  bushes  and  answer,  "Ba!  Ba!"  to  the
to  the  "Coo-oo  sheep!  Coo-oo-sh'p-Cooshy-coo-oo
sheep!"  of  the  pastor  dressed  as  a  shepherd,  finally
following  him  inside  and  partaking  of  the  sacramental
black  bread  for  the  unbeliever  and  white  bread  for
the  "true  sheep."  ^  In  another  case  a  man  was
ploughing  on  Sunday  when  his  mule  and  dog  started
talking  to  him.  He  never  ploughed  again  on  that
day.  3

Christianity  and  Culture.  These  cases  illustrate
some  of  the  outstanding  points  in  the  Negro's  Chris-
tianity. Some  superstition  is  found,  of  course — it  is
found  with  backward  white  Christians  as  well,  for,,
to  a  certain  extent  the  Negro's  religion  is  simply  a
recapitulation  of  that  of  the  Southern  whites.  Chris-
tianity was  too  involved  for  the  Negro  to  have  grasped
it  bodily  upon  his  arrival  in  this  country,  even  if  he
had  had  the  opportunity  for  so  doing.     American  super-

1  141.  See  Davenport,  F.  M.,  Primitive  Trails  in  Religious  Revivals,
pp.  54-55.

2/6zd.,p.  48.

3  Parsons,  E.  C,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Isla7ids,S.  C,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  16
(1923),  p.  71.


Christianity  and  Superstition  545

stitlons,  however,  were  more  in  line  with  his  African
reHgious  beHefs,  and,  encouraged  partly  by  his
owners,  who  found  this  a  ready  method  of  control,
the  slave  adopted  some  which  still  adhere  to  Negro
religion.  The  contact  for  such  spread  of  superstitions
came  mainly  through  the  household  servants  (estimated
as  including  about  one-fourth  of  the  total  slave  popula-
tion). 1  Superstition  is  of  some  value  as  a  disciplinary
force,  but  when  culture  changes,  the  objects  of  discipline
need  also  to  change — thus  the  Negro  largely  took
over  Anglo-Saxon  folk-beliefs  while  clinging  to  a  great
number  of  his  own  folk-tales,  which  indeed  were
appreciated  by  the  white  children — the  main  members
of  the  household  with  whom  he  came  constantly  into
contact.  The  weaker  the  self-maintenance  and  gov-
ernmental organization,  the  more  the  spirits  are  needed
to  supplement  the  efforts  of  impotent  man.  The  slave
was  sure  of  his  living  and  his  master  saw  to  the  pro-
tection of  his  life.  He  had  no  property  in  his  own
name.  The  aleatory  element  and  the  uncertainties  of
life  were  probably  less  pronounced  than  in  Africa,
which  all  meant  that  such  of  his  religious  beliefs  as  he
brought  over  would  tend  to  be  forgotten  or  to  be
placed  on  a  somewhat  lower  plane — the  plane  of
superstition  rather  than  of  religion.  The  absence  of  an
organized  priesthood  in  America  would  also  make  it
harder  for  such  beliefs  to  endure.  The  mere  fact  that
a  people  profess  to  be  Christians  does  not  necessarily
mean  that  their  Christianity  is  of  the  same  type  as
our  own.  The  way  in  which  a  people  interpret
Christian  doctrines  depends  largely  upon  their  secular
customs   and   their  traditions  of  the   past.     There   is

'  Tillinghast,  J.  A.,     The  Negro  in  Africa  and  America,  p.  126.

35


546     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

an  infinite  difFcrcncc  between  the  Christianity  of  the
North  and  South  in  America,  between  that  of  city
and  country,  and  between  that  of  whites  and  colored,
due  in  the  main  to  their  different  modes  of  hfe  and
social  backgrounds.  Most  of  the  time  the  Negro
outwardly  accepts  the  doctrines  of  Christianity  and
goes  on  living  according  to  his  own  conflicting  secular
mores,  but  sometimes  he  enlarges  upon  the  activities
of  God  to  explain  certain  phenomena  not  specifically
dealt  with  in  the  Holy  Scriptures.  Thus  the  Sea
Island  Negroes,  not  fully  content  with  the  Biblical
justification  of  the  color-code,  say  that  in  the  begin-
ning God  gave  man  two  bundles  wrapped  up,  one  big
and  one  small.  He  gave  the  Negro  first  choice  and
he  greedily  chose  the  biggest  bundle,  whicii  contained
a  hoe  and  plough  and  ax,  forcing  him  to  do  all  the
manual  work  in  the  world.  The  little  bundle  of  the
white  man  contained  a  pen  and  ink,  and  he  consequently
was  given  the  indoor  work.  '  Besides  being  a  slave
explanation  of  the  existing  social  order,  this  story
has  also  a  moral  turn  in  that  it  shows  the  evil  results
of  greediness,  and,  incidentally,  the  reverence  of  the
Negro  for  writing.

Christ'uuiity  in  Africa.  Before  taking  up  more
specifically  the  Negro  interpretation  of  Christianity
it  is  interesting  to  note  some  of  the  ^■icissitudes  of  our
religion  in  Africa.  We  find,  for  instance,  that  ''most
of  the  Wolofs  profess  themselves  Mohammedans,  the
rest  Catholics,  which  arc  alike  heathen  at  heart,  only
the  former  have  charms  with  texts  fn^n  the  Koran
which  thev  cannot  read,  and  the  latter,  medals  and


'  Davis,  H.  C,     Negro  luilh-Lorc  in  South  Carolitta,  ./.  .1.  F.  L.,  vol.  27
(1914),  p.  244.


Christianity  and  Superstition  547

scapulars  of  the  'Seven  Dolours'  or  of  the  Trinity,
which  they  cannot  understand.  Many  old  rites  still
flourish,  the  household  gods  are  not  forgotten,  and  for
the  lizard,  most  popular  of  tutelar  deities,  the  cus-
tomary milk  bowl  is  daily  replenished."  '  Real  ad-
vance in  civilization  must  be  founded  upon  advance
in  self-maintenance,  -  and  many  reliable  investigators
deplore  the  eflforts  of  some  missionaries  in  attempting
to  build  up  a  civilization  by  simply  changing  a  religion.  •■♦
Indeed  harm  is  at  times  wrought  in  that  the  natives
"have  had  the  restraint  of  fear  removed  from  their
minds  in  the  mission  schools  without  the  greater  re-
straint of  love  being  put  in  its  place."  "*  Part  of  this,
however,  is  no  doubt  due  to  the  fact  that  the  white
man,  with  whom  Christianity  is  closely  associated
in  the  mind  of  the  savage,  has  also  linked  up  his  name
with  other  less  reputable  activities.  Thus,  in  Liberia
there  is  a  rum  factory  which  the  natives  call  "The
Good  Jesus  Factory" — "Christianity  and  rum  being
closely  associated  In  the  minds  of  the  natives."  ■'  "It
is  In  no  way  unbelief  which  makes  difficult  the  work
of  missionaries  among  savages.  They  believe  every-
thing which  Is  explained  to  them  as  a  revelation,
but  it  does  not  grasp  and  Influence  their  life  in  the
desired  way.  They  distinguish  it,  as  many  reports
testify,  always  as  the  revelation  of  a  strange  god  to
strange  men;  it  is  not  their  revelation."*"'  The  Tshi
people  attributed  the  great  superiority  of  the  whites

'  Keane,  A.  H.,     Man:     Past  and  PreNcnt,  p.  49.
2  Keller,  A.  G.,     Societal  Evolution,  p.  141  ff.

'  Thomson,  J.,     Notes  on  the  African  Tribes  of  the  British  Empire,  J.  A.  I.,
vol.  xvi  (1887),  p.  184.     Ellis,  A.  B.,     Ewe-speaking  Peoples,  p.  12.
^  Kingsley,  M.  H.,     Travels  in  West  Africa,  p.  659  and  069.
''  Afro-American    Encyclopedia,    p.    227.
"  Lippert,  J.,     Kullurgeschichte  der  Menschheil,  vol.  i,  \y.  101.


548     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

to  the  fact  that  they  were  protected  by  a  deity  of
greater  power  than  any  of  those  to  which  they  them-
selves offered  sacrifice.  Thus  they  gladly  accepted
the  white  man's  God,  but  simply  added  Him  to  their
already  numerous  family  of  deities.  Even  then  He
is  considered  too  distant  to  interfere  ordinarily  in
human  affairs,  and,  except  in  times  of  special  calamity,
is  ignored   rather  than  worshipped.  ^

The  Devil  in  Africa  and  America.  The  Africans
cling  to  their  tendency  to  worship  the  malevolent
even  after  they  have  heard  of  Christianity.  One
bishop  asked  them  why  they  persisted  in  worshiping
the  devil  instead  of  God.  The  reply  was,  "God  is
good,  God  is  love  and  don't  hurt  anybody — do  as  you
please,  God  don't  hurt  you;  but  do  bad  and  the  devil
will  get  you  sure!  We  need  not  bother  about  God,
but  we  try  to  keep  on  the  good  side  of  the  devil."  ^
The  Southern  Negro  likewise  gives  the  devil  as  a
personage  considerably  more  attention  than  is  paid
him  by  the  present  whites,  though  in  the  past  both  in
Britain  and  in  the  Early  Colonies  ^  as  well  as  in  other
parts  of  the  world  ^  this  personage  was  greatly  feared
if  not  actually  respected,  seeming  to  show  that  the
Africans  were  not  alone  in  their  emphasis  of  the  ma-
levolent element  in  religion.  Let  us  now  consider  this
and  other  addenda  made  by  these  Negroes  to  Chris-
tianity. In  the  main,  the  Negro  shows  his  principal
departures  by  adding  on  beliefs  not  included  in  the
white  man's  conception  of  Christianity,  and  by  seeking

1  Ellis,  A.  B.,     Tshi-speaking  Peoples,  pp.  24-30.

2  Race  Problems  of  the  South,  p.  143.

^  Ashton,  J.,     The  Devil  in  Britain  and  America.

*  Carus,  P,,     The  History  oj  the  Devil  and  the  Idea  of  Evil.  ,


Christianity  and  Superstition  549

through  Christianity  the  achievement  of  ends  not
sanctioned  by  the  estabhshed  canons.  In  the  former
class  we  find  that  behef  which  has  already  been  men-
tioned, that  rain  while  the  sun  is  shining  indicates
that  the  devil  is  whipping  his  wife  (behind  the  door  ^
or  around  the  stump)  -  for  not  having  turnip  greens  or
cornbread  for  dinner.  ^  Somewhat  akin  to  this  is
that  every  Friday  the  jaybird  (redbird  *  and  mocking
bird)  ^  visit  hell  to  take  kindling,  «  sand,  ^  or  a  drop  of
water  ^  to  the  devil.  Some  say  that  this  grain  of  sand
is  a  ransom  for  the  souls  in  hell,  who  cannot  be  released
until  all  the  sand  on  the  surface  of  the  earth  has  been
carried  below;  ^  while  others  take  the  view  that  the
jaybirds  sold  themselves  to  the  devil  at  one  time  for
an  ear  of  corn,  and  are  obliged  to  take  sticks  and  sand
to  him  every  Friday  to  make  his  fire  hot,  ^  ^  for,  as  one
of  the  Calhoun  children  explains,  "the  wicked  will
always  burn  in  torment  as  long  as  there  is  any  sand
there."  ^  ^  One  Negro  folk-rhyme,  however,  gives  the
impression  that  the  devil  uses  the  sand  to  blind  people:

Did  you  ever  see  de  devil  wid  his  iron  handled  shovel,

A-scrapin'  up  de  san'  in  his  ole  tin  pan?

He  cuts  up  mighty  funny,  he  steals  all  yo'  money,

He  blinds  you  wid  his  san'.     He's  tryin'  to  git  you,  man  1  ^  ^


1 132,  and  141.

2  141.

3  404.

M02,  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  15.

5  Showers,  Susan  B.,     Alabama  Folk-Lore,  Southern    Workman,  vol.  29
(1900),  p.  180.

6  Price,  Sadie  F.,     Kentucky  Folk-Lore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  14  (1901),  p.  53.
'Lee,  C,    Some  Negro  Lore  from  Baltimore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5  (1892),

p.m.     Also  informant  342.

8  352.

9  Southern  Workman,  vol.  24  (1895),  p.  78.

10  42.

1 1  Two  Negro  Tales  Concerning  the  Jay,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  27  (1898),
p.  17.

1 2  51,  and  Talley,  T.  W.,     Negro  Folk  Rhymes,  p.  93.


550     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Other  Negroes,  notably  in  Maryland,  hold  that  the
jaybird  is  a  sort  of  sin-reporter,  making  a  trip  to  hell
every  third  day  to  tell  the  devil  about  the  people's
sins.  1  The  devil  is  also  to  a  certain  extent  associated
with  the  hog,  the  mischievousness  of  this  animal  being
due  to  the  fact  that  the  devil  jumps  from  time  to  time
through  his  hind  feet.  -

Negro  Devil-forms .  To  the  Negroes  the  devil  is  a
very  real  individual,  generally  anthropomorphic,  but
capable  of  taking  almost  any  form  at  will.  He  walks
constantly  upon  the  earth,  always  interfering  with
human  affairs.  Sometimes  he  is  invisible,  as  where
an  old  slave  woman  heard  the  "bomp-bomp-bomp"
of  the  devil's  footsteps  while  she  was  trying  to  convert
a  sick  sinner,  though  no  one  was  visible.  ^  So  hypo-
critical is  this  evil  one  that  he  will  borrow  a  person's
skin  while  that  person  is  sleeping  and  masquerade  about
in  the  disguise  of  that  particular  individual.  *  Most
of  the  time,  however,  when  going  about  on  the  earth,
the  Negro  devil  has  the  appearance  of  a  gentleman,
wearing  a  high  silk  hat,  and  a  frock  coat,  and  having
an  "ambrosial  curl"  in  the  center  of  his  forehead  to
hide  the  single  horn  which  is  located  there.  Mrs.
Virginia  Frazer  Boyle  tells  me  that  when  she  was
first  taken  to  church  by  her  father  and  mother  she  used
to  scan  the  congregation  eagerly  for  a  man  with  that
"ambrosial  curl"  and  one  with  the  "evil  eye",  which  her
old  Negro   nurse   had   told   her  were   to  be  found   in


1  Bergen,  F.  D.,     On  the  Eastern  Shore,  J.A.F.L.,  vol.  2  (1899),  pp.  229-300.

231,0.

3  324.

^  Boyle,  Mrs.  V.  F.,     Devil  Tales,  p.  209.


Christianity  axd  Superstition  551

every  crowd,  even  in  church,  ^  In  most  cases  this
Negro  devil  has  cloven  feet,  -  a  characteristic  also
credited  to  him  in  European  circles.  ^  Possibly  the
black  cat  is  the  animal  most  chosen  by  the  Negro  devil
for  impersonation;  some  go  so  far  as  to  say  that  all
black  cats  represent  the  devil  in  disguise,  ^  "settin'  up
dere  'fo'  de  fiah  larnin'  folks'  business  an'  schemin'
up  ways  ter  tempt  'em."  ^  One  Negro  killed  such  a
cat  by  hanging  it  with  a  greased  rope;  he  had  all  sorts
of  bad  luck  until  a  hoodoo  treated  him  and  set  fire  to
his  cabin.  When  nothing  was  left  but  ashes,  there,
in  the  midst  of  the  hot  coals,  sat  this  same  black  cat,
but  the  man's  troubles  were  over;  his  soul  and  body
were  free.  "^  Nevertheless  the  devil  is  not  limited  to
this  particular  form  but  may  appear  as  a  rabbit,
terrapin,  serpent,  housefly,  grasshopper,  toad,  bat,  or
yellow  dog  at  will.  '^  To  the  Mississippi  Negroes  he
often  appears  as  a  black  billy-goat;^  a  view  strictly
in  keeping  with  his  custom  at  the  English  witches'
Sabbath.  ^  In  New  Orleans  it  is  thought  by  some
that  snakes  and  black  cats  are  incarnations  of  the
devil.  When  the  Ames  crevasse  occurred,  multitudes
of  snakes  were  left  upon  the  subsiding  water  and  the
Negroes  refused  to  kill  them.  ^  ^  A  curious  combination
of  Scripture  and  devil-lore  is  found  in  the  Georgia
142.

2  141,  and  Boyle,  V.  F.,     Devil  Tales,  pp.  114-15.

3  Chambers,  R.,     Popular  Rhymes  of  Scotland,  p.   61,  and  Lean's  Col-
lectanea, vol.  2,  p.  431.

*54.

5  65.

6  Bovle,  Mrs.  V.  F.,     Devil  Tales,  p.  178  ff.
'  Ibid.,  pp.  89,  and  107-31.

8 141,  286,  and  404.

^  Brand,  J.,     Popular  Antiquities  oj  Great  Britain,  vol.  3,  p.  10.
1"  Bergen,  F.  D.,     Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  .1/.  A.  F.  L.  <S'.,  vol.  7  (1899),
p.  86.


552     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

belief  regarding  the  graveyard  snake.  Tliis  snake  is
mostly  black  with  yellow  splotches  on  the  back.  It
lives  all  the  time  in  the  graveyard  where  it  grieves  and
mourns.  When  the  devil  in  the  form  of  a  serpent
succeeded  in  tempting  Adam  and  Eve  he  laughed
until  he  split  himself;  the  spirit  part  of  him  goes  about
tempting  folks  and  helping  hoodoos,  but  the  material
part  lives  in  the  graveyard.  The  skin  of  a  graveyard
snake  worn  about  the  waist  will  enable  you  to  conquer
your  enemies;  the  hand  anointed  with  grease  from
such  a  snake  can  always  steal  things  without  being
observed.  "Hoodoo  folks  is  mighty  fond  er  eating
snakes,  'case  hit  makes  dem  wise  an'  cute;  but  dey
don't  dar  ter  eat  er  grabeyard  snake,  'case  dey  ud  be
eatin'  de  debbel  hisself,  an'  he  couldn't  he'p  'em  no
more."  Make  an  image  of  a  person  out  of  graveyard
snake-oil  mixed  with  flour  or  sand,  bake  it  good  by  an
open  fire,  and  you  can  give  a  person  pains  in  any  part
of  his  body  by  sticking  pins  in  the  image.  You  have
him  "snake-hoodooed,"  and  that  is  the  worst  kind  of
hoodoo.  Satan  himself  may  be  summoned  to  help
you  in  your  black  art  by  getting  a  button  off  a  grave-
yard rattler,  sewing  it  up  with  a  piece  of  silver  in  a
little  red  flannel  bag,  and  wearing  it  over  your  heart.
Say  a  verse  out  of  the  Bible  backwards  at  twelve  o'clock
on  the  crossroads  on  a  moonlight  night,  and  old  Nick
will  come  running  up  to  meet  you.  '■

The  Faust  Legend.  This  idea  suggests  somewhat  the
European  Faust  legend,  and,  indeed  there  are  many
variants  of  the  theme  in  many  parts  of  the  Negro
South.  Ole  Satan  is  a  conjurer;  a  belief  expressed
even  in  religious  songs:


1  Backus,  Mrs.  E.  M.,  and  Leitner,  Mrs.  E.  H.,     Tales  from  Georgia,  J.  A
F.  L.,  vol.  25  (1912),  p.  133.


Christianity  and  Superstition  553

De  debbil  am  a  liah  an'  a  conjurer  too,

Ef  you  doan'  look  out  he'll  conjure  you,  etc.  ^

Being  a  mighty  conjurer  himself,  it  stands  to  reason
that  he  is  the  proper  one  to  teach  others  the  black
art.  But  conjuring  represents  an  African  survival,
and  it  is  worthy  of  note  that  part  of  this  former  religion
was  not  entirely  abandoned  but  merely  given  a  sub-
ordinate part  in  the  new  system;  i.e.  attributed  to  the
evil  element  in  the  cult.  In  accordance  with  this
belief  that  the  devil  is  a  master  in  the  black  art,  one  of
the  first  things  a  person  should  do  when  wanting  to
become  a  witch  is  to  go  to  a  crossroads  and  pray  to  the
devil  for  nine  days  and  nine  nights.  ^  Strange  to  say,
playing  the  fiddle  or  banjo  is  thought  to  be  a  special
accomplishment  of  the  devil,  ^  and  such  instruments
are  tabooed  to  good  church-folk,  though  the  piano  or
accordion  may  be  used  with  impunity.  Some  go  so
far  as  to  say  that  playing  the  violin  is  actually  an
audacious  communication  with  Satan  himself.  ^  Take
your  banjo  to  the  forks  of  the  road  at  midnight  and
Satan  will  teach  you  how  to  play  it.  ^  One  old  slave
was  taught  by  the  devil  at  home,  but  was  not  able  to
play  reels  until  he  had  mastered  the  tune,  "Gimme
Jesus."  ^  It  is  worthy  of  note  that  in  the  West
Highlands  the  fairies  were  supposed  to  teach  men  to
play  the  pipes.  ^     Among  the  Negroes  this  playing  of

1  112, 141,  and  342.     Allen,  W.  E.,     Slave  Songs  of  the  United  States,  p.  108.
Odum,  H.  W.,     Negro  Hymn,  J.A.F.  L.,  vol.  26  (1913),  p.  373.

2  250.

5  Boyle,  Mrs.  V.  F,,     Devil  Tales,  pp.  114-15.

*  284,  and  Negro  Su-perstitions  Concerning  the  Violin,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5
(1892),  pp.  329-30.

*  141,     and    Thomas    and    Thomas,     Kentucky    Superstitions,    p.     291.
Xee,  C,    Some  Negro  Lore  from  Baltimore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5  (1892),  p.  110.

«32.

'Campbell,  J.  F.,     Tales  of  the  West  Highlands,  vol.  12,  p.  311.


554     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

the  banjo  is  incidental  to  forming  a  regular  contract
with  the  devil — the  Faust  motif.  A  New  Orleans
conjurer  described  the  procedure  to  me  as  follows:
If  you  want  to  make  a  contract  with  the  devil,  first
trim  your  finger  nails  as  close  as  you  possibly  can.
Take  a  black  cat  bone  and  a  guitar  and  go  to  a  lonely
fork  in  the  roads  at  midnight.  Sit  down  there  and
play  your  best  piece,  thinking  of  and  wishing  for  the
devil  all  the  while.  By'  and  by  you  will  hear  music,
dim  at  first  but  growing  louder  and  louder  as  the
musician  approaches  nearer.  Do  not  look  around;
just  keep  on  playing  your  guitar.  The  unseen  musician
will  finally  sit  down  by  you  and  play  in  unison  with  you.
After  a  time  you  will  feel  something  tugging  at  your
instrument.  Do  not  try  to  hold  it.  Let  the  devil
take  it  and  keep  thumping  along  with  your  fingers  as
if  you  still  had  a  guitar  in  your  hands.  Then  the
devil  will  hand  you  his  instrument  to  play  and  will
accompany  you  on  yours.  After  doing  this  for  a
time  he  will  seize  your  fingers  and  trim  the  nails  until
they  bleed,  finally  taking  his  guitar  back  and  returning
your  own.  Keep  on  playing;  do  not  look  around.
His  music  will  become  fainter  and  fainter  as  he  moves
away.  When  all  is  quiet  you  may  go  home.  You
will  be  able  to  play  any  piece  you  desire  on  the  guitar
and  you  can  do  anything  you  want  to  do  in  this  world,
but  you  have  sold  your  eternal  soul  to  the  devil  and
are  his  in  the  world  to  come.  One  of  this  informant's
acquaintances  sold  himself  to  the  devil  in  this  way.
He  could  then  do  anything.  Put  him  in  a  refrigerator-
car  and  lock  the  door  with  a  "Yale  lock";  the  man
would  meet  you  as  you  walked  away.  He  could  make
himself  so  small  that  no  jail  bars  could  hold  him,  and,


Christianity  and  Superstition  555

through  his  power  of  invlsibihty  could  take  anything
he  wanted  from  the  stores  without  fear  of  detection.  ^
There  are  other  cases  of  contracts  formed  with  the
devil,  "  and  in  one  case  the  contract  was  broken  by  a
duel  with  the  devil  in  which  the  shape  of  the  cross  was
cut  on  the  devil's  breast.  ^  Others  say  that  the  devil
always  gets  his  own,  even  if  the  person  locks  himself
in  his  room:  "When  de  debil  find  de  doo'  locked  he
des  float  in  fru  de  cracks  an'  jeck  his  teef  out,  and  pull
him  fru  de  keyhole."  *  There  are  also  the  character-
istic English  folk  tales  of  some  haughty  woman  marry-
ing the  devil  in  the  shape  of  a  handsome  man,  but
escaping  later  by  throwing  down  various  things  to
stop  the  devil.  ^

Minor  Devil-beliefs.  There  are  many  other  minor
beliefs  connected  with  the  devil.  For  instance,  if  the
fire  burns  with  a  blue  flame  "hit's  makin'  anger,  and  de
debil  is  sho'  comin'.  Bettah  chunk  some  salt  in  dar
ter  dribe  him  away."  ^  In  Old  England  it  was  said
that  when  an  apparition  appeared  the  candles  in  the
room  always  burned  with  a  blue  flame.  ^  The  devil
is  always  most  active  at  the  waning  of  the  moon,  *
but  old  shoes,  particularly  the  soles,  buried  on  Monday
morning    will    keep    him    down    through    the    week.  ^


154.

-  Skinner,  Charles  M.,  Myths  and  Legends  of  our  Own  Land,  vol.  2,  pp.  94-
96.

3  Boyle,  Mrs.  V.  F.,     Devil  Tales,  p.  59  ff.

M2.

^  Cooke,  Elizabeth  J.,  English  Folk-Tales  in  America,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol*
12  (1899),  pp.  126-30.  Pendleton,  L.,  Notes  on  Negro  Folk-Lore  and
Witchcraft  in  the  South,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  3  (1890),  pp.  202-03.

« 91,  and  Bergen,  F.  D.,  Current  Superstitions,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  4  (1896),
p.  147.

'  Brand,  J.,     Popular  Antiquities  of  Great  Britain,  vol.  3,  p.  69.

« Owen,  Mary  A.,     Voodoo  Tales,  p.  180.

'Bergen,  F.  D.,  Current  Superstitions,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  4  (1896),
p.  142.


556     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

A  person  must  never  cross  the  trail  of  a  snake  without
makins:  a  crossmark  in  it  and  snittiui^  there;  otherwise
the  devil  will  surely  follow  him; '  but  if  a  person  really
desires  to  see  the  devil  all  he  need  do  is  to  put  his
shirt  on  wrongside  out  and  look  into  a  well,  or  else
throw  a  brick-bat  into  a  whirlwind.  -  A  left-handed
person  owes  the  devil  a  day's  work;-'  cutting  your
finger  nails  on  Sunday  indicates  that  you  will  spend
the  rest  of  the  week  with  Satan  ;^  while  dreaming  of
that  gentleman  is  ominous  of  sickness  and  trouble
in  your  famih'.  -^  People  buried  with  their  hair
carefully  dressed  will  have  it  unplaited  by  the  black-
birds sent  by  the  devil.  ^  Even  wicked  animals  seek
the  help  of  Satan.  When  Brer  Wolf  was  trying  to
catch  Sis  Pig's  little  ones  he  called  upon  Satan  to
help  him.  Satan  pulfed  and  blew  at  Sis  Pig's  house;
Sis  Pig  looked  and  saw  his  breath  like  red  smoke.
That's  the  reason  pigs  can  see  the  wind  today  in  the
shape   of   red    smoke.  "

Christ  and  Other  Sacred  Characters.  Turning  to  the
more  sacred  personages  in  Scripture,  we  find  their
simple  Biblical  attributes  greatly  embellished  by  the
Negroes.  Jesus,  while  on  earth,  was  always  ''mighty
fond  of  cuUud  folks."  In  one  case  He  visited  an  old
colored  lady's  house,  and  found  her  very  miserable
because  the  rats  and  mice  were  destroying  everything
she  had.     "Woman,  behold  your  God,"  He  said,  and


1  Bergen,  F.  D.,     Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7  (.1899),  p.  17.

»341.

»110.

*  270.
»00.

•  1-41,  and  Southirn  Workman,  vol.  20  (1S07),  p.  IS.

^  Backus.  Emma  M.,     Animal  Tales  from  Xorth  Carolina,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.
11  (1S9S),  pp.  290-91.


Christianity  and  Superstition  557

throwing  His  right-hand  glove  on  the  floor,  He  turned
it  into  a  cat.  Cats  were  not  present  in  the  ark;  they
were  made  later  of  Jesus's  glove  and  that's  why  it's
unlucky  to  hurt  one  and  a  sin  to  kill  one.  ^  The
hickory-nut  tree  has  its  bark  all  loose  and  pointing
downward  because  Zaccheus  was  up  that  tree  when
Christ  called  him.  He  slid  down  so  fast  that  he
scraped  the  bark  loose  forever.  "De  Bible  say  hit
wuz  a  sycamine  tree,  ^  but  dat's  jes'  de  same  ez  our
scaly-bark  er  hick'ry-nut."  The  same  informant  goes
on  to  say  that  February  has  but  twenty-eight  days
because  Job  in  his  suffering  asked  that  the  day  of  his
birth  be  dropped  from  the  calendar.  He  was  born
from  the  twenty-ninth  to  the  thirtieth  of  February
and  these  two  days  were  dropped  from  the  calendar
except  on  leap-year  when  the  Lord  tacks  on  an  extra
day  to  give  the  devil  another  chance.  ^

Holy  Herbs.  Sacred  names  for  plants  are  common,
being  in  the  main  restricted  to  those  plants  used  for
beneficial  purposes.  Devil's  snuff,  the  powder  from  a
dried  puff-ball,  is  poisonous  and  used  generally  for
harm.  ^  Ed  Murphy  uses  this  in  "conjuring  up
devilment,"  but  he  has  a  great  many  others  of  sacred
nomenclature  which  he  uses  for  cures.  I  rather
suspect  him  of  original  development  in  some  of  these
names,  since  they  are  not  understood  by  other  Negroes
in  the  locality  and  since  I  have  not  located  them  else-
where in  the  South.  Ed  is  a  big  exhorter  in  the
church    and,    considering    his    inability    to    read,    has

1  McLennan,  Marcia,  Origin  of  the  Cat;  a  Negro  Tale,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  9
(1896),  p.  71.

^  Compare  Luke  19:4.

3  258.

M41.


558     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

mixed  his  Scripture  and  soothsaying  remarkably  well.
The  "bowels  of  Christ"  is  apparently  a  species  of
saliva,  with  leaves  entirely  green  at  first  but  becoming
red  or  brown  around  the  edges  as  they  mature,  finally
becoming  entirely  red.  They  represent  the  bowels
of  Christ  on  the  cross,  and  stewed  in  lard  and  mixed
with  kerosene,  or  turpentine  make  a  most  excellent
salve  for  all  diseases.  "Angel's  turnip"  {Apocynum
androscsmi folium)  root  carried  in  a  red  flannel  bag  is
"a  sure  bringer  of  good  luck,"  while  the  leaves  of  the
"peace  plant"  {Ariscema  triphylum)  have  much  the
same  uses.  This  plant  has  two  or  four  leaves  running
off  roughly  in  the  shape  of  a  cross.  Here  is  the  way
it  was  created:  "When  Jesus  wuz  totin'  de  cross  up
de  hill  ter  Calvary  de  Scripture  sez  a  damsel  sed:

Mus'  Jesus  bear  de  cross  alone
An'  all  de  worl'  go  free?
No,  dere's  a  cross  fur  ebby  one
An'  dere's  a  cross  fur  me!  ^

Well  Jesus  he  stop  den  an'  de  peace  plant  sprung  up.
Hit  wuz  her  cross  an'  when  it  hab  four  leaves  de  odder
two  stands  for  peace  and  good  will."  The  "king  of  the
woods"  {Aralia  racemosa)  has  three  leaves  representing
the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost.  Its  root  is  fine  for
making  jacks,  and  a  tea  made  of  it  and  coonroot  will
cure  anything.  -  I  was  not  able  to  get  a  specimen  of
the  "blood  of  Christ,"  but  my  root-doctress  tells  me
that  wrapped  in  red  flannel  (always  wrapping  to-
wards yourself)  along  with  sugar,  spice,  and  bluestone,

^  A  familiar  Negro  hymn.     Verses  of  church  songs  are  freely  quoted  and
often  command  precisely  the  same  reverence  as  verses  of  Scripture.

2  258.


Christianity  and  Superstition  559

its  root  will  surely  bring  you  peace.  ^  Christ  was
hung  upon  a  cottonwood  tree.  The  trees  know  this
and  are  always  trembling  because  they  are  afraid.  ^

God  and  the  Lizard.  Such  lore  applies  even  to  an-
imals. An  old  ex-slave  told  me  the  following.  "One
day  Brer  Lizzud  an'  Deacon  Frawg  wuz  tryin'  ter
get  thru  a  crack  in  a  split-rail  fence.  In  dem  days
Brer  Lizzud  sot  up  lak  Deacon  Frawg  do  now.  Ole
Deacon  Frawg  sez,  'Ah'll  git  thru  dishyere  crack  ef
de  Lawd  spares  me.'  He  tried  hit  an'  squeeze  thru
all  right.  Brer  Lizzud  wuz  mo'  uppity.  Sez  he,
*Ah'll  git  thru  dishyere  crack  whedder  de  Lawd  spare
me  or  no.'  He  tried  hit,  but,  kerflip,  came  a  lawg
down  an'  mash  him  flat.  Dat's  why  de  lizzud  be
flat  terday  and  crawls  de  dus'  on  his  belly,  while  de
frawg  sets  up  an'  hops."  ^  Some  Negroes  will  not  eat
lamb  because  the  lamb  represents  Christ;  ■»  others  say
that  the  dove  and  the  eagle  are  the  only  two  birds
that  will  go  to  heaven  "  (the  dove  representing  the
Biblical  fetish  bird,   the  eagle,   the  American  fetish).

Fetishistic  Christianity.  From  time  to  time  ^  I  have
indicated  that,  while  voodoo  practices  as  a  whole  tend
to  stand  aloof  from  European  lore  because  of  their
pronounced  difference,  yet  in  some  cases  they  recog-
nize a  certain  general  kinship  in  certain  elements  of
European  Christianity  and  a  fusion  or  partial  fusion
results.     "Practices     that    were    originally    imported

1141.

2  Davis,  Mrs.  N.  E.  M.,  The  Cottonicood  Tree:  Louisiana  Superstitions,
J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  18  (1905),  p.  251.

332.

*  11.

6  Bergen,  F.  D.,  Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7  (1899),
p.  84.

6 See  p.  186  ff.,  193ff.,  205,  and  257,  for  iu.stauce.


560     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

from  Africa  tend  to  assimilate  and  fuse  with  related
practices  and  traits  of  the  European  and  Hindu  cul-
tures wherever  the  Africans  have  come  into  contact
with  them.  Obeah  men  in  the  West  Indies  use  the
candles,  the  little  shrines,  or  'chapels,'  as  they  call
them,  and  various  other  portions  of  the  ritual  of  the
Catholic  Church."  ^  This  fetishistic  concept  of  Chris-
tianity is  well  illustrated  by  the  results  of  Roman
Catholicism  in  the  Congo.  "Its  baptism  was  only  an
outward  one,  the  heathen  natives  gladly  accepting  it
as  a  powerful  charm.  For  each  and  all  his  heathen
fetishes  the  priest  simply  substituted  a  Roman  Cath-
olic relic.  The  ignorant  African,  while  he  learned  to
bow  to  the  Virgin,  kept  on  worshipping  also  fetish.
The  Virgin  was  only  just  another  fetish.  The  Roman
Catholic  priests  were  to  him  only  another  set  of
powerful  fetish  doctors.  They  commanded  that,  in-
stead of  the  orunda,  the  parents  should  enjoin  their
children  to  observe  some  particular  devotion,  such  as
to  repeat  many  times  a  day  the  rosary  or  the  crown,
in  honor  of  the  Virgin;  to  fast  on  Saturdays;  to  eat
no  flesh  on  Wednesdays,  and  such  other  things  as  are
used  among  Christians."  ^  "All  worldly  prosperity  in
Africa  depends  upon  the  possession  of  proper  fetishes.
They  are  therefore  quick  to  conclude  that  we  have
very  powerful  fetishes;  and  it  is  inevitable  that  before
long  they  should  conclude  that  the  Bible  is  the  mis-
sionary's fetish.  At  Efulen,  among  the  Bulu,  when  we
had  been  there  but  a  short  time,  a  band  of  men  setting
out  upon   the  war  path  with   their  guns   upon   their


*  Park,    R.    E.,     Magic,  Mentality  and  City  Life,  Publications  American
Sociological  Society,  vol.  18  (1924),  p.  111.     Italics  my  own.
2  Nassau,  R.  H.,     Fetichism  in  West  Africa,  pp.  211-12.


Christianity  and  Superstition  561

shoulders,  marched  up  to  our  hill  and  asked  if  we
would  give  them  a  Bible  to  take  with  them  to  make
their  guns  shoot  straight  and  procure  their  success.
One  day  Dr.  Good  missed  a  Bible.  It  had  been  stolen.
He  heard  nothing  of  it  for  a  month;  after  which  he
was  one  day  walking  through  a  native  village  where  the
people,  expecting  to  go  to  war  the  next  day,  were
preparing  a  very  powerful  fetish  or  'war  medicine'
by  boiling  together  in  a  pot  several  of  their  most
reliable  fetishes;  and  in  the  boiling  pot  he  found  his
Bible."  2  Such  cases  show  us  again  very  clearly  that
the  same  set  of  facts  may  be  interpreted  very  diiTerently
by  different  people,  depending  upon  their  general
culture-pattern.  Our  interpretation  of  Biblical  facts
depends  upon  that  general  complex  of  customs  which
we  call  our  civilization,  and  even  Christianity  differs
among  different  peoples.

Christianized  Voodooism.  This  same  employment
of  elements  of  Christianity  for  fetish  purposes  is
found  with  the  American  Negroes.  I  am  informed
that  Marie  Laveau  was  a  devout  Catholic;  she  kept  a
little  shrine  and  colored  candles  burning  in  her  room,
had  a  priest  with  her  just  before  she  died,  -  and  even
went  so  far  as  to  conduct  the  ritual  of  the  original
voodoo  creed  so  as  to  make  it  conform  to  the  worship
of  the  Virgin  and  of  other  saints.  ^  One  modern  voodoo
woman,  though  the  order  has  been  largely  broken
up,  refuses  to  receive  visitants  on  Saturday  because
that  is  the  day  of  '7«  Sainte  Fierge.^^  She  also  closes
her  establishment  on  Good   Friday  and   in   Lent,   in

1  Milligan,  R.  H.,     Fetish  Folk  of  West  Africa,  pp.  130-31.

2  269.

^  Castellanos,  H.  C,     New  Orleans  as  it  Was,  pp.  97-98.

36


562     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

the  latter  case  "  'cause  de  sain'  too  busy  to  work
wid  her."  ^  Much  of  modern  voodoo  Is  really  an
appeal  to  the  saints  for  furtherance  In  some  extra-
Chrlstlan  undertaking.  Take,  for  Instance,  the  method
recommended  to  me  by  a  voodoo-doctor  of  New  Orleans
last  summer  to  conquer  one's  enemy:  mix  a  pound  of
sugar  and  some  powdered  coonroot  In  a  newspaper,
put  this  Into  a  vessel,  go  Into  a  room  by  yourself,  and
set  the  vessel  on  the  fire.  You  must  be  In  a  very
reverent  frame  of  mind,  putting  your  whole  heart  Into
what  you  are  doing.  When  the  mixture  begins  to
smoke  hold  your  limbs  in  the  vapor,  repeating  rever-
ently the  following  formula:  "Oh  Lord,  Good  Shep-
herd, help  me,  Robert  Bryant.  St.  Michael,  conquer
so-and-so  (your  enemy  or  a  woman  who  Is  following
you  too  closely).  Oh  Lord,  Good  Shepherd,  help  me,
Robert  Bryant.  St.  Patrick,  drive  away  these  devils
from  me,  Robert  Bryant.  Oh  Lord,  Good  Shepherd,
help  me,  Robert  Bryant.  St.  James,  protect  my
body  from  all  accident.  Oh  Lord,  Good  Shepherd,
help  me,  Robert  Bryant.  St.  John,  let  all  of  my
bad  spells  and  troubles  go  from  the  sunrise  to  the
sun  setting.  Give  me  good  luck  and  help  me  to  be
successful.  Oh  Lord,  Good  Shepherd,  help  me,  Robert
Bryant."  These  rites  must  be  held  three  times  a  day,
the  most  Important  part  being  that  you  believe  in  what
you  are  doing  and  In  its  power  to  cure  you.  "St.
Michael  Is  used  to  conquer,  St.  Patrick  to  drive  away
evil,  St.  James  to  protect,  and  St.  John  to  give  you
good  luck."  2  The  Missouri  voodoos  have  much  the
same  Idea.     In  preparing  a  luck-ball  for  Mr.  Charles

1  Pitkin,  Helen,     An  Angel  by  Brevet,  p.  179.
254.


Christianity  and  Superstition  563

G.  Leland  this  formula  was  used:  "The  God  before
me,  God  behind  me,  God  be  with  me.  May  this  ball
bring  all  good  luck  to  Charles  Leland.  May  it  bind
down  all  devils,  may  it  bring  them  under  his  feet.
May  it  bring  him  friends  in  plenty,  may  it  bind  them
to  him.  May  it  bring  him  honor,  may  it  bring  him
riches,  may  it  bring  his  heart's  desire.  May  it  bring
him  success  in  everything  he  undertakes.  May  it
bring  him  happiness.  I  call  for  it  in  the  name  of
God."  ^  No  good  Christian  thinks  of  using  prayer
when  accosting  a  strange  woman,  but  one  New  Orleans
hoodoo  tells  me  that  to  be  most  successful  in  courtship
of  this  sort  one  must  use  the  "Main  Power."  "Speak
ter  de  Lawd  'fo'  you  speak  ter  de  'ooman.  Den  look
de  'ooman  straight  in  de  eye,  and  speak  ter  her  ear-
nes'ly.  If  she  don't  notice  you  let  her  alone  for  a  while,
speak  ter  de  Lawd  again,  den  speak  ter  her  in  de
same  way.  Be  in  deep  earnest,  smiling,  and  wid  a
good  disposition.  De  third  time  you  speaks  ter  her
she  is  bound  ter  go  wid  you."  ^

The  Lucky  Saint  Joseph.  One  of  the  most  graphic
illustrations  of  the  way  in  which  Roman  Catholic
symbols  receive  a  voodoo  interpretation  is  in  the  use  of
the  "lucky  Saint  Joseph."  This  Saint,  as  generally
used  by  the  Roman  Catholics  of  New  Orleans,  consists
of  a  little  gilt  figure  of  Saint  Joseph  with  the  Child,
enclosed  in  a  small  brass  case  about  an  inch  in  height.
The  Saint  is  placed  upside  down  in  the  case  and  is
carried  for  good  luck  or  even  as  a  charm  for  getting  a
good    husband.  ^     The    New    Orleans    Negroes    also


1  Owen,  Mary  A.,     Among  the  Voodoos,  I.  F.  L.  C,  1891,  pp.  232-33.

254.

*  See  also,  Pitkin,  Helen,     An  Angel  by  Brevet,  p.  217.


564     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

carry  this  lucky  Saint  Joseph,  but  in  their  case,  lacking
the  spiritual  background,  they  look  upon  it  in  much
the  same  fashion  as  a  rabbit's  foot,  horseshoe,  or  any
other  less  sacred  charm.  ^  I  was  anxious  to  see  how
the  Mississippi  Negroes,  who  were  not  acquainted
with  this  type  of  fetish,  would  react  to  it;  consequently
I  purchased  an  even  dozen  of  the  images  for  fifty
cents  and  handed  some  of  them  out  to  my  hoodoo
friends  in  return  for  information,  giving  them,  of
course,  the  common  Roman  Catholic  view  in  regard
to  Its  efficacy.  In  every  case  the  image  received  due
respect,  but  the  Negroes  were  not  satisfied  to  obtain
mere  good  luck.  One  Negro  with  a  wounded  hand
carried  it  religiously  about  with  him  In  hopes  of  a  cure,
first  encasing  It  in  a  little  red  flannel  bag.  ^  Another
conjurer  responded  in  a  way  that  showed  clearly  that
many  of  the  conjuring  methods  are  simply  Individual
developments.  Filling  the  case  with  whiskey  he
plunged  the  Saint  In  head  downward,  then  wrapped  It
all  in  red  flannel.  Before  making  a  "hand"  for  any
one  he  would  wet  the  Image  with  camphor  and  rub  It
in  the  palm  of  his  hands  until  he  could  notice  a  brassy
smell.  Then  he  would  rub  his  roots  well  over  this  smelly
spot  before  putting  them  into  the  "trick."  Thus  some
of  the  power  of  the  "Good  Man  of  the  World"  or  the
"Protector,"  for  such  he  christened  Saint  Joseph,
was  transferred  to  that  particular  charm.  In  one
case  he  cured  a  woman  of  "rheumatlz"  by  rubbing  the
image  up  and  down  her  back — I  say  "cured"  because
I  checked  up  on  the  case  and  found  that  the  person  In
question  was  really  able  to  return  to  her  work  after  a

154.
2303.


Christianity  and  Superstition  565

long  absence  due  to  this  trouble.  ^  The  originality
of  another  conjurer  expressed  itself  in  "dressing"
the  image  with  lodestone  and  raw  camphor,  mounting
it  on  a  semi-spherical  lead  base,  and  using  it  as  a  jack.
It  was  supposed  to  answer  questions,  to  bow  in  the
direction  of  stolen  goods  or  hidden  "tricks,"  and  to
fall  towards  the  right  cards  when  he  was  using  this
method  of  telling  fortunes.  ^  With  no  intention  of
sacrilege,  these  little  images  won  me  much  confidence
that  would  have  been  hard  to  obtain  otherwise,  and  the
experiment  showed  clearly  that  certain  sections  of
voodoo  and  Christianity  are  not  too  incompatible
to  mix.

Religion  and  Conjure.  In  fact,  as  I  have  said  before,
almost  all  the  conjurers  of  my  acquaintance  have  been
even  more  religious  than  ordinary  Negroes — some  of
them  being  ministers.  ^  Almost  all  of  them  mix  scrip-
tural quotations  promiscuously  with  conjure  prescrip-
tions, and  some  of  them  run  especially  to  the  Trinity
idea  in  mixing  roots  and  in  regard  to  body  markings.
In  using  the   "jack"   the  formula:

By  some  Peter,

By  some  Paul,

And  by  the  God  that  made  us  all,  "*

shows  unmistakably  the  use  of  Christian  personages
for  what  we  would  call  profane  purposes.  The  church
and  the  voodoo  society  are  not  entirely  separated,
remembering  that  the  church  is  the  main  social  center.

1  258.

«91.

»42.

*  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  46.


566     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

In  Missouri  a  "fire-dance"  was  held  just  after  a  re-
vival meeting,  and  the  voodoo  circle  often  met  in  the
church  itself.  ^  In  another  case  a  group  of  voodoo
initiates  were  secretly  meeting  in  the  church  when  a
stranger  entered,  hypnotized  them  all,  and  stole  their
money  and  valuables.  ^  All  the  way  through  there  is
the  use  of  Christian  derivations  to  prevent  conjuring,
keep  off  ill  luck  and  to  cure  diseases.  Some  Negroes
say,  "De  'ligion  uv  de  Lawd  Jesus  Christ  will  keep
off  all  conjure."  ^  In  many  places  I  have  mentioned
the  use  of  the  cross  symbol,  which,  however,  may  be  of
possible  African  origin  in  part.  Conjurers  make  a
cross  on  a  person's  breast  to  remove  snakes  from  within
him;  two  needles  crossed  in  the  crown  of  your  hat
prevent  any  "trick"  from  harming  you.  *  Cures  are
wrought  "in  the  name  of  the  Lord."  God  is  called
upon  to  bless  the  conjured  person,  and  downfall
invoked  upon  the  work  of  the  devil.  ^  A  "beauty-
rock"  (supposed  to  have  been  used  by  David  in  slaying
Goliath)  will  bring  peace  to  you;^  and  even  in  the
event  of  a  lawsuit  the  names  of  the  twelve  Apostles
written  on  large  sage  leaves  and  worn  in  the  shoes  will
surely  bring  a  favorable  outcome.  ^  Ask  a  ghost,
"What  in  de  name  of  de  Lawd  does  you  want.''"  or
simply  say,  "Lawd  hab  mussy  on  me,"  *  and  the  most
frightful  specter  will  vanish  at  once.     Some  Negroes


1  Owen,  Mary  A.,     Among  the  Voodoos,  I.  F.  L.  C,  1891,  pp.  239-40.

2  Dana,  M.,     Voodoo,  Metropolitan  Magazine,  vol.  28  (1908),  p.  531.
'261.

^54.

^  Bacon,  A.  M.,     Conjuring  and   Conjure-Doctors,  Southern  Workman,  vol.
24  (1895),  p.  210.
« 258.
'241.
» 357.


Christianity  and  Superstition  567

refuse  ever  to  have  a  doctor,  claiming  that  God  is  all
the  doctor  they  need,  ^  a  view  reflected  by  the  following
verse  I  heard  an  old  Negro  woman  singing  at  a  revival
meeting:

I  know  Jesus  am  a  medicine-man,

I  know  Jesus  kin  understan';

I  know  Jesus  am  a  bottle  uv  gold,

Hit  takes  jes'  one  bottle  ter  cure  a  sin-sick  soul.."^

While  the  reference  is  to  spiritual  cure,  many  of  the
Negroes  apply  it  to  physical  cures  as  well.  Members
of  the  Trinity  are  at  times  conceived  of  as  being  much
like  African  spirits.  For  instance,  some  Negroes  fear
to  sweep  out  the  house  after  dark  for  fear  of  "sweeping
out  de  Holy  Ghos'."  ^  The  element  of  propitiation
enters  in  as  shown  by  the  belief  that  failure  to  pay  the
preacher  on  Sunday  will  result  in  a  "long  dry  spell."  ■*

Biblioviancy .  Reading  the  seventh  chapter  of  Rev-
elations will  cut  off  your  bad  luck  and  help  you  to
succeed,  while  opening  the  Bible  at  Genesis  and  reading
a  few  passages  at  random  before  beginning  to  tell
fortunes  with  cards  will  give  you  a  general  idea  of
your  luck  to  come.  ^  Bibliomancy  is  found  in  other
connections;  for  instance,  there  is  the  old  European^
idea  of  a  casual  opening  of  the  Bible  for  some  passage
throwing  light  on  the  future.  The  Negro  generally
makes  a  wish,  then  opens  his  Bible.  If  he  happens
on  the  words,  "and  it  shall  come  to  pass,"  then  he
believes   his   wish   will   be   granted.  ^     Again   there   is

2  103.

=272,  and  386.
•189.
M41.

'  Lean's  Collectanea,  vol.  2,  p.  344.
'397.


568     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

the  practice  of  reading  the  Bible  backwards  to  keep
ghosts  away,  ^  but  such  practices  are  not  common
due  probably  to  Negro  Illiteracy.  It  is  perhaps  more
common  to  place  a  Bible  with  a  crossmark  made
upon  It  under  one's  pillow  to  keep  the  witches  from
"riding  you";  2  In  Scotland  a  Bible  was  carried  as
protection  from  fairies.  ^

Superstitious  Conversion.  It  has  been  pointed  out
earlier  in  the  chapter  that  much  of  a  secular  nature  Is
Included  In  the  process  of  "getting  religion,"  Negro
revivals  minister  to  self-gratification  almost  as  much
as  to  religion,  and  In  the  process  of  Intense  emotional
Intoxication  leading  to  the  vision  there  is  much  super-
stition. Some  "candidates"  are  Instructed  to  spend
the  night  In  the  graveyard,  rolling  on  the  ground,
praying,  fasting,  and  mourning.  In  order  to  get  religion
more  quickly;  **  while  one  little  girl  saw  a  "ha'nt,"
a  headless  woman.  In  this  "coming  through"  process.  ^
God  and  his  angels  can  and  frequently  do  talk  to  good
Christians.  Dead  relatives  also  hold  conversation
with  them,  especially  when  the  Christian  is  ''How
sicF''  "  (In  a  vision-seeing  condition).  Small  omens  of
various  sorts  are  observed  In  an  effort  to  determine
one's  status  in  the  world  to  come.  If  a  baby  cries
at  baptism  the  devil  is  going  out  of  him;  ^  in  England  »

1286.

2  112,  141,  and  231.  Also,  Steiner,  R.,  Observations  on  the  Practice
of  Conjuring  in  Georgia,  p.  178,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  14  (1901).

^  Campbell,  J.  F.,  Popular  Tales  of  the  West  Highlands,  vol.  2,  pp.  59
and  66.

U17.

5  341.

«306.

7 16,  and  397.

*  Henderson,  W.,     Folk-Lore   of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England,   p.  8.


Christianity  and  Superstition  569

and  Scotland  ^  precisely  the  same  belief  was  held,
infants  at  times  even  being  pinched  to  be  sure  that
the  devil  would  leave.  The  Negroes  also  add  that
no  matter  how  bitter  the  weather  may  be  when  a
person  is  baptized  (usually  in  a  river  or  pool  in  the  open)
he  can  never  catch  cold;  -  but  if  a  person  chokes  while
being  baptized  it  is  a  sign  that  he  has  never  been
truly  converted.  ^  If  the  lightning  strikes  near  by  *
■or  if  it  rains  ^  when  a  person  is  dying,  or  if  a  person  die
with  his  mouth  and  eyes  open,  ^  he  has  surely  gone  to
hell;  but  if  it  rains  just  after  a  funeral  the  man's  sins
have  been  washed  away  ^  and  he  has  gone  on  to  heaven,  ^
the  same  being  true  of  a  person  who  dies  with  a  smile
on.  his  face.  ^  A  Christian  on  dying  hears  sweet
music,  but  a  sinner  hears  only  a  terrible  noise  ^ " — a
view  not  so  dissimilar  from  deathbed  scenes  I,  as  a
youth,  have  heard  depicted  from  the  pulpits  by
sensational  white  evangelists.  Look  in  a  good  person's
pillow  after  his  death  and  you  will  find  a  crown  ^  ^ — a
falling  star  indicates  that  such  a  person's  soul  has
gone  on   to  heaven.  ^  -

Dreams  and  Religion.  Dream  omens  are  not  without
their  merit;  the  religion  of  the  antebellum  Negroes
consisted  largely  in  the  kind  of  dreams  they  had,
dreams  of  white  being  of  good  omen,  while  dreams  of

1  Gregor,  W.,     Folk-Lore  of  the  Northeast  of  Scotland,  p.  12.

2  9j   and  278

» 286,  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  16.
<45,  and  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23  (1894),  p.  16.
547.
«341.

7  404.

8  166.

9  127.

10  341.

1 1  Ibid.
^2391.


570     Folk  Beliefs  of  the   Southern  Negro

black  pomted  to  evil.  ^  A  white  man  in  your  dreams
represents  the  Lord,  and  a  black  man  the  devil,  ^
while  a  dream  of  a  black  man  just  after  joining  the
church  shows  that  your  confession  was  prompted  by
the  devil.  ^  To  dream  of  falling  indicates  a  need  for
more  prayer;  *  of  dogs  running,  you  are  not  true  in
your  religious  confession;^  and  if  you  dream  of  fish
it  is  a  sign  that  you  have  sinned.  ^  Others  add  that
whenever  a  Christian  does  wrong  he  will  dream  that
the  devil  is  after  him.  ^  On  the  other  hand  a  dream
of  clear  water  lets  you  know  that  you  are  on  "the  right
side  of  God."  ^  You  can  tell  the  location  of  a  dead
person's  soul  by  a  dream  of  that  person.  If  he  is
moving  in  a  hurry  in  your  dream  he  has  gone  to  hades,
but  if  you  see  him  in  a  pleasant  state  his  abode  is  in
heaven.  ^  A  dream  of  a  preacher  is  a  sure  sign  of  good
luck.  ^  °  If  a  person  dreams  of  an  angel  coming  towards
him  he  will  soon  receive  glad  tidings;  but  if  the  angel
fails  to  approach,  that  person's  life  is  evil  and  the
dream  is  a  warning  to  him  to  reform.  ^  ^  Besides  dreams^
other  minor  signs  are  related  more  or  less  directly  to
religion.  If  a  person's  left  foot  itches  on  Sunday
that  person  has  conjured  God  on  Saturday  night  at
midnight;  ^  ^  if  you  lose  a  tooth  you  will  have  to  look


^  Stokes,  Rev.  A.  J.,     The  Negro  of  Ayitebellum  and  Reconstruction  Days,
Home  and  Foreign  Fields,  vol.  8  (1924),  p.  247.

2  38L

U32.

^341.

6  132.

«33.

'192.

«181.

»131.
»«33.
' »  46.
1 2  240.


Christianity  and  Superstition  571

for  it  on  the  Day  of  Judgment;  ^  and  thunder  denotes
an  angry  Creator.  -

Aleatory  Self-maintenance .  This  completes  our  con-
sideration of  the  intermixture  of  superstition  and  reli-
gion among  the  Negroes.  Superstition  at  any  time
would  seem  to  be  those  beliefs  not  receiving  the  sanction
of  the  more  advanced  mores  of  that  generation.  In
self-maintenance  where  a  test  is  possible,  they  are
represented  by  those  beliefs  counter  to  the  scientific
laws  of  that  day  and  time;  while  in  religion,  where  a
test  is  not  so  readily  possible,  they  are  merely  those
beliefs  differing  widely  from  the  commonly  accepted
creed.  ^  But  faulty  methods  of  self-maintenance  tend
to  be  rapidly  selected  out,  while  in  religion,  where
there  is  less  opportunity  for  a  thorough  test,  outworn
beliefs  persist.  ^  But  these  religious  or  semi-religious
beliefs  have  to  do  with  the  aleatory  element  as  con-
cerned with  self-maintenance,  primarily;  self-perpetua-
tion, secondarily,  and  to  some  small  degree,  with  self-
gratification  as  well.  One  cannot  easily  say  whether
such  and  such  a  thing,  a  rabbit's  foot,  for  instance,
affects  a  person's  luck  in  making  a  living  or  not,  thus
a  reliance  upon  that  particular  thing  will  persist  long
after  industrial  methods  per  se  have  been  brought
thoroughly  up  to  date.  Practices  are  more  enduring
than  theories — a  person  will  put  flowers  on  a  grave
though  he  no  longer  believes  in  a  malevolent  spirit
requiring  propitiation.     We  have  a  feeling  that  it  is

1286.

-Richardson,  C,  Some  Slave  Superstitions,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  41
(1912),  p.  247.

^  For  the  distinction  between  magic  and  miracle,  see  Lehman,  A.,  Aber-
glaube  und  Zauberei,  pp.  7-9.  Cams,  P.,  History  of  the  Devil  and  the  Idea  oj
Evil,  p.  262  ff.

*  See  Keller,  A.  G.,     Societal  Evolution,  p.  128  flf.


572     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

better  to  do  things  that  way.  A  man  may  work  his
crop  all  day  in  accordance  with  the  latest  scientific
methods  of  farming.  On  the  way  home  a  black  cat
may  cross  his  path.  He  may  make  a  crossmark  in
the  road  and  spit  in  it  for  fear  some  stroke  of  chance,
a  hail  storm  or  a  cyclone,  may  upset  all  that  he  has
done  that  day.  Thus  man  has  to  contend  with  two
separate  and  distinct  things — he  has  to  deal,  in  the
first  place,  with  known  laws  which  produce  certain
results,  and  in  the  second  place  with  the  unknown  or
fortuitous  as  touching  upon  the  particular  problem
in  hand.  In  short,  he  is  concerned  with  primary  and
secondary  self-maintenance,  with  understood  self-
maintenance  and  with  inexplicable  or  aleatory  self-
maintenance.  He  must  set  in  motion  processes  which
he  knows  will  work  out  to  his  own  advantage  and  he
must  see  to  it  if  possible,  that  the  adventitious  does
not  come  in  and  disturb  these  processes  or  cause  them
to  produce  results  other  than  anticipated.  Scientific
farming  is  the  primary  self-maintenance;  spitting  in
the  crossmark  after  seeing  the  black  cat,  the  aleatory
self-maintenance.  This  division  is  not  necessarily
absolute  for  all  stages  of  societal  growth.  The  savage
without  knowledge  of  natural  law,  had  mainly  aleatory
self-maintenance,  while  the  more  civilized  man  tends
to  recognize  everything  as  controlled  by  law  and  is
passing  to  a  stage  of  absolute  primary  self-mainte-
nance. ^  But  with  the  less  enlightened  in  a  modern
society,  both  processes  go  hand  in  hand,  and  it  is
with  aleatory  self-maintenance,  aleatory  self-perpetua-
tion, and  self-gratification,  that  superstition  has  most
to  do.


1  See  in  this  connection,    Kellar,    A.   G.,     The   Luck  Element,   Scientific
Monthly,  Feb.  1917,  pp.  145-50.


Christianity  and  Superstition  573

Primitive  and  Civilized  Religion.  When  the  African
slave  first  landed  on  our  shores  he  had  only  what  we
Americans  would  call  pure  superstition.  Later  there
was  a  blending  of  superstition  and  Christianity,  as  he
gradually  assimilated  the  white  man's  creed  and  cred-
ulences.  For  perhaps  the  majority  of  Negroes  and
whites  today,  superstition  and  Christianity  are  grad-
ually becoming  separated,  though  each  continues  to
exist,  independent  of  the  other.  For  the  average  highly
educated  Negro,  as  well  as  the  educated  white,  Chris-
tianity alone  exists  in  the  final  stage,  with  superstition
entirely  discarded.  But  why  was  it  necessary  for  the
slave  to  add  superstition  to  his  early  religion.'*  Evi-
dently there  was  something  in  Christianity  which  did
not  quite  meet  all  of  his  needs  at  that  time.

Aside  from  matters  of  creed,  possibly  the  most
outstanding  differences  between  Christianity  and  the
West  African  religion,  or  any  other  very  primitive
religion  for  that  matter,  is  that  the  primitive  religion
is  more  of  an  everyday  affair.  In  former  chapters  ^
emphasis  was  laid  upon  the  reality  of  the  spirit  environ-
ment to  the  West  African  and  the  obvious  way  in
which  it  ministered  to  almost  every  exigency  of  his
practical  life.  Religion,  self-maintenance,  self-perpet-
uation, and  self-gratification  are  very  closely  entwined
since  religion  deals  with  the  aleatory  element  as  applied
to  each  of  these  societal  fields.  It  is  the  effort  to  prevent
the  "dead  hand"  from  interfering  with  the  affairs  of
life;  if  possible  to  get  the  controlling  ghost  to  help
rather  than  to  hinder.  Vln  modern  Christianity  there
is  a  tendency  to  deal  with  the  hereafter  rather  than


1  See  p.  91,  109  ff.,  169  ff.,  and  259  ff.


574     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

the  here-and-now,  though  this  was  not  always  the  case,
especially  during  the  Middle  Ages  where  Christianity
was  called  upon  to  stop  plagues,  halt  storms,  prevent
earthquakes,  and  in  other  ways  to  assist  directly  in
everyday  life.  ^  '  The  modern  scientist  no  longer  se-
riously believes  that  Christianity  can  be  applied  to
growing  crops,  to  making  rain,  to  winning  brides,  or  to
the  thousand  and  one  miscellaneous  affairs  of  everyday
life.  More  and  more,  natural  law  steps  into  these
matters  and  Christianity  becomes  more  of  a  Sunday
affair,  or  at  least  something  not  related  in  a  causal
way  to  daily  commonplaces.  No  devout  Christian
would  think  of  praying  that  his  enemy  die  or  that  he
himself  should  be  a  good  gambler,  and  matters  like  farm-
ing or  commerce  have  almost  passed  out  of  the  sphere  of
the  supernatural.  The  educated  man  is  able  to  meet
these  practical  needs  through  a  better  understanding  of
natural  law,  but  the  Negro  slave  was  ignorant,  knew
little  of  natural  law,  and  was  accustomed  to  depend
much  upon  religion  to  aid  him  in  controlling  his  large
sphere  of  the  unknown.  I  have  mentioned  the  fact
that  Negro  prayers,  like  African  prayers,  are  very
practical.  Among  the  GuUah  Negroes  of  South  Caro-
lina "each  individual  expects,  and  in  his  prayers,
almost  exacts,  from  Father  and  Son  a  personal  service
involving  not  only  benefits  for  himself  but  harm  to  those
who  despitefuUy  use  him.  'Me  Jedus  (Jesus)  help
me  fuh  fool  de  man!  Uh  put  me  finguh  een  de  man'
eye,  en'  'e  nebbuh  ketch  me,'  "  or  else,  "  'w'en  de  man
ketch  me  een  'e  house  'en  'e  hab  'e  razor  een  'e  han',


^  See  White,  A.  D,,  History  of  the  Conflict  of  Science  with  Theology  in
Christendom,  vol.  i,  pp.  323-415,  and  vol.  ii,  pp.  1-167.  Cams,  P.,  The
History  of  the  Devil  and  the  Idea  of  Evil,  pp.  262-305.


Christianity  and  Superstition  575

Gawd,  tangle'  de  man'  foot,  en'  help  me  fuh  git  'way'."  '
Christianity  alone  was  sufficient  to  deal  with  the
aleatory  element  with  the  white  man,  but  the  aleatory
element  with  the  Negro  was  greater  in  scope  and
Christianity  had  to  be  modified  somewhat  in  order  to
deal  with  it  eflfectively.

""Religion  in  Overalls''  This  modification  with  the
Negro,  chiefly  took  the  form  of  the  supplementing  of
Christianity  with  superstition.  His  ignorance  was
greater  and  his  need  for  supernatural  assistance  in
consequence  was  greater.  Thus  the  Negro  took  over
the  outward  form  of  Christianity  but  gave  it  the
interpretation  of  the  Middle  Ages,  always  striving,  to
make  it  meet  more  nearly  his  practical  here-and-now
needs,  which  of  course  meant  that  new  interpretations
and  new  additions  must  be  made  to  the  established
creed.  Superstition  and  religion  were  alike  assimilated,
both  being  to  the  Negro  simply  ways  of  more  ad-
vantageously dealing  with  this  element  of  chance  which
daily  affected  every  phase  of  his  life  activities.  Even
today  his  religion  is  extremely  practical,  his  prayers
personal,  and  his  church  a  center  of  all  things  social.
Religion  is  more  of  an  everyday  matter,  concerned
not  so  much  with  how  you  behave  towards  other
people  as  with  how  other  people  and  Nature  in  general
behave  towards  you.  /In  short,  Negro  religion  is
really  "religion  in  overalls,"  dealing  more  with  aleatory
self-maintenance  and  with  everyday  life  than  does
white  religion,  i

Meaning  of  Superstition.  It  does  so  by  means  of
what  we  would  call  superstitious  additions  or  super-

1  Gonzales,  A.  E.,     With  .f.sop  Along  the  Black  Border,  Preface,  p.  xiii.


576     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

stitlous  Interpretations.  What  then,  is  the  meaning
of  superstition?  Some  folk-beHefs  are  simply  in-
correct concepts  of  natural  phenomena  which  have
no  special  bearing  on  the  affairs  of  life,  ^  as  for  Instance,
the  Idea  that  on  every  Easter  Sunday  the  sun  shouts,  "^
but  by  far  the  greater  part  of  them  have  to  do  with  the
explanation  and  especially  the  control  of  this  aleatory
element  which  is  so  prominent  In  our  lives.  In  the
main  these  superstitions  represent  simply  the  efforts
of  mankind  to  adapt  himself  more  completely  to  his
imaginary  environment,  to  avoid  every  possible  spiritual
danger,  and  to  utilize  more  fully  the  last  fraction  of
spiritual  power  in  the  unequal  contest  with  life.  They
arise  and  persist  because  all  societies,  or  all  portions  of
one  society,  fail  to  advance  at  equal  rates  of  progress.
The  more  educated  upper  stratas  have  reached  that
understanding  of  scientific  law  which  enables  them  to
dispense  with  many  means  of  controlling  the  aleatory
element  still  in  vogue  with  the  less  fortunate  middle
and  lower  classes.  Thus  the  upper  classes  speak  of
such  lower  class  beliefs  and  practices  which  have  no
scientific  basis  as  superstitions,  though  to  those  who
accept  them  they  are  not  so  regarded.  This  shows
us,  of  course,  that  superstition  Is  a  purely  relative
term  depending  entirely  upon  a  person's  stage  of
culture.

Eliminating  Superstition.  Now  a  few  final  words
with  reference  to  the  elimination  of  superstition.
Ellis  ^  shows  how  West  African  religious  beliefs  be-
ginning with  a  few  local  concepts,  soon  spread  to  the

*  Such  as  the  incorrect  nature  superstitions,  pp.  41  ff.

n72.

'  Ellis,  A.  B.,     Yoruba-speaking  Peoples,  pp.  275,  SOL


Christianity  and  Superstition  577

tribe  as  a  whole.     This  order  seems  to  be  reversed
among  the  Afro-Americans  in  the  process  of  the  disin-
tegration  of   these   beHefs.     Folk-beliefs    at   first   ac-
cepted by  the  whole  group,  are  in  time  given  up  except
in    relatively    isolated    local    communities;    thus    we
might   say   that   those   beliefs   held   only   locally   will
probably  be  the  first  to  disappear  entirely.     This  local
acceptation  of  a  belief,  however,  does  not  necessarily
indicate  that  it  was  once  believed  in  by  the  whole
group — it  may  represent  a  local  West  African  belief
which   has   never  been   widely   accepted   in  America.
Generally  where,  instead  of  some  definite  consequence,
"bad   luck"   is   named   as   the   outcome  of   a   certain
combination  of  circumstances  it  may  be  said  that  that
belief  is  in  process  of  elimination.     A  person  embraces
most  closely  and  remembers  most  clearly  those  beliefs
which  affect  him  most  vitally.     With  the  women  it  is
in  the  main  those  household  beliefs  which  are  largely  of
European  origin — with  the  men  It  is  more  often  voodoo;
beliefs   of   African    source,    pertaining   most   often   to
hating,  loving,  gambling,  keeping  out  of  jail,  and  other
such  activities  in  which  the  male  generally  takes  the
active  part.     It  is  quite  to  be  expected  that  under  the
circumstances  the  English  beliefs  of  feminine  diifusion
should    be    the    most    common    among    the    Negroes.
The  mother  is  more  with  the  children,  and  in  slavery
times,  when  a  Negro  married   a  woman  on  another
plantation,  as  was  often  the  case,  the  children  belonged
to  the  owner  of  the  mother,   while  the  father  could
punish  neither  mother  nor  children,  since  he  would  be
defacing  another  man's  property.  ^     Thus  the  children

'  Mason,  O.  T.,     Woman's  Share  in  Primitive  Culture,  p.  219.
37


578     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

fell  largely  under  the  control  of  the  mother  who  passed
on  down  in  a  uniform  way  the  beliefs  that  she  had  gar-
nered from  the  whites  in  her  household  work.  The  Afri-
can voodoo  beliefs,  on  the  other  hand,  were  more  often
passed  from  mature  man  to  mature  man  outside  of  the
household,  allowing  more  variation  in  transmission
and  in  individual  invention.  But  both  of  these  sets
of  beliefs  are  designed  to  assist  in  the  control  of  the
luck  element,  and  the  best  course  to  pursue  in  seeking
to  supplant  them  would  seem  to  lie  in  the  direction  of
building  up  a  better  understanding  of  natural  law,
that  is,  in  reducing  that  sphere  of  the  unknown  which
is  presided  over  by  pure  chance  or  luck.

Literary  Education  Ineffective.  Often  education  has
been  oifered  blindly  as  the  great  cure-all,  but  I  believe
that  there  are  certain  limitations  which  should  be
taken  into  consideration.  In  a  general  sort  of  way  I
have  noticed  in  my  collection  of  material  that  among
both  blacks  and  whites  the  more  illiterate  are  the
more  superstitious.  In  the  collection  of  material  from
students  of  Atlanta  University  an  attempt  was  made  to
see  what  correlation  existed  between  the  degree  of
education  and  the  amount  of  superstition.  The  col-
lector ^  writes:  "It  would  seem  that  these  beliefs  vary
with  the  degree  of  intelligence  and  disappear  alto-
gether among  the  truly  educated.  They  are  also  found
quite  generally  among  the  uneducated  white  people
of  this  section."  Apparently  the  two  most  common
beliefs  among  the  educated  of  the  community  were,
that  it  is  bad  luck  to  break  a  mirror  or  to  have  a
black  cat  cross  one's  path,  -  both  beliefs  of  European

1347.
2392.


Christianity  and  Superstition  579

origin  and  found  largely  among  the  whites  of  the  South.
But  mere  training  in  reading  and  writing  will  not  do
much  to  remove  superstition.  Many  of  the  conjurers
whom  I  know  could  read  and  write,  and  some  turn
this  knowledge  into  direct  use  in  sorcery,  as  where
the  Bible  is  used  for  purposes  of  divination.  In
New  Orleans  the  "Secrets  of  Albertus  Magnus"  and
the  "Sixth  and  Seventh  Books  of  Moses,"  compila-
tions of  old  mediaeval  magic,  printed  on  very  cheap
paper  with  paper  bindings  are  retailed  to  the  Negroes
at  a  dollar  each,  though  they  cost,  I  am  informed,
only  about  ten  cents  each.  The  sale  is  enormous  ^
and  their  use  by  the  literate  Negroes  very  wide-
spread, 2  extending  even  to  the  Obeah  men  of  the
West  Indies.  ^  This  is  reversion  with  a  vengeance
and  shows  the  futility  of  a  certain  type  of  education.
Superstitions  even  gather  around  the  seat  of  learning
itself,  *  as  we  have  already  shown  by  various  signs
relating  to  books  and  to  lessons  in  general.  It  is
said,  for  example,  that  if  you  part  your  hair  in  the
middle  on  examination  day,  ^  or  sleep  with  your  books
under  your  pillow,  «  you  will  surely  know  your  lesson.
The  principal  of  a  rather  important  denominational
school  in  Mississippi,  a  minister,  writes  me:  ^''Per-
sonally I  have  had  one  dream  that  has  never  failed.
To  dream  of  a  snake  is  a  warning  that  somebody  is
trying   to   do   me   harm   in   some   way.     I    have   had


2  54,  and  Cable,  G.  W.,     The  Grandissimes,  p.  136.

'  Park,  R.  E.,  Magic,  Mentality  and  City  Life,  Publication  American  Socio-
logical Society,  vol.  18  (1924),  p.  111.

*  See  for  instance,  the  superstitions  of  Harvard  Freshman.  Tozzer,  A.  M.,
Social  Origins  and  Social  Continuities,  pp.  242-66.

5  188.

«341.


580     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

many  true  dreams,  but  I  bank  on  this  one.  If  I
kill  the  snake,  I  likewise  conquer  the  enemy.  This
snake  dream  is  the  only  one  I  can  truly  bank  on."

Suggested  Training.  Such  intellectual  weeds  growing
in  the  school  yard  cause  us  to  question  the  efficiency
of  the  school  system  itself.  At  any  rate  they  show
very  clearly  that  an  education  purely  literary,  such  as
has  been  in  the  past  the  Negro's  goal,  will  not  do  away
with  superstition.  An  understanding  of  the  "un-
known" can  come  only  through  an  understanding  of
scientific  laws.  Thus,  training  in  biology,  chemistry,
physics,  and  other  such  sciences,  will  do  more  to
banish  necromancy  than  will  any  studious  reaching
after  the  "three  R's."  Many  Negroes  are  getting  but
little  such  training  in  the  school  work  now  provided,
though  college  men  become  acquainted  with  such
subjects  and  lose  their  friendship  for  the  old  lore.
Such  changes  must  needs  be  very  slow,  however.
Modern  psychology  shows  clearly  the  importance  of
childhood  impressions,  and  such  impressions  are  too
lasting  to  be  erased  at  one  stroke.  One  Negro  with
high  school  training  is  extremely  fearful  of  Fridays
and  black  cats.  He  claims  not  to  believe  in  bad  luck
resulting  from  such,  but  says  that  this  attitude  is
merely  a  habit  which  he  cannot  overcome.  ^  Doubtless
there  are  many  such  still  in  the  grasp  of  early  training.
Conjure  is  easier  to  break  up,  since  it  is  restricted  to
fewer  people  and  generally  learned  later  in  life,  but
the  common  signs  and  household  beliefs  can  only  be
slowly  removed.  Since  the  mothers  are  the  important
agents  in  passing  these  along  to  the  children  it  would

»392.


Christianity  and  Superstition  581

seem  necessary  to  give  female  education  more  emphasis
in  the  educational  system,  especially  providing  in-
struction in  natural  science  for  the  young  women.
The  Northern  Negroes  are  less  superstitious,  due  in
part  to  more  education  of  a  scientific  nature,  and  in
part  to  the  fact  that  they  come  into  closer  contact
with  the  whites.  Beliefs  are  reinforced  and  strength-
ened by  contact  with  other  believers,  and  I  have  had
enough  experience  of  this  nature  to  realize  the  over-
whelming strength  of  mass  suggestion.  Where  black
meets  only  black  in  the  Black  Belt  there  is  no  apt
standard  of  comparison  and  the  old  ideas  remain
rooted    in    fertile    soil.

Race  Pride.  One  most  hopeful  sign  is  the  growth
of  Negro  race  pride,  and  from  this  viewpoint  improve-
ment in  self-maintenance  is  important.  The  whites
of  the  South  gave  up  their  superstitions  all  the  more
quickly  because  the  Negro  took  them  over  and  the
planter  had  no  desire  to  be  like  the  slave.  Today
Negro  race  pride  is  forcing  many  more  or  less  illiterate
Negroes  to  give  up,  or  at  least  to  subdue  and  refuse
to  pass  on,  the  old  beliefs  for  fear  of  ridicule  from  the
more  developed  members  of  their  race.  ^  A  professor
in  one  of  the  most  prominent  Negro  colleges  in  the
South  writes  in  answer  to  my  request  for  superstitions:
"This  year  we  have  decided  that  it  would  not  be  wise
to  suggest  an  assignment  such  as  you  wish  because  of
the  Intense  race  consciousness  of  the  recent  years,
which  Includes  temporarily  the  desire  to  forget  the
past  in  pressing  forward  to  the  future."  The  white
man  may  have  done  the  Negro  an  injustice  in  ridiculing
him  for  superstitions  of  which  he  himself  was  largely

1  For  the  further  significance  of  this  feeling  see,  Puckett,  N.  N.,  Race  Pride
and  Folk-Lore,  Opportunity,  vol.  4  (1926)  pp.  82-85.


582     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

the  author,  but  this  ridicule  is  destined  to  be  a  most
potent  factor  in  forcing  the  Negro  to  rehnquish  them
more  quickly  than  he  ordinarily  would.

Conclusion.  Line  by  line  increasing  knowledge  and
pride  of  race  are  erasing  forever  these  records  of  folk-
thought.  My  appeal  is  again  to  lovers  of  folk-lore,
white  or  black,  European  or  African,  to  search  out  and
preserve  these  fascinating  ^'mental  antiques,"  that  in
the  future  some  ambitious  soul,  observing  only  their
crudities,  may  exclaim,  "We  have  advanced!"  or,
struck  by  some  homely  gem  of  thought,  contrasted  by
sheer  simplicity  with  the  opinions  of  his  day — a
Hepplewhite  creation  in  a  room  of  modern  furniture
— may  ponder  sorrowfully  over  the  limitations  of  a
machine-made  culture.


REFERENCES  CITED

Afro-American  Encyclopedia.     (Nashville,  Tenn.,  1895.)

Ageebi,  M.,  The  West  African  Problem.  Article  in  G.  Spiller,
Inter-Racial  Problems.     (London,  1911).

AiMES,  H.  H.  S.,  African  Institutions  in  America,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  18  (1905).

Allen,  William  F.,  Slave  Songs  of  the  United  States.  (N.  Y.,
1871.)

American   Magazine.

Annals  of  the  American  Academy  of  Political  and  Social  Science.

Ashton,  J.,  Chap-Books  of  the  Eighteenth  Century.  (London,
1882).

AsHTON,  J.,  The  Devil  in  Britain  and  America.  (London,
1896).

Atlantic  Monthly.

Atlanta  University  Publications.     Number  18  (1914).

Babcock,  W.  H.,  Folk-Lore  Jottings  from  Rockhaven,  D.  C,
/.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  4  (1891).

Bacon,  (Miss)  A.  M.,  Conjuring  and  Conjure-Doctors,  Sou-
thern, Workman,  vol.  24  (1895).

Bacon,  (Miss)  A.  M.  (and  Parsons,  (Mrs.)  E.  C),  Folk-Lore
from  Elizabeth  City  County,  Virginia,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  35  (1922).

Bacon,  (Miss)  A.  M.,  Proposal  for  Folk-Lore  Research  at
Hampton,    Virginia,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  6  (1893).

Backus,  (Mrs.)  E.  M.,  Animal  Tales  from  North  Carolina,
J.  A.  F.L.,  vol.  11  (1898).

Backus,  (Mrs.)  E.  M.,  Negro  Ghost  Stories,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  9
(1896).

Backus,  (Mrs.)  E.  M.,  Tales  of  the  Rabbit  from  Georgia  Ne-
groes, J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  12  (1899).

Backus,  (Mrs.)  E.  M.,  (and  Leitner,  Mrs.  E.  H.),  Negro
Tales  from  Georgia,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  25  (1912).

Banks,  F.  D.,     Plantation  Courtship,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  7  (1894).


584     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Barker,  W.  H.  (and  Sinclair,  C),  fVest  African  Folk-Tales.
(London,  1917).

Barton,  W.  C,     Old  Plantation  Hymns.

Basden,  G.  T.,     Among  the  Ibos  of  Nigeria.     (London,  1921).
Bastian,  a.,     Der  Mensch  in  der  Geschichte.     Vol.  ii,  Leipsic,
(1860).

Beatty,  K.  J.,     Human  Leopards.     (London,  1915).

Bergen,  (Mrs.)  Fanny  D.,  Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  M.  A.
F.  L.  S.,  vol.  7  (1899).

Bergen,  (Mrs.)  Fanny  D.,  Current  Superstitions,  Ibid.,  vol.  4
(1896).

Bergen,  (Mrs.)  Fanny  D.,  On  the  Eastern  Shore,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  2  (1889).

Bergen,  (Mrs.)  Fanny  D.,  Some  Bits  of  Plant  Lore,  Ibid.,
vol.  5   (1892).

Bergen,  (Mrs.)  Fanny  D.,  Two  Negro  Witch  Stories,  Ibid.,
vol.  12  (1899).

Binger,  Le  Capitaine,  Du  Niger  au  Golfe  de  Guinee  par  le
pays  de  Kong  et  le  Mossi.     Vol.  ii  (Paris,  1892).

Birmingham   (Ala.)    News.

Boas,  F.,  Mythology  and  Folk-Tales  of  the  North  American
Indians,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  7  (1894).

Boas,  F.,  The  Problem  of  the  American  Negro,  Yale  Review,
vol.  10  (1921).

Boas,  F.  (and  Sinango,  C.  K.),  Tales  and  Proverbs  of  the
Vandau  of  Portuguese  South  Africa,  ] .  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  35  (1922).

BoK,  E.  W.,  The  Americanization  of  Edward  Bok.  (N.  Y.,
1922).

Bolton,  H.  C,  Decoration  of  Graves  of  Negroes  in  South
Carolina,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  4  (1891).

Bolton,  H.  C,  Fortune  Telling  in  America  Today,  Ibid.,
vol.  8  (1895).

BosMAN,  W.,  Description  of  the  Coast  of  Guinea.  Letter  in
J.    Pinkerton's   Voyages   and  Travels,   vol.    16    (London,    1814).

Boyle,  (Mrs.)  Virginia  Frazer,     Devil  Tales.     (N.  Y.,  1900).


References  Cited  585

Brand,  John,  Observations  on  the  Popular  Antiquities  of
Great  Britain,   3    vols.     (London,    1848).

Brannon,  p.  a.,  Central  Alabama  Negro  Superstitions,
Birmingham  (Ala.)  News,  Jan.  18,  1925.

Brawley,  B.  G.,  Short  History  of  the  American  Negro.
<N.Y.,    1913).

Brawley,  B.  G.,  Social  History  of  the  American  Negro.
(N.  Y.,  1921).

Brinton,  D.  G.,  Iconographic  Encyclopedia  of  the  Arts  and
Sciences,  Tr.  Gerland.     Vol.  i  (Philadelphia,  1886).

Brown,  W.  N.,  The  Tar  Baby  Story  at  Home,  Scientific
Monthly,  vol.  15  (1922).

Bruce,  P.  A.,  The  Plantation  Negro  as  a  Freedman.  (N.  Y.,
1889).

Bullock,  (Mrs.)  W.  R.,  The  Collection  of  Maryland  Folk-Lore,
J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  11  (1898).

Bundy,  R.  C,  Folk-Tales  from  Liberia,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  32
(1919).

Burton,  R.  F.,  Wit  and  Wisdom  from  West  Africa.  (London,
1865).

Cable,  George  W.,  Creole  Slave  Songs,  Century  Magazine,
vol.  31  (1886).         "•

Cable,  George  W.,     The  Dance  in  Place  Congo,  Ibid.

Cable,  George  W.,     The  Grandissimes.     (N.  Y.,  1898).

Cabot,  R.  C,  Social  Service  and  the  Art  of  Healing.  (N.  Y.,
1917).

Campbell,  J.  F.,  Popular  Tales  of  the  West  Highlands,  4  vols.
(London,  1890).

Campbell,  J.  G.,  Witchcraft  and  Second  Sight  in  the  High-
lands and  Islands  of  Scotland.     (Glasgow,  1902).

Cardinal,  A.  W.,  The  Natives  of  the  Northern  Territories  of
the  Gold  Coast.      (London,  G.  Routledge  &  Sons).

Carus,  Paul,  The  History  of  the  Devil  and  the  Idea  of  Evil.
(London,  1900).


586     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Castellanos,  H.  C,     New  Orleans  as  It  Was.     (New  Orleans,
1895).

Century  Magazine.

Chamberlain,  A.  F.,     Fear  of  Fire,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  17  (1904).

Chambers,  Robert,     Popular  Rhymes  of  Scotland.      (London,
1841).

Chandler,  J.,     The  Ninth    Coleman,    The   Designer,    vol.    61
(1924).

Chatelain,  H.,     African  Folk-Life,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  10  (1897).

Chatelain,  H.,     Angolan  Customs,  Ibid.,  vol.  9  (1896).

Chatelain,  H.,     Folk-Tales  of  Angola,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  1
(1894).

Chatelain,    H.,     Some   Causes   of  the   Retardation   of  Negro
Progress,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  8  (1895).

Cleveland  (Ohio)  News.

Le  Compte,  C.  N.  de  Cardi,     Ju-Ju  Laws  and  Customs  in
the  Niger  Delta,  J.  A.  I.,  vol.  29  (1899).

Concerning  Negro   Sorcery  in  the   United  States,  J.   A.   F.   L.,
vol.  3  (1890).

Conrad,  Georgia  B.,     Reminiscences  of  a  Southern  Woman,
Southern  Workman,  vol.  30  (1901).

CooKE,  Elizabeth  J.,     English  Folk-Tales  in  America,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  12  (1899).

CouDENHOVE,  H.,     African  Folk,  Atlantic  Monthly,   vol.    128
(1921).

Cowan,  J.  L.,     Welsh  Superstitions,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  15  (1902).

Cronise,    Florence    M.    and    Ward,    Henry    W.,     Cunnie
Rabbit,  Mr.  Spider  and  the  Other  Beef.     (London,   1903).

Cross,  T.  P.,     Folk-Lore  from  the  Southern  States,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  22  (1909).

Cruickshank,  Brodie,     Eighteen  Years  on  the  Gold  Coast  of
Africa,  vol.  ii  (London,  1853).

CuLiN,  S.,     Reports  Concerning  Voodooism,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  2
(1889).


References  Cited  587

CuRTis-BuRLiN,  Natalie,     Negro  Folk-Songs.     (N.  Y.,  1919).

Dana,  M.,     Voodoo,  Metropolitan  Magazine,  vol.  28  (1908).

Davenport,  F.  M.,  Primitive  Traits  in  Religious  Revivals.
(N.  Y.,  1905).

Davis,  D.  W.,  Echoes  from  a  Plantation  Party,  Southern
Workman,  vol.  28  (1899).

Davis,  H.  C,  Negro  Folk-Lore  in  South  Carolina,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  27  (1914).

Davis,  (Mrs)  N.  E.  M.,  The  Cottonwood  Tree;  Louisiana
Superstitions,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  18  (1905).

Dayrell,  E.,  Folk  Stories  from  Southern  Nigeria,  West  Africa.
(London,  1910).

Denham,  M.  a.,  a  Collection  of  Proverbs  and  Popular  Sayings,
Percy  Society,  vol.  20  (London,  1846).

Dennett,  R.  E.,  Notes  on  the  Folklore  of  the  Fjort.  (London,
1896).

Derrickson,  (Mrs)  S.  D.,  Various  Superstitions,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  18  (1905).

Designer,  The

DoRSEY,  G.  A.,  The  Ocimhanda,  or  Witch-Doctor  of  the  Orim-
hunda  of  Portuguese  Southwest  Africa,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  12  (1899).

Down,  J.,     The  Negro  Races,  vol.  i  (N.  Y.,  1907).

DuBois,  W.  E.  B.,  The  Philadelphia  Negro.  Publications
of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.  Series  in  Political  Economy
and  Public  Law.     No.  14.     (Philadelphia,  1899).

DuBois,  W.  E.  B.,     Souls  of  Black  Folk.     (Chicago,  1903).

Du  Chaillu,  P.  B.,  Explorations  and  Adventures  in  Equa-
torial Africa.     (London,  1861).

Dyer,  (Rev.)  T.  F.  T,,     Domestic  Folk-Lore.     (London,  1881).

Dyer,  (Rev.)  T.  F.  T.,     English  Folk-Lore.     (London,  1878).

Earnest,  J.  B.,  Jr.,  The  Religious  Development  of  the  Negro
in  Virginia.     (Charlottesville,  Va.,  1914).

Edinburgh  Review.

EiCHLER,  Lillian,     The  Customs  of  Mankind.     (N.  Y.,  1924).


588     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Ellis,  A.  B.,  The  Ewe-speaking  Peoples  of  the  Slave  Coast  of
West  Africa.     (London,   1890).

Ellis,  A.  B.,  On  Vodu  Worship,  Popular  Science  Monthly^
vol.  38  (1891).

Ellis,  A.  B.,  The  Tshi-speaking  Peoples  of  the  Gold  Coast  of
'  West  Africa.     (London,  1887).

Ellis,  A.  B.,  The  Yoruha-s peaking  Peoples  of  the  Slave  Coast
of  West  Africa.     (London,  1894).

Ellis,  George  W.,  Negro  Culture  in  West  Africa.  (N.  Y.,
1914).

EspiNOSA,  A.  M.,  A  Folk-Lore  Expedition  to  Spain,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  34  (1921).

Etude.

Evans,  J.  H.,  Weather-Lore,  Southern  Workman,  vol.  25
(1895).

Evans,  M.  S.,  Black  and  White  in  the  Southern  States.  (N.  Y.,
1915).

Faduma,  O.,  The  Defects  of  the  Negro  Church.  Paper  No.  10,
The  American  Negro  Academy.     (Washington,  1904).

FiNCK,  H.  T.,  Jazz — Lowbrow  and  Highbrow,  Etude,  vol.  xlii
(1924).

Flint,  (Rev.)  J.,     Flint's  Letters.     (1825).

FoGEL,  Edwin  M.,  Beliefs  and  Superstitions  of  the  Pennsyl-
vania Germans.     (Philadelphia,  1915).

Folk-Tales  from  Students  in  Tuskeegee  Institute,  Alabama,
J.  A.  F.L.,  vol  32  (1919).

FoRTiER,  Alcee,  Customs  and  Superstitions  in  Louisiana,
J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  1  (1888).

FoRTiER,  Alcee,     Louisiana  Customs.     (New  Orleans,  1894).

Frazer,  (Sir)  J.  G.,  The  Golden  Bough.  (One  vol.  ed,,  N.  Y.,
1923).

Frobenius,  L.,     The  Voice  of  Africa,  2  vols.     (London,  1913).

Gatschet,  a.  S.,  African  Masks  and  Secret  Societies,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  12  (1899).


References  Cited  589

Glave,  E.  J.,  Fetishism  in  Congo  Land,  Century  Magazine,
vol.  19  (1891).

GoMME,  Alice  B.,  Traditional  Games  of  England,  Scotland,
and  Ireland.  Dictionary  of  British  Folk-Lore,  pt.  1,  vol.  ii.  (Lon-
don, 1898).

GoMME,  G.  L.,     Ethnology  in  Folklore.     (N.  Y.,  1892).

GoMME,  G.  L.,  Folklore  as  an  Historical  Science.  (London,
1908).

Gonzales,  A.  E.,     The  Black  Border.     (Columbia,  S.  C,  1922).

Gonzales,  A.  E.,  With  ^sop  Along  the  Black  Border.  (Col-
umbia, S.  C,  1924).

Grant,  Madison,  The  Passing  of  the  Great  Race.  (N.  Y.,
1921).

Greber,  a..  Uncle  Remus  Traced  to  the  Old  World,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  6  (1893).

Gregor,  (Rev.)  W.,  Notes  on  the  Folk-Lore  of  the  Northeast  of
Scotland.     Publications  of  the  Folk-Lore  Society,  vii  (London,  1881).

Griffith,  T.  R.,  On  the  Races  Inhabiting  Sierra  Leone,  J.  A.  I.,
vol.  16  (1887).

GuRDON,  (Lady)  E.  C,  County  Folk-Lore  of  Suffolk.  (Lon-
don, 1893).

Hall,  J.  A.,  Negro  Conjuring  and  Tricking,  J.  A.  F.  Z,.,
vol.  10  (1897).

Hardwick,  Charles,  Traditions,  Superstitions,  and  Folk-
Lore.     (London,  1872).

Hardy,  Sarah  M.,  Negro  Superstitions,  Lippincoti' s  Monthly
Magazine,  vol.  xlviii  (1891).

Harris,  Joel  C,     Told  by   Uncle  Remus.     (N.  Y.,   1905).

Harris,  Joel  C,  Uncle  Remus:  His  Songs  and  His  Sayings.
(N.  Y.,  1917).

Hartman,  C,  Traditional  Beliefs  Concerning  the  Generation  of
the  Opossum,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  34  (1921).

Harvey,  E.  H.,     A  Brer  Rabbit  Story,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  32  (1919).

Haskell,  J.  A.,  Sacrificial  Offerings  Among  North  Carolina
Negroes,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  4  (1891).


590     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Hawkins,  J.,  An  Old  Mauma's  Folk-Lore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  9
(1896).

Haynes,  G.  E.,      The  Trend  of  the  Races.     (New  York,  1922).

Hearn,  L.,     Gombo  Zhebes.     (N.  Y.,  1885).

Henderson,  William,  Notes  on  the  Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern
Counties  of  England  and  the  Borders.     (London,  1886).

HiGGiNSON,  (Col.)  T.  W.,  Letter  in  Southern  Workman,  vol.  23
(1894).

Historical  Sketch  Book  and  Guide  to  New  Orleans.     (N.  Y.,  1884) .
HoLLowELL,  E.,       Calhoun  Plantation  Songs.  (3d  ed.,  Boston,
1923).

Home  and  Foreign  Fields.

House,  G.  B.,  The  Little  Foe  of  All  the  World,  Southern  Work-
man, vol.  35  (1906).

Hueffer,  O.   M.,     The    Book   of   Witches.     (N.    Y.,    1909).

Humphreys,  W.  J.,  Some  Useful  Weather  Proverbs.  Year
Book  U.  S.  Dept.  of  Agriculture.     (Washington,  1912).

Humphreys,  W.  J.,  Weather  Proverbs  and  Paradoxes.  (Balti-
more, 1923.)

Hunt,  R.,  Popular  Romances  of  the  West  of  England;  or  the
Drolls,  Traditions  and  Superstitions  of  Old  Cornzvall.  (London,
2d  ed.  1871).

Hutchinson,  H.  N.,  The  Living  Races  of  Mankind.  (N.  Y.,
1902).

I.   F.   L.   C,      The  International  Folk-Lore  Congress.     (1891).

Ingersoll,  E.,  Decoration  of  Negro  Graves,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5
(1892).

Jacobs,  J.,     Reynard  the  Fox.     (A.  L.  Burt,  N.  Y.).

J.  A.  F.  L.,     Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore.

J.  A.  I.,  Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Institute  of  Great
Britain  and  Ireland.

Jamison,  (Mrs.)  C.  V.,  Alabama  Legend  Concerning  the  Will-
o'-the-Wisp,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  18  (1905).

Johnson,  G.  B.,     See  Odum,  H.  W.


References  Cited  591

Johnson,  James  W.,  The  Book  of  American  Negro  Spirituals.
(N.  Y.,  1925).

Johnston,  (Sir)  Harry  H.,  The  Negro  in  the  New  World.
(London,  1910).

Jones,  T.  J.,  Education  in  Africa.  (Phelps-Stokes  Fund,
N.  Y.).

Journal  of  Negro  History.

Kane,  H.  P.,     Reception  by  the  Dead,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5  (1892) .

Keane,  A.  H.,     Man:  Past  and  Present.     (Cambridge,  1920).

Keller,  A.  G.,  The  Luck  Element,  Scientific  Monthly  (Feb-
ruary, 1917).

Keller,  A.  G.,     Societal  Evolution.     (N.  Y.,  1920).

Kennedy,  L.,  Vodu  and  Fodun,  J.  A.  F.  Z,.,  vol.  3  (1890).

Kennedy,  R.  E.,     Black  Cameos  (N.  Y.,  1924).

Kennedy,  R.  E.,     Mellows  (N.  Y.,  1925).

KiNGSLEY,  (Miss)  M.  H.,  Travels  in  West  Africa.  (N.  Y.,
1899.)

KiNGSLEY,  (Miss)  M.  H.,     West  African  Studies.     (N.  Y.,  1899) .

Klaatsch,  Hermann,  The  Evolution  and  Progress  of  Mankind.
Tr.  J.  McCabe.     (London,  1923).

Knowlson,  T.  S.,  The  Origins  of  Popular  Superstitions
and   Customs.     (London,  T.  Werner  Laurie).

Koelle,  Sigismund  W.,  African  Native  Literature,  or  Proverbs^
Tales,  Fables,  and  Historical  Fragments  in  the  Kanuri  or  Bornu
Language.     (London,  1854).

Krehbiel,  H.  E.,     Afro-American  Folksongs.     (N.  Y.,  1914).

Lammert,  G.,  Volksmedizin  und  medizinischer  Aberglaube  in
Bayern.     (Wurzburg,  1869).

Lean,  Vincent  S.,  Lean's  Collectanea,  5  vols.  (London,
1902).

Leather,  Ella  M.,  The  Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire.  (Lon-
don, 1912).

Lee,  C,  Some  Negro  Lore  from  Baltimore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5
(1892).

Lehmann,  a.,  Aberglaube  und  Zauberei,  Tr.  Peterson.  (Stutt-
gart, 1898).


592     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Leitner,  (Mrs.)  E.  H.,     See  Backus  and  Leltner.

Leonard,  A.  G.,  The  Lower  Niger  and  lis  Tribes.  (London,
1906).

LippERT,  J.,  Kulturgeschichte  der  Menschheit,  2  Bande.  (Stutt-
gart, 1887).

Lippincoti' s  Monthly  Magazine.

LiVERMORE,  Mary  A.,  My  Story  of  the  War.  (Hartford,
Conn.,  1891).

Livingstone,  D.,  Missionary  Travels  and  Researches  in  South
Africa.     (London,  1857).

Lomax,  J.  A.,  Stories  of  an  African  Prince,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  26
(1913).

Lopez,  V.,     Article  in  the  Etude,  vol.  xlii  (1924).

Lyell,  (Sir)  Charles,  A  Second  Visit  to  the  United  States  of
North  America,  2  vols.     (New  York,  1894).

Lyell,  (Sir)  Charles,  Travels  in  North  America  in  the  Years
1841-1842,  vol.   i.     (N.  Y.,   1845).

M.  S.  P.  (Mrs.),  Voodooism  in  Tennessee,  Atlantic  Monthly,
vol.  64  (1899).

Maddox,  John  L.,     The  Medicine  Man.     (N.  Y.,  1923).

M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,     Memoirs  of  the  American  Folk-Lore  Society.

Malcolm,  L.  W.  G.,  Short  Notes  on  Soul  Trapping  in  Southern
Nigeria,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  35  (1922).

Marriott,  H.  P.  F.,  The  Secret  Societies  of  West  Africa,
J.  A.  I.,  vol.  29  (1899).

Marshall,  (Sir)  G.,  On  the  Natives  of  the  Gold  Coast,  J.  A.  I.,
vol.  16  (1887).

Mason,  O.  T.,  Woman's  Share  in  Primitive  Culture.  (N.  Y.,
1894).

McCullough,  J.  E.,  The  Human  Way.  (2d  ed.  Washing-
ton, 1918).

McDonald,  G.,  The  Gold  Coast — Past  and  Present.  (N.  Y.,
1898).

McLennan,  Marcia,  Origin  of  the  Cat;  a  Negro  Tale,  J .  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  11  (1898).


References   Cited  593

Meikleham,  R.,     a  Negro  Ballad,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  26  (1913).

Metropolitan  Magazine.

Meyer,    E.   H.,     Deutsche    Volkskunde.     (Strassburg,    1898).

MiLLiGAN,  Robert  H.,  The  Fetish  Folk  of  West  Africa.
(London,  1912).

Minor,  Mary  Y.,  How  to  Keep  off  Witches,  J .  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  2  (1898).

MoLLiEU,  G.,  Travels  in  the  Interior  of  Africa  to  the  Sources
of  the  Senegal  and  Gambia.     (London,  1820).

Moore,  Ruby  A.,  Superstitions  from  Georgia,  J.  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  7  (1894).

Morals  and  Manners  Among  Negro  Americans.  Atlanta
University    Publications,    No.    18.     (Atlanta,    Ga.,    1914).

Nassau,   R.  H.,     Fetichism  in   West  Africa.     (N.  Y.,    1904).

Nassau,    R.    H.,     Where   Animals    Talk.     (London,    1914).

Negro  Dances  in  Arkansas,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  1  (1888).

Negro  Superstitions  Concerning  the  Violin,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  5
(1892).

Negro  Year  Book.  (M.  H.  Work,  Tuskeegee  Institute,
Alabama).

Newell,  W.  W.,  The  Ignis  Fatuus — Its  Character  and  Legen-
dary Origin,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  17  (1904).

Newell,  W.  W.,  Myths  of  Voodoo  Worship  and  Child  Sacrifice
in  Hayti.     Ibid.,  vol.  1  (1888).

Newell,  W.  W.,  Negro  Superstitions  of  European  Origin,
Ibid.,  vol.  12  (1899).

Newell,  W.  W.,  Reports  of  Voodoo  Worship  in  Hayti  and
Louisiana,  Ibid.,  vol.  2  (1889).

NoTT,  G.  W.,  Marie  Laveau,  Times  Picayune.  (New  Orleans,
La.,  Nov.  19,  1922).

Odum,  Anna  K.,  Some  Negro  Folk-Songs  from  Tennessee,
J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  27  (1914).

Odum,  H.  W.,     Negro  Hymn,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.   26   (1913).


38


594     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Odum,  H.   W.    (and  Johnson,   G.   B.),     The  Negro    and  His
Songs.     (Chapel  Hill,  N.  C,  1925).

Opportunity.

Origins  and  Interpretations  of  Primitive  Religions.     Edinburgh
Review,  vol.  186  (1897).

Owen,   (Miss)   Mary  A.,     Among   the   Voodoos,   I.  F.   L.   C,
(1891).

Owen,  (Miss)  Mary  A.,  Pig  Tail  Charley,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  16
(1903).

Owen,  (Miss)  Mary  A.,     Voodoo  Tales.     (N.  Y.,  1893).

Packwood,  (Mrs.)  L.  H.  C,  Cure  for  an  Aching  Tooth,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  13  (1900).

Park,  Mungo,  Travels  in  the  Interior  Districts  of  Africa,
(2d  ed.     London,  1799).

Park,  R.  E.,  The  Conflict  and  Fusion  of  Cultures  with  Special
Reference  to  the  Negro,  Journal  Negro  History,  vol.  4  (1919).

Park,  R.  E.,  Magic,  Mentality,  and  City  Life,  Publications  of
the  American  Sociological  Society,  vol.   18  (1924).

Parsons,  (Mrs.)  Elsie  C.  (and  Bacon,  (Miss)  A.  M.),  Folk-
Lore  from  Elizabeth  City  County,  Virginia,  J .  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  35
(1922).

Parsons,  (Mrs.)  Elsie  C,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,  South
Carolina,  M.  A.  F.  L.  S.,  vol.  16  (1923).

Parsons,  (Mrs.)  Elsie  C,  Folk-Tales  Collected  at  Miami,
Florida,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  30  (1917).

Parsons,  (Mrs.)  Elsie  C,  Tales  from  Guilford  County,  North
Carolina,  Ibid.

Pendleton,  L.,  Notes  on  Negro  Folk-Lore  and  Witchcraft  in
the  South,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  3  (1890).

Percy  Society,  vol.  20.     (London,  1846).

Perkins,  A.  E.,  Negro  Spirituals  from  the  Far  Sotith,  J.  A.
F.  L.,  vol.  35  (1922).

Peschel,  O.,      The  Races  of  Man.     (New  York,  1876).

Phillips,  R.  C,  The  Lower  Congo;  a  Sociological  Study,
J.  A.  I.,  vol.  17  (1888).

Picayune'' s  Guide  to  Nezv  Orleans.     (New  Orleans,   1896).


References  Cited  595

PiNKERTON,  J.,     Collection  of  Voyages,  17  vols.  (1808-1814).

Pitkin,  Helen,     An  Angel  by    Brevet.     (Philadelphia,  1904).

Ploss,  H.,  Das  Kind  in  Branch  und  Sitte  der  Volker,  vol.  ii.
(2d  ed.     Leipsic,  1884).

Popular  Science  Monthly.

Price,  Sadie  F.,  Kentucky  Folk-Lore,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  14
(1901).

Publications   of  the   American   Economic   Association.

Publications  of  the  American  Sociological  Society.

Publications  of  the  Folk-Lore  Society.

Publications  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.  Series  in  Polit-
ical Economy  and  Public  Law,  No.  14.

Puckett,  N.  N.,  The  Negro  Church  in  the  United  States,  Social
Forces,  vol.  4  (1926).

Puckett,  N.  N.,  Race  Pride  and  Folk-Lore,  Opportunity,  vol.  4
(1926).

Race  Problems  of  the  South.  Report  of  the  Proceedings  of  the
First  Annual  Conference  of  the  Southern  Society  for  the  Pro-
motion of  the  Study  of  Race  Conditions  and  Problems  in  the
South.     (Montgomery,  Alabama,  1900).

Rattray,  R.  S.,     Ashanti  Proverbs.     (Oxford,  1916).

Ratzel,  F.,     History  of  Mankind,  3  vol.  ed.     (London,  1898).

Religious  Folk  Songs  of  the  Negro.     (Hampton,  Virginia,  1924).

Richardson,  C,  Some  Slave  Superstitions,  Southern  Work-
man, vol.  41  (1912).

Romanes,  G.  J.,     Mental  Evolution  in  Man.     (N.  Y.,   1889).

Sadler,  W.  S.,  Ways  to  Work  out  Your  Own  Mind  Cure,
American  Magazine,  vol.  xcviii  (1924).

Scarborough,  Dorothy,  On  the  Trail  of  Negro  Folk-Songs.
(Cambridge,  Mass.,  1925).

Schwab,  G.,     Bulu  Folk-Tales,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  27  (1914).

Scientific  Monthly.

Seymour,  W.  H.,  A  Voudou  Story,  Daily  Picayune.  (New
Orleans,   La.,  July  3,   1892).

Showers,  Susie  B.,  Alabama  Folk-Lore,  Southern  Workman,
vol.  29  (1900).

Sikes,  Wirt,     British  Goblins.     (London,  1880).


596     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Simpson,    B.    L.    (Weale,    B.   L.   Putnam),     The   Conflict  of
Colour.     (N.  Y.,  1910).

Simpson,  Eve  B.,     Folk-Lore  in  Lowland  Scotland.     (London,
1908).

SiNAGO,  C.  K.,     See  Boas,  F.

Sinclair,  C,     See  Barker,  W.  H.

Skinner,  Charles  M.,     Myths  and  Legends  of  Our  Own  Land.
(Philadelphia,  1898).

Smiley,    Portia,     Folk-Lore  from    Virginia,    South    Carolina,
Georgia,  Alabama,  and  Florida,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  32  (1919).

Smith,  Clay,     Article  in  the  Etude,  vol.  xliii  (1924).

Snyder,  H.  A.,     Paradise  Negro  School,  Yale  Review,  vol.  xi
(1921).

Social  Forces.

Snyder,  H.  A.,     A  Plantation  Revival  Service,   Ibid.,  vol.   x
(1920).

Southern   Workman  and  Hampton   School  Record.     (Hampton,
Virginia).

Speers,  Mary  W.  F.,     Article  in  /.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  26  (1913).

Spiller,  G.,     Inter-Racial  Problems.     (London,  1911).

Steiner,    R.,     Braziel    Robinson    Possessed    of    Two    Spirits,
J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  13  (1900).

Steiner,    R.,     Observations   on    the   Practice   of  Conjuring   in
Georgia,  Ibid.,  vol.  14  (1901).

Steiner,  R.,     Sol  Lockhart's  Call,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  13  (1900).

Steiner,  R.,     Superstitions  and  Beliefs  from  Central  Georgia,
Ibid.,  vol.  12  (1899).

Steiner  R.,     Superstitious  Beliefs  from  Central  Georgia,  Ibid.

Stokes,    (Rev.)   A.  J.,      The  Negro  of  Antebellum  and  Recon-
struction Days,  Home  and  Foreign  Fields,  vol.  8  (1924).

Stone,  A.  H.,     Studies  in  the  American  Race  Problem.     (N.  Y.,
1908).

Sumner,  W.  G.,     Folkways.     (Boston,  1907).

Superstitions  of  Negroes  in  New  Orleans,  J .  A.  F.  L.,  vol.   5
(1892).


References  Cited  597

Talbot,  D.  Amaury,  Woman's  Mysteries  of  a  Primitive
People.     (London,  1915).

Talley,  T.  W.,     Negro  Folk  Rhymes.     (N.  Y.,  1922).

Thanet,  Octave,  Folk-Lore  in  Arkansas,  J.  A.  F.  Z,.,  vol.  5
(1892).

Thomas,  Daniel  L.  and  Thomas,  Lucy  B.,  Kentucky
Superstitions.     (Princeton,  N.  J.,  1920).

Thomas,  N.  W.,  Anthropological  Report  on  Sierra  Leone,
Part  i.  Law  and  Customs  of  the  Timne  and  other  Tribes.  (Lon-
don, 1916).

Thomson,  J.,  Notes  on  the  African  Tribes  of  the  British  Em-
pire, J.  A.  /.,  vol.  16  (1887).

TiLLiNGHAST,  J.  A.,  The  Negro  in  Africa  and  America.  Pub-
lications of  the  American  Economic  Association,  3d  series,  vol.  3
(N.  Y.,  and  London,  1902).

Times  Picayune.     (New  Orleans,  La.).

TowNE,  Laura  H.,  Pioneer  Work  on  the  Sea  Islands,  South-
ern Workman,  vol.  30  (1901).

TozzER,  A.  M.,  Social  Origins  and  Social  Continuities.  (N.  Y.,
1925).

Two  Negro  Tales  Concerning  the  Jay,  Southern  Workman,
vol.  27  (1898).

Tylor,  E.  B.,     Anthropology.     (N.  Y.,  1881).

Tylor,  E.  B.,     Primitive  Culture,  2  vols.  .(N.  Y.,  1883).

Waitz,  T.,  Anthropologie  der  Naturvolker,  vol.  2  (Leipsic,
1860).

Ward,  Henry  W.,     See  Cronise,  Florence  M.

Waring,  Mary  A.,  Mortuary  Customs  and  Beliefs  of  South
Carolina  Negroes,  J.  A.  F.  L.,  vol.  7  (1894).

Waring,  Mary  A.,  Negro  Superstitions'  in  South  Carolina,
Ibid.,  vol.  8   (1895).

Washington,  Booker  T.,  The  Rural  Negro  Community.
Annals  American  Academy  of  Political  and  Social  Science,  vol.  xl
(1912).

Washington,  Booker  T.,     Up  From  Slavery.     (N.  Y.,  1906).


598     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Weale,  B.  L.  Putman,     See  Simpson,  B.  L.

Weatherford,  W.  D.,      The  Negro  From  Africa  to  America,
(N.  Y.,  1924).

Weatherford,  W.  D.,     Negro  Lije  in  the  South.     (N.  Y.,  1911).,

Weatherford,    W.    D.,     Present    Forces    in    Negro    Progress.
(N.  Y.,  1912).

Weeks,    (Rev.)   J.    H.,     Among    Congo   Cannibals.     (London,
1913).

White,  Andrew  D.,     A  History  of  the  Warfare  of  Science  with
Theology  in  Christendom,  2  vol.     (N.  Y.,  1903).

Whitman,   Paul,     What  is  Jazz  Doing  to  American  Musict
Etude,  vol.  xlii  (1924).

Wilberforce,  W.,     The  Abolition  of  the  Slave  Trade.     (Lon-
don, 1807).

Williamson,  G.,     Superstitions  from  Louisiana,  J .  A.  F.  L.,
vol.  18  (1905).

Wilson,    (Rev.)   J.   L.,     Western   Africa.     (London,    1856).

Wiltse,  H.  M.,     a  Hoodoo  Charm,  J.  a.  F.  L.,  vol.  13  (1900).

Wiltse,   H.   M.,     In   the  Field  of  Southern  Folk-Lore,   Ibid.,
vol.  14  (1901).

Witemberg,    W.    J.,     Items    of   German-Canadian    Folk-Lore,
Ibid.,  vol.   12   (1899).

Winterbottom,  T.,     An  Account  of  the  Native  Africans  in  the
Neighborhood  of  Sierra   Leone.     (London,  1803).

Work,  M.  H.,     Negro   Year  Book.

Work,  M.  H.,     Some  Geechee  Folk-Lore,  Southern   Workman,
vol.  35  (1905).

Yale  Review.

Yearbook  U.  S.  Department  of  Agriculture.     (1912).


LIST  OF  INFORMANTS

(Colleges  in  Italics)

(1)  O.  N.  Abrington,  Jefferson  City,  Mo.;  (2)  Mrs.  L.  Acker,  Columbus,
Miss.;  (3)  Beatrice  Adams,  Vicksburg,  Miss.;  (4)  Albany  Normal  School,
Albany,  Ga.;  (5)  Earnestine  Albergottie,  Burton,  S.  C;  (6)  Alcorn  Agri-
cultural and  Mechanical  College,  Alcorn,  Miss.;  (7)  Earnestine  Allen,  Burton,
S.  C;  (8)  Ishmael  Allen,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (9)  Allen  Normal  School,  Thomas-
ville,  Ga.;  (10)  Mr.  S.  H.  Allison,  New  Orleans,  La.;  (11)  Aaron  J.  Anderson,
Keysville,  Ga.;  (12)  Fred  Armstrong,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (13)  Lucille  Armstrong,
Piney   Woods,   Miss.;   (14)   Atlanta   University,   Atlanta,   Ga.;   (15)   Professor

A.  J.  Aven,  Clinton,  Miss.

(16)  Carutha  Baker,  Jefferson  City,  Mo.;  (17)  Annie  R.  Baldwin,  Keysville,
Ga.;  (18)  Mrs.  John  P.  Baldwin,  Baldwin,  La.;  (19)  Baptist  Industrial  High
School,  Hernando,  Miss.;  (20)  Corene  Barfield,  Thomasville,  Ga.;  (21)  Alfred
Barnes,  Southland,  Ark.;  (22)  Earnestine  Barnett,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (23)
Willie  Barnett,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (24)  James  Barnie,  Atlanta,  Ga.;  (25)  Emma

B.  Bayne,  Vicksburg,  Miss.;  (26)  Theodore  H.  Bazel,  Louisville,  Ky.;  (27)
Jefferson  Beauer,  Southland,  Ark.;  (28)  Beaufort  County  Training  School,
Burton,  S.  C;  (29)  Vivian  Bell,  Athens,  Ala.;  (30)  Beatrice  Bennett,  Calhoun,
Ala.;  (31)  Edward  Blair,  Burton,  S.  C;  (32)  Cap  Blanks,  Columbus,  Miss.;
(33)  Miss  Lyda  Boyd  Blount,  Water  Valley,  Miss.;  (34)  Boggs  Academy,
Keysville,  Ga.;  (35)  Bernice  Boldridge,  Piney  Woods,  Miss.;  (36)  Ada  Boiling,
Calhoun,  Ala.;  (37)  Sarah  Bond,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (38)  Daniel  Bottler,  Atlanta,
Ga.;  (39)  Dorothy  Bowles,  Jefferson  City,  Mo.;  (40)  Mrs.  Alice  Boyd,  Kos-
ciusko, Miss.;  (41)  Mr.  Steve  Boyd,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (42)  Mrs.  Virginia
Frazer  Boyle,  Memphis,  Tenn.;  (43)  Mr.  P.  A.  Brannon,  Montgomery,  Ala.;
(44)  Ira  L.  Brazile,  Jr.,  Atlanta,  Ga.;  (45)  Viola  Briggs,  Columbus,  Miss.;
(46)  Susie  B.  Brooks,  Bunkie,  La.;  (47)  William  Brooks,  Columbus,  Miss.;
(48)  Wiley  Brewer,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (49)  Dorothy  Brown,  Vicksburg,  Miss.;
(50)  Louise  Brown,  Burton,  S.  C;  (51)  Marie  Brown,  Burton,  S.  C;  (52)
Hattie  Bryant,  Keysville,  Ga.;  (53)  M.  R.  Bryant,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (54)
Robert  Bryant,  New  Orleans,  La.;  (55)  Jesse  Buck,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (56)
Bunkie  Academy,  Bunkie,  La.;  (57)  Matthew  Butler,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (58)
Bertha    Bush,    Ft.   Vallev,   Ga.

(59)  Miss  M.  Calfee,  Pulaski,  Va.;  (60)  Deliah  Calvin,  Columbus,  Miss.;
(61)  Calhoun  Colored  School,  Calhoun,  Ala.;  (62)  Miss  Catherine  Campbell,
Columbus,  Miss.;  (63)  Lorena  Cannon,  Atlanta,  Ga.;  (64)  Mr.  E.  J.  Carr,
Clinton,  Miss.;  (65)  Robert  Carr,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (66)  Consuella  Carter,
Piney  Woods,  Miss.;  (67)  Mary  Carter,  Hawkinsville,  Ga.;  (68)  Central
Mississippi  College,  Kosciusko,  Miss.;  (69)  Augustus  C.  Chambers,  Atlanta,
Ga.;  (70)  Mr.  Edward  Chapman,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (71)  Mattie  B.  Charmlin,
Thomasville,  Ga.;  (72)  Pleasant  Ridge  Missionary  Baptist  Church,  Columbus,
Miss.;  (73)  Sallie  Clark,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (74)  Sam  Clark,  Columbus,  Miss.;
(75)  Elbert  Cobb,  Piney  Woods,  Miss.;  (76)  Laura  Cobb,  Piney  Woods,  Miss.;
(77)  Elizabeth  Cochran,  Burton,  S.  C;  (78)  Reba  Cook,  Institute,  Ala.;
{79)  Ruth  Cooke,  Alcorn,  Miss.;  (80)  Lucille  Corbett,  Thomasville,  Ga.;
(81)  OUie  Co.\,  Hernando,  Miss.;  (82)  Vanzie  Creshon,  Piney  Woods,  Miss.;
(83)  Willie  B.  Crocker,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (84)  A.  R.  Crusou,  Sr.,  Columbus,
Miss.;  (85)  Erline  L.  Cureton,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (86)  Professor  J.  E.  Cutler,
Cleveland,  Ohio.

(87)  Beatrice  Davis,  Thomasville,  Ga.;  (88)  Cornelia  Davis,  Vicksburg,
Miss.;   (89)   Fred   Davis,   Calhoun,   Ala.;   (90)   Henry   Dawson,   Willoughby,


600       Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

Ohio.;  (91)  Frank  Dickerson,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (92)  Lucille  Dickerson,  Ft.
Valley,  Ga.;  (93)  Miss  Allene  Dicks,  Natchez,  Miss.;  (94)  Ruth  Dilbert,
Burton,  S.  C;  (95)  Mattie  L.  Dillard,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (96)  W.  Eugene  Dobun,
Atlanta,  Ga.;  (97)  Augusta  Donaldson,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (98)  William  Donnerly,
Atlanta,  Ga.;  (99)  Esque  Douglas,  Jefferson  City,  Mo.;  (100)  Iccil  Dunn,
Piney  Woods,  Miss.;  (101)  S.  B.  Dyer,  Columbus,  Miss.

(102)  Isaiah  Edwards,  Alcorn,  Miss.;  (103)  Alonzo  Evans,  Columbus,
Miss.;  (104)  Thomas  Evans,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (105)  Mr.  Jeff  Eubanks,
Clinton,  Miss.

(106)  Edward  Ferguson,  Jr.,  Albany,  Ga.;  (107)  Willis  Fields,  Columbus,
Miss.;  (108)  Walter  Flowers,  Piney  Woods,  Miss.;  (109)  Bertha  Fogg,  Ft.  Val-
ley, Ga.;  (110)  Henry  Ford,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (Ill)  Ft.  Valley  High  and  In-
dustrial School,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (112)  Rena  Franks,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (113)
Joseph  Fuller,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (114)  Howard  Fultz,  Southland,  Ark.

(115)  Professor  F.  P.  Gaines,  Greenville,  S.  C;  (116)  Mr.  George  W.  Gar-
ner, Clinton,  Miss.;  (117)  Virgil  Gavin,  Jefferson  City,  Mo.;  (118)  Miss  Lucille
Geddes,  Natchez,  Miss.;  (119)  T.  A.  Gentry,  Jr.,  Atlanta,  Ga.;  (120)  Marie
Gibbs,  Burton,  S.  C.;  (121)  Duly  Gilbert,  Thomasville,  Ga.;  (122)  Annie
Mae  Givens,  Keysville,  Ga.;  (123)  Howard  Givens,  Keysville,  Ga.;  (124)
Alf  Goodman,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (125)  Bernice  Gordon,  Burton,  S.  C;  (126)
Ocidee  Gordon,  Thomasville,  Ga.;  (127)  Arizona  B.  Graham,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;
(128)  Mrs.  C.  Bullet  Grant,  New  Orleans,  La.;  (129)  Eloise  Grant,  Burton,
S.  C;  (130)  Florence  Grant,  Burton,  S.  C;  (131)  Irene  L.  Griffin,  Thomas-
ville, Ga.;  (132)  I.  E.  Griffin,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (133)  Elsie  Guilford,  Burton,
S.  C.

(134)  Andrew  R.  Hall,  Thomasville,  Ga.;  (135)  Leavima  Hall,  Calhoun,
Ala.;  (136)  James  Hardy,  Calhoun,  Ala.;  (137)  Mr.  John  Hardy,  Columbus,
Miss.;  (138)  Agnes  M.  Harne,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (139)  Rosa  Harrell,  Ft.  Valley,
Ga.;  (140)  Alfred  Harris,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (141)  Hattie  Harris,  Columbus,
Miss.;  (142)  Lou  Hatch,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (143)  Walter  Haughton,  Columbus,
Miss.;  (144)  George  C.  Henderson,  Chase  City,  Va.;  (145)  Miss  Katherine
Henley,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (146)  Orline  Hicks,  Calhoun,  Ala.;  (147)  Blanche
L.  Hollis,  Calhoun,  Ala.;  (148)  Daisy  Hollinshead,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (149)
Will  Holloway,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (150)  Grace  Holmes,  Atlanta,  Ga.;  (151)
Gladys  Holsey,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (152)  W.  H.  Holtzclaw,  Utica,  Miss.;  (153)
Bee  Hood,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (154)  Johnnie  Howards,  Calhoun,  Ala.;  (155)
Miss  Margaret  Howell,  Canton,  Miss.;  (156)  Eulalia  Hubbard,  Jefferson  City,
Mo.;  (157)  Janie  Hunt,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (158)  Maude  Hunter,  Ft.  Valley,
Ga.;  (159)  W.  H.  Hughes,  Jefferson  City,  Mo.

(160)  Eddie  J.  Iron,  Columbus,  Miss.

(161)  Beatrice  L.  Jackson,  Piney  Woods,  Miss.;  (162)  Miss  Marion  Jackson,
Columbus,  Miss.;  (163)  Mary  Jackson,  Burton,  S.  C;  (164)  Roy  D.  Jackson,
Atlanta,  Ga.;  (165)  Viola  Jackson,  Burton,  S.  C;  (166)  Ida  James,  Ft.  Valley,
Ga.;  (167)  Dr.  T.  V.  James,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (168)  Cleo  Jefferson,  Ft.  Valley,
Ga.;  (169)  Maude  Jefferson,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (170)  Will  Jenkins,  Columbus,
Miss.;  (171)  Miss  Alice  j'ohnson,  McComb,  Miss.;  (172)  Fred  L.  Johnson,
Atlanta,  Ga.;  (173)  Joel  Johnson,  Jefferson  City,  Mo.;  (174)  Louis  Johnson,
Columbus,  Miss.;  (175)  Madge  Johnson,  Piney  Woods,  Miss.;  (176)  Mamie
Johnson,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (177)  Ollie  J.  Johnson,  Keysville,  Ga.;  (178)  Rosetta
B.  Johnson,  Bunkie,  La.;  (179)  Eddie  R.  Jones,  Calhoun,  Ala.;  (180)  Flora
Jones,  Calhoun,  Ala.;  (181)  Maggie  Jones,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (182)  Lorenzo
Jordan,  Thomasville,  Ga.

(183)  Jesse  L.  Kennedy,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (184)  Minnie  King,  Thomasville,
Ga.;  (185)  Preston  King,  Bunkie,  La.;  (186)  Arthur  Kla,  Keysville,  Ga.;
(187)  Miss  V.  M.  Kloss,  Aiken,  S.  C;  (188)  Knox  Academy,  Selma,  Ala.;
(189)   Knoxville  College,   Knoxville,   Tenn.

(190)  Richard  Lang,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (191)  Miss  Clara  D.  Langford,
Columbus,  Miss.;  (192)  Ella  Mae  Lashley,  Piney  Woods,  Miss.;  (193)  Maggie


List  of  Informants  601

Latham,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (194)  Mrs.  M.  Latimer,  Clinton,  Miss.;  (195)
Millard  Lawrence,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (196)  Royal  L.  Lawrence,  Atlanta,  Ga.;
(197)  Mr.  W.  T.  Lawrence,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (198)  George  Ledgyard,  Cal-
houn, Ala.;  (199)  Annie  Lee,  Athens,  Ala.;  (200)  Mr.  J.  B.  Leech,  Clinton,
Miss.;  (201)  J.  B.  Lehman,  Edwards,  Miss.;  (202)  Lessie  Lincoln,  Athens,
Ala.;  (203)  Lincoln  Institute,  Jefferson  City,  Mo.;  (204)  Lincoln  Normal  and
Industrial  School,  Marion,  Ala.;  (205)  Mr.  Sam  Lindamood,  Columbus,  Miss.;
(206)  Pauline  Little,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (207)  Erma  Littleton,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;
(208)  Luvada  Lockhart,  Piney  Woods,  Miss.;  (209)  Gertrude  Lofton,  Ft.
Valley,  Ga.;  (210)  Mr.  J.  A.  Logan,  Clinton,  Miss.;  (211)  Annie  Lee  Long,
Calhoun,  Ala.;  (212)  Harriet  Louville,  Calhoun,  Ala.;  (213)  Col.  W.  A.  Love,
Columbus,  Miss.;  (214)  Mrs.  Laura  Loyd,  Aberdeen,  Miss.;  (215)  Mary  L.
Lucas,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (216)  Clara  Luckett,  Calhoun,  Ala.;  (217)  S.  S.  Lynch,
Kosciusko,  Miss.

(218)  Annie  Mae,  Athens,  Ga.;  (219)  Murphy  Magee,  Piney  Woods,  Miss.;
(220)  Clara  E.  Mainer,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (221)  Will  Manning,  Columbus,  Miss.;
(222)  Ambrose  Maples,  Athens,  Ala.;  (223)  Bertha  Martin,  Burton,  S.  C;
(224)  Mary  Allen  Seminary,  Crockett,  Texas;  (225)  George  Mason,  Columbus,
Miss.;  (226)  Helen  Mason,  Bunkie,  La.;  (227)  Odelle  Mason,  Athens,  Ala.;
(228)  W.  H.  Mayfield,  Alcorn,  iMiss.;  (229)  Viola  McCall,  Calhoun,  Ala.;
(230)  Inez  McCarthy,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (231)  Mary  E.  McCleod,  Ft.  Valley,
Ga.;  (232)  Miss  Amanda  McCormick,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (233)  Annie  McCuller,
Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (234)  T.  O.  Mcjunkin,  Hernando,  Miss.;  (235)  Annie  Mae
McKinney,  Piney  Woods,  Miss.;  (236)  Charles  McPherson,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;
(237)  Eddie  M.  Means,  Calhoun,  Ala.;  (238)  Beulah  Miller,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;
(239)  Deborah  Miller,  Thomasville,  Ga.;  (240)  Fannie  M.  Miller,  Ft.  Valley,
Ga.;  (241)  Houser  A.  Miller,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (242)  Mrs.  J.  H.  Miller,  Aber-
deen, Miss.;  (243)  Lucy  Miller,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (244)  Twain  Miller,  Columbus,
Miss.;  (245)  Mr.  W.  H.  Miller,  Clinton,  Miss.;  (246)  Caroline  Mimms,  Colum-
bus, Miss.;  (247)  Gladys  Minor,  Thomasville,  Ga.;  (248)  Mississippi  College,
Clinton,  Miss,  (white);  (249)  Mississippi  State  College  for  Women,  Columbus,
Miss,  (white);  (250)  Beatrice  Mitchell,  Keysville,  Ga.;  (251)  Miss  Lena
Mitchell,  Natchez,  Miss.;  (252)  Vivian  A4itchell,  Thomasville,  Ga.;  (253)
Will  Moore,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (254)  Moorehouse  College,  Atlanta,  Ga.;  (255)
Mr.  J.  A.  Morton,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (256)  Mount  Herman  Seminary,  Clinton,
Miss.;  (257)  Lucy  Mullen,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (258)  Ed  Murphy,  Columbus,
Miss.

(259)  Laura  Newcome,  Ft.  Vallev,  Ga.;  (260)  Squire  Newcome,  Ft.  Valley,
Ga.

(261)  Rev.  J.  A.  Ousley,  Tutwiler,  Miss.

(262)  Professor  L.  G.  Painter,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (263)  Zannie  Palmer,
Calhoun,  Ala.;  (264)  Daisv  Paschal,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (265)  D.  Patton,  Cal-
houn, Ala.;  (266)  Mrs.  L.  J.  Pauley,  Cleveland,  Ohio;  (267)  Julia  Payne,
Piney  Woods,  Miss.;  (268)  Richard  M.  Payne,  Calhoun,  Ala.;  (269)  Mr.
James  B.  Pelletier,  New  Orleans,  La.;  (270)  Mabel  Pendergast,  Vicksburg,
Miss.;  (271)  Ella  Penrose,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (272)  William  Perkins,  Atlanta,
Ga.;  (273)  John  Pettigrew,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (274)  Grace  Phelps,  Keysville,
Ga.;  (275)  Piney  Woods  Country  Life  School,  Piney  Woods,  Miss.;  (276)  Ida
M.  Pions,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (277)  Mrs.  Helen  Pitkin  (Schertz),  New  Orleans,
La.;  (278)  Mrs.  C.  E.  Pitts,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (279)  Miss  Elizabeth  Pitts,
Columbus,  Miss.;  (280)  Amos  Poole.  Calhoun,  Ala.;  (281)  Mrs.  Alice  Posev,
Aberdeen,  Miss.;  (282)  Otis  L.  Powell,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (283)  Mabel  Prewe'r,
Thomasville,  Ga.:  (284)  Julia  Prewitt,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (285)  Emmelina
Price,  Calhoun,  Ala.;  (286)  Noah  Prowell,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (287)  Mr.  Allen
B.  Puckett,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (288)  Mrs.  Allen  B.  Puckett,  Columbus,  Miss.;


602     Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro

(289)  Mr.  Andrew  C.  Puckett,  Clinton,  Miss.;  (290)  Mr.  Houston  R.  Puckett,
Columbus,  Miss.;  (291)  Mr.  Jason  Niles  Puckett,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (292)
Mrs.  Mary  Puckett,  Aberdeen,  Miss.;  (293)  Miss  Mary  Alice  Puckett,  Colum-
bus, Miss.;  (294)  Miss  Miriam  Puckett,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (295)  Mrs.  Newbell
N.  Puckett,  Cleveland,  Ohio,;  (296)  Mr.  Willis  L.  Puckett,  Columbus,  Miss.;
(297)  Mr.  W.  N.  Puckett,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (298)  Mrs.  W.  N.  Puckett,  Colum-
bus, Miss.

(299)  Theresa  Rambo,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (300)  Mrs.  F.  A.  Randall,  Will-
oughby,  Ohio.;  (301)  Virginia  Redic,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (302)  Eleanor  Redus,
Athens,  Ala.;  (303)  Milton  Reeves,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (304)  F.  W.  Reynolds,
Atlanta,  Ga.;  (305)  A.  B.  Rice,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (306)  Ben  Rice,  Columbus,
Miss.;  (307)  Dennis  Rice,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (308)  Adam  J.  Richardson,
Thomasville,  Ga.;  (309)  Dorothy  Rinlis,  Burton,  S.  C;  (310)  Corine  Rober-
son,  Keysville,  Ga.;  (311)  Mary  Robinson,  Calhoun,  Ala.;  (312)  Rosa  Robin-
son. Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (313)  Inez  Rogers,  Ft.  Vallev,  Ga.;  (314)  Preston  Roper,
Calhoun,  Ala.;  (315)  Annie  Rozier,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (316)  Emory  L.  Russell,
Ft.  Valley,  Ga.

(317)  Kutha  Sampson,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (318)  L  M.  Saunders,  Ft.  Valley,
Ga.;  (319)  Mr.  T.  H.  Schaifer,  Clinton,  Miss.;  (320)  Miss  Etoile  Scofield,
Columbus,  Miss.;  (321)  Hattie  H.  Scott,  Burton,  S.  C;  (322)  Garo  Shambly,
Columbus,  Miss.;  (323)  Thelma  C.  Shanklin,  Burton,  S.  C;  (324)  Charity
Sherrod,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (325)  Isabelle  Sherrod,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (326)
Amzi  Sherron,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (327)  Velma  Sibley,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (328)
J.  W.  Silas,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (329)  Miss  Ruth  Simison,  Clinton,  Miss.;
(330)  Bessie  Simmons,  Burton,  S.  C;  (331)  M.  J.  Slaughter,  Piney  Woods,
Miss.;  (332)  Dewitt  Smith,  Thomasville,  Ga.;  (333)  Mrs.  G.  G.  Smith,  New
Orleans,  La.;  (334)  George  L.  Smith,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (335)  Poliva  Smith,
Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (336)  Rosa  L.  O.  Smith,  Bunkie,  La.;  (337)  Marie  Sneed,
Burton,  S.  C;  (338)  Snow  Hill  Normal  and  Industrial  School,  Snow  Hill,  Ala.;
(339)  Gladys  M.  Soloman,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (340)  Jimmie  G.  Soloman,  Ft.
Valley,  Ga.;  (341)  Southland  Institute,  Southland,  Ark.;  (342)  Julia  Sparks,
Columbus,  Miss.;  (343)  Marion  Stanfield,  Burton,  S.  C;  (344)  Qeither  Y.
Stanfield,  Calhoun,  Ala.;  (345)  Mrs.  E.  B.  Stinson,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (346)
E.  D.  Stockhouse,  Jefferson  City,  Mo.;  (347)  Hershey  H.  Strong,  Atlanta,
Ga.;   (348)    Mr.   Walter   Swoope,   Columbus,   Miss.

(349)  Miss  Elizabeth  Tabb,  Houston,  Miss.;  (350)  L.  B.  Tates,  Columbus,
Miss.;  (351)  Louise  E.  J.  Taylor,  Jefferson  City,  Mo.;  (352)  Otis  Taylor,  Keys-
ville, Ga.;  (353)  Pink  Temple,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (354)  Adline  Thomas,  Cal-
houn, Ala.;  (355)  Alice  Thomas,  Calhoun,  Ala.;  (356)  Amanda  Thomas,  Ft.
Valley,  Ga.;  (357)  Evelyn  N.  Thomas,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (358)  Miss  Genie
Thomas,  Columbus,  A4iss.;  (359)  John  Thomas,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (360)
Velma  C.  Thomas,  Calhoun,  Ala.;  (361)  Cilia  Thomason,  Columbus,  Miss.;
(362)  Lillian  Toomer,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (363)  William  J.  Trent,  Jr.,  Atlanta,
Ga.;  (364)  Trinity  School,  Athens,  Ala.;  (365)  Viola  Mae  Tyrone,  Calhoun,
Ala.

(366)  Union  Academy,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (367)  Utica  Normal  and  Industrial
Institute,    Utica,    Miss.

(368)  Ficksburg  Industrial  School,  Ficksburg,  Miss.;  (369)  Miss  Elizabeth
Vinson,  Austin,  Texas.

(370)  Herma  Wagstaff,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (371)  Laura  Walden,  Ft.  Valley,
Ga.;  (372)  Frank  Walker,  Keysville,  Ga.;  (373)  Mary  Lou  Walker,  Keysville,
Ga.;  (374)  Alonzo  Wallace,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (375)  Mr.  Harland  Wallace,
Carthage,  Miss.;  (376)  Miss  A.  Walworth,  Natchez,  Miss.;  (377)  Lorenzo
Watts,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (378)  Annie  Belle  Ward,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (379)
Ethel  Ware,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (380)  R.  B.  Ware,  Atlanta,  Ga.;  (381)  Beatrice
Washington,   Burton,  S.  C;  (382)   B.  T.  Washington,  Calhoun,  Ala.;  (383)


List  of  Informants  603

Rebecca  B.  Well,  Burton,  S.  C;  (384)  Miss  M.  M.  Wellborn,  Starksville,  Miss.;
(385)  Pearline  West,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (386)  J.  H.  Wheeler,  Atlanta,  Ga.;
(387)  Ellen  White,  Bunkie,  La.;  (388)  Andrew  Whitfield,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;
(389)  Lizzie  Whitfield,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (390)  Miss  Louise  Weir,  Starksville,
Miss.;  (391)  L.  Wiggins,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (392)  R.  M.  Wilkins,  Jr.,  Atlanta,
Ga.;  (393)  Mattie  L.  Willard,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (394)  Albert  Williams,  Colum-
bus, Miss.;  (395)  Cleo  B.  Williams,  Keysville,  Ga.;  (396)  Emily  M:  Williams,
Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (397)  Dr.  H.  Roger  Williams,  Mobile,  Ala.;  (398)  Freddie  A.
Williams,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (399)  M.  J.  Williams,  Ft.  Valley,  Ga.;  (400)  Mildred
Williams,  Thomasville,  Ga.;  (401)  Richard  Williams,  Thomasville,  Ga.;
(402)  Rosa  Lee  Williams,  Keysville,  Ga.;  (403)  Lela  Wilmore,  Vicksburg,
Miss.;  (404)  Miss  Anne  C.  Wilson,  Rosedale,  Miss.;  (405)  Edythe  Wimbush,
Atlanta,  Ga.;  (406)  Laura  Witherspoon,  Columbus,  Miss.;  (407)  Miss  Judith
Woods,   Sumpter  County,  Ala.


INDEX


Abortion,  332.

Abscess,  305.

Absent,  calling  the,   180ff.;  dreams   of

the,  503.
Accidents,  dreams  of,  503;  Friday  and,

403;  nail  cutting  and,  402.
Aches,  and  weather-lore,  508.
Adam,  conjure  root  called,  246.
Adultery,    in   Africa,    24;   charms   for,

261;  discovering,  200;  among  slaves,

24.
Africa,  natives  of  West  Coast  of,  6ff.
African,  sense  in  which  term  is  used,  3.
After-birth,  burying  the,  218;  hasten-
ing the,  333.
Agriculture  (see  also  planting),  323fF.,

428fF.;  of  animals,  32;  nail  cleaning,

403.
Air,  ghosts  and  warm,  117,
Albinoes,  as  conjurers,  203;  reverenced,

199.
Alcohol,  in  conjure,  269;  in  voodoo  rites,

184.
Alligators,  origin  of  scales  of,  39;  and

Marie   Laveau,    186;    indicate    rain,

507;  teeth  of  for  teething,  346;  used

against  witches,  165.
Almanac,  350.

Alphabet,  in  folk  rhyme,  72.
Altar,  of  voodoos,  193.
Alum,  for  bleeding,  333;  for  blindness,

276;   for   chicken    cholera,    389;   for

conjure,  290;  for  gonorrhea,  385;  for

rheumatism,  364.
Amaranthe,  268.
Amulets,  313ff.;  in  Africa,  170;  to  divert

the  evil  eye,  188.
Angels,  524;  dreams  of,  571;  in  Negro

religion,  114.
Angel's  Turnip,  root  for  conjure,  245,

559.
Anger,  and  arising,  417;  and  biscuits

burning,    445;    and    left    eye,    448;


shown  by  fire,  556;  and  new  moon,
464;  and  peppers,  323;  and  salt,  442.

Animals,  omens  given  by,  466fF.;  sha-
dow of,  466;  taboos  concerning,  435ff.

Anisette,  for  conjure,  228.

Ankle,  strap  on  the,  313;  string  on  the,
340.

Antelope,  beaten  by  turtle,  39;  horns
of  the,  172,  197;  food  stolen  by  rab-
bit, 38.

Ants,  and  conjure,  231,  299;  for
whooping  cough,  371;  indicate  mov-
ing, 492;  nest  of,  337,  265,  267;  bite
poisonous,  45.

Anvil-dust,  in  conjure,  230, 237, 252, 277.

Apes,  can  talk,  31.

Apostles,  and  lawsuits,  567.

Apple,  for  birthmarks,  341;  for  conjure,
265;  tree,  477,  512;  burning  wood  of,
421.

Apron,  under  head,  496;  knot  in  the,
488;  lost,  445;  used  against  owls,  483;
thrown  through  window,  415.

Arithmetic,  72fF.

Arm,  452;  bag  under,  233;  beef  under,
267;  struck  by  ghost,  116;  looked
under  to  see  ghost,  139;  kissed,  452;
reptiles  in  the,  208,  253,  298;  left  and
right,  190,  201.

Arrows,  used  by  fairies,  478.

Arrowheads,  made  by  God,  315.

Asafoetida,  for  conjure,  212,  220,  237,
240;  for  disease,  391ff.;  for  rheuma-
tism, 362;  for  witches,  165.

Ashes,  untouched  during  confinement,
334;  in  conjure,  220,  233,  240,  243;
near  corpse,  396;  carried  out  after
dark,  396;  for  good  luck,  315;  and
moles,  481;  blown  towards  moon,
349;  used  in  mourning,  92;  for  sore
throat,  367;  hoodoo  tracks  in,  294.

Asthma,  362,  370.

August,  weather  signs  during,  512.

Aunty,  old  Negroes  called,  23.


606


Index


Automobiles,  crossed  by  cat,  469;  rid-
den by  mermaid,  137;  peanuts
dropped  in,  415;  in  funeral  proces-
sion, 89.

Ax,  41  Iff.,  to  cut  cat,  471;  to  bar  door,
128,  dreams  of  an,  503;  chosen  by
Negro,  547;  for  pains,  390;  can  run,
115;  to  cut  storm,  320.

Baby  (see  also  children  and  tar  baby),
put  on  bed,  347;  carried  to  funeral,
89;  cries  at  wedding,  460.

Back,  chills  up  the,  462;  dog  on  his,
479;  to  the  fire,  420;  breaking
mother's,  433;  objects  passed  over
the,  432;  rubbed  to  stop  boiling  pot,
317;  salt  on  the,  160;  sleeping  on  the,
155;  snake  in  the,  253,  436;  child
walking  over  the,  363;  weak,  191,
420;  whipped  on  the,  413,  433;  of
witches,  450.

Backache,  cause  of,  432;  and  conjure
21  Iff.;  cures  for,  263fT.;  and  snakes,
217,  302,436;  and  tracks,  433.

Back-biter  (see  gossip),  450.

Bacon,  fed  to  baby,  337.

Bait,  comes  off,  428;  spitting  on  the,
355.

Ball,  bounces  in  a,  353;  conjure,  230;
of  silver,  288.

Ballads,  61.

Banjo,  played  by  the  devil,  554;  with
Negro  slaves,  58.

Bank,  dreams  of  a,  503.

Baptism,  569;  of  images,  244.

Barber,  shaves  Brer  Rabbit,  49.

Barb  Iron,  for  conjure,  390.

Barguest,  133.

Bark,  for  cancer,  387;  cherry,  386;
elder,  212;  oak,  373,  386ff.;  In  voodoo
rites,  189.

Barn,  dreams  of  a,  503.

Baseball,  tabooed,  527,  537.

Basin,  dreams  of  a,  503.

Basket,  396.

Bat,  carries  bed  bugs,  48;  devil  as  a,
552;  ghost  as  a,  143ff.;  in  one's  hat,
353;  on  one's  head,  45;  heart  of  a.


283;  in  the  house,  481;  sacrificed,
320;  wings  of  a,  226.

Battle,  African  dance  for,  177.

Beads,  for  conjure,  218.

Beans,  In  conjure,  228,  231;  dreams  of,
503;  planting,  324,  350;  in  voodoo
rites,  184;  leaf  of  for  warts,  380;
whistling,  199.

Bear,  dreams  of  a,  503;  ghost,  120;
mistaken  for  a  louse,  76;  losing  his
tail,  36.

Beast,  Negro  regarded  as  a,  529.

Beauty,  and  birth,  336;  to  obtain,  356.

Bed  (see  also  sleeping),  416;  articles
placed  on  the,  410;  ax  in  the,  390;
candle  under  the,  291;  cat  thrown
over  head  of,  317;  chair  at  foot  of,
483;  clothes  near  the,  329;  of  the
dying,  81;  conjure  placed  in,  224,
230,  242;  falling  from  the,  342,  462;
glass  under  the,  388;  horseshoe  over
the,  158;  mint  under  the,  337;  nails
cut  in,  403;  in  rhyme,  75;  not  turned,
335;  salt  under  the,  160;  shoes  under
the,  427,  482;  singing  in,  413;  sweep-
ing under  the,  334,  398;  tracks  under
the,  354;  turning  over  In,  354;  wrong
side  of,  416.

Bed  bugs,  on  bats,  48,  353;  for  chills,
366.

Bedroom,  conjure  in  the,  225.

Bed  sores,  387.

Bed-wetting,  386ff.,  420.

Beef,  under  arm,  267;  dreams  of,  500;
gall  for  conjure,  293;  melt  for  sick-
ness, 390.

Bees,  notified  of  death,  82;  dreams  of,
503;  omens  given  by,  492;  sting  of,
378.

Beetle,  493;  in  conjure,  234;  blood  for
earache,  375;  a  witch,  150.

Bell,  dreams  of  a,  503;  drinking  from  a,
342;  misunderstood,  50;  of  African
priests,  171;  ringing,  462.

Belt,  loosing  a,  445;  of  cat  skin,  471.

Bench,  spitting  under  a,  395.

Betsy  Bug's  Heart,  a  conjure  plant,
292.


Index


607


Bible,  boiled,  561ff.;  for  divination,
S86ff.;  to  ward  off  ghosts,  141;  to  call
Satan,  553;  singing  the,  71ff.;  to
ward  off  witches,  165;

Bird,  called  the  Curiosity,  534;  and
death,  89;  God  a,  533;  builds  nest  of
hair,  399ff.;  omens  given  by,  481,
488ff.;  and  weather-lore,  508ff.;  and
weddings,  459;  witch  in  the  form  of
a,   149ff.

Birth  (see  also  childbirth),  137ff.,
33Sff.;  on  the  13th,  405.

Birthmarks,  of  conjurer,  201;  of  Nat
Turner,  204;  removing,  340ff.

Birthstone,  433.

Biscuits,  445.

Bit,  used  by  witches,  151ff.

Bite,  of  dog,  389ff.;  of  insects,  45.

Biting,  nails,  338;  witch,  152.

Bitter-weed,  for  chills,  366;  for  fever,
367.

Black,  546ff.;  Christmas,  465;  in
dreams,  571ff.;  married  in,  330;
visions  of,  205,  542;  cat's  bone  for
working  wonders,  255ff.;  not  worn,
193.

Blackbirds,  used  by  the  devil,  84,  557;
and  rain,  511.

Black  haw,  246,  331.

Blacksmith,  a  mystical  character,  237;
and  witches,  159ff.

Bleeding,  cures  for,  221,  333,  377.

Blindness,  and  conjure,  213ff.,  223,  224,
226,  245,  260,  275ff.;  cures  for,  270,
383;  and  devil's  sand,  550;  and  drink-
ing at  night,  434.

Blister,  377.

Blood  (see  also  nosebleed),  driving  out
bad,  390;  of  cat,  196;  of  a  chicken,
344;  for  conjure,  189,  220,  221,  232,
266,  267,  295;  for  consumption,  370;
to  kill  dog,  318;  of  beetle  for  earache,
375;  in  gun  barrel,  356;  heart  washed
in,  541ff.;  of  kid,  182;  knocked  out,
298;  of  murdered  man,  96ff.;  and
nail  cutting,  402;  to  purify,  123;  and
red  color,  221;  for  shingles,  374;  of
snake,  251,  322;  sucked  by  vampire,
148,  153;  from  a  wart,  380.


Blood  of  Christ,  a  conjure  root,  246.

Blood  poisoning,  376.

Bloody  Bones,  73,  132.

Bloom  Day,  429.

Blossoms  picked  off,  493.

Blue,  gums,  74,  204,  308,  378,  458;
married  in,  330.

Bluebird,  and  visitors,  491,

Bluestone,  for  abortion,  332;  in  con-
jure, 237,  240,  246,  293,  297,  326,  559;
a  contraceptive,  331;  for  gonorrhea,
385;  to  destroy  moles,  481;  for  scro-
fula, 384.

Boadicea,  472.

Board,  nailed  to  shoe,  271.

Boat,  stopped  by  conjure,  285;  of
witches,  163ff.

Boggle,  132.

Boggy-boes,  133.

Boils,  378;  and  conjure,  168;  and  liz-
ards, 208.

Bones,  blood  flows  from,  97;  of  black
cat,  255;  of  chicken,  191,  286,  329
and  conjure,  189,  218,  220,  292,  299
to  restore  cow  cud,  287;  fetish,  172
of  frog, 265, 3 15; ghost  comes  for,  123
of  rabbit,  472;  for  toothache,  373
in  voodooism,  184;  for  warts,  379.

Book,  conjure  set  in  a,  276;  dropped,
463;  carried  on  head,  434;  under  the
pillow,  580.

Bottles,  in  childbirth,  333;  conjure  in,
208,  229,  231,  251,  295,  299,  308;  to
decorate  Negro  graves,  104;  to  catch
witches,  161ff.

Boulder-stone,  133.

Bounces,  in  a  ball,  353.

Bowels,  locking  the,  255ff.;  preventing
trouble  with,  408.

Bowels  of  Christ,  a  conjure  root,  246,
559.

Bow-legs,  preventing,  340.

Box,  image  buried  in  a,  242ff.

Box  car,  black  cat  bone  to  move  a,  258.

Bracelet,  for  rheumatism,  361.

Bragging,  434.

Brains,  for  conjure,  222,  293;  for  skill
in  hunting,  355;  substituted,  49;
for  teething,  346.


608


Index


Brass,  pin  a  contraceptive,  331;  for  con-
jure, 299;  to  kill  ghosts,  142;  for
heart  trouble,  388;  for  sprains,  375;
for  rheumatism,  361;  to  locate  buried
treasure,  207;  for  weak  eyes,  382.

Bread  (see  also  biscuits),  408;  dreams
of  baking,  503;  and  conjure,  228,
305;  rubbed  on  cutlass,  263;  thrown
into  fire,  409;  offered  to  ghosts,
lOlff.;  broken  in  another's  hand,
408;  extra  helping  of,  441;  and  a  dry-
March,  511fF.;  last  piece  on  plate,
394;  used  in  sacrament,  545;  un-
cooked, 356.

Breakfast,  actions  before,  417;  dreams
told  before,  496.

Break-necks,  133.

Breast,  chopped  open,  541;  treatment
of  mother's,  337;  rotting  off,  96;  of
witches,  147.

Breastbone, of  a  chicken,  232,237,  329.

Breath,  to  cure  bad,  389;  sucked  by
cat,  470;  blown  into  a  hat,  430;  blown
into  a  hole,  364;  held  to  avoid  Jack-
o'-my-lantern,  134;  for  thrush,  341;
for  warts,  381;  for  whooping  cough,
371ff.

Briars,  for  fevers  and  chills,  365;  in
conjure,  240;  rabbit  thrown  into,
40.

Brick,  dust  for  conjure,  290;  used  to  see
the  devil,  557;  ghost  in  the  shape  of
a,  115;  hair  under  a,  329.

Brides,  330fF.

Bridesmaid,  three  times  a,  422.

Bridge,  proverb  regarding  a,  54.

Bridle,  on  the  churn,  158;  in  riddles,  52;
and  witches,  152,  159.

Bronchitis,  370.

Broom  (see  also  sweeping),  395ff.;  and
babies,  339fi'.,  444;  over  the  door,
218;  to  run  guest  away,  318;  and
owls,  483;  stepped  over,  397if.;  and
witches,  156flF.,  163.

Brotherhood,  creating,  261.

Brow  of  a  witch,  147.

Brown,  married  in,  330.

Brownie,  132.


Brush,  and  witches,  165.

Buckets,  and  conjure,  243;  emptied
after  a  funeral,  98;  and  hawks,  323;
carried  on  head,  306.

Buckeyes,  for  chills,  366;  for  good  luck,
314,  316;  for  rheumatism,  360.

Buckler,  75.

Buckraman,  15.

Buffalo,  fooled  by  tortoise,  38.

Bug-bear,  132.

Bullets,  of  silver  to  kill  ghosts,  142ff.;
to  kill  witches,  157;  treating  wounds,
of,  359.

Bumblebee,  and  visitors,  440.

Bundle,  ghost  as  a,  115.

Bunny-hug,  70.

Burdock,  for  colic,  342,

Burial  (see  also  corpse,  funeral,  hearse,
and  wake),  of  fragments  of  corpse,
91;  of  those  meeting  unusual  deaths,
108;  face  downward,  160;  humor
during,  51ff.;  to  keep  ghosts  down,
107ff.;  of  murdered  man,  96;  of
photograph,  245;  preparations  for,
83ff;  to  the  waist,  340;  in  back  yard,
124.

Burning  (see  also  fire),  biscuits,  445;
cards,  433;  cats,  471;  conjures,  223,
232,  256;  corn-cobs,  429;  cures
for,  387;  of  ears,  450;  shells  of  eggs,
408;  of  face,  452;  goopher-dust,
215;  hair,  399;  image,  244;  letters,
423;  match,  463;  of  names,  193;
onions,  409;  tongue  of  owl,  483;  pine
splinters,  278;  sweepings,  396;  of
candle  in  voodoo,  194.

Bush-soul,  112,  130.

Bustle,  worn  by  Gold  Coast  natives,
27fT.

Butter,  fork  placed  in,  419;  images  of,
244;  on  cat's  paws,  317;  stirring,  408;
comes  with  the  tide,  350;  freed  from
witches,  158.

Butter  beans,  429ff.

Butterfly,  head  bitten  off  for  new
dress,  312,  325;  ghost  as  a,  130;  in
song,  74.

Buttocks,  333.


Index


609


Button,  flies  oflF  clothes,  447;  for
corns,  381;  on  dog,  144;  found,  495;
for  teething,  346.

Button-root,  226.

Buzzard  (see  also  vulture),  teaches
rabbit  to  fly,  49;  used  in  conjure,  271,
274;  a  fetish,  525;  grease  from  a,  389;
omens  given  by  the,  489;  indicates
rain,  510;  for  rheumatism,  361if.;  in
song,  74;  talking  to  a,  436;  feathers
for  teething,  347;  a  witch,  150.

Cake,  and  conjure,  228,  232,  241,  265,
268;  stirred  to  the  right,  408;  taboos
regarding,  423;  at  voodoo  rites,  265;
and  a  stingy  woman,  42.

Calabash,  37.

Calamus  root,  346.

Calf,  slobber  for  ringworm,  379;  sacri-
ficed, 319;  tongue  of  a,  195.

Calinda,  dance  called  the,  58,  179.

Calling,  the  absent,  273ff.,  283;  the
preacher,  533ff.,  in  sleep,  463.

Calls,  in  Negro  songs,  67.

Camel,  hair  of  a,  240.

Camel-walk,  70.

Camphor,  for  chills,  366;  in  conjure,
245,  246,  299;  a  linament,  390;  to
dry  up  mother's  milk,  337;  put  on
Saint  Joseph,  565.

Cancer,  cures  for,  387fi".

Candles,  411flF.,  in  conjure,  179,  227,
238,  265,  291;  indicate  ghost,  556;
in  voodoo  rites,  184ff'.,  193.

Candy,  blood  on,  267.

Cane,  of  conjurer,  202.

Cannabalism,  178;  in  Africa,  5;  possible
survivals  of,  56;  among  witches,  148,
153.

Canoe,  448.

Cans,  on  Negro  graves,  105.

Cap,  made  before  birth,  342;  effect
upon  teething,  345;  of  witch,  147.

Cards,  burned,  433;  and  conjure,  296;
fortune  told  by,  216.

Carpentry,  415.

Carriages,  88.


Castration,  and  the  almanac,  350.

Cat,  467ff.,  bone  of  black,  255;  eats
man's  brains,  49;  in  conjure,  205,
256ff.,  290ff.,  300;  for  consumption,
370;  devil  as  a,  552;  eaten,  183,  196;
eyes  of  a,  226;  fear  of,  581;  and  fetishes,
172;  and  ghosts,  117,  120,  124,  128fl^.,
132,  138,  142fi".;  made  of  Christ's
glove,  557ff.,  hair  of  a,  228,  274;
kept  at  home,  316;  killed,  435;  552,
imitated  by  man,  216;  mummies  of,
256;  crossing  path,  579;  skin  of  a,
195,  198,  232;  wallowing,  479;  and
weather,  505,  507;  whiskers  from
a,  269;  and  witches,  147,  149,  150ff.

Catfish,  dreams  of,  501.

Catholicism,  in  Africa,  561;  sisters  of,
117;  and  voodooism,  193.

Catnip,  for  thrush,  341.

Cattle,  324,  419;  and  butter  beans,  430;
ghosts  make  noise  like,  118;  pray-
ing, 48ff.;  spells  cast  upon,  196.

Caul,  born  with  a,  201,  336;  and  seeing
ghosts,   137fF.;  and  twin  souls,   116.

Caution,  taught  in  folk-song,  72.

Caves,  fetishes,  173;  home  of  souls,
113.

Cedar,  4213".;  for  wounds,  377.

Ceiling,  snake  dust  through,  251.

Cellar,  graveyard  dirt  in  the,  248.

Cemetery,  call  to  the,  451;  and  conjure,
297,  first  to  leave  the,  95.

Chains,  on  ghosts,  122.

Chairs,  410fF.;  lying  across,  412;  at  foot
of  bed,  483;  and  conjure,  225;  for
divination,  282;  ghosts  in  the  form
of,  115;  rats  in,  480;  three  in  a  row,
445;  sweeping  under,  397;  turned
over,  413,  441.

Chameleon,  wins  race  with  elephant,
39.

Champagne,  in  conjure,  219.

Chap-books,  265.

Charcoal,  182.

Checker  playing,  forbidden,  527.

Cherry,  bark  from,  333,  386;  made  to
blossom,  285.


610


Index


Chest,  chicken  bound  to  the,  367;
hairy,  456;  witches  on  the,  148,  151,
162.

Chicken  (see  also  cock,  hen,  and  poul-
try), blood  of,  295;  bones  of,  191;
breastbone  of,  232, 237,  239,  286,  329,
525;  for  chicken  pox,  386;  for  cholera,
389;  in  conjure,  227,  297;  eats  corns,
381;  wears  crepe,  92;  for  cross-eyes,
344;  disease  given  to  a,  365;  dreams  of,
503;  dung  of,  308,  388flF.;  feathers  of
a,  219,  285,  495;  for  fever,  367;  to
keep  from  flopping,  318;  frizzly,
290ff.,  298;  in  Negro  games,  56;
warns  of  ghost,  103;  gizzard  of,  223,
240,  342,  356,  389;  dies  in  hands,
436;  keeping  hawks  from,  291,
323,  417,  images  of,  242;  eggs  of
marked,  48;  on  New  Year's  Day,
461;  for  preacher,  63ff.;  sacrificed,
319;  for  snakebite,  378;  sneezing,  47;
manure  for  toothache,  373;  and
weather-lore,  508.

Chicken  breasted,  201.

Chicken  house,  386.

Chicken  pox,  386.

Chief,  in  Africa,  199.

Childbirth  (see  also  birth),  3  3 2fT.;  charms
for,  261;  and  the  new  moon,  46.

Children,  lore  relating  to,  46,  54ff.,
65,  72ff.,  89,  98ff.,  100,  110,  112,  120,
153,200,  218,  236,  261,  263,  308,  323,
331ff.,  391,363,  444,  449,  460,  470,
480fr.,  500,  504,  569.

Chills,  running  up  back,  462;  and
drinking  before  breakfast,  417;  and
conjure,  241,  302;  cures  for,  364ff. ;
running  from,  359.

Chimney,  and  taming  animals,  317;
calf  tongue  in  the,  195;  clay  from
the,  297;  and  hawks,  323;  marking
the,  54;  in  riddles,  54;  stick  in  the,
483;  sweeping  the,  398.

China-berry,  for  flies  and  fleas,  317;
for  scrofula,  384;  for  teething,  346.


Chips,  conjure  set  with,  223;  in  water,
329.

Cholera,  curing  chicken,  389,

Christ,  73,  114,  557ff.;  and  cotton-
woods,  560;  says  to  go  forward,  426;
a  medicine-man,  568;  visions  of,
543.

Christianity,  in  Africa,  547ff. ;  and  con-
jure, 193,  201,  227ff.;  559,  562ff.,
566ff.,  and  divination,  281ff.;  to  drive
off  ghosts,  141;  of  Negroes,  528ff.;
and  superstition,  521ff.,  545fF.,  560fi'.,
574.

Christmas,  the  Friday  before,  404;
born  on,  138;  and  weather-lore,  465,
512;  wedding  before,  440.

Christmas  Eve,  angels  singing  on,  49;
cattle  pray  on,  48ff.

Church,  birds  flying  over  a,  459;
dreams  of  a,  503;  ghost  in  a,  116;
cross-eyed  lady  in,  460;  among
Negroes,  530ff.;  new  shoes  at,  446;
spitting  at,  395;  visions  of  a,  533;
voodooism  in  the,  567.

Churchyard,  snail  from  the,  362.

Churning,  bridle  to  aid,  158;  and  the
tide,  350.

Cider,  made  during  menstruation,  423.

Cinder,  cat,  471;  for  warts,  380.

Cinderella,  in  Negro  tales,  36.

Circle,  about  chickens,  318;  God  in  a,
543;  around  spittle,  489;  in  voodoo
rites,  182.

Claw,  of  crab,  284;  of  leopard,  172;
of  lion,  217;  of  owl,  483.

Clay,  and  childbirth,  333;  and  conjure,
297,  299;  to  repair  man,  211fi".,
363;  for  pains,  391;  for  rheumatism,
362ff.;  for  sprains,  375.

Cleaning  finger  nails,  402ff.;  house,  291.

Cliff's,  home  of  flying  horses,  136.

Clocks,  411,  444;  stopped  at  death,  82;
ghost  in  the  form  of  a,  115.

Cloth,  for  vulva  dressings,  333;  check-
ered to  keep  off'  witches,  165.


Index


611


Clothing,  445;  in  Africa  and  America,
26ff.;  of  baby,  338ff.;  buried.  243,
272;  of  the  dead,  97ff.;  given  to  the
dead,  103;  to  locate  the  drowned,
352;  to  cure  fits,  384;  washed  on
Friday,  404;  worn  to  a  funeral,  92;
of  a  murdered  man,  lOlff.;  new,  406;
cut  by  rats,  406;  removed,  329;
spider  on  the,  492;  put  in  tree,  107;
washing,  407ff.;  wrongside  out,  483.

Clouds,  and  conjure,  222;  disappearing,
541;  ghosts  resembling,  120,  130;
taken  to  heaven  in,  543;  and  sieves,
164;  split  by  a  spade,  320;  and  weather-
lore,  517ff.

Clover,  and  conjure,  149,  240;  four
leafed,  495.

Coal,  and  conjure,  168,  280,  525.

Coat,  love  charm  on  the,  267;  pro-
tected by  hand,  279;  over  the  head,
430;  taken  off  by  ghosts,  119;  re-
moved, 184;  thread  from,  473;  turned
to  avoid  ghosts  and  witches,  143,
165.

Cobweb,  to  stop  bleeding,  333,  377;
and  rain,  321;  color  of  witch,  150.

Cock,  cooking  a,  408;  and  conjure,  227,
297;  crowing,  466ff.;  imitated,  216;
omens  concerning  the,  685ff.;  fools
the  rabbit,  3SS.;  to  secure  a,  322ff.;
to  locate  a  thief,  281.

Cocklebur,  for  abortion,  332.

Cocoon,  for  divination,  281.

Coffee,  414;  for  divination,  355ff.,  463;
and  ghosts,  101,  119;  at  voodoo  rites,
184.

Coffin,  and  birds,  489;  blackbirds  in  a
buried,  84;  and  conjure,  227;  danger-
ous, 99;  dirt  from  the,  246;  dreams  of
a,  499;  baby  passed  over  mother's,
99;  nail  from  a,  236;  made  of  nails.
283;  never  praised,  98;  silver  screws
in  a,  107;  slipping,  95;  taken  out  on
the  run,  99;  and  water  bucket,  412;
seen  in  a  well,  328;  and  woodpeckers,
487ff.;  in  a  vision,  533;  and  voodoo,
300.


Colds,  369ff.,  384;  impossible  from  bap-
tism, 570;  to  prevent,  332,  334;
weather,  507ff.,  5105.,  516.

Colic,  342,  370;  from  chewing  food,
343;  from  kissing,  343.

Collards,  and  death,  493;  seed  to  keep
off  ghosts,  125;  leaves  for  headache,
379;  for  rheumatism,  362.

Color,  of  wedding  dress,  330;  influence
on  folk-lore,  4ff.

Comb,  dropped,  440;  counting  teeth
in  a,  399.

Comet,  sign  of  war  and  famine,  464.

Commode,  and  whooping  cough,  372.

Confinement,  344ff.

Congo,  dance  called  the,  58.

Conju re-finger,  46.

Constipation,  causing,  255ff.;  and  con-
jure, 168;  enforced,  198.

Consumption,  370ff.;  and  shape  of
breast,  201;  causing,  24S.

Contraceptives,  33  Iff.

Convulsions,  194ff.,  198;  in  Xegro  re-
vivals, 539.

Cooking  (see  also  kitchen),  408;  a  black
cat,  258;  dreams  of,  503;  dung,  255;
during  menstruation,  87;  with  green
wood,  458.

Cooling-board,  87.

Coon-root,  in  conjure,  240,  246,  559,
563;  for  cramps,  375;  for  linament,
390.

Cooter  (see  turtle).

Copper  (see  also  penny),  for  conjure,
288,  437;  for  a  contraceptive,  331;  for
rheumatism,  361.

Cormorant,  witch  as  a,  149.

Corn,  blood  on,  205;  for  corns,  381;
swept  into  the  fire,  409;  planting,
350,  429;  in  riddles.  53;  for  warts,
580;  in  voodooism,  184.

Corn  bread,  and  conjure,  309;  eaten
by  devil,  550;  for  fits,  384.

Corncobs,  burned,  429;  teeth  in  a,  347.

Corn  meal,  for  menstrual  pains,  3S6.

Corn-root,  in  conjure,  239ff.


612


Index


Corns,  how  removed  from  feet,  381;
and  weather,  503,  513.

Corn  shuck,  tea  for  measles,  387.

Corn  stalk,  for  conjure,  228.

Cornerstone,  169.

Corpse,  eaten  by  cat,  470;  in  conjure,
524ff.;  turned  face  downward,  107;
money  on  eyes  of,  84;  receives  friends,
93ff.;  hair  of,  219,  226;  not  handled
by  kinsmen,  83;  limp,  82ff.;  reflected
in  mirror,  81ff.;  addressed  by  mourn-
ers, 87;  touched  by  murderer,  96ff.;
how  carried  in  funeral  procession,
88ff.;  of  murdered  man,  96;  nails  of  a,
241;  hand  of  for  shingles,  374;  teeth
of  for  toothache,  374;  on  a  train,  422;
washing  the,  51;  eaten  by  witches,
153.

Correspondence,  to  stop  undesirable,
357.

Cotton,  46;  color  of  blossoms  of,  466;
in  conjure,  271;  conjured,  279;
dreams  of,  503;  burned  for  navel
dressing,  333;  planting,  350;  threads
of,  195;  for  toothache,  373;  to  plug
tracks,  270.

Cottonwood,  Christ  hung  on  a,  560.

Cough,  of  a  cow,  506.

Counting,  in  Africa,  163;  of  funeral
carriages,  88;  teeth  in  a  comb,  398ff.;
stars,  434;  instinct  of  witches,  142,
156,  162,  293.

Courtship  (see  also  love,  marriage,  and
sweetheart),  charms  for,  302;  for-
mulas, 29if.;  and  ghosts,  118;  and
prayer,  564;  in  folk  rhyme,  11 .

Cow  (see  also  beef  and  heifer),  419;
and  butterbeans,  429;  and  chairs,
411;  prays  on  Christmas  Eve,  48ff.;
and  conjure,  205,  287,  299;  and
daddy-long-legs,  435;  dung  of,  249,
391;  and  frog  killing,  435;  and  ghosts,
117,  120,  130,  132,  359;  hair  ball
from,  231;  grease  from  hoof  of,
361;  horn  of,  271;  horse  changes  to  a,
386;  to  stop  a  kicking,  324;  lowing
of  a,  480;  sucked  by  a  milk  snake,  43;
in     proverbs,     54;     in     riddles,     53;


laughing  at  tailless,  52;  in  Negro
tales,  38;  and  weather,  505ff.;  can
see  the  wind,  506.

Cow-ant,  bite  of  poisonous,  45.

Crabs,  claws  of,  284;  and  moonlight,  45.

Crack,  walking  over  a,  433.

Cradle,  of  dead  baby,  99;  jumped  over
by  a  dog,  479ff.;  rocking  an  empty,
339.

Cramps,  375;  rabbit's  foot  for,  472;
snakeroot  for,  246,

Crawfish,,  mud  from  hole  of,  244,  299;
spring-keeper  resembles  a,  434;  holds
on  until  it  thunders,  45.

Cream  of  tartar,  for  swelling,  388.

Credit,  351.

Crepe,  tied  to  dogs  and  chickens,  92.

Crickets,  in  the  body,  252;  omens
given  by,  492;  prayer  for,  541;  make
witches,  155;  witch  in  the  form  of,
161.

Crockery,  on  Negro  graves,  105.

Crocodile  (see  also  alligator),  talks  to
Marie  Laveau,  186;  and  witches,
148.

Crops,  and  cotton  blossoms,  466;  and
charms,  148;  and  dreams,  503;  and
flying  horses,  512.

Cross,  302,  319ff.;  in  conjure,  193,  195,
228,  251,  283ff.,  292,  297,  567;  used
against  devil,  556;  for  divination,
355ff.;  of  chicken  feathers,  219;  of
fingers,  142,  354,  460;  of  hairpins,
193;  of  herbs,  225;  of  matches,  376;
of  money,  227;  of  needles,  273,  292;
plant  in  the  shape  of  a,  559;  putting
a,  195,  to  produce  rain,  321;  repre-
sented by  scissors,  406ff.;  to  remove
snakes,  303;  with  spittle,  386;  of
sticks,  383;  taken  off,  433;  in  horse
wallow,  318;  of  pins  for  warts,  379,
381;  and  witches,  164.

Cross  eyes,  460;  cured,  344;  and  mir-
rors, 344;  and  rabbit,  475.

Crossmark,  407;  on  the  Bible,  569;  to
avoid  cats,  469;  on  the  ear,  450;  for
kernels,  381;  for  rabbits,  473;  to  kill


Index


613


snakes,   322,   557;   on   turning,  424;

In  voodoo,  191.
Crossroads,  319,   381,  424;  and  black

cat  bone,  257;  devil  at  the,  553.
Cross-vine,  390.
Croup,  370.

Crow,  490;  and  weather,  510.
Crow's  nest,  a  Negro  game,  55ff.
Crown,  in  the  pillow,  570.
Cruel  Man  of  the  Woods,  a  Negro  con-
jure root,  245.
Crying,  after  absent,  432;  and  coffee,

414;    and    finding    a    handkerchief,

495;  to  stop,  341;  on  Sunday,  404;

before  supper,  417;  and  waking,  497;

at  a  wedding,  422,  460.
Cuckoo,  326,  488.
Cucumbers,  pickles  of,  423;  planting,

429.
Cud,  of  cow  conjured  away,  287.
Cult,    Inconsistency    of    the,    98;    not

localized,  145;  and  witchcraft,  355ff.
Cups,   414;   conjure   in,   230;   emptied

after  a  funeral,  98;  on  Negro  graves,

104.
Curiosity,  bird  called  the,  534.
Curl,  In  devil's  hair,  551.
Cursing,  and  conjure,  209,  281;  while

fishing,    428;    of    ghost,     124ff;    of

parents,  425;  with  voodoo,  181.
Curtsy,  to  the  new  moon,  348.
Cutlass,  rubbed  with  bread,  263.

Daddy-long-legs,  435.

Daedalus,  In  Negro  tales,  36.

Dagger,  dreams  of  a,  503.

Dance,  In  Africa  and  America,  58ff;
the  Calinda,  179;  the  Counjal,  16;
to  raise  the  dead,  102;  dreams  of  the,
503;  a  fetish,  171,  176flF.,  198;  holy,
60,  544;  to  win  lover,  184ff.;  as
prayer,  177;  purpose  of,  60;  in  Negro
religion,  533;  no  sin,  60;  the  ^nake,
187;  sneezing  at  a,  290;  tabooed,  527;
of  the  voodoos,  182,  184,  185,  186,
193.

Dandruff,  conjured  by,  229.

Danger,  and  sneezing,  453.


Daniel,  289.

Dark,  visitors  on  New  Year's  Day,  461.

David,  71,  205,  567.

Days,  of  wedding,  330.

Dead,  dreams  of  the,  498ff.;  stirring  up
the,  93;  talking  to  the,  569.

Death,  actions  causing,  43,  45,  48fF.,
65,  81,  84,  88ff.,  91ff.,  98ff.,  118,  141,
168,  175,  194,  196,  2141f.,  216,  223flF.,
226,  232,  235fF.,  243fF.,  339,  342ff.,
349,  396,  398,  400,  404ff.,  409,  411,
413fF.,  418fF.,  425ff.,  429,  432ff.,  436,
440flF.;  in  Africa  and  America,  79fF.;
for  every  birth,  112;  not  real  before
burial,  86;  recognized  by  dog,  83;
made  easier,  81;  regarded  as  a  little
man,  79;  bees  notified  of  a,  82;  observ-
ances after  a,  81ff.;  omens  at  time
of,  82ff.;  omens  of.  Biff.,  83,  85,  95,
204,  220ff.,  260,  272ff.,  284,  286,
408,  499fF.;  of  one  Improves  health  of
other,  79;  due  to  absence  of  soul,  1 10;
clock  stopped  at  time  of,  82.

Death  light,  135.

Death  moles,  458.

Death  watch,  493.

Debts,  collected  by  conjure,  260,  283;
and  the  left  eye,  448;  and  the  finger
nails,  457.

Deer  (see  also  antelope),  charm  to
kill  a,  263;  city  man  refuses  to  shoot,
51;  beaten  In  a  race  with  frog  and
snail,  39;  a  witch,  149.

Deformation,  if  nails  cut,  338.

Dentist,  395.

Departure,  causing  one's,  247,  271.

Depression,  and  good  news,  458.

Despotism,  In  Africa,  9.

Devil  (see  also  Faust  Legend),  524,  550,
557;  In  Africa  and  America,  549ff.;
bound  by  luck  ball,  564;  leaves  at
baptism,  569;  blackbirds  of  the,  84;
visited  by  birds,  550fT.;  calling  the,
141,  358,  553;  and  drowned  cats,  471;
and  frizzly  chickens,  291;  and  red,
221;  compact  with  the,  257;  and  con-
jure, 168,  190,  206,  229,  230;  and  the
souls  of  the  dead,  85;  in  dreams,  571;


614


Index


undresses  to  eat,  37;  and  the  left
hand, 46,  457;  buys  soul  of  Jack,  136;
kept  away,  233,  293;  lacing  in  the,
428;  letting  out  the,  359;  and  Marie
Laveau,  180;  marriage  to  the,  37,
289,  556;  tales  among  Negroes,  36ff.;
in  Negro  religion,  114;  and  the  rooster
487;  as  a  black  snake,  498;  and  sneez-
ing, 454;  and  nails  cut  on  Sunday,
401ff.;  sucks  his  teeth,  426;  treeing
the,  540;  in  Negro  visions,  541ff.;
in  weather-lore,  518ff.;  has  souls
of  witches,  151.

Devil's  Shoe  string,  224,  234,  245,  269,
273.

Devil's  Snuff,  224,  235,  241,  245,  276,
387,  558.

Dew,  for  beauty,  328;  and  plant-lice,
46;  for  tetter,  389.

Dew-claws,  357.

Dime,  and  conjure,  234,  280,  288,  289;
forcramps,  375;  for  rheumatism,  362.

Diphtheria,  370.

Dirt  (see  also  clay,  dust,  and  grave-
yard dirt),  dreams  of,  499;  swept
over  baby,  340,  342;  piled  in  corner,
395;  finger  stuck  into,  96;  thrown
into  grave,  95;  from  under  nails,
402ff.;  from  red  ant's  nest,  299;
evidence  of  witches,  152.

Dirt-daubers,  283,  333,  375,  508.

Discipline,  by  conjure,  284.

Disease  (see  sickness).

Disguise,  from  spirits,  482.

Dish,  breaking  a,  321,  445ff.;  broken  by
ghosts,  118,  126;  man  changes  to  a
silver,  289;  writing  on  a,  413.

Dishpan,  pounding  on  a,  218.

Dishrag,  for  boils,  378;  to  restore  cow
cud,  287;  dropped,  439ff.;  for  weak
eyes,  382;  for  warts,  382.

Dish  water,  spilled,  409.

Disposition  of  child,  339.

Ditch,  432.

Divination,  280ff.,  568ff.

Divining  rod,  154,  207.

Divorce,  does  not  effect  widow's  grief,  90.

Dobby,    133.

Doctor,  seventh  son  makes  a  good,  138.


Dog,  478ff.;  in  Africa,  35;  brains  of  a,
49,  and  conjure,  248ff.,  255;  for  con-
sumption, 370ff.;  wears  crepe,  92;
howling  at  death,  83;  the  devil,  543,
552;  cutting  dew-claws  of,  357;
dodging  the,  248ff.;  to  cure  dog,
389ff.;  dream  of  a,  571;  dung  of,  225;
putty  in  eyes  of,  138;  cures  sores  and
fever  blisters,  377;  to  reduce  food  of
a,  318;  grease  from  a,361;and  ghosts,
103,  116,  117,  120,  128ff.,  130,  132,
143,  144,  543;  hair  of  a,  228,  269,
274;  eats  Hairy  Man,  51;  kept  at
home,  31 6ff.;  imitated,  216;  improved,
318;  killed,  318,  435;  draws  light-
ning, 48;  and  pre-natal  influ-
ences, 332;  fooled  by  rabbit,  46;
in  riddles,  53;  can  talk,  31,  545;
teeth  for  teething,  347;  treads  on
tooth,  347;  avoids  haunted  tree,  116;
eaten  by  voodoos,  187;  weather-lore,
505;  and  witches,  147,  156.

Dog-bite,  graveyard  dirt  for,  247.

Dog-days,  insect  bites  fatal  during,  45.

Dog-fennel,  for  cholera,  389;  a  con-
traceptive, 332;  for  fever,  367.

Dog-finger,  46.

Dogwood,  burning,  421;  a  contracep-
tive, 332.

Dollar-leaf,  for  bad  breath,  389;  for
colds,  369.

Dolls,  on  Negro  graves,  105;  to  win
love,  265.

Donar  (see  also  Thor),  157,  328,  373.

Donkeys,  and  ghosts,  129,  132.

Door,  broom  across  the,  156,  218,  483;
charm  near  the,  180,  271,  326;  look-
ing past  to  see  ghosts,  139;  hair  near
the,  316,  325;  horseshoe  over  the,
158,  476ff.;  leaving  by  the  same
413;  new,  415;  pepper  over  the,  289;
returning  by  the,  425;  rooster  at  the,
485;  salt  in  the,  160;  spade  before
the,  412.

Door  knobs,  changed  to  avoid  ghosts,
99ff.,  142.

Doorsteps,  conjure  near  the,  231,  237,
266,  267,  286;  mustard  seed  under
the,  144.


Index


615


Dough,  for  chills,  366;  image  of,  243.

Dove,  for  bacliache,  363;  in  courting
rhyme,  77;  ghost  as  a,  120;  goes  to
heaven,  560;  heart  of  a,  268;  killing  a,
435ff.;  omens  given  by  a,  326,  488,
510;  wishing  on  a,  354.

Dreams,  85,  496ff.;  and  Christianity,
539,  570fr.;  of  the  devil,  557;  ex-
planation of,  109fF. ;  of  future  mate,
328ff.;  and  the  other  world,  113;
of  red,  220ff.;  of  snakes,  294,  322,
580;  and  the  soul  concept,  169;  of  a
swamp,  115;  and  the  voodoos,  ISSflf.;
of  water,  394.

Dream-soul,  109ff.,  340.

Dress,  biting  butterfly's  head  off  for
a,  312,  325;  shaken  at  moon,  327;
getting  a  new,  447;  pin  taken  from
the,  495;  sewing  while  on,  405;  tear-
ing a,  447;  front  wet,  407,  457.

Drink,  from  a  bell,  342;  from  a  carried
bucket,  412;  conjure  in,  224;  from  a
lake,  442;  of  Negro  preacher,  536;
reptile  in,  250;  from  a  spring,  434.

Drinking,  habit  of  broken  up,  260,  289.

Drowned,  352;  born  to  be,  335ff.;  cats,
471;  man  floats  on  ninth  day,  352;
the  miller,  414.

Drought,  and  church  contributions,
568.

Druids,  507.

Drum,  in  Africa  and  America,  57fT.;
and  voodoo,  195.

Drunkard,  marrying  a,  407.

Ducks,  blood  for  conjure,  295;  and
weather-lore,  510ff.

Duel,  with  the  devil,  556.

Dung,  of  chicken,  297,  308,  388ff.;  to
cause  constipation,  255ff.;  of  cow,
249;  of  dog,  225;  of  goat  to  avoid
ghosts,  144;  of  sheep,  388ff.;  of  rab-
bit for  teething,  347;  of  chickens  for
toothache,  373.

Dust,  of  grave,  448;  in  luck  ball,  233;
from  reptiles,  250ff.;  for  sty,  382;
how  swept,  396;  from  track,    266.

Dyspepsia,  cure  for,  389.


Eagle,  dreams  of  an,  503;  and  luck,
356;  goes  to  heaven,  560.

Ears,  450;  bored  for  weak  eyes,  382;
and  ghosts,  130,  139;  riddle  about,
53,  size  of,  456;  snake  from  the  253.

Earache,  375.

Earrings,  for  weak  eyes,  382;  for  rheu-
matism, 361.

Earth,  for  snake  bite,  378.

Earthquake-hole,  47.

Easter,  death  on,  83;  customs  of  Negroes,
55;  sun  shouts  on,  577.

Eating,  while  lying  down,  413;  too  fast,
393;  with  hat  on,  394;  from  same
plate,  395.

Echo,  in  riddles,  53.

Eclipse,  47,  205,  356.

Education,  by  song,  71;  and  supersti-
tion, 579ff'.

Eel,  44.

Eelskin,  for  backache,  363ff.;  for
drunkards,  389;  for  growing  hair,
322;  for  headache,  379;  for  sprains,
375.

Eggs,  put  in  bed,  413;  for  birthmarks,
340ff.;  for  conjure,  241,  299;  dreams
of  500ff'.;  Easter,  55;  to  see  ghosts,
139;  to  cure  goiter,  374;  manner  of
hatching,  48;  gathered  at  night,  419;
in  riddles,  322;  how  set,  322;  shells  of,
155,  323,  408;  of  guinea  taken  up  with
spoon,  48.

Elbow,  kissed,  326,  357;  struck,  452.

Elderberry,  for  boils,  378;  for  burns,
387;  for  red  bugs,  388;  for  teething,
346.

Elements,  red,  464.

Elephant,  beaten  by  chameleon,  39;
for  conjure,  217;  fooled  by  rabbit,  38;
in  Negro  tales,  33;  devises  tar  baby,
40;  fooled  by  tortoise,  38.

Elephant  glide,  70.
Eleven,  at  table,  405.
Elisha,  113.

Enemies,  and  conjure,  245,  524;  deal-
ing with,  248,  260,  270ff.,  296;  and


616


Index


finger  nails,  457;  haunted  by  ghost
of,  119;  making,  410;  and  rats,  480;
and  snakes,  322,  497,  553,  580.

Epilepsy,  362.

Epsom  salts,  for  rheumatism,  364.

Ethnocentrism,  and  humor,  50ff.

Etiquette  and  signs,  393flF.,  432.

European,  contributions  to  Negro  lore,
78,  80fF.,  495flF.,  519.

Eve,  conjure  root  called,  246.

Evergreen,  dying,  493.

Evil  eye,  460,  476,  551.

Examinations,  and  hair,  580.

Exhorters,  among  Negro  Christians,  538.

Eyes    (see   also   cross    eyed,    evil   eye,
Judas  eye,  and  sty),  447;  at  birth,
138;  black,  74,  388;  of  a  cat,  226;
color  of,  456;  of  a  conjurer,  201flF.;
of  a  corpse,  81,  84fF.,  570;  crossed,
460;  enlarged,  216;  of  a  fish,  234;  of
ghosts,  117,  129;  shut  to  avoid  Jack-
o'-my-lantern,  134;  killed  by  the,  148
meeting,    277,    326;    of    a     needle
138;   removing  objects  in  the,   383
sand  in  owl's,  482;  from  a  potato,  365
trouble  with  the,  382;  walled,  433
and    seeing   the   wind,    505ff.;   of    a
witch,  147;  of  a  wolf,  315.

Eyeballs,  for  love  charms,  261.

Eyebrows,  meeting,  138,  455ff.;  and
the  weather,  513.

Eyeglasses,  a  fetish,  173.

Face,  burning,  452;  of  conjurer,  202;
washed  in  dew,  328,  389;  born  down,
355ff.;  washed  and  rubbed  to  see
ghosts,  139;  looking  in  the,  243;
held  in  the  rain,  341;  washed  before
sleeping,  496;  spider  before  the,  492;
cat  washing  his,  471;  and  witches,
147.

Fair,  weather,  509,  512,  514flF.

Fairies,  116,  132;  avoiding  the,  143;
food  left  for  the  394,  414;  iron  used
against,  478;  teach  music,  554;  ab-
sent with  Negroes,  145fT.;  Friday
for  play  of,  404;  stirrups  of  the,  153.

Faith,  power  of,  300ff.


Falling  palate,  368ff.

Falling,  445;  dreams  of,  571.

Falsehoods  (see  also  hypocrisy  and
liar),  and  dresses,  527;  of  Negroes,
527,  537;  and  saliva,  455;  and  sew-
ing, 405;  and  bump  on  tongue,  458.

Fangs,  of  snake,  250.

Fast  luck,  273.

Fasting,  and  birthmarks,  340;  for  cat,
470;  of  Negro  converts,  538;  to  in-
duce the  spirit,  198;  in  voodooism,
187,  189.

Fat,  of  snake,  251,  390;  for  burns,  387;
for  ghosts,  140.

Father,  dreams  of,  504ff.;  seen  in
mirror,  344.

Faust  Legend  (see  also  devil),  257,
553ff.

Feast,  at  funerals,  97.

Feathers,  of  buzzard,  347,  362;  chicken,
219,  232,  285,  495;  and  conjure,  189,
197,  218,  226,  227,  236,  271,  274,
288;  and  a  hard  death,  81;  in  pil-
lows, 359;  smoke  from  333;  in  voo-
dooism, 184.

February,  why  only  28  days  in,  558.

Fecundity,  in  Africa,  8,  23ff.;  pro-
moted, 261.

Feet,  273,  451flf.;  bare,  185;  clothes  put
on  over,  337;  of  corpse,  88;  worked
for  cramps,  376;  of  the  devil,  552;
dog,  479;  born  first,  336;  of  frog,  270;
and  ghosts,  119,  144;  graveyard
dirt  on  the,  248;  to  keep  from  hurting
the,  290;  of  mole,  316,  345;  patting
of  the,  532,  538;  salve  on  the,  293;
hurt  by  shoes,  427;  gone  to  sleep,  386;
sore,  428;  stepped  over,  418;  swept,
339,  397;  tingling,  151;  and  weather-
lore,  508.

Fellom-City,  14.

Femur,  of  pig,  314.

Fence,  handing  baby  over  a,  343;
rooster  crowing  on  the,  487;  con-
jure on  the,  278;  shaking  hands  over
the,  418.

Fern,  seed  and  ghost,  144.

Festivals,  voodoo,  183ff.


Index


617


Fetch,  133.

Fetishism,  170ff.;  practical  applications
of,  259;  survivals  of,  524ff.

Fever  (see  also  scarlet  fever  and  typhoid),
and  conjure,  195,  244,  302;  and  dung,
255;  and  fallen  palate,  368.

Fever  blister,  377,  458.

Fiddle,  and  the  devil,  554;  tabooed,
527.

Field,  hoe  left  in  the,  418.

Fighting,  of  chickens,  487;  and  nail
cutting,  402.

File,  to  break  love,  268,  270.

Finger  (see  also  conjure  finger,  dog
finger,  and  thumb),  end  of  baby's,
236;  in  conjure  bag,  236;  crossed,
142,  460;  to  form  crow's  nest,  55flF.;
to  stop  defecation,  256;  to  wake
foot  up,  386;  little,  318;  locked,  483;
to  find  things  lost,  324^;  middle,  246,
422;  planting  with  the,  324;  point-
ing the,  429,  433;  pricked,  266;  and
rings,  432;  rotting  of  the,  95ff.,  312;
saliva  on,  450;  of  a  suicide,  226;  to
detect  thief,  282;  of  the  dead  for
toothache,  373;  to  dress  vulva,  333;
and  witches,  152.

Finger  nails,  399fF.;  color  of,  457;  and
conjure,  218,  220,  229,  237,  241,  266,
270,  295;  not  cut,  338;  cut  by  the
devil,  555;  dreams  of  the,  504;  cut  for
weak  eyes,  382;  for  fits,  338;  in
heaven,  399;  looking  at  the,  460;
spots  on  the,  457ff.;  cut  on  Sunday,
557;    and  witchcraft,  175.

fire  (see  also  burning),  419fT.,  443ff.;
cat  before  the,  507;  for  charms,  296,
297,  563;  and  frizzly  chickens,  291,
devil  in  the,  556;  throwing  food  into
the,  409;  and  ghosts,  116,  117,  122,
142,  145;  hair  thrown  into  the,  454;
in  hell,  550;  house  protected  against,
259;  and  Jack-o'-my-lantern,  133fF.;
13SflP.;  old  method  of  kindling,  33;
throwing  milk  into  the,  419;  nails  in
the,  337;  and  owls,  483;  applied  to
placenta,  333;  proverb  about,  54;  for
rain,  321;  salt  in  the,  442,  497,  501;


skillet  on  the,  409,  444;  and  snakes,
322;  and  tracks,  269;  and  voodooism,
291;  and  weather,  513;  and  wind,
505;  witch  in  the,  161.

Fire  dance,  566.

Firefly  (see  lightning  bug).

Fireplace,  443ff'.;  bottle  in  the,  299;
crickets  and  ants  near  the,  492;  and
ghosts,  143;  and  hawks,  323;  per-
simmon wood  in,  420;  rat  on  the,
480;  swept,  396;  wood  from  the,  357;
in  verse,  76;  witch  in  the,  150.

Fire  tongs,  licked  for  sore  throat,  386.

Fish,  bones  of,  299;  dreams  of,  501,
571;  eye  of  a,  234;  falls  back,  466;
grease  from,  363;  photograph  in  a,
272;  swim  bladder  of  a,  355.

Fishing,  354ff.,  428;  charms  for,  260;
on  Sunday,  72.

Fists,  clenched  at  birth,  336.

Fits,  384;  and  conjure,  309;  cures  for,
362;  and  nail  cutting,  338;  in  voo-
dooism,   182.

Flannel  (see  red  flannel).

Flatiron,  and  conjure,  296.

Flattery,  in  Negro  mourning,  89flF.

Fleas,  driven  off,  317.

Flesh,  jumping,  452;  ridged  up,  216.

Floor,  dirt  on  the,  396;  hair  on  the,  266;
log  falling  on  the,  443;  pin  on  the,
495;  spitting  on  the,  489.

Flour,  and  conjure,  240,  553.

Flowers,  dreams  of,  503;  to  stop  rain,
321;  blooming  out  of  season,  493;  for
the  sick,  432.

Fly,  and  the  devil,  37,  552;  driven  off,
317;  omens  given  by  a,  492ff.,  508.

Flying,  visions  of,  542.

Fodder,  to  locate  drowned,  352.

Food,  of  babies,  337ff.,  343;  and  con-
jure, 224,  309;  given  to  dead,  102,
103;  for  fairies,  414;  attracts  ghosts,
98,  104,  453;  graveyard  dirt  in,  247;
during  menstruation,  423;  sneezing
with,  453;  stirring,  408;  taboos  re-
garding, 260;  thrown  away,  98,  396;
offered  by  voodoos,  219;  how  eaten
by  witches,  153.


618


Index


Fog,  and  weather,  514.

Folk-rhymes  (see  rhymes).

Folk-tales,  of  Africans  and  Negroes,
3  Iff.

Fontanel,  341.

Fool,  and  falling  from  bed,  342;  kissed
by  a,  450.

Foot  (see  also  feet  and  rabbit's  foot),
conjured  in  the,  235;  milk  on  cow's,
324;  hitting  the,  448;  of  jay,  314;
left,  508,  571;  of  toad,  240;  print  of
witches',  156.

Foot  wash,  71,  544.

Foresight,  lack  of,  9.

Forest,  home  of  ghost,  113.

Fork,  placed  in  the  Bible,  141;  in
milk,  419;  of  the  road,  382;  under
sieve,  163;  at  the  table,  440;  licked
for  sore  throat,  386;  and  witches,
156,    158ff.

Fortunes,  telling,  336.

Fowl,  buried  alive,  219.

Fox,  in  Africa,  34;  man  imitates,  216;
ridden  by  Brer  Rabbit,  37;  traps
rabbit,  40;  frozen  tail  of,  36.

Foxtrot,  70.

Frenchman,  devises  a  tar  baby,  40.

Frenzy,  in  Negro  religion,  537ff.

Fretfulness,  341flF.;  caused  by  absence
of  soul.  111.

Freya,  150,  472.

Friday  (see  also  Good  Friday),  born
on,  336;  and  conjure,  228;dreams  on,
496;  fear  of,  581;  cutting  garments
on,  409;  and  ghosts,  117;  jaybird
goes  to  hell  on,  550;  cutting  nails
on,  401fF.,  403;  sewing  on,  194;
sneezing  on,  454;  sweeping  on,  396;
unlucky,    403fF.;    wedding    on,    330.

Friend,  loosing  a,  399;  mistreating  a,
432;   summoned,   357;   untrue,   289.

Friendship,  431;  broken  up,  423,  445;
and  hairpins,  447;  and  nails,  457;
and  rings,  422;  and  pepper  and  salt,
409;   and   washing   together,   408.

Frigg,  468,  481.

Frightening,  makes  knock-knees,  342.

Frog,  for  backache,  364;  in  the  body,


250,  304;  bone  of  a,  315;  eats  fire
and    buckshot,   45;    for   chills,    365;
and  conjure,  224,  226,  236,  240fF.;
250ff.,265,  267,  270,  276;  who  went  a
courting,  75S.;  beats  deer  In  a  race,
39;  devil  as  a,   552;  eaten,   222;   a
fetish,   173;   present   form  of,  42;  a
ghost,    130;   for   goiter,   374;   in   the
house,  481;  killed,  435;  lard  from  a,
263;  sacred  legend   about  the,   560
upon  Pharaoh,  71ff.;  for  rain,  321
for  scrofula,  384;  for  teething,  346
in    Ebo    verse,    17;    in    voodooism,
185;  and   warts,   381;  and  weather-
lore,   507;   a   witch,   150.

Frost,  514.

Frostbites,  cures  for,  388.

Froth,  on  coffee,  463.

Fruit,  and  conjure,  385;  dreams  of,
502;  pointed  at,  429.

Frying  pan,  76;  sopping  from  the,  408.

Funeral  (see  also  burial,  coffin,  corpse,
hearse,  and  grave),  in  Africa  and
America,  87ff. ;  crov/s  and  a,  490;
demanded  by  the  dead,  101;  dreams
of  a,  499;  indicated  by  whizzing  of
fire,  444;  fun  at  a,  77ff.;  and  status
of  ghost,  90flF.;  of  Marie  Laveau,
180;  multiple,  92ff.;  at  night,  97;
of  preacher,  93;  procession,  87ff.,
433;  rain  after  a,  570.

Fur,  bags  of,  229.

Furniture,  cracking  of,  444ff.;  haunted,
127ff.

Future,  divination  of  the,  355ff.

Gabriel,  94.

Gall,  of  beef  for  conjure,  293;  for  rheu-
matism,   364;    for    stuttering,    342.

Gambling,  conjure  for,  210,  234,  245,
283;  prayers  regarding,  537;  in
Negro  song,  67.

Games,  survivals  of  African,  56;
goofering  a,  319;  of  Negroes,  54if.;
funeral  survivals  in,  102.

Garden,  altering  the,  415.

Garlic  (see  also  he-garlic  and  onion)
in  conjure,  306;  lucky,  314.


Index


619


Garments,  conjure  by,  229,  238;  cut
on  Friday,  407;  and  bone  of  frog,
265;  wrongside  out,  447.

Garrets,    home   of   ghosts,    116.

Gate,  charm  under  the,  291;  shutting
a,  432.

Geese,  feathers  from,  288,  grease  for
colds,  370;  make  state  initials,  47;
and  weather-lore,  510ff.

Generosity,  shown  by  ears,  456.

Ghosts  (see  also  plat-eye),  11  Iff.;
in  Africa,  104,  169ff.,  262;  kept  off
by  Bible,  569;  leaves  body,  86;
inactive  before  burial,  86;  as  cats,
468  ff.,  470;  attracted  by  former
clothes,  98ff;  seen  by  cock,  485;  of
conjurers,  214;  how  dealt  with,  88,
90ff.,  97,  101,  106ff.,  207,  259,
447,  452,  473,  524,  567;  and  dogs,
479;  seen  in  dreams,  85,  498ff.;
feeding  the,  102ff.;  shown  by  flame,
556;  attracted  by  food,  396,  453;
and  graveyard  dirt,  248;  connected
with  grave,  95,  96;  and  horseshoes,
477;  and  mirrors,  82;  and  old  people,
394;  in  Negro  religion,  569;  and
silver,  288,  289;  injured  by  sweeping,
85;  talked   to,   262ff.,   336.

Ghouls,  153.

Giant,  ghost  like  a,  128.

Gifts,  to  the  dead,  lOlff.;  dreams  of,
499;  with  an  edge,  431;  on  finger
nails,  457ff.;  getting,  318;  and  love,
209;  of  shoes,  427ff.

Gizzard,  for  beauty,  356;  of  chicken,
223,  240,  242;  for  conjure,  298;  for
dyspepsia,  389.

Glass,  breaking  a,  444ff.;  and  conjure,
240;  smoked  for  divination,  356;
button  on  dog,  114;  upside  down,
388;  moisture  on  a,  513.

Glove,  of  Christ,  557if.;  found,  495.

Gnat,  a  ghost,  120;  a  witch,  150,  161.

Goat  (see  also  kid),  horn  of  sucked
from  body,  303;  butts  man's  brains
out,  49;  dung  to  drive  off  ghost,
144;  mistaken  for  ghost,  132;  skin
of  a,  218;  milk  to  see  the  wind,  506.


God,  in  West  Africa,  523ff.;  and  con-
jure, 204,  229,  300,  577;  name  of  in
divination,  281ff.;  in  dreams,  571;
and  ghosts,  140ff.;  and  lizards,  560;
in  Negro  visions,  541ff.

Goiter,  374.

Gold,  and  ghosts,  125,  263;  in  the
mouth,  372;  ore,  225;  ring  for  sties,
382;  and  witches,  164.

Goliath,  205,  564.

Gonorrhea,  385.

Goober  (see  also  peanut),  15.

Good  Friday,  323ff.,  404,  562.

Good  luck,  typical  actions  causing,
41,  196,  238,  245flF.,  258,  291,  313ff.,
323,  328,  330,  338,  339,  352ff.,
409;  omens  of,  336,  442ff.,  496,  500,
571.

Goofer,  231,  319;  dust,  215.

Gossip,  452,  458;  and  dream  omens,
504.

Gourd,  and  conjure,  274;  slave  musical
instrument,  57;  seed  from  a,  256;
and  witches,  155,  161.

Government,  in  Africa  and  America,
25ff.

Grandmother,  cursed,  425.

Grant,  in  Negro  song,  65.

Grapevine,  and  conjure,  246,  298;
to  keep  ghosts  down,  107;  to  grow
hair,  318.

Grass,  on  sinner's  grave,  86;  and  the
new  moon,  327.

Grasshopper,  for  chills,  366;  as  the
devil,  552;  a  ghost,  130;  a  jack-o'-
my-lantern,  135;  nest  for  teething,
347;  and  witches,  155.

Grate  (see  fireplace).

Gratitude,   not   expressed,   400.

Grave,  94ff.;  and  cedars,  421;  and
conjure,  297;  decorations  of,  80;
dreams  of,  499;  dust  from  the,  448;
fetishes,  173;  food  on  the,  102;
ghosts  near  the,  126;  and  a  spade  or
hoe,  411;  measuring  for  the,  479;
cutting  mother's,  431;  pointing  at  a,
96,    312,    433ff.;    dug    with    silver


620


Index


spade,    289;    standing    on    a,    451;
walked  on,  462.

Graveyard,  cat  cooked  in  a,  258;
dirt  for  conjure,  102,  189,  194,  196,
206,  208,  210,  220,  232,  235ff.,
239,  246ff.,  286,  275,  278,  290,  525;
and  comfortable  feet,  144;  and
crossed  fingers,  142;  and  ghosts,
116,  121,  139ff.;  praying  in  the,  538,
541,  569;  rabbit  from  the,  474ff.;
snake,  553.

Gravy,  of  cat  for  consumption,  370.

Gray,  married  in,  330.

Grease,  from  buzzard,  389;  of  dog
for  consumption,  370;  from  fish,
363;  eaten  to  see  ghosts,  140;  of
dishes  for  pregnancy,  332;  for
rheumatism,  361;  story  of  the  tell-
tale, 38;  and  witches,  155,  161;  on
nail  for  wounds,   376.

Greeley,  in  Negro  song,  65.

Green,  married  in,  330.

Greetings,  to  the  dead,  93ff.

Griff  e,  180.

Grigri,  16,  186,  218,  225,  226.

Ground,  cow  milked  on  the,  419;
spitting  on  the,  460.

Ground  pine,  for  menstrual  pains,  386.

Ground  puppies,  barking,  481;  and
conjure,  240,  251.

Growth,  and  conjure,  218,  243;  of
hair,  401;  and  the  moon,  349ff.;
and  being  stepped  over,  339.

Guest  (see  visitor).

Guinea,  fools  Brer  Rabbit,  38fF.;
eggs  removed  with  a  spoon,  48.

Guitar,  played  by  Satan,  555.

Gull,  a  witch,  149.

Gullah,  origin  of  term,  16.

Gullah  Jack,  15,  284.

Gum,  arable,  240;  elastic,  13,  238;
chewed  in  trading,  277.

Gums,  blue,  74;  204,  308,  378,  458;
when  teething,  347.

Gumbo,  at  voodoo  feasts,  184,  186,
193.

Gun,  barrel  for  divination,  356;  fired
to   locate   drowned,    352;    placed    in


the  fire,  264;  to  frighten  off  ghosts,
109.
Gunpowder,    and    conjure,    225,    241,
269,  274,  278;  a  contraceptive,  331;
to  make  a  dog  smart,  318.

Hair,  398ff.,  454ff.;  to  tame  animals,
316;  for  asthma,  370;  unplatted  by
devil's   blackbirds,   84,   557;   of  dog
for  bites,  390ff.;  combing  the,  440
during  confinement,   334;   for  colic
370;  and  conjure,  175,  180,  189,  194
201,  203,  208,  212,  218ff,  223,  226
228ff,  232,   236ff.,   240,   249,   266ff.^
269fr.,  274,  276,  293,  295,  299,  300
304,  309,  325,  495,  525;  for  croup
360;  not  cut,  338;  decorations  of  the
27;  for  earache,  375;  and  examina
tions,  580;  and  fallen  palate,   368ff.
for  fits,   384;  to  avoid  ghosts,   143
of  God,  542;  for  goiter,  374;  to  grow,
318,   322,   357;   hairpin  falling  from
the,  447;  held  over  hell  by  the,  542
of  horse,   182;  matches  in  the,  143
of  future  mate,  326ff.;  demon  with
matted,  40;  and  the  moon,  327,  349
omens  regarding  the,  456;  red,  323
461,  475;  loose  in  voodoo  rites,  185
splinter    in    the,    387;    of   the    dead
placed   in   tree,    107;   and   whooping
cough,  372;  and  witches,  151ff.

Hair  ball,  for  conjure,  231.

Hairdresser,  180.

Hairpin,  447;  dropped,  398;  over  the
lamp,  483;  removed  at  voodoo
rites,   193.

Hallowe'en,  119,  329,  356.

Hands,  4S0fF.;  walking  on  backs  of
the,  216;  bread  broken  in  the,  408;
cold,  456;  conjure  in  the,  230;  of  the
dead^  24;  chickens  die  in  the,  436;
graveyard  dirt  on  the,  247;  behind
head,  425;  kissed,  461;  the  left,
46,  296,  395,  423,  448;  the  right,
139,  207;  of  dead  for  shingles,
374;  devil's  snuff  on  the,  245;
tingling,  151;  touched  by  the,  462;
spit  in  when  trading,  318;  urine  on


Index


621


the,  273;  washing  the,  343,  496;
shaken  through  a  window,  418;  of
witches,   149;  worms  in  the,  252.

Handkerchief,  and  love  divination,
328,  found,  495;  as  a  gift,  431;  of
voodoo  king,  181;  and  owls,  483.

Hanged,  born  to  be,  336;  and  eye-
brows, 456.

Happiness,  356,  448.

Hare  (see  rabbit).

Harelip,  of  conjurer,  201.

Hats,  430;  and  babies,  344ff.;  on  back-
wards, 473;  bat  in  the,  353;  bow
from,  325;  to  take  up  collection,  141;
in  conjure,  214,  224,  252,  275ff.,
292;  and  setting  eggs,  323;  placed  on
furniture,  410;  to  avoid  ghosts,
143ff.;  hair  in,  325;  knocked  off  by
ghost  of  a  house,  115;  worn  in  the
house,  394;  needles  in  the,  460;
upside  down,  473.

Haunt  (see  ghost).

Hawks,  and  chickens,  323,  417;  and
horseshoes,  291;  stone  used  against,
323.

Hay,  in  pig's  mouth,  505.

Head,  at  foot  of  bed,  416;  bird  on  the,
489;  books  on  the,  434;  bucket  on
the,  412;  of  butterfly,  325;  and
character,  74;  of  cat,  471;  coat  over
the,  430;  of  corpse,  533;  of  dog,  479
of  goat,  144;  and  ghosts,  118,  144
145;  hands  behind  the,  425;  hard
436;  squeezed  for  headache,  379
and  hoodoo  bag,  165;  of  horse,  477
itching  of  the,  452;  lizard  dust  on
the,  266;  in  the  loft,  344;  raw,  73
of  rooster,  485fF.;  of  snake,  226
249ff.;  strength  of,  189;  touched,  400,

Headache,  379;  and  conjure,  227,  274
307ff.;    and    hair   combings,    399ff.
and  borrowed  hat,  430;  Jimson  weed
for,  364;  and  photographs,  244;  pre-
vented, 275;  and  tracks,  433.

Health,  and  sun  and  moon,  349.

Hearse,  88ff.

Heart,  of  a  bat,  243;  washed  in  blood,
541if.;    of    snake    for    consumption,


370;  of  dove,  268;  hair  near  the,  325;
image  of  the,  219;  for  nosebleed,
376;  of  snake,  321;  trouble,  388;
eaten  by  a  witch,  148.

Heart's  Root,  for  conjure,  266.

Heaven  (see  also  other  world),  145;
birds  go  to,  560;  Negro's  concept  of,
102;  and  dreams,  503,  571;  Jack
goes  to,  136;  hair  and  nails  needed
in,  399;  visions  of,   533ff.,   542ff.

Hedgehog,  wins  race  with  rabbit,  39.

Heel,  dust  from  the,  272;  frostbitten,
388;  shoe  wears  out  in  the,  446;
stepped  on,  462;  walking  on  the,  216.

He-garlic,  lucky,  314.

Heifer,   for   consumption,   370.

Height,  at  two  years,  339.

Hel,  481.

Hell,  145;  visited  by  birds,  550ff.;
dreams  of,  503,  571;  and  Jack-o'-
my-lantern,  135ff.;  signs  of,  85,  570;
woman  goes  to,  289;  visions  of,  542.

Hemorrhage  (see  also  bleeding),  puer-
peral, 221.

Hens,  crowing,  74,  232,  467,  487;  set
in  May,  419;  riddle  about,  52;  to
secure,  322S.;  to  stop  from  setting,
323;  for  snake  bite,  378.

Hen  house,  for  smarting  eyes,  384;  for
chicken  pox,  386.

Herbs,  in  hoodoo's  grave,  101.

Hiccoughs,  372.

Hickory,  and  conjure,  297;  bark  of  and
Zaccheus,  558.

High  John  the  Conqueror,  299.

Hill,  and  children,  343;  dove  heard
when  climbing,  488;  dreams  of  a,  503.

Hippopotamus,  fooled  by  spider  and
tortoise,  38.

Hips,  greased  during  pregnancy,  332.

History,  in  Negro  song,  65.

Hob-goblin,  133.

Hoboulard,  133.

Hobthrust,  133.

Hoe,  411;  by  house  or  in  field,  418;
Negro   chooses   the,   547.

Hog  (see  also  bacon,  lard,  and  pork),
212;  and  butter  beans,  429;  blood  of,


622


Index


232;  eats  up  chills,  365;  for  colds,
369;  led  away  by  conjurer,  203;
saving  food  of,  357;  hoof  for  fever,
367;  a  ghost,  120;  femur  for  good
luck,  314;  marrow  from  jowl  of,  387;
devil  jumps  between  legs  of,  551;
killed  on  large  of  moon,  3  50;
sacred,  506;  rubbing  stump,  368;
for  teething,  346;  for  toothache,  373;
and  weather,  505;  for  whooping
cough,  371;  can  see  the  wind,  557.

Hole,  dug  by  dogs,  479;  in  ear  to  see
ghosts,  139;  for  witches  to  enter
house,  147.

Holly,  for  measles,  387.

Holy  Ghost,  128.

Honey,  for  blindness,  276;  for  colds,
369;  for  consumption,  371.

Honey  locust,  thorn  from  the,  244.

Honor,  gaining,  260.

Hoodoo,  in  Negro  song,  168.

Hoof,  grease  from  cow's,  361;  of  hog
for  fever,  367.

Hooting,  of  owl,  481ff.

Horehound,  389.

Horns,  of  antelope,  197;  fetishes,  172;
and  conjure,  218;  of  cow,  271,  359;
of  the  devil,  551;  in  voodoo  rites,
182flF.;  fights  witches,   159.

Hornet,   lives   until   sundown,   44.

Horse,  476fF.;  detects  hoodoo,  291;
conjurer  called  a,  159,  201,  204;
changes  to  a  cow,  286;  not  able  to
move  stubborn  corpse,  123;  and
divination,  158flF.;  dying,  136;  putty
in  eyes,  138;  flying,  136ff.,  512;
and  ghosts,  120,  121,  127,  130;  hair
for  goiter,  374;  omens  at  graveyard,
94;  headless,  129;  in  heaven,  542;
and  hearse,  89;  consumed  by  Jack-
o'-my-lantern,  135;  draws  lightning,
48;  born  in  May,  46;  nails  of,  228;
stamping,  353ff.;  water  for  tooth-
ache, 373;  wallow,  318,  436;  and
weather-lore,  505;  for  whooping
cough,  371;  and  witches,  150,  152,
158fT.,   159.

Horse   chestnut,    lucky,    316.


Horse  crow,  and  rain,  510.

Horsehair,  182;  and  conjure,  225,  308;
for  goiter,  374;  turns  to  a  snake,  251.

Horse  nettle,  for  teething,  346.

Horse   radish,   for  headache,   379.

Horseshoe,  315fF.,  476,  565;  for  conjure,
291;  and  ghosts,  107,  142;  meaning
of  the  477fF.;  and  owls,  483;  and
witches,  158.

House,  409fT.;  altering  the,  100,  415fiF.;
bats  in  the,  481;  broken  up,  269ff.;
moving  broom  to  the,  398;  burning,
421,  436;  buzzard  on  the,  490;
and  cats,  486flF.;  cedar  in  the,  421;
and  children,  335,  444;  cleaned
for  conjure,  291;  wet  clothes  in  the,
407;  lowing  of  cow  before  the,  480;
deserted  after  a  death,  101;  dog's
head  in  the,  479;  dreams  in  a  new,
497;  raided  by  fairies,  404;  ghost  in
the  form  of  a,  115;  going  into  the,
424;  and  graveyard  dirt,  247;  hat
on  in  the,  394;  haunted,  116,  131ff.,
441;  ivy  on  the,  445;  leaving  the,
396;  lightning  bug  in  the,  492;
entering  a  locked,  260,  286;  and
moles,  481;  moon  seen  from  the,  464;
leaving  on  New  Year's  Day,  352;
and  owls,  482flF.,  484;  eating  peanuts
in  the,  415;  returning  to  the,  473;
in  riddles,  52;  rooster  crowing  in
the,  485ff.;  salt  in  the,  290;  flying
squirrel  in  the,  476;  night  in  a
strange,  354;  sweeping  the,  395fF.;
teeth  thrown  over  the,  347;  edged
tools  in  the,  411;  whirlwind  in  front
of  the,  465;  whistling  in  the,  394;
entered  by  witches,  147;  wood-
pecker on   the,  487.

Household,  folk-lore  regarding  the,
317ff.,  438,  496,  546.

Howling,  of  dog,  478fF.

Hulda,  or  Harke,  55.

Hulls,  of  butter  beans,  429flF.

Humor,  in  Africa,  8;  of  ghosts,  13 Iff.;
of  Negroes,  8ff.,  49,  102;  in  rhyme,
76fiF.

Humpty  Dumpty,  53.


Index


623


Hunger,  at  bedtime,  416;  and  comets,

464;  proverb  about,  54.
Hunting,  brains  for,  355;  and  conjure,

168,  210,  260ff.;  person  driven,  152;

escape  while,  51;  in  Negro  rhyme,  75.
Hyena,  in  African  tales,  34;  witch  as  a,

149.
Hypnotism,  in  church,  567;  or  religion,

540flf.
Hypocrisy     (see    also     falsehood     and

liar),    in    Africa    and    America,    9ff.;

in  Negro  song,  68.
Hysterics,  384.

Icarus,  in  Negro  tales,  36.

Ignis  fatuus  (see  Jack-o'-my-lantern).

Ill   luck,   typical   actions   causing,   84,

88,  95flF.,  98,  270,  313,  319,  330,  338,

393flF.;  typical  omens  of,  82,  336,  502.
Image  (see  also  tar  baby),  in  conjure,

206,    228,    242ff.,    296,    525,    553;

spider    caught    on    a    gummed,    40;

souls  in  an,  170ff.;  in  voodooism,  182;

to  kill  witches,  157.
Immorality,  of  Negroes,  527.
Immortality,  cedar  symbol  of,  422.
Impulsiveness,  in  Africa    8.
Indigestion,  cures  for,  388.
Indigo,  snake  of,  378.
Inheritance,  in  Africa,  12.
Initiation,  of  voodoos,  182ff.
Ink,  white  man  chooses,  547;  writing

with  red,  433.
Insanity,  in  Africa,  199;  and  conjure,

168,  216,  260,  271,  274ff.,  276;  cured,

191;   dreams   of,    504;    from    fear   of

ghosts,    125;    and    hair,    325,    400;

from    sleeping    in     moonlight,    416;

omens    of,    504;    and    photographs,

245;  and  spiders,  252.
Insects,   45,  491ff.;  and  conjure,   231;

as  ghosts,  130;  and  weather-lore,  508.
Intestines    (see  also    bowels),  of   slain

grumble,    97;    turned    into    reptiles,

251ff.;   resemble  snakes,   250.
Intoxicants,  fetishes,  176fF.
Invisibility,  producing,  257ff..  556.
Ipecac,  to  remove  frog  from  body,  304.


Irishman,   jokes    about,    50ff.

Iron    (see    also    flatiron),    in    conjure,

218;   used   against   fairies,   478;   rod

of,    208;    thrown    into    a    whirlwind,

358.
Ironing,  406ff.
Ironing     board,     sitting    on     a,     413;

left  up,  412.
Isolation,  effect  upon  superstitions,  11.
Itching,    of    ears,    450;    eyes,    448ff.;

feet,  451fF.;  hand,  450ff.;  head,  452;

lips,  452;  nose,  449.
Ivory  root,  226.
Ivy,  and  bad  luck,  445.

Jack,  in  conjure  and  divination,   168,

206,  229,  279ff.,  306,  565.
Jackal,  34,  40.
Jacket-a-wad,  133.
Jack-o'-my-lantern,    132ff.;    origin    of,

135fT.
Jail,  and  birth,  336;  escaping  from,  248,

277ff.;   and   sweeping,   397.
January,    important    in    weather-lore,

352;    woodpecker    in,    511.
Jataka,  40.
Jaw,  of  conjurer,  201,  203;  of  squirrel,

232.
Jawbone,  70;  and  key  of  slaves,  57,  59.
Jaybird,  for  conjure,  232;  foot  of,  314;

goes  to   hell,   550.
Jazz,  origin  of  term,  69ff.
Jealousy,  sign  of  433.
Jelly,  408;  witch  in  the  form  of,  163.
Jellyfish,    in    conjure,    230.
Jerusalem   oak,   for   fever,   367.
Jesse  James,  475.
Jews,  sacrifice  to  dead,  102.
Jimmy-burties,  133.
Jimson  weed,  for  boils,  378;  for  colds,

370;    for    conjure,    226,    235,    238,

246;    for    headaches,    376,    379;    for

rheumatism,  364;  salve  of,  391;  for

wounds,  377.
Jockey  Club,  273.
Jokes  (see  humor).
Journey  (see  also  travel),  dreams  of  a,

504;  begun  on  Friday,  403.


624


Index


Jowl,  of  a  hog,  387;  for  toothache,  373.

Judas,  405.

Judas  Eye,  188.

Jug,  and  conjure,  243,

Ju-ju  (see  also  fetish),  172.

Jumping,  eye,  449;  flesh,  452.

June,  rain  water  for  weak  eyes,  383;

importance     in     weather-lore,     512;

wedding  in,  330.

Kelpie,  133.

Kernel,  381.

Kerosene,  in  conjure,  236;  for  disease,
359;  for  menstrual  pains,  386;  for
a  salve,  559;  for  sore  throat,  368.

Kettle,  slave   musical   instrument,  56.

Keys,  for  conjure,  231;  slave  musical
instrument,  57;  for  nosebleed,  376.

Keyhole,  seive  over  the,  163;  witch
enters   by   the,    147.

Kicking,  a  dog,  480.

Kid,  blood  of  a,  182;  at  voodoo  feast,
187.

Killing,  a  cat,  470fF.;  a  dog,  480;
owls,  485.

Kin,  sewing  clothes,  406.

Kindling,  taken  to  hell,  550.

King,  of  the  slaves,  59ff.

Kingfisher,    omens    regarding,    466.

King  of  the  Woods,  246;  and  the
Trinity,  559.

Kissing,  423;  unknown  in  Africa,  22;
causes  colic,  343;  elbow,  357;  by  a
fool,  450;  hand,  461;  holy,  545;
money,  430ff.;  and  the  moon,  348,
349;  and  teething,  345;  and  red-
birds,  490fF.;  skirt,  447;  a  stranger,
453;  on  Sunday,  356;  for  thrush,
341;  wife,  209;  a  wound,  391.

Kitchen  (see  also  cooking),  408ff.;
peas  over  door  of,  326;  salt  in  the,
290.

Kitty-candlestick  (see  Jack-o'-my-lan-
tern).

Kjokkenmodings,  or  shell  mounds,  472.

Knee,  abscess  on,  305;  knock,  342;
of  turkey,  309.


Knife,  placed  in  Bible,  141;  in  conjure^
217,  223  ff.;  dropped,  440;  to  avoid
ghosts,  143;  and  Jack-o'-my-lantern,
134fF.;  put  in  milk,  419;  and  owls,
482ff.;  to  stop  rain,  320;  woman  turns
to  a  silver,  289;  to  keep  off  witches^
160,  165.

Knots,  and  chills,  365;  and  doves,  488;.
for  headaches,  379;  and  owls,  483;.
for  warts,  380.

Koran,  a  charm,  547.

Kra  (see  dream-soul).

Ladder,  dreams  of  a,  504;  vision  of  a,,
533;  walking  under  a,  418.

Ladybug,  killing  a,  436.

Lake,  drinking  from  a,  442.

Lamb  (see  also  sheep,  mutton,  and
wool),  not  eaten,  560;  visions  of  a,
543.

Lamps,  411;  from  Egypt,  315;  ex-
tinguished, 445;  on  Negro  graves,
105iT.;   hairpins   over   a,   483.

Language  (see  also  speech),  African
survivals  in  America,  14ff.,  16ff.,
19;  and  folk-lore,  7,  13,  20ff.;  im-
provised, 29;  Negro  mutilations  of,
13ff.,   21.

Lanterns,  carried  by  ghost  dogs,  129;
dreams  of,  504;  and  Pigseys  and
Jack-o'-my-lanterns,  134.

Lap,  sparks  in  the,  443.

Lard,  in  delivering  child,  333ff.;  in
conjure,  212;  for  gonorrhea,  385;
and  graveyard  dirt,  247;  for  piles,
387;  for  red  bugs,  388;  for  rheu-
matism, 363;  in  salve,  559;  for
scrofula,  384.

Lark,  in  courtship  rhyme,  77.

Laughing,  before  breakfast,  417;  and
the  devil,  487;  on  Friday,  404.

Law,  in  West  Africa,  25;  escaping  the,
277ff.

Lawsuit,  and  Christianity,  567.

Laziness,  in  Africa  and  America,  8;
and  brooms,  339,  397;  and  tables,
410.


Index


625


Leap-year,  to  give  devil  another
chance,  558.

Leather,  straps  of,  313,  346.

Leaves,  in  conjure,  218;  rustled  by
ghosts,  114.

Left,  arm,  201;  side  of  bed,  416;  bird
goes  to  the,  489;  cat  crossing  to  the,
469;  side  of  the  face,  457;  significance
of  in  folk-lore,  447ff.;  foot,  508,
571;  side  of  grave,  248;  hand,  246,
266,  290,  296,  395,  423,  457;  side  of
head,  473;  jack  turns  to  the,  281;  call
of  kingfisher  on  the,  466;  owl  hooting
on  the,  484flF.;  pocket,  266,  360,  392;
foot  of  rabbit,  474;  rabbit  going  to
the,  472;  rat  running  to  the,  467;
shoe,  427,  446,  478;  shoulder,  138flF.,
143,  248,  318,  325,  327,  381,  382,
442,  464,  474,  476flt.;  side,  331;
teat  of  horse  for  whooping  cough,
371;  wrist,  185.

Leg,  bow  about,  325;  to  remedy  when
bowed,  340;  chair  turned  on  the,
410ff.;  coin  on  the,  314;  of  conjurer,
201;  of  dog  for  consumption,  371;
crossed,  460;  fluttering  of  the,  448;
of  frog,  241;  ghost  without,  128;
lizard  in  the,  301ff.;  one,  461;  snake
skin  about,  322;  turns  to  wood,  418.

Lemons,  for  cold,  370;  for  corns,  381;
for  love,  209.

Leopard,  fetish,  172ff.;  burial  of  man
killed  by  a,  108;  and  rain,  467;
witches  in  a,  148.

Lesson,  forgotten,  434;  missed,  463.

Letter,  burned,  357,  423;  and  finger
nails,  457;  and  hairpins,  447;  in
the  left  hand,  423;  and  itching  hand,
450;  and  love  charm,  326;  example
of  Negro,  29;  and  itching  nose,  456;
and  redbird,  491;  rhyme  about  a,  76;
and  sneezing,  453;  and  popping
sparks,  443ff.;  and  speaking  together,
462;  and  spider,  491;  on  a  stone,  315;
and  witches,  142.

Liar  (see  also  falsehood  and  hypocrisy),
in  Negro  song,  68;  and  sties,  382;
giving  toothache  to  a,  455.


Lice,    bear    confused    with,    16\    from

eelskins,    322;    from    dew,    46;    for

thrush,  341.
Life-everlasting,    for    fever,    367;    for

toothache,  373.
Light,  death,  135;  sign  of  ghosts,  116;

colored     visitor     on     New     Year's

Day,  461.
Lightning,   arrowheads   made  of,   315;

and   brooms,    157;   drawn   by   horse

and  dog,  48;  when  dying,  85,  570;

and  displeased  ghost,  103;  struck  by,

278,     421;     and     walls,     434;     and

weather,  515.
Lightning  bug,  492;  and  blindness,  45;

is  Jack-o'-my-lantern,  135.
Limbs,    broken,    436;    and    owls,    483,

washed    in    pot-liquor,    340.
Lime  water,   a   tonic,   391.
Linament,  390.
Lion,  in  African  tales,  34;  claw  of  a,

217;  in  Negro  tales,  33;  witch  a,  149.
Lip,  blister  on  the,  458;  itching,  452;

of  witch,  147.
Liquid,    witches    use    magic,    155.
Liver,    buried    separately,    96;    of    an

owl,  226;  for  wounds,  377.
Lives,  of  a  cat,  470flF.
Lizards,  in  Africa,  548;  barking,  481;

bite    of    spring,    45;    in    the    body,

216,  250fT.,  298,  303ff.;  and  conjure,

202,   222,   224,   234,   240,   266;   and

God,    560;    killing   a,    45,   436;    has

removable   tail,    44;    in    voodooism,

195.
Loaf,  to  locate  drowned,  352.
Lock,  breaking  a,  555.
Locomotive  (see  train).
Locust,  trees,  283;  and  weather,  508.
Lodestone,  for  conjure,  194,  206,  235,

237,  239,  269,  277,  309;  and  Saint

Joseph,  566;  carried  by  witch,  164.
Lodges,   among   Negroes,   87.
Loft,   head   in   the,    344.
Log,  sitting  on  a  burning,  420;  falling

from    the    fire,    443;    a    ghost,    115;

witches   in    a,    150.
Longevity,  462;   and   brightness,   337;


626


Index


food  for,  356;  and  hair,  454;  and  a
span  worm,  493.

Lost,  articles  found,  324flt.

Love  (see  also  marriage  and  sweet-
heart), unknown  in  West  Africa,  22;
charms  for,  193ff.,  196,  209ff.,
217,  236,  246,  258,  261,  264ff.,
283,  302,  316,  325ff.;  omens  of,
326,  459fF.;  and  redbirds,  490fr.

Lover  (see  sweetheart).

Love    Powder,    209,    264flF.

Love  V^ine,  327.

Luck  (see  good  luck  and  ill  luck).

Luck  ball,  231,  563ff.

Luck  numbers,  190.

Lumber,  new,  142,  415.

Lycanthropy  (see  metamorphosis).

Magic,  360.

Maggots,  in  the  body,  252.

Magnet,  in  conjure,  225;  for  luck,  196,
477.

Malaria,  366.

Mane,  of  horse  plaited,   153.

Mantle,  and  ghosts,  142.

Manure  (see  dung).

March,  born  in,  336;  a  dry,  511ff.;
and  hair  cuts,  401;  hare,  472;  snow
in,    382,    512;    unlucky,    382.

Mare,    a   gray,   476.

Marie  Laveau,  the  voodoo  queen,
179ff.,   186,   191,  225,  562.

Marriage  (see  also  brides,  love  and
sweetheart),  394,  422ff.,  445;  in
Africa,  22ff.;  and  cats,  471;  and
chairs,  441;  and  conjure,  240;  and
dish  water,  409;  divinations  of,
326ff.,  354;  dreams  of,  496,  499;
to  a  drunkard,  407;  and  funerals,  89;
and  hands  behind  head,  425;  and
ladders,  418;  chance  of  lost,  413;
customs  of  slave  Negroes,  24ff. ;
omens  of,  459ff.;  and  rats,  480;  and
red,  221;  and  rings,  432;  and  sweep-
ing, 397ff.;  and  cooking  wood,  458;
and  span  worms,  493;  and  tables,
410;  test,  33;  on  the  thirteenth,  405;
and  toads,  481;  too  young,  393.


Marrow,  from  hog's  jowl,  387.
Mass,    to    cause    death,    141.
Mast,  scratched  for  wind,  325.
Master,  dropped  by  slave,   50.
Matches,  burned,  463;  to  avoid  ghosts,

143;    for    nosebleed,    376;    for    rain,

321.
Mattress,     and     conjure,     219,     227;

changed  when  dying,  81;  sewed  up,

408.
May,   butter   and    conjure,    299;   love

divinations  in,  328;  the  first,  328fF.;

hen  set  in,  419;  water,  210,  257,  383;

watermelons   planted   in,   324;   wed-
ding in,  330.
May  apple,  in  conjure,  240,  254.
Meal  (see  corn  meal),  and  conjure,  240.
Meanness,    and   perspiring   nose,   457.
Measles,   cures   for,   387.
Measuring,  a  baby,  339;  a  grave,  479;

in   proverbs,   54;  yourself,  434.
Meat,  dreams  of,   500;  dropped,  440;

skin   worn   in   shoe,   316;   for  warts,

380;  for  wounds,   376.
Medicine,  poured  on  grave,  104;  can't

hear,   358;   of   Negroes,    358ff.;   and

witches,  148,  159.
Meeting,     eyebrows,     138,     455ff.;     a

person  twice,  462.
Melons,    and    menstruation,    423.
Menstruation,     267,     297,     332,     386,

423ff.
Mercury   (see   quicksilver).
Mermaids,    among  Negroes,    137.
Metamorphosis,  148ff.,  150,  157,  160ff.,

173,   205fF.,   286,   498,   551fr.
Mice,   and   lightning,   373;   cut   quilts,

480;  to   prevent   bed-wetting,  386fF.
Midnight,    cock   crowing   before,    509;

and    conjure,    274,    278,    297,    571;

and  curing  fits,  384;  and  ghosts,  117,

139;     and      graveyard      dirt,      246;

gathering    leaves     at,     190;     rabbit

killed  at,  475;  mass  of  Saint  Secdire

at,    140;   to   remove   sties,   382.
Midwife,   steals   caul,    138.
Milk,    for    blindness,    276;    cows    give

bloody,  43;  for  colds,  370;  a  contra-


Index


627


ceptive,  331;  used  to  train  cows,  324;
drives   off   ghosts,    142;   and   grave-
yard   dirt,    249;    for    lizards,    546
mother's,    337;    proverb    about,    54
smoked,  341;  and  snakes,  251,  254
of    dog    for    teething,    347;    turnip
greens  and,  343;  of  mare  for  whoop-
ing cough,   371;  of  sow   to  see  the
wind,   505;  for  wounds,   377.

Milking,  419.

Mill,  stopping  a,  249,  286.

Minie  ball,  for  nosebleed,   376.

Mining,  in  West  Africa,  263.

Minister   (see   preacher).

Mint,  337,  389.

Miracles,   of   preacher-woman,    534.

Mirror,  414;  and  babies,  344;  on  the
bed,  410;  breaking  a,  579;  in  conjure,
216,  257;  cracking,  441ff.;  covered
at  death,  81ff.;  to  see  ghosts,  139;
and  straight  hair,  400;  and  love,
328;  omens  given   by  a,  441ff.

Miser,  indicated  by  eyebrows,  456.

Mistletoe,  to  dry  mother's  milk,  337.

Mock  beggar,   133.

Mock  burial,   among   Ibos,   91.

Mocking,  an  owl,  485;  a  whippoorwill,
436.

Mocking  bird,  goes  to  hell,  550.

Mock  orange,  in  conjure,  239ff.

Mohammedanism,    in    America,    529.

Mojo,   origin   of  term,    19.

Molasses,  and  conjure,  193,  228;
dish  rag  in,  440;  for  sore  eyes,  383;
draws  ghosts,  453;  at  foot  of  grave,
102.

Mole,  for  boils,  378ff.;  burrowing,  481;
loosing  his  eyes,  42;  paws  for  good
luck,  314;  for  rheumatism,  362;
for    teething,    345;    a    witch,     149.

Moles,  removed  from  body,  388;  on
the  face,  457;  on  arm  for  luck,  201.

Monday,  arising  on,  417;  finding
button  on,  495;  no  credit  on,  431;
catching  the  devil  on,  454;  dreams
on,  497;  fever  blister  on,  458;
cutting  nails  on,  401ff.;  killing
rooster  on,   487;   burying  shoes   on,


556;  sneezing  on,  453;  wedding  on,
330;    meeting   woman   on,   460.

Money  (see  also  dime,  nickel,  penny
and    wealth),    430ff.;    put    in    coffin
102;    and    conjure,    236,    288,    289
300;   upon   eyes   of   corpse,   84;   for
cramps,  375;  stolen  from  dead,  123
dreams     of,     502;     dropped,     462
finding,    495;    in    fishing,    355;    and
ghosts,     140ff.;     and     horses,     354
in  a  horseshoe,  477;  shown  to  moon
327,   348;  and  cutting  nails,  401ff.
and   New  Year's   Day,   3 5 Iff.;   paid
out,  451;  and  Itching  palm,  450ff.
found  after  a  rain,  465;  and  sparks
443;     and     spiders,     492;     unlucky
430;   to   win   wife,   268ff. ;   given   to
widow,   94;   and   witches,    149,    158,
164;  to  cure  wounds,  376.

Monkey,  plays  ghost,  131;  glasses
turn  men  into,  173;  caught  on  a
wax  baby,  40.

Monument,  kept  in  the  house,  419;
not  erected  until  after  sermon,  93.

Moon,  348ff.,  463ff.;  and  birth,  336;
influence  upon  childbirth,  46;  and
conjure,  212,  223ff.,  242,  278;  and
contraceptives,  331;  and  crabs,  45;
in  divination,  327ff.,  356;  and  grease
of  dog,  361;  dreams  of  the,  504;
eclipse  of  the,  47;  and  weak  eyes,
382;  and  ghosts,  117;  and  graveyard
dirt,  246;  and  graveyard  rabbit,
474ff.;  and  nails  and  hair,  401;  and
horseshoe,  478;  giving  moles  to  the,
388;  pointing  at  the,  333,  348;
prayer  to  the,  176;  sleeping  In  the
light  of  the,  416;  and  warts,  381;
and  weather,  515ff.;  Influence  upon
wounds,  377.

Moonstone,  433.

Mop,   stepped  over,   397ff.

Morality,  in  Negro  religion,  527.

Moses,  29.

Mosquito,  killed  by  holding  breath,
47.

Mosquito  hawk  (see  snake  doctor).


628


Index


Moss,  390;  in  conjure,  225,  234;  to
increase   motlier's   milk,   337.

Mother,  love  of  African  for  his,  22ff.;
haunts  baby,  99;  given  weak  back,
420;  made  cross,  398;  speaking  to
ghost  of,  263;  grave  of,  427,  431;
and  hands  behind  head,  425;  in-
jury to,  433;  resemblance  to,  458;
run   out  by,  462.

Mourner's  bench,  537.

Mourning,  87;  black  for,  91;  neg-
lected by  child,  90;  to  avoid  ghosts,
100;  of  ghosts,  119;  hearing,  541;
customs  among  Negroes,  89ff.;  up
the  preacher,  535;  and  spontaneous
song,  62.

Mouth,  bones  passed  through,  257;
charm  in  the,  284;  open  when  dying,
85,  570;  food  in  the,  453;  kissing  in
the,  343;  dropping  meat  from  the,
440;  nail  in  the,  140;  of  owl  shut,
484ff.;  snake  in  the,  253;  stick  in
the,  405;  struck  in  the,  390.

Moving,  and  ants,  492;  and  bats,  481;
caused  by  conjure,  286;  and  doves;
488;  and  unfinished  house,  415,
while  ill,  416;  and  mice,  480;  and
moles,  481;  and  persimmon  wood,
421;  and  woodpecker,  488.

Mud,  dreams  of,  499;  image  of,  244;
and    weddings,    459.

Mule,  dying,  45ff.;  and  ghosts,  114,
139;  selecting  a  good,  46;  for  good
luck,  354;  and  rain,  507;  sacrificed,
319;  talking,  533,  545;  white,  475;
can  see  the  wind,  506;  and  meeting
a   woman,   461.

Mullein,  for  colds,  369;  for  fever,  367;
for  rheumatism,  364;  for  swelling,
388.

Mumpokers,  133.

Mumps,  cures  for,  373,  387.

Murder,  detecting,  88,  96flF.,  260,
279ff.

Murderer,  bothered  by  ghosts,  122flF.,
127;   dust   from   grave   of,    194.

Music,  in  Africa  and  America,  56flF.;
for  discipline,  56;  when  dying,  570;


instruments   of,   56ff.;   and   religion,

537flF.
Mustard,  oil  of,  306;  seed  for  ghosts,

144;  seed  for  witches,  164.
Mutton,   devil   beats   wife   with,   519;

suet  for  conjure,  293.

Nagging,    and    teeth,    455.

Nails  (see  also  finger  nails  and  toe
nails),  398ff.;  to  cure  asthma  and
colic,  370;  thrown  at  cat,  468;
stuck  in  cock,  408;  from  cofRn,
326,  in  conjuration,  231,  234,  240,
256,  271,  274,  283,  285,  293,  295;
for  croup,  370;  hairpin  on  a,  447;  in  a
divining-rod,  207;  from  a  horseshoe,
267,  314,  477;  for  love,  210;  in  the
mouth,  140;  about  the  neck,  337;
driven  in  the  shadow,  lllff.;  for
swelling,  388;  into  footprint  of
witch,  156;  into  tree  from  wounds,
377;  treatment  of  for  wounds,  376.

Name,  of  dead  avoided,  99;  to  chil-
dren, 200,  334ff.;  changed,  101,  423;
conjure  by  the,  193fF.;  called  by
ghost,  118;  to  win  love,  266;  of
future  mate,  328flF.;  to  tree,  483ff.;
and  wealth,  335.

Nature,  erroneous  beliefs  regarding,
41ff.

Neck,  blood  on  the,  344;  fluttering,  448;
knocked  crooked  by  ghosts,  145;
of  owl,  483;  string  about  the,  185.

Necklace,  broken,  447;  of  coins,  314;
of  onions  for  diphtheria,  370;  of
mole's  feet,  345;  for  teething,  346.

Needles,  for  conjure,  195,  228,  230ff.,
235,  240,  242ff.,  273,  276,  292,  296,
299,  to  hear  the  devil,  518;  looked
through  to  see  ghosts,  138;  in  the
hat,  567;  for  warts,  379;  and
weaning,  337;  to  catch  witch,  160,
162.

Negro,  sense  in  which  term  is  used,  3.

Neighing,  of  horse,  476.

Neuralgia,   cures   for,    389.

News,    good,    458;    and    nails,    401ff.;


Index


629


gathered  by  raven,  490;  and  the
rooster,  486.

Newspaper,  dreams  of  the,  504;  to
dodge  ghosts,  142;  image  cut  from,
242;  in  shoes,  293;  and  witches,  165.

New  Year's  Day,  350flF.;  and  pray-
ing cattle,  49;  and  clothes,  407;  and
quivering  eye,  449;  sweeping  on,
396;  meeting  woman  on,  460ff.;
work  on,  406.

Nickel,  in  conjure,  227;  on  Monday,
431.

Night,  drinking  at,  434;  eggs  gathered
at,  419;  hair  combed  at,  400;
rooster  crows  at,  486.

Night  bat,  133.

Nightmares,  158flF.

Night  sweats,  to  cure,  387.

Noah,  32,  71,  535.

Nobility,  Negro's  relation  to,  26.

Noise,  and  conjure,  212;  at  Loanda
funerals,  91;  strange,   118.

Noon,  wearing  garments  until,  447;
and  ghosts,  117,  139;  crowing
rooster  at,  486;  looking  into  well  at,
433.

Nose,  449ff. ;  bean  concealed  in  the,
199;  kiss  on  the,  423;  perspiring,
457;  snake  from  the,  253.

Nosebleed,  376.

Note,  for  a  love  charm,  326.

Notebook,  to  fool  conjurer,   213.

Numbers,  lucky,  233,  463;  in  voodoo,
190.

Nutmeg,  for  headache,  379;  lucky,
314;  for  neuralgia,  389;  for  nose-
bleed, 376.

Nuts,  and  weather-lore,  512.

■Oak,  bark  from  the,  212,  364,  386,  387
for  chills,  364,  366;  a  fetish,  221
for  fever,  367;  moss  at  foot  of,  390
for    toothache,    373.

■Oaths,   making   and   breaking,   261.

Obedience,  in  folk-song,  72;  demanded
by   a   ghost,    126.

Occupations,  in  West  Africa,  llff.;
and   European   culture,   10,    12.


Ogbondl,  African  league,  27.

Oil  (see  also  kerosene),  in  conjure,
195,  218.

Old,  looking  in  the  face  of  the,  343;
owls  are  the,  485;  sassing  the,  394.

Omens,  313,  439ff.

Onions,  and  conjure,  290;  for  diph-
theria, 370;  and  disease,  392;  and
dreams,  497,  504;  in  the  eye,  384;
burned  for  luck,  409;  for  night
sweats,  387.

Opal,  worn,  435.

Opossum,  copulation  of  the,  47;
mistaken  for  ghost,  132;  and  cold
weather,  508.

Oracle,  voodoo  queen  a,  181.

Orange,  tree  pointed  at,  422.

Ore,  in  hoodoo  bag,  236.

Organ,  a  fetish,  173.

Ornaments,  of  Negroes,  27ff.

Ostara,  55.

Other  world  (see  also  heaven),  Negro
concept  of,  113.

Owl,  481ff.;  a  conjurer,  206;  a  fetish,
173;  hooting  of  a,  74;  liver  of  a,
226;  mocked,  436;  stretches  ears  of
rabbit,  36;  in  voodoo  rites,  196;
prophesies  cold  weather,  511;  a
witch,  148,  156.

Ox,  a  ghost,  116.

Oyster,  for  shell  wounds,  389.

Paddle,  448.

Pains,  ax  to  cut,  390;  graveyard  dirt

for,   247;   cured   by  a   symbol,   360;

tallow    for,    391.
Painting,  of  Marie   Laveau,    180.
Palate  (see  fallen  palate),  369.
Palm,  of  Christian  for  fever,  367;  oil

to     avoid     ghosts,      142;     placenta

buried   near  a,   218.
Panaceas,    390ff.

Pans,  emptied  after  a  funeral,  98.
Paper,    blotted,    462;    for    nosebleed,

376;  spider  in  a,  492.
Paralysis,    and    dying    chicken,    436;

by    conjure,    271.
Parlor,   conjure   in   the,   225.
Parsley,    transplanting,    429.


630


Index


Paschal  Supper,  405.

Passing,   between   two   people,   326.

Path,  cat  crossing  a,  468ff.;  conjure  in
the,  228,  230,  235,  237,  240,  245,
274;  to  stop  a,  319.

Pawpaw,    switches,    390.

Peace,  charm  for,  205,  245.

Peace  Plant,  245,  278,  292,  559.

Peach,  kernels  in  charms,  437;  leaves
for  headache,  379;  leaves  for  men-
strual pains,  386;  for  typhoid,  367;
for  worms,  389.

Peacock,   and   rain,   511.

Peanut  (see  also  goober),  414ff.;  in
African  charms,  142;  and  the  full
moon,  350.

Pearl,  button  of,  for  corns,  381.

Peas,  in  conjure,  285;  in  divination,
326;  to  increase  mother's  milk,  337;
and  the  moon,  350;  eaten  on  New
Year's  Day,  350ff.;  planting,  429;
for   warts,    380.

Pebbles,  taken  from  body,  303;  in
divination,  282;  gazing  through,
205;  for  peace,  567;  for  warts,  380.

Peg-a-lantern  (see  Jack-o'-my-lantern).

Pen,  white  man  chooses  a,  547.

Pencil,  writing  with  a,  459.

Penny,  finding  a,  495;  for  indigestion,
388;  buried  under  ladder,  418;
for  rheumatism,  362ff.;  saved,  430;
for  teething,  346;  unlucky,  430;  for
wounds,  376.

Pepper,  borrowed,  409;  forchills,  365ff. ;
and  conjure,  193,  228,  230flF.,  235,
240,  249,  272,  274,  289ff.,  293;  a
contraceptive,  331;  to  cure  fallen
palate,  369;  to  drive  off  ghosts,  143;
used  in  a  jack,  306;  planting,  323;
for  sore  throat,  368;  and  visitors,
356;  for  whooping  cough,  372;
and    witches,    154ff.,    160,    474.

Pepper  grass,  a  laxative,  390.

Perfume,  in  conjure,  212,  223,  237;  in
voodoo  rites,  185.

Persimmon,  not  burned,  421;  and
chills,  365.

Perspiration,  for  conjure,  229.


Phallism,  among  Negroes,  528.

Pharaoh,  64,  71ff.

Photograph,  and  conjure,  194,  244ff.,
271ff.

Physique,  and  folk-lore,  4.

Piano,  conjure  in  a,  225;  dreams  of
a,  504.

Pickaninny,    origin    of    term,    15.

Pickle,    taboos    regarding,    434.

Picnics,  forbidden  to  church  members,
527.

Picture,  falling,  441;  to  remove  snakes,
303.

Pig   (see   hog.)

Pigeon,  to  cure  lameness,  195;  and
weather-lore,  511;  toed,  338.

Pigseys,  134,  153.

Piles,  cures  for,  387.

Pillow,  books  under,  580;  conjure  in,
224,  226ff.;  fork  under,  158ff.;
crown  found  in  the,  570;  and  dreams,
197;  removed  from  the  dying,  81;
flowers  under  the,  321;  ring  under
the,  496;  salt  under  the,  160;  a
seive  under  the,  163;  not  turned,
334.

Pinching,  to  get  a  letter,  462.

Pine,  splinters  of,  278;  for  wounds,
377.

Pinestraw,    for   colds,    369.

Pinetop,    for   frostbites,    388.

Pink,  married  in,  330.

Pins,  494fr.;  and  conjure,  195,  219,
228,  230ff.,  235,  240ff.,  266,  291,
295,  299;  a  contraceptive,  331;  to
hear  the  devil,  518;  dreams  of,  504;
in  garments,  353;  stuck  in  image,
553;  lost,  324;  stuck  under  pillow,
496,  for  warts,  379;  for  witches,  160.

Pip,  on  the  tongue,  458.

Pipe,  blazes  up,  455;  of  conjurer,  241.

Pipes,    57,    557.

Pistol,  of  frog,  75.

Pitcher,  ghost  of  a,  114;  on  Negro
graves,    105.

Placenta    (see    after-birth).

Plantain,  386;  for  cancer,  387.


Index


631


Plants,   493;    for   teething,    347;     and

weather-lore,  512ff.
Planting    (see    also     agriculture),    on

Friday,  404;  and  the  moon,  349ff.;

trees,  421ff.
Plat-eye,  130.
Plate,  to  call  ghosts,   140;  two  eating

from    the    same,    395;    for    witch's

wings,  149.
Playing,  in  the  fire,  420.
Plover,  and  storms,  510.
Plow,  Negro  chooses  the,  547;  used  on

Friday,  404;  used  by  Jesus,  543.
Pneumonia,  369;  due  to  conjure,  168.
Pocket,  hair  in,  266ff.;  hand  in,  451;

rabbit's  foot  in,  475;  turned  to  avoid

ghosts,   134,   143,  482.
Pointing,  finger,  433;  at  fruit,  429;  at

grave  or  moon,  433ff.;  at  owl,  483;

at  a  star,  434.
Poison,    a    fetish,    173;    and    conjure,

224ff.,     260;     prevented     by     silver,

288;  from  snakes,  249.
Pokeberry,   a  laxative,   391;  for  rheu-
matism, 364;  root,  235;  for  scrofula,

384.
Poker,  and  hawks,  323;  and  owls,  483.
Policemen,  and  peanuts,  414ff.
Polytheism,    among    Negroes,     113fT.,

524.
Poplar,    burning,    421.
Pork,   dreams   of,   500;   love   of  ghost

for,  107.
Pot,     feeding     baby     from,     343;     to

stop   a   boiling,   317;   cock   under  a,

281;    broken    in    conjure,    217;    for

coffee,  76;  on  Negro  graves,  105;  has

power  of  motion,  115;  in  riddles,  52;

in  voodoo  rites,  184,  186.
Pothooks,  licked  for  sore  throat,  368.
Pot     liquor,     for     beauty,     356;     and

walking,  340.
Potato,  and  chills,  365;  conjure  in  a,

223;    for    black    eyes,    388;    lucky,

315;  and  the  dark  of  the  moon,  350;

for  rheumatism,  360;  and  the  tide,

350.


Pottery,  taken  from  the  body,  303;
broken   for  the  corpse,   218.

Poultice,  of  cow  manure,   391.

Poultry,  322ff.,  419,  485flF.

Poverty,  due  to  killing  animals,  435;
and  moles  on  the  face,  457;  pro-
ducing, 245;  and  New  Year's  Day,
351;  and  owls,  485;  and  shoes,  446.

Powders  (see  also  gunpowder  and  love
powders),  burned  to  drive  off'  the
devil,  359;  to  remove  conjure  from  a
sawmill,  286.

Praise-houses,    among    Negroes,    532.

Prayer,  said  backwards,  329;  and  con-
jure, 567;  danced,  177;  for  mother's
death,  425;  to  the  devil,  554;  escape
by,  51;  and  folk-tales,  31;  need  of,
571;  of  Negroes,  20ff.,  537,  575ff.;
and  spontaneous  song,  62;  and
voodooism,   563ff.;  of  witches,   141.

Preacher,  312;  character  of,  533fF.;  and
conjure,  168,  204,  205;  dance  to
raise  dead,  102;  dreams  of  a,  571;
funeral  of,  93;  and  a  rooster,  485;
in  song,  63ff.

Pregnancy,  care  during,  266,  332fi'.;
and  the  dead,  98;  indicated  by  tooth-
ache, 458.

Priest,  in  Africa,  171,  539ff.,  249.

Prince's  Feathers,  a  conjure  plant,
298.

Property,  in  Africa  and  America,  12.

Prophet   bird,   466.

Prosperity,  and  the  dead,   104.

Prostitution,  religious,  178.

Proverbs,  Africa  and  American,  54.

Pumpkin,  attracts  ghosts,   119.

Punk,   for  good  luck,   315.

Purpose  of  the  Earth,  a  Negro  con-
jure root,  246.

Purse,  hair  in  the,  325.

Quarrel,  from  breaking  bread,  408;
and  turned  chair,  410;  and  conjure,
209;  and  dreams,  501flt.;  and  the
left  eye,  448ff.;  and  popping  fire,
443;  and  an  itching  nose,  450;  and
peanuts,  414ff.;   and   redbirds,   491;


632


Index


and  spilling  salt,  442;  and  ironing
shirt,  407;  and  sweeping,  398;  and
whirlwinds,    465.

Queen,  of  the  voodoos,  178ff.,  185.

Quicksilver,  and  conjure,  193,  277ff.,
296;  for  divination,  280;  to  locate
drowned,  352.

Quiet  root,  341.

Quilt,  and  dreams,  497;  cut  by  mice,
480,   not  turned,   334.

Quinine,  and  abortion,  332;  and  con-
jure, 243.

Quivering,  of  eyes,  449.

Rabbit,  472;  skin  for  baby,  75;  blade
bone  of,  496;  and  conjure,  216
293;  the  devil,  552;  jumped  by  dog
480;  dreams  of,  504;  the  Easter,  55
a  fetish,  173;  eating  flesh  of,  472
foot  of  a,  143,  206,  223,  225,  234
239,  315ff.,  437,  472ff.,  474fF.,  565
fur  of  a,  240;  and  ghosts,  117
over  grave,  462;  for  menstrual  pains,
386;  riddle  about,  52;  eaten  for
slyness,  355;  stomach  of,  391;  tail
of,  240,  248,  270ff.,  316;  in  African
tales,  34;  in  Negro  tales,  36,  40,  49;
for  teething,  346ff.,  a  witch,  149,  157.

Race    pride,    and    superstition,    582fF.

Racing,    conjure    for,    236.

Rags,  burned  for  colds,  370;  for  con-
juring, 233;  actions  resulting  in,
435fF.

Ragtime  (see  jazz).

Rain,  turns  to  blood,  123;  on
Christmas,  465fF.;  controlling  the,
259,  320fT.;  and  death,  85,  465,  570;
and  dreams,  498ff.;  and  fretfulness,
34;  and  hell  and  heaven,  86;  on
New  Year's  Day,  352;  rhyme  to  stop
the,  75;  on  Saturday,  48;  signs  of,
505ff.,  514ff.;  caused  by  hanging
up  a  snake,  74;  in  Negro  song,  71;
while  sun  shining,  329,  467,  518ff.,
550;  on  wedding  day,  459;  predicted
by   a   worm,   281.

Rainbow,  carried  by  Jesus,  114;  and
weather,  515.


Rain  crow,  egg  to  see  ghost,  139;  and

rain,  509ff.
Rain   water,   to   call   the   absent,    180;
for  sore  eyes,   382;   to  cure  fear  of
thunder,  358;  in  voodooism,   189.
Rats,    480;    cuts    clothes,    406;    brains
eaten,  222;  and  ghosts,  125;  crossing
path,  467;  witch  as  a,  149.
Rattan,  to  lay  ghosts,  107.
Rattles,    from    rattlesnake,    322,    346.
Ravens,  490.

Red,  ants,  299;  clover,  233;  coffin,  533;
the  fetish  color,  168,  181,  220fr.;
elements,  464;  flannel  in  conjure  and
folk-medicine;  168,  206,  212,  220ff.,
228,  231,  234ff.,  241,  245ff.,  266,
268,  270,  273,  279,  286fF.,  291,  293,
295,  296,  302,  306,  309,  318,  361ff.,
375,  436,  553,  559,  565;  worn  by
ghost,  128;  hair,  323,  461,  475,  476;
horses,  354;  ink,  433;  foot  of  jay,
314;  oak,  364,  366ff.,  373,  386,  387;
onion,  290;  paint,  238;  pepper,  240,
248fF.,  272,  289ff.,  293,  298,  306,
331,  356,  365flF.;  powder,  191;
sassafras,  390;  sky,  517;  string,  495.

Redbird,   490ff.;   goes   to   hell,    550.

Red  bugs,  388.

Red  Shanks,  a  conjure  root,  246,  259,
331;  for  gonorrhea,  385.

Reels,    singing   of,    60,    68.

Reflection,  of  ghost,  140;  of  the  sun,  47.

Reincarnation,  of  African  dead,  100;
in   Africa   and   America,    112fF.

Religion,  practical  applications  of,
259ff.;  of  slaves,  73;  and  Negro
song,  68ff.,  538;  and  witchcraft,  174.

Remedies,  of  Negroes,  358ff.

Reptiles,  in  the  body,  216,  249flF.

Resin,  and  conjure,  237,  240.

Respect,  taught  in  folk-song,  72.

Respiration,  diseases  of  the,  364.

Reunion,  of  family,  418.

Revenge,  conjure  for,  218.

Revival,  description  of  Negro,  532ff.

Rheumatism,  314,  360flF.;  and  cats,
471;  and  hair  combings,  400;  and
conjure,  244,  287,  302;  red  flannel


Index


633


for,  565;  rabbit's  foot  for,  472;
and  image  of  Saint  Joseph,  565ff.;
toadstool  for,  246.

Rhymes,  of  the  Negroes,  8,  16ff.,
21,  29,  59ff.,  62ff.,  71ff.,  85ff.,  129,
143,  168,  182flF.,  186,  281flt.,  324,  328,
330,  351,  353,  382,  389,  401,  417,
428,  453ff.,  470,  474,  487,  494,  510,
525,  531,  537,  550,  555,  559,  568.

Rhinoceros,  fooled  by  the  tortoise,  38.

Ribbon,  red  for  love,  221.

Rice,  to  stop  from  boiling,  317;  in
conjure,  148,  217;  offered  to  African
dead,  104;  spilled,  443;  and  voodoo-
ism,  193.

Riddles,   of   Negroes,    52ff.

Riding,  by  witches,  151,  160.

Right,  arm,  139,  190,  201,  233;  side  of
bed,  416;  cat  crossing  to  the,  469;
foot,  241,  269,  273,  324,  345,  474ff.;
side  and  ghosts,  144;  hand,  207;
jack  turns  to  the,  281;  kingfisher
calls  on  the,  466;  side  of  oak,  373;
owl  on  the,  484;  rabbit  on  the,
472ff.;  rat  on  the,  467;  general  lore
regarding  the  right  and  left  sides,
447ff.;  side  of  sheet,  483;  shoe,  326,
446;  shoulder,  269,  381,  464;  food
stirred  to  the,  408;  eye  of  wolf,
315;  wrist,  283.

Ring,  of  horseshoe  nail,  314;  under
pillow,  496;  for  rheumatism,  361;  of
silver,  314;  for  sprains,  375;  for
sties,  382;  and  sweethearts,  432;
dropped  at  wedding,  460.

Ring-Lights,  14.

Ringworms,  379.

River,  and  Jack-o'-my-lanterns,  134;
money  put  into,  300;  visions  of  a,
543.

Roaches,  in  the  body,  252;  for  earache,
375;  witches  as,  161.

Road,  butter  bean  hulls  thrown  into
the,  430;  crossed  by  rabbit,  472ff.;
track  of  snake  in  the,  436;  thread
dropped  in  the,  473.

Robins,  and  lovers,  491.

Robin  goodfellow,  133.


Rock,  a  fetish,  171;  three  in  a  row,  466;
sitting  on  a,  434;  witch  as  a,  148.

Rocking,  an  empty  chair,  411;  an
empty  cradle,  339.

Rodents,  480.

Roof,  conjure  through  the,  224;  wood-
pecker pecking  on  the,  204;  spider
near  the,  492.

Room,  changed  for  conjure,  291;
naming  corners  of  the,  497.

Rooster  (see  cock).

Roots,  for  conjure  and  folk-medicine,
208,  222,  226ff.,  230ff.,  235,  245ff.,
254,  265ff.,  276,  280,  292,  298ff.,
300,  303,  331,  341,  346,  364,  366,
375,  383ff.,  384,  385,  558ff.,  565.

Rope,  of  hangman,  238;  and  rain,  514.

Roses,  conjure  by,  224;  dreams  of,  504.

Row,  skipped  in  planting,  428.

Rum,  and  Christianity,  548;  to  wet  a
charm,   228;   won   at   funerals,    102.

Running,  from  a  chill,  106;  conjure
for,    209.

Sack,  tracks  in  a,  269.

Sacrifice,  of  humans  in  Ashanti,  58;
at  crossroads,  319;  to  the  dead,
lOlff.,  103ff.;  to  the  earth,  263;  of
food,  470;  to  the  ghosts,  91;  of  a
penny,  418;  to  the  spirits,  234,  482;
survivals  of,  238;  to  the  widow,  94.

Saffron,  and  conjure,  225.

Sage,  and  lawsuits,  567;  for  medicine,
389.

Saints,  and  conjure,  193,  563,  564.

Sale  of  new  born  children,  100.

Saliva,  and  brooms,  397;  and  cats,  469;
disposal  of  at  church,  395;  and  con-
jure, 189,  229;  and  cross-eyes,  460;
in  a  crossmark,  284,  407,  424;  on  the
ear,  450;  in  the  fire,  420;  and  fishing,
355;  on  the  floor,  489;  to  wake  foot
up,  386;  and  ghosts,  124;  removes
evil  of  pointing  at  a  grave,  96;  on
the  hands,  265,  272,  451;  on  a  horse-
shoe, 476;  and  money,  431;  on  one's
self,  455;  to  locate  lost  property,
324;    and    rabbits,    473ff.;    on    the


634


Index


skirt,  447;  to  kill  snakes,  322,  557;
and  trading,  276ff.,  318;  and  white
horses,  353;  through  the  window,
418;  on  wood,  357,  420.

Salt,  and  ashes,  396;  borrowed,  409;  for
chills,  365ff.,  367;  for  colds,  370;  and
conjure,  193,  225,  228,  230ff.,  235,
238ff.,  268,  272,  276,  290,  293,  298;
near  the  corpse,  83,  87;  for  cramps,
376;  and  the  devil,  556;  and  dreams,
497;  for  sore  eyes,  383;  for  fallen
palate,  369;  in  the  fire,  409,  420,  501;
not  in  ghost's  and  witche's  food,
104,  161;  to  drive  off  ghosts,  143;
for  headache,  379;  and  future  mates,
329;  for  menstrual  pains,  386;  and
moles,  481;  for  nosebleed,  476;  and
owls,  483;  for  rain,  321;  for  rheu-
matism, 363ff.;  for  sore  throat,  367;
spilled,  442ff.;  to  keep  witches  of,
155,  160.

Saltpeter,   and   conjure,   292ff.,   299.

Salve,  391.

Sampson,  71,  212.

Samunga,     18.

Sand,  and  conjure,  193,  229,  231;
taken  to  hell,  550;  images  of,  553;
in  eyes  of  owl,  482;  and  witches,  164.

Sand-burr,   for   conjure,   234.

Santa  Claus,  bites  tongue  off,   394.

Sarsaparilla,  246.

Sassafras,  for  blindness,  383;  for  blood,
390;  not  burned,  420;  for  conjure,
237;  for  rheumatism,  364.

Saturday,  and  dreams,  496;  nails  cut
on,  410ff.;  rabbit  on,  474;  sneezing
on,  454;  sun  must  shine  on,  48;  and
voodooism,    562;    wedding   on,    330.

Sauce,  stirring,  408.

Saucer,  and  divination,  355;  two  spoons
in  a,  441.

Sawyer  bug,  for  teething,   347.

Scabs,  and  conjure,  229.

Scarlet  fever,  cures  for,  388ff.

Scars,  and  the  moon,  377.

Scandal,   preventing,   260.

Scarecrow,  133.

Scarification,  in  Africa,  27.


Screws,  of  silver  in  coffin,  289.

Scripture,   misquoted,   5.

Scrofula,  384.

Seams,  in  the  head,  307ff.

Sea  shells,  on  Negro  graves,   105.

Secret  societies,  25ff,  312.

Seed,    to    avoid    ghosts,    144;    from    a

gourd,  256;  from  warts,  380;  to  keep

off  witches,   164.
Seed  of  the  Earth,  in  conjure,  234.
September,  rhyme  about,  71.
Sermon,   on    Negroes,    63,    112,    534flf.
Seventh,  daughter  for  backache,  363;

son  can  see  ghosts,  138;  child  wise,

337.
Sewing,  405 ff.;  on  Friday,  194.
Scissors,  dropped,  406;  to  see  ghosts,

139;  to  avoid  witches,  160.
Scorpions,    in    conjuring,    222,    240.
Shadow,  of  an  animal,  466;  of  a  buz-
zard, 460;  ghost  like  a,  126;  location

of  the  soul  in  the,  11  Iff.;  witch  as  a,

150.
Shame    weed,    246,    266ff.;    for    debt,

283;  for  love,  268.
Shaving,  at  night  unlucky,  418.
Shavings,   from   the   graveboard,   248.
Sheep    (see    also    lamb,    mutton,    and

wool),  black,   304;  dung    of,    388ff.;

a  ghost,   116;   In   song,   74;  why  lip

Is  split,  76;  a  witch,  149.
Sheep-calling    Baptists,    545.
Sheets,  torn  by  ghosts,  124;  knots  in,

483.
Shepherd,  see  spirit,  133.
Shield,   in   divination,   282.
Shingles,    cure   of,    374;    on    the    roof,

349.
Ships,  sunk  by  witches,  408ff.
Shirt,  to  call  the  devil,  557;  torn  for

fits,  384;  ironing  hem  or  tail  of,  407.
Shoe,  427ff.,  445;  placed  on  bed,  410;

under   bed,   353;   bow   in   the,   325;

brushing  the,  397;  and  conjure,  203,

223,   271;   to   prevent   cramps,   376;

cross  on  the,  292;  not  worn  by  the

dead,  84;  buried  against   the   devil,

556;     dreams     of,     504;     graveyard


Index


635


dirt  in,  248;  found,  495;  at  funerals,
92;  burned  for  ghosts,  142;  hair  in
the,  267,  271;  burned  for  headache,
379;  not  set  up  high,  343;  left,  478;
for  luck,  354iT.;  skin  of  meat  in,  316;
and  nails,  401ff.;  newspaper  in,
293ff.;  and  owls,  482ff.;  pepper  in
the,  289ff.;  and  rain,  514;  right,
326;  root  in  the,  276,  292;  salt  in  the,
238ff.;  silver  in  the,  288;  snake
dust  in  the,  251;  stone  in  the,  292;
strings  untied,  446;  of  suitor  flies
off,  119;  burned  for  wounds,  377.

Shooting,  at  ghosts,  144ff.;  at  a  photo-
graph, 245;  witches,  157.

Shot,  a  contraceptive,  331;  flogged,
263;  for  whooping  cough,   372.

Shoulder,  bird  on  the,  489;  charm  over
the  269;  fluttering,  446;  graveyard
dirt  over  the,  248;  the  left,  138ff.,  143,
325,  381,  382,  442,  474,  476ff.;  and
love,  327;  moon  seen  over  the,  464;  the
right,  381;  snail  thrown  over  the,  328,
edged  tools  on  the,  411;  and  a  whip-
ping, 318.

Shouting,  in  Negro  religion,  532flf.;
among  slaves,  59.

Shovel  (see  also  spade),  of  the  devil,
550;  in  divination,  282;  for  dust,
396;  and  owls,  483.

Shroud,  bag  made  from  a,  226;  ravel-
lings  from  a,  232;  and  span  worms,
493.

Sickness,  transferred  to  animals,  365;
absorbed  by  salt  and  ashes,  87;
and  moved  beds,  416;  and  birds,
489;  due  to  trapping  bush-soul,  112;
indicated  by  a  caul,  138;  and  cats,
467ff.,  469;  and  clocks,  444;  and
conjure,  168,  208,  232,  236,  276;
and  doves,  488;  and  wounded  dream-
soul,  109ff.;  and  farewells,  432;  and
ghosts,  120;  and  graveyard  dirt,
247;  and  falling  hair,  455;  from  hat,
430;  and  ladders,  418;  and  mirrors,
414;  and  the  new  moon,  463;  and
nails,  401ff.,  403;  omens  of,  499,
502,  504,  557;  and  owls,  482;  pre-
vented, 391ff'.;  and  shoes,  427;
and   big  toe,  524;  transferred,   154;


and    witchcraft,    259;    and    witchs,
151,  154,  164.
Sieve,  divination  by  a,  282;  to  avoid
ghosts,    144;   riddle   about   the,    53;
and  witches,  151,  163.
Signs,  311ff.

Silence,  and  birthmarks,  340;  while
feeding  ghosts,   103.

Silk,  bag  and  teething,  346;  in  luck
ball,  233.

Silkroot,  254.

Silver,  289;  used  in  coffin,  107;  and
conjuring,  230,  268,  287ff.,  292,  294,
298,  299,  553;  dime  for  cramps,  375;
dishes,  185;  dropping  the,  440;  to
kill  ghosts,  123,  142ff.;  to  pay  ghosts,
246;  for  good  luck,  314;  ring  for
heart  trouble,  388;  for  rheumatism,
262;  coin  for  sickness,  391;  spoon,
256;  carried  by  witch,  164;  to  kill
witches,  157ff.,  477.

Sin,  409,  416;  concept  of,  525ff.;  of
Negroes,  537.

Singing,  in  bed,  413;  before  breakfast,
417;  and  dreams,  496;  while  eating,
393;    and    voodooism,    193.

Sipher  wood,  226.

Sitting,  back  to  back,  413;  on  ironing
board,  413;  while  others  stand,  432;
on  a  table,  409ff';  in  a  window,  418.

Skillet,  feeding  baby  from  a,  343;
cracking,  444;  on  the  fire,  409;  and
owls,  483.

Skin,  of  an  antelope,  197;  of  a  cat,  195,
198,  232;  conjurer  leaves  his,  205fF.;
borrowed  by  the  devil,  551;  flutter-
ing of  the,  448;  of  a  goat,  218;  of
a  snake,  236,  276,  321,  322;  spotted,
202;  from  leg  of  turkey,  309;  of
witch,  154ff.,  159,  160flf.,  164,  474;
around   witch's   neck,    147.

Skirt,  shaken  at  the  moon,  327;  salt  in
the,  238;  turned  up,  447.

Skull,  a  fetish,  172.

Sky,  and  weather-lore,  517.

Slander,  charms  to  prevent,  219.

Slate,  snail  on  a,  328.

Slaves,  source  of  American,  3ff'.,  6;
and  energy,  8;  song  about  selling,  Ti.


636


Index


Sleeping  (see  also  bed),  416ff.;  on  the
back,  155;  called  while,  463;  with
a  cat,  470;  rhymes  for  causing,  73ff.,
239,  241if.;  and  dreams,  496;  foot,
386;  and  hoes,  418;  on  housetop,
33;  sweeping  while,  340;  talking
while,  152.

Sleeve,  wolf's  eye  in  the,  315.

Slue  footed,  457.

Smallpox,    treatment   of,    389,    392.

Smarting,  of  eyes  stopped,  384.

Smartweed,  246;  for  fever,  267.

Smells,  for  colds,  384;  to  prevent
disease,  39;  to  drive  off  ghosts,  384.

Smiles,  and  happiness,  356.

Smoke,  from  feathers  of  buzzard,  262;
for  colds,  370;  and  conjure,  238,
304;  and  enemies,  563;  from  feathers,
333;  for  frost  bites,  388;  blown  on
head,  341;  for  headache,  379; proverb
about,  54;  and  rain,  513;  in  riddle,
53;  for  toothache,  373;  wind  re-
sembles, 506,  557;  witch  as,  151;
for    wounds,    377.

Smoking,  455.

Smothered,  by  witches,   151.

Snails,  in  conjuring,  222,  268;  for  good
luck,  328;  wins  race,  39;  for  rheu-
matism, 362;  and  salt,  239;  shell  of
a,  172,  240,  255,  270.

Snakes,  42ff.,  321flF.;  bites  of,  245,  357,
378,  390;  in  the  body,  198,  216,  249ff.,
301ff.;  burial  of  person  bitten  by  a,
108;  brains  of  a,  222;  cane  changed
to  a,  202;  in  conjure,  217,  222,  226,
230ff.,  234,  236,  240,  267,  275,  278,
286,  553;  heart  of  for  consumption,
370;  and  crossmarks,  557,  567;  the
devil,  552ff.;  dreams  of,  294,  322,
497flF.,  580ff.;  has  feet,  44;  fetishes,
173;  graveyard,  553;  escape  of
hunter  from,  51;  and  Marie  Laveau,
180;  marriage  to  a,  160ff.;  origin  of
the,  76;  to  call  a  person,  180;  to
make  rain,  74,  321;  crossed  road,
436;  and  shingles,  374;  skin,  304,
361,  553;  does  not  die  before  sun-
down, 44;  removable  tail  of,  44;
bones  for  toothache,   373;  track  of


a,    44;    in    voodooism,    181fF.,    185,

187,  193,  195,  321;  whistling,  436;

and  witches,  149;  worship  of,  177fF.;

oil  for  wounds,  377.
Snake-doctor,  45;  killing  a,  436.
Snakeroot,  in   conjure  and  folk-medi-
cine, 235,  237,  246,  254,  277,  366,

388,  390.
Sneezing,  435flF.;  of  cat,  507;  at  dance,

290;    to    indicate    ghost,    112;    of   a

rooster,  486.
Snow,  for  sore  eyes,  383;  signs  of,  507,

512ff.;    the    first,    512.
Snuff    (see    also    Devil's    Snuff),    for

sting  of  bee,  378;  and  conjure,  249.
Snuffbox,  conjure  in  a,  255.
Soap,   for  corns,   381;   and   the   moon,

350;   for   snake   bite,    378;   stirring,

408.
Sock   (see   also   stocking),   in   conjure,

272,  276;  turned,  483.
Soda  for  sore    eyes,    383;    for    snake

bite,  378.
Sole,     of     shoe,      136;      burned     for

wounds,  377.
Soloman,  71.
Songs  (see  also  ballads  and  rhymes),

60ff.;  in  Africa,  65ff.;  and  education,

60ff.,     71ff.;     warning     slaves,     64;

spontaneous,    61ff.,    65ff.;    structure

of     Negro,      66ff.;     superiority     of

religious,     68ff.;    originated     during

wakes,  86ff.
Soot,    to    stop     bleeding,     333,     377;

on  bar  of  grate,  44;  for  kernels,  381;

and  rain,  513;  to  detect  thief,  282.
Sore  throat,  cures  for,  367ff.
Sorghum   wheel,   76.
Sorrow,      and      conjure,      232;      from

burning  egg  shells,  408;  and  the  eyes,

448ff.;    and    nail   cutting,    402;    and

itching    nose,    450;    and    rain,    459;

and  sneezing,  454.
Soul  (see  bush-soul,  ghost,  and  spirit),

in   Africa,    108ff.;    in    animals,    113;

of  babies  called.  111,  335ff.;  absent

from    the  body,  80,  111,  334,    398;

remains    in    body   until    burial,    86;


Index


637


in  the  form  of  a  butterfly,  130;
of  dying  called,  80;  concept  from
dreams,  109;  and  dreams,  169;  ex-
changed 365;  in  inanimate  objects,
114;  location  of  the,  113fF.;  lost,
415ff.;  eaten  by  owl,  482;  in  shadow,
lllflF.;  and  shooting  stars,  464;  of
sleeper,  110;  and  sweeping,  397;
trapped,  162.

Spade,  (see  also  shovel),  to  split
clouds,  320;  carried  out  the  front
door,  412;  left  on  the  grave,  94;  of
silver,  289.

Sparks,  from  arrowheads,  315;  and
money,  443.

Sparrow,  caught  by  hare,  37;  witch
eats  like  a,  153.

Spears,  in  divination,  282;  have
ghosts,  59.

Speech,  survivals  of  African,  59;  of
animals,  31fT.;  for  the  dying,  262;
evil,  446,  450;  of  ghosts,  121ff.,
124;  to  ghosts,  140;  grandiloquent,
13ff.,  30ff.,  218fF.;  and  hair,  338;  and
mirrors,    344;    salt    before,    442ff.

Spelly-coats,  133.

Spice,  and  conjure,  228,  246,  559;
for  teething,  346.

Spider,  491ff.,  importance  in  Africa,  34,
38;  in  the  body,  250ff.;  caught  by
gummed  image,  40;  and  insanity,
252;  and  letters,  491;  and  weather,
508;  hung  over  hell  on  web  of,  543;
a  witch,  161.

Spindle,  of  a  witch,  147.

Spirit  (see  also  ghost  and  soul),  leaving
the  body,  453;  enters  converts,
539ff.;  in  a  snail  shell,  270;  of  witch,
161ff.

Spirituals     (see    rhymes    and    songs).

Spitting    (see    saliva).

Spleen,  of  beef  for  sickness,  390.

Splinters,  and  conjure,  241,  278;  for
toothache,  372fT.;  treating  wound  of,
387.

Spoon,  dropped,  440;  to  remove  eggs
from  nest,  48.


Spots,  on  finger  nails,  457;  ghost  in  the

shape  of  white,   120ff.
Sprains,  375;  toadstool  for,  246.
Spring,     rabbit    beaten     for    drinking

from  a,  39ff.;  keeper,  434ff.;  lizard,

435.
Spunky,  134.
Spur,  of  chicken,  240.
Squeak,  of  shoes,  446.
Squirrel,  476,  over  grave,  462;  jaw  of  a,

232;  and  weather-lore,  507.
Srakman,    lllff.,    133.
Stable,  to  cure  whooping  cough,  371;

and   witches,   158.
Stamp,  upside  down,  357.
Stars,   434;   in   lunar   halo,   464;   signs

of    heaven,     570;     running    around

moon,  47;  prayer  for,  541;  shooting,

464;  and  weather,  5151f".
Stealing  (see  theft).
Steel,  filings  from,  206,  268,  277;  for

strength,  212.
Stem,  of  melon,  318.
Stepping,     over     child,     338ff.;     over

fishing    pole,    428;    on     heel,     462.
Steps,  horseshoe  under,  477;  ghosts  and

new,    142;    passing    person    on    the,

417fT.;  stumbling  on  the,  445.
Sterility,  caused  by  conjure,  261.
Sticks,  and  conjure,  300;  crossed,  483;

to  measure  dog's  tail,   317;  broken

by  ghosts,  118;  broken  to  see  ghosts,

139;   twirling   hair   on,   293;   in   the

mouth,  405;  of  witches,  154.
Stick-lick,    at    Negro   funerals,    102.
Stirrups,  of  fairies,   153ff.;  of  witches,

152.
Stocking  (see  also  sock),  bow  in  the,

325;  and  conjure,  273;  in  folk-rhyme,

77;  for  sore  throat,  367.
Stomach,    dog   crawling   on    his,    479;

bathed  with  kerosene,  386;  greased

during    pregnancy,    332;    of   rabbit,

346,    391;    reptiles    in    the,    250ff.,

254,    304,    rubbed    to    stop    boiling

pot,    317;   warm,    254.
Stones  (see  also  hawk-stone  and  rock),

for  conjure,  197,  231,  291;  used  by


638


Index


fairies,   478;   with   natural   lettering

315;  in  visions,  533.
Storm,  and  cats,  468;  death  during  a,

85;  signs  of  a,  510,  514,  517;  stopping

a,   320;  predicted  by  worm,   281.
Stove,    bread    falling    from    the,    408;

peppers  on  the,  272.
Straw,    and    hawks,    323;    in    hair    for

whooping  cough,  372.
Stream,  charm  near  a,  270;  and  chills,

364;  dreams  of  a,  329;  ghost  near  a,

116.
Strength,   charms   for,   260;   of   ghost,

118;  and  the  moon,  349;  and  leather

strap,  314.
Strife,  and  dogwood,  421.
String,  for  abortion,  332;  about  ankles,

340;    knotted    for    chills,    365;    and

food   of  dog,   318;   found,   495;   and

gifts,    318;    to    grow    hair,    357;    for

headache,    379;    about    image,    243;

to  hold  up  palate,   368;  to  prevent

witchcraft,  185.
Stumbling,  on  New  Year's  Day,  352;

on  the  steps,  445.
Stump,  and  rain,  321;  water  for  luck,

475;    rubbed    for   sore    throat,    368;

water  for  warts,  381;  devil  whipping

his  wife  around  the,   550;   witch  in

a,  150.
Stumping,  feet,  452.
Stuttering,  342.

Sty,   382;   from   counting  stars,   434.
Success,  and  dreams,  500.
Sucking,  for  snake  bite,  378.
Sugar,   for  childbirth,   333;   for  chills,

366;  in  coffee,  463;  for  colds,  370;

and    conjure,    194,    209,    246,    559,

563;  first  in  cup,  414;  to   keep   cat

at  home,  317;  for  shingles,  374;  for

wounds,  376.
Suggestion,     in     Negro     Christianity,

538ff.
Suicide,  finger  of  a,  226.
Suit,  to  get  a  new,  325.
Sulphur,   and   conjure,   230,   235,   237,

240,     269,     274,     280;     to     prevent


disease,   392;   and  ghosts,   142,   144.

Sumac,  246.

Sun,  and  conjure,  255;  and  death,
243;  an  African  deity,  33;  dreams  of
the,  504;  shouts  on  Easter,  577;  in
an  eclipse,  47,  205;  bleaching  hair  in
the,  3  49;  burned  woodpecker's
head,  IS;  king,  33;  prayed  to,  300;
signs  before  the  rising  of  the,  417,
496;  and  rain,  329,  467,  518ff.,
550;  looking  in  mirror  after  the
setting  of  the,  414;  rooster  crows
after  setting  of  the,  486;  must  shine
on  Saturday,  48;  heating  water
in  the,  366;  reflected  in  well,  328;
and  weather,  514,  517ff.;  on  wedding-
day,  459.

Sunday,  crying  on,  404;  fishing  on,
72;  itching  foot  on,  571;  kissing  on,
356;  breaking  mirror  on,  442;  moving
on,  353;  cutting  nails  on,  401ff.,
557;  plowing  on,  545;  rooster  crow-
ing on,  487;  sneezing  on,  454;  steal-
ing on,  71;  sun  shouts  on  Easter,
577;  wedding  on,  330;  ghost  working
on,  125.

Sundogs,  and  rain,  518.

Superstition,  nature  of,  521ff.,  572ff.,
576ff.;    eliminating,    577.

Supper,  crying  before,  417;  not  helping
cook,     394;     for     the     dead,     102ff.

Swamp,  can  sleep  and  dream,  115;
fooled  into  by  Jack-o'-my-lantern,
134;  voodoo  meetings  in,  185.

Sweeping  (see  also  broom),  395ff.;
and  babies,  339ff.;  under  bed,  334;
of  child,  444;  up  conjure,  290;  and
the  corpse,  84ff. ;  corn  into  the  fire,
409;  and  the  holy  Gho'st,  565;  away
visitors,  356.

Sweet  gum,  burned,  421;  for  colds,
369.

Sweetheart  (see  also  love  and  mar-
riage), 445;  called,  244;  and  dreams,
497,  499;  and  finger  nails,  457;  can
see  ghosts,  137;  gift  to  a,  431;
given  up,  292;  and  hairpins,  447;
and  heels,  462;  and  hiccoughs,  372;


Index


639


and   burning   match,   463;   and   new

moon,  464;  and  cutting  nails,  401ff.;

and   redbirds,   491;   and   rings,   432;

naming  room  after,  497;  and  shoes,

427ff.;    and    shoe   strings,   446;    and

sneezing,  454.
Swelling,  cures  for,  388.
Swimming,  bone  of  frog,  315;  learning,

355;  preventing  cramps  while,  375.
Switch,  and  whippings,  419;   hit  with

a,  433.
Sword,   of  courting  frog,   75.
Symbol,    drawn    on    ground    to    cure

disease,  360.
Syphilis,  360,  385.

Table,  two  lights  on  a,  411;  cloth
shaken  out,  396;  sitting  on  a,  409;
sweeping  a,  398;  thirteen  at  the,  405;
yawning  at  the,  453.

Taboos,  393ff.

Tacks,  in  conjure,  291.

Tail,  of  cat,  143,  374;  of  dog,  316,  318;
of  hog,  357;  of  lizard,  234;  of  the
ogboya,  467;  of  rabbit,  316;  of
squirrel,   476.

Tales    (see   folk-tales).

Tallow,  for  pain,  391;  in  voodoo  rites,
182.

Tank,  looking  into  a,  329.

Tapeworm,    350.

Tar,  in  conjure,  230;  dreams  of,  504;
and  ghosts,   137.

Tar  baby,  38fF.;  a  living  creature,  41;
for  luck,  41.

Tattler,   and  wet  dress,  457.

Tea,   pouring,  414.

Tears,  in  conjure,  229.

Teeth,  455;  of  alligator,  165,  346;
born  with,  336;  and  conjure,  229,
308;  in  comb,  398ff.;  cutting,  345ff.;
to  rot  dog's,  247;  dreams  of,  502;
gold,  357;  devil  jerks,  556;  needed  at
judgment,  571ff.;  of  leopard,  172;
of  Negroes,  372;  rotted,  308;  not
shown,  395;  of  snake,  232;  and
spitting,  395;  sucking  the,  426ff.;
swallowed,    458;    to    aid    teething,


346ff.;  of  dead  for  toothache,  373;
wisdom,  433;  of  witch,  143.

Teething,  345ff.;  and  hats,  345;  and
mirrors,  343.

Temper,  and  hair,  456.

Ten   Fingers,   a  conjure  plant,   246.

Terrapin    (see    turtle).

Tetter,  to  cure,  389.

Texts,  of  Negro  preachers,  536fF.

Theft,  in  Africa,  526;  and  conjure,
175,  278ff.,  553;  detecting,  196,
199;  by  the  devil,  550,  556;  dreams
of,  504;  forgiven,  540fT. ;  among
Negroes,  527;  protecting  against,  259;
and  shoes,  446;  in  song,  71;  and
voodoo,  284ff. ;  and  a  whirlwind,
465.

Thief,  born  a,  336;  shown  by  buzzard,
490;  chased  by  ghost,  123;  and
cutting  hair,  338;  killed,  318;  and
cutting  nails,  338.

Thimble,  drinking  from  a,  335.

Thirteen,  and  setting  eggs,  323;  un-
lucky,  82,  404ff.,  444.

Thor  (see  also  Donar),  157,  221,  328,
373.

Thorn,  biting  a,  387;  and  conjure,  244.

Thread,  from  coat,  473;  and  weddings,
337.

Thrush,  cures  for,  341.

Thumb,  spot  on  the,  457.

Thunder,  45;  indicates  God's  anger,
572;  arrowhead  made  of,  315;  to
cure  fear  of,  358;  and  displeased
ghosts,  103;  god  of,  524;  and  weather,
514ff.

Thursday,  and  sore  eyes,  383;  fever
blister  on,  458;  cutting  nails  on,
401ff.;  sneezing  on,  454;  wedding
on,  330.

Ticket,  to  heaven,  543.

Tickling,    causes    stuttering,    342.

Tide,  influence  upon  animals,  45;
turned  by  bird,  467;  and  planting
and    churning,    350.

Tiger,  in  Negro  tales,  33.

Tinfoil,  and  conjure,  233;  on  horse-
shoe, 477.


640


Index


Titanic,  song  about  the,  64ff.

Toadstool,  246.

Tobacco,  for  sting  of  bee,  378;  in  con-
jure, 240;  and  bite  of  snake,  378;
in  voodooism,  187.

Toby,  19.

Toes,  to  cure  disease,  524;  and  frogs,
365,  435;  and  hysterics,  384;  of
shoes,  353,  446;  of  dead  tied  together,
107;  and  weather,  508;  webbed,  456;
and  witches,   152.

Toe  nails,  399ff.;  and  chills,  365;  in
conjure,  218,  220,  229,  236fF.,  241,
266,  270;  and  being  pigeon-toed,  338.

Tongue,  biting  the,  470;  bumps  on  the,
458;  of  calf,  195;  clipped,  340;  coin
under  the,  331;  cut  off,  394;  tied,
338,  344;  pip  on  the,  458;  and  gold
teeth,    357;    silver    under   the,    288.

Tonic,  for  malaria,  366;  given  at  full
moon,  349.

Tools,  edged,  411;   left  on   grave,  95.

Toothache,  372ff.;  to  cause,  450;
dreams  of,  502;  and  gossip,  238;  foot
of  mole  for,  345;  and  cutting  nails,
401fF.;  indicates  wife's  pregnancy,
458;  in  rhyme,  1().

Touching,  dead  cat,  471;  posthumous
son  for  ringworm,  379.

Towel,  used   by  two,  408.

Tracks,  and  conjure,  220,  230,  237ff.,
248,  266ff.,  294,  326,  356;  stepping
in,  433.

Trading,  430fF.;  and  conjure,  260;
and  saliva,  318.

Train,  and  conjure,  272,  285;  carrying
corpse,  422;  ghost  in  the  form  of  a,
115.

Travel,  and  brooms,  397;  conjure  for,
260;  and  finger  nails,  457;  and  itching
foot,  451;  omens  of,  504;  and  cut-
ting nails,  401ff.;  and  hearing
person,  462;  signs  during,  466;  and
teeth,  455.

Treasure,  and  ghosts,  117,  126ff.,  141;
locating  a,  207.

Tree,  421ff.,  493fi".;  and  song  of  angels,
49;  and  chills,  364;  conjure  in,  223;


notified  of  death,  82;  dung  in  a,
255flf.;  falling,  313;  fetish,  171fT.,
173;  and  ghosts,  107,  113,  117,  127,
142;  hair  in  a,  267,  272,  274,  325;
to  grow  a  large,  324;  struck  by
lightning,  421;  man  as  a,  148;
burying  mirror  near  a,  442;  seeing
moon  through  a,  463ff.;  nail  into,
271,  277;  naming  a,  483;  nailing
photograph  to  a,  245;  splitting  a,
431;  indicates  water,  207;  and
weather-lore,  512.

Trinity,  and  conjure,  234,  437;  and
plants,  246,  559,  566.

Trouble  (see  also  ill  luck),  and  but-
tons, 445;  forgetting,  401;  and  hands
behind  head,  425;  and  itching  nose,
450;  and  rooster,  486;  in  Negro
song,  71;  washed  away,  442.

Trousers,  love  charm  in,  268;  turned  to
avoid  ghosts,  143;  patching  God's,
543;  dog  urinates  on  the,  480.

Trunk,  conjure  in  a,  231;  open  at
night,  412;  sitting  on  a,  410.

Tuberculosis  (see  consumption).

Tuesday,  nails  cut  on,  401ff.;  sneezing
on,  453;  wedding  on,  330.

Turban,   of  conjurer,   203.

Turkey,  and  conjure,  295,  309;  and
weather-lore,  511.

Turkey-trot,  70.

Turning,  around,  452,  460,  473;  back,
424ff.,   452,   461,   469.

Turnip,  for  frost  bites,  338;  seed  for
witch,   164.

Turnip  greens,  for  conjure,  309;  fed
to  dead,  103;  eaten  by  the  devil,
550;  not  eaten,  343;  in  heaven,  543.

Turpentine,  and  abortion,  332;  for
chills,  366ff.;  and  conjure,  249;  and
graveyard  dirt,  247;  for  indigestion,
388;  for  menstrual  pains,  286;  for
rheumatism,  363;  in  a  salve,  559;
for  wounds,  386.

Turtle,  in  Africa,  34ff.,  38;  devil  a,
552;  catches  jackal  or  hare,  40;  will
haunt   one,   45;    and   the    Irishman,


Index


641


50ff.;    killed,    436;    wins    race,    39;

holds  on  until  it  thunders,  45.
Twins,    causing    birth    of,    261,    332;

cannot  be  imprisoned,  336;  bearing

of  a  sin,  65.
Typhoid,  367.

Ugliness,  and  birth,  336;  and  mirrors,
344.

Umbrella,  on  the  bed,  410;  raised  for
cats,  469;  gift  of  a,  431;  hit  with  a,
397;  to  stop  rain,  321.

Uncle,  old  Negroes  called,  23.

Underwear,  turned  for  conjure,  292;
of  red  flannel,  221,  287ff.

Unicorn,  120.

Upstairs,  taking  baby,  344;  falling,  445.

Urine,  to  tame  animals,  317;  and  con-
jure, 235,  273ff.,  299;  of  dog,  480;
for  weak  eyes,  383;  for  headache,
379;  for  love,  317;  of  frog  causes
warts,  381.

Vampires,  in  Africa,  148;  among
Negroes,  153.

Vase,  in  voodoo  rites,  185.

Vaseline,  for  abortion,  332.

Vaudeville,  Negro  contributions  to,
70ff.

Vegetables,  planted  by  children,  323;
dreams  of,  504.

Vein,  prevents  conjure,  275;  fluttering,
448.

Velvet,  black  for  whooping  cough,  371.

Venereal   disease,   385.

Ventriloquism,    198;   by  conjure,   233.

Verse,  conservatism  of,   16ff.

Vervein,    and    love,    265.

Village,  changed,  263.

Vinegar,  in  conjure,  193,  210,  231,  255;
and  menstruation,  423ff.;  for  rheu-
matism, 362;  for  sore  throat,  368;
for  strength,  212;  for  swelling,  388.

Finmoin,  to  win  love,  265.

Viper,  390.

Visions,  and  gray  eyes,  456;  of  Negro
converts,    63,    541,    544;    of    Negro


ministers,  533ff.;  of  Nat  Turner,
204ff.;  among  whites,  540.

Visitors,  396;  kept  away,  318,  356;
and  chairs,  445;  and  cock,  485;  and
dogs,  479;  dreams  of,  503;  and
things  dropped,  439ff.;  and  fires,
443;  and  green  flies,  493;  and  itching
hand,  451;  on  New  Year's  Day,  461;
and  itching  nose,  449fF.;  omens  of,
441;  and  owl,  484;  and  redbirds,
491;  and  finding  shoes,  495;  and
sneezing,  454;  and  soot,  444;  and
spiders,  492;  and  meeting  a  woman,
461;  of  witch,  147.

Vomiting,  of  buzzard,  436;  to  stop,
388.

Voodoo,  168ff.;  chant,  16;  origin  of
cult,  166ff.,  177ff.;  origin  of  term,  15.

Vulture  (see  also  buzzard),  a  fetish,
173.

Waist,  snake  skin  about  the,  322,  361;
strap  on  the,  316;  string  on  the,  365.

Wakes,  86ff.,  91.

Walking,  taught  to  baby,  340;  back-
wards, 327,  339,  365,  380,  411,  424ff.,
436,  469,  473,  485;  boy,  295;  in  one
shoe,  427;  between  two,  431;  where
horse  has  wallowed,  436;  on  the
water,  534.

Wall,  hair  in  crack  of  the,  266;  leaning
on  the,  434;  scratched  to  stop  boiling
pot,  317.

Waller-wups,  134.

Walnut,  planted,  422.

Wangateur,  19,  195.

War,  charms  for,  210,  260;  and  comets,
464;  dreams  of,  504.

Warlock,  133.

Warts,  cures  for,  379flf.

Washing,  407ff'.;  dreams  of,  504;
clothes  on  Friday,  404;  before
sleeping,  496.

Wasp,  sting  of  a,  378;  stingers  of  a,
283;  lives  until  sundown,  50fT.

Watch,  in  Negro  riddle,  53;  mistaken
for  turtle,   50ff.

Water  (see  also  drink),  bones  put  into.


642


iNDE^i


257;  taken  before  breakfast,  417;
cat  in,  317;  given  to  child,  335;  and
chills,  366;  to  avoid  taking  cold,
369ff.;  and  conjure,  175,  214flF.,
'218,  261,  269fr.,  296,  299,  325;  for
washing  corpse,  84;  crossed,  432;
left  in  cup,  414;  dreams  of,  501,  571;
for  sore  eyes,  383;  for  fits,  384;  and
ghosts,  98,  121;  and  pointing  at
grave,  96;  hair  placed  in,  399;
carried  on  head,  412;  taken  to  hell,
550;  and  setting  hens,  323;  for
hiccoughs,  372;  for  indigestion,  388;
locating,  207;  and  future  mate,  329;
for  measles,  387;  mirror  placed  in,
414,  442;  rinsing  mouth  with  453;
for  night  sweats,  387;  on  photograph,
245;  pigeons  crossing,  195;  purifies
itself,  195,  383;  running,  232,  271,
274,  326;  for  sickness,  391;  left  in
room  for  soul,  110;  to  kill  a  thief,
318;  a  general  tonic,  390;  for  tooth-
ache, 372ff.;  used  by  two,  407;
walking  on  the,  534;  for  warts,  380;
left  for  witches,  157;  and  worms,
299.

Water  lizard,  434flF.

Watermelons,  on  graves,  102;  planting,
324,  429;  smell  of  indicates  snakes,
44;  stolen,  318;  preventing  theft  of,
278;  and  the  tide,  350.

Wax,  and  conjure,  229;  image  of,  244.

Wealth  (see  also  money),  and  day  of
birth,  336;  and  hairy  chest,  456;
and  bubbles  in  coflFee,  463;  and  dogs,
480;  to  gain,  260;  and  gray  hair,
455;  omens  of,  501,  503;  and  teeth,
455;  if  initials  spell  a  word,  335.

Weapons,  medicine  rubbed  on,  263.

Weather-lore,  281,  313,  505.

Wedding  (see  also  marriage),  salutation
in  Africa,  23fT.;  crows  and  a,  490;
day  of  the,  330;  dreams  of,  499,
500;  fun  at  a,  11;  omens  of  a,  440,
459fT.;  postponed,  422;  throwing
shoes  at  a,  445;  Negro  song  at  white,
71.

Wedding  ring,  422.


Wednesday,  journey  begun  on,  403;
nails  cut  on,  401ff.;  eating  onions
on,  497:  sneezing  on,  330.

Weeds,  for  chills,  366;  leaves  from,  190.

Well,  devil  in  a,  557;  and  divination,
356;  falling  into  a,  400,  498;  looking
into  a,  328,  433;  carrying  water  to
the,  412.

Wens,  374.

Werewolf  (see  also  metamorphosis),
456.

Whale,  fooled  by  the  rabbit,  38;  a
witch,  149.

Wheat,  for  love,  268,  328.

Whip-lash,  a  Negro  game,  56.

Whipping,  avoided,  318,  276;  for
walking  backwards,  426;  with  a
broom,  397;  for  burning,  420;  and
conjure,  209,  238,  280fF.;  by  the
devil,  518,  550;  to  cure  disease,  390;
and  left  eye,  449;  in  folk-song,  73;
for  failing  to  wash  feet,  71;  getting  a,
413,  433;  and  two  hats,  430;  and  the
new  moon,  463;  on  New  Year's
Day,  351;  and  owls,  485;  for  burning
poplar,  421;  revenge  for  a,  284;  and
wearing  one  shoe,  427;  a  shot,  263;
and  singing,  417;  and  bringing  a
switch,  419;  for  sucking  teeth,  426.

Whippoorwill,  and  backache,  363;
mocking  a,  436;  omens  of  a,  488ff.;
the  first  of  the  year,   354.

Whirlwind,  and  the  wild  boar,  506;
the  devil  in  a,  358,  557;  ghosts  in  a,
126;  and  quarrels,  465;  and  rain,
514;  and  theft,  465.

Whiskers,  from  cat  and  dog,  269;
of  a  leopard,  173.

Whiskey,  and  conjure,  231,  233fF.,
245fT.,  248,  252fr.,  270fT.,  292,  299;
to  cure  drinking,  389;  attracts  ghosts,
142;  a  linament,  390;  on  foot  of
rabbit,  476;  in  riddles,  52;  put  upon
Saint  Joseph,  565;  in  song,  72;  in
voodooism,  187,  189;  for  work,  322.

Whistling,  to  open  locked  doors,  286;
in  the  house,  394,  412;  of  medicine


Index


643


horn,     199;    attracts     snakes,     436;
for  wind,  325.

White,  546fF.;  in  dreams,  570ff.;  man
in  jokes,  SOff.;  married  in,  330;
man  hearing  signs,  432;  in  riddles,
53;  in  visions,  205,  541,  542.

Whooping  cough,  314,  371ff.

Widow,  and  husband's  ghost,  119;  and
the  Hairy  Man,  51;  mourning  of  the,
91ff.,  93;  marrying  a,  432.

Will-o'-the-wisp  (see  Jack-o'-my-lan-
tern).

Willow,  for  chills,  366;  planting  a,  422.

Wind,  cat  and  the,  468;  carries  con-
jure, 224;  dreams  during  an  east,
497;  indicates  ghosts,  117;  seen  by
hogs,  505fiF.;  making,  325;  saplings
rubbing  in  the,  89;  and  weather,  514.

Window,  418;  baby  held  out  of,  345;
bird  flies  in  the,  489;  bumblebee
through  the,  440;  dog  through
the,  480;  hair  thrown  from  the,  399;
horseshoe  over  the,  158;  new,  415;
salt  in  the,  160;  spitting  through
the,  418;  witch  enters  the,  104,

Wine,  offered  to  ghosts,  104;  to  win
love,  266;  and  menstruation,  423;
offered  to  spirits,  219;  in  voodooism,
193.

Wings,  of  ghosts,  120;  of  horses,  136ff.;
of  jaybird,  232;  visions  of,  542;
of  whippoorwill,  232.

Wisdom,  of  seventh  child,  337.

Wishbone  (see  also  breastbone),  and
wishing,  329.

Wishing,  354;  on  Bible,  568;  on
buzzard,  524;  and  horses,  354;  on
horseshoe,  476;  on  the  new  moon,
349;  and  redbirds,  491,  and  speaking
together,  461.

Witches,  133,  141,  147ff.,  524;  how  to
become  a,  554;  and  brooms,  339;
and  cats,  258,  468;  driven  off  by
conjure,  283;  detecting,  259;  in
Negro  games,  56;  and  horseshoes,
477;  mulberry,  115;  killed  by  rabbit,
474;    kept    from    riding,    569;    put


parents  to  sleep,  239;  in  Negro  song,
168;  strangled,  243;  stirrups  of,  152.

Witchcraft,  79,  146,  168,  174ff.

Wives,  purchased  in  Africa,  22ff.;  of
God  and  Christ,  543;  stolen  by
witches,  151.

Wodan,  157,  468,  477,  490.

Wolf,  helped  by  the  devil,  557;  eye  of
lucky,  315;  food  of  stolen  by  rabbit,
38;  in  African  tales,  34.

Woman,  317ff.;  more  convulsive,  539ff.;
dreams  of  a  death  of  a,  499;  ghost
in  the  form  of  a,  126;  contributions
to  Negro  lore,  68,  312,  33 Iff.,  345,
395ff.,  436ff.,  439ff.,  494,  578ff.;
during  pregnancy,  98;  and  folk-
medicine,  385ff.;  chief  mourners,  90;
in  proverbs,  54;  unlucky,  460ff. ;
whistling,  74ff.,  487.

Wood,  burning  of,  97,  420ff.,  443;
notched  for  chills,  364;  turned  in  the
fire,  420;  cooking  with  green,  458;
knocking  on,  434;  leg  turns  to,  418;
and  owls,  482;  scratching  on,  451;
and  witching,  197.

Woodpecker,  a  conjurer,  204;  and
death,  487;  origin  of  the,  142;  head
burned  In  the  sun,  76;  and  weather,
511.

Wood  shed,  conjure  placed  In  the,  223.

Wool,  bags  of,  229;  In  conjure,  223,  304;
for    pains,    391;    for    wounds,    377.

Work,  charms  for,  277;  with  dead,  84;
begun  on  Friday,  403ff.;  on  New
Year's  Day,  351.

Worms  (see  also  span  worm),  for
backache,  212;  removed  from  the
body,  389;  boiled,  299;  and  conjure,
222;  in  a  cocoon,  281;  dreams  of,
504;  for  earache,  375;  hair  changing
to,  399;  in  the  hand,  352;  salve
from,  363.

Worry,  and  gray  hair,  400.

Wounds,  376ff.;  of  corpse  bleed,  88;
Catholic  Image  for,  565;  and  the
dog-finger,  46;  made  by  oyster,  389.


644  Index

Wren,  killing  a,  436.  Yard,  conjure  in  the,  230;  dog  howling
Wrist,   and   conjure,   283;   red   flannel  i"    the,    479;    redbird    in    the,    491;

about   the,   288;   the  left,    185;   and  ^  ^"""^7  f^"' f  ?„

,„-         .     .      ,       T~,r  Yarn,  in  luck  ball,  233.
owls,  482;  pain  in  the,  375;  strap  on  .

'         '  ^  J         J         r-  Yawning,  at  the  table,  453.

the,  313.  ^

Writing,  a  charm,  218;  on  chimney  or  Zebraw,  ghoul  called  a,  154.

dish,  413;   with   red   ink,  433;   with  Zaccheus,  and  hickory  nut  bark,  558.

a  pencil,  459.  Zombi,  179,  186,  194,  300.


Ji.


GR103
P6


'

DATE

DUE

ri  mv

-:    'jJm-

GAYLORD

PRINTEOINUSA

Negro  t
hapet
Hillt  The  University  of  North  Carolina
press;  Londony  H.  Miifordt  1926»

xiv  p«t  2  l«,  644  p.  front.,  plates*
24  cm*


49024
